BARK 50 1. L 5B 2.Library 1411 (1) ANNUAL REPORT OF THE MEDICAL OFFICER OF HEALTH FOR BARKING BARK 50 CONTENTS Pages 1. Membership of Committees 2-3 2. Staff 4-5 3. Preace 6 4. G Public Health 7-17 5.Personal Health Services 19-22 6. Health Service 23-36 7. Report of the Chief Public Health Inspeector 37-67 PUBLIC HEALTH COMMITTEE as at 31st December, 1956 Chairman—Alderman Mrs. JULIA H. ENGWELL Vice-Chairman—Mr. Councillor LESLIE C. JONES The Mayor—Councillor Mrs. E. G. LAW Mr. Alderman G. H. COLLINS Mr. Councillor A. T. FRENCH Alderman Mrs. A. M. MARTIN Councillor Mrs. D. M. GLENNY Mr. Alderman J. R. SWEETLAND Councillor Mrs. D. M. HAM Councillor Mrs. M. BREDO, C.C. Councillor Mrs. M. PRESTON Councillor Mrs. J. CALLAN Mr. Councillor W. H. ROYCRAFT Mr. Councillor S. C. SIVELL Mr. Councillor LEONARD WRIGHT BARKING COMMITTEE FOR EDUCATION as at 31st December, 1956 Chairman—Councillor Mrs. E. G. LAW Vice-Chairman—Mr. Alderman G. H. COLLIN. Representative Members:— Mr. Alderman A. E. BALL, J.P. Councillor Mrs. D. M ENNY Alderman Mrs. M. BALL, C.A. Mr. Councillor L. F. F. STOCK Alderman Mrs. J. H. ENGWELL Mr. Councillor H. J. K LS Alderman Mrs. A. M. MARTIN Mr. Councillor LESLIE JONES Mr. Alderman J. R. SWEETLAND Councillor Mrs. M. PP TON Mr. Alderman W. G. WERMERLING Mr. Councillor S. R. P VE Mr. Councillor G. J. G. BEANE Mr. Councillor W. H. YCRAFT Councillor Mrs. M. BREDO. C.C. Mr. Councillor S. C. SIVELL Mr. Councillor H. M. GEESON Mr. Councillor LEON D WRIGHT Co-opted Members:— The Rev. Canon W. F. P. CHADW1CK Mr. B. A. CLE NTS The Very Rev. Canon J. A. DACEY Mrs. L. F. M. 1 IS The Rev. N. POVEY Mrs. V. KEAY Mr. J. ANDREWS Mr. A. STONL Nominated Members:— Mr. County Alderman K. E. B. GLENNY, J.F. Mr. County Councillor G. H. SHALDERS Page 2 BARKING HEALTH AREA SUB-COMMITTEE of the Essex County Health Committee as at 31st December, 1956 Chairman—Alderman Mrs. JULIA H. ENGWELL Vice-Chairman—Mr. Councillor LESLIE C. JONES Barking Borough Council Representatives:— Mr. Alderman G. H. COLLINS Councillor Mr?. D. M. HAM Alderman M: A. M. MARTIN Mr. Councillor L. C. JONES Mr. Aldermr; J. R. SWEETLAND Councillor Mrs. E. G. LAW Councillor M M. BREDO. C.C. Councillor Mrs. M. PRESTON Councillor Ni J. CALLAN Mr. Councillor W. H. ROYCRAFT Mr. Council!. A. T. FRENCH Mr. Councillor S. C. SIVELL Councillor N D. M. GLENNY Mr. Councillor LEONARD WRIGHT Essex County Council Representatives:— Mr. County Alderman F. CULLEN Mr. County Alderman K. E. B. GLENNY, J.P. Mr. County Councillor A. C. BERRYCounty Councillor Mrs. S. M. BOVILL County Councillor Mrs. L. FALLAIZE Mr. County Councillor H. J. HILLS ? Executive Council for Essex Representative:— Councillor Mrs. A. E. PRENDERGAST The Local Medical Committee Representative:— Dr. W. J. C. FENTON, J.P. Hospital Management Committee Representative:— Mrs. D. L. BELCHAMBER Voluntary Organisations' Representatives:— Miss V AWSON Miss N. L. ODELL Mrs. C, GRAFFY Mr. R. G. RILEY Page 3 STAFF, 1956 Medical Officer of Health. Area Medical Officer, and Divisional School Medical Officer:— F. GROARKE, M B., L.M., D.C.H.. D.P.H. Deputy Medical Officer of Health. School Medical Officer, Assistant County Medical Officer, and Medical Supervisor of Midwives:— MARGARET I. ADAMSON, M B., B.Ch.. D.P.H. School Medical Officers and Assistant County Medical Officers EILEEN E. V. MARTIN, M.B., B.Ch. EUGENIA POPPER. M.D. ARTHUR E. SELIGMANN, M.D., D.T.M. & H VIOLET SPILLER. M.D., M.R.C.S., L.R.C.P.. D.I'.H. MARY H. WESTLAKE, M B.. B.Ch., D.P.H. Dental Officers:— A. R. LEVY, L.D.S., R.C.S. J. BUNTIN, L.D.S., R.F.P.S.G. H. H. COOKE, L.D.S C.S. (Terminated 30.4.5i Chief Public Health Inspector:— N. BASTABLE, F.R.S.I., F.S.I.A. Senior Public Health Inspector:— Mr. C. S. COOK Public Health Inspectors:— Mr. E. A. ELLIS Mr. E. G. TWEEDY Mr. T. W. GLEW Mr. M. R. WILLIA Student Public Health Inspectors:— Mr. A. G. Merriman Mr. B. R. Saunders Superintendent Health Visitor:— Miss P. M. FAWCETT Health Visitors/School Nurses, etc. Miss M. BAERLOCHER Miss G. K. JEFFRE Miss C. M. BROWNING Miss J. McGILVRA Miss A. CATTLE Miss E. PARRY Miss N. A. FLUCK Mrs. R. ROBERTS' (Tuberculosis Visitor) Miss E. M. SCHRO R Miss L. GOODACRE (Tuberculosis tor> Mrs. A. M. SMALL—Part-Time Miss E. J. WHITIN" ' (Commenced 30.4.56) (Terminated 4 56) Mrs. M. J. P. WEBSTER Page 4 STAFF, 1956—cont. Denial Nurses, etc. Miss H. BUSH (Dental Attendant) Mrs. V. HARDING (Dental Nurse) Miss G. GEDEN (Dental Nurse) Mrs. MOULE (Dental Nurse) (Retired 11.9.56) In addition 18 part-time Nurses are employed for the staffing of the various Clinic services. Chief Clerk:— Mr. F. READ Senior Administrative Assistant:— Mr. G. RUFF Administrative and Senior Clerical Assistants:— Mr. B. S WEAVER (Maternity and Child Welfare and Other Services) Mrs. E M. BARTHOLOMEW (School Health Service) Miss H. i BEARTON (Handicapped Pupils and Special Children) Mr. S. DEEKS (Supplies and Maintenance) Mr. A. HOWLETT (Prevention of Illness; Care and After-Care) Mr. A. C. LONGMUIR (Staffing) Non-Medical Supervisor of Midwives:— Miss D. A. RISELEY District Midwives:— MissE. V. AS ON Mrs. I. M. BRONNICK Miss A. CUNNINGHAM Matrons of Day Nurseries:— Mis. B. NASON Miss I. K. STOKES (Terminated 30.9.56) Domestic Help Organiser:— Mrs. L. EVERITT Chit ropodist:— Senior Dental Technician:— Mr. I EAVESLEY Mr. J. CONSTABLE Speech Therapists:— Mrs LING Mrs. M. WARD (Part-time) (Part-time) Oca enist:— Occupational Therapist:— Miss STANLEY Miss Z. MERCER (Terninated 28.9.56) (Terminated 6.10.56) Mis HURSTON (Part-time) Miss D. M. COLDWELL (Commenced 5.12.56) (Commenced 10.12.56) REGIONAL HOSPITAL BOARD STAFF Superintendent Physiotherapist:— Mr. T. HYND Remedial Gynaast:- Orthoptisf— Mr. H. OGLE Miss M. LEWIS Page 5 TOWN HALL, BARKING, ESSEX December, 1957. To the Mayor, Alderman and Councillors of the Borough of Barking. Mr. Mayor, Ladies and Gentlemen, In presenting this report, I should like to thank colleagues and members of the Council for the help they gave during the year under review. I am, Mr. Mayor, Ladies and Gentlemen, Your obedient Servant, Medical Officer of Health- Page 6 GENERAL PUBLIC HEALTH SHORTAGE OF HOSPITAL ACCOMMODATION In late 1955 you drew the attention of the Regional Hospital Board to the lack of out-patient facilities in Barking, and subsequently in January 1956 you received a letter from the Regional Hospital Board which stated, inter alia:— "The Hoard is aware of the difficulties that are experienced by patients in the Barking area having to travel considerable distances for certain in-patient and out-patient facilities. The position in Barking is reviewed periodically by the Board, but it will be appreciated that to make satisfactory provision will require capital expendititure on a substantial scale. In the meantime the necessary funds for najor building work of this kind are not available to the Board "The requirements in Barking have been specifically brought to the notice of the Ministry of Health, and the Deputy Chief Medical Officer of the Ministry of Health recently visited the area to make a Survey of the possible requirements. The situation is also well Known to the llford and Barking Group Hospital Management Con tee, and the Board had the benefit of their views on the subjec hen consideration was given to the points made in your letter The Hospital Management Committee are equally anxious the steps should be taken as soon as possible to provide the necess facilities for Barking residents. "The rd intends to re-examine the position again as soon as possible as much priority as possible will be given to the developme of the hospital service in Barking, consistent with the other urgent needs in other parts of the Region". Independency of this approach you, in association with representatives of the Boroughs of Ilford and Dagenham, Local Medical Societies and members of Parliament, approached the Board on this matter. The Ocputation suggested that a new hospital of 800-1,000 beds was request in the area and suggested that the Board might make special representations to the Minister for an allocation from Central Funds of this purpose. A summary of the statement made ^ the Board to the deputation is given below:— The deputation were informed that the Board fully appreciated the inadequacy of the hospital provision in the Ilford, Barking and Dagenham areas and recognised this as one of the most pressing problems in the Region. Page 7 "While the provision of a new hospital might be the ideal solution, the Board's representatives saw no hope of persuading the Minister to agree to so large a scheme, and further, when balancing the needs of Ilford, Barking and Dagenham against other parts of the Region, it could not be said that the provision of additional facilities there would be the Board's top priority with regard to any special capital allocation which the Minister might be prepared to make within the next year or so. "It was considered that the addition of a much smaller number of beds than suggested by the deputation would go some way towards meeting the difficulty, and that a more practical approach to the problem in present circumstances would be to see what could be done to improve and extend the resources already available. Two main approaches to the problem might be the development of Barking Hospital, starting with the provision of consultstive services and some beds for general cases and the expansion of ancillary services and an increase in the number of beds at the King George Hospital. "The deputation were promised that the Board would continue to give earnest consideration to the problem of the lack of hospital accommodation in the Ilford, Barking and Dagenh. areas, and that the Board would do all that was possible within available means to achieve some improvement in the present difficult situation as quickly as possible". THAMES VIEW HOUSING ESTATE Clinic Premises The erection of a health services clinic on this Esta vas deferred by the Minister of Health because of the restricticted on capital expenditure. General Practitioner Services During the year the Council agreed to erect a Uni-Seco prefabricated structure for the use of family doctors serveg the Estate but at the end of the year work had not commenced upon this building. MORTUARY FACILITIES During the year you agreed to the request of the Coroner for the Metropolitan District of Essex for permission to said when need be, the bodies of persons dying in Barking to the newly erected mortuary at East Ham. Ilford mortuary still continues to receive the bu of the bodies from Barking. Page 8 CARE OF THE AGED Throughout the year Health Visitors continued to devote more time to visiting the aged in their homes, and resulting therefrom action was taken in many instances to procure necessary treatment and help where needed. One of the most appreciated services which is given on the recommendation of the health visitor's visit is domiciliary chiropody, and at the end of the year 86 old folk were getting this service, through the good offices of the Barking Old People's Welfare Committee. NATIONAL ASSISTANCE ACT 1948—SECTION 47 It was not necessary during the year to remove any persons compulsorilv to hospital or residential accommodation because they were not re iving proper care and attention at home. WELFARE OF THE PHYSICALLY HANDICAPPED For record purposes, 1 re-print a report prepared by the Barking Association for the Welfare of the Physically Handicapped and which was submit to you during the year:— REPORT UNION THE WORK OF THE BARKING ASSOCIATION FOR THE LFARE OF THE PHYSICALLY HANDICAPPED Iniroductior In August 1951, the Ministry of Health issued Circular No. 32/51, entitled "Were Services for Handicapped Persons other than the Blind and the Partially Sighted". This Circular empowers County Councils and County Borough Councils, if they so elect, to set up under the National Assistance Act, 1948 (with the approval of the Minister of Health welfare schemes for handicapped persons. In the model some contained in the Circular, the Minister makes reference to the following matters:— Register Social Welfare Workshop Employment Home Employment Handicrafts, Crafts and Other Skilled Activities Marketing of Produce Hostels, Social Centres and Holiday Homes Training Facilities, etc. Page 9 In the absence of any scheme for physically handicapped persons in Barking, the Barking Borough Council through its Public Health Committee sponsored a public meeting on the 21st May, 1952, with a view to an appropriate scheme being set up. At this public meeting it was agreed "that a Committee should be set up for the purpose of forming a voluntary organisation for the promotion of the welfare of Physically Handicapped Persons within the Borough". The Committee referred to met on the 18th September, 1952, and from thencc emerged the Barking Association for the Welfare of the Physically Handicapped which held its first meeting on the 29th October, 1952. The Barking Borough Council made representations to the Essex County Council to implement the provisions of Circular 32/51, but it was not until July 1953, that the County's Scheme was approved by the Minister of Health. Register There are at present some 150 persons, mostly very severely handicapped, registered with the Association, although probably there is a significant number of other people in Barking who could properly come within the classification "physically handicapped", Which includes any person 'substantially and permanently handicappe by illness, injury or congenital deformity', and does not necessari mean that the person must have lost a limb or be an obvious cripple. A special point is made to offer registration to physically handicapped children leaving Faircross School. Problems facing Handicapped People These can be divided roughly into "individual" and "collective" problems. Individual problems often arise from neglect to take proper advantage of welfare and social services, usually caused through inability to "move at will" but it is a heartening fact that, univecally, people administering these services show great sympathy when problems affecting the physically handicapped are brought to their notice The following matters give some idea of the scope of the Association's work in helping to solve individual problems:— (1) Provision of Wheelchairs (Liaison with Family Doctor, Local Health Authority, Ministry of Health and Hospital) (2) Widening of paths, gateways, lowering of kerbo provision of ramps, etc. (Liaison with the Barking Borough Council. London County Council and County Welfare Department) Page 10 (3) Erection of storage sheds (Liaison with Ministry of Health, London County Council and Barking Borough Council) (4) Provision of gadgets (5) Provision of wireless sets (6) Provision of personal items through National Assistance Board (7) Liaison with Ministry of Labour re employment, e.g., Remploy (8) Housing accommodation. (Suitable housing accommodation can be all important to the comfort of a physically handicapped person, e.g., a person unable to negotiate stairs may suffer much hardship if in a first floor flat or having to climb stair: to the toilet, bedroom, etc.). "Colletive" problems are those which require resources beyond those posse d by a voluntary organisation and can only be truly solved by the Essex County Council. Some o e more important problems are:— (1) Transport. From the beginning this was a most immediate need of the Association so that the home-bound could be catead for but it was not until 1955 that sufficient money had been raised to buy a "Bedford" "Dormobile-type" vehicle which was delivered in August 1955. Whilst we were awaiting the delivery of our vehicle, the Barking Old People's Welfare Commitee very kindly helped us by loaning their van. Our "Belford" has paid dividends beyond expectations. Besides being used for routine journeys to clubs, handicraft classes, con etc., it has enabled us to transport handicapped people with their gear (including chairs) direct to holiday addresss, residential homes, London Termini, etc. It is also ofter used to take groups of people to the country, to the seasion etc. Asa long term policy, however, more transport resources are required because we have reached saturation point in coping with people wishing to attend club and handicraft classes on any particular evening and there will one day be the problem of getting people to an Occupation Centre which is how dealt with. Page 11 (2) Occupation Centre. Idleness and loneliness are souldestroying and unfortunately too many handicapped people are both lonely and idle. All too often the lack of occupation for the handicapped person places a very heavy burden on relatives who have to care for that person. An occupation centre would serve two purposes—it would give handicapped people an incentive to do something useful and at the same time get them out into the world to enjoy the company of other people. The Essex County Council has been pressed for some time to provide an occupation centre but has successively declined to buy St. Margaret's Hall and the Barking Labour Hall for this purpose. The Association has now put forward the proposal that Eastbury House would be an admirable place in which to hold an occupation centre for handicapped people. (3) Residential Homes. One great fear of parents with physically handicapped children today is that no one can say to them "we will take over the burden of your handicappe child when you feel you are no longer able to carry on", Very often "the child" is in fact an adult who may be quite Lelpless and very heavy, and it is difficult to get them away 7 for even temporary periods let alone for long terms. T same difficulty also arises with the handicapped person who lives alone and is just about able to cope with life with some outtside help, e.g., domestic help, district nursing, kindly neighbours, etc. Again the aged husband or wife with a severely handicapped spouse must face old age with some dread. The Association has been engaged in the arrangements to get a number of handicapped persons into homes (almost without exception these are run by voluntar bodies, e.g., Spastics Society) and such arrangements are exttremely lengthy and complicated even though there is goodwill all round. The plain fact is there is, as yet, insufficient suitable accommodation and very often a chronic sick word is the only immediate answer. (4) Holidays. The Association's van has made possible for physically handicapped people to take holidays more than ever before, because it can obviate many difficulties arising from transport. Again a holiday journey to Brighton, for example, for one person can now mean that a group of other handicapped people will also enjoy a day trip to the seaside Page 12 The Essex County Council has sponsored the use of a Holiday Camp in Norfolk at the end of September, but most Barking people prefer to have their holidays nearer to or in the 'high' season. The Essex Association for the Welfare of the Physically Handicapped is investigating the possibility of obtaining the exclusive use of a holiday home in Essex for a period during the summer season for the benefit of handicapped Essex people. Mention must be made of the great help in individual cases which has been given by the National Association for tin Paralysed in finding holiday accommodation for handicapped people. (5) Employment. There are a number of handicapped people who would like to earn their own living, but because of the extent of their disability are not suitable for employment either in industry or at Remploy. Sheltered workshops would be the obious solution. An occupation centre would give them something to do, but would not provide an income. Other Activities of the Association Clubs. who are held in conjunction with the Shaftesbury Society at Greig Hall and Greatfields Hall. They are very popular and form a nucleus for her social activities. Handicaped classes. These are very much appreciated and very well attendend One is held at Central Clinic on Wednesday evenings and another held at Porters Avenue Clinic on Monday evenings. A wide variety of crafts is taught and recently a sale of work netted a profit of £50 Social Events Throught the year invitations are received from other organisations in the shown for groups of physically handicapped people to attend their social functions and these outings are very much welcomed by handicaps people. Finance The Association receives a grant from the Essex County Council through its agent the Essex Association for the Welfare of the Pysically Handicapped There has always been a delay in the payment of grants and the Association has never been able to budget with any Page 13 certainty for the future. It is hoped that soon a formula for the payment of grants will be agreed upon so that the Association may receive its grants in time to budget with some certainty. To conclude this short review which gives some idea of the progress the Association has made in promoting a welfare service for physically handicapped people may it be recorded that although relationships with the Welfare Department of the County Council have been extremely cordial and helpful, there does seem to be a good deal of evidence which supports the view that this new service, which after all has much in common with the health services, should be grafted on to the Health Service as such. MATTERS OF LIFE AND DEATH Population The population of Barking at mid-1956, according to th Registrar General's estimate, was 75,560. This shows a further dei ase from the figure of 78,170 at the 1951 Census. Births 919 live births and 23 still births were registered c ng 1956, distributed as follows:— Live Births:— Males Female Total Legitimate 483 41 896 Illegitimate 13 10 23 Totals 496 423 919 Still-Births:— Legitimate 11 11 22 Illegitimate — 1 1 Totals 11 12 23 Total Live and Still-Births 507 435 942 Birth Rate per 1,000 of Estimated Population 12.16. Birth Rate adjusted by Comparability Factor of 0.93 = 11.31 Still-Birth Rate per 1,000 (Live and Still) Births 24.42. Page 14 Loss of Infant Life The infant death rate in 1956 was 19.59 as compared with 24.49 for 1955. The following tables show the causes of infant deaths:— INFANTILE MORTALITY—1956 Cause of Death Age at Death 0-1 mth. 1-3 mths. 3-6 mths. 6-9 mths. 9-12 mths. Total under 1 year Atelectasis 2 - - - - 2 Birth Injury 2 — — — — 2 Broncho-Pneumonia 2 — — — — 2 Congenital Malformation 1 — 1 — — 2 Haemolytic Disease of the Newborn 1 - - - — 1 Prematuritv 6 1 - - - 7 Bronchitis - 1 - - - 1 Peritonitis - -- 1 — — 1 Totals 14 2 2 — - 18 NEO-NATAL MORTALITY—1956 Cause of Death Age at Death Under 1 wk. 1-2 wks. 2-3 wks. 3-4 wks. Total Atelectasisi 2 - - - 2 Birth Injury 2 - - - 2 Broncho-Pronia 1 1 - - 2 Congenital formations - 1 - - 1 Haemolytic disease of the Newborr 1 - - - 1 Prematurityy 6 — — — 6 Totals 12 2 — 14 Of the total of 18 deaths no less than 12 occurred within the first week of life. Page 15 DEATHS Causes of Death in 1956 Total Tuberculosis and other Infectious Diseases 16 Cancer and other Malignant Diseases 150 Diseases of the Brain and Nervous System 71 Diseases of the Heart and Circulatory System 198 Pneumonia, Bronchitis and other Respiratory Diseases (excluding T.B.) 86 Diseases of the Stomach and Digestive System 17 Accidents, Poisonings and Violence 28 Infant Deaths and Congenital Malformations 21 Other causes 61 Total 648 Crude Death Rate per 1,000 Estimated Population 8.58. Adjusted Death Rate (Comparability Factor 1.42) = 12.1' INFECTIOUS DISEASES The following notifications were received during the ir:— Notification. Deaths Pneumonia 33 29 Tuberculosis Respiratory 46 50 8 9 Non-Respiratory 4 1 Scarlet Fever 49 Dysentery 152 Puerperal Pyrexia 52 — Measles 27 Whooping Cough 110 Food Poisoning 21 - Erysipelas 8 - Scabies 6 - Meningococcal Infection 2 - Poliomyelitis - 1 Diphtheria — - Ophthalmia Neonatorum 13 - Paratyphoid Fever 1 - Page 16 Poliomyelitis Although no cases were notified in the Borough, a Barking child contracted the disease whilst temporarily living elsewhere, and unfortunately died. ESTABLISHMENTS FOR MASSAGE AND SPECIAL TREATMENT Licenccs were renewed during the year in respect of three establishments which are governed by the Borough's bye-laws. LAUNDRY SERVICE Once again the Borough Council's laundry service proved an invaluable adjunct to the services provided in the home to care for the chronic sick. During the year 41 cases were assisted. PERSONAL HEALTH SERVICE This section deals with those services which come under the control of the Barking Health Area Sub-Committee of the Health Committee of the Essex County Council. CARE OF MOTHERS AND YOUNG CHILDREN MATERNITY SERVICE Ante-Natal Care. This was received by all Barking mothers confined during 1956 and was given as follows:— Clinics 709 Hospitals (excluding Barking Hospital) 139 General Practitioners 77 925 Confinements. During the year 925 mothers were confined, giving birth to 942 infants (including 17 pairs of twins). These were born as follows:— Barking Hospital 546 Othi Hospitals 142 At hene 254 942 It is pleasing to report that no maternal deaths occurred during the year. Post-Natal Care. 474 Barking mothers attended the Post-Natal Clinic making total of 599 attendances. In addition 187 mothers were under the care of their family doctors and 139 were under the care of hospitals outside the district. iinfant welfaE ATTENDANCES AT INFANT WELFARE CLINICS—1955 & 1956 1955 1956 Number of children under 1 year old who attended 858 756 Total number of children who attended 2,738 2,533 Total attedences 27,390 25,157 Live births 1956 numbered 919. Taking into account the fact that 30 babies were born in the last two weeks of 1956, and their mothers could scarcely have had the opportunity of bringing them Page 19 along to a clinic in that year, approximately 86% of all children born to Barking mothers were seen at our Infant Welfare Clinics. Distribution of Welfare Foods The following table shows the welfare foods distributed during 1955 and 1956:— 1955 1956 National Dried Milk 37,607 33,880 tins Cod Liver Oil 8,796 7,435 bottles Vitamin Tablets (A & D) 3,868 3,692 packets Orange Juice 70,660 63,258 bottles day nurseries Gale Street Day Nursery functioned throughout the year but Eastbury House Day Nursery closed to children on 12th October, 1956. The table below shows the combined attendances at these nurseries:— Average No. on Register daily attendances January 60 45.7 February 70 48.9 March 69 53.5 April 70 56.4 May 65 55.5 June 71 45.8 July 67 45.6 August 62 40.1 September 56 43.5 October 50 43.7 November, Gale Street only 45 37.8 December, Gale Street only 44 31.5 Nursery and Child Minders' Regulation Act There are no registered child minders in the Borough midwifery During 1956, we had five midwives practising the district, including two under the auspices of the Queen's Nurse 250 patients were delivered in their own homes, only some 27% all patients confined. Supervision of Midwives Dr. M. I. Adamson continued as Medical Sup' visor of Midwives and Miss D. Riseley, Matron of the Barking Ho al, continue to act as Non-medical Supervisor of Midwives. Page 20 HEALTH VISITING The following statistics relate to the work of health visitors:— HEALTH VISITING 1955 1956 No. of visits to Expectant Mothers 1,111 1,388 No. of visits to Children under five 8,224 11,258 No. of other visits 3,837 4.273 No. of Non-Access visits 1,660 2,129 home nursing This service, together with approximately half of the domiciliary midwifery scrvice, is still administered from the County Training Home at Leytonstone. vaccination and immunisation Small pox Vaccination The number of primary vaccinations carried out in 1956 was 188 in infants under one year, 45 in those over one year. This means that about 20% cfinfants are being vaccinated during the first year of life. Poliomyelitis iccination During toyear vaccination was offered to children between the ages of 2 and years and a total of 2,299 acceptances were received. By the end of the year vaccine sufficient to protect only 252 children had been recevied. Diphtheria and hooping Cough Immunisation The number of children receiving primary courses of immunisation during the ye; as as follows:— Page 21 L DIPHTHERIA Family doctors Clinics Total Separate 81 306 387 Combined v whooping cough 266 250 516 Total Diphteria 347 556 903 whooping cough Family doctors Clinics Total Separate 61 168 229 Combined with diphtheria 266 250 516 Total whooping cough 327 418 745 prevention of illness, care and after-care Chiropody Service This still remains a very popular service and difficulty was experienced in meeting all demands for treatment. The total number of attendances made was 17,349 s compared with 24,023 for the previous year. Throughout the year the service was handicapped by shortage of staff, and the services of part-time chiropodists on a sessional basis were utilized because whole-time staff could not be ro uited. You made representations regarding increased remuneratior or chiropodists without success. Sick Room Equipment. This continues to be much in demand and helps greatly to give comfort to patients nursed at home At the end of the year nearly 500 articles were out on loan. domestic help service The number of hours of domestic help given duri: the year has remained more or less constant. Year Number of Helps Employed Number of Cases Helped Total Hours Worked 1950 55 387 80,699 1951 49 327 70,611 1952 84 318 85,743 1953 89 384 105,121 1954 89 503 101,960 1955 90 556 105,104 1956 93 596 104,863 Page 22 SCHOOL HEALTH SERVICE MEDICAL INSPECTION AND TREATMENT The Statistical Return at the end of this report shows the classification of defects found and the treatment thereof. Minor Ailment Clinics Attendances at these clinics were well maintained during the year. CASES TREATED AT MINOR AILMENT CENTRES Eyes: (External and other—excluding errors of refraction and squint) 380 Ears, Nose and Throat Defects (other than operative) 635 Skin Ringworm (body) 3 Scabies 5 Impetigo 87 Other 1,653 Other nor ailments (e.g. minor injuries, bruises, sores, chilblains, etc.) 3,086 Total attendances 23,151 Speech Therap During the year 174 cases made 2,519 attendances to the Speech Clinic held in baget-Ward, Barking Hospital. Two part-time Speech Therapists were employed throughout the year giving a total of 13 treatment sessions per week. During term time 4 of the 13 sessions held are undertaken at Faircross School. DENTAL SERVICES Statistics reating to this service will be found in the Statistical Return at the erect of this report. During the year the number of full-time dentists was reduced f'rorn 3 to 2. It is found impossible to recruit full-time replacement officers althoug number of part-time staff were engaged for varying periods. During the year also the full-time Oral Hygienist resigned and we now have the services of the Oral Hygienist from the Walthamstow area for 2 sessions per week. Page 23 SPECIALIST SERVICES Eye Clinics Dr. R. F. Jamieson, M.B., Ch.B., D.O.M.S., continues to attend Central, Porters Avenue and Woodward Clinics. Cases dealt with were as follows:— External and other diseases excluding errors of refraction and squint 63 Errors of refraction (including squint) 1,152 Total1,215 The number of pupils for whom spectacles were proscribed was 858. Miss Lewis, Orthoptist, treated 150 school children uring 1956. Ear, Nose and Throat Clinics Miss M. Mason, F.R.C.S., continues as the Consult t Ear, Nose and Throat Specialist. Figures for treatment are:— Operative treatment (cases):— (a) For diseases of the ear 2 (b) For adenoids and chronic tonsillitis 237 (c) For other nose and throat conditions 20 Other forms of treatment (cases) 386 Orthopaedic Clinic Mr. L. Gillis, M.B.E., F.R.C.S., continues as 1 Consultant Orthopaedic Surgeon and attends fortnightly. Cases treated were:— In hospital 9 In clinics or out-patients departments —9 Skin Clinic Dr. P. M. Deville, M.R.C.P., M.R.C.S., Consultant Dermatologist. now attends the Skin Clinic, Paget Ward, Barking Hospital, twice a month, and during the year 624 attendances were made to his clinic. Page 24 Child Guidance Figures for school children are as follows:— No. of cases referred 22 No. who received treatment (plus 14 referred in 1955) 9 (Of this number, 2 were subsequently recommended for residential placement as Maladjusted Children.) No. of cases closed—left district or appointments not kept ... 2 No. of cases referred but still awaiting investigation at end of year 11 Participation in case conferences has continued to be of invaluable help and interest, and we are grateful to Dr. Davidson and her team at the llford Child Guidance Clinic for their enthusiastic support. As an Appendix (pages 31 to 36) will be found for reference purposes some notes on Maladjusted Children which were presented to the Barkii g Committee for Education. Paediatric Clinic Dr. S.P. Dimson, Consultant Paediatrician, continued to hold fortnightly sesions at Upney Clinic during 1956, and school children were seen as follows:— New cases 69 Re- mination 272 Total attendances 341 During t year the treatment of eneuretics by using an alarm apparatus was commenced. B.C.G. VACCINATION B.C.G. V Vaccination is offered to the parents of all 13-year-old children, and normally carried out in the term preceding their fourteenth bir. .ay. A Mantc —as well as a Heaf Puncture—Test is undertaken in every case and where there is a positive reaction the child is referred to the Barking hest Clinic for X-ray. Page 25 Below are given some statistics relating to this service:— Number to whom offered 1,126 Number tuberculin tested after parents' consent had been received 751 Heaf Mantoux Positive result 93 97 Negative result 658 654 Number who received B.C.G. 654 HANDICAPPED PUPILS A summary is given below of the ascertainment and placement of handicapped pupils during the year:— Category No. of Pupils ascertained during 1956 No. of pupils admitted to Special School during year Day Residential Total No. of pupils in Special Schools as at 31.12.56 hay Residential Deaf - — — 4 2 Partially deaf 1 — — 6 1 Blind — — — - 2 Partially sighted — — 1 2 3 Epileptic — — — - - Delicate 11 5 3 15 8 Physically Handicapped 5 4 — .9 2 Educationally Sub-Normal 15 8 — 35 i Maladjusted 2 — 3 —- 9 Speech — — — - — Totals 34 17 7 81 28 Faircross School At the end of the year there were 196 pupils at Faircross Special School distributed as follows:— Barking Other Districts E.S.N. Section 35 88 Open Air Section 34 39 E.S.N. Section. During the year 10 children left the S.N. Section on ceasing to be of compulsory school age (4 Barking and 6 out-of- district)—all were recommended for supervision by the local Health Authority under Section 57(5) of the Education Act, 1964 Three children (1 Barking and 2 llford) were found to be ineducable and recommended for action under Sectic 57(3) of the Education Act, 1944. Page 26 Six children (4 Ilford and 2 Dagenham) were no longer considered to require special educational treatment and returned to ordinary schools. Open Air Section. The children in this section at the end of the year were suffering from the following conditions:— Barking Other Districts Cerebral Palsy (Spastics) 7 — Other diseases of nervous system 7 3 Diseases of Bones and Joints 2 4 Heart disease 2 — Asthma 2 12 Bronchiectasis and other lung conditions 5 11 Debility 5 6 Others 4 3 Total 34 39 During the year one child left Faircross School on reaching school-leaving age, 11 children (4 Barking and 7 out-of-district) were no longer considered to require special educational treatment—7 returned to dinary schools and 4, aged 15, were allowed to leave school. In dition, two children transferred to Residential Schools. Employment A summary is given below of young people who left Faircross Special School during the years 1952 to 1956, and, with the Kind co-operation of the Youth Employment Officer, details are also given of the ocupations taken up by them:— Open-Air Section Physically Handicapped Section Educationally Sub-Normal Section Bovs Girls Bovs Girts Bovs Girls Barking 7 2 2 6 16 9 Ilford. - - - - 12 14 Dagenham 2 3 - - 1 2 Romford - - 1 - 1 - East Ham 1 - - - 2 1 Other Distriction Essex - — — — 2 1 Totals 10 5 3 6 34 27 Page 27 Occupation Open-Air Section Physically Handicapped Section Educationally Sub-Normal Section Boys Girls Boys Girls Boys Girls Light factory work 1 1 — — 7 11 Packing (factory) - - - - - 3 Building trade 1 — — — 1 — Electrical Assembly 1 — — — — J 1 Sawmill — — — — 3 — Engineering factory 1 — — — - — Joinery — — — — 4 — Woodwork — — — — 1 — Glass worker — — — — 1 - Electric truck driver 1 — — — — — Garage work — — — — — Tiled fireplaces — — — — 1 — Tiler — — — — 1 — Laundry work — — — — 1 2 Gardening — — — — - — Shoe repairing — — — — 1 — Greengrocers Asst. 1 — — — 1 — Hairdressing 1 — — — — — Shop work — 1 — — 1 — Cinema projectionist (trainee) — — — — 1 — Trainee salesman (Hatters) 1 — — — — — Painting steel drums 1 — — — — 3 Machinist — — — 3 — Blouse finishing - — - - - 1 Needlework trade — 1 — — — ' — General office work — 1 — — — — Several jobs (short) — — — — 4 — Remploy — — 1 — — — Not working — 1 1 3 2 6 Left district 1 — 1 — — Other Special Schools Forty Barking children attended other special schoc as follows:— Category Day Residential Blind Partially Sighted Deaf 4 Partially Deaf 6 Physically Handicapped Delicate Diabetic Epileptic Educationally sub-Normal Maladjusted Convalescence Ninety-nine children were sent away for periods convalescence of up to 8 weeks. Page 28 SCHOOL HEALTH STATISTICS FOR THE YEAR 1956 Total (All Schools) 1. MEDICAL INSPECTION OF PUPILS (a) PERIODIC Number of children examined at school:— (i) Entrants 1,141 (ii) Second age group 1,067 (iii) Third age group 1,010 (iv) Others 3,320 Total 6,538 Number of defects found requiring treatment 980 Number of defects found requiring observation 622 Number of individual pupils found to require treatment 915 Nu tional classification of pupils examined:— 2nd Age 3rd Age Entrants Group Group Others Satisfactry 1,138 1,067 1,005 3,272 6,482 Unstisfactory 3 — 5 48 56 (b) SPECIAL Number of children specially examined (including medical ninations for School Camps, Boxing and Part-time Employment) 11,285 Number of defects found requiring treatment 6,928 Number of defects found requiring observation 328 (c) RE-SPECTION Number of children re-inspected 8,588 2. TREA ENT OF CHILDREN (a) Total attendances at Specialists' Clinics:— (i) Nose and Throat 678 (ii) thopedic 2,628 (iii) nopaedic 54 (iv) diatric 341 (v) n 624 (b) Total attendances at Treatment Clinics:— (i) nor Ailment 23,151 (ii) opody 817 (iii) lopaedic 3,240 (iv) optic 1,824 (v)'Spech Therapy 2,519 (vi) Skin 3,135 (c) Number of children who received operative treatment for tonsi nd adenoids 195 3. HOME VSITING Total number of visits made by School Nurses 1,771 Page 29 SCHOOL HEALTH STATISTICS FOR THE YEAR 1956—com Total (All Schools) 4. UNCLEANLINESS INSPECTIONS (i) Number of examinations of pupils in school 15,598 (ii) Number of pupils found unclean 212 5. DENTAL INSPECTION AND TREATMENT (i) Number of pupils inspected in school 3,302 (ii) Number of pupils inspected at Clinics 1,953 Total 5,255 (iii) Number found to require treatment 3,992 (iv) Attendances for treatment 16,053 (v) Number of fillings: Permanent teeth 5,215 Temporary teeth 1,321 (vi) Number of teeth filled: Permanent teeth 4,373 Temporary teeth 1,229 (vii) Number of teeth extracted: Permanent teeth 1,343 Temporary teeth 5,260 (viii) Number of general anaesthetics administered for extractions 3,269 (ix) Other operations: Permanent teeth 4,635 Temporary teeth 2,459 (x) Number of treatments (included in (ix) above) carried out by Oral Hygienist 995 Page 30 APPENDIX HANDICAPPED PUPILS—SOME NOTES ON MALADJUSTMENT Section 8 of the Education Act 1944 lays upon every local Education Authority the duty to secure that there shall be available for their area sufficient primary and secondary schools to meet the varying age, abilities and aptitudes of the children there. It goes on to mention particular considerations to which authorities must have regard in fulfilling this duty. One of these is that they must make provision for pupils suffering from any disability of mind or body by providing, cither in special schools or otherwise, special educational treatment, which is defined as education by special methods appropriate to thr narticular disability from which a child is suffering. The de; ;tion of handicapped pupils and the selection of the most severely handicappedfor special schools are examples of the way in which authcities measure the varying abilities and aptitudes of the children in their area in order to provide them with the primary or secondary education suited to their particular needs. Section 33 and 34 of the Act deal with the determination and education pupils requiring special educational treatment, and the Regulations rising (The School Health Service and Handicapped Pupils Regulations). Part III Section 14 contains the several categories and definiti of handicapped pupils. The caterories are as follows:— (a) 2nd pupils; (b) Partially sighted pupils; (c) Deaf pupils; (d) Parerly deaf pupils; (e) Educationally Sub-normal pupils; (/) Epiletic pupils; (g) Maladjusted pupils; (h) Physically handicapped pupils; (g) Pupils suffering from speech defect; (j) Delicate pupils. The section i defines maladjusted pupils as follows:— Ma justed pupils, that is to say, pupils who show evidence of emotinal instability or psychological disturbance and require special education national treatment in order to effect their personal, social or educational re-adjustment. Maladjustement is a term that came into general use during the war to describe children who were found to be difficult to billet because of their distributed or disorderly behaviour. It is characteristic of Page 31 maladjusted children that they are insecure and unhappy, and that they fail in their personal relationships. Receiving is difficult for them as well as giving, and they appear unable to respond to simple measures of love, comfort and reassurance. At the same time they are not readily capable of improvement by ordinary discipline. Such children make slow progress at school often despite high intelligence and potential ability because their efforts are not sustained due to tension, and interest and the urge to learn are lost. Their troublesome and peculiar behaviour tend to make them unpopular with other pupils and a nuisance to their teacher and form. Maladjustment does not always show itself in aggressive or troublesome behaviour; indeed quiet and passive conduct may overlay deep emotional disturbance. However, often it is linked to bad behaviour or delinquency, and symptoms commonly seen include truancy, stealing, lying, cruelty, aggression, bullying, exhibitionism, or destructiveness. On the other hand some children are unduly timid, passsive, apathetic, depressed and withdrawn, with no intative or enthusiasm. Others may develop such physical symptoms as soiling, stammering, asthma, skin rashes, tics, speech defects, etc. Gross behaviour disorders are readily recognisable but the lesser degrees shade into what may be termed the lower extrer of normal variation within the range of normal behaviour. As a rough guide a child may be termed maladjusted when his developme is seen to have a bad effect on himself or his fellows. When they reach adult life maladjusted persons tend to get on badly with their fellows and with society as a whole be use of their shallow feelings and have a marked difficulty in settling wn to their social responsibilities. Maladjustment in adults is close connected with disharmony in the home, delinquency, and mental ess, and its worst effects are seen in mental hospitals, divorce courts d prisons. While it is true that the maladjusted child of yesterd can become today's maladjusted parent and his offsprings the maladsted children of tomorrow, it is fortunate that only some of the child subjected to the factors which lead to maladjustment are affecte y them to a significant degree. The reasons why one child succun rather than another is at present obscure. Size of the Problem Although a formidable problem, maladjustment cases not a fleet more than a small proportion of the child population, and of approximately 12,000 Barking school children, only eight are a present place in residential special schools. Page 32 Causation There is no one specific cause. The main pattern of man's development is determined by inherited factors, so that the general direction of functional activity is predetermined, but outside factors such as nutrition, for example, can deflect the body from its ordained pattern, or enable its fulfilment. All sorts of other physical interference can maim or improve it. The same is no doubt true of the mental side of human growth and maturity. The experiences and influences of the first few years of life constitute enormously to mental development, and people dealing with a maladjusted child will often need to see into his early childhood for the cause of the present trouble. There are very many factors which may play a part in producing maladjustment but there is much evidence that a most important factor is a breakdown in the relationship between mother and child in the early months of the child's lire. If the infant is robbed of his mother's attentions, through illne s, desertion or death, and she is not replaced by a permanent substitr then maladjustment may result. Similarly if the attitude of the mothes is grossly faulty and she totally rejects the child as may happen if sh herself is mentally ill or defective or is overwhelmed by difficulties, then she cannot give the baby the unremitting care which it needs. Persona elationships with father develop later. If he is dead, left home, of irresponsible, aggressive, drunken, brutal, or rigidly demands at ute obedience, then the child's chances of normal emotional devlopment will be reduced. Persons o suffer from a physical disability may become maladjusted as a pechological reaction, for instance those who suffer from blindness, de ess, epilepsy, crippling conditions or other blemishes may develop were emotional disturbance. Other causes may be related to too eat scholastic pressure, expecting too much of children, major upheave in their lives, etc. Portrayals of violence and evil in books and cc cs, on the cinema or television screens may confirm and encourage morbid tendencies, such as aggression, cruelty or sensuality. Bad physical conditions or squalor need not, of themselves, have a bad psychological effect provided the parents are adequate and provide the right kind of care and affection for their children, but maladjusted pareents because of their disability and inadequacy frequently graviate to slum property where overcrowding, poverty and Parental disharmony imposes a severe strain on their children. Page 33 Prevention and Treatment Our aim must be not only to treat cases as early as possible but to prevent the condition arising. Cases come to light in different ways. The parents may seek advice from various social agencies for morbid symptoms in their children, but parents are just as likely to dismiss the evidence with some such phrase as "She'll grow out of it", or "He is just like his Dad". Apart from the child's parents, Heallh Visitors who have entry into homes and watch over a child's development from an early age, are potentially the most important agents for discovering maladjustment in children of pre-school age, and since children above the age of five years spend most of the day at school, teachers have a better opportunity than anyone, again excepting the parents, to acquaint themselves with these children who are emotionally disturbed. Teachers and others, even these with tolerance of and the capacity to understand difficult behaviour should realise the limitations of what they can do on their own, and should be aware of the facilities which are available for providing advice and guidance in such cases and be ready to call for help when required, because expert and cautious interpstation and advice is indispensable if mental illness in later life is to be averted, and much may depend on the making of a correct diagnesis. The work demands much patient endeavour and there are many disappointments. The condition once established may run several courses. Recovery may be complete, or it may drift to chronicity, progression, or remission with relapses. Factors which may influence the course would include:— (a) Age—It is generally recognised that little can be one to treat the established adult case of long standing, 2nd the more pronounced the maladjustment becomes in children the more difficult it is to treat and cure the condition. Young children are more adaptable and responsive, and a that can more readily be given to their energies which will Gult in their being socially better adapted and better able to deal with their problems. (b) Intelligence—Children of average or high intelligence respond better than those of inferior intellect because use they can better grasp the factors which created the problem and the adjustments they must make to come to terms with it- (c) Onset—An abrupt onset is more favourable than in a gradual onset which may indicate a rooted abnormality that will be hard to shift. Page 34 (d) Environment—Where a known external cause is at work, removal of the disturbing influence or stress may effect a cure, for example, adverse home conditions. (?) The treatment should be practicable and acceptable, and willing co-operation is essential. The psychiatrist has no ready made aids such as x-rays or antibiotics to investigate and cure his patient's ills. In fact drugs or other forms of physical treatment have little or no place in the treatment of emotional problems. Rather does he arm himself with a close knowledge of the facts, and endeavours to establish a direct and personal relationship with the patient. He uses his psychiatric training and wisdom to disentangle the maze of conflict, conscious or unconscious, that led to 'he distortion or false interpretation of experiences. And to do so he Must not only have a trained understanding of the development of the patient's problems, but must also be able to interpret it to him, and endeavour to give new incentives and direction thereby encouragin and guiding the patient to deal more effectively with current exp ence. It may take months of persistent and complicated endeavour before the patient can be expected to begin to deal effectively with his problems, and it may be found necessary to remove the patient from a distuing environment before beneficial influences can have full impact. Educational treatment The local child Guidance Clinic which is staffed by a professional teamconsis of psychiatrists, educational psychologists and psychiatric social weakers provide the necessary facilities for the investigation and treatment of our cases. The great majority of the cases receive their regulation eatment at the clinic while remaining in their own homes, and pending the ordinary local school. Certain of the pupils attend a special class in an ordinary school, while others with associated handicaps at and our special day school. One of the main purposes of treatment is restore harmony and understanding between parents and children and if possible the child is kept in the natural environment of its own where treatment of him and encouragement and support of the parents can take place together and healthy attitudes of mind fostered out cases will be encountered where there is no hope of treating the child successfully while he remains at home. The home may be unsatisfactory for a variety of reasons such as where the child is deeply rejected by the parents, or where there is continual friction Page 35 and disharmony, or in the homes of problem families, or where the parents are unable to control or tolerate his behaviour, or are unable or unwilling to co-operate in the treatment. The ordinary school may also be unable to tolerate certain maladjusted pupils who may express their feelings in a manner which leads to disruption of the class in various ways. In certain cases treating patients, not as individuals but as members of a group can have the advantage of utilising for curative purposes the influence that patients have on each other. Whatever the reason for recommending a residential school placement, the aim must always be to restore the child to his parents and home as soon as possible. Special schools for this purpose must provide all the ingredients of a full education suited to the pupil's ability and aptitudes as well as creating an environment in which every aspect of the pupil's life is made to contribute to his or her treatment. Most schools give prominence to various kinds of imaginative activities, such as painting and drama, which allow children to work through some of their problems; to practical activities such as woodwork, gardening, and hobbies, to the keeping of pets or the care of animals. The simple fact of receiving individual attention in a small class in an informal nor ompetitive atmosphere—often enables a boy or girl to make progres vhich may contribute greatly towards solving their emotional pr lems. The teacher requires much skill to allow children initial sco to express their maladjustment without disturbing the rest of the class too much or disorganising their work, and to know when to demnand more restrained behaviour. The staff of the local child guidance clinics co-operate in most cases with the teaching staffs of these schools in the care and progress of the pupils. Parents themselves frequently require help to acquare an understanding of their own and their children's problems. Concact between the school and the parents must be maintained, and the parents encouraged to provide a suitable home environment for the child on his discharge. Page 36 ANNUAL REPORT OF THE CHIEF PUBLIC HEALTH INSPECTOR FOR THE YEAR 1956 Section A -GENERAL ADMINISTRATION Section B -HOUSING Section C FOOD SUPPLIES Section D FACTORIES AND WORKPLACES Section E GENERAL SANITATION AND ATMOSPHERIC POLLUTION Section F PEST AND INFESTATION CONTROL Section G MISCELLANEOUS Setion A—GENERAL ADMINISTRATION Table 1 Summary Total Inspections 11,465 Compla 3 received and investigated 935 Preliminary notices served 814 Statutor notices served 287 Table No. 2 Analysis of , ection Work performed by the District Public Health Inspectors Housing 5,888 After infectious disease 203 Premises which food is prepared, stored and sold 2,194 Factories, and Workplaces 700 Shops 604 General Santation 699 Pest Infection Control 275 Outworkers premises 700 Smoke obervations 202 Page 37 Table No. 3 Premises at which improvements were effected Dwelling houses (rendered habitable) 614 Premises used for the preparation and sale of food 42 Shops 18 Drainage (reconstruction, repair, etc.) 165 Factories and Workplaces 19 Portable dustbins provided 678 Table No. 4 Defects found and dealt with under The Public Health Act 1936 and The Housing Act 1936 No. of defects 3,107 Roofs and Flashings 220 Gutters 222 Rainwater pipes 66 Sinks 12 Bath and sink waste pipes 31 Choked drains 153 Defective drains 20 Inspection covers 3 Ventilation and soil pipes 8 33 Gully dishing Gully traps 4 Flushing arrangements 120 W.C. structures 14 W.C. seats 13 W.C. pans 41 Yard paving 31 Chimney pots and stacks 48 Damp walls 149 External walls 29 Underfloor ventilation 11 Window cills 181 Window and door reveals 36 Window frames 187 Sashcords 153 Stair treads 4 Doors and door frames 75 Door cills 16 Page 38 Floors 127 Stoves 69 Walls and ceilings 273 Water supplies 42 Dustbins and dust chutes 628 Verminous rooms 18 Accumulation of rubbish 38 Animals and birds 4 Draining boards 26 Washing coppers 2 Health Education The case of success in public health lies in the community itself participating in every public health activity. The need for health education remains one of the most important matters in the field of public health administration. With the impact of the Food Hygiene Regulations which came into operation on the first day of the. year there was offered an excellent opportunity, which your officer accepted, to link the practical application of the requirements of the law with the lessons to be learnt from the disregard of the basic principles of personal hygiene. Talks have been given to school children, housewives and other associations an endeavour to satisfy the demand for more information from numbers of the public, food purveyors and housewives interested in case subjects. Not lestion importance in the approach to health education is the public health inspector during his routine visits to the homes of the people, the food preparing premises, the factory and workplace, in the cause of proring greater interest and understanding of the problems allied with the matter. New Legislation Housing bsidies Act 1956. Clean Act, 1956. Slum Cleance (Compensation) Act, 1956. Sanitary inspectors (Change of Designation) Act, 1956. Statutory instruments No. 89 Prevention of Damage by Pests (Application to Shipping) (Amendment) Order, 1956. No. 101 Foot and Mouth Disease (Infected and Controlled Areas Restriction) (Amendment) Order, 1956. No. 57 Rent Restrictions Regulations, 1956. Page 39 No. 398 Milk (Special Designations) (Specified Areas) Order, 1956. No. 420 Prevention of Damage by Pests (Application to Shipping) (Amendment No. 2) Order, 1956. No. 919 Milk and Dairies (Channel Islands and South Devon Milk) Regulations, 1956. No. 938 Food Hygiene (Amendment) (No. 1) Regulations, 1956. No. 1127 Calves (Feeding in Transit) Order, 1956. No. 1166 Food Standards (Curry Powder) (Amendment) Regulations, 1956. No. 1167 Food Standards (Tomato Ketchup) (Amendment) Regulations, 1956. No. 1183 Flour (Composition) Regulations, 1956. No. 1409 Milk (Special Designation) (Specified Areas) (No. 2) Order, 1956. No. 1611 Fowl Pest (Infected Areas Restrir ions) Order, 1956. No. 1710 Housing (Payments for Well Maim ned Houses) Order, 1956. No. 1750 Swine Fever (Infected Areas Rest! ions) Order, 1956. No. 2015 Housing Subsidies Order, 1956. No. 2022 Clean Air Act, 1956 (Appointed D Order, 1956. No. 2023 Smoke Control Areas (Authorise uels) Regulations, 1956. Section B—HOUSING Provision of Housing Accommodation Year 1956 January, 1956—Waiting List 3,613 December, 1956—Waiting List 3,14O New Accommodation Thames View Estate 222 London Road/Bennington Avenue Estate (comption) 26 St. Anns Road Flats 15 St. Johns Road Flats 4 Wedderburn Road 2 North Street Flats 6 275 Page 40 New Dwellings completed since end of 1939-1945 War Barking Council 1,743 Private Owners 64 London County Council 68 1,875 War destroyed—(Rebuilt) Barking Council 63 Private Owners (including London County Council) 331 394 Temporary bungalows Barkir Council 207 Londo County Council 297 504 Information Local Land Charges, etc. Inform on as to statutory orders made in respect of dwelling houses and to notices not complied with requiring works of repair was supplie in respect of 494 properties upon request for official search of the and Charges Register. In add on 274 particulars as to properties were supplied in all cases in which mortgages were being arranged under the Housing Act, 1949, in respect of the purchase of small dwellings. Improvemen ants—Housing Act, 1949 (as amended) Enquiriies as to improvement grants were received principally from owner ocupiers of dwelling houses. Grants for the improvement of housing accomandation were approved in respect of 11 applications, the cost of work amounting in the aggregate to £4,321 6s. 2d. Improvement rants amounting to £2,160 13s. Id. were granted. Default action In 45 insureces it was necessary to take action where owners of Properties had not carried out the requirements of notices served. Finally, the works were carried out by the owners in respect of 31 dwelling houses. Page 41 Repairs were carried out by the Corporation at 21 premises in accordance with provisions of Sections 39 and 45 of the Public Health Act, 1936. HOUSING (REPAIRS AND RENTS) ACT, 1954. PartII—Certificates of disrepair. During 1956 there were no applications. In common with many other local authorities we found there was no wish by owners to increase rents at the risk of a demand for repairs, and in consequence no applications were received from tenants. HOUSING SUBSIDIES ACT, 1956. Following the passing of this Act, subsidies can only be claimed for dwellings provided by the local authority to accommodate families displaced by slum clearance. Slum clearance includes dwellings owned by the Corporation which have been certified as unfit. During the year we rehoused:— 28 families from Creekmouth Cottages; 19 families from Camp hutments; 9 families from London Regional hutments 56 Rehousing from Prefabricated Hutments—10 Years Life The remaining 2 (two) families were rehoused from Bradfield Drive together with the 21 (twenty-one) families residing at Blatchford Close site, in preparation for the redevelopment of the Other Unfit Properties The Council declared as unfit the dwellings:— Nos. 2-16, Oxford Street—8 dwellings Nos. 1-8, Hockley Cottages—8 dwellings Orders were also made for the demolition of 3 individut nfit dwellings Linton Road and Church Road Clearance Areas A survey of the 226 dwellings concerned was in Progress and will be the subject of official representation early in 1957. Page 42 Rehousing and the Aged The provision of suitable accommodation for the active but aged population of the Borough has received the earnest attention of the Council. In planning the new estates a special feature of the layout has been the provision of one-bedroom dwellings. Early in the year one block of 24 dwellings situated at Maud Gardens, on the Thames View Estate, became occupied. The name is associated with Alderman Mrs. Maud Ball, C.A., Chairman of the Housing Committee. The gardens were laid out by the Corporation Parks Department with lawns and both rose and flower beds. There is an attractive summer shelter in the centre of the quadrangle. The whole is a pleasing and satisfying picture of care and comfort for the aged In addition to this special feature the Council is providing throughout its estat one-bedroom dwellings for the aged where they can see younger faimiles, indeed relatives growing up around them. So far provision has been made only for the active aged but the Essex Count Council has under consideration with the Barking Council proposals for the erection of suitable hostels for the less active. Such hostels intly shared by the two authorities will be built in the future. Information LocaI Land Charges Information as to statutory orders made in respect of dwelling houses and notices not complied with requiring works of repair was supplied respect of 520 properties upon request for official search of the Land charges Register. In addition particulars as to properties were supplied in all cases in which mortages were being arranged under the Housing Act, 1949, in respect of purchase of small dwellings. Improvements ants—Housing Act, 1949 (as amended) Enquiries to improvement grants were received principally from owner ocupiers of dwelling houses. Grants for the improvement of housing accomodation were approved in respect of 12 applications, the cost of the work amounting in the aggregate to £5,392 8s. lid. Improvement grants amounting to £2,696 14s. 6d. were granted. Page 43 Default Action Statutory notices served on the owners of 46 dwelling houses were not executed within the period permitted and in default legal proceedings were authorised. In each case the owners of the premises referred to carried out the work immediately this action was contemplated and in no case was it necessary to proceed further. Repairs were carried out by the Corporation at 11 premises in accordance with provisions of Sections 89, 45 and 56 of the Public Health Act, 1936. Section C—SUPERVISION OF FOOD SUPPLIES Following a year in which public opinion was expressed very freely in support of a more rigorous approach to clean safe food, the Food Hygiene Regulations were brought into operation. These new regulations made it obligatory for persons engaged in the handling of food for human consumption to attain a reasonable tandard of hygiene in the premises. Special regulations requiring was ng facilities and appliances for personal cleanliness. All premises in he Borough where food is sold are now fitted with a constant hot watt- apply. The overall standard of equipment and appliance used in the food industry continues to improve. The refrigerator is a commonplace piece of equipment in all food shops, whilst in butchers shops and general food shops refrigerated display cabinets e becoming increasingly more popular. The refrigerator is now accepted as a standard unit of equipment in the sale of food. The rapidly increasing industrial exploitation of ratition brings within the bounds of possibility its use in this country the not too distant future for food preservation. Already we read that the future of atomic food pre vation looks so promising that a new plant to process 1,000 tons of food month is to be built in the United States. In this plant, which will start operations in 1958, scientists may well perfect this development, tentially one of the most beneficial uses of atomic energy ever discovered. If they are successful, it will be possible to preserve food without refrigeration, an advance that will revolutionize food storage and distribution throughout the world. Progress toward a practical, effective method of "cold sterilizing" food through exposure to atomic radiation has been steady during the last five years. At the beginning, scie tic knowledge was limited almost entirely to two facts; spoilage bacteria in food are killed by atomic radiation, and food so treated does not retain any o! the atomic radiation. It was not known how much radiation was Page 44 needed, how long the prserved food could be stored without refrigeration, what changes would occur in taste, odour and nutrient value of the food. Most important of all, no one knew whether the atomicprocessed food would be harmful to human beings. The results today are encouraging. Atomic energy has been found extremely useful in many different ways. Radiation can be used to sterilize food so that it can be stored for weeks, months and even years without refrigeration. It can be used to pasteurize food, which increases storage life, so necessary in marketing perishables. The sterilizing power of atomic radiation also can be used to destroy food parasiies; insects in dry foods, such as wheat, peas and beans; or to prevent sprouting of tubers, such as potatoes and onions. Several different tyres-of atomic equipment using the waste products from atomic reacors, atomic rays produced by high-voltage machines, and radio-isotopes have proved highly effective. Through eating tests, atomic-processed foods have been found as nutritious as untreated foods and safe for consumption. The purpose of these comments is to indicate that not only should put health workers now include radiation in their basic training but orkers in the food industry should likewise be taught to think of radio-activity as part of our present daily hazards. Help yourself service stores continue to increase in number, and are proving be a helpful contribution to the presentation of food in an attractiv and safe manner to the housewife. This sa method brings with it problems, particularly relating to correct labe . FOOD PREMISES The following is a classified list of the food premises in the Borough where food repared or sold:— Bakehouses 6 Bread a Cake Shops 18 Butchers shops 42 Confectionery Shops 75 Factory canteens 48 Fishmoners and Fish Fryers 24 Food Manufacturers 3 Fruiteres and Greengrocers 44 Genera stores 34 Grocery Shops 69 Ice Cream Manufacturers 2 Page 45 Ice Cream Vendors 139 Milk Shops 46 Onion Peelers 64 Public Houses and Off Licence Premises 32 Public House Restaurants 9 Restaurants 54 Shops in Markets 48 School Meal Centres and Kitchens 43 In order that there should be no misunderstanding concerning the implications of the Food Hygiene Regulations 1955, which came into operation on 1st January 1956, and the responsibilities associated therewith, all the food traders in the Borough received a printed abstract of these Regulations. A total of 2,194 visits were made to the various food premises by your public health inspectors lo clear up problems, as the maximum penalties for contraventions ai £100 fine, 3 months imprisonment or both. Inspection of Food Premises During the year the following inspections were madt nd notices served:— Number of visits made to the premises 2,194 Notices served for:— Defective or dirty walls and ceilings 30 Hot water fittings 40 Counters and storage accommodation 9 Drainage and paving 9 Sinks and wash-hand basins 33 Unsatisfactory temperatures 8 Defective or dirty floors 12 Defective w.c. fittings 12 Screening of food 12 Accumulations and disposal of refuse 14 Various equipment and fittings 35 FOOD AND DRUGS ACT, 1955—CHEMICAL A \LYSIS A total of 229 samples of food have been submitte to the Public Analyst for chemical analysis, as described in Table V.ofthis number 28 were formal samples. The public analyst reported adversely upon four samples. One was Luncheon Meat containing insufficient meat to justify the description "Luncheon Meat". As there are no standard or this commodity the Public Health Committee requested the Minster of Food Page 46 to fix a minimum standard of 80% meat content for this preparation. A warning letter was sent to the makers, after which manufacture ceased. FOOD SAMPLES REPORTED NOT TO BE GENUINE Sample No. Food Adulteration or Labelling Offence Action Taken 4107 Cakes "Fairy Queens" Labelled containing 100% pure butter Manufacturers agreed to change the label 4123 Breakfast Sausage Deficient in meat Warning letter to manufacturers 4158 "Fruit Syrup for Milk Shakes" Incorrect label. Old stock Manufacturers agreed to change the label 4168 Luncheon Meat Deficient in meat content Warning letter to manufacturers. Manufacture now discontinued FOOD PROSECUTIONS AND COMPLAINTS During the year there were received at the office eight complaints from local residents regarding articles of food purchased in the Borough. Also one complaint was made about a loaf of bread containing a screw, the loaf had been manufactured and purchased outside the district. In this case the local authority was contacted and the complaint investigated to the satisfaction of the complainant. All the local complaints were investigated and dealt with as set out below Nature of Complaint Bottles of pastrised milk containing gnats.—Anistous Fenestralis Bottle of patrised milk containing several bottips Bottle of pastrised milk containing two bottle to. Hot cross fun containing metal button Corned Beejntaining metal Pork Pies moudJy Loaf of bad containing small spring Action Taken Warning letter sent to the milk supplier Legal proceedings were instituted. The case was dismissed Warning letter sent to the milk supplier Warning letter sent to the manufacturer of the bun Warning letter sent to the retailer Warning letter sent to manufacturer of pies Warning letter sent to manufacturer of bread Page 47 FOOD HYGIENE REGULATIONS, 1955 The occupier of a small brick bakery was prosecuted for not complying with the above regulations, in as much as he:— (a) Failed to keep appliances clean; (b) Failed to keep containers free from contamination; (c) Failed to keep structure of food room clean; (d) Allowed refuse to accumulate in a food room; (e) Failed to ensure cleanliness of operatives clothing etc. whilst engaged in food preparation. Convicted and fine £10 on each charge, making a total of £50. Milk Supplies Our milk supplies continue to be of a satisfactory bacteriological quality. It will be noted in the attached table that seven samples failed the Methylene Blue Test. This was due to the fact tha the samples were taken during a very hot period when the atmos heric shade temperature in the laboratory exceeded 65°F betweer he time of sampling and the time of commencement of the sampling technique, consequently the samples were void in accordance with the Milk (Special Designation) (Pasteurised and Sterilised Milk Regulations, 1949. These samples however, did satisfy the Phosphat ? Test which indicates adequate pasteurisation. There have been 80 samples of milk taken through the year for Methylene Blue and Phosphatase examination. All milk supplies retailed in the Borough are at the present time heat treated and thereby made safe for the public to ccusme. BACTERIOLOGICAL EXAMINATION OF :LK Designation of Milk Total Samples Submitted Methylene Blue Test Photase Test Passed Failed Passe Failed Pasturised 61 55 6 61 - Tuberculin Tested (pasteurised) 19 18 1 19 — Page 48 Licences Milk (Special Designation) (Specified Areas) Order, 1951. Milk (Special Designation) (Pasteurised and Sterilised Milk) Regulations, 1949/1953. Dealers Licences 49 Supplementary Licences 12 Milk (Special Designation) (Raw Milk) Regulations, 1949/1954. Dealers Licences 2 Supplementary Licences 8 Ice Cream There are two manufacturers and a total of 199 retailers of Ice Cream in the Borough, including 53 itinerant vendors. During the year 30 samples of Ice Cream and Lollies have been submitted tc sacteriological examination. Four samples of Ice Cream did not satisfy the Methylene Blue Test and appropriate action was taken with the manufacturers in each case. Ten samples of Ice Cream and Lollies were obtained for chemical analysis and all have been reported satisfactory. Examination of the Ice Cream samples showed a fat content much in excess of the present standards fc at content. The Lollies have been satisfactory and free from lead or her metals. ICE CREAM ME YLENE BLUE PROVISIONAL GRADINGS Grade 1 Grade 2 Grade 3 Grade 4 15 5 2 2 ICE CREAM FAT CONTENT Total No.Samples 0%-5% 5%-10% 10%-15% 9-45 Page 49 ICE LOLLIES LEAD CONTENT Total No. Satisfactory Unsatisfactory 1 1 ICE LOLLIES BACTERIOLOGICAL EXAMINATION Satisfactory Unsatisfactory 6 - Manufacture of Sausages At the present time there are 32 premises registered for the manufacture of sausages. One of these establishments is a central factory for several butchers shops under the same control. Another factory produces sausages and other cooked meat foods for the wholesale trade and distributes over a wide area of London and the County of Essex. The remaining 30 premises are butchers shops where he sausages are made and sold in conjunction with their trade. Regular routine sampling for chemical analysis has been maintained and it is noteworthy that although there is an absence of an official standard for meat content in sausages, on no occasion has there been a sample reported below 50% for Beef Sausages and 65% for Pork Sausages. BEEF SAUSAGES MEAT CONTENT No. of Samples 50%-54% I 55%-59% 60%/ 13 10 2 1 Page 50 PORK SAUSAGES MEAT CONTENT No. of Samples 60%-65% 70%-74% 75% Plus 25 16 5 4 OTHER SAUSAGES (Hamburgers, Saveloys, Frankfurter, Liver Sausage, Breakfast Sausage, Luncheon Meat) No. of Samples 40%-49% 150%-59% 60%-69% I 70% />/(« 31 2 10 9 10 REGISTRA ONS OF PREMISES USED FOR THE MANUFACTURE OP SAUSAGES, PRESERVATION OF FOOD, MANUFAC IRE AND SALE OF ICE CREAM AND DEALERS IN MARGARINE Trade Number on Register 1955 Number of applications received during 1956 Number of applications refused during 1956Total number of premises on register 1956 Manufactures f Ice Cream 2 2 Retailers of I Tream 188 11 — 199 Manufacturer Sausages 32 — — 32 Ush Frying and preserving 24 — — 24 nam Boilers 7 2 9 Margarine Des 1 - - 1 Butchers Shops —Meat Supplies The mea tailed in the Borough continues to be of good quality, and obtain by the local butchers mainly from Smithfield. Two butchers slaugher their animals outside the district. This meat is sujected to insection at the time of slaughter and also when delivered to the shops, is pleasing to report that at no time has it been necessary to Condemn any carcases brought into the Borough. Page 51 There are 50 butchers shops in the Borough. Each is provided with modern refrigerators, adequate sinks and wash-hand basins with constant hot and cold water supplies. Five of these shops are also fitted with modern refrigerated window stalls for displaying meat, a feature which it is hoped will become increasingly more popular. TABLE 5 SAMPLES SUBMITTED TO THE PUBLIC ANALYST JANUARY 1st to DECEMBER 31st, 1956 Number Analysed Almonds, Ground 1 Bread 16 Bicarbonate of Soda 2 Butter 3 Cheese 2 Coffee 1 Cooking Fats 9 Cream 1 Custard Powder 1 Fish Paste 4 Flour 3 Fruit 4 Fruit Drinks 18 Herbs and Spices 9 Horseradish 1 Ice Cream 10 Icing Sugar 1 Jam 3 Lollies 2 Margarine 5 Marmalade 4 Marzipan 1 Meat Paste 2 Medicines 12 Milk 8 Mint in Vinegar 1 Mustard 2 Peanut Butter 1 Page 52 Pea Flour 1 Peas 3 Pickle 5 Processed Meat 7 Puddings and pies 8 Rice 1 Sauce 5 Sausages 66 Sweets 2 Tea 3 Yeast 1 Total 229 TABLE 6 UNSOUND FOOD CONDEMNED AND DESTROYED—1956 Bacon 9 lbs. Beans, Tinned 81 tins Beverages, Tinned 12 tins Butter 3 lbs. Cake 12 lbs. Cereals 28 pkts. Cheese 94 lbs. Coffee 3 bottles Cream, Tinned 3 tins Fish 12 stones Fish, Tinned 48 tins Fruit, Tinned 759 tins Ham 499 lbs. Jam and Marmalade 11 lbs. Meat 1,346 lbs. Meat, Tinned 200 tins Milk, Tinned 141 tins Onions 1 jar Paste, Meat and Fish 5 jars Peas, Tinned 103 tins Pickles 4 jars Rice 5 lbs. Sauce 1 bottle Sausages 14 lbs. Page 53 Semolina 1 tin Soup 38 tins Spaghetti, Tinned 3 tins Split Peas 80 lbs. Sweets 9 pkts. Vegetables, Tinned 6 tins Section D—FACTORIES AND WORKPLACES Routine inspection of factories within the Borough was regularly carried out. The visits made and the results are set out in Tables 7 and 8, which have been prepared in accordance with the Factories Ac 1937 and the Public Health Act, 1936. TABLE 7 1.—Inspections for purposes of provisions as to health Premises. Sections enforced by local authority Number on Register Number Inspections Notice Occupiers prosecuted 1. Factories: Sees. 1-6 Factories Act 1937 31 25 - — 2. Factories (not included in 1) Section 7 Factories Act 264 508 23 — 3. Other premises Section 7 Factories Act 4 4 1 - 4. Offices and Workplaces Public Health Act 1936 61 163 3 - Total 360 700 27 - Page 54 TABLE 8 Imrpovements effected at Factories 2.—Cases in which defects were found Particulars Number of cases in which defects were found Found Remedied Referred To H.M. Inspector By H.M. Inspector Want of cleanliness (S.1) - - - - Overcrowding (S.2) - - - - Unreasonable Temperature (S.3) - - - - Inadequate ventilation (S.4) - - - - Drainage of floors (S.6) - - - - Sanitary conveniances(S.7) - - - - (a) Insufficient 6 2 - - (b) Unsuitable and defective 24 16 - - (c) Not separate for sexes 1 1 - - Other offences against the Act (not outwork) 3 - — — Total 34 19 — — Page 55 Outwork Table 9 sets out the type of outwork being carried out in the Borough and the inspections made in respect thereof. TABLE 9 OUTWORK Factories Act, 1937 Section 110: Number of outworkers in list required by Section 110(1)(c) 277 Nature of work carried out:— Making of wearing apparel 157 Handbags 2 Umbrellas 1 Boxes and receptacles of paper 11 Brush making 1 Cosaques, Christmas crackers and stockings, etc 35 Artificial flowers 1 Toys 3 Carding of buttons l Furnishings 1 Section 111: Number of visits to outworkers 700 Number of unwholesome premises Nil Number of notices served Nil Number of prosecutions Nil CLEAN AIR ACT, 1956 The Clean Air Act, 1956 received the Royal Absent on 5th Jul). 1956, and certain of its provisions came into operation 31st ber, 1956. These provisions were mainly those dealing with the the control of smoke from domestic chimneys. Smoke Control Areas The creation of smoke control areas is simplified so that such areas may be established by an order of the Local Author which must confirmed by the Minister. Page 56 Broadly speaking the effect of a smoke control order is to prohibit entirely the emission of smoke from the chimneys in the area. The establishment of such areas will be gradual and progress will be governed by the supply of smokeless fuel and the rate at which fuel burning appliances can be converted or replaced. Above all, progress will depend upon public support: upon an understanding of the problems involved and readiness to co-operate in smoke control. It is estimated that sufficient quantities of the various kinds of smokeless fuels can be made available over the next few years for a substantial start to be made in the establishment of smoke control areas. In the premises to which smoke control orders apply, it will be necessary for solid fuel appliances in which smokeless fuel cannot be burned satisfactorily to be altered or replaced. In private dwellings other than new dwellings, the greater part of the cost of these adaptations will be ne by the Local Authority and the Exchequer. Prior Approve of new Furnace Installations Section 3 the Clean Air Act, 1956, provides that no new furnace may now be installed which is not capable of being operated continuously without emitting smoke and notice must be given to the Local Authority of intention to install a new furnace. A similar vision has been operative in Barking for some years by virtue of the Essex County Council Act, 1952. A person posing to install a new furnace may submit plans and specifications the local authority. If the plans are approved the installation is demed to be capable of operating continuously without emitting smoke This provision will be a useful means of ensuring that the risk of creating new sources of pollution is reduced to a minimum. Thames View Estate —Smoke Control Area The mild winter, coupled with the improvement in the road conditions resulted in an absence of complaint regarding the availability and delivery of smokeless fuels. The few contraventions of the condition of tenancy which were noted were dealt with by giving advice to tenants. Page 57 Industrial Smoke Until the provisions of the Clean Air Act 1956 concerning industrial smoke come into force control continues to be exercised by means of the Public Health Act 1937, and the Smoke Byelaws. A great deal of unspectacular work is carried out by your officers by way of observations on chimneys and discussions with managements in an endeavour to reduce smoke emissions. This work has been rewarding, but there are always likely to be sporadic outbursts due to breakdowns in the mechanical systems or to human frailty. For this reason your officers have to be constantly on the alert to deal with such outbursts when they arise. In one case during the year, the activities of a scrap metal firm were causing emission at night. This arose from the burning of insulation from scrap cable without sufficient air supply and not at a sufficiently high temperature. Following discussions with the management concerning a suitable installation for dealing with the mater the process was discontinued. Another case occurred in which smoke from an incir ator burning wood waste discharged at a low level was causing nuisance to nearby residents. The owners of the factory are planning extensions which will include a new furnace installation. They have undertaken to give priority to the new installation and not wait until the extensions are completed. In the meantime other outlets for their waste material are being sought. One firm whose chimney has caused nuisance from the emission of charred wood ash have had their boiler attendants trained in boiler house practice in an endeavour to improve efficiency. The firm has also placed an order for a dust arrestor to remove the ood ash from the flue gases. A chemical factory carrying out several procesaes and using a number of boilers were called upon by statutory notice to take steps to prevent the emission of smoke in such quantities as be a nuisance As a result of discussions with your officers a mechanical stoker was installed on one boiler which was successful in eliminating the smoke nuisance. The success of the first mechanical stoker has encouraged the firm to go ahead with similar plans for other boilers. When the alterations are completed the Company will require only two chimney stacks place of nine in use hitherto. Page 58 Measurement of Atmospheric Pollution Measurements continued to be made throughout the year, the results of which are shown in the table on page 61. The map on page 63 demonstrates the distribution of the pollution throughout the Borough. Not unnaturally the higher pollution occurs close to the industrial area. Whilst some of this pollution undoubtedly arises from chimneys within the Borough, there must be a substantial amount carried by the prevailing wind from riverside factories further up the Thames Valley. The heavier material such as grit entrained in the flue gases falls to earth comparatively near the source of emission. The point of maximum deposition has been demonstrated to be at a distance of ten times the height of the chimney from the chimney. The lighter material such as smoke articles may be carried many miles by air currents and may indeed not be deposited until carried down by rain. This is demonstrated by the fact that the rainfall shows a direct relationship to the matter deposited. The average monthly deposit for all measuring gauges in the Borough was 10 tons per square mile. This compares with a figure of 18.9 tons per square mile as a national average monthly deposit in the report on obeservations in the year ending 31st March 1955, by the Department Scientific and Industrial Research. The "high average" for that period which is the average of the six highest readings in the country was tons per square mile. It is felt that these figures help to put Barkig, pollution problem in proper perspective. Number of observations 202 Page 59 Smoke Abatement Black Smoke minutes Moderate Smoke minutes Little or No Smoke minutes Amount of smoke recorded during the year 238.25 1257.75 4564 Average amount of smoke recorded per observation 1.1795 6.2265 22.5940 4 26 - 6½ ½ 23 7 16 7 4 8½ 17½ 5 23 2 5 20 5 7 14 9 6 24 — 30 — — 15 12 3 3 8 19 Particulars of contraventions of the Byelaws (over 2 minutes in ½ hour) 8 22 — 4 18 8 3¼ ¼ 26½ 8 8 14 2½ 3½ 24 7 5 18 9½ 5½ 15 4 10 16 10 20 — 4½ 5½ 20 4 10½ 15½ 3 4 23 10½ 2 19½ 4 6 20 4½ 3½ 22 5 9 16 4 13 13 9 9 12 6 7½ 16½ 3 1 26 Page 60 Page 61 ATMOSPHERIC POLLUTION—SULPHUR DIOXIDE READINGS MEASURED AS MILLIGRAMS OF SO3 PER DAY COLLECTED BY 100 sq. C M. LEAD PEROXIDE MONTH 1951 1952 1953 1954 1955 1956 + D.56 D.57 D.58 D.56 D.57 D.58 D.56 D.57 D.58 D.56 D.57 D.58 D.56 D.57 D.58 D. 1571 D.56 D.57 D.58 D.1571 JANUARY 2.29 2.60 1.97 2.04 2.84 2.14 3.50 4.06 3.09 4.43 3.81 3.71 4.19 3.47 3.20 2.23 3.83 4.69 3.59 2.72 FEBRUARY 2.14 2.24 1.81 2.16 2.82 2.38 2.68 2.98 2.01 4.24 3.35 3.69 4.39 3.68 3.27 2.39 2.71 3.57 3.45 2.28 MARCH 1.48 2.05 2.09 1.57 1.28 1.68 2.89 2.57 2.77 3.17 3.64 3.14 3.46 2.24 0.59 1.29 1.91 2.74 2.12 2.41 APRIL 1.31 1.48 1.29 0.95 0.98 1.08 2.16 2.48 2.03 2.23 1.74 2.38 2.88 2.31 1.92 1.31 2.00 2.49 2.32 1.52 MAY 0.43 1.06 1.05 0.72 1.04 0.77 1.53 1.17 1.50 2.20 1.80 1.95 1.50 2.11 1.55 1.03 1.32 2.25 1.52 1.17 JUNE 0.55 0.85 0.55 0.04 0.65 0.58 1.27 1.35 0.97 2.00 1.94 1.22 1.14 1.71 1.13 0.82 0.82 1.55 1.07 0.89 JULY 0.72 1.11 0.97 0.50 1.19 0.78 2.19 2.23 1.82 2.63 2.42 1.64 0.34 0.66 0.42 0.32 1.00 2.00 1.49 0.91 AUGUST 0.87 1.37 1.01 0.75 1.41 0.77 2.43 2.05 1.57 1.93 1.80 1.19 0.70 1.27 0.91 0.64 1.04 2.21 1.67 0.97 SEPTEMBER 0.94 1.53 1.21 1.02 1.10 0.65 2.18 1.75 1.75 3.32 3.03 2.29 1.40 2.87 1.70 1.11 1.01 1.75 1.59 1.01 OCTOBER 1.21 1.63 1.50 1.63 1.54 1.93 2.53 1.84 1.78 4.16 3.63 2.89 2.18 3.24 2.38 1.85 1.86 3.06 2.35 1.80 NOVEMBER 1.82 1.99 1.68 1.96 2.23 2.15 4.15 3.91 3.51 4.36 4.05 3.22 2.66 3.53 2.69 1.91 2.96 3.97 3.20 2.67 DECEMBER 1.35 1.88 1.83 3.77 3.24 3.96 3.38 3.08 3.15 5.00 4.80 3.48 2.60 3.53 2.56 1.83 3.79 4.45 4.45 2.73 Averages 1.26 1.64 1.41 1.43 1.70 1.57 2.57 2.46 2.16 3.33 2.95 2.57 2.29 2.55 1.86 1.39 2.2 2.9 2.40 1.75 + STATIONS: D.56 = Barking Park up to December, 1952, and thereafter Alfreds Way. D.57 = Greatfields Park. D. 5 8 = Par sloes Park. D.1571 = Barking Park SOLID DEPOSIT 1956 In this pictorial representation of pollution density the base of each flag mast is on the site of a deposit gauge. One tenth of an inch represents one month's reading and the weight of pollution is indicated by the shades shown below. Under 20 tons per square mile per month. 20-25 tons per square mile per month. 25-30 tons per square mile per month. Over 30 tons per squ mile per month. Page 62 Offensive Trades Throughout the year there have been 25 visits made (o the eight offensive trade premises operating in the Borough. Type of Trade Number Oil Boiler 5 Fat Melter 1 Soap Manufacturer 1 Gut Scraper 1 Drainage of Existing Buildings There was a noticeable increase in the number of complaints regarding defective or choked drains, received at the office during the year. There were 248 visits made, and arising therefrom it is necessary to repair or relay drains to 165 premises, apply 6 smoke t ts and clear 153 choked drains. Rainfall Rain fell during the year on 218 days and measure 20.31 inches compared with 21.61 inches for the previous year. Daily records show that 0.01 inches or more rain fe on 127 days and 0.04 inches or more rain was recorded on 91 days. SWIMMING BATHS AND SWIMMING P 3L I am indebted to the Borough Engineer who has supplied me with the following figures:— East Street Baths Total bathers: 80,781, including 49,272 children. Park Swimming Pool Total bathers: 51,635, including 39,038 children. Slipper Baths Total users: 41,185. Samples of baths water were taken during the year as follows — East Street Bath Park Swimming Pool Bath at South East Essex Technical College 11 All the samples except one were reported by the Borough Analyst to be of a high standard of bacterial purity. Page 64 Water Supplv The water supply to all the dwelling houses in the Borough is from the South Essex Waterworks Company, whilst the supplies to three factories are drawn from their own deep wells. Each month samples from the main supplies were obtained for bacteriological examination and twice during the year for chemical analysis. There have been eight samples of water obtained from the wells submitted to bacteriological examination. Samples from both mains and deep wells were found to be of a high standard of bacteriological purity. Section F—PEST INFESTATION CONTROL The systematic treatment of the sewers in accordance with the recommendations of the Ministry of Agriculture and Fisheries (Infestation Control Division) was carried out twice. The resui of the treatment are set out below:— May November Number c nanholes baited 408 409 Number: ving pre-bait take 175 96 Number ving complete pre-bait take 110 54 Surface Infes: The following information taken from the Annual Report furnished to the Ministry of Agriculture and Fisheries for the year 1956 shows the degree of estation dealt with by the department. The charge for this service now 5/6d. per hour for business premises. Private dwellings are ced free of charge. PREVALANCE OF RATS AND MICE Type of Properly (1) Properlies in Area No. of properties in area in which infestation was found Analysis of Col. 4 Number infested by (2) Notified by Occupier (3) Survey under the Act (4) Total RATS MICE Major Minor Local Authority Properly 28 15 6 21 - 5 9 Dwelling house 21,214 165 236 401 — 87 74 Business premise 2,010 49 71 120 - 92 35 Totals 23,252 229 313 542 — 184 118 Page 65 MEASURES OF CONTROL BY CORPORATION Type of Property No. of properties inspected No. of inspections made No. of notices served under Section 4 No. of treatments carried out by arrangement with Occupier Under Section 5 Treatment Works Rats Mice Rats Mice Local Authority's property 21 21 - - 5 9 - - Dwelling Houses 401 401 - - 161 74 - - Business Premises 120 120 — — 92 35 — - Totals 542 542 — 258 118 — - Disinfestalion of Verminous Premises The Council provides a disinfestation service. There were 21 minor infestations dealt with, including 20 Council dwellings. It is gratifying to record that the number of verminous premises has greatly reduced since the pre-war days. The improved conditions brought about by the better living accommodation and a greater degree of personal understanding, together with the modern insecticides have all contributed to the general comfort and betterment in the home. Section G—MISCELLANEOUS Supply of Dustbins The number of premises where dustbins are supplied and maintained by the Corporation in accordance with Section 75 (3) of the Public Health Act, 1936, was at the end of the year 4837 The number supplied by the Corporation under this arrangement during the year was 543 whilst 135 dustbins were supplied on payment by eight annual instalments at the rate of five shillings Page 66 Public Cleansing and Refuse Disposal The Borough Engineer has supplied me with the following information:— The quantity of refuse collected and disposed of throughout the year was 56,794 cubic yards. The average weight, 6.34 per cubic yard and the total weight 17,365 tons. In addition, 55,608 tons of refuse were received from other Boroughs. The refuse was disposed of by tipping at Renwick Road in accordance with the provisions of the Essex County Council Act, 1933 (Third Schedule). Pet Animals Jet, 1951 Licences vere issued in respect of eight premises within the Borough to v ich 16 visits of inspection were made. Page 67