UBAR 8 URBAN DISTRICT 0F BAR NET ANUAL REPORT of the MEDICAL OFFICER OF HEALTH to the BAR NET URBAN DISTRICT COUNCIL by CHAS. F. HARDIE. M.A., M.B., B.C., (Cantab). Together with the ANNUAL REPORT of the CHIEF SANITARY AND HOUSING INSPECTOR by CHAS. WILLIAM HILL. M.S.I.A. 1939 (2) ANNUAL REPORT of the MEDICAL OFFICER OF HEALTH to the BARNET URBAN DISTRICT COUNCIL by CHAS. F. HARDIE. M.A., M„B„, B.C., (Cantab). MEDICAL OFFICER OF HEALTH. (3) BARNET URBAN DISTRICT COUNCIL. MEDICAL OFFICE'S REPORT. Public Health Department, No. 10 Wood Street, Barnet. To the Chairman and Members of the Barnet Urban District Council. Mrs. Strugnell and Gentlemen, I have much pleasure in presenting to you my Annual Report on the Health of the District for the year 1939. It is drawn up on the lines indicated in Circular 1961 of the l6th February, 1940, as requested by the Ministry of Health, STATISTICS AND SOCIAL CONDITIONS OF THE AREA. Area (in acres) 1931 3,114 Area added in April 1935 1,176 Total Area 4,290 Population (1931 Census) 14,726 Population of Added Area 338 Registrar General's Estimate of Resident Population mid 1939 22,030 Average Population appropriate to the calculation of death rates 21,980 Number of Inhabited Houses 193:9 6,728 Rateable Value £253,263 Sum represented by a Penny Rate ( excluding Totteridge and Rowley 726.16. 6. ( excluding Totteridge 768.7. 7. ( including Totteridge and Rowley 1055. 5. 3. NATURAL AND SOCIAL CONDITION The population is largely residential, and consists chiefly of people whose occupation lies outside the urban area. Those employed in the district, apart from the tradesmen and their employees, are mainly skilled workers at dental manufacturing, lithographic, rinting and optical works. Relief is supplied by the Public Assistance Committee of the Hertfordshire County Council. (4) EXTRACTS FROM VITAL STATISTICS OF THE YEAR. Total. M. F. Live Births Legitimate 284 153 131 Illegitimate 5 1 4 Birth Rate per 1,000 of the estimated resident population 1" 5.11 Total, M. F. Still Births Legitimate 7 -7 4 Illegitimate 1 1 - Still Birth Rate per 1,000 total (live and still) Births 26 Total M. F. Deaths 231 132 99 Death Rate per 1,000 of the estimated average population 10.5 Deaths from puerperal causess- Puerperal Sepsis NIL. Death Rate per 1,000 total births NIL, Other Puerperal causes NIL. " " " " " " NIL. Death Rate from puerperal causes per 1,000 total (live and still) births NIL. Death Rate of infants under one year of age:- All infants per 1,000 live births 48.61 Legitimate infants per 1,000 legitimate live births 31.80 Illegitimate infants per 1,000 illegitimate live births 1,000 Deaths from Cancer (all ages) 34 " " Measles (all ages) NIL " " Whooping Cough (all ages) NIL " " Diarrhoea, (under 2 years of age) 1 GENERAL PROVISION OF HEALTH CERVICES FOR THE DISTRICT. Hospitals provided or subsidised by the Local Authority or County Counc.il, A. (l) Infectious Diseases Joint Isolation Hospital in Barnet. (2) Joint Smallpox Hospital at Cheshunt, B, (1) Tuberculosis Hospital at Ware, provided by the Herts. County Council. (2) Maternity block with 22 beds at the Wellhouse Hospital. Ambulance Facllities. Infectious Diseases - Motor Ambulance at Isolation Hospital. Non-Infectious Diseases - Two Motor Ambulances, (1) Relieving Officer's Cases and Accidentss- By Day and Night - 'phone BARnet 0051. Wellhouse Hospital, Barnet. (2) Private Cases By Day - 'phone BARnet 0060. Fire Station , High Street, Barnet. By Night - 'phone BARnet 233 1,173 cases of Non-Infectious Diseases were removed by the Motor Ambulances. (5) Clinic and Treatment Centres, A Maternity and Child Welfare Centre and Clinic is held every Monday at "Fieldways," Wellhouse Lane; also a Tuberculosis Clinic on the first and third Y/eanesdays in the month, and a Dental Clinic on Thursdays at the same address. There are (1) Two Nursing Homes for paying patients, (2) The Victoria Hospital, and (3) A General Hospital (Tollhouse) under the Public Assistance Committee, Herts. County Council. The Barnet Nursing Association provides two nurses. There is one Maternity and Nursing Home registered with the County Council. The hospital accommodation for the district is adequate. The Infectious Disease Joint Isolation Hospital provides 54 beds in 3 blocks, one being a cubicle block. There is an operating theatre and a Nuffield Respirator. PUBLIC HEALTH STAFF. ø Medical Officer of Health, x C. F. Hardie, M.A., M.B., B.C., (Cantab). ø Chief Sanitary Inspector. + ø Charles William Hill, M.S.I.A. ø Additional Sanitary Inspectors. + / John Baillie Wilson, C.R.S.I., ø Norman Holt, A.R.San.I. + Clerical Staff - One Clerk. øHolds the special qualification as Inspector of Meat and Other Foods under examination of the Royal Sanitary Institute. / Holds the qualification as Instructor (Civilian Anti-Gas School, Special). ø Salary Contribution of one-half, from Exchequer Grants. x Part-time Officer. + Whole-time Officer. WATEK SUPPLY, The water for the district is supplied by the Barnet District Gas and Water Company and the Colne Valley Water Company. With regard to the Barnet District Gas and Water Company, all the water is chlorinated; and a pathological staff is maintained. The bulk of the water is examined daily and each pumping st tion once a week. 1,680 examinations of the water were made during the year, i.e. 201 Chemical and 1,479 Bacteriological. The Colne Valley Water Company exercises constant supervision and members of the staff are on duty day and night throughout the year, examining samples. All the water supplied by this Company is chlorinated. DRAINAGE AMD SEWERAGE. The Town is drained and sewered on the separate system, excepting the older portions of the district where a combined system obtains. The sewage is conveyed to an Irrigation Farm of 56 acres, but before it is turned on the land it is screened and treated by means of detritus and sedimentation tanks, and three rotary filters. Pumping is necessary for three sewers which have their outlets at a low point on the farm. A few outlying properties are drained to cesspools, and part of Totteridge to the Finchley Borough Sewers. There are only a few earth closets in remote parts of the district. DISPOSAL OF HOUSE REFUSE. The house refuse is collected weekly in covered mechanical conveyances and conveyed to the Farm and disposed of by the controlled tipping system. SANITARY CONDITIONS AMD WATER SUPPLY OF SCHOOLS. There are eight public elementary schools in the district, viz;- Arkley Church of England Infants School; Byng Road County Council School (Junior Mixed and Infants and Senior Mixed Departments); Christ Church School, with Boys, Girls and Infants Departments; Barnet Church of England School (Senior Mixed Department) Totteridge Church of England School, (Boys, Girls and Infants); Grasvenor Avenue, (Infants); St. Catherine's Roman Catholic Mixed School; and Underhill County Council School, (Junior Mixed Department and Infants Department), The Assistant School Medical Officer resides in the district and visits each school at least once each term. He is in constant touch with the teachers, and all doubtful cases of illness are at once referred to him. Infectious cases and contacts are excluded from the Schools and disinfections are carried out when necessary. (7) PREVALENCE OF, AND CONTROL OVER„ INFECTIOUS DISEASES. The following table shows the number of Notifications to the Sanitary Authority during -the year- of each disease specified in the Public Health Act, 1936 and Regulations, -and the number removed to Hospitals- NATURE OF INFECTIOUS DISEASE NOTIFIED REMOVED TO HOSPITAL DEATHS. Smallpox ... ... ... Scarlet Fever 54 34 ... Diphtheria and Membranous Croup 3 3 ... Enteric (Typhoid) Fever 2 2 ... Malaria ... ... ... Ophthalmia Neonatorum ... ... ... Erysipelas 6 6 ... Pulmonary Tuberculosis 17 8 1 Cerebro Spinal Meningitis 3 3 ... Anterior Poliomyelitis 2 2 ... Puerperal Pyrexia 15 15 ... Pneumonia 54 49 ... Polio Encephalitis ... ... ... Total , 156 122 1 Of the foregoing the following cases normally resident outside the district were notified from the Wellhouse Hospital;- Scarlet Fever 3; Erysipelas 4; Puerperal Pyrexia 13; Diphtheria 1; Pneumonia 36; Typhoid Fever 1; Cerebro Spinal Meningitis 2; Anterior Poliomyelitis 1. The cases of Tuberculosis removed are chiefly sent to Ware Sanatorium. The Case Rates per 1,000 of the population are as follows Scarlet Fever 2.45s Diphtheria O.l3; Pulmonary Tuberculosis 0.77; Puerperal Pyrexia 6.73 (per 1,000 Births), (5) AGE INCIDENCE OF INFECTIOUS DISEASE. DISEASE NUMBER OF CASES NOTIFIED YEARS OF AGE 0 1 2- 3- 4 5- 10 15- 20- 35- 45- 65. Scarlet Fever 1 - 3 - 34 5 l 6 - 1 - Diphtheria - 1 - - 1 - - 1 - - - - Typhoid Fever - - - - - - - - 1 1 - - Erysipelas - - - - - - - - 1 2 3 - Ant. Poliomyelitis - - - - - - - l l - - - Puerperal Pyrexia - - - - - - - - 15 - - - Pneumonia 2 2 _ l l 2 1 3 13 11 12 6 Totals 3 7 7 1 5 36 6 6 37 14 16 6 MORTAL STATISTICS, Of 231 deaths, 14 occurred under one year of age. The following were the chief causes of death:- Cancer 34 (17 males, and 17 females)5 Heart Disease 79; Tuberculosis (all forms) 9; Cerebral Haemorrhage 10; Bronchitis 4; Pneumonia (all forms) 135 Congenital Debility and Malformation, Premature Birth 7; Suicide 3; other Violence 11. CONTROL OF INFECTIOUS DISEASES. No use has been made of the Schick and Dick Tests in Diphtheria and Scarlet Fever. VACCINATION. No primary or revaccinations were performed by the Medical Officer of Health under the Public Health (Smallpox Prevention) Regulations 1917. LABORATORY WORK. The Council have made arrangements with the Clinical Research Association for examination and reports on all suspected cases of Diphtheria, Typhoid Fever, and Tuberculosis. 38 specimens were examined and reported upon as follows Positive Negative Diphtheria 1 33 Typhoid Fever - - Tuberculosis _ 4 (9) TUBERCULOSIS NEE CASES -AND MORTALITY DURING 1939 NEW CASES DEATHS Pulmonary NonPulmonary Pulmonary NonPulmonary. M F M F M F M F. 0 1 - - - - - - - 1 - - 1 - - - 1 - 5 1 - 1 3 - - - 1 15 - 2 - 1 - - - - 25 4 3 - 1 1 1 - - 35 - - - - - - - - 45 - - 1 l - 1 - - 55 1 1 - - 2 - - - 65 and over 1 1 1 - - 1 1 - Totals 10 7 4 6 3 3 2 1 The nine deaths from Tuberculosis were all previously notified cases, from which it would appear that the notification of Tuberculosis cases is efficiently carried out. There re re no cases of wilful neglect or of refusal to notify Tuberculosic in any form, PUBLIC HEALTH (PREVENTION OF TUBERCULOSIS) REGULATIONS, 1925. It has not been found necessary to take any action under the above Regulations, relating to Tuberculous employees in the Milk Trade. PUBLIC HEALTH ACT 1936, SECTION 172. COMPULSORY REMOVAL TO HOSPITAL OF CASES OF PULMONARY TUBERCULOSIS, No action was necessary under the above Section. PUELIC HEALTH ACT 1936, SECTION 176. PREVENTION 0F BLINDNESS. No action has been taken under this Section for the prevention of blindness or for the treatment of persons suffering from any disease or injury to the eyes. The report has been typed and duplicated for reasons of economy. I am, Yours faithfully, CHAS. F. HAEDIE, M.A., M.B., B.C., (Cantab) Medical Officer of Health. (10) HOUSING STATISTICS. 1. Inspection of dwelling houses during the years- (1) (a) Total number of dwelling houses inspected for housing defects (under Public Health or Housing Acts). 287 (b) Number of inspections made for the purpose. 340 (&) (a) Number of dwelling houses (included under sub-head (l) above) which were inspected and recorded under the Housing Consolidated Regulations 1925• 28 (b) Number of inspections made for the purpose. 39 (3) Number of houses found to be in a state so dangerous or injurious to health as to be unfit for human habitation. 3 (4) Number of dwelling houses (exclusive of those referred to under the preceding sub-head) found not to be in all respects reasonablyfit for human habitation. 78 2. Remedy of defects during the year without service of formal Notices:Number of defective houses rendered fit in consequence of informal action by the Local Authority or their officers. 59 3. Action under Statutory Powers during the year:- A- Proceedings under Sections 9; 10 and 16 of the Housing Act, 1936:(1) Number of dwelling houses in respect of which notices were served requiring repairs:- 3 (2) Number of dwelling houses which were rendered fit after service of formal noticess(a) by owners. 3 (b) by Local Authority in default of owners. Nil B- Proceedings under Public Health Act; (l) Number of dwelling houses in respect of which notices were served requiring defects to be remedied. 1 (2) Number of dwelling houses in respect of which defects were remedied after service of formal notices (a) by owners. 1 (b) by Local Authority in default of owners. Nil Outstanding Notices„ Nil C- Proceedings under Sections 11 and 11 of the Housing Act, 1916:- (1) Number of dwelling houses in respect of which Demolition Orders were made. Nil (2) Number of dwelling houses demolished in pursuance of Demolition Orders. Nil D- Proceedings under Section 12 of the Housing Act, 1936:- (l) Number of separate tenements or underground rooms in respect of which Closing Orders were made. Nil (2) Number of separate tenements or underground rooms in respect of which Closing Orders were determined, the tenement or room having been rendered fit. Nil 4. Housing Act, 1936 - Overcrowding A- (l) Number of dwellings overcrowded at the end of the year. 13 (2) Number of families dwelling therein. 13 (3) Number of persons dwelling therein. 100 B- Number of new cases of overcrowding reported during the year. 2 C- (l) Number of cases of overcrowding relieved during the year. 6 (2) Number of persons concerned in such cases. 42 D- Particulars of such cases in which dwelling houses have again become overcrowded after the Local Authority have taken steps for the abatement of overcrowding. Nil (1) ANNUAL REPORT of the CHIEF SANITARY INSPECTOR to the BAR NET (URBAN DISTRICT COUNCIL by CHARLES WILLIAM HILL, M.S.I.A., CHIEF SANITARY & HOUSING INSPECTOR. 1939 (2) BARNET URBAN DISTRICT COUNCIL, CHIEF SANTTARY INSPECTOR'S REPORT. Public Health Department, 10 Wood Street, Barnet. To the Chairman and Members of the Barnet Urban District Council. Mrs. Strugnell and Gentlemen, I have the honour to present to you my Annual Report giving particulars of the measures carried out in my Department during the year 1939, in administering the Health Acts and Bye-Laws in force in the District. INSPECTION OF DISTRICT. General Inspections of the District have been carried out from time to time and all complaints investigated. The course of serving a preliminary or intimation notice upon the person in default, specifying the works necessary to abate the nuisance, continues to be followed, and only if a person fails to comply with this preliminary notice, or strict legal procedure is necessary in the first instance, is the matter reported to the Council and a statutory notice asked for. PUBLIC HEALTH ACT-, 19^6. INFECTIOUS DISEASES - INVESTIGATIONS AND DISINFECTIONS. The Infectious Diseases enumerated below have been investigated and reported upon to your Medical Officer of Health;- Scarlet Fever 54; Diphtheria 3> Erysipelas 6; Poliomyelitis 2; and Pulmonary Tuberculosis 17. Sixty houses were disinfected wherein cases of Notifiable Infectious Diseases occurred, and bedding sent to be steam disinfected in certain cases. In addition 3 houses were disinfected on request, after cases of nonnotifiable diseases. In such cases a charge of 5/- is made to cover labour and material. Thirty library books from infectious houses were disinfected or destroyed. DAIRIES. COWSHEDS AND MILKSHOPS. The number of persons registered to sell milk is thirty-two, viz:II Dairies and Cowsheds. 21 Milkshops and Purveyors of Milk. Thirty-three inspections were made, and particular attention paid to the hygienic essentials necessary for a pure milk production and distribution. (3) Eleven Licences were granted to sell milk under the Milk (Special Designations) Order, 1936, viz:- Tuberculin Tested 5 Accredited 1 Pasteurised 5 Eight samples of milk were obtained and taken to the Hill End Hospital Laboratory for examination, viz:- Tuborculin Tested Milk 1 Accredited Milk 4 Pasteurised Milk 2 Ordinary Milk 1 All the samples were reported upon as being satisfactory. PRIVATE SLAUGHTER - HOUSES, The number of slaughter-houses in the district licensed by the Council under the provisions of the Food and Drugs Act, 1938 is four. One slaughter-house was not licensed owing to the occupier giving up business, and has been struck off the register. Beyond the usual intimations requiring limewashing of premises and removal of garbage from time to time, the premises were found to be well conducted. SLAUGHTER OF ANIMALS ACT. There are nineteen persons licensed by the Council as fit persons to slaughte: animals in the district as compared with eighteen in the previous year. No complaint was received concerning the conduct of any of these men. Slaughter houses are visited frequently by an Inspector of the R.S.P.C.A., who holds an honorary appointment under the Council, thus giving him power to enter slaughter houses in order to see that animals are humanely slaughtered. (4) MEAT INSPECTION. CARCASES INSPECTED AND CONDEMNED. Cattle excluding cows Cows Calves Sheep and Lambs Pigs. Number killed (if known) 907 310 2,224 3,017 5,492 Number inspected 159 76 198 831 1,089 All diseases except Tuberculosis. Whole carcases condemned _ _ 1 _ _ Carcases of which some part or organ was condemned 3 3 _ 1 2 Percentage of the number inspected affected with disease other than Tuberculosis 1.88 3,94 .50 .12 .18 Tuberculosis only. Whole carcases condemned _ _ _ _ _ Carcases of which some part or organ was condemned 3 6 _ _ 14 Percentage of condemned to number inspected 1.88 7.89 _ _ 1.28 FOOD AMD DRUGS ACT. The above Act is enforced by the County Authority in this district. The following table shows the number and nature of the samples taken in the Urban District of Barnet, with the results of the analyses. (5) Article No. of Samples Taken Genuine Adulterated Extent & Form of Adulteration Remarks. Cooking Fat 2 2 _ Cream 1 1 — Lard 4 3 1 See below x Milk 15 12 3 " " Jam 2 2 - Flour 3 3 - Shredded Suet 5 5 - Malt Vinegar 1 1 - Cane Syrup 1 l - Egg Substitute 1 l - Tinned Milk 1 l - Tomatoe Juice 1 l - Butter 1 1 — Custard Powder 1 1 - Sugar 1 l — Coffee 1 1 — Fish Paste 1 l _ Tannic Acid Jelly 1 1 — Beef Dripping 1 1 - Tinned Peas 1 1 _ Chocolate 1 1 — Pork Sausages 2 Contained Sulphur Dioxide See below ø Beef Sausages 1 " " " " Totals 49 45 4 - - These three milk samples were respectively 2% added water, 12% and 11% deficient in milk fat. In the first two cases the Vendors were both convicted and fined £5. and 10/6 costs, and in the third case the Vendor was cautioned, three 'Appeal to Cow' samples being taken at his request and containing 2.87%, 3.15% and 2.50% milk fat respectively. x The sample of Lard taken was an informal one and by the time the result of the analysis was known, the consignment had been sold 2nd a formal sample could not be obtained. ø The sausages were found to contain Sulphur dioxide within the prescribed limits, but no notification of presence of preservative was given at the time of purchase end the vendors were cautioned. DRAINAGE AND SANITARY CONVENIENCES. The drains or sanitary fittings of 96 premises were found to bo in some respect defective. In 12 cases it was found necessary to take up and entirely relay the drains. In 76 cases drains were found to be stopped up. 32 water closets, 13 sinks, 119 water closet cisterns, 97 inspection chambers and 8 soil pipes were renewed or repaired. 2 cesspools were abolished. PUBLIC HEALTH ACT. 1936, SECTION 75„ Eighty dustbins were provided after intimation to replace worn out receptacles, or absence of same. The provision of a proper sanitary dustbin is a very useful health measure. It also secures uniformity of receptacle and makes the task of the dustmen cleaner and easier. (6) WATER SUPPLY. At the commencement of the year, owing to a very severe frost during Christmas 1938, there were 117 cases of burst water pipes still to be repaired. These repairs were carried out with the addition of a further 21 cases reported in January„ In 8 cases the water was cub off owing to the non-payment of rates. This department was notified by the Barnet District Gas & Water Company, and steps were taken which resulted in the early reconnection of the supply. FACTORIES ACT. 1937. 38 inspections of factories with mechanical power and 7 inspections of factories without mechanical power were made during the year, including bake-houses. Five notices were served on the occupiers of bake-houses for defects contravening the special sanitary sections of the Act. Five Certificates of adequate means of escape in case of fire were issued by the Council under Section 34 of the Act. INSANITARY PROPERTY. SLUM CLEARANCE PROGRAMME. The Slum Clearance Programme of the Council, which was submitted to the Ministry of Health comprised seven houses and one shop as a Clearance Area, and seventeen individual houses. In my last Report I stated that of the above, there remained one house to be dealt with by demolition to complete the programme, namely:The Bungalow. Barnet Lane. This cottage was condemned, and became the property of the Council, being situated on lands purchased for open space. It has now been demolished and the tenant has been rehoused in a Council house. Additional to the above, cases occur from time to time which need to be dealt with as requiring demolition or reconditioning. No. 27 Sebright Road. This house was condemned as unfit for human habitation. The owner appeared before the Council and gave an undertaking to carry out any requirements of the Council to make it habitable, and owing to the fact that the site could not be used for rebuilding should the house be demolished, the Council agreed to its being reconditioned. The house has now been reconditioned and thus rendered fit for human habitation. (7) No. 57a Sebright Road. This house was reported upon as unfit for human habitation. The owner intimated that he did not propose to object to a Demolition Order and would proceed to demolish the house immediately. This demolition has been carried out. The Bungalow. Homestead Farm. This house was reported upon as unfit for human habitation. The owner stated that he no longer intended the house to be occupied as a dwelling-house and desired to utilize it as a storehouse for agricultural purposes. The Council after consideration raised no objection to the house remaining undemolished so long as the above undertaking was observed. No. 6 Nesbitts Alloy. This house was reported upon as unfit for human habitation. The owners stated that they did not intend the house to be occupied again as a dwelling house, and hoped the Council would allow the property to remain in its present state until after the War, at which time they proposed to submit plans to the Council for the demolition of the house and the erection of a store for Bakery raw materials, finished goods and provisions. After consideration the Council informed the owners that they raised no objection to the house remaining undemolished provided it was not again used for human habitation and it was left properly protected against unauthorized access, and the creation of a nuisance. HOUSING ACT 1935 - OVERCROWDING. The overcrowding survey revealed 37 houses - 13 owned by the Council and 24 privately owned - to be overcrowded. They were reported upon to the Council and Ministry of Health, and at a later date the Council forwarded their proposals for rehousing these overcrowded families. The Act also makes it the duty of the Landlord of a house occupied by a person of the working classes, to insert in the Rent Book a summary of the Housing Act 1935, and the Permitted Number for the house. The Landlord can apply to the Local Authority for this Permitted Number. Applications in respect of 24 houses have been dealt with during the past year. These have been added to those originally surveyed, bringing the total to 3,528. (8) With regard to the 37 cases of overcrowding revealed by the original survey, 9 were relieved in 1935 in 1937, 6 in 1938, and 6 during the past year. Owing to age increases of children an additional 2 families have become overcrowded, so that 13 cases still remain to be dealt with at the end of 1939, namely, One family of four and one family of five requiring Three Bed Non Parlour Type of house with a superficial area of 760 square feet. One family of six and two families of seven requiring Four Bed Non Parlour Type of house with a superficial area of about 1,050 square feet. Four families of eight, requiring Four Bed Parlour Type of house with a superficial area of about 1,130 square feet. Two families of nine in a Four Bedroom Parlour house slightly larger than for eight persons. One family of ten and one family of eleven in Five Bedroom NonParlour houses. Applications for Council Houses. These numbered 89 at the end of the year, a substantial reduction on the 1938 figure, owing to the accommodation provided by the building of 110 houses on the Grange Estate. The transfer of families with young children from Barnet Barracks to houses with three bedrooms is now complete. With two exceptions, all these flats have now been converted for occupation by Aged Persons. The scheme for building four and five bedroom houses on Housing land in Mays Lane to meet the requirements of families of eight, nine, ten and eleven, had to deferred on the outbreak of War. PETROLEUM CONSOLIDATION ACT 1928. There are thirty-four persons licenced to store petroleum upon the Register, as against thirty-five last year. The licences are for varying quantities from 100 gallons to 6,000 gallons. The total quantity of petroleum spirit which may be kept in the various stores is 32,450 gallons, as against 36,800 gallons last year. 63 inspections were made, but there was ho serious breach of Regulations to report. (9) Tanks placed underground and supplying by means of pumps have practicallytaken the place of cans, and are much safer; "These tanks and pumps now number 57 The stores which keep 2 gallon cans are licenced for only 750 gallons out of the above total. One licence was issued for storage of 200 lbs. of Carbide of Calcium. The scale of fees for licences to store petroleum ranges from 5/- for a quantity not exceeding 100 gallons, to £1 for a 1,000 - 5,000 gallons. ERADICATION OF BED BUGS. (1) Number of Council Houses found to be infested 4 " " " disinfested 4 Number of other houses found to be infested 4 " " " " disinfested 4 (2) An electric power sprayer has been used for disinfestations with a non-staining and non-poisonous fluid insecticide and both the sprayer and the insecticide have given highly satisfactory results. (3) Where there is reason to believe that the incoming tenant of a Council house is not too clean, and that the furniture is likely to be infested, an inspection is made and the furniture disinfested if necessary. (4) The work of disinfestation of houses belonging to the Council is carried out by the Housing Department Repairs Staff under the supervision of a Sanitary Inspector. The Council do not undertake the work of disinfestation for private house owners, but give all facilities they can to help them. HERTFORDSHIRE COUNTY COUNCIL ACT 1935. Employment Agencies. Section 74 of the Hertfordshire County Council Act 1935 requires a Local Authority to furnish the County Council during the first week in October in each year, with a report on the conduct and management of employment agencies within their district, with recommendations for the renewal of the Licences or otherwise. During the year the County Council asked for reports in respect of the following promises previously licenced:- (1) Constance Evelyn Briers, 11a, High Street, Barnet. (2) Winifred Doric Larkins, 203 High Street, Barnet. (3) Miss D. Lees, 6 Lawn Mansions, High Street, Barnet. I found these premises to be suitable for the purpose, and inspected the books which were kept in a satisfactory manner. Consequently no objection was raised to the renewal of the Licences. (10) Public Swiming Baths and Bathing Pools. Byelaws are now in force in the district for securing the purity of the water in Swimming Baths and Pools, also for ensuring cleanliness and adequacy of accommodation, prevention of accidents and regulating conduct of persons using the Baths or Pools. There is only one Public swimming pool in the district which is attached to a road-house. This has been inspected from time to time and was always found to be conducted in conformity with the Bye-laws. I am, Yours obediently, CHARLES WILLIAM HILL, M.S.I.A. Chief Sanitary and Housing Inspector, Meat, Food and Petroleum Inspector. (11) SUMMARY, SANITARY INSPECTION OF AREA. Number of Dwelling Houses Inspected (Primary inspections) (1) on complaint or general inspection of district. 259 (2) House to House. 28 Re-inspections of houses and visits to works in progress. 653 Visits to houses on notification of Infectious Diseases, including T.B. 60 Visits and inspections under Petroleum Acts 3 Inspections under Shops Act 33 Visits to Slaughter Houses. 301 " " Factories (including Factory Laundries). 18 " " Bakehouses. 27 " " Outworkers' premises. Nil " " Dairies, Cowsheds and Milkshops. 33 " " Schools. 2 " " Food Manufactories. 37 " " Common Lodging House. 1 " " Public Halls, Cinemas, etc. Nil Inspections under Rent Restriction Acts. Nil Disinfections after Infectious Disease, etc. 60 Visits re. Overcrowding Survey (Measuring houses 24 (other visits 37 "Permitted Number" Certificates issued under Housing Act 1936 24 SANITARY WORK AND REPAIRS., Houses. Roofs repaired and made watertight. 299 Damp walls remedied. 60 Gutters, downspouts repaired or renewed. 99 Exterior brickwork repaired or repointed. 50 Rooms cleansed, repapered or distempered. 320 Stairs, treads, balusters, repaired. 6 Broken sashcords renewed (number of houses). 55 Window frames and sills repaired. 27 Ranges provided or repaired. 109 Coppers provided or repaired. 112 Floors repaired or renewed. 37 Yard surfaces repaired, or repaved. 18 Defective ventilation beneath floors. 8 Hot water cisterns repaired. 31 Draining Boards renewed. 43 Drainage. Drains unstopped and repaired. 76 Drains tested. 4 Drains reconstructed. 12 Soil or Vent Pipes repaired or renewed. 8 Inspection Chambers constructed or repaired. 97 Cesspools abolished. 2 Water Closets and Sinks. Flushing cisterns repaired or renewed. 119 Flush pipes repaired. 2 New basins, W.C.pans or traps provided. 32 Seats, doors etc. repaired or renewed. 35 Water pipes repaired or renewed. 90 New Sinks. 13 Sink waste pipes unblocked. 56 (12). Water Supply. Storage cisterns cleaned. Nil Storage cisterns - new covers provided. 11 Storage cisterns repaired or renewed. 83 Burst water services renewed or repaired. 159 Miscellaneous. New dustbins provided. 80 Accumulations of refuse removed. 12 Nuisances arising from animals and fowls being improperly kept. 1 Rat-infested premises. 4 Defective cr insanitary urinals. Nil Verminous houses disinfected. 8