UBAR 7 URBANDISTRICT OF BARNET ANNUAL REPORT of the MEDICAL OFFICER OF HEALTH to the BARNET URBAN DISTRICT COUNCIL by CHAS. F. HARDIE. M.A., M.B., B.C., (Cantab). Together with the ANNUAL REPORT of the CHIEF SANITARY AND HOUSING INSPECTOR by CHAS. WILLIAM HILL. M.S.I.A. 1938 ANNUAL REPORT of the MEDICAL OFFICER OF HEALTH to the BARNET URBAN DISTRICT COUNCIL by CHAS. F. HARDIE. M. A., M.B., B.C., (Cantab). MBDICAL OFFICER OF HEALTH (3) Barnet urban district council. medical off icer' s report. Health Department, Council Offices, B A R N E T. To the Chairman and Members of the Barnet Urban District Council. Mrs. Strugnell and Gentlemen, I have much pleasure in presenting to you my Annual Report on the Health of the District for the year 1938. It is drawn up on the lines indicated in Circular 1728 of 25th October, 1938, as requested by the Ministry of Health. STATISTICS AND SOCIAL CONDITIONS OF THE AREA. Area (in acres) 1931 3,114 Area added in April 1935 1,176 Total Area 4,290 Population (1931 Census) 14,726 Population of Added Area 338 Registrar General's Estimate of Resident Population mid 1938 21,320 Number of Inhabited Houses 1938 6,222 Rateable Value £237,307 Sum Represented by a Penny Rate excluding Totteridge and Rowley 690.15.0. excluding Totteridge 722.14.2. including Totteridge and Rowley 988.15.7. NATURAL AND SOCIAL CONDITIONS. The population is largely residential, and consists chicfly of people whose occupation lies outside the urban area. Those employed in the district, apart from the tradesmen and their employees, arc mainly skilled workers at dental manufacturing, lithographic, printing and optical works. Relief is supplied by the Public Assistance Committee of the Herts County Council. (4) EXTRACTS FROM VITAL STATISTICS OF THE YEAR. Total. M. F. Live Births Legitimate 313 180 133 Illegitimate 12 5 7 Birth Rate per 1,000 of the estimated resident population 15.24 Total. M. F. Still Births Legitimate 17 12 5 Illegitimate 2 1 1 Still Birth Rate per 1,000 total (live and still) Births 55.23 Total. M. F. Deaths 196 99 97 PGath Rate per 1,000 of the estimated resident population 9.19 Deaths from puerperal causes Puerperal Sepsis NIL. Death Rate per 1,000 total births NIL Other Puerperal causes 1. " " " " " " 3.07 Death Rate from puerperal causes per 1,000 total (live and still) births 2.91 Death RatG of infants under one year of age:- All infants per 1,000 live births 30.7 Legitimate infants per 1,000 legitimate live births 22.36 Illegitimate infants per 1,000 illegitimate live births 250. Deaths from Cancer (all ages) 36 " " Measles (all ages) NIL " " Whooping Cough (all ages) NIL " " Diarrhoea (under 2 years of age) NIL GENERAL PROVISION 0? HEALTH SERVICES FOR THE DISTRICT. Hospitals provided or subsidised by the Local Authority or County Council. A. (1) Infectious Diseases Joint Isolation Hospital in Barnet. (2) Joint Smallpox Hospital at Choshunt. B. (1) Tuberculosis Hospital at Ware, provided by the Herts County Council. (2) Maternity block with 22 beds at the Wollhouse Hospital. Ambulance Facilities. Infectious Diseases - Motor Ambulance at Isolation Hospital. Non-Infcctious Diseases - Two Motor Ambulo-noes. (1) Relieving Officer's Cases and Aocidents; By Day and Night - 'phono BARnet 0051, WcllhousG Hospital, Barno t. (2) Private Cases: By Day - 'phone BARnet 0060, Fire Station , High Street, Barnot. By Night - ;2hone BARrict 2235. 1486 cases of Non-Infectious Diseases were removed by the Motor Ambulance. (5) Clinic 2nd Treatment Centres. A Maternity and Child Welfare Centre and Clinic is held every Monday at "Fieldways," Wcllhouse Lane; also a Tuberculosis Clinic on the 1st. and 3rd. Wednesdays in the month, and a Dental Clinic on Thursdays at the same address. There are (1) Two Nursing Homes for paying patients, (3) The Victoria Hospital, and (3) a General Hospital (Wcllhouse) under the Public Assistance Committee, Herts. County Council. The Barnct Nursing Association provides two nurses. There is one Maternity and Nursing Home registered with the County Council. The hospital accommodation for the district is adequate. The Infectious Disease Joint Isolation Hospital provides 54 beds in 3 blocks, one being a cubiclG block. There is an operating theatre and a Nuffield Respirator. PUBLIC HEALTH STAFF. ø Medical Officer of Health. x C. F. Hardie, M.A., M.B., B.C., (Cantab). ø Chief Sanitary Inspector. † ??? Charles William Hill, M.S.I.A. ø Additional Sanitary Inspectors, † ??? John Baillic Wilson, C.R.S.I., ??? Norman Holt, A.R.San.I. ??? Clerical Staff - One Clork. ??? Holds the special qualification as Inspector of Meat and Other Foods under examination of the Royal Sanitary Institute. ??? Holds the qualification as Instructor (Civilian Anti-Gas School, Special). ø Salary Contribution of one-half, from Exchc quer Grants. x Part-Time Officer. † Whole-Time Officer. (6) WATER SUPPLY, The water for the district is supplied "by the Barnet District Gas and Water Company and the Colne Valley Water Company. With regard to the Barnet District Gas and Water Company all the water is chlorinated; a pathological staff is maintained, one of whom is a B.Sc., trained under Dr. Beale. The bulk of the water is examined daily and each pumping station once a week. The Colne Valley Water Company exercises constant supervision and members of the staff are on duty day and night throughout the year, examining samples. All the water supplied by this Company is chlorinated. ANALYSIS. Report on the Chemical Analysis of Water taken from a Domestic Tap. Stated Grains per Gallon as Parts per 100,000 Total Dissolved Matter left on Evaporation and Dried at 238 Fahr. 25.48 36.40 Loss on Incineration of Residuc 2.24 3.20 Chlorine in Chlorides 1.60 2.29 Equal to Sodium Chloride 2.64 3.77 Nitrogen in Nitrates 0.29 0.41 Free (actual or saline) Ammonia .001 .001 Albuminoid (organic) Ammonia .001 .001 Oxygen absorbed by Oxidisable Organic Matter etc., from a solution of Potassium Permanganate at 80° Fahr. In 15 Minutes .020 .029 In 4 Hours .040 .057 Appearance in 2 feet Tube Clear Hardness before Boiling 20 degrees. 28½ degrees. " after Boiling 6½ degrees. 9½ degrees. Result of Bacteriological Examination: Satisfactory. Total Colonies developed from 1 ctibic centimetre in plate culture at ordinary temperature 150. Ditto in bile salt agar plate culture (special medium for B. coli and its congeners ) nil. MicConkey broth culture test for B. coli and its congeners also gave negative result in as much as 50 cubic centimetres. The results of chemical analysis are equally satisfactory. (7) DRAINAGE AND SEWERAGE . The Town is drained and sewered on the separate system. The sewage is convejred to an Irrigation Farm of 56 acres, but before it is turned on the land it is screened and treated by means of detritus and sedimentation tanks, and three rotary filters. Pumping is necessary for three sewers which have their outlets at a low point on the farm. There arc only a few earth closets in outlying parts of the district. DISPOSAL OF HOUSE REFUSE. The house refuse is collected weekly and conveyed to the Farm and disposed of by the controlled tipping system. SANITARY CONDITIONS AND WATER SUPPLY OF SCHOOLS. There are eight public elementary schools in the district, viz:- Arkley Church of England Infants School; Byng Road County Council School (Junior Mixed and Infants and Senior Mixed Departments); Christ Church School, with Boys, Girls and Infants Departments; Barnet Church of England School (Senior Mixed Department); Totteridge Church of England School, (Boys, Girls and Infants); Grasvenor Avenue, (Infants); St. Catherine's Roman Catholic Mixed School; and Underhill County Council School, (Junior Mixed Department and Infants Department). The Assistant School Medical Officer resides in the district and visits each school at least once each term. He is in constant touch with the teachers, and all doubtful cases of illness are at once referred to him. Infectious cases and contacts are excluded from the Schools and disinfections are carried out when necessary. The following Schools were disinfected after the recurrence of cases of infectious disease;- Byng Road, Underhill and Norfolk House. (Private). (8) PREVALENCE OF, AND CONTROL OVER, INFECTIOUS DISEASES. The following table shows the number of Notifications to the Sanitary Authority during the year, of each disease specified in the Public Health Act, 1936 and Regulations, and the number removed to Hospital:- NATURE OF INFECTIOUS DISEASE. NOTIFIED REMOVED TO HOSPITAL DEATHS Smallpox. .… … … Scarlet Fever. 70 53 … Diphtheria & Membranous Croup. 6 6 … Enteric (Typhoid) Fever. 1 1 … Malaria. … … … Ophthalmia Neonatorum. … … … Erysipelas. 14 13 … Pulmonary Tuberculosis. 15 9 5 Cercbro Spinal Meningitis. … … 1 Anterior Poliomyelitis. 1 1 … Puerperal Pyrexia. 8 8 … Pneumonia. 65 63 6 Polio Encephalitis. … … … Total. 180 154 12 Of the foregoing the following eases normally resident outside the district were notified from Wcllhouse Hospital Scarlet Fever 2; Erysipelas 11; Puerperal Pyrexia 5; Pneumonia, 51; Typhoid Fever 1. The cases of Tuberculosis removed are chiefly sent to Ware Sanatorium. The Case Rates per 1,000 of the population are as follows:— Scarlet Fever 3.28; Diphtheria 0.28; Pulmonary Tuberculosis 0.70; Puerperal Pyrexia 8.72 (per 1,000 Births). (9) AGE INCIDENCE OF INFECTIOUS DISEASE. DISEASE NUMBER OF CASES NOTIFIED YEARS OF AGE 0- 1- 2- 3- 4- 5- 10- 15- i 20- 35- 45- 65- Scarlet Fever - 3 2 rr o 3 39 10 2 7 1 - - Diphtheria - - - - 2 1 1 - 2 - - - Typhoid Fever - - - - - - - - 1 - - - Erysipelas - - 1 - 1 - 1 - 4 - 6 1 Ant. Poliomyelitis - - - - - 1 - - - - - - Puerperal Pyrexia - - - - - - - - 8 - - - Pneumonia 6 6 3 2 4 3 1 4 11 11 11 3 Totals i 6 9 6 5 10 44 13 6 33 12 17 4 MORTAL STATISTICS. Of 196 deaths, 10 occurred under one year of age. The following were the chief causes of death:Cancer 36 (11 males, 25 females); Heart Disease 60; Tuberculosis (all forms) 6; Influenza 3; Cerebral Haemorrhage 11; Bronchitis 4; Pneumonia (all forms) 6; Congenital Debility and Malformation, Premature Birth 7; Acute and Chronic nephritis 7; Suicide 4; other Violence 6. CONTROL OF INFECTIOUS DISEASES. So use has been made of the Schick and Dick Tests in Diphtheria and Scarlet Fever. VACCINATION. No primary or revaccinations were performed by the Medical Officcr of Health under the Public Health (Smallpox Prevention) Regulations 1917. (10) LABORATORY WORK. The Council have made arrangements with the Clinical Research Association for examination and reports on all suspected cases of Diphtheria, Typhoid Fever, and Tuberculosis. 84 specimens were examined and reported upon as follows:- Positive. Negative. Diphtheria 4 62 Typhoid Fever - 1 Tuberculosis 3 14 TUBERCULOSIS. NEW CASES AND MORTALITY DURING 1938 NEW CASES DEATHS Pulmonary Non Pulmonary Pulmonary Non Pulmonary M F M F M F M F 0 - - - - - - - - 1 - - 2 1 - - - - 5 1 - 1 2 - - - - 15 3 - - 1 2 - 1 - 25 4 2 1 2 - 1 - - 35 2 - - - - - - - 45 1 - - - 1 - - - 55 - 1 - - - - - - 65 and over 1 - 2 - - 1 - - Totals 12 3 6 6 3 2 1 - The six deaths from Tuberculosis were all previously notified cases, from which it would appear that the notification of Tuberculosis cases is efficiently carried out. There were no cases of wilful neglect or of refusal to notify Tuberculosis in any form. (11) PUBLIC HEALTH (PREVENTION OF TUBERCULOSIS) REGULATIONS 1925. It has not been found necessary to take any action under the above Regulations, relating to Tuberculous employees in the Milk Trade. PUBLIC HEALTH ACT 1936, SECTION 173. COMPULSORY REMOVE TO HOSPITAL OF CASES OF PULMONARY TUBERCULOSIS. No action was necessary under the above Section. PUBLIC HEALTH ACT 1936, SECTION 176. PREVENTION Off BLINDNESS. No action has been taken under this Section for the prevention of blindness or for the treatment of persons suffering from any disease or injury to the eyes. AIR RAID PRECAUTIONS. The work of the department has been very greatly increased; the assistant Sanitary Inspector devotes most of his time to A.R.P. work. A second Assistant has been appointed. Considerable progress has been made in connection with training of personnel, with the siting of First aid Posts, First Aid Points, etc. Though much remained to be done before an efficient service could be immediately available. A large number of applicants for the A.F.S. were examined. RECREATION GROUNDS AND PLaYING FIELDS. The Council provides facilities for organised games, viz:Three Hard Courts, Five Grass Courts, Two Bowling Greens, and a Putting Green, at the old court House Recreation Grounds at the rear of the Council Offices. There is also an open space for the children to play games. Thirty-eight acres of and at Underhill are developed for the provision of Football and Cricket pitches, etc. Nineteen acres behind Byng Road, and forty-six acres at Barnet Gate have been left as open spaces for recreation purposes. (13) With the assistance of the H. C. C. and the L. C. C., land has been purchased beside the Dollis Brook and in the Rowley Ward as part of the Green Belt. That these recreative facilities will be of great value in promoting 'the health of the District there can be no doubt. The report has been typed and duplicated for reasons of economy. I am, Yours faithfully, CHAS. F. HARDIE, MA, MB., BC., (Cantab). Medical Officer of Health. (13) HOUSING STATISTICS. 1. Inspection of dwelling houses during the year:- (1) (a) Total number of dwelling houses inspected for housing defects (under Public Health or Housing Acts). 388 (b) Number of inspections made for the purpose, 426 (2) (a) Number of dwelling houses (included under sub-head (1) above) which were inspected and recorded under the Housing Consolidated Regulations 1925. 43 (b) Number of inspections made for the purpose. 62 (3) Number of houses found to be in a state so dangerous or injurious to health as to be unfit for human habitation. 2 (4) Number of dwelling houses (exclusive of those referred to under the preceding sub-head) found not to be in all respects reasonably fit for human habitation. 154 2. Remedy of defects during the year without service of formal Notices:- Number of defective houses rendered fit in consequence of informal action by the Local Authority or their officers. 116 3. Action under Statutory Powers during the year:- A- Proceedings under Sections 9, 10 and 16 of the Housing Act 1936: (1) Number of dwelling houses in respect of which notices were served requiring repairs: 14 (2) Number of dwelling houses which were rendered fit after scrvicc of formal notices:- (a) by owners. 13 (b) by Local Authority in default of owners. 1 B- Proceedings under Public Health Act: (1) Number of dwelling houses in respect of which notices were served requiring defects to be remedied. NIL (2) Number of dwelling houses in respect of which defects were remedied after scrvicc of formal notices:- (a) by owners. 19 (b) by Local Authority in default of owners. NIL Outstanding Notices. 5 C- Proceedings under Sections 11 and 13 of the Housing Act 1936:- (1) Number of dwelling houses in respect of which Demolition Orders were made. 2 (2) Number of dwelling houses demolished in pursuance of Demolition Orders. 2 D- Proceedings under Section 12 of the Housing Act 1936:- (1) Number of separate tenements or underground rooms in respect of which Closing Orders were made. NIL (2) Number of separate tenements or underground rooms in respect of which Closing Orders were determined, the tenement or room having been rendered fit. NIL (14) Housing. Act 1936 - Overcrowding:- A- (1) Number of dwellings overcrowded at the and of the year. 17 (2) Number of families dwelling therein. 17 (3) Number of persons dwelling therein. 131 B- Number of new cases of overcrowding reported during the year. NIL C- (1) Number of cases of overcrowding relieved during the year. 6 (20 Number of persons concerned in such cases. 41 D- Particulars of such cases in which dwelling houses have again become overcrowded after the local Authority have taken steps for the abatement of overcrowding. NIL (l) ANNUAL REPORT of the CHIEF SANITARY INSPECTOR to the BARNET URBAN DISTRICT COUNCIL by CHARLES WILLIAM HILL, M. S.I.A., CHIEF SANITARY & HOUSING INSPECTOR. 1938 (2) BARNET URBAN DISTRICT COUNCIL. CHIEF SANITARY INSPECTOR'S REPORT. Health Department, Ocunc.il Offices, BARNET. To the Chairman and Members of the Barnet Urban District Council. Mrs. Strugnell and Gentlemen, I have the honour to present to you my Annual Report giving particulars of the measures carried out in my Department during the year 1938, in administering the Health Acts and Bye-laws in force in the District, and which includes particulars in tabular form as required by the Ministry of Health. Owing to pressure of work in connection with National Emergency measures, it has been: found necessary to present this report mainly in statistical form, leaving out much of the usual written matter. The work of the department was handicapped during the year by reason of the fact that my Additional Inspector, Mr. Wilson, who had qualified as an Instructor in Anti-Gas measures; was seconded as Air Raid Precautions Officer, with the approval of the Ministry of Health and Home Office, and my Clerk was away for a total period of three months, being called up for territorial service, and also in hospital for six weeks. Mr. Wilson was, however, replaced later by the appointment of another additional Inspector. INSPECTION OF DISTRICT. General Inspections of the District have been carried out from time to time and all complaints investigated. The course of serving a preliminary or intimation notice upon the person in default, specifying the works necessary to abate the nuisance, continues to be followed, and only if a person fails to comply with this preliminary notice, or strict (3) legal procedure is necessary in the first instance, is the matter reported to the Council and a statutory notice asked for. PUBLIC HEALTH ACT 1926. INFECTIOUS DISEASES - INVESTIGATIONS AMD DISINFECTIONS. The Infectious Diseases enumerated below have been investigated and reported upon to your Medical Officer of Health;Scarlet Fever 70; Diphtheria 6; Erysipelas 14; and Pulmonary Tuberculosis 15. 91 houses were disinfected wherein cases of Notifiable Infectious Diseases occurred, and bedding sent to be steam disinfected in certain cases. In addition 5 houses were disinfected on request, after cases of non-notifiable diseases. In such cases a charge of 5/- is made to cover labour and material. 46 library books from infected houses were disinfected or destroyed. DAIRIES, COWSHEDS AND MILKSHOPS. The number of persons registered to sell milk is twentyone, viz:- 13 Dairies and Cowsheds. 8 Mlkshops and Purveyors of Milk. Thirty-five inspections were made, and particular attention paid to the hygienic essentials necessary for a pure milk production and distribution. Eleven Licences were granted to sell milk 'under the Milk (Special Designations) Order 1936, viz:- Tuberculin Tested 5 Accredited 1 Pasteurised 5 Seventeen samples of milk were obtained and taken to the Hill End Hospital Laboratory for examination, viz:- (4) Tuberculin Tested Milk 2 Tuberculin Tested (Pasteurised) Milk 1 accredited Milk 7 Pasteurised Milk 4 Ordinary Milk 3 Two samples of Accredited Milk were reported upon as being unsatisfactory. Inspections were made of the premises on which the milk was produced, and advice given to the milkers. Later samples taken from these sources proved satisfactory. PRIVATE SLAUGHTER - HOUSES. The number of Slaughter-houses in the district is five, four of these are Licensed and one Registered. The regis tared Slaughter-house which was closed last year owing to the owner giving up business has been struck off the register, the premises having been taken for a different class of business. Beyond the usual intimations requiring limewashing of premises and removal of garbage from time to time, the premises were found to be well conducted. SLAUGHTER Off ANIMALS ACT 1933, There are eighteen persons licensed by the Council as fit persons to slaughter animals in the district as compared with twenty in the previous year. No complaint was received concerning the conduct of any of these men. Slaughter houses are visited frequently by an Inspector of the R.S.P.C.A., who holds an honorary appointment under the Council, thus giving him power to enter slaughter houses in order to see that animals are humanely slaughtered. (5) MEAT INSPECTION. CARCASES INSPECTED AND CONDEMNED. Cattle excluding Cows COWS Calves Sheep and Lambs Pigs Number killed (if known) .487 197 1899 2817 3607 Number inspected 95 56 126 680 890 All diseases except Tuberculosis. Whole carcases condemned - - - - - Carcases of which some part or organ was condemned - - - - 2 Percentage of the number inspected affected with disease other than Tuberculosis - - - - .22 Tuberculosis only. Whole carcases condemned - - - - - Carcases of which some part or organ was condemned 1 1 - - 3 Percentage of condemned to number inspected 1.05 1.78 - - .33 FOOD AND DRUGS ACTS. The above Acts are enforced by the County Authority in this district. The following table shows the number and nature of the samples taken in the Urban District of Barnet, with the results of the analyses. (6) Article Ho. Samples Taken Genuine Adulterated Extent and Form of Adulter'n Remarks Milk 14 12 2 See below ≠ - Jam 6 6 - - - Shredded Suet 1 1 _ Cocoa 1 1 - - - Chicken and ham paste 1 1 Totals 23 21 2 - - ≠ These two milk samples were respectively 3% and 16% deficient in milk fat. Ho proceedings were instituted against the vendors of these samples, the deficiency in fat, in each case, being traced back to the cows. The Board of Agriculture suggests that the number of samples which should be taken in any district is three per 1,000 of the population. DRAINAGE AND SANITARY CONVENIENCES. The drains or sanitary fittings of 102 premises were found to be in some respect defective. In 37 cases it was found necessary to take up and entirely relay the drains. In 60 cases drains were found to be stopped up. 31 water closets, 10 sinks, 78 water closet cisterns, 7 inspection chambers and 5 soil pipes were renewed or repaired. 1 cesspool was abolished. PUBLIC HEALTH ACT 1936, SECTION 75. 84 dustbins were provided after intimation to replace worn out receptacles, or absence of same. The provision of a proper sanitary dustbin is a very useful health measure. It also secures uniformity of receptacle and makes the task of the dustmen cleaner and easier. (7) WATER SUPPLY. A spell of very severe frost oyer the Christmas period resulted in a large number of burst water pipes throughout the district. Of 184 cases reported to the department for attention, repairs were effected in 67 instances by the end of the year, leaving 117 to be dealt with in the new year. In two cases the water was cut off owing to the non-payment of rates. This department was notified by the Water Company, and steps were taken which resulted in the early re connection of the supply. From the 1st. of January 1938 house owners are relieved of the repair of water services from the main to tho stop coclr, as, under the provisions of the recent Barnet District Gas and Water Act, they have become vested in and maintainable by the Water Company. The service from the stop-cock to the house, however, still remains the owner's liability. COMMON LODGING HOUSES. There is now only one Common Lodging House in the district, which is registered for 25 persons. The House was inspected at various times during the year, and a mid-night inspection was made during the Fair. It was found to be conducted in accordance with the Bye-laws regulating the number of lodgers, and the conduct of Lodging Houses. This property has now been purchased by the Council as a site for a new Central Fire Station. CARAVANS USED i.S DWELLINGS - BURNET FAIR, ETC. Of the caravans which entered the district to attend Barnet Fair, 60 were inspected in order to ascertain their sanitary condition and to enquire as to any illness which might be of an infectious character. The usual temporary sanitary accommodation was provided in different sections of the Fair for the use of the caravaners, and an early morning collection was made of all refuse, fish offal, etc. (8) BAKEHOUSES. There are eight Bakehouses upon the Register. Thirty-two inspections were made of these premises, and six notices were served for defects contravening the special sanitary sections of the Factories Act, SANITARY CONDITION OF CINEMAS, DICING HALLS OTHER PLACES OF ENTERTAINMENT. The Halls used as Cinemas and for Dancing and other entertainments were inspected during the year and the annual certificates required "by the Licencing authorities were issued in respect of the following premises, certifying their fitness for the nature of the entertainment proposed to be given, as regards fire escape, ventilation, dressing and cloak room, and lavatory accommodation. (1) Barnet Cinema and Theatre; (2) Odeon Cinema; (3) Church Houses; (4) Ewen Hall and Congregational Schoolroom; (5) Assembly Hall; (6) Pennyfather Hall; (7) Hobley's, Ltd. (8) Wesleyan Hall; (9) Salisbury Hotel; (10) Red Lion Hotel; (11)National Schools; (12) Totteridge Institute; (13) ArklGy Infants School; (14) Constitutional Club; (15) British Legion Hall, Moxon Street, and (16) The Thatched Barn, Barnet By-Pass. INSANITARY PROPERTY. SLUM CLEARANCE PROGRAMME. The Slum Clearance Programme of the Council, which was submitted to the Ministry of Health comprised 7 houses and one shop as a Clearance Area, and 17 individual houses. In my last Report I stated that the seven houses and shop had been demolished after an unsuccessful appeal by the owners to the Ministry of Health, and the families rehoused in new Council Houses. Of the 17 individual houses, 13 have now been demolished, two reconditioned, and one closed, leaving 1 still to be demolished, namely:- (9) The Bungalow, Barnet Lane. Since this cottage was condemned, it has become the property of the Council, being situated on lands purchased for open space. The tenant is, however, still in occupation, but is being rehoused on the new Grange Estate in the near future. It will thus be seen that the Slum Clearance Programme has been completed, with the exception of the demolition of the "The Bungalow," Barnet Lane. Additional to the Slum Clearance Programme now completed, cases occur from time to time which need to be dealt with as requiring demolition, or reconditioning. ferndale Yard, Totteridge. This house was reported as unfit for habitation last year, but the Demolition Order had not expired. It has now been demolished. No. 80 Union Street. This house remains closed, but there are structural difficulties in the way of its demolition at present. fairlight Farm Cottage. This cottage has now been demolished. No. 27 Sebright Road. This house was condemned as unfit for human habitation. The owner appeared before the Council and gave an undertaking that he would carry out any requirements of the Council to make it habitable. In view of the fact that the site could not be used for rebuilding should the house be demolished, the Council agreed to its being reconditioned, but the work had not been started at the end of the year. The Bungalow, Laurel farm, Totteridge. This house was condemned as unfit for habitation and the Council accepted an undertaking from the owner that it would be closed and not again used for habitation. It is at present being (10) used for storing "building materials but will be demolished as soon as the land adjoining has been developed. Barracks Flats. Six families were removed from these flats and rehoused in Council houses, thus enabling six further flats to be converted for occupation by aged couples, and making nine converted at the and of the year. When the Grange Estate houses are ready for occupation the remaining nin6 flats will be dealt with. There is a big demand for these flats, which are let at 6/per week. HOUSING ACT 1935. OVERCROWDING. The overcrowding survey revealed 37 houses - 13 owned by the Council and 24 privately owned - to be overcrowded. They were reported upon to the Council and Ministry of Health, and at a later date the Council forwarded their proposals for rehousing these overcrowded families. The Act also makes it the duty of the Landlord of a house occupied by a person of the working olasses, to insert in the Rent Book a summary of the Housing Act 1935, and the Permitted Number for the house. The Landlord can apply to the Local Authority for this Permitted Number. Applications in respect of 255 houses have been dealt with during the past year. In addition to the above houses, a further 144 new houses have been measured and added to those originally surveyed, bringing the total to 3504. 154 visits were made for this purpose. With regard to the 37 cases of overcrowding revealed by the original survey, 9 were relieved in 1936, 5 in 1937 and 6 during the past year, leaving 17 cases still to be dealt with at the end of 1938, namely:- Two families of five, requiring Three Bed Non-Parlour Type of (11) house, with, a superficial area of 760 square feet. Two families of 6 and three families of seven, requiring Four Bedroom Non-Parlour house of a superficial area of about 1,050 square feet. Five families of eight, requiring Four Bed Parlour type with a superficial area of approximately 1,130 square feet. Two families of nine in Four Bedroom Parlour houses slightly larger than for eight persons. Two families of ten and one family of eleven in Five Bedroom Non-Parlour houses. Applications for Council Houses, These numbered 193 at the end of the year, and included in this total are nine families to be removed from Barnet Barracks which are being converted for occupation by Aged Persons, The Grange Estate upon which is being built 110 houses, will provide for the majority of these applicants including the cases of overcrowding where the families are only five in number, also the families of seven can be accommodated in existing three bedroom parlour houses by using the parlour as a fourth bedroom, and so constituting a four bedroom non-parlour house, as vacancies occur. To meet the requirements of families of eight, nine, ten and eleven, four and five bedroom houses are shortly to be erected on Housing land on lays Lane. PETROLEUM CONSOLIDATION ACT 1928. There are thirty-five persons licenced to store petroleum upon the Register, as against thirty-three last year. The licences are for varying quantities from 100 gallons to 6,000 gallons. The total quantity of petroleum spirit which may be kept in the various stores is 36,800 gallons, as against 31,610 gallons last year. 47 inspections were made, but there was no serious breach of Regulations to report, . (12) Tanks placed underground and supplying by means of pumps have practically taken the place of cans, and are much safer. These tanks and pumps now number 60. The stores which keep 2 gallon cans are licenced for only 750 gallons out of the above total. One licence was issued for storage of 200 lbs, of Carbide of Calcium. Th6 scale of fees for licences to store petroleum ranges from 5/- for a quantity not exceeding 100 gallons, to £1 for a 1,000 5,000 gallons. ERADICATION OF BED BUGS. (1) Number of Council Houses found to be infested 3 " " " " disinfested 3 Number of other houses found to be infested 4 " " " " disinfested 4 (2) An electric power sprayer has been used for disinfestations with a non-staining and non-poisonous fluid insecticide and both the sprayer and the insecticide have given highly satisfactory results. (3) Where there is reason to believe that the incoming tenant of a Council house is not too clean, and that the furniture is likely to be infested, an inspection is made and the furniture disinfested if necessary. (4) The work of disinfestation of houses belonging to the Council is carried out by the Housing Department Repairs Staff under the supervision of a Sanitary Inspector. The Council do not undertake th6 work of disinfestation for private house owners, but give all facilities they can to help them. HERTFORDSHIRE COUNTY COUNCIL ACT 1935. Caravan Camping Sites. Following the dismissal of their appeal to the Migistrates, made by the London Caravan Company, against the refusal of tho Council to grant a licence for their caravan site at Stirling (13) Corner, owing to non-compliance with the requirements of the Hertfordshire County Council Act, 1935, the Company submitted a comprehensive plan providing for 18 concrete bases for caravans to stand on with proper drai nage therefrom, connected to a main drain. Carriage-ways leading to these stands were also provided for. The plan and proposals were approved by the Council and a first class camping site has now been provided, and licence issued accordingly. Employment Agencies. Section 74 of the Hertfordshire County Council Act 1935 requires a Local Authority to furnish the County Council during the first week in October in each year, with a report on the conduct and management of employment agencies within their district, with recommendations for the renewal of the Licences or otherwise. During the year the County Council asked for reports in respect of the following premises previously licenced;- (1) Constance Evelyn Briers, lla, High Street, Barnet. (2) Rosa Figes Coward, 22, High Street, Barnet. (3) Winifred Doris Larkins, 203, High Street, Barnet. (4) Miss D. Lees, 6, Lawn Mansions, High Street, Barnet. I found these premises to be suitable for the purpose, and inspected the books which were kept in a satisfactory manner. Consequently no objection was raised to the renewal of the Licences. Public Swimming Baths and Bathing Pools. Byelaws are now in force in the District for securing the purity of the water in Swimming Baths and Pools, also for ensuring cleanliness and adequacy of accommodation, prevention of accidents and regulating conduct of persons using the Baths or Pools. There is only one Public swimming pool in the district which is attached to a road-house. This has been inspected from time to time and was always found to be conducted in conformity with the Byelaws. (14) LEGAL PROCEEDINGS. PUBLIC HEALTH ACT 1936. A report was received from the Police to the effect that, during Barnet Fair, two rag dealers were giving children toys in exchange for rags. As this is a contravention of Section 154 of the Public Health Act 1936, the Council instructed the Clerk to prosecute. In one case a fine of 5/- was imposed, but in the other case the summons could not be served as the Police were unable to trace the defendant. BYE-LAWS. FOULING OF FOOTPATHS. A case of fouling of a footpath by a dog on a lead was brought to the notice of the Council. The Council decided to institute proceedings against the person in charge of the dog, and the Bench imposed a fine of 10/-. I am, Yours obediently, CHARLES WILLIAM HILL, M.S.I.A. Chief Sanitary and Housing Inspector, Meat, Food and Petroleum Inspector. (15) summary. SANITARY INSPECTION of -AREA. Number of Dwelling Houses Inspected (Primary inspections) (1) on complaint or general inspection of district. 345 (2) House to House. 43 Re-inspections of houses and visits to works in progress. 976 Visits to houses on notification of Infectious Diseases, including Tuberculosis. 105 Visits and inspections under Petroleum Acts, 47 Inspections under Shops Act 29 Visits to Slaughter Houses. 114 " " Factories (including Factory laundries). 11 " " Bakehouses. 32 " " Outworkers premises. 4 " " Dairies, Cowsheds and Milkshops. 35 " " Schools. 10 " " Food Manufactories. 16 " " Common Lodging House. 3 " " Public Halls, Cinemas etc. 18 " " Caravans attending Barnet Fair. 60 Inspections under Rent Restriction Acts. Nill Disinfections after Infectious Disease, etc. 91 Visits re. Overcrowding Survey )Measuring houses 144 )other visits 67 "Permitted Number" Certificates issued under Housing Act 1936 255 SANITARY WORK AND REPAIRS. Houses. Roofs repaired and made watertight. 54 Damp walls remedied. 47 Gutters, downspouts repaired or renewed. 60 Exterior brickwork repaired or repointed. 35 Rooms cleansed, repapored or distempered. 154 Stairs, treads, balusters repaired. 25 Broken sashcords renewed (number of houses). 78 Window frames and cills repaired. 33 Ranges provided or repaired. 41 Coppers provided or repaired. 36 Floors repaired or renewed. 39 Yard surfaces repaired or repaved. 26 Defective ventilation beneath floors, 8 Hot water systems repaired. 19 Draining Boards renewed. 23 Drainage. Drains unstopped and repaired. 60 Drains tested. Drains reconstructed. 37 Soil or Vent pipes repaired or renewed. 5 Inspection Chambers constructed or repaired. 7 Cesspools abolished. 1 Water Closets and Sinks. Flushing cisterns repaired or renewed. 78 Flush pipes repaired. 1 New basins or traps provided. 31 Seats, doors etc. repaired or renewed. 23 Water pipes repaired or renewed. 9 New Sinks. 10 Sink waste pipes unblocked. 28 (16) Water Supply. Storage cisterns cleaned. 4 Storage cisterns - new covers provided. 16 Storage cisterns repaired or renewed. 36 Burst water services renewed or repaired. 67 Miscellaneous. New dustbins provided. 84 Accumulations of refuse removed. 12 Nuisances arising from animals and fowls being improperly kept 3 Rat-infested premises. 11 Defective or insanitary urinals. NIL Verminous houses disinfested. 7