l (q LIBRARY URBAN DISTRICT OF BARNET, ANNUAL REPORT of the ACTING MEDICAL OFFICER OF HEALTH to the BARNET URBAN DISTRICT COUNCIL by ARTHUR L. HYATT, M.R.C.S.(Eng.), L.R.C.P. Together with the ANNUAL REPORT of the CHIEF SANITARY AND HOUSING INSPECTOR by CPAS. WILLIAM HILL.. M.S.I,A. 1948. (2) ANNUAL REPORT of the ACTING MEDICAL OFFICER OF HEALTH to the BARNET URBAN DISTRICT COUNCIL by ARTHUR L. HYATT, U.R.C.S.(Eng.), L.R.C.P. ACTING MEDICAL OFFICER OF HEALTH. (3) BARNET URBAN DISTRICT COUNCIL, ' MEDICAL OFFICER'S REPORT. Public Health Department, 31 Wood Street, Barnet. To the Chairman and Members of the Barnet Urban District Council. Ladies and Gentlemen, I have much pleasure in presenting to you my Annual Report on the Health of the District for the year 1948. It is drawn up on the lines indicated in Circular 3/49 the 17th January, 1949 - as requested by the Ministry of Health. STATISTICS AND SOCIAL CONDITIONS OF THE AREA, Area (in acres) 4,290 Population (1931 Census) 15,064 Registrar-General's Estimate of Resident Population, mid 1948 24,550 Number of Inhabited Houses 6,740 Rateable Value £258,624 Sum represented (excluding Totteridge Rowley £716 bv a Pennv Rate (excluding Totteridge £755 (including Totteridge and Rowley £1,041 NATURAL AND SOCIAL CONDITIONS. The population is largely residential, and consists chiefly of people whose occupation lies outside the urban area. Those employed in the district, apart from the tradesmen and their employees, are mainly skilled workers at dental manufacturing, lithographic, printing and optical works. (4) EXTRACT FROM VITAL AND MORTAL STATISTICS OF THE YEAR, Total, M. F. Live Birth (Legitimate 389 190 199 (Illegitimate 20 12 8 Birth Rate per 1.000 of the estimated resident population: l6.66 Total. M. F. (Legitimate 10 3 7 Still Births (Illegitimate Nil Nil Nil Still Birth Rate per 1,000 total (live and still) Births: 23.87 Total, M. F. Deaths 262 120 142 Death Rate per 1,000 of the estimated average population: 10.67 Deaths from puerperal causes:- Puerperal Sepsis: Nil. Death Rate per 1,000 total births : Nil. Other Puerperal causes: Nil. " " " " " " : Nil. Death Rate from Puerperal causes per 1,000 total (live and still) Births: Nil. Death Rate of Infants under one year of age:- All infants per 1,000 live births: 24.45 Legitimate infants per 1,000 legitimate live births: 25.71 Illegitimate infants par 1,000 illegitimate live births: Nil Deaths from Cancer (all ages): 55 " " Measles (all ages): Nil " " Whooping Cough (all ages); 2 " " Diarrhoea (under 2 years of age): Nil GENERAL PROVISION OF HEALTH SERVICES FOR THE DISTRICT. Hospitals provided or subsidised by the Local Authority or County Council. A. (l) Infectious Diseases Isolation Hospital in Barnet. (2) Smallpox Hospital at Cheshunt. B. (1) Tuberculosis Hospital at Ware, under North East Regional Hospital Board. (2) Maternity block with 52 beds at the Wellhouse Hospital in Barnet. Ambulance Facilities. Infectious Disease - Motor Ambulance at Isolation Hospital. Non-Infectious Disease - The Motor Ambulance Service is under the control of the Hertfordshire County Council Ambulance Brigade, By Day and Night - 'phone BARnet 2222. (5) Clinic and Treatment Centres, At "Fieldways", Wellhouse Lane, a Child Welfare and Ante-Natal Clinic is held every Tuesday; a Child Guidance Clinic every Thursday; an Eye Clinic every Friday and a Clinic for Remedial Exercises on Monday afternoons, for Schoolchildren. A Tuberculosis Clinic is held every Wednesday at the Wellhouse Hospital. At Vale Drive, a Minor Ailments Clinic for Schoolchildren is held every morning from Monday to Friday inclusive, and every Wednesday and Friday a Speech Therapy Clinic. At "Dollisfield", Totteridge Lane, a Child Welfare Clinic is held every Friday afternoon. There are two Nursing Homes for paying patients. The Barnet District Nursing Association provides three Nurses. PUBLIC HEALTH STAFF. , Acting Medical Officer of Health. ø x Arthur L. Hyatt, M.R.C.S.(Eng.), L.R.C.P. Chief Sanitary Inspector. + 0 Charles William Hill, M.S.I.A. Additional Sanitary Inspectors. + ø John Baillie Wilson, M.R.San.I., M.S.I.A. + ø Alex. W. Nicol, A.R.San.I., M.'S.I.A. (To 31st May, 1948) ø Howard W, C. Alloway, A.R.San.I., M.S.I.A. (From 1st August, 1948) Clerical Staff. One Clerk-Typist. + Holds the special qualification as Inspector of Meat and Other Foods under examination of the Royal Sanitary Institute. ø Salary Contribution of one half from Exchequer Grants. x Part-time Officer. (6) WATER SUPPLY, The water for the District is supplied by the Barnet District Gas & Water Company and the Colne Valley Water Company. With regard to the Barnet District Gas & Water Company, all the water is chlorinated, and a pathological staff is maintained. The water, in bulk, is examined daily, and at each pumping station once a week. 1,890 Chemical and Bacteriological examinations of the water were made during the year, of which 32 Chemical and 68 Bacteriological samples were analysed by an independent laboratory. Of the Bacteriological samples representative of supply, the percentage of first class (i.e. Coliform organisms absent in 100 millilitres) was 99.71%, which is regarded as quite satisfactory. The Colne Valley Water Company exerciscs constant supervision, and members of the staff are on duty day and night throughout the year examining samples All the water supplied by this Company is chlorinated. The water supply is satisfactory both from the Chemical and Bacteriological aspects and the supply is considered adequate. DRAIMGE AND SEWERAGE. The town is drained and sewered on the separate system, excepting the older portions of the district where it is a combined system. The sewage is conveyed to an Irrigation Farm of 56 acres, but before it is turned on the land it is screened and treated by means of detritus and sedimentation tarika, and three rotary filters. Pumping is necessary for three sewers which have their outlets at a low point on the farm. A few outlying properties are drained to cesspools,' and part of Totteridge to the Finchley Borough sewers. There are only a few pail closets in remote parts of the district. SANITARY CONDITIONS AND WATER SUPPLY OF SCHOOLS. There are in the district nine schools administered by the South Herts Divisional Education Executive Committee, viz:- Queen Elisabeth's Boys and Girls Grammar Schools; Byng Road County Council School (Secondary, Junior Mixed and Infants Departments); Christ Church School (Junior Boys and Girls, and Infants Departments); Wood Street Church c£ England School (Secondary); Grasvenor Avenue School (Infants); Underhill County Council School (Junior Mixed and Infants Departments); Totteridge Church of England School (Junior Mixed and (7) Infants Departments) and St. Catherine's Roman Catholic School (Junior Mixed and Infants Departments). DISPOSAL OF HOUSE REFUSE„ The house refuse is collected weekly in covered mechanical conveyances and conveyed to the Council's Sewage Farm, where it is loaded into contract[???] covered lorries and disposed of daily by a controlled tipping system outside the district. PREVALENCE OF. AND CONTROL OVER. INFECTIOUS DISEASES. The following table shews the number of Notifications to the Sanitary Authority during the year, of each disease specified in the Public Health Act, 1936, and the Regulations, and the number removed to Hospitals- NATURE OF INFECTIOUS DISEASE NOTIFIED REMOVED TO HOSPITAL DEATHS Smallpox Nil Nil Nil Cholera Nil Nil Nil Scarlet Fever 32 26 Nil Typhus Nil Nil Nil Diphtheria and Membranous Croup Nil Nil Nil Malaria Nil Nil Nil Ophthalmia Neonatorum Nil Nil Nil Erysipelas 9 3 Nil Tuberculosis 25 17 10 Poliomyelitis Nil Nil Nil Meningitis 3 3 Nil Cerebro Spinal Fever 1 1 Nil Encephalitis Nil Nil Nil Polioencephalitis 1 1 Nil Puerperal Pyrexia 24 24 Nil Pneumonia 27 20 8 Enteric Nil Nil Nil Typhoid 2 2 Nil Dysentery 3 1 Nil Measles 273 10 Nil Whooping Cough 62 3 2 TOTALS 462 111 20 (8) Of the foregoing, the following cases normally resident outside the district were notified from the Wellhouse'Hospital:- Dysentery 1; Puerperal Pyrexia 22; Pneumonia 11; Meningitis 2; Whooping Cough 1; Measles 5; Polioencephalitis 1; Scarlet Fever 1; Cerebro Spinal Fever 1; Typhoid 2. The cases of Tuberculosis removed are chiefly sent to Fare Sanatorium. The Case Rates per 1,000 of the population are as follows:- Scarlet Fever 1.26; Tuberculosis 1.02; Puerperal Pyrexia 4.77 (per 1,000 Births), AGE INCIDENCE OF INFECTIOUS DISEASE, DISEASE NUMBER OF CASES NOTIFIED YEARS OF AGE 0- 1- 2- 3- 4- 5- 10- 15- 20- 35- 45- 65- Total Scarlet Fever - 1 2 2 2 21 1 2 1 - - - 32 Cerebro Spinal Fever - - - 1 - - - - - - - - 1 Dysentery - 2 - - - l - - - - - - 3 Typhoid - - - - - - 1 - - 1 - 2 Meningitis - 1 1 - - - - - - - 1 - 3 Polioencephalitis - - - - - - - 1 - - - - l Whooping Cough 8 10 5 2 11 24 1 - l - - - 62 Erysipelas - - - - - - - - 2 3 3 l 9 Measles 8 21 24 19 48 143 6 1 3 - - - 273 Puerperal Pyrexia - - - - - - - 1 21 2 - - 24 Pneumonia 2 2 - - - - - - 3 4 10 6 27 TOTALS 18 37 32 24 6l 189 8 6 31 9 15 7 437 MORTAL STATISTICS. Of 262 deaths, 10 occurred under one year of age. The following were the chief causes of death:- Heart Disease 8l; Cancer 55; (l6 males and 39 females); Intra-cranial Vascular Lesions 22; Bronchitis 16; Tuberculosis 10; Pneumonia (all forms) 8; Congenital Debility and Malformation 5; Suicide 2; Road Traffic Accidents 3; Other Violence 10. (9) CONTROL OF INFECTIOUS DISEASE, No use has been made of the Schick and Dick Tests in Diphtheria and Scarlet Fever. VACCINATION, No primary or revaccinations were performed by the Medical Officer of. Health under the Public Health (Smallpox Prevention) Regulations, 1917. TUBERCULOSIS. NEW CASES AND MORTALITY DURING 1948. YEARS OF AGE. NEW CASES DEATHS Pulmonary Non-Pulmonary Pulmonary Non-Pulmonary M. F. M. F, M. F. M. F. 0 - - - - - - - - 1 - - 1 - - - - - 5 1 1 - - - - - - 15 3 4 - 1 - - - - 25 - 2 - 1 1 1 - - 35 3 2 - . - 1 3 - - 45 - 1 - - 1 - - - 55 2 - - - 1 - - - 65 and over 2 1 - - 2 - - - TOTALS 11 11 1 2 6 4 - - The ten deaths from Tuberculosis were all previously notified cases, from which it would appear that the notification of Tuberculosis is efficiently carried out. There were no cases of wilful neglect or of refusal to notify Tuberculosis in any form, PUBLIC HEALTH (PREVENTION OF TUBERCULOSIS) REGULATIONS. 1925. It has not been found necessary to take any action under the above Regulations, relating to Tuberculous employees in the Milk Trade. (10) PUBLIC HEALTH ACT, 1936. SECTION 172, COMPULSORY REMOVAL TO HOSPITAL OF CASES OF PULMONARY TUBERCULOSIS. No action was necessary under the above Section, DIPHTHERIA IMMU NISATION. Up to the 30th June 1948. 183 children completed the full course of Immunisation, as followss:- Under 5 years of age: 170 5-14 years of age: 13 In addition, 153 children received a third (booster) injection. No information is available from Herts County Council for the remaining hal: of the year "'hen they took over. SCABIES (PUBLIC HEALTH) NO. 1 ORDER. 1944, The following are particulars of cases of Scabies treated in the district. Adults, Schoolchildren, Under 5 years. Treated at Cleansing Station: 11 4 1 Treated at homes 6 - 4 TOTALS 17 4 5 In addition to the above, 3 adults, 4 schoolchildren and 1 child under 5 years of age, who were close contacts with notified cases, received precautionary treatments at the Cleansing Station. I am, Yours faithfully, ARTHUR L. HYATT, M.R.C.S. (Eng.), L.R.C.P. ACTING MEDICAL OFFICER OF HEALTH. (11) HOUSING STATISTICS, 1. Inspection of dwelling houses during the year:- (a) (i) Total number of dwelling houses inspected for housing defects (under Public Health or Housing Acts). 441 (ii) Number of inspections made for the purpose. 525 (b) (i) Number of duelling houses (included under sub-head (a) above) which were inspected and recorded under the Housing Consolidated Regulations, 1925 and Amending Regulations, 1932. 247 (ii) Number of inspections made for the purpose. 316 (c) Number of houses found to be in a state so dangerous or injurious to health as to be unfit for human habitation. 4 (d) Number of duelling houses (exclusive of those referred to under sub-head, (c) above) found not to be in all respects reasonably fit for human habitation. 428 2. Remedy of defects during the year without service of formal notices:- (a) Number of defective houses rendered fit in consequence of informal action by the Local Authority or their Officers. 400 (b) Informal notices"outstanding at the end of the year. 20 3. Action under Statutory Powers during the years- (a) Proceedings under Sections 9,10 and 16 of the Housing Act, 1936; (i) Number of dwelling houses in respect of which notices were served requiring repairs. Nil (ii) Number of dwelling houses which were rendered fit after service of formal notices:- (A) by owners. 5 (B) by Local Authority in default of owners. Nil (C) outstanding notices. . Nil (b) Proceedings under Public Health Act, 1936: (i) Number of dwelling houses in respect of which notices were served requiring defects to be remedied. 32 (ii) Number of dwelling houses in respect of which defects were remedied after service of formal notices;- (A) by owners. 29 + (B) by Local Authority in default of owners. Nil (C) outstanding notices. 7 (c) Proceedings under Sections 11 and 13 of the Housing Act, 1936: (i) Number of dwelling houses in respect of which Demolition Orders were made. Nil (ii) Number of dwelling houses demolished in pursuance of Demolition Orders, Nil + Includes 4 outstanding from previous year. (12) (d) Proceedings under Section 12 of the Housing Act, 1936: (i) Number of separate tenements or underground rooms in respect of which Closing Orders were made. Nil (ii) Number of separate tenements or underground rooms in respect of which Closing Orders were determined, the tenement or room having been rendered fit. Nil 4. Housing Act, 1936 - Overcrowding:- (a) (i) Number of dwellings overcrowded at the end of the year. (ii) Number of families dwelling therein, (iii) Number of persons dwelling therein, (b) Number of new cases of overcrowding reported during the year. (c) (i) Number of cases of overcrowding relieved during the year. (ii) Number of persons concerned in such cases, (d) Particulars of such cases in which dwelling houses have again become overcrowded after the Local Authority have taken steps for the abatement of overcrowding. (1) ANNUAL REPORT of the CHIEF SANITARY INSPECTOR to the BARNET URBAN DISTRICT COUNCIL by CHARLES WILLIAM HILL, M.S.I.A. CHIEF SANITARY AND HOUSING INSPECTOR. (2) BARMET URBAN DISTRICT COUNCIL, CHIEF SANITARY INSPECTOR'S REPORT.. Public Health Department, 31 Food Street, Barnet. To the Chairman and Members of the Barnet Urban District Council. Ladies and Gentlemen, I have the honour to present to you my 40th Annual Report giving particulars of the measures carried out by my Department, during the year 1948, in administering the various Acts and Bye-laws concerning Public Health, Housing, Petroleum etc, in force within the district. Bombing and the inability to secure labour and materials during the war years has resulted in much property getting into a bad state consequently the enforcement of remedial work was impracticable. Availability of labour and materials although not so acute, is still a limiting factor, A good deal of repair ";ork to property has however been carried out, as the Ministry of Health has given a direction that all repairs required under Statutory Notice from the local authority must receive priority where necessary. As by far the largest part of an Inspector's work is the enforcement of various Acts of Parliament concerning public health, it follows that the majority of the work is as between the Inspector and the individual concerned. This being the case it is obviously undesirable to report on many of these matters individually at the time, but as a record of the work accomplished can only come to the knowledge of the Council in a report such as this, the number of visits and work carried out is tabulated at the end of the report. The work of the department has been set out, as far as possible, under the various Acts to which it relates. INSPECTION OF DISTRICT. General Inspections of the District have been carried out periodically and all complaints investigated. The process of serving a preliminary or intimation notice upon the person in (3) default, specifying the works necessary to remedy the defects found, is usually followed, and only if a person fails to comply with this preliminary notice, or strict legal procedure- is necessary in the first instance, is the matter reported to the Council for statutory action to be taken. PUBLIC HEALTH ACT. 19^6. INFECTIOUS DISEASE - INVESTIGATIONS AND DISINFECTIONS. The cases of Infectious Disease enumerated below have been investigated and reported upon to your Medical Officer of Health;- Scarlet Fever ^1; Erysipelas 9> Tuberculosis 25. Forty-eight houses were disinfected where necessary, and bedding sent to be steam disinfected in certain instances. Two hundred and nineteen library books used by patients were disinfected. DAIRIES. COWSHEDS AND MILKSHOPS. The number of persons registered to sell milk is twenty-two, viz:- 7 Dairies and Cowsheds. 15 Milkshops and Purveyors of Milk. Fifty-four inspections were made, and particular attention paid to the hygtmc essentials necessary for a pure milk production and distribution. Cowsheds of good construction, providing proper light, ventilation and cubic air space per cow are essential, but would be of little value unless accompanied by a proper appreciation of the importance of grooming the cow's flanks, washing the udder, cleanliness of the milker's hands and the proper washing and sterilising of milk utensils and bottles. I am therefore pleased to record that the dairyman and his assistants are learning this lesson and are setting themselves higher standards than ever before. High bacterial counts have a real significance to them now that they have learned the causes and implications and are conscious that a dirty milk supply is a 1 reflection on their methods and cleanliness. Samples are taken from time to time, and the results forwarded to the dairymen. During the past year, thirty-seven samples were taken in the district, and tests appropriate to the particular Designations of milk applied with the following results. (4) Designation. No. of Samples Taken. Passed Test. Failed Test. Tuberculin Tested. 8 5 2 Tuberculin Tested (Pasteurised). 6 6 - Accredited. 11 9 2 Pasteurised. 12 12 - TOTALS 37 32 5 Four Dealer's Licences and nine Supplementary Licences were granted for the retail sale of milk under the Milk (Special Designations) Regulations, 193^ to 1946, vizs:- Dealer's Licences, Supplementary Licences. Tuberculin Tested. 2 4 Accredited - 1 Pasteurised 2 4 Producer's Licences for designated milks are issued by the County Council. PRIVATE SLAUGHTER-HOUSES AND SLAUGHTER OF ANIMALS ACT. 1933. Sincc Food Rationing was introduced the Private Slaughter-houses in the district, three in number* have been closed, meat rationing being more easily organised and administered from one abbatoir supplying a large area than from a number of small slaughter-houses in each district. It is doubtful whether these small private slaughter-houses will again be permitted to function. There are nine persons licensed by the Council as fit persons to slaughter animals, one less than in the previous year. These slaughtermen, although still required to be licensed by this Authority, work outside the district. No complaint has been received from the districts in ';rhich they work concerning the conduct of any of these men. (5) MEAT AND FOOD INSPECTION, The following is a list of the articles of food condemned as unfit for human consumption during the year:- Meat. Beef (Imported) 1303½ lbs. Beef (Home Killed) 68½ lbs. Mutton (HomeKilled) 36 lbs, Bacon 24 lbs. Beef Sausages 12 lbs. Meat Pies 44 lbs. Black Puddings 8½ lbs. Corned Beef 325½ lbs. Corned Mutton 36 lbs. Stewed Steak 12 tins. Luncheon Meat 13 tins. Miscellaneous 10 tins. Fish. Wet Fish (Skate, Herrings, Witches, Bream and Cod) 49½ stones. Smoked Fish (Cod, Haddock and Kippers) 29 stones. Shrimps 3 galls. Salmon 26 tins. Sardines 8l tins. Pilchards 19 tins. Herring Tidbits 456 tins. Smoked Herring Spread 87 tins. Hake 5 tins. Fish Paste 16 tins. Mussels 60 tins. Fruit. Prunes (Dried) 9 lbs. Mixed Fruits (Sultanas, Currants and Peel) 2¾ lbs. Dates 15 boxes. Grapes 102 tins. Grapefruit 39 tins. Plums 25 tins. Apricots 21 tins. Miscellaneous Fruits and Juices 22 tins. Vegetables and Cereals. Peas 59 tins. Carrots 16 tins. Baked Beans 38 tins. Spaghetti in Sauce 11 tins. Parsnips 9 tins. Mixed Vegetables 15 tins. Runner Beans 6 tins. Semolina 5½ lbs. Barley Flakes 21½ lbs. Barley Flour 7½ lbs. Breakfast Cereals 18 pkts. Groceries. Sugar 128 lbs. Cheese 17 lbs. Milk 199 tins. Jam and Marmalade 80 tins. Soup 30 tins. Tea ½ lb. Cocoa 1½ lbs. Coffee Essence 18 botts. Flour 12 pkts. Cake Mixture 44 pkts. Cake 9 lbs. Biscuits 17 lbs. Pickles 17 ,jars. Sauces 16 botts. Pepper 4 lbs. Salt 6 pkts. Rennet 3 botts. Sweets (Boiled Sweets, Toffee and Chocolates) 22¼ lbs. (6) FOOD AND DRUGS ACT. 1938. Those sections of the above Act concerning adulteration and sampling of foodstuffs are enforced by the County Authority in this district. In ray Annual Report for 1947 attention was drawn to the fact that only 13 samples were taken r,ithin this district, and that there was a lack of variety in the articles sampled, It iw.ll be noted that these comments have produced an increase in the variety of articles taken, if not in the number of each. The following details shew the number and. nature of the samples taken in the Urban District of Barnet during the year, and the results of the analyses. Article. No. of Samples Taken. Genuine. Adulterated. Extent and Form cf Adulteration. Milk 5 4 1 2% of Added Water Ice Cream 4 4 — — + Tincture of Rhubarb 1 1 — — Amraoniated Tincture of Quinine 1 1 — — Matte 1 1 — — Rockfish (Tinned) 1 1 — — Syrup of Figs 1 1 — — Fruit .Cake 1 1 — — Soya Flour 1 1 — — Lemonade Crystals 1 1 — — Sulphur Ointment 1 1 — — Gees Linctus 1 1 — — Milk of Magnesia (Tablets) 1 1 — — Olive Oil 1 1 — — Pea Nut Butter 1 1 — — Tomato Sauce 1 1 — — Malt Vinegar 1 1 — — Self Raising Flour 1 1 — — Barley Flakes 1 1 — — Iodised Throat Lozenges 1 1 — — Cocoa 1 1 — — White Pepper 1 1 — — Sweetened Fat 1 1 — — Sandwich Spread 1 1 — — Fish Paste 1 1 — — Cod Liver Oil 1 1 — — Lemonade Powder 1 1 — — Concentrated Ginger Wine Flavouring 1 1 — — Paregoric 1 1 — — Syrup of Figs 1 1 — — Arrowroot 1 1 — — Ground Ginger 1 1 — — Banana Bar 1 1 — — Solution Acetic Acid (Artificial Vinegar) 1 1 — — Coffee and Chicory Essence 1 1 — — Totals 42 41 1 See Below + + No proceedings were instituted against the vendor of this sample, but a warning was given. (7) DRAINAGE AMD SANITARY CONVENIENCES, The drains or sanitary fittings to 106 premises were found to be in some respect defective. In thirteen cases, the drains were found to be so defective as to necessitate their being taken up and entirely relaid. The drains to twenty-one houses were found to be stopped up and remedial action taken. Notice was served at the end of 1947 requiring the overhaul and repair of the sewage filtration plant at St. Joseph's Convent, Totteridge. The necessary works consisting of relaying a length of drain, cleaning of the humus tank, and cleaning and renewal of parts of the filter bed and mechanism, were completed early this year after which a satisfactory effluent was being discharged into the Dollis Brook. Remedial work in connection with all the above properties required the provision of 26 new water closets; 4 sinks; 36 water closet flushing cisterns; 18 inspection chambers and 8 soil pipes. FATER SUPPLY. Fifty premises were reported as being without proper water supply, due mainly to bursts caused by frost. In nine of these cases, however, the water was cut off owing to non-payment of water rates. In each case this Department was notified by the Water Company, and steps were taken which resulted in the early reconnection of the supply. FACTORIES ACT. 1937. Fifty-nine inspections of factories with mechanical power and twelve inspections of factories without mechanical power were made during the year, including bakehouses. Three notifications of contravention of the requirements of the Act were received from H,M. Inspector of Factories. A case of defective sanitary accommodation and one of dirty condition of a factory "ere dealt with informally, whilst one factory having insufficient sanitary accommodation was the subject of statutory action. In addition, two notices were served where defects were found contravening the Act. (8) MEANS OF ESCAPE IN CASE OF FIRE. Section 34 of the Act requires every factory in which more than 20 persons are employed to be certified by the local authority as being provided with such means of escape in case of fire for the persons employed therein as moy reasonably be required in the circumstances of each case. At the instance of H.M. Inspector of Factories, five applications for certificates were received. These factories were inspected, and. in one case improvements were required. Certificates specifying in detail the means of escape provided, together with particulars of fire fighting appliances, '-ere issued to the occupiers after completion, "here necessary, of the alterations. HOUSING ACT. 1936 - OVERCROWDING. In common with most other Authorities, it has been impossible to administer the provisions of the above Act with regard to overcrowding. A certain number of the most serious cases have of course been placed in new Council houses, but a good deal of overcrowding exists. 103 new files have been added during the year to the 3^32 surveys carried out prior to the war, and some 300 of these latter have been revised. The information obtained will form a useful basis upon which to work when it is possible to make a fresh start with this important matter. It will also be to a large extent a guide as to the housing needs of the district. VANS USED AS DWELLINGS. The vans which entered the district for the purpose of attending Barnet Fair were in many instances visited in order to ascertain their sanitary condition, and to enquire as to any illness which might be of an infectious character. Temporary sanitary accommodation was provided in different sections of the Fair for the use of the caravaners and public, and attention paid to such matters as disposal of fish offal and other refuse. SANITARY CONDITION OF CINEMAS, DANCING HALLS AND OTHER PLACES OF ENTERTAINMENT. The Halls used as cinemas, and for dancing and other entertainment, were inspected during the year, concerning their fitness for the nature of the entertainment proposed to be given as regards fire escape; ventilation; dressing, (9) cloakroom and lavatory accommodation. Prior to the war I invited the Chief Officer of the Council's Fire Brigade to accompany me on these inspections, to make an examination of the fire extinguishers and other fire appliances, when instructions were given to have these overhauled where necessary. This practice will be continued in future and the co-operation of the Staticn Officer of the Hertfordshire Fire Service will be sought. HERTFORDSHIRE COUNTY COUNCIL ACT. 19VS. Provision is made in this Act for the conduct and regulation of (1) Hairdressers1 and Barbers' Premises; (2) Swimming Baths and Pools, and (3) Employment Agencies. Hairdressers' and Barbers' Premises. The Council made Bye-laws for securing the cleanliness of these premises in 1937• There are fifteen such establishments in the district. No complaints were received concerning their cleanliness or conduct nor were any serious breaches of the Bye-laws noted during inspections of such premises. S'-imming Baths and Pa thing Pools. The only swimming pool in the district, viz, at "The Barn", Barnet By-Pass, is not now in use. Employment Agencies. Prior to the ^ar there were four employment agencies in the district. These, however, are no longer in existence owing to the control of labour and it seems unlikely they will be starred up again. SHOPS ACT. 1934. Routine inspection of shops which was in abeyance during and since the war, has been started and 45 visits were made. Informal action was taken where necessary. Next year it should be possible to step up this '"ork to include all the shop's in the area. STATUTORY NOTICES, As previously stated, in the large majority of cases preliminary or intimation notice is sufficient to secure the remedying of any defect to property or breach of (10) the Acts, Regulations and Bye-laws in force within the district, and. it was found necessary to ask your authority to serve Statutory Notice in only 32 cases. 34 Statutory Notices have been complied with during the year, including those outstanding from last year, leaving 7 outstanding at the end of this year. PETROLEUM (REGULATION) ACTS. 1928 AND 19^6. There are thirty-six persons licensed to store petroleum and petroleum mixtures upon the Register; one more than last year. The Licences are for varying quantities from 18 gallons to 6,000 gallons. The total quantity of petroleum spirit and mixtures "'hich may be kept in the various stores is 28,653 gallons. Fifty-two inspections were made, but there was no serious breach of the Regulations to report. One Licence -"as issued for the storage of 100 lbs. of Carbide of Calcium. The scale of fees for Licences to Store Petroleum ranges from 5/~ f°r a quantity not exceeding 100 gallons to £1 for 1,000 to 5>000 gallons. Yrith a view to the standardisation of electrical equipment used in connection with petrol service, pumps, the Secretary of State, Home Office, has issued a Model Code of requirements. In the past, the production of satisfactory electrically operated pumps has been rendered difficult by the varying requirements of local authorities. Now the new Code will, in due course, be incorporated in the conditions attached to the issue of Licences for all premises such as garages or filling stations in which electrically operated pumps are installed. ERADICATION OF BED BUGS, Number of Council houses found to be infested. 2 " " " 11 disinfested. 2 Number of other houses found to be infested. 5 11 " " 11 disinfested. 5 An electric power sprayer has been used for disinfestations, employing a nonstaining and non-poisonous fluid insecticide, and has given excellent results. The Council do not undertake the work of disinfestation for private house-owners, but give all facilities possible to assist them. I am, lours obediently, CHARLES WILLIAM HILL, M.S.I.A. Chief Sanitary and Housing Inspector, Meat and Food Inspector, Petroleum Inspector. (11) SUMMARY. SANITARY INSPECTION OF AREA. Number of drolling houses inspected (primary inspections): (1) On complaint or general inspection of district 194 (2) House to house 247 Re-inspections of houses and visits to works in progress 795 Visits to houses on notification of infectious disease 8l Visits and inspections under Petroleum Acts 52 Visits to slaughterhouses NIL Visits to factories (including factory laundries) 43 Visits to bakehouses 28 Visits to Outworkers' premises 16 Visits to dairies, cowsheds and milkshops 54 Visits to food manufactories 40 Visits to public halls, cinemas etc l6 Inspections under Rent Restrictions Acts NIL Disinfections after infectious diseases etc 48 Visits re; Overcrowding Survey (additional properties) 108 "Permitted Number" Certificates issued under Housing Act, 1936 126 Visits re; Civil Building Licencos 99 Visits to inspect meat and other foods 193 Visits to Schools 12 Visits re: pollution of watercourses 91 Visits to Tents, Caravans and Sheds 49 Visits under Shops Act 45 Miscellaneous visits 44 SANITA.RY WORK AND REPAIRS. Houses. Roofs repaired and made watertight 68 Gutters, downspouts repaired or renewed 41 Brickwork, exterior, repaired or repointed 30 Walls, dampness remedied 94 Chimney stacks and pots repaired or renewed 21 Yard surfaces repaired or repaved 8 Room '"alls and ceilings cleansed and decorated 245 Wall plaster repaired or renewed 86 Ceilings repaired or renewed 92 Floors repaired or renewed 39 Floors, defective ventilation rectified 1 Air gratings renewed 4 Doors and frames repaired 36 Window sashes, frames and cills repaired 50 Sashcords renewed (number of houses) 37 Glazing repaired or renewed 73 Stairs, treads, balusters repaired 24 Fireplaces repaired or renewed 46 Kitchencrs repaired or renewed 29 Coppers repaired or renewed 31 Drainage. Drains tested 8 Drains reconstructed 13 Drains unstopped and repaired 21 Inspection chambers reconstructed or repaired 18 Cesspools abolished 1 Cesspools emptied 6 Soil or vent pipes repaired or renewed 8 Gullies, channels and fenders repaired 6l (12) Water Closets, Sinks and Baths, W.C, pans and traps repaired or renewed 26 Flushing cisterns repaired or renewed 36 Flush pipes repaired or renewed 24 Seats, doors etc. repaired or renewed 18 Brickwork repaired or repointed 11 Water pipes repaired or renewed 14 Sinks repaired or renewed 4 Sink wastes unstopped, repaired or renewed 9 Draining boards renewed 21 Bath wastes unstopped, repaired or renewed 8 Pater Supply. Cisterns, storage, repaired or renewed 18 Cisterns, storage, cleansed 2 Cisterns, storage, new covers provided 2 Cisterns, hot water, repaired or renewed 4 Water services, burst, repaired or renewed 41 Stopcocks repaired or renewed 4 Taps repaired or renewed 16 Miscellaneous, Dustbins renewed 34 Refuse accumulations removed 10 Animals and fowls, nuisances from improper keeping 5 Rat infested premises treated 72 Verminous houses disinfested 7 Dirty houses cleansed 2