UBAR 21 URBAN DISTRICT OF BARNET ANNUAL REPORT of the ACTING MEDICAL OFFICER OF HEALTH to the BARNET URBAN DISTRICT COUNCIL by ARTHUR L. HYATT, M.R.C.S.(Eng.), L.R.C.P. Together with the ANNUAL REPORT of the CHIEF SANITARY INSPECTOR by JOHN B. WILSON, M.S.I.A., M.R.San.I. 1953. (2) BARNET URBAN DISTRICT COUNCIL. MEDICAL OFFICER'S REPORT. Public Health Department, 31 Wood Street, Barnet. To the Chairman and Members of the Barnet Urban District Council. Ladies and Gentlemen, I have much pleasure in presenting to you my Annual Report on the health of the district for the year 1953. It is drawn up on the lines indicated in Circular 42/51 of the 10th December, 1951 - as requested by the Ministry of Health, in Circular 1/54. STATISTICS AND SOCIAL CONDITIONS OF THE AREA. Area (in acres) 4,290 Population (1951 Census) 25,019 Registrar-General's Estimate of Resident Population, mid 1953 25,150 Number of Inhabited Houses 7,489 Rateable Value £272,021 Product of a Penny Rate £1,112 NATURAL AND SOCIAL CONDITIONS. The population is largely residential, and consists chiefly of people whose occupation lies outside the urban area. Those employed in the district, apart from the tradesmen and their employees, are mainly skilled workers at dental manufacturing, lithographic, printing and optical works. EXTRACT FROM VITAL AND MORTAL STATISTICS OF THE YEAR. Total. M. F. Live Births (Legitimate 287 166 121 (Illegitimate 14 4 10 Birth Rate per 1.000 of the estimated resident population (standardised): 12.09 Total. M. F. Still Births (Legitimate 5 2 3 (Illegitimate Nil Nil Nil Still Birth Rate per 1.000 total (live and still) Births: 16.34 (3)  Total. M. F. Deaths 270 125 145 Death Rate per 1,000 of the estimated resident population (standardised) : 10.20 Death Rate from Puerperal causes per 1,000 total (live and still) Births: Nil Deaths of Infants under one year of age:- Total M. F. Legitimate 7 3 4 Illegitimate Nil Nil Nil Death Rate of Infants under one year of age per 1,000 live Births: 23.26 Deaths of Infants under four weeks of age:- Total. M. F. Legitimate 6 3 3 Illegitimate Nil Nil Nil Death Rate of Infants under four weeks of age per 1,000 live Births: 19.97 Too much importance should not be paid to the rates where the actual number of cases is small, e.g. - below 10, as such rates are of little statistical significance. Thus, if an attempt is made to compare this area with other districts, or with previous years, it would be better to compare actual cases. GENERAL PROVISION OF HEALTH SERVICES FOR THE DISTRICT, The Council are not the appropriate Local Authority for the purpose of the National Health Service Act, 1946, and do not therefore control any of the Hospitals or ancillary services in the district. Within this district, and under the control of the Barnet Group Hospital Management Committee, are the following:- Barnet General Hospital, Wellhouse Lane, Barnet. 478 Beds. St. Stephen's Hospital, Mays Lane, Barnet. 88 Beds. (Female medical, Ear, Nose and Throat, and male long-stay cases) Victoria Maternity Hospital, Wood Street, Barnet. 48 Beds. "Elm Bank", Arkley. (Female long-stay cases) 27 Beds. The following is a list of Clinics etc. available in the district. Tuberculosis Clinics are held daily, by appointment, at Barnet Chest Clinic, Wellhouse Lane, Barnet. At Vale Drive, there is a Clinic for Schoolchildren on the second and fourth Monday morning in each month, and a Clinic for Remedial Exercises every Monday afternoon. A Speech Therapy Clinic is held on Wednesdays and (4) Fridays, Child Guidance Clinic on Thursdays, and an Eye Clinic on Wednesdays. An Infant Welfare Clinic is held every Tuesday afternoon and also on the first and third Fridays in each month. Dental Clinics are held daily. These Clinics are subject to alteration and it is advisable to enquire of the Vale Drive Clinic (BAR; 6194) for the current days and time. Home Help Service, The local office of the Herts County Council Home Help Service at No. 31 Wood Street, Barnet, is open daily from 11 - 12 noon, Monday to Friday inclusive. This office will close on 30th June 1954, and the work will be carried on from 25 East Barnet Road, New Barnet. PUBLIC HEALTH STAFF. Acting Medical Officer of Health. ø x Arthur L. Hyatt, M.R.C.S.(Eng.), L.R.C.P. Chief Sanitary Inspector. + Ø John Baiilie Wilson, M.R.San.I., M.S.I.A. Additional Sanitary Inspector. Ø Howard W. C. Alloway, A.R.San.I., M.S.I.A. One Clerk-Typist. One Rodent Operative. + Holds the special qualification as Inspector of Meat and other Foods under examination of the Royal Sanitary Institute. Ø Salary Contribution of one half from Exchequer Grants. x Part-time Officer, WATER SUPPLY. The major area of the district is supplied with water from the mains of the Barnet District Water Company, and the remainder is served by the Colne Valley Water Company. All water supplied by the Barnet District Water Company is chlorinated. A pathological staff is maintained and the water is regularly tested at all stages. During the year, a total of 1,703 examinations of the water were made by the Company's own staff. 1,293 of these samples were representative of the supply and 98% were found to be free from B. Coli, In addition, 33 chemical and 62 (5) bacteriological samples were submitted to independent analysis and all of the latter were reported free in 100 m.l. quantities from undesirable organisms. Six samples of water were taken by the Department and submitted for analysis with satisfactory results, coliform organisms being absent in 100 millilitres in each case. The Colne Valley Water Company exercises constant supervision, and members of the staff are on duty day and night throughout the year examining samples. All the water supplied by this Company is chlorinated. The water supply is satisfactory both from the Chemical and Bacteriological aspects. The water supply to the whole district is considered adequate, and all houses are supplied by these companies mains, with the exception of one house which was found during the year to be using well water which is pumped up to a store tank in the roof space. A sample of water from the tap was submitted to the Laboratory and was found to be bacteriologicaily satisfactory. DRAINAGE AND SEWERAGE. The town is drained and sewered on the separate system, excepting the older portions of the district where it is a combined system. The sewage is conveyed to a Sewage Disposal works of 56 acres, where it is screened, grit removed in detritus tanks, thence to primary settlement tanks and thereafter distributed over 3,80 ft. diameter bacteria filters, followed by hunus removal in rectangular tanks before discharge to the Dollis Brook. Pumping is necessary for three sewers which have their outlets at a low point on the works. Part of the Totteridge area drains to the Finchley Borough sewers; in the outlying areas some properties are on cesspool drainage or domestic sewage disposal plants, and a few only have pail closets. SANITARY CONDITIONS AND WATER SUPPLY OF SCHOOLS. There are in the district fourteen schools administered by the South Herts Divisional Education Executive Committee, via;- Queen Elisabeth's Boys and Girls Grammar Schools; Ravenscroft Secondary Modern School; Foulds School (Junior Mixed and Infants Departments); Christ Church School for (6) Infants; Christ Church School for Girls; Christ Church School for Juniors; The Elizabeth Allen Secondary Modern School; Grasvenor Infants School; Underbill School (Junior Mixed); Underbill School (Infants); St. Andrew's Church of England School (Junior Mixed and Infants Departments); St. Catherine's Roman Catholic School (Senior Girls, Junior Mixed and Infants Departments) and Whitings Hill School (Junior Mixed and Infants Departments). The Further Education Centre, Technical Institute, Wood Street, Barnet, is available for Girls and Boys between the ages of 15 and 18. All schools in the district are supplied with mains water and are connected to the Council's main drainage system, DISPOSAL OF HOUSE REFUSE. The house refuse is collected weekly in covered mechanical conveyances and tken to the Council's Sewage Farm, where it is loaded into Contractor's covered lorries and disposed of daily by controlled tipping outside the district. PREVALENCE OF. AND CONTROL OVER, INFECTIOUS DISEASE. The following table shews the number of Notifications to the Sanitary Authority during the year, of each disease specified in the Public Health Act, 1936, and the various Infectious Disease Regulations, and the number of cases removed to Hospital: DISEASE NOTIFIED REMOVED TO HOSPITAL Scarlet Fever 31 14 Whooping Cough 185 2 Diphtheria and Membranous Croup Nil Nil Measles 732 8 Acute Pneumonia 32 18 Meningococcal Infection 4 4 Acute Poliomyelitis (Paralytic) 1 1 " " (Non-Paralytic) 1 1 Acute Encephalitis Nil Nil Dysentery 25 9 Ophthalmia Neonatorum Nil Nil Puerperal Pyrexia 50 50 Smallpox Nil Nil Malaria 1 1 Paratyphoid B. 3 3 Food Poisoning 3 Nil Erysipelas 3 2 Typhoid Fever l 1 Tuberculosis 23 10 TOTALS 1095 124 (7) AGE INCIDENCE OF INFECTIOUS DISEASE, DISEASE NUMBER OF CASES NOTIFIED YEARS OF AGE l- 2- 3- 4- 5- 10- 15- 25- 45- 65- 75- Total. Scarlet Fever – – 1 3 5 19 2 1 _ - - - 31 Whooping Cough 9 14 22 23 18 92 5 1 - - – 1 185 Measles 15 49 86 88 92 379 17 5 1 – – – 732 Acute Pneumonia - - - - - l - 4 7 11 6 3 32 Meningococcal Infection 1 – 1 - - 2 - - - – – – 4 Acute Poliomyelitis (Paralytic) – – - – – 1 – – – – – – 1 (Non-Paralytic) - – – - - – 1 – - – - – 1 Dysentery – – 1 4 2 6 1 3 2 3 2 – 25 Puerperal Pyrexia _ – - - - - - 19 31 _ - - 50 Malaria - - - - - - 1 – - - – 1 Paratyphoid B – – - - – 3 - - - – – - 3 Food Poisoning – – – – - – – 1 1 1 - - 3 Erysipelas – – - – - – - 1 - 2 - – 3 Typhoid Fever – _ – - - – - 1 – – – – 1 TOTALS 25 64 111 118 117 503 26 37 42 17 8 4 1072 Of the foregoing, the following cases normally resident outside the district were notified from the Barnet General Hospital and the Victoria Maternity Hospital:- Dysentery 8; Measles 2; Acute Pneumonia 12; Meningococcal Infection 3; Puerperal Pyrexia 46; Malaria 1, Paratyphoid B. 2; Erysipelas 1. The cases of Tuberculosis removed for treatment are usually sent to Clare Hall, South Mimms, or Grim's Dyke, Harrow Weald,Sanatoria; other patients with an infectious disease being sent to Coppett's Food Hospital, Muswell Hill, N.10. The Case Rates, of certain diseases, per 1,000 of the population for the district are as follows, with the rates for England and Wales shewn in parenthesis:- Scarlet Fever 1.23 (1.39); Whooping Cough 7.36 (3.58); Measles 29.11 (12.36); (8) Acute Pneumonia 0.79 (0.84); Meningococcal Infection 0.04 (0.03); Food Poisoning 0.12 (0.24); Erysipelas 0.08 (0.14). As mentioned earlier in this report, where the number of cases is less than, say, 10, case rates are of little statistical value for comparison purposes. Of the two cases of Poliomyelitis,the paralytic case was a young boy of six years of age who is still receiving treatment. The non-paralytic case was a newly arrived resident to the district who had obviously contracted the disease elsewhere: contact was made with the district concerned, VACCINATION. No primary or revaccinations were performed by the Medical Officer of Health under the Public Health (Smallpox Prevention) Regulations, 1917. INTERNATIONAL VACCINATION CERTIFICATES. At the end of 1952 a new form was introduced for International Vaccination Certificates requiring authentication of the signature of the doctor performing vaccination or inoculation of persons proceeding overseas. During this year 694 such certificates were authenticated and marked with the internationally agreed stamp. TUBERCULOSIS. NEW CASES AND MORTALITY DURING 1953. YEARS OF AGE. NEW CASES DEATHS Pulmonary Non-Pulmonary Pulmonary Non-Pulmonary M. F. M. F. M. F. M. F. 0 — — — — — — — — 1 1 — — — — — — — 5 1 — — — — — — — 15 2 4 — 1 — — — — 25 — 2 1 — — — — — 35 3 — — — — — — — 45 2 2 — — 1 1 — — 55 — 1 — — — 1 — — 65 2 1 — — — — _ — 75 and over — — — — — — — — TOTALS 11 10 1 1 1 2 — — (9) The Public Health (Tuberculosis) Regulations, 1952, which came into operation in May 1952, rescinded an earlier Regulation which required the local Medical Officer of Health to keep a register of all Tuberculous patients, shewing the movements of local cases. Notification of the disease is still required, and as suggested by the Minister of Health the local register is being maintained as the information contained therein may be useful for local purposes. There were no cases of wilful neglect or of refusal to notify Tuberculosis in any form. PUBLIC HEALTH (PREVENTION OF TUBERCULOSIS) REGULATIONS. 1925. It has not been found necessary to take any action under the above Regulations, relating to Tuberculous employees in the Milk Trade. PUBLIC HEALTH ACT. 1936. SECTION 172. COMPULSORY REMOVAL TO HOSPITAL OF CASES OF PULMONARY TUBERCULOSIS. No action was necessary under the above Section. MASS RADIOGRAPHY. During the year the Department co-operated with the North West Metropolitan Regional Hospital Board by acting as an appointment office in connection with a visit of the Mass Radiography Unit to this district. 1,028 appointments were made through this office and from the report of the X-ray Unit 2,209 persons attended, which included groups of employees from local factories and business firms. The Mass Radiography Unit is a most useful weapon in the National fight against Tuberculosis. By this means, cases are brought to light before the more serious symptoms have appeared resulting in early treatment and cure. It is to be hoped that return visit of this Unit will be made in the near future. NATIONAL ASSISTANCE ACT. 1948. - SECTION 47. NATIONAL ASSISTANCE (AMENDMENT) ACT. 1951 - SECTION 1. An aged lady, living alone, was found in a collapsed state and an Emergency Order for her removal was obtained under the provisions of the Amendment Act. The case was reported to Council and authorisation given (10) for application to be made to the Court for an extension Order for a period of three months. The Court granted an Order for six weeks in this instance, but on subsequent applications during the year, two Orders for periods of three months each were made. During the course of the above proceedings the appropriate steps were taken to secure the demolition of the very dilapidated property, in which she had been living, MORTAL STATISTICS. Of 270 deaths, 13 occurred under one year of age. The following were the chief causes of death:- Heart Disease 82; Cancer 53; (31 males and 22 females); Vascular Lesions of nervous system 40, Bronchitis 17; Pneumonia (all forms) 8; Tuberculosis 3; Motor vehicle accidents 3; Other accidents 7. MORTUARY ACCOMMODATION. Under arrangements made with the East Barnet Urban District Council their mortuary is available for the use of this district, and it was so used on twentythree occasions luring the year. SCABIES (PUBLIC HEALTH) NO. 1 ORDER. 1944. Mo cases of Scabies were notified during the year. I am, Yours faithfully, ARTHUR L. HYATT, M.R.C.S.(Eng.), L.R.C.P. ACTING MEDICAL OFFICER OF HEALTH, (11) BARNET URBAN DISTRICT COUNCIL. CHIEF SANITARY INSPECTOR'S REPORT. Public Health Department, 31 Wood Street, Barnet. To the Chairman and Members of the Barnet Urban District Council. Ladies and Gentlemen, I have tne honour to present to you my Annual Report giving details of the work of the Department during the year 1953 in administering the various Acts, Regulations and Byelaws in force in the district. Housing repair work has continued at a comparitively low level for several years now since the war. Now that the extreme shortage of housing accommodation is not so acute and with the impending legislation, in the form of the Housing Rent and Repairs Bill, the main efforts of the department will have to be directed to this work of repair and improvement of housing conditions. Whether there will be any great demand for certificates as to the condition of property in response to the landlord's notice of increase of rent is a matter of conjecture at this stage. The final census figures are expected to be published shortly and when these are available, the Council will become the responsible authority for all duties under the Shops Acts, and not as at present with the County Council exercising some of the powers. This work will combine well with our other visits to shops in connection with the Food and Drugs Acts, of which again the County Council exercise some powers. The Council have resolved to make application for these further powers, from the County Council, as they are entitled to, following the issue of census figures which will show the population to be over twenty thousand inhabitants. INSPECTION OF DISTRICT. General Inspections of the district have been carried out periodically and all complaints investigated. The process of serving a preliminary or intimation notice upon the (12) person in default, specifying the works necessary to remedy the defects found, is usually followed. It was found necessary to ask your authority to serve only twenty-eight Statutory Notices, where persons failed to comply with the preliminary notice, or the strict legal procedure was necessary in the first instance. SANITARY INSPECTION OF AREA. The following is a list of the number and nature of visits and inspections:- Visits re: nuisance and sanitary defects 1475 Visits re: infectious diseases 281 Visits and inspection under petroleum Acts 134 Visits to factories 66 Visits to outworkers premises 23 Visits to food manufactories, cafes etc. 232 Visits re: ice cream and sampling 165 Visits re: overcrowding 36 Visits to inspect meat and other foods 227 Visits to Schools 15 Visits re: pollution of watercourses 117 Visits to Tents, Caravans and Sheds 109 Visits under Shops Act 30 Visits re: keeping of animals 75 Visits re: Rodent Infestations 1921 Visits re: other infestations 75 Miscellaneous visits 135 NUMBER OF NOTICES SERVED DURING YEAR. Number of Informal Notices 125 Number of Statutory Notices 28 Informal Notices complied with 117 Statutory Notices complied with 22 SANITARY WORK AND REPAIRS. The following is a list of repairs effected as a result of informal and formal notices served:- Roofs repaired and made weatherproof 30 Gutters, downspouts repaired or renewed 32 Exterior brickwork repaired or repointed 21 Walls, dampness remedied 32 Chimney stacks and post repaired or renewed 11 Yard surfaces repaired or repaved 3 Ceilings repaired or renewed 39 Wall plaster repaired renewed 28 Walls and ceilings cleansed and decorated 53 Floors repaired or renewed 15 Sub-floor ventilation rectified 2 Doors and frames repaired or renewed 14 Windows repaired 30 Stair treads and balusters repaired 16 Fireplaces repaired or renewed 6 Drains cleared 45 (13) Drains repaired or reconstructed 31 Inspection chambers repaired or reconstructed 24 Soil or vent pipes repaired or renewed 8 Gullies, channels and fenders repaired or renewed 17 Water Closet pans, fittings, repaired or renewed 25 Sinks, waste pipes, etc., repaired or renewed 18 Storage cisterns, cleaned, repaired or renewed 5 Water services, repaired, renewed or re-instated 8 Dustbins renewed 5 Refuse accumulations removed 12 Animals and fowls: nuisance from improper keeping 8 HOUSING ACT. 1936. Two houses were reported to the Council as being unfit for human habitation and incapable of repair at a reasonable expense. These premises form part of a long terrace: demolition is impracticable for the time being, and the owner gave an undertaking that the houses will not be used for human habitation. Two further Demolition Orders were made during the year, one of which was complied with within the year after the Council obtained a Court Order for possession. With respect to the house subject to a Demolition Order which was vacated during 1952, and remained empty, the enforcement of the Order was held over pending redevelopment of the site. This was being actively pursued at the end of the year. At the end of last year there were four families living in overcrowded conditions: two cases have ceased to be overcrowded due to removals from the families. Two new cases of overcrowding were found, leaving a total of four cases remaining at the end of the year, PUBLIC HEALTH ACT. 1936. INFECTIOUS DISEASE. INVESTIGATION AND DISINFECTION. Investigations have been carried out of the more important cases of infectious disease listed in the Medical Officer of Health's Report, and thirty-five premises were disinfected, where necessary, bedding is taken for disinfection to the Barnet General Hospital under arrangements made with the Barnet Group Hospital Management Committee. Five hundred and five library books were disinfected before return to libraries. (14) CLEAN FOOD. The process of taking informal action whenever possible still prevails, and every opportunity is taken to discuss with management and staff all matters concerning food hygiene. A notice was authorised by the Council to be served, under Section 13(3),on the owner of bakehouse premises which were in a dilapidated state. No improvement works have been done to the premises and they remain closed. The following are examples of the type of work which is carried out without service of formal notices and which cannot bo conveniently summarised in any way. The delivery of fish in boxes to a shop before opening time where the boxes were left on the pavement for some time. A re-arrangement of the delivery round has eliminated this practice. A separate bench is now provided for the dressing of rabbits in several butchers' shops and the practice is being developed. Small "worms" appeared after each week-end in a wash-hand basin in a grocer's shop. The water supply was suspected but soon eliminated. Worms were found in the piece of string and cork which served as "stopper and chain". These were replaced, the overflow of the handbasin and the external gully thoroughly cleansed and no more "worms" were found. An increasing number of butchers and fishmongers are using new clean outer wrapping paper over the greaseproof paper which surrounds their wares, Discussion regarding lay-out have been held with the proprietor of a proposed ice-cream factory which is to be erected in the area. FOOD POISONING. Annual Return of Food Poisoning Notifications. Food Poisoning Notifications (Corrected) Returned to Registrar General. 1st Quarter. 2nd Quarter. 3rd Quarter, 4th Quarter. Total. Deaths. Nil. 1 2 Nil 3 Nil Outbreaks Due to Identified Agents, Total Outbreaks, Nil Total cases. Nil Outbreaks of unaiscovered cause. Total Outbreaks. 1 Total cases. 2 Single cases. 1 Agent Identified 1 Unknown Cause Nil Total 1 (15) There is a further decrease, from last year, in the number of food poisoning cases notified. Of the three cases, in only one instance was the causative organism identified. The notification was received some time after the initial symptoms, which hampered our investigations but it also appeared that the man concerned travelled considerably and had meals and snacks in a variety of placer which made it extremely difficult to trace the origin of his illness. The other two cases were man and wife, but in this instance, the laboratory report on specimens shewed, "no intestinal pathogens identified", and our investigations did not point to any particular item of food as being responsible for the illness. It is impossible to say just how the cases arose, whether the fault lies at home or in a shop or cafe. ICE CREAM. 159 Samples of ice cream were taken during the year with the following results:- Manufacturer, Grade I. Grade II. Grade III. Grade IV. Total. A 44 7 1 - 52 B 40 1 - - 41 C 15 5 5 7 32 D 10 1 - 11 F 15 2 - - 17 L 2 2 - 4 M 1 - - - 1 N - - _ l 1 Total 125 18 8 8 159 There are no manufacturers of ice cream in the district. The results of the tests on the samples are given to the shopkeepers, end any unsatisfactory reports are followed up with the authority in whose area the ice cream is made and with the manufacturer direct. The last three manufacturers on the list are travelling salesmen (16) with no regular tour, and there is some difficulty in finding them to take further samples. Considerable correspondence took place between the Department and Manufacturer C and the Public Health Department of the district where the manufacturer operates. Eventually, it was found that a small defect in a water pump was causing contamination which produced the series of low graded samples. The matter was of course promptly rectified and the quality of the samples improved. - With a small number of samples taken from any one manufacturer, it is unwise to pay too much attention to the result of an individual sample and because of small numbers particulars do not give a true picture as stated elsewhere in this report. There is a reduction in the overall number of samples in Grades 3 and 4; in 1952 the percentage was 20% and this year it is 10% of the total of samples taken. Whilst this is still not perfect, there is a considerable improvement. DAIRIES,. COWSHEDS AMD MILKSHOPS. The control of the production of milk is now vested in the Ministry of Agriculture and Fisheries. The local authority is responsible for the inspection and registration of milk distributors and other dairy premises not directly concerned with the actual production of milk, and for licensing for the sale of Designated Milks. This district is within the London area which was designated, as from 1st October, 1951, a "Specified Area" under an Order made by the Minister of Food. This Order is enforced by the Hertfordshire County Council as the Food and Drugs Authority for the area. Briefly, the Order prohibits the retail sale of any raw ungraded milk in a specified area: only milk from tested herds or heat treated milks may be sold by retail. Forty-one samples of milk have been taken, in course of delivery to the consumer, and submitted to the appropriate tests with the following results.- (17) Designation Samples Taken Satisfactory Unsatisfactory Tuberculin Tested (Pasteurised). 5 5 Nil Tuberculin Tested (Farm Bottled). 5 1 4 Tuberculin Tested (Farm Bottled) (Channel Islands). 3 2 1 Pasteurised. 22 22 Nil Pasteurised (Homogenized). 2 2 Nil Pasteurised (Channel Islands). 2 2 Nil Sterilised. 2 2 Nil TOTALS 41 36 5 The five unsatisfactory samples of Tuberculin Tested (Farm Bottled) milk were obtained from two dealers. Copies of the unsatisfactory reports are forwarded to the County Milk Regulations Officer for his action, Two samples of milk submitted for biological examination vere reported positive to Brucella Abortus. The farm concerned was visited: it was found that no milk was sold by retail and that all milk was already being dispatched to a local plant for pasteurisation. No official action was taken under Regulation 20 of the Milk and Dairies Regulations 1949, to stop or restrict the sale of milk. No cases of disease were notified which could be attributed to the consumption of infected milk. Nine Dealer's Licences and twenty-one Supplementary Licences were granted for the retail sale of milk under the Milk (Special Designation)(Raw Milk) Regulations, 1949 and 1950, and the Milk (Special Designation)(Pasteurised and Sterilised Milk) Regulations, 1949 and 1950, viz:- Designation. Dealer's Licences. Supplementary Licences. Tuberculin Tested. 3 7 Pasteurised. 3 7 Sterilised. 3 7 (18) MEAT AMD FOOD CONDEMNED. The following is a list of the articles of food condemned as unfit for human consumption during the year. Meat. Fresh Meat. Beef (English and Scotch)lbs. 333 " (Imported) lbs. 135 Pork (Cooked) lbs. 35½ Lamb and Mutton (Irish) lbs. l8½ Sausages (Beef) lbs. 46 " (Pork) lbs. 93 Canned Meat. Veal lbs. 48 Stewed Steak lbs. 66½ Stewed Mutton lbs. 7 Chicken and Rabbit lbs. 4¾ Tongue lbs. 3 Ham (Imported) lbs. 31 Luncheon Meat lbs. 30 Corned Beef lbs. 42½ Pork Sausages lbs. 25 Fish. Prawns lbs. 8 Salmon tins 1 Dressed Crab tins 3 Brisling tins 4 Pilchards, Sardines and Silds tins 8 Fruit. Grapes lbs. 22 Apples tins 101 Damsons tins 40 Oranges tins 22 Plums tins & bottles 193 Cherries tins & bottles 38 Greengages tins & bottles 31 Miscellaneous tins & jars 138 Fruit Juices tins 5 Vegetables and Cereals. Beans tins 31 Peas tins 98 Tomatoes tins 58 Vegetables (Miscellaneous) tins 11 Flour cwt. 1 Rice, Tapioca, Oats & Barley lbs. 20 Breakfast Cereals pkts. 4 Groceries. Cheese (Processed) lbs. 125 Cake Mixture? lbs. 3¼ Milk tins 55 Soup tins 12 Puddings tins 4 Mincemeat tins 3 Paste and Spreads jars 3 Jam, Marmalade & Honey jars & tins 66 Pickles & Sauces bottles & jars 7 Blancmange Powder pkts & tins 67 Flavouring bottles 5 Dessicated Coconut pkts 24 Cut Peel cartons 5 Forty-two pigs have been inspected on a farm after slaughter. The pigs were swine fiver contacts and one entire carcase was condemned and destroyed because of evidence of swine fever infection. Three pigs heads were also condemned because of infection by tuberculosis. (19) FOOD AMD DRUGS ACT.1938. Those sections of the above Act concerning sampling of food-stuffs for adulteration and sophistication are enforced by the County Authority in this district. The following details shew the number and nature of the samples taken in the Urban District of Barnet during the year, and the results of the analyses. Article. No. of Samples Taken. Genuine. Adulterated. Milk 11 11 – Lollies 2 2 – Porridge Oats 1 1 - Iodised Table Salt 1 1 — Total 15 15 - In view of the Ministry of Health suggestions that samples should be taken on the ratio of 3 per 1,000 of the population the number taken in this district could with advantage still be increased, particularly having regard to the fact that Barnet, as a shopping centre, serves a greater number of people than the resident population. The provisional figures of the 1951 Census indicate that the population of the district is in excess of 20,000, at which figure the local authority may make application to become the Food and Drugs authority. The Council will automatically become the Shops Acts authority on publication of the final census figures and it would appear that the duties of inspection of shops for clean food, adulterated food and hours of closing etc., could well be carried out by one authority and not by two as now. The Council has resolved to make application for the additional powers and must await publication of the final census report in order to proceed. PRIVATE SLAUGHTER-HOUSES AND SLAUGHTER OF ANIMALS ACT. 1933. Since Food Rationing was introduced the Private Slaughter-houses in the district, three in number, have been closed, meat rationing being more easily organised and administered from one abbatoir supplying a large area than from a number of small slaughter-houses in each district. It was doubtful (20) whether these small private slaughter-houses would again be permitted bo function but towards the end of the year the end of meat rationing was in sight and it appears that it may be necessary to open at least one of these slaughter-houses as an interim measure until a sufficient number of abbatoirs can be built. There are eight persons licensed by the Council as fit persons to slaughter animals. These slaughtermen, although licensed by this Authority, work outside the district. No complaint has been received from the districts in which they work concerning the conduct of any of these men. DRAINAGE. One cesspool was dispensed with by connecting the drainage of the property to the Council's sewer. Drainage works, to obviate pollution of surface water sewers and ditches, were required and executed at sixteen properties, and the drains of five premises were found to be defective and were reconstructed under supervision of the department. In addition, the construction of sewage disposal plants to seven new properties was supervised and approved. REPORT REQUIRED BY SECTION 128 (3) OF THE FACTORIES ACT. 1977. Inspections for pourpose of provisions as to health. Number on Register. Number of Inspections. Written Notices. Occupiers Prosecuted. (l) Factories in which Secs. 1,2,3,4 and 6 are to be enforced by Local Authorities. 7 12 1 – (2) Factories not included in (1) in which Sec. 7 is enforced by the Local Authority. 71 44 2 _ (3) Other premises in which Sec. 7 is enforced by the Local Authority, 8 10 – – Total 86 66 3 Two notices served required the thorough cleansing of the sanitary accommodation and in one instance the cleansing of a workroom and provision of a thermometer. (21) Outworkers (Sections 110 and 111). Section 110. \ Section 111. No of outworkers on lists received, j No., of instances of work in unwholesome premises. Notices Served.) i 68 _ J ! - ] i In addition to the above, twenty-three outworkers' premises were visited. Two certificates as to means of escape in case of fire were issued under Section 34 of the Act during tho year, after necessary alterations in one case. The issue of a certificate in respect of a further factory awaits the completion of works to provide additional means of escape, HERTFORDSHIRE COUNTY COUNCIL ACT. 1975. Provision is made in this Act for the conduct and regulation ofs- (1) Tents, Caravans r.nd Sheds; (2) Hairdressers' ana Barbers' Premisesj (3) Swimming Baths and Pools, and (4) Employment Agencies. Tents. Crravans and Sheds. Three individual caravan sites and one multiple site for six caravans ;re approved daring the year subject to compliance with the requirements of the Act in respect of water supply, roads and paths, drainage and layout. The vans attending the Barnet Fair "ere visited to enquire 3g to any infectious diseases and as to their sanitary condition. The provision of temporary sanitary accommodation was required in different sections of the fair for the use of the oaravanners and public, and regular removal of refuse was arranged. Hai r dr o £ s e r s' arid Bar be r g' P r emi s e s, The Council made Bye-laws for securing the cleanliness of these premises in 1937. There are fifteen such establishments in the district. No complaints were received concerning their cleanliness or conduct nor ''ere any serious breaches of the Bye-laws noted during inspections of such promises. (22) Public Syrjjnralnsc Baths -?.rr." Bathing Pools, The only swiiianing pool in the district, viz, at "The Barn", Barnet Bye-Pass, is not now in use. Employment Agencies. Prior to the wur there were four employment agencies in the district. These, however, are no longer in existence owing to the control of labour and it seems unlikely they will be started up again, RODENT CONTROL. Prevention of Damage by Pests Act. 1949. A full time rodent operator is employed for treatment of infestations of rats and mice. and mice. The table below gives details of the work carried out during the years- Tvoa of Property. Local Authority Dwelling Houses Agricultural All other (including Business and Industrial) Total. 1. Number of properties inspected during 1953 as a result (a) of notification or (b) otherwise. (a) 1 123 20 144 (b) 5 531 5 48 589 2. Number of properties (under i) found to be infested by rats. Maj or - 3 - - 3 Minor 6 203 l 13 223 3. Number of properties found to be seriously infested by mice. _ 3 3 4, Number of infested properties (under 2 and 3) treated by the Local Authority. 6 250 2 25 283 5* Number of "block" control schemes carried out 5^ No notices "ere served under Section 4 of the Act, requiring the execution of ■vorks, in connection with infestations. Four informal notices, requiring removal of accumulations harbouring rats,and one informal notice, requiring wiring protection round corn ricks during threshing, were served and complied with. The attention of building site orjerators has been drawn to the necessity of closing drain connections to the sewers at night to prevent ingress and egress of rats, A test bait was made of 10% of the soil sewer manholes in the district, from the results of which are based the two maintenance treatments of the sewers required by the Ministry of Agriculture and Fisheries as one of the conditions (23) under which the Ministry pay of the Council's rodent control expenses. This year, the number of manholes poisoned in these maintenance treatments was 37 and 16 as compared with 15 and 32 manholes poisoned in the treatments carried out during the previous year. The number of manholes to be treated remains fairly steady and the closeness of the figures would appear to indicate that there will be no startling reductions in sewer rat infestation as occurred when this authority first took over these duties. No charge is made for the use of the Rodent Operator's services in treating private domestic premises, provided that the occupiers co-operate in carrying out their duties under the Act. The cost of treatments at all other premises is recoverable. PET ANIMALS ACT. 1951. This Act gives the local Authority, inter alia, power to grant licences to persons to keep pet shops for the sale of pet animals and to attach to the licences conditions concerning the cleanliness and general management of the premises. One new licence was granted during the year making a total of four licensed pet shops in the district. RAG FLOCK ACT. 1951. This Act which came into force on the 1st November, 1951, creates controls over the use of filling materials in the making of upholstery. There are no premises liable to registration within the district. HEATING APPLIANCES (FIREGUARDS) ACT. 1952. This Act and the Regulations made thereunder came into operation on the 1st October 1953, after which date it became an offence to manufacture a heating appliance which does not comply with the standards set. Retailers nave one year to dispose of stocks of fires manufactured before the operative date. All retailers in the district dealing in these appliances have been visited and their attention drawn to the Regulations. (24) DISINFESTATIONS. Seventeen premises were sprayed with a D.D.T. solution, or otherwise treated, for infestations of ants, fleas, cockroaches, etc: eighteen wasps' nests were destroyed. PETROLEUM (REGULATION) ACTS. 1928 an AND 1976. There are thirty-nine persons licensed to store petroleum and petroleum mixtures upon the Register, Two licences lapsed and the necessary precautions were taken in connection with the underground tank which was involved in one case. Three new licences were issued; one for storage of cellulose mixtures after provision of adequate storage accommodation and two for underground storage of petrol served via pumps. One was a completely new installation involving six tanks of 1,000 gallons each with requisite lines and pumps, and the second required cleansing and renewal of various parts before the issue of a licence. Towards the close of the year the Council adopted new conditions attaching to patrol licences and as the licences become due for renewal the new conditions apply and are enforced before issuing the licence. The total quantity of petroleum spirit and mixtures which may be kept in the various stores is 34,370 gallons and 100 lbs. One hundred and thirty-four inspections were made, but there was no serious breach of the Regulations to report. One Licence was issued for the storage of 112 lbs. of Carbide of Calcium. The scale of fees for Licences to Store Petroleum ranges from 5/- for a quantity not exceeding 100 gallons to £1 for 1,000 to 5,000 gallons, and £2 for 6,000 gallons. I am , Yours obediently, J. B. WILSON. Chief Sanitary Inspector.