RBAR2 BARNET RURAL DISTRICT Annual Report OF THE MEDICAL OFFICER OF HEALTH For the Year 1939 BY CHARLES F. HARDIE, M.A., M.B., B.Ch. (Cantab) TOGETHER WITH The Report OF THE SANITARY INSPECTOR A. D. S. BLACKHALL, A.R.San.I. BARNET RURAL DISTRICT Annual Report OF THE MEDICAL OFFICER OF HEALTH For the Year 1939 BY CHARLES F. HARDIE, M.A., M.B., B.Ch. (Cantab) TOGETHER WITH The Report OF THE SANITARY INSPECTOR A. D. S. BLACKHALL, A.R.San.I. Members of the Council Chairman: R. J. MACNAUGHTON, J.P. Vice-Chairman: G. I. BREW Members: E. H. CLARK T. H. COCHRANE H. T. A. DASHWOOD, M.A., J.P. REV. CANON A. R. T. EALES, M.A. MRS. A. M. R. HOOPER W. G. TAYLER J. R. YOUNG Medical Officer of Health: CHARLES F. HARDIE, M.A., M.B., B.Ch. (Cantab.) Sanitary Inspector: A. D. S. BLACKHALL, A.R.San.I. Clerk of the Council: A. LANCASHIRE Council Offices: 16 Shenley Road, Boreham Wood, Herts. Annual Report OF THE MEDICAL OFFICER OF HEALTH • \ 5 To the Chairman and Members of the Bar net Rural District Council. Mr. Chairman, Madam and Gentlemen, I have much pleasure in presenting my Annual Report on the health of the district for the year 1939. Prior to July 1939, the Council's Engineer and Surveyor (Mr. A. J. Wilshire) was also Sanitary Inspector but relinquished this latter office upon the appointment of a whole-time Sanitary Inspector and Meat and Food Inspector. Such an appointment became necessary in view of the rapid development of the district. The report has been prepared and arranged on the lines indicated by the Minister of Health in Circular 1961. Sections D and E, however, dealing respectively with Housing and Inspection and Supervision of Food, have been omitted from the body of my report and are fully dealt with in the report of the Sanitary Inspector. Publication of the report could not be proceeded with as early as usual, this year, owing to the fact that the RegistrarGeneral was unable to provide the usual statistics for 1939 until October, 1940. Much has been accomplished during the year and the improvements effected by the Sanitary Inspector (details of which will be found on page 23) must be regarded as particularly commendable when it is borne in mind that a considerable portion of his time has been devoted to duties as Ambulance Officer and Billeting Officer. Original inspections under the Housing Consolidated Regulations have been abandoned since the outbreak of war, but other routine work of the department is proceeding as in normal times. I am, Your obedient Servant, Charles F. Hardie. 6 SECTION A STATISTICS AND SOCIAL CONDITIONS OF THE AREA Area 8339 acres Population, 1921 Census 4,513 Population, 1931 Census 6,400 Registrar-General's estimate of (а) resident population mid-1939 9,434 (б) average population appropriate to the calculation of death rates 9,643 Number of inhabited houses (end of 1939) according to Rate Books 2,428 Rateable Value (1st April, 1940) £111,959 Estimated product of a penny rate (1st April, 1940) £340 SOCIAL CONDITIONS The District comprises the parishes Shenley and Ridge (chiefly farming and residential), and Elstree. In Elstree the principal occupations are industrial, more particularly, the film studios, photographic plate and paper manufacturing, photographic processing and knitting mills. Elstree is, to some extent, residential, particularly on the west side of the L.M.S. Railway line. On the eastern side of the Elstree station, in the Boreham Wood portion of the Parish, considerable development is taking place. The widening of the main Shenley Road (Shopping Centre) has been completed by the County Council. A considerable number of new factories have been erected and occupied, and many more are in course of erection. Various types of industry are represented including manufacturers of Soaps and Perfumes, Children's Toys, Cosmetics, Table Stationery, Electrical Accessories, as well as Light Engineering and Joinery Works. I am indebted to the Manager of the Ministry of Labour Employment Exchange, Watford, for the following particulars with respect to unemployment in the Boreham Wood Employment Exchange area. During the year the average number of unemployed workmen registered was 148. The highest rate of unemployment was in the week ended 2nd January, 1939, a figure of 249, when the hard weather adversely affected outside workers. The lowest figure recorded was during the week ended 17th July, 1939, namely, 73 ; at this time building and construction works were 7 at their peak of employment and the moving picture industry was also busy. A keen and varied demand for labour set in towards the end of 1939. It is likely to continue under present conditions. VITAL STATISTICS Total M. F. Live Births Legitimate 129 73 56 Illegitimate 2 1 I Birth Rate : 13.9 per 1,000 estimated resident population mid-1939. Stillbirths Rate: 57.6 per 1,000 total [live and still) births 8 6 2 Deaths Death Rate: 8 per 1,000 estimated average population. 77 38 39 The Comparability Factor of 1.13 (furnished by the RegistrarGeneral to correct anomalies in age and sex distribution, compared with the country as a whole) gives a Standardised Death Rate of 9.04. The Death Rates for England and Wales and for the Administrative County of London respectively are given as 12.1 and 11.9 per 1,000 population. Deaths Rate per 1,000 total (live and still) births. Deaths from puerperal causes:— Puerperal sepsis — — Other puerperal causes 1 — Total 1 7.2 Death rates of infants under one year of age:— All infants per 1,000 live births 30.5 Legitimate infants per 1,000 legitimate live births 15.5 Illegitimate infants per 1,000 illegitimate live births 1,000 Deaths from Cancer (all ages) 5 Deaths from Measles (all ages) — Deaths from Whooping Cough (all ages) — Deaths from Diarrhoea (under 2 years of age) — 8 SECTION B GENERAL PROVISION OF HEALTH SERVICES FOR THE AREA 1. Public Health Officers One part-time Medical Officer of Health. One whole-time Sanitary Inspector and Meat and Food Inspector. 2. (a) Laboratory Facilities Examination of sputum is carried out at the Herts County Council laboratory. Swabs are examined by the Clinical Research Association. No changes have been made in these services since before the outbreak of war. (b) Ambulance Facilities Cases of infectious diseases are conveyed by the Joint Isolation Hospital Ambulance. Non-infectious cases, prior to the war, were conveyed by the Barnet Ambulance. Since the outbreak of war, however, the Council has purchased two private cars and one van, which have been converted into emergency ambulances for Civil Defence purposes. A staff of nine drivers and nine attendants (working eight-hour shifts), together with a number of part-time volunteers, are engaged on ambulance services, under the supervision of the Sanitary Inspector (as Ambulance Officer). One of these ambulances is occasionally called into use for street and other accidents, so that the Barnet Ambulance has been relieved, to some extent, of its work in this area. When it has been found necessary to call upon the Barnet Ambulance, the request has been promptly met and arrangements have proved adequate and smoothworking. (c) Nursing in the Home There are Nursing Associations in Elstree, Boreham Wood, Shenley and Ridge, supplying three whole-time nurses who work under the Herts County Council. There is no special nursing for infectious diseases. (d) Treatment Centres and Clinics:— (i) Maternity and Child Welfare Centre : Baptist Church, Shenley Road, 2nd and 4th Tuesdays Boreham Wood at 2 p.m. 9 Clinic : Fieldways, Wellhouse Lane, Barnet Tuesdays, morn. : Ante-Natal, aft. : Children. (ii) Tuberculosis Dispensary Fieldways, Wellhouse Lane, Barnet 1st and 3rd Wednesdays, 2.30 p.m. (iii) Dental Clinic First Aid Post (Church Hall), Shenley Road, Boreham Wood Thrice Monthly : Second Monday, third Tuesday and fourth Wednesday (iv) Child Guidance Clinic H.C.C. Combined Social Services Centre, 16 Victoria Street, St. Albans Mondays to Fridays 9 a.m. to 5 p.m. Saturdays, 9 a.m. to 1 p.m. (v) Venereal Diseases Special Treatment Clinic, Oster House, St. Albans Females: Tuesdays & Thursdays, 10 a.m. to 4 p.m. Males : Wednesdays & Fridays, 2 to 4 p.m. (e) Hospitals Wellhouse Hospital, Barnet General hospital containing 325 beds, including maternity beds; managed by the Public Assistance Committee. Has facilities for operative surgery, X-ray, and massage, and has a whole-time pathologist. Victoria Hospital, Barnet Voluntary hospital containing 50 beds. Bushey and District Hospital, Bushey Local cottage hospital, containing 35 beds. Joint Isolation Hospital, Barnet Infectious diseases are sent to this hospital, which contains 54 beds. Joint Smallpox Hospital, Cheshunt Tuberculosis Sanatorium, Ware Provided by the Hertfordshire County Council. The hospital accommodation appears to be adequate. 10 SECTION C SANITARY CIRCUMSTANCES OF THE AREA. 1. (i) Water. The water supply has been satisfactory in quality and quantity. It is supplied by the Colne Valley Water Co., who state that constant care and supervision are exercised, frequent bacteriological examinations are carried out, and all the water supplied to the district is chlorinated. (ii) Drainage and Sewerage. No important extension of sewerage was carried out during the year. 2. Rivers and Streams. Cases of minor pollution of brooks have been investigated and dealt with. 3. (i) Closet Accommodation. No reliable statistics, regarding the number of types of closets, are available, but, apart from a few pail closets at outlying farms and other premises, all the dwelling-houses in the district are served by water closets. These, with the exception of a few which discharge into cesspools, are connected to the public sewers. (ii) Public Cleansing. House refuse is collected weekly from the whole of the district by the Council's own staff (under the control of the Engineer and Surveyor), and disposed of by controlled tipping on the Meadow Road playing field. (iii) Sanitary Inspection of the Area. The prescribed tabular statement is contained in the Sanitary Inspector's report, which commences on page 17. (iv) Shops and Offices. No action was taken during the year. (v) Camping Sites. (a) Number of sites in the area which were used during 3:939 was one. (b) No licences have been issued under Section 269 of the Public Health Act, 1936. (c) Estimated maximum number of campers resident in the area at one time during the summer season—40. (vi) Smoke Abatement. See page 20 of the Sanitary Inspector's report. (vii) Swimming Baths. There are no public or privately owned swimming baths in the area. (viii) Eradication of bed bugs. One Council house was found to be infested, upon a change of occupancy. The work of disinfestation was carried out by Contractors using Cimex blocks. Subsequent visits were paid, but no further infestation was discovered. 11 4. Schools. The sanitary condition of the schools is satisfactory. The water is supplied by the Colne Valley Water Co. The schools are visited regularly by the Assistant School Medical Officer, and specially on an outbreak of any infectious disease for the purpose of excluding or examining possible contacts and advising on any necessary measures. All cases of infectious diseases are notified by the head teachers. Schools were not closed for infectious disease. The erection of a new senior school (Hertfordshire County Council) was completed during the year, but was not occupied until the beginning of 1940, owing to the outbreak of war. SECTION D HOUSING During the months of July and August, inspections were carried out by the Sanitary Inspector and several properties were considered to be unfit for habitation and not capable at reasonable expense of being rendered so fit. The outbreak of war precluded the possibility of representations being made to the local authority with regard to these dwellings. In certain instances, owners were required informally to carry out certain works of a temporary nature in order that tenants could enjoy reasonable comfort and amenities during the suspension of slum clearance activities. The question of housing of rural workers was also considered during the year and several properties were inspected with a view to their possible repair and reconstruction. In several instances recommendations would have been made for grants to be sought to facilitate the execution of these works. It was with some reluctance, upon the outbreak of war, that these schemes were shelved. Details of housing work carried out during the year will be found on pages 25, 26 and 27 of the Sanitary Inspector's report. During the year, 63 houses were completed by private enterprise. SECTION E INSPECTION AND SUPERVISION OF FOOD [a] Milk Supply. See pages 19 and 24 of the Sanitary Inspector's report. (b) Slaughterhouses and Food Supplies. See pages 19 and 25 of the Sanitary Inspector's report. 12 SECTION F PREVALENCE OF AND CONTROL OVER INFECTIOUS AND OTHER DISEASES There were 8 cases of Scarlet Fever. The disease was of a mild type, and there were no deaths. Seven of the cases were removed to the Isolation Hospital, Barnet. The other patient was effectually isolated at home. There were no cases of Diphtheria. Diphtheria anti-toxin is immediately available if required. No vaccinations were performed by the Medical Officer of Health. Disinfection of infected premises is carried out by the Sanitary Inspector. Incidence of notifiable diseases during the year Disease Total notified Total cases admitted to Hospital Total deaths Smallpox — — — Scarlet Fever 8 7 — Diphtheria - - -- Enteric Fever — — — Puerperal Fever - - - Puerperal Pyrexia - - — Pneumonia. 3 — 5 Erysipelas 4 - — Ophthalmia Neonatorum i — — Measles i — — Malaria 1 - — Age-Group 3-4 4-5 5-10 10-15 20-25 25-35 35-45 45-65 Scarlet Fever 1 4 3 Pneumonia 1 1 1 Erysipelas 1 3 Measles 1 Malaria 1 13 Tuberculosis—New cases and mortality during 1939. Age Periods New Cases. Deaths. Pulmonary Non. Pulmonary Pulmonary Non. Pulmonary m. f. m. f. m. f. m. f. Under one 1- 5 1 2 1 5-10 1 10-15 1 1 15-20 20-25 1 1 25-35 3 35-45 2 45-55 1 55-65 65 and upwards totals 5 3 3 4 1 - 2 2 Annual Report OF THE SANITARY INSPECTOR 17 To the Chairman and Members of the Bar net Rural District Council. Mr. Chairman, Madam and Gentlemen, I trust that I shall not be censured in your minds when I say that it is not without some pride that I submit my first annual report, containing particulars of the work carried out during the year ended the thirty-first day of December, 1939. Carlyle has said that the only happiness a brave man ever troubled himself with asking much about was happiness enough to get his work done. It has been my exceeding good fortune, since entering your service, to find colleagues who are anxious to render assistance and advice and a Council unreluctant to afford me every encouragement. I too have gleaned some of the happiness which is his who can get his work done, but I should be churlish indeed if I did not acknowledge that this has been made possible by your support and by the co-operation of my colleagues. The work of the public health department is of such a nature that it is seldom possible for immediate tangible results to be shown, but none the less vital seeds are being sown which will yield abundant harvest in course of time. I commend my report to your indulgent perusal and have the honour to remain, Mr. Chairman, Madam and Gentlemen, Your obedient Servant, A, D. S. Blackhall. 18 Inspections The total number of inspections and visits for all purposes amounted to eight hundred and sixteen. Details and classification of these inspections will be found on page 21. Notices Served 112 Intimation Notices were served during the year and owners and their representatives were written and interviewed. The Council authorised the service of 14 Statutory Notices upon the failure of informal action, but it was found necessary to serve only 9 of these notices. At the end of the year, a total of 31 notices was outstanding, and in a large number of instances work had been commenced or instructions given for compliance. This position must be regarded as highly satisfactory. In no case was it necessary to institute legal proceedings or to carry out work in default. Details of all notices served during the year are given on page 22. Improvements Effected A tabulated statement of improvements carried out in pursuance of inspections made and notices served is given on page 23. Overcrowding I am satisfied that there are, in normal times, very few cases of serious overcrowding within the district. All complaints received in this connection were fully investigated and routine inspections were made in certain districts for the detection of cases of overcrowding. Council houses were included in these surveys, and only 5 cases of overcrowding—within the meaning of the Housing Act, 1936—were detected. One of these cases was a Council house. In one case, where it was suspected that the occupier had given false information, the authority of the Council was sought and a Statutory Notice served pursuant to the provisions of Section 66 of the Housing Act, 1936. Since the outbreak of war, the large influx of population to the district has possibly resulted in a few isolated cases of overcrowding. One such case, brought about by what may be termed " unofficial billeting," was found and remedied. *9 Milk and Dairies Acts and Orders Number of accredited milk producers 10 Number of tuberculin tested milk producers 1 Number of other producers 11 Number of retail purveyors 15 148 inspections were made during the year, of cowsheds and dairies. Five samples were taken from purveyors within the district, the results of which are enumerated on page 24. Slaughterhouses and Food Supplies. There are three slaughterhouses within the district, all of which are subject to annual licence. One of these slaughterhouses is that used in connection with the Middlesex County Hospital at Shenley. The animals killed and dressed at the other slaughterhouses were regularly inspected, and the table on page 25 gives details of the carcases examined and parts condemned. The meat sold in the district was found to be of a high standard of quality. The owners voluntarily surrendered diseased or unsound meat when their attention was called to its condition. Visits to slaughterhouses, during the year, numbered 126. Other premises where food is sold were also visited and the food exposed for sale inspected. Five premises are registered in accordance with the provisions of the Food and Drugs Act, 1938, for the preparation, etc., of food. Four of these are sausage preparers and one is a fish-frying establishment. These premises were visited on several occasions and found to comply with the requirements of the Act. There are 4 bakehouses on the register and on inspection these were found to maintain a high standard of cleanliness. Factories The Annual Report of the administration of the Factories Act, 1937 is shown on page 28. There has been intense industrial development during the year and the work of revising the register of factories and of making inspections to ensure that 20 the relevant sections of the Act are not being contravened is in progress. This is one branch of the Sanitary Inspector's work which has been sacrificed at the altar of civil defence. Progress is being made, however, and it is contemplated with some confidence that future reports will make demonstrable atonement. Offensive Trades Byelaws with respect to fish frying and offensive trades were adopted by the Council on the 21st October, 1939, and confirmed by the Minister of Health on the 13th December, 1939. The byelaws come into force on the 1st February, 1940. Smoke Abatement Although no action was taken during the year, it cannot be claimed that the district is without offenders. On the contrary, a flagrant contravention attracted my attention at the close of the year and early in 1940 letters were written and the responsible engineer was interviewed in an attempt to prevent a recurrence of the nuisance. This report is not concerned, however, with the result of such action, and the 1940 report will discuss its outcome more fully. Rats and Mice (Destruction) Act, 1919 One complaint was received with regard to rat infestation, and upon investigation it proved to be well-founded. The County Rats Officer, with whom the closest co-operation is maintained, was notified and ultimately the matter was left in his hands. I welcome this opportunity of placing on record my indebtedness to the County Rats Officer for the advice and assistance which that Officer, when consulted, courteously proffered. Civil Defence Since the outbreak of war, much of the Sanitary Inspector's time has been taken up with war time duties as Ambulance Officer and Billeting Officer. He has also been nominated by the Council to deal with the treatment and disposal of foodstuffs contaminated by gas. As a consequence the amount of time which he can devote to public health matters has been considerably curtailed. 21 PARTICULARS OF INSPECTIONS DURING THE YEAR Housing inspections 43 Housing re-inspections 35 Public Health Act inspections 25 Public Health Act re-inspections 50 Visits re overcrowding, including computation of permitted numbers 135 Visits in respect of :— Infectious diseases 17 Verminous premises 19 Accumulations 26 Animals 2 Dirty houses 5 Drainage 113 Factories 4 Outworkers 1 Water supply 4 Cowsheds 86 Dairies and milk shops 65 Food preparers 12 Meat shops 12 Slaughterhouses 126 Stables and piggeries 2 Ice-cream dealers and manufacturers 8 Milk Samples 5 Other inspections 21 Total 816 22 DETAILS OF INTIMATION AND STATUTORY NOTICES SERVED DURING THE YEAR Intimation Notices Nature of Defects No. of Notices served General housing defects including leaking roofs, dampness, defective plaster, floors, window-frames, etc. 23 Houses not reasonably fit (inspections under Housing Consolidated Regulations) 13 Absence of necessary information in rent books. (Sections 4 and 62 of the Housing Act, 1936.) 14 Overcrowding 7 Drainage 14 Defective w.c. connections 1 Insufficient closet accommodation 2 Choked water courses 16 Dirty and insanitary houses 1 Insufficient water supply 1 Offensive accumulations 8 Improper keeping of animals 1 Dairies and cowsheds 8 Factories 3 Total 112 Statutory Notices Nature of Defects Statute No. of Notices served No. of Houses affected Overcrowding ... Section 66 Housing Act, I936 1 1 Cowsheds and dairies ... Milk & Dairies Order, 1926 ... 1 General Housing Defects Section 9 Housing Act, 1936 3 2 Choked Watercourse ... Sections 93 and 259 Public Health Act, 1936 4 4 Totals ... 9 7 23 IMPROVEMENTS CARRIED OUT IN PURSUANCE OF INSPECTIONS MADE AND NOTICES SERVED. No. of Houses Repairs to plastering and woodwork 4 Window frames repaired and sash cords renewed 13 Leaking roofs repaired 7 Guttering repaired, cleansed and renewed 2 External brickwork repointed 3 Chimneys repaired and repointed 1 Dirty rooms redecorated 6 Dampness remedied 3 Accommodation provided for the storage of food 1 Glazed sinks provided in lieu of insanitary stone sinks 1 Drains cleared and drainage systems repaired 14 W.C. connections repaired 2 Ashbins provided 4 Water courses cleansed 3 Accumulations removed 4 Nuisance from the keeping of animals abated 1 Overcrowding abated 3 Cowsheds and dairies limewashed 3 Dairy accommodation provided or improved 2 Cowshed approaches cleansed 1 Cowsheds provided with additional lighting 1 Cowsheds provided with additional ventilation 1 Cowshed floors repaired 2 Rooms disinfected 12 Verminous houses disinfested 1 85 24 DETAILS OF MILK SAMPLES TAKEN. Result of bacteriological examination No. Designation methylene blue test Coliform bacillus in 1/100 ml. Action 1 Tuberculin tested Satisfactory Present in 3 tubes Letters written to retailer and producer. Dairy and farm visited 2 Accredited Unsatisfactory Present in 3 tubes Produced within the district. Farm visited and second sample taken (No. 4). Letter to producer 3 Ordinary milk Not examined Present in 1 tube Bacterial count 50,000 4 Accredited Satisfactory Present in 3 tubes Letter to and interview with producer. Notice served requiring limewashing of dairy and cleansing of approaches to cowsheds. Suggestions made for improving standard of milk 5 Accredited Satisfactory Absent Bacterial count 3,000. Producer (local) complimented on excellent quality of milk All of these samples were taken by the Sanitary Inspector from milkshops and purveyors. Samples were also taken at the accredited farms within the district by the County Veterinary Officer. In nine cases the County Medical Officer drew the attention of the Medical Officer of Health to instances where samples taken by the County were below standard and in these cases the Sanitary Inspector visited the respective farms, interviewed the producers and made suggestions, where it was deemed necessary, for improving the quality of the milk. In all cases, subsequent samples were found to comply with the standard imposed by the Milk (Special Designations) Order, 1936. 25 ANIMALS SLAUGHTERED AND INSPECTED AND PARTICULARS OF CONDEMNATIONS. (The number of animals killed includes those slaughtered at the Shenleybury Farm for the inmates of the Shenley Hospital. These carcases are not normally inspected, except by the Hospital Authorities, as they are not intended for sale.) Cattle ex. Cows Cows Calves Sheep and Lambs Pigs Number killed (estimated) 71 113 47 246 449 Number inspected 69 11 33 246 248 All diseases except Tuberculosis Whole carcases condemned Carcases of which some part or organ was condemned 1 2 Percentage (of the number inspected) affected with disease (other than tuberculosis) 9.1% 0.8% Tuberculosis only Whole carcases condemned 1 Carcases of which some part or organ was condemned 2 4 Percentage (of the number inspected) affected with tuberculosis 2.9% 45% HOUSING I. Inspection of Dwelling-houses During the Year (1) (a) Total number of dwelling-houses inspected for housing defects (under Public Health or Housing Acts) 68 (6) Number of inspections made for the purpose 153 (2) (a) Number of dwelling-houses (included under sub-head (1) above) which were inspected and recorded under the Housing Consolidated Regulations, 1925 43 26 (6) Number of inspections made for the purpose 78 (3) Number of dwelling-houses found to be in a state so dangerous or injurious to health as to be unfit for human habitation 14 (4) Number of dwelling-houses (exclusive of those referred to under the preceding sub-head) found not to be in all respects reasonably fit for human habitation 17 II. Remedy of Defects During the Year without Service of Formal Notices Number of defective dwelling-houses rendered fit in consequence of informal action by the Local Authority or their officers 13 III. Action under Statutory Powers During the Year A. Proceedings under sections 9, 10 and 16 of the Housing Act, 1936 (1) Number of dwelling-houses in respect of which notices were served requiring repairs 2 (2) Number of dwelling-houses which were rendered fit after service of formal notices :— (a) By owners None (b) By local authority in default of owners None B. Proceedings under Public Health Acts (1) Number of dwelling-houses in respect of which notices were served requiring defects to be remedied None (2) Number of dwelling-houses in which defects were remedied after service of formal notice:— (a) By owners None (b) By local authority in default of owners None 27 C. Proceedings under sections n and 13 of the Housing Act, 1936 (1) Number of dwelling-houses in respect of which Demolition Orders were made None (2) Number of dwelling-houses demolished in pursuance of Demolition Orders None D. Proceedings under section 12 of the Housing Act, 1936 (1) Number of separate tenements or underground rooms in respect of which Closing Orders were made None (2) Number of separate tenements or underground rooms in respect of which Closing Orders were determined, the tenement or room having being rendered fit None IV. Housing Act, 1936— Part IV—Overcrowding (а) (i) Number of dwellings overcrowded at the end of the year 3 No (ii) Number of families dwelling therein record (iii) Number of persons dwelling therein (б) Number of new cases of overcrowding reported during the year. 5 (c) (i) Number of cases of overcrowding relieved during the year *3 (ii) Number of persons concerned in such cases 24 * By informal action. 28 ANNUAL REPORT ON THE ADMINISTRATION OF THE FACTORIES ACT, 1937 1. Inspections for Purposes of Provisions as to Health (Including inspections made by the Sanitary Inspector) Particulars Number of Inspections Written Notices Prosecutions Factories with mechanical power 4 3 – Factories without mechanical power — Other premises — — - Total 4 3 - 2. Defects Found Particulars Number of Defects Number of offences in respect of which Prosecutions were instituted Found Remedied Referred to H.M. Inspector Want of Cleanliness Overcrowding - - - — Unreasonable temperature _ _ Inadequate ventilation - - — — Ineffective drainage of floors Sanitary Conveniences : Insufficient Unsuitable or defective 1 1 — — Not separate for sexes — — — — Other offences ... 2 2 — — Total 3 3 - - Bournehall Press, Bushey, Herts.