ubar 24 URBAN DISTRICT OP BARNET ANNUAL REPORT of the MEDICAL OFFICER OF HEALTH to the BARNET URBAN DISTRICT COUNCIL by ARTHUR L. HIATT, M.R.C.S. (Eng.) , L.R.C.P. Together with the ANNUAL REPORT of the CHIEF PUBLIC HEALTH INSPECTOR by JOHN B. WILSON, M.A.P.H.I. , M.R.S.H. 1958. (2) BARNET URBAN DISTRICT COUNCIL. MEDICAL OFFICER'S REPORT. Tel: BARnet 5511 Public Health Department, 31 Wood Street, Barnet. To the Chairman and Members of the Barnet Urban District Council. Ladies and Gentlemen, I have pleasure in presenting to you Annual Report on the health of the district for the year 1958. It is drawn up in accordance with the directions of the Ministry of Health Circular 22/58 of the 9th December, 1958. STATISTICS AND SOCIAL CONDITIONS OF THE AREA. Area (in acres) 4,290 Population (1951 Census) 25,019 Registrar-General's Estimate of Resident Population, mid 1958 26,100 Number of Inhabited Houses 8,144 Rateable Value £475 ,115 Product of a Penny Rate £1 ,925 NATURAL AND SOCIAL CONDITIONS. The population i3 largely residential, and consists chiefly of people whose occupation lies outside the urban area. Those employed in the district, apart from the tradesmen and their employees, are mainly skilled workers in light industries. EXTRACT FROM VITAL AND MORTAL STATISTICS OP THE YEAR. Total. M. P. Live Births (Legitimate 370 187 183 (illegitimate 16 11 5 Live Birth Rate per 1 ,000 of the estimated resident population (Standardised): 14.94 Total. M. P. Still Births (Legitimate 6 4 2 (illegitimate 1 — 1 Still-Birth Rate per 1 .000 total (live and still) births: 17.81 (3)  Total. M. F. Total live and Still-Births Legitimate 376 191 183 illegitimate 17 11 6 Deaths of Infants under one year of age (Legitimate 6 5 1 (illegitimate Infant Mortality Rate per 1 .000 live births: 15.54 Infant Mortality Rate per 1 .000 Legitimate Births: 16.22 Infant Mortality Rate per 1 .000 Illegitimate Births: 0.00 Neo-natal Mortality Rate per 1 .000 live Births: 12.95 Illegitimate live Births per cent of total live Births: 4.15 Maternal Deaths (including Abortion) Nil Maternal Mortality Rate per 1 ,000 total (live and still) Births: Nil Total. M. F. Deaths 239 108 131 Death Rate per 1 .000 of the estimated resident population (Standardised): 9.07 Too much importance should not be paid to the rates where the actual number of cases is small, e.g. - below 10, as such rates are of little statistical significance. Thus, if an attempt is made to compare this area with other districts, or with previous years, it would be better to compare actual cases. GENERAL PROVISION OF HEALTH SERVICES FOR THE DISTRICT. The Council are not the appropriate Local Authority for the purpose of the National Health Service Act, 1946, and do not therefore control any of the Hospitals or ancillary services in the district. Within this district, and under the control of the Barnet Group Hospital Management Committee, are the following:- Barnet General Hospital, Wellhouse Lane, Barnet. 4&1 Beds. St. Stephen's Hospital, Mays Lane, Barnet. 88 Beds. (Female medical, Ear, Nose and Throat, and Male long-stay cases) Victoria Maternity Hospital, Wood Street, Barnet. 59 Beds. "Elm Bank", Arkley. (Female long-stay cases) 27 Beds, The following is a list of Clinics etc., available in the district. Tuberculosis Clinics are held daily, by appointment, at Barnet Chest Clinic, Wellhouse Lane, Barnet. (4) At Vale Drive the following Clinics are held during the school term. A Clinic for Schoolchildren on the second and fourth Monday morning in each month, and a Clinic for Remedial Exercises every Monday afternoon. A speech therapy Clinic is held on Wednesdays and Fridays, Child Guidance Clinics on Thursdays, and an Eye Clinic on Wednesdays. An Infant Welfare Clinic is held every Tuesday afternoon all the year round and also on the first and third Fridays in each month. Dental Clinics are held daily. For the convenience of residents at Totteridge there is an Infant Welfare Clinic at "Dollisfield" every Friday afternoon. A branch Clinic at St. Stephen's Hall, Bells Hill was opened on Thursday, October 2nd and is held every Thursday from 9.30 to 11.45 a.m. with a doctor in attendance on the first and third Thursdays in each month. The Family Planning Association hold sessions at Vale Drive each Wednesday between 6 and 7.30 p.m., and Thursday evenings by appointment. These Clinics are subject to alteration and it is advisable to enquire of the Vale Drive Clinic (BAR: 6194) for the current days and times. Home Help Service. The local office of the Herts County Council Home Help Service at 42 Lytton Road, New Barnet, is open daily from 9-1, Monday to Friday inclusive. British Red Cross Loan Centre. 53 Wood Street. Barnet. Equipment for invalids may be obtained, on loan, between 8 a.m. and 6 p.m., Monday to Friday. PUBLIC HEALTH STAFF. Medical Officer of Health. ø x Arthur L. Hyatt, M.R.C.S.(Eng.), L.R.C.P, Chief Public Health Inspector. + ø John Baillie Wilson, M.A.P.H.I., M.R.S.H. Additional Public Health Inspectors. ø Howard W.C. Alloway, M.A.P.H.I., A.R.S.H. + ø Roy W. Pursglove, M.A.P.H.I. Clerk. Miss Marjorie Runtz. (5) Rodent Operative. J.C. Mace. Public Analyst. J.H. Hamence, Ph.D., M.Sc., F.R.I.C. Deputy Public Analyst. P.S. Hall, B.Sc. , P.R.I.C. + Holds the special qualification as Inspector of Meat and other Poods under examination of the Royal Society of Health. øSalary Contribution of one half from Exchequer Grants, x Part-time Officer. At the request of the Royal Technical College, Salford, Lanes., the Council accepted a student from their Public Health Inspectors' "Sandwich" Course for six months in the department, during which time he was given the opportunity of participating in the majority of our duties. WATER SUPPLY. The major area of the district is supplied with water from the mains of the Barnet District Water Company, and the remainder is served by the Colne Valley Water Company. All water supplied by the Barnet District Water Company is chlorinated. A laboratory staff is maintained and the water is regularly tested at all stages. During the year, a total of 1 ,637 bacteriological and 252 chemical examinations of the water were made by the Company's own staff. 1,315 of these samples were representative of the supply, and, 99.9% were found to be free from B.Coli. Ninety-eight samples representative of supply were submitted for independent analysis and all of these were found to be free from B.Coli. The Colne Valley Water Company exercises similar controls over its supplies. Two samples of water were taken by the Department, from the Barnet District Water Company's supply and submitted for analysis with satisfactory results in each case. The water supply to the whole district is considered adequate. One (6) cottage only in the district is known not to be connected to mains water supply. DRAINAGE MP SEWERAGE. The town is drained and sewered on the separate system, excepting the older portions of the district where it is a combined system. The sewage is conveyed to a Sewage Disposal works of 56 acres, where it is screened, grit removed in detritus tanks, thence to primary settlement tanks and thereafter distributed over three 80 ft. diameter bacteria filters, followed by humus removal in rectangular tanks before discharge to the Dollis Brook. Pumping is necessary for three sewers which have their outlets at a low point on the works. Part of the Totteridge area drains to the Finchley Borough sewers; in the outlying areas some properties are on cesspool drainage or domestic sewage disposal plants, and a few only have pail closets. SANITARY CONDITIONS AND WATER SUPPLY OF SCHOOLS. There are in the district fourteen pohonls administerod by the South. Herts Divisional. Education Committee, viz:- Queen Elizabeth's Boys' Grammar School, Queens Road, Bamet. Queen Elizabeth's Girls' Grammar School High Street, Barnet, Ravenscroft Secondary School, Bamet Lane, N.20. Elizabeth Allen Voluntary Secondary School, Wood Street, Barnet. (with annexe at Byng Road, Barnet.) Whitings Hill Junior Mixed and Infants' School, Whitings Road, Barnet. Foulds Junior Mixed and Infants' School, Byng Road, Barnet. Christ Church Junior Mixed School, Alston Road, Barnet. Christ Church Infants' School, Alston Road, Barnet. Grasvenor Infants' School, Grasvenor Avenue, Barnet. Underhill Junior Mixed School, Mays Lane, Bamet. Underbill Infants' School, Mays Lane, Bamet. St-. Andrew's Voluntary Junior Mixed and Infants' School, Totteridge Green, N.20. St. Catherine's Roman Catholic Infants School, Union Street, Bamet. South Herts College of Further Education, Wood Street, Bamet. (Available for girls and boys aged 15 to 18 years during the day, and for persons over school-leaving age in the evening.) In addition to the above, there are three private schools, viz:- The Hill School (residential), Totteridge Lane, N.20. Norfolk House School, Fitzjohn Avenue, Bamet. St. Marthe's Convent School, Wood Street, Bamet. All schools in the district are supplied with mains water and are connected to the Council's main drainage system. (7) DISPOSAL OF HOUSE REFUSE. The house refuse is collected weekly in covered mechanical conveyances and taken to the Council's Sewage Farm, where it is loaded into Contractor's covered lorries and disposed of daily by controlled tipping outside the district. PREVALENCE OF. AND CONTROL OVER, INFECTIOUS DISEASE. The following table shews the number of Notifications to the Sanitary Authority during the year, of each disease specified in the Public Health Act 1936, and the various Infectious Disease Regulations, and the number of cases removed to Hospital. DISEASE NOTIFIED REMOVED TO HOSPITAL Scarlet Fever 16 Nil Whooping Cough Nil Nil Diphtheria and Membranous Croup Nil Nil Measles 34 5 Acute Pneumonia 4 Nil Meningococcal Infection 4 4 Acute Poliomyelitis Nil Nil Acute Encephalitis Nil Nil Dysentery 8 4 Ophthalmia Neonatorum Nil Nil Puerperal Pyrexia 28 27 Smallpox Nil Nil Malaria Nil Nil Typhoid and Enteric Fevers Nil Nil Paratyphoid Fever Nil Nil Food Poisoning 11 9 Erysipelas Nil Nil Tuberculosis 14 9 TOTALS 119 58 AGE INCIDENCE OF INFECTIOUS DISEASE. DISEASE NUMBER OF CASES NOTIFIED YEARS OF AGE 0- 1- 2- 3- 4- 5- 10- 15- 25- (45- 65- 75- Total Scarlet Fever - - 1 2 1 11 1 - - 1 - - 16 Measles - 3 3 4 9 11 3 - 1 - - - 34 Acute Pneumonia - - - - - - - 1 1 2 - - 4 Meningococcal Infection 1 1 1 - - - _ - - 1 - - 4 Dysentery - - - - - 1- 1 2 3 - - 1 8 Puerperal Pyrexia - - - - - - - 9 18 1 - - 28 Food Poisoning 1 1 - 1 - - 1 1 2 3 - - 11 TOTALS 2 5 6 7 10 23 6 13 25 7 - 1 105 (8) Of the foregoing, the following cases normally resident outside the district were notified from the Barnet General Hospital and the Victoria Maternity Hospital. Measles 4; Meningococcal Infection 3; Dysentery 3; Puerperal Pyrexia 23; Pood Poisoning 8. FOOD POISONING. Annual Return of Pood Poisoning Notifications. Pood Poisoning Notifications (Corrected) Returned to Registrar General. 1st Quarter. 2nd Quarter. 3rd Quarter. 4th Quarter. Total. Deaths. 1 2 7 1 11 Nil Cases Otherwise Ascertained. 1st Quarter. 2nd Quarter. 3rd Quarter. 4th Quarter. Total. Deaths. Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil Symptomless Excreters. 1st Quarter, 2nd Quarter. 3rd Quarter. 4th Quarter. Total. Deaths. Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil Fatal Cases. 1st Quarter. 2nd Quarter. 3rd Quarter. 4th Quarter. Total. Deaths. Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil It is pleasing to report that the incidence of infectious disease shews a general decrease from last year. The three cases of food poisoning resident in this district were not connected although the causative organism, salmonella typhimurium, was the same. Two of the cases, although soon clear of the main symptoms, were a long time under medical attention before being declared free from infection. Complaint was made by a person residing outside the district who suspected that he had food poisoning following a meal at a local cafe. However the complaint was not made until after three days had passed, and the complainant himself had not called in a doctor. Specimens obtained from the cafe and staff all proved negative. This was only a minor incident but it does point to the necessity for immediate and urgent action if any beneficial results are to be obtained in preventing the spread of food poisoning. Poliomyelitis is absent from the list this year, and with increased supplies (9) of vaccine it is to be hoped that full advantage will be taken by all classes of the population eligible to receive it, so that this disease may stay permanently out of the list. The 15-25 years of age group became eligible towards the end of the year but the demand for registration has been extremely poor. This group is not so easy of access as the younger people who are still at school. They are getting out into the world, beyond parental control and enjoying their new freedoms, believing possibly that they had left behind such childish things as "infantile" paralysis which is of course far from the truth. With a fair proportion of school age children now vaccinated the age incidence of poliomyelitis is likely to move upwards. Registration cards for polio vaccination may be obtained from the Vale Drive Clinic or from the Public Health Department, 31 Wood Street, Barnet. TUBERCULOSIS. NEW CASES AND MORTALITY DURING 1958. YEARS OP AGE NEW CASES DEATHS Pulmonary Non-Pulmonary Pulmonary Non-Pulmonary M F M F M F M F 0 - - - - - - - - 1 - - - - - _ - - 5 - - - - - - - - 15 1 1 - - - - - - 25 1 - - - - - - - 35 - 2 -- - - - - - 45 3 - 1 _ - - 1 - 553 - - - _ - - - - 65 and over 2 - - - - - _ - TOTALS 10 3 1 - - - 1 - Fourteen new cases were notified during the year, the same as last year, making a total of two hundred and eleven cases on the Tuberculosis Register. Although the numbers are comparatively small upon which to base any theories (10) on trends, it is interesting to note that there is this year a sharp increase in the number of males over 45 years of age notified as new cases; in fact more than in any of the last ten years, despite the reduction by over half of the total number of new cases as compared with ten years ago. The cases of Tuberculosis removed for treatment are usually sent to Clare Hall Sanatorium, South Mimms, other patients with an infectious disease being sent to Coppett's Wood Hospital, Muswell Hill, N.10. PUBLIC HEALTH (PREVENTION OF TUBERCULOSIS) REGULATIONS. 1925. It has not been found necessary to take any action under the above Regulations, relating to Tuberculous employees in the Milk Trade. PUBLIC HEALTH ACT. 1936. SECTION 172. COMPULSORY REMOVAL TO HOSPITAL OF CASES OF PULMONARY TUBERCULOSIS. No action was necessary under the above Section. INTERNATIONAL VACCINATION CERTIFICATES. At the end of 1952 a new form was introduced for International Vaccination Certificates requiring authentication of the signature of the doctor performing vaccination or inoculation of persons proceeding overseas. During the year one hundred and fifty-eight such certificates were authenticated and marked with the internationally agreed stamp. NATIONAL ASSISTANCE ACT. 1947 - SECTION 47. NATIONAL ASSISTANCE (AMENDMENT) ACT. 1951 -SECTION 1. During the year it was found necessary to obtain emergency orders for the removal to hospital of two aged and infirm persons, one of either sex. I am pleased to say that although the official action was necessary to get them into hospital, both quickly settled down happily. Five aged persons came under our notice but unofficial action secured or appears about to secure a satisfactory outcome in each case. In this work the Old Peoples Welfare Committee are performing an excellent service. A lady visitor maintains a regular and close contact with many aged persons helping them in their problems. Through her, it is hoped that some of these aged and oft times very independent people will be persuaded to accept assistance and the services (11) available to then, thus avoiding interference with their liberty by official action. MORTAL STATISTICS. Of 239 deaths, 10 occurred tinder one year of age. The following were the major causes of death:- Heart Disease 93; Cancer 52 (27 males and 25 females); Vascular Lesions of Nervous system 34; Bronchitis 9; Pneumonia 14; Motor Vehicle accidents 3; Other accidents 5. MORTUARY ACCOMMODATION. Under arrangements made with the East Barnet Urban District Council their mortuary is available for the use of this district, and it was so used on only two occasions daring the year. I am, Yours faithfully, ARTHUR L. HYATT, M.R.C.S.(Eng.), L.R.C.P. MEDICAL OFFICER OF HEALTH. (12) BARNET URBAN DISTRICT COUNCIL. CHIEF PUBLIC HEALTH INSPECTOR'S REPORT. Public Health Department, 31 Wood Street, Barnet. To the Chairman and Members of the Barnet Urban District Council. I have the honour to present my Annual Report for the year 1958. There has been no great demand for certificates of disrepair under the Rent Act 1957, and the work of securing demolition of some unfit houses and repair of others has continued in accord with the programme. The Council extended the Oaklands Road sewer and, before the end of the year, the majority of owners in the area had connected or were in process of connecting their house drains to it. In conjunction with our neighbour Elstree Rural District Council, preliminary steps were taken towards establishing a Smoke Control Area on the L.C.C. estate on the west side of the Banet Bye Pass. Certain initial information had been sent to the Ministry but the preliminary Ministerial approval had not been secured at the end of the year. Such approval is necessary for various reasons, the most important of which is probably the necessity to view the overall demands in the Country, and in particular areas, for smokeless fuels. Whilst there will undoubtedly be some opposition to the setting up of such areas the public health benefits to be derived must surely outweigh the loss of the traditional coal fire in the hearth. I tender my thanks to all officers of the Council and the staff of the Public Health Department in particular, for their assistance and consideration through the year. INSPECTION OF DISTRICT. General inspections of the district have been carried out periodically and all complaints investigated. The process of serving a preliminary or intimation notice upon the person in (13} default, specifying the works necessary to remedy the defects found, is usually followed. It was found necessary to ask your authority to serve sixty-four Statutory Notices, where persons failed to comply with the preliminary notice, or the strict legal procedure was necessary in the first instance. SANITARY INSPECTION OF AREA. The following is a list of the number and nature of visits and inspections:- Visits re: Housing Acts 706 Visits re: nuisance and sanitary defects 907 Visits re: infectious diseases 232 Visits re: Petroleum Acts 178 Visits re: factories 179 Visits re: outworkers' premises 10 Visits re: food manufactories, cafes, etc 373 Visits re: ice cream and sampling 146 Visits re: overcrowding 5 Visits re: aged and infirm persons 129 Visits to inspect meat and other foods 617 Visits re: schools 10 Visits re: pollution of watercourses 25 Visits re: Rent Acts 84 Visits re: Smoke observations 59 Visits re: Tents, Caravans and Sheds 28 Visits re: Shops Acts 115 Visits re: keeping of animals 41 Visits re: Rodent Infestations 2,138 Visits re: other infestations 78 Miscellaneous visits 102 NUMBER OP NOTICES SERVED DURING YEAR. Number of Informal Notices 146 Number of Statutory Notices 64 Informal Notices complied with 103 Statutory Notices complied with 66 SANITARY WORK AND REPAIRS. The following is a list of repairs effected as a result of informal and formal notices served. Roofs repaired and made weatherproof 57 Gutters, downspouts repaired or renewed 65 Exterior brickwork repaired or repointed 171 Walls, dampness remedied 99 Chimney stacks and pots repaired or renewed 20 Yard surfaces repaired or repaved 18 (14) Ceilings repaired or renewed 75 Wall plaster repaired or renewed 115 Walls and ceilings cleansed and decorated 159 Floors repaired or renewed 51 Staircases repaired 10 Doors and frames repaired or renewed 49 Windows repaired 158 Food Stores provided or ventilated 17 Fireplaces repaired or renewed 15 Drains and sewage disposal plants cleared 20 Drains and sewage disposal plants repaired or reconstructed 54 Inspection chambers repaired or reconstructed 15 Soil or vent pipes repaired or renewed 13 Gullies, channels and fenders repaired or renewed 9 Water Closet pans, fittings, repaired or renewed 15 Sinks, waste pipes, etc. , repaired or renewed 6 Storage cisterns , cleaned, repaired or renewed 8 Water services, repaired, renewed or re-instated 2 Dustbins renewed 3 Cesspools abolished 12 HOUSING. Work continued in connection with the St. Albans Road/Alston Road Clearance Order: by the end of the year twenty-three out of a total of twenty-eight houses had been demolished, private development of the site proceeding at the same time. Twelve Demolition Orders were made during the year, two of the houses concerned being previously the subject of Closing Orders. Five houses were pulled down under Demolition Orders made previously. One Closing Order was sealed, it being inadvisable to pursue demolition yet owing to adjacent premises. One house was made fit for habitation by the owner, following approval by the Council of proposed works and extension of time under a Demolition Older. Nineteen houses were made fit by the respective owners as a result of formal action, in addition to which the Council carried out repairs to one house in default. In this latter case a Charging Order was made, requiring the tenant to pay his rent to the Council, but the owner later paid the account in full. Minor defects were dealt with by the application of the Public Health Act. In one instance the Council acted in default to provide a new water closet flushing cistern. The introduction of the Rent Act 1957, has not made any great demands upon the services of the Department. Apart from enquiries the following is a brief summary of certificates etc., issued. (15) Applications for Certificates of Disrepair 8 Landlords' undertaking accepted 5 Landlords' undertaking not accepted 1 Certificates of Disrepair issued 5 Certificates of Disrepair refused 1 Applications for Cancellation of Certificates 2 Certificates of Disrepair cancelled 2 These figures do not necessarily tally, one with the other , owing to a carry over from year to year. PUBLIC HEALTH ACT, 1936. INFECTIOUS DISEASE. INVESTIGATION AND DISINFECTION. Investigations have been carried out of the more important cases of infectious disease listed in the Medical Officer of Health's Report. Where necessary, premises are disinfected and bedding is taken for disinfection to the Barnet General Hospital under arrangements made with the Barnet Group Hospital Management Committee. One hundred and two library books were disinfected before return to librariea, a considerable decrease over the previous year, due to the small number of infectious disease notifications. FOOD PREMISES IN THE DISTRICT. Number of Bakers 8 " " Butchers 13 " " Cafes, Restaurants, etc. 16 " " Confectioners 24 " " Fishmongers 5 " " Greengrocers 12 " " Grocers 35 " " Lincesed Premises 28 " " Chemists 7 FOOD PREMISES REGISTERED UNDER SECTION 16 OF FOOD AND DRUGS ACT. 1955. (a) Sale and Storage of Ice Cream 42 (b) Manufacture of sausages and preserved meats etc. 21 DAIRIES REGISTERED UNDER MILK AND DAIRIES REGULATIONS. 1949-1954. Number of Dairies 2 Any infringements found are rectified or remedied by informal action when pointed out to the trader, and no formal action was needed. During our visits of inspection every opportunity is taken to discuss (16) food hygiene with staff and management and to show what steps are necessary to comply with the regulations and to improve hygiene generally. Ceilings renewed or repaired 2 Wall plaster renewed or repaired 3 Walls and ceilings cleansed 5 Floors repaired 2 Yards and Gullies cleansed 1 Dustbins renewed 7 Hot water supplies provided 2 Handbasins provided 2 Accumulations removed 1 Fittings and utensils cleansed or renewed 3 Sinks renewed 2 Fixtures non-absorbent 2 SHOPS ACT. 1950. No formal action has been necessary under the provisions of this Act. Informal action has secured the provision of various notices required to be displayed regarding closing hours in "mixed" shops. Several tours of the shops on Sundays found a few mixed shops infringing the law. These were reported to the Council and warnings were given. ICE CREAM. All samples of ice-cream are taken to the Central Public Laboratory, Colindale, for testing by the Methylene Blue Test. This is merely indicative and provides no legal standard: the Public Health Laboratory Service suggest that owing to the numerous factors governing the hygienic quality of icerere am it is unwise to pay too much attention to the bacteriological results on any single sample, judgement being based rather on a series of samples. It is suggested as desirable that at least 50^2 should fall into Grade I, 80% into Grades I or II, not more than 20% into Grade III and none into Grade IV. Eighteen samples taken from retailers in the district were all returned as Grade I. There is one company registered for the manufacture of ice-cream, and a policy of concentrating on the control of production rather than retailing has been followed by the department. One hundred and twenty-four samples of ice-cream were taken at various stages in the manufacturing process, with the following results, the percentages being given in parentheses:- (17) Grade I: 94 (75.8%) Grade II: 26 (96.8%) - Grades I and II) Grade III: 2(1.6%) Grade IV: 2 (1.6%) The goal of all samples being at least no lower than Grade II is not one of easy attainment: it must be realised that the large manufacturers are in a position to maintain a constant bacteriological control right through production and throughout the day's working, a facility that is beyond the means of the smaller man. In addition to the above, thirty samples of ice-lollies were dealt with. The Methylene Blue Test is not employed on these: their acid nature renders them self-sterilising and an assessment of the hydrogen ian concentration of a sample indicates its degree of acidity. All were satisfactory. There are also forty-one premises registered for the storage and sale of ice cream, after allowing for one new registration effected during 1958, and two cancelled; one following closure of the premises and one following change of user. DAIRIES. COWSHEDS AND MILKSHOPS. The control of the production of milk is vested in the Ministry of Agriculture Fisheries and Food. The local authority is responsible for the inspection and registration of milk distributors and other dairy premises not directly concerned with the actual production of milk, and for licensing for the sale of Designated Milks. Twenty-four samples of milk have been taken, in course of delivery to the consumer, and submitted to the appropriate tests with the following results:- Designation Samples Taken Satisfactory Unsatisfactory Tuberculin Tested (Pasteurised) 8 8 Nil Pasteurised 11 11 Nil Pasteurised (Homogenised) 1 1 Nil Pasteurised (Channel Islands) 3 3 Nil Sterilised 1 1 Nil Totals 24 24 Nil (18) No official action was taken under Regulation 20 of the Milk and Dairies Regulations 1949, to stop or restrict the sale of milk. No cases of disease were notified which could be attributed to the consumption of infected milk. Ten Dealer's Licences and twenty-one Supplementary Licences were granted for the retail sale of milk under the Milk (Special Designation)(Raw Milk) Regulations, 194-9 and 1950, and the Milk (Special Designation) (Pasteurised and Sterilised Milk) Regulations, 1949 and 1950, viz:- Designation Dealer's Licences. Supplementary Licences. Tuberculin Tested 3 7 Pasteurised 3 7 Sterilised 4 7 FOOD AND DRUGS ACT. 1955. The Council acquired these powers under the Act concerning the adulteration and sophistication of food as from 1st October 1955. The summary overleaf contains the results of eighty-three samples taken by this department. All unsatisfactory samples are reported to the Council and the following are brief comments on them. Cream. A bottle of cream, brought to the office by a resident, with an adhering stain on the inside of the bottle. Analysis showed this to be essentially dried milk solids, suggesting insufficient cleansing of the bottle. A letter was sent to the milk retailer requesting better inspection. Cream Doughnuts and Cream Alices. These were purchased from a shop in the district, where they were labelled as above, but upon analysis were found not to contain cream but imitation cream. Although a notice was displayed elsewhere in the shop to the effect that no article sold contained cream the label was misleading. A letter was sent to the retailer and the labelling was immediately withdrawn. (Continued on page 20) (19) Article No. Examined No. Adulterated Etc. Formal Informal Total1 Formal Informal Total Ammoniated Tincture of Quinine - 2 2 - - - Brislings - 1 1 - - - Butter - 1 1 - - - Cheese, Buttered - 1 1 - - - Chicken Chopped - 1 1 - - - Chicken Fillets in Jelly - 1 1 - - - Chocolate Creamed Semolina - 1 1 - - - Chopped Ham and Pork - 1 1 - - - Chopped Pork and Meat Roll - 1 1 - - - Cider Vinegar - 1 1 - - - Citroze - 1 1 - - - Coffee Sugar, Coloured - 1 1 - - - Corned Mutton - 1 1 - - - Cream - 1 1 - 1 1 Cream Doughnuts - 1 1 - 1 1 Cream Slices - 1 1 - 1 1 Danish Lunch Tongues - 1 1 - - - Diabetic Apricot Jam - 1 1 - - - Garlic Salt - 1 1 - - - Gelatine - 1 1 - - - Ginger, Crystallised - 1 1 - - - Groundnut Oil - 1 1 - - - Hamburger - 1 1 - - - Honey - 1 1 - - - Ice Cream - 2 2 - - - Junket Tablets - 1 1 - - - Lard - 2 2 - - - Lemon Juice - 1 1 - - - Liquid Fruit Pectin - 1 1 - - - Luncheon Meat - 4 4 - - - Margarine - 1 1 - - - Meat Pudding - 1 1 - - - Melon and Ginger Jam - 1 1 - - - Meringue Powder - 1 1 - - - Milk 19 - 19 1 - 1 Milk Drink, Flavoured - 1 1 - 1 1 Milk, Evaporated - 1 1 - - - Minced Chicken and Ham in Jelly - 1 1 - - - Orange Spread - 1 1 - - - Pease Pudding - 1 1 - - - Pepper - 1 1 - - - Petroleum Jelly - 1 1 - - - Pork Roll, Stuffed - 1 1 - - - Rice, Ground - 1 1 - - - Rice Pudding - 1 1 - - - Roselle - 1 1 - - - Salmon Spread - 1 1 - - - Soup, Chicken Noodle - 1 1 - 1 - Soup, Clear Chicken Mix - 1 1 - 1 1 Soup, Cream of Tomato - 2 2 - - - Sponge Sandwich, Dairy Cream - 1 1 - - - Steaklets - 1 1 - 1 1 Steak Stewed - 1 1 - - - Strained Creamed Fish - 1 1 - - - Toffee Popcorn - 1 1 - - - Tomato Juice - 1 1 - - - Tomato Paste - 1 1 - - - Yoghurt and Sugar - 1 1 - 1 1 Totals 19 64 83 1 8 9 (20) Chocolate Flavoured Milk. The composition of this drink was in substantial accord with the declaration of ingredients given on the label. There was some added sugar and in view of this your Analyst felt that the claim in descriptive matter that it had slimming properties could not be substantiated. The Council decided to take no action. Milk. Foreign matter adhering to the inside of the bottle consisted of mould growths, suggesting again, insufficient cleansing of the bottle. This was supplied by a different retailer from the cream mentioned on page 18. A warning letter was sent to the firm concerned. Chicken Noodle Soup and Clear Chicken Soup Mix. Your Analyst reported that although there is no official standard for meat content in such products in his opinion there is insufficient protein in these to justify the descriptions given. It was understood that consultations were in progress between the various bodies interested to come to some agreement on minimum quantities and in view of this the Council decided on no action at the present time. Steaklets. As with earlier articles, the composition of this product was in substantial accord with the declaration of ingredients but your Analyst felt that the nomenclature might be misleading. After corresponding with the Manufacturer and having regard to the other descriptive matter on the packaging, no further action was taken. A resident brought to the office an opened bottle of Yoghurt to which had been added brown sugar. Complaint was made of a fibre resembling hair in the mixture. Your Analyst confirmed that the fibre was of the nature of hemp. No further action was taken as there was insufficient evidence to show how the fibre got into the Yoghurt. (21) MERCHANDISE MARKS ACT. 1926, The Council became the authority for enforcing the provisions of these Acts and Orders made thereunder when they were designated a Pood and Drugs Authority. No contraventions were noted. MEAT AND FOOD CONDEMNED. The following is a list of the articles of food condemned as unfit for human consumption during the year. Meat. Fresh Meat. Canned Meat. One Turkey (Irish) 8 lbs. Corned Beef 10 lbs. Luncheon Meat 2 lbs. Breasts of Lamb (English) 21+ lbs. Steak 4 lbs. Braised Kidneys 6 ozs. Fish. Fresh Fish. Canned Fish. Smoked Haddock 2-g- stone. Salmon 3 tins. Smoked Fillet of Cod 2 stone. Pilchards, Sild and Crab 7 tins. General. Vegetables tins. Jam 6 tins. Fruit 181 tins. Maraialade 9 tins and jars. Milk 8 tins. Paste 3 tins. Soup 1 tin. Sweet Corn 1 tin. Condemned food is taken to the disposal point on the Sewage Farm, where tins are thoroughly perforated and loose food is stained and mixed with household refuse before onward transmission to the controlled tip outside the district. PRIVATE SLAUGHTERHOUSES AND SLAUGHTER OF ANIMALS ACT, 1933. There is only one slaughterhouse, privately owned, operating in the district and your inspectors maintain a high percentage of inspection by evening and week-end visits. Slaughtering is carried on six days per week, the sole exception being Friday, and the general system with regard to the timing of slaughtering is that adult Bovines are slaughtered early in the day's work, proceeding to the "smalls" and in this latter category, calves are usually left until last. (22) This accounts for the 100% inspection of Cattle and Cows, shown in the following table, and the lower percentage of inspection for Calves. However, good co-operation exists between your inspectors and the owner and his slaughtermen who retain for our inspection on the following day any carcase presenting signs of disease or injury. The majority of the condemned meat and offals is taken away by a reputable firm for manufacture into useful by-products, e.g. fertilisers etc. Total weight of carcase meat condemned 4,388 lbs. Total weight of offals condemned 7,649 lbs. CARCASES AND OFFAL INSPECTED AND CONDEMNED IN WHOLE OR IN PART. Cattle excluding j Cows Cows Calves Sheep end Lambs Pigs Number killed (if known) 1 ,046 713 3,246 3,357 5,237 Number inspected 1 ,046 713 2,038 3,051 4,754 All diseases except Tuberculosis and Cysticerci Whole carcases condemned 1 6 8 12 Carcases of which some part or organ was condemned 187 223 3 71 182 Percentage of the number inspected affected with disease other than tuberculosis and cysticerci 17.97 31.36 0.44 2.59 4.08 Tuberculosis only: Whole carcases condemned 1 2 — — 1 Carcases of which some part or organ was condemned 28 57 - - 104 Percentage of the number inspected affected with tuberculosis 2.77 8.28 - - 2.21 Cysticercosis: Carcases of which some part or organ was condemned - 2 - - - Carcases submitted to treatment by refrigeration - 2 - - - Generalised and totally condemned - - - - - The percentages of animals affected with disease remains steady with the exception of cows and tuberculosis. Here the decrease has been from 18.82% last year to 8.28% this year in spite of an increase of over 20% in the number of animals killed. No doubt this is one of the beneficial effects, now being felt, (23) of the Government's eradication scheme, which is steadily progressing. In fact, the time cannot "be far off when all cattle herds in the Country will be up to Attested standard. In June the Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Pood, determined the arrangement whereby the Inspectors issued Certificates for subsidy payments on deadweight pigs, the work then being taken over by the Ministry1 s own officers. Up to June 15th, 705 animals had been dealt with, 101 certificates being issued. The Council received 6d per pig for this service, with a minimum of 3/0d per certificate. There were twelve persons licensed by the Council as fit persons to slaughter animals, most of them work part or full time as slaughtermen at the local slaughterhouse. No complaint has been received from other districts concerning the conduct of any of these men, nor was there any need for adverse report on the men locally employed. DRAINAGE. Twelve cesspools and septic tanks were abolished during the year, ten of the properties concerned being connected to the extended sewer in the Barnet Lane area. Progress is being made in securing that the remaining houses will also connect to this sewer. A pair of cottages on Totteridge Green were put over to main drainage, the Council bearing the additional expense of exceeding the statutory distance limit. The construction of two new sewage disposal plants was approved and supervised by the department, one being for a new house and the other for a group of three farm cottages, the subject of an Improvement Grant. REPORT REQUIRED BY SECTION 128(3) OP THE FACTORIES ACT. 1937. Inspection for purposes of provision as to health. Number on Register. Inspections Written Notices Occupiers Prosecuted (l) Factories in which Secs.1,2, 3, 4 and 6 are to be enforced by Local Authorities 9 20 – – (2) Factories not included in (1) in which Sec. 7 is enforced by the Local Authority. 89 152 – – (3) Other premises in which Sec.7 is enforced by the Local Authority 10 I 7 – – Total 108 179 – – (24) Tvro informal notices were given dunng the year, one to provide sanitary accommodation for workers on a building site and the other to cleanse, decorate and repair sanitary conveniences. Outworkers (Sections 110 and 111) Section 110 Section 111 No, of outworkers on lists received. No, of instances of work in unwholesome premises. Notices Served. 78 - _ Thirteen outworkers reside in the district. Three premises were visited and home conditions were found to be entirely satisfactory. The names and addresses of the other outworkers are notified to the district councils in which they live. One new certificate and four amended certificates as to adequate means of escape in case of fire were issued under section 34 of the Act during the year, in some cases, after necessary works were carried out. PUBLIC HEALTH ACT . 1936 - SECTION 60. Escape from Fire - Certain High Buildings. In two instances, a residential school and a nursing home, informal action was taken to secure improved means of escape from fire. This is carried out in cooperation with the County Fire Prevention Officer. In the case of the nursing home, the matter arose in connection with the re-registration of the premises, by the County Council, following a change of ownership. HERTFORDSHIRE COUNTY COUNCIL ACT. 1935. Provision is made in this Act for the conduct and regulation of:- (1) Tents, Caravans and Sheds; (2) Hairdressers' and Barbers' Premises; (3) Swimming Baths and Pools, and (4) Employment Agencies. Tents. Caravans and Sheds. The vans attending the Bamet Fair were visited to enquire as to any infectious diseases and as to their sanitary condition. The provision of temporary sanitary accommodation wis required in different (25) sections of the fair for the use of the caravanners and public, and regular removal of refuse was arranged. Inspections are also made of food stalls to secure hygieniffconditions. Hairdressers' and Barbers' Premises. There are fourteen such establishments in the district. No complaints were received concerning their cleanliness nor were anyserious breaches of the Council's Bye-laws noted during inspections of such premises. Public Swimming Baths and Bathing Pools. The only swimming pool in the district, viz, at "The Bam" , Barnet Bye-Pass, is not now in use. Employment Agencies. At the request of the County Council two premises were inspected in connection with applications made for use as Employment Agencies, and a report forwarded to the County Council. HOME COUNTIES (MUSIC AND DANCING) LICENSING ACT, 1926. HERTFORDSHIRE (MUSIC AND DANCING) REGULATIONS, 1956 Under the new regulations made by the County Council a report from the local district council is required regarding the suitability and sufficiency of sanitary arrangements at premises for Music and Dancing before licences are issued. No report has been requested during this year. RAG FLOCK ACT. 1951. This Act controls the use of filling materials in the making of upholstery. The premises of one furniture manufacturer are registered under the Act. PET ANIMALS ACT. 1951. This Act gives the local Authority, inter alia, power to grant licences to persons to keep pet shops for the sale of pet animals and to attach to the licences conditions concerning the cleanliness and general management of the premises: there are five persons licensed in the district. (26) No complaints were received not were any major contraventions of the conditions observed during visits of inspection. RODENT CONTROL. Prevention of Damage by Pests Act. 1949. A full time rodent operator is employed for treatment of infestations of rats and mice. and mice. The table below gives details of the work carried out during the year. Type of Property Local Authority Dwelling Houses Agricultural All other (including Business Premises) Total Number of Properties inspected as a result of:- (a) Notification 3 131 2 28 164 (b) Survey under the Act 4 182 12 50 248 (c) Otherwise - 6 1 10 17 Total inspections carried out including reinspections 16 370 26 221 633 Number of properties found to be infested by:- (a) Rats Major - 1 3 3 7 Minor 11 69 3 30 113 (b) Mice Major - 4 - - 4 [Minor 1 87 - 13 101 Number of Properties treated by the Local Authority 12 161 6 39 218 Total treatments carried out including re-treatments 17 223 9 53 302 Number of "Block" control schemes carried out 52 A test bait is made of 1C$ of the soil sewer manholes in the district, from the results of which are based the two maintenance treatments of the sewers required by the Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food, as one of the conditions under which the Ministry pay 50% of the Council's rodent control expenses. The test bait in May resulted in twelve complete "takes" and no partial "takes" of bait out of ninety-three manholes baited. (27) In the maintenance treatment carried out later in May, seventy-three manholes were baited resulting in twenty-three "takes" and in October, fifty-one were baited with thirteen "takes". Rats were found to be breaking out of the house drainage systems in three instances. The defective drains were repaired, and this will prevent a recurrence of infestation, from these sources, in the appropriate sewers. No charge is made for the use of the Rodent Operator's services in treating private domestic premises, provided that the occupiers co-operate in carrying out their duties under the Act. The cost of treatments at all other premises is recoverable. OTHER INFESTATIONS. There was an increase in the requests for assistance and advice on dealing with infestations, amounting to one hundred and fifteen enquiries. The infestations cover a wide variety of insects and other pests, e.g. wasps, beetles, ants, cockroaches, fleas, flies, bees, lice, foxes, squirrels and moles. We are assisted in the identification of some of these insects by the British Museum (Natural History Section) the staff of which give prompt answers to our queries. Small quantities of insecticides are distributed and in some cases the power sprayer is loaned to assist. HEATING- APPLIANCES (FIREGUARDS) ACT. 1952. This Act and the Regulations made thereunder came into operation on the 1st October 1955, after which date it became an offence to manufacture a heating appliance which does not comply with the requisite standards. No contraventions were found, this year, of the standards .set by the Act and Regulations for fireguards on heating appliances. (28) PETROLEUM (REGULATION) ACTS. 1928 MP 1956. One licence for the storage of petroleum spirit in an underground tank was discontinued during the year, the licences in question having changed his vehicles to diesel-burning: thirty-three premises remained on the Register. In one instance the provision of an additional tank required the increase of a licence "by 2,000 gallons, and one licence was reduced by 1 ,000 gallons, two tanks being out of service and made safe. At the end of the year the total quantity for which licences were on issue, in respect of petroleum spirit and petroleum mixtures, stood at 41,885 gallons. The process of testing the older installations, in line with the requirements of the Licence Conditions, has continued, any small defects being remedied at the time. All licencees with electrically operated pumps have been reminded that 1st January 19^0, is the deadline by which such apparatus will be required to be of approved flameproof oans-Lruotian and installation. I am, Yours obediently, J. B. Wilson. Chief Public Health Inspector.