UBAR 27 URBAN DISTRICT OF BARNET ANNUAL REPORT of the MEDICAL OFFICER OF HEALTH to the BARNET URBAN DISTRICT COUNCIL by ARTHUR L. HYATT, M.R.C.S. (Eng.) , L.R.C.P. Together with the ANNUAL REPORT of the CHIEF PUBLIC HEALTH INSPECTOR by JOHN B. WILSQN, M.A.P.H.I. , M.R.S.H. (2) BAR NET URBAN DISTRICT COUNCIL. MEDICAL OFFICER'S REPORT. Tel: BARnet 5511 Public Health Department, 31 Wood Street, Barnet. To the Chairman and Members of the Barnet Urban District Council. Ladies and Gentlemen, I have pleasure in presenting to you my Annual Report on the health of the district for the year 1959. It is drawn up in accordance with the directions of the Ministry of Health Circular 1/60 of the 8th January, 1960. STATISICS AND SOCIAL CONDITIONS OF THE AREA. Area (in acres) 4,290 Population (1951 Census) 25,019 Registrar—General's Estimate of Resident Population, Mid 1959 26,410 Number of Inhabited Houses 8,354 Number of Persons per House 3.16 Rateable Value £504,027 Product of a Penny Rate £2.040 NATURAL AND SOCIAL CONDITIONS. The population is largely residential, and consists chiefly of people whose occupation lies outside the urban area. Those employed in the district, apart from the tradesmen and their employees, are mainly skilled workers in light industries. EXTRACT FROM VITAL AND MORTAL STATISTICS OF THE YEAR. Total. M. P. Live Births Legitimate 367 204 163 Illegitimate 17 10 7 Live Birth Rate per 1 .000 of the estimated resident population (Standardised) : 14.54 Illegitimate Live Births per cent of the total live births: 4.43% (3)  Total. M. F. Still Births Legitimate 9 5 4 Illegitimate — — — Still Birth Rate per 1 ,000 total (live and still) births: 22.90 Total. M. F. Total live ana Still Births Legitimate 376 209 167 Illegitimate 17 10 7 Infant Deaths (Under one year of age) Legitimate 8 5 3 Illegitimate — — — Infant Mortality Rates: Total. Infant Deaths per 1 .000 total live births: 20.83 Legitimate Infant Deaths per 1 ,000 legitimate live births: 21,80 Illegitimate Infant Deaths per 1 .000 illegitimate live births: 0,00 Neo-natal Mortality Rate (Deaths under 4 weeks per 1 .000 total live births: 15.62 Early Neo-natal Mortality Rate (deaths under 1 week per 1 .000 total live births: 13.02 Perinatal Mortality Rate (still births and deaths under 1 week combined per 1 .000 to.tal live and still births): 35.62 Maternal Mortality (including abortion) : Number of Deaths: Nil Rate per 1 .000 total live and still births: 0,00 Total. M. F. Deaths (All Causes): 286 141 145 Death Rate per 1 .000 of the estimated resident population (Standardised): 10,83 Too much importance should not be paid to the rates where the actual number of cases is small, e.g. - below 10, as such rates are of little statistical significance. Thus, if an attempt is made to compare this area with other districts, or with previous years, it would be better to compare actual cases. GENERAL PROVISION OF HEALTH SERVICES FOR THE DISTRICT The Council are not the appropriate Local Authority for the purpose of the National Health Service Act, 194-6, and do not therefore control any of the Hospitals or ancillary services in the district. Within this district, and under the control of the Barnet Group Hospital Management Committee, are the following Barnet General Hospital, Wellhouse Lane, Barnet. 461 Beds. St. Stephen's Hospital, Wellhouse Lane, Barnet. 88 Beds. (Female medical, Ear, Nose and Throat, and Male long-stay cases) (4) Victoria Maternity Hospital, Wood Street, Barnet. "Elm Bank", Arkley. (Female long-stay cases) 59 Beds. 27 Beds. The following is a list of Clinics etc. , available in the district. Tuberculosis Clinics are held daily, by appointment, at Barnet Chest Clinic, Wellhouse Lane, Barnet. (BAR: 7441) At Vale Drive the following Clinics are held during the school term. A Clinic for Schoolchildren on the second and fourth Monday morning in each month, and a Clinic for Remedial Exercises every Monday afternoon. A speech therapy Clinic is held on Wednesdays and Fridays, Child Guidance Clinics on Thursdays, and an Eye Clinic on Wednesdays. An Infant Welfare Clinic is held every Tuesday afternoon all the year round and also on the first and third Fridays in each month. Dental Clinics are held daily. For the convenience of residents at Totteridge there is an Infant Welfare Clinic at "Dollisfield" every Friday afternoon. A branch Clinic at St. Stephen's Hall, Bells Hill, is held every Thursday from 9.30 to 11.45 a.m. with a doctor in attendance, except on the fifth Thursday in the month. These Clinics are subject to alteration and it is advisable to enquire of the Vale Drive Clinic (BAR: 6194) for the current days and times. The Family Planning Association hold sessions at 133 Wood Street, each Wednesday between 6 and 7»30 p.m. , and Thursday afternoons between 2 and 3 p.m. Also Tuesday and Thursday evenings by appointment. (BAR: 5345) Home Help Service. The local office of the Herts County Council Home Help Service at 42 Lytton Road, New Barnet, is open daily from 9 - 1 , Monday to Friday inclusive. (BAR: 2352) British Red Cross Loan Centre, 53 Wood Street. Barnet. Equipment for invalids may be obtained, on loan, between 8 a.m. and 6 p.m. , Monday to Friday. PUBLIC HEALTH STAFF. Medical Officer of Health. Arthur L. Hyatt, M.R.C.S.(Eng.), L.R.C.P. Chief Public Health Inspector. + John Baillie Wilson, M.A.P.H.I. , M.R.S.H. Deputy Chief Public Health Inspector. Howard W.C. Alloway, M.A.P.H.I. , A.R.S.H. (5) Additional Public Health Inspector. + Roy W. Pursglove, M.A.P.H.I. Clerk. Miss Marjorie Runtz. Rodent Operative. J.C. Mace. Public Analyst. J.H. Hamence, Ph.D. , M.Sc., F.R.I.C. Deputy Public Analyst. P.S. Hall, B.Sc. , P.R.I.C. + Holds the special qualification as Inspector of Meat and other Poods under examination of the Royal Society of Health. WATER SUPPLY. The major portion of the district is supplied with water from the mains of the Barnet District Water Company, the remainder, consisting of the western extremities, being served by the Colne Valley Water Company. All water supplied to the district is chlorinated, both Companys employing trained laboratory staff who take regular samples of water for examination at all stages of its treatment. During the year, the Barnet District Water Company's staff examined a total of 1 ,949 samples,of which 1,694 were bacteriological and 255 chemical. Of the bacteriological samples, 1 ,352 were representative of supply, and every one was found to be free from Type I B. Coli in 100 ml. quantities. This figure of 100/2 purity has been equalled only on one previous occasion, in 1957. The Company submitted 99 samples for investigation, both chemical and bacteriological, by an independent laboratory. Every treated water sample so examined proved likewise to be free from Type I B. Coli. It is to be noted that rainfall for the year was well below average. At the North Minims Pumping Station a fall of 21.86" was recorded, this quantity being only 69.9% of that recorded at North Mimms for the previous year, and 14.9% below the average, for a twenty-two year period, of 25.66". It was not, however, found necessary to impose any restrictions on the use of water. (6) The supply to the whole district is considered adequate. One cottage only is known not to "be connected to mains water supply, and action to secure its demolition was in train at the end of the year. DRAINAGE AND SEWERAGE. The town is drained and sewered on the separate system, excepting the older portions of the district where it is a combined system. The sewage is conveyed to a Sewage Disposal works of 56 acres, where it is screened, grit removed in detritus tanks, thence to primary settlement tanks and thereafter distributed over three 80 ft. diameter "bacteria filters, followed by humus removal in rectangular tanks before discharge to the Dollis Brook. Pumping is necessary for three sewers which have their outlets at a low point on the works. Part of the Totteridge area drains to the Finchley Borough sewers; in the outlying areas some properties are on cesspool drainage or domestic sewage disposal plants, and a few only have pail closets. With respect to the Barnet works, these have been overloaded for some years owing to the growth of the town, and will become redundant when the proposed East Middlesex trunk sewage scheme is brought to fruition. Complaints of smell from the farm have increased during recent years, as a consequence of which a trial was made of equipment designed to spray a deodorising fluid. This is barely out of the experimental stage, but results were promising and the Middlesex County Council have approved the installation of the system for use next year as may be necessary. SANITARY CONDITIONS AND WATER SUPPLY OF SCHOOLS. There are in the district fourteen schools administered by the South Herts Divisional Education Committee, viz:- Queen Elizabeth's Boys' Grammar School, Queens Road, Barnet. Queen Elizabeth's Girls' Grammar School, High Street, Barnet. Ravenscroft Secondary School;, Barnet Lane, N.20. Elizabeth Allen Voluntary Secondary School, Wood Street, Barnet. (with annexe at Byng Road, Barnet.) Whitings Hill Junior Mixed and Infants' School, Whitings Road. Barnet. Foulds Junior Mixed and Infants' School, Byng Road, Barnet. Christ Church Junior Mixed School, Alston Road, Barnet. Christ Church Infants' School, Alston Road, Barnet. Grasvenor Infants' School, Grasvenor Avenue, Barnet. Underhill Junior Mixed School, Mays Lane, Barnet. Underbill Infants' School, Mays Lane, Barnet. (7) St. Andrew's Voluntary Junior Mixed and Infants' School, Totteridge Green, N.20. St. Catherine's Roman Catholic Infants School, Union Street, Barnet. South Herts College of Further Education, Wood Street, Barnet. (Available for girls and boys aged 15 to 18 years during the day, and for persons over school-leaving age in the evening.) In addition to the above, there are four private schools, viz:- The Hill School, Totteridge Lane. N.20. Norfolk House School, Fitzjohn Avenue, Barnet. (Nursery School) St. Marthe's Convent School, Wood Street, Barnet. Mrs. Blundell's School, Southover, Woodside Park, N.12. (Nursery School) All schools in the district are supplied with mains water and are connected to the Council's main drainage system. DISPOSAL OF HOUSE REFUSE. The house refuse is collected weekly in covered mechanical conveyances and taken to the Council's Sewage Farm, where it is loaded into Contractor's covered lorries and disposed of daily by controlled tipping outside the district. PREVALENCE OF AND CONTROL OVE, INFECTIOUS DISEASE. The following table shews the number of Notifications to the Sanitary Authority during the year, of each disease specified in the Public Health Act 1936, and the various Infectious Disease Regulations, and the number of cases removed to Hospital. DISEASE NOTIFIED REMOVED TO HOSPITAL Scarlet Fever 13 3 Whooping Cough 6 Nil Diphtheria and Membranous Croup Nil Nil Measles 396 4 Acute Pneumonia 38 1 Meningococcal Infection 1 Nil Acute Poliomyelitis (Paralytic) 1 1 Acute Encephalitis Nil Nil Dysentery 16 10 Ophthalmia Neonatorum 1 1 Puerperal Pyrexia 30 30 Smallpox Nil Nil Malaria Nil Nil Typhoid and Enteric Fevers Nil Nil Paratyphoid Fever Nil Nil Food Poisoning 10 5 Erysipelas 7 4 Tuberculosis 12 12 TOTAlS 531 71 (8) AGE INCIDENCE OF INFECTIOUS DISEASE DISEASE NUMBER OF CASES NOTIFIED YEARS OF AGE 0- 1- 2- 3- 4- 5- 10- 15- 25- 45- 65- 75- Total Scarlet Fever — — — 1 1 8 1 2 _ — — — 13 Whooping Cough — 1 - — 2 1 — 1 1 - - - 6 Measles 9 30 46 44 54 192 18 2 1 - - — 396 Acute Pneumonia 1 — - — 1 5 1 2 7 11 9 1 38 Meningococcal Infection — — - - - - 1 - - - — - 1 Acute Poliomyelitis (Paralytic) — — — — 1 — — — —1 — — 1 Dysentery - 1 — - 1 5 1 1 5 1 1 - 1 16 Ophthalmia Neonatorum 1 — — — — — — — — — — — 1 Puerperal Pyrexia - - - — — - - 13 17 —; - - _ 30 Food Poisoning 3 2 2 — - - - 1 1 1 - - 10 Erysipelas _ — — — - - - 1 1 4 —. .. 1 7 TOTALS 14 34 48 45 59 212 22 23 33 17 9 3 519 Of the foregoing, the following cases normally resident outside the district were notified from the Barnet General Hospital and the Victoria Maternity Hospital. Scarlet Fever 1; Measles 2; Dysentery 6; Ophthalmia Neonatorum 1; Puerperal Pyrexia 28; Food Poisoning 5; Erysipelas 2. FOOD POISONING. Annual Return of Food Poisoning Notifications. Food Poisoning Notifications (Corrected) Returned to Registrar General. 1 st Quarter. 2nd Quarter. 3rd Quarter. 4th Quarter. Total. Deaths. 1 1 5 3 10 Nil Cases Otherwise Ascertained. 1st Quarter. 2nd Quarter. 3rd Quarter. 4th Quarter. Total. Deaths. Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil Symptomless Excreters. 1 st Quarter. 2nd Quarter. 3rd Quarter. 4th Quarter. Total. Deaths. Nil Nil 1 Nil Nil Nil Fatal Cases. 1st Quarter. 2nd Quarter. 3rd Quarter. 4th Quarter. Total. Deaths. Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil This year the increased incidence of infectious disease is almost entirely accounted for by the Measles outbreak which came on us in one of its regular cycles. There was a heavy occurrence of acute Pneumonia in the first quarter of the year, in fact the total for the year wa.s four times the annual average over the previous (9) ten years and twice the peak year in the same ten years. Concerning the five cases of Pood Poisoning normally resident in this district, although all were affected by the same organism, we were unable to find any connection between them. Some 232 registration cards were issued to members of the public in connection with the Poliomyelitis Vaccination Scheme. These were issued mainly to the young persons between 15 and 25 years of age who became eligible at the end of last year. Poliomyelitis Registration cards may still be obtained from the Vale Drive Clinic or the Public Health Department, 31 Wood Street, Barnet. TUBERCULOSIS. NEW CASES AND MORTALITY DURING 1959. YEARS OP AGE NEW CASES DEATHS Pulmonary Non - Pulnonary Pulmonary Non-Pulmonary M f M F M f M f 0 _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ 1 _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ 5 _ 1 _ _ _ _ _ _ 15 2 _ _ _ _ _ _ _ 25 _ _ _ - - - _ - 35 - 1 - 1 - - - - 45 1 1 - - 1 - - 55 3 - - - 1 - - — 65 and over 1 1 - - - - - - TOTALS 7 4 - 1 1 1 _ - Twelve new cases were notified during the year, 2 less than last year, making a total of two hundred and twelve on the Tuberculosis Register. The cases of Tuberculosis removed for treatment are usually sent to Clare Hall Sanatorium, South Minims, other patients with an infectious disease being sent to Coppett's Yfood Hospital, Muswell Hill, N.10. MASS RADIOGRAPHY. The Mass Radiography Unit of the North West Metropolitan Regional Hospital Board visited the district in October, when the Department assisted with publicity and parking facilities. During their stay the Unit dealt with 1,514 members of the general (10) public, attending without specific appointments during open sessions, and some 1 ,300 employees of local firms etc. Two active new cases of Tuberculosis were discovered in this search. PUBLIC HEALTH (PREVENTION OP TUBERCULOSIS) REGULATIONS. 1925. It has not been found necessary to take any action under the above Regulations relating to Tuberculous employees in the Milk Trade. PUBLIC HEALTH ACT, 1936, SECTION 172. COMPULSORY REMOVAL TO HOSPITAL OF CASES OF FUIMONARY TUBERCULOSIS. No action was necessary under the above Section. INTERNATIONAL VACCINATION CERTIFICATES. At the end of 1952 a new form was introduced for International Vaccination Certificates requiring authentication of the signature of the doctor performing vaccination or inoculation of persons proceeding overseas. During the year two hundred and ten such certificates were authenticated and marked with the internationally agreed stamp. NATIONAL ASSISTANCE ACT, 1948 - SECTION 47. NATIONAL ASSISTANCE (AMENDMENT) ACT. 1951 - SECTION 1. One Court Order and one Emergency Order were obtained during the year for the removal of two aged and infirm ladies, both living in insanitary conditions, one to Hospital and one to Part III accommodation. Neither were at all co-operative prior to removal but both settled down quite quickly and happily in their new surroundings. We were directly in touch with seven other aged persons during the year and by various means satisfactory solutions were arrived at. The visitors from the Old Peoples Welfare Committee perform an invaluable service in keeping in touch with many aged persons. The friendly visit and chat is welcomed by the aged who are helped with their day to day problems and, as necessary, they are guided to obtain assistance from the various services which are available. MORTAL STATISTICS. Of 286 deaths, 8 occurred under one year of age. (11) The The follwing were the major causes of death:- Heart Disease 94; Cancer 63 (35 males end 28 females); Vascular Lesions of Nervous system 42; Bronchitis 13; Pneumonia 18; Motor Vehicle accidents 2; Other accidents 3. MORTUARY ACCOMMODATION. Under arrangements made with the East Barnet Urban District Council their mortuary is available for the use of this district, and it was so used on eight occasions during the year. I am, Yours faithfully, ARTHUR L. HYATT, M.R.C.S.(Eng.), L.R.C.P. MEDICAL OFFICER OF HEALTH, (12) BARNET URBAN DISTRICT COUNCIL. CHIEF PUBLIC HEALTH INSPECTOR'S REPORT. Public Health Department, 31 Wood Street, Barnet. To the Chairman and Members of the Barnet Urban District Council. I have the honour to present my Annual Report for the year 1959. In 1958 the Council in conjunction with our neighbouring authority, Elstree Rural District Council, took preliminary steps to establish its first Smoke Control Area, on the L.C.C. Estate on the west side of the Barnet Bye Pass. The Minister's final approval was given in December 1959 and the Order will come into operation on 1st September, 1960. The Council also agreed to bring the 7,hole district under smoke control during the course of the next twenty years, i.e. by starting a new area each year of approximately 400 to 500 houses. The preliminary steps were taken to establish a second smoke control area involving 22 privately owned houses, 446 Council houses and 10 other premises, around and including the Council's Stanhope Estate. Details were submitted to the Minister for preliminary approval just before the close of the year. A considerable amount of office work is involved in creating these areas and in the initial stages many problems are encountered. As we get experience in the work I have no doubt that we shall gain more time for our many other duties which have suffered to some extent. My thanks are due to the staff of the Public Health Department for their support and enthusiasm in the increased work, and to all the officers of the Council for their co-operation throughout the year. INSPECTION OF DISTRICT. General inspections of the district have been carried out periodically and all complaints investigated. The process of serving a preliminary or intimation notice upon the person in default, specifying the works necessary to remedy the defects found, is usually (13) followed. It was found necessary to ask your authority to serve thirtysix Statutory Notices, where persons failed to comply with the preliminary notice, or the strict legal procedure was necessary in the first instance. SANITARY INSPECTION OF AREA. The following is a list of the number and nature of visits and inspections:- Visits re: Housing Acts 542 Visits re: nuisance and sanitary defects 890 Visits re: infectious diseases 218 Visits re: Petroleum Acts 146 Visits re: factories 99 Visits re: outworkers' premises 8 Visits re: food manufactories, cafes, etc 306 Visits re: ice cream and sampling 191 Visits re: overcrowding 2 Visits re: aged and infirm persons 41 Visits to inspect meat and other foods 628 Visits re: schools 32 Visits re: pollution of watercourses 25 Visits re: Rent Acts 70 Visits re: Clean Air Act. 274 Visits re: Tents, Caravans and Sheds 25 Visits re: Shops Acts 168 Visits re: keeping of animals 23 Visits re: rodent infestations 1,915 Visits re: other infestations 529 Miscellaneous visits 204 NUMBER OF NOTICES SERVED DURING- YEAR. Number of Informal Notices 88 Number of Statutory Notices 36 Informal Notices complied with 78 Statutory Notices complied with 43 SANITARY WORK AND REPAIRS. The following is a list of repairs effected as a result of informal and formal notices served:- Roofs repaired and made weatherproof 52 Gutters, downspouts repaired and renewed 33 Exterior brickwork repaired or repointed 72 Walls, dampness remedied 65 Chimney stacks and pots repaired or renewed 26 Yard surfaces repaired or repaved 10 Ceilings repaired or renewed 32 Wall plaster repaired or renewed 93 Walls and ceilings cleansed and decorated 106 Floors repaired or renewed 21 (14) Staircases repaired 45 Doors and frames repaired or renewed 45 Windows repaired 120 Food Stores provided or ventilated 7 Fireplaces repaired or renewed 10 Drains and sewage disposal plants cleared 7 Drains and sewage disposal plants repaired or reconstructed 4 Inspection chambers repaired or reconstructed 1 Soil or vent pipes repaired or renewed 9 Gullies, channels and fenders repaired or renewed 12 Water Closet pans , fittings, repaired or renewed 23 Sinks, waste pipes, etc. , repaired or renewed 9 Storage cisterns, cleaned, repaired or renewed 13 Water services repaired, renewed or re-instated 6 Dustbins renewed 3 Cesspools abolished 4 HOUSING. The final five houses included in the St. Albans Road/Alston Road Clearance Area were razed, the year seeing the completion of private development of the site by the erection of maisonettes. Two cottages owned by the Council were certified as being unfit for habitation and the tenants were rehoused: negotiations were commenced with the Middlesex County Council for the cottages to be used in connection with training for the Rescue Section of Civil Defence. Five houses were demolished by the respective owners following the rehousing of occupiers; work was also commenced on a terrace of seven properties following Orders made in the previous year. Demolition Orders made during the year totalled twelve in number, and although five tenants were rehoused before the close of the year no demolitions were effected. These will wait until the remaining tenants in each block of houses are rehoused. Demolition Orders were revoked in respect of two houses following completion of works. The number of applications for Certificates of Disrepair under the Rent Act 1957, remains the same as last year and, even including enquiries, has not caused much demand on our services. There follows a brief summary of the certificates etc. , issued or refused:- Applications for Certificates of Disrepair 8 Landlords' undertakings accepted 3 Certificates of Disrepair issued 5 Applications for Cancellation of Certificates 7 Certificates of Disrepair cancelled 3 Certificates of Disrepair not cancelled, as tenants' objection sustained by Council 4 (15) No cases of overcrowding,as defined by the Act, have come to light and in this connection it is interesting to note that the rate of occupancy of houses which was steadily falling just prior to World War II, when the rate in 1939 was 3.27 persons per house, then rose during and immediately after the war to a peak in 1948 of 3.64. Since that year there has been a regular decline and the rate now stands at 3.16 persons per house, i.e. less than pre-war, and this in spite of a growing population in the district, now almost 4,400 more than for 1939. PUBLIC HEALTH ACT, 1936. INFECTIOUS DISEASE INVESTIGATION MP DISINFECTION. Investigations have been carried out of the more important cases of infectious disease listed in the Medical Officer of Health's Report. Where necessary, premises are disinfected and "bedding is taken for disinfection to the Barnet General Hospital under arrangements made with the Barnet Group Hospital Management Committee. Two hundred and sixty-three library books were disinfected before return to libraries, a considerable increase over the previous year, due to the measles epidemic. FOOD PREMISES IN THE DISTRICT. Number of Bakers 8 Butchers 13 " " Cafes, Restaurants, etc 15 " " Confectioners 24 " " Fishmongers 5 " " Greengrocers 14 " " Grocers 35 " " Licensed Premises 28 " " Chemists 7 FOOD PREMISES REGISTERED UNDER SECTION OF FOOD AND DRUGS (a) Manufacture, Sale and Storage of Ice Cream 44 (b) Manufacture of sausages and preserved meats, etc 21 DAIRIES REGISTERED UNDER MILK AND DAIRIES GENERAL REGULATIONS. Number of Dairies 2 Any infringements found are rectified or remedied by informal action (16) when pointed out to the trader, and no formal action was needed. During our visits of inspection every opportunity is taken to discuss food hygiene with staff and management and to show what steps are necessary to comply with the regulations and to improve hygiene generally. Walls and ceilings cleansed 5 Floors repaired 1 Yards and Gullies cleansed 3 Dustbins renewed 1 Handbasins provided 3 Soap and towels provided 2 During the summer the owners of Barnet Cattle Market ceased operating it as such and turned the premises over to use as a Stall Market, opening twice weekly on Wednesdays and Saturdays. This raised problems pertaining to the facilities to be provided for stallholders, viz: sanitary accommodation, water supply, drainage, lighting, etc. Certain temporary measures were taken by the owners at the request of the Department: at the close of the year negotiations were proceeding towards making provisions of a more permanent nature. The food stalls have been the subject of close surveillance with a view to securing the individual stall-holders' compliance with matters relating to Pood Hygiene falling within their immediate province as distinct from the responsibilities of the market owner. The individual trades are subject to variation, but on average comprise the following:- Number of Butchers 1 " " Poulterers 1 " " Snack Bars 1 " 11 Confectioners 1 " " Fishmongers 1 " " Greengrocers 3 " " Grocers 2 SHOPS ACT. 1950. No formal action has been necessary under the provisions of this Act and informal action has secured the provision of various notices required to be displayed regarding closing hours in "mixed" shops: in one instance additional sanitary and washing accommodation was required in order to provide for separation of the sexes. Building plans deposited with the Surveyor's Department for Byelaw approval in There is one company registered for the manufacture of ice-cream and the following table gives the results of samples taken from the factory. Grade 114 (78.6%) Grade II 19 (91.7% - Grades I and II) Grade III 11 ( 7.6%) Grade IV 1 ( 0.7%) Comparing with last year's results, it is found that this year, there is a small increase of the percentage in Grade I hut with a lower percentage in Grades I and II; this is due to an increase in those of Grade III. Overall the results are not quite so good as last year's figures, hut with the exception of one sample in Grade IV the results are well within the standard mentioned earlier in this part of the report. There are also forty-three premises registered for the storage and sale of ice cream, adding two new registrations during the year. DAIRIES, COWSHEDS AND MILKSHOPS. The control of the production of milk is vested in the Ministry of Agriculture Fisheries and Food. The local authority is responsible for the inspection and registration of milk distributors and other dairy premises not directly concerned with the (17) connection with shop premises are referred to this Department for consideration under the provisions of the Shops Act. ICE CREAM. All samples of ice-cream are taken to the Central Public Health Laboratory Colindale, for testing by the Methylene Blue Test. This is merely indicative and provides no legal standard: the Public Health Laboratory Service suggest that owing to the numerous factors governing the hygienic quality of ice-cream it is unwise to pay too much attention to the bacteriological results on any single sample, judgement being based rather on a series of samples. It is suggested as desirable that at least 50% should fall into Grade I, 80% into Grades I or II, not more than 20% into Grade III and none into Grade IV. Seven samples taken from retailers in the district were all returned as Grade I. (18) actual production of milk, and for licensing for the sale of Designated Milks. Eighteen samples of milk have been taken, in course of delivery to the consumer, and submitted to the appropriate tests with the following results:- Designation Samples Taken Satisfactory Unsatisfactory Tuberculin Tested (Pasteurised) 2 2 Nil Pasteurised 11 10 1 Pasteurised (Homogenised) 2 2 Nil Pasteurised (Channel Islands) 2 2 Nil Sterilised 1 1 Nil Totals 18 17 1 Regarding the one unsatisfactory sample, this satisfied the Phosphatase Test, indicating that it has been properly processed, "but failed the Methylene Blue Test. This would emply undue bacterial activity. The matter was taken up with the Dairy Company concerned, who offered as explanation that, by some mischance, the milk had been of a previous day's delivery which should not have been re-issued to the roundsman. Further check samples were satisfactory. No official action was taken under Regulation 20 of the Milk and Dairies General Regulations 1959, to stop or restrict the sale of milk. No cases of disease were notified which could be attributed to the consumption of infected milk. Eleven Dealer's Licences and twenty-one Supplementary Licences were granted for the retail sale of milk under the Milk (Special Designation) (Raw Milk) Regulations, 1949 and 1950, and the Milk (Special Designation) (Pasteurised and Sterilised Milk) Regulations, 194-9 and 1950, viz:- I Designation Dealer's Licences. Supplementary Licences. Tuberculin Tested 3 7 Pasteurised 4 7 Sterilised 4 7 (19) FOOD AND DRUGS ACT . 1955. The Council acquired these powers under the Act concerning the adulteration and sophistication of food as from 1st October 1955. The summary on the next page contains the results of seventy¬eight samples taken by this Department. All unsatisfactory samples are reported to the Council and the following ere brief comments on them. Ammoniated Tincture of Quinine. This item has a seasonal sale and when purchased in August had deteriated during storage. On drawing the retailer's attention to the deficiency in ammonia, he withdrew the remaining stock from sale. The contents of a tin of this product were found by your Public Analyst to be liquified and unfit for human consumption. On attempting to get further samples the retailer was only able to supply two tins, the last of his stock. One of these was in good condition and one unfit for human consumption. Peeled Prawns. This was an attractive transparent plastic pack, from a deep freeze cabinet, which appeared to be in good condition. Your Analyst found upon opening the pack that the contents were unsound. The retailer, from whom the sample was purchased, when revisited had no further stock. Similar packs were purchased from other retailers and sent to the Public Health Laboratory Service at Colindale who reported favourably on the bacterial state of the contents. Sweets. A resident brought to the office three packets of a chocolate coated nut confection among the contents of which were insect webbing and eggs. These were sent to your Analyst for identification and report. The Council authorised the institution of proceedings which will be heard early in the new year. (20) A complainant produced an opened tin of ham and chicken roll and embedded in the meat was a fly of the blue bottle type. The Council authorised proceedings to be taken which resulted in a fine of £5-0-0d "being imposed. Similarly, a complainant brought to the office an almost empty bottle of cream on the bottom of which was a lump of glass resembling part of a bottle. Proceedings were taken resulting in a fine of £l0-0-0d and costs. Article No. Examined No. Adulterated Etc. Formal Informal Total Formal Informal Total Ammoniated Tincture of Quinine — 1 1 — 1 1 Cereals — 3 3 — - - Cheese Spread — - 1 — - - Cheese and Bacon Spread — 1 1 - - — Chicken Croquette — 1 1 - - - Chicken Puffs - 1 1 - - - Chicklettes — 1 1 — _ - Chocolate, Drinking - 1 1 — - - Coconut — 1 1 — - - Coffee and Chicory - 2 2 - - — Cooking Pat — 1 1 — - — Crab, Dressed — - 2 — - - Cream — 1 1 - - - Decorating Jelly — 1 1 — - - Dessert Moulds — 4 4 - - - Pish Paste _ 2 2 — - - Pish Sticks — 1 1 - - - Fruit Sauce - 1 1 - - - Game Pate - 1 1 - - - Herring Tid Bits - 2 2 — 2 2 Horseradish — 1 1 - - - Icing Mixture — 1 1 — - - Loaf, sliced — 1 1 — - - Lolly — 1 1 - — - Mace, Ground - 1 1 _ - - Margarine — 1 1 — - - Marmalade — 1 1 - - - Meat Paste — 2 2 - — - Meats and Meat Products — 8 8 - — - Milk 9 - 9 - - - Milk, Condensed - 1 1 — — - Milk Flavouring — 1 1 — — — Mock Salmon Cutlet — 1 1 — - — Mushrooms, sliced — 1 1 - - - Orange Squash — 1 1 — - — Peel, Candied — 1 1 — — — Pepper - 2 2 — — — Powdered Soup - 1 1 — - — Prawns, Peeled — 1 1 — 1 1 Ratafias — 1 1 - - — Rice — 2 2 - - Saccharin Tablets — 1 1 - - - Sal Volatile — 1 1 - — - Sauce — 1 1 - - - Sweets and Confectionery - 3 3 — 1 1 Tea — 2 2 — - - Turkey Croquette - 1 1 - - - Vinegar, Malt - 1 1 - - - Total 9 69 78 - 5 5 (21) MERCHANDISE MARKS ACT. 1926. The Council became the authority for enforcing the provisions of these Acts and Orders made thereunder when they were designated a Pood and Drugs Authority. No contraventions were noted. MEAT AND FOOD CONDEMNED. The following is a list of the articles of food condemned as unfit for human consumption during the year. Meat. Fresh Meat. Canned Meat. Beef (English) 175 lbs. Corned Beef 13 lbs. Pork " 233½ lbs. Luncheon Meat 9½ lbs. Throat Breads (imported) 2 lbs. Steak 3¾ lbs. Ox Liver " 10 lbs. Tongues 12½ lbs. Fish. Sardines and Brisling 7 tins. Salmon 4 tins. Dressed Crab 2 tins. Pilchards 20 tins. General. Vegetables 36 tins. Jam 3 tins. Fruit 40 lbs. and 163 tins. Marmalade 4 tins. Milk 32 pts. and 8 tins. Rice Pudding 1 tin. Cream 2 tins. Spaghetti 1 tin. Soup 1 tin. Dates 1 pkt. Condemned food is taken to the disposal point on the Sewage Farm, where tins are thoroughly perforated and loose food is stained and mixed with household refuse before onward transmission to the controlled tip outside the district. PRIVATE SLAUGHTERHOUSES . AND SLAUGHTER OF ANIMALS ACT. 1958. There is only one slaughterhouse, privately owned, operating in the district and your inspectors maintain a high percentage of inspection "by evening and week¬end visits. Slaughtering is carried on six days per week, the exception being Friday, and the general system with regard to the timing of slaughtering is that adult Bovines are slaughtered early in the day's work, proceeding to the "smalls" and in this latter category, calves are usually left until last. This accounts for the 100% inspection of Cattle and Cows, shown in the (22) following table, and the lower percentage of inspection for Calves. However, good co-operation exists between your inspectors and the owner and his slaughtermen who retain for our inspection on the following day any carcase presenting signs of disease or injury. The majority of the condemned meat and offals is taken away by a reputable firm for manufacture into useful by-products, e.g. fertilisers etc. Total weight of carcase meat condemned:- Bovine 2,872 lbs. Ovine 90 lbs. Porcine 302 lbs. 3,264 lbs. Total weight of offals condemned 6,435 lbs. CARCASES AND OFFAL INSPECTED AND CONDEMNED IN WHOLE OR IN PART. Cattle excluding Cows Cows Calves Sheep and Lambs Pigs Number killed (if known) 870 617 1 ,864 5,402 4,144 Number inspected 870 617 1,337 5,245 3,817 All diseases except Tuberculosis and Cysticerci Whole carcases condemned - 5 4 2 5 Carcases of which some part or organ was condemned 211 255 4 65 115 Percentage of the number inspected affected with disease other than tuberculosis and cysticerci 24.26 42.14 0.60 1.28 3.14 Tuberculosis only: Whole carcases condemned - — — — — Carcases of which some part or organ was condemned 7 11 - - 52 Percentage of the number inspected affected with tuberculosis 0.80 1.78 - - 1.36 Cysticercosis: Carcases of which some part or organ was condemned 7 _ _ - - Caroases submitted to treatment by refrigeration 5 - - - - Generalised and totally condemned - - - - - The percentage of bovines affected by Tuberculosis shows a sharp decline again this year and we see a decrease in the percentage of pigs affected with the disease. (23) This improvement in the disease rate in "both types of animals is a direct result of the Government's eradication scheme, which now covers the area from which the slaughterhouse draws its stock. There were eleven persons licensed by the Council as fit persons to slaughter animals, most of them work part or full time as slaughtermen at the local slaughterhouse. Some have employment outside the district and no complaint has been received from other districts concerning the conduct of any of these men, nor was there any need for adverse report on the men locally employed. REPORT REQUIRED BY SECTION 128(3) OP THE FACTORIES ACT. 1937. Inspection for purposes of provision as to health. Number on Register. Inspections Written Notices Occupiers Prosecuted (l) Factories in -which Sees. 1 , 2, 35 4 and 6 are to be enforced by Local Authorities. 3 - - - (2) Factories not included in (l) in which Sec. 7 is enforced by the Local Authority. 92 99 - - (3) Other premises in which Sec. 7 is enforced by the Local Authority 3 _ - - Total 98 99 - - One informal notice was served requiring provision of adequate sanitary accommodation in a factory. Outworkers (Sections 110 and 111) Section 110 Section 111 No. of outworkers on lists received. No. of instances of work in unwholesome premises. Notices Served. 71 — Sixteen outworkers reside in the district. Eight premises were visited and home conditions were found to be entirely satisfactory,, The names and addresses of the other outworkers are notified to the district councils in which they live. Two new certificates and one amended certificate as to adequate means of escape in case of fire were issued under (24) section 34 of the Act during the year, after necessary works were carried out. PUBLIC HEALTH ACT. 1956 - SECTION 60. Escape from Fire - Certain High Buildings. In co-operation with the County Fire Protection Officer, informal action secured improved means of escape from fire at a nursing home. Where plans are deposited with the Surveyor's Department under the building byelaws, and it appears that section 60 applies to the building, the plans are passed to this department for inspection so that any works which may be necessary are carried out with the other building works. HERTFORDSHIRE COUNTY COUNCIL ACT. 1955. Provision is made in this Act for the conduct and regulation of:- (l) Tents, Caravans and Sheds; (2)Hairdressers' and Barbers' Premises; (3) Swimming Baths and Pools , and (4) Employment Agencies. Tents. Caravans and Sheds. The vans attending the Barnet Pair were visited to enquire as to any infectious diseases and as to their sanitary condition. The provision of temporary sanitary accommodation was required in different sections of the fair for the use of the caravanners and public, and regular removal of refuse was arranged. Inspections are also made of food stalls to secure hygienic conditions. Hairdressers' and Barbers' Premises. There are fourteen such establishments in the district. A complaint concerning lack of cleanliness at one establishment was dealt with informally. Public Swimming Baths and Bathing Pools. The only Swimming pool in the district, viz, at "The Bam" , Barnet Bye-Pass, is not now in use. Employment Agencies. At the request of the County Council two premises were inspected in connection with applications made for use as Employment Agencies, and reports forwarded to the County Council. (25) HOME COUNTIES (MUSIC AND DANCING) LICENSING ACT, 1926. HERTFORDSHIRE (MUSIC AND DANCING) REGULATIONS, 1956. Under the new regulations made by the County Council a report from the local district council is required regarding the suitability and sufficiency of sanitary arrangements at premises for Music and Dancing before licences are issued. Reports were requested in respect of three premises; in each case the arrangements were satisfactory. RAG FLOCK ACT, 1951. This Act controls the use of filling materials in the making of upholstery. The premises of one furniture manufacturer are registered under the Act. PET ANIMALS ACT, 1951. This Act gives the local Authority, inter alia, power to grant licences to persons to keep pet shops for the sale of pet animals and to attach to the licences conditions concerning the cleanliness and general management of the premises: one shop gave up this type of business and one changed hands during the year, leaving four persons licensed in the district. No complaints were received nor were any major contraventions of the conditions observed during visits of inspection. RODENT CONTROL. Prevention of Damage by Pests Act. 1949. A full time rodent operator is employed for treatment of infestations of rats and mice. The table on the opposite page gives details of the work carried out during the year. A test bait is made of 10% of the soil sewer manholes in the district, from the results of which are based the two maintenance treatments of the sewers. The test bait in April resulted in seven complete "takes" and three partial "takes" of bait out of a total of seventy-eight manholes tested. Following this up in may, some thirty-seven manholes were baited; "takes" were recorded in fifteen cases and these were poison baited. We were (26) unable to carry out the second maintenance treatment owing to the illness of the Rodent Operator at the appropriate time. No charge is made for the use of the Rodent Operator's services in treating private domestic premises, provided that the occupiers co-operate in carrying out their duties under the Act. The cost of treatments at all other premises is recoverable. Type of Property Local Authority Dwelling Houses Agricultural All other (including Business Premises) Total Number of Properties inspected as a result of:(a) Notification 4 162 2 31 199 (b) Survey under the Act 6 205 13 56 280 (c) Otherwise - 13 2 8 23 Total inspections carried out including re-inspections 17 440 21 151 629 Number of properties found to be infested by:Major (a) Rats Minor 1 1 - 1 3 8 114 8 28 158 Major (b) Mice Minor - 1 - - 1 2 98 - 14 115 Number of Properties treated by the Local Authority 11 214 9 43 - 277 Total treatments carried out including re-treatments 13 298 11 52 374 Number of "Block" control scheme.s carried out 41 OTHER INFESTATIONS. There was an increase in the requests for assistance and advice on dealing with infestations, amounting to two hundred and ninety-nine enquiries, the majority of which concerned wasps. During the year three hundred and sixty-two wasps nests were destroyed on Council lands, etc. , and privately owned properties. A small charge is made for this service to householders. The infestations cover a variety of insects and other pests, e.g. beetles, ants, cockroaches, fleas, flies, silver fish, woolly bears, woodworm and bugs. (27) We are assisted in the identification of some of these insects by the British Museum (Natural History Section) the staff of which give prompt answers to our queries. Small quantities of insecticides are distributed and in some cases the power sprayer is loaned to assist. During the year the department started a disinfestation treatment on one of the Council's housing estates where many of the houses were infested with Cockroaches. A pressurised powder blower was used to put insecticide powder under the ground floor boards and both powder and liquid were used internally around the fire places, cupboards, door frames and skirting boards. HEATING APPLIANCES (FIREGUARDS) ACT. 1952. No contraventions were found, this year, of the standards set by the Act and Regulations for fireguards on heating appliances. PETROLEUM f REGULATION) ACTS. 1928 AND 1936. Two licences for the storage of petroleum spirit in underground tanks were discontinued during the year, one licencee having changed his vehicles to dieselburaing and the other being swept away by road works. One new licence was issued for petroleum mixtures: thirty-two premises remained on the Register. At the end of the year the total quantity for which licences were on issue, in respect of petroleum spirit and petroleum mixtures, stood at 39 ,430 gallons. The process of testing the older installations, in line with the requirements of the Licence Conditions, has continued, any small defects being remedied at the time. All licenceeswith electrically operated pumps have been reminded that 1st January 1960, is the deadline by which such apparatus will be required to be of approved flameproof construction and installation and some new appliances have been installed during the year. I am, Yours obediently, J.B. Wilson. Chief Public Health Inspector.