LIBRARY UB AR 15 URBAN DISTRICT OF B A R H E T. ANNUAL REPORT of the ACTING MEDICAL OFFICER OF HEALTH to the BARNET URBAN DISTRICT COUNCIL by ARTHUR L. HYATT, M.R.C.S.(Eng.), L.R.C.P. Together with the ANNUAL REPORT of the CHIEF SANITARY AND HOUSING INSPECTOR by CHAS. WILLIAM HILL, M.S.I.A. 1947. (2) ANNUAL REPORT of the ACTING MEDICAL OFFICER OF HEALTH to the BARNET URBAN DISTRICT COUNCIL by ARTHUR L. HYATT, M.R.C.S.(Eng.), L.R.C.P. ACTING MEDICAL OFFICER OF HEALTH. (3) BARNET URBAN DISTRICT COUNCIL, MEDICAL OFFICER'S REPORT. Public Health Department, 31 Wood Street, Barnet. To the Chairman and Members of the Barnet Urban District Council. Gentlemen, I have much pleasure in presenting to you my Annual Report on the Health of the District for the year 1947. It is drawn up on the lines indicated in Circular 170/47 of the 31st December, 1947 - as requested by the Ministry of Health. STATISTICS AND SOCIAL CONDITIONS OF THE AREA. Area (in acres) 1931 3>H4 Area added in April, 1935 1>176 Total Area (in acres) 4,290 Population (1931 Census) 14,726 Population of Added Area J^8 Registrar-General1s Estimate of Resident Population, mid 1947 23,93® Number of Inhabited Houses, 1947 6,637 Rateable Value £257>892 Sua represented (deluding Totteridge and Rowley £703 bv a Pennv Rate (excluding Totteridge £746 (including Totteridge and Rowley £1,030 NATURAL AND SOCIAL CONDITIONS. The population is largely residential, and consists chiefly of people whose occupation lies outside the urban area. Those employed in the district, apart from the tradesmen and their employees, are mainly skilled workers at dental manufacturing, lithographic, printing and optical works. Relief is supplied by the Public Assistance Committee of the Hertfordshire County Council. ■j n • • • (4) EXTRACT FROM VITAL AND MORTAL STATISTICS OF THE. ZEAR Total. M. F. Live Births (Legitimate 452 222 230 (Illegitimate 18 9 9 Birth Rate per 1,000 of the estimated resident population: 19.64 Total. M. F. Still Births (Legitimate 11 8 3 (Illegitimate Nil Nil Nil Still Birth Rate per 1.000 total (live and still) Births: 22.87 Total. M. F. Deaths 284 153 131 Death Rate per 1,000 of the estimated average population; 11.87 Deaths from puerperal causes:- Puerperal Sepsis: Nil. Death Rate per 1,000 total births: Nil. Other Puerperal causes: Nil. " " " " " " : Nil. Death Rate from Puerperal causes per 1,000 total (live and still) Births: Nil. Death Rate of Infants under one year of ages- All infants per 1,000 live births: 21.28 Legitimate infants per 1,000 legitimate live births: 17.70 Illegitimate infants per 1,000 illegitimate live births: 111.11 Deaths from Cancer (ill ages): 41 " " Measles (all ages): Nil " " Whooping Cough (all ages): Nil " " Diarrhoea (under 2 years of age): 1 GENERAL PROVISION OF HEALTH SERVICES FOR THE DISTRICT. Hospitals provided or subsidised by the Local Authority or County Council. A. (l) Infectious Diseases Joint Isolation Hospital in Barnet. (2) Joint Smallpox Hospital at Cheshunt. B. (l) Tuberculosis Hospital at Ware, provided by Herts. County Council. (2) Maternity block with 52 beds at the tollhouse Hospital in Barnet. Ambulance Facilities. Infectious Disease - Motor Ambulance at Isolation Hospital. Non-Infectious Disease - Two Motor Ambulances. (1) Relieving Officer's Cases and Accidents:- By Day and Night - 'phone BARnet 0051, Wellnouse Hospital, Barnet. (2) Private Cases By Day and Night - 'phone BARnet 2335* 2,158 cases of Non-Infectious Disease were removed by the Motor Ambulances. (5) Clinic and Treatment Centres. A Child Welfare and Ante-Natal Clinic is held every Tuesday at "Fieldways", Wellhouse Lanej; also a Dental Clinic every Monday, Thursday, Friday and Saturday. A Tuberculosis Clinic is held every Wednesday ab the Wellhouse Hospital. At Vale Drive, a Minor Ailments Clinic for Schoolchildren is held every morning from Monday to Friday inclusive, and every Wednesday a Speech Therapy Clinic. At "Dollisfield", Totteridge Lgne, a Child Welfare Clinic is held every Friday afternoon. There are two hospitals within the district: (a) a General Hospital (Wellhouse) under the Public Assistance Committee of the Herts. County Council, and (b) The Victoria Hospital; there are also three Nursing Homes for paying patients. The Barnet Nursing Association provides three Nurses. The hospital accommodation for the istrict is adequate. The Infectious Disease Joint Isolation Hospital provides 54 beds in 3 blocks, one being a cubicle block. There is an operating theatre and a Nuffield Respirator. PUBLIC HEALTH STAFF. Acting Medical Officer of Health. ø E Arthur L. Hyatt, M.R.C.S.(Eng.), L.R.C.P. Chief Sanitary Inspector. + ø Charles William Hill, M.S.I,A. Additional Sanitary Inspectors. + ø John Baillie Wilson, A.R.San.I., M.S.I.A. + ø Alex. W. Nicol, A R.San I., M.S.I.A. Clerical Staff. One Clerk. One Typist (Post Vacant.) + Holds the special qualification as Inspector of Meat and Other Foods under examination of the Royal Sanitary Institute. ø Salary Contribution of one half from Exchequer Grants, E Part-time Officer. . ■ o.i: ■ .. ..; (6) WATER SUPPLY. The water for the District is supplied by the Barnet District Gas & Water Company and the Colne Valley Water Company. With regard to the Barnet District Gas & Water Company, all the water is Chlorinated, and.a pathological staff is maintainor The water, in bulk, is examined daily, and each pumping station once a week. 1,377 Chemical and Bacteriological examinations of the water were made during the year, of which 34 Chemical and 65 Bacteriological samples were analysed by an independent laboratory. Of the Bacteriological samples representative of supply, the percentage of first class (i.e. Coliform organisms absent in 100 millilitres) was 99-52%, which is regarded as quite satisfactory. The Colne Valley Water Company exercises constant supervision, and members of the staff are on duty day and night throughout the year examining samples. All the water supplied by this Company is chlorinated. The water supply is satisfactory both from the Chemical and Bacteriological aspects and the supply is considered adequate. DRAINAGE AND SEWERAGE. The town is drained and sewered on the separate system, excepting the older portions of the district where it is a combined system. The sewage is conveyed to an Irrigation Farm of 56 acres, but before it is turned on the land it is screened and treated by means of detritus and sedimen- tation tanks, and three rotary .filters. Pumping is necessary for three sewers which have their outlets at a low point on the farm. A few outlying properties are drained to cesspools, and part of Totteridge to the Finchley Borough sewers. There are only a few earth closets in remote parts of the district. SANITARY CONDITIONS AND WATER SUPPLY OF SCHOOLS. There arc in the district nine schools administered, by the Barnet Education Committee, viz:- Queen Elizabeth's Boys and Girls Grammar Schools^ Byng Road County Council School (Secondary Modern, Junior Mixed and Infants Departments); Christ Church School (Junior Boys and Girls, and Infants Departments); Wood Street Church of England School (Secondary Modern); Grasvenor Avenue School (Infants); Underhill County Council School (Infants)j Totteridge Church of England ■ • • . 'O '■ ' . (7) School (Junior Mixed and Infants Departments) and St. Catherine's Roman Catholic School (Junior Mixed and Infants Departments). DISPOSAL OF HOUSE REFUSE. The house refuse is collected weekly in covered mechanical conveyances and conveyed to the Farm and disposed of by the controlled tipping system. PREVALENCE OF. AND CONTROL OVER. INFECTIOUS DISEASES. The following table shews the number of Notifications to the Sanitary Authority during the year, of each disease specified in the Public Health Act, 1936, and the Regulations, and the number removed to Hospital:- NATURE OF INFECTIOUS DISEASE NOTIFIED REMOVED TO HOSPITAL DEATHS Smallpox Nil Nil Nil Cholera Nil Nil Nil Scarlet Fever 14 8 Nil Typhus Nil Nil Nil Diphtheria and Membranous Croup. 2 2 Nil Malaria Nil Nil Nil Ophthalmia Neonatorum Nil Nil Nil Erysipelas 7 5 Nil Tuberculosis 24 10 6 Poliomyelitis 5 5 Nil Meningitis 2 2 Nil Encephalitis Nil Nil Nil Puerperal Pyrexia 22 21 Nil Pneumonia 56 45 23 Enteric 1 Nil Nil Typhoid 1 1 Nil Dysentery Nil Nil Nil Measles 98 12 Nil Whooping Cough 76 4 Nil TOTALS 3O8 115 29 < ' (8) Of the foregoing, the following cases normally resident outside the district were notified from the Wellhouse Hospital:- Erysipelas 1; Puerperal Pyrexia 17; Pneumonia 29; Cerebro Spinal Meningitis 2; Whooping Cough 4; Measles 63 Poliomyelitis 1. The cases of Tuberculosis removed are chiefly sent to Ware Sanatorium. The Case Rates per 1,000 of the population are cs follows:- Scarlet Fever 0.59} Tuberculosis 1.00; Puerperal Pyrexia 10.40 (per 1,000 Births). AGE INCIDENCE OF INFECTIOUS DISEASE. DISEASE NUMBER OF CASES NOTIFIED YEARS OF AGE 0- 1- 2- 3- 4- 5- 10- 15- 20- 35- 45- 65- Total Scarlet Fever - - - - 3 5 2 l 3 - - - 14 Diphtheria - - - - - - - 2 - - - - 2 Enteric - - - - l - - - - - - - 1 Typhoid - - - - - - - - l - - - 1 Meningitis 2 - - - - - - - - - - - 2 Poliomyelitis - - - - - 2 - 2 l - - - 5 Whooping Cough 10 4 12 9 6 31 1 - 2 - 1 - 76 Erysipelas - - - - - - - - 2 l 2 2 7 Measles 2 10 11 9 14 34 7 5 4 2 - - 98 Puerperal Pyrexia - - - - - - - 1 17 4 - - 22 Pneumonia 6 1 3 - 2 4- 1 - 8 3 14 14 56 TOTALS 20 15 26 18 26 76 11 11 38 10 17 16 284 MORTAL STATISTICS, Of 284 deaths, 10 occurred under one year of age. The following were the chief causes of death:- Heart Disease 87; Cancer 41 (15 males and 26 females); Intra-cranial Vascular Lesions 33> Pneumonia (all forms) 23; Bronchitis 16; Tuberculosis 6; Congenital Debility and Malformation 4; Suicide 5J Road Traffic Accidents 75 Other Violence 6. (9) CONTROL OF INFECTIOUS DISEASE- No use has been made of the Schick and Dick Tests in Diphtheria and Scarlet Fever. VACCINATION, No primary or revaccinations were performed by the Medical Officer of Health under the Public Health (Smallpox Prevention) Regulations, 1917. LABORATORY WORK, The Council have made arrangements with the Clinical Research Association for examination and reports on all suspected cases of Diphtheria, Scarlet Fever, Typhoid Fever^ Tuberculosis, Dysentery and Food Poisoning. specimens were examined and reported upon as folio- rs:- Positive. Negative. Scarlet Fever - 2 Diphtheria - 22 Tuberculosis 1 15 Dysentery - 18 Food Poisoning 1 1 TUBERCULOSIS. NEW CASES AND MORTALITY DURING 1947. YEARS OF AGE. NEW CASES DEATHS Pulmonary Non-Pulmonary Pulmonary Non-Pulmonary M. F. M. F. M. F. M. F. 0 — _ _ _ _ 1 - - _ - - - - - 5 _ 1 1 - - - - - 15 2 4 _ - — — - _ 25 2 5 - - 2 1 - - 35 3 2 1 - 1 1 - - 45 - 2 - - - 1 - - 55 - - - - _ — _ - 65 and over 1 - - - - - - TOTALS 8 14 2 - 3 3 - - The six deaths from Tuberculosis were all previously notified cases, from (10) which it would appear that the notification of Tuberculosis is efficiently carried out. There were no cases of wilful neglect or of refusal to notify Tuberculosis in any form. PUBLIC HEALTH (PREVENTION OF TUBERCULOSIS) REGULATIONS. 1925. It has not been found necessary to take any action under the above Regulations, relating to Tuberculous employees in the Milk Trade. PUBLIC HEALTH ACT. 1936. SECTION 172. COMPULSORY REMOVAL TO HOSPITAL OF CASES OF PULMONARY TUBERCULOSIS. No action was necessary under the above Section. DIPHTHERIA IMMUNISATION. During the year, 459 children completed the full course of Immunisation, as follows:- Under 5 years of age: 261 5 - 15 years of age: 198 In addition, children received a third (booster) injection. The following is the estimated percentage of children resident in the district who have received Immunisation at any time up to 31st December, 1947:- Under 5 years of age: 48$ 5 - 15 years of age: 55^ SCABIES (PUBLIC HEALTH) NO. 1 ORDER. 1944. The following are particulars of cases pf Scabies treated in the district. Adults. Schoolchildren. Under 5 Yrs. Treated at Cleansing Station: 40 7 4 Treated at home: 7 1 _ 47 8 4 Precautionary Treatments 4 8 _ I am, Yours faithfully, ARTHUR L. HYATT, M.R.C.S. (Eng.), L.R.C.P. ACTING MEDICAL OFFICER OF HEALTH. (11) HOUSING STATISTICS. 1. Inspection of duelling houses during the year:- (a) (i) Total number of dwelling houses inspected for housing dofoots (under Public Health or Housing Acts). 627 (ii) Number of inspections made for the purpose. 794 (b) (i) Number of dwelling houses (included under sub-head (a) above) which were inspected and recorded under the Housing Consolidated Regulations, 1925> and Amending Regulations, 1932. 393 (ii) Number of inspections made for the purpose. 502 (c) Number of houses found to be in a state so dangerous or injurious to health as to be unfit for human habitation. 1 (d) Number of duelling houses (exclusive of those referred to under sub-head (c) above) found not to be in all respects reasonably fit for human habitation. 526 2. Remedy of defects during the year without service of formal noticess- (a) Number of defective houses rendered fit in consequence of informal action by the Local Authority or their Officers. 454 (b) Informal notices outstanding at the end of the year. 24 3. Action under Statutory Povers during the year:- (a) Proceedings under Sections 9? 10 and l6 of the Housing Act, 1936: (i)- Number of dwelling houses in respect of which notices were served requiring repairs. 7 (ii) Number of dwelling houses which were rendered fit after service of formal notices:- (A) by owners, 2 (B) by Local Authority in default of owners. NIL (C) outstanding notices. 5 (b) Proceedings under Public Health Act, 1936: (i) Number of dwelling houses in respect of which notices were served requiring drfects to be remedied. 40 (ii) Number of dwelling houses in respect of which defects wore remedied aftor service of formal notices (A) by owners. 36 (B) by Local Authority in default of owners. NIL (C) outstanding notices. 4 (c) Proceedings under Sections 11 and 13 of the Housing Act, 1936: (i) Number of dwelling houses in respect of which Demolition Orders were made. NIL (ii) Number of dwelling houses demolished in pursuance of Demolition Orders. NIL P" (12) (d) Proceedings under Section 12 of the Housing Act, 1936: (i) Number of separate tenements or underground rooms in respect of which Closing Orders were made. NIL (ii) Number of separate tenements or underground rooms in respect of which Closing Orders were determined, the tenement or room having been rendered fit, NIL 4. Housing Act, 1936 - Overcrowding:- (a) (i) Number of dwellings overcrowded at the end of the year. (ii) Number of families dwelling therein. (iii) Number of persons dwelling therein, (b) Number of new cases of overcrowding reported during the year. (c) (i) Number of cases of overcrowding relieved during the year, (ii) Number of persons concerned in such cases. (d) Particulars of such cases in which dwelling houses have again become overcrowded after the Local Authority have taken steps for the abatement of overcrowding. (1) ANNUAL REPORT of the CHIEF SANITARY INSPECTOR to the BARNET URBAN DISTRICT COUNCIL by CHARLES WILLIAM HILL, M.S.I.A. CHIEF SANITARY AND HOUSING INSPECTOR. (2) BARNET URBAN DISTRICT COUNCIL. CHIEF SANITARY INSPECTOR'S REPORT, Public, Health Department, 31 Food Street, Barnet. To the Chairman and Members of the Barnet Urban District Council. Gentlemen, I have the honour to present to you my Annual Report giving particulars of the measures carried out by my Department, during the year 1947, in administering the numerous Acts and Bye-laws concerning Public Health; Housing, Petroleum etc. in force within the district. During the war years, owing to shortage of staff and war duties, this report was considerably curtailed, and as in fact issued only in a statistical form for the purpose of preserving continuity of records. Copies were, however, sent to the Ministry of Health, the County Council, and to other Government Departments concerned. With the return of members of the Staff from War Service it has once more been possible to take up much of the inspection work which had remained in abeyance, partly because of this shortage of staff and also owing to the fact that the enforcement of much remedial work was impracticable. Availability of labour and materials is still a limiting factor, but there has been an improvement, and a great deal of repair work necessary to property has been carried out. The Ministry of Health has given a direction that all repairs under Statutory Notice from the local authority must receive a priority if necessary. INSPECTION OF DISTRICT. General Inspections of the District have been carried out periodically and all complaints investigated. The process of serving a preliminary or intimation notice upon the person in default, specifying the works necessary to remedy the defects found, is usually (3) followed, and only if a person fails to comply with this preliminary notice, or strict legal procedure is necessary in the first instance, is the matter reported to the Council for statutory action to be taken. It will thus be seen that the majority of the work is as between the Inspector and the individual concerned, consequently it is only in a report such as this that the work accomplished can come to the knowledge of the Council. The Annual Report should therefore be of a fairly comprehensive character. The works carried out have as far as possible been classified under the various Acts to which they relate. PUBLIC HEALTH ACT. 1936. INFECTIOUS DISEASE - INVESTIGATIONS AND DISINFECTIONS, The cases of Infectious Disease enumerated below have been investigated and reported upon to your Medical Officer of Health:Scarlet Fever 14; Diphtheria 2; Erysipelas 7; Tuberculosis 24. Forty-seven houses were disinfected wherein cases of Notifiable Infectious Diseases occurred, and bedding sent to be steam disinfected in certain instances. One hundred and twenty-three library books used by patients were disinfected. DAIRIES, COWSHEDS AND MILKSHOPS. The number of persons registered to sell milk is twenty-three, viz:- 8 Dairies and Cowsheds. 15 Milkshops and Purveyors of Milk. Forty-seven inspections were made, and particular attention paid to the hygienic essentials necessary for a pure milk production and distribution. Cowsheds of good construction, providing proper light, ventilation and cubic air space per cow are essential, but would be of little value unless accompanied by a proper appreciation of the importance of grooming the cow's flanks, washing the udder, cleanliness of the milker's hands and the proper washing and sterilising of milk utensils and bottles. I am therefore pleased to record that the dairyman and his assistants are learning this lesson and are setting themselves higher standards than ever before. High bacterial counts have a real significence to them now that they have learned the causes and implications and are conscious that a dirty milk supply is a reflection on their methods and cleanliness. (4) Samples are taken from time to time, and the results forwarded to the dairymen. During the past year, forty-seven samples were taken in the district, and tests appropriate to the particular Designations of milk applied with the following results. Designation. Mo. of Samples Taken. Passed Test. Failed Test. Tuberculin Tested. 8 7 1 Tuberculin Tested (Certified). 1 1 - Tuberculin Tested (Pasteurised) 7 5 2 Accredited. 15 9 6 Pasteurised. 16 16 - TOTALS 47 38 9 Thirteen Dealer's Licences were granted for the retail sale of milk under the Milk (Special Designations) Regulations, 1936 to 1946, viz:- Tuberculin Tested 6. Accredited 1. Pasteurised 6. Producer's Licences for designated milks are issued by the County Council. PRIVATE SLAUGHTER - HOUSES AND SLAUGHTER OF ANIMALS ACT. 1977.. Since Food Rationing was introduced the Private Slaughter-houses in the district, three in number, have been closed, meat rationing being more easily organised and administered from one abbatoir supplying a large area than from a number of small slaughter-houses in each district. It is doubtful whether these small private slaughter-houses will again be permitted to function. There are ten persons licensed by the Council as fit persons to slaughter animals, one less than in the previous year. These slaughtermen, although still required to be licensed by this Authority, work outside the district. No complaint has been received from the districts in which they work concerning the conduct of any of these men. (5) MEAT AND FOOD INSPECTION. The following is a list of the articles of food condemned as unfit for human consumption during the years- Meat. Beef (Imported) 297 lbs. Beef (Home Killed) 17 lbs. Mutton (Imported) 12½ lbs. Pork 2½ lbs. Minced Beaf 110 lbs, Ox Livers 23 lbs. Lambs Livers 10½ lbs. Beef Sausage Meat 26 lbs. Pork Sausage Meat 26 tins Pork Sausages 9 lbs. Meat Pies 3 Bacon 106¾ lbs. Corned Beef 465 lbs. Corned Mutton 142 lbs. Stewed Steak 26 tins Steak & Kidney Pudding 13 tins Meat & Vegetables 15 tins Tongue (Ox & Lamb) 4 tins Fish. Wet Fish (Plaice, Whiting, Mackerel; Coalfish & Dabs) 29½ stone Smoked Fish (Cod, Haddocks & Kippers) 55 stone Fish Roes 11 lbs, Cockles 1 gall. Shrimps 14 lbs. Prawns 28 lbs. Crabs 14 lbs. Salmon 23 tins Pilchards 35 tins Sardines 56 tins Whiting 70 tins Herrings 23 jars Smoked Herring Spread 27 tins Silds 485 tins Herring Tidbits 23,134 tins Cods Liver, Crawfish & Oysters 5 tins Fruit. Prunes 50 lbs. Figs (Dried) 14 lbs. Sultanas 60 lbs. Raisins 68 lbs. Apricots (Dried) 23 lbs. Tomatoes 54 lbs. Dates 187 boxes Grapefruit 10 tins Pears 7 tins Plums 7 tins Peaches 9 tins Apricots 6 tins Fruit Salad 4 tins Tomatoes 31 tins Vegetables and Cereals, Pearl Barley 24 lbs. Lentils 36 lbs. Peas (Dried) 99 Butter Beans 112 lbs. Beetroot 29 tins Silver Beet 1,794 tins Peas 88 tins Sliced Carrots & Peas 19 tins Turnips 212 tins Baked Beans 60 tins Spinach 3 tins Celery Hearts 2 tins Macaroni 48 lbs. Spaghetti 13 lbs. Semolina 117 lbs. Macaroni in Sauce 5 tins Groceries etc. Milk (Liquid) 390 tins Milk (Powder) 3 tins Cheese 36 lbs. Margarine 2¾ lbs. Lard 3 lbs. Sugar 115 lbs. Jam & Marmalade 75 tins Porridge Oats 2 pkts. Pate de Foie 2 tins Blancmange Powder 140 lbs. Soup 17 tins Orange Juice Jelly 4 tins Coffee Essence 9 botts Cake Mixture 2 pkts. Dried Egg 1 pkt. "Beetox" 1 jar "Plantox" 15 lbs. Pickles 9 ars Chocolates l89¾ lbs. Fudge 12 lbs. Nut Toffee 28 lbs. Boiled Sweets 32 lbs. (6) FOOD AND DRUGS ACT, 1958. Those sections of the above Act concerning adulteration and sampling of foodstuffs are enforced by the County Authority in this district. The following details shevr the number and nature of the samples taken in the Urban District of Barnet during the year, and the results of the analyses, Milk (Pasteurised) 8 Milk (Homogenised) 1 Milk (Tuberculin Tested) 2 Milk (Sterilised) 1 Beef Sausage 1 All were found to be genuine. The number of samples taken could in my opinion be increased, having regard to the fact that this is the largest shopping centre in this corner of the County, and supplies a much larger population than that of Barnet. There is also no variety in the articles sampled. DRAINAGE AND SANITARY CONVENIENCES. The drains or sanitary fittings to 95 premises were found to be in some respect defective. In eleven cases, the drains were found to be so defective as to necessitate their being taken up and entirely relaid. In two instances, drains discharging into a watercourse were cut off therefrom and connected to the Council's sewer. The drains to twenty houses were found to be stopped up. During an investigation of pollution of the Dollis Brook, it was found that crude sewage was being discharged into the Brook from. St. Joseph's Convent, Totteridge. The Institution's sewage disposal plant, installed at the instance of this Council in 1937, had been neglected during the war and had fallen into disrepair. Notice was served, requiring the overhaul and repair of the filtration plant. This work was put in hand, but was not completed by the end of the year. Remedial work in connection with all the above properties required the provision of 31 new water closets; 20 sinks; 44 water closet flushing cisterns, 31 inspection chambers and 16 soil pipes. (7) WATER SUPPLY, Fifty-two premises were reported as being without proper vater supply, due mainly to bursts caused by frost. In three of these cases, however, the water was cut off owing to nonpayment of water rates. In each case this Department was notified by the Water Company, and steps were taken which resulted in the early reconnection of the supply. FACTORIES ACT. 1937. Thirty-six inspections of factories with mechanical power and twenty-nine inspections of factories without mechanical power were made during the year, including bakehouses. In one instance, notification was received from H.M. Inspector of Factories concerning the dirty condition of a factory. This was remedied and the Inspector informed accordingly. In addition, four notices were served where defects were found contravening the requirements of the Act. Additional washing accommodation 'as also required in one bakehouse. MEANS OF ESCAPE IN CASE OF FIRE. Section 34 of the Act requires every factory in which more than 20 persons are employed to be certified by the local authority as being provided with such means of escape in case of fire for the persons employed therein as may reasonably be required in the circumstances of each case. At the instance of H.M. Inspector of Factories, four applications for certificates were received. These factories were inspected, and in certain cases improvements were required. When these improvements had been completed, certificates specifying in detail the means of escape provided, together with particulars of fire fighting appliances, were issued to the occupiers, HOUSING ACT. 1936 - OVERCROWDING. In common with most other Authorities, it has been impossible to administer the provisions of the above Act with regard to overcrowding, A certain number of the most serious cases have of course been placed in new Council houses, but a good deal of overcrowding exists. The files, containing particulars of 3,632 (8) surveys carried out prior to the war, are however being added to as new property becomes occupied, and during the past year over 500 were revised. The information already obtained will form a useful b??? upon which to work when it is possible to make a fresh start with this important matter. It will also be to a large extent a guide as to the housing needs of the district. VANS USED AS DWELLINGS. The vans which entered the district for the purpose of attending Barnet Fair were in many instances visited in order to ascertain their sanitary condition, and to enquire as to any illness which might be of an infectious character. Temporary sanitary accommodation was provided in different sections of the Fair for the use of the caravaners, and attention paid to such matters as disposal of fish offal and other refuse. SANITARY CONDITION OF CINEMAS. DANCING HALLS AND OTHER PLACES OF ENTERTAINMENT. The Halls used as cinemas, and for ds.ncing and other entertainment, were inspected during the year, concerning their fitness for the nature of the entertainment proposed to be given as regards fire escape; ventilation; dressing, cloakroom and lavatory accommodation Prior to the war I invited the Chief Officer of the Council's Fire Brigade to accompany me on these inspections, to make an examination of the fire extinguishers and other fire appliances, when instructions were given to have these overhauled where necessary. It is proposed to renew this practice, and invite the co-operation of the Station Officer of the Hertfordshire Fire Service. HERTFORDSHIRE COUNTY COUNCIL ACT, 1975. Provision is made in this Act for the conduct and regulation of (1) Hairdressers' and Barbers' Premises; (2) Swimming Baths and Pools, and (3) Employment Agencies. Hairdressers' and Barbers' Promises. The Council made Bye-laws for securing the cleanliness of these premises in 1937. There are fifteen such establishments in the district. (9) Swimming Baths and Bathing Pools. The only swimming pool in the district, viz, at "The Barn", Barnet By-Pass, is not now in use. Employment Agencies. Prior to the war there were four employment agencies in the district. These, however, are no longer in existence. SHOPS ACT. 1934. Routine inspection of shops has been in abeyance during and since the war, but it is proposed to resume this work at an early date. General inspections, however, are continually made. STATUTORY NOTICES. As previously stated, in the large majority of cases preliminary or intimation notice is sufficient to secure the remedying of any defect to property or breach of the Acts, Regulations and Bye-laws in force within the district, and it was found necessary to ask your authority to serve Statutory Notice in only 47 cases. Of this number, 38 had been complied H.th at the end of the year, leaving 9 outstanding. PETROLEUM (REGULATION) ACTS. 1928 AND 1936. There are thirty-five persons licensed to store petroleum upon the Register; one more than last year. The Licences are for varying quantities from 1.8 gallons to 6,000 gallons. The total quantity of petroleum spirit which may be kept in the various stores is 28,628 gallons. Forty-one inspections were made, but there was no serious breach of the Regulations to report. One Licence was issued for the storage of 100 lbs. of Carbide of Calcium. The scale of fees for Licences to Store Petroleum ranges from 5/- for a quantity not exceeding 100 gallons to £1 for 1,000 to 5,000 gallons. With a view to the standardisation of electrical equipment used in connection with petrol service pumps, the Secretary of State, Home Office, has issued a Model Code of requirements. In the past, the production of satisfactory electrically operated pumps has been rendered difficult by the varying requirements of local authorities. Now the new Code will, in due course, be incorporated in the (10) conditions attached to the issue of Licences for all premises such as garages or filling stations in which electrically operated pumps are installed. ERADICATION OF BED RUGS. Number of Council houses found to be infested. 4 " " " " disinfested. 4 Number of other houses found to be infested. 2 " " " " disinfested. 2 An electric porer sprayer has been used for disinfestations, employing a non-staining and non-poisonous fluid insecticide, and. has given excellent results. The Council do not undertake the work of disinfestation for private house-ov/ners, but give all facilities possible to assist them. I am, Yours obediently, CHARLES WILLIAM HILL, M.S.I.A, Chief Sanitary and Housing Inspector, Meat and. Food Inspector, Petroleum Inspector. (11) SUMMARY. SANITARY INSPECTION OF AREA. Number of dwelling houses inspected (primary inspections): (1) On complaint or general inspection of district 234 (2) House to house 393 Re-inspections of houses and visits to works in progress 847 Visits to houses on notification of infectious disease 63 Visits and inspections under Petroleum Acts 41 Visits to slaughterhouses NIL Visits to factories (including factory laundries) 65 Visits to bakehouses 24 Visits to Outworkers' premises 18 Visits to dairies, cowsheds and milkshops 47 Visits to food manufactories 50 Visits to public halls, cinemas etc 13 Inspections under Rent Restrictions Acts NIL Disinfections after infectious diseases etc. 47 Visits re. Overcrowding Survey (additional properties) 130 "Permitted Number" Certificates issued under Housing Act, 1936 6 Visits to public air raid shelters 3 Visits re. Civil Building Licences 349 Visits to inspect meat and other foods 216 SANITARY WORK AND REPAIRS. Houses. Roofs repaired and made watertight 87 Gutters, downspouts repaired or renewed 65 Brickwork, exterior, repaired or repointed. 35 Walls, dampness remedied. 68 Chimney stacks and pots repaired or renewed 24 Yard surfaces repaired or repaved 13 Room walls and ceilings cleansed and decorated 97 Wall plaster repaired or renewed 74 Ceilings repaired or renewed 95 Floors repaired or renewed 52 Floors, defective ventilation rectified 11 Air gratings renewed 7 Doors and frames repaired 34 Window frames and cills repaired 50 Sashcords renewed, (number of houses) 71 Glazing repaired or renewed 85 Stairs, treads, balusters repaired 26 Fireplaces repaired or renewed 55 Kitcheners repaired or renewed 38 Coppers repaired or renewed 47 Food stores provided with ventilation 1 Drainage. Drains tested 11 Drains reconstructed 11 Drains unstopped and repaired 20 Inspection chambers reconstructed or repaired 31 Cesspools abolished 2 Cesspools emptied 1 Soil or vent pipes repaired or renewed 16 Gullies repaired 50 (12) Water Closets, Sink and Baths. W.C. pans and traps repaired or renewed 31 Flushing cisterns repaired or renewed. 44 Flush pipes repaired or renewed. 23 Seats, dcors etc. repaired or renewed. 27 Brickwork repaired or repointed. 1 Water pipes repaired or renewed. 15 Sinks repaired or renewed. 20 Sink wastes unstopped, repaired or renewed 22 Draining boards renewed 34 Bath wastes unstopped, repaired or renewed 11 Water Supply. Cisterns, storage, repaired or renewed 34 Cisterns, storage, cleansed 10 Cisterns, storage, net covers provided 5 Cisterns, hot rater, repaired or renewed 4 Water services, burst, repaired or renewed 49 Stopcocks repaired or renewed 3 Taps repaired or renewed 15 Miscellaneous. Dustbins renewed 28 Refuse accumulations removed 24 Animals and fowls, nuisances from improper keeping 8 UrinalS; nuisances from defective or insanitary condition NIL Rat infested premises treated 84 Verminous houses disinfested 6 Dirty houses cleansed 6