UBAR 6 u r b a n district of b a r n e t ANNUAL REPORT of the medical officer of health to the bar net urban district council by chas. f. hardie. ma., m.b., BC., (Cantab). Together with the annual report of the chief sanitary and housing inspector by chas. william hill. m.s.i.a. 1937 (2) Annual report of the medical officer of health to the bar net urban district council b y CHAS. F. HARDIE. MA., MB., BC., (Cantab). medical officer of health V (3) BARUB T URBAN DISTRICT COUNCIL MEDICAL OFFICER'S REPORT. Health Department, Council Offices, B A R N E T. To the Chairman and Members of the Barnet Urban District Council. Mrs. Strugnell and Gentlemen, I have much pleasure in presenting to you my Annual Report on the Health of the District for the year 1937. It is drawn up on the lines indicated in Circular 1650 of October 4th. 1937, as requested by the Ministry of Health. STATISTICS AND SOCIAL CONDITIONS OF THE AREA. Area (in acres) 1931 3,114 Area added in April 1935 1,176 Total Area 4,290 Population (1931 Census) 14,726 Population of Added Area 338 Registrar General's Estimate of Resident Population mid 1937 20,750 Number of Inhabited Houses 1937 5,974 Rateable Value .£227,836 Sum Represented by a Penny Rate excluding Totteridge and Rowley £684, 4. 8. excluding Totteridge £716. 4. 4. including Totteridge and Rowley £949. 6. 4. NATURAL AND SOCIAL CONDITIONS. The population is largely residential, and consists chiefly of people whose occupation lies outside the urban area. Those employed in the district, apart from the tradesmen and their employees, are mainly skilled workers at dental manufacturing, lithographic, printing and optical works. Relief is supplied by the Public Assistance Committee of the Herts County Council. (4) EXTRACTS FROM VITAL STATISTICS OF THE YEAR. Total. M. F. Live Births Legitimate 308 154 154 Illegitimate 11 4 7 Birth Rate per 1,000 of the estimated resident population 15.37 Total. M. F. Still Births Legitimate 9 9 - Illegitimate 1 - 1 Still Birth Rate per 1,000 total (live and still) births 30.40 Total. M. F. Deaths 203 "9'3" 110 Death Rate per 1,000 of the estimated resident population 9.78 Deaths from puerperal causes:- Puerperal Sepsis NIL. Death Rate per 1,000 total births NIL® Other Puerperal causes NIL. " " " " " " NIL. Death Rate from puerperal causes per 1,000 total (live and still) births NIL, Death Rate of infants under one year of age:- All infants per 1,000 live births 25 Legitimate infants per 1,000 legitimate live births 23 Illegitimate infants per 1,000 illegitimate live births 91 Deaths from Cancer (all ages) 32 " " Measles (all ages) 1 " " Whooping Cough (all ages) NIL " " Diarrhoea (under 2 years of age) 2 GENERAL PROVISION OP HEALTH SERVICES FOR THE DISTRICT. Hospitals provided or subsidised by the Local Authority or County Councilo. A. (1) Infectious Diseases Joint Isolation Hospital in Barnet. (2) Joint Smallpox Hospital at Cheshunt. B. (l) Tuberculosis Hospital at Ware, provided by the Herts County Council. (S) Maternity block with 22 beds at the Wellhouse Hospital. Ambulance Facilities. Infectious Diseases - Motor Ambulance at Isolation Hospital. Non-Infectious Diseases - Motor Ambulance. By Day and Night - phone BARnet 2336, The Old Court House, Wood Street; Barne t, 1713 cases of Non-Infectious Diseases were removed by the Motor Ambulance. (5) Clinic and Treatment Centres„ A Maternity and Child Welfare Centre is held every Monday, and a Clinic alternate Mondays at "Fieldways", Wellhouse Lane; also a Tuberculosis Clinic on the 1st. and 3rd, Wednesdays in the month, and a Dental Clinic on Thursdays at the same address* There are (1) Two Nursing Homes for paying patients, (2) The Victoria Cottage Hospital , and (3) A General Hospital (Wellhouse) under the Public Assistance Committee, Herts. County Council. The Barnet Nursing Association provides two nurses. There is one Maternity and Nursing Home registered with the County Council. The hospital accommodation for the district is adequate. The Infectious Diseases Joint Isolation Hospital,in Barnet is being extended, but will not be completed until 1938. PUBLIC HEALTH STAFF. ¢ Medical Officer of Health. x C. P. Hardie, MA., MB., BC,,(Cantab). ¢ Chief Sanitary Inspector. † Charles William Hill, M.S.I.A. ¢ Additional Sanitary Inspector, † John Baillio Wilson, C.R.S.I., Clerical Staff - One Clerk. The Chief Sanitary Inspector holds the special qualification as Inspector of Meat and Other Foods under -sxamination of the Royal Sanitary Institute. The Additional Sanitary Inspector holds the qualification as Instructor (Civilian Anti-Gas School,Special). ¢ Salary Contribution of one-half from Exchequer Grants. * Part-Time Officer. † Whole-Time Officer. (6) MATER SUPPLY. The water for the district is supplied by the Barnet District Gas and Water Company and the Colne Valley Water Company. With regard to the Barnet District Gas and Water Company all the water is chlorinated; a pathological staff is maintained, one of whom is a B.Sc., trained under Dr. Beale. The "bulk of the water is examined daily and each pumping station once a week. The Colne Valley Water Company exercises constant supervision and members of the staff are on duty day and night throughout the year, examining samples. All the water supplied by this Company is chlorinated. ANALYSIS. Report on the Chemical Analysis of Water taken from a Domestic Tap. Stated Grains per Gallon as Parts per 100,000 Total Dissolved Matter left on Evaporation and Dried at 230° Fahr. 25.48 36.40 Loss on Incineration of Residue 2.24 3.20 Chlorine in Chlorides 1.60 2.29 Equal to Sodium Chloride 2.64 3.77 Nitrogen in Nitrates 0.29 0.41 Free(actual or saline) Ammonia .001 .001 Albuminoid (organic) Ammonia Oxygen absorbed by Oxidisable Organic Matt etc., from a solution of Potassium Permanganate at 80°Fahr. .001 .001 In 15 Minutes .020 .029 In 4 Hours .040 .057 Appearance in 2 feet Tube Clear Hardness before Boiling 20 degrees. 28½ degrees. " after Boiling 6½- decrees. 9¼ degrees. Result of Bacteriological Examination: Satisfactory, Total Colonies developed from 1 cubic centimetre in plate culture at ordinary temperature 150 0 Ditto in bile salt agar plate culture (special medium for B. coli and its congeners) nil. MacConkey broth culture test for B. coli and its congeners also gave negative result in as much as 50 cubic centimetres. The results of chemical analysis are equally satisfactory. (7) DRAINAGE A ND SEWBRAGE . The Town is drained and sewered on the separate system. The sewage is conveyed to an Irrigation Farm of 56 acres, but "before it is turned on the land it is screened and treated by means of detritus and sedimentation tanks, and three rotary filters. Pumping is necessary for throe sewers which hav6 their outlets at a low point on the farm. There are only a few earth closets in outlying parts of the district. disposal of house refuse. The house refuse is collected weekly and conveyed to the Farm and disposed of by the controlled tipping system. There is no Refuse Destructor. SAnitAry conditions and \7Ater supply of schools. There are seven public elementary schools in the district, viz:- Arkley Church of England Infants School; Byng Road County Council School (Junior Mixed and Infants and Senior Mixed Departments); Christ Church School, with Boys, Girls and Infants Departments; Barnet Church of England School (Senior Mixed Department); Totteridge Church of England School, (Boys, Girls and Infants); St. Catherine's Roman Catholic Mixed School; and Underbill County Council School, (Junior Mixed and Infants). The Assistant School Medical Officer resides in the district and visits each school at least once each term. He is in constant touch with the teachers, and all doubtful oases of illness are at once referred to him. Infectious cases and contacts are excluded from the Schools and disinfections are carried out when necessary. The Byng Road Junior School was disinfected in November following an epidemic of measles. (8) PREVALENCE OF, AND CONTROL OVER, INFECTIOUS DISEASES. The following table shows the number of Notifications to the Sanitary Authority during the year, of each disease specified in the Infectious Disease (Notification) Act, and subsequent Orders, and the number removed to Hospital:- NATURE OF INFECTIOUS DISEASE. NOTIFIED REMOVED TO HOSPITAL DEATHS Smallpox. ... ... ... Scarlet Fever. 47 37 1 Diphtheria & Membranous Croup. 13 13 ... Enteric (Typhoid) Fever. 1 1 ... Malaria. ... ... ... Ophthalmia Neonatorum. 2 2 ... Erysipelas. 17 16 ... Pulmonary Tuberculosis. 7 4 5 C6rebro Spinal Meningitis. 3 3 ... Anterior Poliomyelitis. 3 3 1 Puerperal Pyrexia. 19 19 ... Pneumonia. 121 117 14 Polio Encephalitis. ... ... 2 Total 233 215 23 Of the foregoing the following cases normally resident outside the district were notified from Wellhouse Hospital Scarlet Fever 6; Erysipelas 14; Puerperal Pyrexia 17; Pneumonia 92; Cerebro Spinal Meningitis 3: Ophthalmia Neonatorum 1; Typhoid Fever 1; Anterior Poliomyelitis 1. The cases of Tuberculosis removed are chiefly sent to Ware Sanatorium. The Case Rates per 1,000 of the population are as follows Scarlet Fever 1.98; Diphtheria 0.63; Pulmonary Tuberculosis 0.34; Puerperal Pyrexia 6.08 (per 1,000 Births). (3) AGE INCIDENCE OF INFECTIOUS DISEASE. DISEASE NUMBER OF CASES NOTIFIED YEARS OF AGE. 0- 1- 2- 3- 4- 5- 10- 15- 20- 35- 45- 65- Scarlet Fever 1 - 2 2 4 19 7 4 4 3 1 - Diphtheria - - 1 - 2 6 2 - 1 - 1 - Typhoid Fever - - - - - - - 1 - - - - Oph. Neonatorum 2 - - - - - - - - - - - Erysipelas - - - - - - - - 1 1 9 6 Cor. Spin. Meningitis - - - - - - - - 3 - - - Ant. Poliomyelitis - - - - - - 1 1 - 1 - - Puerperal Fever - - - - - - - - - - - - Puerperal Pyrexia - - - - - - - 2 13 4 - - Pneumonia 13 12 8 - 3 17 2 5 16 7 25 13 Totals 16 12 11 2 9 42 12 13 38 16 36 19 MORTAL STATISTICS. Of 203 deaths, 8 occurred under one. year of age. The following were the chief causes of death:Cancer 32 (9 males, 23 females); Heart Disease 71; Tuberculosis (all forms) 5; Influenza 2; Cerebral Haemorrhage 8; Bronchitis 6; Pneumonia (all forms) 14; Congenital Debility and Malformation, Premature Birth 3; Acute and Chronic Nephritis 6; Suicide 2; other Violence 8. CONTROL OF INFECTIOUS DISBaSES. No use has been made of the Schick and Dick Tests in Diphtheria and Scarlet Fever,, VACCINATION No primary or revaccinations were performed by the Medical Officer of Health under the Public Health (Smallpox prevention) Regulations 1917. (10) LABORATORY WORK. The Council have made arrangements with the Clinical Research Association for examination and reports on all suspected cases of Diphtheria, Typhoid Fever,and Tuberculosis„ 78 specimens were examined and reported upon as follows Positive. Negative. Diphtheria 4 61 Typhoid Fever - 2 Tuberculosis - 11 TUBERCULOSIS. MEW CASES AND MORTALITY DURING 1937. NEW CASES DEATHS. Pulmonary Non Pulmonary Pulmonary Non Pulmonary M F M F M F M F 0 — — — — — — — — 1 — — — — — — — — 5 — — — — - — — — 15 — 2 1 1 — — — — 25 3 1 — — 1 — — — 35 — 1 — — 1 2 — — 45 — — — — — — 1 — 55 — — — 1 1 — — — 65 and over — — — — — — — — Totals 3 4 1 2 3 - 2 — The five deaths from Tuberculosis were all previously notified cases, from which it would appear that the notification of Tuberculosis cases is efficiently carried out. There were no cases of wilful neglect or of refusal to notify Tuberculosis in any form. (11) PUBLIC HEALTH (PREVENTION OP TUBERCULOSIS) REGULATIONS 1925. It has not been found necessary to take any action under the above Regulations, relating to Tuberculous employees in tho Milk Trade. PUBLIC HEALTH ACT 1936, SECTION 172. COMPULSORY REMOVAL TO HOSPITAL OF CASES OF PULMONARY TUBERCULOSIS. No action was necessary under the above Section. PUBLIC HEALTH ACT 1926. SECTION 176. PREVENTION OF BLINDNESS. No action has been taken under this Section for the prevention of blindness or for the treatment of persons suffering from any disease or injury to the eyes. AIR RAID PRECAUTIONS. Certain sites have been provisionally selected as First Aid Posts, and arrangements are being made so that alterations can be effected with celerity when necessary. Classes have been held in First Aid and First Aid for Gas Casualties by the British Red Cross Society and tho St. John's Ambulance Brigade. All the Medical Practitioners in the District have taken an Anti-Gas Course of lectures at the Wellhouse Hospital. RECREATION GROUNDS AND PLAYING FIELDS. The Council provides facilities for organised games, viz:Three Hard Courts, Five Grass Courts, Two Bowling Greens, and a Putting Green, at the Old Court House Recreation Grounds at the rear of the Council Offices. There is also an open spacc for the children to play games. Thirty-eight acres of land at Underbill are developed for the provision of Football and Crioket pitches, etc. Thirty-eight acres behind Byng Road, and forty-six acres at Barnot Gate have been left as open spaces for recreation purposes. (12) The Totteridge Park Estate of sixty-three acres, about ninety acres beside the Dollis Brook purchased last year, and the Grange Estate of one hundred and twelve acres purchased during this year are to be kept as additional open spaces. That those recreative facilities will he of great value in promoting the health of the District there can he no doubt. The report has been typed and duplicated for reasons of economy. I am, Yours faithfully, CHAS. HARDIE, MA., MB., BC.,(Cantab). Modical Officer of Health. (13) HOUSING STATISTICS. 1. Inspection of dwelling houses during the year:- (1) (a) Total number of dwelling houses inspected for housing defects (under Public Health or Housing Acts). 407 (b) Number of inspections made for the purpose. 455 (2) (a) Number of dwelling houses (included under sub-head (1) above) which were inspected and recorded under the Housing Consolidated Regulations 1925. 46 (b) Number of inspections made for the purpose. 61 (3) Number of houses found to be in a state so dangerous or injurious to health as to be unfit for human habitation. 3 (4) Number of dwelling houses (exclusive of those referred to under the preceding sub-head) found not to be in all respects reasonably fit for human habitation 146 2. Remedy of defects during the year without service of formal Notices:- Number of defective houses rendered fit in consequence of informal action by the Local Authority or their officers. 93 3. Action under Statutory Powers during the year:- A- Proceedings under Sections 9, 10 and 16 of the Housing Act 1936; (1) Number of dwelling houses in respect of which notices were served requiring repairs. 19 (2) Number of dwelling houses which were rendered fit after service of formal notices:- (a) by owners. 19 (b) by Local Authority in default of owners. Nil B- Proceedings under Public Health Act: (1) Number of dwelling houses in respect of which notices were served requiring defeats to be remedied. 31 (2) Number of dwelling houses in respect of which defects were remedied after service of formal notices:- (a) by owners. 27 (b) by Local Authority in default of owners. Nil Outstanding Notices. 4 C- Proceedings under Sections 11 and 13 of the Housing Act 1936:- (1) Number of dwelling houses in respect of which Demolition Orders were made. 3 (2) Number of dwelling houses demolished in pursuance of Demolition Orders 4 D- Proceedings under Section 12 of the Housing Act 1936. (1) Number of separate tenements or underground rooms in respect of which Closing Orders were made. Nil (2) Number of separate tenements or underground rooms in respect of which Closing Orders were determined," the tenement or room having been ??? ??? Nil (14) 4. Housing Act 1936 - Overcrowding:A- (1) Number of dwellings overcrowded at the end of the year. 23 (2) Number of families dwelling therein. 23 (3) Number of persons dwelling therein. 176 Number of new cases of overcrowding reported during the year. Nil C- (1) Number of cases of overcrowding relieved during the year. 5 (2) Number of persons concerned in such cases. 28 D- Particulars of such cases in which dwelling houses have again become overcrowded after the Local Authority have taken step3 for the abatemont of overcrowding. Nil (1) ANNUAL REPORT of the CHIEF SANITARY INSPECTOR to the BARNET URBAN DISTRICT COUNCIL by CHARLES WILLIAM HILL, M.S.I.A. CHIEF SANITARY & HOUSING INSPECTOR. 1937 (2) BANET URBAN DISTRICT COUNCIL. CHIEF SANITARY INSPECTOR'S REPORT. Health Department, Council Offices, BARNET. To the Chairman and Members of the Barnet Urban District Council. Mrs. Strugnell and. Gentlemen, I have the honour to present to you my Annual Report giving particulars of the measures carried out in my Department during the year 1937, in administering the Health Acts and Bye-Laws in force in the District, and which includes particulars in tabular form as required by the Ministry of Health. The Housing Act 1936 came into force on January 1st. 1937. This Act consolidates the Housing Acts 19S5 to 1935 and certain other enactments relating to housing. Its chief provisions deal with the repair, maintenance and sanitary condition of houses; Clearance Areas and Redevelopment; Improvement Areas; Abatement of Overcrowding; Provision of Housing Accommodation for the Working Classes; Management of local Authority's Houses and Financial Provisions. It contains one hundred and ninety one sections and twelve schedules. The Factories Act 1937 which comes into force on July 1st 1938 will also impose a good deal of work upon the department. This Act is a consolidating and amending measure and will replace the Factory and Workshop Act 1901 and various later Acts; it is designed to secure safe and healthy working conditions in manufacturing and certain other operations. The spate of new legislation during the last two or three years, including the work in connection with Air Raid Precautions is steadily increasing the demands on the department. (3) INSPECTION OF DISTRICT. General Inspections of the District have been carried out from time to time and all complaints investigated. The course of serving a preliminary or intimation notico upon the person in default, specifying the works necessary to abate the nuisance, continues to be followed, and only if a person fails to comply with this preliminary notice, or strict legal procedure is necessary in the first instance, is the matter reported to the Council and a statutory notice asked for. INFECTIOUS DISEASES PREVENTION ACT 1890. INVESTIGATIONS AND DISINFECTIONS. The Infectious Diseases enumerated "below have" been investigated and reported upon to your Medical Officer of Health:Scarlet Fever 47; Diphtheria 13; Erysipelas 17; and Pulmonary Tuberculosis 7. 52 houses were disinfected wherein cases of Notifiable Infectious Diseases occurred, and bedding sent to be steam disinfected in certain cases. In addition 2 houses were disinfected on request, after oases of non-notifiable diseases. In such cases a charge of 5/is made to cover labour and material. 76 library books from infected houses were disinfected or destroyed. DAIRIES, COWSHEDS AND MILKSHOPS. The number of persons registered to sell milk is the same as in the previous year, viz:- 14 Dairies and Cowsheds. 10 Milkshops and Purveyors of Milk. (4) Thirty-three inspections were made, and particular attention paid to the hygienic essentials necessary for a pure milk production and distribution. Eleven Licences wore granted to sell milk under the Milk (Special Designations) Order 1936, viz;- Tuberculin Tested 5 Accredited 1 Pasteurised 5 MILK (SPECIAL DESIGNATION) ORDER 1936. This Order alters the previous grading of milks, and in future the following grades take their place, viz:- "Tuberculin Tested", "Accredited" and "Pasteurised". To the designation "Tuberculin Tested" may be added "Pasteurised" or "Certified", if the appropriate conditions are complied with, and to "Accredited" may be added the words "Farm Bottled", if bottled at the placc of production. "Accredited" milk is identical with that previously called "Grade A". "Pasteurised" milk is milk that has been heated to and retained at a temperature of not loss than 145° F. or more than 150° F., for at least 30 minutes, and then immediately coolcd to a temperature of not more than 55° F, "Accredited" milk cannot be treated by heat and retain its designation. In addition to the above, we still have milk without designation or standard. The various grades have to conform to certain bacteriological standards. Previous to the 1936 Order, the tests were made as "plate counts" of bacteria present. Now a new test is prescribed for raw "Tuberculin Tested" and "Accredited" milks, called the Methylene Blue Reduction Test. The Reduction Test is not suitable for "Pasteurised" milk, as the heating interferes with the reducing system, so "plate counts" arc still to be used. (5) Arrangements have been made with the County Council for the taking of samples of "Tuberculin Tested." milk once a quarter, to ho sent to the laboratory at Hill End Hospital, St, Albans, for examination, with the view of ascertaining whether the samples conform to the standard required for such milk. During the year a number of such samples were taken and submitted for examination. The Herts County Council reported that on two occasions samples of School Milk supplied by a certain dairy did not satisfy the Methylene Blue Test and I was requested to accompany the Veterinary Inspector to see what could be done to improve the standard of the milk. On the occasion of the first visit, cows were being kept on the premises, but the Manager informed me that the Cowshed was about to be shut up and the cows transferred to another branch. The second sample was taken after the cows had gone, and as the milk had arrived bottled from other depots, it was apparent that the trouble was not in the Cowshed. A short time after, a local resident asked me to examine a bottle of milk supplied by the same firm. The bottle had a thick black ring on the inside, from which it would appear that the sterilization of the bottles was not efficiently performed. As the depot responsible is in Middlesex, I reported the circumstances to the Herts County Council. A sample of milk taken from another Farm was unsatisfactory, in as much as Coliform Bacillus 1/100 was present in three tubes. The Farm was inspected and later a further sample was taken which proved satisfactory. All other samples taken were reported as satisfactory. PRIVATE SLAUGHTER HOUSES. The number of Slaughter Houses in the district is five, as against six in the previous year. Four of these are licensed and one registered. (6) One Registered Slaughter House closed during the year, the owner having given up business. Beyond the usual intimations requiring limewashing of premises and removal of garbage from time to time, the premises were found to he well conducted. SLAUGHTER OF ANIMALS APT 1955. There are twenty persons licensed by the Council as fit persons to slaughter animals in the district as compared with twenty one in the previous year. Ho complaint was received concerning the conduct of any of these men. Slaughter houses are visited frequently by an Inspector of the R. S. P. C. A., who holds an honorary appointment under the Council, thus giving him power to enter slaughter houses in order to see that animals are humanely slaughtered. A complaint was received from the Rabbinical Commission for the Licencing of Shochetim, stating that the attention of the Commission had been drawn to the fact that the killing of cattle for Jewish use had taken place in a slaughter house in the district, by a Shochet(Ritual Slaughterer), who did not hold the Licence of the Commission. The owner of the slaughter house in question, informed me that the slaughter-man produced what purported to be a Licence to Slaughter Animals, but he could not say if it was a Licence issued by the Commission as it was written in Hebrew. Ho slaughtering by Jews is now carried on at the slaughter house. BYE!-LAWS. FOULIHG OF FOOTPATHS. A case of fouling of a footpath by a dog on a lead was brought to the notice of the Council. After consideration of the case, the Council decided,,in the circumstances, not to take legal proceedings against the person responsible, but a warning was given. (7) CARCASES INSPECTED AMD INSPECTED. Cattle excluding Cows Cows Calves Sheep and Lambs Pigs Number killed — — — — — Number inspected 210 54 61 740 256 All diseases except Tuberculosis. Whole carcases condemned — — — — 2 Carcases of which some part or organ was condemned — — — — — Percentage of condemned to number inspected — — — — 1 Tuberculosis only. Whole carcases condemned — 1 — — — Carcases of which some part or organ was condemned — 2 — — — Percentage of condemned to number inspected — 6 — — — 42 lbs. of Herrings were surrendered; they were found to be unfit for human consumption and accordingly condemned. An outbreak of Swine Fever occurred in a herd of Swine, in which two pigs died and were destroyed according to the Regulations. On the advice of the Ministry of Agriculture, the apparently healthy pigs were slaughtered. I was therefore requested to inspect the carcases of 11 pigs so slaughtered. These were found not to have contracted the disease, and were accordingly passed as fit for food. (8) SALE OF FOOD AND DRUGS ACTS. The above Acts arc enforced by the County Authority in this district. The following table shows the number and nature of the samples taken in the Urban District of Barnet, with the results of the analyses. Article No. Samples Taken Genuine Adulterated Extent and Form of Adulter'n Remarks Milk 9 9 - - - Butter 6 6 - - - Lard 5 5 - - - Shredded Suet 3 2 1 See below Sausages 3 3 - - - Cocoa 2 2 - - - Vinegar 1 - 1 See below Totals 29 27 2 - - The sample of Shredded Suet reported adulterated was an Informal Sample, and was found to contain 19% Rice Flour. A Formal Sample was subsequently procured, when the presence of Rice Flour was declared by the Vendors at the time of sale. The percentage of Rico Flour in this sample was 12.8. The attention of the Vendors was drawn to the excessive quantity of Rice Flour in the Informal Sample, and they referred the matter to their Wholesalers. The Wholesalers have submitted an explanation. The sample of Vinegar was also informal and was found to be Artificial Vinegar - but of Full Strength. It was ascertained from the Vendor that he purchased it under the description "Non-brewed" and he was cautioned to sell it under the same description. (9) The Board of Agriculture suggests that the number of samples which should be taken in any district is three per 1,000 of the population. DRAINAGE AND SANITARY CONVENCES. The drains or sanitary fittings of 69 premises were found to he in some respect defective. In 15 cases it was found necessary to take up and entirely relay the drains. In 31 cases drains were found to he stopped up. 19 water closets, 14 sinks, 50 water closet cisterns, 24 inspection chambers and 15 soil pipes were renewed or repaired. 3 cesspools were abolished. It was necessary to obtain the authority of the Council under Section 41 of the Public Health Act 1875, to enter premises for the purpose of opening up the ground and examining the drains of eight houses. In all cases the drains were found to be defective. Three cesspools were abolished after drains had been relayed and connected to the sewer. I reported last year that the Dollis Brook was being polluted by sewage from the St. Josephs Convent School at Totteridge, and Statutory Notice was served upon the owners requiring them to install an approved sewage purification plant of sufficient capacity to deal with a school of 250 boarders and staff. There being no sewer to drain into, plans were submitted at the end of 1936 and the work was proceeded with during this year, and an up to date plant installed consisting of a Settlement Tank, Rotary Filter Bed and Humus Chamber. The plant is working satisfactorily and has given a clear and good effluent up to the present. A complaint was received from the Secretary of the Ratepayers Association concerning the condition of the Brook near Folly Farm, which forms the boundary between Totteridge, Barnot and Mill Hill, Hendon, An inspection of the Brook revealed a (10) considerable volume of almost crude sewage entering from the Mill Hill side. As the district is outside my jurisdiction, I got into communication with the Inspector for the Hendon authority, and intimated the premises (a large Institution) from which I thought the trouble arose. It was fourd that the sewage filtration plant.at this Institution had broken down, and the sewage was by-passing the filter beds into a ditch and thence into the Brook. Repairs were immediately put in hand. PUBLIC HEALTH ACT 1936, Section 75. 71 dustbins were provided after intimation to replace worn out receptacles, or absence of same. The provision of a proper sanitary dustbin is a very useful health measure. It also secures uniformity of recptacle and makes the task of the dustmen cleaner and easier. WATER SUPPLY. In 42 cases, services found to be defective owing to bursts, etc., were repaired. In no case did the Water Company find it necessary to cut off the supply for more than a day, pending the necessary repairs. In three cases the water was cut off owing to the non-payment of rates. This department was notified by the Water Company, and steps were taken which resulted in the early reconnection of the supply. From the 1st. of January 1938 house owners will be relieved of the repair of water services from the main to the stop cock, as, under the provisions of the recent Barnet District Gas and Water Act, they have become vested in and maintainable by the Water Company. The service from the stop-cock to the house will, however, still remain the owner's liability. (11) COMMON LODGING HOUSES. There is now only one Common Lodging House in the district, which is registered for 25 persons. The House was inspected at various times during the year, and a mid-night inspection was made just prior to the Fair. It was found to be conducted in accordance with the Bye-laws regulating the number of lodgers , and the conduct of Lodging Houses. CARAVANS USED AS DWELLINGS - BARNET FAIR. ETC. Of the caravans which entered the district to attend Barnet Fair, a number were inspected in order to ascertain their sanitary condition and to enquire as to any illness which might be of an infectious character. The usual temporary sanitary accommodation was provided in different sections of the Fair for the use of the caravaners, and an early morning collection was made of all refuse, fish offal, etc. BAKEHOUSES. There are eight Bakehouses upon the Register. Thirty inspections were made of these premises, and five notices were served for defects contravening the special sanitary sections of the Factory and Workshop Acts. SANITARY CONDITION OF CINEMAS, DANCING HALLS AND OTHER PLACES OF ENTERTAINMENT, The Halls used as Cinemas and for Dancing and other entertainments were inspected twice during the year and the annual certificates required by the Licencing Authorities were issued in respect of the following premises, certifying their fitness for the nature of the entertainment proposed to be given, as regards fire escape, ventilation, dressing and cloak room, and lavatory accommodation. (12) (1) Barnet Cinema and Theatre; (2) Odeon Cinema; (3) Church House; (4) Ewen Hall and Congregational Schoolroom; (5) Assembly Hall; (6) Pennyfather Hall; (7) Hobley's, Ltd.; (8) Wesleyan Hall; (9) Salisbury Hotel; (10) Red lion Hotel; (11) Girl's Grammar School; (12) Edco Rooms, High Street; (13) National Schools; (14) Totteridge Institute; (15) Arkley Infants School; (16) Constitutional Club and (17) British Legion Hall, Moxon Street. The Chief Officer of your Fire Brigade accompanied me on the inspections of the above premises, and made an examination of the Fire Extinguishers and other Fire Appliances. Instructions were given to have these overhauled where necessary. St. Gregory's Hall, Union Street. This Hall is used as Club premises, and so long as this is the only user, a licence is not required. It came to my knowledge however, that the Hall was being used for other than Club premises, including drill purposes by classes of school children. The room which is an upstairs one, is approached by a very poor and narrow staircase under which is stored waste materials. There are four windows on one side, all of which are fixed, except a top portion for ventilation purposes size 3' x 1'. At the end of the room opposite the entrance there is one window also fixed. On the third side there is a single sash window about 31 x 21, the cill of which is roughly 5' from the floor, with a drop of about 151 0" to the ground outside. The fireplace on the remaining side was also unsafe, having only one fire bar. I reported the matter to the Council and the Education Authority was asked not to use the room for any school purposes, to which they have agreed. (13) INSANITARY PROPERTY. SLUM CLEARNCE PROGRAMME. The Slum Clearance Programme of the Council, which was submitted to the Ministry of Health comprised 7 houses and one shop as a Clearance Area, and 17 individual houses. In my last Report I stated that the seven houses and shop had been demolished after an unsuccessful appeal by the owners to the Ministry of Health, and the families rehoused in new Council Houses, also, that of the 17 individual houses, 9 had been demolished, and one closed, leaving 5 still to be demolished, and two to be reconditioned. During the past year these houses have been dealt with as follows:- Nos. 6 & 8, Tapster Street. Demolition Orders complied with and the site cleared. Little Larkins Farm Cottage. Demolished in compliance with Demolition Order. No. 5, St. Georges Cottages, Moxon Street. Demolition Order complied with. The Bungalow, Barnet Lane. Since this cottage was condemned, it has become the property of the Council, being situated on lands purchased for open space. The tenant is however, still in occupation, as it has not been possible up to the present, to offer him a house suitable to his means. Nos. 1 & 2, St, Georges Cottages, Moxon Street. Dilapidation Notices served in respect of these cottages have been complied with. It will thus be seen that the Slum Clearance Programme has been completed, with the exception of the demolition of the "The Bungalow," Barnet Lane. (14) When the houses on the Grange Estate are ready for occupation the family will be suitably housed, and "The Bungalow", demolished. Additional to the Slum Clearance Programme now practically completed cases occur from time to time which need to be dealt with as requiring demolition. During the past year inspection of the district has revealed the following properties as having become unfit for human habitation. Ferndale Yard, Totteridge. Wooden building and Van occupied by Husband wife andl3 children found to be unfit for habitation. Notice was served upon the owner who made no appeal, and a Demolition Order has accordingly been issued. This had not expired at the end of the year. Fairlight Farm Cottage. This Cottage was found to be unfit for habitation and reported upon accordingly. It was empty at the time of my inspection, but was being renovated by the prospective occupier. He was informed that it would be dealt with as being incapable of being made fit for habitation. The renovation was not proceeded with and the house is still vacant. Steps for demolition will be taken in due course. Ho. 80 Union Street. Pound to be unfit for human habitation. Notice was served under Section 11 of th6 Housing Act 1936 upon the owner, of the time and place at which the condition of the house and any offer with respect thereto, would be considered by the Council. (15) Representation was made to the Council by the owners that no objection would be taken to the demolition on Sanitary grounds, but the question of demolition presented a difficulty as Ho. 78 had a bedroom on the front over No. 80, and No. 80 a bedroom at the rear over Ho. 78. As the future of the two adjoining cottages was under consideration in connection with rebuilding operations it was decided to close No. 80 but to delay consideration of its demolition for 12 months. Ho. 3 Bruce Road. Application was made to convert part of this property for human habitation. The property consists of stabling and garage, with warehouse over, in a very bad state of repair and in my opinion unsuitable for conversion into living accommodation. The Council refused to entertain the application. HOUSING ACT 1935. OVERCROWDING. The overcrowding survey revealed 37 houses - 13 owned by th.6 Council and 24 privately owned - to be overcrowded. They were reported upon to the Council and Ministry of Health, and at a later date the Council forwarded their proposals for rehousing these overcrowded families. The Act also made it the duty of the Landlord to insert in the Rent Book a summary of the Housing Act 1935, and the Permitted Number for the house, by the 1st January, 1937. The Landlord can apply to the Local authority for this Permitted Number. Applications in respect of 313 houses have been dealt with. In addition to the houses previously reported upon, a further 241 houses have been measured and added to those originally surveyed, bringing the total to 3360, 347 visits were made for this purpose. (16) With regard to the 37 cases of overcrowding revealed by the original survey, 9 were relieved in 1936 and 5 during the past year, leaving 23 cases still to be dealt with at the end of 1937, namely:- Four families of five, requiring Three Bed Non.-Parlour Type of house, with a superficial area of 760 square feet. Five families of seven, requiring Four Bedroom Non-Parlour house of a superficial area of about 1,050 square feet. Eight families of eight, requiring Four Bed Parlour type with a superficial area of approximately 1,130 square feet. Four families of nine in Four Bedroom Parlour houses slightly larger than for eight persons. One family of ten and one family of eleven in Five Bedroom Non-Parlour houses. Applications for Council Houses. These numbered 138 at the end of the year, and included in this total are eleven families to bo removed from Barnet Barracks which are being converted for occupation by Aged Persons. The Grange Estate upon which it is proposed to build 110 houses will provide for the majority of these applicants including the cases of overcrowding where the families are only five in number, also the families of seven can be accommodated in existing three bedroom parlour houses by using the parlour as a fourth bedroom, and so constituting a four bedroom non-parlour house, as vacancies occur. The question of housing the families of eight, nine, ten and eleven have still to be dealt with as the Council have no houses of the types required on their Housing Estates. PETROLEUM CONSOLIDATION ACT 1928. There are thirty-three persons licenced to store petroleum upon tho Register, as against twenty-nine last year. The licences are for varying quantities from 100 gallons to 6,000 gallons. (17) The total quantity of petroleum spirit whioh may be kept in the various stores is 31,610 gallons, as against 28,750 gallons last year. 43 inspections were made, hut there was no serious breach of Regulations to report. Tanks placed underground and supplying by means of pumps have praotically taken the place of cans, and are much safer. These tanks and pumps now number 56. The stores which keep 3 gallon cans are licenced for only 810 gallons out of the above total. In connection with one application to store 100 gallons of petrol at a factory, it was found that it was proposed also to keep cellulose solutions in the same store. As these solutions are subject to Factory Department Regulations, I communicated with H. M. Inspector of Factories for the district, who informed me that the Regulations which governed the storage of petrol would be equally satisfactory to the Factory Department for the storage of cellulose solutions. A Licence was accordingly granted. I reported to the Council that a quantity of petrol, namely 48 two gallon tins (96 gallons) had been found in an-empty garage in "The Old Bull" yard, High Street, for which storage no licence had been obtained fr©m this Authority. The Firm occupying the garage was using it for storing petrol in connection with a Government contract,, An explanation was asked for, regarding the infringement of the Regulations, and they replied, regretting the occurrence, stating that it was an oversight on the part of the Engineer in charge of the Contract. In the meantime the petrol was removed. A letter was received from the Secretary of State stating that his attention had been drawn to certain serious accidents resulting from explosions in disused tanks, which had been used previously, for the storage of petroleum spirit, and suggested (18) that the following condition should in future be attached to the licences:- " The holder of this licence shall at least ten days before discontinuing to use any underground tank, to which this Licence relates, for the storage of petroleum spirit, give to the Local Authority,notice of his intention so to do, and shall immediately upon discontinuing so to use it, take such steps, as may he necessary to render it immune from danger of fire and explosion, including any necessary steps which the Local Authority may require him to take for that purpose." The Council adopted this suggestion and in two cases where tanks were disused during the year, I saw that they were made safe. One licence was issued for storage of 200 lbs. of Carbide of Calcium. The scale of fees for licences to store petroleum ranges from 5/- for a quantity not exceeding 100 gallons, to £1 for a 1,000 - 5,000 gallons. ERADICATION OF BED BUGS. (1) Number of Council Houses found to be infested 5 " " " " disinfested 5 Number of other houses found to be infested 3 " " " " disinfested 3 (2) An electric power sprayer has been used for disinfestations with a non-staining and non-poisonous fluid insecticide and both the sprayer and the insecticide have given highly satisfactory results. (3) Where there is reason to believe that the incoming tenant of a Council House is not too clean, and that the furniture is likely to be infested, an inspection is made and the furniture disinfested if neoossary. (19) (4) The work of disinfestation of houses belonging to the Council is carried out by the Housing Department Repairs Staff under the supervision of a Sanitary Inspector. The Council do not undertake the work of disinfestation for private house owners, but give all facilities they can to help them. HERTFORDSHIRE COUNTY COUNCIL ACT 19550 Caravan Camping Sites. Application was made to the Council by the London Caravan Company Ltd.} for a Licence in respect of their Caravan Camping Ground at Stirling Corner. The application was made under the now Public Health Act 1936, which came into force on October 1st 1937. There is a proviso under this Act, that where there is already in force a Local Act, the latter shall have precedence. Therefore, in this District Sections 91 to 100 of the Herts County Council Act 1935 apply and not the new Public Health Act. Section 93 of the Herts County Council Act prohibits the placing of a moveable dwelling on any land situate within an Urban District having a population of not less than 10,000 without the previous consent of the Council. The section goes on to specify the conditions as to water supply, sanitary conveniences,otc0, which must be observed on a Caravan Camping Ground, also procedure for an appeal against refusal of consent by a Local Authority. The application for LicencG was refused, and notice of appeal was given by the London Caravan Co., The appeal against the Council's refusal came before a special session of Barnet Justices on the 29th November 1937. The appeal was dismissed, the Magistrates stating that the appellants and the Council should get together and consider whether it was possible to come to some arrangement, as they had come to the conclusion that the Act had not been complied with. The London Caravan Co., renewed their application together with plans and proposals for complying with the Council's (20) requirements. These were accepted lay the "Council, but as the proposals had only "been received at the end of the year, the work has not "been started. Employment Agencies. Section 74 of the Herts County Council Act 1935 requires a Local Authority to furnish the County Council during the first week in October in each year, with a report on the conduct and management of employment agencies within their district, with recommendations for the renewal of the Licences or otherwise. During the year the County Council asked for reports in respect of the following premises previously licenced:- (1) Constance Evelyn Briers, 11a, High Street, Barnet. (2) Rosa Figes Coward, 22, High Street, Barnet. (3) Winifred Doris Larkins, 203'^ High Street, Barnet. I found these premises to he suitable for the purpose, and inspected the books which were kept in a satisfactory manner. Consequently no objection was raised to the renewal of the Licences. In addition to the above renewals of Licences an application for an Employment Agency Licence was made by Miss D. Lees, 6, Lawn Mansions, High Street, Barnet, I was asked to inspect the premises and report to the County Council. The agency seeks to provide secretarial work in connection with a Secretarial College at the same address. Upon my report the Council offered no objection to the issue of a Licence, Swimming Baths and Bathing Pools. Byelaws have been passed during the year for securing the purity of the water in Swimming Baths and Pools, also for ensuring cleanliness and adequacy of accommodation, prevention of accidents and regulating conduct of persons using the Baths or Pools. There is only one swimming pool in the district which is attached to a road-house. (21) This has "been inspected from time to time and was always found to be conducted in conformity with the Bye-laws. AIR RAID PRECAUTIOUS. The Additional Sanitary Inspector, Mr. J. B. Wilson, who attended a course of Decontamination at the Civilian Anti-Gas School, Falfield, passing out with an Instructor's Certificate (Special), gave two courses of instruction during 1937 in Anti-Gas measures, one to the Nursing Staff at the Wellhouse Hospital and an Assistant Instructors Course. He is responsible for receiving, checking and storage of the hundreds of Respirators of all types and protective suits etc., now in the custody of the Council, also for the issue and return of equipment loaned to the St„ John's Ambulance Brigade, the British Red Cross Society and Air Raid Wardens Classes. ' Two garcges at No. 33, Wood Street have been made into a temporary A. K. P. Depot, a portion of which has been adapted so as to give an impression of a Refuge Room. I am, Yours obediently, CHARLES WILLIAM HILL, M.S.I.A. Chief Sanitary and Housing Inspector, Meat, Pood and Petroleum Inspector. (22) SUMMARY. SANITARY INSPECTION OF AREA. Number of Dwelling Houses Inspected(Primary inspections) (1) on complaint or general inspection of district. 361 (2) House to House 46 Re-inspections of houses and visits to works in progress. 1,083 Visits to houses on notification of Infectious Diseases, including Tuberculosis. 84 Visits and inspections under Petroleum Acts. 43 Visits to Slaughter Houses. 97 TT 11 Factories (including Factory Laundries). 23 " 11 Bakehouses. 30 " 11 Workshops and Workplaces. 21 " " Outworkers' premises. 8 " ,T Dairies, Cowsheds and Mi Iks h ops. 33 " " Schools. ~ 12 " " Food Manufactories. 21 ,T " Common Lodging House. 6 " " Public Halls, Cinemas etc. 37 " " Caravans attending Barnet Fair. 54 Inspections under Rent Restriction Acts. Nil Disinfections after Infectious Disease, etc. 52 Visits re. Overcrowding Survey )Measuring houses• 347 . )other visits 59 "Permitted Number" Certificates issued under Housing Act 1936 313 SANITARY WORK AND REPAIRS. Houses. Roofs repaired and made watertight. 48 Damp walls remedied. 35 Gutters, downspouts repaired or renewed. 54 Exterior brickwork repaired or repointed. 23 Rooms cleansed, repapored or distempered. 114 Stairs, treads, balusters repaired. 16 Broken sashcords renewed (number of houses). 44 Window frames and cills repaired. 40 Ranges provided or repaired. 46 Coppers provided or repaired. 32 Floors repaired or renewed. 19 Yard surfaces repaired or ropaved. 29 Defective ventilation beneath floors. 19 Hot water systems repaired. 26 Draining Boards renewed 22 Drainage. Drains unstopped and repaired. 31 Drains tested (Sec 41, Public Health Act 1875). 8 Drains reconstructed. 15 Soil or Vent pipes repaired or renewed. 15 Inspection Chambers constructed or repaired. 24 Cesspools abolished. 3 Water Closets and Sinks. Flushing cisterns repaired or renewed. 50 Flush pipes repaired. 9 New basins or traps provided. 19 Seats, doors etc. repaired or renewed. 14 Water pipes repaired or renewed. 21 New sinks. 14 Sink waste pipes unblocked. 17 ► (23) Water Supply. Storage cisterns cleaned. 16 Storage cisterns - new covers provided. 8 Storage cisterns repaired or renewed. 25 Burst water services renewed or repaired. 42 Miscellaneous. New dusTbinsprovided. 71 Accumulations of refuse removed. 17 Nuisances arising from animals and fowls being improperly kept. 2 Rat-infested premises. 24 Defective or insanitary urinals. Verminous roomsdisinfested. (8 houses) 17 (34) FACTORIES, WORKS HOPS AMD WORKPLACES Inspection of Factories, Workshops and Workplaces. Including inspections made by Sanitary Inspectors. Premises. Inspections No. of written notices. Prosecutions. (1) (2) (3) (4) Factories (including Factory laundries) 23 2 – Workshops (including Bakehouses and Workshop laundries) 51 7 _ Workplaces (other than Outworkers' premises) 2 - - Total. 76 9 - DEFECTS FOUND IN FACTORIFS, WOKIBHOPS AND WORKPLACES. Particulars. (1) Number of Found. (2) Dofec by Remedied. (3) Referred to H.M. Inspector. (4) Number of Prosecutions. (5) Nuisances under the Public Health Acts. Want of Cleanliness. 6 6 – - Want of Ventilation. - - - - Ov e r c r owd ing. - - - - Want of Drainage of Floors. - - – - Other Nuisances. 2 2 - - Sanitary Accommodation. Insufficient. - — - – Unsuitable or Defective . 1 1 - Not separate for sexes. - - - - Offences under the Factory and Workshop Acts. Illegal occupation of underground Bakehouses,S.101. – - - - Other offences (excluding offences relating to outwork and offences under the Sections mentioned in the Schedule to the Ministry of Health (Factory & Workshop Transfer of Powers) Order 19S1). Insufficient Fire Escape – _ — — - - - - Total. 9 9 – -