UBAR 5 MED. LIBRARY (1) URBAN DISTRICT OF BARNET. ANNUAL REPORT of the MEDICAL OFFICER OF HEALTH. to the BARNET URBAN DISTRICT COUNCIL. BY CHARLES F. HARDIE, M.A., M.B., B.C., (Cantab) TOGETHER WITH THE ANNUAL REPORT of the SANITARY AND HOUSING INSPECTOR BY CHARLES WILLIAM HILL, M.S.I.A 1925 (2) ANNUAL REPORT of the MEDICAL OFFICER OF HEALTH to the BARNET URBAN DISTRICT COUNCIL by CHARLES F. HARDIE, M.A., M.B., B.C., (Cantab) MEDICAL OFFICER OF HEALTH. (3) MEMBER OF THE COUNCIL. CHAIRMAN: MR COUNCILLOR E. JONES,J.P. VICE CHAIRMAN: MR COUNCILLOR G.J.ALDRIDGE, J.P. MEMBERS: MR COUNCILLOR G. BALL, C.C. " " J. H. BENNETT. MRS " C. BURTON. " " C. DUNCH. " " H. RAMES. " " H. E. FERN, J.P., C.C. " " F. W, HACKFORTH-JONES, J.P. " " C. W. HARRIS. " " W. R. KENT. " "A. KIRBY. " " J. K. MACKAY, J.P. " " W. M. MATHER. " " H. K. NIELD. " " J. D. OLNEY. " " E.G. SMITH. " " H. R. TINSLEY. " " H. WISE. CO-OPTED MEMBERS (HOUSING & TOWN PLANNING COMMITTEE). MRS GRAY. " VICKERS. MEDICAL OFFICER OF HEALTH. CHARLES F. HARDIE, M.A., M.B., B.C., (Cantab). SANITARY INSPECTOR. CHARLES WILLIAM HILL, M.S.I.A. (4) STATISTICAL SUMMARY. FOR THE YEAR. 1935. Area in Acres. 3,112 Population (1911 Census). 10,440 Population (1921 Census). 11,772 Population estimated 1925. 12,150 Population per acre. 4.0 Number of Inhabited Houses (1911 Census). 2,202 Number of Inhabited Houses (1921 Census). 2,487 Number of Inhabited Houses 1925. 2,656 Number of Inhabitants per House (1911 Census). 4.7 Number of Inhabitants per House (1921 Census). 4.05 Number of Families or Separate occupiers (1921 Census) 2,717 Rateable Value. £90,584 Crude Birth Hate per 1000 living. 17.6 Nett Birth Rate per 1000 living. 15.5 Crude Death Rate per 1000 living 13.3 Corrected Death Rate per 1000 living. 11.5 Infantile Mortality per 1000 Births. 68. Average Infantile Mortality for previous 5 years. 47. Phthisis Death Rate per 1000 living. .89 Infectious Cases Notified. 115 Cases of Pulmonary Tuberoulosis Notified. 16 (5) BARNET URBAN DISTRICT COUNCIL. MEDICAL OFFICER'S REPORT. Health Deportment, Council Offices, Wood Street, Barnet. January 1926. To the Chairman & Members of the Barnet Urban District Council. Mrs Burton & Gentlemen, I have much pleasure in presenting to you my Report on the Health of the District for the year 1925. The District is in the Barnet Union, and includes the parishes of Arkley, Chipping Barnet, Hadley, South Mimms and Totteridge, and has an area of 3,112 acres. The Town known locally as High Barnet, stands upon a hill at an altitude of 430 feet above sea level. The geological formation upon the hill consists of gravel overlying beds of London clay, while in the valleys the clay comes to the surface. The Town is situated amidst beautiful soenery, and fringes the borders of Hertfordshire and Middlesex. It is about 10 miles from Charing Cross, on what may be termed the crowning summit of the Northern Heights. The District is bracing and healthy, for which reason it is becoming an increasingly popular residential area. NATURAL AND SOCIAL CONDITIONS. The population is largely residential, end consists chiefly of people whose occupation lies outside the urban area. Those employed in the District apart from tradesmen and their employees, are mainly skilled workers at dental manufacturing, lithographic, printing and optical works. Poor Law Relief is supplied by the Barnet Union and provides a Workhouse and Hospital of about 200 beds, both of which are situated within, the Urban District. i (6) POPULATION. The population of Barnet taken at the Census of 1921, was 11,772. In estimating the population of any District, the estimate is always made to Midsummer. The method of estimating the population adopted by the Registrar General is based on the supposition that the rate of increase during the decennial period 1921 to 1931 will be at the seme rate as in the previous decennial period. Such an estimate would be approximately correct in a District where the growth is more or less on a natural basis viz:- excess of births over deaths; but in Barnet, occupying as it does, the position of a suburb of London, this method is obviously inapplicable, the migration being an ever increasing quantity. The more correct method in this case would be to take the number of inhabited houses and multiply by the average number of persons per house existing at the Census. The following table shows the number of inhabited houses, together with the estimated population for each parish on this basis:- Parish. No. of occupied Houses. Population. Arkley. 258 1174 Chipping Barnet. 095 4282 Hadley. 91 372 South Mimms. 1233 5721 Totterdige. 159 821 DENSITY OF POPULATION. The District has an area of 3,112 acres. The average number of persons to the acre at the Census of 1921 was 3.8. The number of persons to each acre is now estimated at 4. (7) The following table gives the density of population of each parish in the District:- Perish. Area in Acres. Population. Density per acre . Arkley. 830 1174 1.4 Chipping Barnet. 379 4282 11.3 Hadley. 27 372 14.0 South Mirams. 272 5721 21.0 Totteridge. 1604 821 0.5 BIRTH RATE. The nett number of Births registered in the District during the year was 189, as compared with 156 in the previous year . Of these Dirths 95 were male and 94 female. The Birth-rate calculated as the rate per 1000 of the population, is 15.5 as compared with 12.8 in 1924. The nett illegitimate births registered give a proportion of 21.1 per 1000 of the total births. death 162 deaths (nett) were registered in the District during the past year, as compared with 120 in the previous year. The crude death rate is 13.3 per 1000 of the population living at all ages, and the corrected death rate 11.5. Public Institutions such as the Wellhouse Hospital have to be taken into account, as a large number of deaths accur in this Institution belonging to other districts in the Union. It is therefore necessary to make corrections by inward and outward transfers of deaths. (8) INFANTILE MORTALITY. The Rate of Infantile Mortality for the past year was 68 per 1000, as compared with 45 during 1924. The average for the past five years has been 47 per 1000. The Rate is calculated as the ratio of infant deaths to births per 1000. The Notification of Births Act 1907, is administered by the Herts County Council. Infantile Mortality has a variety of causes, among which alcoholism, and contamination of infant's food, improper feeding, impure milk, insanitary conditions, and overcrowding are noteworthy. There have been no deaths from Infantile Diarrhoea during the past year. ZYMOTIC DISEASES. The number of deaths from diseases of this class was 3, viz:1 Scarlet Fever and 2 Whooping Cough. The number of cases of Infectious Diseases notified during 1925 was 115, of this number 55 were Chicken Pox. The following table shows tho number of Notifications to tho Sanitary Authority during the year of each disease specified in the Infectious Diseases (Notification) Act and subsequent Orders, and the number removed to Hospital:- Nature of Infectious Disease. Notified Removed to Hospital Deaths. Smallpox. — — — Scarlet Fever or Scarletina. 32 30 1 Diphtheria and Membranous Croup. 3 2 — Enteric (Typhoid) Fever. 1 — — Typhus Fever. — — — Cholera. — — — Relapsing Fever. — — — Continued Fever. — — — Erysipelas. 5 — — Pulmonary Tuberculosis. 16 14 — Cerobro Spinal Fever. — — — Acute Poliomyelitis. — — — Chicken Pox. 55 — — Encephalitis Lethargica. 3 — — 115 46 1 (9) The case Rate per 1000 of the population is as follows:Smallpox, Nil; Soarlet Fever, 2.6; Diphtheria .2; Enteric .08; puerperal Fever Nil; Erysipelas .41; PREVALENCE OF AND CONTROL OVER INFECTIOUS DISEASES. There have been 32 cases of Scarlet Fever compared with 12 last year. They have been of a mild type, with only one death. 30 of the above cases were removed to Hospital. Disinfection of rooms and bedding has been extensively carried out and the public are encouraged to avail themselves of the disinfection facilities available in non-notifiable diseases such as Cancer etc: MORTAL STATISTICS. Of the 162 deaths, 13 occurred under 1 year. Cancer. There have been 23 deaths from this disease, 9 male and 14 female. Bronchitis, Pneumonia &c: There were 22 deaths from diseases of respiratory organs. Heart Disease was responsible for 25 deaths, and all forms of Tuberoulosis, 15 deaths. There have been no noteworthy causes of Sickness or Invalidity. NURSING ARRANGEMENTS . HOSPITHT AND OTHER INSTITUTIONS. MATERNITY & CHILD WELFARE. A Maternity and Child Welfare Centre is held every Monday at the Church House, Wood Street, Barnet. It is well attended and much appreciated. There is an increasing tendency for women to avail themselves of anti-natal treatment. The centre is administered by the Herts County Council. The Barnet Nursing Association provides one free nurse for the sick poor. There are (1) Two Nursing Homes for paying patients (2) The Victoria Cottage Hospital and (3) a General Hospital (Wellhouse) under the Poor Law. MIDWIVES There are two Midwives practicing in the District. < ? ' (10) HOSPITALS PROVIDED OR SUBSIDISED BY THE LOCAL AUTHORITY OR BY THE COUNTY COUNCIL (1) Tuberculosis Hospital at ware presided by the Herts County Council. (2) Maternity lying -in wards at Wellhouse Hospital, Barnet (provided by Poor Law) 11 beds. (3) Infectious Diseases are received at the Joint Isolation Hospital, Barnet 47 beds. (4) There is a Joint Smallpox Hospital at Cheshunt. AMBULANCE FACILITIES. Infectious Diseases - Motor Ambulanoe at Isolation Hospital. Non-Infectious Diseases - Motor Ambulance at Council Offices, 535 cases of Non-Infectious Diseases were removed by the Motor Ambulance during the past year. A new ambulance fully equipped was obtained during the past year. LABORATORY WORK. The Council have made arrangements with the Clinical Research Association for examinations and reports on all suspected cases of Diphtheria, Typhoid Fever and Tuberoulosis. 27 specimens were examined and reported upon as follows:- Diphtheria 22, Tuberculosis 5, PUBLIC HEALTH STAFF. Medioal Officer of Health, C. F. Hardie, M.A., M.B., B.C., (Cantab). Sanitary Inspector. Charles William Hill, M.S.I.A. Clerical Staff. 1 Clerk. The Sanitary Inspector holds the special qualification as Inspector of Meat and Other Foods under examination of the Royal Sanitary Institute. 0 Salary contribution of one-half from Exohequer Grants, X Part time Officer. & Whole time Officer. (11) LIST OF ADOPTIVE ACTS. BYE-AWS AND I.OCAL REGULATIONS. RELATING TO THE PUBLIC HEALTH. IN FORCE IN THE DISTRICT, WITH DATE OF ADOTION Local Adoptive Aots. The Infectious Diseases (Prevention) ACt 1890 (18th May,1891). The Public Health Acts (Amendment Act) 1890. Parts 1,2,3 & 5 (25tH November 1890). Public Health Acts (Amendment) Act 1907. Parts 2,3,5,6,8,9&10; Sections 52 to 66 inclusive and 68 if Part 4, and Section 81 of Part 7 (15th December 1908) Baths & Washhouses Acts (3rd June 1919). Public Health Act 1925 Part II (except Sections 21 & 22) Part III except section 44 and Part IV January 1st 1926. Sections 21 and 22 Part it Seotion 44 Part III; and whole of Part V adopted with consent of Ministry of Health under Order dated 8th February 1926. Bye-Laws & Regulations. Public Health Act 1875 relating t (1) Cleaning of Footways and Pavements (18th July 1884). (2) Common Lodging Houses (18th July 1884). (3) Prevention of Keeping of Animals on premises so as to be injurious to health (9th May 1905). (4) New Streets and Buildings (9th May 1905). (5) Slaughter Houses (18th July 1884). (6) Removal of House Refuse (13th January 1899). (7) Offensive Trades (13th November 1913). (a) Fellmonger and Leather Dresser. (b) Tallow Melter, Fat Melter or Fat Extraotor. (a) Rag, Bone and. Skin. Dealer. (d) Fish Fryer. (e) Gut Soraper. (8) For Prevention of nuisanoes arising from snow, filth, dust, ashes and rubbish (25th September 1925). (9) Contagious Diseases Animals Act 1866 end Dairies Cowsheds and Milkshops Order 1885. with respect to Dairies.Cowsheds & Milkshops(lst January 1900). (12) WATER SUPPLY. The Distict is supplied with water from the mains of the Barnet water company. The water is derived from deep wells sunk into the chalk, situateone at East Barnet, three at New Barnet, one at Potters Bar and one at Tyttenhanger, Colney Heath. The supply has been good during the past year, and is of undoubted quality. Ho complaints have been received of insufficient quantity. ANALYSIS. Report on the Chemical Analysis of water taken from water main. Appearance; clear; no deposit. Total solids. 36.0 parts per 100,000. Free ammonia. Nil. " " Albuminoid ammonia. 0.0046 " " Nitrite. Nil. " " Nitrate. 0.2 " " Oxygen absorption. 3 hr. 0.015 " " Chlorine. 2.0 " " Hardness: temporary. 14.1 " " " permanent. 8.1 " " " total. 22.2 " " Remarks:- This is a good drinking water, free from organic contamination. It is hard, and in domestic use would form a deposit on boiling and would consume a good deal of soap. DRAINAGE & SEWERAGE. The Town is drained and sewered on the separate system. The Sewage is conveyed to an Irrigation Perm of 56 acres, but pefore it is turned on to the land it is screened and treated by means of detritus and sedimentation tanks and three rotary filters. Pumping is necessary for one sewer, which has its outlet at a low point on the Farm. There ere only a few earth closets in outlying parts of the District. (13) DISPOSAL OF HOUSE REFUSE. The House Refuse is collected weekly by the Council's own staff and conveyed to the Farm and tipped, the provision of a small destructor is a subject receiving the consideration of the Counoil. SANITARY CONDITION & WATER SUPPLY OF SCHOOLS. There are seven schools in the District viz:- Arkley C.E. Infants School; Barnet R.C. Mixed School; Barnet C.C. School with Boys and Girls Departments; Christ Church Sohool with Boys, Girls and Infants Departments; Moxon Street Infants School; National Sohool Boyer, Girls and Infants; Totteridge Sohool, Boys and Girls. It has not been necessary to close any sohool for illness during the year. The water supply is adequate and pure. NATIONAL SCHOOL. This school has been greatly improved as regards light and ventilation and the drainage system reconstructed, during the past year. ARKLEY INFANTS SCHOOL. The condition of this Sohool leaves much to be desired in respeot of Cloak Room and Sanitary accommodation and a report has been presented to the School Managers requesting them to remedy the defects contained in the Report. The Assistant School Medical Officer resides in the District, and visits each School at least once each term. He is in constant touch with the teachers and all doubtful cases of illness are at onoe referred to him. Infectious Cases and Contacts are excluded from the School and disinfection of the Schools carried out when necessary. (14) New Cases. Deaths. Age Periods. Pulmonary Non-Pulmonary Pulmonary Non-Pulmonary. M F M F M F M F 0 1 1 5D 1 10 1 1 15 1 20 3 1 2 25 3 35 1 1 45 2 1 1 1 55 1 1 65 & upwards Totals. 7 9 - 3 3 1 - - (15) PUBLIC HEALTH (PREVENTION OF TUBERCULOSIS) REGULATIONS, 1925. It has not been found necessary to take any action under the above regulations in respect of the milk trade. PUBLIC HEALTH ACT, 1925 SECTION 62. No action has been found necessary under this seotion during the year. CONTROL OF INFECTIOUS DISEASES. No use has been made of the Schick and Diok tests in diphtheria and scarlet Fever nor have any of the artificial methods of immunization against these diseases been employed. VACCINATION. Returns of Vaccinations and Statutory Declarations of Objection to Vaccination in the Barnet Urban District during the year ending 31st December, 1925 as compared with 1924. Number of Cases. 1925. 1924. Certificates of successful vaccination of children under the age of 14 years. 76 70 Statutory Declarations of Conscientious Objection to Vaccination. 113 92 (16) HOUSING, GENERAL HOUSING CONDITIONS IN THE AREA. There continues to be a great dearth of housing accommodation in the distriet despite the Councils many activities in this direction. The extent of the shortage is estimated at between 250 and 300 houses of the cottage and small villa type. The Council ereoted 52 cottages before the War. This has been followed up since the war by 93 new buildings and 8 existing cottages reconstructed under the Addison Scheme; 23 cottages under the Chamberlain Act; 18 Barracks Flats obtained on lease from the War Office and 42 Tenant Purohase Houses. An estate of 22½ acres has been purchased for additional houses, and a oontract for 111 cottages has been let. These will be completed in batches during the next 18 months. Loans totalling approximately £30,000 have been made under the Small Dwellings Acquisition Act, and a Loan of £12,000 under the Housing Act, 1925 for 21 houseB on similar lines to the Council's tenant purohase scheme. This scheme is being run by a private gentleman, who is disposing of the houses at cost price and is not requiring the tenant purohaser to put down any deposit. OVERCROWDING. The dearth of housing accommodation is responsible for a certain amount of overcrowding amongst the poorer classes but only in about 7 cases can this be said to be serious. These cases are receiving the consideration of the Council and no doubt when the first batoh of houses at present under construction is completed, certain of the cases will be dealt with. The Council are erecting a number of small two bedroomed cottages the rents of whioh it is hoped will be within the means of these persons. (17) HOUSING STATISTICS FOR THE YEAR 1926. Number of new houses erected during the year:- (a) Total including numbers given separately under (b). 166 (b) With State Assistance under the Housing Acts. (i) By the Local Authority. 23 (ii) By other bodies or persons. 9 (1) Unfit dwelling-houses. Inspection - (1) Total number of dwelling-houses Inspected for housing defects (under Public Health or Housing Acts). 131 (2) Number of dwelling-houses whioh were inspeoted and recordod under the Housing (Inspection of District) Regs. 1910, or the Housing Consolidated Regs. 1925. 44 (3) Number of dwellinghouses found to be in a state so dangerous or injurious to health as to be unfit for human habitation. 2 (4) Number of dwelling-houses (exclusive of those referred to under the preceding subhead) found not to be in all respects reasonably fit for habitation. 77 (2) Remedy of defects without service of formal Notices. Number of defective dwellinghouses rendered fit in consequenoe of informal action by the Local Authority or their Officers. 53 (3) Action under Statutory Powers. A Proceedings under sec. 3 of the Housing Act 1925. (1) Number of dwelling-houses in respect of which notices were served requiring repairs. Nil. (2) Number of dwelling-houses which were rendered fit after service of formal notioes:- (a) By owners. — (b) By Local Authority in default of owners. - (18) (3) Number of dwelling-houses in respect of which Closing Orders became operative in pursuance of declarations by owners of intention to close. Nil. B Proceedings under Public Health Acts. (1) Number of dwelling-houses in respect of which notices were served requiring defects to be remedied. 19 (2) Number of dwelling-houses in which defects were remedied after service of formal notioes:(a) By owners. 14 By Local Authority in default of owners. Nil. C Proceedings under sections 11,14 & 15, of the Housing Act, 1985. (1) Number of representations made with a view to making Closing Orders. 2 (2) Number of dwelling-houses in respect of whioh Closing Orders were made. 2 (3) Number of dwelling-houses in rospeot of which Closing Orders were determined, the dwelling-houses having been rendered fit. Nil. (4) Number of dwelling-houses in respect of whioh Demolition Orders were made. 2 (5) Number of dwelling-houses demolished in pursuance of Demolition Orders. 2 I am, Yours faithfully, Chas. F. Hardie, M.A., M.B., B.C., (Cantab). MEDICAL OFFICER OF HEALTH. (19) REPORT OP THE MEDICAL OFFICER OF HEALTH FOR THE YEAR 1925. FOR THE URBAN DISTRICT OF BARNET. on the administration of the Factory end Workshop Act, 1901, in with FACTORIES, WORKSHOPS AND WORKPLACES. 1. Inspeotion of Factories, Workshops and Workplaces. Including Inspections made by Sanitary Inspectors or Inspectors of Nuisances, Promises. (1) Inspections. '(2) Number of Writen Notices. (3) Prosecutions. (4) Factories (including Factory Laundries) 21 4 — Workshops (including Workshop Laundries) 54 9 - Workplaces (other than Outworkers' premise) 2 2 1 Total. 77 15 1 2. DEFECTS FOUND IN FACTORIES, WORKSHOPS AND WORKPLACES. * Particulars. (1) Number of Defects. Found. (2) Remedied. (3) Referred to H.M. Inspector. (4) Number of Prosecutions. (5) Nuisances under the Public Health Acts:- Want of Cleanliness. 4 4 - 1 - Went of Ventilation. - - - - Overcrowding. - - - - Want of Drainage of floors. - - - - Other nuisances. 9 9 - 1 Sanitary accommodation. insufficient. - - - - Unsuitable or defective. 2 2 - - Not separate for sexes. - - - - Offences under the Factory and Workshop Acts:- Illegal occupation of underground bakehouse (s. 101). - - - - Other offences (Excluding offences relating to outwork and offences under the sections mentioned in the schedule to the Ministry of Heal (Factories & Workshops Transfer Powers) Order 1921. - - - - Total. 15 15 - 1 (20) ANNUAL REPORT. of the SANITARY INSPECTOR to the BARNET URBAN DISTRICT COUNCIL. FOR THE YEAR ENDING 31st DECEMBER, 1925. BY CHARLES WILLIAM HILL, M.S.I.A. SANITARY AND HOUSING INSPECTOR. 1 9 2 5. (21) BARNET URBAN DISTRICT COUNCIL. SANITARY INSPECTOR'S REPORT. Health Department, Council Offices, Barnet. January, 1926. To the Chairman and Members of the Barnet Urban District Council. Mrs Burton and Gentlemen, I have the honour of presenting to you my Annual Report, giving particulars of the measures carried out in my Department during the year 1925, in administering the numerous Health Aots and Bye-Laws in force within the District. Eaoh suoceeding year sees an addition to the legislation affecting Publio Health Departments, and the past year has been no exception to this rule. The Public Health Act 1925 which is partly adoptive and partly of general application comes into force on January 1st, 1926. Steps are being taken by the Council to include the Adoptive parts. The Provisions of the Act consist chiefly of clauses taken from Private Aots obtained from time to time by various Local Authorities, many of the provisions of whioh will be of great advantage to the District. The Housing Act 1925 came into force on July 1st, 1925 and consolidates the various enactments relating to the Housing of the Working Classes, and contains 137 sections with 6 schedules. The Public Health (Meat) Regulations oame into force on April 1st, 1925, and in my opinion is a great step forward towards securing a uniform moat inspection. The chief clauses will be dealt with later under the heading Meat Inspection. (22) INSPECTION OF DISTRICT. A general Inspection of the District is carried out from time to time and steps taken to abate such nuisances as are discovered. This inspection work includes visits to premises wherein various trades are carried on. In order to secure the carrying out of such remedial works as were found necessary, a preliminary notice or letter was served upon the person in default, requiring him to comply with the particular section of such Act or Bye-law as was infringed, and where compliance necessitated structural works these wore specified. If tho person failed to comply with the notioe, the matter was reported to the Counoil, and a statutory notice was authorised. The following table shows the number end nature of inspections and visits paid during the year:- Number of Houses and Premises inspected. 293 " Houses and Premises re-inspected. 331 " Miscellaneous visits. 41 " Visits to Works in progress. 388 " " Bakehouses. 24 " " Slaughter Houses. 62 " " Homeworker's Premises. 2 " " Workshops and Workplaces. 47 " " Factories. 19 " " Dairies, Cowsheds & Milkshops. 26 " " Sohools. 9 " " re Infectious Diseases 65 " " Laundries. 9 " " Ice Cream Shops. 2 " " Food Manufactories. 14 " " Common Lodging Houses. 18 COMPLAINTS. The number of complaints received during tho year were below the average, and numbered 92. These were enquired into, and where the complaint Justified, notice was served upon the owner or occupier as occasion demanded to abate the nuisance. (23) The following table shows the nature and number of the complaints in which action was taken:- Nature of Complaints No. Defective drains. 6 Dilapidated paving of yards. 7 Absence of paving. 4 Defective and obsolete Water-Closet Cisterns. 11 Non-removal of House Refuse. 7 Offensive Accumulations. 13 Nuisance from smoke. 2 Houses not provided with dust receptacle. 8 Damp Walls. 4 Defective Roofs. 9 Insanitary condition of premises. 4 Fowls improperly kept. 5 Miscellaneous. 9 Total. 89 CARAVANS USED AS DWELLINGS. The Caravans which entered the District to attend Barnet Fair were for the most part inspected as in former years, in order to see that they were kept in a cleanly state and that no illness existed Amongst the inmates which might be of an infectious character. It is essential to keep a strict look out on these caravan dwellers, because living as they do, a nomad life, they are sometimes the medium of the spread of infectious diseases from one town to another. I am glad to say there was no evidence of any illness of an infectious character during the present year. The necessary temporary sanitary accommodation was enforced in different sections of the Fair for the use of the Caravaners and this was supplemented for the general Public by temporary erections at the foot of Barnet Hill by the Bast Barnet Valley Council and at the Station by the Railway Company. An early morning collection was made of all refuse, fish shells &c:. (24) COMMON LODGING HOUSES. There are two Common lodging Houses in the District, and the accommodation provided by these Houses is for 51 Lodgers. One house is a mixed Lodging-House and the other for males only A number of inspections have been paid to them and I always found the promises kept in a fairly clean condition. During Barnet Pair midnight inspections were made to see that the Act and Bye-laws were not infringed. Improvements to the Sanitary accommodation has been carried out at one of these houses. Cards are affixed in each room stating whether they are for single or married couples, and also prescribing the number of persons which can be accommodated therein. Walls and ceilings are required to be limewashed twice a year. INFECTIOUS DISEASES PREVENT ACT. 1890. The Infectious Diseases enumerated below have been investigated and reported upon to your Medical Officer of Health viz:- Scarlet Fever. 38 Diphtheria. 3 Enteric (Typhoid) Fever. 1 Erysipelas. 5 Encephalitis Lethargica. 3 Pulmonary Tuberculosis. 16 60 Mo special sanitary action was taken in respect of the 55 oases of Chicken Pox notified. In all 65 visits were paid to houses wherein infectious cases occurred, ♦ « (25) DISINFECTION. 76 rooms were disinfected in houses wherein cases of Infectious Diseases occurred, and in addition, in a number of oases the bedding was sent to be disinfected by the Steam Disinfector. The Steam Disinfector is available upon payment for disfnfaction of bedding after oases of non-notifiable diseases, and is occasionally made use of. The system of disinfection employed As that of fumigation by means of Formalin Vap Lamps, after which the rooms have ye be thoroughly cleansed. SALE Of FOOD AND DRUGS ACTS. The above Acts are enforced by the County Authority in this District. The following table shows the number and nature of the samples taken in the Urban District of Barnet during the past year, with the results of analyses:- Article Number of Samples Taken. Genuine Adulterated. Extent and Form of Adulteration. Remarks. Milk. 14 13 1 7% added water Case pending Butter. 77 7 Cream. 3 3 Margarine. 1 1 Vinegar. 1 1 Totals. 26 85 1 - - The Board of Agriculture suggest that the minimum number of samples which should be taken in any District is 3 per 1000 of the population. It will therefore be seen from the above table that the number of samples taken falls below the suggested minimum by about 14. V (26) MEAT AID FOOD INSPECTION. Speacial attention has been paid to the question of Meat and Food Inspection and the following diseased and unsound food has been destroyed during the year. 1 Caroase of Beef. Tubercular. 154 libs of Beef. 12 libs of Corned Beef. 18 Caroases of Pigs. Swine Fever and Pneumonia. 84 libs of Cod. The Swine Fever occurred in a herd of pedigree pigs and on the advice of an Inspector of the Ministry of Agriculture the owner caused the whole herd to be slaughtered. I was therefore called in to examine the carcases and pass any that were fit for food. 4 small pigs had previously died. In addition to a sow affected with the disease, the pigs condemned, which were mostly small, were found to be affected with Pneumonia. Twenty-four pigs were passed as fit for food and sent to the London Meat Markets. I communicated with the Chief Meat Inspector informing him of the circumstances and asking him to make a final examination before the carcases were placed on the market which he did. The new Meat Regulations which came into operation on April 1st, 1925 provide for the notification of the time and place of the Slaughter of animals with certain exceptions, special provisions dealing with Shops, Stores, Transport and Handling of Meat, and hygienic methods to be adopted in Slaughter Houses and powers ere given which may be said to provide a real step forward in the production of clean meat. DAIRIES COWSHEDS AND MILKSHOPS ORDER. The number of persons registered to sell milk is 23 as follows:- Dairies and Cowsheds. 15 Milkshops and Purveyors of Milk. 8 Total. 23 (2?) All the above promisee have been inspected during the year and special attention paid to the sanitary arrangements, distance of manure heaps from the dairy so as to prevent contamination of milk by flies &c:. The Drainage to one Cowshed at Totteridge was found to be defective. Inasmuch as these sheds are drained into a cesspool and a sewer is being laid along the road in front of the premises the question of re-drainage has been left on abeyance fore short period, but as soon as the sewer is ready to receive the drainage, the owner will be required to re-construct the drain and connect to the sewer. The cesspool will also be abolished. One person was found to have erected a Cowshed in a field and was selling milk without being registered. The shod did not comply with the Order and Bye-laws and steps are being taken to secure conformity therewith. Six notices wore served in connection with these premises. The ease with which Milk is contaminated, both by disease germs and filth, and the ready manner in which it transmits disease, make the question of the hygiene of the dairy of great importance and the enforcement of the necessary hygienic measures a necessity, end this subject will receive additional attention in the future. PRIVATE SLAUGHTER HOUSES. The number of Slaughter Houses in the District is six. Pour Of these are licensed and the remaintag two are registered. Frequent removal of the garbage is insisted upon, also limewashing when necessary. Steps are being taken to improve the drainage of one of these premises. . (28) FACTORY AND WORKSHOP ACT, 1901. The total number of workshops upon the register is 54. These were visited in order to see that the various provisions of the Act were being complied with as regards sanitary accomodation, ventilation, fire escape etc. BAKEHOUSES. The number of bakehouses upon the register is 6. An underground bakchouse which has not been in use for some years has been struck off the Register. They have all been inspected at least twice during the year. Statutory notices were served in two cases (1) To remedy a damp wall and (2) To cleanse and limewash the bakehouse and cleanse the cake mixer. The latter case was reported to the Council and it was decided to warn the occupier that unless the premises were kept in a more cleanly state in future legal proceedings would be taken. FACTORIES. FIRE ESCAPE MP SANITARY CONVENIENCES. An inspection was made of Fire Escapes and Sanitary Conveniences to all Factories. In the case of one Factory the drains which were found defective were repaired. The other defects were of a minor character. WORKPLACES. A number of complaints were received during the year with regard to an Animal Depot in Victoria Lane. Notices were served in respect of an accumulation of manure and also for a nuisance caused by dead Tortoises. Some thousands of Tortoises were being kept heaped up in a portion of the premises and hundreds of them died. (29) The matter was brought to the notice of the Society for Prevention of Cruelty to Animals, hut experts apparently differed on the question of cruelty and no action was taken. The proprietor was proceeded against however, under Section 23 of the Public Health Act 1907 for converting a room on the premises into a dwelling, and a conviction was secured. The Council also made Bye-laws for the better control of these premises. These Bye-laws have now been allowed by the Ministry of Health HOUSING OF THE WORKING CLASSES. INSANITARY PROPERTY. Two houses were condemned as unfit for human habitation during the year, and Closing Orders were served upon the owners. As no effort has been made to place the houses into a habitable condition they are being closed and steps will be taken to have them demolished. The houses in question are Nos. 125 and 127 Wood Street. One of these houses is now empty and it is hoped to secure possession of the other in the near future. Of the houses closed in previous years demolition orders were made for Nos. 1 and 2 Pendleton Cottages, Mays lane Road, and the property was pulled down. Plats have now been erected upon the site. Possession has been obtained of two of the little Briers Cottages and four of the Briers Cottages which had previously been condemned. Steps will be taken for the demolition of these properties when possession can be obtained of the remaining Cottages, Dut progress is slow in this direction owing to the difficulty of the tenants in finding other accommodation. Notices were served to secure the remedying of various defects in other properties inspected as stated in the Housing Statistics on Pages 17 and 18. (30) The Council are building a number of small houses which it is hoped will be occupied by some of the persons in condemned houses. A contract for 111 houses of different types is now in hand on the Wellhouse Estate of 22½ acres which when fully developed will contain about 220 houses. DRAINAGE AND SANITARY CONVENIENCES. The drains of 34 premises were inspected during the year. In 28 cases defects were found to exist which were remedied, 9 of the drains being entirely taken up and relaid. DUSTBINS. Sixty-nine notices were served under section 36 of the Public Health Act 1875 requiring the provision of dustbins. Fifty-four notices had been complied with at the end of the year and fifteen were outstanding. SANITARY CONDITIONS OF CINEMAS, DANCING HALLS, AND OTHER PLACES OF ENTERTAINMENT. The usual annual certificates required by the licencing Authorities were issued in respect of the following premises certifying that they were fit for the nature of entertainment proposed to be given, in respect of fire escape, ventilation, dressing and cloak rooms and lavatory accommodation:- Barnet Cinema and Theatre. Church House. Ewen Hall. The "Mitre" Dancing Hall. Council Chamber. The now fire resisting staircase provided at my request in the Church House is a great improvement on the old wooden staircase. ■ .. (31) PETROLEUM ACTS 1871 to 1881 AND ORDERS IN COUNCIL. Nineteen licences were granted to store petroleum. These licences were for quantities varying from 40 to 4000 gallons. The total quantity of petroleum spirit which may be kept in the licenced stores in the District is 8540 gallons. The various stores were all inspected during the year and found to be kept in accordance with the conditions of the licences. The licences granted included Jour Pumps. Applications for additional Pumps will shortly be made in respect of new Garages now being erected. I am, Yours obediently, CHARLES WILLIAM HILL, M.S.I.A. SANITARY, HOUSING & MEAT & FOOD INSPECTOR. (32) SUMMARY OP SANITARY WORK PERFORMED IN CONNECTION WITH INSPECTION OF DISTRICT. HOUSES- INSPECTION. Houses inspected in routine 201 " " on Complaint 92 Visits re Infections Diseases 65 Common Lodging Houses inspected 18 Schools, visits to 9 TRADE PREMISES- VISITS. Bakehouses 24 Laundries 9 Cowsheds 18 Milkshops 8 Ice Cream Shops 2 Food Manufactories 14 Slaughter Houses 62 Markets 4 Other Factories 19 " Workshops and Workplaces 47 Visits to works in progress 388 REMEDIAL WORKS. HOUSES- Houses Disinfected (rooms) 76 " Cleansed 2 " Closed 2 " Demolished 2 11 in which overcrowding abated 1 V?alls damp and defective, remedied 8 Roof, guttering or spouting repaired 16 Windows made to open 2 Lighting improved Nil Ventilation improved 1 DRAINAGE- Water Closets repaired 21 W.C's supplied with water 2 Cisterns and Flushing apparatus repaired or renewed 26 Pipes disconnected, sink etc. 1 Drains reconstructed 9 "tested by water (length) 45 " " smoke 21 Houses connected to sewer 8 Cesspools emptied 5 (33) WATER- Wells Closed Nil Samples taken for analysis 1 Houses connected with water mains - Cisterns cleansed, repaired or covered 8 YARDS- Yards peved or repaired 29 Sanitary Dustbins provided 54 Accumulations of Manure &c: removed 17 SCHOOLS- Repairs executed &c: 2 TRADE PREMISES- Factories provided with Fire Escape or repaired 1 Workshops cleansed or Limewashed 3 Sanitary Conveniences unsuitable or defective 2 Other nuisances 8 Bakehouses cleansed or Limewashed 1 VARIOUS- Temporary or moveable dwellings inspected. Numerous. Birds and animals kept,removed 11 Miscellaneous 38 LEGAL WORK- Notices served, informal 242 " " Statutory 107 Summonses issued 1 Convictions 1