LIBRARY URBAN DISTRICT_OFBARHET. ANNUAL REPORT of the ACTING MEDICAL OFFICER OF HEALTH to the BARNET URBAN DISTRICT COUNCIL by ARTHUR L. HYATT, M.R.C.S.(Eng.), L.R.C.P. Together with the ANNUAL REPORT of the CHIEF SANITARY INSPECTOR by JOHN B. WILSON, M.S.I.A., M.R.San.I. 1951. (2) BARNET URBAN DISTRICT COUNCIL. « MEDICAL OFFICER'S REPORT. Public Health Department, 31 Wood Street, Barnet. To the Chairman and Members of the Barnet Urban District Council. Ladies and Gentlemen, I have much pleasure in presenting to you my Annual Report on the health of the District for the year 1951- It is drawn up on the lines indicated in Circular 42/51 of the 10th December, 1951 - as requested by the Ministry of Health. STATISTICS AND SOCIAL CONDITIONS OF THE AREA. Area (in acres) 4,200 Population (1931 Census) 15,064 Registrar-General's Estimate of resident Population, mid 1951 24,680 Number of Inhabited Houses 7,180 Rateable Value £262,969 Product of a Penny Rate £1,068 NATURAL AND SOCIAL CONDITIONS. The population is largely residential, and consists chiefly of people whose occupation lies outside the urban area. Those employed in the district, apart from the tradesmen and their employees, are mainly skilled workers at dental manufacturing, lithographic, printing and optical works. EXTRACT FROM VITAL AND MORTAL STATISTICS OF THE YEAR. Total. M. F. Live Births Legitimate 302 158 144 Illegitimate 15 8 7 Birth Rate per 1.000 of the estimated resident population (standardised): 11.82 Total. M. F. Still Births Legitimate 10 4 6 Illegitimate 1 Nil 1 Still Birth Rate per 1.000 total (live and still) Births; 33.54 (3) Total. M. F. Deaths 282 135 147 Death Rate per 1,000 of the estimated resident copulation (standardised): 11.19 Death Rate from Puerperal causes Per 1.000 total (live and still) Births: Nil. Deaths of Infants under one year of age:- Total. M. F. Legitimate 8 5 3 Illegitimate Nil Nil Nil Death Rate of Infants under one year of age per 1,000 live Births: 25.24 Deaths of Infants under four weeks of ace:- Total. M. F. Legitimate 5 4 1 Illegitimate Nil Nil Nil Death Rate of Infants under four weeks of age per 1.000 live Births: 15.77 Too much importance should not be paid to the rates where the actual number of cases is small, e.g. - below 10, as such rates are of little statistical significance. Thus, if an attempt is made to compare this area with other districts, or with previous years, it would be better to compare actual cases. GENERAL PROVISION OF HEALTH SERVICES FOR THE DISTRICT. The Council are not the appropriate Local Authority for the purpose of the National Health Service Act, 1946, and do not therefore control any of the Hospitals or ancillary services in the District. Within this District, and under the control of the Barnet Group Hospital Management Committee, are the following: - Barnet General Hospital, Wellhouse Lane, Barnet. 478 Beds. St. Stephen's Hospital, Mays Lane, Barnet. 88 Beds. (Female medical, Ear, Nose and Throat, and male long-stay cases) Victoria Maternity Hospital, Wood Street, Barnet. 48 Beds. "Elm Bank", Arkley. (Female long-stay cases) 27 Beds. The following is a list of Clinics etc. available in the District. Tuberculosis Clinics are held daily, by appointment, at Barnet Chest Clinic, Wellhouse Lane, Barnet. At Vale Drive, there is a Minor Ailments Clinic for Schoolchildren every Monday morning and a Clinic for Remedial Exercises. A Speech Therapy Clinic is held on Wednesdays and Fridays, Child Guidance Clinic (4) on Thursdays, an Eye Clinic on Wednesdays and an Orthoptist attends all day on Mondays. An Infant Welfare Clinic is held every Tuesday afternoon and also on the first and third Fridays in each month. Dental Clinics are held every weekday. These Clinics are subject to alteration and it is advisable to enquire of the Vale Drive Clinic (BAR: 6194) for the current days and times. Home Helps Service. The local office of the Herts County Council Home Helps Service at No. 31 Wood Street, Barnet, is open daily from 11-12 noon, Monday to Friday inclusive. PUBLIC HEALTH STAFF. Acting Medical Officer of Health. øx Arthur L. Hyatt, M.R.C.S.(Eng.), L.R.C.P. Chief Sanitary Inspector. +ø John Baillie Wilson, M.R.San.I., M.S.I.A. Additional Sanitary Inspector. ø Howard W. C. Alloway, A.R.San.I., M.S.I.A. One Clerk-Typist. One Rodent Operative. + Holds the special qualification as Inspector of Meat and other Foods under examination of the Royal Sanitary Institute. ø Salary Contribution of one half from Exchequer Grants, x Part-time Officer. WATER SUPPLY. The major area of the District is supplied with water from the mains of the Barnet District Water Company, and the remainder is served by the Colne Valley Water Company. All rater supplied by the Barnet District Water Company is chlorinated. A pathological staff is maintained and the water is regularly tested at all stages. During the year, a total of 220 Chemical and 1567 Bacteriological examinations of the water were made by the Company's own staff. 13O1 of these samples were representative of the supply and 98.8% were found to be free from B. Coli. Five samples of water were taken by the Department and submitted for analysis with (5) satisfactory results, coliform organisms being absent in 100 millilitres in each case. The Colne Valley Water Company exercises constant supervision, and members of the staff are on duty day and night throughout the year examining samples. All the water supplied by this Company is chlorinated. The water supply is satisfactory both from the Chemical and Bacteriological aspects. The water supply to the whole district is considered adequate, and all houses are supplied by these companies mains. DRAINAGE AND SEWERAGE. The town is drained and sewered on the separate system, excepting the older portions of the district where it is a combined system. The sewage is conveyed to an Irrigation Farm of 56 acres, but before it is turned on the land it is screened and treated by means of detritus and sedimentation tanks,and three rotary filters. Pumping is necessary for three sewers which have their outlets at a low point on the farm. Part of the Totteridge area drains to the Finchley Borough sewers; in the outlying areas some properties are on cesspool drainage or domestic sewage disposal plants, and a few only have pail closets. SANITARY CONDITIONS AMD WATER SUPPLY OF SCHOOLS. There are in the district fourteen schools administered by the South Herts Divisional Education Executive Committee, viz:- Queen Elizabeth's Boys and Girls Grammar Schools; Ravenscroft Secondary Modern School; Foulds School (Junior Mixed and Infants Departments); Christ Church School for Infants; Christ Church School for Girls; Christ Church School for Juniors; The Elizabeth Allen Secondary Modern School; Grasvenor Infants School; Underbill School (Junior Mixed); Underbill School (Infants); St. Andrew's Church of England School (Junior Mixed and Infants Departments); St. Catherine's Roman Catholic School (Senior Girls, Junior Mixed and Infants Departments) and Whitings Hill School (Junior Mixed and Infants Departments). The Further Education Centre, Technical Institute, Wood Street, Barnet, is available for Girls and Boys between the ages of 15 and 18. (6) DISPOSAL OF HOUSE REFUSE. The house refuse is collected weekly in covered mechanical conveyances and conveyed to the Council's Sevage Farm, where it is loaded into Contractor's covered lorries and disposed of daily by controlled tipping outside the district. PREVALENCE OF. AND CONTROL OVER, INFECTIOUS DISEASE. The following table shews the number of Notifications to the Sanitary Authority during the year, of each disease specified in the Public Health Act, 1936, and the various Infectious Diseases Regulations, and the number of cases removed to Hospital:- DISEASE NOTIFIED REMOVED TO HOSPITAL Scarlet Fever 43 26 Whooping Cough 76 1 Diphtheria and Membranous Croup Nil Nil Measles 261 7 Acute Pneumonia 16 5 Meningococcal Infection 2 2 Acute Paralytic Poliomyelitis Nil Nil Acute Encephalitis Nil Nil Dysentery 9 5 Ophthalmia Neonatorum Nil Nil Puerperal Pyrexia 27 27 Smallpox Nil Nil Paratyphoid B. 1 1 Food Poisoning 10 Nil Erysipelas 4 3 Cholera Nil Nil Typhus Nil Nil Tuberculosis 23 13 TOTALS 472 90 (7) AGE INCIDENCE OF INFECTIOUS DISEASE. DISEASE NUMBER OF CASES NOTIFIED YEARS OF AGE 0- 1- 2- 3- 4- 5- 10- 15- 25- 45- 65- 75- Total Scarlet Fever - 1 1 2 6 25 7 l - - - - 43 Whooping Cough 6 3 8 12 12 31 2 - 2 - - - 76 Measles 8 29 37 42 50 82 6 1 5 1 - - 261 Acute Pneumonia 1 - - - 2 - 3 - 4 6 - - 16 Meningococcal Infection 2 - - - - - - - - - - - 2 Dysentery - 2 - - 1 2 l 1 1 1 - - 9 Puerperal Pyrexia - - - - - - - 5 22 - - - 27 Paratyphoid B. - - - - - - 1 - - - - - l Food Poisoning - - - 2 - 1 - - 5 1 1 - 10 Erysipelas - - - - - 1 - - 1 - 1 l 4 TOTALS 17 35 46 58 71 142 20 8 40 9 2 l 449 Of the foregoing, the following cases normally resident outside the district were notified from the Barnet General Hospital and the Victoria Maternity Hospital:- Scarlet Fever 1; Measles 4; Meningococcal Infection 1; Puerperal Pyrexia 24; Paratyphoid B. 1. The cases of Tuberculosis removed for treatment are usually sent to Clare Hall, South Mimas, or Grins's byke, Harrow Weald Sanatoria; other patients with an infectious disease being sent to Coppett's Wood Hospital, Muswell Hill, N.10. The Case Kates, of certain diseases, per 1,000 of the population for the district are as follows, with the rates for England and Wales shewn in parenthesis:- Scarlet Fever 1.70 (1.11); Who ping Cough 3.08 (3.87); Measles 10.41 (14.07); Acute Pneumonia O.65 (0.99); Food Poisoning 0.41 (0.13); Erysipelas 0.16 (0.14). (8) The incidence of Measles and Whooping Cough is now back to more normal proportions and compares favourably with the national rates. The general publicity given to Food, poisoning and the public interest therein has resulted in better notification of this and allied conditions, and may be considered a good reason for the apparent increase in the Incidence. VACCINATION. No primary or revaccinations were performed by the Medical Officer of Health under the Public Health (Smallpox Prevention) Regulations, 1917 • TUBERCULOSIS. NEW CASES AND MORTALITY CURING 1951, YEARS OF AGE. NEW CASES DEATHS Pulmonary Non-Pulmonary Pulmonary Non-Pulmonary M. F. M. F. M. F. M. F. 0 _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ 1 1 _ _ 1 _ _ _ _ 5 _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ 15 2 1 _ _ _ 1 _ _ 25 6 _ _ _ _ 2 _ _ 35 3 2 _ _ _ _ _ _ 45 2 2 _ _ _ 1 _ _ 55 2 1 _ _ _ _ _ _ 65 _ _ _ _ 1 _- _ _ 75 and over _ _ _ _ _ _- _ _ TOTALS 16 6 _ 1 1 4 _ _ t There -ere no enses of wilful neglect or of refusal to notify Tuberculosis in any form. PUBLIC HEALTH (PREVENTION CF TUBERCULOSIS) REGULATIONS, 192*5. It has not been found necessary tc take any action under the above Regulations, relating to Tuberculous employees in the Milk Trade. (9) PUBLIC HEALTH ACT. 1936. SECTION 172. COMPULSORY REMOVAL TO HOSPITAL OF CASES OF PULMONARY TUBERCULOSIS. No action was necessary under the above Section. NATIONAL ASSISTANCE ACT. 1948. - SUCTION 47. No official action has been taken under this Act to secure the removal, to suitable premises, of persons in need of care and attention. MORTAL STATISTICS. Of 282 deaths, 8 occurred under one year of age. The following were the chief causes cf death:- Heart Diseases 105; Cancer 40 (19 males and 21 females); Vascular Lesions of nervous system 39; Bronchitis 12; Pneumonia (all forms) 12; Influenza 9; Tuberculosis 5; Motor vehicle accidents 2; Other accidents 10. SCABIES (PUBLIC HEALTH) NO, 1 ORDER. 1944. Only one case of Scabies was notified during the year and this case, an adult, was treated at home. I am, Yours faithfully, ARTHUR L. HYATT, M.R.C.S.(Eng.), L.R.C.P. ACTING MEDICAL OFFICER OF HEALTH. (10) B A R N E T URBAN DISTRICT COUNCIL. CHIEF SANITARY INSPECTOR'S REPORT, Public Health Department, 31 Wood Street, Barnet. To the Chairman and Members of the Barnet Urban District Council. Ladies and Gentlemen, I have the honour to present to you my Annual. Report giving details of the work of the Department during the year 1951 in administering the various Acts, Regulations and Byelaws in force in the district. The ten cases of food poisoning notified in the district this year, although not an alarming figure, do show an increase over the previous year. This, in spite of the attention being paid by all concerned to the preparation of food in cafes, restaurants etc. In point of fact all ten cases arose from eating, at home, food prepared in the home. Eight people suffered, in varying degrees, by a housewife using a raw duck egg to whip up with some cream "to make it go round". Attention has been drawn to the necessity of boiling duck eggs for 15 minutes, or otherwise properly cooking them, e.g. as in cake making. The suspected food in the other two cases was ox tongue which had been cooked and pressed at home. The food poisoning outbreaks which receive the greatest publicity are those affecting large numbers of people at one time as at wedding receptions, beanfeasts, canteens or restaurants. In the homes, where only two or three persons are at risk, throughout the year there must be far more affected and a considerable amount of working time is lost due to the so called "chill on the stomach", quite often a doctor is not consulted and the cose is never officially notified. INSPECTION OF DISTRICT. General Inspections of the district have been carried out periodically and all complaints investigated. The process of serving a preliminary or intimation notice upon the person in default, specifying the works necessary to remedy the defects found, is usually followed. It was found necessary to ask your authority to serve only sixteen (11) Statutory Notices, where persons failed to comply with the preliminary notice, or the strict legal procedure was necessary in the first instance. SANITARY INSPECTION OF AREA. The following is a list of the number and nature of visits and inspections:- Visits re: nuisance and sanitary defects l4l6l Visits re: infectious diseases 184 Visits and inspections under Petroleum Acts 67 Visits to factories 83 Visits to Outworkers' premises 7 Visits to food manufactories, cafes etc 260 Visits to public halls, cinemas etc 13 Visits re: Overcrowding Survey 68 Visits to inspect meat and other foods 176 Visits to Schools 29 Visits re: pollution of watercourses 134 Visits to Tents, Caravans and Sheds 111 Visits under Shops Act 28 Visits re: Emergency Feeding Survey 81 Visits re: Animals etc., improperly kept 69 Visits re: Rodent Infestations 2889 Visits re: other infestations 103 Miscellaneous visits 125 NUMBER OF NOTICES SERVED DURING YEAR. Number of Informal Notices 168 Number of Statutory Notices 16 Informal Notices complied with 156 Statutory Notices complied with 19 SANITARY WORK AND REPAIRS. The following is a list of repairs effected as a result of informal and formal notices served:- Roofs repaired and made weatherproof 35 Gutters, downspouts repaired or renewed 30 Exterior brickwork repaired or reprinted 23 Walls, dampness remedied 39 Chimney stacks and pots repaired or renewed 10 Yard surfaces repaired or repaved 5 Ceilings repaired or renewed 41 Wall plaster repaired or renewed 46 Walls and ceilings cleansed and decorated 73 Floors repaired or renewed 15 Sub-floor ventilation rectified 4 Doors and frames repaired or renewed 16 Windows repaired 41 Stair treads and balusters repaired 2 Fireplaces repaired or renewed 7 Drains cleared 39 Drains repaired or reconstructed 37 Inspection chambers repaired or reconstructed 30 (12) Soil or vent pipes repaired or renewed 9 Gullies, channels and fenders repaired or renewed 29 Water Closet pans, fittings, repaired or renewed 27 Sinks, waste pipes, etc., repaired or renewed 20 Storage cisterns, cleansed, repaired or renewed 5 Water services, repaired, renewed or re-instated 10 Dustbins renewed 6 Refuse accumulations removed 16 Animals and fowls: nuisance from improper keeping 10 HOUSING ACT. 1936. Five houses were reported to the Council as being unfit for human habitation and incapable of repair at a reasonable expense, and the necessary steps were taken under Section 11 of the Housing Act, 1936. Two houses forms part of a long terrace; demolition is impracticable for the time being and the owner has given undertakings that these houses will not be used for human habitation. Demolition Orders were made in respect of two further houses but the owners had not obtained vacant possession by the end of the year so that demolition has not been effected yet. A Demolition Order was made in respect of the fifth house, which completed the action commenced late in 1950. During 1951, this house and another on which a Demolition Order had been made last year, were demolished, the tenants being rehoused by the Council. The Council have also rehoused three overcrowded families during the year, leaving some ten cases to be dealt with. PUBLIC HEALTH ACT. 1936. INFECTIOUS DISEASE. INVESTIGATION AND DISINFECTION. Investigations have been carried out of the more important cases of infectious disease listed in the Medical Officer of Health's Report, and forty-six premises were disinfected. Where necessary, bedding is taken for disinfection to the Barnet General Hospital under arrangements made with the Barnet Group Hospital Management Committee. Three hundred end nineteen library books were disinfected, before return to libraries. (13) CLEAN FOOD. In my report of last year, mention was made that copies of the "Clean Food" Byelaws were not available for distribution during 1950. Copies were sent out to all food traders during February of this year. A meeting was arranged shortly afterwards to discuss the implementation of the Byelaws: all food traders in the district were invited, but attendance was poor. I have had meetings and discussions with the local Licensed Victuallers and Master Bakers Associations on the subject of clean food production, and talks on "Clean Food" and "Food Poisoning in the Home" have been given to an association of mothers who attend a local welfare clinic. It is found that frequent visits to food premises - over 400 inspections were made for various purposes - give the opportunity for discussion, and advice can be given on the spot. Informal action by way of letters and preliminary notices act as confirmation and improvements are being made. There are many reasons why staff will not attend meetings and the only way to get the advice over is by inspections during working hours of the premises concerned. One proprietor, as a result of this type of action by the department, decided to rebuild Ms bakehouse, and plans were submitted and approved by the Council during the year, although the actual work of reconstruction has not yet commenced. Similarly, a further bakehouse, in a very dilapidated condition, has ceased to operate as such, the space now being used for storage purposes. Many Food Stalls at the Barnet Fair were inspected and some improvements were made in the methods of washing up of plates, cups etc., and the protection of food on display. Arrangements were being made during October for the holding of a Clean Food Exhibition early in 1952, with the assistance of the Ministry of Agriculture and Fisheries, and provisional bookings have been made of a suitable hall. The Ministry's programme being full up to the end of their financial year some delay may occur, and no definite arrangements can be made for 1952 until the government estimates for their next financial year are finalised. (14) FOOD POISONING. Some details have been given elsewhere in this report of the food poisoning outbreaks and the following table is included as requested by the Ministry. Food Poisoning Notifications (Corrected) Returned to Registrar General. 1st Quarter. 2nd Quarter. 3rd Quarter. 4th Quarter. Total. Deaths. Nil. 8 2 Nil 10 Nil Outbreaks Due to Identified Agents. Total Outbreaks. 1 Total cases 8 Deaths Nil Outbreak due to: Salmonella Organisms: enteritidis var. essen. Outbreaks of undiscovered cause. Total Outbreaks. 1 Total cases 2 Deaths Nil Single cases. Nil The second outbreak was probably due to a Staphylococcal toxin poisoning. Some Ox tongue was purchased and cooked on a Wednesday and eaten by members of the household on Thursday and Friday, but no ill effects were felt by anyone until two male friends of the family ate the tongue on Saturday evening. Within 2½ hours of consumption of the tongue, both men were in a collapsed state and arrived in the hospital from different areas at almost the some time: No samples of the suspected food were available. This latter case was probably due to lack of hand washing, and, as previously mentioned, the importance of this aspect of the duties of food handlers, whether in the home or in business premises, cannot be too often repeated. ICE CREAM. 24 Samples of ice cream, were taken during the summer period with the following results:- Manufacturer. Grade I, Grade II. Grade III. Grade IV. Total. A 3 1 1 2 7 B 3 1 - - 4 C 2 - 1 2 5 D - 1 - - l E 2 1 - - 3 I - 1 1 1 3 J - - - 1 l Total 10 5 3 6 24 (15) With one exception, all these manufacturers are from outside the district; the exception, Manufacturer J, has now given up making. The results of the tests on the samples are given to the shopkeepers; any unsatisfactory report is followed up with the authority in whose area the ice cream is made and with the manufacturer direct. The small number of samples taken during this year is barely sufficient to give a picture of the purity of the ice cream. This can only be obtained by frequent sampling over a fair period and now that the necessary equipment is to hand, the frequency of sampling will be stepped up in the forthcoming year. DAIRIES. COWSHEDS AND MILKSHOPS. The control of the production of milk is now vested in the Ministry of Agriculture and Fisheries. The local authority is responsible for the inspection and registration of milk distributors and other dairy premises not directly concerned with the actual production of milk, and for licensing for the sale of Designated Milks. This district is within the London area which was designated, as from 1st October, 1951, a "Specified Area" under an Order made by the Minister of Food. This Order will be Enforced by the Hertfordshire County Council as the Food and Drugs Authority for the area. Briefly, the Order prohibits the retail sale of any raw ungraded milk in a specified area: only milk from tested herds or heat treated milks may be sold by retail. Twenty samples of milk have been taken, in course of delivery to the consumer, and submitted to the appropriate tests with the following results:- Designation. Samples Taken. Satisfactory. Unsatisfactory. Tuberculin Tested (Pasteurised). 6 6 Nil Pasteurised. 9 9 Nil Pasteurised (Homogenized). 2 2 Nil Pasteurised (Channel Islands). 2 2 Nil Ungraded (Raw). 1 1 Nil TOTALS 20 20 Nil (16) No official action was taken under Regulation 20 of the Milk and Dairies Regulations 1949, to stop or restrict the sale of milk. No cases of disease wore notified which could be attributed to the consumption of infected milk. Four samples of milk submitted for biological examination were reported positive to Brucella Abortus. The three farms concerned "'ere visited: it was found that no milk was sold by retail but that all milk was already being despatched to local plants for pasteurisation. Eight Dealer's Licences and twenty-two Supplementary Licences were granted for the retail sale of milk under the Milk (Special Designation)(Raw Milk) Regulations, 1949 and 1950, and the Milk (Special Designation)(Pasteurised and Sterilised Milk) Regulations, 1949 and 1950, viz:- Designation. Dealer's Licences. Supplementary Licences. Tuberculin Tested. 3 7 Accredited. Nil 1 Pasteurised. 3 7 Sterilised. 2 7 MEAT AND FOOD CONDEMNED. The following is a list of the articles of food condemned as unfit for human consumption during the year. Meat. Fresh Meat. Canned Meats. Beef (English and Scotch) 145 lbs. Veal (Jellied) 54½ lbs. " (Imported) 9 ¾lbs. Beef with gravy and Vegetables 7¾ lbs. " (Cooked, minced) 20 lbs. Corned Beef 43½ lbs. Lamb (English) 49½ lbs. Corned Mutton 13½ lbs. Chicken (English) 8 lbs. Ham (Imported) 549½lbs. Offals 2l¾ lbs. Luncheon Meat 76 lbs. Rabbit (Irish) 60 lbs. Pork (Imported) 13 lbs. Fish. Wet Fish (Cod Fillets) 1 stone. Herring Roes 10 tins. Cockles and Crab 11 jars. Pilchards and Sardines 12 tins. Salmon 4 tins. Prawns and Shrimps 2 tins. (17) Fruit. Cherries 5 tins. Fruit Salad 32 jars. Apples 21 tins. Apricots 28 jars and tins. Bananas 47 tins. Plums 25 jars and tins. Miscellaneous 21 tins. Pears 63 jars and tins. Vegetables and Cereals. Beans 100 jars and tins. Flour and Oatmeal 12 lbs. Peas 69 tins. Tapioca 18 lbs. Tomatoes 15 tins. Spaghetti 6 lbs. Vegetables, Miscellaneous 15 tins. Cereals, Miscellaneous 3½ lbs. Groceries. Cheese 41 lbs. Baby Food 282 tins. Syrup 5 lbs. Milk 21 tins. Jam and Marmalade 78 lbs. Soup 25 tins. Ground Almonds 28 lbs. Fickles and Sauces 67 jars. Fruit Puddings 3 lbs. Paste (Meat) 5 jars. Chocolates 7¾ lbs. Sweets (various) 113 lbs. FOOD AND DRUGS ACT. 1936. These sections of the above Act concerning sampling of food-stuffs for adulteration and sophistication are enforced by the County Authority in this district. The following details shew the number and nature of the samples taken in the Urban District of Barnet during the year, and the results of the analyses. Article. No. of Samples Taken. Genuine. Adulterated. Milk 4 4 - Ice Cream 1 1 - Pork Sausages 3 3 - Be of Sausages 1 1 — Total 9 9 - In view of the Ministry of Health suggestions that samples should be taken on the ratio of 3 per 1,000 of the population the number taken in this district could with advantage be increased, having regard to the fact that Barnet, as a shopping centre, serves a greater number of people than the resident population. (18) PRIVATE SLAUGHTER-HOUSES AND SLAUGHTER OF ANIMALS ACT. 1933. Since Food Rationing was introduced the Private Slaughter-houses in the district, three in number, have been closed, meat rationing being more easily organised and administered from one abbatoir supplying a large area than from a number of small slaughter-houses in each district. It is doubtful whether these small private slaughter-houses will again be permitted to function. There are ten persons licensed by the Council as fit persons to slaughter animals. These slaughtermen, although licensed by this Authority, work outside the district. No complaint has been received from the districts in which they work concerning the conduct of any of these men. DRAINAGE. One property was redrained, so as to dispose of a septic tank, and connection made to the Council's sewer. Drainage works, to obviate pollution of surface water severs and ditches, were required and executed at nine properties, and the drains of eight premises were found to be defective and were reconstructed under supervision of this department. REPORT REQUIRED BY SECTION 128 (3) OF THE FACTORIES ACT. 1977. Inspections for purpose of provisions as to health. Number on Register. Number of Inspections. Written Notices. Occupiers Prosecuted. (1) Factories in which Secs. 1,2,3,4 and 6 are to be enforced by Local Authorities. 5 7 _ _ (2) Factories not included in (l) in v.hich Sec. 7 is enforced by the Local Authority. 63 74 _ _ (3) Other premises in which Sec. 7 is enforced by the Local Authority. 5 2 _ _ Total 73 83 _ _ In only one instance was it necessary to require cleansing of premises: this was duly carried out. (19) Outworkers (Sections 110 and 111). Section 110. Section 111. No of outworkers on lists received. No. of instances of work in unwholesome premises. Notices Served. 40 - - In addition to the above, seven outworkers' premises were visited. Three certificates as to means of escape in case of fire were issued, under Section 34 of the Act luring the year, after execution of works. A further factory has been inspected with a view to revising the existing certificate, but owing to extensive alterations, structural and otherwise, it is not expedient to issue new certificates until these have been completed. HERTFORDSHIRE COUNTY COUNCIL ACT. 1935. Provision is made in this Act for the conduct and regulation of:- (1) Tents, Caravans and Sheds; (2) Hairdressers' and Barbers' Premises; (3) Swimming Baths and Pools, and (4) Employment Agencies. Tents. Caravans and Shads. The increasing use of caravans as a means of "solving" the housing problem has led to nine applications being made for the siting of some fifteen caravans in the district. All applications were approved subject to conditions and compliance with requirements of the Act. Three approvals, covering nine caravans, were not taken up for various reasons, for example, refusal of permission under the Town Planning Acts. These individual sitings are in addition to the multiple site in private ownership on the Barnet Bye-Pass, an extension of which was the subject of negotiations during the year. The vans which entered the district for the purpose of attending Barnet Fair were in many instances visited in order to ascertain their sanitary condition, and to enquire as to any illness which might be of an infectious character. (20) The provision of temporary sanitary accommodation was enforced in different sections of the fair for the use of the caravanners and public, and regular removal of refuse was arranged. Hairdressers' and Barbers' Premises. The Council made Bye-laws for securing the cleanliness of these premises in I937. There are seventeen such establishments in the district. No complaints were received concerning their cleanliness or conduct nor were any serious breaches of the Bye-laws noted during inspections of such premises. Public Swimming Baths and Bathing Pools. The only public swimming pool in the district, vis, at "The Barn", Barnet ByPass, is not now in use. Employment Agencies. Prior to the war there were four employment agencies in the district. These, however, are no longer in existence owing to the control of labour and it seems unlikely they will be started up again. RODENT CONTROL. Prevention of Damage by Pests Act. 1949. A full time rodent operator is employed for treatment of infestations of rats and mice. The table below gives details of the work carried out during the year:- Type of Property. Local Authority Dwelling Houses Agricultural All other (including Business and Industrial) Total 1. Total number of properties in District. 24 6866 26 728 7644 2. Number of properties inspected during 1951 as a result (a) of notification or (b) otherwise. (a) 1 148 - - 177 (b) 6 402 - 45 453 3. Number of properties (under 2) found to be infested by rats. Major - 2 - - 2 Minor 5 288 - 29 322 4. Number of properties found to be seriously infested by mice. - - - 4 4 5. Number of infested properties (under 3 and 4) treated by the Local Authority. 5 290 - 32 327 6. Number of "block"control schemes carried out 54 (21) No notices were served under Section 4 of the Act, requiring the execution of works, in connection with infestations, but four informal notices, requiring alterations to chicken houses, were served and complied with. A test bait was made of 10% of the soil sever manholes in the district, from the results of which are based the two maintenance treatments of the sewers, required by the Ministry of Agriculture and Fisheries as one of the conditions under which the Ministry pay 50% of the Council's rodent control expenses. This year, it was necessary to poison 13 and 24 manholes in these maintenance treatments as compared with 47 and 25 manholes poisoned in the treatments carried out during the previous year,and 82 manholes in the only treatment of the year before. These results are gratifying and it is possible that the hard core which is most difficult to eliminate has been reached. No charge is made far the use of the Rodent Operator's services in treating private domestic premises, provided that the occupiers cooperate in carrying out their duties under the Act. The cost of treatments at all other premises is recoverable. DISINFESTATIONS. Five infestations of bed bugs have been treated during the year, and a further fourteen premises were sprayed with a D.D.T. solution, or otherwise treated, for infestations of beetles, ants, fleas, cockroaches, etc: twenty-six wasps' nests were destroyed. PETROLEUM (REGULATION) ACTS. 1928 AND 1936. There are thirty-eight persons licensed to store petroleum and petroleum mixtures upon the Register. The Licences are for varying quantities from 10 gallons to 6,000 gallons. The total quantity of petroleum spirit and mixtures which may be kept in the various stores is 28,600 gallons and 100 Lbs, Sixty-seven inspections were made, but there was no serious breach of the Regulations to report. (22) One Licence was issued, for the storage of 112 lbs. of Carbide of Calcium. The scale of fees for Licences to Store Petroleum ranges from 5/- for a quantity not exceeding 100 gallons to £1 for 1,000 to 5,000 gallons, and £2 for 6,000 gallons. I am, Yours obediently, J, B. WILSON. Chief Sanitary Inspector.