I UBAR 31 LIBRARY URBAN DISTRICT OF BARNET ANNUAL REPORT of the MEDICAL OFFICER OF HEALTH to the BARNET URBAN DISTRICT COUNCIL ARTHUR L. HYATT, M.R.C.S. (Eng.) , L.R.C.P. Together with the ANNUAL REPORT of the CHIEF PUBLIC HEALTH INSPECTOR by JOHN B. WILSON, M.A.P.H.I. , M.R.S.H. 1963 (2) BARNET URBAN DISTRICT COUNCIL. MEDICAL OFFICER'S REPORT. Tel: Barnet 5511 Public Health Department, 31 Wood Street, Barnet. To the Chairman and Members of the Barnet Urban District Council. Ladies and Gentlemen, I have pleasure in presenting to you my Annual Report on the health of the district for the year 1963. It is drawn up in accordance with the directions of the Ministry of Health Circular 1/64 of the 13th January, 1964. STATISTICS AMD SOCIAL CONDITIONS OF THE AREA. Area (in acres) 4,290 Population (1951 Census) 25,019 (1961 Census - Preliminary Estimate) 27,834 Registrar-General's Estimate of Resident Population, mid 1963 27,580 Number of Inhabited Houses 8,741 Number of Persons per House 3.16 Rateable Value £1 ,520,034 Product of a Penny Rate £6,180 NATURAL AND SOCIAL CONDITIONS. The population is largely residential, and consists chiefly of people whose occupation lies outside the urban area. Those employed in the district, apart from the tradesmen and their employees, are mainly skilled workers in light industries. EXTRACT FROM VITAL AND MORTAL STATISTICS OF THE YEAR. Total. M. F. Live Births Legitimate Illegitimate 415 222 193 24 12 12 Live Birth Rate per 1 .000 of the estimated resident population (Standardised):15.60 Illegitimate Live Births per cent of the total live births: 5.47% (3) Total M. F. Still Births Legitimate Illegitimate 5 Nil 5 – – – Still Birth Rate per 1,000 total (live and still) births: 11.26 Total. M. F. Total Live and Still Births Legitimate Illegitimate 420 222 198 24 12 12 Infant Deaths (Under one year of age) Legitimate Illegitimate 5 4 1 – – – Infant Mortality Rates: Total Infant Deaths per 1.000 total live births: 11.39 Legitimate Infant Deaths per 1 .000 legitimate live births: 12.05 Illegitimate Infant Deaths per 1 .000 illegitimate live births: 0.00 Neo-natal Mortality Rate (Deaths under 4 weeks per 1 .000 total live births): 11.39 Early Neo-natal Mortality Rate (Deaths under 1 week per 1 .000 total live births): 11.39 Perinatal Mortality Rate (still births and deaths under 1 week combined per 1.000 total live and still births): 22.52 Maternal Mortality (including abortion): Number of Deaths: Nil Rate per 1 .000 total live and still births: 0.00 Total. M. F. Deaths (All Causes): 300 142 158 Death Rate per 1.000 of the estimated resident population (Standardised): 10.77 Too much importance should not be paid to the rates where the actual, number of cases is small, e.g. - below 10, as such rates are of little statistical significance. Thus, if an attempt is made to compare this area with other districts, or with previous years, it would be better to compare actual cases. GENERAL PROVISION OF HEALTH SERVICES FOR THE DISTRICT. The Council are not the appropriate Local Authority for the purpose of the National Health Service Act, 1946, and do not therefore control any of the Hospitals or ancillary services in the district. Within this district, and under the control of the Barnet Group Hospital Management Committee, are the following:- Barnet General Hospital, Wellhouse Lane, Barnet. 490 Beds. St, Stephen's Hospital, Mays Lane, Barnet. 88 Beds. (Female medical, Ear, Nose and Throat, and Male long-stay cases) (4) Victoria Maternity Hospital, Wood Street, Barnet. 59 Beds. The following is a list of Clinics etc., available in the district. Tuberculosis Clinics are held daily, at Barnet Chest Clinic, Wellhouse Lane, Barnet. 'Phone BAR: 744-1 for an appointment. At Vale Drive the following Clinics are held: During term time Clinics for Schoolchildren are held on the second and fourth Monday morning in each month and for remedial exercises every Monday afternoon. A Speech Therapy Clinic is held on Wednesdays and Fridays, Child Guidance Clinics on Thursdays, and an Eye Clinic on Wednesday mornings. An Infant Welfare Clinic is held every Tuesday afternoon all the year round. Immunisation sessions are held on the first and third Tuesday mornings in each month. Dental Clinics by appointment. For the convenience of residents at Totteridge there is an Infant Welfare Clinic at "Dollisfield" every Friday afternoon with a Doctor in attendance on the first and third Fridays. A branch Clinic at St, Stephen's Hall, Bells Hill, is held every Thursday from 9.30 - 11.45 a.m. with a doctor in attendance, except on the fifth Thursday in the month. These Clinics are subject to alteration and it is advisable to enquire of the Vale Drive Clinic (BAR: 6194) for the current days and times. The Family Planning Association hold sessions at 133 Wood Street, each Wednesday between 6 - 7.30 p.m. Also Monday, Tuesday and Thursday evenings by appointment. (BAR: 5345) Home Help Service. The local office of the Herts County Council Home Help Service at The Health Centre, East Barnet Road, East Barnet, is open daily from 9 - 5, Monday to Friday inclusive. (HAD: 1251) British Red Cross Loan Centre, next to Christ Church. St. Albans Road. Barnet. Equipment for invalids may be obtained, on loan, between 8-9 p.m. , Monday and 9.30 - 11 a.m. Thursday, or by arrangement ('phone Mrs. B. Shipton, BAR: 5604 or Mrs. D. Cheason, BAR: 0117). (5) PUBLIC HEALTH STAFF. Medical Officer of Health. + Arthur L. Hyatt, M.R.C.S.(Eng.) , L.R.C.P. Chief Public Health Inspector, John B. Wilson, M.A.P.H.I. , M.R.3.H. Deputy Chief Public Health Inspector. Howard W.C. Alloway, M.A.P.H.I., A.R.S.H. Additional Public Health Inspector. Roy W. Pursglove, M.A.P.H.I. Pupil Public Health Inspector. Raymond W.E. Farr. Authorised Meat Inspector. James Ramsay (Appointed 12th November, 1963). Clerk. Miss Marjorie Runtz. J.C. Mace. + J.H. Hamence, Ph.D., M.Sc. , F.R.I.C. + P.S. Hall, B.Sc. , F.R.I.C. + D.H. Roberts, M.R.C.V.S. All Public Health Inspectors hold the special qualification as Inspector of Meat and other Foods under examination of the Royal Society of Health. The Authorised Meat Inspector holds a Certificate as Inspector of Meat and other Foods granted by the Royal Sanitary Association of Scotland. + Part-time officers. WATER SUPPLY. The major portion of the district is supplied with water from the mains of the Lee Valley Water Company, the remainder of the district being supplied by the Colne Valley Water Company. (6) All water supplied to the district is chlorinated and both companies employ trained laboratory staff who regularly take samples of water for bacteriological examination at the various stages of treatment, and from the mains, thus checking the quality of the water as actually supplied to the consumer. The supply to the whole district is of a high level of purity and is considered adequate. All the 516 bacteriological and 15 chemical samples of the water supplied to the district, and examined by the Company's staff, were found to conform to standards of purity considered suitable for public supply. The work of providing duplicate seven million gallon reservoirs and a water tower at Arkley is progressing satisfactorily despite delays due to the frosty weather at the beginning of the year. These works, when completed, will improve the supply to a substantial area of the district. DRAINAGE AND SEWERAGE. The town is drained and sewered on the separate system, excepting the older portions of the district where it is a combined system. The sewage is conveyed to a Sewage Disposal works of 56 acres, where it is screened, grit removed in detritus tanks, thence to primary settlement tanks and thereafter distributed over three 80 ft. diameter bacteria filters, followed by humus removal in rectangular tanks before discharge to the Dollis Brook. Pumping is necessary for three sewers which have their outlets at a low point on the works. Part of the Totteridge area drains to the Finchley Borough sewers, and the Barnet ByPass area into Elstree Rural District Council's sewers. All the closely built up areas of the district are now served by soil sewers, leaving the more rural portions of Totteridge and Rowley, with their low density housing on cesspool drainage or domestic sewage disposal plants. The East Middlesex Trunk sewerage scheme has reached the stage where it is anticipated that the overloaded Barnet Sewage Works will be eliminated early in 1964. SANITARY CONDITIONS AND WATER SUPPLY OF SCHOOLS. There are in the district fifteen schools administered by the South Herts Divisional Education Committee, as listed on the next page. (7) Queen Elizabeth's Boys Grammar School, Queens Road, Barnet. Queen Elizabeth's Girls' Grammar School, High Street, Barnet. Ravenscroft Secondary School, Barnet Lane, N.20. Elizabeth Allen Voluntary Secondary School, Wood Street, Barnet, (with annexe at Byng Road, Barnet). Whitings Hill Junior Mixed and Infants' School, Whitings Road, Barnet. Foulds Junior Mixed and Infants' School, Byng Road, Barnet. Christ Church Junior Mixed School, Alston Road, Barnet. Christ Church Infants' School, Byng Road, Barnet. Grasvenor Infants' School, Grasvenor Avenue, Barnet. Underhill Junior Mixed School, Mays Lane, Barnet. Underhill Infants' School, Mays Lane, Barnet. St. Andrew's Voluntary Junior Mixed and Infants' School, Totteridge Green, N.20. St. Catherine's Roman Catholic Infants School, Vale Drive, Barnet. St. Catherine's Roman Catholic Junior and Secondary School, Union Street, Barnet. Barnet College of Further Education, Wood Street, Barnet. (Available for girls and boys aged 15 to 18 years during the day, and for persons over school-leaving age in the evenings.) In addition to the above there are five private schools, viz:- Hillgarth Nursery School, Blenheim Road, Barnet. The Anchorage Kindergarten School, 38 Normandy Avenue, Barnet. Norfolk House School, Fitzjohn Avenue, Barnet. (Nursery School) St. Marthe's Convent School, Wood Street, Barnet. Mrs. Blundell's School, Southover, Woodside Park, N.12. (Nursery School) All schools in the district are supplied with mains water and connected to the Council's main drainage system. DISPOSAL OF HOUSE REFUSE. The house refuse is collected weekly in covered mechanical conveyances and taken to the Council's Sewage Farm, where it is loaded into Contractor's covered lorries and disposed of daily by controlled tipping outside the district. PREVALENCE OP, AND CONTROL OVER, INFECTIOUS DISEASE. The table on the next page shews the number of Notifications to the Sanitary Authority during the year, of each disease specified in the Public Health Act 1936, and the various Infectious Disease Regulations, and the number of cases removed to Hospital. (8) DISEASE NOTIFIED REMOVED TO HOSPITAL Scarlet Fever 11 Nil Whooping Cough 12 1 Diphtheria and Membranous Croup Nil Nil Measles 562 1 Acute Pneumonia 7 Nil Meningococcal Infection Nil Nil Acute Poliomyelitis Nil Nil Acute Encephalitis 1 1 Dysentery 142 5 Ophthalmia Neonatorum Nil Nil Puerperal Pyrexia 28 28 Smallpox Nil Nil Malaria Nil Nil Typhoid and Enteric Fevers Nil Nil Paratyphoid Fever 1 1 Food Poisoning 1 Nil Scabies 1 Nil Tuberculosis 5 4 TOTALS 771 41 AGE INCIDENCE OF INFECTIOUS DISEASE DISEASE NUMBER OF CASES NOTIFIED YEARS OF AGE 0- 1- 2- 3- 4- 5– 10- 15- 25- 45- 65- 75- Total Scarlet Fever – – 1 1 1 8 – – – – – – 11 Whooping Cough 1 2 1 1 1 3 3 – – – – – 12 Measles 11 31 73 68 84 271 16 5 2 1 – – 562 Acute Pneumonia – – – – – – – – 1 3 1 2 7 Acute Encephalitis – – 1 – – – – – – – – – 1 Dysentery 5 3 2 4 3 73 18 5 22 5 – – 142 Puerperal Pyrexia – – – – – – – 12 16 – – – 28 Paratyphoid Fever – – – – – – – – – 1 – – 1 Food Poisoning – – – – – – – – – – 1 – 1 Scabies – – – – – – – 1 – – – – 1 TOTALS 17 36 78 74 89 357 37 23 41 10 2 2 766 The cases normally resident outside the district notified from the Barnet General Hospital and Victoria Maternity Hospital., which are included in these tables, are as follows:- Dysentery 3; Puerperal Pyrexia 27; Paratyphoid 1. The high number of notifications of Dysentery relates to the outbreak of Sonnei Dysentery at the Whitings Hill School. By the normal meana of notifications and checking on family contacts we had reached a total of (9) seventy-five cases and then in consultation with the County Medical Officer's Department and the Public Health Laboratory Service, Colindale, it was arranged, on June 12th, to take stool specimens from all children (450) at the school. This resulted in us finding 158 children positive and some 65 relatives of them also positive. A strict hygiene drill was instituted at the school including dipping of hands in a suitable disinfectant, hand washing, cleansing and disinfection of water closets, taps, etc., and also a reversal of the normal procedure of exclusions so that the school work could continue almost as normal. Family contacts attending other schools were excluded, as also were food handlers. Following appropriate treatment by their general practitioners, further stool specimens were taken from all children at the school resulting in only twenty-five "positives". The last known case in or connected with the school was cleared of infection on 12th August. Although some families had children attending two or sometimes three schools there was no outbreak at those other schools. I would like to place on record my appreciation of the co-operation and assistance received from the teaching staff, Whitings Hill School and all the parents of children at that school. Early in December, a minor outbreak of Sonnei Dysentery occurred at the St. Andrews School, Totteridge. No connection was found with the earlier outbreak in Barnet. On receiving notifications of two cases in school children the strict hygiene drill was instituted at the school straightway. The last known date of onset in a child was 23rd December and in an adult on 28th December. The total number of cases was twenty-five (seventeen school children and eight family contacts) with no further complications with other schools. (10) FOOD POISONING. Annual Return of Food Poisoning Notifications. Food Poisoning Notifications (Corrected) Returned to Registrar General. 1st Quarter. 2nd Quarter. 3rd Quarter. 4th Quarter. Total. Nil Nil 1 Nil 1 Cases otherwise ascertained. 1 st Quarter. 2nd Quarter. 3rd Quarter, 4th Quarter, Total. Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil Symptomless excreters. 1st Quarter. 2nd Quarter. 3rd Quarter. 4th Quarter. Total. Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil Fatal cases. 1st Quarter. 2nd Quarter. 3rd Quarter. 4th Quarter. Total. Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil TUBERCULOSIS. PUBLIC HEALTH (PREVENTION OF TUBERCULOSIS) REGULATIONS. 1925. No formal action was necessary under the above Regulations, relating to Tuberculous employees in the milk trade. PUBLIC HEALTH ACT. 1956. SECTION 172. COMPULSORY REMOVAL TO HOSPITAL OF CASES OF PULMONARY TUBERCULOSIS. No action was necessary under the above Section. NEW CASES AND MORTALITY DURING 1963. YEARS OF AGE NEW CASES DEATHS Pulmonary Non-Pulmonary Pulmonary Non-Pulmonary M F M F M M F 0 – – - - - — — - 1 - - - - - - - - 5 - - - - - - - 15 - - - 1 - - - - 25 - - - - - - - - 35 - - - - - - - 45 - - - - - - - - 55 1 1 - 1 1 - - - 65 and over 1 — - - - - — - TOTALS 2 1 - 2 1 - - (11) The anti tuberculosis measures, mass radiography, clinics etc., are all playing a part in the scheme to reduce the incidence of this disease. With improved housing conditions, better education, antibiotics and the eradication of tuberculosis in bovine animals it would seem possible now to bring about the defeat of tuberculosis in humans. The number of new cases notified this year (5) is well below the average number for the last ten years, i.e. 18,3 new cases. The Mass Radiography Unit was stationed in the district from 15th to 18th October with sessions for factory personnel and the public. Cases removed for treatment are usually sent to Clare Hall Hospital, South Mimms, other patients with an infectious disease being sent to Coppett's Wood Hospital, Muswell Hill, N.10. INTERNATIONAL VACCINATION CERTIFICATES. At the end of 1952 a new form was introduced for International Vaccination Certificates requiring authentication of the signature of the doctor performing vaccination or inoculation of persons proceeding overseas. During the year three hundred and seventy-one such certificates were authenticated and marked with the internationally agreed stamp. NATIONAL ASSISTANCE ACT. 1948 -SECTION 47. NATIONAL ASSISTANCE (AMENDMENT) ACT. 1951 -SECTION 1. NATIONAL ASSISTANCE ACT. (AMENDI-ENI) ACT. 1962. Six elderly persons came under our notice during the year, and arrangements for their admission to a hospital or home were made, where necessary, without the need for the use of compulsory powers. The visiting Service of the Old People's Welfare Committee continues to render invaluable help in keeping in touch with the elderly housebound people and in bringing in the various services which are available. The Chiropody Service which is arranged at the five Evergreen Clubs and at home in certain circumstances gives relief to many. Part of the prefabricated building in Salisbury Road, rented by the Council, is used by the Women's Voluntary Service for its services generally; in a kitchen and dining room they prepare and provide meals (12) for the elderly, also for the "Meals on Wheels" service. In the Fern Room, a recreational room for the old people, tea, coffee and biscuits are available at a small charge every morning. The whole building is centrally heated and during the winter months, particularly, provides a warm resting place when the elderly are out for exercise or shopping. MORTAL STATISTICS. Of 300 deaths, 5 occurred under one year of age. The following were the major causes of death:- Heart disease 108; Cancer 58 (29 males and 29 females); Vascular Lesions of Nervous system 31; Bronchitis 15; Pneumonia 26; Motor Vehicle accidents 5; Other accidents 2; Suicide 5. MORTUARY ACCOMMODATION. Under arrangements made with the East Barnet Urban District Council their mortuary is available for the use of this district, but no use was made of this during 1963. I am, Yours faithfully, ABTHUR L. HYATT, M.R.C.S.(Eng.), L.R.C.P. MEDICAL OFFICER OF HEALTH. (13) BARNET URBAN DISTRICT COUNCIL. CHIEF PUBLIC HEALTH INSPECTOR'S REPORT. Public Health Department, 31 Wood Street, Barnet. To the Chairman and Members of the Barnet Urban District Council. I have the honour to present my Annual Report for the year 1963. Owing to the full engagement of the staff in connection with the outbreak of Sonnei Dysentery at the Whitings Hill School for almost three months, and the employment of one inspector full time at the privately owned slaughterhouse for six weeks before the new Meat Inspector commenced duties in November, there has been some diminution of the amount of normal routine work undertaken. Fortunately, the proposed No. 5 Smoke Control Area, the survey for which was carried out during the year, was below average in the number of premises to be visited, i.e. 292, so that the survey, the compilation of estimates etc. , the report to Council and subsequently to the Ministry were completed on schedule. Confirmation of the Smoke Control Order was not received from the Ministry by the end of the year". The No. 4 Smoke Control Order came into operation on 1st October 1963, bringing a further 687 houses under smoke control. The Council had authorised the starting of the proposed No. 6 Area following the completion of the No. 5 Area. My thanks are due to the staff of the Public Health Department for their unstinted support throughout the year and to all the officers of the Council for their assistance and co-operation. INSPECTION OF DISTRICT. General inspections of the district have been carried out periodically and all complaints investigated. The process of serving a preliminary or intimation notice upon the (14) person in default, specifying the works necessary to remedy the defects found, is usually followed. The Council's authority to serve Statutory Notices is requested where persons fail to comply with the preliminary notice or where the strict legal procedure is necessary in the first instance. SANITARY INSPECTION OP AREA. The following is a list of the number and nature of visits and inspections:- Visits re: Housing Acts 51 Visits re: nuisance and sanitary defects 1,055 Visits re: noise 52 Visits re: infectious diseases 1,712 Visits re: Petroleum Acts 89 Visits re: factories 28 Visits re: outworkers' premises 7 Visits re: food manufactories, cafes, etc. 598 Visits re: ice cream and sampling 46 Visits re: aged and infirm persons 76 Visits to inspect meat and other foods 544 Visits re: schools 46 Visits re: pollution of watercourses 6 Visits re: Clean Air Act 511 Visits re: Riding Establishments 15 Visits re: Shops Acts 35 Visits re: Tents, Caravans and Sheds 33 Visits re: keeping of animals 7 Visits re: rodent infestations 1,727 Visits re: other infestations 228 Miscellaneous visits 101 NUMBER OP NOTICES SERVED DURING YEAR. Number of Informal Notices 101 Number of Statutory Notices 36 Informal Notices complied with 73 Statutory Notices complied with 58 SANITARY WORK AND REPAIRS. The following is a list of repairs effected as a result of informal and formal notices served:- Roofs repaired and made weatherproof 24 Gutters, downspouts repaired and renewed 18 Exterior brickwork repaired or repointed 9 Walls, dampness remedied 20 Chimney stacks and pots repaired or renewed 3 Yard surfaces repaired or repaved 1 Ceilings repaired or renewed 12 Wall plaster repaired or renewed 20 Walls and ceilings cleansed and decorated 31 Floors repaired or renewed 4 Doors and frames repaired or renewed 4 Windows repaired 23 (15) Staircases repaired or renewed 2 Drains and sewage disposal plants cleared 16 Drains and sewage disposal plants repaired or reconstructed 22 Inspection chambers repaired or reconstructed 15 Soil or vent pipes repaired or renewed 1 Gullies, channels and fenders repaired or renewed 13 Water Closet pans, fittings, repaired or renewed 16 Cesspools abolished, connections to sewer 16 Storage cisterns, cleaned, repaired or renewed 11 Accumulations removed 8 Dustbins provided 2 Fireplaces adapted or renewed 80 DRAINAGE. Owing to the poor state of the sewage disposal systems of six houses in Arkley, which were deemed to be public sewers within the meaning of the Act, the Council, after the necessary investigations, decided to take over part of a private sewer in Arkley Lane and made a declaration that the defined length should vest in the local authority as a public sewer. Plans are being drawn for the laying of a short length of public sewer to connect thereto and for the connection of the drains of the six houses. The department arranged and supervised the repair of a frontage drain by agreement with the owner. The costs, with interest, will be recovered by instalments from the owner. HOUSING. During the year, no Demolition Orders were made but one house was demolished, and one made fit, both of which were the subject of earlier Demolition Orders. There still remain two tenants to be rehoused from two houses the subject of Demolition Orders made prior to this year. No cases of overcrowding, as defined by the Housing Act, have come to our notice during the year. In the oase of a house on which repairs had been started but apparently abandoned, use was made of Section 27 of the Public Health Act 1961 , to secure progression of the work particularly externally where piles of bricks and rubble, rusting scaffolding etc., presented an unsavoury picture. (16) PUBLIC HEALTH ACT. 1956. INFECTIOUS DISEASE INVESTIGATION AND DISINFECTION. Investigations have been carried out of the more important cases of infectious disease listed in the Medical Officer of Health's Report. The dysentery outbreak at Whitings Hill School was the major effort in this field during the year. Investigation of family contacts showed parents working at the School and the local General Hospital. Some 1,500 stool specimens were submitted to the Public Health Laboratory Service. Where necessary, premises are disinfected and bedding is taken for disinfection to the Barnet General Hospital under arrangements made with the Barnet Group Hospital Management Committee. Four hundred and seventy-four library books were disinfected before return to libraries, a considerable increase, due to the Measles epidemic in the early part of the year. FOOD PREMISES IN THE DISTRICT. Number of Bakers 10 " " Butchers 14 " " Cafes, Restaurants, etc. 21 " " Confectioners 25 " " Fishmongers 4 " " Greengrocers 14 " " Grocers 31 " " Licensed Premises 27 " " Chemists 7 FOOD PREMISES REGISTERED UNDER SECTION 16 OF FOOD AND DRUGS ACT. 1955. (a) Manufacture, Sale and Storage of Ice Cream 47 (b) Manufacture of Sausages and Preserved Meats, etc. 25 DAIRIES REGISTERED UNDER MILK AND DAIRIES (GENERAL) REGULATIONS 1959. Number of Dairies 1 Any infringements found are rectified or remedied by informal action when pointed out to the trader, and no formal action was needed. During out visits of inspection every opportunity is taken to discuss food hygiene with staff and management, and several small matters regarding cleanliness (17) and protection of open foodstuffs were taken up informally and rectified, The old Barnet Cattle Market is now used as a stall market selling a wide variety of merchandise and including several food stalls. On average the food stalls consisted of:- Butchers 1 Fishmongers 1 Poulterers 1 Grocers 1 Confectioners 2 Greengrocers 3 Snack Bar 1 Regular visits have been made to the market and it is felt that a reasonable standard is being maintained. SHOES ACT. 1950. Through our liasion with the Surveyor's Department all plans for shops and shop fronts are seen by this Department and compliance with the requirements of the Act is secured at the planning stage. It is remarkable that so many shopfitters do not make any provision for ventilation in the shop front until their attention is drawn to the point, ICE CREAM. All samples of ice-cream are taken to the Central Public Health Laboratory, Colindale, for testing by the Methylene Blue Test. This is merely indicative and provides no legal standard: the Public Health Laboratory Service suggest that owing to the numerous factors governing the hygienic quality of ice-cream it is unwise to pay too much attention to the bacteriological results on any single sample, judgement being based rather on a series of samples. It is suggested as desirable thai at least 50% should fall into Grade I, 80% into Grades I or II, not more than 20% into Grade III and none into Grade IV. There is one company registered for the manufacture of ice-cream and the following table gives the results of samples taken from the factory. Grade I 59 (78.7%) Grade II 11 (93.3% - Grades I and II) Grade III 2 ( 2.7%) Grade IV 3 ( 4.0%) The number of samples taken is rather less than usual owing to our preoccupation with the Dysentery outbreak at a local school. (18) The company concerned, whose distribution is mainly through the medium of mobile vans, have followed the trend in the trade of going over to the production of "Soft Ice-cream". This product is made up in the factory as a pasteurised liquid mix, packed in plastic containers, which must be kept below 45°F, until it is frozen. The freezing process is carried out in a machine installed in the van and operated by the salesman on each sale, delivering ice-cream at a temperature little below the critical freezing temperature of the mix. New methods of manufacture usually mean a reduction of handling of foods but in this case the driver salesman is now responsible for the cleansing and sterilisation of an intricate piece of machinery. It is not surprising that, although the results of samples taken at the factory are reasonably satisfactory, complaints are received from other districts where the mobile salesmen operate. It is to be hoped that in the near future this company will employ a suitably qualified person to take samples daily at the factory and at all stages of production so that only Grade I material goes forward to the outdoor sales section. There are forty-seven premises registered for the storage and sale of ice cream, being one less than last year. DAIRIES. COWSHEDS AND MILKSHOPS. The control of the production of milk is vested in the Ministry of Agriculture Fisheries and Pood. The local authority is responsible for the inspection and registration of milk distributors and other dairy premises not directly concerned with the actual production of milk, and for licensing for the sale of Designated Milks. Five samples of milk have been taken, in course of delivery to the consumer, and submitted to the appropriate tests with the results as shown on the next page. Since all the milk retailed in the district is supplied by the large Companies, maintaining laboratory staffs, there would not appear to be a need for such frequent sampling as heretofore. No official action was taken under Regulation 20 of the Milk and Dairies General Regulations 1959, to stop or restrict the sale of milk. (19) No cases of disease were notified which could be attributed to the consumption of infected milk. Designation Samples Taken Satisfactory Unsatisfactory. Tuberculin Tested (Pasteurised) 1 Nil Pasteurised 2 2 Nil Sterilised 2 2 Nil Totals 5 5 Nil Ten Dealer's (Pre-packed Milk) Licences were granted in 19&1 for the retail sale of milk under the Milk (Special Designation) Regulations, 1960, for a period of five years, to December 19&5. One further 1960, for a period of five years, to December 1965. One further Licence was issued during 1962 and one in 1963, both of which will also expire in December, 1965. Designations Number of Licences. Tuberculin Tested, Pasteurised and Sterilised 5 Tuberculin Tested and Pasteurised 1 Pasteurised and Sterilised 3 Pasteurised 2 Sterilised 1 FOOD AND DRUGS ACT. 1955. The Council acquired these powers under the Act concerning the adulteration and sophistication of food as from 1st October 1955. The summary on the next page contains the results of fifty-eight samples taken by this Department. The eight unsatisfactory samples were sported to the Council and the following are brief comments on them. Beef Roma. The Public Analyst reported that this sample contained 28% of meat. In his opinion, canned products of this type in which meat forms a major part of the title or description should contain 35% of meat. In view of the absence of a legal standard and impending legislation no further action was taken. (20)  Article No. Examined No. Adulterated Etc. Formal Informal Total Formal Informal Total Almonds, Ground. - 4 4 - - - Apple and Blackberry Pudding - - 1 - - - - Apple Juice - 1 - - - - Barbecue Beans - 1 - — — - Beef Roma - 1 1 - 1 1 Blackcurrant Drink - 1 1 - - - Blackcurrant Jelly - 3 3 - 1 1 Cheese Spread - 3 3 - — Chili Con Came - 1 1 — — Chocolate Spread - 1 1 - - - Corned Beef - 1 1 — - - Crab Paste - 1 1 — - - Custard Powder - 1 1 - - - Dehydrated Vegetable Flakes - 1 1 - — - Eclairs with Real Cream - 1 1 - — - Evaporated Milk - 1 1 ; - - — French Jam Sandwich - 1 1 - - — Frosting Mix - 1 1 - 1 1 Grapefruit - 1 1 - - - Ice-Cream, Ready Mix -~ 1 1 - - - Ice-Cream, Soft 2 1 - 1 - 1 Instant Coffee - 1 1 i - - Irish Stew - 2 - | 2 2 Jam - 1 - - — — Lamb Chops - 1 1 j - - Lemonade Shandy - 1 - - - - Loaf, American Enriched - 1 - - 1 1 Luncheon Meat -- 1 1 - - - Marzipan - 1 1 - - - Mashed Potatoes - 1 - - - - Milk, bottle of - 1 1 - 1 1 Mixed Ready Grill - 1 1 - - - Nesquick, Instant - 1 1 - - - Nestea - 1 1 - — - Ovaltine - 1 1 - - — Pappadoms - 1 1 - - - Pineapple-Orange Juice Drink - 1 1 - - - Quick Jel - 1 - - - - Sausages, Chipolatas - 1 -' - - - Sausages, Pork - - 2 - - - Shoestring Potatoes - - 1 - - - Spanish Rice - 1 1 - - - Steak, Stewed - - 1 - — — Strawberry Pie Filling - . i - - - Sugar Tips - 1 1 - - - Sweet and Sour Sauce - - 1 - — — Sweet Curry - 1 - - - - Total 2 56 58 I 1 7 8 (21) Blackcurrant Jelly. This sample,purchased from a grocery shop, was reported to contain no significant proportion of fruit juice and that it should more properly be described "Blackcurrant Flavour Jelly". The suppliers to the shop, expressed regret that in designing new labels for this particular brand of jelly the word, "flavour" had been omitted from this Blackcurrant Jelly, other flavours being satisfactorily labelled. A new label was being designed and the local shop withdrew existing stocks. Frosting Mix. This was another case of incorrect labelling. The product contained a permitted chemical within the specified limits but this was referred to as a "freshness preserver" without giving the proper name of the chemical. Stocks were withdrawn from sale and we are awaiting a reply from the manufacturer's agents in this country. Soft Ice Cream. The sample was taken from a machine outside a local shop and the Public Analyst reported that it contained % Fat and 7.8 c/o milk solids other than fat. The Food Standards (ice Cream) Regulations require that ice cream shall contain not less than 5 % of fat. I was instructed to take further samples from this retailer but was unable to do so as the dispensing machine was closed down for the end of the season. Irish Stew. Your .analyst reported that these samples contained 22 and 29 % meat content. In his opinion this product should contain 35 %. In view of the possibility of variations of meat content as between cans of the same batch further samples are to be taken, but there is as yet no legal standard for these products. American Enriched Loaf. The Public Analyst reported that the true "American Enriched Loaf" as sold in the U.S.A. contains some 5.6 % fat. He understands that (22) this is not popular in this Country and it has been recommended that this be reduced by 50 %. This sample contained 3 % fats. No further action was taken. Milk. A bottle of milk was brought to the Department with specks on the inside of the bottle. Your Analyst reported that these reddish specks were iron filings. A warning letter was sent to the retailer. MERCHANDISE LARKS ACT. 1926. The Council became the authority for enforcing the provisions of these Acts and Orders made thereunder when they were designated a Pood and Drugs Authority. No formal action was found necessary during the year. MEAT AND FOOD CONDEMNED. The following is a list of articles of food condemned as unfit for human consumption during the year, the frozen packets being from two deep freeze cabinets which broke down and the food became defrosted and out of condition. Meat and Poultry. Fresh. Tinned and Frozen. English Pork and Lamt 50 lbs. Meat 19 Tins and Packets. Imported Pigs Kidneys 13 lbs. Poultry 2 „ „ 11 „ Fish. Scampi Tails 308 lbs. Fish (various) 19 Tins and 47 Packets. General. Tinned. Frozen. Fruit 325 Tins. Fruit 2 Packets. Fruit Juice 40 " Vegetables 120 " Vegetables 173 " Dairy Cream Sponge 2 " Spaghetti and Rice 18 " Dairy Mousse 13 " Milk and Cream 6 " Arctic Roll 1 " Marmalade and Jam 5 " Curry 1 " Soup 3 " Pie Filling 1 " Pate De Foie 1 " Condemned food is taken to the disposal point on the Sewage Farm, where tins are thoroughly perforated and loose food is stained and mixed with household refuse before onward transmission to the controlled tip outside the district. (23) PRIVATE SLAUGHTERHOUSES. FOOD AND DRUGS ACT. 1955. SLAUGHTERHOUSES ACT, 1958. SLAUGHTER OF ANIMALS ACT. 1958. MEAT INSPECTION REGULATIONS. 196?. Your Inspectors have, in the past, maintained a high percentage of meat inspection during the course of the six days per week of slaughtering at the local privately owned slaughterhouse. On the 1st October 1963, the Meat Inspection Regulations 1963, came into operation at very short notice. The Council at the first opportunity, gave authority for the employment of a full time meat inspector and we were fortunate in securing the services of Mr. J. Ramsay, who commenced his duties in the middle of November. Since the 1st October we have maintained l00/o inspection of all animals slaughtered, with one exception when twelve calves were slaughtered late in the evening and no inspector was available. The Ministry's Inspector was notified as soon as possible. For the six weeks before Mr. Ramsay took up his appointment one of your three Public Health Inspectors was at the slaughterhouse on the days of slaughtering and therefore unable to carry out other duties. Carcases passed as fit for human consumption are marked with a stamp which is also coded to indicate the inspector who carried out the inspection. Charges are made for the inspection service at the following rates, as permitted by the Regulations: 2/6d for bovines; 9d for calves and pigs, and 6d for sheep and goats. The condemned meat and offals are taken away for manufacture into useful by-products. Totbl weight of carcase meat condemned:- Bovine 704 lbs. Ovine 441 lbs. Porcine 170 lbs. 1 ,315 lbs. Total weight of offals condemned 14,486 lbs. (24) CARCASES AND OFFAL INSPECTED AND CONDEMNED IN "WHOLE OR 3N PART. Cattle excluding Cows ! Cows Calves Sheep and Lambs Pigs Number killed 1 ,980 910 1 ,666 12,339 3,925 Number inspected 1 ,980 910 1 ,301 11 ,829 3,409 All diseases except Tuberculosis and Cysticerci Whole carcases condemned Nil 2 3 7 1 Carcases of which some part or organ was condemned 510 464 10 1,064 267 Percentage of the number inspected affected with disease other than tuberculosis and cysticerci 25.76 51.21 1.00 9.05 7.86 Tuberculosis only: Whole carcases condemned - - - - - Carcases of which some part or organ was condemned 3 1 - - 48 Percentage of the number inspected affected with tuberculosis 0.15 0.11 - - 1.41 C.ysticercosis: Carcases of which some part or organ was condemned 14 5 - - - Carcases submitted to treatment by refrigeration 5 - - - - Generalised and totally condemned - - - - The percentage of animals or parts of animals inspected and found to be infected with disease is "broadly the same as last year with the exception of that in respect of sheep. The increase from 1,29% last year to 9.05% this year is almost entirely due to the great increase in the number of old ewes which were slaughtered under contract. There were ten persons licensed by the Council as fit persons to slaughter animals, most of them work part or full time as slaughtermen at the local slaughterhouse. Two conditional, or learner, licences were also issued. No complaint has been received from other districts concerning the conduct of those who are employed outside the district. (25) REPORT REQUIRED BY SECTION 153(1) OF THE FACTORIES ACT, 1961. Inspections for purpose of provisions as to health. Number on Register Inspections Written Notices Occupiers Prosecuted (l) Factories in which Sees. 1 , 2, 3, 4 and 6 are to be enforced by Local Authorities. 3 3 - - (2) Factories not included in (1) in which Sec. 7 is enforced by the Local Authority. 86 25 - - (3) Other premises in which Sec. 7 is enforced by the Local Authority. 3 - - - — . Total 92 28 - No notices were served. Outworkers (Sections 133 and 134). Section 133 Section 134 No. of outworkers on lists received. No. of instances of work in unwholesome premises. Notices Served. 41 — - Eight outworkers reside in the district. Seven premises were visited during the year and found to be satisfactory. The names and addresses of outworkers employed by factories in this district are notified to the district councils in which they live. PUBLIC HEALTH ACT. 1956 - SECTION 60. Escape from Fire - Pertain High Buildings. Where plans are deposited with the Surveyor's Department under the building byelaws, and it appears that Section 60 applies to the building, the plans are passed to this Department for inspection so that any works which may be necessary are carried out with the other building works. CARAVAN SITES AND CONTROL OF DEVELOPMENT ACT. 1960. The owner of one site appealed in 1 961 against the conditions of licence and this was heard at the local Petty Sessions in 1962. The Court made several minor alterations but did not vary the time limit within which the works were to be carried out. This period was of two (26) years from the hearing which will expire in 1964. The extensive drainage works were commenced in the latter half of the year. The caravans attending the Barnet Fair, axe exempted from the controls of the Act, hut several visits are made to enquire into the sanitary conditions, any infectious diseases and to enforce the provisions of temporary sanitary accommodation in the different sections of the Fair for the use both of caravanners and the visiting public. Regular removal of refuse from caravans and stalls is arranged and inspections are made of food stalls to secure hygienic conditions. HERTFORDSHIRE COUNTY COUNCIL ACTS. 1955 MP 1960. Provision is made in the 1935 Act, inter alia, for the conduct and regulation of:- (l) Hairdressers' and Barbers' Premises; ( 2) Swimming Baths and Pools, and (3) Employment Agencies. Hairdressers' and Barbers' Premises. There are fifteen such establishments in the district. Routine visits are made from time to time to ensure compliance with the Byelaws. Informal action secured the cleansing of walls and ceiling in one instance. Swimming Baths and Bathing Fools. The only swimming pool in the district, viz, at "The Barn", Barnet Bye-Pass is not now in use. The swimming pools at schools are all within the purview of the Education Authority, and are inspected regularly by the County Health Inspector, who arranges bacteriological examination of the water. The Council had no observations to make to the County Council concerning the renewal of licences to carry on Employment Agencies for the year. HOME COUNTIES (MUSIC AND DANCING) LICENSING ACT. 1926. HERTFORDSHIRE (MUSIC AND DANCING) REGULATIONS. 1956. Under regulations made by the County Council a report from the local district council is required regarding the suitability and sufficiency of sanitary arrangements at premises for Music and Dancing before licences are issued. All were (27) satisfactory and the County Council notified accordingly. PET ANIMALS ACT. 1951. This Act gives the local Authority, inter alia, power to grant licences to persons to keep pet shops for the sale of pet animals and to attach to the licences conditions concerning the cleanliness and general management of the premises: four persons are so licensed in this district one less than last year. No complaints were received nor were any major contraventions of the conditions observed during visits of inspection. RIDING ESTABLISHMENTS ACT. 1959. The Council employs a Veterinary Surgeon, on a part-time basis, to inspect the five establishments housing some 110 horses in the district. The condition of the horses and their accommodation was considered satisfactory. Two of these establishments, housing 15 and 10 horses respectively, ceased to function at the end of the year. ANIMAL BOARDING ESTABLISHMENTS ACT. 1963. This Act comes into force on 1st January 19&4 and will require that no person shall keep a boarding establishment for cats and dogs except under the authority of a licence granted under the Act by the local authority. The licence shall specify such conditions as are necessary to secure the objects of the Act, i.e.5 cleanliness, prevention of the spread of disease and cruelty etc. The Council approved a set of general conditions to attach to licences and one application for a licence was received before the end of the year. RODENT CONTROL. Prevention of Damage by Pests Act. 1949. A full time rodent operator is employed for treatment of infestations of rats and mice. The table on the next page summarises the work carried out during the year in a form to suit the purposes of the Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food. (28) RODT5NT CONTROL. Type of Property Local Authority Dwelling Houses Agricultural All other (including Business Premises) Total Number of Properties inspected as a result of: (a) Notification 6 125 4 35 170 (b) Survey under the Act 2 118 8 56 184 (c) Otherwise 1 3 - 10 14 Total inspections carried out including re-inspections 26 734 22 270 1,052 Number of properties found to be infested by:- (a) Rats Mao or ... 1 - 1 1 3 .Minor o 8 84 6 17 115 (b) House Mice Major - 1 1 2 Minor - 61 " 72 133 Number of properties treated by the Local Authority 9 146 4 26 185 Total treatments carried out including retreatments 11 163 5 31 210 Number of "Block" control schemes carried out - 14 A test bait is made of 10^5 of the soil sewer manholes in the district, from the results of which are based the two maintenance treatments of the sewers during the year. The test bait in April resulted in twenty-two "takes" of bait out of a total of ninety-three manholes tested, although heavy rainfall during the period of the test bait confused the result by water splashing or washing away the bait. Following this up in May, sixty-seven manholes were baited; "takes" were recorded in fifteen and these were poison baited. The result of the second maintenance treatment carried out in November showed thirteen "takes" out of a total of thirty-nine manholes baited. No charge is made for the use of the Rodent Operator's services in treating (29) private domestic premises, provided that the occupiers co-operate in carrying out their duties under the Act. Five preliminary notices were served requiring the removal of accumulations harbouring rats. The cost of treatments at all other premises is recoverable. OTHER IN FESTATIONS. The Department is frequently asked for advice and assistance in connection with insect infestations and during this year has dealt with some one hundred and sixty-five enquiries. One hundred and twentyfour wasps nests were destroyed on privately owned properties and on the Council's own lands. A small charge is made for this service to householders. The other infestations cover a variety of things, e.g. beetles, ants, cockroaches, flies and bugs. We are assisted in the identification of some of these insects by the British Museum (Natural History Section) the staff of which give prompt answers to our queries. Following representations by residents of the nuisance caused by feral pigeons , two areas were pre-baited with maize, one in Byng Road and the other the Barracks Yard, rear of the High Street, under the powers given by Section 74 of the Public Health Act, 1961. As the pre-baiting was successful, drawing pigeons to the baiting points from various parts, the Ministry were approached for a licence to use an approved narcotic. This was eventually forthcoming and on Sunday morning, 23rd June at 5 a.m., the hour at which the pre-baiting had been done, the narcotised bait was laid. Just over one hundred pigeons were picked up and destroyed. The following morning a total of sixteen pigeons only were counted on both sites. The contract for dealing with an infestation of cockroaches on one of the Council's housing estates was recommended for renewal for a second (30) year, good results having been obtained. It was thought that the renewal would complete the destruction of the pest. CLEAN AIR ACT. 1956. The Smoke Control programme has continued according to the Council's plan. During the year the works of alterations to fireplaces etc., proceeded in connection with the No. 4 Smoke Control Order which came into operation on the 1st October 1963, bringing a further 687 premises under smoke control, and making a total of 1 ,722 under control, in the district. Whilst approving the works and costs of alterations to fireplaces in the No. 4 area and supervising the works, the survey of the proposed No. 5 area was proceeding. The Council made the appropriate Order and this was submitted to the Ministry for confirmation, but was not received by the end of the year. This Order, if confirmed, will come into operation on 1st October, 1964. Following the completion of the preparatory reports and the making of the No. 5 Order, circular letters and information were sent out to all householders in the proposed No, 6 area. At the end of 1963 the Ministry Circular 69/63 was issued which made some radical changes in the approach to what is "reasonably necessary" as regards types of fireplaces ranking for grant. In the past the basis for grant has generally been the open fire, but with little further increase in the supplies of open fire cokes and good supplies of "hard" cokes available grant may now be paid on the more expensive equipment capable of burning the hard cokes. Although the capital cost of these appliances is higher, the increased efficiency should soon offset this. Likewise , grant may now be paid on the reasonable costs of installing fixed gas fires and electric storage heaters. CONSUMER PROTECTION ACT. 1961. This enactment, which came into operation on 19th August, 1961, repealed the Heating Appliances (Fireguards) Act, 1952, incorporating that legislation in wider terms to cover the making of regulations laying down enforceable standards (31) as to safety requirements and instructions for any prescribed class of goods. No action was needed during the year. NOISE ABATEMENT ACT. 1960. This Act added "noise or vibration which is a nuisance" to the list of Statutory Nuisances actionable by Part III of the Public Health Act 1936. It should be noted that in the case of noise or vibration caused in the course of a trade or business that it is a defence to prove that the best practicable means of preventing or counteracting noise or vibration have been adopted. Also that not only may the Council take action but that any three occupiers of premises may firstly make complaint, as to a noise nuisance, to a justice of the peace, for action directly by the Court. Several observations have been made during the year and some ameliorative measures taken on informal approaches being made. In the absence of legal standards, it is difficult to decide particularly on "border line" cases what is, or is not, a nuisance since so much depends upon individual opinion. The sound level meter gives some indication of comparable noise but certain individuals axe more sensitive than others to noise. PETROLEUM (REGULATION) ACTS. 1928 AND 1956. Thirty premises in the district were licensed for the storage of petroleum spirit and petroleum mixtures, the same as last year. One licencee increased his storage capacity by 1 ,000 gallons and one licensed for 5 gallons of petroleum mixtures, gave up the premises at the end of the year. The process of testing the older installations, in line with the requirements of the Licence Conditions, has continued, any defects being remedied before a licence is renewed. I am, Yours obediently, J.B. Wilson. Chief Public Health Inspector.