UBAR 28 URBAN DISTRICT OP BARNET ANNUAL REPORT of the MEDICAL OFFICER OP HEALTH to the BARNET URBAN DISTRICT COUNCIL by ARTHUR L. HYATT, M.R.C.S. (Eng.) Together with the ANNUAL REPORT of the CHIEF PUBLIC HEALTH INSPECTOR by JOHN B. WILSON, M.A.P.H.I. , M.R.S.H. 1960 (2) BARNET URBAN DISTRICT COUNCIL. MEDICAL OFFICER'S REPORT. Tel: BARnet 5511 Public Health Department, 31 Wood Street Barneto To the Chairman and Members of the Barnet Urban District Council. Ladies and Gentlemen, I have pleasure in presenting to you my Annual Report on the health of the district for the year 1960. It is drawn up in accordance with the directions of the Ministry of Health Circular 1/61 of the 31st January, 1961. STATISTICS AND SOCIAL CONDITIONS OF THE AREA. Area (in acres) 4,290 Population 1951 Census) 25 ,019 1961 Census - Preliminary Estimate) 27,834 Registrar-General's Estimate of Resident Population, mid 1960 26,540 Number of Inhabited Houses 8,379 Number of Persons per House 3.16 Rateable Value £512,162 Product of a Penny Rate £2,055 NATURAL AND SOCIAL CONDITIONS. The population is largely residential, and consists chiefly of people whose occupation lies outside the urban area. Those employed in the district, apart from the tradesmen and their employees, are mainly skilled workers in light industries. EXTRACT FROM VITAL AM) MORTAL STATISTICS OF THE YEAR. Live Births Total. M. F. Legitimate 417 217 200 Illegitimate 11 7 4 Live Birth Rate per 1,000 of the estimated resident population (Standardised) 16.3 Illegitimate Live Births per cent of the total live births: 2.51% (3)  Total. M. F. Still Births Legitimate 11 6 5 Illegitimate 1 1 Still Birth Rate per 1 ,000 total (live and still) births: 27.27 Total Live and Still Births Legitimate Total. 428 M. 223 F. 205 Illegitimate 12 8 4 Infant Deaths (Under one year of age) Legitimate 3 1 2 Illegitimate — — — Infant Mortality Rates: Total Infant Deaths per 1,000 total live births: 7.01 Legitimate Infant Deaths per 1,000 legitimate live births: 7.19 Illegitimate Infant Deaths per 1,000 illegitimate live births: 0.00 Neo-natal Mortality Rate (Deaths under 4 weeks per 1,000 total live births: 7.01 Early Neo-natal Mortality Rate (deaths under 1 week per 1 .000 total live births: 7.01 Perinatal Mortality Rate (still births and deaths under 1 week combined per 1 ,000 total live and still births): 34.09 Maternal Mortality (including abortion): Number of Deaths: Nil Rate per 1 .000 total live and still births: 0.00 Total M. F. Deaths (All Causes): 283 136 147 Death Rate per 1,000 of the estimated resident population (Standardised) ; 10.56 Too much importance should not "be paid to the rates where the actual number of cases is small, e.g. - below 10, as such rates are of little statistical significance. Thus, if an attempt is made to compare this area with other districts, or with previous years, it would be better to compare actual cases. GENERAL PROVISION OF HEALTH SERVICES FOB _ THE DISTRICT. The Council are not the appropriate Local Authority for the purpose of the National Health Service Act, 1 946, and do not therefore control any of the Hospitals or ancillary services in the district. Within this district, and under the control of the Barnet Group Hospital Management Committee, are the following:- Barnet General Hospital, Wellhouse Lane, Barnet. 490 Beds. St. Stephen's Hospital, Mays Lane, Barnet. 88 Beds. (Female medical, Ear, Nose and Throat, and Male long-stay cases) (4) Victoria Maternity Hospital, Wood Street, Barnet. 59 Beds. The following is a list of Clinics etc. , available in the district. Tuberculosis Clinics are held daily, at Barnet Chest Clinic, Wellhouse Lane, Barnet. 'Phone BAR: 7441 for an appointment. At Vale Drive the following Clinics are held during the school term. A Clinic for Schoolchildren on the second and fourth Monday morning in each month, and a Clinic for remedial exercises every Monday afternoon. A speech therapy Clinic is held on Wednesdays and Fridays, Child Guidance Clinics on Thursdays, and an Eye Clinic on Wednesdays. An Infant Welfare Clinic is held every Tuesday afternoon all the year round and also on the first and third Fridays in each month. Dental Clinics are held daily. For the convenience of residents at Totteridge there is an Infant Welfare Clinic at "Dollisfield" every Friday afternoon. A branch Clinic at St. Stephen's Hall, Bells Hill, is held every Thursday from 9.30 to 11.45 a.m. with a doctor in attendance, except on the fifth Thursday in the month. These Clinics are subject to alteration and it is advisable to enquire of the Vale Drive Clinic (BAR: 6194) for the current days and times. The Family Planning Association hold sessions at 133 Wood Street, each Wednesday between 6 and 7.30 p.m. , and Thursday afternoons between 2 and 3 p.m. Also Tuesday and Thursday evenings by appointment. (BAR: 5345) Home Help Service. The local office of the Herts County Council Home Help Service at 42 Lytton Road, New Barnet, is open daily from 9 - 1 , Monday to Friday inclusive. (BAR:2352) British Red Cross Loan Centre, 53 Wood Street. Barnet. Equipment for invalids may be obtained, on loan, between 8 a.m. and 6 p.m. , Monday to Friday. PUBLIC HEALTH STAFF. Medi_cal Officer of Health. Arthur L. Hyatt, M.R.C.S.(Eng.), L.R.C.P. Chief Public Health Inspector. + John B. Wilson, M.A.P.H.I. , M.R.S.H. (5) Deputy Chief Public Health Inspector. Howard W.C. Alloway, M.A.P.H.I. , A.R.S.H. Additional Public Health Inspector. + Roy W. Pursglove, M.A.P.H.I. Pupil Public Health Inspector, Raymond W.E. Farr, (Appointed 5th September, 1966) Clerk. Miss Marjorie Runtz. Rodent Operative. J.C. Mace. Public Analyst, J.H. Hamence, Ph.d. , M.Sc., F.R.I.C. P.S. Hall, B.Sc. , F.R.I.C. + Holds the special qualification as Inspector of Meat and other Foods under examination of the Royal Society of Health. water supply. The major portion of the district is supplied with water from the mains of the Barnet District Water Company, which was merged with other companies to form the Lee Valley Water Company on 1st April, 1960. The remainder of the district is supplied by the Colne Valley Water Company. All water supplied to the district is chlorinated and both companies employ trained laboratory staff who regularly take samples of water for bacteriological examination at the various stages of treatment, and from the mains, thus checking the quality of the water as actually supplied to the consumer. The regularity of the sampling procedure soon found some minor defects in a local reservoir. The necessary remedial measures were immediately undertaken and the water was soon brought back to the high level of purity which has always been maintained. (6) The supply to the whole district is considered adequate. There is only one cottage, which is unoccupied, that is known not to "be connected to mains water supply. It is being repaired and will be connected to the mains before again being used for habitation. drainage and sewerage. The town is drained and sewered on the separate system, excepting the older portions of the district where it is a combined system. The sewage is conveyed to a Sewage Disposal works of 56 acres, where it is screened, grit removed in detritus tanks, thence to primary settlement tanks and thereafter distributed over three 80 ft. diameter bacteria filters, followed by humus removal in rectangular tanks before discharge to the Dollis Brook. Pumping is necessary for three sewers which have their outlets at a low point on the works. Part of the Totteridge area drains to the Finchley Borough sewers; in the outlying areas some properties are on cesspool drainage or domestic sewage disposal plants, and a few only have pail closets. In September, Ministerial approval was given to the Council's proposals for a main drainage scheme including a pumping station in Glebe Lane. Owing to long delivery dates for the pumping equipment, it will not be possible to commence the work this year. When it is finished in 1961 , the pail closets in this area will be dispensed with. With respect to the Barnet works, these have been overloaded for some years owing to the growth of the town, and will become redundant when the proposed East Middlesex trunk sewage scheme is brough to fruition. The deodorising plant installed last year at the Sewage Works has proved satisfactory and the number of complaints has been considerably reduced. Some complaints have been made and it was found that either the plant had broken down or was not in operation owing to unexpected weather changes. SANITARY C0NDITIONS AND WATER SUPPLY OF SCHOOLS. There are in the district fourteen schools administered by the South Herts Divisional Education Committee, as listed over. (7) Queen Elizabeth's Boys' Grammar School, Queens Road, Barnet. Queen Elizabeth's Girls' Grammar School, High Street, Barnet. Ravenscroft Secondary School, Barnet Lane, N.20. Elizabeth Allen Voluntary Secondary School, Wood Street, Barnet. (with annexe at Byng Road, Barnet.) Whitings Hill Junior Mixed and Infants' School, Whitings Road, Barnet. Foulds Junior Mixed and Infants' School, Byng Road, Barnet. Christ Church Junior Mixed School, Alston Road, Barnet. Christ Church Infants' School. Alston Road, Barnet. Grasvenor Infants' School, Grasvenor Avenue, Barnet. Underhill Junior Mixed School, Mays Lane, Barnet. Underhill Infants' School, Mays Lane, Barnet. St. Andrew's Voluntary Junior Mixed and Infants' School, Totteridge Green, N.20. St. Catherine's Roman Catholic Infants School, Union Street, Barnet. South Herts College of Further Education, Wood Street, Barnet. (Available for girls and boys aged 15 to 18 years during the day, and for persons over school-leaving age in the evenings.) In addition to the above there are five private schools, viz:- The Anchorage Kindergarten School, 38 Normandy Avenue, Barnet. The Hill School, Totteridge Lane, N.20. Norfolk House School, Fitzjohn Avenue, Barnet. (Nursery School) St. Marthe's Convent School, Wood Street, Barnet. Mrs. Blundell's School, Southover, Woodside Park, N.12. (Nursery School) All schools in the district are supplied with mains water and are connected to the Council's main drainage system. DISPOSAL OF HOUSE REFUSE. The house refuse is collected weekly in covered mechanical conveyances and taken to the Council's Sewage Farm, where it is loaded into Contractor's covered lorries and disposed of daily by controlled tipping outside the district. PREVALENCE OF, AND CONTROL OVER, INFECTIOUS DISEASE. The table on the following page shews the number of Notifications to the Sanitary Authority during the year, of each disease specified in the Public Health Act 1936, and the various Infectious Disease Regulations, and the number of cases removed to Hospital. The cases normally resident outside the district notified from the Barnet General Hospital and Victoria Maternity Hospital, which are included in the table, are as follows:- Measles 1; Meningococcal Infection 2; Dysentery 12; Puerperal Pyrexia 4; Food Poisoning 2; Erysipelas 4. (8) DISEASE NOTIFIED REMOVED TO HOSPITAL Scarlet Fever 9 2 Whooping Cough 40 1 Diphtheria and Membranous Croup Nil Nil Measles 163 1 Acute Pneumonia 2 1 Meningococcal Infection 2 2 Acute Poliomyelitis Nil Nil Acute Encephalitis Nil Nil Dysentery 35 15 Ophthalmia Neonatorum Nil Nil Puerperal Pyrexia 4 4 Smallpox Nil Nil Malaria Nil Nil Typhoid and Enteric Fevers Nil Nil Paratyphoid Fever Nil Nil Food Poisoning 2 2 Erysipelas 6 4 Tuberculosis 8 6 TOTALS 271 38 AGE INCIDENCE OF INFECTIOUS DISEASE DISEASE NUMBER OF CASES NOTIFIED YEARS OF AGE 0- 1- 2- 3- 4- 5- 10- 15- 25- 45- 65- 75- Total Scarlet Fever - - - - - 8 1 - - - - - 9 Whooping Cough 2 1 4 3 7 20 2 1 - - - - 40 Measles 4 10 15 19 19 91 3 1 1 - - - 163 Acute Pneumonia - - - - - - 1 - 1 - - - 2 Meningococcal Infection 1 - - - - - - 1 - - - - 2 Dysentery - 3 - 1 2 10 6 3 7 1 2 - 35 Puerperal Pyrexia - - - - - - - 2 2 - - - 4 Food Poisoning - - - - - 1 - - - 1 - - 2 Erysipelas - - - - - - - - - 4 1 1 6 TOTALS 7 14 19 23 28 130 13 8 11 6 3 1 263 The Measles outbreak of 1959 continued into this year, "but fewer cases were recorded. The high number of Dysentery cases was due to an outbreak among young children at a special training centre which was closed temporarily, with the cooperation of the County Medical Officer of Health, in order to speedily break the cycle of infection. With the increased supplies of poliomyelitis vaccine becoming available during the year the Ministry increased the vaccination scheme to include all persons up to the age of 40 years. Registration cards may still be obtained from the Vale Drive Clinic or the Public Health Department, 31 Wood Street, Barnet. (9) FOOD POISONING. Annual Return of Food Poisoning Notifications. 1st Quarter. 2nd Quarter. 3rd Quarter. 4th Quarter. Total. Deaths. 2 Nil Nil Nil 2 Nil Cases Otherwise Ascertained. 1st Quarter. 2nd Quarter. 3rd Quarter. 4th Quarter. Total. Deaths. 1 Nil Nil Nil 1 Nil Symptomless Excreters. 1st Quarter. 2nd Quarter. 3rd Quarter. 4th Quarter. Total. Deaths. Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil Fatal Cases. 1st Quarter. 2nd Quarter. 3rd Quarter. 4th Quarter. Total Deaths. Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil TUBERCULOSIS. NEW CASES AND MORTALITY DURING 1960. YEARS OF AGE NEW CASES DEATHS Pulmonary N on-Pulmonary Pulmonary N on-Pulmonary M F M F M F M F 0 - - - - - - - - 1 - - - - - - - - 5 - - - - - - - - 15 - 1 - - - - - - 25 1 1 - - - - - - 35 1 1 - - - - - - 45 2 1 - - - - - - 55 - - - - - - - - 65 and over - - - - 2 - - - TOTALS 4 4 - - 2 - - - The number of new cases (8) is the lowest recorded since I took office twenty years ago. The anti tuberculosis measures, mass radiography, clinics etc. , are all playing a part in the scheme to reduce the incidence of this disease. With improved housing conditions, better education, antibiotics and the eradication of tuberculosis in bovine animals it would seem possible now to bring about the defeat of tuberculosis in humans. Cases removed for treatment are usually sent to Clare Hall Hospital, (10) South Mimms, other patients with an infectious disease being sent to Coppett's Wood Hospital, Muswell Hill, N,10. PUBLIC HEALTH (PREVENTION OF TUBERCULOSIS) REGULATIONS. 1925. It has not been found necessary to take any action under the above Regulations relating to Tuberculous employees in the Milk Trade public health ACT. 1956. section 172._ compulsory removal to hospital of cases' of pulmonary ''tuberculosis. No action was necessary under the above Section. international vaccination certificates. At the end of 1952 a new form was introduced for International Vaccination Certificates requiring authentication of the signature of the doctor performing vaccination or inoculation of persons proceeding overseas. During the year two hundred and fifty-five such certificates were authenticated and marked with the internationally agreed stamp. national assistance act. 1948 - section 47. national assistance (amendment)act, 1951 - section 1. We have had particular contact with some five elderly persons during the year, but no official action under the Acts was required. The Old People's Welfare Committee is doing excellent work especially through the Visiting Service. With a friendly chat the visitors manage to gain the confidence of the elderly people to ease some of their problems and worries and arrange for one or more of the various services to be made available. Their action in time can save the possibility of official action later. mortal statistics. Of 283 deaths, only 3 occurred under one year of age. The following were the major causes of death:- Heart Disease 104; Cancer 63 (32 males and 31 females) ; Vascular Lesions of Nervous system 34; Bronchitis 7; Pneumonia 21; Motor Vehicle accidents 4; Other accidents 4. (11) MORTUARY ACCOMMODATION. Under arrangements made with the East Barnet Urban District Council their mortuary is available for the use of this district, and it was so used on six occasions during the year. I am, Yours faithfully, ARTHUR L. HYATT , M.R.C.S.(Eng.) , L.R.C.P. MEDICAL OFFICER OF HEALTH. (12) BARNET URBAN DISTRICT COUNCIL. chief public health inspector's report. Public Health Department, 31 Wood Street, Barnet. To the Chairman and Members of the Barnet Urban District Council. I have the honour to present my Annual Report for the year 1960. On the 1st September, our first Smoke Control area, came into operation on part of the L.C.C. Estate on the west side of the Barnet Bye Pass; the Council's second Smoke Control Order was forwarded to the Ministry for confirmation just before the end of the year, and we had started the circularising and survey work on the third area. The survey work alone involves many visits to houses, and much more work will be involved when we get to the stage of supervising the works of alteration to fireplaces. The Council agreed to the appointment of a Pupil Public Health Inspector to assist in this work and at the same time the Council are playing their part in the recruitment and training for this particular branch of the Local Government Service. In September, Mr. R.W.E. Farr, who had obtained nine passes at ordinary level in the G.C.E. at the East Barnet Grammar School, commenced his duties as Pupil in the Department. It has been rather fortunate that the increased work of the Clean Air Act and Smoke Control Areas has coincided with a slowing down of our work under the Housing Acts, due to the shortage of new houses becoming available for families who might have been displaced from condemned houses. On the 1st December 1960, we relinquished a duty under the provisions of the new Factories Act 1959, that of certifying the means of escape in case of fire in factories to which the Act applies. Although this did not occupy a large amount of our time, it was an interesting duty and one which kept us in touch with local industries. Apart from these changes, our work has proceeded on much the same lines as in previous years. I must not close this introduction to the report without expressing my thanks (13) to the staff of the Public Health Department for their able assistance and continuing support, and to all the Officers of the Council for their co-operation throughout the year. INSPECTION OF DISTRICT. General inspections of the district have been carried out periodically and all complaints investigated. The process of serving a preliminary or intimation notice upon the person in default, specifying the works necessary to remedy the defects found, is usually followed. It was found necessary to ask your authority to serve only nineteen Statutory Notices, where persons failed to comply with the preliminary notice, or the strict legal procedure was necessary in the first instance. SANITARY INSPECTION OF AREA. The following is a list of the number and nature of visits and inspections:- Visits re: Housing Acts 167 Visits re: nuisance and sanitary defects 731 Visits re: infectious diseases 390 Visits re: Petroleum Acts 136 Visits re: factories 131 Visits re: outworkers' premises 7 Visits re: food manufactories, cafes, etc. 632 Visits re: ice cream and sampling 181 Visits re: overcrowding 3 Visits re: aged and infirm persons 14 Visits to inspect meat and other foods 611 Visits re: schools 5 Visits re: pollution of watercourses 7 Visits re: Rent Acts. 42 Visits re: Clean Air Act. 993 Visits re: Tents, Caravans and Sheds. 23 Visits re: Shops Acts 62 Visits re: keeping of animals 11 Visits re: rodent infestations 1,389 Visits re: other infestations 263 Miscellaneous visits 146 NUMBER OF NOTICES SERVED DURING YEAR. Number of Informal Notices 99 Number of Statutory Notices 19 Informal Notices complied with 95 Statutory Notices complied with 18 (14) SANITARY WORK AND REPAIRS. The following is a list of repairs effected as a result of informal and formal notices served:- Roofs repaired and made weatherproof 22 Gutter, downpouts repaired and renewed 20 Exterior brickwork repaired or repointed 15 Walls, dampness remedied 27 Chimney stacks and pots repaired or renewed 3 Yard surfaces repaired or repaved 2 Ceilings repaired or renewed 13 Wall plaster repaired or renewed 15 Walls and ceilings cleansed and decorated 18 Floors repaired or renewed 2 Staireases repaired 6 Doors and frames repaired or renewed 5 Windows repaired 19 Fireplaces repaired or renewed 1 Drains and sewage disposal plants cleared. 33 Drains and sewage disposal plants repaired or reconstructed. 22 Inspection chamber repaired or reconstructed 13 Soil or vent pipes repaired or renewed 2 Gullies, channels and fenders repaired or renewed 4 Water Closet pans, fittings, repaired or renewed 6 Sinks, waste pipes, etc. , repaired or renewed. 2 Storage cisterns, cleansed, repaired or renewed 4 Water services repaired, renewed or re-instated 2 Accumulations removed 5 HOUSING. During the year, only one Demolition Order was made and demolition had not taken place by the end of the year. The occupiers were rehoused from six houses which were the subject of Demolition Orders made in previous years. The moving of these families provided vacant possession of all houses in three terraces, with the resultant demolition of thirteen houses, There now remain to be rehoused, at the end of the year, the occupiers of three houses, following which demolition can proceed of a further eleven houses. The finding of suitable accommodation for these families is not an easy task, and it does sometimes mean more than one unit of accommodation being provided for the occupiers of one unfit house. It was this situation coupled with the delays of our new housing estate, on which the Council based their report to the Ministry that the five years slum clearance programme, which should have been completed in 1960, would not in fact be completed until 1961. (15) Only one application for a Certificate of Disrepair was made during the year. Even with the applications for Cancellation of Certificates etc. , summarised below, and with fewer enquiries than in previous years, there is less demand for our services in this branch of the work of the Department and it is fairly clear that full use was not made of the provisions of the Act by tenants. No cases of overcrowding, as defined by the Housing Act, have come to our notice during the year. There follows a brief summary of the certificates etc., issued or refused:- Applications for Certificates of Disrepair 1 Landlords' undertakings accepted 1 Certificates of Disrepair issued Nil Applications for Cancellation of Certificates 8 Certificates of Disrepair cancelled 8 Applications by either Landlord or Tenant for Certificate as to Remedying of Defects. 4 Certificates as to the Remedying of Defects issued 4 PUBLIC HEALTH ACT. 1956. INFECTIOUS DISEASE INVESTIGATION AND DISINFECTION. Investigations have been carried out of the more important cases of infectious disease listed in the Medical Officer of Health's Report. Where necessary, premises are disinfected and bedding is taken for disinfection to the Barnet General Hospital under arrangements made with the Barnet Group Hospital Management Committee. One hundred and forty-three library books were disinfected before return to libraries, a considerable decrease over the previous year. FOOD PREMISES IN THE DISTRICT. Number of Bakers 8 " " Butchers 15 " " Cafes, Restaurants, etc 22 " " Confectioners. 25 " " Fishmongers 5 " " Greengrocers 13 " Grocers 34 " " Licensed Premises 28 " " Chemists 6 (16) FOOD PREMISES REGISTERED UNDER SECTION 16 OF FOOD AND DRUGS (a) Manufacture, Sale and Storage of Ice Cream 47 (b) Manufacture of sausages and preserved meats, etc 21 DAIRIES REGISTERED UNDER MILK AND DAIRIES GENERAL REGULATIONS 1949 - 1959. Number of Dairies 2 Any infringements found are rectified or remedied by informal action when pointed out to the trader, and no formal action was needed. During our visits of inspection every opportunity is taken to discuss food hygiene with staff and management and to show what steps are necessary to comply with the regulations and to improve hygiene generally. Mention was made in last year's report of the change of use of the Barnet Cattle Market to that of a stall market selling a wide variety of merchandise and including several food stalls. On average the food stalls consist of:- Butchers 1 Poulterers 1 Snack Bar 1 Confectioners 1 Fishmongers 1 Greengrocers 3 Grocers 3 A sanitary block was established within the market area for the use of stall/holders providing sanitary accommodation for males and females, hand washing and utensil washing facilities. Regular visits have been made to the market and several informal notices have been given to stall holders concerning the Food Hygiene Regulations and Merchandise Marks Acts, and it is felt that a reasonable standard is now being maintained. SHOPS ACT. 1950. Four informal notices were issued to local shopkeepers following visits which showed that they were selling prohibited goods during the half-day closing period. Building plans deposited with the Surveyor's Department for Byelaw approval in connection with shop premises are referred to this Department for consideration under the provisions of the Shops Act. (17) ICE CREAM. All samples of ice-cream are taken to the Central Public Health Laboratory Colindale, for testing by the Methylene Blue Test. This is merely indicative and provides no legal standard: the Public Health Laboratory Service suggest that owing to the numerous factors governing the hygienic quality of ice-cream it is unwise to pay too much attention to the bacteriological results on any single sample, judgement being based rather on a series of samples. It is suggested as desirable that at least 50% should fall into Grade I, 80% into Grades I or II, not more than 20% into Grade III and none into Grade IV. There is one company registered for the manufacture of ice-cream and the following table gives the results of samples taken from the factory. Grade I 87 (73.7$ Grade II 20 (90.7% - Grades I and II) Grade III 8 ( 6.8$ Grade IV 3 ( 2.5$ With the exception of the three samples in Grade IV, the percentages in the other three grades bear favourable comparison with the recommendations set out above. The low gradings probably reflect the disruption caused by building works in progress and the change over to new plant, although there is no real reason why the standard should not be consistently high. There are also forty-seven premises registered for the storage and sale of ice cream, three more than last year. DAIRIES. COWSHEDS AND MILKSHOPS. The control of the production of milk is vested in the Ministry of Agriculture Fisheries and Pood. The local authority is responsible for the inspection and registration of milk distributors and other dairy premises not directly concerned with the actual production of milk, and for licensing for the sale of Designated Milks. Twenty-four samples of milk have been taken, in course of delivery to the consumer, and submitted to the appropriate tests with the following results Designation Samples Taken Satisfactory Unsatisfactory Tuberculin Tested (Pasteurised) 6 6 Nil Pasteurised 10 10 Nil Pasteurised (Homogenised) 3 3 Nil Pasteurised (Channel Islands) 4 4 Nil Sterilised 1 1 Nil Totals 24 24 Nil That all samples were satisfactory is not surprising since all milk retailed in the district is supplied by the large well known companies who maintain their own laboratory staffs to check all supplies at all stages of production and processing. No official action was taken under Regulation 20 of the Milk and Dairies General Regulations 1959, to stop or restrict the sale of milk. No cases of disease were notified which could be attributed to the consumption of infected milk. Ten Dealer's Licences and twenty-one Supplementary Licences were granted for the retail sale of milk under the Milk (Special Designation) (Raw Milk) Regulations 1949 and 1950, and the Milk (Special Designation) (Pasteurised and Sterilised Milk) Regulations, 1949 and 1950, viz:- Designation Dealer's Licences. Supplementary Licences. Tuberculin Tested 2 7 Pasteurised 4 7 Sterilised 4 7 POOD MD DRUGS ACT „ 1955. The Council acquired these powers under the Act concerning the adulteration and sophistication of food as from 1st October 1955. The summary on the next page contains the results of seventy-six samples taken by this Department. (18) (19) Article No. Examined No, Adulterated Etc0 Formal — Informal Total Formal Informal Total Almond Spread - 1 1 - - ~ Almonds, Ground - 3 3 - - - Ammoniated Tincture of Quinine - 4 4 - 3 3 Blackcurrant; Fruit Pie - 1 1 - - - Blackcurrant Vit C. Drink - 1 1 - - - Breadcrumbs - 1 1 - - - Cherry Wine - 1 1 - - - Chicken and Mushroom, Curried - 1 1 - - - Chicken and Rice - 1 1 - - - Chicken Vol-au-Vent - 1 1 - - - Coffee and Chicory Essence - 1 1 - - - Cornish Pastie - 1 1 - - - Cream - 2 2 - - - Cream Sponge, Chocolate Flavoured - 1 1 - - - Fish Splits 1 1 - - - Frankfurter Sausage - 1 1 - 1 1 Frizets - 1 1 - - - Ham, Deviled - 1 1 - - - Herring Fillets in Cream - 1 1 - - - Jam, Plum - 1 1 - - - Kipper Fillets, Buttered - 1 1 - - - Lemonade Crystals - 1 1 - - - Meat Pie - 2 2 - - - Meat Pudding - 1 1 - - - Milk 6 3 9 - 2 2 Milk Shake Syrup - 1 1 - - - Mushrooms - 1 1 - - - Orange Juice - 1 1 - - - Orange Squash - 3 3 - - - Pate de Foie - 1 1 - - - Peanut Butter - 1 1 - - - Pork Pie - 4 4 - - - Pudding, Cream Rice Milk - 1 1 - - - Quosh - 1 1 - - - Rainbow Trout Savoury Snack - 1 1 - - - Rice - 1 1 - - - Rice Flakes - 1 1 - - - Rive11a - 1 1 - - - Salmon Smoked - 1 1 - - - Salmon, with Butter Potted - 1 1 - - - Sardine and Tomato Paste - 1 1 - - - Soup, Cream of Celery - 1 1 - - - Spree - 1 1 - - - Steak Pie - 2 2 - - - Steak, Stewed - 1 1 - - - Steak and Kidney Pie - 8 8 - 1 1 Steak and Kidney Pudding - 1 1 - - - Wine Vinegar - 1 - - - Total 6 70 76 - 7 7 All unsatisfactory samples axe reported t o the Council and the following are "brief comments on them. (20) Ammoniated Tincture of Quinine. This item has a seasonal sale. Our purchases in October shewed, upon analysis, a deficiency in ammonia. When the retailers' attention was drawn to the deficiencies they withdrew their remaining stocks from sale. Retailers should know this problem of the loss of ammonia from long storage and should either purchase in smaller quantities to obviate holding stock for over long periods, or alternatively dispose of it during the summer anyway. Frankfurter Sausages. These were in a transparent plastic wrapper and appeared to be out of condition. The Public Analyst confirmed that they were unfit for human consumption. The Council took proceedings against the retailer who, under Section 115 of the Act, was able to prove a Manufacturer's warranty and the summons was dismissed by the Court. Subsequent proceedings against the Manufacturer resulted in a fine of £10 together with costs. Milk. Two pint bottles of milk were brought to the office by a resident who complained of an unusual odour in the milk. The Public Analyst reported that a chemical examination shewed that the milks contained 0.03 and 0.05 per cent of organic solvent consisting mainly of esters of acetic acid. Mixtures of the type found are in common use as cellulose solvents. There was insufficient evidence as to how these adulterants got into the milk and it was decided not to take any proceedings. Steak and Kidney Pie. A steak and kidney pie with a mould covering half the top of the meat content was the subject of complaint. Subsequent proceedings against the retailer resulted in a £5-5-0d fine and costs. Sweets. Last year the Council authorised the institution of proceedings against a retailer for the sale of three packets of a chocolate coated nut confection which were infested. These were found to be old stock bought up by the retailer for sale in the market at reduced prices: the proceedings were heard at the beginning of this year and a fine of £10 was imposed. (21) The Council assisted in a national survey of the contents of meat pies. The analyses shew that the contents varied from as low as 17.2% up to 53.8$, It is to "be hoped that as a result of this survey the Ministry will "be in a position to lay down standards for a minimum meat content of meat pies, particularly the popular smaller or individual sizes which we were sampling. MERCHANDISE MARKS ACT, 1926. The Council "became the authority for enforcing the provisions of these Acts and Orders made thereunder when they were designated a Pood and Drugs Authority. One warning note was sent to a market retailer for not properly labelling imported meat. MEAT AND POOD CONDEMNED. The following is a list of the articles of food condemned as unfit for human consumption during the year. Fresh Meat. Calf Carcase 59 lbs. Pork (English) 6½ lbs. Veal (English) 20 lbs. Lambs Sweetbreads (English) 3 lbs. Beef (English) 15½ lbs. Lambs Livers (imported) 40 lbs. Canned Meat. Luncheon Meat 14 lbs. Corned Beef 12 lbs. Fish. Salmon 5 tins. Pilchards and Herring Roes 3 tins. General. Vegetable Fat 13/4 cwt. Rice Pudding 1 tin. Vegetables 40 tins. Jam 7 tins. Fruit 40 lbs.and 230 tins. Marmalade 6 tins. Milk 8 tins. Mincemeat 1 jar. Soup 1 tin. Nut Spread 1 carton. Condemned food is taken to the disposal point on the Sewage Farm, where tins are thoroughly perforated and loose food is stained and mixed with household refuse before onward transmission to the controlled tip outside the district. (22) PRIVATE SLAUGHTERHOUSES. SLAUGHTERHOUSES ACT. 1958. SLAUGHTER OF ANIMALS ACT. 1958. The Report as to the slaughterhouse requirements of the District and as to the existing slaughtering facilities, required by Section 3 of the Slaughterhouses Act, 1958, and the Slaughterhouse (Reports) Direction 1959, was submitted to the Minister of Agriculture. Fisheries and Food, during October of this year. This Report was to assist the Minister in appointing a date at which the Slaughterhouses (Hygiene) Regulations, 1958, and the Slaughter of Animals (Prevention of Cruelty) Regulations, 1958, would be brought fully into force for the District, the Regulations held in abeyance being mainly concerned with certain structural matters. The Report detailed the interested organisations consulted in arriving at the conclusions reached, and declared that the one privately-owned slaughterhouse operating in Barnet Urban District appeared to be sufficient for the needs of the District, by virtue of the receipt from the Ministry of a small "export" grant in respect of inspection of meat, calculated on the throughout and on the population concerned, which latter was not expected greatly to increase under present Town Planning restrictions. Considerable works of improvement were being undertaken at this slaughterhouse, and the Report recommended that 1st July, 1961 , should be the day appointed by .the Minister for the construction Regulations to apply in Barnet in their entirety. At the close of the year, acceptance by the Minister of the Report was still awaited, and improvement works were progressing. lour inspectors maintain a high percentage of meat inspection by evening and week-end visits at the slaughterhouse, where slaughtering is carried out on six days per week, the exception being Friday; the general system with regard to the timing of slaughtering is that adult Bovines are slaughtered early in the day's work, proceeding to the "smalls" and in this latter category, calves are usually left until last. This accounts for the 100% inspection of Cattle and Cows, shown in the following table, and the lower percentage of inspection for Calves. (23) However, good co-operation exists between your inspectors and the owner and his slaughtermen who retain for our inspection on the following day any carcase presenting signs of disease or injury. The majority of the condemned meat and offals is taken away by a reputable firm for manufacture into useful by-products, e.g. fertilisers etc. Total weight of carcase meat condemned:- Bovine. 1 ,032 lbs. Ovine 393 lbs. Porcine 134 lbs. 1 ,559 lbs. Total weight of offals condemned 7,698 lbs. CARCASES AND OFFAL INSPECTED AND CONDEMNED IN WHOLE OR IN PART. Cattle excluding Cows Cows Calves Sheep and Lambs Pigs Number killed (if known) 990 797 2,202 5,261 3,524 Number Inspected 990 797 1 ,946 5,196 3,494 All diseases except Whole carcases condemned 2 2 1 10 2 Carcases of which some part or organ was condemned 273 309 2 83 100 Percentage of the number inspected affected with disease other than tuberculosis and cysticerci 27.77 39.03 0.15 1.78 2.92 Tuberculosis only: YvTaole carcases condemned - - - - - Carcases of which some part or organ was condemned - 4 - - 65 Percentage of the number inspected affected with tuberculosis - 0.50 - - 1.86 Carcases of which some part or organ was condemned 10 9 - - - Carcases submitted to treatment by refrigeration Generalised and totally condemned 1 1 - - - - - - - - The percentage of bovines affected by Tuberculosis again shows a decline but there is a slight increase in the percentage of pigs (from 1.36 to 1.86) affected with the disease. This improvement in the disease rate in bovines is a direct result of the Government's eradication scheme and is shown even more dramatically when the total weights of carcase meat condemned over the past five years is considered. Year. Carcase Meat. Offals. lbs. lbs. 1956 12.837 9.490 1957 8.627 8.989 1958 4.388 7.649 1959 3.264 6.435 1960 1.559 7.698 The reduction in the weight of offals condemned is not so marked "but nonethethe overall reduction less/represents a reduced loss of money to the owners of the meat and likewise makes more home killed meat and offals available for sale for human consumption. There were eleven persons licensed by the Council as fit persons to slaughter animals, most of them work part or full time as slaughtermen at the local slaughterhouse. Some have employment outside the district and no complaint has been received from other districts concerning the conduct of any of these men, nor was there any need for adverse report on the men locally employed. REPORT REQUIRED BY SECTION 128(3) OF THE FACTORIES ACTS, 1937 to 1959. Inspection for purposes of provision as to health. Number on Register Inspections Written Notices Occupiers Prosecuted (l) Factories in which Sees. 1. 2, 3, 4 and 6 are to be enforced by Local Authorities. 3 - - - (2) Factories not included in (1) in which Sec. 7 is enforced by the Local Authority. 88 131 - - (3) Other premises in which Sec. 7 is enforced by the Local Authority. 3 - - - Total 94 131 - - One informal notice was served requiring provision of adequate sanitary accommodation in a factory. Outworkers (Sections 110 and 111) Section 110 Section 111 No. of outworkers on lists received. No. of instances of work in unwholesome premises. Notices Served. 101 - - (24) (25) Eighteen outworkers reside in the district. Seven premises were visited and home conditions were found to be entirely satisfactory. The names and addresses of the other outworkers are notified to the district councils in which they live. Three new certificates and one amended certificate as to adequate means of escape in case of fire were issued under section 34 of the Act during the year, after necessary works were carried out. Four applications for new or amended certificates were outstanding when this duty under the Act was taken over by the County Council on 1st December, 1960, and these and all the relevant Certificates, plans and other documents were duly handed over. PUBLIC HEALTH ACT , 1936 - SECTION .6.0. Escape from Fire - Certain High Buildings. Where plans are deposited with the Surveyor's Department under the building byelaws, and it appears that section 60 applies to the building, the plans are passed to this Department for inspection so that any works which may be necessary are carried out with the other building works. CARAVAN SITES AND CONTROL OF DEVELOPMENT ACT .19.60. This Act, which makes further provision for the licensing and control of caravan sites was passed on the 29th July, 1960, and came into operation one month later. Owners of existing sites, if they wished to continue the use of the sites, had to make application for a site licence not later than 28th October, 1960. Applications were so received and consideration was being given at the end of the year to the appropriate conditions to be included in the licences, according to the circumstances pertaining to each site including the Town Planning Permission approval. The caravans attending the Barnet Fair , are exempted from the controls of this Act, but several visits are made to enquire into the sanitary conditions, any infectious diseases; to enforce the provisions of temporary sanitary accommodation in the different sections of the Fair for the use both of caravanners and the visiting public. Regular removal of refuse from (26) caravans and stalls, and inspections are made of food stalls to secure hygienic conditions, HERTFORDSHIRE COUNTY COUNCIL ACTS 1935 AND 1960 . Provision is made in the 1935 Act, inter alia, for the conduct and regulation of:- (1) Hairdressers' and Barbers' Premises; (2) Swimming Baths and Pools , and (3) Employment Agencies. Hairdressers' and Barbers' Premises. There are fourteen such establishments in the district. Routine visits are made from time to time. Public Swimming Baths and Bathing .Pools. The only swimming pool in the district, viz, at "The Barn" , Barnet Bye-Pass is not now in use. Employment Agencies. The Council had no observations to make to the County Council concerning the renewal of licences to carry on Employment Agencies for the year. The 1960 Act, which was passed on the 29th July, 1960, includes amongst other things a section which prohibits the solicitation of school children to sell or exchange any article or thing, and a further section amends section 154 of the Public Health Act of 1936, which bears on the previous item so as to widen the scope of the word "article" to include "any aninal fish bird or other living thing". A further section gives power to the Medical Officer of Health or the Public Health Inspector to serve notice requiring that blocked drains etc. , shall be remedied within 48 hours, and failing compliance with this notice the Council may themselves carry out the necessary work, and, subject to certain conditions, may recover the reasonable expenses incurred. HOME COUNTIES (MUSIC AND .DANCING) LICENSING ACT , 1926. HERTFORDSHIRE (MUSIC AND DANCING) REGULATIONS, 1956. Under regulations made by the County Council a report from the local district council is required regarding the suitability and sufficiency of sanitary (27) arrangements at premises for Music and Dancing before licences are issued. A report was requested in respect of one Hall; the arrangements were satisfactory and the County Council notified accordingly. RAG FLOCK ACT, 1951. This Act controls the use of filling materials in the making of upholstery. The premises of one furniture manufacturer were registered under the Act, but this firm moved from the district during the year, and the register was amended accordingly. PET ANIMALS ACT. 1951. This Act gives the local Authority, inter alia, power to grant licences to persons to keep pet shops for the sale of pet animals and to attach to the licences conditions concerning the cleanliness and general management of the premises: four persons are so licensed in this district. No complaints were received nor were any major contraventions of the conditions observed during visits of inspection. RODENT CONTROL. Prevention of Damage by Pests Act, 1949. A full time rodent operator is employed for treatment of infestations of rats and mice. The table on the opposite page gives details of the work carried out during the year. A test bait is made of 10% of the soil sewer manholes in the district, from the results of which are based the two maintenance treatments of the sewers. The test bait in April resulted in eight complete "takes" and six partial "takes" of bait out of a total of ninety-two manholes tested. Following this up in May, some sixty-five manholes were baited; "takes" were recorded in forty-seven cases and these were poison baited. These figures show a considerable increase over the previous year. Unfortunately the second maintenance treatment, in October, was unsatisfactory owing to the baits being washed away by rain, so that no conclusion could be made as to (28) The cost of treatments at all other premises is recoverable. Type of Property Local Authority Dwelling Houses Agricultural All other (including Business Premises) Total Number of Properties inspected as a result of:(a) Notification 2 142 38 182 (b) Survey under the Act 4 82 16 212 314 (c) Otherwise - 6 - - 6 Total inspections carried out including re-inspections 24 254 18 283 579 Number of properties found to be infested by:- (a) Rats Major Minor 4 64 4 19 91 (b) Mice Major - - - - - Minor 7 119 - 14 140 Number of properties treated by the Local Authority 11 183 4 33 231 Total treatments carried out including re-treatments 14 191 4 45 254 Number of "Block" control schemes carried out 32 OTHER INFESTATIONS. The Department is frequently asked for advice and assistance in connection with insect infestations and during this year has dealt with some two hundred and five enquiries, the majority of which concerned wasps. In fact, some two hundred and eighty-one wasps nests were destroyed on privately owned properties and on the Council's own lands. A small charge is made for this service to householders. The other infestations cover a variety of things, e.g. beetles, suits, the results of the earlier treatment. No charge is made for the use of the Rodent Operator's services in treating private domestic premises, provided that the occupiers co-operate in carrying out their duties under the Act. (29) cockroaches, flies, silver fish, moths, woodwor and bugs. We are assisted in the identification of some of these insects by the British Museum (Natural History Section) the staff of which give prompt answers to our queries. CLEM AIR ACT. 195 6. Continuing with the Council's twenty years programme to eventually bring the whole district under smoke control orders, the full survey was undertaken on the proposed No. 2 Smoke Control Area; the necessary estimates were prepared and the Council made the Smoke Control Order, covering 468 houses and 164 acres, towards the end of the year. This was forwarded to the Ministry for confirmation with the proposed date of operation as 30th September, 1962. At the same time the Council gave approval in principle to the commencement of the survey work for a third area, comprising approximately 475 houses in 109 acres, with the object of bringing Nos, 2 and 3 areas into operation on the same date. It was thought that, owing to the large number of Council houses within the No. 2 area requiring considerable works, a longer period should be allowed for the carrying out of the works. The delay in the operation of the No, 2 Order does not however cause a general delay in the overall programme. No works were required in the No. 1 area which came into operation on the 1st September 1960, and no difficulties were experienced. The benefits of this branch of our work like that of the Tuberculosis in Cattle Eradication Scheme, will probably not be immediately noticed, but as the years go by records will surely show a cleaner atmosphere and a decrease in the incidence of pulmonary disease. No contraventions were found, this year, of the standards set by the Act and Regulations for fireguards on heating appliances. (30) Two licences for the storage of petroleum mixtures were discontinued during the year, one licencee having moved out of the district and the other having given up his store. One new licence was issued for petroleum spirit: thirty-one premises remained on the Register. At the end of the year the total quantity for which licences were on issue, in respect of petroleum spirit and petroleum mixtures, stood at 57,890 gallons. The process of testing the older installations, in line with the requirements of the Licence Conditions, has continued, any small defects being remedied before a licence is renewed. I am, Yours obediently, J.B. Wilson. Chief Public Health Inspector.