22 URBAN DISTRICT OF BARNET ANNUAL REPORT of the ACTING MEDICAL OFFICER OF HEALTH to the BAR NET URBAN DISTRICT COUNCIL by ARTHUR L. HYATT, M.R.C.S.(Eng.), L.R.C.P. Together with the ANNUAL REPORT of the CHIEF SANITARY INSPECTOR by JOHN B. WILSON, M.S. LA., M.R.San.I. 1954. (2) BARNET URBAN DISTRICT COUNCIL. MEDICAL OFFICER'S REPORT, Public Health Department, 31 Wood Street, Barnet. To the Chairman and Members of the Barnet Urban District Council. Ladies and Gentlemen, I have much pleasure in presenting to you my Annual Report on the health of the district for the year 1954. It is drawn up in accordance with the directions of the Ministry of Health Circular 28/54 of the 15th December, 1954. STATISTICS AND SOCIAL CONDITIONS OF THE AREA. Area (in acres) 4,290 Population (1951 Census) 25,019 Registrar-General's Estimate of Resident Population, mid 1954 25,330 Number of Inhabited Houses 7,665 Rateable Value £280,685 Product of a Penny Rate £1,160 NATURAL AND SOCIAL CONDITIONS. The population is largely residential, and consists chiefly of people whose occupation lies outside the urban area. Those employed in the district, apart from the tradesmen and their employees, are mainly skilled workers at dental manufacturing, lithographic, printing and optical works. EXTRACT FROM VITAL AND MORTAL STATISTICS OF THE YEAR. Total. M. F. Live Births (Legitimate 342 167 175 Illegitimate 16 4 12 Birth Rate per 1.000 of the estimated resident population (standardised); 14.28 Total. M. F. (Legitimate 6 4 2 Still Births( illegitimate Nil Nil Nil Still Birth Rate per 1.000 total (live and still) Births; 16.48 (3) Total. M. F. Deaths 240 109 131 Death Rate per 1.000 of the estimated resident population (standardised): 9.00 Total. Deaths from Puerperal causes 2 Death Rate from Puerperal causes per 1.000 total (live and still) Births: 5.42 Deaths of Infants under one year of age:- Total. M. F. Legitimate 7 4 3 Illegitimate 2 1 1 Death Rate of Infants under one year of age cor 1.000 live Births: 25.14 Deaths of Infants under four weeks of age:- Total. M. F. Legitimate 5 3 2 Illegitimate 2 1 1 Death Rate of Infants under four weeks of age per 1.000 live Births: 19.55 The figures of two deaths from puerperal causes (one of which is stated to have occurred over twelve months after the maternal condition) are provided by the Registrar General in his annual figures, but I have been unable to trace these in the death returns whether notified within the district or outside. These are the first recorded deaths from puerperal causes for this district since 1944. Too much importance should not bo paid to the rates where the actual number of cases is small, e.g. - below 10, as such rates are of little statistical significance. Thus, if an attempt is made to compare this area with other districts, or with previous years, it would be better to compare actual cases. GENERAL PROVISION OF HEALTH SERVICES FOR THE DISTRICT. The Council are not the appropriate Local Authority for the purpose of the National Health Service Act, 1946, and do not therefore control any of the Hospitals or ancillary services in the district. Within this district, and under the control of the Barnet Group Hospital Management Committee, are the following;- Barnet General Hospital, Wellhouse Lane, Barnet. 478 Beds. St. Stephen's Hospital, Mays Lane, Barnet. 88 Beds. (Female medical, Ear, Nose and Throat, and male long-stay cases) Victoria Maternity Hospital, Wood Street, Barnet. 48 Beds. "Elm Bank", Arkley. (Female long-stay cases) 27 Beds. (4) The following is a list of Clinics etc. available in the district. Tuberculosis Clinics .are held daily, by appointment, ct Barnet Chest Clinic, Wellhouse Lane, Barnet. At Vale Drive the following Clinics are held during the school term. A Clinic for Schoolchildren on the second and fourth Monday morning in each month, and a Clinic for Remedial Exercises every Monday afternoon. A Speech Therapy Clinic is held on Wednesdays and Fridays, Child Guidance Clinics on Thursdays, and an Eye Clinic on Wednesdays. An Infant Welfare Clinic is held every Tuesday afternoon all the year round and also on the first ~nd third Fridays in each month. For the convenience of residents at Totteridge there is an Infant Welfare Clinic at"Dollisfield"every Friday afternoon. Dental Clinics are held daily at Vale Drive. The Family Planning Association hold sessions at Vale Drive each Wednesday between 6 and 7.30 p.m. These Clinics are subject to alteration and it is advisable to enquire of the Vale Drive Clinic (BAR: 6194) for the current days and times. Home Help Service. The local office of the Herts County Council Home Help Service at 25 East Barnet Road, New Barnet, is open daily from 9 - 1, Monday to Friday inclusive. PUBLIC HEALTH STAFF. Acting Medical Officer of Health, Ø x Arthur L. Hyatt, M.R.C.S.(Eng.), L.R.C.P. Chief Sanitary Inspector. + ø John Baillie Wilson, M.R.San.I., M.S.I.A. Additional Sanitary Inspectors. Ø Howard W.C. Alloway, A.R.San.I., M.S.I.A, + ø David W.E. Jessett, M.S.I.A, (Appointed 5th July, 1954) One Clerk-Typist. One Rodent Operative. + Ø Holds the special qualification as Inspector of Meat and other Foods under examination of the Royal Sanitary Institute. ø Salary Contribution of one half from Exchequer Grants. x Part-time Officer. (5) WATER SUPPLY. The major area of the district is supplied with water from the mains of the Barnet District Water Company, and the remainder is served by the Colne Valley Water Company. All water supplied by the Barnet District Water Company is chlorinated. A pathological staff is maintained and the water is regularly tested at all stages. During the year, a total of 1,732 bacteriological and 240 chemical examinations of the vater were made by the Company's own staff. 1,470 of these samples were representative of the supply and 99.6% were found to be free from B. Coli. The Colne Valley Water Company exercises constant supervision, and members of the staff are on duty day and night throughout the year examining samples. All the water supplied by this Company is chlorinated. The water supply is satisfactory both from the Chemical and Bacteriological aspects. Six samples of water were taken by the Department, four from Barnet District Water Company's supply and two from the Colne Valley Water Company's supply, and submitted for analysis with satisfactory results, coliform organisms being absent in 100 millitres in each case. The water supply to the whole district is considered adequate, and all houses are supplied by these companies mains, with the exception of one house which is still using water from a well in the front garden, from where it is pumped up to a store tank in the roof space. DRAINAGE AMD SEWERAGE. The town is drained and sewered on the separate system, excepting the older portions of the district where it is a combined system. The sewage is conveyed to a Sewage Disposal works of 56 acres, where it is screened, grit removed in detritus tanks, thence to primary settlement tanks and thereafter distributed over three 80 ft. diameter bacteria filters, followed by humus removal in rectangular tanks before discharge to the Dollis Brook. Pumping is necessary for three severs which have their outlets at a low point on the works. Part of the Tottaridge area drains to the Finchley Borough sewers; in the outlying areas some properties are on cesspool drainage or domestic sewage disposal plants, and a few only have pail closets. (6) SANITARY CONDITIONS AND WATER SUPPLY OF SCHOOLS. There are in the district fourteen schools administered by the South Herts Divisional Education Committee, viz.- Queen Elizabeth's Boys and Girls Grammar Schools, Ravenscroft Secondary Modern School, Foulds School (Junior Mixed and Infants) Christ Church School for Infants; Christ Church School for Girls, Christ Church School for Junior Boys; The Elizabeth Allen Secondary Modern School; Grasvenor Infants School, Underhill School (Junior Mixed and Infants); St. Catherine's Roman Catholic School and Will tings Hill School (Junior Mixed and Infants). The South Herts College of Further Education, Wood Street, Barnet, is available for Girls and Boys between the ages of 15 and 18. All schools in the district are supplied "ith mains water and are connected to the Council's main drainage system. DISPOSAL OF HOUSE REFUSE. The house refuse is collected weekly in covered mechanical conveyances and taken to the Council's Sewage Farm, '-here it is loaded into Contractor's covered lorries and disposed of daily by controlled tipping outside the district. PREVALENCE OF. AND CONTROL OVER. INFECTIOUS DISEASE. The following table shews the number of Notifications to the Sanitary Authority during the year, of each disease specified in the Public Health Act, 1936 and the various Infectious Disease Regulations, and the number of cases removed to Hospital, DISEASE NOTIFIED REMOVED TO HOSPITAL Scarlet Fever 16 3 Whooping Cough 47 10 Diphtheria and Membranous Croup Nil Nil Measles 107 3 Acute Pneumonia 6 3 Meningococcal Infection 1 1 Acute Poliomyelitis (Paralytic) Nil Nil " " (Non-Paralytic) 2 2 Acute Encephalitis Nil Nil Dysentery 9 7 Ophthalmia Neonatorum Nil Nil Puerperal Pyrexia 41 41 Smallpox Nil Nil Malaria Nil Nil Typhoid Fever Nil Nil Paratyphoid Fever 1 1 Enteric Fever 1 1 Food Poisoning 9 7 Erysipelas 4 2 Tuberculosis 22 20 TOTALS 266 101 (7) The foregoing figures shew a welcome overall reduction as compared with last year, particularly in respect of measles and whooping cough. AGE INCIDENCE OF INFECTIOUS DISEASE. DISEASE NUMBER OF CASES NOTIFIED YEARS OF AGE 0- l- 2- 3- 4- 5- 10- 15- 25- 45- 65- 75- Total. Scarlet Fever - - 2 2 1 8 2 1 ~ - - - 16 Whooping Cough 7 4 7 6 8 13 - 1 l - - - 47 Measles l 5 13 11 12 64 - l - - - - 107 Acute Pneumonia - l - - - 1 - 2 - 1 1 - 6 Meningococcal Infection 1 - - - - - - - - - - - 1 Acute Poliomyelitis (Non-Paralytic) - - - - - - 1 l - - - - 2 Dysentery 2 - - 1 l 1 2 1 l - - - 9 Puerperal Pyrexia - - - - - - 19 22 - - - 41 Paratyphoid Fever - - - - - - - - - 1 - - 1 Enteric Fever - - - - - - - 1 - - - - 1 Food Poisoning - - - l - 4 - - 3 1 - - 9 Erysipelas - - - - - - - - - 2 - - 4 TOTALS 11 10 22 21 22 91 5 27 29 5 l - 244 Of the foregoing, the following canes normally resident outside the district were notified from the Barnet General H ospital and the Victoria Maternity Hospital:- Whooping Cough 1; Acute Pneumonia 3; Meningococcal Infection 1; Acute Poliomyelitis (Non-Paralytic) 1; Dysentery 6; Puerperal Pyrexia 36; Enteric Fever lj Food Poisoning 65 Erysipelas 1. The cases of Tuberculosis removed for treatment are usually sent to Clare Hall Sanatorium, South Mimms, other patients with an infectious disease being sent to Coppett1s Wood Hospital, Muswell Hill, N.10. The Case Rates, of certain diseases, excluding those cases not normally resident in the district, per 1,000 of the population are as follows;- (8) Scarlet Fever 0.63; Whooping Cough 1.82, Measles 4.22; Acute Pneumonia 0.12; Food Poisoning 0,12; Erysipelas 0.12. As mentioned earlier in this report, where the number of cases is less than, say, 10, case rates are of little statistical value for comparison purposes. VACCINATION. No primary or revaccinations were performed by the Medical Officer of Health under the Public Health (Smallpox Prevention) Regulations, I917. INTERNATIONAL VACCINATION CERTIFICATES. At the end of 1952 a new form was introduced for International Vaccination Certificates requiring authentication of the signature of the doctor performing vaccination or inoculation of persons proceeding overseas. During this year 677 such certificates were authenticated and marked with the internationally agreed stamp. TUBERCULOSIS. NEW CASES AND MORTALITY DURING 1954. YEARS OF AGE NEW CASES DEATHS Pulmonary No n-pulmonary Pulmonary No n-Pu lmo nary M. F. M. F. M. F. M. F. 0 - - - - - - - - 1 - - - - - - - - 5 1 - 1 1 - - - - 15 2 4 1 1 - - - - 25 2 - 1 - 1 2 - - 35 2 - - 1 - - - - 45 2 - - - 1 - - - 55 1 - - - - - - - 65 and over - 2 - - 1 1 - - TOTALS 10 6 3 3 3 - - The Public Health (Tuberculosis) Regulations, 1952, which came into operation in May 1952, rescinded an earlier Regulation which required the local (9) Medical Officer of Health to keep a register of all Tuberculous patients, shewing the movements of local cauus. Notification of the disease is still required, and as suggested by the Minister of Health the local register is being maintained as the information contained therein may be useful for local purposes. The total number of persons entered on the Register at the end of the year was 227, as compared with 215 at the beginning of the year. The difference is accounted for by new cases, deaths, and transfers in and out of the district. There were no cases of wilful neglect or of refusal to notify Tuberculosis in any form. PUBLIC HEALTH (PREVENTION OF TUBERCULOSIS) REGULATIONS. 1925. It has not been found necessary to take any notion under the above Regulations, relating to Tuberculous employees in the Milk Trade. PUBLIC HEALTH ACT. 1936. SECTION 172. COMPULSORY REMOVAL TO HOSPITAL OF CASES OF PULMONARY TUBERCULOSIS. No action was necessary under the above Section. NATIONAL ASSISTANCE ACT. 1948. - SECTION 42. NATIONAL ASSISTANCE (AMENDMENT) ACT. 1951 - SECTION 1. During the year there was a considerable increase in the amount of work in connection ith the aged and infirm, some seven persons receiving our attention. Two were the subject of Emergency Removal Orders under the Amendment Act and Continuation Orders through the Court under the main Act. One, an aged lady, remains at Western House, Ware, where she is quite happy, the other, a man, was discharged from Hospital after improvement in his state of health and alterations of the domestic circumstances. Three further cases were removed voluntarily to suitable Homes. One very independent old gentleman living on his own did not wish to go away from bis home and after much persuasion he permitted his relations to clean up the house and give him the necessary attention. The last case was not one strictly for action under these Acts and (10) eventually the case was removed to hospital for medical attention. MORTAL STATISTICS, Of 240 deaths, 16 occurred under one year of age. The following were the major causes of death:- Heart Disease 80; Cancer 43; (23 males and 20 females); Vascular Lesions of nervous system 29; Bronchitis l8; Pneumonia (all forms) 5i Tuberculosis 6; Motor vehicle accidents 3; Other accidents 4. MORTUARY ACC0MM0DATI0 N. Under arrangements made with the East Barnet Urban District Council their mortuary is available for the use of this district, and it was so used on twenty occasions during the year. I am, Yours faithfully, ARTHUR L. HYATT, M.R.C.S.(Eng.), L.R.C.P. ACTING MEDICAL OFFICER OF HEALTH. (II) HOUSING CONSOLIDATED REGULATIONS. 1925. - ARTICLE 71. HOUSING ACTS, 1936 AND 1949. LOCAL GOVERNMENT (MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS) ACT. 1957. HOUSING REPAIRS AND RENTS ACT. 1954. (l) The number of houses which on inspection were considered to be unfit for human habitation: 7 (2) The number of houses the defects in which were remedied in consequence of informal action by the Local Authority or their officers Nil (3) The number of representations made to the Local Authority with a view to:- (a) the service of notices requiring the execution of works Nil (b) the making of demolition or closing orders 6 (4) The number of formal notices served requiring the execution of works Nil (5) The number of houses which core rendered fit after service of formal notice;- (a) by owners Nil (b) by Local Authority in default of owners Nil (6) (a) The number of demolition orders made 2 (b) The number of houses demolished 18 (c) The number of houses in respect of which an undertaking under sub-section 3 was accepted 2 (d) The number of houses in respect of which a demolition order has been determined Nil (7) (a) The number of closing orders made 2 (b) The number of closing orders determined by Local Authority Nil (12) BARNET URBAN DISTRICT COUNCIL. CHIEF SANITARY INJECTOR'S REPORT. Public Health Department, 31 Wood Street, Barnet. To the Chairman and Members of the Barnet Urban District Council. Ladies and Gentlemen, I have the honour to present to you my Annual Report for the year 1954. With the passing of the Housing Repairs and Rents Act, 1954, in August, and the resumption of slum clearance work, the department turns to a Housing Survey for report to the Ministry before August 1955° The preliminary survey has been started and will be completed on time. With the Act coming into operation late in the year there had not been any appreciable demand for Certificates of Disrepair, although there have been many enquiries from owners and tenants as to their rights and responsibilities under the Act- The 1951 Census final figures were published and the Council made application for the further powers under the Food and Drugs Acts, but the Ministry of Health enquiry was not held before the end of the year. With the publication of the Census figures the Council became the responsible authority for ail duties under the Shops Acts. The benefit of the services of the new additional sanitary inspector, who quickly settled down, were felt in allowing us, without serious reduction of existing routine work, to start the Housing Survey and to spread the additional work of meat inspec tion at the private slaughterhouse irhich opened in July and involved evening and weekend duties. INSPECTION OF DISTRICT. General inspections of the district have been carried out periodically and all complaints investigated. The process of serving a preliminary or intimation notice upon the person (13) in default, specifying the works necessary to remedy the defects found, is usually followed. It was found necessary to ask your authority to serve fifty-nine Statutory Notices, where persons failed to comply with the preliminary notice, or the strict legal procedure was necessary in the first instance. SANITARY INSPECTION OF AREA. The following is a list of the number and nature of visits and inspections:- Visits re: Housing Acts 324 Visits re: nuisance and sanitary defects 1187 Visits re: infectious diseases 129 Visits re: Petroleum Acts 226 Visits re: factories 62 Visits re: outworkers' promises 25 Visits re: food manufactories, cafes etc. 378 Visits re: ice cream and sampling 23O Visits re: overcrowding 24 Visits re: aged and infirm persons 80 Visits to inspect meat and other foods 574 Visits re: schools 9 Visits re: pollution of watercourses 159 Visits re: Tents, Caravans and Sheds 99 Visits re: Shops Acts 53 Visits re. keeping of animals 55 Visits re: Rodent Infestations 2293 Visits re: other infestations 118 Miscellaneous visits l8l NUMBER OF NOTICES SERVED DURING YEAR. Number of Informal Notices 158 Number of Statutory Notices 59 Informal Notices complied with 135 Statutory Notices complied with 36 SANITARY WORK AND REPAIRS. The following is a list of repairs effected as a result of informal and formal notices served:- Roofs repaired and made weatherproof 32 Gutters, downspouts repaired or renewed 23 Exterior brickwork repaired or re-pointed 11 Walls, dampness remedied 30 Chimney stacks and pots repaired or renewed 7 Yard surfaces repaired or re-paved 1 Ceilings repaired or renewed 32 Wall plaster repaired or renewed 26 Walls and ceilings cleansed and decorated 39 Floors repaired or renewed 16 Sub-floor ventilation rectified 3 (14) Doors and frames repaired or renewed 12 Windows repaired 27 Stair treads and balusters repaired 14 Fireplaces repaired or renewed 4 Drains cleared 23 Drains repaired or reconstructed 24 Inspection chambers repaired or reconstructed 14 Soil or vent pipes repaired or renewed 6 Gullies, channels and fenders repaired or renewed 7 Water Closet pans, fittings, repaired or renewed 28 Sinks, waste pipes, etc., repaired or renewed 18 Storage cisterns, cleaned, repaired or renewed 6 Water services, repaired, renewed or re-instated 5 Dustbins renewed 11 Refuse accumulations removed 11 Animals and fowls: nuisance from improper keeping 12 HOUSING. Eighteen houses were demolished by the owners during the year. Fifteen houses formed one terrace and as these houses have become vacant, over several years now, they have remained closed. The other three houses were demolished consequent upon Demolition Orders made in the previous year. Two Demolition Orders were made but not carried out during the year, two Closing Orders were made, demolition being impracticable for the time being. The Housing Repairs and Rents Act, 1954, permitted owners to increase standard rents of houses subject to conditions. In the event of dispute over certain matters, the tenant may apply to the Council for a Certificate of Disrepair which, if issued, enables the tenant to withhold the rent increase. Many enquiries ..ere made both by landlords and tenants, but only three applications '.ere made for Certificates and these could not be reported upon to the Council before the end of the year. PUBLIC HEALTH ACT. 1976. INFECTIOUS DISEASE. INVESTIGATION AMD DISINFECTION. Investigations have been carried out of the more important cases of infectious disease listed in the Medical Officer of Health's Report, and twentytwo premises were disinfected. Where necessary, bedding is taken for disinfection to the Barnet General Hospital under arrangements made with the Barnet Group Hospital Management Committee. One hundred and twenty-two library books ere disinfected before return to libraries. (15) FOOD AMD FOOD PREMISES. The process of taking informal action whenever possible still prevails, and every opportunity is taken to discuss with management and staff all matters concerning food hygiene. Our high hopes of being able to require a more positive and higher standard of food hygiene in food premises under impending legislation have not materialised, owing to opposition from various quarters in the standards to be set by the Bill which has not yet become lay. However the number of visits to this class of premises shews an increase and the amount of repair and maintenance works carried out is summarised below. Ceilings renewed or repaired 2 Wall plaster renewed or repaired 2 Walls and ceilings cleansed, 15 Floors repaired 1 Windows repaired 3 Yard and Gully cleansed 1 Dustbins renewed 3 Hot water supplies provided 6 Hand basins provided 5 Soap and towels provided 4 Accumulations removed 2 FOOD POISONING. Annual Return of Food Poisoning Notifications, Food Poisoning Notifications (Corrected) Returned to Registrar General. 1st Quarter. 2nd Quarter. 3rd Quarter. 4th Quarter. Total. Deaths. Nil. Nil. 1 89 Nil. Outbreaks Due to Identified Agents, Total Outbreaks. 1 Total cases 5 Outbreaks of undiscovered cause, Total Outbreaks. Nil Total cases. Nil Single cases. 4 Agent Identified 3 Unknown Cause 1 Total 4 There is an increase in the number of food poisoning cases, mainly due to a minor outbreak of five cases in a local hospital. Extensive enquiries v ere made by the hospital st ff and this department without any positive results. The cases occurred in different wards and so far as could be (16) ascertained there was no connecting link between them individually or collectively with the kitchen, although this letter is the more likely means of transmission. ICE CREAM. Two hundred and three samples of ice cream were taken during the year with the following results'. - Manufacturer. Grade I. Grade II. Grade III. Grade IV. Total. A 65 8 1 - 74 B 69 7 - - 76 C 1 - - 1 F 26 4 - - 30 G 4 1 - 2 7 N - - 1 - 1 0 14 - - - 14 Total 178 21 2 2 203 All samples of ice cream are taken to the Central Public Health Laboratory at Colindale for testing by the Methylene Blue Test. During the year new premises were constructed in the district for the manufacture of ice cream, This factory was registered and vent into production towards the end of the year and all samples taken (14) 'ere in Grade 1= There is a further reduction in the number of samples falling into Grades 3 and 4 despite an overall increase in the number of samples taken. The unsatisfactory samples represent 2% of the total, compared with 10% in 1953* The^e are now 42 premises registered for the storage and sale of ice cream, including 5 new registrations effected during 1954, DAIRIES. COWSHEDS AMD MILKSHPPS. The control of the production"of milk is now vested in the Ministry of Agriculture and Fisheries. The local authority is responsible for the inspection and registration of milk distributors and other dairy premises not directly concerned with the actual production of milk, and for licensing for the sale of Designated Milks. - (17) This district is within the London area which was designated, as from 1st October, 1951, a "Specified Area" under an Order made by the Minister of Food, This Order is enforced by the Hertfordshire County Council as the Food and Drugs Authority for the area. Briefly, the Order prohibits the retail sale of any raw ungraded milk in a specified area: only milk from tested herds or heat treated milks may be sold by retail. Twenty-five samples of milk have been taken, in course of delivery to the consumer, and submitted to the appropriate tests with the following results:- Designation Samples Token Satisfactory Unsatisfactory Tuberculin Tested. 1 1 Nil Tuberculin Tested (Pasteurised). 4 4 Nil Tuberculin Tested (Farm Bottled). 3 2 1 Tuberculin Tested (Farm Bottled) (Channel Islands). 3 2 1 Pasteurised. 9 8 1 Pasteurised (Homogenised). 2 2 Nil Pasteurised (Channel Islands). 3 3 Nil TOTALS 25 22 3 The three unsatisfactory samples of milk were obtained from one dealer. Copies of the unsatisfactory reports are forwarded to the County Milk Regulations Officer for his action. Two samples of milk were submitted for biological examination one being negative and one positive to Brucella Abortus. The farm concerned sends all mixk produced direct to a local plant for pasteurisation, before being sold by retail. No official action was taken under Regulation 20 of the Milk and Dairies Regulations 1949, to stop or restrict the sale of milk. No cases of disease were notified which could be attributed to the consumption of infected milk. (18) Nine Dealer1s Licences and trenty-four Supplementary Licences were granted for the retail sale of milk under the Milk (Special Designation)(Raw Milk) Regulations, 1949 and 1950, and the Milk (Special Designation)(Pasteurised and Sterilised Milk) Regulations, 1949 and 1950, viz:- Designation. Dealer's Licences, Supplementary Licences. Tuberculin Tested. 3 8 Pasteurised. 3 8 Sterilised. 3 8 I MEAT AND FOOD CONDEMNED, The following is a list of the articles of food condemned as unfit for human consumption during the year. Meat. Fresh Meat. Canned Meat. Beef (English and Scotch) lbs. 15 Veal lbs. 19 " (Imported) lbs, 121 Stewed Steak lbs. 70 Lamb -.nd Mutton (Irish) lbs. 3 Stewed Mutton lbs. 6 Sausages (Pork) lbs. 86 Tongue lbs. 18 Kidneys (Porcine) lbs. 112 Ham (imported) lbs. 33 Luncheon Meat lbs. 22 Corned Beef lbs. 24 Fish. Herrings tins 5 Brisling tins 2 Salmon tins 1 Pilchards, Sardines Crab and Lobster tins 2 and Silds tins 38 Fruit. Blackcurrants tins 51 Grapefruit tins 18 Plums tins 33 Apricots tins 18 Gooseberries tins 19 Oranges tins 12 Pineapple tins 19 Miscellaneous tins 37 Vegetables and Crreals. Beans tins 20 Carrots tins 2 Peas tins 26 Miscellaneous tins 3 Tomatoes tins 36 Groceries. Milk and Cream tins 54 Cooking Fat lbs. 11 Soup tins 12 Cheese (Processed) pkts 24 Puddings tins 1 Cake Mixtures pkts 5 Jam, Marmalade and Jelly tins 38 Muscatels and Figs pkts 2 Paste and Spreads jars & tins 6 Pickles and Sauces bottles 2 (19) The weight ox meat condemned at the slaughterhouse is shewn elsewhere in the report. FOOD AND DRUGS ACT. 1958. Those sections of the above Act concerning sampling of food-stuffs for adulteration and sophistication are enforced by the County Authority in this district. The following details shew the number and nature of the samples taken in the Urban District of Barnet during the year, and the results of the analyses. Article. No. of Samples Taken. Genuine. Adulterated Milk Pasteurised. 2 2 — Milk Tuberculin Tested Pasteurised. 3 3 — Milk Tuberculin Tested. 1 1 — Beef Sausages. 1 1 - Dripping. 1 1 - Porage Oats. 1 1 - Shredded Suet., 2 2 - Strawberry Jam. 1 1 - To tal 12 12 - As mentioned elsewhere in this report, the Council has made application to take over these duties but the result of the application is not known. PRIVATE SLAUGHTER-HOUSES AMD SLAUGHTER OF ANIMALS ACT. 1933. As envisaged in the 1953 report is was found necessary to re-open privateslaughterhouses, throughout the country, and in this district two applications for licences were received. Both were initially refused on public health grounds and eventually one owner did proceed to recondition the premises and. a licence was issued in July. This has entailed additional duties and considerable evening and weekend work in order to inspect the meat produced as to its fitness for human consumption. Number of Animals Slaughtered and Inspected 8663 Inspected Entire Carcase Condemned. Part Carcase Condemned. Bovines excluding Calves 1040 10 12 Calves 3441 2 – Sheep and Lambs 2207 – – Pigs 1975 5 2 (20) Total weight of Carcase Meat condemned:- Bovine 6774 lbs. Porcine 765 lbs. Total 7539 lbs. Total weight of Heads and Offals condemned 4590 lbs. The Council agreed to act as agents for the Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food in the matter of Deadweight Certification of Pigs. This system enables producers to obtain the. Government subsidy on a deadlight basis whore pigs arc sold by private treaty and do not go through a market where they would be graded by a Ministry Grader on a liveweight basis. Since the scheme came into operation locally at the end of July, your Inspectors have issued 74 certificates covering 401 pigs. For this service the Council receives from the Ministry 6d pur pig certified, with a minimum of 3/- per certificate. There are eleven persons licensed by the Council as fit persons to slaughter animals. Although licensed by this authority most of the men are employed outside the districts No complaint has been received from the districts in which they work concerning the conduct of any of these men, nor was there any need for adverse report on the men locally employed., DRAINAGE, In addition to the normal cleansing and repair works required to house drains, the construction of domestic sewage plants to three new properties was approved and supervised by the department. After investigation notices were served in respect of two properties where the- existing sewage disposal plants were considered inadequate to deal with the existing flow through them, but the works had not been commenced during the year Alterations and additions to one plant were required and effected, and one plant was dispensed with by connecting the draimge of the property to the Council's sewer. The relaying of a "combined drain" was in progress at the end of the year the work being carried out by a contractor under supervision of the department. The expenses of this are recoverable from the owners concerned. (21) REPORT REQUIRED BY SECTION 128 (3) OF THE FACTORIES ACT. 1937. Inspections for purposes of provisions as to health. Number on Register. Number of Inspections. Written Notices. Occupiers Prosecuted. (l) Factories in which Secs. 1,2,3,4 and 6 are to be enforced by Local Authorities. 8 9 – – (2) Factories not included in (1) in which Sec. 7 is enforced by the Local Authority. 75 47 2 – (3) Other premises in which Sec. 7 is enforced by the Local Authority, 10 6 -– – Total 934 62 2 – The notices required, in one instance, the adequate screening of a sanitary convenience, and the other, the provision of adequate sanitary conveniences for the number of persons employed. This latter as not applied with in the year. Outworkers (Sections 110 and 111). Section 110. Section 111. No. of outworkers on lists received. No. of instances of work in unwholesome premises. Notices Served. 73 – – In addition to the above, twenty-five outworkers' premises were visited, Too certificates as to moans of escape in case of fire were issued under Section 34 of the Act during the year, after alteration works were completed. Inspections were made and notice of alterations given in a further case, but it was not possible to issue the certificate by the end of the year. Discussions were held with H.M. Inspector of Factories with respect to the issue of one certificate in respect of a factory through which runs the district boundary. This was not found practicable by the neighbouring Council. It has been agreed that in future contact will be made with our (22) neighbouring authority and the inspections will be made simultaneously by the Officers of both authorities and due regard will be paid to circumstances affecting the means of escape in either area. HERTFORDSHIRE COUNTY COUNCIL ACT. 1935. Provision is made in this Act for the conduct and regulation of:- (1) Tents, Caravans and Sheds; (2) Hairdressers' and Barbers' Premises; (3) Swimming Baths and Pools, and (4) Employment Agencies. Tents. Caravans and Sheds. One individual caravan site was approved during the year subject to compliance with the requirements of the Act in respect of water supply, roads and paths, drainage and layout. Court action was necessary to secure the removal of one caravan from an unauthorised site and informal action secured the removal of another. The vans attending tho Barnet Fair were visited to enquire as to any infectious diseases and as to their sanitary condition. The provision of temporary sanitary accommodation was required in different sections of the fair for the use of the caravanned and public, and regular removal of refuse was arranged. Hairdressers' and Barbers' Premises. The Council made Bye-laws for securing the cleanliness of these premises in 1937. There are fifteen such establishments in the district. No complaints were received concerning their cleanliness or conduct nor were any serious breaches of the Bye-laws noted during inspections of such premises. Public Swimming Baths and Bathing Pools. The only swimming pool in the district, via, at "The Barn", Barnet Bye-Pass, is not now in use. Employment Agencies. Prior to the war there were four employment agencies in the district. These, however, are no longer in existence owing to the control of labour and it seems unlikely they will re-open. (23) RODENT CONTROL. Prevention of Damage by Pests Act, 1949. A full time rodent operator is employed for treatment of infestations of rats and mice. The table below gives details of the work carried out during the year:- Type of Property. Local Authority Dwelling Houses Agricultural All other (including Business and Industrial) Total. 1. Number of properties inspected during 1954 as a result (a) of notification or (b) other-wise. (a) 4 169 — 24 197 (b) 5 259 12 42 318 2. Number of properties (under 1) found to be infested by rats, Major - 1 4 3 8 Minor 4 212 5 6 227 3. Number of properties (under 1) found to be infested by mice. Major - 8 - 5 13 Minor 4 65 - 16 85 4. Number of infested properties (under 2 and 3) treated by the Local Authority. 8 286 9 28 331 5. Number of "block" control schemes carried out 63 One statutory notice under Section 4 of the Act requiring the execution of works in connection with an infestation, and one statutory notice under Section 6, requiring a treatment for rat infestation spread over several premises, were served. Three informal notices were served requiring removal of accumulations harbouring rats: all notices were complied with. More mice infestations than hitherto came to our notice and the results of investigations being carried out by the Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food are awaited with interest. From the preliminary findings, it is considered that the methods at present in use are correct but not necessarily for the reasons originally conceived. A test bait was made of 10% of the soil sewer manholes in the district, from the results of which are based the two maintenance treatments of the sewers required by the Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food, as one of the conditions under which the Ministry pay of the Council's rodent control expenses. (24) During this calendar year only one maintenance treatment was carried out and this immediately following the test bait. Fifty-five manholes were poisoned which is a slight increase on last year's treatment. The Second maintenance could not be carried out as planned owing to inclement weather, but was arranged within the financial year which ends after the period covered by this report. No charge is made for the use of the Rodent Operator's services in treating private domestic premises, provided that the occupiers co-operate in carrying out their duties under the Act. The cost of treatments at all other premises is recoverable. OTHER INFESTATIONS. Members of the public seem more concerned with infestations than previously and advice was given in respect of eighteen infestations of a wide variety of insects, e.g. woodworm, carpet beetles, larder beetles, ants, lice, cockroaches etc. Small quantities of liquid or powder insecticides are distributed and only in rare cases do the department carry out the necessary work. This we did in eradicating fifty-four wasps' nests using Cyanide or a power sprayer with liquid insecticide. PET ANIMALS ACT, 1951. This Act gives the local Authority, inter alia, power to grant licences to persons to keep pet shops for the sale of pet animals and to attach to the licences conditions concerning the cleanliness and general management of the premises: there are four persons licensed in the district. No complaints were received nor were any major contraventions of the conditions observed during visits of inspection. RAG FLOCK ACT. 1951. This Act which came into force on the 1st November, 1951, creates controls over the use of filling materials in the making of upholstery. There are no premises liable to registration within the district. (25) HEATING APPLIANCES (FIREGUARDS) ACT. 1952, This Act and the Regulations made thereunder came into operation on the 1st October 1953, after which date it became an offence to manufacture a heating appliance which does not comply with the standards set. Retailers had until October 1954, in which to dispose of stocks of fires manufactured before the operative date, the appropriate shops were visited and in only one shop were any fires found which did not conform. These were immediately withdrawn from sale and arrangements made for their return to the manufacturer. PETROLEUM (REGULATION) ACTS. 1928 AND 1936. There are thirty-five persons licensed to store petroleum and petroleum mixtures upon the Register. Six licences lapsed and the necessary safety precautions were taken in connection with the underground tank which was involved in one case. Two new licences were issued, for underground storage of petrol served via pumps; one after reconditioning and testing of the existing tank, pump and lines, and the other being a new installation constructed under the supervision of the department. The total quantity of petroleum spirit and mixtures which may be kept in the various stores is 39,435 gallons. Two hundred and twenty-six inspections were made to secure compliance with the Council's revised conditions attaching to licences. In one instance it was necessary to report serious breaches of the conditions, i.e. an empty tank not safeguarded and the opening of the flame proof electrical circuit to provide an additional external light., The scale of fees for Licences to Store Petroleum ranges from 5/- for a quantity not exceeding 100 gallons to £1 for 1,000 to 5,000 gallons, and £2 for 10,000 gallons. I am, Yours obediently, J., B. WILSON. Chief Sanitary Inspector.