UBAR 29 URBAN DISTRICT OP BARNET ANNUAL REPORT of the MEDICAL OFFICER OF HEALTH to the BARNET URBAN DISTRICT COUNCIL by ARTHUR L. HYATT, M.R.C.S.(Eng.) , L.R.C.P. Together with the ANNUAL REPORT of the CHIEF PUBLIC HEALTH INSPECTOR JOHN B. WILSON, M.A.P.H.I. , M.R.S.H. 1961 (2) BARNET URBAN DISTRICT COUNCIL. MEDICAL OFFICER'S REPORT, Tel: BARnet 5511 Public Health Department, 31 Wood Street, Barnet. To the Chairman and Members of the Barnet Urban District Council. Ladies and Gentlemen, I have pleasure in presenting to you my Annual Report on the health of the district for the year 1961. It is drawn up in accordance with the directions of the Ministry of Health Circular 1/62 of the 18th January, 1962. STATISTICS AND SOCIAL CONDITIONS OF THE AREA. Area (in acres) 4,290 Population (1951 Census) 25 ,019 (1961 Census - Preliminary Estimate) 27,834 Registrar-General's Estimate of Resident Population, mid 1961 27,280 Number of Inhabited Houses 8,510 Number of Persons per House 3.21 Rateable Value £519,331 Product of a Penny Rate £2,110 NATURAL AND SOCIAL CONDITIONS. The population is largely residential, and consists chiefly of people whose occupation lies outside the urban area. Those employed in the district, apart from the tradesmen and their employees, are mainly skilled workers in light industries. EXTRACT FROM VITAL AND MORTAL STATISTICS OF THE YEAR. Total. M. F. Live Births Legitimate 411 216 195 (Illegitimate 11 6 5 Live Birth Rate per 1 .000 of the estimated resident population (Standardised): 15.47 Illegitimate Live Births per cent of the total live births: 2.61% Live Birth Rate per 1 .000 of the estimated resident population (Standardised): 15.47 Illegitimate Live Births per cent of the total live births: 2.61% (3) Still Births (Legitimate Total. 12 M. 7 F. 5 (illegitimate 2 1 1 Still Birth Rate per 1 ,000 total (live and still) births: 3 2.11 Total Live and Still Births Legitimate Total. M. 223 F. 200 Illegitimate 13 7 6 Infant Deaths (Under one year of age) Legitimate 6 4 2 Illegitimate – – – Infant Mortality Rates: Total Infant Deaths per 1 .000 total live births: 14.22 Legitimate Infant Deaths per 1 ,000 legitimate live births: 14.60 Illegitimate Infant Deaths per 1 .000 illegitimate live births: 0.00 Neo–natal Mortality Rate (Deaths under 4 weeks per 1.000 total live births: 14.22 Early Neo–natal Mortality Rate (deaths under 1 week per 1.000 total live births; 11.85 Perinatal Mortality Rate (still births and deaths under 1 week combined per 1 .000 total live and still births): 43.58 Maternal Mortality (including abortion): Number of Deaths: Nil Rate per 1 ,000 total live and still births: 0.00 Deaths (All Causes): Total. 275 M. 136 F. 139 Death Rate per 1 .000 of the estimated resident population (Standardised): 10.18 Too much importance should not be paid to the rates where the actual number of cases is small, e.g. – below 10, as such rates are of little statistical significance. Thus, if an attempt is made to compare this area with other districts, or with previous years, it would be better to compare actual cases. GENERAL PROVISION OP HEALTH SERVICES FOR THE DISTRICT. The Council are not the appropriate Local Authority for the purpose of the National Health Service Act, 1946, and do not therefore control any of the Hospitals or ancillary services in the district. Within this district, and under the control of the Barnet Group Hospital Management Committee , are the following:– Barnet General Hospital, wellhouse Lane, Barnet. 490 Beds. St. Stephen's Hospital, Mays Lane, Barnet. 88 Beds. (Female medical, Ear, Nose and Throat, and Male long–stay cases) Victoria Maternity Hospital, Wood Street, Barnet. 59 Beds. (4) The following is a list of Clinics etc. , available in the district. Tuberculosis Clinics are held daily, at Barnet Chest Clinic, Wellhouse Lane, Barnet. 'Phone BAR: 7441 for an appointment. At Vale Drive the following Clinics are held: A Clinic for Schoolchildren on the second and fourth Monday morning in each month during term time and a Clinic for remedial exercises every Monday afternoon all the year. A Speech Therapy Clinic is held on Wednesdays and Fridays, Child Guidance Clinics on Thursdays, and an Eye Clinic on Wednesday mornings. An Infant Welfare Clinic is held every Tuesday afternoon all the year round. Immunisation sessions are held on the first and third Tuesday mornings in each month. Dental Clinics by appointment. For the convenience of residents at Totteridge there is an Infant Welfare Clinic at "Dollisfield" every Friday afternoon. A branch Clinic at St. Stephen's Hall, Bells Hill, is held every Thursday from 9.30 – 11.45 a.m. with a doctor in attendance, except on the fifth Thursday in the month. These Clinics are subject to alteration and it is advisable to enquire of the Vale Drive Clinic (BAR: 6194) for the current days and times. The Family Planning Association hold sessions at 133 Wood Street, each Wednesday between 2–3 and 6 – 7.30 p.m. Also Tuesday and Thursday evenings by appointment. (BAR: 5345) Home Help Service. The local office of the Herts County Council Home Help Service at The Health Centre, East Barnet Road, East Barnet, is open daily from 9 – 5, Monday to Friday inclusive. (HAD: 1251) British Red Cross Loan Centre, next to Christ Church. St. Albans Road. Barnet. Equipment for invalids may be obtained, on loan, between 8 – 9 p.m. , Monday and 9–30 – 11 a.m. Thursday, or by arrangement ('phone Mrs. L.P. Allaway, BAR: 8615 or Mrs. D. Cheason, BAR: 0117). PUBLIC HEALTH STAFF. Medical Officer of Health. Arthur L. Hyatt, M.R.C.S. (Eng.) , L.R.C.P. (5) Chief Public Health Inspector. John B. Wilson, M.A.P.H.I. , M.R.S.H. Deputy Chief Public Health Inspector. Howard W.C. Alloway, M.A.P.H.I. , A.R.S.H. Additional Public Health Inspector. Roy W. Pursglove, M.A.P.H.I. Pupil Public Health Inspector. Raymond W.E. Parr. Clerk. Miss Marjorie Runtz. Rodent Operative. J.C. Mace. Public Analyst. J.H. Hamence, Ph.d., M.Sc. , P.R.I.C. Deputy Public Analyst. P.S. Hall, B.Sc. , P.R.I.C. All Inspectors hold the special qualification as Inspector of Meat and other Poods under examination of the Royal Society of Health. WATER SUPPLY. The major portion of the district is supplied with water from the mains of the Lee Valley Water Company, the remainder of the district being supplied by the Colne Valley Water Company. All water supplied to the district is chlorinated and both companies employ trained laboratory staff who regularly take samples of water for bacteriological examination at the various stages of treatment, and from the mains, thus checking the quality of the water as actually supplied to the consumer. The supply to the whole district is of a high level of purity and is considered adequate. There is only one cottage, which is unoccupied, that is known not to be connected to mains water supply. It is being repaired and will be connected to the mains before again being used for habitation. (6) The Public Analyst reported upon his chemical examination of a sample of mains water as follows:— Parts per million Total Solid Residue left on evaporation, dried at 100°C 427.5 Loss on incineration of Residue 42.5 Chlorine present as Chloride 28.0 Equal to Sodium Chloride 46.1 Nitrate Nitrogen 4.7 Ammoniacal Nitrogen (free Ammonia) .01 Albuminoid Nitrogen .01 Oxygen absorbed by Oxidisable Organic Matter, etc., from Potassium Permanganate solution at a temperature of 27 C In 15 Minutes .14 In 4 Hours .24 Appearance Clear Total Hardness 300 Permanent Hardness (i.e. left after boiling) 90 Metallic Contamination Satisfactorily free pH (Hydrogen Ion concentration) 7.2 Free Chlorine 0.02 This calls for no special comment. Rainfall for the year was a little below average, precipitation at the North Mymms Pumping Station being 24.78", 4.27% below the average, for 24 years, of 25.89", but 22.90% under the figure of 32.14" recorded for the year 1960. No restrictions were imposed on the use of water. DRAINAGE AND SEWERAGE. The town is drained and sewered on the separate system, excepting the older portions of the district where it is a combined system. The sewage is conveyed to a Sewage Disposal works of 56 acres, where it is screened, grit removed in detritus tanks, thence to primary settlement tanks and thereafter distributed over three 80 ft. diameter bacteria filters, followed by humus removal in rectangular tanks before discharge to the Dollis Brook. Pumping is necessary for three sewers which have their outlets at a low point on the (7) works. Part of the Totteridge area drains to the Finchley Borough sewers; in the outlying areas some properties are on cesspool drainage or domestic sewage disposal plants, and a few only have pail closets. A group of cottages at Glebe Lane were drained to a public sewer comprised of an inadequate and inefficient disposal system which continually gave rise to nuisance; this received sullage waters, soil disposal being by way of pail closets emptied by the Council. A new sewer was laid, equipped with dual electric pumps arranged to lift the flow to the main sewer in the road. At the close of the year, arrangements for the full use of these facilities were in hand, all except one of the occupiers planning to add bathroom accommodation to their houses, by way of Improvement Grant. The occupiers of new houses erected in East View, during recent years, had suffered severely through the inadequacy of the sewerage, both soil and stormwater, at this point: heavy storm conditions produced backing up into their drain inlets with consequent flooding. The provision of a relief stormwater sewer has rectified the position. Works in connection with a scheme for the sewerage of the Barnet Gate Lane/Hendon Wood Lane area, together with the western end of Mays Lane, were commenced at the end of the year. The new sewers will permit the elimination of cesspools, disposal plants and the like, serving some fifty– two houses and other premises, all of which have polluted the Dollis Brook to a greater or lesser degree. The long awaited East Middlesex trunk sewerage system will when it displaces the Barnet Sewage Works complete the cleansing of the water of the Dollis Brook in this district. The deodorising plant at the Sewage Works has continued in operation, as necessary. A small number of complaints of smell were received and these were investigated. SANITARY CONDITIONS AMD WATER SUPPLY OP SCHOOIS. There are in the district fifteen schools administered by the South Herts Divisional Education Committee, as listed on the next page. (8) Queen Elizabeth's Boys Grammar School, Queens Road, Barnet. Queen Elizabeth's Girls' Grammar School, High Street, Barnet. Ravenscroft. Secondary School, Barnet Lane, N.20. Elizabeth Allen Voluntary Secondary School, Wood Street, Barnet. (with annexe at Byng Road, Barnet.) Whitings Hill Junior Mixed and Infants' School, Whitings Road, Barnet. Poulds Junior Mixed and Infants' School, Byng Road, Barnet. Christ Church Junior Mixed School, Alston Road, Barnet. Christ Church Infants' School, Alston Road, Barnet. Grasvenor Infants' School, Grasvenor Avenue, Barnet. Underhill Junior Mixed School, Mays Lane , Barnet. Underhill Infants' School, Mays Lane, Barnet. St. Andrew's Voluntary Junior Mixed and Infants' School, Totteridge Green, N.20. St. Catherine's Roman Catholic Infants School, Vale Drive, Barnet. St. Catherine's Roman Catholic Junior and Secondary School, Union Street, Barnet. South Herts College of Further Education, Wood Street, Barnet. (Available for girls and boys aged 15 to 18 years during the day, and for persons over school–leaving age in the evenings.) In addition to the above there are five private schools, viz: – The Anchorage Kindergarten School, 38 Normandy Avenue, Barnet. The Hill School, Totteridge Lane, N.20. Norfolk House School, Fitzjohn Avenue, Barnet. (Nursery School) St. Marthe's Convent School, Wood Street, Barnet. Mrs. Blundell's School, Southover hover, Woodside Park, N.12. (Nursery School) All schools in the district are supplied with mains water and connected to the Council's main drainage system. DISPOSAL OF HOUSE REFUSE. The house refuse is collected weekly in covered mechanical conveyances and taken to the Council's Sewage Farm, where it is loaded into Contractor's covered lorries and disposed of daily by controlled tipping outside the district. PREVALENCE OF. AND CONTROL OVER. INFECTIOUS DISEASE. The table on the following page shews the number of Notifications to the Sanitary Authority during the year, of each disease specified in the Public Health Act 1936, and the various Infectious Disease Regulations, and the number of cases removed to Hospital. The cases normally resident outside the district notified from the Barnet General Hospital and Victoria Maternity Hospital, which are included in the table, are as follows:– Measles 2; Pneumonia 6; Meningococcal Infection 1; Dysentery 1; Puerperal Pyrexia 1; Food Poisoning 3. (9) DISEASE NOTIFIED REMOVED TO HOSPITAL Scarlet Fever 2 Nil Whooping Cough 4 Nil Diphtheria and Membranous Croup Nil Nil Measles 359 7 Acute Pneumonia 11 8 Meningococcal Infection 1 1 Acute Poliomyelitis Nil Nil Acute Encephalitis Nil Nil Dysentery 30 1 Ophthalmia Neonatorum Nil Nil Puerperal Pyrexia 1 1 Smallpox Nil Nil Malaria Nil Nil Typhoid and Enteric Fevers Nil Nil Paratyphoid Fever Nil Nil Food Poisoning 4 3 Erysipelas Nil Nil Scabies 1 Nil Tuberculosis 15 11 TOTALS 428 32 AGE INCIDENCE OF INFECTIOUS DISEASE DISEASE NUMBER OF CASES NOTIFIED YEARS OF AGE 0– 1– 2– 3– 4– 5– 10– 15– 25– 45– 65– 75– Total Scarlet Fever – – – – – 2 – – – – – – 2 Whooping Cough 1 – 1 – – 2 – – – – – – 4 Measles 6 26 57 39 62 154 11 2 1 1 – – 359 Acute Pneumonia – – – – – 1 – – 2 2 4 2 11 Meningococcal. Infection 1 – – – – – – – – – – – 1 Dysentery 1 – – 1 – 11 8 2 3 4 – – 30 Puerperal Pyrexia – – – – – – – – – – – – 1 Food Poisoning – – – – – 1 – – 1 1 1 – 4 Scabies – – – – – – – _ 1 – – – 1 TOTALS 9 26 58 40 62 171 19 5 8 8 5 2 413 The Measles outbreak of 1960 continued for the first four months of 1961 when it came to an abrupt halt. There surely cannot now be many children in the district who have not suffered this disease. An outbreak of Sonnei Dysentery in a Junior Mixed and Infants School in a neighbouring district was the cause of the high number of cases resident in this district. Another year has passed with no cases of Poliomyelitis notified in the district. The Polio vaccination scheme is still in being and one hopes (10) that nil returns will not lull parents into a false sense of security and that they will continue to maintain the vaccination state of the children and young persons particularly. Polio vaccination is available for all up to the age of forty years. FOOD POISONING Annual Return of Food Poisoning Notifications. Food Poisoning Notifications (Corrected) Returned to Registrar General. 1st Quarter. 2nd Quarter. 3rd Quarter. 4th Quarter. Total. Nil 2 Nil 2 4 Cases Otherwise Ascertained. 1st Quarter. 2nd Quarter. 3rd Quarter. 4th Quarter. Total. Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil Symptomless Excreters. 1st Quarter. 2nd Quarter. 3rd Quarter. 4th Quarter. Total. Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil Fatal Cases. 1st Quarter. 2nd Quarter. 3rd Quarter. 4th Quarter. Total. Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil TUBERCULOSIS. NEW CASES AND MORTALITY DURING 1961. YEARS OF AGE NEW CASES DEATHS Pulmonary N on–Pulmonary Pulmonary Non–Pulmonary M M , M F M F 0 – – – – – – – – 1 – – – – – – – – 5 – – – – – – – – 15 – – – – – – – – 25 – 1 – 1 – 1 – 1 35 2 – – 1 – – – – 45 5 – – – – – – – 55 2 1 – – – – – – 65 and over – – 1 1 – – – – TOTALS 9 2 1 3 – 1 – 1 The anti tuberculosis measures, mass radiography, clinics etc., are all playing a part in the scheme to reduce the incidence of this disease. With improved housing conditions, better education, antibiotics and the eradication (11) of tuberculosis in bovine animals it would seem possible now to bring about the defeat of tuberculosis in humans. Cases removed for treatment are usually sent to Clare Hall Hospital, South Mirnms, other patients with an infectious disease being sent to Coppett's Wood Hospital, Muswell Hill, N.10. PUBLIC HEALTH (PREVENTION OF TUBERCULOSIS) REGULATIONS, 1925. No formal action was necessary under the above Regulations, relating to Tuberculous employees in the milk trade. One milk roundsman was notified as suffering from Tuberculosis early in the year, and was the subject of hospital treatment. He made a satisfactory recovery and returned to work on being declared quiescent. Modem practices of pre-packing and sealing are of immense benefit in reducing the possibilities of the carriage of infection where the discovery of any particular case of disease is delayed. PUBLIC HEALTH ACT. 1956. SECTION 172. COMPULSORY REMOVAL TO HOSPITAL OF CASES OF PULMONARY TUBERCULOSIS. No action was necessary under the above Section. INTERNATIONAL VACCINATION CERTIFICATES. At the end of 1952 a new form was introduced for International Vaccination Certificates requiring authentication of the signature of the doctor performing vaccination or inoculation of persons proceeding overseas. During the year three hundred and sixty-one such certificates were authenticated and marked with the internationally agreed stamp. NATIONAL ASSISTANCE ACT. 1948 -SECTION 47. NATIONAL ASSISTANCE (AMENDMENT) ACT. 1951 -SECTION 1. No official action was found to be necessary under the Acts, although five elderly persons (including a married couple) came under our notice and received assistance in their problems. The Visiting Service of the Old Peoples' Welfare Committee continues to render the greatest help in this matter. As part of the facilities available to the old people in the district, it is worthwhile to mention that in conjunction with the Hertfordshire County Council as the Health Authority for purposes of Part III of the National Health Service Act 1946, the Barnet Old People's Welfare Committee have arranged for a chiropody service to be provided at the five Evergreen Clubs which operate in the Urban District. The arrangement is for a local Chiropodist to visit each of the Clubs periodically; the patients pay 2/6d. for each treatment and the County Council pay the balance of the Chiropodist's charges. In addition, the Barnet Old People's Welfare Committee themselves arrange for a second Chiropodist to give treatment in the homes of the house-bound elderly, and in these cases the Committee is responsible for the balance of fees payable. MORTAL STATISTICS. Of 275 deaths, 6 occurred under one year of age. The following were the major causes of death:- Heart disease 101; Cancer 62 (29 males and 33 females); Vascular Lesions of Nervous system 31; Bronchitis 11; Pneumonia 19; Motor Vehicle accidents 2; Other accidents 8; Suicide 4. MORTUARY ACCOMODATION. Under arrangements made with the East Barnet Urban District Council their mortuary is available for the use of this district, and it was so used on three occasions during the year. I am, Yours faithfully, ARTHUR L. HYATT , M.R.C.S.(Eng.) , L.R.C.P. MEDICAL OFFICER OF HEALTH. (12) (13) BARNET URBAN DISTRICT COUNCIL. CHIEF PUBLIC HEALTH INSPECTOR'S REPORT. Public Health Department, 31 Wood Street, Barnet. To the Chairman and Members of the Barnet Urban District Council. I have the honour to present my Annual Report for the year 1961. The Council's Smoke Control scheme progressed steadily through the year with the making of two Smoke Control Orders to come into full operation on 30th September, 1962, and both these Orders were confirmed by the Minister without alteration. The survey was started for a fourth area of approximately 674 houses. We do receive, during the year, enquiries from persons wondering when the smoke control order will apply to their houses and when they should cease to order "smoky" coal. We are of course always ready to deal with such enquiries, but it might be useful to explain again that when it is proposed to make an area the subject of a smoke control order, all houses in the area receive a circular letter from the department. During the next six months or thereabouts, a call is made by an Inspector for the purpose of estimating the work required, to explain in some detail the way to claim grant, discuss the smokeless fuels and answer questions from householders. At a later stage, public notices are posted in the area, and still later when the Minister confirms the Order, a further circular letter is sent to all houses, giving details of how to proceed to claim the 70% grant, for which an application form is enclosed. Overall the householder receives about two years' notice before an Order comes into operation, with letters and a visit during that time. During the year, the department was able to assist in a survey to ascertain the extent of the contamination of pet foods with Salmonella organisms, by taking over two hundred samples of horse and other meat from a local cold store. Further detail is given in the body of this report. (14) New legislation passed during the year has added to the duty and powers of the Council, and in one instance has given an additional power to the Officers of the Council, i.e. emergency clearance of blocked drains. The Council during the year accepted from the Royal Technical College, Salford, for practical training in the department, an overseas trainee public health inspector who was in the second year of his three year course. In connection with this scheme, we learned during the year that an earlier pupil, who spent the summer of 1958 in the department, had since passed his examinations as Public Health Inspector and as Inspector of Heat and Other Poods. I must express my appreciation to the staff of the Public Health Department for their continued support and the team spirit which pervades at all times, and to thank all the officers of the Council for their assistance and cooperation. INSPECTION OF DISTRICT. General inspections of the district have been carried out periodically and all complaints investigated. The process of serving a preliminary or intimation notice upon the person in default, specifying the works necessary to remedy the defects found, is usually followed. It was found necessary to ask your authority to serve twentyeight Statutory Notices, where persons failed to comply with the preliminary notice, or the strict legal procedure was necessary in the first instance. SANITARY INSPECTION OF AREA. The following is a list of the number and nature of visits and inspections:- Visits re: Housing Acts 117 Visits re: nuisance and sanitary defects 803 Visits re: noise 22 Visits re: infectious diseases. 539 Visits re: Petroleum Acts 89 Visits re: factories 26 Visits re: outworkers' premises 5 Visits re: food manufactories, cafes, etc 637 Visits re: ice cream and sampling 161 Visits re: overcrowding 10 Visits re: aged and infirm persons 12 Visits to inspect meat and other foods 695 Visits re: Schools 7 Visits re: pollution of watercourses 24 Visits re: Clean Air Act. 934 (15) Visits re: Tents, Caravans and Sheds 64 Visits re: Shops Acts 67 Visits re: keeping of animals 13 Visits re: rodent infestations 1,674 Visits re: other infestations 422 Miscellaneous visits 145 NIE33ER OF NOTICES SERVED DURING Y&SL. Number of Informal Notices 78 Number of Statutory Notices 28 Informal Notices complied with 66 Statutory Notices complied with 16 SANITARY WORK AND REPAIRS. The following is a list of repairs effected as a result of informal and formal notices served:- Roofs repaired and made weatherproof 14 Gutters, downspouts repaired and renewed 16 Exterior brickwork repaired or repointed 6 Walls, dampness remedied 15 Chimney stacks and pots repaired or renewed 2 Yard surfaces repaired or repaved 2 Ceilings repaired or renewed 10 Wall plaster repaired or renewed 9 Walls and ceilings cleansed and decorated 16 Floors repaired or renewed 6 Doors and frames repaired or renewed 4 Windows repaired 27 Fireplaces repaired or renewed 11 Drains and sewage disposal plants cleared 22 Drains and sewage disposal plants repaired or reconstructed. 23 Inspection chambers repaired or reconstructed. 12 Soil or vent pipes repaired or renewed 1 Gullies, channels and fenders repaired or renewed 5 Water Closet pans, fittings, repaired or renewed 3 Storage cisterns, cleaned, repaired or renewed 1 Accumulations removed 6 In addition three cesspools were abolished and replaced by two modern sewage disposal plants following service of notices. HOUSING-. During the year, four Demolition Orders and one Closing Order were made but demolitions under these Orders had not taken place by the end of the year. The occupiers were rehoused from six houses two of which were the subject of Demolition Orders made in previous years. The moving of these families provided vacant possession of a terrace of four houses and (16) three others with the resultant demolition ion of seven houses. There remain to be rehoused, at the end of the year, the occupiers of two houses, subject to Demolition Orders, and when vacant possession is obtained the demolition of five houses can proceed. No applications for Certificates of Disrepair or Cancellation of Certificates were received during the year, and it would seem that this branch of our work has faded out, although our services were never in great demand under these sections of the Statute. No cases of overcrowding, as defined by the Housing Act, have come to our notice during the year. PUBLIC HEALTH ACT. 1956. INFECTIOUS DISEASE INVESTIGATION AND DISINFECTION. Investigations have been carried out of the more important cases of infectious disease listed in the Medical Officer of Health's Report. Where necessary, premises are disinfected and bedding is taken for disinfection to the Barnet General Hospital under arrangements made with the Barnet Group Hospital Management Committee. By special arrangement the bedding of one Scabies patient was disinfected by Finchley Borough Council. Three hundred and fifty-four library books were disinfected before return to libraries, a considerable increase over the previous year, due to the Measles outbreak in the first quarter of the year. FOOD PRELZSES IN THE DISTRICT. Number of Bakers 9 " " Butchers 13 " " Cafes, Restaurants, etc 23 " " Confectioners 24 " " Fishmongers 5 " Greengrocers 14 " " Grocers 33 " " Licensed Premises 28 " " Chemists 7 FOOD PREMISES REGISTERED UNDER SECTION 16 OF FOOD AND DRUGS ACT. 1955. (a) Manufacture, Sale and Storage of Ice Cream 47 (b) Manufacture of Sausages and Preserved Meats, etc 21 (17) DAIRIES REGISTERED UNDER MIILK AND DAIRIES (GENERAL) REGULATIONS 1959. Number of Dairies 1 Any infringements found are rectified or remedied by informal action when pointed out to the trader, and no formal action was needed. During our visits of inspection every opportunity is taken to discuss food hygiene with staff and management, and several minor matters regarding cleanliness and protection of open foodstuffs were taken up informally. The old Barnet Cattle Market is now used as a stall market selling a wide variety of merchandise and including several food stalls. On average the food stalls consisted of:- Butchers 1 Poulterers 1 Snack Bar 1 Confectioners 2 Fishmongers 1 Greengrocers 3 Grocers 1 Regular visits have been made to the market and several informal notices have "been given to stall holders concerning the Food Hygiene Regulations and it is felt that a reasonable standard is now being maintained. SHOPS ACT. 1950. Fourteen informal notices were served on shopkeepers requiring the exhibition of notices in respect of half-day closing and the employment of young persons. We continued to liaise with the Surveyor's Department in the matter of ventilation where plans for new shop fronts are deposited; it would appear to be a feature of modern shop fronts to omit means of ventilation. Early in the year the Hertfordshire County Council raised the question of motor sales premises and weekly half-holidays. The sale of vehicles is carried on, generally throughout the trade, for the six weekdays, and in order to regularise the position, and after consultation with the seven firms in the district so engaged, the Barnet Shops (Exemption) Order, 1961 , was made and came into operation on 1st May, 1961 , exempting from the requirements of Section 1(1) of the Act all shops in the Urban District in which the business of motor vehicle trader is carried on, from closing for a half holiday. A large Company operating shops over a considerable area of the Country, (18) engaged in mixed grocery, provisions, "butchery and poultry, signified their intention of operating their local branch on a five-day week basis, substituting all-day-I.ionday for Thursday afternoon as the weekly half-holiday. This was part of a larger experimental scheme covering a wide area. The Hertfordshire Shops (Barnet) Weekly Half_Holiday Order of 1913, requires that the trade of grocer (inter alia) must close on Thursday afternoon, with Saturday afternoon as an alternative. The Company vrauld have appeared to base their proposal on the decision given in the judgement Fine Pare Limited v. Brighton County Borough Council, when it was held that such an order would not apply to mixed shops wher« more than the stipulated trade is carried on. In view of this judgement, the Council decided to accept the status quo and await the possibility of further legislation on the matter. It may in conclusion be commented on that the system of two concurrent days off is viewed with high favour by the staff concerned, towards whose protection the relevant legislation is largely aimed. ICE CREAM. All samples of ice-cream are taken to the Central Public Health Laboratory Colindale, for testing by the Methylene Blue Test. This is merely indicative and provides no legal standard: the Public Health Laboratory Service suggest that owing to the numerous factors governing the hygienic quality of ice-cream ii is unwise to pay too much attention to the bacteriological results on any single sample, judgement being based rather on a series of samples. It is suggested as desirable that at least 50% should fall into Grade I, 80% into Grades I or II, not more than 20% into Grade III and none into Grade IV. There is one company registered for the manufacture of ice-cream and the following table gives the results of samples taken from the factory. Grade I 42 (44.2%) Grade II 38 (84.2% - Grades I and II) Grade III 1 j (10.5%) Grade IV 5 ( 5.3%) These results are poor by the above suggested standards. Our regular sampling particularly during the summer months showed that the fall in standard came during the latter end of the season, and can only be accounted for by inadequate sterilization of plant. Although it does not shew in these total (19) figures improvement was made before the end of the year. As more modern equipment is added, less handling of the product results, "but the additional equipment provides more joints, pipes, tanks, etc. , requiring to be adequately cleansed and sterilized. If only one small part is not so cleansed and sterilized, the result shews in the methylene blue grading. This Company is now reaching the stage where, I feel, production is sufficient to warrant the employment of bacteriological staff to check all stages of plant and production and thus ensure that the topmost standards are maintained at all times, rather than wait for this department and others to find any lowering of standards by sampling after the product has left the factory on retail sale. There are also forty-seven premises registered for the storage and sale of ice cream, the sane as last year, there being one closure and one new registration. DAIRIES, COWSHEDS AND KELKSHOPS. The control of the productioh of millc is vested in the Ministry of Agriculture Fisheries and Pood. The local authority is responsible for the inspection and registration of milk distributors and other dairy premises not directly concerned with the actual production of milk, and for licensing for the sale of Designated llilks. Five samples of milk have been taken, in course of delivery to the consumer, and submitted to the appropriate tests with the following results:- Designation Samples Taken Satisfactory Unsatisfactory. Tuberculin Tested (Pasteurised) 1 1 Nil Pasteurised 2 2 Nil Pasteurised (Jersey and Guernsey) 1 1 Nil Sterilised 1 1 Nil Totals 5 5 Nil Since all the milk retailed in the district is supplied by the large Companies, maintaining laboratory staffs, there would not appear to be a need for such frequent sampling as heretofore. (20) No official action was taken under Regulation 20 of the Milk and Dairies General Regulations 1959, to stop or restrict the sale of milk. No cases of disease were notified which could be attributed to the consumption of infected milk. Ten Dealer's (Pre-packed Milk) Licences were granted for the retail sale of milk under the Milk (Special Designation) Regulations, 1960, for a period of five years, to December 1965, viz:- Designations Number of Licences. Tuberculin Tested, Pasteurised and Sterilised 5 Pasteurised and Sterilised 3 Pasteurised 1 Sterilised 1 FOOD AND DRUGS ACT . 1955. The Council acquired these powers 'under the Act concerning the adulteration and sophistication of food as from 1 st October 1955 • The summary on the next page contains the results of seventy-nine samples taken by this Department. The two unsatisfactory samples were reported to the Council and the following are brief comments on them. Milk. This sample was reported by the Council's Public Analyst to contain 2.89% milk fat whereas the presumptive standard is 3%. In view of the comparatively minor deficiency and the time-lag in reporting this to Council (proceedings should be instituted within twenty-eight days of purchasing the sample) , it was decided not to take legal action. Later sampling showed satisfactory results. Irish Stewed Steak with Grayy. This sample was reported to contain 67% meat. In the absence of Statutory standards of meat content for these foods no preceedings were taken. The Food Standards Committee has prepared proposed standards and these are under discussion between the interested parties. (21) Article No. Examined No. Adulterated Etc. Formal Informal Total Formal Informal Total Apple Juice — 2 2 — — — Beef Croquettes — 1 1 — - - Beef Dinners — 4 4 — - - Boneless Chicken — 1 1 — - — Brandy Snap — 1 1 — - - Butter — 1 1 — — — Carmine — 1 1 — — — Cheese — 3 3 — — — Cherries (For Cocktails) — 1 1 — - - Chicken Fritters — 1 1 — - - Chop Suey — 1 1 — - - Cream and Cream Doughnuts — 2 2 — - - Creamed Rice Milk Pudding — 1 1 — - - Curry Powder — 1 1 — - - Dressed Crab with Butter — 1 1 — — — Frosting Mix — 1 1 — - - Herring Roes — 1 1 — - - Jelly — 1 1 — - - Lancashire Hot Pot — 1 1 — — — Lemon Glucose Drink — 1 1 — — — Lemon Juice — 1 1 — — — Lemon Puff Biscuits — 1 1 — — - Lobster Spread — 1 1 — - — Margarine — 1 1 — - - Meatendra — 1 1 — - - Milk 10 — 10 1 - 1 Milk, Evaporated — 2 2 — — - Mincemeat — 1 1 — — — Nestles Milk (Tube) — 1 1 — - - Nuttolene — 1 1 — - — Nutty Pats — 1 1 — — - "Onam" (Ham & Tongue) — 1 1 — — - Orange Drinks — 3 3 — - — Orange Pie Filling — 1 1 — — - Paste, Various — 3 3 — — - Peeled Prawns — 1 1 — — - Pickled Baby Beets — 1 1 — — - Pork & Meat Roll, Stuffed — 1 1 — — - Potato Crisps — 1 1 — - Potatoes, Instant — 1 1 — - - Potatoes — 2 2 v — - Potted Meat and Fish — 2 2 — - — Red Cherries — 1 1 — — - Rice, Ground — 1 1 — — — Risotto — 1 1 — — — Rum Butter — 1 1 — — — Sausages - 2 2 — - - Scampie, Savoury — 1 1 — - - Starkles (toasted Oats) — 1 1 — - - Steak, Tinned, Various — 3 3 — 1 1 Strawberries, Sliced in Syrup - 1 1 — - — Stuffed Olives — 1 1 — — - Tartrex with Herbs - 1 1 — - - Total 10 69 79 1 1 2 (22) PET FOODS. Some concern was felt in neighbouring districts following the incidence of food poisoning cases when the suspected medium was pet meat or other pet foods. In following this up the Department were asked by the Public Health Laboratory Service if arrangements could be made for sampling to be carried out at a local pet meat cold store. The meat is stored under refrigeration, as received from the London docks, in polythene bags within a sack. The meat was admitted to this Country under licence, as fit for human consumption, but when received locally it is intended only for pet food and is sold only to pet food shops. Over a period of three months, some two hundred and twenty-six samples of horse meat and beef from various countries were taken, and sixty-four samples showed contamination by ten types of salmonellae organisms; some samples had two types on them. Concurrently more detailed bacteriological sampling of this type of meat was instituted at the London docks by the Port Health Authority. The danger to public health in allowing into this country such contaminated meat, even though not intended for human consumption, lies in the possibility of contamination of the shopkeepers equipment which may then be used on meat etc. for human consumption thus spreading the contamination. There is likely also to be contamination of household equipment used for preparing the pet food, draining boards, cutting boards, knives, etc. , and last but by no means least, it has been shown that these organisms can be found in pet animals, probably through feeding them with the raw meat. It would therefore appear most desirable that good hygiene practices including handwashing, should be even more particularly observed in households where raw pet meat is used. As a further matter of interest, the survey also included garden fertilisers and it was found that 33% of the hoof and horn meal samples taken were similarly infected. The risk of infection from this source is considered small, since the person in the home normally handling it does not usually prepare food for the family, and the meal is not usually kept close to food. (23) MERCHANDISE MARKS ACT. 1926. The Council became the authority for enforcing the provisions of these Acts and Orders made thereunder when they were designated a Pood and Drugs Authority. No formal action was found necessary during the year. MEAT AND FOOD CONDEMNED. The following is a list of the articles of food condemned as unfit for human consumption during the year. Meat. Scotch Lambs 135 lbs. Lambs Kidneys (imported) 40 lbs. English Beef 38 lbs. Canned Meat 291- lbs. Lambs Livers (imported) 70 lbs. Fish. Salmon 4 tins. Pilchards and Shrimps 6 tins. General. Biscuits 16 Pkts, and 40 lbs. Jam 3 Jars and 11 tins. Vegetables 30 tins. Marmalade 3 tins. Fruit 3 Pkts. and 142 tins. Pease Pudding 1 tin. Milk 3 tins. Creamed Rice 2 tins. Soup 6 tins. Walnuts 2 Pkts. Frozen Foods. Vegetables 89 Pkts. (Due to breakdown of Freezer cabinet.) Condemned food is taken to the disposal point on the Sewage Farm, where tins are thoroughly perforated and loose food is stained and mixed with household refuse before onward transmission to the controlled tip outside the district. PRIVATE SLAUGHTERHOUSES. FOOD AND DRUGS ACT. 1955. SLAUGHTERHOUSES JCT . 1958. SLAUGHTER OF ANIMALS ACT. 1958. Following the acceptance by the Minister of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food, on 20th February 19&1 , of the Report as to slaughterhouse facilities in the District, submitted by the Council in October 1960, the Slaughterhouses (Hygiene) Regulations, and Slaughter of Animals (Prevention of Cruelty) Regulations, (Appointed Day - No. 2) Orders, were made on 29th May 1961 , and appointed 1st July 1961 , as the day on which the Hygiene Regulations and the (24) Prevention of Cruelty Regulations vrould apply in toto in the Barnet Urban District. At the time these Orders were made, certain small works of improvement were still remaining to "be effected at Denham Farm Slaughterhouse: these were completed by the time that the Licence fell due for renewal at the end of July. These premises now bear small resemblance to their condition in 19545 when private slaughtering recommenced and "first-aid" works only could be reasonably required, owing to the then current doubt as to the future of the smaller private slaughterhouse. The amount of work put in has been considerable, with enormous improvement in both working conditions for the slaughtermen and in inspection facilities, and has resulted in a unit which is fully capable of being run on proper lines. Your inspectors maintain a high percentage of meat inspection during the course of the six days per week of slaughtering, Friday being the only exception. The general slaughtering programme each day is that adult bovines are slaughtered early in the day, followed by the "smalls" and in this group, calves are usually last in the days work. Thus 100% inspection of adult bovines is maintained and a fair proportion of the "smalls" are inspected during normal office hours of working with some extra work and with Saturday and Sunday working. If 100% meat inspection is to be the order of the day then this will mean that one inspector will be needed six days per week from 8 a.m. to 8 p.m. generally unless there is some control by regulation, of the hours of slaughtering, and this is being resisted by the trade. An alternative has been suggested of making charges for inspection. If this is to be of any use to the local authority it must be sufficient to pay for, or nearly pay for, the services of the additional staff which will be necessary. However, discussions continue and one hopes that some reasonable solution will be found. The majority of the condemned meat and offals is taken away by a reputable firm for manufacture into useful by-products, e.g. fertilisers etc. Total weight of carcase meat condemned:- Bovine 320 lbs. Ovine 117 lbs. Porcine 620 lbs. 1 ,057 lbs. (25) Total weight of offals condemned 9,711 lbs. CARCASES AND OFFAL INSPECTED AND CONDEMNED IN WHOLE OR IN PART. Cattle excluding Cows Cows Calves Sheep and Lambs Pigs Number killed (if known) 1 ,482 651 2,031 6,824 3,919 Number inspected 1,482 651 1,743 6,575 3,726 All diseases except Tuberculosis and Cysticerci Whole carcases condemned — 1 — 1 3 Carcases of which some part or organ was condemned 430 317 — 124 235 Percentage of the number inspected affected with disease other than tuberculosis and cysticerci 29.01 48.85 — 1.90 6.39 Tuberculosis only: Whole carcases condemned — — — — — Carcases of which some part or organ was condemned 2 — — — 76 Percentage of the number inspected affected with tuberculosis 0.14 - _ — 2.04 Cysticercosis: Carcases of which some part or organ was condemned 41 15 _ — — Carcases submitted to treatment by refrigeration 7 2 - - — Generalised and totally condemned — - — — - The percentage of bovines affected bj Tuberculosis again shows a decline but there is again a slight increase in the percentage of pigs (from 1.86 to 2.04) affected with the disease. This increase should, however, be treated with some reserve, as tubercular lesions may be confused with those resulting from an infection of Corynebacterium equi, it being often impossible to distinguish them macroscopically; the latter organism is usually of localised significance only. When considered with the figures for other years, the above shews the excellent results of the Government's Eradication Scheme, as applied to cattle. The percentages of bovines inspected found to be affected with Tuberculosis have been as follows:- (see next page) (26) Year. Cattle (excluding Cows) Cows. Calves. 1956 4.27 18.43 0.18 1957 2.76 18.82 0.16 1958 2.77 18.28 0.00 1959 0.80 1.78 0.00 1960 0.00 0.50 0.00 1961 0.00 0.31 0.00 There were twelve persons licensed by the Council as fit persons to slaughter animals, most of them work part or full time as slaughtermen at the local slaughterhouse. Some have employment outside the district and no complaint has been received from other districts concerning the conduct of any of these men, nor was there any need for adverse report on the men locally employed. REPORT REQUIRED BY SECTION 153(l) OF THE FACTORIES ACT, 1961. Inspection for purposes of provision as to health. Number on Register Inspections Written Notices Occupiers Prosecuted (l) Factories in which Sees 1 , 2, 3, 4 and 6 are to be enforced by Local Authorities. 3 - — — (2) Factories not included in (1) in which Sec. 7 is enforced by the Local Authority. 88 26 - — (3) Other premises in which Sec. 7 is enforced by the Local Authority. 3 — — Total 94 26 — - One informal notice was served requiring the cleansing of sanitary accommodation in a factory. Outworkers (Sections 133 and 134) Section 133 Section 134 No. of outworkers on lists received. No. of instances of work in unwholesome premises. Notices Served. 114 _ — Thirteen outworkers reside in the district. Five premises were visited and home conditions were found to be entirely satisfactory. The names and addresses of outworkers employed by factories in this district are notified to the district councils in which they live. (27) PUBLIC HEALTH ACT. 1956 - SECTION 60. Escape from Fire - Certain High Buildings. Where plans are deposited with the Surveyor's Department under the "building "byelaws, and it appears that Section 60 applies to the building, the plans are passed to this Department for inspection so that any works which may be necessary are carried out with the other building works. CARAVAN SITES AND CONTROL Off DEVEIOH.'iENT ACT. 1960. This Act, which was passed in July 1960, makes provision for the licensing and control of caravan sites. Owners of existing sites who wished to continue the use of the sites, had to make application for a site licence not later than the 28th October 1960. Applications Yfere received and in 1961 , three licences were issued, with conditions appropriate to the tenure of ea.ch particular site. The owner of one site gave notice of appeal against the conditions imposed, but the date of the Court hearing had not been fixed by the end of the year under review. The caravans attending the Barnet Fair, are exempted from the controls of the Act, "but several visits are made to enquire into the sanitary conditions, any infectious diseases and to enforce the provisions of temporary sanitary accommodation in the different sections of the Fair for the use "both of caravanners and the visiting public. Regular removal of refuse from caravans and stalls, and inspections are made of food stalls to secure hygienic conditions. HERTFORDSHIRE COUNTY COUNCIL ACTS. 1955 AND 1960. Provision is made in the 1935 Act, inter alia, for the conduct and regulation of:- (1) Hairdressers' and Barbers' Premises; (2) Swimming Baths and Pools, and (3) Employment Agencies. Hairdressers' and Barbers' Premises. There are fourteen such establishments in the district. Routine visits are made from t ime to time, and in three cases redecoration of wall and ceiling surfaces was required. (28) Swimming Ba.ths and Bathing Pools. The only swimming pool in the district, viz, at "The Bam" , Barnet Bye-Pass is not now in use. The swimming pools at schools are all within the purview of the Education Authority, and are inspected regularly by the County Health Inspector, who arranges "bacteriological examination of the water. Employment Agencies. The Council had no observations to make to the County Council concerning the renewal of licences to carry on Employment Agencies for the year. HOME COUNTIES (MUSIC AND DANCING) LICENSING- ACT. 1926. "IfflCTFOHDSHIES (MUSIC AND DANCING-) REGULATIONS. 1956. Under regulations made by the County Council a report from the local district council is required regarding the suitability and sufficiency of sanitary arrangements at premises for Music and Dancing before licences are issued. All were satisfactory and the County Council notified accordingly. PET ANIMALS ACT. 1951. This Act gives the local Authority, inter alia, power to grant licences to persons to keep pet shops for the sale of pet animals and to attach to the licences conditions concerning the cleanliness and general management of the premises: five persons are so licensed in this district. No complaints were received nor were any major contraventions of the conditions observed during visits of inspection. RODENT CONTROL. Prevention of Damage by Pests Act. 1949. A full time rodent operator is employed for treatment of infestations of rats and mice. The table summarises the work carried out during the year in a form to suit the purposes of the Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Pood. A test bait is made of l0% of the soil sewer manholes in the district, from the results of which are based the two maintenance treatments of the sewers. The test bait in April resulted in only two complete "takes" and five partial "takes" of bait out of a total of nirety manholes tested. (29) Owing to labour shortage we were unable to carry out the treatment until June, when forty-seven manholes were baited and "takes" of the poison bait were recorded in six cases, and again, labour shortage at the appropriate time prevented us from effecting the second maintenance treatment for the year. It is to be hoped that there will not be a big build up of the sewer rat population in the intervening period before we start treating again in 1962. No charge is made for the use of the Rodent Operator's services in treating private domestic premises, provided that the occupiers co-operate in carrying out their duties under the Act. The cost of treatments at all other premises is recoverable. Type of Property Total Local Authority Dwelling Houses Agricultural All other (including Business Premises) Number of Properties inspected as a result of:- (a) Notification 9 167 3 26 205 (b) Survey under the Act 1 130 9 80 220 (c) Otherwise — 15 2 4 21 Total inspections carried out including re-inspections 20 363 44 237 664 Number of properties found to be infested by:- Major - - - - - (a) Rats Minor 6 93 9 22 130 (b)Mice Major - — — — — Minor 4 134 — 11 149 Number of properties treated by the Local Authority 10 5 32 274 Total treatments carried out including retreatments 14 253 5 40 312 Number of "Block" control schemes carried out 21 (30) OTHER INFESTATIONS. The Department is frequently asked for advice ana assistance in connection with insect infestations and during this year has dealt with some one hundred and ninety-five enquiries, the majority of which concerned wasps. In fact, some one hundred and thirty-two wasps nests were destroyed on privately owned properties and on the Council's own lands. A small charge is made for this service to householders. The other infestations cover a variety of things, e.g. "beetles, ants, cockroaches, flies, silver fish, woodworm and bugs. We are assisted in the identification of some of these insects by the British Museum (Natural History Section) the staff of which give prompt answers to our queries. CLEAN AIR ACT. 1956. The Council's twenty-year programme to bring the whole district under Smoke Control Orders continues without serious hitches. The No. 2 Smoke Control Order was submitted to the Minister in December 1960, and this was confirmed, without alteration, in April 1961; the operative date being fixed as 30th September 1962, after which it will be an offence to discharge smoke from a domestic chimney. So soon as an Order is confirmed circular letters are sent to every house in the area concerned, stating the effect of the Order and the procedure necessary to claim the ~/QF/o grant on the reasonable costs of conversion of fireplaces. By the end of the year one householder had obtained approval for proposed works, had carried out the works satisfactorily and was paid the grant. Unfortunately one person executed works before obtaining the Council's approval and no grant was paid. It cannot be too strongly emphasised that approval of proposals must be obtained ^efore any works are commenced. The office procedure has been arranged,with the assistance of authority from the Council, so that in straightforward cases approval can be given within twenty-four hours of application. The Council, as the owner of houses, had placed contracts for major (31) conversions of fireplaces in 226 houses in No. 2 Area before the end of the year. The survey for No. 3 Area was started in 1960 and when completed, the Council made their No. 3 Smoke Control Order, submitted it to the Minister in August 1961, and received confirmation in December 1961, with the operative date on 30th September 19&2, the same date as the No. 2 Order. The circular letters and application forms were sent out before the end of the year. The survey for No. 4 Area comprising approximately 674 houses commenced In September . The procedure for obtaining these Orders has been modified by the Ministry: this has relieved us of some office work and makes for a speeding up by permitting the full survey to be started earlier. Next year should be an extremely busy one with applications to be approved, work inspected and grants paid in respect of two areas whilst the survey and estimating proceeds for a third one. CONSUMER PROTECTION ACT, 1961. This enactment, which came into operation on 19th August 1961, repealed the Heating Appliances (Fireguards) Act, 1952, incorporating that legislation in wider terms to cover the making of regulations laying down enforceable standards as to safety requirements and instructions for any prescribed class of goods. The old Fireguards Regulations were continued in force, but no contraventions were noted. Also repealed and superseded was the Oil Burners (Standards) Act, ^^60, which came into operation on 1st January 19^1: no Regulations for oil heaters had been issued by the end of the year. NOISE ABATEMENT ACT. 1960. This Act added "noise or vibration which is a nuisance" to the list of statutory nuisances, actionable by Part III of the Public Health Act, 1936. One or two complaints of noise were investigated, but were not deemed to justify formal action. Noise nuisance is very much a matter of individual opinion, and in the absence of defined standards it may be very difficult to (32) enforce abatement. In the case of noise or vibration caused in the course of a trade or "business, it is a defence to prove that the best practicable means of preventing or counteracting noise or vibration have been adopted. It should be noted, however, that any three occupiers of premises may jointly make complaint as to a noise nuisance to a justice of the peace, for action directly by the court. PETROLEUM (REGULATION) ACTS. 1928 MP 1936. Thirty-one premises in the district were licensed for the storage of petroleum spirit and petroleum mixtures, the same number as last year. One licencee increased his storage capacity by 1 ,500 gallons, bringing the total to 59,390 gallons. The process of testing the older installations, in line with the requirements of the Licence Conditions, has continued, any defects being remedied before a licence is renewed. I am, Yours obediently, J.B. Wilson. Chief Public Health Inspector.