UBAR 24 URBAN DISTRICT OF BARNET ANNUAL REPORT of the MEDICAL OFFICER OF HEALTH to the BARNET URBAN DISTRICT COUNCIL ARTHUR L. HYATT, M.R.C.S. (Eng.) , L.R.C.P. Together with the ANNUAL REPORT of the CHIEF PUBLIC HEALTH INSPECTOR JOHN B. WILSON, M.A.P.H.I. , M.R.S.H. 1956. (2) BARNET URBAN DISTRICT COUNCIL. MEDICAL OFFICER'S REPORT. Public Health Department, 31 Wood Street, Barnet. To the Chairman and Members of the Barnet Urban District Council. Ladies and Gentlemen, I have pleasure in presenting to you my Annual Report on the health of the district for the year 1956. It is drawn up in accordance with the directions of the Ministry of Health Circular 19/56 of the 11th December, 1956. STATISTICS AND SOCIAL CONDITIONS OF THE AREA. Area,(in acres) 4,290 Population (1951 Census) 25,019 Registrar-General's Estimate of Resident Population, mid 1956 25,630 Number of Inhabited Houses 7,660 Rateable Value £466 ,995 Product of a Penny Rate £1 ,890 NATURAL AND SOCIAL CONDITIONS. The population is largely residential, and consists chiefly of people whose occupation lies outside the urban area. Those employed in the district, apart from the tradesmen and their employees, are mainly skilled workers in light industries. EXTRACT FROM VITAL AND MORTAL STATISTICS OF THE YEAR. Live Births Legitimate Illegitimate Total. M. F. 350 184 166 13 6 7 Birth Rate per 1 .000 of the estimated resident population (standardised): 14.45 Still Births Legitimate Illegitimate Still Birth Rate per 1 .000 total (live and still) Births: 16.26 Total. M. F. 5 3 2 1 Nil 1 (3) Total. M. F. Deaths 249 119 130 Death Rate per 1 .000 of the estimated resident population (standardised): 9.62 Total. Deaths from Puerperal causes Nil Death Rate from Puerperal causes per 1 .000 total (live and still) Births: Nil Deaths of Infants under one year of age:- Total. M. F. Legitimate 5 4 1 Illegitimate Nil Nil Nil Death Rate of Infants under one year of age per 1 .000 live Births: 13.77 Deaths of Infants under four weeks of age:- Total. M. F. Legitimate 4 4 Nil Illegitimate Nil Nil Nil Death Rate of Infants under four weeks of age per 1.000 live Births: 11.02 Too much importance should not be paid to the rates where the actual number of cases is small, e.g. - below 10, as such rates are of little statistical significance. Thus, if an attempt is made to compare this area with other districts, or with previous years, it would be better to compare actual cases. GENERAL PROVISION OF HEALTH SERVICES FOR THE DISTRICT. The Council are not the appropriate Local Authority for the purpose of the National Health Service Act, 1946, and do not therefore control any of the Hospitals or ancillary services in the district. Within this district, and under the control of the Barnet Group Hospital Management Committee, are the following: - Barnet General Hospital, Wellhouse Lane, Barnet. 461 Beds. St. Stephen's Hospital, Mays Lane, Barnet. 88 Beds. (Female medical, Ear, Nose and Throat, and male long-stay cases) Victoria Maternity Hospital, Wood Street, Barnet. 48 Beds. "Elm Bank", Arkley. (Female long-stay cases) 27 Beds. The following is a list of Clinics etc. available in the district. Tuberculosis Clinics are held daily, by appointment, at Barnet Chest Clinic, Wellhouse Lane, Barnet. At Vale Drive the following Clinics are held during the school term. A Clinic for Schoolchildren on the second and fourth Monday morning (4) in each month, and a Clinic for Remedial Exercises every Monday afternoon. A Speech Therapy Clinic is held on Wednesdays and Fridays, Child Guidance Clinics on Thursdays, and an Eye Clinic on Wednesdays. An Infant Welfare Clinic is held every Tuesday afternoon all the year round and also on the first and third Fridays in each month. For the convenience of residents at Totteridge there is an Infant Welfare Clinic at "Dollisfield" every Friday afternoon. Dental Clinics are held daily at Vale Drive. The Family Planning Association hold sessions at Vale Drive each Wednesday between 6 and 7.30 p.m. , and Thursday evenings by appointment. These Clinics are subject to alteration and it is advisable to enquire of the Vale Drive Clinic (BAR: 6194) for the current days and times. Home Help Service. The local office of the Herts County Council Home Help Service at 42 Lytton Road, New Barnet, is open daily from 9 - 1, Monday to Friday inclusive, PUBLIC HEALTH STAFF. Medical Officer of Health. ø x Arthur L. Hyatt, M.R.C.S. (Eng.) , L.R.C.P. Chief Public Health Inspector. + ø John Baillie Wilson, M.A.P II.I. , M.R.S.H. Additional Public Health Inspectors. ø Howard W.C. Alloway, II.A.P.H.I., A,R. S,.H. + ø//George A. Faulkner, M.A.P.H.I, One Clerk-Typist. One Rodent Operative. + Holds the special qualification as Inspector of Meat and other Foods under examination of the Royal Sanitary Institute. // Holds the special qualification as Smoke Inspector under examination of the Royal Sanitary Institute. ø Salary Contribution of one half from Exchequer Grants. x Part-time Officer. (5) WATER SUPPLY. The major area of the district is supplied with water from the mains of the Bamet District Water Company, and the remainder is served by the Colne Valley Water Company. All water supplied by the Barnet District Water Company is chlorinated. A pathological staff is maintained and the water is regularly tested at all stages. During the year, a total of 1,720 bacteriological and 244 chemical examinations of the water were made by the Company's own staff, 1,394 of these samples were representative of the supply and 99.8% were found to be free from B.Coli. The Colne Valley Water Company exercises similar controls over its supplies. Five samples of water were taken by the Department, four from Barnet District Water Company's supply and one from the Colne Valley Water Company's supply, and submitted for analysis with satisfactory results in every case. The water supply to the whole district is considered adequate, and all houses are supplied by these companies mains. One house previously reported as not being supplied with mains water, has now been connected to the corapany's service, but a further cottage was found, during the year, to be using well water. PEONAGE AND SEWERAGE. The town is drained and sewered on the separate system, excepting the older portions of the district where it is a combined system. The sewage is conveyed to a Sewage Disposal works of 56 acres, where it is screened, grit removed in detritus tanks, thence to primary settlement tanks and thereafter distributed over three 80 ft, diameter bacteria filters, followed by humus removal in rectangular tanks before discharge to the Dollis Brook. Pumping is necessary for three sewers which have their outlets at a low point on the works. Part of the Totteridge area drains to the Finchley Borough sewers; in the outlying areas some properties are on cesspool drainage or domestic sewage disposal plants, and a few only have pail closets. (6) SANITARY CONDITIONS AND WATER SUPPLY OF SCHOOLS. There are in the district eleven schools administered by the South Herts Divisional Education Committee, viz:- Queen Elisabeth's Boys and Girls Grammar Schools; Ravenscroft Secondary Modern School; Foulds School (Junior Mixed and Infants); Christ Church School (Junior Mixed); The Elizabeth Allen Voluntary Secondary School; Grasvenor Infants School; Underhill School (junior Mixed); Underhill Infants School; St. Catherine's Roman Catholic School and Whitings Hill School (Junior Mixed and Infants). The South Herts College of Further Education, Wood Street, Barnet, is available for Girls and Boys between the ages of 15 and 18 during the day road for persons of all ages in the evenings. All schools in the district are supplied with mains water and are connected to the Council's main drainage system. DISPOSAL OF HOUSE REFUSE. The house refuse is collected weekly in covered mechanical conveyances and taken to the Council's Sewage Farm, where it is loaded into Contractor's covered lorries and disposed of daily by controlled tipping outside the district. PREVALENCE OF. AND CONTROL OVER. INFECTIOUS DISEASE. The following table shews the number of Notifications to the Sanitary Authority during the year, of each disease specified in the Public Health Act, 1936, and the various Infectious Disease Regulations, and the number of cases removed to Hospital. DISEASE NOTIFIED REMOVED TO HOSPITAL Scarlet Fever 15 3 Whooping Cough 60 6 Diphtheria and Membranous Croup Nil Nil Measles 12 Nil Acute Pneumonia 9 3 Meningococcal Infection 5 5 Acute Poliomyelitis (Paralytic) 3 3 Acute Encephalitis 1 1 Dysentery 8 4 Ophthalmia Neonatorum 1 1 Puerperal Pyrexia 41 41 Smallpox Nil Nil Malaria 1 1 Typhoid and Enteric Fevers Nil Nil Paratyphoid Fever Nil Nil Tick Typhus 1 1 Food Poisoning 22 9 Erysipelas 4 2 Tuberculosis 15 7 TOTALS 198 87 (7) AGE INCIDENCE OF INFECTIOUS DISEASE. DISEASE NUMBER OF CASES NOTIFIED YEARS OF AGE 0- 1- 2- 3- 4- 5- 10- 15- 25- 45- 65- 75- Total Scarlet Fever - - - 1 1 13 - - - - - - 15 Whooping Cough 4 7 6 1 10 31 1 - - - - - 60 Measles - 1 1 - 3 4 3 - - - - - 12 Acute Pneumonia - - - - 1 - 1 - 3 - 3 1 9 Meningococcal Infection 1 1 - 1 2 - - - - - - - 5 Acute Poliomyelitis (Paralytic) - - 1 - — - - - 2 - - - 3 Acute Encephalitis - - - - - 1 - - - - - - 1 Dysentery - 1 - - - 3 2 - 1 - 1 - 8 Ophthalmia Neonatorum 1 - - - - - - - - - - - 1 Puerperal Pyrexia - - - - - - - 14 27 - - - 41 Malaria _ - - - - - - - 1 - - - 1 Tick Typhus - - - - - - - - 1 - - - 1 Food Poisoning - 1 2 - - 3 2 4 8 1 1 - 22 Erysipelas - - - - - - - - 1 3 - - 4 TOTALS 6 11 10 3 17 55 9 18 44 4 5 1 183 Of the foregoing, the following cases normally resident outside the district were notified from the Barnet General Hospital and the Victoria Maternity Hospital:- Acute Pneumonia 2; Meningococcal Infection 4; Acute Poliomyelitis (Paralytic) 1; Dysentery 4; Ophthalmia Neonatorum 1; Puerperal Pyrexia 35 J Malaria 1; Tick Typhus 1; Pood Poisoning 9; Erysipelas 1. The number of notifications of infectious diseases received is well below the average for the past few years. Diphtheria is conspicuous by its absence from the list and it is to be hoped that it will remain so. There is a danger that, with the decreased incidence of the disease, parents of children will decide that the risk is (8) not worthwhile immunising against. The reverse is of course nearer the true situation, i.e. , the higher the level of immunisation in the child population the fewer will be the cases of diphtheria. The Public Health Inspectors visit most cases to make enquiries as to the source of infection and to trace contacts. The thirteen cases of food poisoning occurred amongst the staff of a private Nursing Home. The source of infection was never found but several of the staff were from foreign countries and it was assumed that a snack prepared by one of them was the cause. Adequate isolation and other precautions were taken and no cases occurred amongst the patients in the Nursing Home. The cases of Tuberculosis removed for treatment are usually sent to Clare Hall Sanatorium, South Mimms, other patients with an infectious disease being sent to Coppett's Wood Hospital, Muswell Hill, N.10. INTEENATIONAL VACCINATION CERTIFICATES. At the end of 1952 a new form was introduced for International Vaccination Certificates requiring authentication of the signature of the doctor performing vaccination or inoculation of persons proceeding overseas. During the year 272 such certificates were authenticated and marked with the internationally agreed s tamp. MASS RADIOGRAPHY. In pursuance of the continuous campaign against Tuberculosis, the Mass Radiography Unit of the North West Metropolitan Regional Hospital Board visited the district during March and April, operating at several points in the district, including the car park outside the Public Health Department, from 28th March to 9th April. Appointments were made for factory staffs but the general public could walk straight in during the appropriate sessions. Although we did not obtain any definite figures from the Organising Secretary, I understand that the Unit was well attended. (9) TUBERCULOSIS. NEW CASES AND MORTALITY DURING 1956. YEARS OF AGE NEW CASES DEATHS Pulmonary Non-Pulmonary Pulmonary Non-Pulmonary M F M F M F M F 0 - - - - - - - - 1 - - - - - - - - 5 - - - - - - - - 15 1 1 1 - - - - - 25 4 1 - 1 - - - - 35 1 1 - - 2 - - - 45 1 - - - - - - - 55 - - - - - - - - 65 and over 2 - - 1 - - - - TOTALS 9 3 1 2 2 - - - Fifteen new cases were notified during the year making a total of 208 cases on the Tuberculosis Register, a reduction of 7 last year's total. These figures continue the steady reduction in the number of new cases and of deaths from this disease during each year. PUBLIC HEALTH (PREVENTION OF TUBERCULOSIS) REGULATIONS. 1925. It has not been found necessary to take any action under the above Regulations, relating to Tuberculous employees in the Milk Trade. PUBLIC HEALTH ACT. 1936. SECTION 172. COMPULSORY . REMOVAL TO HOSPITAL OF CASES OF PULMONARY TUBERCULOSIS. No action was necessary under the above Section. NATIONAL ASSISTANCE ACT. 1948 - SECTION 47. NATIONAL ASSISTANCE (AMENDMENT) ACT. 1951 - SECTION 1. Contact is maintained with several aged persons in the district but early in the year our attention was drawn to an old gentleman of 89 years of age who was found to be living in filthy conditions and to be in need (10) of hospitalisation yet refusing care and attention. He was removed on an Emergency Order after persuasion had failed. Further Orders were made "by the Court and after an initial recovery he was transferred to a County Council Home for Old Persons. His condition however deteriorated and he returned to Hospital where he died six months after our first contact with him. MORTAL STATISTICS. Of 249 deaths, 5 occurred under one year of age. The following were the major causes of death:- Heart Disease 95; Cancer 39 (19 males and 20females); Vascular Lesions of Nervous system 32; Bronchitis 11; Pneumonia 4; Tuberculosis 2; Suicide 3; Motor Vehicle accidents 2; Other accidents 6. MORTUARY ACCOMMODATION. Under arrangements mode with the East Barnet Urban District Council their mortuary is available for the use of this district, and it was so used on eighteen occasions during the year. I am, Yours faithfully, ARTHUR L. HYATT, M,R.C„S,(Eng.) , L.R.C.P. MEDICAL OFFICER OF HEALTH. (11) BARNET URBAN DISTRICT COUNCIL. CHIEF PUBLIC HEALTH INSPECTOR'S REPORT. Public Health Department, 31 Wood Street, Barnet. To the Chairman and Members of the Barnet Urban District Council. Ladies and Gentlemen, I have the honour to present to you my Annual Report for the year 1956. The Council's first post war clearance area was declared early in the year, and after considerable discussion it was decided not to purchase the area but to proceed by way of a Clearance Order, thereby leaving it to the owner to redevelop the area. Housing work, with its inevitable inspections, revisits and office work has occupied much of the time of your Inspectors, whose title was changed to that of Public Health Inspectors by the Sanitary Inspectors (Change of Designation) Act 1956. At the same time, the new Public Health Inspectors Education Board was set up to examine for and issue a Diploma in Public Health Inspection as the basic qualification to be recognised by the Minister, and,amongst other things, to keep under revision all questions relating to recruitment, training and examination of Public Health Inspectors. The Council considered the recommendations of the Working Party for Public Health Inspectors with regard to extending the system of paid pupillage as a means of entry to the profession, and has agreed to bear this matter in mind for future appointments. During the year under review there were no changes of staff and the work proceeded in a regular manner. I wish to thank all officers of the Council and the staff of the Public Health Department in particular, for their co-operation and help throughout the year. (12) INSPECTION OF DISTRICT. General inspections of the district have "been carried out periodically and all complaints investigated. The process of serving a preliminary or intimation notice upon the person in default, specifying the works necessary to remedy the defects found, is usually followed. It was found necessary to ask your authority to serve seventy-nine Statutory Notices, where persons failed to comply with the preliminary notice, or the strict legal procedure was necessary in the first instance. SANITARY INSPECTION OF AREA. The following is a list of the number and nature of visits and inspections:- Visits re: Housing Acts 767 Visits re: nuisance and sanitary defects 1314 Visits re: infectious diseases 248 Visits re: Petroleum Acts 131 Visits re: smoke observations 42 Visits re: factories 163 Visits re: outworkers' premises 22 Visits re: food manufactories, cafes etc 743 Visits re: ice cream and sampling 322 Visits re: overcrowding 7 Visits re: aged and infirm persons 47 Visits to inspect meat and other foods 669 Visits re: schools 6 Visits re: pollution of watercourses 51 Visits re: Tents, Caravans and Sheds 59 Visits re: Shops Acts 89 Visits re: keeping of animals 20 Visits re: Rodent Infestation 2275 Visits re: other infestations 54 Miscellaneous visits 98 NUMBER OF NOTICES SERVED DURING YEAR. Number of Informal Notices 175 Number of Statutory Notices 79 Informal Notices complied with 127 Statutory Notices complied with 63 (13) SANITARY WORK AND REPAIRS The following is a list of repairs effected as a result of informal and formal notices served. Roofs repaired and made weatherproof 53 Gutters, downspouts repaired or renewed 37 Exterior "brickwork repaired or repointed 31 Walls, dampness remedied 107 Chimney stacks and pots repaired or renewed 13 Yard surfaces repaired or repaved 13 Ceilings repaired or renewed 62 Wall plaster repaired or renewed 101 Walls and ceilings cleansed and decorated 142 Floors repaired or renewed 35 Doors and frames repaired or renewed 20 Windows repaired 152 Food Stores provided or ventilated 14 Fireplaces repaired or renewed 22 Drains and sewage disposal plants cleared 41 Drains and sewage disposal plants repaired or reconstructed 25 Inspection chambers repaired or reconstructed 11 Soil or vent pipes repaired or renewed 11 Gullies, channels and fenders repaired or renewed 9 Water Closet pans , fittings, repaired or renewed 30 Sinks, waste pipes, etc. , repaired or renewed 25 Storage cisterns, cleaned, repaired or renewed 5 Water services , repaired, renewed or re-instated 5 Dustbins renewed 10 Refuse accumulations removed 6 Animals and fowls: nuisance from improper keeping 2 HOUSING. The Council declared its first post war clearance area, comprising twenty- eight houses, early in the year and made a Clearance Order in October. If any objections are made by the owner a date will no doubt be fixed early in 1957 for the inquiry. As a result of formal action under the Housing Acts, sixteen houses were made fit during the year which number includes one house on which a Demolition Order had been made but later revoked following extensive work, and one house in which the work was carried out in default by the Council who are receiving the rent in payment of expenses incurred. The provisions of the Public Health Acts have been used to remedy lesser defects in other houses. The local Petty Sessions Court made Nuisance Orders, on the application of the Council, against the owner of two flats in the district. The Court also enforced a fine of £1 and costs. Two houses were actually demolished following Orders made in 1955, and (14) thirteen Demolition Orders were made this year tout not complied with during the period under review. Two of these Orders were made in respect of two houses, in a terrace of three, which had previously been the subject of Closing Orders. All three in the terrace are vacant and demolition should follow early next year. The Council carried out works by agreement with the owner following service of Abatement Notices under the Public Health Act 1936, and the Council are collecting the rent to cover the cost of the works. The demand for Certificates of Disrepair under the Housing Repairs and Rents Act 1954 has been even less than it was in the previous year. One application only was made during the year and a certificate issued. One application was made by the owner of a property for a revocation certificate and this was granted as were two further certificates which had been applied for at the end of last year. PUBLIC HEALTH ACT. 1956. INFECTIOUS DISEASE. INVESTIGATION AND DISINFECTION. Investigations have been carried out of the more important cases of infectious disease listed in the Medical Officer of Health's Report. Where necessary, premises are disinfected and bedding is taken for disinfection to the Barnet General Hospital under arrangements made with the Barnet Group Hospital Management Committee. Fifty library books were disinfected before return to libraries. FOOD PREMISES IN THE DISTRICT. Number of Balers 8 ” ” Butchers 13 ” ” Cafes, Bestaurants. etc. 16 ” ” Confectioners 23 ” ” Fishmongers 5 ” ” Greongrocers 14 ” ” Grocers 34 ” ” Idcensed 28 ” ” Chemists 9 FOOD PREMISES REGISTERED UNDER SECTION 16 OF FOOD MP DRUGS ACT. 1955. (a) Sale and Storage of Ice Cream 45 (b) Manufacture of sausages and preserved meats etc. 2l (15) DAIRIES REGISTERED UNDER MILK MP DAIRIES REGULATIONS. 1949-1954. Number of Dairies 2 The new Pood Hygiene Regulations came into force in part in January of the year and the remaining provisions as from July. The number of visits this year shows an increase over last year' s and is brought about by our efforts to ensure that all food traders were aware of the new Regulations. During our visits of inspection every opportunity is taken to discuss food hygiene with staff and management and to show what steps are necessary to comply with the regulations and to improve hygiene generally. Ceilings renewed or repaired 2 Wall plaster renewed or repaired 2 Walls and ceilings cleansed 5 Floors repaired 1 Yards and Gullies cleansed 2 Dustbins renewed 2 Hot water supplies provided 11 Handbasins provided 4 Soap and towels provided 12 Accumulations removed 2 Fittings and utensils cleansed or renewed 3 FOOD POISONING. Annual Return of Food Poisoning Notification. Food Poisoning; Notifications (Corrected) Returned to Registrar General. 1st Quarter. 2nd Quarter. 3rd Quarter. 4th Quarter. Total. Deaths. Nil. 2 16 4 22 Nil Outbreaks Due to Identified Agents. Total Outbreaks. 1 Total cases. 13 Outbreaks of undiscovered cause. Total Outbreaks. Nil Total cases. Nil Agent Identified 7 Unknown Cause 2 Total 9 Of the twenty-two total cases notified during the year, nine were persons normally resident outside the district and admitted to the Barnet General Hospital already suffering and notified from the Hospital. Investigations would be carried out by the districts where the patients were normally resident. The thirteen cases occurring in this district are referred to in the Medical Officer's report. (16) ICE CREAM. Ninety-seven samples of ice cream were taken, from retailers in the district, during the year with results as shown below which are considered satisfactory. Manufacturer. Grade I. Grade II. Grade III. Grade IV. Total. A 40 — 1 — 41 B 46 — — — 46 F 10 — — — 10 Total 96 — 1 — 97 All samples of ice cream are taken to the Central Public Health Laboratory, Colindale, for testing by the Methylene Blue Test. One hundred and seventeen samples were taken this year from the ice cream factory registered in the district, twice the number taken last year. The general standard, indicated by the laboratory, should show some 50% of samples in Grade I, 80% in Grades I and II, and not more than 20% in Grade III and none in Grade IV. The corresponding figures from samples we have taken, at all points of production are as follows 67.5%; 94.0%; and just over 4%. These figures on their own give a quite satisfactory picture, but there were also two samples in Grade IV, these are two too many, and can only be considered as due to the human element which occasionally falters. There are now forty-two premises registered for the storage and sale of ice cream, after allowing for one new registration effected during 1956, and two cancelled following closure of the premises. DAIRIES. COWSHEDS AND MILKSHOPS. The control of the production of milk is vested in the Ministry of Agriculture Fisheries and Food. The local authority is responsible for the inspection and registration (17) of milk distributors and other dairy premises not directly concerned with the actual production of milk, and for licensing for the sale of Designated Milks. Twenty-four samples of milk have been taken, in course of delivery to the consumer, and submitted to the appropriate tests with the following results:- Designation Samples Taken Satisfactory Unsatisfactory Tuberculin Tested (Pasteurised) 3 3 Nil Tuberculin Tested (Farm Bottled) 2 2 Nil Tuberculin Tested (Farm Bottled) (Channel Islands) 2 2 Nil Pasteurised 7 7 Nil Pasteurised (Channel Islands) 6 6 Nil Pasteurised (Homogenized) 3 3 Nil Sterilised 1 1 Nil TOTALS 24 24 Nil No official action was taken under Regulation 20 of the Milk and Dairies Regulations 1949, to stop or restrict the sale of milk. No cases of disease were notified which could be attributed to the consumption of infected milk. Ten Dealer's Licences and twenty-;one Supplementary Licences were granted for the retail sale of milk under the Milk (Special Designation) (Raw Milk) Regulations, 1949 and 1950, and the Milk (Special Designation)(Pasteurised and Sterilised Milk) Regulations, 1949 and 1950, viz:- Designation. Dealer's Licences. Supplementary Licences. Tuberculin Tested. 3 7 Pasteurised. 3 7 Sterilised. 4 7 FOOD AND DRUGS ACT. 1958. The Council acquired those powers under the Act concerning the adulteration and sophistication of food as from 1st October 1955. The summary overleaf contains the results of eighty samples taken by this department. (18) Article No, Examined No. Adulterated Etc. Formal Informal Total Formal Informal Total Almonds, Ground — 1 1 — — — Ammoniated Tincture of Quinine — 8 8 — 3 3 Baking Powder — 1 1 — — — Bicarbonate of Soda — 1 1 — — — Butter — 3 3 — — — Buttered Coconut Macaroons — 1 1 — — — Campherated Oil — 1 1 — — — Caramels, Milk — 1 1 — — — Cheese — 1 1 — — — Cheese spread with Tomato — 1 1 — — — Cherrylet — 1 1 — — — Chicken Pate — 1 1 — — — Chicklettes — 1 1 — — — Coconut, Desiccated — 1 1 — — — Cream — 4 4 — — — Curry Powder — 1 1 — — — Dripping — 2 2 — — — Pish Cakes — 1 1 — — — Flour — 1 1 — — — Garlic Salt — 1 1 — — — Gelatine — 1 1 — — — Ham and Chicken — 1 1 — — — Hydrogen Peroxide — 1 1 — — — Icing Sugar — 1 1 — — — Jam — 2 2 — — — Lard — 1 1 — — — Marzipan — 2 2 — — — Marzipan Substitute — 1 1 — — — Milk 13 1 14 — — — Mile, Condensed — 1 1 — — — Orange Squash — 1 1 — — — Pearl Barley — 1 1 — — — Pepper — 2 2 — — — Pineapple Chunks, Crystallised 1 1 2 1 1 2 Rice, Creamed — 2 2 — — — Saccharin Tablets — 1 1 — — — Sausages Pork — 1 1 — — — Spice, Mixed — 1 1 — — — Steak, Stewed — 1 1 — — — Self-Raising Flour — 1 1 — — — Tartaric Acid — 1 1 — — — Tomato Juice — 1 1 — — — Tomato Ketchup — 1 1 — — — Tomato Puree — 1 1 — — — Vinegar 3 1 4 — — — Vinegar, Pickling 1 — 1 1 — 1 Total 18 62 80 2 4 6 All unsatisfactory samples were reported to the Council. Vinegar. This was advertised in the vendor's shop as "Pickling Vinegar". The Public Analyst reported that this was not a brewed condiment and that it was also deficient in its content of acetic acid. The Council sent a warning letter to the vendor. (19) Crystallised Pineapple Chunks. This sample was of boiled sweets. The Public Analyst reported on the informal sample to the effect that they consisted of sugar confectionery artificially flavoured and contained no pineapple fruit. After some difficulty a formal sample was taken and the report was similarly worded. Unfortunately the report arrived too late for the Council to consider taking any action on that sample. The item is not apparently in much demand in this district as I have been unable to obtain a further sample. However, some descriptions of sugar confectionery are of long standing and have been accepted by usage, and it is not clear that the Council would succeed if any action were taken. Ammoniated Tincture of Quinine. Three informal samples of the above item were obtained and were reported unsatisfactory in that they were deficient of ammonia. The chemists concerned agreed to withdraw their stock forthwith on being approached on the matter. There is only a comparatively small and seasonal demand for this product and it is subject to deterioration in stock. MERCHANDISE MARKS ACT. 1926. The Council became the authority for enforcing the provisions of these Acts and Orders made thereunder when they were designated a Pood and Drugs Authority. During the year two verbal warnings were given to retailers for failing to properly label imported meat. MEAT AND POOD CONDEMNED. The following is a list of the articles of food condemned as unfit for human consumption during the year. Meat. Fresh Meat. Canned Meat. Lambs Liver 2¾ lbs. Ham 32 lbs. Corned Beef 32 lbs. Pigs Kidneys 30 lbs. Luncheon Meat 4½ lbs. Steak 6 lbs. Beef Sausages 22 lbs. Jellied Veal 6 lbs. Ox Tongue 12 lbs. (20) Fish. Salmon 3 tins. Sardines 5 tins. Pilchards 15 tins. Dressed Crab 4 tins. Groceries. Cheese 80 lbs. Vegetables 56 tins. Fruit 92 tins. Margarine ½ lb. Milk 27 tins. Cream 20 tins. Golden Syrup 2 lbs. Jam 8 tins. Coffee 12 tins. Dried Fruits 91 lbs. Soups etc. 7 tins. Condemned food is taken to the disposal point on the Sewage Farm, where tins are thoroughly perforated and loose food is stained and mixed with household refuse before onward transmission to the controlled tip outside the district. PRIVATE SLAUGHTERHOUSES AND SLAUGHTER OF ANIMALS ACT. 1955. There is only one slaughterhouse, privately owned, operating in the district and your inspectors maintain a high percentage of inspection "by evening and week-end visits. Slaughtering is carried on six days per week, the sole exception being Friday, and the general system with regard to the timing of slaughtering is that adult Bovines are slaughtered early in the day's work, proceeding to the "smalls" and in this latter category, calves are usually left until last. This accounts for the 100% inspection of Cattle and Cows, shown in the following table, and the lower percentage of inspection for calves, despite evening and week-end visits. However, good co-operation exists between your inspectors and the owner and his slaughtermen who retain for our inspection on the following day any carcase presenting signs of disease or injury. The majority of the condemned meat and offals is taken away by a reputable firm for manufacture into useful by-products, e.g. fertilisers etc. Total weight of carcase meat condemned 12,837 lbs. Total weight of offals condemned 9,490 lbs. (21) CARCASES AND OFFAL INSPECTED AND CONDEMNED IN WHOLE OR IN PART. Cattle Excluding Cows Cows Calves Sheep & Lambs Pigs Horses Number killed (if known) 609 944 6,047 2,371 5,744 — Number inspected 609 944 3,365 2,018 4,653 — All diseases except Tuberculosis & Cysticerci Whole carcases condemned — 1 4 8 3 — Carcases of which some part or organ was condemned 174 291 5 71 77 — Percentage of the number inspected affected with disease other than tuberculosis & cysticerci 28.57 30.93 0.27 3.92 1.72 — Tuberculosis only: Whole carcases condemned 1 10 3 — 1 — Carcases of which some part or organ was condemned 25 164 3 — 58 — Percentage of the number inspected affected with tuberculosis 4.27 18.43 0.18 0.00 1.27 — Cysticercosis: Carcases of which some part or organ was condemned 3 — — — — — Carcases submitted to treatment by refrigeration — — — — — — Generalised and totally condemned — — — — — — The Council acts as agent for the Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food in the matter of Deadweight Certification of Pigs. During the year your inspectors have issued 253 certificates covering 924 pigs. For this service the Council receives from the Ministry 6d per pig (22) certified, with a minimum of 3/- per certificate. There are eleven persons licensed by the Council as fit persons to slaughter animals, most of them work part or full time as slaughtermen at the local slaughterhouse. No complaint has been received from other districts concerning the conduct of any of these men, nor was there any need for adverse report on the men locally employed. DRAINACE. Supervision was given by the department to the relaying of the combined drains of two blocks of houses where the work was carried out by the Council and the expenses apportioned between the owners. Apart from the normal repair jobs to drainage systems the department is responsible for the approval and supervision of construction of domestic sewage disposal plants in the unsewered areas of the district and in this connection three new houses were constructed with sewage disposal plants. REPORT REQUIRED BY SECTION 128 (3) OF THE FACTORIES ACT. 1937. Inspection for purposes of provisions as to health. Number on Register. Number of Inspections. Written Notices. Uccupiers Prosecuted. (l) Factories in which Secs. 1, 2, 3, 4 and 6 are to be enforced by Local Authorities. 9 13 — — (2) Factories not included in (1) in which Sec. 7 is enforced by the Local Authority. 92 148 1 — (3) Other premises in which Sec. 7 is enforced by the Local Authority. 10 2 — — Total 111 163 1 — The notice served required the provision of additional sanitary accommodation, which was provided. (23) Outworkers (Sections 110 and 111). Section 110. Section 111. No. of outworkers | on lists received. No. of instances of work in unwholesome premises. Notices Served. 103 — — Thirty-two outworkers reside in the district. Twenty-two premises were visited and home conditions were found to be entirely satisfactory. The names and addresses of the other outworkers are notified to the district councils in which they live. Pour new certificates and one amended certificate as to adequate means of escape in case of fire were issued under section 34 of the Act during the year, after alteration works were completed. The conversion of Elliotts factory, Park Road, into several small factories has entailed many visits in connection with the provision of sanitary accommodation for the individual factories and the giving of advice with respect to means of escape in case of fire in consultation with the Fire Prevention Officer for the County. HERTFORDSHIRE COUNTY COUNCIL ACT. 1935. Provision is made in this Act for the conduct and regulation of:- (1) Tents, Caravans and Sheds; (2) Hairdressers' and Barbers' Premises; (3) Swimming Baths and Pools, and (4) Employment Agencies. Tents. Caravans and Sheds. The vans attending the Barnet Fair were visited to enquire as to any infectious diseases and as to their sanitary condition. The provision of temporary sanitary accommodation was required in different sections of the fair for the use of the caravanners and public, and regular removal of refuse was arranged. Hairdressers' and Barbers' Premises. There are fourteen such establishments in the district. No complaints were received concerning their cleanliness nor were any serious breaches of (24) the Council's Dye-laws noted during inspections of such premises. Public Swimming Baths and Bathing Fools. The only swimming pool in the district, viz, at "The Bam", Barnet Bye-Pass, is not now in use. HOME COUNTIES (MUSIC MP DANCING) LICENSING ACT. 1926. HERTFORDSHIRE (MUSIC AND DANCING) REGULATIONS. 1956. Under the new regulations made by the County Council a report from the local district council is required regarding the suitability and sufficiency of sanitary arrangements at premises for Music and Dancing before licences are issued. Some twenty premises were inspected in this connection and a report forwarded to the County Council. RODENT CONTROL. Prevention of Damage by Pests Act. 1949. A full time rodent operator is employed for treatment of infestations of rats and mice. The table below gives details of the work carried out during the year:- Type of Property Local Authority Dwelling Houses Agricultural All other (including Business Premises) Total Number of Properties inspected as a result of: (a) Notification 5 137 1 32 175 (b) Survey under the Act 6 172 23 68 269 (c) Otherwise 9 6 — 12 18 Total inspections carried out including re-inspections 23 357 28 183 591 Number of properties found to be infested by: (a) Rats (Major 2 — 2 2 4 (Minor 3 76 4 11 94 (b) Mice (Major — — 1 — 1 (Minor 3 117 — 16 136 Number of Properties treated by the Local Authority 6 193 7 29 235 Total treatments carried out including retreatments 13 243 9 45 310 Number of "Block" control schemes carried out 38 (25) Pour informal notices were served, one to ratproof poultry houses and three to remove accumulations. A test bait was made of 10% of the soil sewer manholes in the district, from the results of which are based the two maintenance treatments of the sewers required by the Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Pood, as one of the conditions under which the Ministry pay 50% of the Council's rodent control expenses. The test bait in May resulted in one complete "take" and two partial "takes" of bait out of ninety-three manholes baited. The maintenance treatments carried out in May and December, when twelve and fourteen manholes were baited respectively, resulted in three and five "takes" respectively. These confirm the excellent results which were obtained last year when I expressed the hope that this would continue. No charge is made for the use of the Rodent Operator's services in treating private domestic premises, provided that the occupiers co-operate in carrying out their duties under the Act. The cost of treatments at all other premises is recoverable. OTHER INFESTATIONS. Members of the public seem more concerned with infestations of all kinds of insects than previously and advice was given in respect of one hundred and three infestations of a wide variety of insects and animals, e.g. various beetles, ants, cockroaches, fleas, moths, bugs, silver fish, foxes, moles, rabbits, squirrels, etc. In this work we are assisted by the identification services of the British Museum (Natural History Section), the staff of which have on several occasions given a prompt answer to our enquiries. Small quantities of liquid or powder insecticides are distributed and in a few cases your Inspectors assist in the work of disinfesting by the loan of a power sprayer. PET ANIMALS ACT. 1951. This Act gives the local Authority, inter alia, power to grant licences to persons to keep pet shops for the sale of pet animals and to attach to the (26) licences conditions concerning the cleanliness and general management of the premises: there are five persons licensed in the district. No complaints were received nor were any major contraventions of the conditions observed during visits of inspection. RAG FLOCK ACT. 1951. This Act controls the use of filling materials in the making of upholstery. The premises of one furniture manufacturer are registered under the Act. HEATING APPLIANCES (FIREGUARDS) ACT. 1952. This Act and the Regulations made thereunder came into operation on the 1st October 1953, after which date it became an offence to manufacture a heating appliance which does not comply with the requisite standards. No contraventions were found, this year, of the standards set by the Act and Regulations for fireguards on heating appliances. PETROLEUM (REGULATION) ACTS. 1928 AND 1936. There are thirty-six persons on the Register licensed to store petroleum and petroleum mixtures. Three new licences were issued for the storage of small quantities of petroleum mixtures; one licence for mixtures was discontinued, as were two licences for storage of petroleum in underground tanks. The tanks were rendered safe by filling with water and or sand. One new licence was issued, for underground storage of petrol served via a pump, being a new installation constructed under the supervision of the department. The total quantity of petroleum spirit and mixtures which may be kept in the various stores is 38,442 gallons. One hundred and thirty-one inspections were made to ensure compliance with the Council's revised conditions attaching to licences. I am, Yours obediently, J. B. WILSON. Chief Public Health Inspector.