LIBRARY RBAR Barnet Rural District ANNUAL REPORT of the Medical Officer of Health For the Year 1937. by CHARLES F. HARDIE, m.a.,m.b„ b.c. (Cantab.). together with the REPORT of the Sanitary Inspector ARTHUR J. WILSHIRE, M.I.M.&Cy.E.,A.R.S.I. PRINTED AT THE "BARNET PRESS" OIFICS. Barnet Rural District ANNUAL REPORT OF THE Medical Officer of Health For the Year 1937. BY CHARLES F. HARDIE, M.A., M B., B.C. (Cantab.). together with the REPORT of the Sanitary Inspector ARTHUR J. WILSHIRE, M.i.M.&cy.E.,A.R.s.i. Members of the Council chairman: R. J. MACNAUGHTON, J.P. vice-chairman ; G. I. BREW. members: E. H. Clark. T. H. Cochrane. H. T. A. Dashwood, M.A. Rev. A. R. T. Eales; M.A. Mrs. A. M. R. Hooper. W. G. Tayler. J. R. Young. medical officer of health: Charles F. Hardie, M.A., M.B. B.C. (Cantab.). surveyor and sanitary inspector: A. J. Wilshire, M.I.M. & Cy.E., A.R.S.I. clerk: A. Lancashire. Barnet Rural District Council MEDICAL OFFICERS REPORT To the Chairman and Members of the Barnet Rural District Council Gentlemen, I have much pleasure in presenting to you my Annual Report on the Health of the District for the year 1937. Statistics and Social Conditions of the Area. Area in acres 8,339 Population (1931 census) 5,946 Population, 1937 (Keg. Gen.) 8,650 Number of Inhabited Houses, 1937, according to Pate Books 2,090 Rateable Value £78,731 Product of a Penny Kate £300 4 Social Conditions. The District comprises the several parishes of Elstree, Shenley, and Ridge. The chief occupations are, in Shenley and Ridge, farming and residential. In Elstree they are industrial, more particularly film, photographic plates and papers, knitting mills, and, to some extent, residential. Considerable industrial development is taking place. Unemployment of a nature peculiar to the film industry has been prevalent during 1937. Extracts from Vital Statistics of the Year. Total. M. F. Live Births Legitimate 121 69 52 Illegitimate 4 1 3 Birth-rate, 14.5 per 1,000 of the estimated population. Still Births 3 3 0 Bate per 1,000 total births 24. Deaths 63 33 30 Death-rate, 7.2 per 1,000. Number of women dying in, or in consequence of, child birth:— Rate per 1,000 births. From Sepsis 1 8 From Other Causes 1 8 Total 2 16 Death-rate of infants under one year of age per 1,000 live births (Total, 32):— Legitimate, 32. Illegitimate, 0 Deaths from Cancer 8 Deaths from Measles (all ages) 0 Deaths from Whooping Cough (all ages) 0 Diarrhoea (under 2 years of age) 0 5 Mortal Statistics. Of 63 deaths, 4 occurred under 1 year. The following were the chief causes of death: Cancer, 8; Tuberculosis, 3; Heart Disease, 16; Bronchitis, 0; Ulcer of Stomach or Duodenum, 0; Pneumonia, 4. Tuberculosis. New cases and mortality during the year 1937 New Cases. Deaths. Age Periods Pulmonary Non-Pulmonary Pulmonary Non-Pulmonary M. F. M. F. M. F. M. F 0 1 5 10 1 15 20 25 2 35 45 1 55 65 and upwards 1 Totals 3 2 2 1 6 GENERAL PROVISION OF HEALTH SERVICES IN THE AREA. I. Public Health Officers of the Authority. One part-time Medical Officer of Health. One whole-time Sanitary Inspector and Surveyor combined. One part-time Veterinary Surgeon. II. (a) Laboratory Facilities. Examination of sputum is carried out at the Herts County Council laboratory. Swabs, etc., are examined by the Clinical Research Association. (b) Ambulance Facilities. Infectious diseases cases are conveyed by Joint Isolation Hospital Ambulance. Non-infectious cases are conveyed by the Barnet Ambulance. The arrangements are adequate and work smoothly. (c) Nursing in the Home. There are Nursing Associations in Elstree, Boreham Wood, Shenley, and Ridge, supplying three whole-time nurses who work under the Herts County Council. There is no special nursing for infections diseases. (d) Hospitals. Wellhouse Hospital, situated in Barnet, a general hospital containing 325 beds, managed by the Public Assistance Committee. Victoria Hospital, situated in Barnet, a voluntary hospital of 50 beds, Bushey Cottage Hospital, situated in 7 Bushey; patients from this area attend at the above hospitals. There are no hospitals actually situated in the area. The bulk of the patients go to the Wellhouse Hospital, which has 325 beds, including maternity beds. The Wellhouse Hospital has facilities for operative surgery, X-ray, and massage, and has a whole-time pathologist. Infectious diseases are sent to the Joint Isolation Hospital in the Barnet Urban District, which has 47 beds. There are a joint Smallpox Hospital at Cheshunt, a Tuberculosis Hospital at Ware, provided by the Herts C.C., and maternity lying-in wards at the Wellhouse Hospital. The hospital accommodation appears to be adequate. Byelaws and Regulations. New Streets and Buildings. 17/7/1929. Slaughter Houses. 20/4/1926. Cowsheds, Dairies, and Milkshops. 19/9/1839. Houses let in Lodgings. 14/7/1923. Tents, Vans, Sheds, etc. 7/10/1920. Sanitary Circumstances of the Area. Water. The water supply has been satisfactory in quality and quantity. It is supplied by the Colne Valley Water Co., who state that constant care and supervision is exercised, frequent bacteriological examinations are carried out, and all the water supplied to the district is chlorinated. 8 Drainage and Sewerage. Scavenging. House refuse is collected weekly by the Council's own staff from the whole of the district, and disposed of by control tipping on the Meadow Road playing field. Rivers and Streams. Minor pollution of brooks has been dealt with. Sanitary Inspection of the Area. General inspection of different parts of the district is carried out, together with continuous attention to certain areas in connection with cesspools and similar matters, and revisits to work in progress to abate nuisances are made as necessary. Shops. Inspections have been carried out as in former years, but all records have been lost in the recent fire at the offices. Swimming Pools. Aldenham Reservoir is used for this purpose, with very satisfactory results. Milk, Meat, and Food Inspection. Inspection of meat has been carried out by the Council's Veterinary Surgeon. The number of persons registered as Cowkeepers or Purveyors is 29, of whom 16 are registered in connection with milkshops or dairies, and 22 as cowkeepers. All these premises have been inspected during the year, and, particularly, attention has been paid to the cleanliness of cattle, milkers, etc, 9 REPORT OF THE MEAT INSPECTOR E. P. OFFORD M.R.C.V.S. Cattle excluding Cows Cows Calves Sheep Pigs Number known killed 68 21 38 139 127 Number inspected 61 18 31 120 108 All diseases except tuberculosis: Whole carcases condemned — — — — — Some part or organ of carcase condemned 12 2 — 11 j— Percentage of number inspected affected with non-tubercular diseases 20% . approx. .. 10% .. approx. — — — Tuberculosis only: Whole carcase condemned 1 1 — — — Some part or organ of tubercular carcase condemned — 1 — — — Percentage of number inspected affected with tuberculosis 1.5% approx. 9.5% approx. — — — 10 There are 5 privately-owned slaughter houses, two being licensed and the others registered. The number of bakehouses on the register is 5, and all have been inspected during the year, as have also 4 workshops and 9 factories. The necessary attention has been given to the maintenance of fire exits in unobstructed condition in the various sound studios of the film industry. Smoke Abatement. No action has been called for. Schools. The sanitary condition of the schools is satisfactory. The water is supplied by the Colne Valley Water Company. The schools are visited regularly by the Assistant School Medical Officer of Health, and specially on an outbreak of any infections disease for the purpose of excluding or examining possible contacts and advising on any necessary measures. All cases of infectious diseases are notified by the head teachers. Schools were not closed for infectious disease. Rag Flock Acts. There is no "Rag Flock manufactured in the district. Housing. During the year 36 houses have been commenced by the Council and 211 by private enterprise. 11 Unfit houses are dealt with as they become unfit. The number is very small. The Prevalence of and Control over Infectious and Other Diseases. There were 10 cases of Scarlet Fever. The disease was of a mild type, and there was no death. The cases were removed to the Isolation Hospital, Barnet. There were 2 cases of Diphtheria. Diphtheria anti-toxin is immediately available if required. No vaccinations were performed by the Medical Officer of Health. Influenza was prevalent in the early part of the year. Disinfection of infected premises is carried out by the Sanitary Inspector. Disease. Total cases notified. Total cases admitted to Hospital. Total deaths. Smallpox 0 — — Scarlet Fever 10 10 — Diphtheria 2 2 — Enteric Fever 0 — — Puerperal Fever 0 — — Puerperal Pyrexia 0 — — Pneumonia 4 — 4 Erysipelas 3 — — No case of Ophthalmia Neonatorum was notified. 12 REPORT of SANITARY INSPECTOR FOR THE YEAR 1937. The routine work of the Sanitary Inspector's Department was carried out during the year, but all his records were destroyed in the recent fire at the offices of the Council, so that it is impossible to compile the usual tables or show details of his work. 1. Inspection of Dwelling-houses during the Year:— (1) (a) Total number of dwellinghouses inspected for housing defects (under Public Health or Housing Acts) (b) Number of inspections made for the purpose (2) (a) Number of dwelling-houses (included- under sub-head (1) above) which were inspected and recorded under the Housing Consolidated Regulations, 1925 (b) Number of inspections made for the purpose (8) Number of dwelling-houses found to be in a state so dangerous or injurious to health as to be unfit for human habitation 13 (4) Number of dwelling-houses (exclusive of those referred to under the preceding sub-head) found not to be in all respects reasonably fit for human habitation 11. Remedy of Defects during the Year without Service of formal Notices : Number of defective dwellinghouses rendered fit in consequence of informal action by the Local Authority or their officers 111. Action under Statutory Powers during the Year:— A.—Proceedings under sections 17, 18, and 23 of the Housing Act, 1930: (1) Number of dwelling-houses in respect of which notices were served requiring repairs (2) Number of dwelling-houses which were rendered fit after service of formal notices:— (a) By owners (b) By local authority in default of owners 14 B.—Proceedings under Public Health Acts: (1) Number of dwelling-houses in respect of which notices were served requiring defects to be remedied (2) Number of dwelling-houses in which defects were remedied after service of formal notice:— (a) By owners (b) By local authority in fault of owners C.—Proceedings under sections 19 and 21 of the Housing Act, 1930: (1) Number of dwelling-houses in respect of which Demolition Orders were made 02) Number of dwelling-houses demolished in pursuance of Demolition Orders D.—Proceedings under section 20 of the Housing Act, 1930: (1) Number of separate tenements or underground rooms in respect of which Closing Orders were made 15 (2) Number of separate tenements or underground rooms in respect of which Closing Orders were determined, the tenement or room having been rendered fit IV. Housing Act, 1935.—Overcrowding (a). (i) Number of dwellings crowded at the end of the year (ii) Number of families dwelling therein (iii) Number of persons dwelling therein (b) Number of new cases of overcrowding reported during the year (c) (i) Number of cases of crowding relieved during the year (ii) Number of persons concerned in such cases ANNUAL REPORT On the Administration of the Factory and Workshop Act, 1901, in connection with Factories, Workshops, and Workplaces. 1.—INSPECTION OF FACTORIES, WORKSHOPS AND WORKPLACES, Including Inspections made by Sanitary Inspectors or Inspectors of Nuisances Premises. (1) Number of Inspections. (2) Written Notices. (3) Prosecutions. (4) Factories (including Factory Laundries) - - - Workshops (including Workshop Laundries) — — — Workplaces (other than Outworkers' premises) - - - Total — - — 2.—DEFECTS FOUND IN FACTORIES, WORKSHOPS AND WORKPLACES. Particulars. Number of Defects. Number of offences in respect to which Prosecutions were Found. Remedied. Referred toH.M. Inspector. (1) (2) (3) (5) Nuisances under the Public Health Acts :— Want of Cleanliness - - Want of Ventilation — — — — Overcrowding — — — — Want of Drainage of Floors — — — — Other Nuisances — — — — Sanitary Accommodation (Insufficient — — — — Unsuitable or Defective — — — — Not separate for sexes — — — — Offences under the Factory and Workshop Acts:— Illegal occupation of Underground Bakehouses (s. 101) - — — — Other Offences — — — — (Excluding offences relating to outwork and offences under the Sections mentioned in the Schedule to the Ministry of Health (Factories and Workshops Transfer of Powers) Order, 1921.) Total — — — -