Library UBAR 30 URBAN DISTRICT OF BARNET ANNUAL REPORT of the MEDICAL OFFICER OF HEALTH to the BARNET URBAN DISTRICT COUNCIL by ARTHUR L. HIATT, M.R.C.S.(Eng.) , L.R.C.P. Together with the ANNUAL REPORT of the CHIEF PUBLIC HEALTH INSPECTOR by JOHN B. WILSON, M.A.P.H.I. , M.R.S.H. 1962. (2) BARNET URBAN DISTRICT COUNCIL. MEDICAL OFFICER'S REPORT. Tel: BARnet 5511 Public Health Department, 31 Wood Street, Barnet. To the Chairman and Members of the Barnet Urban District Council. Ladies and Gentlemen, I have pleasure in presenting to you my Annual Report on the health of the district for the year 1962. It is drawn up in accordance with the directions of the Ministry of Health Circular 1/63 of the 30th January, 1963. STATISTICS AND SOCIAL CONDITIONS OF THE AREA. Area (in acres) 4,290 population (1951 Census) 25,019 Population (1961 Census - Preliminary Estimate) 27,834 Registrar-General's Estimate of Resident Population, mid 1962 27,460 Number of Inhabited Houses 8,705 Number of Persons per House 3.15 Rateable Value £533 ,498 Product of a Penny Rate £2,137 NATURAL AND SOCIAL CONDITIONS. The population is largely residential, and consists chiefly of people whose occupation lies outside the urban area. Those employed in the district, apart from the tradesmen and their employees, are mainly skilled workers in light industries. EXTRACT FROM VITAL AND MORTAL STATISTICS OF THE YEAR. Total. M. F. (Legitimate 388 218 170 Live Births (Illefitimate 20 12 8 Live Birth Rate per 1 .000 of the estimated resident population (Standardised); 14.86 Illegitimate Live Births per cent of the total live births: 4.90% (3) Total. M. F. Still Births (Legitimte 9 6 3 (Illegitimate - - - Still Birth Rate per 1 .000 total (live and still) "births: 21.58 Total, M. F. Total Live and Still Births 397 224 173 (Illegitimate 20 12 8 Infant Deaths (Under one (Legitimate 7 4 3 year of age) (illegitimate - - Infant Mortality Rates: Total Infant Deaths per 1,000 total live births: 17.16 Lepgitimate Infant Deaths per 1,000 legitimate live births: 18.04 Illegitimate Infant Deaths per 1 ,000 illegitimate live births: 0.00 Neo-natal Mortality Rate (Deaths under 4 weeks per 1,000 total live birth): 12.25 Early Neo-natal Mortality Rate (Deaths under 1 week per 1.000 total live births): 12.25 Perinatal Mortality Rate (still births and deaths under 1 week combined per 1 .000 total live and still births): 33.57 Maternal Mortality (including abortion): Number of Deaths: Nil Rate per 1 ,000 total live and still births: 0.00 Total. M. P. Deaths (All Causes): 302 160 142 Death Rate per 1 ,000 of the estimated resident population (Standardised): 11.22 Too much importance should not be paid to the rates where the actual number of cases is small, e.g. - below 10, as such rates are of little statistical significance. Thus, if an attempt is made to compare this area with other districts, or with previous years, it would be better to compare actual cases. GENERAL PROVISION OP HEALTH SERVICES FOR THE DISTRICT. The Council are not the appropriate Local Authority for the purpose of the National Health Service Act, 1946, and do not therefore control any of the Hospitals or ancillary services in the district. Within this district, and under the control of the Barnet Group Hospital Management Committee, are the following:- Barnet General Hospital, Wellhouse Lane, Barnet. 490 Beds. St. Stephen's Hospital, Mays Lane, Barnet. 88 Beds. (Female medical, Ear, Nose and Throat, and Male long-stay cases) Victoria Maternity Hospital, Wood Street, Barnet. 59 Beds. (4) The following is a list of Clinics etc. , available in the district. Tuberculosis Clinics are held daily, at Barnet Chest Clinic, Wellhouse Lane, Barnet. 'Phone BAR: 7441 for an appointment. At Vale Drive the following Clinics are held: During term time Clinics for Schoolchildren are held on the second and fourth Monday morning in each month and for remedial exercises every Monday afternoon. A Speech Therapy Clinic is held on Wednesdays and Fridays, Child Guidance Clinics on Thursdays, and an Eye Clinic on Wednesday mornings. An Infant Welfare Clinic is held every Tuesday afternoon all the year round. Immunisation sessions are held on the first and third Tuesday mornings in each month. Dental Clinics by appointment. For the convenience of residents at Totteridge there is an Infant Welfare Clinic at "Dollisfield" every Friday afternoon with a Doctor in attendance on the first and third Fridays. A branch Clinic at St. Stephen's Hall, Bells Hill, is held every Thursday from 9.30 - 11.45 a.m. with a doctor in attendance, except on the fifth Thursday in the month. These Clinics are subject to alteration and it is advisable to enquire of the Vale Drive Clinic (BAR: 6194) for the current days and times. The Family Planning Association hold sessions at 133 Wood Street, each Wednesday between 2-3 and 6 - 7.30 p.m. Also Tuesday and Thursday evenings by appointment. (BAR: 5345) Home Help Service. The local office of the Herts County Council Home Help Service at The Health Centre, East Barnet Road, East Barnet, is open daily from 9 - 5, Monday to Friday inclusive. (HAD: 1251) British Red Cross Loan Centre, next to Christ Church. St. Albans Road. Barnet. Equipment for invalids may be obtained, on loan, between 8 - 9 P.m., Monday and 9.30 - 11 a.m. Thursday, or by arrangement ('phone Mrs. L.P. Allaway, BAR: 8615 or Mrs. D. Cheason, BAR: 0117). (5) PUBLIC HEALTH STAFF. Medical Officer of Health. + Arthur L. Hyatt, M.R.C.S.(Eng.) , L.R.C.P. Chief Public Health Inspector. John B. Wilson, M.A.P.H.I. , M.R.S.H. Deputy Chief Public Health Inspector. Howard W.C. Alloway, M.A.P.H.I., A.R.S.H. Additional Public Health Inspector. Roy W. Pursglove, M.A.P.H.I. Pupil Public Health Inspector. Raymond W.E. Parr. Clerk. Miss Marjorie Runtz. Rodent Operative. J.C. Mace. Publio Analyst. + J.H. Hamence, Ph.d., M.Sc., F.R.I.C. Deputy Public Analyst. + P.S. Hall, B.Sc. , F.R.I.C. Veterinary Surgeon. + D.H. Roberts, M.R.C.V.S. (Appointed 10th July, 1962) All Inspectors hold the special qualification as Inspector of Meat and other Foods under examination of the Royal Society of Health. + Part-time Officers. WATER SUPPLY. The major portion of the district is supplied with water from the mains of the Lee Valley Water' Company, the remainder of the district being supplied by the Colne Valley Water Company. All water supplied to the district is chlorinated and both companies employ trained laboratory staff who regularly take samples of water for bacteriological examination at the various stages of treatment, and from the (6) mains, thus checking the quality of the water as actually supplied to the consumer. The supply to the whole district is of a high level of purity and is considered adequate. All the 434 bacteriological and 15 chemical samples of the water supplied to the district, and examined by the Company's staff, were found to conform to standards of purity considered suitable for public supply. Rainfall for the year was again low, at 24.36" , compared with 24.78" for 1961. The 1962 figure is 5.68% below the average for twenty-five years, of 25.83". No restrictions were imposed on the use of water. In order to improve the supply to certain parts of the district, the Lee Valley later Company commenced the construction of a new underground reservoir at Arkley, having a planned capacity of 13,000,000 gallons. During the year, the Council considered the question of the Fluoridation of Water Supplies, and in October decided to join with the Finchley Borough Council in representations to the Lee Valley Water Company and to the Ministries concerned supporting the introduction of Fluoride to the Company's supplies. It is interesting to note from the Annual Report of the Lee Valley Water Company that some of the sources of supply on the Herts and Essex borders contain a small proportion of natural fluoride. DRAINAGE AND SEWERAGE . The town is drained and sewered on the separate system, excepting the older portions of the district where it is a combined system. The sewage is conveyed to a Sewage Disposal works of 56 acres, where it is screened, grit removed in detritus tanks, thence to primary settlement tanks and thereafter distributed over three 80 ft. diameter bacteria filters, followed by humus removal in rectangular tanks before discharge to the Dollis Brook. Pumping is necessary for three sewers which have their outlets at a low point on the works. Part of the Totteridge area drains to the Finchley Borough sewers, and part of Barnet By-Pass into Elstree Rural District Council's sewers; in the outlying areas some properties are on cesspool drainage or domestic sewage disposal plants, and a few only have pail closets. (7) The provision of new soil and stormwater sewers in the Barnet Gate Lane/Hendon Wood Lane area was completed, save for minor reinstatements, by the end of the year, "by which time the majority of the properties concerned had "been connected thereto. All closely built-up areas of the district, other than the more rural portions of Totteridge and Rowley, with their scattered habitations, are now served by soil sewerage. The East Middlesex trunk sewerage scheme has moved further towards fruition, some works of construction taking place in the district. This will in due course eliminate the overloaded Barnet Sewage Works. The deodorising plant at the Sewage Works has continued in operation, as necessary: few complaints of smell were received and these were investigated. SANITARY CONDITIONS AND WATER SUPPLY OF SCHOOLS. There are in the district fifteen schools administered by the South Herts Divisional Education Committee, as listed on the next page. Queen Elizabeth's Boys Grammar School, Queens Road, Barnet. Queen Elizabeth's Girls' Grammar School, High Street, Barnet. Ravenscroft Secondary School, Barnet Lane, N.20. Elizabeth Allen Voluntary Secondary School, Wood Street, Barnet. (with annexe at Byng Road, Barnet.) Whitings Hill Junior Mixed and Infants' School, Whitings Road, Barnet. Foulds Junior Mixed and Infants' School, Byng Road, Barnet. Christ Church Junior Mixed School, Alston Road, Barnet. Christ Church Infants' School, Byng Road, Barnet. Grasvenor Infants' School, Grasvenor Avenue, Barnet. Underhill Junior Mixed School, Mays Lane, Barnet. Underhill Infants' School, Mays Lane, Barnet. St. Andrew's Voluntary Junior Mixed and Infants' School, Totteridge Green, N.20. St. Catherine's Roman Catholic Infants School, Vale Drive, Barnet. St. Catherine's Roman Catholic Junior and Secondary School, Union Street, Barnet. South Herts College of Further Education, Wood Street, Barnet. (Available for girls and boys aged 15 to 18 years during the day, and for persons over school-leaving age in the evenings.) In addition to the above there are five private schools, viz:- Hillgarth Nursery School, Blenheim Road, Barnet. The Anchorage Kindergarten School, 38 Normandy Avenue, Barnet. Norfolk House School, Fitzjohn Avenue, Barnet. (Nursery School) St. Marthe's Convent School, Wood Street, Barnet. Mrs. Blundell's School, Southover, Woodside Park, N.12. (Nursery School) All schools in the district are supplied with mains water and connected to the Council's main drainage system. (8) DISPOSAL OF HOUSE REFUSE. The house refuse is collected weekly in covered mechanical conveyances and taken to the Council's Sewage Farm, where it is loaded into Contractor's covered lorries and disposed of daily by controlled tipping outside the district. PREVALENCE OF, AND CONTROL OVER, INFECTIOUS DISEASE. The following table shews the number of Notifications to the Sanitary Authority during the year, of each disease specified in the Public Health Act 1936, and the various Infectious Disease Regulations, and the number of cases removed to Hospital. DISEASE NOTIFIED REMOVED TO HOSPITAL Scarlet Fever 5 Nil Whooping Cough 1 Nil Diphtheria and Membranous Croup Nil Nil Measles 14 Nil Acute Pneumonia Nil Nil Meningococcal Infection Nil Nil Acute Poliomyelitis Nil Nil Acute Encephalitis Nil Nil Dysentery 7 2 Ophthalmia Neonatorum Nil Nil Puerperal Pyrexia 12 12 Smallpox Nil Nil Malaria Nil Nil Typhoid and Enteric Fevers Nil Nil Paratyphoid Fever Nil Nil Food Poisoning 13 3 Tuberculosis 11 7 TOTALS — 63 24 AGE INCIDENCE OF INFECTIOUS DISEASE DISEASE NUMBER OF CASES NOTIFIED YEARS OF AGE 0- - 1- 2- 3- 4- 5- 10- 15- 25- 45- 65- 75- Total Scarlet Fever - - 1 - 1 3 - - - - - - 5 Whooping Cough - - - - - - - 1 - - - - 1 Measles - 1 4 4 3 1 - 1 - - - - 14 Dysentery 1 1 - - 1 - - 2 2 - - 7 Puerperal Pyrexia - - - - - - - 7 5 - - - 12 Food Poisoning 1 2 2 — 1 1 2 3 1 — — — 13 TOTALS 2 3 8 4 5 6 2 12 8 2 - - 52 (9) The cases normally resident outside the district notified from the Barnet General Hospital and Victoria Maternity Hospital, which are included in these tables, are as follows Dysentery 2; Puerperal Pyrexia 12; Pood Poisoning 2. Another year has passed with no cases of Poliomyelitis notified in the district. The Polio vaccination scheme is still in being and one hopes that nil returns will not lull parents into a false sense of security and that they will continue to maintain the vaccination state of the children and young persons particularly. The new Oral Polio vaccine became available early in the year and the ease with which the immunisation can be carried out should assist in getting an even higher percentage of children protected. FOOD POISONING. Annual Return of Food Poisoning Notifications. Food Poisoning; Notifications (Corrected) Returned to Registrar General. 1 st Quarter. 2nd Quarter. 3rd Quarter. 4th Quarter. Total. 1 Nil 5 7 13 Gases otherwise ascertained. 1st Quarter. 2nd Quarter. 3rd Quarter. 4th Quarter. Total. Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil Symptomless excreters. 1st Quarter. 2nd Quarter. 3rd Quarter. 4th Quarter. Total. Nil Nil 2 Nil 2 Fatal cases. 1st Quarter. 2nd Quarter. 3rd Quarter. 4th Quarter. Total. Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil TUBERCULOSIS. PUBLIC HEALTH (PREVENTION OF TUBERCULOSIS) REGULATIONS. 1925. No formal action was necessary under the above Regulations, relating to Tuberculous employees in the milk trade. PUBLIC HEALTH ACT,1936, SECTION 172. COMPULSORY REMOVAL TO HOSPITAL 0F CASES OF PULMONARY TUBERCULOSIS. No action was necessary under the above Section. (10) HEW CASES AND MORTALITY DURING 1962 YEARS OF AGE NEW CASES DEATHS Pulmonary Non-Pulmonary Pulmonary N on-Pulmonary M F M F M F M F 0 - - - - - - - - 1 - - - - - - - - 5 - 1 - - - - - - 15 2 - - - - - - - 25 2 - - - - - - - 55 2 - - - 1 - - - 45 2 — - - - - - - 55 - - - - 1 - - - 65 and over 2 - _ _ - - - - TOTALS 1 - - 2 — - - 10 The anti tuberculosis measures, mass radiography, clinics etc., are all playing a part in the scheme to reduce the incidence of this disease. With improved housing conditions, "better education, antibiotics and the eradication of tuberculosis in bovine animals it would seem possible now to bring about the defeat of tuberculosis in humans. Cases removed for treatment are usually sent to Clare Hall Hospital, South Minims, other patients with an infectious disease being sent to Coppett's Wood Hospital, Muswell Hill, N.10. INTERNATIONAL VACCINATION CERTIFICATES. At the end of 1952 a new form was introduced for International Vaccination Certificates requiring authentication of the signature of the doctor performing vaccination or inoculation of persons proceeding over-seas. During the year one thousand, nine hundred and ninety-one such certificates were authenticated and marked with the internationally agreed stamp. This is approximately six times the usual number of certificates Authenticated in a year and this exceptional increase is no doubt to the increase in foreign travel and also to the smallpox outbreaks in other parts of this Country. (11) NATIONAL ASSISTANCE ACT 1948 -SECTION 47. NATIONAL ASSISTANCE (AMENDMENT) ACT. 1951 - SECTION 1. NATIONAL ASSISTANCE ACT. 1948 (AMENDMENT) ACT. 1962. Several elderly persons came under our notice during the year. In one case agreement was reached over the excessive hoarding by the lady which severely restricted the space available in her small flat. The excess was sorted by relatives and disposed of by the Council. One Emergency Order was obtained to remove to hospital an elderly lady found by the Police, in a distressed state late in the evening. The Visiting Service of the Old People's Welfare Committee continues to render invaluable help in keeping in touch with the elderly house-bound people and in bringing in the various services which are available. The Chiropody Service which is arranged at the five Evergreen Clubs and at home in certain circumstances gives relief to many. The Council made use of the above enactments to erect, during the year, a prefabricated building in Salisbury Road, and to show their support of the activities of the Old People's Welfare Committee, let it to them at a noneconomic rent. Part is used by the Women's Voluntary Service for its services generally; in a kitchen and dining room they prepare and provide meals, also for the "Meals on Wheels" service. In the Fern Room, a recreational room for the old people, tea, coffee and biscuits are available at a small charge every morning. The whole building is centrally heated and during the winter months particularly provides a warm resting place when the elderly are out for exercise or shopping. MORTAL STATISTICS. Of 302 deaths, 7 occurred under one year of age. The following were the major causes of death:- Heart disease 112; Cancer 70 (35 males and 35 females); Vascular Lesions of Nervous system 39; Bronchitis 10; Pneumonia 12; Motor Vehicle accidents 4; Other accidents 4; Suicide 3. (12) MORTUARY ACCOMMODATION. Under arrangements made with the East Barnet Urban District Council their mortuary is available for the use of this district, and it was so used on one occasion only during the year. I am, Yours faithfully, ARTHUR L. HYATT, M.R.C.S.(Eng.), L.R.C.P. MEDICAL OFFICER OF HEALTH. (13) BARNET URBAN DISTRICT COUNCIL. CHIEF PUBLIC HEALTH INSPECTOR'S REPORT. Public Health Department, 31 Wood Street, Barnet. To the Chairman and Members of the Barnet Urban District Council. I have the honour to present my Annual Report for the year 1962. Owing to illness, and to unusual events in the public health sphere in 1963, this report is published rather later in the year than is usual. These events will be reported in detail in the Annual Report for 1963 - The Council's Smoke Control Scheme proceeded according to plan when two Orders affecting some 936 houses came into operation on 30th September 1962. The survey of the fourth area was completed and the Order confirmed by the Minister before the end of the year. This allows a full nine months for alteration of fireplaces etc, , before the Order comes into operation on 1st October 1963. The work involved in surveyin , approving proposed works, inspecting completed works and passing claims for grant for smoke control areas is considerable. With the construction of a new sewer in the Barnet Gate Lane area, the Department took over the work of supervising the connection of the houses to the sewer and the abolition of the many cesspools. As a result some of the routine work has suffered but the report shews the amount of work which has been accomplished. In my last report, mention was made that an overseas student was accepted for practical training from the Royal Technical College, Salford. He was accepted early in 1982 for a further short term and I am pleased to report that he passed his final examination in July. I must express my thanks to the staff of the Public Health Department for their continued support and willingness at all times, and to all the Officers of the Council for their assistance and co-operation throughout the year. (14) INSPECTION OF DISTRICT. General inspections of the district have been carried out periodically and all complaints investigated. The process of serving a preliminary or intimation notice upon the person in default, specifying the works necessary to remedy the defects found, is usually followed. It was found necessary to ask your authority to serve twenty-eight Statutory Notices, where persons failed to comply with the preliminary notice, or the strict legal prooedure was necessary in the first instance. SANITARY INSPECTION OF AREA. The following is a list of the number and nature of visits and inspections:- Visits re: Housing Acts 90 Visits re: nuisance and sanitary defects 1 ,535 Visits re: noise 79 Visits re: infectious diseases 247 Visits re: Petroleum Acts 93 Visits re: factories 24 Visits re: outworkers' premises 2 Visits re: food manufactories, cafes, etc 544 Visits re: ice cream and sampling 160 Visits re: aged and infirm persons 18 Visits to inspect meat and other foods 557 Visits re: schools 3 Visits re: pollution of watercourses 15 Visits re: Clean Air Act.1 ,148 Visits re: Riding Establishments 5 Visits re: Shops Acts 34 Visits re: Tents, Caravans and Sheds 67 Visits re: keeping of animals 14 Visits re: rodent infestations 1 ,528 Visits re: other infestations 511 Miscellaneous visits 104 NUMBER OF NOTICES SERVED DURING YEAR. Number of Informal Notices 141 Number of Statutory Notices 133 Informal Notices complied with 111 Statutory Notices complied with 126 SANITARY WORK AND REPAIRS. The following is a list of repairs effected as a result of informal and formal notices served: - Roofs repaired and made weatherproof 19 Gutters, downspouts repaired and renewed 8 (15) Exterior brickwork repaired or repointed 9 Walls, dampness remedied 23 Chimney stacks and pots repaired or renewed 2 Yard surfaces repaired or repaved 2 Ceilings repaired or renewed 7 Wall plaster repaired or renewed 17 Walls and ceilings cleansed and decorated 25 Floors repaired or renewed 3 Doors and frames repaired or renewed 9 Windows repaired 30 Fireplaces repaired or renewed 1 Drains and sewage disposal plants cleared 23 Drains and sewage disposal plants repaired or reconstructed 43 Inspection chambers repaired or reconstructed 28 Soil or vent pipes repaired or renewed 3 Gullies, channels and fenders repaired or renewed 1 Water Closet pans, fittings, repaired or renewed 12 Cesspools abolished, connections to sewer 34 Storage cisterns, cleaned, repaired or renewed 3 Accumulations removed 3 Dustbins provided 5 HOUSING. During the year, two Demolition Orders were made but demolitions under these Orders had not taken place by the end of the year, as the tenant of one remains to be rehoused. The occupiers were rehoused from one house which was the subject of a Demolition Order made in a previous year and this resulted in the demolition of five cottages. There still remains one tenant to be rehoused from a house the subject of a Demolition Order made prior to this year. No cases of overcrowding, as defined by the Housing Act, have come to our notice during the year. PUBLIC HEALTH ACT. 1956. INFECTIOUS DISEASE INVESTIGATION AND DISINFECTION. Investigations havve been carried out of the more important cases of infectious disease listed in the kedical Officer of Health's Report. Where necessary, premises are disinfected and bedding is taken for disinfection to the Bamet General Hospital under arrangements made with the Barnet Group Hospital Management Committee. This service was not needed during the year. (16) One hundred and forty-one library "books were disinfected before return to libraries, a considerable decrease over the previous year. FOOD PREMISES IN THE DISTRICT. Number of Bakers 10 " " Butchers 14 " Cafes, Restaurants, etc 21 " " Confectioners 26 " " Fishmongers 3 " 11 Greengrocers 14 " " Grocers 31 " " Licensed Premises 27 " " Chemists 7 FOOD PREMISES REGISTERED UNDER SECTION 16 OF FOOD MP DRUGS ACT. 1955. (a) Manufacture, Sale and Storage of Ice Cream 48 (b) Manufacture of Sausages and Preserved Meats, etc 23 DAIRIES REGISTERED UNDER MILK AND DAIRIES (GENERAL) REGULATIONS 1959. Number of Dairies 1 Any infringements found are rectified or remedied by informal action when pointed out to the trader, and no formal action was needed. During our visits of inspection every opportunity is taken to discuss food hygiene with staff and management, and several small matters regarding cleanliness and protection of open foodstuffs were taken up informally. The old Barnet Cattle Market is now used as a stall market selling a wide variety of merchandise and including several food stalls. On average the food stalls consisted of:- Butchers 1 Fishmongers 1 Poulterers 1 Greengrocers 3 Confectioners 2 Grocers 1 Snack Bar 1 Regular visits have been made to the market and several informal notices have been given to stall holders concerning the Food Hygiene Regulations and it is felt that a reasonable standard is being maintained. SHOPS ACT. 1950. Through our liasion with the Surveyor's Department all plans for shops and shop fronts are seen by this Department and compliance with the (17) requirements of the Act is secured at the planning stage. It is remarkable that so many shopfitters do not make any provision for ventilation in the shop front until their attention is drawn to the point. ice cream. All samples of ice-cream are taken to the Central Public Health Laboratory, Colindale, for testing by the Methylene Blue Test. This is merely indicative and provides no legal standard: the Public Health Laboratory Service suggest that owing to the numerous factors governing the hygienic quality of ice-cream it is unwise to pay too much attention to the bacteriological results on any single sample, judgement being based rather on a series of samples. It is suggested as desirable that at least 5Qfft> should fall into Grade I, 80% into Grades I or II, not more than 20% into Grade III and none into Grade IV. There is one company registered for the manufacture of ice-cream and the following table gives the results of samples taken from the factory, an improvement over the figures for last year. Grade I 83 (85.8%) Grade II 19 (96.2% - Grades I and II) Grade III 4 ( 3.8%) Grade IV Nil The company concerned, whose distribution is mainly through the medium of mobile vans, have followed the trend in the trade of going over to the production of "Soft Ice-cream". This product is made up in the factory as a pasteurised liquid mix, packed in plastic containers, which must be kept below 45°F, until it is frozen. The freezing process is carried out in a machine installed in the van and operated by the' salesman on each sale, delivering ice-cream at a temperature little below the critical freezing temperature of the mix. The introduction of new methods of manufacture normally means a reduction in the handling necessary, but this is regrettably not so in the instance of the production of this type of ice-cream. The system obviously lays a fcaavy onus on the salesman, who is now responsible for the cleansing and (18) sterilisation of a complicated piece of machinery. It is therefore not surprising that, despite good results of examination of the liquid mix at the factory, we have received many complaints of low gradings of samples taken in other Authorities areas. As in all the other fields of food handling, hygienic practices depend mainly upon a proper education of the salesmandriver and upon his appreciation of the problems and risks involved, and that visual cleanliness alone is not sufficient. There are also forty-eight premises registered for the storage and sale of ice-cream, there being one new registration during the year. dairies, cowsheds and milkshops. The control of the production of milk is vested in the Ministry of Agriculture Fisheries and Food. The local authority is responsible for the inspection and registration of milk distributors and other dairy premises not directly concerned with the actual production of milk, and for licensing for the sale of Designated Milks. Five samples of milk have been taken, in course of delivery to the consumer, and submitted to the appropriate tests with the following results:- Designation Samples Taken Satisfactory Unsatisfactory. Tuberculin Tested Farm bottled (Channel Island) 1 1 Nil Tuberculin Tested (Pasteurised) Nil Pasteurised 1 1 Nil Pasteurised (Channel Island) 1 1 Nil Sterilised 1 1 Nil Totals 5 5 Nil Since all the milk retailed in the district is supplied by the large Companies, maintaining laboratory staffs, there would not appear to be a need for such frequent sampling as heretofore. No official action was taken under Regulation 2") of the Milk and Dairies General Regulations 1959, to stop or restrict the sale of milk. No cases of disease were notified which could be attributed to the consumption of infected milk. (19) Ten Dealer's (Pre-packed Milk) Licences were granted in 19^1 for the retail sale of milk under the Milk (Special Designation) Regulations, 19^0, for a period of five years, to December 1965. 0ne further Licence was id during 1962 and this will also expire in December, 19&5. Designations Number of Licences. Tuberculin Tested, Pasteurised and Sterilised 5 Tuberculin Tested and Pasteurised 1 Pasteurised and Sterilised 3 Pasteurised 1 Sterilised 1 FOOD AND DRUGS ACT . 1955. The Council acquired these powers under the Act concerning the adulteration and sophistication of food as from 1st October 1955• The summary on the next page contains the results of seventy-four samples taken by this Department. The nine unsatisfactory samples were reported to the Council and the following are brief comments on them. "Chandy". The Public Analyst reported that no significant amount of beer was found on analysis. When first marketed, the product did in fact contain beer. It was therefore considered misleading to label the present product, "The Original Chandy". The Food and Drugs Authority for the area where this is produced were also investigating this and agreement was reached with the manufacturers to include the words, "Non Alcoholic" on the label. "Chippy Apple'n Orange". Although the Analysis showed that the vitamin content was as stated, the law requires the statement to be in a particular form. On drawing the attention of the Company to this point new labels were designed, conforming with the law. (20) Article No. Examined No. Adulterated Etc. Formal Informal Total Formal Informal Total. Baking Yeast - 1 1 - - - Blackcurrant Drops - 1 1 - - - Bread Sauce - 1 1 - - - Butter - 1 1 - - - Chandy - 1 1 - 1 1 Cheese Products - 3 3 - _ - Chicken, Boned _ 1 1 - - - Chippy Apple'N Orange - 1 1 - 1 1 Chocolate Instant - 1 1 - - - Cochineal - 1 1 - - - Coconut, Desiccated - 1 1 _ - - Crab and Lobster, tinned - 2 2 - - - Creamed Mushrooms - 1 1 - - - Curry, Indian - 1 1 _ - - Dairy Cream Eclairs - 1 1 - - - Dairy Cream, Devonshire - 1 1 - - - Dried Fruits _ 1 3 - - - Egg Macaroni Noodles - 1 1 - - - Fruti-Fort - 1 1 - 1 1 Hamburgers - 1 2 - - - Hydrogen Peroxide B.P. - 1 1 - — - Ice Cream - 1 3 - - - Ice Lolly Syrups - 1 6 - - 4 Icing, Easy - 1 1 - - - Jam - 3 3 - - _ Kippered Herrings - 1 1 - - - Le-Ka-Ri - 1 1 - - - Lemon Glucose Drink - 1 1 - - - Mamade - 1 1 - - - Marzipan, Golden - 1 1 - - - Milk 9 _ 9 - - - Nite-Cup - 1 1 - - - Paste - 1 1 - - - Pepper Sauce - 1 1 - - - Pheasant Consomme with - - - - Sherry Wine - 1 1 - - - Pure Vegetable Ghee - 1 1 - - 1 Quik Jel - 1 1 - - Rennet Essence - - 1 - - - Rice Krispies - 1 1 - - - Rice, Ready cooked - 1 1 - - - Salad Dressing Mix - 1 1 - — - Salt, Seasoned - 1 1 - - - Spanish Rice - 1 1 - - - Steak, Casserole - 1 1 - 1 1 Sugar Tinted Crystals - 1 1 - - - Sunny Spread - - - — - - Trice - 1 1 — — - Veal Curry - 1 - - - - Vegetable, Egg, Noodles and - - - - - Chicken - 1 - — - Viennese Coffee Concentrate - 1 1 - - - Water Chestnut - 1 1 - - - Total 9 65 74 - 9 9 (21) "Fruti Fort". Analysis of this product showed a 65/o content of sugars and other carbohydrates, and included in the printed matter on the wrapping were the words, "Appetising yet non-fattening". It was considered that the labelling was misleading and after correspondence with the Swiss manufacturers, they agreed to eliminate the reference to "Nonfattening" on all future consignments to this Country. Pure Vegetable Ghee. This sample was of satisfactory composition and was free from butter fat. However the label on the can carried the words, "Pure Vegetable Ghee Cow Brand", together with the representation of a oow. It was considered that the label was strongly suggestive of dairy interest and therefore misleading for an article which contained no butter and described as Vegetable Ghee. The multiple retail grocer immediately withdrew all stocks from sale upon receipt of our views, and the importers apologised and did likewise. Steak Casserole. The Council's Analyst reported that this sample contained only meat. In view of the fact that the whole question of standards for this and similar products is being considered, there being no legal standard at present, the matter was not pursued. Ice Lolly Syrup. This bottle did not have included in the printing thereon a statement of the ingredients as required by the Labelling of Food Order. The manufacturers informed the Council that this matter had been brought to their notice previously and that new labels were in use; that your Inspectors must have found some old stock. This was quite likely as the sample was purchased from a shop normally selling refrigerators and other electrical appliances. No further action was taken. (22) Lollie Compounds. These samples of flavourings for lollies were reported "by the Analyst as containing excessive amounts of preservatives, although sulphur dioxide, one of the preservatives used, was not found in the final product, i.e. lollies. Shortly after the samples were obtained and reported upon new Regulations concerning preservatives in similar products came into force but these did not clarify the question as to whether the Regulations applied to these particular products. further enquiries were still being made at the end of the year. MERCHANDISE MARKS ACT. 1926. The Council became the authority for enforcing the provisions of these Acts and Orders made thereunder when they were disignated a Food and Drugs Authority. No formal action was found necessary during the year. MEAT AND FOOD CONDEMNED. The following is a list of the articles of food condemned as unfit for luman consumption during the year. Meat. Lambs Livers (imported) 55 lbs. Bacon (Packets) 22^ lbs. Pigs Melts (imported) 28 lbs. Canned Meat 11 lbs. Fish. Whiting 2 stones. Salmon and Pilchards 5 tins. General. (Dried) 85 lbs. Jam and Marmalade 3 tins. Fruit (Fresh) 91 tins. Milk 9 tins. Vegetables 13 tins. Creamed Rice 6 tins. Condemned food is taken to the disposal point on the Sewage Farm, where tins are thoroughly perforated and loose food is stained and mixed with household refuse before onward transmission to the controlled tip outside the district. (23) private slaughterhouses. FOOD AND DRUGS ACT, 1955. SLAUGHTERHOUSES ACT. 1958. SLAUGHTER OF ANIMALS ACT. 1958. Your inspectors maintain a high percentage of meat inspection during the course of the six days per week of slaughtering, Friday being the only exception. The general slaughtering programme each day is that adult bovines are slaughtered early in the day, followed by the "smalls" and in this group, calves are usually last in the days work. Thus 100% inspection of adult bovines is maintained and a fair proportion of the "smalls" are inspected during normal office hours of working with some late work and with Saturday and Sunday working. If 100% meat inspection is to be the order of the day then this will mean that one inspector will be needed six days per week from 8 a.m. to 8 p.m. generally unless there is some control by regulation, of the hours of slaughtering, and this is being resisted by the trade. An alternative has been suggested of making charges for inspection. If this is to be of any use to the local authority it must be sufficient to pay for, or nearly pay for, the services of the additional staff which will be necessary. However, discussions continue and one hopes that some reasonable solution will be found. The majority of the condemned meat and offals is taken away by a reputable firm for manufacture into useful by-products, e.g. fertilisers etc. Total weight of carcase meat condemned:- Bovine 844 lbs. Ovine 51 lbs. Porcine 140 lbs. 1 ,035 lbs. Total weight of offals condemned 12,135 lbs. (24) CARCASES AND OFFAL INSPECTED AND CONDEMNED IN WHOLE OR IN PART. Cattle excluding Cows Cows Calves Sheep and Lambs Pigs Number killed (if known) 1 ,515 813 2,071 8.428 4,513 Number inspected 1 ,515 813 1,634 8.305 4,106 All diseases except Tuberculosis and Cysticerci Yifhole carcases condemned 1 1 1 1 3 Carcases of which some part or organ was condemned 517 461 3 106 210 Percentage of the number inspected affected with disease other than tuberculosis and cysticerci 34.19 56.83 0.24 1.29 5.19 Tuberculosis only: Whole carcases condemned r- - - - - Carcases of which some part or organ was condemned _ 1 - - 86 Parcentage of the number inspected affected with tuberculosis - 0.12 - - 2.09 Cysticercosis: Carcases of which some part or organ was condemned 31 6 - - - Carcases submitted to treatment by refrigeration 9 3 Generalised and totally condemned - - - - - The percentage of bovines affected by Tuberculosis again shows a decline but there is again a slight increase in the percentage of pigs (from 2.04 to 2.09) affected with the disease. This increase should, however, be treated with some reserve, as tubercular lesions may be confused with those resulting from an infection of Corynebacterium equi, it being often impossible to distinguish them macroscopically; the latter organism is usually of localised significance only. Vftien considered with the figures for other years, the above shews the excellent results of the Government's Eradication Scheme, as applied to cattle. There were nine persons licensed by the Council as fit persons to slaughter animals, most of them work part or full time as slaughtermen at the local slaughterhouse. Some have employment outside the district and no complaint has been received from other districts concerning the conduct of any of these (25) men, nor was there any need for adverse report on the men locally employed. I — _ BX 153(l) 0P THE _ «. 1*1. Inspection for purposes of provision as to health. [ I I Number on Register Inspections j Written ( Notices ' Occupiers Prosecuted I . . (1) Factories in which Sees. 1 , 2, 3, 4 and 6 are to be enforced by Local Authorities. 3 ; j (2) Factories not included in (1) in which Sec. 7 is enforced "by the Local Authority. 00 -j 24 i ~ t (3) Other premises in which Sec. 7 is enforced by the Local Authority. I I 5 _ ; - Total 93 ' 24 - - One informal notice was served requiring suitable screening "between male and female toilet accommodation in a factory. Outworkers (Sections 133 and 134) Section 133 Section 134 !■■■! ! III! .II No. of outworkers on lists received. No. of instances of work in unwholesome rrs. Notices Served. I 79 " Seven outworkers reside in the district. Two premises were visited during the year and found to be satisfactory. The names and addresses of outworkers employed "by factories in this district are notified to the district councils in which they live. PUBLIC HEALTH ACT. 1936 - SECTION 60. Escape from Eire - Certain High Buildings. Where plans are deposited with the Surveyor's Department under the "building byelaws, and it appears that Section 60 applies to the building, the plans are passed to this Department for inspection so that any works which may be necessary are carried out with the other building works. (26) CARAVAN SITES MP CONTROL OF DEVELOPMENT ACT. I960. This Act, which was passed in July 1960, makes provision for the licensing and control of caravan sites. Owners of existing sites who wished to continue the use of the sites, had to make application for a site licence not later than the 28th October 1960. Applications were received and in 1961 , three licences were issued, with conditions appropriate to the tenure of each particular site. The owner of one site gave notice of appeal in 1961 and this was eventually heard at the local Petty Sessions after protracted unsuccessful negotiations between the Council and the owner. This particular site is in two local government districts. The Court Order made several minor alterations, some which were to make the licences bear standard conditions as between the two districts. The work required to bring the site up to the licence conditions was not started by the end of the year. Both licences had required the works to be completed within twenty-four months; this condition was not amended by the Court. The caravans attending the Barnet Fair, are exempted from the controls of the Act, but several visits are made to enquire into the sanitary conditions, any infectious diseases and to enforce the provisions of temporary sanitary accommodation in the different sections of the Fair for the use both of oaravanners and the visiting public. Regular removal of refuse from caravans and stalls ia arranged and inspections are made of food stalls to secure hygienic conditions HERTFORDSHIRE COUNTY COUNCIL ACTS. 1935 AND 1960. Provision is made in the 1935 Act, inter alia, for the conduct and regulation of:- fl) Hairdressers' and Barbers' Premises; (2) Swimming Baths and Pools, and (3) Employment Agencies. Hairdressers' and Barbers' Premises. There are fourteen such establishments in the district. Routine visits are made from time to time to ensure compliance with the Byelaws. (27) Swimming Baths and Bathing Pools. The only swimming pool in the district, viz, at "The Barn" , Barnet ByePass is not now in use. The swimming pools at schools are all within the purview of the Education, Authority, and are inspected regularly by the County Health Inspector, who arranges bacteriological examination of the water. Employment Agencies. The Council had no observations to make to the County Council concerning the renewal of licences to carry on Employment Agencies for the year. HOME COUNTIES (MUSIC Aid DANCING) LICENSING ACT. 1926. HERTFORDSHIRE (MUSIC AND DANCING) REGULATIONS . 1956. Under regulations made by the County Council a report from the local district council is required regarding the suitability and sufficiency of sanitary arrangements at premises for Music and Dancing before licences are issued. All were satisfactory and the County Council notified accordingly. PET ANIMAIS ACT. 1951. This Act gives the local Authority, inter alia, power to grant licences to persons to keep pet shops for the sale of pet animals and to attach to the licences conditions concerning the cleanliness and general management of the premises: five persons are so licensed in this district. No complaints were received nor were any major contraventions of the conditions observed during visits of inspection. RIDING ESTABLISHMENTS ACT. 1939. During the year the Council engaged a Veterinary Surgeon on apart-time basis to inspect the five establishments housing some 110 horses in the district The condition of the horses and their accommodation was considered satisfactory. (28) RODENT CONTROL. Prevention of Damage by PestF Act. 1949. A full time rodent operator is employed for treatment of infestations of rats and mice. The table on the next page summarises the work carried out during the year in a form to suit the purposes of the Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food. This return has been altered and does not now include the treatment of field mice which so often are found in dwelling houses. A test bait is made of "10% of the soil sewer manholes in the district, from the results of which are based the two maintenance treatments of the sewers. The test bait in April resulted in fourteen complete "takes" and no partial "takes" of bait out of a total of ninety-two manholes tested. Following this up in May, sixty-two manholes were baited; takes were recorded in thirty and these were poison baited. Unfortunately heavy rain confused the results of the second maintenance treatment which was carried out at the end of October and beginning of November when thirty-tree manholes were baited. No charge is made for the use of the Rodent Operator1s services in treating private domestic premises, provided that the occupiers co-operate in carrying out their duties under the Act. Seven preliminary notices were served requiring the removal of accumulations harbouring rats and to seal off old drains etc. The cost of treatments at all other premises is recoverable. OTHER INFESTATIONS. The Department is frequently asked for advice and assistance in connection with insect infestations and during this year has dealt with some one hundred and fifteen enquiries. Forty-eight wasps nests were destroyed on privately owned properties and on the Council's own lands. A small charge is made for this service to householders. The other infestations cover a variety of things, e.g. beetles, ants, cockroaches, flies, silver fish, woodworm and bugs. We are assisted in the identification of some of these insects by the British Museum (Natural History Section) the staff of which give prompt answers to our queries. (29) RODENT CONTROL Type of Property Local Authority Dwelling Houses Agricultural All other (including Business Premises) Total Number of Properties in inspected as a result of: - (a) Notification 3 109 4 20 136 (b) Survey under the Act 10 140 8 80 238 (c) Otherwise - 15 2 10 27 Total inspections carried out including re-inspections 32 452 23 230 737 Number of properties found to be infested by:- (Major - _ 2 - 2 (a) Rats Minor 9 64 2 14 89 (b)House Mice Major - - - - - Minor 1 65 1 15 82 Number of properties treated by the Local Authority 10 129 3 27 169 Total treatments carriec out including re- treatments 14 145 5 31 195 Number of "Block" control schemes carried out 25 One of the Council's housing estates has been infested with cockroaches for some years and the Department had carried out treatments to those premises of which complaint was made. It seemed that the infestation was growing so a survey was made of all houses on the estate. This showed the matter to be quite serious. Special powder blowers were obtained and the Council's Rodent operator effected two treatments. This reduced the infestation considerably but to continue was beyond the staff of the Department. A specialist firm was engaged to carry out four quarterly treatments, only one of which was effected by the end of the year. (30) CLEAN AIR ACT, 1956. The Council's twenty-year programme to bring the whole district under Smoke Control Orders continues according to plan. The Nos. 2 and 3 Smoke Control Orders were confirmed by the Minister in 1961. In 1962 the works proceeded, mostly in Council owned properties and the Orders came into operation on 30th September 1962. Only a few verbal warnings have been given after your Inspectors had seen smoke issuing from chimneys. The survey of the No. 4 Area proceeded normally and this was submitted to the Minister and confirmed in November, with the operative date being fixed as 1st October 1963- This allows a full nine months for anj necessary alterations to fireplaces to be made. Prom this date no smoke should issue from the 685 houses affected by the Order. I must again emphasise that no works should be started before written approval has been obtained from the Council, if grant aid is required. CONSUMER PROTECTION ACT. 1961. This enactment, which came into operation on 19th August 1961 , repealed the Heating Appliances (Fireguards) Act, 1952, incorporating that legislation in wider terms to cover the making of regulations laying down enforceable standards as to safety requirements and instructions for any prescribed class of goods. One electric fire was found not to comply with the regulations made under the Act. These fires were sent out by the manufacturer with the elements not assembled. The shopkeeper assembles at least one for display purposes and although an instruction slip was attached to the fire this was not clear. Representations made to the manufacturer resulted in a new set of instructions for assembly being issued. NOISE ' ABATEMENT ACT. 1960. This Act added "noise or vibration which is a nuisance" to the list of Statutory Nuisances actionable by Part III of the Public Health Act 1936. It should be noted that in the case of noise or vibration caused in the course of a trade or business that it is a defence to prove that the best practicable (31) means of preventing or counteracting noise or vibration have been adopted. Also that not only may the Council take act:on but that any three occupiers of premises may firstly make complaint, as to a noise nuisance, to a justice of the peace, for action directly by the Court. In the latter hi If of the year a portable sound level meter was purchased and test readings were made in various parts of the district where factories etc. were adjoining residential properties in order to get some practise in using the instrument and to obtain some comparisons of levels of noise. The first complaint received was investigated and tne management of the factory acquainted with our readings and interpretations. Seven days later the company requested us to take further readings, following adjustments and alterations which had been made to a sand blasting machine. Considerable improvement had been made and no further complaints were received. Other similar matters have been dealt with and so far we have had good co-operation from the factory owners. In the absence of legal standards, it may be difficult to decide particularly on 'border lin$ cases what is, or is not, a nuisance since so much depends upon the individuals opinion. The noise level meter gives some indication of comparable noises but certain individuals may be super sensitive to noise and made so irritable or nervous as to consider unreasonable a noise that others would not notice unduly. PETROLEUM (REGULATION) ACTS. 1928 AMD 1936. Thirty premises in the district were licensed for the storage of petroleum spirit and petroleum mixtures, one less than last year. One licencee increased his storage capacity by 1 ,000 gallons and turned one tank of 500 gallons over to Diesel Oil. One other licencee changed his 500 gallon tank to Diesel Oil and does not therefore need a licence. The process of testing the older installations, in line with the (32) requirements of the Licence Conditions, has continued, any defects being remedied before a licence is renewed. I am, Yours obediently, J.B. Wilson. Chief Public Health Inspector.