UBAR 23 URBAN DISTRICT OF BARNET ANNUAL REPORT of the ACTING MEDICAL OFFICER OF HEALTH to the BARNET URBAN DISTRICT COUNCIL by ARTHUR L. HYATT, M.R.C.S. (Eng.) , L.R.C.P. 00O00 Together with the ANNUAL REPORT of the CHIEF SANITARY INSPECTOR by JOHN B. WILSON, M.S.I.A. , M.R.San.I. 00O00 1955. (2) BARNET URBAN DISTRICT COUNCIL. MEDICAL OFFICER'S REPORT. Public Health Department, 31 Wood Street, Barnet. To the Chairman and Members of the Barnet Urban District Council. Ladies and Gentlemen, I have pleasure in presenting to you my Annual Report on the health of the district for the year 1955. It is drawn up in accordance with the directions of the Ministry of Health Circular 17/55 of the 23rd November, 1955. STATISTICS AND SOCIAL CONDITIONS OF THE AREA. Area (in acres) 4,290 Population (1951 Census) 25,019 Registrar-General's Estimate of Resident Population, mid 1955 25,480 Number of Inhabited Houses 7,781 Rateable Value £288,784 Product of a Penny Rate £1,162 NATURAL AND SOCIAL CONDITIONS. The population is largely residential, and consists chiefly of people whose occupation lies outside the urban area. Those employed in the district, apart from the tradesmen and their employees, are mainly skilled workers in lithographic printing, optical and other light industries. EXTRACT FROM VITAL AND MORTAL STATISTICS OF THE YEAR. Live Births Total. M. F. Legitimate 349 188 161 Illegitimate 14 6 8 Birth Rate per 1 ,000 of the estimated resident population (standardised): 14.39 Still Births Total. M. F. Legitimate 4 3 1 Illegitimate Nil Nil Nil Still Birth Rate per 1 .000 total (live and still) Births: 10.89 (3) Total. M. F. Deaths 259 131 128 Death Rate per 1 .000 of the estimated resident population (standardised); Total. 9.66 Deaths from Puerperal causes Nil Death Rate from Puerperal causes per 1 .000 total (live and still) Births: Nil Deaths of Infants under one vear of age:- Total. M. F. Legitimate 5 5 Nil Illegitimate 1 Nil 1 Death Rate of Infants under one year of age per 1 ,000 live Births: 16.53 Deaths of Infants under four weeks of age:- Total. M. F. Legitimate 4 4 Nil Illegitimate 1 Nil 1 Death Rate of Infants under four weeks of age per 1 .000 live Births: 13.77 Too much importance should not "be paid to the rates where the actual number of cases is small, e.g. - below 10, as such rates are of little statistical significance. Thus, if an attempt is made to compare this area with other districts, or with previous years, it would be better to compare % actual cases. GENERAL PROVISION OF HEALTH SERVICES FOR THE DISTRICT. The Council are not the appropriate Local Authority for the purpose of the National Health Service Act, 1946, and do not therefore control any of the Hospitals or ancillary services in the district. Within this district, and under the control of the Barnet Group Hospital Management Committee, are the following:- Barnet General Hospital, Wellhouse Lane, Barnet. 461 Beds. St. Stephen's Hospital, Mays Lane, Barnet. (Female medical, Ear, Nose and Throat, and male long-stay cases) 88 Beds. Victoria Maternity Hospital, Wood Street. Barnet. 48 Beds. "Elm Bank" , Arkley. (Female long-stay cases) 27 Beds. The following is a list of Clinics etc. available in the district. Tuberculosis Clinics are held daily, by appointment, at Barnet Chest Clinic, Wellhouse Lane, Barnet. At Vale Driven the following Clinics are held during the school term. A Clinic for Schoolchildren on the second and fourth Monday morning in (4) each month, and a Clinic for Remedial Exercises every Monday afternoon. A Speech Therapy Clinic is held on Wednesdays and Fridays, Child Guidance Clinics on Thursdays, and an Eye Clinic on Wednesdays. An Infant Welfare Clinic is held every Tuesday afternoon all the year round and also on the first and third Fridays in each month. For the convenience of residents at Totteridge there is an Infant Welfare Clinic at "Dollisfield" every Friday afternoon. Dental Clinics are held daily at Vale Drive. The Family Planning Association hold sessions at Vale Drive each Wednesday between 6 and 7.30 p.m. These Clinics are subject to alteration and it is advisable to enquire of the Vale Drive Clinic (BAR: 6194) for the current days and times. The local office of the Herts County Council Home Help Service at 42 Lytton Road, New Barnet, is open daily from 9 - 1, Monday to Friday inclusive. PUBLIC HEALTH STAFF. Acting Medical Officer of Health. ø x Arthur L. Hyatt, M.R.C.S. (Eng.), L.R.C.P. Chief Sanitary Inspector. + ø John Baillie Wilson, M.R.San.I. , M.S.I.A. Additional Sanitary Inspectors. Ø Howard W.C. Alloway, A.R.San.I. , M.S.I.A. + Ø David W.E. Jessett, M.S.I.A. (Resigned 17th April, 1955) + Ø // George A. Faulkner, M.S.I.A. (Appointed 2nd May, 1955) One Clerk-Typist. One Rodent Operative. + Holds the special qualification as Inspector of Meat and other Foods under examination of the Royal Sanitary Institute. // Holds the special qualification as Smoke Inspector under examination of the Royal Sanitary Institute. Ø Salary Contribution of one half from Exchequer Grants. x Part-time Officer. (5) WATER SUPPLY. The major area of the district is supplied with water from the mains of the Barnet District Water Company, and the remainder is served by the Colne Valley Water Company. All water supplied by the Barnet District Water Company is chlorinated. A pathological staff is maintained and the water is regularly tested at all stages. During the year, a total of 1 ,677 bacteriological, 245 chemical and 33 special examinations of the water were made by the Company's own staff. 1,245 of these camples were representative of the supply and 99.4?° were found to be free from B, Coli. The Colne Valley Water Company exercises similar controls over its supplies Five samples of water were taken by the Department, three from Barnet District Water Company's supply and two from the Colne Valley Water Company's supply, and submitted for analysis with satisfactory results in every case. The water supply to the whole district is considered adequate, and all houses are supplied by these companies mains, with the exception of one house which is still using water from a well in the front garden, from where it is pumped up to a store tank in the roof space. DRAINAGE AND SEWERAGE. The town is drained and sewered on the separate system, excepting the older portions of the district where it is a combined system. The sewage is conveyed to a Sewage Disposal works of 56 acres, where it is screened, grit removed in detritus tanks, thence to primary settlement tanks and thereafter distributed over three 80 ft. diameter bacteria filters, followed by humus removal in rectangular tanks before discharge to the Dollis Brook. Pumping is necessary for three sewers which have their outlets at a low point on the works. Part of the Totteridge area drains to the Finchley Borough sewers; in the outlying areas some properties are on cesspool drainage or domestic sewage disposal plants, and a few only have pail closets. (6) SANITARY CONDITIONS AND WATER SUPPLY OF SCHOOLS. There are in the district eleven schools administered by the South Herts Divisional Education Committee, viz:- Queen Elizabeth's Boys and Girls Grammar Schools; Ravenscroft Secondary Modern School; Foulds School (Junior Mixed and Infants); Christ Church School (Junior Mixed); The Elizabeth Allen Voluntary Secondary School; Grasvenor Infants School; Underhill School (Junior Mixed) ; Underhill Infants School; St. Catherine's Roman Catholic School and Whitings Hill School (Junior Mixed and Infants). The South Herts College of Further Education, Wood Street, Barnet, is available for Girls and Boys between the ages of 15 and 18. All schools in the district are supplied with mains water and are connected to the Council's main drainage system. DISPOSAL OF HOUSE REFUSE. The house refuse is collected weekly in covered mechanical conveyances and taken to the Council's Sewage Farm, where it is loaded into Contractor's covered lorries and disposed of daily by controlled tipping outside the district, PREVALENCE OF, AND CONTROL OVER. INFECTIOUS DISEASE. The following table shews the number of Notifications to the Sanitary Authority during the year, of each disease specified in the Public Health Act, 1936, and the various Infectious Disease Regulations, and the number of cases removed to Hospital. DISEASE NOTIFIED ED TO HOSPITAL Scarlet Fever 12 1 Whooping Cough 34 1 Diphtheria end Membranous Croup Nil Nil Measles 345 14 Acute Pneumonia 8 3 Meningococcal Infection 1 1 Acute Poliomyelitis (Paralytic) 1 1 " " (Non-Paralytic) 2 2 Acute Encephalitis Nil Nil Dysentery 2 1 Ophthalmia Neonatorum 1 1 Puerperal Pyrexia 55 54 Smallpox Nil Nil Malaria Nil Nil Typhoid and Enteric Fevers Nil Nil Parat.vphoid Fever Nil Nil Food Poisoning 7 6 Erysipelas 3 3 Scabies 1 Nil Tuberculosis 17 10 TOTALS 489 98 (7) AGE INCIDENCE OP INFECTIOUS DISEASE. DISEASE NUMBER OF CASES NOTIFIED YEARS OF AGE 0- 1- 2- 3- 4- 5- 10- 15- 25- 45- 65- 75- Total Scarlet Fever - - 1 1 1 7 1 - 1 - - - 12 Whooping Cough 5 2 1 7 2 12 1 2 1 1 - - 34 Measles 3 16 33 43 55 186 5 2 2 - - - 345 Acute Pneumonia - - 1 2 - 2 - 1 1 1 - - 8 Meningococcal Infection 1 - - - - - - - - - - - 1 Acute Poliomyelitis (Paralytic) - - - - - - - 1 - - - - 1 (Non-Paralytic) - - - - 1 - - - 1 - - - 2 Dysentery - - - - - 1 1 - - - - - 2 Ophthalmia Neonatorum 1 - - - - - - - - - - - 1 Puerperal Pyrexia - - - - - - - 22 33 - - - 55 Food Poisoning - - - - - 3 - 1 1 2 - - 7 Erysipelas - - - - - - - - - 2 1 - 3 Scabies - - - - - - - 1 - - - - 1 TOTALS 10 18 36 53 59 211 8 30 40 6 1 - 472 Of the foregoing, the following cases normally resident outside the district were notified from the Barnet General Hospital and the Victoria Maternity Hospitals - Whooping Cough 1; Measles 8; Acute Pneumonia 3 J Acute Poliomyelitis (Non-Paralytic) 1; Dysentery 1; Ophthalmia Neonatorum 1; Puerperal Pyrexia 44; Pood Poisoning 5; Erysipelas 1. This was a "measles year" and after allowing for this and deducting the out-district cases brought to the local hospitals, the general level of incidence of notifiable diseases remains fairly low. The cases of Tuberculosis removed for treatment are usually sent to Clare Hall Sanatorium, South Mimas, other patients with an infectious disease being sent to Coppett.'s Wood Hospital, Muswell Hill, N.10. (8) The Case Rates, of certain diseases, excluding those cases not normally resident in the district, per 1,000 of the population are as follows Scarlet Fever 0.47; Whooping Cough 1.30; Measles 13.23; Acute Pneumonia 0.20; Food Poisoning 0.08; Erysipelas 0.08. As mentioned earlier in this report, where the number of cases is less than, say, 10, case rates are of little statistical value for comparison purposes. VACCINATION. No primary or revaccinations were performed by the Medical Officer of Health under the Public Health (Smallpox Prevention) Regulations, 1917. INTERNATIONAL VACCINATION CERTIFICATES. At the end of 1952 a new form was introduced for International Vaccination Certificates requiring authentication of the signature of the doctor performing vaccination or inoculation of persons proceeding overseas. During this year 363 such certificates were authenticated and marked with the internationally agreed stamp. TUBERCULOSIS. NEW CASES AND MORTALITY DURING 1955. YEARS OF AGE NEW CASES DEATHS Pulmonary N on-Pulmonary Pulmonary Non- Pulmonary M. F. M. F. M. F. M. F. 0 mm mm 1 - - - - - - 5 - - - - - - - - 15 2 4 - - - _ - - 25 1 1 - - - - - - 35 2 1 - 2 - 1 - - 45 1 2 - - - - - - 55 - 1 - - - - - - 65 and over - - - - 2 - - - TOTALS 6 9 - 2 2 1 - - (9) Seventeen new cases were notified during the year making a total of 215 cases on the Tuberculosis Register, a reduction of 12 on last year's total. The reduction is brought about by recovery of cases, deaths and transfers out of the district. There were no cases of wilful neglect or of refusal to notify Tuberculosis in any form. PUBLIC HEALTH (PREVENTION OF TUBERCULOSIS) REGULATIONS. 1925. It has not been found necessary to take any action under the above Regulations, relating to Tuberculous employees in the Milk Trade. PUBLIC HEALTH ACT. 1956. SECTION 172. COMPULSORY REMOVAL TO HOSPITAL OF CASES OF PULMONARY TUBERCULOSIS. No action was necessary under the above Section. NATIONAL ASSISTANCE ACT. 1948. - SECTION 47. NATIONAL ASSISTANCE (AMENDMENT) ACT. 1951 - SECTION 1. Some visits have been made to old people in the district but no cases have arisen requiring official action by the Council. MORTAL STATISTICS. Of 259 deaths, 11 occurred under one year of age. The following were the major causes of death:- Heart Disease 83; Cancer 53 (29 males and 21+ females) ; Vascular Lesions of nervous system 44; Bronchitis 11; Pneumonia 9; Tuberculosis 3; Motor Vehicle accidents 3; Other accidents 5. MORTUARY ACCOMMODATION. Under arrangements made with the East Barnet Urban District Council their mortuary is available for the use of this district, and it was so used on thirteen occasions during the year. I am, Yours faithfully, ARTHUR L. HYATT, M.R.C.S. (Eng.) , L.R.C.P. ACTING MEDICAL OFFICER OF HEALTH. (10) BARNET URBAN DISTRICT COUNCIL. CHIEF SANITARY INSPECTOR'S REPORT. Public Health Department, 31 Wood Street, Barnet. To the Chairman and Members of the Barnet Urban District Council. Ladies and Gentlemen, I have the honour to present to you my Annual Report for the year 1955. The Housing Survey was completed in time for the requisite report to be made to the Minister. The survey shows that some 138 houses are considered unfit for human habitation and these will be dealt with in a five years programme. At the close of the year the first proposed clearance area of 28 houses was in preparation and will be reported to the Council early in the new year. The Ministry of Health enquiry was made at the beginning of the year and as a result, as from 1st October 1955 the Council became the Food and Drugs Authority for the area in lieu of the County Council. The Rivers (Prevention of Pollution) Act 1951 made certain changes in the law as to the quality of effluents etc., and to the authorities responsible for carrying out this work. Under the Hertfordshire (Prevention of Pollution) Order 1955, the Hertfordshire County Council now act as a river board in respect of ditches and streams in this area the principal of which is the Dollis Brook. The County Council have made a preliminary survey and will be following this up in the near future by the taking of samples of effluents discharging to the Brook. I would like to take this opportunity to tender my thanks to the officers of the Council and the staff of the Public Health Department in particular for their co-operation and help through the year. (11) INSPECTION OF DISTRICT . General inspections of the district have "been carried out periodically and all complaints investigated. The process of serving a preliminary or intimation notice upon the person in default, specifying the works necessary to remedy the defects found, is usually followed. It was found necessary to ask your authority to serve sixty Statutory Notices, where persons failed to comply with the preliminary notice, or the strict legal procedure was necessary in the first instance. SANITARY INSPECTION OF AREA. The following is a list of the number and nature of visits and inspections:- Visits re: Housing Acts 641 Visits re: nuisance and sanitary defectes 1339 Visits re: infectious diseases 178 Visits re: Petroleum Acts 129 Visits re: smoke observations 18 Visits re: factories. 215 Visits re: outworkers' premises 14 Visits re: 504 Visits re: 227 Visits re: 14 Visits re: 13 Visits to inspect meat and other foods 568 Visits re: schools 7 Visits re: pollution of watercourses 112 Visits re: Tents, Caravans and Sheds 28 Visits re: Shops Acts 77 Visits re: keeping of animals 34 Visits re: Rodent Infestation 2398 Visits re: other infestations 79 Miscellaneous visits 184 NUMBER OF NOTICES SERVED DURING YEAR. Number of Informal Notices 132 Number of Statutory Notices. 60 Informal Notices complied with 117 Statutory Notices complied with 58 (12) SANITARY WORK AND REPAIRS. The following is a list of repairs effected as a result of informal and formal notices served:- Roofs repaired and made weatherproof 27 Gutters, downspouts repaired or renewed 21 Exterior brickwork repaired or repointed 17 Walls, dampness remedied 45 Chimney stacks and pots repaired or renewed 2 Yard surfaces repaired or repaved 3 Ceilings repaired or renewed 31 Wall plaster repaired or renewed 52 Walls and ceilings cleansed and decorated 80 Floors repaired or renewed 9 Doors and frames repaired or renewed 5 Windows repaired 67 Pood Stores provided or ventilated 5 Fireplaces repaired or renewed 11 Drains and sewage disposal plants cleared 30 Drains and sewage disposal plants repaired or reconstructed 20 Inspection chambers repaired or reconstructed 12 Soil or vent pipes repaired or renewed 3 Gullies, channels and fenders repaired or renewed 3 Water Closet pans, fittings, repaired or renewed 18 Sinks, waste pipes, etc. , repaired or renewed 6 Storage cisterns, cleaned, repaired or renewed 2 Water services, repaired, renewed or re-instated 5 Dustbins renewed 10 Refuse accumulations removed 4 Animals and fowls: nuisance from improper keeping 9 HOUSING. The necessary survey has been made and preparation of the details was well in hand for presentation to the Council early next year of a report in connection with our first post war clearance area which will involve some 28 houses. Two houses were demolished by the owners during the year, in compliance with Demolition Orders made in the previous year. Seven houses were dealt with under the provisions of Section 11 of the Housing Act 1936, as amended, resulting in one Closing Order, one Undertaking not to use the property for human habitation and five Demolition Orders. One of these Demolition Orders was revoked after extensive works had been carried out and another house was being repaired etc., prior to application for revocation of the Demolition Order. Following non compliance with Abatement Notices served under the Public Health Acts in respect of three houses, the Council carried out the works in (13) default of the owner and are now collecting the rents in payment of the Council's expenses. The demand for Certificates of Disrepair under the Housing Repairs and Rents Act 1954 has not been as great as was anticipated. Eleven applications were made during the year. Thirteen certificates were issued and one was refused; these latter figures include three applications which were made but could not be dealt with in 1954. Seven applications were made by owners of properties for revocation of these certificates, five of which were granted, two remaining to be dealt with next year. PUBLIC HEALTH ACT. 1956. INFECTIOUS DISEASE. INVESTIGATION AND DISINFECTION. Investigations have been carried out of the more important cases of infectious disease listed in the Medical Officer of Health's Report, and seventeen premises were disinfected. Where necessary, bedding is taken for disinfection to the Barnet General Hospital under arrangements made with the Barnet Group Hospital Management Committee. Two hundred and ninety-five library books were disinfected before return to libraries. FOOD AND FOOD PREMISES. The new Food Hygiene Regulations which were anticipated for this year will not in fact be in operation until January 1956. However we have increased again our visits to the types of premises involved and every opportunity is taken to discuss the present and future requirements with the management. The standard of hygiene generally is quite good and is improving and the summary below of works effected shows an increase on last year. Ceilings renewed or repaired 5 Wall plaster renewed or repaired 5 Walls and ceilings cleansed 35 Floors repaired 5 Windows repaired 2 Yards and Gullies cleansed 3 Dustbins renewed 9 (14) Hot water supplies provided 15 Handbasins provided 5 Soap and towels provided 14 Accumulations removed 1 Fittings and utensils cleansed or renewed 8 FOOD POISONING-. Annual Return of Food Poisoning Notifications. Food Poisoning Notifications (Corrected) Returned to Registrar General. 1st Quarter. 2nd Quarter. 3rd Quarter. 4th Quarter. Total. Deaths. Nil. 2 5 Nil 7 Nil Outbreaks Due to Identified Agents. Total Outbreaks. 1 Total cases. 4 (3 not notified) Outbreaks of undiscovered cause. Total Outbreaks. Nil Total cases. Nil Single cases. 6 Agent Identified 5 Unknown Cause 1 Total 6 Of the seven total cases notified during the year, five were persons normally resident outside the district and admitted to the Barnet General Hospital already suffering and notified from the Hospital as cases of Salmonella poisoning. Investigations would be carried out by the districts where the patients were normally resident. One case of Food Poisoning notified from the local hospital concerned the proprietor of a catering business in the district. Immediate investigations we re made and stool specimens showed that two other members of his family and one employee were also affected although not showing symptoms. As all persons affected were employed in the business strict hygienic measures were enforced and regular visits were made to ensure that these were being carried out. The employee eventually entered hospital because domiciliary methods of treatment did not have the desired effect. No further cases occurred in the family or employees nor any amongst the customers. ICE CREAM. Ninety-nine samples of ice cream were taken, from retailers in the district, during the year with results as shown overleaf. (15) Manufacturer. Grade I. Grade II. Grade III. Grade IV Total. A 36 13 - - 49 B 36 4 - - 40 C 3 - - - 3 D 1 - - - 1 F 5 - - - 5 N - 1 - - 1 Total 81 18 Nil Nil 99 All samples of ice cream are taken to the Central Public Health Laboratory Colindale for testing by the Methylene Blue Test. Fifty-seven samples were taken from the factory registered in the district with the following results:- 44 Grade I; 7 Grade II; 4 Grade III; 2 Grade IV. The number of samples taken is not great but even so the percentage of samples in Grades III and IV is higher than I like to see. The laboratory states generally that over a period of say six months 50% of the samples should be in Grade I, 80% in Grades I and II find not more than 20% in Grade III and none in Grade IV. In this case the percentages fall down because of two samples in Grade IV. The low grade samples first appeared some seven months after the factory started operations, and this coincided with the hot weather and the seasonal demand for their products. This appears to produce some lack of attention to comparatively minor details but which produce immediate results in the down grading of samples. So soon as the defects are demonstrated they are put right. There are now 43 premises registered for the storage and sale of ice cream, including one new registration effected during 1955. DAIRIES. COWSHEDS AND MILKSHOPS. The control of the production of milk is now vested in the Ministry of Agriculture Fisheries and Food. The local authority is responsible for the inspection and registration (16) of milk distributors and other dairy premises not directly concerned with the actual production of milk, and for licensing for the sale of Designated Milks. Twenty samples of milk have been taken, in course of delivery to the consumer, and submitted to the appropriate tests with the following results:- Designation Samples Taken Satisfactory Unsatisfactory Tuberculin Tested (Pasteurised) 3 3 Nil Tuberculin Tested (Farm Bottled) 5 5 Nil Tuberculin Tested (Farm Bottled) (Channel Islands) 4 3 1 Pasteurised 7 7 Nil Pasteurised (Homogenized) 1 1 Nil TOTALS 20 19 1 The unsatisfactory sample of milk was reported to the County Milk Regulations Officer for his action. No official action was taken under Regulation 20 of the Milk and Dairies Regulations 1949, to stop or restrict the sale of milk. No cases of disease were notified which could be attributed to the consumption of infected milk. Ten Dealer's Licences and twenty-one Supplementary Licences were granted for the retail sale of milk under the Milk (Special Designation) (Raw Milk) Regulations, 1949 and 1950, and the Milk (Special Designation)(Pasteurised and Sterilised Milk) Regulations, 1949 and 1950, viz:- Designation. Dealer's Licences. Supplementary Licences. Tuberculin Tested. 3 7 Pasteurised. 3 7 Sterilised. 4 7 FOOD AND DRUGS ACT, 1938. The Council acquired those powers under the Act concerning the adulteration and sophistication of food as from 1st October 1955. The summary overleaf contains the results of some 21 samples taken by the County Council and 15 by (17) this department. Article. Number of Samples Taken. Genuine. Adulterated. Milk 13 12 1 Cream 1 1 - Margarine 2 2 - Lard 1 1 - Cider Vinegar 1 1 - Pork Sausages 10 9 1 Double Cream 1 1 - Golden Raising Powder 1 1 - Salad Cream 1 1 - Lemon Flavouring Essence 1 1 — Total 32 30 2 Milk "Appeal to Cows'" 4 The sample of milk reported "not genuine" was deficient in milk fat to the extent of 10 per cent of the normal quantity present in natural milk. The "Appeal to Cow" samples, which were procured in relation to this sample, were also found to be deficient in milk fat thus exonerating the vendor from any suspicion of "skimming". The unsatisfactory sample of pork sausages was taken informally and showed a meat content of 50$. A follow up formal sample was t aken and this showed a 61% meat content which was considered to be within reasonable limits of the desirable percentage of meat in sausages. MEAT AND FOOD CONDEMNED. The following is a list of the articles of food condemned as unfit for human consumption during the year. Meat. Fresh Meat. Canned Meat. Pork 120 lbs. Ox Tongue 18 lbs. Chilled Beef 106 lbs. Luncheon Meat 36 lbs. Pigs Kidneys 28 lbs. Ham 61 lbs. Sausages and Sausage Stewed Steak 14 lbs. Meat 210 lbs. Corned Beef 37 lbs. Fish. Haddock Fillets 42 lbs. Canned 23 tins. Groceries. Fruit 64 tins. Soup 4 tins. Vegetables 41 tins. Flour 6 lbs. Preserves 18 tins. Dried Fruits 28 lbs. Milk 30 tins. (18) PRIVATE SLAUGHTER-HOUSES AND SLAUGHTER OF ANIMALS ACT, 1933. There is only one slaughterhouse, privately owned, operating in the district and your inspectors maintain a high percentage of inspection by evening and week-end visits. The information and form in which it is given below is not as desired by the Ministry but sufficient records have not been kept for the purpose. However a new system of recording was introduced at the end of this year which will enable the requisite detailed analysis to be made of the percentage of animals affected by disease in one form or other for the next annual report. Number of Animals Slaughtered and Inspected 15,468 Inspected Entire Carcase Condemned. Part Carcase Condemned. Tuberculosis Other Diseases Tuberculosis Other Diseases Bovines excluding Calves 1097 4 2 5 6 Calves 6843 1 2 - - Sheep and Lambs , 1618 - - - - Pigs 5910 2 5 4 19 Offals Condemned (Exclusive of entire carcases condemned). Head Lungs Liver Kidneys Tuberculosis Other Diseases Tuberculosis Other Diseases Tuberculosis Other Diseases Tuberculosis Other Diseases Bovine 56 1 64 22 18 225 6 2 Ovine - - - 15 _ 14 — - Porcine 80 2 3 55 2 8 - 1 Total weight of carcase meat condemned 4,799 lbs. Total weight of offals condemned 6,072 lbs. The Council acts as agent for the Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food in the matter of Deadweight Certification of Pigs. During the year your inspectors have issued 243 certificates covering 1 ,063 pigs. For this service the Council receives from the Ministry 6d per pig (19) certified, with a minimum of 3/- per certificate. There are ten persons licensed by the Council as fit persons to slaughter animals. Although licensed by this authority most of the men are employed outside the district. No complaint has been received from the districts in which they work concerning the conduct of any of these men, nor was there any need for adverse report on the men locally employed. DRAINAGE. The work of relaying a "combined drain" serving nine houses, mentioned in last year's report, was satisfactorily completed early this year. The expenses incurred were apportioned between the Council and the respective owners of the properties. Apart from the normal repair jobs to drainage systems the department is responsible for the approval and supervision of construction of domestic sewage disposal plants in the unsewerelareas of the district. In this connection four new houses were constructed with sewage disposal plants; three plants were considerably enlarged to deal with increased flows owing to change of use of the properties; three new plants were installed to replace defective and leaking cesspools and one cesspool was abolished on the connection of the house drains to the sewer. REPORT REQUIRED BY SECTION 128 (3) OP THE FACTORIES ACT. 1937 Inspection for purposes of provisions as to health. Number on Register. Number of Inspections. Written Notices. Occupiers Prosecuted. (1) Factories in which Sees. 1,2,3,4 and 6 are to be enforced by Local Authorities. 10 12 - - (2) Factories not included in (1) in which Sec. 7 is enforced by the Local Authority 89 198 - - (3) Other premises in which Sec. 7 is enforced by the Local Authority. 10 5 - - Total 109 215 4 - (20) The outstanding notice from last year was satisfactorily completed. The notices served this year required cleansing of sanitary conveniences, cleansing of walls and the provision of adequate sanitary accommodation which latter was not carried out by the end of the year. Outworkers (Section 110 and 111). Section 110. Section 111. No. of outworkers on lists received. ' No, of instances of work in unwholesome premises. Notices Served. 76 - - Fourteen outworkers' premises were visited and home conditions were found to be entirely satisfactory. Pour certificates as to means of escape in case of fire were issued under Section 34 of the Act during the year, after alteration works were completed. The conversion of Elliotts factory, Park Road, into several small factories has entailed many visits in connection with the provision of sanitary accommodation for the individual factories and the giving of advice with respect to means of escape in case of fire in consultation with the Fire Prevention Officer for the County. HERTFORDSHIRE COUNTY COUNCIL ACT, 1935. Provision is made in this Act for the conduct and regulation of:- (1) Tents, Caravans and Shads; (2) Hairdressers1 and Barbers' Premises; (3) Swimming Baths and Pools, and (4) Employment Agencies. Tents, Caravans and Sheds. The vans attending the Barnet Pair were visited to enquire as to any infectious diseases and as to their sanitary condition. The provision of temporary sanitary accommodation was required in different sections of the fair for the use of the caravanners and public, and regular removal of refuse was arranged. Hairdressers' and Barbers' Premises. There are thirteen such establishments in the district. No complaints (21) were received concerning their cleanliness nor were any serious breaches of the Council's Bye-laws noted during inspections of such premises. Public Swimming Baths and Bathing Pools. The only swimming pool in the district, viz, at "The Barn", Bamet Bye-Pass, is not now in use. RODENT CONTROL. Prevention of Damage by Pests Act, 1949. A full time rodent operator is employed for treatment of infestations of rats and mice. The table below gives details of the work carried out during the year:- Type of Property Local Authority Dwelling Houses Agricultural All other (including Business Premises) Total 1. Number of Properties inspected as a result of: (a) Notification 2 119 - 26 147 (b) Survey under the Act 5 300 16 129 450 (c) Otherwise — 3 - 2 5 2. Total inspections carried out including re-inspections 19 476 36 294 825 3. Number of properties found to be infested by: (a) Rats ( Major - - - - - ( Minor 6 101 7 25 139 (b) Mice ( Major - — - - - ( Minor 2 104 - 29 135 4. Number of properties treated by the Local Authority 8 205 4 48 265 5. Total treatments carried out including retreatments 12 231 4 59 I 306 6, Number of "Block" control schemes carried out 31 One statutory notice was served requiring proper storage bins for animal feeding stuffs. Six informal notices were served; three to remove accumulations, one to raise a fowl house off the ground and two to rid land of rats. (22) A test bait was made of 10% of the soil sewer manholes in the district, from the results of which are based the two maintenance treatments of the sewers required by the Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food, as one of the conditions under which the Ministry pay 50% of the Council's rodent control expenses. The test bait in May resulted in 1 complete take and 5 partial takes of bait out of 90 manholes baited. The maintenance treatments carried out in June and November, when 35 and 25 manholes were baited respectively, resulted in 1 partial take only on each occasion. These results constitute the best ever and indicate that the sewers are now virtually cleared of rats. It is to be hoped that subsequent tests and treatments prove this low level of infestation to be maintained. No charge is made for the use of the Rodent Operator's services in treating private domestic premises, provided that the occupiers co-operate in carrying out their duties under the Act. The cost of treatments at all other premises is recoverable. OTHER INFESTATIONS. Members of the public seem more concerned with infestations of all kinds of insects than previously and advice was given in respect of twenty-eight infestations of a wide variety of insects, e.g. various beetles, ants, cockroaches, flies, mosquitoes, fleas, moths, bugs, silver fish, etc. Small quantities of liquid or powder insecticides are distributed and only in rare cases do the department carry out the necessary work. This we did in eradicating fifty-nine wasps' nests using Cyanide or a power sprayer with liquid insecticide. PET ANIMALS ACT. 1951. This Act gives the local Authority, inter alia, power to grant licences to persons to keep pet shops for the sale of pet animals and to attach to the licences conditions concerning the cleanliness and general management of the premises: there are five persons licensed in the district. No complaints (23) were received nor were any major contraventions of the conditions observed during visits of inspection. This Act which came into force on the 1st November, 1951 , creates controls over the use of filling materials in the making of upholstery. A furniture manufacturer started in the district and the premises are registered under the Act. HEATING APPLIANCES (FIREGUARDS) ACT. 1952. This Act and the Regulations made thereunder came into operation on the 1st October 1953, after which date it became an offence to manufacture a heating appliance which does not comply with the standards set. No contraventions were found this year. PETROLEUM (REGULATION) ACTS. 1928 AND 1936. There are thirty-five persons on the Register licensed to store petroleum and petroleum mixtures. One licence was transferred to the new occupier and one licence for a small quantity of lighter fuel was not renewed. One new licence was issued, for underground storage of petrol served via a pump, being a new installation constructed under the supervision of the department. The total quantity of petroleum spirit and mixtures which may be kept in the various stores is 39,917 gallons. One hundred and twenty-nine inspections were made to ensure compliance with the Council's revised conditions attaching to licences. I am, Yours obediently, J. B. WILSON. Chief Sanitary Inspector.