Ac. 4412 (1) BEC 31 BOROUGH OP BECKENHAM REPORT OF THE MEDICAL OFFICER OF HEALTH FOR 1964 BY L. R. L. EDWARDS, M.D. (Lond.), D.P.H. Medical Officer of Health "The chief function of the Medical Officer of Health is to safeguard the health of the area for which he acts by such means as are at his disposal, and to advise his Authority how knowledge of public health and preventive medicine can be made available and utilised for the benefit of the community . "Whils he has special duties for the prevention of infectious diseases, all morbid conditions contributing to a high sickness rate or » mortality in the area should be studied frith a view to their prevention or control". (From the Ministry of Health memorandum on the duties of Medical Officers of Health.) MEMBERS OF THE PUBLIC HEALTH COMMITTEE PROM JUNE, 1964. Chairman Councillor P.G. GORDON-SMITH. Deputy Chairman Councillor M„ WILLIAMS. Alderman T. BOYD BOYD. Alderman W. DUNCAN. Councillor R.E. BASKETT. Councillor P.J. DOVER. Councillor R.G-. FOSTER. Councillor A.W. HALSE. Councillor J.M. SMITH. Councillor E.R. SMITHERS. Councillor F.R. STEVENS. Councillor Mrs. M.J. HIGGINS. Councillor Mrs. O.L. ROBERTS. Councillor Mrs. D.E.L. WEST, M.B.E. Ex Officio: THE MAYOR. STAFF OF THE PUBLIC HEALTH DEPARTMENT Medical Officer of Health L.R.L. EDWARDS, M.D. (Lond. ) , D.P.H. Chief Public Health Inspector G.A. WEBBER, Certificate of the Royal Sanitary Institute and the Sanitary Inspectors' Examination Joint Board. Certificated Food Inspector. Deputy Chief Public Health Inspector E.U. WILLIAMS, Cert. R.S.I, and S.I.E.J.B. Certificated Food Inspector. District Public Health Inspectors W.T.G. WOODWARD, Cert. R.S.I, and S.I.E.J.B. Certificated Food Inspector. W.F. FORREST, Cert. R.S.I, and S.I.E.J.B. Certificated Food Inspector. Certificated Smoke Inspector. D.W. FOSTER, Cert., R.S.I, and S.I.E.J.B. Certificated Food Inspector. Certificated Smoke Inspector. C.J. UTTING, Cert, of Public Health Inspectors' Education Board, Certificated Food Inspector (Resigned 21.12.64). Pupil Public Health Inspector D.E. LUKE. Clerical Staff: Shorthand Typist. MRS. P.C. SPIVEY, (Resigned 7o8.64). MRS. M.L. WHITTLES, (Commenced 21.9 Clerks. MISS Y.V. READ MRS. J, NEMAN, (Resigned 30. 9.64). MISS S, LEECH, (Commenced 19.10.64). MISS L.J.E. TURNER Rodent Officer,, E.J. READ Rodent Operator L.&. hodges Disinfector - General Assistant m. hindson Mortuary Attendant - General Assistant C.C. EVANS (Resigned 29. 8. 64), R.E. RATCLIFFE (Commenced 9.11.64). CONTENTS PAGE introductory letter 1 Section A„ Vital Statistics Environmental Conditions and Control 2 Summary of Vital Statistics 4 Total Deaths 3 Cancer Deaths, I960 to 1964 6 Notifications and Deaths from Tuberculosis 7 Infantile Mortality 8 Stillbirths 9 Section B. Health and Social Services Hospitals and Clinics 10 County Council Health Services 10 and 11 Private and Voluntary Services 11 Local. Clinics for 'Maternity and Child Welfare 12 and 13 Report of District Officer 14 Reporb of Home Help Organiser 14 Report of Chest Physician 15 Tuberculosis Care Committee 16 Old People's Welfare Services 17, 18, 19 & 20 Women's Voluntary Service 21, 22 Home Safety Committee 23 Beckenham Accident Prevention Committee 24 and 25 Sections C»D„ and E. Environmental Services Housing Inspections 26 Nuisances 26 Food and Drugs 27, 28 and 29 Ice Cream 30 Rent Act, 1957 30 Disinfection 30 Mortuary 30 Moveable Dwellings 30 Factories Act 1937-1959 31and 32 Water Supply 33 Drainage 33 Rodent Control 33 Shops Act, 1950 33 National Assistance Act, 1948 (Section 50) 33 Smoke Control Water Supply Examination 35 and 36 Section F, Infectious Diseases Control Age and Sex Incidence 37 Monthly Prevalence 38 District Distribution 39 Smallpox Vaccination and Whooping Cough and Diphtheria Immunisation 40 Poliomyelitis Vaccination 40 INTRODUCTION To the Chairman and Members of the Public Health Committee I have the honour to present ray report on the health of tho Borough during 13Q+. At the time of writing, the transfer of services to the London Borough of Bromley from the constituent authorities of Beckenham, Penge, Bromley., Orpington and that part of Chislehurst and Sidcup south of the A, 2.0 trunk road, together with the appropriate services in this area provided by the Kent County Council has taken place. This will be my last report to the Beckenham Committee and consequently ray prefatory remarks will be short and tinged with regret at the loss of contact with certain member colleagues who have supported me during my thirteen years in Beckenham as their Medical Officer of Health. As you will know, I have been appointed to the post of Medical Officer of Health of the new London Borough of Bromley. I hope to receive the continued support of those members of the Beckenham Authority who have become elected representatives to the new authority and to earn the support of the elected members from the other authorities as our joint hopes and plans are achieved. In previous reports there has been emphasis on the need to expand services provided under the National Assistance Act 1948 for the welfare of elderly persons, handicapped persons and the homeless and to co-ordinate the statutory services with the role of voluntary organisations. This challenge should be met in the new borough by use of its greater resources and by the allocation of this work to a separate department of the main Health and Welfare Section of the Authority. It is hoped that there will be an expansion of services provided under the National Health Services Act 1946 and Mental Health Act 1959, in particular of mental after care in the community, including additional training centres and hostels. Especially should there be greater opportunity for officers employed, including Medical Officers, Health Visitors, Midwives, Home Help staff, Mental Health staff, Inspectorial and supporting administrative staff, to develop their skills by various forms of training. At the same time, I believe there is a still greater future for the environmental services in meeting nev; challenges under Housing improvement, Smoke Control, Food Hygiene, Noise Control, Pest Control and improved general hygiene. The amalgamation of staffs from the constituent authorities should enable planned programmes for these to be phased more efficiently over wider areas. In conclusion, I once again thank the Chairman and Members of the Health Committee for their encouragement throughout 1964 and congratulate in particular my own staff for duties carried out most efficiently despite increased pressures of personal anxieties and with a true dedication to local Government Service L.R.L. EDWARDS Medical Officer of Health, -1- SECTION A ENVIRONMENTAL CONDITIONS AND CONTROL The Borough lies on the outskirts of London and occupies part of the extreme North-west corner of Kent. It has an area of 5,935 acres of which 2,000 acres are open spaces consisting of Parks, Recreation Grounds, Playing Fields and privately owned Sports Grounds. It contains 270 acres of public open spaces of various kinds, and over 300 acres of other open land without full public access. From North to South of the Borough is a chain of open spaces while farmland and woods to the South form a green belt. The Town extends from the Crystal. Palace Grounds to the fringe of the Kentish farmlands and its neighbours are Lewisham (Sydenham and Catford) to the North, Bromley and Hayes to the East - Penge and Croydon to the West and Orpington to the South. The contours fall in height from South to North, so that the district of West Wickham on the south side of the "borough averages 21.0 feet above sea level, whereas Beclcenham itself averages 150 feet above sea level. Running from South to North are four streams - the Ravensbourne, the Beck, the Chaffinch Brook, and Pool River. These are culverted through the greater part of their course which is through beds of "valley gravel",, Half of the area geologically consists of "Blackheath Pebble Beds", and the remaining half of "London Clay". These valleys create a series of undulations. The Ravensbourno in the East forms part of the boundary between Bromley and Becker-ham, but otherwise lies outside the borough. The Pool River is a stream formed by the junction of the Boundary Brook with the Beck. It leaves the borough in the Worsley Bridge Area. The Chaffinch Brook is formed from the South Norwood and St. Jamas tributories in the South of the Borough and joins the Beck in Cator Park* The climate is comparatively mild, and the annual rainfall is low. The total for 1964 was 21.07 inches,. The population has grovm from 26,330 in 1901 to 74,334 in the 1551 Census (Estimated population In June, 1.964- was 78,230). Areas of West Wickham and Hayes were added to the former Urban District in 1934 and in 1955 the Registrar General estimated the population of the West Wickham area as 20,600. Beclcenham is now a coherent and well-ordered borough with a wide variety of houses most of which are owner occupied and have been built between the wars. Many of the larger older houses have been converted or replaced by self-contained flats or maisonettes. The Borough has a total of approximately 700 shops which are largely sited along the four main roads in the Borough in two main shopping centres. The water supply of the Borough is a mixture of well water from West Wickham9 Orpington, Shortlands, and Merton Abbey mixed with River Thames derived filtered water. The wells are in chalk strata and the Shortlands well is 250 feet deep. -2- Samples are collected by staff of the Board at least live times a week end the average chemical and bacteriological quality of the water before and after treatment is set out in the tables at the end of Section E of this reports In addition our own inspectors collect samples of water for bacteriological examination. The natural fluoride content of all sources is variable but at best is only one quarter of the optimum,, The water is moderately hard and is not plumbo solvent, In the north-west cf the borough the Corporation provides a building (modernised in 1938) containing three swimming baths of 100 ft., 80 ft., and 70 ft. length. Water is supplied from a borehole well sunk J00 feet into chalk strata. Water is cleaned by rapid pressure filtration and chlorination with a change over period of one in four hours duration,, As a check on the efficiency of chlorination plant, every two weeks and more frequently at times of excessive load, a 100 ccc, sample of water from the exit end of the Baths is taken in the middle part of the day and. tested for B. Coli in the Laboratory of the Establishment, Three or four times a year, full bacteriological examination at a Public Health Laboratory is carried out. Results even at times of heaviest bathing loads have been very satisfactory. The West Kent Main Sewerage Board is responsible for main sewerage and sewerage disposal. Beckenham possesses quite a large number of Industrial and Commercial Firms, but most of the Industries fall in the category of "Light Industry" and the majority come under the general heading of Engineering. The Industries are almost confined to two main zones of the Borough on the northern and southern edges, and in all, employ 7,000 persons, the greatest number being in the engineering firms. Twenty-four establishments employ 50 or more employees. The main industries are concerned with the production of drugs, serums, vaccines, chemical apparatus, electric tools and electric motors, electronic equipment, compressed air equipment, including spray guns for paint or ccllulose bronze nameplates, vitreous enamelled, perspex and plastic signs and letters, bronze founding, metal founding, sheet metal work, general engineering and grading of scrap metals, offico accessories, motor accessories, glues and adhesives, cellulose lacquer leather products, protective food packaging, dyers and cleaners and almond millers. Smaller firms arc concerned with printing^ film bag manufacture, landscape gardening and rustic work. Tables in Section C set out the work of inspection and supervision of these industries. -3- SUMMARY OF VITAL STATISTICS, 1964. Area of District in acres 5,935 Estimated mid-year population 78,230 Population Density - persons per acre 13.18 Rateable Value at 31st March, 1965 £4,361,889 Number of Inhabited Dwellings 25,530 Male Female Live Births 654 541 Total 1,195 Live Birth rate per 1,000 population 15.28 Illegitimate Live Births per cent of total live births (74) 6.19 Male Female Still-births 6 7 Total 13 Still-births rate per 1,000 live and still-births 10.76 Total live and still-births 1,208 Infant Deaths (deaths under 1 year) 10 Total infant deaths per 1,000 total live births 8.37 Legitimate infant deaths per 1,000 legitimate live births 8.92 Illegitimate infant deaths per 1,000 illegitimate live births 0.00 Neonatal Mortality Rate (deaths under 4 weeks per 1,000 total live births) 7.53 Early Neonatal Mortality Rate (deaths under 1 week per 1,000 total live births) 6.69 Perinatal Mortality Rate (Stillbirths and deaths under 1 week combined per 1,000 live and stillbirths) 17.38 Maternal Mortality (including abortion) 1 Maternal mortality rate per 1,000 live and still-births) 0.83 Daath Rate per 1,000 population from Cancer (l88 deaths) 2.40 Death Rate per 1,000 population from Pulmonary Tubereclosis (2 deaths) 0.03 Death Rate per 1,000 population from Non-Pulmonary Tuberculosis (0 deaths) 0.00 Death Rate per 1,000 population from Accidents (24 deaths 0.31 Birth Rate i, including Stillbirths) per 1,000 population; Crude 15.44 Corrected (X 1.05) 16.21 Male Female All Deaths Registered 406 448 Total 854 Death Rite per 1,000 population: Crude «» co 10.92 Corrected (X 0,93) 0 10.15 Natural Increase: Births exceeded deaths by 341 -4- TOTAL DEATHS, 1964 (Registrar-General's Official Returns). All causes - 854. Male, 406 Female 448. CAUSES OF DEATH MALES FEMALSS l. Tuberculosis, respiratory 2 – 2. Tuberculosis, other - _ 3. Syphilitic disease - 1 4. Diphtheria - - 5. Whooping Cough - - 6. Meningococcal infections - - 7. Acute poliomyelitis - - 8. Measles - - 9. Other infective and parasitic diseases 1 – 10, Malignant neoplasm, stomach 12 9 11. Malignant neoplasm, lung, bronchus 23 18 12. Malignant neoplasm, breast - 22 13. Malignant neoplasm, uterus - 5 14. Other malignant and lymphatic neoplasms 56 43 15. Leukaemia, aleukaemia 1 4 l6. Diabetes - - 17. Vascular lesions of nervous system 31 70 18. Coronary disease, angina 104 75 19c Hypertension with heart disease 8 12 20. Other heart disease 32 68 21. Other circulatory disease 28 19 22. Influenza - 1 23. Pneumoma 20 30 24o Lronch5.tis 20 9 25. Other diseases of respiratory system 4 3 26. Ulcer of stomach and duodenum 3 4 27. Gastritis, enteritis and diarrho3 a - 2 28. Nephritis and nephrosis - 2 29. . Hyperplasia of prostate 5 - 30. Pregnancy, childbirth, abortion - 1 31. Congenital malformations 5 3 32. Other defined and ill-defined diseases 36 27 33, Motor vehicle accidents 7 3 34s All other accidents 3 11 35. Suicide 5 5 360 Homicide and operations of war — l TOTALS 406 448 -5- CANCER DEATHS 1960 1961 . . 1962 1963 1964 Cancer of Lung 48 41 50 57 41 Males 170 Females 67 Total 237 Cancer of Breast 19 25 25 18 22 Males 1 Females 108 Total 109 Cancer of Uterus 8 8 10 6 5 37 Cancer of Stomach 24 25 1 28 r 18 21 Males 6l Females 55 Total 116 Other Malignant Neoplasms 83 94 86 97 99 Males 218 Females 241 Total 459 Total Deaths from Cancer 182 193 199 196 188 Males 450 Females 508 Total 958 For comparison, deaths from Respiratory Tuberculosis are shown 1960 1961 1962 1963 1964 1 1 4 2 2 Males 10 Females 0 Total 10 -6- -7- TUBERCULOSIS - Table of Notifications and Deaths, 1964, from Local Records SEX Total A & S S WARDS * M. F. 0 to 5 6 to 10 11 to 15 16 to £0 21 to 25 26 to 35 36 to 45 46 to 55 56 to 65 66 and over Age known L.Pk. and K.H. M.H. c.c. C.H. E.P. Short lands| W.W. (Nth) w.w. (sth). NOTIFICATIONS | New cases only ] j Pulmonary. 17 9 26 – 1 1 2 3 1 3 2 5 8 - 8 2 6 3 1 2 2 2 | Non-Pulmonary. – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – | Totals 17 9 26 – 1 1 2 3 1 3 2 5 2 – 8 2 6 3 1 2 2 2 | DEATHS | Pulmonary« i 3 2 10 – – – – – 1 – 2 1 6 o c. 2 2 2 2 s | Non~Pulmonazye – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – Totals 8 2 10 – – – – – 1 – 2 1 6 – 2 2 2 – – 2 2 – * L.Pk. and K.H. - Lawrie Park and Kent House. M.H. - Manor House. C.C. - Copers Cope. C.H. - Clock House. E.P. - Eden Park. W.W. (Nth). - West Wickham (North). W.W. (Sth). - West Wickham (South). - 8 - INFANT MORTALITY The number of infant deaths under the age of 12 months for which full records exist was 9 compared with 21 in 1963• The registrar-General returns 10 deaths and the infant mortality rate for 1964 was 8.37 per 1,000 total live "births, 12 hours or under Under 1 week Under 1 month Under 1 year Total M. F. M. F. M. F. M. F. M. F. Congenital: Hearth _ _ 1 1 _ _ _ _ 1 1 Multiple Abnormalities _ _ 1 _ _ _ _ _ 1 _ Achondroplasia 1 _ _ — _ _ _ _ 1 _ Antenatal: 1 _ 1 _ _ _ _ _ 2 _ Natal: Atelectasis 1 _ 1 _ _ _ _ _ 2 — Postnatal: Bronchopneumonia. _ _ _ _ _ _ l _ 1 _ TOTALS 3 _ 4 1 _ _ 1 _ 8 1 ' ' SECTION B HEALTH AND SOCIAL SERVICES In this section are included hospitals and clinics serving the Borough but not all of which are situated within the Borough. Many of these services, including the provision and supervision of old persons hones within the Borough, are directly administered by the County, and the District Officer and District Organiser of the Home Help Service have contributed information for which I am grateful, I am indebted to Mr. Forster and to Mrs, Fisher for their accounts of the work of" the T.B. Care Committee and the Women's Voluntary Service,, l. Hospitals and Clinics Beckenham Hospital - Croydon Road, Beckenham,, Beckenham Maternity Hospital - Stone Park Avenue, Beckenham, Bethlam Royal Hospital., Monies Orchard Road. Beckenham, Bromley Chest Clinic - Tiger Lane, Mason's Hill, Bromley. Bromley Hospital - Cromwell Avenue, Bromley. Kent. Brook General. Hospital - Shooters Hill, S.E.18. Cane Hill Hospital - Coulsdon, Surrey,, Children's Hospital - Sydenham, S.E.26, Cheyne Hospital - West Wickham, Kent. Farnborough Hospital. - Farnborough, Kent, Hither Green Hospital - Hither Green, S.E.13, Joyce Green Hospital - Dartford, Kent,, Lennard Hospital - Bromley Comnon, Bromley, Leyboume Grange Colony - West Mailing, Kent, Netherne Hospital - Coulsdon, Surrey, Orpington Hospital - Sevenoaks Road, Orpington. Kent. Penge Chest Clinic - 1, Westbury Road, Penge, S.E.20. Sundridge Hospital, Sundridge, Nr. Sevenoaks, Kent, Widmcre Road and Mason's Hill Maternity Units, Bromley, Kent. 2, Other Services (Kent County Council). Home Helps. Beckenham District Office, 12, Beckenham Road, Beckenrham, Home Nurses. Beckenham District Office, 12, Beckenham Road, Beckenham. Midwives. Beckenham; 12, Beckenham Road, Beckenham, West Wickham 4, Grosvenor Road and 105a, Station Road, . Ambulances. Through Hospital or Beckenham District Office Old. People's Homes Red House, Southend Road (Middlesex in Borough. C.C.). Kingswood House, Shortlands (Kent C.C.) Durham House and Annexe, Shortlands (Kent C.C.). Thornton House, Bromley Road (S.C.S. Society). Ribblesdale, Crystal Palace Park Road (Salvation Army) Rutland Lodge, Mays Hill Road, Shortlands (Private). 3. Durham Road (Private). 13. Gwydor Road (Private). 99 Venner Road (Private), Mental Welfare. District Offices, 12 Beckenham Road, Beckenham. General Welfare. District Offices, 12 Beckenham Road, Beckenham, Chiropody Clinics. West Wickham and Beckenham. Clinics for Maternity and Child Welfare. The District Officer and his staff are available to assist in the event of any difficulty arising in the arranging of any of the aforesaid County Health Services. . Private and Voluntary Service. Private Nursing Homes. (1) "Fairlavm", 34 Albemarle Road, Beckenham. (2) "Inglewood", 25 Durham Avenue, Bromley, Kent. (3) "Sloans", 151 Albemarle Road, Beckenham, Kent (4) "Waverley1', 51 Albemarle Road, Beckenham, Kent Registration and supervision is delegated to the Borough Council. Children'• s Homes. (1) Dr. Barnardo's Home, 1G Park Road, Beckenham (2) Maude Nathan Home, 72 Crystal Palace Park Road, S.S.26. (3) St. Hilda's Home, Crescent Road, Beckenham. (4) Salvation Army Children's Home, 42 Crystal Palace Park Road, S.E.26. Medical Loan Depot of B.R.C.S. 45 Beckenham Road, Beckenham. Women's Voluntary Services. 12 Bromley Road, Beckenham 103 High Street, West Wickham, Kent. -11- LOCAL CLINIC SERVICES Service Days and Times Prem ises in Use ANTE NATAL B.y Appointment -• Mondays and Wednesdiys, 9-12 noon and 2-3.50 ps Tuesdays, 9-1 £30 p. i. Hater, lity Hospital, Stone m0 Park ..venue, Beckenham. Materi.r' ty Hospital, Stone Park 1 .venue, Beckenham Thursdays, 9-12 nocl Fridays, 9-10 a.m,. Bookings ~ Tuesdays and Thursdays, 2-3 p.m. Maternity Hospital, Stone Park Avenue, Beckenham. CHILL WELFARE Kondays, 2-4 p.m. Clinic Block, Havres Lane, West Wickham Tuesdays, 2-if p0m. (a) Baths Annexe, Beckenham Road, ■ (b) Assembly Hall, Gates Green Road, West Wickhaim Wednesdays, 2-4 p.m. (a) Church Hall, Langley Road, Elmers End (b) Church Hall, Valley Road, Shortlands Thursdays, 2-4 p.m. (a) Church Hall, Lennard Road, Penge. (b) Clinic Block, Town Hall, Beckenham Fridays, 2-4 p.m. (a) Church Hall, Langley Road, Elmers End. (b) Clinic Block, Hawes Lane, West ITickham. POST NATAL Every Friday 10 0.a . a 12.30 p.m« Maternity Hospital, Stone Park Avenue, Beckenham. By appointment. VACCINATION and IMMUNISATION clinics Vaccination and poliomyelitis immunisations by appodnmtment; also diphtheria, whooping and tetanus immunisations. Held during Infant Welfare Sessions at above Clinics except Chulsa Clinic. (Langley Road Friday afternoons only). DENTAL (infant Welfare Cases) By appointment. Clinic Block, Town Hall, Beckenham. By appointment. Clinic Block, Hawes Lane, West Wickham. - 12 - LOCAL CLINIC SERVICES Service Lays and Times Preriiir.es in Use SPEECH Mondays to Fridays inclusive (b3r appointment) Clinic Block, Town Hall Beckenham., CSmOPAEDIC Treatment, Second Wednesday in each month (by appcri ntment) Surgeon in attendance TJ 13 Phy« iotherapist attends by Clinic Block, Town Hall, Beokerihanu appointment as follows:- Monday afternoons ) Thursday afternoons ) Clinic Block, Town Hall, Beckenham, KOTHSRCRA 1?T GLASSES and Friday afternoons 2 p,m, Clinic Block, Town Hall, Beckexiiujiu ESAX&DIOH SISIIUXSIS Thursday afternoons 2 p.m. Clinic Block, Hawes Lane, West Wiokham. KffiWWES M'liS NATAL Monday afternoons 2 p»m« Clinic Block, Town Hall, Beckenham Thursday afternoons 2,15 p»mc Clinic Block, Havres Lane, West Wickham„ CHIROPODY CLIMC Monday and Thursdays 9-12 noon (by appointment) Alternate Tuesdays 9-12 noon (by appointment) Clinic Block, Town Hall, Beckenham Clinic Block, Hawes Lane, West Wiokham. -13- REPORT OP THE DISTRICT OFFICER The following report has "been submitted by Mr, C.J* Moore, District Officer, for which I express my thanks. "The year under review showed a steady increase in the volume of the work of the District Office. During the year 163 applications were received for admission to Part III Accommodation, as against 121 in tho previous year, and of these 61 persons were placed in County Establishments and 18 in homes provided by voluntary organisations. Referring to the final paragraph of my report for 1963, there was a further increase in the number of issues of nursing aids and aids for the handicapped, The number of aids out on loan in the district at the end of 1963 was 26, and at the end of 1964 was 58. In August- a further service was undertaken by the District Officer, This was the follow up of the patients discharged home from the geriatric units. This included the arrangement of the appropriate domiciliary statutory and voluntary services, together with general welfare supervision. During the period from August to the end of the year, 23 patients were referred," REPORT OF HOME HELP ORGANISER. My thanks are duo to Miss Hocking and Mrs. Thompson for the report on this service for the Beckenham and Penge Area. "Demand for the service continued steadily during 1964. Approximately 1,1.-0 cases per week received assistance and 634 new cases were given service during the year. Fifteen families were given service under the Family Care Scheme, but no Family Welfare Service was given during the year. Two cases received evening service. Applications for Home Help Service should be made to the Organisers, at 12, Beckenham Road, Beckenham," - 14 - ' WORK OF TEE CHEST CLINICS I have pleasure in submitting the following report and Table on the work of the Chest Clinics during the .year under review, forwarded to me by Dr. D.G-. Madigan, Chest .Physician, to whom I express my thanks:- "Statistical details of new patients from Beckenham Borough attending the Chest Clinics during 1964 are given In the attached table. No particular comment upon the figures is called for, as they reflect the pattern of recent years. In the field of Tuberculosis control there appears to be undue complacency in Britain today, and this is an attitude towards the disea.se that must be challenged assiduously. Some enlightened countries are beginning to talk about eradication of Tuberculosis, but I do not think we can begin to talk about eradication In this country until we have tightened up our methods of control. Adequate co-operation from all sections of the community depends upon all being imbued with a sense of purpose, and this can only be achieved by well directed and persistent propaganda to this end. Complacency may well cause us to lose ground in the fight against this disease, whereas we should be advancing towards a position whence an all-out effort at eradication could be embarked upon. Immigration has introduced a serious problem in certain industrial centres, and may have adverse repercussions on Tuberculosis control. The danger arising out of patients not taking drugs as prescribed is also a problem which still persists." New Cases attending the Chest Clinics for the first time during 1964 Adults Children under 15 years Male Female Male Female Pulmonary Tuberculosis 11 9 1 1 Non-Pulmonary Tuberculosis - 4 - - Non-Tuberculosis 99 57 32 30 Non-Tuberculosis Tuberculosis New Contacts Examined 97 3 B.C.G-. Vaccination of contacts: 62 Patients admitted to Hospital or Sanatorium suffering from Tuberculosis during 1964.: 28. -15- ■ BECKENHAM DISTRICT TUBERCULOSIS CARE COMTITIEE The following report on the work of the local Tuberculosis Care Committee has been submitted by the Hon. Secretary., Mr. M.E, Forster, to whom I express my thanks. Twenty seven years ago the Beckernham District Tuberculosis Care Committee was set up to help tubercular patients and their families in Beckenham and West Wickham, During 1964. this Voluntary Committee continued its work by spending nearly £320 on such items as gifts at Christmas, meat vouchers, fare for families to visit patients in hospital or sanatorium; settling of electricity and gas bills, and H.P. debts; helping with removal expenses; providing clothing, occupational therapy materials, holidays, house decorations, and correspondence courses. The Committee works in close co-operation with the Chest Clinics and any cases which are referred to the Committee are promptly attended to by one of two Liaison Officers who are authorised to spend up to £5 on immediate needs. Other cases are dealt with at the monthly meetings or, in emergency, by a sub-committee made up of the Committee officers. The Committee has 23 members who represent most voluntary organisations in the area, and relies mainly on its yearly sale of Christmas Seals to replenish its funds. This year it brought In £295. Other money was raised through a Jumble Sale, and the balance made up from donations. Compared with last year, the Committee spent about £10 more in giving 101 grants to less patients, bat the Committee found that help was required by patients with bronchitis and heart trouble. The help for patients other than tubercular has been part; of the Committee's work for the past few years. - 16 - ■ ■ - '■ ' ' BECKENHAM OLD PEOPLE'S WELFARE SERVICES The various services available for elderly persons can be summarised as:- 1. Meals 6. Visiting,, 2. Clubs for recreation 7. Grants (cash or goods). 3. Chiropody 8. Parties and entertainment 4. Outing and holidays 9. Emergency help 5. Personal service 10.Information handbook. Meals These are cooked at two centres. They are delivered in insulated containers on two special vans to the homes of those who from illness or infirmity are unable to provi.de for themselves hot meals. Meals are served three times a week from West Wickham and Beckenham. Thirty-five meals are taken out each time from West Wickham and 40 from Beckenham, There are now two Luncheon Clubs, the meals are cooked by W.V.S. and only a nominal charge is made. Thirty-five meals are served by each Club, For the rest of Beckenham 46 meals are delivered twice a week. The Old People's Welfare Committee hopes to provide a Day Centre which, unlike the Clubs mentioned later in this report, will be open every day of the week to provide social and recreational activities and a Luncheon Club, In addition the kitchen facilities at this centre may enable a daily delivery of hot meals to be made and so increase the numbers of homes included in this service. The Borough Council are helping the Committee with this project, and in addition, having provided a second equipped meals van in 1961 are helping with the maintenance and repair of the two vehicles at an estimated total cost of £150-£2OO per annum. The Council also make an annual contribution of £52 to subsidise the cost of meals which are provided at a charge of 1s, 0d. to 1s. 6d, Nevertheless very considerable voluntary help by assisting at the Centre and helping with the Meal Service will be required from the Borough to set up and maintain the Day Centre which could become the pivot of the service, Clubs The Borough Council pays grants in respect of the annual rents of the following clubs which meet weekly at various premises in the borough:— Coney Hall over 60,s (Thursday afternoons) Civil Defence "C,! Centre, Croydon Road (formerly Assembly Hall). West Wickham over 60's Lecture Hall, Sussex Road. (Monday afternoons) Darby and Joan West Beckenham Hall, Sidney Road (Tuesday afternoons) Darby and Joan West Beckenham Hall, Sidney Road (Thursday afternoons) Darby and Joan Amelia Hall, Croydon Road (Tuesday afternoons) Veterans' Club Aaelia Hall, Croydon Road. (Thursday afternoons) These clubs enable pensioners to lead a happy communal life once a week and the activiti.es of the clubs are directed by its own members committees assisted by a W.V.S. Leader and W.V.S. Secretary, The Veterans Club was a community service project of the Rotary Club of Beckenham,. -17- ; fe. ■'& $S • 5 C & ■ il . ' Three clubs below provide contacts for specially disabled persons, sone of who are elderlys- Social Club for the Blind (Alternate Wednesday afternoons) Azelia Hall, Croydon Road. Samaritan Club for Disabled (1st and 3rd Thursday afternoons) St. Mary's Church Hall, Shortlands. Club for Handicapped People (2nd and 4th Friday afternoons) Emmanual Church Hall, The G-rove, West Wickhan. Chiropody The British Red Cross Society Clinic, dealing with 70-80 patients and. held every other week on alternate Wednesday mornings has continued at the Emanuel Church Hall, West Wickhan, Elderly persons needing hone visits are referred by the Society to the District Officer of the Kent County Council and domiciliary visits are carried out under the County scheme. A whole tine chiropodist employed by the Kent County Council holds a clinic on alternate Tuesday mornings at Hawes Down Infant Welfare Clinic, West Wickhan, and on Monday and Thursday mornings at the Infant Welfare Clinic, Town Hall, Beckenhan, Domiciliary visits for those unable to attend the centres are arranged through the District Officer who also arranges appointments for treatment and assessments of charge up to a maximum of 4s. for treatments in any one week. The Red Cross Clinic at West Wickhan and the Town Hall Welfare Clinic, Bockenhan, are conveniently situated close to main bus routes. Outings_and Holidays Members of Darby and Joan Clubs pay 6d, to l/-d a week to a holiday fund and the balance is made up by the Women's Voluntary Service, who organise outhings to the seaside and holidays at reduced rates. Outings are also arranged by other voluntary organisations, such as the Old People's Welfare Comnittee, Rotary Club, the Soroptimist Club, the Beckonham Veterans Club, the West Wickhan Connunity Council and the West Wickhan British Legion, Personal Service (Visiting, Information and Energency help) Following upon visits, the need for other personal help, such as shopping or gardening is ascertained. The need for grants in cash oxgoods or assistance of various kinds including the provision of books for the library, the need for outings or holidays for those not attending clubs, or out of touch with relatives and needing conpanionship is discovered at these tines, — 18 — Information in a guide handbook for old people has been issued widely by the Old People's Welfare Committee through sub-post offices, libraries and shops and by Officers of the National Assistance Board and by voluntary organisations. With the establishment of a Day Centre more old people will become known and in time a fairly comprehensive register will be available. The Emergency Call Scheme (Beckenham) has proved its worth and the voluntary committee operating it have produced a flashing warning light for attachment to the Help Card and use at night which may be generally adopted,, Following the issue of the Lifebe.lt Emergency Call Card to each person, information is being collected by a member of the Committee and will form the basis for further visiting and other personal services. Visiting is carried out by members of various organisations such as the W.V.S. Rotary and Inner Wheel Clubs and various Townswomen's Guilds. Visits of qualified nurses to old persons are made by health visitors of the County Health Authority. At these visits the nature of the emergency is determined and information is obtained concerning details of relatives membership of clubs, provision of services, means of income, accident prevention safeguards, ability to manage at home or need for admission to old peoples homes. Care in Homos Admissions to old people's homes are either arranged privately, or if to county maintained homes, by the family doctor through the District Officer, A comprehensive list of the 42 Rest Homes and Old People's Homes and 32 Nursing Homes within a 5 mile radius is also maintained in the Beckenham Health Department® A domestic help service, which includes a night attendant and evening service, is provided by the County Health Authority in suitable cases and for an assessed charge. Where possible, nursing requisites, aids, equipment and bedding are provided and Home Nurses attend to give treatments for those nursed at home, by arrangement between the family doctor and the District Officer. Help with laundry and baths , when required., Is provided by the special concessions to pensioners provided by -two launderettes and facilities at the Central Baths at reduced charges. The Librarian arranges for the collection and change of books if elderly persons are unable to make the journey to the libraries. Hospital Visiting The Rotary Club co-operates with a voluntary Committee in the north-western area of the Borough in arranging transport for infirm persons Ffishing to visit hospital. -19- ■ Housing Accommodation For elderly persons on their housing list points scheme the Council have over the years provided more than 200 flats or flatlets on various estates through the Borough. The Abbeyfield Society have set up three homes and a fourth will be opened early in 1964 The Beckenham Old People's Welfare Committee have a project for building a block of flatlets with communal room and wardens quarters. Accommodation in private houses in suitable cases may be arranged through the North-West Kent Council of Social Service, This scheme provides mainly for those in hospital who have a home of their own but Whom the hospital cannot release because there is no one to care for them and for similar types of need. Nursing at Home No night nursing is provided by the District Nurses but day home nursing is provided by one male nurse and thirteen female nurses employed by the County Council for the area of Beckenham, Penge and Anerley. -20- V WOMEN'S VOLUNTARY SERVICE I an very grateful to Mrs0 J.M, Fisher, Centre Organizer of the W.V.S, who has kindly submitted. the following interesting report - Darby and Joan Clubs. Three Darby and Joan Clubs in Beckenhan and two Over 6Cfs Clubs in West Wickhan are still running in the Borough. Of the Beckenhan Clubs, two are held on Tuesday and one on Thursday from 1.4-5 to 4.15 P.m. Membership of the three Clubs in Beckenhan is about 500, and all the neribers are over 60 years of age. The membership fee is Id., and a charge of 3d is made for tea. Whist Drives, Darts Matches and Raffles are held each week, and at least two of the Clubs have talented choirs which entertain not only their own members, but other organisations as well, A free library is available to members and there are also plenty of magazines for reading. Spring and Autumn outings are arranged for Club members and in the winter visits are made to pantomimes and ice shows. Members also have holidays at reduced rates -- out of season - at the seaside, A savings group is run for members who wish to save weekly towards holidays, outings etc. The Club3 are subsidised by voluntary subscriptions. The two Over 601s Clubs are run in West Wickham with an average membership of 130/150. Meals on Wheels Meals are served three tines a week from West Wickham and Beckenhan, Thirty-five meals are taken out each time from West Wickham and 40 from Beckenhan. The service is run principally for the benefit of invalids and elderly people who live alone and cannot cook for themselves. The meals are cooked in the Centre by members of W.V.S. Appeals for meals usually come from Hospital Almoners, Doctors and through the Darby and Joan Clubs. An allowance towards the cost of transport is made through the local and county authorities. Cost of the meals is subsidised by voluntary funds, and those in need are only required to pay a very small sum for the service. West Wickham Luncheon Club There are now two Luncheon Clubs, the meals are cooked by W.V.S. and only a nominal charge is made. Thirty-five meals are served by each Club. Old Peoplo's Welfare Visits are made to elderly people who live alone, and assistance is given with regard to clothing which is supplied free on the authority of the National Assistance Board, District Nurses, etc. Owing to a fund started by one of the Townswomen's Guilds we are now able to send a few special cases of old people away to the sea for out of season holidays. This year we were able to send eight away. -21- Hospital Work Work in connection with Beckenham Hospital has been much appreciated and consists of help with the library, flowers and magazines. Members at West Wickham aerye teas for the parents of children at Cheyne Hospital, Maternity Work Many baby garments have been knitted and we now have a Guild of Service which will supply help personally to the Matron, This Guild consists of W.V.S. and non-W.V.S. from Bookenham and West Wickham, Members from Test Wickham also run a trolley service at the Home Baby Clinics Helpers are supplied at three of the baby clinics in the Borough and assist on the selling of Welfare Foods, weighing end clerical work. Clothing Depot Good stocks of second-hand clothing are held at West Wickham and Beckenham which are available for the old and sick people in the Borough who come to us with a note from the National Assistance Foard, Doctors or Health Visitors. We are also able to help younger people with clothes and mothers with baby clothes. We work in liaison with Prison authorities. Welfare Foods The Centre dispenses National Dried Milk, Orange Juice, Cod liver Oil and Vitamin tablets. Periodicals for the Forces We send five large parcels of books and magazines each month to our Forces in the Middle and Far East, and West Wickham send 12 smaller parcels a month. We get a small grant from the County Office towards postage and the remainder has to be found by the Centre, usually from any money we obtain from the sale of salvage. Services Club One of our members attends the Victory Club each Friday, where she works in the library. Canning Members fx on the West Wiokhafi Centre canned a large quantity of fruit for the Maternity Hospital during the summer, Chilli; eni s Holiday s We have been able to arrange holidays for a number of children who are recommenaed to us by the Tuberculosis After Care Committee and Health Visitors, Last summer seven children benefited from a holiday at the seaside or in the country, The parents pay what they can towards the holiday and we find the rest. Civil Dofenco Eight members of the West Wickham Centre belong to the Food Flying Squad and three from Beckenham. In addition to the aforementioned activities the W.V.S. is closely connected with the Tuberculosis After-Care Committee, Area Pension Officer, British Legion, The Disabled Persons' Committee and Children's Homes. We also run a Trolley shop at Durham House and at Kingswood House. -22- BECKENHAM HOLES SAFETY SUB-COMMITTEE I have pleasure in submitting the following report on the work of the Beckenhan Hone Safely Committee, forwarded to no by Mr. J. Bretton, Local Safety Offioer. During the past year, the Hone Safety Sub-Committee has supported the National Campaign on general hone safety aspects, hut particularly on the theme of "Sight Testing". It is hoped through this part of the campaign to make all people conscious of the appalling rate of eye injuries which occur almost daily. Nearly all hone accidents can kill. Many non-fatal injuries leave permanent disability, especially burns and scalds and fractures, but tragic though these consequences are, they often seen less serious than the accident which causes eye injury or blindness, so depriving the vie tin of all or part of the sense of sight. Prom. January to March, 1965, it is proposed to hold a "Winter Hazards" campaign, dealing with falls and poisoning, and from October to December, emphasis will be on National lire Prevention Campaign, and the Home Office, in conjunction with R.S.P.A. and fire Protection Associations, are arranging for full national publicity on this very costly and important subject. Various Quiz Units and portable displays were shewn at nary Summer Fetes and Shows, whilst large and snail exhibitions were held at Clinics and Schools. A considerable quantity of publicity material was displayed throughout the Borough daring the year, particularly on local Authority and school premises, this with the valued assistance of various head teachers and their staff, and members of the Junior Accident Prevention Council. A Road/Home Safety exhibition was one of the features at the Town Hall during the visit of the "Young Citizens" on the 25th September, 1964, The Local Safety Officer was in attendance, and many interesting questions were asked and discussions took place among these young men and women. Training equipment and propaganda material was on view, the latter being freely distributed. As a result of these exhibitions, displays, etc., many requests have been made to the Local Safety Officer for lectures to be given to Youth Clubs2 Parent Teachers' Associations, Scouts and Guides and St. John's Ambulance, In the latter cases, many of these training lectures being required as part of the syllabus for the Duke of Edinburgh's Award. In 196/4- Beokenham Hospital recorded l,66l home accidents, of which 548 were children. This compares most favourably with the figures for the previous year, when 2,153 accidents were recorded, of which 759 were children. It is noted, however, that cuts, fractures and burns still predominate as the chief causes of hone accidents, - 23 - . BECKSNHM ACCIDENT PREVENTION COMMITTEE The following report on the work of the Beckenhan Accident Prevention Committee has been submitted by Mr0 J. Bretton, Local Safety Officer. National Road Safety Campaign 1965 - "Road Safety Depends on You" The present campaign with its thene "Think Ahead" will continue until the end of March, 1965, when it will be replaced on the 1st April with the new campaign, the theme being "Road Safety Depends on You". This campaign plans to cover the training of all road users, whether pedestrians, riders or drivers, with the emphasis on responsibility, physical fitness, competence of drivers, drink and the necessity of vehicle fitness. During the campaign, and to meet the desire of many people concerned with Road Safety, certain periods will be devoted to a pin-point event, covering keep the distance, drink and vehicle maintenance, together with others. It is hoped by the furtherance of these schemes and ideas, that 1965 will be a year of progress for accident prevention. Safety consciousness daily becomes fashionable, with the result that the accent on training becomes more pronounced. The "Tufty Clubs" which started in December 1961 have caught on like wildfire. Many hundreds of clubs have started throughout the country, and the training given to these toddlers within these clubs, should be a wonderful contribution in the fields of personal safety. The Child Safety Service will continue its valuable aids for the teaching of school children. There must be further extensions of the National Childrens Cycling Scheme, the R.A.C./A.C.U. scheme for learner motor-cyclists and the various driver training schemes which are being formed in many areas. Experience has shown that the schemes shown above have been most instrumental in the reduction of road, accidents, and in particular, those affecting child cyclists. Cycling Proficiency Cycling by young people, particularly those of school age, plays a tremendously important part in their development, as proficient road users for the future. Many of the casualties on the highway are caused by ignorance of road laws, incorrect or slip-shod signalling, lack of understanding of the machine being driven, or just plain thoughtlessness. Expert roadmanship calls for a variety of skills that can be learned under the National Cycling Proficiency Scheme. From April 1964 to April 1965, approximately 789 children from various schools within the Borough have been trained, and tested for their certificate and badge; this shows a slight increase from those of the previous year. These figures were only attained through the excellent co-operation afforded the Local Safety Officer by the Head Teachers and their staff, and the parents of these children, who allowed them to attend for training during the school holiday periods. -24- General (a) Many Junior and Infant schools were visited by the Local Safety Officer prior to the Christmas holidays, lectures and demonstrations given, whilst a considerable amount of propoganda material, in the form of games, painting hooks, puzzles, etc., were distributed to the children. (b) The "Tufty Club" at the West Wickham Clinic, nas now a membership of 186 children, all under the age of five years. Excellent assistance and co-operation has been given to the Local Safety Officer by the Clinic Staff and parents of these young children in the preparation of demonstrations. (c) The joint Road/Home Safety Exhibition by Beckenham and Penge Councils was held at the Town Hall, Penge, from the 12th to 17th October. This exhibition was indeed a great success, approximately 6,000 people attended during the week; many schools co-operated and regular groups attended at half hour intervals, and were shown all the exhibits and took advantage of the "Roadcraft" working models under the direction of the many Police Instructors who were in attendance. (d) Series of lectures on Road and Home Safety have been given to Youth Clubs, Land Rangers and school groups during the year under review; many of these lectures on Accidents in the Home being required as part of the syllabus to qualify for the Duke of Edinburgh's Award. Accident Statistics An analysis of personal injury road accidents, throughout the Borough, as supplied by the Police Authorities, is shown below with comparisons for the previous year. 1962 1963 ACCIDENTS reported 400 397 CASUALITIES resulting 504 537 FATAL 13 7 SERIOUS 76 93 Age Groups 15 years and under 88 91 16-50 years of age 321 370 Over 50 years of age 95 76 Classes of Road User involved, 1964- Motor Cars and passengers 230 Motor Cyclists and pillion passengers 94 Scooters, Moped and pillion passengers 53 Pedal Cyclists 72 Pedestrians 88 Total 537 - 25 - . REPORT ON THE WORK OP THE PUBLIC HEALTH INSPECTORS FOR THE YEAR 1964. I am very grateful for the following Report and Tables from Mr. G.A. Webber, Chief Public Health Inspector, which sets out the work of the Inspectors during the year. SECTIONS C, D, E. Statistical information relating to the work of the Inspectors is appended:- Housing-Inspection of Dwelling Houses during the Year. Total number of dwelling-houses inspected for housing defects (under Public Health or Housing Acts) 1,293 Number of inspections made for the purpose 2,170 Number of dwelling-houses (included under sub-head (l) above) which were inspected and recorded under the Housing Consolidated Regulations, 1925 31 Number of inspections made for the purpose 35 Number of dwelling-houses (exclusive of those referred to under the following sub-head) found not to be in all respects reasonably fit for human habitation 132 Number of dwelling-houses found to be in a state so dangerous or injurious to health as to be unfit for human habitation - Number of dwelling-houses in respect of which informal notices were served 88 Number of dwelling-houses in which defects were remedied after service of informal notices 90 Number of dwelling-houses in respect of which formal notices were served requiring defects to be remedied 44 Number of dwelling-houses in which defects were remedied after service of formal notices: (a) by owners 50 (b) by Local Authority in default of owners - Number of complaints received 1,524 Number of initial visits 8,218 Number of re-visits 2,495 Nuisances Remedied Structural Defects of properties - External 70 Internal 68 Insanitary conditions other than vermin 5 Verminous conditions 4 Smoke Nuisances 20 Choked drains 454 Other drainage defects 115 Defective sanitary appliances 40 Insufficient or unsuitable water supply 20 Absence of dustbin accommodation 10 Offensive accumulations 22 -26 . FOOD AND DRUGS SAMPLING Two hundred and forty-three samples of food and drugs were submitted to the Public Analyst. Details are appended:- Article Formal Informal Almonds (Ground) - 4 Almond Extract - 1 Almond Flavouring - 1 Anchovy Sauce - 1 Apple Green Food Colouring - 1 Aspirins - 2 Baking Powder - 1 Beans in Tomato Sauce - 1 Beef Spread with Butter - 1 Bitter Lemon Drink - 2 Blackcurrant Drink - 3 31oater Spread - l Breakfast Grill - 1 Bronchial Mixture - 1 Cake Covering - l Cambridge Steaks - 1 Cashew Kernels - 1 Castor Oil - 1 Cayenne Pepper - 2 Cheese Sauce - 1 Cheese Spread - 3 Cherries in Syrup - 1 Chicken Supreme - 1 Chocolate Eclair - l Coffee — 3 Coffee & Chicory Essence - l Cooking Oil - l Concentrated Bolognese Sauce - 1 Corned Beef Loaf - 1 Cough Mixture - 2 Crab Spread - 1 Cream - 4 Cumberland Sauce - 1 Currants - 1 Curry Powder - 1 Custard Powder - 1 Dessicated Coconut - 1 Drinking Chocolate - 3 Eccles Cake - l French Angelica - 1 Frig-Ice - 1 Fruit Salad in Heavy Syrup - 1 Gin - 4 Ginger (Ground) - l - 27 - Article Fomal Informal Glace Cherries - 2 Glycerine Lemon & Honey Balsam - 1 Golden Raising Powder - 1 Groundnut oil - 2 Halibut Liver Oil Capsules — 1 Han & Chicken Roll — 1 Herbal Cough Mixture - 1 Ice Cream - 6 Instant Apple Flakes - 1 Instant Milk - 1 Jam — 1 Jelly - 3 Lamb Tongues - 2 Lemons - 1 Lemon Cheese — 2 Lemon Crown Mix - 1 Lemond Curd - 1 Lemon Filling - 1 Lemon Glucose Brink - 1 Lemon Juice — 2 Lemon Squash - 2 Madeira Cake - 1 Margarine - 1 Marzipan - 1 Meat Tuna - 1 Milk, Evaporated - 2 Milk Pasteurised 44 5 Milk, Sterilised 11 — Milk, Separated 1 - Milk, T.T. 13 - Milk, Untreated 2 - Minced Steak with Spaghetti & Tomato - 1 Mincemeat Flavoured with Brandy - 1 Mint Jolly - 1 Mixed Fruit - 1 Non Alcholic Ginger - 1 Orange Drink - 3 Orange Flavoured Syrup - 1 Orange Pie Filling - 1 Orange Squash - 3 Oxtail Soup - 2 Pancake Mixture - 1 Peaches in Sorbital Syrup - 1 Peanut Butter - 2 -28- Article Formal Informal Pearl Barley - 2 Peas — 1 Pilchards in Tomato Sauce — 1 Plums in Syrup - 1 Pork in Natural Juice - 1 Pork Kidneys in Rich Gravy - 1 Pork Luncheon Meat — 2 Pork Sausages - 1 Prunes in Syrup - 1 Quick-Jel - 1 Raspberry Pie Filling - 1 Raspberry & Rose Hip Syrup - 1 Rice (Ground) - 1 Rice Milk Pudding - 3 Rum Flavouring - 1 Saccharin Sodium Tablets — 1 Scampe Pate - 1 Self Raising Flour - 1 Shredded Beef Suet - 1 Spaghetti Bolognese - 1 Steakettes - 1 Stewed Steak - 3 Sultanas - 2 Tartare Sauce - 1 Tenderising Salt - 1 Tomato Juice - 1 Tomato Sauce Mix - 1 Vegetable Oil - 1 Venison Steak in Wine Sauce - 1 Vi-Dris - 1 Vinegar - 3 Wholewheat Flour - 1 Yogurt - 2 No instances of adulteration were found. In addition to the sampling of milk for chemical analysis, samples are also taken and submitted to the Public Health Laboratory Service for examination for keeping quality, and in the case of pasteurised milk, for the adequacy of heat treatment, In 1964, 116 samples were submitted. Six failed the keep ing quality test, but immediate repeat samples from the dairies concerned proved satisfactory., The remainder passed the tests to which they were submitted. - 29 - Ice Cream Six samples of loe Cream were submitted to chemical analysis during 1964 and all were found to comply with the statutory standard for this product. One hundred and nineteen samples were submitted to bacteriological examination, as a result of which the samples are graded into four degrees of bacterial cleanliness. The results were as follows:- Grade 1 Grade 2 Grade 3 Grade 4 108 11 - Only samples falling into Grades 3 aud 4 are regarded as unsatisfactory, indicating some bacterial contamination either in the manufacture or the retail serving of the product. Rent Act, 1957 The details of the administration of this Act were referred to fully in the 1957 Annual Report Three applications were received for Certificates of Disrepair during the year 1964, bringing the total number of applications tc 153 since the Act came into operation in June, 1957. Disinfection The Council undertakes, free of charge, the disinfection of rooms, articles of clothing and bedding after cases of Tuberculosis and occasionally other Infectious Diseases. Requests for the steam disinfection of bedding, etc., other than for notifiable illness, are mot but a charge is made for the service During 1964, 42 applications were received and accounts rendered for £66. 0. 0. During the year, 150 Library books were collected from homes and hospitals where infectious disease had occurred, disinfected and returned to the Library of origin. Mortuary The administration of the Beckenham Mortuary is the responsibility of the Public Health Department, the Mortuary Attendant being a member of the Medical Officer's staff. During 1964, 217 bodies were brought to the Mortuary where postmortem examinations were conducted by a Home Office Pathologist. Twenty-six Inquests were held in the Town Hall. Movable Dwellings Thirteen families occupied movable dwellings under licence from the Council during 1964. Thirty-nine inspections of the sites of the caravans were made, and in no instance was a Public Health nuisance discovered. . ' Factories Act, 1937-1959 PRESCRIBED PARTICULARS ON THE ADMINISTRATION OF THE FACTORIES ACT, 1937 PART 1 OF THE ACT 1. INSPECTIONS for purposes of provisions as to health (including inspections made by Public Health Inspectors). Premises Number on Register Number of Inspections Written Notices Occupiers Prosecuted (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (i) Factories in which Sections 1, 2, 3, 4, and 6 are to be enforced by Local Authorities 17 1 - - (ii) Factories not included in (i) in which Section 7 is enforced by the Local Authority 164 180 - - (iii) Other Premises in which Section 7 is enforced by the Local Authority (excluding outworkers' premises) - - - - - 31 - 2. Cases in which DEFECTS were found. Particulars Number of cases in which defects were found Number of cases in which prosecutions were instituted Found Remedied Referred From H.M. Inspector To H.M. Inspector (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) Want of clean- (S.l). liness 1 1 - - - 0vercrowding(S.2) Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil Unreasonable temperature(S.3) Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil Inadequate ventilation(S.4) Nil Nil Nil Nil - Nil Ineffective drainage of floors (S.6) Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil Sanitary Conveniences (S.7) (a) Insufficient 4 4 Nil Nil Nil (b) Unsuitable or defective 4 - - - - (c) Not separate for sexes Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil Other offences against the Act (not including Nil Nil Nil. Nil Nil Total 9 9 - - - PART VIII OF THE ACT OUTWORK (Sections 110 and 111) Nature of Work Section 110 Section 111 Number of outworkers in August list required by Section 110 (l) (c) Number of cases of default in sending lists to the Council Number of prosecutions for failure to supply lists Number of instances of work in unwholesome premises Notices served Prosecutions (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) Wearing apparel, making, etc. 33 - - - - - -32- Water Supply The water supply of the area ha3 been satisfactory in quality and quantity, the Metropolitan Water Board supplying all properties in the area by main. Bacteriological examination has been regular, 36 samples being taken during the year. All proved to be satisfactory. Drainage. As will be seen from the Table of nuisances remedied, 454 instances of choked drains were reported during the year. A great many of these chokages related to public sewers, i.e. drains receiving wastes of two or more houses. The Council accepts as a legal responsibility, the clearance of public sewers, and the work is undertaken without any charge being made to the owners or occupiers of the properties. Of the 454 cases discovered, however, 336 related to private drainage, and in these cases a charge is made for the work undertaken. Accounts were rendered for £287. 2. Od for this work. Infestation by Rats and Mice. Six hundred and thirty two complaints were received in 1964 of which 40 related to business premises. A charge is made for the service provided in respect of business premises, whereas private residential property is served free of charge. During the year, accounts for £86. 7. 3d were rendered in respect of business premises. Baiting of certain sections of the main sewers known to be rat infested, has been maintained during the year. Shops Act, 1950. The duties of the Public Health Inspectors under this Act differ very widely in character. The health and welfare provisions embrace sanitation, heating, ventilation, rest facilities, etc., but the Inspectors are also the Council's authorised Officers for enforcing the statute so far as it relates to hours of opening and closing, the weekly half-holiday and early closing day, Sunday trading, the type of goods which are prohibited from sale at certain times, the employment of young persons, and the keeping of records. During 1964, 401 visits were made to shops in the Borough, National Assistance Act, 1948 Burial and Cremation of Dead Section 50 of this Act places responsibility on a local authority for the burial of persons who have died, or been found dead, in their area where it appears that no suitable arrangements for disposal have been made. During 1964, it was necessary to take action under this Section on one occasion only. - 33 - CLEAN AIR ACT, 1956 SMOKE CONTROL AREAS The Beckenham Smoke Control Order, 1960, embracing 2,297 properties has been in force since 1st November, 1961. The Beckenhan (No. 2) Smoke Control Order, 1962 covering a further 2,500 properties came into operation, on the 1st October, 1963. During 1963 the detailed survey of the proposed third area was completed, but submission to the Minister for Confirmation was delayed until December 1964, due to uncertainty of the availability of the approved fuels. During 1964, a detailed survey of the proposed No. 4 area was commenced. At the request of the Minister the Council submitted its proposed programme for eventually covering the whole Borough as a smokeless area in the following approved form:Approximate number of premises in the area: 27,800, Acreage of local authority area. 5,935. 34 Number of premises and acreage of land in smoke control areas. (1) (2) Covered by Orders made up to 3l.l2.6l, (3) Estimated additions oevored by . Orders to be made during 1962, (4) Estimated additions covered by Orders to be made during 1963 (5) Estimated additions covered by Orders to be made during 1964 (6) Estimated additions covered by Orders to be made during 1965 (7) Estimated additions covered by Orders to be made during 1966 (8) Final. objective the total numbers it is intended ultimately to cover) (9) Target year for completion of programme Premises 2,667 - 2,670 NIL 2,260 2,220 27,800 1971 Dwellings 2,297 - 2,500 NIL 1,890 1,850 24,038 Acres 507.2 - 534.2 NIL 1,015.9 433.7 5,935 ■ -35- I am grateful to Dr. E, Windle Taylor, Director of Water Examination for the following tables:- BEFORS TREATMENT Source of supply Number of samples Agar plate count per ml. ' Coliform count Kscherichia coli count 20-24 hours at 37°C 3 days at 22 C, Per cent samples negative in 100 ml. Per cent samples negative in 100 ml. Thames-derived South of River ¯ ¯ ¯ ¯ ¯ Shortlands No. 1 well 68 0.0 75 98.53 98.53 Shortlands No. 2 well 85 0.1 3 100.0 100,0 Shortlands No. 3 well 199 0.2 3 99.50 99.50 West wickham well 238 0.1 6 100.0 100.0 Orpington well 242 . 0.4 6 99.58 100.0 Source of Supply AFTER TREATMENT Number of samples Agar plate count per ml. Coliform count ischerichia coli count 20-24. hours at 37°C. 3 davs at 22 C Per cent samples negative in 190 ml, Per cent. samples negative in 100 ml.  Thanes-derived South of River 1883 10o6 99.95 100.0 Short-lands well 244 0.1 2 99.59 99.59 West Wickham well 242 0.0 2 100.0 100.0 Orpington well 245 0.2 19 100.0 100.0 -36 AVERAGE RESULTS OF THE CHEMICAL EKAMINATION OF WATER. SUPPLIED TO THE BOROUGH OF BECKNHAM DURING 1964 Milligrammes per litre (unless otherwise stated) Description of sample Thames-derived South of River Shortlands Well West Wickham Well Orpington Number of samples 159 11 4 4 Ammoniacal nitrogen 0.031 0.008 0.006 0.007 Albuminoid nitrogen 0.075 0.027 0.028 0.015 Nitrate nitrogen 5.0 5.2 5.7 6.9 Chloride as Cl. 34 18 15 16 Oxygen abs. from KMno 4 hrs. at 27 C 1.06 0.06 0.06 0.12 Turbidity units 1 Nil Nil Nil Colour (Burgess) scale 11 Nil Nil Nil Hardness (total) 264 284 266 284 Hardness (non-carbonate) 64 64 28 36 pH value 7.6 7.2 7.2 7.1 Phosphate as Po4 1.0 — — Silicate as Si02 9 — — — Sulphate as SO4 60 — —.i — Magnesium as Mg. 5 — — — Surface-active material as Manoxol OT 0.09 — — — Electrical conductivity (micromhos) 550 520 480 510 Natural fluoride as F. 0.25 0.15 0.l 0.1 j-j. ' . ■ ■ ' ' SECTION F. INFECTIOUS DISEASE (l) DISEASE 0-4 years 5-14 years 15 years and over Age Unknown Admitted to Hospital TOTAL TOTAL  M E M F M E M E M E M E Measles 27 24 25 24 — 1 _ _ 52 49 101 Scarlet Fever 11 4 15 10 _ 1 _ _ 1 _ 26 15 41 Whooping Cough. 3 11 11 14 3 _ _ 1 _ 1 17 26 43 Dysentery. _ _ 1 2 2 2 _ _ _ _ 3 4 7 Meningococcal Infection. l _ _ _ _ 1 _ _ 1 1 1 1 2 Pneumonia. _ 1 1 _ 5 2 _ _ _ _ 6 6 12 Erysipelas _ _ _ _ 2 1 _ _ — — 2 1 3 Food Poisoning 2 1 2 _ 2 _ _ _ 1 — 6 1 7 Opthalmia Neonatorum _ 1 _ _ _ _ _ _ — _ — 1 l Malaria _ _ _ _ _ 1 _ _ _ _ _ 1 1 - 37 - INFECTIOUS DISEASE (2) The following Table gives the number of cases notified during the year. DISEASE J.AN FEB MAR APR MAY JUNE JULY AUG SEPT OCT NOV DEC TOTAL   Measles, 4 6 2 - - 10 38 15 2 5 6 13 101 Scarlet Fever. 3 7 12 4 2 1 2 1 2 2 3 2 41 Whooping Cough. 3 6 5 . 2 6 5 5 4 6 1 - - 43 Dysentery 3 - - - - 1 1 1 - - - - 7 Meningococcal Infection. - - - - - - - - 1 1 - - 2 Pneumonia 8 1 - - - - - - - 1 2 - 12 Erysipelas - 1 - - - - 1 - - - - - 3 Eood Poisoning 2 - - - - - - 2 3 - - - 7 phthalmia Neonatorum 1 - - - - - - - - - - - 1 Malaria 1 - - - - - - - - - - - 1 TOTALS 25 21 19 7 8 17 47 23 14 11 11 15 218 -38- INFECTIOUS DISEASE (3) W A R D S* L.Pk. and K.H. C.C. C.H. M.H. E.P. Shortlands w.w. (North) w.w. (South)   Measles 23 4 1 34 20 5 8 6 Scarlet Fever 18 — 6 2 2 4 7 2 Whooping Cough 15 2 16 1 1 2 1 5 Dysentery — 5 — 1 — 1 — — Meningococcal Infection — l 1 — — — — — Pneumonia — — 1 3 4 — — 4 Erysipelas — — 1 2 — — — — Food Poisoning — 1 1 — 1 4 — — Opthalmia Neonatorum 1 — — — — — — — Malaria — — — — — — — 1 TOTALS 57 13 27 43 28 16 16 18 - 39 - * L.Pk, and K.H.- Lawrie Park and Kent House. M.H. - Manor House. C.C. - Copers Cope. C.H.Clock House E.P. Eden park. w.w. (North) - West Wickham (North). w.w. (South) - west Wickham (South). IMMUNISATION AND VACCINATION I have set out below the Diphtheria Immunisation, Whooping Cough Immunisation and Smallpox Vaccination figures for 1964 based on record cards. Year of | Birth Diphtheria Immunisation Whooping Cough Immunisation (Singly or in combination) (Singly or in combination, Primary Reinforcing Primary 1964 444 - 443 1963 432 50 429 1962 28 253 26 1961 5 78 5 I960 5 83 3 1955-1959 9 469 6 1950-1954 3 65 1 TOTAL 926 1018 Primary Vaccination 1 year Re-Vaccination School Age but under 8 years. 601 - POLIOMYELITIS VACCINATION The following Table shows the number of injections given in the various priority groups during the year ended 31st December, 1964. Year 3rd & 4th Dose (Salk and Oral) 3 Orals (Completed Course) 1964 1 165 1963 4 639 1962 4 81 1961 3 35 1949-1960 663 55 1933-1948 2 36 Others 3 37 Total 680 1048 -40-