BER 3 METROPOLIS LOCAL MANAGEMENT ACT. 18 & 19 Vic. cap. 120. REPORTS OF DR. CHALLICE, MEDICAL OFFICER OF HEALTH, FOR THE PARISH OF BERMONDSEY, SURREY, FOR THE YEARS 1858-9. "EITHER DEATH OR LIFE." Shakspeare. LONDON: PRINTED BY W. BRICKHILL & H. GREENWOOD, NEWINGTON (S.) 1859. MEDICAL OFFICER'S REPORT. TO THE VESTRY OF BERMONDSEY. June 21st, 1858. Mr. Chairman and Gentlemen,—Notwithstanding the excessive heat, we are happily exempt from the presence of any serious epidemic, although some few cases of diarrhœa and summer cholera have occurred. I am, however, anxious with regard to several places in the parish, more especially of the district in and about Blue Anchor-road, where there is an entire absence of drainage. Buildings are being rapidly raised and occupied, and there is a state of things arising which I consider as highly dangerous. The open ditches in the market garden grounds are also in a very offensive condition, and it is highly desirable that the tide should be let in frequently during the present season. My attention has been drawn to a most offensive high level sewer in Grange-road, which I think is a very serious nuisance, and believe has been productive of disease on former occasions. It passes immediately beneath the pavement, and is in an imperfect Condition. It is my duty also to draw the attention of the Vestry to the open ditch in Blue Anchor-lane; this is one of the works which, I trust, will he early carried out; most decidedly it is the most serious nuisance left in this parish. I have certified the premises occupied by Messrs. Morrall & Co. as a nuisance, in consequence of the entire absence of efficient drainage. Also the premises of Mr. Dilnut in Grigg's-place for an accumulation of skutch; and the shop of Mr. Pearce, 13, Bermondsey New-road, for cats' and dogs' meat in an offensive and putrid condition. I place so much reliance on the efficacy of the free use of water in our district, during the present temperature and season, that I venture very respectfully and urgently to advise additional watering carts, even although attended with some increased expense, for a temporary period. I am, Gentlemen, Your obedient Servant, JOHN CHALLICE, M.D., Officer of Health. TO THE VESTRY OF BERMONDSEY. July 5th, 1858. Mr. Chairman and Gentlemen, —I have on two occasions, viz., on the 5th and the 2nd instant, inspected the premises of Messrs. Eason in reference to the complaint made to this Board of a most offensive and aggravated nuisance, arising from the process of tan burning. I have also, since the last meeting of the Vestry, directed my attention constantly to the shaft through which the smoke arising from this process passes to the atmosphere, and which is the source of the nuisance complained of. My report now must be the same as on a former occasion. The facts are exactly similar. The tan is consumed in a closed furnace or oven, and the smoke is passed through a flue over a fire into the shaft. On some occasions there has undoubtedly been much smoke escape from the shaft; and in certain conditions of the atmosphere it has been a considerable discomfort to the neighbourhood, occasioning cough, and also nausea with loss of appetite. Lately, however, I have not observed any amount of smoke which would cause such legitimate grounds of complaint. This improvement may fairly be attributed to increased pains and care taken in keeping the fire in the flue constantly fed with coals, for then the quantity of smoke which escapes is trifling in comparison with what it is under other circumstances. My attention and that of your Inspector being now directed to the question, any occasion in which the neighbourhood is subjected to inconvenience, which must be the result of inattention or neglect, shall be presented to this Vestry on the first opportunity. My attention has been called to offensive effluvia proceeding from the premises of Messrs. Barrow & Son in the Spa-road. On inspection, I found some pits close to the foot pavement, and others within a few feet, which contained very offensive matters; there was also an accumulation of skutch by the palings, and there is an offensive privy abutting on the pavement. The practice of keeping skins in "old soaks" is one which I am pleased to find is being abolished by some of the large firms; as it is now ascertained that the plentiful use of fresh water is in every respect preferable. I look upon the entire abolition 4 of the custom as very desirable, and likely to aid materially in maintaining the improved health of our district. I have also to report that, en complaint, I visited and inspected Mr. Axtell's premises in Bermondsey-street. The yard was filthy, is unpaved, has no channels for carrying off the surface drainage, and the soaks adjoin the rear of houses in Bermondsey-street, causing sickness and great inconvenience to the inhabitants. I visited the premises on a former occasion, and pointed out to Mr. Axtell the necessity for improvement, which I regret has not (although promised) been attended to. There are urgent complaints of inefficient and most inadequate water supply for the purposes of life, health, and cleanliness at George'splace East, in Snow's-fields, and in Fort-street. Measles are still prevalent, and somewhat fatal. For the week ending June 19th, we had 8 deaths from this disease, and 3 from whooping cough. The total number from all causes being 30, which is beyond the average by 7. For the week ending June 26th, there are 4 deaths from measles, 2 from Scarlatina, and 3 from Diarrhœa; in children, not however in an epidemic form, the total mortality this week is 21, being somewhat less than the average. I am happy to report that, owing to a fall in the temperature and some rain, the Thames is to-day decidedly less offensive. I am, Gentlemen, Your obedient Servant, JOHN CHALLICE, M.D., Officer of Health. TO THE VESTRY. OF BERMONDSEY. July 19th, 1858. Mr. Chairman and Gentlemen, —The mortality in Bermondsey for the week ending July 3rd, was 20, which is below the corrected average. We had 4 deaths from Measles, 3 of these were in the Leather Market district; 2 from Scarlatina, 1 from "Whooping Cough, and 1 from Typhus, in the St. James's district. In the Metropolis Diarrhœa prevailed to a considerable extent, 24 deaths having taken place from this disease. We have been very free from Diarrhœa, no death occurring from it in that week. In the week ending July 10th, our deaths were 28. The Market district had 16 deaths, and of these 3 are registered from Diarrhœa, 4 from Measles, and 1 from Small Pox, being the first case in this or the last year. The cases of Diarrhœa occurred in a labouring man 75 years of age, and natural decay is also assigned as the cause of death; in an in- 5 fant of 7 weeks, and one of 8 months—they are therefore not cases of an epidemic character calculated to cause anxiety. My attention has been called by your Inspector to the condition of some premises in St. James's-road; they arc fitted up as an extensive piggery; nearly one hundred pigs were there, and although the styes are paved and evidently well looked after, there was a most abominable stench in and outside the place. This arises from the drainage running into an open ditch by the side of the thoroughfare, and from the open space of ground in front of the styes, which was one mass of slough and filth of a most offensive character. Some amount of the offensive effluvia was also caused by the food given to the pigs, which was principally animal matter in a state of decomposition. I have again inspected the premises of Mr. Barrow, in the Spa-road. As regards the pits by the road-side, there is a manifest and most decided improvement. The skutch, also complained of, is removed. But I regret to state that there is a very considerable amount of offensive effluvia, proceeding from pits in close contiguity to the Baths and Washhouses, justly complained of by the officers of that most valuable institution. I urged very strongly upon Mr. Barrow the absolute necessity for remedying the cause of complaint, which he promised. I have inspected also the premises of Mr. Brockwell, in Bermondsey street, size manufacturer, and certify an accumulation of offensive skutch thereon. Complaints are made from the factory of Messrs. Christey, that there is occasionally a most sickening effluvia, which proceeds from Mr. Brockwell's factory. From the appearance of the skutch, I have little doubt that it is subjected to that most obnoxious process by which fat is abstracted from it, by the agency of sulphuric acid. Should direct evidence of this arise, I most strongly recommend the adoption, by the Vestry, of prompt and decisive action for its instant suppression. In the premises of Mr. Axtell there is some improvement; but they are still in an unsatisfactory and offensive state, arising, in a great measure, from the sodden and saturated earth in the yard and around the pits. There is also but little space, and it is altogether an unsuitable spot for the trade carried on—abutting on the rear of the houses in Bermondsey-street, the inmates of which have suffered considerably in their health. I certify also to an accumulation of offensive skutch on the premises of Mr. Olney, Fellmonger, in Market Street. At Messrs. Margetson's, there are some soaks separated from the public thoroughfare simply by a wooden fence, a few feet only from the pavement. I consider, as they are at times very offensive, that they should be removed to a greater distance from the street, and that a letter from the Vestry to Messrs. Margetsons should be written on the subject. My attention has been directed to a very considerable heap of refuse just over the border of our parish, in the Manor-road. I inspected it on the 10th inst., it was not then offensive; but there was some vegetable accumulation, which would in all probability soon become so. The spot is open market-garden ground, and at a distance from 6 any dwelling. It is very desirable that means should be taken to prevent the accumulation of vegetable matters. I am, Gentlemen, Your obedient Servant, JOHN CHALLICE, M.D., Officer of Health. TO THE VESTRY OF BERMONDSEY. August 2nd, 1858. Mr. Chairman and Gentlemen, —During the week ending July 17th, the Deaths registered in our parish were 26, and for the week following 28, in each case being a fraction below the corrected average. Yet we are suffering somewhat severely from Measles and Whooping Cough; 11 deaths having taken place from the former, and 4 from the latter disease in the fortnight; 4 deaths occurred from Diarrhœa in the week ending July 19th, and 5 from the same disease in the following week; and on the 21st, a child died, aged 15 months, at 41, John street, Dockhead, of Infantile Cholera. I have visited the house, and found that the case was one of that isolated character now always met with in one district or the other of the Metropolis at this season of the year. It is, therefore, not sufficient to create alarm, but more than sufficient to instil watchfulness and precaution. The drainage connected with the privy of the house was stopped, and I have certified it as a nuisance. The supply of water was said to be plentiful. My attention has been drawn to another case of death, from disease of a different character, at No. 4, Swan Mead, where a child died from low Fever, with ulceration of the face, mouth, tongue, and fauces, on the 19th ult.; and close by, another died lately from Small Pox. I allude especially to these cases because I have, upon more than one occasion, reported to the Vestry upon the condition of this locality. The premises occupied by Mr. Cripps are in the highest degree offensive. On the 29th July I found the process of skutch-boiling with sulphuric acid in full operation. The stench emitted was most suffocating; producing not only sickness and nausea, with headache and pains in the bowels, but also a sense of constriction about the chest, with difficulty of breathing. The heated vapour from this process is conducted into the sewer, thus rendering its contents most offensive, and injurious to the health of the inhabitants, not only in the immediate neighbourhood, but also to others at a considerable distance. In some premises nearly adjoining, also in the occupation of Mr. Crisp, there were considerable accumulations of putrid animal matters, covered with myriads of maggots. There were also stale and stinking bones, evidently intended for boiling, as there is an open boiler and some vessels containing fat. I earnestly urge upon the Vestry the necessity 7 for prompt and decided measures for stopping these processes so offensive and injurious to health. The premises of Mr. Brockwell are improved, and so are those of Messrs. Axtell, in a very marked degree. These instances are satisfactory, as affording a proof that, with care and moderate attention, great mitigation of offensive effluvia may without difficulty be accomplished. The state of the open ditches in the Blue Anchor-lane, and adjoining district, is much aggravated in consequence of the drainage works in progress in Jamaica-row. The contents are now offensive in the highest degree, and have remained stagnant for several weeks. I consider it most necessary, not only for the preservation of the health of the inhabitants of that district, but also for the welfare, in some degree, of the Metropolitan population, that lime should be freely used at once for deodorisation, before the blackened putrescent liquid be let into the river Thames. On enquiry, I find that in the course of the present week, the advanced state of the works above mentioned will permit of the inlet of the tide, I strongly advise that some steps should be immediately taken in order that dangerous consequences may be avoided. I am, Gentlemen, Your obedient Servant, JOHN CHALLICE, M.D., Officer of Health. TO THE VESTRY OF BERMONDSEY. August 16th, 1858. Mr. Chairman and Gentlemen, —At this period of the year, the responsibilities of your Officer of Health are necessarily materially increased, as it is the season when, on former occasions, our population suffered so severely from epidemic Cholera. It is my duty to advise you as to the steps necessary to be taken in a precautionary point of view—should I omit to do so the blame would, of necessity, rest with me. I have on a former occasion reported to you on the unsatisfactory condition of the manufacturing premises occupied by Mr. Morris, at John street, Dockhead; and I regret that the recommendations which I considered necessary for the protection of the health of the inhabitants of that crowded locality have not been attended to. On inspection last Wednesday, I found that the pits used for the East India kips were offensive in the highest degree—the surface of the liquid being of a blue-black colour, and on the slightest agitation giving off a most offensive odour, in which "sulphuretted hydrogen," (gas known to be most deleterious to human health) largely predominated. It appears also that the contents of these pits are let off into a drain, the effluvia from which penetrates the tenements in immediate proximity to the yard. In one of these dwellings a severe and fatal case of summer Cholera lately occurred. 8 I consider that these receptacles for East India kips should be covered; and I advise that the contents should on no account whatever be let off or disturbed during sunrise.. I consider this a question of great importance, and have in consequence certified the pits as a nuisance and injurious to health, in order that some definite arrangement should be come to. In addition to this pregnant cause of mischief, there was an accumulation of fleshings or cuttings in a putrid and offensive condition, to which I have also certified. The proceedings against Mr. Cripps have, after a second hearing before the magistrate, been again adjourned for a week, and the process complained of is to be discontinued until a decision has been arrived at. I would strongly advise that the watering of the parish should be more effectually carried out. During the sultry weather some of the back streets were peculiarly offensive; and in my opinion a larger body of water should be thrown upon the roads, as by this means the temperature of the thoroughfares is diminished, the effluvia from the gulleys mitigated, and in addition, the contents of the sewers diluted. The deaths in the week ending July 31st are 23; and for the week terminating August 7th, 28—one of these is reported as of Cholera; but it appears to have been quite free from any of the symptoms of epidemic or malignant disease, having lasted for ten days, and the patient was previously paralyzed for upwards of two years. Diarrhœa is somewhat prevalent, severe with children, but rarely fatal, and at some places it has lately assumed an epidemic character; but it is now diminishing in severity and frequency. I. am, Gentlemen, Your obedient Servant, JOHN CHALLICE, M.D., Officer of Health. TO THE VESTRY OF BERMONDSEY. September 6th, 1858. Mr. Chairman and Gentlemen, —I have (accompanied by your Inspector of Nuisances) visited and examined the several undermentioned places, where the orders of the Vestry have not been complied with, I am aware that some legal doubts exist, which have in a great degree interfered with the salutary action of the Board. I very deeply regret that such is the case; for I believe that in one district the non-compliance with our requisition has been the occasion of the outbreak of very serious and fatal cases of Scarlatina. On the 23rd ult. I visited Nos. 13, 14, and 15, West-lane; at each of these houses there are open privies, which are peculiarly offensive generally, but at certain times are most singularly so, The principal cause for this very obnoxious condition appears to be when the coppers, 9 which are in close contiguity to the privies, are heated for domestic purposes; the contents of the cesspools then become of an increased temperature, offensive, depressing, and poisonous gases are evolved, the health of the neighbourhood deteriorated, disease is developed, becomes contagious, and affects the surrounding district, increasing our mortality, and adding misery to the troubles of poverty. I remarked in my visit that bad as the condition was for the dwellers in the houses in West-lane, it must bo immeasurably worse for those who lived in Brewer's-yard, as the privies were close to the rear of the houses of the latter, and some distance, probably 30 feet, removed from those of the former. At No. 14 in West-lane, the privy and wash-house abuts upon No. 8, Brewer's-yard. Here lately, Scarlatina broke out, the children were attacked, recovered, and the family have now fled; the house is empty opposite, about eight feet from door to door; there are now two children dead and others sickening. At No. 4, also on the opposite side, there is another dead child and five other sickly children, with a pale, anxious and depressed mother, who appear ready to become victims to the pestilential influence now enveloping the place. The rear of the houses on the-eastern side of the yard, i.e. to the rear of West-lane, was absolutely insufferable from stench, and the cause was most clearly traceable to the cesspools before mentioned. It is satisfactory that the water supply in this spot has not been complained of; but at the house, No. 4, the only receptacle was a small leaky wash tub, containing but a few gallons, quite inadequate for the purposes of cleanliness and health. The drainage is defective, and there are open cesspools. If possible or practicable, it would be highly desirable to clear the houses in this yard of their sickly occupants, while the works absolutely necessary for the prevention of further disease and mortality are being carried out. At No. 2, Prospect-row, a school with between 40 and 50 boys, at an age very susceptible to the exciting cause of disease, there is a very offensive privy, with an opening into the cesspool from broken ground exterior to it. This is another of the cases where the orders of the Board remained unnoticed. At No. 18½, Fashion-street, although the privy was distant from the house, the stench arising from it was perceptible when entering the premises. It is loudly complained of by the occupants, and must be acting most injuriously upon them. No. 19, Ernest-street has an open privy with a cesspool close to the house, and a copper adjoining separated only by the wall. The stench which arises from this place is complained of by the neighbours; and is in all probability rendered more noticeable in consequence of the absence of any disagreeable 'effluvia from the adjoining houses, where sanitary arrangements have been satisfactorily carried out. At Nos. 1, 2, and 3, Abbey-street, the privies have a drain in common, and are equally offensive, generally so much so, that it is impossible to close the doors without danger of suffocation. The necessary works at Rose-court are in progress. 10 I have not the slightest doubt that all these cases are polluting the atmosphere and seriously affecting the health of the inhabitants in the neighbourhood. The accumulation of damaged grain in the Railway arches has been by order of the magistrate removed. I am happy also to be able to report to the Vestry that, after an adjourned hearing before the magistrate, the removal of the serious nuisance complained of in the yard of Mr. Cripps, Swan Mead, has been at last effected. The premises of Mr. Axtell, in Bermondsey-street, are less offensive than heretofore, but are still capable of improvement. The mortality in the parish during the last three weeks has been respectively 24, 27, and 31, in this period there have been 9 deaths from Diarrhœa in children, and 1 case of Diptheria. I am, Gentlemen, Your very obedient Servant, JOHN CHALLICE, M.D., Officer of Health. TO THE VESTRY OF BERMONDSEY. September 20th, 1858. Mr. Chairman and Gentlemen,—As compared with the average for the last ten years, the mortality of our district during the two weeks ending Sept. 4th and 11th may be viewed in a favourable aspect, the deaths being 25 and 24, and the average 38 and 44. It will be useful however to bear in mind that this average is swollen by deaths which occurred in corresponding weeks in the years 1849, 1854, when epidemic cholera raged amongst us; the mortality being 98 and 134 in the week ending Sept. 4th, and 132 and 161 in the following week of these two years. Visitations of epidemic disease bear a strong similarity in many respects to periods of monetary and commercial panics; when present, alarm and consternation, with hasty and often ill-advised measures, frequently add to their severity and propagation. Now, then, is the time for measures of precaution and prevention, and it is in St. James' district that I earnestly ask for vigorous action on the part of the Vestry. The urgency and necessity for further sanitary improvement of this large and growing portion of the population of our parish is manifested by the fact, that in the week ending Sept. 11th, of 14 deaths which occurred in the entire parish from preventible diseases, no less than 9 were in St. James. In some degree this comparative unhealthiness is doubtless owing to the imperfect drainage, which is now in the course of very material rectification and improvement. I consider it advisable that prompt 11 action should be taken to avail ourselves of this increased privilege, by which most excellent results may fairly be anticipated. It is not, however, solely to deficient drainage that sickness prevails to a serious extent in some parts of the district; it is in some instances to the gross and criminal neglect of the owners of property that the origin of disease may be traced, its course and ravages pointed out. As an illustration, I point to Meridian-place, Dockhead, a court occupied by decent cleanly and hard-working people, who are suffering from a deprivation of the first necessary of life and health—water; in consequence not of a deficient supply, for there is evidence in the softened saturated condition of the small plots of ground in the rear, of great waste of water, and there are no receptacles furnished by the owner. It is quite lamentable to notice the shifts to which the poor people in this crowded court are put. In some instances the sink stone is stopped, so that a small pool or puddle might remain to get a supply from; others have an earthen pan, butter firkin, or leaky pork tub; but with scarcely an exception there was no proper provision made. On the eastern side of the court there are open offensive cesspools, contaminating the atmosphere, and rendering the houses unhealthy and unendurable. On the western side they have been abolished and pans substituted. The improvement, notwithstanding the deficiency of water, was undeniable; indeed, there is here evidence of what I have before noticed with satisfaction, that great care prevails in keeping the pans in a state of cleanliness, and the advantage over the old system was thoroughly valued and appreciated by the occupiers of the houses. I think it most advisable that some system or regulation should be come to by which the water supply to places such as I have faintly described may be improved; and as this is so essential to the health of the poor, and to sanitary amelioration generally, I venture to urge upon the Board the exercise of their full powers on this important subject. After considerable investigation, I became more and more convinced that much of the irregularity in the water supply is owing, not to any fault of the Water Company, but to the incompleteness or imperfection of the water receptacles and fittings. In my report, dated the 6th inst., I expressed an opinion that the outbreak of Scarlatina in Brewer's Yard was traceable to the foul emanations from cesspools in West Lane. Several deaths had occurred, much sickness, and much sorrow; all, humanly speaking, preventible. Your Inspector has reported to me this day, that nothing has been done to carry out the order of the Board, and I intreat the Vestry to suffer no further evasion or delay in the completion of necessary works for abolishing a foul and dangerous nuisance. There is a house in John's Place, Parker's Row, in which the outbreak of disease may be considered imminent, in consequence of exhalations proceeding from an enormous cesspool, into which they all drain in common. This is a case requiring the attention of the Vestry, as in and near this place, on former occasions, cholera and fever have prevailed. 12 The notices of the Vestry are disregarded, and unattended to at No. 2, Prospect Row, at the houses from 5 to 9, Brewer's Yard, at 19, Ernest Street, at No. 3, Mill Pond Street, at No. 70, Bermondsey New Road, at No. 19, Willow Walk, and also at 14, Salisbury Street. The inhabitants from No. 74 to 79, George Row, are complaining of entire absence of water supply for the last six weeks; which, as the other houses in the districts are well supplied, is in all probability dependant upon some obstruction or deficiency in the apparatus. Still the evil exists, and requires a most prompt course of action for its remedy. I am, Gentlemen, Your obedient Servant, JOHN CHALLICE, M.D., Officer of Health. TO THE VESTRY OF BERMONDSEY. October 4th, 1858. Mr. Chairman and Gentlemen—Having on the 29th ult received a complaint from the Messrs. Christey of Bermondsey Street, to the effect that they were much annoyed, indeed seriously inconvenienced by an offensive stench proceeding from the premises of Mr. Brockwell, I visited and closely examined them. On entering from the street there was perceptible an offensive animal odour, arising or proceeding from a building in which the manufacture of size is carried on. This place is fairly kept, and there is evidence here, of care, cleanliness, and due precaution for the prevention of nuisance, at all times most necessary, as the situation is very objectionable for a business of this description. There was a strong animal odour in an adjoining shed, within the yard, used as a fellmongers and wool rug manufacturers: there was a general stench difficult to particularise, as the entire place was in a filthy and dilapidated condition. I do not state that the filthiness and offensiveness of the premises are owing entirely to neglect, for their general condition is much aggravated by the absence of paving, proper channels, and suitable drainage; the earth being soddened, saturated with drippings from the skins, and very offensive. There was skutch giving off ammonia, and requiring removal. As a substitute for a privy there was a rude imitation of a tent for the use of the workmen, without any attempt at drainage or decency, as the soil had accumulated and was exposed to view in a somewhat considerable heap exterior to the canvas. Here also the sewer was open, apparently for the purpose of supplying the premises with hot water which flowed from Messrs. Christey's. It appears to me that the buildings are in a dangerous condition; likely on the least extraordinary pressure or sudden 13 gale of wind, to be levelled with, the ground, and thus possibly occasion the loss of human life. Considering the trade, or combinations of trades carried on at this place, I have no hesitation in recommending the Vestry to exercise their full powers in remedying its existing condition, which is productive of present nuisance, with great risk of ulterior disease. In order to render these premises in a fit condition for carrying on the various processes, without injury to the inhabitants of the immediate neighbourhood, a complete renovation of the paving and drainage are necessary. The present health of the parish is now in a very satisfactory condition. The deaths in the week ending September 18th, being 31; while the average for the last 11 years was 37; and for the week ending Sept. 25th, 14, the average being 37. We had only one fatal case of small pox in Metcalfe Court, the family in which it occurred appear poor, almost in destitution, the room crowded and dirty, scarcely habitable; it would be most desirable to remove them to some other abode, and require the landlord to cleanse and limewash the floors, walls, and ceiling before it is again inhabited. I am, Gentlemen, Your obedient Servant, JOHN CHALLICE, M.D., Officer of Health. TO THE VESTRY OF BERMONDSEY. November 1st, 1858. Mr. Chairman and Gentlemen, —On several occasions it has been my duty to bring before your notice complaints by the inhabitants of the district, of irregular and inefficient water supply. Your attention this evening is earnestly requested to some practical suggestions in relation to this important subject, inasmuch as in almost every instance of complaint, explanations have been afforded by the Engineer to the Water Company, which appeared to remove the cause of complaint from their shoulders, to other circumstances over which they have had no control. I am extremely anxious that a thorough inspection and investigation should take place, as deprivation of this primary necessity of life, health, and comfort, is often most severely felt by the working classes in some of the crowded districts of the parish, creating not only discontent, but tending also greatly to the production and aggravation of disease. I may I trust be pardoned by the Vestry, if I recommend that some enquiry should bo made, as to the working of improved modes of water supply in the neighbouring and other districts,—before coming to a resolution on this question, I am induced to suggest this, as I have reason for believing that the system of constant supply is in operation in the 14 City, and in other districts, with very advantageous results. If experience proves that the abolition of water receptacles can with safety and convenience be effected, I know of no greater boon to our population. Should there be well-founded objections to the working of it, then it will be most desirable to energetically carry out the proposals made by the Water Company. I am glad to report that the premises of Mr. Brock well are in an improved condition, and that he is evincing anxiety to carry out fully the orders of the Vestry. There are three cases in which I have certified that pigs are kept, so as to be injurious to health—viz., in Bermondsey New-road, in Little George-street, and in East-lane. There is a disease now prevalent in various parts of the country, assuming an epidemic form, and in many instances of a very fatal character, termed Diptheria. It appears to be a species of fungus or growth attacking the root of the tongue and air passages, and unless checked soon causes death by suffocation. I allude to this because I have had especial enquiries made of me from various sources, on the supposition that the disease would be so likely to become developed in Bermondsey. Such however is not the case, with the exception of one fatal instance, occurring in a child a year old, complicated with measles. During the last four weeks we have no record of any death from this disease, and from my own experience, and the result of my enquiries, I have every reason for believing that we are peculiarly free from Diptheria. Indeed during the last month the health of the parish has been in the highest degree satisfactory, the mortality registered being as follows— For the week ending October 2nd, 10, the average in corresponding weeks for the last ten years being 35; for the following week, 19 as against 25; for the next week 24 as against 26; and for the week ending October 23rd, 17, the decennial average being 25—making in the above period a total mortality of 70, whilst the average for the corresponding period is 111, which if the increased population be taken into consideration would be 122. The births in the same period registered are 176; shewing, I believe, a larger balance in favour of vitality over mortality than can be produced in any other district, either Provincial or Metropolitan. With the improved condition of health, it is most gratifying to find that all our large manufactories, so well described as "hives of industry," are in full operation, and our labouring population all well employed. I am, Gentlemen, Your faithful Servant, JOHN CHALLICE, M.D., Officer of Health. 15 TO THE VESTRY OF BERMONDSEY. November 15th, 1858. Mr. Chairman and Gentlemen, —For the week ending October 30th, our mortality was 19; the corrected average for the same week being 31, we lost 5 from Scarlatina. This disease being more fatal in the metropolis at large than in any corresponding period, except in 1848. In the week ending November 6th the deaths were 23, the corrected average being a fraction under 25; there were four fatal cases of Scarlatina, 2 of them in St. James' district, and one in each of the other districts. My attention has been directed to the condition of some houses in Cherry Garden Street, by the kindness of Dr. Dixon, and I have certified them as unfitted for human habitation in consequence of their filthy and neglected state. They are large old houses, with staircases where the light of heaven never penetrates; in these dark places filth always abounds, and disease is generally rife. One of the fatal cases of Scarlatina occurred at No. 5 in this street, the ground floor being occupied by a Marine Store Dealer, and a child is now ill from this Fever, in a back room behind the shop, where there is neither light nor ventilation, the goods which stock the shop, such as rags and bones, are in a condition most singularly suited for not only originating disease, but for aggravating and intensifying any already prevailing. I believe that Marine Store Shops often give rise to disease, and I consider it highly desirable that they should be placed under supervision and inspection. Another fatal case of Scarlatina occurred at 4, William's Place, Dockhead. The mother complains of foul smells both at the front and back doors, —from the former it appears to proceed from a urinal, from the latter from defective drainage and a choked-up privy. William's Place is a row of five houses, occupied by decent working people, but there is only one privy, and one leaky water receptacle, which exposes the inhabitants to great privation, as the supply is only on alternate days. No. 1, Metcalf Court, is a house in some measure in similar circumstances to the houses in Cherry Garden Street. I am informed that it has been brought under the notice of the Guardians. I had, however, previously inspected it. It differs from the houses in Cherry Garden Street in this respect, that it is occupied by only one family, whereas the former have 4, 5 and 6 families; the inmates appear quite as filthy, — indeed, if possible, more so than the room they inhabit, and the houses above mentioned are already under notice. I have certified this also as unfitted in its present state for human habitation. I am, Gentlemen, Your faithful Servant, JOHN CHALLICE, M.D., Officer of Health. 16 TO THE VESTRY OF BERMONDSEY. December 6th, 1858. Mr. Chairman and Gentlemen,—During the three weeks of November ending the 13th, 20th, and 27th respectively, the temperature has been unprecedentedly low; the thermometer having each week been below the average for the last forty-three years. This unusual severity of the season has caused a great amount of additional sickness in the metropolis, and a very marked increase of mortality; and, as usual under similar circumstances, it is the aged, the very young, and the weak, sickly, and unprotected poor who have suffered in the greatest degree. The increase of deaths beyond the average for the corresponding weeks, taking the entire metropolis, was 229, 403, and in the week ending November 27th, 652, being an addition of about 30, 40, and in the latter instance of 50 per cent, in the mortality. I am happy to say that although we have participated in this increased sickness and mortality it has been only in a limited degree, as, for the week ending the 13th, our deaths were 25, the average being 25-2°; the next week the deaths were 38, the average being 24, and during the following week 31, the average being 27; thus shewing an increase of only about 15 per cent. As a proof that our comparative immunity from the consequences of the late severe and inclement temperature is not accidental, but is one of the advantages of the locality, I turn to the tables of the principal northern districts, and find the strongest confirmation of the opinion I have always entertained, that our sheltered position is peculiarly favorable for the preservation of health and life during a low atmospheric temperature; as an illustration, I take Hampstead, St. Pancras, Islington, and Hackney, during the three weeks alluded to, and I find the following result. The week ending November 13th :— Hampstead 6 deaths the average being 4 St. Pancras 120 „ „ 69.7 Islington 61 „ „ 41 Hackney 38 „ „ 21.3 For the week ending November 20th: — Hampstead 5 deaths the average being 3.9 St. Pancras 130 „ „ 75.5 Islington 63 „ „ 40.5 Hackney 32 „ „ 21 For the week ending November 27th:— Hampstead 4 deaths the average being 2.8 St. Pancras 137 „ „ 77.1 Islington 79 „ „ 49 Hackney 42 „ „ 23.3 It is right and proper that these facts should be generally known, for many instances are in my recollection of persons afflicted with chest affections, who, thinking that the northern side of the Metropolis would afford them relief and a fresher atmosphere, and being also ill-advised, 17 have found when too late their sufferings increased and their lives shortened by removing from us. Of the 87 deaths which occurred in the three weeks just elapsed, 36 were of children of and under 2 years of age, and 14 of persons aged 60 years and upwards. The births in the above period are 124. A case of fatal Diptheria has been registered in King's Place, Crosby row. My attention has been called to three tenements in Gregory Court, Bermondsey Square. Complaint was made by a police constable, that they were overcrowded, unfit for human habitation and without water supply: as regards overcrowding, it appears that No. 2 is occupied by a man, wife and seven children, which would be undoubtedly more than could with safety to health occupy so small a tenement, but upon investigation it appears that three of the children sleep at No. 3, which is inhabited by an elderly female, the grandmother, who has lived there for 40 years, and she shares the house with some of her grandchildren at night. No. 1 is tenanted by a widow with 4 children, but is not so overcrowded as to justify me in certifying. There is no water laid on. I am informed, however, by the proprietor that he is in negotiation with the water company for this desirable object. I am, Gentlemen, Your obedient servant, JOHN CHALLICE, Officer of Health. TO THE VESTRY OF BERMONDSEY. December 21st, 1858. Mr. Chairman and Gentlemen, —For the week ending December 4th, the deaths registered were 35, being 5 beyond the corrected average for the last ten years. One death occurred from Diptheria in West Street, two from Scarlatina, and two from Whooping Cough. In the week ending December 11th, the mortality is 32, which is as near as possible the corrected average. Scarlatina shows an increase, six deaths being registered from this disease, two in each district; there is one fatal case of Diarrhœa and two of Typhus. As regards Scarlatina, some discussion has lately taken place with medical authorities as to the fact whether the poor or the rich were the greatest sufferers from this malignant, and very frequently epidemic disease. lam of opinion that the improved condition of the dwellings of the poor in our Parish has prevented the spreading and persistence of Scarlatina and Measles in several remarkable instances. As an illustration I mention Kirby-street, Snow's-fields, and Mellick'splace, Russell-street, where, formerly, previous to sanitary improvements, your District Parochial Medical Officers were in almost constant 18 attendance, and where now their valuable services are scarcely ever required. I mention this matter especially as I am anxious to bear my testimony to the great and general improvement of House Property in our Parish, occupied by the working classes, in consequence of its being stated, as regards other Districts, "That the Health Officers find their efforts frustrated by the extensive owners of property." My general experience has been the reverse of this, almost without exception. I am, Gentlemen, Your obedient servant, JOHN CHALLICE. I may state that I view the condition of the site of Bethesda Chapel with considerable alarm, in its relation to public health. The structure has been pulled down by police authority, and human remains are unprotected and exposed to atmospheric influence, except by the flooring of the chapel; a condition of things fraught with imminent danger to the neighbourhood. I am most anxious that some decided steps should be taken, so that this evil, which is likely to prove a source of disease, may without further delay be remedied. TO THE VESTRY OF BERMONDSEY, January 3rd, 1859. Mr. Chairman and Gentlemen, —In the return of the Registrargeneral for the week ending December 18th it is stated that the mortality of London is still high, the deaths being 1531; whereas the corrected average would be 1301, thus shewing an excess of mortality of 230 persons. Diseases of the respiratory organs still producing a great proportion of the deaths, no less than 441 being registered from these causes alone. We have not contributed to this excess in the mortality table, our deaths in the week were 21, the corrected average being 25; they are rather unequally distributed, two only having occurred in the Leather Market district, one being accidental, the other from Consumption. In St Mary Magdalen there were 4 deaths, 3 from chest affections and one from Paralysis, there being no fatal cases of Zymotic disease in either of these localities. The deaths in St. James's were 15, 3 arose from Scarlatina and two from Whooping-cough. The births in the parish were 42. For the following week, terminating December 25th, a great improvement in the health of the Metropolis is remarkable, as compared with the preceding. The deaths having fallen to 1240, which is 16 below the average. Our mortality was but 18, the average being within a fraction of 28. They are thus distributed: sin Saint James's (two from 19 Scarlatina), 5 in St. Mary Magdalen, and 8 in the Leather Market District. Thus the general health of the Parish is absolutely satisfactory, and when compared with others, shows a rapid advance in the sanitary condition of the population. I have had reason to thankfully acknowledge the courtesy of the Vestry upon all occasions, and in almost every instance its readiness to consider and adopt the suggestions and recommendations which I have from time to time felt it my duty to advise, and bring to your consideration. There is, however, an exception. It is the case in which I recommended some precautions, and the adoption of some plan for the more effectual ventilation of our sewers. I advise and still consider that a great amelioration and most considerable improvement would be effected by the construction of simple and inexpensive shafts, from the sewers to some of the public buildings and lofty warehouses, so that a considerable portion of the sewer gases might become mixed with the atmosphere, and to a great extent dissipated, instead of being breathed by foot passengers, and frequently by children, no doubt to the great detriment of their health, and very frequently producing serious disease. It has long been known that emanations from sowers are prejudicial; a remarkable illustration of this fact occurred lately in which some Dogs were exposed for the sake of experiment for a certain period to the influence of sewer gases— It was found in every instance that the animal exposed soon loathed its food, became sick, had Diarrhœa, wasted and died. Now from enquiry I have made, it appears we have nearly 50 man holes, or main ventilating shafts to the sewers within our parish. That upon an average one or two of these are daily opened for some hours, a necessary precaution no doubt to enable the workmen to enter the sewers in safety. It is equally without doubt at an extreme risk of passengers and inhabitants. Many instances have occurred to me of cases of extreme and dangerous illness from this cause. The present plan is so clumsy, and there is such an entire absence of all precaution that I cannot help looking upon it as a stigma upon the mechanical and sanitary science of the day. I am convinced by a very simple contrivance, such as the fitting of a framework, with a species of telescope tube attached, over these man holes, when they are opened for the purposes of ventilation, much good may be effected in our own district, and an excellent example be set to others. Therefore I respectfully recommend to the Vestry the attempt at all events to alleviate what is undoubtedly at all times a public nuisance, and is occasionally a very serious evil. There is at present, in various portions of the Metropolis, a movement to carry out the philanthropic object of some gentlemen for the establishment of drinking fountains for the poor. lam anxious that we should participate in the manifold advantages of this plan; being under 20 the impression that a resolution of the Vestry, affirming this principle, would be of importance and value to us. I am, Gentlemen, Your obedient servant. JOHN CHALLICE, Medical Officer of Health. TO THE VESTRY OF BERMONDSEY. January 31st, 1859. Gentlemen, —In the week ending January Ist, the mortality of the parish increased to a marked degree; the deaths registered being 41, whilst the corrected average is but 32. Seventeen deaths occurred in Saint James's district; of these, I was from Scarlatina, in Drunimondterrace, and 3 from Whooping cough; and a Chelsea Pensioner, aged 88 died without medical attendance. The same number of deaths are registered in St. Mary Magdalen. There is, I regret to state, one from confluent Small-pox, Hanover street, where vaccination had been neglected. "Whooping-cough was fatal in 2 cases, and one death was registered from intemperance in the Leather-market district, where the deaths are but 7 for the week. As an unusual occurrence worthy of reflection 2 deaths are registered from Syphilis, one being the wife of a journeyman lighterman, and the other that of an infant. For the following week, that ending January 8th, the deaths were 30, which is slightly below the corrected average. In St. James's the deaths were but 6, and of these 2 were accidental, one a child two years old from a scald, and the other an infant by a fall from a window. Whooping cough was fatal in one case. In St. Mary Magdalen the deaths -were 13 and of these no less than 9 were from affections of the chest, and principally with the aged, for there is one 79, two 78, one at 77, and one at 76 years of age, and all from Bronchitis. In the Leather-market district the deaths are 11; two of these are from Fever in William-street. I advise a house to house visitation in this street. For the week ending 15th of January the deaths are 29, which is in excess of the average. There were 10 in the St. James's district, one from Scarlatina; 10 in St. Mary Magdalen, one from Diptheria; and 9 in the Leather Market. The week following, terminating January 22, the deaths were 23, which is below the average by 8. There were 8 in St. James's, 2 being from Whooping cough; 9 in St. Mary Magdalen, one from Scarlatina in Georges place, and one from Scarlatina, complicated with Diptheria in the Grange Road. In the Leather Market district the deaths were 6, none from Zymotic disease or requiring comment. This week the Registrar-general alludes to 4 deaths in one family at 21 Bow from Scarlatina which were attributed by the father to a "Black Ditch" in the rear of the house. I consider it my duty to allude to this circumstance in order that We may bear in mind the necessity that exists, as soon as it is practicable, to deal effectually with the open and very offensive Blue Anchor Lane Ditch, which I look upon as highly dangerous to the public health. On reference to the mortalit y tables it will be observed that, with the exception of one or two isolated cases, we hare hitherto escaped that very malignant and fatal disease termed Diptheria, and it has not assumed with us the character or form of an epidemic; that is a subject for congratulation, and ought also to be a motive for increased sanitary precautions, inasmuch as in various districts, especially in country where no drainage existed, or was in a defective condition, there are many lamentable instances of 4, 5, and 6 of a family being swept of by this disease. Upon enquiry and investigation I find, that although Diptheria has prevailed to an alarming extent in spots and places around the Metropolis- which from their situation would generally be supposed peculiarly exempt from its ravages—that in almost every instance, glaring sanitary evils existed, such as overflowing cesspool, large stagnant receptacles for fermenting and putrifying aniand vegetable refuse, combined with most inefficient drainage. On the 19th instant I received a communication from the Burial Board, in reference to the burial ground belonging to Guy's and St Holland now used as a timber yard.I accompanied Mr. Holland, the Government Inspector to the spot on the 24th instant; as he is about to report his views on the subject to the Secretary of I refrain from any further comment at present. On the 14th instant, in consequence of frequent complaints as to a considerable nuisance to the neighbourhood of Weston Street and Molesworth Square, I, accompanied by your Inspector visited the premises of Messrs. Dixon and Whiting, and Mr. Fish, with reference to the smoke arising from their consumption of tan and refuse. It appears to me that no adequate precaution is used to prevent such process being a nuisance and annoying the neighbourhood. Since the erection of a second furnace in Mr. Fish's premises the grievance has in height, and there is no provision for consuming the smoke whatever. I advise that notice be given to remedy what I belive to be a nuisance and just ground of complaint. Mr. Chapman in the Bermondsey New Road has not removed the pigs which he promised to do before Christmas, and I advise prompt proceedings against him, as they are a nuisance, and the place is in a filthy and unwholesome condition. I am, Gentlemen, Your obedient servant, JOHN CHALLICE. 22 TO THE VESTRY OF BERMONDSEY. February 7th, 1859. Gentlemen, —At the last meeting of the Vestry, complaints having been made of the existence of offensive effluvia in the Spa road, I, on the 2nd instant, visited and inspected the premises of Messrs. Barrow and Son, and also those of Messrs. Gibbs and Austin: your Inspector of Nuisances accompanied me. I have no hesitation in stating that an arrangement recently made by the Messrs. Barrow must of necessity become a very serious, if not dangerous nuisance to the neighbourhood, if not removed. They have recently commenced using a capacious pit, for soaking East Indian kips, which is within a few paces of the public thoroughfare, and adjoining the house in the Spa-road occupied by Mr. Dodd. Of the extreme necessity of removing this source of nuisance promptly there can be no doubt, and I advise a notice or recommendation to Mr. Barrow to this effect. It is but justice to this gentleman to state that the yard appears to be exceedingly well kept; there is no accumulation of refuse, and care seems to be taken (with the exception above mentioned) to carry on the manufacture with all due sanitary precautions. In the premises of Messrs. Gibbs and Austin there is an old soak, which is when stirred or disturbed most offensive, and is within a few yards of the public pavement. As this can be removed to a greater distance, and the stench would be thereby much diminished, and its injurious effects upon the public health considerably lessened, I advise a notice to Messrs. Austin and Gibbs to the same effect. The mortality for the week ending January 29th is 24, the corrected average for the corresponding period during the last 10 years is 29. There were six in St. Mary Magdalen, 8 in the Leather Market, and 10 in St. James's district. The births in the same period are 59. There is one case mentioned as Diptheria, in King-street; but complicated as it was with consumption, it is not of a nature to excite apprehension. I am, Gentlemen, Your obedient servant, JOHN CHALLICE. Officer of Health. TO THE VESTRY OF BERMONDSEY. Feburuary 21st, 1859. Mr. Chairman and Gentlemen, —On Thursday, the 19th instant, I attended at the police-court with your inspector to enforce your proceedings against the owner of houses in Marigold-court, which have been certified as unfitted for human habitation, in consequence of their filthy and dilapidated condition, and the entire absence of privy accommodation, combined with accumulation of filth, and other circumstances 23 calculated to deteriorate the health of the neighbourhood, and promote the progress of disease. In consequence, however, of the singular carelessness or inattention of the officer, on whom the duty of serving the legal notices devolved, the subject was adjourned till Thursday next, the summonses having been by him delivered at Hand and Marigold Court, Star Corner, instead of the place indicated in the order of this Board. The complaint against Mr. Humphrey for not supplying "privy accommodation" for the numerous work people on his premises was investigated by the Magistrate, and at the request of the party appearing for Mr. Humphrey was adjourned to give that gentleman an opportunity of consulting with your surveyor, in order that public decency and propriety henceforth might be preserved, and the orders of the Vestry complied with. Accompanied by your Inspector of Nuisances, I have visited and examined the houses in William Street, where fever of a low type has lately prevailed, and in some few cases proved fatal. Although the privies are panned and trapped, there is evident in the houses, more or less, a decided taint or sewer smell. Some of the people complain much of this, and the children almost without exception look pale, feeble, and out of health, several still suffering from low remittent fever. The sink stones are generally untrapped, and I was informed that when the alteration took place in the privies, in some instances, holes were dug in the back yards, into which the contents of the cesspools were emptied. Free communication, however, appears to exist in every instance with the sewer, but it is very evident that as the drains pass through several of the houses, and as at frequent; intervals a most offensive and sickening effluvium escapes by the untrapped sinkstones and from other sources, that a necessity exists for a searching investigation and the adoption of more effectual precautions for preservation from sickness by the exlusion of poisonous sewer emanations from the dwellings in this street, tenanted as they are principally by our industrious classes employed in the neighbouring factories. In this, as in almost every other case, the children show most vividly the effect of impure air. They are deficient in vital stamina and healthy development, and are absolutely unequal to resist the influence of epidemic disease. In Hargrave Square, close to the above street, a most vicious arrangement exists, viz,, four privies constructed together in a block, open, and in contiguity with a sewer; they are foul smelling places, and injurious to health. In Brook-street adjoining, the inhabitants also complain of a most sickening and offensive smell from the drains, and at No. 8 the yard was overflowed with sewage and soil, in consequence of some defect or stoppage. At 1 and 2, Queen Street, there are overflowing open cesspools and dilapidated privies, which I certify. It is most desirable that prompt measures should bo taken in this district to carry out sanitary improvements, as I repeat, that looking to the physical condition of a considerable proportion of the population, they are ill-calculated to resist diseases in 24 an epidemic form, and the coming spring and summer will aggravatevery materially the existing evils. In addition to the evils from the above-mentioned sources, the atmosphere is here tainted by a considerable accumulation of ashes and house refuse. The inhabitants complain that the dust carts, when they come, pass their doors at six o'clock in the morning. In some instances there are the accumulations of some weeks. I have on former occasions reported to the vestry proceedings taken to check and put a stop to the sale of diseased meat. This important and responsible part of the duty devolving on your officer of health I bear constantly in my mind. There are some difficulties in carrying out fully the wise intentions of the Legislature, in the very wholesome enactment in the Metropolitan Management Act, on this generally vital interesting subject. From my first entrance upon the duties I have paid earnest and constant attention to physical and general characters of meat in a diseased or unwholesome condition, intended for human food, and I can now speak with confidence where formerly I should have had doubts, which would have prevented my taking prompt and active measures, such as the following:— I visited the premises of a carcase butcher in the Leather Market district (your inspector accompanied me), on Thursday afternoon, the 17th instant, and in the front shop there was a large tub filled with salted beef, bad and totally unfitted for human food. On proceeding to the slaughter-house I observed the carcases of two sheep, which I considered showed the marks of disease of a decided character. The butcher remonstrated and stated that he bought the sheep at market, and believed them to be good, although somewhat poor. Now one was fleshy, weighty, and full of fat, the flesh of a dark colour, but soft, moist, and pulpy: the other was pale, the flesh almost of a grey colour, and the carcase wasted to an extreme degree. The entire viscera in each had been removed, with the exception of the kidneys. The kidneys in the fat and fleshy carcase were enlarged, and full of pus, in the other, one kidney was wasted, and one contained pus. I begged the butcher to observe their condition, took his knife and cut a section of each, when he acknowledged their diseased state, and expressed his sorrow, again stating that the carcases had been passed at market, and that he was taken in. As this is a subject of universal interest, I may, I trust, be pardoned for entering upon it more in detail than is my usual wont in reports to your Board; inasmuch as I believe that, owing to some strange neglect, either intentional or unintentional, in the central market, there exists increased facilities for the sale of meat of the above description, which in poor neighbourhoods is offered at a price to tempt the needy, who in satisfying their hunger unconsciously are receiving into their systems the seeds of disease in the subtle form of animal poison. If the owner of this diseased meat had contested the fact of its condition, it would have been my duty to take the unsound meat before a Magistrate, in order that it might be destroyed, and if the Vestry had thought fit, to press subsequently for the penalty. As, however, he 25 consented to its seizure and destruction under the surveillance of your inspector, after some consideration I considered that in this instance this was an advisable course, inasmuch as the same proceeding had been sanctioned by the Vestry on a former occasion with good result. I trust and believe that this discovery will prove an excellent and salutary warning. The mortality of the parish for the week ending Februrary 5th was 25, the corrected average within a fraction of 33. There were 5 in St. Mary Magdalen, 9 in the Leather Market, and 11 in St. James district. For the week ending the 10th inst. there is an increase, the deaths being 29, the corrected average being a fraction under that number:— there were 3 in the Leather Market, 8 in St. Mary Magdalen, and 18 in St. James district. A fatal case of Typhus Fever occurred in the Blue Anchor Road. I look with considerable anxiety to this locality, and at the risk of being charged with repetition, I again draw the attention of the Vestry to the urgent necessity for promptly draining this daily increasing populous district. I am, Gentlemen, your obedient servant, JOHN CHALLICE, Officer of Health. TO THE VESTRY OF BERMONDSEY. March 7th, 1859. Gentlemen,—My attention has been directed to the sanitary state of Meridian Place, in consequence of a communication from the Board of Guardians to the effect "that a case of Fever had occurred at No. 10, and that the houses were in a bad condition." On the 3rd instant I visited the place, accompanied by your inspector, and was agreeably surprised to find that a very great improvement had taken place since my last inspection; the yards have been paved, closets panned, sink stones trapped, and the water supply is good; the only complaint made by the inhabitants now is an occasional stench from the untrapped gulley in the centre of the court, which I advise to be trapped forthwith. By a reference to the journal of the District Medical Officer it is satisfactory to find that Fever has not spread to other houses in the court, which in all propability it would have done, had not great sanitary improvements been carried out. The condition of Matilda Place is altogether bad, the houses are filthy, the privies dilapidated, offensive, disgusting, and unhealthy. It is necessary for the health of the inmates that immediate steps should be taken to remedy the existing evils. The paving of each of these courts is in a defective condition, not creditable to our which stands so prominent in this respect in almost the whole of the district. The site of Bethesda Chapel remains in the same condition; it is dangerous to the health of the district in consequence of the exposure of 26 human remains in various stages of decomposition. I have great anxiety lest this spot should become a dangerous public nuisance. Several cases of Fever have been brought under my notice in the Blue Anchor Road district; the drainage is here, as before stated, most defective, I entreat the Vestry to direct its earnest attention to this important subject, comprising the vital interests of a large and daily increasing population. Notwithstanding the high rate of temperature, the health of the parish, as indicated by the mortality and the returns of the medical officers, appears to be satisfactory. For the week ending 19th of February, the deaths were 18, viz., 10 in St. James's, 5 in St. Mary Magdalen, and 3 in Leather Market district. The births were 56 in the same period, and the corrected average of deaths would have been 28. In the week ending February 26th the mortality was 22, the corrected average being 25. The deaths were thus distributed,—9 in St. James's, 7 in St. Mary Magdalen, and 6 in the Leather Market. The births in the same period were 62; a figure which represents a most remarkable increase of population. In the St. James's district the births were 32, whilst the deaths were but 9. I am, Gentlemen, Your obedient servant, JOHN CHALLICE, TO THE VESTRY OF BERMONDSEY. March 21st, 1859. Mr. Chairman and Gen Gentlemen,-In the week ending March 5th, the deaths in the parish registered were 24, the corrected average would bo 28; in the epidemic class we had but one death, which was from "Whooping Cough. There were 7 deaths in St. Mary Magdalen, and 9 births; 12 in the Leather Market, and 14 births; and in St. James's but 5, whilst the births were 21. For the week terminating March 12th the deaths were 19, the corrected average being 30-6; 2 children's deaths are registered, each aged 3 years, under the head of Diptheria; one was the son of a Bricklayer, in Baalzephon-street, and the other that of a daughter of a Railway Porter, at No. 20, Willow-street. In the latter case the throat disease was preceded by Scarlatina. There are 8 other children in the house, who appear to have escaped any contagion, and therefore it may be assumed that the disease was not of the malignant or epidemic form elsewhere so fatal. The sanitary arrangements of the house are not objectionable._ The little boy in Baalzephon-street had been ill for some time, his parents having about three weeks ago removed from Haggerstone. There have been 5 cases of Small Pox lately in this house, the children, all of one family, were unvaccinated when it broke 27 out, but the medical attendant adopted the wise precaution of at once vaccinating them, and in consequence the disease was modified, and they recovered. The sanitary arrangements in this house were fairly carried out. The births in St. James's district this week were 29, and the deaths but 5; a most unusual and remarkable proportion worthy of record. In the Leather Market they were 13; the deaths 7; whilst in St. Mary Magdalen only 6 were born, and 7 died. My attention has been drawn by your inspector to the presence of a serious nuisance of recent growth in Brown's Fields. Although at first sight it would appear to be one rather of a moral than of a physical nature, it is of a character calculated, I am convinced, to bring about much misery, vice, and disease, to the juvenile portion of our population. On visiting the spot last evening, accompanied by Mr. O'Brien and a police constable, about 7 o'clock, I found that there was a gipsy encampment of 12 tents, most of them occupied by 2, 3, and 4 adult?, besides several children and young persons of both sexes. I think that there must be nearly a hundred of these Arabs of a civilised country living in a state bordering upon complete barbarism, now settled down in our parish. The spot, as is well known to most gentlemen of the Vestry, is bounded by a ditch near the factory of Messrs. Bryan and Parker, which is, I am sorry to say, even now giving off most offensive and sickening odours, increased by the stagnant condition in several places, caused by obstruction in consequence of the breaking down of the banks by the large numbers of boys and girls who congregate hero, especially on the Sunday, for the purposes of donkey racing, dog fighting, fortune telling, and other more immoral purposes. On inquiry I found that some of these people have been here for nearly six months, others only a few weeks, and their ostensible occupation is clothes-peg and skewer making. There was one tent into which we were especially invited to enter by two young women not of a doubtful character. These people have no water for use except from the adjoining filthy ditch, unless they beg from houses at a considerable distance, and I am convinced, from the appearance of men, women, and children, that they are scarcely or ever washed. I have done all I can to mitigate this evil, by certifying the tents as habitations unsuited and unfitted for human beings. I trust that this step will prove effectual, and promptly, for no right-thinking person can contemplate without alarm and sorrow the continuance of a condition of things which I have but faintly described, one doubtless constituting a very hot-bed of crime and disease. I am, Gentlemen, Your obedient servant, JOHN CHALLICE. 28 TO THE VESTRY OF BERMONDSEY, April 4th, 1859. Mr. Chairman and Gentlemen, —Complaint having been made to me of a Nuisance existing in the Railway Arches by Blue Anchor lane, in the occupation of Mr. Hickmott, who there carries on the trade of Artificial Manure maker, I visited and closely inspected the premises on the 25th ult., accompanied by your Inspector of Nuisances. By the first arch, and on the outside, there was a considerable heap of seal hair, which had been limed, and was not offensive. "Within there were large quantities of bags filled with refuse fur, giving off a musty odour, but not of a decided offensive character. There was however distinguishable a peculiar faint sickly smell, which proceeded from sugar refuse, and which I know to be injurious to health. In the adjoining arch, the process of converting crushed bones and other refuse animal substances into artificial manure, was being carried on, and I remained some time to witness it. By the aid of concentrated sulphuric acid the various substances employed, such as _ bones, fur, hair, sugar refuse, dried night soil, and plaster of Paris, are, after being mechanically mixed, converted by " chemical combustion" into a dark brown pulverulant mass, very valuable no doubt to Agriculturists, albeit produced at the inevitable sacrifice of the comfort and health of the inhabitants residing close to these premises. I have on several occasions certified this process as injurious to health, and I do so now with perfect confidence, inasmuch as a stay of less than half an hour caused me a head-ache, with a sense of constriction about the temples, unpleasant taste in the mouth, and a tightness at the chest. I was quite free from these symptoms before going in. Similar effects were produced on the tenant of a house, the rear of which is but a few yards from the arch where the process is carried on ; with the addition also of nausea, sickness, and loss of appetite. The mortality for the week ending 19th March was 18, the corrected average would be 25.2 thus distributed—4 in St James, all infants, two being twins who died at 2 and 3 days old, and the cause of death was the same in all, viz: convulsions. The births in this district are 13. In St. Mary Magdalen, the deaths were 7, and of these I regret to report five were of a zymotic character, viz., 3 from Scarlatina, one from confluent Small Pox unvaccinated, and one from Fever and Diarrhœa. The case of Small Pox was in the Grange Road, there were 4 other children in the house unvaccinated when the disease first showed itself. These children were vaccinated and escaped the disease. This is another remarkable indication if any were required of the inestimable value of vaccination, and also of the absolute necessity which exists for ascertaining without delay the number of unvaccinated children within our parish. I cannot help thinking that the exersise of some of the compulsory powers, with regard to the enforcement of vaccination, would be attended with the best results, more especially as Small Pox is certainly on the increase. The births in this district were also 13, so that each 29 division of the parish was equally prolific, giving a total of 39 births against 18 deaths. For the week ending March 26th the health of the parish, as illustrated by the rate of mortality, was satisfactory in a most remarkable degree. The deaths registered were but 14; a lower number than in any corresponding week for the last 19 years. In the Leather Market district the deaths were 2, one from Scarlatina, in Edward Street, and the births were 15. In St. Mary Magdalen the deaths were 4, none from Zymotic disease, and the births were 16. In St. James's the deaths were 8; one from Typhus, in Meridian Place, engendered by personal filth and overcrowding, and the births were 15, a preponderance of births over deaths of more than 300 per cent., a fact which requires no comment. It is worthy of remark that the temperature of the week was nearly 50 degrees above the average, which may, in some degree have had a favourable influence upon the health of the population at this season of the year. I have learnt with satisfaction from your inspector that the Gipsies in Brown's Fields have taken their departure, in consequence of the notice served upon them to conform to the usages of civilised society. I am, Gentlemen, Your obedient servant J. CHALLICE, M.D., Medical Officer of Health. TO THE VESTRY OF BERMONDSEY. April 18th, 1859. Mr. Chairman and Gentlemen,- Although the district of St. James suffered to some extent from Scarlatina in the week ending April 2nd, there having been three deaths from this cause, one from Measles, and one from Small Pox unvaccinated, the entire mortality for the whole parish was but 21, while the corrected average is 29.5. In the Leather Market district 2 fatal cases of Scarlatina are likewise registered. The St. Mary Magdalen district is free from any mortality, occasioned by Zymotic disease. The births registered in the week were 48. For the week ending April 9th the mortality was 25, the average being 27.9. There is one case of death ascribed to Diphtheria at 151 in the Grange Road. I find upon enquiry no assignable cause, the sanitary condition of the house being in every respect satisfactory. The mother considers it to have been more a case of Croup, at all events there are no symptoms of this disease in any other inmates of the house. There is a fatal case of Typhus in St. James Street, and one of Scar- 30 latina in Printer's Place. In Melliek's Place 2 deaths from Small Pox have taken place, both unvaccinated. In the Leather Market district the wife of a Cow Keeper killed herself by excessive indulgence in spirits, and a Police Constable died from fever in Coxhead's Gateway. Complaint has been made to me upon several occasions, by a member of the Vestry, that serious sanitary evils existed and were left unnoticed in some of the better and superior houses in our parish. In regard thereto I am anxious to have the instructions of the vestry, inasmuch as I am most desirous that no spot should be left within the district where the finger could be pointed, as originating or fostering disease. I have entertained the opinion that it was the wish of the Vestry that no steps should be taken unless some special ground of complaint arose, or unless there was tangible proof of the existence of some evil which required a prompt remedy. On the 14th instant I visited the arches in Blue Anchor Road, in the occupation of Mr. Hickmott, against whom proceedings were ordered by the vestry at their last meeting. I was pleased to find that a considerable portion of the dried manure was removed, and that there was less offensive odour within the premises. The inhabitants of the dwellings close by say that there is a very great improvement. I am, Gentlemen, Your obedient servant, JOHN CHALLICE, Officer of Health. TO THE VESTRY OF BERMONDSEY. May 2nd, 1859. Mr. Chairmen and Gentlemen, —Having been informed by your Inspector of Nuisances that complaints had been made by the Inhabitants of St. John's, of an offensive effluvium arising from the premises of Mr. Petch, at Dockhead, I have paid especial attention to this spot, which in the recollection of the Vestry has often previously been a source of trouble and police investigation. Formerly the malt roasting was most obnoxious; it appears, however, that for the last six weeeks this process, has been discontinued on these premises; therefore the cause of complaint, if justly described, could not have arisen from that source. As regards the roasting of chicory, from my own observation, from enquiries in the vicinity, and from close personal inspection this morning, I do not think there is so legitimate a ground of complaint as to justify a prosecution. This morning my attention was called to a nuisance of an aggravated 31 description, in the rear of a Licensed Slaughter-house in Long Lane. The entrails and excrement of the slaughtered animals are thrown up in heaps by a gateway entering from Chapel Place. There is a large pool also of green, putrid, and offensive water, for which there appears no drainage whatever. Unless this nuisance be promptly removed or altogether remedied, I strongly recommend the Vestry to oppose a renewal of the license at the forthcoming session. The deaths for the week ending April 16th were 27, which is slightly in excess of the corrected average. For the week terminating April 23rd the mortality was but 20, whilst the corrected average would be 27 5/10. There was one fatal case of Diptheria in St. James's district. I am, Gentlemen, Your obedient Servant, JOHN CHALLICE, M.D., Officer of Health. TO THE VESTRY OF BERMONDSEY. May 16th, 1859. The smoke and vapour arising from the process of malt roasting on the premises of Mr. Petch, at Dockhead, has since my last report upon this subject on the 2nd instant, not diminished, but I regret to add has considerably increased, and is in my opinion now a nuisance of some magnitude, inasmuch as the peculiar odour causes nausea and headache in many individuals, with loss of appetite, although there are others who have become habituated to it, and. do not suffer to the same extent. On the 13th instant the vapour and effluvia were strongly perceptible at the Vestry Offices in Maltby Street; as I approached towards the premises they became increased, and on entering the yard the smell was so intense and powerful as to be quite sickening. The cylinder in which the malt is roasted had just been emptied, so that the smoke was less in volume and density than it is during the roasting. The gas was not burning, therefore the current of air which is generally kept up, through the shafts in the roof, thereby greatly facilitating ventilation, and to the same extent diminishing the cause of complaint on the part of the public—was not in operation. I am inclined to believe that it is principally owing to the inattention and neglect in using the best means for carrying off the vapour from these premises, through the shafts and the jets of ignited gas, that the neighbourhood has lately suffered so much annoyance. I again inspected the premises on the 14th instant, about ten o'clock a.m. Volumes of dense suffocating vapour came from the open windows; I endeavoured to ascertain if the gas fires were lighted, but I cannot speak with confidence upon the subject, as the smoke was so 32 dense, and the atmosphere so oppressive, that I could not remain within the building till it had become sufficiently clear for me to observe whether they were so or not. My belief is, however, that the gas was not alight; at all events, the bulk or great body of smoke and heated vapour escaped from the windows, and not from the shafts or chimneys. My attention has been called to a heap of manure in Little Paulin street, which is justly complained of by the master of a school in Little George street; the drainage and moisture from the manure percolates through the wall of the building, where from 60 to 70 young boys are at school, giving rise to a most disagreeable, offensive foetor, obnoxious to health. On further inspection, finding that there was but one privy of the smallest character, for the use of this school and inhabitants of the adjoining house, I have certified accordingly. The sanitary condition of the houses 26, 27, 28 and 29, Star Corner, demands improvement. To the evils of open and most offensive privies and defective drainage, there is to be added that of deprivation of water. The atmosphere of these houses is polluted, tainted to such an extent, that the dwellings are scarcely fitted for human habitation. The tenant of one has a child goffering from Leprosy, which she says has not been benefited by any treatment, either at the Skin or Hospitals, or by private doctors, and no wonder, the blood is poisoned by the daily and hourly inhalation of impure air. The deaths for the last two weeks were 23 and 20 respectively, each being below the average. I am, Gentlemen, Your obedient Servant, JOHN CHALLICE, M.D., Medical Officer of Health. TO THE VESTRY OF BERMONDSEY. June 20th, 1859. Mr. Chairman and Gentlemen,—Although in this Report, which contains a Review of our Sanitary Condition and Progress during the last twelve months, there is much matter for our congratulation, I do not present it with feelings of unmixed satisfaction, as within the above period it will be observed, there has been a considerable amount of mortality in our district, from Scarlatina, Measles, Whooping Cough, and Small Pox. The deaths from Scarlatina have been 120; from Measles, 71; from Whooping Cough, 60; from Diarrhœa, 42; from Typhus Fever, 23; and from Small Pox, 16. It is of course quite unnecessary for me to speak of the value to mankind of Vaccination, in the prevention of a disease loathsome in its 33 character, and formerly rivalling in its ravages upon the human race the great scourges and plagues which have visited this world at various That great discovery of our countryman, Dr. Jenner, which may fairly be reckoned as one of the greatest ever made, when the results to the whole human race are taken into consideration, has in some degree with some persons fallen into disrepute, because of cases here and there occurring where Vaccination had already been performed. Now the first fatal case of Small Pox registered in our district was in July; there was 1 in August, 2 in September, 2 in October, 1 in November, none in December, 1 in January, 1 in February, 1 in March, 3 in April, and 2 in May. Why, in a population like ours, if the Small Pox, coming as it has lately in an epidemic form, had found us unprotected by Vaccination, instead of numbering its victims by units, its visitation would in all human probability, as it has in other memorable instances, have been marked by the death of thousands, leaving even many of those who escaped with their lives scarred and sightless. Many most remarkable instances of the preservative powers of Vaccination have come under my notice, and it is with extreme satisfaction- I report to the Vestry my belief that in our district it has been most effectually performed. Ido not think that Vaccination is neglected in anything like the proportion which the registration of births, as compared with the certificates of Vaccination, would seem to indicate. In the first place it must be remembered that a very large proportion of infants die before they are three months old; then there are the removals; and lastly, a considerable proportion of those vaccinated by private practitioners are unregistered. Still, if more effectual measures can be taken for enforcing and extending the blessings of Vaccination than exist at present, without becoming harsh or arbitrary, they ought to be supported by every enlightened citizen and parent. It will be observed by the tabular statement appended to this report, which I have prepared, that the deaths from Diarrhœa almost all occurred in the months of July, August and September. There were 14 fatal cases of this disease in July, 17 in August, and sin September, making 36 out of a total of 42. Considering the excessive heat of June and July, and the unprecedented condition of the river Thames, this result is, to my mind, not an unfavorable indication; indeed I believe that our district, instead of being the favoured seat or nucleus of this disease, suffered much less than others, and particularly in the severer forms, viz., that of summer or autumn Cholera, from which we were almost entirely exempt. I have on former occasions shown how powerful an influence is exorcised, not only in the aggravation but also in the production of this form of disease, more especially with children, by unsound and unwholesome food. I refer with some satisfaction to my efforts in cheeking, to a great extent, the sale of diseased meat, stale fish, and unsound fruit—to which I attribute, to a considerable degree, our comparative exemption and improved condition, as regards this class of complaints. I may be permitted to observe that in the performance of this duty, which is one of painful responsibility, I have 34 been most ably and zealously assisted by Mr. O'Brien, your Inspector of Nuisances. As an instructive illustration, and as a warning, I mention two instances in which I have lately had officially to investigate the cause of sudden death, and in both it was proved most clearly to have arisen from eating bad fish. In one the symptoms produced greatly resembled Cholera; this was caused by a smoked haddock, and occurred in a hear ty, healthy, steady young man of 25 years. The other was an elderly female who partook of some fried fish, which was proved to have been stinking, but disguised by the fatty covering to it—vomiting was brought on, and continued to within a few minutes of her death. Whooping Cough has been unusually fatal and severe with us—I have on several occasions alluded to it. In the second week in January no less than 5 deaths occurred from this cause. As I have before stated, a very mistaken opinion prevails with the public, and especially with the poorer classes, that medical treatment is unnecessary in this disease. Nothing can be more mischievous than this impression, and it is to this cause that a considerable proportion of the deaths are owing. However, there is in all poor and crowded districts a great need for open spaces, where children can enjoy, in some degree, fresh air and exercise. I have often witnessed with pain a child sitting on the curb stones and coughing over a gulley hole. How can recovery be expected under such circumstances? The almost inevitable crowding, too, at night, and in the same room and bed, to which our papulation is from its nature compelled to submit, tends to the aggravation and perpetuation of this very formidable malady of childhood. I must here express my opinion upon the great advantage that would accrue to our district by the establishment of a steam boat pier ; it would afford an outlet and a means for getting fresh air to a large and crowded part of our parish, where it is much needed. Measles has also been very severe and fatal with us. In the week ending July 19th, no less than eight deaths occurred from it; altogether in the 52 weeks 71 died from this cause, but of these no less than 58 occurred in the last two weeks of June, and in July, August, September and October. From Scarlatina we have suffered severely; no less than 120 deaths having been caused by this malignant and most infectious disease. The decline of Measles took place at the latter part of October, and it was then that Scarlatina broke out with renewed energy, and it is somewhat remarkable that in the 3rd week in November, the coldest on record for that period of the year, no less than 8 deaths are registered from this cause. Typhus has been fatal in 24 cases. The worst form of this disease which I have witnessed for many years, occurred in Meridian Place, where it was certainly fostered and propagated, by Overcrowding and filth. It was a most fortunate circumstance that the sanitary condition of this place, which a short time previous was very bad, had 35 in the interim been much improved, or in all human probability the disease would not have remained confined to the house in which it originated. Notwithstanding the above-mentioned causes which have added to our mortality, the result is not unsatisfactory, for the deaths from all causes in the year were but 1211, whilst the births were 2246, the corrected average of deaths would have been 1456. In St. James's district the deaths registered are 439, the births 922. In the leather Market, the deaths are 365, the births are 647. In St. Mary Magdalen, the deaths are 407, the births 677. Of the entire deaths, no less than 529 infants and children under 2 years of age are registered, 184 died between 2 years and 20; 131 deaths took place between 20 and 40 years, that is the prime of life. In the period from 40 to 50 years, which may be termed the turning part, 64 died, and from 50 to 70 years of age we had 140 deaths; from 70 to 90 years no less than 77 expired, and there were two registered whose age exceeded 90 at their death. I find, by a return from your Inspector of Nuisances, that notices have, by order of the Vestry, been served to the number of 555; during the year, 504 cesspools have been abolished, 61 instances of defective drainage remedied, 6 badly paved yards repaired, 15 instances of offensive effluvia, arising from trades, remedied; and here I may, I trust, be permitted to remark that, almost without exception, I have found the utmost readiness on the part of Manufacturers to adopt every reasonable precaution for remedying anything approaching to a nuisance or just ground of complaint. There are 12 cases in which animals have been kept so as to become a nuisance, which have by your orders been removed; 14 dwellings certified as without privy accommodation; 38 as being in a filthy and unwholesome condition; and 5 cesspools emptied in consequence of the non-existence of a sewer within 100 feet. There have been proceedings in 8 cases before the Magistrates, 7 of which were successful and one deferred. There have been two seizures of meat in an unsound condition, unfitted for human food. The notices not complied with are 39. I have most sincerely to tender my best thanks to the Vestry for its hearty and considerate co- operation, at all times, in the great work of sanitary improvement. It is to me a subject of sincere congratulation that on no occasion has there existed any antagonistic feeling on this important subject, involving as it does, the present and future health of the population of our large manufacturing Metropolitan district. I am, Gentlemen, Your obedient servant, JOHN CHALLICE, M.D., Officer of Health. 36 TO THE VESTRY OF BERMONDSEY. July 18th 1859. Mr. Chairman and Gentlemen, —During the last four weeks we have experienced, almost without interruption, summer heat above the average, and with nearly two miles of our Parish boundary constituted by the River Thames, which is now reeking, blackened, and almost insupportable from the stench arising from its putridity, I have, from week to week, watched with considerable anxiety the progress of disease amongst us, and its effects upon the lives of our denizens. It is with almost unmixed satisfaction I find that the health of the population, as a general rule, continues to be in most respects satisfactory. In the week ending June 18th, although we had 3 Deaths from Scarlatina, 2 from Whooping Cough, 1 from Typhus, and 1 from Small Pox, yet the total was but 18, while the corrected average would have been 23. For the week following that ending the 25th of June, the Deaths were 29; 8 from Scarlatina, 1 from Measles, 2 from Small Pox, 1 from Diarrhœa, and 1 from Whooping Cough. The mortality this week was 5 in excess of the average. In the week terminating July 2nd, the Deaths were 26, being about 4 in excess of the average; we had again 3 from Scarlatina, 3 Measles, 2 from Diarrhœa, and 1 from Typhus. For the week ending July 9th, the deaths were 21, as compared with an average of about 23. There was 1 death from Typhus, 1 from Diarrhœa, 1 from Diptheria, and 1 from Small Pox. Although these isolated cases of malignant and epidemic diseases, are sufficient to keep up our watchfulness, with some degree also of anxiety, still it is a subject of consolation and encouragement to find that, instead of, as of old, spreading from child to child, from room to room, tenement to tenement, house to house, street to street, district to district, till a wide circle became stricken by the ravages of these several diseases, now almost without exception it is only in isolated cases, or in very small groups that these diseases afflict and trouble us. A fatal case of Diptheria occurred at No. 1, Queen's Road. On visiting the house I found not only an open cesspool, but also a close, confined, strong-smelling stable, without drainage, and a considerable heap of manure in the yard. Refering to a subject of general Metropolitan interest, the condition of the Thames, and its influence upon public health, I am of opinion that, bad as it is, yet there is a clear and decided gain to the community at large, in bringing this vast amount of putrescent, putrifying, and matter prone to putrifaction, from the close, confined, narrow streets, ill-ventilated courts, small dwellings, and tenements of the crowded Poor, into the light and even heat of the present season. Now the evil is seen and appreciated by all; formerly it was felt almost solely, always primarily, by the Poor. It was then concentrated, it is now diffused. Now it is brought to the Nostrils of our Legislators, and our poor Productive Classes can breathe in consequence a purer atmosphere. 37 I may perhaps be permitted to offer an opinion upon the plan in operation by the Metropolitan Board of Works, for deodorising the putrescent waters of the Thames, by quantities of lime cast into the sewers. As regards the Thames, the good effects are not very manifest; but as regards the sewers, and its action checking foul and injurious emanations from the gulley holes and air shafts into the streets, I have satisfied myself that the results are decidedly of a most beneficial character-in fact a great preservative of public health. I am not aware that we are participating, to our due and fair extent, in this advantage-I believe the contrary. Great benefit would, I know, accrue to our district, were lime, copiously mixed with water, and a proper admixture of chloride of lime, let daily into some of the large main sewers of our parish. I am, Gentlemen, Yours faithfully, JOHN CHALLICE, M.D., Officer of Health. TO THE VESTRY OF BERMONDSEY. August 15th, 1859. Mr. Chairman and Gentlemen,--I have on former occasions mentioned that it is at this period of the year, when there is generally a tendency to Diarrhœa and to Cholera, that the responsibility of your officer of health is of necessity very considerably increased. Formerly, the returns of the Registrar-General for the districts south of London, especially for Bermondsey, were looked to as an indication as to whether or not the rest of the metropolis was threatened with an epidemic, as it was in these localities that the population were generally first attacked and suffered most. It will be, I am sure, most satisfactory to the Vestry, and to all interested in the health and well being of our district, to learn that the official records of this trying period no longer point to us with alarm and warning, as the focus from whence cholera or even diarrhœa might be expected to spread to other parts of the metropolis. Speaking of the week ending July 16th, the Registrar-General says -"The most striking feature is the increase of mortality from Diarrhœa, which has gone on increasing from 34 to 58, 132, and 264 cases." It may be observed that more cases occurred in the north and east districts than in those on the south side of the river, although the population of either of the former groups is much less than that of the latter. Our mortality was 25 for this week, the corrected average being within a fraction of 28. There were, however, rather a large proportion of Diarrhœa, viz., 9 cases, although one of these was in an old man of 81, where old age is also justly ascribed as a 38 cause of death; another was that of a labouring man aged 61 the rest were young children. In the week ending July 23rd, with an increase of temperature of an average of 8º, the deaths from Diarrhœa rose to the somewhat alarming number of 415. On Monday in this week the thermometer reached 93 3 in the shade, and in the sun 115º, we had again 9 deaths from Diarrhœa, all in young children, with the exception of one case, a managed 61 years, a chronic not an acute epidemic case, the illness having lasted some weeks. The last week in July the deaths with us from Diarrhœa were 8; 7 of these occurred in young children, and 1 in a man of 58 years. Our general mortality reached as high as 37, the corrected average being 33. In the first week of August, taking the entire metropolis, the deaths from Diarrhœa declined to 312, but there were 24 from Cholera and Choleraic Diarrhœa. We had 4 fatal cases of Diarrhœa in young children, although our total mortality was but 19, the corrected average being 37, 5º, we had no fatal case of Cholera. The condition of the Thames, a question to us of vital interest during the last three weeks has shown a marked improvement. This desirable change has, I hare no doubt, exercised a beneficial effect on the health of the community in our district. I have watched with considerable interest the effect produced upon the waters of the river by the deodorising process, instituted by the Metropolitan Board of Works, and I am convinced that very great advantages have accrued to the Metropolis from the perseverance and energy with which they have been carried out. There is, I regret to state, still existing with us, a very offensive open sewer by Bermondsey Wall. The tide conies up only at rare intervals, There are open privies over its course, and also very primitive contrivances, by which a numerous labouring class in this district relieve themselves. I consider it very desirable for the preservation of health and public decency, that this open sewer should be covered without delay. I am, Gentleman, Your faithful Servant, JOHN CHALLICE, M.D., Officer of Health. 39 40 BERMONDSEY. Table shewing the Deaths as compared with the average number in corresponding weeks for the last 10 years; also the mortality from Zymotic Diseases DATE. Deaths. Average Measles. Typhus Fever. Diarrhœa. Small Pox. Whoop. Cough. Scarlatina. 30 8 ... June 19 23 ... 1 3 ... 21 24 26 4 3 4 2 1 ... 20 22 July 3 4 ... 1 2 ... ... „ 10 28 22 3 3 1 1 1 ... „ 17 26 26 5 3 ... 1 3 ... 28 6 „ 24 28 5 ... 3 2 ... „ 31 23 33 3 1 4 1 1 1 28 36 August 7 1 1 1 ... 24 ... ... „ 14 38 3 2 ... ... ... 1 „ 21 27 39 4 3 ... 2 4 ... „ 28 31 38 6 6 ... 3 1 ... September 4 25 42 2 3 ... 3 ... ... 20 40 „ 11 1 1 2 2 1 4 31 37 „ 18 1 1 2 1 ... ... „ 25 14 40 1 1 3 ... ... ... October 2 10 38 2 1 1 1 ... ... „ 9 19 27 2 1 1 1 1 ... 23 4 „ 16 28 1 1 1 ... ... 17 28 „ 23 2 1 1 ... ... ... „ 30 19 24 5 ... ... ... ... ... EXTREME COLD November 6 23 24 1 ... 1 ... ... ... „ 13 25 27 2 1 3 3 ... ... 31 26 1 2 „ 20 ... 2 8 ... 31 „ 27 30 1 ... 2 4 ... ... 35 28 December 4 ... 2 2 ... ... ... „ 11 32 30 1 1 2 6 ... ... 21 „ 18 24 ... ... ... 2 3 ... „ 25 18 27 1 1 ... 2 ... ... January 1 41 30 2 1 1 5 ... ... 30 1 ... „ 8 30 2 2 ... ... 29 „ 15 24 ... ... 2 ... ... ... „ 22 16 28 2 2 ... ... ... ... „ 29 24 25 ... 1 ... ... 5 ... February 5 25 31 ... 2 ... 1 ... ... 29 25 „ 12 2 ... 2 1 ... ... „ 19 18 26 ... 1 1 3 ... ... 22 „ 26 24 1 ... ... 2 ... ... 24 26 March 5 1 1 ... ... ... ... „ 12 18 27 1 1 ... ... 1 ... „ 19 18 23 1 1 1 ... ... 3 „ 26 14 26 1 1 ... 1 ... ... April 2 20 27 1 ... 1 1 ... ... „ 9 25 25 3 2 5 ... ... ... „ 16 26 25 ... ... ... ... ... ... „ 23 20 25 .. ... ... ... ... 1 „ 30 23 25 ... ... 1 ... ... 2 May 7 20 24 1 ... ... ... 4 ... „ 14 5 22 1 ... ... ... 2 4 „ 21 17 21 1 ... ... ... 2 ... „ 28 16 21 1 1 1 ... 2 ... 25 24 1 ... ... ... June 4 ... 5 26 23 1 3 „ 11 ... ... ... 1 1211 1456 72 19 58 115 24 44 41 BIRTHS and DEATHS for BERMONDSEY, in 52 Weeks, from June 14th, 1858, to June 11th, 1859. St. James' District. Leather Market District. St. Mary Magdalen District. DATE. Births. Deaths. Births, Deaths. Births. Deaths. June 19 18 9 8 13 10 8 „ 2 6 16 6 9 6 17 9 July 3 10 4 9 10 14 6 „ 10 19 6 10 16 8 6 „ 17 19 7 10 10 9 9 13 7 17 „ 24 11 14 10 „ 31 9 13 16 2 6 8 August 7 26 9 9 7 15 12 19 9 5 „ 14 6 11 9 15 9 12 „ 21 7 9 11 7 „ 28 11 7 8 17 16 September 4 11 11 12 5 8 9 „ 11 16 14 5 3 8 3 „ 18 15 11 18 7 16 13 6 „ 25 16 13 5 9 3 October 2 17 2 16 5 12 3 „ 9 17 4 15 8 10 5 „ 16 23 7 15 10 9 6 „ 23 16 3 12 8 16 6 „ 30 25 5 16 8 19 6 November 6 22 10 2 7 19 6 „ 13 19 14 10 4 14 7 „ 20 19 11 12 11 13 9 „ 2 7 11 8 15 7 11 16 15 December 4 16 7 7 14 13 „ 11 27 11 9 7 14 14 21 15 „ 18 10 2 17 4 9 5 „ 25 12 8 14 5 January 1 14 17 12 7 18 17 „ 8 20 6 23 13 11 13 10 „ 15 19 10 9 17 10 „ 22 15 8 10 6 19 2 26 10 „ 29 14 8 17 6 11 February 5 20 14 9 22 5 „ 12 17 18 10 3 14 8 „ 19 22 10 16 3 18 5 „ 26 32 9 14 6 16 7 21 March 5 5 14 12 9 7 29 „ 12 5 13 7 7 6 „ 19 13 4 13 7 13 7 „ 26 15 8 15 2 16 4 6 April 2 21 10 8 17 6 23 10 „ 9 15 10 18 5 „ 16 21 9 12 11 17 6 „ 23 13 8 12 5 7 7 „ 30 17 4 18 7 12 12 May 7 15 8 12 9 12 3 18 „ 14 3 20 1 12 1 13 3 „ 21 17 7 9 7 „ 28 15 6 19 3 9 7 June 4 16 12 12 5 8 8 „ 11 12 11 11 4 6 11 922 439 647 365 407 42 BERMONDSEY. DEATHS. In Weeks ending Under 2 years. From 2 years, and under 20. From 20 years, and under 40. From 40 years, and under 50. From 50 years, and under 70. From 70 years, and upwards. June 19 16 3 2 2 73 4 12 2 2 1 4 „ 26 75 2 July 3 12 3 2 .. 171 2 „ 10 12 7 1 2 77 .. „ 17 72 2 14 3 2 83 71 „ 24 1 79 23 1 3 .. 88 1 11 „ 31 82 2 8 1 71 72 Aug. 7 2 5 3 2 16 1 11 4 2 81 „ 14 .. 12 3 1 2 5 81 „ 28 .. „ 28 .. .. .. .. 17 4 2 2 Sept. 4 .. 1 74 „ 11 10 7 2 77 .. 3 „ 18 12 6 2 1 74 4 5 1 2 „ 25 .. 5 1 2 1 86 Oct. 2 .. 2 1 81 „ 9 10 4 .. 2 2 87 „ 16 9 2 8 1 „ 23 7 3 3 75 .. 9 3 2 5 „ 30 .. 13 5 2 1 1 74 Nov. 6 5 1 1 8 72 „ 13 6 3 2 „ 20 13 8 3 75 5 5 78 „ 27 13 3 .. 74 4 Dec. 4 70 15 3 1 4 73 „ 11 4 13 8 1 .. 74 1 „ 18 78 2 14 1 3 75 1 75 10 „ 25 76 2 1 1 85 76 3 70 Jan. 1 19 4 7 2 82 88 70 Carried forward 111 41 66 60 39 339 43 BERMONDSEY. DEATHS-(continued). In Weeks ending Under 2 years. From 2 years, and under 20. From 20 years, and under 40. From 40 years. and under 50. From 50 years, and under 70. From 70 years, and upwards. Brought forward.. 111 60 41 39 339 66 78 3 Jan. 8 73 5 77 12 3 1 78 76 „ 15 99 3 5 75 3 71 12 2 73 „ 22 3 74 3 . 6 3 91 „ 29 6 .. 78 8 2 1 M. 83 Feb. 5 5 86 78 3 2 10 2 83 1 79 7 „ 12 .. 3 76 14 70 „ 19 4 6 5 1 81 .. R.C. 4 2 „ 26 11 3 74 2 w. 4 March 5 2 73 11 1 1 76 4 4 3 „ 12 4 3 74 9 4 3 „ 19 1 1 2 „ 26 10 0 2 „, .. April 2 10 3 2 1 3 91 L.M. „ 9 9 3 6 2 3 75 80 4 „ 16 10 4 1 5 ! v „ 23 8 70 1 5 1 3 76 81 „ 30 7 5 3 3 7 77 May 7 7 1 3 1 3 „ 14 3 3 3 3 3 77 74 5 „ 21 3 .. 1 2 76 „ 28 7 5 3 4 82 .. June 4 6 I „ 11 7 7 5 4 76 1 Total 531 183 126 70 140 76 Notices served by order of the Vestry. Pans and Traps provided, and connected with Drains or Sewers. Dwellings in a filthy and unwholesome condition. Cesspools emptied, no Sewer within 100 feet. Dwellings without any privy accommodation. Seizures of Meat being unfit for human food. Animals so kept as to be a nuisance. Summonses before Police Magistrates. Cesspools entirely done away with. Defective and Offensive Drains. Average number of inspections. Offensive Accumulations. Slaughterhouses inspected. Notices not complied with. Slaughterhouses licensed. Effluvia from Trade. Badly paved Yards. 504 555 504 61 6 15 5 12 14 38 5 35 34 8 37 3520 2 I have the honor to be, Gentlemen, Your most obedient Servant, 20th June, 1859. ROBERT JOHN O'BRIEN, Inspector to the Vestry.