12 BER 4 METROPOLIS LOCAL MANAGEMENT ACT, 18 & 19 Vic. cap. 120. Reports OF DR. CHALLICE, MEDICAL OFFICER OF HEALTH, FOR THE PARISH OF BERMONDSEY, SURREY, FOR THE YEARS 1859-60. "EITHER DEATH OR LIFE." Shakspeare. LONDON: PRINTED BY E. BILLING & SON, 152, BERMONDSEY STREET. 1860. MEDICAL OFFICER'S REPORT. TO THE VESTRY OF BERMONDSEY. October 3rd, 1859. Mr. Chairman and Gentlemen, —September has, with us, this year passed most favorably, as regards sickness and mortality. Contrasted with former months of the same period, the results are striking and in the highest degree satisfactory. For e xample, in the week ending Sept. 3rd, the deaths are 17, the average being 39; for the next week 13, the average 45; for the week following 18, the average being 39; and for the week ending Sept. 24th. 19, the average being 36. During the whole month but six fatal cases of diarrhoea occurred, and these were without exception, with young children and infants. In the entire absence of any serious Epidemic disease, a most favorable period presents itself, now that the summer heat has passed, for pressing forward with vigour our career of sanitary improvement. My attention has been drawn to Sussex place, Long lane, by Mr. Richmond, who had lately attended there a case of Typhus fever. This is a court with six small tenements, and with back yards, about six feet by five. Two of the tenements have privies panned and trapped and with water supply, the other four have open and most offensive cesspools, the atmosphere from which pervades the dwellings, rendering them most unwholesome. This is so remarkable, that the inhabitants of No. 3, one of the improved places, present a much better condition of health than their next neighbours at No. 2. It was at No. 1, that the fever occurred. I have visited Kilmington place, Blue Anchor road, there are here three tenements in a most disgraceful condition, when looked upon, as human dwellings. They are dilapidated and filthy, and alford but little shelter to the wretched inhabitants from the inclemency of the weather. I certify that Nos. 1, 2 and 3, Kilmington place, are houses totally unfit for human habitation. Your Inspector has informed me that Mr. Baker, of Star corner, Butcher, slaughters animals in buildings in Long lane, without having any license for that purpose. It is with satisfaction I report, that in most instances the requirements of the Vestry with regard to Slaughter-houses have been satisfactorily carried out. I am, Gentlemen, Your obedient Servant, JOHN CHALLICE, M.D., Medical Officer. TO THE VESTEY OF BERMOJSTDSEY. October 17th, 1859. Mr. Chairman and Gentlemen, —I have, accompanied by your Inspector, visited the manufacturing premises of Messrs. Morris, Dockhead, in consequence of complaints that they were so conducted as to be a nuisance to the neighbourhood and injurious to health. On a former occasion I inspected and reported upon these premises, and the result was, that some improvement took place at the time. On entering the yard, the odour and effluvia was powerful and very offensive, proceeding principally, from some pits termed technically, I believe, "Grainers." These pits are within a short distance of the rear of some houses on the Eastern side of John street, and are the source from which the stench so much complained of proceeds. I think it advisable that these pits should be removed to the rear of the premises. There was a further source of nuisance in a large and old soak at another part of the yard, so offensive when the surface was agitated, that any description must be inade- quate. It produced a very marked and decided effect upon your Inspector of Nuisances, and I felt its influence for some hours afterwards. We inspected the adjoining premises of Messrs. Nickerson, which were in a far superior condition, evincing evidence of care and also the entire absence of offensive effluvia. The health of our Pariah continues good. The deaths for the week ending October 1st. were 20, the average being 34 ; and for the week ending October 8th. 16, the average being 25. I have for some time thought it my duty not to confine myself simply to a report of the sanitary condition of our district, but to compare our position as regards health and life with Metropolitan districts. I believe that this course has been attended with good results, removed popular and ill-founded opinions with regard to Bermondsey, I this evening take a summary view of the thirteen weeks, ending October 1st, not only as regards ourselves, but also our neighbouring districts, and briefly of other portions of the Metropolis. It has been a critical period; there were on several occasions very threatening, even alarming symptoms of the advent of a severe and fatal Epidemic, which providentially appears now to have passed away. I think it important only to take for our consideration the diseases named Zymotic, and justly considered to be preventible to a great degree.—These are Small Pox, Measles, Scarlatina, Whooping Cough, Diarrœa, and Typhus. We must take as a standard the last census, which will tell somewhat against us, for the central and some other districts cannot have increased in population in the same ratio as Bermondsey. During the thirteen weeks the deaths from Small Pox in the Metropolis were 287, which represents one death for every 8234 persons. The entire Metropolis has been visited more or less with this virulent disease. The Eastern district suffered most, then the Central, then the Southern, next the Northern, and least of all the Western. In the Southern district the deaths were 1 in 8173, then 73 cases registered—3 in Christchurch and St. Saviour's, 3 St. Olave's and St. John's, 25 St. George's, Southwark, 15 in Newington, 10 in Lambeth, 4 at Clapham, 6 at Deptford and Greenwich, 6 at Lewisham and Plumstead, and in Bermondsey 1, Camberwell is in the same position with 1 death only registered, and Rotherhithe which in sanitary improvements is running a fair race with ourselves, had no death whatever from Small Pox. With regard to Measles, how do we stand ? The mortality from this disease in the quarter for the Metropolis was 231. The Western districts suffering most, Central districts next, then the Northern, then the Eastern much less, and last of all the Southern. There were but 24 deaths from this disease to the latter district. We escaped altogether, having no fatal case. With Scarlatina the Eastern and Southern districts were most severely attacked, the former somewhat in excess of the latter. Taking the Southern population, the deaths being 294, that is 1 in 2097. In Bermondsey the deaths were 15, which is 1 in 3208. I am sorry we had any, still that is not unsatisfactory. We suffered considerably less than St. George's, the deaths there were 19; less than Newington or Lambeth; less even than the suburban districts of Clapham, Battersea, Wandsworth, Putney or Streatham. With Plumstead, Lee, Lewisham and Sydenham, as regards the prevalence of Scarlatina, let it be especially recorded, that taking the deaths as a criterion, and although a melancholy it is the best test, that whereas Bermondsey lost one of its population out of every 3208; this district presumed to be favorable to health, to which many of our inhabitants have usually fled, lost 1 in 1204.—Comment is unnecessary. Taking some of the Northern districts, I will illustrate by St. Pancras and Marylebone, in one of these large divisions of the Metropolis the deaths were 1 in 2618, and in the other, St. Pancras, which includes Regent's Park, Kentish, Camden and Somers Towns, are 1 in 3199. Islington West, including as it does the Fever Hospital, it is unfair to mention. But with Islington East, we compare very favorably. The City of London was comparatively speaking very little affected. Patent reasons account in a great degree for this exception. Some of the Eastern districts suffered very severely. St. George's in the East, with a population to about the same extent, and in some respects of a similar character to ours, lost 50, or more than three times our mortality. Shoreditch, Hoxton, Haggerstone, Shadwell and Ratcliffe, all suffered to a far greater extent than Bermondsey, Bow and Poplar rather less. It is unnecessary to go into any details or comparative Tables as regards Whooping Cough—we suffered less than most other districts, our deaths were 3. The examination of the Mortality Tables for Diarrhœa, I approached with considerable trepidation, inasmuch as this division with its more formidable type Cholera, formerly gave us a most unenviable reputation. The mortality from this disease in the whole Metropolis during the 13 weeks was 2743, a very formidable fact, as the deaths from all other Zymotic diseases fell short of this number by 712. Proving thus the severity and prevalence of this Epidemic visitation. The Eastern districts were most severely afflicted, then in a lesser degree the Northern, then the Southern, next the Western, and last the Central division. In Bermondsey, the deaths were 50,that is 1. 962 In Newington „ 77, „ 1.841 In that portion of Lambeth, composed of the Waterloo and Lambeth divisions 1. 860 In St. George's 1. 925 In Christchurch 1. 940 In Kennington, Brixton and Norwood 1.1450 In this instance, as in former cases, the elevated districts being peculiarly favored. But most singularly favorable were the adjoining parishes of St. Olave's and St. John's, where the deaths 1.1490. Clapham also stands very favorably 1.1410. But in Dulwich, Camberwell and Peckham the deaths were 1.719. In Greenwich, Deptford and Woolwich 1.720. In Plumstead, Eltham, Lea and Lewisham 1.826. And in Rotherhithe 1.825. Thus in all these Southern districts, Bermondsey stands favorably, except with Clapham, Kennington and St. John's. Shoreditch, Hackney, Whitechapel, St. George's in the East, Shadwell, Ratcliff, Limehouse, Mile End, Bow and Poplar, all suffered more to a very material extent, but in somewhat different proportions to Bermondsey. Without going into further details which may be fatiguing to the Vestry, I shall append a Table, which will prove to demonstration the excellent position we now occupy—rewarding us richly for past exertions and encouragement for future efforts in the completion and perfection of all sanitary improvements. I am, Gentlemen, Your obedient Servant, JOHN CHALLICE, M.D., Medical Officer. TO THE VESTEY OE BERMONDSEY. November 7th, 1859. Mr. Chairman and Gentlemen, —I am happy to report that the general health of the Parish continues in a very satisfactory condition. In the week ending October 15th, the deaths were only 8, the corrected average for the last ten years would have been within a fraction of 29; and the lowest mortality in any corresponding week was 18. There is no other district in the Metropolis where the deaths were so few in proportion to the population; with the exception of one death from Diarrœa, in an infant of seven weeks in the Leather Market district, we were free from any fatal case of Zymotic disease, The mean temperature of the air for the week was 55°, which was about 4½° above the average. For the week ending October the 22nd, the deaths rose to 17, still however very considerably below the average, which is somewhat in excess of 26. We had one death from Typhus in the St. James' district, but none from any other Zymotic disease. Two of the deaths only occurred in St. Mary Magdalen district, one being a widow 87 years of age, paralyzed for thirteen years, and the other an infant of one month. In the Leather Market district there were also but two deaths, one the wife of a labouring man 66 years of age, and the other an illegitimate child eight months old. In the St. James' district the deaths were 13, one of these was a journeyman Tanner, 74 years old; his death was accidental. The widow of a Sack maker also died, aged 74. The mean temperature of the air during the week was 48-3°, which is less by 0-8° than the average of the same week in 43 years. Although so near the average, this week was remarkable, and deserving of record for extreme fluctuation in the temperature of the atmosphere, the highest point of the thermometer was 64-5/10° and the lowest 28° or 4 degrees below freezing point. The week ending October 29th is remarkable for almost an unprecedented degree of cold, being within a fraction of 9° below the average for the last 43 years, and on Monday the thermometer marked 26½°, or 5½° below freezing point. It was to be expected that this unusual severity would tell hard upon the aged and the young. The deaths although increased to 21, were still under the average, which is about 28. There were 3 fatal cases of Scarlatina. The total deaths in the three weeks were 46, the births 153. I am, Gentlemen, Your obedient Servant, JOHN CHALLICE, M.D. Officer of Health. TO THE VESTRY OF BERMONDSEY. Nov. 21st, 1859. Mr. Chairman and Gentlemen, —I have inspected the premises in Swan Mead, used as a manufactory of farina from potatoes. These were on a former occasion brought under the notice of the Vestry, and complained of, in consequence of the effluvia arising from large quantities of potatoes, in a diseased condition. There does not appear to me to be at present the same legitimate and strong grounds for complaint as formerly, inasmuch as the potatoes do not now give off any disagreeable odour. It is true that there is a faint and sickly odour about the place, which is however not perceptible outside the premises. Close to the chapel there is a very offensive open privy communicating with the public Sewer. It is very probable that the drainage from these premises, combined with this cause, may produce the nuisance complained of by the memorialists to your Board. The mortality for the week ending Nov. sth was 20, the corrected average being 24.—There were 8 in St. James', 5 in St. Mary Magdalen, and 7 in the Leather Market. The births for the same period were 46. For the week ending Nov. 12th, the deaths were 19, the corrected average being 26; thus divided, 2 in St. James', 8 in St. Mary Magdalen, and 9 in the Leather Market. The births were 53. I am, Gentlemen, Your obedient faithful Servant, JOHN CHALLICE, M.D., Officer of Health. TO THE VESTRY OF BERMONDSEY. Dec. 5th, 1859. Mr. Chairman and Gentlemen, —The deaths for the "week ending Nov. 19th, were 27, which is within a fraction of the average for the last ten years. There was one fatal case of Small Pox, in a child who had been unsuccessfully vaccinated on three occasions. The births were 45. For the week ending Nov. 26th, the mortality for the district was diminished to 19, the corrected average would have been 31. The births were 42. The health of the parish thus appears to be in a satisfactory state. I am, Gentlemen, Your very faithful Servant, JOHN CHALLICE, M.D. Medical Officer. TO THE VESTRY OF BERMONDSEY. Dec. 19th, 1859. Mr. Chairman and Gentlemen, —The deaths in the week ending Dec. 3rd, from all causes, were 23, the corrected average would have been within a fraction of 29. There were 2 deaths from Scarlatina, 1 from Diptheria, and 2 from Typhus. The births in the same period were 35. For the week ending Dec. 10th, the deaths were 25, the corrected average being within a fraction of 30. One death occurred from Diarrhoea, and 1 from Scarlatina. In the fortnight it will be seen that we have had no fatal case of Small Pox, this disease however exists in a modified form in some localities within the district. The births this week were 54. In consequence of complaints made to me, I have visited and inspected St. James' Wharf, Bermondsey wall, in the occupation, of Mr. Knight. These premises are used as an artificial Manure manufactory. There is a great accumulation of animal and other refuse, also a considerable amount of mixed manure, which must in progress of conversion have been productive of effluvia, calculated to be not only a nuisance but also damaging to the health of the inhabitants of the neighbourhood. I recommend that a notice be issued from the Vestry for prompt removal of the accumulation of manure, and also a caution to the proprietor to discontinue an acknowledged pernicious process. Complaint has also been made by Mr. Bisley, that manufactured Fish Manure from the premises of Messrs. Dorset and Co., has been deposited against houses in his occupation in Jamaica row; I have, accompanied by your Inspector, visited the place, and recommend a notice for its removal. I am, Gentlemen, Your faithful Servant, JOHN CHALLICE, M.D., Medical Officer. TO THE VESTRY OF BERMONDSEY. Jan. 2nd, 1860. Mr. Chairman and Gentlemen,—In pursuance of the order of the Vestry at its last meeting, I have inspected the premises in the Rotherhithe New road, reported to the Board as objectionable inasmuch as bone boiling was believed to be carried on there to a considerable extent, although ostensibly used as a rope, mat and twine manufactory. I have on several former occasions had these premises brought under my notice, as objectionable in many respects. Since my first inspection, which was at the request of the Improvement Board, they are very materially improved. The process of bone boiling is doubtless at all times more or less offensive, according to the conditions surrounding it. Placing the maximum of offensive effluvia at 100°, which would probable on an average take place in July. At the present period of the year, the effluvia would be scarcely perceptible in the public thoroughfare, which is about 200 feet distant, and might fairly be represented by 10°. When accompanied by your Inspector on the 29th ult., I found the process of bone boiling, or digestion, carried on in two distinct premises; one in the occupation of Mr. Davis, and the other, of Mr. Squires. The former had four boilers in full operation an unusual heap of bones (at a rough calculation from 80 to 100 tons) stored up, and giving off a very faint, musty and sickening odour. I consider this accumulation as constituting a nuisance. In the adjoining premises the accumulation was less. In each case the premises were clean, and the process carried out in the least objectionable form. However, these premises will require constant supervision. As formerly, the cause of complaint as regards Mr. Wiseman, in Tyer's-gateway, has been investigated, and that gentleman has promised to prevent any recurrence of the nuisance. I have inspected the houses in Providence buildings West, from Nos. 1 to 4, with your Inspector, —they are dilapidated, filthy and unfitted for human habitation. The tenements from Nob. 1 to 8, in the same place, on the East side, are in the same condition. Also houses in the same court, from 1 to 3, facing Mill street. The health of the parish continues moderately satisfactory. For the week ending Dec. 17th, the deaths were 23, which is a fraction below the decennial average; there were 3 deaths from Scarlatina and 2 from Whooping Cough. In the week ending 24th Dec. the deaths were 28, the corrected average being a fraction above 26. There were 4 deaths from Zymotic disease, 1 from Small Pox, 1 from Measles, 1 from Scarlatina, and I from Typhus. I am, Gentlemen, Your faithful Servant, JOHN CHALLICE, M.D. Officer of Health. TO THE VESTRY OF BERMONDSEY. Mr. Chairman and Gentlemen, —In the Quarter ending Dec. 31st, it is a satisfactory fact for us, that the Registrar General, in speaking of the prevalence of the Small Pox in the various Metropolitan districts, remarks as follow, "It deserves to be especially mentioned, that in the sub-district of St. James, Bermondsey, not a single death from this disease has occurred for a period of nearly six months." Of the 3 fatal cases registered in Bermondsey from Small Pox, 2 occurred in the Leather Market, and 1 in St. Mary Magdalen subdistricts. Taking the entire population, the Southern division of the metropolis seems to have suffered next to the Northern; it is probable that the excess of deaths in the latter may have arisen from the mortality in the Small Pox Hospital. It appears that during the last Quarter, 1 person out of 4458 died of Small Pox in the Northern districts of the metropolis. In the Southern districts 1 died out of 5050. In the Central division 1 died out of 5387; and in the Eastern, 1 out of 5644; whilst in the Western division only 1 died out of 8183. So that in the most favored districts 1 death occurred in 8183, whilst in Bermondsey the proportion was 1 fatal case of Small Pox in 16,042 of the population. I took seme pains in this Analysis, as I have often of late been told that Small Pox was raging fearfully in Bermondsey, It requires a constant repetition of facts to dispel rumours founded upon preconceived prejudices. With reference to the premises at Bermondsey Wall, used for the purpose of fabricating artificial Manures, I have had an interview with the owner.—He expressed his desire to carry out any improvements in the premises that I could suggest, so that the process should be less a nuisance and less offensive. I declined doing this, believing that no alterations would be of any real advantage in this most inappropriate site, for a novel, noxious trade. Mr. Knight upon this has promised to remove altogether, within six weeks, and in the interval to avoid creating any fresh nuisance. I have again visited the premises of Mr. Wiseman, the process of Hair drying is offensive, and there is at present not the best available means used for the prevention of a nuisance. I have certified to an accumulation of refuse of an offensive description, in the rear of premises adjoining the School, in Grange Walk. I have also inspected the School-room, in Grange Walk, which as regards provision for ventilation is very deficient. I shall be prepared in an early future occasion to suggest some improvements, which appear to me practicable and desirable. During the last two days, throughout the length and breadth of the Parish, there has been one general outcry respecting the foul and pestiferous odour arising from Gas supplied by the Surrey Consumers' Company. I have had this day several communications on this subject. I find the Gas to be impregnated with sulphuretted hydrogen, an offensive, injurious and poisonous Gas, similar to that generated in sewers and cesspools. I may mention, that when giving evidence before a Committee of the House of Commons on this subject, referring to a similar occurrence in this district, I was asked, why the penalties were not enforced for such a gross case of carelessness and neglect on the part of a public Company. I am, Gentlemen, Your obedient Servant, JOHN CHALLICE, M.D. Officer of Health. TO THE VESTRY OF BERMONDSEY. Feb. 6th, 1860. Mr. Chairman and Gentlemen, —The mortality of the Parish for the week ending January 14th, was beyond the average, being 31, the corrected average being 25. Chronic Bronchitis, contributed to this increase. In the next week, ending the 19th day of January, the mortality diminished to 19, comparing favorably with an average of 28. There were 2 fatal cases of Small Pox, 1 in St. James', the other in the Leather Market district. For the week ending Jan. 28th, the mortality rose to 33, the corrected average being 25. There was 1 fatal case of Small Pox in the Leather Market district. The condition of Paragon place and St. John's place requires amendment, the drainage is inefficient, and the pipes are choked up the privies are open and offensive the inhabitants complain, and appear to be suffering in their health from the presence of noxious influences. I strongly advise also, suitable drainage and paving to South place, Grange road. Great complaints are made by the Inhabitants of this neighbourhood of very serious inconvenience, and also in many instances injury to health by its existing defective condition. I am, Gentlemen, Your obedient Servant, JOHN CHALLICE, M.D. Officer of Health. TO THE VESTRY OF BERMONDSEY. Feb. 19, 1860. Mr. Chairman and Gentlemen, —The mortality of our Parish for the two weeks terminating on Feb. 4th, and Feb. 11th, was I regret to state unusually heavy, being in each week considerably above the average. For the week ending Feb. 4th, the deaths were 33, the corrected average being; a fraction below 30, the mortality for the entire Metropolis was beyond the average. In the week ending the 11th inst. our deaths rose to 35, the corrected average for corresponding weeks being 26. The increased mortality in the Metropolis was 136. Chest diseases have mainly contributed to swell the tables of mortality, but other diseases of a Zymotic character have added to the catalogue. In the fortnight, there have been with us 2 deaths from Small Pox, 2 from Measles, 4 from Scarlatina, 2 from Whooping Cough and 1 from Typhus. I have on several occasions during the last fortnight tested the Gas, supplied by the Surrey Consumers' Gas Company.—In no instance have I detected the presence of sulphuretted hydrogen, but ammonia was indicated on every occasion.—The latter is probably not in sufficient quantity to be actually injurious to health. It is however a recognized legal impurity, and will serve to account for the corrosion of the gas fittings. Complaint has been made to me of a foul and offensive condition of the cesspools at 14 and 15, Corrugated row. This district is one in which the orders of the Board have not hitherto been carried out. I respectfully urge upon the Vestry, that this is an opportune period for pressing forward and completing sanitary improvements. I certify, that Ship and Mermaid court is in a condition to be highly dangerous and injurious to the health of the inhabitants.— The privies are filthy in the extreme. It may be in the recollection of the Board, that I have on several former occasions had to report upon the disgraceful condition of this place. I look upon it as a hot-bed, for propagating and fostering the seeds of disease. Lately, I regret to state, several cases of Small Pox have occurred here; one fatal. I am, Gentlemen, Your faithful Servant JOHN CHALLICE, M.D. Officer of Health. TO THE VESTRY OF BERMONDSEY. March 5th, 1860. Mr. Chairman and Gentlemen, —The mortality of our district for the two weeks, ending respectively the 18th and 25th of February, has been unusually severe. For the former period the deaths were 33, the corrected average being 25, and for the latter period 34, the average being within a fraction of 25. This increased mortality is not however from any local cause or in a great degree from the prevalence of epidemic disease. The entire population of the Metropolis appears to have suffered from this excess of mortality; affections of the chest, such as Bronchitis and Inflammation of the Lungs, have contributed largely to this result. —As usual the aged and very young, combined, contribute most largely to the tables of mortality. As an illustration of the 9 deaths in St. James district in the week ending the 25th of Feb., 1 was a Greenwich pensioner, aged 87; the widow of a gardener 84; a master currier 77; and the wife of a bone-boiler 71; the others were under 14 months of age, with but one exception. In the fortnight, 2 children have died from Small Pox, 1 in Bermondsey street, and the other in Ship and Mermaid court. There is evidently a strong tendency to Small Pox pervading the entire Metropolis, and I consider it highly advisable, publicly to impress upon all, the necessity of re-vaccination, not only in young persons, but also with adults. The advantage of this precaution I can bear testimony to; in several instances I have witnessed within the last few weeks the wonderful preservative power of this, one of the greatest and mightiest of human discoveries. There is also this additional advantage in the adoption of re-vaccination, that in not one in a hundred instances does it produce the slightest inconvenience or indisposition. I have visited the premises of the Metropolitan Gas Company; was courteously received, and had every information afforded me. The Gas is good, illuminating power about thirteen candles, free from ammonia and sulphuretted hydrogen. I am prevented from reporting on the Gas of the Surrey Consumers' Company, as I was refused inspection of the premises by the gentleman in charge of the offices; on the ground that he was not aware of my intention to visit the works. I am, Gentlemen, Your obedient Servant, JOHN CHALLICE, M.D., Officer of Health. TO THE VESTRY OF BERMONDSEY. April 2nd, 1860. Mr. Chairman and Gentlemen, —The period included in the four weeks, ending March 3rd, 10th, 17th, and 24th respectively, has been marked with an excess of mortality and of sickness throughout the Metropolis. In this visitation, the Parish of Bermondsey has not altogether escaped. Several causes tending to the production of this result. Thus, in the week ending March 3rd we had 2 deaths from Small Pox, in the succeeding week we had none, in the week following there was 1, and in the last week we were again exempt. In the first week of the period, of which we are now speaking, the increased mortality for the Metropolis amounted to 115, or to about 12½ per cent, beyond the corrected average of deaths; — with us the deaths were 26, the corrected average being 26-4°, —thus we did not contribute towards the 115, this excess was made up by 23 of the Metropolitan districts out of the 36. The other 13 stood at about, and below the usual mortality. The week following, that ending March 10th, the weather was inclement, and yet the excess of mortality fell to 32, for the Metropolis at large, but the effect of this inclemency was felt in the week succeeding. Our deaths for the week ending March 10th were 25, the corrected average being 27-5°. During the week, ending March 17th, Influenza, Bronchitis, and Chest affections prevailed throughout London. The deaths were 201 in excess of the average, our mortality rose to 30, the corrected average being within a fraction of 23. We had 1 death from Small Pox, 1 from Measles, 1 Scarlatina, and 1 Whooping Cough. 13 died from affections of the chest and lungs, and the others from organic diseases. The highest temperature during the week, was on Friday, when the thermometer marked 90° in the sun, and the lowest was the day previous, Thursday, when the temperature was at the remarkable low degree of 22°. The effects of this extreme range of temperature are most strikingly marked by the mortality in the week ending March 24th, when the excess of deaths for the Metropolis rose to the high amount of 244; the deaths from Bronchitis alone being 135 in excess of the corrected average. Our deaths were 28, the corrected average being a fraction beyond 25.—Of these 4 were from Whooping Cough and 1 from Diptheria. It thus appears that the excess of deaths in Bermondsey during these four weeks, which have been so trying upon the human constitution throughout the Metropolis, has been but 7. The total excess being 592, or about 1 to 3990 of the population, and an increase of 10 per cent, in the mortality. The increase in our deaths was at the rate of 7½ per cent., or 1 in 6875 of the entire population. These facts tend to confirm the opinion I entertain, and which I have before expressed, that the situation of Bermondsey is very favorable to the preservation of health during inclement weather, and especially during the prevalence of E. and N.E. winds. However, the period is now approaching when diseases of a dif- ferent character generally prevail, to which our population and the crowded parts of the district are more exposed. It behoves us to be especially on our guard, with regard to the possible increase of Small Pox. This disease it is well known is in the highest degree contagious, and although it can at all times, and in all temperatures, become engendered, yet during a period when there is heat and closeness of the atmosphere, it is most likely to increase in intensity and malignity, and also become more extensively propagated. I have been grieved to find lately, that precautions which formerly were taken for the prevention of the spreading of this disease, are now in a great measure neglected. I have witnessed and met with persons who were only just recovering from the Small Pox, and from whom contagion would undoubtedly go forth to those who were unprotected or predisposed, not only in the public streets but in omnibuses and in railway carriages. One the driver of a cab, another a toll-gate collector. I know of one instance where a gentleman took the Small Pox from a child in an omnibus, had the disease most severely and, although he recovered, one of his servants took it from him and died. I have also recognized whilst riding in a cab, the peculiar odour which is known to attend the worst forms of this disease, —those who have noticed and are acquainted with this singular smell, which cannot well be described, can readily detect it. On my charging the driver with having conveyed a Small Pox patient, and at the same time telling him that I was a doctor, he admitted the fact. Now it has been well said, "That it may be doubtful how far in this free country it is justifiable to compel a person to take care of his own life, or that of his offspring; it can scarcely be disputed, that no one has a right to put in jeopardy the lives of his fellow subjects. " The principle of so using one's own as not to injure another's is one which has always been recognized, in our legislation as regards property and personal nuisances; and it is but an extension of this principle to apply it to the questions of health and life. There is a necessity for further legislative powers on this subject. No one who has been attacked by Small Pox should come back to the community till the lapse of at least twenty-one days after the turn or crisis of the malady. It occurs to me, that one available precaution may be at once adopted by the Vestry. —I advise that a notice be sent to every Marine-store shop keeper in the district, to at once clear out their stock of rags, and lime-wash, and otherwise cleanse and purify their shops. I believe that next to personal communication with the infected, contact with clothes worn, to be a most prolific source of contagton. Almost all people are now agreed as to the protecting power of vaccination.—It is unnecessary for me to say one word upon that head. But I urge the necessity for re-vaccination in adults. The wonderful advantage of this practice on the Continent has been realized, more especially in Sweden and in Denmark, and also to a very marked extent in the Prussian army. I say then, let all the young be vaccinated; and if asked what I mean by the young, I would say all on the right side of 50. But we have other diseases to guard against—and it is my duty to point out to you while fully admitting our constant progress towards a satisfactory sanitary condition, that the open ditch in Blue-anchor lane is likely, and indeed certain, to become this year worse than ever, inasmuch as all the drainage from a considerable number of houses upon the spot now runs into it. If it be not practicable to at once cover in this offensive ditch, dedorization should be resorted to at an early period, to prevent miasma and disease, which otherwise will probably become developed. I have before reported on the existence of an open, filthy, and very offensive ditch by Bermondsey Wall, at the rear of some factories, and into which several privies are emptied. I trust that the Vestry will forthwith order it to be cleansed and covered. I have made repeated application for admission to the testing room of the Surrey Consumers' Gas Company, in the Railway Arcade, but without success. I have inspected the manufacturing premises at Rotherhithe, and before reporting thereupon, I purpose paying another visit. The premises occupied by Mr. Knight at St. James' Wharf, Bermondsey Wall, which are used as an artificial Manure manufactory, I have visited on several occasions. The proprietor has broken faith with me and the Vestry, as he promised that he would not continue the noxious process he carries on in these premises, but that he would remove in the course of six weeks. This was about six months ago. I advise, as the process is one injurious to health, that prompt legal proceedings should be taken upon satisfactory evidence of the continuance of the nuisance. 1 may, I trust, be permitted to urge the propriety of the prompt carrying out of the orders of the Vestry on sanitary matters, or where there are nuisances to be obviated. This would be beneficial, as proving that the Vestry are in earnest in the matter. Moreover, should our district unfortunately be afflicted with the presence of an epidemic, we should have the satisfaction of having neither per- mitted or sanctioned the continuance of any cause which could be considered in any way prejudicial to the health of the inhabitants of the district, or injurious to the public at large. We are, I trust, running a fair, successful, and triumphant race with other Metropolitan Vestries with regard to sanitary improvements.— We are now in the van, we have distanced those who have struggled with us; our sanitary condition challenges comparison with the most favored districts. In my opinion, there is no reason why we should not continue to maintain the vantage ground so honorably won, by unceasing sacrifice, and exertion on the part of the Vestry and the parishioners at large. I am, Gentlemen, Your obedient faithful Servant, JOHN CHALLICE, M.D., Medical Officer. TO THE VESTRY OP BERMONDSEY. Mr. Chairman and Gentlemen,—The week ending 31st March, was marked by an unusual degree of mortality, which prevailed in a great degree throughout the Metropolis. Our district suffered considerably, the deaths being 38, whilst the corrected average would have been but 26. We had 2 fatal cases of Small Pox, 1 from Scarlatina, 3 from Whooping Cough, 1 from Typhus, and 1 from Diarrhœa. Probably this excessive mortality might be attributed in a great measure to the extreme fluctuations of the temperature, as one portion of the week it was below the average, and another portion considerably above it. The lowest point marked was 25 degrees, or 7° below freezing, whilst the highest was 86", a variation of 61° within the 24 hours. No less than 16 of the 38 deaths occurred from diseases of the lungs and air passages. A practical and forcible illustration of the necessity for cure and precaution in protecting the human frame against the evil influence of sudden and extreme changes of temperature. There were 3 deaths of persons over 80 years of age, and premature twins who survived their birth but five minutes. The first week in April our deaths were 27, which exceeded the average only by a fraction. Whooping Cough was again fatal in 3 cases, there were 2 deaths from Measles, 1 from Scarlatina, and 1 from Small Pox unvaccinated in Gilliam's court. There were 5 deaths from age and natural decay, but the fatal cases from Chest affections were greatly diminished in comparison with the preceding week, and the temperature was less variable. The week ending April 14th, was remarkable for a great increase of cold, being 4½° below the average. Our mortality was 30, the average being and of these, no less than IS of the deaths arose from Chest affections, 2 occurred from Whooping Cough, 1 from Measles, and 1 from Diptheria—1 aged person, at 86 years, from natural decay. For the week ending the 21st of April, our mortality fell to 18, whilst the corrected average was 24-2/10; we had 2 deaths from Scarlatina, and 1 from Small Pox, none from any other Zymotic disease. Five fatal cases of Affection of the Chest only, and a schoolmaster, aged 78 years, from natural decay. The week ending April 28th, was most remarkable for an excessive amount of cold, the temperature for the entire week being 6-6° below the average for 43 years. We had 1 death from Typhus, and 1 from Scarlatina; 11 fatal cases from Chest affections, and one old lady at 97, the widow of a coast guardsman, from natural decay The entire mortality was 28, the corrected average being 25-3/10. In these five trying weeks, 141 of our Parishioners paid the debt of nature. In the same period the births were 215. On Monday, Tuesday and Wednesday last, accompanied by your Inspector of Nuisances, I carefully examined the premises of the several marine store dealers within the district.—It gives me pleasure to report, that the preliminary notices issued to the owners by the sanction of the Vestry, appear to have been productive of material improvement. There was scarcely an accumulation to be complained of, and there appeared to be a general willingness to comply with any reasonable request. I suggested that where rags or linen were brought in a foul condition, the propriety of separating them from the rest and scalding with boiling water; also to have them removed during the summer months twice a week, as well as any other animal or vegetable refuse. The premises, 159, Bermondsey street, I certify as in a filthy and dilapidated condition; at 26 and 27, Star corner, is a large accumulation of rags; 188, Long lane, the house is in a filthy and dilapidated condition, unfitted for human habitation. These are the only cases out of the thirty requiring any especial attention. I have however to report, with regret, that at 63, Hickman's folly, the owner, Mr. James Harradine, refused me admittance to his premises, he admitted having had the notice of my intention to visit and inspect;—he was positive and very decided upon the point. On the 4th inst. I visited Mr. Duckett's house, in Great George street, according to the order of the Vestry, that gentleman objected to my entrance upon his premises, upon the grounds that I had had no complaint of the existence of any nuisance I have to request the attention of the Vestry to the existence of a serious nuisance in Alma road—an open offensive sewer, which receives the drainage from a cow yard, and is also a receptacle from the privies of nine or ten houses. Human habitations now surround this spot, and immediate remedy is required. At Nos. 4, 5, 6, Inkerman terrace, great inconvenience is felt, and much danger is imminent in consequence of the cesspool being closed, or full, which receives the drainage from each of these houses. The offensive effluvia is now sickening and powerful and with the advent of hot weather, will in all probability produce fever. I have inspected the premises of the Phoenix Gas Company, Bankside, the place is well kept and well arranged. Every precaution appears to be taken to render the supply of gas pure, and of good illuminating quality. The gas was free from sulphuretted hydrogen or ammonia, and of the illuminating quality of from 12 to 13 sperm candles. I have inspected also the premises at Keating's row, used as an artificial Manure manufactory; there was an accumulation of putrid fish refuse in a most offensive condition, —also a deposit of night soil. Care is taken to prevent the effluvia from escaping by chemical means, still there is a sickening odour. The Manufactory is at a considerable distance from a public thoroughfare, but taking into consideration the surrounding neighbourhood, I look upon its existence as a public nuisance. I am, Gentlemen Your faithful Servant, JOHN CHALLICE, M.D., Officer of Health. TO THE VESTRY OF BERMONDSEY. May 21st, 1860. Mr. Chairman and Gentlemen, —In the week ending May 5th, the deaths in Bermondsey were 24, being a fraction below the corrected average; we had 1 fatal case of Measles, and 1 from Typhus. The births for the same period were 47. The temperature was very slightly beyond the average. Although the deaths in the week, ending May 12th, were but 4 in excess of the average, being 25, yet those arising from diseases of an epidemic and infectious character, amounted to no less than 11 of that number. There were 5 fatal cases of Measles, —2 in St. James' and 3 in St. Mary Magdalen district. There were 3 deaths from Whooping Cough, all in the Leather Market district, 1 from Typhus, 1 from Diarrhœa, and 1 from Small Pox. Although the temperature for the week was only slightly in excess of the average, towards the end it increased very considerably. The births in the week were 36. The artificial Manure manufactory in Keating's row, has again given cause for complaint from various quarters. On the 18th inst. I repeated my inspection, and I have to report the premises as very offensive, a decided nuisance and injurious to health, notwithstanding the adoption of various precautions to prevent the presence of putrescent matter from being detected. The ordinary steps which are usually effectual for remedying offensive nuisances appear to be in this case inoperative, inasmuch as there is a constant renewal, and removal of offensive matters. I have inspected the premises of Mr. Duckett, in Great George street, and also those of Nos. 38, 39, 40 and 41, Great George street, and have to report the existence of open privies and cesspools. In consequence of legal proceedings taken against Mr. Harradine, as well as the above mentioned gentlemen, no further opposition was offered to my entrance upon their premises for the purpose of inspection, and for the information of the Vestry. There was rather a large accumulation of rags upon the premises of Mr. Harradine; he promised however that they should be forthwith removed. I have certified as to the existence of very offensive open privies and cesspools, in the houses Nos. 8, 9, 10, 11, 12 and 13, Corru- gated Row; these require a prompt remedy, as the inhabitants of the houses complain bitterly of annoyance and injury to their health, from effluvia proceeding from these places. The time is now arrived when the Urinals throughout the Parish should be lime-washed, cleansed and deodorized. I am, Gentlemen, Your obedient faithful Servant, JOHN CHALLICE, M.D., Officer of Health. TO THE VESTRY OF BERMONDSEY. June 10th, 1860. Mr. Chairman and Gentlemen, —In the last fortnight our Parish, in common with many of the surrounding districts, suffered very considerably from a severe accession of Measles, which has materially increased the mortality. For the week ending May 19th, the deaths were 25, the corrected average being 20; there were 4 deaths from Measles in St. Mary Magdalen district, and 1 in St. James'. The mortality for the week ending May 26th, rose to 31, the corrected average being a fraction only beyond 20. This week the deaths from Measles increased to 6, four being in St. James' and 2 in the Leather Market districts. We had 2 deaths from Whooping Cough, and 1 fatal case of Small Pox. We are free from other Zymotic diseases. There is improvement in the premises used for a Manure factory, in the rear of Jamaica row; I have visited them on several occasions, and shall continue to exercise thereon a strict supervision. My attention has been drawn, by your Inspector of Nuisances, to a lamentable instance of human wretchedness and absence of all propriety, at Cherry-garden stairs. In a shed or boat-house, there are residing a man with his two daughters—the eldest apparently about eighteen years of age, the youngest about twelve, and a boy about nine years of age. There is not a remnant of furniture— they all sleep together on the ground, on a piece of matting, with no covering whatever —and are in a state of absolute filthiness beyond description. The place is 6 feet by 4, and 6½ feet in height, —giving about one-fourth of the quantity of air requisite for one person. It is alike a necessity and mercy for the adoption of prompt steps for removing these poor creatures, from a place in every respect unfitted for human habitation. Complaint has been made to me of a nuisance, emanating from Scutch in its conveyance from Messrs. Young's premises to the water side. I have visited the Manufactory, and the Manager promised to use every endeavour to prevent the effluvia, which will I trust be effectual. I am, Gentlemen, Your faithful Servant, JOHN CHALLICE, M.D., Officer of Health. TO THE VESTRY OF BERMONDSEY. June 18th, 1860. Mr. Chairman and Gentlemen, —At half-past 10 o'clock A.M. on the 12th inst. I visited the premises of Mr. Powell's, fish Manure manufactory, I was attracted thereto by the peculiar offensive odour, and suffocating vapour, produced by the combination of concentrated sulphuric acid, commonly known as "Oil of Vitriol," with putrescent and decaying animal substances. On approaching the building, where the process of mixing is carried on, the stench was intolerable, although modified in some degree by the burning of Tan outside the premises. From the density of the vapour, and from other circumstances, I judged that Acid had been just added to the fish refuse. There was a large heap of putrid fish, probably a waggon load. —The effluvia arising from it was sickening. I have now, no hesitation in stating that these premises are a nuisance, and that the business carried on cannot fail to corrupt the atmosphere for a considerable area, producing in all cases annoyance, and in many instances injury to health to the inhabitants of the neighbourhood. I have certified that pigs are kept, so as to be a nuisance and injurious to health, at 1 and 2, Zion court, and the houses from 1 to 4, in the same court with deficient drainage, and open and offensive privies. I am happy in being able to report a diminution in the mortality of the district, during the two weeks ending June 2nd, and 9th respectively,—For the former period the deaths were 18, the corrected average being 23; for the latter period 20 deaths were registered, the corrected average being 22. Measles produced death in four instances, in my opinion many lives are lost by this disease in consequence of neglect or improper treatment at its commencement. One fatal case of Small Pox occurred with us. I am, Gentlemen, Your very faithful Servant, JOHN CHALLICE, M.D., Officer of Health. TO THE VESTRY OF BERMONDSEY. July 2nd, 1860. Mr. Chairman and Gentlemen,—The deaths in the district for the week ending June 18th, were 23, the corrected average being 22 5/10. Measles proved fatal in 3 cases, Small Pox in 1 instance, and Typhus, Scarlatina and Whooping Cough in the same proportion. The week succeeding that, terminating June 25th, the deaths were but 16, the corrected average being 25. Measles proved fatal in 4 cases, "Whooping Cough in 1 instance, and there was 1 death from Diptheria On the morning of the 27th ult. about two o'clock, I visited the Manure factory by Jamaica row, so frequently brought before the notice of the Vestry. There was a large accumulation of putrid fish refuse being worked up; the stench proceeding from the place was of an intolerable description and clearly recognizable, not only in the public thoroughfare near the building, but at a considerable distance up the Spa road. It is my deliberate conviction, and I have no hesitation in giving my decided opinion that the health of the surrounding district must be materially and seriously affected by the continuance of this very serious nuisance. It is my intention to present a condensed Annual report to the Vestry at its next meeting. I am, Gentlemen, Your very faithful Servant, JOHN CHALLICE, M.D., Officer of Health. TO THE VESTRY OF BERMONDSEY. July 16th, 1860. Mr. Chairman and Gentlemen, —A review of the sanitary condition of our Parish during the period of the last twelve months and its influence upon the health and lives of the population, is not calculated to give rise to such feelings of congratulation and satisfaction as on former occasions. Disease has been more prevailed and more fatal. Our regret at this fact, will in no degree be mitigated by the knowledge, that an increased mortality has prevailed not only in the immediate surrounding districts, but also, without exception, in various degrees throughout the entire Metropolis. The re-appearance of Small Pox in an epidemic form is one of the causes of increased mortality amongst us. This has naturally given rise to anxiety, and although (as a reference to the Tables annexed to this Report will shew) we have not suffered to the same extent as other districts, still it has been with us in a malignant form, and I believe we are greatly indebted to the active measures taken by our Medical Officers for its suppression by energetically carrying out vaccination. It is principally to this cause that the disease in almost every instance was confined to isolated spots, and is now, happily, disappearing.—Very different was its rise, pro- gress, and decline on former occasions. The history of this disease is fraught with more real importance than can be well imagined or described—often decimating a people, and in some instances destroying whole tribes of the human race.—Such has been its character within even the present century amongst the North American Indians, and especially with the Hindu races, who until very lately, held in abhorrence the operation of vaccination. However under the benign influence of this wonderful discovery, and its almost universal adoption, year by year the ravages of Small Pox have diminished. When present, as a rule, it was in a mild and manageable form, rarely leaving its well known mark upon the countenance, (not as heretofore destroying often the eyesight and hearing, rendering its victim in a hopeless, helpless condition,) and very seldom indeed proving fatal. I am inclined to believe that the increasing immunity from this disease, at last gave rise to a feeling of false security, amounting to indifference. There can be no doubt that the performance of vaccination has been of late in too many instances neglected. A very large proportion of the fatal cases occurred in the unvaccinated. It is true that there have been instances, where death happened in those who had the well known mark upon the arm, an indication that vaccination had been successfully performed. These however were exceptions, yet still of sufficient frequency to exercise a pernicious influence, by creating doubts as to the protecting power of vaccination. A question in relation to this most important and interesting subject has arisen; it is this, —Is it not likely that the vaccine matter has become deteriorated, by passing through the systems of successive generations of human beings? I am strongly of opinion that it has, and I do not hesitate to recommend the propriety and necessity for the adoption of action, by which a constant supply of fresh vaccine lymph might be procured from the cow. I am convinced that were this not difficult plan adopted generally, we should have very little of the Small Pox for the future. A reference to the column, shewing the deaths from Measles, affords a proof how fatal this disease has been with children. I again repeat my conviction, that those who die from this malady, might be saved by proper care, attention and medical treatment in its early stages. Old prejudices and customs are difficult to overcome. It is necessary to attack them again and again. Most surprising and lamentable is it, that on the appearance of a disease so well known for its frequent fatal consequences, many days are often suffered to elapse before medical assistance is sought for. When serious complications come on, when the disease has run riot through the unfortunate helpless little sufferers, then forsooth, when the lungs or brain, or both are attacked, a doctor is sent for! Because there is danger of death! This has often occurred to me, and I have been told when at the bedside, it was only because the child had no chance of surviving, that a doctor had been sent for. Recovery from Measles is hardly ever complete without skilful medical assistance. I believe that a large proportion of deaths in childhood, or during the period of youth—and especially those arising from affections of the chest, may be traced to neglected or improperly treated Measles. Up to this period we have been almost exempt from Diarrhœa, propably the low temperature as compared with last year has exercised a considerable influence. Typhus has proved fatal in many instances, and isolated cases of Diptheria have occurred. Scarlatina has also visited us, but not to any material extent. Whooping Cough has however been especially fatal and general; this is doubtless owing in a great degree to the prevalence of low temperature, a continuance of cold Easterly winds, and excessive moisture. The same remarks which I have made above, on the subject of Measles, in reference to the neglect and disinclination prevailing with the poorer classes in seeking medical assistance, applies also to Whooping Cough. I regret to find that there are several deaths in our district from a disease, to which I cannot refrain from alluding.—This is the Venereal. In almost all the instances it is poor helpless and innocent infants who have from the gross neglect and culpability of one or both parents, gone early to the grave. I mentioned in a former Report, that this loathsome malady was becoming of a more malignant type, and I believe that a considerable proportion of the obstinate skin diseases, which are becoming so frequent in young children,have their origin from this polluted source. The Tables which will form an appendix to this Report will, notwithstanding exceptional adverse facts, prove I trust in the whole satisfactory as to the past, and encouraging for the future. It has been said that figures may be made to prove anythingstill as a rule, they are stubborn facts. In the weekly printed returns of the Registrar General, especial notice is now very properly taken upon the number of deaths in infants from suffocation in bed. My experience tells me, that these deaths arise in almost every case from great carelessness, and sometimes from culpable criminality. A return of these cases has lately been ordered by the Secretary of State, which will probably give rise to some legal enactment upon the subject. During the year we had nine deaths from this cause, which is I believe an unusually small number considering our population, as compared with many other districts. As a matter of interest it may be worthy of record, that during the twelve months past, the week ending October 15th, was least fatal to us, only 8 died. The week ending July 30th (remarkable for excessive heat) the most fatal, when 37 died. The greatest number of births took place in the last week of January, when our population was added to, by the very unusual and unprecedented number of 75. There were only two weeks when the births were fewer than the deaths; these were the last weeks in February and in March. Owing to some slight discrepancies between the printed returns of the Registrar General and those in manuscript, I am not able to give the exact number of births and deaths, but I will do so now approximately, intending only necessary corrections in the press. In the twelve months, the deaths I take at 1269, and the births at 2247. In justice to those concerned, I must record the fact, that only three women died in childbirth. —A most satisfactory circumstance, not alone as a proof of the salubrity of our district, but also one of the very successful practice of the art of midwifery by the resident Medical Practitioners. As regards sanitary works, and precautions taken during the year for the prevention of sickness, I find from a report of Mr. O'Brian, your Inspector of Nuisances, to whose activity and intelligence upon all occasions I most cheerfully bear testimony, that there have been abolished 195 cesspools, with the substitution of good and effectual drainage and the appliances of pans and traps ; 22 offensive accumulations removed, 5 arising from trades; 20 houses in a filthy and unwholesome condition, certified and remedied; 43 animals kept, so as to be a nuisance and injurious to health, removed; 44 slaughter houses inspected and reported upon; 30 marine-store dealers visited, reported upon, and revisited Before concluding this Report, I may I trust, be excused for offering most heartily my thanks to the Gentlemen of the Vestry for their earnest co-operation and aid upon all occasions. A consciousness of this support is most encouraging to me, your Officer of Health, in the performance of duties which are in their exercise frequently of an inquisitorial character, calculated sometimes to give rise to feelings of opposition, if not of anger and resentment. In fairness however to all concerned, I must state, that almost without exception, I have met with no obstruction in the performance of the duties of the office I have the honor to hold. On the contrary, every facility has been afforded to me, so that in many instances just cause of complaints have been remedied, and improvements easily effected by friendly council and conciliation, without any necessity for enforcement by having recourse to the "letter of the law." I am, Gentlemen, Your obedient faithful Servant, JOHN CHALLICE, M.D., F.R.C.P. Edin. Officer of Health. TO THE VESTRY OF BERMONDSEY. Sept. 17th, 1860. Mr. Chairman and Gentlemen, —Since my last ordinary Report, it is most satisfactory for me to state, that the health of our Parish has very greatly improved, and the deaths have been considerably under the corrected average. In the week ending August 4th, the deaths were 17, the corrected average being 28, and the births 45. The following week the deaths were 19, the corrected average being 33, the births 27. For the week ending 18th August, 21 died, the average 35, and the births 41. The week following the deaths were but 16, the average 33, and the births 37. This very favorable condition, and most unusual low rate of mortality, has continued in the week ending September 1st and 8th respectively, they were 19 and 33, the births 51 and 63. The unusual low temperature for the period above mentioned, has doubtless acted favorable in diminishing the mortality from Diarrhœa. I have in pursuance of the order of the Vestry, inspected the premises of Mr. McMurdo, Manufacturing Chemist. Complaint has from time to time been made of the existence of a most offensive effluvia, not only most disagreeable, but also of a very suffocatiug nature. This has been noticed more especially at night, and attributed to various sources. I have, however, no doubt that the origin of this offensive and suffocating vapour is from the premises of Messrs.- It proceeds from the manufacture or composition of a chemical termed the sulphate of mercury. This is produced by the combination in a retort of quicksilver and strong sulphuric acid, under the influence of a high temperature. During this process fumes of sulphurous acid gas are given off, and passed through a tube into a shaft 80-ft. in height, from whence it escapes into the atmosphere. From the density of this vapour, in certain conditions of the surrounding air, a considerable proportion would descend, and thus become not only a nuisance, but also injurious to the health of the inhabitants in the district. The process is, I am informed, always carried on at night, and generally only about once a week. It may in my opinion be remedied without much difficulty or expense. If the vapour were passed through a vessel containing lime, or were condensed in a leaden chamber, the difficulty would be removed. I am, Gentlemen Your very faithful Servant, JOHN CHALLICE, M.D., Officer of Health. TO THE VESTRY OE BERMONDSEY. Oct. 1st, 1860. Mr. Chairman and Gentlemen, —It is very satisfactory for me to report upon the continued favorable condition of the health of the Parish. The mortality is not merely diminished very considerably when compared with the general average of deaths for the last ten years, but is absolutely less, in relation to the population than in 34 out of the 36 Metropolitan Districts. I am speaking now of the week ending September 15th, the deaths registered being but 12, and the corrected average within a fraction of 40. For the week ending September 22nd, the registered deaths were 15, the corrected average being 34. I visited the premises of Mr McMurdo, Manufacturing Chemist, in Homey Lane, on the night of 28th inst. or rather on the morning of the 29th, as it was near upon one o'clock a.m. I was accompanied by your Inspector, having been informed by him, that the process of manufacturing the sulphate of mercury, during which the suffocating vapour, so much and so justly complained of is cooled, would then take place. It was in full operation, and after dewing it ami inhaling some of the vapour, I feel it right to urge upon the Vestry, the necessity for Mr. McMurdo carrying out without delay the alterations and works required, to abate this nuisance. I am, Gentlemen, Your faithful Servant, JOHN CHALLICE, M.D. Officer of Health. TO THE VESTRY OF BERMONDSEY. Oct. 15th, 1860. Mr. Chairman and Gentlemen, —The continued low rate of mortality in Bermondsey, is an unanswerable indication of our improved sanitary condition. For the week ending September 29th, the deaths registered were but 13, the corrected average being within a fraction of 36. We had 1 death from Measles, 1 from Scarlatina, and 1 from Typhus ; these occurred in St. James's District. In the Leather Market District, a child's death is registered as from Diarrhoea, whether justly or not, it is impossible to state, as the death was uncertified by any medical practitioner. The births in the week were 22. In the week ending October 6th, the deaths increased to 19, the corrected average being 25. There are again in the Leather Market District, two deaths registered, without medical certificates of the cause of death. I allude especially to this circumstance, inasmuch as a very serious responsibility is thus often incurred. The births in the week were 41. I am, Gentlemen, Your very faithful Servant, JOHN CHALLICE, M.D., Medical Officer of Health. BIRTHS and DEATHS for BERMONDSEY, from January 7th, to December 30th, 1860. Week ending. Births. Deaths. Deaths at 70 & up January 7 53 26 1 14 31 1 53 21 48 19 3 33 75 5 28 February 4 45 33 .. 35 11 52 5 18 42 33 4 25 28 34 5 March 3 41 24 4 10 47 25 .. 39 17 30 1 28 24 52 2 31 34 38 5 April 7 46 27 5 46 27 5 14 30 21 60 3 28 42 18 3 May 5 31 28 2 12 47 24 .. 25 1 19 36 25 1 26 34 June 2 31 .. 36 20 4 9 41 16 43 18 .. 23 44 23 .. 30 16 47 .. July 7 29 38 3 21 1 14 50 21 30 27 3 28 44 26 .. 17 August 4 .. 49 11 11 17 45 .. 19 18 27 .. 21 25 41 2 September 1 37 16 1 18 8 51 3 15 36 12 1 22 15 .. 32 29 13 26 .. 19 October 6 October 6 41 .. 13 32 31 1 16 3 20 54 1 27 47 16 November 3 16 1 55 24 10 55 3 17 22 1 47 24 51 22 1 December 1 41 33 1 8 44 25 2 15 54 33 .. 22 38 43 .. 31 30 28 6 2360 1278 94 DEATHS from Six Zymotic Diseases, registerel in Bermondsey in Fifty-two Weeks, from January 7th, 1860, to December 29th, 1860. Measles Typhus Fever. Diarrhœa. Week ending. Small Pox. Scarlatina Diptheria. Whooping Cough. 1 2 1 1 2 January 7, .. .. 5 „ 14, .. 1 .. .. .. .. 2 „ 21, 2 .. .. .. .. .. „ 28, 1 1 2 .. .. .. .. 1 1 1 1 February 4, 1 .. .. 1 3 1 „ 11, 1 .. .. .. 2 1 2 1 .. .. „ 18, .. 1 .. 3 1 .. „ 25, .. .. 2 1 1 March 3, .. .. .. .. 1 „ 10, .. .. 2 1 .. .. 1 1 1 .. .. 1 „ 17, .. 1 .. 4 .. „ 24, .. .. .. 1 1 „ 31, 2 1 .. 3 .. April 7, 1 2 3 .. .. .. .. 2 1 .. „ 14, .. 1 .. .. 1 2 .. .. „ 21, .. .. .. 1 „ 28, .. 1 .. .. .. .. 1 .. 1 .. May 5, .. .. .. 3 1 1 „ 12, 1 5 .. .. „ 19, .. 5 .. .. .. .. .. 1 6 .. .. 2 .. .. „ 24, .. 2 1 .. .. June 2, .. .. 1 1 „ 9, 2 .. .. .. .. 1 1 1 2 1 .. „ 16, .. „ 23, 4 1 1 .. .. .. .. 1 1 .. „ 30, .. 4 .. .. 1 1 July 7, 1 4 .. .. .. .. 7 2 2 1 .. „ 14, .. 2 2 „ 21, .. 4 .. .. .. 1 2 „ 28, 2 1 .. .. .. 1 1 1 1 .. 1 1 August 4, .. 1 2 .. .. .. 1 „ 11, 3 1 3 „ 18, .. .. .. .. 1 „ 25, 1 2 .. .. .. .. 1 September 1, 2 .. 3 .. .. .. 2 .. .. „ 8, .. 3 .. .. 2 2 1 „ 15, .. .. .. .. 1 1 .. .. .. .. „ 22, .. 1 1 1 1 „ 29, .. .. .. .. October 6, .. .. .. .. .. .. .. „ 13, 1 1 2 .. 3 .. 2 1 .. 1 .. .. „ 20, .. .. 3 .. „ 27, .. .. .. .. 1 November 3, .. .. .. .. 3 .. 1 1 1 4 1 „ 10, .. 2 1 3 1 .. 2 „ 17, .. .. 3 1 .. .. 1 „ 24, .. .. 1 .. 3 .. December 1, .. .. .. 1 .. 1 2 .. .. „ 8, 1 4 1 1 „ 15, .. 4 .. .. 1 „ 22, 1 2 .. 7 1 .. 1 1 1 .. 4 1 „ 29, .. 8 85 22 20 Total Deaths 25 80 50 BERMONDSEY VESTRY, 1859 and 1860. Gentlemen, —I beg to lay before the Vestry the following Return ending March 25th, 1860, showing the various Nuisances, &c. inspected and reported to the Vestry by the Medical Officer of Health, and Inspector of Nuisances, and the proceedings taken for the abatement of the same under the Nuisance Removal and Local Management Acts. TABULAR STATEMENT. Houses and other premises inspected and reported to the Vestry. Slaughter-house notices received for the purpose of applying for Licenses. Slaughter-houses inspected and Licensed. Marine Store Keepers premises inspected. Notices served for the removal of accumulation Houses where works were executed by the Contractor, under orders froai the Vestry. Notices not complied with. Summonses taken out before Police Magistrates, for not complying with orders of the Vestry. Average number of inspections made by the Inspector during the progress and completion of required works, &c. &c. Notices served on the Owners and Occupiers to execute works, &c. Cesspools abolished, privies panned and trapped and connected with Sewer. Defective drains repaired. Badly paved yards. Offensive accumulations. Effluvia from trades, Sec. Houses in a filthy and unwholesome condition, &c. Houses pulled down, not being fit for human habitation. Cesspools emptied, no Sewer being within 1OO feet. Animals kept so as to be a nuisance, &c. 3550 43 44 22 8 355 64 17 5 20 8 7 43 30 37 320 195 24 I have the honor to be, Gentlemen, Your most obedient Servant, ROBERT JOHN O'BRIEN, Inspector to the Vestry.