345 end. THIRTY-FIRST ANNUAL REPORT of THE VESTRY of the parish of ST. JAMES AND ST. JOHN, CLERKENWELL, FOR THE YEAR 1886-7. Presented pursuant to the 198th Section of the Metropolis Local Management Act, 18th and 19th Vict., cap. 120. London: w. j. goode, printer, 23, st. john's lane, clerkenwell. 1887. INDEX. PACE. Report of the Vestry 5 Artizans Dwellings Acts, 1868-82 18, 35 Baths and Washhouses 19 Beer Adulteration Bills 28 Board School Sites 17 Bolton Court 18 Borough Members 36 Butter Suhstitutes Bill 28 Cabs, Disinfection of 20 Chapel Stroet Market 19 Coal and Wine Dues 25 Constant Water Supply 34 Description of the Parish, Wards, &c. 5 Dust Pails 35 Eggs unfit for food 20 Fire Brigade Expenses Bill 32 Foreigners, Houses occupied by 35 Gas, Price of 22 Hyde Park Corner (New Streets) Bill 27 Insanitary Houses 35 Margarine Act 28 Meetings 38 Metropolis Management Act Amendment Bill 30 Metropolitan Board Precepts 13 Metropolitan Railway Bill 27 Muswell Hill 7 Northampton and Wilmington Squares 21 Passing Alley 23 Portrait of Yestry Clerk 36 Prisons, Demolition of 13 4 Report of the Vestry—continued. PAGE Public Parks and Works Metropolis Bill 29 Pates 8 Sanitary condition of the Parish 33 Sanitation of Houses (Metropolis) Bill 31 Sanitary Regulations of Buildings Bill 32 School Board Elections 24 School Board Precepts 12 School Board Sites 17 Sessions House, Assessment of 10 Telephone Wires 12 Tramways 22 Valuation Lists 10 Vestry Clerk's Portrait 36 Vestrymen's Qualification Bill 31 Water Companies Regulation of Powers Bill 29 Wilmington and Northampton Squares 21 Annual Statement of Accounts 39 Summary Statement of Contracts 51 Report of Committee of Works on Wharf Operations 63 Report of Surveyor 61 Report of Medical Officer of Health 71 Reports of Analyst and Inspectors 83 List of Vestrymen and Committees 99 List of Officers 104 APPENDICES. No. 1.—Poor Rate Accounts 105 No. 2.—List of Officers with Salaries, &c. 111 No. 3.—Account of the Parochial Estates of the Parish of Clerkenwell, 1826 117 No. 4—Regulations for Tenement Houses under Sanitary Act, 1866, Sec. 35 133 REPORT OF THE VESTRY For the Year ended 25th March, 1887. The Vestry of the Parish of St. James and St. John, Clerkenwell, beg to present the following Report of their proceedings and other matters connected therewith during the year ended on the 25th March, 1887. The Parish of Clerkenwell contains 380 acres, about 65 of which are situate at the outlying portion of the Parish at Muswell Hill. According to the last census the population was 69,019. The number of assessments in the Parish, according to the Valuation List, which came into force on the 6th April, 1886, was 8,324. The Parish is divided into five wards as follows : Ward No. 1 (Pentonville), comprises all that portion of the Parish which lies north of a line drawn from the west boundary of the Parish at Battle Bridge, along the centre of Pentonville Road, to the east boundary of the Parish at the top of the City Road, thence up High Street and Liverpool Road to Sermon Lane, thence westward (according to the boundary of the Parish), to Caledonian Road, including Nos. 61 to 77, and 68 to 100, in that road, and 6 to 17, Caledonian Crescent, thence to the western boundary at Battle Bridge, and all that portion of the Parish which is situate at or about Muswell Hill. This Ward contains 1,632 assessments, of a rateable value of £59,656, and returns twelve members to the Vestry. 6 Ward No. 2 (St. Philip's), comprises all that portion of the Parish which lies within a line drawn along the centre of King's Cross Road, from Baker Street to Battle Bridge, thence up Pentonville Road to the north-west corner of Claremont Square, thence down Amwell Street and Rosoman Street to Exmouth Street, along Exmouth Street and Mount Pleasant to the boundary, thence along the boundary of the Parish to King's Cross Road, bottom of Baker Street, including nearly the whole of the House of Correction site. This Ward contains 1,473 assessments, of a rateable value of £53,135, and returns fifteen members to the Vestry. Ward No. 3 (St. Mark's), comprises all that portion of the Parish within a line drawn along the Pentonville Road, from the north-west corner of Claremont Square, to tho junction of the City Road and Goswell Road, thence down Goswell Road to corner of Spencer Street. including Nos. 290 to 320 on the north-east side of Goswell Road and Nos. 1 and 30, in Sidney Street, thence along Spencer Street, Myddelton Street, Rosoman Street and Amwell Street to the north corner of Claremont Square. This Ward contains 1,245 assessments of a rateable value of £60,132, and returns twelve members to the Vestry. Ward No. 4 (St. James'), comprises all that portion of the Parish within a line drawn from Goswell Road, along the centre of Spencer Street, Myddelton Street, Exmouth Street, Mount Pleasant, to the boundary of the Parish, thence along the line of the Old Fleet Ditch to new Street, opposite Clerkenwell Green, thence along Clerkenwell Green (north side of Sessions House) and Aylesbury Street to St. John Street, thence up tho centre of St. John Street to Percival Street, along the centre of Percival Street, and up Goswell Road to Spencer Street. 7 This Ward contains 2,468 assessments, of a rateable value of £105,050, and returns eighteen members to the Vestry. Ward No. 5 (St. John's), comprises all that portion of the Parish which lies south of the southern boundary of Ward 4, bounded on the east by a line drawn along the ccntre of Goswell Road from Percival Street to Clerkenwell Road, on the west by the Old Fleet Ditch, and on the south by a line drawn from Goswell Road down Clerkenwell road, thence irregularly, accordingly to the boundary of the Parish, to the Old Fleet Ditch. This Ward contains 1,506 assessments, of a rateable value of £75,604, and returns fifteen members to the Vestry. With regard to the outlying portion of the Parish at Muswell Hill the following extract from Cromwell's History of Clerkenwell will be of interest, especially to those unacquainted with its history : — " There is a small detached portion of the Parish, situate at Muswell, or Muswell Hill, about five miles and a half from London, and on the north-western confiues of Hornsey. This little tract (about 65 acres) was given to the Nunnery of Clerkenwell by Beauvais, Bishop of London, about the year 1112; and having become famous through a legendary tale of a 'great cure performed upon a King of Scots, who was, by some divine intelligence, advised to take the water of a well in England, called Muswell,' a Chapel was erected on the spot, 'sometime bearing the name of our Lady of Muswell.' Here was placed an image of 'Our Lady, whereunto was a continual resort in the way of pilgrimage.' This Chapel (which of course was an appendage to the Nunnery) had sunk, along with many other fabrics originating in religious romance, before the reign of Elizabeth; and, when Norden wrote, an Alderman Roe had 'a proper house occupying the site.' "The Wells, from which this tract, and the hill comprising it, take name, are two in number, and continue in good preservation, being bricked round to the depth from which they seemingly spring, (about live feet and a half), and enclosed besides from the field, wherein they are situated, by wooden railings. Though a few yards only asunder, 8 their waters differ in quality ; that of the ono being hard, sweet, and beautifully pellucid, while the other more nearly resembles rain water, and is used only for the purposes to which tho latter is commonly applied. Neither are at present supposed to possess any medicinal properties. An infant brook issues from their united and ceaseless overflowing; which, descending the hill, and winding through the adjacent meadows, at length finds its way to the comparatively distant Lea River. "This tract is regularly visited, and its limits marked at the perambulation of the Parish, which takes place septennially; it is at present entirely under pasturage. The only habitations upon it are two by the road side, traditionally said to occupy the site of the dairy farm, which, in the monastic times, sent its produce to the nuns of Clerkenwell. Part of an adjoining house being also within the parochial line, (as is signified by the usual initials affixed to its front), the perambulators are obliged to pass through this latter dwelling, in order to assert their long established boundary." This part of the Parish has within the last few years been laid out for building. New roads have been formed, and there are now 32 houses in assessment. Rates.—During the year the Eates made by the Vestry were as follows :— For the half-year to Michaelmas, 1886. A Poor Pate of 1s. 5d. in the £, estimated to realize nett £22,950 A Metropolitan Consolidated 4d. „ „ „ 5,400 A Sewer Rate 1d. „ „ „ 1,350 A General ,, 11d. „ „ „ 14,850 2s. 9d. £44,550 For the half-year to Lady-day, 1887. A Poor Pate of 1s. 4d. in the £, estimated to realize £21,600 A Metropolitan Consolidated 4d. „ „ „ 5,400 A Lighting Rate 1d. „ „ „ 1,350 A General „ 11d. „ „ „ 14,850 2s. 8d. £43,200 The rates made in April, for the half-year to Michaelmas, were based upon a rateable value of £350,383, and those 9 made in October for the half-year to Lady-clay, upon a ateable value of £353,664. The amounts required by the Guardians of the Holborn Union were £24,879 in the first, and £24,523 in the second half-year, total £49,402, the average for 14 years previous to the amalgamation of Clerkenwell with the Holborn Union, when Clerkenwell managed its own Poor under the Local Act, being £23,093, the highest year being £34,534. The Parish of Clerkenwell received from the Common Poor Fund £3,937 9s. 6d. and £5,227 6s. 6d. in the first and second half-years respectively. The precept of the Metropolitan Board of Works for the year was for the sum of £10,102 4s. 9d. and that of the School Board of £12,907 9s. 5d. The Police precepts for the year amounted to £7,362 19s. 2d. It will thus be seen that of the £87,750 raised during the year, the sum of £70,659 was required by bodies beyond the control of the Vestry. 6,338 Summonses have been issued for the recovery of the rates for the four quarters of the year, representing an average of 1,584 per quarter. This appears a large number, but it is quite evident that a very large proportion of the persons summoned are content to wait for the summons, treating it as the "final demand " for payment, preferring to pay the small fee of 1s. charged for the summons and hearing, and to hold their money as long as possible. That this is so is patent from the fact of a very small proportion, not more than a tenth of those summoned, attending the hearing, the bulk of the remainder paying without further proceedings being necessary. 113 Committal Warrants were granted in respect of non-payment of rates, averaging 28 per quarter, the 10 majority of the cases being those of persons who set the Vestry at defiance, and have no goods on the premises on which distress can be levied, and it may be taken that practically the same persons form the cases each quarter. In the large majority of these cases also, when proceedings have reached this extreme, the money is forthcoming. An average of 14 cases per quarter were excused by the justices on account of poverty. Valuation Lists.—Four Provisional Valuation Lists and one Supplemental List have been made out during the year, dealing with 314 assessments and resulting in a net increase in the rateable value of £3,474. In consequence of the closing of the two prisons, Coldbath Fields and the House of Detention, in March 1886, no sum has been received from the Government in aid of the rates in respect thereof. The amount which has been so lost to the credit of the rate was about £733 or rather over a half-penny in the pound. The Sessions Ilouse has also been declared by the Queens Bench Division of the High Court to be exempt from rating and a further diminution of the producing power of the rates is therefore experienced of over £100 per annum. Assessment of Sessions House.—The following is an extract from the Times of the 8th December, 1886 :— NICHOLSON v. THE ASSESSMENT COMMITTEE OF HOLBORN UNION. This was an appeal by Sir Richard Nicholson, Clerk of the Peace for the County of Middlesex, against the Assessment of the Sessions House at Clerkenwell. By an Act passed in 1775 (18 Geo. III., c. 67) such persons as at the time being should be in the commission of the peace for the county of Middlesex were appointed commissioners for building a Sessions House and empowered to purchase a site for it. The Act further provided that the commissioners should be empowered " to cause a now Sessions House, with all proper and necessary apartments and offices, to be erected on such piece or pieces of ground for 11 the use of the said county of Middlesex, and for other good and ???eseary purposes, for the better performance of the King's service the county," which building was not to be rated or assessed for the yment of the sewer tax, land tax, or any public, parochial, or other e or tax whatsoever at a higher rate than it might be rated or essed in 1777. The assessment in that year was, gross value, 35, rateable value, £113.* It so remained until 1879, when, in the ovisional Valuation List, made under the Valuation Metropolis Act, 69, it was increa&d in respect of additions and enlargements to £800 oss and £667 rateable value. On appeal to the Assessment Comttee these amounts were reduced to £<65 and £388. The Justices w appealed against this decision. Mr. E. S. Wright, for the appellants, contended that the rateable lue ought to be as assessed in 1777—that was £113 only, and cited a mber of authorities, relying chiefly on that of " Coomber v. Justices Berkshire" (9,Q.B.D. 17), where the premises in question were milar to the Clerkenwell Sessions House, and used not only for dicial and assize, but also for county, business. Mr. Poland (with whom was Mr. Castle), for tho respondents, conended that the present case was distinguishable from that of " Coomber Justices of Berkshire." The Sessions House was not exclusively sed for the administration of justice, and the case showed that there ere rooms in it assigned to the joint clerk of Committees to the ustices, in which, as keeper of the Sessions House, he was bound to eside. As to the new part of the Sessions House, that would be ateable according to the ordinary law, as it could not be affected by he Act of 1775, when of course it had never been contemplated. Mr. 11. S. Wright having been heard in reply, Mr. Justice Denman, n giving judgment, said it was impossible to distinguish the present ase from that of "Coomber v. Justices of Berkshire." There the question had been whether buildings in which the assizes for the county of Berks were held, with the buildings surrounding the Courts, were rateable, and there it was stated that there was a resident police officer. In that case it had been found that the use of the buildings was solely for official business, and it had been stated as a ground of decision that, though strictly speaking the property was not Crown * This statement from this point is incorrect. The facts are as follows :— In 1879 the Sessions House was enlarged and the assessment was increased from £135 £113 to £465, £388, the value of the buildings, 25 to 28, Clerkenwell Green, formerly standing on the ground being added to the original assessment, and this increase was accepted by the Justices. In 1880, during the making out of the quinquennial List, the assessment was raised to £600 £500 by the Vestry. The Justices then appealed to the Union Assessment Committee, who confirmed the assessment. Tho Justices then further appealed to the Queen's Bench Division against the rateability of the premises at all.—R.P. 12 property, yet it was in the nature of it, being occupied for public purposes—that was, connected with the government of the county. This Sessions House was occupied for the discharge of the public service of the county, and he (his Lordship) did not think that that went beyond the decision in "Coomber v. Justices of Berkshire," and the other authorities bearing upon the point. Another question in the case was as to how far the original Act was to be considered as not only limiting the rateable value, but fixing it permanently. On this point, too, he was in favour of the contention for the appellants. Mr. Justice Hawkins, in concurring, said upon this latter point that the contention for the respondents was that any part of the Sessions House built prior to 1777 was to be assessed only at £135 gross value but he (his Lordship) thought, by the provisions of 18 Geo. III, c. 67, it had been enacted that if the Sessions House became assessable at all, it was not to be assessed above £135. Appeal accordingly allowed, with costs. Telephone Wires.—The Vestry during the year assessed the telephone wires of the Parish at a gross value of £13 and a rateable value of £10. Heavy costs were previously incurred by other Parishes in fighting the question before the Assessment Sessions, where the assessment was settled at 6s. gross value per mile. The Vestry are of opinion that the assessment is a very inadequate one, but they were not prepared to incur the heavy expenses which would be entailed by carrying the question to the Superior Courts, which would swallow up the rates which would be derived from the telephone wires for many vears to come. School Board Precepts.—The following is a list of the Precepts of the School Board, on the Parish of Clerkenwell, since it was called into existence by the Elementary Education Act, 1870. £ s. d. £ s. d. 1871 511 8 9 1880 7,436 9 8 1872 943 11 2 1881 7,900 4 4 1873 780 0 2 1882 8,067 10 5 1874 1,869 9 3 1883 9,397 16 2 1875 3,267 12 11 1884 11,054 2 2 1876 4,897 4 9 1885 11,999 1 10 1877 6,046 10 1 1886 12,890 9 0 1878 6,013 14 10 1887 12,210 12 5 1879 6,371 8 11 13 Metropolitan Board Precepts.—The following is a list the Precepts of the Metropolitan Board of Works since ??? passing of the Metropolis Local Management Act, ???55. Main Drainage. Fire Brigade. Bridge Expenses. All other Expenses, Total. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ S. d. £ s. d. 57 — — — 1,161 4 3 1,161 4 3 58 — — — 1,557 10 8 1,557 10 8 59 2,767 3 0 — — 1,915 9 2 4,682 12 2 60 2,767 3 0 — — 1,532 10 4 4,299 13 4 61 2,767 3 0 — — 1,717 14 11 4,484 17 11 62 2,767 3 0 — — 1,585 15 3 4,352 18 3 63 2,767 3 0 — — 2,058 1 7 4,825 4 7 64 2,767 8 0 — — 2,657 6 6 5,424 9 6 65 3,031 11 3 — — 1,981 8 6 5,012 19 9 66 3,031 11 0 505 5 2 — 2,595 18 7 6,132 14 9 67 3,031 11 0 505 5 2 — 3,320 12 2 6,857 8 4 68 3,031 11 0 505 5 2 — 2,421 6 7 5,958 2 9 69 3,031 11 0 505 5 2 — 2,874 7 9 6,411 3 11 70 3,309 6 0 551 11 0 — 1,611 5 3 5,472 2 3 71 1,528 1 9 551 11 0 — 1,470 17 3 3,550 10 0 72 471 10 10 531 19 6 — 1,659 11 6 2,663 1 10 73 464 0 0 531 19 5 — 1,823 19 3 2,819 18 8 74 1,638 8 9 580 8 5 — 2,422 18 5 4,641 15 7 75 1,914 12 6 594 10 10 — 3,183 7 2 5,692 10 6 76 1,758 4 7 630 19 10 — 2,967 16 6 5,357 0 11 77 1,648 17 11 630 2 2 — 3,315 9 11 5,594 10 0 78 1,889 10 9 673 18 10 208 7 6 2,945 4 1 5,717 1 2 79 1,719 2 0 832 1 6 667 9 5 3,588 10 11 6,807 3 10 80 1,592 14 1 798 9 3 995 12 6 4,194 7 0 7,581 2 10 81 1,588 13 2 844 2 8 l,046 16 5 4,626 19 5 8,106 11 8 82 1,424 17 10 991 3 7 1,075 18 8 5,138 0 4 8,630 0 5 83 1,246 8 4 1,015 18 2 1,090 11 7 5,310 11 1 8,663 9 2 '84 1,965 2 7 1,091 13 1 1,063 0 4 4,970 10 0 9,090 6 0 85 1,570 14 1 1,095 5 6 1,188 17 3 6,455 17 2 10,310 14 0 86 1,710 16 5 1,142 7 10 1,332 2 7 5,976 17 11 *10,162 4 9 87 1,744 3 6 1,163 7 4 1,437 5 3 6,755 2 9 †11,099 18 10 £61 9s. 3d. was added to this amount for Government property not in Valuation List, and 9 11s. fid. was deducted for reduction in Valuation List by the striking out of the Sessions house Assessment, making a net sum of £10,149 12s. Gd. † £7 13s. 4d., is added to the amount for Government property not in Valuation List. Demolition of the Prisons.—This question has engaged he attention of the Vestry at frequent intervals throughut the year. It will be remembered that in the last Report it was mentioned that the Vestry had expressed to 14 the Home Secretary their opinion that the sum asked for the land (£ 180,000) was altogether prohibitive. To this communication the Home Secretary replied, that the sites were not offered at a valuation made by him or his officers, but, his action was guided by the provisions of 39 and 40 Vict., cap. 21, sec. 34. The Vestry then suggested in reply that the Government should introduce a Bill on the lines of Lord Salisbury's separate Report in connection with the Royal Commission on the Housing of the Working Classes, viz.—"That the sites should be sold at cost price to some authority or trust that will build workmen's dwellings upon them, or upon other similar sites obtained by exchange for portions of them." From a report of the Metropolitan Board of Works, supplied to them by that Board, the Yestry learnt that the Home Secretary had enquired whether there was any probability of the Board being willing to enter into negociations with the Prison Commissioners for the purchase of the sites or either of them with a view to the erection of Artizans Dwellings thereon. The Board, however, having in view the fact that in connection with the Gray's Inn Road Improvement, and the New Street from Gray's Inn Road to St. John Street, 11 sites, comprising an area of 160,928 square feet and providing accommodation for nearly 3,000 persons, have been or will be reserved in the near neighbourhood of the prisons, did not deem it expedient to enter into such negociations. The Board also in its reply to the Home Secretary endorsed the opinion of the Yestry that a portion of the site should be reserved as an open space. The Yestry then took into consideration, at a Special Meeting on the 8th July, 1886, the whole question of the utilization of the sites, and they directed that the Prison Commissioners be asked to state the terms upon which they would be prepared to sell the sites for the purpose of erect- 15 ing dwellings for the working classes or for the conversion of same into open spaces. On the 18th September, a reply was received from the Home Office inviting an offer for the purchase of both or either of the sites, assuming that the Vestry have power to make the purchase, as to which the Home Secretary gave no opinion. After a very full discussion, the Vestry decided to wait upon the Metropolitan Board of Works to urge the desirability of that Board acquiring the site of Coldbath Fields Prison as an open space, and they also invited the Vestry of St. Pancras and the Ilolborn District Board of Works to co-operate with the Vestry in the matter. The Ilolborn Board agreed to co-operate with the Vestry, but the Vestry of St. Pancras replied that they were of opinion that the money would be better spent in acquiring Parliament Fields for the extension of Hampstead Heath, "which is within a reasonable distance of Clerkenwell by tramway." The Deputations attended the Board on the 14th January, and Captain Penton, M.P , addressed the Board in support of the Memorials, which were referred to the General Purposes Committee for consideration and report. On the 10th February, the Vestry's attention was called to answers given in the House of Commons on the 8th of that month by the Home Secretary to questions by Captain Penton and Mr. J. Rowlands, in which he stated that he was considering offers for the Coldbath Fields site. Captain Penton on that occasion also attended the Vestry and gave further information on the matter. On the 10th March the Vestry received the following letter from Captain Penton :— House of Commons, March 8th, 1887. My Dear Sir, I beg to inform you that on the 24th February I put a question to the Secretary of State for the Home Department, in the House of Commons, in the following terms :—"Whether the Peabody Trustees 16 have made an offer for the Coldbath Fields Prison Site, for the pur- pose of erecting Artizans' Dwellings thereon, and if so, whether before accepting this or any other offer for the entire site, he will give the Metropolitan Board of Works, or the Clerkenwell Vestry, time to consider the advisability of tendering for a portion of the site, to be retained as an open space, in accordance with the resolutions of those Boards as to the necessity for such a space, in this densely populated neighbourhood ? " The Secretary of State replied :—"I have stated more than once in this House that it is my desire to dispose of the Prison Sites in. the way recommended by the Royal Commission on the Housing of the Working Classes. I have received an offer for the site of Coldbath Fields Prison from a Society whose purpose it is to provide cheap and healthy homes for the working classes. This offer is now under consideration. I have received no offer from the Peabody Trustees. Any proposal either from the Metropolitan Board of Works or from the Clerkenwell Vestry for the retention of a portion of the site as an open space will receive my careful attention. I must add that both these Bodies have had ample time to consider the question." Shortly after this, having heard on very good authority, that the delay on the part of the Metropolitan Board of Works arose from the uncertainty as to the renewal of the Coal and Wine Dues, and that whether or not that Body should acquire the site in question, depends entirely on the renewal of those Dues, I had another interview with the Secretary of State for the Home Department and asked him, in the first place, whether he had any objection to divulging the name of the " Society" from which he has received an offer ? and secondly, whether he would pledge himself not to accept finally any offer until the question of the renewal of the Coal and Wine Dues had been decided. He replied that he could not give the name of the "Society," because that might have a detrimental effect on the negotiations in progress— neither could he pledge himself to wait until Parliament has decided the question of the Coal and Wine Dues—but, he added " the expression of such a wish will have due weight with me." Ho further expressed a wish to receive a direct communication from the Vestry stating explicitly what their wishes are in regard to this site. I may mention that he did not hold out any hope of the whole space being left open—and appeared to think that the best use to which a portion of it, at all events, could be put, would be to build a very good class of artizans dwellings, which could be let out at a very cheap rate. I may further mention that nearly a month back I forwarded through Colonel Duncan, who also supported the scheme, a letter 17 om an influential member of the Vestry, suggesting that a Branch. the Imperial Institute should be built on the vacant Prison site — dding my own recommendation to the same effect. This letter was ent to Sir Frederick Abel, the Secretary to the Committee of the institute, presided over by H.R.H. the Prince of Wales. To this better I have received no reply as yet. I am, My Dear Sir, Faithfully yours, FPEDK. T. PENTON. Robert Paget, Esq., Vestry Clerk. The Vestry took this letter into consideration at their next Meeting and decided to communicate to the Home Secretary the views of the Vestry with regard to the pre???ervation of the site as an open space, and suggested that if it be the intention of the Government to appropriate the site of the Prison for Artizans' Dwellings, the Metropolitan Board of Works should be relieved of the obligation to provide similar accommodation on the line of the new street from the Gray's Inn Road to the "Angel." With this step the year closed to which this Report relates. Board School Sites.—In November the attention of the Vestry was called to the Scheduling of three sites in the Parish for the erection of new Schools in Sermon Lane; Northampton Road and Fletchers Row; and Waterloo Place and Bowling Green Lane; and they took into their consideration the necessity of additional School Buildings being provided in the Parish, and the eligibility of the sites which had been selected. In regard to Sermon Lane and Bowling Green Lane, the Vestry did not deem it necessary to take any action, but with reference to the site scheduled in Fletcher's Row, and Northampton Road, the Vestry, through its Works Committee had an interview with the Chairman of the School Managers for the district, the Rev. J. H. Rose, M.A., the Vicar, who pointed out 18 that, having regard to the fact that the Schools in St. James' Walk, and on the old Workhouse site in Farringdon Road, are only temporary schools, and that the Spa Fields School is now closed, additional permanent accommodation is necessary, but he stated that the Managers had taken into consideration the possibility of the House of Detention site being available for a school, and also the fact that a large number of houses from which children are sent to the Board Schools will be removed by the formation of the new street, and had therefore recommended the School Board to postpone the acquisition of the Northampton Road site until these changes are more advanced. The Vestry adopted these views, and made representations to the same effect to the School Board. The matter was under the consideration of the School Board for some time, and the Vestry have since been informed that the site has been definitely abandoned. Artizans' Dwellings Acts, 1868-1882—Bolton Court.— The Report of the proceedings in this matter terminated last year with the statement that the Vestry had received the award of the Arbitrator appointed by the Local Government Board. This award settled the amount of compensation to be given to Mr. T. J. Dalton in respect of the seven cottages comprised in Bolton Court at £610, but made no order with reference to the apportionment of the ground rent between the Vestry and Mr. Dalton. The Arbitrator was willing to state the grounds of his award if requested by both sides, but Mr. Dalton's Solicitors declined to do so. The Vestry then left the matter unreservedly in the hands of their solicitors to act as they might deem best in the Vestry's interests. They, therefore, agreed with Mr. Dalton's Solicitors, to settle the matter by payment of £441 cash and £14 per annum towards the rent of £100 reserved by the lease, all costs 19 be paid by the Vestry. These costs, including the bitrator's fee, amounted to £149 1s. 3d. The Vestry then decided to take proceedings against the ???perior landlords, so as to be in a position to deal further th the property by pulling down the houses, and they ???ve been advised that proceedings must be commenced novo. The Medical Officer, therefore, on the 17th March, 1887, presented to the Vestry an Official Repre???ntation under the Acts, which was referred to the Sanitary ommittee for consideration and report. Baths and Washouses.-The Vestry during the year ???ve again very fully considered the question of the tablishment of Baths and Washhouses in the Parish, the ebate extending over four evenings. On the 13th January, 1887, an amendment to the motion roposing the adoption of the Acts was moved, that a poll ???f the ratepayers be taken on the subject, and was carried ???y 24 votes to 20, but it was ultimately decided to adjourn he further consideration of the question for twelve months. Market in Chapel Street.—The conduct of this market has engaged a considerable share of the Vestry's attention luring the past year. The Vestry in February received a Memorial from many of the Inhabitants of the street, calling attention to the proportions which Sunday Trading had assumed in the street, and suggesting the desirability of the Vestry taking steps to abate the nuisance thus created. The inhabitants further alleged that great inconvenience is caused by the dual policc control, the north side of the street being in the N division, and the south side in the G division, and suggested the advisability of the entire street being placed under the control of one division only. The Vestry, therefore, represented this matter to the Com- 20 missioner of Police, who replied that under the existing arrangement there is more supervision than if the costermongers' market were in one division, and that the special attention of the police has been directed to the locality. On the question of Sunday Trading the Vestry issued notices prohibiting such trading on the public way, but it soon appeared that several of those tradesmen who signed the petition to the Vestry only did so as a means of getting rid of the competition of the costermongers, for they themselves continued to trade as before. The Vestry, therefore, issued a further notice, confining such tradiug to the insides of the shops, and giving notice that no stall board will be allowed outside the shops on Sundays. The Vestry have also decided to sweep Chapel Street at 5 o'clock on Sunday mornings instead of at midnight on Saturdays as heretofore. Disinfection of Cabs.-In August, 1886, the Vestry received a letter from the Commissioner of Police on the question of disinfecting Cabs which may have conveyed a person suffering from contagious or infectious disease, and asking whether the Vestry would undertake the disinfection of same, and also whether a certificate could be given to the driver that his cab was disinfected. The Vestry considered the subject, and replied to the Commissioner that it was prepared to provide for the disinfection of cabs belonging to parishioners, or which may have conveyed parishioners, of Clerkenwell on payment of a reasonable fee Up to the present time, however, the Vestry has not been required to fulfil its promise. Eggs unfit for Food.—The Vestry have experienced a difficulty in the carrying out of the Acts relating to unwholesome food in the case of eggs. Some 12,000 bad eggs were seized, and the Yestry wished to take proceed- 21 ???gs against the persons exposing them for sale, but were ???et by the difficulty that the Act (26 and 27 Vic., cap. 117) ???efines the articles which may be seized as follows :—" Any ???imal, carcase, meat, poultry, game, flesh, fish, fruit, ???getables, corn, bread, or flour." None of these terms ???uld be held to embrace eggs, and the Vestry were, there???re, reluctantly compelled to abandon the proceedings. he Vestry, however, addressed a communication to the Government, calling attention to the case with the view to a amendment of the law, so as to include bad eggs in the ???efinition of unwholesome food. They also invited the co-operation of the other local authorities in the matter, ???me of whom, in consequence, took similar action. Wilmington and Northampton Squares.—On the 25th March, 1886, a letter was received and laid before the estry from Mr. C. C. Walker, of Lilleshall Old Hall, ear Newport, Salop, an old inhabitant of Clerkeuwell, the subject of these Squares. This public spirited and enerous gentleman had borne the expense of laying out the enclosures of Wilmington and Northampton Squares ??? the Metropolitan Public Gardens Association at a cost over £l,000, and he now offered to place the result of ???is expenditure at the disposal of the Vestry for the use nd enjoyment of the parishioners of Clerkenwell. The ???estry conveyed its thanks to Mr. Walker for his kindness ???nd generosity, and also entered into negociation with the ???arquess Northampton, as to transferring the spaces in ???uestion to the Vestry. In July, a letter was received from ???he Marquess's Solicitor stating that his Lordship, feeling ???he great importance of public gardens and recreation rounds being provided in London on a far larger scale ???an heretofore, would convey as a free gift the gardens to ???e Vestry to be maintained by them as public gardens. ???t the same time a letter was received from the Public 22 Gardens Association, offering to transfer to the Vestry, all the working stock free of cost. The Vestry accepted these offers, and at the close of the year to which this Report relates, were taking steps to carry them into effect. Price of Gas.—The Vestry, in November, received a letter from the Strand District Board inviting the support of the Vestry to a request to the Metropolitan Board of Works to apply to Parliament for a reduction of the price of gas in the northern half of the Metropolis, so as to equalize the price with that charged by the South Metropolitan Gas Co., on the Southern side of the Thames. The Vestry acceded to the request, and addressed the Metropolitan Board of Works accordingly, but the Board replied that it did not consider such an application would be attended with any probability of success, and that, moreover, the Board is advised that it has no statutory power to incur expenditure for such a purpose. The Vestry, in March, 1887, received an intimation from the Gas Light and Coke Co., that after the 31st of that month the price of gas supplied to the street lamps would be reduced from 2s. 6d. to 2s. 5d., per thousand cubic feet. Tramways.—The line of tramways of the London Street Tramways Co., authorised to be laid along King's Cross and Farringdon Roads to Clerkenwell Road, was laid during the year now under review. It will be remembered that the usual agreement was entered into between the Vestry and the Company, for the payment by the latter for the paving to be taken to lying between the rails and extending to 18 inches on either side. While the line was in course of formation the Company offered, that in lieu of paying the Vestry for the old paving, they (the Company) should take up and relay the whole of the roadway throughout from kerb to kerb, putting in Portland cement concrete 23 oundation where previously there was none, using new tone in all cases between the rails of the tramways and 8 inches outside the rails, and between the tramways and he kerbs at the widenings at Calthorp Street and Wharton Street, and where the carriage way is widened by narrow???ng the footways ; and redressing and using the best of the ???ld stone for the remaining parts; and further to pay the Vestry the sum of £150. This proposal the Vestry agreed to and Farringdon Road and King's Cross Road, have been consequently put into a thoroughly good state of repair. The Company also relaid the footway in Farringdon Road in places where the alteration of the levels of the carriageway required it without expense to the Vestry. The Vestry gave permission for two small portions of the footway in Farringdon Road, and one in King's Cross Road, to be thrown into the carriageway so as to allow a distance of 9 feet 6 inches between the rails and the kerb. Passing Alley.—In October, 1886, the Vestry received a communication from Messrs. Godfrey and Webb, solicitors to Messrs. Lovell and Christmas, the freeholders of the premises abutting on the south side of Passing Alley (a narrow passage running between St. John's Lane and St. John Street), asking the consent of the Vestry to the discontinuance and stopping up of such Alley under the authority of the Act 57, (Geo. III, Cap. 29, Sec. 79. The Vestry, however, also received a Memorial from the Inhabitants, strongly objecting to the proposal, but rather urging the widening of the Alley and they declined to give consent to the closing of the Alley, but suggested to the adjoining owners to improve same by giving up sufficient ground for the passage to be widened. The applicants in December then made another proposal. They had then 24 acquired the freehold of the property on the northern side of the Alley, and they now proposed to remove the Alley about 40 feet farther south, so as to abut on the southern boundary of their property instead of bisecting it, and they farther offered to give up sufficient land for widening same by a foot or eighteen inchcs, if the Yestry would pay them half the value of the land required. The Vestry again declined to give its consent, and the applicants again came forward with a further proposal, viz., to remove the Alley 40 feet to the southward, to make it a uniform width of 4 feet 6 inches, the old Alley being only 2 feet 10 inches, and to bear the whole expense of the alteration. In support of this proposal the neighbouring inhabitants of St. John's Street and St. John's Lane petitioned, and after some further consideration, and communication with the Holborn District Board, in whose district the new Alley would be partially situate, the proposal was agreed to. School Board Elections.—In October, 1886, a letter was received from the Yestry of St. James', Westminster, protesting against the recent action of the School Board in electing to a casual vacancy, in the representation of Westminster, a stranger to the constituency instead of one of the Candidates at the last Election, who received a large measure of support, and asking the Vestry to support their representations to the Education Department upon the subject, to the effect that the Department should introduce a Bill into the next Session of Parliament, providing for the filling up of casual vacancies on the Board by direct election by the ratepayers in the division in which the vacancy has occurred instead of by the Board itself. The Vestry, consequently, communicated with the Department in the same spirit, but a reply was received stating that the present method was introduced to avoid the additional expense of contested elections. 25 The Vestry also again communicated with the Education Department, urging the desirability of adopting the Parliamentary Electoral Districts as the Electoral districts for School Board purposes and the abolition of the cumuative vote, and they also communicated with the Borough Members asking them to support such views. Captain Penton, in consequence, had an interview with Sir Henry Holland at the Education Department, during the course of which he was informed that a Parliamentary Committee was appointed in 1884 to consider the question, that that Committee did not draw up any report, but, from evidence produced before it, it appeared that the system of cumulative voting was the only system which ensured a due representation of minorities, and that, without such due representation of minorities, it would be very difficult, if not absolutely impossible, to carry out the provisions of any compulsory Education Act. Sundry letters from other local authorities were received on the subject, and in March, the Vestry, on the invitation of the Greenwich District Board, appointed delegates to join a Deputation to the Education Department in favour of the alterations in the present system above referred to. Coal and Wine Dues.—In May, 1886, the Vestry, in view of the Coal and Wine Dues ceasing in July, 1889, sent a communication to the other local authorities of the Metropolis, expressing their opinion of the desirability of the continuauce of these Dues as a fund for the preservation of Open Spaces. Part of these Dues, which are of long standing, have been allotted since 1862 to the Metropolitan Board of Works for public improvements. They have been renewed from time to time, and in 1868 they were renewed till 1S89, chit fly to meet the expense of the Thames Embankment at Chelsea, and for freeing from tolls certain bridges over the Thames and Lee beyond the limits 26 of the Metropolis, but within the area over which the Dues are levied. From 1869, under the Metropolitan Board of Works Loans Act of that year, the proceeds of the Dues ceased to be allocated to specific purposes, and have formed part of the Board's annual revenue. At the present time the Board's share of the proceeds is about ,£325,000 a year, and if the Dues are allowed to cease in 1889 the deficiency will have to be made good by a proportionate increase in the Metropolitan Consolidated Bate, estimated at 2½d. in the pound. In view of this contingency, the Metropolitan Board has, since 1872, made repeated applications to successive Governments, but has always met with discouragement,, A request was made in October, 1886, to Lord Randolph Churchill, then Chancellor of the Exchequer, by means of a Deputation from the Board and the City Corporation, but he returned an unfavourable answer to the deputation. He, however, intimated that a preponderant expression of opinion on the part of the inhabitants of the Metropolis might induce the Government to alter its decision. A letter was then addressed by the Metropolitan Board of Works, to the Vestries and District Board, asking for their active co-operation in making such opinion known to the Government. A very large proportion of the Vestries and District Boards expressed themselves in favour of the continuance. The Metropolitan Board of Works introduced a Bill into Parliament for the renewal of the Duties, which was read a first time on the 28th January, in favor of which the majority of the Local Authorities of the Metropolis petitioned. The Bill, however, made no progress, and was eventually dropped. 27 Metropolitan Railway Bill.— In March, lb87, the Metropolitan Board of Works drew attention to this Bill, by which the Metropolitan Railway Company sought power to take and purchase lands or houses adjoining, or near to, the railway, for the purpose of improving the ventilation of the railway and stations. It was proposed, in the Bill, that the Company should have compulsory powers of purchase upon obtaining a certificate from the Board of Trade, specifying the lands required and stating that it is reasonable and expedient that such lands should be acquired for the purpose. The Board was opposed to the Board of Trade being authorised to empower the Company to acquire lands compulsorily; and was of opinion that such power should only be given by Parliament upon application in the usual way by Bill, and upon good cause being shown; and petitioned to this effect. The Vestry supported the view of the Metropolitan Board of Works, and presented a petition against the Bill; and they shortly afterwards heard from the Company that they would not proceed with that part of their Bill. Hyde Park Corner (New Streets) Bill.— The Vestry of Islington called attention in February, 1887, to the reintroduction of the "Hyde Park Corner (New Streets) Bill," the object of which was to cast a moiety of the cost of the maintenance of streets, stated to form part of the Parishes of St. Martin in the Fields and St. George, Hanover Square, upon the other Parishes of the Metropolis by means of a contribution from the Metropolitan Board of Works in aid of such cost. Having regard to the facts that the two parishes of which such streets are stated to form part, are two of the lowest rated in the Metropolis, and that the Parish of 28 Islington would derive little or no benefit from the maintenance of the said streets, that Vestry resolved to petition against the Bill, and invited the other local authorities to do the same. The Vestry adopted the views of the Yestry of Islington, and presented a petition to the House of Commons against the Bill, as did many other of the local authorities. The Commons struck out the objectionable parts of the Bill, which were, however, reinstated by a Committee of the House of Lords. Further action on the part of the Local Authorities was the result, and the consequence was that the Lords' amendments were disagreed with, and the Bill eventually passed in the phape desired. The Yestry also considered the following Bills:— Beer Adulteration Bills.—These were two Bills introduced into Parliament in identical terms, similar to those introduced last session. They provided that every person selling beer brewed from, or containing any ingredients other than hops, or malt from barley, shall keep conspicuously posted at the bar a legible notice stating what other ingredients are contained in such beer, on penalty of a fine not exceeding £5 for the first offence, and £20 for any subsequent offence, to be recovered by any informer. The Yestry again presented a Petition in favour of the Bills, but they were eventually dropped. Butter Substitutes Bill.—This Bill provided that premises were Margarine or Oleo-Margarine are made shall be registered with the Clerk of the Union in which such premises are situate, and shall be open to inspection by the Inspectors under the Sale of Food and Drugs Act; that all packages of such goods shall be distinctly marked as such; that manufacturers and wholesale and retail dealers shall 29 under penalties, inform their customers when Margarine or Oleo-margarine is being sold to them, &c. The Bill is identical with that introduced into the last Session of Parliament, in favour of which the Vestrypetitioned, and they again presented a Petition in its favor. This Bill subsequently became law until the title of the Margarine Act. Public Parks and Works (Metropolis) Bill.— This Bill, introduced by the Government, proposed to transfer from the Government to the Metropolitan Board of Works, and consequently from Imperial to Local taxation, the charge of maintaining Victoria Park, Battersea Park, Kennington Park, a public Garden adjoining Bethnal Green Museum, Westminster Bridge, and the Chelsea Embankment. The Vestry had before them a letter from the Vestry of Chelsea, enclosing copy petition they had presented for an inquiry into the subject by a Select Committee with regard to the revenues of the estates proposed to be transferred, and they presented a similar Petition. The Bill, however, eventually became law. Water Companies (Regulation of Powers) Bill.— By this Bill it was proposed that where the owner, and not the occupier, of a dwelling-house is liable for water rates, the water shall not be cut off for non-payment, but the rate shall become a first charge on the dwelling-house, which may be recovered from the owner or occupier in the same manner as water rates may by law be recovered, provided that proceedings shall not be taken against the occupier until notice has been given him to pay such rate out of the rent due, and he has omitted to pay, and also that no greater sum shall be recovered as water rate than 30 the amount of the rent owing by him. The Bill also provided that the Company contravening the Act shall be liable to a penalty of £5 per day during which the water shall remain cut off. to be paid to the person aggrieved. The Vestry presented a Petition in favour of this Bill, and it eventually became law. Metropolis Management Act Amendment Bill.— By this Bill it was proposed that after the passing of the Act no street shall be laid out without the consent of the Vestry or District Board of the District, or, on appeal, of the Metropolitan Board of Works, over land where the sub-soil has been removed, and also that it shall not be lawful to excavate such sub-soil from land over which it is proposed to form any street, and the Vestry or District Board, in giving their consent, may impose such conditions as they may think fit. Penalties are imposed not exceeding £5 for the offence, and 20s. for every day during which the offence is continued. It also proposed that mains or pipes shall not be laid in new streets without the approval of the Vestry or District Board, and that plans and sections, showing the depth below the surface at which, and the position and course in which, such mains or pipes are proposed to be laid, shall be submitted to the local authority for its approval subject to appeal to the Metropolitan Board of Works, under a penalty of £5 for the offence, and 20s. per day. The Yestry presented a Petition in favour of the Bill, and proposed a resolution that the Borough and County Members be requested to support same, and they were 31 written to accordingly. The Bill however was eventually dropped. Vestrymen's Qualification Bill.— By this Bill it was proposed to abolish the rating qualification for Vestrymen. The Yestry, however, took no action in the matter. The Bill made no progress, and was eventually dropped. Sanitation of Houses (Metropolis) Bill.— This Bill proposed that a Government Authority, to be called a Sanitary Board, consisting of twelve members, selected from the Sanitary Institute of Great Britain, the Royal Institute of British Architects, and the Association of Municipal and Sanitary Engineers and Surveyors, should be created, whose duty it should be to define the duties of the Sanitary Surveyors and Inspectors, and to examine and appoint same, and to grant certificates of competency, and also to approve and license all sanitary apparatus to be used in carrying out the provisions of the Act, and who should have full authority over Local Board Engineers and Surveyors in the matter of drainage of houses and the provision of sewers, and all matters relating to the sanitation of houses, subject only to the right of appeal to the Local Government Board. It also proposed that the Metropolis should be divided into 70 districts, each district to be under the control of a Sanitary Surveyor. Very large powers were to be given to the Sanitary Surveyors over both new and old buildings, and penalties were imposed upon owners or occupiers obstructing the Surveyors or failing to comply with their directions. The Vestry, however, opposed the Bill as an unnecessary and mischievous interference with the powers and duties 32 of Local Governing Authorities, as by law constituted, and as tending in the direction of centralization as against the principles of local self government. The Bill made no progress and was eventually dropped. Sanitary Registration of Buildings Bill. —By this Bill it was proposed to provide for the sanitary registration of buildings by the appointment of a sanitary registration authority, under the control of the Local Government Board; that the Local Government Board should grant licenses in sanitary practice to certain persons and corporations ; that any buildings to be used as a school, college, hospital, asylum, hotel, or lodging-house, should not be used until a sanitary certificate has been issued for same in accordance with the provisions of the Act, which certificate should run for five years; and penalties were imposed for letting or occupying an uncertified building. The Yestry, however, opposed the Bill for the same reason as the Sanitation of Houses (Metropolis) Bill, and it was eventually dropped. Fire Brigade Expenses.— The Vestry, in December last, had before them a communication from the Metropolitan Board of Works, forwarding a statement of their reasons for proposing that the Fire Insurance Companies, as well as the ratepayers, shall contribute towards the cost of the enlargement of the Fire Brigade. It will be remembered that the present Fire Brigado Rate is limited to one half-penny in the £, with a contribution from the Insurance Companies of £35 per million pounds insured per annum, and the Yestry thought that an increase of £38,000 per annum, which an additional farthing in the £ would produce, in addition to the 33 creased contributions by the Fire Brigade Companies, to £10 per £1,000,000, would be sufficient for the purpose of the Fire Brigade, and they, therefore, addressed a communication to this effect to the Metropolitan Board of Works. The Metropolitan Board of Works introduced a Bill into Parliament to take power to increase the rate to a penny in the £, and also to increase the contributions of the Fire Insurance Companies; but the Insurance interest in the House of Commons was sufficient to stop the progress of the Bill, and it was eventually dropped. Sanitary Condition of the Parish.— It will be remembered that at the close of the last parochial year the Report of Mr. D. Cubitt Nichols, on the sanitary condition of the Parish, had just been received by the Vestry, and had been referred to a Special Committee for consideration. The Special Committee considered the Report, and made the following recommendations to the Vestry:— 1. That it is desirable that a constant water supply be provided, and that the matter be referred to a Committee to consider the question, and to report as to the portion of the Parish to which such constant supply should be first applied. 2. That it be referred to the Sanitary Committee to prepare Regulations under the 35th Section of the Sanitary Act, 1886, to bo applied to those houses in the Parish let in tenements, and in which the landlords are non-resident. 3. That it be referred to the Sanitary Committee to inspect houses in Little Bath Street, Great Bath Street, Little Sutton Street, Taylor's Row, Paved Place, Victoria Place, Mount Zion, Prime's Buildings, Wellington Place, York Buildings, and York Valley, and to report upon the desirability of the Vestry exercising the powers conferred on them by the thereto. 34 4. That it bo referred to the Sanitary Committee and Committee of Works to consider the desirability of providing galvanized iron pails with covers for the storage of dust, for all houses where the yards can only ho entered through the living rooms, or whoro a common dustbin cannot be provided by the Vestry. These recommendations were all approved by the Vestry, and the various references were made as suggested. The results so far are as follows:— Constant Water Supply.— The Vestry expressed the opinion that it was desirable to give a constant supply to the portion of the parish lying south of a line drawn along Percival Street, Corporation Row and Bowling Green Lane to Farringdon Road, thence up Farringdon Road and along Mount Pleasant to Phoenix Place; and decided to take the necessary steps to cause same to be carried out. The Metropolitan Board of Works were, in the first instance, applied to in July, 1886, to put in force its powers in the matter; but the Board replied that they had hitherto not taken action in the matter, and did not think it desirable to depart from their practice in the case of Clerkenwell. The Vestry then made application to the Local Government Board, and in October received from that Board copy of its correspondence with the New River Company on the matter, in which the Company stated their willingness to provide the supply, but stated that some few months must elapse before the district referred to could be dealt with. Soon after the close of the year to which this Report refers, the Vestry received a letter from the Company that they were taking steps to introduce the supply, and notices have been issued that the change would take place on the 27th September, 1887. 35 Regulations under Sect. 35 of the Sanitary Act, 1866. —The Vestry prepared a series of regulations under the 35th Section of the Sanitary Act, 1866, to be applied to tenement houses, and after considerable correspondence with the Local Government Board, these regulations have been finally approved, and steps are being taken to put same in force. A copy of these Regulations will be found at the end of this book as an Appendix. Insanitary Houses.- With regard to the houses referred to in the report of Mr. Cubitt Nichols, situated in Little and Great Bath Streets, Little Sutton Street, Taylor's Row, Paved Place, Victoria Place, Mount Zion, Prime's Buildings, Wellington Place, York Buildings and York Valley, and to which he drew attention with the view to the powers of the Vestry under the Artizans and Labourers Dwellings Act, 1868, being put in force in reference to them; the Vestry found that York Buildings and York Valley were in course of demolition; that Prime's Buildings and Wellington Place had been pulled down and the site cleared, and Mount Zion was in hand with the view to substantial repair. With regard to the other cases the Vestry were of opinion that no necessity exists for dealing with same under Torrens' Acts, the defects found being such as may be dealt with under the ordinary sanitary laws. Dust Pails.— No action has yet been taken in this matter, as the Vestry have been trying an experiment in the removal of dust daily from boxes placed on the footway in Exmouth Street, Myddelton Street, and Spencer Street, and have awaited the result. Houses Occupied by Poor Foreigners.—Among other Sanitary precautions the Vestry have directed their Sanitary 36 Officers to keep a strict supervision over the houses inhabited by the low class foreigners, whose ways of crowding together in large numbers are most objectionable, from both a sanitary and a moral point of view. Borough Members,—The Vestry desire to place on record their obligations to the Members of Parliament for the Borough of Finsbury, Captain Penton (Central Division), Colonel Duncan (Holborn Division), and James Rowlands, Esq. (Eastern Division) for the care and attention they have always given to the interests of the Parish. In local questions, both in and out of Parliament, in which they could be of service, these gentlemen have invariably taken a deep interest, and have shown a sympathy with local wants which entitle them to the thanks of the Vestry. Presentation to the Vestry of the Portrait of the Vestry Clerk.— A record of the year's proceedings would not be complete unless it contained the following extract from the Minutes of the Yestry of the 2nd December, 1886, as an incident of some interest in parochial work:— "The Rev. J. H. Pose, M.A., Vicar, reported having attended a large meeting of Subscribers and friends in that Vestry Hall on the previous Tuesday week, and received, on behalf of the Vestry, the very fine portrait of their esteemed Vestry Clerk, Mr. Paget, which now hung in that Vestry hall. It was now his pleasing duty to hand over the picture to the Vestry as something worthy of their acceptance, alike as a work of art, and also as a good memento of Mr. Paget. He need not say more, as a very full and faithful report of the presentation had already appeared, especially in the local papers." "Mr. Robson then presented the following address, which was handsomely engrossed on vellum, to the Vestry Clerk, 37 ???s a memento of the occasion, which was ordered to" be ??? ntered on the Minutes: On November 13th, 1856, Mr Robert Paget was elected as Vestry Clerk to the Parish of Clerkenwell, and commenced his labours on the 4th of the same month. After 30 years' service in that position, a ???esire was felt amongst men of all parties in the Parish that the event Should not be permitted to pass unnoticed. Accordingly a Committee was formed to consider the subject, and it was resolved that subscripions should be invited to purchase the excellent Portrait of Mr. Paget ???xhibited in the Royal Academy in the previous year, and painted by One of his talented artist sons (Mr. Sidney Paget), and present the Same to the Parish. The Committee required one hundred guineas or the purchase, but so admirably did the parishioners and others ???espond to the appeal, that it was found possible to present Mrs. Paget with a handsome Drawing-room Clock, with Candelabra to match, in ???ecognition of her husband's long and eminent services in Clerkenwell. The presentation was made by Mr. William Robson, Member of the Metropolitan Board of Works, Chairman of the Committee, to the Rev. John Henry Rose, M.A., Vicar of Clerkenwell, Chairman of the Vestry, as representing the parishioners, in the Vestry Hall, Rosoman Street, on the evening of Tuesday, November 23rd, 1886, in the presence of a large gathering of friends. The Committee further felt that a record of the event would be acceptable to Mr. Paget and his family, and consequently ordered these particulars to be engrossed on vellum, and signed by the Chairman, Treasurers, and Honorary Secretary, and presented to Mr. Paget, and it is signed accordingly. WILLIAM ROBSON, Member of the Metropolitan Board of Works. Chairman. JOSEPH JOHN GOODE, Vice-Chairman of the Holborn Union, &c. GEORGE ANTILL, Treasurers. Member of the Clerkenwell Vestry, &c. GEORGE AUGUSTUS POTTER, Captain 7th Volunteer Battalion King's Royal Rifles, Honorary Secretary. It was moved by Mr. Brooks, seconded by Mr. Davies, and unanimously Resolved—That the best thanks of the Vestry are due and are hereby given to the Subscribers for the purchase and presentation of the excellent portrait just received. 38 Mr. Paget expressed his deep sense of the great honour so kindly done to him by the Subscribers in acquiring the Portrait for the purpose, (which he had endeavoured to express at the Presentation) and to the Vestry for accepting same as worthy to occupy a place on the walls of their Board room, and also for the other Presents, in which gratitude Mrs. Paget and family warmly participated." Meetings.— The following is a list of the number of Meetings of the Vestry and its Committees during the year:— Vestry 45 Committee of Works 45 Sanitary Committee 31 Assessment Committee 25 Finance Committee 15 Parliamentary Committee 5 Sub-Committee of Works 7 Special Committees 18 Petty Sessions 4 195 By Order, ROBERT PAGET, Vestry Clerk. STATEMENT and ACCOUNT of all Moneys Received and Expended from 26th March, 1886, to 25th March, 1887, By the Vestry of the Parish of Saint James and Saint John, Clerkenwell. Folio in Ledger. RECEIPTS. Moneys received by the Vestry from 26th March, 1886, to 25th March, 1887. Moneys owing to the Vestry 25th March, 1887. (Estimated) Folio in Ledger. DISBURSEMENTS. Unpaid at 25th March, 1886. Incurred from 26th March, 1886 to 25 th March, 1887. Paid from !6th March, 1886, to 25th March, 1887. Unpaid 25th March, 1887. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £. s. d SEWER ACCOUNT. SEWER ACCOUNT. Balance brought forward from 25th March, 1886 415 19 7 87 Surveyor's salary, one third of 116 13 4 116 13 4 207 Capon, T., drain pipes, &c. 23 16 10 23 16 10 Received on Rates as follows: 208 Baldwin, E., do. 120 11 0 91 8 10 29 2 7 446 Rate made April, 1885 7 4 10 215 Waller & Co., gully grates, &c. 13 13 6 83 14 0 67 18 6 29 14 0 253 Fees for connecting private drains with sewers 127 5 8 Do., Urinal, King's Cross Road 170 14 0 170 14 0 Do., do , Chapel Place 42 0 0 42 0 0 257 Loan of drain rods, &c. 7 4 0 171 New River Co , Water to urinals 31 15 7 19 10 7 12 5 0 331 21st. Middlesex Volunteers, forming new drain in Prospect Row 16 13 9 230 Barrett, R. & Son, drain rods 4 9 8 2 17 11 305 Killing back, C., New Sewer in Jerusalem Court 154 10 6 154 10 6 33] Vestry of St. Pancras, Moiety of cost of Urinal, King's Cross Road 85 7 0 Do., do., York Street 123 1 4 123 1 4 138 Sewermen's wages 339 16 8 339 16 8 233 Rewards for information as to posting Bills in Urinals 3 0 0 3 0 0 174 New River Co., forming gully Holford Mews 5 9 10 239 Bawden. Mrs. Slops for Sewermen 6 4 0 6 4 0 311 Falberg, F., Flushers' boots 2 12 6 2 12 6 695 4 8 312 Clifford, R., Sewermen's boots.. 9 18 0 9 18 0 Balance against account at 25th March, 1887 328 4 6 328 Gay & Co., paint for urinals 13 6 0 13 6 0 337 Evans, H. D., Emptying cesspools, Colney Hatch Lane 1 16 0 1 16 0 1023 9 2 Collectors' Commission 1 4 9 0 1 9 1 6 6 222 15 1 1040 4 9 1022 6 2 239 10 8 Folio in Ledger RECEIPTS. Moneys received by the Vestry from 26th March, 18S6, to 25th March, 1887. Moneys owing to the Vestry 25th March, 1887 (Estimated) Folio in Ledger DISBURSEMENTS. Unpaid at 25th March, 1886 Incurred from 26th March, 1886 to 25th March, 1887. Paid from 26th March, 1886, to 25th March, 1887. Unpaid at 25th March. 1887. £ s. d. £ S. d. £ S. d. £ s. d. £ S. d. £ S. d. £ s. d. CONSOLIDATED RATE ACCOUNT. CONSOLIDATED RATE ACCOUNT. Received on Rates as follows: 199 Metropolitan Board of Works 1016!) 4 0 10169 4 0 463 Rate made April, 1884 0 16 8 Collectors' Commission 41 5 9 182 15 8 184 11 11 39 9 6 466 October, 1884 3 1 8 469 April, 1885 4 1 9 41 5 9 10351 19 8 10353 15 11 39 9 6 472 October, 1885 228 9 11 475 April, 1886 5436 17 3 Balance against account at 25th March, 1886 241 12 2½ 477 October, 1886 5340 18 1 100 0 0 199 Metropolitan Board of Works, Repayment in consequence of reduction in rateable value 19 11 6 10595 8 1½ Balance in favor of account at 25th March, 1887 438 8 8½ 11033 16 10 11033 16 10 LIGHTING ACCOUNT LIGHTING ACCOUNT Received on Rates as follows: 175 Gas Light & Coke Co., Lighting 831 1 3 2798 9 5 2774 0 8 855 10 0 500 Rate made April, 1883 0 2 2 214 Clark, H., Gas work 74 0 10 394 5 11 373 8 10 94 17 11 505 October, 1884 5 8 6 328 Sugg & Co., repairs to lamp opposite "Angel" 7 5 0 7 5 0 508 October, 1885 1142 0 11 511 April, 1886 1362 0 7 215 Waller & Co., Lamp Columns 43 17 6 29 6 0 14 12 6 512 October, 1886 844 15 0 515 0 0 Collectors' Commission 23 19 11 55 10 7 65 7 6 14 3 0 251 Sundry persons, Repair of damage to lamps 20 11 11 936 7 0 3292 3 5 3249 7 0 979 3 5 Balance against Account at 25th March, 1887 3374 19 1 Balance against account at 25th March, 1886 349 2 6 223 10 5 3598 9 6 3588 9 6  £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. WHARF ACCOUNT WHARF ACCOUNT. Balance on Superintendent's Petty Cash Account brought forward 0 12 3 Watering, Dusting, Slopping, and Cartage. 381 Stubbs, W., Rent of Wharf, less tax 148 12 6 594 10 0 594 10 0 148 12 6 409 Received for Ashes and breeze 434 3 8 81 0 0 418 Do. Street Sweepings 87 0 0 12 0 0 423 Phillips, T. J., Rent of 27, Commercial Road, less tax 10 17 6 43 10 0 43 10 0 10 17 6 421 Do. Removal of Trade Refuse 159 13 0 393 Lambeth Vestry, Rates of Wharf 186 13 4 186 13 4 382 W. Stubbs, Use of jetty for barge loading 5 12 6 3 2 6 394 Do. do. 27, Commercial Road 10 18 8 10 18 8 Do., Rent of rooms at Wharf 45 0 0 9 0 0 395 Queen's Taxes for Wharf, and 27, Commercial Road 31 10 2 31 10 2 329 J. Burton, Use of jetty for barge loading 14 7 6 383 Lambeth Waterworks Co., Water 8 2 8 24 9 8 28 7 4 4 6 0 384 South Metropolitan Gas Co., Gas 18 16 6 43 13 6 43 13 9 18 16 3 331 Harrison, Barber & Co., for five dead horses 10 0 0 210 Monk, G., Repairing Dust-shoots 14 19 3 14 19 3 389 Hay, Straw, &c. 90 0 10 361 8 6 365 3 6 86 5 10 246 Radford & Co., Repairs to Water Van 0 5 0 391 Oats, &c 130 9 1 371 13 0 401 2 4 100 19 9 15 0 0 397 Sun Fire Office, Insurance 2 12 6 2 12 6 H. Paine, Horse 331 Stubbs, W. do. 2 8 6 2 8 6 ' Do., Moiety of cost of Paving Jetty 44 16 5 44 16 6 Do., Cement, Rubbish Shooting, &c. 8 11 7 6 2 10 2 8 9 154 Wagse 2410 11 8 2410 11 8 398 Ford, F., Veterinary Surgeon, and Farriery 21 5 9 85 6 7 83 1 10 23 10 6 Price, T. S., Keep of Horse at Straw-yard 4 19 6 4 19 6 Veterinary College 2 0 2 2 0 388 Smith. Parfrey & Hitchings, Repairing Wheels 13 12 9 57 0 1 48 0 11 22 11 11 433 Fitzgerald, E. G., Timber for Vans 16 2 7 27 8 4 43 10 11 406 Sandell & Sons do. 10 16 1 10 16 1 431 Smith, J. A., Ironwork for Vans 12 1 9 104 13 0 99 8 9 17 6 0 432 Smith, G. M., Paint for Vans.&c. 17 14 7 16 8 0 1 6 7 314 Carson & Son. Paint 0 13 11 0 13 11 385 Heeks, M..Dust Baskets & Repairs 3 0 10 3 0 1 6 0 11 387 Stephens, Repairs to Ladders 0 3 6 0 3 6 386 Proffitt, J., Harness and repairs 11 5 2 48 4 10 46 18 2 12 11 10 218 Seymour. G. W., Ironmongery, Tools. &c 13 6 9 6 9 6 19 16 3 333 Preston, W., do. do. 45 2 0 6 3 7 38 18 5 Do., do. Wheelwrights' Tools 17 18 6 17 18 6 317 Moser & Son, Wheelwrights' Tools 7 9 9 7 9 9 381 Stubbs, W., Horse hire 17 0 7 89 0 0 88 13 7 17 7 0 324 Varney, W. do. 112 17 3 112 17 3 Carried forward 756 13 11 120 2 6 Carried forward 533 1 1 4775 0 5 4784 5 2 523 16 4 Folio in Ledger. RECEIPTS. Moneys received by the Vestry from 26th March, 1886 to 25th March, 1887. Moneys owing to the Vestry 25th March. 1887, (Estimated.) Folio in Ledger. DISBURSEMENTS. Unpaid at 25th March, 1886. Incurred from 26th March. 1886, to 25th March, 1887. Paid from 26th March, 1886, to 25th March, 1887. Unpaid 25th March,. 1887. £ s. d £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s d. Brought forward 756 13 11 120 2 6 Brought forward 533 1 1 4775 0 5 4784 5 2 523 16 4 332 Five Horses 350 0 0 350 0 0 277 Committee's Expenses 7 19 8 7 19 8 287 Miscellaneous Expenditure by Superintendent 54 11 4 54 11 4 405 Harrison, Barber Co., Oil and Grease 6 16 0 6 16 0 406 Sandell & Son, Sawdust for Horse 0 16 0 0 16 0 404 Walker & Son, Brooms 2 17 9 2 17 9 325 Buck, J., Chaff Knives 0 12 0 0 12 0 399 Harris, S. & H., Harness Composition 3 12 0 3 12 0 402 Davies, J., Writing Names on Vans 0 17 0 0 17 0 403 Ward, W. & E., Removing Old Tins 2 7 6 2 7 6 419 Barges, Removing Hard Core 34 10 0 34 10 0 239 Bawden, Mrs., Dustmen's Jackets, &c. 9 2 0 9 2 0 219 Dunhill, H., Carmen's Jackets. 0 19 6 0 19 6 203 Heard, E., Removal of Dust at Muswell Hill 3 15 0 15 0 0 15 0 0 3 15 0 Balance against Account at 25th 756 13 11 536 16 1 5265 1 2 5274 5 11 627 11 4 March, 1887 (carried to General Rate Account) 4518 2 5 Balance in Mr. Gore's hands at 25th March, 1887 0 10 6 5274 16 4 120 3 6 5274 16 4 General account. General account. Paving, Paving Materials. Ballast, &c. Balance in favour of Account brought forward 2149 5 3½ 201 Griffiths, J. J., Paving with Old Material— Received on Rates as follows: Lower Rosoman Street 2 16 11 2 16 11 538 Rate made April, 1883, 2nd part 0 8 8 Pentonville Road Sewer Trenches 3 13 3 545 April, 1884, 1st part 13 3 548 „ 2nd „ 7 9 Wellington St. (footway) 192 15 4 192 15 4 3 13 3 2 1 0 Berkley street (footway) 127 8 8 127 8 8 551 October, 1884, 1st part 2 9 6 High Street by "Angel" 554 „ 2nd „ 13 11 3 16 0 9 and "Blue Coat Boy" (footway) 44 12 4 44 12 4 Carried forward 2168 15 8½ Carried forward 371 6 6 367 13 3 3 3 3  £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. Brought forward 2168 16 8½ Brought forward 071 0 0 557 April, !885, 1st part 9 10 9 St. James Bldgs. (footway] 55 14 6 55 14 6 2nd ,, 18 2 1 Goswell Bd. (carriageway: 50 0 0 50 0 0 27 12 10 205 Mowlem, J. & Co., Paving Materials 137 6 8 978 14 0 543 8 4 572 11 4 563 October, 1885, 1st part 342 15 2 566 „ 2nd „ 2284 0 0 Paving footways— 2626 15 2 St James' Walk 65 6 8 66 6 3 569 April, 1886,1st part 8151 14 10 Sarah Place and Northampton Buildings 72 8 1 72 8 1 572 6809 14 10 14961 9 8 Suffolk Street 32 16 4 32 16 4 574 October, 1886,1st part 8011 9 8 ' St. John's Square 44 6 4 44 6 4 576 ,, 2nd ,, 4223 13 8 Crossing Baker Street 22 19 9 22 19 9 12235 2 11 2725 0 0 331 Patent Victoria Stone Co., Paving Rawstorne Place 118 13 2 118 13 2 RENTS. 246 Guardians of the Poor of the Holborn Union, Rent of Board Room of Vestry 40 0 0 304 202 Val de Travers Asphalte Co. Jobbing Works 0 12 6 0 12 6 1 5 0 Paving— Suffolk Street 142 8 6 142 8 6 247 47 & 49, Northampton-road 68 8 0 249 Ell, 245-7, Pentonville Road 117 18 8 29 9 8 246 Engine House, Penton Street to Midsummer, 1884, per Messrs. 1 19 91 Turnmill Street at condy and Mitchell's 3 18 2 3 18 2 Northampton Buildings and Sarah Place 119 9 8 119 9 8 228 5 10 REPAIR OP TRENCHES. Arlington Street 154 0 0 154 0 0 177 Gas Light & Coke Co. 202 5 10 60 18 1 335 Brunswick Rock Asphalte Co. Paving footway in Exmouth Street 20 16 0 20 16 0 174 New River Co. 445 7 6 105 2 6 222 Post Office Telegraphs 2 0 6 649 13 10 203 Heard, E., Ballast, Flints, &c... 45 16 0 242 3 8 204 9 1 83 10 7 256 License Fees for the erection of hoardings 74 15 6 322 Holborn District Board of Works, Repair of part of St. John's Lane 17 3 0 17 3 0 256 Coal-plates, cutting holes for 3 9 0 258 Old Stone sold 1 7 0 231 Hornsey Local Board, Maintenance of Colney Hatch Lane 95 6 2 95 5 2 259 Paving repairs for private individuals, exclusive of amounts deposited for boarding licenses 172 11 9 337 Limmer Asphalte Paving Co., 65 16 8 65 16 2 315 Jackson, F. A. & Son, Hire of Steam Roller 63 12 0 31 4 0 32 8 9 261 Pines and costs recovered under Sale of Pood and Drugs Act 67 5 6 252 Do., under Local Management and Nuisance Removal Acts... 64 16 6 325 Gagan, J., Dressing Stone. 25 7 6 25 7 6 171 New River Co., Water and Meter Rent, Season 1886 221 10 9 221 10 9 273 Inquests, amounts received for use of Coroner's Court 20 0 0 In addition to the paving works above specified, the sides of King's Cross and Farringdon Roads were repaved by the London Street Tramways Co., in connection with their works when laying their lines in lieu of paying the Vestry at per yard for the paving taken to by them.] 835 London Street Tramways Co., Payment of paving in King's Cross Road and Farringdon Road (in addition to repaving the road from kerb to kerb) ... 150 0 0 329 Guardians or Governors of the Poor, Repayment of Valuation List Expenses from the Poor Rate 472 11 0 Carried forward 33924 12 2½ 2920 10 3 Carried forward 779 8 4 2388 14 4 2410 2 10 757 19 0 Folio in Ledger. RECEIPTS. Moneys received by the Vestry from 26th March, 1886, to 25th March, 1887 Moneys owing to the Vestry 25th March, 1887 (Estimated) Folio in Ledger. DISBURSEMENTS Unpaid at 25th March, 1886 Incurred from 26th March, 1886, to 25th March, 1887 Paid from 26th March, 1885 ,to 25th March, 1886 Unpaid at 25th March 1887 Brought forward 33924 12 2½ 2920 10 3 Brought forward 779 8 4 2388 14 4 2410 2 10 757 19 10 200 School Board for London, Repayment of part of Precept in consequence of reduction in rateable value 25 15 0 RENTS, RATES AND TAXES. 240 Penton, Cant. F.T. .Ground Rent Pentonville-rd. & Penton-pl. 13 1 0 26 2 0 26 2 0 13 1 0 246 Alexandra Palace Co., Final 0 1 0 241 Reed, T., ground rent of 47 & 49, Northampton-road 5 16 0 23 4 0 23 4 0 5 16 0 Sundry persons for disinfection 3 3 0 243 Metropolitan Railway Company, acknowledgement for urinal in Farringdon-road 0 10 0 0 10 0 Fee for analysis of butter 0 2 6 263 Marquis Northampton, groundrent of Mortuary 0 9 8 0 9 8 171 New River Company, Ground Rent of Vestry Hall 9 13 4 9 13 4 Do., Water Rate for Vestry Hall 4 16 0 4 16 0 Do., do., for 49, Northampton Road and Mortuary 6 14 7 6 14 7 Do., Acknowledgement for Fountain and two Urinals in Hardwick-street and Arlington-street 0 3 0 0 3 0 264 Insurance of Vestry Hall, West of England Fire Office 1 5 0 1 5 0 265 Do. on 47 & 49, Northampton-rd., Royal Exchange Assurance Office 0 9 0 0 9 0 266 Do. of Mortuary, Phoenix Fire Office 0 15 0 0 15 0 267 Queen's Taxes for Vestry Hall 5 19 0 5 19 0 Do. Mortuary 4 7 8 4 7 6 Do. 49, Northampton-road 3 5 0 3 6 0 Income Tax on Interest on Loans 25 4 6 25 4 6 269 Rates for Vestry Hall 18 19 2 18 19 2 Do. Mortuary 22 15 0 22 15 0 Do. 49, Northampton-road... 9 4 2 9 4 2 200 PRECEPTS. School Board for London [A repayment of £25 15s. from this amount, see contra] 12916 4 0 12916 4 0 Carried forward 33953 14 5½ 2920 10 3 Carried forward 798 5 4 15468 14 3 15490 2 9 776 16 10  £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s d. Brought forward 33953 14 5¾ 2920 10 3 Brough forword 1 ! ■ SALARIKS AND WAGES. 85 Vestry Clerk 400 0 0 400 0 0 Do. On account of Poor Rate and Poor law work 100 0 0 100 0 0 87 233 6 8 233 6 8 89 First Assistant Clerk 250 0 0 250 0 0 91 Second ditto 200 0 0 200 0 0 93 Third ditto 145 0 0 145 0 0 95 Fourth ditto 135 0 0 135 0 0 292 Temporary ditto 51 0 0 51 0 0 97 Surveyor's Clerk 100 0 0 100 0 0 99 Medical Officer of Health 200 0 0 200 0 0 101 Analyst of Food, &c. 100 0 0 loo 0 0 103 Solicitors 100 0 0 100 0 0 114 Inspectors 436 16 0 436 16 0 123 Mortuary Keeper 41 2 0 41 2 0 130 Paviors and Masons, including Labourers 1394 14 7 1394 14 7 1278 15 11 1278 15 11 150 Do., extra for Removal of Snow 164 15 7 164 15 7 167 Stone Breakers 23 14 6 23 14 6 170 Men delivering Lists of Officers, Sanitary precautions, &c. 7 4 0 7 4 6 Collectors' Commission 131 4 6 556 4 0 538 0 4 149 8 3 SUPERANNUATIONS. 109 Mortlock, Mrs. 4 14 6 4 14 6 161 Cook, Mrs. 13 0 0 13 0 0 Clarkson 14 14 0 14 14 0 162 Bawden, Mrs. 3 10 0 3 10 0 LOANS. 187 Atlas Assurance Society, 33rd and 34th Instalments 4217 4 3 981 5 3 3235 19 0 Ditto Interest 182 10 3 182 10 3 189 Atlas Assurance Society,12th Instalment 9450 0 0 1050 0 0 8400 0 0 Ditto Interest 366 13 5 366 13 5 191 Atlas Assurance Society,11th Instalment 2000 0 0 200 0 0 1800 0 0 Ditto Interest 78 1 2 78 1 '2 193 Metropolitan Board of Works, 10th Instalment 1265 0 0 115 0 0 1150 0 0 Ditto Interest 46 7 2 46 7 2 194 Metropolitan Board of Works, 5th Instalment 5200 0 0 325 0 0 4875 0 0 Ditto Interest 179 3 1 179 3 1 Carried forward 33953 14 5½ 2920 10 3 Carried forward 23061 14 1 22275 1 3 24949 11 2 20387 4 0 Folio in Ledger. RECEIPTS. Moneys received by the Vestry from 26th March, 1886, to 25th March, 1887. Moneys owing to the Vestry 25th March, 1887. (Estimated) Folio in Ledger. DISBURSEMENTS. Unpaid at 26th March 1886. Incurred from 26th March, 18S6 to 25th March 1887. Paid from 26th March, 18S6, to 25th March, 1887. Unpaid at 25th March 1887. Brought forward 33953 14 5½ 2920 10 3 Brought forward 23061 14 1 22275 1 3 24949 11 2 2038 4 0 195 Metropolitan Board of Works, 3rd Istalement 1800 C 0 100 0 0 1700 0 0 Ditto Interest 60 7 6 60 7 6 DONATIONS, &c. 1 310 Metropolitan Drinking Fountain Association, Annual donation 2 2 0 2 2 0 332 Finsbury Dispensary, Donation in aid of funds 10 10 0 10 10 0 335 Royal Chest Hospital ditto 10 10 0 10 10 0 ARTIZANS' DWELLINGS ACTS, 1868-82. 268 Dalton, T. J., Compensation for Bolton Court 441 0 0 441 0 0 Do., Ground Rent of do. 10 10 0 7 0 0 3 10 0 334 Coldham & Isaacson, Mr.Dalton's Costs, including Arbitrator's fee 102 19 0 102 19 10 103 Boulton, Sons & Sandeman, the Vestry's Costs 46 1 5 46 1 5 SUNDRY BILLS. 89 R. E. Paget, commission on rents collected 3 8 3 3 8 3 103 Boulton, Sons & Sandeman, Sundry costs out of pocket 2 13 9 2 13 9 105 Cheshire.F.,and Wife, attending Holborn Guardian Meetings. 5 4 0 4 0 175 Gas Light & Coke Co., Gas at Inspector Cheshire's house 4 7 7 4 7 210 Monk, G., Smith's work 27 0 6 90 10 11 99 14 5 17 17 0 212 Sarjeant. E. H., Carpenter swork 8 0 4 67 15 9 59 4 0 17 2 1 213 Dore, J. R., Plumber's work 98 2 6 85 6 4 18 16 2 215 Waller, G. & Co., Guard Posts, &c. 17 4 6 17 4 6 216 Mc Dougall Bros., Disinfectants 151 8 11 151 8 11 35653 14 51 2020 10 3 218 Seymour, G. W , Tools 18 13 2 18 13 2 Carried forward 4915 18 1 23399 18 0 26177 6 10 22138 9 3 Brought forward 33953 14 5½ 2920 10 3 221 Terry, J., Addresses to Queen and Duchess of Albany, on Death of Duke of Albany in 1834 6 6 0 6 6 0 223 Lewis, J., Brooms 49 1 0 49 1 0 225 Goode, W. J., Printing 57 0 6 294 1 0 281 4 0 67 7 6 228 Lill, H., Stationary 16 8 1 70 14 0 68 5 11 18 16 2 229 Peacock, E., Repairing Trucks 6 5 6 6 16 6 232 Ayton, A. W., Chandlery 6 4 7 22 5 1 20 4 7 7 5 11 235 Adevertisements 17 10 3 17 10 3 235 Sanitas Co., Disinfectants 5 1 6 5 1 6 237 Newman, J., Billposting 1 4 0 1 4 0 238 Coals tor vestry Hall & Mortuary 30 3 0 30 3 0 239 Bawden, Mrs., Sweepers' Slops 12 17 0 12 17 0 272 Balance of License Fees returned 3 16 5 3 10 5 275 Committee of "Works, refreshments 2 4 9 2 4 9 278 Sanitary Committee do. 1 7 18 4 7 18 4 282 Assessment Committee do., and conveyance 27 11 2 27 11 2 313 Finance Committee do. 0 14 6 0 14 6 286 Auditors do. 1 0 11 1 0 11 283 Deputations, conveyance 4 10 6 4 10 6 286 Miscellaneous Expenses 14 18 3 14 18 3 297 Mortality Returns for Medical Officer 4 2 0 4 2 0 299 Petty Expenses, Postage, &c. (Clerk) 34 9 0 34 9 0 300 Do., do. (Surveyor) 9 1 3 9 1 3 278 Do.. Adulteration Purchases, Summons fees, &c. (Inspector) 32 0 0 32 0 0 303 Glanvill T.. Inspectors' Suits 25 0 0 25 0 0 320 Everitt & Son, Inspectors' ' Trousers 4 4 0 4 4 0 305 Cheque Book 1 5 0 1 5 0 London Fever Hospital, expenses of maintenance of patients 37 16 0 37 16 0 307 Shaw & Sons, Law Books 0 4 0 0 4 0 Watson & Son, Surveyor's Instruments 1 0 0 1 0 0 Hawkey, J. & R-. Matting 1 9 3 1 9 3 308 Hansard & Son, Parliamentary Papers 2 0 6 2 0 6 Bloomfield,R. Z. ,Inpectors'Caps 2 2 0 2 2 0 309 Kelly & Co., Directory 1 12 6 1 12 6 Beal, E. W., Magistrates' Clerk Fees under Valuation Act 1 3 4 1 3 4 310 Cove, Repairing Locks 0 8 0 0 8 0 Carried forward 13395 14 5½ 2920 10 3 Carried forward 24994 11 3 24136 18 10 26899 11 3 2223 18 10 Folio in Ledger. RECEIPTS. Moneys received by the Vestry from 26th March, 1886, to 25th March, 1887. Moneys owing to the Vestry 25th March, 1887 (Estimated) Folio in Ledger. DISBURSEMENTS. Unpaid at 25th March, 1886. Incurred from 26th March, 1886 to 25th March, 1887. Paid from 25th March, 1886, to 25th March, 1887. Unpaid at 25th March, 1887. £ s d £ d £ s d £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s, d Brought forward 33953 14 5½ 2920 10 3 Brought forward 24994 11 3 24136 18 10 26899 11 3 22231 18 10 . 311 Austin, J., Inspectors' Boots 4 12 0 4 12 0 334 Cronch, E. do. 3 6 0 8 6 0 315 Moore, J. & Son,Winding Clocks, Vestry Hall and St. James" Church 8 10 0 8 10 0 316 Zuccato & Wolff, Trypograph Papers 0 12 6 0 12 6 320 Jackson, E., Desk Slope 0 4 0 0 4 0 323 Eyre & Spottiswoode, Parliamentary Papers 3 0 0 3 0 0 325 Castle, H. J. & Son, Valuers' Fees re New River Company's Assessment 53 14 0 14 0 326 Marchant, J., Coals for Melting Snow 23 12 6 23 12 6 329 Bumsted & Co., Salt for do 11 10 0 55 0 0 66 10 0 530 Unite, J., Waterproof Coats for Sweepers, &c. 22 16 0 22 16 0 Bugden, T., do. for Inspectors 8 18 6 8 18 6 333 Testimonial to Mr. W. Pierpoint as Churchwarden 15 15 0 15 15 0 833 Pfeil & Co., Fire Devils for Melting Snow 4 0 0 4 0 0 333 Preston & Co., Tools 20 2 6 0 17 6 19 5 0 334 O' Connor, Mrs. J., Moiety of fine of i.5 for selling adulterated milk, returned 2 10 0 2 10 0 336 Piper, Mrs. do. of fine of £3 do. 1 10 0 1 10 0 Billinge, R , Dusters, &c. 8 4 1 8 4 1 Wenham Patent Gas Lamp Co.. Lamps in Board Room 28 10 0 28 10 0 425 Removals to Mortuary 4 0 0 4 0 0 Carried forward 33953 14 51 2920 10 3 Carried forward 25028 17 3 24382 19 11 27132 3 4 22279 13 10 33953 14 5½ 2920 10 3 Brought forward 250u8 17 3 24382 19 11 27132 3 4 22278 13 10 427 Disinfections 1 4 6 1 4 6 25028 17 3 24384 4 5 27133 7 10 22279 13 10 Deficiency on Wharf Account (being the cost of Dusting, Slopping, and Watering the Parish for the year) 4513 2 5 Balance in Clerk's hands on Current Expenses Account at 25th March, 1887 45 8 5 31696 18 8 Balance in favour of account at 25th March, 188 2256 15 9½ 33953 14 5½ 2920 10 3 33953 14 5½ TREES ACCOUNT. £ s. d. Balance against account at 25th March. 1887 3 15 0 Balance against account at 25th March, 1886 3 10 0 330 Shillingford, G., Pruning Trees 0 5 0 0 5 0 215 Waller & Co, Gratings for Trees 9 9 0 9 9 0 337 Lovell, S., Supplying and Planting Trees 5 13 3 5 13 3 3 15 0 15 7 3 3 15 0 15 2 3 ABSTRACT. RECEIPTS. Owing to the Vestry at 25th March, 1887. EXPENDITURE. Owing by the Vestry at 25th March, 1887. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. Sewer Account 695 4 8 Sewer Account 0 0 0 Sewer Account 1023 9 2 Sewer Account 239 10 8 Met. Consolidated do. 11033 16 10 Met. Consolidated do. 100 0 0 Met. Consolidated do. 10595 8 1½ Met. Consolidated do. 39 9 6 Lighting do. 3374 19 1 Lighting do. 515 0 0 Lighting do. 3598 9 6 Lighting do 979 3 5 wharf do. 756 13 11 Wharf do. 120 2 6 Wharf do. 5274 5 11 Wharf do. 776 16 10 General do. 33953 14 5½ General do. 2920 10 3 General do. 27133 7 10 General do †22279 13 10 Planting Trees 0 0 0 Planting Trees do. 0 0 0 Planting Trees do. 3 15 0 Planting Trees 15 2 3 £47628 15 6½ Bal. at Bank 2139 14 7 ,, in Clerk's hands 45 8 5 ., in Supt. hand 0 10 5 2185 13 5 £49814 8 11½ £3655 12 9 £49814 8 11½ £24329 16 6 † This amount includes the sum of £21,160 19s. 0d., payable by instalments. PURSUANT to the 195th Section of the Metropolis Local Management Act. We hereby certify that we have carefully examined the respective Accounts of the Vestry of the Parish of Saint James and Saint John. Clerkenwell, for the year ending Lady-day, 1SS7, and that we find them to be true and correct in all particulars, and we hereby sign the same in token thereof. Dated this ninth day of June. 18S7. JOHN BONE LEWIS. G. J. BRAILEY. A. CLAUSS. GEO. W. TILLETT, Auditors. To the Vestry of the Parish of St. James and St. John, Clerkenwell. WM. FEARY, Gentlemen,— We, the undersigned Auditors of the Accounts of the Parish of St. James and St John, Clerkenwell. having completed our audit for the year ended March 25th, 1887, have to express our satisfaction at the manner in which the Accounts have been kept, and we are anxious to report our further approval of the manner in which we have been assisted by the Vestry Clerk and his principal Assistant; and notwithstanding the enormous increase in account-keeping of late years, we are nevertheless pleased to find that the work has been done in the most satisfactory manner. Dated this 9th day of June, 1887. JOHN BONE LEWIS, A. CLAUSS, W. FEARY, G. J. BRAILEY. GEO. W: TILLETT. SUMMARY STATEMENT OF CONTRACTS FOE THE PERFORMANCE OF GENERAL WORKS AND THE SUPPLY OF MATERIALS. Date. Name of Contractor. Nature of Work to be performed or Materials supplied. Period. Price. 1886. March 30th W. E. Bridges 40-lb. Oats Three months from March 25th, 1886 19/10 per quarter ditto FT. Paine Hay, Straw and Clover ditto Market prices April 1st J. Mowlem & Co. Paving Materials One year, from March 25th, 1886 At Schedule of Prices ditto J. Mowlem & Co. Broken Guernsey Granite ditto 13/9 per cubic yard ditto E. Heard Ballast, Flints, &c. ditto At Schedule of Prices April 8th W. J. Goode Printing ditto ditto ditto J. Mowlem & Co. Paving Sundry Streets At Schedule of Prices July 13 th W. Macklin 40-lb. Oats Three months from 24th June, 1886 20/9 per quarter July 13th H. Paine Hay, Straw and Clover ditto Market prices October 5th W. E. Bridges 40-lb. Oats Three months from Sept. 29th, 1886 20/4 per quarter SUMMARY STATEMENT OF CONTRACTS—continued. Date. Name of Contractor. Nature of Work to be performed or Material supplied. Period. Price. 1886. October 5th H. Paine Hay, Straw and Clover Three months from Sept. 29th, 1886 Market prices Dec. 16th C. Killingback 12-in. pipe Sewer, Jerusalem Court £147 ditto G. Waller & Co. Urinal, Chapel Place £42 Dec. 21st W. E. Bridges 38-lb. Oats Three months from 25th Dec. 1886 15/- per quarter ditto H. Paine Hay, Straw and Clover ditto Market prices 1887. Feb.24th C. Killingback 12-inch pipe Sewer, York Street £118 ditto Limmer AsphalteCo. Paving Vineyard Gardens 8/4 per yard super ditto J. Mowlem & Co. Paving sundry side Streets Schedule of prices 53 REPORT of the COMMITTEE OF WORKS on DUSTING, SLOPPING, &c., For the year to 25th March, 1887. The Committee beg to present their Report for the year ending on the 25th March last, of the operations and results of the system of doing the Dusting, Slopping and "Watering of the Parish, by this Vestry's own staff, as submitted by the Clerk, and approved and adopted by the Committee. Dusting.—During the year there have been 7,341 loads of dust, and 272½ loads of trade refuse removed, 132 freights of ashes and breeze, containing 8,316 chaldrons, have been removed from the Wharf, for which a sum of £391 17s. 11d. has been received, being an average of £2 19s. 5d. per freight against £3 18s., £5 2s. 11d., and £7 15s. 11d. for the three previous years. 20 freights of hardcore have also been removed, for which barges have been hired at a cost of £34 10s. Street Sweepings.—During the year 3,914 loads of street sweepings were removed from the Parish, 276 of which were collected late on Saturday nights, 123 freights were disposed of, 76 being sold for £76 10s., and 47 being removed free. 54 Watering.—The watering was done mainly by the Vestry's stall, but for 72 days an average of nearly 5 horses per day were hired of Mr. Stubbs and Mr. Varney for the purpose. Cartage.—The horses and carts have also been employed during tho year in carting stone, refuse from 205 gullies, sewer refuse (14 loads), and 84½ loads of rubbish, the cost of which would have amounted to £114, if the Vestry had to hire horses carts and men for the purpose, at say 12s. 6d. per day. Horses.—Five of the horses which have boon in the Vestry's employment since the establishment of the Wharf died during the year, "Barrett," on the 22nd April, from rupture, "Williams," on the 27th April, from farcy, "Brighty," on the 26th August, from twisted gut, "Harrison," destroyed on the 26th October, being unable to stand, and "Osborne," on the 16th February, 1887, from twisted gut. Four horses were purchased on the 21st May, and one on the 5th October, for the sum of £350 ; but of the first four one suffered from fever in the feet, and was unable to work for a considerable time, and it was ultimately sold for £15. The Vestry therefore possessed 16 horses at the close of the year. Hiring of horses was resorted to as above stated for watering purposes, and in consequence of the heavy snowfalls in December and January, horses were also hired at that time to assist in clearing the streets. Vans and Carts.— The number of vans and carts at the close of the year was 11 vans, 12 carts, and 12 water vans. Two now carts have been constructed by the Wheelwright during the year. Fodder.—The fodder account amounts to £733 1s. 6d., being an average of 15s. 10d. per horse per week—a reduction from last year of £97 on the total, or 2s. 7d. per horse per week. The Net Expenditure for the year ended the 25th March, 1887, is shown by the following Account:— Receipts. £ s. d. Expenditure. £ s. d. For Ashes and Breeze 391 17 11 Rent, less Tax 594 10 0 Trade Refuse removal 159 13 0 Do., 27, Commercial Road 43 10 0 Street Sweepings 76 10 0 Queen's Taxes 31 10 2 Use of berths for barge loading Stubbs, Rent of Mr. Gore's late 5 0 0 Parochial Rates 197 12 0 Gas 43 13 6 Apartments 36 0 0 Water 24 9 8 Horse sold to Mr. Paine 15 0 0 Five Horses 350 0 0 Five dead horses sold 10 0 0 Pepairing Dust Shoots 14 19 3 Payment for damage to Van 0 5 0 Moiety of Cost of Repaying Jetty 44 16 5 Oats, &c. 371 13 0 694 5 11 Hay, Straw and Clover 361 8 6 733 1 6 Veterinary Surgeon and Farriery 92 8 1 Insurance 5 1 0 Wages, Superintendent 163 16 0 Horsekeeper and assistance 116 6 6 Clerk 65 0 0 Slopmen 341 17 10 Dustmen 659 15 4 Watering 116 7 0 Barge Loaders 318 13 10 Dust Sifting 463 7 6 Cartage of Stone, &c. 28 19 0 2274 3 0 Horse Hire 201 17 3 Committee Expenses 7 19 8 Barges Removing Hardcore 34 10 0 Carried forward 694 5 11 Carried forward 4694 1 4 Receipts— continued. £ s. d. Expenditure— continued. £ s. d. Brought forward 694 5 11 Brought forward 4694 1 4 Balance. or the net charge for the year 5,042 15 3 Removing Old Tins 2 7 6 Harness and Repairs 48 4 10 Shovels. Scoops, &c. 17 3 9 Baskets 3 0 1 Dustmen's Jackets, &c. 10 1 6 Wheelwright's Wages 136 8 8 Repairs to Wheels 57 0 1 Timber 27 8 4 Iron, Ironwork, Bolts, &e. 139 0 9 Paint 18 8 6 Tools 17 18 6 Writing Names on Vehicles 0 17 0 397 1 10 Rubbish Shooting, &c. 8 11 7 Oil and Grease 6 16 0 Harness Composition 3 12 0 Removal of bust, Muswell Hill 15 0 0 Other smaller payments 59 0 7 5265 1 2 Depreciation— Buildings and permanen work 1/29th 100 0 0 Horses, Vans, and othe stock 1/9th 372 0 0 472 0 0 £5,737 1 2 £5737 1 2 57 An examination of the above account shows that with the exception of the purchase of the five horses for £350, the gross expenditure is £50 lower than for the preceding year, and the Committee deem this satisfactory as showing that the expenditure over which the Vestry has control is not increasing. On the other hand, the continued fall in the price received for ashes, and the reduced amount received for street sweepings, has had the effect of increasing the net expenditure by about £174. Adding the cost of the horses, £350, an increase of £524 is shown over last year's cost. The Committee would, however, again compare the result with the contracting system as still carried out in Holborn. The area of that district is 167 acres, with between 3,000 and 4,000 inhabited houses. The contract for the work for that district was, for the year under review, about £6,300. Clerkenwell has an area of 380 acres, with between 7,000 and 8,000 inhabited houses, and the cost was £6,485 (adding £1,443 for sweepers' wages, to the net amount shown above); this comparison appearing to show that if Clerkenwell were still adhering to the old system of contracts, the cost would be many hundreds, if not some thousands, of pounds greater than it is at present. The following is a statement of the stock at the Wharf on the 25th March last, with the Committee's estimate of the value STABLE. £ s. d. £ s. d. Sixteen horses at an average value of £44 704 0 0 Twenty-two sets of harness at £ 210s. 55 0 0 Nosebags, Loin Cloths 10 10 0 769 10 0 LOFT. Gas Engine 40 0 0 Bean Crusher 9 0 0 Sundries— Chaff-cutters and boxes, &c., Weighing Machine, Measures, &c. 8 0 0 Forward 57 0 0 826 10 0 58 Forward 826 10 0 VANS AND CARTS. Twelve Water Vans (10 at £25, 2 at £20) 290 0 0 Eleven Slop Vans (at £40) 440 0 0 Six Carts (at £18 10s.) 111 0 0 Two new Carts (£35 and £28) 63 0 0 Four Dobbin Carts (since sold for £9) 9 0 0 913 0 0 WHEELWRIGHT'S SHOP. Tools and Fixtures 40 10 0 Jetty Box, Ladders, Barrows, Baskets, &c., &c. 32 0 0 £1,812 0 0 There was also in stock— Timber, Iron and Steel, Bolts, Paint, &c. 90 0 0 Fodder 35 12 6 £125 12 6 Proceeding upon the plan adopted last year the capital value of the stock as shown by the books is as follows :— Value at March 25th, 1886 1,600 0 0 Add four horses purchased at £70 each 280 0 0 Two Carts constructed 63 0 0 £1,943 0 0 Less one-ninth of original cost for depreciation 372 0 0 Capital value at 25th March, 1887 £1,571 0 0 It would thus appear that the present value of the stock is really higher than it appears in the accounts. This is mainly accounted for by the very extensive repairs which have been done to the vans and carts, these being estimated to be worth £180 more than they were a year ago. 59 The Committee also beg to report that on Friday, September 23rd, a Committee consisting of Mr. Davies, in the Chair, Mr. Evans, Mr. Gooden, Mr. Hooper, Mr. Sans, and Mr. Schieb, visited the Wharf for the purpose of verifying as far as possible the estimate of the value of the stock at the Wharf on the 25th March last. Mr. Gore produced a list of all articles in very full detail, with the estimated value appended to each, which the Committee carefully examined and compared with the stock. With one or two very trifling exceptions the Committee approved the estimate. Mr. Gore's stock statement in full detail was laid before the Committee. [Presented to the Vestry, October 4th, and approved by them October 20th, 1887]. 61 Survenyor's Report. To the Vestry of the Parish of Saint James and Saint John, Clerkcenwell. Surveyor's Office, Vestry Hall, Clerkenwell, July, 1887. Gentlemen, I beg to lay before you my Report upon the Works, &c., executed by your Vestry during the year ending Lady-day, 1887. SEWERS AND GULLIES. Fifty sewers were cleansed and repaired, 1 new side entrance cover was fixed, 21 new gullies were constructed, 257 cleansed and repaired, 7 trapped, and 4 new gully drains laid ; 13 new gully grates and 1 air grate were fixed, and 3 flushing shafts constructed. 141 loads of deposit were removed from the sewers and gullies. A 12-inch pipe sewer, 140 feet long, was constructed in Jerusalem Court, and connected with the existing sewer in St. John Street. 62 A 12-inch pipe sewer, 230 feet long, was constructed in York Street and connected with the Fleet sewer in King's Cross Road. Seventy-two private drains were unstopped by the Sewermen at the expense of the owners of the premises, for which the sum of £7 4s. was received by the Vestry. Where necessary the pipe sewers in the Parish were flushed by water supplied by the New River Company, and the brick sewers, where practicable, by water from the main sewers being turned through them by means of flushing gates fixed in the sewers for that purpose. COURT FLUSHING. The Courts and Alleys in the Parish were washed at night and sprinkled with carbolic acid from 28th August to 11th September. HOUSE: DRAINAGE. The total number of premises drained were 193 (including 7 new houses in the outlying portion of the Parish at Muswell Hill), the details of which drainage is shown upon 119 plans prepared for that purpose, and deposited in the Surveyor's Office. These drains consist of 3 12-inch, 39 9-inch, and 83 6-inch. The amount of fees received for making the connections of the new drains to the sewers was £121 3s. Ventilation of Sewers.—A report of the Special Purposes Committee of the Metropolitan Board of 63 Works upon the subject of the "cleansing and ventilation of Sewers " was referred to me to report upon, so far as they were applicable to the Parish of Clerkenwell. Such report was laid before the "Works Committee, and afterwards approved by the Vestry. PAVEMENTS. Carriageways.—The carriageway of Northampton Buildings, Sarah Place, Suffolk Street (Clerkenwell Green)., Arlington Street (opposite Sadler's Wells Theatre), were paved with Val de Travers compressed asphalte. Part of the carriageway of St. James's Walk was taken up, dressed, and relaid. A new granite crossing was laid in Baker Street, opposite Granville Street. The carriageway of Amwell Street, River Street, part of Myddelton Square and Baker Street were covered with broken granite and rolled with the steam roller. Footways.—The footways of Northampton Buildings, Sarah Place, Suffolk Street (Clerkenwell Green), and part of St. James's Walk were relaid, and the deficiency made good with new York stone, and St. John's Square, rear of Bryant's Buildings, was laid with new patent Victoria stone pavement. The footway in Rosoman Street and Exmouth Street, by "Spa" P.H., was laid with Brunswick Bock mastic as phalte. 64 The London Street Tramway Co. having obtained Parliamentary powers, constructed their lines in Farringdon and King's Cross Roads, and arranged with the Vestry to relay the carriageway from kerb to kerb, and to lay new pavement where the roads were widened. The kerbs, footway, paying and gullies were altered as necessary. The south corner of Wharton Street, by King's Cross Road, was set back, and King's Cross Road, by Calthorpe Street, was considerably widened and the levels improved. A refuge was constructed in the centre of the road, opposite Baker Street. The work was commenced in May, and the official inspection by the Board of Trade took place on the 29th November last. Jetty at Wharf.—The Jetty at Phoenix Wharf was repaved with improved wood paving by Mr. W. Stubbs, the Vestry paying half the cost. JOBBING WORKS. For the maintenance and general repair of the carriageways and footways of the Parish the following materials have been used:— Pit Ballast 84 cube yards Thames Ballast 19 „ „ Hoggin 291 „ „ Sand 213 „ „ Thames Shingle 51 „ „ 65 Broken Granite 1,486 yards, of which 361 yards were broken by men employed by the Vestry. 6,295 ft. sup. new York were laid. (Of which 565 ft. were for the various Companies). 50,776 ft. sup. old York relaid. (Of which 13,767 ft. were for the various Companies). 84 ft. sup. new Patent Victoria Stone were laid. (Of which 30 ft. sup. were for the various Companies). 179 ft. sup. Patent Victoria Stone relaid. (Of which 42 ft. sup. were for the various Companies). 29 ft. run new kerb fixed. 2,074 ft. run kerb reset. (Of which 167 ft. were for the various Companies). 7,318 yds. sup. granite were relaid. (Of which 2,926 yds. were for the various Companies). 1,110 yds. sup. Pebbles relaid. (Of which 427 yds. were for the various Companies). 116 yds. sup. York edging were laid and 20 yds. relaid. 18 yds. sup. Ballast and 488 yds. sup. Macadam were also relaid for the various Companies and 12 gas and water boxes cut into stones in the footway pavement. 66 57 coal plates were cut into stones over vaults by the Vestry's workmen at the expense of the owners of the vaults. The amount received from the various Companies for the repair of trenches during the year was £620 13s. 9d. Concrete in Gas and Water Companies Trenches. —The question as to the liability of the Companies to pay for an extra amount of concrete to be put in trenches opened in streets about being repaved was raised by the New River Company, who refused to pay for such extra concrete, although they had repeatedly done so before. By order of the Vestry the extra concrete was used as formerly, and the account sent to the New River Company. Owing to the severity of the past winter the masons and paviors were unable to execute any repairs to the pavements of the Parish on (including wet days during the year) 33 days. On these days the masons were employed in cutting up York edging and dressing kerb, and the paviors in dressing granite cubes, except when assisting to clear away the snow. Snow Storm.—A very heavy fall of snow occurred on the 26th December last, and further falls on the 4th and 5th January. 1,270 loads of snow were carted from the public ways and deposited in Northampton square, Claremont Square, St. John Street Road, and Clerkenwell Green, and "Fire Devils" 67 were immediately used for melting the same, the whole of which was disposed of by the 19 th January. I estimated the quantity of snow that fell upon the public ways alone on the three days at 129,000 cubic yards. A further fall of snow occurred on the 15th March. None of the snow was carted to the open spaces in the Parish, but a small quantity from the narrowest portions of the main thoroughfares was sent to the Vestry's "Wharf. The total cost of removing the snow was about £488. Cattle Troughs.—Three new cattle troughs were erected by the Metropolitan Drinking Fountain Association on the following sites :— Clerkenwell Green, opposite Sessions House. St. John Street, north side of Clerkenwell Road. Farringdon Road (late Ray Street), over Railway Tunnel. Trees.—Fifteen iron ventilating gratings were placed round the trees on the public ways in the Parish, and 18 new trees were planted to replace a similar number of dead ones. ST. JOHN'S BURIAL GROUND. The Vestry, upon the application of the Rector and Churchwardens, directed that the paths of this public garden should be put into proper order, and that a garden roller be supplied, also that a galvanised iron dustbin be erected in the grounds, and the entrance to garden paved. 68 LIGHTING. The following additional public lamps have been erected by the Vestry during the year :— One New Standard Lamp between Nos. 3 and 5, Affleck Street. Myddelton Street 3 new lamps, and 3 existing lamps altered to new positions. St. John Street Road, between Myddelton Street and Owen's Row, 3 new lamps, and 3 existing lamps altered to new positions. St. John's Street Road, between Corporation Row and Myddelton Street, 2 new lamps, and 1 altered to new position. St. John Street, between Clerkenwell Road and Corporation Row, 4 new lamps, and 5 existing lamps altered to new positions. Farringdon Road, by Calthorpe Street, 1 new lamp. Refuge, Farringdon Road, opposite Baker Street, 1 large lamp. Muswell Road, Muswell Hill, 3 new lamps. Permission has been granted for the following private lamps :— Nos. 240, 242, and 244, Pentonville Road, 3 lamp columns on footway, lamps to be kept alight from sunset to sunrise. 68, Farringdon Road, bracket lamp. 114, King's Cross Road, ,, 10, Great Sutton Street ,, 175, St. John Street ,, St. John's Gate ,, 69 48, St. John Street Road, bracket lamp. 13, Albemarle Street ,, " Berkley Arms," St. John's Lane, bracket lamp. 15, High Street, clock lamp. EMMEN'S BUILDINGS, CHAPEL STREET. Plans were prepared showing a suggested improvement of this Court by throwing part of the forecourts into the public way in a line with James's Gardens. Owing to various difficulties that arose in the negotiations the improvement was not carried out. URINALS. The improvements carried out by the London Street Tramway Co. at the corner of King's Cross Road and Calthorpe Street necessitated the removal of this urinal, which has since been re-erected on the south side of Calthorpe Street, opposite the Prison wall. Upon the application of the Deacons and Seatholders of the Wesleyan Chapel in St. John's Square, the urinal opposite the chapel was removed and re-erected in the Square near to Jerusalem Court. A new two-stall iron urinal was erected in Union Place, Chapel Street. The whole of the public urinals in the Parish were cleansed three times daily and sprinkled with carbolic acid. JAMES'S GARDENS, CHAPEL STREET. This Court is flushed once a fortnight, except in very wet or frosty weather, by order of the Vestry. 70 STREET WATERING. The street watering was done by the Vestry's own vans, extra horses being hired as required; 5,081,000 gallons of water being used, the amount paid for which, including rent of meters, was £222 0s. 9d. I have now adverted generally to the principal works in my department upon which I have been engaged during the past year. I have the honour to remain, Gentlemen, Your obedient Servant, WILLIAM IRON, Surveyor. REPORT of the MEDICAL OFFICER OF HEALTH FOR, 1886. To the Vestry of St. James and St. John, Clerkenwell. Gentlemen, I have the honour of laying before you my 31st Annual Report, viz.:—That for the year 1886. The number of deaths occurring from all causes in Clerkenwell, during the year 1886, was 1,170. The annual average for the last ten years was 1,281, so that the deaths were 111 less than the average. The deaths in 1885 having been 1,195, those in 1886 were 25 less than in the preceding year. 72 The accompanying Table exhibits the number of deaths which have taken place in the Parish in each of the last ten years, the births in each year being placed opposite : — DEATHS. BIRTHS. 1877 1,385 2,522 1878 1,303 2,590 1879 1,456 2,667 1880 1,313 2,430 1881 1,254 2,414 1882 1,261 2,420 1883 1,172 2,402 1884 1,303 2,448 1885 1,195 2,390 1886 1,170 2,279 The births were thus 111 less than in the preceding year, and 177 less than the average. According to the Registrar-General's sub-districts in which the deaths and births occurred, they stand thus :— deaths. births. excess. St. James 310 564 254 Amwell 293 590 297 Pentonville 239 483 244 Goswell 328 312 In each year a number of deaths of the parishioners takes place in general and special hospitals, in the Workhouses, which are extra-parochial, in the Infirmary, and in Lunatic Asylums. The number of deaths which occurred in the hospitals was 132 ; in the Workhouses, 61; in the Infirmary, 92; in the Asylum's Board hospitals, 6; and in Lunatic Asylums, 16; while 3 deaths occurred in the streets; so that the extra-parochial deaths in all amounted to 310, making a grand total of 1,480. 73 The estimation of the mortality of a Parish, in regard to the extra parochial deaths, is a matter of uncertainty. In some of the returns of mortality they are excluded; but this is obviously unfair, as, e.g., the deaths of patients who have acquired their fatal diseases in a parish should surely be included in the mortality returns. But in the case of those who are removed to extra parochial workhouses, many of them not old, and who remain inmates for years, often many, it may be doubtful whether the altered conditions under which they live may not have influenced their deaths; or some disease may not have been acquired in their new abode, which could not be traced to their former residence. This is also particularly the case in regard to lunatics, some of whom may live 20 years or more in a new parish, before death occurs. At any rate, all deaths removed from this parish, however long ago, and dying in other parishes, are included in my estimate of the mortality ; so that it cannot be said that the mortality is under-rated. At the Census in 1871, the population of Clerkenwell amounted to 65,380; in 1881 to 69,076; the increase being 3,696. Assum ing this rate of increase to have continued during the last 5 years, the present population of the Parish will be 70,921. At this rate, the intra parochial mortality for the year has been 16.4 per 1,000 ; including the hospital deaths, 18.4 ; and the Workhouse and Infirmary deaths, and Lunatics, 20.8 per 1,000. Hence the mortality of the year has been very slightly below that of the preceding year. The mortality for all London during the year was 19.9—that of the West Districts, 19.2; of the North Districts, 18.1 ; of the Central Districts, 23.6 ; of the East Districts, 23.3 ; and of the South Districts, 19.1. 74 So that Clerkenwell is still at the head of its own group of the crowded Central Districts, and of the East Districts with their sparse population; and, as I have said before, the crowding of an ordinary population in an acre, always exerts a powerful influence upon the mortality of a district. The number of deaths arising from the principal zymotic diseases in the parish in 1886, was 172 ; being 57 loss than in the preceding year. The number and the causes of the zymotic (infectious and contagious diseases) occurring in Clerkenwell during the last 10 years, are exhibited in the following table :— small pox. measles. scarlet fever. hooping cough. typhoid fever. diarrhoea. totals. 1877 15 73 82 36 25 53 284 1878 1 39 41 56 25 73 235 1879 1 74 44 61 11 36 237 1880 2 26 51 87 14 65 245 1881 10 39 54 53 26 58 240 1882 0 61 60 81 18 40 260 1883 0 61 46 33 16 59 215 1884 6 48 27 69 7 79 236 1885 6 87 21 52 5 58 229 1886 0 18 12 42 7 93 172 75 Four of the deaths included under Scarlet Fever, were registered as arising from Diphtheria; 2 of the Typhoid deaths were registered aa arising from common continued Fever; and 2 of the Diarrhoea deaths were returned as from Cholera. The average number of deaths arising from the principal zymotic diseases in the parish during the past 10 years was 234; so that the number for 1886 was 62 below the average. Hence the deaths from Measles and Scarlet Fever have been far below the average; those from Whooping Cough, much less numerous; from Typhoid Fever, very few; but from Diarrhoea, considerably more numerous. The zymotic deaths occurring in extra-parochial hospitals of inhabitants of Clerkenwell amounted to 14; viz.: 1 from SmallPox; 3 from Scarlet Fever; 7 from Diphtheria; and 3 from Typhoid Fever, No death occurred from Typhus. 8 deaths were uncertified ; and 3 deaths occurred in the streets. The number of deaths arising from all causes in infants under 1 year of age was 375; 3 more than in last year. 227 deaths occurred at and above 60 ; 25 more than last year. 107 inquest deaths were registered in the year; 8 more than in the preceding year. Of these, 31 related to deaths occurring in the St. James Sub-district; 26 in the Amwell; 20 in the Pentonville; and 30 in the Goswell Sub-district. 35 deaths arose from violence; the number for 1885 being 9 more than in the preceding year. In 20 large English towns, the mortality in 1886 was:—In London, 19.9; Brighton, 17.1; Portsmouth, 23.8; Norwich, 23.3; Plymouth, 23.5; Bristol, 19.3; Wolverhampton, 23.2; Birmingham, 19.9; Leicester, 20.3; Nottingham, 20.4; Liverpool, 23.8; Manchester, 26.3; Salford, 22.1; Oldham, 22.8; Bradford, 19.2; Leeds, 21.9; Sheffield, 19.8; Hull, 18.8; Sunderland, 19.5; and Newcastle-on-Tyne, 22.2. 76 Slaughter-houses.— These were inspected by the Sanitary Committee & myself, on November 8th. They were 15; 6 in the three upper wards, and 9 in two lower; and were kept by the same number of butchers. They were very clean, and in excellent order; there was really no default. No complaint from parishioners was made of them during the course of the year. Cow-houses,—These were inspected at the same time as the Slaughter-houses. They were 19; 11 in the upper wards, and 8 in the lower. There were 17 cow-keepers. They were also in excellent order. The cows were 206, 31 less than in the preceding year; 92 in the upper wards, and 114 in the lower. The animals were very fine and healthy. Bake-houses.— These were inspected on May 10th and May 17th. They were 30 in each ward. They were mostly in good order ; a few required lime-whiting. Mortuary.— The excellent mortuary continues its usefulness. 279 bodies were received in the year. Of these, 114 were for inquest purposes, upon which 50 post mortems were made; 99 were Holborn Union cases, and 65 were brought from the dwellings of parishioners, including 9 cases of fever. Had not the Mortuary existed, these bodies would have been kept in dwelling rooms. Inspectors' Reports.— The work done by our two attentive and energetic Inspectors during the year will be found below:— Nuisances in respect to which notices have been served, and work done to abate, in 1886, in wards 1, 2 and 3. 298 water-closets provided with water supply. 128 water-closets provided with new pans or old pans cleaned. 227 defective drains remedied. 123 dirty houses cleaned. 77 183 gulley traps in lieu of bell traps. 180 defective pavings remedied. 122 dust bins repaired. 12 defective roofs repaired. 13 underground rooms emptied or made to comply with requirements of the Metropolis Management Act. 38 cases of overcrowding abated. 28 accumulations of stinking rubbish removed. 62 deficient water supplies increased. 7 nuisances from keeping animals abated. 4 cesspools abolished. 3 dead bodies kept in rooms where persons lived removed. 2 deficient water-closet accommodation increased. 7 smoke nuisances abated. 4 fumigations after cases of small pox. 59 scarlet fever. 3 typhoid. 7 diphtheria. 5 of the fumigations were done at Vestry expense. 9 were done by Vestry's disinfector and costs recoverd. 49 were done by occupiers of rooms. 12 summonses were taken out under The Metropolis Local Management Acts, and fines inflicted, £39, costs £1 2s. 8 summonses under the The Nuisances Eemoval Acts, and fines inflicted, 24s. 78 81 samples of food and drugs were submitted to the public analyst, 20 summonses were taken out, and fines inflicted amounting to £38 14s. 969 houses were inspected, 329 on complaint. Total number of visits to houses, 2709. 756 preliminary notices were served, and 315 statutory notices were served. W. J. BARTLETT. Nuisances in respect to which notices have been served, and works done to abate same from January 1st to December 31st, 1886, in "Wards 4 and 5:— 287 water-closets provided with water supply. 5 diphtheria. 52 scarlet fever. 6 typhoid fever 18 accumulation of offensive matter removed. 7 animals kept so as to be a nuisance. 143 cases of overcrowding abated. 9 cesspools destroyed. 57 choked drains unstopped. 205 choked water-closets unstopped. 186 defective drains reconstructed or repaired. 234 defective pavings repaired. 23 defective roofs repaired. 79 dirty houses cleansed and repaired. 79 570 dirty stored water receptacles cleansed and repaired. 305 dustbins repaired or new provided. Fines, food and drugs, £30. Fines, Metropolis Local Management, £30. 497 gulley traps provided in lieu of bell traps, &c. 353 houses visited on complaint. 59 illegal kitchens emptied. 1137 preliminary notices served to abate nuisance. 98 rooms fumigated after dangerous infectious diseases. 65 rooms stripped and cleansed. 81 samples submitted to public analyst. 6 smoke nuisanses abated. 142 statutory notices served. 180 water-closets provided with new pans or old cleansed. HUGH ROSE. In the disinfection of the houses, the streets, the gullies, &c., of the Parish, 1,120 gallons of carbolic acid, and 90 cwt of carbolic powder, were used during the year, at a cost of £154. During the warmer months of the year, the courts, alleys, and crowded streets were frequently flushed with carbolic water ; the same was also used in the watering of the roads. I hope the important points I alluded to in my last Report will not be forgotten. 80 Foremost among the large number of improvements effected in the Parish during the year, is the supply of fixed water apparatus and supply to tho water closets. The question of tho water-supply formed quite an antilogy. In the early days of the Vestry's good work (1857), when it was attempted to enforce the supply, summonses wero dismissed, as there was no nuisance. Water closets within tho Parish in Clerkenwell have always been required to be furnished with water, and have always had it. But in the case of those out of doors, in yards, where a good supply was at hand, this was not enforced. Sanitary Committee after Committee have viewed these smaller courts and houses where the water was at hand, and have considered this sufficient, and in this I concurred. The same opinion is still entertained in some Parishes, in Islington, for instance, water is not required to out-door closets where there is no nuisance. But latterly the magistrates have come to the decided opinion, that a closet without water is a nuisance. In a recent case, in my presence, the Defendant, summoned for having no water to his closet asserted that there was no nuisance. The Magistrate retorted: Sir, you are talking nonsense, a closet without water must be a nuisance, and a fine was inflicted. But public opinion is in favour of the supply, and the Vestry have decided that it shall be provided, and I am not now aware of tho existence of a closet in the parish without water. It will be remembered, that a year or two ago, the agents of the Mansion House Counsil inspected tho Parish, and found, out of 464 houses visited, 194 had no water to the w.c. It is curious that this Parish should have been so specially picked out for complaint, when during tho last year, water was laid on to 495 closets in Kensington, and 218 in St. Luke's Parish, and in 1884, there were 3,029 closets without water supply in St. Pancras, which has since been provided 1 Again, Sir Charles Dilke, after his inspection of the Parish, said "your water closets and watersupply are your great point." 81 I have shown above, that the mortality of the past year has not appreciably diminished. Considering the large number of nuisances remedied in the Parish, and the improvements effected, it might be argued that these really did not relate to sanitary matters. But this would be a rash conclusion, considering the short time that has elapsed since they were effected. At the same time, I am convinced that in an overcrowded or overpopulatel parish like ours, the main point to be attended to is the manner of living and the habits of the rougher members of the community—especially greater attention to cleanliness, and more orderly living; for most of the undue mortality occurs among the dirty, negligent, and disorderly part of the population. Among the important improvements made in the Parish, in the last year or two, must be particularly mentioned:—The opening of the disused Spa Fields Burial Ground; a fine open space of an acre and a half, adapted as a playground for children. This belongs to the Marquis of Northampton; and was drained and set in order, at the cost of £250, paid by the Metropolitan Gardens Associatiou, through Lord Meath (Brabazon). The Northampton Square Gardens, of one acre, and the Wilmington Square Garden, of one acre, two roods; both laid out and planted at the expense of C. C. Walker, Esq., of Lillieshall, Salop, at a cost of £1,030. The two latter are now taken over by the Vestry, who will keep them in order. It need scarcely be stated that these open gardens will afford opportunity of quiet exercise, and must be of great benefit to the health of those who make use of them. Another important proceeding is the action of the Vestry in replacing tho hard paving stones of the smaller streets and courts by asphalte. As these places are often the only playgrounds the children, have many a fall which, against the stone, would perhaps produce disease of the joints or bones, will be prevented from so doing. 82 The Meteorology of the year was as follows:— 1886. Temperature. Average. Difference from average of 45 years. Humidity (Saturation=100.) Height of Barometer. Rain in inches. Difference from average of 72 years. Year 48.7 -0.7 81 29.7 24.2 -1 8 First Quarter (Jan., Feb.,March 36.5 - 3.5 85 29.7 5.3 + 0.1 Second Quartar .. (April, May, June') 52.5 —0.4 77 29.7 5.9 + 0.1 Third Quarter (July, Aug., Sept.) 61.5 + 0.7 77 29.8 4.8 —2.4 Fourth Quarter . (Oct., Nov., Dec.) 44. + 0.5 87 29.6 8.0 x 0.3 Hence the mean temperature of the year was slightly below the average; that of the first two quarters being below, that of the two latter quarters above. These relations have an important influence upon the mortality of the Parish: for a cold winter increases the deaths from pulmonary diseases, while a warmer one diminishes them; and a warm summer increases, while a cold summer diminishes the deaths from diarrhoea. The amount of rain, which purifies the air, and scours the sewers and drains, is also of importance; the amount was nearly two inches less than the average. I have the honour to remain, Gentlemen, Your obedient servant, J. W. GRIFFITH, M.D., Member of the Royal College of Physicians. VESTRY of the Parish of St, James & St. John, CLERKENWELL. SALE OF FOOD & DRUGS ACT, 1875. REPORTS of DR. REDWOOD, ANALYST, AND INSPECTORS, 1886-87. 84 REPORT OF ANALYST, For the Quarter ending June 25th, 1886. Consecutive Numbers. Date when received. Name of Inspector. Name of Article. Distirguishing Mark., RESULTS OF ANALYSIS. 51 1886 May 1 W. Bartlett Ipecacuanha Wine C 1 50 Not adulterated 52 „ „ ditto Pepper C 1 51 Not adulterated 53 „ „ ditto Butter C 1 52 Adulterated with 85 per cent. foreign fat 54 „ „ ditto Quinine C 1 53 Not adulterated 55 „ „ ditto Milk C 1 54 Not adulterated 56 „ „ ditto Mustard C 1 55 Not adulterated 57 „ „ ditto Butter C 1 56 Not adulterated 58 „ „ ditto Butter C 1 57 Sold as a mixture 59 „ „ ditto Milk C 1 58 Poor Milk 60 „ „ ditto Whisky C 1 59 Not adulterated 61 „ „ ditto Rum C 1 60 Not adulterated 62 „ 15 H. Rose Milk C 2 52 Not adulterated 63 „ „ ditto Milk C 2 53 Not adulterated 64 „ „ ditto Butter C 2 54 Not adulterated 65 „ „ ditto Butter C 2 55 Adulterated with 85 per cent. foreign fat 66 „ „ ditto Ipecacuanha Wine C 2 56 Not adulterated 67 „ „ ditto Butter C 2 57 Adulterated with 85 per cent. foreign fat 68 „ 20 ditto Milk C 2 58 Adulterated with 9 per cent. water 69 „ „ ditto Milk C 2 59 Not adulterated 70 „ „ ditto Milk C 2 60 Not adulterated 71 „ „ ditto Pepper C 2 61 Not adulterated 72 „ 29 W. Bartlett Milk C 1 61 Not adulterated 73 „ „ ditto Butter C 1 62 Not adulterated 74 „ „ ditto Milk C 1 63 Not adulterated 75 „ „ ditto Butter C 1 64 Not adulterated 76 „ „ ditto Milk C 1 65 Adulterated with 7 per cent. water 77 „ „ ditto Butter C 1 66 Not adulterated 78 „ „ ditto Milk C 1 67 Not adulterated 79 „ „ ditto Milk C 1 68 Adulterated with 8 per cent. water 80 „ „ ditto Butter C 1 69 Not adulterated 81 June 8 H. Rose Milk C 2 62 Not adulterated 82 „ „ ditto Mustard C 2 63 Not adulterated 85 REPORT OF ANALYST—continued. Consecutive Number. Date when received. Name of Inspector. Name of Article. Distinguishing Mark. Results of ANALYSIS. 83 1886 June 8 H. Rose Butter C 2 64 Not adulterated 84 „ „ ditto Rum C 2 65 Not adulterated 85 „ „ ditto Butter C 2 66 Adulterated with 75 per cent. foreign fat 86 „ „ ditto Milk C 2 67 Not adulterated 87 „ „ ditto Precipitated Sulphur C 2 68 Not adulterated 88 „ „ ditto Cream of Tartar C 2 69 Not adulterated 89 „ 12 W. Bartlett Butter C 1 70 Not adulterated 90 „ „ ditto Butter C 1 71 Not adulterated 91 „ „ ditto Coffee C 1 72 Not adulterated 92 „ „ ditto Coffee C 1 73 Not adulterated 93 „ „ ditto Butter C 1 74 Adulterated with 75 per cent. foreign fat 94 „ „ ditto Coffee C 1 75 Adulterated with 25 per cent. of chicory 95 „ „ ditto Sweet Spirits of Nitre C 1 76 Not adulterated 96 „ „ ditto Rum C 1 77 Not adulterated 97 „ „ ditto Sweet Spirits of Nitre C 1 78 Not adulterated 98 „ „ ditto Rum C 1 79 Not adulterated T. REDWOOD. 17, Bloomsbury Square, W.C. 86 INSPECTOR'S REPORT, For the Quarter ending 30th June, 1886. To the Vestry of the Parish of St. James and St. John, Clerkenwell. Gentlemen, I beg respectfully to report that during the quarter ending June 30th, 1886, I purchased and submitted to the Analyst, the following articles:— 7 milk, 10 butter, 1 popper, 1 quinine, 1 ipecacuanha wine, 1 mustard, 1 whisky, 3 rum, 3 coffee, 2 sweet spirits of nitre. C 1 52. Cowood & Co., 34, Chapel Street, for selling butter adulterated with 85 per cent. of foreign fats. Fined 40/-, 2/- costs. C 1 66. Arthur Horritt, 95, White Lion Street, for selling milk adulterated with 7 per cent.of added water. Fined 40/-, 2/- costs. C 1 68. William Evans, 11, Wynyatt Street, for selling milk adulterated with 8 per cent. added water. Fined 40/-, 2/- costs. C 1 74 & 75. Ann Davis, 10, Margaret Street, for selling coffee and butter adulterated to the extent of 25 per cent. and 85 per cent. respectively. Vendor had left shop before summons was issued. I have the honor to remain, Gentlemen, Your obedient Servant, W. J. BARTLETT, Inspector. 87 INSPECTOR'S REPORT, For the Quarter ending 30th June, 1886. To the Vestry of the Parish of Clerkenwell. Gentlemen, I beg respectfully to submit to you the proceedings taken under the Food and Drugs Act, for the quarter ending 30th June, 1886. I have submitted 24 samples to the Public Analyst, viz: — 13 milk, 5 butter, 1 ipecacuanha wine, 1 pepper, 1 mustard, 1 rum, 1 cream of tartar, 1 precipitated sulphur. David Davies, 97, Goswell Road, was summoned for selling milk adulterated 6 per cent. added water, (sample C 251), and fined 20/- and 2/- costs. Thomas Edwards, 122, St. John Street, for selling butter adulterated 85 percent, of foreign fats, (sample C 2 55). Fined 50/- and 2/- costs. Arthur Howes, 2, Corporation Row, butter adulterated 85 per cent. foreign fats, (sample C 2 57). Fined 50/- and 2/- costs. Richard Jones, Upper Ashby Street, milk adulterated 9 per cent. added water. Fined 20/- and 2/- costs. Mary Conway, 12 Jerusalem Court, butter adulterated 75 per cent. foreign fat. Fined 40/- and 2/- costs. (Sample C 2 66). Alfred Jones, 13, Ashby Street, milk adulterated 16 per cent. added water, (sample C 2 72). Fined 50/- and 2/- costs. I am, Gentlemen. Your obedient Servant, HUGH ROSE, Inspector. 88 REPORT OF ANALYST, For Quarter ending 30th September, 1886. Consecutive Numbers. Date when received. Name of Inspector. Name of Article. Distinguishing Mark. RESULTS OF ANALYSIS. 99 1886 July 1 H. Rose Milk C 2 70 Not adulterated 100 „ „ ditto Milk, C 2 71 Not adulterated 100 „ „ ditto Milk C 2 72 Adulterated with 16 per cent. of water 102 „ 19 ditto Milk C 2 73 Adulterated with 11 per cent. of water 103 „ „ ditto Milk C 2 74 Not adulterated 104 „ „ ditto Milk C 2 75 Poor Milk 105 „ „ ditto Butter C 2 76 Not adulterated 100 Sept. 7 ditto Milk. C 2 77 Adulterated with 7 per cent. of water 107 „ „ ditto 1 Milk C 2 78 Not adulterated 108 „25 W. Bartlutt Milk C 1 80 Not adulterated 109 „ „ ditto Milk C 1 81 Not adulterated 110 „ „ ditto Milk C 1 82 Not adulterated 111 „ „ ditto Milk C 1 83 Not adulterated 112 „ „ ditto Milk C 1 84 Not adulterated 113 „ „ ditto Milk C 1 85 Not adulterated 114. „ „ ditto Butter C 1 86 Not adulterated 115 „ „ ditto Butter C 1 87 Not adulterated 116 „ „ ditto Butter C 1 88 Not adulterated 117 „30 H. Rose Milk C 2 79 Not adulterated 118 „ „ ditto Butter C 2 80 Adulterated with 85 per cent. of foreign fat 119 „ „ ditto Sausages C 2 81 Not adulterated 120 „ „ ditto Sausages C 2 82 Not adulterated 121 „ „ ditto Precipitated Sulphur C 2 83 Not adulterated 122 „ „ ditto Butter C 2 84 Not adulterated 123 „ „ ditto Mustard C 2 85 Not adulterated T. REDWOOD. 17, BLOOMSBURY SQUARE, W.C., 4th October, 1886. 89 INSPECTOR'S REPORT, For the Quarter ending 30th September, 1886. To the Vestry of the Parish of St. James and St. John, Clerkenwell. Gentlemen, I beg respectfully to report that during the quarter ending 30th September. 1886, I purchased and submitted to the Analyst, the following articles:— 6 milk, 3 butter, all of which were unadulterated. I have the honor to remain, Gentlemen, Your obedient Servant, W. J. BARTLETT Inspector. 90 INSPECTOR'S REPORT, For Quarter ending 30th September, 1886. To the Vestry of the Parish of St. James and St. John, Clerkenwell. Gentlemen, I beg most respectfully to report that during the quarter ending 30th September, 1886, I purchased and submitted to the public Analyst the following articles:—milk 9, butter 3, sausages 2, mustard 1, precipitated sulphur 1. Joseph Osborn, 15, Great Bath Street, for selling milk adulterated 11 per cent, added water, (sample C 2 73). Fined 5/- and 2/- costs. William Jones, 1, Whiskin Street, milk adulterated 7 per cent. added water, (sample C 2 77), dismissed, the Magistrate remarking that it was a small per centage. Margaret Lowe, 44, Northampton Road, for selling butter adulterated 85 per cent. foreign fats, (sample C 2 80). Fined 10/- and 2/- costs, or one month's imprisonment. I am, Gentlemen, Your obedient Servant, HUGH ROSE, Inspector. 91 REPORT OF ANALYST, For Quarter ending 31st December, 1886. Consecutive Numbers. Date when received. Name of Inspector. Name of Article. Distin- guishing Mark. results of ANALYSIS. 124 1886 Nov. 13 W. Bartlett Milk C 1 89 Not adulterated 125 „ „ ditto Milk C 1 90 Not adulterated 126 „ „ ditto Milk C 1 91 Not adulterated 127 „ „ ditto Milk C 1 92 Not adulterated 128 „ „ ditto Butter C 1 93 Adulterated with 85 per cent. foreign fat 129 „ „ ditto Milk C 1 94 Not adulterated 130 „ „ ditto Coffee C 1 95 Adulterated with 20 per cent. chicory 131 „ „ ditto Milk C 1 96 Not adulterated 132 „ „ ditto Butter C 1 97 Not adulterated 133 „ „ ditto Butter C 1 98 Adulterated with 80 per cent. foreign fat 134 „ „ ditto Coffee C 1 99 Not adulterated 135 „ 16 H. Rose Butter C 2 86 Not adulterated 136 „ „ ditto Milk C 2 87 Not adulterated 137 „ „ ditto Milk C 2 88 Not adulterated 138 „ „ ditto Milk C 2 89 Not adulterated 139 „ „ ditto Milk C 2 90 Adulterated with 11 per cent. added water 140 „ „ ditto Butter C 2 91 Not adulterated 141 „ „ ditto Milk C 92 Not adulterated 142 „ 20 ditto Oatmeal C 2 93 Not adulterated 143 „ „ ditto Pepper C 2 94 Not adulterated 144 „ „ ditto Mustard C 2 55 Adulterated with 10 per cent. flour and turmeric 245 „ „ ditto Pepper C 2 96 Not adulterated 146 „ „ ditto Oatmeal C 2 97 Not adulterated 147 „ „ ditto Mustard C 2 98 Not adulterated 148 „ „ ditto Coffee C 2 99 Not adulterated 149 „ „ ditto Lard C 2 100 Not adulterated 150 „ 25 W. Bartlett Milk C 1 100 Adulterated with 12 per cent. added water 151 „ „ ditto Milk C 1 101 Not adulterated 152 „ „ ditto Milk C 1 102 Not adulterated 153 „ „ ditto Milk C 1 103 Not adulterated 154 „ „ ditto Milk C 1 104 Not adulterated 155 „ „ ditto Butter C 1 105 Not adulterated 156 „ „ ditto Coffee C 1 106 Not adulterated 92 REPORT OF ANALYST—continued. Consecutive Numbers. Date when received. Name of Inspector. Name of Article. Distinguishing Mark. results op analysis. 157 1886 Nov. 25 W. Bartlett Milk C 1 107 Adulterated with 11 per cent. added water 158 Dec. 9 H. Rose Milk C 2 101 Not adulterated 159 „ „ ditto Cayenne Pepper C 2 102 Not adulterated 160 „ „ ditto Coffee C 2 103 Not adulterated 161 „ „ ditto Peppier C 2 104 Not adulterated 162 „ „ ditto Butter 0 2 105 Not adulterated 163 „ „ ditto Milk C 2 106 Not adulterated T. REDWOOD. 17, Bloomsbury Square, W.C., 3rd January, 1887. 93 INSPECTOR'S REPORT, For the Quarter ending 30th December, 1886. To the Vestry of the Parish of St. James and St. John, Clerkenwell. Gentlemen, I beg respectfully to report that during the quarter ending 30th December, 1886, I purchased and submitted to the Analyst the following articles :— 12 milk, 4 butter, 5 coffee. C 1 93. H. Hare, 28, Collier Street, selling butter adulterated with 88 per cent. of foreign fat. Fined 40/-, 2/- costs. C 1 95. J. Andrews, 45, Penton Street, selling coffee adulterated with 20 per cent. of chicory. Fined 10/-, 2/- costs. C 1 98. C. Martin, 51, Chapel Street, selling butter adulterated with 80 per cent. of foreign fats Fined 40/-, 2/- costs. C1 100. H. Piper, 9, Upper Gloucester Street, selling milk adulterated with 12 per cent. added water. Fined £3, 2/- costs. C1 107. J.Bradley, 53, Penton Street, for similar offence. Fined £3, 2/- costs. I have the honour to remain, Gentlemen, Your obedient Servant, W. J. BARTLETT, Inspector. 94 INSPECTOR'S REPORT, For Quarter ending 31st December, 1886. To the Vestry of the Parish of St. James and St. John, Clerkenwell. Gentlemen, I beg most respectfully to report that during the quarter ending 31st December, 1886, I purchased and submitted to the public Analyst the following articles:—milk 7, butter 3, oatmeal 2, pepper 4, mustard 2, lard 1, coffee 2. David Morgan, 22, Compton Street, was summoned for selling milk adulterated 11 per cent. added water, (sample C 2 90). Fined 20/- and 2/- costs or one month's imprisonment. Matthew Timlett, 36, Red Lion Street, for selling mustard adulterated 10 per cent. flour and turmeric, (sample C 2 95). Fined 10/- and 4/- costs, a second summons having to be applied for. I am, Gentlemen, Your obedient Servant, HUGH ROSE, Inspector. 95 REPORT OF ANALYST, For Quarter ending 31st March, 1887. Consecutive Numbers. Date when received. Name of Inspector. Name of Article. Distinguishing Mark. RESULTS OF ANALYSIS. 1 1887 Jan. 12 H. Pose Butter C 2 1 Not adulterated 2 „ „ ditto Milk C 2 2 10 per cent. added water 3 „ „ ditto Sweet Spirit of Nitre C 2 3 Not adulterated 4 „ „ ditto Coffee C 2 4 Not adulterated 5 „ „ ditto Mustard C 2 5 Not adulterated 6 „ „ ditto Butter C 2 6 Not adulterated 7 „ „ ditto Butter C 2 7 90 per cent. foreign fat 8 „ „ ditto Pepper C 2 8 Not adulterated 9 „ „ ditto Mustard C 2 9 Not adulterated 10 „ „ ditto Cream of Tartar C 2 10 Not adulterated 11 „ 20 W. Bartlett Milk C 1 Not adulterated 12 „ „ ditto Butter C 2 Not adulterated 13 „ „ ditto Milk C 3 Not adulterated 14 „ „ ditto Butter C 4 85 per cent. foreign fat 15 „ „ ditto Milk C 5 Not adulterated 16 „ „ ditto Butter C 6 Not adulterated 17 „ „ ditto Milk C 7 Not adulterated 18 „ „ ditto Milk C 8 Not adulterated 19 „ „ ditto Coffee C 9 30 per cent. chicory 20 „ „ ditto Mustard C 10 Not adulterated 21 „ „ ditto Butter C 11 Not adulterated 22 Mar.10 ditto Milk C 12 6 per cent. added water 23 „ „ ditto Milk C 13 Not adulterated 24 „ „ ditto Milk C 14 Not adulterated 25 „ „ ditto Butter C 15 55 per cent. foreign fat 26 „ „ ditto Milk C 16 Not adulterated 27 „ „ ditto Butter C 17 85 per cent. foreign fat 28 „ „ ditto Butter C 18 Not adulterated 29 „ „ ditto Coffee C 19 10 per cent. chicory 30 „ „ ditto Butter C 20 Not adulterated 31 „ „ H. Rose Pepper C 2 11 Not adulterated 32 „ „ ditto Whisky C 2 12 9 per cent. added water 33 „ „ ditto Pepper C 2 13 Not adulterated 34 „ „ ditto Butter C 2 14 Not adulterated 35 „ „ ditto Milk C 2 15 39 per cent. added water 36 „ „ ditto Butter C 2 16 80 per cent. foreign fat 37 „ „ ditto Butter C 2 17 Not adulterated 38 „ „ ditto Tea C 2 18 Not adulterated 96 REPORT OF ANALYST—continued. Consecutive Numbers Data when received. Name of Inspector. Name of Article. Distinguishing; Mark. RESULT OF ANALYSIS. 39 1887 Mar. 24 W. Bartlett Pepper C 22 Not adulterated 40 „ „ ditto Butter C 23 Not adulterated 41 „ „ ditto Milk C 24 Not adulterated 42 „ „ ditto Butter C 25 Not adulterated 43 „ „ ditto Coffee C 26 10 per cent. chicory 44 „26 H. Rose Milk C 2 19 Not adulterated 45 „ „ ditto Butter C 2 20 85 per cent. foreign fat 46 „ „ ditto Mustard C 2 21 Not adulterated 47 „ „ ditto Oatmeal C 2 22 Not adulterated 48 „ „ ditto Coffee C 2 23 Not adulterated 49 „ „ ditto Butter C 2 24 Not adulterated 50 „ „ ditto Mustard C 2 25 Not adulterated T. REDWOOD. 17, Bloomsbury Square, W.C., 5th April, 1887. 97 INSPECTOR'S REPORT, For the Quarter ending 31st March, 1887. To the Vestry of the Parish of St. James and St. John, Clerkenwell. Gentlemen, I beg respectfully to report that during the quarter ending 31st March, 1887, I purchased and submitted to the Analyst the following articles:—10 milk, 10 butter, 3 coffee, 1 mustard, 1 pepper. C 4. H. Molloy, 9, Collier Street, for selling butter adulterated with 85 per cent. of foreign fat. Fined 40/-, 2/- costs. C 9. H. Kennett, 46, Chapel Street, selling coffee adulterated with 30 per cent. of chicory. Summons dismissed. C 15. Eliza Parrott, 10, Chapel Street, for selling butter adulterated with 55 per cent. of foreign fats. C 17. Walter Ball, 27, Penton Street, for selling butter adulterated with 85 per cent. of foreign fats. Vendor left shop previous to hearing. C 19 and C 26. No summons taken out by order of Vestry. I have the honor to remain, Gentlemen, Your obediem Servant, W. J. BAKTLETT, Inspector. 98 INSPECTOR'S REPORT, For the Quarter ending March 25th, 1887. To the Vestry of the Parish of Clerkenwell. Gentlemen, I beg respectfully to submit to you the proceedings taken under the Food and Drugs Act for the quarter ending Lady-day, 1887. I have submitted 25 samples to the Public Analyst, viz:—3 milks, 8 butters, 1 cream of tartar, 1 sweet spirits of nitre, 1 Irish whiskey, 4 mustards, 1 oatmeal, 2 coffees, 3 peppers 1 green tea. William Cummings, 41, Rosoman Street, was summoned for selling milk adulterated 10 per cent. added water, (sample C. 2 2). Fined 40/- and 2/ costs. David Morgan Davies, 18, Sutton Street, butter adulterated 90 per cent. foreign fats. Fined £5 and 2/- costs. (Sample C 2 12). John B.'Fleuret, "The Jolly Coopers," Clerkenwell Close, for selling whiskey diluted with 9 per cent. Instructed to take no action. (Sample C 2 12). Thomas Edwards, 122, St. John Street, milk adulterated 75 per cent. ndded water. Fined £10 and 2/- costs. Caroline Ward, 19 Albemarle Street, butter adulterated 80 per cent. foreign fats. Fined 40/- and 2/costs. Mary Ann Corder, 38, Bath Street, butter adulterated 85 per cent. foreign fats. Fined 40/- and 2/costs. I am, Gentlemen, Your obedient Servant. HUGH ROSE, Inspector. VESTRYMEN Elected pursuant to the Metropolis Local Management Act, 18th & 19th Vict., cap 120. WARD No. 1. All that portion of the Parish which lies north of a line drawn from the west boundary of the Parish at Battle-bridge, along the centre of Pentonville-road, to the east boundary of the Parish at the top of the City-road, thence up High-street and Liverpool-road to Sermon-lane, thence westward (according to the boundary of the Parish,) to Caledonian-road, including Nos. 61 to 77, and 68 to 100, in that road, and 6 to 17, Caledonian-crescent, thence to the western boundary at Battle-bridge, and all that portion of the Parish which is situate at or about Muswell-hill. to go out of office in Mr. SAMUEL AUGUSTUS BROOKS 10, Northampton Square 1888 Mr. ALFRED GOAD 29, High Street JOHN BETJEMANN 36 & 38, Pentonville Road Mr. BENJAMIN GOODEN 20, Hermes Street Mr. JAMES GIBSON 24, Penton Street 1889 Mr- GEORGE MORRIS 17, High Street Mr WILLIAM ROBERT YATES 1* Penton Street Mr. WILLIAM JOHN HOOPER 33, Penton Street Mr. WILLIAM LEMON KELLAWAY 57, White Lion Street 1890 Mr. CHARLES BATCHELDER 11, Baron Street Mr GEORGE WILLIAM BETJEMANN 36& 38. Pentonville Road Mr. ALFRED GEORGE ALLARD 5, Rodney Street WARD No. 2. All that portion of the Parish which lies within a line drawn along the centre of Kings Cross-road, from Baker-street to Battlo-bridge, thence up Pentonville-road to the north-west corner of Claremont-square, thence down Amwell-street and Rosoman -street to Exmouth-street, along Exmouth-street and Mount-pleasant to the boundary, thence along the boundary of the Parish to King's Cross-road, bottom of Baker street, including nearly the whole of the House of Correction. Mr. JAMES JOHNSON 50, Baker Street Mr. WILLIAM JOHN JENNINGS 2, Tysoe Street 1888 Mr WILLIAM ROBSON 19, Holford Square Mr. JOHN WALTER HOPKINS 21, River Street Mr. HENRY ATKINSON 27, Great Percy StreetMr. ALFRED JOHN DIXIE ... ... 13, Wilmington Square Mr. ARTHUR THOMAS CATLEY 23, Lloyd Square 1889 Mr. WILLIAM PIERPOINT 240, St. John Street Mr. HENRY CHARLES LEETE 11, Amwell Street Mr. ROBERT CHARLES MURRAY 113, Pentonville Road Mr. JOHN CHARLES MENCE 100, King's Cross Road Mr. ANGELO BECK 29, Granville Square 1890 Mr. JOHN DORE 23a, Holford Square Mr. FREDERICK GEORGE SCHEIB 55, Amwell Street Mr. WILLIAM TRY REVNELL 126, Farringdon Road 100 WARD No. 3. All that portion of the Parish within a line drawn along the Pentonville-road, from the north-west corner of Claremont-square, to the junction of the City-road and Goswellroad, thence down Goswell-road to corner of Spencer-street including Nos. 290 to 320 on the north east side of Goswell-road and Nos. 1 and 30, in Sidney-Street, thence along Spencer-street, Myddelton-street, Rosoman-street and Amwell-street to the north corner of Claremont-square. TO GO OUT OF OFFICE IN Mr. JOSIAH LEAVER 1, Rydon Crescent 1888 Mr. NATHAN HARRIS 68, St. John Street Road Mr. HENRY HILL 11, Cyrus Street Mr. JAMES DURRANT SPIRES 205, Goswell Road Mr. EDWARD SANS 3, Garnault Place 1889 Mr. ARTHUR WHITE 53, Myddelton Street Mr. JHOMAS KEYWORTH EVANS 327, Goswell Road Mr. REUBEN SQUIRE 37, Myddelton Square Mr. GEORGE ANTILL 43, Myddelton Street 1890 Mr. DECIMUS ALFRED BALL 219 & 221, Goswell Road Mr. DANIEL COOKSEY 52, Amwell Street Mr. WM. BLAGDEN RICHARDS, B.A. 329, Goswell Road WARD No. 4. All that portion of the Parish within a line drawn from Goswell-road, along the centre of Spencer- street, Myddelton-street, Exmouth-street, Mount-pleasant, to the boundary of the Parish, thence along the line of the Old Fleet Ditch to New-street, opposite Clerkenwell-green, thence along Clerkenwell green (north side of Sessions-house) and Aylesbury-street to St. John-street, thence up tne centre of St. John-street to Percivalstreet, along the centre ot Pereival-street, and up Goswell-road to Spencer-street. Mr. THOMAS WILDBORE 145, 147,149, Farringdon Rd Mr. JOSEPH JOHN GOODE, J.P. 48, Clerkenwell Green 1888 Mr. REDMOND DENIS LYONS 1, Newcastle Place Mr. JOHN FREEMAN 45, Rosoman Street Mr. JOSEPH WALlON 7, Upper Charlts Street Mr. JAMES FRANCIS KELLY 21, Tysoe Street Mr. WILLIAM MORTIMER FOXCROFT 3, Holford Street Mr. WILLIAM HENRY McCARTHY 9, Mount Pleasant 1889 Mr. ELI HAVARD 19, St. John Street Road Mr. ROBERT STEBBINGS 1 8, Myddelton Street Mr. EDWARD PINN 235, Goswell Road Mr. HENRY PHILIP SCHEIB 4, Myddelton Street Mr. WILLIAM DAVIES 13, Claremont Square Mr. HENRY BURBILGE 63, St. John Street Road 1890 Mr. WILLIAM ERASER JACKSON 175, St. John Street Mr. JAMES JOHN STOCKALL 6 & 8, Clerkenwell Road Mr. GEORGE MASTERS 300, Goswell Road Mr. JOSEPH SADDINGTON143, Farringdon Road 101 WARD No. 5. All that portion of the Parish which lies south of the southern boundary of Ward 4, bounded on the east by a line drawn along the centre of Goswell-road from Perceval-street to Clerkenwell-road, on the west by the Old Fleet Ditch, and on the south by a line drawn from Goswell-road down Clerkenwell-road, thence irregularly, accordingly to the boundary of the Parish, to the Old Fleet Ditch. TO GO OUT OF OFFICE IN Mr. JAMES HENRY WHITE Mr. ARTHUR MILLWARD ... 1888 Mr. FREDERICK HASLEHAM Mr. CHARLES TAYLOR Mr. GEORGE BONNEY Rev. WILLIAM DAWSON, M.A. Mr. FREDERICK LOWE 1889 Mr. HENRY WALKER Mr. WILLIAM REASON Mr. WILLIAM JOLLY Mr. JAMES STEVENS KNIGHT Mr. THOMAS BAXTER l890 Mr. GEORGE BY ASS Mr. JOHN JAMES POTTS ... Mr. JOHN BOYD CASKIE, M.D. 156, St. John Street 12, Albemarle Street 44, Sekforde Stree; 4, Compton Street 5 & 6, St. James's Street 59, Red Lion Street 26, Clerkenwell Road 30, Red Lion Street 100, St. John Street 20, Berkley Street 4½, Clerkenwell Close 33 & 35, Goswell Road 169, St. John Street 18, Red Lion Street 89, Goswell Road Representative at the Metropolitan Board of Works, WILLIAM ROBSON, Esq., (Whose term of office will expire by effluxion of time on the second Wednesday in June, 1890). EX-OFFICIO MEMBERS. ST. JAMES'. Rev. JOHN HENRY ROSE, m.a., Vicar ...Lloyd House, Lloyd Street Mr. WILLIAM L KELLAWAY, Churchwardens 57, White Lion St. Mr. JAMES D. SPIRES, 205, Goswell Road ST. JOHN'S, Rev. WILLIAM DAWSON, M.A., Eector 59, Red Lion Street Mr. ARTHUR MILLWARD, 12, Albemarle Street Mr. JOHN JAMES POTTS, 13, Red Lion Street 102 VESTRY COMMITTEES. FINANCE COMMITTEE. Mr. W. ROBSON, Ex-Officio Ward 1. Mr. B. GOODEN „ A G. ALLARD „ J. GIBSON Ward 2. Mr. J. JOHNSON, Chairman „ A. BECK „ H. A. ATKINSON Ward 3. Mr. D. COOKSEY „ T. K. EVANS ,, „ R. SQUIRE Ward 4. Mr. W. M. FOXCROFT „ J.WALTON „ E. HAVARD Ward 5. Mr. A. MILL WARD,Vice-Ch. „ J. S. KNIGHT „ G. BONNEY PARLIAMENTARY COMMITTEE. Mr. W. ROBSON, Ex-Officio Ward 1. Mr. W. L. KELLAWAY „ „ „ „ Ward 2. Mr. J. JOHNSON „ A. BECK „ R. C. MURRAY Ward 3. Mr. W. B. RICHARDS, B.A., Chairman. „ „ „ „ Ward 4. Mr. J. F. KELLY „ E. HAVARD H. P. SCHEIB, V.-Chair. Ward 5. Mr. A. MILLWARD „ J. H. WHITE „ „ ASSESSMENT & APPEAL COMMITTEE. Mr. W. ROBSON, Ex-Offic;o Ward 1. Mr. G. MORRIS „ W. L. KELLAWAY „ „ „ „ Ward 2. Mr. J. W. HOPKINS „ „ A. J. DIXIE, Vice-Cbair. „ W. T. RE VNELL „ A. T. CAILEY Ward 3. Mr. D. A. BALL „ H. HILL „ ,, J. LEAVER, Chairman „ R. SQUIRE Ward 4. Mr. W. M. FOXCROFT „ R. D. LYONS „ E. PINN „ w. h. McCarthy Ward 5. Mr. W. REASON „ W. JOLLY" „ G. BONNEY „ G. BYASS Ex-Officio Members of the ComraiKee. Mr. W. L. KELLAWAY Churchwardens „ J. D. SPIRES „ W. DAV1ES „ J. D. SPIRES „ A. J. DTXIE „ T. WILDBORE f 0verseers „ R. SIEB13INGS „ F. G. SCHEIB 103 COMMITTEE OF WORKS. Mr. W. ROBSON, Ex-Officio Wakd 1. Mr. S. A. BROOKS „ ,, G. MORRIS, Chairman „ W. J. HOOPER „ B. GOODEN Ward 2. Mr. A. T. CATLEY „ H. C. LEETE „ F. G. SCHEIB „ J. DORE Ward 3. Mr. E. SANS „ T. K. EVANS „ G. ANTILL „ J. LEAVER Ward 4. Mr. w. davies, Vice-Chair. „ T. wildbore „ J. walton „ w. h. McCarthy Ward 5. Mr. J. B. CASKIE, M.D. „ W. JOLLY „ J. S. KNIGHT „ J. J POTTS Wharf Rota— Chairman and Vice-Chairman and one from each Ward. OPEN SPACES COMMITTEE, Mr. W. ROBSON, Ex-Officio Mr. S. A. BROOKS, Chairman ,, J. WALTON, Vice-Chairman „ A. T. CATLEY „ W. DAVIES „ A. J. DIXIE „ T. K. EVANS „ E. HAVARD „ W. B. RICHARDS, B.A. „ E. SANS „ R. SQUIRE Vestry Hall, Cleekenwell, August, 1887. SANITARY COMMITTEE. Mr. W. ROBSON, Ex-Officio Ward 1. Mr. S. A. BROOKS „ J. GIBSON „ W. J. HOOPER „ A. G. ALLARD Ward 2. Mr. A. J. DIXIE „ F. G. SCHEIB J. DORE „ W. T. REVNELL Ward 3. Mr. E. SANS, Chairman „ D. COOKSEY „ G. ANTILL „ W. B. RICHARDS, B.A. Ward 4. Mr. W DAVIES „ T. WILDBORE,Vice-Ch. „ W. F. JACKSON ., G. MASTE RS Ward 5. Mr. J. B. CASKIE, M.D. „ J. J. POTTS „ W. REASON „ G. BYASS AUDITORS OF ACCOUNTS. Appointed by the Ratepayers. Ward I. Mr. J. 3. LEWIS, 56, Pentonville-road Ward 2. Mr. A. CLAUSS, 32, Pentonville-road Ward 3. Mr. W. FEARY, 251, Goswell-road Ward 4. Mr. G. J. BRAILEY, 21, Aylesbury-st. Ward 5. Mr. G. W. TILLETT, 141, St. John-st. TRUSTEES OF THE BANKING ACCOUNT. Mr. J. J. GOODE „ W. ROBSON „ J. GIBSON „ W. M. FOXCROFT „ W. PIERPOINT KOBERT PAGET, Vestry Clerk . 104 OFFICERS UNDER THE METROPOLIS LOCAL MANAGEMENT ACT, WITH THEIR RESIDENCES. Vestry Clerk, Mr. ROBERT PAGET, 19, Lloyd Square First Assistant Clerk, Mr. ROBERT ERNEST PAGET, 129, Osbaldeston Road, Casenove Road, N. Second Assistant Clerk, Mr. EDMUND PURDY, 10, Ferns Road, Stratford, E. Third Assistant Clerk," Mr. GEORGE RAY BROWN, 17, Ockendon Road, N. Fourth Assistant Clerk, Mr. CHARLES ASHFORD HARRISON, 23,Oglander Rd. East Dulwich, S.E. Surveyor of Roads, Pavements, Lamps, Sewers, &c. Mr. WILLIAM IRON, 148, King Edward Road, E. (May be seen at the Vestry Hall, daily, from 10 till half-past 11 am. when and where all applications for Licenses for Hoardings, House Drainage &c., must be made.) Surveyor's Assistant, Mr. PETER GORRIhGE KILLICK, 170, Stanstead Rd , Forest Hill, S.E. Wharf Superintendent, Mr. ISAAC GORE, Phoenix Wharf, Commercial Road, Lambeth, S.E. Inspectors of Nuisances, Street Keepers, and Inspectors unde the Adulteration Act, Works Department. FREDERIC CHESHIRE, 60, Rosoman Street Sanitary Department. Wards 1, 2 and 3— WILLIAM JOHN BARTLETT, 47, Wharton Street Wards 4 and 5— HUGH ROSE, 32, Cumming Street Assistant Inspector and Messenger, JOHN SAMUEL BISSMIRE, 5, Clerkenwell Close Solicitors to the Vestry, Messrs. BOULTON, SONS & SANDEMAN, 21a, Northampton Square Medical Officer of Health, J. W. GRIFFITH, Esq., M.D., 50, Camberwell Grove, S.E. Analyst of Food, &c. Dr. REDWOOD, 2, Fisher Street, Red Lion Square. District Surveyor (under Metropolitan Buildings Act), Mr. ERNEST CARRITT, 3, Wilmington Square APPENDIX I. 106 At a Meeting of the Vestry, held on the 18th December, 1873. "The Clerk called attention to the fact that since "the Vestry had ceased to collect the Poor Rate, which "duty had reverted to the Guardians or Governors of "the Poor under the Local Act, and which Board had "been revived for the purpose in November, 1871, "there was no Poor-rate Account published, except "the remainder of those in collection by the Vestry "previous to that time, and suggested whether it would "not be desirable, by an agreement between both "Boards, to publish the Poor Eate Account of the "Guardians or Governors as an appendix to the Annual "Reports of the Vestry, in which case there would be "one and a half years' Poor Eate Account to be "appended to the Report about to be issued for the "year ended Lady-day last. "It was moved by Mr. Bamford, seconded by "Mr. Dore, and— "Resolved that such suggestion be approved and "adopted." (Extract from Board Minutes.) ROBERT PAGET, Vestry Clerk. The Poor Rate Account of the Guardians or Governors of the Poor for the year ending Lady-day, 1887, is annexed hereto accordingly. Guardians or Governors of the Poor of the Parish of Saint James, Clerkenwell, (UNDER THE LOCAL ACT). STATEMENT AND ACCOUNT OF THE RECEIPTS AND EXPENDITURE ON ACCOUNT OF THE POOR RATE, For the Half-year ended Michaelmas, 1886. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. 1886 £ s. d. Balance brought forward 1603 5 6 March 26. C. H. Garland, Esq., Treasurer of the Holborn Guardians, Balance of Second Instalment of Precept 1260 0 0 Received on Rates as follows :— R. Paget, Salary as Clerk to Lady-day 12 10 0 October, 1884— 1st portion 4 19 0 Vesiry of Clerkenwell, Valuation List Expenses 472 11 0 2nd „ 24 18 4 29 17 4 W.J. Ironside,Commission.&c.,to Lady-day 42 19 4 G. A. Potter, do. 48 12 5 April, 1885— lst portion 6 6 7 H. W. Holliday, do. 35 18 3 2nd „ 33 19 7 T. Powell, do. 39 13 2 40 6 2 June 1. Receiver of Metropolitan Police District Police Rate per Warrant dated 1st January last 3502 9 2 October, 1885— 1st portion 262 16 4 2nd „ 5001 4 2 "Architect," Advertisement re letting Workhouse site 2 10 0 5264 0 6 Treasury for Government property 194 11 3 S. G. Turner, Returning Officer's Expenses for Central Finsbury 113 4 11 Churchwardens of Clerkenwell. Repair of Churchyard 18 5 0 April, 1886— 1st portion 9301 1 1 2nd „ 8716 8 2 June 28. C. H. Garland, Treasurer, &c. on account of First Instalment of Precept 4000 0 0 18017 9 3 23351 13 3 July 19. do. balance 4447 16 8 Guardians of the Holborn Union, half-year's rent of College House Estate to Midsummer 150 0 0 „ 20. R. Paget, Salary as Clerk to Midsummer 12 10 0 W. J. Ironside. Commission, &c. to do 39 5 2 G. A. Potter do. 43 2 7 Forward 25299 10 0 Forward 14091 7 8  £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. Brought forward 25299 10 0 Brought forward 14091 7 8 Poor Rate made April, 1886— H. W. Holliday, Commission, &c. to Midsummer 33 7 1 Given in charge at 1s. 5d. 25336 18 10 Arrears of former Rates 5648 14 10 T. Powell, do. 41 7 0 Errors in last book, entries as irrecoverable, since collected 40 14 7 W. J. Goode, Printing 2 2 6 Boulton, Son & Sandeman, Committals 20 5 2 R. Paget, Petty Disbursements 3 19 0 5689 9 5 Aug. 17. C. H. Garland, on Account of Second Instalment of Precept 2000 0 0 31026 8 3 Aug. 24. C. H. Garland, on account of Second Instalment of Precept 2000 0 0 25299 10 0 Sept. 7. C. H. Garland, Treasurer, &c., on account of Second Instalment of Precept 1500 0 0 Collected 23351 13 3 Losses— .. 28. do. 3500 0 0 Allowed to owners 402 1 10 " 23192 8 5 Empties 1024 9 7 Excused 60 11 1 Balance carried forward 2107 1 7 Runaways 302 8 10 Reduced by appeal 66 5 8 25299 10 0 Duplicate Assessments 365 2 3 2220 19 3 25572 12 6 Arrears carried forward 5453 15 9 ROBERT PAGET, Clerk to the Board, January 1st 1887. I find the sum of two thousand one hundred and seven pound» one shilling and sevenpence to be the balance on this account against the Guardians or Governors of the Poor of the Parish of St. James, Clerkenwell. Dated this 16th day of February. 1887. H. LLOYD ROBERTS, Auditor. Guardians or Governors of the Poor of the Parish of Saint James, Clerkenwell, (UNDER THE LOCAL ACT). STATEMENT AND ACCOUNT OF THE RECEIPTS AND EXPENDITURE ON ACCOUNT OF THE POOR RATE, For the Half-Year ending Lady-Day, 1887. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. 1886. £ s. d. Balance brought forward 2107 1 7 Oct. 12. W. J. Ironside, Commission, &c., to Michaelmas 54 2 7 Received on Rates as follows:— April, 1883— 2nd portion 16 8 G. A. Potter do. do. 55 7 5 April, 1884— 1st portion 2 4 4 H. W. Holliday do. do. 40 19 0 2nd „ 2 6 3 T. Powell do. do. 47 7 3 4 10 7 Boulton, Sons & Sandeman, Legal Charges as follows— October, 1884— 2nd portion 2 4 2 April, 1885— 1st portion 3 4 2 Committal Warrants for Rates, &c. 29 14 10 2nd „ 2 4 7 Disorderly houses, 229, Pentonville Road, and 175, Farringdon Road 2 11 4 5 8 9 October, 1885— 1st portion 2 2 0 do. do. and as to fines 8 9 8 2nd „ 21 1 10 do. do. E. Barrett 29 16 8 23 3 10 R. Paget, Salary as Clerk to Michaelmas 12 10 0 April, 1886— 1st portion 201 11 1 Overseers' Expenses preparing Borough List 236 0 4 „ 2nd „ 4886 6 1 5087 17 2 do. County List, 17 14 6 Treasury for Government property— 28 12 4 do. Jury List 54 18 0 308 12 10 October, 1886— 1st ,, 8011 4 8 Boulton, Sons & Sandeman Expenses of Election of Vestry in May last 63 9 4 2nd „ 8447 5 2 16458 9 10 Nov. 2. C. H. Garland, Treasurer, &c., Balance of Second Instalment of Precept 3394 0 0 21582 11 0 Forward 23718 4 11 Forward 4047 0 11  £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. Brought forward 23718 4 11 Brought forward 4047 0 11 Guardians of the Pol born Union, half-year's rent of Highgate property to Christmas 150 0 0 Dec. 3. Receiver of Metropolitan Police District, Precept dated 1st July last 3049 15 10 21. A. G. A Hard. Repairs to Churchyard of St. James', Pentonville 19 5 0 Poor Rate made October. 1886— Given in change at Is. 4d. 23942 2 8 24. R. Paget, Salary as Clerk to date 12 10 0 Arrears of former rates 5453 15 9 1887. Errors in last book, entries irrecoverable, since recovered 38 12 1 Jan. 3. Repairs to Churchyard of St. Johns 71 5 0 11. W. J. Ironside, Commission, &c., to Christmas 35 9 4 5492 7 10 G. A. Potter do 39 6 9 H. W. Holliday do 33 0 7 29434 10 6 T. Powell do 37 16 0 Collected 21582 11 0 Receiver of Metropolitan Police District Rate on Government Property not in Valuation List 2 9 4 Losses— Allowed to owners 410 12 7 25. C. H. Garland, Treasurer to the Holborn Union on account of Precept 4000 0 0 Empties 1006 2 2 Excused 57 11 4 Feb. 21. do. Balance 2875 19 4 Runaways 178 14 11 Reduced by appeal 40 3 9 15. Churchwardens of St. James , Clerkenwell, repair of Churchyard 8 16 4 Duplicate Assessments 300 16 10 1994 1 7 23576 12 7 March 15. C. II. Garland, Treasurer, &c., on Account of Instalment of Precept 5000 0 0 Arrears Carried forward £5857 17 11 25. R. Paget, Salary as Clerk to date 12 10 0 19845 4 5 Forward 23868 4 11 Balance carried forward 4023 0 6 £23868 4 11 ROBERT PAGET, Clerk to the Board, July 6th, 1887. I find the sum of four thousand and twenty-three pounds and sixpence to be the balance on this account against the Guardians or Governors of the Poor of the Parish of St. James, Clerkenwell. Dated this 6th day of July, 1887. H. LLOYD ROBERTS, Auditor. APPENDIX II. [ Under Resolution of the Vestry of June 9 th, 1887.] LIST OF OFFICERS WITH THEIR SALARIES, &c. Name of Officer. Date of Appointment, and Salary at Appointment. Subsequent increase of Salary. Amount received during year ending March 25th, 1887. Robert Paget, Vestry Clerk November, 1856, £180 per annum, rising £10 per annum for 2 years To £250, from January. 1860; to £300, from January, 1863; to £350, rising: to £400 by two further annual increases of £25. from February, 1868. [This increase being for extra duties arid responsibilities caused by the transfer of the Poor Rate work from the Workhouse, Coppice Row. to the Vestry Hall.] To £500, from September, 1881. £500. The Vestry Clerk is also Clerk to the Trustees of the Church at a salary of £20 per annum by Act of Parliament. William Iron, Surveyor December, 1880, £250 per annum To £300, in March, 1882; To £350, in December, 1885 .£350. John William Griffith, M.D., Medical Officer of Health April, 1856, £100 per annum To £150, from January, 1868; to £200, from Christmas, 1875 £200. Theophilus Redwood, Ph. D., Analyst March, 1873, .£100 per annum £100. Boulton, Sons & Sandeman, Solicitors Mr. W. J. Boulton was appointed in January, 1858, at £100 per ann. Firm appointed on his decease in Sept., 1871 £100. Robert Ernest Paget, First Assistant Clerk January, 1871, £40 per annum as junior Clerk To £80, on temporary appointment as First Assistant, from July, 1871; to £90, from December, 1871, with further increase of £10, from December. 1872; to £150, from December, 1873; to £175, from March, 1877, with further increase of £25, from March, 1878; to £250, from March. 1882 £250 salary, and £3 8s. 3d. commission on weekly rents, under resolution of the Vestry £1 1s. attending poll at Vestry Election. Edmund Purdy, Second Assistant Clerk January, 1858, £40 per annum as junior Clerk To £50, from June, 1859; to £60, from September, 1860; to £70, from December, 1861; to £80 from March, 1864; to £90, from March, 1865; to £100, from March, 1866; to £120, from June, 1868; reduced to £100, from January, 1870; increased to £120, from July, 1871; to £140, from September, 1873; to £160, from March, 1876; to £180, from June, 1880; to £200, from March, 1884 £200, and £1 Is. attending poll at Vestry Election George Ray Brown, Third Assistant Clerk March, 1871, £40 per annum as junior Clerk (on transfer of Poor Rate work to the Vestry Hall) To £50, from July, 1871; to £60, from September, 1872; to £70, from June, 1874; to £80, from September, 1875; to £100, from September, 1877; to £120, from June, 1880; to £140, from May, 1883; to £160, from December, 1886 £145, and JJ1 Is. attending poll at Vestry Election. Charles Ashford Harrison, Fourth Assistant Clerk August, 1871, at £40 as j unior Clerk To £50, from December, 1872; to £60, from June, 1874; to £70, from September, 1875; to £90, from September, 1877; to £110, from June, 1880; to £130, from May, 1883; to £150 from December, 1886 £135, and £1 Is. attending poll at Vestry Election. Peter Gorringe Killick, Surveyor's Clerk 22nd September, 1881, at £70 To £100, from December, 1883 £100. Edward J. Sans, Temporary Clerk March, 1886, at .£1 weekly £51 Isaac Gore, Wharf Superintendent March, 1880, at 50s. weekly, and residence To £3 3s. in April, 1884 £163 16s., with residence John Calbow March, 1880, at 15s. To 20s. March, 1881; to 25s., February 1884 <£65. Frederic Cheshire, Street-keeper and Inspector in Works Department and Hall Keeper July,1873, at 25s. weekly, wife allowed 8s. weekly for cleaning office To 30s. in May, 1877; appointed as Adulteration Inspector at £10 per annum. Attendance at Holborn Guardians' Meetings at Yestry Hall, from August, 1874, 2s. weekly. Mrs. Cheshire's allowance increased to 10s. 6d., May, 1883. 2s. 6d. weekly allowed for attendance in Chapel Street on Saturday nights, in May, 1883 iJill 16s., with house, coal and gas and uniform. William J. Bartlett, Sanitary Inspector 20th August, 1885, £2 10s. and uniform £130, and uniform. Hugh Rose, Sanitary Inspector 20th August, 1885, £2 10s. and uniform £130, do. Name of Officer. Date of Appointment, and Salary at Appointment. Subsequent increase of Salary. Amount received during year ending March 25th, 1887. John S. Bissmire, Messenger & Assistant Sanitary Inspector January, 1876, at 12s. To 17s., October, 1878; to 21s., May, 1883 ; to 25s., October, 1885 J665, do. George Bissmire, Mortuary keeper 16th November, 1882, 15s. weekly and apartments £39, and apartments, coal and gas, and allowance of £2 2s. per annum for washing towels for post-mortem room. Wm. Jno. Ironside, Collector March, 1859, at 4d. in the £. £110 £185 16s. 7d. Commission. £4 4s. for writing half-yearly Local Ratebooks. £1 Is. for attending poll at Vestry Election. George A. Potter, Collector December, 1883, at 4d. in the £. £192 l1s. £197 16s. Commission. £4 4s. for writing half-yearly Local Ratebooks. £1 Is. for attending poll at Vestry Election. Harry W. Holliday, Collector September, 1872, at 4d. in the £. £82 6s. 8d. £156 15s. l1d. Commission. £4 4s. for writing half-yearly Local Ratebooks. £1 1s. for attending poll at Vestry Election. Thomas Powell, Collector December, 1875, at 4d. in the £. £109 16s. 2d. £178 0s. 10d. Commission. £4 4s. for writing half-yearly Local Ratebooks. £1 1s. for attending poll at Vestry Election. APPENDIX III. Extract from Cromwell's History of Clerkenwell. ACCOUNT OF the PAROCHIAL ESTATES, &c, AN ACCOUNT OF THE ESTATES, RENT CHARGES, AND INTERESTS, BELONGING TO THE PARISH OF CLEEKENWELL, 1836. 118 119 WHERE SITUATE. NAMES OF DONORS AND LESSORS. INSTRUMENT UNDER WHICH HELD. DATE. PRESENT RENT. DIRECTIONS AS TO THE' APPLICATION. NAMES OF TENANTS. NATURE OF TENANCY WHEN EXPIRING AND REMARKS. ESTATES. £ s. d. House in St. John Street, No. 160, and four houses in Red Lion Alley, Nos. 5, 6, 7, and 8 Constantino Bennett Will 6th January, 1577 22 15 0 Coals to the poor at Christmas G. Mitchell Lease Lady-day, 1869 Paid by Mr. Fidler Two houses and two pieces of land at Cobham, in Surrey Roger Bellow Will 29th April, 1614 20s. per annum to Parish of Cobham, rest in bread on Sundays One house Roger Bellow 31 10 0 E. Beckford Yearly Two houses Roger Bellow 12 0 0 M. Stanstreet Yearly Three land Roger Bellow 8 8 0 - Wm. Slifield Lease Michaelmas, 1846 House (No. 22) in Silver Street, called the "Axe," heretofore two houses, and formerly called Turnmill George Trappes and Sir M. Stanhope Deed 27th February, 1617 14 0 0 £2 12s. in bread, rest at discretion J. Notley Lease Lady-day, 1831 Paid by Mr. Welsh, of Turnmill Street Street Cockshute Farm, at Malvern, in Worcestershire Sir George Strode Deeds 6th & 7th August, 1657 125 0 0 £6 for Preparation Sermons, residue to the poor W. Stephens Lease Michaelmas, 1830 Paid by Mr. Stephens These premises are let at a full rack rent, House in Turnmill Street, No. 59, and two houses in Bitt Alley, Nos. 1 & 2 William Sanderson Will 17th May, 1650 18 0 0 Clerkenwell, and Wendover, Bucks, in equal moieties Anthony Payne Lease Christmas, 1837 Paid by the tenant, and one moiety is regularly paid to the Parish of Wendover Three houses in Clerkenwell Close Two of these houses converted into one Sir Robert Wood Will 26th March, 1663 50 0 0 Bread John Moore Lease Midsummer, 1886 Remaining house and shed converted into two houses 12 (Ground rent) 0 0 H. Powell Lease Midsummer, 1884 Estate in Hertfordshire Gyles Russell Will 29th August, 1664 For bringing up three poor children in Christ's Hospital until 16 years of age The Nomination is made by the Churchwardens and Overseers, on either of the children going out 120 121 "WIIERE SITUATE. NAMES OF DONORS AND LESSORS. INSTRUMENT UNDER WHICH HELD. DATE. PRESENT RENT. DIRECTIONS AS TO THE APPLICATION. NAMES OF TENANTS. NATURE OF TENANCY WHEN EXPIRING AND REMARKS. £ s. d. IIouso corner of Turnmill Street, and house adjoining on Clerkenwell Green, formerly two houses Leo Wiggles worth Deeds 25th & 26th November, 1672 52 10 0 For putting out poor children apprentice with a fee of £3 each Messrs. Coombe & Co. Lease Michaelmas, 1827 Paid by tenant IIouso in Ray Street,formerly two houses, and called '' Hockley-in-the-Hole " Ann Gardner Will 12th January, 1705 1 1 0 20s. to Charity Schools, residue to 20 poor widows G. Strutton Lease Michaelmas, 1856 Paid by Mr. Willis, Clerkenwell Green Clerk's well in Ray Street, and building over the well 18 0 0 Monthly The lease which expired at Midsummer, 1823, contained a covenant to renew for 40 years longer at the same rent, and might have been renewed—according to its conditions, at the rent of £2, but the right of renewal was lost through neglect to give due notice Piece of ground adjoining last mentioned premises Lease 18th August, 1863. Ihis lease is at a peppeicorn, and contains a covenant for keeping pump in repair, and a covenant to renew for 40 years on same terms Church Rectory and Advowson of St. James, Clerkenwell Purchased of Edward Drake Deed enrolled in Chancery 2nd June, 1656 Subject to £4 18s. 9d. per annum to Curate Yetted in Samuel Butler, Thomas Carpenter, Thomas Maynard, and John Towers (1 vacancy.) When Trustees are reduced to two, other three to be appointed 122 128 WHERE SITUATE. NAMES OF DONORS AND LESSORS. INSTRUMENT UNDER WHICH HELD. DATE. Persent Rent. DIRECTIONS AS TO THE APPLICATION. NAMES OF TENANTS. NATURE OF TENANCY. WHEN EXPIRING AND REMARKS. £ S. d. Small piece of ground, and building behind well Building in Ray Street, formerly used as a watchhouse, part since fitted up for a lock-up house for persons taken on Sundays for misdemeanors, and the rest as two shops The Commissioners of Paving paid for this building in the year 1798 £140, and held it as tenants to the Trustees at 1 guinea per annum, until January, 1822, when possession was given up in consideration of £50 paid by the Churchwardens to the Commissioners, in pursuance of an Order of Vestry of 7th November, 1821 1 shop 12 0 0 Tenant at will 2 shop 2 12 0 Tenant at will Acre of land in the Parish of Saint Mary, Islington (near the Regent's Canal Basin) Purchased of Henry Penton Deeds 17th & 18th August, 1792 In hand Part of burial ground Small piece of ground in churchyard at the north east corner, on which was formerly a house Thomas Bedingfield Part of burial ground Piece of ground laid into churchyard Purchased of Earl of Noithainpton Deeds 1st January, 1789 Subject to £21 per annum This lease contains a covenant for renewal every 21 years for ever, on paying a fine of £21. The present lease will expire at Christmas, 1830. Application must be made for a renewal previous to that time Pentonville chapel and yard Henry Penton Lease 124 125 where situate. names of donors and lessors. instrument under Hich held. date. Persent Rent. directions as to the application. names of tenancy. nature of tenancy. when expiring and remarks. £ s. d. Burial ground Bowling Green Lane, and "Cherry Tree" public house Marquis of Northampton Lease 17th July, 1766 21 0 0 Subject to £50 per annum. The public house is let to James Perry ■ Lease Midsummer, 1848 The lease from Marquis of Northampton will expire at Christmas, 1874 Burial ground in Ray Street Purchased of Thomas Crosse Deeds RENT CHARGES. Public house called the "Maidenhead," and premises adjoining, in the Parish of St. Sepulehre William Heron Will 12th July, 1580 14 0 0 £10 for repairing Church, and £4 for poor Paid by Clothworkers' Company On Woodbridge estate, including the east side of St. James's Walk to the north side of Aylesbury Street, from thence along the west side of St. John Street, down the south side of Corporation Row, and all the internal buildings T. Seckforde, Esq. Statute for Government of Woodbridge College, clause 35 10th July, 1587 10 2 0 1? 0 i 0 For poor 1s. in bread Paid by Mr. Palmer, of Doughty Street. By the Statnte this estate is charged £2 per annum, but the rental, on granting the last lease in 1757 being increased fivefold, £10 per annum On house and gardens in Turnmill Street Thomas Herbert Deed 5th July, 1590 3 0 0 every Sunday Food rayment, paid by Girdlers Company On manor of Lackford, in Suffolk Lady E. Kytson Deed 26th November, 1625 and firing paid by Sir Charles Kent, of Portman Square, who deducts 2s. 6d. for collecting On house in Turnmill Street John Smith 1 Will 1 21st September, 1668 2 12 0 At direction of C h u r c h wardens Paid by Mr. Judd On public house in Turnmill Street, corner of Cock Court, called the "Duke's Head" — Stoakes 1 2 0 0 0 0 Paid by Mr. Noel, Cecil Street, Strand House now part of the "Crown Tavern," Clerkenwell Green Sir Edward Smith 1 0 0 Faggots for poor paid by mr.sheppard, of the "Crown Tavern " — Scudamore paid by vntners Company . Henry Garrett will 29th September, 1764 0 6 8 Paid by Haberdashers' Company 809 6 8 126 127 WHERE SITUATE. NAMES OF DONORS AND LESSORS. INSTRUMENT UNDER WHIOH HELD. DATE. PRESENT RENT. DIRECTIONS AS TO THE APPLICATION. NAMES OF TENANTS. NATURE OF TENANCY. WHEN EXPIRING AND REMARKS. MONEYS AND STOCK. £ s. d. £50 0 0 William Pearson Will 15s. for a Sermon on Michaelmasday, 2s. Reader, 1s. 6d. Clerk, 1s. 6d. Sexton, and £1 Churchwardens for collation This £50 has been expended. but the 40s. per annum is regularly paid in the manner directed by the Testator £1000 0 0 Thomas Crosse,Esq. Will Minister £1 10s., Churchwardens 10s., Sexton 5s., Beadle 5s., Ringers 10s., and 40 poor widows 1s. 6d. each on St. Thomas's Day The principal was held out in purchasing the workhouse and burial ground in Ray Street Navy 5 per cent., now 4½ William Richards Will proved 26th June, 1819 To Minister and Churchwardens for distribution of interest in bread to poor at Christmas, in half peck loaves This was a gift of £200, and after payment of legacy duty was invested in 5 per cent. Navy Annuities, and produced £173 1s. 6d. in that stock, the annual dividend thereon is £8 13s. £173 1 6 Four per cent. Annuities, Susannah Nieman Will proved 4th September, 1816 To Minister of St. James.for distribution of dividends in coals to poor in the Parish in December, not more than a sack to a family This was a gift of £250 4 per cent. Annuities, and is reduced to £225 by payment of legacy duty thereout now 3½ £225 0 0 128 WHERE SITUATE. NAMES OF DONORS AND LESSORS. INSTRUMENT UNDER WHICH HELD. DATE. PRESENT RENT. DIRECTIONS AS TO THE APPLICATION. NAMES of TENANTS. NATURE OF TENANCY. WHEN EXPIRING AND REMARKS. £ s. d. Four per cent. Annuities, Susannah Nieman Will proved 4th September, 1816 To Minister of St. James's for distribution of dividends, in quartern loaves, to poor in St. James's This was a gift of £375 4 per cent. Annuities, and is reduced to £357 10s. by legacy duty being paid thereout now 3½ £337 10 0 Four per cent. Annuities, Susannah Nieman Will proved 4th September, 1816 To Minister of St. James's, and Eector of St. John's, for distribution of dividends of 1s. 6d. each This was a gift of £250 4 per cent. Annuities, and is reduced to £225 by legacy duty being paid thereout now 3½ £225 0 0 Four per cent. Annuities, Susannah Nieman Will proved 4th September, 1816 To Minister of St. James's, and Eector of St. John's, for distribution of dividends, in coals in winter,to poor in either district This was a gift of £400 4 per cent. Annuities, and is reduced to £360 by legacy duty being paid thereout now 3½ £360 0 0 £100 0 0 Francis Loveday Will 3rd June, 1702 Interest to be paid to poor on St. Thomas's Day This £100 was laid out in erecting a gallery in the Church 129 APPENDIX IV THE VESTRY OF THE PARISH OF ST. JAMES & ST. JOHN, CLERKENWELL. 29 & 30 Vict., cap. 90, s. 35, and 37 & 38 Vict., cap. 89, s. 47. REGULATIONS WITH RESPECT TO "TENEMENT-HOUSES," BEING HOUSES LET IN LODGINGS OK OCCUPIED BY MEMBERS OF MORE THAN ONE FAMILY, {THE LANDLORD BEING NON-RESIDENT.) LONDON: PRINTED BY W. J. GOODE, 23, ST. JOHN'S 'LANE, CLERKENWELL. 1887. ■ CLERKEN WELL. Regulattons with respect to "Tenement=houses," being houses: let ttt lodgings or occupied by members of more than one family (the landlord being non=resident). INTERPRETATION OF TERMS. In these Regulations, unless the context otherwise requires, the following words and expressions have the meanings hereinafter respectively assigned to them ; That is to say— "Tenement-house" means a house let in lodgings, or occupied by members of more than one family and entered as a tenement-house on the register of lodging houses, kept under these Regulations. "Landlord" means the person (whatever may be the nature or extent of his interest in the premises) by whom, or on whose behalf, such house is let out, or who for the time being receives, or is entitled to receive, the profits arising from such letting, and who is non-resident. "T??? nant'' means a person to whom any room or rooms in a tenement-house may have been let as a lodging, or for his use or occupation. 136 INFORMATION AND REGISTRATION. 1. The landlord of a tenement-house, within a period of 14 days after he shall have been required by a notice in writing, signed by the Vestry Clerk, and duly served upon or delivered to such landlord, or, in case he cannot be found, his agent, shall supply the information necessary for the registration of such house by the Vestry in forms supplied for the purpose, and shall sign a true statement of the following particulars with respect to such house, which information shall be duly registered; that is to say— (a) The number of rooms in the house: (b) The number of rooms let in tenements: (c) The manner of use of each tenement: (d) The number, age, and sex of the occupants of each room used for sleeping. OVERCROWDING. 2. The landlord shall not knowingly cause or suffer a greater number of persons than will admit of the provision of three hundred and fifty cubic feet of free air space for each adult, and of one hundred and seventy-five cubic feet of free air space for each person of an age not exceeding twelve years to occupy, at any one time, as a sleeping apartment, a room used for that purpose. 137 3. A tenant shall not knowingly cause or suffer a greater number of persons than will admit of the provision of three hundred and fifty cubic feet of free air space for each adult, and of one hundred and seventy-five cubic feet of free air space for each person of an age not exceeding twelve years to occupy, at any one time, as a sleeping apartment, a room used for that purpose, and which has been let to each tenant. EIGHT OF ENTRY FOR PURPOSES OF INSPECTION. 4. Every tenant shall, at all reasonable times, when required by the Medical Officer of Health, or the Inspector of Nuisances under his direction, or any other officer specially appointed or authorised by the Vestry in that behalf, afford any such officer free access, for the purpose of inspection, to the interior of any room or rooms that may have been let to such tenant. CLEANLINESS OF COURT, YAED, AEEAS, &c.— DUTIES OF TENANT. 5. When a tenant is entitled to the exclusive use of any court, courtyard, area, or other open space within the premises, such tenant shall cause such court, courtyard, area, or other open space to be thoroughly cleansed as often as may be requisite to keep the same in a clean and wholesome condition. 138 DRAINAGE AND CLEANLINESS OF COURT, YARD, AREAS, &c.—DUTIES OF LANDLORD. 6. Where two or more tenants are entitled to the use in common of any court, courtyard, area, or other open space within the premises, the landlord shall cause such court, courtyard, area, or other open space to be thoroughly paved, drained and trapped. He shall cause the same to be cleansed and lime-whited once at least in every year, in the months of March, April or May, and as often as may be requisite to keep the same in a clean and wholesome condition. WATER CLOSETS. 7. The landlord shall cause every part of every watercloset belonging to such honse to be maintained in good order, and every part of the apparatus of such water-closet, and every drain or means of drainage with which such water-closet may communicate, to be maintained in good order and efficient action, and shall also cause all such means of ventilation as may be provided in connection with such water-closet to be maintained in good order. 8. In every case where a tenant is entitled to the exclusive use of any water-closet belonging to such house, such tenant shall thoroughly cleanse the same as often as may be necessary. 139 9. In every case where two or more tenants are entitled to the use in common of any water-closet belonging to such house, the landlord shall cause the pan, seat, floor, and walls of such water-closet to be thoroughly cleansed or lime-whited as often as may be necessary. DUST BINS. 10. The landlord of a tenement-house shall cause every dustbin belonging to such house to be maintained at all times in good order. 11. Where a tenant is entitled to the exclusive use of any dustbin belonging to such house, such tenent shall cause such dustbin to be kept in a wholesome condition. 12. Where two or more tenants are entitled to the use in common of any dustbin belonging to such house, the landlord shall cause such dustbin to be kept at all times in a wholesome condition. 13. No person shall throw any filth or wet refuse into any dustbin belonging to a tenement house. ANIMALS. 14. A tenant shall not cause or suffer any animal to be kept in any room which has been let to such tenant, or elsewhere upon the premises, in such a manner as to render the condition of such room or premises filthy or unwholesome. 140 WATER SUPPLY. 16. Where a tenant is entitled to the exclusive use of any cistern or other receptacle for the storage of water supplied to the premises, such tenant shall cause the same to be thoroughly cleansed as often as may be requisite for the purpose of keeping it in a clean and wholesome condition. 17. Where two or more tenants are entitled to the use in common of any cistern or other receptacle for the storage of water supplied to the premises, the landlord shall cause every part of the interior of such cistern or receptacle to be thoroughly cleansed as often as may be requisite for the purpose of keeping the same in a clean and wholesome condition ; and no cistern or reservoir supplying water for drinking or culinary purposes or for use in the preparation of food, shall have any connection with a water-closet. WATER CLOSET ACCOMMODATION. 18. The landlord shall provide sufficient accommodation for every house by means of a water-closet or waterclosets, and every water-closet shall be supplied with proper flushing apparatus, and such accommodation shall be in the proportion of not less than one water closet to every twenty persons lawfully occupying the house. 141 NEW WATER CLOSETS. 19. In every case where the construction of a new water-closet is necessary in a tenement-house, the landlord shall construct such water-closet in accordance with the following rules:— (i.) If within the house, one side at least of such watercloset shall be an external wall, in which shall be a window of not less dimensions than one foot super. (ii.) The water-closet shall be furnished with a separate cistern or flushing box of adequate capacity, which shall admit of the supply of water without any direct connection between any service pipe upon the premises, and any part of the apparatus of such water-closet, other than such cistern or flushing box. (iii.) The water-closet shall be furnished with a suitable apparatus for the effectual application of water to any pan, basin, or other receptacle with which such apparatus may be connected and used, and for the effectual flushing and cleansing of such pan, basin, or other receptacle, and for the prompt and effectual removal therefrom of any solid or liquid filth which may from time to time be deposited therein. 142 CLEANSING AND VENTILATION OF HOUSES. 20. The landlord shall cause every part of the house to be thoroughly cleansed as often as may be requisite, and provide adequate means of ventilation, and shall cause such means of ventilation to be maintained in good order. 21. Every tenant shall cause every room or rooms, in his exclusive occupation, to be ventilated daily, and to be thoroughly cleansed from time to time as often as may be requisite for the purpose of keeping the same in a cleanly and wholesome condition. 22. Where a tenant is entitled to the exclusive use of any staircase, landing or passage in such house, such tenant shall cause the same to be thoroughly cleansed as often as may be requisite for the purpose of keeping the same in a cleanly and wholesome condition. INFECTIOUS DISEASES. 23. The landlord of a tenement-house, immediately after he shall have been informed, or shall have ascertained that any person in such house is ill or has died of a dangerously infectious or contagious disease, shall give notice thereof to the Medical Officer of Health of the Vestry, and to every tenant in such house, and shall carry out, without delay, all measures for disinfection which the Medical Officer of Health may direct. 143 24. In every case where a tenant has been informed, or has reasonable grounds for believing, that an occupant of any room is ill, or has died, of a dangerously infectious or contagious disease, he shall forthwith give notice thereof to the Medical Officer of Health of the Vestry, to the landlord, and to every other tenant in such house, and shall carry out, without delay, all measures for disinfection which the Medical Officer of Health may direct. PENALTIES. 25. Every person who offends against any of the foregoing regulations shall be liable to a penalty not exceeding forty shillings for any one offence, with an additional penalty of ten shillings for every day during which a default in obeying such regulations may continue. Sealed with the Common Seal of the Vestry. By order of the Vestry this 28th day of July, 1887. ROBERT PAGET, Vestry Clerk. Confirmed by the Local Government Board this Sixth day of August, 1887. CHARLES T. RITCHIE, President. HUGH OWEN, Seeretary.