TWENTY-NINTH ANNUAL REPORT OF THE VESTRY OF THE PARISH OF ST. JAMES AND ST. JOHN, CLERKBNWELL, FOR THE YEAR 1884-5. Presented pursuant to the 193th Section of the Metropolis Local Management Act, 18th and 19th Vict., cap. 120. london: W. J. GrOODE, PRINTER, 23, ST. JOHN'S LANE, CLERKENWELL. 1885. INDEX page. Report of the Vestry 5 Annual Statement of Accounts 35 Summary Statement of Contracts 46 Report of Committee of Works on Wharf Operations 49 Report of Surveyor 53 Report of Medical Officer of Health . . 57 Reports of Analyst ..71 List of Vestrymen and Committees . . 77 List of Officers 82 APPENDICES. No. 1.—Poor Rate Accounts 83 No. 2.—Report of Local Government Board for 1883-4, on Sale of Food and Drugs Act 89 No. 3.—Speech of Mr. W. Robson, as to allegations made by Sir Charles Dilke, M.P., with regard to the Vestry 95 REPORT OF THE VESTRY For the Year ended 26th March, 1885. Pursuant to the 198th Section of the Metropolis Local Management Act, 1855, the Yestry of the Parish of St. James and St. John, Clerkenwell, beg to present the following Report of their proceedings under the above Act, and the other Acts which are administered by them, during the year ended on the 25th March, 1885. Rates.—During the year the Eates made by the Yestry were as follows:— For the half-year to Michaelmas, 1884. A Poor Rate of 1s. 6d. in the £, estimated to realize £23,400 A Metropolitan Consolidated 3d. „ „ ,, 3,900 A General ,, 1s. Od. ,, „ „ 15,600 2s. 9d. £42,900 For the half-year to Lady-day, 1885. A Poor Rate of 1s. 6d. in the £, estimated to [realize £23,490 A Metropolitan Consolidated „ 5d. ,, ,, ,, „ 6,525 A Lighting „ 2d. „ „ „ „ 2,610 A General ,, 9d. ,, ,, „ ,, 11,745 2s. l0d. £44,745 The rates made in April, for the half-year to Michaelmas, were based upon a rateable value of £337,529, and those for the half-year to Lady-day, upon a rateable value of £342,900. 6 The amounts required by the Guardians of the Holborn Union were £25,121 in the first, and £24,282 in the second half-year, towards which the Parish of Clerkenwell received from the Common Poor Fund £4,633 11s and £5,600 16s. in the first and second half-years respectively. The precept of the Metropolitan Board of Works for the year was for the sum of £9,090 6s. 0d. and that of the School Board of £11,054 2s. 2d. The Police precepts for the year amounted to £6,940 19s. 2d. It will thus be seen that of the £87,270 raised during the year, the sum of £66,254 was required by bodies beyond the control of the Vestry. Valuation Lists.—A Supplemental, and three Provisional Valuation Lists, have been made out and deposited during the year, affecting some 568 assessments, and producing a net increase in the rateable value of about £6,000. Proceeding first to note the questions dealt with in the last Report in an incomplete manner, the Vestry now beg to submit the following observations:— Gates and bars across thoroughfares.—At the close of the preceding year the Vestry had just appointed three delegates to a Conference at the St. Pancras Vestry Hall to consider this subject. The delegates of the various local authorities arrived at a resolution urging the Metropolitan Board of Works to introduce a Bill into Parliament, at the earliest possible moment, for the abolition of such gates and bars, and noted with satisfaction a statement of the Home Secretary that he sympathized with the object of the Conference, and would give every facility for the consideration of any Bill dealing with the subject. The 7 Metropolitan Board of Works inserted a clause in their Various Powers Bill, 1885, for the abolition of obstructions of this nature across the streets of the metropolis, the maintenance of which streets is paid for out of the public rates, but the clause was withdrawn on the ground, as stated in the Board's letter of the 2nd April, 1885, "that the Board's proposal will meet with an amount of opposition that was not anticipated by the Board, every interest that would be in any way affected by the operation of the clauses being aroused against them," and that "the assistance, in the way of evidence in favour of the clauses, which the Board hoped to receive, has not been forthcoming to the extent expected, and to the extent necessary, if success is to be looked for," and that the Board had therefore referred the matter to a Committee for further consideration. Artizans' Dwellings Acts.—It will be remembered that at the close of last year the Vestry had referred to their Sanitary Committee the Official Representations which had been made to them under Torrens' Acts, by their Medical Officer of Health, with regard to the following areas:— Fox Terrace 13, 14, 15, Eagle Court Union Place Rhodes' Buildings John's Place Smith's Place Exmouth Place Slade's Place Bolton Court and Margaret Court Bishop's Court The Committee carefully considered the Representations, together with the Reports of the Surveyor upon them, and in due time presented recommendations to the Vestry with regard to the various areas. The recommendations of the Committee were very fully considered at special Meetings of the Vestry, and orders were made in all cases, either in accordance with the recommendations of the Committee or in a modified form. Great improvements in 8 the property affected have taken place in consequence, though the orders of the Vestry have not yet been fully complied with in all cases. In two instances the owners have exercised their statutory power of calling upon the Vestry to purchase the property, and their claims are now under consideration. They relate to Bolton Court, and some "obstructive" buildings in St. John's Square in connection with the Bishop's Court area. Clerkenwell Electric Lighting Order, 1885.—Notwithstanding the extension of time granted to the Metropolitan Brush Electric Lighting Co. by the Board of Trade, for the appropriation and deposit of capital for this enterprise, no progress whatever was made with it, and therefore on the 11th August, 1884, the Board of Trade revoked the Order. Board School. Green Terrace,—The proposal of the School Board to take Nos. 1 to 10 Green Terrace as a site for a Board School, which first came before the Vestry in November, 1883, and to which a strong opposition has been manifested by the whole of the neighbouring locality, has continued to engage the attention of the Vestry at intervals throughout the year. In July, 1884, in consequence of the declared intention of the School Board not to abandon the sitp, the Vestry sought and obtained the good offices of. Mr. Torrens, M.P. for the Borough of Finsbury, with the Education Department, the result of which was that, although the matter was so far advanced towards completion, it was re-opened. The School Board itself, though its Works Committee was evidently bent on carrying its own way, was almost equally divided, and resolutions were carried and lost upon the question with very narrow divisions. Eventually, on the 26th February, 1885, the School Board passed a resolution that application be made to the Education Department for authority to abandon the site, and instructing the Works Committee to 9 select a site south of Exmouth street, or reconstruct and enlarge the Bowling Green Lane School. The Vestry, together with a large number of the inhabitants, then waited upon the Right Hon. A. J. Mundella, M.P., VicePresident of the Committee of Council on Education, on the 15th March, in support of the application of the School Board, and their views were then very fully laid before him by the following Memorial from the Yestry, and by Mr. Robson in support thereof. To the Right Hon. A. J. Mundella, M.P., Vice-President of the Committee of Council on Education. The Memorial of the Yestry of the Parish of St. James and St. John Clerkenwell, respectfully sheweth, That it having come to the knowledge of your Petitioners that the School Board had selected Green Terrace as a site for a Board School, your Petitioners being of opinion that it was exceedingly undesirable to destroy one of the better class of residential property (of which there is too little remaining in Clerkenwell already), appointed a Deputation who waited upon the School Board in January, 1884, against the site being taken for the purpose, pointing out another site in the immediate locality (Lloyd's Row and Thomas Street) as being equally suitable and not involving the destruction of so good a class of property. That at that time very strong representations were made to the Vestry by the inhabitants of Green Terrace and neighbourhood, and also by the New River Company, against the Green Terrace site being taken. That in reply to this appeal the Vestry were informed that on March 21st that the Works Committee of the School Board did not see their way clear to recommend the Board to abandon the site, and that that suggested by the Vestry would be less suitable of the two. That the Vestry then entered into the more general consideration of the need of a Board School being erected on the site in question, and found that the real need for additional accommodation existed on the south side of Exmouth Street in the more immediate proximity of the Corporation Buildings and Farringdon Buildings in Earring don Road, and the Peabody Buildings in Peartree Court, where there are some 750 dwellings containing a population of some 3,750 persons, exclusive of the families of the ordinary occupiers and lodgers in this densely populated locality, and that the children from this neighbourhood, to attend a school in Green Terrace or thereabouts, would have to pass a crowded and most dangerous thoroughfare close by the Vestry Hall, Rosoman Street, at least four times a day. That your Memorialists then pointed out several other sites south of Exmouth Street, which 10 might be made available in the more immediate locality of the Buildings above referred to, and the great danger to the children having to cross Exmouth Street for the purpose of attending school, but without immediate result. That the inhabitants of Green Terrace and neighbourhood having become deeply concerned at the prospect of Green Terrace being taken, convened a public meeting to consider the subject, which was more crowded and demonstrative in favour of the object in view (the denunciation of Green Terrace site being taken) than any public meeting which has been held in Clerkenwell for many years. That the communications of the inhabitants resulting from this meeting and further communications from the Vestry to the School Board have been respectfully received by the majority of that Board, and have led to the further consideration of the question whether a Board School is needed at all near Green Terrace, the result of this more mature consideration being that the School Board has just passed a resolution by the large majority of 31 to 13 to apply to the Education Department for authority to abandon the Green Terrace site. That the New River Company, the freeholders, who had been served by the School Board with notice to treat for the purchase of the site have most readily agreed to release the School Board from their obligations under such notice, being reluctant to part with the property and to have the value of the surrounding property depreciated by a Board School being established thereon. That your Memorialists may be considered as friends of the School Board and its policy generally, never having joined in opposition thereto in compliance with invitations from other localities with that view. That your Memorialists therefore very respectfully but very urgently pray the Education Department of the Privy Council to consent to the application of the School Board to be allowed to abandon the Green Terrace site for a Board School. And your Memorialists will ever pray. (Signed) ROBERT PAGET, Vestry Clerk. In reply, Mr. Mundella stated that the Department would be prepared to sanction the abandonment of the site so soon as the School Board provide another suitable site for the requirements of the neighbourhood. Goswell Road.—The Agreement referred to in the last Report, as being about to be entered into between this Yestry and the Vestry of St. Luke's, for the maintenance of Goswell Road by the two parishes, the dividing line being opposite Seward Street, Clerkenwell taking the northern, and St. Luke's the southern side, was duly 11 carried into effect by the issue of an Order by the Metropolitan Board of Works, dated 6th of February, 1885. Widening of St. John Street.—This matter was also under the consideration of the Vestry in the year embraced by the last Report, and, at its close, the matter had been referred to the Vestry's surveyor to prepare a plan of the property which would be required to be taken. This having been done, the Vestry memorialised the Metropolitan Board of Works to undertake the work as a Metropolitan Improvement, knowing, as they do, that by far the larger portion of the traffic passing this narrow gorge comes from districts far outside the limits of the parish, attracted by the great Central Markets which lie just below, and within the City boundary. The Metropolitan Board of Works, however, replied that having given careful consideration to the matter, they are unable to regard the improvement as one which should be undertaken by the Metropolis at large. Colney Hatch Lane.—The Vestry are unable yet to report the provision of a means of drainage of the houses in Colney Hatch Lane. Considerable correspondence took place during the year between various complainants, the Hornsey Local Board, the Local Government Board, and the Yestry, upon the subject of the nuisances arising from the want of drainage, particularly as regards two houses. The owner of these houses, however, took steps to mitigate the nuisance, and the complaints have now ceascd. It is understood that the Metropolitan Board of Works have come to an arrangement with the Friern Barnet Local Board to take the drainage of this area, though no official communication has been received from them to that effect. Cholera,—During the summer and autumn of 1884, the Vestry took every precaution against a visitation of cholera, which, however, happily did not reach this country. 12 Baths and Washhouses,—The Committee appointed by the Vestry in January, 1884, to obtain information as to the working of the Public Baths and Washhouses already established, presented a Report strongly recommending the adoption of the Act, as was done on a similar occation in 1874, but after a debate, extending over four nights, a resolution was passed that owing to the depressed state of the staple trades of the parish, and for other reasons, it is inexpedient to incur the expense at the present time. 93 Chapel Street, and Engine House, Penton Street.— These premises, which had been in the occupation of the Vestry and their predecessors, the Paving Commissioners, since 1792, having been let from Christmas, 1882, by Colonel Penton to new tenants, it being alleged that the premises formed part of the Penton estate, and that the lease, under which the premises were erected, expired at that date; the Vestry disputed the title of Colonel Penton to the property, having regard to the records of the Paving Commissioners of Oct. 4th, 1821, stating that "by what means the Commissioners became possessed of them [the premises in question] does not appear, but they are found exercising acts of Ownership so early as the 4th October, 1792." An action for ejectment was therefore brought against the Vestry by Captain Penton, and was tried before Mr. Justice Grove, on the 1st July, 1884, when judgment was given for the plaintiff. The Vestry did not appeal, and possession was given up. Peartree Court.—The Metropolitan Board of Works on the 14th January, 1885, handed over to the Vestry the care and maintenance of the new streets, &c. in Peartree Court, which had been cleared under the Artizans' and 13 Labourers' Dwellings Improvement Act, 1875, and on which large blocks of model dwellings had been erected by the Peabody Trustees. In connection with this improvement a thoroughfare has been made at the end of Robert's Place, Bowling Green Lane, into the Peartree Court area. Rawstorne Place.—Another thoroughfare has been made, in connection with the erection of Artizans' Dwellings in Rawstorne Place, by the Brewers' Company making an opening into Buxton Street London Government Bill, 1884.—This Bill, alluded to in the last Report, was introduced into the House of Commons just before the Easter recess, but it made little progress afterwards. The second reading was taken early in July, and during the debate on the 8th of that month a motion for adjournment of the debate was made which was rejected by 188 to 117. The Government then expressed themselves satisfied with the vote as an expression of opinion, and the debate was adjourned, not again to be resumed, for on the 10th July the Bill was abandoned. The main features of the Bill, so far as they affected the Yestries and District Boards, were that district councils should take their place, which district councils were to have only such powers as should be delegated to them by the Central or Supreme Council, the officers being appointed by the Central Council. The Bill was unanimously condemned by the local authorities for this and other reasons. This Yestry, acting in accordance with the general feeling of the Metropolis, authorised the Clerk to prepare, and cause to be presented, the following Petition to Parliament:— 14 To the Honourable the Commons of Great Britain and Ireland, in Parliament assembled. The humble Petition of the estry of the Parish of St. James and St. John, Clerkenwell, in the County of Middlesex, Sheweth, 1.—That your Petitioners are one of the Vestries mentioned in Schedule A in the Metropolis Local Management Act, 1855, and have an area of 380 acres, a population of nearly 70,000 inhabitants, and that the value of the property theroin amounts to about £405,000 gross and £335,000 rateable. 2.—That your Petitioners have considered the London Government Bill now before your Honourable House. That whilst deeming it desirable there should be a central authority having jurisdiction over those matters which belong to the Metropolis as a whole, they are of opinion that the powers and duties proposed to be given to the central authority by the Bill are such as would prove unworkable and impracticable, and would virtually destroy Local Self-Government in the Metropolitan districts. 3 —That the management by Englishmen of their own affairs and the power of raising and applying their money for their own purposes, known as Local Self-Government, has for centuries distinguished Englishmen from other nations, and that principle has, through all time of English history, received the support of England's best Statesmen, and good legislation should, in the opinion of this Board, be directed to foster and expand that characteristic, as freedom of thought and action is as much needed as a principle in Local Legislation as it is in Imperial Legislation. In the opinion of your Petitioners the London Government Bill is distinctly opposed to the principle of Self-Government and the freedom of that Institution, and ought to be opposed by all classes of Englishmen who desire to think and act for themselves in matters which affect themselves, unless so amended as to leave Local Self-Government unimpaired. 4.—That in the opinion of your Petitioners the Metropolis Management Act (Sir Benjamin Hall's Act, 1855) has been productive of great benefit during its operation. Under its provisions vast improvements have been effected in London and for the benefits of its inhabitants, and under its powers all the inhabitants of London who have felt any real interest in its management have been afforded the opportunity to become personally interested in such management, and it may be fairly inferred that if any considerable or influential portion of the inhabitants of the Metropolis had been sincerely impressed with the opinion that more judicious measures could have been adopted some effort to become personally interested in such management would have been made to give effect to those views during the long period which has elapsed between 1855 and the present time. 15 5.—That your Petitioners humbly submit that no good cause for the total abolition of the existing method of governing the Metropolis has been shown, but your Petitioners admit that some alterations and amendments may and probably would prove beneficial, especially in the direction of giving more power and improving the Municipal status of the present governing bodies. 6.—That your Petitioners humbly submit that, before passing such a sweeping measure as the Bill would be, a searching enquiry should be made into the present system, so that its defects may be discovered end provided for in any change. 7.—That your Petitioners humbly submit that in their opinion if such an enquiry were instituted, it would be found that any shortcomings which there may have been, have arisen not so much from any action, or want of action, on the part of the Local Authorities, but from the want of more power in the Local Authorities, under the laws which they have had to administer. 8.—That your Petitioners, without attempting to enumerate all the defects in the Bill, would humbly instance that the proposal to place the important duty of making and collecting rates, and the preparation of the Valuation Lists, in the hands of the Overseers, appointed under the Act of Elizabeth, and nominated by open Yestry according to an Act of George III., in lieu of the Vestries, who are the present rating authorities, is a return to an obsolete practice, is legislation of a retrograde character, and would be productive of much irregularity, confusion, and additional expense. 9.—That the Bill takes away the right of the Parishioners, deliberately reserved to them by Parliament in 1876, to have thoir Accounts audited by Auditors appointed by themselves (Sched., p. 93), which is in itself an essential principle of Local Self-Government. 10.—That for these and other reasons your Petitioners humbly submit that the Bill is objectionable in its present form. Your Petitioners therefore humbly pray that the said Bill may not pass into Law as it now stands, but that such Amendments may be introduced therein as shall secure to your Petitioners the privileges, and maintain the principles of Local Self-Government in their fullest integrity. And your Petitioners will ever pray. Sealed with the Common Seal of the Vestry this Third day of July, 1884. By Order, ROBERT PAGET, Vestry Clerk. 16 During the present Session no time has been found for reintroduction of the Bill. Of the chief Bills affecting the Vestry introduced into Parliament since the last Report the following is a brief summary:— The principal measure of the year—The Representation of the People Act, 1884.—was passed in an autumn session of that year. Its chief object is the extension of household suffrage to the Counties, but it also makes several other though smaller provisions. One of these is to remove the disqualification a householder formerly laboured under, if his house was held as part of his service to his employer. Another, and perhaps the most important to the authorities of parishes in Boroughs, is that the Overseers are charged with the duty of ascertaining the names of persons qualified under the "dwelling house" franchise of the 5th Section of the Registration Act, 1878, by reason of their inhabiting part of a house separately occupied as a dwelling. Redistribution of Seats Act.—This Act provides for the constitution of single member constituencies, and for the future this Parish will have its own parliamentary representative under the designation of Central Finsbury. Metropolitan Management Elections (Ballot) Bill.— This Bill, proposed to make official ballot papers compulsory at Vestry Elections, to provide that at least four days shall elapse between the nomination and the day of Election, and that the Poll shall, as far as circumstances admit, be conducted as the Poll at a contested Parliamentary Election is, by the Ballot Act of 1872, directed to be conducted. The Vestry were of opinion that the provisions of the Bill are such as would improve the present method of conducting Elections, and they therefore presented a Petition to Parliament in favor of same, but the Bill was dropped alter being read a second time. 17 Overhead Wires.—A Select Committee of the House of Commons having been appointed to cousider this question the Vestry adopted the following views: That the Vestries and District Boards should be the local authorities for the purpose of the regulation of these wires, the Metropolitan Board of Works or the Board of Trade being constituted the final Court of Appeal in the matter; that all wires should be registered with the local authorities, that penalties shall be attached to any infringement of the Act to be passed dealing with the question, and that the wires shall be rateable and rated. Water Companies' Charges.—Two bills were brought before Parliament for dealing with the question of the basis of charge of the Water Companies, one in the House of Commons introduced by Mr. Torrens defining the words "annual value" in the Waterworks Clauses Act, 1847, as the rateable value of the Valuation Lists; and one in the House of Lords introduced by Earl Camperdown, which provides that either quarterly or half-yearly the Company shall deliver to the person liable to pay the Water Rate, a statement of the particulars of the demand showing how the total sum is made up, and also providing that the Water Company shall not cut off the water supply until they have obtained an order granted on a summons to show cause why the supply of water should not be cut off, which order shall state when the cutting off may take place, as well as the reason for putting the power of cutting off in force. The Vestry were of opinion that both these Bills contain reforms which are urgently needed, and they therefore presented petitions to Parliament in their favour. Mr. Torrens' Bill passed into law, but that of Earl Camperdown was dropped after its second reading in the House of Commons. 18 The Vestry have succeeded in obtaining a reduction on the price to be charged by the New River Company for the water used in street watering, the price now charged being 9d. per 1,000 gallons instead of 1s. as heretofore. Parliamentary Schemes affecting the Parish.—The following seven projects affecting the parish have been introduced into Parliament this Session : Metropolitan Board of Works (Various Powers) Bill.— To construct a new street from Gray's Inn Road to the "Angel," passing in rear of the north side of Exmouth Street, through John Street, Tysoe Street, Rosoman Street and Garnault Place, to St. John Street Road by St. John's Terrace. The Vestry approved the Bill and it eventually became law. Metropolitan Railway Co. (Various Powers) Bill.—To construct a new Station in King's Cross Road, near Baker Street. The Vestry took no action with regard to this Bill. It passed into law on the l6th July. Metropolitan Central Tramways.—To construct Tramways from Farringdon Road, passing up Baker Street, Amwell Street, Penton Street, Roman Road, Drayton Park, and Blackstock Road to Finsbury Park. The Vestry gave it consent to the scheme upon condition that the Farringdon Road and Baker Street portions were abandoned. This was agreed to, but no progress was made with the Bill. North Metropolitan Tramways (No. 1).—To construct new Tramways from Old Street, along Clerkenwell Road and Theobald's Road, to near New Oxford Street. This scheme, to which the Vestry had on former occasions given its consent was again introduced, and this time with partial success, the Bill receiving the Royal assent on the 21gt May, the line ceasing at the Holborn Town Hall 19 North Metropolitan Tramways (No. 2).—To construct Tramways along St. John Street Road, St. John Street, from the "Angel," to near the New Meat Market, and Goswell Road (Siding). The Vestry gave assent to this scheme upon condition that the line ceased about the end of Aylesbury Street until the thoroughfare below should be widened. This was agreed to by the Company, but the bill was not proceeded with. London Street Tramways.—To construct Tramways along King's Cross Road and Farringdon Road, from King's Cross to Clerkenwell Road. This scheme was again introduced, accompanied by suggested improvements by way of widening the thoroughfare at certain points to meet objections raised to the scheme when it was last before Parliament, viz.: to take compulsory powers to acquire the house No. 64 King's Cross Road at the corner of Wharton Street, so as to improve the access to King's Cross Road from that street, and also to take the premises Nos. 1, 3, 5, 7 and 9 King's Cross Road, with the view of improving the road at that point; and, further to improve the levels of King's Cross Road in front of the sunken houses by slightly raising the road on the west side, and at the south end of Kings Cross road, opposite the property abovementioned, where it is proposed to improve the gradient. The Vestry gave its assent to the Scheme, and it received the Royal assent on the 22nd July. Islington ("Angel") and City Subway.—To construct Subway from the "Angel" to Moorgate Street, along City Road. The Vestry took no action with regard to this Scheme, which was read a first time on 5th March and withdrawn on the 10th of the same month. Regulations for houses let in lodgings, or occupied by more than one family, under Sec. 35 of the Sanitary Act, 1866.—In the last Report it was stated that a draft 20 set of Regulations, for the information and guidance of the Vestry, had been forwarded by the Local Government Board, who had declared the 35th Sec. of the Act to bo in force, which draft Regulations were under the consideration of the Vestry. The Regulations were under discussion at several meetings of the Vestry, and were ultimately rejected. The feeling which prevailed in the Vestry was that the Regulations generally were of such an inquisitorial and troublesome character that they were unsuited to the government of an Englishman's home. For instance, it was shown that in some cases even clergymen occupied lodgings which would be reached by these Regulations. In the parish of Clerkenwell there is a very large number of respectable people who are compelled to take houses larger than they require, because they cannot obtain suitable houses within their means, and arc therefore compelled, in aid of their rent, to take in lodgers, and the Vestry felt that to put in force regulations of the kind suggested would be an unnecessary invasion of the privacy of the houses of this class of people by a Public Officer, and therefore repugnant to the feelings of such people. Hence the non-adoption of the regulations as recommended. They further felt from the beginning that such suggestions as that "the floors of rooms shall be swept daily and washed weekly" (clause 21), that "every window shall be cleaned," &c. (clause 22), and that "every receptacle of refuse," &c., shall be cleansed every day (clause 23), and that "every window shall be opened and be kept fully open for an hour at least in the forenoon, and an hour at least in 21 the afternoon of every day " (clause 34), were not such as the Vestry could reasonably address to without being resented by English householders. They may also say that such regulations as these, suggested by the Local Government Board, were calculated to prejudice the minds of the Vestry against the regulations in general, and undoubtedly materially contributed to their non-adoption. These being the views of the Vestry, the Yestry Clerk, in reply to enquiry from the Local Government as to what the Yestry were doing in the matter, per resolution of the Board of the 8th August, was authorised to reply, setting forth the views of the Vestry, and accordingly replied as follows:— Vestry Hall, Clerkenwell, 58, Rosoman Street, August 15 th, 1882. Sir, At the last Meeting of this Vestry I was directed to reply to your letter of the 30th May last, as to the course adopted by the Vestry with regard to the suggested Regulations for Houses let in tenements, or occupied by members of more than one family, under the 30th Section of the Sanitary Act, 1866. I, therefore, beg to state that on such suggested Regulations being laid before the Vestry on the 3rd January last, they were referred to the Sanitary Committee for consideration and report. On the 21st February a report was presented from the Sanitary Committee submitting same, together with their observations thereon, for the consideration and approval of the Vestry with the view to their being sanctioned by the Local Government Board, as required by the Act. This Report, consisted mainly of mere verbal alterations, abbreviating the wording of certain clauses, but approving generally of the principles laid down in such Regulations. On this Report coming up to the Vestry, it was moved by Mr. Gibson, seconded by Mr. Ross—That the consideration of the question be adjourned for a fortnight, and that in the meantime the Clerk make enquiry of the other Vestries of the Metropolis as to their action in the 22 matter. An amendment was moved by Mr. Brighty, seconded by Mr. Javens—That the report be referred back to the Sanitary Committee for further consideration, and that the Clerk enquire of the other Vestries of the Metropolis as to their action in the matter, and, after discussion, the motion was by leave withdrawn, and the Amendment was put as the original motion, and duly carried. The Sanitary Committee afterwards held four Meetings, and then presented a Report with some further modifications, and recommending as follows:— Houses to which the Regulations shall apply. The following Regulations shall be applied to houses wholly let in unfurnished lodgings, with non-resident landlords, or where two-thirds of the houses are let out in lodgings, and to all tenements under the Small Tenements Act, otherwise the Poor Rate Assessment and Collection Act, 1869. Whereupon it was moved by Mr. Jennings, and seconded by Mr. Foxcroft— That such Clause be approved and adopted. It was moved as an amendment by Mr. Lyons, seconded by Mr Squire. That the Regulations be applied only to houses entirely let out in tenements. "Which Amendment was put and lost, there appearing two for it, and a large majority against it. The original motion was then put and lost, there appearing 9 for and 17 against it. I think I am perfectly right in saying that the feeling which prevailed in the Vestry was that the Regulations generally were of such an inquisitorial and troublesome character that they were unsuited to the government of an Englishman's home. For instance, it was shown that in certain cases even clergymen occupied lodgings which would be reached by these Regulations. In the Parish of Clerkenwell there is a very large number of respectable people who are compelled to take houses much beyond their means as regards rent, because they cannot obtain such houses as would be within their means, and are, therefore, compelled in aid of their rent, to take in lodgers, and the Vestry felt that to put in force regulations of the kind suggested would be an unnecessary invasion of the privacy of the houses of this class of people by a public officer, and, therefore, repugnant to the feelings of such people. Hence the non-adoption of the regulations as recommended. They further felt from the beginning that such suggestions as that 23 "the floors of rooms shall be swept daily and washed weekly,'' (Clause 21), that "every window shall be cleaned," &c. (Clause 22), and that " every receptable of refuse, &c., shall be cleansed every day" (Clause 23), and that "every window shall be opened and be fully open for one hour at least in the forenoon, and one hour at least in the afternoon of every day " (Clause 34) were not such as the Vestry could reasonably address to English householders. I may also say that such Regulations as those suggested by the Local Government Board were calculated to prejudice the minds of the Vestry against the regulations in general, and undoubtedly materially contributed to their non-adoption. With regard to the amendment above referred to, proposing that the Regulations should apply to tenement houses only, being rejected (the mover and seconder alone voting for it), it will be noticed that this was no more acceptable to the members of the Sanitary Committe than to the other members of the Vestry. I have the Honour to be, Sir, Your Obedient Servant, ROBERT PAGET, Hugh Owen, Esq., Vestry Clerk. Secretary, Local Government Board. Sanitary Condition of Clerkenwell.—The representations of Sir Charles Dilke, M.P., with reference to the bad sanitary condition of the parish, referred to in the last Report, continued to engage the attention of the Yestry during the year. On the 3rd May the following appeared in the Parliamentary Report of the Times and other daily papers:— On the 4th July, during the debate on the second reading of the London Government Bill, Sir Charles Dilke, in his speech, made the following remarks—"His honourable " friend (Mr. Torrens) knew the constitution of the Clerken''well Vstry, and the effect of his speech and vote might "be to leave that Yestry as it was. His honourable friend "knew that chairman after chairman of the Sanitary "Committee had again and again reported in favour of "sanitary reforms, and that their reports had been vetoed 24 "year after year by a majority of the Vestry who were "interested in the class of property which the Sanitary "Committee would interfere with. All who had held the "chairmanship of the Sanitary Committee for years past "had testified to the harm done by the action of the "majority of the Vestry. The Sanitary Committee had "now been repressed, and there was no one left to protest " against the management of the affairs of the parish." The Home Secretary has spoken of some "parishes as constituting a positive danger to the whole "Metropolis, and he (Sir Charles Dilke), on his official "responsibility maintained that that was the case. He "maintained, with regard to the Parish of Clerkenwell, "that its sanitary condition was not only a disgrace, but a "danger to the whole town, and the Vestry was not to be "trusted with such a position. Medical Officers of Health "had testified that it was well known they had much "difficulty in performing their duties when so many of "those who employed them were directly or indirectly "affected by the discharge of those duties." . "His honourable friend knew how much sanitary regula"tions were needed with regard to tenement houses; and "also that St. Pancras and Clerkenwell had refused to listen "to the representations of the Local Government Board " that they should pass sanitary bye-laws," The attention of the Sanitary Committee was called to the matter on the 7th July, and they passed a resolution— ''That the Clerk write at once to Sir Charles Dilke, "emphatically denying the truth of the statements made, and "also furnish a statement of the facts of the case to the "Borough Members, the Lord Mayor, the Home Secretary, "and other Members of Parliament, asking them to bring "subject before the House of Commons at the earliest " possible opportunity, in order that the denial may receive ''the same publicity as the allegations made, so far as the ''allegations against this Committee are concerned." 25 The Clerk thereupon wrote the following letter, a copy of which was in the hands of all the members of the House of Commons on the next morning:— Copy.] Vestry Hall Clerkenwell, 58, Rosoman Street, E.C., July 7 th, 1884. To the Right Hon. Sir Charles Dilke, Bart., M.P. Sir, LONDON GOVERNMENT BILL. This morning the Sanitary Committee of this Vestry had their attention called to your speech made in the House of Commons on Friday last, as reported in the daily press of Saturday, wherein you are reported to have said as regards Clerkenwell:— "His honourable friend (Mr. Torrens) knew the constitution "of the Clerkenwell Vestry, and the effect of his speech and vote "might be to leave that Vestry as it was. His honourable friend "knew that Chairman after Chairman of the Sanitary Committee "had again and again reported in favour of Sanitary Reforms, ''and that their reports had been vetoed year after year by a "majority of the Vestry who were interested in the class of "property which the Sanitary Committee would interfere with. "All who had held the Chairmanship of the Sanitary Committee "for years past had testified to the harm done by the action of "the majority of the Vestry. The Sanitary Committee had now "been repressed, and there was no one left to protest against the " management of the affairs of the parish." ****** "The Home Secretary has spoken of some parishes as constituting a positive danger to the whole Metropolis; and he "(Sir Cbarles Dilke), on his official responsibility, maintained " that that was the case. He maintained, with regard to the " Parish of Clerkenwell, that its sanitary condition was not only a "disgrace, but a danger to the whole town, and the Vestry was " not to be trusted with such a position. Medical Officers of Health " had testified that it was well known they had much difficulty in " performing their duties when so many of those who employed " them were directly or indirectly affected by the discharge of " these duties." 26 "His honourable friend knew how much sanitary regulations "were needed with regard to tenement houses; and also that St. "Pancras and Clerkenwell had refused to listen to the represen"tations of the Local Government Board that they should pass " sanitary bye-laws." The Sanitary Committee expressed their great astonishment at these statements, as being altogether incorrect, and without foundation, and as they are directly and severely reflected upon, they have directed me to state the real facts of the case. It is not the fact that " Chairman after Chairman of the Sanitary Committee had again and again reported in favour of Sanitary Reform," and "that their reports had been vetoed "year after year by a majority of the Vestry, who were interested in "the class of property which the Sanitary Committee would interfere "with," and "that the Sanitary Committee had now been repressed, "and that there was no one left to protest against the management of "the affairs of the parish." On the contrary, the reports of the Sanitary Committee have almost invariably been accepted and agreed to without question. For instance, during the past year there have been thirty-two Meetings, and only twice have their recommendations not been adopted, one being a proposal to resort to other means to effect the abolition of an underground water cistern after the case had been tried at the Police Court, and had failed, and the other as to the adoption of certain regulations suggested by the Local Government Board with respect to houses let in lodgings or occupied by members of more than one family; the Yestry considering, like many others, that these were unnecessary, as the present sanitary laws were sufficient for the purpose. In the previous year (1882-3) no recommendation of the the Sanitary Committee was rejected. The Sanitary Committee has not "been repressed," but is alive and in full activity. It regrets exceedingly that you should consider that "the sanitary condition of " the parish is not only a disgrace but a danger to the whole of the town, " and that the Yestry is not fit to be trusted with such a position." In a letter I addressed to you on the 20th of March last, I quoted a Return made to the Metropolitan Board some time ago of works carried out by the Yestry since its formation in 1856, to 25th March, 1881, showing that nearly £28,000 has been expended in sanitary works alone. I also enclosed extracts from the Medical Officer's Annual Reports on the general sanitary condition of the parish, shewing that the death-rate had been steadily decreasing for years past, until it had recently been reduced to between 18 and 19 per 1,000, and this, notwithstanding an increase of population, while the mortality of all London is 21 per 1,000. I also stated that—"The Vestry have established a *%* The underlines were applied to those copies addressed to the Local Governing Bodies of the Metropolis. 27 Coroner's Court, and a mortuary (probably the best in London) at a cost of nearly £3,000, to which great numbers of bodies are removed annually from the dwellings of the poor, and the Vestry believe that though imperfections may still exist, the parish will very favourably compare with the Metropolis generally as to its sanitary condition, and that the Vestry, whose labours have been incessant in this direction, do not merit any discouragement in their work." In acknowledging the receipt of the above letter, on the 24th of March, you were pleased to conclude with the remark—"It is undoubtedly true that the parish is a healthy one." The Committee therefore trust that the imputation that the sanitary condition of Clerkenwell is " not only a disgrace but a danger to the town, and that the Vestry is not fit to be trusted with such a position," may be removed, as altogether opposed to facts. I have the honour to be Sir, Your obedient Servant, ROBERT PAGET, Vestry Cleric. At the Meeting of the Vestry on the 10th July, Mr. Churchwarden Robson called attention to the speeches of Sir Charles Dilke at the Kensington Town Hall on the 24th May, in which he is reported to have said: "It had been shown by the Chairman of the Sanitary Committee of the (Clerkenwell) Vestry, that he had, at every turn, been thwarted in his efforts on behalf of the ratepayers, by the interested opposition of those who controlled the Vestry; and also to the speech in the House of Commons on the 4th July above referred to. A resolution was therefore passed, by 27 to 4.— "That the attention of this Board having been called to "the statements made by Sir Charles Dilke in the Kensington Town Hall and the House of Commons, which are ''absolutely without foundation, this Board expresses its "deep regret that a Cabinet Minister should deem it "consistent with his high and responsible position to make "such statements without ascertaining whether they were "true, and hereby enters its emphatic protest against the "unfair and cowardly means which are being employed to " circulate such false reports," 28 The Speech of Mr. "Robson was ordered to be printed, and a copy sent to every Member of both Houses of Parliament, the Metropolitan Board of Works, and each of the Vestries and District Boards of the Metropolis. The Speech having thus become a public document as embodying the expression of the Vestry, a copy of it is appended to this Eeport). [ See Appendix No. 1]. Sir Charles Dilke, on the 9th July, replied to the letter of the Yestry Clerk of the 7th inst. that his remarks therein criticised were chiefly founded on his own personal knowledge of the parish acquired during the past nine months, and on evidence given before the Royal Commission on the Housing of the Working Classes by the Chairman and an Ex-Chairman of the former Sanitary Committees, by Lord William Compton, and Mr. Boodle, (Agent to the Northampton Estate,) and by five of the local clergy, that the adoption of the regulations with respect to houses let in lodgings has been repeatedly suggested by the late Sanitary Committee, and that the Yestry are entirely mistaken in supposing the other Sanitary Laws are "sufficient for the purpose," that they are, in his opinion, utterly insufficient. That with regard to his statement that the Sanitary Committee has now been repressed, he points out that the active and energetic Chairman of the late Sanitary Committee has been not only dismissed from the Chairmanship, but excluded from the Committee itself, apparently for his activity and energy, and that the composition of the Sanitary Committee has now become similar to that of the whole of the other Committees of the Vestry, the composition of which will shortly be explained to the public at large, also referring to the death-rate of Clerkenwell. On the 7th August the following proceedings took place at the Yestry :— Pursuant to notice given in the summons, Mr. Ross called attention to the statement in Sir Charles Dilke's 29 letter of the 9th July that he founds his statements regarding the unsanitary state of Clerkenwell, partly on evidence given before the Royal Commission on the housing of the working classes, by the Chairman and Ex-Chairman of the former Sanitary Committees, by Lord William Compton and Mr. Boodle, and by five of the local clergy, (the Vicar of the Parish not being called,) and moved, seconded by Mr. Leaver—That the Royal Commissioners be asked, through Mr. Torrens, to allow the Vestry Clerk to attend before that Commission, and to hand in a copy of Mr. Robson's Speech, as being a fair and truthful statement of the case of the Vestry and its sanitary administration, and to pray that such statement be published as an appendix to the Report of the Commission. The Clerk stated that he had just received an intimation that the Royal Commission were willing to receive any evidence he may be prepared to give, to-morrow (Friday), and suggested that it be left in his hands to produce such evidence as to the sanitary condition and administration of the Parish as he might be able to give, which, however, he had had no time to prepare as he would like to have done. The motion was then by leave withdrawn. And it was agreed that the Clerk be authorized to attend before the Royal Commission, and to give such evidence regarding the Vestry and its sanitary administration as he may deem fit. Pursuant to notice given in the Summons, Mr. Clements then moved, seconded by Mr. Ross, and it was resolved— " That Sir Charles Dilke's letter of the 9th instant, as on the "agenda, altogether fails as a reply to the Vestry Clerk's "letter to him of the 7th instant, it being a mere general " statement, instead of a reply to the direct denials of the " truth of the specific statements made by him. That Sir " Charles Dilke be asked to explain how he can reconcile his 30 "statement "on his own official responsibility," that the "sanitary condition of Clerkenwell was "not only a dis"grace, but a danger to the whole town "with its death "rate, which is below that of the Metropolis generally, and "his own statement in his letter to the Vestry, dated the "24th March, that "It is undoubtedly true that the Farish "is a healthy one."That he be asked to explain the state"ment in his letter on the agenda "that the composition of "the Sanitary Committee has now become similar to that of "the whole of the other Committees of the Vestry, the com"position of which will shortly be explained to the public "at large." Whether, by this statement, he refers to and "endorses the statement made in the House of Commons on "the 8th instant, by Mr. G. Russell, Parliamentary Secre"tary to the Local Government Board, on the same subject, "as reported in the Times of the 9th instant, viz.: " In the "Parish of Clerkenwell, in each of the five Committees a "large majority were house-farmers, or closely connected "with them. In the Finance Committee 10 out of 15, in "the Works Committee 15 out of 20, in the Assessment "Committee 15 out of 20, the Parliamentary Committee 6 "out of 15, and in the Sanitary Committee 9 out of 20 were "house-farmers." That Mr. G. Russell be written to, ask"ing him for his authority for the statement he made, as "above quoted, the correctness of which the Vestry alto" gether disputes." The following Letters were written accordingly : — Vestry Hall, Clerkenwell, August 14 th, 1884. Sir, At the last Meeting of this Vestry the following Resolution was passed, viz.: — "That Sir Charles Dilke's letter of the 9th ulto., as on the agenda, altogether fails as a reply to the Vestry Clerk's letter to him of the 7th ulto., it being a mere general statement, instead of a reply to the direct denials of the truth of the specific statements made by him. That Sir Charles Dilke bo asked to explain how he can 31 reconcile his statement, 'on his own official responsibility,' that the sanitary condition of Clerkenwell was ' not only a disgrace, but a danger to the whole town 'with its death rate, which is below that of the Metropolis generally, and with his own statement in his letter to the Vestry, dated the 24th March, that 'It is undoubtedly true that the Parish is a healthy one.' That he be asked to explain the statement in his letter of the 9th July, 'That the composition of the Sanitary Committee has now become similar to that of the whole of the other Committees of the Vestry, the composition of which will shortly be explained to the public at large.' Whether by this statement he refers to and endorses the statement made in the House of Commons on the 8th July, by Mr. G. Russell, Parliamentary Secretary to the Local Government Board, on the subject as reported in the Times of the 9th July, viz.:—'In the Parish of Clerkenwell, in each of the five Committees a large majority were house-farmers, or closely connected with them. In the Finance Committee 10 out of 15, in the Works Committee 15 out of 20, in the Assessment Committee 15 out of 20, the Parliamentary Committee 6 out of 15, and in the Sanitary Committee 9 out of 20 were house-farmers'; the truth of which statements the Vestry altogether disputes." I have, therefore, to ask you accordingly. I have the honour to be. Sir, Your obedient Servant, ROBERT PAGET, Vestry Clerk. The Right Hon. Sir Charles W. Dilke, Bart., M.P., 76, Sloane Street, S.W. Vestry Hall, Clerkenwell, August 14 th, 1884. Sir, The attention of this Vestry has been called to a statement made by you in the House of Commons on the 8th ulto., as reported in the Times of the 9th ulto., viz:— "In the Parish of Clerkenwell, in each of the five Committees, "a large majority were house-farmers, or closely connected with "them. In the Finance Committee 10 out of 15, in the Works "Committee 15 out of 20, in the Assessment Committee 15 out of "20, in the Parliamentary Committee 6 out of 15, and in the "Sanitary Committee 9 out of 20 were house-farmers." As the Vestry altogether disputes the correctness of this statement, 32 I am directed to ask you to be good enough to inform the Vestry upon what authority you made such statement. I have the honour to be, Sir, Your obedient Servant, ROBERT PAGET, Vestry Clerk. G. Russell, Esq., M.P., 2 Morpeth Terrace, Victoria Street, S.W. Vestry Hall, Clerkenwell, 15th August, 1884. Sir, Referring to my letter of yesterday, and to your statement therein quoted, as to the composition of the Committees of the Vestry, I ought perhaps to have added that there is a pretty general conviction in the minds of the Vestry that you have been very greatly misinformed and misled in the matter, hence the request that you state upon what authority you make such statements. I have the honour to be, Sir, Your obedient Servant, ROBERT PAGET, Vestry Clerk. G. Russell, Esq., M.P., 2 Morpeth Terrace, Victoria Street, S.W. REPLIES : — Local Government Bcard, Whitehall, August 16 th, 1884. Sir, I am directed by Sir Charles Dilke to acknowledge your letter of the 14th, and to say in reply, that he considers that the evidence you were good euough to give before the Royal Commission at its last sitting will, when published, furnish the best commentary upon the correspondence which has taken place between him and the Clerkenwell Vestry. I am, Sir, Your obedient Servant, J. E. C. BODLEY. R. Paget, Esq. 33 Local Government Board, Whitehall, August 15th, 1884. Sir, The memoranda from which I spoke on the 9th ulto. are not at hand, but I have no doubt that the citation which you make is substantially accurate. The words "or closely connected with them," should be repeated at the end of the paragraph. After this lapse of time, I do not see that any useful purpose would be served by enquiring into the authorship of an analysis which came to me from a trustworthy source. And I am strengthened in this view by the fact that your evidence before the Royal Commission on the Housing of the Poor, abundantly confirms the purport of my observations. I have the honour to be, Sir, Your obedient Servant, G. W. E. RUSSELL. R. Paget. Esq. This correspondence was laid before the Vestry on the 28th September, when the Clerk stated that if the replies just read are intended to convey the impression that his evidence went to confirm the allegations which had been made against the Clerkenwell Vestry, by those gentlemen, he must beg leave to demur to any such inference. That when the evidence was published it would be found that nothing which he had stated in his evidence substantiated the statements which had been made. When he was asked certain questions about members owning house property, he replied that he did not know the houses that they owned, nor was it his business to inquire. He said he believed a good many of the members of the Vestry were fortunate enough to be owners of house property, at least he hoped so. He was further asked if he was of opinion that owners of property were proper persons to be a majority of a Board and administer local affairs. He said most emphatically it was his belief that they were. When asked did he think it was the belief of the parishioners generally, he replied 34 that the fact of these gentlemen being returned to the Vestry convinced him that the parishioners were of the same opinion as himself. He thought the more property a man had in the parish, the more fitted he was to take part in local affairs. He told the Commission that they had not such men as the Marquis of Northampton, or Colonel Penton, on the Vestry, therefore they tried to get the best men that they could find. He was also asked, was there not a number of publicans on the Committees, and he replied that there was, but the numbers which had been quoted in the House of Commons were not correct. In reply to questions, he gave it as his decided opinion that they were qualified to be on the Committees, and quite as eligible, if not more so than others, because they were the highest rated people in the parish, and therefore had the most at stake. He remarked that it would be an extraordinary thing to find a Vestry in the Metropolis on which there were not publicans, and instanced that in the parish of Islington a gentleman who was Churchwarden for many years, and also, he believed, representative of the parish at the Metropolitan Board of Works, was a publican. He denied that the evidence which he had given substantiated the allegations which had been made against the Vestry, and about the constitution of the Committees. Memo.—The Report of the Royal Commission issued subsequent to the date embraced in this Report, bears out the foregoing statement of the Clerk. By Order, ROBERT PAGET, Vestry Hall, Vestry Clerk. Clerkenwell, 1885. METROPOLIS LOCAL MANAGEMENT ACT. STATEMENT and ACCOUNT of all Moneys Received and Expended from 26th March, 1884. to 25th March, 1885, By the Vestry of the Parish of Saint James and Saint John, Clerkenwell. Folio in Ledger. RECEIPTS. Moneys received by the Vestry from 26th March, 1884, to 25th March, 1885. Moneys owing to the Vestry 25th March, 1885. (Estimated) Folio in Ledger. DISBURSEMENTS. Unpaid at 25th March, 1884. Incurred from 26th March, 1884 to 25th March, 1885. Paid from 26th March, 1884, to 25th March, 1885. Unpaid 25th March, 1885. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. SEWER ACCOUNT. SEWER ACCOUNT. Balance brought forward from 25th March, 1884 33 10 9 87 Surveyor's salary, one third of 100 0 0 100 0 0 207 Capon, T., cement, drain pipes, &c. 36 0 5 97 7 10 113 15 4 19 12 11 Received on Rates as follows : 441 Rate made April, 1882 0 6 8 215 Waller & Co., Side Entrances, gully grates, &c. 24 3 0 49 1 3 73 4 3 442 October, 1882 0 5 0 443 April, 1883 1 0 3 171 New River Co , Water to urinals 25 3 0 16 6 0 8 17 0 253 Fees for connecting private drains with sewers 54 19 7 230 Barrett & Son, drain rods 5 7 11 6 7 11 305 C. Killingback, New Sewers in Peuton Place and Eagle Court 673 9 3 605 19 0 67 10 3 257 Loan of drain rods, &c. 7 14 0 301 Treasury, Fines paid for posting Bills in Urinals 24 0 0 302 J. Pizzey, New Sewer in Berkley Street 487 7 11 438 6 0 49 1 11 174 New River Company, Cleansing sewer in Arlington Street 11 7 3 135 Sewermen's wages 321 7 0 321 7 0 233 Rewards for information as to posting Bills in Urinals 4 0 0 4 0 0 133 3 6 239 Mrs.Bawden, Slops for Sewermen 3 4 0 3 4 0 311 Falberg, F., boots for flushers 2 12 6 2 12 6 Balance against account at 25th March, 1885 1563 10 1 312 Clifford, R. do. sewermen 9 13 6 9 13 6 289 Miscellaneous Expenses 2 10 6 2 10 6 Collectors' Commission 0 7 7 0 i 7 60 11 0 1781 4 8 145 2 1 1696 13 7 1696 13 7 Folio in Lodger RECEIPTS. Moneys received by the Vestry from 26th March, 1884, to 25th March, 1885. Moneys owing to the Vestry 25th March, 1885 (Estimated) Folio in Ledger DISBURSEMENTS. Unpaid at 25th March, 1884 Incurred from 26th March, 1884 to 25th March, 1885. Paid from 26th March, 1884, to 25th March, 1885.. Unpaid at 25th March, 1885. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. CONSOLIDATED RATE ACCOUNT. CONSOLIDATED RATE ACCOUNT. Received on Ratas as follows: 199 Metropolitan Board of Works 9090 6 0 9090 6 0 468 Rate made October, 1881 0 3 4 Collectors' Commission 13 11 8 173 12 11 146 19 0 40 5 7 459 October, 1883 138 12 2½ 13 11 8 9263 18 11 9237 5 0 40 5 7 463 April, 1884 3940 3 9 466 October, 1884 6385 3 9 140 0 0 Balance against Account at 25th March, 1884 332 18 10 10464 3 0½ 9570 3 10 Balance in favor of Account at 25th March, 1885 893 19 2½ 10464 3 0½ LIGHTING ACCOUNT LIGHTING ACCOUNT 175 Gas Light & Coke Co., Lighting 849 12 3 2787 6 9 2815 13 2 821 5 10 Balance brought forward from 25th March 1884. 293 9 3½ 214 Clark, H., Gas work 39 17 6 259 1 4 208 15 10 89 3 0 Received on Rates as follows: Collectors' Commission 23 8 7 48 3 1 46 15 11 24 15 9 497 Rate made October, 1881 0 1 8 911 18 4 3094 11 2 3071 4 11 936 4 7 498 April, 1882 0 1 8 499 October, 1881 0 7 2 Balance in favor of account, 25th March, 1885 142 19 2 500 April, 1883 1 17 3½ 602 October, 1883 1339 4 4 604 October, 1884 1573 3 8 1030 0 0 251 Sundry persons, Repair of damage to lamps 5 19 0 3214 4 1 3214 4 1  £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. WHARF ACCOUNT. WHARF ACCOUNT. Balance on Superintendent's Petty Cash Account brought forward 4 6 5 Watering, Dusting, Shopping, and Cartage. 407 Received for Ashes and breeze 718 7 8 80 7 0 196 Coombe's Exors., 1 year's Instalment of Loan 1600 0 0 800 0 0 800 0 0 421 Do. Trade Refuse 141 16 6 415 Do. Street Sweepings 121 0 0 6 10 0 Do. do. Interest, less tax 62 8 0 62 8 0 382 W. Stubbs, Use of berths for barge loading 23 8 9 0 12 6 381 W. Stubbs, Rent, less tax 150 11 0 599 12 8 600 18 4 149 5 4 201 J. J. Griffiths, paving dust shed 193 1 4 193 1 4 ,, W. Stubbs, Rent of Mr. Gore's Apartments 39 0 0 9 0 0 423 Phillips, T. J., Rent of 27, Commercial Road, lass tax 10 15 8 43 17 6 43 14 9 10 18 5 888 Smith, Parfrey & Hitchings, Discount allowed 2 6 0 393 Lambeth Vestry, Rates of Wharf 155 14 8 155 14 8 394 Do. do. 27, Commercial Road 8 0 0 8 0 0 401 Hayes & Son, do. 7 17 0 395 Queen's Taxes for Wharf 19 7 6 19 7 6 Do. 27, Commercial Road 2 7 6 2 7 6 383 Lambeth Waterworks Co.,Water 17 4 0 31 18 9 34 12 0 14 10 9 384 South Metropolitan Gas Co., Gas 14 5 8 31 7 8 33 0 5 12 12 11 307 Hawkey, J. & R., Linoleum, &c., at 27, Commercial Road 9 7 1 9 7 1 389 Hay, Straw, &c. 78 7 0 372 18 8 362 7 8 88 18 0 391 Oats, &c. 234 7 10 434 1 10 561 8 2 107 6 6 397 Sun Fire Office, Insurance 2 12 6 2 12 6 331 Stubbs, W. do. 2 8 6 2 8 6 152 Wages 2192 11 6 2192 11 6 398 T. S. Price, Veterinary Surgeon and Farrier 4 9 3 78 12 6 63 8 6 19 13 3 396 H. Standbrook, Farrier 19 19 1 19 19 1 400 Havard, E., Repairs to Vans and Carts 37 15 6 37 15 6 401 Hayes & Son do. do. 230 12 6 157 14 8 72 17 10 388 Smith, Parfrey & Hitchings, Repairing Wheels of Water Vans 23 5 6 23 5 6 385 Heeks, M..Dust Baskets & Repairs 3 12 2 5 9 8 6 4 10 2 17 0 386 Proffitt, J., Harness and repairs 7 15 2 42 19 1 42 7 9 8 6 6 218 Seymour. G. W., Shovels, Scoops, &c. 5 5 4 16 10 7 13 2 0 8 13 11 381 Stubbs, W., Horse hire for watering 225 5 7 225 5 7 Do. Cement. &c. 5 0 0 5 0 0 219 Dunhill, H., Dustmen's Smocks, Loin Cloths and Van Covers 14 16 8 14 16 8 277 Committee of Works and Rota's Expenses 20 17 2 20 17 2 396 Standbrook, H.,Vice.&c. at Wharf 1 12 0 1 12 0 287 Miscellaneous Expenditure by Superintendent 42 5 9 42 5 9 312 Clifford. R.. Boots for Jettyman 1 19 6 1 19 6 405 Winkley R. Shaw, Oil and Grease 4 8 0 4 8 0 Carried forward 1058 2 4 96 9 6 Carried forward. 2184 7 8 4875 10 2 5742 1 5 1317 16 5 Folio in Ledger. RECEIPTS. Moneys received by the Vestry from 26th March, 1884 to 25th March, 1885. Moneys owing to the Vestry 25th March. 1885. (Estimated.) Folio in Ledger. DISBURSEMENTS, Unpaid at 25th March, 1884. Incurred from 26th March. 1884. to 25th March. 1885. Paid from 26th March, 1884,to 25th March. 1885. Unpaid 25th March, 1885. £ s. d £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. Brought forward 1058 2 4 96 9 6 Brought forward 2184 7 8 4875 10 2 5742 1 5 1317 16 5 404 Walker & Son, Brooms 2 2 9 2 2 9 313 Fitzgerald. Timber for Vans 0 16 10 0 16 10 813 Dowling & Co . Faint for Carts 2 18 2 2 18 2 314 Carson & Son do. for Stables 1 6 3 1 6 3 H. McLachlan, Carpenter's work 2 2 0 2 2 0 387 J. Stephens. Repairing Ladders 1 13 3 1 13 3 399 Harris, S. & H., Harness Composition 3 12 0 3 12 0 402 Fitzwnter, J. M.. Writing Names on Vans, &c. 2 17 6 2 17 6 403 Ward. W. & E., Removing old tins 2 2 6 2 2 6 406 Sandell & Sons, Timber 2 15 5 2 15 5 419 Barges, Removing Hard Core 25 10 0 25 10 0 424 Cook. A , Repairing ironwork of Vans and Stable 9 10 7 9 10 7 Deficiency at 25th March, 1885 (carried to General Account) 1058 2 4 96 9 6 Balance in Superintendent's hands at 25th March, 1885 2184 7 8 4932 17 5 5799 8 8 1317 16 5 4743 9 0 2 2 8 5801 11 4 5801 11 4 GENERAL ACCOUNT. GENERAL ACCOUNT. Balance in favor of Account at 25th March, 1881 121 0 0½ Paving, Paving Materials. Ballast, &c. Do. Current Expenses Account 36 18 2 201 Griffiths, J. .1., Paving sides of Pentonville Road from Penton Street to King's Cross 202 14 0 202 14 0 •• Received on Rates as follows: 531 Rate made October, 1881. 1st part 0 11 8 Do., Paving with Old Materia!— Clerkenwell Close 60 9 6 60 9 5 532 ,, 2nd „ 0 8 4 Winchester Street 45 12 11 45 12 11 1 0 0 Pine Street 18 1 3 18 1 3 533 April. 1882, 1st part 0 6 8 Rosoman Street, Lower 17 8 1 17 8 1 534 ,, 2nd. ,, 0 10 0 Merlin's Place 13 2 0 13 2 0 0 16 8 Vineyard Walk 9 12 11 9 12 11 Carried forward Carried forward 367 0 7 367 0 7  £ s. d £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. Brought forward 367 0 7 367 0 7 535 Rate made October, 1882,1st part 0 10 0 Griffiths, J. J., Paving with Old Material— 536 ,, 2nd ,, 0 10 9 1 0 9 Cross Street 8 15 3 8 15 3 537 April, 1883, 1st part 2 0 6 Brunswick Close 7 8 8 7 8 8 538 „ 2nd ,, 7 9 6 Coldbath Square 7 2 6 7 2 6 9 10 0 Red Lion Street 7 8 1 7 8 1 539 October, 1883, 1st part 1109 0 6 Spencer Place 5 3 3 5 3 3 542 ,, 2nd .. 2678 9 10 Baker's Row 4 8 5 4 8 5 3787 10 4 Short's Row 3 16 5 3 16 5 545 April, 1884, 1st part 7882 19 11 Clark Street 1 9 1 1 9 1 548 ,, 2nd ,, 7910 13 6 Pentonville Road Sewer trenches 3 13 3 0 9 0 0 9 0 3 13 3 15793 13 5 550 October. 1884. 1st part 5108 0 2 205 Mowiem, J. & Co., Paving footway, Garnault Place 108 2 3 81 0 0 27 2 3 553 2nd ,, 3932 19 1 9040 19 3 2700 0 0 Do., do. Green Terrace 147 13 3 110 5 0 37 8 3 RENTS. Do., do. Risoman Street 83 13 10 62 5 0 21 8 10 302 G. Hawkins, Rent of Engine House to Lady-day, 1884 1 19 2 Do., do. Amwell Street 304 Patent Victoria Stone Co., Paving footway of High Street 338 18 5 245 Guardians of the Poor of the Holborn Union, Rent of Board Room of Vestry 40 0 0 304 16 0 34 1 5 ,, Val de Travers Asphalte Co., paving Brunswick Close 308 14 0 308 14 0 247 47 & 49, Northampton-road 68 9 0 Islington Vestry, paving part of Caledonian Crescent 15 14 11 15 14 11 248 Sewell, 8, Rosoman-mews 7 16 0 118 4 2 205 Mowlem & Co., Paving Materials 38 15 7 289 11 5 283 3 10 45 3 2 REPAIR OP TRENCHES. 201 Griffiths. J. J., Broken Granite 40 19 5 40 19 5 177 Gas Light & Coke Co. 306 16 8 94 0 0 203 Heard, E.. Ballast, Flints, &c. 48 8 1 379 15 4 282 7 0 145 16 5 174 New River Co. 415 14 6 99 0 0 231 Hornsey Local Board, Maintenance of Colney Hatch Lane 54 3 11 54 3 11 222 Post Office 0 17 0 723 8 2 255 License Fees for the erection of hoardings 91 17 4 RENTS, RATES AND TAXES. 240 Penton, Cant. F.T. .Ground Rent Pentonville-rd. & Penton-pl. 13 4 5 26 6 7 26 8 10 13 2 2 256 Coal-plates, cutting holes for same 2 13 6 241 Reed, T., ground rent of 47 & 49, Northampton-road 5 17 6 23 8 0 23 9 0 5 16 6 258 Old Stone sold 1 10 0 259 Paving repairs for private individuals, exclusive of amounts deposited for hoarding license, &c. Bangs Exors. (House of Retreat, Lloyd Square) 12 13 0 242 Coxe Estate, acknowledgement for Urinal in Angel Mews 0 1 0 0 1 0 243 Metropolitan Railway Company, acknowledgement for urinal in Farringdon-road 0 10 0 0 10 0 Colls & Son (Ford's Diamond "Works) 7 18 8 244 Ebbage.Rent of 8, Rosoman-mews 4 11 8 19 10 0 19 11 8 4 10 0 263 Marquis Northampton, groundrent of Mortuary 0 9 10 0 9 10 Parry, 8 and 9. Margaret Street 0 5 10 Vacuum Pump Co., Farringdon Road 39 13 10 171 New River Company, Ground Rent of Vestry Hall 9 15 0 9 15 0 Cubitt & Co.. Peabody Buildings 11 8 7 New River Co., Water and Meter rent Season, 1884 313 19 6 313 19 6 Haylock, T. H.,Wilmington Sq. 3 7 9 75 7 8 Do., Water for Court flushing 49 4 9 49 4 9 Carried forward 29805 9 5½ 2893 0 0 Carried forward 568 2 2 2170 1 0 1987 7 8 750 15 6 Folio In Ledger RECEIPTS. Moneys received by the vestry from 26th March, 1884, to 25th March, 1885 Moneys owing to the Vestry 25th March, 1885 (Estimated) Folio in Ledger. DISBURSEMENTS Unpaid at 25th March, 1884 Incurred from 26th March, 1884, to 25th March, 1885 Paid from 26th March, 1884, to 25th March, 1885 Unpaid at 25th March 1885 Brought forward 29805 9 5½ 2893 0 0 Brought forward 568 2 2 2170 1 0 1987 7 8 750 15 6 261 Fines recovered under Sale of Food and Drugs Acts 22 7 0 171 New River Co., Water Bate for Vestry Hall 4 16 0 4 16 0 273 Inquests, amounts received for use of Coroner's Court 17 5 0 Do., do., for 49, Northampton Road and Mortuary 5 0 0 5 0 0 30! Sewell, S., Fine for selling putrid ducks 10 0 0 Do., do., for 8, Rosoman Mews 0 16 0 0 16 0 Do., Acknowledgement for Fountain and two Urinals in Hardwick-street and Arlington-street 0 3 0 0 3 0 303 Chalet Company, Rent of Clerkenwell Road Chalet 10 0 0 264 Insurance of Vestry Hall, West of England Insurance Office 1 5 0 1 5 0 265 Do. on 47 & 49, Northampton-rd., Royal Exchange Assurance Office 0 9 0 0 9 0 266 Insurance of Mortuary, Phoenix Fire Office 0 15 0 0 15 0 267 Queen's Taxes for Vestry Hall 5 5 0 5 5 0 Do. Mortuary 6 6 3 6 6 3 Do. 49, Northampton-road 2 18 4 2 18 4 Do. 8, Rosoman Mews 0 14 11 0 14 11 Do. 247, Pentonville Road 0 6 1 0 6 1 IncomeTax on Interest on Loans 19 6 3 19 6 3 269 Rates for Vestry Hall 19 10 10 19 10 10 Do. Mortuary 34 17 11 34 17 11 Do. 49, Northampton-road 9 9 10 9 9 10 Do. 8, Rosoman Mews 4 14 11 4 14 11 PRECEPT. 200 London School Board 11054 2 2 11054 2 2 SALARIES AND WAGES. 85 Vestry Clerk 400 0 0 400 100 0 0 Do. On account of Poor Rate and Poor law work 100 0 0 0 0 87 Surveyor (two-thirds of salary) 200 0 0 200 0 0 89 First Assistant Clerk 250 0 0 250 0 n 91 Second ditto 200 0 0 200 0 0 93 Third ditto 140 0 0 140 0 0 95 Fourth ditto 130 0 0 130 0 0 97 Surveyor's Clerk 100 0 0 100 0 0 rried forward 29865 1 5½ 2893 0 0 Carried forward 568 2 2 14859 17 6 14677 4 2 750 15 6  £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. Brought forward 29865 1 5½ 2893 0 0 Brought forward 568 3 2 14859 17 6 14677 4 2??? 750 15 6 99 Medical Officer of Health 200 0 0 200 0 0 101 Analyst of Pood, &c 100 0 0 100 0 0 103 Solicitors 100 0 0 100 0 0 112 Inspectors 353 18 0 353 18 0 105 Inspectors under Sale of Food and Drugs Act—Mr. Cheshire 10 0 0 10 0 0 107 Mr. Thain 10 0 0 10 0 0 107 Inspector Thain, allowance in lieu of Rent 26 0 0 26 0 0 120 Mortuary Keeper 41 2 0 41 2 0 128 Labourers, including Paviors and Masons 1483 17 8 1483 17 8 144 Sweepers 1241 7 0 1241 7 9 167 Labourers, Breaking Stone, &c. 23 it 6 23 2 6 170 Men delivering Lists of Officers, Sanitary precautions, &c 11 3 6 11 3 6 Collectors' Commission 181 12 1 528 6 7 594 4 8 115 14 SUPERANNUATIONS. 109 Mortlock, Mrs 35 0 0 35 0 0 160 Cook, Mrs 13 0 0 13 0 0 Abrahams 1 8 0 1 8 0 Clarkson 1 15 0 1 15 0 LOANS. 187 Atlas Assurance Society,29th and 30th Instalments 6046 16 0 893 6 6 5153 9 6 Ditto Interest 270 19 7 270 19 7 189 Atlas Assurance Society,10th Instalment 11550 0 0 1050 0 0 10500 0 0 Ditto Interest 460 17 3 400 17 3 191 Atlas Assurance Society, 9th Instalment 2400 0 0 200 0 0 2200 0 0 Ditto Interest 95 6 6 95 6 6 193 Metropolitan Board of Works, 8th Instalment 1495 0 0 115 0 0 1380 0 0 Ditto Interest 54 19 9 54 19 9 194 Metropolitan Board of Works, 3rd Instalment 5850 0 0 325 0 0 5525 0 0 Ditto Interest 201 18 2 201 18 2 195 Metropolitan Board of Works, 1st Instalment 2000 0 0 100 0 0 1900 0 0 Ditto Interest 67 7 6 67 7 6 DONATIONS, &c. 310 Metropolitan Drinking Fountain Association, Annual donation 2 2 0 2 2 0 Carried forward 296 85 1 5½ 2893 0 0 Carried forward 30091 10 3 20193 9 3 22760 0 6 27524 19 0 Folio in Ledger. RECEIPTS. Moneys received by the Vestry from 26th March, 1884, to 25th March, 1885. Moneys owing to the Vestry 25th March, 1885. (Estimated) Folio in Ledger. DISBURSEMENTS. Unpaid at 26th March, 1881. Incurred from 26th March, 1884, to 25th March, 1885. Paid from 26th March, 1884, to 25th March, 1885. Unpaid at 25th March, 1885. Brought forward 29865 1 5½ 2893 0 0 Brought forward 30091 10 3 20193 9 3 22760 0 6 27524 19 0 300 City of London Lying in Hospital, Donation in aid of funds 10 10 0 10 10 0 VALUATION LIST. 169 Assistant Clerks 20 0 0 20 0 0 225 Goode, W. J., printing 15 17 0 7 10 0 8 7 0 SUNDRY BILLS. 89 R. E. Paget, commission on 3 14 3 3 14 3 rents collected 103 Boulton, Sons & Sandeman.Capt. I'enton's Taxed Costs and mesne profits in aetion Penton v Vestry 162 1 10 162 1 10 Do ,Vestry's Costs in same action 81 1 3 81 1 3 Do., Sundry costs out of pocket 20 18 5 20 18 5 105 Cheshire.F. .and Wife, attending llolborn Guardian Meetings 5 6 0 5 6 0 209 Lee, J., Smith's work 47 18 5 28 14 19 4 3 210 Monk, G. do 12 15 0 12 15 0 211 Ebbage, W., Carpenter's work 18 0 7 18 0 7 212 Sarjeant, E. H. do. 7 7 10 7 7 10 213 Dore, J. R., Plumber's work 4 8 3 71 19 7 68 13 2 7 14 8 215 Waller, G. & Co., Repair of water post 0 12 6 0 12 6 217 Calvert, F. C. & Co., Carbolic acid 17 18 6 220 19 1 230 2 8 8 14 11 236 Sanitas Co., Disinfectants 4 1 0 4 1 0 218 Seymour, G. W., Ironmongery 7 7 3 23 16 0 27 7 11 3 15 4 219 Dunhill, H., Waterproofs, &c. 16 5 6 16 5 6 306 Boulton, & Son, Leggings, &c 11 5 0 11 5 0 220 Berry, A., Chandlery 6 4 0 6 4 0 221 Terry, J., Testimonial to Mr. ExChurchwarden Goode 10 10 0 10 10 0 Do., Address to Queen on escape from assassination 4 4 0 4 4 0 223 Lewis, J., Sweepers' Brooms 49 11 6 49 11 6 225 Goode, W. J., Piinting 48 13 9 325 12 6 345 9 6 28 16 9 227 Homewood, J., stationery 17 5 1 17 5 1 228 Lill, H. do 61 14 1 47 12 9 14 1 4 Carried forward 29865 1 5½ 2893 0 0 Carried forward 30224 2 8 21368 15 0 23977 4 5 27615 13 3 Brought forward 29865 1 5½ 2893 0 0 Brought forward 0224 3 a 1368 6 0 3977 1 5 27615 13 3 229 Peacock, E , New masons' truck and repairs 15 1 0 15 1 0 232 Ayton, A. W., Chandlery 21 3 7 15 7 8 5 5 11 235 Advertisements 28 4 3 28 4 3 237 Newman, J., Billposting 8 10 0 8 to 0 239 Coals for Vestry Hall & Mortuary 20 7 0 20 7 0 271 Balance of License Fees returned 16 17 8 16 17 8 275 Committee of Works, expenses and refreshments 58 7 11 58 7 11 279 Sanitary Committee, do 26 9 8 26 9 8 281 Assessment Committee, do 69 2 7 69 2 7 313 Finance Committee, do 0 5 6 0 5 6 306 Baths & Washhouses Com. do. 2 15 0 2 15 0 283 Deputations to various bodies 29 5 2 29 5 2 284 Auditors 16 2 3 16 2 3 ,, Hire of Spencer Place Chapel for Meeting re Water Supply 2 10 0 2 10 0 Railway Fares for Assistant Inspector Candidates 2 14 0 2 14 0 Overpaid rates returned 1 18 8 1 18 8 Shorthand Notes of Mr. Robson's Speech as to Sir Charles Dilke's Speeches 2 7 8 2 7 8 Sundry Law hooks 2 14 6 2 14 6 Miscellaneous Expenses 4 1 6 4 1 6 297 Mortality Returns 1 11 9 1 11 9 299 Petty Expenses, Postage, &c. 58 5 1 58 5 1 306 Do., do. (Surveyor) 14 17 0 14 17 0 302 Testimonial to Mr. E.J.Thompson on his retirement from the Metropolitan Board of Works 25 0 0 25 0 0 303 Granvill, T., Inspectors' Suits . 12 12 0 12 12 0 311 Austin, J., Inspectors' boots 3 9 0 3 9 0 308 Bloomfield ,R.T., Inspectors' Caps 2 12 6 2 12 6 303 Hunt. J., Repairs to Vestry Hal and Inspector's residence 90 13 2 90 13 2 305 Cheque Book 1 5 0 1 5 0 ,, London Fever Hospital, expenses of maintenance of patient 6 3 0 6 3 0 307 Shaw & Sons, Law books 2 11 6 2 11 6 ,, Watson, W. & Son, Surveyor's Instruments 3 1 2 3 1 2 Hawkey, J. & R., Matting, etc. 0 16 8 0 16 8 308 Hansard A Son, Parliamentary Votes 2 0 0 2 0 C Beck & Co. Repairing water post 0 12 6 0 12 6 309 Kelly & Co., Directories 3 2 6 3 3 6 Carried forward 29865 1 5½ 2893 0 0 Carried forward 30224 8 21926 5 9 24529 9 3 27 62 19 2 Folio In Ledger. RECEIPTS. Moneys received by the Vestry from 26th March, 1834, to 25th March, 1885. Moneys owing to the Vestry 25th March, 1885 (Estimated) Folio in Ledger. DISBURSEMENTS. Unpaid at 25th March, 1884. Incurred from 26th March, 1884 to 25th March, 1885. Paid from 25th March, 1884, to 25th March, 1883. Unpa at 25th Maro 1885. £ s. d f, s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. Brought forward 29865 1 5½ 2893 0 0 Brought forward 30224 2 8 21926 5 9 21529 9 3 27620 19 2 Beal, E. W., Magistrate's Clerk's Fees under Valuation Act 1 0 10 1 0 10 Vail & Co., Printing re Sir Chas. Dilke's Speeches 3 2 6 3 2 6 310 Cove, Repairing locks, Ac 1 7 6 1 7 6 311 Mandeville,Repairing disinfecting oven 0 3 A 0 3 6 312 Inspector Cheshire, for adulteration purchases 2 0 0 2 0 0 Coghlan, G. M., copies Metropolis Local Management Aets 1 16 0 1 16 0 315 Moore, J. & Son,Winding Clocks, Vestry Hall and St. Jamea' Church 8 10 0 8 10 0 425 Removal of bodies to Mortuary 6 5 0 6 6 0 427 Men disinfecting 6 16 6 5 16 6 30224 2 8 21956 7 7 24551 1 1 27629 9 2 Balance against Wharf Account 4743 9 0 29294 10 1 Balance in favour of account at 25th March, 1885 601 17 5½ Less due to Clerk on Current Expenses Account 31 6 1 570 11 4½ 29865 1 5½ 2893 0 0 29865 1 5½ TREES ACCOUNT. £ s. d Balance brought forward from last year 7 16 0 310 G. Shillingford, pruning and supplying Trees 4 17 0 Balance in favour of account 2 19 0 7 16 0 7 16 o ABSTRACT. RECEIPTS. Owing to the Vestry at 25th March, 1885. EXPENDITURE. Owing by the Vestry at 25th March, 1885. £ s. d £ s d £ s. d Sewer Account 145 3 1 Sewer Account 133 3 6 Sewer Account 0 0 0 Sewer Account ... 1696 13 7 Met. Consolidated do. 40 5 7 Met. Consolidated do. 10464 3 0½ Met. Consolidated do. 140 0 0 Met. Consolidated do. 9570 3 10 Lighting do 935 4 7 Lighting do. 3214 4 1 Lighting do 1030 0 0 Lighting do. 3071 4 11 Wharf do. 1317 16 5 Wharf do. 1058 3 4 Wharf do. 96 9 6 Wharf do. 5799 8 8 General do 27629 2 2 General do. 29865 1 General do. 2893 0 n General do. 24551 13 1 Planting Trees 0 0 0 Planting Trees 7 16 0 Planting Trees do. 0 0 0 Planting Trees do. 4 17 0 £ 44693 9 1 Bal. at Bank 78 4 9 „ in Supt. hands 2 2 8 80 s Bal. due to Clerk on Cur. Exp. Ac 31 6 1 49 1 4 £44742 10 5 £4159 9 6 £ 14742 10 5 £30067 17 10 *This amount includes the sum of £800, payable by instalments, †This amount includes the sum of £26,658 9s. 6d., payable by instalments. PURSUANT to the 195th Section of the Metropolis Local Management Act, We hereby certify that we have carefully examined the respective Accounts of the Vestry of the Parish of Saint James and Saint John, Clerkenwell, for the year ending Lady-day, 1885, and that we find them to be true and correct in all particulars, and we hereby sign the same in token thereof. Dated this Twenty-ninth day of May, 1885. JOHN BONE LEWIS, ABTHUB WEBB, SAMUEL HOGG, EDWARD LENABD, GEO. W. TILLETT, Auditors. To the Vestry of the Parish of St. James and St. John, Clerkenwell. Gentlemen,—We, the undersigned, Auditors of the Accounts for the Parish of St. James and St John, Clerkenwell, having completed our Audit for the year ending March 25th, 1885, have to express our satisfaction at the excellent manner in which the Accounts have been kept and we tender our cordial thanks to Mr. Paget and his son for their courteous attention to us during the Audit by giving us every explanation recurred which greatly facilitated our progress. Dated this 29th day of May, 1885. We are, Gentlemen, Yours very respectfully, JOHN B. LEWIS, ABTHUB WEBB, SAMUEL HOGG, EDWABD LENABD, GEO. W. TILLETT. SUMMARY STATEMENT OF CONTRACTS FOR THE PERFORMANCE OF GENERAL WORKS AND THE SUPPLY OF MATERIALS. Date. Name of Contractor. Nature of Work to be performed or Materials supplied. Period. Price. 1884. March 22nd J. Mowlem & Co. Paving Materials One year from March 25th, 1684 At Schedule of Prices ditto E. Heard Broken Guernsey Granite ditto 14/6 per cubic yard ditto E. Heard Ballast, Flints, &c. ditto At Schedule of Prices ditto W. J. Goode Printing ditto ditto ditto W. E. Bridges 40-lb. Oats Three months from March 25th, 1884 22/3 per quarter ditto H. Paine Hay, Straw and Clover ditto Market prices June 12th J. Pizzy Constructing New Sewer in Berkley street £465 June 26th Yal de Travers Asphalte Co. Paving part of Brunswick close 10/6 per yard super July 8th J. H. Guerrier & Co. 40-lb. Oats Three months from 24th June, 1884 24/- per quarter H. Paine Hay, Straw and Clover ditto Market prices July 10th J. J. Griffiths Paving Dust shed at Wharf £186 August 7th J. Hunt Eepairs at Vestry Hall £61 15s. October 9th J. Mowlem & Co. Relaying footways in Garnault Place, Eliza Place and Amwell Street At Schedule of Prices ,, ,, Patent Victoria Stone Co. Repaving footway High Street with Victoria stone 7¼d. per foot super „ 14th W. Macklin 38-lb. Oats Three months from Sept. 29th, 1884 21/- per quarter 7th H. Paine Hay, Straw and Clover ditto Market prices „ 28th Waller & Co. New Urinal, King's Cross Road £163 Nov. 13th C, Killing-back Constructing New Sewers in Ea.gle Court & Penton Place £700 1885. January 6th J. H, Guerrier & Co. 40-lb. Oats Three months from 25th Dec., 1884 22/- per quarter ditto H. Paine Hay, Straw and Clover ditto Market prices March 5th New River Co. Water for Street Watering Season 1885 9d. per 1000 gallons 49 REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE OF WORKS ON DUSTING, SLOPPING, &c., For the year to 25th March, 1885. The Committee beg to present their Report for the year ending on the 25th March last, of the operations and results of the system of doing the dusting, slopping and watering of the Parish by the Vestry's own staff, as submitted by the Clerk, and approved and adopted by the Committee. 50 Dusting.—During the year there have boon 7,290 loads of dust, and 282½ loads of trade refuse removed. 139 freights of ashes and breeze, containing 8,661 chaldrons have boon removed from the Wharf, for which a sum of £715 6s. 1d. has been received, or an average of £5 2s. l1d. per freight, (against £7 15s. lid. lust year). 19 freights of hardcore have also been disposed of, 1 has been removed free, and 18 removed at a cost of £25 10s. 0d. Slopping.—During the year 3,636 loads of street sweeping were removed from the Parish, 186 of which, were collected late on Saturday nights. 99 freights of slops wore disposed of, 97 being sold for £121 10s. 0d., and 2 being removed free. Watering.—The watering was done mainly by the Vestry's stalf, but for 83 days an average of just over 5 horses per day were hired of Mr. Stubbs for the purpose. Cartage.—The horses and carts have also been employed during tho year in carting stone, gully refuse, &c., the cost of which, reckoning the horse, cart and man at 12/6 per day, would have amounted to £81 18s. 8d. Horses, Vans, and Carts.—The horses, vans, and carts remain as at the close of the previous year, viz., 17 horses, 11 vans, 10 carts, and 12 water vans. The dust shed has been paved at a cost of £193. This sum is treated as expenditure out of capital in the following Account, and a proportion is included in the item for depreciation. The Net Expenditure for the Year ended the 25th March, 1885, is shown by the following Account: — Receipts. £ s. d. Expenditure. £ s. d. For Ashes and Breeze 715 6 1 Interest on Loan 62 8 0 Trade Refuse removal 141 16 6 Rent, less tax 599 12 8 Street Sweepings 121 0 0 Do. 27, Commercial Road 43 17 6 Stubbs, use of berths for barge loading 14 1 3 Queen's Taxes 21 15 0 Parochial Rates 163 14 8 Do. Rent of Mr. Gore's late Apartments 36 0 0 Gas 31 7 8 Water 31 18 9 Oats, &c. 434 1 10 Hay, Straw & Clover 372 18 8 807 0 6 Veterinary Surgeon & Farriery 78 12 6 Insurance 5 1 0 Repairs to Buildings and Jetty do. Vans and Carts 11 3 8 259 18 1 Wages, Superintendent 161 4 0 Horsekeeper and assistance 118 2 6 Clerk at Wharf 65 0 0 Slopmen 276 12 6 Dustmen 682 12 2 Watering 142 10 6 Barge Loaders 301 5 2 Dust Sifting 421 12 8 Carried forward. 1,028 3 10 Carried forward 2,168 19 6 2,116 10 0 Receipts—continued. £ s. d. Expenditure—continued. £ s. d. Brought forward 1,028 3 10 Brought forward 2,168 19 6 2,116 10 0 Stone Carting 20 12 0 Wheelwright 3 0 0 2192 11 6 Horse hire for Watering 225 5 7 Rota Committee Expenses 20 17 2 Barges, removing hardcore 25 10 0 Harness and Repairs 46 11 1 Shovels, Scoops, &c. 16 10 7 Ladders and Baskets 7 2 11 Linoleum. &c., for Office at 27, Commercial Road 9 7 I Loin Cloths, Van Covers, and Dustmen's Jackets 14 16 8 Other small payments, including Mr. Gore's Petty Cash 54 10 6 Balance, or the net charge for the year 4,135 9 3 One year's depreciation 434 0 0 £5,163 13 1 £5,163 13 1 53 Surveyor's Report To the Vestry of the Parish of Saint James and Saint John, Clerkenwell. Surveyor's Office, Vestry Hall, Clerkenwell, 6th August, 1885. Gentlemen, I beg to lay before you my Report upon the Works, &c., executed by your Vestry during the year ending Lady-day, 1885, SEWERS AND GULLIES. One hundred and seven Sewers were cleansed and repaired, and 105 loads of soil removed, two new side entrance covers were fixed, six new gullies were constructed, 246 cleansed and repaired, and eight trapped, eight new gulley grates and 19 new air grates were fixed, and two flushing shafts constructed. 54 A 4ft. × 2 ft. 6 in. Brick Sower 320 ft. long was constructed, in Berkley Street, and connected with the existing Hewers in St. John's Lane and Red Lion Street. An 18 inch Sewer pipe GOO feet long was constructed in Penton Place, and connected with the Fleet Sewer in King's Cross Road, and 280 feet of 12 in. pipe Sewer in Eagle Court connected with Sewer in St. John's Lane. 40 foot of 9 inch pipe Sewer was laid in Prospect Row from Henry Street Sewer. HOUSE DRAINAGE. The total number of premises drained were 69, the details of which drainage is shewn upon 53 plans prepared for that purpose and deposited in the Surveyor's Office, these drains consist of 1 15-inch, 1 12-inch, 12 9-inch, and 34 6-inch. Three old drains were trapped. PAVEMENTS. Carriageways.—The carriageway of part of Brunswiok Close wus paved with Val de Travers Compressed Asphalto FOOTWAYS. Garnault Place, Green Terrace (West side), Eliza Place, East side of Rosoman Street between Hardwick Street and Amwell Street, and Amwell Stroet from Margaret Street to Baker Street, wero relaid, and the deficiency partly made good with the old York from 55 High Street, and partly with new York. That portion of High Street in the Parish of Clerkenwell was laid with new Patent Victoria Stone, as also the footway on the West side of Liverpool Road between High Street and Chapel Street. The footway on the North side of Calthorpe Street was laid with York edging. Jobbing Works.—For the maintenance and general repair of the Carriageways and Footways of the Parish, the following materials have been used:— 19 tons of new Granite were laid. Ballast 156 cube yards. Hoggin 44 „ Sand 272 „ Shingle 179 ,, Broken Granite 396 yards, of which 180 yards were broken by the Vestry's men. 6,754 ft. sup. new York laid. (Of which 1,132 ft. were for the various Companies.) 58,423 ft. sup. old York relaid. (Of which 21,983 ft. were for the various Companies.) 12 ft. sup. new Patent Victoria Stone was laid, and 125 ft. sup. 364 ft. run new Kerb fixed. (Of which 6 ft. were for the various Companies.) 2,588 ft. run Kerb reset. (Of which 270 were for the various Companies.) 13,017 yds. sup. Granite relaid. 56 (Of which 3,143 yds. were for the various Companies.) 433 yds. sup. Pebbles relaid. (Of which 155 yds. were for the various Companies.) 142 yds. sup. York edging laid. 104 yds. sup. Ballast, and 807 yds. Macadam were also laid for the various Companies. 50 plates were cut into stones over coal vaults by the Vestry's workmen at the expense of the owners of the vaults. COURT FLUSHING. The Courts and Alleys in the Parish were washed at night and sprinkled with Carbolic Acid from July 7 th to August 26th. James' Gardens.—This Court is flushed once a fortnight by order of the Vestry. STREET WATERING. The Street Watering was done by the Vestry's own vans, extra horses being hired as required, 5,887,000 gallons of water being used, the amount paid for which, including rent of meters, was £313 19s. 6d. URINALS. The whole of the Urinals in the Parish were tarred and painted, and cleansed three times daily. I have the honor to remain, Gentlemen, Your obedient Servant, WILLIAM IRON, Surveyor. 57 REPORT OF MEDICAL OFFICER OF HEALTH, FOR 1384. To the Vestry of St. James and St. John, Clerkenwell. Gentlemen, I have the honor of laying before you my 29th Annual Report, viz.:—That for the year 1884. The number of deaths occurring from all causes in Clerkenwell, during the year 1884, was 1303. The annual average for the last 10 years was 1332, so that the deaths were 29 less than the average. The deaths in 1883 having been 1172, those in 1884 were 131 mure than in the preceding: year. The accompanying table exhibits the number of deaths which have taken place in the Parish in each of the last 10 years, the births in each year being placed opposite: — 58  DEATHS. BIRTHS. 1875 1,539 2,505 1876 1,342 2,559 1877 1,385 2,522 1878 1,303 2,590 1879 1,456 2,667 1880 1,313 2,430 1881 1,254 2,414 1882 1,261 2,420 1883 1,172 2,402 1884 1,303 2,448 The births were thus 46more than in the preceding year, and 47 less than the average. According to the Registrar-General's sub-districts in which the births and deaths occurred, they stand thus: — deaths. births. excess. St. James 312 635 323 Amwell 350 644 294 Pentonville 298 530 232 Goswell 343 639 296 In each year, a number of the deaths of the parishioners takes place in general and special Hospitals, In former years, the number of these has always been calculated, by estimating the proportion of them from the known number occurring in all the hospitals of the metropolis, in relation to the number of inhabitants. But this year, I have obtained the exact number from the official returns; it is 113. As the deaths occurring in Workhouse and the Infirmary are not registered in the Parish, these must be added to complete the total mortality. The number of deaths in the Workhouses referable to Clerkenwell amounted to 58; in the Infirmary to 83; and in the Hospitals of the Asylums Board to 17. 59 So that the intraparochial mortality for the year has been 18.8; including the hospital deaths, 20; and the Workhouse and Infirmary deaths, 22 per 1,000. Hence the mortality of the year has been somewhat above that of the preceding year. The mortality for all London during the year was 20.3; that of the West Districts, 19.2; of the North Districts, 19.1; of the Central Districts, 23.8; of the East Districts, 23.0; and of the South Districts, 19.8. So that Clerkenwell still keeps its place at the head of its own group of crowded Central Districts, and of the East Districts with their far less crowded population; and it must not be forgotten that the population to an acre exerts a great influence upon the mortality of a parish or district. But the estimation of the true mortality of a parish or district is a very difficult matter. If the population consists mainly of the working and poorer classes, the mortality will surely be in comparative excess. Moreover, the erratic character of this population may transfer many deaths to a parish, the cause of which has been acquired in some other parish. Again, the omission of the extraparochial and even extrametropolitan deaths gives a parish or group of parishes a smaller mortality than really belongs to them, and these deaths are not included in the "Mortality for all London" quoted above ; while those belonging to Clerkenwell are included in my estimate ; and this makes the comparative mortality appear higher than it really is. Moreover, there are 53 weeks in the Registration year of 1884. The number of deaths arising from the principal Zymotic diseases in the parish in 1884 was 236, being 21 more than in the preceding year. The number and the causes of the zymotic deaths occurring in Clerkenwell during the last 10 years are exhibited in the following Table- 60  small pox. measles. scarlet fever. hooting cough. typhus. diarrhoea. totals. 1875 2 36 76 82 24 58 278 1876 2 48 34 41 12 73 210 1877 15 73 82 36 25 53 284 1878 1 39 41 56 25 73 235 1879 1 74 44 61 11 36 227 1880 2 26 51 87 14 65 245 1881 10 39 54 53 26 58 240 1882 0 61 60 81 18 40 260 1883 0 61 46 33 16 59 215 1884 6 48 27 69 7 79 236 The average number of deaths arising from the principal zymotic diseases during the past 10 years was 243 ; so that the number for 1884 was 7 below the average. The zymotic deaths occurring in extraparochial hospitals, amounted to 31, viz.: 16 from Small Pox,—13 of these in the Asylums Board Hospitals; 2 from Scarlet Fever; 6 from Diphtheria; 3 from Typhoid Fever; 1 from Hooping Cough; and 3 from Diarrhoea. Small Pox was unusually prevalent in the parish during the year, as it was also in the metropolis generally. As regards the individual districts, the Registrar-General's tables show that the 61 Small Pox death rate per million of intra and 'extraparochial cases for the last 8 years is as follows:— London 297 Central Districts 171 Western „ 170 Southern ,, 315 Northern ,, 284 Eastern ,, 433 and that the mean annual death rate for the separate parishes, selecting individual cases, has been:—for Kensington, 153; Chelsea, 214; St. George, Hanover Square, 94; Marylebone, 153; Pancras, 212; Islington, 241; Hackney, 571; Strand, 190: Holborn (in which district is Clerkenwell), 189; Shoreditch, 357; Bethnal Green, 426; St. George-in-the-East, 509 ; Stepney, 651, &c. So that our much maligned parish stands well in regard to its small mortality from the Small Pox, even above the renowned parish of Chelsea 106 cases are known to have occurred in the parish, 73 of which were removed to Hospitals. The deaths from Measles were fewer than in the preceding year ; also those from Scarlet Fever ; while those from Hooping Cough were in excess. The 7 deaths from Typhus, comprised 1 from Typhus proper, and 6 from Typhoid Fever. The deaths from Diarrhœa were above the average; 2 of these were registered as from Cholera—of course, English Cholera. The number of deaths arising from all causes in infants under 1 year of age, was 416, 49 more than in the preceding year. These deaths may be considered to form a fair test of general careful domestic management, and here again, Clerkenwell takes a good place. In a table published by the Registrar-General, in which the intra and extra-parochial deaths in each Parish are included to form a corrected comparison, the deaths under 1 year to 1,000 births, are:—in Kensington, 148; in 62 Chelsea, 144; St. George, Hanover Square, 130; Hampstead, 155; Islington, 131; Strand, 175; Holborn, 165; in the "retrograde" Parish, Clerkenwell, 125; Whitechapel, 157; St. George, Southwark, 158; &c. 203 deaths occurred at and above 60; 11 more than in the preceding year. 121 Inquest-Deaths were registered in the year; 23 more than in the preceding year. Of these, 25 related to deaths occurring in the St. James District; 43 in the Amwell; 23 in the Pentonville; and 30 in the Goswell District. 12 deaths occurred in the House of Correction; 3 in the House of Detention. 33 deaths arose from violence; the number for 1883 being 30. In 20 large English towns, the mortality in 1884 was:— London, 20.3 ; Brighton, 18.0; Portsmouth, 19.4; Norwich, 21.2; Plymouth, 21.0; Bristol, 18.4; "Wolverhampton, 23.4; Birmingham, 21.4; Leicester, 22. 1 ; Nottingham, 22.9 ; Liverpool, 25.2; Manchester. 26.4 ; Salford, 22 3; Oldham, 24.5; Bradford, 20.1 ; Leeds, 24.2 ; Sheffield, 22.4 ; Hull, 21.1 ; Sunderland, 23.1; and Newcastle.on.Tyne, 23.1. Underground Kitchens.—We have not received a report upon these from the District Surveyor during the year; perhaps because he does not consider any of them unfit for habitation. We havehoweveremptiedseveralofthem. But many are still occupied ; which although not strictly in accordance with the requirements of the Act, are yet sufficiently so to be occupiable. The important points in regard to an underground kitchen, are its dryness, the light, and the ventilation. None of these kitchens are damp, the enormous sums of money spent by the Vestry in paving and draining the Parish has rendered the soil so dry, that damp is out of the question. Moreover many of these kitchens now occupied have been viewed by Committee after Committee, who have decided not to interfere with their occupation. They are 63 mostly occupied by poor elderly persons, perhaps working a mangle, and who pay a small rent. Many of the rooms in the new Model Dwellings are much darker and closer than the underground kitchens. Again, the cheapest dwellings are at the top of the buildings, where it is impossible for poor old people to go up the stairs; and the top rooms are very cold. One elderly female recently turned out, could not find another room at her price, and so has been taken into the Workhouse as a tenant for life. As the Act was passed many years ago, when the paving and drainage were far less perfect, I think the occupation of the kitchens might very well be left to the judgment of the Vestry. House-to-House Visitation.—a notable event in the year was the house-to-house inspection of dwellings in the Parish, as the Cholera cry still continued. For the purpose of carrying this out, two additional or Assistant Inspectors were engaged, and commenced their work on July 28th; one taking the upper, and the other the lower wards of the Parish. These were able and energetic men, one of them certificated. A list of the main points to be observed was given to them, comprising : the drainage, sinks, closets, water supply, and butts or cisterns, the cleanly state of the houses and rooms, ovecrowding, and the state of the dust-bins. In this way a large number of defective conditions were found, of which the owners and occupiers of the houses were informed by notice, and which although perhaps individually not very important, yet collectively, as relating to the 7,000 tenements in the Parish required serious attention. The upper Inspector ceased work on 31st January, the other is still engaged, and is doing valuable service. A largo number of these defects, many of them, however, not legal defects, have been remedied; others are still in hand. One assistant Inspector is still engaged in re-visiting either the same premises, or those where attempt at keeping things in order are defeated by the negligent or destructive action of the occupiers. 64 Slaughter-houses.—These were inspected by the Sanitary Committee and myself on November 7th, and the 10th. The Slaughter-houses were 15; 6 in the upper Wards, and 9 in the lower, and were kept by the same number of butchers. They were very clean and in excellent order, a slight defect in the paving of one being the only default. Cow-houses.—These were inspected at the same time as the Slaughter-houses. They were 19; Sin the upper Wards, and 11 in the lower. They were kept by 17 cow-keepers. They were also in excellent order. The cows were 250; 124 in the upper Wards, and 126 in the lower. The animals were very fine and healthy. Bake-houses.—These were not all inspected during the year; the preceding year's inspection terminating on January 14tli, 1884. Mortuary.—During the year 1884, 300 bodies were brought to the Mortuary; of these, 102 were brought for inquest purposes, upon which 42 post-mortems were made; 97 were Holborn Union cases, all belonging to Clerkenwell; and 101 were brought from houses of parishioners, including 6 cases of Fever, and 4 of Small Pox, and where the corpses would otherwise have remained in living rooms. Hence the utility of our excellent Mortuary is increasingly appreciated. The Royal Commission on the Housing of the Working Classes.—A sketch of the evidence given before this Commission, which was very adverse to Clerkenwell, was published in the newspapers, but the issue of the "Minutes of Evidence," and the first Report of the Commissioners, enables us to obtain full details. After perusing these, I at once examined the premises on which certain evils and nuisances were stated to exist, with the results given below. But as the statements differ so materially from the conditions found to exist, I have separately paragraphed the statements and the facts. 65 1. Statement.—(Lord Compton) 19, St. Helena Place, 5 families in 6 rooms; 6 in one room; total, 16. Fact: 14 persons in the 6 rooms, 9 adults, 5 children; no overcrowding by measurement; not 6 in any room. 2. Statement.—(Lord Compton) 15, St. Helena Place, 6 rooms occupied by 6 families; 8 persons in 1 room; 21 in all house. Fact: 17 persons in 6 rooms; 6 persons in second floor front, man, wife, and 4 children, aged 9 years, 4, 2½, and 1; the entire space somewhat under the mark, but the children are very young; 263 cubic feet per head. 3. Statement.—(Lord Compton) 1, Wilmington Place, 11 families in 11 rooms, 1 left last week; 7 persons occupying 1 room. Fact : A double fronted house of 10 rooms, occupied by 8 families; 6 persons in the first floor front, man, wife, and 4 children, aged 8, 7, 4 years, and 3 months; 27 5 cubic feet per head. 4. Statement.—(Lord Compton) 30, Noble Street, 5 families of 26 persons inhabiting 6 rooms; 1 room with 6 persons; 2 with 5 in each. Fact: 4 families of 20 persons in 6 rooms; the largest family of 8 persons in 3 rooms; man, wife, grandmother, and children aged 10, 8, 4, 2 years, and 6 months; == 5£ persons. 5. Statement.—A small house in Allen Street was occupied by 38 persons, 7 living in 1 room (Mrs. Bates). Fact: No house in Allen Street is occupied by 38 persons; the greatest number in any house is 21, the smallest 5. 6. Statement.—(Mr. Griffiths) 10, Ann's Place, 9 grown-up persons in 2 rooms. Fact: The 2-roomed house is occupied by man, wife, and 5 children, aged 9, 7, 6, 4 and 2 years; in all to 4£ adults. 7. Statement.—Northampton Court, (Mrs. Bates) 12 persons in a 2-roomed house, 8 in 1 room. 66 Fact: Not more than 9 in any house (No. 6), and this not overcrowded by measurement; 4 rooms. 8. Statement.—5, Bolton Court, 10 persons occupy 2 small rooms; Court closed. 9. Statement.—36, Bowling Green Lane, (Mr. Griffiths) 6 persons in an underground kitchen. Fact: A family of man, wife, and 4 children, aged 11, 9, 6 years, and 2 months, occupy 2 kitchens, not 1; the front kitchen is well cleared out; there is no overcrowding as regards cubic capacity; the back kitchen is not underground. 10. Statement.—7, New Court, 11 persons in 2 rooms, in which fowls were also kept. Fact: There is no New Court in Clerkenwell, although there are several in other parishes; but we have a Court called New Buildings, in Margaret Street; No. 7 in this Court, a 2-roomed house, is occupied by man, wife, and 2 children; No fowls are, or ever have been kept in this house. 11. Statement.—In Swan Alley, in an old, partly wooden and decayed house, there were 17 persons inhabiting 3 rooms. There is no such place in Clerkenwell. The last two statements must refer to some other parish, 12. Statement.—York Place, York Street, (Mr. Jennings) 5 houses with 2 rooms and a small kitchen; the walls were damp, the paper hanging in shreds; no back yards, and no back ventilation. (These last named defects are among the most mischievous evils attached to poor dwellings in populous neighbourhoods). The court outside was all in holes; the drain or sink which should carry off the wet, was upon the highest part of the ground, instead of upon the lowest, so that of course, the water laid in pools all about the place ; no washhouses. Fact: There is no York Place in Clerkenwell; the term was formerly applied to some houses on the South side of the Pentonville Road; near the turnpike. But I have no doubt 67 that these remarks are intended to apply to the houses in York Valley; these are 5 in number, situated on a slope of the hill behind certain houses on the South side of Pentonville Eoad, the entrance is from York Street; the houses are in fair condition, the walls not damp, the paper hanging in shreds in one house, arising from the paper not having been properly pasted on, it is not discoloured; there are no back yards, but ample front space, the existence of this, forming the reason why I did not condemn the court in 1875, when I did all those in which there was no back ventilation. The neighbourhood is open, but poor; in front of the court-yard, so to speak, is a wall, 20 feet away from the houses ; this is the boundary end wall of the gardens of the houses in the Pentonville Road; these houses being 30 feet further away, that is, the length of the gardens, so that the houses are 50 feet clear from the back of the houses in front. The breadth of the open ground of the Court is 83 feet, so that these houses are favoured with an open space of 1,660 feet; in front of the houses are two separate brick-built washhouses, with a closet in each, and nearer the houses, in the open, are 2 water butts, at a little distance apart; each water butt is placed over a shallow paved pit, each with a sink, the supply pipe being in the ground, and made of iron, as lead would be stolen in this neighbourhood ; at the lower part of the ground is another sink to drain away the water from the general surface of the Courts, so that the remarks that the sink was at the highest part of the ground is simply untrue. But there was a nuisance in the Court, which was caused by the supplypipe in the yard becoming decayed, and so allowing the earth to enter it when the water was off; and when the water was turned on, the water that came up at first was muddy and had to be thrown away. This was an accidental occurrence, which might have been remedied at once, if it had come to the knowledge of the Vestry; but no complaint had been made of it; and it was entirely independent of any radically wrong 68 construction of the premises. Would that our Courts in the parish were all so open and healthy as this one, they would nover have been condemned by me. 13. Statement. —Wilmington Place (Lord Compton). The collars are in a dreadfully bad state, the walls dripping with wot 10 months in the year ; all below the required height, which is 8 feet. At No. 1, 2 front kitchens, each 11 ft. 10 in., by 10 ft., and 7 ft. 9 in. high; that is 3 inches under the legal height. (Lord Compton and his Surveyor). No. 2, a kitchen, 15 ft. 6 in., by 13 ft., and 6 ft. 8 in. high. The doctor might declare those places unfit for habitation. Fact: The kitchens in Wilmington Place are not in a bad state. The walls are perfectly dry, thanks to the excellent paving of the streets, which has cost the Parish so much money. Some of the wall-paperings were dirty, particularly the one which I had the honor of examining with Lord Compton. But the female occupant told us, it had been papered and white-washed 6 months before, but the room smoked so, that it was thus rendered dirty. Neither Lord Compton nor his Surveyor seem aware of the requirements of the Metropolis Local Management Act, in regard to underground kitchens. There is no specified height for old kitchens, and even for new ones, the height required is 7 feet, not 8. So that, in regard to the house No. 1, where the kitchen is 7 ft. 9 in. high, it is 9 inches above the height required even for a new kitchen. Some few years ago, a water-pipe running through the passage of one of these houses, burst, and stained the wall. This, the paper not having been replaced, may have given rise to the statement regarding the dampness. The floor of some of the areas in Wilmington Place are not quite so much below the level of the floor of the kitchens as should be, according to the strict wording of the Act, but they are so little deficient, that they may safely be left as they are. 69 It is thus shown, that the statements made before the Royal Commission, in regard to Clerkenwell, are utterly untrue, complaints belonging to other parishes being jumbled up with those referred to our parish, and everywhere there is gross misrepresentation, to say the least, as well as hasty statements founded upon careless examination. To the latter, I would refer the false reports made, for there can be no special motive unless it be to force the Municipal Bill. That there are certain Courts and Alleys which should have been done away with, when I condemned them, 10 years ago, is true. The want of ornamental repair in many houses, which have been almost wrecked by the destructive occupiers, has been great. The "bitter cry," however, has awoke the groundlandlords who have caused a great many improvements to be made in numerous houses in the parish, which could not have been enforced by law. The great difficulty is to find a means of reforming the habits of the occupants of the poorer houses. That the condition of the premises depends upon the occupiers, is constantly seen on visitation; for in some houses and tenements, everything is clean, and orderly, while in others, everything is dirt, disorder, and destruction. The above mis-statements having been considered as facts, and appearing to show that, as Sir Charles Dilke puts it, the Parish of Clerkenwell is the worst in the Metropolis, the next point was to account for this state of things. This was attributed to the working together of house-farmers and publicans on the Vestry, preventing Sanitary matters being properly attended to. But it is curious to note, that among the owners or lessors of all the properties above mentioned, one only (No. 7) is a vestryman; so that there is no relation whatever in the light of cause and effect, 70 The Meteorology of the year was as follows:— 1884. Temperature, Average. Difference from average of 43 years. Dew-point. Humidity (Saturation = 100.) Height of Barometer. Bain in inches. Difference from average of 70 years. Year 50.7 + 1.3 44.4 80 29.8 18.05 —7.33 Winter Quarter Jan., Feb., March) 43.4 + 3.5 38.8 84 29.8 4.64 —0.37 Spring Quarter (April, May, Juno 52.5 —0.4 45.1 76 29.7 4.31 —1.50 Summer Quarter (July, Aug., Sept.) 62.7 + 2.5 54.0 74 29.8 4.53 —2.87 Autumn Quarter. . (Oct., Nov., Dec.) 44.1 —0.4 39.7 85 29.8 4.57 —2.59 Hence the mean temperature of the whole year, was somewhat above the average; the winter and summer quarters being above, the spring and autumn quarters below. This has an important influence upon the mortality; for a mild winter diminishes the deaths from pulmonary diseases, while a warm summer increases the deaths from diarrhoea. I have the honour to remain, Gentlemen, Your obedient Servant, J. W. GRIFFITH, M.D., July, 1885. Member Royal College of Physicians. VESTRY of the Parish of St. James & St. John, CLERKENWELL. Sale of Food & Drugs Act, 1875. REPORTS of DR. REDWOOD, ANALYST. 1884-5, 72 QUARTER ENDING JUNE 30th, 1884. No. of Sample. Date when Received. Name of Inspector. Name of Article. Distinguishing Mark. RESULTS OF ANALYSIS. 55 1884 May 3 Thain Butter C 109 Not adulterated 56 „ „ ditto Bread C 110 Not adulterated 57 „ „ ditto Bread C 111 Not adulterated 58 „ „ ditto Butter C 112 Not adulterated 59 „ „ ditto Mustard C 113 Not adulterated 60 „ „ ditto Mustard C 114 Not adulterated 61 „ „ ditto Pepper C 115 Not adulterated 62 „ „ ditto Pepper C 116 Not adulterated 63 „ „ Cheshire Milk C 654½ Not a fair sample 64 „ „ ditto Milk C 655½ Not a fair sample 65 „ „ ditto Bread C 656½ Not adulterated 66 „ „ ditto Butter C 657½ Not adulterated 67 „ „ ditto Bread C 658½ Not adulterated 68 „ „ ditto Coffee C 659½ Not adulterated 69 June 7 Thain Bread C 117 Not adulterated 70 „ „ ditto WhitePepper C 118 Not adulterated 71 „ „ ditto Mustard C 110 Not adulterated 72 „ „ ditto Mustard C 120 Not adulterated 73 „ „ ditto WhitePepper C 121 Not adulterated 74 „ „ ditto Coffee C 122 Not adulterated 75 „ „ ditto Butter C 123 Not adulterated 76 „ „ Cheshire Bread C 660½ Not adulterated 77 „ „ ditto Sugar C 661½ Not adulterated 78 „ „ ditto WhitePepper C 663½ Not adulterated 79 „ „ ditto Coffee C 662½ Not adulterated 80 „ „ ditto Mustard C 664½ Not adulterated 81 „ „ ditto Bread C 665½ Not adulterated 82 „ 19 Thain Milk C 124 Not adulterated 83 „ „ ditto Milk C 125 Not adulterated 84 „ „ ditto Milk C 126 Not adulterated 85 „ „ ditto Milk C 127 * Adulterated 11 % added water 86 „ 25 ditto Bread C 128 Not adulterated 87 „ „ ditto Bread C 129 Not adulterated 88 „ „ ditto Pepper C 130 Not adulterated 89 „ „ ditto Mustard C 131 Not adulterated T. REDWOOD. 17, Bloomsbury Square. * Mr. Jenkins, Aylesbury Street. Fined £1 and costs. 73 QUARTER ENDING SEPTEMBER 30th, 1884. No. of Sample. Date when Received. Name of Inspector. Name of Article. Distinguishing Mark. RESULTS OF ANALYSIS. 90 1884 July 5 Cheshire Gin C 667½ Not adulterated 91 „ „ ditto Milk C 668½ Not adulterated 92 „ „ ditto Milk C 669½ Not adulterated 93 „ „ ditto Mustard C 670½ Not adulterated 94 „ „ ditto Bread C 671½ Not adulterated 95 „ „ ditto Milk C 672½ Not adulterated 96 „ „ ditto Bread C 673½ Not adulterated 97 Aug. 8 ditto Porter C 674½ Not adulterated 98 „ „ ditto Gin C 675½ Not adulterated 99 „ „ ditto Mustard C 676½ Not adulterated 100 „ „ ditto Milk C 677½ Not adulterated 101 „ „ ditto Bread C 678½ Not adulterated 102 „ „ ditto Milk C 679½ Hot adulterated 103 „ „ ditto Milk C 680½ Not adulterated 104 „ „ ditto Bread C 681½ Not adulterated 105 „ 9 Thain Pepper C 1 Not adulterated 106 „ „ ditto Pepper C 2 Not adulterated 107 „ „ ditto Mustard C 3 Not adulterated 108 „ „ ditto Mustard C 4 Not adulterated 109 „ „ ditto Bread C 5 Not adulterated 110 „ „ ditto Bread C 6 Not adulterated 111 „ 29 Cheshire Oatmeal C 682½ Not adulterated 112 „ „ ditto Vinegar C 683½ Not adulterated 113 „ „ ditto Milk C 684½ Not adulterated 114 „ „ ditto Milk C 685½ * Adulterated 10 % added water 115 „ „ ditto Milk C 686½ Not adult erated 116 „ „ ditto Mustard C 687½ Not adulterated 117 „ „ ditto Black Pepper C 688½ Not adulterated 118 „ „ ditto Butter C 689½ Not adulterated 119 Sept. 1 Thain Mustard C 7 Not adulterated 120 „ „ ditto Mustard C 8 Not adulterated 121 „ „ ditto Pepper C 9 Not adulterated 122 „ „ ditto Pepper C 10 Not adulterated 123 „ „ ditto Butter C 11 Not adulterated 124 „ „ ditto Bread C 12 Not adulterated 125 „ 27 ditto Bread C 13 Not adulterated 126 „ „ ditto Bread C 14 Not adulterated 127 „ „ ditto Pepper C 15 Not adulterated 128 „ „ ditto Pepper C 16 Not adulterated 129 „ „ ditto Mustard C 17 Not adulterated 130 „ „ ditto Mustard C 18 Not adulterated T. REDWOOD. 17, Bloomsbury Square. * Sir. Watkins, 65, Exmouth Street. Fined £3 and costs. QUARTER ENDING DECEMBER 30th, 1881. No. of Sample. Date when Received. Name of Inspector. Name of Article. Distinguishing Mark. RESULTS OF ANALYSIS. 1884 131 Oct. 4 Cheshire Milk C 1½ Not adulterated 132 „ „ ditto Milk C 2 ½ * Adulterated 30 % added water 133 „ „ ditto Butter C 3½ Not adulterated 134 „ „ ditto Bread C 4½ Not adulterated 135 „ „ ditto Bread C 5½ Not adulterated 136 „ „ ditto Coffee C 6½ Not adulterated 137 „ 9 ditto Dripping C 7½ Not adulterated 138 „ „ ditto Milk C 8½ Not adulterated 139 Nov. 1 Thain Milk C 19 Adulterated 12% added water 140 „ „ ditto Mustard C 20 Not adulterated 141 „ „ ditto Pepper C 21 Not adulterated 142 „ „ ditto Mustard C 22 Not adulterated 143 „ „ ditto Bread C 23 Not adulterated 144 „ „ ditto Bread C 24 Not adulterated 145 „ „ Cheshire Milk C 9½ Hot adulterated 146 „ „ ditto Milk C 10½ Very poor in quality 147 „ „ ditto Beer C 11½ Not adulterated 148 „ „ ditto Beer C 12½ Not adulterated 149 „ „ ditto Bread C 13½ Not adulterated 150 „ „ ditto Sugar C 14½ Not adulterated 151 „ 29 Thain Butter C 25 Not adulterated 152 „ „ ditto Coffee C 26 Not adulterated 153 „ „ ditto Pepper C 27 Not adulterated 154 „ „ ditto Mustard C 28 Not adulterated 155 „ „„ „ ditto Mustard C 29 Not adulterated 156 „ „ ditto Milk C 30 Not adulterated 157 ditto Milk C 31 ‡ Adulterated 27 % added water 158 „ „ Cheshire Pepper C 15½ Not adulterated 159 „ „ ditto Mustard C 16½ Not adulterated 160 ditto Mustard C 17½ Not adulterated 161 „ „ ditto Mustard C 18½ Not adulterated 162 „ „ ditto Pepper C 19½ Poor sample 163 „ „ ditto Beer C 20½ Not adulterated 164 Dec. 17 Thain Vinegar C 32 Not adulterated 165 „ „ ditto Vinegar C 33 Not adulterated 166 „ „ ditto Vinegar C 34 Not adulterated 167 „ „ ditto Coffee C 35 Not adulterated 168 „ „ ditto Coffee C 36 Not adulterated 169 „ „ ditto White Pepper C 37 Not adulterated 170 „ „ ditto Black Pepper C 38 Not adulterated 171 „ „ ditto Tea C 39 Not adulterated 172 „ „ ditto Mustard C 40 Not adulterated 173 „ „ ditto Chocolate C 41 Not adulterated 174 „ „ ditto Sweets C 42 Not adulterated 175 „ „ ditto Sweets C 43 Not adulterated 176 „30 Cheshire Brandy C 21½ Not adulterated 177 „ „ ditto Gin C 2 2½ Not adulterated 178 „ „ ditto Irish Whisky C 23½ Not adulterated 179 „ „ ditto S. Whisky C 24½ Not adulterated 180 „ „ ditto Milk C 26½ Not adulterated 181 „ „ ditto Milk C 27½ Not adulterated 182 „ „ ditto Oatmeal C 28½ Not adulterated 183 „ „ ditto Mustard C 29½ Not adulterated 184 „ „ ditto Bread C 30½ Not adulterated 185 „ „ ditto Bread C 31½ Not adulterated 186 Jan. 1 ditto S. Whisky C 25½ Not adulterated 17, Bloomsbury Square. T. REDWOOD. * R. Lewis, 1, Whiskin Street. Fined £5 and ousts. ‡ — Edes, 2, Jerusalem Passage. Fined £1 and costs. 75 QUARTER ENDING MARCH 31st, 1885. No Sample. Date when Received. Name of Inspector. Name of Article. Distinguishing Mark. RESULTS OF ANALYSIS. 1885 1 Jan.17 Cheshire Beer C 32h Not adulterated 2 „ „ ditto Mustard C 33½ Not adulterated 3 „ „ ditto Mustard C 34½ Not adulterated 4 „ „ ditto .Bread C 35½ Not adulterated 5 „ „ ditto Bread C 36½ Not adulterated 6 Jan. 30 ditto Beer C 37½ Not adulterated 7 „ „ ditto Chocolate C 38½ Not adulterated 8 „ „ ditto Corn Flour C 39½ Not adulterated 9 „ „ ditto Bread C 40½ Not adulterated 10 Ja . 31 Thain Bread C 43 Not adulterated 11 „ „ ditto Bread C 44 Not adulterated 12 „ „ ditto Coffee C 45 Not adulterated 13 „ „ ditto Coffee C 46 Not adulterated 14 „ „ ditto Butter C 47 Not adulterated 15 „ „ ditto Butter C 48 Not adulterated 16 „ „ ditto Mustard C 49 Not adulterated 17 „ „ ditto Mustard C 50 Not adulterated 18 Mar. 2 ditto Bread C 51 Not adulterated 19 „ „ ditto Bread C 52 Not adulterated 20 „ „ ditto Coffee C 53 Not adulterated 21 „ „ ditto Coffee C 54 Not adulterated 22 „ „ ditto Tea C 55 Not adulterated 23 „ „ ditto Mustard C 56 Not adulterated 24 „ „ ditto Cocoa C 57 Not adulterated 25 „ „ ditto Mustard C 58 Not adulterated 26 „ „ Cheshire Coffee C 41½ Not adulterated 27 „ „ ditto Tea C 424 Not adulterated 28 „ „ ditto Sugar C 43½ Not adulterated 29 „ „ ditto Mustard C 44½ Contains 5 to 6 % of starch 30 „ „ ditto Milk C 45½ Not adulterated 31 „ „ ditto Milk C 46½ Not adulterated 32 „ „ ditto Bread C 47½ Not adulterated 33 „ „ ditto Bread C 48½ Not adulterated 34 Mar. 25 Thain Bread C 59 Not adulterated 35 „ „ ditto Mustard C 60 Not adulterated 36 „ „ ditto Mustard C 61 Not adulterated 37 „ „ ditto Oatmeal C 62 Not adulterated 38 „ „ ditto Tea C 63 Not adulterated 39 „ „ ditto Coffee C 64 Not adulterate d 40 „ „ ditto Cocoa C 65 Not adulterated 17, Bloomzbury Square. T. REDWOOD. Memo.—Apropos of the carrying out of the Sale °f Food and Drugs Act, 1875, a Report of the Local Government thereon is deemed of sufficient interest to be added hereto for the information of the Vestry. ROBERT PAGET, Vestry Clerk. [See Appendix No. ] 77 VESTRYMEN Elected pursuant to the Metropolis Local Management Act, 18th & 19th Vict., cap. 120. WARD No. 1. All that portion of the Parish which lies north of a line drawn from the west boundary of the Parish at Battle-bridge, along the centre of Pentonville-road, to the east boundary of the Parish at the top of the City-road, thence up High-street and Liverpool-road to Sermon-lane, thence westward (according to the boundary of the Parish,) to Caledonian-road, including Nos. 61 to 77, and 68 to 100, in that road, and 6 to 17, Caledonian-crescent,, thence to the western boundary at Battle-bridge, and all that portion of the Parish winch is situate at or about Muswell-hill. to go out of office in 1886 Mr JAMES GIBSON 19 & 20, Pen ton Street Mr. JAMES WILLIAM 1 1IURST0N 128 Pentonville Road Mr. GEORGE MORRIS 17, High Street Mr. GEORGE WILKS 2 & 3, Myddelton Street 1887 Mr. CHARLES BATCHELDER 11, Baron Street Mr. GEORGE WILLIAM BET J EM ANN 66 & 38. Pentonville Rd. Mr. ROBERT GILLARD 11, High Street Mr GEORGE EASON 48, Henry Strert 1888 Mr. JOSHUA PATTERSON 8, New Winchester Street Mr. SAMUEL AUGUSTUS BROOKS 10, Northamptoa Square Mr. ALFRED GOAD 29, High Street Mr. JOHN BETJEMANN 30 & 38, Pentonville Rd. WARD No. 2. All that portion of the Parish which lies w thin a line drawn along the centre of King's Cross-road, from Baker-street to Battle-bridge, thence up Pentonville-road to the north-west corner of Claremont-square. thence down Amwell-street and Rosomanstreet to Exmouth-street, along Exmouth-street and Mount-pleasant to the boundary, thence along the boundary of the Parish to King's Cross-road, bottom of Baker, street, including nearly the whole of the House of Correction. 1886 Mr. ARTHUR THOMAS CATLEY 23, Lloyd Square Mr. WILLIAM PIERPOINT 240, St. J.hn IStreet Mr. JAMES HARDING 71, Goswell Roid Mr. REUBEN SQUIRE 37, Myddelton Square Mr. FRKDK. WM. WILLCOOKS la, Lower Vernon Street 1887 Mr. THOS. STANDING JENNING: 159, Farringdon Road Mr. GEORGE BUTLER 21. Lloyd Square Mr. ANGELO BECK 29, Granville Square Mr. JOHN CHARLES MFNCE 100, King's Cross Road Mr. JOHN DORE 23a, Holford Square 1888 Mr. JAMES JOHNSON 60, Baker Street Mr. WILLIAM JOHN JENNINGS 2, Tysoe Street Mr WILLIAM ROBSON 19, Holford Square Mr. JOHN WALTER HOPKINS 21, River Street Mr. HENRY KNOTT 111, Pentonville Road 78 WARD No. 3. All that portion of the Parish within a line drawn along the Pentonville-road, from the north-wept comer of Claremont-square, to the junction of the City-road and Goswell-road, thence down Goswell-road to corner of Spencer-street including Nos. 290 to 320 on the north .east side of Goswell-road and Nos. 1 and 30, in Sidney-street tbence along Spencer-street, Myddelton-street, Eosoman-street and Amwell-street tc the north corner of Claremont-square. to go out of office in 1886 Mr. SAMUEL BRIGHT 31a, Spencer Street Mr. EDWARD SANS 3, Garnault Place Mr. CHARLES EDWARD GWINN ELL 5, River Street Mr. CHARLES LEWIS BIGGS 297, Goswell Road 1S87 Mr. DECLMUS ALERED BALL 219 & 221, Goswell Road Mr. DANIEL COOKSEY 52, Amwell Street Mr. WILLIAM L. KELLAWAY 57, White Lion Street Mr. GEORGE ANTILL 43, Myddelton Street 1888 Mr. JOSIAH LEAVER 1, Rydon Crescent Mr. NATHAN HARRIS 68, St. John Street Road Mr. HENRY HILL 11, Cyrus Street Mr. JAMES DURRANT SPIKES 205, Goswell Road WARD No. 4. All that portion of the Parish within a line drawn from Goswell-road, along the centre of Spencer-street, Myddelton-street, Exmouth-street, Monut-pleasant, to the boundary of the Parish, thence along the line of the Old Fleet Ditch to New-street, opposite Clerkenwell-gieen, thence along Clerkenwell green (north side of Sessions-house) and Aylesbury-street to St. John-street, thence up the centre of St. John-street to Percivalstreet, along the centre of Percival street, and up Goswell-road to Spencer-street. 1886- Mr. JOHN ROSS0 47, Exmouth Street |Mr. WILLIAM OSBORNE 21, Spencer Street Mr. JAMES FRA0NCIS KELLY 21, Tysoo Street Mr. WILLIAM MORTIMER FOXCROFT 3, Holford Street Mr. JOHN PRATT 34, Clerkenwell Green Mr. WILLIAM HENRY McCARTHY 9, Mount Pleasant 1887- Mr. STEPHEN WATERS 6, Myddelton Street Mr. JOSEPH SADDINGTON 143, Farringdon Road Mr. WILLIAM KING 7, Gloucester Street Mr. CHARLES GILLETT PAYN 5, Myddelton Street Mr. ALERED HASLEHAM 7, Clerkenwell Green Mr WILLIAM DAVIES 27, Whiskin Street 1888- Mr. THOMAS WILDBORE 145, 147, 149, Farringdon Rd. Mr. JOSEPH JOHN GOODE 48, Clerkenwell Green Mr. Mr. JOHN WILLIAMS 13, Northampton Square REDMOND DENIS LYONS 1, Newcastle Place Mr. JOHN FREEMAN 45, Rosoman Street Mr. THOMAS WILLIAM WRAGG 5 & 5½, Bath Street 79 WARD No 5. All that portion of the Parish which lies south of the southern boundary of Ward 4, bounded on the east by a line drawn along the centre of Goswell-road from Percivalstreet to Clerkenwell-road, on the west by the Old Fleet Ditch, and on the south by a line drawn from Goswell-road down Clerkenwell-road, thence irregularly, accordingly to the boundary of the Parish, to the Old Fleet Ditch. TO go out of office in 1886 Mr. GEORGE BYASS 169, St. John Street Mr. ROBERT PRINGLE 42, Clerkenwell Road Mr THOMAS BAXTER 35, Goswell Road Mr. HENRY WALKER 30, Red Lion Street Mr. WILLIAM JOLLY 20, Berkley Street 1887 - Mr. SAMUEL BENNETT 187, St John Street Mr. WILLIAM MOTT 22, St. John's Lane Mr. EDWARD THOMAS WACKETT 14, Berkley Street Mr. SAMUEL RICHES 52 & 53, Northampton Street Mr. ELI WILLIAM JAYENS 16, Clerkenwell Green 1888 Mr. JAMES HENRY WHITE 156, St. John Street Mr. JOSEPH WHITTAKER 21, Great Percy Street Mr. ARTHUR MILLWARD 12, Albemarle Street Mr. FREDERICK HASLEHAM 44, Sekforde Street Mr. CHARLES TAYLOR 4, Compton Street Representative at the Metropolitan Board of Works, WILLIAM ROBSON, Esq., (Whose term of office will expire by effluxion of time on the second Wednesday in June, 1887.) EX-OFFICIO MEMBERS. ST. JAMES'S. Rev. JOHN HENRY ROSE, m.a., Vicar Lloyd House, Lloyd Street Mr. WILLIAM PIERPOINT, 240, St. John Street Mr. WILLIAM M. FOXCROFT, Churchwardens Holford Street ST. JOHN'S. Rev. WILLIAM DAWSON, Rector 59, Red Lion Street Mr. WILLIAM JOHN HUNTER, 155, St. John Street Mr. JOHN JAMES POTTS, Churchwardens 13, E.d. Lion Street 80 VESTRY COMMITTEES FINANCE COMMITTEE. I Mr. W. ROBSON, Ex-OFficio. Ward 1. Mr. J. PATTERSON „ G. MORRIS „ J. W. THURSTON Ward 2. Mr. J. C. MENCE „ T. S. JENNINGS „ W.J.JENNINGS Ward 3. Mr. D. COOKSEY „ H. HILL „ W. L KELLAWAY Ward 4. Mr. R. D. LYONS, Vice-Chn. „ w. h. McCarthy „ j. ross Ward 5. Mr. A MILLWARD „ „ W. JOLLY, Chairman „ S. BENNETT PARLIAMENTARY COMMITTEE Mr. W. ROBSON, Ex-Officio. Ward 1. Mr. J. PATTERSON „ G. EASON „ J. BETJEMANN Ward 2. Mr. J. C. MENCE „ J. JOHNSON, Vice-Chn. „ R. SQUIRE Ward 3. Mr. S. BRIGHTY „ w. l. kellaway „ C. l. BIGGS Ward 4. Mr. j. f. kelly, Chairman „ s. waters „ h. w. McCarthy Ward 5. Mr. W. MOTT „ S. BENNETT „ C. TAYLOR ASSESSMENT & APPEA COMMITTEE. Mr. W. ROBSON, Ex-Officio. Ward 1. Mr. C. BATCHELDER „ A. GOAD „ J. PAT TERSON ., G. MORRIS. Vice Chun Ward 2. Mr. J. DORE A. BECK „ H. KNOTT „ W. J. JENNINGS Ward 3. Mr. D. A. BALL „ H. HILL „ E. SANS „ J. LEAVER Ward 4. Mr. J. ROSS, Chairman „ W. OSBORNE „ J. SADDINGTON „ J. WILLIAMS Ward 5. Mr. E. W. JA VENS „ A. MILLWARD „ W. JOLLY „ S. BENNETT Ex-Officio Members of the Committee. Mr. W. PIERPOINT Church,, W. M. FOXCROFT wardens. „ J. D. SPIRES „ G. WILKS „ R.D.LYONS overseers „ W. DAYIES Overseers- „ J PATTERSON „ N. HARRIS 81 COMMITTEE OF WORKS Mr. W. ROBSON, Ex-Officio. WardI. Mr. C. BATCHELDER „ G. MORRIS „ G. WILKS „ A. GOAD Ward 2. Mr. J. W. HOPKINS „ W. PIERPOINT „ „ j. DORE „ A. BECK Ward 3. Mr. H. HILL, Chairman ,, D. A. BALL „ E. SANS „ J. LEAVER Ward 4. Mr. R. D. lyons „ W. osborne „ w. h. McCarthy „ J. ross Ward 5. Mr. E. W. JAVENS, Vice-Cha. „ W. MOTT W. JOLLY „ E. T. WACKETD Wharf Rota—Chair man and Vice-Chairman and one from each Ward. AUDITORS of ACCOUNTS Appointed by the Ratepayers. Ward ]. Mr. J. B. lewis, 170, Pentonville-road Ward 2. Mr. A. WEBB, 138, Farringdon-Road Ward 3. Mr. SAMUEL HOGG, 54, Myddeton-sq. Ward 4. road Mr. E. LENARD, 57, St. John-street Ward 5. Mr. G. Wr. TILLETT, 141, St. John-st. Vestry Hall Clerkenwell, December 30th, 1885, SANITARY COMMITTEE Mr. W. ROBSON, Ex-Officio. Ward 1. Mr. C. BATCHELDER „ G. WILKS „ S. A. BROOKS „ J. BETJEMANN Ward 2. Mr. J. W. HOPKINS „ „ J. DORE „ J. C. MENCE „ H. KNOTT Ward 3. Mr. D. COOKSEY „ J. LEAVER „ ,, E. SANS, Vice-Chairman „ „ N. HARRIS, Chairman Ward 4. Mr. W. DAVIES „ W. OSBORNE „ J. WILLIAMS „ E. D. LYONS WARD 5. Mr. A. MILLWARD „ G. BYASS „ H. WALKER „ W MOTT TRUSTEES OF THE BANKING ACCOUNT. Mr. J. J. GOODE „ W. ROBSON „ J. GIBSON „ W. M. FOXCROFT „ W. PIERPOINT ROBERT PAGET, Vestry Clerk. 82 OFFICERS under The Metropolis Local Management Act, WITH THEIR RESIDENCES. Vestry Clerk,* Mr. ROBERT PAGET, 19, Lloyd Square. First Assistant Clerk, Mr. ROBERT ERNEST PAGET, 38, Osbaldeston Road, Cazenove Road, N. Second Assistant Clerk, Mr. EDMUND PURDY, 28, Ham Park Road, West Ham. Third Assistant Clerk, Mr. GEORGE RAY BROWN, 67, Oakley Road, N. Fourth Assistant Clerk, Mr. CHARLES ASHFORD HARRISON, 23, Oglander Road, East Dulwich. Surveyor of Roads, Pavements, Lamps, Sewers, &c., Mr. WILLIAM IRON, 148, King Edward Road, E. (May be seen at the Vestry Hall, daily, from 10 till half-past 11 a.m. when and where all applications fur Licenses for Hoardings, House Drainage, &c., must be made.) Surveyor's Assistant, Mr. PETER GORRINGE KILLICK, 7, St. Helen's Villas, Forest Hill, S.E. Wharf Superintendent, Mr. ISAAC GORE. Phoenix Wharf, Commercial Road, Lambeth. Inspectors of Nuisances and Street Keepers. Works Department. FREDERIC CHESHIRE, 60, Rosoman Street. Sanitary Department. Wards 1, 2, and 3.—WILLIAM JOHN B ARTLETT, Vestry Hall. Wards 4 and 5.— HUGH ROSE, Vestry Hall. Assistant Inspector and Messenger, JOHN SAMUEL BISSMIRE, 5, Clerkenwell Close. Solicitors to the Vestry, Messrs. BOULTON, SONS & SANDEMAN, 21a, Northampton Square. Medical Officer of Health, J. W. GRIFFITH, M.D., 50, Camberwell Grove. Analyst of Food, &c. Dr. REDWOOD, 17, Bloomsbury Square. District Surveyor (under Metropolitan Buildings Act), Mr. ERNEST CARRITT, 3, Wilmington Square. APPENDIX I. 84 At a Meeting of the Vestry, held on the 18th December, 1873. "The Clerk called attention to the fact that since "the Vestry had ceased to collect the Poor Bate, which "duty had reverted to the Guardians or Governors of "the Poor under the Local Act, and which Board had ''been revived for the purpose in November, 1871, "there was no Poor-rate Account published, except the remainder of those in collection by the Vestry "previous to that time, and suggested whether it would "not be desirable, by an agreement between both "Boards, to publish the Poor Rate Account of the "Guardians or Governors as an appendix to the Annual "Reports of the Vestry, in which case there would be "one and a half years' Poor Rate Account to be "appended to the Report ab< ut to be issued for the " year ended Lady-day last. "It was moved by Mr. Bam ford, seconded by " Mr. Dore, and— "Resolved that such suggestion be approved and " adopted." (Extract from Hoard Minutes.) ROBERT PAGET, Vestry Clerk. The Poor Rate Account of the Guardians or Governors of the Poor for the year ending Lady-day 1885, is annexed hereto accordingly. Guardians or Gobernors of the poor of the Parish of St. Same, Clerkenwell. (under the LOCAL ACT) STATEMENT AND ACCOUNT OF THE RECEIPTS AND EXPENDITURE ON ACCOUNT OF THE POOR RATE, For the half-year ended Michaelmas, 1884. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. 1884. £ s. d. Balance brought forward 1833 6 2 April 22. C. H. Garland, Balance of Second Received on Kates as follows ment of Precept 4973 0 O October 1881—1st portion 0 11 8 29. R. Paget, Salary as clerk to Lady-day 12 10 0 -nd „ 0 16 8 ,, W. J. Ironside, commission to Lady-day 48 11 7 1 8 4 „ H. W. Holliday 43 12 0 April, 1882—1st portion 0 15 0 „ T. Powell „ 47 1J 7 2nd 0 16 8 „ W. J. Goode, Printing 9 5 O 1 11 8 „ Boulton, Sons & Sandeman, costs re committals for rates, &c. October 1882—Is portion 0 10 0 40 15 5 2nd M 1 15 10 „ Finsbury Dispensary, moiety ol £ 10 e- 2 5 10 turned by Mr. Kellaway on 22t id u lt. 5 o o April 1883—1st portion 3 0 9 „ Rova' Chest Hospiial, ditto 5 0 o „ 2nd „ 19 4 6 May 27. G. W. Brown, commission, &c. 27 3 22 5 3 June 3. liectwr of Metropolitan Police District Police Rate, due 1st January October 18S3—1st portion 376 5 8 3456 11 2nd „ 3500 13 8 24. R. Paget, Salary as Clerk to Midsummer... 12 X. X 10 «-> o 7376 19 4 30. C. M. Garland, on account of Union Precept 5000 0 0 Treasury for Government property—1st portion 90 15 11 July 8. W. Ebbage, Cupboards at Church for reception of books from Clerkenwell Workhouafi 2nd „ 129 14 2 17 14 6 220 10 1 „ W.J. Ironside, Commission to Midsummer 39 12 7 April 1884—1st portion 3998 17 2 „ G. A. Potter,ditto, to Lady-day 42 5 7 2nd „ 7678 2 3 „ ,, ,, Midsummer 56 1 6 17576 19 5 98 7 1 24981 9 10 For vvard 27035 6 1 Forward 13837 4 4  £ s d. £ s. d. £ s. d. Brougrht forward 27035 6 1 Brought forward 13837 4 4 Poor Rate made April 1884:— July 8. H. W Holliday, ditto do. 37 9 1 Given in charge at is. 6d 25767 4 8 „ T. Powell „ „ 39 1 0 Arrears of former rate Errors in last book entries as irrecoverable since collected 8008 19 0 ,, G. Monk, Repaint to Churchyard.St. James' Pentonville, as per Churchwarden's certificate 6 0 4 13 4 Aug. 5. C. H. Garland, Balance of 1st Instalment of Precept 2927 9 0 Deduct overcharge 8013 12 4 „ C. H. Garland on account of 2nd Instalment 2000 0 0 0 4 2 Sept. 16. Ditto ditto 5000 0 0 8013 8 2 27053 6 1 23843 9 5 Balance carried forward 3191 16 8 33780 12 10 Collected 24981 9 10 £27035 6 1 Losses— Allowed to owners 443 13 0 Empties 951 15 5 Excused Runaways 55 250 10 0 3 9 Reduced by appeal 25 19 9 Duplicate Assess ments 656 14 8 2383 13 10 27365 3 8 Arrears carried forward 6415 2 2 I find the sum of Three thousand one hundred and ninety-one pounds sixteen shillings and eightpence to be the balance on this account against the Guardians and Governors of the Poor of the Pariah of St. James'. Clerkenwell. ROBERT PAGET, Clerk to the Board, Dated this 21st day of January, 1885. 10th January, 1885. H. LLOYD ROBERTS, Auditor. Guardians Gofernors of the foor of the faristr of lames, dcrhcitfoell. (under the local act.) STATEMENT AND ACCOUNT OF THE RECEIPTS AND EXPENDITURE ON ACCOUNT OF TH: POOR RATE, For the half-year ended Lady-day, 1885. £ s. d £ s. d. £ s. d. 1884 .£ s. d Balance brought forward 3191 16 8 Sept. 30. C. H. Garland, Treasurer to the Guardians of the Holborn Union on account of Second Instalment of Precept Received on Rates as follow 3 :— April 1883—2nd portion 3 4 0 2500 0 0 Oct. „ 1st „ 4 13 4 „ R. Paget, Salary as Clerk to Michaelmas 12 10 0 „ 2nd „ 68 14 0 „ W. J. Ironside, Commission to „ 55 5 10 73 7 4 „ G. A. Potter „ „ 51 17 2 April 1884—1st nortion 405 9 0 „ H. W. Holliday „ „ 40 17 8 „ 2nd „ 5475 11 4 „ T. Powell „ „ 42 4 6 5881 0 4 Oct. 14. Overseers' expenses preparing Treasury for Governent Borough List 152 13 6 property, 1st portion, 1st portion 2nd portion 103 15 4 „ Ditto County List Certificate 17 8 6 129 14 2 ,, Ditto Jury List 45 4 0 — 233 9 6 215 6 0 Oct. 1884—1st portion 10216 0 3 „ W. J. Goode, Printing Rate Books, &c. 8 13 6 2nd „ 7864 6 5 18080 6 8 28. C. H. Garland, Treasurer, &c., Balance of Second Instalment of Precept 24037 18 4 3060 0 0 Dec. 23rd. Nov. 24. Receiver for Metropolitan Police District Police Rate as per warrant dated 1st July, 1884 Guardians of the Holborn Union, one years' rental of College House Estate, Highgate, to Christmas 300 0 0 3470 9 7 >• 25. Boulton, Sons & Sandeman, Expenses of Election of Vestrymen in May last 54 2 6 26. C. H. Garland on account of First Instalment of Precept 1000 0 0 Dec. 5. Ditto do. 1500 0 0 27763 4 6 12011 6 9  £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. Brought forward 27663 4 6 1885. Brought forward 12011 6 9 Poor rate made october 1884 June 6. R. Paget, Salary to Christmas 12 10 0 Given in charge at ls. 6d 25729 4 0 „ Advertisements re Workhouse site 15 7 6 Arrears of former rate 6415 9 2 „ E. H. Sarjeant, Advertising board for same 8 7 9 Error in last book „ W. J. Ironside, Commission to Christmas 47 1 5 entries as irrecoverable since collected „ G. A. Potter do. 52 17 1 17 17 0 6433 6 2 „ H. W. Holliday do 43 15 6 ,, T. Powell do. 52 8 7 32162 10 2 ,, Boulton, Sons & Sandeman, Costs out of Collected Losses— 24 1037 18 4 pocket, Potter's Bond and Workhouse premises 13 5 0 Allowed to owner 3 426 18 1 „ Committals for Rates 22 7 7 Empties 1016 17 9 27. C. H. Garland, Balance of First Instalment of Precept 4040 4 0 Excused 48 4 7 Runaways 206 9 0 Feb 24. Ditto on account of Second Instalment 3000 0 0 Reduced by appeal 85 12 7 March 3 Churchwardens of Clerkenwell, Repairs of St. James' Churchyard 8 11 6 Duplicate ments 363 14 0 214 7 16 0 26185 14 4 4 24. C. H. Garland, Treasurer, &c , on account of Second Instalment of Precept 5000 0 0 Arrears carried forward 5976 15 10 25. R. Paget, Salary as Clerk to date 12 10 0 24340 12 8 Balance carried forward 3422 11 10 £27763 4 6 .£27763 4 6 ROBERT PAGET, Clerk to the Board, 1st July, 1885. I find the sum of Three thousand four hundred and twenty two pounds eleven shillings and tenpence to be the balance on this account against the Guardians and Governors of the Poor of the parish of St. James,' Clerkenwell. Dated this 22nd day of July, 1885. H. LLOYD ROBERTS, Auditor. APPENDIX II 90 Sale of Food and Drugs Act, 1875. Extract from the Annual Report of the Local Government Board for 1883-84. Up to the 31st of December, 1882, the number of Authorities who had appointed analysts, with our approval, was as follows:— Counties - - 52 Boroughs, under section 10 - 164 „ „ „ „ 11 8 Vestries and District Boards in the Metropolis - - 39 Up to the 31st of December last the total number of Authorities who had availed themselves of the salutary provisions of this important Statute was 265, two additional boroughs having, during the past year, made the requisite appointments. We are still in correspondence with the very few Authorities who have, so far, not complied with the provisions of the law in this respect. The result of the analyses made during the year is shown in the appended abstract. It will be seen that the total number of such analyses is 19,648, or about 200 more than in 1882. As the public continue to avail themselves only to a very small extent of the provisions of the Acts, the setting of motion of the machinery provided for the suppression of adulteration depends mainly upon whether the Local Authorities 91 choose to exercise their power of procuring samples for analyses. In many of the Metropolitan districts, in a large number of important boroughs, and in about half the counties, this power is exercised to an extent that may be considered fairly satisfactory, but on the other hand, there are many districts in which nothing at all is done in the matter. This is the case in the majority of the smaller boroughs, and the same may be said of a large proportion of the rural districts. The following table shows the number of samples examined during the year and the percentage of cases in which adulteration was reported:— Examined. Adulterated. 1882. Percentage adulterated. 1883. Percentage adulterated. Milk 8,119 1,626 19.6 20.0 Bread 1,041 28 6.4 2.7 Flour 473 2 0.6 0.4 Butter 1,311 236 13.9 18.0 Coffee 1,208 281 18.7 19.1 Sugar 270 — — — Mustard 801 120 17.9 15.0 Pickles (including tinned vegetables) 55 — 2.6 — Jam 134 5 8.2 3.7 Confectionery 214 — — — Wine 89 4 2.8 4.5 Beer 402 8 55 2.0 Spirits 2,174 489 25.3 22.5 Drugs 304 50 14.5 16.4 Other Articles 3,053 156 4.8 5.1 Totals 19,648 2,955 15.07 15.04 It will be observed from this table that the proportion of adulterated samples is rather more than 15 per 92 cent. of those examined. This percentage is about the same as that for the previous year. Of the samples examined by Dr. Hassall in 1854-56, more than one half were reported against. In 1877, the first year in which the returns under the Act of 1875 were tabulated, the proportion was 19.2. It would seem, therefore, that some progress is being made, though not very quickly, in reducing the amount of adulteration; and there is no doubt that its character is much less injurious than formerly. At the time of Dr. Hassall's examinations the adulterants employed were in a large proportion of cases dangerous to health; now, if the public are cheated by the mixture of water with milk or chicory with coffee, they are not poisoned by copper in their pickles or sulphuric acid in their spirits. Milk continues to be the chief subject of analysis, and the proportion of samples reported against is about one fifth of the whole number examined. In the Metropolis, however, the proportion is still larger, amounting to about 26 per cent. On a former occasion we gave the grounds for a calculation that Londoners are paying between £70,000 and £80,000 a year for water sold under the name of milk, and we are inclined to think that the estimate was by no means excessive. We find that the Public Analyst for Plumstead calculates that in that single district the milkmen receive between £7,000 and £8,000 tor water, while the fines for adulteration imposed on them collectively amount to about £100 annually. The sale of butterine in place of butter seems to be increasing. We do not find in the reports of the analyses any mention of ingredients injurious to health, but inquiries on this point are being made by a Committee of the New York Senate with regard to the 93 manufacture of spurious butter in that country, and we shall watch with interest for their report. The adulteration of spirits continues to flourish; it seems to consist, however, in simple dilution with water. The standard fixed by the Act of 1879 allows the sale of gin watered down to 35° below proof, and, therefore, composed of only about 32 per cent. of alcohol and 68 percent. of water. But a good deal of gin it appears is sold contaiuing less than 20 per cent. or alcohol. Much more serious, as regards the public health, is the extensive sale of drugs which analysis shows to be not in accordance with the pharmacopoeia. Many of the samples reported against are, no doubt, not adulterated in the ordinary sense of the word, but are merely, from having being originally defective, or having deteriorated through keeping, below the standard strength. The result, however, is that a prescription compounded with such drugs may fail altogether to produce the effect which would have been produced by drugs of proper quality. In other cases, preparations of expensive drugs, such as quinine, are either unduly diluted, so that a prescription of three grains would contain only two grains, or a cheap drug (e.g., cinchonine) is substituted. Of the 19,648 samples above referred to all but 252 were obtained by officers appointed under the Act of 1875. Of those purchased privately about one fourth were found adulterated, of those purchased officially about one seventh. This difference is of course mainly explicable by the fact that a private purchaser's suspicion of adulteration is ordinarily pretty strongly aroused before he bestirs himself to put the Acts into operation on his own account. Several important decisions of the High Court of 94 Justice have been given during the year under the Sale of Food and Drugs Acts. In Harris v. May (L.E. 12, Q.B.D. 97) a general contract for the supply of pure milk was held not to be the specific warranty required by section 25 of the Act 1875, in order to protect the retailer from penalty for selling adulterated milk in the same state as when he purchased it. In Gage v. Elsey (L.R. 10, Q.B.D. 518) it was held that section 6 of the Act of 1879 does not affect the operation of section 8 of the principal Act, and that the vendor of any spirits reduced by water below the standard strength would not be guilty of an offence under the last-named Act if he could show that adequate notification of the dilution had been given to the purchaser. In Chappell v. Enson (47.J.P. 804) the purchaser of an article of food notified to the seller that it was his intention to have it analysed by the Public Analyst, and offered to "divide it," but the seller refused, the offer. The justices convicted, but it was contended before the High Court that the purchaser ought, in the words of the statute, to have offered to "divide it into three parts." The Court, however, held that the time had not come to offer to divide it into three parts, because the vendor refused the offer to divide it; and the appeal was accordingly dismissed. SIR CHARLES DILKE AND THE CLERKENWELL VESTRY. S P E E C H OF MR. WILLIAM ROBSON, CHAIRMAN, AT THE CLERKENWELL VESTRY, In reply to allegations made by Sir Charles Dilke in the House of Commons and elsewhere, concerning the Clerkenwell Vestry, AND RESOLUTION THEREON. THURSDAY, 10th JULY, 1884. (Ordered by the Board to be Prutted.) LONDON: PRINTED BY W. J. GOODE, 23, ST. JOHN'S LANE, E.G. SIR CHARLES DILKE AND THE CLERKENWELL VESTRY. Speech of Mr. W. ROBSON, Chairman of the Vestry, in reply to Sir CHARLES DILKE, and resolution thereon. At the ordinary Meeting of the Clerkenwell Vestry on Thursday, July 10th, Mr. Churchwarden Gibson presiding, Mr. W. Robson, in accordance with notice of motion of the 5th inst., called attention to recent statements in the House of Commons and elsewhere concerning the Vestry of Clerkenwell, and moved the following resolution thereon:— "That the attention of this Board having been called to the "statement made by Sir Charles Dilke in the Kensington "Town Hall and the House of Commons, which are abso"lutely without foundation, this Board expresses its deep "regret that a Cabinet Minister should deem it consistent "with his high and responsible position to make such state"ments without ascertaining whether they were true; and "hereby enters its emphatic protest against the unfair " and cowardly means which are being employed to circu"late such false reports." Mr. Robson said:—It has been suggested to me, occupying as I happen to do at the present time, the position of Chairman of this Board, that it was incumbent upon me, some week or two since, to have drawn the attention of this Board to certain statements which had been made in other places reflecting very considerably upon the action of chis Vestry. Although I had some sympathy with that suggestion, yet for another reason I thought it was advisable that nothing hurriedly should be done in dealing with the question. My reason for this was that I believed that certain people, encouraged by the fact 4 that no notice Had been taken of the gross mis-statements that had been made, would take further courage and venture upon a yet more daring step. And my idea was not without foundation. Upon that silence some one has drawn conclusions and made a statement that is so glaring that the task I have to-night is a very easy one indeed. I don't know if gentlemen read in the papers of yesterday, or the day before, that a question which was asked in the House of Commons with reference to the dynamite outrages, and the reply of the Home Secretary. Mr. I Healy asked whether the Home Secretary was aware that there were manufactories in Paris of false penny-alining. The Home Secretary replied, "Yes, Sir, and I should not confine it to Paris." Perhaps he had something in his mind at the time of a branch establishment somewhere in the neighbourhood of Clcrkcnwell. There is an old adage, that "Silence gives consent," and I think that if we, as a Vestry, had remained silent with regard to statements that have been made of late, we should have been said to be tacitly assenting to them. Whether I please or offend it matters but little, but I will say that in my humble judgment the Vestry of Clcrkcnwell have made many mistakes, and by a course they have thought fit to take they have brought upon themselves many of the attaeks that have been made. Occupying, as I have, the chair at this Vestry during the past twelve or fifteen months, it has been no part of my business to enter into the discussions; but whilst I recognise that the Vestry have been quite within their rights in what they have done, yet I venture to think they have somewhat erred in judgment. That being the ease, it strengthens my idea of the situation, and makes my task all the easier. I lay down as a principle, which cannot be shaken, that the individual—whether it be Sir Charles Dilke, or whether it, be one of his lacqueys— whether it be a member of the Government, or a member of the Clerkenwell Vestry—that individual who circulates statements without having first ascertained whether they are true or not, is as morally guilty of falsehood as he who tells the most direct lie. I say any individual who 5 attacks and takes away the character of another individual, without being able to justify what he has done, is guilty of what I may call moral assassination. The resolution which I now submit to you is as follows:— "That the attention of this Board having been called to the "statements made by Sir Charles Dilke in the Kensington "Town Hall and the House of Commons, which are absolutely "without foundation, this Board expresses it deep regret that "a Cabinet Minister should deem it consistent with his high "and responsible position to make such statements without "ascertaining whether they were true, and hereby enters it "emphatic protest against the unfair and cowardly means " which are being employed to circulate such false reports." In dealing with this question there is no need that I should indulge in any wild or excitable statements. I shall simply read to you the statements as made in other places and reported in the public press, and then against those statements I shall lay before you simple facts, and shall leave those facts to stand against the statements, and gentlemen can then form their own conclusions. Speaking in the Town Hall, Kensington, Sir Charles Dilke said:— "It had been shown by the Chairman of the Sanitary " Committee of that (the Clerkenwell) Vestry, that ho had, at every " turn, been thwarted in his efforts on behalf the ratepayers, by the "interested opposition of those who controlled the Vestry." Now, it is my business to tell you how far this statement is borne out by facts; and I regret exceedingly in doing so that the late Chairman of the Sanitary Committee is not here in his place to night. I regret it for this reason; Mr. Jennings and myself are very old friends. There is no Member of this Board for whom I have for years entertained a greater respect. I knew him long before I thought we should ever come in contact on the Yestry of Clerkenwell. I have and do esteem him as a gentleman of the highest integrity; and until I have it from his own lips, I will not believe he ever made such a statement. And I will tell you why. When was he elected Chairman of the Sanitary Committee ? In the month of May, 1883. Now, gentlemen, in order that I should not indulge in any rash statements, I have made it my business—instead of taking my usual 6 rest—to road through the Vestry Minutes from the beginning of 1881 to the present time in order to find out the real facts of the ease. I have seen the written minutes for two years prior to that in order to ascertain exactly how the matter stands. Mr. Jennings, as I have said, was elected Chairman of the Sanitary Committee in May, 1883, and June, July, August, September, October, November, December, and January of the present year passed away, and every recommendation made by the Sanitary Committee, and by their Chairman, Mr. Jennings, was carried without the slightest hesitation. No amendments were moved or carried, and yet, forsooth, "in every step he had taken in the interests "of the ratepayers he was thwarted by those interested "—by those having house property in Clerkenwell." On the 21st of February, 1884, when the regulations of the Local Government Board with respect to houses let out in lodgings, were first brought before this Board, that was the first occasion on which a reference back to the Committee was made. And then what happened? An amendment was moved and carried that the report be referred back to the Sanitary Committee for further consideration, and that in the meantime the Vestry Clerk inquire of other parishes what they were doing in the matter. And by whom was this amendment moved? Was it by the "house-farmers," the "brokers," or the "publicans," or the "money lenders"? No; it was moved by Mr. Brighty, the champion of Sanitary reform, and a member of the Sanitary Committee. And yet we are told that at every step the chairman was thwarted by interested parties! It may be said Sir Charles Dilke spoke in Kensington Town Hall on the 24th of May, and you are referring to what took place in February; but I will tell you that on March 24th of this year Sir Charles Dilke wrote to this Vestry a letter, saying that on the following day two members of the Vestry (the Chairman of the Sanitary Committee being one) were going to bo examined before the Royal Commission on the Housing of the Poor. I have proved to you that, prior to that, Mr. Jennings had never met at the hands of 7 this Vestry with the slightest rebuff, and therefore I fail to see how any man could say "he had met with rebuffs at every turn he took." I for one, at least, am at a loss to see the truth of the remark. And, more than that, the Vestry had gone out of its way in enabling him to carry on his work, for, at the request of the Sanitary Committee, it had given them unlimited power to carry out the provisions of the Nuisances Removal Acts. And yet the Vestry of Clerkenwell is to be held up to ridicule by those whom, I believe, did so from interested motives. But Sir Charles Dilke stated at that meeting, or at any rate in the House of Commons, that "There existed in the Clerkenwell Vestry a combination of "publicans, house-farmers, brokers, and money-lenders, who con"trolled and regulated all that was done." That is a matter of which I am somewhat ignorant, and I have no doubt that those who supplied Sir Charles Dilke with his information have more knowledge of brokers and money-lenders than I have. And I am free to confess that in all my business life it has not been my custom to play the part of Paul Pry, in order to ascertain the business of those with whom I have worked. Apart from seeking to appreciate their capability for, and earnestness in public duty, I have sought to know nothing, but have been willing to cooperate with them from the very fact that they, too, have been anxious to do something for the public good. It does seem a very strange thing that, in the House of Commons, Mr. George Russell, the Parliamentary Secretary of the Local Government Board, made the statement, as reported in the Times of the 9th instant, and other papers, relative to the Committees of the Clerkenwell Vestry, that "In the Parish of Clerkenwell, in each of the five Committees, a "large majority were house-farmers, or closely connected with "them. In the Finance Committee 10 out of 15, in the Works "Committee 15 out of 20, in the Assessment Committee 15 out of "20, the Parliamentary Committee 6 out of 15, and in the Sanitary "Committee 9 out of 20 were house-farmers." I will simply say that his statement is untrue. What was stated in the House of Commons on the previous evening? Having told the exact numbers (what they 8 call exact numbers,) this champion of truth winds up bysaying "the rest of the Committees are publicans and money-lenders." All I have to say to this is that it is a vile calumny on the members of the Vestry. Why should I (I am speaking for myself), occupying a business position in this parish, and endeavouring to do my duty in all public matters,—why should I be held up to public ridicule by the man who has ventured to make these statements? Because, if "the rest of them are publicans and money-lenders," I must come within the category. I cannot tell you all the qualifications of the members of the various Committees, but I do know the numbers as stated in the House of Commons to be false. And it does seem to me singular that from a House so largely constituted of brewers and distillers such an outcry against publicans should come. It is no secret that I am no friend of publicans—nothing to do with their trade in any way; but looking at the combination in the House of Commons of those concerned in the liquor trade, it does seem strange that such a speech should have been made. And when it has not been thought wrong for a brewer to occupy the position of a Cabinet Minister, it is strange that it should be thought so wrong in the Clerkenwell Vestry. If such, too, had been my convictions, and I had the drafting of a Bill which was to be for the better government of the people, I should most certainly have endeavoured to take care that the views I held should be carried out. In the House of Commons last Friday evening Sir Charles Dilke made another speech:— "His honourable friend (Mr. Torrens) knew the constitution "of the Clerkenwell Vestry, and the effect of his speech and vote "might be to leave that Vestry as it was. His honourable friend "knew that Chairman after Chairman of the Sanitary Committee "had again and again reported in favour of Sanitary Reform, and "that their Reports had been vetoed year after year by a majority "of the Vestry who were interested in the class of property which "the Sanitary Committee would interfere with. All who had held "the Chairmanship of the Sanitary Committee for years past had "testified to the harm done by the action of the majority of the "Vestry. The Sanitary Committee had now been repressed, and 9 "there was no one left to protest against the management of the "affairs of the parish." "The Sanitary Committee had been suppressed, and no one left to protest against the sanitary condition of the parish." I will tell you what has been suppressed— and that is the truth in the utterances of Sir Charles Dilke. That statement is simply false. What are the facts? Who have been the previous chairmen of the Sanitary Committee? Mr. Leaver, Mr. Harrison, Mr. Brighty. What are the records of the Minutes? I have seen the printed minutes, and the written minutes which were in existence prior to their being printed, there has never been a recommendation of any value whatever—which has been sent up from the Sanitary Committee from the month of April in the year 1879— (I have not gone further back) which has been rejected by this Vestry. And I challenge anyone—I care not who—to produce a single record in the history of this Board where "the recommendations of the chairmen of the Sanitary Committees have been vetoed year after year." And I should like to know where the combination of "house-farmers and publicans" has existed in order to reject any one recommendation made. Take one test case—and that is the secret of all the complaint —viz., the non-adoption of the regulations of the Local Government Board with regard to houses let out in lodgings, or occupied by more than one family. If there had been a combination of publicans and house-farmers against those regulations it would be shown on the Minutes. What is the fact? How many publicans voted against the regulations? One! And yet there was "a combination between publicans and housefarmers to reject them." But the vote just referred to was counterbalanced,as one publican voted on the other side! There have been one or two cases in which the Vestry have interfered with the recommendations of the Sanitary Committee. In October, 1883, the Vestry carried an amendment to give a larger salary to an assistant Sanitary inspector than had been recommended by the Sanitary Committee. And this is one of the cases in 10 which "interested Vestrymen have thrown obstacles in the way!" With those two exceptions the Vestry have never refused to adopt sanitary recommendations, and no difficulty has been placed in the way of the Sanitary Committees or their chairmen carrying on their work. Now I think I have said enough to call attention to the statements which have been made. As I said at first, so now I repeat, I am not here as a defender of the Clerkenwell Vestry with respect to all it has done in sanitary matters; but I say that if, as Sir Charles Dilke says, there are pest spots in Clerkenwell which are a danger to the inhabitants of the parish and the Metropolis at large, ho has never pointed out where those spots exist. And I think it would have shown a higher kind of statesmanship, and a more laudable desire in the interests of the inhabitants of the Metropolis, if, instead of abusing us, he had told the Vestry where the evil and danger lay, so that the evil might be removed and the danger averted. This has never been done. And even if it were true that there are men upon this Vestry who have intentionally stood in the way of sanitary reform, would it not have been wiser to help those who are endeavouring to do their duty, than to throw aspersions at them, and seek refuge in high position? Justice then would have been done. In the framing of the resolution I have endeavoured to speak very clearly and very distinctly. A Member of Parliament was, the other day, talking to me on this matter, and he told me if I liked to supply him with any information respecting it he would take care that my name was not put forward. But I told him, as I tell you, that my name shall be attached to my opinions. I care nothing for high official position; but if a person, whoever he may be, takes advantage of his position, and makes statements which are not borne out by facts, I shall feel it my duty, here and elsewhere, to enter my protest against them in words as clear and distinct as the English language will enable me to do. I therefore move the resolution standing in my name. 11 Mr. E. J. Thompson (late Clerkenwell member of the Metropolitan Board of Works) seconded. After a lengthy discussion, Mr. Robson having replied to remarks made by several members, proceeded: A great deal had been said about house-farmers. What were they? He did not know, and thought that if the whole of the members who spoke so much about them were to give written definitions no two of them "would agree. If a man held a house and let out a part it was unjust to level such a name as house-farmer at his head. He himself had none of his money invested in house property, but he had been told that such statements as had gone forth had been most damaging to persons who had money invested in house property. Mr. Robson, in conclusion, said:— The great mistake this Vestry has made was the rejection of Mr. Jennings from the Sanitary Committee. It is quite true as Mr. Kelly has said, that I had hoped it would not be so, that I had said it would be a scandal if he were rejected. But I say Sir Charles Dilke himself is responsible for the rejection of Mr. Jennings. What happened? At the Kensington Town Hall on the Saturday night prior to the election, Sir Charles Dilke had said that he had been told that the Chairman of the Sanitary Committee of the Clerkenwell Vestry had been thwarted in every way. Therefore, is it to be wondered at that members (who knew this was not the case,) should resent it, and allow their feeling to get the better of their judgment? I know that this feeling actuated many members in their action at the election. What has caused the Vestry of Clerkenwell to be brought into such disrepute? I believe it has arisen from the fact that members of this Board, instead of discussing matters that come before them fairly and quietly, allow themselves to degenerate into personalities. This is a practice which should be condemned on every public Board. We have been told to-night that the London Government Bill has been withdrawn. I could almost have wished, for many reasons, that this had not been the 12 case, if it could have been so amended as th become a workable measure. The fact of its having been withdrawn leaves things to on-so far an Local SelfGovernment is concerned in exactly the same position us before the Bill was proposed. May I now appeal to the Vestry, and say that, whatever mistakes have been made, there is yet time to retrieve. Let bygones be bygones; let the jealousies cease; and, forgetting all personal ill feeling, endeavour to cultivate a desire to do the very best for the Parish. The past few months in this place have boon the most irksome of my life, from the fact of the amenities that have existed; and a gentleman said to me the other day that if he had £100 placed in his hands he would not come forward on the Clerkenwell Vestry, lest his reputation should bo attacked. Gentlemen, I with confidence submit the resolution to you. I ask you to consider it, and carry it heartily. And I also ask you to consider the words of my appeal, in order that in the future the work may be done more harmoniously and more efficiently than it has been in the past. The Chairman then put the resolution, which was carried, there appearing 27 for, and 4 against it.