CRAI Urban District of Crayford. Annual Report OF THE Medical Officer of Health, For the Year 1925, BY C. M. OCKWELL, F.R.C.S. <Eng.>, D.P.H. <Camb.) Crayford Urban District Council. To the Chairman and Members of the Crayford Urban District Council, and Health Committee : — Ladies and Gentlemen, I have the honour to present my Fifth Annual Report. Instructions have been received from the Ministry of Health that the Report for this year shall he a Survey Report—i.e., in addition to the usual information it contains a survey of the work for the past five years of the Urban District Council as a local Sanitary Authority. The Crayford Urban District Council was instituted as a separate body in October, 1920, at a time which, unfortunately, practically coincided with the end of the boom period, which developed during the War, and continued for a short space afterwards. This boom, and subsequent depression has left its mark to an unusual degree on our area. During the War period to accommodate Munition Workers who were transferred to this District to work at Messrs. Vicker's Works, at Crayford and Erith, 800 hoiises were erected at Crayford and 400 at Northumberland Heath. The population increased 91.3 per cent, between the Census of 1911 and that of 1921. Though, of course, many families have left the District, it remains fairly 1 true to say that this increase of population has since had to be provided for. The figures given of men on work for which the Unemployed Grant's Committee have given grants, and the figures for Poor Law relief, give eloquent testimony to the conditions under which the new Council has carried on. Fortunately, the number of workers at Messrs. Vicker's Works has materially improved from the worst, but still greater improvement must take place before we can hope to attain to that state that we can look upon as normal. Among the more staple industries, which unfortunately employ much smaller numbers of workers, are Messrs. Baker's and Messrs. Evans' Fabric and Silk Printers, and the Southern Railway Locomotive Sheds at Slade Green. Further developments are hoped for at Messrs. Baker's in the matter of weaving, but at present is only in an experimental stage. Owing to the change over from Steam to Electricity, changes are proceeding ' at Slade Green. The ultimate result remains to be seen. The leather works of Messrs. Murgatroyds continue in a state of depression, with much short time and unemployment. The following figures are of interest:— Nos. in receipt of relief. Amount paid in relief. 1921 600 £11,684 1922 400 £22,456 1923 341 £13,825 1924 328 £8,240 1925 250 £5,484 Amount spent on work for which Unemployment Grant's Committee have given Grants: — 1921/22 £4785 1922/23 £1984 1923/24 £3023 1924/25 £1960 1925-26 £3084 £14,836 2 Number of Employees at Messrs. Vickers' Works during the period mentioned:— 1921 1530 1922 520 1923 950 1924 950 1925 1200 Number of Season Ticket Holders using Crayford Station (of the order of) 100 Number of Workmen's Tickets issued daily from Crayford (of the order of) 200 Report on the Geology of the Crayford District:- The District, which includes Crayford, Northumberland Heath, and Slade Green, lies in part on high ground formed by sands and pebble-beds belonging to the formation known geologically, as the Blackheath Beds, and in part on low-lying gravels, brickearths and Marsh deposits which border the lower courses of the Darent and the Cray. The Blackheath Beds form an extensive Plateau, stretching from Blackheath, through Woolwich, Plumstead and Bostal Commons to Erith and Northumberland Heath. The remarkably even surface of this plateau lies usually between 150 and 180 feet above sealevel This high situation, combined with the porous nature of the pebbly soil, makes the whole district of the pebble-beds a pleasant and healthy residential area. On the east this high ground drops sharply towards the marshes. Along the foot of the slope, and at about, 50 feet above Ordnance datum. runs the road from Crayford to Erith, and on the East of this road, the ground falls gradually through Slade Green, where the surface is not more than 20 to 25 feet above sea-level to the river level. In Crayford Marsh a few hundred acres are even below the high water mark. The Chalk, the lowest and oldest formation visible in the district, can be seen only in the great pits between Erith and Crayford, where it has become exposed by the removal of vast quantities of gravel and brickearth. The Chalk lies at too great a depth to affect the character of the ground surface, and it is only of importance as a storage for underground water. The Metropolitan 3 Water Board draws large quantities from (he pumping station at Crayford. Above the Chalk lies a thick deposit of fine sand, the Thanet Sand, of marine origin, and 50 or more feet thick. It may be seen in pits below Perry Street and Wansunt. and is extensively worked at Erith for export as a moulding sand. The Woolwich Beds above the Thanet Sand are composed of sands and fresh-water clays. They are not well exposed, and are of no economic importance. The succeeding clean sands and thick pebble-beds of the Blackheath Beds are those which form so much of the surface, and impart a distinctive character to all the high ground of the district. The Chalk, Thanet Sand, Woolwich Beds, and Blackheath Beds extend under all the district about Northumberland Heath and Bexleyheath. A shaft sunk from the surface would pass through Blackheath Beds 50ft., Woolwich Beds 40ft., Thanet Sand 50ft. (the figures being in each case average values), and would reach the Chalk at approximately 130 to 150 feet below the ground level. The remaining formations are river-deposits of sand, gravel, and loam. On the high ground about Crayford Church and Dartf'ord Heath, are ancient river gravels which have long been worked in great pits on Dartf'ord Heath. The brickearth pits on the lower ground between Crayford and Erith have yielded vast quantities of materials for bricks, and the supply is far from being exhausted. 1 have reproduced this report in view of its importance from the point of view of future building developments. Other things being equal, it behoves the Council to develop the higher parts of their area for building sites. In this connection I am pleased to report that the Council have recently had the sewer laid along May Place Road and Hills and Holes. Refuse Tip (Messrs. Rutter's). The question of the dumping of refuse in the district from outside areas came prominently before the Council soon after thev were constituted an Urban Authority in 1920. 4 Despite repeated efforts by Council Officials, very little was accomplished at first, except in the matter of screening, and ultimately the Ministry of Health was approached, and although interviews and inspections by their officials took place, and whilst the Ministry appeared sympathetic, nothing practical resulted. In view of the important question of dealing with the disposal of house and other refuse, 1 suggested to the Health Committee that they should urge the Council to solicit the sympathy and support of other local Sanitary Authorities, and as a result, the Council passed a resolution suggesting that the Ministry of Health should bring in a Bill which should provide that a local authority should not be permitted to send refuse into the area of another authority, or within one mile thereof, without the consent of that authority. A copy of this resolution was sent to a number of other local authorities. The Council will remember that this resolution was strongly supported by these authorities who sent it to the Ministry of Health, and mainly as a result of this, the Ministry, in July, 1922, convened and held several conferences with representatives of the London County Council, and the Metropolitan and other boroughs, as a result of which these authorities undertook to use their best endeavours to prevent nuisances at the dumps for their refuse. Furthermore, a set of draft rules for regulating the dumping of refuse, were issued by the Ministry, and chiefly provided for the deposit of refuse in layers, adequate and timely covering of earth, and the avoidance of dumps arising above the level of the surrounding country. At a subsequent interview in August, 1922, a deputation from the Council waited upon the Ministry of Health, and was informed of the action taken by the Ministry with the London authorities, when the Ministry suggested that in view of the magnitude of the problem of the disposal of London's refuse, tlie Council should keep the Ministry informed of the results arising out of the action so far taken by the Ministry. Whatever may have happened in other districts, very little improvement occurred at Messrs. Rutter's dumps. 5 and the Ministry of Health was kept constantly informed of the position. One of the London boroughs concerned, after satisfying themselves that this Council had cause to complain, took the first opportunity and cancelled the contract with the firm responsible for contravening the regulations. On two occasions the dumps have caught fire, and though this might have been prevented if the regulations had been carried out, it gave Messrs. Butter's an answer as to why the covering had not been done. During the past year, however, although dumping has again been carried on without regard to the regulations, the refuse has not caught fire. It having come to my knowledge that refuse was still arriving from the particular London borough already mentioned, a meeting was held at the tip with the Borough Surveyor concerned (at which the Clerk, the Sanitary Inspector and myself attended) and as a result no further refuse came from that particular area. Messrs. Rutter's complained to the Council, but it decided to take no action. Since this incident, matters have greatly improved at the tip. Owing to the value for brickmaking purposes of the material dumped, we are hoping that the improvement will continue. Reviewing the statistics which deal with the health of the district for the five-year period. The population increased according to the Registrar General's returns from 12050 to 13060. We find the birth rate has been well above the average, reaching 26.1 per 1000 of population the first year, dropping slightly till it was 24.18 in 1923, reaching the low-water mark of just under 20 in 1924, and climbing to 20.82 last year. During the first year there was a large total of infectious disease, viz:—111 cases of Diphtheria, with 12 deaths and 93 of Scarlet Fever, with one death. Fortunately, the totals since then have dropped considerably till in 1923, there were only 4 cases of Diphtheria and. 11 of Scarlet Fever. In 1924, there were 9 cases of Diphtheria but 62 of Scarlet Fever. Last year the figures were 33 cases of Diphtheria and 24 of Scarlet Fever. 6 The death rate has also kept well below the average, being 9.6 in 1921. dropping to the record low figure of 7.08 in 1923, and rising to 9.1 in 1924. In 1925 it was 8.4. These good figures are accounted for to some extent, at least, by the fact, borne out by the 1921 Census figures of the relatively large number of young married couples living in the district. During the same period, 1459 births were certified. There were 5 deaths of women dying in, or, in consequence of childbirth, giving a rate of 3.4. One only of these deaths was from Sepsis. Though these figures are better than the average, it should be possible to improve them. The rate per 1000 births for deaths of infants under one year declined steadily from 90 in 1921 (figure above the average) to 35.4 in 1924, a highly satisfactory drop. It has gone up to 40 this year, apparently chiefly in consequence of a larger number of deformed and premature babies. I should like to express my thanks to the Health Visitors, Nurse Horseman, who unfortunately, has been ill for so long, and latterly to Nurse Kiddell. Both have shown great devotion and keenness in their work. The features of the average attendances at the Child Welfare Clinics have been the increase at Slade Green from 17.35 in 1921, and 14.1 in 1922, to 23.7 in 1924, and 23.0 in 1925. Northumberland Heath has been fairly constant in the thirties, while Crayford has crept up from 53 to 77 in 1924, and 68 in 1925. Clinics. Maternity and Child Welfare Clinics are held fortnightly at Northumberland Heath. Slade Green and Crayford. 7 Attendance figures are as follows:— Clinics Held. Total Attendances. Average. Crayford 27 1834 68 Slade Green 25 586 23 Northumberland Heath 26 714 27 Maternity Home. Eighty-eight babies were born in the Maternity Home last year. The home is not subsidized by the Council. Ante-Natal Clinic. This is held at Barnes Cray House. Crayford (Crayford Maternity Home), weekly, on Thursday afternoons. It is run with the knowledge and approval of the Council, but at present is not subsidized by them. They are being increasingly attended and are much appreciated. No charge is made to expectant mothers. Public Health Officers. MEDICAL OFFICER OF HEALTH (part-time) C. M. Ockwell, F.R.C.S. (Eng.), D.P.H., Camb, SANITARY INSPECTOR (whole-time), H. G. Davey. A.M.I.S.E., M.S.I. A. HEALTH VISITOR (whole-time), Nurse Kiddell. Home Nursing. The Crayford Nursing Association have one wholetime nurse at Crayford, and one at Slade Green. Both are nurses trained and sent down by the Queen's Victoria's Jubilee Institute for Nurses. The Council gives no grant, but have an arrangement for home nursing of measles, the Council undertaking to reimburse the Association if extra help is required. Northumberland Heath (the Crayford part of it) is served with the rest of that district by a Ranyard nurse. Midwives. There is one midwife resident in Crayford itself; one midwife resident outside the area, but practising 8 largely at Northumberland Heath, and another at Erith, subsidized by the Kent County Council, practising at Slade Green. Hospital Arrangements, Etc., Infectious cases are dealt with at Bow Arrow Hospital, which also serves the Dartf'ord Rural Urban Districts. An arrangement is made with the Metropolitan Asylums Board for admission of small pox patients into their Hospital at Joyce Green, Dartf'ord. School and Tuberculosis Clinics are provided by the County Council at Dartf'ord and Erith. Venereal Clinic at 37, West Hill, Dartf'ord. Ordinary hospital accommodation is provided by the Erith, Bexley and Dartf'ord Cottage Hospitals, and the Guardians' Hospital. The London hospitals are of fairly easy access. Arrangements have been made with Sidcup Fire Brigade M.A.B. and Dartf'ord Guardians, for the hire of their ambulances for the removal of cases of serious illness to hospital. Cases of infectious deseases are removed by the Infectious Diseases Hospital Ambulance. Adoptive Acts. Lists of Acts adopted by the Dartford R.D.C. and Bye-Laws in force in the Parish of Crayford at the date of the creation of the Urban District of Crayford:— Public Health Acts (Amendment) Act. 1907, viz:— Part II., Sections 15, 16 17, 18, 20, 21, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28. 29, 30, 31, 32 and 33. Part III., Sections 34-50 (inclusive). Part V., Sections 69-75 (inclusive). *Notifications of Births Act, 1907. *Housing of the Working Classes Act, 1890, Part III. 9 Infectious Diseases (Prevention) Act, 1890. *Now Public General Acts. The Private Street Works Acts, 1892. Infectious Diseases (Prevention) Act, 1890. Public Libraries Acts, 1892-1922. Small Dwellings Acquisition Act 1899. SANITARY CIRCUMSTANCES OF THE AREA. Water. The water supply of the district will be found dealt with in the Sanitary Inspector's Report. Sewers. During the last five years the Council have from time to time extended their sewerage, particularly where developments are likely to take place. Particulars of new foul-sewers laid down during the five years:— Housing Scheme No. 1 and 2 2280 feet. Maiden Lane 1470 feet. Barnehurst Sewer (Hills and Holes, May Place Road) 4315 feet. Iron Mill Lane 300 feet. North End Road 120 feet. Total 8485 ft 1.6 mls. All sewers belonging to the Council discharge into the West Kent Sewer, the outfalls of which are in the Dartford area. Closet Accommodation. The closet in use is with few exceptions of the water closet type, furnished with flushing appartus. 10 W.C.s discharging into drainage system 2631 W.C.s discharging into Cesspools, etc. 59 Pail Closets 8 Scavenging. Refuse from dwelling houses is collected each week by Thorneycroft motor lorry. The method is efficient. Trade refuse is collected on payment. The refuse is taken to Slade Green. where it is screened and sorted. There is a fairly ready market for breeze and ash which is sold. What is left over after screening and sorting is dumped and covered. The method works satisfactorily. Schools. The sanitary conveniences are good. The more recently built schools are more hygienic than the older ones. The chief troubles at the present time are the overcrowding and the fact that large numbers of children have to go outside the district. Smoke Abatement. There were 10 records of factory chimneys. The attention of Messrs. Baker and Murgatroyd have been drawn to this matter. No legal action have been taken. Housing. This remains a difficult problem in our area. It can safely be said that 50 houses are required to make good the shortage in the Slade Green and North End area. In Crayford itself the consideration is governed mainly by two factors:— (1) The likelihood of any permanent development at Messrs. Vicker's Works. (2) The possibility of the area becoming a dormitory for City workers in view of the electrification of the railway in the area. Messrs. Vicker's factory is capable of employing 12,000 or more people, but at present is only employing just over 1,000. As far as can be judged no big 11 ments are expected. Apparently, the reverse process is just as likely to happen. It has also to he borne in mind that an appreciable number of people who work outside the district would leave Crayford, if suitable accommodation offered elsewhere. If one were set the problem of estimating the shortage, assuming that the present state was permanent the figure would probably be about 250. A good deal of delay occurred in the placing of the contract for the new 54 houses on the Watling Street site, but they are now in process of construction. Another 50 there and 50 for Slade Green are now in contemplation and have been provisionally sanctioned by the Ministry of Health. HOUSING STATISTICS FOR THE YEAR 1925. Number of new houses erected during the year:— a. Total (including nos. given separately under b) 8 b. With State assistance under (he Housing Acts: i. By Local Authority Nil. ii. By other bodies or persons 6 1. Unfit Dwelling-Houses. Inspection—(1) Total number of dwellinghouses inspected for housing defects (under Public Health or Housing Acts) 2. Number of dwelling-houses which were inspected and recorded under the Housing (Inspection of District) Regulations, 1910, or the Housing Consolidated Regulations, 1925 59 3. Number of dwelling-houses found to lie in a state so dangerous of injurious to health as to be unfit for human habitation 1 12 4. Number of dwelling-houses (exclusive of those referred to under the preceding subheading) found not to be in all respects reasonably fit for human habitation 58 2. Remedy of defects without service of formal notices. Number of defective dwelling-houses rendered fit in consequence of informal action by the Local Authority or their officers 356 3. Action under Statutory Powers. a. Proceedings under section 3 of the Housing Act, 1925: — 1. Number of dwelling-houses in respect of which notices were served requiring repairs 19 2. Number of dwelling-houses which were rendered fit after service of formal notices:— (a) By Owners 18 (b) By Local Authority in default of Owners 3. Number of dwelling-houses in respect of which Closing Orders became operative in pursuance of declarations by Owners of intention to close b. Proceedings under Public Health Acts:— 1. Number of dwelling-houses in respect of which notices were served requiring defects to be remedied 12 2. Number of dwelling-houses in which defects were remedied after service of formal notices:— (a) By Owners 12 (b) By Local Authority in default of Owners 13 c. Proceedings under sections 2, 14, and 15. of the Housing Act, 1925:— 1. Number of representations made with a view to the making of Closing Orders 2. Number of dwelling-house in respect of which Closing Orders were made 3. Number of dwelling-houses in respect of which Closing Orders were determined, the dwelling-houses having been rendered fit 4. Number of dwelling-houses in respect of which Demolition Orders were made 5. Number of dwelling-houses demolished in pursuance of Demolition Orders General Statistics. Area 2610½ acres. Population Census (1921), 11,924; Number of inhabited houses (1921), 2460. Number of families or separate occupiers, 2834. Rateable value. £51900. Sum represented by a penny rate, £215. Extract from Vital Statistics. Total. M. F. Births. Legitimate 263 129 134 Birth Bate - 20.82 Illegitimate 9 2 7 Death Rate - 8.4 No. of women dying in, or in consequence of Childbirth From Sepsis 0 ,, other causes 1 Deaths of Infants under 1 year of age:— Legitimate 11. Illegitimate 0. Total 11. Rate per thousand births 40.4 Deaths from Measles (all ages) Nil ,, ,, Whooping Cough (all ages) 4 ,, ,, Diarrhoea (under 2 years 1 14 Notifiable Diseases During the Year. Disease Total cases Notified. Cases admitted to Hospital. Total Deaths. Diphtheria 33 33 4 Small Pox 0 0 0 Scarlet Fever 21 21 0 Enteric Fever (including ParaTvphoid) 2 0 1 Pneumonia 4 0 6 Erysipelas 3 1 0 Acute Poliomyelitis 0 0 0 Tuberculosis. Age Periods New Cases. Deaths. Pulmonary Non Pulmonary Pulmonary Non Pulmonary M. F. M. F. M. F. M. F. 0 1 5 1 10 3 4 3 15 1 1 2 4 1 20 3 1 2 1 1 25 1 3 1 2 1 1 35 6 4 4 2 45 1 I 55 1 1 2 65 upwards 1 2 Totals 14 ] 6 10 8 7 5 2 0 Two cases of diphtheria occurred as return cases. Bacteriological and Pathological Specimens. These are examined at the Kent County Council Laboratory at Maidstone. The facilities are much 15 appreciated and are especially useful for the detection of diphtheria carrier cases. Ophthalmia Neonatorum. Cases. Vision un impaired. Vision Impaired. Total Blindness. Death. Notified. Treated. At Home In Hospital 3 3 0 3 0 0 0 Milk Supply. An appreciable amount of the milk supply is produced locally. The condition under which it is produced varies, but is on the whole moderately good. A keen inspection is kept up. No Grade A milk has been sold, though we have approached some of the local producers, and hope they may eventually be persuaded. One milk sample was taken from an emaciated cow and an innoculation test carried out. The result was satisfactory. No veterinary inspector has yet been appointed. Public Health (Prevention of Tuberculosis) Regulations, 1925. All the milk purveyors have been interviewed and their attention drawn to these regulations. No further action has been necessary. Public Health Meat Regulations, 1924. Upon these regulations coming into force all the local butchers were called together and the terms of the regulations explained to them by the Inspector, when the butchers unanimously agreed to keep their shop windows closed, not to exhibit meat in front of their shops and generally to comply with the terms of the regulations. No difficulty has been experienced in the administration of these regulations. There are 110 street stalls within the district. 16 Private Slaughter Houses. In 1920 January 1925 December 1925 Registered 3 3 3 Licensed — — 1 Total 3 0 4 See also Sanitary Inspector's Report on meat Inspection. I am Your obedient servant, C. M. OCXWELL Medical Officer of Health. Subjoined is the SANITARY INSPECTOR'S REPORT FOR THE YEAR, 1925. To the Chairman and Members of the Health Committee. Ladies and Gentlemen, I append hereto particulars of my Annual Report for 1925. In the first place it is very difficult to include in a report of this nature all the activities of a Sanitary Engineer and Inspector to a Local Urban Sanitary Authority. Again, although a brief summary of the works carried out is given, which come under the category of housing repairs, it is impossible to tabulate all the works actually done. I am pleased to be able to report that it has been necessary to serve only 31 Statutory Notices as against 305 preliminaries. Of course, in a good many cases personal interviews have been resorted to. 17 Housing inspection. During' the year I recorded 59 house-to-house inspections out of a total of 375 premises dealt with. No doubt the Committee are aware that an Inspector has to systematically inspect all dwellings under a certain rental from year to year and keep records of each house, which are classified as House-to-House Inspections. During 1925, a tremendous amount of housing repairs have been executed. This will be readily seen by mentioning a few of the larger works carried out, a portion of which culminated as the result of lengthy negotiations and numerous interviews, etc. I can frankly say that at first the possibility of bringing some of these matters to a satisfactory conclusion appeared to be remote without involving llie Council in considerable expense enforcing their requirements by legal action. Premises. Works Carried Out. Nos. 11, 13, 15, 17, 19. North End Road. These premises were in a very dilapidated condition but have now been thoroughly repaired at a cost of over £1000. Nos. 14, 16, 18, 20, 22. 24, Willow Road. There are 12 houses involved in the preliminary notice served, the front elevations of which are and were in a very bad state of repair, so much so that it appeared to me to be useless to attempt to carry out repairs. As the result of my activities herein, the Owners have agreed to recondition the front elevation of each house, six of which have been dealt with satisfactorily, and at the time of writing this report, I am informed that The Builder has received instructions to commence on the remaining six houses. The 12 houses are being dealt with in pairs for 18 the convenience of the Owner and I hope in this way to complete the works on the whole 12 during 1926. The cost of repairs to each pair of houses I estimate at £125. Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4. 5, Whitehall Cottages, Whitehall Lane. The old defective drains at these dwellings have been grubbed up and a new drainage system constructed. Also other house repairs were executed. Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4. 5, Perry Farm Cottages. These five cottages have been re-drained into a septic tank in lieu of the existing cesspool, which was within a few feet of the premises, five new brick water closets built furnished complete with flushing apparatus, the water supply carried over each of five sinks in the usual way and five new ash bins provided. Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4. 5. G, 7, 8, 9, 10, Manchester Row. Considerable repairs have been carried out to these cottages, including the provision of five new grates, new doors and windows, and the whole painted externally. Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4 5, 6, Orchard Terrace. Star Hill. These cottages have received attention during 1925, and repairs executed. A good deal still remains to be done relative to housing inspection, but this part of the work must of necessity be done slowly and tactfully. Whilst on the question of housing inspection numerous cases of overcrowding are found, but very little can be done, having regard to the housing shortage. Another point of importance is the nuisance from damp houses. A lot of small dwellings inspected are found 19 to he damp to some degree, and in a good number of cases this is due to the absence of damp courses, defective eaves and rainwater pipes-, ground banked up above damp course externally, and also, due to the porosity of the brickwork. It is with the first mentioned cause I experience the most difficulty. Water Supply. The Urban District is practically without exception served by the Metropolitan Water Board, but there are a few houses here and there not connected up to the Water Hoards supply, but derive their supplies from deep wells. I would particularly mention that it is unfortunate that the water mains are not carried along Whitehall Lane, West of Railway Crossing especially as there are now fifteen houses along this road. The Council have taken the matter up with the Water Board but so far the matter has not been brought to a satisfactory conclusion. I think the Council would be well advised to do all they can to hasten the laying of a main along this road, especially having regard to the fact that the above newly elected dwellings are unable to drain into a sewer. Food Inspection. During the year I paid 538 visits to food shops and premises where food is prepared. The total weight if material codemned is 8cwt 211bs. all of which was surrendered without action having to be taken. This Council has not adopted a system of meat marking as provided by the Public Health Meat Regulations 1924. Condemned meat is destroyed in the Furnace of a local factory, or if necessary arrangements are made with the Dart ford Urban District Council to have large quantities burnt in their destructor. The number of slaughter houses in use and occupation remains the same as previously reported, namely three registered and one licensed annually. These premises have been kept in a reasonably clean state and in one case I have been able to obtain the execution of minor 20 improvements, such as the rendering of the internal wall surfaces, the removal of a copper etc. The slaughter house in Colyers Lane which was erected a short while ago is being extensively used. As many as 80 to 100 pigs etc. are being killed each week during the season. In this case slaughtering takes place on four days each week. Bakehouses. There are five bakehouses on the Register all of which have been regularly visited. During the year under review 1 called this Councils attention to the dilapidated Conditions of the Bakehouse situated at No 14, High Street which the Council acquired some while ago with the result that it has been decided to demolish the Bakehouse and flour store and erect a new one. At the time of writing the work is in hand. Rat and Mice Destruction Act. Attention has been given to this matter from time to time during the year, particularly at our own refuse tip. No doubt the Committee will remember that during Rat Week a special film was obtained from the Ministry of Agriculture and Fisheries and exhibited at the Princess's Theatre, and a certain amount of literature was distributed within the district relative to rat and mice destruction. During the year 1 made 125 visits to premises relative to this matter. Cowsheds and Milkshops. There are four cowsheds and two milkshops on my register which have been visited from time to time with a view to ascertaining whether the bye-laws, relative thereto, are being carried out. The number of Milk Purveyors on the register is 17 and the number of Producers 4. 21 Drainage Works. As in previous years I have carried out numerous tests to existing and new drainage works. Seventeen dwellings have been redrained completely, 10 drainage systems repaired, 13 new salt glazed sinks provided, 23 new pedestal wash down basins fixed. Old drains are tested with smoke and new work is tested with the hydraulic test. The new Public Health Act, 1925, sec., 39, provides that 24 hours notice must be given to the Inspector before a person proceeds to uncover a drain. The operation of this section will be a distinct advantage to the Inspertors as defective drains will be reported to him by Builders and others who have been called in to investigate complaints by owners. INSPECTION OF FACTORIES, WORKSHOPS AND WORKPLACES. Including inspections made by Sanitary Inspectors or Inspectors of Nuisances Premises. Number of:— Inspections. Written Notices Prosecutions. Factories (including Factory Laundries) 1 — — Workshops ,, Workshop ,, 12 3 — Workplaces (other than Outworkers' premises) — — — Total 13 3 — 22 Defects Found in Factories, Workshops and Workplaces. Particulars. Number of Delects. Number of Prose cutions. Found Reme died Referred to H.M. Inspector Nuisances under the Public * Health Acts— Want of Cleanliness 3 3 „ ,, Ventilation Overcrowding Want of drainage of floors Other nuisances 2 1 Sanitary Accommodation— Insufficient Unsuitable or defective Not separate for sexes Offences under the Factory and Workshop Acts— Illegal occupation of ground bakehouse Other offences Total 5 4 Summary of Inspections Made. Inspections on complaint 318 Re-inspections 455 House-to-House Inspections 59 Interviews with Builders, Owners, etc. 298 Ordinary Inspections 291 Visits investigating cases of infectious disease 87 Inspecting works in progress 226 Number of House Drains tested 51 Number of smoke records taken 10 Number of drainage surveys made 3 Number of milk samples taken 1 Number of plans drawn 10 Number of water samples taken 3 23 Visits to slaughter houses 500 ,, refuse tips 239 food shops 38 ,, milk shops 15 ,, bakehouses 14 ,, farms 14 ,, piggeries, stables, etc. 12 ,, schools 6 ,, caravans 2 ,, factories, workshops 13 ,, marine stores 15 ,, fair grounds 3 ,, common lodging houses 3 ,, re rat destruction 125 Total 2813 Summary of Principal Works Carried Out Arising Out of Housing Inspections. Houses Improved Externally: — No. of House Roofs repaired 90 ,. Eaves and Rainwater Downpipes repaired 36 ., yards Concreted, Paved or Drained 16 ,, Ash Bins provided 251 ,, Houses Cement Pointed Externally to keep out damp 26 ,, Nuisances from Damp Walls remedied 46 ., New Window Cills provided 15 ,, New Chimney Pots provided 25 ,, Chimney Stacks repaired 13 ,, Sculleries Repaired Structurally 6 ,, Windows repaired or renewed 148 ,, Houses Painted externally 28 ,. Garden Fences repaired 9 ,, Ashpits abolished 4 ,, Houses Reconstructed as to Front Elevation 6 24 Houses Improved Internally: No. of Rooms Cleansed and Purified 287 ,, Dirty Houses Found and Cleansed 8 ,, Firegrates Repaired or Renewed 31 House Floors Repaired 73 ,, Water Fittings Repaired or Renewed 39 ,, Rooms Repaired as to Plastering 193 ,, New Locks, Etc. to Doors and Windows provided 47 ,, Skirting Boards Repaired 14 ,, New Copper Pans Provided 32 ,, Doors Repaired 28 ,, Hearths Repaired 35 ,, Defective Stairs Repaired 23 ,, Chimney Flues Repaired 6 ,. Houses Painted Internally 5 Drains, Etc: — No. of Septic Tanks Built 3 ,, Blocked Drains Unstopped 27 ,. Flush Boxes Repaired or Renewed 21 ,, Nuisances from Cesspools Abated 8 ,, New Waste Pipes Provided 19 ,, W.C.s Repaired Structurally 18 ,, New Pedestal Washdown Basins Fixed 23 ,, Lavatory Basins Fixed 4 Water Closets Provided with Flushing apparatus complete 6 ,, New Salt Glazed Sinks Provided 13 ,, Defective Soil and Vent Pipes Repaired 10 ,, Cases where action taken under Sec. 41, Public Health Act, 1875 4 , Nuisances from Blocked Sewers Abated 5 ,, Dwellings Redrained Under Notice 17 ,, Arm Joints to W.C.s Repaired 25 ,, Cesspools Abolished 2 ,, New Inspection Covers Provided 14 ,, Houses where water laid on over sinks boll traps removed 3 Sink Waste Pipes Disconnected 3 ,, Existing Drainage Systems Repaired 10 25 Miscellaneous: — No. of Slaughter Houses Limewashed 8 ,, Nuisances from Keeping of Animals Abated 9 ,, New Stables Erected in Lieu of Existing 1 ,, Bakehouses Cleaned and Limewashed 6 ,, Nuisances from Accumulation of Refuse Abated 21 ,, Cowsheds Cleansed and Limewashed 8 ,. Slaugter Houses Improved 1 ,, New Slaughter Houses Erected 1 I remain, Yours respectfully, H. G. DAVEY, A.M.I.S.E., M.S.T.A., Sanitary Engineer and Inspector. 26