Nc 4421(5) EBAR 22 EIGHTY-SEVENTH ANNUAL REPORT of the MEDICAL OFFICER OF HEALTH for the year 1960 by C. M. SCOTT, M.R.C.S.(Eng.), L.R.C.P. (Lond.) Medical Officer of Health to the Council together with the ANNUAL REPORT of W. K. PICKUP, M.R.S.H. Chief Public Health Inspector East Barnet Urban District Council EIGHTY-SEVENTH ANNUAL REPORT of the MEDICAL OFFICER OF HEALTH for the year 1960 by C. M. SCOTT, M.R.C.S.(Eng.), L.R.C.P. (Lond.) Medical Officer of Health to the Council together with the ANNUAL REPORT of W. K. PICKUP, M.R.S.H. Chief Public Health Inspector East Barnet Urban District Council East Barnet Urban District Council EIGHTY-SEVENTH ANNUAL REPORT OF THE MEDICAL OFFICER OF HEALTH FOR THE YEAR 1960 To the Chairman and Members of the East Barnet Urban District Council. I have the honour to present my report for the year 1960. It has been said repeatedly that it is unwise to attempt to draw conclusions from the statistics of an area of the size of East Barnet and this contention is further proved (if proof were necessary) by several items in this year's tables. The best example is perhaps that of Infant Mortality where the jump last year produced a disquieting figure—this year we are back to normal. But the total of deaths due to congenital abnormalities remains at the same disturbing figure as last year—with no possible explanation at the moment. This comment also applies to deaths from leukaemia—a similar puzzle. There is a notable absence of tuberculosis from amongst the causes of deaths— the first time on record so far as this district is concerned and here at least it is likely that the figures are to be believed in their full implication as a truly great triumph. The graphs showing the 10 year birth rate and death rate per 1,000 of population show that East Barnet remains faithful to its tradition of a lower birth rate (and also a slightly lower death rate) than the average for the country—and it is felt that different people may take different views as to which is the more creditable. From among the various detailed sections of the Chief Public Health Inspector's report there are perhaps three that merit special mention. First and foremost—HOUSING. No effort has been spared to improve housing conditions in the district by all possible means. It is realized that there are still far too great a number of families Page Three living in poor accommodation to give any state of complacency, nevertheless there can be some small satisfaction in seeing the blackest spots disappear. It is my firm conviction that good housing conditions are an absolute essential for any reasonable standard of health and happiness and that more can be done to alleviate physical and mental distress by the provision of adequate housing facilities than by almost any other single factor. Secondly, FOOD HYGIENE. The details given of the various complaints investigated will be of real interest and prove once again that the human element is the most difficult to keep at the concert pitch of cleanliness necessary in this field. Much is being written of the possible danger of the innumerable processings that most foods undergo nowadays and it is true to say that this subject needs more rigorous investigation than has yet been done. But so far as the handling of foodstuffs is concerned, common sense and goodwill can ensure a high safety standard. Thirdly, SMOKE CONTROL. The volume of work has been far greater than originally anticipated and it is noteworthy that all the extra work has been absorbed by the (small) department without detriment to its more routine duties. During the year under review the Department moved to Church Farm, a move which was not welcomed with any great enthusiasm by the staff. However, we have now settled down quite happily in a rural retreat, although the formerly enjoyed day-to-day contact with other departments is definitely a loss. There are minor disabilities that do not need stressing but by and large the move, it must be admitted, worked out better than anticipated. For which, as for many other things, my very sincere thanks are due to every member of my staff. C. M. Scott, Medical Officer of Health. Page Four STATISTICS AND SOCIAL CONDITIONS OF THE AREA public health staff Medical Officer of Health : C. M. Scott, M.R.C.S.(Eng.), L.R.C.P.(London). Chief Public Health Inspector: W. K. Pickup, M.R.S.H., Cert. R.S.H. Meat Inspection, Cert. R.S.H. Sanitary Science. Deputy Chief Public Health Inspector: S. C. Smith, M.A.P.H.I., Cert. R.S.H. Meat Inspection. Public Health Inspectors: K Ketley, M.A.P.H.I., Cert. R.S.H. Meat Inspection. J. P. McCormack, M.A.P.H.I. Cert. R.S.H. Meat Inspection (from September, 1960). Technical Assistant: R. H. Harland. Clerical Assistant : Mrs. K. Wilson. Typist and Clerk: Mrs. J. Emmerton. Rodent Operator: A. E. Hoskins. Public Analyst: Dr. J. H. Hammence, Ph.D., M.Sc., F.R.I.C. Deputy Public Analyst: P. S. Hall, B.Sc., F.R.I.C. PROVISION OF HEALTH SERVICES IN THE DISTRICT hospitals The following hospitals serve the district for both infectious disease and general treatment. Barnet General Hospital, Wellhouse Lane, Barnet. Coppetts Wood Hospital, Coppetts Road, Muswell Hill. The Chest Clinic, attached to Barnet General Hospital, deals with Tuberculosis out-patients and holds clinics daily. The following hospital serves the district for Maternity Cases. Victoria Hospital, Wood Street, Barnet. clinics The following clinics are held within the district at temporary premises, and dates and times may be obtained from the Health Centre, New Barnet (Tel. : Barnet 3138). Infant Welfare Clinics Dental Clinics Diphtheria and Polio Immunisation Clinics Page Five In addition clinics, as follows, are held at: Church Farm, Church Hill Road: Speech Therapy Dental Ophthalmic Infant Welfare Diphtheria and Polio Immunisation Friends Meeting House, Waterfall Road, N.11: Infant Welfare Diphtheria and Polio Immunisation St. Marks Hall, Woodville Road, New Barnet: Infant Welfare Diphtheria and Polio Immunisation AREA AND RATEABLE VALUE Area (in acres) 2,644 Registrar General's estimate of population (1960) 41,550 Number of inhabited houses (rated) 12,499 Number of persons per house 3.32 Rateable value (at 31st December, 1960) £728,812 Product of penny rate (Est.) £2,975 Number of business premises 627 Number of industrial premises 36 VITAL STATISTICS Live births— Male Female Total Legitimate 246 231 477 Illegitimate 6 7 13 Totals 252 238 490 Still births— Legitimate 4 2 6 Illegitimate — — — Totals 4 2 6 Deaths of infants under 1 year of age— Legitimate 6 2 8 Illegitimate — 1 1 Totals 6 3 9 Deaths of infants under 4 weeks of age— Legitimate 5 1 6 Illegitimate — — — Totals 5 1 6 Total number of deaths of all ages 177 188 365 Page Six births 1959 1960 Live births (rates per 1,000 population) 12.8 12.3 Still births (rates per 1,000 population) 0.28 0.15 Still births (rates per 1,000 total; live and still births) 22.4 12.6 DEATHS Infants under 1 year of age (rate per 1,000 live births) 43.1 20.6 Total all ages (rate per 1,000 population) 10.54 9.86 The Registrar General's Comparability Factors for Births and Deaths have been taken into account when calculating the above rates. Death rate of legitimate infants under 1 year per 1,000 legitimate births 37.1 16.8 Death rate of illegitimate infants under 1 year per 1,000 illegitimate births 105.2 76.9 TABLE 1 Notifications of Infectious Diseases (other than Tuberculosis) received during the year 1960 DISEASES Total Cases Notified Under 1 year 1 year 2 years 3 years 4 years 5-9 years 10-14 years 15-24 years 25 years and over Scarlet Fever 28 ......... 1 ......... ......... 1 19 5 2 ......... Whooping Cough 73 6 6 12 5 5 31 6 ......... 2 Measles 17 ......... 1 4 1 5 6 ......... ......... ......... Dysentery 24 1 1 4 1 ......... 2 4 1 10 Acute Pneumonia 5 ......... ......... ......... ......... ......... ......... 1 ......... 4 Food Poisoning 3 ......... ......... ......... 1 1 1 ......... ......... ......... Chicken Pox 78 3 ......... 3 4 4 32 24 5 3 Totals 228 10 9 23 12 16 91 40 8 19 Page Seven TABLE II Causes of, and Ages at, Death during the year 1960 CAUSES OF DEATH All Ages Under 1 year 1-2 years 3-5 years 6-15 years 16-25 years 26-45 years 46-65 years 66 and over Tuberculosis, respiratory ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... Tuberculosis, other ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... Syphilitic disease ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... Diphtheria ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... Whooping Cough ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... Meningococcal infections ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... Acute Poliomyelitis ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... Measles ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... Other infective and parasitic diseases 2 ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... 1 1 Malignant neoplasm, stomach 5 ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... 1 4 ,, ,, lung, bronchus 18 ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... 5 13 ,, ,, breast 12 ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... 8 4 ,, ,, uterus 1 ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... 1 ...... Other Malignant and lymphatic neoplasms 35 ...... ...... ...... ...... 1 1 19 14 Leukaemia, aleukaemia 6 ...... 1 1 ...... ...... ...... 2 2 Diabetes 2 ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... 1 1 Vascular lesions of nervous system 48 ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... 11 37 Coronary disease, angina 66 ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... 1 25 39 Hypertension with heart disease 12 ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... 12 Other heart disease 59 1 ...... ...... ...... ...... 2 12 44 Other circulatory disease 21 ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... 1 4 16 Influenza ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... Pneumonia 23 1 1 ...... ...... ...... ...... 3 18 Bronchitis 11 ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... 3 8 Other diseases of the respiratory system ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... Ulcer of stomach and duodenum 3 ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... 1 2 Gastritis, enteritis and diarrhoea 1 ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... 1 Nephritis and nephrosis 3 ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... 1 1 1 Hyperplasia of prostrate 1 ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... 1 Pregnancy, childbirth, abortion ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... Congenital malformations 6 5 1 ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... Other defined and ill-defined diseases 17 1 ...... 1 1 ...... 1 5 8 Motor vehicle accidents 6 ...... ...... ...... ...... 2 1 ...... 3 All other accidents 4 1 ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... 3 Suicide 4 ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... 2 2 ...... Homicide and operations of war ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... Totals 365 9 3 2 1 3 10 105 232 Page Eight TABLE III Infantile Mortality, 1960 Net deaths from stated causes at various ages under 1 year CAUSES OF DEATH Under 1 week 1 week 2 weeks 3 weeks Total under 4 weeks 1-3 months 4-6 months 7-9 months 10-12 months Total between 1 month and 1 year Total under 1 year Heart disease 1 ...... ...... ...... 1 ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... 1 Pneumonia 1 ...... ...... ...... 1 ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... 1 Congenital malformations 3 ...... ...... ...... 3 2 ...... ...... ...... ...... 5 Ill-defined diseases 1 ...... ...... ...... 1 ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... 1 Accidental death ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... 1 ...... 1 Totals 6 ...... ...... ...... 6 2 ...... ...... 1 3 9 TABLE IV Tuberculosis New Cases and Mortality during year 1960 AGE PERIODS NEW CASES DEATHS Respiratory Non-Respiratory Respiratory Non-Respiratory M. F. M. F. M. F. M. F. Under 5 years 1 1 ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... 5-14 years ...... 2 ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... 15-24 years ...... 1 ...... 1 ...... ...... ...... ...... 25-44 years ...... 1 ...... 3 ...... ...... ...... ...... 45-64 years 6 1 ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... 65 and over 1 ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... Totals 8 6 ...... 4 ...... ...... ...... ...... Page Nine Page Ten Page Eleven COMMENTS ON STATISTICS Population The Registrar General's mid-year estimate of population for 1960 is 41,550, an increase of 190 on the previous year and of 330 on 1959. This slight increase of population year by year is due to natural causes. The number of persons per house 3.32 is a slight decrease on 1959. This figure has not varied greatly in the last few years. Births The number of live births has decreased by 14 as compared with 1959. The birth rate for the district has been lower than the average for the last two years and is well below the five year average. In comparison with the rest of England and Wales the difference is considerable. There does seem to be a tendency for the birth rate of the district to decrease. The number of illegitimate births is less than in 1959 and is considerably lower than the average for the last ten years which is 18-5 but during that period it has fluctuated between 9 and 35. Mortality The death rate for the year is less than for 1959 by .68 and is lower than the average for seven years which is 10.30. The method of calculating the death rate was changed in 1953 and figures prior to that date cannot be compared with the following years. The deaths of infants under one year per 1,000 live births is 20.6. In 1959 this figure was 43.1 but the average for seven years is 24.4. The figure for 1959 caused some concern but it is apparent that this was one of the high figures which do occasionally occur when dealing with comparatively small populations. The number of Cancer deaths during the year was 43 compared with 68 in 1959 and 87 in 1958. The average number of persons dying of Cancer over the last ten years was 79.1. 1959 and 1960 figures are well below this average but it is such a short period that no useful deductions can be drawn. Deaths from Cancer of the Lung are also less than the previous year but are only slightly below the average for this district which is 19.7. There have been no deaths from Tuberculosis this year which is the first time that this has occurred for a very considerable period. The deaths from Tuberculosis have been falling for some time and it is apparent that Tuberculosis is one of the diseases which is being eradicated. This year there were 6 deaths from Leukaemia of which 2 were in children under five years. Over the last ten years there have been only 17 deaths from this disease. It is possible that this increase is only incidental but the deaths from this disease require watching closely over the next few years. Page Twelve Infectious Diseases Table IV which lists the new cases of Tuberculosis shows that there were only 18 during the year. The average for ten years is 33.2 and as previously mentioned there is definitely a general decrease in the incidence of this disease. Table I listing the infectious diseases which have occurred in the district during the year is very low when compared with 1959. As the diseases which cause the variation of these figures, i.e. Scarlet Fever, Whooping Cough, Measles and Chicken Pox are comparatively minor ailments of childhood, the total figure does not have any significance particularly when Measles appears to run in cycles and can vary greatly. This year the figure of 17 does not appear to be a true figure for the district as the previous lowest over the last ten years was 242. The number of cases of Dysentery which occuring seem to be generally on an increase. However, by far the greater number of these are Sonne Dysentery which is a comparatively mild disease although in some cases is very persistent. There has been only three cases of Food Poisoning and these were isolated and had no connection outside family circles. INTERNATIONAL VACCINATION CERTIFICATES At the end of 1952 a new form was introduced for International Vaccination Certificates requiring authorisation of the signature of the doctor performing the vaccination or inoculation of persons proceeding overseas. During the year over a hundred such certificates were authenticated and marked with the internationally agreed stamp. LABORATORY FACILITIES These facilities are provided by the Central Public Health Laboratory Service. The Service has been of the greatest assistance to the Department through its laboratories at Colindale and at Coppetts Wood Hospital. This assistance, and the close co-operation which has continued for so many years between my Department and the Laboratory Service, is gratefully acknowledged. The following is a summary of the work carried out by the Laboratory Service for the Department during 1960:— Nose and throat swabs 7 Faeces 283 Sputum 5 Urine 2 Milk 92 Ice Cream 92 Water 11 Page Thirteen SPECIAL HOUSING CASES During the year 31 families were referred to the Department for special consideration for housing accommodation on medical grounds. All the families were visited and after consideration of the reports received from the inspector visiting the home and the medical certificates or letters submitted with the applications, twelve of the families were recommended to the Housing Committee as being in need of more suitable accommodation in view of the medical condition of one or more members of the family. By the end of the year six of these cases had been given Council accommodation and one had found more suitable accommodation privately. The great problem facing the Department now is the increasing number of cases of elderly and infirmed persons being referred for Council old persons' dwellings or ground floor flats. Quite frequently it is found that their existing accommodation is excellent but for the fact that it is situated on the first floor. Those who are arthritic or have heart trouble are thus frequently confined to their rooms as the effect required to descend and return up some twenty or more stairs or steps is often beyond them. Page Fourteen East Barnet Urban District Council REPORT OF THE CHIEF PUBLIC HEALTH INSPECTOR FOR THE YEAR 1960 To the Chairman and Members of the East Barnet Urban District Council. I have the honour to present my ninth annual report to the Council. The year of 1960 was an exceptionally busy one for the department as a whole. Whilst the Clean Air Act largely contributed to the increase in the volume of work the general public health work also increased considerably in tempo. The overall increase was so great that at times it seemed doubtful as to whether or not it would be possible to keep the staff from being completely overwhelmed. Strangely enough the Table of Visits (Table I) shows very little indication of the true state of affairs during the year; however, a closer consideration of the figures reveals that while the number of complaints made under the section dealing with public health is less, those made in connection with housing and clean air have increased by almost the same amount as the reduction on public health. Visits made in connection with housing and the Clean Air Act by their nature take a much longer time per visit on average. It must also be remembered that visits under these two sections create more administrative and clerical work for the inspectors and clerical staff. In addition to this very considerable increase much time and patience had to be expended by the staff in the office in dealing with the flood of queries raised by the introduction of the Clean Air Act in East Barnet. Fortunately our move to new quarters at Church Farm took place in the early Spring before the main onslaught of this additional work. However, any move in office accommodation does cause disorganisation but everything was running smoothly before the rush of additional work commenced. Page Fifteen In 1959 it was considered that the increase in the volume of work of the department would necessitate an addition to the staff and in the Council's estimates for 1960 an allowance for this was made. In 1960 it became evident that the increase would have to be made; the appointment was advertised and subsequently Mr. J. P. McCormack was appointed as Public Health Inspector in September. The problem of requisitioned houses was solved in 1960 and it was possible to increase the routine inspections with a view to dealing with the unfit houses in the district. Five clearance areas were represented to the Council during the year details of which may be seen in the report on Housing. Whilst the number of houses dealt with in this year is only eight more than in 1959 a considerable amount of spade work has been done in regard to the inspection and survey of the houses remaining on the schedule of unfit premises. It is apparent that several of the houses scheduled in 1955 as suitable for demolition should now be considered either as capable of repair or in some cases due to the amount of work carried out by owner/occupiers may even be removed from this schedule entirely. The summer was an extremely poor one but the number of wasp nests which had to be dealt with was 147. In the report on this section the matter is dealt with more fully and the new arrangements which the Council have agreed to are detailed. The number of visits made under the Food Hygiene Regulations remains very similar to previous years, indicating that in spite of the volume of work under other categories this very important duty has not been neglected. Sampling under the Food and Drugs Act has also continued and complaints received were fully investigated and in two cases of complaint successful proceedings were instituted. A detailed report on this subject may be found in the body of the report. In conclusion I would express my thanks to every member of the Public Health Department, with particular reference to my Deputy, Mr. S. C. Smith. In spite of what has been in some ways a rather trying year the staff of the department have given me every support and have made a successful effort to cope with an exceedingly heavy volume of work. I also wish to thank all other officers of the Council for their assistance and co-operation. W. K. Pickup, Chief Public Health Inspector. Page Sixteen TABLE I Table of Visits and Inspections made during the Year PUBLIC HEALTH 1959 1960 Nuisances and Sanitary Defects 3,679 2,873 Infectious Diseases 347 254 Schools 41 39 Brooks and Streams 12 14 Verminous Premises 1 Hairdressers and Barbers 18 4,428 23 3,203 HOUSING Housing Act, 1936, Part 2 870 1,205 Permitted Numbers and Overcrowding 163 132 Applicants for Housing (Special Cases) 74 1,207 105 1,442 FOOD HYGIENE Restaurants and Snack Bars 391 397 Fish Shops 137 129 Butchers' Shops 323 319 Bakehouses 26 37 Ice Cream Premises 217 238 Other Food Shops and Premises 699 725 Food Inspections 225 201 Milk (Special Designations) Registrations 71 2,089 48 2,094 FACTORIES Factories 151 162 Outworkers 39 190 36 196 INFESTATIONS Rat and Mouse 2,583 2,699 Insects 325 2,908 453 3,102 FOOD AND DRUGS Sampling and in connection therewith 326 326 287 287 SHOPS ACTS Visits made 498 498 521 521 CLEAN AIR ACT Visits made 1,656 1,656 2,672 2,672 13,072 13,517 Page Seventeen TABLE II HOUSING ACT, 1936 and 1957 Demolition Orders 2 Closing Orders 1 Houses demolished as a result of Orders 7 Closing Orders determined – Clearance Areas declared under Section 25:— Clearance Areas 5 Houses in above Areas 26 NUMBER OF NOTICES SERVED DURING THE YEAR 1959 1960 Informal Notices 60 62 Statutory Notices 8 12 Result of the service of these Notices as follows:– 1959 1960 1959 1960 Preliminary Notices Statutory Notices Complied with 51 65 9 11 Work in progress or in hand at end of year 2 2 1 – Not complied with 15 12 1 3 TABLE III IMPROVEMENTS EFFECTED AS A RESULT OF NOTICES SERVED Exterior No. of. Houses Roofs repaired and made weathertight 28 Rainwater pipes and rainwater gutters cleaned, repaired or renewed 20 Chimney pots and flues repaired 3 Brickwork repaired or repointed 5 Rendering repaired or renewed 5 Damp walls remedied 32 Choked drains cleared 19 Soil and vents repaired or renewed 3 Drains repaired or relaid 31 Exterior paving relaid or repaired 3 Dustbins renewed 12 Accumulation of refuse removed 1 Interior Wallplaster repaired or re-plastered 9 Ceilings repaired or re-plastered 11 Sinks renewed 5 Wastepipes repaired or renewed 4 W.C.'s and fittings repaired or renewed 17 Page Eighteen Insufficient water supplies remedied 2 Stairs and staircases repaired or renewed 2 Floors and skirtings repaired or renewed 7 Doors and frames repaired or renewed 4 Window frames and sills repaired or renewed 13 Sash cords renewed 14 TABLE IV FACTORY INSPECTIONS Factories Act, 1937 Inspections for the purposes of provisions as to Health Premises No. on Register Number of Inspections Written Notices Factories without mechanical power 3 7 – Factories in which mechanical power is used 89 155 – Totals 92 162 – Cases in which Defects were Found Particulars Number of cases in which defects were found Referred Found Remedied To H.M. Inspector By H.M. Inspector Want of cleanliness – – – – Unsuitable or defective sanitary conveniences – – – – Other offences (not including offences relating to home work) – – – – Totals – – – – TABLE V FOOD SURRENDERED DURING 1960 cwts. qrs. lbs. Meat – 3 20 Fish – 1 20 Chickens – – 19 Tinned Foods (other than meat) 2 3 20 Tinned Ham – 3 10 Tinned Meat – 3 6 Frozen Foods 1 0 21 Totals 7 1 4 Page Nineteen TABLE VI Food and Drugs Act, 1955 SAMPLES EXAMINED BY PUBLIC ANALYST No. Examined No Found Adulterated Formal Informal Total Formal Informal Total 31st March – 12 12 – l 1 30th June – 12 12 – 2 2 30th September 3 6 9 – 1 1 31st December 3 9 12 – – – Totals 6 39 45 – 4 4 SAMPLES EXAMINED BY PUBLIC HEALTH DEPARTMENT Quarter Ended No. Examined No. Found Adulterated 31st March 14 – 30th June 13 – 30th September 10 – 31st December 12 – Totals 49 – TABLE VII Food Premises in District Number of Grocers 48 „ „ Confectioners 41 „ „ Greengrocers 27 „ „ Butchers 26 „ „ Wet and Dry Fishmongers 9 „ „ Fried Fish Dealers 7 „ „ Chemists 13 „ „ Bakehouses 6 „ „ Public Houses 18 „ „ Restaurants 20 TABLE VIII Food Premises Registered Under Section 16 of Food and Drugs Act, 1955 (a) Storage of Ice Cream intended for sale 60 (b) Preparation or manufacture of sausage and potted, pressed, etc., meats 27 Page Twenty PUBLIC HEALTH GENERAL Table 1 lists the number of visits and inspections made during the year with regard to the Public Health Inspectors' work. The visits are divided under various sub-headings and the figures for 1959 are given for the purposes of comparison. The total visits in Table I show an increase of 455 over 1959 totals. The increase is mainly due to Clean Air Act and Housing Act inspections, while visits under the heading " Public Health " are considerably less. The reason for the reduction is enlarged upon in the paragraphs dealing with the various sub-headings. NUISANCES AND SANITARY DEFECTS The number of visits under this sub-section is considerably less than they were in 1959 being down by approximately 800. The number of complaints made by the public in 1960 is nearly 100 less than in 1959. The visits made under this sub-section are those which are made as a primary inspection following the complaint and subsequent visits to ensure that the complaint has been remedied. The number of visits and complaints are, therefore, closely related and vary directly in relation to one another. Every complaint received, including anonymous complaints which are minor or frivolous, has meant at least one visit. In the case of many of the complaints the Inspector can only give advice but where contraventions of the Public Health Act, 1936, or other Acts are concerned the necessary notices for the remedying of the complaint are served on the owner or occupier, as the case may be. The number of notices served during the year show a considerable increase in preliminary notices and a slight increase in statutory notices. Table II of the report gives the numbers of notices served both in 1960 and 1959 and the results of the service of those notices. The relationship between the number of notices and complaints seems to vary widely year by year and is mainly related to the cause of the complaint. Table III which lists the repairs carried out as a result of notices served on owners shows a slight increase due in the main to the increase in the number of notices. INFECTIOUS DISEASES AND FOOD POISONING The number of visits made under this heading during the year is approximately 90 less than in 1959. Table I of the Medical Officer of Health's report shows the number of cases of Infectious Diseases occurring during the year and as these visits are normally those made Page Twenty-one to these Infectious Diseases, in particular Scarlet Fever, Dysentery and Food Poisoning, the number of visits is proportionally less. VERMINOUS PREMISES No visits were made during the year regarding verminous premises. SCHOOLS, BROOKS & STREAMS, HAIRDRESSERS & BARBERS PREMISES These are routine inspections and do not vary by any extent year by year. NATIONAL ASSISTANCE ACT, 1948—SECTION 50—BURIAL OF THE DEAD During the year there was a case of a person who died where it appeared that no arrangements for the disposal of the body had been made. The Council, under Section 50 of the above Act, made the necessary arrangements and an application was made to the Ministry of Pensions and National Insurance for the death grant. Subsequently the whole of the cost incurred by the Council in this matter was recovered. SHOPS ACT Routine inspections of shops under this Act have continued and no serious contraventions have (seen observed during the year. Some of these inspections have to be made outside office hours and on Sundays in order to ascertain that the closing hours and the provisions regarding Sunday trading are being observed. One warning letter was sent to a trader concerning the sale of a cleaning preparation on Sunday. FACTORIES Routine visits to factories and outworkers for the purpose of the Factories Act were made during the year and a total of 196 inspections were made. No contraventions of the Act were found and consequently no notices were served. The number of factories without mechanical power has continued to reduce and there are now only three such factories in the district. The small number of these factories can quite easily be understood when the definition of " mechanical power " is such that an electric drill will exclude a factory from this category. HOUSING At the beginning of 1960 there were eight houses on which demolition orders had been served but the premises had not been demolished Page Twenty-two and six closing orders were in force. The premises on which the demolition orders were operative being: — 65 and 65a Church Hill Road (one house) 107 and 109 Leicester Road 20 Gloucester Road 24 and 26 Henry Road 74 and 76 Leicester Road. The premises on which closing orders were operative being: — 55 Lyonsdown Road 70 East Barnet Road 41 Lancaster Road 46a East Barnet Road 90 East Barnet Road 7 Victoria Road There were at this time also six confirmed Clearance Areas affecting 68 houses which had not yet been demolished although the majority of these houses were vacant. With regard to the demolition orders operative at the beginning of 1960 the following houses were demolished during the year: — 65 and 65a Church Hill Road 107 and 109 Leicester Road 20 Gloucester Road 24 and 26 Henry Road. This leaves only two houses, 74 and 76 Leicester Road still not demolished. The six closing orders were still operative at the end of the year. As a result of reports and representations made to the Housing Committee during 1960 five Clearance Areas were declared, two demolition orders and one closing order making a total of 29 houses dealt with under the Housing Act. The period allowed under this Act for objections against clearance areas had not yet elapsed in respect of the Clearance Areas declared during the year and consequently it is not yet known whether or not the Minister will confirm the Areas. In addition to the above one house was made fit by the owner who voluntarily carried out the necessary works and this house was removed from the Schedule of Unfit Houses. Work is in progress on several other premises which are at present included in the Schedule of Unfit Houses. This work is of such a character that on its completion it will probably be possible to remove them from this Schedule. Details of the various Clearance Areas and unfit houses on which action was taken during 1960 is as follows: — Lancaster Road Clearance Areas: In the Council Schedule of Clearance Areas a number of houses in Lancaster Road were considered to be suitable for action under Part 3 of the Housing Act. On Page Twenty-three making detailed inspections it was found that several of these houses were in a better condition than was previously supposed and in consequence the single Area which was proposed in the Schedule has had to be divided into four separate Areas. Lancaster Road (No. 1) Clearance Area : This Area consists of eight houses, being Nos. 201-215 inclusive and is situated on the east side of the road. The Medical Officer of Health represented this Area to the Committee at their September meeting and the Council subsequently declared these houses to be a Clearance Area. This Area consists of a part of a terrace of 16 houses of a cottage type with plain front elevations and gabled ended roofs. The houses were built at various periods, the oldest being approximately 100 years old and the newest about 70 years. Lancaster Road (No. 2) Clearance Area : This Area was represented to the Housing Committee by the Medical Officer of Health at the same time as Lancaster Road (No. 1) Clearance Area, that is at the September meeting, the Council declaring it a Clearance Area at the following Council meeting. The Area consists of three houses, Nos. 124, 126 and 128 Lancaster Road, and is part of a terrace of four houses, which were built approximately 90 years ago. The houses are of a cottage type with plain front elevations and are of rather drab appearance. The roof is continuous over the whole of the block of four although the first two houses have been recently re-tiled. The party walls of these houses are 4" in thickness. Lancaster Road (No. 3) Clearance Area: This Area was represented to the Committee by the Medical Officer of Health at the November Committee. The Council at the following meeting declaring it to be a Clearance Area. It consists of two houses, Nos. 179 and 181 Lancaster Road and is situated on the same side as the Lancaster Road (No. 1) Clearance Area. No. 179 Lancaster Road is the last house of a terrace of 3 houses but was built at a different date to the other two houses in the terrace. It is separated from No. 181 by a passageway. No. 181 is part of a pair of semi-detached houses, the other house of the pair being No. 183. The pair were built in 1886. Lancaster Road (No. 4) Clearance Area: This Area was represented to the Committee by the Medical Officer of Health at the same time as No. 3 Area and the Council declared it to be a Clearance Area at the same Council meeting as No. 3 Area was so declared. It consists of two houses Nos. 185 and 187 Lancaster Road. These houses are brick built and are part of a terrace of 16 houses which includes the Lancaster Road (No. 1) Clearance Area. At the end of the year the Council were still considering whether to make clearance orders or compulsory purchase orders on all of these Areas. Page Twenty-four Hadley High stone Clearance Area: The Medical Officer of Health represented a Clearance Area of eleven houses in Hadley Highstone to the November Committee. This Area was subsequently declared by the Council to be a Clearance Area. The Area comprises eleven terrace cottages arranged in two blocks along Hadley Highstone, one being a block of eight houses Nos. 39 to 53 and the other three houses Nos. 55 to 59. The cottages are brick built, each block having a continuous slate pitched roof. Most of the dwellings have four rooms with a back addition scullery. 49 Leicester Road: A report was made to the Committee in May, 1960 regarding the condition of these premises. It was reported that the premises were unfit and that the cost of repairs was unreasonable. The property is a semi-detached house, No 1 Plantagenet Road being the other one of the pair. The houses are brick built with a slate roof and No. 49 Leicester Road comprises seven rooms and a scullery. After consideration the Council made an Order for the demolition in October, 1960. 1 Plantagenet Road: A report to the Committee on these premises was made at the same time as the report on 49 Leicester Road. As previously stated this house, together with 49 Leicester Road, make a pair of semi-detached houses. The Council considered the report and made a demolition order on the premises in October. 10 Margaret Road: A report was made regarding two first floor rooms in these premises to the January Committee and after consideration the Council were of the opinion that they were unfit for human habitation and in February a Closing Order in respect of this part of the building was made. Rent Act, 1957: During the year there were only three applications for certificates of disrepair under this Act. Of these, one certificate of disrepair was issued and in the case of the other two the landlords gave undertakings to carry out the works. The only other action under this Act was an application by a landlord for the cancellation of a certificate of disrepair. This was reported to the Council and as the tenant did not raise any objection the certificate was cancelled. Since the Act came into force only 47 applications for certificate of disrepair have been received. In the first two years of the operation of the Act 38 applications for certificates of disrepair were dealt with. As previously mentioned in Annual Reports it is apparent that the full use of the certificates has not been made by the tenants of houses and from the year under review it seems as though the sections dealing with the issue of certificates of disrepair under the Rent Act are falling into dis-use. Page Twenty-five FOOD HYGIENE During the year 2,094 visits were made to various food premises in the district. Some types of premises and trades require more frequent visits than others and this fact is reflected in the figures for restaurants, snack bars and butchers shops. In my last two reports comment was made on the fact that although the Food Hygiene Regulations have been in force since 1955 it was still necessary to remind assistants in food premises of the necessity of observing hygienic practices at all times when handling open food. Two prosecutions were taken against food handlers for smoking whilst handling open food and in each case fines of £10 were imposed with £2 2s. Od. costs. I am very glad to report that a number of shops are now exhibiting notices requesting customers to refrain from smoking whilst in the shop. Whilst expecting cleanly conditions behind the counter there are members of the general public who are prepared to smoke close to open food whilst waiting to be served. It is hoped the exhibiting of such notices will become general practice. The general improvement in food premises noted in my last report has continued and the increasing popularity of the self-service store has, no doubt, contributed to this. MEAT PIES During the year nine samples of meat pies of various kinds were submitted for examination as a part of the national survey which is being carried out by the Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food on the composition of meat pies at present on the market. The meat content of the samples taken were found to vary from 53.0 per cent to 18.8 per cent. From the results obtained it would appear that the smaller pies had the lowest meat content and that the price was not necessarily a guide to the quality of the article. It is hoped that as a result of this survey the Ministry will be in a better position to consider a minimum meat content for the smaller kind of meat pie for which these days there is a large demand. MILK SUPPLY Fifteen applications were received from dealers for Dealer's (Pre-packed Milk) Licences under the Milk (Special Designation) Regulations, 1960. Under these Regulations licences are now issued for a period of five years instead of annually as heretofore and supplementary licences are no longer necessary. Page Twenty-six 92 samples of milk were purchased and submitted for bacteriological examination to the Ministry of Health Public Health Laboratory at Coppetts Wood. There were only two unsatisfactory samples. ICE CREAM Two applications were received for the registration of premises for the sale of ice cream. The premises and equipment being satisfactory the applications were granted. 92 Samples of ice cream were obtained and submitted for bacteriological examination. All the samples were reported Provisional Grade 1. This is the second successive year that I have been able to report all the samples of ice cream taken during the year as being Grade 1. There are no premises manufacturing ice cream for sale in the district. All ice cream is obtained from large wholesale firms. FOOD AND DRUGS The following Table shows the various types of food and drugs sampled during the year:— No. of Samples Analysed Almonds, Ground 1 Arrowroot l Blackcurrant Juice Cordial 1 Butter 1 Chicken Soup 5 Chocolate Flavoured Milk Drink 1 Crab Spread with butter 1 Cream Cheese Spread 1 Creamed Mushrooms 1 Curried Chicken with Mushrooms 1 Curry Powder 1 Double Cream 1 Flour, Self-raising 1 Gelatine 1 Meat Pies:— Pork 5 Steak & Kidney 4 Milk 28 Milk, Channel Island and South Devon 26 Milk Bread 1 Milk Gums 1 Milk Shake 1 Nutmeg, ground 1 Pepper, White 1 Page Twenty-seven Salmon Mayonnaise 1 Sausages, Pork 2 Steak Cutlets 1 Stewed Steak 1 Soup:— Cream of Tomato 1 Tomato Puree, Concentrated 2 94 Of the above mentioned samples, four were reported as being unsatisfactory. Two of these were soups, the labelling of which was considered to be misleading. These soups were imported products and the list of ingredients given on the label—in each case—was not arranged as required by the Labelling of Food Order. In each case also a soup prepared in accordance with the instructions on the label would have contained only approximately 2 per cent of lean chicken meat extractives and in the opinion of the Public Analyst was very poor for an article described as " Chicken Soup The matter was brought to the notice of the importers and eventually the manufacturers agreed to the reprinting of the label. The third sample was a milk loaf. This loaf contained 0.7 per cent of non-fatty milk solids which was considered to be only one-sixth of the amount proper to milk bread. Whilst there is no legal standard for this type of bread the description, composition, labelling and advertising of bread containing milk ingredients was considered by the Food Standards Committee in the autumn of 1959 and recommendations were made after hearing evidence from interested organisations. The recommendations received wide publicity in trade journals and it was felt that local bakers must have been aware of them and that a loaf containing such a small percentage of non-fatty milk solids was in fact a very poor article. The Council therefore authorised the sending of a letter to the manufacturers of all milk bread sold in the district drawing their attention to the recommendation of the Food Standards Committee. The fourth sample was a chocolate drink of the type sold by dairy companies which was found to contain a small portion of mould when opened. It appeared that the cork liner of the crown cap was faulty and this had resulted in air entering the bottle after sterilisation. In addition to these unsatisfactory samples complaints were also received during the year concerning a number of foodstuffs which were not in a sound state when purchased or which contained foreign bodies. Page Twenty-eight Examples of these types of complaint are listed below: — METAL IN CAKE A complaint was received of a piece of metal in a cake. The metal, a fragment from the worn edge of a baking tray, was found when the cake was cut. Previous warnings having been given to the firm concerned, proceedings were instituted on this occasion and a fine of £3 inflicted. OILY RAG IN LOAF A cut and wrapped loaf was found when opened to contain a large piece of oily rag of the type normally used for greasing bread tins. Here again, the firm concerned had received a previous warning and proceedings were taken in respect of this case resulting in a fine of £5 with £2 2s. 0d. costs. MOULDY STEAK AND KIDNEY PIE A complaint was received that a steak and kidney pie manufactured by a well-known firm was found to be mouldy when removed from its wrapping. The mould was very slight and enquiries showed that due to the manager of the shop being on holiday the usual procedure for stock rotation had gone amiss. No previous complaints had been received concerning the firm and a warning letter was sent and the need for care in the handling of this type of product emphasized. MOULDY FISH PASTE A jar of paste was found to be in a mouldy condition. An inspection of the remaining stock in shop revealed five other jars. The shop had recently changed hands and the paste concerned was old stock. A letter was sent to the proprietor stressing the importance of stock rotation. BIRD'S FOOT IN CHEESE A portion of wrapped Dutch Edam Cheese purchased in a selfservice store was found on being cut to have the foot of a small bird embedded in its substance. The foot had obviously entered the cheese, possibly with the rest of the bird, during manufacture in Holland. It was not possible to trace the actual firm making the cheese. MILK BOTTLES The usual complaints of dirty milk bottles continue to be received and it seems most unlikely that while milk is delivered in glass bottles the general public will ever learn that the sole purpose of the bottle is that of holding milk. Page Twenty-nine It is to be hoped that the time is not far distant when a satisfactory non-returnable container can be produced economically. Two complaints received this year concerned cement in bottles and no doubt these were originally delivered to building sites. The collection of bottles from such sites is, I understand, a problem for the dairy companies. Another related to pupae cases of the Drosophila buskii (a fruit fly). The female fly is attracted to milk bottles which contain dregs of sour milk left by the previous customer. The eggs are laid so that the larvae when they hatch out can feed on the sour milk residue. In due course they pupate and the pupae cases are cemented firmly to the sides of the bottle. Unless they are present in large numbers they are not easily seen as the bottles come wet from the washing machine and it is not until the bottles are filled with milk that they become at all obvious. The washing of the bottle by the customer before returning it to the milkman would appear to be the simple solution to this problem. CLEAN AIR ACT, 1956 In January, 1959, the Ministry of Housing and Local Government issued a circular, No. 5/59, in which it made certain parts of the country black areas. These black areas are areas in which the smoke problem was considered to be acute. This circular also requested Councils in these black areas to make a programme to include the whole or part of their district in a smoke control area. The East Barnet Urban District was included as a black area although it is on the fringe of the area which covers the whole of the metropolis. In consequence of this circular a report was made to the General Purposes Committee in April, 1959, and a scheme was placed before them proposing that the whole of the Urban District should become a smoke control area in 12 years. In the report it was suggested that the district should be divided into twelve zones and that one zone should be made a smoke control area each year. In that report a programme for the first five years was suggested. This programme dealt with the central and southern portion of the district but did not quite make the whole of that portion of the district a smoke control area, two zones being outstanding which under the main proposal would take a further two years, being seven in all. The Committee considered this report and decided to recommend to the Council that it should be accepted. The Council subsequently accepted the report and the Ministry was informed and the programme for the first five years forwarded to them. At the same time as the report on the Clean Air Act was made to the Committee the details for area No. 1 were given. This area consists of that part of the district which is bounded by Cat Hill on the south, Page Thirty Park Road on the west and the boundaries of the district on the other two sides. It includes 857 properties of which some 450 would require adaptations of varying degrees. On the 14th December. 1959. a Smoke Control Order for this area was made and a detailed survey of it was started. On the 16th March, 1960, the Ministry confirmed the area and the date on which it became operative as being the 1st October, 1960. Immediately the area was confirmed a circular letter giving details of the smoke control area and its implications, together with application forms for approval of adaptations were sent to all householders within the area. On the 12th to the 18th June the Solid Smokeless Fuels Federation toured this area with a mobile exhibition on smokeless fuels and appliances. Applications for approval of works were received in the department, the numbers at first being small but gradually increasing as the period for adaptations advanced. However, at the first October approximately only 70 per cent of the premises which were known as a result of the survey to require adaptations had made an application for approval of works to be carried out. A number of householders did not comply with the provisions of the Clean Air Act regarding the making of application for approval of works of adaptation and the claiming of grant and consequently they unfortunately lost their grant. The apparent cause in the majority of these cases seemed to be that occupiers did not read the various information and instructions given to them on the forms. The main reason for loss of grant was the installation of equipment before the Council's approval had been given. In the instructions on the back of the form regarding application for adaptations it was definitely stated that no work must be commenced or any expense incurred until the Council's approval had been received and this particular instruction was underlined. At the same time as the survey for the No. 1 area was proceeding a pilot survey for area No. 2 was under way and on 26th February, 1960, the necessary information for presenting the area for provisional approval by the Ministry was reported to Council. This area contained 874 houses and it was estimated that 740 fireplaces would require adaptation. The Ministry was informed of the proposal for area No. 2 and a provisional approval was received from them on the 7th June. Immediately this approval was received a detailed survey was started and on the 6th December it was completed and a report was made to the Committee. On the 7th July a circular No. 28/60 was received from the Ministry of Housing and Local Government in which the use of sticks and paper for lighting fires was approved in houses in which there was no Page Thirty-one supply of town gas. In consequence of this circular a variation of the Smoke Control Order No. 1 was made permitting certain people not having a supply of gas to the house to use sticks and paper for kindling. Smoke Control Order No. 2 was prepared giving general permission for occupants of houses without town gas to use sticks and paper. On the 29th September a Public Meeting was held in the East Barnet Grammar School hall dealing with the subject of clean air and smoke control areas generally. Approximately 80 people attended and representatives of the Council, Gas and Electricity authorities and Solid Fuel manufacturers and suppliers were on the platform to answer questions. A film show lasting about 45 minutes, showing three films entitled: "The Future is Electric", "Window to the Sky", and "All lit up". The first film "The Future is Electric" showed the production of electricity and atomic power stations; "Window to the Sky" being a general film on the workings of the Clean Air Act and "All lit up" being a cartoon on the use of gas ignition. These films were loaned to us by the Electricity Board and the Gas Council. Following the film show questions were invited by the Chairman of the General Purposes Committee from the audience. This gave rise to a lively 1½ hours of question and discussion between the audience and the panel. The impact of smoke control on the Public Health Department has caused a great increase in the work. In the majority of cases the applications are received, approvals made by the Committee and ultimately the grant is settled with little difficulty. The few cases in which the procedure is not followed create an amount of work which is entirely out of proportion to the numbers of cases. In organising Smoke Control Order No. 2 an attempt is being made to iron out some of the difficulties which were encountered by occupiers and owners in the first area. The introduction of the smoke control in East Barnet appears to have been well received by the public in general and has not presented any undue difficulties. Undoubtedly the benefits of smoke control are wide and far reaching but until a considerable portion of the area is smokeless the benefits will not be fully appreciated. WATER SUPPLY During the year the Barnet District Water Company ceased to exist on the 1st April and was superseded by the Lee Valley Water Company. The water is obtained from deep wells sunk into chalk being the same supply as under the Barnet District Water Company. During 1960 a total of 598 samples of the water supply to the East Barnet Urban District were taken and examined. Between January 1st and the 31st March the Barnet District Water Company took 136 Page Thirty-two bacteriological samples all of which were found to be free from type 1 B. Coli and eleven chemical samples which were satisfactory. In addition, 17 bacteriological samples and 9 chemical samples were submitted for independent analysis in this period and were all reported to be of a satisfactory quality. Between April 1st and December 31st the Lee Valley Water Company took 410 bacteriological samples all of which were free of type 1 B. Coli in 100 ml. quantities and 15 chemical samples which were satisfactory, being a total of 425 samples. Eleven samples were also taken by the Public Health Department and submitted to the laboratory at Coppetts Wood Hospital. All of these samples were reported as satisfactory. OTHER INSPECTIONS PET SHOPS Three persons are licensed to keep pet shops in the district and visits are made periodically to the premises. In each case the business has been found to be carried on satisfactorily. INFESTATIONS RODENT CONTROL During the year 465 complaints of rats and mice were received. All complaints were visited and in addition premises adjoining the houses from which the original complaints were received were also visited as necessary. In consequence 650 properties were inspected for rats and mice infestations during the year. Of these properties 458 were found to be infested and were treated for infestation. The number of complaints received were almost exactly the same as in 1959. The increase in visits was due to it being necessary to include more of the surrounding properties in the primary inspections in order to locate the source of the infestation. In the 1959 Report it was stated that rat and mice complaints showed an increase of about 50 per cent over 1958. It is apparent from the figures for this year that these numbers have been upheld. All the infestations which were visited were of a minor character although some of these are very persistent and recur every year. Where difficulty is experienced re-treatment using various poisons and bait produce satisfactory results. The 10 per cent test baiting of the sewer manholes was carried out during June. Eight manholes showed "takes" and these were subsequently treated with Warfarin and with Paranitrophenol as a mould Page Thirty-three inhibitor. Inspections were made on the 4th, 8th and 11th days after baiting and any "takes" were recorded at the last inspection. A subsequent treatment of the sewers was carried out when 32 manholes were baited. Only seven "takes" were recorded and inspections made at the end of baiting showed no "takes". INSECT CONTROL The majority of complaints regarding infestation of premises by insects were those of carpet beetles, moths and wasps. All complaints were visited and advice given and where necessary insecticides applied free of cost. During the year there were 147 wasp nests destroyed. This figure, while not as high as that for 1959 is a sufficient number to cause considerable dislocation in the department's working. In addition, the charge which is made to the public for the destruction of wasp nests showed a considerable loss to the Council. In consequence to the above a report was made to the General Purposes Committee of November and the Committee decided that in future the destruction of wasp nests be dealt with by the Council's Rodent Operator and that additional assistance be provided when necessary together with transport and equipment, and that the charge for the destruction of wasp nests be raised to a flat rate of 25/- to be paid in advance. Page Thirty-four