4421(3) 2 Library EBAR 23 EIGHTY-EIGHTH ANNUAL REPORT of the MEDICAL OFFICER OF HEALTH for the year 1961 by C. M. SCOTT, M. R.C.S.(Eng.), L.R.C.P.(Lond.) Medical Officer of Health to the Council together with the ANNUAL REPORT of W. K. PICKUP, M.R.S.H. Chief Public Health Inspector East Barnet Urban District Council EIGHTY-EIGHTH ANNUAL REPORT of the MEDICAL OFFICER OF HEALTH for the year 1961 by C. M. SCOTT, M.R.C.S.(Eng.), L.R.C.P.(Lond.) Medical Officer of Health to the Council together with the ANNUAL REPORT of W. K. PICKUP, M.R.S.H. Chief Public Health Inspector East Barnet Urban District Council East Barnet Urban District Council EIGHTY-EIGHTH ANNUAL REPORT of the MEDICAL OFFICER OF HEALTH FOR THE YEAR 1961 To the Chairman and Members of the East Barnet Urban District Council. I have the honour to present my report for the year 1961. There are perhaps one or two items worthy of special comment from among the mass of detailed information packed into the report —which gives as a whole a picture of an average healthy district that has made considerable effort to progress with improvement of housing, enforcement of food hygiene, and of smoke control. It will be seen that 1961 was a "measles year," but in this anti-biotic era there are few serious complications. Doctors who have been in practice for twenty or thirty years must continue to marvel at the changed pattern of the common infectious diseases. But lest selfsatisfaction should creep in there is. of course, the balancing menace of the increase, for example, of leukaemia, not to mention the ever prevalent scourge of cancer. Sonne dysentery has given some problems for the Department during the past year, particularly in the case of one of the older and smaller schools in the district where there was an outbreak which lasted for some considerable time. There is always the problem of the exclusion of the persistent carrier, but this has been eased by the ready co-operation of the school staff in enforcing rigorous sanitary measures, thus enabling the affected children to carry on at school before the actual freedom from infection. Page Three The sale of pet foods from ordinary food shops has aroused considerable attention. The potential danger of infecting human foodstuffs is, in my opinion, very high and can never be kept completely at bay without legislation prohibiting the sale of human and animal foodstuffs from one and the same shop. One seems to be crying for the moon at the moment, but once the public realise the implications opinion will, I feel, insist on regulations to eliminate this increasing danger. Smoke control continues steadily, if necessarily slowly, and has now been generally accepted as desirable by the public at large. A steadily increasing number of applications for Council re-housing on medical grounds come through the Department's hands. All are sympathetically dealt with, and I hope justice is usually not only done but is seen to be done. Inevitably some applicants remain disappointed, but our biggest need remains for ground floor accommodation for handicapped and elderly people. On the whole then 1961 was a year of steady progress without many special features of note, but once again characterised by a large and increasing volume of work done by every member of my staff, to all of whom my very sincere thanks. C. M. Scott, Medical Officer of Health. Page Four STATISTICS AND SOCIAL CONDITION OF THE AREA public health staff Medical Officer of Health: C. M. Scott, M.R.C.S. (Eng.), L.R.C.P. (London). Chief Public Health Inspector: W. K. Pickup, M.R.S.H., Cert. R.S.H. Meat Inspection, Cert. R.S.H. Sanitary Science. Deputy Chief Public Health Inspector: S. C. Smith, M.A.P.H.I., Cert R.S.H. Meat Inspection. Public Health Inspectors: K. Ketley, M.A.P.H.I., Cert. R.S.H. Meat Inspection. J. P. McCormack, M.A.P.H.I., Cert. R.S.H. Meat Inspection. Student Public Health Inspector: M. Williams (from September, 1961). Technical Assistant: R. H. Harland. Clerical Assistant: Mrs. K. Wilson. Typist and Clerk: Mrs. J. Emmerton. Rodent Operator: A. E. Hoskins. Public Analyst: Dr. J. H. Hammence, Ph.D., M.Sc., F.R.I.C. Deputy Public Analyst: P. S. Hall, B.Sc., F.R.I.C. PROVISION OF HEALTH SERVICES IN THE DISTRICT hospitals The following hospitals serve the district for both infectious disease and general treatment. Barnet General Hospital, Wellhouse Lane, Barnet. Coppetts Wood Hospital, Coppetts Road, Muswell Hill. The Chest Clinic, attached to Barnet General Hospital, deals with Tuberculosis out-patients and holds clinics daily. The following hospital serves the district for Maternity Cases. Victoria Hospital, Wood Street, Barnet. clinics The following clinics are held within the district, and dates and times may be obtained from the Health Centre, East Barnet Road (Tel.: Hadley Green 1251). Infant Welfare Dental Diphtheria and Polio Immunisation Page Five In addition, the following clinics are held also at: Church Farm, Church Hill Road: Speech Therapy Ophthalmic Dental Infant Welfare Diphtheria and Polio Immunisation Friends Meeting House, Waterfall Road, N.ll: Infant Welfare Diphtheria and Polio Immunisation St. Mark's Hall, Woodviile Road, New Barnet: Infant Welfare Diphtheria and Polio Immunisation area and rateable value Area (in acres) 2,644 Registrar General's estimate of population (1960) 40,610 Number of inhabited houses (rated) 12,596 Number of persons per house 3,22 Rateable value (at 31st December, 1960) £735,755 Product of penny rate (Est.) £3,000 Number of business premises 621 Number of industrial premises 34 vital statistics Live births— Male Female Total Legitimate 257 227 484 Illegitimate 8 14 22 Totals 265 241 506 Still births— Legitimate 3 5 8 Illegitimate — — — Totals 3 5 8 Deaths of infants under 1 year of age— Legitimate 5 3 8 Illegitimate 2 — 2 Totals 7 3 10 Deaths of infants under 4 weeks of age— Legitimate 3 2 5 Illegitimate 2 — 2 Totals 5 2 7 Total number of deaths of all ages 197 231 428 Page Six births 1960 1961 Live births (rates per 1,000 population) 12.3 13.2 Still births (rates per 1,000 population) 0.15 0.20 Still births (rates per 1,000 total; live and still births) 12.6 16.9 deaths Infants under 1 year of age (rate per 1,000 live births 20.6 22.4 Total all ages (rate per 1,000 population) 9.86 12.67 The Registrar General's Comparability Factors for Births and Deaths have been taken into account when calculating the above rates. Death rate of legitimate infants under 1 year per 1,000 legitimate births 16.8 16.5 Death rate of illegitimate infants under 1 year per 1,000 illegitimate births 76.9 166.6 TABLE 1 Notifications of Infectious Diseases (other than Tuberculosis) received during the year 1961 DISEASES Total Cases Notified Under 1 year 1 year 2 years 3 years 4 years 5-9 years 10-14 years 15-24 years 25 years and over Scarlet Fever 9 ......... ......... ......... 1 ......... 4 2 1 1 Whooping Cough 3 ......... ......... 1 ......... 1 ......... 1 ......... ......... Measles 663 3 39 82 71 75 354 31 5 3 Dysentery 56 1 1 5 ......... 2 31 8 1 7 Acute Pneumonia 7 ......... ......... ......... ......... ......... ......... 1 6 Food Poisoning 1 ......... ......... ......... ......... ......... ......... 1 ......... ......... Erysipelas 1 ......... ......... ......... ......... ......... ......... ......... ......... 1 Chicken Pox 135 6 3 11 15 9 67 13 6 5 Totals 875 10 43 99 87 87 456 57 13 23 Page Seven TABLE II Causes of, and Ages at, Death during the year 1961 CAUSES OF DEATH All Ages Under 1 year 1-2 years 3-5 years 6-15 years 16-25 years 26-45 years 46-65 years 66 and over Tuberculosis, respiratory 2 ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... 2 Tuberculosis, other ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... Syphilitic disease 1 ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... 1 ...... Diphtheria ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... Whooping Cough ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... Meningococcal Infections ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... Acute Poliomyelitis ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... Measles ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... Other infective and parasitic diseases 1 ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... 1 Malignant neoplasm, stomach 12 ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... 5 7 ,, ,, lung, bronchus 24 ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... 2 10 12 ,, ,, breast 9 ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... 1 8 ,, ,, uterus ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... Other Malignant and lymphatic neoplasms 35 ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... 5 11 19 Leukaemia, aleukaemia 6 ...... 1 ...... ...... ...... ...... 1 4 Diabetes 1 ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... 1 Vascular lesions of nervous system 55 2 ...... ...... 1 1 2 8 41 Coronary disease, angina 71 ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... 2 17 52 Hypertension with heart disease 9 ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... 1 2 6 Other heart disease 70 ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... 4 7 59 Other circulatory disease 21 ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... 2 5 14 Influenza 1 ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... 1 ...... Pneumonia 24 2 ...... 1 1 ...... 2 1 17 Bronchitis 17 ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... 2 15 Other diseases of the respiratory system 3 ...... ...... 1 ...... ...... ...... 1 1 Ulcer of stomach and duodenum 2 ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... 2 Gastritis, enteritis and diarrhoea 3 ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... 1 1 1 Nephritis and nephrosis 5 ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... 1 3 1 Hyperplasia of prostate 3 ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... 1 ...... 2 Pregnancy, childbirth, abortion ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... Congenital malformations 4 i ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... 1 Other defined and ill-defined diseases 31 1 ...... 1 1 ...... 1 1 25 Motor vehicle accidents 5 ...... ...... ...... ...... 1 ...... ...... 4 All other accidents 12 2 ...... ...... ...... 2 2 ...... 6 Suicide 1 ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... 1 ...... Homicide and operations of war ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... Totals 428 10 1 3 3 4 26 81 300 Page Eight TABLE III Infantile Mortality, 1961 Net deaths from stated causes at various ages under 1 year CAUSES OF DEATH Under 1 week 1 week 2 weeks 3 weeks Total under 4 weeks 1-3 months 4-6 months 7-9 months 10-12 months Total between 1 month and 1 year Total under 1 year Vascular lesions of nervous system 2 ...... ...... ...... 2 ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... 2 Pneumonia 1 ...... ...... ...... 1 1 ...... ...... ...... 1 2 Congenital malformations 3 ...... ...... ...... 3 ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... 3 Other defined and Ill-defined diseases ...... 1 ...... ...... 1 ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... 1 All other accidents ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... 2 ...... ...... ...... 2 2 Totals 6 1 ...... ...... 7 3 ...... ...... ...... 3 10 TABLE IV Tuberculosis New cases and Mortality during year 1961 AGE PERIODS NEW CASES DEATHS Respiratory Non-Respiratory Respiratory Non-Respiratory M. F. M. F. M. F. M. F. Under 5 years ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... 5-14 years ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... 15-24 years 2 1 ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... 25-44 years 2 1 ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... 45-64 years 4 ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... 65 and over 3 ...... ...... ...... 2 ...... ...... ...... Totals 11 2 ...... ...... 2 ...... ...... ...... Page Nine Page Ten Page Eleven COMMENTS ON STATISTICS Population The Registrar General's mid-year estimate of the population for 1961 is 40,610, a decrease of 940 on the previous year. The figure is undoubtedly calculated on the Census figures and not on estimates. It would appear that the figures for the past few years have been on the high side. The number of persons per house has dropped from 3.32 to 3.22. This very slight variation is related to the population figures. Births The number of live births has increased by 16 as compared with 1960. This, together with the reduction in the population has slightly increased the birth rate. The birth rate for the year is about average for the district, but, as can be seen by reference tc the graph, is well below the figure for England and Wales. The tendency for the birth rate to decrease was commented upon in the last report and may have been due to the estimated population figures being higher than the actual. The number of illegitimate births has increased very considerably in 1961, but is only slightly higher than the average over the last ten years, which is 18.8. This figure has varied during that period between 9 and 35. Mortality The death rate shows a considerable increase in 1961, there in fact being 63 more deaths which, together with the reduction in population, has increased the figure considerably. It is higher than the average for the last eight years, which is 10.6. The deaths of infants under one year per 1,000 live births is 22.4. In 1960 this figure was 20.6, while in 1959 it was 43.1, the average for the last eight years being 24.1. Comparisons of these figures with previous years' rates has little meaning, but the figure for the past year is below the average. The number of deaths from Cancer during the year is 80. This is a little higher than in 1960, but is approximately the same as the average for the last ten years, which is 79.1. The number of deaths from Tuberculosis is 2. This is a very low figure and is one which shows a continued overall reduction. There were 6 deaths from Leukaemia, the same as in the previous year. Over the last eleven years there have only been 23 deaths from this disease, 12 of them occurring in the last two years. As mentioned in my last Annual Report, this increase may only be incidental, but the number of deaths from this disease require to be watched over the next few years. Page Twelve INTERNATIONAL VACCINATION CERTIFICATES At the end of 1952 a new form was introduced for International Vaccination Certificates requiring authorisation of the signature of the doctor performing the vaccination or inoculation of persons proceeding overseas. During the year several hundred such certificates were authenticated and marked with the authorised stamp. LABORATORY FACILITIES These facilities are provided by the Central Public Health Laboratory Service. The Service has been of the greatest assistance to the Department through its laboratories at Colindale and at Coppetts Wood Hospital. This assistance, and the close co-operation which has continued for so many years between my Department and the Laboratory Service is gratefully acknowledged. The following is a summary of the work carried out by the Laboratory Service for the Department during 1961— Nose and throat swabs 18 Other swabs 4 Faeces 460 Sputum 3 Urine 4 Milk 88 Ice Cream 88 Water 10 Other food 2 INFECTIOUS DISEASES Table IV, which gives the number of new cases of Tuberculosis, shows that there were only 13 such cases during 1961. The average number of new cases over the last ten years is 31.4. As previously mentioned, the incidence of Tuberculosis has decreased rapidly over the past few years. Table 1, which lists the number of cases of infectious diseases notified during 1961, shows a total of 875. This is very much higher than 1960, but is largely due to the increase in the number of cases of Measles, of which 663 were notified. The diseases which make up the greater number of cases notified are the ailments of childhood and vary greatly year by year. This is particularly so with Measles which occurs in cycles. Page Thirteen The number of cases of Dysentery notified was considerably more than in the previous year. This increase was largely due to an outbreak at a local school. However, the majority were cases of Sonne Dysentery, which is normally a comparatively mild disease, although it can be very persistent. Only one case of Food Poisoning was notified. SPECIAL HOUSING CASES During 1961, 40 families were referred to the Department for special consideration for Council housing accommodation on medical grounds. All the families were visited, and after consideration of the reports received from the Inspector visiting the homes and the medical certicates or letters submitted with the applications, 10 of the families were recommended to the Housing Committee as being in need of more suitable accommodation. By the end of the year 7 of these 10 families had been rehoused in Council accommodation. In addition, following a review of the housing situation at the end of 1961, 2 further families from the original 40 have been rehoused. Four have also found alternative accommodation privately, and two elderly applicants, it is hoped, will be allocated accommodation in the Council's new premises for elderly persons at Vale Court, Bulwer Road, New Barnet. Page Fourteen East Barnet Urban District Council REPORT of the CHIEF PUBLIC HEALTH INSPECTOR FOR THE YEAR 1961 To the Chairman and Members of the East Barnet Urban District Council. I have the honour to present my tenth annual report to the Council. The year of 1961 was in general pattern similar to 1960. There was an increase in the volume of work over the previous year mainly due to the operation of the Clean Air Act. The appointment of another inspector naturally increased the amount of clerical work, and the position is such that if either member of the clerical staff is away from the office for any reason, the amount of work rapidly overwhelms the remaining member. Table I, which lists the number of visits made by the Public Health Inspectors, shows an increase of 1,525, the increase being mainly under the headings of Public Health, Housing and Clean Air. The increase in the Clean Air figures is due to the fact that the zone, which was surveyed during 1961 and which is covered by the order coming into operation in October, 1962, was approximately 50 per cent larger than those previously dealt with. The increase in the number of visits made under the headings of Public Health and Housing was mainly due to the increase in staff. Details of the work carried out under these headings can be found in the body of the report. The number of callers and telephone calls has increased very greatly during the year and the time taken in attending to these matters has increased in proportion. With a clerical staff of only two, a continual Stream of callers hinders the normal routine work by a far greater amount than the actual time required to answer the query. In September the Council authorised me to employ a pupil in the Department, and it will be seen from the list of staff that this has been done. Page Fifteen Inspections of foodshops under the Food Hygiene Regulations have increased in number, and although this is one of the more mundane routine duties of the Department, I feel it is one which bears good results. There is no doubt that as the years pass by the food handlers in the shops become more hygiene conscious and the owners of the premises more inclined to carry out minor suggestions which a few years ago they would have avoided if possible. I should like to draw your attention to the paragraph in the report on Pet Foods. This is a commodity which is now sold by shops selling food for human consumption, mainly fish shops, but which on the whole is not a satisfactory article to be in any food shop. Unfortunately there is no means of preventing fish shops from supplying pet food to customers, and it undoubtedly meets a demand which has to be satisfied. I would feel far happier with regard to this article if I could be sure that all the retailers selling pet food were scrupulously careful in ensuing that all knives, scales and other articles used in connection with pet foods were not also used for the cutting or weighing of food for human consumption. In conclusion I would express my thanks to every member of the Public Health Department and in particular to my Deputy, Mr. Smith, who has given me every support and has carried out his duties with his usual efficiency. The amount of work as previously mentioned has continued to increase, but the staff of the Department have coped with it cheerfully. However, if the increase continues a point will be reached when the clerical staff will have to be enlarged. I also wish to thank all other officers of the Council for their assistance and co-operation. W. K. Pickup, Chief Public Health Inspector. Page Sixteen TABLE 1 Table of Visits and Inspections made during the Year PUBLIC HEALTH 1960 1961 Nuisances and Sanitary Defects 2,873 3,201 Infectious Diseases 254 631 Schools 39 40 Brooks and Streams 14 14 Verminous Premises — — Hairdresser and Barbers 23—3,203 36—3,922 HOUSING Housing Act, 1936, Part 2 1,205 1,416 Permitted Numbers and Overcrowding 132 91 Applicants for Housing (Special Cases) 105—1,442 115—1,622 FOOD HYGIENE Restaurants and Snack Bars 397 421 Fish Shops 129 132 Butchers' Shops 319 315 Bakehouses 37 41 Ice Cream Premises 238 253 Other Food Shops and Premises 725 804 Food Inspections 201 192 Milk (Special Designations) Registrations 48—2,094 31—2,189 FACTORIES Factories 162 187 Outworkers 36—196 42—229 INFESTATIONS Rat and Mouse 2,699 2,410 Insects 453—3,102 348—2,758 FOOD AND DRUGS Sampling and in connection therewith 287—287 312—312 SHOPS ACTS Visits made 521—521 519—519 CLEAN AIR ACT Visits made 2,672—2,672 3,491—3,491 13,517 15,042 Page Seventeen TABLE II HOUSING ACT, 1936 and 1957 Demolition Orders 4 Closing Orders 2 Houses demolished as a result of Orders 4 Closing Orders determined 3 Undertakings determined 1 Clearance Areas declared under Section 25 :— Clearance Areas 4 Houses in above Areas 10 NUMBER OF NOTICES SERVED DURING THE YEAR 1960 1961 Informal Notices 62 78 Statutory Notices 12 8 Result of the service of these Notices as follows :— 1960 1961 I960 1961 Preliminary Notices Statutory Notices Complied with 65 71 11 10 Work in progress or in hand at end of year 2 4 _ __ Not complied with 12 17 3 1 TABLE III IMPROVEMENTS EFFECTED AS A RESULT OF NOTICES SERVED Exterior No. of Houses Roofs repaired and made weathertight 26 Rainwater pipes and rainwater gutters cleaned, repaired or renewed 18 Chimney pots and flues repaired 2 Brickwork repaired or repointed 4 Rendering repaired or renewed 3 Damp walls remedied 39 Choked drains cleared 12 Soil and vents repaired or renewed 2 Drains repaired or relaid 24 Exterior paving relaid or repaired 2 Dustbins renewed 11 Accumulation of refuse removed 6 Interior Wallplaster repaired or re-plastered 12 Ceilings repaired or re-plastered 15 Sinks renewed 3 Page Eighteen Wastepipes repaired or renewed 2 W.C.'s and fittings repaired or renewed 16 Insufficient water supplies remedied 3 Stairs and staircases repaired or renewed 2 Floors and skirtings repaired or renewed 12 Doors and frames repaired or renewed 8 Window frames and sills repaired or renewed 19 Sash cords renewed 12 TABLE IV Factories Act, 1937 FACTORY INSPECTIONS Inspections for the purposes of provisions as to Health Premises No. on Register Number of Inspections Written Notices Factories without mechanical power 3 8 — Factories in which mechanical power is used 88 179 2 Totals 91 187 2 Cases in which Defects were Found Number of cases in which defects were found Particulars Referred Found Remedied To H.M. Inspector By H.M. Inspector Want of cleanliness l l — – Unsuitable or defective sanitary conveniences l l _ l Other offences (not including offences relating to home work — — — — Totals 2 2 — l TABLE V FOOD SURRENDERED DURING 1961 cwts. qrs. lbs. Meat — 3 18 Fish 1 0 18 Tinned Food (other than meat) 4 2 17 Tinned Ham — 2 22 Tinned Meat 1 0 24 Frozen Foods 1 2 4 Total 10 0 19 Page Nineteen TABLE VI Food and Drugs Act, 1955 SAMPLES EXAMINED BY PUBLIC ANALYST Quarter ended No. examined No. found adulterated Formal Informal Total Formal Informal Total 31st March 4 3 7 l — 1 30th June 4 8 12 — – — 30th September 6 8 14 — — — 31st December 3 11 14 — — — Totals 17 30 47 l — 1 SAMPLES EXAMINED BY PUBLIC HEALTH DEPARTMENT Quarter ended No. examined No. found adulterated 31st March 12 — 30th June 13 – 30th September 11 – 31 st December 13 – Totals 49 — TABLE VII Food Premises in the District Number of Grocers 47 „ „ Confectioners 41 „ „ Greengrocers 27 „ „ Butchers 26 „ „ Wet and Dry Fishmongers 9 „ „ Fried Fish Dealers 7 „ „ Chemists 13 „ „ Bakehouses 6 „ „ Public Houses 18 „ „ Restaurants 19 TABLE VIII Food Premises Registered Under Section 16 of Food and Drugs Act, 1955 (a) Storage of Ice Cream intended for sale 63 (b) Preparation or manufacture of sausage and potted, pressed, etc., meats 27 Page Twenty PUBLIC HEALTH General Table I lists the number of visits and inspections made during the year by the Public Health Inspectors in the course of their duties. The figures are set out under various sub-headings and the figures for 1960 are given for the purpose of comparison. The total number of visits show a considerable increase over the previous year, viz., 1,525. The major increases in the number of inspections made are under the heading Public Health, Housing and Clean Air Act, whilst in respect of Infestations there has been a considerable reduction. The reasons for these variations are enlarged upon in the paragraphs dealing with the particular sub-headings. The main factor, however, is the fact that 1961 was the first full year in which the work of the additional Public Health Inspector appointed in the autumn of 1960 is shown. Nuisances and Sanitary Defects In this section there has been an increase of 328 visits. These visits are those made following a complaint by a member of the public and those visits made in following up such complaints to ascertain whether the conditions giving rise to the complaint have been remedied. These visits are closely related to the number of complaints received. Every complaint received, including anonymous complaints which are often minor or frivolous, has meant at least one visit. In the case of many of the complaints received the Inspector can only give advice, but where contraventions of the Public Health, 1936, or other Acts are concerned the necessary notices for the remedying of the complaint are served on the owner or occupier as the case may be. The number of notices served during the year shows an increase in preliminary notices and a slight decrease in statutory notices. Table II of the report gives the number of notices served both in 1960 and 1961 and the results of the service of those notices. The relationship between the number of notices and complaints seems to vary widely year by year and is mainly due to the cause of the complaint. Table III which lists the repairs carried out as a result of notices served on owners shows a slight increase due in the main to the increase in the number of notices served. VERMINOUS PREMISES No visits were made during the year regarding verminous premises. SCHOOLS, BROOKS & STREAMS, HAIRDRESSERS & BARBERS PREMISES These are routine inspection and do not vary by any extent year by year. Page Twenty-one National Assistance Act, 1948 — Section 50 BURIAL OF THE DEAD During the year one case was dealt with under this Section where a person died and where no arrangements had been made for the disposal of the body. The Council made the necessary arrangements for the funeral and obtained the appropriate sum from the Ministry of Pensions and National Insurance in respect of the Death Grant. SHOPS ACT Routine inspections of shops under this Act have continued and no serious contraventions have been observed during the year Some of these inspections have to be made outside office hours and on Sundays in order to ascertain that the closing hours and the provisions regarding Sunday trading are being observed. FACTORIES Routine visits to factories and outworkers for the purpose of the Factories Act were made during the year and a total of 229 inspections were made. Two contraventions of the Act were found and notices were served on the occupiers of the premises. The number of factories without mechanical power has remained at three. The small number of these factories can quite easily be understood when the definition of " mechanical power" is such that an electric drill will exclude a factory from this category. INFECTIOUS DISEASES AND FOOD POISONING The number of visits made under this heading during the year is more than double that of 1960 and this is entirely due to an outbreak of Sonne Dysentery at Monken Hadley School early in the year. In this small Church School with 95 pupils, 45 were affected, and in addition a further 24 cases were notified from members of their families (11 adults and 13 children). Two specimens of faeces were examined from every child and member of the staff of the school and where positive results were reported specimens obtained from every member of the child's family. All positive cases were excluded from school until they had received treatment and two negative specimens obtained. Arrangements were made with the school authorities for the conveniences to be cleaned and disinfected four times a day and subsequently for some works of repair to be carried out. The outbreak lasted some six weeks. Page Twenty-two As the school is situated almost on the boundary of the district a number of the children came from the areas of adjoining authorities, and I am grateful for the co-operation of the staffs of the Public Health Departments of Enfield and Barnet in this matter. FOOD HYGIENE During the year 2,184 visits were made to various premises in the district where food is handled. Some types of premises require more frequent visits than others by reason of the type of business carried on and this fact is reflected in the figures for restaurants, snack bars and butchers' shops. There is no doubt, whatsoever, that the standards of hygiene observed by food handlers in the district is gradually improving though it has been necessary on several occasions to draw the attention of shop assistants to such unhygienic practices as licking the fingers before picking up wrapping paper and blowing on paper bags to open them. The widespread practice of employing part-time staff in shops increases the Inspectors' difficulties. A morning call and comments then made to the staff might well prove useful. A subsequent visit made in the afternoon can reveal at least a 50% change in the staff. I am glad to report again that a number of shops are exhibiting notices requesting customers to refrain from smoking whilst in the shop. It is hoped that the exhibiting of such notices will in time become general practice. There is a continuing demand from shop keepers for the notices supplied free of charge by the Department requesting the public not to take dogs into food shops. When these were first made available shop keepers were hesitant to display them, fearing it is presumed that they might give offence to dog loving customers but during the past two or three years it has been noticeable that the large majority of owners of food shops are only too ready to display them. MILK SUPPLY Two applications were received from dealers for Dealer's (Prepacked Milk) Licences under the Milk (Special Designation) Regulations, 1960. Under these Regulations licences are now issued for a period of five years instead of annually as heretofore and supplementary licences are no longer necessary. Page Twenty-three FOOD AND DRUGS The following table shows the various types of food and drugs sampled during the year: — No. of samples Almonds, Ground 1 Ammoniated Tincture of Quinine 1 Anchovies 1 Beef Burgers l Beef and Kidney Pie l Beef and Vegetable Casserole l Butter l Buttered Coconut l Casserole Steak l Cheese Sandwiches (Biscuits) 2 Chicken Paste 1 Condensed Milk 2 Cream 2 Diet-Thins Manischewitz 1 Ginger Cordial 1 Gravy Salt 1 Ground Nutmeg 1 Hamburger Patties 1 Ice Cream 2 Marzipan 2 Meat and Fish spreads with butter 3 Milk 19 Milk, Channel Islands and South Devon 31 Milk Bread 2 Milk Shake Syrup 1 Mince 2 Minced Turkey 1 Mincemeat 1 Mock Salmon Cutlets 1 Orange Squash 1 Orangeade Powder 1 Pork Luncheon Meat 1 Rice Pudding 1 Sausages, Pork 1 Shrimps, Peeled 1 Shrimps, Potted with butter 1 Soup, Cream of Tomato 1 Table Jelly 1 Tomato Puree 1 96 Page Twenty-four Of the above-mentioned samples only one was reported as being unsatisfactory. This was a sample of milk bread. I commented in my 1960 report that whilst there is no legal standard for this type of bread, the description, composition, labelling and advertising of bread containing milk ingredients had been considered by the Food Standards Committee in the autumn of 1959 and that recommendations, subsequently amended, were made after hearing evidence from interested parties. Although the recommendations received wide publicity in trade journals, the Council considered it desirable to draw the attention of all bakers in the district to them by sending a circular letter. As a result of the sending of this letter only one baker continued to manufacture this type of bread. A sample taken from this particular firm's premises early in the year was found to be 47 per cent deficient of the minimum amount of non-fatty milk solids recommended for milk bread. Enquiries at the bakehouse revealed that the previous day a number of the bakehouse staff had been taken ill and temporary hands had been engaged. A second sample taken a few days later was satisfactory and in the circumstances a warning letter was sent. In addition to this unsatisfactory sample four complaints were received concerning two dirty milk bottles and two of bread containing foreign bodies. It is gratifying to note that this is the smallest number of complaints of this nature received for some years. MILK BOTTLES Every year I comment on the habits of those members of the public who fail to appreciate that the sole purpose of a milk bottle is that of holding milk. Of the two complaints received concerning dirty bottles, one related to a bottle which had, in all probability, served as a vase for flowers whilst the other contained cement and had probably been delivered originally to a building site. When consideration is given to the number of bottles of milk which must be delivered in the district during the course of a year I feel that the fact that only two complaints were received regarding dirty bottles reflects great credit on the organisation of the dairy firms serving East Barnet. Page Twenty-five BREAD In the first instance a small piece of coke was found in a fruit malt loaf. The bakery concerned had coke fired ovens and whilst the coke was stored outside the bakehouse it seemed highly probable that this was the source of the small portion which found its way into the loaf. A warning letter was sent. In the second case a small fragment of glass was found in a loaf two days after its purchase. Examination of the glass revealed that its surfaces were moulded and suggested that it had possibly originated from the bevelled rim of a cylindrical or hemi-spherical container such as a butter dish. There was no evidence of the fragment having been baked in the loaf. No further action was taken. 88 samples of milk were purchased and submitted for bacteriological examination to the Ministry of Health Public Health Laboratory at Coppetts Wood. There were no unsatisfactory samples. ICE CREAM Three applications were received for the registration of premises for the sale of ice cream. The premises and equipment being satisfactory the applications were granted. 88 samples of ice cream were obtained and submitted for bacteriological examination. All the samples were reported Provisional Grade 1. This is the third successive year that I have been able to report all the samples of ice cream taken during the year as being Grade 1. There are no premises manufacturing ice cream for sale in the district. All ice cream is obtained from large wholesale firms. HOUSING At the beginning of 1961 there were four houses on which demolition orders had been made but the premises had not been demolished and eight closing orders were also in force. The premises on which demolition orders were operative were: — 49 Leicester Road 74 „ „ 76 „ „ 1 Plantagenet Road Page Twenty-six and the premises on which closing orders were operative being: — 46a East Barnet Road 48a „ „ „ 70 „ „ „ 90 „ „ „ 41 Lancaster Road 55 Lyonsdown Road 10 Margaret Road 7 Victoria Road There were at this time six confirmed clearance areas affecting 68 houses which had not been demolished although the majority of the houses were vacant. During 1960 five clearance areas were declared by the Council, these being Lancaster Road (No. 1) Clearance Area, (201-215 inclusive), Lancaster Road (No. 2) Clearance Area, (124, 126 & 128), Lancaster Road (No. 3) Clearance Area (179 & 181), Lancaster Road (No. 4) Clearance Area (185 & 187) and the Hadley Highstone Clearance Area (39-59). In 1961 the Council made compulsory purchase orders in respect of the four clearance areas in Lancaster Road, including in the compulsory purchase orders covering the Areas No. 1, 3 & 4; 183, 189, 191, 193, 195, 197, 199, Lancaster Road which, with the premises included in the clearance areas, makes a continuous terrace for demolition, i.e., Nos. 179-215 inclusive. 122 Lancaster Road was included in the compulsory purchase order for Clearance Area No. 2. This addition completed a terrace of four houses. A clearance order was also made in respect of the Hadley Highstone Clearance Area. On the 28th July, 1961 the Minister confirmed the compulsory purchase orders on the Lancaster Road Clearance Areas Nos. 1, 3 & 4. As an objection to the compulsory purchase order on Lancaster Road Clearance Area No. 2 was received a Public Local Enquiry was held on the 23rd March, 1961. The Minister confirmed this Order on the 5th July, 1961. The clearance order in respect of Hadley Highstone Clearance Area was confirmed without modification by the Minister on the 2nd June, 1961. Two of the premises on which there were outstanding demolition orders, viz 1, Plantagenet Road and 49, Leicester Road and one in respect of which there was a closing order, viz 41, Lancaster Road, were demolished during 1961. Three closing orders on the premises 48a and 70 East Barnet Road, and 10 Margaret Road were determined Page Twenty-seven as the owners had carried out the works necessary to remedy the defects. Work was also in progress on the demolition of houses in four of the areas covered by compulsory purchase orders made on existing clearance areas and which involved 55 houses. This leaves only two houses, 74 & 76 Leicester Road not demolished and five closing orders still operative. As a result of reports and representations by the Medical Officer of Health made to the Housing Committee during 1961, five clearance areas were declared comprising 10 houses. 4 demolition orders and 2 closing orders were also made. Details of the various clearance areas and unfit houses on which action was taken during 1961 are as follows. East Barnet Road Clearance Area Nos. 1 & 2. These houses which were shown in the Schedule of Proposed Clearance Areas were represented by the Medical Officer of Health to the June Housing Committee consist of a terrace of houses numbered 87, 89, 91, 93, 95, 97, East Barnet Road; 91 was found to be fit for habitation and consequently the terrace was divided into two areas, being 87 & 89 in Area No. 1 and 93, 95, 97 in Area No. 2. The main defects in these properties were disrepair, dampness, absence of ventilated food stores and drainage. The Council subsequently made a compulsory purchase order to cover all the properties in the terrace 87-97, East Barnet Road. The time for objections under the Housing Act has not yet expired and the order has therefore not been confirmed. Lancaster Road Clearance Area No. 5. This area consists of 11 & 13 Lancaster Road and was included in the Schedule of Proposed Individual Unfit Houses. It was represented by the Medical Officer of Health to the Committee as a clearance area in July and subsequently the Council made a compulsory purchase order to cover 11, 13, & 15 Lancaster Road; 15 Lancaster Road being built onto the flank wall of 13. The main defects of these properties were disrepair, dampness, absence of ventilated food stores and drainage. The period allowed for objections to the compulsory purchase order by the Housing Act having not yet elapsed, it is not known whether or not the Minister will confirm the order. Mill Corner Clearance Area. This area consists of three cottages 4, 5 & 6 Mill Corner, Hadley. It was represented to the Committee by the Medical Officer of Health in December and the Council Page Twenty-eight declared the premises to be a clearance area. This area is part of a terrace of four houses, the fourth house. No. 3, being fit for habitation. The main defects of these houses being, disrepair, dampness, absence of ventilated food stores and drainage. The Council has not yet decided whether a closing order or compulsory purchase order will be made in respect of this area. 9 Edward Grove. A report was made to the Committee in December 1960 with regard to these premises. After consideration of the report, the list of defects and estimates of cost of repair attached thereto the Council decided that the cost of repairs was unreasonable and that the premises were unfit for habitation. The Council subsequently made a demolition order in April. The main defects in this property were disrepair, dampness and absence of ventilated food store. The premises have not yet been demolished. 43 Lancaster Road. A report was submitted to the Committee in January, 1961 which stated that the premises were in an extremely dilapidated condition and that very extensive repairs and rebuilding would be required if the premises were to be rendered reasonably fit for habitation. An approximate estimate of the cost of such work was given in the report. The Committee considered the report and having complied with the provisions of the Housing Act, 1957 decided to make a demolition order in respect of this property. The premises have not yet been demolished. 20 & 22 Lancaster Road. A report on these premises was submitted to the Committee in February in which it was stated that the premises were unfit for habitation by reason of disrepair, dampness, etc. An estimate of the cost of works required to render the premises reasonably fit was attached to the report. The Committee after having considered the report and complying with the provisions of the Housing Act, 1957, decided to make demolition orders in respect of these properties. The orders were made in May. The premises have not yet been demolished. 101 East Barnet Road. A report on these premises was submitted to the Committee in January in which the condition of the premises was detailed, an estimate of the cost of works required to render the premises reasonably fit was attached. The Committee after consideration of this report and complying with the provisions of the Housing Page Twenty-nine Act, 1957, decided at their meeting in April to make a closing order in respect of these premises. 96 East Barnet Road. A report on these premises was submitted to the Committee in May and the Committee after considering the details of the report and the estimated cost of repairs, made a closing order on this property in October. 1 Hexham Road. A report on these premises was submitted to the Committee in April. The report stated that the premises were unfit for habitation by reason of disrepair, dampness and drainage. The report also contained an estimate of the cost of repairs necessary to render the premises reasonably fit for habitation. The Committee after consideration of the report served notice of time and place at which consideration of the condition of the house would be made. The owner appeared before the Committee and made an offer to carry out the necessary works which was accepted. 127 Brunswick Park Road; 3 Dury Road; 51a East Barnet Road; 18 Victoria Avenue. Reports on these properties were submitted to the Committee in September in which the premises were stated to be unfit for habitation by reason of disrepair, dampness, natural lighting, drainage, etc. An estimate of the cost of the necessary works to render the premises reasonably fit was also submitted. The Committee after due consideration and complying with the provisions of the Housing Act, 1957 decided, in December, to make closing orders in respect of these premises. 57 Somerset Road; 16 Victoria Avenue. Reports on the above properties were submitted to the Committee in October. These stated that the premises were unfit for habitation by reason of disrepair, dampness, etc. The Committee after consideration of the reports and complying with the provisions of the Housing Act, 1957, decided to make closing orders in respect of these properties. 123 & 125 Brunswick Park Road. Reports on the above properties were submitted to the December meeting of the Housing Committee. The reports stated that these premises were unfit for habitation by reason of disrepair, dampness, etc.; and an estimate for the cost of necessary works to render the premises reasonably fit was attached to the reports. The Committee considered the reports and have taken the necessary steps to comply with the provisions of the Housing Act, 1957, decided to make closing orders in respect of these houses. Page Thirty In 1955 the Council as required by Section 1 of the Housing Rent and Repair Act, 1954 caused a survey to be made of the District for the purpose of estimating the number of unfit houses in the District. 415 houses were found to come within this category. Since the date of this estimate 97 houses have been included in clearance areas and 50 houses have been dealt with as individual unfit houses. In addition to the above 200 houses have been removed from the list due to works of repair carried out by the owners of the premises. In a few cases a further detailed inspection has shown that the premises are not in fact in such a condition as to warrant demolition. This leaves 68 houses still to be dealt with. At the present moment inspections are being made of these premises as it appears that in a considerable number of these works of repairs have been carried out by the owners. PET FOODS During the year an investigation was carried out with a view to assessing whether any risk might be involved in the sale of certain pet foods in shops, mainly fish shops, where food for human consumption is also sold. The bacteriological condition of some pet foods has been suspect for some time and the rising popularity of keeping pets with the corresponding rise in the demand for pet foods has given some concern in public health circles. It has become common practice for fish shops to sell pet foods and those foods which have proved most popular are imported horse flesh and a manufactured product containing approximately 60% of meat. Unfortunately much of the horse flesh is accompanied by labels or cards stating that it is or has been passed as suitable for human consumption. Whilst the meat is, in fact, not diseased, its bacteriological condition has often left much to be desired. Between April and September 25 samples of manufactured pet food and 26 samples of horse flesh were sampled. Of these 10 and 14 samples respectively showed contamination with salmonella organisms. The percentage of unsatisfactory samples was rather higher than that obtained by Drs. Galbraith, Taylor and Cavanagh at the Central Public Health Laboratory, Colindale, in an extensive survey carried out in four different districts. The examination of all the samples was carried out at the Colindale Laboratory and I am grateful to these doctors and to Dr. Betty Hobbs for their help in this matter and for the information so readily supplied whenever queries were posed. Page Thirty-one It has been continually stressed on the staffs of fish shops the importance of thoroughly washing the hands after handling pet foods and of the necessity of keeping these foods and the equipment used in connection with their sale apart from those normally used in the business. The fact that only one case of food poisoning was notified during the year may indicate that perhaps too much concern was felt for this possible source of infection but on the other hand the vigilance shown by the Department may well have prevented other cases. The sale of these foods now forms a substantial part of the fishmonger's business and as it is not possible under existing legislation to prevent such sales reliance must be placed on the goodwill of the trade and the supervision exercised by the Department. CLEAN AIR ACT, 1956 During 1961 the Council's programme has continued, the position at the end of 1960 being that one area was operative and a second area was awaiting the approval in detail by the Minister. This second area contained 874 houses and it was estimated that 740 fireplaces would require adaptation at an estimated cost of £7,428. On the 15th March the Minister approved the Order without modification and immediately the necessary forms and explanatory memorandum were sent to all owners and occupiers in the area. During the period 15th March to 1st October, the date on which the Order became operative, applications for approval of works so that the owners would be able to claim grants were received from approximately 70 per cent of those who required adaptations. In view of the very slow response, a letter was sent to all owners who required adaptations and who had not made application for works of adaptation during August. Early in 1961 a circular was received from the Ministry in which the procedure for the making of an Order under the Act was simplified. Previously it had been necessary for the Order to be approved in principle by the Minister and later, after a detailed survey of the area in question had been made and an accurate estimate etc. prepared, for approval in detail, permitting works and ultimately the Order to become operative, sought. The new procedure cancelled the need of getting approval in principle. At the same time as Smoke Control Area No. 2 was being proceeded with, the survey for Smoke Control Order No. 3 was being carried out. Page Thirty-two Area No. 3 is approximately that area bounded by Pymmes Brook on the east, Longmore Avenue and East Barnet Road on the north, the railway on the west and by Parkside Gardens, Avondale Avenue and a short portion of Alverstone Avenue on the south. This area contains 1,160 properties and 2,046 fireplaces require adaptation. The estimated capital cost would be £16,524 if all the owners subsequently apply for grant. In view of the experience gained in the operation of the Orders in the first two areas this seems unlikely. A report, together with the necessary forms and other information required by the Minister, was presented to the General Purposes Committee at their December meeting. The Committee approved the report and made an Order which was sent to the Minister for confirmation. On the 19th October a Public Meeting was held in St. Mary's Church Hall with a programme similar to the meeting held in 1960. There were about 150 people present, the hall being filled almost to capacity. The Chairman of the General Purposes Committee opened the meeting and films dealing with the subject of clean air were shown. Unfortunately these films ran rather longer than was anticipated and it was about 9.30 p.m. before the panel, consisting of the Chairman of the General Purposes Committee, members of the Coal, Electricity and Gas Boards, the Medical Officer of Health and myself could assemble and questions invited from the audience. The questions followed the same pattern as the previous meeting, and although they were still forthcoming, the meeting had to be closed at 10.30 p.m. The Eastern Electricity and Eastern Gas Boards both had exhibitions of suitable fires and heaters in a small room adjoining the hall. This exhibition was very well attended. During the year the Council decided to participate in the scheme for the measurement of air pollution. The necessary equipment has been received and will be put into operation early in 1962. The information derived from this equipment is forwarded to a central laboratory and will form part of the scheme for the estimation of air pollution in the Greater London Area. The amount of work due to the operation of the Clean Air Act has increased considerably over the previous year. This increase has been particularly noticeable in the office due to the large increase in the number of enquiries both in the public office and over the telephone. Up to the present the Department has been able to cope with the increase. Page Thirty-three Smoke control is continuing to be well received by the public in general and has not presented any undue difficulties. WATER SUPPLY The Lee Valley Water Company supplies the district with its water supply. This supply is largely obtained from deep wells sunk into chalk. The Company took 1,990 samples of water representative of supply for bacteriological examination over the whole of its area of supply. Of these only 7 contained B. Coli 1, giving a percentage of purity of 99.6 per cent. During the year the Water Company took 481 samples of water for bacteriological examination and 23 samples for chemical analysis from the local supply. All these samples were satisfactory. In addition to the above 10 water samples for bacteriological examination were submitted by the Department to the Laboratory at Coppetts Wood Hospital. All these samples were satisfactory. INFESTATIONS RODENT CONTROL During the year 482 complaints of rats and mice were investigated and where necessary the premises adjoining the houses from which the original complaints were received were also visited. In consequence 669 properties were inspected for the presence of rats and mice. Of these properties 463 were found to have signs of infestations and were treated. The number of complaints received show a slight increase on 1960 and there has been an increase each year since 1959. The majority of the infestations were of a minor character though one or two were very persistent. Warfarin has been used in the majority of cases though where difficulty has been experienced further treatments using a different poison has usually produced satisfactory results. The reason for the reduction in the total number of visits made under this heading during the year was the fact that the usual test baiting and treatment of the sewers was not carried out. Unfortunately the pressure of other work at the time when this treatment was due to be carried out prevented its being done. However, the results obtained during the past few years have shown that the number of rats infesting the sewers of the district is remarkably low and omitting to carry out one treatment is not likely to have any serious effect. Page Thirty-four INSECT CONTROL The majority of complaints regarding infestation of premises by insects were those of carpet beetles, moths and wasps. All complaints were investigated and advice given and where necessary insecticides applied free of cost. During the year 61 wasp nests were destroyed. This figure is not as high as that for 1960 and the decrease is undoubtedly due to the increase in the charge authorised by the Council in respect of this service. However, it should be remembered that the charge, viz: 25/is a realistic figure and relates directly to the cost of the work to the Council. The charge is, in any case, considerably lower than that made by outside firms specialising in insect eradication. OTHER INSPECTIONS PET SHOPS Three persons are licensed to keep pet shops in the district and visits are made periodically to the premises. In each case the business has been found to be carried on satisfactorily. Page Thirty-five