EBAR 20 K 4421 (3) ANNUAL REPORT of the MEDICAL OFFICER OF HEALTH for the year 1958 by c. m. scott, M.R.C.S.(Eng.), L.R.C.P.(Lond.) Medical Officer of Health to the Council together with the ANNUAL REPORT of W. K. pickup, M.R.S.H. Chief Public Health Inspector East Barnet Urban District Council B East Barnet Urban District Council EIGHTY-FIFTH ANNUAL REPORT of the MEDICAL OFFICER OF HEALTH FOR THE YEAR 1958 To the Chairman and Members of the East Barnet Urban District Council. I have the honour to present my report for the year 1958. There are few items worthy of comment in the year's statistics. The variations in the notifications of infectious diseases are perhaps indicative of the rapidly increasing opinion that, so far as the normal children's infections are concerned, there is little value in notification. As a result of this climate of opinion it would appear that medical practitioners are themselves not notifying all the cases of measles, scarlet fever, whooping cough and chicken pox, thus rendering the statistics very suspect. So long as these diseases are notifiable it is unfortunate that this position should be true. Poliomyelitis immunisation is increasing steadily and now seems to have been generally accepted by the public. There is a considerable amount of apathy to be overcome but surprisingly little active opposition. As regards Housing it is regrettable that owing to the urgent necessity of de-requisitioning, Slum Clearance has been considerably slowed downand it becomes increasingly obvious that there is a great probability of our eleven-year programme failing completion in the allotted time. There is the additional factor that the older houses are, in many instances, steadily deteriorating and it may well be that the number of houses that will eventually have to be dealt with will be considerably in excess of the original estimate. Few people will regret the passing of Warwick Cottages, Albert Road and Margaret Road - but many people will regret the Page Three inevitable delay in rehousing the occupants of these houses. Several isolated houses have been the subject of either demolition or closing orders and the scattered black spots in the district are steadily but slowly lessening. The Chief Public Health Inspector has commented at length on the Clean Air Act and it is likely that the district will not be behindhand in the application of this Act-greatly to the benefit of the general health of the area. Food Hygiene continues to be vigorously pursued by the Department and local traders co-operate admirably in this matter. In fact it would be fair to say that the trader is in general more conscious of his responsibilities than is the customer. Once again I would like to express my appreciation of the invariably helpful co-operation given by the Chief Officers and Staff of all departments whenever their assistance has been sought. C. M. Scott, Medical Officer of Health. Page Four STATISTICS AND SOCIAL CONDITIONS OF THE AREA public health staff Medical Officer of Health: C. M. Scott, M.R.C.S.(Eng.), L.R.C.P.(London). Chief Public Health Inspector: W. K. Pickup, M.R.S.H., Cert. R.S.H. Meat Inspection, Cert. R.S.H. Sanitary Science. Deputy Chief Public Health Inspector: S. C. Smith, M.A.P.H.I., Cert. R.S.H. Meat Inspection. Public Health Inspector: K. Ketley, M.A.P.H.I., Cert. R.S.H. Meat Inspection. Assistant: R. H. Harland. Senior Typist: Mrs. K. Wilson. Typist and Clerk: Mrs. J. Emmerton. Rodent Operator: A. E. Hoskins. Public Analyst: Dr. J. H. Hammence, PhD., M.Sc., F.R.I.C. Deputy Public Analyst: P. S. Hall, B.Sc., F.R.I.C. PROVISION OF HEALTH SERVICES IN THE DISTRICT hospitals The following hospitals serve the district for both infectious disease and general treatment. Barnet General Hospital, Wellhouse Lane, Barnet. Coppetts Wood Hospital, Coppetts Road, Muswell Hill. The Chest Clinic, attached to Barnet General Hospital, deals with Tuberculosis out-patients and holds clinics daily. The following hospital serves the district for Maternity Cases. Victoria Hospital, Wood Street, Barnet. clinics The following clinics are held within the district and dates and times may be obtained from the Health Centre, 149-151 East Barnet Road, New Barnet (Tel.: Barnet 3138) East Barnet Road: Infant Welfare Clinics Dental Clinics Ante-Natal Clinics Minor Ailments Clinics Diphtheria Immunisation Relaxation Classes Page Five Church Farm, Church Hill Road: Speech Therapy Dental Clinics Ophthalmic Orthoptic Friends Meeting House, Waterfall Road, N.ll: Infant Welfare St. Marks Hall, Woodville Road, New Barnet: Infant Welfare AREA AND RATEABLE VALUE Area (in acres) 2,644 Registrar General's estimate of population (1958) 41,200 Number of inhabited houses (rated) 12,461 Number of persons per house 329 Rateable value (at 31st December, 1958) £701,727 Product of penny rate (Est.) £2,726 Number of business premises 811 Number of industrial premises 36 VITAL STATISTICS Male Female Total Live briths— Legitimate 287 266 553 Illegitimate 6 8 14 Totals 293 274 567 Still births- Legitimate 7 3 10 Illegitimate — — — Totals 7 3 10 Deaths of infants under 1 year of age- Legitimate 2 — 2 Illegitimate — — — Totals 2 — 2 Deaths of infants under 4 weeks of age- Legitimate — — — Illegitimate — — — Totals — — — Total number of deaths of all ages 175 230 405 Page Six BIRTHS 1957 1958 Live births (rates per 1,000 population) 13.2 14.4 Still births (rates per 1,000 population) 0.18 0.25 Still births (rates per 1,000 total; live and still births) 140 18.2 DEATHS Infants under 1 year of age (rate per 1,000 live births) 22.2 3.85 Total all ages (rate per 1,000 population) 10.7 10.8 The Registrar General's Comparability Factors for Births and Deaths have been taken into account when calculating the above rates. Death rate of legitimate infants under 1 year per 1,000 legitimate births 22.1 3.6 Death rate of illegitimate infants under 1 year per 1,000 illegitimate births — — TABLE 1 Notifications of Infectious Diseases (other than Tuberculosis) received during the year 1958 DISEASES Total Cases Notified Under 1 year 1-2 years 2-3 years 3-4 years 4-5 years 5-10 years 10-15 years 15-20 years 20-35 years 35-45 years 45-65 years 65 and over Scarlet Fever 28 ...... ...... 2 4 1 16 1 ...... 1 1 ...... ...... Chicken Pox 116 2 3 12 5 6 59 20 2 4 2 1 ...... Whooping Cough 5 1 ...... ...... 1 2 ...... ...... ...... 1 ...... ...... ...... Measles 76 4 5 15 10 17 24 1 ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... Pneumonia 7 ...... ...... ...... ...... 1 ...... ...... 1 ...... 1 2 2 Poliomyelitis 3 ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... 1 ...... 1 ...... 1 ...... ...... Meningitis 4 ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... 2 ...... ...... 2 ...... ...... ...... Erysipelas 1 ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... 1 Food Poisoning 1 ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... 1 ...... Dysentery 1 ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... 1 Totals 242 7 8 29 20 29 102 22 4 8 5 4 4 Page Seven TABLE II Causes of, and Ages at, Death during the year 1958 CAUSES OF DEATH All Ages Under 1 year 1-2 years 2-5 years 5-15 years 15-25 years 25-45 years 45-65 years 65 and over Tuberculosis, respiratory 2 ...... ...... ...... ...... 1 ...... 1 ...... Tuberculosis, other 1 ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... 1 ...... Syphilitic disease ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... Diphtheria ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... Whooping Cough ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... Meningococcal infections ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... Acute poliomyelitis ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... Measles ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... Other infective and parasitic diseases ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... Malignant neoplasm, stomach 11 ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... 3 8 „ „ , lung, bronchus 15 ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... 7 8 „ „ , breast 13 ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... 7 6 „ „ , uterus 6 ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... 1 5 Other Malignant and lymphatic neoplasms 42 ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... 3 18 21 Leukaemia, aleukaemia 2 ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... 1 1 Diabetes 2 ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... 1 1 Vascular lesions of nervous system 53 ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... 12 41 Coronary disease, angina 61 ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... 24 37 Hypertension with heart disease 12 ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... 2 10 Other heart disease 75 ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... 1 8 66 Other circulatory disease 28 ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... 1 8 19 Influenza ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... Pneumonia 14 ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... 1 3 10 Bronchitis 13 ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... 2 11 Other diseases of the respiratory system 4 ...... ...... ...... 1 ...... ...... 2 1 Ulcer of stomach and duodenum 3 ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... 1 2 Gastritis, enteritis and diarrhoea 3 1 ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... 1 1 Nephritis and nephrosis 2 ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... 1 1 Hyperplasia of prostate 2 ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... 2 Pregnancy, childbirth, abortion 1 ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... 1 ...... ...... Congenital malformations 1 ...... 1 ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... Other defined and ill defined diseases 23 ...... ...... 1 1 ...... 2 4 15 Motor vehicle accidents 2 ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... 2 All other accidents 7 1 ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... 1 5 Suicide 7 ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... 6 1 Homicide and operations of war ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... Totals 405 2 1 1 2 1 9 115 274 Page Eight TABLE HI Infantile Mortality, 1958 Net deaths from stated causes at various ages under 1 year CAUSES OF DEATH Under 1 week 1-2 weeks 2-3 weeks 3-4 weeks Total under 4 weeks 1-3 months 3-6 months 6-9 months 9-12 months Total between 1 month and 1 year Total under 1 year Gastritis, enteritis and diarrhoea ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... 1 ...... ...... ...... 1 1 All other accidents ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... 1 ...... ...... 1 1 Totals ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... 1 1 ...... ...... 2 2 TABLE IV Tuberculosis New Cases and Mortality during year 1958 AGE PERIODS NEW CASES DEATHS Respiratory Non-Respiratory Respiratory Non-Respiratory M. F. M. F. M. F. M. F. 0— ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... 1— ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... 5— 2 2 ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... 15— ...... 1 ...... ...... ...... 1 ...... ...... 25— 3 1 1 1 ...... ...... ...... ...... 35— 5 2 ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... 45— 3 1 ...... ...... 1 ...... ...... ...... 55— ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... 1 65 and over 1 ...... ...... 1 ...... ...... ...... ...... Totals 14 7 1 2 1 1 — 1 Page Nine Page Ten Page Eleven ANALYSIS OF VITAL STATISTICS 1. The Registrar General's mid-year estimate of population for 1958 is 41,200. This figure is an increase on the previous year of 250 and an increase on 1956 of 540. The population appears to be increasing slightly year by year although the increase is so slight as to be negligible. The number of persons per house has dropped very slightly from 3.36 to 3.29 per house. 2. There has been an increase in the number of live births for the year over 1957 of 48, the live births being for the year under consideration 567. The birth rate is increasing slightly but as can be seen from the graph in which births of England and Wales and East Barnet Urban District are shown for the last ten years the variation in the birth rate follows the general trend for the rest of the country very closely although it is slightly less. The number of illegitimate births has fallen very considerably in relation to the previous year's figures but, however, there seems to be a very wide fluctuation in these figures year by year and no definite conclusions can be drawn in a comparatively short period. 3. The death rate for the year shows a very slight increase over last year and if the graph showing death rates for England and Wales and this district is consulted it will be seen that the death rate for this district is increasing slightly but is still below that of England and Wales. In 1948 the gap was very much wider. However, on consideration I think this is only to be expected as the population of the district increased very considerably in the period 1930-1938 and the increase was largely made up of middle-aged and elderly people. Consequently the period through which we are now passing, that is 20 years after the large population increase, is showing a higher death rate. 4. Infantile mortality rate 3.85 as against 22.2 in 1957. This figure is very low indeed as the average rate is about 18. During the year there were only two deaths of children below 1 year of age, and the death rate of illegitimate infants is 0. As regards the statistics these figures are entirely non-representational and can have no significance. 5. The number of deaths from Cancer during 1958 is 87 which is the same as for 1957. Of this figure 15 were due to Cancer of the lung which shows a very considerable decrease on 1957. However, when dealing with small figures over periods of one year they have very little meaning. 6. In Table IV which deals with Tuberculosis there has been a total of 24 new cases during the year. This is three cases less than there were in 1957 and as far as this disease is concerned there is apparently over a considerable period a gradual reduction in the number of new cases. The number of deaths from Tuberculosis this year was three which, although it is one higher than 1957, is a low figure and there is a Page Twelve able average reduction in the number of deaths from this cause over a period. 7. Infectious diseases on Table I show a very considerable decrease over 1957. The reduction is mainly due to Measles and Whooping Cough. 1957 was a year in which there was a very large number of Measles cases, 804 as aginst 76 for 1958. During 1958 only five cases of Whooping Cough were notified. A decrease in the number of cases of Whooping Cough may be expected, particularly as immunisation against Whooping Cough is becoming more prevalent, although I feel that last year there were some cases of Whooping Cough that were not notified. There was only one case of Food Poisoning notified during the year, which is considerably below the average. water The water which is obtained from deep wells sunk into the chalk is supplied by the Barnet District Water Company. The Company maintains an up-to-date laboratory under the direction of a fully qualified Chemist and Bacteriologist. During the year 1958 examinations were made on 1,889 samples of water, of which number 1,315 were bacteriological examinations of water samples representative of supply. 1,314 were found free from B. Coli (type 1) in 100 ml., the other sample showed a positive result which represents 99-9 per cent of all samples delivered free from B. Coli (type 1) in 100 ml. In addition, the Water Company submitted 98 samples of water for independent analysis during the year, which included 58 bacteriological samples of water representative of supply. Again one sample was positive, i.e., 57 samples were absent from B. Coli (type 1) in 100 ml., being 98.3 per cent. Ten samples were also taken by us and submitted for examination to the Public Health Laboratory. The reports were in every case satisfactory. Page Thirteen East Barnet Urban District Council REPORT of the CHIEF PUBLIC HEALTH INSPECTOR FOR THE YEAR 1958 To the Chairman and Members of the East Barnet Urban District Council. I have the honour to present my seventh annual report to the Council. The number of visits made in connection with the work of the Department shows a slight decrease although, in fact, the Department has been exceptionally busy. A start has been made in implementing the Clean Air Act in the making of a pilot survey of an area in Cockfosters. This Act will undoubtedly cause a very considerable increase in the amount of the work of the Department. I feel that the effect of this Act will be extremely beneficial to the population as a whole. At the present moment the formation of Smoke Control Areas throughout the country is slow but this is a natural effect as time is required for a principle to be accepted. With regard to work under the Housing Acts in the District this has slowed down considerably owing to the lack of houses for rehousing tenants of unfit properties. The cause of this deficiency is outside the control of the Council being in the main due to the Housing Requisitioning and Housing Amendment Act. As soon as the tenants of requisitioned houses have been rehoused under this Act it is hoped the rate at which unfit houses are being dealt with will increase its pace. Work under the Food and Drugs Act and the Food Hygiene Regulations has proceeded in a satisfactory manner and the results of sampling under the Food and Drugs Act can be seen in the reducing number of unsatisfactory samples. The Inspectors and staff of the Department have combined to show their usual high standard of efficiency. In conclusion I wish to tender Page Fourteen my thanks to the staff of the Public Health Department and particularly to my deputy Mr. S. C. Smith who has given me great assistance during the year, and to all other officers of the Council for their assistance and co-operation. W. K. Pickup, Chief Public Health Inspector. Page Fifteen TABLE 1 Table of Visits and Inspections made during the Year PUBLIC HEALTH 1957 1958 Nuisances and Sanitary Defects 4,105 3,834 Infectious Diseases 161 153 Schools 83 85 Brooks and Streams 41 44 Verminous Premises 4 6 Hairdressers and Barbers 28—4,493 20—4,142 HOUSING Housing Act, 1936, Part 2 1,875 712 Permitted Numbers and Overcrowding 138 281 Applicants for Housing (Special Cases) 51—2,064 48—1,041 FOOD HYGIENE Restaurants and Snack Bars 342 - 451 Fish Shops 193 185 Butchers' Shops 319 391 Bakehouses 61 55 Ice Cream Premises 204 243 Other Food Shops and Premises 693 722 Food Inspections 191 205 Milk (Special Designations) Registrations 107—2,110 98—2,350 FACTORIES Factories 173 189 Outworkers 114—287 98—287 INFESTATIONS Rat and Mouse 2,382 2,668 Insects 194—2,576 176—2,844 FOOD AND DRUGS Sampling and in connection therewith 483—483 479—479 SHOPS ACTS Visits made 685—685 593—593 CLEAN AIR ACT Visits made — — 418—418 12,698 12,154 Page Sixteen TABLE II HOUSING ACT, 1936 and 1957 Demolition Orders 2 Closing Orders 5 Houses demolished as a result of Orders 4 Houses on which work was carried out in pursuance of an undertaking under Section 11 2 C learance Areas declared under Section 25— Clearance Areas 9 Houses in above Areas 9 NUMBER OF NOTICES SERVED DURING THE YEAR 1957 1958 Informal Notices 84 67 Statutory Notices 19 16 Result of the service of these Notices as follows: Preliminary Notices Statutory Notices 1957 1958 1957 1958 Complied with 79 69 22 16 Work in progress or in hand at end of year 4 3 - 1 Not complied with 22 8 3 2 TABLE III IMPROVEMENTS EFFECTED AS A RESULT OF NOTICES SERVED No. of Houses Exterior Roofs repaired and made weathertight 28 Rainwater pipes and rainwater gutters cleaned, repaired or renewed 24 Chimney pots and flues repaired 3 Brickwork repaired or repointed 5 Rendering repaired or renewed 4 Damp walls remedied 18 Choked drains cleared 10 Soil and vents repaired or renewed 2 Drains repaired or relaid 8 Exterior paving relaid or repaired 1 Dustbins renewed 22 Accumulations of refuse removed 4 Interior Wallplaster repaired or re-plastered 12 Ceilings repaired or re-plastered 12 Sinks renewed 6 Page Seventeen Wastepipes repaired or renewed 2 W.C.'s and fittings repaired or renewed 9 Insufficient water supplies remedied 7 Stairs and staircases repaired or renewed 2 Floors and skirtings repaired or renewed 7 Doors and frames repaired or renewed 4 Window frames and sills repaired or renewed 9 Sash cords renewed 5 TABLE IV FACTORY INSPECTIONS Factories Act, 1937 Inspections for the purposes of provisions as to Health Premises No. on Register Number of Inspections Written Notices Factories without mechanical power 10 21 - Factories in which mechanical power is used 89 168 3 Totals 99 189 3 Cases in which Defects Were Found Particulars Number of cases in which defects were found Referred Found Remedied To H.M. Inspector By H.M. Inspector Want of cleanliness 2 2 - - Unsuitable or defective sanitary conveniences 1 Other offences (not including offences relating to home work) — - - - Totals 3 2 - - TABLE V FOOD SURRENDERED DURING 1958 cwts. qrs. lbs. ozs. Meat 4 1 6 — Fish 2 2 20 — Tinned Foods 1 1 19 — Other Foods — — 9 9 Totals 8 1 26 9 Page Eighteen TABLE VI Food and Drugs Act, 1955 SAMPLES EXAMINED BY PUBLIC ANALYST No. Examined No. Found Adulterated Quarter Ended Formal Informal Total Formal Informal Total 31st March 7 12 19 - - - 30th June 5 14 19 - - - 30th September 1 12 13 1 - 1 31st December 3 11 14 - 2 2 Totals 16 49 65 1 2 3 SAMPLES EXAMINED BY PUBLIC HEALTH DEPARTMENT Quarter Ended No. Examined No. Found Adulterated 31st March 24 - 30th June 16 - 30th September 16 - 31st December 32 - Totals 88 - TABLE VII Food Premises in District Number of Grocers 48 „ „ Confectioners 41 „ „ Greengrocers 27 ,, ,, Butchers 26 ,, ,, Wet and Dry Fishmongers 9 ,, ,, Fried Fish Dealers 7 „ „ Chemists 13 „ „ Bakehouses 7 ,, „ Public Houses 19 „ „ Restaurants 20 TABLE VIII Food Premises Registered Under Section 16 of Food and Drugs Act, 1955 (a) Storage of Ice Cream intended for sale 58 (b) Preparation or manufacture of sausage and potted, pressed, etc., meats 27 Dairies Registered Under Milk and Dairies Regulations, 1949-1954 Number of Dairies registered 15 Page Nineteen PUBLIC HEALTH GENERAL Table I lists the number of visits and inspections made during the year with regard to the Public Health Inspectors' work. The visits are divided under various sub-headings and the figures for 1956 are given for purposes of comparison. There has been a reduction of some 500 visits made in the year and the number of complaints received from residents of the district has been less, which naturally affects the number of visits made. NUISANCES AND SANITARY DEFECTS The number of visits under this heading show a reduction on 1957. These visits generally relate to the primary inspections and subsequent visits following complaints made by residents. They also include any other visits which may be made as a result of information or knowledge regarding the sanitary conditions in the district. During 1958 the number of complaints made have been less and consequently the preliminary notices served during the year as listed in Table II is also less. Table III which shows a list of repairs carried out as a result of notices served on the owners, however, remains very much the same as in previous years. In addition to the figures in Table III a considerable number of defects in premises have been remedied by action taken under the Rent Act, 1957, that is by the issue of Certificates of Disrepair or the acceptance of undertakings from landlords. If this figure was added to those in Table IIIa considerable increase in the improvements effected to premises would be shown. INFECTIOUS DISEASES AND FOOD POISONING The number of visits made with regard to Infectious Diseases during the year is practically the same as in 1957. This is mainly because the number of cases of Scarlet Fever and other diseases which are visited by the Inspectors is very similar to the previous year. There was only one Food Poisoning case during the year, which is very low, but any case of Food Poisoning is always carefully followed up and every endeavour is made to trace the cause. SCHOOLS, BROOKS AND STREAMS, HAIRDRESSERS AND BARBERS PREMISES Inspections made under these headings are largely routine inspections and they justify very little comment; they do not vary to any great extent year by year. VERMINOUS PREMISES The visits made to verminous premises nowadays are so low owing to the few premises so infested that any comment is unnecesary. Page Twenty FACTORIES Routine visits to factories and outworkers for the purposes of the Factories Act were made throughout the year. A total of 189 visits was made and three contraventions of the Act were found. In two of these cases the matter was remedied by the service of informal notices. In the third instance which concerned the dirty and dilapidated condition of three W.C. apartments in a small factory it was necessary to serve a notice under Section 7 of the Factories Act, 1937 and subsequently to take legal proceedings. The case was heard before the Barnet Magistrates Court and dismissed as not being proved. SHOPS ACTS Routine inspections of shops under these Acts have continued and no serious contraventions have been observed during the year. Inspections are made outside office hours and on Sundays in order to ascertain that the closing hours are being observed and at shops where Sunday trading takes place the Act is not being contravened. HOUSING The progress under this section of the report during 1958 has mainly been in individual properties; only two small Clearance Areas both being part of the same area have been declared. The reason for this slowing down in the Council's programme in dealing with unfit houses has been entirely due to the Requisitioned Houses and Housing Amendment Act, 1955, which stated that all requisitioned houses have to be released by April, 1960, and consequently Council houses required for the rehousing of the occupiers of unfit houses have had to be allocated to the tenants of houses vacated under derequisitioning. However, as can be seen by Table II some progress has been made in that two Demolition Orders and five Closing Orders have been made. The two Clearance Areas declared by the Council consisted of Nos. 1-6, Warwick Cottages, and Nos. 12, 13, 14 Warwick Cottages, New Barnet. The whole of the Warwick Cottages, that is numbers 1-14, were included in the Compulsory Purchase Order which has now been confirmed by the Ministry. In January of the year two Enquiries were held into two Clearance Areas declared by the Council; one Area being in Leicester Road, New Barnet and the other in Bulwer Road, New Barnet. The Area in Leicester Road was not confirmed and consequently has been deleted as a Clearance Area. The Area in Bulwer Road was confirmed, with the exception of one house. This house was, however, included in the Compulsory Purchase Order. The two Clearance Areas, Albert Road and Margaret Road, New Barnet which were confirmed in 1956 and 1957 respectively are still not entirely vacated although the housing conditions are deteriorating badly. At the beginning of 1958 there were five houses on which Demolition Orders had been served, the Orders being operative but the houses not demolished and three Closing Orders. Page Twenty-one The premises on which Demolition Orders were operative were as follows: 54 Edward Road, New Barnet 14 Warwick Cottages, New Barnet 13 Victoria Road, New Barnet 15 Victoria Road, New Barnet 36 Clifford Road, New Barnet. The premises on which Closing Orders were operative: 107 Leicester Road, New Barnet 9 Warwick Cottages, New Barnet 149 Brunswick Park Road, New Southgate, N.ll. With regard to the properties on which Demolition Orders were operative the following have been demolished - 13 and 15 Victoria Road and 36 Clifford Road. 14 Warwick Cottages has been included in the confirmed Clearance Area of Warwick Cottages, which leaves one premises outstanding being 54 Edward Road. With regard to Closing Orders No. 9 Warwick Cottages is now part of the Clearance Area of that name and at No. 149 Brunswick Park Road the necessary repairs were carried out and consequently the Closing Order has been determined. As a result of report and representations made to the Housing Committee at the end of 1957 and during 1958 action as detailed has been taken with regard to the properties listed. Warwick Cottages Clearance Areas Nos. 1 and 2 - The Medical Officer of Health made representations to the Committee with regard to two Clearance Areas referring to the above properties in February. These cottages consist of the terrace of fourteen premises and were divided into two Areas being Nos. 1-6 inclusive and Nos. 12, 13 and 14. Nos. 7, 8 and 10, 11 were in such a condition as not to warrant being included in a Clearance Area and No. 9 was already subject to a Closing Order. The whole row being Nos. 1-14 were included in a Compulsory Purchase Order made by the Council and confirmed by the Ministry during the year. 46a East Barnet Road - A report on this property was submitted to the December 1957 meeting of the Housing Committee. These premises comprise of a shop with living accommodation over and the report stated that the living accommodation was unfit for habitation. After deliberation the Committee accepted an undertaking from the owner that the premises would not be used for human habitation. 58a East Barnet Road - These premises are to all intents a repetition of 46a East Barnet Road and after due consideration by the Committee they accepted an undertaking that the living accommodation would not be used for human habitation. 158 Oakleigh Road South - In December 1957 the Committee accepted an undertaking that the owner would carry out the necessary works to Page Twenty-two render the premises fit and during 1958 the works as detailed on the specification were carried out in a satisfactory manner and consequently the undertaking was cancelled. 9 Richmond Road - A report on this property was made to the November 1957 Housing Committee and in January 1958 a Demolition Order was served. The property has now been demolished. 53 Lyonsdown Road - In October 1957 the Committee accepted an undertaking from the owners to carry out the necessary works to render the above property fit and during 1958 the works were carried out and the undertaking cancelled. 55 Lyonsdown Road - In 1957 a specification was placed before the Committee indicating what works the owner was prepared to carry out and the Committee decided that they could not accept such specification unless additional works were carried out. At the end of 1957 the matter was still under consideration. As no agreement could be reached on this matter a Closing Order was made in January 1959. Basement Flat 49 Lyonsdown Road - In December 1957 a report was made by reason of repair and condition as to damp unfit for habitation and in March 1958 the Committee intimated that they would accept an undertaking from the owner that within a period of six months he would carry out the necessary works to render the premises fit. In November, the undertaking not having been complied with a Closing Order was made on the Basement Flat. The tenants subsequently being rehoused. 21 Victoria Road - A report was made to the Committee in March 1958 stating that part of these premises which were used for habitation were unfit by reason of repair, stability, condition as to damp and facilities for the storage of food. The Committee after consideration decided to make a Closing Order on the portion of the building used for habitation. Subsequently the occupiers were rehoused and the premises closed. 70 East Barnet Road - A report was made to the Housing Committee in February 1958 stating that the above property was unfit for human habitation by reason of repair, stability and conditions as to damp. The property consists of a shop with living accommodation above. The Committee at their June meeting after due consideration decided to make a Closing Order on the living accommodation. 16 Welbeek Road - A report on the above property was made in July. The report stated that the premises by reason of repair, conditions as to damp, natural lighting and facilities for the storage of food, were unfit for habitation. The property is a self-contained ground floor flat in a terraced house. After giving the matter full consideration the Committee at their September meeting decided to make a Closing Order. 37 Hadley Highstone - The condition of the above property was the subject of a report to the Committee in September. The report stated that Page Twenty-three by reason repair, stability and condition as to damp the house was unfit for habitation. The property is a detached house situated at the rear of Hadley Highstone. After due consideration the Committee decided at their December meeting to make a Demolition Order. 41 Lancaster Road - The condition of this property was the subject of a report to the Housing Committee in October. The premises were stated to be unfit for habitation by reason of repair, stability, condition as to damp and facilities for the storage of food. The premises consist of a three storey detached shop with living accommodation. The matter is still under consideration by the Committee. RENT ACT, 1957 In the year 1958 twenty-two applications for Certificates of Disrepair were received and in 13 cases undertakings were received from the landlords to carry out the works and in the other cases the necessary Certificates of Disrepair were issued. Under Paragraph 8(2) of the First Schedule of the Act, six Certificates were issued. This paragraph deals with the issue of Certificates to landlords or occupiers stating whether or not work detailed on an undertaking has been carried out in a satisfactory manner; it is not obligatory on a landlord to apply for such certificate on completion of works and in fact many do not do so. In three cases applications from the landlords for the cancellation of Certificates of Disrepair were made and as no objections were received from the tenants the Certificates were cancelled. The amount of use which is made by tenants of the parts of the Rent Act dealing with Certificates of Disrepair remains surprisingly low. The number of tenants who could successfully make application for Certificates is quite high. The reason for the low figure cannot be lack of knowledge of the existence of these Certificates in view of the publicity that the Act has been given. C LEAN AIR In March of this year the Clerk of the Council and myself submitted a report to the General Purposes Committee on the procedure for making Smoke Control Orders under the Clean Air Act, 1956. The Committee discussed the matter and Clean Air generally at length and as various neighbouring Councils were considering making Smoke Control Areas, one of which at least adjoins the East Barnet Urban District, it was decided to postpone any further consideration until later in the year when accurate information regarding other Authorities' intentions were known. At the October meeting of the General Purposes Committee the matter of Smoke Control Areas was again discussed, further information was available regarding the intentions of the Southgate Borough Council, who were considering an Area the western boundary of which is along the East Barnet Urban District boundary at Cockfosters from the Cock Hotel Page Twenty-four to Cat Hill. In view of this the Committee decided to make a preliminary survey of an area bounded by a line from the Cock Hotel to Cat Hill Park Road - Edgworth Road, in order to ascertain the approximate number of houses in this area which would require adaptation so that an estimate of the cost of any proposed scheme for the establishment of a Smoke Control Area might be ascertained. In consequence of this decision a pilot survey of the area was proceeding at the end of the year and a report to the Committee on this area is to be made in 1959. During the year the usual routine smoke observations of various industrial chimneys were made and a report regarding smoke and fumes emitted from the exhaust pipe of a diesel engine was made to the General Purposes Committee in July. The Committee decided to serve a notice on the occupier to abate the nuisance and to carry out such work as may be necessary to prevent the recurrence. However, the diesel engine in question was not used for several months and it is now noted that the premises are for sale. FOOD HYGIENE During this year 2,350 visits have been made to the various food premises in the East Barnet Urban District. These visits show an increase over the visits made in 1957 by 240. The number of visits made year by year varies slightly for no particular reason. It will be seen that the increase in the number of visits has been mainly to restaurants and snack bars and butchers shops. These two types of premises do in fact require more frequent inspections than any of the other trades. Not necessarily because the traders themselves are more careless but that the trades themselves in have more factors requiring closer attention. In spite of the fact that the Food Hygiene Regulations, 1955, have now been in force for three years it is still necessary to remind assistants in food shops and canteen workers of the importance of observing hygienic practices at all times when handling open food. Only too often the food trader himself does not realise that careless handling occurs in his shop. Those who come in to buy are often in a better position to notice the habits of those serving. Too often does one see fingers licked before picking up a square of greaseproof paper or the blowing on a paper bag to open it. These matters could be and I believe to some extent are dealt with by the fastidious shopper. On the other hand the assistant or shopkeeper is not always at fault. Some customers show complete disregard of the most elementary rules of hygiene. A cigarette with long ash held in the hand which is indicating a particular joint in a butcher's window is not an uncommon sight, whilst the desire of some customers to handle several joints or several pieces of fish before making a purchase is the careful shopkeeper's nightmare. Page Twenty-five The majority of shops in the district selling cooked meats now have glass counter screens protecting this particular foodstuff from indiscriminate coughs or sneezes of the customer. The majority of shopkeepers in the district now appear to have lost the prejudice they appeared to have had of placing their wares behind glass. MILK SUPPLY I he lollowing licences were granted to dealers to sell under the Milk (Special Designations) Regulations 1956-1959. Tuberculin Tested 7 Pasteurised 11 Sterilised 14 The following supplementary licences under Principal licences granted by other authorities to sell milk from premises outside this area were also granted. Tuberculin Tested 10 Pasteurised 10 Sterilised 10 96 Samples of milk were purchases and submitted for bacteriological examination to the Ministry of Health Public Health Laboratory at Coppetts Wood. There was only one unsatisfactory sample of milk. This sample was obtained from a producer-retailer and investigation showed that the sample obtained was of the previous evening's milking which had not been placed in the refrigerator. The particularly warm night on this occasion no doubt was the reason why the sample failed the methylene blue test. ICE CREAM Four applications were received from the registration of premises for the sale of ice cream. The premises and equipment being satisfactory the applications were granted. 100 Samples of ice cream were obtained and submitted for bacteriological examination with the following results: Provisional grade 1 87 ,, ,,2 5 ,, ,, 3 2 ,, ,,4 6 The eight unsatisfactory samples (Grades 3 and 4) were all loose ice cream. It has been proved time and time again that the cause of these unsatisfactory samples is the use of servers which have not been properly sterilised, yet it is very difficult to impress on the vendors of loose ice cream the importance of this aspect of their business. There are no premises manufacturing ice cream for sale in the district. All ice cream sold is obtained from large wholesale firms. Page Twenty-six MEAT AND OTHER FOOD INSPECTIONS The requirements of the Public Health (Meat) Regulations, 1924, have been carried out as regards all premises on which meat is sold for human consumption. The inspection of food (other than meat) is carried out as necessary. As may be seen from the Table of foods surrendered as unfit during the year a total amount of approximately 8 cwts. of food was condemned. This was disposed of by burying, all meat and meat products being stained first. FOOD AND DRUGS The following Table shows the various types of food and drugs sampled during the year: No. of Samples Analysed No. of Samples Analysed Almond Flavouring 1 Lemon Juice 2 Apples 2 Marzipan 1 Aspirin Tablets 1 Milk 56 Blancmange Mix 1 Milk, Channel Island and South Devon 29 Bon-Bons, Whipped Cream 1 Bread 1 Milk Shake 1 Butter Oranges, Spanish 1 Buttered Cheese Spread 1 Pastes, Chicken and Ham 1 Camphorated Oil 1 Ham and Beef 2 Cheese Spread 1 Lobster 2 Cheese Spread with Pineapple 1 Pineapple Dessert 1 Chocolate Liqueurs 1 Rice 1 Chicken in Jelly 1 Sardines 2 Concentrated Chicken Broth 1 Sausages, Pork 2 Cornflour 1 Soups, Cream of Mushroom 1 Custard Powder 1 Cream of Tomato 2 Double Cream 1 Sponge Sandwich with fresh cream 1 Double Cream Cheese 1 Dried Milk 1 Sugar, Demerara 1 Dried Yeast 1 Table Jellies 2 Epsom Salts 1 Tea 2 Evaporated Milk 1 Tomato Puree 2 Glucose Tablets 1 Vinegar 1 Ground Mace 1 White Pepper 1 Ground Nutmeg 3 Whole Pickling Spice 1 Glycerine 1 Herring Tid-bits 1 Total 153 Ice Cream 6 Lard 1 Of the above mentioned samples only three, viz., Double Cream Cheese, Lobster Paste and the Bread were reported by the Public Analyst as being unsatisfactory and I would like to comment briefly on these three samples. DOUBLE CREAM CHEESE This was a sample of cheese sold at 5s. per pound and which at the time the sample was purchased was clearly labelled "Double Cream Cheese." The Analyst reported that the fat content was only 35.3 per Page Twenty-seven Cent, which was insufficient to justify the description of "Double Cream Cheese." Unfortunately when the sample jar arrived at the laboratory it was found to be cracked, and it was thought that this might be prejudicial to the Council's case were proceedings taken. On returning to the shop to obtain a further sample it was found that the wholesaler supplying the cheese had informed the shopkeeper that he was misdescribing the article and had suggested that in future the rather dubious description "Superb Creamery Cheese (not to be confused with Double Cream Cheese)" be used. The Council in the circumstances authorised the sending of a warning letter. LOBSTER PASTE This sample, an informal one, manufactured by a well-known firm was found to contain Rhodamine B an artificial colouring matter which is not one of the permitted colours named in the Colouring Matter in Food Regulations, 1957. The Regulations, so far as manufacturers of foodstuffs such as meat or fish pastes are concerned, came into operation on the 31st December, 1957, but retail shopkeepers are allowed until 30th June, 1959, to dispose of stocks on their shelves which may contain prohibited colouring matter. In this instance the attention of the manufacturers was drawn to the Public Analyst's report and they immediately arranged with the retailer for the return to them of the remaining stock of this paste. BREAD Several slices of a loaf of bread were submitted for examination following a complaint alleging that the loaf contained rodent excreta. Analysis showed that the black pellet in the loaf was in fact a compact mass of dirty dough. There was no evidence to indicate how the pellet came to be in the loaf and the Council authorised the sending of a warning letter to the baker concerned. In addition to the above unsatisfactory samples, complaints were also received during the year concerning a number of foodstuffs which were not in a sound state when purchased or which contained foreign bodies. Examples of these types of complaints are listed below: MINCED TURKEY A jar of Minced Turkey manufactured by a reputable firm was alleged to contain a fly. Examination of the "fly" showed that it was, in fact, a small portion of a turkey's feather. NAIL IN A FANCY CAKE A fancy cake in a pre-packed carton of five was found to have a 1 ½ inch wire nail embedded in it. The nail was of the type commonly used in Page Twenty-eight currant boxes and the point had caused discolouration of the chocolate fondant covering. The bakery of the firm concerned was not situated in the district and the firm could not offer any explanation as to how the nail may have come to be in the cake. A warning letter was sent to the firm. MOULDY FRUIT PIES The individually packed fruit pie is becoming increasingly popular and complaints were received of two which were sold in a slightly mouldy condition. The reason in each case for the condition was that the pie had been kept longer in the shop than it should have been, due to the fact that the assistants had not kept a careful check on the code marks on the packets and had permitted new stock to be displayed and sold before the pies in question which had been in the shop for a day or so. A warning letter was sent to the manufacturers and to the retailers and the importance of the efficient handling of goods of a perishable nature stressed in an interview with the Manageress of the shop concerned. No further complaints have been received. GREASE IN BREAD Moulding machines in small bakeries if not kept in a perfectly clean condition may give rise to complaints of grease stains in bread. Two complaints were received during the year and the bakers concerned were interviewed and the importance of keeping their machines in first class condition mechanically stressed. DIRTY MILK AND CREAM BOTTLES Two complaints were received during the year concerning the condition of milk and cream bottles. Considering the vast numbers of bottles handled each year by the large dairy companies and the improper use to which some householders even in these enlightened days put milk bottles, it is really surprising there were so few complaints. The milk bottle which was the subject of complaint had obviously been used as a "vase" for flowers. The objcctional habit some householders have of screwing up the metal cap and leaving it in the bottle gave rise to a remarkable coincidence when a customer of a well-known dairy twice within a period of five weeks had delivered to her home a pint bottle of T.T. Pasteurised Milk which contained a crumpled metal milk bottle cap. The caps had obviously been through the sterilizing plant with the bottle and no further action was taken beyond drawing the Company's attention to the incidents. OTHER INSPECTIONS PET SHOPS Four persons are licensed to keep pet shops in the district. Visits arc made periodically to the premises and in each case the business has been Page Twenty-nine found to be carried on satisfactorily. There has been need once again to stress the importance of a supply of water and sand being readily available in case of fire. INFESTATIONS RODENT CONTROL During the year 301 complaints of rats and mice have been received. All complaints have been visited and in addition premises neighbouring the houses from which the original complaints were received have been visited where necessary. In consequence 398 properties have been inspected for rat and mice infestations during the year. Of these properties 295 were found to be infested and were treated for infestations. The number of complaints received show a decrease on the previous year. The infestations have all been of a minor character and treatments have in general been successful. Where difficulty has been experienced re-treatment with variations of poisons and bait has produced satisfactory results. In accordance with the requirements of the Rodent Control Branch of the Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food two treatments of the sewers were made. The first was made in June following the test baiting of 10 per cent. of the sewer manholes in the district. A maintenance treatment was carried out in November when 29 manholes were baited. Only four "takes" were recorded and for this treatment Warfarin with para nitrophenol as a mould inhibitor was used. Inspections were made on the fourth, eighth and eleventh days after baiting, the amount of bait being doubled each time a "take" was recorded. No "takes" were recorded at the last inspection. INSECT CONTROL The numbers of complaints received regarding infestation by insects was approximately the same as the previous year. The majority of the insects complained of were carpet beetles, moths and similar types. All complaints were visited and advice given, and where necessary insecticide supplied free of cost. Wasps nests are destroyed by the Council on payment of a small charge to cover cost of materials and time and during the summer 53 nests were dealt with. Page Thirty