w 5-6 FELTHAM URBAN DISTRICT COUNCIL. REPORT OF MEDICAL OFFICER OF HEALTH for 1925. F. H. WOODS, M.R.C.S., L.R.C.P., Medical Officer of Health. Feltham, Middx. May, 1926. FELTHAM URBAN DISTRICT COUNCIL. REPORT OF MEDICAL OFFICER OF HEALTH for 1925. F. H. WOODS, M.R.C.S., L.R.C.P., Medical Officer of Health Feltham, Middx. May, 1926. 3 Council Offices, Feltham, Middx. March, 1926. Mr. Chairman and Gentlemen, I beg to present to you the yearly report on the health and sanitary conditions of your district. The district, which contains an acreage of 1,790, has a population of 7,081. The majority of the population are engaged in agriculture. A large number are employed by the Southern Railway and several hundred people proceed daily to London and elsewhere on business. The day population is also increased by the civilians attached to the Royal Army Service Corps Depot. 1. Vital Statistics. The births during the year numbered 147, of which 77 were male and 70 female. Of these, four male and three female were illegitimate. This table shows a decrease of births as compared with a st year of two. 4 The deaths during the same period numbered 76. a decrease of one (35 male, a decrease of five, and 41 female, an increase of four). Ten infants (five male and five female) died under one year of age. The birth and death rate work out as follows: Birth rate 20.37 per 1,000 of the population. Death rate 10.94 per 1,000 of the population. The causes of death were as follows : Cause Male Female Total Whooping Cough 2 1 3 Diphtheria 2 0 2 Influenza 2 2 4 Encephalitis Lethargica 1 1 2 Tuberculosis (respiratory system) 4 4 8 Other Tuberculous Disease 0 1 1 Cerebral Haemorrhage 3 1 4 Cancer 6 6 12 Heart Disease 4 13 17 Arterio-Sclerosis 1 1 2 Bronchitis 1 1 2 Pneumonia 0 3 1 Other Respiratory diseases 1 0 1 Acute and Chronic Nephritis 0 1 1 Congenital debility and premature birth 3 2 5 Other deaths from violence 2 1 3 Other defined diseases 3 5 8 35 41 76 2. Infectious Diseases. There has been no epidemic. Measles of a mild type has been prevalent among the school children in December. 5 The cases of infectious disease notified were:— Scarlet Fever 28 Diphtheria 14 Puerperal Fever 2 Erysipelas 3 3. Water Supply. Water is supplied to the district by the South-West Suburban Water Company, of Egham. It is satisfactory in quality. A certain number of houses are supplied by wells. Every endeavour has been made to connect them with the main supply. 4. Sanitary Circumstances. The drainage of the district is by cesspool, excepting the Southern Railway houses (comprising 128 dwellings) which have their own sewage disposal works. These works were laid by Messrs. Tuke & Bell, and comprise a detritus chamber, settling tanks and percolating filters, with automatic distributors and humus tank. The works are maintained by and at the expense of the Southern Railway—they are satisfactory. The cesspools are emptied by a vacuum motor van, which is satisfactory and cleanly in action. In the winter months it is difficult to deal with the emptying of the cesspools as promptly as is desirable. Short of obtaining a second van this cannot be avoided. 6 In view of the above fact it cannot be too strongly urged that a system of main drainage be installed as soon as possible. Some cottages are still fitted with the pail system; these are emptied by the Council's workmen in a satisfactory manner. 5. Disinfection. Dwellings in which infectious disease occurs are in every case disinfected by Formaldehyde. 6. Tuberculosis. I have to report four new cases—a decrease of three over last year. All cases of suspected tuberculosis are seen and visited from time to time by the Tuberculosis Officer for the County of Middlesex. 7. Food Supply. There are two dairies in your area; they are clean and well kept. The district is also supplied by purveyors from Hanworth and Bedfont. The quality of the milk is good. The meat (other than imported) comes from two registered slaughter-houses; there are none licensed. These slaughter-houses do not comply with modern requirements. The meat has been satisfactory in character—there have been no seizures. 7 8. Housing Accommodation. Thirty-five new houses have been erected in the last year. Many houses ought to be condemned as unfit for human habitation, but until others are available for use, no good purpose can be served by endeavouring to obtain Closing Orders. There is still a great shortage of accommodation. The population increased during the year by over 400, and will undoubtedly continue to increase at an even greater rate. At present this increase finds accommodation in houses already overcrowded. The Council houses which are being built will do little to mitigate these evils. There is an urgent necessity for more houses in the very near future. The appendix gives you details of the work done in the matter of housing conditions. You will note that in the opinion of Mr. Carter and myself there are 130 houses in your district practically unfit for human habitation. 9. Maternity and Child Welfare. There are four midwives practising in your district, one of whom has a licensed maternity home. Their work is satisfactory and is inspected by visitors acting for the County M.O.H. The School Medical Officer holds weekly sessions at the 8 Council School on Tuesday afternoons, where children are examined, their eyes and teeth attended to. 10. Sanitary Administration. The work of Sanitary Inspector is carried out by your Surveyor, Mr. Carter, M.Inst. M. & C.E., M.R.San.Inst. The Staines Joint Isolation Hospital takes cases of scarlet fever, diphtheria, typhoid and certain other infectious diseases. The Clinical Research Society examine any swabs or other infectious material. Drinking water is analysed by Mr. S. Aston, 3 New Court, Lincolns Inn, and by Professor R. T. Hewlett, Seamans' Hospital. Greenwich, S.E. 10. 11. Factories and Workshops. There are eight factories in your district, and six workshops, namely:— Bakehouses 2 Smith's Shop 1 Tailors' Shops 3 6 In conclusion, Gentlemen, I beg to thank you for the manner in which you have supported me in carrying out my duties, and also to thank Mr. Sandy and Mr. Carter for their great assistance. 9 APPENDICES. APPF.NDIX A. Housing Conditions Statistics for the year ending 31.12.25. 1. General. a Estimated population 7.081 b General death rate 10.71 per 1,000 c Death rate from tuberculosis 1.26 per 1,000 d Infantile mortalitv 1 38 per 1,000 e All classes of dwelling houses 1.440 f No. of working class houses 1,214 g No of new working class houses erected 15 V 2. Unfit Dwelling Houses. 1. Inspection. a. Total number inspected for housing defects (Public Health or Housing Acts)162 b. Number inspected and recorded under (Housing and Inspection of District) Regulations, 1910 35 c. Number found to be in a state so dangerous or injurious to health as to be unfit for human habitation 1 d. Number (exclusive of c) found not to be in all respects reasonably fit for human habitation 130 2 Remedy of Defects without Service of Formal Notice. Number of dwelling houses rendered fit in consequence of informal action by Local Authorities Officers 26 3. Action under Statutory Powers. A.—Proceedings under Sec. 28 of the Housing Act, 1919. a. No. of houses in respect of which notices were served requiring repairs nil. b. No. of houses rendered fit : 1. By owners nil. 2. By Local Authority nil. 3. By Closing Orders becoming operative owing to owners declaration of intention of closing nil. B.—(a) Number of houses in respect of which Notices were served requiring remedy of defects 32 b. Number in which defects were remedied by owners 30 c. By Local Authority nil. 10 C.—Proceedings under Section 17 and 18 of the Housing, &c., Act, 1909. a. Number of representations made with a view to the making of closing orders 1 b. Number of houses in respect of which closing orders were made nil. c. Number in which the order was determined, the houses having been rendered fit nil. d. No. of demolition orders nil. e. No. demolished in pursuance of order nil. One house was closed voluntarily by owner. 3. Unhealthy Areas. a. Areas represented to Local Authority with a view to improvement, parts 1 and 2 of Act, 1920 nil. b. No. of houses not complying with building byelaws, erected with consent of Local Authority under Section 25 of Housing, etc. Act, 1919 nil. 11 Annual Report of the Medical Officer of Health for the year 1925 for the Urban District of Feltham on the Administration of the Factory and Workshop Act, 1901, in connection with Factories, Workshops, Workplaces, and Homework. 1. Inspections of Factories, Workshops and Workplaces (including inspections made by Sanitary Inspectors and Inspectors of Nuisances) Premises Inspections Written Notices Prosecutions Factories (including factory laundries) 16 — — Workshops (including workshop laundries) 11 — — Workplaces (other than outworkers premises) nil. — — 27 - - 2. Defects found in Factories. Workshops and Workplaces, 3 3. Registered Workshops. Workshops on Register at end of year : Bakehouses 2 Smith's Shop 1 Tailors' premises 3 6 4 Other matters, Nil. I am, Mr. Chairman and Gentlemen. Your obedient Servant, F. H. WOODS, M.O.H.