Borough of Finchley ANNUAL REPORT of the MEDICAL OFFICER OF HEALTH 1964 J. D. RUSSELL, M.S., B.S.(Syd.), D.P.H., Medical Officer of Health Borough of Finchley ANNUAL REPORT of the MEDICAL OFFICER OF HEALTH 1964 J. D. RUSSELL, MB., B.S.(Syd.), Medical Officer of Health MEMBERS OF THE PUBLIC HEALTH COMMITTEE as at 31st December, 1964 Chairman: Councillor Mrs. J. A. CLYNE Vice-Chairman : Councillor D. J. TERWEY THE MAYOR (Councillor MURRAY MED WAY, J.P.) THE DEPUTY MAYOR (Councillor C. A. ROBERTS) Alderman E. GRANT, O.B.E. C. J. HARTIGAN, C.C. A. T. PIKE, O.B.E., J.P. Councillor N. A. J. BURGESS A. D. COHEN, M.A. F. D. GIBSON A. N. R. GUNN, M.A. W. G. HART J. S. HILL „ P. W. MEYER N. J. SAPSTED J. WEBB, M.C.S.P., M.Inst.S.M. MEMBERS OF THE COUNCIL APPOINTED TO VARIOUS BODIES CONCERNED WITH PUBLIC HEALTH WORK as at 31st December, 1964 Middlesex County Council Local Area (Health) Committee Alderman J. GORDON BRYSON, J.P. L. G. SNELLING Councillor Mrs. J. A. CLYNE J. S. HILL The Council of the National Society for Clean Air Councillor Mrs. J. A. CLYNE London and Home Counties Clean Air Advisory Council Councillor Mrs. J. A. CLYNE London Council of the Royal Society for the Prevention of Accidents Councillor H. I. ROSE 2 Middlesex Old People's Welfare Committee Councillor H. A. ALL WOOD Mrs. M. LOWE (Deputy) Finchley Old People's Welfare Committee THE MAYOR (Councillor MURRAY MED WAY, J.P.) Alderman L. G. SNELLING Councillor H. A. ALLWOOD P. W. MEYER „ C. A. ROBERTS Finchley Guild of Social Service THE MAYOR (Councillor MURRAY MEDWAY, J.P.) Alderman L. G. SNELLING Councillor H. A. ALLWOOD Mrs. J. A. CLYNE Mrs. M. LOWE STAFF OF THE PUBLIC HEALTH DEPARTMENT Medical Officer of Health : J. D. RUSSELL, M.B., B.S.(Syd.), D.P.H. b Medical Officer of Health : J. L. PATTON, M.B., Ch.B., D.P.H. (Medical Officer of Health, Hendon) (This is a reciprocal arrangement with the Borough of Hendon) Chief Public Health Inspector : J. GRAY, M.B.E., F.R.S.H., F.A.P.H.I. (Retired 20/6/64) K. J. MILLEN, M.R.S.H., F.A.P.H.I. (From 21/6/64) Deputy Chief Public Health Inspector: J. P. DAVIES (1)(2) (From 21/6/64) Public Health Inspectors : W. H. NICHOLLS(l)(2) B. E. W. GABB(1)(2)(3) J. A. CUMMINS(1)(2). W. J. G. BATES (1) (2) 3 Pupil Public Health Inspector : M. P. SINDIC (From 9/11/64) Technical Assistant: E. M. JENKINS (Resigned 23/2/64) E. D. GOLDUP (From 20/4/64) Chief Administrative Assistant: N. A. JUPP Clerks : Miss K. M. NICHOL (Senior Clerk) A. G. FORSYTH Mrs. B. COSTELLO Miss E. J. STANLEY Miss C. BOULTON P. R. BURY Chief Disinfector, Rodent Operative and Mortuary Attendant: C. L. ASTLEY Assistant Disinfector, Rodent Operative and Mortuary Attendant: D. H. W. SMITH Drain Tester and Handyman: H. J. MAY Caretaker (308, Regents Park Road, N.3) : Mrs. I. G. MAY (1) Public Health Inspector's Certificate. (2) Meat and Other Foods Certificate. (3) Smoke Inspector's Certificate. 4 Telephone No. : FINchley 0018 Public Health Department, 308, Regents Park Road, Finchley, N.3. TO THE MAYOR, ALDERMEN AND COUNCILLORS OF THE BOROUGH OF FINCHLEY. Mr. Mayor, Ladies and Gentlemen, I have the honour to present my Report on the health and sanitary circumstances of the Borough of Finchley for the year 1964. Under the provisions of the London Government Act, 1963, the Borough of Finchley will cease to exist on the 31st March, 1965, when it is merged into the Greater London Borough of Barnet, and consequently this will be the last Annual Report of the Medical Officer of Health for the Borough of Finchley. Presenting the Report at this early stage and within the life of the Borough has necessitated the use of some provisional figures. Again due to the limited time factor and the considerable pressure of work arising from amalgamation, comment must be brief. It is indeed a pity that the Report for a year which has seen progress and accomplishment in virtually every field of the work should have to be condensed. Health education was intensified, a fillip was given to standards of food hygiene, the miniature mass radiography unit visited the Borough, facilities and hygiene in public conveniences were improved, the Borough undertook the collection of refuse by direct labour with resounding success, the number of Council housing applicants supported on medical grounds rehoused was 51, compared with 18 last year, and the clean air programme progressed to the extent that 70% of the total acreage of the Borough will be a smoke control area by the Autumn of 1965. Mr. J. Gray, Chief Public Health Inspector, retired in June after serving the Borough loyally and with distinction for 36 years. To the staff I extend sincere gratitude for the high standard of work and the manner in which it was performed, and in particular mention the loyal and substantial support I received from Mr. Millen, Chief Public Health Inspector and Mr. Jupp, Chief Administrative Assistant. In conclusion, I thank the Chairman and Members of the Public Health Committee for the consideration and support they so readily accorded me. I am, Your obedient servant, J. D. RUSSELL, Medical Officer of Health. 5 CONTENTS Page Statistics 7 Prevalence and Control of Infectious and Other Diseases 8 Health Education 12 Welfare of the Elderly 13 State of Employment 14 Water Supply 15 Swimming Pools 16 Laundry Service for the Incontinent 16 Sewerage and Sewage Disposal 16 Sanitary Conveniences .— 17 Places of Public Entertainment 17 Refuse Collection and Disposal 18 Clean Air 18 Food 21 Inspections and Complaints 23 Housing 24 Page Shops and Offices 27 Factories and Workplaces 28 Outworkers 28 Disinfection and Disinfesta. tion 29 Rodent Control 29 Noise 30 Caravans 30 Heating Appliances 31 Rag Flock and Other Filling Materials 31 Animals 31 Burial or Cremation 32 Exhumations 33 Mortuary 33 Conferences and Courses 33 Medical Examinations 33 Outstanding Notices 34 Acknowledgments 34 General Information 35 Statistical Tables, etc 5'0 Index 78 6 STATISTICS The Registrar-General's mid-year estimate shows an increase in population of 1,060 to 70,390 the highest since 1950 when the population figure was 70,720. It has not been possible to provide a truly accurate figure on vital statistics as the details from the Registrar-General will not be available until the end of April, 1965. I have, however, prepared provisional figures for the full year which show a small increase in live births to 1,129 giving a live birth rate per 1,000 population of 16.0 consistent with 16.0 and 16.2 for 1962 and 1963 respectively. The figure of 9 infant deaths gives a lower rate per 1,000 live births than that for 1963 when the number of infant deaths recorded was 18. The provisional figure of 809 death from all causes shows an appreciable fall compared with 854 in 1963. The number of deaths caused by cancer of the lung continues to rise, i.e., 55 (45 in 1963) and the figures show an increase in deaths caused by cancer of the stomach, 27 (13 in 1963), cancer of the breast, 22 (20 in 1963), and an increase in coronary heart disease, 195 (192 in 1963); it is pleasing to note the possible decreases in other heart diseases, 78 (114 in 1963) and suicide, 11 (17 in 1963). The number of deaths due to motor vehicle accidents was ten compared to five in 1963. This figure refers to Finchley residents only regardless of place of death and therefore does not agree with the figure of 13 provided by the Road Safety Organiser. The Road Safety Organiser's figures which are for the full year show an increase of one accident and 20 persons injured over the figure for 1963. It is noted with regret the increase in persons fatally injured, i.e., 13 compared with seven in the previous year. This is the highest since 1951 when 16 people were killed on Finchley roads and seems to be consistent with the national figures which are expected to be the highest on record. Statistical Tables—see pages 50-57. 7 PREVALENCE AND CONTROL OF INFECTIOUS AND OTHER DISEASES Diphtheria This is the eighteenth consecutive year there were no cases of diphtheria in Finchley. Dysentery Fifteen cases of dysentery were notified and a further 26 cases otherwise ascertained. The causative organisms found were :— 40 shigella sonnei. 1 shigella flexner. Of these, 7 were sporadic cases, the remainder being individual family outbreaks. Encephalitis Seventeen cases of benign myalgic encephalomyelitis or Royal Free Disease were notified by a general practitioner in October. The diagnosis was confirmed by Dr. A. Melvin Ramsay, consultant physician at the Royal Free Hospital, who dealt with the outbreak at the hospital in 1955. A virological study is being undertaken at the Public Health Laboratory at Colindale at the time of writing. All general practitioners were circularised in November to discover if other cases were being missed in the area, but to date no other cases have been reported. The true aetiology and nature of the disease is unknown. Food Poisoning Eleven persons were notified as suffering from food poisoning during the year and in addition 33 cases were otherwise ascertained. The causative organisms identified were as follows :— Salmonella brandenburg 2 Salmonella Chester 11 Salmonella enteriditis 1 Salmonella heidelberg 2 Salmonella typhimurium 12 cl. Welchii 1 Not identified 21 Staphylococci 2 There were three food poisoning outbreaks. The first affected a party of four, two members of which were resident in a neighbouring district. Prior to the onset of the symptoms the party ate a meal prepared for them in a restaurant in Finchley. Prawns forming part of the meal were found to contain coagulase positive staphylococci. The organism was, in fact, found to be present in sealed containers imported 8 from abroad. The clinical features of the cases were nausea and abdominal pain within half an hour followed by diarrhoea lasting 24 hours. The second outbreak occurred in a party of 40 children who travelled by coach to a Youth Hostel in the West Country to spend a week's holiday. At firsts investigations indicated that the source of infection was a boy who was ill at home on the day before he left on the trip. Pathological findings threw some doubt on this, three organisms, salmonella typhimurium, salmonella heidelberg and salmonella Chester were recovered. Salmonella heidelberg was recovered from specimens submitted from the suspected boy and salmonella typhimurium and salmonella Chester from specimens submitted from the other patients, both types in some cases from the same patient. A report received from the Central Public Health Laboratory, Colindale, indicated that during this period, seven outbreaks occurred over a widespread area and that in four of the outbreaks all three serotypes were isolated, while in three, two of the serotypes were isolated. It seems therefore that the illness was caused by infected food eaten soon after the party's arrival at the Hostel. The clinical features were nausea, temperature, headache, vomiting and diarrhoea for a period of 24 hours. The third outbreak affected 17 persons out of a total of 21 at risk all of whom had eaten lunch at a cafe in the Borough. There was no food or drink consumed in common and no foodstuffs left over. The proprietress of the cafe had suffered from diarrhoea the previous evening; her husband was unaffected but had a heavy cold. Faecal specimens from them and three patients were found to be negative. The clinical features were sickness and diarrhoea for a period of 24 hours. Measles The incidence of measles reaches epidemic proportions about every other year and from the figures given it will be seen that this was not an " epidemic " year. Paratyphoid One sporadic case of paratyphoid occurred during the year. Poliomyelitis For the fifth year running there have been no cases of poliomyelitis. Puerperal Pyrexia Twenty-eight cases were notified, one of which was a home confinement and a Finchley resident; the remainder occurred in the North Middlesex Hospital Annexe in The Bishops Avenue and were residents of other districts. The Puerperal Pyrexia Regulations, 1951, require medical practitioners to notify to the medical officer of health all cases of puerperal pyrexia which is defined as being "Any febrile condition occurring in a woman in whom a temperature of 100.4°F (38°C) or more has occurred within 14 days after childbirth or miscarriage." 9 The Minister of Health in Circular 28/51 advised that the investigations should be carried out by the medical officer of the county and not by the district medical officer of health. Typhoid Fever The epidemic in Aberdeen during the month of June, in which over 400 cases of typhoid fever occurred, was caused by an imported can of corned beef containing the typhoid bacillus. The repercussions of this epidemic were such as to increase, to a considerable extent, the work of the department. Many enquiries were received and much time was spent in tracing cans bearing the same code numbers as the suspected can; 84 cans were found and withdrawn from sale. Tuberculosis Twenty-four new cases were notified, giving a case rate of 0.34 per 1,000 population. In the last decade over the country as a whole, both the case and death rates have been more than halved. This has been due to a number of factors, improved living standards, mass radiography, B.C.G. vaccination, eradication of tuberculosis in cattle and last but far from least the new anti-tubercular drugs. Notification of tuberculosis is obligatory by virtue of the Public Health (Tuberculosis) Regulations, 1952, made under sections 143 and 283 of the Public Health Act, 1936. The County Council have a statutory responsibility under section 28 of the National Health Service Act, 1946, for preventing tuberculosis, including B.C.G. vaccination, and for the care and after-care of tuberculous persons. The hospital services provide for the hospitalisation and out-patient treatment of tuberculous patients. The Borough Council as the Local Sanitary and Housing Authority has a responsibility for the welfare of tuberculous patients in these respects. This tripartite responsibility demands the closest liaison to ensure that persons suffering from tuberculosis receive comprehensive care and attention. B.C.G. vaccination of children approaching 13 years and older continued at the secondary schools and of 1,040 children eligible, the parents of 572 (55%) consented to the preliminary testing, vaccination and, where necessary, chest X-ray. Mass Radiography A total of 5,484 persons (2,523 males and 2,961 females) attended for a chest X-ray during the survey carried out by the North West Metropolitan Regional Hospital Board during October/November. This figure shows an increase of just over 10% on the survey of 1961 but is disappointing having regard to the wide publicity given 10 to the visit by the Mass X-ray Unit; in addition to the usual advertisement in the local papers 24,000 leaflets were distributed by post and by hand and were available in public offices and libraries. The leaflet contained a schedule of times and places and the following message :— "Great strides have been made by medical science in the battle against tuberculosis, but the battle must continue if we are to be finally rid of this dread disease. I appeal to you to help in this task by having a chest X-ray at our Mass Radiography Unit, which is visiting Finchley Remember, 5 seconds now may save YEARS of ill-health. (Signed) J. D. RUSSELL, Medical Officer of Health." Arising from the X-rays 30 persons were referred for further investigations, the results of which are not yet available. Details of the permanent Mass X-ray Units are given in the information section, page 41. Vaccination and Immunisation Vaccination and immunisation against diphtheria, whooping cough, tetanus, smallpox and poliomyelitis is a function of the Local Health Authority, Middlesex County Council, under Section 26 of the National Health Service Act, 1946. International Certificates of Vaccination Only three forms of international certificates of vaccination have been prescribed —namely for smallpox, cholera and yellow fever—and persons who are being vaccinated against these diseases should in their own interests see that their certificates are on the international forms. There is no international certificate of vaccination against typhoid fever or paratyphoid fever, but apart from any requirement by a particular country, all persons going abroad are advised to be effectively vaccinated against these diseases. Vaccination against any disease other than yellow fever can be done by a person's own doctor or exceptionally (by arrangement) at a hospital. Yellow fever vaccination must, for international and technical reasons, be done only at a centre designated by the Government. A free yellow fever vaccination service has been established for this purpose (see information section, page 40). The international forms for smallpox and cholera must be obtained by the traveller himself, and after completion by the doctor, taken to the Local Authority for authentication. During the year, 1,187 certificates were authenticated. Statistical Tables—see pages 58-61. 11 HEALTH EDUCATION A quarterly Health Education Bulletin introduced in January was distributed to the Editors of local papers and voluntary organisations in the Borough. In January, July and October local support was given to the national campaigns on Sight Protection, Water Safety and Winter Hazards respectively, and in each bulletin posters, leaflets and book marks available for distribution were listed. In addition, a list of topics was given upon which officers of the Department would be available to talk. The subjects were as follows :— The Health Service in the New Borough. Sight Protection. Your Local Public Health Department. The Landlord and the Tenant. Falls in the Home. The Clean Air Act. The Offices, Shops and Railway Premises Act. Safety in the Home. Water Safety. Home Safety—Fire. Twenty-three talks were given and I am grateful to members of the Department for their co-operation, particularly when this involved time outside the normal working hours. The Council continued its Newsletter "Focus on Finchley" sent to the ratepayers by way of the rate demand. The April issue included the 4th series on "Living with Danger" which dealt with the commonsense precaution of installing a domestic fire extinguisher, and the 5th series in the October issue dealt with drowning accidents and artificial resuscitation by means of "The Kiss of Life." In addition, a further warning concerning smoking and lung cancer was included in the October issue and is reproduced below. "THE COUNCIL IS STILL CONCERNED — ABOUT YOUR HEALTH NO SMOKING CIGARETTES CAUSE CANCER The American study, reported by the Government of the United States in January this year, announces that: 12 "Cigarette smoking is a health hazard of sufficient importance in the United States to warrant appropriate remedial action." The 1962 report of the Royal College of Physicians called for : "Decisive steps" by the Government. It is our plain duty to discourage children and young people from this harmful habit. Not to start is easier than having to stop !" The Council pay an annual subscription to the Central Council for Health Education and the Royal Society for the Prevention of Accidents. WELFARE OF THE ELDERLY Removal to Suitable Premises of Persons in Need of Care and Attention Provision is made under Section 47 of the National Assistance Act, 1948 as amended by the National Assistance (Amendment) Act, 1951, for securing the necessary care and attention in suitable hospital or other place (e.g., residential accommodation provided under Part III of the Act) for persons who :— (a) are suffering from grave chronic disease or being aged, infirm or physically incapacitated, are living in insanitary conditions, and (b) are unable to devote to themselves and are not receiving from other persons proper care and attention. A number of cases, mainly elderly persons living in poor conditions, were brought to my notice but with the help of the social and visiting services and voluntary admission to hospital or home, each case resolved itself and I am pleased to report that it was not necessary to invoke the provisions of the section. Workroom/Day Centre The establishment of a workroom/day centre at a site in Ballards Lane under the provisions of the National Assistance Act, 1948 (Amendment) Act, 1962, was the subject of a paragraph in my Annual Report, 1963. Building operations anticipated towards the end of 1964 did not eventuate and are now expected to commence in the early part of 1965. Cinema Admissions Until 4 p.m. on each weekday (except Bank Holidays), elderly persons may visit the cinema at a reduced rate of admission—namely, 9d. for any seat in the house— on production of his or her pension book. 13 Free Baths Free baths at the Public Baths, Squires Lane, N.3, are available to old-age pensioners on production of their pension book on Mondays, Tuesdays and Wednesdays between the hours of 9 a.m. and 4 p.m. Laundry Service for the Incontinent—see page 16. Housing No report on the welfare of the elderly would be complete without reference to their housing problem which, in my opinion, is the one fundamental consideration and will be found under the appropriate heading—Housing. Voluntary Organisations The many voluntary organisations in the Borough provide a wide variety of services thereby making a major contribution to meet the problems of the elderly. Details of the facilities available are shown in the Information Section of this Report. STATE OF EMPLOYMENT Finchley is largely a residential district containing comparatively little industry or commerce and is mainly a "white collar" area, the majority of workers travelling to the City or West End. More manual workers are now settling in the district but again most of the skilled workers travel to the more industrialised areas of Hendon, Wembley, Willesden, etc. The percentage of unemployed workers to the employed population is not known, but it is believed to be well below the national percentage. Unemployment usually reaches its lowest point in June of each year, rises again after Christmas and then starts to decrease in March. Adverse wintry weather conditions, coupled with a general recession in industry, resulted in a higher rate of unemployment in 1962 and 1963, but by the end of 1964 the number of unemployed had fallen to the comparatively low level recorded three years earlier. Figures for Finchley are not available, but the following table shows the number of unemployed adult persons, i.e., aged 18 and over, for the Finchley and Friern Barnet areas :— 1962 1963 1964 June December June December June December Men 184 281 239 225 167 176 Women 47 52 47 52 22 28 Total 231 333 286 277 189 204 14 Young people who started upon their careers or who sought a change of job during the year had little difficulty in finding something suitable. The physical and economic climate has been reasonable and as a consequence there is no marked change in the employment position to report. Since the implementation of the Education Act, 1962, there have been two school leaving periods (i.e., at the end of the Easter and Midsummer terms) instead of three and with virtually no Christmas school leavers a number of the vacancies notified during the winter months remained unfilled until the Easter school leavers were available. These young people, together with those who left at Midsummer had a wide variety of occupations from which to choose but the popularity of some cannot be shaken. Engineering was still the first choice of most boys but this year it was followed closely by clerical and sales work. Where girls were concerned by far the largest number entered clerical work of some kind. Retail distribution was again the next in order of preference with hairdressing holding a very poor third place. At the December count 206 unfilled vacancies were recorded (118 for boys and 88 for girls). When the count of unemployed young persons was taken in the same month there were 7 boys and 4 girls on the register. WATER SUPPLY The water supply to all dwellings in the Borough is direct from the public water mains and no supplies are given by means of standpipes. The Lee Valley Wrater Company distribute the water, part of which is supplied via a bulk supply from the Metropolitan Water Board. Five hundred and fifty-nine bacteriological and 10 chemical samples of water from the distribution system were examined by the Company and were reported to conform to standards of purity considered suitable for public supply. The level of fluoride at the Northaw Pumping Station was recorded as 0.7 parts per million, less than 0.2 part per million was recorded at the other five pumping stations and at the 2 remaining points which are on the distribution system. A mixture of Northaw water with water having no significant fluoride content reduces the level in the blended water to insignificant traces. Fluoride in the Finchley supply is invariably recorded as "less than 0.2 mg./litres." The water was not liable to plumbo-solvent action and no cases of contamination occurred. The results of chemical analyses may be obtained from the Lee Valley Water Company's Annual Report. Statistical Tables—see page 62. 15 SWIMMING POOLS Finchley has two swimming pools, Squires Lane Baths and the Open Air Pools in the High Road, N.12. The latter comprises adult and children's pools and is said to be one of the finest examples in the London area. Both establishments are equipped with modern filtration and chlorination plants The water is drawn from the public water supply and is continuously filtered on a six-hour cycle, make-up water being added as necessary to cover losses by evaporation, filter washing and other causes. The chlorination is controlled in accordance with the latest practice in this important subject. Ninety samples of water were taken for bacteriological examination by the public health inspectors and the results were consistently satisfactory. This reflects greatly to the credit of the staff directly concerned with the operation of the purification plants, for the bathing load is frequently heavy. In the 1964 season, 366,273 people visited the pools. There are 12 slipper baths available to the public at the Squires Lane Baths. LAUNDRY SERVICE FOR THE INCONTINENT This service was introduced in 1957 in accordance with the provisions of Section 42 of the Middlesex County Council Act, 1956, and although in practice it is virtually a welfare service for the elderly, it is, of course, available to any incontinent person. The washing machine is installed at the Disinfecting Station and arrangements are made for articles to be collected and delivered on Tuesday and Friday of each week. The cost of the service is borne by the local authority. The number of persons receiving assistance at the beginning of the year 7 The number of persons for whom the service was recommended and subsequently authorised by the Medical Officer of Health or by the public health inspectors during the year 13 The number of persons receiving assistance at the end of the year 5 During 1964, 580 collections of articles were made. SEWERAGE AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL Most of Finchley is provided with a dual system of sewers; one system dealing with rainwater only which is discharged untreated into open water courses, namely, the Mutton Brook, Dollis Brook and Strawberry Vale Brook. The other system dealing with foul sewage is now linked with the East Middlesex Main Drainage Scheme which 16 utilises a modern treatment plant at Deephams Works, Tottenham. Land at the old Sewage Disposal Works in North Finchley, is being reclaimed for playing fields by filling and grading. In some older streets in the Borough, rain water and foul sewage is conveyed by a single sewer into the foul sewer system. In two small sectors of low lying land there are a few buildings which for economic reasons it is impracticable to connect into existing sewers. The control of rats in sewers is referred to in the paragraph on Rodent Control on page 29. SANITARY CONVENIENCES There are 17 public conveniences in the Borough under the control of the Borough Engineer and Surveyor. In addition, there are 32 conveniences attached to public houses. The latter are the subject of regular inspection by the public health inspectors. Arising out of the typhoid epidemic in Aberdeen, further publicity was given to the need for providing hand washing facilities in public conveniences and recommendations on the lines of the suggestions contained in my Annual Report, 1963, were adopted in the main by the Council and referred to the Council of the London Borough of Barnet for information. In addition, instructions were given that all coin operated locks in public lavatories be removed to allow free use thereof with the exception of the special " wash up " rooms at the Stanhope Road convenience and that soap dispensers and paper towels be provided where possible free of charge. At a later date a 24-hour service was provided at the Stanhope Road convenience and it is with regret that I have to report that this attempt by the Council to provide improved facilities was abused on two occasions by acts of vandalism, perpetrated by a minority "riff-raff" element in the population. PLACES OF PUBLIC ENTERTAINMENT The Middlesex County Council as the licensing authority, requested the inspection of the sanitary accommodation of 23 places of public entertainment in the Borough. One defect was found and remedied after notice to the responsible person, and a report was submitted to the County Council. Public houses and places of entertainment in which food is sold or where rooms are used for the preparation of food are subject to inspection in accordance with the Food Hygiene (General) Regulations, 1960. 17 REFUSE COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL The refuse-collection and disposal service is under the control of the Borough Engineer and Surveyor. The collection of refuse has been carried out by direct labour since 1st April, 1964, as a result of a Council decision taken in 1962. The refuse-collection vehicles now in use have been supplied by Shelvoke & Drewry of Letchworth, being known as their "Pakamatic" type. They are equipped with a compression device in the form of a large ram which effects a reduction in the volume of the refuse in the ratio of 2½: 1, and enable 50 cubic yards of loose refuse to be accommodated in a 20-cubic yard body. No hand trimming of the refuse in the vehicle is necessary and the vehicles offer ease of loading with maximum reduction of dust nuisance. The Council has also extended its service for the collection of household junk such as unwanted furniture and material too large for the dustbin, and it is hoped that householders will make use of this service. It is not generally realised that the full quantity of domestic refuse arising from the normal enjoyment of each household will be collected in every week, and the quantity is not restricted to one bin. The habitual use of cardboard boxes, however, for storing quantities of refuse pending collection causes many difficulties, particularly in wet weather, and it is hoped to encourage occupiers of houses where more than one bin of refuse accumulates to provide a second or third standard dustbin. The disposal of refuse will be one of the responsibilities of the Greater London Council as from 1st April, 1965, but it may be two or three years before comprehensive working arrangements and disposal points are established. In the meantime, the disposal of Finchley's refuse is done by using it as part of the filling material for reclaiming about 15 acres of land at the former Sewage Disposal Works for ultimate use as playing fields and public walks and pleasure grounds. The use of refuse for this purpose has been approved by the Ministry of Housing and Local Government and, where it is used, the area is regulated as a controlled tip in accordance with the standard practice and the requirements of the Ministry of Housing and Local Government. A man is engaged full-time on all forms of pest control and the Borough Engineer and Surveyor's officers work in constant consultation with the Public Health Inspectors in maintaining the tip in a sanitary condition. CLEAN AIR Smoke Control Areas For the purposes of the provisions of this Act, the Borough has been divided into 14 areas. In eight of these, Smoke Control Orders were in force at the end of 1963, and this year Finchley No. 9 Smoke Control Order affecting a large part of the N.2 district, came into operation on October 1st. 18 During the year, the Council made two further Smoke Control Orders, planned to become operative in the summer and autumn of 1965. The new arrangements for smoke control areas, described in Circular 69/63 of the Ministry of Health and Local Government, necessitated some changes in the Clean Air Act itself. Since these related only to dwellings, the Minister included the necessary amendments in the Housing Act, 1964, Section 95. Briefly, under the provisions of this section a "new dwelling" ineligible for grant is one on which erection began after August 16th, 1964, and not July 5th, 1956, as was formerly the case. If the supply of any fuel is likely to be insufficient within an area, the local authority must by resolution designate (prescribe) appliances suitable only for such fuel as being unsuitable for the area. Under the provisions of the Section, the Minister is empowered to designate classes of appliances which are in his opinion unsuitable "as placing undue strain on fuel resources" either locally or generally. He has, in fact, by Circular No. 60/64 designated direct acting electric space heaters which no longer rank for grant payment within Smoke Control Areas. Discretionary power is also given in the Section to a local authority to approve for grant purposes expenditure incurred on adaptations after an order has been made but before it is confirmed by the Minister. Such adaptations did not formerly qualify for grant. The new Act also provides for a larger contribution from the Exchequer to a local authority when discretionary grants are made in cases of hardship, and means of ignition for fires are now eligible for grant whether or not other " works" are involved. Atmospheric Pollution Other contributions to the attainment of a smoke free atmosphere are secured through the operation of the remainder of the Clean Air Act and regulations made thereunder. Nuisances from smoke, apart from that emitted from chimneys, is a problem in all urban areas in which pockets of industry are situated. In 1963 the Council adopted Section 47 of the Middlesex County Council Act, 1961. This prohibits the emission of dark smoke from industrial premises and is designed to prevent nuisance from the open air burning of material done as part of a reclamation process, e.g., the burning off of insulating material to salvage the metal cable. Factory chimneys are kept under observation and any emission of dark smoke which exceeds the permissible limits in the Dark Smoke (Permitted Periods) Regulations is immediately dealt with. The discharge of dark smoke from a chimney usually 19 irises from mechanical mishap rather than from inadequate plant, or inefficient boiler management. In cases of obdurate technical difficulty, boiler plant owners can avail themselves of advice from the National Industrial Fuel Efficiency Service. The Act requires that new furnaces (except those of domestic capacity) must, as far as practicable, be capable of being operated without emitting smoke when burning fuel of a type for which the furnace is designed; it is an offence to install such furnaces without previously notifying the local authority, but whilst notification is obligatory, the submission of plans for approval is optional. A further objective designed to ensure adequate dispersion of flue emissions lequires that when building plans for industrial premises incorporating the construction of a chimney for carrying smoke, grit, dust or gases are submitted for byelaw approval, the council must be satisfied that the height of the chimney will be sufficient to prevent nuisance. The Council made a notable contribution to the reduction of atmospheric pollution early in 1964 when the use of the old refuse destructor was discontinued. The garden bonfire is not officially proscribed and it is difficult to reconcile a Clean Air policy with toleration of a source of smoke from this cause. In cases of complaints, bonfire addicts are urged to exercise care and common-sense, or in preference to burning garden rubbish, to make use of the special collection arrangement operated by the Borough Engineer and Surveyor. In industry there is a trend from the use of solid fuel to oil. Similarly householders are selecting gas, electricity and fuel oils as sources of heat more frequently than before. This trend is likely to be a notable factor in the reduction of smoke produced. There is no doubt, however, that the increased use of fuel oil gives rise to an increase in the emission of sulphur dioxide. Instruments to measure smoke and sulphur dioxide in the air are maintained at the Public Health Department and at the Public Libraries at East and North Finchley. The data obtained is supplied to the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research at Warren Spring Laboratory, Stevenage. There it is included in statistical records which form part of a country-wide investigation and research project. The measurement of atmospheric pollution in Finchley was commenced in 1960 and it is yet too early to demonstrate a positive downward trend parallel with London as a whole, but in my opinion the prohibition of smoke from new furnaces, the dispersion of smoke and other products of combustion from tall factory chimneys, coupled with the wide introduction of Smoke Control Areas both in Finchley and the adjoining districts must achieve a much cleaner atmosphere. Statistical Table—see page 63. 20 FOOD Part I of the Food and Drugs Act, 1955, deals with the composition and labelling of food and drugs, food unfit for human consumption, hygiene in connection with the sale, etc., of food, registration of certain food premises and food poisoning. Part II deals with milk, dairies and cream substitute. Part III regulates the provision and management of markets. Part IV has to do with slaughterhouses and knackers' yards and the power to provide cold stores in public slaughterhouses. Parts V and VI relate to administration. The County Council administers the Act with reference to the composition and labelling of food and drugs and is responsible for dealing with the various aspects of the production and distribution of milk, licensing and registration of dairymen, dairy farms and dairy farmers. Food Unfit for Human Consumption The inspection of food and the premises in which it is stored, manufactured or sold occupies a great deal of the time of the public health inspectors. In addition wholesalers and retailers frequently seek advice as to fitness or soundness of a variety of foods. In consequence it is nowadays rare to find unfit foodstuff exposed or stored for the purpose of sale. The consumption of fresh food diminishes whilst the use of packages, canned and frozen foods increases. These products are of good quality and provided shop keepers sell, and housewives use, such goods in rotation there is no risk of deterioration or spoilage. The outbreak of typhoid in Aberdeen came as a shock to the public and a salutory reminder that a failure of control of production methods can be disatrous. Following the report of the Committee of Enquiry set up by the Ministry of Health to enquire into the occurence, some tightening up of methods of surveillance over the production of food for import is to be anticipated. Food Hygiene The Food Hygiene (General) Regulations, 1960, lay down requirements in respect of cleanliness of food premises and stalls and of apparatus and equipment, the hygienic handling of food, cleanliness of persons engaged in the handling of food and their clothing, and the action to be taken where they suffer from or are carriers of certain infections; the construction of food premises, their repair and maintenance and the facilities, including sinks and washbasins, to be provided, and the temperature at which certain foods are to be kept. There are 475 foodshops in Finchley and visits are made to secure the observation of hygienic practices in clean and properly equipped premises. Particular attention is paid to establishments in the Borough engaged in the wholesale production of foodstuff. 21 The public shows an increasing awareness of the need for the clean handling of foodstuffs and when housewives no longer tolerate bad conditions, standards will improve. This does not imply that local food shops are not in the main, clean and well equipped. Nevertheless some food handlers do from time to time commit bad practices in the handling of food. Registration of Food Premises Premises used for the manufacture, storage or sale of ice cream and for the preparation or manufacture of sausages or potted, pressed, pickled or preserved food have to be registered. This is designed to ensure that before such operations are commenced the premises are satisfactory for the purpose. There are 157 shops registered for the sale of ice cream. Seventy-five premises are registered for the manufacture of sausages and the preservation of ham or other meat. In addition, there are 6 dairies registered in accordance with the Milk and Dairies (General) Regulations, 1959. Ice cream and ice lollies sold in Finchley are obtained from one or other of the several large manufacturers whose product is nationally known to be of a high standard. None is manufactured in the Borough. Food Poisoning Food poisoning is a notifiable disease under the Food and Drugs Act, 1955, and as such is described in the paragraph on the Prevalence and Control of Infectious and Other Diseases. Hawkers Twenty-four hawkers are registered under Section 11 of the Middlesex County Council Act, 1950, 6 of whom sell fruit and vegetables from barrows in the streets; the remainder sell greengrocery and other foodstuffs from door to door. In each case, the premises in which the food is stored must be approved by the local authority concerned; in 14 cases, the premises, being situated in Finchley, were inspected and found to be satisfactory. Slaughterhouses There is one, privately owned, licensed slaughterhouse in the district and although equipped and maintained to standards which satisfy the Regulations as to hygiene and the prevention of cruelty to animals, it is not in use. To ensure that all animals are humanely slaughtered only skilled operators may do this work; two persons were licensed as slaughtermen during the year. 22 New meat inspection Regulations came into force in October, 1963. The main provisions are (a) meat at slaughterhouses must be inspected, (b) meat must not be removed from the slaughterhouse until it has been inspected, (c) meat inspected and passed as fit for human consumption must be marked with an official mark, (d) local authorities may charge for the inspection, (e) the minimum period of notice of slaughter is extended from 3 hours to 24 hours. In addition, new standard procedures for meat inspection are also introduced. Complaints Eleven complaints were received about dirty milk bottles and 16 cases were reported alleging the presence of foreign material in foodstuff. Foodstuff thought to be unsound was referred for opinion in 23 instances. Of the latter, one can of food was spoiled because of damage to the container; in one case, fish not placed in a refrigerator was consequently spoiled. Investigation showed that in 11 cases failure by shopkeepers to sell perishable stock in rotation was the cause of loss of quality. These cases were dealt with informally. In 10 instances, examination and enquiry showed that the complainants' fears were groundless. One case standing over from 1963 concerning a pin in a loaf of bread was brought before the Magistrates in February, and the defendant firm conditionally discharged upon payment of 10 guineas costs. One notes with disquiet an increase over the very low figure of 1963 in the number of complaints about dirty milk bottles. So long as the public continues to misuse empty bottles, the problem will remain. One can only hope that the advent of disposable containers will be hastened. In the meantime the rinsing of empty bottles and their immediate return to the milk suppliers would help prevent the risk of bottles not thoroughly cleansed being recirculated. In cases of foreign material in food there is often difficulty in establishing responsibility or in producing satisfactory evidence to show when or where the material complained of was introduced into the article. Bearing in mind the vast amount of packaged and factory fashioned food sold, the number of complaints is small. Statistical Tables—see pages 64-66. INSPECTIONS AND COMPLAINTS The public health inspectors have made 21,995 visits to houses, business and industrial premises and places in which food is handled. As a result numerous defects and shortcomings were found. In consequence 333 informal and 10 statutory notices were served, resulting in repairs and improvements being carried out. In no case was it necessary for the Council to take legal proceedings or carry out work in default of owners. 23 1,735 Complaints and requests for services were received. The heavy demand of 1963 for the clearance of blocked drains was repeated emphasising the value to the public of this service. Particulars of the number of requests for the destruction of wasps' nests and notifications of infestation of rats and mice are reported elsewhere. Six complaints were received about nuisance from pigeons. A brief account of the action taken by the Council is reported in a paragraph in the section " Disinfection and Disinfestation." Statistical Tables— see pages 67-68. HOUSING Since my last report, the Finchley Council has continued to provide housing for elderly persons whenever a suitable site becomes available or premises suitable for conversion could be obtained. In 1964, 18 aged persons' units have been completed and another 24 will shortly be available. There will also be a number of aged persons' units included in the development of other estates for which plans are now being prepared. The needs of the "handicapped" are not overlooked and ground floor accommodation is often made available for this type of housing applicant. During the year, two specially designed bungalows have also been constructed for paraplegic cases. 1 x 11-storey block of 44 flats, together with 1 x 3-storey block of 12 flats have been completed and tenders are now being invited for a scheme comprising 9 flats at 194, Ballards Lane. Included in this development there are a day centre and 4 welfare units of accommodation for aged persons. The scheme for the erection of 16 maisonettes at 43, Holden Road is now 60% complete and planning permission is now awaited for the development of the site at "Rocklands," Gordon Road, to provide 28 flats and maisonettes. The acquisition of further land within the development area at Vale Farm, East Finchley, is proceeding. The Council continue to endeavour to make the best use of existing Council dwellings by arranging transfers and reducing under-occupation. The Public Health Department was actively concerned with housing applications, in some cases supported by medical certificates, referred by the Borough Valuer and Housing Officer for consideration of additional points on medical grounds, sanitary circumstances and state of overcrowding. Additional points were recommended in 69 cases and special consideration was urged in 29 cases. Where the medical 24 ditions merited urgent rehousing but the award of "additional points" did not give immediate help the matter was submitted to the Housing Committee for special consideration. Each and every housing application supported on public health grounds received the fullest consideration by the Housing Committee and 51 of these cases were rehoused. Overcrowding Sixteen new cases of statutory overcrowding as prescribed by the standard laid down in the Housing Act, 1957, involving 41 adults and 43 children, were brought to the attention of the department. Twenty-five cases were removed from the register, either having themselves obtained alternative accommodation or been rehoused by the Council. The Council allocate additional points to a housing applicant where statutory overcrowding exists. Houses in Multiple Occupation The local authority is empowered by the Housing Act, 1961, to serve a notice on a person having control of a house in multiple occupation where, in their opinion., the house is so far defective with respect to the provision of facilities and amenities having regard to the number of individual households accommodated on the premises as not to be reasonably suitable for occupation by those individuals or households. 18 cases were dealt with during the year . The Housing Act, 1964, Part IV enlarges the local authority's powers to deal with squalid living conditions and provides an entirely new power enabling the Council to take over control of management of a multi-occupied house summarily if the living conditions are so bad that immediate intervention rather than the more protracted processes of requiring the proprietor to ameliorate the conditions is necessary for the protection of the residents' safety, welfare or health. In addition the local authority may now make, subject to confirmation by the Minister, a scheme authorising compilation of a Register of houses in multiple occupation and the Council at its meeting in December approved a recommendation of the Public Health Committee that the London Borough of Barnet be requested to consider at an early date, the desirability of compiling such a Register. Slum Clearance and Individual Unfit Houses During the year three houses were represented as unfit for human habitation and incapable of repair at reasonable cost. Being attached to other property it was therefore expedient to make Closing Orders. One family had been re-housed by the end of the year. The two others will shortly be accommodated. 25 Improvement of Houses The Housing (Financial Provisions) Act, 1958, provides, inter alia, that a local authority may (a) make advances for the purpose of acquiring houses and for altering enlarging, repairing or improving houses; (b) make grants for the provision of houses by the conversion of buildings and for the improvement of dwellings. The Borough Treasurer, in co-operation with the Borough Valuer, deals with applications for advances for house purchase and I understand from him that 111 applications were approved, the sum advanced amounting to £220,960. The Public Health Department supplies the Borough Valuer with any known history of a property which may assist him in his valuation; this was done in 159 cases. An owner may seek an advance or grant towards the cost of substantial alterations which may involve structural work but the power to make such advances or grants is exercised at the discretion of the local authority. The House Purchase and Housing Act, 1959, designed to supplement the previous grant provisions, enables local authorities to make advances for house purchase up to the full value of the property. It also places a duty on them to make standard grants towards the cost of the provision of a fixed bath or shower in a bathroom, a wash-hand basin, a hot water supply, a W.C. and satisfactory facilities for storing food where these are not provided. The Borough Engineer and Surveyor approves applications for Discretionary and Standard Improvement Grants and I understand from him that 33 applications were received all of which were granted. Of these, only 10 were in respect of tenanted houses. The Housing Act, 1964, Part III is aimed at making grants more attractive and thus to encourage more owners to improve their dwellings. There is included a provision for a reduction from ten years to three years in the period during which rent or other conditions attach to a house improved with grant. Improvement Areas Part II of the Act provides another new device enabling the local authority to make improvement areas. The Act provides, inter alia, that "If a local authority are satisfied that any area in their district contains dwellings lacking one or more of the standard amenities and that, of the dwellings in that area which are so lacking, at least one half— (a) are so constructed that it is practicable to improve them to the full standard, and (b) will, after they have been improved to the full standard be in such condition as to be fit for human habitation, and will be likely, subject to normal maintenance, to remain in that condition and available for use as dwellings for a period of not less than fifteen years, 26 the local authority may cause the area to be defined on a map and may pass a resolution declaring the area so defined to be an improvement area for the purposes of the Part of of this Act." The effect of this is to compel owners to improve tenanted dwellings in such areas. In Circular No. 53/64 the Minister of Housing and Local Government states, inter alia, that "The choice of areas suitable for improvement will require careful consideration. The main point the Minister wishes to emphasise is that area improvements is something more than a means of providing amenities in individual houses. It is part of the process of urban renewal. So, in choosing areas for early action, and in implementing their schemes of improvement, local authorities should consider all the measures which are open to them to fit areas for the requirements of modern living and for improving the quality of the environment— for example, the provision of new street furniture, tree planting, more parking facilities, better open spaces. Where the local authority is implementing, or intends to implement, a smoke control programme, it may be practicable to make an improvement area also a smoke control area." The Rent Act, 1957, having amongst its objectives the aim of enabling landlords by means of an increase of rent, to keep houses still the subject of rent control in a fair state of repair, was as in the recent past, very little used by tenants. Three applications for Certificates of Disrepair were received. After service of the proper notices, one certificate was issued and in two cases the landlords gave undertakings to correct the defects of repair requested by tenants. The work had not been done at the end of the year but the time limits had not expired. Statistical Tables— see pages 69-71. SHOPS AND OFFICES The Shops Act, 1950, regulates the hours of closing, conditions of employment and Sunday trading. Sections 37 and 38 of the Act which dealt with the health and comfort of shop workers have been repealed by the Offices, Shops and RailwayPremises Act, 1963. The public health inspectors are also shops inspectors and they have made 72 inspections in connection with this duty. Contraventions were noted and dealt with without recourse to formal proceedings. The number of persons observing the Jewish Sabbath and registered in accordance with the provisions of Section 53 of the Act is 14. The Offices, Shops and Railway Premises Act, 1963, and the Offices, Shops and Railway Premises First Aid Order, 1964, came into force during the year. The object of the Act is to raise standards of working conditions in shops, offices and certain railway premises so as to promote the health, welfare and safety of persons employed 27 in them. Regulations made under the Act, in respect of the provision of sanitary conveniences and washing facilities come into operation on 1st January, 1966. After 1st May, 1964, anyone intending to employ people in office, shop or railway premises is required to send a notification to the appropriate authority. The premises already in use on 1st May were required to be registerd by 31st July, 1964. In spite of nation-wide advertising by the Ministry of Labour and a local reminder in the Council's newsletter "Focus on Finchley" to ratepayers only 601 notifications have been received. Notification has been received of 3 accidents in shops. These were all of minor character and called for no special investigation. Statistical Tables—see pages 71-72. FACTORIES AND WORKPLACES The Factories Act, 1961, is a consolidating Act which repeals and replaces the Factories Acts, 1937 to 1959, without significant amendment. The Act came into force on 1st April, 1962 and, inter alia, places on local authorities the responsibility for the enforcement of the provisions relating to cleanliness, overcrowding, temperature, ventilation, drainage of floors and sanitary conveniences in respect of any factory where mechanical power is not used and the provisions concerning sanitary conveniences in powered factories. In accordance with Section 8 (5) of the Act, a register is kept of all factories situated in the district; 336 factories and workshops are registered. Three hundred and sixty-seven inspections were made. A number of defects were found, of which the majority were remedied during the year and in no case was it found necessary to institute legal proceedings. Statistical Tables— see pages 73-74. OUTWORKERS Section 133(1) (c) of the Factories Act, 1961, requires occupiers of factories to notify local authorities of the names and addresses of persons employed by them in their own homes. The following table shows, by trades, the number of outworkers residing in the district:— Wearing apparel 26 Lampshades 5 Making of brushes 1 Making of boxes 3 Plastic bags 1 Artificial flowers 1 Upholstery 1 Twelve visits were made by the public health inspectors to the houses of these outworkers and conditions were found to be satisfactory. 28 DISINFECTION AND DISINFESTATION The department received and acted upon a large number of complaints of infestation by insect pests from householders this year. The types of pest represented a wide variety and the largest single number of complaints was made about wasps' nests. Of recent years there has been a vast and virtually uncontrolled increase in the number of wild or " feral pigeons " in all town areas. Flocks of these birds which can be a source of annoyance if not nuisance, have become established in the Borough. In one area action as provided for in the Public Health Act, 1961, was taken to reduce a small but well established flock of pigeons which were causing considerable nuisance. The Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food authorised the use of a narcotic drug and the work was undertaken by a specialist firm of contractors. Bathing facilities are provided at the Disinfecting Station for the cleansing of verminous persons. In the case of females, treatment is carried out under the supervision of a woman attendant specially employed for the purpose. During the year, five persons were treated. The department maintains a high pressure boiler with vacuum producing and hot air apparatus for the disinfection and disinfestation of clothing, linen and other articles. Library books, fabrics and other articles liable to damage by steam are treated by formalin spray in the disinfecting chamber. Four hundred and seventy-eight articles were treated; 149 of these were parcels of used clothing for despatch abroad to those countries which require a certificate that this treatment has been carried out. A charge is made for disinfection and disinfestation with the exception of terminal disinfection carried out after a notifiable disease and the cleansing of verminous persons. Statistical Table— see page 75. RODENT CONTROL Although the Prevention of Damage by Pests Act, 1949, places the onus of responsiblity for ridding premises of rats or mice on the owner or occupier of premises, it has been found in practice that best results are achieved when the local authority undertakes disinfestation as a health service. In Finchley, this service is available to all residents of private dwellings and occupiers of business premises. Surveys and appropriate treatments are carried out by a trained staff; a charge is made for this service. It is the practice each year for a sewer treatment to be carried out by placing poison baits in manholes and thus to achieve a reduction of the rat population in the sewer systems. In November, 595 manholes were treated in this way, and there was a total of 17 complete poison takes as a result. 29 The poison bait normally used by the department is warfarin, which in the normal dosage is not harmful to man or domestic animals. With regard to the land being used for the tipping of refuse at the old Sewage Disposal Works, a satisfactory measure of control has been achieved by the employment of routine measures. Statistical Table— see page 76. NOISE The Noise Abatement Act, 1960, made new provisions in respect of the control of noise and vibration and enables a local authority to deal with it as a statutory nuisance in accordance with the procedure in the Public Health Act, 1936. Provision is also made which enables three or more persons aggrieved by a noise nuisance to make a complaint to a Magistrate. Byelaws, "For the good rule and government of the Borough of Finchley and for the prevention of nuisances" made in pursuance of Section 249 of the Local Government Act, 1933, are complementary to the Noise Abatement Act, I960, and are designed to deal with noisy animals, street noises, i.e., music near houses, churches or hospitals, the playing of musical instruments by mechanical means, and calling or shouting for the purpose of hawking. There were 7 complaints about noise during the year; 2 related to noise from factories, one from constructional work, 3 about noisy neighbours and 1 concerning noise in playing fields. In an urban area in which industry is not confined to limited areas, nor separated from residential property by open space it would seem inevitable that on occasion some noise nuisance will arise. The firms concerned were co-operative, and there were no unresolved problems at the end of the year. In all the other cases an informal approach secured the desired results. CARAVANS There are no sites for caravans or mobile dwellings within the meaning of the relevant Acts in the district. During the year caravan dwellers again made halts in Finchley during their passage along the North Circular Road. Old Coppetts Road, a cul-de-sac and parallel to the North Circular Road offers an almost perfect pull-in for such travellers and it would seem desirable that something should be done to limit access to the unused portion of this old highway. 30 HEATING APPLIANCES The Consumer Protection Act, 1961, which came into operation on 19th August, 1961, repealed the Heating Appliances (Fireguards) Act, 1952, and the Oil Burners (Standards) Act, 1960. The Heating Appliances (Fireguards) Regulations, 1953, however, remain in force and require that fireguards be fitted to gas fires, electric fires and oil heaters. The Oil Heaters Regulations, 1962, made under the Act of 1961, relate to domestic space heaters which burn kerosene (paraffin oil) and, inter alia, impose requirements concerning their construction, design and performance. Visits were made to premises having fires on sale and the stocks were inspected and found to be satisfactory. RAG FLOCK AND OTHER FILLING MATERIAL The Rag Flock and Other Filling Materials Act, 1951, requires the registration of those premises where filling materials are used in the manufacture of bedding, toys, baby carriages and other articles of upholstery and the licensing of premises where rag flock is manufactured or stored for distribution. The Regulations of 1961 made under the Act supersede previous regulations and, inter alia, apply standards of cleanliness for each kind of filling material to which the Act applies, prescribe a list of analysts for the purpose of doing tests and the form of records to be kept by occupiers of premises registered or licensed. The premises of one person trading as an upholsterer and registered under the Act were inspected and found to be satisfactory. ANIMALS Under the Pet Animals Act, 1951, no person may keep a pet shop without a licence granted by a local authority; the licence contains conditions relating to suitable accommodation, provision of food and drink, avoidance of sale of mammals at too early an age, prevention of infectious disease, and fire precautions. The number of persons licensed at the end of the year was 6. All premises have been inspected and found to be satisfactory. The Animals Boarding Establishments Act, 1963, came into force on 1st January, 1964. The Act provides that no person may keep a boarding establishment for dogs or cats without a licence from a local authority. In addition to provisions similar to those required by the Pet Animals Act, 1951, the person licensed must keep a register of the animals and their owners. One person has been licensed to keep a boarding establishment for dogs. 31 The Riding Establishments Act, 1939, empowers a local authority to authorise a registered veterinary surgeon to inspect any premises believed to be used as a riding establishment, which means any stables or other premises whatsoever at which horses are kept for the purpose of being let out on hire for riding or of being used in providing in return for payment instruction in riding. It is an offence for any person to let out on hire or use for providing instruction any horse in such a condition that its use for that purpose will be likely to cause suffering to the horse, or to keep a horse for those purposes in so neglected a state or in such conditions that suffering is, or is likely to be, caused to the horse. There is one riding establishment in the Borough which was inspected on two occasions by a veterinary surgeon. The Riding Establishments Act, 1964, repeals the Act of 1939 and comes into force on 1st April, 1965. After this date no persons may keep a riding establishment unless licensed by the local authority. The Diseases of Animals Act, 1950, deals inter alia with the enforcement of general orders relating to the movement of animals; the cleansing and disinfection or places and vehicles occupied by animals; the protection of animals from suffering during transit; the importation, exportation and quarantine of animals; the keeping of records by owners and others relating to animals and poultry; and during outbreaks of specified diseases the enforcement of special orders relating to the control of the movement of animals and disinfection of places, vehicles and articles, etc. The administration and enforcement of the provisions of the Act and of the Diseases of Animals (Waste Foods) Order, 1957, is the duty of the Middlesex County Council. Under the Diseases of Animals (Waste Foods) Order, 1957, 3 pig-keepers in Finchley are licensed by the County Council and operate plant and equipment for the boiling of waste foods. There were no outbreaks of animal diseases in Finchley during the year. BURIAL AND CREMATION It is the duty of the local authority under Section 50 of the National Assistance Act, 1948, to cause to be buried or cremated the body of any person who has died or been found dead in the area, in any case where it appears to the authority that no suitable arrangements for the disposal of the body have been or are being otherwise made. The expenses incurred may be recovered from the estate of the deceased person, by death grant subject to the contribution conditions being satisfied or from any person who for the purposes of the Act was liable to maintain the deceased person immediately before his death. 32 Any person who has died or been found dead in these circumstances in Finchley is buried in the St. Pancras Cemetery. One burial was carried out by the Council during the year. EXHUMATIONS Licences for the removal of human remains under the Burial Act, 1857, state, inter alia, " It is considered advisable that the medical officer of health should be notified whenever such a licence is granted in order that he may be in a position to take (under his general powers) any action that may appear to him to be necessary in the interests of public health. Five copies of licences for such removals were received from the Home Office during the year. The exhumations were carried out in the early hours of the morning and were observed by a public health inspector, to ensure compliance with the conditions of tin licences. MORTUARY The Council provide a mortuary under the provisions of the Public Health Act, 1936, and the Coroner, whose district includes Finchley, uses his power in Section 24 of the Coroner's Amendment Act, 1926, to direct that bodies from the Potters Bar and Friern Barnet Urban Districts, which are also within his district, shall be taken to the Finchley Mortuary. Two hundred and forty-seven bodies were received into the mortuary during 1964, and of these 81 were from the Friern Barnet area and 31 from Potters Bar. Post mortem examinations were carried out in all cases. CONFERENCES AND COURSES Money spent on the attendance of officers at conferences and courses is a sound investment, both for the authority and the officers concerned. It is the best means of keeping abreast of current developments in the various fields and gives the officer an opportunity to discuss mutual problems with colleagues. There is no doubt at all that a conference or course is enriched by the contributions added by the participants. A list of conferences and courses attended during the year is shown on page 77. MEDICAL EXAMINATIONS Fifty-four examinations were undertaken during the year. Thirty persons were examined in respect of new appointments; 14 were examined for transfer to the permanent staff and two were found to be unfit; four were for special report following 33 injury and extended sick leave and were found to be unfit; five were for extension of service and one on behalf of another authority. OUTSTANDING NOTICES In pursuance of the provisions of the Land Charges Act, 1925, 2,291 enquiries were received from the Town Clerk concerning outstanding notices and smoke control areas in relation to all types of property in the district. The necessary searches were made and information supplied. Acknowledgments to:— The Chief Officers of the Council— The Town Clerk— R. M. Franklin, Esq. The Borough Engineer and Surveyor— P. M. Spencer, Esq. The Borough Treasurer— W. R. Harman, Esq. The Borough Education Officer— A. T. Dodd, Esq. The Borough Valuer and Housing Officer— I. Fooks, Esq. The Borough Librarian— J. D. Reynolds, Esq. C. N. Austwick, Esq., Area Welfare Officer, Middlesex County Council. Dr. K. M. Bodkin, Area Medical Officer, Area No. 4, Middlesex County Council. Dr. B. A. Butterworth, Finchley Chest Clinic, 980, High Road, N.20. Mrs. I. K. Chaplin, Secretary, Finchley Guild of Social Service, Municipal Offices, East End Road, N.3. Mrs. D. E. Colebrook, Centre Organiser, W.V.S., 308, Regents Park Road, N.3. A. T. Dickinson, Esq., Divisional Superintendent, 93rd Ambulance Division (Men), St. John Ambulance Brigade. Dr. R. Emond, Consultant, Infectious Diseases, Coppetts Wood Hospital. Dr. R. C. Greenberg, Senior Medical Officer, Mental Health Department, Middlesex County Council. C. E. Harris, Esq., Chief Chemist and Bacteriologist, Lee Valley Water Company. Miss J. Hunter, Youth Employment Officer, Finchley and Friern Barnet Youth Employment Bureau. Dr. A. Melvin Ramsay, Consultant, Infectious Diseases, The Royal Free Hospital. Miss F. M. Rochat, Divisional Director, Finchley and Hendon Division, British Red Cross Society. J. Sayers, Esq., Manager, Ministry of Labour, 316a, Regents Park Road, N.3. Miss E. J. Stanley, Honorary Secretary, Finchley Old People's Welfare Committee. Dr. C. E. D. Taylor, Central Public Health Laboratory, Colindale Avenue, N.W.9. Miss M. K. Wading, Divisional Superintendent, 133rd Nursing Division (Women), St. John Ambulance Brigade. Dr. G. S. Wigley, County Medical Officer, Middlesex County Council. 34 GENERAL INFORMATION CONCERNING THE STATUTORY AND VOLUNTARY SERVICES AVAILABLE STATUTORY SERVICES PERSONAL HEALTH SERVICES Health Services under Part III of the National Health Service Act, 1946, are provided by the Middlesex County Council. County Medical Officer: G.S. Wigley, M.R.C.S., L.R.C.P., D.P.H., 3, 5 & 7, Old Queen Street, S.W.I. Telephone: TRAfalgar 7799. Area Medical Officer, Area No. 4, Finchley and Hendon: Miss Kathleen M. Bodkin, M.R.C.S., L.R.C.P., D.P.H., Area Health Office, Gateway House, Regents Park Road, Finchley, N.3. Telephone: VIRginia 9121. Ante-natal Clinics: (1) Health Centre, Oak Lane, N.2, on Fridays (2 p.m. to 4.30 p.m.). (2) Torrington Clinic, Torrington Park, N.12, on Wednesdays (9.30 a.m. to 12 noon). N.B.— Post-natal mothers are also seen at these clinics. Infant Welfare Clinics: (1) Health Centre, Oak Lane, N.2, on Tuesdays, Wednesdays and Thursdays (2 p.m. to 4.30 p.m.). (2) Torrington Clinic, Torrington Park, N.12, on Wednesdays and Fridays (2 p.m. to 4.30 p.m.). (3) Methodist Church Hall, Essex Park, N.3, on Tuesdays and Thursdays (2 p.m. to 4.30 p.m.). Day Nursery: Kingswood Day Nursery, 6, Hendon Avenue, N.3. Open— Mondays to Fridays inclusive (8 a.m. to 6 p.m.). *Midwifery: The mid wives operating in Finchley are:— Miss M. Cole, 26, Victoria Grove, N.12. (HILlside 6601). Miss R. Carey, 23, Prospect Ring, N.2. (TUDor 5262). *Home Nursing: A number of home nurses cover the district and private practitioners are informed of the names and telephone numbers. *Enquiries for a home nurse or midwife may be made direct to the nurse or midwife concerned or to the Area Superintendent of Home Nurses and Non-Medical Supervisor of Midwives, Area Health Office, Gateway House, Regents Park Road, Finchley, N.3. (VIRginia 9121). Chiropody: The County Council's extension of the chiropody service offers treatment in the first instance to the elderly, the physically handicapped, expectant mothers and nursing mothers with a child under 12 months, but 35 does not preclude recommendations being made in respect of other persons needing chiropody treatment, including school children provided with free treatment under the Education Act, 1944. The Service provides treatment at the Torrington and Oak Lane Clinics. Transport for attendance, where required on medical grounds, is provided and in certain circumstances arrangements can be made for chiropodists to visit Old People's Homes. In exceptional cases home visits can be made. Clinic for the Elderly: An advisory clinic for the elderly is held on a Monday afternoon once a month at the Torrinton Park Clinic, 16, Torrinton Park, Finchley, N.12. The purpose of the clinic is to provide general advice on healthy living, including personal health problems, diet, accident prevention and social welfare and cultivation of interests essential to mental health in old age. In certain instances a medical examination will be carried out at the discretion of the medical officer in charge. In cases where it is considered that medical attention and treatment is indicated, information will be given to the patient's private medical practitioner so that he may consider making any necessary arrangements. Health Visiting: There are a number of health visitors in Finchley who are available to give advice on health matters. Domestic Help: Assistance can be provided in maternity cases, sickness in the home and in respect of aged people. Medical certificates are necessary in each case. It is the County Council's rule that home help provision may not be continued for more than six months in any case without the approval of the Area Health Committee, and it is its policy that, in cases of acute emergency, immediate assistance be given for a short period without detailed investigation; however, for longer periods, the approval of the Area Health Committee is required. Vaccination and Immunisation: Vaccination and immunisation against smallpox, diphtheria, whooping cough, tetanus and poliomyelitis can either be undertaken by appointment at local clinics or may be arranged through the private medical practitioners. Prevention of Illness, care and after-care: Arrangements can be made whereby persons can be sent away for a recuperative holiday following an acute illness. School Health Service: Arrangements for treatment can be undertaken at the undermentioned clinics by appointment:— Dental Clinic, Health Centre, Oak Lane, N.2. Dental Clinic, Kingswood, 6, Hendon Avenue, N.3. Speech Clinic, Health Centre, Oak Lane, N.2. Speech Clinic, Torrington Clinic, Torrington Park, N.12. 36 Orthopaedic Clinic, Health Centre, Oak Lane, N.2. Orthodontic Clinic, Health Centre, Oak Lane, N.2. Minor Ailment Clinic, Health Centre, Oak Lane, N.2. Minor Ailment Clinic, Torrington Clinic, Torrington Park, N.12. Eye Clinic, Health Centre, Oak Lane, N.2. Aural Clinic, Health Centre, Oak Lane, N.2. B.C.G. Vaccination: Vaccination against tuberculosis is offered to all children approaching 13 years and over. Subnormal Children: A day special school for educationally subnormal children is provided at Oak Lodge, Oak Lane, N.2. The regular catchment area covers Finchley, Hendon and Hornsey, but if specially asked the school will admit children from Friern Barnet, Southgate, Potters Bar and Wood Green. The residue of Wembley and Willesden children are in attendance but these districts now have their own schools. Welfare Foods: Proprietary welfare foods are available to mothers attending infant welfare clinics and, in addition, Ministry of Health welfare foods, i.e., Cod Liver Oil, National Dried Milk, Orange Juice, Vitamin A & D Tablets are issued. The latter commodities are also available at the W.V.S. Centre, 308, Regents Park Road, N.3, and the Centre is open for this service from 10 a.m. to 12 noon and 2 p.m. to 4 p.m. on Mondays to Fridays. Further information regarding these services may be obtained from the Area Medical Officer, Area Health Office, at the above address. MENTAL HEALTH SERVICES The Borough of Finchley forms part of the East Central Division for Mental Health Services in the Middlesex County Council. Divisional Office: 2, Maryland Road, Wood Green, N.22. (Tel.: BOWes Park 5244). Senior Medical Officer: Dr. R. C. Greenberg. Divisional Mental Welfare Officer: Mr. W. J. Ward. Senior Mental Welfare Officers: Mr. E. Inglis; Mr. C. Carr. Mental Welfare Officers: Mr. R. Harmer; Miss M. Lay; Mrs. S. J. Tenermont; Mr. L. F. Foote; Mr. T. R. Brady; Mr. P. N. Papalazarou. Mental Health Social Worker: Miss C. M. Coups. The mental health social worker makes regular visits to the homes of all the sub-normal and severely sub-normal females and males up to the age of ten years and advises on all aspects of the patient's well being and employment in appropriate cases. She submits written reports on her visits so that where necessary the County Medical Officer may take appropriate action such as arranging admission to psychiatric hospitals 37 either on a temporary or permanent basis. Such temporary admissions, of up to eight weeks, are arranged to meet acute domestic difficulties or ill health of mother. The mental welfare officers deal similarly with the sub-normal and severely sub-normal males over the age of ten years. The main duty of the mental welfare officer is pre- and after-care of those persons suffering from mental illness including dealing with those requiring compulsory detention in psychiatric hospitals under the Mental Health Act, 1959. Both the mental welfare officers and the mental health social workers transport patients in their cars to and from the psychiatric hospitals, in case of emergency. As regards the general practitioners, they receive via the Middlesex Executive Council, a schedule setting out the information given above and also the procedure under which they may obtain the services of a mental welfare officer outside norma] office hours. In addition to the home visiting service, there are junior training schools for the young severely sub-normal and adult training centres for those of sixteen years of age and over. Although at present there are none of these establishments actually sited within the Borough, Finchley children are transported daily by coach to the purpose-built Friern Barnet Junior Training School and Finchley youths and girls are taken by coach to the Edmonton Adult Training Centre. A therapeutic social club is run for incipient mental cases and for those discharged from psychiatric hospitals who are in need of after-care, at York Park Day Nursery, York Road, Hendon, N.W.9, at 7 p.m. every Tuesday evening. A hostel for employable persons recovering from mental illness has opened at Park House, High Road, East Finchley, N.2. It is the County Council's intention to increase the above facilities. WELFARE SERVICES Welfare Services under Part III of the National Assistance Act, 1948, are provided by the Welfare Department of the Middlesex County Council. The following services are under the direction of the local Area Welfare Officer, Mr. C. N. Austwick, 36, Woodhouse Road, N.12. (HILlside 2822):— (a) Admittance to residential accommodation through reasons of age and infirmity. (b) Provision of temporary accommodation for persons rendered homeless through eviction, fire or flood. (c) Welfare of the physically handicapped (day to day supervision by welfare visitor). (d) Welfare of the blind and partially sighted (day to day supervision by home teacher). 38 A handicraft class for the blind is held once a fortnight on Tuesdays at 2.30 p.m. at Christchurch Hall, High Road, N.12; and on the alternate Tuesday a social club is held at St. Mary's Church Hall, Hendon Lane, N.3, in the afternoon. A work centrc for handicapped persons is open in the mornings from Monday to Friday at the Hendon Ex-Service Men's Club, Heriot Road, N.W.4. Details of the County Council and registered (non-profit making) voluntary old people's homes are as follows:— County Council: "Beach Lodge," 66, Hendon Lane, N.3. FINchley 5522. 35 women. "Meadowside," 58, Holden Road, N.12. HILlside 7816. 22 women. Voluntary: "Fairlight," 51, Woodside Avenue, N.12. HILlside 1513. 20 mixed. French Memorial Home, 13, Nether Street, N.12. HILlside 4353. 20 mixed. Woodside Home, Lake View Drive, N.20. HILlside 1127. 42 women. Nazareth House, 162, East End Road, N.2. TUDor 1104. 59 mixed. For blind residents: Vernon House, The Bishop's Avenue, N.2. SPEedwell 2130. 42 mixed. For Jewish residents only: Leo Baeck House, The Bishop's Avenue, N.2. SPEedwell 9806. 43 mixed. Osmond House, The Bishop's Avenue, N.2. MEAdway 1185. 30 mixed. Heinrich Stahl House, The Bishop's Avenue, N.2. MEAdway 3474. 54 mixed. Hammerson House, The Bishop's Avenue, N.2. MEAdway 4523. 30 mixed. AMBULANCE SERVICE A series of ambulances and sitting case cars is maintained by the Middlesex County Council. In cases of emergency, dial 999. In other cases, ambulances should be obtained through the family doctor or hospital. HOSPITAL SERVICE The hospitals serving Finchley are:— Finchley Memorial Hospital, Bow Lane, N.12. (FINchley 1195). Barnet General Hospital, Wellhouse Lane, Barnet, Herts. (BARnet 7421). North Middlesex Hospital, Silver Street, Edmonton, N.18. (EDMonton 3071). "Tower" Maternity Annexe (North Middlesex Hospital), The Bishop's Avenue, N.2. (SPEedwell 3612). Royal Northern Hospital, Holloway Road, N.7. (ARChway 2211). Whittington Hospital, Archway Road, N.19. (ARChway 3070). Coppetts Wood Isolation Hospital, Coppetts Road, N.10. (TUDor 9792/3). 39 CENTRES FOR FREE YELLOW FEVER VACCINATION Important.— Every person requiring vaccination must make an appointment with the Centre: where times of attendances are shown, they are given for guidance only. Address Tel. No. Time of Attendance Yellow Fever Clinic No. 1: Hospital for Tropical Diseases, 4, St. Pancras Way, London, N.W.1. EUSton 4411 Ext. 137 Yellow Fever Vaccination: Monday, Wednesday & Friday, 11.30 a.m. to 12.30 p.m. Tuesday and Thursday, 12.30 to 1.15 p.m. Other vaccinations: Monday, Wednesday & Friday, 12.15 to 1.00 p.m. Tuesday and Thursday, 11.30 a.m. to 12.15 p.m. Yellow Fever Clinic No. 2: Medical Department, Unilever House, Blackfriars, London, E.C.4. FLEet Street 7474 Ext. 2841 Tuesday and Friday, 3.45 p.m. No other vaccination can be done at this Centre. Yellow Fever Clinic No. 3: 53, Great Cumberland Place, London, W.l. AMBassador 6456 Yellow Fever Vaccination: Monday to Friday, 10 to 11 a.m. Tuesday, Wednesday and Thursday, 2 to 3 p.m. Other vaccinations: Monday to Friday, 10 a.m. to 5 p.m. By appointment. VENEREAL DISEASE List of clinics convenient for Middlesex residents:— Luke & Martha Clinics, West London Hospital, Hammersmith, W.8. Whitechapel Clinic, London Hospital, London, E.l. Special Clinic, West Middlesex Hospital, Isleworth, Middlesex. The Prince of Wales General Hospital, Tottenham, London, N.15. 40 Special Clinic, Hillingdon Hospital, Uxbridge, Middlesex. St. Mary's Hospital, Praed Street, London, W.2. Special Clinic, Central Middlesex Hospital, Park Royal, London, N.W.10. TUBERCULOSIS AND CHEST X-RAY Finchley Chest Clinic The Chest Clinic serving this district is situated at 980, High Road, Whetstone, N.20. (HILlside 6681). Chest Physician: Dr. B. A. Butterworth. Assistant Chest Physician: Dr. W. Traub. Finchley Chest Clinic give X-rays mainly on a doctor's request. They will, however, do so for other reasons, free of charge, but if an X-ray is required for insurance or immigration purposes a charge is usually made. Application for an appointment should be made in writing for this purpose. Mass Radiography Mixed X-ray Sessions for both Men and Women Static Chest X-ray Centre, 32, Drayton Park, N.5 (Tel.: NOR. 2450) (this unit is on the lower ground floor of a Welfare Centre). Mondays 2—4.15 5—7.15 p.m. Tuesdays 9.45—12.30 2—5.30 p.m. Wednesdays 9.45—12.30 2—5.30 p.m. Thursdays 2—4.15 5—7.15 p.m. The following Centres are visited weekly by a mobile unit:— Dibdin House, Maida Vale, W.9 MONDAY (the unit stands in Carlton Vale just a few yards 2—4.30 p.m. from the traffic lights at the junction with Maida and 5—7 p.m. Vale). Raymede Welfare Centre, Ladbroke Grove, W.10 TUESDAYS (the unit stands in Faraday Road at junction with 10.30—12 noon Ladbroke Grove). Shipton House, Prince of Wales Road, N.W.5 TUESDAYS (the unit is in the roadway outside Shipton House a 2—4 p.m. few yards from the junction with Maiden Road). X-ray sessions will not be held on Christmas Eve and Public Holidays. 41 CARE AND WELFARE OF CHILDREN WHO ARE DEPRIVED OF A NORMAL HOME LIFE Enquiries should be made to Children's Area Officer, 1, Friern Park, N.12 (HILlside 4264). VOLUNTARY SERVICES FINCHLEY OLD PEOPLE'S WELFARE COMMITTEE Public Health Department, 308, Regents Park Road, N.3. (Secretary—Miss E. J. Stanley—FINchley 0018.) The Finchley Old People's Welfare Committee is a co-ordinating Committee for the statutory services and voluntary organisations serving the elderly people of the Borough. In addition to its work of co-ordination, the Committee advises and assists those persons of 60 years of age and over whose need is indicated or puts such people in touch with the appropriate service. OLD PERSONS' CLUBS Companions of St. Barnabas St. Barnabas Church Hall, Gainsborough Road, N.12. Wednesdays—2.30 p.m. to 4.30 p.m. Enquiries to Mrs. A. Student-Cuming, 29, Westbury Road, N.12. (Tel.: HILlside 7478). Evergreen Clubs Finchley Club, St. Luke's Hall, Mountfield Road, N.3. Wednesdays—2.30 p.m. to 4.30 p.m. Disabled Persons Handicraft Club—Membership on production of a doctor's certificate. St. Mary's Church Hall, Hendon, Lane, N.3. Thursdays—2.30 p.m. to 4.30 p.m. Enquiries concerning the above clubs to:— Miss F. M. Rochat, Divisional Director, British Red Cross Society, 172, Regents Park Road, N.3. (Tel.: FINchley 2588). Good Companions' Club Youth Hall, High Road, East Finchley, N.2. Tuesdays—2.30 p.m. to 4.15 p.m. Enquiries to Mrs. V. Coomber, 12a, Torrington Court, Torrington Park, N.12. (Tel.: HILlside 7575). 42 Hampstead Garden Suburb Fellowship Fellowship House, Willifield Way, N.W.I 1. (for residents of the Suburb). Meetings daily. Enquiries to Mrs. D. Stonhold, 3, Asmuns Hill, N.W.I 1. (Tel.: SPEedwell 0714). Old Age Pensioners Club Granville Hall, Granville Road, N.12. Thursdays—2 p.m. to 4.30 p.m. Enquiries to W. Owens, Esq., 183, Squires Lane, N.3. (Tel.: FINchley 7162). St. Paul's Over Sixties Club Long Lane, N.3. Thursdays—2.30 p.m. to 4.30 p.m. Enquiries to Mrs. N. Pearce, 36, Finchley Way, N.3. (Tel.: FINchley 4957) The Finchley and District Senior Citizens' Club Granville Hall, Granville Road, North Finchley, N.12. Mondays—7 p.m. to 9.45 p.m. and at Oak Lodge, Oak Lane, N.2. Alternate Thursdays—7.30 p.m. to 9.30 p.m. Enquiries to D. Boughton, Esq., 21, William Street, N.12. The Friendship Clubs Finchley Central Friendship Club, Finchley Central Synagogue, Redbourne Avenue, N.3. Mondays, 7.30 p.m. Enquiries to Mrs. H. Preston, 56, Rosemary Avenue, N.3. (Tel.: FINchley 7248). Kinloss Gardens Club, Finchley Synagogue, Kinloss Gardens, N.3. Tuesdays at 2.30 p.m. Enquiries to Mrs. S. Sharer, 58, Hendon Avenue, N.3. (Tel.: FINchley 4344). Norrice Lea Club, Hampstead Garden Suburb Synagogue, Norrice Lea, N.2. Mondays—2 p.m. to 4.30 p.m. Enquiries to Mrs. C. Godfrey, 14, Norrice Lea, N.2. (Tel.: MEAdway 3163). 43 Woodside Park Club, Woodside Hall, Woodside Park Road, N.12. Wednesdays—2 p.m. to 4.30 p.m. Enquiries to Mrs. K. Bookatz, 22, Hemington Avenue, N.ll. (Tel.: ENTerprise 0416). BRITISH RED CROSS SOCIETY The provision of sick room requisites. Various items of sick room equipment are available on loan at a very small charge, or in the case of persons on national assistance articles may be supplied free. Such articles as crutches and indoor and outdoor invalid chairs are included in this equipment. Chiropody Appointments are made for treatment at reduced charges. Escort Duties Escort duties are performed, for example, sick persons may be met at the main railway stations and escorted through London to their destinations, often to places outside London. Various other services are given such as:— Manning First Aid Posts at public functions and private entertainments. Nursing in the home in emergencies. Blanket bathing in the home for men and women. Assisting in carrying patients up and down stairs, where required, when ambulance service is not available. Driving disabled patients to clubs by volunteer drivers. Clubs for the elderly and handicraft clubs for the disabled. Paying home welfare visits on behalf of the Family Welfare Association, the Invalid Children's Aid Association, and various Services Benevolent Associations. Red Cross Services available in cases of sickness, disablement and infirmity from old age. Lectures and training in first-aid, nursing and mothercraft given to members of the public and National Hospital Service Reserve. All enquiries to be directed to Miss F. M. Rochat, Divisional Director, British Red Cross Society, 172, Regents Park Road, N.3. (FINchley 2588). OCTOPUS CLUB The Finchley Borough Council have continued to grant to the Octopus Club the use of the Indoor Bath at Squires Lane on alternate Sundays from 12.30 p.m. to 2 p.m. The total membership of the Club is about 50 and the average number of members who attend each session is about 26. 44 The Club does not confine itself to those who have suffered from poliomyelitis. Persons who have suffered from any kind of disablement may attend at the Bath, providing that each can produce a certificate from his family doctor stating that he is free from infection and would benefit from attending the swimming sessions. The cases are collected from a wide area by ambulance and cars (such arrangements being made by the British Polio Fellowship) and are assisted in changing and serving hot drinks, and also in the water by voluntary helpers, from the British Red Cross Society and members of various Swimming Clubs. The improvement physically and mentally has been most marked. This Club is an excellent illustration of the successful co-operation with and between the voluntary bodies. ST. JOHN AMBULANCE BRIGADE 93rd Ambulance Division (Men) Divisional Superintendent: A. T. Dickinson, 49, Ingleway, N.12. 133rd Nursing Division (Women) Divisional Superintendent: Miss M. K. Wading, 10, Nether Close, N.3. The St. John Ambulance Brigade can provide special nursing services in the home under the guidance of the family doctor. Escort duties can also be arranged. WOMEN'S VOLUNTARY SERVICE 308, Regents Park Road, N.3. Telephone: FINchley 2372. Clothing Depot—at the centre, where garments are received, and distributed by recommendation to those in need. Meals on Wheels Service—the distribution on recommendation, of hot dinners to housebound and disabled persons. During the year 10,637 meals were distributed (9,117 in 1963). Visiting and shopping undertaken for people in certain Homes. 1914-1918 War Widows and lonely old people also visited. Wool blankets made by knitting of six-inch squares from oddments of wool provided at the centre. Blankets given to the needy. Women of all ages welcomed to give their services. FINCHLEY GUILD OF SOCIAL SERVICE Information Centre provides free advice on personal or any other problems; helps with enquiries on current legislation prior to legal advice; e.g., housing and rent difficulties, domestic worries, pension queries, etc. All interviews are stricdy confidential. 45 Sympathetic help and advice is freely given, and in cases where legal help is necessary, it is arranged for the applicant to see a solicitor. Help for Invalids—elderly housebound, and patients discharged from hospital are visited where necessary, and assistance or advice is given in needful cases. "Wireless for the Bedridden" Society—the Guild acts as sponsor in providing radio sets for housebound invalids. During the summer, the Guild arranges holidays at special terms. Programmes are available from February onwards, on application. A "Workroom for the Elderly" is held at the East Finchley Methodist Church, High Road, N.2. The main purpose of the workroom is to keep elderly people fit and at the same time allowing them to earn small sums of money from repetitive work. This scheme is available to all elderly people in the Borough. All enquiries for services offered by the Finchley Guild of Social Service should be directed to their Secretary at the Municipal Offices, Hertford Lodge Annexe, East End Road, N.3. (Telephone: FINchley 2626). Hours 9.30 a.m. to 12.30 p.m., Monday to Friday, and 6 p.m. to 8 p.m. on Mondays. BRITISH LEGION The British Legion helps ex-service men and women and their dependants at times of difficulty through ill-health or other causes. Such people do not have to be Legion members. Assistance given with rent arrears, mortgage repayments, supplying coal and food, if necessary, hiring articles such as ladders and equipment, also helping with pension appeals. Committee meets at Granville Hall, Granville Road, N.12, on second Monday in every month. FINCHLEY RATEPAYERS' ASSOCIATION This is a body which exists for the benefit of the citizens of the Borough as a whole. It assists in preserving or improving amenities within the Borough. Problems of a local nature which it is felt require advice, or matters needing to be remedied, should be submitted to the Honorary Secretary of the Ratepayers' Association—H. A. Collis, Esq., 14, Hillcourt Avenue, N.12. (HILlside 4731). RETARDED CHILDREN'S AID SOCIETY, LTD. This non-profit making Society has two "Peter Pan" Homes which, although registered with the Hertfordshire County Council are available to children from all parts of the country. 46 The Home, at Butlin House, 104, Leicester Road, New Barnet, accommodates 11 mentally handicapped boys between the ages of 5 and 16 years and " The Sapsted," Peter Pan House, 2, Warwick Road, New Barnet, 11 girls in the same age group. The children are in the care of 5 housemothers with the assistance of daily helps and voluntary workers. The Homes are open to private patients and children recommended by the Middlesex, Hertfordshire, Wiltshire and London County Councils, the charge being £5 per week, the remainder of the cost being borne by the Society. The Society has its own training centre for the children of Hertfordshire, Wiltshire and London, but at the moment children from Middlesex attend the Friern Barnet Junior Training Centre at Oakleigh Road North, N.20. Enquiries should be made to the Honorary Secretary, 21, East End Road, N.3 (FINchley 2780). MIDDLESEX AND SURREY LEAGUE FOR THE HARD OF HEARING The following activities are available at the Finchley group — games, socials, competitions, exhibitions, discussions, debates, talks, lip-reading and clear speech practice, arm-chair travel with coloured slides, advice and help with all problems of hearing. Members may participate in conferences, week-end courses, and other functions organised by the League, and by the British Association for the Hard-ofHearing, to which the League is affiliated. Home visits are arranged for the sick and housebound members. Members may also join in the various holidays organised during the year. Finchley Meetings: 1st and 3rd Tuesdays in each month, 7—9 p.m. at 7, Woodside Grove, N.12. Lip-reading Circle: Fridays, 2.30 p.m.—4 p.m. at the Further Education Centre, Stanhope Road, N.12. Sketching Circle: 2nd Monday in the month. Location not yet finally settled. Enquiries to the Secretary, Miss Mary Taylor, 24, Quakers Lane, Potters Bar, Middlesex. (Tel.: Potters Bar 58373). Miss Taylor will be pleased to lecture to other organisations on the problems of the hard-of-hearing. 47 ALCOHOLICS ANONYMOUS Alcoholics Anonymous is a following of men and women who share their experience, strength and hope with each other that they may solve their common problem and help others to recover from alcoholism. Service Offices: England and Wales—11, Redcliffe Gardens, London, S.W.10. Telephone: FLAxman 9669 and 9779). London Inter-Group—(Telephone: PADdington 8947 and 6389). (A service operates at this office from 10 a.m. to 10 p.m. Monday to Saturday and 2 p.m. to 10 p.m. on Sunday.) There are about 40 meetings held in the Greater London area on various nights of the week. Normally these meetings are "closed" when the attendance is restricted to members and people who suspect that they have a drinking problem. Every group, however, has at least one meeting a month which is "open" and which can be attended by friends and relatives of alcoholics or those interested in the disease. Full details and addresses of all meetings in the United Kingdom are included in the pamphlet "Where to Find Alcoholics Anonymous" or can be obtained by ringing one of the numbers given above. THE SAMARITANS The Samaritans exist to help those tempted to suicide or despair and immediate contact can be made at any hour of the day or night. The "clients" may, if they wish, remain anonymous and be befriended or counselled only over the telephone; but the vast majority trust the Samaritans sufficiently to reveal their identity and to meet them face to face, for they know that their problems are treated in the strictest confidence. Emergency calls: Telephone: MANsion House 9000 Other calls: Telephone: MANsion House 2277 St. Stephen's Church, Walbrook, London, E.C.4. The Rev. Chad Varah, Rector. USEFUL INFORMATION MINISTRY OF PENSIONS AND NATIONAL INSURANCE 40/44, Ballards Lane, Finchley, N.3. Telephone: FINchley 4071. NATIONAL ASSISTANCE BOARD 40/44, Ballards Lane, Finchley, N.3. Telephone: FINchley 6646. 48 REGISTRAR OF BIRTHS, DEATHS AND MARRIAGES Mrs. E. E. Govier, 1, Friern Park, North Finchley, N.12. Telephone : HILlside 4768. Hours of attendance to the Public:— Monday, 10 a.m. to 12.30 p.m. and 2 p.m. to 4 p.m. Tuesday, 2 p.m. to 4 p.m. Wednesday, 10 a.m. to 12.30 p.m. and 2 p.m. to 4 p.m. Thursday, 10 a.m. to 12.30 p.m. Friday, 2 p.m. to 4 p.m. Saturday, 9 a.m. to 11 a.m. Superintendent Registrar : Mr. W. E. Robinson, 182, Burnt Oak Broadway, Edgware. Telephone : EDGware 0876. Daily, 10 a.m. to 12.30 p.m. and 2 p.m. to 4 p.m. Saturday, 10 a.m. to 12 noon. THE FAMILY PLANNING ASSOCIATION—FINCHLEY BRANCH Clinics at Health Centre, Oak Lane, N.2. on Thursdays at 7 p.m. Honorary Clinic Secretary: Mrs. B. Rowley, 62, Corringham Road, N.W.11. (Telephone : SPEedwell 7802). MARRIAGE GUIDANCE COUNCIL Moss Hall Junior School, Moss Hall Grove, N.3, on Monday evenings (by appointment). Full particulars from the Secretary, 73, Crouch Hall Road, N.8. (Telephone : MOUntview 8223). BOROUGH ENGINEER AND SURVEYOR A telephone call will secure the removal of household junk such as unwanted furniture and material too large for the dustbin:— 294/296, Regents Park Road, N.3. FINchley 1136, Ext. 13 and 20 or Refuse Collection Depot, Summers Lane, N.12. ENTerprise 2629 49 STATISTICS Area (in acres) 3,478 Population— Registrar-General's estimate Mid 1964 70,390 Census, 1961 69,370 Number of Inhabited Dwellings, 1st April, 1964:— Houses and flats 21,515 Other properties with living accommodation 445 Rateable Value at 1st April, 1964 £5,218,082 Product of a penny rate 1964/5 £20,900 VITAL STATISTICS—PROVISIONAL LIVE BIRTHS Males Females Total Legitimate 571 520 1,091 Illegitimate 21 17 38 592 537 1,129 Rate per 1,000 population 16.0 Area Comparability Factor 0.96 Corrected rate 15.4 Illegitimate live births per cent. of total live births 3.4% STILLBIRTHS 7 1 8 Total live and stillbirths 599 538 1,137 Rate per 1,000 live and stillbirths — — 7.0 INFANT DEATHS (under 1 year of age) 6 3 9 Rate per 1,000 live births — — 8.0 NEO-NATAL DEATHS (under 4 weeks of age) 5 2 7 Rate per 1,000 live births — — 6.2 50 EARLY NEO-NATAL DEATHS (under 1 week of age) 2 1 3 Rate per 1,000 live births — — 2.7 PERI-NATAL DEATHS (stillbirths and deaths under 1 week of age) 9 2 11 Rate per 1,000 live and stillbirths — — 9.7 MATERNAL MORTALITY (including abortion) — — 2 Rate per 1,000 live and stillbirths — — 1.8 DEATHS FROM ALL CAUSES 379 430 809 Rate per 1,000 population — — 11.5 Area Comparability Factor — — 0.90 Corrected rate — — 10.3 51 INFANTILE MORTALITY Deaths from stated causes at various ages under one year of age CAUSE OF DEATH Under 1 week 1-2 weeks 2-3 weeks 3-4 weeks Total under 4 weeks 4 weeks and under 3 months 3-6 months 6-9 months 9-12 months TOTAL Smallpox — — — — — — — — — — Chicken Pox — — — — — — — — — — Measles — — — — — — — — — — Scarlet Fever — — — — — — — — — — Whooping Cough — — — — — — — — — — Diphtheria and Croup — — — — — — — — — — Erysipelas — — — — — — — — — — Tuberculous Meningitis — — — — — — — — — — Meningitis (not Tuberculous) — — — — — — — — — — Convulsions — — — — — — — — — — Laryngitis — — — — — — — — — — Bronchitis — — — — — — — — — — Pneumonia (all forms) 1 — 1 — 2 — 1 — — 3 Diarrhoea — — — — — — — — — — Enteritis — — — — — — — — — — Gastritis — — — — — — — — — — Syphilis — — — — — — — — — — Rickets — — — — — — — — — — Suffocation, Overlying — — — — — — — — — — Asphyxia Neonatorum — — — — — — — — — — Injury at Birth — — — — — — — — — — Atelectasis — — — — — — — — — — Congenital Malformations — 2 1 1 4 — — — — 4 Premature Birth 2 — — — 2 — — — — 2 Atrophy, Debility and Marasmus — — — — — — — — — — Accidents — — — — — — — — — — Leukaemia — — — — — — — — — — Tumours — — — — — — — — — — Other Causes — — — — — — — — — — TOTALS 3 2 2 1 8 — 1 — — 9 52 CAUSES OF, AND AGES AT, DEATH No. CAUSES OF DEATH NET DEATHS AT THE SUBJOINED AGES OF " RESIDENTS " WHETHER OCCURRING WITHIN OR WITHOUT THE DISTRICT All ages Under 4 weeks 4 weeks and under 1 year 1 and under 5 5 and under 15 15 and under 25 25 and under 35 35 and under 45 45 and under 55 55 and under 65 65 and under 75 75 and over 1. Tuberculosis, Respiratory 5 — — — — — — — 1 1 2 1 2. Tuberculosis, Other — — — — — — — — — — — — 3. Syphilitic Disease — — — — — — — — — — — — 4. Diphtheria — — — — — — — — — — — — 5. Whooping Cough — — — — — — — — — — — — 6. Meningococcal Infections — — — — — — — — — — — — 7. Acute Poliomyelitis — — — — — — — — — — — — 8. Measles — — — — — — — — — — — — 9. Other Infective and Parasitic Diseases — — — — — — — — — — — — 10. Malignant Neoplasm, Stomach 27 — — — — — — 1 5 6 6 9 11. Malignant Neoplasm, Lung, Bronchus 55 — — — — — — — 8 22 17 8 12. Malignant Neoplasm, Breast 22 — — — — — — 1 1 9 6 5 13. Malignant Neoplasm, Uterus 5 — — — — — — — 1 3 1 — 14. Other Malignant and Lymphatic Neoplasms 83 — — — — 2 4 3 8 20 19 76 15. Leukæmia, Aleukæmia 6 — — 1 — — 2 — — 3 — — 16. Diabetes 3 — — — — — — — — — — 3 17. Vascular Lesions of Nervous System 91 — — — — — — — 4 12 26 49 18. Coronary Disease, Angina 195 — — — — — — 3 11 35 54 92 19. Hypertension with Heart Disease 8 — — — — — — 1 — 1 1 5 20. Other Heart Disease 78 — — — — — 1 1 — 4 14 58 21. Other Circulatory Disease 47 — — — — — — 1 3 3 13 27 22. Influenza — — — — — — — — — — — — 23. Pneumonia 58 1 1 1 — 1 — — 1 3 10 40 24. Bronchitis 26 — — — — — — — 2 5 7 17 25. Other Diseases of Respiratory System 5 — — — — — — — — 2 — 3 26. Ulcer of Stomach and Duodenum 9 — — — — 1 — — — — 4 4 27. Gastritis, Enteritis and Diarrhœa 2 — — — — — — — 1 — — 1 28. Nephritis and Nephrosis 9 — — — — — — 1 2 1 3 2 29. Hyperplasia of Prostate — — — — — — — — — — — — 30. Pregnancy, Childbirth, Abortion 2 — — — — — 2 — — — — — 31. Congenital Malformations 7 4 — — — 1 — — — — — 7 32. Other Defined and Ill-Defined Diseases 34 2 1 1 1 — 2 2 3 8 3 11 33. Motor Vehicle Accidents 10 — — 1 — 3 1 — 1 2 — 7 34. All Other Accidents 11 — — — — 1 2 2 3 1 1 7 35. Suicide 11 — — — — 1 2 2 3 1 1 1 36. Homicide and Operations of War — — — — — — — — — — — — Totals 809 7 2 4 2 10 17 17 55 144 188 363 53 VITAL STATISTICS FOR THE PAST 25 YEARS Year Total Live Births Birth Rate Total Deaths Death Rate Total Infant Deaths Infantile Mortality Rate Deaths from Measles Deaths from Whooping Cough Deaths from Diarrhoea (under 2 years) 1940 725 12.1 806 12.9 27 38.0 1 — 2 1941 721 12.4 734 12.7 15 21.8 — 3 1 1942 891 14.9 751 12.5 48 53.9 1 7 3 1943 1035 17.1 790 13.0 57 55.1 1 2 4 1944 1037 17.4 830 13.9 34 32.8 — 5 5 1945 987 16.1 725 11.8 36 36.4 1 — 1 1946 1207 17.6 774 11.3 30 24.9 1 1 5 1947 1319 18.7 830 11.7 27 20.5 — 1 4 1948 1086 15.3 763 10.8 30 27.6 — 1 2 1949 981 13.9 834 11.8 19 19.3 — — 2 1950 962 13.6 819 11.6 16 16.6 — — — 1951 915 13.0 877 12.5 22 24.0 — — — 1952 953 13.6 782 11.1 11 11.5 — — — 1953 902 12.9 765 10.9 20 22.2 — — — 1954 877 12.5 747 10.7 16 18.2 — — — 1955 894 12.8 746 10.7 19 21.3 — — — 1956 910 13.0 831 11.9 12 13.2 — — — 1957 925 13.3 781 11.3 16 17.3 — — — 1958 902 13.1 825 11.9 18 20.0 — — — 1959 932 13.5 790 11.5 19 20.4 — — — 1960 1052 15.3 738 10.7 14 13.3 — — — 1961 989 14.4 847 12.3 23 23.3 — — — 1962 1118 16.2 815 11.8 15 13.4 — — — 1963 1106 16.0 854 12.3 18 16.3 — — — 1964 1129 16.0 809 11.5 9 8.0 — — — * Figures for January to November only available—see page 54 ROAD ACCIDENTS Number of persons injured ADULTS CHILDREN Fatal Serious Slight Fatal Serious Slight Pedestrians 4 25 48 1 6 24 Pedal Cyclists — 8 28 — 1 13 Motor Cyclists 1 6 36 — — — Scooterists 1 12 34 — — — Moped Riders 1 — 5 — — — Drivers : Private Cars 1 16 106 — — — Goods Vehicles — 2 22 — — — Passengers: Private Cars 4 7 94 — — 4 Pillion Passengers — 4 15 — — — Public Service Vehicles — 3 15 — — 1 Goods Vehicles — — 9 — — — Sidecar Passengers — 1 2 — — — 12 84 414 1 7 42 55 Comparative Figures of Accidents and Casualties for the years 1960-1964 1960 1961 1962 1963 1964 Road Accidents 483 441 440 412 413 Casualty Figures : Adults : Killed : Under 60 years of age 1 2 4 2 8 Over 60 years of age 2 1 3 4 4 Seriously injured : Under 60 years of age 64 74 90 83 72 Over 60 years of age 16 18 13 12 12 Slightly injured : Under 60 years of age 413 384 347 367 388 Over 60 years of age 44 34 26 29 26 TOTALS 540 513 483 497 510 Children : Killed 1 1 — 1 1 Seriously injured 5 10 18 2 7 Slightly injured 60 53 52 40 42 TOTALS 66 64 70 43 50 GRAND TOTALS 606 577 553 540 560 56 METEOROLOGICAL DATA AVENUE HOUSE GROUNDS, FINCHLEY, N.3 MONTH RAINFALL TEMPERATURE DIRECTION OF WIND (Days) Total Inches Greatest in 24 Hours Days on which 0.01 in. or more fell Mean Maximum Minimum No. of Nights at or below 32° F. S.W. Quadrant including W. S.E. Quadrant including S. N.E. Quadrant including E. N.W. Quadrant including N. Depth inches Date Degrees Date Degrees Date Jan. 0.78 0.27 27 12 37.3 48 30 22 14 11 12 4 8 7 Feb. 1.04 0.31 28 10 40.7 55 28 24 20 12 12 3 7 March 3.20 0.93 14 13 40.7 58 14 27 8 14 10 3 13 5 April 3.58 0.82 20 17 48.3 67 27 30 6 1 19 2 5 4 May 2.27 0.85 30 12 58.4 79 13 43 1 and 15 — 31 — — — June 4.19 0.96 1 17 * * 25 — 3 2 July 2.76 1.56 21 11 64.0 80 26 47 10 — 20 11 — — August 1.41 0.49 18 16 63.8 86 28 42 20 — 1 6 — 10 Sept 0.48 0.21 14 7 60.2 78 11 40 21 — 13 9 — 8 Oct. 1.44 0.25 6 14 48.0 69 6 32 17 1 8 2 3 18 Nov. 1.80 0.59 13 13 46.2 57 16 and 20 25 30 2 14 8 3 5 Dec. 1.73 0.46 12 17 37.8 56 9 19 29 17 9 1 18 3 Year 1964 24.68 1.56 21 July 159 — — — — — — 188 49 60 69 * June—Instrument out of order. 57 PREVALENCE AND CONTROL OF INFECTIOUS AND OTHER DISEASES Cases of Infectious Disease Notified during the Years 1960 to 1964 DISEASE 1960 1961 1962 1963 1964 Scarlet Fever 19 18 9 7 9 Whooping Cough 25 11 2 41 14 Poliomyelitis : Paralytic — — — — — Non-Paralytic — — — — — Measles 74 1173 150 739 116 Diphtheria — — — — — Dysentery 45 13 17 32 15 Meningococcal Infection 1 1 — 1 — Pneumonia 12 8 3 9 5 Smallpox — — — — — Encephalitis : Infective — 1 — — 17 Post-Infectious — 1 — — — Typhoid Fever — — — 1 — Paratyphoid Fever 1 — — 1 1 Erysipelas 2 2 1 — — Food Poisoning 4 17 7 6 11 Tuberculosis : Respiratory 25 34 24 23 16 Meninges & C.N.S — — — — — Other 1 — 2 4 8 Puerperal Pyrexia 26 25 23 18 28 Ophthalmia Neonatorum 1 2 2 2 1 Anthrax — — — — — TOTALS 236 1306 240 884 241 58 Ages of Cases of Infectious Diseases Notified DISEASE Under 1 1 2 3 4 5/9 10/ 14 15/ 24 25/ 34 35/ 44 45/ 64 65 + Scarlet Fever — — — — — 8 1 — — — — — Whooping Cough 1 1 4 2 1 4 — 1 — — — — Poliomyelitis : Paralytic — — — — — — — — — — — — Non-Paralytic — — — — — — — — — — — — Measles 2 11 18 14 14 48 5 3 1 — — — Diphtheria — — — — — — — — — — — — Dysentery — — — 1 1 4 1 2 6 — — — Meningococcal Infection — — — — — — — — — — — — Pneumonia — — — — — 1 1 1 — — 1 1 Smallpox — — — — — — — — — — — — Encephalitis: Infective — — — — — 3 1 2 5 2 4 — Post-Infectious — — — — — — — — — — — — Typhoid Fever — — — — — — — — — — — — Paratyphoid Fever — — — — — — — — 1 — — — Erysipelas — — — — — — — — — — — — Food Poisoning — — — — — 1 4 1 — 3 2 — Tuberculosis : Respiratory — — — — — 1 — 2 5 2 3 3 Meninges & C.N.S. — — — — — — — — — — — — Other — — — — — — — 1 1 3 1 2 Puerperal Pyrexia — — — — — — — 19 9 — — — Ophthalmia Neonatorum 1 — — — — — — — — — — — Anthrax — — — — — — — — — — — — TOTALS 4 12 22 17 16 70 13 32 28 10 11 6 TUBERCULOSIS The following table shows the number of notifications and the number of deaths during the past 10 years:— Year New Cases Deaths Pulmonary Non-Pulmonary Pulmonary Non-Pulmonary M. F. M. F. M. F. M. F. 1955 27 20 2 3 6 1 1 1 1956 22 10 2 4 6 2 — — 1957 15 11 1 2 5 2 — — 1958 19 10 — — 2 — — — 1959 14 9 — 3 2 — — — 1960 15 10 — 1 6 2 — — 1961 19 14 — — 1 — — — 1962 12 12 1 1 — 2 — — 1963 15 8 1 3 1 1 — 1 1964 9 7 4 4 4 59 VACCINATION AND IMMUNISATION Diphtheria Immunisation, etc.: By General Practitioners By Medical Officers of the Local Authority (1) Children immunised : Diphtheria only 1 18 Tetanus only 28 77 Diph. & Tetanus Primary 33 60 Triple Primary 529 188 Triple Booster 203 178 Diph. & Tetanus Booster 93 79 Quadrilin Primary 4 — (2) Children immunised with combined diphtheria and whooping cough prophylactic — 3 (3) Children given "Booster" doses of diphtheria prophylactic alone 72 299 Tetanus Booster 8 11 (4) Children given " Booster" doses of combined diphtheria and whooping cough prophylactic — — Whooping Cough Immunisation : (5) Children immunised 3 4 (6) Children given " Booster" doses of whooping cough vaccine — — Vaccination against Smallpox : (7) Persons vaccinated for the first time 347 251 (8) Persons re-vaccinated 128 — Vaccination against Poliomyelitis : (9) Persons who received a reinforcing dose 306 216 (10) Persons who completed a primary course of vaccination 618 423 B.C.G. Vaccination : Number of children eligible 1040 Number of forms received 572 (55%) Initial skin test: Number tested 545 Number absent 27 Results of test reading : Number found with negative reaction 508 Number found with positive reaction 23 Number absent 14 B.C.G. Vaccination : Number of negative reactors vaccinated 507 60 BACTERIOLOGICAL WORK The following table shows the number and nature of reports received concerning specimens examined at the Central Public Health Laboratory, Colindale:— Positive Negative Throat-Nose Swabs : Haemolytic Streptococci 72 179 Vincents Angina 3 Coagulase Pos. Staphylococci 3 Yeast Cells 3 Candida Albicans 2 Strep, pneumoniae 2 Haemophilus Para influenzae 1 Faeces: Sonne Dysentery 63 297 Salmonella 18 Esch. Coli 1 CI. welchii 1 Parasites (worms) 1 Sputum : T.B. Smear 2 39 Other Organisms 6 Urine : Coliform Group 1 3 Myco. T.B. 1 Mycobaterium Type II 1 Pus : Coagulase Pos. Staphylococci 2 3 Proteus Group 1 61 WATER SUPPLY TO FINCHLEY (1) Chemical Samples Examined No. of Samples Examined Raw Water mg/1. No. of Samples Examined Treated Water mg/1. Lead Fluoride Lead Fluoride Essendon Pumping Station 10 Absent Less than 0.2 11 Absent Less than 0.2 Hatfield Pumping Station 11 Absent Less than 0.2 11 Absent Less than 0.2 Northaw Pumping Station 2 Absent 0.7 2 Absent 0.7 North Mimms Pumping Station 12 Absent Less than 0.2 12 Absent Less than 0.2 Roestock Pumping Station 1 Absent Less than 0.2 3 Absent Less than 0.2 Tyttenhanger Pumping Station — — — 2 Absent Less than 0.2 Cecil Road (20" main) — — — 4 Absent Less than 0.2 Arkley Reservoir — — — 5 Absent Less than 0.2 Total 36 50 (2) Bacteriological Analysis of Pumping Station Raw Waters Pumping Stations No. of Samples Examined E. Coli ABS/100 Mis. E. Coli Present in Mis. 100 50 10 1.0 0.1 0.01 Essendon 50 4 2 7 21 13 3 — Hatfield 50 22 4 2 13 8 1 — Northaw 22 17 3 2 — — — — North Mimms 51 — — 3 20 13 15 — Roestock 9 4 2 2 1 — — — Tyttenhanger 5 5 — — — — — — Total 187 52 11 16 55 34 19 — (3) Bacteriological Analysis of Pumping Station Treated Waters Pumping Stations Number of Samples Examined Number of Samples E. Coli— Absent/ 100ml. % Purity Treated Water Samples Essendon 50 50 100 Hatfield 52 52 100 Northaw 22 22 100 North Mimms 366 366 100 Roestock 23 23 100 Tyttenhanger 23 23 100 Total 536 536 62 SMOKE CONTROL AREAS Area of the Borough (in acres) 3,478 Total number of properties as at 1st April, 1964 26,040 Areas in operation Area. No. of Premises Acreage 1. Basing Estate, N.3 200 13 2. The Grange, N.2 291 10 3. Elmshurst Estate, N.2 171 10 4. Part of Hampstead Garden Suburb, N.2 and N.W.11 1,546 446 5. Part of Hampstead Garden Suburb, N.2 and East Finchley 932 110 6. Bounded by North Circular Road, London Transport Board Railway, Deansway, Brim Hill, Widecombe Way, Lyttelton Road and Falloden Way 2,414 316 7. Bounded by Regents Park Road, London Transport Board Railway and North Circular Road 1,934 207 8. Bounded by Borough boundary, London Transport Board Railway (Mill Hill Branch), Regents Park Road and North Circular Road 2,089 337 9. Bounded by North Circular Road, Borough boundary, Fortis Green, East End Road and London Transport Board Railway 2,812 400 12,389 1,849 Surveys completed during 1964—to come into operation in autumn of 1965 10. Bounded by High Road, Granville Road, Ballards Lane, Kingsway, Woodhouse Road, Borough boundary and North Circular Road 1,673 317 11. Bounded by Granville Road, High Road, North Circular Road, London Transport Board Railway and Ballards Lane 2,903 263 16,965 2,429 Survey commenced during 1964 12. Bounded by Argyle Road, Alexandra Grove, Ballards Lane, London Transport Board Railway (Mill Hill branch) and Borough boundary Survey not completed 63 FOOD PREMISES 1. The number and type of food premises:— (a) Bakers, etc. 26 (b) Butchers 46 (c) Confectioners 105 (d) Fishmongers 13 (e) Greengrocers 48 (f) Grocers and provisions 97 (g) Restaurants, Cafes, Canteens, etc 140 Total 475 2. The number and type of food premises registered under Section 16 of the Food and Drugs Act, 1955:— (a) Sale of Ice Cream 157 (b) Manufacture of Sausages 33 (c) Cooking of Hams 10 (d) Pickling of Meat 20 (e) Preparation of pickled and preserved food 10 (f) Cooking of Poultry 2 Total 232 3. Summary of work carried out in connection with the equipment:— First aid materials provided 6 Food screening provided 1 Lighting provided 1 Machines cleaned or repaired 4 Nailbrushes provided 1 Oven provided 1 Refrigerators cleaned or provided 4 Soap provided 3 Towels provided 5 Wash hand notices provided 3 Water heaters repaired or provided 9 64 UNSOUND FOOD CONDEMNED Canned Total lbs. Weight ozs. Beverages 58 9 Corned Beef 32 13 Cream 1 14 Fish 100 1 Fruit 3031 4 Fruit Juice 412 7 Fruit Pudding/Pie 4 4 Ham 2 12 Jam 238 6 Luncheon Meat 8 13 Macaroni 15½ Marmalade 16 13 Meat 225 11 Meat Pudding/Pie 2 6½ Milk 133 1 Paste 15 Ravioli 6 15 Rice Pudding 43 4 Sausages 8 Soup 1 5 Sweet Corn 47 10 Tomatoes 433 15 Vegetables 127 15 Fresh Total lbs. Weight ozs. Eggs — — 1080 Fish 56 — Fruit 37 — Meat 3504 — Rabbit 3 12 65 Prepared Total lbs. Weight ozs. Biscuits 129 12 Butter 439 — Cake — — 22 pieces Cereal 8 4 Cheese 182 7 Cream — — 3 cartons Dried Fruit 148 — Flour 216 — Lard 48 — Marzipan 24 — Meat Pies 21 2 Paste 2 4 Pastry — 8 Sugar 1181 — Tapioca 20 — Tea 131 — Vegetables 20 10½ Frozen Foods Packets Cheeseburgers 42 Chicken 14 Eclairs 9 Fish 962 Fruit 3 Ice Cream 86 Meat 326 Meat Pudding/Pie 94 Mousse 138 Pastry 100 Sponges 20 Sweet Corn 32 Vegetables 2096 66 SUMMARY OF INSPECTIONS AND VISITS Initial Inspections under Housing Acts and Public Health Acts 1,962 Other inspections, including advisory visits 774 Re-Inspections 1,653 Overcrowding 45 Houses let in multiple occupation 24 Infectious Disease 232 Rodent Control 1,664 Clean Air Act, 1956 (including smoke control area surveys) 10,219 Factories and Workplaces (including Bakehouses and Restaurant Kitchens) 379 Slaughterhouse 8 Cowsheds, Dairies and Milkshops 5 Ice Cream Premises 17 Meat, Fish and Other Food Premises 610 Hawkers, Vehicles and Stores 44 Hairdressers' Premises 20 Pet Animals Act, 1951 6 Animal Boarding Establishments Act, 1963 31 Shops Acts 72 Offices, Shops and Railway Premises Act, 1963 87 Miscellaneous 4,143 21,995 COMPLAINTS AND REQUESTS FOR SERVICES Defective roofs 37 Insanitary or defective condition of premises 96 Damp premises 54 Blocked or defective drains 568 Defective W.C.s 12 Defective water fittings 12 Flooding 34 Unsatisfactory housing conditions, including overcrowding 11 Dustbins, defective or absence of 10 Accumulation of refuse 72 67 Refuse collection 24 Smoke nuisance 22 Bonfires 57 Noise nuisance 7 Animals improperly kept 4 Verminous premises 9 Wasps 163 Bees 12 Other insect infestations 56 Rats or mice infestation 317 Squirrels 8 Pigeons 6 Unsound food 23 Foreign matter in food 16 Dirty milk bottles 11 Water supply unsatisfactory 4 Miscellaneous 91 1,736 SUMMARY OF DEFECTS REMEDIED AND WORK CARRIED OUT Roofs repaired 72 Rainwater pipes and gutters unstopped, renewed or repaired 58 Dampness remedied 88 Walls and ceilings repaired 106 Rooms cleansed, distempered or re-papered 88 Windows and doors repaired or renewed 72 Flooring repaired 47 Water fittings provided, repaired or renewed 11 Drainage reconstructed, repaired or renewed 113 Drains unstopped or cleansed 435 W.Cs. and sanitary fittings provided, repaired or renewed 81 Tests of drains and sanitary fittings 33 Length in yards of drains laid 17 Miscellaneous defects, dilapidations and nuisances abated 219 68 HOUSING Recommendations by the Public Health Department on applications for rehousing, etc.:— Medical Statutory Overcrowding* General Waiting List Handicapped Persons Elderly Persons Points 1 18 — — 10 2 13 — — 4 3 11 — — — 4 8 — — 2 5 3 — — — Urgent or special consideration 9 1 19 — No recommendation 27 2 22 — Observations were given on the medical condition of five council tenants. During the year, 51 of the cases supported by the Department were rehoused. * Five cases, although living outside the district, were considered and are included in this list. STATUTORY OVERCROWDING Persons Involved Dwellings Families Adults Children Number at 1st January 34 35 102 51 New cases reported 16 16 41 43 Number of cases relieved 25 25 60 55 Number outstanding at 31st Dec. 25 26 83 39 No further overcrowding has occurred in those dwellings dealt with by the Council. 69 HOUSING STATISTICS 1. Inspection of Dwelling-houses : (1) (a) Total number of dwelling-houses inspected for housing defects (under Public Health or Housing Acts) 1,962 (b) Number of inspections made for the purpose 3,615 (2) (a) Number of dwelling-houses (included under sub-head (1) above) which were inspected and recorded under the Housing Consolidated Regulations, 1925 — (b) Number of inspections made for the purpose — (3) Number of dwelling-houses found to be in a state so dangerous or injurious to health as to be unfit for human habitation 1 (4) Number of dwelling-houses (exclusive of those referred to under the preceding sub-head) found not to be in all respects reasonably fit for human habitation 228 2. Remedy of defects during the year without service of formal notices : Number of defective dwelling-houses rendered fit in consequence of informal action 122 3. Action under Statutory Powers during the year : A. Proceedings under Sections 9, 10 and 12 of the Housing Act, 1957: (1) Number of dwelling-houses in respect of which notices were served requiring repairs — (2) Number of dwelling-houses which were rendered fit after service of formal notices : (a) By owners — (b) By Local Authority in default of owners — B. Proceedings under Public Health Acts : (1) Number of dwelling-houses in respect of which notices were served requiring defects to be remedied 10 (2) Number rendered fit: (a) By owners 3 (b) By Local Authority in default of owners 1 C. Proceedings under Section 17 of the Housing Act, 1957 : (1) Number of dwelling-houses in respect of which Demolition Orders were made — (2) Number of dwelling-houses demolished in pursuance of Demolition Orders — 70 RENT ACT, 1957 Applications for Certificate of Disrepair 1957 (approximate 6 months) 60 applications 1958 50 applications 1959 14 applications 1960 8 applications 1961 3 applications 1962 Nil 1963 2 applications 1964 3 applications SHOPS ACT, 1950 Particulars in regard to shops on the record kept in the department are as follows:— Number on Register at beginner of year 927 Number closed 10 New Shops 3 Number on Register at end of year 920 Changes of Occupant 8 71 OFFICES, SHOPS AND RAILWAY PREMISES ACT, 1963 Period covered from 1st May to 31st December Table A— Registrations and General Inspections Class of premises No. of premises registered Total registered premises at end of year Registered premises receiving a general inspection Offices 178 176 12 Retail shops 366 366 43 Wholesale shops, warehouses 24 24 1 Catering establishments open to the public, canteens 32 32 - Fuel Storage depots 1 1 - TOTALS 601 599 56 Table B— Number of Visits of all kinds by Inspectors to Registered Premises 87 Table C— Analysis of Persons Employed in Registered Premises by Workplace Class of workplace No. of persons employed Offices 2,668 Retail shops 2,114 Wholesale departments, warehouses 548 Catering establishments open to the public 251 Canteens 72 Fuel storage depots 10 TOTAL 5,663 Total Males 2,875 Total Females 2,788 72 FACTORIES AND WORKSHOPS 1. Inspections for purposes of provisions as to health made during the yea. Premises Number on Register Number of Inspections Written Notices Occupiers prosecuted (i) Factories in which Sections 1, 2, 3, 4 and 6 are to be enforced by Local Authorities 129 161 - - (ii) Factories not included in (i) in which Section 7 is enforced by the Local Authority 198 206 7 - (iii) Other Premises in which Section 7 is enforced by the Local Authority (excluding out-workers' premises) 9 - - - TOTAL 336 367 7 — 2. Cases in which Defects were found. Particulars Number of cases in which defects were found Number of cases in which prosecutions were instituted Found Remedied Referred To H.M. Inspector Referred By H.M. Inspector Want of Cleanliness (S.l) 8 8 - 1 - Overcrowding (S.2) — — — — — Unreasonable Temperature (S.3) - - - - - Inadequate ventilation (S.4) 1 — 1 — Ineffective drainage of floors (S.6) - - - - - Sanitary Conveniences (S.7)— (a) Insufficient 6 3 — — — (b) Unsuitable or defective 3 4 — — — (c) Not separate for sexes 1 1 — 1 — Other offences against the Act (not including offences relating to Outwork) 9 7 - - - TOTAL 28 23 1 2 — 73 3. The total number of Factories and Workplaces on the Register was 336 made up as follows:— Bakehouses 16 Boot Repairers 22 Builders' Workshops 16 Cycle Makers and Repairers 4 General Engineers and Motor Engineers 55 Glass Blowers 1 Joinery Manufacturers 1 Laundries 2 Monumental Masons 3 Plant Propagation 1 Plastic Manufacturers 2 Prepared Meat Factories 1 Printers and Printers' Accessories 11 Restaurant Kitchens 92 Sheet Metal Workers 1 Shopfitters 1 Tailors and Dressmakers 15 Temperature Recording Instrument Manufacturers 1 Timber Merchants and Sawyers 9 Upholsterers 9 Watch and Clock Repairers 4 X-Ray Apparatus 1 Other Trades 68 74 DISINFECTION AND DISINFESTATTON In addition to the inspections made by the public health inspectors, the disinfectors carried out the following visits:— Disinfection 40 Disinfestation:— Bugs 6 Fleas 3 Cockroaches 1 Wasps 160 Bees 16 Lice 5 Flies 3 194 Removal of household rubbish, etc. 10 Summary of work carried out:— Disinfection : Rooms 11 Articles 213 Disinfestation: Rooms 33 Articles 265 A large number of verminous and dirty articles were destroyed. 75 RODENT CONTROL Summary of work carried out Type of Property (4) Total of Cols. (1), (2) & (3) (1) Local Authority (Other than Council Houses) (2) Dwelling Houses (inc. Council Houses) (3) Business Premises 1. Number of properties inspected as result of (a) Notification 10 230 25 265 (b) Survey 2 33 4 39 12 263 29 304 2. Total inspections carried out 68 1,470 126 1,664 3. Number of properties inspected which were found to be infested by (a) Rats 11 213 25 249 (b) Mice 1 53 4 58 12 266 29 307 4. Number of infested properties (in 3 above) treated by Local Authority 11 242 29 282 76 CONFERENCES AND COURSES The following conferences and courses were attended during the year :— Association of Public Health Inspectors : Annual Conference. Week-end School. Association of Public Health Lay Administrators : Summer School. Central Council for the Disabled : Study Conference on the London Government Act and the Welfare Services for the Physically Handicapped. Central Council for Health Education : Annual Conference— Fluoridation. Coal Utilisation Council : Course— Solid Fuel Appliances— 3 days. Home Safety Committee, Area 10 : Conference. Institute of Shops Act Administration : Conference. Metropolitan Education Joint Council : Course— Man in Management— 5 days. National Old People's Welfare Council: Conference on Community Care for the Elderly. National Society for Clean Air : Conference. Royal Society of Health : Conference. University of London : Course— Problems of Air Pollution in Perspective— 6 lectures. This list does not include the sessional meetings of the above and other professional societies. 77 INDEX Page Accidents, Road 7, 55, 56 Acknowledgments 34 Advances and Grants 26 Alcoholics Anonymous 48 Ambulance Service 39 Animal Boarding Establishments 31 Animals 31 Ante-Natal Clinics 35 Atmospheric Pollution 19 Bacteriological Work 61 Baths 14, 16 Births and Birth Rate 7, 50 British Legion 46 British Red Cross Society 44 Burial or Cremation 32 Caravans 30 Certificates of Disrepair 71 Chest X-ray 41 Children, Care and Welfare 42 Chiropody 35, 44 Cinema Admissions 13 Clean Air 18, 63 Clinic for the Elderly 36 Clubs for the Elderly 42 Committee Members 2 Complaints and Inspections 23 Conferences and Courses 33 Consumer Protection 31 Contents 6 Day Nursery 35 Deaths 7, 50, 52, 53 Defects Remedied and Work Carried Out 68 Diphtheria 8 Discretionary Grants 26 Diseases of Animals 32 Disinfection and Disinfestation 29, 75 Domestic Help 36 Dysentery 8 Elderly, Welfare of the 13,39, 42 78 Page Employment, State of 14 Encephalitis 8 Exhumations 33 Factories 28,73, 74 Family Planning Association 49 Finchley Chest Clinic 41 Food 21 Food Complaints 23 Food Hygiene 21 Food Poisoning 8, 22 Food Premises 22, 64 Food Unfit for Human Consumption 21, 65, 66 Free Baths 14 General Information concerning services available 35 Grants and Advances 26 Guild of Social Service 45 Hawkers 22 Health Education 12 Health Services 35 Health Visiting 36 Heating Appliances 31 Home Nursing 35 Hospital Service 39 House Purchase 26 Houses in Multiple Occupation 25 Housing 24, 69, 70 Immunisation and Vaccination 11, 35, 37, 60 Improvement Areas 26 Improvement of Houses 26 Infant Welfare Clinics 35 Infectious and Other Diseases 8, 58, 59 Inspections and Complaints 23, 67 International Certificates of Vaccination 11 Land Charges 34 Laundry Service for the Incontinent 16 Marriage Guidance 49 Mass Radiography 10, 41 Measles 9 Medical Examinations 33 Members of Committees 2 Mental Health Services 37 79 Page Meteorological Data 57 Middlesex and Surrey League for the Hard of Hearing 47 Midwifery 35 Ministry of Pensions and National Insurance 8 Mortuary 33 National Assistance Board 48 Noise 30 Notices Served 23 Octopus Club 44 Offices, Shops and Railway Premises 27, 72 Oil Heaters 31 Old People's Homes 39 Old People's Welfare 42 Outstanding Notices 34 Outworkers 28 Overcrowding 25, 69 Paratyphoid 9 Personal Health Services 35 Persons in Need of Care and Attention 13 Pet Animals 31 Places of Public Entertainment 17 Poliomyelitis 9 Prevalence and Control of Infectious and Other Diseases 8, 58, 59 Prevention of Illness, Care and After-Care 36 Public Conveniences 17 Puerperal Pyrexia Rag Flock and Other Filling Materials 31 Ratepayers' Association 46 Refuse Collection and Disposal 18, 49 Registrar of Births, Deaths and Marriages 49 Retarded Children's Aid Society Ltd. 46 Riding Establishments 32 Road Accidents 7, 55, 56 Rodent Control 29, 76 St. John Ambulance Brigade 45 Samaritans 48 Sanitary Conveniences School Health Service 36 Services available Sewerage and Sewage Disposal 16 Shops and Offices 27, 71, 72 80 Page Slaughter of Animals 22 Slum Clearance and Individual Unfit Houses 25 Smoke Abatement 19 Smoke Control Areas 18, 63 Smoking and Health 12 Staff 3 Standard Grants 26 Statistics 7, 50 Subnormal Children 37 Swimming Pools 16 Tuberculosis 10, 41, 59 Typhoid Fever 10 Vaccination and Immunisation 11, 36, 37, 60 Venereal Disease 40 Vital Statistics 7, 50 Voluntary Services 42 Water Supply 15, 62 Welfare Foods 37 Welfare of the Elderly 13, 39,42 Welfare Services 38 Women's Voluntary Services 45 Workroom/Day Centre 13 Yellow Fever Vaccination 40 81 - Hendon Printing Works Limited 66, East Road, Burnt Oak 1 : ; -| I 'l Edgware, Middlesex Telephonei EDG. 6181 _ _ _ I "> i ■. 'f 1 ••'!;'! 1 '."J ~ "j '! "'N h "t;5 ■ I;- > r ril T'izt ;