439 II Finc 44 Library Borough of Finchley ANNUAL REPORT MEDICAL OFFICER OF HEALTH 1963 J.D. RUSSELL, M.B., B.S.(Syd.), D.P.H., Medical Officer of Health : Borough of Finchley ANNUAL REPORT of the MEDICAL OFFICER OF HEALTH 1963 J. D. RUSSELL, M.B., B.S.(Syd.), D.P.H., Medical Officer of Health MEMBERS OF THE PUBLIC HEALTH COMMITTEE as at 31st December, 1963 Chairman : Councillor Mrs. J. A. CLYNE Vice-Chairman : Councillor J. WEBB, M.C.S.P., M.Inst.S.M. THE MAYOR (Councillor FRANK DAVIS, J.P.) THE DEPUTY MAYOR (Councillor LEONARD SATTIN, M.A.) Alderman J. GORDON BRYSON, J.P. E. GRANT, O.B.E. C. J. HARTIGAN, C.C. A. T. PIKE, O.B.E., J.P. Councillor N. A. J. BURGESS A. D. COHEN, M.A. „ F. D. GIBSON „ A. N. R. GUNN, B.A. W. G. HART J. S. HILL P. W. MEYER N. J. SAPSTED, J.P. „ D. J. TERWEY MEMBERS OF THE COUNCIL APPOINTED TO VARIOUS BODIES CONCERNED WITH PUBLIC HEALTH WORK as at 31st December, 1963 Middlesex County Council Local Area (Health) Committee Alderman J. GORDON BRYSON, J.P. „ L. G. SNELLING Councillor Mrs. J. A. CLYNE „ J. S. HILL The Council of the National Society for Clean Air Councillor Mrs. J. A. CLYNE London and Home Counties Clean Air Advisory Council Councillor Mrs. J. A. CLYNE London Council of the Royal Society for the Prevention of Accidents Councillor H. I. ROSE 2 Middlesex Old People's Welfare Committee Councillor J. WEBB, M.C.S.P., M.Inst.S.M. Mrs. M. LOWE (Deputy) Finchley Old People's Welfare Committee THE MAYOR (Councillor FRANK DAVIS, J.P.) Alderman L. G. SNELLING H. H. WILMOT Councillor H. A. ALLWOOD C. A. ROBERTS Finchley Guild of Social Service THE MAYOR (Councillor FRANK DAVIS, J.P.) Alderman L. G. SNELLING H. H. WILMOT Councillor Mrs. J. A. CLYNE Mrs. M. LOWE STAFF OF THE PUBLIC HEALTH DEPARTMENT Medical Officer of Health : J. G. HAGAN, M.B., B.Ch., B.A.O., D.P.H. (Resigned 31/3/63) A. F. ADAMSON, M.D., M.B., Ch.B., D.P.H. (Temporary—1/4/63 to 19/7/63) J. D. RUSSELL, M.B., B.S.(Syd.), D.P.H. (Appointed 19/7/63) Acting Medical Officer of Health: J. L. PATTON, M.B., Ch.B., D.P.H. (Medical Officer of Health, Hendon) (This is a reciprocal arrangement with the Borough of Hendon) Chief Public Health Inspector: J. GRAY, M.B.E., F.R.S.H., F.A.P.H.I. Deputy Chief Public Health Inspector: K. J. MILLEN(1)(2) Public Health Inspectors: W. H. NICHOLLS(l)(2) J. P. DAVIES(l)(2) B. E. W. GABB(1)(2)(3) J. A. CUMMINS (1) (2) 3 Pupil Public Health Inspector: W. J. G. BATES (Obtained Public Health Inspector's Certificate, July, 1963; appointed Supernumerary Public Health Inspector on 1/10/63) Temporary Assistant (Smoke Control Areas): E. M. JENKINS (Obtained Public Health Inspector's Certificate, November, 1963) Chief Administrative Assistant: N. A. JUPP Clerks: Miss K. M. NICHOL A. G. FORSYTH Mrs. B. COSTELLO Miss E. J. STANLEY Miss C. BOULTON P. R. BURY Chief Disinfector, Rodent Operative and Mortuary Attendant: C. L. ASTLEY Assistant Disinfector, Rodent Operative and Mortuary Attendant: D. H. W. SMITH Drain Tester and Handyman: H. J. MAY Caretaker (308, Regents Park Road, N.3) : Mrs. I. G. MAY (1) Public Health Inspector's Certificate. (2) Meat and Other Foods Certificate. (3) Smoke Inspector's Certificate. 4 Telephone No.: FINchley 0018 Public Health Department, 308, Regents Park Road, Finchley, N.3. TO THE MAYOR, ALDERMEN AND COUNCILLORS OF THE BOROUGH OF FINCHLEY. Mr. Mayor, Ladies and Gentlemen, I have the honour to present my report on the health of the sanitary circumstances of the Borough of Finchley for the year 1963. Dr. J. G. Hagan retired from the post of Medical Officer of Health on the 31st March to take up an appointment with the Department of Health in his native Ireland. In the interim between then and the 19th July when I commenced duties as your Medical Officer of Health, Dr. A. F. Adamson, retired Medical Officer of Health for Hendon, was Acting Medical Officer of Health. The trend in statistics has been mainly on the credit side with an increase in population and the birth rate and a further fall in infant mortality. A rise in the total number of deaths from all causes is on the debit side ,the more so because it has resulted from largely preventable diseases. The indisputable Captains of the Host of Death are coronary heart disease and lung cancer. A well regulated life, a moderate, well-balanced diet and exercise would do much to reduce the incidence of the former, whilst that of the latter would be dramatically reduced by the simple expedient of not smoking cigarettes. Every death ascribed to accident and suicide represents a bitter waste of life. Much research has been done and much more is needed to mitigate these causes of human suffering. In the same allegorical vein as above, how remarkable and delightful is the demotion to the ranks of that erstwhile Captain, Infectious Disease. Health education is a raison d'etre of a public health department, and it is surprising to me that so little is known about its modus operandi and effectiveness. The Report on Health Education of a Joint Committee which was appointed in 1959 by the Central and Scottish Health Services Councils under the Chairmanship of Lord Cohen of Birkenhead, is anxiously awaited. A special effort was made during the year to stress the danger of cigarette smoking when a Central Council for Health Education mobile unit visited the Borough. This novel and imaginative approach was part of a national programme, the effect of which, success or failure, will serve as a pointer to future efforts. 5 While I feel that the Council has done much in the field of welfare for the elderly, and indeed nowhere have I seen such community effort, interest and sympathy as exhibited by Finchley's voluntary organisations, much remains to be done. The scope of services is vast but the prime need is simply housing. The Council have provided 164 units of accommodation and are planning to provide approximately 40 more. The County Council and voluntary associations also play their part but there still remains a desperate shortage of suitable accommodation. True the answer lies not wholly in the Borough but is a national responsibility. The Council decided during the year to provide a workroom/day centre designed to meet a known urgent need. I hesitate to mention at all fluoridation of public water supplies as so much has been written on the subject and continues to be written it seems almost daily. There is no doubt at all that it will come, but it rather looks as though it will be so tardy as to try the patience of a Job. I am glad to report that the clean air programme has proceeded smoothly and according to schedule and it is expected that 53% of the total acreage of the Borough will be a smoke control area by the 1st October, 1964. There were only 13 known cases of food poisoning this year, but there are undoubtedly a large number of cases that go undetected. Food poisoning could be virtually abolished by strict adherence to a rigid code of hygienic and clean food handling. I do not think sufficient emphasis is laid upon hand drying. Many conscientiously wash their hands and then proceed to spoil it all by drying with a towel already used by other persons. I should like to see individual sterile towels or hot air dryers used throughout the catering industry. I should also like to see the housewives pursue a militant Clean Food Campaign. The serving and display of food in shops leaves much to be desired. Assistants handle paper money and coins and the food indiscriminately. They lick their fingers to grasp paper money, greaseproof paper, etc., or blow into bags to open them. A shop which does not conform to a high standard of cleanliness should be boycotted by the housewife. That there is little reference above to the future lies in the pending dissolution of the Borough of Finchley which will cease to exist after the 31st March, 1965, when it is absorbed into the new Greater London Borough of Barnet. I firmly believe that the change will provide a better health service than hitherto, but equally that the name of Finchley and the spirit and character of Finchley will endure to benefit the new Borough. Accordingly this will be the penultimate Annual Report of the Medical Officer of Health as I intend to present the last, based as it must be on provisional figures, to the Borough early in 1965. In closing this introductory letter it is my pleasant duty to acknowledge my indebtedness to the loyal co-operation of the members of the Health Department 6 particularly the Chief Public Health Inspector, Mr. Gray, and my Chief Administrative Assistant, Mr. Jupp. I am indebted also to Mr. Jupp and Mr. Millen for helping to compile this report. I have greatly appreciated the warm welcome accorded me by the Members of the Council and the support and understanding of the Chairman and Members of the Public Health Committee. I am, Your obedient servant, J. D. RUSSELL, Medical Officer of Health. 7 CONTENTS Page Statistics 9 Prevalence and Control of Infectious and Other Diseases 11 Research 14 Health Education 15 Welfare of the Elderly 17 State of Employment 20 Fluoridation of Public Water Supplies 21 Water Supply 22 Swimming Pools 23 Laundry Service for the Incontinent 23 Sewerage and Sewage Dis24 posal 24 Sanitary Conveniences Places of Public Entertain25 ment Refuse Collection and Disposal 25 Clean Air 26 Food 28 Inspections and Complaints 32 Page Housing 33 Shops 37 Factories and Workplaces 38 Outworkers 38 Disinfection and tion 39 Rodent Control 40 Noise 40 Caravans 41 Heating Appliances 42 Rag Flock and Other Filling Materials 42 Animals 43 Burial or Cremation 44 Exhumations 44 Mortuary 44 Conferences and Courses 45 Medical Examinations 45 Outstanding Notices 45 Acknowledgments 46 General Information 47 Statistical Table, etc. 62 Index 90 8 STATISTICS The population figure shows a further small increase to 69,330 being the highest since 1957 when the Registrar-General's mid-year estimate was 69,380. The live birth rate per 1,000 population of 16.2 for 1962 and 16.0 for 1963 were the highest since 1947 and are consistent with the provisional figure for England and Wales for 1963 of 18.2, also the highest since 1947. The provisional figure of 20.9 infant deaths per 1,000 live births for England and Wales was the lowest ever recorded in this country. The figure for Finchley was 16.3. Unfortunately, however, the highly significant perinatal mortality rate has risen this year to 23.1 but it is some consolation that the figure is below the provisional figure of 29.3 for the country as a whole. The fact that this rate has been falling in England and Wales over past years has caused some satisfaction, but when it is related to that of other countries with comparable living standards there is little cause for satisfaction. In one list of 18 countries, only five had worse rates than England and Wales. Reports(1) published recently will, I believe, be largely instrumental in bringing about the much needed improvement in the maternity services. The increase in the total number of deaths was largely due to a rise in the number of deaths caused by coronary heart disease 192 (168 in 1962), cancer of the lung 45 (36 in 1962) and pneumonia 66 (47 in 1962). The increase in the number of deaths ascribed to coronary heart disease and lung cancer follows the national trend. It seems to be the price we have to pay for our modern civilization and like many another price subject to inflation. The prolonged severe wintry conditions of the beginning of the year may have had some influence on the increased number of deaths from pneumonia. Perhaps another sorry reflection on our civilization, our affluent society, is the increase in the number of deaths by suicide. This subject, I am glad to say, is receiving more and more attention in the way of investigation and prevention by both statutory and voluntary agencies. The number of deaths due to motor vehicle accidents was 5 compared to 8 in 1962. This figure, supplied by the Registrar-General, refers to Finchley residents only regardless of place of death, and therefore does not agree with the figure of 7 provided by the Road Safety Organiser. Contrary to the national trend, road accidents and casualties in Finchley decreased in 1963 despite the increased intensity of motor vehicle traffic. The figures of 412 road accidents and 540 casualties represent a reduction of approximately 6% and 2% respectively on the 1962 figures. It is pleasing to report a continued reduction in the number of casualites in the motor cyclist group and the considerable decrease in the number of school children 9 involved in accidents, which should serve as an incentive to continue and intensify lessons on Road Safety. The number of deaths due to accidents in the home is also less than last year, 8 compared with 11, but it will be noted that this figure is in excess of that due to road accidents. Each year in Britain there are some 20,000 accidental deaths. Approximately 1,000 occur at work, 4,000 are miscellaneous, 7,000 occur on the road and 8,000 occur in the home. Each year there are as well some 300,000 admissions to hospital as a result of accidents. It is thus an enormous problem and the fact that the home is a more dangerous place than the road is a sobering reflection. A report(2) on the subject published this year stresses the necessity for research into what is a complex and alarming situation. In January and February the weather was the coldest since 1740 and the blizzards during the first three days were the worst that had occurred since 1881; the coldest day was the 27th January at 40°F and the night of 25th January the coldest at 13°F. The hottest day of the year was 16th June when 85°F was recorded. Rainfall for the year showed an increase of 1.71 inches over 1962 to a total of 27.94 inches, the highest rainfall being during November when a total of 5.31 inches was recorded over 29 days of the month. (1) Report of the Maternity Services Emergency Informal Committee, National Birthday Trust Fund, 1963. London. Brit. Med. J., 1961, 1, 1313. Ibid., 1962, 2, 1187. Butler, N. R., and Bonham, D. G., Perinatal Mortality, 1963. E. & S. Livingstone, Edinburgh and London. (2) Working Party on Accident Prevention and Life Saving, 1961-1963, 1963. Royal College of Surgeons of England. Statistical tables—see pages 62-70. 10 PREVALENCE AND CONTROL OF INFECTIOUS AND OTHER DISEASES Diphtheria There were no cases of diphtheria in Finchley during the year. On the 16th October a case occurred in the area of a neighbouring authority in a boy who attended a school in Finchley. All home, class and school coach contacts were swabbed and active and passive immunisation carried out where necessary. One swab only was positive, a boy recently returned from Cyprus, who was a carrier and was admitted to hospital. A prolonged incubation period of nine days, no doubt due to the high level of immunity engendered by previous active immunisation, resulted in the brother of the case being allowed back to school before he developed the disease on the 25th October, and as a result all contacts had to be re-examined. No further cases occurred and the two cases and the carrier recovered. Dysentery Thirty-two cases of dysentery were notified and a further 18 cases otherwise ascertained. The causative organisms found were:— 48 shigella sonnei. 1 shigella flexner, type 2. 1 shigella boydii, type 11. Of these, 24 were sporadic cases, the remainder being individual family outbreaks. Food Poisoning Six persons were notified as suffering from food poisoning during the year and in addition seven cases were otherwise ascertained. The causative organisms identified were as follows:— Salmonella Stanley 1 Salmonella typhimurium 5 Staphylococci 6 Not identified 1 There were two food poisoning outbreaks. The first affected two members of a family of three who ate the same meals, all at home, prior to the onset of the symptoms. No specimens of the food were available. The clinical features of the cases were severe headache, sickness and diarrhoea for a period of 48 hours duration and the causative organism was found to be salmonella typhimurium. The second outbreak occurred in a factory in the borough. The meal suspected of having caused the outbreak was prepared in the factory canteen and of the 50 persons at risk, 5 were affected. The main symptoms, diarrhoea, sickness, temperature and headache, were of moderate severity over a period of 3 days and the agent causing 11 the outbreak was found to be staphylococcus aureus. Unfortunately notification of this outbreak was not received in time to obtain a specimen of food ; an examination of the canteen staff and equipment proved negative. The remaining 6 cases of food poisoning were individual cases. Measles The incidence of measles reaches epidemic proportions about every other year and from the figures given it will be seen that this was an " epidemic " year. As a disease, measles is relatively mild but a number of serious complications can arise. During the past few years efforts have been made to develop a reliable vaccine for this disease, but so far without success. Poliomyelitis For the fourth year running there have been no cases of poliomyelitis. The introduction of poliomyelitis vaccination not only on a national scale but internationally has resulted in a dramatic fall in the incidence and mortality of this dread disease; as a public health measure it has been an unqualified success. Last year in England and Wales only 51 cases were confirmed. Deaths from acute poliomyelitis in England and Wales numbered 7, the lowest number ever recorded, compared with 18 in 1962, the previous lowest annual figure. For the years 1951-3 the average annual number of deaths from this cause was 262. Puerperal Pyrexia Eighteen cases were notified, all of which occurred in the North Middlesex Hospital Annexe in The Bishops Avenue and were residents of other districts. The Puerperal Pyrexia Regulations, 1951, require medical practitioners to notify to the medical officer of health all cases of puerperal pyrexia which is defined as being "Any febrile condition occurring in a woman in whom a temperature of 100.4°F (38°C) or more has occurred within 14 days after childbirth or miscarriage." The Minister of Health in Circular 28/51 advised that the investigations should be carried out by the medical officer of the county and not by the district medical officer of health. Typhoid Fever A student teacher on holiday at home in Finchley was admitted to Coppetts Wood Hospital with typhoid fever. The patient had been living in lodgings whilst attending a training college in the provinces and investigation revealed that her landlady, with whom she had been in contact, was a typhoid fever carrier. The disease responded well to treatment and the student recovered. 12 A number of persons were examined bacteriologically following their visits to Switzerland during the typhoid fever outbreak at Zermatt—all were found to be negative. One case associated with this outbreak was confirmed in a Finchley resident living temporarily in another area and who was admitted to Coppetts Wood Hospital. The attack was a mild one and responded well to treatment. Tuberculosis Three persons died from tuberculosis and 27 new cases were notified, giving a death rate of 0.04 and a case rate of 0.39 per 1,000 population. In the last decade over the country as a whole, both the case and death rates have been more than halved. This has been due to a number of factors, improved living standards, mass radiography, B.C.G. vaccination, eradication of tuberculosis in cattle and last but far from least the new anti-tubercular drugs. Notification of tuberculosis is obligatory by virtue of the Public Health (Tuberculosis) Regulations, 1952, made under sections 143 and 283 of the Public Health Act, 1936. The County Council have a statutory responsibility under section 28 of the National Health Service Act, 1946, for preventing tuberculosis, including B.C.G. vaccination, and for the care and after-care of tuberculous persons. The hospital services provide for the hospitalisation and out-patient treatment of tuberculous patients. The Borough Council as the Local Sanitary and Housing Authority has a responsibility for the welfare of tuberculous patients in these respects. This tripartite responsibility demands the closest liaison to ensure that persons suffering from tuberculosis receive comprehensive care and attention. B.C.G. vaccination of children approaching 13 years and older continued at the secondary schools and of 1,050 children eligible, the parents of 685 (65.2%) consented to the preliminary testing, vaccination and, where necessary, chest X-ray. Mass Radiography The North West Metropolitan Regional Hospital Board Mass Radiography Unit visited Finchley during 1957 and 1961 and, it is hoped, will carry out a further survey during 1964. Details of permanent Mass X-ray Units are given in the information section, pages 53-54. Vaccination and Immunisation Vaccination and immunisation against diphtheria, whooping cough, tetanus, smallpox and poliomyelitis is a function of the Local Health Authority, Middlesex County Council, under Section 26 of the National Health Service Act, 1946. 13 In accordance with the advice contained in Ministry of Health Circular 10/63, the staff of the Public Health Department and their families were offered a reinforcing dose of poliomyelitis vaccine; all accepted. The possibility of health staff coming into contact with smallpox is similarly covered by offering re vaccination every 3 years. This was last offered and accepted by all members of the staff in 1962. Certain categories of staff in this and other departments of the Council, such as dustmen, gardeners, building trade operatives, disinfectors and sewer men, by the nature of their work, run the risk of contracting tetanus. I should like to see immunisation against tetanus offered to these people by the new Borough Council of Barnet. International Certificates of Vaccination Only three forms of international certificates of vaccination have been prescribed namely for smallpox, cholera and yellow fever—and persons who are being vaccinated against these diseases should in their own interests see that their certificates are on the international forms. There is no international certificate of vaccination against typhoid fever or paratyphoid fever, but apart from any requirement by a particular country, all persons going abroad are advised to be effectively vaccinated against these diseases. Vaccination against any disease other than yellow fever can be done by a person's own doctor or exceptionally (by arrangement) at a hospital. Yellow fever vaccination must, for international and technical reasons, be done only at a centre designated by the Government. A free yellow fever vaccination service has been established for this purpose (see information section, page 52). The international forms for smallpox and cholera must be obtained by the traveller himself, and after completion by the doctor, taken to the Local Authority for authentication. During the year, 1,094 certificates were authenticated. Statistical Tables—see pages 71-74. RESEARCH Salmonella Infection in Poultry (1) The practice of eviscerating poultry in retail shops which sell other foodstuffs is common in England and Wales. Galbraith, N. S. et al(2) described an outbreak of Salmonella Saint-paul infection due to cooked meat which was probably contaminated by the infected intestinal contents of ducks eviscerated in the same room as that in which the meat was prepared. In 1961 and 1962 retail butchers' and fishmongers' shops in Hendon and Finchley were visited periodically by public health inspectors who collected cloacal swabs of untrussed poultry offered for sale. Broiler fowls, prepacked poultry and other birds, which were eviscerated before being sent to the retail shops, were not included in the 14 survey. Sometimes the public health inspectors revisited the shops shortly after the poultry had been eviscerated and collected samples of meat and meat products as well as swabs of the tables and benches on which the poultry had been trussed, in order to find out if cross contamination from the poultry took place. The purpose of the investigation was to find out the infection rate of poultry eviscerated in retail shops in the area and to try and assess the importance of this practice as a cause of human salmonella infections. The cloacal swabs were examined for salmonellae—three (0.3 per cent.) of 1,046 chickens and 41 (19.7 per cent.) of 208 ducks were positive. The infected birds did not appear to be associated with any reported cases of human salmonellosis in the district. Thus, although the practice of eviscerating poultry in retail shops is a potential hazard, the results of this survey suggest that the risk is probably small. The high rate of infection found in ducks emphasizes the importance of a satisfactory standard of hygiene in the retail shops. A special room should be provided for poultry evisceration in which there are adequate facilities for the staff to wash their hands; overalls or aprons should be worn and should be used only in the poultry preparation room. (1) Galbraith, N.S., Taylor, C. E. D., Patton, J. L., Hagan, J. G. (1964) : Med. Off. 355. (2) Galbraith, N. S., Mawson, K. N., Maton, G. E. and Stone, D. M. (1962) : Mon. Bui1., Min. Hlth. & P.H.L.S., 21, 109. HEALTH EDUCATION The Central Council for Health Education placed at the disposal of Finchley Borough Council a Mobile Unit to augment the publicity campaign on smoking and health. This unit, fully equipped with visual aids, etc., and staffed by 2 male graduate lecturers specially trained for the purpose, visited 22 schools, clubs, etc., in Finchley during the week commencing 6th May, when 2,700 pupils, teaching staff and club members heard and saw for themselves the health hazards associated with smoking. Dr. Adamson, Acting Medical Officer of Health, in a report to the Council referred to the competent manner in which the unit lectures performed their difficult task and the interesting an intelligent questions put by the pupils. He continued "I have received a number of helpful observations from head teachers expressing appreciation for the unit, giving extracts from comments made by pupils and their parents and generally indicating that a further lecture or follow-up would be acceptable. My impression is that the programme was too compressed and 15 that more time for illustrations, specimens, etc., and questions would have been well received. Despite the defensive and evasive reactions of some parents and pupils, I am of the opinion that the programme was worthwhile but feel that any impact, however small, will be lost unless health education on this important subject is pursued at regular intervals and more especially when pupils are reaching school leaving age. The co-operation of the Borough Education Officer and the teaching staff was valuable in ensuring the smooth running and success of this series of lectures." The promotion of health education generally continued during the year through the medium of leaflets distributed to school children; book marks available at public offices and libraries where a considerable demand was noted; book marks enclosed with smoke control survey literature and posters displayed throughout the Borough. Talks to a number of organisations in the Borough were given by members of the Public Health Department. In April and October of each year the Council send to the ratepayers by way of the rate demand "Focus on Finchley," a newsletter of useful information and "tit-bits." In the April, 1963 issue the second series on "Living with Danger" dealt with sensible habits to keep homes free from burns and scalds and was followed in October by the third series "Living with Danger" concerning electrical accidents. Health education was honoured in the October newsletter by a front page paragraph which is reproduced below and which provoked a number of interesting letters from members of the public. " The Council is concerned — About Your Health There must be few apophthegms truer Than 'prevention is better than cure.' The Medical Officer of Health and his team wage a constant battle against dirt, germs and unhealthy habits in a determined and increasingly successful effort to prevent disease and promote full health and well-being. In this battle you can't afford to be neutral but an active and valuable ally. DID YOU KNOW that more peope are injured and killed each year in the home than on the roads ? Make sure your home is a safe home. DID YOU KNOW that tuberculosis could be completely eliminated in this country ? Have a chest X-ray annually at the Mass Radiography Centre. DID YOU KNOW that bronchitis is called 'the English disease' ? The Council hope to complete their smoke control programme by 1968. 16 DID YOU KNOW that the English have the worst teeth in the world ? Remember your dental hygiene. DID YOU KNOW that nearly 24,000 people died of lung cancer last year and that cigarette smoking causes lung cancer ? Please, please, don't smoke, set an example to youth; to children everywhere; to your own children. If you wish any advice on public health matters, do not hesitate to contact the Public Health Department, 308, Regents Park Road, Finchley, N.3. Telephone: FINchley 0018." The Council pay an annual subscription to the Central Council for Health Education and the Royal Society for the Prevention of Accidents. WELFARE OF THE ELDERLY Removal to Suitable Premises of Persons in Need of Care and Attention Provision is made under Section 47 of the National Assistance Act, 1948 as amended by the National Assistance (Amendment) Act, 1951, for securing the necessary care and attention in suitable hospital or other place (e.g., residential accommodation provided under Part III of the Act) for persons who:— (a) are suffering from grave chronic disease or being aged, infirm or physically incapacitated, are living in insanitary conditions, and (b) are unable to devote to themselves and are not receiving from other persons proper care and attention. A number of cases, mainly elderly persons living in poor conditions, were brought to my notice but with the help of the social and visiting services and voluntary admission to hospital or home, each case resolved itself and I am pleased to report that it was not necessary to invoke the provisions of the section. A case typical of the problems brought to the attention of the department was that of an independent Scot living alone in a furnished room. To make matters worse, as it were, he was a member of the medical fraternity, who are notoriously bad patients. Information which was confirmed by a subsequent visit reached the department that this venerable gentleman was ill and living in insanitary conditions. He was undoubtedly in need of care and attention and although he promised to enter hospital next day, I initiated statutory action to ensure this, having learned from bitter experience not to rely on promises made under these circumstances. That night, taken by a friend "to the local," he collapsed in the street on the way home and was removed by ambulance to hospital. There he was found to be seriously ill and, in fact, died seven days after admission. 17 Workroom/Day Centra The establishment of a workroom/day centre at a site in Ballards Lane under provisions of the National Assistance Act, 1948 (Amendment) Act, 1962, was considered by the Council in 1962. Suggestions embodying an extension of the services to be provided were considered in September this year when the revised scheme and estimate were approved in principle, and it is anticipated that building operations will commence towards to end of 1964. The proposed accommodation as it now stands includes the provision of a combined workroom / club room / dining room, reading room, matron / warden's office, geriatric clinic, bath/shower room, kitchen and hairdressing salon, together with store room, W.Cs., etc., to be contained in ground floor accommodation of approximately 2,400 sq. ft. so constructed to permit development to first floor level if required. In addition, 4 units of ground floor old persons' accommodation will be erected with direct access to the centre, together with the development of a block of 9 self-contained flats. The centre will be staffed by a resident matron/warden and driver/handyman, preferably man and wife, no doubt supplemented by the willing assistance of voluntary workers from organisations in the Borough. One of the self-contained flats mentioned above will be reserved for the matron/warden and driver/handyman and a communicating bell system will be installed between this flat, the old persons' accommodation, the matron/warden's office and at vantage points within the centre. This scheme will permit the provision of a comprehensive range of services designed to serve a dual purpose; to encourage and foster in the old people themselves an active and pleasurable participation in the centre's amenities, both occupational and medical, and to offer respite from responsibility and the opportunity to be otherwise gainfully employed to the old person's family. The largest room, approximately 40 ft. x 24 ft., will serve as a work room and a club room as well as dining room at lunch time. The work room and club room portions can be varied from day to day according to use. The success of a workroom run by the Finchley Guild of Social Service in a hall in East Finchley since October, 1962, has indicated the need and the benefit that ensues. A reading room is provided for those who want peace and quiet to read, write or meditate. A clinic room will be operated on a sessional basis to provide a geriatric health advisory service and chiropody. Other facilities include a bath/shower room and a hairdressing salon. The W.V.S. have agreed in principle to provide as part of their Meals on Wheels service delivered hot meals to be dispensed from the kitchen. 18 Transport for the housebound by means of a "sitting-case" vehicle with a hydraulic tail lift is an essential element of the scheme by meeting the need of an unfortunate class of people for whom no provision exists at present. It can also be used for the conveyance of the meals on wheels and work goods and it is hoped on occasions for day outings. The day to day administration of the centre as a whole will be conducted directly by the Public Health Department under the Medical Officer of Health with the help of a House Committee composed of Members of the Council and various voluntary bodies, subject to report to the Public Health Committee. Cinema Admissions Until 4 p.m. on each weekday (except Bank Holidays), elderly persons may visit the cinema at a reduced rate of admission—namely, 9d. for any seat in the house— on production of his or her pension book. Free Baths Free baths at the Public Baths, Squires Lane, N.3, are available to old-age pensioners on production of their pension book on Mondays, Tuesday and Wednesdays between the hours of 9 a.m. and 4 p.m. Laundry Service for the Incontinent—see page 23. Housing No report on the welfare of the elderly would be complete without reference to their housing problem which, in my opinion, is the one fundamental consideration and will be found under the appropriate heading—Housing. Voluntary Organisations The many voluntary organisations in the Borough provide a wide variety of services thereby making a major contribution to meet the problems of the elderly. One of the best known, is the Meals on Wheels Service provided by the W.V.S. During the year, 9,117 meals were distributed (8,270 in 1962) and it is worthy of mention that this valuable service is made possible by the kind co-operation of a local firm, Simms Motor Units Ltd. The meals are prepared in the works canteen and supplied to the W.V.S. for distribution at a cost subsidised by the firm itself. The Council make a grant to the W.V.S. by means of financial aid for the purchase of equipment and payment for meals ordered but not consumed. Details of facilities available are given in the information section, page 55. 19 STATE OF EMPLOYMENT Finchley is largely a residential district containing comparatively little industry or commerce and is mainly a "white collar" area, the majority of workers travelling to the City or West End. More manual workers are now settling in the district but again most of the skilled workers travel to the more industrialised areas of Hendon, Wembley, Willesden, etc. The percentage of unemployed workers to the employed population is not known, but it is believed to be well below the national percentage. Unemployment usually reaches its lowest point in June of each year, normally rises again after Christmas and then starts to decrease in March. The exceptionally hard winter and consequent general recession in industry resulted in a considerable increase in the registers in early February to a peak of 411 men and 28 women. The registers gradually decreased during the summer but industry did not recover its momentum until later in the year and due to this continued momentum the decrease was maintained during the 1963/64 winter. Figures for Finchley are not available, but the following table shows the number of unemployed adult persons, i.e., aged 18 and over, for the Finchley and Friern Barnet areas:— 1961 1962 1963 June December June December June December Men 102 182 184 281 239 225 Women 5 23 47 52 47 52 Total 107 205 231 333 286 277 School leavers, slightly fewer in number than last year, were absorbed into employment without undue difficulty, although the choice of employment available to boys and girls in Finchley was somewhat restricted. Conditions improved as the year progressed and they were able to select from a large number and variety of local vacancies. This upward trend was noticeable also in the neighbouring areas to which some of our young workers are attracted every year. The variety of occupations open to young people did not affect the popularity of some. As in previous years, engineering attracted boys of all ages and all levels of ability. Next in order of preference were the building and electrical contracting industries, the distributive trades and office work of various kinds. 20 Clerical work was the first choice of most girls. After this, the most-favoured occupations were shop work and hairdressing. At the December count, 180 unfilled vacancies were recorded (88 for boys and 92 for girls). In the same month, 14 young people (10 boys and 4 girls) were registered as unemployed. FLUORIDATION OF PUBLIC WATER SUPPLIES In view of the negligible amount of fluoride in the water supplied to Finchley the Council, in 1962, approved the principle of fluoridation of water supplies and in January, 1963, resolved to inform the Lee Valley Water Company and the Middlesex County Council of their views, and to request that arrangements be made for Finchley's water supply to be fluoridated as a matter of urgency. In April, 1963, Middlesex County Council as the Local Health Authority submitted to the Minister of Health proposals to make arrangements with statutory water undertakers serving their area, under Section 28 of the National Health Service Act, 1946. In Circular 12/63, the Minister of Health issued general approval to all local health authorities expressing the hope that authorities would make arrangements covering all areas where the water is deficient in fluoride, so as to secure, as soon as possible, the improvement in dental health which fluoridation will bring about. A Report on Fluoridation published by the Lee Valley Water Company in June, 1963, contained a technical report prepared by the Chief Engineer, the Chief Chemist and Bacteriologist and the Chief Accountant. The purpose of this report being to record the results of a technical investigation of fluoridation as specifically applied to the day to day operation of the Lee Valley Water Company, and to indicate the practical effects of such an operation. Consideration of the problem had been based on the propostion that if the water supplied by the Company is to have fluoride added, then its application must be complete throughout the Company's area which comprises parts of three Counties, Essex, Hertfordshire and Middlesex. In addition to the supplies derived from the Chalk Wells and boreholes the Company receives a large scale bulk supply from the Metropolitan Water Board of up to 6,000,000 gallons per day, and therefore it will be necessary to have a decision regarding fluoridation by the Metropolitan Water Board and to relate this to requirements in the Company's area. All the 29 London Metropolitan Boroughs have approved the principle of fluoridation. Of the County Councils involved, Essex, London and Middlesex have approved fluoridation in principle but Hertfordshire has made no final decision as yet. The conclusions of the Technical Report were as follows:— 1. The addition of fluoride to the water supplies at a specified level, while it presents few technical difficulties, poses a number of problems of varying degrees of importance in the day to day operation of the undertaking. 21 2. The scheme formulated for the Company's area, particularly as applied to the unattended stations, has no precedent and, therefore, contains a number of quite original and untried proposals which may need amendment in the light of experience. 3. The vital need for safety has been given first priority throughout the preparation of the proposals. 4. In order to maintain the proposed standards of testing and control, it will be necessary to examine more than 36,500 samples annually—of these some 300 will be subjected to test by distillation. 5. Several years may be needed for the full and complete implementation of the scheme. 6. The total annual cost is estimated at £65,414 which, for a population in found figures of 603,000 gives a unit cost per head of 2s. 2d. The estimated unit cost per head of 2s. 2d. is considerably in excess of the about 10d. per head of population quoted in the Report No. 105 issued by the Government on Fluoridation. The Lee Valley Water Company give the following reasons to account for this increase; scattered situations of the water sources, the number of unmanned stations and the fact that no softening is carried out. However, the cost of fluoridation should be related to the cost of dental treatment. In 1961 the cost of dental treatment under the National Health Service (excluding the cost of the school dental service) was over £44 million. This is about 17/- per head of population. (30/- per head in Middlesex.) Recently the United States Public Health Service estimated that the treatment of dental cavities now prevented by fluoride would cost 56 times as much as fluoridation. In December this year the Council resolved that the report of the Lee Valley Water Company be accepted. It is a fact that each and every medical and scientific body that has studied fluoridation has come to the selfsame conclusion that fluoridation is necessary, effective and extremely safe. WATER SUPPLY The water supply to all dwellings in the Borough is direct from the public water mains and no supplies are given by means of standpipes. The Lee Valley Water Company distribute the water, part of which is supplied via a bulk supply from the Metropolitan Water Board. Five hundred and five bacteriological and 19 chemical samples of water from the distribution system were examined by the Company and were reported to conform to standards of purity considered suitable for public supply. 22 The level of fluoride at the Northaw Pumping Station was recorded as 0.7 parts per million, 0.2 was recorded at four other stations and no evidence was found at the remaining three stations. A mixture of Northaw water with water having no significant fluoride content reduces the level in the blended water to insignificant traces. Fluoride in the Finchley supply is invariably recorded as " less than 0.2mg./litres." The water was not liable to plumbo-solvent action and no cases of contamination occurred. The results of chemical analyses may be obtained from the Lee Valley Water Company's Annual Report. Statistical Tables—see page 75 SWIMMING POOLS Finchley has two swimming pools, Squires Lane Baths and the Open Air Pools in the High Road, N.12. The latter comprises adult and children's pools and it said to be one of the finest examples in the London area. Both establishments are equipped with modern filtration and chlorination plants. The water is drawn from the public water supply and is continuously filtered on a six-hour cycle, make-up water being added as necessary to cover losses by evaporation, filter washing and other causes. The chlorination is controlled in accordance with the latest practice in this important subject. 77 samples of the water were taken for bacteriological examination by the public health inspectors and the results were consistently satisfactory. This reflects greatly to the credit of the staff directly concerned with the operation of the purification plants, for the bathing load is frequently heavy. In the 1963 season, 291,813 people visited the pools. There are 12 slipper baths available to the public at the Squires Lane Baths. LAUNDRY SERVICE FOR THE INCONTINENT This service was introduced in 1957 in accordance with the provisions of Section 42 of the Middlesex County Council Act, 1956, and although in practice it is virtually a welfare service for the elderly, it is, of course, available to any incontinent person. The washing machine is installed at the Disinfecting Station and arrangements are made for articles to be collected and delivered on Tuesday and Friday of each week. The cost of the service is borne by the local authority. 23 The number of persons receiving assistance at the beginning of the year 10 The number of persons for whom the service was recommended and subsequently authorised by the Medical Officer of Health or by the public health inspectors during the year 8 The number of persons receiving assistance at the end of the year 7 During 1963, 862 collections of articles were made. SEWERAGE AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL Most of Finchley is provided with a dual system of sewers; one system dealing with rainwater only which is discharged untreated into open water courses, namely, the Mutton Brook, Dollis Brook and Strawberry Vale Brook. The other system dealing with foul sewage was during the year linked with the East Middlesex Main Drainage Scheme which utilises a modern treatment plant at Deephams Works, Tottenham. Subsequently the old Sewage Disposal Works in North Finchley, working much above capacity for many years, were dismantled. In some older streets in the Borough, rain water and foul sewage is conveyed by a single sewer into the foul sewer system. In two small sectors of low lying land there are a few buildings which for economic reasons it is impracticable to connect into existing sewers. The control of rats in sewers is referred to in the paragraph on Rodent Control on page 40. SANITARY CONVENIENCES There are 17 public conveniences in the Borough under the control of the Borough Engineer and Surveyor. In addition, there are 32 conveniences attached to public houses. The latter are the subject of regular inspection by the public health inspectors. Public conveniences in the Borough of Finchley as elsewhere up and down the country, fall short of the ideal which, in my opinion, comprises the following provisions:— (a) Free hand-washing facilities to include soap and hot water. (b) Free hygienic hand-drying facilities. (c) Smooth, washable and impervious surfaces. (d) No coin operated W.C. door locks. (e) Sanitary towel dispenser and receptacle in all female conveniences. (f) 24 hours a day service. The two factors which militate against achievement of this ideal are finance and vandalism, with accent on the latter. 24 I suggest that scrupulously clean, pleasantly attractive public conveniences providing all facilities completely free of charge would not only be ideal on public health grounds and a credit to the borough, but would also be less liable to attract vandalism. PLACES OF PUBLIC ENTERTAINMENT The Middlesex County Council as the licensing authority, requested the inspection of the sanitary accommodation of 22 places of public entertainment in the Borough. Two defects were found and remedied after notice to the responsible person, and a report was submitted to the County Council. Public houses and places of entertainment in which food is sold or where rooms are used for the preparation of food are subject to inspection in accordance with the Food Hygiene (General) Regulations, 1960. REFUSE COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL The refuse collection and disposal service is under the control of the Borough Engineer & Surveyor. The collection of refuse, which is carried out on behalf of the Council by a contractor, will be done by direct labour as from the 1st April, 1964, as a result of a Council decision taken in 1962. Disposal of refuse is accomplished by incineration in a destructor which is situated on land adjacent to the Sewage Disposal Works; the plant is obsolete and in need of extensive alteration. The destructor caused considerable nuisance from smoke and the Council intend to abandon this method of refuse disposal early in 1964. The disposal area is under the routine general surveillance of the Public Health Department. Measures adopted to limit rat and insect infestations are described in the relevant paragraphs. The disuse of the Sewage Disposal Works land, which is of undulating formation, constitutes a large area and this, if levelled and landscaped, could provide a fine open space. As a means of achieving this and at the same time providing an alternative means of refuse disposal, it was decided to level some 15 acres by infilling with house refuse. The scheme was approved by the Ministry of Housing and Local Government in December, 1962, subject to conditions to prevent the risk of nuisance. In order to achieve adequate control over pest infestation a man is to be engaged in full-time employment solely to deal with all forms of pest control and maintenance of the tip in a sanitary condition. It is anticipated that tipping of refuse will commence in the Spring of 1964. 25 CLEAN AIR Chronic bronchitis is described as the English Disease and the mortality from lung cancer rises annually. Both these diseases are related to atmospheric pollution. Pollution of the atmosphere causes millions of pounds worth of damage to buildings, all sorts of materials, agriculture and horticulture every year. Finchley Borough Council have pursued a vigorous policy of smoke control since the inception of the Clean Air Act, 1956, which is simply described as an Act to make provision for abating the pollution of the air. Smoke Control Areas For the purposes of the provisions of this Act, the Borough has been divided into 14 areas. In 6 of these, Smoke Control Orders were in force at the end of 1962. This year a further 2 areas covering the N.3 part of the district, south of the London Transport Board Railway, were the subject of Orders which came into force on 1st October. In the same month the Council made a Smoke Control Order to cover a large part of the N.2 area which is due to become operative on the 1st October, 1964, when 53% of the total acreage of the Borough will be a Smoke Control Area. In December, the Minister stated in the Ministry of Housing and Local Government Circular 69/63 that although it remains the Government's intention to encourage and facilitate vigorous action against urban smoke pollution, a re-assessment of the availability and demand for fuel and power requires revised arrangements for the implementation of further Smoke Control Areas. This revision in the main relates to two factors, firstly the future limited production of open fire coke due to technological changes in the gas industry, and secondly to the difficulties which the electricity supply industry is at present experiencing in meeting peak loads in very cold weather. He emphasized that sufficient supplies of smokeless solid fuels for use in "improved" open grates will continue to be available to meet the needs of those living in areas already subject to smoke control, including areas covered by Smoke Control Orders confirmed by him but not yet in operation, and that producers and distributors will do all that they can to ensure that these needs continue to be met. Submission of further proposals for Smoke Control Areas may be subject to amendments to the Clean Air Act, enactment of the recently published Housing Bill, consultations with fuel and power producers and distributors and with neighbouring local authorities. He further considered that the installation of openable stoves, under floor draught open fires or fixed gas, electric storage or oil heaters should now be regarded as "reasonably necessary" works, and that the full expenditure of such installations should rank for grant subject to certain conditions. 26 These revised arrangements, which will undoubtedly increase the cost of future Smoke Control Areas, were agreed in principle by the Council on the 9th January, 1964, when it was also agreed that the present smoke control schedule remain unaltered. Publicity relating to Clean Air has continued to be widely circulated and lectures have been given to organisations within the Borough. The mobile Exhibition Unit of the Solid Smokeless Fuels Federation visited the district again and was stationed at various sites within the Smoke Control Areas Nos. 7 and 8 during a two-week period. Atmospheric Pollution Other contributions to the attainment of a smoke free atmosphere are secured through the operation of the remainder of the Clean Air Act and regulations made thereunder. Factory chimneys are kept under observation and any emission of dark smoke which exceeds the permissible limits in the Dark Smoke (Permitted Periods) Regulations is immediately dealt with. The discharge of dark smoke from a chimney usually arises from mechanical mishap rather than from inadequate plant, or inefficient boiler management. In cases of obdurate technical difficulty, boiler plant owners can avail themselves of advice from the National Industrial Fuel Efficiency Service. The Act requires that new furnaces (except those of domestic capacity) must, as far as practicable, be capable of being operated without emitting smoke when burning fuel of a type for which the furnace is designed; it is an offence to install such furnaces without previously notifying the local authority, but whilst notification is obligatory, the submission of plans for approval is optional. A further objective designed to ensure adequate dispersion of flue emissions lequires that when building plans for industrial premises incorporating the construction of a chimney for carrying smoke, grit, dust or gases are submitted for byelaw approval, the council must be satisfied that the height of the chimney will be sufficient to prevent nuisance. Decisions in some cases raise difficult technical problems. Aesthetic considerations sometimes are a complicating factor, when a high chimney technically necessary may be unduly obtrusive in the locality. Guidance is offered where necessary and differences of opinion are usually reconciled. The Council will make a notable contribution to the reduction of atmospheric pollution when early in 1964 the old refuse destructor will cease to be used. Nuisances from smoke, apart from that emitted from chimneys, is a problem in all urban areas in which pockets of industry are situated. In September the Council adopted Section 47 of the Middlesex County Council Act, 1961. This prohibits the emission of dark smoke from industrial premises and is designed to prevent nuisance 27 from the open air burning of material done as part of a reclamation process, e.g., the burning off of insulating material to salvage the metal cable. The garden bonfire is not officially proscribed and it is difficult to reconcile a Qean Air policy with toleration of a source of smoke from this cause. In cases of complaints, bonfire addicts are urged to exercise care and common-sense, or in preference to burning garden rubbish, to make use of the special collection arrangement operated by the Borough Engineer and Surveyor. In industry there is a trend from the use of solid fuel to oil. Similarly householders are selecting gas, electricity and fuel oils as sources of heat more frequentiy than before. This trend is likely to be a notable factor in the reduction of smoke produced. There is no doubt, however, that the increased use of fuel oil gives rise to an increase in the emission of sulphur dioxide. Instruments to measure smoke and sulphur dioxide in the air are maintained at the Public Health Department and at the Public Libraries at East and North Finchley. The data obtained is supplied to the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research at Warren Spring Laboratory, Stevenage. There it is included in statistical records which form part of a country-wide investigation and research project. The report published by the Warren Spring Laboratory for 1958 to 1963 drew attention to the fact that whilst the emission of smoke in London has dropped 60%, that of sulphur dioxide has risen by 32%. Despite this, there is no detectable increase in the ground level concentration of the latter. This is because most of the increased emission is widely dispersed from high chimneys. The measurement of atmospheric pollution in Finchley was commenced in 1960 and it is yet too early to demonstrate a positive downward trend parallel with London as a whole, but in my opinion the prohibition of smoke from new furnaces, the dispersion of smoke and other products of combustion from tall factory chimneys, coupled with the wide introduction of Smoke Control Areas both in Finchley and the adjoining districts must achieve a much cleaner atmosphere. Statistical Tables—see pages 76-77, FOOD Part I of the Food and Drugs Act, 1955, deals with the composition and labelling of food and drugs, food unfit for human consumption, hygiene in connection with the sale, etc., of food, registration of certain food premises and food poisoning. Part II deals with milk, dairies and cream substitute. Part III regulates the provision and management of markets. Part IV has to do with slaughterhouses and 28 knackers' yards and the power to provide cold stores in public slaughterhouses. Parts V and VI relate to administration. The County Council administers the Act with reference to the composition and labelling of food and drugs and is responsible for dealing with the various aspects of the production and distribution of milk, licensing and registration of dairymen, dairy farms and dairy farmers. Food Unfit for Human Consumption The public health inspectors visit foodshops and places in which food is manufactured or stored. It is rare to find unfit foodstuff exposed or stored for the purpose of sale as producers, wholesalers and retailers have a sense of responsibility and in case of doubt seek the opinion of the public health inspector as to the fitness or soundness of all sorts of commodities. The great bulk of food certified as unfit for human consumption is contained in cans. When the contents are unfit these normally show very obvious signs, e.g., "blowing," that is, the can is distended due to the production of gases within. The sampling of imported foods, including canned goods, for examination by laboratory methods is undertaken at ports of entry. A newer aspect of food inspection arose from the massive development of the prepacked frozen food trade. Some retailers are not careful enough in the use of cold store and display units—there is a tendency to overload, and unless supervision is exercised by shopkeepers, staff sometimes fail to sell stock in rotation. The quality of frozen food is good. The only instances of deterioration brought to the notice of the department have arisen from mechanical failure of refrigerator motors. When this happens, stock rapidly spoils. Unfit food is removed in the department's motor van and is destroyed in the Refuse Destructor. Food Hygiene The Food Hygiene (General) Regulations, 1960, lay down requirements in respect of cleanliness of food premises and stalls and of apparatus and equipment, the hygienic handling of food, cleanliness of persons engaged in the handling of food and their clothing, and the action to be taken where they suffer from or are carriers of certain infections; the construction of food premises, their repair and maintenance and the facilities, including sinks and washbasins, to be provided, and the temperature at which certain foods are to be kept. There are 455 foodshops in Finchley and visits are made to secure the observation of hygienic practices in clean and properly equipped premises. Generally the equipment of retail and wholesale food premises is in line with enforceable standards. Advances in the standards of protection of food displayed 29 for sale are slowly being made and the open-fronted meat shop is now a thing of the past in Finchley and fish shops are following suit. Bakers and confectioners might well arrange their stocks of comestibles so that they are screened against the risk of contamination by customers in the shop. The provision of plate glass display cabinets with chrome fittings, and the use of attractive materials for decoration is good but basically the safe handling of footstuffs lies in the hands both of the operatives in the food preparation rooms and the sales staff. With few notable exceptions, retail food firms make little effort to teach food hygiene to their staffs. Such faults as there are in the handling or display of food arise from thoughdessness and a failure to understand the risks which are attached to unclean practices, in particular the failure to make hand-washing a matter of strict routine, and the handling of foods to be eaten uncooked without the use of suitable tools. The service of fancy cakes by hand is an unattractive habit and an unnecessary one. Any small inconvenience to sales staff in the use of tongs could be, I am sure, overcome with practice. Members of the public are sometimes guilty of malpractices, such as smoking in foodshops, handling of food on display or taking dogs into foodshops. Shopkeepers are often loth to risk offending customers and willingly exhibit in their premises notices supplied by the department which request customers not to smoke or take dogs into shops. Registration of Food Premises Premises used for the manufacture, storage or sale of ice cream and for the preparation or manufacture of sausages or potted, pressed, pickled or preserved food have to be registered. This is designed to ensure that before such operations are commenced the premises are satisfactory for the purpose. There are 164 shops registered for the sale of ice cream. Seventy-seven premises are registered for the manufacture of sausages and the preservation of ham or other meat. In addition, there are 6 dairies registered in accordance with the Milk and Dairies (General) Regulations, 1959. Ice cream and ice lollies sold in Finchley are obtained from one or other of the several large manufacturers whose product is nationally known to be of a high standard. None is manufactured in the Borough. Butchers make sausages on their own premises and one firm uses a small factory in the Borough for the manufacture of sausages, the preparation of hams and tongues and the roasting of chickens in considerable quantities for sale at its branches in Finchley, Hendon, Hornsey, Barnet and Friera Baraet. 30 Food Poisoning Food poisoning is a notifiable disease under the Food and Drugs Act, 1955, and as such is described in the paragraph on the Prevalence and Control of Infectious and Other Diseases. Markets and Hawkers There are no markets in the Borough. There are, however, 23 hawkers registered under Section 11 of the Middlesex County Council Act, 1950, 6 of whom sell fruit and vegetables from barrows in the streets; the remainder sell greengrocery and other foodstuffs from door to door. In each case, the premises in which the food is stored must be approved by the local authority concerned; in 14 cases, the premises being situated in Finchley, were inspected and found to be satisfactory. Concern is expressed in many quarters regarding the exposure of food for sale on barrows and stalls, but so long as open-fronted greengrocers' shops are allowed it is difficult to protest, but protests can certainly be made concerning inadequate or absent hand washing facilities on the barrow or stall and if loud enough should provoke the necessary legislation. In any event it is advisable to wash fruit before consumption. Slaughterhouses There is one, privately owned, licensed slaughterhouse in the district and although equipped and maintained to standards which satisfy the Regulations as to hygiene and the prevention of cruelty to animals, it is not in use. To ensure that all animals are humanely slaughtered only skilled operators may do this work; two persons were licensed as slaughtermen during the year. New meat inspection Regulations came into force on the 1st October. The main provisions are (a) meat at slaughterhouses must be inspected, (b) meat must not be removed from the slaughterhouse until it has been inspected, (c) meat inspected and passed as fit for human consumption must be marked with an official mark, (d) local authorities may charge for the inspection, (e) the minimum period of notice of slaughter is extended from 3 hours to 24 hours. In addition, new standard procedures for meat inspection are also introduced. These Regulations introduce a radical change in that meat inspection, previously undertaken voluntarily and as part of a policy to ensure a fit supply of meat, is now to be done as a statutory duty and charges may be made for the service. The purpose of the Regulations is to achieve 100% inspection of all food animals slaughtered for human consumption. As a point of historical record, this was the practice in Finchley when slaughterhouses were in use for both local and wholesale market supplies. 31 Complaints Four complaints were received about dirty milk bottles and eleven instances were reported alleging the presence of foreign material in foodstuffs. In addition, 27 complaints or enquiries were received relating to unsound food. Of the latter, one case was due to the infestation of fish with a common parasite harmless to man; two cans of food were spoiled because of damage to the containers; in two cases foodstuff was spoiled because it was not properly protected against insects; investigation showed that in 15 cases failure by shopkeepers to sell perishable stock in rotation was the cause of loss of quality; one complaint arose from a mishap when a delivery boy dropped meat into flood water in the road and in six instances enquiry showed that the complainants' fears were groundless. These cases were dealt with informally with the exception of one in which information was laid before the magistrates. It is anticipated that the hearing will be early in 1964. The problem of the dirty milk bottle appears insoluble. There is no doubt that milk suppliers take precautions incurring heavy expense in trying to prevent the re-issue of milk bottles not thoroughly cleansed. To a large extent the public is to blame because of the misuse of the empty bottles. The one complete remedy, and in my opinion an overdue reform, is the introduction of the disposable carton in place of the bottle. In the meantime the rinsing of empty bottles and their immediate return would go a long way towards solving the difficulty. In case of foreign material in food there is often difficulty in establishing responsibility or in producing satisfactory evidence to show when or where the material complained of was introduced into the article. Bearing in mind the vast amount of packaged and factory fashioned food sold, the number of complaints is small. Statistical Tables—see pages 78-80. INSPECTIONS AND COMPLAINTS The work of the public health inspectors encompasses a widening field and the principles upon which good environmental hygiene is built remain the same; pure water, clean food, clean air, adequate shelter and the removal of conditions inimical to healthy surroundings. The achievement of these desiderata is the aim of the department. In pursuit of this objective a total of 17,169 visits were made to houses, business and industrial premises and places in which food is handled. Arising from these visits numerous defects and short-comings were found. In consequence, 436 informal and 13 statutory notices were served, resulting in repairs and sanitary improvements being carried out; in no case was it necessary for the Council to take legal proceedings or carry out work in default of owners. 32 There is a diversified range of matters upon which people seek advice or assistance and 1,822 such requests and complaints were received. The large number of blocked and defective drains notified (602 compared to 395 in 1962) is no doubt due to the fact that it is widely known that a skilled service is available for which only a modest fee is charged. This service is of great benefit to owners who experience difficulty in obtaining trade labour at short notice to deal with the considerable nuisance which arises from obstructed drains. Reference is made elsewhere in the Report to the number of requests for the destruction of wasps' nests and complaints of infestations of rats and mice. Statistical Tables—see pages 81-82. HOUSING Although it is only in recent years that the Government has urged local authorities to provide housing for elderly persons as a major part of their building programme, the Finchley Council has been concerned with this type of accommodation for some considerable time and has used ordinary one-bedroom council dwellings for this purpose. In 1963, 13 aged persons units from conversions and 8 purpose built units were provided. Two schemes for the provision of 35 aged persons purpose built units and two purpose built bungalows for handicapped persons are under construction and scheduled for completion in 1964. There will also be a one bedroom flat completed as part of one of the larger schemes for general housing. Plans are in hand for 9 flats, a day centre and 4 welfare units of accommodation for aged persons at 194, Ballards Lane, and there will also be a number of aged persons units included in the development on other estates for which plans will shortly be prepared. With regard to "handicapped" persons, many of these are included in the elderly persons who have been allocated ground floor accommodation. Also, the Council has already provided a purpose-built bungalow which houses a man and wife, who are both handicapped, and provision has been made for two more such bungalows in another stage of the development in the same area. In addition to the above, a further 56 flats at East Finchley will shortly be available for letting. A tender for the erection of 16 maisonettes at 43, Holden Road has been accepted and the Council have plans for extensive development adjacent to the Vale Farm area at East Finchley. 33 Preliminary consideration is also being given to the development of the site at Rocklands in Gordon Road. The Council are also at present making further endeavours to reduce underoccupation in existing council dwellings and thereby making better use of their accommodation. The Public Health Department were actively concerned with housing applications, in some cases supported by medical certificates, referred by the Borough Valuer and Housing Officer for consideration of additional points on medical grounds, sanitary circumstances and state of overcrowding. Additional points were recommended in 55 cases, special consideration was urged in 5 cases and the regrading of 3 elderly persons suggested. Where the medical conditions merited urgent rehousing but the award of "additional points" did not give immediate help the matter was submitted to the Housing Committee for special consideration. I wish to record that each and every housing application supported on public health grounds received the fullest consideration by the Housing Committee. Overcrowding Eighteen new cases of statutory overcrowding as prescribed by the standard laid down in the Housing Act, 1957, involving 47 adults and 37 children, were brought to the attention of the department. Sixteen cases were removed from the register, either having themselves obtained alternative accommodation or been rehoused by the Council. The Council allocate additional points to a housing applicant where statutory overcrowding exists. Many families live in acute discomfort from overcrowding and yet do not fall within the narrow confines of the standard, which is hardly surprising when one considers that this was introduced 28 years ago in the Housing Act, 1935, and has been perpetuated in the Acts of 1936 and 1957. It would seem high time that this inadequate standard was reconsidered. The Council, fully appreciating the stringent conditions of existing legislation, adopt a more realistic approach when assessing housing needs by awarding points on an ascending scale according to the insufficiency of bedroom accommodation. Houses in Multiple Occupation The local authority is empowered by the Housing Act, 1961, to serve a notice on a person having control of a house in multiple occupation where, in their opinion, the house is defective with respect to natural and artificial lighting, ventilation, water supply, personal washing facilities, drainage and sanitary conveniences, facilities for 34 storage, preparation and cooking of food and for the disposal of waste water, etc.; the provision of proper means of escape from fire may be required when necessary. A notice may be withdrawn if the number of occupants is reduced to a point where the existing facilities are adequate. The local authority is enabled to give a direction limiting the number of persons who may occupy a house (or part of a house) in multiple occupation, and penalties are laid down for failure to comply with such a direction. After the 24th November, 1964, a local authority may make, subject to confirmation by the Minister, a scheme authorising the compilation of a register of houses in multiple occupation. The continued influx of population into the London area is bound to have repercussions in all urban areas, and many houses are being let in lodgings and owners make little attempt to provide amenities or adequate facilities. Undoubtedly increasing use will need to be made of the provisions to limit the risk of many houses becoming overcrowded and under-equipped with reasonable facilities for the number of households accommodated. Eleven cases were dealt with during the year and in the main the Council's requirements were satisfied; in 2 cases notice to quit by the owner was used to reduce the number of occupants, a risk which must be accepted to achieve an adequate standard for the remaining households. Slum Clearance and Individual Unfit Houses In continuance of the five-year 1961/1965 slum clearance programme under the Housing Act, 1957, and in accordance with the Ministry of Housing and Local Government Circular 2/60, the remaining 10 known unfit houses were dealt with. In 3 cases, having regard to the structural stability of adjoining property, Closing Orders were made whilst the remainder were subject to Demolition Orders. All the tenants were rehoused by the Council. Although to date 22 unfit houses have been designated and either closed or demolished it is anticipated that as a result of routine inspections, further individual unfit houses will come to light. It will be remembered that the original estimate following the survey in 1960 was 30. Improvement of Houses The Housing (Financial Provisions) Act, 1958, provides, inter alia, that a local authority may (a) make advances for the purpose of acquiring houses and for altering, 35 enlarging, repairing or improving houses; (b) make grants for the provision of houses by the conversion of buildings and for the improvement of dwellings. The Borough Treasurer, in co-operation with the Borough Valuer, deals with applications for advances for house purchase and I understand from him that 127 applications were approved and advances were made in 110 cases; the sum advanced amounted to £265,690. The Public Health Department supplies the Borough Valuer with any known history of a property which may assist him in his valuation; this was done in 131 cases. An owner may seek an advance or grant towards the cost of substantial alterations which may involve structural work but the power to make such advances or grants is exercised at the discretion of the local authority. The House Purchase and Housing Act, 1959, designed to supplement the previous grant provisions, enables local authorities to make advances for house purchase up to the full value of the property. It also places a duty on them to make standard grants towards the cost of the provision of a fixed bath or shower in a bathroom, a wash-hand basin, a hot water supply, a W.C. and satisfactory facilities for storing food where these are not provided. Many families live in accommodation in which amenities and facilities are inadequate judged by modern-day living standards. Frequently this applies to houses soundly constructed and in good repair. In 1962, the Ministry of Housing and Local Government urged local authorities to tackle this problem in a bold way by demonstrating to owners what could be done by adaptation and the installation of necessary fittings and amenities, e.g., hot water systems, bathrooms, indoor W.C. During the year the Council considered this subject in some detail and proposals were made to define areas in the Borough in which the houses could well be subject to improvement. An area in North Finchley was selected to be dealt with as a pilot scheme but action to implement this was deferred pending consideration of the practicability and desirability of prescribing Redevelopment Areas in the district. The Borough Engineer and Surveyor approves applications for Discretionary and Standard Improvement Grants and I understand from him that 49 applications were received and 47 were granted. Of these, only four were in respect of tenanted houses. The Rent Act, 1957, has amongst other objectives the aim of enabling landlords, by means of an increase of rent, to keep houses still the subject of rent control in a fair state of repair. This is achieved by the tenant having the right to apply to the local authority for a Certificate of Disrepair. The step precedent to the application to the local authority is that the tenant must first serve in statutory form a notice upon 36 the landlord setting down the defects of repair which he alleges against the property. When a certificate has been issued by a council, it enables the tenant to abate the increase of rent until the required repairs have been done. Many tenants fall at the first hurdle. Others, having completed the very time-consuming course and obtained the certificate, frequently fail to take steps to reduce the rent. Nevertheless, many tenants do come to terms with their landlords. In some houses tenants do repairs and undertake renovation of decorations. In other cases tenants know that even the enhanced rent yields a return which is insufficient to enable owners to undertake more than minimal work of a maintenance character. There has been a big decline in the number of applications for Certificates of Disrepair since the Act was introduced in 1957. There may be many tenants of rentcontrolled houses who could use the Rent Act procedure to secure repairs but the lengthy procedure and formalities involved are daunting. So much so that it is not until deterioration is followed by nuisance or dilapidations tend to unfitness that the issue is brought to the department for action under the Public Health or Housing Acts. This is a more straightforward procedure for tenants. Statistical tables—see pages 83-85. SHOPS The Shops Act, 1950, is a consolidating Act re-enacting the existing law on hours of closing, conditions of employment, Sunday trading and general matters relating to these subjects. In addition to their statutory duty for enforcing the provisions relating to ventilation, temperature and sanitary conditions (Section 38) the Council have appointed each Public Health Inspector as a Shops Inspector for the whole of the Act. The number of persons observing the Jewish Sabbath and registered in accordance with the provisions of Section 53 of the Act was 13. One hundred and fifty-four inspections were made and contraventions were dealt with without recourse to legal proceedings. 37 Particulars in regard to shops on the record kept in the department are as follows:— Number on Register at beginning of year 926 Number closed 7 New Shops 8 Number on Register at end of year 927 Changes of Occupancy 11 The Offices, Shops and Railway Premises Act, 1963, received the Royal Assent during the year and will come into force on a day to be appointed by the Minister; the operation of different provisions being phased. The object of the Act is to raise standards of working conditions in shops, offices and certain railway premises so as to promote the health, welfare and safety of persons employed in them. This Act repeals the Offices Act, 1960, which was never implemented, sections of the Public Health Act, 1936, and Shops Act, 1950, and amends certain provisions of the Factories Act, 1961. FACTORIES AND WORKPLACES The Factories Act, 1961, is a consolidating Act which repeals and replaces the Factories Acts, 1937 to 1959, without significant amendment. The Act came into force on 1st April, 1962 and, inter alia, places on local authorities the responsibility for the enforcement of the provisions relating to cleanliness, overcrowding, temperature, ventilation, drainage of floors and sanitary conveniences in respect of any factory where mechanical power is not used and the provisions concerning sanitary conveniences in powered factories. In accordance with Section 8 (5) of the Act, a register is kept of all factories situated in the district; 340 factories and workshops are registered. Three hundred and forty-eight inspections was made. A number of defects were found, of which the majority were remedied during the year and in no case was it found necessary to institute legal proceedings. Statistical tables—see pages 85-87. OUTWORKERS The following table shows, by trades, the number of outworkers residing in the district:— Wearing apparel 23 Curtains and furniture hanging 1 Lampshades 8 Making of brushes 1 Making of boxes 3 Plastic bags 2 Jewellery 2 Twenty-one visits were made by the public health inspectors to the houses of these outworkers and conditions were found to be satisfactory. 38 Section 133(1)(c) of the Factories Act, 1961, requires occupiers of factories to notify local authorities of the names and addresses of persons employed by them in their own homes. DISINFECTION AND DISINFESTATION In spite of a continued drop in the number of reported instances of verminous premises, there is a steady demand for the treatment of dwellings affected by a variety of insects. By far the greater number of requests received were for the destruction of wasps' nests, 166 in all. During the hot spells it is sometimes difficult to answer all calls for assistance promptly. Often there is disappointment that the disinfectors cannot undertake structural work to reveal the site of a wasps' nest or accept risks in potentially dangerous situations. In the latter case the use of slow acting, long lasting insecticides placed at a point remote from the nest often has the desired effect. An irritating problem arose at the Sewage Disposal Works in May when swarms of tiny harmless flies emanated from the clinker filter beds as these became disused and, carried by the wind, invaded nearby houses. Luckily the fly had a short natural life and this fact, together with the activities of the affected householders and the concurrent complete drying out of the filter beds, soon abated the nuisance. Terminal disinfection of rooms and contents after most infectious diseases is best performed by the use of soap and water, fresh air and, if possible, sunshine. Where sterner measures are deemed necessary, as in the case of serious infectious disease such as smallpox, the premises are subjected to special disinfecting treatment. Bathing facilities are provided at the Disinfecting Station for the cleansing of verminous persons. In the case of females, treatment is carried out under the supervision of a woman attendant specially employed for the purpose. During the year, two persons were treated. The department maintains a high pressure boiler with vaccum producing and hot air apparatus for the disinfection and disinfestation of clothing, linen and other articles. Library books, fabrics and other articles liable to damage by steam are treated by formalin spray in the disinfecting chamber. Four hundred and sixty-three articles were treated; a large number of these were, in fact, parcels of used clothing for despatch abroad to those countries which require a certificate that this treatment has been carried out. In March the Council agreed to undertake the disinfection of library books and parcels of clothing for abroad on behalf of the Hendon Borough Council, payment being by way of an annual lump sum. In addition, other articles are dealt with on a time and materials basis of charge. The service commenced on the 1st April. A charge is made for disinfection and disinfestation with the exception of terminal disinfection carried out after a notifiable disease and the cleansing of verminous persons. Statistical table—see page 87. 39 RODENT CONTROL The Prevention of Damage by Pests Act, 1949, requires an occupier to notify the local authority if his premises are infested by rats or mice, but it is the responsibility of the occupier himself to take steps to destroy them. It is the Council's duty to see that he does this. Nevertheless, best results are achieved where the local authority undertakes disinfestation as a public health service. In Finchley, householders and occupiers of business premises can have the assistance of trained staff, which ensures that suitable material and reliable techniques are used, and that all the property involved in any infestation is dealt with; a charge is made for this service. Rats and mice are dependent upon man for their food and shelter and it is, to an extent, because of man's carelessness that efforts at control seem only to contain the rat population. The number of notifications and requests for assistance remains fairly constant. In 5 cases smoke tests were applied to rat runs and as a result defects in drains or sewers were revealed in each case. The necessary remedial works were carried out. So as to limit the number of rats in sewers, it is the practice to place poison baits in them in May and October of each year, but owing to a shortage of labour it was impossible to undertake the Spring treatment in 1963. In October bait was laid in 792 manholes and in none of them was it taken. The Sewage Disposal Works and the site of the Refuse Destructor has always presented a substantial risk of infestation, but routine precautions kept the rat population at an extremely low level. As the use of the Works diminished, all unused drains were taken up or sealed off; in the case of drains kept in use in which the flow of water is intermittent or scanty, permanent baiting points were established at points of access. In addition, care was taken to cover and consolidate sites which had been used for the deposit of organic material from the sewage disposal plant. A good measure of control is maintained by the use of warfarin which, in the dosage normally used, presents no hazard to man or domestic animals. There has been no occasion to use the more toxic poisons, which present a considerable risk to man. Statistical table—see page 88. NOISE The Noise Abatement Act, 1960, made new provisions in respect of the control of noise and vibration and enables a local authority to deal with it as a statutory nuisance in accordance with the procedure in the Public Health Act, 1936. Provision is also made which enables three or more persons aggrieved by a noise nuisance to make a complaint to a Magistrate. 40 Byelaws, "For the good rule and government of the Borough of Finchley and for the prevention of nuisances" made in pursuance of Section 249 of the Local Government Act, 1933, are complementary to the Noise Abatement Act, 1960, and are designed to deal with noisy animals, street noises, i.e., music near houses, churches or hospitals, the playing of musical instruments by mechanical means, and calling or shouting for the purpose of hawking. There were 16 complaints about noise during the year; 10 related to noise from factories, one from constructional work, 3 about noisy neighbours, 1 the barking of a dog and 1 occasioned by festivities in a place of public entertainment. In an urban area in which industry is not confined to limited areas, nor separated from residential property by open space it would seem inevitable that on occasion some noise nuisance will arise. The firms concerned were co-operative, and there were no unresolved problems at the end of the year. In all the other cases an informal approach secured the desired results. CARAVANS In February, 1962, the Ministry of Housing and Local Government in a circular to local authorities drew attention to the problem of gipsies and other similar caravan dwellers in finding suitable sites for living quarters or permanent settlements. In consequence, the Middlesex County Council with the co-operation of the district councils undertook a survey to assess the problem. The survey showed that a problem existed in North Middlesex and to a much lesser degree in West Middlesex. Subsequently, the County Planning Officer investigated the possibility of finding suitable caravan sites in the north and west of the county. Only three localities seemed possible but in each the local authority concerned felt there was not sufficient problem to warrant the provision of an itinerant caravan site and that no sites within their district were suitable. Having regard to the views of these authorities and to the fluctuating numbers of itinerant caravanners in the county it was decided to take no further action until a further assessment of the problem had been carried out. This has not yet been done. During the year itinerant caravan dwellers made halts in Finchley, during their passage along the main roads. They occupied sites in old Coppetts Road, on grassed spaces alongside the North Circular Road and in the Market Place, N.2. The families left the district after intervention by the public health inspectors and warnings from the Town Clerk that proceedings for trespass would be taken. Such people are not always gipsies. More often than not they are Irish nomads, having neither settled abode nor regular means of employment. Nowadays they are motorised and some live in tolerable comfort in well-equipped caravans. They usually 41 subsist on erratic earnings often derived from seasonal work supplemented by dealing in scrap or the sale from door to door of artificial flowers or clothes pegs. An overnight stay is of little consequence but nuisance can soon arise when the travellers' aim is to work the area for a few days. The usual source of trouble arises from the absence of suitable means for the disposal of waste water and rubbish, with unwanted debris left indiscriminately over the landscape. Chemical closets are often provided but the means of disposal of the contents is a matter for speculation. The array of clothing spread to dry on bushes and small trees discounts the generalisation that these people are always dirty. Despite their apparent hardship, the children appear to thrive. Old people, perhaps, seem to suffer most. There is no specific means of dealing with these sporadic visits of caravan dwellers. General powers under the Public Health Act can be used to prevent public health hazards but afford only a slow and cumbrous method of control. As these people are usually encamped on land privately or publicly owned the threat of proceedings for trespass usually persuades them to move along. It is obvious that moving people off one unauthorised site and leaving them to find another is no solution. There are no sites for caravans or movable dwellings within the meaning of the relevant Acts in the Borough of Finchley. HEATING APPLIANCES The Consumer Protection Act, 1961, which came into operation on 19th August, 1961, repealed the Heating Appliances (Fireguards) Act, 1952, and the Oil Burners (Standards) Act, 1960. The Heating Applicances (Fireguards) Regulations, 1953, however, remain in force and require that fireguards be fitted to gas fires, electric fires and oil heaters. The Oil Heaters Regulations, 1962, made under the Act of 1961, relate to domestic space heaters which burn kerosene (paraffin oil) and, inter alia, impose requirements concerning their construction, design and performance. Fifteen visits were made to premises having fires on sale and the stocks were inspected and found to be satisfactory. RAG FLOCK AND OTHER FILLING MATERIAL The Rag Flock and Other Filling Materials Act, 1951, requires the registration of those premises where filling materials are used in the manufacture of bedding, toys, baby carriages and other articles of upholstery and the licensing of premises where rag flock is manufactured or stored for distribution. The Regulations of 1961 made under the Act supersede previous regulations and, inter alia, apply standards of cleanliness for each kind of filling material to which the Act applies, prescribe a list of analysts for the purpose of doing tests and the form of records to be kept by occupiers of premises registered or licensed. 42 The premises of one person trading as an upholsterer and registered under the Act were inspected and found to be satisfactory. ANIMALS Under the Pet Animals Act, 1951, no person may keep a pet shop without a licence granted by a local authority; the licence contains conditions relating to suitable accommodation, provision of food and drink, avoidance of sale of mammals at too early an age, prevention of infectious disease, and fire precautions. The number of persons licensed at the end of the year was 6. All premises have been inspected and found to be satisfactory. The Animals Boarding Establishments Act, 1963, received the Royal Assent during the year and comes into force on 1st January, 1964. The Act provides that no person may keep a boarding establishment for dogs or cats without a licence from a local authority. In addition to provisions similar to those required by the Pet Animals Act, 1951, the person licensed must keep a register of the animals and their owners. The Riding Establishments Act, 1939, empowers a local authority to authorise a registered veterinary surgeon to inspect any premises believed to be used as a riding establishment, which means any stables or other premises whatsoever at which horses are kept for the purpose of being let out on hire for riding or of being used in providing in return for payment instruction in riding. It is an offence for any person to let out on hire or use for providing instruction any horse in such a condition that its use for that purpose will be likely to cause suffering to the horse, or to keep a horse for those purposes in so neglected a state or in such conditions that suffering is, or is likely to be, caused to the horse. There is one riding establishment in the Borough. The Diseases of Animals Act, 1950, deals inter alia with the enforcement of general orders relating to the movement of animals; the cleansing and disinfection oi places and vehicles occupied by animals; the protection of animals from suffering during transit; the importation, exportation and quarantine of animals; the keeping of records by owners and others relating to animals and poultry; and during outbreaks of specified diseases the enforcement of special orders relating to the control of the movement of animals and disinfection of places, vehicles and articles, etc. The administration and enforcement of the provisions of the Act and of the Diseases of Animals (Waste Foods) Order, 1957, is the duty of the Middlesex County Council. Under the Diseases of Animals (Waste Foods) Order, 1957, 3 pig-keepers in Finchley are licensed by the County Council and operate plant and equipment for the boiling of waste foods. 43 The Transit of Calves Order, 1963, was made on the 11th July and came into operation on the 22nd July, except for provisions relating to the construction of vehicles in which calves are carried; these latter provisions come into force on the 1st January, 1964. The Order is designed to protect calves from unnecessary suffering during transport by road. There were no outbreaks of animal diseases in Finchley during the year. BURIAL AND CREMATION It is the duty of the local authority under Section 50 of the National Assistance Act, 1948, to cause to be buried or cremated the body of any person who has died or been found dead in the area, in any case where it appears to the authority that no suitable arrangements for the disposal of the body have been or are being otherwise made. The expenses incurred may be recovered from the estate of the deceased person, by death grant subject to the contribution conditions being satisfied or from any person who for the purposes of the Act was liable to maintain the deceased person immediately before his death. Any person who has died or been found dead in these circumstances in Finchley is buried in the St. Pancras Cemetery. One burial was carried out by the Council during the year. EXHUMATIONS Licences for the removal of human remains under the Burial Act, 1857, state, inter alia," "It is considered advisable that the medical officer of health should be notified whenever such a licence is granted in order that he may be in a position to take (under his general powers) any action that may appear to him to be necessary in the interests of public health." Two copies of licences for such removals were received from the Home Office during the year. The exhumations were carried out in the early hours of the morning and were observed by a public health inspector, to ensure compliance with the conditions of the licences. MORTUARY The Council provide a mortuary under the provisions of the Public Health Act, 1936, and the Coroner, whose district includes Finchley, uses his power in Section 24 of the Coroner's Amendment Act, 1926, to direct that bodies from the Potters Bar and Friern Barnet Urban Districts, which are also within his district, shall be taken to the Finchley Mortuary. 44 Two hundred and seventeen bodies were received into the mortuary during 1963, and of these, 74 were from Friern Barnet and 20 from Potters Bar. Post mortem examinations were carried out in all cases. CONFERENCES AND COURSES Money spent on the attendance of officers at conferences and courses is a sound investment, both for the authority and the officers concerned. It is the best means of keeping abreast of current developments in the various fields and gives the officer an opportunity to discuss mutual problems with colleagues. There is no doubt at all that a conference or course is enriched by the contributions added by the participants. A list of conferences and courses attended during the year is shown on page 88. MEDICAL EXAMINATIONS Fifty-six examinations were undertaken during the year. Thirty-one persons were examined in respect of new appointments and one was found to be unfit; 15 were examined for transfer to the permanent staff and one was found to be unfit; one was a special report following injury; 6 were for extensions of service, and 3 on behalf of another authority. OUTSTANDING NOTICES In pursuance of the provisions of the Land Charges Act, 1925, 2,486 enquiries were received from the Town Clerk concerning outstanding notices and smoke control areas in relation to all types of property in the district. The necessary searches were made and information supplied. 45 Acknowledgments to The Chief Officers of the Council— The Town Clerk—R. M. Franklin, Esq. TTie Borough Engineer and Surveyor—P. M. Spencer, Esq. The Borough Treasurer—W. R. Harm an, Esq. The Borough Education Officer—A. T. Dodd, Esq. The Borough Housing Officer—I. Fooks, Esq. The Borough Librarian—J. D. Reynolds, Esq. C. N. Austwick, Esq., Area Welfare Officer, Middlesex County Council. Dr. J. F. Azzopardi, Geriatrician, Barnet General Hospital. Dr. K. M. Bodkin, Area Medical Officer, Area No. 4, Middlesex County Council. Dr. B. A. Butterworth, Finchley Chest Clinic, 980, High Road, N.20. Mrs. I. K. Chaplin, Secretary, Finchley Guild of Social Service, Municipal Offices, East End Road, N.3. Mrs. D. E. Colebrook, Centre Organiser, W.V.S., 308, Regents Park Road, N.3. A. T. Dickinson, Esq., Divisional Superintendent, 93rd Ambulance Division (Men), St. John Ambulance Brigade. Dr. R. Emond, Consultant, Infectious Diseases, Coppetts Wood Hospital. Dr. R. C. Greenberg, Senior Medical Officer, Mental Health Department, Middlesex County Council. C. E. Harris, Esq., Chief Chemist and Bateriologist, Lee Valley Water Company. Miss J. Hunter, Youth Employment Officer, Finchley and Friern Barnet Youth Employment Bureau. Dr. A. Melvin Ramsay, Consultant, Infectious Diseases, The Royal Free Hospital. Miss F. M. Rochat, Divisional Director, Finchley and Hendon Division, British Red Cross Society. J. Sayers, Esq., Manager, Ministry of Labour, 316a, Regents Park Road, N.3. Miss E. J. Stanley, Honorary Secretary, Finchley Old People's Welfare Committee. Dr. C. E. D. Taylor, Central Public Health Laboratory, Colindale Avenue, N.W.9. Miss M. K. Watling, Divisional Superintendent, 133rd Nursing Division (Women), St. John Ambulance Brigade. Dr. G. S. Wigley, County Medical Officer, Middlesex County Council. 46 GENERAL INFORMATION CONCERNING THE STATUTORY AND VOLUNTARY SERVICES AVAILABLE STATUTORY SERVICES PERSONAL HEALTH SERVICES Health Services under Part III of the National Health Service Act, 1946, are provided by the Middlesex County Council. County Medical Officer : G. S. Wigley, M.R.C.S., L.R.C.P., D.P.H., 3, 5 & 7, Old Queen Street, S.W.I. Telephone: TRAfalgar 7799. Area Medical Officer, Area No. 4, Finchley and Hendon : Miss Kathleen M. Bodkin, M.R.C.S., L.R.C.P., D.P.H., Area Health Office, Town Hall, Hendon, N.W.4. Telephone : HENdon 8282. Ante-natal Clinics : (1) Health Centre, Oak Lane, N.2, on Tuesdays (9.30 a.m. to 12 noon) and Fridays (2 p.m. to 4.30 p.m.). (2) Torrington Clinic, Torrington Park, N.12, on Wednesdays (9.30 a.m. to 12 noon). N.B.—Post-natal mothers are also seen at these clinics. Infant Welfare Clinics: (1) Health Centre, Oak Lane, N.2, on Tuesdays, Wednesdays and Thursdays (2 p.m. to 4.30 p.m.). (2) Torrington Clinic, Torrington Park, N.12, on Wednesdays and Fridays (2 p.m. to 4.30 p.m.). (3) Methodist Church Hall, Essex Park, N.3, on Tuesdays and Thursdays (2 p.m. to 4.30 p.m.). Day Nursery: Kingswood Day Nursery, 6, Hendon Avenue, N.3. Open— Mondays to Fridays inclusive (8 a.m. to 6 p.m.). *Midwifery: The mid wives operating in Finchley are:— Miss M. Cole, 26, Victoria Grove, N.12. (HILlside 6601). Miss R. Carey, 23, Prospect Ring, N.2. (TUDor 5262). *Home Nursing: A number of home nurses cover the district and private practitioners are informed of the names and telephone numbers. *Enquiries for a home nurse or midwife may be made direct to the nurse or midwife concerned or to the Area Superintendent of Home Nurses and Non-Medical Supervisor of Midwives, Area Health Office, Town Hall, Hendon, N.W.4. (HENdon 8282, Ext. 513). 47 Chiropody: The County Council's extension of the chiropody service offers treatment in the first instance to the elderly, the physically handicapped, expectant mothers and nursing mothers with a child under 12 months, but does not preclude recommendations being made in respect of other persons needing chiropody treatment, including school children provided with free treatment under the Education Act, 1944. The Service provides treatment at the Torrington and Oak Lane Clinics for persons of pensionable age, i.e., men aged 65 and over and women aged 60 and over. Transport for attendance, where required on medical grounds, is provided and in certain circumstances arrangements can be made for chiropodists to visit old people's homes. In exceptional cases home visits can be made. Clinic for the Elderly: An advisory clinic for the elderly is held on Monday afternoons at the Torrington Park Qinic, 16, Torrington Park, Finchley, N.12. The purpose of the clinic is to provide general advice on healthy living, including personal health problems, diet, accident prevention and social welfare and cultivation of interests essential to mental health in old age. In certain instances a medical examination will be carried out at the discretion of the medical officer in charge. In cases where it is considered that medical attention and treatment is indicated, information will be given to the patient's private medical practitioner so that he may consider making any necessary arrangements. Health Visiting: There are a number of health visitors in Finchley who are available to give advice on health matters. Domestic Help: Assistance can be provided in maternity cases, sickness in the home and in respect of aged people. Medical certificates are necessary in each case. It is the County Council's rule that home help provision may not be continued for more than six months in any case without the approval of the Area Health Committee, and it is its policy that, in cases of acute emergency, immediate assistance be given for a short period without detailed investigation; however, for longer periods, the approval of the Area Health Committee is required. Vaccination and Immunisation: Vaccination and immunisation against smallpox, diphtheria, whooping cough, tetanus and poliomyelitis can either be undertaken by appointment at local clinics or may be arranged through the private medical practitioners. Prevention of Illness, care and after-care: Arrangements can be made whereby persons can be sent away for a recuperative holiday following an acute illness. 48 School Health Service: Arrangements for treatment can be undertaken at the undermentioned clinics by appointment:— Dental Clinic, Health Centre, Oak Lane, N.2. Dental Clinic, Kingswood, 6, Hendon Avenue, N.3. Speech Clinic, Health Centre, Oak Lane, N.2. Speech Clinic, Torrington Clinic, Torrington Park, N.12. Orthopaedic Clinic, Health Centre, Oak Lane, N.2. Orthodontic Clinic, Health Centre, Oak Lane, N.2. Minor Ailment Clinic, Health Centre, Oak Lane, N.2. Minor Ailment Clinic, Torrington Clinic, Torrington Park, N.12. Eye Clinic, Health Centre, Oak Lane, N.2. Aural Clinic, Health Centre, Oak Lane, N.2. B.C.G. Vaccination: Vaccination against tuberculosis is offered to all children approaching 13 years and over. Subnormal Children: A day special school for educationally subnormal children is provided at Oak Lodge, Oak Lane, N.2. The regular catchment area covers Finchley, Hendon and Hornsey, but if specially asked the school will admit children from Friern Barnet, Southgate, Potters Bar and Wood Green. The residue of Wembley and Willesden children are in attendance but these districts now have their own schools. Welfare Foods: Proprietary welfare foods are available to mothers attending infant welfare clinics and, in addition, Ministry of Health welfare foods, i.e., Cod Liver Oil, National Dried Milk, Orange Juice, Vitamin A & D Tablets are issued. The latter commodities are also available at the W.V.S. Centre, 308, Regents Park Road, N.3, and the Centre is open for this service from 10 a.m. to 12 noon and 2 p.m. to 4 p.m. on Mondays to Fridays. Further information regarding these services may be obtained from the Area Medical Officer, Area Health Office, Town Hall, Hendon, N.W.4. (HENdon 8282). MENTAL HEALTH SERVICES The Borough of Finchley forms part of the East Central Division for Mental Health Services in the Middlesex County Council. Divisional Office: 2, Maryland Road, Wood Green, N.22. (Tel. : BOWes Park 5244). Senior Medical Officer : Dr. R. C. Greenberg. Divisional Mental Welfare Officer : Mr. W. J. Ward. Senior Mental Welfare Officers : Mr. E. Inglis; Mr. C. Carr. Mental Welfare Officers : Mr. R. Harmer; Miss M. Lay; Mr. N. Green. Mental Health Social Worker : Miss C. M. Coups. Psychiatric Social Worker : Vacant. 49 The mental health social worker makes regular visits to the homes of all the sub-normal and severely sub-normal females and males up to the age of ten years and advises on all aspects of the patient's well being and employment in appropriate cases. She submits written reports on her visits so that where necessary the County Medical Officer may take appropriate action such as arranging admission to psychiatric hospitals either on a temporary or permanent basis. Such temporary admissions, of up to eight weeks, are arranged to meet acute domestic difficulties or ill health of mother. The mental welfare officers deal similarly with the sub-normal and severely sub-normal males over the age of ten years. The main duty of the mental welfare officer is pre- and after-care of those persons suffering from mental illness including dealing with those requiring compulsory detention in psychiatric hospitals under the Mental Health Act, 1959. Both the mental welfare officers and the mental health social workers transport patients in their cars to and from the psychiatric hospitals, in case of emergency. The psychiatric social workers are largely concerned with the after-care and rehabilitation of persons discharged after undergoing treatment either in hospitals or at out-patient clinics but also deal with a similar type of case who may not have had to enter a psychiatric hospital and in cases referred from the National Assistance Board because of chronic unemployment, they also assist couples in cases of marital difficulty. As regards the general practitioners, they receive via the Middlesex Executive Council, a schedule setting out the information given above and also the procedure under which they may obtain the services of a mental welfare officer outside normal office hours. In addition to the home visiting service, there are junior training schools for the young severely sub-normal and adult training centres for those of sixteen years of age and over. Although at present there are none of these establishments actually sited within the Borough, Finchley children are transported daily by coach to the purpose-built Friern Barnet Junior Training School and Finchley youths and girls are taken by coach to the Edmonton Adult Training Centre. A therapeutic social club is run for incipient mental cases and for those discharged from psychiatric hospitals who are in need of after-care, at York Park Day Nursery, York Road, Hendon, N.W.9, at 7 p.m. every Tuesday evening. It is the County Council's intention to increase the above facilities and to provide, in addition, hostel accommodation for the mentally disordered living in the community. WELFARE SERVICES Welfare Services under Part III of the National Assistance Act, 1948, are provided by the Welfare Department of the Middlesex County Council. 50 The following services are under the direction of the local Area Welfare Officer, Mr. C. N. Austwick, 36, Woodhouse Road, N.12. (HILlside 2822):— (a) Admittance to residential accommodation through reasons of age and infirmity. (b) Provision of temporary accommodation for persons rendered homeless through eviction, fire or flood. (c) Welfare of the physically handicapped (day to day supervision by welfare visitor). (d) Welfare of the blind and partially sighted (day to day supervision by home teacher). A handicraft class for the blind is held once a fortnight on Tuesdays at 2.30 p.m. at Christchurch Hall, High Road, N.12; and on the alternate Tuesday a social club is held at St. Mary's Church Hall, Hendon Lane, N.3, in the afternoon. A work centrc for handicapped persons is open in the mornings from Monday to Friday at the Hendon Ex-Service Men's Club, Heriot Road, N.W.4. Details of the County Council and registered (non-profit making) voluntary old people's homes are as follows:— County Council : " Beach Lodge," 66, Hendon Lane, N.3. FINchley 5522. 35 women. " Meadowside," 58, Holden Road, N.12. HILlside 7816. 22 women. Voluntary: " Fairlight," 51, Woodside Avenue, N.12. HILlside 1513. 20 mixed. French Memorial Home, 13, Nether Street, N.12. HILlside 4353. 20 mixed. Woodside Home, Lake View Drive, N.20. HILlside 1127. 42 women. Nazareth House, 162, East End Road, N.2. TUDor 1104. 59 mixed. For blind residents : Vernon House, The Bishop's Avenue, N.2. SPEedwell 2130. 42 mixed. For Jewish residents only : Leo Baeck House, The Bishop's Avenue, N.2. SPEedwell 9806. 43 mixed. Osmond House, The Bishop's Avenue, N.2. MEAdway 1185. 30 mixed. Heinrich Stahl House, The Bishop's Avenue, N.2. MEAdway 3474. 54 mixed. Hammerson House, The Bishop's Avenue, N.2. MEAdway 4523. 30 mixed. AMBULANCE SERVICE A series of ambulances and sitting case cars is maintained by the Middlesex County Council. In cases of emergency, dial 999. In other cases, ambulances should be obtained through the family doctor or hospital. 51 HOSPITAL SERVICE The hospitals serving Finchley are :— Finchley Memorial Hospital, Bow Lane, N.12. (FINchley 1195). Barnet General Hospital, Wellhouse Lane, Barnet, Herts. (BARnet 7421). North Middlesex Hospital, Silver Street, Edmonton, N.18. (EDMonton 3071). " Tower" Maternity Annexe (North Middlesex Hospital), The Bishop's Avenue, N.2. (SPEedwell 3612). Royal Northern Hospital, Holloway Road, N.7. (ARChway 2211). Whittington Hospital, Archway Road, N.19. (ARChway 3070). Coppetts Wood Isolation Hospital, Coppetts Road, N.10. (TUDor 9792/3). CENTRES FOR FREE YELLOW FEVER VACCINATION IMPORTANT.—Every person requiring vaccination MUST MAKE AN APPOINTMENT WITH THE CENTRE : where times of attendances are shown, they are given FOR GUIDANCE ONLY. Address Tel. No. Time of Attendance Hospital for Tropical Diseases, EUSton Yellow Fever Vaccination: 4, St. Pancras Way, London, 6441 Monday, Wednesday & Fri- N.W.l. Ext. 137 day, 11.30 a.m. to 12.30 p.m. Tuesday and Thursday, 12.30 to 1.15 p.m. Other vaccinations: Monday, Wednesday & Friday, 12.30 to 1.15 p.m. Tuesday and Thursday, 11.30 a.m. to 12.30 p.m. Unilever Ltd., Medical Depart- CENtral Tuesday and Friday, 3.30 to ment, Unilever House, Black- 7474 4.30 p.m. friars, London, E.C4. Ext. 91 No other vaccination can be done at this Centre. West London Designated Vac- AMBassador Yellow Fever Vaccination : cinating Centre, 53, Great 6456 Monday, Tuesday, Thursday Cumberland Place, London, and Friday, 11 a.m. to 12 W.l. noon. Tuesday, Wednesday and Thursday, 2 to 3 p.m. Other vaccinations : Monday to Friday, 10 a.m. to 5 p.m. 52 VENEREAL DISEASE List of clinics convenient for Middlesex residents:— Luke & Martha Clinics, West London Hospital, Hammersmith, W.8. Whitechapel Clinic, London Hospital, London, E.l. Special Clinic, West Middlesex Hospital, Isleworth, Middlesex. The Prince of Wales General Hospital, Tottenham, London, N.15. Special Clinic, Hillingdon Hospital, Uxbridge, Middlesex. St. Mary's Hospital, Praed Street, London, W.2. Special Clinic, Central Middlesex Hospital, Park Royal, London, N.W.10. TUBERCULOSIS AND CHEST X-RAY Finchley Chest Clinic The Chest Clinic serving this district is situated at 980, High Road, Whetstone, N.20. (HILlside 6681). Chest Physician : Dr. B. A. Butterworth. Assistant Chest Physician : Dr. W. Traub. Finchley Chest Clinic give X-rays mainly on a doctor's request. They will, however, do so for other reasons, free of charge, but if an X-ray is required for insurance or immigration purposes a charge is usually made. Application for an appointment should be made in writing for this purpose. 53 Mass Radiography Mixed X-ray Sessions for both Men and Women 32, DRAYTON PARK, N.5 (Telephone No. NORTH 2450) Bus Service:— Underground Stations:— 43, 104, 172, 271, 279 to Holloway Road( Piccadilly Line). Drayton Park traffic lights. Drayton Park (Northern City Line). MONDAY 2.00 p.m.— 4.15 p.m. 5.00 p.m.— 7.15 p.m. TUESDAY 9.45 a.m.—12.30 p.m. 2.00 p.m.— 5.30 p.m. WEDNESDAY 9.45 a.m.—12.30 p.m. 2.00 p.m.— 5.30 p.m. THURSDAY 2.00 p.m.— 4.15 p.m. 5.00 p.m.— 7.15 p.m. MOBILE UNIT at the junction of MAIDA VALE and CARLTON VALE Bus Service:— Underground Stations:— 1, 8, 16, 60, 176, get off at Maida Vale Station (Bakerloo Line) Kilburn Park Road, (5 minutes walk). Maida Vale. By Railway:— 28, 31, get off at Kilburn Kilburn High Road Station High Road (10 minutes (10 minutes walk), walk). MONDAY (only) 2.00 p.m.—4.30 p.m. 5.30 p.m.—7.30 p.m. No appointment is necessary. A stamped addressed envelope should be taken for the result. NOTE: This is a mobile unit parked at the side of Dibdin House in CARLTON VALE twenty yards from the traffic lights at the junction with MAIDA VALE. The Unit will not operate on Public Holidays or on Christmas Eve. CARE AND WELFARE OF CHILDREN WHO ARE DEPRIVED OF A NORMAL HOME LIFE Enquiries should be made to Children's Area Officer, 1, Friern Park, N.12. (HILlside 4264). 54 VOLUNTARY SERVICES FINCHLEY OLD PEOPLE'S WELFARE COMMITTEE Public Health Department, 308, Regents Park Road, N.3. (Secretary—Miss E. J. Stanley—FINchley 0018.) The Finchley Old People's Welfare Committee is a co-ordinating Committee for the statutory services and voluntary organisations serving the elderly people of the Borough. In addition to its work of co-ordination, the Committee advises and assists those persons of 60 years of age and over whose need is indicated or puts such people in touch with the appropriate service. During 1963, 804 requests for assistance were received. Eye Testing In special circumstances, elderly people may have their eyes tested at home. OLD PERSONS' CLUBS Companions of St. Barnabas St. Barnabas Church Hall, Gainsborough Road, N.12. Wednesdays—2.30 p.m. to 4.30 p.m. Enquiries to Mrs. A. Student-Cuming, 29, Westbury Road, N.12. (Tel. : HILlside 7478). Evergreen Clubs Finchley Club, St. Luke's Hall, Mountfield Road, N.3. Wednesdays—2.30 p.m. to 4.30 p.m. Disabled Persons Handicraft Club—Membership on production of a doctor's certificate. St. Mary's Church Hall, Hendon Lane, N.3. Thursdays—2.30 p.m. to 4.30 p.m. Enquiries concerning the above clubs to:— Miss F. M. Rochat, Divisional Director, British Red Cross Society, 172, Regents Park Road, N.3. (Tel. : FINchley 2588). Good Companions' Club Youth Hall, High Road, East Finchley, N.2. Tuesdays—2.30 p.m. to 4.15 p.m. Enquiries to Mrs. V. Coomber, 12a, Torrington Court, Torrington Park, N.12. (Tel.: HILlside 7575). 55 Hampstead Garden Suburb Fellowship Fellowship House, Willifield Way, N.W.I 1. (for residents of the Suburb). Meetings daily. Enquiries to Mrs. D. Stonhold, 3, Asmuns Hill, N.W.11. (Tel. : SPEedwell 0714). Old Age Pensioners Club Granville Hall, Granville Road, N.12. Thursdays—2 p.m. to 4.30 p.m. Enquiries to W. Owens, Esq., 183, Squires Lane, N.3. (Tel. : FINchley 7162). St. Paul's Over Sixties Club Long Lane, N.3. Thursdays—2.30 p.m. to 4.30 p.m. Enquiries to Mrs. N. Pearce, 36, Finchley Way, N.3. (Tel. : FINchley 4957) The Finchley and District Senior Citizens' Club Granville Hall, Granville Road, North Finchley, N.12. Mondays—7 p.m. to 9.45 p.m. Enquiries to D. Boughton, Esq., 21, William Street, N.12. The Friendship Clubs Finchley Central Friendship Club, Finchley Central Synagogue, Redbourne Avenue, N.3. Mondays, 7.30 p.m. Enquiries to Mrs. H. Preston, 56, Rosemary Avenue, N.3. (Tel.: FINchley 7248). Kinloss Gardens Club, Finchley Synagogue, Kinloss Gardens, N.3. Tuesdays at 2.30 p.m. Enquiries to Mrs. S. Sharer, 58, Hendon Avenue, N.3. (Tel. : FINchley 4344). Norrice Lea Club, Hampstead Garden Suburb Synagogue, Norrice Lea, N.2. Mondays—2 p.m. to 4.30 p.m. Enquiries to Mrs. C. Godfrey, 14, Norrice Lea, N.2. (Tel.: MEAdway 3163). Woodside Park Club, Woodside Hall, Woodside Park Road, N.12. Wednesdays—2 p.m. to 4.30 p.m. Enquiries to Mrs. K. Bookatz, 22, Hemington Avenue, N.ll. (Tel. : ENTerprise 0416). 56 BRITISH RED CROSS SOCIETY The provision of sick room requisites. Various items of sick room equipment are available on loan at a very small charge, or in the case of persons on national assistance articles may be supplied free. Such articles as crutches and indoor and outdoor invalid chairs are included in this equipment. Chiropody Appointments are made for treatment at reduced charges. Escort Duties Escort duties are performed, for example, sick persons may be met at the main railway stations and escorted through London to their destinations. Various other services are given such as:— Manning First Aid Posts at public functions and private entertainments. Nursing in the home in emergencies. Blanket bathing in the home for men and women. Assisting in carrying patients up and down stairs, where required, when ambulance service is not available. Driving disabled patients to clubs by volunteer drivers. Clubs for the elderly and handicraft clubs for the disabled. Paying home welfare visits on behalf of the Family Welfare Association, the Invalid Children's Aid Association, and various Services Benevolent Associations. Red Cross Services available in cases of sickness, disablement and infirmity from old age. All enquiries to be directed to Miss F. M. Rochat, Divisional Director, British Red Cross Society, 172, Regents Park Road, N.3. (FINchley 2588). OCTOPUS CLUB The Finchley Borough Council have continued to grant to the Octopus Club the use of the Indoor Bath at Squires Lane on alternate Sundays from 12.30 p.m. to 2 p.m. The total membership of the Club is about 50 and the average number of members who attend each session is about 26. The Club does not confine itself to those who have suffered from poliomyelitis. Persons who have suffered from any kind of disablement may attend at the Bath, providing that each can produce a certificate from his family doctor stating that he is free from infection and would benefit from attending the swimming sessions. The cases are collected from a wide area by ambulance and cars (such arrangements being made by the Infantile Paralysis Fellowship) and are assisted in changing and serving hot 57 drinks, and also in the water by voluntary helpers, from the British Red Cross Society and members of various Swimming Clubs. The improvement physically and mentally has been most marked. This Club is an excellent illustration of the successful co-operation with and between the voluntary bodies. ST. JOHN AMBULANCE BRIGADE 93rd Ambulance Division (Men) Divisional Superintendent: A. T. Dickinson, 49, Ingleway, N.12. 133rd Nursing Division (Women) Divisional Superintendent: Miss M. K. Wading, 10, Nether Close, N.3. The St. John Ambulance Brigade can provide special nursing services in the home under the guidance of the family doctor. Escort duties can also be arranged. WOMEN'S VOLUNTARY SERVICE 308, Regents Park Road, N.3. Telephone : FINchley 2372. Clothing Depot—at the centre, where garments are received, and distributed by recommendation to those in need. Meals on Wheels Service—the distribution on recommendation, of hot dinners to housebound and disabled persons. Visiting and shopping undertaken for people in certain Homes. 1914-1918 War Widows and lonely old people also visited. Wool blankets made by knitting of six-inch squares from oddments of wool provided at the centre. Blankets given to the needy. Women of all ages welcomed to give their services. FINCHLEY GUILD OF SOCIAL SERVICE Information Centre provides free advice on personal or any other problems; helps with enquiries on current legislation prior to legal advice; e.g., housing and rent difficulties, domestic worries, pension queries, etc. All interviews are strictly confidential. Sympathetic help and advice is freely given, and in cases where legal help is necessary, it is arranged for the applicant to see a solicitor. Help for Invalids—elderly housebound, and patients discharged from hospital are visited where necessary, and assistance or advice is given in needful cases. " Wireless for the Bedridden " Society—the Guild acts as sponsor in providing radio sets for housebound invalids. 58 During the summer, the Guild arranges holidays at special terms. Programmes are available from February onwards, on application. A "Workroom for the Elderly" opened on 12th October, 1962, at the Congregational Church Hall, East End Road, N.2, has now moved to the East Finchley Methodist Church, High Road, N.2. The main purpose of the workroom is to keep elderly people fit and at the same time allowing them to earn small sums of money from repetitive work. This scheme is available to all elderly people in the Borough. All enquiries for services offered by the Finchley Guild of Social Service should be directed to their Secretary at the Municipal Offices, Hertford Lodge Annexe, East End Road, N.3. (Telephone : FINchley 2626). Hours 9.30 a.m. to 12.30 p.m., Monday to Friday, and 6 p.m. to 8 p.m. on Mondays. BRITISH LEGION The British Legion helps ex-service men and women and their dependants at times of difficulty through ill-health or other causes. Such people do not have to be Legion members. Assistance given with rent arrears, mortgage repayments, supplying coal and food, if necessary, hiring articles such as ladders and equipment, also helping with pension appeals. Committee meets at 359, Regent Close, Ballards Lane, N.12. FINCHLEY RATEPAYERS' ASSOCIATION This is a body which exists for the benefit of the citizens of the Borough as a whole. It assists in preserving or improving amenities within the Borough. Problems of a local nature which it is felt require advice, or matters needing to be remedied, should be submitted to the Honorary Secretary of the Ratepayers' Association—H. A. Collis, Esq., 14, Hillcourt Avenue, N.12. (HILlside 4731), or to the Chairman— W. W. Willcocks, Esq., 34, Park Hall Road, N.2. (TUDor 1214). RETARDED CHILDREN'S AID SOCIETY, LTD. This non-profit making Society has opened two "Peter Pan" Homes which, although registered with the Hertfordshire County Council are available to children from all parts of the country. The first Home, at Butlin House, 104, Leicester Road, New Barnet, accommodates 10 mentally handicapped boys between the ages of 4 and 15 years and the second, "The Sapsted," Peter Pan House, 2, Warwick Road, New Barnet, for 11 girls in the same age group. The children are in the care of 5 housemothers with the assistance of daily helps and voluntary workers. 59 The Homes are open to private patients and children recommended by the Middlesex, Hertfordshire and London County Councils, the charge being £5 per week, the remainder of the cost being borne by the Society. The Society has its own training centre for the children of Hertfordshire and London, but at the moment children from Middlesex attend the Friern Barnet Junior Training Centre at Oakleigh Road North, N.20. Enquiries should be made to the Honorary Secretary, 21, East End Road, N.3. (FINchley 2780). MIDDLESEX AND SURREY LEAGUE FOR THE HARD OF HEARING The following activities are available at the Finchley group—games, socials, competitions, exhibitions, discussions, debates, talks, lip-reading and clear speech practice, arm-chair travel with coloured slides, advice and help with all problems of hearing. Members may participate in conferences, week-end courses, and other functions organised by the League, and by the British Association for the Hard-ofHearing, to which the League is affiliated. Home visits are arranged for the sick and housebound members. Members may also join in the various holidays organised during the year. Finchley Meetings—at 34, Lambert Road, North Finchley, N.12. 1st and 3rd Tuesday in each month at 7—9 p.m. Lip-Reading Circle every Thursday at 2.30—4 p.m. 1st Tuesday—Teatime Book Discussion at 5—7 p.m. Enquiries to the Secretary, Miss Mary Taylor, 24, Quakers Lane, Potters Bar, Middlesex. (Tel. : Potters Bar 58373). Miss Taylor will be pleased to lecture to other organisations on the problems of the hard-of-hearing. ALCOHOLICS ANONYMOUS Alcoholics Anonymous is a following of men and women who share their experience, strength and hope with each other that they may solve their common problem and help others to recover from alcoholism. Service Offices : England and Wales—11, Redcliffe Gardens, London, S.W.10. Telephone : FLAxman 9669 and 9779). London Inter-Group—(Telephone : PADdington 8947 and 6389). (A service operates at this office from 10 a.m. to 10 p.m. Monday to Friday inclusive and 10 a.m. to 1 p.m. on Saturday.) 60 There are about 40 meetings held in the Greater London area on various nights of the week. Normally these meetings are "closed" when the attendance is restricted to members and people who suspect that they have a drinking problem. Every group, however, has at least one meeting a month which is "open" and which can be attended by friends and relatives of alcoholics or those interested in the disease. Full details and addresses of all meetings in the United Kingdom are included in the pamphlet "Where to Find Alcoholics Anonymous" or can be obtained by ringing one of the numbers given above. THE SAMARITANS The Samaritans exist to help those tempted to suicide or despair and immediate contact can be made at any hour of the day or night. The "clients" may, if they wish, remain anonymous and be befriended or counselled only over the telephone; but the vast majority trust the Samaritans sufficiently to reveal their identity and to meet them face to face, for they know that their problems are treated in the strictest confidence. Emergency calls : Telephone: MANsion House 9000 Other calls : Telephone : MANsion House 2277 St. Stephen's Church, Walbrook, London, E.C.4. The Rev. Chad Varah, Rector. USEFUL INFORMATION MINISTRY OF PENSIONS AND NATIONAL INSURANCE 40/44, Ballards Lane, Finchley, N.3. Telephone: FINchley 4071. NATIONAL ASSISTANCE BOARD 40/44, Ballards Lane, Finchley, N.3. Telephone: FINchley 6646. REGISTRAR OF BIRTHS, DEATHS AND MARRIAGES Mrs. E. E. Govier, 1, Friern Park, North Finchley, N.12. Telephone : HILlside 4768. THE FAMILY PLANNING ASSOCIATION—FINCHLEY BRANCH Clinics at Health Centre, Oak Lane, N.2. on Thursdays at 7 p.m. Honorary Clinic Secretary: Mrs. B. Rowley, 62, Corringham Road, N.W.I 1. (Telephone : SPEedwell 7802). MARRIAGE GUIDANCE COUNCIL Avenue House, East End Road, N.3. on Tuesdays at 11 a.m. (by appointment). Full particulars from the Secretary, 73, Crouch Hall Road, N.8. (Telephone : MOUntview 8223). 61 STATISTICS Area (in acres) 3,478 Population— Registrar-General's estimate Mid 1963 69,330 Census, 1961 69,370 Number of Inhabited Dwellings, 1st April, 1963:— Houses and flats 21,464 Other properties with living accommodation 439 Rateable Value at 1st April, 1963 £5,100,991 Product of a penny rate 1963/4 £20,650 LIVE BIRTHS Males Females Total Legitimate 516 519 1,035 Illegitimate 38 33 71 554 552 1,106 Illegitimate live births per cent. of total live births—6.4% Rate per 1,000 population Finchley 16.0 Area Comparability Factor 0.96 Corrected rate for Finchley 15.3 England and Wales (provisional) 18.2 STILLBIRTHS Males Females Total Legitimate 11 5 16 Illegitimate 2 - 2 13 5 18 Total live and stillbirths 567 557 1,124 Rate per 1,000 live & stillbirths Finchley 16.0 England and Wales (provisional) 7.3 62 ENFANT DEATHS (under 1 year of age) Males Females Total Legitimate 9 8 17 Illegitimate 1 — 1 10 8 18 Rate per 1,000 Finchley: live births Legitimate 16.4 Illegitimate 14.1 Total 16.3 England and Wales (provisional) 20.9 Rate per 1,000 live births Finchley 9.0 England and Wales 14.2 Rate per 1,000 live births Legitimate 7.7 Illegitimate- Total 7.2 63 NEO-NATAL DEATHS (under 4 weeks of age) Males Females Total Legitimate 6 4 10 Illegitimate — —— — 6 4 10 EARLY NEO-NATAL DEATHS (under 1 week of age) Males Females Total Legitimate 5 3 8 Illegitimate — — 5 3 8 PERI-NATAL DEATHS (stillbirths and deaths under 1 week of age) Males Females Total legitimate 16 8 24 Illegitimate 2 — 2 18 8 26 Rate per 1,000 live & stillbirths Legitimate 22.8 Illegitimate 27.4 Total 23.1 MATERNAL MORTALITY RATES (including abortion) per 1,000 total live and stillbirths Finchley (1 death) 0.89 England and Wales (244 deaths) (provisional) 0.28 DEATHS FROM ALL CAUSES Males 389 Females 465 Total 854 Rate per 1,000 population Finchley 12.3 Area Comparability Factor 0.90 Corrected rate for Finchley 11.1 England and Wales 12.2 64 INFANTILE MORTALITY Deaths from stated causes at various ages under one year of age CAUSE OF DEATH Under 1 week 1 -2 weeks 2-3 weeks 3-4 weeks Total under 4 weeks 4 weeks and under 3 months 3-6 months 6-9 months 9-12 months TOTAL Smallpox - - - - - - - - - - Chicken Pox - - - - - - - - - - Measles - — — — — — — — — Scarlet Fever — - — — — — — — — Whooping Cough - - - - - - - - - - Diphtheria and Croup - - - - - - - - - - Erysipelas - — — — — — — — — Tuberculous Meningitis - - - - - - - - - - Meningitis (not Tuberculous) - - - - - - - - - - Convulsions — — — — — — — — — Laryngitis — — — — — — — — Bronchitis — — — — — — — 1 — 1 Pneumonia (all forms) 2 - - - 2 1 3 - - 6 Diarrhoea - - - - - 1 - - - 1 Enteritis — — — — — — Gastritis — — — — — — — — Syphilis - - - - - - - - - - Rickets - - - - - - - - - - Suffocation, Overlying - - - - - - - - - - Asphyxia Neonatorum 2 - — — 2 — — — — 2 Injury at Birth —. — — — — — — — — Atelectasis 1 — — — 1 — — — — 1 Congenital Malformations 1 1 - - 2 - 1 - 1 4 Premature Birth 1 — — — 1 — — — — 1 Atrophy, Debility and Marasmus - - - - - - - - - - Accidents - - - - - - - - - - Leukaemia — — — — — — — — — — Tumours — — — — — — — — — — Other Causes 2 — — 2 — — — — 2 TOTALS 9 1 — — 10 2 4 1 1 18 65 CAUSES OF, AND AGES AT, DEATH No. CAUSES OF DEATH NET DEATHS AT THE SUBJOINED AGES OF "RESIDENTS" WHETHER OCCURRING WITHIN OR WITHOUT THE DISTRICT All ages Under 4 weeks 4 weeks and under 1 year 1 and under 15 5 and under 15 15 and under 25 25 and under 35 35 and under 45 45 and under 55 55 and under 65 65 and under 75 75 and over 1. Tuberculosis, Respiratory 2 - - - - - - - - 1 1 - 2. Tuberculosis, Other 1 - - 1 - - - - - - - - 3. Syphilitic Disease 2 - - - - - - - - - - 2 4. Diphtheria — — - — — — — - - - — 5. Whooping Cough —. — — — — — — — — — — — 6. Meningococcal Infections — — — — — — — — — — — 7. Acute Poliomyelitis — — — — — — — — — — — — 8. Measles — — — — — — — — — — — — 9. Other Infective and Parasitic Diseases 2 — — — — — 1 — — — — 1 10. Malignant Neoplasm, Stomach 13 — — — — — — — — 3 2 8 11. Malignant Neoplasm, Lung, Bronchus 45 — — — — — — — 3 14 17 11 12. Malignant Neoplasm, Breast 20 — — — — — — 1 2 4 6 7 13. Malignant Neoplasm, Uterus 5 — — — — — — 1 2 — 2 — 14. Other Malignant and Lymphatic Neoplasms 86 — — 1 — — — 1 6 16 28 34 15. Leukaemia, Aleukæmia 2 — — — — — — — — 1 1 — 16. Diabetes 5 — — — — — — — — 1 1 3 17. Vascular Lesions of Nervous System 89 — — — — 1 — — 1 14 19 54 18. Coronary Disease, Angina 192 — — — — — 2 1 5 34 57 93 19. Hypertension with Heart Disease 14 — — — — — — — — — 2 12 20. Other Heart Disease 114 — — — — 1 1 1 1 3 20 87 21. 22. Other Circulatory Disease Influenza 59 2 — — — — — — _ 2 8 8 41 2 23. Pneumonia 66 2 4 — — — — — 2 2 10 46 24. Bronchitis 37 — 1 1 — — — 2 1 6 11 15 25. Other Diseases of Respiratory System 2 — — — — — — — 1 — — 1 26. Ulcer of Stomach and Duodenum 5 — — — — — — — — — 1 4 27. Gastritis, Enteritis and Diarrhoea 1 — 1 — — — — — — — — — 28. Nephritis and Nephrosis 4 — — — — — — — — 2 1 1 29. Hyperplasia of Prostate 6 — — — — — — — — 1 2 — 30. Pregnancy, Childbirth, Abortion 1 — — — — — — — — — — — 31. Congenital Malformations 8 2 2 — — — — — — 2 2 — 32. Other Defined and Ill-Defined Diseases 38 6 — — 1 — — 1 1 6 11 12 33. Motor Vehicle Accidents 5 — — — — 2 1 — — — 1 1 34. All Other Accidents 11 — — — 1 3 — 1 1 2 — 3 35. Suicide 17 — — — — 3 1 2 1 6 2 2 36. Homicide and Operations of War — — — — — — — — — — — — Totals 854 10 8 3 2 10 7 11 29 126 205 443 66 VITAL STATISTICS FOR THE PAST 25 YEARS Year Total Live Births Birth Rate Total Deaths Death Rate Total Infant Deaths Infantile Mortality Rate Deaths from Measles Deaths from Whooping Cough Deaths from Diarrhoea (under 2 years) 1939 951 14.5 705 11.1 35 36.8 — - 3 1940 725 12.1 806 12.9 27 38.0 1 — 2 1941 721 12.4 734 12.7 15 21.8 — 3 1 1942 891 14.9 751 12.5 48 53.9 1 7 3 1943 1035 17.1 790 13.0 57 55.1 1 2 4 1944 1037 17.4 830 13.9 34 32.8 — 5 5 1945 987 16.1 725 11.8 36 36.4 1 — 1 1946 1207 17.6 774 11.3 30 24.9 1 1 5 1947 1319 18.7 830 11.7 27 20.5 — 1 4 1948 1086 15.3 763 10.8 30 27.6 — 1 2 1949 981 13.9 834 11.8 19 19.3 — — 2 1950 962 13.6 819 11.6 16 16.6 — — — 1951 915 13.0 877 12.5 22 24.0 — — —— 1952 953 13.6 782 11.1 11 11.5 — — — 1953 902 12.9 765 10.9 20 22.2 — — — 1954 877 12.5 747 10.7 16 18.2 — — — 1955 894 12.8 746 10.7 19 21.3 — — — 1956 910 13.0 831 11.9 12 13.2 — — — 1957 925 13.3 781 11.3 16 17.3 — — — 1958 902 13.1 825 11.9 18 20.0 — — - 1959 932 13.5 790 11.5 19 20.4 — — - 1960 1052 15.3 738 10.7 14 13.3 — — — 1961 989 14.4 847 12.3 23 23.3 — — - 1962 1118 16.2 815 11.8 15 13.4 — — - 1963 1106 16.0 854 12.3 18 16.3 — — — 67 ROAD ACCIDENTS Number of persons injured ADULTS CHILDREN Fatal Serious Slight Fatal Serious Slight Pedestrians 5 27 45 1 — 20 Pedal Cyclists — 11 24 — 1 12 Motor Cyclists — 8 31 — — — Scooterists 1 5 37 — — — Moped Riders — — 9 — — — Drivers: Private Cars — 23 95 — — — Goods Vehicles — 6 21 — — — Passengers : Private Cars — 12 94 — 1 7 Pillion Passengers — 2 7 — — — Public Service Vehicles — — 25 — — 1 Goods Vehicles — — 8 — — — 6 95 396 1 2 40 68 Comparative Figures of Accidents and Casualties for the years 1959-1963 1959 1960 1961 1962 1963 Road Accidents 464 483 441 440 412 Casualty Figures: Adults: Killed: Under 60 years of age 5 1 2 4 2 Over 60 years of age 4 2 1 3 4 Seriously injured: Under 60 years of age 70 64 74 90 83 Over 60 years of age 16 16 18 13 12 Slightly injured: Under 60 years of age 390 413 384 347 367 Over 60 years of age 30 44 34 26 29 TOTALS 515 540 513 483 497 Children: Killed — 1 1 — 1 Seriously injured 8 5 10 18 2 Slightly injured 77 60 53 52 40 TOTALS 85 66 64 70 43 GRAND TOTALS 600 606 577 553 540 69 METEOROLOGICAL DATA AVENUE HOUSE GROUNDS, FINCHLEY, N.3 MONTH RAINFALL TEMPERATURE DIRECTION OF WIND (Days) Total Inches Greatest in 24 Hours Days on which 0.01 in. or more fell Mean Maximum Minimum No. of Nights at or below 32° F. s.w. Quadrant including W. S.E. Quadrant including S. N.E. Quadrant including E. N.W. Quadrant including N. Depth inches Date Degrees Date Degrees Date Jan. 1.06 0.32 2 9 28.1 40 27 13 25 29 ... ... 28 3 Feb. 0.54 0.12 7 11 31.4 46 9 19 3 27 ... 2 21 5 March 2.96 0.53 9 17 44.1 60 6 24 2 8 17 1 6 7 April 2.44 0.41 15 18 49.8 70 20 31 2 1 14 2 6 8 May 2.03 0.32 1 14 53.6 78 19 36 2 ... 25 3 1 2 June 3.58 0.82 13 17 61.7 85 16 43 5 and 7 ... 4 1 12 13 July 1.58 0.88 6 11 61.5 80 24 and 31 46 6 and 7 ... 14 4 3 10 August 3.03 0.48 17 18 61.0 84 5 44 1 ... 16 ... 2 13 Sept. 2.65 0.47 1 15 57.5 82 22 42 12 to 19 23, 24 & 28 ... 7 3 5 15 Oct. 1.85 0.36 31 15 52.8 70 13 38 14 ... 13 ... 6 12 Nov. 5.31 1.22 18 29 46.9 60 11 31 21 1 10 5 2 13 Dec. 0.91 0.29 24 13 35.9 47 31 20 24 and 25 15 8 2 20 1 Year 1963 27.94 1.22 18 Nov. 187 48.7 85 16 June 13 25 Jan. 81 128 23 112 102 70 PREVALENCE AND CONTROL OF INFECTIOUS AND OTHER DISEASES Cases of Infectious Disease Notified during the Years 1959 to 1963 DISEASE 1959 1960 1961 1962 1963 Scarlet Fever 27 19 18 9 7 Whooping Cough 7 25 11 2 41 Poliomyelitis : Paralytic 3 — — — — Non-Paralytic 2 — — — — Measles 602 74 1173 150 739 Diphtheria — — — — — Dysentery 12 45 13 17 32 Meningococcal Infection — 1 1 — 1 Pneumonia 35 12 8 3 9 Smallpox — — — — — Encephalitis : Infective — — 1 — — Post-Infectious — — 1 — — Typhoid Fever — — — — 1 Paratyphoid Fever 4 1 — — 1 Erysipelas 1 2 2 1 — Food Poisoning 13 4 17 7 6 Tuberculosis : Respiratory 23 25 34 24 23 Meninges & C.N.S. — — — — — Other 3 1 — 2 4 Puerperal Pyrexia 30 26 25 23 18 Ophthalmia Neonatorum 2 1 2 2 2 Anthrax — - - — — TOTALS 764 236 1306 240 884 71 Ages of Cases of Infectious Diseases Notified DISEASE Under 1 1 2 3 4 5/9 10/ 14 15/ 24 25/ 34 35/ 44 45/ 64 65 + Scarlet Fever - - - - 4 3 8 - - - - - Whooping Cough 6 4 2 7 1 11 2 — - - - Poliomyelitis : Paralytic — — — — — — - - - - - - - Non-Paralytic — — — — — - — - - - - - Measles 15 56 88 117 104 332 12 12 3 - - - Diphtheria — — — — — - - - - - - - Dysentery — 2 3 1 3 13 3 1 6 - - - Meningococcal Infection — — — 1 - - - - - - - 7 Pneumonia 1 — —- — 1 4 - i - - - - Smallpox - - - - - - - - - - - - Encephalitis: Infective - - - - - - - - - - - - Post-Infectious - - - - - - - - - - - - Typhoid Fever - - - - - - - 1 - - - - Paratyphoid Fever - - - - - - - - 1 - - - Erysipelas - - - - - - - - - - - - Food Poisoning — — — 1 - 1 - 1 - 2 1 - Tuberculosis : Respiratory 1 — 1 — — 1 - 4 2 2 8 4 Meninges & C.N.S. - - - - - - - - - - - - Other - - - - - - - 1 2 - - 1 Puerperal Pyrexia - - - - - - - 13 3 2 - - Ophthalmia Neonatorum 2 - - - - - - - - - - - Anthrax - - - - - - - - - - - - TOTALS 25 62 94 127 113 365 23 36 17 6 9 7 TUBERCULOSIS The following table shows the number of notifications and the number of deaths during the past 10 years :— Year New Cases Deaths Pulmonary Non-Pulmonary Pulmonary Non-Pulmonary \.A C M. F. M. F. M. F. M• F. 1954 29 23 1 2 2 4 - - 1955 27 20 2 3 6 1 1 1 1956 22 10 2 4 6 2 - - 1957 15 11 1 2 5 2 - - 1958 19 10 — — 2 - - - 1959 14 9 — 3 2 - - - 1960 15 10 — 1 6 2 - - 1961 19 14 — — 1 - - - 1962 12 12 1 1 - 2 - - 1963 15 8 1 3 1 1 - 1 72 VACCINATION AND IMMUNISATION By General Practitioners By Medical Officers of the Local Authority Diphtheria Immunisation, etc.: (1) Children immunised : Diphtheria only — - Tetanus only 10 42 Diph. & Tetanus Primary 21 37 Triple Primary 425 189 Triple Booster 219 8 Diph. & Tetanus Booster 47 22 Quadrilin Primary 5 — (2) Children immunised with combined diphtheria and whooping cough prophylactic Nil Nil (3) Children given "Booster" doses of diphtheria prophylactic alone 70 256 Tetanus Booster 2 13 (4) Children given "Booster" doses of combined diphtheria and whooping cough prophylactic 2 - Whooping Cough Immunisation : (5) Children immmunised — 1 (6) Children given "Booster" doses of whooping cough vaccine - - Vaccination against Smallpox : (7) Persons vaccinated for the first time 216 105 (8) Persons re-vaccinated 233 — Vaccination against Poliomyelitis : (9) Persons who received a reinforcing dose 631 329 (10) Persons who completed a primary course of vaccination 654 426 B.C.G. Vaccination : Number of children eligible 1050 Number of forms received - 685 (65.2%) Initial skin test: Number tested ... 633 Number absent ... 52 Results of test reading : Number found with negative reaction ... 557 Number found with positive reaction ... 48 Number absent ... 28 B.C.G. Vaccination : Number of negative reactors vaccinated ... 557 73 BACTERIOLOGICAL WORK The following table shows the number and nature of the specimens examined at the Central Public Health Laboratory, Colindale :— Positive Negative Throat/Nose Swabs : Diphtheria Bacilli 1 Haemolytic Streptococci 31 Vincent's Angina 2 Coagulase Pos. Staphylococci 4 Faces : Sonne Dysentery 104 | Salmonella 20 I 377 Esch. Coli 2 Staphylococcus Aureus 2 Sputum : T.B. Smear - Other Organisms 2 168 1,262 74 WATER SUPPLY TO FINCHLEY (1) Chemical Samples Examined No. of Samples Examined Raw Water mg/1. No. of Samples Examined Treated Water mg/1. Lead Fluoride Lead Fluoride Essendon Pumping Station 10 Absent Less than 0.2 9 Absent Less than 0.2 Hatfield Pumping Station 9 Absent Less than 0.2 9 Absent Less than 0.2 Northaw Pumping Station 3 Absent 0.7 2 Absent 0.7 North Mymms Pumping Station 10 Absent Less than 0.2 10 Absent Less than 0.2 Roestock Pumping Station 2 Absent Less than 0.2 2 Absent Less than 0.2 Tyttenhanger Pumping Station — — — 3 Absent Less than 0.2 Cecil Road (20" main) — — — 8 Absent Less than 0.2 Arkley Reservoir — — — 6 Absent Less than 0.2 Total 34 49 (2) Bacteriological Analysis of Pumping Station Raw Waters Pumping Stations No. of Samples Examined E. Coli ABS/l00 Mis. E. Coli Present in Mis. 100 50 10 1.0 0.1 0.01 Essendon 49 - - 7 23 17 2 - Hatfield 50 10 3 8 16 8 5 — Northaw 24 21 1 1 1 — — — North Mymms 53 — — 1 12 27 13 — Roestock 12 5 1 4 1 1 — — Tyttenhanger 1 1 - - - - - - Total 189 37 5 21 53 53 20 - (3) Bacteriological Analysis of Pumping Station Treated Waters Pumping Stations Number of Samples Examined Number of Samples E.Coli— Absent/100 ml. % Purity Treated Water Samples Essendon 49 49 100 Hatfield 50 50 100 Northaw 24 24 100 North Mymms 365 365 100 Roestock 24 24 100 Tyttenhanger 16 16 100 Total 528 528 75 SMOKE CONTROL AREAS Area of the Borough 3,478 Total number of properties as at 1st April, 1963 25,937 Areas in operation Area. No. of Premises Acreage 1. Basing Estate, N.3 200 13 2. The Grange, N.2 291 10 3. Elmshurst Estate, N.2 171 10 4. Part of Hampstead Garden Suburb, N.2 and N.W.I 1 1,546 446 5. Part of Hampstead Garden Suburb, N.2 and East Finchley 932 110 6. Bounded by North Circular Road, London Transport Board Railway, Deansway, Brim Hill, Wide- combe Way, Lyttelton Road and Falloden Way 2,414 316 7. Bounded by Regents Park Road, London Transport Board Railway and North Circular Road 1,934 207 8. Bounded by borough boundary, London Transport Board Railway, Regents Park Road and North Circular Road 2,089 337 9,577 1,449 Survey completed during 1963— to come into operation on 1st October, 1964 9. Bounded by North Circular Road, borough boundary, Fortis Green, East End Road and London Transport Board Railway 2,812 400 12,389 1,849 Survey commenced during 1963 10. Bounded by North Circular Road, borough boundary, Woodhouse Road, Kingsway, Ballards Lane, Granville Road and High Road Survey not completed 76 CONCENTRATION OF SMOKE AND SULPHUR DIOXIDE MONTH SMOKE SULPHUR DIOXIDE (SOa) RATIO SMOKE TO SO, MICROGRAMMES PER CUBIC METRE AVERAGE VALUE HIGHEST VALUE LOWEST VALUE AVERAGE VALUE HIGHEST VALUE LOWEST VALUE 1 2 3 1 2 3 1 2 3 1 2 3 1 2 3 1 2 3 1 2 3 January 185 169 159 614 684 613 54 28 33 334 288 257 1458 1357 691 135 111 75 .55 .59 .62 February 211 197 201 473 458 474 67 41 45 393 342 345 647 598 626 145 117 89 .54 .58 .58 March 86 80 154 151 164 226 32 15 26 155 138 205 286 264 349 30 38 60 .55 .58 .75 April 64 63 86 211 123 248 25 26 9 156 130 152 434 235 338 87 78 58 .41 .48 .57 May 37 45 46 58 64 106 21 29 23 88 79 101 163 145 145 29 36 46 .42 .57 .46 June 27 30 29 66 78 232 12 0 6 64 50 47 179 161 141 20 18 14 .42 .60 .62 July 28 37 23 62 66 50 13 11 8 71 67 63 284 197 209 36 27 14 .39 .55 .37 August 26 — 22 59 74 51 6 8 9 67 — 62 139 145 164 24 17 15 .39 — .35 September 46 50 41 88 85 63 19 18 18 99 93 96 261 214 190 39 28 33 .46 .54 .43 October 59 85 62 105 131 105 20 63 22 128 144 124 233 245 236 59 97 59 .46 .59 .50 November 114 133 116 393 334 324 16 25 24 222 206 223 531 495 531 63 36 75 .51 .65 .52 December 138 122 116 265 254 241 24 32 15 285 229 208 513 406 364 146 111 85 .48 .53 .56 77 (1) Public Health Department, 308 Regents Park Road, N.3. (2) Public Library, High Road, East Finchley, N.2. (3) Public Library, Ravensdale Avenue, North Finchley, N.12. Smoke— the term "smoke" is used to denote all fine suspended impurity in the atmosphere which is collected by a test assessed by means of a Reflectometer. Sulphur Dioxide—includes all acid-producing gases in the air with the exception of carbon dioxide and is the "net acidity" calculated as sulp'iur dioxide. filter and of the air FOOD PREMISES 1. The number and type of food premises :— (a) Bakers, etc. 31 (b) Butchers 45 (c) Confectioners 104 (d) Fishmongers 13 (e) Greengrocers 52 (f) Grocers and provisions 103 (g) Restaurants, Cafes, Canteens, etc. 107 Total 455 2. The number and type of food premises registered under Section 16 of the Food and Drugs Act, 1955 :— (a) Sale of Ice Cream 164 (b) Manufacture of Sausages 35 (c) Cooking of Hams 10 (d) Pickling of Meat 20 (e) Preparation of pickled and preserved food 10 (f) Cooking of Poultry 2 Total 241 3. Summary of work carried out in connection with the equipment:— Chopping blocks provided 1 Clothing accommodation provided 2 First aid materials provided 4 Floor covering provided 1 Food preparing tables covered 1 Machines cleaned or repaired 4 Nailbrushes provided 5 Oven repainted 1 Refrigerators cleaned or provided 3 Soap provided 3 Tiling provided 2 Towels provided 5 Water heaters repaired or provided 9 78 UNSOUND FOOD CONDEMNED Canned Total Weight lbs. ozs. Cream 24 — Fish 116 1J Fruit 2551 4J Fruit Juice 341 6£ Fruit Pudding/Pie 1 4 Macaroni 5 13 Meat 448 13J Meat Pudding 11 5i Milk 144 3 Paste 1 12§ Preserves 175 5 Ravioli 5 3 Rice Pudding 64 7^ Sausages 7 9 Soup 10 13i Sweet Corn 31 5 Vegetables 845 £ Fresh Total Weight lbs. ozs. Eggs 2726 Fish 112 7 Fruit 241 — Meat 1510 13 Offal 6 — Poultry 170 — and 173 2 Cases of Frying Chickea Rabbit 130 — 79 Prepared Total Weight lbs. ozs. Butter 337 8 Cereal 25 12 Cheese 814 — Desiccated Coconut 20 — Dried Fruit 365 8 Flour 279 — Fruit Pie 81 8 Lard 96 8 Macaroni 457 — Margarine 72 — Meat 47 9 Meat Pies — — 40 Paste 2 3 Preserves 6 — Rice 140 — Sausages 73 8 Sponge Mix — 12 Sugar 110 — Tapioca 20 — Tea 47 — Trussing Fat 7 — Vegetables 113 6 Frozen Foods Packets Cheeseburgers 15 Chicken 3 Dinner 2 Eclairs 5 Fish 532 Ice Cream 6 Meat 196 Meat Pudding/Pie 78 Mousse 73 Pastry 45 Sausage Rolls 13 Sponges 20 Sweet Corn 6 Vegetables 865 80 SUMMARY OF INSPECTIONS AND VISITS Initial Inspections under Housing Acts and Public Health Acts 2,152 Other inspections, including advisory visits 1,069 Re-Inspections 2,463 Overcrowding 42 Houses let in multiple occupation 16 Infectious Disease 223 Rodent Control 1,484 Clean Air Act, 1956 (including smoke control area surveys) 7,669 Factories and Workplaces (including Bakehouses and Restaurant Kitchens) 348 Slaughterhouse 8 Cowsheds, Dairies and Milkshops 13 Ice Cream Premises 35 Meat, Fish and Other Food Premises 469 Hawkers, Vehicles and Stores 14 Hairdressers' Premises 32 Pet Animals Act, 1951 8 Shops Acts 154 Heating Appliances 15 Miscellaneous 955 17,169 COMPLAINTS AND REQUESTS FOR SERVICES Defective roofs 22 Insanitary or defective condition of premises 144 Damp premises 68 Blocked or defective drains 602 Defective W.C.s 24 Defective water fittings 43 Flooding 16 Unsatisfactory housing conditions, including overcrowding 10 Dustbins, defective or absence of 12 Accumulation of refuse 66 Refuse collection 17 Smoke nuisance 38 Noise nuisance 16 81 Animals improperly kept 1 Verminous premises 8 Wasps 166 Bees 14 Other insect infestations 65 Rats or mice infestation 309 Foxes 1 Squirrels 3 Pigeons 6 Unsound food 27 Foreign matter in food 11 Dirty milk bottles 4 Miscellaneous 129 1,822 SUMMARY OF DEFECTS REMEDIED AND WORK CARRIED OUT Roofs repaired 50 Rainwater pipes and gutters unstopped, renewed or repaired 90 Dampness remedied 34 Walls and ceilings repaired 48 Rooms cleansed, distempered or re-papered 54 Windows and doors repaired or renewed 41 Flooring repaired 16 Water fittings provided, repaired or renewed 12 Drainage reconstructed, repaired or renewed 106 Drains unstopped or cleansed 454 W.Cs. and sanitary fittings provided, repaired or renewed 67 Tests of drains and sanitary fittings 65 Length in yards of drains laid 92 Miscellaneous defects, dilapidations and nuisances abated 63 82 HOUSING Recommendations by the Public Health Department on applications for rehousing, etc. :— Medical Statutory Overcrowding* General Waiting List Handicapped Persons Elderly Persons Points 1 6 - - 8 2 11 — — 8 3 7 — — 2 4 8 — — 1 5 4 — — — Urgent or special consideration — 1 4 — Regrading — — 3 — No recommendation 9 — 1 — Observations were given on the medical condition of three council tenants. During the year, 18 of the cases supported by the Department were rehoused. *One case, although living outside the district, was considered and included in this list as the residential qualification was satisfied, i.e., the applicant had completed at least five years' continuous residence in the Borough. STATUTORY OVERCROWDING Persons Involved Dwellings Families Adults Children Number at 1st January 32 34 112 38 New cases reported 18 18 47 37 Number of cases relieved 16 17 52 24 Number outstanding at 31st Dec 34 35 102 51 No further overcrowding has occurred in those dwellings dealt with by the Council. 83 HOUSING STATISTICS 1. Inspection of Dwelling-houses : (1) (a) Total number of dwelling-houses inspected for housing defects (under Public Health or Housing Acts) 2,152 (b) Number of inspections made for the purpose 4,615 (2) (a) Number of dwelling-houses (included under sub-head (1) above) which were inspected and recorded under the Housing Consolidated Regulations, 1925 — (b) Number of inspections made for the purpose — (3) Number of dwelling-houses found to be in a state so dangerous or injurious to health as to be unlit for human habitation 10 (4) Number of dwelling-houses (exclusive of those referred to under the preceding sub-head) found not to be in all respects reasonably fit for human habitation 332 2. Remedy of defects during the year without service of formal notices : Number of defective dwelling-houses rendered fit in consequence of informal action 160 3. Action under Statutory Powers during the year : A. Proceedings under Sections 9, 10 and 12 of the Housing Act, 1957 : (1) Number of dwelling-houses in respect of which notices were served requiring repairs 1 (2) Number of dwelling-houses which were rendered fit after service of formal notices: (a) By owners — (b) By Local Authority in default of owners — B. Proceedings under Public Health Acts: (1) Number of dwelling-houses in respect of which notices were served requiring defects to be remedied 8 (2) Number rendered fit: (a) By owners 5 (b) By Local Authority in default of owners — C. Proceedings under Section 17 of the Housing Act, 1957: (1) Number of dwelling-houses in respect of which Demolition Orders were made 7 (2) Number of dwelling-houses demolished in pursuance of Demolition Orders 7 84 RENT ACT, 1957 Applications for Certificate of Disrepair 1957 (approximate 6 months) 60 applications 1958 50 applications 1959 14 applications 1960 8 applications 1961 3 applications 1962 Nil 1963 2 applications FACTORIES AND WORKSHOPS 1. Inspections for purposes of provisions as to health made during the year. Premises Number on Register Number of Inspections Written Notices Occupiers prosecuted (i) Factories in which Sections 1, 2, 3, 4 and 6 are to be enforced by Local Authorities 129 156 - - (ii) Factories not included in (i) in which Section 7 is enforced by the Local Authority 202 171 3 - (iii) Other Premises in which Section 7 is enforced by the Local Authority (excluding out-workers' premises) 9 2 - - TOTAL 340 329 3 - 85 2. Cases in which Defects were found. Particulars Number of cases in which defects were found Number of cases in which prosecutions were instituted Found Remedied Referred To H.M. Inspector Referred By H.M. Inspector Want of Cleanliness (S.l) 7 6 - - - Overcrowding (S .2 ) — — — — — Unreasonable Temperature (S.3) - - - - - Inadequate ventilation (S.4) — — — — — Ineffective drainage of floors (S.6) - - - - - Sanitary Conveniences (S.7) - - - - - (a) Insufficient 1 1 — 1 — (b) Unsuitable or defective 6 4 — — — (c) Not separate for sexes — — — — — Other offences against the Act (not including offences relating to Outwork) 18 19 - - - TOTAL 32 30 - 1 - 3. The total number of Factories and Workplaces on the Register was 340 made up as follows :— Bakehouses 16 Boot Repairers 22 Builders' Workshops 16 Cycle Makers and Repairers 4 General Engineers and Motor Engineers 56 Glass Blowers 1 Joinery Manufacturers 1 Laundries 2 Monumental Masons 3 Plant Propagation 1 Plastic Manufacturers 2 86 Prepared Meat Factories 1 Printers and Printers' Accessories 11 Restaurant Kitchens 92 Sheet Metal Workers 1 Shop fitters 1 Tailors and Dressmakers 15 Temperature Recording Instrument Manufacturers 1 Timber Merchants and Sawyers 9 Upholsterers 9 Watch and Clock Repairers 4 X-Ray Apparatus 1 Other Trades 72 DISINFECTION AND DISINFESTATTON In addition to the inspections made by the public health inspectors, the disinfectors carried out the following visits:— Disinfection 61 Disinfestation 174 Removal of household rubbish, etc 28 Summary of work carried out:— Disinfection : Rooms 16 Articles 463 Disinfestation: Rooms 15 Articles 1 Premises Bugs 3 Fleas 2 Cockroaches 1 Wasps 67 Bees 2 Lice 1 Moths 1 Hornets 1 A large number of verminous and dirty articles were destroyed. 87 RODENT CONTROL Summary of work carried out Type of Property (1) Local Authority (Other than Council Houses) (2) Dwelling Houses (inc. Council Houses) (3) Business Premises (4) Total of Cols. (1), (2) & (3) 1. Number of properties inspected as result of (a) Notification 18 201 20 239 (b) Survey 5 40 2 47 — 23 — 241 — 22 — 286 2. Total inspections carried out 149 1,210 125 1,484 3. Number of properties inspected which were found to be infested by (a) Rats 17 190 20 227 (b) Mice 6 49 2 57 — 23 — 239 — 22 — 284 4. Number of infested properties (in 3 above) treated by Local Authority 18 232 20 270 CONFERENCES AND COURSES The following conferences and courses were attended during the year:— Association of Public Health Inspectors : Annual Conference. Week-end School. One day Conference—A Discussion on the Meat Regulations. Association of Public Health Lay Administrators : Summer School. Central Council for the Disabled : Study Conference on the London Government Act and the Welfare Services for the Physically Handicapped. Central Council for Health Education : Annual Conference— Fluoridation. 88 College for the Distributive Trades : Refresher Courses : Meat Inspection—18 lectures. Poultry—1 day. Home Safety Committee, Area 10 : Conference. Institute of Shops Act Administration : Conference. National Society for Clean Air : Conference. Royal Institute of Public Health and Hygiene : Conference. Royal Society for the Prevention of Accidents : Conference—Home Safety. University of London : Course—Air Pollution—Its Effect on Society—6 lectures. This list does not include the sessional meetings of the above and other professional societies. 89 INDEX Page Accidents in the Home 10 Accidents, Road 9,68 Acknowledgments 46 Advances and Grants 35 Alcoholics Anonymous 60 Ambulance Service 51 Animal Boarding Establishments 43 Animals 43 Ante-Natal Clinics 47 Atmospheric Pollution 26, 76 Bacteriological Work 74 Baths 19, 23 Births and Birth Rate 9, 62 British Legion 59 British Red Cross Society 57 Burial or Cremation 44 Caravans 41 Certificates of Disrepair 36, 85 Chest X-ray 53 Children, Care and Welfare 54 Chiropody 48, 57 Cinema Admissions 19 Clean Air 26, 76 Clinic for the Elderly 48 Clubs for the Elderly 55 Committee Members 2, 3 Complaints and Inspections 32, 81, 84 Conferences and Courses 45, 88 Consumer Protection 42 Contents 8 Day Nursery 47 Deaths and Death Rate 9, 62 Defects Remedied and Work Carried Out 82 Diphtheria 11 Discretionary Grants 35 Diseases of Animals 43 Disinfection and Disinfestation 39, 87 Domestic Help 48 Dysentery 11 Elderly, Welfare of the 17, 48, 51, 55 90 Page Employment, State of 20 Exhumations 44 Eye Testing 55 Factories 38, 85 Family Planning Association 61 Finchley Chest Clinic 53 Fluoridation of Public Water Supplies 21 Food 28 Food Complaints 32 Food Hygiene 29 Food Poisoning 11 Food Premises 29, 78 Food Unfit for Human Consumption 29, 79 Free Baths 19 General Information concerning services available 47 Grants and Advances 35 Guild of Social Service 58 Hawkers and Markets 31 Health Education 15 Health Services 47 Health Visiting 48 Heating Appliances 42 Home Nursing 47 Hospital Service 52 House Purchase 35 Houses in Multiple Occupation 34 Housing 33, 83, 85 Immunisation and Vaccination 13, 48, 73 Improvement of Houses 35 Infant Welfare Clinics . 47 Infectious and Other Diseases 11, 71 Inspections and Complaints 32, 81, 84 International Certificates of Vaccination 14 Land Charges 45 Laundry Service for the Incontinent 23 Markets and Hawkers 31 Marriage Guidance 61 Mass Radiography 13, 54 Measles 12 Medical Examinations 45 Members of Committees 2, 3 91 Page Mental Health Services 49 Meteorological Data 10, 70 Middlesex and Surrey League for the Hard of Hearing 60 Midwifery 47 Ministry of Pensions and National Insurance 61 Mortuary 44 National Assistance Board 61 Noise 40 Notices Served 32 Octopus Club 57 Offices, Shops and Railway Premises 38 Oil Heaters 42 Old People's Homes 51 Old People's Welfare 17, 48, 51, 55 Outstanding Notices 45 Outworkers 38 Overcrowding 34, 83 Personal Health Services 47 Persons in Need of Care and Attention 17 Pet Animals 43 Places of Public Entertainment 25 Poliomyelitis 12 Prevalence and Control of Infectious and Other Diseases 11, 71 Prevention of Illness, Care and After-Care 48 Puerperal Pyrexia 12 Rag Flock and Other Filling Materials 42 Ratepayers' Association 59 Refuse Collection and Disposal 25 Registrar of Births, Deaths and Marriages 61 Research Retarded Children's Aid Society Ltd. 59 Riding Establishments 43 Road Accidents 9 Rodent Control 40, 88 St. John Ambulance Brigade 58 Salmonella Infection in Poultry 14 Samaritans 61 Sanitary Conveniences 24 School Health Service 49 Services available 47 Sewerage and Sewage Disposal 24 92 Page Shops 37 Slaughter of Animals 31 Slum Clearance and Individual Unfit Houses 35 Smoke Abatement 27, 77 Smoke Control Areas 26, 76 Smoking and Health 15 Staff 3, 4 Standard Grants 35 Statistics 62 Subnormal Children 49 Swimming Pools 23, 57 Tuberculosis 13, 53, 72 Typhoid Fever 12 Vaccination and Immunisation 13, 48, 49, 73 Venereal Disease 53 Vital Statistics 9, 62 Voluntary Services 19, 55 Water Supply 21,22, 75 Welfare Foods 49 Welfare of the Elderly 17, 48, 51, 55 Welfare Services 50 Women's Voluntary Services 19, 58 Workroom/Day Centre 18,59 Yellow Fever Vaccination 52 93 ........ Hendon Printing Works Limited 66, East Road, Burnt Oak Edgware, Middlesex Telephone: EDG. 6181