BOARD OF WORKS FOR THE FULHAM DISTRICT. THIRD GENERAL REPORT, To 25th MARCH, 1859; THIRD ANNUL REPORT OF MEDICAL OFFICER OF HEALTH: ABSTRACT OF ACCOUNTS, &c., &c. HAMMERSMITH: PR1NTED BY J. THOMPSON, "WEST LONDON OBSERVER," BROALWAY. 1859. OFFICERS OF THE Board of Marks for the Fulham District. 1859—60. BOARD. FULHAM Barr, H , Mr., Sands End. Cox, G , Mr, Lillie Road. Cooper, T., Mr., Wimberley House. Coxhead, J., Mr., Myrtle Place. Flicker, E., Mr, Church Street. Guazzaroni, J. J Mr. Bedford Cottage Gosden, F. H., Mr., Vale Place. Harwood, Capt. E., Sands Enil. Hamilton, J., Mr., Dorcas Terrace. Johnson, R., Mr., Kensington Hall. King, W., Mr., High Street. Lammin, W. H., Mr., The Shorrolds. Matyear, W., Mr., Crab Tree. Thatcher, W., Mr., Dorcas Terrace. Watts, C., Mr., High Street. HAMMERSMITH. Ayres, C., Mr., Broadway. Betteridge, D., Mr., RavenscourtPk. Bird, W., Esq., Brook Green. Bernard, J., Mr., Fulham Road. Crookes, J., Mr., Brook Green. Clark, F. L., Mr., King Street. Fitchew, W , Mr., Willoughby House. Gould, A., Mr., Angel Terrace. Hunt, J., Mr., Broadway. Halsey, H., Mr., Alpha Villas. Hurst, J. J., Mr., Brook Green. Jordan, T. H., Mr., King Street. Landon, W., Mr., Inver Villa. Morison, W., Mr , Broadway. Neale, H., Mr., Gold Hawk Terrace. Osmond, S., Mr., King Street. Philippart, Sir John, College House. Pope, E. B., Mr., Bridge Road. Prince, W., Mr., King Street. Stevens, V., Mr., Brook Green. Smith, T. M., Mr., Vimiera House. Walmsley, E.'B., Mr., The Mall. Wells, W., Mr., Brook Green. Yeldham, J., Mr., Fulham Road. Representative to Metropolitan Board. Mr. V. Stevens, Brook Green, Hammersmith. Medical Officer of Health. Mr. F. J. Burge, New Road, Hammersmith. Surveyor. Mr. A. C. Bean, Shaftesbury Road, Hammersmith. Clerk. Mr. W. Lovely, Bridge Avenue, Hammersmith. Inspectors of Nuisances. Mr.W. H. Richmond,Walham-green Mr.W. Lawrence, Broadway House. BOARD OF WORKS FOR THE FULHAM DISTRICT. Third General Report to the 25th or March, 1859. Pursuant to the 198th Section of the Metropolis Local Management Act, 1855. The Board of Works for the Fulham District present to their Constituents the following Report of their proceedings for the year ending March 25, 1859. During the year application was made to the Public Works Loan Commissioners for the second portion of the Loan to which reference was made in last year's Report, and having obtained such portion, viz. £5,000, they expended the same in proportions as follows:— £3,000 in the Parish of Hammersmith, and £2,000 in the Parish of Fulham in the performance of the following Works:— HAMMERSMITH NEW PAVING. Feet. South Side, King Street, from the "Hampshire Hog" to the "Black Bull," about 4,400 Bridge Road, both Sides 3,100 Albion Road, from near the "Thatched House" to the "Seven Stars 1,300 Angel Lane, East Side 400 Middle Mall, near Mr. Clarke's, and by the "Doves" 400 Total Length 9,600 OLD PAVING. High Road, from New Road to Grove Place 650 Hog Lane 800 Waterloo Street to "The Doves" 560 Ship Lane 350 Queen Street 2,200 Church Lane and Rose and Crown Lane 1,200 Brook Green Place and Passage 800 Total Length 6,560 Paths kerbed; Wood Lane, Farm Lane, and Part of St. Peter's Square. Total Length And the Works in Progress (when the last Report was made), in King Street, New Road, and Brook Green have been completed. 3,370 FULHAM—NEW PAVING. Feet. Portland Place, about 100 North End 6,200 Fulham Town, West Side 900 Ann's Place 100 Total Length 7,300 King's Road, with Old Paving 750 4 And the Works in progress when the last Report was made from Walham Green to Stamford Bridge have been completed; sundry improvements made to paths in Dawes Lane, King's Road, and other places with old Boulder Stones and Kerbing; and several road crossings have been laid. Your Board intimated last year their intention to thoroughly investigate the question of the drainage of the district at the earliest possible period. They have now to state that having instructed their Surveyor, he ha presented to them an elaborate Report, accompanied by plans and section for the construction of sewers in the following places;—viz: Hammtrsmith.—Wood Lane, Brook Green Lane, Brook Green and Masboro' Koad, Stamford Brook Diversion, New Road, West of Albion Road, New Road, East of Albion Road, Bradmore, King Street, West of Cambridge Road, King Street, East of Cambridge Road, Waterloo Street, Beavor Lane, King Street East, and High Road, Brook Green Branch, Brook Green Place, and Fulham Road, at the estimated cost of £27,248, 16s. Fulham.—Notth End Line, Sun Street, High Street, Parson's Green Lane, Peterboro' Road, and King's Road, at the estimated cost of £12,152, 19s. ; or a total for the District, of £39,401, 15s. Your Board in the firm belief that a systematic plan of Sewerage is absolutely required, and that the District will not rise in importance as compared with others in the Metropolitan Area, unless such plan be carried out, have therefore referred the Surveyor's Report and Plans to the Chief Engineer of the Metropolitan Board, to ascertain if such a mode of drainage can be adopted in connection with the Great Metropolitan Main Drainage and Intercepting Scheme, with a view to the further consideration of the matter so soon as Mr. Bazalgette's opinion shall have been obtained. With respect to the present Sanitary Condition of the District, they beg to direct attention to the annexed Report of the Medical Officer of Health. The following details will exhibit some portion of the work performed by the Sanitary Committee. SANITARY OPERATIONS IN FULHAM. Privies Emptied 115 „ Repaired 10 „ Emptied, trapped, and panned with water supply 9 „ Water Supply 1 „ Drained 5 Drains Repaired 6 „ Cleansed 32 Gullies Repaired 5 „ Cleansed 5 Piggeries Cleansed 7 Pigs Removed 11 „ Reduced 16 Houses Cleansed 16 Miscellaneous 44 282 SANITARY OPERATIONS IN HAMMERSMITH. Privies Emptied 72 „ Repaired .. 17 „ Emptied, trapped, and panned 3 „ Trapped and panned with water supply 8 „ Emptied, trapped, and panned with water supply and Drainage 22 5 „ Trapped and panned 16 „ Drained 1 Drains Made 2 ,, Repaired 18 ,, Cleansed 53 Gullies Made 4 „ Repaired 14 „ Cleansed 3 Dust Bins Cleansed 1 „ Heaps Removed 3 „ Cleansed 1 Pigs Reduced 4 „ Removed 11 Houses Cleansed 17 „ Repaired 1 Miscellaneous 29 — 300 Grand Total 582 Houses benefitted in Fulham 287 „ Hammersmith 258 545 Your Board have ordered to be presented herewith an Abstract of the several Contracts entered into during the year; and also of their accounts which have been duly audited. They deem any extensive reference to their proceedings during the year superfluous, inasmuch as by the Metropolis Local Management Act, the accounts and proceedings of the Board are open to Public inspection, independent of the copious Reports, which from time to time have appeared in the Local Press. They, however, take this opportunity of expressing a hope, that their exertions in the improvement of the District will be appreciated by their Constituents. Abstract of Contracts entered into by the Board during the year ending 25th March, 1859. Mr. Coat for Paving and Masonry Works, at certain prices set forth in the Schedule, and embodied in the Contract. Mr. Coat for Works of Slopping for the Parishes of Hammersmith and Fulham, for twelve Months, after the rate of £30 for each Parish. Mr. Coat for Works of Cartage—at per day of 10 hours—in strong and well-made Carts attended by one man, and drawn by one horse, 6s. 6d. per day, or at the option of the Board at 1s. perjourney average, to or from any part of the District. The man attending to assist in loading the cart. Mr. Stapleton for the removal of Dust, Ashes, &c., from the several houses, yards, and premises in the Parish of Hammersmith, for twelve months, for £50. Mr. Johnson, for the same work in the Parish of Fulham, for twelve months, for £40. Mr. Mulcock, for the supply of the best grey pit flints for twelve months, after the rate of 5s. 3d. per cubic yard, to be drawn to any part of the District where required, and to be supplied in such quantity and at such times as the Board may direct. Mr. Millwood for certain works of bricklaying, &c., for twelve months, at 30 per cent. less than the prices set forth in the Office Schedule, and embodied in the Contract. Register of Mortgages on Rates authorised by the 18th and 19th Vict. c. 120, to be levied within the Parishes of Fulham and Hammersmith, in the District of the Board of Works for Fulham District, in the County of Middlesex. No. of Mortgage. Date of Mortgage. Amount of Principal sum Borrowed. Rate per cent. of Annual Interest payable thereon. Rate or Rates Mortgaged to secure re-payment of the Principal Sum Borrowed. Time orTimes fixed by the Mortgage Deed for Repayment of the Principal Sum Borrowed. Purpose for which the Money was Borrowed. Date of Repayment. Amount of Principal Sum to be repaid annually. No. 1. 25th day of November 1857. £6,000. 5 per cent. per annum. All, and every, the General Rates to be made and levied in the Fulham District, under or by virtue of the "Metropolis Local Management Act," and all other, the Monies and Rates, which the Board of Works for the Fulham District, are empowered to Mortgage for the purpose of securing the principal Monies and Interest intended to be thereby secured. 25th day of November, 1858, and on the 25th day of November in every succeeding year, until the whole of the monies thereby secured shall have been lawfully paid off and satisfied. £300 for 20 years. For the purpose of defraying the expenses incurred or to be incurred by the Board of Works for the Fulham District, in the execution of certain Works of Paving in the Fulham District. Names and Descriptions of the Parties to the Mortgage Deed. Signature of Clerk Authenticating the Register. Reference Number to Transfer in Register of Transfers. Remarks. Mortgagor. Mortgagee. Name, Description, and Place of Residence. W. Lovely, Clerk to the Board of Works for the Fulham District. Interest to be paid annually, with the Principal, unto the Cashiers of the Bank of England, at their office, for the use of her Majesty, her Heirs, and Successors. The Board 0f Works for the Fulham District. William Williamson Willink, of the South Sea House, in the City of London, Esq., Secretary to the Commissioners for carrying into execution an Actof Parliament made and passed in theSessions ofthe 14th and 15th Years of the reign of her present Majesty, Queen Victoria, intituled an Act to authorise for a further period the advance of money out of the consolidated fund, to a limited amount for carrying on Public Works, and Fisheries, and Employment of the Poor, and the several Acts therein recited, mentioned, or referred to, and the Acts subsequently passed for amending, continuing or extending the same, and which said Commissioners are called "The Public Works Loan Commissioners." Entered this 25th day of November, 1857. W. LOVELY, Clerk to the Board. Register of Mortgages on Rates authorized by the 18th and 19th Vict. c. 120, to be levied within the Parishes of Fulham and Hammersmith, in the District of the Board of Works for the Fulham District, County of Middlesex. No. of Mortgage Date of Mortgage Amount of Principal Sum Borrowed. Rate per cent. of Annual Interest payable thereon. Rate or Rates Mortgaged to secure Repayment of the Principal Sum Borrowed. Time or Tunes fixed by Mortage Deed for Repayment of the Principal Sum Borrowed. Purpose for which the Money was Borrowed. Date of Repayment. Amount of Principal Sum to be repaid annually. No. 2. 8th day of September 1858. £5,000 5 per Cent. per Annum. All, and every, the General Rates to be made and levied in the said Fulham District, under or by virtue of the "Metropolis Local Management Act," and all other, the monies and rates, if any, which the said Board of Works for the Fulham District, are by the last-mentioned Act, empowered to Mortgage for the purpose of securing the Principal Monies and Interest intended to be thereby secured. 8th day of September, 1859, and on the 8th day of September in every succeeding year, until the whole of the principal monies intended to be thereby secured shall have been fully paid off and satisfied. £250. For the Purpose of defraying the expenses incurred or to be incurred by the Board of Works for the Fulham District, in the execution of certain Paving Works within the Fulham District. Names and Descriptions of the Parties to the Mortgage Deed. Signature of Clerk Authenticating the Register. Reference Number to transfer in Register of Transfers. - Remarks. Mortgagor Mortgagee. Name, Description, and Place of Residence. W. Lovely, Clerk to the Board of Works for the Fulham District. Interest to be paid annually with the Principal unto the Cashiers of the Bank of England, at their Office, for the use of her Majesty, her Heirs, and successors. The Board of Works for the Fulham District. William Williamson Willink, of the South Sea House, in the City of London, Esq., Secretary to the Commissioners for carrying into execution an Act of Parliament made and passed in the Sessions of the 14th and 15th years of the reign of her present Majesty, Queen Victoria, intituled an Act to authorize for a further period, the advance of money out of the consolidated fund to a limited amount for carrying on Public Works and Fisheries, and employment of the Poor and the several Acts therein recited, mentioned, or referred to, and the Acts subsequently passed for amending, continuing, or extending the same, and which said Commissioners are called the " Public Works Loan Commissioners." Entered this 9ih Day of September, 1858. W. LOVELY, Clerk to the Board. 8 FULHAM DISTRICT. THIRD ANNUAL REPORT, OF MEDICAL OFFICER OF HEALTH, 1858. PRESENTED TO THE SANITARY COMMITTEE, APRIL 21, 1859. Gentlemen, At a time when the Metropolitan District is just emerging from a period of more than usual mortality and sickness, it is not without interest that this my Third Annual Report should be presented to you. By this you will be informed how far they have affected the Fulham District, and be induced probably to consider what moral lessons are deducible therefrom. It is by reflection on such matters as these that the public eye is led to take a retrospect of events, and is at the same time carried forward to survey the probabilities and possibilities of the future, to reflect on the penalties already incurred, or to ponder on the dangers happily escaped. It is well for that community which takes advantage of these seasonable warnings (perchance to others), neither indulging on the one hand in paralyzing despair, nor sinking into listless security on the other. Sanitary Science and experience has full clearly proved to how great an extent the prevention of disease and its extention rests with us. It is not ours to rule the wind either in its force or its direction, neither have we power to regulate its temperature, its moisture, or its electricity, which exercise so great and manifest an influence on the human economy. It does, however, remain with us to see that none of our excreta or refuse be left to fester round our dwellings, that over-crowding in our cottages be prevented, domestic cleanliness enforced, unwholesome food prohibited from use, that good supplies of pure and wholesome water be provided, that Pigs and other offensive animals be not kept too near our houses, and that proper sewerage be constructed. Neglect of these precautions has ever carried with it heavy penalties. The debilitating fever and the exhausting flux in this find pabulum to feed on. The poisonous atmosphere, loaded with exhalations, has done its work upon the system, and produced a fitting soil for the zymotic ferment to germinate in. It is by wrestling with these proegumal agencies that 9 sanitary medicine presents so strong a barrier to epidemic maladies. The Fulham District has not escaped some warnings. The Cholera Visitations of '49 and '54 have both found here their victims. Typhus and Scarlet Fevers have slowly gathered their votaries around them, and other preventible diseases have numbered many amongst their conquered. Preventive measures have, however, now fairly taken root amongst us, and although we have yet (as we are told), some plague spots unsubdued, many and vast improvements of a sanitary character have been accomplished. The position of the Fulham District on the western side of the Metropolis, the prevalence of western winds, with nothing to impede their action, a line absorbing subsoil, immense open spaces and luxuriant vegetation, all tend to make it pre-eminently salubrious and genial. It is our fault if nature's gifts are wasted on us. Many great and insurmountable difficulties, have arisen, and will yet present themselves in grafting new upon the old conditions of its social aspect, but it behoves all to lend a willing aid to the great work of reform, and though, from necessity, the chief onus of the changa may fall at present on cottage property, it is but right that those who hitherto have fed their own resources by impoverishing others, should now in turn make good the public damage. Moderation and respect for rights have hitherto guided the Committee in the exercise of the powers vested in them by the Legislature, and if all that can be desired has not been fulfilled, there remains the satisfaction of knowing that you have avoided oppression. Nothing can possibly exceed the adverse circumstances existing in some parts against radical sanitary improvement. A population thickly imbued with Irish elements of the lowest denomination cannot otherwise than tend to offer difficulties of great magnitude in all attempts to promote its health and cleanliness. Cottages, out of number, constructed in the excavations of old brickfields, with the soft refuse bricks, at a period when attention to sanitary conditions was entirely unthought of; habitations run up in swamps and quagmires, and their foundations three parts of the year sopped with surface water, are poor materials to work on, A steady and persevering supervision has, however, done much good, and all who take a dispassionate view of the condition of the District under your charge must admit that your labours and those of the Officers under your direction, have not been without results. It should be remembered that here we have to remodel an old system—a system on which has been for centuries engrafted by slow degrees all the undesirable elements we now wish to eradicate. It is by slow degrees alone that these can be removed. The authorities have sanctioned (and perhaps have had no power to prevent) the erection of property on sites perfectly unfit for human habitations; and the total aosence of drainage to carry off the waste and surface waters renders it almost impossible in wet seasons to prevent occasional accumulations of mud and filth around them. As yet too the public, aye, and even some authorities, have to learn and put in practice the grand hygienic principle of striking at the root of Pauperism and sickness, by devoting more attention to the physical condition of the poor. OVERCROWDING OF DWELLINGS. The overcrowding of dwellings is one of the most pregnant sources of sickness and decay at all ages, and is unfortunately that, which under present circumstances, presents formidable obstacles to amelioration. 10 The Common Lodging-Houses Act has indeed worked wonders within its sphere of action, but there is a condition affecting the working classes, not coming within this statute, which demands deliberate and careful attention from the authorities. Frequent have been the pictures brought to light of such an amount of indiscriminate herding of the sexes as is truly fearful to contemplate. It is not only in the more densely peopled portion of the Metropolis that these cases may be found; the suburbs afford too many instances of a similar kind. In the course of last month only, during one of my periodical investigations in the Rookery, I found a most shocking disregard for decency, and proper separation of the sexes in several houses. Hundreds of like instances of moral turpitude may be discovered within our district, as also of those where the size of the apartments is totally inadequate to the number of occupants. Nov, where lies the remedy? It is vain to look for its accomplishment by the poor themselves. The daily necessities of the labourer's family draw so heavily on his earnings as to leave only a very small sum for payment of rent, and hence the most limited house accommodation is sought for and endured. The initiative must be taken by the authorities or by those who take an interest in ameliorating the working peoples' lot. Fortunately, the statistics of almost every instance where the effort has been made, prove the self-supporting character of Institutions, specially provided as dwellings for the poor, and of thus laying the axe to the root of this corrupt tree. Until this desirable object can be more generally obtained, I believe considerable good might be accomplished by a legislative enactment, placing every house let out in weekly tenements to more than one family, under similar regulations to those affecting common lodging-houses, and rendering landlords liable for permitting overcrowding to exist upon their property. It is a fact worthy of note that although there are from 50,000 to 60,000 persons sleeping nightly in the common-lodging houses of London, there has not been for the last two years one case of fever engendered therein. From observation, I believe the next census will prove that an enormous addition has been made since 1851 to the labouring population of these united parishes. The cleansing and uprooting of some of the property of the kind above described in the nearer Metropolitan Districts, has forced large numbers of labourers into ours, and affords a strong argument for an equalization of the Poor-Rate, at the same time that it compels us seriously to consider how they are housed. INFANT NURSERY. In my last Report I had the honor of informing you that I had opened an establishment for the daily care of the infant children of poor women compelled to go from home to work. Through the whole of last year I toiled anxiously to extend the uses of this Institution. I have now the pleasure of assuring you of its success, and that twelve benevolent Ladies are lending me their valuable aid to enlarge its sphere of usefulness. During the year the number of admissions was 1,372, and the daily average is steadily increasing. OPEN DITCHES. It is a happy anticipation that on the completion of the Main Drainage Scheme we may look with confidencc for the total exclusion of neitifarous 11 matter from open ditches, channels originally intended for surface water only, but which have been made receivers of every kind of filth. These are sources of incalculable mischief from which neither elevation nor any other condition can free them. I need only refer to a case of fearful mortality during the last year, which occurred in a house on Shooter's Hill. Four of one family cut off by scarlatina in three days, with nothing to account for such malignancy in that elevated situation, but an adjoining foul and open ditch. TRADE NUISANCES. There is a question, Gentlemen, which I believe so vitally affects the future sanitary condition of part of this district, that I cannot omit to mention it. I refer to the probable great extension of the process of brickrmaking in the neighbourhood of the Gold Hawk Road, Hammersmith. The burning of bricks is attended with an evolution of gases of a most injurious character, and not only so, for the brickfields are generally also made the depositories for all the dust and refuse from your own locality as well as of that of the adjoining parishes, and a considerable portion of which is used in the manufacture in question. The notorious " Dismal Swamp," with its intensely poisonous exhalations, is nothing in extent compared with, and even the Soap Factory at Castelnau, in its worst features, cannot exceed the horribly sickening influences of the gases arising from this source. The stinking odours of the Thames in its most filthy state fall into insignificance in the estimation of those compelled to breathe these foetid emanations. About twelve months since you had occasion to take proceedings against Mr. Axton for the removal of a large collection of dust and refuse, and for a discontinuance of the process of sifting the same in a field at the rear of the Gold Hawk Terrace. This deposit had been placed there evidently preparatory to the making of bricks. In consequence of your action before the Magistrate, this nuisance was suspended, but within the last few weeks the ground has been excavated to a considerable extent, and there is no doubt but that during the ensuing summer and autumn the whole neighbourhood will be polluted by the working of immense kilns. The injury to health and property from this cause is as yet incalculable, and already the inhabitants are seriously alarmed at the probable result. The field referred to embraces an area of several acres surrounded by inhabited houses, and extends even to the rear of the very centre of the Town of Hammersmith. It is computed that it will take several years to exhaust it of the brick earth, and during the whole time of its working it will prove a constant medium of annoyance. So importantly do I believe this will affect the well-being of a very large community that I consider no time should be lost in obtaining if possible an injunction to restrain it. During the year in the adjoining Parish of Barnes, a Factory has been brought to work for the manufacture of Soap, and for Fat melting, &c. The latter is one of the most offensive trades known, and has Dever failed to create a nuisance of a most serious character, wherever established; indeed to such an extent is this the case that the most strenuous measures have every where been taken to dislodge them. The Factory of Messrs. Cowan is situate beyond the limits of the Metropolis Local 12 Management Act, but in such close contiguity to the Parishes of Hammersmith and Fulham as to be as prejudicial to them, as it is to that in which it actually stands. The authorities of Barnes have already taken action before the magistrate, and, I believe, intend to prosecute an indictment at the sessions, a proceeding which should receive every possible countenance and support from the authorities and inhabitants of the Fulham District. An order has been obtained from the magistrate compelling the proprietors to provide covercd receptacles on the premises for the refuse from the works, and to prevent its being poured into an adjoining open ditch, communicating with the Thames. The Conservators of the river have also prohibited its flowing in any way thereto. VENTILATION OF SEWERS. The subject of the Ventilation of Sewers has occupied much of my attention during the last 12 months, and in conjunction with Mr. Bean, your Surveyor, I have been engaged in a series of experiments with reference to the deodorization of their gases. On the 23rd of September last I presented to the Committee a Report upon this subject, which, as it has not been published, I beg permission to refer to and attach hereto. Since the date of that Report, in consequence of its favourable reception by yourselves, the Board of Works have had constructed two cast-iron ventilators of the kind described. One of these has been placed in the Broadway, and the other in the Bridge Road. Hammersmith. Upon these I have for several weeks been making observations, but the season of the year has not been favourable for obtaining definite results. From the tests, however, to which the apparatus has been subjected, I feel perfectly convinced the principle is that which offers the greatest chance of remedying the evils arising from the present ventilating shafts. The results of my experience go to prove that the mechanical obstruction offered by the charcoal does not prevent the free and easy egress of the sewer air, a difficulty which, a priori, there was reason to fear would seriously militate against its use. I am not in a position yet to give you more than an outline of my opinion as to what may be expected to be accomplished. It will require a patient series of investigations throughout the summer months to ascertain the full powers of the apparatus. I may observe that the Broadway shaft presents the severest trial to which it can be subjected, constructed as it is over one of the largest sewers existing in the district, receiving an enormous quantity of sewage matter from an extensive area, and being immediately in contiguity with an old and very offensive sewer under Queen Street. It is worthy of remark that though the Bridge Road Sewer is continuous with that at the Broadway, and I believe, of the same dimensions, there is a concentration of foetid gases emanating from the latter, not experienced from the former sewer ; this may be accounted for from the fact, that in the sewers passing northward to Shepherd's Bush and eastward to Brook Green, from this point no ventilating shafts exist, neither is there any outlet for the gases in that portion of the old sewer between the Broadway and the river. Hitherto my experiments have been confined to ascertaining the amount of deodorizing power possessed by dry charcoal, and of the same material saturated with Condy's Patent Disinfecting Fluid. That this substance (charcoal), has an extraordinary capability of arresting and absorbing 13 fœtid gases, has been attested by Dr. Lethe by, the City Officer of Health, and my experience fully confirms his observations on this point. But it was to Condy's fluid to which from some successful experiments in my Laboratory, that I looked for a larger amount of destructive agency. The decomposition of the components of this deodorizer affords such an extraordinary volume of available oxygen that it offers the most ready, cheap, and certain means of burning up impurities. The very facility, however. with which these changes take place, at present offers obstacles to its practical application as proposed, but I have reason to believe that this impediment may yet be overcome; in fact, I am already in possession of a combination of materials by which Mr, Condy has sought to give a more lasting action to it. The operation of charcoal, I believe, is principally exerted on the sulphuretted hydrogen and sulphide of ammonium existing in the sewer gases, but the power of nascent oxygen would not rest here. In sewer emanations there exist offensive compounds which, although as yet they have defied the scrutiny of the chemist to define,would not resist the pyrogenic influence of free oxygen. This, therefore, appears to me the element to which we have a right to look for the most complete results. Its most appropriate mode of generation remains for future investigation to determine. I purpose conducting some experiments with pumice stone, which I am inclined to think may prove a more powerful deodorizer even than charcoal. During the several weeks that I have been engaged at the Broadway and Bridge Road Shafts, I have not been able to detect the slighest smell from either, whilst the charcoal sieves have been in use, neither can I ascertain that any persons accustomed to repass them have experienced annoyance. The delicate test papers used have occasionally shown evidence of the escape of gases, but after exposure to them for several days have not evidenced any intensity of character, whereas, when exposed to the same without the charcoal, they have become rapidly and powerfully affected. Upon the whole I am convinced that the apparatus suggested by Mr. Bean and myself, offers the best practical mode of dealing with this difficult question. Its easy application, and the facility with which it may be worked, must claim for it a favorable consideration. Mr. Haywood, the Engineer to the City Commission, in his Report upon the Ventilation of Sewers, dated Nov. 22, 1858, remarks also that it " will be the cheapest in adaptation." In the same Report he states it as his opinion, however, that the use of charcoal sieves will offer considerable impediment to the currents which now circulate in the sewers, and that probably three or four ventilators will be required where there is now only one, unless they are relieved more freely by the house drains and untrapped inlets than at present. Dr. Letheby's opinion and experience are in accordance with my own upon this point, but even should it be found desirable to increase the outlets, I believe the apparatus now before you may be rendered applicable to the roadside gullies, and thus render any increase in the number of shafts unnecessary. The adaptation of a Syphon outlet underneath it, fitted with a flap to act in case of drought, would effect this object. Under ordinary circumstances I consider the use of dry charcoal will always be sufficient in them to counteract the injurious gases, but during the prevalence of epidemics, or extraordinary hot weather, some additional deodorizer may be advisable. in connection with this subject I beg to bring under your notice an Apparatus, suggested by Mr. Love- 14 grove, Surveyor to the Hackney District, sections and plans of which I append hereto. Its modus operandi will be found described in a report to the Hackney Board of Works, dated Nov. 11th, 1858. mortality. .4 The details of mortality and sickness in the Fulham District during the year 1858, compared|with other districts, have been of a favorable character. The total number of deaths has been 773, of which 347 occurred in Fulham, and 426 in Hammersmith. The Lunatic Asylums have contributed 11; the Union House, 77; and Nazareth House, the Convent of the Good Shepherd, and the Reformatory, blythe Lane, 22. The number of Inquests has been 81. An epidemic named Diphtheria, hascut off large numbers of the people in London and various other parts of the kingdom during the last few mouths, but it will be satisfactory to you to know that whilst Paddington, Kensington, Belgravia, and other richer parishes have suffered, we have enjoyed comparative immunity from its attacks. Very few cases have been brought under my notice, and only three deaths have actually occurred from this malady within our limits; it has, however, shewn itself among us, and throat affections have been more than usually prevalent. Diseases of the Zymotic class have furnished 137 to the number of deaths. No fever of a dangerous character has prevailed, except in Palace Place, at Fulham, where during the autumn months several cases of a Typhoid type occurred. The houses for the most part were in good sanitary condition, but the existence and condition of the Bishop's Moat at the rear appeared to have been the exciting cause of the outbreak. infant mortality. The returns of last year still show the fearful mortality arising in the infant portion of the population, and every source of this devastating influence cannot be too scrupulously analyzed and made known. I have already, in my various reports, forcibly laid before the public many of the causes which are in operation to produce this sad result, but more have yet to be unravelled. It is true that of the 63,882 deaths which occurred in London during 1858, the causes were specified in 63,027 instances, nearly all of which, according to the Registrar-General's Returns, were certified by the medical attendants, by the medical officers of institutions, or by the coroners; but this does not disprove the fact that there is a large mortality arising from diseases which, although not ranked amongst the preventible, prove fatal from wilful neglect, or maltreatment of premonitory symptons. In a large number of instances, especially amongst the poor, and particularly as regards chest affections, the prescribing chemist has charge of the cases during their early and more curable stages, and it is only when the little stock of ready money is exhausted, or the unchecked malady has aroused the fears of both the friends and ignorant prescriber, that the properlyeducated medical man is sought for, perchance just time enough to close the eyes of the little sufferers, and pronounce, in his certificate, the ostensible cause of death. 15 Surely with such an amount of gratuitous assistance as the British Isies present, the noble hospitals, the not less useful dispensaries, the parochial system, with the large and well-known philanthropy of the members of the medical profession, there remains no plea for such a state of things. Of the 773 deaths in the two parishes, 235 were of children who had not reached their third year, and 299 had not attained their 5th year of age. Of these 212 belonged to the working classes, and in 54 instances or nearly 6-1 percent, of the total mortality, the cause of death was assigned to debility from birth, no unimportant illustration of the effects of an enervated physical condition. Fifty children, of which Hamraermith furnished 35, were cut off by Chest affections, and 98 from diseases of the Zymotic class before arriving at their fifth years. Of the total deaths 13 were from measles, 33 from whooping cough, 39 from diarrhoea, 21 from scarlatina, and 14 from typhus. Under the head of diarrhoea, the Registrar General is in the habit of placing a large number of cases, not only where it is connected with mesenteric disease and debility in the young, but also in all those instances where it appears merely as a concomitant of extreme old age. This unduly exaggerates the one and diminishes the legitimate number of the other. It is gratifying to observe that the deaths of no less than I32jpersons (or 17 per cent, of total deaths), were registered last year, who had attained to 70 years and upwards. Of these seventy eight died between 70 and 80, forty-eight between 80 and 90, and six at 90 and upwards ; the oldest persons were widows of 96, one at Walham Green, the other an inmate of the workhouse, the relict of a garden labourer. I am happy to say the Fulham District has enjoyed during the last year a happy immunity from small-pox. Only two deaths occurred from this disease in 1856, one in 1857, and none in 1858. During the latter part of last year, two or three cases occurred at Crab Tree, Fulham, and more recently one in Fulham Fields, and another in Britannia Court, Hammersmith, but, owing I believe, to the promptness of Mr. Roy and the Union Authorities in immediately removing these latter cases to the Small Fox Hospital, the progress of the disease has been entirely stayed. In connection with these cases, I am desirous of arousing the attpntion of the public to the necessity for every care being paid to vaccination. Prejudice with some still lingering in the community, and indifference in others, prove yet sad stumbling-blocks to the development of the blessings of this grand prophylactic. The provisions of the Compulsory Vaccination Act enact that "The father or mother of every child born in England or Wales utter the 1st day of August, in the year of Our Lord, one thousand eight hundred and fifty-three, shall, within three calendar months after the birth of the said child, or in the event of the death, illness, absence, or inability of the lather and mother, then the pe rson who shall have the care, nurture, or custody ot the said child shall, within four calendar months after the birth of such child, take or cause to be taken the said child to the medical officer or practitioner appointed in the Union or parish in which the said child is resident, according to the provisions of the firstrecited Act, for the purpose of being vaccinated, unless he shall have been previously vaccinated by some duly qualified Medical Practitioner, and the vaccination duly certified, and the said medical officer or practitioner so appointed shall, and he is hereby required thereupon, or as soon after as it may conveniently and properly be done, to vaccinate the aaid child, &c.," and such wise precautions cannot be too rigidly and 16 energetically enforced. I would also observe with reference to thi subject, that bv statute it is rendered a penal offence to expose in thi public thoroughfare any patient labouring under small pox. I consider tha the very absence of this scourge from i<ur distriot should induce us to ust every effort to keep it from our doors, and that the public attention shoulc be occasionally drawn by the authorities to the importance of doing so births. The number of births registered in the year was 1126, showing an exces of births over deaths of 353. I have the greatest pleasure in stating that the Board of Guardians hav< kindly given me permission to inspect the medical relief book# at thi workhouse, each Thursday, by which I am enabled to gain early informa tion of prevailing sickness in the district. meteorology. The meteorology of the year has presented one or two striking peculiarities,; extreme heat, extreme cold, and remarkably small rain fall, although the number of days on which it fell has been above the average. The mean temperature of the 13 weeks ending April 3rd, was 37*6, the highest 67"0, the lowest 22'3 During the five consecutive weeks ending March 13th, the weather was exceedingly cold, and the mean of each week considerably below the average ; indeed the mean daily temperature was below the average on every day except Feb. 13th, from Feb. 7th to March 12th inclusive. The effect of this severity of weather was sensibly shown in the mortality. The deaths which in January and February were 108, rose in March and April to 152. The temperature of June was remarkably high, the thermometer having tisen in the shade on the 16th to 92'0. The lowest point obtained was 46'5, which occurred on the 28th. Only *9th of an inch of rain fell during the month. Mr. Glaisher states that " the mean temperature of this month has been but once exceeded since the year 1771, a period of 87 years, viz., in the year 1846.." The weather in November and December was exceedingly severe and trying. In the former, frost and fog prevailed up to the 25th, the thermometer having descended on the 24th to 18 5. The air was remarkably stagnant throughout, except on the 14th and 15th. The general direction of the wind was from north and east. Kain fell on the 25th, and continued for several days. And heie again the mortality was considerably influenced by atmospheric conditions, the number of deaths, which in September and October were 116, rose in November and December to 146, and this excess continued to be evidenced through the succeeding month of January. No ozone was registered on 56 out of the 66 days occurring between October 14th and December 18th, inclusive, and coincident with the absence of this oxydizing agent, much sickness existed. In conjunction with Dr. Tripe of Hackney, I have been for some time engaged in observations^ this important element, and we have found thrat it is completely removed from the air which has passed over the Metropolis. The total rain fall of the year was only 17 465 inches, and the number of days on which it fell, 150. 17 The records of your committee will shew that a large amount of sanitary work has been carried out during the past year, a detail of which will be given in your customary annual report to the Board. Several important decisions have been obtained, and it is pleasing to observe that success continues to attend your efforts in e»*ery case in which you have ordered proceedings to be taken before the magistrate. concluding remarks. The general sanitary results of the year cannot be considered otherwise than satisfactory, but there is still every possible reason for continued and energetic exertion. The great problem still to be solved presses strongly on my mind. A re we prepared to meet the outbreak of any serious epidemic ? Is the population of the Fulham District yet in a position to present all attainable opposition to the generation and extension of preventible disease ? I feel that we yet fall far short of this much to be desired end. Some of the miserable hovels which lie scattered through these parishes must be obliterated from their maps, much of the cottage property must be remodelled, damp and unwholesome yards be paved with some impermeable surface, a yet more frequent removal of domestic refuse, a large extension of the water mains, and other available sources of supply, a well developed system of public supervision over the children of the poor, and a more enlarged sympathy with the general physical condition of the working classes are necessary before we can reach this goal. I cannot conclude this Report without thanking you, gentlemen, for a large amount of personal exertion in visiting and investigating with your officers many of the cases of nuisance which have been brought before you, by which they have been most materially (and beneficially to the district) supported in their labours. If, in the prosecution of my duties I have sought in any way for more to be done than in your discretion you have thought desirable, I trust you will consider I have been prompted only by a desire to place the Fulham district in the best possible sanitary condition, and if in what has been done, my portion of the labour has merited your approval, it will be a lasting gratification to Gentlemen, Your Faithful Servant, FREDERICK J. BURGE, April 21st, 1859. Medical Officer of Health. TO THE SANITARY COMMITTEE. Board of Works, Fulham District. " Gentlemen,—In compliance with your request I have the honour to lay before you the following report upon the most advantageous means of ventilating sewers, and of deodorizing the gases arising from them. The very ingenious apparatus invented and proposed by Mr. Bean, your Surveyor, appears to me admirably adapted to accomplish the mechanical 18 agency required, but as several disinfectants, I think, might be made available for the destruction either of part or the whole of the injurious gases, some slight modification of the details are rendered desirable according: as one or the other may be found most useful and economical. The substitution of a series of "Trays" for holding the disinfectant, instead of the " Cradle" exhibited in the original model, will, I believe, be found to answer this purpose, or the application of a series of metal tubes, placed side by side in a vertical position, with perforated bottoms, through which the air would pass from the sewer, and be sure to come more perfectly in contact with the deodorizing agent. " The exceedingly elaborate report lately presented by Dr. Letheby to the City Commission, renders it unnecessary that I should enter into many matters of detail, which I bad previously prepared to lay before you, but you will remember the experiments which I had the pleasure of shewing in your presence on the 1st of July last, and the remarks I then made on the nature of sewer products, and on the agents most likely to be useful for disinfecting them. " The principal gases usually existing in sewer emanations, have been found to be sulphuretted hydrogen, sulphide of ammonium, ammonia, carburetted hydrogen, carbonic acid, nitrogen, &c., with some others, the exact composition of which are not yet known. The chemical agent which will destroy or decompose the greater number of these, will, of course, ceteris paribus, be the most valuable. " Mr. Bean having been unable as yet to take the necessary steps for securing the invention, has prevented my conducting any number of experiments on the public sewers, and the difficulty of manipulating with an apparatus constructed of wood, so easily influenced by temperature and moisture, has also tended to limit my practically carrying out the design. I have, however, conducted numerous experiments in my laboratory for the purpose of ascertaining the applicability of the principle, and have every reason to think that, when manufactured with a proper material, the apparatus will prove eminently successful. " The chemical agents which have principally engaged my attention at present have been— " 1st. Lime mixed with ordinary charcoal, as originally proposed by Mr. Bean, and exposed to the sewer emanations by means of his « Cradle." "The whole of the sulphuretted hydrogen may thus be decomposed, and. 1 believe, some of the other gases decomposed or absorbed. " 2ndly. The oxides of iron, mixed with sawdust. " These agents have been most successfully used in the purification of coal-gas by the Imperial and other Gas Companies, which suggested to me the idea that, by the adaptation of a series of trays to the apparatus, so arranged as to ensure the perfect transmission of the entire sewer air thvough them, this mixture would form an admirable material for securing the object. " 3rd. The Oxides of iron, mixed with coarsely-powdered charcoal. " The operation of these would be somewhat similar to the preceding. There is, however, this drawback to the foregoing substances, that although the sulphuretted hydrogen and sulphide of ammonium would be totally annihilated, there are other gases arising from the decomposition of organic matter, which might possibly remain unaffected by them. The same may be said of chlorine and some others. " The agents which in the present stage of my inquiries seem to promise most hope of securing all possible advantages are— 19 "4th. The manganate and permanganate of potass. " These constitute the active principles in Condy's disinfecting fluid, and form an admirable means for destroying impure gases. They, however, with others, have hitherto rank'-d only amongst, the strictly local disinfectants, and from their non-diffusible nature could not be satisfactorily applied to the pases pervading the atmosphere of large sewers. "The permanganate of potass is asubstance havingthe peculiar property of freely and easily parting with a portion of its combined oxygen to any oxydizable organic substance. The potassium, like other metallic bises, decomposes the sulphuretted hydrogen and sulphide of ammonium, whilst the oxygen set free, unites with or burns as it were the remaining noxious gases arising from putrescent organic matter. " The mode by which 1 think they can be made available is by saturating very coarsely-powdered charcoal with a rather strong solution, and securing the passage of the sewer air through the material by means of the series of trays or metal tubes before alluded to. " The above chemical agents are none of them new, but are all well tried servants in sanitary science; nevertheless, though they have been used as disinfectants in the ordinary manner, none have as yet been applied to the decomposition of sewer gases in an apparatus so fraught with advantages as that suggested by Mr. Bean and myself. The manner in which they have been generally used has been by merely suspending flannels, &c., saturated with the various solutions, either in the sewers or ventilating shafts, necessarily allowing a very large proportion of the gases to escape, without contact with the disinfectant, a circumstance which it is believed will be avoided by the use of the proposed apparatus. " A very important advantage in it is,'that the action will be entirely on the gaseous matters. No extraneous substance will be added to the contents of the sewers ; at any rate there would be nothing to interfere with the utilization of the sewage, should such be found practicable and desirable. " The large experience and many favourable opportunities for investigation enjoyed by Dr. Letheby. have enabled him to give to the world a valuable store of practical deductions, and it would be presumptuous in me now to go further into details on this subject. If the apparatus now under your notice fails to accomplish all that can be desired, I am quite certain that it will be instrumental in diminishing to a most sensible extent the offensiveness of the ventilating shafts; that its cost will not be excessive, and that the expense of maintaining it in action will be trifling compared with the advantages obtained. The charcoal may be washed and used almost ad infinitum. The oxide of iron may be revived by exposure to the air, and us^d for a very lengthened period, and even it Condy's patent solution were u^ed, it may be purchased according to Dr. Letheby at a cost of about Is. per gallon. The apparatus should be under the supervision of the Officer of Health or Surveye>r. but the replenishing and removal of tl e material, when ordered, might be accomplished by any shrewd workimm belonging to your ordinary staff. " I do not apprehend there will be any necessity for a very frequent change of the disinfectant, except during the existence of an epidemic, or in very hot weather ; and I tbink a series of chemical test-papers can be so arianged and applied, as to indicate when such change is necessary, without trusting to the sense of smell. " In e< nelusioo, Gentleman, allow me to repeat my belief that whether the means thus so very imperfectly presented to your notice, sufficiently 20 realize all that is expected of them, so as to be deemed worthy of general application, there is great probability of such an amount of benefits being derived as to warrant a trial in your district. I am sorry to place before you so crude a report on the Chemistry of this subject; buti matters of this kind require far greater opportunities and much more time than I have at my command. " I remain, Gentlemen, " Your faithful and obedient Servant, Hammersmith, " FREDERICK J. BURGE, Sept. 23, 1858. Medical Officer of Health." SUPPLEMENTARY REPORT. To the Board of Works of the Fulham District. Gentlemen,—Since the presentation of the foregoing Reports to the Sanitary Committee, I have been constantly engaged in a series of experiments on the Broadway and Bridge Road Ventilators. The materials used for the deodorization of the gaees have been simple charcoal, the oxide of iron mixed with coarse sawdust, and charcoal saturated with Condy's fluid. The first and last have been placed in the cellular arrangement already described, and the oxide in the series of trays also alluded to. From the partial manner in which the apparatus has been applied, it is impossible to arrive at a positive conclusion as to the exact amount of resistance to the passage of the gases offered by the deodorizer, but as far as my experience has taught, I feel certain that no injurious influence is exercised thereby upon the ventilation of the sewer. Coincident with my experiments, Mr. Bean has caused an investigation to be made periodica1 by the person in charge of the Bridge Road Sewer, with reference to its condition as indicated by the sense of smell, and for the ourpose of ascertaining whether any change for the worse had occurred in consequence of the use of the apparatus. These examinations testify that the air of the sewers will not be in any way injuriously affected, and that whilst almost, if not quite the whole of the nuisance arising from the old mode of ventilating them will by this means be annihilated, no impediment of consequence will be offered to the passage of the gases, neither can any ill consequence be expected to affect the workmen employed in cleansing or repairing them. An inquiry in the neighbourhood of the Broadway Ventilator satisfies me also that no injurious influence has been exerted on the house drains in consequence of my experiments. I have endeavoured to search truthfully into the effect of the apparatus, and have therefore no hesitation in recommending your Board to adopt a more enlarged application of it, selecting for further trial such a portion of tbe district as will, in the opinion of Mr. Bean and myself, put it to the severest possible test. I hope, by the Diagrams now before you, to give you ocular evidence of the result of some of my experiments. The test papers attached thereto point out the intensity of the gases in the sewer and shaft, and their modification after passing through the deodorizing process. I remain, Gentlemen, Your faithful and obedient Servant, FREDERICK J. BURGE, July 6th, 1859. Medical Officer of Health. board of works FOR THE FULHAM DISTRICT. ABSTRACT OF ACCOUNTS FOR THE YEAR ENDING 25th MARCH, 1859. Dr. Abstract of General Cash Account Contra £ s. d/ £ s. d. To Balance 388 4 10 3669 4 11 . „ 23 6 3 „ district Charges 286 1 10 411 11 1 100 0. 0 To Fulham General Rate 1847 12 11 97 5 3 „ Rent of Garden proportion 4 0 0 4152 12 0 „ Loan Commissioners ... 2000 0 0 6 5 3851 12 11 „ Lighting Rate 909 19 1 69 8 11 „ Sewers' Contribution 4 10 7 ,, Metropolitan Sewer Rate 203 0 8 207 II 3 5911 8 0 Total — 4969 3 3 ,, District Charges 429 2 9 To Hammersmith General Rate 2100 0 0 „ Repayment to Loan Commissioners 200 0 0 ,, Contributions 29 1 10 194 10 5 ,, Rent of Garden proportion 6 0 0 6735 1 o ,, Loan Commissioners ... 3000 „ Deposit Account 2000 0 0 7135 1 10 ,, Local Sewers 204 15 3 „ Lighting 2200 0 0 ,, Sewers' Rate—Metropolitan Board 1923 1 10 Sewers' Contributions... 26 15 11 „ Metropolitan Sewers' Rate 1923 1 10 1949 17 9 10,638 0 9 Total 11,284 19 7 Balance 200 5 7 . Grand Total £16,665 13 11 Grand Total £ 116,665 13 11 ■ _ ' " Abstract of District Charges Account. L R- ■ Sala ries Advert sem ents. Ren t, &o Rep airs Printi Statio go nerj nd ■ Sun dries TC TAL. To General Purposes, Fulham, being two-fifths of £/ l.» 4*. <d., and pan £286 1 10 £ d. £ d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ S. d, £ S. d. out of General Rate ... ••• . e n,\ Bv Medical Officer of Health 100 0 0 100 0 0 £429 2 y ,, Surveyor 200 0 0 „ Cleik 200 0 0 ,, Messenger 15 12 0 ,, Advertisements 7 12 4 ,, Rent, Rates, and Taxes 69 lb 2 „ Repairs ,, Printing and Stationery ,, Sundries £715 ~ 7 £" 15 4 7 715 4 7 ])R Abstract of Fulham General Rate Account. d £ s. 12 10 10 48 4 2 43 6 8 „ Wages, Roadmen 383 9 9 3851 12 11 „ „ Inspector 78 0 0 461 ,, Materials. ,, Flint 133 2 3 ,, Core and Gravel ... ... b i 200 14 ,, Rent of Shed 15 0 6 3 b 9 16 r, „ Permanent Works 2872 15 3 3669 286 1 10 ,, Loan Commissioners' Repayment of £20, Portion of Loan 100 0 0 „ Loan Commissioners' Interest 97 0 3 Balance 275 £ 4427 15 10 £ 4427 15 10 Dk. Abstract of Hammersmith General Rate Accoiait. tlr- £ s. d. 37 £ s. d. To Balance 547 5 3 By New Tools and Repairing Old Ones 5 1 „ Overseers on General Rate ... 2100 0 0 „ Cartage 71 lb 3 ,, Contributions 35 1 10 ,, Dusting 19 48 b 8 ,, Loan Commissioners SOOO 0 0 „ Wages—Roadmen 451 4 „ Deposit Account ... 2000 0 0 „ „ Inspector 78 0 0 529 19 7135 1 10 Materials 4 Flints 145 0 7 Core and Gravel 33 18 0 Rent of Shed 10 0 0 Miscellaneous 70 2 0 Permanent Works 4965 0 1 5911 8 0 District Account 429 2 9 Loan Comissioners' Report of 20th portion of Loan 200 0 0 Loan Commissioners' Interest 194 10 5 Balance 947 5 11 Total £7,682 7 1 Total £7,«*2 1 1 Vn. Abstract of Fulham Lighting- Rate Account. T)n. Abstract of Hammersmith Li eh tin? Rate Account. Ok. £ s. d. £ s. d. —-— To Overseers on Lighting Rate 909 19 1 By Balance 608 17 10 . . £ T> D 1 ,, Balance 581 5 2 Imperial Gas Company 370 10 0 - - Brentford Gas Company 160 10 0 London Gas Company 351 6 5 882 6 5 1491 4 3 1491 4 3 .>866 4 1 2866 4 J Dr- ■ Abstract of Fulham Sewers' Rate Account. Cr. Dr. Abstract of Hammersmith Sewers' Rate Account. <jR- £ s. d. £ u. £ s. d. £ s. d. lo Balance 715 11 0 By Metropolitan Sewer Rate 723 0 3 To Balance 272 11 4 By Metrop. Sewer Rate 1923 1 10 Contributions ... 4 10 7 Tidekeepers' Wages ... 16 5 0 Contribution ... 26 15 11 Tide Keeper's Wages 22 19 0 Works to Sewers ... 53 3 11 Overseers on Metrop. Rate 1923 1 10 Sewer Works ... 181 16 3 792 9 2 • 1949 11 9 20; 11 2 3 3 Balance 130 13 1 Balance 94 12 0 923 923 2 3 2222 9 1 1212 9 1 Assets and Liabilities. Dr. fuuu m ge ne ral purposes account. Cr. Dr hamm ersmi dh general purposes acc ount. C r £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. x s. d. To Cash Balance 275 3 10 Permanent Works 153 3 8 To Cash Balance 947 5 11 Permanent Wor is . 11 >7 16 8 Due from Overseers on precept, dated Granite 85 8 6 Balance 394 18 9 Hunt 11 8 0 May 26, 1858 220 0 0 Cartage 17 16 9 Slopping 15 0 0 Slopping 15 0 0 Flint 22 b 10 Core 21 6 0 Cartage 21 9 0 Flint 21 2 6 Bennett 7 17 6 Jobbing Works 5 11 9 Tools M organ 10 17 o 20 19 6 Tools 8 2 1 1 Hunt 2 5 0 Gravel 24 1 fi 11 14 Hackman 0 9 0 Jobbing Works 9 11 4 Balance 143 1 3 ,, ■ 1 18 7 Gravel 4 0 0 Engine 5 0 0 Granite 87 5 3 Small Accounts ... 3 15 6 495 3 10 495 3 10 1342 4 8 1342 4 8 Dr- Fulham. Cr. Dr- Hammersmith. Cr. lighting account. £ s. d. 1 1 £ s. d. lighting account. £ s. d. £ s. d, Due from Overseers on precept, dated Balance 666 4 1 Nov. 24, 1858 ... ... 1800 0 0 Brentford Gas Company ... 1074 15 10 Due from Overseers on precept, dated Balance 581 5 2 Balance ... ... 0 9 11 Western „ „ 59 10 0 Due from Overseers on precept, dated 0 0 1 Brentford Gas Company ... 12 10 0 1800 9 11 1800 9 11 sewers' account. £ s. d. £ 8. d. Nov. 24, 1858 900 0 0 92 1? 6 Cash Balance ... ... 94 12 0 Mr. Webb ... 2 1 6 Balance ... ... 12 8 7 West vliddlesex Water Works 3 10 6 Balance 41 19 9 London ,, ,, 2c $ 13 0 Mr. Millwood... 84 1 i 9 5 11 Mr. Randall ... 1 18 0 Grand Junction Water Works 1 4 0 942 0 8 942 8 Mr. Millwood 12 9 3 107 0 7 107 0 7 sewers' account. £ s. d. £ s. d. district account. Mr. Churchman 4 6 0 ,, Coat 1J 6 Cash Balance 7 ' „ Thompson ... 2 15 b „ Erby 1 0 0 ,, Page 0 18 0 Water Rate ... 1 5 0 — G as 1 17 0 £ 130 13 1 £130 13 1 £34 4 0 £34 4 0 BOARD ROOM, BROADWAY HOUSE, Hammersmith, May 21, 1859. either thJ6^ * *\ov? car^u^.v investigated the several existing accounts of the Board, have compared them with the Books and Vouchers, and find them correct. I cannot, hewevet, agree with my Co-Auditors in sienit *e su£8e!> ,on or conclusion they have taken upon tlun. to i:dd to thtiv Cerlil cate, Mid which 1 regret to add is not in the state in whiih it was first signed by them. In the one first signed by them and tendered for my vi.a„'i Tiff ' aPl>rovin& °f l^e system on which the accounts weie kipt—that I refused to sign, as in my judgment a system does not call for approval, which does not contain accounts which would shew at one c ' e o e accounts of each parish in the district was, ar.d no such account is in fact kept. These remarks are elicited from me much against my will, but I feel bound to make them. June 1G, 1859. JOHN BLACHFORD, Auditor. BOARD ROOM, BROAD VAY HOUSE, following several tncc cmt^—Viz°FulbL°nff!| j l,m'i ^Ver^a,cc?u,'ts of t,ie Board, have compared them with t! e Books «nd Vouchers, and find them correct. We, however, find that balances are due upon the eu»g«,t that this indicates a state of things which ought Z\ anv1 '■ } *'ot £22<j ; Fl'lh{'ni Lifehting Rate, dated Nov. 24, 1868, of £o00, a. d due from Hammersmith for i.igluing of, £1800. being a total of £29-0, and ® ' y °»gc» to exist, inasmuch as it ii• rticts injustice f-n the prompt-pa\ ing ratepayers, and leads to delay in the paying of the accounts of the Board. J. WILLIAM?, | . , C. I. PAGL1.UNO. i Aud torl-