GREF 7 1915. GREENFORD URBAN DISTRICT COUNCIL. Annual Report OF GEORGE HOPE, d.p.h., l.r.C.p , m.r.c.S.. and d.s.a. (London). Medical Officer of Health. London Francis A. Perry, 4, Kirchen Road, West Easling, W 1916. 1915. Greenford Urban District Council. Area in Acres 3,042 Inhabited Houses 246 Population 1,290 Civil Population 1,183 Population per House 5.0 Population per Acre 0.4 Birth Rate based on Population for 1914 21.3 Birth Rate, Corrected, based on Population for 1914 21.3 Death Rate according to Civil Population 22.7 Death Rate of Population is estimated as formerly 20.9 Death Rate, Corrected (Civil Population) 21.1 Death Rate, Corrected (Otherwise) 19.3 Infantile Mortality Rate 111.3 Rateable Value £15,850 Assessable Value (General District Rate) £10,745 13s. 4d. Greenford Urban District Council. Annual Report for 1915. Beaconsfield House, Hanwell, W. To the Chairman and Members of the Greenford Urban District Council. Gentlemen, I have the honour to present my Annual Report on the Public Health of your District during the past year. The natural and social conditions of the District as well as its Sanitary circumstances, Water Supply, condition of Rivers and Streams, remain the same. Its rural character is unchanged. Your Surveyor informs me that the total number of houses occupied is only 246. The houses are grouped chiefly in clusters at Greenford Park, Greenford, Greenford Green, Perivale, and West Twyford, with considerable distances intervening, with only a few houses dotted about. Population. According to a communication received from the Regis trar General, the population used for estimating the various rates based thereon should be the Civil Population, which he 6 estimates at 1,183 Whereas calculated in the usual way by taking the average number of inmates of occupied houses at the last Census, the estimate would have been 1,290—as our figures are so small, this will make a considerable difference in the various rates based thereon, which must be considered accordingly. Births. The same authority states that the Birth Rate should not be calculated on the population of the current, but the previous year, for reasons which are too long to detail here. There were only 27 births registered during the year, the lowest number since 1911; of these 27 births, only 10 were boys. If the Birth Rate is based upon the population of the •previous year, viz., 1,265, it works out at 21.3 per 1,000, but if on the civil population for the year, viz., 1,183, it is 22.7. There was only one illegitimate birth and none occurred in Institutions outside the District of residents thereof. Notification of Births Act. This act is now universal although much benefit will not accrue therefrom, unless worked in conjunction with Health Visiting, and child welfare arrangements; as stated in my last Annual Report nothing of this kind is done in the District for reasons given therein:— Immediately a Birth is notified a copy of the notification is sent to the County M.O., The Middlesex County Council being the Supervising Authority for Mid wives, etc., for this District. Infantile Mortality. Of the 27 Births 3 died within the year giving the excessively high rate of 111.3 per 1,000 children born. Of course, the smallness of numbers under consideration makes a great difference, this rate for the previous year was 93.7 per 1,000. and varies considerably, in 1888 it was only 35.7 7 Since the Notification of Birth; Extension Act came into force on the 1st September to the end of the year only two Births were notified, both by medical men. There are not any midwives residing in the district those attending cases come from the surrounding districts. In connection with the notification of measles as well as Health Visiting for Child Welfare, I made the following report to your Council:— The Measles Regulations, 1915, will come into force in this as well as all other districts on the 1st January, 1916, by which not only has every case of measles to be notified, but also visited, investigated and particulars recorded, by an official under the direction and suprvision of the M.O.H., and the requirements under these regulations are evidently supplementary to those required to be carried out in the previous regulations concerning Child Welfare, which was foreshadowed by the compulsory adoption of the Notification of Births Acts. The essential official in each being a female health visitor. As I have before pointed out, such an official is absolutely necessary to carry out the duties under these regulations. It is a difficult problem for an Urban District Council with such limited means as Greenford to deal with, and I have already stated I think for such districts it should be a County matter. I, however, pointed this out to an Inspector from the Local Government Board, who had come down to investigate what was being done in an adjoining District and he asked if I knew whether the County Council intended doing anything ? I would suggest that the Middlesex County Council be asked whether they are likely to formulate a scheme as suggested in the Child Welfare Circular for such districts as this, and also that the matter may be duly considered so that when the L.G.B. Inspector comes, the officials shall know the decision of the Council. The Council decided not to take any steps in the matter at present 8 Deaths. There were 27 deaths registered in the District, 10 of these were transferred by the Registrar General as being deaths of non-residents, these have therefore to be deducted from the 27 before arriving at the nett total, in like manner 8 deaths occurred amongst residents dying outside the District have to be added making the nett total of deaths for the year, 25. The death rate is therefore 22.7 per 1,000 if the Civil Population be taken and 20.9, if the population be estimated as in former years, last year it was only 16.6. The corrected or nett death rate will be 21.1 or 19.3 accor ding to which estimate of population is taken. Of the 27 deaths that occurred in the District 20 were males, and onh- 7 were females; 12 of these deaths occurred at the Home for Invalids at Twyford Abbey; these are not strictly speaking residents of our District, but the Registrar General has only transferred 9, thus saddling us with 3 deaths which belong elsewhere. The figures under consideration being so few, this small addition gives a considerable increase in our death rate in proportion, and makes it appear higher than it really is when compared with this rate for other Districts. The ages and causes of death can be seen by referring to Table III. Infectious Diseases. We have been unfortunate during the year in having more than our usual share of diseases of this class, so much so, and it being felt that the excessive prevalence was a great deal due to the want of care or information on the part of the inhabitants that at the request of the Council the following notice was circulated throughout the District:— " Owing to the prevalence of Infectious Disease in the neighbourhood, it is highly desirable that all PARENTS should, if their children be ailing, especially in cases of sore throats and sickness send at once for their Medical Adviser 9 "This is important, both in the interests of themselves and that of their neighbours. "The attention of Parents is called to Sec. 3 of Infectious Disease (Notification) Act, 1889, under which the "head of the family "is bound to give Notice of any case of Infectious Disease to the Medical Officer of the District, and in case of neglect to do so, is liable to a fine not exceeding £2. The different infectious diseases notified with the ages of the patients, the part of the District where the case occurred, and the number removed to Hospital can be seen by referring to Table II. Four cases of Scarlet Fever were treated in the Temporary Isolation Hospital at Horsenden Hill; the others and also the cases of Diphtheria were admitted to the Isolation Hospital of an adjoining district. Out of 11 cases of Scarlet Fever only one died (in the Ealing Hospital). None of the 6 cases of Diphtheria proved fatal. There was one death from Measles, which is now again compulsorily notifiable. There was also one death from Whooping Cough. Tuberculosis. Four cases were notified during the year, all Pulmonary. They were all brought to the notice of the Tuberculosis Medical Officer, two being removed to Sanatorium. Pathological Means for Diagnosing Disease. As mentioned in my previous reports, the Council undertakes the examination of Swabs for Diphtheria Bacilli, also Sputum for T., B., and Blood for Enteric Fever, but not examination of Spinal Fluid or Swabs for the Meningo-Coccus —in Cerebro Spinal Meningitis. 10 The Council also provides Antitoxin for cases of Diphtheria. The examination of Spinal fluid for suspected cases of Cerebro-Spinal Meningitis is now undertaken by the Middlesex County Council. General Sanitary Work. Forms setting out this work as devised by the Middlesex County Council are appended hereto, Nos. 1, 2 and 3, and can be referred to for information under this heading. Table of Adoptive Acts, Bye-Laws and Regulations in Force. Infectious Diseases Prevention Act, 1890 Adopted in 1902 Public Health Act Amendment Act, 1890, Part III. —Ditto 1900 Housing of the Working Classes Act, 1890, Partlll —Ditto 1903 The Public Health Act Amendment Act 1907, has not been adopted. Common Lodging Houses No Bye-laws. Slaughter Houses do. do. Cleansing, etc., and Removal of Refuse -Bye-laws made in 1901. Houses Let in Lodgings —No Bye-laws Tents, Vans, Sheds, etc. Hop-Pickers' Lodgings Fruit, etc., Pickers' Lodgings Public Mortuaries Public Cemeteries Public Lodging Houses Prevention of Nuisances -Bye-laws made in 1901 Keeping Animals Included in Bye-laws as to Nuisances. Offensive Trades Bye-laws made in 1906 New Streets and Buildings Ditto 1910 Removal of Offensive Matter and House Refuse Public Conveniences —No Bye-laws Public Baths and Washhouses Swimming Baths Open Spaces Markets Buildings, Limited Powers Communications between Drains and Sewers Removal of Patients Management of P.M. Room Dairies, Cowsheds and Milkshops Regulations made 1910 11 It will be seen by the above that the Council do not undertake the Scavenging of th District. I brought the circular and return on this subject which I received from the L.G.B. on May the 21st, before the Council, but they decided not to take any further steps in the matter at the present. This matter and that of dealing with the Sewage of the Di trict is, as pointed out in my last annual report, the most pressing for the Council's consideration, and has had again tobe considered during the year in connection with the large encampment at Park Royal, part of which is in our area, and with reference to which I submitted the following Report to your Council in May. Beaconsfield House, Hanwell, W. 17th May, 1915. To the Chairman and Members of the Greenford Urban District Council. Gentlemen, Inasmuch as a matter of urgency has arisen, viz., the encampment of a large number of Troops in a part of your district, viz., West Twyford, and the neighbourhood adjoinng known as Park Royal, I deem it expedient to make this Report to you on the subject. You are aware that this Council does not undertake or contract for the removal of house refuse from premises, or the cleansing of Earth Closets, privies, ashpits and cesspools for any part of the District, but in 1901 you made Bye-L,aws imposing the duty of cleansing, etc., on the occupiers in accordance with Sec. 44 P.H.A., 1875. You are also aware that there are no sewers in the District and that none were contemplated for the present, in this part of the District, which is even more sparsely populated than the rest. The emptying, cleansing and supervision of 168 (the number given me) pail closets daily would be, in my opinion too great an undertaking for the Council, with its present resources, and staff; moreover, a more satisfactory method of disposing of the sewage than by the "conservancy" system is at hand. 12 As already stated only a part of the site of the camp is in the Greenford District, which is without sewers. In the other part, viz., that in the Willesden District sewers are already laid down into which I understand the greater part of the camp will be drained. Under these circumstances I am of opinion that arrangements should be made in accordance with Sec. 22, P.H.A., 1875, for the outstanding portion to be drained in the same manner. If the Camp is likely to be of a permanent nature, I am of opinion that the treatment of the Sewage other than by the water carriage system as recommended, will be prejudicial to the health of the Troops and the Public Health of the surrounding Districts. I am, Gentlemen, Your obedient servant, GEORGE HOPE. The Disposal of Sewage. This matter has been dealt with in my Annual Report for 1912, 1913 and 1914, and now remains in the same condition as when last reported. It has still been under consideration, a Committee was formed to visit an adjoining district to ascertain the cost of working a scheme which it was thought might be adopted as an alternative to the water carriage system, etc., for Greenford, the following is the report thereof. "The Committee ascertained that in the visited Urban District it is the custom of the Council to obtain a written order or request from the Owners of the various houses before emptying a cesspool. The area of the visited Urban District is about 1,700 acres, the population about 5,000 and the number of houses about 1,000, the sub-soil of the district is gravel and is water-logged, and the water level is within some 4 to 6 feet of the surface. "The district has not a Sewage system, but is dealt with principally by cesspools, a small number of houses having earth closets. The Rates of the District are 7 6 in £. 13 "There is a Surface Water drainage system in the district which communicates with the Thames at a point above the water intake of the S.W. Water Co., so that case has to be taken that no pollution is allowed. "The Bye-Laws in the District are after the Model Series of the L.G.B., and a provision is there that Cesspool shall b; water-tight and of a certain capacity; the Council insist that the Cesspool shall be water-tight, but allow an overflow into a soak-away, and the soil being permeable the overflow gets away freely. "The Council undertake the emptying of cesspools and earth-closets at a charge in the former case of 6/- for the first load and 3/- for the second, with an additional charge where the cover is below the surface of 1/- for opening the cesspool and if drain rods are necessary a further charge of 1/6 is made; for emptying the earth closets a charge of 2d. per week is made. In both cases special carts are provided. The Council insist that Owners shall sign the Order or request for cesspools to be emptied, so as to ensure payment, and allow an abatement of 10% if the account" s paid within a certain time,, which minimises the anrcunt of bad debts. The Council contract for their cartage hut provide their own carts and the Council's men undertake the work, three men working with each cart; as a rule they work with 2 carts one being carted away and emptied whilst the other is being filled, so as to save the time of the labourers. "The soil is carted away and discharged into lagoon on ground rented on the borders of the district and subsequently carted away and dealt with on the land. The Council pay £15 per annum for the land rented and have to pay extra for the soil to be finally dealt with. "Cesspools are allowed to be constructed within 30ft from buildings. The soil is not readily accepted by Farmers owing to the disinfectant (Sulphate of Iron) used when emptying the cesspools. The cost of the construction of the lagoons is about £10 each. The van used is specially constructed locally, by Messrs. Wakely & Garrett, of Bedfont Lane, and cost £32 10s. 0d. (the price would probably now be increased), and holds about 300 gallons. The Committee 14 "were present at the emptying of a cesspool belonging to a cottage, and distant from same about 30 ft and o:ily when standing close to the cesspool could any appreciable nuisance be noticed; the cart is air-tight and has a small vent, to allow the air to escape as the sewage is pumped into the cart, after which air-valve is closed, and when passing through the streets no nuisance would be noticeable. "A special pump supplied by Messrs. Glover, of Wolverhampton and worked by handlever is used, requiring two men to pump. "The Surveyor informed the Committee that even in the case of terrace houses the system works satisfactorily, a length of matting being laid down by the men when carrying the suction pipe through the house. "It appears that the Medical Officer for the district is somewhat adverse to the cesspool system, but the Surveyor is quite satisfied with it, and although the L.G.B. have been asking the Council to lay down a sewerage system in lieu of it they have not yet forced them to do so; it appears that the district is so flat that a sewerage system would be particularly costly as all sewage would have to be pumped up, some it would be necessary to use the compressed air system for lifting the sewage, which would be worked from a central station." The matter is still under consideration. Rubbish Tipping on the Banks of the Canal. This nuisance which has occurred from time to time for many years has again given rise to trouble as will be shown by the following correspondence and my Special Report thereon. Local Government Board, Whitehall, S.W. 22nd May, 1915 Sir, I am directed by the Local Government Board to state that they have received from the D.D.M.S. of the Eastern Command the enclosed copy of a report by the Officer 15 manding No. 1 Reserve Horse Transport Depot, stationed at Park Royal, with reference to the nuisance alleged to arise from refuse which has been tipped on a site near the camp. The Board desire to be furnished with a special report by the Medical Officer of Health on the subject matter of the complaint, and also to be informed what action has been or is being taken by the District Council to secure the early abatement of the nuisance. I am, Sir, Your obedient servant, (Signed) H. O. STUTCHBURY for Assistant Secretary. To The Clerk to the Greenford Urban District Council. Head Quarters, Eastern Command. (1.) On a recent visit of the Specialist Sanitary Officer it was brought to his notice that a large heap of refuse had been deposited from the barges on a site quite close to these cantonments. (2). When the wind blows in the direction of the camp a most offensive smell arises from this heap of refuse. (Signed) C. L. PRIOR, Lt.-Col. Park Royal, Commanding No. 1 Reserve Horse 17th May, 1915 Transport Depot. Beaconsfield House, Hanwell, W. 21th May, 1915. SPECIAL REPORT re Tipping of Refuse on the Banks of Canal at West Twyfcrd. I beg to report as follows :—That this is a re-occurrence of an old standing nuisance can be seen by referring to the Report of Dr. S. Monckton Copeman on the Sanitary condition of the River Brent dated November 8th, 1893, also to my Annual Reports for 1909, Page 6, 1910, Pages 8 and 9, and that for 1913, Page 19. 16 Since the last report the deposit of refuse in this neighbourhood has ceased till the early part of the present month when a further deposit of about a couple of barge loads was reported. Notice was at once sent to Mr. R. Goddard, College Farm, Harrow Weald, on whose land the refuse was deposited, dated May 4th, resquesting him to desist from depositing any offensive sweepings or other refuse and to at once take steps to cover up the sweepings and rubbish already deposited. In company with the Sanitary Inspector and the Chairman of the Public Health Committee, I again visited the deposit yesterday and found that although there has been no fresh deposit during the past three weeks, still the heap has not been covered, and in its present state is likely to be a nuisance especially during hot weather. Notice has been again served on Mr. Goddard that unless the heap is satisfactorily covered with 48 hours proceedings will be taken against him. Inasmuch as the nuisance is of such a recurring nature, and that these deposits are often made surreptitiously on the banks of this canal which is on our extreme eastern border a part of our district sparsely populated and with difficulty watched and as now recently a large number of troops have become encamped in the vicinity, I recommend that an Assistant Sanitary Inspector should be appointed especially to deal with this and other matters connected with the large number of troops now stationed in the District. (Signed) GEORGE HOPE, d.p.h., l.R.C.p., m.r.c.s., etc. M.O.H. Terminus Wharf, Paddington Basin, W. 5th May, 1915., Mr. W. H. Read, Surveyor, etc., The Avenue, West Ealing. Dear Sir, In reply to yours of May 4th, there will be no other sweepings shot at West Twyford, as we have made other arrangements. Yours faithfully, (Signed) HENRY BOYER. 17 Sanitary Conveniences. These remain the same as last year. Offensive Trade. We still have one that of a bone boiler, but complaints have not been made during the year as hithertofore. Housing. Information and particulars required by Article V. of the Housing (Inspection of District) Regulations, 1910, can be seen by referring to Tables T. of the Middlesex County Council Sanitary Work appended hereto. There were no closing orders issued during the year. There is no evidence of overcrowding, but a great deal of the Cottage Property in the District is dilapidated from age, and again, in some instances quite new houses are now being let to more than one family who are more noted for want of personal cleanliness than otherwise. These cases all require and receive the constant attention of your Sanitary' Inspector. In conclusion, Gentlemen, I beg to thank you and my Brother Officials for the assistance I have always received in carrying out my duties. I am, Gentlemen, Your obedient servant, GEORGE HOPE. TABLE 1. Vital Statistics of Whole District during 1915 and Previous Years. Name of District, Greenford Urban. Year. Population estimated to Middle of each Year. Births. Total Deaths Registered in the District. Transferable Draths. Nett Deiths belon -ing to the District. Uncorrected Number. Nett. of Non residt nts register d in the Dis lict. of Residents Kit regis'ered in the District. Under 1 year of Age. At all Ages. Number. Rate. Number. Rite per 1000 Nett Births. Number Rate. Number. Rate. 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8 9. 10. 11. 12. 13. 1910 1188 28 28 23.5 19 15.9 10 6 1 35.7 15 12.6 1911 1064 26 26 24.4 12 11.2 2 6 2 76.9 16 15.0 1912 1180 33 33 27.9 24 20.3 17 3 2 60.6 10 8.4 1913 1245 29 29 23.2 19 15.2 10 4 3 103.4 13 10.4 1914 1265 32 32 25.2 21 16.6 7 5 3 93.7 19* 15.0 1915 1290 27 27 *21.3 27 22.7 10 8 3 111.3 25 *21.1 Area of District in acres 3041. Total population at all ages 1064. Total families or separate occupiers 222. At Census 1911. * Vide text of report. 19 Table 2. Cases of Infectious Disease notifed during the Year 1915. Notifiable Disease. At all Ages. At Ages—Years. Under 1. 1 and under 5 years. 5 and under 15 years. 15 and under 25 years. 25 and under 45 years. 45 and under 65 years. 65 and upwards. Small-pox Cholera Plague Diphtheria (including Membranous croup) 6 2 4 Erysipelas 2 1 1 Scarlet fever 11 9 1 1 Typhus fever Enteric fever Relapsing fever Continued fever Puerperal fever Cerebro spinal Meningitis 1 1 Poliomyelitis Pulmonary Tuberculosis 4 2 1 1 Other forms of Tuberculosis Totals 24 1 2 13 3 3 2 Total Cases notified in each Locality—Greenford 17; Greenford Green and Horsenden, 7. Total Cases removed to Hospital 17—4 Diphtheria; 11 Scarlet Fever; 2 Pulmonary Tuberculosis. Temporary Isolation Hospital for Scarlet Fever Cases at Horsenden, 2; 4 cases of Scarlet Fever were treated here; 6 were sent to the Ealing Isolation Hospital; and 1, a military case, to Harrow. Sanatorium.—South Mimms, Clare Hall, and for Small Pox. 20 Table 3. Causes of, and ages at Death during the Year 1915, Causes of Deatn. Nett Deaths at the subjoined ages of " Residents " whether occurring within or without the District. Total Deaths whether of "Residents" or "Non-Residents" in Institutions in the District. Twyford Abbey. All Ages. Under 1 year. 1 and under 2 years. 2 and under 5 years. 5 and under 15 years. 15 and under 25 years. 25 and under 45 years. 45 and under 65 vears. ! 65 and | upwards. All Causes Certified Uncertified Enteric Fever Small-pox Measles 1 1 Scarlet Fever 1 1 Whooping Cough 1 1 Diphtheria and Croup Influenza 1 1 1 Erysipelas Phthisis (Pulmonary * Tuberculosis) 2 1 1 Tuberculous Meningitis Other Tuberculous Diseases 1 1 Cancer malignant disease Rheumatic Fever Meningitis Organic Heart Disease 1 1 Bronchitis 1 1 Pneumonia (all forms) Other diseases of piratory organs Diarrhoea and Enteritis 1 1 Appendicitis and Typhlitis • Cirrhosis of I,iver 1 Alcoholism 1 Nephritis and Bright's Disease 1 1 1 Puerperal Fever Other accidents and diseases of Pregnancy and Parturition Congenital Debility and Malformation including Premature Birth 1 1 Violent Deaths excluding Suicide 4 1 3 1 Suicide 1 1 Other Defined Diseases 8 4 4 7 Diseases ill-defined or unknown Totals 25 3 1 1 2 2 10 6 12 Table 4. Infant Mortality 1915. Nett Deaths from stated Causes at various Ages under One Year of Age. Cause of Death. Under 1 week. 1-2 weeks 2-3 weeks. 3-4 weeks. Total under 4 weeks. 4 weeks and under 3 months. 3 months and under 6 months. 6 months and under 9 months. 9 months and under 12 months. Total Deaths under l year. All causes Certified Uncertified Small-pox Chicken-pox Measles Scarlet lever Whooping-Cough 1 1 Diphtheria and Croup Erysipelas Tuberculous Meningitis Abdominal Tuberculosis OtherTuberculousDiseasei Meningitis (not Tubctculous) Convulsions Laryngitis Bronchitis Pneumonia (all forms) Diarrhoea Enteritis 1 1 Gastritis Syphilis Rickets Suffocation overlying Injury at birth Atelectasis Congenital Malformations Premature birth 1 1 1 Atrophy Debility and Marasmus Other causes—Accident Totals 1 1 1 1 3 Nett births in the year—Legitimate 26; Illegitimate 1. Nett deaths in the year of—Legitimate infants 3; Illegitimate infants 0. 22 Factories Workshops, Workplaces and Homework. 1.—Inspection. Including Inspections made by Sanitary Inspectors or Inspectors of Nuisances. Premises. Number of Inspections. Number of Written Notices. Number of Pro secutions. Factories (including Factory Laundries) Workshops (including Workshop Laundries) Workplaces (other than Outworkers' premises included in Part 3 of this Report) 12 4 Total 12 4 Defects Found. Particulais. Number of Defects Found. Number of Defects Remedied. Number ol Defects Referred lo H.M. Inspectoi. Number ol Prosecutions. Nutsances under the Public Health ,Acts* Want of cleanliness 4 4 Want of ventilation Overcrowding Want of Drainage of Floors Other nuisances 3 Sanitary accommodation Insufficient Unsuitable or defective Not separate for sexes Offences under the Factory and Wornshop Acts— Illegal occupation of underground Bakehouse (s. 101) Breach of special sanitary requirements for bakehouses (ss. 97 to 100) Other offences (excluding offences relating to out work which are included in Part 3 of this Report) Total 7 4 *Including those specified in "sections 2, 7 and of the Factory and Workshop Act 901 as remediable under the Public Health Acts. 23 Sanitary Work. INSPECTIONS— Number of Premises Inspected on Complaint 52 Number of Premises Inspected in connection with Infectious Diseases 36 Number of Premises under Periodical Inspection 63 Houses Inspected from House-to-House (H. and T.P. Act,Sect. 17) 56 Total Number of Inspections and Re-inspections made 179 DWELLING HOUSES AND ACTION UNDER H. AND T.P. ACT, 1909.— Number of Houses dealt with under Sect. 15 20 Number of Houses made Habitable without Closing Orders 20 ACTION TAKEN. (OTHER THEN UNDER H. AND T.P. ACT.)— Cautionary or Intimation Notices Given 85 MOVABLE DWELLINGS, CARAVANS, TENTS, &c.— Number observed during the Year 2 Number Removed from District 2 COWSHEDS— Number on Register 0 Number of I nspections made 17 Number of Milch Cows in District 115 24 OFFENSIVE TRADES— Number of Premises in District 1 Number of Inspections made 11 Contravention of Bye-Laws 3 WATER SUPPLY AND WATER SERVICE— Cisterns Cleansed, Repaired, Covered, &c. 3 DRAINAGE AND SEWERAGE OF EXISTING BUILDINGS— Number of Water Closets substituted for Dry Receptacles 6 Water Closets Repaired, Supplied with Water, or otherwise Improved 5 Percentage of Houses provided with Water Closets 33% DRAINS— Examined, Tested, Exposed, etc. 8 Unstopped, Repaired, Trapped, etc. 5 Waste Pipes, Rain Water Pipes Disconnected, Repaired &c. 10 New Soil Pipes or Ventilating Shafts fixed 3 Existing Soil Pipes or Ventilating Shafts Repaired 4 Reconstructed 3 CESSPOOLS— Rendered Impervious, Emptied, Cleansed, &c. 15 SUNDRY NUISANCES ABATED— Overcrowding 4 Accumulations of Refuse 8 Foul Ditches, Ponds, &c., and Stagnant Water 5 Foul Pigs and other Animals 2 Dampness 3 Yards repaved or repaired 12 Other Nuisances 34