Ac 4351 HAMP 63 Metropolitan Borough of Hampstead. Report on the Health of the Borough. 1962 R. D. DEWAR, B.Sc., M.B., CH.B., D.P.H, Medical Officer of Health. Metropolitan Borough of Hampstead Report on the Health of the Borough. 1962 R. D. DEWAR, B.Sc., M.B., CH.B., D.P.H. Medical Officer of Health. 2 CONTENTS PAGE Aged and Infirm Persons 25, 60, 76 Atmospheric Pollution 31 Factory Acts , 1937 to 1959 61 Food and Drugs 47, 65 Health Education 3,33 Housing 36, 60, 70 Infectious Disease 3, 20, 56, 60 Inspection of the Borough 28, 60 London County Council Division 2 16, 79 Mortuary 59 Population; Births; Deaths 18, 53, 55 Public Health Committee; Staff 16, 17 Rodent and Pest Control 30, 60, 63 Statistical Summary 53 Index 81 3 Public Health Department, 98a, Avenue Road, Hampstead, N. W. 3. 2nd May, 1963. TO THE MAYOR, ALDERMEN AND COUNCILLORS OF THE METROPOLITAN BOROUGH OF HAMPSTEAD Mr. Mayor , Ladies and Gentlemen, I have the honour to present my Annual Report on the Health of the Borough for the year 1962. The year started with much more public awareness of the preventive health services by reason of a case of smallpox which was discovered in the neighbouring Borough of St. Pancras at Christmas 1961, This was quickly followed by the outbreak of smallpox in Yorkshire and it became evident that the cases were associated with the smallpox epidemic occurring in Pakistan. No cases of smallpox were found in Hampstead but many people who had travelled from Pakistan by air arrived at London Airport and some of them on arrival stayed for longer or shorter periods in Hampstead. This involved a considerable amount of surveillance. A somewhat unfortunate aspect of the occurrence was that natives of Pakistan and India were generally shunned by the public irrespective of the length of time that they had been in this country. In an effort to increase public interest in the health services a health exhibition under the title of "At Home in Hampstead" was held at the Town Hall from 7th to 14th April, 1962. It was generally agreed that the form and content of the exhibition was outstandingly good and it was very successful in that it was visited by some 5 ,000 persons including many of the notable residents of the Borough. There is, unfortunately, no way of measuring how much lasting benefit to the public health is achieved by such an exhibition but there was no doubt of the interest which was shown by the visitors, particularly the younger ones and it is hoped that the money which was spent by the Council on this project was well spent. A fuller 4 description of the exhibition is given later in this report but I should pay tribute here to the Housing Architect and his staff who were responsible for the design and lay-out of the exhibition which was the real basis of its success. Housing conditions throughout the borough have maintained a steady, if slow, improvement, and there is an increase in the standards which occupiers now rightly expect. One of the problems in Hampstead is that of houses which were built originally for single family occupation and which are now occupied by a number of families. In some cases the houses are let off in single rooms and whilst there is always the suspicion that the house is being used in this way merely to produce a larger rent, it is true that there is a considerable need for this type of accommodation in Hampstead. It is, however, necessary to ensure that where the number of persons or the number of families living in a house is increased, the sanitary and other facilities are adequate to give good living conditions. The Housing Act, 1961 , which was passed towards the end of that year, provides the necessary powers to require proper standards, including improvements, in houses which are in multiple occupation but it was. found that the application of the Act presented a good deal of difficulty in the early stages. It was necessary for the Council to fix standards giving the number or proportion of W. C's. , sinks, baths, etc. which should be provided and a Code of Practice was adopted which was recommended by the Metropolitan Boroughs' Standing Joint Committee and which takes account of the Ministry's recommendations. Difficulties were also envisaged concerning the rehousing of families who would have to leave the houses as a consequence of the requirements for additional facilities. The result was that a disappointingly small amount of work was carried out under this Act until the end of 1962. It is, however, hoped that the number of premises dealt with in 1963 will be substantial, What may be a major landmark in the history of local government in Hampstead was the introduction of the London Government 5 Bill in November, 1962. In this Bill it is proposed that the Boroughs of Hampstead, Holborn and St- Pancras should be united to form one of the new London Boroughs which would come into existence on 1st April, 1965, It seems likely that the number of Annual Reports which will be made on the lines of this one is strictly limited and I have therefore, taken the opportunity of including some of the domestic history of the Public Health Department of Hampstead. In doing this , I am much indebted to Mr. F. S. Hill, who retired from the Council's service in 1940 and who is now living in Barnet. Mr. Hill was appointed to the Public Health Department in 1896, four years before the creation of the Borough of Hampstead, and he became the Chief Clerk and Assistant Administrative Officer. After 44 years service and 23 years of retirement his memory is extraordinary. He says in his letter: - "I recall the Chairman of the Vestry, the Vicar of the Parish Church, a fine old gentleman, the Rev. S. B. Burnaby and his deputy, Major General Young, R. E. , who was a good friend to the officers. In 1896 when I transferred to the 'Sanitary Department' life was very slow and easy. We had no telephones and hardly any callers and about a dozen letters a day. We, in our Department, had the first typewriter in the Town Hall - an old Yost with a circular pad (no ribbon) - and sometimes to get away early we would put the clock on half-an-hour, If we had a case of infectious disease needing admission to hospital, one of us walked round to the Fever Hospital Ambulance and asked for it. Those were the days! " Some of the historical information has been obtained from the reports of former Medical Officers of Health but much is derived from other notes and records, many of which are in Mr, Hill's handwriting. I am very grateful to the Members of the Council and particularly to the Chairman and Members of the Public Health Committee for their continued encouragement and support. I would also like to express my thanks to the Town Clerk and 6 the other Chief Officers and their staffs for their ready assistance at all times and I am particularly indebted to my deputy, Dr. M. McQuaid, the Chief Public Health Inspector, Mr. J. F. Armstrong, the Chief Clerk, Mr. A. H. Slade and to the other members of the staff of the Public Health Department for their loyal help at all times, I have the honour to be , Mr. Mayor , Ladies and Gentlemen, Your obedient Servant, R. DUNCAN DEWAR, Medical Officer of Health. 7 NOTES ON THE HISTORY OF PUBLIC HEALTH IN HAMPSTEAD When the Vestry of Hampstead was created by the Metropolis Management Act, 1855, it was authorised to appoint a Medical Officer of Health, The first Medical Officer of Health was appointed in the same year. As the information concerning public health in the early years is very largely derived from the reports of the medical officers, it is perhaps not inappropriate to start with some particulars of these men. There have been eight Medical Officers of Health of Hampstead, their service extending over a period of 108 years. The first Medical Officer of Health was Dr. Charles F, J. Lord who was appointed as a part-time Medical Officer of Health in 1855, He retained this position until 1879. There is not a great deal of biographical detail known about Dr. Lord, but he appears to have been a student at Guy's Hospital and St. Thomas's Hospital and qualified as L.S. A. in 1825 and M, R.C.S. in 1826. He came to Hampstead as a medical practitioner in 1827 when he was in partnership with Dr. James Winter and he lived at 13 College Crescent. He was the Poor Law Medical Officer and Public Vaccinator from 185 2 to I860. He was a bachelor and towards the end of his life he became blind. It is not known when he died but he was apparently living in 1889 "but very old and blind". An interesting point is that Dr.Lord is apparently the first known blood donor in this country, This must have been when he was a medical student about 140 years ago. Some light is thrown on medical salaries of this era by a letter from the Guardians of the Hampstead District to the Poor-Law Commissioners dated March, 1847 concerning the proposed salary of the Medical Officer of the Hampstead District of the Edmonton Union, which says , inter alia:- "On the new Poor Law coming into operation in Hampstead, the payment to the Medical Officer was reduced from about £240 to £ 130 per annum. When 8 the Union House at Edmonton was opened and the infirm poor were removed from the Hampstead Workhouse the salary was fixed at £80". "In 1846 the Board regulated the whole of the medical salaries for this Union on the previous 3 years and £5 was taken off the salary". -and- "During the past year the payment to the Medical Officer has been at the rate of Is. 7½d. per case including midwifery cases and those of severe surgery." In 1879 Dr. Lord was succeeded by Dr. Edmund Gwynn as parttime Medical Officer of Health, a post which he filled until 1901. During his term of office the Public Health Department was developed and much work was done under the Public Health (London) Act, 1891 and the Housing Acts. Dr. Gwynn achieved a high reputation and was at one time President of the Society of Medical Officers of Health of England. After his retirement he travelled abroad and in Egypt he contracted an illness from which he died. In 1901 when the Metropolitan Borough of Hampstead had been created Dr. Herbert Littlejohn was appointed as the first full-time Medical Officer of Health, Dr. Littlejohn, who qualified as M. B. Ch. M. F. R.C. S. (Edin. ), D.P.H. was the son of Professor Sir Henry Littlejohn, Medical Officer of Health of Edinburgh. Dr. Littlejohn was Medical Officer of Health for Scarborough before coming to Hampstead, He died in 1905 from an accidental overdose of sulphonal. Dr. G. F. McCleary, B. A. M. D. ,D. P. H. , was appointed as Medical Officer of Health in 1906. He was previously Medical Officer of Health of Battersea. He resigned in 1912 on being appointed as Chief Medical Officer, National Health Insurance Commissioners for England. Dr. Frank Edward Scrase , F. R. C. S. , L. R. C. P. ,D. P. H., was appointed as part-time Acting Medical Officer of Health after the death of Dr, Littlejohn until Dr. McCleary was appointed and he remained as Deputy Medical Officer of Health during Dr. McCleary's term of office. In 1912 Dr. Scrase retired from private medical practice in Hampstead and was appointed as full-time Medical Officer 9 of Health. He retired from the Council's service in September, 1932, on attaining the age of 65 years. In 1932 Dr. Scrase was succeeded by Dr. H, Leslie Oldershaw, M. D. , M. R. C. S. ,D. P. H. , who had previously been Deputy Medical Officer of Health for Coventry, Dr. Oldershaw joined the forces in December, 1943 and from then until the end of the war Dr. Clark Trotter acted in a temporary capacity. In 1948, when the personal health services were transferred to the London County Council under the National Health Service Act, Dr, Oldershaw was appointed by the London County Council as Divisional Medical Officer whilst still retaining the post of Medical Officer of Health for Hampstead, This dual appointment ceased in 1950. It had been agreed with the London County Council that following the alteration in the responsibility for some of the health services under the National Health Service Act, the Metropolitan Boroughs should in appropriate cases employ a Medical Officer of Health jointly for two or more boroughs. In 1950, in pursuance of this agreement, Dr. Dennis Geffen, Q.B. E. ,M. D. ,D. P. H. , who was the Medical Officer of Health for the Borough of St, Pancras, was appointed jointly for the two Boroughs of Hampstead and St. Pancras. Joint appointments of this kind present certain difficulties and at the request of the Borough of St, Pancras the joint appointment was terminated in 1956 and Dr. Geffen became again the full-time Medical Officer of Health for St, Pancras. Dr. Dennis Geffen died in 1959. In 1956 Dr. R. Duncan Dewar was appointed as Medical Officer of Health for the Borough of Hampstead, The first Report of Dr. Charles Lord in 185 7 deals with "the monster defect in the Parish of Hampstead, viz,: the general want of appropriate Sewers and Drains", the need for the abolition of cesspools and the provision of an uncontaminated water supply, the evil of "crowding" where "houses originally built for one family have become over-tenanted being sub-let in rooms" and the need for proper heating, lighting and ventilation. There can be no doubt that parts of Hampstead were at that time far from being ideal places in which to live and equally no doubt 10 that Dr. Lord himself was an acute observer with an extensive knowledge of medicine and a bold and enthusiastic advocate of progress in hygiene and public health, Dr. Lord had no hesitation in pointing out the defects which existed and it is only in his fourth Report made in 1860 that he is prepared to say that there had been any improvement in general living conditions. At that time there was little industry in Hampstead but a great deal of laundry work was done, and one Report states that "laundry work may be called the staple trade of the town". This was often carried out under bad conditions and even in his first Report Dr. Lord advocates the provision of public baths and washhouses, No action in this matter was taken by the Vestry and in subsequent Reports Dr. Lord presses his arguments giving instances of the practice in other districts and other countries. In 1865 he said "Shall England go for a practical lesson to our Mohamedan brethren in Turkey, or to the Greek Church in Russia and not be wise by what they teach!" His arguments and eloquence were, however, unavailing and it was not until 1888 that the Finchley Road Baths were opened, thirty-two years after Dr. Lord's first appeal and nine years after he had retired from office. At the same time as the Finchley Road Baths were being built, the Wells and Campden Charity erected the baths and washhouses in Palmerston Road and in the following year they made a similar provision in Flask Walk. In the early twentieth century these two buildings were leased to the Borough Council which had then taken the place of the Vestry. It is of interest to note that up to 1865 the removal of "Dust and Ashes" was carried out by contract at sums varying from £ 100 to £250 per annum, but that it was then discovered that "dust contractors are paying high prices to the London Vestries for the privilege of collecting the dust from parishioners" because of the "present and prospective demand for bricks" and that in 1866 a contract was made with Mr. John Culverhouse whereby he paid the Vestry £550 per annum for the privilege. For the next twenty years there are mentions of complaints due to brick-burning in the Fleet Road area. The practice was finally only discontinued after an action in the High Court at the end of 1885. At the present day the collection 11 and disposal of refuse costs somewhat less than £ 150,000 per annum. Dr. Lord was not afraid to be outspoken and he mentions those "who impede progress by a timid countenance" and "some, scrupulously bent on saving the Parish rates, complain, with a sad inconsistency, that open sewers and sullage pits in fields are allowed to remain" and says in one Report that "there has been in the Hampstead authorities a want of vigour in enforcing pains and penalties against those who recklessly break laws framed for the promotion of the public health". In the Report written in 1869 Dr. Lord says "We may congratulate the Vestry that an ambulance, for the removal of the sick, has been obtained for the use of the parish" but at the bottom of the page there is a footnote - "Since writing the above I have learned, with regret, that the ambulance after all is not even begun". Throughout his long term of office Dr. Lord's main concern was to improve the living conditions of what was then described as "the labouring classes". He wanted decent houses with good water and proper drainage. He was very ably assisted by the Surveyors of the period, John Douglas and Charles H. Lowe, and by the time of his retirement in 1879 the emphasis was more on the control of the infectious diseases which took such a heavy toll of life at that period. There were, however, many causes which he ardently supported, such as compulsory vaccination, notification of infectious diseases and the promotion of cremation in favour of ordinary burial , and there can be no doubt that he had a good deal of influence in the public health legislation of the day. In his last report he puts forward a strong plea for the provision of public conveniences for women. The reports of the time usually gave some indication of the weather conditions and after our experience of the winter of 1962-63 it is perhaps not inappropriate to quote from the first Report of Dr. Gwynn who succeeded Dr. Lord. "The unusual spring season of 1879, characterised by low temperature and abundant rain, was followed by a summer wet and sunless. The autumn followed dull and cold, but drier, wintry and severe weather setting in early in November and continuing throughout December; a lower temperature being marked for that month than for any December in this century". 12 Hampstead was growing rapidly at this period and the following are the census figures for the latter half of the nineteenth century. 1851 11,986 1881 45,436 1861 19,104 1891 68,425 1871 32,271 1901 81,942 Hampstead always appears to have had a larger excess of females than other parts of London or of the country. In 1881 there were 159 females to every 100 males. Fifty years later in 1931 the figure was still 155 females for every 100 males. This figure reduced in 1951 to 139 and in 1961 to 127. The average for England and Wales is about 107 females to every 100 males. One of the main preoccupations in the latter half of the nineteenth century was infectious disease. There were major epidemics of smallpox and the Metropolitan Asylums Board, which was responsible for the fever hospitals, admitted 15,171 cases of smallpox between 1876 and October, 1879. Of these patients 2,677 (or 17.6 per cent.) died. During 1881 there were 41 cases of smallpox in Hampstead and of these 24 were admitted to hospital and 17 were treated at home - of these, four died in hospital and two died at home. At this time there was considerable belief that the infection was airborne and there was strong objection to the hospital (now the Royal Free Hospital, Lawn Road) being used for the reception of smallpox cases because of the number of houses in the immediate vicinity. Investigations were carried out to find the number of persons living within a quarter of a mile of the hospital and those living between a quarter and a half a mile away, and it was shown that after the hospital had been used for smallpox cases for a short time that in proportion to the population, the greatest number of new cases of smallpox occurred in the immediate vicinity of the hospital and that a greater number of new cases occurred in the area between a quarter and half a mile from the hospital, than in the town as a whole, Whilst from a modern statistical point of view it might be considered 13 that other possible modes of transmission of the disease had not been given adequate weight yet it is certain that a considerable amount of useful epidemiological work was being done at this period. During the same year (1881) the Vestry installed the first disinfector in the old Stone Yard, Lithos Road, This was an apparatus which disinfected by air heated to 240 degrees F, by gas burners. Three years later the temperature regulator failed and the apparatus was destroyed by fire, It was replaced by high pressure steam disinfection similar to that which is in use today. Smallpox was not, of course, the only serious infectious disease which was prevalent and the infectious diseases which caused the greatest number of deaths during the ten years from 1870 onwards were "diarrhoea" followed by whooping cough, scarlet fever, measles, smallpox and diphtheria in that order of severity. The highest individual figure for any one year was 59 deaths from scarlet fever in 1870 (when the population was one-third of the present day figure). The British Medical Association had passed a resolution in favour of the compulsory notification of infectious disease in 1882, In 1889 the Hampstead Vestry instituted voluntary notification and the Infectious Diseases Notification Act came into force later in that year. The Housing of the Working Classes Act, 1890, gave the Vestry additional powers and during that year 51 houses were represented and were either put in proper repair or were demolished. The Vestry was not at that time empowered to provide dwellings but Wells Buildings and Campden Buildings had been provided by the Wells and Campden Charity as some of the first large blocks of dwellings in the old town. The "New Buildings" had been privately erected in Flask Walk in the '50's, The Public Health (London) Act, 1891, consolidated much of the law relating to public health in London and represented most of the sanitary code of London for the next 45 years. Indeed, some of the sections of this Act remain in force and many others have been repeated almost word for word in present legislation. During the same year the Mortuary was opened in New End on the site of "Chestnut House" and a shelter was provided in the old 14 Stone Yard, Lithos Road (now the site of the Public Health Station and Electricity Depot) for the accommodation of families who were temporarily displaced whilst their homes were being disinfected. There is little of real moment recorded in the following years but concern was expressed over the quality of the water supplied to the area. A survey showed that 4 wells were still in use for domestic purposes. In 1894 electricity was used for the first time for street lighting and Finchley Road was the first road so lighted. Towards the end of the decade there were several outbreaks of typhoid fever. The London Government Act, 1899 created the Metropolitan Boroughs and Hampstead "attained its full administrative dignity as a municipal unit in London, representing another step forward in its steady development from an early ecclesiastical vestry, a manorial court, a local government vestry to a Metropolitan Borough. During these centuries the isolated village at the top of the hill had grown into an inseparable part of the great metropolis, " The boundaries of the Borough of Hampstead followed very closely those of the preceeding Vestry of the Parish of St. John. Increased powers were given to the Council and in particular power to adopt Part III of the Housing of the Working Classes Act, 1890. At that time, the staff of the Public Health Department was a chief and three district sanitary inspectors and two clerks, but shortly afterwards an inquiry was begun into the housing conditions in the Borough with seven temporary inspectors, As a result of this investigation into the state of old worn-out properties and mews dwellings where coachmen lived in rooms over the stables, many of the older dwellings were condemned and efforts were made to find a site for the erection of new dwellings. This was eventually found in Lower Cross Road (now Garnett Road), and Park Dwellings were erected and were opened in 1906. Shortly after the formation of the Borough, a campaign against tuberculosis was begun and in 1901 Hampstead was a pioneer in instituting a system of voluntary notification. The Borough had two beds in the then Mount Vernon Hospital for Consumption and 15 owned two shelters which were lent to patients who might wish to use them in their own gardens, This open air and rather spartan treatment might not meet with universal approval today, but it did at least diminish the likelihood of infection of other members of the family. In 1912 the Municipal Tuberculosis Dispensary was opened in the Health Institute. In 1917 the Borough Council's Pre-Maternity Clinics opened in the Town Ward and in Kilburn, and when in 1918 the Maternity and Child Welfare Act was passed, the Council appointed additional staff and extended the work and the number of clinics. Following the Housing Act, 1919 a special survey of the Borough was made and schedules of dilapidations were served in 1 ,264 cases. Two years later in 1921 the municipal dwellings comprising 140 flats were erected at South End Close. This note of the early history of public health in Hampstead can perhaps best be ended in the words of Mr. F.S.Hill, the former chief clerk of the Public Health Department, who served Hampstead so well from 1896 to 1940. "Thus the nature of the work of the Department has grown from environmental, to personal, care. Apart from the War years, the development has continued and steadily increased, Hampstead has been fortunate in the progressive character of its early Vestrymen and Councillors and of those who have succeeded them". 16 PUBLIC HEALTH COMMITTEE The Worshipful the Mayor (Councillor B. West, J. P. ) ex-officio member. Chairman: Councillor G. Finsberg, M.B.E. ,J.P. Aldermen Miss D. R. Bailey Mrs. F. E. Cayford, J.P. ,L.C.C. Councillors Miss E, Beer (Vice-Chairman) A. W.Roome Mrs. L. Campbell,L.C.C. Miss J. Silver Mrs. D.Davis S.Torrance Miss P. Frankau, F. R. S. L. L.J.Walker P. R. Phillips Vice-Chairman of the Housing Committee. REPRESENTATIVES ON OUTSIDE COMMITTEES AND OTHER ORGANISATIONS CONCERNED WITH PUBLIC HEALTH WORK Hampstead Council of Social Service: Aldermen Miss D. R. Bailey, E. Snowman, M. V. O. , O.B. E. , R. M. Brodtman, E. P. Wallis-Jones , M. A , LL. B. ; The Hon. Mrs. Ruth Bennett, Mrs. R. S. G. Carnegie. Hampstead Old People's Housing Trust Ltd. : Aldermen E, Snowman, M. V. O. ,0. B. E. , R. M. Brodtman; Councillors Miss S. H. Ayliff, J. J. Tobin, M. A. , LL. B. ; Mrs. H. M. Young. Hampstead Old People's Welfare Association: Alderman R. J. Cleaver, L. C. C.; Councillors Miss S. H. Ayliff, Miss E. Beer, Mrs, D.Davis, Miss M. du Mont, M. A. , A. E. Skinner; Mrs. R. S. G, Carnegie, D. F. Ridgley. Hospital Management Committee: Archway Group: Mr. A. C. Morson, O. B. E. ,F. R. C. S. London County Council Divisional Health Committee. Division 2: Alderman Miss D. R. Bailey; Councillors Miss E.Beer, Mrs. D, Davis. National Society for Clean Air: Councillor Miss E.Beer; The Medical Officer of Health, London and Home Counties Clean Air Advisory Council: The Smoke Inspector. 17 STAFF OF THE PUBLIC HEALTH DEPARTMENT Medical Officer of Health: - R. D. Dewar. B. Sc. ,M. B. , Ch, B. ,D, P. H. , Barrister-at-law. Deputy Medical Officer of Health: - Miss M. McQuaid, L. R. C. P. ,L. R,C,S(I). ,D. P. H. Chief Public Health Inspector:- J. F, Armstrong (a)(b) Deputy Chief Public Health Inspector:- F, V, Outlaw (a)(b) Specialist Inspectors:- Old People's Welfare: Mrs. C, G, Speechley (a)(d)(e)(f) Housing: L, E. Trigg (a)(b); R. Clark (a) Food: W. F. Newport (a)(b) Clean Air Act: E. Ulrich (a)(b)(c) Health Education: G. L. Nicklin (a) District Inspectors:- D. W. Malcolm (a) P. C. F. Griffiths (a)(b) G. L. Nicklin (a) A, M. Norton (a)(b) R. W. M. Cook (a)(b) L. S. Willett (a)(b)(from 7. 5, 62) Co F. Pidgeon (a)(b)(up to 5. 2. 62) L. T. Pithers (a)(from 19 7, 62) Student Public Health Inspectors:- L. T. Pithers (up to 18. 7. 62), Miss C. R. Hughes , D.R. Roberts , R. C. Martin (from 24. 9. 62) Chief Clerk:- A. H. C. Slade Clerical Staff:- G. W. Bedell J. A. Gilbody Miss M.Sharp Mr s. G, A. Fletcher Mrs. M. Roe R. E.Davis (temporary) Public Analyst:- E. Voelcker. A. R. C. S. , F. R. I. C. Mortuary Keeper:- S. King Public Health Station Keeper:- H. Howe Survey Assistants (Clean Air Act):- Miss B. P. Dimmock, J. Woodman, A. A. Brittle (up to 1 2. 5. 62), Miss A. J. Ferst (from 17.5,62) (a) Public Health Inspector's Certificate. (b) Food Inspector's Certificate. (c) Smoke Inspector's Certificate. (d) Health Visitor's Certificate. (e) State Registered Nurse. (f) State Certified Midwife. 18 POPULATION The Registrar General's estimate of the mid-year population for 1 962 is 98 ,240 , an increase of 1 ,250 over the estimate for the previous year. The natural increase, that is the larger number of births than deaths , would only account for 725 , but Hampstead has for many years had a larger "floating" population than many other local authority areas. The total estimated population is still somewhat smaller than the Census figure for 1961 when the number was 98,844, Although the general London report of the 1961 Census is now published, the detailed report by enumeration areas which was requested for Hampstead has not yet been received and a detailed report on the findings is not therefore included in this report, but some extracts from the tables are included in the statistical section at the end of this report. BIRTHS The number of live births was 1 ,775 , an increase of 55 over the figure for 1961. Of the total, 904 were boys and 871 were girls. The number of live births per 1 ,000 of the population was 18.1 and the adjusted birth rate, which takes account of the proportion of women of child-bearing age and allows comparison with other areas was 13. 8. Of the births, 266 were illegitimate or 15 per cent, of the total. This is an increase of 1.7 per cent, over the previous year, which itself had shown a similar increase over 1960. This rise in illegitimacy is a cause for concern. London as a whole tends to show a higher figure than the rest of the country, partly because unmarried expectant mothers come to London where they are not known and where the facilities are extremely good. Nevertheless the continued increase is substantial and whilst there is no cause for anxiety on purely health grounds, one cannot help but be disturbed on the moral issues involved. The percentages of live births which were illegitimate during the past ten years is given below, but it should perhaps be mentioned that even the highest of these figures is substantially less than the percentages for some other metropolitan boroughs last year. 19 Year Per cent. Year Per cent. 1953 9.6 1958 11.0 1954 9.1 1959 10.7 1955 8.9 1960 11.5 1956 10.0 1961 13.3 1957 9.4 1962 15. 0 The number of stillbirths increased by one to 24, but the stillbirth rate per 1,000 live and stillbirths remains the same at 13. INFANT MORTALITY Twentyeight children under one year of age died and of these sixteen died within the first week. The infant mortality rate (deaths of infants under one year per 1 ,000 live births) remains at 16, which is equal to the lowest rate recorded in Hampstead, DEATHS The number of Hampstead residents who died during 1962 was 1,050, an increase of 75 over the previous year. The death rate of 10, 7 per 1,000 of the population is an increase over the two previous years when the rates were 10.1 and 10.4, There was an increase in the number of deaths from cancer of the lung but the number was no higher than the average over the past five years. The most notable increase in deaths was from heart disease which accounted for 25 per cent, more deaths in 1962 than in 1961. Of these deaths , 67 were in persons in the 20 year age group of 45 to 64 years; 80 were in the ten year group of 65 to 74 years, and 109 were persons of more than 75 years of age. There were no deaths from diphtheria or poliomyelitis and no maternal deaths due to childbirth. The number of deaths from motor vehicle accidents increased sharply from 5 in 1961 to 18 in 1962 and this is in fact the highest figure recorded in the past twelve years. Deaths from other accidents fell by 5 to 16. The number of suicides at 26 is similar to the average over recent years. 20 INFECTIOUS AND OTHER DISEASES The total number of notifications of infectious disease during 1962 was 423, as compared with 1,248 during the previous year. The reduction in number was more than accounted for by the much smaller number of cases of measles and there were increases in the notifications of dysentery, ophthalmia neonatorum and puerperal pyrexia. Smallpox On Christmas Day 1961 a visitor from Pakistan arrived in this country and stayed in the neighbouring borough of St. Pancras. He became unwell and visited a hospital out-patient department in the early hours of December 28th when his condition was diagnosed as smallpox, The tracing of contacts was made more difficult because it was not known immediately that on his journey from Karachi he had changed planes in Paris, At about the same time other cases of smallpox came to light in persons who had travelled from Pakistan or who had been in contact with them, and the position was made more difficult because in some of the earlier cases the patients had died before the disease had developed sufficiently for a firm diagnosis to be made. The matter was given much publicity by the press and the calls for vaccination became so great that special clinics had to be set up in London and in many other parts of the country and at one time there was a temporary shortage of vaccine lymph. In Hampstead a small number of contacts were visited and kept under surveillance but a more difficult task was to try and discover other contacts, natives of Pakistan, who were known to have travelled in the same plane but whose names and addresses were unknown. None was found in Hampstead and no case of smallpox occurred in the Borough. During January, 1962 the number of contacts in Hampstead from cases in other parts of the country and from a small outbreak in Dusseldorf increased and by the end of January notifications were being received through the Ministry of Health of all visitors arriving from Karachi who had given a Hampstead address. There had been 21 some doubt cast upon the accuracy of some of the certificates of vaccination and the authorities at London Airport were taking the greatest precautions to prevent the importation of other cases of smallpox. The notifications of arrivals continued until March and subsequently notifications were received of persons who had travelled by sea and who had been in contact with cases or suspected cases of smallpox in May, August, October and November. In addition to the surveillance of these contacts requests were received from general practitioners to give an opinion on a number of cases presenting symptoms not unlike those of smallpox. As I have said above, no cases of smallpox were found but the diagnosis was sufficiently in doubt to require the advice of one of the Ministry's consultants in three cases. The additional clinics for vaccination were in general organised and staffed by the London County Council; general practitioners also carried out large numbers of vaccinations. . Vaccinations in the Public Health Department were mainly confined to re-vaccination of the staff and of the staff of other departments where there appeared to be more than the usual risk and the vaccination of certain groups of persons where, for one reason or another, this could more conveniently be done by arrangement than by sending the individuals to one of the clinics. Another less serious aspect of the outbreak was that for some months continental countries demanded an international certificate of vaccination for visitors from this country and authentication of the signature of the certifying doctor increased from the usual steady number of about 300 to 400 per year to about 3 ,000 during the first half of 1962. Diphtheria No cases of diphtheria occurred in Hampstead during 1962, although two cases were notified as diphtheria and the corrected diagnosis, in each case, of glandular fever was only made after investigation in hospital. 22 Typhoid and Paratyphoid Fevers Four cases of typhoid fever were notified. One of these was a Spanish girl who had come to this country to work and the other three cases were of persons who had been on holiday in Spain or in the Canary Islands, and developed the disease during or immediately after their return. All the cases made satisfactory recoveries, Seven other people who had been contacts or who had been on similar holidays in Spain were investigated but no evidence of typhoid fever was found, A mother and her seven month old baby who had been on holiday in Spain were found to be suffering from paratyphoid fever. After they had recovered from the disease they continued to excrete the organisms but as the husband, who had remained well, was also excreting similar organisms, the mother and baby were allowed home. They remained well but continued to excrete paratyphoid B organisms for some weeks. The other case of paratyphoid fever occurred in a man who had recently come to this country from Pakistan, The organisms in this case were found to be paratyphoid A, which is less commonly found and the organisms were of an unusual antigenic structure. The patient made a satisfactory recovery. Poliomyelitis Only one case of poliomyelitis occurred in Hampstead during the year, and this was of the non-paralytic type. In one suspected case the diagnosis was not confirmed. Dysentery There was a large increase in the number of cases of dysentery which totalled 62, Of this number 32 were single cases and 21 of them were associated with an outbreak of the disease which occurred at the Gospel Oak Primary School in St, Pancras, In some cases the children were quite ill but all recovered although some continued to excrete the organisms for a long time. 23 The remaining 30 cases were in 8 family outbreaks, the numbers affected in each family ranging from two to six, and during the course of the disease some patients apparently recovered and were re~infected, Ophthalmia Neonatorum There was a large increase in the number of cases of ophthalmia neonatorum notified during the year, 43 as compared with 2 during the previous year. The great majority of cases were notified from a maternity unit attached to one of the teaching hospitals and occurred during a comparatively short period, In only one case was the condition confirmed as due to a genococcal infection. All the cases recovered without injury to the sight. General The other cases of infectious disease do not call for any special comment. Tuberculosis Cases of tuberculosis are shown in a separate table from the other notifiable diseases in the statistical section. The number of cases of non-pulmonary tuberculosis is somewhat less at 11 than in the previous year (16), but there is no indication that this is any real improvement because even this figure is still 2 more than the average for the past ten years. The number of cases of pulmonary tuberculosis is, however, encouraging and the reduction in the number of new cases now appears to be following the trend which has been evident throughout the country as a whole for some years past, The notification of 43 new cases (30 male and 13 female) is the lowest number that has been rprm-rlprl i-n HarrrnstpaH. Figures for the previous years are as follows: - 24  Males Females Total 1931 - 1940 39 40 79 ) 1941 - 1945 56 47 103 ) average 1946 - 1950 51 44 95 ) 1951 - 1955 53 44 97 ) 1956 60 29 89 1957 62 46 108 1958 50 32 82 1959 58 35 93 1960 45 16 61 1961 28 26 54 1962 30 13 43 These numbers are, of course, small and it would be unwise to draw any rigid conclusion from them but it does appear to indicate a very satisfactory trend in the control of tuberculosis in Hampstead MASS X-RAY No visit was paid to Hampstead by the Mobile Unit during 1962, but for the purposes of examination of staff and others whom it was necessary to refer, use was made of the permanent units of the North-West Metropolitan Regional Hospital Board situated at 32 Drayton Park, N. 5 , and Maida Vale (at junction with Carlton Vale, W. 9,) Sessions for both men and women are held as follows:32 Drayton Park Monday 2 p.m. - 4.15 p.m. and 5 p.m. - 7.15 p.m. Tuesday 9.45 a.m. - 12.30 p.m. and 2 p.m. - 5.30 p. m. Wednesday 9.45 a.m. - 12.30 p.m. and 2 p.m. - 5.30 p.m. Thursday 2 p.m. - 4.15 p.m. and 5 p.m. - 7.15 p.m. Maida Vale Monday 2 p.m. - 4.30 p.m. and 5 p.m. - 7.30 p.m. 25 MEDICAL EXAMINATIONS Appointments to the Council's permanent staff are subject to passing a medical examination, which includes a chest X-ray usually carried out by the permanent mass radiography units at Drayton Park and Maida Vale. Examinations are normally carried out by the Medical Officer of Health (or the Deputy Medical Officer of Health in the case of female staff). Seventy-three examinations were undertaken during the year. Thirty-five were in respect of new appointments; 20 were for transfer to the permanent staff; 13 were special reports required because of absence through sickness; 2 were for extension of service; 3 were on behalf of another authority. Six persons were found to be unfit to carry out their duties and were recommended to be placed on superannuation. NATIONAL ASSISTANCE ACT, 1948, SECTION 50 In twenty-three instances the Public Health Department were called upon to arrange the burial of a person who was either without any known relative or the relatives were unable to meet the cost of arranging a private funeral. The total cost of the burials was £268, 1s. 3d. and of this amount £217. 10s. 2d. has so far been recovered from the estates of the deceased, from relatives, or from death grants, Frequently, the circumstances of these cases are very distressing and the service rendered by the Department is one which is generally very much appreciated by the friends and relatives of the deceased as evidence by the letters received from time to time, CARE OF THE AGED Out of the large number of elderly people living in Hampstead, only a small proportion, estimated at about 5 per cent, of them, are in need of the services which are provided by the local authorities or voluntary bodies. Many old people, particularly those who have been self employed, 26 continue at work long after the usual age for retirement and it has been found that old people who are in good health usually prefer to continue in employment. As a general rule old people who continue to work are more active in mind and body than those who do not, but it is not always easy to decide whether they are in good health because they work, or whether they work because they are in good health. There can, however, be no doubt that old people who have not worked for some time and who come to the Old People's Workshop, which is run by the Hampstead Old People's Welfare Association, where they can do work suited to their capacity in congenial surroundings, do improve in health both mentally and physically. It is equally true that a certain number of old people who have looked after themselves reasonably adequately, when admitted to an old people's home where they have no responsibilities , die in a very short time. The aim of the local authority services should, therefore, be to give support to the old people so that they can live comfortably and happily in their own homes but that the services provided should not be so complete as to remove their interest in, or their responsibility for, their own well-being. It is on this basis that the local authority services have been developed. The home help service in particular is designed to help in the running of the home with a certain amount of cleaning, shopping and cooking, dealing especially with the heavier tasks. The other services including nursing, meals-on-wheels, the visiting service provided by the Old People's Welfare Association and the incontinent laundry service are also intended to be supportive services and all of them either singly or combined are not intended to provide complete care but to make it reasonably possible, in the particular circumstances, for the old people to continue to live in their own homes and to look after themselves. I greatly appreciate the services provided by the London County Council, the National Assistance Board and the various voluntary organisations which have eased the task of the Borough Council enormously. I must also mention the great kindness and help which is shown by neighbours and which is often of much greater value than is generally appreciated. Old people often have difficulty in maintaining their standards as their strength and agility diminish 27 and in these circumstances even a very slight illness such as a bad cold which forces them to forego the ordinary household duties for a few days , may be quite sufficient to bring about a reduction in the standards which is never really recovered. A little neighbourly help at these times is quite invaluable. Old people who are in need of help are not, of course, always "nice old people" and in many cases they have alienated their friends and relatives by their bad temper or bad habits. This is where a voluntary visitor who can and will show some friendliness and interest in spite of what is often obvious ingratitude, can do much to improve the lives of these difficult old people. National Assistance Act, 1948. Section 47 Under this section the Council is empowered to apply to the Court for an Order for the removal of an old person to a hospital or an old people's home if they are living in insanitary circumstances and are unable to devote to themselves and are not receiving from other people proper care and attention. A number of these cases arise every year, but the old people can often be persuaded to take advantage of the facilities provided without having to apply to the Courts for an Order. Fortunately, during 1962 all the cases where removal was necessary were persuaded to go voluntarily either into hospital or into an old people's home, and it was not necessary to make application to the Court. In one instance the Council gave authority for application to be made to the Court but before the date of the hearing the old lady was persuaded to go voluntarily into an old people's home. In one case where an old lady was living in insanitary circumstances it was necessary to get authority from the Council to apply for an Order for her to be taken to the Cleansing Station to be cleaned and for her clothing to be disinfested and cleansed under the provisions of the Public Health (London) Act, 1936. Again, with a good deal of difficulty it was possible to persuade the lady to go voluntarily to the Cleansing Station and an application to the Court was unnecessary. PUBLIC HEALTH LAUNDRY The number of persons requiring the assistance of the Public 28 Health Laundry has remained fairly constant over the last two years and has varied between 24 and 30. At 31st December, 1962 two of the patients had been having the laundry service for more than three years, three for more than two years and three for more than one year. Many people have written expressing their appreciation of this most worth while service which is such a boon to aged persons who are unable to cope with the difficult problem of soiled laundry. The soiled articles are collected, laundered and delivered twice a week, and the total number of articles dealt with during the year was 13, 163. DISINFECTION AND DISINFESTATION During the year, 118 rooms were disinfected after infectious disease in 82 premises and a total of 6,102 articles were passed through the steam chamber. This figure includes a regular weekly collection from one hospital of approximately 100 blankets. There is still a demand for the disinfection of parcels of clothing prior to dispatch abroad and 93 parcels belonging to private individuals were disinfected to comply with regulations in the receiving countries. The normal charge for this service is 5s. Od. per parcel. A total of 135 rooms in 63 premises were treated for various types of infestation during 1962. In addition to the ordinary disinfection or disinfestation of premises, 31 filthy or verminous rooms were cleared after the death or removal of the occupant. SANITARY CIRCUMSTANCES Water Supply All the drinking water used in the Borough is supplied by the Metropolitan Water Board. There are no private wells in use. Examination of the water supply is only carried out after receipt of a complaint or if there is any reason to suspect the purity of any particular supply. 29 The water supply to the whole of the Borough has been satisfactory both in quality and quantity. No samples of raw water have been examined. Two samples of drinking water submitted for bacteriological examination and one for chemical analysis proved satisfactory. No form of contamination of the water supply was found which required any action by the Council. All the dwelling houses in the Borough have a piped supply direct to the houses and none is supplied by stand-pipes. Sewerage All the houses in Hampstead are connected to the main drainage system, the sewerage passing eventually to the London County Council's main sewers and to the sewage disposal works outside the Borough. No new schemes for sewerage within the Borough are contemplated at the present time. Barbers and Hairdressers Forty inspections were made of barbers premises and in no instance was it found necessary to serve written notice, such minor defects as were found being dealt with on the Inspector's verbal requests Eighty-nine premises are registered under Section 18 of the London County Council (General Powers) Act, 1954. Shops Act, 1950 Lighting, washing facilities, facilities for taking meals, temperature, ventilation and sanitary conveniences are mainly the responsibility of the Borough Council although the London County Council operates such powers in respect of seven premises licensed for public entertainment. No contraventions were reported. The Rag Flock and Other Filling Materials Act, 1951 There is one firm in the Borough registered for the use of filling materials used in manufacturing bedding and other articles 30 of upholstery. The premises are satisfactory. Common Lodging Houses There are no common lodging houses in the Borough. General Public Health Inspection A summary of the work of the Public Health Inspectors in connection with complaints and nuisances, inspections of schools, public buildings, bombed sites, private roads and passageways, drainage work, factories, etc. will be found in the Statistical Section. PREVENTION OF DAMAGE BY PESTS ACT, 1949 Destruction of Rats and Mice - Surface Treatment There has been little change in the trend of surface rat infestations over previous years. Complaints did increase by some 1 per cent. but were confirmed in only 198 cases as compared with 210 in 1961. Similar circumstances have prevailed regarding the treatment of mice infested dwellings which totalled 362 as compared with 361. Looking back over the last 10 years reveals that in 1952 the comparative figures for rats were 169 and mice 376. During the intervening years the lowest recorded figures were in 1955, 110 and 301 respectively, and the highest in 1959 with 412 for rats and 429 for mice. Otherwise the picture presented was very much as it is today. Orthodox treatments recommended by the Ministry have continued to be used with satisfactory results. In 6 cases it was necessary to repair or renew drainage systems, A table showing the summary of surface treatments appears in the Statistical Section. 31 Control of Rats in Sewers I am indebted to the Borough Engineer and Surveyor for particulars in regard to the control of rats in sewers. The Department concerned carries out its own treatments but works in close harmony with the Public Health Department and cooperates most readily in the supply of information concerning progress, etc. During the year, tenders were invited for the treatment of sewers with Fluoracetamide. The comparative cost was considerably greater than anticipated and consequently the scheme did not go into operation during 1962. Reliance was once again placed in Zinc Phosphide and Arsenious Oxide. The numbers of complete and partial takes was higher than in 1961 , the complete figures being given in the Statistical Section. It is anticipated that Fluoracetamide will be used by the Council's operators in 1963. Three treatments at 4 monthly intervals have been suggested with unpoisoned baiting prior to the third operation, ATMOSPHERIC POLLUTION Smoke Control Areas The map reproduced shows Hampstead sub-divided into 12 areas for smoke control. Copies of this map have been issued in some numbers to various departments of the Gas and Electricity Boards , to fuel merchants and to other interested parties and it will be seen that the Council's published programme had a target date of 1968 for completion of the programme. Closer reference to the table of dates will show that Area No. 5 was to be operative in 1963, and while this has been accomplished it is now known that the planned timing of Nos. 6 and 7 will be set back to 1964. In spite of this a very close look at this aspect of the Department's work has encouraged the Council to ask for a marked acceleration of the programme and every effort is to be made to complete the programme so that the whole of Hampstead is smoke controlled by 1965. It is hoped that with the assistance of an 32 additional smoke inspector and by following a more carefully planned and more consistent and economical order of progression it will prove possible to secure the orders affecting Areas 6, 7 and 8 in 1964, and the final four in 1965. The decision that a defined part of the Borough shall become smokeless is taken by the Council. The Control Order, however, is subject to confirmation by the Minister of Housing and Local Government and it is he who sets the date on which the order shall become operative. This is the date after which the emission of smoke constitutes an offence and the time lapse between confirmation and actual enforcement is never less than six months. It is during this six months that all the necessary replacements and alterations to fireplaces are supposed to be effected. It is now clear that the No. 3 Order was under publicized and that knowledge of it was slow in gaining ground. In consequence, requests for advice on heating arrangements and applications for grants started slowly and continued late. In contrast a very determined effort was made to notify householders in Area No. 4 and a considerable number of queries and applications were received as soon as the Minister's confirmation was made known. As a result, the staff found themselves directly involved in implementing both of these Control Orders at the same time and I know they were hard pressed during the summer months. It is to their credit that this unexpected "bulge" was dealt with effectively and with very few cases of delay and that at the same time they completed the survey for Area No. 5, which has subsequently been confirmed for operation on 1st October, 1963. It might have been thought that any doubts as to whether or not this work with all its frustrations was worth while would have been resolved by the great fog which enveloped London for over three days in the first week of December, but because smoke control as now practised does not deal specifically with sulphur compounds, much publicity was given to the view that clearing the air of smoke is a waste of time, effort and money. The elimination of sulphur pollution from the air we breathe is clearly to be desired but inasmuch as a winter fog in London is water vapour containing quantities of black filth plus some sulphur based irritants, most people will consider that elimination of the black filth is in itself worth some effort. 33 Smoke Nuisances Complaints continue to diminish and are usually speedily rectified after a call by the smoke inspector. The most persistent complaints refer to emission from one of our hospitals which is shortly to be demolished and rebuilt. Otherwise, the usual crop of complaints concerning nuisances from the burning of garden and other refuse has been dealt with, HEALTH EXHIBITION When the first smoke control areas were being surveyed a public meeting was called so that members of the public should have an opportunity of expressing their views on the Council's proposals and it was hoped that this might avoid the necessity for a public inquiry. The meeting was held at the Town Hall and in conjunction with it a small exhibition was prepared with the assistance of the Gas and Electricity Boards, In the latter half of 1961 the Public Health Committee agreed that another exhibition should be held. It was considered that in view of the cost of preparation it should remain open for a week and it was felt that the opportunity should be taken to show some aspects of the other health services provided by the Council in addition to the prevention of atmospheric pollution, The exhibition was held from 7th to 14th April, 1962 at the Town Hall, The small hall was devoted to clean air and apart from the Public Health Department's stand which dealt with the Council's work in this field, stands were prepared by the National Coal Board, the London Electricity Board, the North Thames Gas Board and the Solid Smokeless Fuels Federation, The Department's stand showed how atmospheric pollution is measured and gave details of the programme for Hampstead and full information on all aspects of the problem, A feature which attracted a good deal of attention was a "juke box" which in addition to giving information by question and answer on specially made records, also allowed the selection of some of the more popular musical records and this was much appreciated by some of the visitors. Rather surprisingly, the younger visitors generally preferred the 34 information and the adults frequently selected the musical records. The commercial exhibitors showed a wide variety of appliances, many of them in actual operation, suitable for use with solid smokeless fuels, gas and electricity. The large hall was taken up with commercial exhibits and stands relating to the health services of the Council. The arrangement of the stands which was designed by the Housing Architect and his staff provided for a one-way flow through the whole of the exhibition and made the fullest use of the somewhat restricted space for an exhibition of this kind. The unusual lay-out provided a very attractive change from the ordinary run of commercial exhibitions and was favourably commented upon by members of the public, the press and technical and professional journals and associations. Credit is due to all the members of the Council's staff who cooperated most enthusiastically in the effort to focus attention upon the various health and allied services administered by the Borough Council and the London County Council. Originality was the keynote of the exhibition and the Architect's striking lay-out was fully supported by the ingenuity and initiative used by the staff in the preparation and display of the actual exhibits demonstrating the theme of the exhibition - "At Home in Hampstead". This title was chosen because it is in the home that the basis of health must be laid. Material things such as houses, food and smoking fires can be controlled by law but it is only by knowing the reason for doing (or not doing) certain things that people can be persuaded to lead healthy, enjoyable lives. Emphasis was naturally placed on the need for care on the part of everyone connected with the preparation of food and this was most engagingly demonstrated in the stand prepared by the Public Health Laboratory Service at Colindale - "Food Poisoning and its Prevention". Once more, I am indebted to Dr. Betty Hobbs and her staff for their encouraging support. The following exhibitors had stands in the large hall:- Public Health Department Stand. Ministry of Agriculture , Fisheries and Food Stand. Plan of Exhibition. 35 The Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food, Marks and Spencer Ltd. J.Sainsbury, Ltd, Rentokil Ltd. National Dairymen's Association. Domestos Ltd. National Assistance Board, The British Automatic Co. Ltd. Consumer Research Association. The Perfect Flavour Ice Cream Co. Ltd. In addition to the Public Health Laboratory stand the following stands were devised by the Council and the London County Council:- Public Libraries Department. Housing Architect's Department. Baths and Washhouses Department. Public Health Department. Public Analyst. London County Council (Home Safety). Home ownership, improvement and repairs comprised an important section of the exhibition. Information as to loans for the purchase of properties and grants for their improvement, conversion and repair was freely available. In the entrance hall a "television screen" (kindly loaned to us by J. Sainsbury, Ltd.) showed constantly changing pictures of Hampstead and the work of the Public Health Inspectorate. These pictures were supplied from photos taken by the inspectors themselves during their daily routine. Film shows were arranged and competitions for school children for which a generous prize list was donated by many local firms. Organised parties of school children were escorted around the exhibition and judging by subsequent "quizzes" it was obvious that the visit had made some considerable impact upon them. The organisation and presentation of an exhibition on this scale obviously entails a very considerable burden of work on all concerned and I am very grateful indeed to everyone who contributed to making 36 this, in the words of one of my visiting colleagues - the best health exhibition he had seen, HOUSING Slum Clearance No proposals have been made to the Minister of Housing and Local Government for comprehensive slum clearance for the period up to and including 1965. There are various important redevelopment proposals embracing large areas of the Borough including the Netherwood Street area, which has in the past been considered for Slum Clearance but was not at that time representable. A number of individual linfit premises still remain to be considered and these will be dealt with as and when the rehousing problem involved can be dealt with. Underground Rooms It is estimated that there are some 4,000 basement or subbasements in Hampstead which fall within the purview of the new Regulations. All complaints regarding underground rooms are investigated with a view to their being brought up to a standard conforming with the Regulations. This is sometimes impracticable owing to difficulties of temporarily rehousing occupiers whilst the rooms are rendered fit. All conversions involving basements are reported upon by the Public Health Inspectors and opportunity is taken at this stage to make the rooms comply with the Regulations. As these Regulations are comparatively new I have again set them out in full to assist architects, surveyors, builders and others concerned in making underground room fit, "REGULATIONS prescribed by the Mayor, Aldermen and Councillors of the Metropolitan Borough of Hampstead for securing the proper ventilation and lighting of rooms to which sub-section (2) of Section 18 of the Housing Act, 1957 applies, and the protection thereof against dampness, effluvia or exhalation. 37 Every room, used or suitable for use for human habitation, the surface of the floor of which is more than three feet below the surface of the part of the Street adjoining or nearest the room, or more than three feet below the surface of any ground within nine feet of the room, shall comply with the following regulations, that is to say: - Drainage 1. The subsoil of the site of the room shall be effectually drained wherever the dampness of the site renders this necessary. 2. No subsoil drain shall discharge into a soil drain except through a suitable trap. 3. Every drain passing through the room, and every drain or sewer passing under the room other than a subsoil drain, shall be gastight and watertight. Floors 4. The floor of the room shall be of such material or materials and construction as adequately to resist the passage of moisture or exhalation from the ground. Walls 5. The walls of the room shall either be of such material and construction, or shall have been so treated, as adequately to resist the passage of moisture to their inner surface, or to any timber or other material forming part of the building that would be harmfully affected by dampness. Ventilation and Lighting 6. The room shall have a window or windows as specified in paragraph (i) of this regulation for the purposes of ventilation, and in paragraph (ii) for the purposes of lighting:- (i) One or more windows which can be opened at the top directly into the external air to an extent equivalent in aggregate area to not less than onetwentieth of the area of the floor of the room. (ii) One or more windows having an aggregate area clear of the window frame amounting to not less than onetenth of the area of the floor of the room, and so 38 situated that from any point thereon, or, if the total window area exceeds the foregoing minimum requirement, from any point on a part or parts thereof which satisfy that requirement, a line can be drawn upwards at an angle of thirty degrees with the horizontal in a vertical plane at right angles to the plane of the window without intercepting any obstruction except an open fence within a distance of ten feet measured horizontally from the window. For this purpose a bay window with side lights shall be deemed to be a flat window equal in area to the sum of the areas of the front and side lights, situated at a distance from the face of the wall from which it projects equal to half the maximum depth of the projection. 7. Immediately outside any window provided in pursuance of these regulations there shall be an unobstructed space which shall conform with the following requirements: - (i) The space shall extend throughout the entire width of the window and (except where the area of such window is not less than one-seventh of the area of the floor of the room) for two feet on each side of the window. (ii) The space shall in every part extend for not less than two feet from the external wall of the room except that, where the window is a bay window with side lights , the depth of the space in front of that window may be reduced to not less than one foot. (iii) If the space is below the general level of the ground within nine feet from the window so much of it as satisfies the foregoing requirements of this regulation shall be properly paved with impervious material and effectually drained, and the paved surface shall be at least six inches below the level of the bottom of the sill of the window. Nothing in this Regulation shall probit the placing in or over such open space of any steps necessary for access to any part of the building in which the room is contained, provided they are not placed over or across any window satisfying the requirements of the preceding Regulations. 39 8, From and after the date on which the Minister of Housing and Local Government consents to the foregoing regulations the Regulations under Section 17(7) which were prescribed by the Mayor, Aldermen and Councillors of the Metropolitan Borough of Hampstead on 4th May, 1911 , and consented to by the Minister on 5th July, 1911 , shall be revoked, " Housing Act, 1961. Houses in Multiple Occupation and Improvement of Houses This very important housing legislation has received the close and energetic attention of the Council and its Housing and Public Health Committees throughout the year. A pilot survey was instituted. This consisted of two parts (a) a general survey of properties in Sumatra Road to ascertain those capable of being improved with the aid of Standard and/or Discretionary Improvement Grants and (b) a survey covering the rest of the Borough in known cases of multiple occupation. The total number of premises covered in the pilot survey up to the end of the year was 75. The survey continued in 1963- The immediate action taken as a result of the various inspections was that the Council decided to make Management Orders under Section 12 of the Act on the six worst cases reported. These were:- 4 Downside Crescent 3 and 5 Heath Hurst Road 48 Parliament Hill 73 Priory Road 2 Rosslyn Hill. The orders have since been served and accepted without opposition by the owners and persons having control of the properties. On the question of the provision of essential facilities under Section 15, the Council decided that all houses falling short of a standard of facilities laid down by a Code of Practice suggested by the Metropolitan Boroughs' Standing Joint Committee, should in the first place be the subject of an informal approach to the landlords 40 with the aim of seeking their cooperation in the provision of these facilities. The following table shows the position at the conclusion of the first survey:- Type of Amenity No. of unsatisfactory lettings % of unsatisfactory lettings Inadequate provision of bath/showers 51 13. 35 Absence of hot water supply 117 30, 06 Absence of cold water supply 66 17. 28 Inadequate provision of sinks 60 15. 70 Insufficient W, C, accommodation 32 8. 37 Inadequate food storage facilities 156 40. 84 Inadequate or unsuitable space heating facilities 32 8. 37 Informal action was instituted forthwith and I have been most agreeably impressed with the response thereto. The question of the provision of a hot water supply particularly, is one which I anticipate would be the subject of some contention, but this did not appear to be the case. The main problemsin this connection have been associated with elderly tenants who felt unable to cope with the intricacies of modern hot water fitments. In two cases , the owners were prepared to provide bathrooms but tenants have been unwilling to\ have them. Generally, we have not been able to make much progress with th$ provision of bathrooms owing to tenants having to relinquish part of their accommodation in order to provide the necessary room for a bath. One of the difficulties in encouraging owners of tenement properties to apply for Improvement Grants is the problem of grant for a bathroom which must be "for the exclusive use of one particulai family". No Grant is available where bathrooms are shared. On overcrowding, thirteen cases were reported, six being from one house well known to the Department as being a "clearing house" for Asian immigrants. All the cases were dealt with by the 41 giving of Directions to Prevent or Reduce Overcrowding in accordance with Section 19 of the Act. The effect of this is that vacancies occurring on persons leaving the property cannot be filled until the number of residents is reduced to the specified limit. The hardship of immediate eviction is avoided, as is also the evil of perpetuating overcrowding. The attention of all the large land owners and estate agents in Hampstead and surrounding areas has been drawn to the main provisions of the Act regarding both houses in multiple occupation and improvement grant facilities. They have also been sent a copy of the Code of Practice previously referred to and which I set out in full for the benefit of those concerned: - "Housing Act, 1961 - Section 15 Works to be executed to houses in multiple occupation Code of Practice adopted by the Council 1. - NATURAL LIGHTING (a) Every habitable room shall be provided and maintained with a window or windows opening directly to the external air, capable of being opened to at least one-half of the extent of the window, and having,where practicable, a total area (exclusive of the sash frames) equal to at least one-tenth of the floor area of the room. (b) In underground (basement) rooms the area of the window, equal to one-tenth of the floor area of the room, must be above the point where a line drawn downwards at an angle of 30° to the horizontal plane, from the highest point of any obstruction within 10 feet of the window, passes through the window opening, as required by the Council's Underground Room Regulations. (c) Wherever practicable every common staircase shall be provided and maintained with adequate means of natural lighting and, in the case of the reconstruction in part or entire of an existing building, or of a new building constructed for multiple occupation, with a window or windows with a total superficial area clear of the sash frames of not less than four square feet 42 on the staircase at each storey above the lowest storey and opening directly to the external air. 2. - ARTIFICIAL LIGHTING (a) Every habitable room, hall, passage, bathroom and water closet shall be provided and maintained with suitable means for securing adequate artificial lighting either by electricity or gas. (b) There shall be provided and maintained adequate means for the artificial lighting of all common staircases and passages by means of either electricity or gas as required by the Council's Byelaws as to artificial lighting of common staircases in tenement houses and flats. Artificial lighting controlled by a suitable system of retracting switches or other similar devices shall be deemed to be adequate. 3. - VENTILATION Every room, hall, passage, staircase, bathroom and water closet apartment shall be provided and maintained with adequate means of ventilation. 4. - WATER SUPPLY A proper and sufficient supply of water for drinking purposes from the mains of the Metropolitan Water Board or other suitable sources shall be provided and maintained. The premises shall be deemed to be without a proper and sufficient supply unless:- (a) such supply is provided within the room or one of the rooms in the separate occupation of each family; (b) in the case of a hostel, boarding house, guest house, boarding school or similar establishment, such supply is reasonably accessible to the occupants of each room used for sleeping, (Note - The Metropolitan Water Board's Byelaws require the provision of a stop tap to each chargeable supply, and it is 43 suggested that in addition a stop tap be provided for each floor or separate letting. ) 5 - PERSONAL WASHING FACILITIES (1) In each letting there shall be provided a hot and cold water supply at a wash-hand basin or at a sink. There shall also be provided in connection with each letting a fixed bath or shower in a bathroom with hot and cold water. Where it is impracticable for the bathroom to be within the dwelling, it shall be in such a position within the curtilage of the building as to be readily accessible from the letting, In such cases, wherever practicable, regard shall be had to the mention in the Ministry of Housing and Local Government Circular 16/62 of a suggested scale of provision of two baths or one bath and one shower per ten persons. In any event, the minimum provision shall be in the ratio of one fixed bath or shower to ten persons irrespective of age. (2) In the case of a hostel, boarding house, guest house, boarding school or similar establishment there shall be two baths (or one bath and one shower) each with separate hot and cold water supplies for every ten residents, 6. - DRAINAGE AND SANITARY CONVENIENCES (1) Suitable and sufficient water closet accommodation shall be provided and maintained for the use of each family by whom any part of the premises is occupied and so far as is practicable on the storey or one of the storeys in which are situate the rooms or lodgings in the separate occupation of the family. In determining the amount of water closet accommodation to be provided, regard shall be had to the standard of two water closets for every ten residents, as recommended by the Ministry of Housing and Local Government in Circular 16/62, and in any case the sanitary accommodation shall be deemed insufficient if:- (a) each water closet is not provided in a separate compartment; (b) each water closet is not reasonably accessible to the persons for whom it is intended; (c) in cases (ii) and (iii) below, it does not provide one water closet for every eight persons irrespective of age; or 44 (d) it fails to provide a minimum of one water closet for (i) each letting of four rooms or more; (ii) every two separate lettings of two or three rooms; or (iii) every three separate single room lettings. (2) In the case of:- (a) a hostel, boarding house, guest house, or similar establishment there shall be a minimum of one water closet within a separate compartment for every eight persons, sited so as to be conveniently accessible in relation to sleeping rooms; (b) a boarding school there shall be a minimum of one water closet within a separate compartment for every five pupils. 7. - FACILITIES FOR THE STORAGE AND PREPARATION AND COOKING OF FOOD AND FOR THE DISPOSAL OF WASTE WATER The provision inside each separate dwelling (as distinct from a staircase or landing in common use), of adequate facilities for cooking food, and a food cupboard ventilated to the external air and of dimensions not less than: - One-room dwelling 3 cu. ft. A two-room dwelling 4 cu. ft. A three-room dwelling 6 cu. ft. A dwelling comprising more than 3 rooms 8 cu. ft. (These requirements relate to separate dwellings in family occupation. In the case of bed-sitting rooms in use as bachelor apartments, facilities for storing, preparing and cooking food are normally not necessary, and in such circumstances these provisions will not be required. ) 8. - INSTALLATION FOR SPACE HEATING OR FOR THE USE OF SPACE HEATING APPLIANCES (a) In each unfurnished letting there shall be provided an approved fireplace capable of burning solid smokeless fuel or an 45 adequate number of suitable points to which electric or gas space heating appliances with adequate ventilation where necessary can be attached, or (b) in each furnished letting there shall be provided an approved fireplace capable of burning solid smokeless fuel or an adequate number of space heating appliances. (c) A system of central heating, providing adequate space heating to each letting at all time s , will be deemed sufficient. (d) Where an approved solid fuel fired appliance is in use, adequate fuel storage facilities shall be provided and maintained. 9. - PROVISION OF MEANS OF ESCAPE FROM FIRE A house or part of a house which is let in multiple occupation shall be provided with such means of escape from fire as the Council, after consultation with the London County Council, considers necessary. 0. - REFUSE AND LITTER There shall be provided and maintained in a house let in multiple occupation an adequate number of suitable refuse containers , so sited as to be readily accessible to the Council's refuse collecting service. 1. - OVERCROWDING (a) The maximum number of persons who may occupy any room or rooms as a separate family, shall not exceed the number permitted under the Housing Act, 195 7 (Section 77) and the Sixth Schedule to that Act, That is to say - A room or rooms occupied by a separate family shall be deemed to be overcrowded when the number of persons sleeping therein either - (i) is such that any two of those persons, being persons ten years old or more of opposite sexes, and not 46 being persons living together as husband and wife, must sleep in the same room; or (ii) is in excess of the number of units specified in Table I in relation to the number of rooms; or the aggregate number of units for all the rooms specified in Table II whichever is the less. TABLE I Where a dwelling consists of:- (a) One room 2 units (b) Two rooms 3 units (c) Three rooms 5 units (d) Four rooms 7½units (e) Five rooms or more 10 units, with an additional 2 units in respect of each room in excess of five. TABLE I Where a dewlling consists of:- (a) 110 sq. ft. or more 2 units (b) 90 sq.ft. or more, but less than 110 sq.ft. 1½ units (c) 70 sq.ft. or more, but less than 90 sq.ft. 1 unit (d) 50 sq.ft. or more, but less than 70 sq.ft. ½ unit (e) under 50 sq. ft. NIL In computing the number of rooms for the purpose of Table I, rooms having a floor area of less than 50 sq. ft. are to be disregarded. In Tables I and II 1 unit = a person ten years old and over. ½ unit = a child 1 year old and over, but under 10 years old. No account shall be taken of a child under 1 year old. 47 (b) Subject to Section 90 of the Housing Act, 1957, in the case of a hostel boarding house, guest house, boarding school or similar establishment, the maximum number of persons who mayoccupy any room wholly or partly used as a sleeping apartment shall be such as to allow not less than 400 cubic feet of free air space for each person, " A "housing team" is being set up within the Department for the specific purpose of continuing inspections of houses in multiple occupation, This has been reinforced by the appointment of an additional inspector especially for the purpose of stepping-up the rate of inspections and subsequently supervising the works entailed thereby. INSPECTION AND SUPERVISION OF FOOD Food and Drugs Act, 1955, Food Hygiene (General) Regulations, I960 The "self-service" system in food shops is continually extending and is now being applied with modification to the smaller one-man type of business, where its adoption may well be its only chance of survival, unless the demand for "personal service" should return. Now that the prepacking of almost every kind of food has reached such proportions, the public seem to prefer to select their own goods and possibly save a few pence by taking advantage of price wars between rival "multiples" in spite of the obvious criticisms and limitations of the system, It follows that the proper labelling of all food commodities is now of paramount importance and demands a much greater degree of control by the Department to ensure that: - 1. - the origin of the prepacked goods is disclosed; 2. - wherever possible, the date of prepacking of perishable goods is indicated (this requirement is, of course, nullified if actual "shelf" conditions in retailers shops are unsatisfactory); 3. - the labels are not so illustrated and the contents described that the purchaser forms an incorrect assessment of what is offered. The Public Analyst has criticised the descriptions of a number of foods during the year. These have subsequently been amended to 48 comply with legislation or the foods withdrawn from sale, The Public Health Committee again considered the problem of (1) prohibiting dogs in food shops; (2) the unsatisfactory display of "open food" in places likely to lead to its contamination; and (3) the encouragement of the use by food traders in premises having no rear or side entrances of the "paper sack" system of refuse collection, The following letter, signed personally by the Chairman of the Public Health Committee, Mr. Councillor Geoffrey Finsberg, M. B, E. , J. P, was sent to over 500 local shopkeepers: - "The Hampstead Borough Council is anxious to ensure that the conditions under which food is displayed and sold in shops are of the highest possible standard. In Hampstead, the shopkeepers themselves generally keep to a very high standard which is not always followed by the general public who are their customers and I am making this personal appeal to you to ask for your cooperation in inviting the public to follow the example which you yourself set. There are two major ways in which you can help: - 1. - SMOKING. It is already an offence for a food handler to smoke in any food room where there is open food or whilst handling open food and although this is of somewhat less consequence in a customer who should not normally handle any food intended for other people, it is nevertheless most undesirable and I should appreciate if it you would display a notice asking customers to refrain from smoking whilst in the shop. A suggested notice is enclosed and I would also suggest that an ash-tray or sand-bin might be provided under the notice where cigarette ends can be disposed of safely if customers are already smoking when they enter the shop. 2. - DOGS, It is most undesirable that dogs or indeed any animals should be allowed to come in contact with any food intended 49 for human consumption and some shopkeepers already will not allow dogs to be brought into their premises. Whilst some other shopkeepers might feel there would be some objection to making an absolute prohibition, I am confident that all are public spirited enough to make a request to their customers and I am, therefore, enclosing a notice which could be displayed on or near the door and I hope you will use it if you do not already have a similar notice. In addition to these two ways of trying to influence public opinion, I enclose a copy of Part III of the Food Hygiene (General) Regulations, I960, which require, as you will observe, inter alia, the 'taking of all such precautions as are reasonably practicable to avoid risk of contamination'. In this connection, I would suggest that any food which is not in sealed containers should not be displayed unless at least 18" from the ground and this particularly applies where there is a self-service or partial self-service arrangement. You will appreciate only too well that however clean the floor is kept it must become dusty during the day and that small children as well as dogs take a great interest in articles at eye level! I feel sure that I can count on your wholehearted cooperation and I would ask you to fill in and return the enclosed reply slip in the stamped envelope giving particularly any comments or difficulties which you anticipate and any suggestions on the wording of the notices. " FOOD HYGIENE (GENERAL) REGULATIONS, I960. PART III Requirements relating to persons engaged in the handling of food. Food to be protected from risk of contamination 8. - A person who engages in the handling of food shall, while so engaged, take all such steps as may be reasonably necessary to protect the food from risk of contamination, and in particular (without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing) - (a) shall not so place the food as to involve any risk of ination; (b) shall not in or about any forecourt, yard, market or stall place 50 any food lower than eighteen inches from the ground unless it is adequately protected by other means from risk of c ontamination; (c) shall comply with the requirements of the next three following regulations. Personal cleanliness 9. - A person who engages in the handling of food shall, while so engaged (a) keep as clean as may be reasonably practicable all parts of his person which are liable to come into contact with the food; (b) keep as clean as may be reasonably practicable all parts of his clothing, overclothing or overalls which are liable to come into contact with the food; (c) keep any open cut or abrasion on any exposed part of his person covered with a suitable waterproof dressing; (d) refrain from spitting; (e) refrain from the use of tobacco or any other smoking mixture or snuff while he is handling any open food or is in any food room in which there is open food, Carrying of food and wrapping, etc. of open food 10. - A person who engages in the handling of food shall not whileso engaged (a) carry any food in a vehicle or container along with any article from which there is a risk of contamination of the food, or with any live animal or live poultry, without taking all such precautions as are reasonably practicable to avoid risk of contamination, and in particular (without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing) shall not allow any live animal or live poultry to come into contact with meat or fish; (b) use for wrapping or containing any open food any paper or other wrapping material or container which is not clean or which is liable to contaminate the food, and in particular (without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing) shall not allow any printed material, other than printed material designed exclusively for wrapping or containing food, to come into contact with any food other than uncooked vegetables Persons suffering from certain infections 11. - (1) Subject to the provisions of this regulation, as soon as 51 any person engaged in the handling of food becomes aware that he is suffering from, or is the carrier of, typhoid fever, paratyphoid fever or any other salmonella infection or dysentery or any staphylococcal infection likely to cause food poisoning, he shall forthwith give notice of the fact to the person carrying on the food business who shall immediately after receipt of the notice notify the appropriate medical officer of health accordingly. Provided that where the person required to give such notice is himself the person carrying on the food business he shall give notice immediately to the appropriate medical officer of health. (2) For the purposes of this regulation the appropriate medical officer of health is - (a) in the case of a person engaged in the handling of food at or from food premises, the medical officer of health of the district in which the premises are situated; and (b) in any other case either the medical officer of health of the district in which the person to whom the notice relates resides or the medical officer of health of the district in which the food business is situated, (3) For the purposes of the last foregoing paragraph a food business which is carried on from a ship shall be deemed to be situated in the district or port health district in which the ship is for the time being moored. To the Chairman of the Public Health Committee. 98a, Avenue Road, N. W. 3. From I am glad to play my part in the campaign to raise the general standards of hygiene and am willing to display the "Smoking"/"Dogs" Notice(s). I am not prepared to display the notices concerning "Smoking" and "Dogs". REMARKS: Date Signed 52 The response was reasonably encouraging and resulted in many shopkeepers agreeing to display "No Smoking" and "Dogs" notices on the premises. Further approach was also made to the Metropolitan Boroughs' Standing Joint Committee and the Association of Municipal Corporations suggesting amendment of the Food Hygiene Regulations to include the prohibition of dogs in food shops and to ensure that no food not completely enclosed should be placed less than 18 inches from the ground. The Association considered that both matters should be encouraged by "voluntary action" and "persuasion" rather than by legislation. Thirty-five of the 103 traders having no rear or side entrances to their premises agreed to adopt the paper sack system of refuse collection and further efforts are being made to increase this number. This method of refuse collection is obviously-to be preferred from a hygiene point of view where refuse has to be carried through food premises. As usual, the Council's Food Inspector has been active during the Easter, Whitsun and August Bank Holiday Fairs on Hampstead Heath. All food stalls are regularly inspected and samples of the produce taken, No less than 119 samples of food were obtained, of which 65 were for bacteriological examination and 54 for chemical analysis. Bacteriologically, three soft ice creams, one ice cream and one sample of whelks were not up to standard and chemically one soft ice cream and two dairy ice creams adversely reported upon. The attention of the vendors was drawn to each of the unsatisfactory samples, Generally speaking, it is obvious that the supervision of the food stalls on the Heath and the highway has resulted in a greatly improved standard of food hygiene and distribution. In connection with the storage, preparation and sale of food generally, I would mention that Hampstead residents now have the benefit of a very energetic Consumer Council Group who are doing a great deal to foster a keen and discriminating public opinion on food matters. 53 STATISTICAL SUMMARY Area of Borough 2,266 acres No. of structurally separate dwellings, Census 1961 30,545 No. of private households , Census 1961 40,370 No. of separate rating assessments of dwelling houses 24,364 Rateable Value, March 1962 £ 2,287,597 Sum produced by Id. rate £9,283 Population: Registrar General's Estimate mid-1962 98,240 Estimated Population of Children 30th June, 1962:— Under 1 1-4 Total under 5 5-14 Total under 15 1,720 4,380 6,100 8,200 14,300 Live Births: Legitimate: Males 758 Females 751) Total: - 1,775 Illegitimate: 146 120) Live birth rate per 1 ,000 population 18. 1 Illegitimate live births per cent, of total live births 14. 9 Area Comparability Factor .76 Adjusted birth rate 13.8 Still-births: Males 17 Females 7 Total:- 24 Still-birth rate per 1 ,000 live and still-births 13.4 Total live and still-births 1,799 Infant Deaths: Males 14 Females 14 Total:- 28 Neo-natal deaths (first 4 weeks of life) (M. 10 F. 11) 21 Early Neo-natal deaths (first week of life) (M. 6 F. 10) 16 Infant Mortality Rates: - All infants per 1 ,000 live births 15.7 Legitimate infants per 1,000 legitimate live births 13.3 Illegitimate infants per 1,000 illegitimate live births 30.1 Neo-natal deaths per 1,000 live births 11.8 Early Neo-natal deaths per 1 ,000 live births 9.0 Perinatal Mortality Rate (still-births & deaths under 1 week per 1 , 0Q0 live and still-births) 22. 2 Maternal deaths (including abortion) NIL Maternal mortality rate per 1 ,000 live and still-births NIL Deaths: - Males 467. Females 583) Total:- 1,050 Death rate per 1 ,000 population 10. 7 Area Comparability Factor 1.0 Adjusted death rate 10. 7 54 CAUSES OF DEATH 1962 Cause of Death Total Males MALES - AGES Total Females FEMALES - AGES Total Males & Females 0 - 1 - 5 - 15 - 25 - 45 - 65 - 75 - 0 - 1 - 5 - 15 - 25 - 45 - 65 - 75 - Tuberculosis respiratory 2 - - - - - 2 - - 2 - - - - 1 - - 1 4 Tuberculosis other - - - - - - - - - 1 - - - - - - - 1 1 Syphilitic disease 2 - - - - - - 1 1 - - - - - - - - - 2 Diphtheria - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - Whooping Cough - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - Meningococcal infections - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - Acute poliomyelitis - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - Measles - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - Other infective and parasitic diseases _ _ - _ _ - - _ _ 2 _ _ 1 _ _ 1 - - 2 Malignant neoplasm, stomach 7 _ _ _ _ 1 2 2 2 13 _ _ - _ - 3 5 5 20 Malignant neoplasm, lung, bronchus 38 _ _ _ _ _ 16 14 8 13 _ _ - _ - 8 3 2 51 Malignant neoplasm, breast _ _ - _ - - _ _ _ 28 _ - - - 1 9 8 10 28 Malignant neoplasm, uterus - - _ _ - _ _ - _ 8 _ _ _ _ 1 4 2 1 8 Other malignant and lymphatic neoplasm 43 _ 1 _ _ 2 12 14 14 70 _ - _ _ 2 23 18 27 113 Leukaemia, aleukaemia 4 - - - - 1 1 1 1 6 - - - - - 1 4 1 10 Diabetes 4 - - - 1 - 1 1 1 3 - - - - - - 1 2 7 Vascular lesions of nervous system 29 _ - - _ - 7 9 13 68 _ - _ 1 - 7 19 41 97 Coronary disease angina 159 _ _ - 1 6 46 47 59 104 _ - - _ - 21 33 50 263 Hypertension with heart disease 4 _ - - - _ 2 1 1 11 _ _ _ - - 1 1 9 15 Other heart disease 20 1 - - - - 5 6 8 63 - - - - - 2 15 46 83 Other circulatory disease 14 - - - _ _ 5 5 4 31 - _ _ _ 1 2 7 21 45 Influenza 2 - - - - - 1 1 - 3 - - - - - - 1 2 5 Pneumonia 26 2 - - - - 3 2 19 37 1 - - - - 4 2 30 63 Bronchitis 35 - - - - - 7 9 19 21 1 - - - - 1 8 11 56 Other diseases of respiratory system 5 _ _ - - 1 2 1 1 3 - - - - 1 - - 2 8 Ulcer of stomach and duodenum 4 _ - - - _ 2 2 _ 3 - - - _ - 1 - 2 7 Gastritis, enteritis and diarrhoea 1 _ 1 - - _ - - - 2 1 - - - - - - 1 3 Nephritis and nephrosis 3 _ _ - - 1 2 - - 4 - - - - - 4 - - 7 Hyperplasia of prostate 4 - - - - - - - 4 - - - - - - - - - 4 Pregnancy, child birth, abortion - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - Congenital malformations 4 4 - - - - - - - 3 1 - - - - 1 - 1 7 Other defined and illdefined diseases 26 7 - 2 _ - 3 5 9 55 10 _ - _ 3 6 9 27 81 Motor vehicle accidents 10 - - - 1 2 4 2 1 8 - _ - 3 1 1 - 3 18 All other accidents 11 - - - 1 4 5 - 1 5 - - - - - 1 2 2 16 Suicide 10 - - - - 3 2 4 1 16 - - - 2 6 7 1 - 26 Homicide and operations of war - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - TOTAL:- 467 14 2 2 4 21 130 127 167 583 14 - 1 6 17 108 139 298 1050 55 Year Population Birth Rate Death Rate Infant Mortality Rate Maternal Mortality Rate 1900 81,230 20,0 11.3 104 2 1905 83,430 16.1 9.3 94 4 1910 85,210 14,0 8.6 60 1 1915 81,760 15.3 12.1 76 4 1920 91,519 17.1 9.4 48 2 1925 88,040 12.2 10.5 55 5 1930 84,830 11.8 11.5 58 6 1931 87,740 11.2 11.7 61 2 1932 90,130 10.9 11.6 54 2 1933 90,380 9.6 11.0 38 NIL 1934 90,000 10.4 11.3 53 4 1935 90,600 11.0 11.2 49 1 1936 90,700 11.5 11.3 66 3 1937 90,690 11.2 11.6 54 3 1938 90,480 11.7 11.4 57 1 1939 90,170 10.9 11.6 38 1 1940 71,520 11.1 16.2 49 5 1941 58,760 10.9 15.9 59 1 1942 63,240 14.5 14.2 49 5 1943 69,320 16.6 14.3 43 2 1944 69,840 16.1 14.6 62 1 1945 74,390 16.2 13.4 42 2 1946 89,720 17.4 11.8 36 1 1947 95,650 18.1 11.2 29 2 1948 95,480 15.7 10.3 29 1 1949 97,090 14.7 10.5 29 2 1950 97,400 15.5 10.0 10 1 1951 97,750 14.5 11.5 27 1 1952 97,700 14.9 11.2 24 NIL 1953 97,970 14.5 11.8 16 1 1954 98,210 14.7 9.1 17 1 1955 97,710 14.1 10.0 17 NIL 1956 97,580 15.1 10.5 23 1 1957 97,130 15.4 10.5 18 1 1958 96,480 15.5 11.1 21 NIL 1959 96,810 16.5 10.9 22 NIL 1960 98,080 17.1 10.4 20 1 1961 96,990 17.7 10.1 16 1 1962 98,240 18.1 10.7 16 NIL 56 INFECTIOUS DISEASE DISEASE Notifications Removed to Hosp. 1962 Deaths 1962 1958 1959 1960 1961 1962 Diphtheria 1 1 1 - - - - Dysentery 60 79 48 16 62 6 - Encephalitis: Acute Infective - - - - 1 1 - Post Infectious 1 1 4 3 3 2 - Erysipelas 5 8 6 1 4 - - Food Poisoning 15 26 23 13 12 2 - Measles 706 344 86 1,093 193 6 - Meningococcal Infection 1 2 3 2 1 1 - Ophthalmia Neonatorum: Hampstead residents 6 11 - 2 16 15 - Non-residents 3 14 5 - 27 27 - Paratyphoid Fever 1 - 2 1 3 3 - Pneumonia 40 47 12 19 22 4 3 Poliomyelitis: Non-Paralytic - 3 - 3 1 1 - Paralytic 2 2 3 4 - - - Puerperal Pyrexia: Hampstead residents 30 19 7 3 16 13 - Non-residents 39 34 21 13 12 12 - Scabies 13 17 15 10 9 - - Scarlet Fever 51 37 18 38 20 5 - Typhoid Fever 2 5 2 2 4 4 - Whooping Cough 21 37 58 25 17 3 - TOTAL:- 997 687 314 1,248 423 105 3 TUBERCULOSIS Age Periods Respiratory Non-Respiratory New Cases Deaths New Cases Deaths M F M F M F M F 0 _ _ - _ _ - _ - 1 - - - - - - - - 5 - 1 - - - - - - 15 5 2 - - - 4 - - 25 15 8 - 1 - 3 - - 45 8 2 2 - 1 1 - - 65 2 - - - - - - - 75 - - - 1 1 1 - 1 TOTAL:- 30 13 2 2 2 9 - 1 57 FOOD POISONING Cases notified 1st Qtr, 2nd Qtr. 3rd Qtr. 4th Qtr. Total 1 3 1 7 12 Otherwise ascertained - _ - - _ Deaths - - - - - Outbreaks No. of Outbreaks Cases Notified Otherwise Ascertained Total Cases Family Other Agent ified - - - - - Agent not identified 1 - 2 - 2 Single Cases Cause Cases Notified Otherwise Ascertained Total Cases Salmonella Typhimurium 1 - 1 Salmonella Bredeney 1 - 1 Not identified 8 - 8 Salmonella Infections not Food-borne NIL BACTERIOLOGICAL EXAMINATIONS (Infectious Diseases) Throat/Nose Swabs:- No. of Examinations Diphtheria Bacilli found NIL Haemolytic Streptococci found 16 Vincents organisms found 1 Negative 37 Faeces:- Shigella found 72 Salmonella Typhimurium found 5 Salmonella Bredeney found 1 Salmonella Paratyphi B found 1 Polio Virus Type 1 found 1 Esch, Coli O. 26 found 1 Negative 408 58 HAMPSTEAD BOROUGH COUNCIL CLEANSING CENTRE Verminous Conditions Scabies * Cases Treatments Cases Treatments Adults 7 8 10 23 Children 1 1 - - Contacts 1 1 - - * Includes one female treated at the request of Medical Officer of Health, Hendon. London County Council (General Powers) Act, 1953 Persons cleansed at home NIL DISINFECTION AND DISINFESTATION No. of calls by borough van 5,913 No. of articles passed through steam chamber 6,102 No. of rooms disinfested after vermin 135 No. of rooms disinfected after infectious disease 118 No. of rooms cleansed after death or removal 31 Parcels of clothes for despatch abroad 93 Articles on medical loan collected and disinfected on behalf of London County Council 19 PUBLIC HEALTH LAUNDRY A twice weekly service is in operation and 1,689 bags of laundry have been dealt with during the year. The number of calls made by the van was 2,509. Articles Laundered:- Draw Sheets 2,871 Shirts 342 Sheets 2,383 Vests 725 Blankets 229 Towels 1,888 Pillow-cases 1,812 Pants 795 Nightdresses and Pyjamas 2,118 Total Articles 13,163 The number of people using the laundry service has varied from 24 to 30 per month. 59 PUBLIC MORTUARY, NEW END Bodies admitted by order of:- Coroner 226 Ambulance 36 Police 7 Marie Curie Hospital 1 Public Health Department 6 276 Causes of death:- Natural Causes 223 Suicides:- Coal Gas Poisoning 6 Drugs 13 Falls 3 Hanging 2 Drowning 2 Cut wrist 1 27 Accidental:- Drowning 1 Falls 2 Railway 1 Traffic 9 Burns 1 14 Foetus 1 Post Operative 3 Stillborn 1 Bodies brought for accommodation 7 276 No. of post mortem examinations carried out 269 Of the 276 bodies admitted to the Mortuary, 244 were of Hampstead residents. Coroner's Court The Hampstead and St, Pancras Coroner's Court is at Camley Street, N. W. 1. Telephone: EUSton 1691. Coroner:- I. Milne, Esq. 60 PUBLIC HEALTH INSPECTION Inspections:- Housing defects 704 Loans for house purchase 192 Improvement grants 63 Housing Act, 1957. Repair of unfit houses (Sec. 9) 8 Demolition & Closing Orders 6 Overcrowding 54 Housing Act, 1961. Houses in multi-occupation 149 Rent Act, 1957. Certificates of Disrepair 3 House-to-House 145 Underground rooms (other than Closing Orders) 54 Accumulations of refuse 174 Dustbins 41 Nuisance from trees 8 Nuisance from bonfires 34 Improper keeping of animals 4 Noise 35 Smoke (Timed observations) 130 Other nuisances 110 Re-inspections: 4,881 Inspection: Schools 12 Public Buildings, Hospitals, etc. 3 Clubs, Institutions, etc. 2 Offices, Business premises 3 Bombed site or open space 8 Mews or Stable Yard 63 Private Roads or Passageways 74 Re-inspections: 305 Inspections: Drainage work: Under Notice 17 Voluntary 309 Installation of Heating Apparatus 36 Housing Applications 339 Aged or Infirm Persons 133 Infectious Disease 296 Special Survey: Smokeless Zones 11,001 Infestations: Rodent 1,076 Other 210 Re-inspections: 4,002 61 Inspections: Foodshops and stalls 828 Shops other than foodshops 95 Shops Act 18 Merchandise Marks Act 68 Hairdresser 40 Pet Animals 4 Pharmacy & Poisons 11 Rag Flock 1 Fairground 11 Re-inspections: 700 Lectures, discussions, talks 167 Total complaints received 1,030 Intimation Notices served 297 Statutory Notices served 117 Attendances at Court or Inquiries 1 FACTORY ACT, 1961 No. on Register Inspections Re-inspections Written Notices Factories in which S. 1, 2, 3, 4 and 6 are to be enforced by local authority 203 39 25 - Factories not included above in which S. 7 is enforced by the local authority 269 202 154 31 Other premises in which S. 7 is enforced by the local authority (excluding outworkers premises) 4 4 3 - TOTAL:- 476 245 182 31 No prosecutions were undertaken during the year. 62 Defect Found Remedied Referred To H. M. Inspector By H. M. Inspector Want of Cleanliness (S. 1) 6 6 - - Overcrowding (S. 2) - - - - Unreasonable temperature (S. 3) - - - - Inadequate ventilation (S.4) 2 2 - - Ineffective drainage of floors (S. 6) _ _ _ _ Sanitary conveniences (S. 7) (a) Insufficient 4 4 - - (b) Unsuitable or defective 19 21 - 1 (c) Not separate for sexes 2 2 - - Other offences against the Act (Not including offences relating to outworkers) 1 1 _ _ TOTAL:- 34 36 - 1 No prosecutions were undertaken during the year. OUTWORKERS No. of Hampstead firms making return 15 Total Outworkers notified by Hampstead firms 143 Outworkers resident in Hampstead (included in above) 13 Outworkers notified to us from other boroughs 44 Visits paid by Public Health Inspectors 44 Classes of Work Outworkers Wearing Apparel-making, etc. cleaning and washing 42 Artificial flowers 1 Cosaques, Christmas stockings, etc. 13 Lampshades 1 TOTAL:- 57 No cases of default in sending lists or instances of work in unwholesome premises. No notices served or prosecutions undertaken. 63 PET ANIMALS ACT, 1951 New Licences issued - Licences discontinued - Licences renewed 4 Visits by Public Health Inspectors 4 PHARMACY & POISONS ACT, 1933 New Licences issued 11 Licences renewed 79 Ceased to sell poisons or removed 18 No. on Register at end of year 90 Visits by Public Health Inspectors 11 PREVENTION OF DAMAGE BY PESTS ACT, 1949 Destruction of Rats and Mice. Surface Treatment No. of properties inspected as a result of:- Local Authority Dwellings (including Council Properties All other (including business premises) Total Notification - 565 12 577 Survey - 496 3 499 Total inspections including reinspections - 3,980 61 4,041 No. of properties infested by: Rats - 198 7 205 Mice - 362 8 370 Control of Rats in Sewers Date Manholes Baited Poison used Complete Takes Partial Takes Baiting Sequence April 733 2.5 per cent. Zinc Phosphide 33 216 1-4-8 Nov. 713 10 per cent. Arsenious Oxide 66 145 1-4-8 64 LEGAL PROCEEDINGS Nature of Offence Result of Proceedings Sale of cream slice Fined £ 10 with £5. 5s. Od. costs, containing glass Sale of milk in dirty bottle Fined £ 100 with £ 10. 10s. Od. costs, On appeal fine reduced to £ 25. do. Fined £50 with £5 costs. Sale of Yoghurt containing grub Fined £ 10 with £2. 2s. Od. costs, UNSOUND FOOD One hundred and fourteen certificates were issued in respect of 69 consignments comprising the following items: - Meat 259 packets; 102 tins; 1,614 lbs. 11oz. ; 2 turkeys; 2 chines and ends; 123 chickens; 17 pairs Short Fores; 2 cases pigs spleens; various cuts value £40. 17s. Id. Fruit 82 packets; 451 tins; 2 trays. Vegetables 478 packets; 346 tins; 32 bags. Fish 347 packets; 74 tins; 1¼: lbs. Fruit juice 49 tins Confectionery 898 packets Milk 71 ,, Mousses 138 ,, Jam 4 ,, Flour 2 ,, Pet Food 1 ,, Ice Cream 802 ,, Soup 8 ,, Pastry 163 ,, Rice 35 ,, Corn-on-Cob 10 ,, Cream 18 ,, Petit Pois 12 ,, Syrup 1 ,, Dinners 6 ,, Coffee 1 ,, Sauces 12 bottles Cereals(2 ,, Ginger Beer 15 ,, (12 packets 65 EXAMINATION OF WATER Chemical Bacteriological Analysis Examination Swimming bathwater 10 46 Tank water 1 2 All the above samples were satisfactory. FOOD PREMISES The total number of foodshop premises is 833. There are 345 shops with multiple trades and in the following table these have been entered once under each type of trade carried on. No. on Register Primary Inspections Misc. Visits Baker, Patisserie 60 55 29 Butcher 93 84 175 Canteens and Clubs 68 18 - Confectioner 132 76 5 Delicatessen and Grocer 183 115 141 Fishmonger 22 51 119 Fried Fish 8 9 45 Greengrocer 93 92 204 Ice Cream 257 122 49 Milkshop and Dairy 72 28 12 Off Licence 49 22 - Public House 54 80 11 Refreshment House 59 7 41 Restaurant, Snack Bar 139 82 29 Street Trader or Stallholder 53 84 211 Chemists 29) Factory 4) 3 3 Herbalist 4) Fairground 1) 1,380 928 1,074 Revisits to shops (including shops other than foodshops) 700. 66 FOOD & DRUGS ACT, 1955, SECTION 16 Ice Cream Potted, pressed, pickled or preserved food Confectioners and Tobacconists 78 Butchers 2 Grocers and Delicatessen 14 Fishmongers 4 Grocer & Delicatessen 55 Garages 1 Provisions 4 Bakers 8 Butchers 34 Restaurants 40 Florists 1 Factory 2 Dairies 26 Kiosk & Stalls 5 Fried Fish 6 Stores 9 Club 1 Fish Shop 2 Off Licences 3 TOTAL:- 257 Cinemas 2 Greengrocers 24 TOTAL:- 64 BACTERIOLOGICAL EXAMINATION OF FOOD Nature of Sample No. of Samples Satisfactory Unsatisfactory Ice Cream 37 33 4 Milk 12 12 - Whelks 7 6 1 Cockles 7 7 - Jellied Eels 6 6 - Frankfurters 2 1 1 Beefburgers (Uncooked) 1 1 - Hamburgers 1 1 - Prawns 1 1 - Oysters 1 1 - Toffee Apple 1 1 - Brisket Sandwich 1 1 - Egg Sandwich 1 1 - Cooked Ham 1 - 1 Orange Lolly 1 1 - Fruitie Lolly 1 1 - 81 74 7 67 CHEMICAL ANALYSIS OF FOOD Summary of items sent to the Public Analyst Milk, cream, butter, margarine, yoghurt 31 Cheese, cheese spread 46 Fish, fish products 35 Meat, meat products 82 Vegetables, fruits 37 Sauces, pickles, flavourings, oils, spices, etc. 76 Cakes, pastry, biscuits 47 Flour, flour products 8 Rice 7 Jam, honey 7 Fruit juices 25 Confectionery, sweets, chocolate, etc. 20 Ice cream, ice cream powder 31 Soup 9 Spirits 18 Milk bottles 2 Jelly, gelatin 4 Sugar, glucose 4 Nuts 2 Tea 2 Marzipan 2 Lard 2 Cereals 2 Dried Yeast, Condensed Milk, Coffee, Hors d'Oeuvres, Mincemeat, Lolly, Medicinal Charcoal Biscuits, Aspirin, Hydrogen Peroxide, Bicarbonate of Soda, Diabetic Chocolate Drink, Brandy Butter, Suet, Egg Noodles, Dried Bamboo Shoots, Egg White, Milk Shake Syrup, Fruit Cereal 18 517 Twenty-seven samples were found to contain preservative but in only one instance, smoked salmon mayonnaise, was this contrary to the Regulations. Altogether, 30 samples were reported upon adversely by the Analyst. Details of the infringements are given in the following table. 68 ADULTERATED OR UNSATISFACTORY SAMPLES AND CONTRAVENTIONS OF FOOD & DRUGS ACT Flour. Contained black sooty particles consisting of dirty starch grains. Source of contamination not determined. Tobler Cerisette "Alcoholic" and "Tobler - O-Rum". Amount of proof spirit does not justify statement "A chocolate for adults". Producer warned. Label altered. Rilchoc Block. Not chocolate. Producers warned. Double Creme Cheese. Deficient in fat. Importers warned. Label altered. Long Grain Brown Rice. Incorrect labelling. Producers warned. Rollmop in Aspic. Instructions requiring storage under refrigeration not sufficiently conspicuous. Importers warned. Smoked Salmon Mayonnaise. Contained preservative. Producers warned. Dairy Ice Cream (2) Contained fat other than milk fat. Retailer warned. Dairy Soft Ice Cream. Contained fat other than milk fat. Producer warned, Canneloni. Description should be in English, Importers warned. Single Cream Cheese, Deficient in fat. Label amended. Spinach Soup (2), Mushroom Soup, Onion Sauce Mix, Pure Vegetable Ghee. All improperly labelled. Labels amended. Kummel Kase, Cheese made from skimmed milk. Stocks withdrawn Label amended. Spiced Cheese Spread, Deficient in fat. Stock withdrawn. Distribution discontinued. 69 ADULTERATED OR UNSATISFACTORY SAMPLES AND CONTRAVENTIONS OF FOOD & DRUGS ACT (Contd.) Blackcurrant Juice, Incorrect description. Label amended. Cream Cheese "Triple Chambourcy". Deficient in fat. Stocks exhausted. Distribution discontinued. Parsley Sauce. Incorrect description. Label amended. Mint Sauce. Did not contain mint leaves. Stocks exhausted. Distribution discontinued. Crab Paste. Contained glass. Producers warned. Cream Soda. Contaminated by petrol. Producers warned. Yoghurt. Contained a fly larva. Fined £ 10 with £ 2. 2s. 0d. costs. Bread. Contained black charred dough and oil or grease. Evidence inconclusive. No action. Cream Slice. Contained glass. Fined £10 and £ 5. 5 s. Od. costs. Shoulder of lamb. Meat unsound. Evidence inconclusive. No action. Dirty Milk Bottle. Fined £ 100 with £ 10. 10s. Od. costs. On appeal fine reduced to £25. Dirty Milk Bottle. Fined £50 with £5 costs. MILK SUPPLY Milk (Special Designations) Regulations No, of milk sellers 72 Licences in force: Pasteurised 68 Tuberculin Tested 44 Sterilised 58 Twelve samples of pasteurised milk were submitted to Methylene Blue and Phosphatase tests. All were satisfactory. 70 LOANS FOR HOUSE PURCHASE Year Applications received Granted Refused, withdrawn or under negotiation at end of year 1961 206 124 82 1962 198 83 115 Total since 1951 1,096 587 509 IMPROVEMENT GRANTS Year Applications received Granted Refused, withdrawn or under negotiation at end of year 1961 Standard 19 10 9 Discretionary 19 13 6 1962 Standard 19 13 6 Discretionary 19 9 10 Total since 1954 239 135 104 HOUSING Dwelling-houses inspected for housing defects (tinder Public Health or Housing Acts) 1 ,669 Dwelling-houses (included in above) which were inspected and recorded under the Housing Consolidated Regs, 1925-1932. (House-to-House inspection) 145 Dwelling-houses found to be in a state so dangerous or injurious to health as to be unfit for human habitation 39 Dwelling-houses found not to be in all respects fit for human habitation 641 71 HOUSES IN CLEARANCE AREAS AND UNFIT HOUSES ELSEWHERE Houses Demolished Clearance Areas, Housing Act, 1957 Nil Not in Clearance Areas 31 Unfit Houses Closed Under Sections 16, 17 and 35, Housing Act, 1957 4 Persons displaced 11 Families displaced 6 Parts of Buildings closed (Section 18) 4 Persons displaced 11 Families displaced 6 Unfit Houses made fit and Houses in which Defects were Remedied By Owner By Local Authority After informal action by local authority 514 Nil After formal notice: Public Health Acts 105 Nil Housing Act, 1957 20 2 Under Section 24, Housing Act Nil Nil No action was taken under Sections 17, 34, 46, 48 and 53 of the Housing Act regarding Unfit Houses in Temporary Use. No houses in Clearance Areas were purchased by agreement. OVERCROWDING Dwellings Families Adults Children On register 31.12.61 243 243 622 435 New cases 1962 43 43 142 98 286 286 764 533 Rehoused 1962 18 18 54 33 On register 31.12.62 268 268 710 500 72 CERTIFICATES OF DISREPAIR Applications for certificates 3 Applications withdrawn or cancelled NIL Certificates refused NIL Authority to issue certificates - (a) in respect of some but not all defects - (b) in respect of all defects 3 3 Undertakings given by landlords NIL Undertakings refused NIL Certificates issued 3 Applications for cancellation of certificates NIL Objections by tenants to cancellation of certificates NIL Decisions to cancel in spite of tenants objection NIL Certificates cancelled NIL HOUSING ACT, 1957. SECTION 9 Repair of Insanitary Houses Out of 145 premises surveyed by the Housing Inspector and the District Public Health Inspectors, four were subsequently reported to the Public Health Committee as being unfit and suitable for action under Section 9. Appropriate action under the Public Health (London) Act was taken with the remainder. REHOUSING Visits and revisits in connection with the investigation of 386 rehousing applicants 887 No. of reports submitted to Hampstead Housing Manager 350 No. of reports submitted to Other Boroughs 6 73 ACCIDENTS IN THE HOME - Comparative figures 1961-1962 Cause of Accident 1961 1962 1961 1962 L.C.C.Div.2* County of London Fall On stairs 187 178 1,119 998 From ladder 14 25 111 101 From chair 21 16 174 149 Outside (i. e. windows balconies, roofs, etc.) 40 41 217 198 In garden 15 14 227 219 In bath 1 3 15 23 From one level to another (i. e. tables , boxes , beds) 65 69 412 434 On same level (i. e. in room over objects) 144 125 920 751 Unspecified 479 555 3,261 3,692 Hit by object 25 30 202 221 Cooking Stove (saucepans , water ,fats ,etc.) 18 18 123 136 Teapot 2 6 45 53 Other boiling water 23 23 151 179 Electric Shock 6 3 39 22 Poisoning (including foreign objects) 47 36 338 340 Gassing 25 41 165 192 Knife-like Wounds (including spikes and cuts from glass) 49 46 337 326 Fires 21 35 178 185 Windows (trapping) 11 5 42 29 Suffocation 2 5 18 31 Not specified 54 39 337 328 TOTAL:- 1,249 1,313 8,431 8,607 Rate per 10,000 population 25.5 26.8 26.5 27.1 *Division 2 - Hampstead, Paddington, St. Marylebone, St. Pancras and Westminster. 74 CENSUS 1961 Population 1951 1961 Ward Acreage Persons Persons Males Females Persons per acre No. 1 Town 697 12,832 12,656 5,214 7,442 18.2 No. 2 Belsize 271 15,894 15,873 6,793 9,080 58.6 No. 3 Adelaide 317 14,193 14,578 6,178 8,400 46.0 No. 4 Central 314 13,606 14,508 6,233 8,275 46.2 No. 5 West End 247 13,971 13,894 6,322 7,572 56.3 No. 6 Kilburn 186 12,929 12,993 6,176 6,817 69.9 No. 7 Priory 235 11,706 14,342 6,518 7,824 61.0 Borough: - 2,266 95,131 98,844 43,434 55,410 43.6 Census 1961 Private households 40,370 Population in private households 91 ,600 Structurally separate dwellings occupied 30,545 Rooms occupied 125,959 Density of occupation:- Persons per room 0.75 Percentage of persons at more than 1½ per room 11.5 75 CENSUS 1961. POPULATION IN AGE GROUPS Age last birthday (5 year groups) Persons Males Females 0-4 5,544 2,857 2,687 5-9 4,098 2,021 2,077 10-14 4,709 2,354 2,355 15-19 6,181 2,518 3,663 20-24 10,765 4,359 6,406 25-29 9,792 4,904 4,888 30-34 7,578 3,884 3,694 35-39 6,808 3,248 3,560 40-44 6,224 2,813 3,411 45-49 6,998 3,114 3,884 50-54 7,100 3,032 4,068 55-59 6,223 2,639 3,584 60-64 5,263 2,048 3,215 65-69 3,969 1,360 2,609 70-74 3,230 1,068 2,162 75-79 2,308 679 1,629 80-84 1,335 378 957 85-89 548 127 421 90-94 149 29 120 95 and over 22 2 20 TOTAL: 98,844 43,434 55,410 76 THE CARE OF THE AGED Agencies concerned with the Care of the Aged Hampstead Old People's Welfare Association, Miss O. Courtney Jones, 107 Kingsgate Road, N. W. 6. MAI 3652 Hampstead Council of Social Service, Burgh House, New End Square, N, W.3. HAM 0049 107 Kingsgate Road, N„W.6. MAI 2007 Hampstead Old People's Housing Trust Ltd. , Mrs. B. Gibson, 7 Harley Road , N. W. 3. PRI 2950 Women's Voluntary Services, 119 Cholmley Gardens , N. W. 6. HAM 9552 British Red Cross Society, HAM 7171 98 Avenue Road, N. W. 3. (Ext. 116) National Assistance Board, Old Post Office, Downshire Hill, N, W. 3. HAM 9027 Ministry of Pensions & National Insurance, 30 Euston Square, N. W, 1. - for N. W. 3. area only EUS 6451 122 Kilburn High Road, N. W, 6. - for N. W. 6. and N. W. 2. area MAI 0804 Home Help Organiser (L. C. C. ) 251 Finchley Road, N. W. 3. HAM 4136 Welfare Officer (Applications for residential accommodation for persons in need of care and attention) 10 Warwick Row, S. W, 1. VIC 0162 Admitting Officer (Enquiries regarding inmates of Luxborough Lodge), 10 Warwick Row, S.W.I. VIC 0162 Public Health Department, Specialist Health Inspector, Mrs, C. G, Speechley, 98a, Avenue Road , N. W. 3. HAM 7171 Divisional Medical Officer, London County Council, 313 Harrow Road, W. 9. CUN 4815 77 Services provided for Aged Persons Laundry. For incontinent persons only. Applications to the Medical Officer of Health, 98a, Avenue Road, N.W.3. HAM 7171. Meals. Delivered twice weekly by British Red Cross Society and Women's Voluntary Services. Dinner Clubs. These are held at - St. Stephen's Church Hall, Pond Street, N. W. 3, on Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday, 12 noon. Health Institute, 107 Kingsgate Road, N. W. 6. on Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday, Friday, 12 noon. Library. Books provided by the Borough Council are delivered fortnightly to homebound old people. A member of the library staff accompanies the van, Holidays. Arranged by the Hampstead Old People's Welfare Association. Chiropody Service. Weekly sessions are held in N.W.6 and N.W.3. The Rotary Club of Hampstead provide transport to the clinic for those too frail to travel, Patients who are unable to attend the clinic even by car, are visited and treated in their own homes. Appointments for treatment are made on application to the Hampstead Old People's Welfare Association. Baths. Old Age Pensioners are allowed to use the slipper baths at the Central Baths, Finchley Road, and the Branch Baths at Flask Walk and Palmerston Road, free of charge at any time. Homes. Information obtainable from the Medical Officer of Health, 98a, Avenue Road, N. W. 3 , the Hampstead Old People's Welfare Association, 107 Kingsgate Road, N.W.6 , or the Old People's Homes Committee, 296 Vauxhall Bridge Road, S.W.1. VIC 9977. Workshops for the Elderly, 107 Kingsgate Road, N.W.6. Organised by the Hampstead Old People's Welfare Association, 78 Hospital Care. Application should be made by the patient's doctor to Dr, Exton Smith, Whittington Hospital, Highgate Wing, Dartmouth Park Hill, N. 19. ARC 3070, In cases of difficulty further advice can be obtained from the Medical Officer of Health, 98a, Avenue Road, N. W. 3. HAM 7171. Ext. 110. Medical Loan, Items of medical equipment are available on loan from the Divisional Office, London County Council or the British Red Cross Society. Darby and Joan Clubs St. Stephen's Hall, Pond Street, N. W. 3. Wednesdays 2-4.30 p.m. Holy Trinity Church Hall, Finchley Road, N.W. 3. Tuesdays 2-4 p.m. Unitarian Church Hall, Quex Road, N. W. 6. Thursdays 2-4 p.m. St. James' Hall, Netherwood Street, N. W. 6. Wednesdays 2-4 p.m. Brondesbury Fellowship Men's Club 107 Kingsgate Road, N. W. 6. Daily 2-5 p.m. Good Companions Club Burgh House, New End Square, N. W. 3. Mondays 5-8 p.m. Good Neighbours Club 51 Belsize Square, N. W. 3. Wednesdays 2.30 - 5 p.m. Burgh House Club Burgh House, New End Square, N. W. 3. Daily 2-7 p. m. Friendship Clubs Belsize Club, 22 Eton Villas, N. W. 3. Monday afternoons. The Synagogue, Dennington Park Road, N. W. 6. Thursday 3-5 p.m. 79 Broadhurst Club, Levine House, Monday and Wednesday Broadhurst Gardens, N. W. 6. evenings. The Day Club for Over-Sixties, Monday and Thursday, 51 Belsize Square , N. W. 3. 11 a.m.-5.30 p.m. Maccabi (Retired Jewish Gentlemen) 73 Compayne Gardens, N. W,6. Thursday 2,30-5 p.m. Congregational Church Hall, Lyndhurst Road, N. W. 3. Thursday 3-5 p.m. LONDON COUNTY COUNCIL, DIVISION 2, PUBLIC HEALTH DEPARTMENT Divisional Medical Officer:- H. Leslie Oldershaw, M.D., B.Sc. D.P.H. 313 Harrow Road, W.9. CUN 4815. Hampstead Sub-Office:- 251 Finchley Road , N. W. 3. HAM 8450 Clinics, Day Nurseries and School Treatment Centres L. C, C, Day Nurseries (normally open all day, Monday to Friday) Woodchurch 11/13 Woodchurch Road, N.W.6. MAI 2937 Parkhill 2 Parkhill Road, N, W. 3. GUL 4233 Pond Street 27/29 Pond Street, N.W. 3. HAM 1686 A list of private day nurseries can be obtained from the Hampstead Sub-Office, 251 Finchley Road, N. W. 3, Maternity and Child Welfare Centres 60 West End Lane, N. W. 6. MAI 5381 2 Parkhill Road, N. W. 3. GUL 4759 Hampstead Wells, Christchurch Hill, N. W. 3. HAM 9534 3/5 Daleham Gardens , N. W.3. SWI 3424 9 Solent Road, N. W. 6. HAM 5978 Welfare Foods (National dried milk, orange juice, cod liver oil, etc.) are obtainable from these centres. School Treatment Centres Kilburn Treatment Centre, 107 Kingsgate Road,N.W.6. MAI 3005 Dental Clinic , Lithos Road, Finchley Road, N. W. 3. HAM 4763 80 Speech Therapy Centre 75 Dynham Road, N. W. 6. MAI 3005 Immunisation and Vaccination Clinics Smallpox Vaccination:- 60 West End Lane, N. W. 6. Tuesday 10-11 a.m. 3/5 Daleham Gardens, N. W. 3. Thursday 10-11 a.m. Diphtheria and Poliomyelitis Inoculations:- 60 West End Lane, N. W. 6. Tuesday 10-11 a.m. 3/5 Daleham Gardens, N. W.3. Thursday 10-11 a.m. Diphtheria and Poliomyelitis Inoculation of babies can also be dealt with at the Maternity and Child Welfare Centres by arrangement. Domestic Help Service Home Help Organiser, 251 Finchley Road, N. W. 3. HAM 4136 District Nursing Associations Hampstead District Nursing Association, 3 Pond Street, N. W. 3. HAM 6406 Kilburn & W. Hampstead District Nursing Assoc., 20 Dennington Park Road, N. W. 6. HAM 4232 Further information regarding the Care of Mothers and Young Children, Child Minders and Day Nurseries, Health Visiting, Family Planning, Recuperative Holidays, Foot Clinics, Tuberculosis Care and After-care, care of persons suffering from illness or Mental Defectiveness, Treatment Centres for School Children, etc. may be obtained from The Divisional Medical Officer, London County Council, 313 Harrow Road, W. 9. 81 INDEX PAGE Accidents in the Home 73 Aged Persons:- Care of the Aged 25, 60, 76 Cleansing of 58, 77 Laundry Service 27, 77 Area of Borough 53 Area Comparability Factors 53 Atmospheric Pollution 31 Bacteriological Examinations:- Food 66 Infectious Disease 57 Swimming Bath Water 65 Barbers and Hairdressers 29, 61 Bathing Centre 58 Baths, Old Persons 58, 77 Births, Birth Rate 18, 53, 55 British Red Cross Society 76 Burials 25 Census 53, 74 Certificates of Disrepair 60, 72 Chemical Analysis:- F ood 67 Swimming Bath Water 65 Chiropody Service 77 Clean Air Act, 1956 31 , 60 Cleansing Station 58 Clearance Areas 71 Clinics 79 Closing Orders 60, 71 Clubs, Old Persons 78 Common Lodging Houses 30 Complaints 61 Cooked Meats 66 Council Representatives of other Organisations 16 82 PAGE Darby and Joan Clubs 78 Day Nurseries 79 Deaths 19, 53-55 Demolition Orders 60, 71 Dinner Clubs 77 Disinfection and Disinfestation 28, 58 District Nursing Associations 80 Division 2, London County Council 16, 76, 79 Divisional Health Committee 16 Domestic Help Service 80 Drainage 60 Dwellings:- Rate Assessments 53 Structurally Separate 53 Factory Act:- Inspections 61 Outworkers 62 Food Inspection 47, 65 Food Poisoning 57 Foot Clinics 77 Hairdressers and Barbers 29, 61 Hampstead Council of Social Service 16 , 76 Hampstead Old People's Housing Trust Ltd. 16, 76 Hampstead Old People's Welfare Association 16, 76 Health Education and Exhibition 3,33 History of Public Health Department 5,7 Home Help Organiser 76 Homes, Old Persons 77 House-to-House Inspections 60 Housing Act,1961 4,39,60 Housing 36, 60, 70 Ice Cream 66 Improvement Grants 60, 70 Immunisation and Vaccination Clinics 80 Infant Mortality 19, 53, 55 83 PAGE Infectious Diseases 3 , 20, 56 , 60 Inspection of the Borough 28, 60 Intimation Notices 61 Laundry Service 27, 58 Legal Proceedings 64 Loans for House Purchase 60, 70 London County Council Division 2 16, 79 London County Council (General Powers) Act, 1954 S. 18 29, 61 London County Council (General Powers) Act, 1953 S. 43 58 Mass X-ray 24 Maternal Mortality 53, 55 Maternity & Child Welfare Centres 79 Medical Examinations, Staff 25 Milk 69 Ministry of Pensions and National Insurance 76 Mobile Meals Service 77 Mortuary 59 National Assistance Act, 1948, Section 50 25 National Assistance Act, 1948, Section 47 27 National Assistance Board 76 Old Persons 25, 60, 76 Outworkers 62 Overcrowding 71 Pet Animals Act, 1951 61,63 Pharmacy and Poisons Act, 1933 61 , 63 Population 18, 53, 55 Prevention of Damage by Pests Act, 1949 30, 60, 63 Public Health Committee 16 Public Health Laboratory 57, 66 Public Health Laundry 27, 58 Rag Flock, etc. Act, 1951 29, 61 Rateable Value 53 Rehousing 72 84 PAGE Rent Act, 1957 60, 72 Rodent Control 30, 60, 63 Sampling 66, 67 Sanitary Circumstances of the Area 28 , 60 Scabies 58 School Treatment Centres 79 Sewerage 29 Sewers, Rodent Control 31, 63 Shops Act, 1950 29, 61 Slum Clearance 36, 71 Smoke Abatement 31 , 60 Smoking in Foodshops 48 Speech Th,erapy Centre 80 Staff:- Medical Examination 25 Public Health Department 17 Statistics:- Public Health Inspection 60 Statistical Summary 53 Statutory Notices 61 Stillbirths 53 Structurally Separate Dwellings 53 Swimming Baths 65 Tuberculosis 23, 56 Underground Rooms 36, 60 Unsound Food 64 Vaccination and Immunisation Clinics 80 Verminous Persons 58 Water Supply 28, 65 Welfare Centres 79 Welfare Office, L. C. C. 76 Women's Voluntary Service 76 Workshop, Old People's 77