AC. 4351 ACKD : 1/10/02 HAMP 62 Metropolitan Borough of Hampstead. Report on the Health of the Borough. I961 R. D. DEWAR, B.Sc., M B., CH.B., D.P.H. Medical Officer of Health. Metropolitan Borough of Hampstead. Report on the Health of the Borough. 1961 R. D. DEWAR, B.Sc., M.B., CH.B., D.P.H. Medical Officer of Health. 2 CONTENTS Page Aged and Infirm Persons 16,57 Atmospheric Pollution 27 Factory Acts, 1937 to 1959 46 Food and Drugs 35, 49, 52 Health Education 29 Housing 30,53 Infectious Disease 11-14, 41 Inspection of the Borough 21 , 45 London County Council Division 2 60 Mortuary 44 Population; Births; Deaths 9, 38, 40 Public Health Committee; Staff 7,8 Rodent and Pest Control 25 Statistical Summary 38 Index 62 3 Public Health Departments, 98a, Avenue Road, Hampstead, N. W. 3. 2nd May, 1962. TO THE MAYOR, ALDERMEN AND COUNCILLORS OF THE METROPOLITAN BOROUGH OF HAMPSTEAD. Mr. Mayor, Ladies and Gentlemen, I have the honour to present my Annual Report on the Health of the Borough during 1961. A disadvantage from which the public health service suffers as compared with the curative medical services is that results are almost invariably slow and unspectacular. In order to avoid errors due to climatic or other variations it is usual to make comparisons over 10, 20, 30 years or even longer periods and in the control of communicable disease the greatest successes are when, from the point of view of news, nothing happens. In housing, the provision of new dwellings with all the amenities which are now considered as necessities rather than luxuries, gives some measure of the improvement, but against this must be set the increasing obsolescence of the older houses and it is not possible to give any precise measurement of the improvement on balance. Nevertheless there has been an improvement in the general health of the population and the standard of living has continued to rise. An indication of the improvement in housing is the continuing decrease in the number of complaints received of housing defects. This is probably not because the number of defects arising has fallen, but because both owners and occupiers are somewhat more willing to remedy conditions without recourse to the Public Health Department. 4 New legislation and particularly the Housing Act, 1961 , will assist in still further improving standards especially in a Borough such as Hampstead where a great many houses are in multiple occupation. The Food Inspector has been able to maintain the momentum of improvement in the preparation, storage and sale of food and although there will always be some mistakes due to ignorance or carelessness, the number of serious cases has been very small. The Hampstead Heath Fairs are now regarded as models so far as the sale of food at such gatherings is concerned, but this is only because of the regular and thorough inspection on every occasion. At the Easter Fair the weather made the Inspector's duties very light but very uncomfortable! Health Education is becoming of greater and greater importance and largely due to the enthusiasm and ability of the Public Health Inspector, Mr. G. L. Nicklin, who is mainly responsible for this work, it is being increasingly accepted in Hampstead where the number of talks and lectures has increased fivefold. The Clean Air programme did not progress as rapidly as had been hoped, mainly due to the great amount of work involved in checking the proposals for the conversion or adaptation of fireplaces and their approval (or otherwise) for the payment of the grant. By reorganising the work of the assistants employed in smoke control and because of the simplification of the procedure now required by the Ministry, it is hoped to speed up the programme. The care of old people continues to be an important and difficult part of the work of the Department. The London County Council services, including home helps and district nursing, the Meals-on-Wheels service, the general medical practitioners and the Hampstead Old People's Welfare Association have all given great assistance in the endeavour to make it possible for the old people to remain in their own homes. It must, however, be admitted that a few of the old people are extremely uncooperative and it is at times very difficult indeed to decide how bad the conditions can be allowed to become before an application should be made to the Court for the old person's compulsory removal. 5 I would like to express my appreciation of the work done by Mrs. Speechley, for the immense trouble which she takes and for her kindness, thoughtfulness and patience in dealing with these old people who are in need. At the end of the year a case of smallpox was discovered in the neighbouring Borough of St. Pancras. The energetic measures which were taken at that time prevented any secondary cases occurring in London but an outbreak of smallpox in Yorkshire shortly afterwards combined with a great deal of publicity in the national press and on television, resulted in a public demand for vaccination amounting almost to a mass vaccination campaign. Although there was not a need for vaccination on this scale and although the semihysterical attitude which developed was unfortunate, it did result in a large number of people, including young children, being vaccinated and it may for a time lead to an increased proportion of young children being presented for protection against this serious disease. In December the Government set out proposals for the reorganisation of local government in the Greater London area. The proposals are basically similar to those of the Royal Commission although so far as Hampstead is concerned the combination of boroughs would include Holborn as well as St. Pancras, and not St. Pancras alone as suggested by the Royal Commission. The main deviation from the Royal Commission's proposals concerns education. Local authorities are invited to make observations on the proposals and whilst any action taken may have considerable effects on the Annual Reports of future years it would be inappropriate to make any comments in this one0 I deeply regret that I have to record the death of James Cuskin, a Public Health Assistant, who had been employed in the Public Health Department for 31 years. He was a cheerful, hardworking and trustworthy servant of the Council and is greatly missed by all members of the staff. My thanks are due to the Members of the Council and more particularly the Chairman and Members of the Public Health Committee for their help and encouragement throughout the year. 6 I am indebted to the Town Clerk and Chief Officers of the Council and their staffs for their advice and assistance and to my Deputy, Dr. M. McQuaid, the Chief Public Health Inspector, Mr. J. F. Armstrong and the Chief Clerk, Mr. A. H. Slade and to the other members of the staff for their loyal support at all times. I have the honour to be, Mr. Mayor , Ladies and Gentlemen, Your obedient Servant, R. DUNCAN DEWAR, Medical Officer of Health. 7 PUBLIC HEALTH COMMITTEE The Worshipful the Mayor (Councillor B. West, J. P. ) ex-officio member. Chairman: Councillor G. Finsberg, M. B. E. Aldermen S. A. Boyd, M.S. , F.R. C.S. Mrs. R. S. G. Carnegie Mrs. F. E. Cayford, J. P. , L. C. C. Councillors Miss D.R.Bailey (Vice-Chairman) D.F.Ridgley V. A. Bonafont Miss J. Silver W.K.Evans, M. A. S.Torrance Miss M. du Mont, M. A. L. J. Walker The Chairman of the Housing Committee. REPRESENTATIVES ON OUTSIDE COMMITTEES AND OTHER ORGANISATIONS CONCERNED WITH PUBLIC HEALTH WORK Hampstead Council of Social Service: Aldermen Mrs. R. S. G. Carnegie , E. Snowman, O. B. E. ; Councillors Miss D.R.Bailey, R. M. Brodtman, S. P. Pyke. The Hon. Mrs. Ruth Bennett. Hampstead Old People's Housing Trust Ltd. : Alderman E. Snowman, O.B.E. ; Councillors Miss S.H.Ayliff, R. M. Brodtman, J.J.Tobin, M. A. , LL. B. , Mr s. H. M. Young. Hampstead Old People's Welfare Association: Aldermen Mrs. R. S. G, Carnegie , R. J. Cleaver , L. C. C. ; Councillors Miss S.H.Ayliff, Miss E. Beer, Mrs. D.Davis, Miss M. du Mont, M. A. , D.F.Ridgley, A. E. Skinner. Hospital Management Committees: Archway Group: Mr. A. C. Morson, O. B.E. ,F.R. C.S. , Mrs. M. J. Oatway, S. R. N. London County Council Divisional Health Committee. Division 2: Councillors Miss D.R. Bailey, Miss E.Beer, Miss M. du Mont,M. A National Society for Clean Air: Councillor G. Finsberg, M.B.E. , The Medical Officer of Health. London and Home Counties Clean Air Advisory Council Councillor G. Finsberg, M. B. E. , The Smoke Inspector. 8 STAFF OF THE PUBLIC HEALTH DEPARTMENT Medical Officer of Health: - R. D. Dewar , B. Sc. , M. B. , Ch. B. ,D. P. H. , Barrister -at-law Deputy Medical Officer of Health: - Miss M.McQuaid, L.R. C. P. , L. R. C. S(I). ,D.P. H. Chief Public Health Inspector: - J. F. Armstrong (a)(b) Deputy Chief Public Health Inspector: - F. V. Outlaw (a)(b) Specialist Inspectors: - Old People's Welfare: Mrs. C. G. Speechley (a)(d)(e)(f) Housing: L. E. Trigg (a)(b) R. Clark (a) Food: W. F. Newport (a)(b) Clean Air Act: E.Ulrich (a)(b)(c) Health Education: G. L. Nicklin (a) District Inspectors; - D. W. Malcolm (a) C. F. Pidgeon (a)(b) G. L. Nicklin (a) P. C. F. Griffiths (a)(b) R. W. M. Cook (a) A. M. Norton (a) Student Public Health Inspectors: - H.A. Shitta-bey (up to 21. 9. 61), L. T. Pither s , Miss C.R. Hughes, D. R. Roberts (from 4. 9. 61). Chief Clerk: - A. H. C. Slade Clerical Staff: - G. W. Bedell J.A.Gilbody Miss M. Sharp Mrs. M. Roe Mrs. G. A. Fletcher Public Analyst: - E.Voelcker, A. R. C. S. ,F.R. I.C. Mortuary Keeper: - S. King Public Health Station Keeper: - H. Howe Survey Assistants (Clean Air Act): - Miss B. P. Dimmock J. Woodman (a) Public Health Inspector's Certificate. (b) Food Inspector's Certificate. (c) Smoke Inspector's Certificate. (d) Health Visitor's Certificate. (e) State Registered Nurse. (f) State Certified Midwife. 9 POPULATION The preliminary report on the Census of 1961 gives the population of Hampstead as 98,902, an increase of nearly 4 per cent. on the number of 95,131 at the census of 1951. The County of London as a whole showed a decrease of nearly 5 per cent. during the same period. Changes in the method of tabulating the information received at the census have made it possible for the figures to be supplied either on a ward basis or on a basis of the 155 enumerators districts , and these latter figures have been requested. When they are received they will allow more detailed analysis of the population and of some of the facilities provided in houses in various parts of the Borough. In spite of the census figure of 98,902, the Registrar General has given the mid-year estimate of the population in 1961 (that is some two months after the census enumeration) as 96,990, a decrease of 1 ,090 from the previous year as compared with an increase of 1 ,270 between 1959 and I960. The Registrar General gives in an explanatory note some of the factors which are taken into account in arriving at the estimated mid-year population but one would have thought from local knowledge that the estimated population would have shown an increase rather than a decrease. The calculations of vital statistics which are set out in the statistical summary are, however, calculated on the estimate given. BIRTHS The number of live births (1 ,720) continues to increase and was in fact the highest since 1947 (1 ,727). The number of live births per 1 ,000 of the population was 17. 7 and the adjusted birth rate, which takes account of the proportion of women of child bearing age and allows comparison with other areas was 13.5. Of the births, 892 were male and 828 female. There were 228 illegitimate births, or 13.3 per cent. of the total live births, an increase of 1.8 per cent, over the previous year, Stillbirths decreased by 7 to a total of 23, the lowest post war figure. 10 INFANT MORTALITY Twenty-seven children under one year of age died and of these 20 were under one week old. The infant mortality rate (deaths of children under one year per 1 ,000 live births) dropped by four to 16, the lowest rate since 1953 and 1954 when the figure was also 16. The figure of 16 is in fact the lowest ever recorded in Hampstead. DEATHS The number of Hampstead residents who died in 1961 was 975. This is the lowest number of deaths recorded since 1930, with the exceptions of the year 1954 and the years 1941 and 1942. During the last mentioned years the population was reduced by evacuation to 58,760 and 63,240 respectively. This gives a crude death rate of 10. 1 per 1 ,000 of the population and an adjusted death rate for comparisons with other areas of 10. 0. In 1960 the crude death rate was 10.4 and the adjusted rate 10. 5. There was only one death from tuberculosis and this was in a woman of 88 years of age who had not previously been notified as suffering from this disease. In fact tuberculosis was only given as a contributory cause of death but the primary cause was indefinite for the purposes of classification. The number of deaths from cancer of the lung which rose from 38 in 1959 to 63 in 1960, fell again in 1961 to 43. This fluctuation is what might be expected in dealing with comparatively small numbers and it does not unfortunately indicate a reduction in the disease. There were no deaths from poliomyelitis and none from measles in spite of the very large number of cases of the latter disease. Deaths due to motor vehicle accidents fell from 13 in 1960 to 5, but deaths from all other accidents rose from 18 to .1960 to 21 in 1961. The number of deaths from suicide fell by 3 to 24. 11 INFECTIOUS AND OTHER DISEASES The total number of notifications of infectious disease during 1961 was 1 ,248. This was the highest for some years, but of the total nearly 88 per cent. were cases of measles most of which occurred during the first quarter of the year, the peak being reached in the middle of February. Apart from cases of measles the total notifications dropped from 228 in .1960 to 155 in 1961. Smallpox No case of smallpox occurred in the Borough during 1961 , but a case was found in the neighbouring Borough of St. Pancras on Christmas Day. Rapid and energetic measures were taken in that Borough and although there were contact cases to be followed up and several cases of chicken pox came under suspicion, Hampstead remained free. Unfortunately, other cases of smallpox were confirmed in Yorkshire and these were associated - as was the St. Pancras case - with the epidemic in Pakistan. Public demand for vaccination mounted and the situation developed almost to one of mass vaccination. Whilst public alarm is not the best reason for vaccination, a great many people including a large number of children who would not otherwise have come forward, were presented for vaccination. The staff of the Public Health Department had been vaccinated in the autumn of 1960 and were re-vaccinated at this time. Diphtheria Although there were no cases of diphtheria in Hampstead in 1961 , cases had occurred in Islington and Finsbury and in January, 1961 there were confirmed cases in a Training Centre in Kensington which was attended by some Hampstead children. Nose and throat swabs were taken from more than 50 persons in Hampstead, mainly children, who had been or may have been contacts with the confirmed case, but fortunately all the bacteriological results were negative. 12 With the wide spread of contacts, especially from such places as the Training Centre in Kensington which is attended by children from a number of different boroughs, there was an increased possibility of children who were absent when contacts were examined, returning without swabs having been taken. A form of procedure was therefore agreed with the County Medical Officer setting out the responsibilities of the County medical staff and the Borough medical staffs which will apply throughout London in any subsequent outbreak of the disease. Typhoid and Paratyphoid Fevers A husband and wife had been on holiday in Tangiers and during the latter part of the holiday and for a short time after returning home the wife felt moderately ill but soon recovered. Two to three weeks later the husband became ill and was admitted to hospital where it was confirmed that he was suffering from paratyphoid fever. Specimens of faeces from the wife, as a contact, showed no evidence of paratyphoid but did show that she was a carrier of salmonella typhi (Vi phage type E. 1). Conditions in both patients cleared satisfactorily and after a short time specimens were bacteriologically negative and subsequent specimens have also been negative. Another case of a typhoid carrier was found in a baby of a few weeks of age. The infection was discovered from a routine examination of all the children in a mother and baby home following a case of diarrhoea in another child. The infection was due to salmonella typhi of Vi phage type 46. The child had been and was still being breast fed and intensive search did not reveal the source of infection. The child was never seriously ill and the infection cleared satisfactorily. A case notified as typhoid fever was not confirmed. Poliomyelitis There were seven cases of poliomyelitis in Hampstead during 1961. Four of the cases were accompanied by paralysis and the remaining three were non-paralytic. 13 Three of the cases were members of one family, a boy of 6 years and a girl of 13 years were paralytic cases, and a girl of 10 years who did not have paralysis. The first of these cases was the brother who had just returned from a school holiday in Wales and the other two patients were admitted to hospital after an interval of 9 days and a further 17 days. None of these children had been immunised, Also connected with this family outbreak was another boy of 8 years of age, a cousin of the other children. He had received three injections of poliomyelitis vaccine. He was never very ill and showed no paralysis. At about the same time (September, 1961) but unconnected with the previous cases, two sisters contracted poliomyelitis. Both had been immunised and the diagnosis in the case of the younger one of 14 years, was at first in some doubt but was finally shown to be non-paralytic poliomyelitis. Her sister of 16 years of age was admitted to hospital a week later with some paralysis of the left leg. Both made good recoveries. Earlier in the year there had been a case of paralytic poliomyelitis of the bulbar type in an infant of seven months of age. He was treated in St. Anns Hospital, Tottenham, and he made a complete recovery. He had not been immunised. Seven other cases of poliomyelitis were notified but were not confirmed. Scarlet Fever During the year 38 cases of scarlet fever were notified. None of them was seriously ill and in the majority of cases the disease was very mild. The table showing the number of notifications of infectious disease is given in the statistical section. Diseases other than those mentioned above call for no special comment. 14 Tuberculosis Cases of tuberculosis are shown in a separate table from the other notifiable diseases in the statistical section, The total number of new cases during 1961 was 70, as compared with 71 in I960. There has, however, been a difference in that new cases of pulmonary tuberculosis in men fell from 45 to 28, whereas in women the number of cases increased from 16 to 26. Cases of non-respiratory tuberculosis rose for both sexes, men from 2 to 5 and women from 8 to 11. The marked drop in the number of female cases which occurred in I960 has therefore not been sustained although at 37 it is still less than the figure for 1959 (38) and previous years. Taken over a period of years the trend now showing in the reduction of the number of cases of pulmonary tuberculosis is fairly satisfactory, but this is not the case with the nonpulmonary type of case. The figures for the past ten years are as follows:- Non-pulmonary Tuberculosis Male Female Total 1952 6 4 10 1953 1 5 6 1954 1 5 6 1955 - 4 4 1956 2 10 12 1957 - 9 9 1958 7 6 13 1959 2 4 6 1960 2 8 10 1961 5 11 16 With such small numbers it is not possible to form any firm conclusions. The larger numbers could well be due to improved ascertainment or improved notification. It is however somewhat disappointing that for a disease which it is hoped to eliminate entirely in the foreseeable future, the notifications should be consistently above those of a decade ago. 15 MASS X-RAY No visit was paid to Hampstead by the Mobile Unit during 1961 , but for the purposes of examination of staff and others whom it was necessary to refer, use was made of the permanent unit of the North-West Metropolitan Regional Hospital Board situated at 32 Drayton Park, N. 5. Sessions for both men and women are held as follows: - Monday 2 p. m. - 4.15 p.m. and 5 p.m. - 7.15 p.m. Tuesday 9.45a.m. - 12.30p.m. and 2p.m. - 5.30p.m. Wednesday 9.45a.m. - 12.30p.m. and 2p.m. - 5.30p.m. Thursday 2p.m. - 4.15p.m. and 5p.m. - 7.15p.m. MEDICAL EXAMINATIONS Appointments to the Council's permanent staff are subject to passing a medical examination, which includes a chest X-ray usually carried out by the permanent mass radiography unit at Drayton Park. Examinations are normally carried out by the Medical Officer of Health (or the Deputy Medical Officer of Health in the case of female staff). Examinations are occasionally carried out of Hampstead residents who have been appointed to local government posts in other areas. No fee is charged. Similarly persons appointed to Hampstead but living at a distance are generally examined in their home area in order to save time and expense in travelling. Where the examination is carried out by the Medical Officer of Health no fee is paid, but if the examination is carried out by a general medical practitioner a fee is paid in accordance with the scale approved by the British Medical Association. Seventy-four examinations were undertaken during the year. Forty-six were in respect of new appointments; 10 were for transfer to the permanent staff; 17 were special reports required because of absence through sickness; 1 was on behalf of another authority. Five persons were found to be unfit to carry out their duties and were recommended to be placed on superannuation. 16 NATIONAL ASSISTANCE ACT, 1948. SECTION 50 In twenty instances, the Public Health Department were called upon to arrange the burial of a person who was either without any known relative or the relatives were unable to meet the cost of arranging a private funeral. This is more than double the number dealt with during the previous year. The total cost of the burials was £ 215. 0s. 6d. and of this amount £ 177. 18s, 1d, has so far been recovered from the estates of the deceased, from relatives, or from death grants. Frequently the circumstances of these cases are very distressing and the service rendered by the Department is one which is generally very much appreciated by the friends and relatives of the deceased as evidenced by the letters received from time to time, CARE OF THE AGED Although the percentage of elderly people in the community is increasing only a comparatively small proportion require the services which the local authority can supply. Most of the old people are able to manage quite well by their own efforts or with help from their families or friends and too much help can be as damaging as too little. It is not uncommon to find that an old person who has been taken to an old people's home where he or she has no responsibilities, dies in a very short time from what appears to be lack of interest in life and the absence of any real need to do anything at all. Fortunately the old people themselves are almost always anxious to do their their own work and a number of them refuse the assistance which can be provided by home helps or by "mealson-wheels" even when it is considered that they should have this help. In general, this self reliance is to be admired although in some instances of old people living alone the danger from fire causes much worry to other people. It is likely that there are a number of old people who are in need of help who are not known to the Public Health Department but out of the estimated 12,000 people in Hampstead over the age of 65 years, only 126 new cases were reported during 1961. 17 The total number in need of help and including those reported in previous years is somewhat less than 500, which implies that the remaining 11 ,500 old people manage their affairs quite effectively without the intervention of the local authority services. It is, however, quite certain that of these 11 ,500 another 100 or 150 will, during the course of 1962, come to require some help. It is at times pitiful to trace how an old person who has maintained a good standard has, through illness, often quite a minor illness, had to reduce the standard and has never been able to regain the lost ground. Further illness or misfortune reduce the standards still further until some outside help is given. Help, even of a temporary nature during and just after an illness could make a great deal of difference to the comfort of some of these old people if only we were aware of the need. In spite of this, our thanks are due to the medical practitioners, nurses, officers of the National Assistance Board, hospital almoners, relatives and friends who notify the Public Health Department of cases where it seems that help is needed. Thanks are also due to the officers of the London County Council, particularly those concerned with the home help service. The number of home helps has never been excessive in Hampstead, and home helps themselves are subject to seasonal illnesses like other people so that the most effective use of the home helps available must at times present some difficult problems. The home helps themselves give very valuable service and many of them do far more than they are paid to do. It is encouraging also to see the kindness which is shown by neighbours or people living in the same house and the Hampstead landladies in particular are often exceedingly kind and thoughtful. One service which is of especial help is the laundry service provided by the Borough Council. This is a free service for persons who, through age or illness, are incontinent and by accepting the responsibility for the most distasteful task of cleansing and laundering the soiled linen the Council has made it possible for the patients to remain in their own homes where otherwise their removal to hospital would be a necessity. 18 NATIONAL, ASSISTANCE ACT , 1948. SECTION 47 In spite of the services mentioned in the preceding section, a number of old people become so ill or infirm that it is necessary for them to go either into hospital or into one of the old people's homes provided by the London County Council. In the first place efforts are made to try and arrange for the old people to live with relatives or friends but failing this arrangements are made with the Welfare Department of the London County Council or with the Whittington Hospital and it must be recorded that both these bodies have shown the greatest cooperation. In the majority of cases the patient can be persuaded to accept these arrangements, but during the year there were two cases in which the patient refused and it was necessary to apply to the Courts for a Removal Order. In one case the old lady of 94 years of age who lived on the top floor of a house, had over the years accumulated such a collection of old newspapers and rubbish that it was almost impossible to get into the rooms, which were permanently blacked out and where the only lights were from candles. She had on a previous occasion set fire to some of the rubbish but the fire was discovered by other occupants of the house before serious damage was caused. The Magistrates made an Order for her removal to a London County Council Home and once the Order was made the old lady went quite willingly. The other case was a lady of 93 years of age who lived in a basement flat with her equally elderly husband, The husband did his best but the old lady would not allow him to do even what he could to clean her room and she refused any assistance from the home help service. Once again when a Removal Order was made by the Court the old lady went with very little protest, Although an Order can be made for the removal and maintenance of an old person for a period of three months, the Welfare Department of the County Council usually requests that in the first instance the Order should be for not more than six weeks 19 and this was done in the two cases mentioned above, Both the old ladies settled down well and agreed voluntarily to remain in the homes and no extensions of the Orders were required. PUBLIC HEALTH LAUNDRY The number of persons requiring the assistance of the Public Health Laundry has remained fairly constant over the last two years and has varied between 27 and 34. At the 31st December 1961 , two of the patients had been having the laundry service for more than three years, three for more than two years and four for more than one year, The value of this service over a long period of time is immense. The difficulty of coping with soiled laundry in a one room home or by relatives who are out at work during the day or are themselves perhaps becoming aged or infirm, is a very real one and the laundry service is of considerable help in relieving one burden of the aged person who is not ill enough to be removed to a hospital or a home. The Public Health Laundry which operates from the Public Health Station in Lithos Road is kept very fully occupied and it is perhaps fortunate that the number of patients requiring the use of the laundry has become fairly stabilised at around 30. Any increase in this number would probably require additional staff and equipment and the present building could not readily be enlarged to meet an extra demand, The soiled articles are collected, laundered and delivered twice a week, "and the total number of articles dealt with during the year was 14,803. DISINFECTION AND PIS INFESTATION In recent years it has been recognised that steam disin— fection is necessary on somewhat different grounds from those which were previously considered valid. In the ordinary house smallpox and possibly tuberculosis are the main illnesses following which steam disinfection of bedding8 articles of clothing and disin— fection of the room itself is necessary, Following other illnesses the ordinary washing and laundering of clothes and the cleansing of 20 the room with soap and water are all that is really required. Nevertheless disinfection of rooms and their contents after in— fectious disease has been carried out so generally and for so many years that it would probably be wrong to refuse disinfection where it is requested, and in any case, even in these days one cannot be sure in every case that a room will be thoroughly cleansed after an illness. In hospitals and nursing homes the problem is quite different. Wards are in continuous use by a number of patients and the danger is one of cross-infection where a patient who is already ill becomes infected with "germs" which are introduced by another patient with possibly serious consequences, In these case the disinfection of blankets in particular is of great importance in reducing the amount of cross infection and as was stated in the last report a method has been found of sterilizing blankets and other woollen articles repeatedly without damaging the material as the ordinary process is apt to do, if carried out many times, During the year, 135 rooms were disinfected after infectious disease in 109 premises and a total of 7,541 articles were passed through the steam chamber. This figure includes a regular weekly collection from one hospital of approximately 100 blankets. There is still a demand for the disinfection of parcels of clothing prior to dispatch abroad and 135 parcels belonging to private individuals were disinfected to comply with regulations in the receiving countries. The normal charge for this service is five shillings per parcel, Disinfestation of premises infested with vermin is now carried out with insecticides which have a prolonged effect over weeks or months and massive infestation is now very unusual. Members of the public, however, call for disinfestation at the first signs of infestation. Evidence of infestation is not always found but if bugs or fleas are found in any room which is being sprayed the adjoining rooms are also treated. Cockroaches are also not uncommon in some of the older houses and about one quarter of the rooms treated were dealt with for this purpose. 21 Other seasonal infestations which cause a good deal of trouble are clover mites and small fruit flies , neither of which have any medical significance but which can cause considerable annoyance to the occupants of a house. A total of 327 rooms in 114 premises were treated during 1961. In addition to the ordinary disinfection or disinfestation of premises , 21 filthy or verminous rooms were cleared after the death or removal of the occupant, On a special and unusual request by an importer, 191 crates containing 170s000 children's cane shopping baskets in— tended to be sold containing chocolate Easter eggs were disinfec— ted and made safe. The baskets had come from Hong Kong and it was thought that some may have been infested with a minute insect. SANITARY CIRCUMSTANCES The Ministry of Health requires that this Report should include information on certain points concerning water supply and sewerage. Water Supply All the drinking water used in the Borough is supplied by the Metropolitan Water Board. There are no private wells in use. Routine examination of the water supply is not carried out by the Council but examinations are carried out if any complaint is received or if there is any reason to suspect the purity of any particular supply. The water supply to the whole of the Borough has been satisfactory both in quality and quantity. No samples of raw water have been examined but one sample for bacteriological examination and one for chemical analysis have been taken of drinking water from a dwelling where there had been a complaint. Both samples were found to be satisfactory. Some of the water supplied by the Metropolitan Water Board has a plumbo solvent action and the 38th report by the Director of 22 Water Examination gives details of an experiment conducted between 1952 and 1958 using a 60 foot coil of lead piping. The report states "These results show that after the pipe had been in use for about two months, the amount of lead taken up by river-derived water left standing overnight was considerably reduced, and that after one year, the amount taken up overnight was reduced to a more or less constant figure of about 0. 3 mg. /1. However, even with a pipe that has been installed for several years, it is still advisable to run the stagnant water to waste first thing in the morning to obtain an entirely leadfree water. " The 39th report by the Director points out that some types of plastic piping contain a proportion of lead and that although the amount of lead taken up by water from these pipes is less than from a lead pipe, it is advisable that all plastic pipes should be tested to measure the amount of lead which is freed before the pipe is put into use. No form of contamination of the water supply was found which required any action by the Council, All the dwelling-houses in the Borough have a piped supply direct to the houses and none is supplied by stand-pipes. Sewerage All the houses in Hampstead are connected to the main drainage system, the sewerage passing eventually to the London County Council's main sewers and to the sewage disposal works outside the Borough. The reconstruction works to prevent the possibility of flooding after heavy storms completed some years ago have proved satisfactory. No new schemes for sewerage within the Borough are contemplated at the present time. London County Council (General Powers) Act, 1955, Section 27 This section is of considerable benefit to the Department as it cuts out the unreasonable delay often associated with the service of the usual nuisance notices. 23 Essential pre-requisites to the service of such notices are:(a) the Council must be satisfied that the house is in such a state as to be a nuisance or injurious or dangerous to healthy and (b) having regard to all the circumstances unreasonable delay would be occasioned by the procedure prescribed by the usual nuisance notices,, The intimation of this power to certain reluctant property owners has had considerable effect even though no actual formal notice was served during the year. London County Council (General Powers) Act, 1925 , Section 33 Colas Mews Site This site continues to be a source of nuisance and, as I have observed in previous years, I see no hope of improvement until it is developed,, The present misuse of the area is mainly attributable to the street traders who persistently deposit their garbage and unwanted containers both on the highway and the private site. This example is followed by the usual indiscriminate refuse dumpers who appear to work overnight and in consequence the owner has to be asked repeatedly to keep the site clear. Although the private land has been fenced on numerous occasions this again appears to be a waste of time and money because as fast as the fence is erected portions are destroyed. Public Health (London) Act, 1936. Section 40 as amended by Section 6 and Schedule of the London County Council (General Powers) Act, 1951 Drainage Statutory notices in respect of defective drainage were served in three cases and the owners complied therewith. Householders are still not generally aware that they are responsible for the repair and maintenance of private drains until they are connected to the actual sewer. This can be a very expensive contingency. Barbers and Hairdressers Barbers and Hairdressers premises are registered under the Model Byelaws made by the Council under Section 18, London County 24 Council (General Powers) Act, 1954. Seventy-one inspections were made and in no instance was it found necessary to serve written notice, such minor defects as were found being dealt with on the Inspector's verbal request. The number of premises on the register at the end of the year was 85. Shops Act, 1950 Lighting, washing facilities, facilities for taking meals, temperature, ventilation and sanitary conveniences are now the responsibility of the Borough Council although the London County Council still operate such powers in respect of seven premises licensed for public entertainment. No contraventions were reported. Consumer Protection Act, 1961 This Act entitled "An Act to make provision for the protection of consumers" came into force on the 19th August, 1961. The provisions relating to heating appliances and oil burners, which are administered by the Department and were formerly contained in the Heating Appliances (Fireguards) Act, 1952, and the Oil Burners (Standards) Act,1960, are now incorporated in the new Act. Regulations prescribing standards of safety, construction, design and performance will be issued by the Secretary of State. The Rag Flock and Other Filling Materials Act, 1951 New Regulations entitled "The Rag Flock and Other Filling Materials Regulations, 1961" were issued during the year superseding the Regulations of 1951 and 1954. These Regulations deal with the following matters:- (a) Used wood wool is prescribed as a filling material to which the Act applies. (b) The standards of cleanliness for each kind of filling material to which the Act applies. 25 (c) The names of the Analysts for the purposes of tests under the Act, the fees which may be charged by any Analyst making such a test, and the form in which a certificate of the results is to be given- (d) The form in which records are to be kept of occupiers of premises registered under the Act for the use of filling materials, or licensed for the manufacture or storage of rag flock, the manner in which the records are to be kept and the information which is to be recorded. There is one firm in the Borough of Hampstead whose premises are registered for the use of filling materials used in manufacturing bedding and other articles of upholstery. One inspection was carried out which showed the premises to be in a satisfactory condition. Common Lodging Houses There are no common lodging houses in the Borough. Road Traffic Act, 1956. Section 42 New Regulations "Motor Cycle (Protective Helmets) (Amendment) Regulations, 1961" were issued during the year. There are no premises in the Borough to which these Regulations apply. PREVENTION OF DAMAGE BY PESTS ACT, 194 9 Destruction of Rats and Mice The incidence of surface rat infestations has continued the trend of I960 and there has been a further reduction in the number of complaints received amounting to approximately 20 per cent. An even greater reduction has been experienced with mice infestations. In this instance it amounts to almost 30 per cent. Nevertheless, 928 properties were inspected and of this number 210 were found to be infested by rats and 361 by mice. The total number of visits made for purposes of survey and treatment totalled 26 3,748. In five cases it was necessary to serve notices for the partial or complete renewal of drainage systems. In all instances the necessary work was done without resort to legal proceedings. Summary of Surface Treatment No. of properties inspected as a result of: Local Authority Dwellings (including Council properties) All other (including business premises) Total Notification — 563 8 571 Survey — 357 — 357 Total inspections including reinspections — 3,719 29 3,748 No, of properties infested by: Rats Mice — 205 358 5 3 210 361 Control of Rats in Sewers I am indebted to the Borough Engineer and Surveyor for particulars in regard to the control of rats in sewers. In view of the disappointing results obtained with the use of "Warfarin" suspended in manholes, as opposed to the more orthodox system with the use of Zinc Phosphide and Arsenious Oxide, this experiment was discontinued. During the year two treatments were carried out as follows:- Date No. of manholes baited Poison used Complete T ake s Partial Takes Baiting Sequence March Oct/Nov. 735 756 2. 5% Zinc Phosphide 10% Arsenious Oxide 36 5 114 135 1-4-8 1 -4-8 27 In November, 1961 , a letter was received from the Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food requesting local authorities to review their methods of rodent control in sewers. It also urged that modern treatment methods should be used and co-ordinated with adjacent Boroughs. Considerable stress was laid upon the use of Fluoracetamide. Having carefully considered the Ministry's point of view and having consulted other authorities with experience in the use of this poison, it has been decided to invite private contractors to undertake trial treatments. It is hoped, therefore, to report upon this method of control in the report for 1962. ATMOSPHERIC POLLUTION Smoke Control Areas The Council's programme to make the whole of the Borough a Smoke Control Area by 1967 was advanced a further stage when the No. 3 Control Order became operative on 1st December, 1961. The area covered by this Order is the largest of the twelve areas into which Hampstead has been divided for the purposes of the programme. It covers some 350 acres and includes more than 7,000 dwellings. The implementation of the Order provided many lessons and not a few problems. The actual estimates of the cost of work to be done which have been submitted for approval for grant purposes have in many instances been very different from the notional estimates of such costs, although the latter have in some instances been based on official information. Considerable tact is needed in trying to reduce these estimates,, In many cases the builder has a long association with his customer and but for this would probably not have been interested in giving an estimate for the replacement of a fire grate. So although the smoke inspector's duty is clear, a brusque intimation that a builder's estimate of £20 for the fireplace is (say) £5 above "reasonable cost" may cause strain in a hitherto satisfactory business relationship involving far greater sums. It is not easy to encourage householders to hawk a job costing a few pounds around the building trade in order to find a man 28 who will work cheaply and it is not possible as an officer of a local authority to recommend an individual builder., This work takes a great deal of time but one of the smoke survey assistants , Mr. J, A„ Woodman, was detailed to investigate these estimates and he has persuaded and advised in such a commendably tactful yet determined manner that costs have been kept to a minimum, The survey of Area No. 4 was almost completed by the end of 196lo This area which is on the eastern side of the Borotigh covers 150 acres and includes some 3,700 dwellings. It has been found that Clean Air is not unpopular,, The great majority of people are prepared willingly to cooperate with the Council in complying with a Smoke Control Order, provided that they know about it. It was found in the large No. 3 area that far too many people genuinely did not know that they were included in a smoke control area, and they ordered their summer-price coal and innocently continued to use it after the order came into operation,, This was in spite of the publicity which was given to the matter which was much in excess of the legal requirements and which alsc included a small but well publicised exhibition which was held in conjunction with a well attended and very lively public meeting,, Part of the difficulty appears to be the inevitable delay between the earlier inspections on a survey and the confirmation of the order. Indeed some people had so completely forgotten that they denied that they had ever been told about the proposed Smoke Control Order until they were shown the records giving the date of the inspection and details of the fireplaces in the house. In conjunction with a good records system it would seem that a circular letter to every householder at all three stages (survey, confirmation of order and operative date of the order) is the most satisfactory system. The use of a pre-paid postcard questionnaire has made it possible to accelerate surveys and it is confidently hoped that the whole Borough will have been dealt with by 1967. 29 Smoke Nuisances Smoke nuisances followed the pattern of previous years, the most frequent complaint being smuts from oil-fired boilers. Several cases of domestic smoke within smoke control areas were dealt with and only in one case was any action beyond verbal notice required. There is little doubt that smoke emission is becoming accepted as anti-social and if this feeling becomes general the Clean Air Act will be effective in spite of its apparent shortcomings. Staff In Hampstead all the work connected with clean air was carried out by a staff of one public health inspector with two unqualified assistants, a third assistant being appointed in order to speed up the completion of the programme, The work covers the surveys and implementation of Smoke Control Orders, measurement of air pollution, investigation of smoke nuisances, notifications of new installations and all the clerical work involved. As the timing of the application for approval for grant purposes depends on the individual householders, there have been times when the number of staff employed seemed hardly adequate but it is difficult to attract staff of the quality required for a post which will no longer be required in five year's time. The two assistants , Miss B. Dimmock and Mr, J. A. Woodman, have, however, gained so much experience in the work that it is now possible to give them more responsibility and it is hoped that the new arrangements will suffice without the need to employ more extra staff. HEALTH EDUCATION There is continuing evidence to show that the work of the Department is more and more concerned with the individual. Indeed, Public Health, to be absolutely effective, must rely to a large extent upon the knowledge and cooperation of all who are in any way concerned with it. During the year a full programme of group health education has been in progress. It has included talks on hygiene in the home, water supply, food hygiene, sampling procedure, nutrition and diet, home safety and the work of the Public Health Inspector. 30 Church groups of all ages and social and political organisations have f6rmed the greater part of the audiences for lectures and discussion on these subjects, all of which have been supported with visual lecture aids, either film strips, slides or photographs., An encouraging development in the field of organised health education has been the regular lectures given by this Department's staff to student nurses at Hampstead General HospitaL In the period immediately prior to IntermediateExamination, lectures are given on water supply, food poisoning, drainage and sewage disposal, milk production and treatment, refuse disposal and clean air. Work beyond the borough boundary has included lectures and group discussions. The subject "Health Education and the Food Salesman" has formed part of residential courses held by the National Dairymen's Association alt the Borough Polytechnic. Various lectures have also been delivered to student groups at the South East London Technical College. HOUSING Slum Clearance The Council was asked by the Minister of Housing and Local Government to formulate proposals, jointly with the London County Council of their slum clearance programme for the next five years. With the concurrence of the London County Council it was reported that there are no comprehensive areas in the Borough which could be represented as Slum Clearance Areas in the immediate future. There are a number of individual cases, however, which remain to be dealt with and it is proposed to reconsider these as soon as practicable having regard to the Council's available pool of housing accommodation for decanting purposes. These number some 23 properties. Underground Rooms New Regulations were approved by the Minister of Housing and Local Government and are now in force. r THE END OF AN ERA - FLEET ROAD DEMOLITION WORK FLEET ROAD AREA REDEVELOPMENT 31 All property conversions involving basements are made subject to the basement being made to comply with the Regulations. Existing basement rooms are deemed to be unfit for habit— ation unless they comply with the Regulations, which are as follows: - "REGULATIONS prescribed by the Mayor, Aldermen and Councillors of the Metropolitan Borough of Hampstead for securing the proper ventilation and lighting of rooms to which sub-section (2) of Section 18 of the Housing Act, 195 7 applies, and the protection thereof against dampness, effluvia or exhalation. Every room, used or suitable for use for human habitation, the surface of the floor of which is more than three feet below the surface of the part of the street adjoining or nearest the room, or more than three feet below the surface of any ground within nine feet of the room, shall comply with the following regulations, that is to say: - Drainage lo The subsoil of the site of the room shall be effectually drained wherever the dampness of the site renders this necessary. 2. No subsoil drain shall discharge into a soil drain except through a suitable trap. 3. Every drain passing through the room, and every drain or sewer passing under the room other than a sub— soil drain, shall be gastight and watertight. Floors 4. The floor of the room shall be of such material or materials and construction as adequately to resist the passage of moisture or exhalation from the ground. Walls 5. The walls of the room shall either be of such material and construction, or shall have been so treated, as adequately to resist the passage of moisture to their inner surface, or to any timber or other material forming part of the building that would be harmfully affected by dampness. 32 Ventilation and Lighting 6. The room shall have a window or windows as specified in paragraph (i) of this regulation for the purposes of ventil¬— ation, and in paragraph (ii) for the purposes of lighting: - (i) One or more windows which can be opened at the top directly into the external air to an extent equivalent in aggregate area to not less than one-twentieth of the area of the floor or the room. (ii) One or more windows having an aggregate area clear of the window frame amounting to not less than one-tenth of the area of the floor of the room, and so situated that from any point thereon, or, if the total window area exceeds the foregoing minimum requirement, from any point on a part or parts thereof which satisfy that requirement, a line can be drawn upwards at an angle of thirty degrees with the horizontal in a vertical plane at right angles to the plane of the window without intercepting any obstruction except an open fence within a distance of ten feet measured horizontally from the window. For this purpose a bay window with side lights shall be deemed to be a flat window equal in area to the sum of the areas of the front and side lights 5 situated at a distance from the face of the wall from which it projects equal to half the maximum depth of the projections 7. Immediately outside any window provided in pursuance of these regulations there shall be an unobstructed space which shall conform with the following requirements: (i) The space shall extend throughout the entire width of the window and (except where the area of such window is not less than one-seventh of the area of the floor of the room) for two feet on each side of the window, (ii) The space shall in every part extend for not lesss than two feet from the external wall of the room except that, where the window is a bay window with side 33 lights, the depth of the space in front of that window may be reduced to not less than one foot. (iii) If the space is below the general level of the ground within nine feet from the window so much of it as satisfies the foregoing requirements of this regulation shall be properly paved with impervious material and effectually drained, and the paved surface shall be at least six inches below the level of the bottom of the sill of the window. Nothing in this Regulation shall prohibit the placing in or over such open space of any steps necessary for access to any part of the building in which the room is contained, provided they are not placed over or across any window satisfying the requirements of the preceding Regulations. 80 From and after the date on which the Minister of Housing and Local Government consents to the foregoing regulations the Regulations under Section 17(7) which were prescribed by the Mayor, Aldermen and Councillors of the Metropolitan Borough of Hampstead on 4th May, 1911 , and consented to by the Minister on 5th July, 1911, shall be revoked. " Housing Act, 195 7 The following action was taken regarding Closing Orders, during 1961:- No. of basements-closed and occupiers rehoused 8 No. of basement premises made fit and Closing Orders determined 3 Permission given for use of basement for storage purposes 1 Closing Orders in respect of other houses or parts of houses 24 Closed mews premises made fit and permission given for use as offices 1 Housing Act, 1961 Part II of this Act is designed "to confer further power on local authorities as regards houses let in lodgings or occupied by 34 more than one family". It is particularly welcomed in Hampstead where there are many well-built and substantial houses which were originally intended for occupation by one family and which cannot be dealt with under slum clearance provisions because the buildings themselves are sound, but which are now occupied by a number of families although the sanitary and other facilities have not been increased in proportion to the increase in the number of occupants. Section 15 of the Act empowers the local authority to require the execution of works to remedy defects not only in natural lighting, ventilation, water supply, drainage and sanitary conveniences and facilities for the storage, preparation and cooking of food and the disposal of waste water , which are mentioned in Section 4 of the Housing Act, 1957, but also adds artificial lighting, personal washing facilities and installations for space heating or for the use of space heating appliances. The Act further empowers the local authority to do the work in default, although it appears that the provisions for recovery of the cost are less satisfactory than in other Housing Acts, and it could well happen that in certain circumstances the Council might find it difficult or impossible to recover the money so spent. The methods of enforcement appear also to be somewhat cumbersome but the Act nevertheless does give considerable assistance in dealing with a very difficult and growing problem. Another welcome feature of this Part of the Act is that it allows the Council to deal with overcrowding in houses in multiple occup— ation before the overcrowding has developed, which is not the case with Section 90 of the Act of 1957. The operation of the Act may, however, cause a good deal of hardship because it will be impossible in many instances to provide the required standard of amenities without taking away some of the accommodation used for living or sleeping purposes. This will mean that a number of families will be evicted and it is most unlikely that the Council could, in fairness to those people already on the housing waiting list, offer alternative accommodation to the evicted families. This is the price which must be paid in order to achieve and maintain proper standards in the many houses in multiple occupation 35 throughout, the Borough. The hardship could be minimised bytaking advantage of the normal changes in tenancies which are constantly occurring and it is to be hoped that landlords will use these opportunities rather than resort to the harsher method of eviction. The Housing Act, 1961 also provides for the registration at a later date of houses in multiple occupation and inter alia for some amendments concerning improvement grants. Old People's Housing A number of local voluntary organisations are doing sterling work in providing excellent housing facilities for old persons. Maximum assistance has been provided by the Council by way of mortgages and improvement grants and at the end of the year plans were well advanced for the acquisition, conversion and im— provement of five large old houses which will provide accommodation for some 75 old people. INSPECTION AND SUPERVISION OF FOOD Food and Drugs Act, 1955; Food Hygiene (General) Regulations, I960 There can be no doubt that the sale of food in Hampstead is gradually passing out of the hands of the small retailer and into those of the giants, particularly in the Supermarket world. Although this trend may be regretted in many quarters, it must be admitted that these concerns with their large financial and other resources are able, not only to provide ideal premises, equipment and re— frigerated displays of an excellent hygienic standard, but at the same time to maintain fresh foods of good quality at competitive prices, It seems likely that many residents are unaware of the extent to which the family's food is safeguarded and partly for this reason the Public Health Committee suggested the organisation of a Health Exhibition to be held in the early part of 1962 which, in addition to demonstrating the work of the Public Health Inspectors, the Public Analyst and the Public Health Laboratorys Colindale in this field, would endeavour to illustrate the various principles which should be observed in the home to ensure that foods remain fit for consumption 36 after purchase. The character of Hampstead is such that a large proportion of its residents favour taking their meals at local restaurants, of which there is a steadily increasing number who are specialising in Continental and Asian foods. The majority of. these are applying for licences as Refreshment Houses or to sell alcohol and for these reasons are being required to provide sanitary accommodation for male and female staff and the public a highly desirable feature in all such premises whether licensed or otherwise. Notifications of food poisoning have been encouragingly low during the year which justifies the conclusion that the work of all those concerned with the fitness of food for consumption is having positive results. Complaints regarding the sale of milk in "dirty" bottles continue to arise and in spite of continued investigation and research into this problem by the producers, the problem remains unsolved. The public should bear its share of responsibility in this matter since it is apparent that, but for the abuse to which emptied bottles are subjected which renders their cleansing by approved mechanical methods impracticable, no such problem would exist. Under the established system of retail milk distribution in this country, there seems to be no satisfactory method of making a charge for the non-return or misuse of milk bottles and the use of expendable containers would, however, not only increase the cost of milk to the consumer but may well produce other problems in the disposal of large quantities of these containers particularly in hot weather, from the small amounts of stale milk left in them. Recent improvements in the equipment of the Ice Cream van are worthy of notice. New types incorporating electric generators capable of providing power for refrigeration and heating water for cleansing purposes are now appearing which meet the requirements of the Food Hygiene Regulations, 1960 more fully. The development of this equipment has enabled the itinerant vendor to retail Soft Ice Cream and it can be foreseen that this commodity will gain in popularity. It will shortly be available at THE PUBLIC HEALTH INSPECTOR DISCUSSES HEALTH PROBLEMS 37 the Heath Fair for the first time and it will be interesting to compare its chemical and bacteri61ogica'l standards with those of the "Hard" Ice Creams also on sale. Dairy Ice Cream is still in small demand but if the "soft" principle is applied to it, which is likely when technical limitations to its use in existing continuous freezers are overcome, it could gain in popularity. It is often considered to be "too rich" to the palate. Efforts to exclude dogs from food shops have not been notably successful,. All food retailers appear to be in favour of this restriction and some of the larger multiple stores and super— markets have taken the initiative in this matter but the smaller retailers are not prepared to antagonise their customers by attempting to enforce it. Further improvement must to a very large extent depend on public opinion and in this respect the attitude of the larger stores is most helpfil. The situation is much the same with regard to smoking by the public in such premises and the enforcement of the Food Hygiene Regulations, 1960 against shop assistants is made difficult because of this obvious anomaly in the law which, purely on the grounds of health, prohibits smoking on one side of a counter displaying open food but permits it on the other side. 38 STATISTICAL SUMMARY Area of Borough 2, 265 acres No. of structurally separate dwellings, Census 1951 23,010 No. of private households , Census 1951 35,970 No, of separate rating assessments of dwelling houses 24,078 Rateable Value, March 1961 £2,267,204 Sum produced by Id. rate £9,182 Population: Registrar General's Estimate mid-1961 96,990 Estimated Population of Children 30th June, 1961: Under 1 1 - 4 Total under 5 5 - 14 Total under 15 1 ,740 4 , 560 6S 300 8,500 14,800 Live Births: Legitimate: Males 781 Females 711) _ " Illegitimate: " 111" 117) Totai:_ 1 '720 Live birth rate per 1 ,000 population 17. 7 Illegitimate live births per cent, of total live births 13. 3 Area Comparability Factor .76 Adjusted birth rate 13.5 Still -births: Males 11. Females 12 Total:- 23 Still-birth rate per 1 ,000 live and still-births 13 Total live and still-births 1,743 Infant Deaths: Males 12. Females 15 Total:- 27 Neo-natal deaths (first 4 weeks of life) (M. 11. F, 10) 21 Early Neo-natal deaths (first week of life) (M. 11. F. 9) 20 Infant Mortality Rates: - All Infants per 1 ,000 live births 16 Legitimate infants per 1 ,000 legitimate live births 14. 7 Illegitimate infants per 1 ,000 illegitimate live births 21. 9 Neo-natal deaths per 1 ,000 live births 12.2 Early Neo-natal deaths per 1 ,000 live births 11. 6 Perinatal Mortality Rate (still-births deaths under 1 week per 1 ,000 live and still-births) 24. 7 Maternal deaths (including abortion) 1 Maternal mortality rate per 1 ,000 live and still-births 1 Deaths: - Males 435. Females 540) Total:- 975 Death rate per 1 ,000 population 10.1 Area Comparability Factor 0.99 Adjusted death rate 10.0 39 CAUSES OF DEATH 1961 Cause of Death Total Males MALES - AGES Total Females FEMALES - AGES Total Males & F e males 0 1 5 15 25 45 65 75 0 1 5 15 25 45 65 75 Tuberculosis respiratory — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — 1 1 Tuberculosis other — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — Syphilitic disease — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — 1 1 Diphtheria — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — —- — Whooping Cough — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — Meningococcal infections —_ — — — — — — — — 1 1 — — — — — — — 1 Acute poliomyelitis — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — Measles — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — Other infective and parasitic diseases — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — Malignant neoplasm, stomach 9 — — — — 1 2 4 2 21 — — — — — 3 7 11 30 Malignant neoplasm, lung, bronchus 34 — — — — 1 18 9 6 9 — — — — — 2 1 6 43 Malignant neoplasm, breast 1 — — — — — 1 — — 28 — — — — 4 10 6 8 29 Malignant neoplasm, uterus — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — 3 1 1 5 Other malignant and lymphatic neoplasm 51 — — — — 2 23 15 11 63 — — — l 1 22 20 19 114 Leukaemia, aleukaemia — — — — — — — — — 3 — —- — 1 — 1 - — 1 3 Diabetes 3 — — — — 1 1 — 1 4 — — — — — — 1 3 7 Vascular lesions of nervous system 36 — — — — — 8 10 18 66 — — — — — 9 11 46 102 Coronary disease angina 108 — — — — —_ 46 30 32 103 — — — — 1 15 28 59 211 Hypertension with heart disease 6 — — — — — — — 4 13 — — — — — — 2 11 19 Other heart disease 30 — — — — — 6 6 18 50 — — — — 2 2 11 35 80 Other circulatory disease 24 — — — — — 6 — 10 29 — — — — 1 2 5 21 53 Influenza — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — 6 6 Pneumonia 26 — — — — 3 5 7 10 35 — — — — 3 2 5 25 61 Bronchitis 31 — — — — — 7 10 13 18 — 1 — — — 3 2 12 49 Other diseases of respiratory system 2 — — — — — 1 — 1 3 — — — — 1 1 1 5 Ulcer of stomach and duodenum 5 — — — — — 3 1 1 6 — — — — — 1 1 4 11 Gastritis, enteritis and diarrhoea 1 — — — — — — 1 — 2 — — — — — — — 2 3 Nephritis and nephrosis 7 — — — 1 1 4 — 1 1 — — — — — 1 — — 8 Hyperplasia of prostate 7 — — — — — — 1 6 — — — — — — — — — 7 Pregnancy, child birth, abortion — — — — — — — — — 1 — — — — 1 — — — 1 Congenital malformations — — — — — — — — — 10 5 2 — — — 2 1 — 10 Other defined and illdefined diseases 26 11 — — 2 2 4 2 5 38 9 — — — 2 7 7 13 64 Motor vehicle accidents 3 — — — — 2 — — 1 2 — — — — — 1 1 — 5 All other accidents 10 — — — — 2 4 — 1 11 — — — 1 — 4 2 4 21 Suicide 15 — — — 3 5 4 1 — 9 — — — 1 4 3 1 —_ 24 Homicide and operations of war — — — — — — — — — 1 — — — 1 — — — — 1 TOTAL: - 435 12 1 1 6 20 145 107 143 540 15 3 — 5 20 93 *114 290 975 40  Infant Mortality Rate Maternal Mortality Rate Year Population Birth Rate Death Rate 1900 81 ,230 20. 0 11. 3 104 2 1905 83,430 16. 1 9. 3 94 4 1910 85,210 14. 0 8. 6 60 1 1915 81,760 15. 3 12. 1 76 4 1920 91,519 17. 1 9.4 48 2 1925 88,040 12. 2 10. 5 55 5 1930 84,830 11. 8 11. 5 58 6 1931 87,740 11. 2 11. 7 61 2 1932 90,130 10. 9 11. 6 54 2 1933 90,380 9. 6 11. 0 38 NIL 1934 90,000 10. 4 11. 3 53 4 1935 90,600 11. 0 11. 2 49 1 1936 90,700 11. 5 11. 3 66 3 1937 90,690 11. 2 11. 6 54 3 1938 90,480 11. 7 11. 4 57 1 1939 90, 170 10. 9 11. 6 38 1 1940 71 ,520 11. 1 16. 2 49 5 1941 58,760 10. 9 15. 9 59 1 1942 63,240 14. 5 14. 2 49 5 1943 69,320 16.6 14. 3 43 2 1944 69,840 16. 1 14. 6 62 1 1945 74,390 16. 2 13.4 42 2 1946 89,720 17.4 11. 8 36 1 1947 95,650 18. 1 11, 2 29 2 1948 95,480 15. 7 10. 3 29 1 1949 97,090 14. 7 10. 5 29 2 1950 97,400 15. 5 10. 0 19 1 1951 97,750 14. 5 11. 5 27 1 1952 97,700 14. 9 11. 2 24 NIL, 1953 97,970 14. 5 11. 8 16 1 1954 98,210 14. 7 9. 1 17 1 1955 97,710 14. 1 10. 0 17 NIL 1956 97,580 15. 1 10. 5 23 1 195 7 97,130 15. 4 10. 5 18 1 1958 96,480 15. 5 11. 1 21 NIL 1959 96,810 16. 5 10. 9 22 NIL 1960 98,080 17. 1 10. 4 20 1 1961 96,990 17. 7 10. 1 16 1 41 Notifications Removed to Hosp. 1961 Deaths 1961 DISEASE 1957 1958 1959 I960 1961 Diphtheria — 1 1 1 — — — Dysentery 26 60 79 48 16 - Encephalitis: Acute Infective 1 — — — — — — Post Infectious — 1 1 4 3 3 — Erysipelas 13 5 8 6 1 — — Food Poisoning 10 15 26 23 13 6 — Malaria 1 — — — — — — Measles 829 706 344 86 1,093 44 — Meningococcal Infection — 1 2 3 2 2 1 Ophthalmia Neonatorum: Hampstead residents , 8 6 11 — 2 2 — Non-residents 19 3 14 5 — — — Paratyphoid Fever — 1 — 2 1 1 — Pneumonia 48 40 47 12 19 2 2 Poliomyelitis: Non-Paralytic 4 —- 3 — 3 2 — Paralytic 11 2 2 3 4 4 — Puerperal Pyrexia: Hampstead residents 26 30 19 7 3 2 — Non-residents 59 39 34 21 13 13 — Scabies 13 13 17 15 10 — — Scarlet Fever 55 51 37 18 38 9 — Typhoid Fever 3 2 5 2 2 1 — Whooping Cough 109 21 37 58 25 3 — TOTAL: - 1 ,235 997 687 314 1 ,248 94 3 TUBERCULOSIS Age Periods Respiratory Non-Respiratory New Cases Deaths New Cases Deaths M F M F M F M F 0 — 1 — — — — — — 1 — 1 — — — — — — 5 — 1 — — 2 — — — 15 6 9 — — — — — — 25 11 8 — — 3 9 — — 45 10 5 — — — 1 — — 65 1 — — — — 1 — — 75 — 1 — 1 — — — — TOTAL:- 28 26 -— 1 5 11 — — 42 FOOD POISONING Cases notified 1 st Qtr. 4 2nd Qtr. 5 3rd Qtr. 3 4th Qtr. 1 T ota1 13 Otherwise ascertained 1 2 1 — 4 Deaths — — — — — Outbreaks No. of Outbreaks Family Other Cases Notified Otherwise Ascertained Total Cases Single Cases Cause Cases Notified Otherwise Ascertained T otal Cases Salmonella Typhimurium 4 — 4 Salmonella Stanley 1 — 1 Meleagridis 1 — 1 Not identified 2 — 2 Salmonella Infections not Food-borne NIL BACTERIOLOGICAL EXAMINATIONS (Infectious Diseases) Throat/Nose Swabs: No, of Examinations Diphtheria Bacilli found NIL Haemolytic Streptococci found 17 Negative 50 Faeces: Shigella found 16 Salmonella Typhi murium found 11 Salmonella Typhi found 1 Negative 182 277 43 HAMPSTEAD BOROUGH COUNCIL CLEANSING CENTRE Verminous Cases Conditions T reatments Scabies * Cases Treatments Adults 5 6' 9 19 Children 2 2 6 12 Contacts — — 2 2 * Includes 3 families (12 persons) treated at the request of Medical Officer of Health, Hendon. London County Council (General Powers) Act, 1953 Persons cleansed at home Nil DISINFECTION AND DISINFESTATION No.x>£ calls by borough van 6,107 No. of articles passed through steam chamber 7,541 No. of rooms disinfested after vermin 327 No. of rooms disinfected after infectious disease 135 No. of rooms cleansed after death or removal 21 Parcels of clothes for despatch abroad 135 Articles on medical loan collected and disinfected on behalf of London County Council ... 20 PUBLIC HEALTH LAUNDRY A twice weekly service is in operation and 1 ,773 bags of laundry have been dealt with during the year. The number of calls made by the van was 2,728. Articles Laundered: Draw Sheets 2,850 Shirts 282 Sheets 2,799 Vests 884 Blankets 181 Towels 2,504 Pillow-cases Nightdresses and 2,300 Pants 932 Pyjamas 2,071 Total Articles 14,803 The number of people using the laundry service has varied from 27 to 34 per month. 44 PUBLIC MORTUARY, NEW END Bodies admitted by order of: - Coroner 229 Ambulance 30 Police 7 Marie Curie Hospital 1 Public Health Department 5 272 Causes of death:- Natural Causes 220 Suicides: - Coal Gas Poisoning 11 Drugs 11 Railway 1 Hanging 1 Asphyxiation by plastic bag 1 Cut wrist . 26 Accidental: - Electrocution 1 Falls 2 Railway 1 T raf fic 9 13 F oetus 4 Post Operative 3 Inattention at Birth 1 Bodies brought for accommodation 5 272 No. of post mortem examinations carried out 267 Of the 272 bodies admitted to the Mortuary, 235 were of Hampstead residents. Coroner's Court The Hampstead and St. Pancras Coroner's Court is at Camley Street, N. W. 1. Telephone: EUSton 1691. Coroner: - I.Milne, Esq. 45 PUBLIC HEALTH INSPECTION Inspections: Housing defects 742 Loans for house purchase 184 Improvement grants 73 Housing Act, 1957. Repair of unfit houses (Sec„ 9) 29 Demolition & Closing Orders 52 Overcrowding 58 Rent Actj 1957. Certificates of Disrepair 5 House-to-House 248 Underground rooms (other than Closing Orders) 61 Accumulations of refuse 202 Dustbins 55 Nuisance from trees 15 Nuisance from bonfires 29 Improper keeping of animals 2 Noise 96 Smoke (Timed observations) 223 Other nuisances 118 Re -inspections: 6,340 Inspections: Schools 6 Public buildings, Hospitals, etc. 4 Clubs , Institutions, etc. 4 Offices, Business premises 9 Bombed site or open space 3 Mews or Stable Yard 62 Private Roads or Passageways 71 Re -inspections: 324 Inspections: Drainage work: Under Notice 14 Voluntary 390 Installation of Heating Apparatus 109 Housing Applications 349 Aged or Infirm Persons 278 Infectious Disease 180 Special Surveys: Smokeless Zones 8,501 Overcrowding 171 Infestations: Rodent 928 Other 307 Re -inspections: 6,220 46 Inspections: Foodshopsand stalls 1,070 Shops other than food shops 16 Shops Act 39 Merchandise Marks Act 19 Hairdresser 71 Pet Animals 14 Pharmacy 8t Poisons 10 Rag Flock 1 Fairground 14 Re -inspections: 967 Lectures, discussions, talks 100 Total complaints received 1,294 Informal Notices (verbal notice, letter) 268 Intimation Notices served 318 Statutory Notices served 83 Attendances at Court or Inquiries 15 FACTORY ACT, 1961 No. on Register Inspections Re -inspections Written Notices Factories in which S„ 1 , 2, 3,4 and 6 are to be enforced by local authority 213 126 17 — Factories not included above in which S. 7 is enforced by the local authority 279 209 174 21 Other premises in which S. 7 is enforced by the local authority (excluding out— workers premises) 4 4 3 — TOTAL: - 496 339 194 21 No prosecutions were undertaken during the year. 47 Defect Found Remedied Referred To H. M. By H. M. Inspector Inspector Want of Cleanliness (S. 1) 3 3 — — Overcrowding (S. 2) — — — — Unreasonable temperature (S„ 3) — — — — Inadequate ventilation (S. 4) 6 6 - 1 Ineffective drainage of floors (S. 6) — — — — Sanitary conveniences (S. 7) (a) Insufficient — — — — (b) Unsuitable or defective 9 6 — 2 (c) Not separate for sexes 1 — — — Other offences against the Act (Not including offences relating to outworkers) 2 2 4 — TOTAL: - 21 17 4 3 No prosecutions were undertaken during the year., OUTWORKERS No. of Hampstead firms making return 15 Total Outworkers notified by Hampstead firms 259 Outworkers resident in Hampstead (included in above) 24 Outworkers notified to us from other boroughs 47 Visits paid by Public Health Inspectors 58 Classes of Work. Outworkers Wearing Apparel - making, etc. cleaning and washing 4 7 Artificial flowers 1 Cosaques, Christmas stockings, etc. 20 Lampshades 3 TOTAL:- 71 No cases of default in sending lists or instances of work in unwholesome premises. No notices served or prosecutions under— taken. 48 PET ANIMALS ACT 3 1951 New Licences issued Licences discontinued Licences renewed 4 Visits by Public Health Inspectors 14 PHARMACY & POISONS ACT, 1933 New Licences issued 10 Licences renewed 88 Ceased to sell poisons or removed 10 No. on Register at end of year 97 Visits by Public Health Inspectors 10 LEGAL PROCEEDINGS Date of Hearing Nature of Offence Result of Proceedings 10. 2. 61 Sale of mouldy sausages Fined £ 10 with costs. 10. 2. 61 Sale of mouldy apple tart Fined £5 with costs. 28. 2. 61 Sale of milk in dirty bottles Fined £50 each on 3 summonses with £50 costs. Appeal dismissed with further costs of £ 84. 1 2s. Od. 23. 3. 61 Sale of jam tart containing piece of adhesive plaster Fined £ 20 with £ 10 costs. 12. 5. 61 Smoking whilst handling food Summons dismissed. 19. 5. 61 Smoking whilst handling food Fined £ 2 with £ 1. Is. Od. costs. 19. 5. 61 Sale of mouldy meat pasty Fined £ 15 with £ 8. 8. Od. costs. 22. 8. 61 Sale of steak and kidney pie which was sour and stale. Fined £ 25 with £ 3. 3. Od. costs. 22. 9. 61 Sale of mouldy sausages Fined £50 with £ 10. 10s. 0d. costs. 49 EXAMINATION OF WATER Chemical Analysis Bacteriological Examination Swimming bath water 8 44 Tap water 1 1 Sub-soil water 1 1 White Stone Pond water — 1 All the above samples were satisfactory. FOOD PREMISES The total number of foodshop premises is 872. There are 368 shops with multiple trades and in the following table these have been entered once under each type of trade carried on. No. on Register Primary Inspections Misc. Visits Baker, Patisserie 62 86 142 Butcher 99 80 272 Canteens and Clubs 68 31 - Confectioner 137 74 13 Delicatessen and Grocer 204 203 257 Fishmonger 24 29 171 Fried Fish 9 4 23 Greengrocer 99 88 240 Ice Cream 266 .71 33 Milkshop and Dairy 69 72 45 Off Licence 50 18 3 Public House 55 44 6 Refreshment House 60 28 25 Restaurant, Snack Bar 140 123 21 Street Trader or Stallholder 56 115 190 Chemists 30 ) Factory 4 ) 4 — Herbalist 3 ) Fairground 1 ) 1 ,436 1, 070 1 ,441 Revisits to shops (including shops other than foodshops) - 967. 50 FOOD & DRUGS ACT, 1955 , SECTION 16 Potted 8pressed 8pickled Ice Cream or preserved food Confectioners and Butchers 2 Grocers and Tobacconists 81 Fishmongers 5 Delicatessen 14 Grocer & Delicat- Garages 1 Provisions 4 essen 58 Bakers 8 Butchers 36 Restaurants 42 Florists 1 Factory 2 Dairies 23 Kiosk & Stalls 5 Fried Fish 6 Stores 9 Club 1 Fish Shop 2 Off Licences 3 TOTAL:- 266 Cinemas 2 Patisserie 1 TOTAL:- 66 Greengrocers 26 BACTERIOLOGICAL EXAMINATION OF FOOD Nature of Sample No, of samples Satisfactory Unsatisfactory Ice Cream 27 22 5 Jellied Eels 8 8 — Whelks 8 8 — Cockles 8 7 1 F rankfurter s 2 2 — Steak Pie 1 1 — Hamburgers 2 2 — Sausage Roll 1 1 — Lime Split 1 1 — Chocolate Cake 1 1 — Milk 8 8 — Oysters 1 1 — Peeled Prawns 1 1 — Prawns 1 1 — Toffee Apples 2 2 — Tap Water 1 1 — Instant Potato 1 1 — Luncheon Meat 1 1 — Mallow Creams 1 1 — 76 70 6 51 MILK SUPPLY Milk (Special Designation) Regulations Dealers Premises No. of milk sellers 69 Licences issued:- Pasteurised 62 Tuberculin Tested 42 Sterilised 56 Methylene Blue and Chemical Phosphatase Tests Analysis Pasteurised Milk 8 All the samples were satisfactory. ADULTERATED OR UNSATISFACTORY SAMPLES AND CONTRAVENTIONS OF FOOD & DRUGS ACT Article Offence and Action Taken Jam Tart Contained adhesive plaster. Producer fined £ 20 with £ 10 costs Barley & Mushroom Ingredients not set out in proper order or Soup Mix proportions. Distributors written to. Minestrone Soup ditto. Mix Cream of Oyster Deficient in fat. Importers warned. Soup Cornish Pasty Mouldy filling. Producer fined £ 15 with £ 8. 8s. Od. costs. Gin Added water 2. 8 per cent. Subsequent formal samples proved satisfactory. Pork Sausages Mouldy. Retailer fined £50 with £ 10. 10s. Od. costs. Pimentos Contained benzoic acid. No further stock. Butter Mouldy. Withdrawn from sale. Bottle of Milk Contained dust and dirt. Retailer warned. 52 ADULTERATED OR UNSATISFACTORY SAMPLES AND CONTRAVENTIONS OF FOOD & DRUGS ACT"(Contd. ) Article Offence and Action Taken Peeled Potatoes Affected by blight. Consignment destroyed- Steak and Kidney Pie Mouldy. Retailer fined £25 with £3. 3s. Od. cos Lime Syrup Excessive benzoic acid. Stock withdrawn. Quick Thick Gravy Incorrect description. Stocks exhausted. Label to be amended. Mushroom Soup Incorrect description. "Code of Practice" for labelling and composition under discussion. Onion Sauce ditto. Chocolates Dirty box. Vendor cautioned. Bread Contained foreign matter. Retailer warned. Chocolate Liqueurs Devoid of alcohol. Stocks withdrawn. Cream Fudge Contained fat other than milk fat. Stocks withdrawn. Label amended. Bottle of Milk Contained metal cap. No action. Frozen Rabbit Infected with cystic formations. Retailer warned. Dried Bean Soup Beetle infested. Letter sent. Artificial Cream Bun Mouldy. Retailer written to. Slice of Bread Mouldy. Proprietor written to. Wrapped Sliced Loaf Mouldy. Retailer fined £25 with £5. 5s. Od. costs. Steak &: Kidney Pie Mouldy. Letter sent to retailer. 53 UNSOUND FOOD Two hundred and forty-four certificates were issued in respect of the following items of unsound food:- Cereals 12 pkts. Cheese 18½ lbs® Coffee 10 tins Confectionery 63¾ lbs. Fish 43 tins, 16 lbs. Frozen Food 1 egg, 41 pkts.. Fruit 348 tins , 2¾ lbs. , 203 jars, 15 cartons Jam 5 tins, 31 jars Meat products 1 leg porks 117 tins, 29 cartons, 452¼ lbs. Poultry 77 lbs. Milk5 cream 24 tins Pickles, spices 63 jars Purees , juices 2 jars , 58 tins Salt 19 pkts© Soups 8 pkts, 56 tins Vegetables 263 tins, 23 cartons, 4205 lbs, 9 oz. HOUSING Dwelling-houses inspected for housing defects (under Public Health or Housing Acts) 1 ,716 Dwelling-houses (included in above) which were inspected and recorded under the Housing Consolidated Regs. 1925-1932. (House-to-House inspection) 248 Dwelling-houses found to be in a state so dangerous or injurious to health as to be unfit for human habitation 32 Dwelling-houses found not to be in all respects fit for human habitation 586 54 HOUSES IN CLEARANCE AREAS AND UNFIT HOUSES ELSEWHERE Houses Demolished Clearance Areas, Housing Act, 1957 NIL Not in Clearance Areas NIL Unfit Houses Closed Under Sections 16, 17 and 35, Housing Act, 1957 24 Persons displaced 78 Families displaced 35 Parts of Buildings closed (Section 18) 8 Persons displaced 14 Families displaced 8 Unfit Houses made fit and Houses in which Defects were Remedied By By Local Owner Authority After informal action by local authority 586 NIL After formal notice: Public Health Acts 99 NIL Housing Act, 1957 13 2 Under Section 24, Housing Act NIL NIL No action was taken under Sections 17, 34, 46, 48 and 53 of the Housing Act regarding Unfit Houses in Temporary Use. No houses in Clearance Areas were purchased by agreement. OVERCROWDING On register 31. 12. 60 Dwellings 225 Families 225 Adults 553 Children 363 New cases 1961 43 43 118 102 268 268 671 465 Rehoused 1961 25 25 49 30 On register 31. 12. 61 243 243 622 435 55 CERTIFICATES OF DISREPAIR Applications for certificates 3 Applications withdrawn or cancelled NIL Certificates refused NIL Authority to issue certificates - (a) in respect of some but not all defects - (b) in respect of all defects 3 3 Undertakings given by landlords 1 Undertakings refused NIL Certificates issued 2 Applications for cancellation of certificates 3 Objections by tenants to cancellation of certificates 1 Decisions to cancel in spite of tenants objection NIL Certificates cancelled 2 HOUSING ACT, 1957. SECTION 9 Repair of Insanitary Houses Out of 248 premises surveyed by the Housing Inspector and the District Public Health Inspectors, twentyone were subsequently reported to the Public Health Committee as being unfit and suitable for action under Section 9. Appropriate action under the Public Health (London) Act was taken with the remainder. REHOUSING Visits and revisits in connection with the investigation of 386 rehousing applicants 924 No. of reports submitted to Hampstead Housing Manager 376 No. of reports submitted to Other Boroughs 10 56 ACCIDENTS IN THE HOME - Comparative figures 1960-1961 Cause of Accident 1961 1960 1961 1960 L. C. C. Div. 2 * County of London Fall On stairs 187 208 1,119 1 ,221 From ladder 14 13 111 113 From chair 21 41 174 199 Outside (i. e. windows balconies, roofs, etc.) 40 55 217 234 In garden 15 16 227 251 In bath 1 3 15 18 From one level to another (i. e. tables, boxes, beds) 65 60 412 348 On same level (i. e. in room over objects) 144 170 920 888 Unspecified 479 401 3,261 2,868 Hit by object 25 22 202 184 Cooking Stove (saucepans ,water ,fats , etc.) 18 12 123 108 • T eapot 2 7 45 53 Other boiling water 23 21 151 129 Electric Shock 6 2 39 26 Poisoning (including foreign objects) 47 36 338 318 Gassing 25 28 165 137 Knife-like Wounds (including spikes and cuts from glass) 49 30 337 321 Fires 21 23 178 141 Windows (trapping) 11 6 42 47 Suffocation 2 4 18 17 Not specified 54 41 337 326 TOTAL: - 1,249 1,209 8,431 7,947 Rate per 10,000 population 25.5 24. 1 26.5 24.9 * Division 2 - Hampstead, Paddington, St. Marylebone, St,Pancras and Westminster. 57 THE CARE OF THE AGED Agencies concerned with the Care of the Aged Hampstead Old People's Welfare Association, Miss O. Courtney Jones, 107 Kingsgate Road, N.W.6. MAI 3652 Hampstead Council of Social Service Burgh House, New End Square, N. W. 3. HAM 0049 107 Kingsgate Road, N. W. 6. MAI 2007 Hampstead Old People's Housing Trust Ltd. , Mrs. B. Gibson, 7 Harley Road, N. W. 3. PRI 2950 Women's Voluntary Services, 119 Cholmley Gardens, N. W. 6. HAM 9552 British Red Cross Society, 98 Avenue Road, N. W. 3. HAM 7171 National Assistance Board, Old Post Office, Downshire Hill, N. W. 3. HAM 9027 Ministry of Pensions & National Insurance, 30 Euston Square , No W. 1 „ - for N. W. 3. area only EUS 6451 122 Kilburn High Road, N. W. 6. - for N. W.6. and N.W.2. area MAI 0804 Home Help Organiser (L.C.C.) 251 Finchley Road, N. W. 3. HAM 4136 Welfare Officer (Applications for residential accommodation for persons in need of care and attention) 10 Warwick Row, S„ W. 1. VIC 0162 Admitting Officer (Enquiries regarding inmates of Luxborough Lodge), 10 Warwick Row, S.W, 1. VIC 0162 Public Health Department, Specialist Health Inspector, Mr s. C. Go Speechley, 98a, Avenue Road, N. W.3. HAM 7171 Divisional Medical Officer, London County Council, 313 Harrow Road, W. 9. CUN 4815 58 Services provided for Aged Persons Laundry. For incontinent persons only. Applications to the Medical Officer of Health, 98a, Avenue Road, N. W. 3. HAM 7171 Meals. Delivered twice weekly by British Red Cross Society and Women's Voluntary Services. Dinner Clubs. These are held at - St. Stephen's Church Hall, Pond Street, N. W. 3. on Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday, 12 noon. Health Institute, 107 Kingsgate Road, N. W. 6. on Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday, Friday, 12 noon. Library. Books provided by the Borough Council are delivered fortnightly to homebound old people. A member of the library staff accompanies the van. Holidays. Arranged by the Hampstead Old People's Welfare Association. Chiropody Service. Weekly sessions are held in N. W. 6 and N. W. 3. The Rotary Club of Hampstead provide transport to the clinic for those too frail to travel. Patients who are unable to attend the clinic even by car, are visited and treated in their own homes. Appointments for treatment are made on application to the Hampstead Old People's Welfare Association. Baths. Old Age Pensioners are allowed to use the slipper baths at the Central Baths, Finchley Road, and the Branch Baths at Flask Walk and Palmerston Road, free of charge at any time. Homes. Information obtainable from the Medical Officer of Health, 98a, Avenue Road, N. W. 3, the Hampstead Old People's Welfare Association, 107 Kingsgate Road, N. W. 6, or the Old People's Homes Committee, 296 Vauxhall Bridge Road, S.W. 1. VIC 9977 Workshops for the Elderly, 107 Kingsgate Road, N. Wo 6. Organised by the Hampstead Old People's Welfare Association, 59 Hospital Care. Application should be made by the patient's doctor to Dr. Exton Smith, Whittington Hospital, Highgate Wing, Dartmouth Park Hill, No 19. ARC 3070. In cases of difficulty further advice can be obtained from the Medical Officer of Health, 98a, Avenue Road, N. W. 3. HAM 7171. Ext. 110. Medical Loan. Items of medical equipment are available on loan from the Divisional Office, London County Council or the British Red Cross Society. Darby and Joan Clubs St. Stephen's Hall, Pond Street, N. W. 3. Wednesdays 2 - 4. 30 p. m. Holy Trinity Church Hall, Finchley Road, N. W. 3. Tuesdays 2 - 4 p. m. Unitarian Church Hall, Quex Road, N. W. 6. Thursdays 2 - 4 p. m. St. James Hall, Netherwood Street, N. W. 6. Wednesdays 2-4 p.m. Brondesbury Fellowship Men's Club 107 Kingsgate Road, N. W. 6. Daily 2 - 5 p. m. Good Companions Club Burgh House, New End Square, N. W. 3. Mondays 5 - 8 p. m. Good Neighbours Club 51 Belsize Square, N. W. 3. Wednesdays 2.30 - 5 p.m. Burgh House Club Burgh House, New End Square, N. W. 3. Daily 2 - 7 p. m. Friendship Clubs Belsize Club, 22 Eton Villas, N. W. 3. Monday afternoons. The Synagogue, Dennington Park Road, N. W. 6. Thursday afternoons. 60 Broadhurst Club, Levine House, Monday and Wednesday Broadhurst Gardens, N. W. 6. evenings- The Day Club, Monday and Thursday. 51 Belsize Square, N. W. 3. Maccabi (Retired Jewish Gentlemen) 73 Compayne Gardens, N. W. 6. Thursday 2. 30 - 5 p. m. Congregational Church Hall, Lyndhurst Road, N. W. 3. Thursday afternoons- LONDON COUNTY COUNCIL, DIVISION 2, PUBLIC HEALTH DEPARTMENT Divisional Medical Officer: - Ho Leslie Oldershaw , M. D. ,B. Sc. ,D.P, H 313 Harrow Road, W, 9. CUN 4815. Hampstead Sub-Office:- 251 Finchley Road, N. W. 3. HAM 8450 Clinics, Day Nurseries and School Treatment Centres L. C. C. Day Nurseries (normally open all day, Monday to Friday) Woodchurch 11/13 Woodchurch Road, N. W. 6. MAI 2937 Parkhill 2 Parkhill Road, N. W. 3. GUL 4233 Pond Street 27/29 Pond Street, N. W. 3. HAM 1686 A list of private day nurseries can be obtained from the Hampstead Sub-Office. 251 Finchley Road, N. W. 3. Maternity and Child Welfare Centres 60 West End Lane, N. W. 6. MAI 5381 2 Parkhill Road, N. W. 3. GUL 4759 Hampstead Wells, Christchurch Hill, N.W. 3. HAM 9534 3/5 Daleham Gardens, N. W. 3. SWI 3424 9 Solent Road, N. W. 6. HAM 5978 Welfare Foods (National dried milk, orange juice, cod liver oil, etc. ) are obtainable from these centres. School Treatment Centres Kilburn Treatment Centre, 107 Kingsgate Road, N.W.6. MAI 3005 Dental Clinic, Lithos Road, Finchley Road, N. W. 3. HAM 4763 61 Speech Therapy Centre Welfare Centre, 60 West End Lane, N. W. 6. MAI 5381 Immunisation and Vaccination Clinics Smallpox Vaccination: 60 West End Lane, N. W. 6. Friday 2. 30 - 3. 30 p. m. 2 Parkhill Road, N. W. 3. Monday 9. 45 - 10. 45 a.m. (children only) 3/5 Daleham Gardens, N. W. 3. Thursday 10 - 11 a. m. Diphtheria and Poliomyelitis Inoculations: 60 West End Lane, N. W. 6. Tuesday 10 - 11a. m. 2 Parkhill Road, N. W. 3. Monday 9. 45 - 10.45 a,m. 3/5 Daleham Gardens, N. W. 3. Thursday 10 - 11 a.m. Diphtheria and Poliomyelitis Inoculation of babies can also be dealt with at the Maternity and Child Welfare Centres by arrangment. Domestic Help Service Home Help Organiser, 251 Finchley Road, N. W. 3. HAM 4136 District Nursing Associations Hampstead District Nursing Association, 3 Pond Street, N. W. 3. HAM 6406 Kilburn & Wo Hampstead District Nursing Assoc. , 20 Dennington Park Road, N. W. 6. HAM 4232 Further information regarding the Care of Mothers and Young Children, Child Minders and Day Nurseries, Health Visiting, Family Planning, Recuperative Holidays, Foot Clinics, Tuberculosis Care and After-care, care of persons suffering from illness or Mental Defectiveness , Treatment Centres for School Children, etc. may be obtained from The Divisional Medical Officer, London County Council, 313 Harrow Road, W. 9. 62 INDEX PAGE Accident in the Home 56 Aged Persons: - Care of the Aged 16,57 Cleansing of 43 Laundry Service 19,43 Area of Borough 38 Area Comparability Factors 38 Atmospheric Pollution 27 Bacteriological Examinations:- Food. 50 Infectious Disease 42 Swimming Bath Water 48 Bakehouses 49 Barbers and Hairdressers 23,46 Bathing Centre 43 Baths, Old Persons 43,58 Births, Birth Rate 9,38,40 British Red Cross Society 57 Burials 16 Certificates of Disrepair 45,55 Chemical Analysis:- Food 51 Swimming Bath Water 48 Chiropody Service 58 Clean Air Act, 1956 27 Cleansing Station 43 Clearance Areas 54 Clinics 60 Closing Orders 45,54 Clubs, Old Persons 59 Colas Mews Site 23 Common Lodging Houses 25 Complaints 45 Consumer Protection Act, 1961 24 Cooked Meats 49 Council Representatives of other Organisations 7 Darby and Joan Clubs 59 Day Nurseries 60 63 PAGE Deaths 10,38-40,44 Demolition Orders 45 Dinner Clubs 58 Disinfection and Disinfestation 19,43 District Nursing Associations 61 Division 2, London County Council 60 Divisional Health Committee 7 Domestic Help Service 61 Drainage 45 Dwellings: - Rate Assessments 38 Structurally Separate 38 Factory Act: - Inspections 46 Outworkers 47 Food Inspection 35, 49,52 Food Poisoning 42 F oot Clinics 58 Hairdressers and Barbers 23,46 Hampstead Council of Social Service 7,57 Hampstead Old People's Housing Trust Ltd. 7,57 Hampstead Old People's Welfare Association 7,57 Health Education 29 Heating Appliances 24 Home Help Organiser 57 Homes, Old Persons 58 House-to-House Inspections 45 Housing 30,53,54 Ice Cream 49 Improvement Grants 45 Immunisation and Vaccination Clinics 61 Infant Mortality 10 ,38 ,40 Infectious Diseases 11,41 Inspection of the Borough 45 Intimation Notices 46 Laundry Service 19,43 Legal Proceedings 48 Loans for House Purchase 45 London County Council Division 2 7,60 London County Council (General Powers) Act, 1925 S. 33 23 London County Council (General Powers) Act, 1955 S. 27 22 64 PAGE London County Council (General Powers) Act, 1954 S. 18 23,46 London County Council (General Powers) Act, 1953 S. 43 43 Mass X -Ray 15 Maternal Mortality 38,40 Maternity & Child Welfare Centres 60 Medical Examinations, Staff 15 Milk 49,50 Ministry of Pensions and National Insurance 57 Mobile Meals Service 58 Mortuary 44 National Assistance Act, 1948, Section 50 16 National Assistance Act, 1948, Section 47 18 National Assistance Board 57 Oil Burners 24 Old Persons 16,57 Outworkers 47 Overcrowding 54 Pet Animals Act, 1951 46,48 Pharmacy and Poisons Act, 1933 46,48 Population 9,38,40 Prevention of Damage by Pests Act, 1949 25 Public Health Committee 7 Public Health Laboratory 42,50 Public Health Laundry 19,43 Public Health (London) Act, 1936 Section 40 23 Public Mortuary 44 Rag Flock, etc. Act, 1951 24,46 Rateable Value 38 Rehousing 45,55 Rent Act, 1957 45,55 Road Traffic Act, 1956, Section 42 25 Rodent Control 25 Sampling 51 Sanitary Circumstances of the Area 21,45 Scabies 43 School Treatment Centres 60 Sewerage 22 Sewers, Rodent Control 26 65 PAGE Shops Act, 1950 24,46 Slum Clearance 30 ,54 Smoke Abatement 27 Smoking in Foodshops 37 Speech Therapy Centre 61 Staff: - Medical Examination 15 Public Health Department 8 Statistics: - Public Health Inspection 45 Statistical Summary 38 Statutory Notices 46 Stillbirths 9,38 Structurally Separate Dwellings 38 Swimming Baths 48 Tuberculosis 14,41 Underground Rooms 30 Unsound Food 52 Vaccination and Immunisation Clinics 61 Verminous Persons 43 Water Supply 21,48 Welfare Centres 60 Welfare Office, L. C.C. 60 Women's Voluntary Service 57 Workshop, Old People's 58