HAMPT 8 Hampton Urban District Council. ANNUAL REPORT OF THE INSPECTOR OF NUISANCES, For the Year ended 31st December, 1906. To the Chairman and Members of the Hampton Urban District Council. Gentlemen, I beg to submit my Tenth Annual Report on the work of the Sanitary Department for the Year 1906. Inspections: Complaints received and attended to 34 Number of houses, premises, &c., inspected 644 Number of premises periodically inspected 51 House-to-house inspections 56 Number of re-inspections after order or notice 1819 Total inspections and re-inspections 2463 Notices: Letters written 124 Cautionary Notices given 147 Statutory Notices served 10 Prosecutions None- Dwelling Houses: Premises repaired, cleansed, &c. 17 House closed as unfit for habitation 1 Houses demolished (previously closed by order of Justices) 3 Roofs repaired . 6 Eaves gutters repaired 8 Rain water pipes repaired 16 Yard paved and drained . 1 Defective window sills repaired 3 Schools: Number in District 8 Frequency of inspection Monthly. Number found defective 1 Slaughter-Houses: Number on Register 5 Number of visits paid 23 Number cleansed and whitewashed 3 Nuisance from manure abated 1 Drain cleared 1 Water closets cleansed or repaired 2 Dairies, Cowsheds and Milk Shops: Number of Cowsheds in District 10 Number of Dairies and Milkshops in District 5 Number of visits paid 18 Cowsheds cleansed and limewashed 3 Nuisances from manure abated 2 Drain cleared 1 Ditch cleansed 1 Water troughs cleansed 3 Offensive Trades: Number in District 1 Number of inspections 4 Rooms cleansed and whitewashed 2 Dust: New movable dustbins provided 28 Complaints of non-removal None. Water Supply and Water Service: Houses—Water laid on to 4 New cisterns provided 2 Draw-off taps placed in mains 4 Cisterns cleansed, covered, &c. 9 Flushing tanks provided to water closets 10 Flushing tanks repaired 10 Drainage: Drains exposed, tested, &c. 10 Number found defective 5 Drains cleared 86 Drains repaired 9 Drains and soil pipes ventilated 12 Drains re-constructed and connected to sewer 7 New drains provided to premises previously without efficient drainage 5 Disconnecting traps or chambers inserted New stoneware sinks provided New sink waste pipes fixed Sink wastes repaired Urinals cleansed Waste pipe disconnected from drain Cesspools emptied Cesspools abolished Privy pits emptied and abolished Yentilating shafts repaired New water closets fixed New water closets erected Water closets repaired Water closets cleansed Closets supplied with water or supply improved Soil pipe repaired 3 Sundry other Nuisances abated: Overcrowding 3 Foul ditches . 2 Accumulations of refuse 15 Animals improperly kept 5 Defective paving 2 Infectious Diseases and Disinfection: Cases of scheduled diseases notified 38 Cases of measles notified 420 Patients removed to Hospital 22 Notices sent to Schools 167 Number of houses visited on notification 242 Number of rooms disinfected 135 Number of rooms stripped and cleansed 57 Factory and Workshops Act, 1901: Number of workshops and work-places on Register 17 Number of retail bakehouses on Register 9 Number of laundries oil Register 6 Number of visits to workshops and work-places 32 Number of visits to bakehouses 29 Number of visits to laundries 20 Bakehouses cleansed and limewashed 6 Workrooms cleansed and limewashed 3 Washhouse ventilated 1 Premises re-drained 2 New water closets fixed 2 New flushing tanks fixed 2 Water closet repaired 1 Flushing tank repaired 1 Cistern cleansed and covered 1 Outworkers lists received 2 Outworkers lists forwarded to other Authorities 2 Canal Boats Acts: Number of boats inspected 5 Contraventions of Acts or Regulations None. In concluding this report, I beg to tender my sincere thanks to the Council for their continued confidence, and for the hearty support accorded me in all matters reported to them in the course of my duties during the past year. I have the honour to be, Gentlemen, Public Offices, Your obedient Servant, Hampton, ALBERT SHALL, January, 1907. A. R. San. I. Urban District Council of Hampton. Annual Report OF THE Inspector of Nuisances, FOR THE YEAR 1906. Makepeace, Hampton Press. HAMPTON URBAN DISTRICT COUNCIL. Medical Officer's Annual Report. HAMPTON, MIDDLESEX, 6th February, 1907. Gentlemen, I herewith submit my Annual Report for the year ended 31st December, 1906. VITAL STATISTICS. Population.—For the purpose of the foregoing statistics I have estimated the population of the District at the middle of 1906 to be 9,000. Births and Birth Rate.—The total number of berths registered in the District during the year was 198—90 males and 108 females—of whom five were illegitimate. This is equal to a birth-rate of 22'0 per thousand of the population, a considerably reduced rate compared with last year, when the rate was 30"8 per 1,000. Deaths and Death Hate.—The total number of deaths registered during the year from all causes was 97. This includes two non-residents; fourteen residents whose death took place in the Union Infirmary at Kingston; three residents who died at the Teddington Cottage Hospital; and seven residents whose deaths occurred at other institutions outside the District. After correcting these lists by deducting the deaths of non-residents and adding those of residents who died outside the District, this brings the total number of deaths of persons belonging to the District to 95, the causes of whose deaths, together with the ages at death, are tabulated below:— Causes of Death. Deaths at the subjoined ages of "Residents" whether occurring in or beyond the District. All ages. Under I. 1 and under 5. 5 and under 15. 15 and under 25. 25 and under 65. 65 and upwards. Measles 4 l 2 1 Diphtheria 1 — 1 - - - - Influenza 1 — — - - - 1 Diarrhoea 6 6 — - - - — Enteritis 2 — — - - 1 l Puerperal Fever 1 — — - - l - Phthisis 9 — 1 - - 8 — Cancer 4 — — - - 3 1 Bronchitis 4 — — - — — 4 Pneumonia 5 1 — - - 2 2 Alcholism,Cirrhosis of Liver 4 — — - - 3 1 Heart Diseases 8 — — - - 3 5 Accidents 3 1 — - - — 2 Suicide 1 — — - - 1 — All other causes 42 9 3 - 1 11 18 Totals 95 18 7 1 1 33 35 (2) Taking the number of deaths of persons belonging to the District at 95, in accordance with the above table, this gives a death-rate of 10.5 per thousand; an improvement on last year's rate of 11.8 per thousand. Thirty-eight of these deaths were of persons 60 years of age and upwards, of whom 11 were between 60 and 70; 18 between 70 and 80; 7 between 80 and 90; and 2 were over 90. Eighteen deaths occurred among infants under one year of age from the following causes, viz.: Measles, 1; Diarrhoeal diseases, 6; Debility, 5; Convulsions, 3; Pneumonia, 1; Suffocation, 1; and other diseases, 1. This is equal to a mortality rate of 90.9 per thousand births; a slight increase on the rate for 1905, which was 86-5 per thousand births. I would point out that although the mortality rate amongst infants has slightly increased during the dast year, the rate for 1906 is 33.4 per thousand births lower than the average rate for the previous ten years. There have been eleven deaths registered from the principal zymotic diseases (Diphtheria, 1; Measles, 4; Diarrhoea, 6), equal to a rate of 1.2 per thousand of the population, a reduction on last year's rate, which was 2'0 per thousand. Six deaths were the subject of Coroner's Inquests during the year, the verdicts of the Juries being as follows : Suicide, 1; Accidents, 3; Natural Causes, 2. Infectious Diseases.—I append herewith a table shewing the notifications received during the year under the provisions of the Infectious Diseases Notification Acts, with the age periods of the patients:— Disease. At all ages. Under I. I and under 5. 5 and under 15. 15 and under 25. 25 and under 65. 65 and upwards. Diphtheria 4 - 1 2 - 1 - Scarlet Fever 24 — 6 15 2 1 - Enteric Fever 1 — — — — - 1 Puerperal Fever 2 - — — — 2 — Erysipelas 7 - — — — 6 1 Measles 420 15 207 189 9 - - Totals 458 15 214 206 11 10 2 We suffered during the past year from an outbreak of Measles, far away in excess of any previously experienced in the district, no less than 420 cases having been notified, of which four proved fatal. The outbreak commenced among the scholars attending the Station Road Schools at Hampton in the early part of July, and spread with such alarming rapidity that I deemed it advisable to close these schools for one week. The summer holidays commenced at the close of this period, so that these schools were closed for five weeks. Even this extreme measure of closure for five weeks failed to stamp out the disease, and in October we were face to face with a recrudescence of the epidemic, which affected both Hampton and Hampton Hill. I then advised the closure of the whole of the infant schools in the district for a period of three weeks, and the various Sunday Schools were also closed for a like period by the kind cooperation of the Clergy and the Managers. During the periods of closure the schools were thoroughly cleansed and disinfected. In future Measles will be no longer included in the list of notifiable infectious diseases, the Council having so decided. Only one case of Enteric Fever occurred during the year, which was clearly a case imported from the Continent. (3) There was a marked improvement in the incidence of Diphtheria in comparison with the previous year, four cases only having been notified, one of which, unfortunately, proved fatal shortly after admission to hospital. Scarlet Fever never reached an epidemic stage at any time during the year, and I am pleased to report that no death occurred from this diseare. The usual precautions of fumigating rooms, &c., with formalin and the stripping and cleansing of rooms where necessary, have been taken after cases of infectious illness have occurred, entailing a large amount of work. In addition, premises occupied by persons suffering from Phthisis are also disinfected on the removal or death of the patient. Bedding and clothing are disinfected by steam. Isolation Hospital.—Nineteen patients suffering from Scarlet Fever and three from Diphtheria have been treated at the Hospital during the year from this district. The Council have decided to erect a Porter's Lodge and discharging wards at the Hospital. An enquiry has been held by au Inspector of the Local Government Board with reference to the raising of a loan for this purpose, but the sanction of the Board has not yet been received. Water Supply.—The district is supplied with water on the constant service system by the Grand Junction district of the Metropolitan Water Board, and the supply has been well maintained throughout the year. The nuisance complained of in previous reports respecting the discharge of black smoke from the chimneys of the waterworks has been considerably reduced, and it has not been found necessary to serve any notice for the abatement of this particular nuisance during the past year. Trade Premises.—The various trade premises which include slaughter-houses, bakehouses, cowsheds, dairies and the soap works have been regularly visited and inspected by myself and the Inspector during the year, and at a number of these premises it was found necessary to require works of cleansing and other remedial measures to be carried out at once. I would strongly urge upon cowkeepers and milksellers the importance of insisting on scrupulous cleanliness on the part of their employees in dealing with the milk supply, as regards not only themselves personally, but also the utensils used in the distribution of this important part of the food supply. Dwelling Houses.— A considerable number of houses have been inspected during the year—a portion being house-to-house inspections—and a large number of sanitary improvements have been effected. One house has been closed as unfit for habitation and will probably be pulled down in the near future. Three others previously closed by order of the Justices have been demolished, and a small number of old houses have been pulled down to be replaced by modern buildings. Three houses were fouud to be overcrowded and the nuisance was promptly abated on the service of notices. A further number of house drains have been entirely reconstructed and connected to the public sewer during the year, and there are now 95 per cent. of the houses in the district so connected. It has not been found necessary to take any proceedings before the Magistrates during the year. Building operations have been brisk, and a large number of new houses have been erected in various parts of the district. Dust Removal and Scavenging.—This work has been satisfactorily carried out during the year. There is a weekly collection of house refuse throughout the district which is performed by the Council's own staff. (4) The disposal of house refuse, by deposit in disused and worked-out gravel and sand pits, is still in vogue in the district. As I have mentioned in previous reports, I consider this to be a most unsatisfactory method of disposal, and has at times given rise to a serious nuisance. I am, however, glad to learn that the Council have decided to erect a Refuse Destructor, which ought to effectually deal with this persistent trouble. Private Streets.—Warfield Road, Hampton, and the remaining portion of Park Road, Hampton Hill, have been made up during the year. Dean and Old Farm Roads are still in the same condition as they were a year ago. Sewage Works.—I have visited these works at various times during the year and have found them to be efficiently conducted and free from any nuisance arising from the method of treatment or the disposal of the sewage. Factory and Workshops Act, 1901.—The workshops, laundries and bakehouses in the district have been inspected from time to time by myself and the Inspector, and a register is kept of these premises as required by section 131 of the Act. Four workshops ceased to be used as such and three new ones were added to the register, leaving a total of 32 on the register at the close of the year. The lists of outworkers have been received from those persons who employ such outworkers (making wearing apparel), and the names and addresses of the outworkers have been forwarded to the authorities in whose districts they resided. One workshop was overcrowded and the nuisance was promptly remedied. Sis bakehouses and three workrooms have been cleansed and whitewashed after notice, three of the bakehouses twice in the year. One washhouse has been ventilated. Two laundries have been entirely re-drained and new sanitary conveniences provided. A few other small defects have been remedied. Further complaints have been received during the year respecting the nuisance caused by the pollution of storm water sewers by the discharge of waste water containing chemicals from a factory at Hampton Hill. The matter is under consideration, and seems likely to be remedied at an early date. I enclose the returns for the Local Government Board, the Home Office, and the County Council, together with a list of the sanitary work carried out by the Inspector of Nuisances. This, Gentlemen, terminates my Annual Report, which I think is quite as satisfactory as last year's. We have a reduced death rate, which should encourage us in our efforts to promote the well-being of the inhabitants of this district, and in concluding it gives me very great pleasure to record my sincere thanks for the very great assistance I have always received from my Inspector of Nuisances—Mr. A. Shail—in carrying out the duties pertaining to my office as Medical Officer of Health, which he has rendered, as heretofore, with great skill, kindness and ability. I have the honour to remain, Gentlemen, Your obedient servant, WENT WORTH TYNDALE. To the Chairman and Members of the Hampton Urban District Council.