HAMPT 6 HAMPTON URBAN DISTRICT COUNCIL. Medical Officer's Annual Report. HAMPTON, MIDDLESEX, 13th February, 1905. Gentlemen, I herewith submit my Annual Report for the year ended December 31st, 1904. VITAL STATISTICS. Births and Birth Rate.—The total births registered in the district during the year was 233—112 males and 121 females—equal to a rate of 31.06 per thousand of the population. This is the highest rate recorded during the past eleven years. Deaths and Death Rate.—The total number of deaths registered during the year from all causes was 101. This includes one non-resident who died from drowning; nine residents whose deaths occurred at the Union Infirmary at Kingston; and one resident who died at the Isolation Hospital at Tolworth. This brings the total deaths of persons belonging to this district to 100; the causes of whose deaths, together with the ages at death, are tabulated below:— Causes of Death. Deaths at the subjoined ages of "Residents" whether occurring in or beyond the District. All ages. Under 1. 1 and under 5. 5 and under 15. 15 and under 25. 25 and under 65. 65 and upwards. Whooping Cough 4 4 - - - - - Diphtheria 3 — 1 2 - - - Enteric Fever l — — — - 1 - Diarrhoea 9 9 — — - - - Enteritis 4 3 — — - - 1 Phthisis 4 — — — — 4 — Other Tubercular Diseases 3 1 1 1 - — — Cancer 3 — — — - 2 1 Bronchitis 8 1 3 — - 1 3 Pneumonia 4 1 — — - l 2 Alcholism,Cirrhosis of Liver 1 — — — - l — Premature Birth 5 5 — — - — — Heart Diseases 8 — — 1 - 3 4 Accidents 4 2 — 1 - 1 — All other causes 39 6 4 — 1 9 19 Totals 100 32 9 5 1 23 30 The population of this district at the middle of 1904 I have estimated at 7,500. Taking the number of deaths of persons belonging to this district at 100, as per table above, this gives a death rate of 13.3 per thousand; an increased rate as compared with 1903, but less than 1902, when the rate was 13.6. Thirty of these deaths were of persons 65 years of age and upwards; of whom eleven were between 80 and 90; twelve between 70 and 80, and seven between 65 and 70. Thirty-two deaths occurred among children under one year of age; equal to a mortality rate of 137.3 per thousand births. 2 Twelve of these deaths were due to Diarrhoea or Enteritis, which was very prevalent during the month of August; five were due to premature births ; and two were the result of accidental suffocation. A potent reason for this outbreak of intestinal trouble was to be, in all probability, found in the increased temperature during that month. There have been seventeen deaths recorded from the principal zymotic diseases (Whooping Cough, 4; Diarrhoea, 9; Diphtheria, 3; and Enteric Fever, 1), equal to a rate of 2-2 per thousand of the population. Eleven deaths were the subjects of Coroner's Inquests during the year, and the verdicts of the Juries were as follows:—Natural Causes, 6; Accidents, 4; and Drowning, 1. Infectious Disease.—The following cases were notified to me during the year under the Infectious Diseases Notification Acts, viz.:— Disease. At all ages. Under 1. 1 and under 5. 5 and under 15. 15 and under 25. 25 and under 65. 65 and upwards. Scarlet Fever 51 - 15 32 2 2 - Diphtheria 12 — 6 5 1 — — Enteric Fever 2 - — 1 1 — — Erysipelas 3 - — — — 2 1 Measles 299 11 122 158 6 2 — Totals 367 11 143 196 10 6 1 Of the fifty-one cases of Scarlet Fever 37 were removed to the Isolation Hospital, and I am pleased to report that not a single death occurred from this disease. This disease was most prevalent during the months of July and August. The primary cause of this outbreak was in all probability due to an infected child being in contact with other children who were at the time attending school. Two cases only of Enteric Fever occurred in the district (both patients belonging to the same family), the first of which was undoubtedly due to eating contaminated oysters while away from home. Both these patients recovered; and the death from this disease recorded took place at the Workhouse Infirmary at Kingston. Eight patients suffering from Diphtheria were treated at Isolation Hospital. There were two distinct outbreaks of Measles during the year—at Hampton during the Spring, and at Hampton Hill nearly at the close of the year. Both outbreaks were severe, necessitating the closure of the Public Elementary Schools; and the managers of the various Sunday Schools, upon my recommendation, kindly closed those schools also. There was no fatality from this disease. Needless to say, the work of disinfecting the various tenements entailed a large amount of labour upon the Sanitary Inspector, considerably over two hundred rooms having been disinfected by him with Formalin during the year. Isolation Hospital—The Isolation Hospital erected by the Council has been in full working order since March, and has proved of great service to the District for the purposes for which it was built. This Hospital comprises a pavilion with four wards, with kitchens, bathrooms, and lavatories; an administrative block; laundry and steam disinfecting apparatus; mortuary and coach house. , 3 A fitted ambulance van has also been provided for the removal of patients; and telephonic communication has been installed between the Hospital and the residence of the Medical Superintendent. During the year under review no case of Small Pox having occurred in the district, it was, of course, not found necessary to use the temporary Hospital erected during 1902. The Hospital has, however, been maintained in a state of efficiency. Our tenure of the land upon which this building stands is very nearly approaching its termination, and I can only most strongly urge upon the Council the pressing necessity of making arrangements without delay for the reception and treatment in a hospital of persons suffering from this disease should any such occur; or I shall be reduced to the unsatisfactory measure of patients having to be treated for this terrible disease in their own homes, which, should such contingency occur, would be much to be deplored. Water Supply.—I have examined two samples of well water and both were found to be fit for domestic use. Practically the whole of this district is supplied, with water on the constant service system by the Grand Junction section of the Metropolitan Water Board. The service is well maintained, and the quality of the water gives no cause for complaint. Waterworks.—The pumping stations of three of the Companies now merged in the Metropolitan Water Board are situated in this District, and occasional complaints have been made of the nuisance caused by the discharge of black smoke from the chimney shaft of one of these works. This nuisance has latterly been abated considerably, and I trust that with care on the part of those responsible for these works that there will be 110 further cause of complaint. Trade Premises.—The bakehouses, slaughter-houses, dairies and cowsheds in the District have been inspected from time to time by myself and the Inspector, and it has been necessary to require the occupiers of these premises to be more attentive to necessary works of cleansing and limewashing, as I consider that too much attention cannot be paid to the cleanliness of these premises, in which a large proportion of the food of the people is prepared. There are no regulations in force in this District relating to cowsheds, dairies and milkshops, and it is very desirable that the Council should formulate a series of Eegulations applicable to these businesses for the approval of the Local Government Board. The Soaj3 Works have been visited periodically, and I have no fault to find with the conduct of the business. Dwelling Houses.—Five houses which were in an unsatisfactory condition were closed by the owner; these and four others—previously closed by order of the Magistrates —have been demolished, and new ones are being erected upon the sites. A considerable number of dwelling houses have been inspected by myself and the Inspector during the year, including a house-to-house inspection of a portion of the District, the result being that it was found necessary to require various repairs and a considerable amount of cleansing of rooms and the surroundings of the houses carried out. These works have been promptly done in most instances, and other remedial works are now in progress. In only one instance was it found necessary to take proceedings before the Magistrates in order to obtain the abatement of nuisances, with the result that the Bench made an Order for the works to be executed, and the payment of costs. The work was done by the Council in accordance with the Order of the Court. Eight cases of overcrowding have been discovered and abated during the year. 4 The houses erected by the Council in 1903, under the provisions of the Housing of the Working Classes Act, have continued to be occupied and have proved satisfactory, apparently supplying a demand for houses of that class in the district. Movable Dwellings, Caravans, Tents, &c.—The only case to report under this heading was an invasion of foreign gipsies nearly at the close of the year, and prompt measures were taken by the Inspector in removing them from the District as soon as they were found. Dust Removal and Scavenging.—This work is now undertaken entirely by the District Council with their own staff, and to the best of my knowledge has been carried out satisfactorily, with the exception that at times during the summer months I had strongly to complain of the serious nuisance arising from the pit in which the house refuse was deposited. Sewage Removal and Disposal.—The tank capacity at the Sewage Works has been increased during the year by the completion of a new hydrolitic oxidising tank, which I trust will prove the success anticipated. The Sewage Disposal Works have been conducted in an efficient manner, and no complaint with reference to the works has been received during the year. The greater majority of houses in the district are now connected with the public sewer; a number of house drains have been re-constructed and connected during the year; while all new houses are connected at the time of erection. Private Streets.—Buckingham Road—the condition of which had been the subject of comment in my two previous reports—is now being made up under the Private Street Works Act, and the remaining portion of Nightingale Road is also to be done. Old Farm Road still requires attention. Factor// and Workshops Act, 1904.—The bakehouses, workshops, and laundries in the District have been inspected from time to time during the year, and a register is kept of these premises. Two workshops ceased to be occupied as such, and two new ones were registered, leaving a total of 27 on the register at the close of the year. The lists of out-workers have been obtained from those persons who employ such outworkers (making wearing apparel), and the lists have been forwarded to the Local Authorities concerned. One list has been received from outside the District, and the home-worker's premises has been inspected. It was found necessary to require works of cleansing in eight bakehouses and one workshop, and the work was carried out without delay. One establishment was entirely re-drained and new sanitary convenience provided, and minor defects have been remedied at other premises. There was no overcrowding in any of the premises. I enclose the returns for the Local Government Board and the County Council, together with the lists of sanitary work carried out by the Inspector of Nuisances. It is again my pleasing duty in concluding this report to express my sincere thanks to my Inspector, Mr. A. Shail, for his unvarying kind assistance, which he always renders me at any time in carrying out my work, and the prompt and thorough performance of anything that I consider should be done. I take this occasion to say that this year it has been necessary to engage his services to an uuusual extent, by reason of the large number of disinfections required and the iucreased number of inspections to be performed. I need hardly say that his duties have been most satisfactorily carried out in every respect. I have the honour to remain, Gentlemen, Your obedient Servant, WENT WORTH TYNDALE. To the Chairman and Members of the Hampton Urban District Council.