HEN 1 Hendon Urban District Council Hendon Urban District Council Sanitary Report FOR THE YEAR 1896, by F. W. ANDREW, M.R.C.S., L.R.C.P., MEDICAL OFFICER OF HEALTH FOR HENDON, Fellow of the Incorporated Society of Medical Officers of Health. Hendon: J. H. warden and co., "hendon and finchley times" office, n.w. 1897. INDEX page. Summary 5 Description of Districts 7 Population 9 Table of Acreage, Number of Houses, and Population of Parish 10 Vital Statistics 11 Death Kate 12 Infant Mortality 12 Birth Kate 13 Inquests 14 Mortuary 14 Table of Deaths 15 Table of Population, Births, and of New Cases of Infectious Sickness 16 Zymotic Diseases 17 Report on Measles and Whooping Cough 21 Notifications 30 Dusting 30 Water Supply 31 Cowsheds and Dairies 32 Milk shops 32 Slaughter Houses 32 Bakehouses and Butchers' Shops 32 Laundries 32 Vaccination Statistics 34 Birkbeck Estate, Mill Hill 35 Burnt Oak Sewerage 35 Systematic Inspection of District 35 Sewage Treatment 35 Infectious Diseases' Hospital 36 Sanitary Work SANITARY REPORT. 1896. To the Chairman and Members of the Hendon Urban District Council. Gentlemen, I have the honour to present my report to you for the year 1896. I will give first a summary of those matters of sanitary interest which have occurred during the period above mentioned. The first nine months of the year were remarkable for the extreme drought which prevailed; after this period incessant wet weather set in with hardly any intermission for the rest of the year. It was, perhaps, fortunate that the first part of the year was so mild, as a very serious epidemic of Measles and Whooping Cough prevailed all over the district, and, had the weather been severe, I fear the zymotic death-rate would have been largely increased. Scarlet Fever has also been amongst us as in former years, Child's Hill being visited by a much larger extent than the other two Wards, although an outbreak occurred in Mill Hill in the earlier part of the year, and Hendon Ward was also visited by this disease throughout the year but not in an epidemic form. 6 The number of cases of Diphtheria was considerably below that of the previous year, Typhoid Fever remaining at about the same. The death-rate for the district is a little higher than the previous year, but undoubtedly a great deal more sickness prevailed, mainly owing to the Measles and Whooping Cough epidemics. For the purposes of more clearly defining the different parts of this large and scattered parish, I have divided up the Wards into sub-districts, and one is now able to see at a glance, on looking at the tables, the amount of sickness and mortality in each. The question of "dust removal "has demanded a good deal of attention during the year, and I have entered into this matter fully in another part of this report. An impetus to building in the West Hendon District has been given since the erection of Schweppes' Factory, and houses are being rapidly erected, and before very long this part of the diitrict bids fair to be the most thickly populated in the parish. The question of a better train service to Hendon is of vast importance to the growth of the neighbourhood, and it is to be hoped that the time is not far distant when Hendon will see this an accomplished fact. Other matters of importance have taken place during the year, among which may be mentioned:— (a) The taking over by the Council the treatment of the sewage of Hendon themselves. (b) The extension of the Mill Hill sewerage. (c) A contract having been entered into for the continuation of the Low Level sewerage system to Burnt Oak and Orange Hill, which is to be commenced at once. 7 (d) The application from the Abney Park Cemetery Company for the purchase of land at Golders Green for the purpose of placing a cemetery there. A very lengthy and exhaustive enquiry was held by the Home Office; the Hendon District Council being directly opposed to it from sanitary and other grounds. Finally, the Home Office gave their decision that they could not see their way to allow of the cemetery being placed there. This is the second time this site has been applied for for this purpose, and has been refused both times. (e) The extension of the Infectious Diseases Hospital. (f) The exclusion of Measles and Whooping Cough from the list of notifiable diseases. A special report upon this matter is appended. DESCRIPTION OF DISTRICTS. As the Hendon Parish is a very scattered one, containing district hamlets in different parts, I propose for the purposes of my report to define these roughly and give them separately in the different tables. Formerly, the divisions were simply Hendon, Child's Hill, and Mill Hill Wards. When referring to a particular district, say Hendon, it might be in the outlying district of Burnt Oak, which, although part of Hendon Ward, is a distinct sub-district. I propose also to give the estimated population of these districts, and the number of deaths and the number of cases of infectious diseases in each. Central Hendon Is defined by the river Brent on one side, from Dollis Brook to Renter's Lane Bridge; and from Renter's Bridge to The Burroughs Pond and Colin Deep Bridge. 8 West Hendon Is bounded on the east by a line drawn from Renter's Bridge, to The Burroughs Pond, to the junction of Colin Deep and Edgware Road, then following the Edgware Road to the junction of Kingsbury Lane, including the houses only on the north side. At this point both sides of the road, houses north and west, are included, and further on the whole of the district west of the Midland Railway to the Welsh Harp Water as far as the Welsh Harp Bridge. Child's Hill District Comprises all the parts from Prospect Road on the south to the four cross roads on the north. Golder's Green, including Golder's Hill Terrace and Chatterbox Row, are also parts of this district. On the east this district is bounded by Hampstead; on the west as far as Granville Terrace (included). Cricklewood District Comprises all the district to the west of Granville Terrace to the Edgware Road. The whole of the Midland Cottages, Elm Road, Tew Road, and Richborough Roads are all included in this district. Burnt Oak District Comprises all the houses within the area from the junction of Colin Deep and Edgware Road to the Edgware Bridge on the east side of the road only. Temple Fortune Comprises all the houses lying upon the east of the parish on the Finchley North Road, and is a distinct little district by itself. Mill Hill District Comprises all the area from Barnet Gate on the north, to the Great Northern Railway on the south. 9 POPULATION. No proper census having been taken since 1891, it becomes very hard in a growing neighbourhood, varying in density in different parts, to get what one would much desire—an accurate total of the number of persons in the parish. In West Hendon and Burnt Oak I am enabled to give fairly accurate results, as a census was taken of these two districts last year for the purpose of the Ecclesiastical Commissioners, and I have no hesitation in saying that these two districts are far and away the most thickly populated in the parish. To give some idea Pollard Road strikes an average of 12 per house, a very high figure considering there are thirty houses in it. I think it would be most useful if the Council would undertake to have a census of the whole parish taken in the coming year ; the cost would be little and the information obtained would be of inestimable value, especially for the compilation of statistics, and for the purposes of the educational I problem in Hendon. The following figures are as estimated :— Hendon Ward comprises— Central Hendon 927 houses Population 5814 West Hendon 378 „ „ 2646 Burnt Oak 111 „ „ 777 Public Institutions 4 „ 500 Total 1420 Total 9737 Child's Hill Ward comprises— Cricklewood 487 houses Population 3165 Child's Hill 417 „ „ 2918 North End Golders Green 16 „ „ 112 Golders Green (including Highfield School 51 „ „ 456 Temple Fortune 45 „ „ 292 Total 1016 Total 6943 Mill Hill Ward comprises— 304 houses Population 1650 Institutions „ 532 Total 2182 Acreage, No. of Houses, and Population of Parish. Ward. Acreage. Number of Houses. Population. 1879 (Formation of Board). 1891 1896 (LadyDay). 1879 1891 1896 LadyDay (estimated). Increase from 1879 Hendon 3383 800 1278 1416 4800 7706 (a) 9737 4937 (a) Including 423 in Institutions. Child's Hill 1999 350 950 1016 2200 6072 6949 4749 Mill Hill 3000 250 287 304 1500 2065 (6) 2182 682 (b) Including 532 in Institutions. Totals 8382 1400 2515 2736 8500 15843 18868 10368 10 11 The above works out the total population for the whole parish at 18,862. I think the figures given to me up to Lady-day, 1895, as 17,031 very misleading, as they are based on the rate of 6 persons only per house. In West Hendon and Burnt Oak I know it is over 7, and it must be remembered that ten years ago there was not nearly the demand for houses as there is at the present time, and yet houses have not been built in a corresponding proportion to the increase of the population, with the natural consequences that the present houses, which were estimated to contain an average of 6 persons per house in 1891, now contain possibly an average of 7½ per house. At the Midland Cottages, Cricklewood, a census was taken last year of the number of persons in them, and although these houses are only allowed to contain one family in each, and perhaps a lodger, the average per house was 6¼. VITAL STATISTICS. Number of Deaths.—The total number of Deaths in the Parish for the year is 330, as against 289 in the year 1895. Ninety-five of these occurred in the Infirmary, 23 being chargeable to Hendon Parish, the remainder being from Willesden, Harrow, Great and Little Stanmore, Edgware, and Kingsbury. Deducting 73, the number from these outlying Parishes, it leaves 257 to be accounted for in Hendon proper. Of this number 78 occurred in Hendon central district, 32 in the newly defined district of West Hendon, 9 in Burnt Oak, 57 in Child's Hill, 32 in Cricklewood, 26 in Mill Hill, and 6 in Temple Fortune. Ninety-five deaths occurred under one year, 49 from one and under five, 14 from five and under fifteen years, 15 from fifteen and under twenty-five years, 82 from twenty-five and under sixtyfive, and 75 from sixty-five and upwards. It will be seen that the number of deaths under five years is very high, namely, 144, being nearly half the total number of deaths in the whole parish. During the first six months of the year a very large amount of sickness prevailed owing to a severe outbreak of measles and whooping cough; these diseases have accounted for 33 of the deaths under five years. 12 THE DEATH RATE. In order to estimate the death-rate properly, it is necessary to obtain all the information possible with regard to the statistics of the Workhouse, as this institution accommodates besides Hendon—Willesden,Harrow, Greatand LittleStanmore,Edgware, and Kingsbury. The following is the return given me:— (a) Average number of Inmates in Union for year 349 (b) „ „ chargeable to Hendon 75 (c) Number of Deaths in Union for year 95 (d) „ „ „ chargeable to Hendon 23 (e) Number of Births in Union for year 36 (f) „ „ ,, chargeable to Hendon 7 From the above return it will be seen that 95 deaths took place in the Infirmary, of which number 23 only were chargeable to Hendon, and in estimating the death-rate the number of Inmates in the Union from other parishes must be deducted from the population. The other Institutions are included in the death-rate, which is only fair considering the inmates of them reside there all the year round, and so justly entitle themselves as residents. The death-rate for the whole district worked out on the above lines is equal to 13.8 per 1000, which is somewhat higher than the previous year, but undoubtedly a great deal more sickness prevailed during 1896 than in 1895. INFANT MORTALITY. Ninety-five children died under one year, as against seventynine in 1895. This gives the very high infant mortality of 160 per 1000, as against 149 per 1000 in 1895, and 116 in 1894. It will therefore be seen that the infant mortality has increased considerably in each of the years above mentioned. During the year a very large amount of sickness prevailed amongst young children, owing mainly to a severe epidemic of measles and whooping cough which 13 raged all over the district, measles being accountable for 8 deaths under one year, and w hooping cough 5. In the previous year not a single death occurred from these diseases under one year. The deaths resulting from lung complaints were also high, 23 having succumbed as against 18 the previous year. The following is a list giving the causes of death under one year:— Pneumonia and Bronchitis 23 Marasamus 9 Premature Birth 10 Convulsions 5 Diarrhoea 6 Laryngerius Stridulus 1 Asphyxia in bed 2 Tubercular Meningitis 4 Atrophy 17 Croup 3 Measles 8 Whooping Cough 5 Erysipelas 1 Heart Disease 1 Total 95 BIRTH RATE. Five hundred and eighty-nine children were registered, as per follows:— Hendon 303 Child's Hill 115 Cricklewood 99 Mill Hill 36 Infirmary 36 Of the 36 births in the Infirmary, seven only were chargeable to Hendon parish. Deducting the remaining 29, it leaves 560 to be accounted for in Hendon proper. This is equal to a birth-rate of 31.2 per 1000. 14 1879 (second half) Death-rate 16.6 Birth-rate 34.9 1880 „ 16.5 „ 34.9 1881 „ 12.3 „ 36.5 1882 „ 15.4 „ 36.9 1883 „ 15.7 „ 34.5 1884 „ 17.9 „ 37.7 1885 „ 14.0 „ 43.0 1886 „ 17.18 „ 43.2 1887 „ 15.4 „ 38.7 1888 „ 13.0 „ 37.4 1889 „ 14.6 „ 38.4 1890 „ 15.0 „ 36.7 1891 „ 13.9 „ 32.3 1892 „ 12.3 „ 26.9 1893 „ 13.4 „ 33.2 1894 „ 13.5 „ 32.1 1895 „ 12.4 „ 31.2 1896 „ 13.8 „ 31.2 INQUESTS. Twenty Inquests were held. Accidental 8 Natural Causes 6 Suicide of Unsound Mind 3 Drowning 3 Total 20 MORTUARY. Fourteen bodies were taken to the Mortuary. While on this question I should like to say that certain alterations require to be made to the table, etc., the cost of which would be very little, and the benefit to those making post-mortems would be great. I have no doubt the Council will have this attended to. Table a.—Table of Deaths during the Year 1896, in the Hendon Urban District, classified according to Diseases, Ages, and Localities. Names of localities adopted for the purpose of thsse Statistics; Public Institutions being shewn as separate localities. Mortality from all causes, at subjoined Ages. Mortality from subjoined cases, distinguishing Deaths of Children under Five Years of Age. At all ages, Under 1 year. 1 and under 5. 5 and under 15. 15 and under 25. 25 and under 65. 65 and upwards. Smallpox. Scarlatina. Diphtheria. Mem. Croup. Fevers. Cholera Erysipelas. Measles. Whooping Cough Diarrhoea and Dysentery. Rheumatic Fever. Phthisis. Bronchitis, Pneumonia, and Pleurisy. Heart Disease. Cancer. Injuries. All other Diseases. Total. | Typhus. Enteric or Typhoid. Continued. Relapsing. Puerperal. Hendon (Central) 78 28 14 2 6 17 11 under 5 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 7 4 4 ... ... 7 ... ... 1 16 39 5 upwds. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 8 4 5 3 4 14 39 West Hendon 32 10 6 — 1 8 7 under 5 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 3 ... ... ... 1 7 ... ... 1 7 19 5 upwds. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 2 1 ... 1 8 13 Child's Hill 57 24 10 2 1 9 11 under 5 ... ... 1 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 3 3 4 ... ... 7 ... ... 1 13 33 5 upwds. ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 3 5 2 1 ... 12 24 Cricklewood 32 11 5 2 4 6 4 under 5 ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2 1 1 ... ... 4 1 ... ... 7 17 5 upwds. ... 1 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... 4 ... 1 ... ... 7 15 Mill Hill 26 7 3 6 — 5 5 under 5 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 4 ... ... ... 7 11 5 upwds. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... 3 1 1 ... ... 9 15 Burnt Oak 9 3 2 — - 2 2 under 5 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 3 ... ... ... ... 2 ... ... ... ... 5 5 upwds. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2 2 4 Temple Fortune 6 3 2 - — — 1 under 5 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... 3 5 5 upwds. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 1 Infirmary 90 9 7 2 3 35 34 under 5 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 5 1 1 ... ... 2 ... ... ... 9 18 5 upwds. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... 11 7 6 5 2 40 72 Totals 330 95 49 14 15 82 75 under 5 ... ... 2 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 23 10 10 ... l 34 1 ... 3 ... 147 5 upwds. ... 2 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... 2 1 30 19 16 9 9 ... 183 20 Inquests. 6 Natural Causes. 3 Suicides (2 drowning, 1 run over by train). 8 Accidental. 3 by drowning, open verdict. Table B.—Table of Population, Births, and of New Cases of Infectious Sickness, coming to the knowledge of the Medical Officer of Health, during the year 1896, in the Hendon Urban District, classified according to Diseases, Ages, and Localities. Names of localities adopted for the purpose of these statistics; Public Institutions being shown as separate localities. Population At all Ages. Registered Births. Aged under 5 or over 5. New cases of Sickness in each locality coming to the knowledge of the Medical Officer of Health. Number of such cases removed from their homes in the several localities for treatment in Isolation Hospital. Smallpox. Scarlatina. Diphtheria. Mem. Croup. Fevers. Cholera. Erysipelas. Measles to Dec. 12.* Whooping Cough to Dec. 12.* Smallpox. Scarlatina. Diphtheria. Mem. Croup. Fevers. Cholera. Erysipelas. Census 1891. Estimated to middle of 1896. Typhus. Enteric or Typhoid. Continued. Relapsing. Puerperal. Typhus. Enteric or Typhoid. Continued. Relapsing. Puerperal. Hendon (Central) 5885 303 Under 5 ... 5 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2 119 83 ... 2 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 5 upwds. 2 8 4 ... ... 2 ... ... 3 111 92 20 2 5 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... West Hendon 2646 ... Under 5 ... 7 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 70 8 2 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 5 upwds. ... 8 ... ... ... 2 ... ... ... ... 1 19 2 4 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Burnt Oak 777 ... Under 5 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 32 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 5 upwds. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 23 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Infirmary & School 15843 429 36 Under 5 ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 22 20 ... +1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 5 upwds. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 4 3 2 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Temple Fortune 292 ... Under 5 ... 4 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 5 4 ... 2 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 5 upwds. ... 3 ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... 6 2 ... 3 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Child's Hill ‡ 3486 115 Under 5 ... 13 2 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 80 10 ... 5 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 5 upwds. 2 32 ... ... ... 2 ... ... ... ... 3 34 3 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Cricklewood 3165 99 Under 5 ... ... 4 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 68 12 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 5 upwds. 1 7 6 ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... 0 32 2 ... 7 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Mill Hill 2182 36 Under 5 ... 4 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 5 upwds. ... 16 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 5 ... ... 5 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Totals 15843 18862 ... Under 5 ... 34 7 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... 3 396 114 ... 14 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 5 upwds. 5 74 10 ... 8 ... ... 3 ... 23 214 31 3 46 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... *These diseases after date mentioned were struck off the List. †Sent to Willesden. ‡ Includes 112 from North End, Hampstead, and 456 from Golders Green, including Highfield School, 17 ZYMOTIC DISEASES. scarlet fever. This disease continues to make itself well known in the district, 108 cases being reported as against 66 in 1895. By far the largest number of cases came from Child's Hill district, 45 being notified from this quarter; Mill Hill came next with 20 cases; West Hendon 15; Hendon Central 13; Temple Fortune 7; Cricklewood 7; and the Infirmary 1. Fifty-nine of these cases were removed to the Infectious Diseases Hospital. Owing to two rather sudden outbreaks it was found impossible to accommodate all the patients in the Hospital which required removal and hence the question of enlargement of the present hospital was forcibly brought before you, and I am thankful to say this has since been done. Scarlet Fever in Mill Hill Ward.—Unfortunately this district, usually so free from infectious disease, was visited in the early part of the year with an outbreak. Twenty cases in all occurred during the year. In January a young girl returned home from service in Finchley and developed this disease; she lived at Burton Hole and was isolated at home. From the middle of February to the end of the month 16 cases were reported to me. The epidemic was of a very mild type. On enquiries being made I found that nearly every case attended a small free school attached to St. Margaret's Home. I visited and examined all the children, and found one child full out with a typical Scarlet Fever rash and sore throat. I sent her home, and on visiting the house found another child covered with desquamation from Scarlet Fever who had also been attending at the school. The mother, on being questioned, was entirely ignorant of anything having been the matter with her children. 1 immediately ordered the school to be closed. It is most unfortunate that (he cases were not discovered earlier, but the disease being so mild, the parents in several instances called in no doctor at all. Only one or two other cases occurred during the rest of the year; they were isolated at home. Seven cases from this district were removed to the Hospital. 18 Scarlet Fever in Hendon Ward.—In all, 28 cases occurred; 13 in Central Hendon, 15 in West Hendon. No case was reported from Burnt Oak district throughout the year. It may be well to record one outbreak as showing how the schools are the means of spreading the infection broadcast. During September and October 17 cases were reported to me, and in every instance' they were children attending the British Schools, Brent Street. I examined all the children in the school, and found one boy peeling freely all over the body. I should think he must have had the disease over a fortnight. He had never been away from school and said he never felt ill in any way. I asked him whether any of his brothers or sisters were ill, and his reply was, his sister was in bed with a sore throat. On visiting the house I discovered the little sister two-and-a-half years old with a very bad throat and a Scarlet Fever rash full out. The mother, at the time of my visit, was out at laundry work, and was quite surprised when I told her. This illustrates how important it is that the schools generally should be under a system of medical supervision. In the West Hendon district the fifteen cases reported from this quarter extended over different parts of the year, and could not be traced to contamination from any one quarter. Scarlet Fever in Child's Hill Ward.—A very large number of cases, namely, 59, were reported from this Ward, but it must be remembered that it is a \ ery scattered district, and that of this number 10 occurred at Golder's Green, and attended the British Schools at Hendon previously spoken of. Seven cases also occurred at Temple Fortune, and 7 at Cricklewood, the remainder, 35, coming from Child's Hill district. The number of cases from Cricklewood is small considering the population, which is larger than that of Child's Hill. On the other hand the number at Child's Hill is far above the average. At no one time during the year was there any large number of cases reported, but the disease extended itself gradually over the year with the exception of the last two months. I feel sure that this number would have been much decreased had it been possible to remove all the cases away to the Hospital ; but owing to that institution 19 being full, it was impossible, with the result that many recurrences occurred in the same families. 4 Small Pox. Five cases were reported, but I regret to say that in one case, at least, the disease was eventually found to be wrong, with an unfortunate result. The first case reported was a young gentleman from Child's Hill district. He was a student at St. Bartholomew's Hospital, and the case was first diagnosed as chicken pox at the Hospital, but the medical attendant certified it as small pox. The case was isolated at home. Another member of the same family was attacked later. Both progressed favourably and made a rapid recovery. On May 1st, a young girl from the Midland Cottages, Cricklewood, was reported suffering from small pox. I made careful enquiries. The girl had quite recently been an in-patient at the London Hospital, and since her return had not been out of the house. Her father was an engine driver and his duties carried him to the Docks daily. Beyond this I could gather no clue to account for the case. She was removed at once to the Small Pox Hospital at Highgate. On May 11th, another case, a young girl from Church Lane, Hendon, was reported as suffering from small pox, and was removed to the Hospital at Highgate, and certified as such from there. After a detention of eight weeks she returned, and a week afterwards developed undoubted small pox. She was again removed to the Hospital. At the first intimation of this case the family were all re-vaccinated, with the exception of the father who refused to be done, and curiously enough, a fortnight after the girl's return from the Hospital the first time, he was attacked with the disease and removed to the Hospital also. No other case occurred, although the family was a large one. Diphtheria. Seventeen eases were reported as against 35 in the preceding year : 5 from Central Hendon, 10 from Cricklewood, and 2 from Child's Hill. 20 In Cricklewood 7 of the cases occurred and all attended at the same school, and I have little doubt, that they contracted the disease from one another as they were nearly all in one class. No sanitary defects were found at the school. I examined all the children in one class and found several with " sore throats" and sent them home. I also visited several of the absentees at their homes and found four with bad throats. In several other instances certain drainage defects were found and remedied. In two instances grave complaints were made as to the emanation of sewer gas from the street sewers. These have also been attended to. typhoid fever. Eight cases were notified: 4 in Central Hendon; 2 in West Hendon; 2 in Child's Hill; 1 in Cricklewood; and 1 in Temple Fortune. In four of the houses sanitary defects were found, but in the remainder no cause could be ascertained in any way for the disease. measles. ' Six hundred and ten cases were reported up to December 12th, at which date this complaint was struck off the list of notifiable diseases by order of the Council. Of this number 380 cases occurred in Hendon Ward, and every one within the first six months of the year; they were distributed as follows: Hendon 211; West Hendon 89; Burnt Oak 55; Infirmary 25. Two schools were closed entirely and parts of two others also. In Child's Hill 114 cases occurred; in Cricklewood 100 cases. In both of these districts the disease spread itself over a considerable period, and it was not thought advisable to close the schools. In Temple Fortune 11 cases occurred, and in Mill Hill Ward only 21 5 cases. On December 12th this disease was, by order of the Council, struck off the list of notifiable diseases. Appended will be found my report to the Council upon this disease. whooping cough. One hundred and seventy cases were notified: Central Hendon 103; West Hendon 10; Burnt Oak 1; Child's Hill 19; Cricklewood 14; Temple Fortune 6; and Infirmary 22. This disease was, by order of the Council, also struck off the list of notifiable diseases. In the appended report my remarks upon this subject are to be found. Copy of Report on Measles and Whooping Cough sent tothe Local Government Board. Urban District Council Offices, Hendon, N.W., October 13 th, 1896. Sir, Having received from the Clerk to the Hendon Urban District Council a copy of your letter dated 30th September, 1896, with reference to withdrawal of Measles and Whooping Cough from the list of notifiable diseases in this district, I now present you a full report upon these diseases and the way it has been attempted to cope with them, and as to the advisability of continuing or abandoning them. On receiving notice of a case of Measles the following action is taken. The Sanitary Inspector or myself visits the house as soon as possible, and make enquiries as to the number of children in the house, and the schools which they attend (in many cases the children of the same family attend different schools). The sanitary arrangements of the house are also investigated. A formal certificate is then forwarded at onceto the School Authorities in the following form 22 District Council Offices, Hendon, 189 To the Head Teacher School I have this day received notice from a Medical Practitioner that residing at is suffering from A further certificate will be forwarded to you when the house is free from infection, and until then I must ask you not to allow anyone to attend school from above house. Medical Officer of Health. The parents are at the same time warned that they must isolate the affected ones as far as practicable, and in no case to allow them to leave the house or mix with other children for a period of three weeks. The Sanitary Inspector at the end of this time in most cases again visits the houses to obtain information as to whether any further outbreak has arisen which has not been reported, and if satisfactory the house is disinfected. A formal certificate is forwarded to the school declaring the house free from infection. Information received from School Authorities. A large amount of information is obtained by me of existing disease from the School Attendance Officer, for in every case where 1 have found Measles prevalent, I visit the Schools and gather from the register how many are away, and on consulting with the School Attendance Officer, he is generally able to tell whether their non-attendance is due to Measles or not; if in doubt, the Inspector visits the houses and ascertains. In many instances I have examined the children myself, say of the Infant Department (the one generally affected) and sent home doubtful cases. I also give advice to the teachers of the signs and premonitory symptoms of the disease, and ask them to exclude from school 23 any children which appear affected and to send in their names. In every case I have always received the ready help of the School Authorities. School Closure. When epidemics occur the question of closure of schools or parts of schools immediately becomes an important element in preventing the further spread of this disease, and I consider that in this district it has produced beneficial results. In my report to the Council for the four weeks ending May 19th, 1894, I stated that "During the month 103 cases were "reported, 49 from New Hendon, 39 from Mill Hill, 12 from "Central Hendon, and 23 from Child's Hill; sixty-seven different "families were affected, but a large number of these came from "the same house, there being two families in each house. I "seriously considered the advisability of closing St. John's "Schools, but as they were breaking up for the vacation in a few "days I did not do so." In my next report for the month ending June 16th, I stated : "Measles 28 cases: 12 in Hendon, 7 in Child's Hill, 7 in Mill "Hill. Now from May 7 to May 21 the schools were closed, and "I think it is only fair to conclude that this rapid reduction was "partly due to the schools closing for holidays, and what makes "it all the more apparent is that directly the schools re-opened "during the next four weeks 100 fresh cases were reported, 89 of " which occurred in Child's Hill." In my report for the four weeks ending August 11th, I stated: "Child's Hill 29 cases. This disease is rapidly diminishing, in a ''great measure no doubt due to the closure of the schools for "their vacations." During the year 1895, very few cases occurred, but in the present, half-year ending June 30th, 526 cases were reported. First an outbreak occurred at Burnt Oak Schools during the end of 24 January and the beginning of February. The report runs: "On Monday, the 10th inst., I attended before you and obtained "your sanction to close the schools. This has been done. The "number of cases has rapidly dimished during the week." On February 17th, 1896, the British Schools were seriously affected, and the Infants' School was closed, and on February 27th, the Infants' Department at the National Schools was also closed for the same reason. On the 23rd of March an epidemic occurred in children attending the Catholic Schools and these were closed. In each case the disease abated on closing the schools, and no doubt in great measure prevented others contracting the disease. I ought here to state that whenever I have closed the Day School I have always obtained the consent of the Managers to close the Sunday Schools also, as it would be obviously unwise to allow one to be open and not the other. Other Measures Taken. In order to make it publicly known that compulsory notification of Measles was in force in this district, and that not only had the Medical Practitioners to notify the cases, but failing medical advice being called in, the parents were bound to notify, the Board caused printed handbills to be distributed wholesale throughout the district giving all particulars. The result was not satisfactory, as the parents either through ignorance or neglect failed to attend to it. Now a to the results of the different actions taken to prevent further spread of the disease. 1 st.—Compulsory Notification. It is only too well shown that notification is not performed properly, a large number of cases not being notified at all, and only by accident or by most rigid enquiries are they found out. For instance, on my report to the Council on the outbreak at Burnt Oak, on February 15th, 1896, I stated: "Owing to the "ignorance on the part of the parents and no medical man being "called in, I was not informed of the existence of the disease in "this quarter until about 20 children were taken ill." 25 This shows how usual it is for the parents to treat this disease without medical aid, and often, when medical aid is called in, it is to treat the disease sometime after it has manifested itself. In the meanwhile other children are contracting it. It seems to me that unless the Sanitary Authorities can be strictly informed of all cases, and especially at the commencement of an outbreak, the good that the Act is intended to do is lost. In my annual report for the year 1895,1 stated: "As to the advisability "of including this in the list of notifiable diseases, it is doubtful "that much good is gained by it. Of course as regards closing "of schools it is a guide, but as this disease is most infectious "during the early stage, the harm is generally done before "attention is drawn to it and all hopes of so checking the disease "is prevented." 2nd.—Isolation. The question of isolation in Measles is one that is all very well in theory but most difficult in practice. In by far the majority of the houses affected it has been found impossible to make the parents comprehend the importance of isolating the sick from the unaffected ones, and in nearly every case it is impossible to obtain isolation at all, there not being sufficient accommodation, with the unhappy result, that the whole family gradually fall with the complaint. The only remedy in order to make isolation effectual is the erection of a hospital, but the expense would be enormous, and I doubt whether it would decrease the number of cases to any great extent, as this disease, being so infectious in the very early stages, the whole family is extremely likely to contract it before the case is taken away. One thing I have no doubt hospital treatment would do, that is to lessen the mortality from this disease, for amongst the poor Measles is a disease that the parents think much too light of, with the result that the children are not sufficiently cared for, and Bronchitis and Pneumonia terminate many lives which, under proper treatment, would be saved. 26 3rd.—Disinfection. It is extremely hard to disinfect thoroughly, even by the ordinary methods, houses affected by Measles. It is found that the parents will not properly isolate their children in one room during the illness, but allow them to run all over the house, and, in a large number of cases, send them out before the infectious period is past, and in such cases the whole house has to be disinfected. The parents very much resent their rooms being disinfected for Measles; some stormy scenes have often occurred on the visit of the Inspector to disinfect. The disinfection of the clothes is an important feature, but I much regret that my Council have not yet thought fit to incur the expense of a proper disinfecting chamber, and so the clothes can only be very imperfectly disinfected. The question of a disinfector is under the consideration of the Council, so I trust this matter will soon be satisfactorily settled. 4th.—Expense. The question of expense is one which has constantly engaged the attention of my Council, and the point is whether the advantages reaped repays the very large expense necessarily incurred. For besides the payment of medical fees (which is very heavy) in times of epidemics it is absolutely essential to add to the sanitary staff in order to cope with the increased work, one inspector being incapable of making all the necessary enquiries, disinfection revisits, etc., in a population of 17,000 inhabitants, and mainly of the poorer class, for out of this number over 2,800 children are attending the free schools in the district; this does not include any children under 4 or over 13 years. As to the advisability of continuing or abandoning Measles from the list of notifiable diseases, I am of opinion that the following are the objections against notification:— (1) A large number of cases are never reported by the parents, and although printed handbills have been issued as to compulsory notification, many did not do so. 27 (2) Infection being carried in the very early stages before diagnosis is certain, large numbers receive the poison before you are able to prevent it. This is especially the case in schools where the children are so closely congregated. (3) The Schools are the main centres for disseminating the disease, and, with the ready help I have always obtained from the Teachers and School Attendance Officer, and the medical men in the district, I can easily ascertain the cause of absence of the scholars, and use my judgment as to whether it is expedient to close them or not. (4) Proper isolation is not obtainable in nearly all cases as the houses are thickly populated, two families in one house invariably, and one room cannot be kept apart for sickness entirely, and the mothers must wait upon the sick and well, as they cannot afford to pay anyone to do it. There being no hospital to admit cases of measles, patients cannot be removed from their houses. (5) Disinfection cannot be performed with the thoroughness that one can wish. Having no disinfecting chamber it is impossible to disinfect the clothes worn by the patients, and it is impossible to do this thoroughly at the houses. (6) The expense of notification has been very great, and I am of opinion that the increased expenditure is hardly justified by the results obtained. (7) That the epidemics continue every other year, and that during the past four years they have increased in numbers, and the disease is not of a milder type. 28 WHOOPING COUGH NOTIFICATION. I think I need not dwell at any length upon this subject, as the remarks I have made with regard to Measles apply also to Whooping Cough, only to a much greater extent. I consider it is a disease with which it is impossible to adequately deal with under the Notification Act for the following reasons:— (1) A large number are never reported. (2) The disease at the onset often starts as an ordinary cold, the characteristic cough often does not shew itself for some time, and during all this period the case is highly infectious and the poison rapidly taken by others. (3) The mothers of the poor invariably treat this disease themselves, and continue to send their children in the streets and to school all the time. (4) Isolation is impossible as many cases last three months, and fresh air is the one thing above all that does most good during convalescence, and the parents would not consent to keep their children shut up in a stuffy room for a long period. In fact this disease is impossible to cope with in any way by isolation at home, and hospital treatment is out of the question in this district. (5) Disinfection is very hard to enforce, as all the discharges being so infectious it is hard to know where to begin and where to end. (6) The expense of notification is very great and has not in any way repaid the amount spent on it. To sum up I am of opinion that Measles and Whooping Cough are diseases which cannot be efficiently treated in this district by the aid of notification to in any way repay the 29 necessary expense incurred. I do not wish to deny that some good is gained, but, I think, if the points which 1 have given are carefully considered, it will be seen that in no single measure taken has the result been entirely satisfactory; after all, the object of notification is prevention of disease, but I do not think that it has to any great extent diminished the number of cases in this district, in fact, as statistics shew, they have increased. Of course the actual number of eases of this complaint can never be known. In the place of notification I would suggest that the schools be regularly visited by the Sanitary Staff, and the co-operation of the School Authorities obtained in the treatment of this disease, the names of absentees taken, and the cause of absence ascertained, and I have always found, as before stated, that the School Attendance Officer can invariably give me this information. The teachers should be told the signs and symptoms of the disease, and asked to exclude all doubtful cases and to send in their names, and the question of the necessity for closure can then be considered. For the information of the parents printed handbills should be sent out at the commencement of each outbreak, giving the signs and symptoms of the disease and the precautions necessary to be taken. Information can also be obtained from the medical men as to the extent of the disease in any particular part of the district. I think, if the above points are carefully attended to, as much good will be done in checking this disease as by compulsory notification, which is very costly. I think that a trial would be advisable. I am, Sir, Tour obedient Servant, F. W. ANDREW, Medical Officer of Health Hendon Urban District. 30 NOTIFICATIONS. The total number of cases of Infectious Disease during the year coming to the knowledge of the Medical Officer of Health was 950 as against 237 in 1895, and 817 in 1894. The following are the amounts incurred for notification of the lifferent diseases during the year :— £ s. #] Scarlet Fever 13 10 0 Measles 74 7 6 Whooping Cough 20 4 6 Diphtheria 2 2 6 Erysipelas 2 11 6 Typhoid Fever 1 0 0 Small Pox 0 12 6 Membranous Croup 0 2 6 Puerperal Fever 0 7 6 Total £114 18 6 It will be seen that out of this total £94 11s. Od. was incurred for notification of Measles and Whooping Congh. DUSTING. The dusting is performed by contract, there being three different contracts for the different Wards. One of the conditions of the contract is that the collection of the dust-bins shall be removed weekly. Numerous complaints reached us in June last of the non-removal of dust refuse, and of the great nuisance caused by the obnoxious smells arising from decomposition. These complaints came mainly from Hendon Central Ward, where, in some instances, weeks had elapsed between the visit of the dust cart. This matter was fully reported to you by myself and the Sanitary Inspector at a meeting of the Council. The contractor stated that the dusting could not be efficiently done at the 31 price. A fresh contract was accepted, but even worse complaints arose, and it has been a matter of no little trouble for the Sanitary Inspector to keep the contractor up to his work. As the collection of the refuse of the district is a matter of great importance from a sanitary point of view, I would ask my Council to give this matter serious consideration at the earliest time possible, in order that the very numerous complaints complained of may not be repeated in the ensuing year. The best remedy I would suggest, and I have no doubt in the long run, the cheapest, is for the Council to do the work themselves with their own horses and carts; if otherwise, I would earnestly ask the Council when next contracting to accept a tender which will ensure the work being done efficiently, as in previous contracts the money does not enable half as many carts being put on as is necessary. The next point on this matter to be considered is the final destination of the refuse. It has always been the custom to obtain shoots for same by filling up low lying grounds, and during the past year has been carted to the Hendon Brickfields, where it is finally sifted and used for the purposes of making bricks. Both such means of removal have been the cause of numerous complaints in the past. The main object to be attained from a sanitary point of view is the rapid destruction of such matters, and although the first outlay is rather an expensive one, I think it would soon well repay itself, that is by constructing a "Destructor," and so rapidly burning everything away. This could be conveniently placed at the Sewage Works, and the refuse left after burning could be used for the purposes of filtering on the sewage beds and other purposes. The proper removal of the dust refuse of the district and its final disposal I leave to you as one of the first matters for your consideration. WATER SUPPLY. The water supply is obtained from the Colne Valley and West Middlesex Waterworks Company. I can only repeat my 32 remarks in former reports, namely, how important it is that the constant supply should be general all over the district; and I trust that before long we shall see it universal. COWSHEDS AND DAIRIES. An important work in the district is the inspection of the dairies and cowsheds in the district, of which there are a large number. They have all been visited, and, speaking generally, were found in good condition. Notices in several instances had to be served as to whitewashing and cleansing. MILK-SHOPS. These were all visited and found in good order. SLAUGHTER-HOUSES. All the slaughter-houses have been examined and found to comply with the necessary requirements. BAKEHOUSES AND BUTCHER'S SHOPS. These were all visited and inspected, and found in fair order. In some cases notices were served to clean, etc. LAUNDRIES. The laundries being now under the Factory Act are regularly supervised by the Government Inspector. They have also been inspected by me, and in several instances notices had to be served to make good certain defects. TABLE D.—Tabular Statement as to the number of Cowsheds, Dairies, Laundries, Bakehouses, Butchers' Shops, and Slaughter Houses, under the Act, visited by the Medical Officer. Wards, Cowsheds. Dairies and Milk Shops. Laundries. Bakehouses. Butchers' Shops. Slaughter Houses. Hendon Ward 8 9 13 8 7 8 Child's Hill Ward 9 7 47 2 3 0 Mill Hill Ward 3 3 0 1 2 1 Totals 20 19 60 11 12 9 33 TABLE E.—Table giving the various statistics with regard to Vaccination for the years 1892 to 1896. Year. Total Births. Total Vaccinated. Insusceptible of Vaccination. Dead and Unvaccinated Postponed. Removed or gone away. Children unvaccinated in Union. No. of those who remain unvaccinated. 1892 504 414 4 33 13 28 11 Not given. 1893 534 359 8 29 17 4 9 Not given. 1894 533 373 12 34 21 17 12 64 1895 551 440 5 50 5 40 11 1896 589 395 10 48 30 35 71 34 35 BIRKBECK ESTATE, MILL HILL. The roads on this Estate, Viz.: Birkbeck, Shakespeare, Milton, Tennyson, Marion, Byron, and Victoria Roads, have been sewered by the Council at the owners' expense. All the houses, with the exception of about seven, have been drained and connected with the new sewers, the old cesspool system being abolished. BURNT OAK SEWERAGE. A contract has been entered into for the continuation of the Low Level Sewerage system to Burnt Oak and Orange Hill, and the work will be commenced at the beginning of the year. SYSTEMATIC INSPECTION OF DISTRICT. The whole district is now gradually undergoing a house to house visitation by the Sanitary Inspector, and all sanitary defects such as superficial bad drainage, defective dust-bins, water supply, unhealthy and dirty rooms, etc., etc., are being rigidly enquired into, and the necessary notices are at once sent to remedy such defects. The Inspector again visits the houses after the termination of the time stipulated in the notices to see if they have been attended to, failing which the Council are undertaking the work themselves and charging the cost to the proper persons. I feel sure that already the Inspector has done a large amount of good work, the number of notices served showing how necessary a systematic inspection was needed. Appended will be found the number of houses visited and the number of notices served, and complaints remedied. SEWAGE TREATMENT. The contract with the International and Purification Company having terminated in February, the Council undertook the treatment of the sewage themselves. Additional land to the amount of nineteen acres has been purchased at the request of the Local Government Board, although at the present time it is quite 36 possible to efficiently treat the sewage on the old amount of land. A very large sum has also been expended in thoroughly cleansing the old land filter beds, which were left by the late Company in a very bad state. In order to do this the surface of the filters was dug up to a depth of 6 inches, and the soil and weeds burnt, the resulting ballast being afterwards spread over the surface. On the top of this was put 3 inches of the best Leighton Buzzard sand. The area of filters so done amounts to 4 acres. Besides these filters the Council have brought from the International Company their own polarite filters which were in use, and so are carrying on the polarite system as before with the addition of the large area of sand and ballast filters before mentioned. The effluent now turned out is a very good one, and owing to the large surface of filters all the sewage is able to be efficiently dealt with. Formerly, owing to the polarite filters being so small, only about one-fifth of the clarified effluent was able to be treated, the remaining four-fifths having to pass through the absolutely then useless land filters. The sludge is being dealt with by passing it over the land on which is grown various crops. The sludge pressed varies according to the time and weather, and also according to the state of the land whether it is fit to receive it. Numerous samples of the effluent have been analysed by me, and found in most cases to comply with the requirements of the Rivers Pollution Act. INFECTIOUS DISEASES HOSPITAL. Sixty patients were admitted to the Hospital during the year; thirty-five females and twenty-five males. Fourteen were under 5 years of age, and 45 over 5 years of age. The following were admitted from the different districts :— Hendon (Central) 7 West Hendon 6 Golders Green 5 Temple Fortune 5 Child's Hill 23 Cricklewood 7 Mill Hill 7 37 The following number were admitted during the different months of the year:— January 0 February 11 March 2 April 8 May 8 June 6 July 4 August 2 September 12 October 0 November 7 December 0 Total 60 At three periods during the year, owing to sudden outbreaks occurring, it was found impossible to admit all the cases, and the question of at once enlarging the Hospital came up for your consideration, and it was resolved to proceed at once with the erection of a new Ward. Two deaths occurred. Both were very malignant cases. The advantage of having a mortuary attached to the Hospital was found very great as the cases were able to at once be removed from the Ward. A new Probationary Ward has been built with a nurse's room adjoining. The Ward will hold four beds. This new addition will be found a great boon, as in the past cases have been found to be suffering from more than one disease when admitted, and they w ill now be able to be isolated in the new Ward, and be seen by the Medical Officer before entering the general Wards. In cases of emergency this building could also be isolated for any special case. 38 Below will be found an account of the expenses incurred at the Hospital for the year ending 31st December :— Doctor's Fees. Nurse's Fees. Caretakers Wages. Maintenance, Provisions, & c. Disinfectant, Stoving, etc. Hire of Horse & Disinfecting Ambulance. Total Cost. £. s. d £. s. d £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s d £ s. d. £ s. d. 50 0 0 99 12 0 65 0 0 10 5 11 11 13 16 1 18 0 0 352 0 0 Sixty patients were under treatment during a total period of 391 weeks. This is at a cost of 18s. per head per week. New additions were erected at a total cost of about £120. Phis includes all drainage, etc. £37 9s. was paid for treatment of three cases treated in Small Pox Hospital in January. £56 lis, was also paid for treatment of Scarlet Fever cases at Wardell Convalescent Home. Stanmore. Appended will be found tables giving the work performed by the Sanitary Inspector during the year. In conclusion, I beg to thank the Members of the Council for the continued kindness and confidence they have always show n me. I have the honour to be, Gentlemen, Tour Obedient Servant, F. W. ANDREW, M.R.C.S., L.R.C.P. HENDON URBAN DISTRICT COUNCIL.-SANITARY WORK, 1896. Sanitary Districts. Disinfection. Dust. Dampness. Sundry nuisances abated. Contagious Diseases of Animals. Infant Life Protection Act. Note. —Asterisks or other signs appearing opposite a District signify that those columns of the District are taken together. Rooms fumigated. Rooms stripped and cleansed. Articles disinfected or destroyed. Dust-bins repaired. New bins provided. Movable receptacles substituted for fixed. Periodical frequency of dust removal. Number of complaints of nonremoval received. Roofs repaired, &c. Guttering and rain-pipes repaired, &c. Gardens, Areas, &c., levelled and drained. Yards paved and drained. Surface adjoining houses paved. Dry areas provided. Ventilation below floor provided. Basements rendered impervious. Overcrowding. Smoke. Accumulations of refuse. Foul ditches, ponds, &c., and stagnant water. Foul pigs and other animals. Other nuisances. Outbreaks. Animals affecting. Animals destroyed. Number of licensed premises. Number of children. Number of deaths. Hendon Urban District Council 165 17 Lots 17 70 109 Weekly. 144 10 8 ... ... ... ... ... ... 3 4 160 5 13 45 2 6V 54 ... ... ... HENDON URBAN DISTRICT COUNCIL. —SANITARY WORK, 1896. Sanitary Districts. Inspections. Notices. Dwelling Houses. Houses let in separate Dwellings or Lodgings. Common Lodging Houses. Canal Boats used as Dwellings. Movable Dwellings, Caravans, Tents, etc. Note. —Asterisks or other signs appearing opposite a District, signify that thosecolumns of the District are taken together. Complaints Received. Cases of Infectious Disease Notified. Number of Premises periodically Inspected. Houses Inspected from House-toHouse. Total Number of Houses, Premises, etc., Inspected. Total Number of Re-inspections after Order or Notice. Total Number of Inspections and Re-inspections. Letters Written. Cautionery Notices Given. Statutory Orders Issued. Summonses Served. Convictions Obtained. Houses, Premises, etc., Cleansed, Repaired, etc. Closed as Unlit for Habitation. Re-opened after Repairs, Alterations, etc. Demolished. Illegal Underground Dwellings Vacated. Number Registered under ByeLaws. Periodical, Frequency, or Number of Inspections. Number of Contraventions. Number Registered under Bye-Laws. Periodical Frequency or Number of Inspections. Number of Contraventions. Number Registered Under the Acts. Periodical Frequency or Number of Inspections. Number of Contraventions of Regulations. Number Observed during the Year. Number of Nuisances therefrom Abated. Number Removed from District. Hendon Urban District Council 145 950 130 768 241 68 1321 45 76 11 ... ... 43 ... ... ... ... 90 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 163 ... 163 HENDON URBAN DISTRICT COUNCIL.-SANITARY WORK, 1896. Sanitary Districts. Schools. Workshops and Work-places. Laundries. Bakehouses. Slaughter-houses. Cow-sheds. Dairies and Milkshops. Un sound Food. Adulterated Food. Offensive trades. Mortuaries. Note. —Asterisks or other signs appearing opposite a District, signify that those columns of the District are taken together. Number in District. Periodical Frequency or Number of Inspections. Number found Defective. Number in District. Piriodical Frequency or Number of Inspections. Contraventions of Factory Acts. Number in District. Periodical Frequency or Number of Inspections. Contraventions of Factory Acts. Number in District. Periodical Frequency or Number of Inspections. Contraventions of Factory Acts. Number on Register. Periodical Frequency or Number of Inspections. Contraventions of By-Jaws. Number on Register. Periodical Frequency or Number of Inspections. Contraventions of Bye-laws. Number on Register. Periodical Frequency or Number of Inspections. Contraventions of Bye-laws. Animals Seized. Articles or Parcels Seized. Samples taken. Found adulterated. Number of premises in District. Periodical Frequency or Number of Inspections. Contraventions of Bye-laws. Accommodation. Number of bodies received. Hendon Urban District Council 10 Frequently. 1 .. .. 11 60 Frequently. .. 11 Quarterly. . 10 Quarterly. .. 20 Half-yearly. .. 19 Half-yearly. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 14 HENDON URBAN DISTRICT COUNCIL.-SANITARY WORK, 1896. Sanitary Districts. Water Supply and Water Service. Privy and Ash Pits, Ash and Earth Closets. Drainage and Sewerage. Wells. Houses, Water Laid on to. Percentage of Houses Supplied from Mains. Cisterns. Flush Cisterns Provided to W.C'.s Draw-Taps Removed from Cisterns to Mains. Percentage of Houses Supplied on Constant System. Water Closets. Percentage of Houses provided with Water Closets. Drains. Cesspools. Percentage of Houses Drainage into Sewers. Sewers. Note.—Asterisks or other signB appearing opposite a District signify that thosecolumns of the District are taken together. New Sunk. Cleansed, Repaired, Etc. Closed as Polluted. New, Provided. Cleansed, Repaired, Covered, Etc. Overflow Pipes Disconnected from Drains. Above Ground Receptacles Substituted for Pits. Movable Receptacles Substituted for Fixed. Water Closets Substituted for Dry Receptacles. New Constructed. New Apparatus Provided. Repaired, Cleansed, Etc. Supplied with Water, or Supply Rendered Efficient. Ventilated. Examined, Tested, Exposed, Etc. Un3topped, Repaired,Trapped,Etc. Waste Pipes, Rain Water Pipes, Etc., Disconnected. Soil Pipes and Drains Ventilated. Disconnecting Traps or Chambers Inserted. Reconstructed. New Laid. Rendered Impervious, Emptied, Cleansed, Etc. Abolished and Drain Connected to Sewer. Yards of New Sewers Laid. Yards of Sewers Reconstructed. Hendon Urban District Council ... ... ... 3 95 5 10 ... 10 ... ... 7 7 3 15 19 1 95 1 95 12 12 ... 2 4 6 3 30 30 85 3000 30