HOR 42 BOROUGH OF HORNSEY REPORT OF THE MEDICAL OFFICER OF HEALTH FOR 1950 BOROUGH OF HORNSEY REPORT OF THE MEDICAL OFFICER OF HEALTH FOR 1950 MEMBERS OF THE TOWN COUNCIL *Alderman S. G. Goulding, j.p., Mayor Alderman H. F. Nichols, Deputy Mayor ALDERMEN F. H. Bailey, j.P. *L. J. Valette W. J. Grimshaw, j.P. *M. W. Burns H. Hynd, j.p., M.P. Mrs. C. M. Cave Miss E. C. McCullough, j.P. *†G. F. N. Norman *T. Tivendale G. W. F. Pallett COUNCILLORS *†Miss O. R. Anderson *Mrs. W. L. Le Messurier (Chairman of the Health Committee) *J. Lindsey L. A. Bains *W. Maiden *D. F. W. Billingsley E. B. C. Mayo Mrs. C. E. Burke-Scott R. D. Milne, m.a. *†R. A. Butler, j.p. *A. H. Morley F. C. Cave, j.p. N. Muldoon F. E. Cleary H. L. Norman H. P. Creasy F. J. Randall *†W. J. M. Crosland *Miss J. Richardson Mrs. K. M. St Patrick Crump *†Mrs. J. W. C. St. John, m.a. O. J. R. de Boer (Vice-Chairman Area Health Com.) F. W. Edwards *Mrs. L. F. Sutton H. A. Goodwin R. F. Sutton P. Hardiman T. E. Thursby *W. T. T. Herbert *C. V. Tipping A. S. Kent G. E. Turvey J. C. O. Lawrence G. Watson R. G. Leeming A. J. Young * Member of the Health Committee at 31st Dec. 1950 † Member of the Area Health Committee at 31st Dec. 1950. 2 Public Health Department, Town Hall, Hornsey, N.8. To His Worship the Mayor, Aldermen and Councillors of the Borough of Hornsey Mr. Mayor, Ladies and Gentlemen, In accordance with my statutory duty I submit the Annual Report relating to the Borough Health Services for the year ending the 31st December, 1950. The volume of work shown in the various sections of this Report demonstrates the importance of the functions left to a progressive Local Sanitary Authority. The health department has concentrated throughout the year on fundamental problems of environmental hygiene—housing, inspection and supervision of food and infectious disease control. Positive progress has been made in the improvement of unsatisfactory individual housing conditions, and much preliminary work undertaken in preparation for the Campsbourne Clearance Area. In respect to the latter a heavy burden has fallen on the shoulders of the Chief Sanitary Inspector Mr. Jesse, the Senior District Sanitary Inspector Mr. Chance, and the clerical staff. The clerical staff was depleted early in the year by the transfer of the Area Health staff from the Town Hall to new offices in Somerset Road, Tottenham. Since the end of the year the department has been re-inforced by the appointment of Mr. D. B. Davies, D.P.A., Health Education Officer in the Borough of Luton, to the post of Chief Clerk. The whole-time appointment of Mr. W. J. Wilson, D.P.A., M.S.I.A., responsible to me for your Clean Food Campaign, promises an increasingly effective effort in the education of food handlers in the Borough and awakening of public interest in matters of food hygiene. Co-operation of food traders has been most encouraging and a special indebtedness is owed to the Local Chamber of Commerce for their active support in making the scheme an initial success. No serious outbreak of infection occurred during the year; and the health of the Borough as measured by vital statistics showed a satisfactory record. To the Chairman, Councillor Miss O. Anderson, and Members of the Health Committee I am extremely indebted for their support and kind encouragement throughout the year. I am, Your obedient servant, G. Hamilton Hogben, Medical Officer of Health. September, 1951. 3 INDEX TO SECTIONS 1. FOOD 2. INFECTIOUS DISEASES AND TUBERCULOSIS 3. SANITARY INSPECTION 4. HOUSING 5. NATIONAL ASSISTANCE ACT, 1948 6. HEALTH EDUCATION 7. OTHER SERVICES 8. STATISTICAL TABLES 4 SECTION 1 FOOD INSPECTION AND SUPERVISION OF FOOD PREMISES During the year, 852 visits were paid to food premises. In the latter half of the year particular attention was given to the inspection of cafes, restaurants and snack bars and 157 letters were written to owners or occupiers pointing out that alterations, redecorations, redesigning and improvements were required at their premises. Verbal requests were also made in 50 instances. In the case of three snack bar cafes, two of which are situated in the Turnpike Lane area and the other at Highgate, special reports were submitted to the Council who decided that by reason of the inadequate plumbing and drainage facilities and unsatisfactory structures these premises would require complete reconstruction before they could be considered suitable for further use as food premises. In the absence of concrete proposals by the owners of the cafes it would have to be decided that the premises as such must be closed. By the end of the year a definite scheme for rebuilding, including provision of proper drainage and plumbing facilities had been received for consideration in one of the cases; in the second case negotiations were proceeding between the occupier of the cafe and the owner of the land on which the cafe stands; in the third case no solution has yet been found and the ultimate closing of the premises may be necessary. Many of the larger firms are now carrying out post war repairs and alterations to their premises, in some cases without prior request by this department. Some of the improvements are in advance of legislative requirements. As far as owner/occupier premises are concerned the standard, on the whole, is reasonable and there is a general desire to co-operate with the Health Department. There are, however, certain establishments where response to requests, written or verbal, is not accepted and these can only be dealt with adequately by legal action. MILK SUPPLY During the latter part of 1949 the Food and Drugs (Milk and Dairies) Act 1944 became law and on the same date the Milk (Special Designations) Act 1949, Milk and Dairies Regulations 1949, Milk (Special Designation) (Raw Milk) Regulations 1949, and Milk (Special Designations) (Pasteurised and Sterilised Milk) Regulations, 1949 came into operation. These Acts and Regulations implement, to a large degree, the Government's policy as defined in the White Paper "Measures to Enforce the Quality of the Nation's Milk Supply" published in July 1943. 5 The supervision of milk production on the farm now becomes the responsibility of the Minister of Agriculture and Fisheries and local authorities retain the duties of controlling the distribution and sale of milk. The licensing of pasteurising and sterilising establishments is transferred to the County Council, the Food and Drugs Authority, but the Borough Council are still responsible for enforcing the provisions of the Milk and Dairies Regulations (which apply to all dairy premises). Unnecessary overlapping results from both authorities having duties on the same premises. The Borough Council is still responsible for the granting of dealers and supplementary licences for the sale of special designated milk. Licences were granted during the year as follows:— Dealers Supplementary Licences Licences pasteurised 27 9 tuberculin tested 25 10 accredited 1 — sterilised 40 9 The Milk and Dairies Regulations, 1949, require the local authority to register all dairy premises (other than dairy farms) and all persons carrying on the trade of milk distributor. Applications for registration during the year were as follows:— distributors ... 52 Dairies 2 Thirty-six samples of milk sold under special designations were taken in course of delivery or from shops and submitted for bacteriological examination. All were found to be satisfactory. ICE CREAM There are 142 premises registered for the sale, manufacture or storage of ice cream. Frequent inspections of these premises are carried out to ensure that the requirements of the Food and Drugs Act 1938 are being maintained, and in cases where ice cream is manufactured that the requirements of the Ice Cream (Heat Treatment) Regulations 1947 are being complied with. Forty-two samples of ice cream were taken during the year and submitted for bacteriological examination. The results were as follows:— Grade 1 Grade 2 Grade 3 Grade 4 21 13 5 3 Where ice cream is sold from vehicles these are inspected as often as possible but as most of them come into the Borough from other districts and usually stay in one position for only a short time it is difficult to locate them. The vehicles of vendors operating from within the Borough are inspected frequently and, on the whole, a satisfactory standard is obtained. Section 16 of the Food and Drugs Act 1938 which has been adopted by the Council requires that all vehicles from which ice cream is sold shall have the name and address of the dealer legibly displayed. 6 BAKEHOUSES A bakehouse is a factory within the meaning of the Factories Act 1937 and is subject to the general provisions of that Act relating to factories. Legal powers for enforcing standards of hygiene in bakehouses are contained in Section 13 of the Food and Drugs Act 1938. There are fifteen bakehouses in the Borough and these are inspected periodically. In addition to the above there are three basement bakehouses in the Borough. Section 54 of the Factories Act 1937 defines a "basement bakehouse" as "a bakehouse any baking room of which is so situate that the surface of the floor is more than three feet below the surface of the footway of the adjoining street or of the ground adjoining or nearest to the room". It is illegal to use as a bakehouse a basement bakehouse which was not in use on the 30th July, 1937 and certified as suitable by the district Council before that date. The Act also requires that basement bakehouses be inspected every fifth year and, if found suitable as regards construction, height, light, ventilation and hygienic condition, certificates of suitability should be renewed. Certificates of suitability were renewed in respect of the three underground bakehouses at 220 Archway Road, 335 Archway Road and 104 Stroud Green Road in September 1949. SLAUGHTERHOUSES The Live Stock (Restriction of Slaughtering) Order, 1940 continued in force and no slaughtering was carried out during the year. No licences to slaughter were issued. REGISTRATION OF HAWKERS OF MEAT, FISH, FRUIT AND VEGETABLES AND THEIR PREMISES Section 279 of the Middlesex County Council Act, 1944 provides for the registration of all hawkers of meat, fish, fruit and vegetables and for the registration of the storage premises. The following registrations were effected during the year:— Sale Storage fruit and vegetables 4 2 fish 3 1 The total number of hawkers registered up to the 31st December 1950 was 71. REGISTRATION OF PREMISES FOR THE MANUFACTURE OF PRESERVED FOODS Two premises were registered during the year under the provisions of Section 14 of the Food and Drugs Act, 1938, for the pickling of meat. The total number of premises registered up to the 31st December 1950 was 58. 7 WATER SUPPLY The water supply for Hornsey is provided by the Metropolitan Water Board. The supply has been satisfactory both in quantity and quality during the year. Hornsey is supplied from two sources:— (a) Water from the New River, treated at the Board's filtration works at Hornsey, and Stoke Newington. (b) River Thames water stored in Littleton Reservoir and treated at the Board's filtration works at Kempton Park. Water is pumped from these works into service reservoirs at Crouch Hill. Samples of water are collected on five days in every week, or more often if required, at each stage of the purification process and tests include physical, chemical and microbiological examination. The water supply to this area is not plumbo-solvent. All new and repaired mains are chlorinated before being restored to use and samples of water from them are tested bacteriologically to ensure that its quality is up to that normally supplied. The water supply is in all cases direct to dwelling houses; none is supplied by means of a stand pipe. Chemical Examination 486 samples of New River water filtered at the Hornsey and Stoke Newington Works and 244 samples of River Thames water filtered at the Kempton Park works were chemically examined and found to be satisfactory. Bacteriological Results Agar Colony Bact. coli Test Count after Neg. Bact. coli Bact. coli Filtration Works No. of 20-24 hrs. per 100 ml. per 100 ml. Samples at 37° C. Hornsey 257 7.9 100.0% nil Stoke Newington 257 12.2 100.0% nil Kempton Park 819 18.6 99.9% 0.002 8 SECTION 2 INFECTIOUS DISEASES AND TUBERCULOSIS INFECTIOUS DISEASES Under Section 144 of the Public Health Act, medical practitioners are required to notify the Medical Officer of Health of the occurrence of a case of notifiable infectious disease in the district. Other diseases may be declared to- be notifiable by the Minister of Health or the local authority. Control of the spread of infectious disease involves:— Notification. Bacteriological examination. Inspection of homes by the sanitary inspectors and, by arrangement with the Area Health Service, in some cases by the health visitors. Disinfection where necessary of premises and personal effects. Exclusion from school of patients and child contacts and the collection of statistics regarding each case. Regulations authorise control in respect of dairymen patients and contacts, and the removal home from hospital of bodies of persons who have died from infectious diseases. Tables showing details of notifications received appear on pages 44 and 45. TUBERCULOSIS The care of the tuberculous since the National Health Service Act 1946 has been divided between the Regional Hospital Board, the County Council, and the District Council. Treatment is provided by the Hospital Board which now controls the Chest Clinics; "after care" is the responsibility of the County Council while the district medical officer of health receives the notifications from medical practitioners and keeps the official notification register. Notification is compulsory under the Public Health (Tuberculosis) Regulations, 1930. A table showing the numbers of patients on the notification register appears on page 43. LABORATORY SERVICES The Laboratory Services are directed by the Medical Research Council on behalf of the Ministry of Health. Pathological specimens are sent for examination to the Central Public Health Laboratory at Colindale and the Branch Laboratory at Coppetts Wood Hospital, Hornsey. The Public Health Department is a collection centre for specimens submitted by general practitioners and local authorities and supplies of containers are obtainable between 9.0 a.m. and 5.15 p.m. (9 a.m. to 12.30 p.m. on Saturdays). 9 Specimens received in the Public Health Department office are collected on Monday to Friday at 2 p.m and at 10 a.m on Saturday by a messenger from the Laboratory Service. Specimens may also be sent direct to the Hornsey Laboratory before 5 p.m Monday to Friday and 12 noon on Saturdays. The Central Public Health Laboratory maintains a 24-hour emergency service. The assistance of the technical staff attached to the laboratories is also available in connection with outbreaks of infectious diseases at day nurseries and schools and this assistance is extremely valuable in controlling the spread of infection. FOOD POISONING Section 17 of the Food and Drugs Act, 1938 provides that if a registered medical practitioner becomes aware or suspects that a patient is suffering from food poisoning he shall forthwith notify the Medical Officer of Health of the district. Prompt notification ensures that the Medical Officer of Health is informed of outbreaks of illness occurring in the district and believed to have been caused by food and is thus able to make prompt inquiries and take action to avoid the spread of infection and to obviate a recurrence. Investigation of a case or outbreak involves extensive inquiries at patients' homes, and canteens or restaurants at which meals may have been obtained, as well as the collection of suitable material for laboratory examination. It is often possible to limit an outbreak by stopping the sale of suspected food or recovering unconsumed portions already sold. It is important to identify the types of food poisoning as soon as possible and this can often be done on clinical grounds and confirmation obtained from the bacteriological examination of specimens from patients. Information on every outbreak and an annual return of food poisoning are sent to the Ministry of Health and the systematic collection of this information is of great value in the study of matters in connection with the incidence and control of food poisoning. Although some forms of food poisoning are of chemical origin the types most commonly occurring are caused by bacteria mainly of the salmonella group which have largely been responsible for the remarkable increase in outbreaks in England and Wales from about 50 per year before the last world war to 964 in 1949. In 1950, 7,503 persons were notified as having suffered from food poisoning. Twelve cases were notified in Hornsey during the year, seven of whom had apparently been infected at a garden fete. The outbreak was investigated and salmonella typhi-murium was isolated from the faeces of two carriers. Five single cases were notified, one due to staphylococcus pyogenes, two to salmonella typhi-murium and the other two to unknown causes. 10 11 DIPHTHERIA IMMUNISATION Regular sessions for this purpose are held at the Welfare Centres and the parents of children attending the Day Nurseries are also encouraged to allow their children to be immunised. 1.—Immunisation in relation to child population :— Number of children at 31st December, 1950, who had completed a course of immunisation at any time before that date. Age in years at 31/12/50 Under 1 1 2 3 4 5 to 9 10 to 14 Total under 15 Number Immunised 35 884 1,158 1,400 1,309 2,163 366 7,315 Estimated mid-year child population 1950 Children under five 7,995 Children 5—14 10,030 18,025 2.—Only one case of diphtheria was notified during the year. The patient was a child of 5 years who was not removed to hospital. She had completed immunisation in October 1946 but had not received the recommended "booster" injection just before starting school. SECTION 3 SANITARY INSPECTION INSPECTION OF FACTORIES The Council is responsible for enforcing certain provisions of Part I of the Factory Act, 1937. The relevant sections are as follows:— section 1.—Cleanliness. section 2.—Overcrowding. section 3.—Temperature. section 4.—Ventilation. section 6.—Drainage of floors. section 7.—Sanitary Convenience. A distinction is drawn between factories where mechanical power is used and those where mechanical power is not used. The provisions of sections 1, 2, 3, 4, 6, and 7 have to be enforced by the Council in those factories without mechanical power, but where mechanical power is used section 7 only is the responsibility of the Council, the other sections being enforced by the H.M. Inspectors of Factories. Section 8 requires the Local Authority to "Keep a register of all factories situate within their district with respect to which the duty of enforcing any of the said provisions is imposed upon them". H.M. Inspectors notify the Health Department of new factories or of the introduction of mechanical power, and other information which appears to affect the jurisdiction of the Local Authority. In Hornsey there are 216 factories where mechanical power is used and 35 without mechanical power. A table showing inspections carried out during the year appears on page 50. INSPECTION OF OUTWORKERS PREMISES Section 110 of the Factory Act, 1937 requires the occupier of every factory and every contractor employed by such occupier in the business of a factory to keep a list of all the outworkers direcdy employed either as workmen or as contractors in such classes of work as may from time to time be specified by Regulation. The list must be open to inspection by H.M. Inspector of Factories and any officer duly authorised by the district council. Copies of the list showing all the outworkers employed during the previous six months must be sent to the district council during February and August of each year. The list should contain the following particulars:— (i) Full name of outworker. (ii) Whether a workman or contractor. (iii) Class of work. (iv) Place of Employment. (v) Home address. 13 The classes of work which have been specified by Regulation are as follows:— 1 Making, cleaning, washing, altering, ornamenting, finishing, and repairing of wearing apparel. 2 Making up, ornamenting, finishing, and repairing of table linen, bed linen, or other household linen (including in the term linen, articles of cotton and linen mixtures) and any processes incidental thereto. 3 Making, ornamenting, mending, and finishing of lace and of lace curtains and nets. 4 Making of curtains and furniture hangings and any processes incidental thereto. 5 Cabinet and furniture making and upholstery work. 6 Making of electro-plate. 7 Making of files. 8 Manufacture of brass and of any articles or parts of articles of brass (including in the term brass any alloy or compound of copper with zinc or tin). 9 Fur-pulling. 10 Making of iron and steel cables and chains. 11 Making of iron and steel anchors and grapnels. 12 Making of cart gear, including swivels, rings, loops, gear buckles, mullin bits, hooks, and attachments of all kinds. 13 Making of locks, latches, and keys. 14 Making or repairing of umbrellas, sunshades, parasols, or parts thereof. 15 Making of artificial flowers. 16 Making of nets other than wire nets. 17 Making of tents. 18 Making or repairing of sacks. 19 Covering of racquet or tennis balls. 20 Making of paper bags. 21 Making of boxes or other receptacles or parts thereof made wholly or partially of paper, cardboard, chip, or similar material. 22 Making of brushes. 23 Pea picking. 24 Feather sorting. 25 The carding, boxing, or packeting of buttons, hooks and eyes, pins, and hair pins. 26 Making of stuffed toys. 27 Making of baskets; and any process incidental thereto. 28 Manufacture of chocolates or sweetmeats, and any work incidental thereto. 29 Making or filling of cosaques, Christmas crackers, Christmas stockings or similar articles or parts thereof, and any work incidental thereto. 14 15 30 The weaving of any textile fabric, and any process incidental thereto. 31 The manufacture of lampshades other than lampshades made wholly of metal or glass or stone. A table showing the number of outworkers in the Borough appears on page 50. RODENT CONTROL The Prevention of Damage by Pests Act 1949 came into force on the 31st March, 1950 and repealed the Rats and Mice (Destruction) Act, 1919. This Act is wider in its scope than the 1919 Act as, in addition to dealing with infestations by rats and mice it provides for notification to the Minister of Agriculture and Fisheries of infestations of food premises by insect pests. It is the duty of the local authority to ensure that, as far as practicable, its area is kept free from rats and mice, to carry out such inspections as are necessary for the purpose, and to keep such records as may be required by the Minister. The Act also requires the submission of reports to the Minister and the first one was for the nine months ending 31st December, 1950. In future reports will be submitted annually and in particular they will contain information relating to:— (1) The prevalence of rats or mice in the district and the extent to which measures of control have been carried out. (2) The special circumstances to which any undue presence of rats or mice in the district may be attributed. (3) The nature and extent of the co-operative working with contiguous local authorities and with County Agricultural Executive Committees. The following is a summary of the work undertaken during the year:— Prevalence of Rats and Mice Infestations notified by occupier Otherwise discovered Total Major infestations Minor infestations Mice only 469 71 540 None 441 99 Measures of Control Properties inspected No. of inspections Notices served Premises disinfested Block treatments Rats Mice 400 2,842 None 263 25 No block treatments were found to be necessary. No legal proceedings were taken under the Prevention of Damage by Pests Act, 1949. Regular sewer maintenance treatments were carried out during the year. SHOPS ACTS The Shops Act 1950 came into operation on the 1st October 1950. It is purely a consolidation Act and makes no change in the existing law. The Act repeals the Shops Acts 1912-1936, the Retail Meat Dealers' Shops (Sunday Closing) Act, 1936, the Shops (Sunday Trading Restriction) Act 1936, certain sections of the Young Persons (Employment) Act 1938 and Defence Regulation 60 A.B. During the year 874 inspections were made. The majority were concerned with the non-provision of the necessary notices. The following work was carried out in connection with the provisions of the Act relating to the health and comfort of the workers:— Lighting provided 2 Sanitary Accommodation provided 1 Sanitary Accommodation labelled 4 Washing facilities provided 17 No. of shops cleansed 13 No. of shops dealt with 23 Regular observations were kept on the shopping areas to ensure that the shops were closed for the weekly half-holiday, and during evenings and Sundays to see that the requirements of the Act as to closing hours were being complied with. In two instances it was found necessary to institute legal proceedings. One summons was in respect of a contravention of Section 4 of the Shops Act 1912 as to closing on the weekly half-day. The second summons concerned a contravention of the Shops (Sunday Trading Restriction) Act 1936. A fine of £1 was imposed in the first case and £1 fine with £1 ls. 0d. costs in the second. / 16 SMOKE ABATEMENT Summary of the History of the Smoke Nuisance at Hornsey Engine Sheds For many years annoyance and discomfort has been experienced by the residents of North Haringey from smoke discharged from the railway engines and engine sheds of the locomotive depot in that area. Correspondence in connection therewith is voluminous and from time to time smoke observations of many hours duration have been carried out by the sanitary inspectors. The matter has been before the Council a number of times and sub-committees have been appointed. As far back as November, 1900, the Hornsey Urban District Council received a deputation supported by a petition containing 136 signatures of owners, ratepayers, and tenants. Again in June, 1906 a serious complaint was reported to the Health Committee and as a result four summonses were issued relating to black smoke. A fine of twenty shillings and costs were awarded and two cases were dismissed. From 1907 to 1929 further complaints were received, reports were submitted by the Medical Officer of Health and deputations attended the meetings of the Health Committee and the Borough Council. In May, 1929 the Health Committee considered a report by Dr. J. S. Owens, Consulting Engineer. This report is too long to reproduce here but he refers to certain improvements intended to be carried out by the Railway Company as follows:— "The coaling stage is to be replaced by a mechanical coal handling plant situated about 100 to 120 yards west of the houses in Wightman Road, that is, about 70 to 90 yards further away from the houses than at present. The ramp and its attendant troubles will be done away with, the waggon unloading will be by tippler instead of by hand, and this will occupy a much shorter period, while the loading into engine-tenders will be from hoppers with shoots suitably arranged. Thus the period of loading locomotives will also be very much reduced. "I think that on the whole this would be a great improvement over the present methods, but I drew Mr. Marley's attention to the danger of dust from the waggon tipplers and shoots, unless special care is taken to enclose them properly, so that the wind may not blow through the stream of falling coal at any point. "An ash-pit is to be provided, into which all locomotives must discharge their ash, and none will therefore be dumped on the ground beside the rails, as at present. I was informed by Mr. Marley that the scheme, including the new coal handling plant and ash-pit, had received the sanction of the Directors, but he could not tell me how long it would be before the scheme would be in operation. This is a point of importance, and I therefore asked him to inquire and let me know when the work was to be commenced and the scheme completed. I have not, however, heard anything further on the matter. It is important that no delay should be incurred in getting on with the proposed alterations." The Town Clerk was instructed to press for definite information as to the date when it was anticipated that the improved methods referred to would be in operation and also to communicate with the Company in regard to certain suggestions made by Dr. Owens with the view of mitigating the nuisance arising from smoke as distinguished from dust. 17 At their meeting in July, 1929, the Health Committee considered the following letter from the Locomotive Running Superintendent:— "Hornsey Engine Shed" "Referring to your letter of the 6th instant, enclosing copy of Resolutions of your Council and of certain Recommendations made by Dr. Owens, the contracts in connection with the provision of the new coaling plant for this depot are on the point of being let. This plant is constructed of ferroconcrete and takes approximately seven months to erect. It will, I anticipate, be from nine months to a year before the whole of the alterations and improvements it is proposed to carry out at Hornsey are completed. "With regard to Dr. Owen's recommendations, (1) Careful Firing:— We are at the present time using fire lighters at Hornsey for lighting up loco. boilers, and with this method of fire lighting the procedure mentioned in Dr. Owen's notes is largely followed:— (2) Independent Blast:— The use of an independent blower for raising steam in locomotives is not advisable and is not resorted to except in cases of emergency owing to the damage which may be caused to the tubes of the engines by the use of such apparatus. (3) Use of Hot Water:— I am quite in agreement with this paragraph. The cost of such a plant is, however, considerable and whilst its advantages are undoubted it is difficult to justify the expenditure. The matter will, nevertheless, be borne in mind. (4) Oil-Lighters:— I have no information respecting this method of fire lighting but will take an opportunity of speaking to the Great Western people and asking for details. (5) Coke:— I am afraid this is impracticable. The time taken to raise steam with coke alone would be so excessive as to make it impossible to adopt such a method". The new coalhopper was in operation by September, 1931. On the 23rd May, 1938 "Notice of Offence" under the Public Health Act, 1936, was sent to the Railway Company informing them of the emission of black smoke from certain engines for a period of eight minutes in the morning and six minutes in the afternoon of that date. The Chief Legal Adviser replied, on the 26th May, that the matter was receiving his attention. During the war no complaints were received and it was not until August, 1950 that this matter again came into prominence. On the 14th August, 1950, a complaint of smoke nuisance from the engine sheds was received from a resident in Wightman Road. At about the same time one of the local papers reported that nearly 200 people had signed a petition calling upon British Railways to abate the nuisance. The petition also dealt with noise from loud speakers directing night work, and the glare from bright lights erected above the roof tops which shone into the bedrooms. The engine sheds were visited by the sanitary inspector on the 23rd September and during an interview with the Deputy Depot Superintendent the following facts were ascertained:— (i) The total capacity of the sidings is approximately 80 engines. 18 (a) The number in the sheds at any one time varies considerably, the number under steam or getting up steam varying from 3 to 50 engines. There are generally more engines on the sidings during the end of the week. (iii) The method of lighting fires in the engines (the chief cause of smoke nuisance) is by means of some dozen fire lighters and coal. The fuel is reasonably good, but they have to use what is sent; no Welsh steam coal is used. The fires are lighted in the engines at all times night or day. The American method of firing suggested by Dr. Owens is not the one used. (tv) No coke is used in firing owing to the excessive time required by such method to get up steam. (v) The time required for an engine to get up steam is four hours. Independent blast is not used except in an emergency owing to the possibility of damage to boiler pipes. (vi) The number of engines fired from cold varies considerably and although each engine boiler is filled with warm water after cleansing, an engine may stand so long before being fired that the water in the boiler becomes cold. (vii) It appears that since the coalhopper was built there has been a considerable reduction in the dust nuisance which has been a cause of complaint in the past. The recommendation of Dr. Owens regarding an ash-pit for receiving ashes from the fire boxes has been adopted but not all firemen use it. Engines which are on the siding some distance from the ash-pits are not always shunted to the ashpits because of the delay this would cause, and the ashes are emptied on to the permanent way. These ashes are loaded periodically by hand on to a railway waggon thus spreading a considerable amount of dust which can be observed from the bridge. It is almost impossible to eliminate all smoke from these sidings during shunting operations, but it could be minimised if firemen exercised care and intelligence when feeding the fires so that each engine consumed its own smoke, as far as practicable, and in addition if some other means could be devised of preventing the emission of volumes of smoke when steam is being raised. A series of smoke observations on the engines and engine sheds were carried out by the sanitary inspectors during January and February, 1951. The results of these were reported to the Health Committee in March and the Committee recommended that in order to carry out a more scientific survey of the atmospheric pollution in the North Haringey area, three deposit gauges be installed in selected positions and monthly examinations of deposit matter submitted for analysis. 19 SECTION 4 HOUSING INSPECTION OF HOUSES The inspection of dwelling-houses continues to take up the major part of the sanitary inspectors' time. As will be seen from the summary on page 49, 13,353 houses were inspected during the year, mainly as the result of complaints received from the occupiers. Due to lack of maintenance during the war and subsequent years, it is often found on inspection that the repairs required are extensive, involving in some cases work of a structural character. Many of the houses in the Borough are aged leasehold properties with only a short period unexpired and the high cost of building repairs in relation to controlled rents often creates financial difficulties for owners in complying with Notices. Briefly the powers of local authorities to deal with insanitary houses are as follows:— Under the Public Health Act 1936, it is the duty of the local authority to deal with Statutory Nuisances as defined in Section 92. Where such nuisances are found to exist the local authority serves a notice requiring the abatement of the nuisances. If the Notice is not complied with the owner is summoned before a Court of Summary Jurisdiction and an Order obtained. The Order gives a specified period in which to carry out the work. If the Order is not complied with the local authority may do the work and recover the expense. Under the Housing Act, 1936, where a local Authority consider that a house is in any respect unfit for human habitation; they shall, unless they are satisfied that it is not capable at a reasonable expense of being rendered fit, serve a Notice upon the owner requiring him, within a reasonable time, to carry out the work specified in the Notice. The owner can appeal to the County Court against the Notice, but subject to the right of appeal, the local authority may carry out the work if the owner fails to do so and recover the cost, with interest, if necessary by deducting the instalment of the cost from the rent. In determining whether a house can be rendered fit for human habitation at a reasonable expense, regard shall be had to the estimated cost of the necessary works and the value which it is estimated the house will have when works are completed. It will be seen, therefore, that "reasonable expense" is the prime factor to be considered under the repairs sections of the Housing Act. With the present high cost of building repairs it becomes increasingly difficult to determine what is reasonable expense. The market values of house property at the present time often bear little relation to investment values owing to the increased cost of building labour and materials as compared with the absence of any increase in rent. Also, it must be rememberd that, under the Housing Act, if a local authority considers that a house is unfit and is not capable, at a reasonable expense, of being made fit, they must consider the question of demolition. 21 The practice generally adopted in this district since the war has been to require the abatement of nuisances under the Public Health Act 1936. Broadly speaking, defects which can be dealt with under this Act are such matters as defective roofs, rain-water pipes, dampness, sanitary fittings and drains. This is a minimum standard of repair and in some parts of the Borough is insufficient to maintain the houses in all respects fit for human habitation. If housing conditions are to be improved, or even maintained, more use must be made of Sections 9 and 10 of the Housing Act 1936 although discretion will be necessary in deciding to which properties the sections will be applied. CAMPSBOURNE CLEARANCE AREA The first stage of the redevelopment of this Area is now under way and the demolishing of the buildings in Brook Road and Brook Place has now commenced. Before this work could be started 49 families, including several elderly persons, had to be rehoused. The Housing Manager has carried out a difficult task in finding alternative accommodation for these families at rents which they could reasonably afford. A census of the families living in the area was carried out early in the year and at the same time notice was taken of their general housing conditions. The following is a summary of the report:- Total acreage of area dealt with 21.08 Houses per acre approximately 23.14 Persons per acre approximately 125.00 Persons per house 5.45 Number of families 856.00 Dwelling houses and part dwelling houses (4 derelict) 488.00 Business premises etc 22.00 Persons living within the area Males over 10 years of age 1,031 Females over 10 years of age 1,084 2,115 Males under 10 years of age 252 Females under 10 years of age 194 446 Male lodgers 45 Female lodgers 28 73 Total 2,634 22 In order to show the number of rooms occupied by the 856 families and the average number of occupants per room, the population figures have been converted into units of population—two children counting as one adult. Thus there are 2,411 adult units occupying 484 houses, flats and business premises. Only 25 per cent of the houses are occupied by one family. The census revealed that 69 per cent of the 484 dwellings were sublet the remainder consisting of business premises, self-contained flats or houses too small for sub-letting. The following table shows the number and percentage of the population occupying one to seven rooms, and the average number of persons per room. Number and percentage of population occupying 484 dwellings. No. of rooms occupied Average numbers of persons per room 92 (3.8%) One 1.8 per room 416 (17.3%) Two 1.04 „ „ 681 (28.3%) Three .84 „ „ 446½ (18.5%) Four .81 „ ” 427 (17.7%) Five .76 „ „ 197½ (8.2%) Six .68 „ „ 151 (6.2%) Seven and Over .63 ,, „ Of the 856 families 5.9% occupied one room, 23.5% two rooms, 31.8% three rooms, 16.0% four rooms, 13.2% five rooms, 5.6% six rooms, and 4.0% seven and more rooms. Congestion therefore was in the one, two and three room accommodation, due not to the size of the families but to the degree to which rooms were sublet by the principal occupiers who reserve the larger proportion of accommodation for their own families. Useful information was obtained for long term planning of the area and emphasised the trend towards smaller families and the increase in the age of the population. Twenty-eight families or 3.3% were overcrowded under the present standard of the Housing Act 1936 but 12.6% were overcrowded by the Council's standard. Rent paid varies from four shillings per week to one of two pounds ten shillings per week, the average rent being about sixteen shillings and fivepence. There were few verminous houses discovered during the census and with the co-operation of the tenant and modern methods of disinfestation such cases were effectively dealt with. Many families are living under conditions of stress without the provision of essential conveniences and reasonable amenities, some in a dark damp environment. The majority despite great difficulties maintain a high standard of cleanliness and make the best of their accommodation and the following table shows how difficult this is especially so far as the housewife is concerned. The table shows the absence of suitable food accommodation, absence of bathrooms, the lack of suitable cooking and washing facilities and the communal use of water-closets. 23 Water supply Cooking and sink accommodation Joint use of, Sep. use of, ‘In scullery, In living rooms, On landing, ‘Suitable food accom. No. of Families 331 525 630 198 28 6 Washing accommodation Water Closet Bathroom or Bath Joint use of Sep. use of None Joint use of Sep. use of In Scull. No. of Families 573 197 86 648 208 60 POST WAR HOUSING DEVELOPMENT I am indebted to the Borough Engineer and Surveyor for the following information which shows the outstanding achievement of the Borough Council in post war housing. The number of new dwellings completed by the local authority and private enterprise together by the end of 1950 was 866 details of which are as follows:— Council Private Total 1946 3 28 31 1947 113 9 122 1948 169 59 228 1949 164 104 268 1950 105 112 217 Total 554 312 866 The types of accommodation provided by the Council are analysed in the following table:— 1Bed room 2 Bed room 3 Bed room 4 Bed room 1 Bed sitting room Totals flats 38 257 108 6 — 409 houses — 22 74 15 — 111 aged persons dwellings — — — — 34 34 38 279 182 21 34 554 24 Standards and Planning The overall sizes of houses and flats are briefly:— houses—2 bedrooms 750/800 sq. ft. 3 bedrooms 900/950 sq. ft. (2 W.C.). 4 bedrooms 1,000/1,175 sq. ft. (2 W.C.) Aged Persons Dwellings 450/550 sq ft. flats 1 bedroom 500 sq. ft. 2 bedrooms 700 sq. ft. 3 bedrooms 850 sq. ft. 4 bedrooms 950 sq. ft. and the sizes of rooms for houses and flats are as follows:— 1st bedroom 135/150 sq. ft. Other double bedroom 110/120 sq. ft. Single bedroom 70/80 sq. ft. Living room 180/220 sq. ft. Kitchen 90/110 sq. ft. Internal Planning The Living Room. This is designed for sitting and dining with French windows and sun balcony large enough to take a pram. An open fire is provided for burning smokeless or other solid fuel which is ignited by gas. Kitchen. The kitchens are large enough to take the necessary equipment—draining board, sink, second draining board, work slab, cooker. There is adequate space for a table, and cupboard space for cooking utensils. Space is also available for a refrigerator and wash boiler and in most kitchens a solid fuel domestic boiler is provided. Bedrooms. Are light and airy and of convenient shape, with built-in wardrobe. Bathroom and W.C. Are separate except in the one bedroom flats. Pram Stores. In some schemes these have been incorporated in the main building, but in the majority they are separate buildings. Layout of sites. Every effort has been made by the Council to improve amenities by planning attractive garden layouts and by providing window and flower boxes. Where space is available children's playgrounds are being provided, and in addition suitable areas for drying clothes. Redevelopment. Practically all suitable building sites in the Borough have been acquired by the Council for development before the end of 1951 and the position in 1952 will be that approx. 80 families will need to be rehoused to provide 44 new dwellings. By the end of the year the redevelopment of the Borough was well in hand. The housing programme, of necessity, had been confined mainly to areas which suffered extensive war damage or which were due for reconstruction and this provided an opportunity for replanning these areas. Almost every housing scheme commenced by the Council since the end of 1948 has involved the demolition of occupied dwellings. 25 Finsbury Park Area. Extensive war damage occurred here and the main housing effort has in consequence been concentrated in this neighbourhood. The following are the figures:— No. of new dwellings in hand or completed 262 Additional number contemplated 58 Total 320 There is little doubt that as a result of the Council's efforts a considerable improvement in layout and amenities has been achieved. An amended Master Plan is being prepared for the redevelopment of the remaining land and will include proposals for establishing a small neighbourhood unit in this partly isolated portion of the Borough. The Campsboume Area. This comprehensive scheme involves an area of 16.08 acres for residential purposes and the ultimate demolition of approximately 450 properties, many of which are below standard and overcrowded. The Master Plan provided for new accommodation as follows:— houses 2-bedroom 66 3-bedroom 4 4-bedroom (Licensed premises) 1 71 flats 1-bedroom 28 2-bedroom 250 3-bedroom 47 325 aged persons dwellings 40 Had it not been for the war, work would no doubt have been begun some years ago, but a start has now been made on this very necessary scheme. The Brook Road part of the area was cleared under the Housing Act 1936 (Section 25) and flats are now being erected on the site. The second section for the clearance in the Campsbourne area was represented by the Medical Officer of Health on 11th April, 1951. The Council submitted a Compulsory Purchase Order for confirmation by the Minister of Local Government and Planning and as seven objections were made a local enquiry was held in the Town Hall on the 24th July, 1951. Population. The redevelopment of the Borough is planned to provide for a population of 80,000 people. This would give an average density of 40 persons per acre in the western half and 70 in the eastern half of the Borough. Demand for Land. The building of new houses is in itself insufficient. Work, schools, shops and social services must be available and there are still large unsatisfied demands for land for education and health services, 26 open spaces, children's playgrounds and other amenities which are essential to a well balanced community. In the areas of other Local Authorities parts of the "Green Belt" surrounding London have already been taken for housing purposes, thus further extending the spread of London urban development. Some reduction in population will doubtless be achieved when it is possible for restrictions on building licences to be eased or rescinded as many of the applicants for licences who are willing to build outside the borough are now living with relatives who would be unlikely to take other families into their homes. Requisitioned properties. As the law now stands requisitioned properties will have to be given up by December 1952, and people rehoused in such properties cannot properly be regarded as off the the waiting list. There are at present 832 units of accommodation under requisition in Hornsey and a difficult situation is likely to result when the properties have to revert to their original owners. Few, if any, of the applicants on the housing waiting list can be considered after 1952 apart from those which can be dealt with by the normal casual vacancies which arise. DEMOLITION AND CLOSING ORDERS Housing Act, 1936 Sections 11 and 12. Elsewhere in this report I have referred to the question of "reasonable expense" in making a house fit for human habitation. Where the local authority are satisfied that a house is not capable of being rendered fit at reasonable expense they shall consider the question of demolition. Demolition Orders in respect of seven dwelling houses were made by the Health Committee during the year. The properties were as follows:— 17 Haringey Road. 54, 56, 58, 60, 62 Park Road. 16 Ennis Road. Closing Orders were considered in respect of the underground rooms at 24 and 26 Myddelton Road. In the case of No. 24 the Order was not made as the owner agreed to carry out work approved by the Council for rendering the basement fit; this work to be commenced as soon as the Council rehoused the tenant. There is very little doubt that many other properties in the Borough could be dealt with under these Sections, but in view of the rehousing difficulties action is taken only in the most urgent cases. The following tables indicate the properties on which demolition and closing orders have been made or considered from 1947 to 1950 and the position at the 31st December 1950:— 27 Demolition Orders Property Council Resolution Order Made Action Taken 11 & 13 Boyton Rd. — 21/10/47 Demolished by Council at request of owner. 97 & 99 North Hill 21/12/48 1/3/49 Demolished. 6 Enfield Gardens 27/9/49 30/11/49 Demolished. 7 Enfield Gardens — — Demolished by Owner. 4 Brook Road 22/2/49 Order not made. Undertaking not to relet. Demolished. 17 Haringey Road 24/1/50 14/2/50 Demolished. 54 Park Road 21/3/50 22/3/50 Tenant not yet rehoused. 56 Park Road 21/3/50 22/3/50 Tenant rehoused. Premises not yet demolished. 58 Park Road 21/3/50 22/3/50 do. 60 Park Road 21/3/50 22/3/50 do. 62 Park Road 21/3/50 22/3/50 Tenants not yet rehoused. 16 Ennis Road 21/3/50 22/3/50 One family has been rehoused. Premises still occupied. Closing Orders Property Part affected Council Resolution Order Made Action Taken 3 Eastfield Road Two basement rooms 20/12/48 31/1/49 Rooms closed. 25 Myddelton Rd. One basement room 25/1/49 4/2/49 Room closed 105 Southwood Lane One basement room 26/4/49 29/4/49 Room closed 24 Myddelton Rd. Two basement rooms 26/9/50 Order not made. Owner to carry out work approved by Council. Tenant not yet rehoused. 26 Myddelton Rd. Two basement rooms 26/9/50 29/12/50 Tenant not yet rehoused 5 Haringey Grove Two basement rooms 19/12/50 2/1/51 — 43 St. Mary's Rd. Two basement rooms 19/12/50 2/1/51 — 130 Tottenham Lane Two basement rooms 19/12/50 2/1/51 — SECTION 5 NATIONAL ASSISTANCE ACT 1948 Section 47.—Persons in need of care and attention. This section gives the Local Authority powers for the purposes of securing the necessary care and attention of persons suffering from grave chronic disease, or who are:— (i) aged, infirm or physically incapacitated. (ii) living in insanitary conditions. and (iii) unable to devote to themselves and are not receiving from other persons proper care and attention. The local Authority on receipt of a certificate from the medical officer of health may apply to a court of summary jurisdiction for an order to remove the person to a suitable hospital or other place. An order may not be made for a period in excess of three months but the court may from time to time by order extend that period for a further period not exceeding three months. There is no doubt that this power of removal has been exercised generally to the benefit of many old people, and many others have been helped as a result of investigations and the efforts of the Department to secure proper care and attention before taking summary action. The Sanitary Inspector takes action with regard to the sanitary conditions, fumigation of the premises is arranged. If required, the home help cleans the rooms, and the home nurse is available to attend the patient. Voluntary organisations are sometimes asked to assist by providing bedding and clothing. No person was removed under Section 47 during 1950, but the following are brief reports on some of the cases which were investigated with a view to compulsory removal. Case A.—A man of 83 years who lived alone in two rooms. He was frail and unable to give himself proper care and attention. His rooms were dirty, damp and dilapidated and although they were swept clear of rubbish, very little cleaning was done. Two sons called daily to see him. He appeared to be mentally alert and at first rejected the suggestion that he should be removed from the rooms as he claimed he was perfectly happy but he finally agreed and was admitted to a home for old people. Case B.— Two sisters of 68 and 71 years living in one room which was verminous referred to the Department by their Doctor as both suffered from extensive impetigo of the scalp, and were verminous. They agreed to be admitted to hospital for treatment and while there they were given notice to vacate their rooms and accommodation in a home for old people was found for them by the Area Welfare Officer. Case C.— A single woman of 76 years living alone. There had been complaints from other tenants of the house regarding the insanitary conditions in which 29 she lived, and her doctor referred her to the Department for removal as she was suffering from malnutrition; she refused to go to hospital. The patient was visited and it was found that the home conditions were not sufficiently bad to enforce removal under Sec. 47. It was reported that a friend did shopping for her and another "tidied up occasionally". However, a few days later she agreed to be removed to hospital. Case D.—A letter was received stating that a woman of 65 years of age was living alone in two rooms in a very insanitary condition, that she did not get proper food and was incapable of caring for herself. On inspection it was found that her bed-sitting room, although untidy and over furnished was not really dirty. The other room used as a kitchen was -littered with milk bottles and stale food and the general condition unsatisfactory. She obtained some meals at the Civic Restaurant and appeared reasonably well nourished. She seemed very ashamed of her personal condition and the condition of her kitchen and promised to make an effort to improve matters. Six months later she was found to be filthy and neglected but while arrangements were being made for compulsory removal she agreed to go to an old people's home. She stayed there for a short time only, during which time her rooms were thoroughly cleansed. On returning she again neglected her rooms and herself and became a general nuisance to the other tenants. After much persuasion she once again agreed to go to an old people's home. Section 50.—Burial or Cremation of the Dead. Under this section the Borough Council took over from the County Council the duty of arranging the burial or cremation of any person who has died or been found dead in the area in any case where it appears to the authority that no suitable arrangements for the disposal of the body have been, or are being, made. Only one case was dealt with by the Department during the year. Arrangement was made for the burial of a woman of 84 years who was found dead at home. The full cost of the burial was recovered by the Council. 30 SECTION 6 HEALTH EDUCATION Health Education in its many aspects has always been an integral part of the work of the Health Department. Long before the first "School for Mothers" was opened there began the slow and difficult process of urging the need for higher standards in sanitation and environmental conditions generally. Environmental health problems are still largely concerned with teaching and although the enforcement of minimum standards is a necessary part of the duties of the department, the most important and satisfying aspect of the work consists in giving help and advice on the many matters under the control of the department. The vital importance of environment has been illustrated in the segregation of tuberculous families in Papworth village where not one infant born into the community has contracted tuberculosis. The central authorities concerned with health education are the Ministry of Health which conducts national campaigns on health and disease, the Ministry of Education which promotes health education in the schools, and the Ministry of Food which is concerned with food hygiene. The Central Office of Information through the Central Film Library issues on free loan excellent films on various health subjects. The Central Council for Health Education financed by the Ministry of Health and local authorities, advises and assists local authorities in their health education work and provides an exhibition service. Hornsey make an annual contribution of £7 10s. Od towards the Central Council. The Borough Council is empowered to carry out health education under Section 179 of the Public Health Act 1936. The Middlesex County Council through its Area Health Committee receives its powers under Part III of the National Health Service Act, 1946. FOOD HYGIENE During the latter part of 1949 the Council considered the measures necessary to promote a higher standard of hygiene in the preparation and handling of food in catering and other food premises in the Borough. The Council adopted the model byelaws issued by the Ministry of Food and they came into force on 26th March 1950. In order to give special attention to the inspection of food premises and particularly to work of an educational and propaganda nature in regard to food hygiene a sanitary inspector was appointed to specialise in these duties. 31 The following suggestions for a Clean Food Campaign were considered:— A. Lectures to Food Traders. B. Lectures to the Public. C. Clean Food Exhibition. D. Clean Food Guilds. E. Codes of Practice. It was decided in the first instance that lectures to the Food Traders and their staffs would be a suitable method of opening the Campaign. Lectures were accordingly held on the 13th and 27th November and 11th December, 1950. The attendances at these lectures numbered respectively 300, 150, and 100. Lower attendances at the last two lectures were, no doubt, affected by the Christmas season. Stimulating and informative addresses were given by Dr. Betty C. Hobbs of the Central Public Health Laboratory Service on "Bacteriology and Food Hygiene". On "Food and Disease" by Dr. Tyser, Deputy Medical Officer of Health, and lastly on "Hygiene in Relation to Food Premises and Food Handlers" by Dr. Burton, Deputy Medical Adviser, the Central Council for Health Education. The Chair was taken at the inaugural meeting by Miss O. Anderson, Chairman of the Hornsey Public Health Committee, supported by Alderman G. F. N. Norman and Mr. J. Ash, Chairman and Secretary respectively of the Hornsey Chamber of Commerce. The Medical Officer of Health and Chief Sanitary Inspector took the Chair at the two subsequent meetings. The department acknowledges the active support given by the Hornsey Chamber of Commerce in encouraging the attendances at the lectures of those engaged in the preparation and handling of food throughout the Borough. 32 SECTION 7 OTHER SERVICES MEDICAL EXAMINATION OF STAFF Ninety-two persons were medically examined to determine their fitness for acceptance on the permanent staff. Eighty-nine were found to be fit. One of the conditions of the new scheme for sickness pay for all employees who come within the scope of the National and Provincial Councils for Non-Trading Services (Manual Workers), which came into operation on the 5th July 1948, is that all new employees be required to submit to a medical examination before the completion of six months service with the Council in order to determine their fitness for admission to the scheme. Seventy-four persons were examined, sixty-six of whom were accepted for the scheme. VETERINARY INSPECTIONS Mr. F. G. Buxton, the Veterinary Inspector, has kindly supplied me with details of his work in the Borough, under the Diseases of Animals Acts and Orders during 1950 as follows:— No Licences were issued under the Contagious Diseases of Animals Acts. One dead cow suspected of having died of anthrax was inspected under the Contagious Diseases of Animals Acts. It was found to be not suffering from anthrax. Two inspections were made under the Riding Establishment Act, 1939. The number of horses and ponies inspected was 20. AREA HEALTH SERVICE The personal health services now under the control of the Middlesex County Council are administered from the Area Health Office, Somerset Road, Tottenham, N.17. Telephone number TOTtenham 4500. AREA WELFARE SERVICE The Welfare Service of the Middlesex County Council is administered in Hornsey by the Area Welfare Officer, 5 Lansdowne Road, Tottenham, N.17. Telephone number TOTtenham 1212, and it is to this officer that enquiries should be directed regarding the admission of persons to residential homes provided by the Middlesex County Council. LUNACY AND MENTAL TREATMENT ACTS The Authorised Officers for the purpose of these Acts have their offices at 5, Lansdowne Road, Tottenham, N.17. Telephone number TOTtenham 1211. AMBULANCE SERVICE Ambulances are stationed at the Fire Station in Tottenham Lane, and are on call for urgent cases throughout the day and night. Telephone number, MOUntview 2222. 33 SECTION 8 STATISTICAL TABLES Since before the first Census Act in the year 1800 the collection of information and its statistical presentation has been suspect and subject to much criticism. The scientific study of health and disease, however, demands research and the careful examination of vital statistics. These statistics, prepared centrally by the Registrar General largely from material supplied from local sources, as well as by the local authorities themselves, have often been the starting point in advances made in preventive and curative medicine and they will continue to provide basic material for the study of the social life of the people. The Medical Officer of Health is required to report on the statistics of births, deaths, population changes and the incidence of disease in his district. Births are notified to the Local Health Authority within 36 hours and registered by the Registrar of Births within 6 weeks and a return of all births is supplied weekly to the Medical Officer of Health. Deaths must be registered within 5 days and the registrar notifies the Medical Officer of Health weekly of all deaths in the district. These have to be adjusted for inward and outward transfers and classified according to age into one of the 50 groups of causes of deaths set out in the International Statistical Classification of Diseases, Injuries and Causes of Death. To enable comparison between districts with unequal populations, rates (usually rates per 1,000) are calculated from the numbers of births, deaths, etc., and so that comparison may be made between the rates of districts with differing population structures, comparability factors are calculated for each district. These relate the figures in each district to a standard population and accurate comparison of the various rates may then be made. The area comparability factors for Hornsey for 1950 are Births 0.89 and Deaths 0.92 and the rates after multiplication by this factor become 12.7 and 10.1 respectively. Deaths of babies under one year (infantile mortality) and deaths of babies under one month (neo-natal mortality) have shown a steady decrease since the beginning of the century from 154 per 1,000 live births in 1900 to 29.8 in 1950. The infantile mortality rate is generally accepted as the most sensitive guide to the environmental and economic conditions of a community and although it is lower than was thought possible only a few years ago there is still room for improvement as it is higher than the rates in some of the Scandinavian countries. The increase in expectation of life since 1841 is such that boys born in that year had an expectation of life of 40 years and girls 42 years. By 1948 these had increased to 66 and 71 years. The statistical tables have not been relegated to the end of the report but have been collected together for easy reference. 35 SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC STATISTICS Area (acres) 2,872 Area of Parks and Open Spaces (acres) 329 Population: Census 1931 95,524 Census 1951 98,134 Registrar General's estimate 1950 98,780 Number of separately assessed inhabited premises according to Rate Books 27,055 Rateable value (General Rate) £1,069,229 Product of a penny rate £4,382 VITAL STATISTICS LIVE BIRTHS M F Total Legitimate 694 647 1,341 Illegitimate 41 32 73 735 679 1,414 Birth Rate (per 1,000 population) Hornsey 14.3 England and Wales 15.8 126 County Boroughs and Great Towns including London 17.6 148 Smaller Towns 16.7 London Administrative County 17.8 STILL BIRTHS M F Total Legitimate 11 13 24 Illegitimate 1 2 3 12 15 27 Still-birth Rate (per 1,000 population) Hornsey 0.27 England and Wales 0.37 126 County Boroughs and Great Towns including London 0.45 148 Smaller Towns 0.38 London Administrative County 0.36 36 INFANT DEATHS (under I year of age) M F Total Legitimate 17 13 30 Illegitimate — — — Comparable Infant Death Rates (per 1,000 live births) Hornsey 21.2 England and Wales 29.8 126 County Boroughs and Great Towns including London 33.8 148 Smaller Towns 29.4 London Administrative County 26.3 MATERNAL DEATH RATES Hornsey (one death only) 0.69 England and Wales—Maternal Mortality (Rate per 1,000 total live and still-births) 0.86 DEATHS FROM ALL CAUSES Males 524 Females 560 1,084 Death Rate (per 1,000 population) Hornsey 11.0 England and Wales 11.6 126 County Boroughs and Great Towns including London 12.3 148 Smaller Towns 11.6 London Administrative County 11.8 NOTIFICATIONS OF PUERPERAL PYREXIA Number of Notifications 4 Puerperal Pyrexia Rate (per 1,000 total live and still-births) Hornsey 2.80 England and Wales 5.81 126 County Boroughs and Great Towns including London 7.43 148 Smaller Towns 4.33 London Administrative County 6.03 37 DEATHS OF HORNSEY RESIDENTS Classified according to ages and age groups Under 1 1 to 2 2 to 4 5 to 14 15 to 24 25 to 34 35 to 44 45 to 54 55 to 64 65 to 74 75 to 84 85 and over Totals 1 Tuberculosis, respiratory M - - - - - 1 4 1 5 2 — — 13 21 F — — — — 1 3 1 2 1 - — —- 8 2 Tuberculosis, other M - - - - - - - - - - - - 2 2 F - - - - - - - - - - - - - 3 Syphilitic disease M - - - - - - - - 1 2 — — 3 3 F - - - - - - - - - - - - - 4 Diphtheria M - - - - - - - - - - - - - - F - - - - - - - - - - - - - 5 Whooping cough M - - - - - - - - - - - - - 2 F 1 — 1 - - - - - - - - - 2 6 Meningococcal infections M - - - - - - - - - - - - - 1 F - - 1 - - - - - - - - - 1 7 Acute poliomyelitis M - - - - - - - - - - - - - 1 F - - - - - 1 - - - - - - 1 8 Measles M - - - 1 - - - - - - - - 1 1 F - - - - - - - - - - - - - 9 Other infective and parasitic diseases M - - - - - 1 1 1 — 1 — — 4 6 F - - - - - - 1 1 — — — — 2 10 Malignant neoplasm, stomach M - - - - - - - 2 2 2 1 — 7 22 F - - - - - - 1 — 2 6 6 — 15 38 Deaths of Hornsey Residents—continued Under 1 1 to 2 2 to 4 5 to 14 15 to 24 25 to 34 35 to 44 45 to 54 55 to 64 65 to 74 75 to 84 85 and over Totals 11 Malignant neoplasm, lung, bronchus M - - - - - - 2 8 12 9 3 — 34 44 F - - - - - - 1 1 6 2 — — 10 12 Malignant neoplasm, breast M - - - - - - - - - - - - - 26 F - - - - - 1 1 4 5 11 3 1 26 13 Malignant neoplasm, uterus M - - - - - - - - - - - - - 6 F — — — — 1 — — 2 — 1 2 — 6 14 Other malignant lymphatic neoplasms M - - - - - - 2 5 20 17 17 3 64 113 F - - - - - - 4 9 10 13 13 — 49 15 Leukaemia, aleukaemia M — — — 1 — - — — 1 — — 1 3 3 F - - - - - - - - - - - - - 16 Diabetes M - - - - - - - - - - 1 — 1 5 F - - - 1 - - - - - 1 — 2 4 17 Vascular lesions of nervous system M - - - - - - 2 5 17 14 5 43 141 F - - - - - - 1 2 11 29 40 15 98 18 Coronary disease, angina M - - - - - - 4 9 17 31 18 2 81 129 F - - - - - - - 1 11 16 15 5 48 19 Hypertension with heart disease M - - - - - - - - 2 5 5 2 14 45 F - - - - - - - 3 1 10 15 2 31 20 Other heart disease M - - - - - 1 2 3 5 13 19 14 57 145 F — — — — 1 — 1 1 10 15 38 22 88 21 Other circulatory disease M - - - - - - 1 1 2 10 9 3 26 49 F - - - - - - - 2 2 6 11 2 23 39 Deaths of Hornsey Residents—continued Under 1 1 to 2 2 to 4 5 to 14 15 to 24 25 to 34 35 to 44 45 to 54 55 to 64 65 to 74 75 to 84 85 and over Totals 22 Influenza M - - - - - - 1 1 — 1 1 — 4 11 F - - - - - - - - - 1 3 3 7 23 Pneumonia M 1 - - - - - 1 2 5 6 8 5 28 57 F — — — 1 — 2 3 3 2 2 11 5 29 24 Bronchitis M 1 - - - - - 1 2 9 5 11 2 31 52 F - - - 1 - - - - - 7 9 4 21 25 Other diseases of respiratory system M — — — 1 — — — 1 1 2 3 1 9 12 F - - - - 1 - - - - 1 1 — 3 26 Ulcer of stomach and duodenum M - - - - - - - 2 3 4 — — 9 12 F - - - - - - - - - 1 2 — 3 27 Gastritis, enteritis and diarrhoea M - - - - - - - - 1 1 1 — 3 6 F - - - - - - - - - 3 - - 3 28 Nephritis and nephrosis M - - - - - - - - - 2 1 — 4 10 F — — — — — 2 — 2 — 1 1 — 6 29 Hyperplasia of prostate M - - - - - - - - - 2 1 1 4 4 F - - - - - - - - - - - - - 30 Pregnancy, childbirth, abortion M - - - - - - - - - - - - - 1 F - - - - - - - - - - - - 1 31 Congenital malformations M 5 — — — — 1 1 2 1 — 1 — 11 14 F 3 - - - - - - - - - - - 3 32 Other defined and ill-defined diseases M 8 1 — — — 2 2 — 6 9 12 3 43 93 F 9 - - - - - 3 2 3 14 12 7 50 40 Deaths of Hornsey Residents—continued Under 1 1 to 2 2 to 4 5 to 14 15 to 24 25 to 34 35 to 44 45 to 54 55 to 64 65 to 74 75 to 84 85 and over s 33 Motor vehicle accidents M — — — — 1 1 3 — — — 1 — 6 8 F - - - - - - - - - - 2 — 2 34 All other accidents M 2 — — 1 1 — 1 1 1 2 — 2 11 23 F — — — — — 1 — 1 — 4 4 2 12 35 Suicide M - - - - - 1 — 2 3 2 — — 8 16 F - - - - - - 1 2 1 2 2 — 8 36 Homicide and operations of war M - - - - - - - - - - - - - F — — — — — — — — — — — — TOTALS M 17 1 — 4 2 8 27 47 102 145 127 44 524 F 13 — 2 3 4 10 19 38 65 146 190 70 560 30 1 2 7 6 18 46 85 167 291 317 114 1,084 41 INFANT DEATHS CAUSES BY AGE GROUPS AND SEXES Under 1 Day 1—6 Days 1 Week 2 Weeks 3 Weeks Total Under 1 Month 1—2 Months 3—5 Months 6—8 Months 9—11 Months Totals M F M F M F M F M F M F M F M F M F M F M F Pneumonia — — — — — — — — — — — — 1 — — — — — — — 1 — Bronchitis — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — 1 — — — 1 — Congenital malformations — — 4 — — — — — — — 4 — 1 — — 3 — — — — 5 3 Whooping cough - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 1 — 1 Injury at birth 1 — 3 — — — — — — — 4 — — — — — — — — — 4 — Other diseases of early infancy — — 3 8 — — — — — 1 3 9 — — 1 — — — — — 4 9 All other causes — — — — — — — — — — — — — — 1 — 1 — — — 2 — TOTALS 1 — 10 8 - - - - - 1 11 9 2 — 2 3 2 — — 1 17 13 42 TUBERCULOSIS The total number of cases on the Tuberculosis Register at the end of 1950 was 862, viz., pulmonary 755, non-pulmonary 107. TUBERCULOSIS REGISTER Pulmonary Non-Pulmonary Total Male Female Male Female Male e (a) Number of Cases on Register at commencement of year 393 303 54 47 447 350 (b) Number of Cases notified for first time during year under Regulations 49 47 4 5 53 52 (c) Cases restored to Register — — — — — — (d) Cases added to Register otherwise than by notification under Regulations (1) Transferred from other Districts 25 22 4 - 29 22 (2) From Death Returns 2 — — — 2 — (e) Number of Cases removed from Register 49 37 3 4 52 41 (/) Number of Cases remaining on Register at end of year 420 335 59 48 479 383 43 Cases removed from the Register shown under (e) are accounted for as follows :— Found not to be T.B. Recovered Removed to another area Died at home Died at Sanatorium or other Institution TOTAL M F M F M F M F M F M F PULMO NARY 1 1 1 1 30 27 9 4 8 4 49 37 NO N - PUL MONAR Y 1 2 ~ 3 1 3 4 NOTIFICATION OF INFECTIOUS DISEASE BY AGE AND SEX AGE IN YEARS Scarlet Fever Whooping Cough Acute Poliomyelitis Measles Diphtheria Paralytic Non-Paralytic M F M F M F M F M F M F Under 1 — — 13 15 — — — — 8 6 — — 1—2 6 5 60 42 2 1 — — 73 84 — — 3—4 19 14 62 79 — 1 — 1 124 117 — — 5—9 31 51 92 74 2 1 — 1 190 191 — 1 10—14 2 8 3 1 — 1 — 1 2 3 — — 15—24 2 1 — — 1 1 — 1 — 2 — — 25 and over 3 3 3 4 1 2 — — — 3 — — TOTALS 63 82 233 215 6 7 — 4 397 406 — 1 145 448 13 4 803 1 AGE IN YEARS Acute Pneumonia Dysentery Erysipelas Meningococcal Infection Food Poisoning Puerperal Pyrexia M F M F M F M F M F M F Under 5 4 1 2 1 — — 2 1 — 1 — — 5—14 4 1 1 3 1 1 — — 1 1 — — 15—44 5 3 1 1 1 4 — — 1 5 — 4 45—64 10 10 1 — 4 5 — 1 2 1 — — 65 and over 8 8 — — 2 3 — — — — — — TOTALS 31 23 5 5 8 13 2 2 4 8 — 4 54 10 21 4 12 4 No case of ophthalmia neonatorum was notified. 44 NOTIFICATION OF INFECTIOUS DISEASE BY WARDS Highgate Muswell Hill Crouch End Central Hornsey North Haringey South Haringey Stroud Green Finsbury Park Totals Scarlet Fever 17 35 9 13 20 17 23 11 145 Whooping Cough 41 89 20 73 70 12 78 65 448 Acute Poliomyelitis: Paralytic 2 2 1 4 1 - 2 1 13 Non-Paralytic 1 — — 1 1 — 1 — 4 Measles 126 23 31 210 98 57 119 139 803 Diphtheria — — — — — 1 — — 1 Acute Pneumonia 4 6 6 10 11 5 9 3 54 Dysentery 2 4 — 1 1 — — 2 10 Erysipelas 2 2 1 7 1 1 6 1 21 Meningococcal Infection 3 — — — — 1 — — 4 Food Poisoning 5 2 — — 2 1 — 2 12 Puerperal Pyrexia 2 — — 2 — — — — 4 TOTALS 205 163 68 321 205 95 238 224 1,519 45 PUBLIC HEALTH LABORATORY SERVICE BACTERIOLOGICAL EXAMINATIONS Throat and Nose Swabs Diphtheria bacilli 3 Haemolytic streptococci 149 Vincents angina 1 Negative 565 718 Faeces Shigella 3 Salmonella 2 Protozoa 2 Negative 44 51 Sputum Tubercular smear 6 Other organisms 3 Negative 40 49 Pertussis Cough Plates — Postnasal swabs — Negative 3 3 Milk Ice cream 40 Pasteurized 24 Other 6 70 Miscellaneous 928 1,819 46 SANITARY INSPECTION Inspections made during the year were as follows:— Food Food Premises (See table on next page) 852 Registration of Hawkers 23 Infectious Diseases Notifiable Infectious Diseases 249 Smallpox contacts 39 Food Poisoning 27 Sanitary Inspections Complaints 1,801 Drainage 738 Water Tests applied 78 Smoke and Chemical Tests 119 Rodent Control 151 Surveys (Permitted numbers: Borough Council Dwellings) 116 Overcrowding conditions 145 Building Licences 92 Street Trading 8 Shops Acts 874 Factories 244 Outworkers 86 Cinemas, Halls, etc., Renewal of Music and Dancing Licences 27 Rent Restrictions Acts 4 Moselle Pollution 1,449 Moselle Pollution re-inspections 140 Smoke Observations 24 Stables and Urinals 5 Verminous conditions 65 Other reasons 345 Housing Housing Inspections (See table on page 49) 1,413 Campsbourne Clearance Area 152 Others Petroleum Stores 104 Re-inspections For all purposes 7,452 TOTAL VISITS 16,822 47 FOOD PREMISES Inspections of food premises were made during the year as follows:— Butchers' Shops 80 Restaurants, Cafes, etc. 136 Grocers' Shops 221 Bakehouses 32 Fish Shops 48 Milkshops 43 Greengrocers' Shops 90 Other Food Premises ... 65 Cooked Meat Shops 14 Ice Cream Premises ... 123 Total Inspections Made—852 The following is a list of food condemned as unfit for human consumption. Wherever possible this was disposed of as salvage :— lbs. ozs. lbs. ozs. Canned Vegetables ... 532 7 Rabbits 163 — Canned Fruit 762 9 Bacon 44 12 Canned Fruit Juice 43 14 Pickles 78 15 Canned Meat 1,355 8 Salad Cream 8 15 Canned Fish 45 4 Chocolate Spread 1 2 Canned Milk 462 3 Sandwich Spread 3 4 Canned Soup 47 11 Paste 30 15 Canned Marmalade 77 — Cocoa 8 — Canned Jam 98 2 Mincemeat 266 — Canned Xmas Pudding 581 — Spices 12 — Dried Milk 112 — Mustard — 13 Dried Fruit 137 5 Pepper 7 — Dried Vegetables 68 — Cake Mixture 48 — Cheese 50 2 Pudding Mixture 5 2 Margarine 33 — Custard Powder 6 — Butter 18 — Gravy Powder 20 9 Fats 7 — Flour 262 — Tea 51 8 Biscuits 21 — Sugar 39 — Sweets 45 10 Cereals 68 2 Olives 1 2 Golden Syrup 2 — Tomatoes 1,222 — Meat 1,556 9 Apples 83 — Fish 801 — Bananas 1 — Poultry 281 8 TOTAL Food Condemned—9,570 lbs. 15 ozs. 306 visits were made to food premises in connection with condemnation. 48 HOUSING INSPECTIONS 1.—Inspection of Dwelling-houses during the year:— (a) (1) Total number of dwelling-houses inspected for housing defects (under Public Health or Housing Acts) 1,305 (2) Number of inspections made for the purpose 1,413 (b) Number of dwelling-houses found to be in a state so dangerous or injurious to health as to be unfit for human habitation 7 (c) Number of dwelling-houses (exclusive of those referred to under the preceding sub-head) found not to be in all respects reasonably fit for habitation 755 2.—Remedy of Defects during the Year without service of formal notices:— Number of defective dwelling-houses rendered fit in consequence of informal action by the Local Authority or their Officers 1,059 3.—Action under Statutory Powers during the Year:— (a) Proceedings under Sections 9, 10 and 16 of the Housing Act, 1936:— Number of dwelling-houses in respect of which notices were served requiring repairs 1 (b) Proceedings under Public Health Acts:— (1) Number of dwelling-houses in respect of which notices were served requiring defects to be remedied 182 (2) Number of dwelling-houses in which defects were remedied after service of formal notices (a) by owners 196 (b) by Local Authority in default of owners ... 3 (c) Proceedings under Sections 11 and 13 of the Housing Act, 1936:— (1) Number of dwelling-houses in respect of which Demolition Orders were made 7 (2) Number of dwelling-houses demolished in pursuance of Demolition Orders 3 (d) Proceedings under Section 12 of the Housing Act, 1936:— Number of separate tenements or underground rooms in respect of which Closing Orders were made 1 BYELAWS relating to houses intended or used for occupation by the working classes and let in lodgings or occupied by members of more than one Family. Sixteen houses have been dealt with under these Byelaws during the year and the following work carried out:— 4 (b) Water supply 14 4 (d) Food stores 2 5 (b) Means of carrying off waste water 11 5 (g) Staircase repairs 2 8 Stairs lighted 1 49 FACTORIES ACT, 1937 The following tables show the work carried out by the Sanitary Inspector under this Act:— 1. Inspections of Factories Premises Number of Inspections Written Notices cutions Factories with Mechanical Power 190 8 NIL Factories without Mechanical Power 54 2 TOTALS 244 10 NIL 2. Defects Found Particulars No. of defects Referred to H.M. Inspector Number of defects in respect of which Prosecutions were instituted. Found Remedied Want of Cleanliness 1 1 NIL NIL Overcrowding — — Unreasonable Temperature — — Inadequate ventilation — — Ineffective drainage of floors — — Sanitary Conveniences (a) insufficient 1 1 (b) unsuitable or defective 16 16 (c) not separate for sexes — — Other offences 1 1 TOTALS 19 19 NIL NIL There are 224 Outworkers on the register engaged in the following occupations:— Wearing apparel 163 Curtains and furniture hangings 1 Brass and brass articles 1 Artificial flowers 10 Paper bags 1 The making of boxes or other receptacles or parts thereof made wholly or partially of paper 11 Brush making 3 Feather sorting 5 Carding, etc. of buttons etc 4 Stuffed toys 22 Cosaques, Christmas crackers, Christmas stockings etc. 2 Lampshades 1 86 visits were paid to outworkers' premises during the year. 50 LEGAL PROCEEDINGS under the PUBLIC HEALTH ACT, 1936 Proceedings were taken in 18 instances. Date of Hearing Premises Result of Proceedings 4th Jan. 38,42,46 Alexandra Rd, N.8 Court Order for execution of work within 3 months. 4th Jan. 7 Holmesdale Rd., N.6 Adjourned sine die as work in hand. 12th Feb. 5 & 7 Hanbury Rd., N.8 Fines of £2 imposed in each case with £4 4s. 0d. costs. 1st March 156 Archway Rd., N.6 Court Order for execution of work within 28 days and £1 1s. Od. costs 29th Mar. 174 Nelson Rd., N.8 Adjourned sine die as work in hand. 29th Mar. 77 Ferme Park Road, N.8 Adjourned 14 days as work in hand. 19 th April 5 & 7 Hanbury Road, N.8 Fine of £25 imposed and £10 10s. costs. 26th April 6 Coleridge Road, N.8 Court Order for execution of work within 6 weeks. 26th April 16 Coleridge Road, N.8 Adjourned for 2 months. 26th April 45 Elder Avenue, N.8 Court Order for execution of work within 6 weeks and £2 2s. costs. 21st June 26 Birchington Road, N.8 Adjourned 28 days. 21st June 58 Westfield Road, N.8 Adjourned 28 days. 21st June 68 St. Mary's Road, N.8 Adjourned 28 days. 21st June 20 High Street, N.8 Court Order for execution of work within 6 weeks and £2 2s. costs. 5th July 200 Wightman Road, N.8 Court Order for execution of work within 28 days and £5 5s. costs. 13th Sept. 15 Edison Road, N.8 Court Order for execution of work within 28 days £3 3s. costs. 13th Sept. 6 Collingwood Avenue, N.10 Court Order for execution of work within 28 days and £3 3s. costs. 15th Nov. 13 Edison Road, N.8 Court Order for execution of work within 28 days and £2 2s. costs. 51 SUMMARY OF SANITARY IMPROVEMENTS EFFECTED. Drainage Number of houses and premises redrained 13 Repairs or amendments to existing drains 155 Drains or gullies unstopped or cleansed 198 Manholes provided or repaired 83 Intercepting traps fixed 22 Soil and Vents repaired or renewed 90 Water-Closet and Sanitary Fittings Water-closet buildings provided or repaired 18 Water-closet pans provided or renewed 86 Water-closets unstopped, cleansed or repaired 69 Flushing cisterns provided or repaired 42 New sinks provided 51 New lavatory basins provided 46 Waste pipe trapped, repaired or unstopped 95 Baths provided or made useable 28 Miscellaneous Roofs repaired 680 Rain-water gutters, renewed or repaired 416 Rain-water pipes provided or repaired 327 Dampness remedied 278 Damp-proof courses provided 54 Yard paving provided or repaired 79 Rooms cleansed 1,439 Rooms disinfested of vermin 14 Walls and ceilings repaired 3,134 Floors repaired 266 Sub-floor ventilation provided 27 Windows, doors, skylights, sashcords and fittings repaired 1,081 Window-sills repaired 145 Water cisterns repaired, cleansed or covered 30 Water supply pipes repaired 30 Stoves, Ranges, Coppers renewed or repaired 191 Flues and Chimneys repaired 90 Accumulation of Refuse removed 31 Dustbins provided 14 Food Stores provided 4 Miscellaneous items 182 NOTICES The Notices served during the year were as follows:— Verbal Preliminary Statutory Public Health and Housing Acts 126 1,144 187 Housing Byelaws — 11 7 Shops Acts 10 35 — Food and Drugs Act — 82 — Factories Act 6 10 2 142 1,282 197 52 PRlNTED BY ROBERTS & NEWTON LTD London. n-8