THE ANNUAL REPORT on THE HEALTH of the Parish of St. Mary Abbotts, KENSINGTON DURING THE YEAR 1872. BY T. ORME DUDFIELD, M.D., MEDICAL OFFICER OF HEALTH. KENSINGTON: James Wakeham, 4, Bedford Terrace, Church Street. 1873. THE ANNUAL REPORT on THE HEALTH of the * Parish of St. Abbotts. KENSINGTON, DURING THE YEAR 1872, BY T. ORME DUDFIELD, M.D., MEDICAL OFFICER OF HEALTH. KENSINGTON: James Wakeham, 4, Bedford Terrace, Church Street. 1873. CONTENTS. page General Remarks on the Mortality in 1872 5 Population 8 Births 8 Marriages 9 Deaths 9 „ not certified" 10 „ from Zymotic Diseases 12 Small Pox Epidemic 12 „ „ how it is spread 14 Sanitary Legislation, defects in 17 Typhoid Fever in South Kensington 18 Deaths from Local Diseases 19 ,, in Public Institutions (Parish Infirmary) 20 Inquests 20 Meteorology 21 Vaccination 21 „ Act, prosecutions under 22 Sanitary Work 23 The Potteries 23 Sewer Ventilation 23 Dust Removal 24 Tucker's Factory 24 Overcrowding 24 Jennings' Buildings 25 Yeoman's Row 25 Licensed Slaughter Houses 26 „ Cow Sheds 28 Bakehouses 28 Sanitary Wants : Mortuary, Disinfecting Chamber, Baths and Wash-houses 28 Water Supply and the " Water Regulations " 29 Gas 33 SEVENTEENTH ANNUAL REPORT of the MEDICAL OFFICER OF HEALTH. Being for the Year 1872. To the Vestry of the Parish of St. Mary AbbotCs, Kensington. Gentlemen, In presenting my Third Annual Report, it affords me satisfaction to state that the mortality in 1872 was below that of any former year of which we possess the vital statistics, viz., 17.17 per 1000 of the population (127,436.) This is but a fraction above what is considered a healthy rate, viz., 17 per 1000. The Registrar-General in his annual summary of births, deaths, &c., in London and other large towns, furnishes us with a statement of the death-rate in 50 large towns, including such health-resorts as Dover, Hastings, Brighton, Bath, Cheltenham, among others, and in not one of them was the death-rate so low as in Kensington last year. The nearest approach to it was Hastings 17.80, and Cheltenham 17.60.' In the other towns named the rate varied between 20.9 and 25.2 per 1000. In only seven of these 50 town districts was the death-rate below 20 per 1000. The death-rate in Kensington was 18.92 in 1871, and in ten years, 1862-71, the average was 21.42. It is satisfactory to observe that the favourable state of the public health was general in the Metropolis, the death-rate last year having been 21.4 per 1000 : the rate in 1871 was 24.6, or almost identical with the average of 10 years. Thus the improvement in all London, i.e., the reduction in the rate of mortality, was greater than in Kensington, but then it must be observed there was much greater room for improvement. The subjoined table shows the annual rate of mortality in the several great divisions of the Metropolis and in Kensington during the year 1872 :— London 21.4 per 1000 West Districts 19.5 „ North „ 21. L „ Central 23.4 „ East „ 23.5 South . „ 20.7 „ Kensington... 17.1 „ 6 The lower death-rate in 1872 was due in a large measure to a diminished mortality from zymotic diseases. Thus in 1871 the death-rate from the seven principal members of this class (viz., Small-pox, Measles, Scarlet Fever, Diphtheria, Whoopingcough, Fever, and Diarrhoea) was equivalent to 6 per 1000 in London generally, and 4.5 per 1000 in Kensington, whereas in 1872 the death-rate from the same diseases in London and in Kensington respectively, was 3.8 and 3 per 1000, a reduction in the whole Metropolis of 2.2 per 1000, and of 1.5 per 1000 in Kensington. I he subjoined table shows the percentage of deaths from the: diseases to total deaths ;— 1871. 1872. Reduction in 1872. Kensington 23.3 18.1 5.2 per cent. London 24.2 17.9 6.3 „ The average percentage of deaths from these diseases to total deaths in Kensington in 10 years was 18.7. It was as low as 13.3 in 1866, which, though a Cholera year, was an exceptionally healthy year, as judged by the comparative freedom from zymotic diseases. The general rate of mortality however was 22 per 1000, nearly 5 per thousand higher than in 1872. The highest proportional mortality from zymotic diseases in ten years (1862-71) occurred in 1871, viz., 23.3 percent, on the total deaths, which however, were equal, as before stated, to only 18.9 per 1000. The high rate of mortality from the zymotic diseases in 1871 arose from the prevalence of small pox, which killed 120 persons, the average number in ten years being only 13. This excessive mortality from small pox in 1871 may probably be the explanation of the moderate death rate from zymotic diseases in 1872, a low mortality from all not being unusual when any member of the class has previously prevailed in a severely epidemic form. Zymotic diseases are due to an action set up in the body, not unlike that of fermentation (as exemplified in yeast),the particular poison having the power of reproducing itself almost indefinitely, and in several of the diseases of manifesting itself in the shape of an eruption upon the skin. The mo it striking illustration is afforded by small-pox. The ferment, i.e., the matter of small pox, being taken into the system, whether through the lungs in respiration or through the skin by inoculation, multiplies itself to an enormous extent, and is, in due course, thrown off by the skin in the form of countless pustules, each charged with the means of spreading the disease, either by infection or by contagion. It does not often happen that more than one of the eruptive diseases is violently active at the same time. This fact has led some persons to imagine a correlation of the several diseases which they hold to be due to a common poison, manifesting itself in one form or another according to the " epidemic constitution of the year." In other words they consider these diseases to be convertible the one into the other, just as the 7 old alchemists believed in the transmutation of metals. Be this as it may, the fact remains that, as a rule, when one zymotic disease is very active the others are to a greater or less degree in abeyance, and thus after a violent eruption like that of small pox in 1871-2, it is not uncommon to witness a considerable temporary reduction of mortality from zymotic diseases generally. Why is this ? Can it be that a particular element in the blood which we may reasonably suppose to be that which the zymotic poison attacks, and upon which it grows and multiplies, becomes exhausted, or worked out in the individuals liable to, and who contract the disease, and therefore in the population generally ? This would seem to be the case as a rule, quoad the individual, and with respect to each disease, for it is notorious that the same person rarely suffers twice from the same disease, though it is equally obvious from common experience that the same person may take all of them consecutively—a fact, by the way, which militates against the theory of the unity of the zymotic poison. It is true that small-pox, scarlet fever, &c., may attack the same individual twice or oftener, at long intervals ; and it does not seem far-fetched to suppose that in such cases the particular element in the blood before referred to, as the food or nidus of the zymotic poison may have been renewed, or possibly was never quite eliminated. I am aware that this is not the view commonly entertained, but it appears to me equally reasonable with the more popular one which ascribes the cessation of an epidemic, e.g., of small-pox, to a gradual decrease in the virulence of the poison, and a progressive inability to propagate itself, so that after a fearful inflation of the mortality, tho deaths diminish more and more till the disease scarcely appears in the weekly mortality returns. To me it seems equally probable that, the disease having selected for its victims those who were fitted to receive the poison, gradually dies out, because it finds no more food—for the epidemic extends from town to town, from country to country, and from continent to continent, going through the same stages of increase, maximum virulence, and decline alike in all. The subject is full of difficulty, but the experience of each year and of each epidemic, may be expected to throw additional light upon it, and it is satisfactory to know that earnest and able men are making it their peculiar study—for of this we may be sure our present immunity from zymotic diseases will not last, but will be followed sooner or later by a serious outbreak—whether of Scarlet fever, or, as seems not improbable, Cholera, it is impossible to tell. Our duty is clear, viz., to do what lies in our power to be prepared for the worst, that the enemy may not come and find us wanting. It may be mentioned in passing, that the very abundant rains of the latter part of 1872 and the early part of 1873 have been credited as active agents in reducing zymotic mortality, by washing out the sewers and removing the sources of malaria. I think we may fairly ascribe a 8 good deal of the general healthiness of the year to the prosperity of the people. A time of prosperity is generally a healthy time. The people are well fed and clothed, and have fewer anxieties. There is perhaps less of overcrowding, squalor, and self-neglect; the debilitating influences of poverty are at their lowest; the standard of health is raised, and the body is better able to resist the inroads of disease. With these few general remarks I pass to the usual detailed subjects of the annual report. POPULATION. The population of the parish at the middle of the year was about 127,436. The town registration district contained as nearly as can be estimated, 97,069, and the Brompton district, 30,367. The males numbered about 51,103, the females 76,333—an excess of no fewer than 25,230. The inhabited houses were 16,768—an increase of 1056 during the year The average number of persons per house was 7.6. The houses in the Metropolis generally contain an average of 7.8 persons per house. The total number of houses in the parish was rather over 19,000, something like 2,900 being either unoccupied or in course of erection. The area of Kensington is 2,190 acres; the general density of the population 58 per acre, but it must be remembered that several hundred acres are still uncovered by buildings, especially in the north west, while in many of the poorer localities a density far above the average is attained. The estimated increase of population during the year was 4,326, viz., a natural increase of 1869 representing the excess of births over deaths, and 2457 being the excess of immigration over emigration. BIRTHS. The Births registered during the year were 4,041, viz., 3,259 in the town district, and 782 in Rrnnintnn : 2.056 were males, and 1 Qftn fftmn.lps. 1,985 females. The quarterly number of both sexes is stated below:— Males. Females. Total. 1st Quarter 520 566 1086 2nd „ 491 450 941 3rd „ 513 513 1026 4th „ 532 456 988 2056 1985 4041 The Birth-rate was 31.5 per 1000 of the population, that of the entire metropolis being 35.4. This comparatively low rate is due to the great disproportion in the relative number of the sexes to which reference has been made. 9 MARRIAGES. The marriages during the year were 1132, of .these 978 were solemnised at the several churches, 96 in other places of worship, and 58 at the register office. The marriages in 1871 were all but identical in number, viz., 1131; 805 solemnised in churches, 149 in other places of worship, and 87 at the register office. For these figures I am indebted to the courtesy of Mr. Barnes, the registrar of births and deaths for the Town district, whose obliging willingness to afford me official information upon all occasions, I am happy to acknowledge. DEATHS. The deaths registered during the year were 2225, viz., 1736 in the Town district and 489 in Brompton. Ninety of the deaths in the latter district took place at the hospital for consumption and diseases of the chest, viz., males 47 and females 43. As only five parishioners of Kensington died in this hospital we must deduct 85 from the above total, thus reducing the deaths in Brompton district to 404, and in the whole parish to 2140. But 29 parishioners died in the Small-pox Hospitals and two in the Fever Hospital of the Metropolitan Sick Asylum Board. Appropriating these deaths to the districts from whence the patients came, the total will be as follow:—Town district. 1762 ; Brompton, 409; whole parish, 2171. 1762 ; Brompton, 409; whole parish, 2171. Subjoined is a quarterly statement of the mortality. Males. Females. Total. 1st Quarter 307 308 615 2nd „ 271 219 490 3rd „ 260 289 549 4th „ 248 269 517 1086 1085 2171 The deaths of males and females respectively are thus seen to be identical in number, notwithstanding the very large disproportion of the sexes. The general death-rate was 17.17 per 1000; viz., 18.1 in the Town district, and 13.3 per 1000 in the Brompton district; the rate in the male sex being 21.2, and in the female sex only 14.2, a difference in favour of the latter of 7 per 1000. The annual rate of mortality of the sexes in all London was males 23.5, females 19.6; total 21.4 per 1000. Six hundred and twenty six children died under one year of age, equal to 15.6 per cent, on the registered births, and to 29.4 per cent on the total deaths. In the Metropolis generally the deaths of children under one year were only 26.3 per cent, of the total mortality. Under five years of age, 959 children died, 45.4 per cent, of' all deaths, the per centage in the entire Metropolis being 43.4. Four hundred and ninety-two persons died at 60 years of age and upwards, equivalent to 22.7 per cent, of the total mortality, the deaths at the same period of life in the 10 entire Metropolis being only 17.9 per cent. At 80 years of age and upwards there were 103 deaths. The subjoined table shows the ages at death, grouped in seven divisions. Under one year 626 One and under five 333 Five „ ,, 20 140 20 „ „ 40 271 40 „ „ 60 309 60 „ „ 80 389 80 and upwards 103 Total 2171 The subjoined table exhibits in the form of a comparative analysis, some of the facts above stated and others which will be found of interest relative to the mortality in Kensington, and in the Metropolis generally. Comparative Analysis of the Mortality in ali London and in Kensington in 52 weeks ending 28th December, 1872. LOCALITY. Annual Death Rate per 1000 from all causes. Annual Death Rate per 1000, from 7 principal Zymotic Diseases. Per centage of Deaths under 1 year to Births Registered. Per centage of Deaths to Total Deaths. Under 1 year of age. At 60 years of age and upwards. From 7 Zymotic Diseases. From Violence. Registered upon information of the Coroner (Inquests.) Registered in large Public Institutions. London 21.4 3.8 15.9 26.3 19.8 17.9 3.7 6.8 16.9 Kensington 17.17 3.0 15.6 29.4 22.7 18.1 2.0 6.2 12.8 Thirty deaths were " not certified," that is, the deceased either had no medical attendant during their last illness, or were attended by unqualified practitioners. Sixteen were under a year old, seven between 1 and 5, two between 5 and 20, two between 40 and 60, and three upwards of 60. In 9 cases it is expressly stated that there was no medical attendant, in 14 the deaths were returned as "not certified," but in these cases and seven others the cause of death was fully set forth. These 21 persons doubtless were attended by unqualified practitioners, who gave certificates upon which the cause of death was registered, although the deaths were returned by the Registrars as " not certified " in accordance with the instructions of the Registrar-General. If we assume, as we fairly may, that the persons who employed unregistered practitioners did so in ignorance of their 11 tion, it would follow that the only "uncertified" deaths were those in which the return states there was " no medical attendant," viz., 9, or less than 5 per 1000. But including all cases the percentage of uncertified deaths to total deaths was a trifle under 1.5, a proportion not widely differing from the average in all London, but much lower than in some parts of the country, where it ranges as high as 10 per cent. Now, as certificates of death are rarely refused by medical men who have been in attendance, and as it is scarcely probable that so large a proportion of cases of fatal illness receive no medical attendance, it is reasonable to conclude that a large number of persons are attended in their last illness by unqualified practitioners who certify. The cause of death may be given upon such certificate, but the death is nevertheless returned as " not certified." With a view to put some check upon unqualified practice, and to enable the public to discriminate between qualified and unqualified medical men, I called the attention of the Registrar-General to the desirability of a slight alteration in the form of death certificate, consisting in the addition of the words " Duly Registered Medical Practitioner " under the place for signature. As unqualified men use these certificate forms (which are intended solely for the use of qualified practitioners), it is not to be wondered at if many people are misled into the belief that they are duly qualified. But if the proposed addition were made, an unqualified practitioner would be placed in a dilemma, for either he would erase the words proposed to be added, and so reveal his true status; or by leaving them in he would subject himself to the penal 39th clause of the Medical Act. The Registrar-General was good enough to approve the suggestion, which will, I hope, be carried into effect before long. At present the giving of certificates of death by medical men is a voluntary act, almost universally adopted by the profession, on public and scientific grounds. But quite recently a Bill has passed the House of Lords, and is likely to become law during the present Session,* one object of which is to compel medical men to give a certificate, showing the apparent cause of death of all persons attended by them in their last illness. Such a practice will no doubt be useful, but the manner in which it is proposed to be carried out, is a somewhat ungracious return for the gratuitous and voluntary services of the profession during many years. Table A (appendix) contains the causes of death, arranged in quarterly groups. From these it appears that the winter quarters were not su fatal as usual, the deaths being fewer in excess over those in the summer quarters than we ordinarily anticipate. This was due to the exceptionally mild weather, particularly in the fourth quarter of the year, during which actually * The Bill was subsequently withdrawn, owing to the impossibility of getting it through the lower House on account of the lateness of the session. 12 fewer deaths took place than iu the second summer quarter. The total deaths registered in the four quarters consecutively were— (1) 615 (2) 490 (3) 549 (4) 517 The deaths from diseases of the zymotic class were 390, a reduction of 52 below 1871, viz. :— Deaths from the principal Zymotic Diseases including Small Pox cases in the Hospitals. • Town. Brompton. Total. Small Pox 62 6 68 Measles 28 15 43 Scarlet Fever ... 22 7 29 Diphtheria 12 2 14 Whooping Cough 69 8 77 Fever—Typhus 4 0 4 ., Enteric or Typhoid 20 8 28 ,, Simple Continued 10 0 10 Diarrhoea 84 26 110 Cholera 5 2 7 Total 316 74 390 The average annual number of deaths in 10 years from these diseases was 37G.1. With correction for increase of population the number in 1872 should have been 509. With these few preliminary remarks, I pass to the consideration of the mortality from the principal diseases, beginning with those of the zymotic class. SMALL-POX. The Small-pox epidemic, the history of which occupied so large a space in my last annual report, lingered throughout the year. The deaths numbered G8, viz., 29 in the Hospitals and 39 in the parish. Taking 20 per cent, as a reasonable average fatality, it would appear that there were about 340 cases of illness, of which we possess records in only 195 instances, viz., 152 in the North District, and 43 in the South District—the dividing line of the Districts, for sanitary purposes, being the Uxbridge-road. But of the deaths, 65 belonged to the Town registration district, and 3 to the Brompton district. From the beginning to the end of the epidemic, i.e., from the last quarter of 1870 to the end of 1872, there were 196 deaths of parishioners, and from the knowledge of this fact, we arrive at the conclusion that about 1000 persons were attacked by the disease. 13 There was, as in 1871, considerable difference in the two Sanitary Districts in the ages of the persons attacked, as shown below : Age at date of Attack. Town District. Brompton District. Under 1 6 — Above 1 & under 5 13 — „ 5 „ 20 70 15 „ 20 „ 40 49 24 „ 40 „ 60 14 3 ., 60 & upwards — 1 Total 152 43 The sex of the sufferers is shown below :— Sex. Town. Brompton. Total. M. 76 28 104 F. 76 15 91 152 43 195 The sex in the fatal cases :— M. 38 F. 30 The deaths occurred at ages as follows :— Under 1 10 Above 1 & under 5 6 „ 5 „ 20 22 „ 20 „ 40 19 „ 40 „ 60 11 Total 68 The deaths occurred in the several months as follows :— January 21 February 4 March 6 April 8 May 2 June 4 July 10 August 3 September 1 October 2 November 6 December 1 68 14 There were two very severe local outbreaks in the north-western part of the parish. The first occurred in Testerton-street, near the Latymer-road Railway Station. The first case was that of a man who was opposed to vaccination. The home accommodation and the circumstances of the family were miserably insufficient, but nothing was heard of his illness till it had ended fatally. This man had three children, the youngest of whom sickened and died, having had no medical attendance. While this child was lying dead I visited the house, and found the remaining two children ill. They were removed to the Hospital at once, where they both recovered, although unvaccinated. In this street and close at hand other twelve cases at least occurred, and a careful investigation made at the time, left no doubt that the infection extended from the first group of sick. This outbreak occurred in July. In September another localised outbreak occurred in and about the Walmer-road, and there was this special feature of interest connected with it, that it commenced in a mews contiguous to the premises where the process of disinfection had been carried on during the entire course of the epidemic, and the question naturally arose whether the disease was due in the first case to this proximity ? I say in the first case—there were six in all in the family first attacked—because when once the disease had entered the close and filthy abode in which they lived, all the other cases followed as a matter of course. To solve this question I made a careful enquiry, and arrived at the conclusion that there was no ground for the suspicion, for it turned out that during the period of incubation of the first case the disinfecting chamber was not in use. I dwelt upon this group of cases in my October report, for I felt it was important to find out whether the disinfecting chamber was likely to be of danger to the inhabitants of the locality in which it is situated. There had been few cases of small-pox in the neighbourhood during the preceding twelve months, although it had been raging elsewhere, and although every infected article of clothing and bedding in hundreds of cases had been purified at the chamber. Only 11 cases (in 10 houses) had occurred within a radius of 200 yards; and but one in the isolated block of closely packed, thickly populated houses, which surrounds the chamber. Moreover, none of the persons engaged in and about the disinfecting process had suffered from small-pox, although, as it turned out, they had not been revaccinated. The conclusion at which I arrived was that if due care were taken—the infected articles being quickly exposed to a high temperature and chemical fumigation, the process might be carried on without appreciable risk to those engaged in it or to the surrounding inhabitants. The correctness of this conclusion having been disputed by a local practitioner, I, at his request, reviewed the whole subject in the light thrown upon it by a large number of cases in the 15 neighbourhood which had come under his care, but which had not been previously reported to me. The first case investigated was that of a respectable married woman (Mrs. A.), whom I found sitting in a chair in the midst of her family, on the tenth day of the eruption. She was being nursed by Mrs. B., a laundress, in whose employ she had been, while every member of Mrs. B's household, she herself excepted, was struck down by the malady; and here, of course, she became infected. During the period, extending over many weeks, that the disease was in Mrs. B's house the business of the laundry was carried 011 without interruption. The father and four children had a light attack, but the fifth child, the first attacked, died. How did the infection get into this household ? From the disinfecting chamber ? No. The little child who died had played in the street with one of the children of Mr. C., (whose family, in the mews already referred to, were the first victims of the outbreak), and while the latter had the eruption full out. Mr. C's children, it appeared, had been allowed to run about the neighbourhood without restraint after the first few days of their illness, which assumed a mild form, and was never dangerous to the individuals themselves, but served to spread the infection fatally to other persons. The reckless disregard of sanitary precautions in this family was only equalled by the public indifference, for although these facts were well known in the neighbourhood there was not found anyone to report them to the Inspector of the District, who was most diligent in the discharge of his dangerous duty in the locality. The picture would not be complete without the further remark that Mrs. B's two eldest children, who were ironers, very quickly resumed their occupation, having had the disease in a mild, but (as I need scarcely add) in a communicable form ; and the illness being concealed lest the business should be injured. The cases to which I have now alluded extended from the commencement to nearly the conclusion of the outbreak. They were traced in a direct line from one to the other, and the only unsettled question at the date of my report, was the origin of the first case ? I stated that Mr. C. was a " general dealer," and might have purchased infected articles. I did not know then what I have been informed since, that he contracted for the removal of the "wash" from one of the large small-pox hospitals, whence possibly he may have carried the infection. But to resume, Mr. D, an intelligent shopkeeper, was attacked, and he stated that Mr. C's children were in and out of his shop constantly during their illness, the family being good customers. Immediately opposite lived Mr. E., who became ill as well as his two children, the mother only escaping. This Mr. E. had been working, at the time he took the disease, with Mr. F., whose child died of small-pox. Next door to Mr. F. lived Mr. G., all of whose children had the disease. In another house close at hand a youth of 16 was attacked; his 16 parents professed themselves unable to account for his illness, but it transpired that their married danghter, who lived two doors off, had been ill as well as her child (who died), and that there had been constant intercourse between the two families throughout the illness in the latter. The only other case I shall allude to (I did not trace the origin of it) was that of Mr. J., whose mother kept a laundry, the business of which was carried on without interruption during the man's illness, which was concealed as usual. This history I think proves that the disinfecting chamber had nothing to do with the origin or with the spread of the disease, but the belief was general and invincible in the neighbourhood that it was the sole cause. There can, however, be no reasonable doubt that the malady spread by direct contact—because the sick were retained in crowded houses, without the possibility of isolation or the requisites for safe treatment: because, moreover, the people seemingly took no precaution to prevent its spreading; and rarely, unless compelled, disinfected their rooms, clothing, &c. In my last annual report I dwelt on the fact that the speedy removal of a first case, always prevented the spread of disease in the same house, and often in the locality also We could not say how the disease got entrance, but we could and did stop it, but where cases were concealed, or if the patients were not removed, the disease spread and lingered till it had exhausted itself. Another fact of great importance came out in the course of the enquiry, viz., the inadequate medical attendance received by the sick. The people would not go to the District Medical Officer because they knew he would, as in duty bound, urge the removal of the sick; and as a rule they did not go to a private practitioner, because they could not afford to pay him for his services. In several fatal and other cases 1 ascertained that a medical man had been called in but once, apparently to give a diagnosis, and possibly to prevent difficulties in the event of a fatal termination, so that there was practically no medical treatment. When I visited Mrs. A. she had not been seen by a medical man for eight days. Mrs. B. sought advice at the last gasp for the child who died, but for no other member of her family. In a few instances the bodies of persons who died of small-pox were buried without medical certificates In other instances certificates were given though there had been no legitimate medical attendance, the doctor not having been called in until death was imminent. Most of the victims were, of course, unvaccinated. At an early period of the epidemic I tried without success to obtain inquests upon uuvaccinated children, who died of small-pox and I still believe that such enquiries at that time would have been useful. I hold, moreover, that inquests should be held when persons die of a malady like small-pox, without medical attendance and particularly when the disease might possibly have been prevented by proper measures of precaution. It is said that the object of the coroner's inquisition 17 is to ascertain the cause of death. I cannot but think, however, that it has a wider scope, that it is a proper part of sucli an enquiry to determine whether the disease might not have been prevented; and when that medical care is withheld which might have been had upon application, I think a presumption of neglect is raised, the responsibility of rebutting which should be thrown upon those {e.g., parents) in charge of the sick. At any rate I am confident that the dread of public exposure and judicial censure would materially check the evils to which I have felt it my duty to allude. These local outbreaks furnish practical illustrations of the inadequacy of existing Sanitary laws to cope with epidemic diseases. If sucli diseases are to be met successfully, their existence should be made known instantly to the health officer of the district, who, while taking all necessary precautions for the protection of the public, should have due regard to the interests of the sufferers. If the home accommodation admits of the patient being isolated, and the means at the disposal of the family are sufficient to provide for the wants of the sick, there would be no occasion to insist on removal. Otherwise the health officer should have absolute power to remove cases to the Hospital. Had this power been in my hands, not six of the sixty persons whose cases I have alluded to, would have remained at home. Indeed, it is probable that the sick would have numbered six rather than sixty ! A case which was taken before the police magistrate shows how insufficient are our powers. Three children in one family had small-pox successively. They, with their parents, occupied a small back-room of a house where a laundry business was carried on. The means of the father were quite inadequate to provide necessaries for the children, and he could not afford to pay a doctor. The district medical officer therefore was called in, and certified a case as a proper one to be removed to the Hospital. The parents refused to let the child go, and hence the proceedings, instituted under section 26 of the Sanitary Act, 1866. The Magistrate dismissed the summons, ruling that the clause in question did not give us power to remove the child, but only authorised the Vestry to pay the cost of the removal by the father: the father had failed to comply with the order of the Justice, and as no penalty was prescribed for disobedience—(a " casus omissus ")—the man was enabled to set authority at defiance. A great and unsuspected danger to the public health was revealed in the course of the enquiry. I refer to the practice of laundresses, who appear habitually to carry on their business during the prevalence of infectious disease in their household. Surely in such a case the sick should be removed instantly, or the business-should be suspended ? Would not the 38th section of the Sanitary Act, 1866, apply to such a case? This clause imposes a penalty upon those who transmit infected clothing without having previously disinfected it—the question here being whether garments 18 washed in a laundry where infectious disease exists, may not be deemed to be infected ? Again, is not the clothing of attendants upon the sick infected, and capable of conveying infection, and should not some restriction be placed on the movements of such persons ? The importance of these questions, among others, led to my December report in which they were discussed, being forwarded to the Local Government Board, in the hope and expectation that they would see fit to obtain an amendment of the Sanitary Laws for preventing the spread of contagious diseases. The Session of Parliament is now far advanced, but I cannot learn that there is any probability of such legislation, nor am I aware that your Vestry's communication elicited any expression of opinion from the Board which is now at the head of the Sanitary Administration in this country. Measles.—The deaths from this disease (43) were 14 below the actual average in 10 years (57) without correction for increase of population ; 16 occurred in the first quarter, 17 in the second, 7 in the third, and 3 in the 4th. Scarlet Fever was less fatal than in any year since 1866, which, as before stated, was an exceptionally favourable year, on account of the low mortality from diseases of the zymotic class. In that year there were 28 deaths from scarlet fever in a population of 89,000. In 1872 there were 29 deaths, the population having increased to 127,000. Fourteen deaths were ascribed to Diphtheria. Whooping Cough killed 77 children, or 27 over the uncorrected average ; 45 died in the first half of the year, and 32 in the second. The mortality from Fever, (42) was rather below the average of 10 years, (51). Four of the deaths were ascribed to Typhus, 26 to Typhoid, and ten to simple continued fever. In the autumn several deaths from' Typhoid were registered in South Kensington. As the prevalence of this disease is properly regarded as indicating unsanitary conditions; it being often due to the breathing of sewage tainted air or the drinking of sewage polluted water, the occurrence of several fatal cases within a short period and in such a locality excited both anxiety and surprise. I felt it my duty therefore to make enquiries with a view of tracing the origin of the outbreak. The result of enquiry, if not satisfactory in one sense, was in another sense reassuring,for it turned out that none of the cases originated in the parish. The unfortunate sufferers contracted the disease during a holiday absence from town in various parts of the country (one case in Paris), and returned home to sicken and die. This incident strongly illustrates a danger which few perhaps bear sufficiently in mind when leaving home in pursuit of health or recreation. I may add that only one death, and indeed only one case, occurred in each of the several houses alluded to, which, moreover, were somewhat widely separated. The disease did not spread and nothing more has been heard of it in the same localities to date of this report. Diarrhoea was fatal to 110 persons, of whom 2 died in the first quarter, 5 in the second, 97 in the third, and 6 in the 4th. This mortality, though in excess of the actual average deaths in 10 years (94) is con- 19 siderably below the returns of the last two years (154 and 129 respectively), and below the corrected average in 10 years. As usual, the principal victims were young children, 94 having died under one year old, and 9 in the second year of life. Pour persons succumbed from this cause at ages above 60, and three between 2 and 60. Eighteen women died of diseases connected with childbirth or 4.5 per 1000 births—not a large proportion; but probably some deaths connected with the puerperal state were registered under other heads not having occurred within the few first days after parturition. Ten deaths were ascribed to Syphilis, 8 being infantile or hereditary. The deaths from this malady are probably understated. Malignant disease "Cancer," in its various forms, was fatal to 70 persons, of whom 61 were above 40 years of age. The tubercular diseases destroyed 360—exclusive of eighty-five non-parishioners in the Brompton Hospital—viz , Scrofula 12, Tabes mesenterica 47, Phthisis 229, Hydrocephalus and Tubercular meningitis 72. Thus far I have spoken of general diseases zymotic or constitutional. I now come to the extensive class of local diseases. Those affecting the nervous system were returned as the causes of death in 225 cases, including apoplexy, 57; Paralysis, 43 ; Epilepsy, 10; Convulsions, 72 ; and " Brain disease," not otherwise described, 30. Diseases of the organs of circulation were returned in 132 cases, viz., Pericarditis, 5; Aneurism, 6; and Heart disease, &c., 121. Diseases of the respiratory organs were fatal in 403 cases, viz., 270 in the winter quarters, and 133 in the summer quarters: 251 of the deaths were due to bronchitis; 95 to pneumonia, and 57 to other forms of lung disease. In former reports I have dwelt upon the influence of temperature over the mortality from this important class of diseases. The figures above stated plainly demonstrate the fact that the mortality from pulmonary affections is inversely as the temperature. Diseases of the digestive organs were accountable for 85 deaths, including Gastritis, 4; Enteritis, 8; Peritonitis, 7; Stomach disease, 8; and Liver disease, &c , 41. Diseases of the Urinary organs were fatal in 53 instances, including " Bright's disease " 25. Two deaths from Ovarian dropsy, and 6 from Uterine disease, &c,, were recorded. Thirty-three children perished from premature birth, and 21 from teething. Of 122 deaths ascribed to Atrophy and Debility, nearly all were those of young children, 116 being in the first year of life. Many of these deaths probably belong fairly to the tubercular class. It is lamentable to think that not a few of them in all probability resulted from veritable starvation, due to the use of improper farinaceous food, which the delicate alimentary system is quite unable to digest in the forms in which it is often presented to the children of the poor. Old age was returned as the cause of death in 64 instances. Of violent deaths 45 were recorded, namely, fractures and contusions, 17; burns and scalds, 8; suffocation, 8; poisoning and drowning, respectively one each; manslaughter, 1; accidental wound, 1; suicidal ditto, 3; hanging, 2. " Causes of death ill-defined or not specified," 26. 20 DEATHS IN PUBLIC INSTITUTIONS. The only "public institutions " in the parish are the Hospital for Consumption and Diseases of the Chest, situated at Brompton, and the parish Infirmary in Wright's Lane. In the former institution 00 deaths took place (males 47 and females 43). Of the deceased only 5 (males 3 and females 2) were parishioners. The Parish Infirmary being situated in the Town district, all the deaths are registered in that district, to which, doubtless, a, very large proportion of them properly belong. The deaths in this large and important hospital were 174, viz., males 91 and females 83; and the ages at which they occurred were as subjoined :— Under one year 38 Between 1 and 5 10 „ 5 „ 20 4 „ 20 „ 40 19 „ 40 „ 60 42 „ 60 ,, 80 55 „ 80 upwards 6 174 The causes of death were as follow:- Measles 1 Brain disease and paralysis 19 Enteric fever 1 Convulsions 2 Continued fever n Heart disease 14 Diarrhoea 5 Laryngitis 2 Dysentery 1 Bronchitis 30 Erysipelas 1 Other pulmonary diseases 7 Rheumatism 1 Liver disease 1 Herpes zoster 1 Kidney „ 2 Puerperal disease, &e. 2 Uterine ,, 1 Ascites 2 Premature birth 2 Syphilis 4 Violent 3 Tubercular, Tabes, Marasmus, &e. 28 Natural decay 4 Bedsore 1, ulcer 1, various 2 4 Phthisis 25 Gangrene 1 174 Cancer 9 INQUESTS. One hundred and thirty-six inquests were held during the year, viz. 116 in the Town district and 20 in the Brompton district. The deaths occurred at ages as subjoined:— Under 1 year 37 Between 1 year and 5 22 „ 5 „ 20 4 „ 20 „ 40 16 „ 40 „ 60 30 At 60 and upwards 27 21 In 75 cases the deaths were "sudden in 33 the deceased were "found dead in bed." In 102 instances the cause of death was ascertained by a post mortem examination. Verdict of death from "natural causes" was returned in 91 cases, i. e. death was due to disease. In 22 of these cases the fatal disease was found in the brain and nervous system; in 60 in the pulmonary and vascular systems; and in 9 cases in various other organs. The violent deaths (accidental) were 29 in number, viz.:— Suffocation 8 Violent—Palls 7 ,, Crushed 1 ,, Scalds 5 „ Burns 3 „ Run over 2 „ Drowned 1 ,, Poison 1 „ Injuries to head 1 Of the suffocation cases, one was returned as " asphyxia," one as "strangulation;" one death was by coal gas and one from the fumes of carbonic acid gas inhaled by the sufferer while sleeping on a kiln. Seven suicides occurred, viz., by hanging, 2; by wound of throat, 1; by pistol shot, 2; by a fall from window, 1; by crushing under a locomotive engine, 1. One verdict of " manslaughter " was recorded; one death from "want of proper nourishment." There were five open verdicts of " found dead." The subjects of inquiry were in 78 cases males and in 58 females. METEOROLOGY. The Registrar-General informs us that the mean temperature at Greenwich in 1872 was 50°.7 Fahrenheit, viz., first quarter 43.6. 2nd quarter 52°'8; 3rd quarter 61°.l; 4th quarter 45°.3. The mean temperature of the dew point was 45°.2. The dryness of the atmosphere, i.e., the difference between the dew point temperature and air temperature was 5° 5 a difference of .1 only from the averages of 33 years. The fall of rain was 33 inches, as compared with 24.2, the averages of 33 years. Rain fell on 197 days. The means of the monthly readings of the^barometer were 29 630: the mean degree of humidity (Saturation =100) was 82. VACCINATION. For the return in the Appendix, (Table B), showing the state of vaccination, I am indebted to Mr. Shattock, the Vaccination officer, whose efficient services it is my pleasing duty to recognize therein. The births registered during the period covered by the return numbered 4076, and the successful vaccinations 3452, leaving a deficiency of 624. But of this number of apparently unvaccinated children, 22 323 are accounted for, having died; and 75 are otherwise satisfactorily accounted for in other columns of the return. The actual cases not accounted for are 221, or between 5 and G per cent. on the total births. It does not follow that all of even this moderate number remain unvaccinated, or indeed that they are living in the parish at the present time. They are children as described in column 10, "removed to places unknown, or which cannot be reached, and cases not having been found." It must be allowed, therefore, that so far as vaccination is a preservative against smallpox—and it is nearly perfect when properly performed—the state of infant vaccination in this parish gives us reasonable cause to hope that any future epidemic will iind us far better prepared than the last. I am glad also to notice that the Guardians of the poor have shown every disposition to carry out the provisions of the Act with vigour, by instructing their Clerk to take proceedings in the Police Court, upon the information of the Vaccination officer, against parties who infringed certain provisions. In all these cases convictions were obtained. They were as follow:- A.B. An accoucheuse vaccinated a child and filled up the official certificate form, which should be used only by a "duly registered medical practitioner." Having expressed contrition for an unintentional breach of the law, and promised not to repeat the offence, a nominal fine only was inflicted. C.D. for the same offence, was fined ten pounds, the Justice feeling satisfied that he wilfully claimed to be what he was not, a " duly registered medical practitioner." E.P. was fined a nominal sum under a very important clause (10 of the Amending Act), for refusing to allow the public vaccinator to take lymph (under section 17 of the Act of 1867) from the arm of her child, which had been vaccinated at the public cost. The success of vaccination depends upon skilful operation and the observance of precautions which give rise to results which only qualified persons are competent to recognize. It is proper, therefore, that the practice should be confined to those who have had special instruction, and possess due knowledge of the subject; hence the importance of the convictions in the two cases first referred to, which may be expected to have the desired effect of restricting the practice to duly qualified practitioners. The clauses of the Acts referred to in the third case are of less importance in citieS and large centres of population than in sparsely populated districts, where arm-to-arm vaccination might be put a stop to, by the selfish refusal of a parent to allow the operator to take lymph from the arm. Upon the whole, there can be no doubt that, at the present time, infant vaccination is being carried out with a success perhaps never before attained in this metropolis, a result largely due to the appointment of vaccination officers, whose several districts cover the entire area, and to a resolution on the part of the Guardians 23 generally, to carry out the Act loyally. All that is now necessary to keep up this high standard of success, is united action on the part of the Vaccination officers, who should inform one another of changes of residence of unvaccinated children; report to the Guardians any breach of the Act, and refuse to accept any evidence of successful vaccination excepting a certificate by a public vaccinator, or a " duly registered medical practitioner." SANITARY WORK. Table F. (appendix) exhibits in a compendious form the principal items of Sanitary Work, &c , accomplished during the year. A few subjects require, by reason of their importance, a more detailed notice. And first of all I may mention that the district of the Potteries, Netting Dale, has received a good deal of attention, but less than I could desire So long as pig-keeping is kept up it will bo impossible to put the place in a proper Sanitary condition, as it is dangerous to attempt any thorough inspection without the aid of the police. The parties directly interested in the pig feeding business are few, but they are noisy, and those who would be glad to have the benefit of regular visits from the Sanitary Inspector, are unwilling to incur the odium of making complaints. A good many inspections have been made nevertheless, and considerable progress in the eradication of the pig nuisances. Several cases have been taken before the Magistrates, who appear now to be fully alive to the unfitness of the locality for the keeping of swine, and the necessity of our measures. There are very few premises where the keeping of pigs is not prohibited, though fresh cases turn up from time to time. It was formerly our custom to sue offenders upon prohibited premises for penalties at the rate of ten shillings a day for disobedience of the Magistrates' order; but the difficulty of obtaining entrance and proof was so great that we have abandoned that plan, and now ask for the full fine of forty shillings in each case, for the offence of keeping swine in an unfit locality. The Magistrates informed by repeated cases of the practical contempt of their orders have inflicted this larger penalty, and thus the work of four separate inspections has been effected by one visit, and with the best possible lesults. There are at the present time comparatively few pigs in the Potteries, but Kensington parishioners have reason to complain that they still suffer the nuisance, so many of the pigs having been removed into an adjacent parish, close to our own boundaries, whence come the most numerous complaints Some of the former pig feeders still live in the Potteries, where they collect and boil the various abominations known as " wash." In some narrow and confined premises large accumulations of this stuff are to be seen, and must be dealt with like any other offensive accumulation, while the boiling—the source of many complaints, must be stopped as an " offensive trade." A good many complaints have been received of the bad smells proceeding from sewer ventilators, and in several instances the charcoal filters have been applied with satisfactory results. It cannot be too 24 often repeated that sewers must be ventilated, and that it is better to have the nose offended in the public highway than the health injured by the escape of poisonous gases within houses. There is at present no other alternative. It has been proposed that all the gullies should be effectually trapped, and, no doubt, as they are situated so much nearer houses than the ventilating shafts, it would be satisfactory to many if this were done; but I doubt the prudence of such a step in the older thoroughfares, when the ventilators are few in number and widely separated. The gullies in those localities act as ventilators also, and if all of them were trapped, and no additional ventilating shafts provided, I fear the results would be disastrous; for wo might expect a large increase in the number of cases of typhoid fever, a disease which was fatal to 26 persons in 1872, and which is due to impurity of air or water arising from untrapped or insufficiently trapped drains and waste pipes. If the sewers are not freely ventilated in the streets, scarcely any house drain traps can arrest the passage of sewer gases, which, as before stated, are far more dangerous in houses than in the open air. As usual, the complaints of non-removal of dust have been numerous, and a large portion of the time of all three inspectors has been taken up in attending to them. Considering the importance of the subject, and the large amount of money paid for the work, it is a question whether it would not be economical to appoint a special inspector to superintend the execution of the contracts, if the Vestry cannot undertake the duty? There can be no doubt that the neglect of dust bins, and the improper use of them by the deposit of animal and vegetable refuse, is the cause of a good deal of sickness, besides a much larger amount of lowered health which pre-disposes the body to disease. I know nothing which would give greater satisfaction to the parishioners at large than the regular removal of the contents of their dust bins. This is the one subject which brings me, and the sanitary staff generally, into the most frequent communication with ratepayers—letters and calls from them, and visits by the inspectors arising out of complaints, being far more numerous than upon all other sanitary matters whatever. This is not as it should be, and it really represents a large waste of sanitary labour which might be usefully directed to other matters. The tallow melting and candle factory in High-street, Kensington, has been frequently inspected during the year, and has been a source of less annoyance than in former years. However desirable it may be to abolish such an establishment in the midst of a populous neighbourhood, it must be confessed that few complaints have been made respecting this one, and enquiry has generally shown that the cause of offence is to a large extent avoidable, being due to temporary neglect of the means provided for preventing the escape of effluvia. Of all " nuisances " perhaps none is more injurious to health (besides being often a cause of indecency) than " overcrowding." This happens nearly always in houses let out in tenements; and is difficult to deal with under the ordinary sanitary laws. It is to be desired that the " Lodging house clauses " of the Sanitary Act, 1866, should be enforced in this parish; regulations would have to be drawn up for the approva 25 of the Government authorities, which would determine in all eases the maximum number of persons that should be permitted to oecupy rooms, &c., while provision would be made for the periodical sanitary cleansing, &c., of all such houses, which would have to be registered. This question was before the Works, General Purposes, and Sanitary Committee in 1866, and some progress was made in draughting regulations, but it fell through, and has never since been revived. Jennings' buildings have received the customary attention during the year, both by way of inspection and sanitary work in the houses, and also by frequent flushing and cleansing of the public ways, water closets, &c. So crowded, dilapidated, and generally unsatisfactory a locality must always have been a source of trouble and anxiety—and it was not possible therefore to feel otherwise than glad when it was announced during the current year that the property had changed hands and was coming down. At the present time many of the houses are not only vacated but also destroyed, and though the remaining dwellings do not seem likely to be demolished so soon as was expected, there is reason to believe that they will not continue very long to prevent the consummation of a long wished for and important improvement. The population of" Jennings' Buildings," at the taking of the census in 1871, was 876. The deaths registered in 1872 were 29, (independently of any that may have occurred in the Parish Infirmary), equivalent to 33 per 1,000, or not far short of double the average in the parish generally. Fifteen children died under 5 years of age, six being under a year old; nine persons died at 60 years of age and upwards, and five between the ages of 5 and 60. Two deaths were attributed to measles, the only fatal zymotic disease, but ten were due to tubercular diseases, which indicate an unhealthy state of the population, whether inherited or acquired. Five inquests appear to have been held ; in three cases upon children under one year who died of tubercular diseases; in two cases upon adults who died of heart disease, all the deaths being reported as " sudden." Yeoman's Row is another of those localities which, from their crowded and impoverished condition, necessarily require and receive much sanitary attention. About the middle of the year an idea was abroad that "fever " was prevalent there, but upon investigation there was discovered no foundation for the rumour. Indeed, all things considered, the health of the inhabitants of Yeoman's Row, judged from the mortality returns, would appear to have been very good last year, although it would seem, from the District Medical Officers' Relief Book, that a large proportion of the people are constantly under his care. The deaths were only 17, including two children, who died on the day of their birth, one in convulsions, and one from premature birth. As the population numbered at the 1871 Census 950 souls, it would appear that the mortality in Yeoman's Row was below rather than above the average in the entire parish. The unfavourable feature is the large proportion of deaths of children, 11 of the 17 deaths having occurred under 5 years. Three persons died at ages above 60, and one each at 18, 53 and 54. Nine of the deaths were due to tubercular or scrofulous diseases. 26 LICENSED SLAUGHTER HOUSES. The licensed slaughter houses, 54 in number, viz.: 32 in the North, and 22 in the South sanitary district, have been regularly inspected. A list of them is given in the Appendix (Table G.) The time is at hand when something definite must be decided with respect to them viz. : whether to extend the period beyond August, 1874, at which, under the Building Act, 1844, they should be abolished, or to provide a substitute in the form of Public Abattoirs for the common use of the trade. The subject is now under the consideration of a Select Committee of the House of Commons, whose report will, I hope, lead to a satisfactory settlement of the question. No doubt the private slaughter houses in the Metropolis generally are better kept than they were before the system of licensing brought them under the authority of the Local Boards. But it would be wrong to suppose that the majority of them are what they ought to be. Many, more or less serious defects in position, construction, and other details have been, in some measure overlooked, on the assumption that they would be soon abolished. Very few indeed of them were built for the purpose, and in several the conditions under which the license is granted are not strictly adhered to. Thus, as it is plainly stated upon the notice paper supplied to all applicants for the licence, " no part of the place used as a slaughter house shall be inhabited, nor shall any underground room or cellar be so used; " but several slaughter houses are situated in Mewses, and the rooms over them are inhabited. In more than one instance the slaughter house may be properly described as an underground room or cellar, and I opposed the renewal of one licence last year on this ground, but the magistrates overruled my objection because the place had been tolerated so long. The other conditions are as follow :—a good water supply, impermeable flooring, good drainage directly connected with the sewer and properly trapped, the inlet to be covered with a fixed grating of definite size to .prevent solid refuse from entering the sewer; covered receptacles to contain manure, garbage, and refuse, all of which is to be removed from the premises between the hours of 10 p.m. and 8 a.m. The premises are to be lime-washed at least three times a year, and cattle are not allowed to be kept in or about them fcrr a longer period than thirty-six hours. It may be mentioned that only about one-half of the butchers in the parish have licensed slaughter houses. Some of those who have slaughter houses accommodate those who have none for a small fixed charge, and two or three slaughter houses are practically abattoirs but without that supervision which would be enforced were the system once introduced by legal enactment. Should the Select Committee decide to advise the House to retain the existing system, it would become my duty to recommend your Vestry to oppose the re-licensing of some, and to require very considerable improvements in other slaughter houses which do not come up to the standard. It seems not improbable however that a more satisfactory system will be adopted, viz. that of public slaughter houses, which appears to have been a complete success in every sense wherever it has been adopted—not having increased the price of meat, and having given great satisfaction to the trade after a short trial. I cannot but think the same results would follow a fail trial of the system in the 27 polis, and that the butchers would soon perceive the advantages of slaughtering in a clean, airy, well-ventilated abattoir, in lieu of the close, stuffy places (immediately contiguous to the dwelling house and shop in many instances) where this necessary but disagreeable work is now carried on. I am quite aware that it has been contended that private slaughter houses are unobjectionable, because no direct mischief to health has been traced to them. But how often do we trace disease directly to nuisances with which we deal ? We are satisfied that certain things, to wit, defective drains, and privies without a water supply, are injurious to health, and we act accordingly. In like manner we may fairly conclude that many private slaughter houses must be objectionable upon sanitary grounds, and all may become so without that incessant supervision which official management can alone secure ; and as the advantages of the private slaughter houses may, as I think, be obtained without the evils, actual or possible, I confess to a hope that the modern system will be adopted. It may be mentioned that complaints are not unfrequently made by persons living in the vicinity of slaughter houses, of disturbed rest from the lowing of cattle and the bleating of sheep. These noises are due I believe in some cases to the discomfort arising from the totally inadequate space provided for the reception of the animals, which is often a portion of the slaughter house itself, from which they can see, if not able to comprehend, what is going on. It is almost unnecessary to say that properly constructed abattoirs would be free from this objection, aud that the comfort of the helpless creatures would be considered, and the annoyance of which parishioners complain would cease, or at least be felt in fewer localities. It may be also mentioned as an answer to the assertion that the abolition of private slaughter houses would enhance the price of meat, that not only do half the butchers buy all their meat, but that many who have licences rarely kill, and that the most extensive slaughterers probably buy at least half the meat they sell. These different arrangements do not appear to influence the price of meat in any way. The subjoined extracts, from a letter received by Mr. Liddle, the Medical Officer of Health for the Whitechapel district, from Dr. Littlejohn, of Edinburgh, may serve to answer some of the objections raised against the system of abattoirs:- "No private slaughter houses are now permitted in Edinburgh, but there is one public abattoir, containing 43 booths and one piggery. The abattoir is considered very advantageous to the trade, and also to the general public, animals are slaughtered in it at a cheaper rate than in private slaughter houses, not to speak of the greater cleanliness of the process, the meat is decidedly cheaper in consequence of the unusual facilities afforded in the abattoir. The public, but especially the poor, are benefited not only in the cheapening of the food, but also in the form of sound wholesome food. Without a public abattoir in which all animals used for food must be brought for inspection, and to be slaughtered, there cannot be a satisfactory inspection of butcher's meat. If private slaughter houses are allowed, the opportunities for deception are so great that no amount of inspection can prevent the sale of meat from unsound animals. In three years' time the rent of the Edinburgh abattoir will have discharged the cost 28 of its erection, meanwhile the rents of the booths have been reduced to 8Z, several butchers may combine to rent a booth, and the charge for each bullock is now l½d., for each sheep ¼d., and the entrails of the various animals, with the offal, feet, &c., are cleaned by a staff of women free of expense." Such evidence appears to me irresistible, and I am unable to understand why a system which has worked so well elsewhere, may not be successfully applied in the Metropolis. LICENSED COW SHEDS. The licensed Cow Sheds are 36 in number, viz., 18 in the North, and 18 in the South Sanitary District. A list of them is given in the appendix (Table H.) They have been carefully and systematically inspected. The conditions imposed upon the licensees are as follows:—Proper lighting and ventilation; proper paving and drainage of the Cow-house and adjoining yard; good water supply ; properly constructed dung pit; good repair, cleanliness, and efficient covering of the grain bins, and other food receptacles. The cowhouse is to be cleansed, and the solid manure to be swept up twice a day, and removed from the premises at least three times a week before 8 a.m. The premises are to be lime-whited at least twice a year: and the yard is to be cleansed at least once a day. Upon the whole these conditions are fairly complied with, though as it will be readily understood there is a wide range in the suitability of the premises licensed for the keeping of cows. BAKEHOUSES. The Act for the regulation of bakehouses (which are visited at least four times a year), provides for the painting, whitewashing, cleansing, and ventilation of the bakehouse and its freedom from effluvia arising from any drain, privy, or other nuisance. Regulations are also prescribed with reference to sleeping accomodation on the same floor as the bakehouse, and the age of the employes: all of which are duly enforced. SANITARY WANTS. Among the principal sanitary "wants" of the parish, I regret to have again to include a disinfecting chamber and a mortuary. The process of disinfection is still carried on by a private firm under special arrangement, and however carefully the work may be done the arrangement cannot be considered satisfactory, nor should it be regarded as other than temporary. There appears to be a general concurrence of opinion on the necessity of obtaining a parish disinfecting place as early as possible ; the difficulty which still blocks the way is the question of the site, a difficulty which is experienced in other parishes besides Kensington. Perhaps there is not the same unanimity with regard to the mortuary, but from time to time cases arise which demonstrate its absolute necessity upon sanitary grounds as well as upon grounds of decency and humanity. I have good reason for believing that the cases referred to are many times more numerous than those which come to my knowledge, and I am persuaded that a well placed and properly 29 structed mortuary-chamber would supply a great public want, and be regarded as a boon by very many poor and other parishioners. The question of providing baths and washhouses has been seriously taken up, most carefully considered, and ably reported upon by a committee specially appointed for that purpose. It is not too much to say that a majority of the Vestry cordially supported the principle of these institutions, admirable in a sanitary sense, and desirable in every way ; and although the proposition to establish them did not obtain the necessary two thirds majority, the ground has been well prepared and their introduction may, I hope, be considered only a question of time. Meanwhile the neighbouring parish of Paddington has resolved to erect baths and washhouses in the Queen's-road, Bayswater, a position so near us, and so convenient of access from a large part of Kensington by the Metropolitan railway, that it may be reasonably expected the wants of the parish will be supplied to some extent, while the experience of the Paddington Commissioners will ultimately serve as a guide when ever Kensington shall take this great question in hand. WATER SUPPLY. Dr. Frankland, F.R.S., who analyses the Metropolitan waters monthly for the Registrar-General, reports that the water supplied by the West Middlesex Company was clear upon all occasions when examined during the year, and free from "living organisms." The Grand Junction Company's water was clear and transparent upon eight occasions, turbid twice, and slightly turbid three times. It also contained "living organisms" upon two occasions. The water supplied by the Chelsea Company was clear and transparent upon eight occasions, turbid once, slightly turbid four times, and contained "living organisms" at three examinations. The living organisms in the Grand Junction and Chelsea waters were detected in the turbid samples. The turbidity itself is due to the inadequacy of the subsidence reservoirs and filter-beds, which are unable to deal efficiently with Thames water when the river is in flood. The temperature of the river water varied during the year so much as 29°4F, viz., between 41°3 and 70°7F. It was "mawkish and vapid in summer, and in danger of freezing in winter." The temperature of the deep-well water of the Kent Company, drawn from the chalk, ranged only through 5°4F. It was "cool and refreshing in summer, and far removed from the freezing point in winter." "Taking the proportion of organic elements in a given volume of the Kent Company's water as unity, the following are the maximum, minimum, and average quantities present in other Metropolitan waters during the past year:- Maximum. Minimum. Average. Kent 1. 1. 1. West Middlesex 11.1 2.5 5.2 Grand Junction 16.1 2.9 6.4 Chelsea 17.0 3.1 6.2 30 "The Thames, in the winter months especially, becomes much polluted with sewage and the washings of manured fields before it reaches the intakes of the respective water Companies." " The mean hardness of Thames water was 20.7 degrees or parts in 100,000 It can be reduced to nearly the necessary degree of softness by lime," a plan which would much improve it, and be attended with great benefits economically. With respect to quantity there does not appear to be any cause of complaint against the water supply. It is estimated that the West Middlesex, Chelsea, and Grand Junction Companies distributed respectively 178, 252, and 279 gallons for domestic purposes daily to each house in their several districts, the lowest quantity being equivalent to an average of upwards of 22 gallons per head of the population. Kensington, in common with the rest of London, continues to be supplied with water upon the intermittent system, although it is nearly two years since the Metropolis Water Act, 1871, was passed, with the specific object of affording a constant supply. In my last Annual Report I referred to the fact that the Board of Trade had issued a Commission to consider the regulations made by the Water Companies, "for the constant supply of water for domestic purposes," and the amended regulations proposed by the Metropolitan Board of Works. In the month of November, 1872, the regulations in the form approved by the Board of Trade were issued, and it is not too much to say that to the needless severity of their provisions it is due that they have remained, for all but new buildings, nearly a dead letter, although they have the force of law, and are, theoretically, in general operation at the present time. It rests with the Metropolitan Board, in the first instance, to require the constant supply. The views of the Board with reference to the regulations are set forth in a report of the Works and General Purposes Committee, in the month of February, 1873. The Committee having regard to the imperfect state of legislation by which no real and effective constant supply is secured, the exclusion of the Board from any jurisdiction which could be exercised in favor of the consumers, and further to the great cost which the regulations would impose upon the owners of property, and the almost unlimited authority placed in the hands of the Water Companies, recommended that the Board should not take any steps at present with a view to giving notice for a constant supply of water in any of the districts of London. The Metropolis Water Act, 187 i, it was stated, does not provide absolutely for a constant supply, but there are three modes by which it may be obtained. 1. The Company may give it. 2. The Metropolitan Board may apply to a Company for it; or 3. The Local Government Board, failing the above, may require it. No Company, however, is compelled to give a constant supply until the regulations, under which it is to be given, are made by them and confirmed by the Board of 31 Trade. These regulations were described as most, unsatisfactory and indefinite in their meaning, and it was contended that the Act of 1871 had been passed altogether in the interests of the Water Companies, and was not calculated to be productive of any advantage to the water consumers. In the course of the debate which followed the reading of this report, it was stated that if the regulations were complied with, it would be at a cost to the ratepayers of this Metropolis of about one-third of the present rates, or about four millions sterling—not for new fittings but for additions to those which the Water Companies might deem to be efficient. I reported, in some detail, upon the regulations in November, and pointed out that the Commissioners had decided that all existing fittings that are sound and efficient shall be deemed to be " prescribed fittings " under the Act (Reg. 33). The regulations inter alia, refer to pipes, cisterns, and taps—the size, weight, position, and material of the pipes and other apparatus of supply being specified, regard being had throughout to the prevention of waste and fouling. With few exceptions they are non-retrospective, Among the retrospective regulations is No. 13 to secure the proper construction, maintenance, and placing of cisterns and inlet or ball taps; No. 14 which provides for the abolition of waste pipes, a fertile and unsuspected source of dangerous fouling, as they are often in untrapped connection with drains, and allow the passage of sewer gases which become absorbed into the water. In future underground Cisterns are not to be employed without permission of the Company (Reg. 16), and no wooden receptacle without a proper metallic lining is henceforth to be brought into use for the storage of water (Reg 17). No boiler, urinal, or water closet may be served direct from any pipe, but only through the intervention of a cistern or service box (Reg. 20). A group of houses e. g. in a court may be supplied by a stand pipe, the draw tap to be of the waste preventer kind (Reg. 19), and waste preventing apparatus is to be applied in future to water closets and urinal cisterns, so as to limit the discharge of water at each flush (Reg. 21). No alterations can be made in any fittings without two days previous notice in writing to the Company (Reg. 27), and every Act in contravention of the regulations renders the offender liable to a penalty not exceeding five pounds (Reg. 31)- It may be here observed that no sample fittings have been deposited, and therefore it is but too probable that differences of opinion will arise between consumers and the companies as to what are " prescribed fittings," and lead to litigation. These regulations were expressly framed with a view to the " constant supply," but the Commissioners stated that they intended them to apply to the intermittent system also to pave the way for the constant supply by requiring that when new houses are erected, or the fittings in old houses removed, the' new fittings shall be adapted for the constant supply, although the 32 Company may not at the time be under an obligation to afford it. I think it will be apparent, even from this cursory outline of a few of the regulations, that we are likely to wait long for a constant supply, unless the Companies think fit to force it upon as, which it would be to their advantage to do if reduction in the amount of water supplied, viz., by the prevention of waste, is of any importance to their interests. New buildings, and especially in new neighbourhoods, will get a constant supply first, and the experience thus acquired of the benefits of the system may in course of time lead to its more general adoption; but old and poor localities will probably have to wait a long time. Indeed, if the terms of the Act are strictly enforced by the Companies, it will be found almost impossible to provide a district with the " prescribed fittings " within the specified time. Without entering into further details, and having regard to tho powers for obstruction given to the Companies, I may repeat here what I have before stated, that " our prospect of an early and general introduction of the constant supply system depends largely upon the disposition of the Companies to comply loyally with tho spirit of the Act." Let us see then, in conclusion, what has been done by them since the Act has come into operation. The only Company that has, to my knowledge, taken any serious step with a view to providing the constant service, is the East London, which gave notice to the Metropolitan Board of Works, some time in 1872, of their intention to bring under constant supply on and from the 25th day of March, 1873, a large block of premises, comprising upwards of 6,000 houses, at the East End, at the same time announcing their intention, with as little delay as possible, to deal in the same manner with other parts of their district. I cannot learn that the scheme has been carried out. Major Bolton, the Water Examiner under the Act, in his report for April, 1873, states that the Kent Company have given notice of their intention to give a constant supply in June to about 1,000 houses at Rotherhithe and Deptford. The New River Company are stated to have made provision for effecting a constant supply by constructing a new service reservoir at Highgate. The Southwark and Vauxhall Company are constructing reservoirs at Nunhead for high-pressure constant service. The West Middlesex Company have given constant supply to about 100 houses on the application of the owners, who have provided fittings according to the regulations, and are said to be fully prepared to extend the constant supply when called upon. This Company is constructing additional engine power at Hammersmith and at Hampton, to afford an effective constant supply. The Grand Junction Company are making a high-service covered reservoir at Kilburn for the same purpose. The New River and the Lambeth Companies are giving a constant supply to many houses in courts and alleys, by means of stand pipes. This appears to be all that has 33 been done in the matter hitherto, and it can be considered satisfactory in the future tense only, seeing that so very few of the half-million houses, supplied by the Water Companies, have been favoured with a constant high-pressure service. GAS. The average illuminating power of the Cannel Gas supplied by the Western Gas Light Company during the year, was 21.64 candles, a slight reduction on the averages of 1871, viz. 21.96 candles, but still 1.64 above the Parliamentary standard of 20 candles. The subjoined return, for which I am indebted to the Company, and which very nearly agrees with the results of my own examinations, is compiled from the monthly statements of Mr. Valentin the Company's examiner:— January 21.59 July 21.21 February 22.22 August no return March 22.06 September 21.18 April 21.77 October 21.54 May 21.31 November 22.23 June 21.68 December 21.33 Average 21.64 With respect to the impurities :—Of ammonia there were traces, but none of sulphuretted hydrogen; of sulphur in any other form the averago of the returns supplied was 15.6 grains per 100 feet; or more than four grains below the permitted amount. The supply of Gas passed out of the hands of the Western Company at the end of the year upon the completion of a scheme of amalgamation with the Gas Light and Coke Company, commonly called the Chartered Gas Company. This amalgamation, duly announced and finally approved by the Queen in Council, was effected under the provisions of the City of London Gas Act, 1868, and the Gas Light and Coke Company's Act, 1871. The rate charged by the Western Company for Cannel Gas of 20 candle illuminating power was five shillings per 1,000 cubic feet. The Chartered Gas Company supply Cannel Gas of 23 candle power, subject to the conditions, as to price, of the Gas Act, I860, and the amending Act of 1868, by the terms of which they were enabled to charge a rate proportional to the price of three shillings and nine pence per 1,000 cubic feet for 16 candle Gas, or in other words five shillings and five pence per 1,000 cubic feet. It is obvious that this " increase in price " is apparent rather than real, for the Western Company's price for 23 candle Gas, considered pro rata, would have been five shillings and nine pence per 1,000 feet; while the Chartered Company's price for 20 candle Gas, the article supplied by the Western Company, could not have exceeded four shillings and nine pence per 1,000. The change of Company, therefore, would in all probability have given satisfaction in the long run, when the cause of the apparent increase of price came to be understood, and when the effect of the supply of a superior article had been realized in a reduction of consumption, and in the amount of Gas bills. But unfortunately the 34 Company thought it necessary, at the end of January 1873, to apply to the Board of Trade for a revision of the illuminating power and price of the Gas, under sect. 57 of the City of London Gas Act, 1868. This led to the appointment of a commission and a lengthened enquiry, the result of which was an increase of l0d. per 1,000 cubic feet, thus raising the price of Gas to six shillings and three pence. In consequence, however, of the great outcry raised at this increase, the Company gave notice of their intention to reduce the illuminating power of the Gas to 20 candles, on the 1st July 1873, and the charge to 5s. 5d., which is 5d. more than the Western Company charged for Gas of the same illuminating power, and about 4d. more than the Chartered Company could have charged for the same prior to the award of the Board of Trade in April. At this price, therefore, the Gas will remain till the end of the year, when it will revert to the former rate, it being open, however, to the Company and to the Metropolitan Board of Works, in the month of January 1874, to make another application to the Board of Trade for a revision of illuminating power and price. The power, so long as cannel Gas is supplied, cannot be reduced below 20 candles, nor can the price be raised higher than 7s. 6d. per 1,000 cubic feet, under the terms of the Gas Act, 1860, The amalgamation of the Companies brings the Gas supply in this parish under the provisions of the Gas Act of 1868, and consequently the duty of examining the Gas devolves upon the Metropolitan Board of Works, the "local authority" for the purpose. The Gas, therefore, will be tested daily, as to its illuminating power and purity, at the Station provided by tne Company, which is situated at No. 123, Ladbroke Grove, at about the distance from the Kensal Works prescribed by the Act, viz., 1,000 yards. By direction of your Vestry I attended numerous meetings of delegates from many of the Vestries of the Metropolis, held in the Vestry Hall of St. Martin in the Fields, the object being to obtain united action by the Local Boards in opposition to the extension of the already too large powers of Gas Companies. The reports of the delegates have been printed and circulated. It was resolved to oppose Bills introduced by the Imperial and the Chartered Companies. The Bill of the former Company was withdrawn, and that of the Chartered Company very materially modified, as a result of the opposition of the Corporation, the Metropolitan Board, and such of the Vestries (Kensington not included) as took steps to obtain a locus standi. I cannot conclude my report without expressing my entire satisfaction with the manner in which the Sanitary Inspectors have performed their numerous duties. It is not alone that they have been diligent, but they have at all times shown an interest in their work which could only arise from a proper sense of its importance. I have the honor to be, Gentlemen, Your very obedient Servant, T. ORME DUDFIELD, M.D., Vestry Hall, Kensington, Medical Officer of Health. July, 1873. TABLE A. Deaths Registered from all causes in Kensington, in the Year 1872, (Deaths of Non-Residents in the Brompton Consumption Hospital excluded.) FIRST QUARTER ENDING MARCH 30. Kensington Town. Brompton. CAUSES OF DEATH. All Ages. AGES. Kensington Town. Brompton. CAUSES OF DEATH. All Ages. AGES. Under 1. 1 & under 5. 5 to 20. 20 to 40. 40 to 60. 60 to 80. 80 & upwards. Under 1. 1 & under 5. 5 to 20. 20 to 40. 40 to 60. 60 to 80. 80 & upwards. (CLASSES.) Order 4—Digestive Organs. 101 22 I. ZYMOTIC DISEASES 123 38 35 20 19 9 2 ... Gastritis ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 86 27 II. CONSTITUTIONAL 113 13 26 11 28 21 12 2 Enteritis ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 230 61 III. LOCAL 291 57 35 3 22 53 103 18 Peritonitis ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 48 13 IV. DEVELOPMENTAL 61 44 3 ... 2 ... 5 7 Ascites ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 12 1 V. VIOLENT DEATHS 13 3 4 1 3 2 ... ... Ulceration of Intestines and Stomach 3 ... ... ... ... 1 2 ... 9 5 (Not specified or ill-defined.) 14 1 1 4 5 1 2 ... 3 ... 486 129 615 156 104 39 79 86 124 27 Hernia ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Ileus ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... I. ZYMOTIC DISEASES. Order 1.—Miasmatic. 1 ... Intussusception 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Stricture of Intestines ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Fistula ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 28 4 Small-pox 32 6 1 11 9 5 ... ... 1 ... Stomach Disease. &c. 1 ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... 7 Measles 16 1 14 1 ... ... ... ... Pancreas Disease, &c. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 5 3 Scarlet Fever (Scarlatina) 8 ... 5 2 ... 1 ... ... 3 ... Hepatitis 3 ... ... ... 2 ... ... 1 2 1 Diphtheria 3 ... 2 ... ... ... 1 ... 2 ... Jaundice 2 2 ... ... ... ... ... ... Quinsy ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 4 2 Liver Disease,&c. 6 ... ... ... 1 1 4 ... 4 ... Croup 4 ... 3 1 ... ... ... ... Spleen Disease, &c. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 27 1 Whooping-cough 28 18 10 ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... Typhus 1 ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... Order 5—Urinary organs. 6 1 Enteric or Typhoid Fever 7 1 ... 3 3 ... ... ... 1 Nephritis 1 ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... 1 ... Simple continued Fever 1 ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... Ischuria ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 4 1 Erysipelas 5 3 ... ... ... 1 1 ... 8 2 Bright's Disease (Nepliria) 10 ... ... ... 2 5 3 ... 3 2 Puerperal Fever (Metria) 5 ... ... ... 5 ... ... ... 2 Diabetes 2 ... ... ... 1 ... 1 ... Carbuncle ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... Calculus (Stone) 1 ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... Influenza ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... Cystitis 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 1 ... Dysentery 1 ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... 3 2 Kidney Disease, &c. 5 ... ... ... 1 1 3 ... 1 1 Diarrhœa 2 2 ... ... ... ... ... ... Order 6- Organs of Generation Simple Cholera ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Ague ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2 ... Ovarian Dropsy 2 ... ... ... ... 1 1 ... 1 1 Remittent Fever 2 2 ... ... ... ... ... ... 4 ... Uterus Disease, &c. 4 ... ... ... 1 3 ... ... 3 ... Rheumatism 3 1 ... 1 1 ... ... ... Order 7—Organs of Locomotion. Order 2—Enthetic. Synovitis (Arthritis) ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 4 ... Syphilis 4 4 ... ... ... ... ... ... Joint Diseases, &c. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Stricture of Urethra ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Order 8—Integumentary System Hydrophobia ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Glanders ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Phlegmon ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Ulcer ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Order 3—Dietic. Privation ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Skin Disease, &c.. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Want of Breast-milk ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... IV. DEVELOPMENTAL DISEASES. 1 Purpura and Scurvy 1 ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... Alcoholism a Del. Tremens ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Order 1—Diseases of Children. b Intemperance ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 5 3 Premature Birth 8 8 ... ... ... ... ... ... Order 4—Parisitic. 1 ... Cyanosis ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Spina Bifida 1 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... Thrush ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... Other Malformations 1 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... Worms, &c. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 5 ... Teething 8 6 2 ... ... ... ... ... II. CONSTITUTIONAL DISEASES. Order 2—Diseases of Adults. Paramenia ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Order 1—Diathetic. 1 ... Childbirth (see Puerperal Fever) 1 ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... 1 1 Gout 2 ... ... ... ... ... 2 ... 5 Dropsy 5 ... 1 1 ... ... 2 1 11 1 Cancer 12 ... 1 ... ... ... 6 ... ... Order 3 — Diseases of Old People. Cancrum Oris (Noma) ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2 Mortification 2 ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 10 2 Old Age 12 ... ... ... ... ... 5 7 Order 2— Tubercular. Order 4—Diseases of Nutrition. 3 Scrofula 3 1 1 ... 1 ... ... ... 25 5 Atrophy and Debility 30 28 1 ... 1 ... ... ... 11 2 Tabes Mesenterica 13 7 6 ... ... ... ... ... 41 15 Phthisis 56 2 2 9 25 17 1 ... V. VIOLENT DEATHS, &c. 42 8 Hydrocephalus and Tubercular Meningitis 20 3 15 1 1 ... ... ... ... Order 1—Accident or Negligence. III. LOCAL DISEASES. 3 ... Fractures and Contusions 3 1 1 ... ... 1 ... ... 1 ... Wounds 1 ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... Order 1—N&tous System. 4 ... Burns and Scalds ... 4 ... 3 ... ... ... ... ... 2 1 Cephalitis 3 1 ... ... 1 1 ... ... Poison ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 14 6 Apoplexy 20 ... ... ... 1 7 11 ... Drowning ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 12 2 Paralysis 14 ... 2 ... 1 1 9 1 1 1 Suffocation 2 2 ... ... ... ... ... ... Insanity ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Otherwise ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Chorea ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 Epilepsy 1 ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... Order 3—Homicide. 14 6 Convulsions 20 16 4 ... ... ... ... ... Murder and Manslaughter ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 9 2 Brain Disease, &c. 11 2 ... ... 2 4 2 1 Order 2—Organs of Circulation. 1 ... Order 4—Suicide. Wounds: Gunshot, Cut, Stab 1 ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... Poison ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 Pericarditis 1 ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... Drowning ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 1 Aneurism 2 ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... 1 ... Hanging 1 ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... 26 7 Heart Disease, &c. 33 1 1 ... 4 10 14 ... 1 ... Otherwise 1 ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... Order S—Respiratory organs. Order 5—Execution. 7 1 Laryngitis 8 3 4 ... ... 1 ... Hanging ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 87 18 Bronchitis 105 25 15 ... 3 10 42 10 Violent Deaths (not classed) ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... Pleurisy 1 ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... Sudden deaths (cause unascertained) ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 14 5 Pneumonia 19 2 9 ... 1 2 4 1 2 ... Asthma 2 ... ... ... ... 1 1 ... 14 ... Causes not specified or ill defined 14 1 1 4 5 1 2 ... 7 2 Lung Disease, &c. 9 5 ... ... ... 2 ... 2 TABLE A (continued). SECOND QUARTER ENDING 29th JUNE. Kensington Town. Brompton, CAUSES OF DEATH. All Ages. AGES. Kensington Town. Brompton. CAUSES OF DEATH. All Ages. AGES. Under 1. 1& under 5. 5 to 20. 20 to 40. 40 to 60. 60 to 80. 80 & upwards. Under 1. 1 & under 5. 5 to 20. 20 to 40. 40 to 60. 60 to 80. 80 & upwards. (Classes.) Order 4.—Digestive organs. 83 16 i. ZYMOTIC DISEASES 99 21 41 15 11 7 4 ... Gastritis ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 102 22 II. CONSTITUTIONAL 124 32 11 8 33 22 14 4 1 Enteritis 1 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... 178 25 III. LOCAL 203 32 27 12 17 32 71 12 1 ... Peritonitis 1 ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... 40 10 IV. DEVELOPMENTAL 50 33 4 ... ... ... 2 11 Ascites ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 10 2 V. VIOLENT DEATHS 12 1 2 1 ... 4 2 2 Ulceration of Pntestines and ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2 (Not specified or ill-defined.) 2 ... ... ... ... 1 1 ... Stomach ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Hernia ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 415 75 490 119 85 36 61 66 94 29 Ileus ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Intussusception ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... I. ZYMOTIC DISEASES. Stricture of Intestines ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Order 1.—MiasmaUc. Fistula ... ... ... ••• ... ... ... ... 13 Small-pox 13 ... 2 6 2 3 ... ... Stomach Disease, &c. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 12 6 Measles 18 4 13 1 ... ... ... ... Pancreas Disease, &c. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 7 2 Scarlet Fever (Scarlatina) 9 2 3 2 2 ... ... ... 2 ... Hepatitis 2 ... ... 1 ... ... 1 ... 5 Diphtheria 5 ... 5 ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... Jaundice 1 ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... Quinsy ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 7 2 Liver Disease, &c. 9 ... 1 ... ... 4 2 ... 3 1 Croup 4 1 2 1 ... ... ... ... Spleen Disease, &c. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 17 2 Whooping-cough 19 9 10 ... ... ... ... ... 1 Typhus 1 ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... Order 5.—Urinary organs. 3 Enteric or Typhoid Fever 3 ... ... 1 2 ... ... ... 1 ... Nephritis 1 ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... 3 Simple continued Fever 3 ... 2 1 ... ... ... ... 1 ... Ischuria 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 3 Erysipelas 3 ... ... ... ... ... 2 ... 3 1 Bright's Disease (Nephria) 4 ... 1 ... 1 ... 2 ... 3 Puerperal Fever (Metria) 3 ... ... ... 3 ... ... ... 2 ... Diabetes 2 ... ... ... ... 1 1 ... Carbuncle ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Calculus (Stone) ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Influenza ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2 ... Cystitis 2 ... ... ... ... ... 1 1 Dysentery ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 3 ... Kidney Disease, &c. 3 ... ... ... ... ... 3 ... 5 Diarrhoea 5 ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... 1 Simple Cholera 1 ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... Order 6.—Organs of Generation Ague ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Ovarian Dropsy ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2 Remittent Fever 2 ... 1 1 ... ... ... ... ... Uterus Disease ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2 3 Rheumatism 5 ... ... 1 1 3 ... ... Other Zymotic Diseases ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Order 7.—Organs of Locomotion Synovitis (Arthritis) ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Order 2.—Enthetic. Joint Disease, &c. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2 Syphilis 2 ... 1 ... 1 ... ... ... Stricture of Urethra ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Order 8.-Integumentary System. Hydropliobi«. ... ... Glanders ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 4 ... Phlegmon 4 ... ... 1 1 2 ... ... Order 3.—Dietic. Ulcer ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Privation ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Skin Disease, &c. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Want of Breast-milk ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2 1 Purpura and Scurvy 3 ... ... ... ... 1 2 ... IV. DEVELOPMENTAL DISEASES. Order 1.—Diseases of Children. Alcoholism a Del. Tremens ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... b Intemperance ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Order 4.—Parasitic. 11 3 Premature Birth 14 14 ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... Cyanosis 1 ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... Thrush ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Spina Bifida ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Worms, &c. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Other Malformations ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... II. CONSTITUTIONAL DISEASES. Order 1.—Diathetic. 5 ... Teething 5 2 3 ... ... ... ... ... Order 2.—Diseases of Adults. Paramenia ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 1 Gout 2 ... ... ... ... 1 1 ... Childbirth (see Puerperal Fever ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2 Dropsy 2 ... ... ... ... ... 2 ... 17 ... Cancer 17 ... ... ... 1 6 7 3 Order 3. — Diseases of old People. Cancrum Oris (Noma) ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2 ... Mortification 2 ... ... ... ... 1 ... 1 10 3 Old Age 13 ... ... ... ... ... 2 11 Order 2.—Tubercular. Order 4.—Diseases of Nutrition 2 2 Scrofula 4 2 l ... 1 ... ... ... 13 4 Atrophy and Debility 17 17 ... ... ... ... ... ... 9 4 Tabes Mesenterica 13 8 4 1 ... ... ... ... 50 11 Phthisis 61 3 2 7 31 14 4 ... V. VIOLENT DEATHS &c. Order 1.—Accident or Negligence. 21 2 Hydrocephalus and Tubercular Meningitis 28 19 4 ... ... ... ... ... III. LOCAL DISEASES. Order 1.—Nervous System. 3 2 Fractures and Contusions 5 ... ... 1 ... 2 1 1 Wounds ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 3 ... Burns and Scalds 3 ... 2 ... ... ... 1 ... 2 ... Cephalitis 2 ... 1 1 ... ... ... ... 1 ... Poison 1 ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... 10 3 Apoplexy 13 ... ... ... ... 2 10 1 1 ... Drowning 1 ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... 15 1 Paralysis 16 ... ... ... 1 2 11 2 1 ... Suffocation 1 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... Insanity ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Otherwise ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Chorea ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 3 1 Epilepsy 4 ... ... 1 1 2 ... ... Order 3.—Homicidc. 9 1 Convulsions 10 4 5 1 ... ... ... ... Murder and Manslaughter. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 6 1 Brain Disease, &c. 7 ... ... 1 1 2 3 ... Order 4.—Suicide. Order 2.—Organs of Circulation Wounds : Gunshot, Cut, Stab ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... Pericarditis 1 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... Poison ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2 1 Aneurism 3 ... ... ... 2 ... 1 ... Drowning ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 29 3 Heart Disease, &c. 32 ... 1 2 4 11 14 ... 1 ... Hanging 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 Order 3.—Respiratory Organs. Otherwise ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Order 5.—Execution. 4 1 Laryngitis 5 2 1 ... ... ... 2 ... 43 4 Bronchitis 47 13 10 ... 2 2 15 5 Hanging ... ... ... ... ... ... Pleurisy ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Violent Deaths (not classed)... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 24 3 Pneumonia 27 11 7 1 2 3 2 1 Sudden Deaths (cause unascertained) ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Asthma ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 3 2 Lung Disease, &c. 5 ... ... 1 1 1 2 ... 2 ... Causes not specified or ill-defined 2 ... ... ... ... 1 1 ... TABLE A (continued.) THIRD QUARTER ENDING 28TH SEPTEMBER. Kensington Town. Brompton. CAUSES OF DEATH. All Ages. AGES. Kensington Town. Brompton. CAUSES OF DEATH. All Ages. ages. Under 1. 1 & under 5. 5 to 20. 20 to 40. 40 to 60. 60 to 80. 80 & upwards. Under 1. 1 & under 5. 5 to 20. 20 to 40. 40 to 60. 60 to 80. 80 upward (classes.) Order 4.—Digestive Organs. 137 37 I. ZYMOTIC DISEASES 174 101 33 8 9 15 7 1 92 20 11. CONSTITUTIONAL 112 22 14 13 30 28 4 1 2 ... Gastritis 2 ... ... ... 1 1 ... ... 137 30 III. LOCAL 167 30 16 8 19 37 49 8 3 ... Enteritis 3 ... ... 1 ... 2 ... ... 72 9 IV. DEVELOPMENTAL 81 55 1 2 4 ... 10 9 3 ... Peritonitis 3 ... ... 1 ... 1 1 ... 8 3 V. VIOLENT DEATHS 11 3 3 ... 1 1 1 2 Ascites ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 4 (Not specified or ill-defined.) 4 ... ... 1 ... 1 2 ... 1 ... Ulceration of Intestines 1 ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... Hernia ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 450 99 549 211 67 32 63 82 73 21 1 Ileus 1 ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... 1 ... Intussusception 1 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... I. ZYMOTIC DISEASES. Order 1.—Miasmatic. Stricture of Intestines ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Fistula ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 12 2 Small-pox 14 3 ... 4 4 3 ... ... 2 1 Stomach Disease, &c. 3 ... ... ... ... ... 3 ... 6 1 Measles 7 2 5 ... ... ... ... ... Pancreas Disease, &c. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 3 ... Scarlet Fever (Scarlatina) 3 ... 3 ... ... ... ... ... Hepatitis ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2 ... Diphtheria 2 ... 1 1 ... ... ... ... 1 ... Jaundice 1 ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... Quinsy ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 11 1 Liver Disease, &c. 12 ... ... ... 2 8 2 ... 5 ... Croup 5 1 4 ... ... ... ... ... Spleen Disease, &c. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 13 3 Whooping-cough 16 6 10 ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... Typhus 1 ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... Order 5.—Urinary Organs. 6 2 Enteric or Typhoid Fever 8 ... ... 2 1 5 ... ... 2 Nephritis 2 ... ... 1 1 ... ... ... 2 ... Simple continued Fever 2 ... ... ... ... ... 2 ... 1 ... Ischuria 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 1 ... Erysipelas 1 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... 3 2 Bright's Disease (Nephria) 5 ... ... ... 1 2 2 ... 1 Puerperal Fever (Metria) 1 ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... 2 ... Diabetes 2 ... ... ... 1 ... 1 ... Carbuncle ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Calculus (Stone) ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Influenza ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Cystitis ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... Dysentery 1 ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... 2 ... Kidney Disease. &c. 2 ... 1 ... ... ... 1 ... 72 25 Diarrhœa 97 82 8 1 ... 2 3 1 Order 6.—Organs of Generation. 4 1 Simple Cholera 5 1 2 ... 1 1 ... ... Ague ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Ovarian Dropsy ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Remittent Fever ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2 ... Uterus Disease, &c. 2 ... ... ... 1 1 ... ... 1 1 Rheumatism 2 ... ... ... ... 1 1 ... 3 ... Other Zymotic Diseases 3 1 ... ... ... 1 1 ... Order7.—Organs of Locomotion. Order 2.—Enthetic. Synovitis (Arthritis) ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Joint Disease, &c. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2 ...... Syphilis 2 2 ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... Stricture of Urethra 1 ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... Order 8.—Integumentary System. Hydrophobia ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Glanders ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2 ... Phlegmon 2 ... 1 ... ... ... 1 ... Ulcer ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... Order 3.- Dictic. Slin Disesase, &c ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Privation ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... IV. DEVELOPMENTAL DISEASES. Order 1.—Diseases of Children. I Want of Breast-milk ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Purpura and Scurvy ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Alcoholism a Del. Tremens ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... b Intemperance ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 4 ... Premature Birth 4 4 ... ... ... ... ... ... Order 4.—Parasitic. 2 ... Cyanosis 2 2 ... ... ... ... ... ... Spina Bifida ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2 1 Thrush 3 2 ... ... ... 1 ... ... Other Malformations ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Worms, &c. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 3 1 Teething 1 3 1 ... ... ... ... ... II. CONSTITUTIONAL DISEASES. Order 1.—Diathetic. Order 2.—Diseases of Adults. Paramenia ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 3 ... Childbirth (see Puerperal Fever 3 ... ... 1 2 ... ... ... Gout ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Order 3.—Diseases of old People. 1 ... Dropsy 1 ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... 18 1 Cancer 19 ... ... ... 3 12 4 ... Cancrum Oris (Noma) ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 15 4 Old Age 19 ... ... ... ... ... 10 9 1 ... Mortification 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 Order 4.—Diseases of Nutrition Order 2.—Tubercular. 45 4 Atrophy and Debility 49 46 ... 1 2 ... ... ... Scrofula ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 14 3 Tabes Mesenterica 17 14 3 ... ... ... ... ... V. VIOLENT DEATHS, &c. Order 1—Accident or Neglig- gence 41 13 Phthisis 54 ... 2 10 27 15 ... ... 17 3 Hydrocephalus and Tubercular Meningitis 20 8 9 3 ... ... ... ... 1 3 Fractures and Contusions 4 ... 1 ... 1 ... ... 2 Wounds ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... III. LOCAL DISEASES. Order 1.—Nervous System. 1 ... Burns and Scalds 1 ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... Poison ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 6 ... Cephalitis 6 ... 4 ... 2 ... ... ... Drowning ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 13 ... Apoplexy 13 ... ... ... ... 5 8 ... 3 ... Suffocation 3 1 ... ... ... 1 1 ... 6 1 Paralysis 7 ... ... ... ... 2 4 1 Otherwise ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Insanity ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Order 3.—Homicide. Chorea ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2 1 Epilepsy 3 ... ... ... 1 1 ... 1 1 ... Murder and Manslaughter 1 ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... 13 3 Convulsions 16 14 2 ... ... ... ... ... Order 4.—Suicide. 4 ... Brain Disease, &c. 4 ... ... ... 1 2 1 ... Wounds : Gunshot, Cut, btab ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Order 2.—0rqans of Circulation Poison ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Pericarditis ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Drowning ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... Aneurism 1 ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... Hanging ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 15 9 Heart Disease, &c. 24 ... ... ... 3 7 13 1 2 ... Otherwise 2 2 ... ... ... ... ... ... Order 3.—Resviratorii Organs. Order 5.—Execution. 3 2 Laryngitis 5 3 1 1 ... ... ... ... Hanging 15 6 Bronchitis 21 7 1 1 1 1 6 1 Violent Deaths (not classed)... ... ... Pleurisy ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Sudden Deaths (cause unascertained) ... 16 1 Pneumonia 17 4 5 3 1 2 2 ... Asthma ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 4 ... Causes not specified or ill-de- fined 4 ... ... 1 ... 1 2 ... 6 ... Lung Disease, &c. 6 1 1 ... 1 1 2 ... TABLE A (continued). FOURTH QUARTER ENDING 28TH DECEMBER, And total Deaths in the Parish during the entire year 1872. Kensington Town. Brompton. CAUSES OF DEATH. All Ages. AGES. Whole year and at all Ages. Kensington Town. Brompton. CAUSES OF DEATH. All Ages. AGES. Whole Year and at all ages. Under 1. 1 & un. 5 5 to 20. 20 to 40. |40 to 60. 60 to 80. 80 & up Registration District. Total Deaths in entire Parish ! Under 1. | 1 & un. 5 | 5 to 20. | 20 to 40. 40 to 60. | 60 to 80. 80 & up. Registration District. Total Deaths in entire Parish Kensngtn. Town. Brmpton. Kensngtn Town. Brmpton. (classes.) Order 4.—Digestive Organs 61 15 I. ZYMOTIC DISEASES 76 17 23 13 14 5 4 382 90 472 2 ... Gastritis 2 ... ... ... ... 1 1 ... 4 ... 4 86 19 II. CONSTITUTIONAL 105 12 9 8 26 30 20 ... 366 8S 454 4 ... Enteritis 4 3 1 ... ... ... ... ... 7 1 8 197 57 III LOCAL 254 77 33 10 23 36 66 9 742 173 915 2 1 Peritonitis 3 ... 1 ... 2 6 1 7 50 10 IV. DEVELOPMENTAL 60 37 1 ... 1 ... 5 6 210 42 252 Ascites ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 8 1 V. VIOLENT DEATHS 9 3 ... 2 ... 2 1 1 38 7 45 Ulceration of Intestines ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 4 ... 4 10 3 (Not specified or ill-defined.) 13 7 ... 3 1 2 ... 25 8 33 Hernia ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Ileus ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 1 412 105 517 153 66 33 67 74 98 26 1763 408 2171 1 ... Intussusception 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 3 ... 3 Stricture of Intestines ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... I. ZYMOTIC DISEASES. Fistula ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Order 1.—Miasmatic. 4 ... Stomach Disease, &c. 4 ... ... ... 2 1 1 7 1 8 9 ... Small-pox 9 1 3 1 4 ... ... ... 62 6 68 Pancreas Disease,&c. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2 1 Measles 3 1 2 ... ... ... ... ... 29 15 44 Hepatitis ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 5 ... 5 7 2 Scarlet Fever (Scarlatina) 9 1 4 3 1 ... ... ... 22 7 29 Jaundice ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 4 ... 4 3 2 Diphtheria 5 ... 2 2 1 ... ... ... 12 3 15 10 4 Li/ver Disease,&c. 14 ... ... 2 1 6 4 1 32 9 41 Quinsy ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Spleen Disease, &c— ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 5 ... Croup 5 1 3 ... ... ... 1 ... 17 1 18 13 2 Whooping-cough 15 6 6 2 ... 1 ... ... 70 8 78 Order 5.—Urinary Organs. Typhus ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 3 ... 3 1 ... Nephritis 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2 3 5 3 2 Enteric or Typhoid Fever 5 ... ... 3 1 1 ... ... 18 5 23 Ischuria ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2 ... 2 3 ... Simple continued Fever 3 ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... 9 9 6 ... Bright's Disease (Nephria) 6 ... ... ... ... 2 4 ... 20 5 25 Erysipelas ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 8 1 9 Diabetes ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 4 2 6 3 1 Puerperal Fever (Metria) 4 ... ... ... 4 ... ... ... 9 4 13 Calculus (Stone) ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... 1 Carbuncle ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Cystitis ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 3 3 Influenza ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... Kidney Disease, &c 1 ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... 9 2 11 1 ... Dysentery 1 ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... 3 ... 3 5 1 Diarrhoea 6 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 83 27 110 Order 6.—Organs of Generation 1 ... Simple Cholera 1 ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... 5 2 7 Ovarian Dropsy ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2 ... 2 Ague ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Uterus Disease, &c ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 6 ... 6 Remittent Fever ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 3 1 4 2 Rheumatism 2 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 6 6 12 Order .—Organs of Locomotion Other Zymotic Diseases ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 3 ... 3 Synovitis (Arthritis) ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Order 2.—Enthetic. 10 ... 10 Joint Disease, &c. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2 ... Syphilis 2 ... 1 ... ... 1... ... ... 10 ... 10 Order 8.—Integumentary . l Stricture of Urethra 1 ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... 1 1 2 Hydrophobia— ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2 ... Phlegmon 2 1 ... ... ... ... ... 1 8 ... 8 Glanders ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... order 3.- Dietic. ulcer ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... 1 Skim Disease, &c. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Privation ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... IV. DEVELOPMENTAL DISEASES. Order 1.—Diseases of Children. Want of Breast-milk ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 1 Purpura and Scurvy 2 ... ... ... ... 1 1 4 2 6 2 ... Alcoholism a Del Tremens ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... b Intemperance 2 ... ... ... 2 ... ... ... 2 ... 2 4 3 Premature Birth 7 7 ... ... ... ... ... ... 24 9 33 Cyanosis ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 3 ... 3 Order 4.—Farasitic. Spina Bifida ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... 1 1 ... Thrush 1 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... 3 1 4 1 1 Other Malformations 2 2 ... ... ... ... ... ... 2 1 21 Worms, &c. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 4 ... Teething ... 3 ... ... ... ... ... ... 17 4 21 II. CONSTITUTIONAL DISEASES. Order 2.—Diseases of Adults. Paramenia ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Order 1.—Diathetic. 1 ... Childbirth(seePuerperalFever) 1 ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... 5 ... 5 1 ... Gout 1 ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... 3 2 5 Order 3.—Diseases of Old People. 5 Dropsy 5 1 1 ... ... 1 2 ... 11 2 13 17 5 22 ... ... ... 3 5 14 63 7 70 1 ... Cancrum Oris (Noma) 1 ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... 1 16 4 Old Age 20 ... ... ... ... ... 4 16 51 13 64 Mortification ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 5 ... 5 Order 2.—Tubercular. 24 2 Atrophy and Debility 26 25 ... ... ... ... 1 ... 107 15 122 4 1 5 1 1 ?, 1 ... 9 3 12 V. VIOLENT DEATHS, &c. Order 1.—Accident or Negli- 2 2 Tabes Mesenterica 4 2 1 X ... 36 11 47 49 9 Phthisis 58 1 3 6 23 21 4 ... 181 48 229 7 2 Hydrocephalus and Tubercular Meningitis 9 7 2 ... ... ... ... ... 57 15 72 5 ... Fractures and Contusions 5 2 ... 1 ... 1 ... 1 12 5 17 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... III. LOCAL DISEADES. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 8 ... 8 order 1.- Neruous System ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... 1 1 1 Cephalitis 2 1 1 1 ... ... ... ... 11 2 13 Drowning ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... 1 11 ... Apoplexy 11 1 ... ... ... 5 4 1 48 9 57 2 ... Suffocation 2 1 ... 1 ... ... ... ... 7 1 8 2 4 Paralysis 6 ... ... 1 ... ... 5 35 8 43 Otherwise ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Insanity ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Order 3.—Homicide: Chorea ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2 ... Epilepsy 2 ... ... ... 1 1 ... ... 8 2 10 Murder and Manslaughter ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... 1 20 6 Convnlsions 26 20 6 ... ... ... ... ... 56 16 72 Order 4.—Suicide. 4 4 Brain Disease, &c. 8 ... ... ... ... 3 5 23 7 30 1 1 Wounds: Gunshot, Cut, Stab 2 ... ... ... ... 1 1 ... 2 1 6 Order 2.—0rqans of Circulation Poison ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 2 Laryngitis 3 ... ... 1 ... ... ... 4 1 5 Drowning ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 61 17 Bronchitis ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 4 2 6 Hanging ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2 ... 2 26 6 Heart Disease, &c. 32 ... ... 2 8 8 ... ... 96 25 121 Otherwise ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 3 ... 3 Order 3.—Resviratoru 0rqans. Order 5.—Execution. 1 2 Laryngitis 3 2 1 ... ... ... ... ... 15 6 21 Hanging ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 61 17 Bronchitis 78 34 15 ... 2 1 21 5 206 45 251 Violent Deaths (not classed)... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 3 ... Pleurisy 3 ... 1 ... 1 ... 1 ... 4 ... 4 Sudden Deaths (cause unascertained ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 23 9 Pleurisy 83 15 7 2 2 4 2 ... 77 18 95 4 1 Asthma 5 ... ... ... ... 3 2 ... 6 1 7 10 3 Causes not specified or ill-defined. 13 7 ... ... 3 1 2 ... 23 3 26 3 2 Lung Disease 5 ... ... 1 ... ... 1 ... 19 6 25 TABLE B. PARISH OP SAINT MARY ABBOTTS, KENSINGTON. Return respecting the Vaccination of Children whose Births were Registered during the year 1872. DATE. Registration Sab-Districts comprised in Vaccination Officer's District. Number of Births returned in Birth List Sheets Number of these Births duly entered in Columns 10, 11, and 13 of the Vaccination Register (Birth List Sheets) viz.: Number of these Births which are not entered in the Vaccination Register, on account (as shown by Report Book) of Column 10. Successfully vaccinated. Column 11. Column 13. Dead. Un-vaccinated. Postponement by Medical Certificate. Removal to Districts, the Vaccination Officer of which has been duly apprized. Removal to places unknown, or which cannot be reached, and cases not having been found. Insusceptible of Successful Vaccination. Had Small-Pox. 1 2 3 4 5 6 8 9 10 1st January to 30th June. Kensington Town 1624 3384 9 137 5 4 85 Brompton 409 350 1 31 2 25 1st July to 31st Decern Kensington Town 1680 1409 9 127 27 6 97 Brompton 363 309 4 28 7 1 14 Total 4076 3452 23 0 323 41 11 221 APPENDIX. TABLE C. Showing the estimated Population of Kensington, in each of the 10 years, 1862.71, and in 1872; the number of Births and Deaths; the annual rate of Mortality (and in London), together with the number of Deaths from Zymotic Diseases, &c. The Year. Estimated Population at the middle of the year. Births. Total Deaths. Deaths per 1000 living. Deaths from Zymotic diseases Kensington. Per centage of Deaths from Zymotic diseases to Total Deaths The Year. Kensington. London. 1862 73,246 1960 1604 21.90 23.56 269 16.7 1862 1863 75,762 2330 1628 21.49 24.47 351 21.3 1863 1864 78,279 24 94 1849 23.62 26.53 374 20.4 1864 1865 80,796 2619 1733 21.45 24.56 319 18.5 1865 1866 89,087 3080 1966 22.07 26.48 259 13.3 1866 1867 96,224 3158 1933 20.09 23 01 276 14.2 1867 1868 101,040 3522 2232 22.09 23.60 457 20.8 1868 1869 106,320 3625 2249 2115 24.63 369 16.4 1869 1870 115,062 3705 2473 21.49 24.12 545 22.2 1870 1871 123,110 3804 2328 18.92 24.70 542 23.3 1871 Average of 10 Years 21.42 24.56 376 18.7 1872 127,436 4041 2171 17.17 21.40 390 18.1 1872 TABLE E. Shewing the Principal Localities in which Fatal Cases of Seven Zymotic Diseases occurred in 1872, the deaths from SmallPox in Hospital being referred to the localities whence the Sick were removed. Name of Street or Place. S. Pox. Measles. Scrlt. Fever. Diphtheria. Whooping Cough. Fever. Diarrhœa. Total. Name of Street or Place. S. Pox. Measles. Scrlt. Fever. Diphtheria. Whooping Cough. Fever. Diarrhœa. Total. Died in Hospital Died at home Typhus. Simple Contind. Enteric. Died in Hospital. Died at home. Typhus Simple Contind. Enteric. Adair Road ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2 3 Lancaster Road 1 1 ... ... ... 3 1 1 1 1 9 Appleford Road ... 1 1 ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... 3 Lambton Mews 1 ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... 2 Abingdon Road ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 2 Lonsdale Road ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... 1 2 Adrian Terrace ... ... ... ... 2 ... ... ... 1 ... 3 Archer Street ... ... ... ... ... 2 ... ... ... ... 2 Manchester Road 2 2 ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... 5 Acklam Road ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... 1 2 4 Admiral Place ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... 1 New Street ... ... 1 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... 2 Bolton Road ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 2 Norland Terrace ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... 1 Newland Terrace ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... 1 Buckingham Mews ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 Blechynden Street ... 3 ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... 1 5 Portobello Road 1 ... ... 2 ... 3 ... 1 1 4 12 Bramley Road 1 1 ... ... ... 3 ... ... ... 3 8 Portland Road ... ... ... 4 ... 3 ... 2 ... 3 12 Barandon Street 2 ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... ...... 1 4 Pelham Street ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... 1 Bangor Street ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... 2 3 Pembroke Gardens ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... 1 Canterbury Road ... 2 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Pembroke Place, West ... ... ... ... 2 ... ... ... ... ... 2 2 Princes' Gate ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 1 Cambridge Gardens ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 Peel Street ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 1 Crescent Place ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 2 Calverley Street ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 Queen's Gate Terrace ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... 1 Cornwall Mews ... ... 1 ... ... 1 ... ... ... 1 3 Queensberry Place ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... 1 Cornwall Gardens ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... 1 Cranley Mews ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 Royal Crescent Mews ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... 1 2 Clarendon Road, N. H. ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... 1 ... 2 Randolph Road ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 Colville Square ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 Rillington Road ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... 1 Church Street ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... 1 St. Ervan's Road ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 Church Court ... ... ... ... 2 1 ... ... ... 1 4 Silchester Road ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 Crescent Street ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... 1 2 Swinbroke Road 1 ... 2 ... ... 1 ... ... ... 1 5 Child's Street ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2 2 Southam Street 1 ... 2 ... 1 2 ... ... ... 1 7 Campden Street 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 St. Katherine's Road ... ... 1 ... ... 2 ... 1 ... 1 5 Shaftesbury Terrace ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 2 Dukes' Lane ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... 1 St. George's Road ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 Dartmoor Street ... ... ... ... ... 3 ... ... ... 2 5 Sheffield Terrace ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... 1 St. Ann's Road ... ... ... ... ... 2 ... ... ... 1 3 Edmund Terrace ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 Stoneleigh Street ... ... ... ... ... 2 ... ... ... 1 3 Edge Terrace ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 South End ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... 1 ... 2 Eildon Road ... ... ... 2 ... ... ... ... ... ... 2 t. James' Street 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 Earl's Court Road ... ... ... 2 ... ... ... ... 1 5 8 St. James' Road ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... 1 Edinboro' Road ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 St. Mark's Place ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... 1 St. Mark's Mews 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 Florence Terrace ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 St. Clement's Road ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2 2 Fowell Street 1 ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... 2 Thorpe Mews ... 2 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2 Goreham Place ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 Testerton Street ... 4 ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... 1 6 Golborue Road ... ... 2 ... ... 4 ... ... ... 1 7 Thistle Grove Lane ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 Glos'ter Grove 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 Thistle Grove ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 Glo'ster Grove, East ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 Treverton Street 1 ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... 1 3 Golborne Gardens ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... 1 2 Thomas' Place ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... 1 Green's Row ... ... ... ... ... 3 ... ... ... ... 3 Tavistock Road ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... 1 Golden Mews 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 Tavistock Crescent ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... 1 Talbot Road ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2 2 Hurstway Street 1 6 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... High Street, N. H. ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... 1 ... ... 2 Virginia Place ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... ...... ... ... 1 Heathfield Street ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 Victoria Grove 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ...... ... ... 1 Harcourt Terrace ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2 ... Horbury Crescent ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... 1 Walmer Road 2 2 1 1 ... 1 ... ... ... 5 12 Holland Park Mews 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 William Street 2 ... 1 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... 4 Wallgrave Road ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 2 Ifield Road ... ... 2 ... ... 1 ... ... ... 1 4 Workhouse 1 ... 1 ... ... ... ... 1 1 5 9 Wallgrave Terrace ... ... ... 2 ... ... ... ... ... ... 2 Johnson Street ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 Wornington Road ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... 1 1 3 James Street, Kensington 1 1 ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... 3 Western Terrace 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 Wellington Mews ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... 1 King Street ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... 1 Kensington Park Road 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 Yeoman's Row ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... 2 3 Kensington Park Road Mews ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... 1 TABLE D. Showing the Number of Deaths in ten years, 1862-71, from the principal Zymotic Diseases, and the Number in 1872. DISEASE. 1862 1863 1864 1865 1866 1867 1868 1869 1870 1871 Total in 10 years Annual Average. 10 years. 1872 DISEASE. Small Pox 0 49 5 18 10 29 4 6 8 120 249 24.9 68 Small Pox Measles 30 83 100 52 40 19 84 27 70 64 569 56.9 43 Measles Scarlet Fever 110 89 90 31 28 35 170 106 198 95 952 95.2 29 Scarlet Fever Diphtheria Not separately registered .. .. .. 9 14 11 34 11.3 14 Diphtheria Whooping Cough 54 22 56 37 28 68 34 71 55 72 497 49.7 77 Whooping Cough Fever 51 54 60 77 33 46 52 42 46 48 509 50.9 42 Fever Diarrhœa 24 54 63 104 112 78 113 108 154 129 939 93.9 110 Diarrhœa Cholera .. .. .. .. 8 1 .. .. .. 3 12 4.0 7 Cholera Total 269 351 374 319 259 276 457 369 545 542 3761 376.1 390 Total. TABLE F. SANITARY WORK, COMPLETED IN THE YEAR ENDED MARCH 25th, 1873. DISTRICT. Inspections. Results of Inspections. House Drains. Privies and W.C's. Dustbins. Water Supply. Miscellaneous. Number of Houses, &c., Inspected. Ditto, Special Sanitary. Ditto, Re-inspected during progress of Works, &c. Orders issued for Sanitary Amendments of Houses and Premises. Rooms, Passages, Staircases, &c., Cleaned and Whitewashed Rooms Disinfected after Small Pox, &c. Wash houses, Privies, Stables, Outhouses, &c Cleaned and Lime washed. Cleared and Repaired. Trapped. Connected with Sewer. New Fittings, Seats, &c. Cleaned and Repaired. Supplied with Water. New Provided. New Provided. Repaired. Cisterns (new) Erected. Ditto, Cleansed and Repaired. Ditto, provided with Covers. Removal of Accumulations of Dung, Stagnant Water, Animal and other offensive Matter. Swine removed from Places unfit for the keeping of the same, the Styes being mostly abolished. Regularly Inspected. Bakehouses. Licensed Cowhouses. Licensed Slaughter Houses. North 4276 1266 708 538 1053 69 399 135 117 22 26 40 58 9 25 32 5 47 25 169 190 73 18 32 South 4245 1361 531 448 1034 36 215 98 79 19 18 34 62 3 16 27 9 32 19 88 18 53 18 22 Total 85212627 1239 986 2087 105 614 233 196 41 44 74 120 12 41 59 14 79 44 257 208 126 36 54 TABLE G. LICENSED SLAUGHTER HOUSES. SOUTH SANITARY DISTRICT, (22.) LOCALITY. LICENSEE. Glo'ster Grove East Mrs. Nutkins 11, Church Street, Kensington Mr. Stimpson 11, Peel Place, Silver Street „ Andrews The Mall, Silver Street „ Wright 57, Fulham Road „ Turner 356, Ditto „ Malyon 37, Brompton Road „ Shackell 51, Ditto ,, Marner 121, Ditto „ Cox 183, Ditto „ Scarlett 12, New Street, Brompton ,, Williims 7, Montpelicr Street, Bromplon „ Hall 60, Kensington High Street „ English Phillimore Mews „ Clayton 1, Newland Place „ Sandford 15, High Street, Notting Hill „ Short 133, Ditto ditto „ Candy 6, Hope Terrace, Notting Hill „ Miller 1, Earl's Court Road „ Cannon 35, Ditto ditto „ Barnes Ditto ditto „ Collins Warwick Road „ Fazan NORTH SANITARY DISTRICT, (32.) 13, Archer Mews ... Mr. H. Rush Ditto „ Ward 8, Blenheim Crescent „ Cook 20, Bolton Mews Messrs. Smith and Son 148, Clarendon Road Mr. Casswell TABLE G. Continued. LICENSED SLAUGHTER HOUSES. NORTH SANITARY DISTRICT. LOCALITY. LICENSEE. 195, Clarendon Road Mr. J. W. Rush 142, Ditto ditto „ Rutland 10, Edenham Mews „ Gibson Tavistock Mews,Portobello Road „ Hughes 8, Vernon Mews, PortobelloRoad „ Young 196, Portobello Road „ Scoles 165, Lancaster Road „ Allinson Ledbury Mews ,, French Lonsdale Mews „ Olney 50, Princes Road, Notting Hill ,, Parratt 98, Ditto ditto „ Roser 10, Princes Mews, Notting Hill „ Cole 10, Princes Road Mews, ditto „ Coles Portland Road ditto „ Col ley 41, Princes Place, ditto „ Pickworth 23, Norfolk Terrace „ Matthews 61, Silchester Road „ Matthews 5, James Street, Potteries „ Van Ditto ditto ,, Arnsby Mary Place, Potteries „ Nind 7, Thomas Street, Potteries „ Hutchings 27, Ditto ditto „ Squire Royal Crescent Mews „ Blackburn Ditto ditto „ Ginger Ditto ditto „ Down 140, Walmer Road „ Seaton 144, Ditto „ Baker TABLE H. LICENSED COW SHEDS. SOUTH SANITARY DISTRICT, (18.) LOCALITY. LICENSEE. 5, Glo'ster Grove East Mrs. Reeves 7, Silver Street Mr. Mackenzie 7, The Mall, Notting Hill „ Ellis Do. do. „ Draper Fulham Road(St.Mark's Place) „ Starr 7, Chapel Place, Brompton „ Vincent Do. do. „ Vincent Holland Park Farm Messrs. Tunks and Tisdall Newland Terrace Mr. Harman Gore Lane ,, Thompson Earl's Court Road, (Pembroke Place) „ Harman Do. do. „ Follett Do. do. „ Allaway Warwick Road „ Pool South End, Kensington „ Wool house Do. do. „ Lunn Stratford Road „ Foster Addison Cottage, Lorne Gardens Bishop's Farm Dairy Company NORTH SANITARY DISTRICT, (18.) 191, Portobello Road Mr. D. Hughes 207, Do. do. Aylesbury Dairy Company Do. do. (Angola Mews) Mr. Johnson Do. (Wornhigton Mews) „ Jones Ledbury Mews „ Boon Do. do. „ Liddiard Notting Barn Farm „ Liddiard 49, Tavistock Crescent „ Parker James' Street, Potteries ,, Arnsby 5, Do. do. „ Van 21, Thomas Street, Potteries... „ Bidgood 12, Blechynden Mews „ White 14, Do. do. „ Copperwheat 15, Do. do. „ Cockman 9, East Road Mews „ Stephen Keen 183, Walmer Road „ Predk. Keen 10, Talbot Mews „ Pearcey 4, Archer Mews „ Skingle