KIN 064 BOROUGH OF KINGSTON-UPON-THAMES. Annual Report For the year ended 31st December, 1920, OF THE MEDICAL OFFICER of HEALTH AND THE SANITARY INSPECTOR. Kingston-upon-Thames : Phillipson's Press,Ltd., Printers, St. James' Road. Report of the MEDICAL OFFICER OF HEALTH. Municipal Offices, June, 1921. Gentlemen, I present you with my Annual Report for the Year 19-0, on the health and sanitary conditions of Kingston-upon-Thames. Total Births were 923. Males 470, Females 453. 29 Males and 22 Females were illegitimate. Population for Birth Rate was 39,067, showing an Annual Birth Rate of 299 per thousand. Total Deaths were 437. Males 205, Females 232. Population for Death Rate was 38,631, showing an Annual Death Rate of 113 per thousand. Deaths under 1 year were 31 Males and 30 Females, producing an Infant Mortality of 66*1 per thousand births. Zymotic Deaths numbered 15, giving a Zymotic Death Rate of .39 per thousand. I look upon all these figures as highly satisfactory, bearingfavourable comparison with all other towns in England aud Wales. 4 CAUSES OF DEATHS (Civilians only). Causes of Death. Males. Females. Scarlet Fever 1 - Whooping Cough 5 4 Diphtheria and Croup 2 1 Influenza 2 4 Erysipelas — 1 Pulmonary Tuberculosis 21 18 Tubercular Meningitis — 2 Other Tubercular Diseases 2 3 Cancer, malignant disease 25 31 Rheumatic Fever 2 1 Meningitis — 3 Organic Heart Disease 27 33 Bronchitis 10 19 Pneumonia (all forms) 20 10 Other Respiratory Diseases 3 — Diarrhoea, etc. (under 2 years) 8 — Appendicitis and Typhilitis 1 1 Cirrhosis of Liver 4 1 Nephritis and Brights Disease 6 4 Puerperal Fever — 3 Parturition (apart from Puerperal Fever) — 1 Congenital Debility, etc. 7 9 Suicide 4 — Violence, apart from Suicide 11 5 Other defined diseases 44 76 Special Causes (included above)— Cerebro-Spinal Fever — 1 DISEASES. Measles.—This disease was notifiable in 1919, but was rescinded iu December of same year. I believe it was found that notification without means of treatment in hospitals did not prevent the spread of the complaint. No death was reported in the Borough. Scarlet Fever.—The disease was generally of a mild form. and was distributed amongst various Wards, viz.: Town Ward 23 Hill Ward 33 Norbiton ,, 35 Canbury „ 48 139 cases altogether, of which 107 were removed to hospital. One death occurred. 5 Whooping Cough.—Caused 9 deaths. Diphtheria.—82 notifications was sent in from following Wards, viz.: Town Ward 16 Hill Ward 14 Norbiton ,, 31 Canbury „ 21 64 cases were sent to hospital. 21 were verified by the Clinical Research Association. 3 deaths occurred. I cannot trace any local causes to account for these cases, comparing one Ward with another. Enteric Fever.—2 cases were notified. Not traced to any source. No death occurred. Erysipelas.—32 cases were reported, none of zymotic origin. Climatic changes accounted for the disease in the aged and infirm. 1 death occurred. Puerperal Fever.—6 cases were notified. 3 died. Ophthalmia Neonatorum.—6 cases notified. Owing to prompt treatment all made good recovery though in every case both eyes were involved. 3 oases required hospital treatment. The others were cared for by our Health Visitors. Malaria.—The 5 cases notified came from abroad aud were duly notified to the Ministry of Health. Treatment was carried out in London hospitals. Cerebro-Spinal Fever.—One case occurred in December in a female child who caught the disease from the father who had been under treatment abroad. The child died after a very short illness. The other persons in the house, four in number, were kept under medical observation as they had shown signs of the disease on Clinical Research examination. No other definite case occurred, and the family spoken of were still under strict observation at the end of the year. Rabies, Anthrax and Smallpox.—Did not occur during 1920. Several "contacts" with Smallpox on board ships coming from abroad were notified to me at various periods during the year, and were inspected by me at my office and kept under observation until certified as fit to go to work or daily duties with safety to the general public. Re-vaccination had been practiced in all cases before my interviews. 6 The Borough experienced no epidemic during 1920. Influenza which was prevalent in 1919 gave little trouble or anxiety, but 6 deaths were notified from the pneumonic type of this disease. Anti-Influenzal vaccine was largely used by local practitioners with marked effect, and Anti-Toxin proved invaluable in Diphtheria. Its early use mitigated symptoms and acted as a prophylactic in "contacts " and, no doubt, will account for the very low mortality from this once extremely fatal complaint. Our infectious cases are now well cared for at Molesey, Hampton and Wimbledon Hospitals, after careful discussions and arrangements between the several Authorities. Our Town Clerk was indefatigable in his efforts to protect our Borough, and, at the same time, to conserve its interests. I consider the present method of dealing with our infectious cases as most practicable, least expensive, and very benficial to our Borough, there being no local Isolation Hospital. In the middle of the year your Committee passed a resolution sanctioning the erection of a "Velox" disinfector (Grampian Engineering Co.,) a very much required sanitary aid, as I pointed out in my report of 1918. This will be in thorough working order, I expect, before many months, when all necessary arrangements have been completed. These improvements are all due to the persistent efforts of Mr. Perry, your Sanitary Inspector, whose practical recommendations were recognised and carried out, and a saving of expenses and greater efficiency may be looked for by these changes, as compared with the old systems so long carried on in Kingston. The District Nursing Association Home for maternity cases was opened during the year under the superintendence of Miss Trotter. Accommodation now exists for six beds. Cases unable to find comfortable treatment at home, and unable to contribute full fees have been assisted by half fees paid by the Corporation. The Institution is ably and admirably conducted on the latest hygienic principles, and has given entire satisfaction while reflecting credit on Miss Trotter and her nursing staff. The Hostel at Epsom for unmarried mothers with infants received one case at the expense of the Corporation. the mother contributing to her maintenance during her stay, and at the same time training so as to be able to earn her living on discharge from the Hostel. A great boon is thus provided for the benefit of unfortunate unmarried girls who have become mothers, 7 Public Elementary Schools as to health administration were well cared for. No school had to be closed for infectious disease : and there were few exclusions of individual scholars for verminous conditions. Conditions were generally healthy. The sanitary state and water supply satisfactory, as I have ascertained personally. The Maternity and Child Welfare has kept up its beneficial use in our midst. An additional Infant Centre was opened in Washington Road in June The average attendances Were about twenty-five mothers with infants. At Eden Street Centre the average attendances were about fifty mothers with infants. Dr. Warner carried on the clinical examinations and treatment at both Centres twice weekly, and worked assiduously at her important duties. Our two Health Visitors, Miss Arthur aud Miss Duncan had their time fully occupied with attendances at the Centres and the numerous visits paid iu following up cases : rendering advice as to food, clothing and sanitation of houses, and seeing that necessary medical treatment was carried out, and in reporting to Maternity and Child Welfare Committee at each monthly meeting. The Voluntary Lady Workers, about twelve in number, are to be congratulated on their zealous and self-sacrificing application to their duties at Centres and Committee meetings. Without their useful co-operation in the work the Welfare Centres System could not be carried on. The Borough ought to be extremely grateful to these ladies. Milk Inspection is undertaken in Kingston by the Surrey County Council, under Food and Drugs Act. Your veterinary surgeon, Mr. Edwards, inspected with me at various periods the cowsheds and dairies. Matters generally were satisfactory. I am of opinion that our milk supply is wholesome and good, and that the arrangements for distribution are adequate. Scavenging in the Borough was carried out in the usual manner by the Borough Surveyor's Department. Moveable ashbins were removed and emptied weekly, aud in necessary cases three times weekly. There are very few complaints, and always attended to at once. Kingston is eminently a water closet Borough. I know of no earth closets, privies or cesspools. 8 New Bye-Laws for the Good Rule and Government of the Borough came into force in December, 1920. A decided acquisition. Private Wells, many of which existed in Kingston in 1918 are gradually disappearing. When the water on expert examination, has been found to be dangerous to the health the well has been at once closed. Such a menace ought not to be permitted in any populous town with somewhat narrow limits. As the larger part of our meat is obtained from London markets a very small amount of slaughtering now goes on locally. A constant supervision goes on, and the slaughter houses are kept in such a condition as to comply with the laws. Prosecutions under this head are almost unheard of in the Borough. Under Sale of Food and Drugs Act there were three prosecutions aud two convictions. One under the heading of milk, and one under the heading of drugs. At the end of the year the Borough was in a most favourable sanitary condition. No outbreak existing, the Birth Rate was comparatively good, aud the Death Rate was low. For these reasons Kingston is to be congratulated. FACTORIES, WORKSHOPS AND WORKPLACES Inspection of Factories, Workshops and Workplaces. Including Inspections made by Sanitary Inspector or Inspector of Nuisances. PREMISES Number of Inspections Written Notices Prosecutions (1) (2) (3) (4) Factories (Including Factory Laundries) 18 3 - Workshops (Including Workshop Laundries) 14 Workplaces (Other than Outworkers' premises included in Part 3 of this Report) Total 32 3 — 9 Defects found in Factories, Workshops & Workplaces. PARTICULARS No. of Defects Number of Presecutions Found Remedied Referred to H.M. Inspector (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) Nuisances under Public Health Acts—* Want of cleanliness 1 1 — — Want of ventilation — — — — Overcrowding — — — — Want of drainage of floors — — — — Other nuisances 1 1 — — Sanitary accommodation: Insufficient 3 2 — — Unsuitable or defective 10 6 — — Not separate for sexes — — — — Offences under the Factory and Workshop Acts: Illegal occupation of underground bakehouse (s. 101) - - - - Breach of special sanitary requirements for bakehouses (ss. 97 to 100) - - - - Other offences (Excluding offences relating to outwork which are included in Part 3 of this Report) 1 1 - - Total 16 11 — — including those specified in Sections 2, 3, 7 & 8 of the Factory and Workshop Act, 1901, as remediable under the Public Health Acts. Your obedient servant, SAM BROWNE, M.I)., Medical Officer of Health. Registered Workshops. A New Register is in course of formation. Other Matters. Class (1) Number (2) Matters notified to H.M. Inspector of Factories :— Failure to affix Abstract of the Factory and Workshop Acts (s.133), 1901) - Action taken in matters referred by H.M. Inspector as remediable under the Public Health Acts, but not under the Factory and Workshop Acts (s. 5, 1901) Notified by H.M. Inspector 3 Reports (of action taken) sent to H.M. Inspector 1 Other - Underground Bakehouses (s. 101) in use at the end of the year — Report of the SANITARY INSPECTOR. To the Chairman and Members of the Sanitary and Drainage Committee. Gentlemen, I have the honour to present to you my second Annual Report on the Work carried out by your Sanitary Inspector during the year 1920, in connection with the administration of the various Statutes and Byelaws relating to Public Health in force within the Borough. During the year it has been my endeavour to devote sufficient time to each of the many matters which come within the jurisdiction of the department. As duriug the previous year attention has been given to the following matters, viz:—House to House inspections, Special inspections for the investigation of complaints, etc , Supervision and testing of drainage and general sanitary works carried out in connection with existing buildings, Inspections of dairies, cowsheds and milkshops, factories, workshops, slaughter-houses, bakehouses, restaurants, butchers', fruiterers' and fishmongers' shops; the inspection of meat and other foods and of premises where foodstuffs are deposited or prepared for sale, Special inspections of premises where infectious diseases have occurred, and investigations into the origin of infection. The total number of inspections made was 2644. On 310 premises inspected sanitary defects to the number of 1957 were discovered. In connection with these defects 232 preliminary and 50 verbal notices were issued. It was only found necessary to issue 15 "Statutory" notices duriug the year. At the end of the year 1185 of the 1957 defects discovered had been remedied. 11 INSPECTIONS. The following is the total number of inspections made in regard to each section of the work, together with a summary of sanitary improvements executed :— House to House and Rent Restrictions Act Inspections 36 Re-inspections after Order or Notice... 300 Visits to Works in Progress 864 Factories and Workshops (including Bakehouses) 32 Cowsheds, Dairies and Milkshops (excluding Inspections by Medical Officer of Health and Veterinary Inspector) 17 Ice Cream Premises 9 Foodshops 261 Infectious Disease Enquiries 139 Markets 75 Special Inspections (Complaints, etc.) 669 Slaughterhouses 73 Offensive Trades 16 Miscellaneous Visits 153 Total number of Inspections 2644 DRAINAGE. Number of old drains examined, tested, exposed, etc. 39 Number of Houses and premises redrained 30 Number of drains repaired or amended I Drains or gullies unstopped or cleansed 30 Length in yards of new Stoneware drains laid 1318 Length in yards of new Heavy Cast Iron drains laid 40 Manholes provided 62 Manholes altered or repaired 1 Intercepting traps fixed 19 Fresh air inlet shafts repaired or renewed 27 New gully traps fixed 117 New soil pipes and ventilating shafts 36 Water tests applied 154 Smoke tests applied 43 Cesspools abolished 1 12 WATER CLOSETS AND SANITARY FITTINGS. New W.C. basins fixed 66 W.C.'s unstopped, cleansed or repaired 7 W.C. flushing tanks repaired or renewed 15 Flush pipe connections repaired 5 Water supplied to W.C.'s 15 New W.C. apartments provided 4 W.C. apartments lighted, repaired and ventilated 14 New impervious sinks provided 20 New waste pipes fixed 16 Existing waste pipes trapped 4 SANITARY CONVENIENCES. New urinals constructed 8 Urinals cleansed and repaired 3 Urinal abolished 1 MISCELLANEOUS. Roofs repaired 27 Eaves gutters renewed or repaired 21 Stack pipes renewed or repaired 19 Stack pipes disconnected from drains 9 Damp walls remedied 32 Ventilation provided beneath floors 17 Yards paved 33 Yard paving repaired 2 Floors of rooms repaired 32 Floors of rooms renewed or repaved 6 Rooms repaired, cleansed and distempered 177 Windows repaired, renewed or made to open 72 Cisterns repaired, cleansed covered or removed 16 Wells closed 1 Movable ashbins provided 106 Nuisance from overcrowding abated 1 Nuisance from animals abated 5 Accumulation of manure or refuse removed 5 Water supplied to houses 7 Miscellaneous 26 Sheds removed 2 Stables paved and drained 6 13 INFECTIOUS DISEASE AND DISINFECTION. 296 rooms have been disinfected in 253 houses during 1920, as compared with 238 rooms in 202 houses in 1919. During the year the Council adopted the recommendation of the Sanitary Committee to provide a steam disinfecting station. The apparatus chosen is the "Velox" high pressure steam disinfector. The work of erecting the premises and apparatus was completed in May, 1921, and the apparatus has been in general use since the end of June. 1921. Steam is obtained from the Electricity Works and the apparatus has proved quite satisfactory so far. The motor ambulance which has recently been delivered is used for carriage of bedding between infected premises and the disinfecting station, and occasionally patients are removed to Molesey and Hampton Hospitals in this vehicle. 139 visits were made to premises in connection with cases of infectious disease. Careful enquiries were made in respect of the history of each case in accordance with the directions of your Medical Officer of Health. The presence or otherwise, of sanitary defects was also noted at each house and the necessary steps taken to have the same remedied. HOUSE DRAINAGE. 30 houses were re-drained during the year. In order to ascertain correctly the condition of drains in certain cases it has been necessary for the Corporation to avail themselves of the powers conferred upon them by Section 41 of the Public Health Act, 1875, to authorise your Sanitary Inspector to enter premises, open up the ground and examine drains, etc. In other cases, however, the owners have had the necessary excavations carried out themselves, and have afforded all reasonable facilities to your Sanitary Inspector to apply tests to the drains. The practice of preparing a block plan of new schemes of re-drainage has been continued. The plans, together with essential details are filed for future reference. The following premises were re-drained during the year :— Somerset Road 1 house Kingston Hill 1 house Cambridge Road 1 „ Market Place 1 house Washington Road 2 houses High Street 1 house Coombe Road 1 house Shortlands Road 2 houses Burritt Road 2 houses King's Road 1 house London Road 4 „ Hawk's Road 2 houses Richmond Road 2 „ Elm Road 1 house Acre Road 3 „ Bittoms Lane 4 „ Total 30 houses Eden Street 1 house 14 From the summary it will be seen that this work necessitated the laying of approximately 1318 yards of stoneware and 40 yards of heavy cast iron drain pipes. The sanitary defects discovered at the premises were either remedied or were in hand at the end of the year. In this connection and also in regard to sanitary defects discovered as the result of other inspections, I should like to point out that, owing to labour conditions and the high cost of materials there is still great difficulty in obtaining the execution of necessary works, and the time taken in remedying the defects is even now much in excess of pre-war days. This delay causes additional work to your Sanitary Inspector, and has a tendency to produce arrears of work. It has been impossible to attempt a house to house survey of working class houses during the year although such a survey is extremely desirable and necessary. Such work, when properly carried out, helps to raise the general standard of fitness of this class of property, and is beneficial from the point of view of both landlord and tenant. OVERCROWDING. Several cases of overcrowding came to the notice of the Department during the year. Owing to the shortage of houses it has been impossible to take extreme action to obtain abatement of the nuisance. In certain cases a re arrangement of the members of the family according to age and sex provides the necessary air space for each occupant. It is frequently found that kitchens and sitting rooms are permanently uses as bedrooms. ASH RECEPTACLES. The absence of suitable impervious covered ash receptacles in connection with houses in the Borough is very marked. At the end of the year it is estimated that out of a total of about 8000 houses, well over 5000 were without proper ashbins. It is no uncommon sight to see ranks of miscellaneous receptacles, such as pails, boxes, tin trunks, tubs, etc., etc., all in various stages of HOUSING. Only 8 houses were inspected under the Housing Acts during the vear. viz :— Hawk's Road 2 houses Washington Road 2 „ Bittoms Lane 4 „ Total 8 houses 15 decrepitness, standing upon the edge of the footpaths in whole streets awaiting collection by the vans. These receptacles are mostly uncovered and the contents are easily upset and spread about by children and dogs. In wet weather the contents of these insanitary receptacles are allowed to become saturated with water, aud, as has already been pointed out by other observers, the extra weight of water means extra cost for removal. Further, improper ash receptacles encourage the breeding of flies, and the diseases which can be conveyed by these insects are too well known to need repeating. During 1920 only 106 new ashbins were provided as the result of sanitary notices. It would appear, therefore, that the only means of removing this serious nuisance is by dealing with whole streets at one time, and now that good galvanized iron ashbins can be procured at reasonable prices this work should be proceeded with at once. The work of' collecting house refuse is carried out very regularly in the Borough. This fact is shown by the very few complaints received from householders. Upon enquiry it is usually found that the cause of non-collection is one outside the control of the collectors, and is due to default on the part of the householder. INCREASE OF RENT AND MORTGAGE INTEREST (RESTRICTIONS) ACTS 28 applications were received during the year from tenants for certificates under Section 2, Sub-section 2, of the above Act. 3 of the applications were irregular and 1 tenant removed from Kingston immediately after making the application for a certificate. These 4 cases were not proceeded with. The premises were subjected to a careful inspection in each case and 21 certificates were issued to tenants and 3 applications were refused. HOUSES LET IN LODGINGS. There are several houses of this class in the Town. Sanitary defects are usually numerous owing to the class of property and tenant, but the powers contained in the existing Bye-laws have been found to be adequate to obtain the removal of any sanitary defects up to the present, 16 COMMON LODGING HOUSES. There are 2 registered Common Lodging Houses in the Borough, viz :— John Othen, 8 & 10, Vicarage Road, William Marsh, 52, Canbury Passage, There is accommodation for 56 men in the former and 35 men in the latter. The premises are periodically inspected and are generally found in a satisfactory condition. These premises have evidently filled a need in the Borough, as upon the occasion of each visit I have found all the beds in use. SLAUGHTERHOUSES. 1 slaughterhouse, situate 37, High Street, has been closed during the year. There are now 6 private slaughterhouses in the Borough, all of which have been in use during the year. The addresses are:— No. 36, Cambridge Road. No. 45, Cambridge Grove Road. No. 90, Acre Road. No. 120, London Road. Bath Passage. Cowleaze Road. The buildings, with one exception, are old. They are, however, kept in a fairly satisfactory condition and the occupiers show willingness to comply with your Council's requirements. 73 visits were paid to these premises duriug the year. These visits were made at the time of slaughtering so far as possible, but as no notice of slaughtering is given to the Sanitary Inspector, and the times of slaughtering are not regular, it is obvious that only a proportion of the animals killed could be examined. MEAT AND FOODS INSPECTION. This branch of the work has received considerable attention during the year. Every care has been taken to detect any diseased, unsound or unwholesome food. During the year no less than 409 visits have been paid to premises where food is prepared or exposed for sale. Probably the most important part of this work is that of examination of carcases at the time of slaughter, when all the organs may be examined. It is to be regretted that the time available for this work during 1920 was only approximately 50% of the time devoted to the same work during 1919. The quantity of diseased and unsound meat discovered and condemned during 1920 was also approximately 50% of that for 1919. It would, however, be unjust to attribute this decrease solely to the diminished number 17 of slaughterhouse visits. One cause of this decrease is that the number of animals slaughtered in the town has decreased considerably since the Food Control Orders were rescinded in July. Since that date also, butchers have been able to purchase animals without restriction, instead of having animals allocated to them under the Food Orders. It is reasonable to presume that a better quality of meat is now obtainable as a direct result of this change. There can be little doubt that most of the animals of doubtful condition were killed off during the period of the war, and I anticipate a further decrease in the quantity of meat condemned owing to definite disease such as tuberculosis during this and the next few years. A considerable number of visits and inspections have been made in connection with food inspection in the evenings after office hours. During 1920, 2286 lbs. of Beef and Beef Offal were found to be affected with tuberculosis, as compared with 4558 lbs. in in 1919. Tuberculosis was discovered in two carcases of Pork also. The latter fact indicates a very low incidence of this disease amongst pigs in the neighbourhood. The result of inspections is reflected in the following list of foodstuffs condemned during the year:— Beef 2295 lbs. Beef Offal 3142 „ Mutton & Lamb 6377 „ Pork 395 ,, and 1 carcase. Rabbits 725 „ Chickens 193 „ Bacon 58 „ Corned Beef 48 „ Butter 16 „ Condensed Milk 32 tins. Marmalade and Jam 5 lbs. Preserved Pears 1 tin. ,, Plums 10 tins. „ Tomatoes 3 „ „ Sardines 6 „ „ Crayfish 2 „ „ Salmon 1 tin. „ Fish Paste 5 jars. Kippers 4 boxes. Mackerel 3 „ Haddocks 2 „ Winkles 3 sacks. Potatoes 56 lbs. Tomatoes 8 boxes. 18 With the exception of 3 instances the whole of the condemned foodstuffs were surrendered voluntarily. This is due chiefly to the fact that food retailers now understand that immediately upon becoming aware of the diseased or unsound condition of any food it is incumbent upon them to report the facts at once to the Sanitary Inspector. In the 3 exceptions above mentioned the articles of food were formally ¨seized " under the powers contained in Sections 116-119 of the Public Health Act, 1875. MANUFACTURE OF ICE CREAM. Inspections were made of premises where Ice Cream is manufactured for public consumption. Generally speaking the utensils are kept in clean condition but the surroundings in which this commodity is made are very far from satisfactory in many cases. It is extremely necessary that the powers of local authorities in connection with this trade should be extended in order that the whole process may be properly supervised and regulated. BAKEHOUSES. Generally speaking these premises have been kept in a satisfactory condition, aud the requisite limewashing and cleansing has been carried out without the service of notices except in a few instances. I am not aware of the existence of any underground bakehouse in the Borough. SANITARY CONVENIENCES AT LICENSED PREMISES During the year 3 new urinals have been constructed in connection with licensed premises. As the result of re-inspections it has been found that the new urinals have been maintained in good condition. The 3 old urinals which have been removed were a serious menace to the public health, and the provision of these new urinals, which are in each case composed of glazed slabs or stalls, has done a great deal towards improving the general condition of the premises concerned. COMPLAINTS 189 complaints were made during the year as follows :— Drains and Sanitary Arrangements 46 Water Supply 6 Accumulation of Manure and non-removal of House Refuse 10 Absence of Ashbins 3 19 Complaints—(contd.) Flooding of Cellars 5 Dampness (Bursting of Pipes, etc.) 4 Insanitary Condition of Premises 86 Defective Roofs 2 Nuisance from Keeping of Animals 4 Overcrowding 1 Smoke Nuisance from Chimneys 3 Nuisance from Rats 7 Miscellaneous 12 Total 189 The complaints were investigated promptly and where the Corporation possessed powers to interfere immediate steps were taken to remove the cause of the complaint. FACTORY AND WORKSHOPS ACTS. A new register of factories and workshops is in course of formation. The original list of premises was rendered useless by the industrial changes in the town during and since the war. 32 inspections have been made during the year and generally the condition of the factories and workshops has been found quite satisfactory. Other details of the work is included in the Report of your Medical Officer of Health. OFFENSIVE TRADES. The following Offensive Trades are carried on in the Town, viz. :— Leather Tanning. Rag and Bone Dealers. The premises are inspected at irregular intervals and without notice to the occupiers. The tannery is maintained in a satisfactory condition and no complaints in respect thereof have been received during the year. In the case of the rag and bone dealers however great difficulty is experienced by reason of the fact that the business is often carried on in cottages which are quite unsuited for the purpose, either by reason of the number of occupiers or the position and construction of the premises. Generally it is only by accident that one becomes aware of these smaller dealers as the work of rag sorting is carried on at the rear of the house. Other larger premises are situated very close to the public highway and constant supervision is required. 20 When the Public Health Acts Amendment 1907 is in force in the district (and one may anticipate that this will be so in the near future) it will be desirable for the Corporation to declare the trade of Fish Frying as an "Offensive Trade," and to prepare new, or revise the existing Byelaws with regard to all the Offensive Trades. PIGGERIES. Several premises where pigs were being kept in contravention of the Byelaws came under observation during the year. The request of the Board of Agriculture that the keeping of pigs should be encouraged (providing that the public health is safeguarded) was kept in mind when dealing with each case. In most of the cases the styes were badly constructed, uudraiued, and were dirty. After due notice the keeping of pigs was discontinued at 5 premises. Permission to erect a stye and to keep pigs was granted in one case during the year. RAG FLOCK ACT. No samples of Rag Flock were taken for analysis during the year. CANAL BOATS ACTS, 1887 & 1884. Two boats were inspected during the year. There were no contraventions of the Acts discovered. WELLS. The number of wells used for drinking water and actually known to exist in the Borough at the end of the year was 75. There are probably many others, and some of the 75 known wells provide drinking water to more than one house each. It is estimated that 120 houses are supplied with water from wells. 6 samples of water were taken for analysis during the year, aud the results are shown as under :— Situation of Well. Result of Analysis. Fairfield West Usable drinking water. *Kings Road Usable drinking water (polluted by coal gas) Bearfield Road Usable drinking water. Kings Road Organically pure water. Mill Street Usable drinking water. Fairfield West Usable but suspicious water. Of the 6 premises 1, marked*, was provided with water from the Metropolitan Water Board's mains by the end of the year. 21 CONCLUSION. The particulars of work 111 this Report do not include any of the details of the work carried out by the late Mr. Pearce at the commencement of the year. Owing to his unfortunate illness, Mr. Pearce was unable to carry out his duties from Easter onwards, but every effort was made to keep the work of the Department up to date. I again desire to thank you, Mr. Chairman and the Members of the Sanitary and Drainage Committee and Corporation generally for your kindly consideration and support during the year, and the officers of other departments who are always very willing to afford me assistance and information. I am, Mr. Chairman and Gentlemen, Yours faithfully, HAROLD T. PERRY, A.R.San.I. Sanitary 1 uspector.