AC 4374 LEW 61 THE REPORT by the BOARD OF WORKS FOR THE LEWISHAM DISTRICT of THEIR PROCEEDINGS in the EXECUTION OF THE METROPOLIS LOCAL MANAGEMENT ACT, (18 and 19 Vict., c. 120), DURING THE YEAR 1856. PUBLISHED BY ORDER OF THE BOARD, IN JUNE, 1857. greenwich : printed by w. h. crockford, blackheath road. 1857. THE REPORT by the BOARD OF WORKS FOR THE LEWISHAM DISTRICT of THEIR PROCEEDINGS in the EXECUTION OF THE METROPOLIS LOCAL MANAGEMENT ACT, (18 and 19 Vict., c. 120), DURING THE YEAR 1856. PUBLISHED BY ORDER OF THE BOARD, IN JUNE, 1857. greenwich : printed by w. h. crock.ford, blackhbath road. 1857. 68627 CONTENTS. page. Forms of Notice for Building and Applications for Drainage iv. Division of Lewisham into Wards—Appointment and Number of Vestrymen—" Lewisham District"—Board of Works—Persons Appointed—Auditors of Accounts 1—3 Jurisdiction of the Board—Highways—Drainage—Nuisances 3—4 Meetings—Attendance of Members—Officers—Duties—Persons Appointed—Scavenger—Offices—Corporate Seal 4—8 Highways—Accounts of the Lewisham Highway Board—of the Surveyor of Highways, Penge—Compensation to Clerk and Surveyor to Highway Board—Contracts for Cartage—Road Scrapings—Road Material—Private Eoads undertaken by the Board—Highway Improvements—Encroachments—Bailway Interference—Terms Arranged—" Regular Line of Building"—General Orders 8—14 Watering Blackheath 14—15 Lighting—Lewisham—Sydenham 15—17 Sewerage—Works by the Commissioners of Sewers—Debt— Sewers Contemplated and Constructed by the Board of Works —Difficulty as to Penge Drainage—Stanstead Lane Sewer, why executed—Litigation as to Rushey Green Sewers 17—22 Drainage and Sanitary Matters—Powers in reference to same— Contracts for carrying out the Works—Case in Penge— Number of Houses Drained into Sewers—Nuisances 22—26 Expenses—How Sums Raised for—Apportionment of—Loan for Sewerage Works—Application of 26—27 Admission of the Press and Ratepayers to Meetings of the Board 27—28 Accounts of Receipts and Expenditure—Liabilities and Assets— Summary of Contracts 29—31 Names and Addresses of Members and Officers 32 Appendix—Award for Division of Lewisham into Wards and Appointment of Vestrymen 33—34 Abstract of the Judgment in the Suit of Stainton v. the Metropolitan and Lewisham District Boards of Works 35—37 Medical Officer's Reports 38—83 Appendix II—Particulars of Precept issued by the Metropolitan Board of Works on the Lewisham District 84 2 In 1857. Mr. Walter Bagnall Mr. John Bennett „ Benjamin Smith „ T. H. Lavers „ Benjamin Parsey „ Charles Atkins „ William Morphew „ William Goodman In 1858. Mr. S. Southorn Mr. Joseph Mead Dr. Henry Greenwood „ James Belcham Mr. Benjamin Standring „ William Kelsey „ Charles Sewell ' „ Henry Couldery In 1859. Mr. Alderman Eagleton Mr. William Edgerton „ W. H. Shove „ Thomas Tapley „ C. B. Colchester „ Henry Robinson ,, James Brooker „ Bart. Chaundy The following persons were at the same time appointed members of the Board by the Vestry of Penge (Mr. Puzey having been balloted out of office in 1857):— Mr. Thomas Puzey. Mr. Thomas Maugham. Mr. W. W. Stanger* By a curious anomaly in the Act (sect. 11) three Auditors are, on the election of Vestrymen, elected by the Ratepayers of Lewisham, one for each ward ; and five are elected by the Ratepayers of Penge. From the eight persons so elected three are (sect. 194) elected by ballot by the Board as the Auditors of their accounts for the current year. The persons elected (on the 28th November, 1855), were— By the Blackheath Ward *Mr. R. G. Jones. By the Sydenham Ward *Mr. Edwin Nash. By the Lewisham Ward Mr. J. H. Morgan. Mr. Thomas Smith. *Mr. James Fleet. By the Hamlet of Penge Mr. Felix T. Berry. Mr. G. Pearson. Mr. Stephen Cousins. Of whom those marked thus (*) were elected by ballot as Auditors of the accounts of the Board up to the 25th March, 1857. *Mr. John Sinkins, Mr. W. M. Ridgway, Mr. Daniel Phillips, and Mr. James Hoath were on the 28th April, 1857, appointed on the resignations and in the places of Messrs. Standring, Colchester, Couldery, and Atkins. Mr. Sabin was at the same time appointed in the place of Mr. Goodman, resigned. Mr. Brooker was on the 20th May appointed by the united Boards of Plumstead and Lewisham a member of the Metropolitan Board, in the place of Mr. Atkins, resigned. Messrs. Baonall, Smith, Parsey, and Morphew were reappointed by the Vestry on the 3rd June, 1857, and Messrs. Dodds, Lane, and Andrews were at tho same time appointed in the places of Mr. Bennett and Mr. Lavers, who declined to be put in nomination, and Mr. Sabin, who had become disqualified. 3 The Districts of Plumstead and Lewisham are (sect. 46) united for the purpose of electing a member of the Metropolitan Board of Works, as the Representative of the two Districts,; and at the meeting of the two Boards, held (on the 12th December, 1855) for the purpose of electing such member, Mr. Charles Atkins was appointed. There have been five vacancies in the Board during the year. Mr. Eagleton having become disqualified by his acceptance of the office of Treasurer of the Board, was on the 5th February succeeded by Mr. De la Salle. The vacancy occasioned by the death of Mr. Chaundy was on the 8th April supplied by Mr. Groves ; and the vacancies occasioned by the resignations of Mr. Maugham and Mr. Puzey, were supplied by the appointment of Mr. James Daikers and Mr. Ebenezer Pritchard, on the 16th October; and that of Mr. Sewell by the appointment of Mr. Joseph Dale, on December 13. The jurisdiction of the Board may be comprised under three general heads:— 1. The repair and general management of the public highways in the district, including generally all the powers vested in Surveyors of Highways under the Highway Act (5 and 6 Wm., c. 50), and many special powers conferred by the Act; such for instance as that (under sect. 106) for adopting any private roads as public roads; for watering (sect. 116); and lighting (sect. 130) such roads; and maintaining a regular line of building in all streets (143). 2. The drainage of the district, both land or surface drainage, and drainage for sewerage purposes. The Act vests in the Board all sewers and drains in the district, whether constructed at the public expence or by private individuals, except only the main sewers. And the Board are charged with the construction (subject to the approval of the Metropolitan Board) of all future sewers ; and with the supervision of all house drains to be connected with any sewers; and no sewers can bo constructed by any private individual except with the sanction of the Board. They are empowered to compel the drainage, of any premises within one hundred feet of any sewer; and on default of the owner, after due notice, to execute the necessary works at his expense. They are also required to be satisfied before any new house is begun to be built that it is in a position capable of drainage; and for this purpose the Act requires (sect. 76), that seven days' notice shall be given to the Board before beginning to lay or dig out the foundation of any new house or building within the district, or to rebuild any house B 2 4 or building therein, and also before making any drain for the purpose of draining directly or indirectly into any sewer. 3. And the sanitary condition of the district—The Board are (under sect. 134), the "Local Authority" for the execution therein of the duties and powers of " The Nuisances Removal Act for England, 1855," consolidating " The Nuisances Removal and Diseases Prevention Acts of 1848 and 1849;" and also of another "Act for the Better Prevention of Diseases," passed in 1855, containing special powers for extreme cases of epidemics.* The Board decided that they must meet at least once a week, in order to perform satisfactorily the duties confided to them; and they accordingly determined to meet every Thursday Evening, at six o'clock. This was, however, for some time found to be insufficient, and from the 3rd March, to the 21st July inclusive, an additional weekly meeting was held every Monday Morning, at ten o'clock; the business of such meetings being confined to matters of minor importance. Seven Members of the Board (sect. 38) form a quorum; but instances having occurred of business of an urgent though detail character being required to be transacted when a quorum of Members were not in attendance, the Board passed a resolution, on the 24th April, to the effect that if at any of the times appointed for the Ordinary Meetings of the Board less than seven Members should be present, they should (being not less than three in number) constitute a Committee for the consideration and dispatch of matters of business requiring immediate attention; and should report their proceedings at the next meeting of the Board for confirmation and approval. During the year there have been (inclusive of 2 meetings held in December, 1855) 52 full Board meetings, 10 Monday meetings, and 12 Committee meetings under the above-mentioned resolution. The attendance of the Members is given in the following table; but as regards those against whose names an asterisk is placed, reference should be had to the dates at which they were appointed, or ceased to be, Members of the board. *The word " nuisances," under the above Act, includes— "Any premises in such a state as to be a nuisance, or injurious to health. "Any pool, ditch, gutter, water-course, privy, urinal, cesspool, drain, or ashpit, so foul "as to be a nuisance, or injurious to health. "Any animal so kept as to be a nuisance, or injurious to health. "Any accumulation or deposit which is a nuisance, or injurious to health." 5 ATTENDANCE OF THE MEMBERS OF THE BOARD. members' names. board meetings. committee meetings. total. on thursdays. on mondays. Mr. Walter Bagnall 20 7 3 30 Mr. Benjamin Smith 26 9 2 37 Mr. Benjamin Parsey 24 5 1 30 Mr. William Morphew 19 — — 19 Mr. John Bennett 3 — - 3 Mr. T. H. Lavers 11 5 1 17 Mr. Charles Atkins 47 10 8 65 Mr. William Goodman 45 10 9 64 Mr. S. Southorn 28 9 7 44 Dr. Henry Greenwood 48 10 10 68 Mr. Benjamin Standring 18 — — 18 *Mr. Charles Sewell 20 — — 20 *Mr. Joseph Dale — — — — Mr. Joseph Mead 18 — — 18 Mr. James Belcham 31 3 2 36 Mr. William Kelsey 15 — — 15 Mr. Henry Couldery 24 3 3 30 *Mr. Alderman Eagleton 3 — - 3 *Mr. J. T. De la Salle 19 — - 19 Mr. W. H. Shove 42 2 - 44 Mr. C. B. Colchester 7 — - 7 Mr. James Brooker 35 —- - 35 Mr. William Edgerton 31 — — 31 Mr. Thomas Tapley 41 — 1 42 Mr. Henry Robinson 24 — 1 25 *Mr. Bart. Chaundy 2 — — 2 *Mr. John Groves 18 — 1 19 *Mr. Thomas Maugham 16 6 2 24 *Mr. James Daikers 3 — - 3 *Mr. Thomas Puzey 15 — - 15 *Mr. E. Pritchard 4 — - 4 Mr. W. W. Stanger 12 1 3 16 The first step taken by the Board was to determine what Officers were required to perform the duties involved in the execution of the powers vested in them by the Act, of which a sketch has been 6 attempted to be given; and to determine the emolument of each Officer, and as far as practicable, in the absence of any experience, to fix the duties to be performed by him. Considerable difficulty was felt by the Board, immediately upon their own constitution, in defining the precise duties of each Officer; and they accordingly decided that the appointments should be made subject to revision at the end of a year. The following Officers were appointed:—a Treasurer—Clerk—Medical Officer of Health— Surveyor—Two Inspectors of Nuisances, to act also as Assistant Surveyors—and a Scavenger, or Dustman. The duties of the Clerk were defined as follows:—To give daily attendance at an office to be provided by the Board, personally or by deputy duly authorized by the Board, but remunerated by him; to keep all accounts; to give and receive all notices required to be given or received by him under the Act; to attend before Justices as and when required by the Act; to attend all meetings and to take minutes of all proceedings of the Board, and to keep all the books relating thereto; to negociate and carry out any loan or loans upon the Rates; and generally to do all the clerk's duties as prescribed by the Act. Proposed salary not less than £200 a year. The duties of the Surveyor, who should give his whole time to the office:—To take charge of and superintend the repair of all existing sewers in the district (except main sewers), and superintend the construction of new ones and the drainage of all houses; to superintend the maintenance and repair of all highways and roads; the cleansing of all ponds, ditches, and cesspools; and the lighting, cleansing, and watering the district; and to perform all other duties appertaining to the office which are prescribed in the Act. Proposed salary £200 a year. The duties of the Medical Officer of Health:—To inspect and ascertain the sanitary condition of the district; and to point out such causes as are likely to affect injuriously the health of the inhabitants; and the most efficacious mode of checking or preventing the spread of epidemics; and to make a report of the same to the Board once a month, or oftener if required. Proposed remuneration, a fee of £5 5s. for each report. The duties of Inspectors of Nuisances—to be likewise Assistant Surveyors :—To enforce the execution of the duties to be performed by the Scavenger; to provide and keep a book for entry of all complaints made by any inhabitant of the district of any infringement of the Act or Nuisance, into the truth of which such Inspector should forthwith inquire and report to the Board; to make (subject to their direction) complaints before Justices, and take legal proceedings against offenders as required by the Act; to act upon the instructions of the Surveyor in all matters within their province as Assistant Surveyors; to attend all meetings of the Board; to devote their whole time to the duties of the office; 7 and. keep a journal of all subjects brought under their cognizance; and one of them to be resident in the Village of Lewisham, and the other in the Village of Sydenham. Proposed salary, £80 a year each. The Surveyor and Assistant Surveyors to keep books for the entry of all works done, men employed, and materials used, and when and where. Mr. Alderman Eagleton was appointed Treasurer of the Board, and £1,000 Consols was, as security for the due performance of the duties of the office, invested by him in the names of three Members as Trustees for the Board. Advertisements were issued inviting candidates for the offices of Clerk, Medical Officer of Health, Surveyor, and Inspectors of Nuisances, and the following persons were appointed to the offices on the terms proposed:— Mr. O. C. T. Eagleton, Clerk. „ F. E. Wilkinson, Medical Officer of Health. „ W. H. Treverton, Surveyor. „ John Duncan, ) Inspectors of Nuisances and Assistant „ Luke Skeet, Surveyors. And Mr. Edwards (to whom the preparation of this Report has been entrusted) was, on the nomination of the Clerk, authorised by the Board, as his Deputy, to give the attendance at the office, required by the Act, for the transaction of the ordinary business of the Board. Subsequently James Burton was appointed foreman of the road labourers, at £1 1s. per week; and Mr. Perry and his wife were appointed Messenger and Housekeeper, at £1 per week. Mrs. Perry has been retained in the office of Housekeeper, at 12s. per week, since the death of her husband in August, the office of Messenger having been shortly afterwards discontinued. As regards the appointment of a Scavenger for the removal of dust and rubbish from the district, it was originally proposed to have one for Sydenham and Penge, and another for Lewisham and Blackheath; but it was subsequently considered undesirable to appoint such an officcr, except for the portion of the district lying north east of a line from the parish boundary at Honor Oak to and including Beckway's Cottages, between Perry and Catford Hills, and north of a line drawn from the same Cottages, running east through Cockshead Farm House to the boundary of the district adjoining Lee Parish. This contract was submitted to public tender, and was let to Mr. B. Parks for a year from the 24th February, he paying the Board £10 for the privileges the appointment conferred. This arrangement has, however, proved unsatisfactory to each party, and also, 8 to judge from the numerous complaints on the subject, to the public; and on that account has not been renewed, nor has any scavenger been subsequently appointed. The site of the offices, which by the Act the Board are required to provide, was a question which at an early stage demanded their attention; and after much consideration they decided upon the premises in Grove Place, at present occupied by them, as being at once the most centrally situated, the cheapest, and affording the best accommodation of any that offered at the time ; and the Board succeeded in obtaining a lease of them from the Leathersellers' Company for 21 years, determinable at the end of the first 14 years, at a rent of £30 per annum. The estimated expense of fully adapting them to the purposes of the Board was £150; but it was found necessary—for convenience, not ornament—to erect a porch, and also build a shed and stables, which materially increased the original estimate. The design fixed upon for the Corporate Seal (which by the Act the Board are required to have), was the "White Horse of Kent surrounded by the corporate title, " The Board of "Works for the Lewisham District." Thus far of the steps taken by the Board in equipping themselves for the performance of their functions. It will be convenient in the Report of their further proceedings to follow the same division as adopted in sketching out the subjects coming under their jurisdiction. First therefore of THE HIGHWAYS. The Highways of Lewisham were under the control of a Board appointed by the Vestry under the Highway Act from 1849 to 31st December, 1855, when they were superseded by the Board of "Works, to whom they submitted an account of receipts and expenditure from the 26th March previous (1855), and also of their assets and liabilities, from which Report the following is extracted:— RECEIPTS. EXPENDITURE. £ 8. d. £ 8. d. By cash, 26th March, 1855 155 15 6 To labourers' wages and contract work 334 6 0 Ditto on account of rates 1160 0 0 Ditto on contingencies 63 9 9 Ditto materials and team work 634 17 11 Ditto tradesmen's bills anc incidental expenses 305 12 9 Clerk's salary 70 0 0 Balance 34 8 7 £1379 5 3 £1379 5 3 9 LIABILITIES. ASSETS. £ s. d. £ s. d. Amount due to Mr. J. E. Lee 65 6 3 Amount due on rates made 27th December, 1853 1 12 8 Ditto to Mr. 6. Withes 66 4 0 Ditto to Mr. G. Willmott 43 12 9 Ditto ditto 4th July, 1854 10 0 0 Ditto to Mr. B. Parka 100 6 9 Ditto ditto 2nd January, 1855 100 0 0 Ditto to Mr. W. Miller 9 6 1 Ditto ditto 24th July, 1855 . 300 0 0 Ditto to Mr. \V. Penny 12 0 9 Cash balance 34 8 7 Ditto to Mr. W. Marshall 6 6 0 Ditto as rent 8 15 0 Ditto to Messrs. Bailey &Pegg 7 8 6 Ditto to Mr. S. Forster 13 4 0 Ditto to Mr. J. Corder 8 6 0 Ditto to Mr. J. Hollis 2 10 0 Estimated surplus 102 15 2 £446 1 3 £446 1 3 The Highway Board also submitted a statement of existing contracts entered into by them. With Mr. Barber for the collection of the Highway Rate, at 2½ per cent. on the amount collected. With Mr. B. Parks for the cartage of material, at Is. per yard, or ton, per mile; and 7s. per day for the hire of a set of one horse and harness, cart, and man. With Mr. Wythes for 1,000 yards of gravel, from Penge, at 4s. per yard, of which 669 remained to be delivered. And with Mr. Colson for 300 yards of gravel, to be delivered at Forest Hill Station, at 4s. 6d. per yard, of which 184 yards remained to be delivered. There were also some contracts existing for the removal of road scrapings up to the 25th March, 1856; and one with S. Forster, Esq., for permission to dig gravel in his pits, near Rushey Green, on payment of 1s. 6d. per yard for all gravel removed. The Highways of Penge were under the management of a Surveyor of Highways appointed in the usual manner in rural districts, and giving his services gratuitously, and of a paid Deputy Surveyor. The following is extracted from the Surveyor's Account, from the 25th March, 1855, to the end of the year:— RECEIPTS. EXPENDITURE. £ s. d. £ s. d. By cash of Mr. Homes, with rate book 107 8 4 To labourers' wages and contract work 62 15 1 Cash from defaulters on former rates 72 9 1 Ditto materials and team work 206 11 4 Ditto tradesmen's bills, incidental expenses, &c. . . 20 16 3 Interest on £1,500 deposited in the London Joint Stock Bank, to 31st December . 148 4 7 Assistant Surveyor's salary . 22 10 0 Balance 15 9 4 £328 2 0 £328 2 0 In connection with the Highway Board a claim has been made, under the 214th sect, of the Act, by Mr. Q-. F. Corbett, who was their Clerk and Surveyor, for compensation for the loss of his office consequent upon that Board being superseded by the Board of 10 Works. Mr. Corbett had held the office from the constitution of the Highway Board; at first devoting his whole time to it, but in April, 1853, time was expressly given him to attend to his own business ; and his salary reduced to £80 per annum. The compensation claimed by him was an annuity of £52 10s, or an equivalent in the sum of £745 4s. 6d. The Board were of opinion that, apart from the exorbitance of such a claim, there were peculiar circumstances in this case which justified the award of a comparatively trifling sum, and accordingly voted Mr. Corbett £40 as the amount of half-a-year's salary. From this award he appealed to the Metropolitan Board of Works, who, in accordance with a general rule observed by them in such cases, made a final award of an annuity of £20 for seven years and nine months, if Mr. Corbett should so long live (to be computed from the 1st January, 1856); subject to the proviso at the end of the section referred to for suspending the annuity in the event therein mentioned. Mr. Parks's contract with the Highway Board, for the cartage of material expired on the 25th of March, 1856, and he declined to renew it; when the Board advertised for tenders for the work and were reluctantly obliged to enter into a contract with Mr. Colson, from the 16th April, 1856, to the 25th March, 1857, at a considerably higher rate, viz., at 2d. per cubic yard, per furlong; and 10s. per day for the hire of each set of one horse and harness, and one cart and man. The road scrapings for the year commencing 25th March, were let as under :— roads. to whom sold. amount. £ s. d. No. 1. From Catford Hill to Meadow Croft . Mr. James Trehearn 3 10 0 No. 2. From Meadow Croft to Sydenham Bridge, including Southend Lane to Poole Bridge Mr. James Bridgland 5 10 6 No. 2a. From Sydenham Bridge to Rockhills, thence along Sydenham Hill and round to the finger post opposite the "Woodman,"including Jews' Walk Ditto 4 10 6 No. 3. From Sydenham Bridge to Forest Hill Railway Station, including Forest Hill and Wells Road Mr. Charles Dennett 6 0 0 No. 4. Stanstead Lane, Eliza Place, and Perry Vale, to Meadow Croft Mr. W. Denton 2 15 0 No. 5. From the Vicarage, Lady-well, to the finger post in Stanstead Lane Mrs. Mary Grant 2 0 0 No. Hither Green and George Lane Mr. Henry Hinder 12 0 No. 7.* All the roads on Blaekheath Mr. George Willmott nil. No. 8. All the roads in Penge Mr. James Trehearn 3 10 0 *Mr. Willmott undertakes the cleaning of the roads and streets of Blaekheath as an equivalent for the road scrapings. 11 The material used for the repairs of the roads in the district is, with the exception of some flint on the roads of Blackheath, Gravel; which is derived chiefly from three sources:—the pits on Blackheath, from which the Parish have had an immemorial right to dig gravel free of charge. Pits near Rushey Green, belonging to Samuel Forster, Esq., with whom the Board have continued the contract entered into with him by the Highway Board, for permission to dig gravel at 1s. 6d. per yard. And by purchase from the pits at Croydon; whence it is brought either by Railway or Carts. The gravel from Blackheath is of a very inferior quality, which, coupled with the cost of digging and cartage, renders it, except when used in the neighbourhood of the pits, as costly as a better material. The material used on the roads in the district during the year has been as follows:— IN THE PARISH OF LEWISHAM. QUANTITY IN YARDS OR TONS. PRICE PER YARD OR TON. AMOUNT OP COST. S. d. £ s. d. From the Blackheath Pita 460 nil nil From the Rushey Green Pits BY PURCHASE. 865 1 6 64 17 6 Under contracts entered into by the Highway Board with Mr. Wythes 453½ 4 0 90 14 0 Ditto ditto Mr. Colson 184 4 6 41 8 0 Under contracts entered into by the Board of Works with Mr. Constable 559 5 0 139 15 0 Ditto ditto Mr. Colson 1296 5 0 324 0 0 Ditto ditto ditto 150 5 6 41 5 0 Ditto ditto ditto 1005 6 0 301 10 0 Ditto ditto Mr. Lee, flints, per ton 316 7 6 118 10 0 5288½ £ 1120 19 6 IN THE HAMLET OF PENGE. By purchase under contracts entered into by the Board of Works with Mr. Constable 527 5 6 70 13 6 Ditto ditto Mr. Leech, flints 30 5 6 8 5 0 Ditto ditto Mr. Colson 8 5 6 2 4 0 Ditto ditto ditto 28 5 0 7 0 0 Ditto ditto Messrs. Martin & Wright 1000 4 0 200 0 0 1303 £ 288 2 6 Of the 1,000 yards supplied for Penge by Messrs. Martin and Wright, not more than 200 were put on the roads during the year, the remainder lying on the road sides, in various places, ready for use in the ensuing months. The variation in price is partly accounted for by the places at which the material is delivered being more or less easy of access. The cost of cartage of such material upon the roads has been about £370; of which only about £30 has been in respect of Penge. 12 The Board have exercised the powers vested in them, under the 106th section of the Act, for undertaking the repair at the public expence, as public roads, of the following roads, which theretofore were private roads, and maintained by private individuals, although used by the public at large. The Park and Albert Roads were taken conditionally on the payment by persons interested in them of £140, the estimated cost of putting them in repair. 1. On the 3rd April—The road in Penge running from the Billet Road, at a point near the Church, in a north west direction to the boundary of the Hamlet. 2. On the 5th June—The road in Lewisham from Jew's "Walk to Rock Hill, called Longton Grove, and Longton Grove West. 3. On the 20th November—The Albert Road, Sydenham, and so much of the Park Road there as lies between the north east end of the Albert Road, and the High Street, Sydenham. 4. On the 11th December—The road in Penge called the Belvedere Road, running from the boundary of the Hamlet at the north west end of such road, to the boundary of the Hamlet at the south west end of the same road. Beyond maintaining the general repair of the roads in the district, the Board have carried out various works for their improvement, the more important of which are— The formation of two new roads on Blackheath—one from the corner of the Orchards, near Aberdeen Villas, to Talbot Place, and the other from the Dover Road, at the entrance into Greenwich Park, towards Tranquil Yale, Blackheath ; and placing posts and rails for the protection of the heath at various points; The arching over and levelling the ditch throughout Lewisham Village; The laying a drain in and filling up the ditch along the south side of Stanstead Lane, and throwing the space gained into the road; and The formation of kerbed footpaths at Forest Hill Terrace, near the Railway Station, and in the Billet Road, Penge, from the Crystal Palace Bridge towards the Church. The encroachments on the Highways, which from time to time have been made by various persons, have been the subject of great consideration and lengthened debate. The attention of the Board was drawn to the subject in March, by an encroachment then making on the road, in Penge, leading to Beckenham. This was summarily disposed of—the wall in the course of erection on the Highways being pulled down under the order of the Board; the fence was subsequently set back. Considerable difficulty has, however, been felt in dealing with encroachments of more or less long standing. A Committee was formed to inspect and report on the 13 obstructions and encroachments on the roads in the district, especially between Rock Hill Corner and Mr. Thomas's premises. The most glaring was found to be that adjoining Mr. Saxton's property, where the road set out under the Enclosure Award as a 50 feet road, now varies in width from 43 to 46 feet, for a length of about 1,200 feet. Another encroachment was found to have been made by the Lambeth Water Works Company; and a third in front of the premises in Eliza Place, Forest Yale, occupied by Mr. Chaplin. A general order was made by the Board requiring the several roads to be restored to their original width. This order was communicated to the persons affected by it; but it has not in any case been attended to or enforced. The most important interference during the year with the preexisting condition of the roads has been made by the construction of the West End and Crystal Palace and the Mid Kent Railways; the former passing under the Anerley Road, Ponge, and the latter passing over the turnpike road at Loam pit Yale, under the roads at Ladywell and Catford Bridge, and over the road at Bell Green, all in Lewisham. The Acts of Parliament for the construction of both these railways received the Royal Assent some months prior to the constitution of the Board. As regards the crossing of the Anerley Road by the West End and Crystal Palace Railway, a special clause was inserted in that Act permitting the rate of inclination of the approaches to the bridge over the line to be 1 in 14: thus in this case the Board were completely fettered. Such, however, although to a great extent, was not wholly the case with the Mid Kent Railway Company; they had no special powers for the construction of their works, but were bound by the general law affecting them; and to that the Board might have been held, but for a technical difficulty the Company were under by reason of the jurisdiction over the sewers and highways in the district having in the course of their proceedings been transferred to newly constituted bodies. Of this circumstance the Board of Works took advantage to modify as far as possible, by arrangement with the Company, the proposed works, so far as they interfered with the highways at the points mentioned. The following was the result:— 1. As regards Loampit Yale—That the Company should make a proper raised footpath at the north side of the turnpike road under the proposed bridge 5 feet wide, in addition to the full width (30 feet) of such road; and on the south side form a footpath through a pier, under an archway in the same, 6 feet wide; and that the road adjoining the river leading to the mill should be not less than 26 feet wide; and the bridge over the river at the same point should be of the span originally intended, subject to the Company adequately 14 strengthening the embankment on the north side of the river. 2. As regards Ladywell—That the Company should widen the bridge over the river 5 feet, making the road one uniform width of 25 feet, on being permitted to increase the rate of inclination of the approach on the east side to 1 in 17. 3. As regards Catford Bridge—That the Company should take down the then bridge, and build a new one with a water-way equal to that between the piers of the iron tube sewer adjoining, and make the roadway over the bridge of a uniform width of 25 feet, on being permitted to increase the rate of inclination of both approaches to 1 in 17. Notices have been served (in December) upon the Board of applications intended to be made to Parliament for Acts for the construction of further railways in the district; the one from the Greenwich Junction to Dartford, crossing the turnpike road in Lewisham Village; the other a direct London and Sydenham Railway. As regards both proposed railways, the Board have taken measures for securing as far as practicable the public convenience. The provisions of the Act for maintaining a regular line of building in the streets or roads, though in many cases involving individual hardship, have been readily complied with, except in the instance of three houses which were being erected at the corner of Brockley Lane. Here the Board were totally defied, and the houses being rapidly proceeded with in spite of repeated notices, they determined to exercise the power vested in them under such circumstances, and demolished the buildings. An action was in consequence commenced against the Board, but shortly afterwards discontinued, and brought against their Surveyor. This, however, has not been prosecuted. Three general orders have been made by the Board affecting the highways:—That all outside shop blinds shall hang at least 7 feet from the ground; that all gates opening immediately upon any road shall be made to open inwards only; and that no trees shall be allowed prejudicially to affect any road by hanging over it. WATERING. For some years past the roads of Blackheath have been watered by private arrangement, each occupier contributing what he thought right towards the expense, the Highway Board having no power to make a rate for the purpose. Express power is, however, given (sect. 116) to the Board, of which they have availed themselves as regards about two miles of the roads on Blackheath. The expense is levied by rate on the occupiers of the property adjoining the roads which are watered, and amounts to about £200 per annum. The water is supplied by the Kent Waterworks Company at £60 15 per mile per annum, and the watering effected under contract with Mr. G. F. Stevens at £80 per annum. It was intended to have watered a portion of the roads at Sydenham, but the difficulty of obtaining a supply of water (the Lambeth Waterworks Company having declined to provide it), and the great length of the roads requiring watering, and the consequent expense involved, deterred the Board from carrying out the intention. Power is given to them under the same section (116) to erect pumps for the gratuitous supply of water to the inhabitants, and they have erected two adjoining the high road at Rushey Green, where considerable inconvenience has been felt by the poorer classes from the private wells, which were only a few feet deep, having become dry since the construction of the sewers there. The public wells over which the pumps were erected were previously open and very dangerous. LIGHTING. Lewisham Village was, early in the year 1855, lighted with gas, under the management of Lighting Inspectors appointed under the Act of 3rd and 4th Wm. IV., c. 90. The portion of the parish lighted was from the Sydney Arms, in Lewisham Road, or Limekiln Lane, along the road in an easterly direction to the Lewisham Railway Station, thence along the road in a southerly direction to the premises occupied by Mr. Alexander Rowland; and 46 columns were erected for lighting such length of road. The Vestry, under the power vested in them by the Act for that purpose, fixed £160 as the amount the Inspectors should be authorized to expend in any one year. This was raised by a rate of 5d. in the pound on the property adjoining the road lighted. The sum thus authorized was manifestly insufficient to meet the necessary outlay for the purchase of columns, and £120 was advanced for the purpose by John Penn, Esq., to be repaid by instalments from time to time, out of any annual surplus the Inspectors might have in hand. The columns and lamps, as well as the gas, were supplied under contracts with the Phoenix Gas Company, the columns, lamps, &c,. at £3 each; the gas as under :— £3 for the winter 8 months for each lamp lighted from sunset until one o'clock in the morning; £1 extra beyond the above for every winter 8 months for each lamp lighted from one o'clock in the morning until sunrise; and £1 extra beyond both the above for every lamp kept lighted from sunset to sunrise for the summer 4 months. The following is an account of the receipts and expenditure of the Inspectors from their appointment until the 30th December, 1855: 16 RECEIPTS. EXPENDITURE. 1855. £ s. d. 1855. £ s. d. June 4. By Lighting Rate. 75 0 0 June 9. Phoenix Gas Company for columns, lamps, &c 117 0 0 „ 6. Loan from John Penn, Esq 120 0 0 Nov. 28. Lighting Rate 75 0 0 July 3. Gas supplied to July 1st 39 1 3 Dec. 31. Ditto to date 69 15 0 Rent ditto 1 0 0 Interest on loan to 6th December 3 0 0 To sundries 7 18 10 Balance 32 9 11 £270 0 0 £270 0 0 In this position the functions of the Lighting Inspectors ceased, and devolved upon the Board of Works, who requested Mr. Penn to allow his loan to continue, and to be paid by four annual instalments of £30 each, the first to be retained out of the balance in his hands, which proposal was at once acceded to. The Board resolved that for the winter eight months, commencing 1st September, the lighting of this portion of the district should be continued throughout the night until sunrise, instead of until one o'clock, as theretofore. With these exceptions, the arrangements of the Inspectors have not been altered. The lighting of Sydenham with gas has been effected under the auspices of the Board, who have departed from the principle of rating only such property as adjoins the roads lighted, which was adopted in lighting Lewisham, and have determined that the whole division of the district which was to be lighted should also be rated. The division of Sydenham thus lighted and rated comprises, So much of the Parish of Lewisham as is west of a line drawn from its south boundary at the point where it adjoins Beckenham, running northward along the centre of Kent House Lane to the north end of Meadow Croft, thence in a straight line running north-westward to the point where Stanstead and Brockley Lanes join, thence along the centre of Brockley Lane to the northernmost part of the piece of land No. 2,624 on the parochial maps, thence in a straight line to and over the Railway bridge No. 9, thence in a straight line touching the eastern boundary of the Telegraph Cottage to the boundary of the Parish adjoining Camberwell. For lighting this portion of the district 139 columns and lamps have been erected, which, as well as the gas, have been supplied by the Crystal Palace District Gas Company, under the contract the particulars of which will be seen in the summary of contracts appended to this report. The lighting of Sydenham is also intended to be continued, as in Lewisham, from sunset to sunrise for the winter eight months of each year. 17 The Board entered into negociations with the Phoenix Gas Company for lighting Blackheath, but were unable to arrange satisfactory terms, and ultimately resolved to defer the lighting for at any rate another year. Applications have been made to them to light the Retreat and Hither Green, Lady-well Lane, and the Hamlet of Penge generally; also a private road from Upper Sydenham to Peak Hill, and other private roads in the district; but various circumstances have conspired to prevent the extension of the lighting beyond what has been described. SEWERAGE. With reference to the second branch of the jurisdiction of the Board, the Drainage of the District, it will, perhaps, be desirable to lay before the inhabitants a short statement of the works executed by the Metropolitan Commissioners of Sewers. They are as follows:— Two main sewers, vested in the Metropolitan Board of Works, viz., " The Ravensbourne and Sydenham Sewer" (especially for the drainage of the Lewisliam district), commencing at Bell Green, and extending along and by Catford Hill Road, through Rushey Green, along the turnpike road, and turning off near Lady-well Lane through the fields to the west of the Village, along Silver Street, across Loampit Yale and through Mill Lane, and discharging into Deptford Creek at Parish Wharf, near Kingsford's Mill. In connection with this is a branch sewer up Lady-well Lane, about as far as the Lady-well Inn. The other main sewer, "The Ravensbourne and Lee Green Sewer" (more especially for the drainage of Lee and Eltham), commences in the Eltham Road near Lee Green, and proceeding along the Lee Road, enters the Lewisham district at Lee Bridge, proceeding along the turnpike road through Lewisham Village, and turning off near the Railway Station, and proceeding along the Lane to, and passing out of the Lewisham district at, the Silk Mills, proceeding thence through Bath Place, Edgerton Road, and North Pole Lane to a pumping station, where it discharges into Deptford Creek a little north of the Greenwich Railway. In connection with the latter is— 1. A sewer, commencing at a point a little south of Hither Green Lane, and proceeding along the turnpike road through Lewisham Village to the junction with the main sewer, nearly opposite the Lion and Lamb Inn, with a branch up the Avenue Road. 2. Another sewer in Lewis Grove, joining the main at the north end of the Grove. 3. A third sewer from a point a little west of the Blackheath Railway Station, along the north side, and nearly adjoining the railway as far as Love Lane, then crossing it and proceeding in a C 18 straight line to its junction with the main sewer in the Lewisliam Road, nearly opposite Lewisham Bridge. 4. And a fourth sewer from the south-west corner of Blackheath, proceeding down Lewisham Hill to its junction with the main near the Railway Station. There is also a junction sewer between the two main sewers from the Lee Green sewer, at a point nearly opposite the Roebuck inn, along Homesdale into the Sydenham sewer, where it crosses Loampit Yale. In connection with which are several pipe sewers laid in the various streets and alleys of Loampit Yale. The Commissioners also constructed some sewers in Loat's Pits, Lewisham, and in High Street, Jews' Walk, and Willow Road, Sydenham. Several sewers had also been constructed at the expense of private individuals, the more important of which are, one in Blackheath Village by Lord Dartmouth, and one in Forest Hill by several residents there; some of the estates laid out by building societies are also efficiently drained, but such unfortunately is not universally the case. The debt due from the district, in respect of the works constructed and in contemplation by the Metropolitan Commissioners of Sewers, as apportioned by the Metropolitan Board of Works, is £26,664 18s. 10d., composed of the following items:— £ s. d. Outstanding amount of loan of £140,000 for Main Intercepting Drainage Works 1627 15 7 Loans for ordinary sewerage and drainage purposes 21311 1 5 Amount of claim for Ordnance Survey of Metropolis 9 16 0 Approximate estimate of debt on the current expenditure account of the Commissioners 3716 5 10 Total £26,664 18 10* The Board commenced their proceedings with reference to the drainage of the district, by directing their Surveyor to report what sewers and drains were most urgently required in the district, of what dimensions, and at what cost he estimated the construction. Subjoined is an abstract of his report. The sewers marked thus (*) were selected by the Board for immediate construction, and submitted to the Metropolitan Board for their sanction: those marked (T*) have been executed during the year. *The £140,000 was borrowed by the Commissioners for the Main Intercepting Drainage Works, and is in hand. The last Sewer Rate made by the Commissioners on the District, was in December, 1854. A similar rate would have been made in December, 1855, but the Commissioners' power ceasing at the end of the year, they thought it better not to make the rate, and hence the debt of £3,716 5s. lOd. on current expenditure, for which the rate, if made, would have provided. 19 locality op work. length in feet. size. materials. estimated cost. BLACKHEATH. £ s. d. ¶*Queen Street, Loat's Pits 180 12 inch Pipe 22 10 0 ¶* Essex Place ditto 140 9 inch Ditto 10 10 0 ¶* Regent Street ditto 180 9 inch Ditto 13 10 0 ¶*King Street ditto 200 2ft by 2ft Half-brick 41 17 0 ¶* Ditto, in connection with the above 200 12 inch Pipe 25 0 0 ¶*Along the east side of Blackheath Village 500 1ft 6 by 1ft 6 Half-brick 119 0 0 ¶* Spencer Place 200 2ft by 2ft Ditto From Lewisham Hill along Dartmouth Grove to tho Green Man 1650 1ft 6 by 1ft 6 Ditto 262 10 0 LEWISHAM ¶*Main road, Rushey Green 1050 12 inch Pipe 136 0 0 ¶* Willow Walk ditto 300 9 inch Ditto 15 8 0 ¶ *From Silver Street along Homesdale 850 3ft by 2ft Half-brick 260 13 0 ¶ Lewis Grove 200 12 inch Pipe 30 0 0 Limes Grove 500 2ft by 2ft Half-brick 100 0 0 SYDENHAM. ¶*From the junction in the main line in Catford Hill Road, along Stanstead Lane to the west side of Dartmouth Park 5280 3ft 9 by 2ft 6 One brick 3054 0 0 *¶From the end of the above sewer in Stanstead Lane to Sydenham Park 3300 3ft 4 by 2ft 3 Ditto 1353 2 2 ¶*Brockley Lane 300 12 inch Pipe 37 0 0 ¶*From the Brighton Railway (North of the Greyhound) up the open ditch to Kirkdale 935 3ft by 2ft Half-brick 333 0 0 *Dartmouth Road, west side 30 1ft 6 by 1 ft 6 Ditto 70 0 0 ¶ * Ditto ditto 350 12 inch Pipe Wells Road, north side 172 12 inch Ditto 20 0 0 •Opposite Sydenham Church 650 12 inch Ditto 65 0 0 East side of Forest Hill Station, in Perry Yale 693 12 inch Ditto 80 17 0 ¶*The Yalley Line, at the back of Wells Road, upper part of Kirkdale 140 2ft by 2ft Half-brick 20 8 0 *From Bell Green to the Brighton Railway, near the Greyhound 3800 3ft by 2ft Ditto 1622 19- 6 ¶Jews' Walk 425 3ft by 2ft Ditto 819 19 0 *Wells Road 1555 2ft by 2ft Ditto *Sydenham Hill 550 2ft by 2ft Ditto *From Whittle's property, Forest Hill, along the Dulwich Road to the boundary of the District 835 2ft by 2ft Ditto 265 0 0 PENGE. *From Bell Green to Penge 8400 3ft 4 by 2ft 3 Brick 3326 0 0 *At the back of Anerley Gardens, to connect with sewer on the National Freehold Land 2000 2ft by 2ft Half-Brick 442 0 0 *Upper Norwood to the boundary of the District 200 18 inch Ditto 25 0 0 *In Green Lane, in connection with the proposed Main Line 900 2ft by 2ft Ditto 192 10 0 *The Watershead Line, dividing the Parishes of Beckenham and Penge 160 2ft by 2ft Ditto 24 0 0 C 2 20 A difficulty arises in effecting the drainage of Penge, from the necessity of constructing the sewer for that purpose through a portion of the parish of Beckenham, which is not within the Metropolitan area; and under these circumstances the sanction of the Metropolitan Board was withheld to the last five sewers under the head of Penge, until some arrangement could be made with the owners of the property in Beckenham through which the sewer must pass, and other persons interested in the construction of the work. All the other sewers submitted to the Metropolitan Board received their sanction. Of the sewers thus sanctioned those at Rushey Green and Loat's Pits were, on the recommendation of the Committee to whom the Surveyor's report was referred, first executed. It was found desirable during the construction of the former to extend it considerably, and the extreme wetness of the soil made the use of a large quantity of clay necessary. Hence the actual cost of the work will be seen to exceed very far the original estimate and contract price. The contract was let by tender to Mr. John Murray for £310; the total cost, including the extra work, was £468 9s. 4d. The sewers were completed as under :— locality. length in feet. size. materials. RUSHEY GREEN. From the junction with the Main Sewer, nearly opposite the Rising Sun, along the west side of the road to the Avenue, and thence crossing the road to and a few feet south of the Black Horse 1134 12 inch Pipe A branch from such pipe sewer at a point near the south end of Hindsley's Place, crossing and proceeding along the east side of the road to about 40 feet south of the Police Station 168 9 inch Ditto A branch from the same pipe sewer up Willow Walk 200 Ditto Ditto Another branch from the same sewer up the 100 Ditto Ditto LOAT'S PITS. Queen Street 188 12 inch Ditto Essex Place 145 9 inch Ditto Regent Street 172 Ditto Ditto King Street 200 2ft by 2ft Half-brick Ditto, in connection with the above 202 12 inch Pipe The next sewerage works undertaken by the Board were the one in Homesdale, Lewisham, commencing at the junction with the main sewer there and running northward up the hill, and that in Spencer Place, Blackheath, commencing at the junction with an 21 existing sewer in the front of the Literary Institution, and running north-westward. They were constructed in exact accordance with the original proposal. This contract was also let by tender to Mr. Murray, for £305 ; the actual cost with extras was £334 6s. lOd. The third and most important works constructed by the Board are the sewers from Catford Hill along Stanstead Lane to Dartmouth Park, and thence to Sydenham Park. And inasmuch as these sewers pass through a comparatively uninhabited portion of the district, some explanation may be desirable of the inducements to the Board to carry out so extensive a work in such a locality. The soil of the western portion of the district, from Catford Bridge to the boundary, consists (see Medical Officer's First Report) of London clay, wholly impervious to fluid substances. Thus in this locality no soakage into the soil takes place as in other portions of the district, and the whole sewage of Sydenham and Forest Hill overflowed from the numberless cesspools in those places, and found its way through the ditches near and adjoining Stanstead Lane, and (except such portion as was evaporated in its course) thence to the river Ravensbourne, creating the most intolerable and pestilential stench from Forest Hill to Catford Bridge, and polluting to a frightful extent the chief source of supply of the Kent Water Works, from which upwards of 9600 houses were supplied with water in 1849, and that number is now probably very materially increased. By this work the sewage from about 700 houses has been intercepted from the river, and although the sewerage system for Sydenham and Forest Hill is still very far from complete, the first grand step to its perfect drainage has been thus taken. These works were let by tender to Mr. Dethick for £5247. As actually constructed they are as follows. The total cost, including extra work, will be £5523 2s. 8d. locality. length in feet. size. materials. From the junction with the Main Sewer in Catford Hill, at a point at the end of Stanstead Lane, to the west side of Dartmouth Park, at a point at the end of Park Road, including a bell mouth for a sewer in such road From the end of such sewer along Brockley Lane, under the Railway near the Forest Hill Station, and along the footpath on the west side of the line to Sydenham Park In Sydenham Park Branch from the Stanstead Lane Sewer up Brockley Lane, west side At the back of Wells Road, in continuation of a sewer there from Jews' Walk 5618 3237 28 300 140 3ft 9 by 2ft 6 3ft 4by 2ft 3 2ft by 2ft 12 inch 2ft by 2ft One brick Ditto Half-brick Pipe Half-brick In addition to the above, the Board have constructed a pipe sewer 22 without contract, by labourers in their employ acting under the Surveyor of the Board, in Dartmouth Road, west side, 318 feet 12 inch Pipe Thus the total length of sewers constructed during the year is as follows:— FT. IN. FT. IN. FEET.[/##3] Brick Sewers 3 9 by 2 6 5618 3 4 by 2 3 3237 3 0 by 2 0 850 2 0 by 2 0 568 —10,273 Pipe Sewers 12 inch 2142 9 inch 785 — 2927 Total length 13,200 feet. Before leaving the subject of sewerage it will be well to explain the cause and result of the litigation in which the Board have unfortunately been involved with the representatives of the late Mr. Stainton, of Springfield House, Lewisham, in consequence of the construction of the sewers in Rushey Green. The sewers were commenced in March, and completed in the following month, and in June the solicitors of the late Mr. Stainton intimated to the Board that the water was withdrawn from their clients' ponds and watercourses, as they were informed in consequence of the defective construction of the sewers, and that if the sewers were made water-tight the water would return; they were therefore advised to take proceedings against the Board to compel them to make the sewers water-tight, unless they were willing to effect that object without such proceedings. The Board, however, declined to alter the construction of the sewers, foreseeing the enormous expense involved in complying with the request made, and that water-tight sewers would not answer the purpose desired unless the Board, on their part, compelled every owner (at least at a treble cost) to lay down water-tight drains to communicate with such sewers; and that such water-tight sewers and drains (if practicable) would simply drain the houses with which they were connected, and not the soil itself, which was of so wet a nature as to be very prejudicial to health. A suit was at once instituted against the Board, which was heard in December; the hearing of the case occupied the greater part of four days, and was argued by the Attorney General, Mr. Roundell Palmer, Mr. Lloyd, and Mr. Selwyn (Queen's Counsel), and several junior counsel. It is unnecessary here to enlarge on the facts or arguments adduced, as they are fully given in the judgment of the Master of the Rolls, of which an abstract is appended to this report. The result fully justified the course adopted by the Board, the bill being dismissed, although without costs. 23 DRAINAGE AND SANITARY MEASURES. The Board are empowered to compel the drainage into a sewer of any premises within 100 feet of it; and all such house drainage (except as after mentioned), should be effected by the owners of the premises under the immediate superintendence of the Officers of the Board—the plans of the drainage having been previously submitted to and approved by them. The portion of all house drains under the public thoroughfares the Board decided to construct themselves, with the view as well to the better protection of the public from accidents as the more satisfactory reinstating the roads. The contract for this work was in the first instance let, by tender, to Mr. James Pool, of Greenwich, at 25 per cent, under the prices of the price book compiled by the Metropolitan Commissioners of Sewers, and known as " The Blue Book Prices." This contract was not, however, fulfilled to the satisfaction of the Board, and the works were subsequently let to, and until very recently were executed by, Mr. Goodison, at 15 per cent, under the same prices. In default of such drainage being effected by the owners, the Board have (by sect. 73, as stated), the power, after 28 days' notice, of effecting the drainage through their own officers, and charging the owner with the expense incurred. They have also more summary powers under sect. 81. It was soon found that it would be necessary to exercise these powers very extensively—and a contract was made with Mr. Goodison for the execution of these works (which are of a more complex character and involving a far greater responsibility than the mere drains) at the Blue Book Prices. The necessity for bringing these sections into operation has arisen from various causes :—the comparative poverty of owners—legal disabilities—disputes between parties interested, &c. In some very exceptional cases, however, the Board have met with determined opposition, one of which may be cited, from the importance of the principle which ultimately became involved in it. Four cottages standing together in Green Lane, Penge, were reported as having privies in a very dilapidated condition and being exposed to public view. The Board issued an order for their repair; they were, however, so bad as to be incapable of repair, as subsequently stated by the owner, and he pulled them down, and refused to provide any substitute as required by a further order. The cottages were occupied by about twenty persons, and in this condition they remained for several weeks, when the Board (under sect. 86), empowering them under such circumstances to provide "sufficient" privies, erected four privies on the premises, at a cost with cesspool, District Surveyor's fees, &c., of £26 7s. 6d. To the repeated applications for payment of this amount the owner made no reply, 24 and ultimately the Board applied to the Magistrates at Croydon, under the 225th sect., which directs that in every case where any expenses are to be recovered in a summary manner (as under sect. 86), the "amount shall, in case of dispute be ascertained, and determined by, and be recoverable before, Two Justices." It was admitted that the Board had expended the amount sought to be recovered in the exercise of the powers vested in them, but was contended that a wise discretion had not been used by them, under the circumstances of the case, and therefore the Bench ought not to make the order. In this view they concurred; and it was in vain contended on the part of the Board that it was not the intention of the Legislature, under the section referred to (225), thus to constitute " Two Justices," or within the Metropolitan Police District a Stipendiary Magistrate, a Court of Appeal against the acts of the Yestries and Boards of Works; such a Court (the Metropolitan Board of Works), being expressly constituted under the 211th sect, of the Act. The Chairman (Mr. Biron), did not hesitate to express an opinion that the Metropolitan Board would be certain to endorse the order of the District Board, and that he would not open the door to such oppression; and the Bench declined to make an order for the expenses incurred by the Board, and directed them to pay the costs attending the summons. It was proposed to take Counsel's opinion as to the remedy of the Board under such circumstances, and a Committee was appointed to view the premises ; they did not, however, agree as to the propriety of the works constructed, and in the meantime an offer was made by the owner of the premises of £10 by way of compromise; this amount was, with certain qualifying conditions, accepted at a meeting at which seven Members only were present. Against th!s act of the Board several Members claimed the right, at a subsequent meeting, of entering their protest; but the compromise being then effected no further steps were taken in the matter. Thus the question is still open whether the Magistrates, under the section referred to, have the power of determining the discretion or otherwise of the Vestries and District Boards in the exercise of their powers, and of visiting the Ratepayers with the expenses involved in an adverse judgment. Under the power vested in the Board by the sections (73 and 81), under consideration, they have effected the drainge of the Workhouse, the Free School, the Police Station, 23 houses in the Grove, turning out of Lewis Grove, including the 200 feet of pipe sewer proposed to be laid there (see Abstract of Surveyor's Report), and 44 other houses. The total cost of these works, and the amount repaid to the Board up to the 25th March, 1857, will be seen by reference to the statement of Receipts and Expenditure. Further payments to a considerable amount have been since made. 25 Besides the drainage thus effected, upwards of 500 houses have, during the year, been drained into the sewers by the owners, either voluntarily, or in obedience to notices issued by the Board; such drains being carried out under the superintendence of their officers; the Board having previously approved the plans submitted to them for that purpose. The great proportion of the houses thus drained are in Loampit Yale, Avenue Road, and Rushey Green. A very inconsiderable portion in Penge and Sydenham communicate with sewers only partially covered. The expense of all house drainage is by the Act made payable by the "owner," who is defined (sect. 250), to be the person receiving the rack rent. This has been very generally complained of as a serious tax, especially where, as is frequently the case, the owner has only a short term of years, or the property consists of small tenements, and the outlay, consequently, very disproportionate to its value. With the view of mitigating as far as possible the complaints on this head the Board have abstained from ordering a water supply, water supplying pipes, cisterns, and apparatus (which very materially increase the expense), to be provided as a general rule, although in exceptional cases it has been ordered. The necessity for it in every case has, however, been strongly urged by the Medical Officer, and on more than one occasion has been made apparent to the Board by experience. They are therefore fully persuaded that the absence of such supply renders especial care necessary on the part of the occupants of all premises that the drains should be kept thoroughly cleansed ; and upon the exercise of this caution the Board still rely to justify them in relaxing the extreme letter of the Act. As no power is given to require the drainage into a sewer of any premises not within one hundred feet of it, cesspools must for a considerable time remain attached to a large proportion of the houses in this district. The Board have, as regards all houses under such circumstances which have been built during the year, required that they should be drained into cesspools constructed at a proper distance from the houses*, and as regards all old houses, similarly circumstanced, where any nuisance exists, the remedy applied has consisted in the construction of proper cesspools and their being emptied, the privies cleansed or reconstructed, and the premises generally being put in a proper condition, according to the requirements and facilities of each case; what has been done in this direction, and what remains to be done, will be seen to a great extent from the Medical Officer's Reports. The complaints of nuisances by inhabitants are comparatively rare; the Board therefore rely on their Medical Officer and Inspectors of Nuisances for the efficient performance of this branch of their duties ; the zeal of the former is fully manifested in his Reports. 26 The Inspectors have laid before the Board upwards of 150 Reports of Nuisances, for the abatement of which orders have been made and notices issued; and as a general rule the Board have every reason to be satisfied with the readiness shewn by the inhabitants to comply with their requirements. FINANCE. The expenses of the Board are directed (sect. 158), to be met by precepts issued by them upon the Overseers of the Parishes in the district; as regards the Parish of Lewisham these precepts are referred to the Board of Guardians of the Poor of the Parish, who, by a Local Act (passed in 1814), are invested with the powers of Overseers; and (sect. 159), where it appears that any expenses have been incurred for the special benefit of any particular part of the district, or not for equal benefit of the whole district, the Board of Works may direct them to be levied in such part, or exempt any part, or require a less rate to be levied thereon, as the case may require. They are also empowered (with the sanction of the Metropolitan Board), to borrow, at interest, on the credit of any monies or rates authorized to be raised by them, any money for the purpose of defraying any expenses incurred under the Act. The Board decided that the cost of the construction of the proposed sewers and all sewerage expenses incurred by them should be liquidated by one equal rate throughout the Parish and Hamlet respectively in which the works should be situate, and that they should not be deemed to be for the special benefit of any particular part of the Parish or Hamlet; the section referred to (159) being only brought into operation as regards watering and lighting the roads. The Board also decided that their general expenses, including rent and furniture of offices, salaries of officers, implements and all establishment expenses, should be paid out of the amount to be levied as General Rate, and be borne by the Parish and Hamlet rateably according to their rateable values; and the rateable value of Lewisham being £116,135, and of Penge £31,306, it was determined that Penge should bear one-fifth of all such expenses, as being the nearest approach to the principle laid down compatible with the justice of the case. To such amount it will be seen the Hamlet is charged in the annexed account of expenditure. On submitting the proposed sewers (see page 19), for the approval of the Metropolitan Board, their sanction was also requested to the borrowing, by the Board, of £10,000, the estimated cost of their construction. This sanction was given—and on the 10th July, the Board borrowed of the Kent Fire and Life Office (Maidstone), the sum of £6,000, at £5 per cent, on the general terms of the Act— that is, repayable on six months' notice by either party. A further 27 sum of £2,000 was borrowed of the same society, on the same terms, on the 13th December. These and all other sums borrowed for similar purposes will be defrayed out of the rates by a sinking fund of not less than two per cent; thus throwing the cost of all such works over a period not exceeding fifty years. It will be seen on reference to the account of receipts and expenditure that, in order to meet the current liabilities of the Board, it has been necessary to draw largely on the amount borrowed for sewerage purposes; this has arisen from circumstances beyond the control of the Board. They found themselves on their constitution surrounded with heavy liabilities, and only a trifling sum (under £50), to meet them ; they were compelled to launch into a considerable current expenditure, and their legitimate resources were outstanding Highway Rates, difficult of collection, and precepts on the Overseers, which could not be met for several months. As soon as the Board could form any approximate estimate of their expenditure, they issued (in March), precepts on the Overseers for the required amounts to bo paid within three months. That upon Penge was paid to the day, as was also a subsequent one made in September, but those upon Lewisham in March were not fully paid until December, and a considerable proportion of those made in September are still outstanding; this delay has been partly the result of a reassessment of the Parish which was made in 1856, and partly due to other causes which have since been removed. The sums thus diverted will, with the least possible delay, be refunded and applied to the objects for which they were borrowed.* In conclusion, the question of the admission of the press and ratepayers to the meetings of the Board demands some notice in this report, as having been the subject of repeated applications to them, and the pretext for fomenting some amount of agitation in Lewisham and Sydenham. At one of the first meetings of the Board, several ratepayers presented themselves as an audience, but the Board (with a lively recollection of the scenes that were wont to be enacted at the meetings of the open vestry) decided that they should withdraw. An application was made at the same meeting for admission by a representative of the press. This also was refused ; for although the Board wished that every facility should be given to place the public in possession of their corporate proceedings, they were at the same time anxious, as far as possible, to relieve individual members from the odium which necessarily attaches to duties having so direct a personal bearing as those which they are, at every meeting, called upon to perform. * See Appendix II., at the end of the Medical Officer's Reports, for particulars of the Preccpt issued in March, 1857, by the Metropolitan Board upon the District. 28 The legislature has taken eare that every publicity which it considered desirable should be given to the proceedings of the Metropolitan Vestries and District Boards by directing (sec. 61), not only that the minutes of their proceedings, account books, contracts, &c., should be open to the inspection of any ratepayer or owner of property in the district, but that an annual report of their proceedings, accounts, contracts, debts, &c., should be published and sold at a merely nominal price; and the Board confidently appeal to this report to prove that they not only do not shrink from such publicity, but that they have endeavoured to place in the hands of every person interested the utmost information on the several subjects coming within their cognizance. Ratepayers too impatient to await its publication, have, however, been sought, and from time to time assembled in various parts of the Parish, and have arrived at resolutions urging upon the Board the revocation of their decision on the subject; but no means have been furnished them for ascertaining whether such meetings really represented the wishes of the great body, or what proportion, of the ratepayers, and the Board maintained throughout the year the course they had originally laid down for themselves, conceding only that the minutes of their proceedings should have still further publicity by being opened to any accredited reporter of the press, as soon as they were signed, as required to give them full validity. These vexed questions are now, however, it is hoped, finally set at rest, the much coveted boon of the admission of the press having been recently granted. 29 Statement of the Receipts and Expenditure of the Board of TForJcs for the Lewisham District, from 1 st January 1856, to 25th March, 1857. RECEIPTS. £ s. d. EXPENDITURE. £ s. d. LEWISHAM, for General Purposes. LEWISHAM, for General Purposes Highway Board, outstanding rates £405 10 7 Highway Board, outstanding liabilities £344 1 0 By precept on Overseers 1600 0 0 Highway wages 905 15 2 Contributions towards highways, con- Highway materials and cartage 1996 1 7 245 6 3 Furniture and implements (four-fifths) 160 2 5 2250 16 10 Repairs and alterations to house, ditto 208 8 0 For Sewerage Purposes. Establishment ditto . 653 9 11 Loan on security of Sewer Rate £8000 0 0 4267 18 1 459 16 5 For Sewerage Purposes. 294 1 2 8753 17 7 Sewerage works and attendant expenses £5274 0 0 Lighting Lewisham Division, from Inspectors Cleansing ditches 89 1 4 32 9 11 Private work 700 8 1 Ditto Sydenham ditto damage to lamp 2 11 6 Frontage drains 418 4 10 PENGE, for General Purposes. 6481 14 3 By precepts on Overseers ,£800 0 0 Lighting, Lewisham Division current expenses Surveyor of Highways, balance, &c 18 19 4 £69 0 0 818 19 4 Instalment of debt of Lighting Inspectors 30 0 0 For Sewerage Purposes. 99 0 0 Private works 10 0 0 Watering, Blackheath 184 15 0 Balance of cash overpaid by the Treasurer £11 1 1 PENGE, for General Purposes. Highway wages £190 1 11 Balance of cash account overpaid 8 0 11 9 1 Highway materials, &c 350 14 2 Furniture and implements (one-fifth) . 40 0 7 Repairs and alterations ditto 52 2 0 Establishment ditto 163 7 6 796 6 2 For Sewerage Purposes. Private works 30 9 11 Petty Cash.—For balance in hand 20 0 10 £11,880 4 3 £11,880 4 3 We have caused to be prepared and do allow the above account in abstract, showing the Receipt and Expenditure of the Board of Works for the Lewisham District for the preceding year, to which is appended a summary statement of all Contracts entered into by the Board in such year, and of the monies owing to, and debts and liabilities owing by, such Board, on the 25th day of March, 1857. R. G. JONES. EDWIN NASH. JAMES F. FLEET. 30 Statement of Liabilities and Assets of the Board of Works for the Lewisham District. LIABILITIES.—25th March, 1857. £ 8. d. ASSETS.—25th March, 1857. £ 3. d. LEWISHAM, fob General Purposes. LEWISHAM, for General Purposes. Highway materials 370 2 7 Amount due by Overseers on precepts . £1600 0 0 Establishment, &c 148 15 10 Ditto ditto on contract for removing dust, &c. 10 0 0 For Sewerage Purposes. 1610 0 0 Sewerage works £1397 6 0 For Sewerage Purposes. Frontage drains 13 6 0 Law and Engineer's charges (estimate) 500 0 0 Amount due by Overseers on precepts . £1200 0 0 1910 12 0 Ditto ditto for private works 240 11 8 Ditto ditto frontage drains 124 3 8 ror Lighting. 1564 15 4 Lewisham Division 192 10 0 Blackheath, Watering. Sydenham ditto 621 17 3 PENGE, tor General Purposes. Amount due by Overseers on Precept 200 0 0 For Lighting. Establishment, &c 37 3 11 For Sewebage Purposes. Lewisham Division, amount due from Overseers on Precept 219 0 0 Sewerage works 23 12 2 Sydenham ditto ditto ditto 550 0 0 ON AMOUNT BORROWED 1886 18 5 For Lewisham sewerage expenses, but applied to general purposes 2726 0 0 £6,030 13 9 £6,030 13 9 31 SUMMARY STATEMENT Of all written Contracts entered into by the Board, from the 1st January, 1856, to the 25th March, 1857. date of contract. name of person with whom the contract was made. nature of the work to be performed, or materials supplied, and general terms. 1856. Jan. 24 William Colson To supply 200 cubic yards of gravel on the roads in Lewisham, at 5s. per yard. Ditto Henry Constable To supply 400 cubic yards of gravel on same roads, at same price. Feb. 7 Ditto To supply 400 cubic yards of gravel, at 5s. per yard in Lewisham, and 5s. 6d. per yard in Penge Feb. 23 Benjamin Parks To remove the dust and rubbish from all premises within a specified portion (see page 7) of the district, for one year from the 14th February instant, paying the Board £10 for the same. Feb. 28 William Colson To supply 200 yards of gravel, in Lewisham, at 5s. per yard. Nov. 1 John Murray To construct the several sewers in Loat's Pits and Rushey Green, the particulars of which are given in page 19, for £310, and all additional works required at the schedule prices in the contract. April 12 James Pool For laying house drains under the public thoroughfares, and connecting same with the sewers, at 25 per cent, under " The Blue Book Prices," for 12 months, determinable on notice. April 16 William Colson To cart all material within the district, at 2d. per cubic yard per furlong, and any material from any wharf in Deptford to any place within the district, at three-halfpence per ton per furlong , and for the hire of each set of one horse and harness and one cart and man, at 10s. per day, from the date of contract until 25th March, 1857. May 6 John Murray To construct the sewers in Spencer Place and Loampit Hill (for particulars see page 19), for £305, and all additional works required at the schedule prices in the contract. August 27 William Dethick To construct the sewers from Catford Hill to Sydenham Park (see page 19), for £5247, and all additional works required at the schedule prices in the contract. October 16 The Crystal Palace District Gas Company To supply and fix, as directed, any number of gas lamps, columns, and lanterns, complete, within any portion of the district, at £4 10s. each, and supply gas to each lamp, from dusk to dawn throughout the year, at £5 5s. per lamp, or £4 2s. per lamp for the winter eight months, the agreement to be determinable by the Board at any time in the years 1859 or 1861, on giving 6 months' previous notice. 32 The following are the Names and Addresses of the present (June, 1857) Members of the Board, and of their Officers. Members. Mr. Josiah Andrews, Rushey Green, Lewisham. Mr. Walter Bagnall, Blackheath. Mr. James Belcham, Lewisham. Mr. James Brooker, Brockley Park, Sydenham. Mr. James Daikers, Penge. Mr. Joseph Dale, Bell Green, Sydenham. Mr. J. T. De la Salle, Sandwell Place, Lewisham. Mr. Hiix Dodds, Farmer, Lewisham. Mr. William Edgerton, Farmer, Sydenham. Dr. Henry Greenwood, Blackheath. Mr. John Groves, Hither Green, Lewisham. Mr. James Hoath, Catford Mill, Lewisham. Mr. William Kelsey, Lewisham. Mr. William Lane, Rushey Green, Lewisham. Mr. Joseph Mead, Forest Hill. Mr. William Morphew, Forest Hill. Mr. Benjamin Parsey, Sydenham. Mr. Daniel Phillips, Rushey Green, Lewisham. Mr. Ebenezer Pritchard, Penge. Mr. W. M. Ridgway, Sydenham. Mr. Henry Robinson, Bridge Mill, Lewisham. Mr. W. H. Shove, Blackheath. Mr. John Sinkins, Sydenham. Mr. Benjamin Smith, Blackheath. Mr. S. Southorn, Blackheath. Mr. W. W. Stanger, Belvedere Road, Upper Norwood. Mr. Thomas Tapley, Farmer, Lewisham Officers. Mr. O. C. T. Eagleton, Montpelier Row, Blackheath, Clerk. Mr. F. E. Wilkinson, Sydenham Park, Sydenham, Medical Officer. Mr. W. H. Treverton, West Kent Park, Forest Hill, Surveyor. Mr. John Duncan, New Cross, Inspector of Nuisances. Mrs. Perry, Housekeeper. Offices. Grove Place, Lewisham, near the Church. 33 APPENDIX. PARISH OF LEWISHAM COrY AWARD FOR THE DIVISION INTO WARDS AND THE APPORTIONMENT OF VESTRYMEN. I, William Dure ant Coopek, of Guildford Street, in the county of Middlesex, Esquire, having been duly appointed by the Right Honourable Sir George Grey, Baronet, one of Her Majesty's Principal Secretaries of State, by virtue of an Act passed in the last Session of Parliament, intituled " An Act for the Better Local Management of the Metropolis," to be one of the persons to set out the wards into which certain parishes are by the said Act directed to be divided, and to apportion the number of vestrymen to be elected for such parishes respectively among such wards, and to apportion the number of vestrymen to be elected for any parish already divided into wards under any local Act, and, further, to act separately in such division and apportionment from the other persons appointed or to be appointed to perform those duties under the said Act, have proceeded in the performance of the duties required by the said Act to be executed by me, in reference to the Parish of Lewisham, including Sydenham Chapelry (being a parish mentioned in Schedule (B.) to the said Act, containing more than 2,000 rated householders, and not already divided into wards under any local Act), and to determine and set out the number, extent, limits, and boundary lines of the wards into which the said parish is to be divided, and to apportion among such wards the number of vestrymen to be elected for such parish: Now I do hereby, by virtue of the provisions and directions of the said Act, divide the said Parish of Lewisham, including Sydenham Chapelry, into three wards, none of which contains less than 500 rated householders, to be called respectively No. 1, or Blackheath Ward, No. 2, or Sydenham Ward, and No. 3, or Lewisham Ward ; and I determine and appoint that the said ward to be called No. 1, or Blackheath Ward, shall consist of so much of the said parish as lies north of a line drawn from the east boundary of the parish, at the point where it adjoins the parishes of Lee and Charlton, running westward along the centre of the London Boad to the point where the Parish of Lewisham adjoins the Parish of St. Paul, Deptford; and that the said ward to be called No. 2, or Sydenham Ward, shall consist of so D 34 much of the said Parish of Lewisham as will be comprised within a line drawn from the west boundary of the said parish near Honor Oak, adjoining the Parish of Camberwell, running eastward to the west side of the bridge known as No. 9 bridge over the London and South Coast Railway, thence southward in a straight line to the west side of the railway bridge thrown over the road leading from the Dartmouth Road, Forest Hill, to Perry Yale, thence to the centre of the said road under the last-mentioned bridge, thence along the centre of the road leading through Dartmouth Vale and Perry Yale to the centre of the Sydenham Road opposite Meadow Croft, thence southward along the centre of the Sydenham Road to the centre of the road at Bell Green, thence along the centre of Kent House Lane to the south boundary of the Parish of Lewisham, adjoining the Parish of Beckenham, and thence by the boundary of the Parish of Lewisham next the Parishes of Beckenham and Camberwell to the starting point; and that the said ward to be called No. 3, or Lewisham Ward, shall consist of the remainder of the said Parish of Lewisham, including the remainder, if any, of the said Chapelry of Sydenham. And, having regard, as far as in my judgment it is practicable, as well to the number of persons rated to the relief of the poor in each ward as to the aggregate amount of the sums at which all such persons are rated, I do apportion and assign nine vestrymen to the said ward to be called No. 1, or Blackheath Ward, and twelve vestrymen to the said ward to be called No. 2, or Sydenham Ward, and fifteen vestrymen to the said ward to be called No. 3, or Lewisham Ward. In witness whereof I have hereunto set my hand, this Fourth day of October, in the year of our Lord One thousand eight hundred and fifty-five. William Dttrrant Cooper. 35 AN ABSTRACT OF THE JUDGMENT of THE MASTER OF THE ROLLS, in the suit op STAINTON V. THE METROPOLITAN BOARD OP WORKS AND THE BOARD OF WORKS FOR THE LEWISHAM DISTRICT. This suit was originally instituted against the Metropolitan Board of Works, and subsequently against that Board and the Lewisham District Board, for an injunction to restrain both the Boards from causing or continuing the diversion of a stream which theretofore flowed through the grounds of the late Mr. Stainton. He had since 1817 been possessed of a house and grounds in Lewisham, and in 1835 he purchased a field (called Springfield, between Willow Walk and the Avenue opposite the Black Horse, Bushey Green), containing a copious spring of water, from whence a stream flowed over a marshy piece of ground in a northerly direction. Having purchased the land, Mr. Stainton collected the water into one spot forming a pond, and diverting the flow from it into another channel to his house and grounds, and ultimately by its original course through the Village into the Ravensbourne. Large sums were expended, as well in the purchase of the land as the formation of the pond and channel for diversion of the rivulet flowing therefrom, which had been regarded by Mr. Stainton with peculiar pleasure, in which probably his representatives participated, and thus no compensation given by a jury could repay to them the pretium affectionis with which they regarded it. In 1855 the Metropolitan Commissioners of Sewers began the main sewer, which is constructed from a point near the village church to the Black Horse Inn, Rushey Green, in the turnpike road, and from thence in its course to Bell Green, in the Catford Hill Road. When the sewer had got opposite Mr. Stainton's property, and had cut through a bed of clay which seems to have retained the water in the basin or gravel upon which Rushey Green is situated, the spring disappeared from the spot where it previously welled up, and thereupon the plaintiffs filed their bill for an injunction. It appeared to him (the Master of the Rolls) on the hearing (6th June, 1855), that it was the intention of the Commissioners of Sewers to construct the sewer so that, if the expectations of the engineer proved correct, it would not inflict any injury on the plaintiffs; and although, should the sewer permanently divert the water from the plaintiffs' spring the Commissioners claimed the right of doing so; yet he thought it better, as the question of fact was in contest, that the motion should stand over until the sewer was completed, inasmuch as if the result turned out as was anticipated, no question either of fact or law would arise. The sewer was then completed, but the result arising from its construction was still in dispute from the circumstance that a side sewer parallel with the main sewer had been made into it by the District Board, within the limit of the band of clay which formerly contained the water; the D 2 36 combined result was clearly that one or both of the sewers diverted the water from the spring, which formed the rivulet which had been converted into what was considered ornamental water on the grounds of Mr. Stainton. The District Board was then brought before the Court, and the motion resumed and extended so as to obtain an injunction against them as well as the Metropolitan Board. The motion was at his (the Master of the Bolls) suggestion converted into a motion for a decree, so that a final adjudication might at once be made. The case occupied the greater part of four days, and was gone into very fully both on the facts and the law. On the question of fact the Master of the Bolls came to the conclusion that both the main and side sewer prejudicially affected the spring, to what extent and in what proportion he was unable to say. The side sewer was probably the more injurious of the two; but his impression was, that either would, if retained unaltered, be sufficient to drain away the water which originally rose on the plaintiffs' land and supplied the rivulet. This being established or assumed, the question of law arose, whether the plaintiffs were entitled to the injunction they asked, or whether the defendants were entitled to do what they had done and continue the sewers and drainage in their present state; upon which he (the Master) had come to a conclusion favourable to the defendants. He was of opinion that the decisions which relate to the right of an adjoining proprietor to divert, by drainage or underground operations, water which might have flowed or was flowing in the soil of an adjoining proprietor could not be imported into the consideration of the case. The Boards could not be treated as clothed with the rights or obligations of owners of lands. Such as they were they were defined by statute; beyond it they could do nothing; what it permitted or required they were bound to do; to the statute therefore he must look for a solution of the question, interpreted and illustrated by the decided cases which relate to acts done under similar statutes. He fully concurred in that class of cases of which Jones v. Bird, and the Grocers' Company v. Donne, illustrated the principle. In other words, he entertained no doubt that if either of the Boards were producing the injury complained of by the unskilful or improper construction of the sewers, the Court would interfere to prevent it; but he did not think these cases applied here, as he was of opinion that for the object pointed- out by the statute, both the sewers were constructed in a very skilful manner, and were well fitted to discharge the duties imposed upon them, if the injury incidentally inflicted was not to be regarded. He had to look at what the powers of the defendants were under those acts, and thought this case was governed by the proviso at the end of the 50th sect, of the Act of 11 and 12 Yict. c. 112, as regarded the Commissioners of Sewers, and a proviso, identical in terms, at the end of the 86th sect, of the Act of 18 and 19 Vict. c. 120 (the Metropolis Local Management Act), as regarded the Metropolitan and District Boards. The proviso referred to (the operation of which was not to be limited to the previous part of the section in each Act) enacted that where any work done by the Commissioners should interfere with or prejudicially affect any right to the use of water, full compensation should be made to all persons sustaining damage thereby in manner provided by the act. In his opinion this was a case where the right to the use of water was interfered with, and such right was limited to a claim for compensation. No doubt, in many cases connected with 37 public works, railways, canals, &c., the sum awarded by a jury was no real compensation. The jury might be unable to appreciate the pleasure enjoyed by another in a matter which to them would appear to be foolish; but this was an evil inseparable from these matters, and the legislature having thought fit to enact that individual rights, in other cases held so sacred, should in these cases be sacrificed to obtain a great public benefit, it did not lie within the power of a court of equity to say that the object of the legislature should be prevented because a right was interfered with for which adequate compensation could not possibly be afforded. It was said that the sewers might be so constructed as not to drain away any of the water that supplied the rivulet, that if they were made watertight and confined rigidly to draining the houses the injury would be avoided, and thence it was contended that the only question was one of expense, and the case of Coates v. the Clarence Railway Company was cited in support of this view. The evidence, however, led to the conclusion that it would not be possible to construct these sewers as suggested, having regard to the functions they had to perform, but that they would not be fitly constructed unless they admitted the filtration of water from the adjoining lands, and the District Board expressly stated that they considered it essential for the due performance of their duty, having regard to the state of the adjoining soil, to admit the water from it to percolate into the drain; and the same careful and expensive mode of constructing each separate drain would be required in the case of every house communicating with the main drain; and the final result, as far as he (the Master) could judge, that the drainage of the district when completed in this unusual manner would be expensive, liable to derangement, and probably ineffectual for the purposes intended by the act, while he was satisfied that the present drains and sewers were perfectly well constructed for those purposes, setting apart only the interference with the enjoyment by the plaintiffs of the rivulet. If the object of the plaintiffs could be obtained by the construction of the sewers and drains in the manner suggested, the same mode could be adopted in every case; and if such a course were intended by the legislature the provision referred to would be useless and unmeaning. But he was of opinion that it had a clear meaning, and applied to the consequences of constructing sewers and drains in the ordinary manner, and that the legislature did not mean to impose a peculiar mode of construction to meet any exceptional cases. The case of Coates v. the Clarence Railway Company was not repugnant to this view. If he (the Master) were satisfied that the drains were improperly constructed, or even that by a very slight expense as good a system of drainage might be maintained consistently with preserving the accustomed flow of the rivulet, he should not hesitate to enforce that mode of construction; but he had not only not come to that conclusion, but that an opposite conclusion if not proved was strongly impressed 011 his mind as the fair result of the evidence and facts proved. He had felt considerable hesitation respecting the costs of the suit, but under all circumstances he thought he should best consult the ends of justice by dismissing the bill without costs. He foresaw that litigation was likely to arise hereafter as to the right to compensation, the amount of it, and whether, if at all, it should be borne by the Metropolitan Board, or the District Board, or by both, and if so, in what proportion, and he suggested that all further litigation should be put an end to by agreement between the parties. 38 REPORTS OF THE MEDICAL OFFICER OF HEALTH, to THE BOARD OP WORKS FOR THE LEWISHAM DISTRICT, 1856. JANUARY. Gentlemen, In presenting this my first Medical Report, as to the sanitary condition of the District over which you have done me the honour of electing me as "Medical Officer of Health," I have endeavoured, as briefly as possible, to point out— Firstly. What general causes are more immediately liable to engender disease and increase mortality; Secondly. To give a slight sketch of the geographical and geological peculiarities of the district; and, Thirdly. To append Tables of the past Mortality for the last ten years; the Mortality of the present month up to the 26th instant, and Meteorological Tables taken from observations made at Greenwich Observatory. With regard to sanitary matters, I have found it necessary from the short period which has elapsed since my taking office, to generalise upon that which seems to be more immediately requisite to be attended to, and to reserve for future Reports such inquiries as demand more special and minute attention. The District appears to have been healthy, when compared with some other Metropolitan Districts; but it will be for you, Gentlemen, not only to prevent increase of mortality as population rapidly increases, but by timely sanitary regulations, to render the District more healthy than it has ever been. The removable causes of disease may be classified under eight heads, viz. 1st. Want of light. 2nd. Want of ventilation and free circulation of air. 3rd. Deficient or impure supply of water. 4th. Adulterated food. 5th. Animal food rendered poisonous by disease or decay. 6th. Putrifying animal matter, drains, privies, cesspools, slaughter-houses, &c. 7th. Marsh miasm. 8th. The state of dwelling houses. Cause I. Want of Light. Solar light either comes to us directly as in sunshine, or is diffused through the atmosphere as in ordinary daylight; and is absolutely 39 sary for the healthy development of the animal as well as the vegetable kingdom. The consequences of want of light are more perceptible, and, therefore, more familiar to us in the vegetable kingdom; and are remarkably shown in the properties and chemical products of plants reared in the open day or in the dark. The tendency of plants in a room to turn themselves to the light, the peculiar want of colour and succulent growth of plants grown in the dark, and the advantage which gardeners take of this property to bleach celery, endive, &c., will sufficiently illustrate this part of my subject. But human beings are equally dependent upon light; without light they become cachectic and unhealthy; blanched from loss of the red colour of the blood; debilitated and dropsical; scrofula is developed, and they will probably be carried off by tubercular disease, or rendered fit prey for epidemics. Mothers living in dark cellars produce an unusual proportion of defective children. In some cells under the fortifications of Lisle, a number of poor people took up their abode. The proportion of defective infants produced became so great, that it was found necessary to issue an order commanding that these habitations should be closed up. But even in cases where the absence of light is less complete, the effects are abundantly striking in the pale and sickly complexion and stunted frame. The diseases the want of it produces are of long continuance, and waste the means of life before death results; and as to death itself, it has been calculated that in London nearly 10,000 persons perish annually from deficient circulation of air and want of light. Cause II. Want of Ventilation and, Free Circulation of Air. An adult respires about 17 to 20 times in a minute; and it is calculated that during an ordinary inspiration about 25 cubic inches of atmospheric air are taken in, and about the same quantity expelled during an ordinary expiration. The gas taken in is atmospheric air; that which is expelled differs materially. "We find, that the greater portion of oxygen (constituting about one-fifth part of atmospheric air), has disappeared; and that it is replaced by an equal volume of carbonic acid gas, an additional quantity of which is eliminated by the skin. Carbonic acid is a poisonous gas, 13 to 15 per cent, of which mixed with atmospheric air, is sufficient to destroy life; and as we see that each human being consumes per minute nearly four cubic feet of oxygen, and expels quite that quantity of carbonic gas, &c., it becomes of the most vital importance that overcrowding should be prevented; and that ventilation and a good supply of pure air should be made available by every means in our power. In illustration of these facts, every one must have read of the horrible death of the Englishmen who were locked up all night in a close dungeon at Eort William, Calcutta; 146 individuals were imprisoned in a room 20 feet square with only one small window; and before morning all but 23 had died under the most dreadful of tortures, slowly increasing suffocation. 40 A similar accident happened in 1742. The keeper of the Round Tower at St. Martin's crammed 28 people into a room 6 feet square, and not quite 6 feet high, and 4 were suffocated. Cause III. Deficient or Impure Supply of Water. The paramount necessity for an abundant supply of pure water, both for internal use and for purposes of cleanliness, cannot for a moment be questioned. The skin being the organ by which much noxious matter is eliminated from the body, and upon which the human being depends for the regulation of its temperature, it is of the greatest importance that every facility should be afforded for strict cleanliness as a means of preserving health. The source of all fresh water is rain, which comes to us in this way in the purest form, containing as it does few or no salts; in fact, nothing more than an admixture of a certain proportion of atmospheric air and a small quantity of carbonic acid; and, according to Liebig, in the neighbourhood of large towns, a minute quantity of ammonia. Humboldt and Gay Lassac shew that the quantity of these gases equals about one-twenty-fifth of the volume of the water; and that the proportion of the oxygen to the nitrogen, instead of being as 21 to 79, as in atmospheric air, is as 31 to 69. I may here mention, that lead cisterns are unfit for storing rain water, as from its containing carbonic acid, it is liable to form the poisonous carbonate of lead. River or well water, from its containing salts, prevents this by forming an insoluble crust or deposit on the surface of the lead, thus preventing solution. Well water is obtained from the natural filtration of rain through a more or less pervious stratum, which being impeded in its descent by an impervious substratum, is obtained by digging. The quality materially depends upon the natural peculiarities of soil through which it percolates, or with which it comes in contact; and is liable to be contaminated in populous places by accidental admixture with decomposing organic matter from leakage of drains, cesspools, sewers, &c. These facts prove the necessity of properly securing with cement, not only the sides of wells, but the entire extent of sewers and cesspools, the receptacles of animal refuse and decomposition, instead of (as is frequently the case), using mortar for the bottom of sewers and cement only for the top; most cesspools not being cemented at all, in order that the liquid parts may better percolate away, and require less frequent emptying. No further illustration is wanted of this fact than the results which have been proved to have taken place by a Commission which was appointed to inquire into the causes of the fatality of asiatic cholera in the neighbourhood of Golden-square, when it was ascertained beyond doubt, that the frightful mortality was occasioned by the leakage of a single drain into a well, which the inhabitants were in the habit of using for their supply of water. River water depends for its quality upon its source, and upon the nature of the soil through which it passes. If it passes through its whole course over a siliceous bed, it will be as a general rule extremely pure, holding less salts in solution than well water, 41 and consequently softer. If on the contrary it passes through a clayey bed, it will hold in solution certain salts which are peculiar to such soil. A river varying much in level at different times, will be generally an unfit supply for internal use, from the occasional miasmatic nature of its banks when but partially covered with water and exposed to the sun's rays, as well as from the less diluted impurities which are undoubtedly mixed with it in passing through a cultivated tract. When there is a large body of water, on the contrary, unless there is most extensive pollution, the impurities may be almost too diluted to be appreciable. But as poisons contained in water are introduced into the system in the most subtle form, and in a condition which renders them most easily absorbed by the fluids of the body, and in a most unobserved and gradual manner, it behoves those who have the custody of the public health to look well into the sources of supply; and where public companies are concerned, to its proper and efficient filtration prior to service. Cause IV. Adulterated Food. This subject in its many varieties is so familiar to you from the recent able investigation of the subject as published in the "Lancet," that entering into details would be a work of supererogation on my part, and would unnecessarily occupy your time. I may, however, in impressing the importance of procuring food in a pure state, recall to your recollection a few pernicious admixtures, viz.— alum in bread, Prussian blue in green tea, the occasional admixture of the excrement of the silk worm in black tea, salts of copper in pickles, red lead and vermillion in anchovy sauce and paste, arsenic and copper in certain green coloured sweetmeats, chicory in coffee, &c. &c. Cause V. Animal Food rendered Poisonous from Diseased Action or Partial Decomposition. Dr. Christison mentions a poison contained in the blood of over-driven cattle, noticed by Morand in the year 1776, in which the animal seemed to vary little from its natural condition ; but in which, if any of tho^raw meat or blood were applied to a scratch, or even sometimes to the unbroken skin, produced severe inflammation or malignant boils. Another disease, fortunately rare in this country, is common on the continent, in which animals are affected with boils, a disorder called " milzbrand." This distemper renders the animal so poisonous, that those who handle the skin or entrails, or who eat the flesh, are apt to suffer severely. Sometimes cholera is produced, but more commonly typhus fever, or malignant pustules, which diseases are frequently fatal in a few hours. The tendency of decomposition to impart deleterious qualities to animal matter previously wholesome, has been long known. To those unaccustomed to the use of tainted food, the mere commencement of decay is insupportable. Game decayed only sufficiently to please the taste of the epicure, has produced severe cholera in persons not accustomed to eat it in that state. Gaspard, ilajendie, Leuret, and Stamont, have proved by experiment, that putrid animal matte*, introduced into the veins of healthy animals, quickly proved fatal, producing a disease resembling typhus fever; and 42 similar effects were observed by Hajendie when animals were confined over vessels in which animal matter was decaying. These questions throw much light upon the tendency of putrid effluvia to produce typhus, cholera, &c. Partially decomposed sausages, cheese, ham, bacon, smoked sprats, and different varieties of fish, &c., have frequently caused disease and death. Under this head I may also mention milk from diseased cows; and where these animals are kept without a supply of proper food, fresh air, light, and exercise, and in the midst of offensive refuse. This may, I think, be more often a cause of disease than is anticipated. Cause VI. Brains, Privies, Cesspools, Slaughter Souses, Grave Yards, and other Sources of Animal Decomposition. A dense, warm, moist atmosphere, with no wind, is a favourable condition for the production of fever and other epidemic diseases; and when to these conditions are superadded a want of drainage or imperfect drainage, the contiguity of privies, manure and offal heaps, grave yards, or other foci of animal decomposition, the exciting cause is perfect; and there is nothing more wanted than human beings fitted by intemperance, delicacy, debility, fatigue, or anxiety, for the reception of those invisible gases which are so fertile in the production of disease. The decomposition of animal matter is called " putrefactive fermentation ; " and in this manner, favoured by warmth and moisture, it returns, after a due period, into its ultimate elements. The products of this fermentation consisting of poisonous compounds remarkable for their foetor of hydrogen, with sulphur, phosphorus, and carbon, and of these gases, with portions of offensive and partially decomposed animal matter. That these causes are sufficient to produce dire disease and epidemy has been abundantly proved by the liability in crowded and badly ventilated jails, transport ships, among armies, &c., to generate fever, cholera, &c.; hence the terms jail fever, camp fever, &c., with which we are unfortunately familiar. Put the court-yards and roads interspersed among the poor dwellings of some neighbourhoods, are places thickly strewed with the seeds of disease. Malaria rise at times from these localities, mixed with animal poison, which when inhaled, cannot fail to engender debility, consumption, disease, and pauperism. These causes act by depressing the vital powers, and vary only in intensity according to the quantity of poison absorbed. Cause VII. Marsh Miasm. The exhalations thrown out from decomposing vegetable matter, only partially covered with water and exposed to the sun's rays, are called miasmata. The precise nature of these emanations has as yet been undecided, some saying that they consist of sulphuretted hydrogen, some hydro-carbon, &c., but the fact is well known, that they are capable of producing, in those exposed to their influence, a peculiar disease termed intermittent fever or ague. 43 It is certain that these miasmata are heavy, and accumulate in the lower part of the atmosphere; and that they are more virulent when applied through the medium of moisture. Their course may be traced to a considerable distance from their source, forming currents wafted along by the wind; and people at the top of a hill may be affected by them, although from their weight a wall might stop them or alter their course. Ague is now endemic in but few parts of England, where it was formerly very prevalent, the progressing system of drainage and cultivation tending to put an end to it; and the only mode of exterminating the disease is by a proper and perfect system of surface drainage. It is not to be supposed from the term "marsh miasm," that marshes are the only sources whence these exhalations arise; they may be formed upon local accumulations of wet undrained earth, slime, mud, &c. They are of course more powerful when most extensive, therefore the disease resulting is modified according to amount of concentration, sometimes exhibiting itself merely in the form of apparent debility, loss of appetite, headache, &c.; at other times, with all the virulence of the disease, differing only in degree according to the dose of poison, from mild ague and fever, and those severe cases which are fatal in a few hours; from the mild ague and remittents of this country to those which are fatal in the second or third paroxysm in hot countries. Cause VIII. The State of Dwelling Houses. The condition of dwelling houses may be a source of disease, not only from Causes I. II. III. VI. VII., viz., want of light, want of ventilation, deficient or impure supply of water, noxious gases eliminated by decomposing animal and vegetable poison, but they may be detrimental to health from dampness occasioned by insufficient foundation, bad surface drainage, want of proper relative elevation above the ground as regards the neighbourhood immediately surrounding, want of proper dry flooring, want of such repairs as are necessary for cleanliness, want of proper protection from the weather in consequence of insufficient or dilapidated roofing, want of proper windows, and too early habitation in houses recently built. These causes are all liable to produce characteristic disease. Besides those already mentioned, I may name catarrhs, influenzas, bronchitis, rheumatism, diseases of skin, &c.; and such diseases tend to shorten life, and further increase the eatalogue of pauperism and vice. Sundry of the causes here enumerated, act more prejudicially for various evident reasons at a low elevation; and vary materially according to the amount of wind, temperature, peculiar states of the atmosphere, such as its electric state, barometic pressure, sudden atmospheric changes, amount of heat, moisture, rain fall, &c. &c. The healthiness of a district also depends materially upon the kind of occupation of its inhabitants; and the length of life varies materially according to the kind of employment by which its inhabitants earn their daily living. For instance, in some occupations poisons enter into the system through the medium of the skin, or enter the stomach, or arc breathed into the 44 lungs. In others, there is great exposure to the weather. In some, there is a great amount of loss of rest and exposure to the night air. In others, there is a great deal of confinement in close apartments and want of exercise. In some, exposure to noxious exhalations of various kinds. In some, an excessive amount of labour. In others, there is great exposure to heat or to cold; and last, though not least, in some there is great and overburthening mental anxiety. All these varieties must doubtless tell seriously upon the health more or less of districts generally. LEWISHAM. The parish of Lewisham [so called from læsew, a meadow, and ham, a village], is situate upon a very undulating tract of land; is bounded upon the north by the parish of Greenwich and of St. Paul's, Deptford; on the north-west and west by the parish of Camberwell; on the south by the parish of Beckenham, which here forms a tongue of land, separating it from the hamlet of Penge; on the south by the parish of Bromley; on the east by the parish of Lee; on the north-east by the parishes of Kidbrooke and Plumstead. The village of Penge, a hamlet of Battersea, is bounded on the north and north-east by the parish of Beckenham; on the north-west by the parish of Camberwell; on the west by a point of the parish of Lambeth; on the south and south-east by the parish of Croydon. The District is intersected by the river Ravensbourne, which takes its rise on Keston Common, not far from the borders of Surrey, and near an old fortified camp which Drs. Tabor and Hasted suppose to have been the encampment of the Roman legions under Aulus Plautius, whilst awaiting the arrival of the Emperor Claudius. Taking a most sinuous course, it flows north north-west at the base of Bromley Hill, between the parishes of Hayes and Bromley, receiving three branches in Lord Farnborough's park, and proceeding to Southend, expands into a broad sheet of water; again narrowing, it continues its course through the fields, and near Catford Bridge unites with the small river Chaffinch, or Poole River (which receives two branches from the Norwood hills), and flowing on the north-west side of Lewisham across Brockley Road, did receive the water of the Lady Well, which since the building of the new sewer in this road has been closed up. It also receives, after passing nearly through Lewisham, the stream of water called the Ravensbourne Brook, which runs through the entire length of the village by the road side; and which takes its origin from some springs situate upon Rushey Green; also the small stream called the Lee Bourne or Quaggy. Thence proceeding to Deptford, the river empties itself into Deptford Creek, which is continuous with it and the Thames. In its course it turns several mills, and supplies the Kent "Waterworks Company for the use of the inhabitants of Greenwich, Deptford, and parts of Blackheath and Lewisham, Camberwell, Peckham, and the Government yards of Woolwich and Deptford. On either side of the Ravensbourne, the country rises until it attains on the east side, at the highest point of Blackhcath, an elevation of 155 feet above the mean sea level. 45 On its westerly side, the country rises until it attains, at the highest point of Sydenham, an elevation of 365 feet. The top of the Crystal Palace grounds, the highest point of Penge, being 361 feet above the mean sea level. The District is somewhat protected from the violence of the wind on account of the high ridges bordering it; but suffers most from northeasterly winds, from which quarter it is not so protected. The mean annual rain fall is about 25 inches (Greenwich Observatory). The prevalent winds during the year 1855, as compiled from the Meteorological Tables of the Crystal Palace Company, were as follows: Between north and east 99 days. Between south and east 37 days. Between north and west 71 days. Between south and west 73 days. The District is based upon eocene tertiary deposit, varying in its thickness and differing materially in its character in different parts, as well as in its composition in the same part, and intersected by outcrops as at New Cross Railway cutting, where the lower tertiary strata rise from beneath the London clay, and as near Lewisham and Blackheath, where the secondary formation (the chalk) appears in one or two places, London clay having entirely disappeared; the chalk being covered by a varying crust of sand and pebble beds, with a base of indurated Woolwich clay filled with shells. The principal part of the drainage of this District finds its way ultimately into the Ravensbourne, mixed with the overflow of cesspools where these receptacles exist, and the direct drainage from many houses; and after being conducted into the natural watercourses, ditches, &c., finds its way rapidly into the small tributaries of this river, and must seriously contaminate it. These conditions exist more especially in Sydenham and Penge, where almost every ditch or brook is more or less contaminated. In Lewisham, a sewer has been constructed, into which many of the drains of the houses open; and in this portion of the District the evil is in a partial degree avoided. The quality and supply of water so varies, that it must be considered under the separate divisions of the District. The number of acres contained in the parish is 5220. The number of occupied houses is 2914. Unoccupied houses, 207. Sheds, outbuildings, and stables in the whole parish, 74. Number of assessments on land in the whole parish, 869. Making the total number of assessments, 4064.* Rateable value of property £113,886; and which at 11d in the pound amounts to £5219 15s. 6d. The numbers of the population of Lewisham village was, In the census of 1841 5388. In the census of 1851, it amounted to 6097. *The above is extracted from rate books, and relates to rates made 24th July, 1855. 46 The population of the chapelry of Sydenham was, by the census taken In 1841 2919. In 1851 4501. Showing a rapid increase, which has been steadily progressing. The population of the hamlet of Penge was, in the census of 1851, 270, since which it has enormously increased. Appended are the Tables of Mortality of Lewisham and Sydenham, running over a space of fourteen years. The information given is not quite so complete as I could have wished, from the fact that Blackheath is mixed up with other parishes to form a registrar's sub-district. And any information about the mortality of Penge appears not to be procured, as it is registered under the Croydon district. These inconveniences I hope to be able to get rid of by collecting future registrations as far as they relate to this District. By the annexed Table it will be seen that some causes must have been in operation against the health of Lewisham as compared with that of Sydenham. The deaths registered in 1841, being in Lewisham village 1 out of 39.5, in Sydenham 1 out of 65. The deaths registered in 1851, being in Lewisham 1 out of 44, in Sydenham 1 out of 72.5. The advantage in favour of the health of Sydenham, thus seems to be 1 death out of 27, although the mortality of Lewisham seems diminished during that space. 47 NUMBER OF DEATHS REGISTERED IN THE UNDERMENTIONED REGISTRAR'S SUB-DISTRICTS FROM 1841 TO 1851 INCLUSIVE. Registrar's Sub-Districts. Parishes comprising the the Sub-Districts. Population. Deaths Registered. 1841. 1851. 1841. 1842. 1843. 1844. 1845. 1846. 1847. 1848. 1849. 1850. 1851. 1852. 1853. 1854. Lee Comprising the parishes of Lee, Kidbrooke, and that part of the parish of Lewisham lying N.N.W. and N.N.E. of Plough Bridge 6949 8478 91 107 117 109 106 125 125 120 152 115 117 133 129 154 Lewisham Village Sydenham Together comprising the remainder of Lewisham parish. 5388 6097 139 101 111 91 131 131 126 160 193 137 139 132 168 189 2919 4501 45 30 35 51 50 60 62 66 69 54 62 74 65 125 48 BLACKHEATH. Blackheath, or so much of it as is comprised in the Parish of Lewisham, lies on the north side of the District. The main portion of the place is situated upon a flat-topped hill, elevated at its highest point 155 feet above the sea level, and declining gradually as it nears Lewisham. It is admirably adapted by its fine open position, and the nature of the soil upon which it is placed, for a healthful resort, and from its elevation commands fine views of the neighbourhood. The ward contains 836 houses. From the nature of the soil the roads might be supposed to be in good order. They are in most parts sound and dry, the wet being rapidly removed after rain. Its geological formation is, like Lewisham, composed of the lower tertiary strata, consisting of a crust of pebble beds and sand, varying in thickness, but averaging about 30 feet, placed upon a bed of shells* mixed with a hard impervious substratum of Woolwich plastic clay, about 2 or 3 feet thick, based upon the chalk, which crops out in one or two points of the neighbourhood. The drainage of the place is almost entirely into cesspools, which, more especially on account of the porous nature of the soil, and the impervious bed beneath, must be decidedly objectionable, and if the population were more extensive, would doubtless prove prejudicial by its liability to contaminate the water drawn from wells. It is supplied with water from many wells sunk in the neighbourhood, and is said to have a supply of good water from this source. It is also supplied by the Kent Waterworks Company, who draw their supply from the river Ravensbourne. It would surprise a cursory observer to be informed, that close upon this beautiful neighbourhood exists one of the most pestiferous localities that could be described in any country place. I allude to a place called Loat's Pits. This locality, to which serious attention must be directed, exists within a few hundred yards of the Heath, between the Heath and Greenwich. The inhabitants seem to be noted for their squalor and wretchedness. Many of its houses are unfit for habitation; they are overcrowded; many of them have no supply of water, and are compelled to beg it of their neighbours, or go without it. Some of the cesspools are overflowing. Privies, heaps of refuse, and other fertile sources of disease abound; and it is important, as a precautionary measure, that some means should be adopted for cleansing this Augean stable, loaded with the seeds of disease. I have also to direct your attention to a nuisance in the shape of a dunghill and offal heap, situated at the back of Spencer Place, which is calculated to injure the health of the inhabitants. I am informed that occasionally when this refuse is removed, the sulphuretted hydrogen evolved blackens the silver in a jeweller's shop opposite, as well as that in some of the houses near. *Cyrena deperdita. 49 The attention of the Inspector is directed also to Bath Place, Phoenix Passage, and Paragon Mews. THE TILLAGE OF LEWISHAM. The Village of Lewisham occupies a somewhat central position in the District, and lies principally upon a fine broad road, extending about a mile in length, and on the high road to Bromley. It is situated upon a bed of the lower tertiary strata, consisting of pebbles and sand; a very porous, and consequently dry soil. There are also chalk and marl pits in the neighbourhood. The elevation of Lewisham at the South part (Rushey Green), is 58.7 feet above the sea level, and gradually declines till at the lowest part, (viz., Homes Dale), near the bridge, the elevation is 27 feet. It is supplied with water partly by wells sunk in the neighbourhood, the water of which appears of good quality, by the Kent Waterworks Company, by the Ravensbourne, and by the brook running through the village. The number of houses in Lewisham Village is 1,289. The population, according to the census of 1851, 6,097. Although there is a fine sewer running through the village, a great proportion of the houses, &c., are still using the old method of drainage, viz., cesspools, which (as I have already mentioned under article Blackheath), are particularly objectionable in a porous soil, from their liability to contaminate the water of wells. Many drains still open into the stream which runs through the street. It seems to be highly important (as every facility is afforded), that the cesspools should be emptied, cleansed, and filled in, and the drainage carried into the sewer prepared for it. Several nuisances exist in this locality, to which I beg to call your attention, and some of these require the most vigilant inspection. In Willow Walk, Rushey Green, a foetid ditch exists opposite the houses, at the backs of which are privies and overflowing cesspools, &c., and the soil is altogether damp and undrained. A large ditch, also carrying drainage, exists at the backs of the houses in Elizabeth Place. At Little Blackheath Hill, an extensive yard, used for cows, horses, &c., is full of liquid animal and vegetable refuse, and must be extremely pernicious to the surrounding neighbourhood. At Homes Dale, Silver Street, Poplar Row, Hanover Street, and Cross Street there exists overcrowding, want of drainage, overflowing cesspools, and privies, and it seems necessary for the sake of the health of the neighbourhood, that a sewer should be formed from this district into the main. SYDENHAM. Sydenham is situated on the South-west side of the Parish of Lewisham, and is remarkable for the beauty of its scenery. The country is extremely undulating, varying constantly in level, as Sydenham Hill, 330.5 feet above the sea level, Jews' Walk, 180 feet to 204 feet, Perry Yale 112 feet, Albert Road 186 feet, Forest Hill 227 feet. The District is very healthy, and no doubt depends for its healthiness upon this undulation, by which water and drainage naturally run over its surface. The soil altogether differs from that of Blackheath and Lewisham, con- E 50 sisting here of a plastic ferruginous clay drift, sometimes mixed with sand, sometimes with small portions of gravel, and at other times with broken up London clay (upper tertiary), upon which it is based. The thickness of this crust varies materially in different localities, being in some places 20 or 30 feet in thickness, at others not more than 4 or 5. The water from wells varies very much here, on account of this quality of soil, holding frequently in solution salts of magnesia, alumina, and iron. A well of this kind, originally situated in Wells Road, and from its proximity to Dulwich, called the Dulwich Well, was much brought into notice in 1640. From the chalybeate properties of the water, it was doubtless serviceable in many cases where such treatment was to be desired. On the crest of Sydenham Hill it is more sandy, and here some very good water is to be obtained, at a depth of about 30 feet. Sydenham is now, however, supplied by the Lambeth Waterworks Company, who obtain their water at Thames Ditton, and which Company supply 710 houses. Also by the waterworks upon Peak Hill, which supply 100 houses: the water is here obtained from "Eeigate Sands," by a well and boring 410 feet in depth, and is of good quality. The number of houses in this Ward is 789. The population, according to the census of 1851, 4,501. Many parts of this district require, from the careless drainage of the neighbourhood, and the absence of outlet for drainage in many parts, the most careful supervision as a preventive measure. It is the nature of such a soil as exists here to absorb and retain moisture, and consequently especial attention to drainage is required. Professor Johnstone, in his Agricultural Lectures, states that water will drop from l00lbs. of dried quartz soil when it has absorbed 25lbs. of water. l00lbs. of calcareous sand ditto 251bs. of water. l00lbs. of loamy soil ditto 401bs. of water. l00lbs. of chalk ditto 451bs. of water. l00lbs. of clay loam ditto 501bs. of water. l00lbs. of pure clay ditto 701bs. of water. Part, however, in this instance, being returned by evaporation, part being retained, and part, owing to the undulating nature of the country, finding its way into the natural water courses. I would particularly mention the state of the roads in this Ward, and request the assistance of the Surveyor and Inspectors of Nuisances to report on this matter. They are in so extremely filthy a state as to be, in my opinion, positively prejudicial to health. Some of these roads, in fact, better deserve the name of marshes in wet weather, at which time, and for some time after, constant evaporation is taking place from their surface, frequently doubtless mixed with decomposing animal matter. Added to which some of the roads are in such an insecure state as to be dangerous for the transit of horses and vehicles. I would also beg to call your attention to the part called "West Kent Park," or more commonly, "The Freehold." Unless some outlet is made for the drainage of this locality, which is covered with houses, I fear the most disastrous results to the health of the neighbourhood in case of hot weather setting in. 51 Marshes, privies, ditches filled with sewage, which can get no further, assist in contaminating the air for some distance round this locality. An equally dangerous spot is a piece of land at the back of Dartmouth Row and Dartmouth Place (which places are also in a wretched state of decomposition and filth). This piece of land, perhaps half an acre in extent, is a complete marsh, made more foul by the drainage and refuse thrown from the houses abutting on it. Sickness exists there already, and must be worse if unattended to. A portion of the old canal, and some of the land adjoining, and situated at the base of Forest Hill, from the variations in level of the water contained in it, must throw out miasm when its banks are uncovered, as they were last summer, which is rendered still worse by the fact, that until lately the greater part of the drainage of Forest Hill opened into it. The greater part of the drainage, with the overflow of cesspools, and refuse from one or more slaughter-houses, runs at the back of some of the houses in the High Street, along part of Willow Road, and this combined with drainage from many houses, empties itself near Park End, and thence under the Railway; after running by the side of a footpath for some distance, it finds its way through numerous water courses and ditches by the sides of the road in Perry Yale, towards Lewisham, and is extremely offensive and liable to produce disease. The privies, cesspools, and offensive ditches in this neighbourhood would occupy too great a space to enumerate at length in this report. They must, however, be extremely dangerous to health, as the population increases rapidly. Many parts that I have enumerated are marked by depraved health, and although at present no epidemic has committed its fearful ravages amongst us, still we have been warned; and these districts cannot exist in their present state with impunity. I am favoured with a letter from the Incumbent of Christ Church, Forest Hill, urging my attention to these points. PENGE. Penge, commonly called Penge Common, was until the last few years an uncultivated and undrained mass of forest, which has since been nearly all cleared. The inhabited portion of the District is situated upon a flat piece of ground at the base of the Hill upon which the Crystal Palace stands, and about a mile from that building, and is relatively low in elevation. It is intersected by two small streams which find their way into the Poole river, towards Kent House Farm. These streams intersect the village in two or three directions, and are characterized by their extreme filth, receiving the drainage of the Crystal Palace, Almshouses, all the houses on the National Freehold Land Society's plot of ground, and many others. The soil differs little from that of Sydenham, consisting of a clay loam, in some parts mixed with gravel, and based on London clay. The number of houses in Penge is now 385. The population has so increased since the building of the Crystal Palace, that the census number of inhabitants gives no correct information on the subject (270). E2 52 The Hamlet contains 840 acres. The Lambeth Waterworks Company supply 141 houses in this neighbourhood. Many of the inhabitants, however, have to fetch water from the wells at the Crooked Billet and Waterman's Asylum, &c. Some of the cottages depend for their supply upon ponds. Several parts of this district require the attention of the Surveyor and Inspectors. The filthy state of the brooks, the totally undrained state of some parts immediately in contiguity with houses, demand that some system of drainage be planned which should comprehend the whole district. More immediate attention is required, as at the present time and for some weeks past there as been existing an epidemic of measles, as well as of whooping cough, which in some places has assumed a formidable character. Closely surrounding a court-yard, in which are placed a stable, slaughterhouse, and dung heap, draining into a well (which was until lately used for drinking), there have been 16 or 17 severe cases of measles. The mortality in Penge for the last 4 weeks ending Saturday last, has been 7, which carried throughout the year would make an average of 91 deaths. This must be a heavy mortality for so small a district. DISTRICTS. BIRTHS. DEATHS. Males. Females. Total. Males. Females. Total. Blackheath 5 4 9 2 2 4 Lewisham no returns 2 4 6 Union Workhouse 5 5 10 Penge 3 7 Sydenham no returns 3 3 Total CLIMATE OF THE LEWISHAM DISTRICT. Week ending. Weight of air. Barometer corrected. Mean inches. Temperature of Air. Thermometer. Prevailing winds. Rainy days. Amount of rain in inches. Highest. Lowest. Mean of daily readings. Jan. 19. 29.732 50 0 24 5 38 7 S. W. 4 0.15 26. 29.100 54 0 36 5 44 5 S. W. 6 1.07 I have the honour to remain, Gentlemen, Your obedient Servant, F. E. WILKINSON. Sydenham, 31st January, 1856. 53 FEBRUARY. Gentlemen. In presenting this my second Medical Report as to the sanitary state of the district, I have to report upon the appearance of small pox in the village of Lewisham, in a locality to which I have already called your attention; and upon the continued prevalence of measles in the Hamlet of Penge. Several cases of fever occurring in parts of Blackheath and Lewisham, in an isolated form. The mortality of the district has been smaller than last month, viz:—for Blackheath.—8 deaths. Lewisham.—8 deaths; 2 of which have occurred in the Union Workhouse; 1 case of confluent smallpox, Willow Road, Rushey Green; 1 low fever, 1 intermittent. Sydenham.—3 deaths. Penge.—4 deaths are registered; 1 of which occurred from hooping cough in the Anerley Industrial School. I have the honour to be, Gentlemen, Your obedient servant, F. E. WILKINSON. Blackheath and Lewisham.—The contamination of the river Ravensbourne requires serious attention from the fact that the Kent Waterworks Company supply 554 houses in Lewisham and 252 on Blackheath. But the question rests on a broader basis than this, from the fact that this company supply 16,000 houses in Blackheath, Lewisham, Peckham, Camberwell, and Deptford, as as well as the naval establishments at Woolwich and Deptford; and the consumption of water last year was 863,000,000 gallons. I have visited the works of this company and have had the greatest facility afforded me for examining their process of filtration and purification; and have ascertained that every effort is made to supply the water in the purest form possible. After depuration by subsidence and exposure to air, the water passes through filter beds of several acres in extent, composed of layers of gravel and sand, after which it is pumped up for the use of its consumers; the supply being a daily one. £5,000 were paid to the Commissioners of Sewers in November, 1850, upon which they undertook to remove all sewage from this stream. For this purpose some of the main lines of sewers are completed, some branches are in progress, and much of the drainage has been diverted; but much remains to be done, not only in constructing works, but in compelling owners of property to drain into the outlets provided for them. An open drain, from upwards of 20 houses (built by Mr. Fearnley, of the parish of Lewisham), immediately adjoining and at the back of Lee Bridge, runs into the stream, and requires your order for being carried into the sewer. A side drain requires to be constructed from Willow Walk, Rushey Green, into the main sewer; prior to which some purifying means should be used, as several cases of smallpox have occurred in this locality. Several houses (with two water closets only), in a great state of filth, situated in Tun's Passage, Blackheath, require cleansing and the drainage carried into the sewer; which I understand runs near this locality. Lewis Grove, Lewisham, requires the attention of the Inspector of Nuisances. A great proportion of the drainage of Waterloo Place, Lewisham, still empties into the stream which runs through Lewisham, and requires your order for its removal. Several of the houses in Loat's Pits, situate near Blackheath, are not supplied with water, and are otherwise in a state of fifth. Penge.—The state of several localities in this neighbourhood requires some comprehensive system of drainage, not only to make the place healthy, but to remove dangerous contamination from the Ravensbourne; in the absence of which local purification is necessary. Sydenham.—Spring Field, Wells Road, contains over 30 dwelling houses, and I have to solicit your orders upon the owners of these houses to make good the road which, from never having been ballasted, is in a most filthy condition, and unwholesome to the inhabitants residing there. The drains are also open and most offensive; and an outlet is here required to receive the sewage. 54 The drainage of the Wells Road, to which I called your attention in my first report, is also in a dreadful state; and the new houses upon the hill above have turned their drains into the open ditch, contaminating the brook which flows by the side of the road. A house at the back of the "Bird in Hand," High Street, Sydenham, is in an unhealthy state from a cesspool lately attached to a privy in the corner of the house, in the occupation of Mr. Cooper, chimney sweep; all the family have been suffering from diarrhoea in consequence. Some of the houses in Russell Street, Sydenham, are suffering from overflowing privies, &c., and general dirt. The Albert Road, Sydenham Park, containing many first class houses, occupied by most respectable ratepayers, is in a dangerous, dirty, and unwholesome condition. Park Road, which runs into it from the High Street, has been within the last month put into proper repair. I should inform you that these roads have been open to the public for several years past, and have been frequently repaired at the expence of the landlords of adjoining houses. METEOROLOGICAL OBSERVATIONS. Week ending. Weight of air. Barometer corrected. Mean inches. Temperature op Air. Thermometer. Prevailing winds. Rainy days. Amount of rain in inches. Highest. Lowest. Mean of daily readings. Feb. 2. 29.776 44 2 25 8 33 5 S. W. 2 0.16 9. 29.840 58 0 28 9 44 0 S.W, 3 0.19 16. 29.676 54 0 36 3 47 0 S. 3 0.55 23. 29.979 50 0 33 0 35 6 N. E. 3 0.19 Sydenham, February 28th, 1856. MARCH. Gentlemen, In presenting this my third Monthly Report as to the sanitary state of the District, I have mentioned such nuisances as are decidedly detrimental to health and require immediate attention. I have to request your order that a depot or depots of disinfecting material may be established in one or more parts of the District, which may be readily accessible for the quick removal of noxious exhalations, especially where it would take some time to procure their removal by the construction of works. That such a plan is desirable, may be inferred from the state of health of Willow Walk, Rushey Green, Dartmouth Row, and West Kent Park, Sydenham, &c., to which places I have already called your attention. The births of 25 girls and 27 boys are registered in the District, occurring between the 23rd of February and 24th of March. From the tables of mortality appended it will be seen that the prevalent cold winds and low temperature are particularly detrimental at this season of the year to old people and infants. Of 27 deaths registered between the 23rd of February and 24th of March, 11 have occurred between the ages of 60 and 82; 10 in children under 2 years of age; 10 of these have arisen from diseases of the air passages; Meteorological observations are appended. I have the honor to remain, Gentlemen, Yours respectfully, F. E. WILKINSON, Medical Officer of Health. 55 Montpelier Row, Blackheath.—The untrapped gully-holes receiving sewage from stables and houses in the Mews, at the back of Montpelier Row, emit at times noxious effluvia; several cases of fever have occurred in this locality, and a coachman and his wife who reside opposite one of these holes frequently suffer from ill health, which has been attributed to the above-mentioned cause. Lewisham Hill, Lewisham.—An accumulation of refuse and drainage (Thomson's Nursery, Lewisham Hill), reported by the Inspector of Nuisances, is a nuisance to the neighbourhood round and prejudicial to health, and means should be adopted for its speedy removal. Bath Place, Blackheath.—An accumulation of drainage in this place is likely to occasion disease, and requires the construction of a drain for its removal. West Kent Park, Sydenham.—A drain receiving the sewage from the North Road, has no outlet; the contents of the sewer have been during the last month overflowing from a gully hole at the East-end of this Road, and opposite to three houses inhabited by highly respectable tenants; one of these tenants has removed in consequence, and two members of a family residing in the last house have been suffering from fever and abscess. The effluvium has been most offensive; means have been attempted by the owners of the property to remove this nuisance, but from the drains having been improperly constructed the attempt has only partially succeeded, and a large hole containing sewage still remains open, which is dangerous to health as well as unsafe for passengers. Lower Sydenham.—Eight cottages and some other houses drain into four privies, situated between the houses opposite to the Dolphin Inn. Some open drains and a noxious pond also exist here, and it is requisite that some means should be used to effect the cleansing and drainage of this part. Crystal Crescent, Upper Sydenham.—The drainage and roads of this locality are in a most unhealthy condition and require attention. The road from never having been ballasted is in wet weather a complete quagmire. Stanstead Lane, Sydenham.—A cesspool overflowing into the ditch forms a dangerous and offensive nuisance to the inhabitants of this locality and requires your order for its removal. West Kent Park..—The gully holes in this neighbourhood arc without gratings, and are very dangerous to passengers. METEOROLOGICAL OBSERVATIONS. Week ending. Weight of air. Barometer corrected. Mean inches. Temperature of Air. Thermometer. Prevailing winds. Rainy days. Amount of rain in inches. Highest. Lowest Mean of daily readings. March 1. 30.365 57 6 33 3 37 9 S W &N E — 0.00 8. 30.265 46 0 26 0 34 3 N. E. — 0.00 15. 29.66 50 0 26 5 36 3 E. — 0.00 22. 29.823 52 0 31 1 42 8 S.E.&N.E. 6 1.29 Sydenham, 27th March, 1856. APRIL. Gentlemen, In presenting my fourth report upon the sanitary condition of the district, I beg leave to direct your attention to the fact that some difficulty has arisen in parts of the district, more especially in Sydenham, among those persons who have received notices to drain, from the fact that they can only drain upon their neighbours' property or into the open ditches, as in most of these localities no sewer exists for the ultimate removal of the drainage. In the Sydenham Ward and in Penge, from the nature of the soil, a cesspool rapidly fills, and would require constant pumping out to prevent overflow. The evil is equally great in Blackheath and Lewisham, as the wells are likely to become contaminated from cesspools; all this was however explained at length in my first report. 56 As the obtaining pure water is absolutely necessary for the preservation of health, I have thought it necessary to examine into the contaminations of the Ravensbourne River. I give a list of some of the drainages entering this river, and solicit your orders for their immediate removal. Several localities require your orders also for their sanitary improvement; a list of which is appended. In Waterloo Place, Rushey Green, smallpox has again made its appearance, and one death has occurred. Measles has been endemic in the St. George's children's poor house; 30 cases have occurred, and 7 deaths have taken place from this disease. The house is perfectly cleanly and has been but recently connected with the main sewer; but several open offensive privies still exist. The children are about to be removed to Mitcham. Measles have also been prevalent in the Anerley Industrial School, at Penge, and two deaths are reported from this disease. In Wells Road, Sydenham, a death from severe typhoid fever has occurred; this district I have already called your attention to. The old watercourse through Lewisham, in my opinion, requires cleansing and filling in or arching over, as nothing remains now but a stagnant ditch of decomposing miasmatic matter, which must be injurious to the inhabitants. The mortality of the district has been heavy this month, more especially from diseases affecting the respiratory organs. In Blackheath 5 births and 12 deaths are registered. In Lewisham 22 births and 25 deaths; 13 of the deaths having occurred in the workhouses. In Penge 8 births and 5 deaths are registered; 3 of these have occurred in the Anerley Industrial School. In Sydenham 21 births and 10 deaths have been registered. Appended are meteorological tables for the month. 1 have the honour to remain, Gentlemen, Your most obedient servant, F. E. WILKINSON, Medical Officer of Health. Lewisham.—The total want of drainage and bad state of some cottages in Hanover Street, Lewisham, require immediate attention. The yards and gardens in this part abutting on Mr. Robinson's premises are in a dreadful state. This arises from want of communication with the common sewer and no outfall whatever; every impurity from houses and privies is floating; and this will be found prevalent more or less throughout this neighbourhood. I have also to call your attention to the bad state, from offensive drains, privies, &c., of Waterloo Place, Rushey Green; Miss Elizabeth Price's buildings; Mr. Price's buildings; the yard of a cowkeeper, opposite the toll gate; 14 cottages situated in Cleveland Square, at the back of the "White Hart;" and an offensive ditch at the top of Hither Green Lane. Penge.—Some banks by the side of the road leading from the Anerley Railway Station to Oakfield Road are extremely dangerous, from the absence of fencing or hoarding of whatsoever kind. Sydenham.—The overflow drainage, from Round Hill Terrace to the houses in South Road, runs along by the side of the road in an open ditch and is very offensive; this requires covering in, and a gully hole in the valley requires trapping. The state of the open ditches in Perry Vale and Perry Rise demand immediate attention; they are most offensive. One ditch, opposite the "Forester Inn" and several adjacent houses, receives the drainage of 16 houses, as well as a yard where 20 cows, 3 or 4 horses, and 20 to 25 pigs (throwing out a most offensive smell) are kept. This evil is now increased by other persons (who have received notices to drain) conducting their sewage into the same ditch; this is most offensive and dangerous, and is only one of several ditches running down as far as Meadow Croft, which contribute their pestilential smell to the atmosphere on a calm day. The state of the privies opposite the lower Sydenham chapel require your orders for their improvement; a water closet adjoining the footpath is overflowing. 57 A LIST OF SOME OF THE IMPURITIES DISCHARGED INTO THE RAVENSBOURNE RIVER. Commencing at the lower part of the river Ravensbourne, the first impurity will be found at Mr. Arnold's Silk Mills, from house and other drainage; this should be inspected. At the entrance gates of this Mill there is a junction between the main sewer and a drain from Ravensbourne Terrace exists, the opening of which is so small that it chokes up, and the drainage rising flows afterwards through Mr. Arnold's premises, to the injury of the stream and to the great annoyance of the factory people. At the Bridge, near the Railway Station, a drain will be found discharging from the station and adjoining houses. Sheppard's Placc; a drain will be found discharging from the houses of Messrs. Phillips and Sidery directly into the river. Price's Row, west side of Ravensbourne, just below Lewisham Bridge; Mr. Price, 6 houses, Mr. Perry, 3 houses, drain into the stream; these are very bad. Pigs, sometimes in great numbers, are kept and slaughtered at Mr. Price's. Above Lewisham Bridge, near Mr. Robinson's Mill, Mr. Fox 10 houses, North Cottages; Mr. Whitcombe 2, Mr. Sweetlove 2, Mr. Harvey 9, Sophia Place; Mr. Marshall 1, Mr. Fearnley 10, Esplanade Cottages; these drain in the most open and offensive manner into the stream. Near Lee Bridge, Mr. Owen, butcher, and Mr. Bush, drain into the Quaggy or Lee river, and near here 22 houses in Lewisham Grove discharge all conceivable nuisances. Avenue Road, Mr. Smith 2 houses, Mr Knott 4 houses, drain into the Ravensbourne. METEOROLOGICAL OBSERVATIONS. Week ending. Weight of air. Barometer corrected. Mean inches. Temperature op Air. Thermometer. Prevailing winds. Rainy days. Amount of rain in inches. Highest. Lowest. Mean of daily readings. Mar. 29. 29.908 51 0 26 0 37 7 E. — 0.00 April 5. 29.776 96 8 24 4 46 4 S. E. 2 0.09 12. 29.272 51 3 37 0 47 1 S. W. 6 0.57 19. 29.856 65 0 32 0 46 0 N. E. 2 0.17 Sydenham, 24th April, 1856. MAY. Gentlemen, The returns of the Inspectors of Nuisances have been before you for the last four weeks, and relate to several matters which require your orders for their removal, and I now specify some further points which should receive your early attention. The question has been put to me, as to whether animals kept in populous localities are nuisances and injurious to health. I am decidedly of opinion that a closely inhabited neighbourhood is a most unfit place for animals to be kept in, and that in such a locality no animal can be "so kept" as to avoid becoming a nuisance, and in many states of the atmosphere injurious to health ; if every inhabitant householder were allowed the right of keeping pigs, cows, &c., a town would be intolerable. Further, the health of animals requires an abundance of space and a large supply of fresh air, which can only be got in country places. I shall call your attention further to this matter, after examining the cow-houses slaughter-houses, &c., of the District. I have appended some further information respecting the drainage into the Ravensbourne. Viewing this river as a source of water supply to 120,000 persons, it requires some effort to prevent the evil results of contamination, which come strongly before the notice of your Board, which alone has the power to prevent it. Some of the 58 drainage merely requires your order for its removal; in other instances works would be necessary, and would require time and consideration as to the best mode of carrying them out. The mortality of the District has somewhat decreased since I had the honour of addressing you. 81 births and 39 deaths were registered between the 21st of April and the 26th of May; of which 17 births and 10 deaths were registered in Blackheath; 22 births and 15 deaths „ „ in Lewisham; 9 births and 6 deaths „ „ in Penge; 33 births and 8 deaths „ „ in Sydenham. A case of smallpox has terminated fatally at Perry Hill, Sydenham. The ditches in this neighbourhood are almost all in a filthy condition from sewage. The recent warm weather has affected the mortality in some of the bad localities of the District; 6 deaths having occurred in King Street, Regent Street, and Essex Place, to which places I called your attention in a former Report, and which require measures for their sanitary improvement. Appended are meteorological tables and table of mortality for the Month. I have the honor to be, Gentlemen, Your faithful servant, F. E. WILKINSON. DRAINAGE INTO THE RIVER RAVENSBOURNE—(Continued) . Grote's Buildings and Elliot Place.—The drains from these houses have an outfall into the ornamental water of Mr. Brandram's grounds. Near Lee Bridge.—Drains from Mr. Owen, Butcher, and Limes Villas, discharge into the Quaggy stream. As this drain is close to the new sewer, it could be immediately diverted. Lady Well.—A house belonging to Mr. Holdsworth, and 12 others, including a cowkeeper's, the property of Mr. Couldery, drain (including the privies) into a ditch communicating with the river. This is very bad. The sewer is close at hand. In the rear of Mr. Hadley's premises, extending from the Vicarage to Mr. Penn's, is a very offensive black ditch, with scarcely any fall, receiving drainage from the houses. This is a most dangerous nuisance. The passage of horses and carts through the stream at Lewisham Bridge, is another source of contamination to the river, and several complaints on this matter have reachcd me. Lewisham.—I have to call your attention to the state of the privies in St. George's Infant Poor-house, Lewisham, to which my attention was attracted from measles having been endemic, and several deaths having occurred. Some months ago part of the drainage was carried into the common sewer, but leaving several offensive privies still remaining. When the drain was opened into the sewer, it was found that the water from the well drained away; consequently it was deepened, and a pretty good supply of water as to quantity is obtainable from this source. I have examined the water from this source, and find that there is appreciable contamination, doubtless from percolation. It is, in my opinion, absolutely necessary that proper closets should be constructed, and the privies emptied, properly cleaned, and filled in with a certain amount of charcoal, &c., and earth. The bed of the old stream, now nearly dry, in the Village, I think it right again to mention. It is now in many parts most offensive and very dangerous to the health of the inhabitants. Many houses still drain therein, such as Frederick Place, Brook House, and others, and it is becoming a receptacle for rubbish and offal. It would be advisable attentively to remove direct drainage, and convey it into the sewer, arch it over, allowing it to remain as a drain for the surface water, and to intercept its communication with the Ravensbourne, at Lewisham Bridge, by turning it into the sewer which runs immediately under its bed at this point. Penge.—At the back of the Anerley Industrial School, several pieces of undrained marshy land exist, which should be attended to, as they are undoubtedly a source of disease among the children of that establishment. The drainage of this District is most offensive in many parts, and requires your serious consideration for its removal into proper covered channels. Sydenham.—The drainage at Hindsley's Place, Forest Vale, is complained of, the closets and drains being very offensive. The privy and cesspool at Swiss Cottage, in the occupation of Miss Clarke, Perry 59 Vale, are offensive, and the drains frequently overflow. I think that no proper drainage exists to these houses, although there is a barrel drain near at hand. The privies at the back of Mr. Jones, bricklayer, require emptying and cleansing. An open ditch at the back of the Dolphin Inn, Lower Sydenham, is most dangerous and offensive. This ditch runs from the back of the Wells Road, is then arched over for a small part of its course; is then again open and very offensive as it runs through a piece of land belonging to the Leather-sellers' Company, and close to the High Road; it continues its course at the base of Peak Hill, through the land at the back of the Greyhound Inn, thence under the railway, thence through Mr. Price's and Miss Mayow's grounds, to the back of the Dolphin Inn, whence it becomes covered in, in its course to Bell Green. This ditch receives a vast amount of drainage, and is most offensive and dangerous. Some time back several of the holders of property through which this ditch passes were desirous of contributing a portion of the expense which would be necessary for covering it in. The drainage in Willow Road, and Scudder's Row, is in an extremely bad state, and is much complained of. I called the attention of the Board to this nuisance in my first report. The road is well-nigh impassable from filth in bad weather. A drain was put in by the Commissioners of Sewers through a part of this road some years ago. A drain running by Sydenham Hill is also very offensive and requires carrying into the main. METEOROLOGICAL OBSERVATIONS. Week ending. Weight of air. Barometer corrected. Mean inches. Temperature of Air. Thermometer. Prevailing winds. Rainy days. Amount of rain in inches. Highest. Lowest. Mean of daily readings. April 26. 29.775 73 0 30 6 48 5 E. 1 0.27 May 3. 29.564 53 5 31 0 41 3 N. W. 3 0.75 10. 29.795 68 3 29 8 44 3 N. 2 0.33 17. 29.493 72 0 42 9 51 2 S. W. 6 1.24 24. 29.564 70 0 41 0 53 1 s. w. 5 1.08 Sydenham, May 29th, 1856. JUNE. Gentlemen, The mortality of the District has somewhat diminished, since my last report; two deaths only having been registered in Penge, and these not regular inhabitants of the place; three deaths only being registered in the Blackheath Ward. But no positive conclusion can be drawn from this as to the present state of health of the District, as a form of low fever is prevalent in several of the bad parts of the District, to which I have called your attention in my reports; and many of which localities, I would again urgently press upon your notice, as contained in the half-years' alphabetical summary appended. I have also to mention— The drains from Westwood House, at the top of Jews' Walk, Sydenham, which are at times very offensive and injurious to the health of the opposite inhabitants; the cesspool in the grounds has been recently emptied and cleansed, but this can only be of very temporary benefit. An open filthy ditch exists by the side of the Vicars' School, Loat's Pits, detrimental to the health of the children and others. Pigs, kept by Mr. Jones, Lewisham, are complained of by the neighbours, and are doubtless a great nuisance to the inhabitants. 60 I would also call your attention to the amount of stagnant water which remains in many of the ditches; also in mud-pools of the bed of the old water course, at Lewisham, which require cleansing. 13 houses on the right side of the Lady Well, Lewisham, are without any water supply whatever; the well having been drained into the sewer. A ditch, at the top of Forest Hill, just within the Camberwell boundary, is a nuisance and detrimental to the health of the adjacent ratepayers of the Parish of Lewisham. Part of this is being covered in, but it is more urgently required that the upper part should be attended to as well. 21 births and 10 deaths are registered in Sydenham; 6 births and 2 deaths „ „ in Penge; 13 births and 3 deaths „ „ in Blackheath; 18 births and 13 deaths ,, ,, in Lewisham. Meteorological tables are appended as usual. I have the honour to remain, Gentlemen, Your obedient servant, F. E. WILKINSON. METEOROLOGICAL OBSERVATIONS. Week ending. Weight of air. Barometer corrected. Mean inches. Temperature op Air. Thermometer. Prevailing winds. Rainy days. Amount of rain in inches. Highest. Lowest. Mean of daily readings. May 31. 29.691 70 0 43 1 53 3 S.W.&N.E. 3 0.97 June 7. 29.902 75 5 41 1 56 7 S. W. — 0.00 14. 29.829 72 5 48 0 59 1 S. W. 3 0.53 21. 29.734 72 9 44 0 55 6 S. W. 4 1.21 Sydenham, June 26th, 1856. 61 SUMMARY OF NUISANCES reported FROM JANUARY TO JUNE INCLUSIVE. locality. nature of nuisance. when reportd. means adopted to remedy. Albert Road, Sydenham Road in a dangerous and filthy state January and February Not remedied at present, but nearly sufficient money is collected for its repair by private contribution Arnold's Silk Mills, Lewisham Drainage into Ravensbourne April Drainage into Ravensbourne still continues Avenue Road, Lewisham Mr. Smith's 2 houses, Mr. Knott 4 ditto, drainage into Ravensbourne April Work in hand, and will shortly be done Anerley Industrial School, Penge Marshy undrained land at back of school; drainage of house deodorized, and part drained into ditch April Nothing done Bird-in-hand Passage, Sydenham Offensive privies and deficient drainage, causing sickness February Not remedied Brockley Lane, A ditch filled with noxious March Not remedied Sydenham Crooked Billet, Penge sewage, with no outfall A yard at back of houses contiguous; no drainage; offensive manure heap January Not remedied Cross Street, Lewisham running into well Overflowing privies and want of drainage Not remedied Crystal Crescent, Sydenham Marshy offensive road and bad drainage March Not remedied Cleveland Square, back of White Hart, Lewisham Bad drainage and offensive state of 14 cottages April Not remedied Forest Hill, Sydenham Drainage into canal; marshy state of banks and neighbouring land January Drainage is all cut off and the canal is refilled Forest Hill, Sydenham Open ditch receiving drainage just within the Camberwell boundary, detrimental to health of the adjacent Lewisham rate- payers June George Inn, Lewisham Offensive drains from, and Nicholson's brewery April This completed Grote's Buildings, Lewisham Drainage flowing into ornamental water of Mr. Brandram's grounds May Not remedied Home's Dale, Lewisham No drainage; overflowing privies and cesspools January Not remedied, but in hand Hanover Street, Lewisham Overflowing privies and cesspools and want of drainage January Not remedied, but in hand 62 locality. nature op nuisance. when reportd. means adopted to remedy. Hanover Street, Lewisham Ditto ditto, the yards and gardens abutting on Mr. Robinson's premises are in a dreadful state; no communication with the sewer April Not remedied, but in hand Hither Green Lane, Lewisham Offensive ditch receiving drainage April Not remedied Hindsley's Place Offensive smell of drains May This appears to be a bad trap only High Street, Sydenham Open offensive ditch at back of some houses, receiving drainage from slaughterhouses, &c. January Not remedied Lewisham Stagnant water in ditch and old water-course June Lady-well Thirteen houses are entirely without water supply, the Lady-well being cut off June Loat's Pits, Blackheath Total want of drainage, deficient water supply, open privies, and the most filthy accumulations January Not remedied Lewisham Drains entering old bed of stream, although there is a sewer January Not remedied, but in hand Lee Bridge, Lewisham Drains from upwards of 20 houses built by Mr. Fearnley, of Lewisham, open into Lee brook, thence into Ravensbourne February Not remedied, but in hand Lewisham, opposite Toll Gate Bad drainage and state of cowkeeper's yard April Not remedied, but in hand Lewisham Bridge Above this bridge, North Cottages, Sophie's Place (24 houses), drain in an offensive manner into the Ravensbourne April Not remedied, but in hand Lee Bridge, Lewisham Mr. Owen, butcher, and Mr. Bull's, drain into the Quaggy stream Not remedied, but in hand Lewis Grove, Lewisham Twenty-two houses discharge all conceivable nuisances into the river In hand LimesVilla, Lewisham The drains discharge into Quaggy; this is close to the new sewer May Not remedied Lewisham Bed of stream partially dry; very offensive and unhealthy May In hand Lady-well, Lewisham House belonging to Mr. Holdsworth, and 12 others, including cowkeeper's, drain into Ravensbourne (including privies) May Not remedied Lewisham In rear of Mr. Hadley's premises, from Vicarage to Mr. Penn's, exists an offensive black ditch, without fall; a great source of disease This is completed 63 locality. nature of nuisance. when reportd. means adopted to remedy. Lewisham Bridge Injury to Ravensbourne from horses and cattle fouling the stream In hand Loat's Pits An open offensive ditch by side of Vicar's school June Lewisham Pigs kept in confined yard by Mr. Jones June Montpelier Mews, Blackheath Offensive gully holes from drains in rear of Mr. Barnet's house March Not remedied North Road, West Kent Park, Sydenham Offensive drainage running over from gully holes North Road is completed, but the ditch is still in existence Park End, Sydenham Offensive drainage and open ditch, offensive and injurious to health January In hand Penge General want of drainage; ditches offensive and water-courses filled with drainage, discharging into Ravensbourne Not remedied Poplar Row, Lewisham Overflowing privies and want of drainage January Not remedied Phœnix Passage, Blackheath Want of drainage, and filthy accumulations January This is finished Paragon Mews, Blackheath Want of drainage, and filthy accumulations January This is completed Park Road, Sydenham Road in dangerous and dirty condition February Road has been put into repair by private contribution Perry Vale, Sydenham Drainage from cow-houses; 20 cows, 3 horses, 20 pigs, and large cesspool of refuse, as well as dwelling houses, drain into a most offensive ditch opposite several houses April In hand Perry Vale and Perry Rise, Sydenham Ditches receive offensive drainage from all the upper part of Sydenham April Not remedied Price's Buildings, Lewisham Bad drainage and offensive privies April This is completed Price's Row, Lewisham Mr. Price 6 houses, Mr. Perry 3 houses, drain into the Ravensbourne; pigs are sometimes kept and slaughtered in quantities on these premises This is completed Perry Vale Swiss Cottage; open privy and occasional overflow of cesspool April Not remedied Ruth Place, Blackheath Want of drainage and filthy accumulations January Not remedied Russell Street, Sydenham Overflowing privies and cesspools, and houses in a dirty state February Not remedied 64 locality. nature of nuisance. when reportd. means adopted to remedy. Raglan Street, Sydenham Open ditch between Street and Railway; very offensive; the drain is sunk below the level of the ditch, and contains filthy accumulations April Not remedied Ravensbourne Terrace, Lewisham At entrance gates of Mr. Arnold's mill, a junction between main sewer and drain from this Terrace chokes up and flows over premises, to great annoyance of factory people, then runs into Ravensbourne April Not remedied, but the work is in hand Railway Bridge, Lewisham Near this point a drain from Station and houses adjoining, discharges into River April Not remedied Ravensbourne River Offensive drainage and extensive contamination of river supplying 120,000 persons January February March April May Not remedied, but the work is in hand Sydenham Bad state of road January Very much improved Silver Street, Lewisham Overflowing privies and bad state of drainage January Not remedied, but the work is in hand Springfield Wells Road Road in a filthy state; never properly made ; open offensive drains February Not remedied Sydenham Opposite Dolphin Inn; 8 cottages with 4 offensive privies; offensive drains and noxious pond Not remedied Stanstead Lane, Sydenham A stagnant ditch full of drainage is in a most offensive condition, and dangerous to health March Not remedied Sydenham, Lower Overflowingprivics and want of drainage in lane opposite Mr. Brown's, Registrar Not remedied Sheppard's Place, Lewisham Houses of Messrs. Phillips, Sideiy, and West drain into River April Not remedied St. George's Infant Poor-house, Lewisham Measles epidemic. Bad state of drainage; offensive privies; contamination of water Not remedied Sydenham, Lower Offensive privies and drains at back of Mr. Jones's, bricklayer, and Dolphin Inn Not remedied Sydenham Hill Offensive ditch Not remedied 65 locality. nature of nuisance. when reportd. means adopted to remedy. Sydenham Offensive ditch, conveying large quantity of drainage, runs at back of Wells Road, through field of - Leathersellers' Company, bottom of Peake Hill, back of Greyhound Inn, under Railway, through Mr. Price's and Miss Mayow's grounds, to back of Dolphin Inn May Not remedied Scudder's Row Offensive drains May Not remedied, but work in hand Spencer Place, Blackheath Dunghill and offal heaps at back of butcher's and poulterer's J anuary Sewer made, but drains not opened in Taylor's Lane, Sydenham Filthy ditch and offensive drainage March This ditch is cleansed West Kent Park, Sydenham General want of outlet for drainage; accumulations of an offensive character in ditches and drains January Not remedied Willow Road, Sydenham Offensive drainage and dirty accumulations January Not remedied, but the work is in hand Willow Walk, Lewisham Foetid ditch opposite houses, privies overflowing, &c. January Not remedied, but the work is in hand Wells Road, Sydenham Filthy state from offensive and bad drainage; here houses also turn their J anuary Not remedied, but the work is in hand drains into the ditch, and contaminate the brook flowing down the hill March West Kent Park, Sydenham None of the gully holes are trapped, and some are open and the holes March Not remedied Waterloo Place, Lewisham gerous Offensive drains and bad state of privies and April Not remedied Willow Road, Sydenham pools Offensive drainage May Not remedied Westwood House, Sydenham Offensive drainage from overflowing of cesspool of house and cottage June Partially remedied by emptying cesspool and cleansing ditch, but will shortly be as bad as ever 66 JULY. Gentlemen, The return of mortality for the month ending July 28, although still favourable, exhibits, in some parts of the district, an increase over those of last month; but (with the exception of one death from hooping cough) no mortality has occurred from epidemic disease. Ihus in the sub-district of DISTRICTS. BIRTHS. DEATHS. Males. Females. Total. Males. Females. Total. Blackheath 5 8 13 3 2 5 Lewisham 8 12 20 6 4 13 Ditto Workhouse 1 2 Penge 4 2 6 2 2 Sydenham 13 13 26 3 6 9 Total 65 29 A mild form of diarhoea has been prevalent in some parts of the district; and many cases of fever are occurring in parts to which I have called your attention during the last six months, and alphabetically arranged in the summary returned to your Board last month. This summary comprises, I believe, nearly all the more important localities in which nuisances occur which are detrimental to the health of the inhabitants, and in many your attention is still required. As drainage is carried out it will be of great importance to look to the water supply, without which no system of drainage can be perfect, and the best scheme may become useless from the blocking up of pipes, and reflux of drainage from closets, &c. The supply of water should be from mains daily or constantly charged; and where such mains already exist landlords should be compelled to supply their houses with water. I have to solicit your order that some means may be afforded (lime, chloride of lime, or peat charcoal), to abate the nuisance on the piece of land and ditch at the back of Raglan Street and Dartmouth Row, Sydenham, prior to the arrival of the sewer which is about to be constructed. Much illness exists there, and the place is as bad as ever from accumulations of filth and sewage. Dr. Jones (the Poor Law Medical Officer), as well as Mr. Bottomley, of Croydon (Surgeon to the Brighton Railway Company), have also called my attention to this locality. Meteorological tables are appended as usual. I have the honour to be, Gentlemen, Your obedient servant, F. E. WILKINSON. Medical Officer of Health. METEOROLOGICAL OBSERVATIONS. Week ending. Weight of air. Barometer corrected. Mean inches. Temperature op Air. Thermometer. Prevailing winds. Rainy days. Amount of rain in inches. Highest. Lowest. Mean of daily readings. June 28. 29.999 83 1 49 0 63 4 Variable 0.00 J uly 5. 30.008 77 0 44 0 59 2 N. E. — 0.00 12. 29.658 79 0 44 0 57 6 N. & N. W. 4 0.31 19. 29.840 77 6 48 0 60 1 s. w. 2 0.33 26. 29.738 83 0 56 7 64 2 s. w. 4 0.35 Sydenham, July 31st, 1856. 67 AUGUST. Gentlemen, During the month ending 25th August, there were registered in the Lewisham district 22 deaths, viz.:— DISTRICTS. DEATHS. BIRTHS. Males. Females. Total. Males. Females. Total. Blackheath 1 2 3 5 2 7 Lewisham 4 1 4 4 8 Ditto Workhouse . . . 1 2 9 St. George's Infant Poorhouse 1 Penge 2 1 3 5 4 9 Sydenham 2 5 7 7 9 16 Total 22 40 This return exhibits a more favourable state of the public health than that indicated in my last report. Two deaths from infantile diarrhoea have taken place; one in West Kent Park, and one in Stanstead Lane, both at present offensive localities, but in process of improvement. One death from fever in Loat's Pits, Blackheath; one ditto from hooping cough and measles in the St. George's Infant Poor House. Diarrhoea still continues very prevalent, but is generally not of a very alarming character, and in case of any sudden attack bottles of medicine are provided for public use at all the police stations. Fifty-six children were seized with this disease (diarrhoea), attended with severe vomiting, in the Anerley Industrial School, Penge, on the night of Saturday, the 16th instant, for which I can find no positive cause beyond the rapid change of temperature which took place upon the day previous; the thermometer having ranged from 104 in the sun to 48 degrees at night. Hooping cough, scarlatina, and measles, are again making their appearance, especially in Penge, which is at present an undrained locality, but no fatal case has occurred with the exception of the one mentioned in St. George's Infant Poor House. Cowhouses.—As the health of the population of any district, in my opinion, materially depends upon the quality of the milk supplied, especially as the main support of children is from this source; and as the quality of the milk much depends upon the manner in which cows are kept, as to food and water, air, exercise, and amount of space, ventilation, and cleanliness of cowhouses, I have instituted an examination of the cowhouses in the district, and, with the assistance of the Inspector of Nuisances, hope shortly to lay before you an account of these matters, as well as whether, from want of drainage, or attention in removing deposit, any complaints are made by the surrounding householders. UNHEALTHY DISTRICTS. Blackheath.—The locality Loat's Pits continues in a very unhealthy state from dirty decomposing deposit and rubbish. A slaughter-house here is also in a very offensive state. Although several sewers have been made here, the house drainage is not at present opened into them, and I have to solicit your order that this shall be attended to at once. The state of Belmont Terrace and Sandwell Place urgently requires that a sewer should be constructed to carry off the sewage of these houses into the main. Fever has been from time to time very prevalent here, and all the wells are contaminated with sewage from leaky cesspools, and the water is totally unfit for use. Lewisham.—Some of the houses and closets in the neighbourhood of Home's Dale, Cross Street, Poplar Row, and Hanover Street, are in a dirty state, and require water supply to make the drainage efficient. The same may be said of "Willow Walk, Rushey Green, Waterloo Place, and Patrol Place, which further require much attention for their sanitary welfare. One or two pigstyes exist in this locality, which from the confined space must be productive of nuisance. The state of the Quaggy, near the Railway, as well as in other places, must be very F 2 68 unwholesome from the lowness of the water, which causes a quantity of filthy mud to be exposed to the sun's rays. The pools of water which exist in the bed of the old Lewisham stream must be unhealthy from the same cause; and if the population were more thickly placed would, I have no doubt, be a serious cause of disease. These might be filled in, as there is abundance of waste earth from the cuttings for the new sewer now in course of construction in Stanstead Lane. Some cottages at the back and near to the " Black Horse Inn," are in an undrained and dirty condition, and require opening into the sewer. Penge.—The drainage of this locality requires attention. The sewage running along the open ditches and stream here is most offensive; and although the mortality is not very great just now, a great deal of sickness prevails. Many of the houses here are without water supply, which is the more necessary as some of the wells are contaminated with sewage. One well in a court yard, near the " Crooked Billet," reported in January, is still receiving drainage from a dung heap, which is a nuisance to the neighbouring cottages. Sydenham.—The portion of the old canal, near the Forest Hill Station, which up to within a very short period received drainage from Forest Hill, is about to be converted into a reservoir to contain water conveyed from Croydon to be filtered and supplied to the engines at New Cross. Having been informed that it was the intention of the Directors of the London and Brighton Railway Company to empty the canal and throw the stagnant mud upon the banks, I wrote to the Directors, and am in receipt of a note from their Secretary informing me that this is not now to be done. A case of ague has just shown itself opposite the banks of this canal; this is a most unusual disease in Sydenham, and if it can be produced by the action of the sun upon the malarious banks, the result of emptying this piece of water during the hot weather could scarcely be otherwise than alarming. The state of the waste land and ditch at the back of Dartmouth Row and Raglan Street requires that the ditch should be cut to let off the accumulated sewage, and some lime, or chloride of lime, placed there frequently to prevent noxious effluvia, in anticipation of the new sewer. The same may be said of portions of a very offensive ditch containing drainage in Stanstead Lane, Brockley Lane, and Wells Road; all these places are dangerously offensive and unhealthy. The gully holes in West Kent Park require trapping; many of the inhabitants have placed clods of earth over the gratings to prevent the exit of the most noxious effluvia. This only increases the evil in other parts. The cottages situated in a yard, opposite the " Dolphin Inn," Lower Sydenham, require drainage, being in a most filthy state; Dr. Corbould, the Dispensary Surgeon, has requested me to mention this again. The gas works still throw their refuse liquor into the ditch and Pool River; this cannot be necessary with the sewer in such close proximity. Meteorological tables arc appended as usual. I have the honour to remain, Gentlemen, Tour obedient servant, F. E. WILKINSON. METEOROLOGICAL OBSERVATIONS. Week ending. Weight of air. Barometer corrected. Mean inches. Temperature op Air. Thermometer. Prevailing winds. Rainy days. Amount of rain in inches. Highest. Lowest. Mean of daily readings. Aug. 2. 30.006 89 8 53 4 67 6 S.W.&S. E. 2 0.22 9. 29.860 87 9 49 8 66 1 S. E. 1 0.21 16. 29.763 87 0 48 5 66 9 s. w. — 0.00 23. 29.472 71 8 45 0 57 8 N. E. 4 1.54 Sydenham, August 28th, 1856. (5,9 SEPTEMBER. Gentlemen, The returns of mortality of the entire District exhibit an increase over those of last month, which may be in some measure accounted for by the considerable changes of temperature which have taken place, and which have affected the mortality, as regards aged people and infants. The maximum temperature in the shade, occurred on the 31st of August, when the thermometer was read 74 degrees; since which time it has been as low as 30 degrees. DISTRICTS. BIRTHS. DEATHS. Males. Females. Total. Males. Females. Total. Blackheath 2 2 4 4 3 7 Lewisham 10 7 17 6 5 15 Ditto Workhouse 1 2 St. George's Infant Poorhouse 1 Penge 3 5 8 3 1 4 11 11 22 6 4 10 Total 47 36 3 deaths from diarrhoea have occurred in the Lewisham "Ward, viz. :— 1 in Home's Dale; 1 in Loampit Hill; 1 in Lewisham Village; and 1 (dysentery) in Lewisham Terrace. 2 deaths from diarrhoea in Blackheath "Ward:— 1 in Garden Row; 1 in Granville Terrace. 1 death from diarrhoea in Raglan Street, Sydenham. 1 hooping cough. 2 deaths from diarrhoea in Penge, viz :— 1 in Anerley Vale; 1 in Oakfield Road. These cases occur almost invariably in localities which I have before called your attention to as being in an unhealthy condition, and the disease is still prevalent. Hooping cough of a severe character is prevalent at Penge. Three cases of poisoning have occurred in Sydenham, from the dangerous practice of mixing pernicious ingredients with sweetmeat ornaments; the admixture in these instances consisting of a preparation of arsenic and copper, remarkable for its beautiful green colour and poisonous nature. The substance was not, however, purchased in this District, or I should have thought it right to have taken steps to prevent its future sale. Penge.—I have to request your attention to the offensive and unwholesome state of some of the houses at Penge, from insufficient drainage. A drain from the " Crooked Billet" Inn, and houses adjacent, has become blocked up, and both this and the ditch into which it empties, at the back of some of the shops, are in a most filthy condition, together with the water course into which the greater part of the sewage of Penge ultimately collccts as it runs towards the Ravensbourne. Some cases of hooping cough in one of the houses above-mentioned are very bad, and I have no doubt are rendered so by the imperfect drainage and offensive condition of the house in which they reside. A very offensive nuisance and prejudicial to health has occurred near the Waterman's Asylum, Penge, from the contents of some privies having been emptied upon the surface of the ground, in close contiguity with the inhabited houses. Would it not be of great importance that a scavenger should be appointed, and employed to remove all such offensive matter away from the neighbourhood of dwelling houses ? A nuisance has also occurred at the Anerley Industrial School, from the bursting of a drain pipe in the Infirmary. This has however been remedied. Sydenham.—A very disgusting effluvium is complained of when the offensive liquor from a cesspool in the cellar of the " Rock and Fountain" public house, is pumped out into the street. A sewer has existed in this locality for some years, into which not more than six 70 houses open; I should be glad of your order to allow the drainage to be carried into this proper channel. Some very offensive privies are much complained of at the backs of the houses in a line with Dartmouth Row, which render the houses to which they are attached very offensive and unhealthy. Lewisham.—The overflow of cesspools, &c., from many houses at Rushey Green, neighbourhood of Cockshead Lane, runs into the ditch by the side of the road. It is important that this should be conveyed into the sewer. Sydenham.—Some cesspools receiving drainage are being emptied and spread over the field in the neighbourhood of Park Road and Park End, Sydenham. This is certainly not a fit time of year for such a procedure, and is most disagreeable and unwholesome. Meteorological tables are appended as usual. I remain, Gentlemen, Your obedient servant, F. E. WILKINSON. METEOROLOGICAL OBSERVATIONS. Week ending. Weight of air. Barometer corrected. Mean inches. Temperature of Air. Thermometer. Prevailing winds. Rainy days. Amount of rain in inches. Highest. Lowest. Mean of daily readings. Aug. 30. 29.821 75 5 45 8 61 1 S. W. 3 0.08 Sept. 6. 29.847 74 0 43 8 57 5 E. 3 0.09 13. 29.852 72 3 44 8 58 7 N. 3 0.41 20. 29.905 70 0 40 0 53 7 N. W. 2 0.25 Sydenham, September 25th, 1856. OCTOBER. Gentlemen, During the month ending October 27th the total number of deaths registered in the District was 34. In the four preceding months the number was 115, giving a month's average of 28*3. This return gives consequently an increase of mortality for the present month, which may be accounted for from the fact that pulmonary disease has been fatal in 11 instances, viz.: 2 bronchitis; 5 pheumonia; and 4 phthisis. As to epidemic disease:— 1 death from small pox occurred in Avenue Terrace, Lewisham, on the 27th of last month; scarlatina was fatal at Bell Green, Sydenham, in 1 case; diarrhoea in Raglan Street and Bell Green, also in Garden Row. Typhus fever in 1 case, .Lewisham W orkhouse. DISTRICT. BIRTHS. DEATHS. Males. Females. Total. Males. Females. Total. Blackheath 2 2 4 4 4 8 Lewisham 10 13 23 2 7 9 \Vnrkhouse 1 2 3 Penge 1 2 3 3 3 6 Sydenham 14 15 29 4 4 8 Total 27 32 59 14 20 34 Inflammation of the eyes is prevalent among some of the children at the Anerley Industrial School, but the children having been separated from the rest of the School. 71 and placed in a separate ward of the Infirmary, to prevent the spread of the disease, are, under medical treatment, recovering. The District is at the present time remarkably free from epidemic disease. I wish to call the attention of the Board of Works to the fact, that the elm trees of the Parish are being destroyed by a small beetle (the Scalytus Destructor), which pierces the bark and deposits its egg beneath it; unless attended to, all the fine elm trees in the parish must ere long yield to these insect/ ravages. The plan which I should propose as the only one likely to be successful (and most appropriate at this season of the year, when the lavae are in a dormant state) would be to cut down and burn all the trees attacked, and if any re-appearance of the insect should take place in the summer in the remaining healthy trees, to adopt means which I should be prepared to suggest to stay its further progress. Trees of a different kind might also, at this season of the year, be planted to supply the place of those destroyed. Since my last report I have visited the site of the new Cemetery, which seems to be well adapted, as regards its situation, soil, and capabilities of drainage, for the purpose contemplated. It will be of great importance to carry the drainage below the depth allowed for graves, and to place the drains sufficiently close together, as otherwise the water in existing or future wells may be contaminated as bodies decompose. The great importance also of well planting cemeteries with trees, shrubs, grass, &c., ought to be considered, as vegetation not only separates the noxious products of decomposition and converts them to a useful purpose; but at the same time is a source of ornament and health. In many parts of the District accumulations of vegetable refuse from gardens, &c., take place contiguous to dwelling houses. Both for the sake of appearance and health these decomposing collections should be prevented, or the scavengers be employed to remove them. The irregular supply of water from the Lambeth Waterworks Company requires some remonstrance; frequently 2 days elapse without any water coming in. Many new houses depending for their sole supply upon this source, much inconvenience is occasioned. Several nuisances occurring in the District require your order for their removal. I will enumerate them under the respective Wards in which they occur. Blackheath.—The overflow of cesspools, drainage, &c., from Grote's Buildings, Pound's Mews, and many adjoining large houses, empties into an offensive ditch at the back of the houses, and must be a great annoyance at times, as well as injurious to health. The sewer lies at the bottom of the Hill parallel with the North Kent Railway, and it appears to me that it would be a great benefit to the locality, now several new houses are erecting, if the cesspools to all the houses were emptied and filled in, and a proper sewer constructed to the main. The privies at Pound's Mews and adjacent require emptying and cleansing. Phoenix Place, Blackheath, is still insufficiently drained. The inhabitants allow the closets to remain in a most filthy state. Lewisham.—The dirty state of the river Quaggy requires attention; houses still drain into it, among which I may name Newman's block of houses close by its entrance into the Ravensbourne. This must seriously contaminate the water. Hither Green Lane.—A privy here is overflowing into the road, and requires emptying and cleansing. Stanstead Lane.—An overflow of offensive drainage near to Catford Hill. Opposite the "Rising Sun," Rushey Green.—Drainage from stables and large dung heaps; accumulation of manure in dirty yard running into ditch. No drainage. A privy and cesspool at Rushey Green, near the Police Station, has been filled in without having been emptied, and great nuisance occasioned. There is no closet or sufficient drainage here. The houses beyond the " Black Horse" Inn, Rushey Green, still drain into the ditch opposite. Penge.—The drainage from the Crystal Palace, the general open sewer of Penge, and the ditches near the " Crooked Billet," are still in a very offensive state. The land at the back of the Anerley School is not yet efficiently drained, although the authorities of the School are having the ditch cleansed and drained, which may somewhat tend to relieve the marsh in its neighbourhood. The cottages in Harding's Lane, Penge, are entirely without water supply, except from a pond in an adjacent field. The houses have no drainage; the closets require emptying, and the ditches near the houses are full of filthy accumulation. 72 Sydenham.—Orchard Place, although close to the Bell Green Sewer, remains in an undrained state. This is not a healthy part of the District, therefore it more urgently requires attention. Many complaints have reached me as to the state of a cow house, in the occupation of Mr. Duffin, wherein a number of pigs, cows, horses, &c., are kept without sufficient supply of air and drainage. The grains also used as food remain and decompose, and when moved are very offensive. This is closely surrounded by dwelling houses. The privy at the back of Mr. Jones's, bricklayer, near the "Dolphin Inn," is cot at present attended to. This was reported some months ago. The houses in a Court-yard opposite the " Dolphin Inn" have also been reported and still remain in the same state. The house occupied by Mr. Moore, grocer, at the basement has the water up to the floor boards constantly from want of drainage. Two cottages, situate at the corner of Taylor's Lane, "Well's Road (and owned by Mr. Cross, of Camberwell Green), are in a dirty state. The privies are dilapidated, the pans obstructed and filthy; an offensive ditch also at the corner. Fever is now existing in the house occupied by Mr. Barwell. I find that the water has been cut off in consequence of the previous tenant not having paid the water-rate. The inhabitants have to beg what water they can get for drinking purposes, and the house has been cleaned with the sewage water which I some months ago pointed out as about to run from the houses above. The closets at the adjoining cottages are out of repair and require cleaning. The yards and privies to the houses occupied respectively by Messrs. Dobbs and Blunden, Wells Road, are in a most filthy state. Mr. Blunden keeps pigs in a most dirty state. I have the honor to remain, Gentlemen, Yours respectfully, F. E. WILKINSON. METEOROLOGICAL OBSERVATIONS. Week ending. Weight of air. Barometer corrected. Mean inches. Temperature of Air. Thermometer. Prevailing winds. Rainy days. Amount of rain in inches. Highest. Lowest. Mean of daily readings. Sept. 27. 29.241 65 5 40 0 52 9 S. W. 1 7 1.43 Oct. 4. 29.439 66 0 47 0 50 1 S. W. 5 0.54 11. 29.883 61 8 49 0 54 3 Variable. 5 0.80 18. 29.937 64 0 45 0 50 5 Variable. 2 0.36 25. 30.208 66 2 36 5 51 2 Variable. — 0.00 Sydenham, October 30th, 1857. NOVEMBER. Gentlemen, The returns of mortality for the present month, ending November 23rd, exhibit a favourable change, the total number of deaths registered in the district being 23; whereas last month 34 deaths were registered. Of these one person had attained the age of 92 years, two had attained the age of 86 years, and three were above 70 years of age. One death from typhus, occurred in Silver Street, Lewisham, and one also in the Avenue Road. One death from diarrhoea (infant) in Osborne Cottages, and one death from diarrhoea (infant) at Southend. A death from fever occurred at Penge, and is attributed to the offensive effluvia arising from the drainage running from the Crystal Palace, &c. Two deaths occurred from pulmonary consumption, and two ditto from other diseases of the lungs. Five deaths are attributed to natural decay. A few mild cases of measles have occurred in parts of the district; but diseases of the zymotic class are not at all prevalent. 73 DISTRICT. BIRTHS. DEATHS. Males. Females. Total. Males. Females. Total. Blackheath 3 2 5 1 1 2 Lewisham 6 10 16 3 7 Union Workhouse 1 Penge 2 3 5 1 2 Anerley School 1 Sydenham 4 12 16 4 4 8 Total 15 27 42 10 13 23 The following list of localities requiring attention for their sanitary improvement as to drainage, water supply, and general cleanliness, I submit for your consideration. Blackheath.—Some filthy cesspools exist in Loat's Pits, which should be emptied and cleansed as drains are fixed; water supply should be afforded to all the houses in Osborne Place, Blackheath; the whole of the houses require draining into the sewer. Some of the privies are full and their contents soaking out of the ground. The Duke's Head Inn has for some time past been drained into a deep well under the kitchen of the adjoining house. Blackheath Hill; the yard in the occupation of Mr. Samuel, Blackheath, is frequently in an offensive state from accumulation of manure and from pigs kept there. Phoenix Square (Tuns Passage), requires paving and cisterns for the reception of water over the closets. Lewisham.—Home's Dale, and Rushey Green, are without water supply; the closets are liable to become blocked up. Sewage still enters the Quaggy from the last house of Newman's Buildings. Penny's Cottages, by the Lewisham Railway Station, require draining into the sewer. Pigs and manure heaps are still at the back of Messrs. Jones and Co veil's premises. Penge.—The drainage of Penge is still in a most unsatisfactory state. The Infirmary at the Anerley Industrial School requires ventilation; the wards are very offensive when closed. Proper closets should be fixed in the school yard. Sydenham.—Cesspool at Mr. Short's, Perry Yale, complained of by a neighbour. Privy and cesspool by Cooper's, sweep, very offensive. Yard at back of Bee Hive public house dirty and offensive; requires paving and draining. Forest Hill (within Camberwell parish). An offensive ditch receives sewage from houses in Lewisham parish. Offensive gully-holes in the Park Road (lately taken by the Board). Albion Terrace; some of the houses offensive from cesspools and obstructed drainage. A small slip should be carried up from the main sewer to reccive the drainage of these houses. Steel's Cottages, near Dartmouth Row, offensive from want of proper drainage and filthy privies. Gully-holes on "West Kent Park Estate untrapped, and most of them without gratings; dangerous to passengers. Meteorological tables are appended as usual. I have the honour to be, Gentlemen, Your obedient servant, F. E. WILKINSON. 74 METEOROLOGICAL OBSERVATIONS. Week ending. Weight of air. Barometer corrected. Mean inches. Temperature of Air. Thermometer. Prevailing winds. Rainy days. Amount of rain in inches. Highest. Lowest. Mean of daily readings. Nov. 1. 30.165 56 7 31 4 44 7 N.E.&calm. 1 0.34 8. 30.236 57 7 29 0 43 4 N. E. 3 0.23 15. 29.649 49 8 29 0 38 3 N. 4 0.12 22. 30.025 52 6 23 8 42 3 N. W. 1 0.15 Sydenham, November 27th, 1856. DECEMBER. Gentlemen, The returns of mortality for the month, from 23rd of November to 20th of December, are of a very favourable character as regards the number of deaths in Blackheath, Penge, and Sydenham; but in the Lewisham Ward the mortality is a little in excess of the monthly average; the principal number of deaths have occurred amongst the aged and infants, 2 deaths having been recorded in persons above 60 years of age, 3 in those above 70, and 4 in those above 80 years of age; 6 deaths have occurred in children under 2 years of age. A death has occurred from a bad form of scarlatina in Camden Cottages, Blackheath with this exception, there has been no mortality from zymotic disease. DISTRICT. BIRTHS. DEATHS. Males. Females. Total. Males. Females. Total. Blackheath 5 5 10 1 1 2 Lewisham 9 16 25 7 7 18 Union Workhouse 3 1 Penge 3 3 6 2 2 Sydenham 5 11 16 5 1 6 Total 22 35 57 11 12 28 Appended, are meteorological tables for the month; also an alphabetical summary of the nuisances, &c., injurious to the health of the population of the District, contained in the monthly reports for the last six months. I have also appended a table of the mortality of each Ward for the year, comprising a monthly statement of the causes of death (more especially from zymotic disease,) sex, and age, at which death takes place, which I think must prove useful as a matter of reference. The average number of births which take place per month in the District amounts to 52; which gives 624 births per annum; but from the great number of houses built and occupied within the last four years, it is almost impossible with any degree of accuracy, to form a conclusion as to the increase of population upon the last census. During the entire year I have kept an accurate register of each street or block of houses in which a death has occurred, in order to ascertain with precision as to how far the proximity of nuisance, damp, or the want of elevation and drainage of a locality favours the spread of disease. This will, I hope, also prove a useful guide to the sanitary requirements of the District. I have the honor to be, Gentlemen, Your obedient servant, F. E. WILKINSON. 75 METEOROLOGICAL OBSERVATIONS. Week ending. Weight of air. Barometer corrected. Mean inches. Temperature of Air. Thermometer. Prevailing winds. Rainy days. Amount of rain in inches. Rain and snow. Highest. Lowest. Mean of daily readings. Nov. 29. 29.677 58 0 24 3 39 3 N. W. 2 0.52 Dec. 6. 29.675 56 0 19 4 35 5 N.W.&S.W. 2 0.30 13. 29.219 58 9 41 6 51 3 S. W. 6 0.78 20. 30.128 48 0 24 0 38 8 N. N. E. 2 0.03 27. 29.419 46 5 24 6 35 7 W. 1 0.13 Sydenham, December 27th, 1856. 76 SUMMARY OF NUISANCES reported FROM JULY TO DECEMBER INCLUSIVE. locality. nature of nuisance. when reportd. means adopted to remedy. North Surrey Industrial School, Anerley Drain pipes burst in infirmary September Remedied Ditto Undrained land at back of October and Dec. Nothing done Ditto Infirmary requires ventilation and proper closets November Only partially remedied Ditto Drains in Infirmary burst Dec. Remedied Belmont Terrace Requires draining and August Cesspools emptied Black Horse Inn, Lewisham pools emptying Cottages at back of undrained and dirty August Nothing done Brockley Lane, Sydenham Most offensive sewage August Sewer constructed Duke's Head Inn, Blackheath Drains are turned into well of adjoining house November Remedied Blackheath Yard occupied by Mr. Samuel in an offensive state from accumulations November Ordered to cleanse Bird-in-hand Public House, Sydenham Yard at back of requires draining and paving August Nothing done Cross Street, Lewisham Dirty and requires water supply- August Drains laid in; water supplied to some Crooked Billet, Penge Drain blocked up; ditch near well in a filthy state from drainage September Nothing done Cemetery, Lewisham Importance of draining and planting shrubs and trees September Disenfecting Disinfecting agents for occasional urgent use required July Not supplied Dartmouth Row, Sydenham Sewage accumulations offensive upon waste land and ditch August Nothing done Opposite Dolphin Inn, Lower Sydenham Cottages and yard opposite very filthy from want of drainage September Nothing done Duffin's Cowhouse, Sydenham Many complaints of offensive smell from manure and grains decomposing October As before Dolphin Inn Yard Jones, bricklayer—privies offensive October Nothing dono Forest Hill, Sydenham Offensive ditch in Camberwell parish, receiving sewage from houses in Lewisham parish June and November A drain made in old ditch 77 locality. nature of nuisance. when reportd. means adopted to remedy. Gas "Works, Sydenham Refuse liquor runs into Pool river, which communicates with Ravensbourne Nothing done Grote's Buildings, Blackheath Overflow of drainage into ditches requires drain to conduct it into the sewer August Still drains into ditch Homes Dale, Lewisham Dirty state and requires water supply Aug. and Nov. As before Hanover Street, Lewisham Requires water supply August As before High Street, Sydenham House drains should be opened into sewer September About one-third opened into sewer Hither Green Lane Privy overflowing into road, offensive October Remedied Lewisham, bed of stream Pools recommended to be filled in ; stagnant water in bed of old stream unwholesome August Same as before Loat's Pits, Blackheath Slaughter-house not drained into the sewer; dirty ditch by side of Vicar's School; filthy cesspool should be emptied and cleansed August June October Not done Lady-well, Lewisham Thirteen houses without water supply, & undrained June Nothing done Lambeth "Waterworks Irregular supply; complaints September Improved Orchard Place, Sydenham Unhealthy ; not drained, although the new sewer is close at hand October Nothing done Osborne Place, Blackheath All the houses require draining into the sewer; some of the privies are ftill, and the contents soaking out of the ground November Nothing done Park Road, Sydenham Cesspools ought not to be emptied at this time September Drain opened into new sewer Pound's Mews, Blackheath Overflow of drainage into ditch requires carrying into sewer; privies full September Nothing done Phoenix Place, Blackheath Closets in a filthy state; want water supply September Completed Harding's Lane, Penge Cottages without water supply and no drainage October Same Perry Yale, Sydenham Cesspool at Mr. Short's complained of November Remedied Park Road, Sydenham Urgently require trappings; offensive gully holes November Trapped Penge Want of drainage. Hooping cough, scarlatina, and measles prevalent. Some of the wells contaminated with sewage. Offensive sewage in ditches; all eventually gets into River Ravensbourne August September October November Nothing done Poplar Row Dirty state and requires water supply August Nothing done Patrol Place Dirty state and requires water supply August Nothing done 78 locality. nature op nuisance. when reportd. means adopted to remedy. Quaggy River Full of filthy mud exposed to the sun's rays from lowness of water. Sewage still enters this stream, and thence into Ravensbourne August September October Improved Raglan Street Dirty offensive ditch full of sewage August Drained into sewer Ravensbourne River Water supply contaminated with Penge drainage Same as before Rock and Fountain, Sydenham Offensive drainage pumped into street September Opened into sewer Rushey Green, Lewisham Drainage from Cockshed Lane into ditch opposite Black Horse Inn. Drainage from stable and dung heap. No drain into sewer. Privy and cesspool near Police Station. No sufficient drainage. Houses beyond Black Horse still drain into diteh, without water supply October Same November Remedied Same Sydenham; piece of canal atForest Hill Talk of emptying and throwing mud upon banks; would be dangerous August Not to be done Stanstead Lane Sydenham Offensive drainage House occupied by Moore, grocer, undrained. Privy, by Cooper, sweep, Forest Hill, offensive. Steel's Cottages, near Dartmouth Row, no drainage and offensive privies Opened into sewer Undrained Undrained; notices ser ved to drain Sandwell Place, Blackheath W ard Requires urgently to be drained; fever occurs here Nothing done Sydenham and Lewisham Trees being destroyed by an insect, " Scalytus Destructor," should be cut down to save the remaining healthy ones Nothing done Taylor's Lane, Sydenham Two cottages at corner, privies dilapidated, obstructed, and filthy; an offensive ditch at corner; fever attacking the inmates ; adjoining cottages are in the same state Still in a filthy state Near Waterman's Asylum The cesspools emptied and thrown at the back of a house. A scavenger should be employed to remove these nuisances Remedied Vegetable refuse thrown in decomposing heaps in various parts of all the Districts Remedied Westwood House, Sydenham Offensive drains from into ditch, should be arched over > June Same as before 79 locality. nature op nuisance. when rei-ortd. means adopted to remedy. Water supply necessary for efficient drainage July Willow Walk, Rushey Green Requires water supply August Not done West Kent Park No traps or gratings to gully holes; very offensive and dangerous August and November Nothing done Sydenham Poisoning from arsenite of copper in sweetmeat ornaments September Remedied Pigs are kept in an offensive manner in various parts of the District June Partially improved 80 TABLES OF MORTALITY FOR THE YEAR 1856. No. 1, OR BLACKHEATH WARD. 1856. January. February. March. April. May. June. July. August. September. October. November. December. Under 1 year. 1 to 5. 5 to 10. Total under 10. 10 to 20. 20 to 30. 30 to 40. |40 to 50. 50 to 60. |60 to 70. |70 to 80. Above 80. Males. Females. |Total. Small Pox — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — Measles — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — Scarlatina — — — — — — — — — — 1 — — 1 — 1 — — — — — — — — — 1 1 Malignant Sore Throat — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — Hooping Cough 1 3 1 1 — — — — — — — — — 6 — 6 — — — — — — — — 1 5 6 Diarrhoea and Dysentery — — — — — 1 — — — — — — — — — — — — — 1 — — — — — 1 1 Diarrhoea of Infants — — — — — — — 2 — 1 — — 2 1 — 3 — — — — — — — — 3 — 3 Cholera — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — Fever — — — — 1 — 1 — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — 1 1 2 Erysipelas — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — 1 — 1 — — — — — — Puerperal Fever — 1 — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — 1 1 — 1 — — — 1 1 Lung Diseases, &c. — — — — 3 — — 1 — 1 1 — — 1 1 2 — — 1 — — — 1 — 3 3 b Phthisis — — 1 1 2 — — — 1 2 — — — 2 — 2 — 3 — — 2 — — — 5 2 i Hydrocephalus — — 1 1 — — — — — — — — I I — 2 — — — — — — — — 1 1 2 Tabes 1 — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — 2 — — Scrofula — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — Spasmodic Croup — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — Convulsions of Children — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — Other diseases, chiefly Chronic 5 4 4 6 2 1 2 2 3 — — 1 3 — b 8 i 3 5 3 2 7 I — 16 14 30 Violence 1 — — — — — 1 — — — — — — — — — 2 — — — — — — — 2 — 2 Privation — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — Poison — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — Premature Birth — — — — — 1 — 1 — — — — 2 — — 2 — — — — — — — — 1 1 2 Natural Decay — — — — 1 — — — — 2 — — — — — — — — — — — 1 — 2 1 2 3 Rheumatism — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — 1 81 No. 2, OR SYDENHAM WARD. 1856. January. February. March. April. May. June. July. August. September. October. November. December. Under 1 year. 1 to 5. 5 to 10. Total under 10. 10 to 20. 20 to 30. 30 to 40. 40 to 50. 50 to 60. 60 to 70. 70 to 80. 80 and above. Males. Females. Total. Small Pox — — — — 1 — — — — — — — — 1 — 1 — — — — — — — — — 1 1 Measles — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — Scarlatina — — — — — — — — — 1 — — — — — — 1 — — — — — — — 1 — 1 Malignant Sore Throat — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — Hooping Cough — — — — — — — — — — — — — 1 1 — — — — — — — — — 1 1 Diarrhoea and Dysentery — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — Diarrhoea of Infants — — — — — — — 2 1 1 — — 4 — — — — — — — — — — — 2 2 4 Cholera — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — Fever — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — Erysipelas — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — Puerperal Fever — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — Lung Disease, except — — 3 2 2 1 1 1 2 1 — — 5 2 — 7 — 1 — 1 1 — 2 1 5 8 13 Phthisis — — 2 1 1 1 1 — 1 2 1 1 2 4 2 1 Hydrocephalus — — — — — — — — — — 1 — — 1 — 1 — — — — — — — — — 1 1 Tabes — 1 — — 1 — — — — — — — 1 — 1 2 — — — — — — — — i 1 2 Scrofula — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — Spasmodic Croup — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — Convulsions of Children — — 1 1 1 — — 1 1 — 1 — 2 3 1 6 — — — — — — — — 5 1 6 Other diseases chiefly Chronic 3 1 1 4 4 4 3 4 3 2 3 3 1 2 6 2 2 1 4 3 ft b 3 1«> 1<» 32 Violence — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — Privation — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — Poison — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — Premature Birth l — — — 1 — — — 1 — — — 3 — — 3 — — — — — — — — 2 1 3 Natural Decay — — 2 — — — — 1 — 2 2 — – — — — — — — — — 1 2 4 3 4 1 82 No. 3, OR LEWISHAM WARD. 1856. January. February. March. April. May. June. July. August. September. October. November. December. Union Workhouse. St. George's Infant Poorhouse. Under 1 year. 1 to 5. 5 to 10. Total under 10. 10 to 20. 20 to 30. 30 to 40. 40 to 50. 50 to 60. 60 to 70. 70 to 80. Over 80. Males. Females. Total. Small Pox . — 1 2 1 1 2 2 1 _ 1 _ — 3 1 4 Measles _ — 7 2 2 — — — — — — — 7 2 7 2 11 — — — — — — — — 7 4 11 Scarlatina — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — Malignant Sore Throat — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — Hooping Cough — — 2 1 2 1 1 — — — — — 1 1 5 2 — 7 — — — — — — — — 4 3 7 Diarrhoea and Dysentery — — — — — — — — 2 — — — 1 — — — — — — — — — 1 1 1 — 2 1 3 Diarrhoea of Infants — — — — — — — 1 2 1 3 — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — 3 4 / Cholera — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — Fever 1 1 — — — — — — 1 1 — 2 — — — — — 1 — 2 1 — — — 4 4 Erysipelas 1 — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — 1 — — — 1 1 Puerperal Fever — — — — — 1 — — — — — — — — — — — — :— 1 — — — — — — — 1 1 Intermittent Fever 1 — — — — — — — — — — — — — — 1 1 — — — — — — — — — 1 1 Lung Diseases, except Phthisis 3 2 6 — 2 2 3 — 2 3 3 5 8 1 9 3 — 12 — — — 1 — 5 7 6 16 15 31 Phthisis 4 2 1 — 2 2 1 — 1 — — 7 — 1 — — 1 2 2 3 4 1 — — — 7 6 13 Hydrocephalus — — — — I 1 — — 1 — — — 1 1 1 3 — — — — — — — — 2 1 3 Tabes 1 1 — 2 1 1 — — 2 2 — — — 1 3 6 — 9 1 — — — — — — — 4 6 10 Scrofula — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — —> — — — Spasmodic Croup — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — Convulsions of Children 2 1 1 — 1 1 2 — 1 — 2 — 1 — 8 3 — 11 — — — — — — — — 4 i 11 Other diseases, chiefly Chronic 4 1 8 5 5 4 4 1 5 2 2 6 18 — 4 1 1 6 1 — 4 7 5 12 10 2 22 2b 47 Violence — — — — — — —. — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — Privation — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — Poison — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — Premature Birth 1 2 — — — — — — — — — — — — 3 — — 3 — — — — — — — — 1 2 3 Natural Decay 2 2 — — — 1 — 3 — 1 1 I — — — — — — — 1 — 1 — 4 4 5 5 10 Rheumatism — — — — — 1 — — 1 — — — — — — — — — 1 — — — — 1 — — 1 1 2 83 PENGE. 1856. January. February. March. April. May. June. July. August. September. October. November. December. North Surrey Industrial School. Under 1 year. 1 to 5. 5 to 10. Total under 10, 10 to 20. 20 to 30. 30 to 40. 40 to 50. 50 to 60. 60 to 70. 70 to 80. Over 80. Males. Females. Total. Small Pox — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — Measles 1 — — 2 — — — — — — — — 2 1 2 — 3 — — — — — — — — 1 2 3 Scarlatina — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — Malignant Sore Throat — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — Hooping Cough 1 1 1 I — — — — — — — — 1 1 2 I 4 — — — — — — — — 2 2 4 Diarrhoea and Dysentery 1 — — — — — — — 1 — — — — — 1 — 1 — — — — — 1 — — 2 — 2 Diarrhoea of Infants — — — — — — — — 1 1 — — — 2 — — 2 — — — — — — — — — 2 2 Cholera — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — Fever — — — — — — 1 — — — 2 — 2 — — 1 1 2 — — — — — — — 2 1 3 Erysipelas — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — Puerperal Fever — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — Lung Diseases, except 2 1 I 1 2 — — — 1 — — 2 — 2 3 1 6 — 1 — — 1 — — 2 4 6 10 Phthisis — 1 — — — 1 — — — — — — — — — — — 1 1 — — — — — — 1 1 2 Hydrocephalus — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — Tabes — — — — — — — 1 — — — — — 1 — — 1 — — — — — — — — — 1 1 Scrofula — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — Spasmodic Croup — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — Convulsions of Children 1 — 1 — 1 1 — — — — — — — 3 1 — 4 — — — — — — — — 2 4 Other diseases, chiefly Chronic 1 — 1 2 — — 1 1 — 4 — — — — — — — 2 — 1 1 — 1 2 3 7 3 10 Violence — 1 — 1 — — 1 — 1 — — — — 1 — — 1 1 1 — 1 — — — — 1 — 4 Privation — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — Poison — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — Premature Birth — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — Natural Decay — — — — — — — — 1 — — — — — — — — — — — — — — 1 — 1 — 1 84 APPENDIX II. So much misapprehension has prevailed in the District with reference to the Precept made upon it by the Metropolitan Board, that, although belonging rather to this year than 1856, the real state of the case cannot be too early understood The Precept is for ,£10,628 7s., and is composed of the following items:— Portion of loan (in respect of works in the District) raised by £ s. d. the Commissioners of Sewers repaid by the Metropolitan Board in June, 1856 4086 6 1 Approximate estimate of amount due to the Commissioners on their current expenditure account (see page 18) 3716 5 10 Amount to be raised (annually) for repayment of loans:—£5 per cent, on £21,311 Is. 5d. (see page 18) 1065 11 1 Interest on such loans 1034 4 2 Interest and instalment (annual) on the £1627 15s. 7d., the proportion of the £140,000 assessed on the District (see page 18) 158 18 5 Metropolitan Board, proportion of establishment charges . . 294 18 7 Sums required for sewerage works to main sewers in the District 272 2 10 £10,628 7 0 Thus the amount in respect of current expenditure is only £2,825 15s Id., £4,086 6s. Id. being in respect of a loan paid off, and which it will be competent to the District Board to borrow again, and the remaining £3,716 5s. lOd. in respect of expenditure which, in the ordinary course, would have been met by a rate in December, 1855, but which was not levied. The amount of the Precept will not be raisable by an equal rate over the whole Parish, as the Board have decided with reference to all sewerage expenses incurred by them, but will be apportioned upon the Old Watershed Districts (under the Commissioners), in respect of which the debt has been incurred. Thus, of the present Precept there will be levied— £ s. d. Over the whole Parish, Lewisham 501 15 7 In that portion of the Parish which was within the Greenwich District under the Metropolitan Sewers Act of 1848 1701 16 6 In that portion of the Parish which was within the Ravensbourne District under the same Act 8289 12 4 £10,493 4 5 In the Hamlet of Penge 135 2 7 £10,628 7 0 It will be unnecessary to analyze each of these items further than as follows:— Of the £1,701 16s. 6d. to be raised on " the Greenwich District," there is— £ s. d. In respect of the loan paid off 700 3 11 Ditto ditto current expend' ure debt 675 6 9 Ditto ditto all the other charges (annual) 326 5 10 £1,701 16 6 And of the £8,289 12s. 4d. to be raised on " the Ravensbourne District," there is— £ s. d. In respect of the loan paid off 3387 2 2 Ditto ditto current expenditure debt 2865 0 9 Ditto ditto all other charges annual 2037 9 5 £8,289 12 4