LEW 62 THE REPORT by the BOARD OF WORKS FOR THE LEWISH DISTRICT of THEIR PROCEEDING in the EXECUTION OF THE METROPOLIS LOCAL MANAGEment (18 and 19 Vict., c. 120), FOR THE YEAR 1857. PUBLISHED BY ORDER OF THE BOAR JUNE, 1858. greenwich : printed by w. h. crockford, blackheath road. THE REPORT by the BOARD OF WORKS FOR THE LEWISHAM DISTRICT of THEIR PROCEEDINGS in the EXECUTION OF THE METROPOLIS LOCAL MANAGEMENT ACT, (18 and 19 Vict., c. 120), FOR THE YEAR 1857. PUBLISHED BY ORDER OF THE BOARD, JUNE, 1858. greenwich : printed by tv. h. crockford, blackheath road. CONTENTS. page. Forms of Notice for Building and Applications for Drainage iv. Members of the Board and Establishment Arrangements.— Elections of Members—Auditors—Meetings—Alterations in Appointments of Officers—District Surveyor 1—4 Highways.—Expenditure for Labour and Material—Cartage— Boad Scrapings—Private Boads—New Streets—Improvements—Reinstating Roads after Construction of Sewers— Encroachments—New Railways—Roadside Trees—Gas and Water Mains—Precepts and Bates for General Purposes 4—10 Watering.—Blackheath Boads—Precepts and Bates—Sydenham Boads—Terms of Contracts 10—12 Lighting.—Lewisham Village—Avenue Boad—Precepts and Bates—Phoenix Gas Company—Proposed Extension of Lighting. Sydenham.—Extended Lighting—Precepts and Bates —Proposed Extensions—Crystal Palace District Gas Company's Act of Incorporation. Penge.—Discordant wishes of Batepayers 12—15 Sewerage.—Sewers constructed by the Board—Blackheath Sewer —Sewers constructed by Burial Boards and Private Individuals—Stainton—Turnpike Boad, Lewisham Tillage—Millowners and Kent Water Works. Penge.—Difficulties— Ultimate Proceedings—Precepts and Bates 15—20 House Drainage and Sanitary Measures.—Contracts Determined —Cost of Work—Houses Drained—Opposition to Authority of Board—Nuisances Abated 20—22 Finance.—Embarrassments—Temporary Loan—Estimates for 1857—Issue of Precepts—Apportionment of Establishment Charges—Metropolitan Precepts—Monies Baised by Mortgage and Bate—Precepts and Bates—Debts of Commissioners of Sewers 22—27 General Subjects.—Equalization of Poor Bates—Parks and Metropolitan Improvements—Metropolitan Gas Supply—Apportionment of Debts on Separate Sewerage Districts—Main Drainage Scheme—Amendment of Metropolis Local Management Act—Suggestions by Board—Injustice of Principle as applied to the Lewisham District—Extension of District to a portion of Beckenham Parish 27—30 Statement of Beceipts and Expenditure 31—33 Statement of Establishment Expenses and Apportionment thereof 34 Statement of Liabilities and Assets 35 Statement of Financial Condition of Board 36 Names and Addresses of Members of Board and their Officers 37 Appendix.—Dates at which Members go out of Office, 38—Auditors, 38—Attendance of Members, 39—Lists of Committeemen, 39 and 40—Reports of Committees as to Salaries and Duties of Officers and Cartage, 40 to 44—Road Scraping CONTENTS—(Continued). iv. Contracts, 45 and 46—Bye Law of Metropolitan Board as to New Streets, 47—Metropolitan Board Precepts, 48 and 49— and Analyses of same, 50 and 51—Proceedings on Finsbury Park Bill (52 to 55), and Metropolitan Gas Supply, 55 to 58 —Resolutions on Main Drainage Scheme, 58—Suggestions for Amendment of Metropolitan Local Management Act, 59 to 61 38—61 Medical Officer's Monthly Reports 62—87 Summary of Nuisances reported from January, 1857, to March, 1858, inclusive 88—94 Table of Deaths during the four quarters of the year 1857 95—98 Table of Deaths from Zymotic Diseases, with the Localities in which they have occurred 99 Table of Birth and Deaths in each "Ward of Lewisham and in Penge 100 FORMS OF APPLICATION FOR DRAINAGE. FOR EXISTING HOUSES. To the Board of Works for the Lewisham District. Date 185 The application of Mr. of for leave to lay down (in accordance with the provisions of the "Act for the Better Local Management of the Metropolis," the Regulations of the said Board, and the Directions of their Surveyor), Glazed Stoneware Pipe Drains inches in diameter, to and from the house situate to communicate with and to have a current into the Sewer in or cesspool, as shewn in the annexed Plan. (Signature) Note.—The plan required is a ground plan drawn on a separate half sheet of foolscap paper to a scale of one sixteenth of an inch to a foot, shewing by the adjacent Roads, &c., the position of tho premises and the proposed mode of drainage. FOR HOUSES PROPOSED TO BE BUILT. To the Board of Works for the Lewisham District. Date 185 The Notice of Mr. of of his intention to build houses on the side of And the application of the said for leave to lay down (in accordance with the provisions of the "Act for the Better Local Management of the Metropolis," the Regulations of the said Board, and the Directions of their Surveyor), Glazed Stoneware Pipe Drains inches in diameter, to and from such houses, to communicate with and have a current into the Sewer in or Cesspool as shewn in the annexed Plan. (Signature) Note.—The Plan required is a Ground Plan drawn on a separate half sheet of foolscap paper to a scale of one sixteenth of an inch to a foot, shewing by the adjacent Roads, &c., the position of the premises, the proposed mode of drainage, the distance of the intended Building from the Road in front, and whether such Building will be in a regular line with the adjoining houses. REPORT. In the preparation of this, the second Annual Report of their proceedings, the Board of Works for the Lewisham District have (as with their previous Report), endeavoured to convey the fullest information compatible with the form of a General Report, and have not permitted the expense of its publication to weigh against the advantages to the ratepayers, with which it is believed an accurate knowledge by them of the proceedings of Parochial Boards is attended. The compilation of the Report has again been confided to Mr. Edwards, and the arrangement of subjects which was previously adopted will, as far as is practicable, be adhered to. The information will extend, in all cases, to the 25th March, 1858, so as to make it co-extensive with the accounts which are required by the Metropolis Local Management Act to be made up to that date, and the Report will in some instances (where it appeared desirable), be brought down to within a few days of the date of publication. MEMBERS OF THE BOARD AND ESTABLISHMENT ARRANGEMENTS. Several resignations of Members of the Board took place in the early part of the year 1857, but as the changes thus occasioned, as well as those incident to the Annual Election in June, were specified in the previous Report, it is unnecessary to do more than refer to them here. No further changes took place until the 3rd of March in the present year, when Mr. Carter was appointed, on the resignation by Mr. Mead of his office. On the Annual Election of Members, in June last, by the Lewisham Vestry, Messrs. Southorn, Sinkins, Carter, and Phillips, were re-elected, and *Dr. Purvis, and Messrs. Adams, Sabin, and Abbott were elected in the places of Dr. Greenwood (who declined to be put in nomination), and Messrs. Dale, Belcham, and Kelsey —Mr. Belcham having become disqualified for election by his nonelection as a Vestryman. Mr. James Daikers was at the same time re-elected to the Board by the Vestry of Penge. In addition to the list of the names and addresses of the Members of the Board, required by the Act to be given in each Report, there * Dr. Purvis has since resigned his office, but no one has yet been appointed in his stead. b 2 will be found in the Appendix a list of Members, shewing at what date each will go out of office by rotation. Mr. Brooker was ballotted to go out of office as a Member of the Metropolitan Board of Works on the 9th June, 1858, and was on that day re-elected by the united Boards of Works for the Plumstead and Lewisham Districts. The names of the Auditors of Accounts appointed, both for Lewisham and Penge, for each year, will be found in the Appendix. Mr. Corbett became disqualified to act as an Auditor of the Accounts of the Board by taking a contract under them; and the Auditors appointed to audit their Accounts to the 25th March, 1858, were Messrs. Jones, Lyon, and Hopcraft—the latter gentleman, however, from a misapprehension of the possible duties involved in his appointment as an Auditor by the Yestry of Penge, did not attend, and the Accounts were therefore audited by Messrs. Jones and Lyon alone. The Meetings of the Board have not been so numerous as during their first year; a more familiar acquaintance with their duties having facilitated their performance of them. On the 11th June, 1857, a resolution was passed at a Special Meeting convened for the purpose, that the Board should thenceforward meet only once a fortnight, except when specially convened, and this has, with some extension of the time of each sitting, and a more general reference of matters of detail to Committees, been found sufficient for the transaction of the business. The substitution of fortnightly for weekly meetings has also resulted in an increased attendance of Members—the average attendance at each Meeting for twenty Meetings, from the date of the alteration to the end of March, 1858, having been nearly fourteen, against an average attendance of eleven Members for the same number of Meetings preceding the alteration; and on only two occasions has there been an insufficient number (7) of Members present to form a quorum, on one of which a Committee was held under the Resolution providing for such cases, and on the other an extra Meeting was held the following week. There have been forty-one Ordinary Meetings of the Board, from the 1st January, 1857, to the 31st March, 1858, and eight Special Meetings—two of which, however, were held on one evening, and two others on the same evenings, and after the business of the Ordinary Meetings. A table shewing the attendances of each Member is given in the Appendix, but it must be observed, in consulting it, that the Members against whose names an (*) is placed have not been upon the Board the whole period. The Board have, as alluded to, availed themselves more extensively of the power given them of appointing Committees for purposes which, in their discretion, would be thus better managed, and, in addition to the Committees specially appointed 3 from time to time to consider and report on particular subjects, Standing Committees have been appointed, consisting of the Members of each Ward, and of Penge, respectively, to whom subjects of a local character and involving local taxation in each Ward, and in Penge, have been from time to time referred, as the Lighting and Watering of Roads; and also a General Purpose Committee and Finance Committee. A list of the Members constituting each Committee, for the last and present years, is given in the Appendix. The appointment of the Officers, and the salaries and duties assigned to the several Offices, having, on the constitution of the Board, been made provisionally, a Committee of the whole Board took into consideration in January, 1857, "the appointment, duties, and emoluments of the several Officers, and the alterations which should be made in relation thereto." Their Report, however (see Appendix), was not fully adopted, the alterations being limited to the discontinuance of one of the Inspectors of Nuisances, the appointment of a Foreman of the Roads under the Surveyor, and the continuance of Mrs. Perry as Housekeeper. Again, in January in the present year, a Committee having been appointed to enquire into a fraud which was found to have been practised upon the Board in the supply of Road Material, circumstances were brought before them tending to raise doubts as to the propriety of the duties assigned to the several Officers, and the appointment of another Committee was recommended, "to enquire into the duties of the several Officers, and the system pursued as regards all the operations of the Board, with a view to ascertain the precise mode in which all orders of the Board are executed, and the sufficiency or otherwise of the checks upon the Contractors and Labourers, and generally whether the present working staff and arrangements are such as are best suited to the performance of the duties which devolve upon the Board." A Committee was appointed accordingly, and, after a lengthened enquiry, they recommended several important changes. Their Report, which is given at length in the Appendix, was adopted by the Board without alteration, and Mr. Treverton was appointed to the office of Sewers Surveyor at the same salary as theretofore, and Mr. Duncan to the joint offices of Highway Surveyor and Inspector of Nuisances at the salary of £100 per annum and other advantages assigned to the office. The office of Housekeeper was resolved to be discontinued on the 25th March, 1858, but its continuance has from unavoidable circumstances been temporarily extended. Mr. Eagleton tendered his resignation as Treasurer of the Board in February last, but at their request he retained the office until the 25th March, the end of their financial year, when the London and Westminster Bank were appointed Treasurers, and any security B 2 4 from them was dispensed with, the Board passing a Resolution to the effect that the credit of the Bank was a sufficient security for the due performance of the office. With reference to the appointment of a Scavenger—as to the desirability of which, considerable difference of opinion exists— tenders were issued in accordance with the recommendation in the Report of the Committee of the whole Board (see Appendix), but as only two were sent in, and each of them requiring the payment by the Board of £10 for the performance of the duties of the office, neither of them was accepted; and, upon several complaints being made to the Board of the non-appointment of such an officer, the subject was again considered, but ultimately adjourned for six months. The Board were appealed to in reference to the position of the Office of the District Surveyor of Lewisham; it may, therefore, be well to state shortly the course adopted by them. Complaints having been made to the Metropolitan Board on the subject, they passed a Resolution to the effect that the office was not conveniently situated, and requested Mr. Badger to procure an office more centrally situated; but he protested that no public inconvenience was occasioned by the position of his office, upon which they invited the suggestions of this Board, who reported that, although as a general rule the more centrally the office of a District Surveyor was situated the better, they were not aware that the position of Mr. Badger's office was attended with inconvenience to, or had been complained of by, the public. The direction for the removal of the office was therefore not insisted on. It will, however, be seen that the Board not only have acted, but are prepared to act, on one consideration only, namely, the public convenience. THE HIGHWAYS. A marked reduction from the previous year has been made in the expenditure upon this head. The amount contained in the former statement of receipts and expenditure represented the expenditure of fifteen months, and in the subjoined table a reduction of onefifth has been made for the purpose of comparison with the expenditure of the twelve months preceding the 25th March, 1858. Expenditure from lst January, 1856, to 25th March, 1857. £ s. d. Labourers' Wages (4-5ths) 724 12 1 Material (4-5ths) 1596 17 3 Expenditure from 25th March, 1857, to 25th March, 1858. £ s. d. Labourers' Wages 473 19 5 Material 1447 9 9 The difference in the quantity of material used upon the roads during the same relative periods has been almost as great:— 5 From the 1st of January, 1856, to the 25th March, 1857. yards. From the Blackheath Pits (4-5ths) 368 From the Rushey Green Pits (4-5ths) 692 By purchase 3171 4231 From the \loth March 1857, to the 25th Marchj 1858. yards. From the Blackheath Pits 617 From the Rushey Green Pits 1970 By purchase 1121 3708 The reduction is partly accounted for by the roads having been allowed to fall out of condition towards the end of the year 1855— by £140 contributed towards and expended upon the Park and Albert Roads, Sydenham, being included in the outlay of 1856— by the average price of the purchased gravel having been reduced— by the increased use of gravel from the Blackheath and Rushey Green pits, and by the discharge of the liabilities of the Highway Board, which were included in the expenditure to the 25th March, 1857, and exceeded those of this Board at that date. The supply of gravel obtained for Penge in 1856 has been found nearly sufficient for the last year also. The cost of cartage of road material for Lewisham for the year has been about £258, which also bears a favourable comparison with that of the previous year, which would be £296, taking four-fifths of the amount expended in the fifteen months ending 25th March, 1857, as representing it. This reduction is in some measure due to the more advantageous contracts made by the Board, which will be presently explained. The item of cartage of road material is a far heavier one than at first sight appears, as it comprises not only the amount above-mentioned, which is almost wholly expended in the cartage of material from the Blackheath and Rushey Green pits, but it forms a considerable part of the price of the purchased gravel; for such gravel may be obtained at the Pits (Croydon), for about 2s. 6d. per yard, but delivered in Lewisham it usually costs the Board from 4s. 9d. to 6s. per yard, the difference between the two prices being of course the cost of the cartage from the pits to the roads. Upon these considerations it was proposed that the Board should provide themselves with Horses and Carts for the cartage of all material used by them, and the Surveyor (Mr. Treverton) laid several estimates on the subject before the Board, from which it appeared that six horses would be necessary to do the work, and he estimated the cost of them, with the necessary carts and harness, at about £350, the annual expence at about £550, and the cost of cartage on the present system at about £750, thus showing a saving of only about £200 per annum, without allowing for interest on the outlay, and wear and tear. These estimates, together with the financial difficulties of the Board, determined them in the 6 tinuance of the system of contracts. The enquiry, however, led to the revision of, and some important alterations in the form of contract adopted, more especially the division of the district into three subdistricts or divisions, which admits of greater competition between Contractors, and extending the charge for carriage, at per furlong, to all distances of half-a-mile and upwards, all shorter distances being charged as hire at per day, instead of allowing the Contractor to charge on whichever system was the most profitable, as had been the case before. The Report of the Committee on the subject is given in the Appendix. The Cartage in the two divisions of Lewisham was let to Mr. Colson at l¾d. per yard per furlong; and the hire of a horse and cart at 9s. per day, and 6s. for every additional horse. The Cartage of Penge was let on the same terms to Messrs. Martin and Wright. These terms were a reduction of ¼d. per yard per furlong on the contract of the previous year (1856), and a reduction of 1s. per day for the hire of every horse and cart. The Road Scrapings for the year commencing 25th March, 1857, were sold for £28 9s. 6d., and for the present year a slight increase upon the previous amount has been obtained by a more judicious division of the roads, and including some which have hitherto been omitted. The detailed particulars are given in the Appendix. The Board have not definitively undertaken the repair of any roads (under the 106th section of the Act), during the present year, although they have expressed their readiness to do so, in two instances, on certain conditions. In one case, they were applied to to undertake the Park Road, and the West Road, Dartmouth Park ; they at once refused the application as to the latter, but resolved (January, 1857), to undertake the former on proper gullies being made to it, and about 300 yards of gravel supplied for its repair. This condition was not, however, complied with, but the application was renewed in the following September, when still greater outlay for the repair of the road was required; this was refused, and the application was ultimately withdrawn, with an intimation that the road would be closed against the public. The other case was the Avenue Road, Lewisham, which they resolved to undertake the repair of, on payment by the owners of £10 to put it in repair. An application was also made to the Board to undertake the following roads in Penge:—the Maple Road, Oakfield Road, Station Road, Jasamine Grove, Hawthorne Grove, Woodbine Grove, and Laurel Grove; but the Maple Road was the only one tliey entertained any idea of undertaking, and their Surveyor (Mr. Treverton), having estimated the cost of putting that road in proper repair at £410, the Board declined to take any. Great difficulty is found in dealing with private roads such as those above-mentioned, and the roads in the West Kent Park, 7 Forest Hill, when they are allowed to get out of repair, as they arc not of sufficient public utility to warrant their repair being undertaken at the public expence, and yet being open to the public, they are in some instances (as with the West Kent Park), allowed to get so greatly out of repair as to be a public nuisance. The outlay required, too, is in many instances of a most serious amount, from the roads not having been properly constructed in the first instance. The 105th section of the Act has in some Districts been held to apply to such cases, but the Board have felt a difficulty in such an exercise of its powers, and, although they ultimately determined on this course to such an extent as might be necessary to render the roads free from danger to passengers, they hoped to provide for the case by a special clause on the proposed amendment of the Act. They regret, however, that their suggestion on this subject has not met with the concurrence of the Metropolitan Board of Works. All "New Streets," or rather roads in speaking of such a district as this, proposed to be made since the 1st of January, 1856, require the sanction of the Metropolitan Board, who, by a Bye Law on the subject (see Appendix), have specified not only the width they shall be made, but also the form and materials, which will in a great measure remove the difficulties now felt with roads previously formed. The following new streets have been made under the sanction of the Metropolitan Board during the last year:—two upon Matthew Hill's Estate, near Lewisham Bridge; the Suburban Grove, Lower Sydenham; one at the back of the Alma Tavern, and two roads near the Anerley Tavern, Penge. These roads have not at present been named, and it cannot be too widely known that it is necessary (under the 141st section of the Act), that fourteen days' notice of the intended names of any new streets must be given to the Metropolitan Board, who may object to such name if there be already a street in the Metropolis called by the same. This provision also applies to the names and numbers of houses. Great difficulty, as may be imagined, is found in enforcing its observance, and the Metropolitan Board have appealed to the Vestries and District Boards, and this Board on their part appeal to the public, to assist them in carrying out a provision, the non-observance of which is attended with daily inconvenience in the more thickly populated parts of the Metropolis, and is becoming more and more felt even in this suburban district. Material improvements have in two instances been made in the roads, under the 87th section of the Act, which empowers Vestries and District Boards to fill up and cover in ditches at the road sides, and throw the space gained into the roads. This has been done at the ditch between the Roebuck Inn and Lewisham Bridge, and also for a length of about 200 feet in Perry Vale, 8 near the Forest Hill Station, and in both cases at the expence of the owners of the adjoining ground. A further portion (230 feet), of the ditch in Lewisham Village has also been covered in, thus completing the work throughout the Village from the Church to the Bridge. The ditch and ponds in front of the late Mr. Stainton's premises have also been covered in and partially filled up at the expence of the Trustees; and it has been proposed to cover the remaining length from the Church to the Workhouse, but the proposition was negatived on a motion for adjournment of the question for six months. The Board have also, for the purpose of widening the road, been in negociation (which is still pending), for the purchase of a slip of ground opposite Hill House, Forest Hill. And they have consented to an application from the Deptford Burial Board, for improving the approach to the Cemetery of that Parish, by giving up a piece of waste ground in Ivy Lane, and taking in exchange a piece of ground to be thrown into the road at the entrance to the Cemeterv; such alteration to be effected at the cost of the Deptford Burial Board. Extensive repairs, amounting almost to its formation, have also been made to the road called Common Lane, leading from Deptford to Brockley, and minor improvements have been made in altering the boundary fences of the road at Southend, and between the Black Horse Inn and Sangley Farm House, in both cases at the expence of the owner of the adjoining property. Paved crossings have also been laid in Blackheath Village; and in this category may be placed the abatement of the nuisance arising from the dripping of water through the Railway Bridges at Loampit Vale, Forest Hill, and Penge, which, in the latter instances, was with great difficulty wrung from the Company. A serious question has arisen on the construction of sewers, as to the cost of reinstating the roads, which in London is done by the contractors; but the roads are so made there as to be almost unaffected, except to the width of the cutting made for the sewer, whereas a deep cutting in the half-formed parish roads of this semirural district destroys the whole surface, or "crust," of the road, and the rights of the Board and Contractor under such circumstances have been viewed very variously. As regards the sewer in Stanstead Lane, although it was completed in November, 1856, the Board were not satisfied that the road had been properly re-made for several months afterwards, and after several references to the Surveyor, the subject was in April (1857), referred to the General Purposes Committee, and ultimately, in May, a Committee of the whole Board took up the question, and a minute inspection of the road was made by them, when it became manifest that the Contractor had incurred a very heavy expence in repairs to the road beyond what could have been anticipated, and what could in fairness 9 be expected of him, and the road was taken off his hands by the Board. A similiar question arose as to the road in Ladywell Lane, up to the Cemetery, but the amount involved not being so heavy it was more easily disposed of. The roads over the Mid-Kent Railway at Ladywell and Catford Bridge have also been the subject of several references to the General Purposes Committee, and they were not accepted, as complying with the arrangements referred to in the previous report between the Board and the Company, until March last, when several improvements were made by the Contractors, for which they were not strictly liable, and on that consideration other things were waived which might have been insisted on, and they were relieved from the onus of their further repair. The question of the encroachments on the Highways, referred to in the former report, has not been revived, but the Board have several times prevented further encroachments being made, viz., in front of Mr. Kingsford's premises, Lower Sydenham; near the Lewisham Station of the North Kent Railway at the side of the Plough Inn, where too large an enclosure was being made to form a stable yard; in front of Mr. Hazeldine's premises, on the top of Sydenham Hill; opposite Mr. Chapman's premises, Eliza Place, Forest Hill; and near Sir Joseph Paxton's premises, Rock Hills. These instances are not, however, adduced invidiously, as several, if not all of them, occurred from the ignorance of the parties as to their precise rights. Of the proposed Railways, of which notices were served upon the Board in December, 1856, as mentioned in the former report, one has not been proceeded with, and the other, the Dartford Junction, has been thrown out in Committee. A renewed attempt was made in the present Session of Parliament to obtain an Act for the latter with some alterations. It was proposed to carry this line directly across the Village of Lewisham, near Mr. Brown's premises, branching off to the right to join the North Kent Line near the Parish boundary, at the back of Ellerslie House, and to the left to join the Mid Kent Line at Ladywell Bridge, and the Bridge across the main road to have been 16 feet high, and about 70 feet in width! It is difficult to conceive a greater eyesore than such a work would have been, and the proposed embankments across the valley on the West of the Village would have materially increased the evils of inundations. The Board were therefore prepared to make a strong opposition to the Bill unless extensive modifications were made in the proposed works, and they sought the professional assistance of James McNair Harkness, Esq., C.E. (whose services they had retained with advantage on a previous occasion), to direct them as to the requirements to be made of the Company, and the alterations in the works on which they ought to insist. Again, however, the Bill was thrown out in an early stage in the 10 mittee of the House of Commons, and the opposition of the Board was thus rendered unnecessary. The loss from the abstraction of water and some natural causes, of a number of the trees, which were so great an ornament to the road sides in Lewisham and Sydenham, will be regretted by many of the inhabitants; but the felling of some trees similiarly placed in Penge has been prevented through the intervention of the Board, made at the instance of several residents of the Hamlet; Mr. Adams, the owner of the trees, at once acceding to the request that they should be saved. A general order has been made by the Board requiring all main pipes, whether for gas or water, to be laid in the carriage roads, about two feet from the water table of the roads, instead of in the foothpaths as has been the practice in this district, and one which has been attended with much inconvenience to the public. The Precepts and Rates made upon Lewisham for "General Purposes," which comprise little else than the Highways, arc as follow:— Date and Amount of Precepts. Date and Amount of Bates. Rateable V alue of Property chargeable. Amount levied. 1856. March 27. £1,600 1856. Apl. 29. 4d. £116,135 £ 1,935 8. 11 d. 8 1856. Sept. 4. £1,600 1857. Jan. 6. 4d. £121,283 2,021 7 8 1857. Aug. 6. £2,000 1857. Sept. 8. 4d. £132,863 2,214 7 8 1858. March 18. £2,500 Kate not yet made. WATERING.—Blackheath Roads. The watering of these roads has been continued in 1857 and during the present year with but slight alteration in the parts watered, and, within a trifle, at the same cost; except that, under the arrangement for apportioning the Establishment expenccs of the Board (subsequently explained), there will be added to the cost of the watering a rateable proportion of such cxpences. It has been suggested that some of the roads upon the Heath should be watered as well as those immediately adjoining the houses, in order the more completely to lay the dust, but as so doing would greatly increase the expence, without affording any adequate increase of revenue to meet it, the proposal has not been adopted. Considerable dissatisfaction has been manifested at the amount of the rate levied for the expences of the watering, and at several persons having been charged to it who were not benefitted—both which points demand a few words of explanation. As to the first; the Board do not (as explained in the previous report, page 26), levy the rates for the monies expended by them. They simply issue Precepts to the Overseers for the sums they require, which 11 arc raised by the Local Board of Guardians—with them, therefore, rests the responsibility of levying more than is absolutely necessary. The precepts issued for these expences have been £200 in each year, as follows:— Date and Amount of Precept. Date and Amount of Rate. Rateable Value of Property chargeable. Amount levied. 1856. Sept. 11. £200. 1857. Jan. 6. 6d. £13,015. £ 325 s. 7 d. 6 1857. Oct. 29. £200. 1858. Feb. 9. 4d. £11,738. 195 12 8 1858. May 27. £200. Kate not yet made. Allowance must of course be made from the sum levied for the cost of collection, and a certain per centage which will always be irrecoverable. With reference to the second point, the rating of persons not benefitted; a clerical error was made in the first Precept, which was not discovered until the rate made under it was in collection, when payment of it was in several instances refused; and the attention of the Board being called to the fact, they at once rectified the mistake, and requested the Local Board of Guardians, under the power vested in them for the purpose (see Note), to exempt the several persons who had been improperly charged. The Board of Guardians, however, decided that the case did not come within the provision referred to, and that they must insist upon the payment of the rate by all persons upon whom it had been levied. The Board of Works regretted the annoyance which was thus (as it appeared to them, needlessly) occasioned to a number of the Ratepayers ; but the only remedy left to them was to repay the sums improperly charged as soon as they should be received by them from the Local Board, which will be done. Sydenham Roads. The difficulty met with last year in watering these roads, viz., the inability of the Lambeth Water Works Company to supply the water, having been removed, the Board, upon a renewed memorial from the inhabitants, decided to water the road from Kent House Lane, Lower Sydenham, to a point on Rock Hill, 200 yards above Taylor's Lane, and Jews' Walk; and, as soon as the advantages Note.—Extract from the Lewisham Local Act. "Provided always, and be it further enacted, That it shall be lawful for the said churchwardens and overseers for the time being-, or the major part of them, with the consent of the guardians, or any three of them, and they are hereby empowered, upon the complaint or request of any person or persons subject to the payment of any rate or rates, assessment or assessments, to be made by virtue of this Act, who shall think himself, hersel for themselves aggrieved thereby, or incompetent to pay the same, to mitigate, reduce or lesson the same, as they in their discretion shall think just and reasonable; and also to remit or excuse the payment thereof on account of the poverty or indigence of any person or persons liable to pay the same, so complaining or requesting the remission or reduction of such rates or assessments." 12 of the watering so far was fully felt, the Board were memorialized to extend it to the roads from the Greyhound Inn, along Kirkdale, to the top of High Street, thence along the road to Forest Hill Station, and from the Bridge under the Railway, near the Station, to the Boundaries of the Parish next to Dulwich and Peckham. The terms arranged with the Lambeth Water Works Company are £63 per mile per season of six months, and 30s. per annum for each stand-cock, with a proportionate reduction, for this year, for the lateness of the season at which the watering was commenced. The watering of each set of roads has been let by Tender—the first to George Pocock for £62 5s.; the latter to Henry Scott for £60. LIGHTING.—Lewisham Village. The Lighting in this part of the District has been extended to the Avenue Road, in which five lamps were erected in November, 1857, and lighted for the remainder of the year, at the rate of £5 per lamp, which is an increase of £1 beyond what has been hitherto paid; with this exception no alteratiou has been made from the previous year. The Precepts and Rates for this purpose have been as follow:— Date and Amount of Precept. Date and Amount of Rate. Rateable Value of Property chargeable. Amount levied. 1856. Sep. 4. £219. 1857. March 3. 6d. Houses £10,401 £ 260 s. 0 d. 6 2d. Land 15 2 6 £10,416 260 3 0 1857. July 23. £300. 1858. March 9. 7½d. Houses 10,379 324 6 10½ (Re-issued 2nd Nov., 1857). 2½d. Land 15 3 1½ £10,394 324 10 0 The Phoenix Gas Company have given notice to the Board to determine their Contract, and have expressed their intention of making a considerable increase in the price of gas, on the ground that the cost of supplying each lamp has been increased 20s. by the "exorbitant assessment" of the Company to the Parochial Rates, and such increase, they intimate, must be reimbursed to the Company in any new contract. If the Company have any cause of complaint against their assessment to the rates, they have of course the remedy of appeal which is open to every ratepayer; but of this they have not availed themselves, and the monopoly they enjoy admits of their thus taking the law into their own hands with impunity. Hopes are, however, entertained that the enquiry which is now pending before the House of Commons on the subject of the Metropolitan gas supply will terminate so great an abuse of power. 13 The impending termination of the contract of the Board with the Company, and their inability to extend the lighting except at a much increased rate, have, with other considerations, prevented them from hitherto acceding to the memorials they have from time to time received requesting the lighting of the Village of, and roads on, Blackheath; Hither Green Lane; Ladywell; and Loampit Hill. As to Hither Green Lane there was the additional reason that a memorial was presented to the Board numerously signed objecting to the expence which the lighting would entail. The Mid Kent Railway Company were foremost in their application for lighting Ladywell, and the Road from their Station at Lower Sydenham to Bell Green, but they declined to contribute towards the expence. It was intended to have lighted Lewisham Hill, in order to mitigate in some measure the danger of the high footpath there, opposite and belonging to the owner of Dartmouth Terrace; but the suggestion for this remedy of the evil did not reach the Board until shortly before the end of the lighting season, and it was hoped that in course of the summer such an amendment would be made in the Act as would enable the Board to deal with this nuisance in a more effectual manner; the lighting was, therefore, postponed. Sydenham. The lighting of Sydenham has been extended to the Laurie Road, where four lamps have been erected. Two have also been placed in Hanover Road, two in Willow Road, one at Park End, and one in St. Germain's Road. These lamps are lit under the same contract as those originally erected, and although the same measure is meted to this—the Crystal Palace District Gas Company—as the Phoenix, they have not made their increased assessment to the rates a ground for anv increase in their rorice of gas. The Precepts and Rates on this part of the district have been as follow:— Date and Amount of Precept. Date and Amount of Bate. Rateable "Value of Property chargeable. Amount levied. 1856. Oct. 16. £550. 1857. Fob. 17. 3d. 1 Houses £58,118 £ 726 9. 9 d. 6 ld. Land 2,400 10 0 0 £60,518 736 9 6 1857. Aug. 6. £500. 1858. March 9. 3d. Houses £66,941 836 15 3 1d. Land 2,542 10 11 10 £69,483 847 7 1 1858. Mar. 18. £500. Rate not yet made. 14 Applications have been made to the Board for a further extension of the lighting in this division, viz., to the Canal Road leading over the Canal Bridge from the Forest Hill Station, which was refused on the ground that the road was a private one—a principle that has since been departed from ; also to the road from the Railway Bridge at Forest Hill, through Park Road to Stanstead Lane; and to the road from Meadow Croft to Catford Bridge. These several applications will receive further consideration in the course of the summer. During the present Session of Parliament the Crystal Palace District Gas Company applied for an Act for their Incorporation, and the bill contained a clause confining the district to be lighted by the company within such limits as would not interfere with the Phoenix and other old-established companies, and also clauses proposing that in case of dispute as to the price of gas for lighting public lamps, the question should be referred to two other Gas Companies, and that the quality of the gas should only be tested upon the requisition of five consumers to a magistrate, to appoint a competent person for the purpose of making the test, and six hours' notice to be given to the Company of the appointment. These provisions were considered by the Board to be so adverse to the public interest that they resolved to oppose the bill, and to seek the cooperation of the Camberwell and Lambeth Vestries, parts of both those parishes being lighted by the same Company. The Lambeth Vestry joined the Board in their opposition to the bill, and the negociations to which it gave rise resulted in the substitution of the arbitration clauses of the Companies Clauses Act 1845, for the clause referring disputes to other Gas Companies—and in giving to the Board the same power as any five consumers—in reducing the notice of the appointment of a person to test the gas from six to four hours, and also in making such appointment compulsory with the magistrate, instead of optional—provisions which are highly favourable to the public interest, and a complete safeguard against such a course as is being pursued by the Phoenix Company. In addition to such clauses the Board proposed, and the Company conceded, that they should be allowed at any time to test the gas by any of their own officers, but the Committee of the House objected to this power being given to the Board, and the clause was struck out. The question of limiting the district to be lighted so as to prevent competition, was considered to be more effectually dealt with in the general question of the Metropolitan Gas Supply, in which it will be seen the Board have felt it to be their duty to join. Penge. A numerously signed memorial by the Ratepayers of Penge, requesting that the Hamlet should be lighted with gas, having 15 been presented to the Board, they were preparing to comply with the request thus expressed, when a public meeting of the inhabitants was called, at which resolutions were passed condemnatory of the measure, and it having appeared that if there was not a preponderance against the lighting, there were at least as many ratepayers disposed one way as the other, the Board adjourned the further consideration of the question sine die. SEWERAGE. The Sewerage works, constructed during the past year, have been very inconsiderable, and although a large sum (£1,524 13s. 3d.) has been expended under this head within that time, nearly £1,300 of it has been in respect of deferred payments on account of the Stanstead Lane Sewer—the cost of which was £5,492 2s. 8d.,* being about £1,000 in excess of the estimate—but the Sewer was made nearly 300 feet longer than originally contemplated. The bewers constructed by the .board during the past year to the 25th March, 1858, and their cost (as furnished by the Sewers Surveyor) have been as follows:— locality of work. length in feet. size. materials. cost. £ s. #] Brockley Lane.—Extension of the branch sewer from Stanstead Lane 300 12 inch Pipe 32 0 0 Wells Road.—On the north side of the road between Hanover Street and Springfield Hill 178 9 inch Ditto 9 1 0 Same.—On the south side of the road between the same points 120 12 inch Ditto 9 19 3 Forest Hill.—From a point near the Paiish boundary next Peckham, along the road side within the Parish of Camberwell . . . 282 12 inch Ditto 22 1 0 Blackheath.—A branch from the valley line of sewer, parallel with the North Kent Railway, from a point at the rear of Grote's Buildings, and running northwards 130 2ft. by 2ft. Ilalf-brick 19 17 0 From the sewer in Tranquil Yale to Camden Row 250 9 inch Pipe 126 10 7 Penge.—A sewer parallel with the boundaiy ditch between the Hamlet and the Parish of Croydon, at the rear of the Belvidere Road 310 12 inch Pipe 22 18 0 Thus there has been constructed 1,570 eet at a cost of £242 6 10 *This was erroneously stated at £5,523 2s. 8d. in the previous report. 16 Since the above-mentioned date, a Sewer has been constructed in Kirkdale, Sydenham, and further Sewers are in contemplation in Wells Road. The Sewer mentioned as having been laid within the Parish of Camberwell, receives exclusively sewage from premises in Lewisham, and was, therefore, necessarily constructed at the cost of this Board. A contribution of £10 was made by Mr. Donkin to the cost of the Sewer in Camden Row, Blackheath, which was originally intended to have branched out of the Sewer in the valley next the North Kent Railway, in a northerly direction to Camden Row, and the cost estimated at £30, but this proposition was opposed by Miss Collins, through whose property the Sewer would have passed, and as no great difference of expense between the two lines was anticipated, the Sewer as constructed was substituted for the plan originally adopted. The change of plan has, however, turned out very unfortunately, for it was necessary to lay the Sewer at a great depth, and the soil was found to be of a character exceedingly difficult to work, and entailing very heavy additional expense beyond what was anticipated, the estimate being about £56 only. There has, in addition to the above, been another Sewer constructed under somewhat peculiar circumstances, viz., by the Burial Board of the Parish of Lewisham, at the joint expense of that Board and the Deptford Burial Board. The Sewer already constructed in Lady Well Lane, terminating at a point near the Lady Well Inn, has been carried up the lane to the entrance Lodge of the Lewisham Cemetery. The object of the Burial Boards was simply the drainage of the Cemeteries, but they were required by the Metropolitan Board of Works to construct so much of the Sewer as is in the Lane of a larger size than intended, in anticipation of its use for house drainage. Thus one-half the cost of this Sewer has been borne by the Parish of Deptford. It is as follows:— locality of work. length in feet. size. materials. by whom constructed. Brockley Lane, from the termination of an existing sewer there near the Lady Well Inn, to the entrance of the Lewisham Cemetery. 1040 3ft. 9in. by 2ft. 6in. Brick The Burial Boards for the Parishes of Lewisham and Deptford. The following Sewers have, within the same time (from 1st January, 1857, to 25th March, 1858,) been constructed by private individuals:— 17 locality of work. length in feet. size. materials. by whom constructed. A branch from the sewer in Stanstead Lane, up a new road (unnamed), on the north side thereof, nearly opposite Bramble Lane 440 18 inch Half-brick Mr. J. Skilbeck On the south side of Rock Hill from a point near the end of Jews "Walk to the Laurie Road* 522 18 inch C. Millington, Esq. Capt. Weller G. Wythes, Esq. On two new roads (un-named), on Matthew Hill's estate, near Lewisham Bridge 360 3ft. by 2ft. Half-brick Pipe The Trustees of Matthew Hill, deceased. Same 520 12 inch Same 380 9 inch Lewisham Park 400 3ft. by 2 ft. Brick The Earl of Dartmouth. In several instances the Board have been called upon to build Sewers which they have thought ought, like the above, to be constructed at the expense of the owners of the property to be peculiarly benefitted. They have, therefore, declined to undertake them, unless the cost be contributed by the owners. Of this class are Sewers required for the drainage of Grote's Buildings, Eliot Yale, and the adjacent property, the Paragon Mews, Montpelier Place, Bath Place, &c., Abion Terrace, Sydenham, &c. &c. In all these cases the necessity for Sewers is fully admitted, the only question being whether they should be constructed at private or the public expense. The legal proceedings instituted against the Board by the representatives of the late Mr. Stainton, with a view to compel the reconstruction of the Sewers at Rushey Green, so as to restore the water on their premises, having terminated in the dismissal of the bill, an application was made, in March, 1857, to this Board and the Metropolitan Board of Works, for compensation for the injury done to the property, with a suggestion for the appointment of an arbitrator to assess the damage and determine how it should be borne between this and the Metropolitan Board of Works; a proposal which was declined by each Board, as its acceptance would have excluded them from contesting the right of the parties * This Sewer was originally intended (see First Report, page 19), to have been a 12 inch pipe, and constructed by the Board. Such intention was, however, departed from, as it was found only to receive the drainage of three or four premises. c 18 to any compensation whatever, and which right they are advised does not exist. A formal notice was, therefore, in October last, served upon each Board, requiring them to appoint an Arbitrator, and subsequently a Mandamus was applied for and granted by the Court of Queen's Bench. Although such was nominally a success on the part of the applicants, the real question at issue remains unaffected, and it is probable that no further proceedings will be taken until the decision of a somewhat similar case (Chasemore v. Richards) which is now before the House of Lords under appeal. As at present decided, that case is in favour of the Boards of Works, and it would be a matter of regret that the expense of a reference to arbitrators to ascertain the amount of damage sustained should be incurred, if it should be ultimately decided that the damage is what is technically termed damnum absque injuria, or of such a character as the Law will not recognise as conferring the right to compensation. The costs of the Metropolitan Board of Works in this suit, which have been far heavier than those of this Board, will not, it has been ascertained, be levied exclusively upon this district, but as they have been incurred in settling a principle of the utmost importance, they will be defrayed by a general rate, extending throughout the Metropolis. This Board were prepared to urge the adoption, by the Metropolitan Board, of this course, but finding that it had been already determined on by them, any efforts towards its accomplishment were, of course, unnecessary. A question, which at one time threatened to take a somewhat serious aspect, arose shortly after the excessive rains of October last, upon the falling in of the Turnpike Road, in Lewisham Tillage, in several places over the Sewers there. The roads being under the New Cross Trust, the Trustees called upon the Board not only to make good the damage which had been sustained, but also to undertake very expensive works in concreting the Sewer all round, so as to prevent the possibility of a recurrence of the accident. Immediately on the subsidence of the waters, the Board caused a careful examination of the Sewer to be made, and finding it to have been efficiently constructed, and to be in a perfect state of repair, they felt bound to repudiate all liability in respect of the road, and with the exception of putting in a block of concrete (at a cost of about £3), at a point near the Lion and Lamb Inn, they declined to meddle in any way with the Sewer. An action was also commenced against the Board by a Carrier, whose waggon had sustained some damage by getting into one of the holes in the road, but this the Board determined to resist, and it has not been proceeded with. An application has been made on behalf of the millowners on "the river, and the Kent Water-works Company, to the Board, to construct a drain from the Black Horse Inn, in order to convey to 19 the river the water which is supposed to have been diverted from it by the construction of the Sewers in Rushey Green, and an intimation was at the same time held out that legal proceedings would be taken in the event of non-compliance with the request, but notwithstanding that the Board declined to incur any expense for the object pointed out, no proceedings have been, nor does it appear likely that any will be, taken. Penge. The Sewerage of Penge has occupied considerable attention of the Board, but from the difficulties which surround its execution, the progress has been slow. In order to effect the drainage of the inhabited part of the Hamlet, a Sewer will have to be made along Green Lane and Kent House Lane to Bell Green, a length of about 8,000 feet, without any houses within a long distance of its course. The estimated cost of this work is about £4,000, which is a large outlay, having regard to the rateable value of the houses in the Hamlet; and the Board, therefore, sought contributions towards the cost of the work from the Crystal Palace and the Kent Water-works Companies, as the former discharges an immense volume of sewage into the river, and the latter was interested in maintaining its purity. The application to the Crystal Palace Company was, however, unsuccessful, but the Kent Water-works Company were prepared to respond to it in a liberal manner, when the Board were unexpectedly prevented from carrying out the work by the Metropolitan Board, who declined to give their sanction to its execution, on the ground that the provisions of the Act (section 69) did not (as they were advised) confer on the Board any power to construct the length of sewer which would have to be laid in the parish of Beckenham. Had the execution of this work not been thus stopped, the Board would also have applied to Mr. Cator, the owner of the land in Beckenham, between Penge and Lewisham, for a contribution towards the cost of it, with whom some arrangement would, no doubt, have been made for giving the houses on this intervening slip of land the benefit of the sewer, and at the same time assessing them to its cost. In the meantime two sewers had been projected for the abatement of the nuisance (of which serious complaints have frequently been made), arising from the sewage of a number of houses in the upper part of the Hamlet, running along an open channel into the piece of the old Canal adjoining the Anerley Tea Gardens. These were sanctioned by the Metropolitan Board, and let by tender to Mr. Goodison for £542, but on a more minute survey of the locality one of them was found to be unnecessary, and such extensive modifications were required in the other as (with new circumstances c 2 20 which have since occurred) have delayed its execution for the present. Subsequently a Sewer has been sanctioned from a point at the back of the Alma Tavern to the Anerley Road near Anerley Yale, and the Metropolitan Board have given their sanction to the construction of so much of the main line of sewer as will be within the Hamlet, with a temporary out-fall sewer, two feet in diameter, to the ditch in Kent House Lane, from which the sewage must flow into the river until the powers of the Board are extended so as to admit of the completion of the work through the intervening part of Beckenham parish, or the Metropolitan Board see reason to doubt the correctness of the interpretation they have put on the powers alreadv conferred bv the Act. The Precepts and Rates for Sewerage Purposes have been as follow:— Date and Amount of Precept. Date and Amount of Bate. Rateable Value of Property chargeable. Amount levied. 1856. Sept. 4. £1200. 1857. Feb. 17. 3d. Houses £111,350 £ s. d. 1391 17 6 ¾d. Land 9,933 31 0 9¾ £121,283 1422 18 3¾ 1857. July 23. £1000. 1858. Feb. 9. 2d. Houses 124,141 1034 10 2 ½d. (Land 9,858 20 10 9 £133,999 1055 0 11 The Surveyor of the Board has collected a mass of detail information having reference to the sewerage of the district, at the request and for the use of the Government Referees on the Metropolis Main Drainage Scheme, and which will be found in the Appendix to their Report. HOUSE DRAINAGE AND SANITARY MEASURES. The House Drainage operations of the Board, as stated in the previous report, were originally carried out under two general contracts—one for the execution of the frontage drains under public thoroughfares, and another for the drainage works on private premises, the first at 15 per cent, under the "Blue Book Prices," the second at the full amount of those prices; but two circumstances have occurred which have resulted in the termination of such contracts, and in the work being executed by workmen in the employ of the Board, under the immediate and continuous supervision of their Sewers Surveyor. The first change was made in June, 1857, shortly after the drainage of the Lewisham Workhouse, when the 21 water in the well on the premises being found to be contaminated with sewage, the drains were re-opened, and the matter fully investigated by a Committee of the Board, and no doubt remaining but that the work had been very imperfectly done, the Board resolved thenceforth to take the work into their own hands. The other change arose out of the drainage of Osborne Place, Blacheath, of the expense of which great complaints were made by several of the owners, and a Committee being deputed to inquire into the subject, reported not only that the charges made for the work in question could not be maintained, but that the contract ought at once to be determined. The report was adopted by the Board, who have, since that time (Nov., 1857), carried out all private drainage works on the same plan as the frontage drains. The Board also adopted the view of the Committee as to the impropriety of some of the charges made for draining Osborne Place, but as the Contractor has refused to make the required deductions, the question of the correctness of the charges will probably be determined by a jury. Drain pipes are now obtained by the Board at prices 43 per cent. lower than were paid in the first instance, and the Sewers Surveyor estimates that the cost to the public of the frontage drains are, on an average, 30 per cent. lower than they were under the contract system, and of the private drainage works about 45 per cent, lower than under the Board's contract for such works. The number of new houses, of which notices have been given to the Board, and the plans of drainage submitted for their approval, from the 1st Jan., 1857, to the 25th March, 1858, have been 143, and there have been 230 houses (built prior to 1856), drained into the sewers between the above dates, in obedience to notices issued by the Board. Eighteen houses have also been drained by the Board, on the default of the owners and at their expense, which number, it will be seen, is a great reduction upon that of the first year, and it is with pleasure that the Board acknowledge the increased readiness with which their orders are complied by the public—only one instance having occurred of their having been met by a pertinacious defiance of their authority, which was by the owner of the Duke of Cambridge Beer-house, near Lewisham Bridge, who refused to allow the drainage of the adjoining houses, called Shepherd's Place, to be carried through his premises, and laid down drains which were inconsistent with such a plan. The Board were, therefore, obliged to have recourse to the remedy given under the 77th section of the Act, and a penalty of £50 was imposed on the owner of the premises, but on his subsequent compliance with the order of the Board, the penalty was, with their consent and on payment of all costs, reduced to a merely nominal amount. In another case, an order was made by the Board for the drainage of 22 some gothic cottages in Bell Green, belonging to Mrs. Cowburn, into the sewer which passes through the garden immediately in front of them. The order was made upon the report of the Medical Officer of several cases of malignant fever (of which some were fatal), having occurred in the cottages for want of drainage, but notwithstanding these circumstances an appeal was made to the Metropolitan Board against the order, by which a delay of many months was created, but the order was confirmed after a lengthened hearing, and the examination of witnesses on both sides; still the owner neglected to effect the drainage of the premises, which was ultimately done by the Board, and the expenses incurred not having been paid, it has been necessary to issue a summons for their recovery. Cesspools have also, in many cases, been required to be made or emptied where drainage into sewers has been impracticable; but for the proceedings of the Board in the abatement of nuisances, reference must be made to the summary of nuisances reported by the Medical Officer, and it must suffice to state here a few instances in which the sanitary jurisdiction of the Board has been beneficially exercised. A material improvement in the ventilation of the Infirmary of the North Surrey Industrial Schools, at Anerley, has been effected at their instigation, acting on the reports of their Medical Officer; and although the fact may not be altogether attributable to the alterations, it is with satisfaction that the Board have learned that since they were completed (4th January last), only one death has occurred in the Institution, 13 deaths having taken place during the 12 months prior to the alterations, of which number 9 were from preventible causes, that is, such diseases as are usually consequent upon insufficient ventilation and drainage. In compliance with a request from the Board, the Directors of the Crystal Palace District Gas Company have discontinued keeping the accumulations of refuse on their premises, which were so loudly complained of by the inhabitants in the neighbourhood, and reported by the Medical Officer of Health. Nuisances from persons keeping pigs in confined neighbourhoods, from ballast-burning and brickmaking in inhabited parts of the district, and from other sources, have also, in many instances, been abated. FINANCE. The financial embarrassments of the Board were, as mentioned in the previous report, temporarily staved off by applying towards the general purposes money which had been borrowed for carrying out certain sewerage works, but as such works were from time to time executed, and payment for them became due, the difficulties of the position were fully felt, and the Board were obliged to have recourse 23 to a temporary loan of £2,000, until the monies due upon the precepts issued by them should be paid. And after endeavouring in vain, by advertisement and otherwise, to effect their object on easier terms, they were under the necessity of accepting the amount from their Treasurer, at £6 per cent., repayable on a month's notice at any time after the expiration of nine months. This sum was taken up on the 14th May, 1857, and one-half of it paid off on the 14th February last, the expiration of the nine months, and it is hoped that the remainder will be paid off during the present year, although the position of the Board, on the 25th March last, was but a slight improvement on that of the previous year. At the first date, £2,726 out of the £8,000 borrowed for sewerage works had been applied to general purposes, and on the second, £1,000 was due on the temporary loan, and £1,201 6s. 9d. out of the sum so borrowed for sewerage works remained unapplied to its legitimate purpose. lo meet the estimates lor the year commencing 2oth March, 1857, which were made in the July of that year, the Finance Committee recommended the issue of the following precepts:— £. 8. d. For Watering the Blackheath Roads 200 0 0 ,, Lighting Lewisham Village 300 0 0 „ Ditto Sydenham 1000 0 0 „ General Purposes—Lewisham . 4500 0 0 „ Sewerage Purposes 1000 0 0 „ General Purposes—Penge 800 0 0 Making a total Income for the Expenditure of the Board of £7,800 0 0 In the above sums provision was made, in several instances, for deficiencies on the previous year, amounting to upwards of £1,000, and on reference to the statement shewing the financial condition of the Board, and of each separate head of expenditure, it will be seen how nearly such estimates approached to the actual necessities of the Board. The above estimates were adopted by the Board, and precepts were issued in July, 1857, for the several amounts, payable by four equal instalments, at as nearly equal intervals as possible between the date of issue and the 25th March, 1858, in order to facilitate the proceedings of the Overseers of the Poor of Lewisham and Penge, and enable them to make equal quarterly rates at fixed periods of the year. This intention was, however, frustrated, as regards Lewisham, by the Local Board of Guardians, who held that they were bound (under section 161 of the Act) to raise the full amount specified in any precept by one rate, even although the sum was expressly directed to be paid by instalments ranging over an extended period. The precepts, with the exception of the one for sewerage expenses and that issued upon Penge, to which no 24 objection was made, were, therefore, recalled, and a precept was issued in August for £2,000, in respect of the estimate for general purposes, the remaining sum of £2,500 not being called for until March last, and the amount for lighting Sydenham was divided into two equal amounts, and precepts issued for them at the same times. The precepts for the expenses of watering Blackheath, and lighting Lewisham, were re-issued on the 2nd of November. The sewerage works, as previously explained, are carried out with funds raised by loans, and the precepts issued for sewerage purposes are for the current expenses under this head, such as cleansing and repairing sewers, interest on the loans, and £5 per cent, per annum on the amount borrowed to form a sinking fund for the repayment of the loans. The Board have invested £400, in Consols, as a sinking fund in respect of the £8,000 borrowed. An important change has been made by the Board in the mode of charging their establishment expenses, which amount to about £800 per annum. In the first instance these sums were charged on the fund raised under the general rate, but by a resolution of the Board, made in September, they are now apportioned, first, between Lewisham and Penge, in the proportions of four-fifths and one-fifth, as heretofore, and then between the several heads of the expenditure of the Board, in respect of which separate rates are made. Thus each head of expenditure bears the cost of administering the amount expended under it. For further explanation see the statements of establishment expenses and their apportionment. The Board having (as subsequently stated) acquiesced in the principle upon which the debts of the late Commissioners of Sewers have been apportioned by the Metropolitan Board, and the expenses of that Board have been levied, have applied themselves solely to the consideration of the means by which the sums comprised in the precepts issued by the Metropolitan Board, on this district, might be raised with the least inconvenience to the ratepayers. Two precepts have been issued on the district, one dated 13th March, 1857, and the other the 15th January last. They will be found in the Appendix, with a full analysis of each. A large proportion of the sums comprised in these precepts, it will be seen, was required in respect of debts due upon the district for sewerage works, and other expenses of the Commissioners of Sewers, and it became the first duty of the Board to ascertain what amount they would be allowed to borrow, and what they must necessarily raise by rate. They proposed that the sums required for debts should be raised by loans, but that those required for current expenses should be met by rates, and this principle was 25 sanctioned by the Metropolitan Board. Thus out of the two precepts, amounting together to £13,478 6s. Od, £8,692 4s. 8d. will be raised by mortgage, repayable by annual instalments, extending over 20 years. After great delay and difficulty, the Board have succeeded in negociating loans for this sum, at £5 per cent, per annum. £1,505 16s. 3d. of the amount will be charged upon the part of the Parish of Lewisham within the former Greenwich District, and £7,186 8s. 5d., the remainder, upon the part of the parish within the Ravensbourne District. The following sums, therefore, together with 10 per cent, on the amount borrowed (£5 per cent, by way of sinking fund for its repayment, and £5 per cent, interest,) will alone have to be raised by rate, viz.:— LEWISHAM. £. s. d. On the whole Parish—1st Precept 501 15 7 2nd ditto 427 12 11 929 8 6 On the former Greenwich District—1st Precept 326 5 10 2nd ditto 152 9 10 478 15 8 On the former Ravensbourne District—1st Precept 2038 9 5 2nd ditto 1088 2 0 3126 11 7 4534 15 9 PENGE. On the whole Hamlet—1st Precept 135 2 7 2nd ditto 115 3 2 250 5 9 £4785 1 6 Precepts in respect of these sums, with 10 per cent, for sinking fund and interest on the sums to be borrowed, were issued in respect of the first Metropolitan precept, in September, 1857, and in respect of the second, in April last, as follows:— 26 LEWISHAM. £ s. d. £ s. d. Over the whole Parish—For the 1st Precept 501 15 7 2nd ditto 427 12 11 929 8 6 On the former Greenwich District—1st Precept 395 1 4 2nd ditto 166 10 5 561 11 9 On the former Ravensbourne District—1st Precept 2351 0 6 2nd ditto 1181 12 7 3532 13 1 £5,023 13 4 PENGE. On the whole Hamlet—1st Precept 135 2 7 2nd ditto 115 3 2 250 5 9 £5,273 19 1 Rates have hitherto been made only in respect of the sums required under the first Metropolitan precept, viz., a 4d. rate in the Greenwich District, and an 8d. rate in the Ravensbourne District. The former was made on the 29th December, 1857, when the rateable value of the property chargeable was Houses, £33,461, producing at 4d. in the pound £557 13 8 Land 503, producing at Id. (one-fourth) 2 1 11 £33,964 £559 15 7 The rate on the Ravensbourne District was made in January, 1858, when the rateable value was Houses, £90,169, producing at 8d. in the pound £3,005 12 8 Land 7,771, producing at 2d. (one-fourth) 64 15 2 £97,940 £3,070 7 10 No rate has been made in respect of the precept for £501 15s. 7d., it is, therefore, assumed that the necessity for making a separate rate for this sum has been avoided by comprising it in the two rates made, which, it will be seen, far exceed the amount of the first precepts issued on the two districts. No rate has been made in Penge for these purposes, the sums having been advanced out of other monies in the hands of the Overseers applicable to the purpose. The debt upon the former Ravensbourne District amounts to £24,858 17s. 6d., and has been apportioned as follows:— £ s. d. On the part of the District in Lewisham . 18,705 10 6 Ditto ditto Plumstead 5,832 1 4 Ditto ditto Cambcrwell 321 5 8 27 And the debt upon the former Greenwich District amounts to £16,745 5s. 7d., and has been thus apportioned:— £ s. d. On the part of the District in Lewisham 2,605 10 11 Ditto ditto Plumstead 241 12 6 Ditto uitto Greenwich .... 13,898 2 2 Thus the debt on the part of Lewisham Parish in the Ravensbourne District is £18,705 10s. 6d., and on the part of the Parish in the Greenwich District only £2,605 10s. lid., and it is partly in respect of these debts (portions of which have been paid off by the Metropolitan Board), that the sums to be raised on mortgage by this Board will be re-borrowed; but in addition to these sums are the debts on the current expenditure of the Commissioners of Sewers and for the Ordnance Survey of the Metropolis, which are also similarly apportioned, and the debt in respect of the Main Intercepting Drainage Works, the particulars of which are given on page 18 of the former Report. Several subjects of general metropolitan interest have, at various times, occupied the attention of the Board, and have been agitated by various Vestries and District Boards, as affecting more peculiarly the ratepayers of their parishes and districts. In some of these movements the Board have felt it to be incumbent upon them to join, and from others to hold aloof. Of the latter class is that for the equalization of Poor Rates throughout the Metropolis, which has been viewed without reference to the merits of the question, but in its pecuniary bearings on the district, and as the Poor Rate in neither of the parishes in this district exceeds the average rate (Is. in the £), which it is thought would result from the adoption of the proposition, it is clear that no pecuniary benefit would be derived in the district by the change, and the Board have, therefore, abstained from taking any part in the attempt to accomplish it. The proposition for making Parks and improving the Streets of London, by rates to be levied upon the Metropolis, as defined by the Metropolis Local Management Act, is one of the most serious importance to the ratepayers of this district, who will derive no appreciable benefit from any such works; the Board have, therefore, taken an active part in the opposition to the scheme on its first appearance in the shape of a bill for forming a Park for the Borough of Finsbury, and a Committee of Delegates from the Metropolitan Vestries and District Boards having been formed for organising the opposition to the bill, delegates were appointed by the Board. A meeting of representatives of 27 parishes was held in May, 1857, 28 when the resolutions were passed which are given at length in the Appendix; the proceedings of the delegates received the approval of this Board, who directed the payment of their quota to the expenses incurred, and a petition from the Board was presented through C. W. Martin, Esq., the Member for West Kent, to the House of Commons, against the bill. The resolutions at the Meeting of Delegates, and the petition presented to the House of Commons, which contains the details of the grievance, are given in the Appendix. Notwithstanding the opposition made to this bill it has passed, but no proceedings have yet been taken towards carrying it into execution. The Board also joined in the movement set on foot by the Vestry of Marylebone, on the subject of the division of the Metropolis into Districts by the Gas Companies, an arrangement which has been made by the Companies with the view of preventing the competition at present existing between them, and thus eventually increasing the cost of the supply of gas. A Committee of delagates from the Metropolitan Vestries and District Boards was appointed (as with respect to the Finsbury Park Bill), to which the Board sent a delegate. The Committee adopted the resolutions and petition to Parliament set out in the Appendix. The result of this movement has been the appointment of a Committee of Enquiry as proposed, before whom the question is now pending, and their appointment cannot, it is thought, fail to be beneficial to the ratepayers. The share of the Board in the expenses incurred amounts only to £10. The Board have not concurred in the agitation which has, in many parishes, been fomented against the principle upon which the debts of the late Metropolitan Commissioners of Sewers, and the expenses of the Metropolitan Board, are apportioned; for although they do not approve of the apportionment of the debts which has been made in this district, they are satisfied of the correctness of the principle which has been adopted, and the futility of any opposition to it is manifested by the fact that the districts in which the most violent opposition was made to the precepts of the Metropolitan Board, have ultimately succumbed to the necessity of providing for their payment. The Board have also declined to petition Parliament (as proposed by the Vestry of Mile End Old Town) that the election of Churchwardens and Overseers should be continued to the inhabitants in open Vestry. The Vestries of St. Pancras and Shoreditch have each set on foot movements in reference to the Main Drainage Scheme, to which the Board were invited to, and sent a delegate, but, after several attendances at their meetings, he reported that their deliberations were not likely to lead to any beneficial result, and was in consequence, at his own request, recalled. This subject has received the 29 full consideration of the Board, and the resolutions unanimously arrived at by them in reference to it are given in the Appendix. Copies of the resolutions were forwarded to the Metropolitan Board, and all the Vestries and District Boards in the Metropolis. The amendment of the Metropolis Local Management Act, which has on all hands been admitted to be so urgently required, was attempted by the Vestry of Hampstead, at whose suggestion delegates were appointed by a number of Vestries and District Boards, including this, but it was found that the views propounded were too incongruous to admit of unity of action, and the Metropolitan Board have undertaken to deal with the subject. The Committee of the Board, to whom it was referred, invited suggestions from the Metropolitan Vestries and District Boards for the amendment of such of the provisions of the Act as relate to their powers and duties. The report of the Committee, and the bill for the amendment of the Act, which they have proposed, are now before the public, but (possibly from the causes which terminated the proceedings of the delegates), their care appears rather to have been devoted to the removal of their own difficulties than those with which the Vestries and District Boards are beset. A Committee of this Board devoted a great deal of time and care to the consideration of the subject, and an abstract of their suggestions is given in the Appendix. Of those which are directed to minor details no notice is taken by the Metropolitan Board, and the two suggestions of the greatest local interest (Nos. 26 and 35), of which a few words of explanation will be added, share the same fate; but the suggestions numbered 6, 11, 12, 17, and 34 have met with the approval of the Metropolitan Board, and clauses are inserted in the bill, which, if made law, will effect the object this Board had in view. The suggestion No. 26 was made in the belief that no general principle of apportionment of the debts of the Commissioners of Sewers, throughout the vast extent of the Metropolis, will be found to operate equitably in every instance, and although the Board approve the principle that the dissolved "Separate Sewage Districts" should each bear their own debts, they confidently point to the apportionment upon this District, as an instance of the injustice arising from the universal application of any principle, however equitable it may be in the main. The debt on the former Ravensbourne District has been almost wholly incurred in the construction of the Ravensbourne and Sydenham Main Sewer, which is available, and is proposed to be at once used for the drainage of the Hamlet of Penge, but as Penge was not within the Ravensbourne District, it cannot be charged with 30 any portion of that district's debts; and thus the Hamlet will, without contributing a fraction to its cost, be entirely drained through a sewer upwards of three miles long, and constructed at an expense of about £20,000, and that sum (of which no portion has yet been paid), will be defrayed by Lewisham, Plumstead, and Camber well, although the two latter parishes can never derive any appreciable benefit from the existence of the sewer. It should, perhaps, be added, that the Members of the Board who represent the Hamlet of Penge, entirely dissent from the view taken by the other Members on this question, and have protested against the suggestion for such an alteration in the Act. The other suggestion (No. 35) referred to was for including in this District a portion of the Parish of Beckenham, which is a narrow triangular slip of land running to a point near the north end of the Crystal Palace, and lying between Lewisham on one side and Penge on the other, having the river for its base. This portion of the parish is thus entirely cut off from the remainder, and it must, on ceasing to drain into the river, be drained into the Ravensbourne and Sydenham Sewer, to the cost of which it should be charged equally as Penge, but the section of the Act (209) providing for the extension of the Metropolis, is not adapted to such a case, and the only means of achieving so desirable an object is by a special enactment for the purpose; but which the Metropolitan Board have declined to insert in their projected Bill. 31 THE BOARD OF WORKS FOR THE LEWI SHAM DISTRICT. Statement of the allowance of the Auditors. We, the undersigned, being two of the Auditors elected by the Board of Works for the Lewisham District, have caused to be prepared and do allow the within written account in abstract, showing the Receipts and Expenditure of such Board for the year ending the 25th of March, 1858, to which is appended a summary Statement of the monies owing to and the debts and liabilities owing by such Board at that date. JOHN WEST LYON. R. G. JONES. 32 STATEMENT OF THE RECEIPTS AND EXPENDITURE OF From the 25th March 1857. Receipts. PARISH OF LEWISHAM. General Purpose. £ s. d. Overseers in payment of Precepts £3100 0 0 Loan from E. Eagleton, Esq. 2000 0 0 Highway Board—outstanding rates 9 11 2 Highways—road scrapings sold 47 19 3 Incidental £1 8 4 „ Rent, rates, &c 1 10 0 2 18 4 5160 8 9 Sewerage. Current expenditure—Overseers in payment of Precepts £2200 0 0 Sewerage works—contribution by B. Donkin, Esq 10 0 0 2210 0 0 Metropolitan Board expenses, Overseers in payment, &c. 501 15 7 Private works 345 6 7 Frontage drains 262 1 10 Lighting. Lewisham Village—Overseers in payment of Precepts . 219 0 0 Sydenham— ditto ditto 550 0 0 Watering Roads. Blackheath—Overseers in payment of Precepts 200 0 0 HAMLET OF PENGE. General purposes. Overseers in payment of Precepts 800 0 0 Sewerage. Metropolitan Board expenses, Overseers in payment, &c. 135 2 7 Petty cash—for balance in hand 25th March, 1857 20 0 10 £10,403 16 2 33 THE BOARD OF WORKS FOR THE LEWISHAM DISTRICT, to the 25th March, 1858. Expenditure. PARISH OP LE WISH AM. General purposes. £ B. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. Highways—materials, cartage, &c £1447 9 9 Ditto—labourers' wages 473 19 5 1921 9 2 Loan—instalment and interest 1060 0 0 2981 9 2 Establishment Expenses—proportion of 269 14 10 3251 4 0 Sewerage. Current expenditure £913 5 10 Law expenses 252 10 0 1165 15 10 Sewerage works 1524 13 3 2690 9 1 Establishment Expenses, proportion of 243 7 8 2933 16 9 Private works 148 5 6 Frontage drains 313 5 11 Lighting. Lewisham Village—current expenses 286 1 1 ,, Inst, and interest on debt 67 10 0 353 11 1 Establishment Expenses, proportion of 31 19 8 385 10 9 Sydenham 1172 0 3 Establishment Expenses, proportion of 106 1 2 1278 1 5 Watering Roads. Blackheath 170 12 6 Establishment Expenses, proportion of . 15 8 8 186 1 2 D HAMLET OF PENGE. General purposes. Highways—material, cartage, &c 360 10 8 Ditto—labourers' wages 72 11 6 433 2 2 Establishment Expenses (one fifth) . 166 12 11 599 15 1 Sewerage. Current expenditure 5 5 0 Balance due to Treasurer, 25th March, 1857 11 1 1 Balance in hand, 25th March, 1858 . 1291 9 6 £10,403 16 2 34 THE BOAED OF WOEKS FOE THE LEWISHAM DISTEICT. Statement showing the items of Expenditure comprised under the head of Establishment Expenses, and how they a/re apportioned among the several heads of Expenditure. ITEMS OF EXPENDITURE INCLUDED IN ESTABLISHMENT EXPENSES. APPORTIONMENT OF ESTABLISHMENT EXPENSES. £ s d. £ s. d. Incidental expenses 77 4 2 Lewisham—General purposes 269 14 Id Eent, rates, and taxes 41 0 7 ,, Lighting Lewisham Village 31 19 8 Eepairs 14 15 5 „ Lighting Sydenham 106 1 2 Implements 36 10 4 „ Watering Blackheath roads 15 8 8 Salaries 574 l6 0 ,, Sewerage purposes 243 7 8 Stationery and printing 88 18 5 Being four-fifths of the establishment expenses 666 12 0 Penge—General purposes, being the remaining one-fifth of such expenses 166 12 11 £833 4 11 £833 4 11 Examined and found correct, JOHN WEST LYON, E. G. JONES, auditors. Note.—The Establishment Expenses of the Board are in the first instance apportioned between the Parish of Lewisham and Hamlet of Penge, in the proportion of four-fifths to the former and one-fifth to the latter; and such expenses are further apportioned rateably among the several heads of the Expenditure of the Board in respect of which separate Rates are levied. Thus the Expenditure for the Parish of Lewisham for the year, under the several heads of General Purposes, Sewerage, Lighting and "Watering, is £7,368 2s. 1d., and the proportion of the Establishment Expenses payable by Lewisham is £666 12s. The amount chargeable to each head of Expenditure is, therefore, ascertained by the Rule of Three. If £7,368 2s. 1d. cost £666 12s. to administer, what is the cost of administration of each item of expenditure? 35 Statement of the Immediate Liabilities and Available Assets of the Board of Works for the Lewisham District, on the 25th March, 1858. LIABILITIES. PARISH OF LEWISHAM. General Purposes. £ 8. d. Tradesmen's Bills, Salaries, &c. £232 10 2 E. Eagleton—Loan and Interest 1015 0 0 To amount borrowed* 1201 6 9 2448 16 11 Lighting. Lewisham Village—Phoenix Gas Company 73 13 9 Sydenham—Crystal Palace District Gas Company 261 12 6 Watering Roads—Blackheath 27 10 0 Sewerage Purposes. Of the District Board,— Tradesmen's Bills, &c. £40 16 9 Law Charges (Estimate) 500 0 0 540 16 9 139 5 3 Of the Metropolitan Board,— The whole Parish 929 8 6 The "Ravensbourne District" 10,312 19 10 The "Greenwich District" 1985 11 11 HAMLET OF PENGE. Sewerage Purposes. Metropolitan Board Expenses 250 5 9 £16,970 1 2 ASSETS. PARISH OF LEWISHAM. General Purposes. £ s. d. Outstanding Precepts £3000 0 0 Lambeth Water Works Company. 26 18 5 3026 18 5 Lighting. Lewisham Village Precept outstanding 300 0 0 Sydenham Outstanding Precepts 1000 0 0 Watering Roads—Blackheath ditto 200 0 0 Sewerage Purposes. Of the District Board,— Private Works 200 0 0 Frontage Drains 175 15 4 Of the Metropolitan Board,— The whole Parish (cash in hand) The "Ravensbourne District" 501 15 7 2351 0 6 The "Greenwich District" 395 1 4 HAMLET OF PENGE. Sewerage Purposes. Metropolitan Board Expenses (cash in hand) 135 2 7 Balance of Cash in hand 654 11 4 8029 16 1 £15,768 14 5 Note.—The Deficit arises upon the liabilities on the former Ravensbourne and Greenwich Districts, in respect of which the Board are authorised to, and will borrow, £8692 4s. 8d., repayable by annual instalments, extending over a period of 20 years. * For Sewerage Works, but applied to General Purposes. Statement showing the Financial condition of the Board of Works for the Lewisham District, and of each separate Head of Expenditure, on the 25th March, 1858. Mortgages and other special liabilities. Balance in debt or credit on the receipts and expenses from 1st Jan., 1856, to 25th March, 1857. Receipts and expenditure for the year ending 25th March, 1858. Liabilities and assets on the 25th March, 1858. Financial condition of the district on the 25th March, 1858. in debt. in credit. receipts. expenditure liabilities. assets. in debt. in credit. PARTSH OF LEWISHAM. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d £ s. d. £ s. d. General Purposes 1000 0 0 2017 1 3 5160 8 9 3251 4 0 2448 16 11 3026 18 5 6 14 7 470 5 0 Lighting—Lewisham Village 30 0 0 66 10 1 219 0 0 385 1 261 12 6 1000 0 0 12 17 7 „ Sydenham Watering Roads—Blackheath Of District Board 238 10 0 184 15 0 2 11 6 550 0 0 186 1 2 27 10 0 200 0 0 1 13 10 Current Expenses 200 0 o 1409 3 6 540 16 9 160 18 5 Sewerage Works 89 1 4 2200 0 0 1524 13 3 1211 6 9 Private Works 8000 0 0 2726 0 0 10 0 0 148 5 6 139 5 3 200 0 0 17 4 2 Frontage Drains 240 11 8 345 6 7 313 5 11 175 15 4 7 7 Of Metropolitan board 124 3 8 262 1 10 929 8 6 427 12 11 Ravensbourne District. 501 15 7 10312 19 10 2351 0 6 7961 19 4 Greenwich District 1985 11 11 395 1 4 1590 10 7 HAMLET OF PENGE. Sewerage Purposes 22 13 2 800 0 0 599 15 1 222 18 1 Of District Board 5 5 0 5 5 0 Private Works. 20 9 11 20 9 11 Of Metropolitan Board 135 2 7 250 5 9 115 3 2 †8 0 ‡11 1 1 †8 0 *20 0 10 ‡11 1 1 *20 0 10 §1291 9 6 §1291 9 6 ||8029 16 1 ||8029 16 1 £9268 10 0 2762 13 9 2762 13 9 10403 16 2 10403 16 2 16970 1 2 16970 1 2 10127 15 6 10127 15 6 * Balance in hand March 25, 1857. † Cash overpaid March 25, 1857. ‡ Balance due to Treasurer March 25, 1857. § Balance in hand March 25, 1858. || Deficit. 37 THE BOARD OF WORKS FOR THE LEWISHAM DISTRICT. The Names and Addresses of the Members of the Board, and of their Officers, in June, 1858. Members. Arbott, Mr. John, Limes Grove, Lewisham. Adams, Mr. Francis, Sydenham. Andrews, Mr. Josiah, Rushey Green, Lewisham. Bagnall, Mr. "Walter, Blackheath. Brooker, Mr. James, Brockley Park, Sydenham. Carter, Mr. Joseph, Brockley Park, Sydenham. Daikers, Mr. James, Dulwich Road, Penge. De la Salle, Mr. Jas. Thos., Sandwell Place, Lewisham. Dodds, Mr. Hill, Lewisham. Edgerton, Mr. William, Southend, Lewisham. Groves, Mr. John, Hither Green, Lewisham. Hoath, Mr. James, Catford Bridge, Lewisham. Lane, Mr. William, Rushey Green, Lewisham. Morphew, Mr. William, Sydenham. Parsey, Mr. Benjamin, Sydenham. Phillips, Mr. Daniel, Rushey Green, Lewisham. Pritchard, Mr. Ebenezer, Tudor House, Upper Norwood. Purvis, Dr. Prior, Blackheath. Ridgway, Mr. William, Sydenham. Robinson, Mr. Henry, Lewisham. Sabin, Mr. Stephen, Catford Hill, Lewisham. Shove, Mr. William Spencer, Blackheath. Sinkins, Mr. John, Sydenham. Smith, Mr. Benjamin, Foy Cottage, Blackheath. Southorn, Mr. Simon, Blackheath Hill, Blackheath. Stanger, Mr. Wm. W., Belvedere Road, Upper Norwood. Tapley, Mr. Thomas, Lewisham. The London and Westminster Bank, Treasurer and Banker. Mr. O. C. T. Eagleton, Montpelier Row, Blackheath, Clerk. Mr. F. E. Wilkinson, Sydenham Park, Sydenham, Medical Officer. Mr. W. H. Treverton, Forest Hill, Sewers' Surveyor. Mr. John Duncan, New Cross, Highways' Surveyor and Inspector of Nuisances. Offices. Grove Place, Lewisham, near the Church. 38 APPENDIX. A LIST OF THE MEMBERS OF THE BOARD, SHEWING AT WHAT DATE EACH WILL GO OUT OF OFFICE BY ROTATION. In June, 1858. Mr. James Belcham „ Joseph Carter „ Joseph Dale Dr. Henry Greenwood Mr. William Kelsey „ Dan. Phillips „ John Sinkins „ Simon Southorn Penge—Mr. James Daikers. In June, 1859. Mr. James Brooker „ Jas. Thos. De la Salle „ William Edgerton „ John Groves Mr. W. M. Ridgway „ Henry Robinson „ W. S. Shove „ Thomas Tapley Penge—Mr. W. W. Stanger. In June, 1860. Mr. Josh. Andrews „ Walter Bagnall „ Hill Dodds „ James Hoath Mr. William Lane „ William Morphew „ Benjamin Parsey „ Benjamin Smith Penge—Mr. Ebenezer Pritchard. AUDITORS. The Auditors of the accounts of the Parish appointed for Lewisham were,— In 1857. In 1858. For the Blackheath Ward Mr. R. G. Jones Mr. R. G. Jones. For the Sydenham Ward Mr. J. W. Lyon Mr. J. W. Lyon. For the Lewisham Ward Mr. G. F. Corbett . Mr. Derbyshire. The Auditors appointed for Penge in 1857 were, Messrs. James Fleet, Felix Berry, William Hoperaft, Edward Parkinson, and Edward Mansell; and the same gentlemen were re-appointed in 1858. 39 ATTENDANCE OF MEMBERS Of the Board from 31st December, 1856, to the 31st March, 1858. Members' Names. Number of Attendances. *Andrews, Mr. Josiah 20 *Atkins, Mr. Charles 4 Bagnall, Mr. Walter 32 Belcham, Mr. James 24 Brooker, Mr. James 32 *Carter, Mr. Joseph 1 *Couldery, Mr. Henry 7 Daikers, Mr. James 17 *Dale, Mr. Joseph 3 De la Salle, Mr. J. T. 5 *Dodds, Mr. Hill. 18 Edgerton, Mr. W. 28 *Goodman, Mr. W. 12 Greenwood, Dr. H. 28 Groves, Mr. John. 11 *Hoath, Mr. James. 7 Kelsey, Mr. William 5 Members' Names. Number of Attendances. *Lane, Mr. William 14 *Lavers, Mr. Thomas H. 3 *Mead, Mr. Joseph 1 Morphew, Mr. W. 16 Parsey, Mr. Benjamin 26 ^Phillips, Mr. Daniel. 7 Pritchard, Mr. E. 19 *Ridgway, Mr. W. 3 Robinson, Mr. Henry. 16 *Sabin, Mr. Stephen. 4 Shove, Mr. W. Spencer 25 *Sinkins, Mr. John. 14 Smith, Mr. Benjamin. 27 Southorn, Mr. Simon. 24 Stanger, Mr. W. W. 18 *Standring, Mr. B. 1 Tapley, Mr. Thomas. 38 COMMITTEES OF THE BOARD. Finance Committee. 1857. Mr. Belcham „ Daikers „ Edgerton Dr. Greenwood Mr. Kelsey „ Shove „ Tapley 1858. Mr. Brooker „ Daikers „ Edgerton „ Morphew „ Parsey „ Shove „ Tapley General Purposes Committee. 1857. Mr. Brooker „ Dale „ Edgerton „ Goodman „ Parsey „ Robinson „ Shove „ Southorn „ Tapley 1858. Mr. Brooker „ Edgerton „ Morphew „ Parsey „ Robinson „ Shove „ Southorn „ Stanger „ Tapley * The Members against whose names an asterisk is placed have not been upon the Board the whole period. 40 LOCAL COMMITTEES. 1857. Blackheath. Mr. Benjamin Smith. „ Wm. Spencer Shove. Dr. Henry Greenwood. Mr. Walter Bagnall. „ Simon Southorn. ,, James T. De la Salle. Lewisham. Mr. John Groves. ,, W. Kelsey. „ Hill Dodds. „ Thomas Tapley. „ William Lane. „ Josiah Andrews. „ Daniel Phillips. „ James Belcham. „ Henry Robinson. „ W. Edgerton. „ James Hoath. Sydenham. Mr. William Ridgway. „ James Brooker. „ William Morphew. „ Joseph Mead. „ Benjamin Parsey. „ Joseph Dale. ,, John Sinkins. Penge. Mr. W. W. Stanger. „ E. Pritchard. „ James Daikers. 1858. Blackheath. Mr. Benjamin Smith. „ W. S. Shove. Dr. Prior Purvis. Mr. Walter Bagnall. „ S. Southorn. „ James T. De la Salle. Lewisham. Mr. John Groves. „ Hill Dodds. „ William Edgerton. „ Thomas Tapley. „ William Lane. „ Josiah Andrews. „ Daniel Phillips. „ Henry Robinson. „ James Hoath. „ Stephen Sabin. „ John Abbott. Sydenham. Mr. William Ridgway. „ James Brooker. „ William Morphew. „ Joseph Carter. „ Benjamin Parsey. „ John Sinkins. „ Eras. Adams. Penge. Mr. W. W. Stanger. „ E. Pritchard. „ James Daikers. REPORTS OF COMMITTEES APPOINTED WITH REFERENCE TO THE SALARIES AND DUTIES OF OFFICERS. Report of the Committee of the whole Board. Lewisham District Board of Works, 14th January, 1857. The Committee of the whole Board, formed January 8th, 1857, "for the purpose of considering the appointment, duties, and emoluments of the several Officers, and any alterations deemed expedient in relation thereto," report— 41 That having met by adjournment on Monday, January 12th instant, when 19 members were present, they proceeded to the investigation of the matters referred to them, and after a careful consideration of the duties and salaries of each Officer in succession, they resolved to make the following recommendations. That Mr. O. C. T. Eagleton be reappointed Clerk, at a salary of £250 per annum. That Mr. Henry Treverion be reappointed Surveyor, at a salary of £200 per annum. That Mr. Wilkinson be reappointed Medical Officer of Health, at his present rate of emolument, namely, £5 5s. for each Report, to be sent in monthly. That Two Inspectors be appointed as heretofore. That Mr. Duncan be reappointed Inspector, at a salary of £80 per annum and £10 extra wages for travelling, and that he be requested to reside in the district. That the other Inspectorship be declared vacant, and advertisements inserted in the Daily Papers for competent persons to offer themselves as Candidates for the same. That the Messenger provisionally employed be not reappointed, but one of the Inspectors be selected to discharge the duties of Messenger when required. That Mrs. Perry be reappointed Housekeeper, at a salary of 12s. per week. Henry Greenwood. Benjamin Smith. W. S. Shove. James Bbooker. Report of the Committee appointed 21st Jan., 1857, consisting of Mr. Belcham „ Brooker ,, Daikers „ Edgerton Mr. Morphew „ Parsey „ Shove „ Tapley. Office of Works, Grove Place, Lewisham, 4th February, 1858. The Committee, appointed at the last Meeting of the Board, "to enquire into the duties of the several Officers and the system pursued as regards all the operations of the Board, with a view to ascertain the precise mode in which all the Orders of the Board are executed, and the sufficiency or otherwise of the Checks upon the Contractors and Labourers, and, generally, whether the present working staff and arrangements are such as are best suited to the performance of the duties which devolve upon the Board," beg to report— That having met on the 27th ultimo (when all the members were present), and on the 3rd instant, and having read the Report of the Committee, appointed on the 5tli December, 1855, "To consider as to the Officers required, their duties and emoluments," and having considered the alterations from time to time made in the arrangements adopted upon such report, 42 your Committee are of opinion that yet further alteration in the duties and emoluments of some of your officers is essential, and they recommend that such duties be as follows:— Those of the Clerk.—Either personally, or by Deputy duly authorized by the Board, to attend daily at the Office as required by the Act; to keep the accounts of the Board, and be responsible for the regularity of all notices issued under their order; to attend all summonses or complaints, issued by or against them, and attendable before any Justice or Justices; to attend all meetings, whether of the Board, or any Committee appointed by them, and to take minutes of the proceedings of all such meetings, and, as to the proceedings of any Committee, to draw up their Reports when required, and as to the proceedings of the Board, to enter the same in a minute book as required by the Act, and to make and keep all such other books as are thereby required; to negociate and carry out on behalf of the Board any loan or loans upon the rates, except under special circumstances, upon which the Clerk is to apply to the Board for special remuneration; to conduct all correspondence; and, generally, to perform all other duties required of him by the Act. Remuneration—As heretofore—(£200 per annum). With reference to the office of Surveyor, your Committee recommend an entire change; that instead of one officer there should be two—one to superintend the Sewerage and Drainage of the District, and be called the Sewerage Works Surveyor; and the other to have charge of the Highways, and be also Inspector of Nuisances, and be called the Highways Surveyor. The duties of the Sewerage Works Surveyor to be, to project all sewers required in the District, and be responsible for their proper position, size, length, inclination, and material, and to prepare the necessary plans and specifications for all such works, and make all estimates of the cost, and be responsible for the due execution of the same, and the propriety of all payments made in respect thereof. To be responsible for the efficiency of all existing sewers, and perform the like duties as regards any repairs or reconstruction of such sewers, as are above specified with respect to new sewers. To be responsible for all house drainage in every respect as regards new sewers, and superintend the execution of all such work, whether performed by the Board or the owners of the property drained; and to keep the time of the labourers employed by the Board in any such work, or in cleansing, repairing, constructing, or otherwise, in connection with sewerage; to pay the wages of all such labourers, and render proper weekly accounts of all such payments, and be responsible for the propriety of all payments made in respect of the same. To keep a stock account of all materials used by the Board in any such works; and, generally, to perform all other duties within the province of a Surveyor (not comprised in the duties assigned to the Highways Surveyor), as may be from time to time required of him by the Board, and to devote his whole time to the performance of such duties. Remuneration—A salary of £200 per annum. The duties of the Highways Surveyor to be, to superintend the repair and maintenance of all highways in the District, under the control of the Board; and be responsible for the due execution of all contracts for material, cartage, road watering, lighting, and other contracts in any way affecting 43 such highways, and for the propriety of all payments made under any such contracts; and to be responsible for the due performance by the Road Labourers of the work assigned to them. And your Committee expressly recommend that the responsibility, as regards contractors and labourers, be not deputed to any foreman or other person. And to be responsible that no more such labourers are employed than are required, or higher wages paid them, respectively, than they fairly earn; to pay such wages, and render proper weekly accounts of such payments. To keep a stock account of all materials used by the Board on such highways; and, generally, to perform all the duties of a Surveyor of Highways under the General Highway Act, as modified by the Act under which the Board are constituted. And also to perform all the duties of an Inspector op Nuisances, as comprised in such Act, except laying complaints before Justices, which shall be laid by the Clerk, the Inspector rendering such assistance as may be required of him; and he to serve all notices issued by order of the Board, and to devote his whole time to the performance of such duties. Remuneration—Annual salary of £100. The duties of the Medical Officer of Health to be such as are prescribed by the Act, and to make a Report on the last Thursday in every month, or oftener if required; and to be requested to enter complaints of particular nuisances in the Complaint Book, that they may be enquired into by the Inspector, reported on by him, and laid before the Board at the next meeting. Remuneration—£5 5s. for each report as heretofore. Your Committee further recommend that the office of Housekeeper be discontinued, and that the Highways Surveyor occupy the house attached to the Offices of the Board rent free, and be allowed coals and gas; and that he be responsible for the safe keeping of all property on the premises, and for the proper cleaning of the Board Room and Offices, and for every requisite attendance upon the Members and Officers. Your Committee also recommend that the office of Foreman of Labourers be also discontinued, and that the entire responsibility for the due performance of all contracts affecting the roads rest solely with the Surveyor of Highways. James Brooker, W. S. Shove, James Belcham, Thomas Tapley, Benjamin Parsey, J. Daikers, The Members of the Committee present on the date of the Report. 44 REPORT OF COMMITTEE AS TO CARTAGE OF MATERIAL AND THE APPOINTMENT OF A SCAVENGER. Grove Place, Lewisham, 28th March, 1857. The Committee appointed at the last meeting of the Board of Works for the Lewisham District, to consider and report upon the nature of the contracts to be entered into by the Board for executing the Cartage of Material, and for the collection of Dust and Rubbish in the district, beg to report:— That they think it desirable, for the purpose of cartage of material, to divide the district into three divisions—one to consist of so much of the Parish of Lewisham as lies east of the London and Brighton Railway—a second of so much of the same parish as lies west of the same railway, or within two furlongs of the eastern side of the same—and the third to consist of the Hamlet of Penge. That the cartage should be executed in each division at a price per yard per furlong, except where the material is carried a distance of not more than two furlongs, when it should be executed by day work. That the Tenders should be made for executing the work, both by distance and day work, in respect of each division, separately. And as regards the portion of Lewisham Parish east of the railway (which may be called Blackheath and Lewisham division), should specify a price for cartage from the pits at Blackheath, Rushey Green, and Southend, and also from any wharf at Deptford; as regards the portion of the parish west of the railway (or the Sydenham and Forest Hill division), should specify a price for cartage from the Forest Hill Station, and also from Croydon; and as regards the Penge division, comprising the whole Hamlet, should specify a price from Croydon. And that a price should also be specified in respect of each division for the hire of each set of one horse and harness and one cart and man per day. And also an additional price for each additional horse and harness per day. And with reference to the Contract for the Collection and Removal of Dust and Rubbish in the District, the Committee beg to report— That they recommend that Tenders be invited in the same terms as heretofore. W. S. SHOVE. THOS. TAPLEY. WM. EDGERTON. JAS. BROOKER. 45 ROAD SCRAPINGS. To whom sold, and amount realized, for the year commencing 25th March, 1857. ROADS. to whom sold. amount. £ s. d. No. 1. From Catford Hill to Meadow Croft Mr. J. Bridgland 3 12 0 No. 2. From Meadow Croft to Sydenham Bridge, including Southend Lane to Poole Bridge Ditto 5 10 6 No. 2a. From Sydenham Bridge to Rockhills, thence along Sydenham Hill and round to the finger post opposite the "Woodman, including Jews' Walk Mr. Trehearn 5 5 0 No. 3. From Sydenham Bridge to Forest Hill Railway Station, including Forest Hill and Wells Road Mr. Stidolph 6 10 0 No. 4. From Stanstead Lane, Eliza Place, and Perry Vale to Meadow Croft Ditto 1 10 0 No. 5. From Vicarage, Lady well, to finger post in Stanstead Lane Mr. Denton 2 2 0 No. 6. Hither Green and George Lanes Mr. Patch 1 0 0 No. 7.* All the Roads on Blackheath Mr. Wilmott — — — No. 8. All the Roads in the Hamlet of Penge Mr. Trehearn 3 0 0 £28 9 6 * Mr. Willmott undertakes the cleaning of the roads and streets of Blackheath as an equivalent for the road scrapings. 46 To whom sold, and amount realized, for the year commencing 25th March, 1858. ROADS. to whom sold. amount. £ s. d. No. 1. From the Black Horse, Rushey Green, to the finger post in Meadow Croft Mr. J. Trehearn 4 0 0 No. 2. From the finger post in Meadow Croft to Sydenham Bridge, including Southend Lane to the Tiger's Head, Southend Ditto 6 10 0 No. 3. From Sydenham Bridge to Rockhill8, thence along Sydenham Hill to the finger post opposite the Woodman, including Jews' Walk Mr. G. Pocock 2 10 0 No. 4. From the Greyhound, near Sydenham Bridge, to the finger post on Sydenham Hill opposite the Woodman, thence along the Hill to Eliot Bank, and thence to Jews' Walk Ditto 2 10 0 No. 5. High Street, Sydenham, Park Road, Albert Road, Dartmouth Road, and Forest Hill, to the Parish Boundaries next Camberwell . Mr. H. Stidolph 6 0 0 No. 6. From the finger post in Meadow Croft to the Forest Hill Station, and thence along Stanstead Lane to Catford Hill Mr. W. Denton 3 6 0 No. 7. From the Vicarage, Lewisham, through Ladywell to the finger post in Stanstead Lane Mr. G. Pocock 2 0 0 No. 8. George Lane and Hither Green Lane, from Lewisham Village to a point near the Parish Boundary Mr. T. H. Owen 1 5 0 No. 9. All the Roads on Blackheath Mr. T. Wilson 2 10 0 No. 10. All the Roads in the Hamlet of Penge on the North Side of the London and Brighton Railway Mr. J. Hempstead 2 0 0 No. 11. All the Roads in the Hamlet of Penge on the South Side of the London and Brighton Railway Ditto 2 0 0 £34 11 0 47 BYE LAW AS TO THE FORMATION OF NEW STREETS IN THE METROPOLIS, Made by the Metropolitan Board of Works at a Meeting of the said Board, held at Guildhall, in the City of London, on the 17th day of March, in the year of our Lord 1857, in and for the limits of the Metropolis as defined by an Act passed in the 19 th year of the reign of Her present Majesty, "For the better Local Management of the Metropolis:" and submitted to and confirmed at a subsequent meeting of the said Board, held at Guildhall aforesaid, in and for the limits aforesaid, on the 3rd day of April, in the year of our Lord 1857; and approved by the Right Honourable Sir George Grey, Baronet, one of Her Majesty's Principal Secretaries of State, pursuant to the said Act; and published this 1st day of May, anno domini 1857. In pursuance of the Powers vested in the Metropolitan Board of Works, by the Act of Parliament passed in the Nineteenth year of the Reign of Her present Majesty, intituled, "An Act for the better Local Management of the Metropolis," It is hereby Ordered by the said Board as follows, that is to say:— 1. Four weeks, at the least, before any New Street shall be laid out, written Notice shall be given to the Metropolitan Board of Works, at their Office, No. 1, Greek Street, Soho, in the County of Middlesex, by the person or persons intending to lay out such New Street, stating the proposed level and width thereof, and accompanied by a plan of the ground, showing the local situation of the same. 2. Forty feet, at the least, shall be the width of every New Street intended for carriage traffic; twenty feet, at the least, shall be the width of every New Street intended only for foot traffic: Provided that the said width, respectively, shall be construed to mean the width of the carriage and footway only, exclusive of any gardens, forecourts, open areas, or other spaces in front of the houses or buildings erected or intended to be erected in any street. 3. Every New Street shall, unless the Metropolitan Board of Works otherwise consent in writing, have at the least two entrances of the full width of such Street; and shall be open from the ground upward. 4. The measurement of the width of every New Street shall be taken at a right angle to the course thereof, half on either side from the centre or crown of the roadway to the external wall or front of the intended houses or buildings on each side thereof; but where forecourts or other spaces are intended to be left in front of the houses or buildings, then the width of the Street, as already defined, shall be measured from the centre line up to the fence, railing, or boundary dividing, or intended to divide such forecourts, gardens, or spaces from the public way. 5. The carriage-way of every New Street must curve or fall from the centre or crown thereof at the rate of three-eighths of an inch, at the least, for every foot of breadth. 6. In every New Street the curb to each footpath must not be less than four, nor more than eight inches, above the channel of the roadway, except in the case of crossings, paved or formed for the use of foot-passengers; 48 and the slope of every footpath towards the curb must be half an inch to every foot of width, if the footpath be unpaved, or not less than a quarter of an inch to every foot of width, if the footpath be paved. 7. In this Bye Law the word " Street" shall be interpreted to apply to and include any highway (except the carriage-way of any turnpike-road), and any road, public bridge (not being a county bridge), lane, footway, square, court, alley, or passage, whether a thoroughfare or not; and a part of any such highway, road, bridge, lane, footway, square, court, alley, or passage. 8. In case of any breach of the regulations contained in this Bye Law, the offender shall be liable for each offence to a penalty of Forty Shillings; and in case of a continuing offence to a further penalty of Twenty Shillings for each day after notice thereof from the Metropolitan Board of "Works. METROPOLITAN BOARD PRECEPTS. To the Board of Works for the Lewisham District, in the Counties of Kent and Surrey. By virtue of an Act passed in the 19th year of Queen Victoria, intituled " An Act for the Better Local Management of the Metropolis." The Metropolitan Board of Works do issue their Precept, under their Common Seal, to you the said Board of Works of the said Lewisham District, and do hereby require you to pay to the Bank of London, Threadneedle Street, in the City of London, Treasurer and Banker of the said Board, on or before the 30th day of May now next ensuing, the sum of £10,628 7s., being the amount of the several and respective sums of money hereunder set down and expressed opposite to and against the several parishes and parts within your District, hereinafter mentioned, which said several sums ought, in the judgment of the said Board, to be charged upon the said several parishes and parts respectively for defraying the expenses of the said Board in the execution of the said Act, and which they the said Board did, on the 3rd day of March, 1857, ascertain and assess upon the said several parishes and parts, for such purpose under and in pursuance of the provisions of the said Act in that behalf. Names of Parishes and Parts. Sums. £ s. d. £ s. d. Lewisham.—The whole of the Parish 501 15 7 That part of the said Parish ot Lewisham within the said Lewisham District which was at and immediately before the determination and expiration of the Metropolitan Sewers Act, 1848, included in the Greenwich separate Sewerage District . . . 1,701 16 6 That part of the said Parish of Lewisham within the said Lewisham District which was at and immediately before the determination and expiration of the Metropolitan Sewers Act, 1848, included in the Ravensbourne separate Sewerage District 8,289 12 4 Hamlet or Penge.— The whole Hamlet 10,493 4 5 135 2 7 £10,628 7 0 By Order of the Board, E. H. WOOLRYCH, Dated this 13th day of March, 1857. Clerk to the Board. 49 To the Board of Works for the Lewisham District, in the Counties of Kent and Surrey. By virtue of an Act passed in the 19th year of the Reign of Queen Victoria, intituled "An Act for the Better Local Management of the Metropolis," The Metropolitan Board of Works do issue this their Precept, under their Common Seal, to you the said Board of Works of the said Lewisham District, and do hereby require you to pay to the Bank of London, Threadneedle Street, in the City of London, Treasurer and Banker of the said Board, on or before the 25th day of March now next ensuing, the sum of £2,849 19s., being the amount of the several and respective sums of money hereunder set down and expressed opposite to and against the several Parishes and parts of Parishes within your District, hereinafter mentioned, which said several sums ought, in the judgment of the said Board, to be charged upon the said Parishes and parts of Parishes respectively for defraying the expenses of the said Board in the execution of the said Act, and which they the said Board did, on the 8th day of January, 1858, ascertain and assess upon the said several Parishes and parts of Parishes for such purpose, under and in pursuance of the provisions of the said Act in that behalf. Names of Parishes and parts of Parishes. Sums. £ s. d. £ s. d. Lewisham.—The whole of the Parish 427 12 11 That part of the Parish of Lewisham within the said Lewisham District which was at and immediately before the determination and expiration of the Metropolitan Sewers Act, 1848, included in the Greenwich separate Sewerage District 283 15 5 That part of the said Parish of Lewisham within the said Lewisham District which was at and immediately before the determination and expiration of the Metropolitan Sewers Act, 1848, included in the Ravensbourne separate Sewerage District 2,023 7 6 Hamlet of Penge.—The whole Hamlet 2,734 15 10 115 3 2 £2,849 19 0 By Order of the Board, E. H. WOOLRYCH, Clerk to the Board. Dated this 15th day of January, 1858. Analysis of the Precept of the Metropolitan Board of Works upon the Board of Works for the Lewisham District, dated 13th March, 1857. PARTS CHARGED. Approximate financial condition on current expenditure account of late Metropolitan Commissioners of Sewers. ESTIMATED EXPENSES OF THE METROPOLITAN BOARD FOR THE YEAR 1856. TOTAL CHARGE FOR THE YEAR. Sums required for works of sewerage. Third instalment and interest on main intercepting drainage loan of £140,000. Interest on loans incurred and retired allowances granted by late Metropolitan Commissioners of Sewers. Establishment charges, including compensation allowances. Amount proposed to be raised to meet repayments of outstanding loans, mortgages, &c. Reimbursement of loan repaid in May last to Mr. J. C. Peache. TOTAL. IN DEBT. LEWISHAM. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. The whole of the Parish 138 11 10 5 12 7 125 4 1 232 7 1 363 3 9 501 15 7 That part of the Parish in the former "Greenwich District" 675 6 9 65 6 11 130 13 4 130 5 7 700 3 11 1026 9 9 1701 16 6 Ditto ditto "Ravensbourne District" 2865 0 9 199 13 1 903 10 10 935 5 6 3386 2 2 5424 11 7 8289 12 4 3678 19 4 270 12 7 125 4 1 1034 4 2 232 7 1 1065 11 1 408f 6 1 6814 5 1 10493 4 3 PENGE. The whole Hamlet *37 6 6 1 10 3 33 14 4 62 11 6 97 16 1 135 2 7 £ 3716 5 10 272 2 10 158 18 5 1034 4 2 294 18 7 1065 11 1 4086 6 1 6912 1 2 10628 7 0 * These debts are in respect of the Main Intercepting Drainage, being proportion of first instalment of £140,000, which has been repaid, together with interest; and the other two items in this column are in respect of expenditure, which, in the ordinary course, would have been met by a Rate in December, 1855, but which the Commissioners did not make, as their functions were then on the eve of termination. Analysis of the Precept of the Metropolitan Board of Works upon the Board of Works for the Lewisham District elated 15th January, 1858. PARTS CHARGED. Reapportionment of proportions of main intercepting drainage loan of £ 140,000 heretofore charged to City of London, Woolwich, and certain parts enumerated in schedule C. ESTIMATED EXPENSES OF THE METROPOLITAN BOARD FOR THE YEAR 1857. SEWERAGE AND DRAINAGE. TOTAL CHARGE FOR THE YEAR. SPECIAL CHARGES. GENERAL CHARGES. Total estimated expenses for the year. SEWERAGE AND DRAINAGE. METROPOLIS IMPROVEMENTS MAIN INTERCEPTING DRAINAGE. GENERAL PURPOSES. Amount proposed to be raised to meet repayment of outstanding loans and mortgages. Sums required for works, including guaging for main intercepting drainage. Interest on loans contracted, and annuities and retired allowances granted by late Metropolitan Commissioners of Sewers. Incidental expenses. Instalment and and interest on main intercepting drainage loan of £140,000. Establishment charges, including compensation allowances. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. LEWISHAM. The whole of the Parish 35 16 9 3 19 4 15 16 0 138 15 3 233 5 7 351 16 2 427 12 11 That part of the Parish in the former "Greenwich District" 32 13 11 120 15 11 153 9 10 130 5 7 283 15 5 Ditto ditto "Ravensbourne District" 246 3 9 841 18 3 1088 2 0 935 5 6 2023 7 6 PENGE. 35 16 9 282 17 0 962 14 2 15 16 0 138 15 3 233 5 7 1633 8 0 1065 11 1 2734 15 10 The whole Hamlet 9 13 0 1 1 4 4 5 1 37 7 4 62 16 5 105 10 2 115 3 2 £ 45 9 9 283 18 4 962 14 2 20 1 1 176 2 7 296 2 0 1738 18 2 1065 11 1 2849 19 0 52 THE FINSBURY PARK BILL. Petition to Parliament and other Proceedings thereon. In Parliament. Finsbury Park. Session 1857. (Power to make a Park for Finsbury, in the respective Parishes of Saint Mary Islington, Saint Mary Stoke Newington, and Hornsey, all in the County of Middlesex. Power to levy rates, and to borrow money for the purposes of the Act, and for other purposes). Petition against. Unto the Honourable the Commons of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland, in Parliament assembled. The Humble Petition of the Board of Works for the Lewisham. District. Sheweth, That a Bill is now depending before your Honourable House, entituled, "A Bill to authorize the formation of a Park for the Northern Suburbs of the Metropolis, to be called 'Finsbury Park,'" which Park it is proposed to lay out, plant, and enclose, and devote to the use and recreation of the public, in the several Parishes of Saint Mary Islington, St Mary Stoke Newington, and Hornsey, in the County of Middlesex. That for the purposes of the said measure it is proposed by the said Bill to expend a sum of two hundred thousand pounds, of which £50,000 is to be contributed by the Commissioners of Public Works, and £150,000 to be raised on mortgage of the rate proposed to be authorized by the Bill. That this rate is an equal rate to be from time to time made, assessed, and levied upon the Metropolis, as defined by the "Metropolis Local Management Act, 1855," and the Schedule thereto, to be called the "Finsbury Park Rate," and it is further proposed that not only the original expense of forming and laying out the Park, but of maintaining it, including the salaries and wages of the officers to be appointed in connection with it, shall be defrayed out of this rate. That your Petitioners understand that this measure is promoted and has been introduced into Parliament by the Vestries of the Parishes constituting the Borough of Finsbury, or some of them, who have in so doing, as your petitioners respectfully submit, acted in excess of the powers vested in them, and also contrary to the provisions of "The Metropolis Local Management Amendment Act, 1856," which by its tenth section devolves upon the Metropolitan Board of Works the power of deciding what open spaces shall in future be laid out within the Metropolis for the purposes of public recreation, and enables that Board to apply to Parliament for powers to provide such parks, pleasure grounds, places of recreation, and open spaces for the improvement of the Metropolis, or the public benefit of the inhabitants thereof, as they may think fit. That your petitioners have reason to believe that this is only the first of several measures of a similar nature which will be immediately brought 53 forward, if the principle involved in the present Bill shall receive the sanction of the Legislature, and they view with the deepest apprehension the large amount of additional taxation which will consequently be imposed on the already very heavily taxed Metropolitan Parishes. That your petitioners are justified in this apprehension by the terms of a Report presented to the Metropolitan Board of Works by the Committee on Works and Improvements, on applications for parks and open spaces in the districts of Bermondsey, Hampstead, and Finsbury, dated the 13th day of January last, from which it appears that the estimated cost of providing the said three parks will amount to the sum of £500,000, but which your petitioners believe will in point of fact far exceed that amount. That your petitioners respectfully beg to remind your Honourable House that the local taxes in the Metropolitan Parishes are already very heavy, and that the extra taxation which must be resorted to in carrying out the Main Drainage scheme, and other urgent and necessary works for which the Metropolitan Board was originally constituted, must inevitably be very large; and if to this is to be added the burden of providing parks for all the crowded Metropolitan districts, great injury and inconvenience must be occasioned to the ratepayers, and essential works of local improvement will be greatly limited and retarded, if not altogether stopped. That the assessments to meet the expenses of additional parks, if levied in the manner proposed by the present Bill, will be oppressive, and calculated to injure the value of all house property in the Metropolis, except in the districts immediately benefitted, which will thus have their value augmented at the expense of the ratepayers at large; and your petitioners urge this consideration on your Honourable House the more strenuously that the pressure of local taxation is even now found to have the effect of driving great numbers of the inhabitants to seek a residence beyond the Metropolitan boundary, thus throwing a great deal of property either out of occupation altogether, or causing it to be let at greatly reduced rents. That your petitioners submit that it is unjust to tax the ratepayers of remote districts for the establishment of a park from which they can derive no benefit whatever; and that if from the great increase of population, or other causes, new parks and open spaces are required in the Metropolis, these should be provided at the National expense, in the same manner as the existing parks have been provided, or if not exclusively at the cost of the nation, then partly by the nation and partly by the district or districts immediately benefitted. That in any view it is altogether premature to propose the establishment of a park for Finsbury, or elsewhere, in the manner proposed by the present Bill, until the important and expensive works of general drainage and Metropolitan improvement, now in progress and contemplated, shall have been provided for, and the amount of taxation which these works involve has been definitively ascertained, when, as your petitioners believe, it will be found that any further increase of the local burdens would be intolerable and oppressive. Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the said Bill may not pass into a law, and that they may be heard by themselves, their counsel, agents, and witnesses against the preamble and whole clauses thereof, and that such amendments may be made 54 and clauses inserted therein as may be necessary for the protection of the rights, property, and interests of the ratepayers of the Parishes represented by your petitioners, and of the Metropolis generally, and that such other relief may be afforded to them in the premises as to your Honourable House may seem meet. And your petitioners will ever pray, &c. Minutes of Proceedings at a Meeting of Delegates from the Parishes of Kensington, Lambeth, Newington, Wandsworth, Putney, Clapham, Tooting Graveney, Streatham, Battersea, Chelsea, St. James' Westminster, Hammersmith, Fulham, Greenwich, Deptford, Woolwich, Limehouse, Wapping, Shadwell, Ratcliffe, Lewisham, Penge, Plumstead, Eltham, Kidbrooke, and Lee, appointed to watch the proceedings in Parliament of the Metropolitan Board of Works, held at the " Gray's Inn Coffee House," Holborn, on Friday, the 8th day of May, 1857, Richabd Rot, Esq., of Kensington, in the Chair. Resolved, 1. "That this meeting unanimously recommends that the 'Finsbury Park Bill' be opposed in Parliament, and that a Petition be presented by each Vestry and District Board of "Works, in the spirit (as far as the same apply to the views and requirements of each Vestry and District Board) of the petition presented by the Kensington Vestry." 2. " That a Committee be appointed to oppose such bill, and to carry out the above resolution; that such Committee do consist of the following representatives of the undermentioned Vestries and Boards, with power to add to their number; that Mr. Theodore Martin, of New Palace Yard, Westminster, bo and he is appointed Parliamentary Agent, and that the sum of £15 be subscribed by each Vestry and Board towards defraying the expenses incurred or to be incurred in opposing the said Bill." Committee. Richabd Rot, Esq., Kensington Albebt F. Jackson, Esq., Wandsworth G. B. Richardson, Esq., Greenwich John Henderson, Esq., Woolwich J. F. South, Esq. Plumstead Joseph Cbookes, Esq., Hammersmith John P. Rydeb, Esq., Chelsea. 3. "That the Committee be invited and is authorised by this meeting to consider and report upon any other matter laid before them by Mr. Hawkes, or that may be taken in Parliament affecting the interest of the ratepayers." 4. And "That a copy of the resolutions passed at this meeting be at once sent to each Vestry and District Board of Works in the Metropolis, and that their consideration be invited thereto." 55 PROCEEDINGS IX REFERENCE TO THE SUPPLY OF GAS TO THE METROPOLIS. Resolutions passed at a Meeting of Deputations from the Vestries of St. Marylebone, St. Pancras, St. Mary Islington, St. James, and Paddington, held 18th November, 1857. 1. That this Meeting view with considerable apprehension the recent division of the Metropolis into districts by the various Gas Companies, and is of opinion that the various Metropolitan Vestries and District Boards should unite, to prevent the operation of the Companies from working injuriously to the Gas Consumers of the Metropolis. 2. That this Conference be adjourned to afford an opportunity for further communication with other Parishes, and by the various Deputations with their respective Vestries and District Boards, and for procuring further information as to the contemplated operations of the Gas Companies. 3. That a copy of the foregoing Resolutions be sent to the Vestry of each Parish and District Board who have sent Delegates to this Meeting, and to all other Metropolitan Parishes. Resolutions passed at a Meeting of Deputations from Metropolitan Vestries and District Boards, held on the 2nd and 16th December, 1857. 1. That it is desirable that the Metropolitan Parishes should concur in a united application to Parliament, by petition, or on the motion of the Metropolitan Members, for a Committee of Enquiry into the existing arrangements for the supply of Gas to the Metropolis. 2. That a Committee from this Meeting be appointed to prepare such petition, and that the Vestry of St. Marylebone be requested to communicate the same to all other Parishes, and solicit the affixing of the Common Seal of each Vestry or District Board to such petition, and that the same be entrusted to the respective Borough Members for presentation. 3. That a Deputation composed of the Representatives present, and such others as may be nominated, do wait upon the Home Secretary (the Members of Parliament for the Metropolis being also invited), to represent the evils of the existing monoply, and to solicit the aid of the Government in protecting the interests of the ratepayers, by supporting the proposed Committee of Enquiry. 4. That a copy of these Resolutions be forwarded to each Metropolitan Member, with a request that he will concur in an arrangement to secure the aid of the Government in granting such Committee, and join the proposed Deputation to the Home Secretary. Copy Petition adopted by the Committee. To THE honourable THE commons of THE united klngdom of GbEAT Britain and Ibeland, in Parliament assembled. The Humble Petition of, Sfc. Sheweth, That your petitioners have been informed and believe that the various Gas Companies have recently divided the Metropolis into districts to be supplied by particular Companies, the other Companies withdrawing from 56 such districts, and thus creating in effect a monopoly by destroying competition. That one of the principal evils of this monopoly of districting is that the consumers are placed entirely at the mercy of the Metropolitan Gas Companies in respect of price, quality, and quantity. That your petitioners are informed and believe that most of the Gas Companies which now supply London with Gas, obtained their Acts of Parliament on the distinct basis of competition. That the article of gas has become, not merely a luxury, but an actual necessity to the inhabitants of the Metropolis, and the importance of this matter to the Parochial Authorities and gas consumers may be estimated by the statement which appears at page 10, Appendix I., No. 38, in the lteport of Messrs. Galton, Simpson, and Blacxwell on Metropolitan Drainage, dated 3rd August, 1857, and ordered by your Honourable House to be printed, which statement is as follows:—" According to an estimate of George Lowe, Esq., C.E., Engineer to the Chartered Gas Company, London, the annual consumption of coal for the purpose of gas making in London was then about 840,000 tons, which would yield 7,728,000,000 cubic feet of gas; the value of this volume of gas would be, at 4s. 6d. per 1,000 cubic feet, £1,738,800," and your petitioners are informed and believe that the annual sum paid to the various Gas Companies in London is near £2,000,000 per annum, and which is continually increasing. Your petitioners submit that the several Gas Companies should be restricted by Legislative enactments to a maximum charge for, and be bound to a particular standard in the quality of, the gas supplied by them. Your petitioners, therefore, humbly pray that you will cause an enquiry to be made by a Committee of your Honourable House into the existing arrangements for the supply of gas, and that you will be pleased to adopt such measures as to your Honourable House shall seem meet for protecting the interests of the Gas Consumers of the Metropolis. Resolutions passed at a Meeting of Deputations from the Metropolitan Vestries and District Boards, held on the 11 th May, 1858. That the Marylebone Vestry be requested to communicate with the Vestries and District Boards, and invite their contribution of the sum of £10 towards the expenses of an Enquiry into the existing Means and Regulations for supplying Gas for the Public Lighting. That one or more Members from each Parish or District in a Borough or County form a Committee to confer with the Member of Parliament having the district in charge (one of whom shall act as Secretary), as to the evidence to be adduced. That a Committee of ten be appointed, as Managers, to conduct this enquiry on the part of the Delegates, to communicate with all other Committees, and to take all such steps as may be requisite to conduct the enquiry. All expenses to be limited to the amounts received from Parishes, and that such Managers consist of Messrs. Bachhoffner, Young, Elt, Kintrea, Hattersley, Stretton, Fitchew, Jackson, Hodges, and Stedall. That Mr. Beal and Mr. Hughes be appointed joint Honorary Secretaries to the Committee of Management. 57 Suggestions by the Metropolitan Delegates tcith reference to the recent division of the Metropolis into Districts by the Gas Companies. Preamble :— That the Gas Companies have divided the several Parishes in the Metropolis into Districts, and prescribed the mains from which alone the supply for the respective Parishes shall be taken. That the result of this proceeding is, that Parishes and individual consumers not agreeing to the terms and demands of the respective Companies, may be left without gas, and, from all their arrangements being adapted to this mode of illumination, without light altogether. That the mischievous tendency of such a power is obvious, and its arbitrary exercise must inflict incalculable injury on public and private interests. That the public have no redress, except by an alteration in the law. That aggressive steps have already been taken by some of the Companies, both against individuals and public bodies. That such a monopoly, in an article so essential to trade and the common comfort and convenience of life as light, together with its importance in the prevention of crime, and affecting as it does the individual and collective interests of this the first Metropolis in the world, should not be left to the caprice or cupidity of any private irresponsible body of men. Enactments proposed :— That the quality of the gas as regards its illuminating power shall be such, that an argand burner having 15 holes and a 7-inch chimney, consuming five cubic feet per hour, shall give a light equal to the light of 12 sperm candles of six in the pound, burning 120 grains per hour; and that the gas so supplied shall be free from ammonia, bisulphide of carbon, and sulphuretted hydrogen, or other deteriorating agents. That there shall be maintained an uniform pressure on the service pipe, of not less than lO-lOths. That the price of Newcastle coal gas, per 1,000 cubic feet, shall not exceed 4s. 6d. That each Yestry (or one or more Vestries or District Board or Boards may combine for the purpose) shall appoint a Chemical Examiner, who shall, as often as may be necessary during the week, examine the quality and pressure of the gas so supplied, and shall present a Monthly Report to the "Vestry or Vestries or Board or Boards, stating the number of examinations made during the period, and the quality and pressure of the gas so supplied. That the several Companies, if requested by the consumers, shall supply fit and proper meters, at a rent charge not exceeding 10 per cent, of the value of the meter supplied. That the Vestry or Board shall appoint one or more Officers to examine and report upon the due working of the public and private meters in the Parish or District. That as the supply of gas is a simple debt between the supplier and the consumer, the Company shall be bound to supply an incoming tenant, without let or hindrance of any kind whatever, notwithstanding that the former 58 tenant may be indebted to the Company, and shall also be bound to supply Parishes or District Boards requiring a supply for the public lights. That it shall not be lawful for any Gas Company to charge for the public lamps a higher price per 1,000 feet of gas consumed than the lowest price charged to any private consumer; and if any dispute shall arise between the Gas Company and any Yestry or District Board as to price to be charged for the public street lamps, the question in dispute shall be referred to arbitration, the decision of the arbitrator to be final and binding on all the parties. That notwithstanding the previous limitation of price, any Company supplying gas equal to 18 sperm candles, burning 120 grains per hour, may demand a price not exceeding 6s. per 1,000 cubic feet, for such lastmentioned gas. That whenever any Vestry, or District Board, shall require any Company to supply any portion of their Parish or District within the limits of the Company's Act, such Company shall be bound to lay down mains and pipes for the supply of such District, provided the Vestry or District Board shall place and light public lamps at intervals not exceeding 100 yards along the roads or streets through which such mains are required to be laid. That power be granted to Vestries and District Boards to purchase by arrangement, mains and works of any Gas Company, or to erect any works for the purpose of lighting either public or private lights. That an enactment, similar to section 17 of the 15th and 16th Vict., cap. 84, "The Metropolis Water Supply Act, 1852," be imposed on the Companies, to oblige them to keep a map of their mains and pipes, for the inspection of all persons interested. RESOLUTIONS PASSED BY THE BOARD IN REFERENCE TO THE METROPOLITAN MAIN DRAINAGE QUESTION, FORMATION OF PARKS, AND OTHER EXTENSIVE WORKS OF METROPOLITAN IMPROVEMENT. That this Board have watched with great satisfaction the proceedings of the Metropolitan Board of Works in resisting the efforts which have been made to impose upon the Metropolis the cost of extending the Main Intercepting Sewerage Works to Sea Reach. That this Board entertain a deep sense of the injustice of the cost, not only of the main intercepting sewerage works, but also of the formation of parks and places of recreation, and the widening of streets, and other works for the improvement of the Metropolis, being levied exclusively upon the Metropolitan area, as defined by the Metropolis Local Management Act, and consider that such works, being of a national character, their cost should be defrayed out of national resources. That this Board are of opinion that whatever proportion of the cost of such works be contributed by the Metropolis, such contribution should not be levied by a sewer rate, to which owners of landed and house property are alone chargeable. That this Board are of opinion that the Port Dues, the Coal Tax, the Hackney Carriage Duties, and any other similar Civic or Imperial charges 59 on the trade or traffic of London, should be placed at the disposal of the Metropolitan Board for the improvement of the Metropolis. Resolved that Copies of the above Resolutions be forwarded to the Metropolitan Board of Works, and all Metropolitan Vestries and District Boards. ABSTRACT OF THE SUGGESTIONS OF THE BOARD FOR THE AMENDMENT OF THE METROPOLIS LOCAL MANAGEMENT ACT. 1.—That the poll which, under section 17 and 18, must be taken for both Vestrymen and Auditors, whether each office be contested or not, may be taken for either as may be desired. 2.—That the Chairman of the Vestry or Board may be elected annually, or for any other period, and not necessarily at every meeting, as required by section 41. 3.—That the formalities to be observed for the revocation of any resolution of a Vestry or District Board, may be determined by each Vestry and District Board, instead of being prescribed by the Act as at present under section 57. 4.—That Committees may be authorised to deal exclusively with any matters delegated to them without the previous approval of the Vestry or Board appointing them—a power which it is very questionable whether they have under section 58. 5.—That any Private or Joint Stock Bank may be appointed as the Treasurer of any Vestry or District Board, with power for them to dispense with any security for the performance of the office—an appointment and power, although frequently exercised, probably not contemplated under sections 62 and 65. 6.—That any sewers authorised under see. 69 may be so made, repaired, and maintained by any Vestry or District Board, in any parish or place other than the Parish, District, or place of such Vestry or Board, and whether the same be within the Metropolitan area or not. 7.—That the compensation contemplated by sec. 69, for damage done in constructing sowers, should be limited to such damage as may be dono during and in the construction of the sewer, and not in respect of any easement or right through the land. 8.—That the Vestry or Boards may determine whether the expense of connecting house drains with any substituted sewers (contemplated by sec. 69), shall be borne by themselves or by the owners of the property to be connected with such sewerage. 9.—That in all cases (as under sees. 73, 74, 76, 85, &c.), where Vestries and District Boards are empowered to require the construction of any works, and, in default thereof by the proper party, to execute such works themselves, at the cost of the owner or occupier; they may (if they think fit) summon the defaulter for a penalty, as under section 111. 10.—That the Surveyor of any Vestry or District Board may make any order or requisition in reference to any building, of which notice shall be given (under section 76) subject to the approval of the Vestry or District 60 Board, and also by notice, in writing, may require that any such building shall not be commenced until the then next general meeting of such Vestry or District Board, so that such meeting be held within 15 days after such notice of an intention to build. 11.—That section 77 be extended to drains made into any Sewer of any other size than that directed by the Board, and not merely to such as are of a larger size. 12.—That section 80 be extended to Sewers built, or to be built, under similar circumstances, since the 1st January, 1856. 13.—That section 92 be expressly extended to any expenses of Yestries, such as salaries, &c. 14.—That surplus lands at the sides of roads be specially vested in Vestries and District Boards, in addition to the general transfer of property, under section 96. 15.—That sections 99 and 100 be extended to courts, &c., whether thoroughfares or not; and that the words " public place" in such sections mean any place where any person has a right to go, whether for passing on elsewhere, or to attend any dwelling in such place, or for any other purpose. 16.—That section 105 be extended to any general repairs of any private roads, or numbers of roads forming an estate or building plot, and that the words " new streets" mean any road not dedicated and taken by the Vestry or District Board. 17.—That the following words in the 106th section be omitted, "unless such notice in writing be also given to all persons interested in such street or." 18.—That Vestries and District Boards may require main pipes to be laid in any part of any roads, whether at the sides, in the footways, or otherwise, as they may direct; some Gas Companies having contended that such power is not given under section 110. 19.—That, in addition to the power given by section 111, Vestries and District Boards may have the alternative power of reinstating the roads and charging the expense incurred, as in case of drainage works under section 81, and others. 20.—That the licenses for slaughter-houses, which are now necessary under the 30th section of the Metropolitan Market Act, 1851, in places within the Metropolitan Police District, as originally constituted and defined by the Act of the 10th Geo. IV., cap. 44, should be required throughout the Metropolitan area, and the notices of applications for such licenses be given to Vestries and District Boards as required under section 131, with reference to the slaughter-houses now within the Market Act. 21.—That nothing contained in the 150tli section shall be held to qualify the powers contained in the 69th section, for making sewers through any land, &c., on payment of compensation for the damage done thereby. 22.—That section 154 be extended to surplus land at the sides of roads. 23.—That in all cases where any work is done specially for the benefit of any particular locality, under section 159, the Vestry or Board may make a rate, by way of improvement rate, without the intervention of Overseers. 24.—That any precepts issued under section 161 may be made for any 61 sum payable by instalments, at different periods or otherwise, which has been held to be, under the present section. 25.—That land should be rated to lighting rates at only one-fourth of the amount at which houses and other property are rated, as with respect to sewerage expenses, and so whether the same be situate in a parish in which the Act of 3rd and 4th William TV., cap. 90, was in force or not at the time of passing the Metropolis Act, and that it be made clear what is intended by the words " three times greater." 26.—That the principle of the 181st section be adhered to, with reference to the debts of the late Commissioners of Sewers, but that where it shall appear to the Metropolitan Board that any such debt or liability shall have been incurred in respect of sewerage works, which are available for any larger area than the district on which such debt was chargeable at the time of the expiration of the Metropolitan Sewers Act, the Metropolitan Board shall have power to charge any such extended area (being within the limita of the Metropolis) with the payment of such proportion of so much of such debt as shall then remain unpaid as the said Board may think fit. 27.—That the order of the Metropolitan Board shall, under section 183, be sufficient sanction for a loan, and a certified extract from the minutes of the Board be sufficient evidence of such order. 28.—That sections 11 and 194 be so qualified that a greater number of Auditors should never be appointed for a parish not divided into wards than for one which is so divided, such parishes being both in the same district. 29.—That in the power to Auditors, contained in section 195, to allow and disallow the accounts and items therein, no question shall be raised as to whether any particular item is or not properly incurred " in the execution of the Act." 30.—That the powers of the Auditors, under section 197, should be more clearly defined, and extend to parish officers accounts' (other than Poor Law), which would appear, from the last sentence of the 8th section, not to be comprised in their powers. 31.—That section 199 may be extended to all charities under the controul or in the gift of a rector, churchwardens, or other parish officers. 32.—That in every case in which the amount of costs is to be ascertained, under section 225, it should not be competent to the Justices to enquire into any other question than whether the amount sought to be recovered has been expended by the Vestry or District Board, and so expended in the bona fide execution of the Act. 33.—That the Act of 20 and 21 Victoria, chapter 43, be extended to all cases in which the power of appeal to Quarter Sessions is given under this section. 34.—That it shall be lawful for the Vestries and District Boards to apportion the expense of the drainage of private premises between the tenant, leaseholder, and freeholder thereof, according to the nature and extent of the interest therein. 35.—That so much of the Parish of Beckenham as lies between Lewisham and Penge, and on the north-west side of the Pool River, be included in the Lewisham District, and for all the purposes of the Act, be considered as part of the Hamlet of Penge. 62 REPORTS of THE MEDICAL OFFICER OF HEALTH, to THE BOARD OF WORKS FOR THE LEWISHAM DISTRICT, FROM JANUARY, 1857, TO MARCH, 1858, (inclusive). JANUARY. DISTRICTS. Males. BIRTHS Females. Total. Males. DEATHS. Females. Total. 8 5 13 3 4 7 Lewisham 4 7 11 4 4 8 Union "Workhouse — — — 1 2 3 Penge 2 4 6 — 2 2 N. S. Industrial School — — — 2 — 2 Sydenham 9 9 18 3 3 6 Total 23 25 48 13 - 15 28 Gentlemen, The returns of mortality for the month ending the 24th day of January last, exhibit a favourable average as compared with the corresponding month of last year, the deaths registered being 28, whereas in January, 1856, they were 30 in number. The changeable weather has been particularly unfavourable to the health of the aged. The deaths of 10 old persons are registered, of whom 4 were over 60 years of age, 3 over 70, and 1 over 80 years of age. Chest diseases, and diseases of the zymotic class, have been more prevalent during the last two weeks, but no death has occurred from the latter class of disease; the former has been fatal to 10 persons. The ventilation of the infirmary at the North Surrey Industrial Schools is in progress, and great benefit will be derived from this important measure. Charcoal disinfecting trays are also in course of construction, to neutralize noxious effluvia. I have, however, still to complain of the undrained land at the back of the School, which is now a source of dampness and cold, and in spring and early summer, when the sun's rays have gained more power, must be a source of ill health from the malaria produced by decomposing vegetation. I have to call your attention to the following list of nuisances, many of them injurious to the health, which require your order for their removal; and also to the fact, that many easily removable nuisances, reported from time to time during the past year, are still unaltered. The smoke evolved from ballast burning, upon the site of the new chapel, at Forest Hill, in close contiguity to dwelling houses, has been a source of great annoyance, and, in one instance, has certainly hastened the death of an aged gentleman, who was suffering from bronchitis. Offensive privies at back of Fallwell's, draper and chemist, Lower Sydenham. Pigs kept by two bakers, Cowley and another, and Ashly's, since removed. Offensive sewage in ditch running from Shaw's Cottages, &c., Perry Rise. Dirty and dangerous road at back of Forester Inn. There are 19 houses in this locality. 63 Gas refuse running into Pool stream, at Lower Sydenham, from gas works: before reported as a serious source of contamination of the Ravensbourne river. Meteorological tables for the month are appended as usual. METEOROLOGICAL OBSERVATIONS. Week ending. Weight of air. Barometer corrected. Mean inches. Temperature of Air. Thermometer. Prevailing winds. Rainy days. Amount of rain in inches. Highest. Lowest. Mean of daily readings. Jan. 3. 29.746 52° 7 18° 5 40°6 W. S. W. 3 0.23 10. 29.799 49 2 28 1 36 8 N. E.&S.W. 6 1.20 17. 29.636 45 0 26 0 36 5 Variable 3 0.39 24. 29.547 49 8 28 4 36 1 W. 5 0.41 I have the honour to be, Gentlemen, Your obedient Servant, F. E. WILKINSON, Medical Officer of Health. Sydenham, January, 1857. FEBRUARY. DISTRICTS. Males. BIRTHS. Females. Total. Males. DEATHS Females. Total. Blackheath 3 5 8 2 4 6 Lewisham 12 11 23 3 4 7 Union Workhouse — — — 1 3 4 St. George's Infant Poorhouse — — — — 1 1 Penge 2 4 6 1 1 2 N. S. Industrial School . — — — — — — Sydenham 7 17 24 9 5 14 Total 24 37 61 16 17 33 Gentlemen, The deaths registered during the four weeks ending on the 21st February, 1857, were 33. The mortality for the corresponding month of last year amounted to 23 only. This difference is caused by the increased comparative mortality for the month in Sydenham, 14 deaths having taken place against 3 in 1856 (February), the principal causes being diseases of the breathing organs; of these 11 persons have died from inflammation and other diseases of the lungs, 3 of them being from pulmonary consumption. One death is registered from typhus fever, in West Kent Park, Sydenham. The absence of proper drainage in this locality requires prompt attention. The most favourable symptom of the health of the district is, however, the absence of deaths from preventible causes. With the above exception, no death has occurred from zymotic disease, and very little disorder of the kind exists throughout the district. The following list of localities demanding attention for their sanitary welfare, I beg to recommend to your attention:— Blackheath.—The dirty state of Loat's Pits is reported by Mr. Burroughs, Registrar of the district, and requires attention. A horse infirmary is erected in this neighbourhood, close to the backs of some of the houses, and is in my opinion very objectionable, especially as it stands some feet above the adjoining houses, and has no drainage. 64 An offensive drain from the corner opposite the Duke's Dead Inn, Little Blackheath Hill, from stables, &c., runs along the public road. The public privies adjoining Pound's Mews require attention. Grote's Buildings are now drained into the ditch at the back of the adjoining houses, and are not connected with the sewer. Phoenix Square and Dartmouth Passage are still dirty and unpaved. Butcher's yard, at the corner of the above (Dartmouth Passage), has an accumulation of manure. Osborne Place has no drainage. Paragon Mews. One house adjoining Reeves's stables is most offensive. The privy is under the staircase. Two cases of fever have occurred in this house. Camden Cottages. Cesspool and want of drainage. Bath Place is dirty and undrained; a large cesspool here is running over. Lewisham.—No drainage from Leathersellers' Almshouses. Cross Street, Hanover Street, Poplar Row, and Waterloo Place are without Bupply of water to closets. Penge.—Offensive drainage into ditches along the road from the Anerley Station to the Crystal Palace (vide letter from Rev. Mr. Worrlledge). Stagnant water begins at the corner of the Oakfield Road (vide letter). Drainage into the water forming a portion of the old canal near Anerley Station. Sydenham.—Duffin's, Jauncey's, and adjacent houses are not drained into the sewer. The soil and refuse still takes its old course into Perry Yale ditches, and is most poisonous and offensive. (Dartmouth Road.) Dirty privy and cesspool, much complained of, at the back of Baker's, butcher (late Rudhoram's). The houses in Dartmouth Row require draining into the sewer adjacent. The soil and sewage flow over the adjoining land. Dirty and offensive privy at the back of Mr. Perry's, butcher, High Street. Most offensive ditches, containing a great quantity of sewage, still exist for some hundreds of yards by the side of Brockley Lane, West Kent Park. Ponds of filthy sewage, containing drainage from 40 houses in Wells Road, and holding many thousand gallons, lie at the backs of the houses. The drainage into the ditches by the side of the public road is most offensive in this locality, Wells Road. The state of the roads leading through Hanover Street and Crystal Crescent, and Skudder"s and Willow Road, reported in January, 1856. METEOROLOGICAL OBSERVATIONS. Week ending Saturday. Weight of air. Barometer corrected. Mean inches. Temperature of Air. Thermometer. Prevailing winds. Rainy days. Amount of rain in inches. Highest. Lowest. Mean of daily readings. Jan. 31. 29-602 36° 0 27° 1 31° 2 N. E. & S. W. 4 0.44 Feb. 7. 29-762 38 5 27 2 32 3 N. E. & S. W. 1 0.08 14. 29-837 47 6 35 0 40 9 s. w. 2 0.09 21. 29-988 51 5 34 3 42 5 S. & s. w. 0 o.oo I have the honour to be, Gentlemen, Your obedient Servant, F. E. WILKINSON, Medical Officer of Health. Sydenham, 26th February, 1867. 65 MARCH. DISTRICTS. Males. BIRTHS. Females. Total. Males. DEATHS Females. Total. Blackheath — — — — 3 3 Lewisham 4 14 18 3 4 7 Union Workhouse — — — 1 — 1 Tenge 3 4 7 — — — Anerley Industrial School — — — 4 — 4 Sydenham 14 10 24 3 3 6 Total . 21 28 49 11 10 21 Gentlemen, The returns of mortality exhibit a favourable state of the public health, 21 deaths having been registered for the entire district, against 23 in the corresponding month of last year. Hooping cough and scarlatina are becoming somewhat prevalent; one death has occurred from the first-named disease, and two deaths from the latter: of these, however, one case was brought from Clapham. Four deaths have occurred in the North Surrey Industrial School, one phthisis, two diarrhoea, and one sloughing of the mouth and gums. The noxious smell from the Sydenham Gas Works having been much complained of, I have paid several visits for the purpose of ascertaining the cause, and if possible applying proper remedies. In the process of preparing carburetted hydrogen, or coal gas, for illuminating purposes, other offensive gases are formed, which it is necessarry to remove, on account of their offensive and incombustible nature. For this purpose certain processes are performed, and at the Sydenham works the gas is passed through purifiers containing strata of slaked lime and oxide of iron. This lime and oxide requires at intervals to be removed, for the purpose of placing fresh material, and this changing process occasions a most disagreeable and noxious effluvium, and as it requires frequently to be done, the plan I should suggest would be that adopted at some of the metropolitan works, viz., the placing the purifiers in a covered building provided with a chimney, which would convey the disagreeable odour out of reach. The residue after making gas consists of tar, coke, and ammoniacal liquor. This latter, which is very offensive, is, at most of the Metropolitan works, conveyed away and sold to manufacturing chemists, but at the Sydenham works is made upon the premises into sulphate of ammonia. During part of this process (the mixing the sulphuric acid with the ammoniacal liquor), a most offensive and poisonous gas is given off (sulphuretted hydrogen), in consequence of which, at Sydenham, this mixing has lately been done in a luted case, and the offensive gas passed through the lime purifiers. The whole of this process should also be done in a building provided with a shaft, and for the sake of the Company as well as consumers, it would in my opinion be better (as sometimes adopted) to pass the offensive gas through the furnaces, where it would become decomposed. I append, as usual, a list of places demanding attention for their sanitary improvement, and would wish particularly to call attention to the state of the land at the back of Dartmouth Row, Sydenham, which is covered with sewage. I am afraid, unless this is attended to before the hot weather sets in, it will be my painful duty to inform you of the increased mortality of the neighbourhood. Perry Vale and the neighbourhood also receive no benefit from the new sewer, as almost all the offensive sewage takes its old course. Blackheath.—Bath Place, Paragon Mews, Osborne Place, Camden Cottages, Russell Square. Lewisham.—Leathersellers' Almshouses, Botany Bay. "Want of water supply Rushey Green, Homesdale, &c. Penge.—Drainage from Crystal Palace, general drainage of Penge running into stream, offensive ditch at backs of houses in main street. F 66 Sydenham.—Wells Road, Kirkdale, back of Dartmouth Row and Place, Perry Vale, Mr. Keats, Forest Hill, Mr. Croxon's, Eliza Place, drains in Wells Road, and pigs kept in several places round that'locality, a large drain opening on railway, 300 yards from end of new sewer, and running into Perry Vale and stream. METEOROLOGICAL OBSERVATIONS. Week ending. Weight of air. Barometer corrected. Mean inches. Temperature of Air. Thermometer. Prevailing winds. Rainy days. Amount of rain in inches. Highest. Lowest. Mean of daily readings. Feb. 28. 30-214 51° 0 33° 3 41°2 S. E. & N. E. 0 0.00 Mar. 7. 30122 55 0 32 3 43 1 Variable 0 0.00 14. 29-607 40 0 28 0 37 2 N.W.&S.W. 3 0.33 21. 29-719 66 2 33 0 45 1 S.W.&S.E. 2 0.33 I have the honour to be, Gentlemen, Your obedient Servant, F. E. WILKINSON, Medical officer of Health. 26th March, 1857. APRIL. DISTRICTS. Males. BIRTHS Females. Total. Males. DEATHS. Females. Total. Blackheath 5 4 9 1 5 6 Lewisham 17 13 30 3 2 5 Union Workhouse — — — — 4 4 Penge 5 4 9 4 — 4 N. S. Industrial School . — — — — — Sydenham 20 7 27 6 5 11 Tota 47 28 75 14 16 30 Sydenham, 30th April, 1857. Gentlemen, Since Saturday, the 21st of March, 75 births and 30 deaths have been registered in the district. Epidemic diseases have been much more prevalent than for the last several months; of these hooping cough is very common, and one death is registered from this cause Cases of low fever exist also in some of the bad localities of the district, to which I have so often directed your attention. One death is registered from severe scarlet fever, in Dartmouth Passage, Blackheath, but this disease is not very prevalent. Since the return of cold weather, chest diseases have been more prevalent, and eight deaths are recorded from this cause, two of which were phthisis. I have, in several instances, where complaints have been made to me of the existence of nuisances, written a private note to the landlord, requesting their immediate removal, to prevent the formal interference of the Board of Works; and I am happy to say that this plan has been attended with a great amount of success. But if official notices of the Board are not attended to, I should suggest that the offending parties should be immediately summoned before a magistrate, by the Inspector of Nuisances (Metropolitan 67 Local Management Act, sec. CXXXIII.), (Nuisances Removal Act, sees. XII., XIII., XIV.), when do doubt an order would be made, and a penalty attached if not attended to at once. In consequence of a report that fever was endemic at Blackheath in a passage and court (Dartmouth Passage and Phoenix Square), I visited the locality, and found some children suffering from low fever, and that one child had died from severe scarlet fever. I have so often and urgently brought this place, with others of the same class, before the notice of the Board, that all the members must be well aware of the state of the neighbourhood. I, however, think it right to append the result of a house to house visitation which I have made in Phoenix Square, Dartmouth Passage, Camden Passage, Camden Row, Garden Cottages, &c., Blackheath, and at the same time to state my conviction that something must be done to remedy evils of this description, to avert the occurrence of disease and death. The sewer (quite useless to some of these localities) lies about 200 feet below Camden Row, and a pipe laid up this distance would well drain this part. In Lewisham several nuisances exist dangerous to health, and some have indeed existed, not only for the last year or two, but are not much improved since visited and reported upon by a Committee appointed by the Churchwardens in 1853. The Esplanade houses (Mr. Furnell's) are in a filthy state. Mr. Russell's property, situated at Loampit Vale, is also in a very bad state. Water is required to be laid on in Hanover Street, Cross Street, and their heighbourhoods generally. This is necessary where closets are used, in any soil, but more necessary still in porous strata. Much inconvenience has been occasioned at the Union Workhouse, Lewisham, by th'e stoppage of the drain. I have been informed by your Surveyor that this has occurred from portions of oakum, which had gradually accumulated; and from the pipes not having been cemented together (as recommended by me in my first report, dated J an , 1856), the reflux drainage oozed through the joints, and having percolated through the porous soil, contaminated the water of the well which supplies the inmates. It will be some time before this evil will be got rid of, although the drain is now put right. The house occupied by Mr. Downs's library, near the "Workhouse, has the water from the pump very offensive, it is supposed from the same cause. Illness in the house is also attributed to this by the Medical attendant. I must congratulate the Board that part of the ditch (the old water-course) through Lewisham, is being filled in (a course which I recommended in a report some months ago, during the construction of the Stanstead Lane sewer). It would be well if this were continued through the entire Village. The portion of this ditch opposite the Leathersellers' Almshouses is very dirty, from the fact that these buildings are not drained, and that the ditch is used for the purpose of throwing slops and other filth in. In Sydenham the drains from Verey*8 Cottages run into an offensive ditch by the side of the road. The state of the land at the back of Dartmouth Row is still filthy, and with a few feet of pipe might be opened into the sewer, which is here and in some other parts worse than useless, as in its construction old drains have been blocked up, and the sewage finds its way back into the houses, clay soil (in one instance it ran into the cellars of a house), or oozes out over the neighbouring land. The drains in Kirkdale, Wells Road, and the accumulation of liquid filth here, are still as poisonous and offensive as usual. I am, Gentlemen, Your obedient Servant, F. E. WILKINSON. Medical Officer of Health. Tuesday, 21st April, 1857. PJumix Square or Court. Receiver in centre of court for drainage. Drain blocked up. Two closets to eight houses. Water on for two hours a day. No cisterns. No water on when examined. Water is usually on for two hours per day. Kent Water Works. All houses with four rooms. F 2 68 No. 1. Mr. and Mrs. Whittle and five children. No bark premises. No window at back of house. No water now. No cistern. Water turned on daily for two hours. One child ill with abscesses. No. 2. Mr. and Mrs. Stone and two children. Same as above. No. 3. Mr. and Mrs. Iberan and three children. Same as No. 1. No. 4. Mr. and Mrs. Cheeseman and two children. Same as No. 1. Other side. No. 5. Mr. and Mrs. Asker and three children. Small back yard very dirty. Two children ill with fever. (Attended by Mr. Carr). No. 6. Mr. and Mrs. Onley and two children and one nurse child. Same as No. 5. No. 7. Miss Noble, a sister, and one lodger. Same as No. 5. No. 8. Mr. and Mrs. Thomas Cheeseman and six children. Same as No. 5. In Dartmouth Passage or Tuns Passage. Butcher's at corner of passage Dungheap in this yard, as well as in Tuns Court. Mr. and Mrs. Marchant. Five children at home. One dead of scarlatina. No cistern. Yard wet and dirty from water overflowing. Mr. Seager landlord, 18, Montpelier Row. Mr. Dandridge very well off for drainage. Camden Cottages, Camden Place, and Camden Row. Sewer about 200 feet off. Road with quantity of vegetable refuse, &c., thrown about. Pump in road contains offensive water. Sink under pump used for emptying slops. Nos. 5 and 6, Camden Cottages. Mr. and Mrs. Croucher; an afflicted husband ; nine children. Privy and cesspool want emptying. Cesspool emptied two years ago. Offensive smell; also affecting the houses in Camden Passage. No drainage. Mr. Russell landlord, Shooters' Hill Road. Two houses at bottom of square. •Mrs. Payne (widow) and daughter. Privy, &c., same as above. Pump-water offensive and cannot be used. Water laid on by tenant lately. Mr. Russell landlord. Garden Cottage. Mr. Davis and one child. Wife lately dead of phthisis. No drainage ; obliged to carry everything up to the pump sink in the road, which is often stopped up, when obliged to throw everything on the road. Privy nearly full; emptied three years ago. No water supply, except to get it from pump, where it is very bad, and obliged to borrow it to make tea. Landlord, Mr. Russell. Garden Cottage. John Ball and wife and one child. A cesspool made in garden by himself Privy quite full; requires emptying. Pigs kept here. No drainage. No water supply. Camden Cottages or Square. Mr. and Mrs. Read and five children. No drainage. No way of removing slops or refuse of any description without carrying through house. Privy very offensive; emptied two years ago. Cesspool full and overflowing. Privy in next yard, at Couldery's, butcher, very offensive, and manure, &c., in the same yard, when moved very offensive. Mrs. Denny (widow) and three children. Privies full; cesspool overflowing; emptied 4 or 5 years ago. Pump well unfit for use. No water laid on. Very great complaints. Mr. Russell landlord. Miss High (seven living in house). Privy very offensive; emptied four years ago. No water supply. Pump unfit for use. The dirty water from 20 or 30 houses thrown down in sink to pump. Mr. Jeek, three in family. Privy requires emptying. Yard very confined. Landlord, Mr. Russell. Mr. and Mrs. Gerrard and two children. No drainage. Privy quite full; requires emptying. No water supply except from offensive common pump. Mr. Russell landlord. Camden Row. Mr. and Mrs. Cutts and two children. No water. Privy very offensive, and supplies four houses. Pump in yard without water. Small sink under pump, which receives all the slops, &c. Landlord, Mr. Brown. Agent, Mr. Sanderson, Greenwich. Mr. and Mrs. Corderoy and five children. Mr. and Mrs. Ball. Mr. and Mrs. Yivash. Drain at back of these houses most filthy. Cesspool has not been emptied for fourteen years. Camden Passage. Widow Coppin. No window, except into above-named yard of four houses in Camden Row. Pump at top very offensive. No water. 69 Widow Cuthbert and one daughter. No water. Mrs. Wise. No water. Large cesspool in yard at bottom. Privy quite full (for the three houses). Landlord, Mr. Brown. Agent, Mr. Sanderson, Auctioneer, Greenwich. METEOROLOGICAL OBSERVATIONS. Week ending. Weight of air. Barometer corrected. Mean inches. Temperature of Air. Thermometer. Prevailing winds. Rainy days. Amount of rain in inches. Highest. Lowest. Mean of daily readings. Mar. 28. 29.625 54° 0 27°7 39° 6 S. E. 2 0.07 April 4. 29.334 57 4 40 1 47 8 S. E. 7 0.45 11. 29.519 65 0 38 2 49 9 Variable 6 0.53 18. 29.453 46 0 31 4 43 4 Variable 6 0.38 MAY. DISTRICTS. Males. BIRTHS. Females. Total. Males. DEATHS Females. Total. Blackheath 5 2 7 3 3 Lewisham Village 15 5 20 7 5 12 Union Workhouse — — — 2 2 4 St. George's Infant Poorhouse — — — — — — Penge 2 4 6 — 1 1 N. S. Industrial School . — — — — 1 1. Sydenham 13 14 27 4 1 5 Total 35 25 60 13 13 26 Gentlemen, During the month ending Saturday, the 23rd of May, the births of 60 children were registered in the district. During the same period 26 deaths are recorded. The state of health of the district, as derived from the tables of mortality, thus appears favourable, as during the corresponding month of last year 35 deaths were registered, showing a diminution of nine. The mean temperature of the air for the last fortnight has been 14 degrees higher than for the four weeks preceding. Six deaths have occurred from epidemic disease. In Lewisham.—One measles, Hanover Street. (No water supply). One diarrhoea, Hither Green. (No drainage). In Sydenham.—One hooping cough, Forest Hill Terrace. (Marshy and undrained road). One fever, Raglan Street. (In close proximity to the offensive mass of sewage exuding from Dartmouth Row). In Blackheath.—One fever, Regent Street. (A locality several times reported). In Penge.—One dysentery, North Surrey Schools. (Undrained land at back). Chicken-pox has been very prevalent, principally in the neighbourhood of West Kent Park, Sydenham. Hooping cough, although on the decline, is still prevalent. Several nuisances I have to bring before your notice, some of them suffered to continue from houses being situated beyond the distance which enables the local authorities to compel entry. In any case of this kind, when the probable expense would be of the most trivial description, I should recommend pipes to be laid, so as to bring the houses within range, or with all the prospective advantages of a sewer, the public generally will not reap so great an advantage as they are entitled to. 70 I nave paid careful attention to the alleged contamination of the ditches emptying into the Poole river by the Sydenham Gas Company, and there is, I think, no doubt about the fact. It appears to me to be principally caused by leakage of the water from the gasometer, perhaps with tar from the tar reservoir, and is of a black appearance and offensive odour. Water also occasionally runs from the culvert under the works, with which I was informed they had no communication. A privy for the use of the workpeople is also situated near the open ditch, and is in a very disgusting state. A proper closet should be built, opening into the sewer. The refuse lime from the gas purifiers is also allowed to lie in heaps about the yard. In my opinion this should be removed. Since my last report, I am happy to say that a part of the nuisance in the Wells Road has been removed, the ditches on either side of the road having been piped. But there still exist (as before reported), large pools of most offensive filth running out of the drains and ditches above. This should be pumped into the adjacent ditch, and the ingress stopped up, or a pipe continued through the length of the drain, chloride of lime being sprinkled over the exposed surface, and if possible the pool filled in. It is most offensive for a long distance round, and very prejudicial to health. I append a complaint, signed by several inhabitants, and forwarded to me. The drainage of Dartmouth Row into the sewer is in progress, but unless the adjacent houses are brought within range of the sewer, the state of the place will be only partially improved. The offensive ditches at Kirk dale and Peak Hill require to be covered in. A privy, a most offensive nuisance to several houses round, is situated at the back of Mr. Baker's, butcher, Forest Hill. This requires removing, and a proper closet should be substituted, and opened into the sewer below. Pigs are kept in a filthy yard at Mr. Hay don's, butcher, abutting upon two or three houses in the Street at Sydenham. By the " Police Act," pigs are positively forbidden to be kept near dwelling houses, and by the " Nuisances Removal Act," no animal is allowed to be kept as a nuisance. The greater part of the drainage of Forest Hill (with the drainage of Dartmouth Park and Park Road Terrace), is conveyed in a sewer (constructed some years back, at the expense of the inhabitants of Forest Hill, and rendered necessary by the Brighton Railway Company stopping, very properly, the entry of sewage into the old canal), to a brickfield adjoining Park Road Terrace. Part of this is used for the purpose of making bricks, and the remainder, after standing about in pools and ditches of the most offensive description, runs on in large quantities towards Lewisham. This is most offensive and prejudicial to health, and is situated about 100 yards from the end of the sewer in Stanstead Lane. It would be to the interest of the owners of property in this neighbourhood to assist the Board of Works in connecting the two sewers together. Blackheath.—I have several times reported the state of the Mews at the back of Montpelier Row, Blackheath. Nothing has been done to remedy this. Disease has at times been very prevalent there. I may particularize one house, before named, in a most offensive state, in which two deaths have occurred from fever. The drainage of Bath Place and Osborne Place also require attention. A pipe sewer might, at no great expense, be constructed from the Heath end of Paragon Mews, through Bath Place and Osborne Place, into the sewer, thus taking the drainage of several bad localities, as well as that of the adjacent houses. Phoenix Place is still as before reported. Dartmouth Passage is also the same. Camden Place, Camden Row, and Garden Place require water supply, and a pipe to convey the drainage into the sewer parallel with the line of railway. Lewisham —Botany Bay, &c., openly drain into the river near the source of supply for the Kent Water Company. Rushey Green and Hanover Street, Silver Street, &c., wait your order for water supply Sandwell Place is in an unhealthy state, so much so that some families will be obliged to leave their houses. This place might be easily drained into the sewer with a pipe. The urinals at the Hare and Billet, and other public-houses in Lewisham, are offensive, and should have better protection and water supply. Penge.—The drainage from the south end of the Crystal Palace, and part of Norwood Hill, drains into the ornamental pond at the Anerley Gardens (part of the old canal). This is used as a place for healthful recreation, the water being in summer in constant requisition for boating, &c. 71 The water near the Anerley Station is also stagnant, and from its elevation keeps the ground below its level in a damp state. The filthy and offensive drainage through Penge, finding its way into the Poole river and Ravensbourne, might be alleviated by deodorizing with peat charcoal, changed at proper intervals. I have several times before mentioned a filthy ditch at the backs of the houses in Penge Street. The time of year has almost too far gone now to empty this with safety; but it might be emptied, the contents being conveyed away in carts, and chloride of lime being carefully used at the time. METEOROLOGICAL OBSERVATIONS. Week ending. Weight of air. Barometer corrected. Mean inches. Temperature of Air. Thermometer. Prevailing winds. Rainy days. Amount of rain in inches. Highest. Lowest. Mean of daily readings. Apl. 25. 29.882 69° 0 28° 2 46° 6 S. W. & N. E. 2 0.32 May 2. 29.912 59 0 29 1 41 5 N. E. 0 0.00 9. 29.962 65 3 31 5 44 8 N. E. 0 0.00 16. 29.808 80 2 39 1 57 6 Variable 2 0.08 23. 29.706 79 0 45 0 58 9 S. W. 2 0.35 I have the honour to remain, Gentlemen, Your obedient Servant, F. E. WILKINSON, Medical Officer of Health. Sydenham, 28th May, 1857. JUNE. DISTRICTS. Males. BIRTHS Females. Total. Males. DEATHS Females. Total. Blackheath 7 4 11 3 3 6 Lewisham Village 6 5 11 4 3 7 Union Workhouse — — — 2 1 3 St. George's Infant Poorhouse — — — — — — Penge — 1 1 1 — 1 N. S. Industrial School . — — — — — — Sydenham 6 8 14 2 2 4 Total 19 18 37 12 9 21 Gentlemen, The state of the public health, as indicated by the Registrar's returns of mortality, bears a favourable aspect, 21 deaths having been registered during the month ending upon the 20th of June, a number below the average, and much below the return of the corresponding month of last year, when 28 deaths were recorded. Perfect information as to the health of the district is, however, not to be derived from these sources, as many diseases may and do exist, which have no fatal termination. The births of 37 children were registered, against 58 in June, 1856 A death is registered at Montpelier Row, Blackheath, from general debility and petechial spots. Drainage is urgently required in this locality. 72 A death from acute rheumatism is registered at Cross Street, Lewisham, a locality also before named. A case of typhoid fever has occurred at the North Surrey Industrial School, but is now convalescent. Chicken-pox is also still prevalent in "West Kent Park, Sydenham. (Not yet drained efficiently). Small-pox has broken out in a row of houses on the right side of Ravensbourne Bridge, called Shepherd's Place, and belonging to Mr. Jones, Borough. A case has also occurred in Hanover Street. In Bridge Street one man has died from this disease, after having been sent to the Small-pox Hospital, and three children are suffering from a typhoid type of the same disorder. I have visited the locality, and found the place offensive for some distance round, from most disgusting privies, with no drainage whatever. These privies, I am informed, are partially refilled with water as soon as emptied. The inhabitants here have no water supply other than the river in front, which is here always in a dirty state, from the constant passage of horses and vehicles through it. It was necessary that some prompt measures should be adopted to remove these nuisances, and I hope that the proposed plans have had the effect of removing the nuisances dangerous to health, and will stay the spread of the existing disease. Whilst mentioning the above disorder, I may take the opportunity of reminding you of the extreme danger incurred by conveying patients suffering from infectious diseases in the public vehicles, and the importance of the question whether such a means of spreading disease should not be prevented ? It would be well to have a proper invalid conveyance constructed and kept at the workhouse, as there is no doubt that many patients lose their lives from the rough handling and uncomfortable posture required in many vehicles, whilst being conveyed to the public hospitals and asylums in a state of disease. I should wish to attract your attention to the fact that there are several other parts of the district in a state equally dangerous with the one above-mentioned, and that upon the principle that " prevention is better than cure," remedies should be applied as early as possible to remove existing causes of disease. Epidemic disease almost invariably takes its origin in localities of this kind; but its virulence is not necessarily expended there; and when once it commences there is no prejudging the amount of suffering and mortality that may take place, nor the amount of pauperism and expense that may be charged upon the Parish, probably to be avoided entirely by timely and judicious attention and outlay. Some houses at Ladywell, Lewisham, to which I have before directed your attention, are in a most filthy and dangerous state. I have made a house to house visitation there, and find that 14 families residing in houses belonging to Mr. Couldery, and 4 families residing in houses belonging to Mr. Collet, together comprising a population of upwards of 110 persons, are quite without water supply (having been so since the demolition of the Lady Well), and live in a constant atmosphere of disgusting effluvium, from privies and ditches quite full, and in close proximity to the houses. The inhabitants inform me that they are so distressed for water, that they would be willing to dig a well free of charge, if they were supplied with materials for completing the work. The sewer also being close at hand, there appears no reason why these houses should not be efficiently drained, and proper closets constructed, either with the water laid on, or one or more force pumps to supply cisterns. Upwards of 150 inhabitants reside upon the opposite side of the road; many of them are supplied with water from private pumps, but the quantity is limited. The state of things here is superior to that on the other side of the road, but the old privies and house drains require carrying into the sewer close by (they are very dangerous in a porous soil vide First Report J, and then several offensive ditches in the neighbourhood should be filled in. This should have been done when the sewer was constructed. Many of the houses in the main street, Lewisham, are yet undrained; they should be carried into the sewer. Sickness is continually produced from the want of this, as seen by report of Mr. Brown, surgeon, Lewisham. Dr. Corbould also represents the houses in Taylor's Lane (before reported upon), unfit for habitation. Sydenham.—I have found it necessary to apply to the Committee of the New Baptist Chapel, upon the subject of ventilation, as the architect's plans upon this subject were not carried out. This has been attended to. The offensive drainage upon Forest Hill (Camberwell boundary), is removed, a pipe sewer having been put in. 73 The drains and ditches along Perry Yale are still receiving sewage that might be diverted. The accumulation of drainage in the Wells Road is still the same as before. The cottages, dilapidated privies, and offensive drainage at the corner of Taylor's Lane remain the same as when before reported some months back. Penge.—The infirmary at the North Surrey District School is not efficiently constructed for the accommodation of the sick children of the establishment as regards ventilation, nor are its water closets so arranged and constructed as to prevent the spread of effluvium through the building. I have represented these facts to the Board of Management, who have appointed a Committee to consider the subject. The stagnant and offensive water under the dining hall of the school is not so extensive in quantity as at first supposed, and means are now in progress to efficiently carry away this accumulation into the adjacent drain. I should also suggest that deep drains be carried along the Lane at the back of the building, to intercept the land drainage at the back; this might be conveyed across the road into the Anerley water, and trenches migh be cut or pipes laid in the adjacent land to convey the surface water into the drain, Reception wards are also in progress for the accommodation of the new inmates, which will, I hope, prevent infectious disease being introduced into the School. The ornamental water (part of old canal), situated in Anerley Gardens, is in a very filthy state from drainage. A drain might be constructed along the bank and under the railway, which would intercept this and convey it into the sewer upon the Freehold Land Society's Estate. A sewer for Penge is a most important necessity for the place itself, as well as others supplied by the Kent Water Company. METEOROLOGICAL OBSERVATIONS. Week ending. Weight of air. Barometer corrected. Mean inches. Temperature of Air. Thermometer. Prevailing winds. Rainy days. Amount of rain in inches. Highest. Lowest. Mean of daily readings. May 30. 29.597 74° 0 42° 9 56° 9 Variable 1 0.12 Jirne 6. 29.877 82 9 39 3 60 6 S. W. 2 0.23 13. 29.758 70 9 38 9 56 0 S. W. & S. E. 4 0.71 20. 29.882 84 0 38 8 60 3 N. E. 1 0.85 I have the honour to be, Gentlemen, Your obedient Servant, F. E. WILKINSON, Sydenham, 25th June, 1857. Medical Officer of Health. JULY. DISTRICTS. Males. BIRTHS Females, Total. Males. DEATHS Females. Total. Blackheath 4 8 12 2 3 5 Lewisham Village 10 12 22 6 6 12 Union Workhouse . — — — 1 1 2 Penge 5 4 9 1 1 2 Watermen's Asylum —. — — — 1 1 N. S. Industrial School — — — 1 1 2 Sydenham 10 12 22 7 6 13 Total 29 36 65 18 19 37 74 Gentlemen, During the five weeks ending upon the 30th of July, 65 births and 37 deaths have been recorded. The mortality is thus considerably above that of last year, as during the same space of time in 1856, 26 deaths only were registered. The oppressive weather seems to have been more especially prejudicial to the health of the young, as 15 deaths have occurred amongst children under five years of age, besides four under the age of ten. Seven deaths are registered in those between 50 and 60, and five in those above 70 years of age. Seven deaths have taken place from epidemic disease, viz., one in Perry Rise from "bilious fever." (The open drains have been before reported as very offensive). Two in Rushey Green, one from " fever," one from " diarrhoea." (No water is at present supplied here). One, Sydney Arms, "hooping cough." One, West Kent Park, "hooping cough." Cesspools abound here, and although the drains are in, they in most instances take merely cesspool overflow, and several of the houses are in an offensive state. One, Bell Green, " scarlatina." (The inhabitants here are suffering from offensive cesspools, and drainage into ditches). One, Southend, "measles." (No drainage). One, "fever," North Surrey Industrial School. Privy smell still in infirmary. Hooping cough and scarlatina are very prevalent in some parts of the district, especially in those parts which I have brought under your notice as requiring sanitary measures for their improvement. Several cases of typhus fever have occurred in the North Surrey Industrial School, Anerley, and I am sorry to say that there is no separate building for isolating these cases. Further, the ventilation of the infirmary is still incomplete. The drainage of Shepherd's Place, Lewisham, a most offensive spot, and a locality in which I last month reported to you the occurrence of cases of smallpox, has not been drained, merely from the fact that one inhabitant householder disapproved of the plan determined upon by the local authority, and obstructed its execution. The extensive ballast burning upon Mr. Murley's ground, near Forest Hill, has been continued, notwithstanding a notice served upon them to discontinue, last Saturday; the heap has reached a large size, and is almost under the windows of two adjacent houses, and close to many others. It has elicited several remonstrances and complaints, and doubtless the suffocating gases arising from it are a nuisance, and decidedly detrimental to health, more especially to the health of infants and those with delicate lungs. Thus in two instances the authority of the Board has been rendered nugatory; and as in urgent cases such neglect might be attended with disastrous results, it would, I think, be advisable immediately to summon before a magistrate and fine all parties guilty of disobedience. I have recently examined some very inferior samples of milk supplied to the public; one more especially, supplied to a public institution, was very inferior in quality. One or two of the parties have been remonstrated with, and if the supply is not improved, I shall feel it my duty to publish the names and analyses for your inspection and order. Blackheath.—The drainage of Montpelier Row and Mews still requires your serious attention ; one house in particular, before reported as having fever in it, is in a most offensive state from a privy under the staircase. Bath Place also still requires your order for cleansing and drainage. Camden Cottages, Camden Place, &e., are still in a filthy state. Pigs and manure heap in butcher's yard, Blackheath. Pigs and manure heaps at Little Blackheath Hill, in the midst of a large population. Drainage of urinal, &c., into a well, at Duke's Head, in Little Blackheath Hill, has not yet been remedied. Lewisham.—A recent complaint has been made as to the overflow of a cesspool in Sandwell Place, and an order, I believe, served to empty. This can only be, however, of temporary benefit, as the wells are already contaminated, and the porous soil round this neighbourhood must be in a state of filth. Fever has been prevalent here, and a short drain is much wanted. Pigs are still kept in the village, in very closely inhabited parts. A more decided effort is still desirable to remove the drainage and filth from the 75 Ravensbourne. A closet at Mr. Arnold's silk mills, near the supply, is a most disgusting nuisance, reported last year. Penge.—The state of the water at the Anerley Gardens (full of sewage), and the less contaminated but offensive state of the piece of water on the other side of the railway (both portions of the old canal), becomes at this season of the year alarming, especially from its close proximity to the North Surrey Schools, where there are nearly 700 children. I append a complaint upon the subject numerously signed by the inhabitants of the neighbourhood. The reception wards of the North Surrey Industrial Schools are nearly completed : a piece of gas main under the floor of the building has been removed at my request. Sydenham.—A complaint from Mr. Miller's, "West Kent Park, has reached me. The houses here are in a most offensive state from dilapidated and overflowing closets and cesspools. They require your immediate order for their improvement. The "Railway Bell," Forest Hill, and adjacent houses, require draining into the sewer. The drains and gully near Round Hill Villa require trapping, as they are sometimes most offensive. Pigs are kept in the Willow Road, and from their offensive state are a common nuisance. The state of the drains near the brewery, Lower Sydenham, requires immediate attention. "Scarlet fever" has been and is very prevalent there, and besides one death, above-named, I shall in my next report have to mention one or two others. The drains at the back of the Wells Road and Kirkdale are, at this time of the year, verv pestilential. METEOROLOGICAL OBSERVATIONS. Week ending. Weight of air. Barometer corrected. Mean inches. Temperature of Air. Thermometer. Prevailing winds. Rainy days. Amount of rain in inches. Highest. Lowest. Mean of daily readings June 27. 30.058 88° 5 50°7 58° 2 E. 1 0.21 July 4. 29.678 92 7 52 0 62 4 S. W. 4 0.28 11. 29.745 79 4 45 7 59 6 S. W. 3 0.30 18. 29.998 89 7 50 9 68 0 s. w. 1 0.15 25. 29.828 86 0 51 7 68 3 s. w. 1 0.03 I have the honour to remain, Gentlemen, Your obedient Servant, F. E. WILKINSON, Sydenham, 30th July, 1857. Medical Officer of Health. AUGUST. DISTRICTS. BIRTHS. DEATHS. Males. Females. Total. Males. Females. Total. Blackheath 6 3 9 — 4 4 Lewisham 12 6 18 4 4 8 Union Workhouse — — — 2 2 4 Sydenham 7 10 17 9 10 19 N. S. Industrial School — — 1 1 2 Penge 1 5 6 — 4 4 Total 26 24 50 16 25 41 76 Gentlemen, During the month included between the 25th of July and the 22nd of August, 50 births and 41 deaths are recorded. The mortality is the heaviest that I have had to report to you, and during the same period last year 22 deaths only were registered. The excess above the average is fully attributable to the increased rate of mortality in Sydenham, 19 deaths having been registered in this "Ward alone, against 7 in August, 1856. Twenty-two deaths have occurred in children under five years of age, from various causes. Fourteen deaths have taken place from epidemic disease. In Blackheath.—One typhus, Osborne Place; until recently in an offensive state from deficient drainage and abutting upon Bath Place, an undrained and offensive locality. In Lewisham.—One diarrhoea, Hanover Street. (No water supply). One diarrhoea, Rushey Green. (No water supply, and only partially drained). One diarrhoea, Loampit Hill. (No drainage or water supply). In Sydenham.—One hooping cough, Upper Sydenham. (Offensive drainage at Kirkdale and adjacent). One hooping cough, Dartmouth Row. (Partly drained, and offensive from Steele's Cottages, adjacent). One hooping cough, Wells Road. (Offensive drainage at the back, and offensive privies and cesspools). Two malignant scarlet fever. (Mr. Cowburn's house Bell Green. No drainage and extremely offensive. Adjacent to sewer). One diarrhoea, the Grove, adjacent to Wells Road. (Drainage, an opening in the ditch ; also very offensive). One diarrhœa, Belle's Cottages, West Kent Park. (This locality, although apparently drained, is full of cesspools, and many of the houses are offensive). In Penge.—Two typhus fever, one with sloughing mouth, North Surrey Schools. (Infirmary not well ventilated, and offensive from closets in the building). One diarrhoea, Woodbine Grove. During the last month diarrhoea has been extremely prevalent in the district, and in several instances fatal. In Pear Tree or Schloss Alley, in Loampit Yale, where cholera first showed itself in July, 1849, the greater number of the inhabitants have been affected by it. Although drained here into the sewer, the houses have no water supply, therefore the closets are inefficient from the difficulty of flushing them, and the inhabitants procure their impure water for drinking, as well as other purposes, from the running stream below the mill, which is immediately contaminated by the sewage of the houses in Mill Terrace, North Cottages, &c., near Angus's mill. Where water is supplied, I should urge the importance of frequently cleansing cisterns or other receptacles for water. Many cisterns which I have examined lately, from the length of time which has elapsed since they were cleaned, contained water in a decidedly unfit state for drinking. The most pure supply is liable to contamination from decomposition and dirt of this kind. Several nuisances, detrimental to health, require your order for their removal. Some of the houses in Tuns Passage, Blackheath, are kept in an unwholesome and filthy state from the liquid oozing from a dung-heap, &c., in Mr. Fox's stable-yard. In one of these houses I reported some months ago a death from scarlet fever. At Mr. Hopkins's, greengrocer, Blackheath, the privies are full and overflowing into the cellar, and the whole yard and house is offensive from the same cause. Five children have been ill in one house, and their illness has been very properly, in my opinion, attributed to this cause. In the next house a case of typhus fever is now lying. In Lewisham, water supply is required at Rushey Green, Hanover Street, Loampit Hill, &c. Mill Terrace and North Cottages require draining, as at present they assist in contaminating the water of the Ravensbournc. The drainage from Arnold's Silk Mill is still most open and offensive. The drainage of Rushey Green beyond the Black Horse Inn is still unattended to; an open ditch here is offensive from this cause. In Sydenham.—I had occasion in my last report to complain of the filthy state of some houses at Bell Green, since which a most offensive nuisance, affecting the neigh- 77 hourhood for some distance, has occurred from the emptying cesspools and privies and throwing their contents upon the ground, and more especially dangerous as it was done whilst scarlet fever was endemic. This was put a stop to by the Police, and the parties implicated having been summoned before a magistrate, were fined 10s. each. The drainage along the line of ditch from Westwood House is only partially completed, and where incomplete is very offensive. The gullies opposite the Police Station, and Round Hill Villa, are very offensive, and require trapping. METEOROLOGICAL OBSERVATIONS. "Week ending. Weight of air. Barometer corrected. Mean inches. Temperature of Air. Thermometer. Prevailing winds. Rainy days. Amount of rain in inches. Highest. Mean of Lowest. dailyreadings. Aug. 1. 29.870 83° 4 49°5 65° 6 S. W. 1 0.60 8. 29.704 88 0 52 4 65 2 S. W. 4 0.85 15. 29.793 88 6 50 5 63 7 S. W. 4 1.52 22. 29.887 83 0 51 7 65 1 N. E. 2 0.32 I have the honour to remain, Gentlemen, Your obedient Servant, F. E. WILKINSON, Medical Officer of Health. Sydenham, 27th August, 1857. SEPTEMBER. DISTRICTS. Males. BIRTHS. Males. DEATHS. Females. Total. Females. Total. Blackheath 5 2 7 1 3 4 Lewisham 11 5 16 11 6 17 Union Workhouse — — — 2 5 7 Sydenham 13 7 20 6 8 14 N. S. Industrial School — — — 1 — 1 Penge 9 3 12 1 3 4 Total 38 17 55 22 25 47 11* 36 Gentlemen, During the month from 22nd August to 19th September, 53 births and 47 deaths have been registered. The returns of mortality are considerably increased by the addition of the Coroner's return of inquests upon 11 of the sufferers from the railway collision at the Lewisham Station, on 28th June last. Deducting these, 36 remain, the same number as registered during the corresponding month of last year; therefore, calculating for increase of population, showing a diminished rate of mortality. 18 deaths are recorded amongst children under one year of age. Amongst adults, six deaths have occurred in those from 50 to 70 years of age, and seven in those from 70 to 95. * Inquests, 28th of June. 78 Seven deaths have occurred from epidemic disease. One diarrhoea, one fever, Union Workhouse. One diarrhoea, Brockley Place. Two scarlatina, Lower Sydenham. Drain filthy. No water. One scarlatina, Upper Sydenham. Close upon an offensive cow and pig yard. One diarrhoea, Rushey Green. Offensive ditch. No drainage. No water supply. One fever, North Surrey School. Want of ventilation and separation. Scarlet fever is very prevalent (and in some instances fatal), especially in parts of the Sydenham District. And here I have particularly to urge upon your attention the drainage and water supply of the district, which might by your order be rendered healthy. The disease has now continued for the last three months, fixing itself upon the dirty and unwholesome localities which landlords are too careless and parsimonious to have properly cleaned. Diarrhœa still shows itself occasionally, but is gradually disappearing. Twenty-nine cases of fever have occurred during the last four weeks at the North Surrey School. I have before stated my opinion that the infirmary attached to the school, unlike the main building, is ill constructed for its purpose; that there is at present no means of thorough ventilation ; and that the numerous water-closets within its walls (which are occasionally flushed) are unnecessary, and render the atmosphere offensive and unwholesome. A fever ward, separated and placed at a distance from the infirmary and school, where so many children are congregated together (nearly 700), should be constructed for the immediate isolation of cases of epidemic disease, which is sure at some time or other to affect the inmates, and I am afraid, under existing arrangements, equally sure to be fatal. I have received several complaints from inhabitants residing in the neighbourhood of the brickfield in Dartmouth Park, Forest Hill, respecting the noxious and unpleasant fumes from the above-named brickfield. It is a very common notion that where there is abundance of fresh air, any quantity of decomposing or noxious matter proves harmless. Although when there is great dilution less mischief may ensue, still there can be no greater mistake than to suppose that no harm results. In all cases of the above kind (brickfields, limekilns, ballast burning, &c.), the great amount of carbonic acid and oxide evolved must quite poison the air in the direction in which it is wafted; in addition to which, in the present instance, the water used for the manufacture of bricks is a collection of sewage, which I before mentioned as being detained for this purpose in its progress through the ditches (and which might be altogether carried into the sewer). This must throw out, during the process of drying, sulphuretted hydrogen gas. The deadly nature of these gases, even when partially diluted, I fully explained in my first report (January, 1856). Many nuisances require your order for their removal, and if I might suggest a plan, it would be that streets and houses should be taken in rotation, seeing that every house is drained and supplied with water before proceeding to the next, and summoning parties who refuse or neglect the order of the Board. In this way my report of nuisances would soon be shortened. Lewisham.—The houses are in the same state as when before reported upon in June last, after a house to house visitation. At Loampit Vale and Loampit Hill I have made a house to house visitation, and beg to draw your attention to the filthy state in which these houses are. I mention a few below. Providence Row. Privies full and offensive. Supplied with water by pump. Main Road, Loampit Hill and Vale. Mrs. Pantony, Mrs. Jaynes. Privy and cesspool offensive, oozes through copper-hole into house. Yard dirty; no water. Mr. Smith. Privy full and offensive, dilapidated, no door, no water supply ; greatly distressed for it. Mrs. Tower, Mrs. Coomber, Mrs. Ireland, Mrs. Hayes. Privies full and offensive; dirty yards ; no drainage; no water supply. Dartmouth Cottages, Loampit Vale. Offensive privies run into the ditch immediately behind. The sewer runs in front of all these houses. 79 Almost all these people are greatly distressed for water; some get it when the carts which are used for watering the roads come round, or beg it, or in many instances buy it. Sydenham.—Some cases of typhus fever, and one whole family affected with dysentery, in West Kent Park, are attributed to the offensive state of this district from cesspools, superficial drainage, &c. The open gullies, without gratings, reported in March, 1856, are still the same. I bring them before your notice again, inasmuch as they have occasioned two accidents within the last month, one to a horse, and one to a female, who severely injured her leg from falling down into one of these dangerous pits. Offensive cesspools, opening into an offensive ditch, exist in the houses in Albion Terrace (before reported). In one instance the cesspool is under the kitchen floor, with no other cover to it. The footpath leading from Park End to Forest Hill Station is damp from the want of two or three gullies, the old ditch having been filled in in the construction of the new sewer. Part of this footpath was overflowed with drainage a week or two ago, from the obstruction to a drain which still carries the sewage from Duffin's cow-house, and other houses, over the sewer into a ditch in Perry Yale. Offensive yards, ponds, and cow-yards exist at Lower Sydenham, near the turning to Kent House Farm. There is no outlet for the drainage here, although the old covered drain, occupying the ditch, exists, and might be made use of. Two deaths from scarlet fever have occurred here. Two complaints, one of offensive drainage, from Mr, Lester, Hanover Street, Sydenham, and one from Mr. Hammond, surgeon, of a stable erected against his house, and very offensive, require attention. Meteorological tables are appended as usual. METEOROLOGICAL OBSERVATIONS. Week ending. Weight of air. Barometer corrected. Mean inches. Temperatube of Air. Thermometer. Prevailing winds. Rainy days. Amount of rain in inches. Highest. Lowest. Mean of daily readings. Aug. 29. 29.913 85°9 48°8 66°9 Calm & N. E. 0 0 Sept. 5. 29.620 86 5 46 9 60 4 S. W. 5 0.84 12. 29.542 75 7 51 4 60 5 s. w. 4 2.24 19. 30. 041 80 7 48 9 62 1 S.W.&N.E. 1 0.25 I have the honour to remain, Gentlemen, Your obedient Servant, F. E. WILKINSON, Medical Officer of Health. Sydenham, September 24, 1857. OCTOBER. DISTRICTS. BIRTHS. DEATHS. Males. Females. Total. Males. Females. Total. Blackheath 5 4 9 3 3 6 Lewisham 8 9 17 4 2 6 Union Workhouse — — — 1 2 3 Sydenham 20 8 28 8 4 12 Penge 2 3 5 1 1 2 Total 35 24 59 17 12 29 80 Gentlemen, During the five weeks ending upon the 24th of October, the births of 35 males and 24 females (total 59) have been registered. During the same period 29 deaths have been recorded. This number bears a favourable average, and is 5 less than during the five corresponding weeks ending upon 27th October in last year. Some parts of the district are still suffering from epidemic diseases, and four deaths are registered from this cause. These disorders appear to me to be kept up and rendered more deadly by noxious accumulations occasioned by the great deficiency of house drainage and water supply, and I have again to urge upon the attention of your Board the importance of using your legitimate power to compel owners of houses to adopt the best means to render their property cleanly and free from the seeds of disease. I cannot, however, but constantly observe the great carelessness evinced by many occupiers of houses as to the purity of water supplied to them, and the filthy state in which the cisterns and other receptacles for water are allowed to remain, contaminating the most pure supply; also the want of cleanliness observable in houses, and yards and gardens attached. The necessity of exerting a little trouble in these particulars cannot be too much urged upon the public, as essential to the maintenance of health. Five deaths are recorded in Sydenham from epidemic disease, viz., Four malignant scarlet fever, in Lower Sydenham, a locality previously brought before your notice, and one in Brockley Park. No drainage but into cesspools, overflowing into ditch. The brickfield in Dartmouth Park, which I brought before your notice in my last report as being complained of, is now being done away with, and no more bricks are to be burned in that locality. It is now, however, of very great importance to use proper means to carry off the pestilential accumulations of drainage and filth which exist there in close proximity to, and partly caused by, the houses in Park Road Terrace, which are not yet completely drained. Some damage has been done in parts of the district by the large amount of water accumulated in consequence of the rain on Thursday last. This is not to be wondered at, when the quantity which fell in 24 hours is considered, viz., 257 inches. "The average annual fall of rain in London during the 17 years, 1840—56, was 24 inches; consequently more than a tenth part of the average fall of rain in 365 days fell on Thursday last. The fall of rain upon an acre was 58,140 gallons, or rather more by weight than 259 tons."—(Greenwich Observatory). Several districts and houses have been complained of, most of which have, however, been brought under notice before, viz., Hanover Street, Sydenham. Offensive gullies at the end of "Wells Road, in High Street, Sydenham. The offensive holes in the drain pipe occupying the old ditch by Round Hill Villa. A gully required. Springfield, Sydenham. Diarrhoea very prevalent throughout the summer. Steele's Cottages, Sydenham, require connecting with the Dartmouth Row drainage. Cottages in Lower Sydenham. Scarlet fever prevalent. Wyndham Cottages, West Kent Park. Offensive. The Swiss Cottage public-house stands close by the sewer, but is undrained, damp, and offensive. Camden Row, Blackheath. Paragon Mews, Blackheath. Bath Place, Blackheath. Occasional offensive accumulations at Mr. Phillips's farm, Lewisham, from decomposing grains and manure. Loampit Vale. Offensive, and in want of water supply. Drainage into Ravensbourne from Arnold's silk mill and adjacent, 81 METEOROLOGICAL OBSERVATIONS. Week ending. Weight of air. Barometer corrected. Mean inches. Temperature of Air. Thermometer. Prevailing winds. Rainy days. Amount of rain in inches. Highest. Lowest. Mean of daily readings. Sept. 26. 29.935 73°6 41°5 59°1 Variable 3 0.46 Oct. 3. 29.868 70 3 45 5 58 4 S. W. 1 0.17 10. 29.357 63 4 41 9 50 7 W. S. W. 5 0.83 17. 29.915 67 7 42 3 55 2 Variable 1 0.19 24. 29.638 64 9 42 7 51 5 Variable 2 2.85 I have the honour to remain, Gentlemen, Your obedient Servant, F. E. "WILKINSON, Sydenham, 29th October, 1857. Medical Officer of Health. NOVEMBER. DISTRICTS. Males. BIRTHS Females. Total. Males. DEATHS Females. Total. Blackheath 3 5 8 2 1 3 Lewisham 8 7 15 3 2 5 Union Workhouse — — — 1 1 2 Sydenham 14 14 28 3 5 8 Penge 3 1 4 6 4 10 N. S. Industrial School — — — — 1 1 Total 28 27 55 15 14 29 Gentlemen, The health of the district, as derived from the Registrar's returns of mortality, bears a favourable aspect, 18 deaths having been registered during the month from 29th of October to 21st of November, whilst last month the deaths in the district amounted to 27, and during the same period last year 23 deaths were registered. The births of 25 boys and 26 girls have also been registered during the same time. Three deaths have taken place from zymotic disease. One, at Osborne Cottages, Lewisham, registered " choleraic fever." One, at Avenue Road, Lewisham, influenza. One, in West Kent Park, Sydenham, typhus fever. Attacks of influenza have been lately very prevalent, excited by the cold and humid atmosphere which has existed during the latter part of the month, but only one fatal case is recorded. With the exception of this, zymotic diseases are not prevalent, although still hovering about some of the badly drained districts which I have so often brought under your notice, in which only they seem to be occasionally fatal. Blackheath.—Some cases of typhoid fever have occurred at Blackheath, in the house of Mr. Bryan Donkin, which are certified by two medical men to have been occasioned by the imperfect drainage around his residence, and I believe from what I have seen, correctly so. I have examined the house and grounds, and find that the garden and yard are honeycombed with several cesspools, not only receiving the drainage of the house itself, but also that of the adjoining ones. In my first report (January, 1856), I pointed out the probability that the well water in this district might be contaminated in this way, and G 82 such has been the result here ; and it is necessary to efficiently cleanse and fill in the cesspools, and supply proper drainage, to prevent a recurrence of disease. Camden Row and Camden Place are likewise still undrained, and in a filthy state from cesspools and privies. A drain might be so constructed as to receive the sewage from all these localities, and conduct it into the main sewer. This would confer a great boon upon the inhabitants. Paragon Mews and Bath Place are still in the same state as formerly. A drain might at no great expense be carried up these districts from Osborne Place. Lewisham.—A great many of the houses (before mentioned) in Loampit Yale, are now in a most disgusting state of filth, and urgently require drainage and water supply. Part of Rushey Green is still undrained and offensive, and requires a small drain to convey it into the sewer. Water is still required in Hanover Street, Cross Street, Rushey Green, &c. Shepherd's Place, a most offensive locality, is as yet undrained. Sydenham.—Steele's Cottages, near Dartmouth Row, are still throwing out a quantity of noxious drainage upon the ground at the back of Dartmouth Row, within a short distance of the sewer. The ground in the neighbourhood of many houses is a perfectly poisonous swamp. The inmates of houses in the occupation of Mr. Coulson, Park House, and Mr. Weidner, West Kent Park, are represented as suffering from an accumulation of sewage underneath the floors, and in danger of sickness as the result of such serious neglect. The drainage of houses at the back of the Forester Inn, in Willow Road, and Hanover Street, urgently require the order of the Board to make the houses habitable. The road here is also in a dangerous and most unhealthv state. METEOROLOGICAL OBSERVATIONS. Week ending. Weight of air. Barometer corrected. Mean inches. Temperature of Air. Thermometer. Prevailing winds. Rainy days. Amount of rain in inches. Highest. Lowest. Mean of daily readings. Oct. 31. 29.774 64°0 37°8 51°6 S. W. 1 0.46 Nov. 7. 29.748 64 3 43 9 53 8 N. E. 4 0.49 14. 30.341 53 2 30 0 45 1 N. 0 0.00 21. 30.125 45 2 35 5 38 7 Variable 0 0.00 I have the honour to be, Gentlemen, Your obedient Servant, F. E. WILKINSON, Sydenham, 26th November, 1857. Medical Officer of Health. DECEMBER. DISTRICTS. Males. BIRTHS Females. Total. Males. DEATHS Females Total. Blackheath 3 5 8 1 1 2 Lewisham 16 11 27 7 7 14 Union Workhouse — — — 7 2 9 Sydenham 12 13 25 2 3 5 Penge 2 3 5 2 — 2 Total 33 32 65 19 13 32 Gentlemen, The health of the district, as derived from the Registrar's returns of mortality, bears a favourable aspect, which in some of the Wards is particularly observable. Thus, in Blackheath, the mortality for the past five weeks has only amounted to two, and in 83 Sydenham only to five. In the Union "Workhouse the mortality has exceeded the average, the deaths numbering 9. These, however, have been principally amongst the aged. Scarlatina is still prevalent in the district, and has been so for some months. Several deaths have taken place from this disease in the undrained localities; of these three have occurred at Southend, and one at Wells Road, Sydenham. In West Kent Park (a place notorious for its insufficient drainage and offensive odours, notwithstanding the great facilities for efficient sewerage), some cases of typhus fever exist! Some formidable diseases of the epidemic class I have had several times within the last few months to bring before your notice. In Angel Terrace, Loampit Hill, typhus fever has also broken out. These houses have been but recently drained, and it is important to enquire whether the cesspools have been properly emptied, cleansed, and filled in. No water is supplied here, which renders the drainage comparatively ineffectual. An accident has occurred at the North Surrey Industrial School, in consequence of some of the children partaking of water which had been drawn from the engine boiler, and which contained a poisonous solution used for the purpose of keeping the metal clean; but no death (as has been reported) has occurred there from this or any other cause during the month. Lewisham.—Many of the inhabitants about the neighbourhood of Loampit Hill and Rushey Green are still distressed on account of the absence of water supply in their neighbourhood. Notices have been served upon the owners of premises at Loampit Hill to drain the houses into the sewer. It is much to be desired that that should be effected before another summer approaches, for should cholera attack us, these neighbourhoods would be far from safe. Blackheath.—Paragon Mews and Montpelier Row still require your attention to render their neighbourhoods healthy. Bath Place is still in an undrained and dirty state. The drainage of Camden Row and Place will, I hope, soon be carried into the sewer. It is most important that the offensive privies and cesspools should be cleansed and filled in, to prevent their still remaining a cause of disease. Sydenham.—The lane opposite the Old Church, Lower Sydenham, remains still in a very filthy state. The drainage is most offensive. Some of the houses opposite Kent House Road are still offensive from overflowing cesspools. Some of the houses in Hanover Street are offensive from a similar cause. At West Kent Park the roads are very dangerous. The gulley holes are still (many of them) open and dangerous, and very offensive. At the back of Wells Road and Peak Hill the drainage is also very offensive. Penge—The drainage here is still very offensive and injurious to health. Much might be done by cleansing ditches at this season of the year. A well at the back of the " Billet" is still contaminated with drainage. METEOROLOGICAL OBSERVATIONS. Week ending. Weight of air. Barometer corrected. Mean inches. Temperatube of Air. Thermometer. Prevailing winds. Rainy days. Amount of rain in inches. Highest. Lowest. Mean of daily readings. Nov. 28. 29.575 55°3 30°5 41°6 Variable 4 0.78 Dec. 5. 29.858 56 4 35 8 46 1 S. W. 2 0.10 12. 30.369 55 3 36 3 45 0 S. W. 0 0.00 19. 30.082 57 0 35 0 45 6 S. W. 3 0.16 26. 30.083 55 4 32 0 47 1 W. S. W. 1 0.10 I have the honour to remain, Gentlemen, Your obedient Servant, F. E. WILKINSON, Sydenham, December 31st, 1857. Medical Officer of Health. G 2 84 JANUARY. DISTRICTS. BIRTHS. DEATHS. Males. Females. Total. Males. Females. Total. Blackheath 0 4 4 4 2 6 Lewisham 7 9 16 6 4 10 Sydenham 13 11 24 6 9 15 Penge 4 5 9 3 2 5 Total 24 29 53 19 17 36 Gentlemen, The returns of mortality for the month ending upon the 23rd of January are in excess of the average; also in excess of those registered during the corresponding months in 1856-7, when 30 deaths were returned. During the present month 36 deaths have been registered, but calculating for increase of population, this number would not bear an unfavourable aspect, especially as two inquests are included in the present returns from the Coroner's quarterly returns. Six deaths have taken place from zymotic disease, and all these have taken place (as usually observable in this district), in localities to which I have called your attention as remarkable for their want of proper drainage and their offensive state. I have before brought under your notice the great want of water supply, and the real distress on this account in some parts of the district. In some places it is obtained with great difficulty even for domestic purposes; and the drainage is, and will be, constantly rendered inefficient by the blocking up of pans and pipes from want of water supply. As doubtless the power rests in your hands to compel owners of houses to lay on water, and the supply seems absolutely necessary for cleanliness and health, I beg to submit to you the importance of considering the matter, and using the best means to attain this end. The following localities still demand attention from their want of drainage and offensive state:— Lewisham.—Cottages at back of Black Horse. Dirty ditch by Lady well, apparently still receiving drainage. Ravensbourne Park—drainage into cesspools, some of which are upon a higher level than the adjoining houses. Cleveland Square, back of White Horse. Phillips's houses, near river. Stagnant water in old watercourse through Lewisham should be covered in before the hot weather returns. Blackheath.—Drainage of Grote's Buildings. Pound's Mews. Camden Row and Place and Garden Cottages. Bath Place. Montpelier Row and Paragon Mews. Houses in Montpelier Vale (baker's, greengrocer's, &c.) Sandwell Place. Penge.—Ditch at back of houses should now be cleansed and a drain put in. General want of drainage, overflow enters Ravensbourne. Sydenham.—Yard opposite Dolphin Inn undrained. Duffin's cow-houses, complaints of offensive smell. Orchard Place undrained and unhealthy, overflow enters Ravensbourne. Park Road Terrace, Dartmouth Park, is still undrained, with the exception of four or five houses at the east end. Houses along main line of sewer in main street are most of them unconnected. West Kent Park.—Offensive and dangerous gullies and insufficient drainage; roads impassable. Steele's cottages undrained and offensive; a heap of decomposing matter at the back of the greengrocer's here is much complained of. Wells Road and Taylor's Lane. 85 Willow Road and Scudder's Row. The new houses erecting here should be connected with the sewer immediately. Meteorological tables are appended as usual. METEOROLOGICAL OBSERVATIONS. Week ending. Weight of air. Barometer corrected. Mean inches. Temperature of Air. Thermometer. Prevailing winds. Rainy days. Amount of rain in inches. Highest. Lowest. Mean of daily readings. Jan. 2. 30.280 48°0 31°0 39.1 W. S. W. 0 0.00 9. 30.148 51 9 20 9 34 5 S. W. 2 0.09 16. 30.209 50 9 30 4 39 8 S. W. 1 0.06 23. 30.231 47 0 30 5 37 8 Variable. 0 0.00 I have the honour to remain, Gentlemen, Your obedient Servant, F. E. WILKINSON, Medical Officer of Health. Sydenham, 28th January, 1858. FEBRUARY. DISTRICTS. BIRTHS. DEATHS. Males. Females. Total. Males. Females. Total. Blackheath 4 6 10 2 11 13 Lewisham 7 8 15 6 3 9 Union Workhouse 0 0 0 3 2 5 Sydenham 11 15 26 8 4 12 Penge 3 1 4 1 1 2 Total 25 30 55 20 21 41 Gentlemen, During the month ending Saturday, the 20th February, 1858, 55 births and 41 deaths have been registered. The mortality, therefore, during this space of time has considerably exceeded the average. This increased mortality is to be attributed to the great inclemency of the weather, which has probably mainly caused the death of 14 aged people. Thus 2 have died between 56 and 60, 2 between 60 and 70, 9 between 70 and 80, and 1 between 80 and 90 years of age. Chest affections have been and are considerably on the increase. Thus diseases of the respiratory organs have been fatal to 12 persons during the month. Five deaths have taken place from preventable (epidemic) disease. The localities in which these deaths have taken place are enumerated below, viz.:— One fever, Regent Street, Lewisham. One typhus, Union Workhouse, Lewisham. One hooping cough, Poplar Place, Lewisham. One scarlet fever, Wells Road, Sydenham. One scarlet fever, Lower Sydenham. 86 During the corresponding months in 1856 and 1857, the deaths of 23 and 32 persons were respectively registered. I have been again called upon to examine the locality in the neighbourhood of Mr. Bryan Donkin's, Blackheath, which requires a great deal of attention. Fever has here been attributed (no doubt with justice) to the contamination of the well water by the numerous cesspools in the locality. Some expense has been incurred in bringing the sewer up to these points, and it does seem to me urgently necessary for the health of the inhabitants of this neighbourhood that this new outlet for sewage should be made abundantly useful, and the numerous and dangerous cesspools be thoroughly emptied, cleansed, and filled in. Last month I complained of the want of drainage of Orchard Place, Perry Yale, between Sydenham and Lewisham. I am informed by the Surveyor that these houses are at too low a level to be drained into the sewer. The deodorizing process with peat charcoal in a common receiver might be with great advantage used here, and would in some measure obviate a nuisance, and increase the healthiness of the locality. Near the above and opposite a house called "Laurel Brook," is a ditch rendered offensive by the overflow drainage from a house above. This might readily be drained into the sewer. The drainage running along in an uncovered ditch in Kirkdale and the bottom of Peak Hill is at times extremely offensive, and must be most prejudicial to the health of the numerous inhabitants around. It would be most desirable to have this covered over before the summer, as the emanations are then most noxious. The following localities also require attention on account of their want of drainage, &c. Bath Place and Paragon Mews, Blackheath. Ravensbourne Park, Lewisham. "West Kent Park, Sydenham. Offensive gullies; some of the roads impassable. Lane opposite Lower Sydenham Chapel. Also the houses opposite Mr. Gator's road, Lower Sydenham, which are undrained and offensive, and in which several deaths have taken place from scarlet fever, one of which I report this month above. Road leading to Hindsley's Place, Forest Hill, at the back of the Forester Inn. This road has never been ballasted, and is totally impassable. The marshy wet land at the back of the North Surrey Industrial School. Here is an accumulation of water at the back of the infirmary. A trench cut along into the ditch by the side of the road would obviate this nuisance. It only requires your order, as the school authorities would be glad to remove the nuisance if allowed so to do. Meteorological tables are appended as usual. METEOROLOGICAL OBSERVATIONS. Week ending. Weight of air. Barometer corrected. Mean inches. Temperature of Air. Thermometer. Prevailing winds. Rainy days. Amount of rain in inches. Highest. Lowest. Mean of daily readings. Jan. 30. 30.104 51°0 21°4 37°5 Variable. 1 0.22 Feb. 6. 29.738 52 8 26 3 37 8 S. W. 2 0.77 13. 29.954 45 8 28 5 34 3 S.E.&N. E. 2 0.08 20. 29.872 47 0 24 0 34 0 N. E. 2 0.97 I have the honour to remain, Gentlemen, Your obedient Servant, F. E. WILKINSON, Medical Officer of Health. Sydenham, 25th February, 1858. 87 MARCH. DISTRICTS. BIRTHS. DEATHS. Males. Females. Total. Males. Females. Total. Blackheath 3 2 5 3 1 4 Lewisham 12 14 26 5 1 6 Union Workhouse 0 0 0 1 0 1 Sydenham 14 13 27 5 5 10 Penge 2 2 4 1 2 3 Total 31 31 62 15 9 24 Gentlemen, During the month ending upon the 20th of March, the births of 31 males and 31 females (total 62) have been registered. Also during the same space the deaths of 15 males and 9 females. The health of the population of the district, as derived from the tables of mortality, thus bears a very favourable aspect, in 1856 27 deaths having been registered during the month of March, and in 1857 21 deaths. From this information, also, March appears to be a very healthy month in this district. Of epidemic diseases, scarlatina and measles are very prevalent in some parts of the district. Smallpox has also appeared at Lewisham, and one death has been registered from this cause in Hanover Street. One death from diarrhoea has take place at Queen Street, Blackheath. I have appended a list of complaints of the localities which have been reported to you from time to time as unhealthy, from January, 1857, up to the present time. Tables of mortality are also in preparation for the year. Meteorological tables for the month are appended as usual. METEOROLOCICAL OBSERVATIONS. Week ending. Weight of air. Barometer corrected. Mean inches. Temperature op Air. Thermometer. Prevailing winds. Rainy days. Amount of rain in inches. Highest. Lowest. Mean of daily readings. Feb. 27. 29.837 44°1 23°5 33°1 E. 0 0.00 Mar. 6. 29.420 43 0 23 3 31 5 E. N. E. 3 0.45 13. 29.526 50 8 23 6 34 7 N. W. 1 0.28 20. 29.963 61 4 36 9 48 0 W. 2 0.10 I have the honour to remain, Gentlemen, Your obedient Servant, F. E. WILKINSON, Medical Officer of Health. Sydenham, 25th March, 1858. 88 SUMMARY OF NUISANCES reported FROM JANUARY, 1857, TO MARCH, 1858, BOTH INCLUSIVE. locality. nature of nuisance. when reported. what remedy. Almshouses, Leathersellers' Undrained February March Anerley Offensive drainage into ditches February Anerley Drainage into piece of old canal February Anerley Complaint of inhabitants that water near Anerley Station, from its elevation above adjoining houses, occasions much dampness May Anerley Water receiving drainage here; very offensive February Arnold's Mill, Lewisham Closet for workpeople over stream near Kent Water Works July New closet erected Anerley Gardens Offensive state of the water from drainage, &c. June Albion Terrace, Sydenham Cesspools under houses, and open and offensive drainage running by the end of Raglan Street September Bell Green Gas refuse January Bath Place, Blackheath Want of drainage and dirty state February, March, May, July, Oct., Nov., Dec., Jan., 1858, Feb., 1858 Brockley Lane Offensive drainage February Sewer constructed Botany Bay, Lewisham Drainage into stream March April Bridge Street, Lewisham Offensive drainage (smallpox) June Little Blackeath Hill Pigs and manure heap in cowkeeper"s yard July Belle's Cottages, West Kent Park Require efficient drainage August Bell Green Offensive drainage at Cowburn's houses, Lower Sydenham July August Brockley Park No drainage but into cesspools overflowing into ditches October Blackheath Drainage contaminates well water at Mr. Bryan Donkin's (fever in consequence) November February, 1858 Sewer constructed Camden Cottages Cesspool and want of drainage February, March, July Sewer constructed 89 locality. nature of nuisance. when reported. what remedy. Cross Street No water supply February, April, November Crystal Palace Drainage from contaminates stream, and renders the ditches in Penge offensive March, May, November, and December Camden Passage, Blackheath Filthy and offensive drainage April Camden Row, Blackheath Ditto ditto April, May, Oct., Nov., Bee., and Crystal Crescent Filthy and undrained roads January, 1858 February Camden Place, Blackheath Undrained and offensive July, January, 1858 Cowburn's Cottages, Lower Sydenham Drainage requires immediate attention. Scarlet fever fatal July Ditto ditto Two deaths, scarlet fever August Cleveland Square, Lewisham Insufficiently drained January, 1858 Duke's Head Inn Drain from stables by side of public road February Dartmouth Dirty and not paved and February, April, sage, Blackheath drained May Dartmouth Passage, corner of, Blackheath Butcher's yard, accumulation of manure and refuse February, May Dartmouth Row, Sydenham Offensive drainage, very dangerous to health March, April Drained into sewer Dartmouth Place, Sydenham Ditto ditto March, April, August Partly drained into sewer Dartmouth Park, Sydenham Nuisance from brickfield September Duffin's Cow Yard • Offensive drainage running over footpath by railway September Dartmouth Cottages, Lewisham Drain into ditch immediately at back September Dartmouth Park, Sydenham Offensive ditch receiving drainage at the back of Park Road Terrace October Duffin's Cow Houses Smell complained of January, 1858 Forest Hill Ballast burning near New Chapel January Forest Hill Terrace, &c. Impassable and marshy road January Forest Hill Duffin's, Jauncey's, and adjacent houses not drained February Forest Hill Dirty privy and cesspool at Baker's, butcher February Forest Hill Drainage from Mr. Keats' March Forest Hill Chapel Insufficient ventilation June Remedied Forest Hill Ballast burning, prejudicial to health July Forest Hill Station to Park End Footpath; no gullies ; ditch filled in in constructing new sewer; damp September 90 locality. nature of nuisance. when reported. what remedy. Forester Inn, Sydenham Houses at back of require draining—Simmons's and Unwin's houses November Grote's Buildings, Blackheath Drained into ditch February January, 1858 Garden Cottages, Blackheath Offensive drainage April, May January, 1858 The Grove, Sydenham Offensive drainage adjacent August Greyhound Inn, Sydenham Complaint of smell from stable adjoining Mr. Hammond's house September Hindsley's Place, Sydenham ' Impassable and marshy road January High Street, Sydenham Offensive privies at back of Fallwell's, viz., Baker's, January February Butcher's, & Willoughby's houses May Hanover Street, Lewisham No water supply February, August, March, April, Hanover Street, Sydenham Bad and wet roads May February, August, March, April, May Hanover Street, Lewisham No water, therefore drainage ineffectual. Smallpox June November Hare and Billet, Lewisham Urinal and dungheap offensive September Hanover Street, Sydenham Undrained and offensive September, October, December Hindsley's Place, Forest Hill Road filthy and impassable February Kirkdale Poisonous drainage in open ditch April, July, Aug., January, 1858 Kent House Farm, near Dungheap and butcher's offal near Kent House Farm September Loat's Pits Dirty state of February Loafs Pits, back of Horse infirmary in course of erection February Loampit Hill, Esplanade Filthy state April Loampit Yale, Lewisham Houses undrained April, October, November Lewisham Library near 'Workhouse undrained ; sickness attributed to this cause April Lewisham Ditch (old watercourse) should be filled in April Lewisham, Hare and Billet Inn Urinal offensive and exposed May Ladywell Houses undrained; ditches very offensive; no water supply June, September 91 locality. nature of nuisance. when reported. what remedy. Lewisham Offensive drainage. Newman's house reported by Mr. Brown June Loampit Hill, Lewisham No drainage or water supply August, September, December Lewisham Occasional offensive accumulations at Mr. Phillips's yard, from decomposing grains and manure September, November Laurel Brook, Perry Vale, Sydenham Offensive drainage into ditches January, 1858 Montpelier Row, Blackheath Undrained April, July, January, 1858 Mill Terrace, Lewisham Drainage into stream August Montpelier Vale, Blackheath Mr. Hopkins's, greengrocer, and adjacent privies full & overflowing into cellar, and whole yard and house offensive from same cause (fever) August, December, and January, 1858 North Surrey Industrial School Marsh land at back of January, February, 1858 Ditto, ventilation of infirmary Insufficiently ventilated and badly constructed for its purpose January, June, August, September North Cottages, Lewisham Drainage into river August Osborne Place, Blackheath No drainage February, March, May Drained Oakfield Road, Penge Stagnant water February Orchard Place, Sydenham Undrained and unhealthy; overflow into stream January and February, 1858 Perry Rise Drainage from Shaw's Cottages in open ditch, injurious to health January Pound's Mews Privies February, 1857, and January, 1858 Phoenix Square Dirty and not paved and insufficiently drained February, April, Paragon Mews No drainage; offensive smells. House adjoining February, March, April, September, Reeve's stables privy under staircase, most offensive. (Two cases fever) November, December, and January and February, 1858 Poplar Row No water supply February Penge Offensive and filthy ditch at back of houses in main street March, December, and January, 1858 Perry Vale, Sydenham Offensive drainage from Shaw's Cottages, &c. March Park End A drain from several houses here runs across railway into ditches by Perry Vale March Not remedied 92 locality. nature of nuisance. when reported. what remedy. Perry Yale No advantage from new sewer, as nearly all sewage takes its old course March Perry Hill, Sydenham, Yery^s Cottages Drains from Very's Cottages run in offensive ditch by side of road April Park Road Terrace, Dartmouth Park, Sydenham Offensive and filthy ditch at back of May Not remedied Penge Drainage into Ravensbourne should be deodorized prior to construction of sewer May, December, and January, 1858 Perry Yale, Sydenham Drains and open ditches still receive sewage June Police Station, Sydenham Gully opposite requires trapping September Providence, Row, Lewisham Privies full and offensive; not drained September Park House, Sydenham Mr. Coulsonand Mr. Weidner complain of the offensive state of the house and want of drainage, together with the noxious smell of ditch adjoining receiving: drainage November Peak Hill, Sydenham No drainage, offensive sewage runs at bottom December, February, 1858 Penge, yard near Crooked Billet Offensive, and well contaminated with sewage as in 185 6 December Park Road Terrace, Dartmouth Park, Sydenham Still undrained, except 3 or 4 houses at the end January, 1858 Rushey Green No water supply March, April, August, and Jan., 1858 Round Hill, Sydenham Offensive gully July, August, October Rushey Green Undrained beyond Black Horse Inn August, November, December, and January, 1858 Ravensbourne Park Drainage into cesspools, some of which are above the level of adjacent houses January and February, 1858 Sydenham Pigs complained of at Cowley's and Ashby's January Sydenham Hill, High Street Dirty privy and yard complained of at Haydon's, butcher May Scudder's Row Dirty road and want of drainage February January, 1858 Sydenham Gas Works Noxious smell much complained of, arising from purifiers and the manufacture of sulphate of ammonia March Remedied by cleansing purifier at night, and mixing acid and ammoniacal liquor in a covered vessel 93 locality. nature of nuisance. when reported. what remedy. Sydenham Gas Works Contamination of brook April Silver Street Wants water supply May Sandwell Place Very unhealthy and undrained May Shepherd's Place, Lewisham Offensive and undrained. Drainage obstructed by owner of a neighbouring house July November Sandwell Place Overflow of cesspool, wells contaminated July January, 1858 Sydenham, Railway Bell and adjacent houses Requires draining into sewer July Steele's Cottages, Sydenham Undrained and offensive August, October, November, January, 1858 Schloss Alley, Lewisham No water supply; closets blocked up and useless August Sydenham, Lower Offensive drainage. Pond and privy at Jenkins's, Lower Sydenham. Death, scarlatina September Sydenham, Lower Offensive state of houses opposite Cator's Road. Deaths, scarlatina September December Sydenham Hill, High Street Offensive gully at end of Wells Road October Remedied Springfield, Sydenham Offensive drainage. A great deal of sickness during the summer October Swiss Cottage, West Kent Park, Sydenham Complaints of insufficient and offensive drainage October Sydenham, Lower Offensive state of lane opposite old church December January, 1858 Shepherd's Place, near Lewisham Bridge Offensive drainage and privies January, 1858 Sydenham, Lower Yard opposite Dolphin Inn undrained and offensive January, 1858 Sydenham, Upper Houses along main line of sewer are most of them undrained January, 1858 Taylor's Lane, Sydenham Houses offensive and undrained July January, 1858 Tuns Passage, Blackheath Nuisance (prejudicial to health) from liquid running from Mr. Fox's stable-yard August Waterloo Place No water supply February Wells Road Ponds of filthy drainage from upwards of 40 houses in Wells Road, most offensive February, March, Wells Road Offensive drainage April, July, August, December, January, 1858 94 locality. nature op nuisance. when reported. what remedy. Wells Road Pigs kept here and much complained of on account of the filthy odour and offensive drainage March Workhouse, Lewisham Carelessly drained, consequently the well water contaminated April Remedied Wells Road Complaint of inhabitants concerning drainage May West Kent Park Undrained. Chicken-pox prevalent June, September, January, 1858 West Kent Park Brown's houses undrained; offensive and dilapidated closets July, September Westwood House, Sydenham Drainage into ditch August Willow Road, Sydenham Houses not drained into sewer September January, 1858 West Kent Park Uncovered gullies, dangerous and offensive September, January, 1858 February, 1858 Ditto ditto Ditto and dangerous roads December, January, 1858 February, 1858 95 DEATHS DURING THE FOUR QUARTERS OF THE YEAR 1857. AGES MONTHS. YEARS. Total M. F. Causes of Death. 0 3 6 1 2 3 4 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50 55 60 65 70 75 80 85 90 95 100 I. Zymotic: Small-pox — — — 1 — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — 1 1 — Measles — — — 1 1 — — 1 — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — 3 2 1 Scarlatina — — — 2 3 3 4 — 3 — 1 — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — 16 6 10 Hooping Cough 1 2 2 2 — — 2 — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — 9 5 4 Croup — — — 1 — 2 3 1 — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — 7 3 4 Thrush 1 2 — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — 3 2 1 Diarrhoea 2 2 1 4 — — 3 — — — — — — — — — — 1 — — — — — — — — — 13 6 '7 Dysentery — — — 1 1 — — — — — — — — — — 1 — — 1 — — 1 1 — — — — 6 1 5 Cholera — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — Influenza 1 — — 1 — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — 2 1 1 Scurvy and Purpura — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — Ague — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — Remittent Fever — — — — — — 1 2 1 — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — 4 1 3 Infantile Fever — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — Typhus Fever — — — 1 — 1 1 — 3 1 2 — — — — — 1 1 1 — 1 — — — — — — 13 6 7 Puerperal Fever (Metria) — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — Rheumatic Fever — — — — — — — — — — 1 — — 1 1 — — — — — — — — — — — — 3 2 1 Erysipelas — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — Syphilis 1 — 1 — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — 2 1 1 Noma (Canker) — — — — — — — 2 — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — 2 2 — Hydrophobia — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — II. Dropsy, &c.: Haemorrhage — — — — — — — — — — — — — 1 — — — — — — — — — — — — — 1 — 1 Dropsy — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — 1 2 — — — — — 3 1 2 Abcess — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — 1 1 — Ulcer — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — Fistula — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — Mortification — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — 1 — — — — — — — — 1 — 1 Cancer — — — — — — — — — — — — — 1 1 1 1 2 1 __ 2 — — 9 2 7 Gout — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — —— — — — — — — — — — — — — — III. Tubercular: Scrofula — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — Tabes Mesenterica — 1 1 1 — 1 1 — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — 5 4 1 Phthisis (Consumption) — — — — — 2 1 — 1 4 3 1 5 6 3 1 2 — 3 — 2 — — — — — — 34 23 11 Hydrocephalus — 1 1 2 3 — — 1 — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — 8 5 3 Total 6 7 5 17 8 9 16 7 9 6 7 1 5 10 4 3 4 3 6 2 4 4 1 2 146 75 71 96 AGES MONTHS. YEARS. Total M. F. Causes of Death. 0 3 6 1 2 3 4 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50 55 60 65 70 75 80 85 90 95 100 Brought forward 6 7 5 17 8 9 16 7 9 6 7 1 5 10 4 3 4 3 6 2 4 4 1 2 146 75 71 IV. Brain & Nerves: Cephalitis — — — — 1 1 — — — 1 — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — 3 2 1 Apoplexy — — — — — — — — — — 2 — — — 1 — 1 2 — — 1 — — — 7 4 3 Palsy (Paralysis) — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — 2 3 2 2 — — 1 10 2 8 Delirium Tremens — — — — — — — — — — — — 1 — 1 — — — — — — — — — — — — 2 2 — Chorea — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — Epilepsy — — — — — — — — — 1 — — — — — — 1 — — — — — — — — — — 2 1 1 Tetanus — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — Insanity — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — Convulsions 3 1 — 5 1 2 — — 1 1 — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — 14 7 7 Disease of Brain, &c. — — — — — — 1 1 1 — — — — — — — — — — — — 1 1 — — — — 5 3 2 V. Heart and Blood Vessels Pericarditis — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — Aneurism — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — Disease of Heart, &c — — — — — — — — — 1 1 — 1 2 1 — — 1 4 1 1 1 — — — — — 14 5 9 VI. Lungs & Organs of respiration: Laryngitis — — — — 3 — — — — — — — 1 — — — 1 — — — — — — — — — — 5 3 2 Bronchitis 1 2 — 3 — — — 1 1 — 1 — 1 — 1 2 2 3 3 4 1 3 1 2 — — 32 19 13 Pleurisy — — — — — — — — — — — — — 1 — — — — 2 — — — 1 — — — — 4 1 3 Pneumonia — 2 — 3 1 1 1 — 3 — — — — — — — — — — — — — 1 — — — 1 13 6 7 Asthma — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — 1 — — 1 2 — — — — 4 3 1 Disease of Lungs — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — 1 — — — — — — 1 — 1 VII. Stomach & Digestive Organs: Teething — — 2 4 4 — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — 10 8 2 Quinsy — — — — — — — — 1 — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — 1 — 1 Gastritis — — 1 — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — 1 — 1 Enteritis — — 1 — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — 1 — — — — 2 — 2 Peritonitis — 1 — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — 1 1 — — — — — — — 3 2 1 Ascites — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — Ulceration of Intes- tines — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — Hernia (Rupture) — — 1 — — — — — — — — — 1 — — — — — — — — — — — — — — 2 1 1 Ileus — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — Intussusception — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — Total 10 13 10 32 18 13 18 9 16 10 9 1 9 16 6 4 8 7 17 8 14 11 12 6 2 2 281 144 137 97 AGES MONTHS. YEARS. Total M. F. Causes of Death. 0 3 6 1 2 3 4 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50 55 60 65 70 75 80 85 90 95 100 Brought forward 10 13 10 32 18 13 18 9 16 10 9 1 9 16 6 4 8 7 17 8 14 11 12 6 2 2 281 144 137 Stricture of Intestinal Canal — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — Disease of Stomach, &c — — — — — — — — 1 — — — — — — — — — — 1 1 — — — — — — 3 1 2 Disease of Pancreas — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — Inflammation of Liver (Hepatitis) — — — — — — — — — — — — 1 — — 1 — — — — — — — — — — — 2 — 9 Jaundice 1 — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — 1 — 1 Disease of Liver — — — 1 — — — — — — — — — — — — — 2 1 1 — — — — — — — 5 3 2 Disease of Spleen — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — 1 — — — — — — 1 1 — VIII. Kidney, &c.: Nephritis — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — Nephria (Bright’s Dis.) — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — Ischuria — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — Diabetes — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — Stone — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — Cystitis — — — — — — — 1 — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — 1 — 1 Stricture of Urethra — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — Disease of Bladder, &c — — — — — — — — — — 1 — — — — — — 1 — — — — — — — — — 2 2 IX. Childbirth : Paramenia — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — Ovarian Dropsy — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — Childbirth (see Me- tria) — — — — — — — — — — — — 1 1 — 1 — — — — — — — — — — — 3 3 Disease of Uterus, &c. — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — 1 — — — 1 — 1 X. Joints,Bones,&c.: Rheumatism — — — — — — — — — 1 — — — 1 — — — — — — — 1 1 — — — — 4 2 2 Arthritis — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — Disease of Joints, &c. — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — 1 — 1 XI. Skin, Cellular Tissue : Carbuncle — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — Phlegmon — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — Disease of Skin, &c. — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — Total 11 13 10 33 18 13 18 10 17 11 10 1 11 18 9 6 8 10 18 10 16 12 13 7 2 2 305 151 154 98 AGES MONTHS. YEARS. Total M. F. Causes of Death. 0 3 6 1 2 3 4 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50 55 60 65 70 75 80 85 90 95 100 Brought forward 11 13 10 33 18 13 18 10 17 11 10 1 11 18 7 6 8 10 18 10 16 12 13 7 2 2 305 151 154 XII. Malformations: Cyanosis — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — Spina Bifida — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — Other Malformations 4 2 1 — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — 7 4 3 XIII. Premature Birth and Debility 19 — — — — 1 — — — — — 1 — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — 21 9 12 XIV. Atrophy 1 3 — — 1 — — — — — 1 — 1 — — — — 1 — — — — — — — — — 8 2 6 XV. Old Age — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — 2 7 4 1 1 —. 15 7 8 XVI. Sudden — — — — — — — — 1 — — — — — — — — — — 1 — — — — — — — 2 2 — XVII. Violent Death: Intemperance — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — Privation of Food — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — Want of Breast Milk — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — Neglect — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — Cold — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — Poison — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — Burns and Scalds — — — — — — — — — 1 — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — 1 — 1 Hanging — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — Suffocation — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — Drowning — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — 1 — — — — — — — — — — 1 1 — Fractures and Contu- sions — — — — — — — — — — 2 — — — — 1 — — — — — — — — — — — 3 3 _ Wounds — 1 — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — 1 1 — Other Violence — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — Causes not specified. — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — Railway Collision — — — — — — — — — — 1 4 3 1 — — — — — — — — — — — — — 11 7 4 Total 35 19 11 34 19 14 18 10 18 13 14 6 15 19 7 7 9 12 18 11 16 14 20 11 3 2 375 187 188 DEATHS FROM ZYMOTIC DISEASES, WITH THE LOCALITIES IN WHICH THEY HAVE OCCURRED. Elevation above mean tidal level. Avenue Square, Lewisham 30.6 Avenue Road, Lewisham 31.9 Brockley Place, Lady Well, Lewisham 37.2 Brockley Park 101.4 Belvidere Road, Penge 360.8 Cross Street, Loampit Dale, Lewisham 27.7 Lewisham Village, Dartmouth Cottages 30.0 Dartmouth Hill, Lewisham 146.8 Dartmouth Row, Sydenham 172.1 Forest Hill Terrace, Sydenham 145.3 The Grove, near "Wells Road, Sydenham 185.0 Hamlet Road, Penge Hanover Street, Lewisham 25.9 Hither Green 79.2 Kelvin Terrace, Sydenham 234.3 Loampit Dale, Lewisham 27.7 Lewis Grove, Lewisham 31.1 Lewisham Village 34.6 Loampit Hill, Lewisham 45.3 Merton Place, Blackheath 47.6 Montpelier Row 119.7 North Surrey Industrial School Osborne Place, Blackheath 81.9 Osborne Cottages, Lewisham Phænix Place, Blackheath 103.2 Perry Rise, Sydenham 111.6 Fox Lane, Penge Regent Street, Loat's Pits, Blackheath . 47.6 Rushey Green, Lewisham 58.7 Ravensbourne Park, Lewisham 87.8 Russell Street, Sydenham 215.2 Raglan Street, Sydenham 168.2 Lewisham Road 60.1 Southend, Lewisham 85.8 Sydenham Hill 339.6 Upper Sydenham 218.3 Lower Sydenham100.8 Tranquil Yale, Blackheath 93.7 Union Workhouse, Lewisham 42.0 West Kent Park, Sydenham 119.3 Wells Road, Sydenham 220.0 Woodbine Grove, Penge Total. causes of death. Zymotic. Small-pox — — — — — — 1 — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — 1 Measles — — — — — — — — — — — — 1 — — — — — — 1 — — — — — — — — — — — — — 1 — — — — — — — — 3 Scarlatina (Scarlet Fever) — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — 1 — — 1 — — 1 — — 2 1 — 8 1 — — 1 — 16 Hooping Cough — — — — — — — — 1 1 — — — — 1 — — 1 — — — — — — — — — — — — — — 1 — — 1 — — — 1 2 — 9 Croup 1 — — — — — — — — — — 1 1 — — 1 — — — — — — — — — — — 1 1 — — —"— — — — — 1 — — — — — 7 Thrush — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — 1 — — .— — — — — — — — — — — 1 — — — — — — — — 1 — — 3 diarrhoea (Bowel Complaint) — — 1 — — — _ 1 1 1 1 2 — — — 3 — — — — — — — — — 1 1 — 1 13 Dysentery — — — — 1 — — 1 — — — — — — — — — — — — — 2 — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — 1 1 — — 6 Cholera — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — Influenza — 1 — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — 1 — — — — — — — — — — — 2 Scurvy and Purpura — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — —— — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — Ague — — — — — — — — —— — — — —1 — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — Uemittent Fever — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — 1 — — — 1 1 1 — — — — — — — — — — — — — — 4 Infantile Fever — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — Typhus Fever — — — 1 — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — 1 2 1 1 — — — — 1 1 — 1 — — — — — — 1 3 — — 13 Puerperal Fever (Me- tria) — _ _ — — — — — — — _ — _ — _ — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — Rheumatic Fever — — — — — 1 — — — — — — — — — 1 — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — 1 — — — — — — 3 Erysipelas (Rose) — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — Syphilis — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — Noma (Canker) — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — 2 — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — Hydrophobia — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — Total 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 3 1 1 2 1 1 1 1 1 9 1 1 1 1 1 3 5 1 3 1 1 3 1 2 9 1 3 7 3 1 82 * This death from scarlatina occurred in a child brought from Clapham whilst labourin g under the disease. BIRTHS AND DEATHS IN THE SEVERAL WARDS OF LEWISHAM, IN PENGE, AND ALSO THE UNION WORKHOUSE, NORTH SURREY INDUSTRIAL SCHOOL, AND WATERMEN'S ASYLUM, DURING THE YEAR 1857. BLACKHEATH WARD. MONTHS. BIRTHS. DEATHS. Males Females Total Males Females Total January 8 5 13 3 4 7 February 3 5 8 2 4 6 March 4 5 9 0 3 3 April 5 4 9 1 5 6 May 5 2 7 0 3 3 June 7 4 11 3 3 6 July 4 8 12 2 3 5 August 6 3 9 0 4 4 September 5 2 7 1 3 4 October 5 4 9 3 3 6 November 3 5 8 2 1 3 December 3 5 8 1 1 2 Total 58 52 110 18 37 55 LEWISHAM WARD. MONTHS. BIRTHS. DEATHS. Males Females Total Males Females Total January 4 7 11 4 4 8 February 12 11 23 4 3 7 March 4 14 18 3 4 7 April 17 13 30 3 2 5 May 15 5 20 7 5 12 June 6 5 11 4 3 7 July 10 12 22 6 6 12 August 12 6 18 4 4 8 17 September 11 5 16 11 6 October 8 9 17 4 2 6 November 8 7 15 3 2 5 December 16 11 27 7 7 14 Total 123 105 228 60 48 108 LEWISHAM UNION WORKHOUSE. MONTHS. DEATHS. Males Females Total January 1 2 3 February 1 2 3 March 1 0 1 April 0 4 4 May 2 2 4 June 2 1 3 July 1 1 2 August 2 2 4 September 2 5 7 October 1 2 3 November 1 1 2 December 7 2 9 Total 21 24 45 SYDENHAM WARD. MONTHS. BIRTHS. DEATHS. Males Females Total Males Females Total January 9 9 18 3 5 8 February 7 17 24 9 4 13 March 14 10 24 3 3 6 April 20 7 27 6 5 11 May 13 14 27 4 1 5 June 6 8 14 2 2 4 July 10 12 22 7 6 13 August 7 10 17 9 10 19 September 13 7 20 6 8 14 October 20 8 28 8 4 12 November 14 14 28 3 5 8 December 12 13 25 2 3 5 Total 145 129 274 62 56 118 PENGE. MONTHS. BIRTHS. DEATHS. Males Females Total Males Females Total January 2 4 6 0 2 2 February 2 4 6 1 1 2 March 3 4 7 0 0 0 April 5 4 9 4 0 4 May 2 4 6 0 1 1 June 0 1 1 1 0 I July 5 4 9 1 1 2 August 1 5 6 0 4 4 September 9 3 12 1 3 4 October 2 3 5 1 1 2 November 3 1 4 6 4 10 December 2 3 5 2 0 2 Total 36 40 76 17 17 34 NORTH SURREY INDUSTRIAL SCHOOL. MONTHS. DEATHS. Males Females Total January 2 0 2 March 4 0 4 May 0 1 1 July 1 1 2 August 1 1 2 September 1 0 1 November 0 1 1 Total 9 4 13 WATERMEN’S ASYLUM. One (Female) Death. »• . JR2/68