AC 432 (3) ??? MILE END MOH reporte HAML 4 of the MEDICAL OFFICER OF HEALTH to the VESTRY of MILE END OLD TOWN. first general Report, JUNE, 1856. london: printed by d. francis, 24, mile end roa)> 1856 HAML 4 REPORT. Gentlemen, The "Instructional Minute of the General Board of Health"* requires that the Medical Officer of Health, if he be the first appointed in his District, shall, as soon as possible, furnish to the Local Board a connccted account of certain matters relating to the condition of the Hamlet, with respect to the Public Health. SITUATION. The Hamlet of Mile End Old Town may be described as situated in the Eastern part of the Metropolis, on the North bank of the River Thames. Its form is that of an irregular triangle—the base being towards the East and the apex towards the West. It is surrounded by the Parishes of Bromley St. Leonard's and St. Mary Stratford-le-Bow 011 the East—on the North by St. Matthew Bethnal Green, and St. Mary Whitechapel. The Parish of St. George in the East and the Hamlet of Ratcliff bounding it on the South side. It contains 681 acres of land, about 10,000 houses, besides 1000, or thereabouts, either unoccupied or not completed, and about 61,500 inhabitants. EXTENT AND POPULATION. Almost within the memory of individuals of the present generation Mile End Old Town has changed its character. It was formerly an ill-regulated suburb, but has now become an integral portion of the * Dated Dcc. 20th, 1855. 4 great Metropolis. The population has, according to the census tables, increased, from 9,848 persons, in 1801, to 56,602 persons, in 1851. The subjoined Table shows the rate of decennial increase. Number of Persons in Mile End Old Town, (taken from the Population Tables.j 1801 1811 1821 1831 1841 1851 9,848 14,465 22,876 33,898 45,308 56,602 DENSITY OF POPULATION. The density of the population differs considerably in the five wards, as also the area contained within their limits. The following Table will show, in whole numbers, the area, the number of houses, the number of inhabitants, and the proportion of persons to the acre in each Ward :— WARD. Area in Acres. Houses inhabited. Persons. Number of Persons to the Acre. 1.—North 162} 1998 12,188 75 2.—East 193 1125 7,262 37 3—West 78 1920 11,712 150 4.—Centre 135} 2750 16,775 124 5.—South 113 2215 13,511 119 TOTAL 681 10,008 61,448 The areas have been obtained by calculation from the Ordnance Sheets—the number of houses from the poor-rate books—and the population of each ward by multiplying the number of houses occupied by the average number of occupiers, viz. : 61. Large open spaces, to the extent of upwards of 150 acres, are found in the North, East and Centre Wards; some of them are cultivated for market produce—others for grazing—while some are intended and plotted out for building purposes, but at present not covcred. 5 INCLINATION AND LEVELS. The surface gradually slopes towards the river, without any elevation or depression worthy of notice. The Regent's Canal, constructed about 36 years ago, divides the Hamlet into two unequal portions, and, running North and South, separates the East from the other Wards. The levels offer but little variation in their range; the highest ground is in North Street in the North Ward—the level of which according to the Government survey is 46 feet 8 inches, and the lowest, near Rhodeswell in the East Ward, which is 23 feet 3 inches.* SOIL. The soil, for the purposes of this Report, may be described as consisting of a variable thickness of vegetable soil, resting on a stratum of gravel of considerable depth. The depth of the humus, or vegetable soil, is from 2 to 5 feet, and that of the gravel from 9 to 16 feet, and even more. These rest upon what is called London or blue clay. ' • WATER SUPPLY. No spring affording a (low of water is to be found. The District is amply supplied with water by the East London Water Company, from which source the public supply is almost exclusively obtained. Some Artesian wells have been constructed by the proprietors of establishments where a copious and regular supply of water is of the first importance; these wells are from 200 to 500 feet in depth. The supply obtained from them is less than might be expected, and is found to be exhausted, or to diminish, so as to require an increase of descent at the rate of 2 feet 10½ inches every year. The chief defect in the water of the East London Works, which is derived from the Lea River above Tottenham Lock, is its quality of hardness ; while it contrasts favourably with other London Companies in the * The levels are those given iu the Ordnance Sheets—the datum for which is 7 feet above low water mark al Liverpool, and they are only here used to express the range, or to show that there is a difference of 23 feet 5 inches between the highest and lowest ground. The average height of Mile End Old Town above th» Trinity high water mark is 16 feet. 6 smaller quantity of impurity and organic matter contained in it. Hardness in water is not objectionable for drinking in its natural state ; that, however, is not the mode in which the bulk of the supply is consumed. As a solvent, for cooking, preparing tea, coffee, beer, and other like beverages, as well as for the use of the laundry, softer water is preferable. DRAINAGE. The drainage of a district is a matter of the highest importance, and it is a subject of regret that an examination of our own has been followed by a conclusion that it is lamentably deficient; its extension and improvement will be one of the most effective means at the disposal of the Vestry for securing the public health. The necessity of attention to this vital matter is almost daily increasing. It is one of those precautionary measures for the purpose of preventing disease which are scarcely necessary in a small community, but become of the greatest moment where a number of individuals are congregated. The examples of a community, consisting of a few gipsies' tents, and the congregation of persons in an encamped army, may be adduced. Disease rarely occurs in the former, although precaution for the most part is not entertained, while the latter will seldom remain healthy in a single spot, but for a very short space of time, although the most judicious selection of the site may have been accompanied by the most prudent subsequent regulation. The change which has taken place in Mile End Old Town in the population, and the great increase of habitations, point out the necessity of adopting measures to avoid some of the evils always attendant upon the occupation of a particular spot of ground by a large number of persons. In fact, the Hamlet is in a course of transition, if it has not yet become completely changed from country to town, the sanatory management of the one differs much from the other, and it is, therefore, through the alteration in the local condition of the district, that a corresponding alteration in the measures to be taken for the health of the public becomes imperative; foremost among these means is the effectual removal of refuse of all kind, especially sewage matter, as well as superabundant water contained in the vegetable soil. 7 SEWERS. There are at the present time about 250 streets in the Hamlet, and in 106 of them only are main sewers, sewers or drains. The former are three in number :— The BatclifF Highway Sewer, (Eastern and N. Eastern Branches.) The Limekiln Dock Sewer, and The Eastern Counties' Railway Sewer. For their direction your Medical Officer must refer you to the Metropolis Local Management Act, Schedule D, where their position and course are fully described. PAVING OF STREETS AND ROADS. There are two principal turnpike roads which are paved at the sides, the central portion being made in the usual manner with gravel and broken granite, and kept in order by scraping and watering. But a small number of streets are paved throughout, and the kennels and gutters cannot be said to be in a state the most efficient for their object. ATMOSPHERIC AND METEOROLOGICAL PECULIARITIES. The atmosphere is characterized by being for the most part highly charged with moisture, arising from two probable causes:—first, the defective state of the surface drainage; and second, the natural situation. The prevailing winds blowing from the West and South bring with them vapour arising from the Thames, as well as from a greater distance. It has been calculated that the area of the Thames in London may be approximately estimated at 2,245 acres. 1,857a gallons daily evaporate from an acre of water surface. 4,000,000 gallons, or 18,000 tons of water are, therefore, converted into vapour from the London basin of the Thames alone. The atmosphere, perhaps, also from its position, is more fully charged than in some of the neighbouring districts with the produce of combustion, soot, &c. 8 DUST AND REFUSE. Dust and ordinary refuse are removed by persons who have entered into contract with the Vestry for the effectual and speedy removal of the same, when deposited. The roads and streets are cleansed under the direction of the Surveyor to the Vestry, and the arrangements made for the purpose appear to be efficient and satisfactory. SLAUGHTER HOUSES. From the accommodation afforded by the existence, within a practicable distance, of several markets for the sale of meat, slaughtering is carried on, in a degree, not at all corresponding to the amount of animal food consumed. The slaughter houses your Medical Officer has visited have been, with very few exceptions, well drained and cleansed, and are conducted in a manner so as not to be noxious to health. It will be necessary to be vigilant in maintaining their present state of cleanliness during the ensuing season of hot weather, when very trifling causes, by being superadded to others, may occasion a rapid spread of disease and mortality. PUBLIC BATHS AND WASH-HOUSES. Fublic baths and wash-houses have not yet found a place in the Hamlet. Those who use baths travel some distance to establishments in other districts. Washing of linen among the poorer class is so conducted, in most cases, through the force of circumstances, as to add greatly to the dampness and unhealthincss of their dwellings. BURIAL PLACES. Burial places, which were not long since numerous, have become reduced to three in number. Two of them are spacious—the Tower Hamlets' Cemetery, containing 30 acres, and the Jews' burying ground in the Mile End Road, containing about 11 acres.* That belonging to * There is also a small burying ground in Globe Fields, used by the members of tlie Jewish religion belonging to the synagogue in Maiden Lane. 9 Trinity Church, Cottage Grove, is of small extent and but little used. Those which are closed, under the "Act to Amend the Laws concerning the Burial of the Dead," consist of Wycliffe Chapel, Mile End Cemetery, and the East London Cemetery, besides the vaults beneath Brunswick Chapel. The German Jews' Cemetery, adjoining the Mile End Workhouse, was closed, pursuant to their own regulations, some time since. PLANTING CEMETERIES. It would be conducive to the general health, where they will permit of it, if these places of interment which are now closed, occupying conjointly a considerable area, were drained a short depth beneath the surface, partially levelled, so as not to lessen the distinction of particular graves, and planted with shrubs and trees. Plants assimilate the hydrogen of water, while they consume and liberate the oxygen; they also absorb carbonic acid, and appropriating the carbon emit oxygen from this additional source. There are other modes by which the existence of plants in the exercise of their vital processes tend to purify the atmosphere generally, by affording that which is good for the support of animal life, and consuming that which is noxious to it. Thus an undoubted and considerable advantage would be gained by interposing between the dead and the living that which would neutralize the products and effects of decomposing animal matter with which the soil of places, long and freely used for burying the dead, is always strongly impregnated. MANUFACT^^S AND NOXIOUS TRADES. Mile End Old Town appears to possess all the local conditions requisite for a healthy place of residence, and if it is not so to the fullest extent at the present time it is evident that it is capable of being made so by judicious management. Noxious trades are comparatively few, and it is to be hoped that in most cases, where unpleasant odours arise from certain manufacturing processes, some means may be devised to destroy their effluvia and noxiousness, and so obviate the otherwise disagreeable necessity of interfering with industrial occupation. Some trades caunot be carried on without a 10 certain amount of injury to health, and most of those who follow such trades have, doubtless, selected their present position at a time when the population was comparatively scarce; the conditions having become altered by the increased and increasing number of inhabitants, it may, possibly, become necessary to cause those, whose occupations are injurious, to carry on their processes in some locality where a less amount of injury would result than in a densely-populated district. I am gratified in being able to inform the Vestrv that few, if any, cases exist at present, which will immediately require such interposition. HABITATIONS OF THE POOR. It is to be regretted that the great increase in the number of habitations should have been allowed to take place without some municipal direction, or some supervision competent to supply its place —the general salubrity of the District would certainly have been better secured. A great number of the buildings destined for occupation by the labouring classes are constructed of the most inferior materials, in the cheapest possible manner, without proper drainage, and without any observance of order, regularity, or regard to light, or to ventilation by natural currents of air. Every owner of a piece of ground has had the opportunity of making the most of it for his own advantage, and in real opposition to the public good. The houses, thus originally badly constructed, have been insufficiently repaired as they have become decayed or injured, and it will be a prominent part of the duty of the Medical Officer of Health, with the aid of the Vestry, to endeavour, by improving the state of the habitations of the poor, to remedy a soml evil which is, in his opinion, the greatest defect in the Hamlet. EPIDEMIC DISEASES. Epidemics, such as influenza, cholera, typhus or scarlet fever, have not, within the last thirty years, found any very congenial spot in the Hamlet, notwithstanding its defects, where they might become developed and intensified. The mortality of Mile End Old Town is less than that of the Parish or Union of Stepney, of which it forms 11 a part.* I am not in possession of figures or tables on which I can found a precise statement. Still, although we have been hitherto so favoured during the former prevalence of epidemics, instances have been, and will be brought under your notice, of the existence in certain places of every thing that can contribute to the fostering of disease; and the conditions which conduce to its spread, have been on the increase of late years rather than otherwise. Many spots are to be found which an experienced observer could, with the greatest accuracy, indicate as the future habitat of pestilence. To trace out these spots, which do not obtrude themselves on the public eye, through the actual occurrence of disease in them of peculiar character, forms a principal part of the duty of your Medical Officer of Health, and it is to strenuous exertion in procuring the purification of these filthy and pestilential places, that he hopes to be able, with gratification, to attribute at a future time an evident improvement in the health, enjoyment, and longevity, of the inhabitants of the Hamlet. SANATORY STATE. The general health of the Hamlet has been, since January, in a most satisfactory state. The number of deaths, recorded by the District Registrars, your Medical Officer is informed are less than usual. The cases under treatment by the Parochial Mcdical Officers have not been remarkable for their severity, and have been, and are, fewer than have usually been observed in former years, notwithstanding the increase in population. In the absence of the returns of the District Registrars your Medical Officer is unable to inform either himself or the Vestry on many points of importance. To this cause must be attributed the vagueness of the information he is obliged to lay before you on the subject of the sanatory condition of the Hamlet. * The number of deaths from cholera in Mile End Old Town, during the epidemic of 1848-49, was 80 in the Upper District and 86 in the Lower—total 166. The deaths annually, from all causes, are in Stepney at the rate of 242 to every 10,000 persons. It must be remembered that the workhouse at Mile End receives the fever cases of the whole of the Stepney Union, which will give an incorrect return of the mortality of the Hamlet. 12 HOUSE VISITATION. Since the 6th of February upwards of 300 houses have been visited. The drains of 53 of them have been connected with the sewer; in 140 cases where the houses were not sufficiently near a sewer for the Vestry to insist upon a communication being formed, the drains have been improved, and made as nearly perfect as circumstances would permit—23 are in course of alteration. Many houses have also undergone necessary repairs through the interference of the Officers of the Vestry. In addition to these visitations several nuisances of importance have been corrected. TOWER HAMLETS' CEMETERY. Some matters, also, of considerable moment, and seriously affecting the public health, have been altered, through the readiness of the proprietors of premises in which nuisances existed, or offensive trades were carried on, to perform that which was reasonable and likely to remove the cause of complaint. The suggestions which your Medical Officer has offered, have been promptly adopted in many instances, and with perfect success. In the Tower Hamlets' Cemetery a considerable source of annoyance, and perhaps of disease, existed, through pumping the contents of the drains belonging to the Cemetery to the sewer which is at a higher level. I was informed, that the effluvium which proceeded from the building where the process was carried on, was generally attributed to the proper drainage of the soil of the Cemetery itself, which was supposed to have become impregnated with offensive matter, from the immense number of bodies which had been there interred. This, however, on careful examination, proved to be erroneous, and the source of the stench was traced to the pollution of the soil by the refuse from the Great Central Gas Company's Works, which found its way through the contiguous soil, in so unobstructed a manner, that its offensive character remained unaltered. The directors of the Tower Hamlets' Cemetery, upon application by your Medical Officer, have, as far as they are concerned, removed the nuisance, by adapting the pumping drainage from a drain in a different quarter, where the fluid, by filtration, is rendered nearly free from every description of impurity and odour. 13 DUTIES OF THE MEDICAL OFFICER OF HEALTH. As there has been much misconception respecting the duties of the Medical Officer of Health, I may here, perhaps, be allowed to submit an outline of what I believe to be their prominent features, as well as to acquaint the Vestry with that which I have done in endeavouring to perform those duties, and to state the difficulties which have been met with, in the confident hope of their removal. When I was elected your Medical Officer of Health, in February last, I conceived that I was entrusted with the important charge of the sanatory management of the Hamlet; that it was my duty to acquaint myself with the existing condition of the District; more especially with those matters which have a natural tendency to produce, promote, or intensify disease, particularly that of an endcmic or contagious character; to construct channels of information, or avail myself of those already in existence, by which I could be readily and speedily informed of any changes in the health of the inhabitants, and to use such information for the purpose of investigating the causes producing those changes, so as to be able to recommend or suggest to the Vestry measures calculated to effect, wherever it could be accomplished, a removal or abatement of exciting or aggravating causes of disease; thus attaining the prime object of sanatory supervision— a sensible reduction in the rate of mortality. It also appeared to me that an accurate record should be kept of all matters which came under my notice, so that I should be able to render statistical reports to the Vestry as often as might be required. As I had no predecessor in my office, whose successful method of obtaining and using information I might imitate, or whose errors I might endeavour to avoid, I was compelled either to construct a system to carry on the duty, or to find, select, and adopt, with some modification, one which had stood the test of experience. With such an example as that of Mr. J. Simon before me, whose skill and success in the management of sanatory affairs in the City of London have procured for him a very high reputation, I could scarcely hesitate as to the course to be pursued. I therefore spent considerable time and took great pains to acquaint myself with the method employed by Mr. Simon. I have consequently constructed a similar system, in close imitation of his, and although capable at present of improvement it is evident that great advantages will be derived from its operation. 14 WEEKLY MORTALITY RETURNS. The supply of the weekly mortality returns of the District Registrars would enable me to carry out my plans much more efficiently. Without them, I can only express my opinion as to the state of the health of the Hamlet; with them, I should be able to lay before you periodical statements in figures, which would convey absolute facts. But, as the Vestry are aware, they are not at present to be had in a form applicable to this Hamlet, without purchasing them of the District Registrars, or at least remunerating them for the trouble of furnishing the written statements required. From the Registrar General's weekly returns can be had statements of the mortality in the Stepney Union ; but, if that were adopted, it would give a very inaccurate return of that of Mile End Old Town, which forms the healthiest portion of that Union. In the absence of these returns, I have been obliged to report special cases to the Committee for Drainage, Sewerage, and Nuisances, to inquire into particular cases of disease, with a view to trace their causes, and to ascertain whether they were removable or otherwise; and I have endeavoured, mainly by persuasion, suggestion, and influence, to correct some of the defects of which it is my special duty to procure the removal. In conclusion, I beg to remark that in constructing this Report I have endeavoured, as far as possible, to adhere to the specification in the "Minute of the Board of Health," as to the nature of the information desired. In doing so, I am fully aware that I have communicated many facts previously well known to those whom 1 have the honor to address, but as it was necessary to follow some outline I felt that I could not have a better guide than the Minute referred to. I have the honour to be, Gentlemen, Your obedient Servant, J. H. FREEMAN, Medical Officer of Health for Mile End Old Town. Town House, June 4th, 1866. 15 I have subjoined an Appendix which, I believe, will be of use. It consists of a statement of the kind and condition of the sewerage of the Hamlet, as represented in plans and maps furnished by the Commissioners of Sewers to the Surveyor to the Vestry. Also, the state of drainage of the streets; this I have obtained from the statement of Mr. Carter, the Street-keeper, who has been practically acquainted with the street drainage and gullies during the last forty years. Both are as nearly correct as the two sources from which they arc derived will permit* APPENDIX SHOWING TIIE STATE OF SEWERAGE APPLICABLE TO THE DRAINAGE OF HOUSES, Ac., AND THE SURFACE DRAINAGE OF STREETS* No. 1 .—NORTH WARD. Street. Sewerage applicable to the Drainage of Houses, &c. Street Drainage. Albert Road No Sewer None. Albert St., Globe Fields Ditto Ditto. Albert St., Cambridge Road. Ditto Ann Street Ditto Ditto. Argyll Road Ditto Ditto. Anchor Yard Sewer throughout Ditto. Bellevue Place Sewer Drain. Brunswick Place Ditto, imperfect Ditto. Carlton Road Sewer between York Street and Norfolk Street, Ditto iii part. Charles Street No Sewer None. Church Street Ditto Ditto. Cleveland Grove Drain Drain. Cleveland Street Main Sewer Ditto. Cornwall Road No Sewer Drain bv side of Wall. Devonshire Street, East Sewer Sewer. Devonshire Street, West Ditto Ditto. Edgar Place No Sewer None. Essex Streot Ditto Ditto. Eaejle Place Ditto Ditto. East Street Ditto Ditto. Edward Street Sewer Sewer. Fuller's Almshouses Sewer at rear, running towards Anchor Yard, Drain behind. Sewer. Globe Road Main Sewer Green Street No Sewer Drain. * Many of the Streets which are said to be without Street Drainage arc drained byhaving a fall towards an adjacent Street, which is directly drained to the Sewer. 16 Street. Sewerage applicable to the Drainage uf Houses, &c. t Drainage. James Street No Sewer None. King Street Ditto Ditto. Mile End Place Ditto Drain at the back. Nicholas Street Sewer Drain. Norfolk Street Sewer throughout Ditto. North Street No Sewer None. Park Street Sewer throughout Drain. Prospect Place No Sewer None. Queen Street Ditto Drain in part. St. Peter's Street Sewer throughout Drain. St. Peter's Road Sewer Drain. Spring Garden Place Drain Partly drained. Tollit Street No Drain None. Union Street Ditto None. Union Court Ditto Ditto. Vintner's Almhouses Ditto Drain at rear. West Street Sewer throughout Sewer. Willow Street No Sewer Drain in part. Willow Walk Ditto Drain. York Street Ditto Drain in part. No. 2.—EAST WARD. Albion Street No Sewer None. Ann's Road Ditto Ditto. Bridge Street, East Sewer J of eitent between Single Street & Washington Street, Ditto. Bow Common Lane Sewer for short distance between Single Street and Washington Street, Drain beneath Footpath. Canal Road Sewer throughout Drain as far as Mr. Johnson's Premises. Coborn Road Sewer Pipe Drain. Cottage Grove No Sewer None. Dunstan's Road Sewer J of length between Edinburgh Street & Rhodeswell Road, None. Edinburgh Street No Sewer None. Frederick Place Ditto Short Drain on West Side behind the Houses at South End. Grove Road Ditto None. Grove Street Ditto Ditto. Grove Mews Ditto Ditto. Lincoln Street Sewer Drain behind the Houses. Livcrmore's Cottages None None. Morgan Street Ditto Ditto. Park Road Ditto Ditto. Regent Road Sewer of extent between Bow Common Lane and Prince Regent, Ditto. 17 Street. Sewerage applicable to the Drainage of Houses, &c. Street Drainage. Regent Street Sewer throughout Sewer. Regent Street, South . Ditto None. Rhodeswell Road Sewer part of extent Ditto. Single Grove No Sewer Drain. Single Street Sewer throughout Ditto. South Grove Ditto, short intermission near North End, None. Thomas Road No Sewer None. Tredegar Square Drained all round to Main Sewer on West Side, Drain. Upper Montague Street No Sewer None. Washington Street Sewer \ length, commencing at North End, Drain. No. 3.— WEST WARD. Baker Street No Sewer Drain. Haker Street, Upper Ditto Bedford Street Sewer ½ length from Middle of West Side of Bedford Square to Lower StorerStreet Sewer. Bedford Square Sewer ½ extent of West Side Drain at rear of Houses. Charles Street No Sewer None. Chapel Court Ditto None. Essex Street Ditto Ditto. Frederick Place Ditto Drain. Gloucester Street Sewer crosses the Street at centre, with Pipe Drain throughout, Pipe Drain from Gloucester Place to William Street. Greenfield Street Sewer § of extent from North End, Sewer. Gray Street No Sewer Drain in part. Henry Street Ditto Drain. Holloway Street Ditto None. John Street Ditto Drain. John's Place Ditto Small ditto at South End. Mulberry Street Sewer Northern ⅔ Sewer. New Road Main Sewer Ditto. New Street, East Sewer throughout New Street, West No Sewer Nelson Street Sewer throughout Sewer. Norfolk Street Sewer Western ¾ Ditto. Nottingham Place Sewer crosses near SouthEnd Drain at back of Houses. Oxford Street No Sewer Partly drained. Plummer's Row Sewer to within a few yards of Fieldgate Street, Sewer. Philpot Street Sewer Northern ½ Ditto at North End. Raven Row Ditto, all that part in Mile End Old Town, Old Sewer, South Side. Russell Street Sewer in part Drain. 18 Street. Sewerago applicable to the Drainage of Houses, &c. Street Drainage. Russell Street, Little . Sewer in small part None. Rutland Street Sewer throughout Drain. Rutland Street, Little No Sewer Ditto. Rutland Street, Lower Sewer £ Eastern End Ditto. Rutland Street, New . Sewer throughout Ditto. Rutland Street, East . Ditto Ditto. Roberts' Placc No Sewer Ditto rear of Houses. Sidney Street Sewer f of length from Robert Street to the Commercial Road, Drain in part at South End Storer Street, Upper Sewer Western ⅔ Drain. Storer Street, Lower . Sewer throughout Ditto. Storer Street, Middle . No Sewer Ditto. Suffolk Street, Old ... Ditto, except short intermission on East Side of Turner Street, Ditto. Thomas Street No Sewer Ditto back of Houses. Turner Street Sewer throughout Sewer. Union Street Ditto Ditto. Union Row Ditto William Street Ditto Sewer. York Street No Sewer None. York Street Ditto Sewer. No. 4.—CENTRE WARD. Alfred Street No Sewer Drain in part. Assembly Place Sewer throughout Bancroft's Place Sewer Sewer. Bridge Street, West. Sewer from West End to within 30-ft. of the Bridge, Pipe Drain. Bull Lane Sewer throughout Goes to Sewer in llatcliff. Beaumont Square Drained all round to Sewer None. Beaumont Street No Sewer None. Carr Street Sewer for a few feet only, just within boundary, Ditto. Crown Place Sewer throughout Part drained to the Road and part at back. Chambers Street No Sewer Small Drain. Claremont Place Ditto Drain at back of Houses, East Side. Diamond Row Sewer throughout Sewer. Duckett Street Ditto Ditto. Emmett Street No Sewer None. Ernest Street Sewer throughout Sewer. Ernest Street, West... Ditto Ditto. Edward Street Ditto Sewer. Friendly Place Sewer from Bancroft's Place, about 4 of extent, None. Garden Street No Sewer George Street Ditto 19 Street. Sewerage applicable to the Drainage of Houses, See. Street Drainage. Ilannibal Road Sewer throughout Brick and Pipe Drain. High Street, Stepney No Sewer (in Mile End Old Town,) Drain to Sewer. Henry Street Ditto Drain. JohuStreet, Commercial lioad, Ditto John Street, Upper Sewer throughout John Street, Lower Ditto Johnson Street Ditto James Street Ditto King Street Ditto Sewer. Lomas's Buildings Ditto Drain. Louisa Street No Sewer None. Maria Terrace Ditto Ditto. Mary Street Ditto Drain. Nelson Street Sewer throughout Sewer. None. Ocean Street No Sewer Portland Place Ditto Pleasant Row Sewer throughout Sewer. Prospect Place Ditto Ditto. Princes Street No Sewer Pipe Drain. Queen Street Ditto None. Redman's Row Sewer throughout Drain in part. Rhodeswell Road Sewer in small portion of Eastern End, None. , Single Place No Sewer Drain. Skidmore Street Sewer throughout Pipe Drain. Stcpnev Green Sewer in part Drain in part. Silver Street No Sewer Small Drain. Spring Gardens Ditto Drained to Sewer in Ratcliff. Smith Street Ditto Drain. Thomas Street Sewer throughout None. Trafalgar Square Sewer on West Side None. Union Place Sewer throughout Drain. Wade's Place No Sewer Small Drain. Westover Street Ditto None. Wellesley Street New Sewer Drain. Wellington Street Sewer Ditto. Wellington Place Ditto Ditto. White Horse Lane Main Sewer Sewer. Drain. William Street Sewer York Place Ditto Drain. No. 5.—SOUTH WARD. Albany Street Sewer throughout Sewer. Apsley Street Ditto Alma Terracc Sewer Middle Third Drain in part. Ann Street Sewer throughout Arbour Gardens No Sewer None. Arbour Street, East Sewer nearly the N. ½ Drain in part. 20 Street. Sewerage applicable to the Drainage of Houses, &c. Street Drainage. Arbour Street, West... Ditto, a few yards only at Southern End, None. Bermuda Street No Sewer None. Cecil Street Ditto Drained to back of Houses. Cottage Lane Ditto Part at North End. Church Road Pipe Sewer Drain in part. Clark Street No Sewer None. Charles Street Sewer Eastern ⅔ Drain at East End. Dempsey Street No Sewer Drain in part. Exmouth Street Ditto None. Epping Place Sewer throughout Drain. Fair Street Ditto Drain. Grove Place Ditto Green Street No Sewer None. Greenwood Street Ditto Drain run9 to back of Houses. Grosvenor Street Sewer Southern ¾ Drain in part. Heath Street Sewer throughout Small Drain. Holmes Street No Sewer None. Hawkins Street Ditto Drain. Hall's Buildings Ditto Harlow Place Ditto Drain runs to back of Houses, West Side. Jamaica Street Sewer throughout Sewer. John Street No Sewer Drain. Jubilee Street Ditto Ditto part at South End Jubilee Place Ditto Drain runs to Sewer in Redman's Row. Lady Lake's Grove Sewer throughout Drain. Leslie Street No Sewer Drain runs to rear of Houses. North Street Ditto Drain. Newcastle Place Ditto Ditto runs to back of Houses. Oxford Street Ditto Drain in part. Portland Street Ditto Drain. Paterson Street Ditto Ditto. None. Robert Street Ditto Richardson Street Ditto Drain. Sidney Square Sewer West Side only Drained to Sewer on West Side. Stracey Street Sewer throughout Drain. St. Vincent Street No Sewer None. William Street Sewer throughout Drain. White Horse Place No Sewer Drain runs to back of Houses. The Two Principal Roads, Mile End Road and the Commercial Road, are completely Sewered. PRINTED BY D. FRANCIS, 24, MILE END ROAD.