VESTRY OF THE Hamlet of Mile End Old Town. THE THIRTY-THIRD ANNUAL REPORT and an ABSTRACT OF THE ACCOUNTS for the YEAR ENDING 25th MARCH, 1889. london: printed bt e. s. wheatley, 176. mile end road, e. 1889. LIST OF VESTRYMEN—1889-1890. The Rector and Churchwardens are ex-officio Members. Rector of the Parish, of Stepney, Vestrymen—continued. (Which includes this Hamlet.) The Rev. Edwin Hoskyns, M.A. No.3,West-continued. (Rural Dean), Rectory, White Horse-lane, Mr. A. Jacobson, loo, Commercial-rd. 1890 Stepney, E. ,, D.Jones, 41, Commercial rd. 1892 Vestrymen. ,, S.Lyons, 31, New-road 1892 .No. 1 or North Ward— (18 Members.) ,, J.W McEwen, 53 New-road 1890 Mr .F.Banday, ,, J. Makdokp, 81, Ben Jonson rd 189 388, Mile End road 1891 ,, G. Padfiicld, 235, Commercial-rd. 1892 "R.F Brown, 130, Devonshire-st. 1892 ,, C.A.Schweitzer,43, Commercial-rd. 1892 ,, A.F.Charrington, Anchor Brewery, ,, J.H.Smitii, 227, Commercial-rd. 1891 Mile End-road 1892 Dr. S. Constable, 406, Mile End-road 1891 No. 4, or Centre Ward—{21 Members). Mr. H. Cushen, 207 & 209, Mile End- Mr. J. Anderson, " Clare Hall," 269,Oxfprd- street 1890 „ E. G. Dinn, 174, Globe road 1891 J.Andrews, 29, Mile End-road1892 „ J. S. Dwyer, 99, Mile End-road 1891 ,, J.Andrews, 29, Mile End-road1892 „ D.Horn. 63, St. Peters-road 1892 ,,T. W. Booth, 43 White Horse-lane „ E. H. Kerwin, 31, Mile End-read 1891 ,, J .Brown&161, Stepney-green 892 „ G. Lawson, 103, Globe-road 1892 ,, J. Brown, 59 Stepney-green 892 „ C. Lyel, 32, Grafton-street 1890 ,, r ifJ.Cade 54,WnteHorse-lne. 891 „ W. Mitsto, 22, Alderney-road 1890 "W. Chandler, 147, Stepney-green 890 ,, W.J. Nay, 38, Grafton-street 1890 "F. N. Charrington, 41, Stepney-gn. 1890 F F. Oshorn "Kino-Harry "279 " G. CoKER, 39, Beaumont-sq. 1892 m'lle End rode 1890 ,, J. A. Eorster, 275, Oxford-street A. Fdrness, 5, Eastbury-terrace 1891 W. Ockelford, 249, Mile End-road 1891 ,, u t t, i-< m v. i iona ,, W. J. Hasted, 306, Mile End-road 1892 Dr. h. J. Reilly, 1o4, Globe road 1892 " u „ o-i- n/r-i t? i n icon u T D ' „ A , onft R. Hirst, 23/, Mile End-road 1890 Mr- £ ^harlson, 6 Cottage-grove 1890 j D R m Stepney.„Teeu i890 „ H.W.Roberts, 60, Bancroft-road 1890 R. Kemp, 114a, Stepney?grn. 1891 Xo. 2, or East Ward—(18 Members). ,, A. Lloyd, 16, Copley-street 1890 -.r o . n i t Tonn ,, T. A. Macve, 236, Mile End-road 1891 Mr. S. Alum, C^'l-road 890 C. H Pokcas, 47, Ben Jonson.rd. 1892 » /9,L.ch4eldroad 891 p i!l t 1!1. M. ,, A.M.Bell, 40, Tredegar-square 1892 " man's road 1892 ,, H.Bull, 33 St Ann's-road 1892 T 1, Stepney-square 1890 » Chambers, 600, Mile End-road 1891 W.S.Upton, 276, Mile End-road 1891 „ J.T.Davis, oo Coborn-road 892 » j. Mardle, 122, Clark-street 1S91 ,, J. Druitt, 447, Mile End-road 1891 ., A. Druitt, 118, Bridge-street 1892 No. 5, or South Ward—(18 Members). ,, H.E.Ludbrook, 29, Tredegar-square 1890 . M. Lyon, 616 &618,MileEnd-rd. 1892 Mr. G. F. Borge, 51o, Commernial-rd. 1891 ,, C. McCarthy, 294 & 296, Mile „ J. T. Calton, 2, West Ai-b, ur-st 1892 End-road 1891 ,, T. Cook, 060, Commen ial-rd. 1890 ,, T.G.Livermore, 14, South Grove 1892 ,, T. W. Dupen, 195, Oxford-street 1890 ,, J. J. Musto, 21, Clinton-road 1891 J.W.Henley, o43, Commercial-rd. 189 ,, J. Richmond, 180£, Burdett-road 1891 „ E. Kemp, 114, stepney-green 1891 ,, C. J. W. Rudd, Marden Cottage, „ W. A. Kemp, 112, Stepney-gTeen 1892 53, Grove road 1890 ,, C. Lac by, Baths, 4, Exmouth-st. 1891 ,, H.Thomas, 2 Id, South grove 1890 Dr. J. Lynch, 3/2, Commercial-id. 189 „ H. Tippett, 30, Grove-road 1890 Mr. J. Loftbs, 207, Jubilee-street, 1891 ,, G. D. Wade, 12, Grove-road 1890 „ F. O. Martin, 491493^Commer- No. 3, or West Ward—(15 Members). ^ Moore, 144, Mile End-rd. 1892 Mr. C.Birks, 2, Greenfield-street 1891 ,, O. W. Peacock, 581 & 519 Commer- ,, A. Botterill, 233,Commercial-rd. 1890 _ cial-i°ad . „ T.Browning, 39, Commercial-rd. 1891 „ T.J.Smith, a, 7 Comme^l-id. 890 „ J. Calnan, 159,Commercial-rd. 1890 „ J. Taylor, lo A^ Julbdee*t. 890 „ H. E. Collett, 70 & 77, Myrdle-st. 1892 „ L Welteke, 130 S^rcial rd 890 „ W J Cook 201,Commercial-rd. 1890 ,, W. White, 369, Commeiual- d. 18JU .i RJ.eSb«eo, 43, New-road 1891 „ a. Wood, 319, Commemal-rd. 1890 4 Auditors of Vestry Accounts. North Ward Mr. F. J. Gross, 44, Nicholas- Centre Ward—Mr. .J. F. Haines, 212, Mile street End-road East ,,—Mr. J.P. Lasii, 188, Burdett-rd. West ,,-MR. J.Taylor, 249, Com- South ,,-Mr.W.S Colleny, mercial-road mercial-road Officers of the Vestry. Treasurer of the Vestry. Surveyor to the Vestry. Charles Fisher, Esq., London and West- Mr, J. M. Knigiit, Vestry Hall. minster Bank (Eastern Branch), 130. Hours, 11 until 1. Whitechapel, E. Superintendent of Labour. Clerk to the Vestry. Mr. A. Baxter, Riga "Wharf, Emmott-street Mr. Millner Jutsum, Vestry Hall, and Vestry Stables, Canal-road. Bancroft-road Inspectors of Nuisances. Assistant Clerk to the Vestty. Mr. Henry Leshaw, 19, Cottage Grove, and Mr. Edward Hall, Vestry Hall, Bancroft-rd. Vestry Hall. Mr. Charles Cox, Vestry Hall. Second Assistant Clerk to the Vestry. Hours, 10 to 11. Mr. Alfred Greeves, Vestry Hall, Bancroft-road. Inspector under the Adulteration Acts. Mr. Henry Leshaw, 19, Cottage Grove. Medical Officer of Health. Dr. T.Taylor, 131a, Mile End-road, and Messenger and Housekeeper—Mr. J. Gilnagh, Office, Vestry Hall, Bancroft-road. Hours, 10 until 4. Analyst. Mr. R. H. Harland, Plough Court, 37, Constable. Lombard-street, E,C. Mr. John Stevens, 73, Carlton Road. REPORT, This Report of the Vestry for the year ending the 25th March, 889, is prepared on a similar plan to that of last year. It is an abstact of the minutes. Where the Report of the Finance Committee only contained recommendations for the payment of Cheques nothing more is said than that the Report was adopted. Every Report of the Sanitary Committee contained recommendations with regard to the confirmation of orders as to drainage and for the execution of sanitary works. It is not necessary to repeat them therefore, but a reference to Schedules I and II hereto gives information with regard thereto. 58 Members present. Contracts sealed with— (1) Mr. Stevens for supply of Horses, Carts and Drivers. (2) Messrs. Penny and Hull for Printing. A Poor Rate of 7d. in the £ for the quarter approved. The report of the Finance Committee recommended— (1) Calls for rates as under— £17800 0 0 for General Purposes. 1730 0 0 for Lighting. 1375 0 0 for Sewers. 12829 3 II for Metropolitan Consolidated Rate. (2) That the Tender of Messrs. Powell & Co. for Stationery should be accepted. The report was adopted and precepts sealed. Mr. W. S. Upton and Mr. R. Hirst elected senior and junior Churchwardens respectively. Messrs. R. Kemp, C. Birks, J. Loftus, G. Padfield, F. N. Charrington, J. L. Dale, A. Lloyd, W. Chandler, J. Seigenberg, J. T. Calton, H. Tippett, J. Pearson, and T. Richardson, were nominated as Overseers, and their names were ordered to be submitted to the Magistrate in the order given. Votes of thanks were passed to Messrs. A. Prevost (the retiring Churchwarden), R. Hirst and R. Scriven (the late Overseers), and ordered to be engrossed and presented in the ordinary way. Mr. B. Cundick re-elected Collector at a salary of £250. Mr. John Milton re-elected Beadle at a salary of £170. Mr. John Stevens re-elected Parish Constable at a salary of £10. Date of Vestry Meeting. 1888. April 3. (Easter Tuesday) 6 April 11th. at, Members present. Contract with Messrs. Powell & Co. for Stationery sealed. The report of the Finance Committee recommended that the Local Government (England and Wales) Bill should be considered in a Committee of the whole Board. The report was adopted. The Order of the Vestry under the Artizans and Laborers Dwellings' Act, 1868, Re 48, Duckett Street, was considered and it being reported that the works had been carried out, it was resolved that no further proceedings be taken. The further consideration of the reports under the same act, with regard to houses in Philpot Street, was adjourned for four weeks as the works ordered were in progress. The report of the Highways Committee recommended— (1) That in case the owner of Nos. 40 and 42, Wellesley Street made default in repairing the Vaults under that street pursuant to notice, the Vestry's Surveyor should repair the same, and charge the expenses of so doing against the owner. (2) That the Vestry make a pitched entrance to 226, Mile End Road, upon the applicant thereof first paying the estimated cost. (3) That £10 be paid to Mrs. Rich without prejudice, and in discharge of her claim for alleged injuries. (4) That shrubs be provided for the Recreation Grounds, Stepney Green and Trafalgar Square. (5) That the carriage way of George Place be paved with old pitching. The report was adopted. The report of the Sanitary Committee— (1) Stated that the summons against a person for adulterating milk 10 per cent, was heard on 28th ult. and the person convicted and fined 20s. and costs. (2) Recommended that proceedings be taken against another person for adulterating milk 12 per cent. The report was adopted. The following matters were referred to the Sanitary Committee for consideration and report— (1) Urinal at "King Harry" P.H., Grafton Street. (2) Do. "Maid and Magpie" P.H., Oxford Street. (3) Water Supply to closets in houses in Trafalgar Square. The report of the Dusting and Cleansing Committee recommending the acceptance of Messrs. Rathbone and Son's tender to supply 100 quarters of oats at 14s. per quarter was adopted. The 25th April was fixed for the appointment of the Assessment Committee. The 28th day of May was appointed for the Elections of Vestrymen and Auditors, and the places for the holding of the Elections fixed. Messrs. Peacock, Lyon, Roberts, Henley, Brown and Cushen were appointed delegates to attend a conference at the 7 ton Vestry Hall, on the subject of the Metropolitan Board of Works (Local Management, &c.) Bill. The use of the Vestry Hall granted for two months to the Trustees of the People's Palace for meetings of the Orchestral Society connected with that institution. An alleged nuisance to the highway opposite 97, Mile End Road was referred to the Highways Committee for consideration and report. The question of each Sanitary Inspector being made responsible tor the enforcement of the Adulteration Acts in his district was referred to the Sanitary Committee for consideration and report. April 25th. 48 Members present. The report of the Finance Committee— (1) Recommended that the Vestry do not agree with the resolutions of the Erith Board, to the effect that moneys to be received by any District under the proposed continuance of the Coal and Wine dues should be applied as the local authority might think fit. (2) Submitted a list of persons holding appointments under the Vestry, with the names of their securities, and in one case recommended the substitution of another surety. The report was adopted. The report of the Highways Committee, recommended— (1) That the request of Smith & Son, for the Vestry to construct a pitched entrance to their premises in Raven Row, at applicants' cost, be acceded to. (2) That the application for liberty to fix a coal plate in the pavement opposite 93 Mile End Road, be refused. (3) That so much of the west end of the Commercial Road in this Hamlet as abutted on Whitechapel, should be repaved, and that the work should be done by the Whitechapel Board. (4) That the Vestry should not take any action with regard to the alleged nuisance to the highway opposite 97 Mile End Road. (5) That the Surveyor should take steps to prevent any recurrence of the complaint made by the Metropolitan Board of Works, of sweeping mud into sewers. The report was adopted. The accounts for Portland Cement for the last year, were referred to Highways Committee for consideration and report. The report of the Sanitary Committee submitted— (1) Quarterly report of the Public Analyst. (2) Reported that the person who had adulterated milk 12 per cent. had been convicted, and fined 10/- and costs. And recommended— (3) That no alteration should be made, with regard to the Inspectors, carrying out the Adulteration Acts. (4) That to prevent the nuisance complained of at the 8 urinal at the "King Harry" P.H., a urinal should be erected in the middle of the roadway in Grafton Street. (5) That the Vestry should agree with a suggestion made by the Vestry of St. James and St. John, Clerkenwell, that in lieu of the powers to cut off water supply if fittings defective, power should be given to the water company or the local authority, to carry out the necessary works to put fittings in proper condition, and to charge the owner with the costs. The report (except that part relating to the urinal in Grafton Street, which was referred back to the Committee for further consideration,) was adopted. The report of the Dusting and Cleansing Committee recommending that the tender of Mr. A. Smith to supply brooms be accepted, was adopted on condition that a provision be inserted in the contract, that on contractors default to supply goods, the Vestry might procure them elsewhere, and charge him with the cost. The question of the discharge of old men from the Vestry's employ, was referred to the Highways and Dusting and Cleansing Committees respectively, to investigate and report. Messrs. Roberts, Collier, Lyon, Pearson, Rudd, Calnan, Seigenberg, A. Prevost, Furness, Lloyd, Lacey and Henley, were elected members of the Assessment Committee. Resolution carried protesting against the clause in the Local Government Bill, proposing that publicans in the event of their houses being closed, should be compensated out of the ratepayers' pockets. May 9th. 47 Members present. Mr. Smith's contract for supply of brooms sealed. The report of the Finance Committee adopted. The report of the Committee of the whole Board Re Street Improvements— (1) Stated that terms has been agreed on as under: PROPERTY Claim Purchase money agreed 410 & 414, Mile End .Road, (long term) £1720 £1300 1, 3, 5, Harford Street Freehold 2200 1300 19 & 21, Do. Do 1550 1207 23, 25 & 27, Do. Do 1900 1348 10/- 29, Do. Do. 1075 843 10/- 1, Bridge Street Do. 850 653 3,Do. Do. 1046 713 (2) That sealed offers had been made in other cases. (3) That terms had been agreed for purchase of the Copyhold Interest in the Manor House, for the White Horse Lane Improvement, at £725. The report was adopted. The report of the Highways Committee— (1) Recommended that tenders should be invited, for the supply of Portland Cement and lime for 12 months, instead of continuing the plan hitherto adopted. (2) Stating that eight men had been discharged on the 2nd 9 March then last, but that one man only had since been put on. The report was adopted. The report of the Sanitary Committee recommended— That the Surveyor should be directed to prepare report and estimate of the cost, of an underground urinal in Harford Street. (2) That the Sanitary Inspector should require the proprietor of the "King Harry," to keep the urinal there in good condition. (3) That the sewer in Bridge Street and part of Albion Street, should be connected with the deep sewer in Albion Street, the estimated cost being £400, and that tenders should be invited for the work. The report was adopted. The report of the Dusting and Cleansing Committee gave the information directed by the Vestry with regard to the men who had been discharged from the Vestry's employ, and the reasons thereof. The report was adopted. A motion "that the Dusting and Cleansing Committee be "directed to investigate as to the time the men under Mr. Baxter "are paid on Saturdays" was lost. A return of attendances of Vestrymen, at meetings of the Vestry and Committees, was ordered to be printed. A report of Medical Officer of Health, under Artizan and Labourers Dwellings' Act, 1868, on house, 6 Neat's Cottages, was submitted and referred to the Surveyor, to report upon pursuant to the Act. May 23rd. 49 Members present. A member having been asked if the reports in the public press of a speech made by him, with reference to the conduct of the members of the Vestry were correct, and declining to answer, it was resolved that such refusal be entered in the minutes. The report under the Artizans and Labourers Dwellings' Act, 1868, with regard to the houses in Philpot Street, was further considered, and it being reported that the works ordered had been executed, it was resolved that no further steps be taken. The following tenders were accepted— (1) Mr. W. Finch for sewers work in Edward's Road and Albion Street for £389 10/-. (2) Messrs. Ashton & Green for cement, at 31/- per ton. The report of the Finance Committee was adopted. The report of the Committee of the whole Board, Re Harford Street Improvement— (1) Stated that terms had been agreed for the purchase of the long leasehold interest in No. 412 Mile End Road, for £900, the original claim being £1177. 2) Recommended that the necessary financial arrangements in relation to the improvement, be referred to the Finance Committe to carry out. 10 (3) That the Vestry should borrow at once £7000, the re- payment to be spread over 20 years. (4) That the consent of the Metropolitan Board of Works be obtained, and that they be asked to advance the amount. The report was adopted. The report of the Highways' Committee— (1) Stated the steps they had taken with a view to the improvement of Victory Bridge, and submitted a letter from the Surveyor to the Limehouse District Board, stating that that Board did not consider it expedient to proceed further with the matter. (2) Recommended that persons tendering for supply of broken granite, be asked to give a price for supply of spauls with a view of having them broken by persons out of employ resident in the Hamlet. (3) Recommended that an application for permission to construct cellar flags at 25, Whitman Road be granted on terms. (4) Recommended that no opposition to the line of frontage in Raven Row proposed by Mann & Co. be offered, provided that the space between the building line and the existing footway be dedicated to the public. The report (except clause 3 which was referred back) was adopted. The report of the Sanitary Committee, recommended— (1) The approval of proceedings taken against owner of property in Mile End Road to compel him to cleanse drain, which being stopped up prevented the proper drainage of houses in Leslie and Cecil Streets. (2) That the relieving officers be allowed 4/- per case for persons removed by them to hospitals for the purpose of isolation and not by reason of poverty. (3) That the application for the Vestry to fix a urinal in the roadway at the junction of Wilson Street and Alma Road be not acceded to. (4) That a urinal be erected at the South East corner of Devonshire Street and Globe Road at an estimated cost £75. The report (except clause 4 which was referred back) was adopted. Notice of a nuisance at 64 and 66, Mile End Road and 1 to 6, Leslie Street given by the Sanitary Sub. Inspector who was authorised to take proceedings to abate the same. The report of Dusting and Cleansing Committee, recommended— (1) That the Vestry take on lease for 21 years at a rental £130 and on certain conditions, the wharf and lay bye of Mr. T. Gardner adjoining the goods yard at Devonshire Street Station. (2) That the Vestry should agree with the Great Eastern 11 Railway Co. to make an entrance, and to have and maintain a roadway through the goods yard, and to have the use of such entrance and roadway on certain conditions. (3) That the Vestry should agree with the Railway Company to make a siding to the boundary of the wharf in consideration of an annual payment. (4) That the rails from such siding should be extended across the wharf land. (5) That the offer of Mr. Gardner to grant a right of way and maintain the roadway to the wharf from the Mile End Road at a rental of £$0 per annum in case of the determination of the agreement with the Railway Company be accepted. (6) That the Vestry agree with Mr. Gardner for the option to have an adjoining piece of land at a rental of £10 and on certain other conditions. (7) That the Vestry should have free right of way over an existing roadway on certain conditions. The report was referred to a Committee of the Whole Board for consideration and report. 13th. 70 Members present. The Churchwardens return of the result of the Election of Vestrymen and Auditors received. Order on the Overseers for payment out of the Poor Rate of £105 5 9 the expenses of such elections was sealed. Messrs. Ashton & Green's contract for supply of Portland Cement sealed. The report of the Finance Committee, recommended— (1) That the annual report of which they had approved, should be printed. (2) That a petition be presented in favor of the Excise Duties (Local purposes) Bill. (3) That the clerk communicate with the promoters of the Footpath and Roadside Wastes Bill, to obtain the insertion of provisions which would enable the Vestry to deal more effectually with the waste in the Mile End Road. The report was adopted. The report of the Highways Committee, recommended— (1) That a contract be entered into for the supply of 2,000 tons of spauls and broken granite. (2) That an application for liberty to advertise on the public pavements be not granted. (3) That the Vestry deny their liability in reference to an accident alleged to have occurred through a hole in the pavement. (4) That a larger lantern with two burners should be fitted to the lamp in Beaumont Square. (5) That the channels in Duckett Street and Mary Street should be paved with scoriœ blocks. 12 (6) That an additional lamp should be placed in Knott Street. (7) That an additional lamp should be placed in John's Place. The report was adopted. The report of the Sanitary Committee, recommended— (1) That an application for the Vestry to place a urinal in Assembly Passage be not acceded to. (2) That a urinal to accomodate four persons be erected in Devonshire Street. (3) That fresh tenders for executing the sewer in Edward's Road and Albion Street be invited, Mr. Finch having withdrawn his tender which had been accepted by the Vestry. (4) That tenders be invited for the performance of the jobbing sewers work. (5) That the Vestry approve of the proposal of Metropolitan Board of Works to place the Commercial Road from Jamaica Street to Cannon Street Road under the exclusive management of the Vestry of St. George in the East, for the purposes of sewerage and drainage, and to order that Vestry to reconstruct the sewer upon this Vestry contributing to the cost, and that the Metropolitan Board should be asked to insert several clauses as mentioned in the report, which in the opinion of the Committee were necessary for the protection of this Hamlet. The report (except clause 2) was adopted. The condition of certain houses in Stepney Green and Allars Road was referred to the Sanitary Committee for consideration and report. The report of the Dusting and Cleansing Committee recommended the acceptance of the following tenders, (a) Mr. Reynolds for 3 months, Clover first cut 92/-, Hay 90/-, Wheat Straw 38/-, Oat Straw 40/-. (b) Mr. Pechey for 100 quarters of Oats at 14/- per quarter. The report was adopted. A resolution passed that no vestryman should be eligible to be elected on more than one of the standing Committees. The members of the several standing Committees were appointed. The vacancies on the Assessment Committee were filled up. The annual accounts as audited and allowed were submitted. The Overseers accounts as audited were submitted. The Surveyor reported under the Artizan and Labourer's Dwellings Act, 1868, in respect of the house 6, Neat's Cottages. Resolution passed directing copies of the reports to be sent to the owner, and the day and time for hearing objections thereto fixed. June 20th. 55 Members present. A motion that the resolution of the Vestry of 15th December 1880, 13 "That the sum limited for refreshments for Committees on survey do not exceed 5/- per head" be rescinded, lost. A resolution was passed— I hat in future no monies be paid out of the Petty Cash for refreshments without coming before the board for its sanction." A resolution was passed— That in future all workpeople employed by the Vestry be paid by an officer under the direction of the Clerk or Surveyor as the Board may direct." The last mentioned resolution was referred to the Finance Committee to consider and report as to the best means for carrying it out. A resolution was passed urging the Metropolitan Board of Works to take immediate steps to carry out the Blackwall Tunnel scheme in its entirety. The report of the Finance Committee was adopted. A motion with reference to the mode of disposing of the Filly, the property of the Vestry, was referred to the Dusting and Cleansing Committee for consideration and report. t 4th. 51 Members present. A Poor rate of 8d. in the £ approved. The following tenders were accepted— (1) Mr. S. W. Hawkings for the performance of Sewer works in Edwards Road and Albion Street for £"396. (2) Messrs. Fennings for Broken Granite and Spauls at 9/9 and 7/3 per ton, respectively. Tenders for the performance of Jobbing Sewers work were opened and referred to the Sanitary Committee for consideration and report. The reports of the Medical Officer of Health and Surveyor with respect to 6, Neat's Cottages were considered, the owner's objections heard, and the works ordered to be executed upon certain conditions and the matter adjourned till next meeting of the vestry. The report of the Finance Committee recommending that application should be made to the Metropolitan Board of Works for consent to borrow £"14,000 temporarily, for the purposes of street improvements was adopted. The report of the Committee of the Whole Board Re Improvements— (1) Stated that terms had been arranged for the purchase of the Copyhold Interest in 420 and 418, Mile End Road for £1,600, the original claim being £2,640. (2) Stated that a precept to summon a jury to assess the compensation in respect of 7, 9, 11,13,15,aaand 17, Harford Street, had been issued. (3) Recommended approval of Committees proceedings. (4) Recommended employment of Messrs. Wilde and Venables, Accountants, to investigate trade claims. 14 (5) Recommended that the offer of the Metropolitan Board to advance £7,000 repayable in 20 years at £3 10s. per cent, interest be accepted. (6) Recommended approval of following terms with the tenant of the Manor House— (a) Tenant to give up forecourt. (£) The Vestry to pay tenant £50 of which £20 at least should be spent in repairs. (c) The Vestry to grant a lease for 7, 14 or 21 years determinable at tenants option at £32 per annum. (7) That the report of the Dusting and Cleansing Committee of 23 May, Re Wharf, should be adopted. The report was adopted. The report of the Highways committee recommended— (1) That tenders be invited for performance of Smith's work. (2) That liability to compensate Mrs. Long for alleged accident in Burdett Road be denied. (3) That the application for permission to place a cellar flap in Whitman Road be granted on conditions. The report was adopted. The report of the Sanitary Committee— (1) Recommended that the Board deny liability to compensate for injuries caused by overflow of sewers, owing to heavy rain on the 25th June. (2) Reported that upon inspection, the sanitary condition of certain houses in Allars Road was found to be satisfactory. (3) Recommended that peremptory notices be served where sanitary orders reported not complied with. (4) Recommended that the Metropolitan Board of Works be informed that the Vestry would contribute half the cost of reconstruction, &c., of sewer in Commercial Road. The report was adopted. Assent given to the name of the Vestry being used in relation to a Cricket Match for a charitable object, and the use of committee room granted for meetings. The report of the Dusting and Cleansing Committee recommending that the Vestry's Filly be sold was adopted. Certain statutory notices with regard to the supply of Electricity for lighting purposes referred to the Highways Committee to be dealt with. Letters from the Coroner on the subject of a public Mortuary lor the Hamlet, referred to the Sanitary Committee. Six copies of Woolrych's Metropolis Management Acts ordered to be purchased to be lent to members. July 18th. 50 Members present. Contracts sealed with— (1) Messrs. Fennings for supply of Granite. (2) Mr. Hawkings tor Sewers Work in Edwards Road and Albion Street. 15 The report of the Finance Committee recommended— (1) That the instructions to the Clerk with reference to the attendance of persons at the Vestry Meetings be suspended. (2) That the Mortgage for £7,000 to the Metropolitan Board of Works be sealed, and .a cheque for the costs drawn. (3) That in lieu of a loan of £14,000, the Metropolitan Board of Works be asked to advance £10,000 for 5 years, or until they made their promised contribution, which ever should first happen. (4) That the cheque recommended to be paid to Mr. Rutty should not be paid until he settled his account for the hire of the steam roller. The report was adopted. The Mortgage referred to was sealed and the Clerk authorised to receive the cheque on behalf of the Vestry. The report the Highways Committee recommended— (1) That tenders be invited for supply of Kentish Flints and Hoggin. (2) That Messrs. Cole's tender for Smith's Work be accepted. (3) That the footway of John's Place be paved with Flags and the roadway paved with Tees Scoriae Blocks. (4) That notices be served requiring persons to discontinue displaying goods upon lamps erected with consent of the Vestry. (5) That a claim for compensation for damage alleged to be caused by horses taking fright at the steam roller be settled for 30/-. (6) That the crossing at Fair Street and Oxford Street should be paved. The report was adopted. The condition of the paving in the Mile End Road between Globe Road and Stepney Green referred to the Highways Committee for consideration and report. The report of the Sanitary Committee— (1) Stated they had investigated complaints of want of proper water supply to closets in houses in Arbor Square, and from inspection of the houses referred to, found the complaint not correct, and that the houses were in good condition. (2) That Mr. Hawkings' tender for Jobbing Sewers Work be accepted. (3) That one of Knight's patent deodorising chambers should be fixed at ventilating grate in Jubilee Street. The report was adopted. The report of the Dusting and Cleansing Committee recommended— . . (1) That their proceedings in settling claims for compensation at £3 and 30/- respectively, in respect ot an accident alleged to have been caused by a water an, should be approved. 16 (2) That the Board deny liability in respect of an accident alleged to have occurred in Cleveland Street. The report was adopted. The Surveyor reported that the order of the Vestry for works to be carried out at 85 to 89, Greenfield Street had not been complied with, and it was resolved that if the works were not proceeded with in a week, further proceedings should be taken at the cost of the owner. Order of the Vestry, Re No. 6, Neat's Cottages, ordered to be served, and that the Clerk' serve notice to quit on the tenant of such house. Precept of the School Board for London for half year ending Christmas amounting to £6,057 15s. 4d. submitted and referred to Finance Committee. Financial Statement of the Guardians for half year ending Lady-day, 1888, received. A Motion protesting against payment by Metropolitan Board of Works of Solicitor's expenses on the enquiry being held into the proceedings of that Board was lost. August 1st. 41 Members present. Contracts sealed with— (1) Mr. Hawkings for Jobbing Sewers Work. (2) Messrs. Cole for smiths Work. Messrs. Wills and Packham's tender for supply of Kentish Flints, &c., accepted. The report of the Finance Committee recommended— (1) That a new Carpet be provided for the Vestry Hall, and that tenders be invited, and that the matter be referred back to the Committee to carry out. (2) That in the event of the Metropolitan Board of Works agreeing to advance the £10,000 asked for, the Committee be authorised to affix the Vestry's seal to the Mortgage, and that the Clerk be authorised to receive the cheque on behalf of the Vestry. (3) That the seal of the Vestry be affixed to a duplicate of deed of convevance of the Manor House, Stepney Green. The report was adopted. The seal of the Vestry was affixed to— (1) The duplicate deed of conveyance of the Manor House. (2) The counterpart lease of the Wharf adjoining Devonshire Street Goods Station. (3) The agreement as to adjoining land Resolutions carried adjourning the Vestry to the 19th September, and giving the various committees powers to take temporary measures on behalf of the Vestry, should occasion arise. A deputation was received on the subject of the nuisance 011 the Waste on Sundays. A deed of indemnity to the Surveyor in respect of acts carried out by him pursuant to the orders of the Vestry was sealed. The report of the Committee of the Whole Board, Re Street 17 Improvements, recommending that the Clerk be authorised to settle the costs of title and conveyance of the various claimants' solicitors, at such sum as he considered reasonable and proper, and would be allowed on taxation, or in the event of his being unable to settle them, to have them taxed, was adopted. The report of the Highways Committee recommended— (1) That the clerk be instructed to take all necessary steps to defend an action commenced by Mr. Long. (2) That an applicant for the Vestry to place another lamp in Assembly Passage be informed that the place is already sufficiently lighted. (3) That the Metropolitan Board of Works be informed with regard to an application made to them, for permission to form a paved way out of Hannibal Road, that the Vestry do not object to the line of frontage in Cressy Place, but that the proposed new street ought not to be allowed. The report was adopted. The report of the Sanitary Committee recommending— That an applicant for increased urinal accommodation near the "Mitre" P.H., White Horse Lane, should be informed that the present convenience is sufficient was adopted. The report of the Dusting and Cleansing Committee recommending that Mr. Pattison's tender to supply 100 qrs. of oats at 13/6 per quarter, should be accepted, was adopted, and the agreement for the purpose sealed. The Surveyor submitted a Plan and Estimate, under the Artizan and Labourers Dwellings' Act, in respect of Nos. 85 to 89, Greenfield Street, and notice thereof was directed to be given to he owner, and the further consideration of the matter was adjourned to the 19 September. . A motion that certain information asked by the Guardians in reference to a man discharged from the Vestry's service, should be supplied to them, was lost. Sept 15th. 44 Members present. Contract with Wills & Packham for supply of flints, &c., sealed. . The report of the Finance Committee stated- (1) That pursuant to the authority of the Vestry, the Committee had sealed the mortgage to the Metropolitan Board of Works to secure £10,000. (2) That the Committee had accepted Vesper & Corner's tender to supply the new carpet to the Vestry Hall. The report was adopted. The report of the Highways Committee— (1) Submitted estimate for the half-year. And recommended— (2) That the Vestry construct a paved entrance to private property in Stepney Green, 011 the owner paying the cost. 16 (0 That the Vestry deny liability in respect of alleged damage to pipes in Nelson Street. (4) That the attention of the Police be called to the growing nuisance, caused by Mr. Sullivan in Commercial Road. (5) That the Surveyor alter the position of a lamp 111 White Horse Lane near Rectory Square. (6) Submitted refusal of consent by the Metropolitan Board of Works, to formation of new street out of Hannibal Road. And also recommended— (7) That a new lamp be placed in Lomas Buildings on certain conditions. (8) That Lomas Buildings be paved at the expense of the owners. (9) That the narrow entrance of Whitman Road be paved. (10) That Silver Street, from Oxford Street to George Street, be paved, and the channels in the remainder of the street paved. (11) That the channels be paved in Pole Street, Hawkins' Street, Richardson Street, and Redman's Road. (12) That part of the footway of Exmouth Street be widened. The report was adopted. The report of the Sanitary Committee— (1) Submitted estimate for the half-year. (2) Recommended that memorialists complaining of indecencies occurring at the urinal at Blomfield Road, be referred to the Police. (3) Submitted quarterly report of Public Analyst. The report was adopted. The report of the Dusting and Cleansing Committee submitting— Estimate for the quarter, and recommending that tenders be invited for bargeing away refuse was adopted. The further consideration of the Plans, &c., Re Houses in Greenfield Street was proceeded with, and it being reported that the owner had provided nine water closets, the matter was adjourned till the next meeting. Resignation of Mr. Burge of his membership of the Sanitary Committee received. A Motion that all persons tendering, should be required to deposit £5 upon certain conditions, was lost. Ihe mode to be adopted in the future for reception of moneys lor removal of 1 rade Refuse, &c., referred to the Dusting and Cleansing Committee for consideration and report. Oct. 10th. 46 Members present. Messrs. Gardners' tender for removal of refuse by barge accepted. Poor Rate of 7d. in the £ approved. Ihe report of the Finance Committee recommending— Calls for rates as under : £19,250 for General Purposes. 1,600 „ Lighting. T>375 >> Sewers. was adopted and the precepts sealed. 1 he report of the Highways Committee recommended— (r) That permission be granted to build three new areas at St. Augustine's Parsonage, Settles Street, on certain conditions. (2) That additional lamps be placed— (a) one in Nelson Street, (b) one in Perth Street. (3) That the carriage way of the north end of Globe Road, be repaired. (4) That the carriage way in the Mile End Road, between Globe Road and Stepney Green, be repaved. (6) That the old stone be redressed and laid in Old Church Road, Settles Street, and entrance to Wharf at Devonshire Street. (7) That £5,000 be borrowed for twenty years, and that it be referred to the Finance Committee, to make the necessary arrangements. The report was adopted. A memorial Re Lighting of Georgina Place received. The report of the Sanitary Committee recommended— (1) The giving of a caution to person adulterating milk 15 per cent. (2) That the action of the Sanitary Officers in relation to an outbreak of Measles at the St. Paul's Road Board School, be approved. (3) That a Knight's patent deodorising chamber be fixed at the ventilating grate in Albion Street. The report was adopted. A Letter directed to be sent to the School Board for London, complaining of the dirty state of the schools at St. Paul's Road. Mr. Dupen elected a member of No. 3 Committee, in place of Mr. Burge. The report of the Dusting and Cleansing Committee recommended— (1) That the tenders of (<7) Messrs. Gingell & Co. to supply for three months— Clover. Hay. Straw. 1st cut. '2nd cut. Oat. Wheat. 139/- 126/- 100/- 38/- 38/- (£) Of Mr.Pattison to supply 100 quarters of Oats at 15/be accepted. (2) That the existing system of collecting amounts for Trade Refuse, &c., should not be altered. The report was adopted. The Agreements with Messrs. Gingell & Co. for supply of Fodder, and with Mr. Pattison for supply of Oats, at the prices given, were sealed, 20 The further consideration of Plans, &c., Re Houses in Greenfield Street was proceeded with, and sufficient works having been done, further proceedings directed to be stayed. The question of the Insurances on the various properties of the Vestry, referred to the Finance Committee for consideration and report. Ort. 24th. 55 Members present. Contract with Messrs. Gardner for bargemg away Refuse, &c., sealed. The report of the Finance Committee was adopted. The report of the Highways Committee recommended— (1) That persons causing a nuisance to highways by hanging goods on lamps, be required to abate same. (2) That the Vestry object to the proposed mode of erecting houses, at 137 and 139, Sidney Street. (3) That the conduct of the surveyor in removing the steps opposite 123, White Horse Lane, with the consent of the owner be approved. The report was adopted. The report of the Sanitary Committee— (1) Submitted Analysts quarterly report. (2) Recommended that a summons be taken out against the owner of 59, Old Church Road, for failing to carry out sanitary works. The report was adopted. A special report of the Medical Officer of Health Re use of 59, Mile End Road as a shelter for outcasts was received, and the recommendations therein contained adopted, and proceedings ordered to be taken in case of default. A special report of the Medical Officer of Health on the subject of the epidemic of measles at the St. Paul's Road Schools, and recommending their being closed was received, approved, and adopted. The inspector under the Adulteration Acts was directed to report quarterly along with the Analysts report the wards out of which the samples had been taken. The use of the Vestry Hall granted for a banquet in aid of the Funds of the Victoria Park Hospital. 1 he report of the Dusting and Cleansing Committee, recommended— (1) fhat two corrugated iron sheds be erected on the dust wharf. (2) 1 hat a kitchen for the use of the women employed there be erected. (3) lhat water be laid to the last mentioned building and that the Guardians be asked to give a supply by meter from the School Lavatory as the nearest available source. (4) I hat a chimney shaft and two furnaces for consuming refuse be erected on the dust wharf. The report was adopted. Ihe use oi a committee room to receive tithes granted if applicant would pay £22 o 21 Nov. 7th. Members present. Ihe report of the Finance Committee was adopted. 1 lie report of the Highways Committee, recommended— (1) lhat tenders be invited for the supply of 10,000 feet of York Paving. (2) That an application for permission to erect a fountain at the corner of Eagle Place be granted on conditions. (3) That lamps be placed in (a") Bancroft Road. (b) Georgiana Place. (c) Terrace Place, Stepney Green. (d) Centre of Turner Street and Walden Street. but that with regard to cases (b) and (c) without adopting the places as public highways. (4) Stating that the application to the Metropolitan Board of Works Re the re-erection of Nos. 137 and 139 Sidney Street had been refused. The report (except that part relating to lamp at Turner Street which was referred back) was adopted, the Committee to determine the spot at which the fountain should be erected. The question of the lighting of Whitehead Street and Philpot Place was referred to the Highways Committee for report. The report of the Sanitary Committee, recommended— (1) Approval of settlement of claim for compensation. (2) Stating that the School Board had replied to the letter sent by the Vestry and stated that the schools had been closed and would be disinfected. (3) Recommended that the applications of Mr. Lloyd and Mr. Swadling for licenses for cow houses at 2, Joseph Street and 180, Stepney Green be opposed. (4) That an additional man-hole be inserted in the sewer in South Grove and the drains at the cross streets relaid. The report was adopted. The report of the Dusting and Cleansing Committee, recommended— (1) That the wages of the dustmen who are paid by load be increased from iod. to 1 /- per load in all cases. (2) Stated that the Guardians had declined to accede to request to supply water to kitchen on wharf. (3) Directing appeal against the assessment of the dust wharf. The report was adopted. Nov. 2ist. 46 Members present. Tenders accepted ot (1) Mr. Rutty for supply of 10,000 feet of York Paving at 55/6 per 100 feet, superficial. (2) Messrs. Glover & Son for erection of Iron Sheds at dust wharf for £143. The report of the Finance Committee recommending that if the Metropolitan Board of Works would advance the £"5,000 22 required for the Mile End Road and Globe Road paving, for 15 years at 3^ per cent, the Vestry should accept the same, was adopted. The report of the Committee of the Whole Board Re Harford Street Improvement. (1) Stated that the owners of Nos. 7, 9, 11, 13, 15 and 17, Harford Street had agreed to accept £"2,252 the original claim for which was £"3,861. (2) Recommended that precepts to the sheriff should be sealed to summon juries in the cases of the claims of the tenants of 1 and 3, Harford Street. The report was adopted and the precepts sealed. The report of the Highways Committee, recommended— (1) That permission be granted to insert coal plates in the pavement in front of 61, St. Peter's Road and 484, Mile End Road respectively 011 certain conditions. (2) That notices be served to prevent nuisances to highway in Cornwall Road. (3) That Eaton Place be paved upon the owners agreeing to pay the cost. (4) That permission be granted to erect a lamp on the pavement opposite to the " Prince Albert," Lincoln Street, on conditions as to removal, etc. The report was adopted. The report of the Sanitary Committee which recommended that the Vestry do not agree with the views of the Shorditch Vestry on the subject of vaccination, was received, but the Vestry adjourned without adopting it. Dec. 5th. 53 Members present. The seal of the Vestry was affixed to— (1) Mr. Rutty's Contract for supply of York Paving. (2) Agreement with Great Eastern Railway Company with regard to the laying down and maintenance of sidings at dust wharf. Ihe tender of Messrs. Woodham and Fry for Paving Works in Mile End Road, &c. for £5,107, accepted subject to enquiries. 1 he report ol the Finance Committee recommended— I hat in future the work people employed by the Vestry should be paid under the direction of the Surveyor, and as far as practicable at the Vestry Hall Offices. 1 he report (except the part as to the payment of the work people which was referred back) was adopted. 1 he report ol the Highways Committee recommended— (1) Ihe placing ol additional lamps as under: in Union Court (1), Whitehead Street (1), Lindley Street (1), Arbor Square (2), Lincoln Street (1), Maplin Street (2), St. Dunstan s Road (2), Salisbury Street (1), Driver's Buildings (1), Essex Place (1), Globe Road (1), Eaton Place (1), Queen's Anus Court (1), and Philpot Place (1), but as to some cases with special reservations as to non-taking over of the places as highways. 23 (2) That the channels in Floriston Street and Calverly Street be paved with Scoriae Blocks. (3) That resolutions be passed for paving, &c. Eaton Place at the expense of the owners. The report was adopted. Formal resolution with regard to paving, &c. Eaton Place were passed accordingly. The subject of lighting John's Place and Sternfield Street was referred to the Highways Committee. The report of the Sanitary Committee dealing with the views of the Shorditch Vestry on the subject of vaccination was adopted. The report of the Dusting and Cleansing Committee recommended— (1) The acceptance of the tenders of Rathbone & Son to supply 100 quarters of oats and 25 quarters of beans at 16/3 and 39/- per quarter, respectively. (2) That 3 slop vans be purchased and tenders invited. (3) That 3 carts for carriage of stone be purchased and tenders invited. (4) That the agreement with the Great Eastern Railway for use of sidings, &c., be sealed. (5) That Messrs. Glover having declined to execute contract for erection of iron sheds on Dust Wharf, the matter be referred back to the Committee with power to authorise the Surveyor to put in the foundations by the men in the Vestry's employ, and that tenders be invited for the iron work. (6) Stating that on appeal the rating of the Dust Wharf had been reduced from £ 130 to £108 rateable value. The report was adopted. The agreement with Rathbone & Son for supply of oats and beans was sealed. A report from Veterinary Surgeon on the condition of one of the Vestry's Horses was received and horse ordered to be slaughtered. The totals of the gross and rateable values of the Valuation Lists of the several Parishes, &c. of the Metropolis received. The resignation of Mr. Miller as a Vestryman received. A Memorial on the subject of State colonization was referred to the Parliamentary Committee. An application for the hire of the Vestry Hall declined. A resolution was passed that the Vestry could not accede to an application for them to take over the maintenance of Holy Trinity Churchyard. Messrs. Cushen, J. D. Kemp and Birks were appointed delegates to attend a conference at Chelsea, on the subject of the Local Government Act as it affects Highways. A resolution passed that the 5/- per head allowed for refreshments be granted only to those who attend the survey and partake of the refreshments. 24 Dec.19th . 40 Members present. The report of the Highways Committee stated— That the result of enquiries with regard to Messrs. Woodham & Fry was satisfactory and they had directed contract to be prepared. The report was adopted. Messrs. Woodham & Fry's contract sealed. Seal of the Vestry affixed to mortgage to the Metropolitan Board of Works for .£5,000 at Per cent. and the clerk authorised to receive cheque for the Vestry. The following tenders were accepted. (1) Mr. T. Lye for erection of chimney shaft and furnaces at dust Wharf for £358. (2) Messrs. Fraser for iron work at do. for £172 10s. (3) Mr. Ruston's for supply of slop vans at £32 each. 4) The Hull Cart Co. for supply of stone carts at £16 10s. each. The report of the Finance Committee was adopted. The decisions of the Finance Committee with regard to the insurances on the Vestry's properties were read. The report of the Committee of the Whole Board Re Harford Street improvement, stated (1) The proceedings of the Committee with regard to Kendon's claim £351 which had been settled for £50 and Henwood's claim of £420 which had been settled At £75. (2) That Hollingsworth's claim £555 had been settled for £100. (3) That they had sealed offers of compensation to Andrew Lamp] ugh and George Clarke and recommended that precepts be sealed to summon jury if offers not accepted. (4) That Hyams' claim of £ 100 had been settled for £50 and (5) Recommended that their proceedings should be adopted. The report was adopted. Mr. Mardorf was elected a member of the Highways Committee in place of Mr. Miller resigned. The report of the Sanitary Committee, recommended— (1) That a caution be given to a person supplying a sample of mustard found by the Analyst to be adulterated. (2) That an application for the Vestry to Fix a urinal at Ben Jonson Road be not acceded to. (3) That proceedings be taken against owner of properties in Greenfield Street, for shutting up closets which had been provided by order of the Vestry. The report was adopted. The Clerk directed to write to the East London Water Company complaining of the shutting off of the water on several occasions. The report of the Dusting and Cleansing Committee, stated— (1) That they had instructed the Surveyor to put in the Foundations and uprights for the sheds at the dust wharl. 25 Recommended— (2) That the tender of Whitford & Co. for the performance of the ironwork for £93 16s. should be accepted. (3) That telephonic communication be established between the Surveyor's office and the dust wharf. (4) That the tender of Whitford & Co. for erection of kitchen at the dust wharf for£55 be accepted. The report was adopted. The application of the Deputy Returning Officer for the borough of the Tower Hamlets for the purposes of the election of County Councillors, for the use of a room at the Vestry Hall in connection with that election was granted. A resolution passed that in future all persons tendering should be required to deposit with the clerk the sum of £5 the same to be returned immediately to the parties whose tenders are rejected but in the case of the party whose tender is accepted to be retained until the contract is signed, if the tender be withdrawn after its acceptance by the Vestry the deposit to become forfeited. 1889. 49 Members present. Jan. 9th . following contracts sealed with (1) Mr. Lye for erection of shaft, etc. (2) Messrs. Fraser for ironwork for do. (3) Mr. Ruston for slop vans. (4) Hull Cart and Waggon Co. for stone carts. (5) Whitford & Co. for erection of sheds and portable kitchen. A Poor Rate of 7d. in the £ approved. The report of the Finance Committee was adopted. The report of the Committee of the Whole Board Re Harford Street improvement, stated— (1) Settlement of Mr. Clark's claim of £ 133 17s. for £50. (2) That they had sealed offers in respect of Mrs. Perriam's and Mr. Cox's claims, and recommended that the necessary precepts be sealed to summon jury if the offers not accepted. (7) The settlement of Underwood's claim of £1687 3 6 for £460 and of Miller's claim of £680 9 6 for £325. and (4) Recommended that their proceedings be adopted. The report was adopted and the clerk having stated that Mr. Cox would accept the offer the precept in Mrs. Perriam's case only was sealed. The report of the Sanitary Committee, recommended— (1) That a smoke testing apparatus for testing drains be obtained. (2) That one of Knight's patent deodorising apparatus be fixed at the grating in Myrdle Street. The report was adopted. The state of the sewer in Morgan Street was refened to The Sanitary Committee for report. Two orders of the Metropolitan Board of Works dated 21st December, 1888, on the following matters received. 26 One, placing part of the Commercial Road under the exclusive management of the Vestry of St. George in the East, for the purposes of sewerage and drainage only, and ordering that the cost of construction and future maintenance of the new sewers and of the existing sewers, should be borne by that Vestry and this Vestry in equal proportions. The other, ordering the construction of a new sewer in the Commercial Road by the the Vestry of St. George in the East, the work to be commenced within three months and completed within twelve months after the date of the order. A letter received from the East London Water Works Company on the subject of the complaint Re shutting off of water. The use of the Vestry Hall granted for the purpose of the Election of County Councillors. The Surveyor directed to take up the carpet in the Vestry Hall on the day of election. Estimate of £66 12s. as the cost of paving, etc. Eaton Place approved. A Motion with regard to the relations existing between the clerk and a contractor was proceeded with but the Vestry adjourned during the debate. Jan. 23rd. 46 Members present. The correctness of the minutes of the last meeting questioned but they were confirmed. Surveyor's absence excused. The report of the Finance Committee recommended— (1) That in future all work people employed by the Vestry be paid under the direction of the surveyor and so far as practicable at the Surveyor's office at the Vestry Hall, but as regards the men under the control of the Dusting and Cleansing Committee between the hours ot 5 and 6 on Friday evenings, or if that time be found inconvenient then at such other time as may be arranged between that Committee and the Surveyor. (2) That this Vestry agree that the present system of rating public companies upon their profits, instead of upon the annual value ot the premises owned by them, is unsatisfactory. The report was adopted. The report of the Highways Committee recommending that the Vestry deny liability in respect of the claim for compensation made by Mrs. Butcher, was referred back for the Clerk and Medical Officer, to see the claimant and report. The report of the Sanitary Committee stated— (1) That in the absence of Mr. Leshaw, the Inspector; Mr. Cox, the Sub-Inspector, acted. (2) Submitted quarterly report of Public Analyst. The report was adopted. Resolutions passed directing the Inspector to take proceedings 27 to abate nuisances at 86, Greenfield Street, and 406, Commercial Road, and the necessary authorities signed by the chairman. A Resolution passed appointing Mr. Cox, the Inspector, under the Adulteiation of Foods, &c. Acts, during the absence of Mr. Leshaw. The estimated expense of paving, &c., Eaton Place, apportioned among the owners of the various properties therein. A Motion that the Board expresses the opinion that it is undesirable for the Clerk, to act as Solicitor for any person or persons, carrying out a contract with the Vestry, was lost, and the matter was referred to a Committee of the whole Board. Feb. 6th. 49 Members present. Motion that the Surveyor be instructed to immediately take steps to have the gates, now erected at Brunswick Place, removed, was lost; and A Resolution passed that the owners of the property be required to immediately take out a license, for the erection of the hoarding enclosure at Brunswick Place, and in the event of their not doing so, that the Surveyor be directed to remove that which has already been erected. The report of the Finance Committee was adopted. The report of the Highways Committee recommended— (1) That tenders be invited for the necessary Stone, for carrying out the White Horse Lane Improvement, and that the work be performed by the Vestry's workmen. (2) That one additional lamp be placed in each of the following streets: Grafton Street, Carlton Road, Morgan Street, Tredegar Square, Shandy Street, Ernest Street, Duckett Street, and Caroline Place, but as to the last on certain conditions. (3) That the entrance to Lomas Buildings, be paved with old stone. (4) That the crossing of Jamaica Street and Redman's Road, be paved. (5) That no further action be at present taken, in relation to the works being carried out at Brunswick Place. The report was adopted. The report of the Sanitary Committee recommended— (1) That a new 18-inch pipe sewer, be laid in Morgan Street. (2) That Frederick Place be connected with the sewer, and the pipes relaid. (3) That tenders for the work be invited. (4) And reporting the result of proceedings before magistrate, in respect of the houses in Greenfield Street and Commercial Road, and recommending proceedings for penalties in the latter case, where the order had not been carried out. (5) That a number of cases of oranges, unfit tor tion, had been condemned. (б) Recommended that proceedings be taken against 28 sons, who sold milk certified by the Public Analyst, to be adulterated to the amount of 25, 40, and 50 per cent., respectively, and that other persons be cautioned. The report was adopted. The condition of Driver's Buildings was referred to the Medical Officer of Health, to report if they could be dealt with under the Artizans and Labourers Dwellings' Act, 1868. The report of the Dusting and Cleansing Committee, recommending the acceptance of the following tenders, viz., (1) Of Mr. Mumford for supply of fodder for three months. Clover. Hay. Straw. 1st cut. 2nd cut. Wheat. Oat. 119/- 84/- 79/- 35/- 36/- (2) Of Mr. Pechey for supply of 100 quarters of Oats, and 20 quarters of beans, at 15/3 and 41/- respectively ; was adopted. The Agreements with Mr. Mumford and Mr. Pechey, for supply of fodder and corn, respectively, were sealed. The use of the Vestry Hall for the purposes of a Ball, in aid of a Charity, was granted. The matter of the urinal at the entrance to Grafton Street, referred to the Sanitary Committee. The Conveyance to the Vestry of the houses 19 to 29 (odd), Harford Street, and I, Bridge Street, and the memorial thereof for registration, were sealed. Mr. Dwyer resigned his membership of the Highways Committee. The Half-yearly financial statement of the Guardians submitted. The Precept of the Metropolitan Board of Works, amounting to £3,881 6s. 7d. for one quarter, received, and referred to the Finance Committee. Permission given to Mr. Knight, the Surveyor, to supervise the erection of warehouses at Devon Wharf. Feb. 20th. 48 Members present. Letter received from Surveyor, enclosing medical certificate of his illness, and explaining the provisions he had made, for carrying on the work, during his enforced absence. A resolution passed approving of the arrangements made by the Surveyor. Mr. Fyfe's tender for supply of 100 tons of granite pitching at 26./- per ton accepted. The report of the Finance Committee was adopted. The report of the Highways Committee recommending that the Vestry deny liability in the matter of Mrs. Butcher's claim, was adopted. Mr. Nay elected a member of the Highways Committee in the place of Mr. Dwyer. The report of the Sanitary Committee recommended— (1) That the tender of Mr. Finch for sewer work at Morgan Street, for £230 10s. be accepted. 29 (2) That the Clerk write the occupier of the "King Harry" P.H., Grafton Street, that the urinal should be closed. The report was adopted. The contract with Mr. Finch for the sewer work in Morgan Street, &c., was sealed. The Deed of Covenant with Major Furtado, with reference to 418 and 420, Mile End Road, sealed. The report of the Dusting and Cleansing Committee recommended— (1) That tenders for two sweeping machines be received and dealt with by the Vestry. (2) That an iron safe for use at the stables be purchased. The report was received, but during the debate on the motion for its adoption, the Vestry adjourned. Mar. 6th. 48 Members present. Several persons proposed as Chairman, and Mr. A. Prevost elected. Resolution passed to seal contract with Mr. Fyfe for supply of granite, but in the absence of the Senior Churchwarden, who has the custody of one of the keys of the seal box, the seal was not affixed. The report of the Finance Committee recommending that tenders be invited for printing and stationery, for one or three years, was adopted. The report of the Highways Committee recommending that the narrow part of Canal Road, between Mile End Road and Gunmaker's Arms Bridge, be paved with old stone, from the Mile End Road, was adopted. The state of the Tramways in the Mile End Road referred to the Highways Committee for report. The question of providing hat pegs in the Vestry Hall referred to the Finance Committee for consideration and report. The report of the Sanitary Committee— (1) Recommended that a pipe sewer be laid in Emmott Street, from Skidmore Street to Bridge Street. (2) Submitted a report of the Medical Officer of Health, to the effect that he could not report the properties in Driver's Buildings and Swan Court as coming under the Artizans and Labourers Dwellings' Act, 1868. (3) Recommended that proceeding be taken against a person who sold milk certified by the analyst to be adulterated 25 per cent., and that others be cautioned. The report was adopted. Special report of the Medical Officer of Health on the condition of houses in Frimley Street received, and notices requiring performance of sanitary works ordered to be served. An application for consent of the Vestry for the closing up of Brunswick Place under Michael Angelo Taylor's Act, and several other communications on the same subject received and referred to a Committee of the Whole Board for consideration and report. 30 Mar. 20th. 53 Members present. Use of the Vestry Hall granted for a meeting of ratepayers in reference to the election of Guardians. Tenders (1) For Printing, and (2) For supply of Stationery, received, opened, initialed by the chairman and referred to the Finance Committee for consideration and report. The contract with Mr. Fyfe for supply of granite sealed. The report of the Finance Committee was adopted. The report of the Highways Committee— (1) Submitted estimate for the half year, recommended— (2) That the additional space of the footway on the south side of Raven Row be paved at the cost of the owners, and that a portion of the present footway be added to the roadway. (3) That additional lamps be fixed as follows:— 2 in Carter Street, 1 Patterson Street, 1 Ben Jonson Road, 1 Hawkins Street, 1 Firmin Place. (4) That the owner of the lamp fronting the "Prince Albert," Lincoln Street, be called on to remove it and refix it in the line of the curb. (5) That John's Place and Parfett Street are sufficiently lighted. (6) That alteration in the lines of curb in Old Church Road be made. (7) That the renewed application for the Vestry to take over the maintenance of Trinity Church Yard be not acceded to. (8) That notice to repair their lines in the Mile End Road be served on the North Metropolitan Tramways Co. (9) That the Vestry approve of the resolutions passed at the conference at Chelsea, with regard to the Highways and the future maintenance thereof by the local authorities. The report was adopted. The position of a lamp in Lindley Street referred to the Highways Committee. I he report of the Sanitary Committee, recommended— (1) That their proceedings in having works done to the sewer in Nicholas Street be approved. (2) I hat in view of the inability to obtain from the Registrar General's Office the reports authorised by the Vestry to be obtained, the returns of Births and Deaths be obtained from the District Registrars as formerly. (3) That proceedings be taken against persons who sold milk certified to be adulterated 12 and 25 per cent,. respectively. (4) That the Vestry deny any liability in reference in matters referred to in the notice of action served on behalf of Mrs. Nott. 31 and submitted (5) Estimate for the half year. (6) Statement that 3 convictions had been obtained for adulteration whilst one case was dismissed on a technical point. The report was adopted. The report of the Dusting and Cleansing Committee, recommended— (1) That an additional sweeping machine be purchased and that the matter be referred back to the Committee to purchase such machine. (2) That the Committee be authorised to purchase a safe for use at the stables. (3) That the Committee be authorised to purchase 3 horses. (4) That tenders be invited for the supply of horses, carts, and drivers for one year. and submitted (5) The half yearly estimate. The report, with an amendment that tenders be invited for supply of sweeping machine in lieu of being referred back to the Committee, was adopted. The report of the Committee of the Whole Board Re Harford Street Improvement and Re Brunswick Place stated— (1) That the offer to Mr. Lamplugh had been increased to £75 and recommended that precept to summon jury be sealed in case offer not accepted. (2) That sealed offers had been made as follows— Re 414, Mile End Road, Claim £767. Offer £250. 7 and 9, Harford Street, „ 1564. „ £710. 13, „ „ £556. „ £}15310. 21, „ „ „ £1486. „ £766. 29, „ „ „ £I382. „ £600. (3) That a sealed offer had been made in respect of 412, Mile End Road and recommended that precept to summon jury be sealed. and recommended (4) That the Clerk and Surveyor be authorised to obtain evidence to support the Vestry's case, and (5) That having visited Brunswick Place the necessary consent of the Vestry be given to the closing up of that place in manner described in plan A, accompanying the application. The report was adopted. 32 SCHEDULE I. List of Orders made on Drainage applications confirmed by the Vestry. Date of Premises in respect of which order made. Vestry Meeting. | 1S88.—April 11.—198, Jubilee Street. Rectory, New Street. 24, New Road. 21a, 21b, 21c, and '2Id, South Grove. 4, Mulberry Street. 63 and 65, Bancroft Road. April 25.—77, Bancroft Road. 129, Jubilee Street. May 9.—School Board Schools, Baker Street. 197, Jubilee Street. Stables next Grove Lodge, Grove Road. June 13.—69, Bancroft Road. 9 and 11, Settles Street. July 4.—152, Jubilee Street. 90 and 92, Bridge Street. 14, Jamaica Street. July 18.—108 to 122, Shandy Street. 66 to 70, ditto Aug. 1.—160, Mile End Road. Sept. 19.—65, Lincoln Street. 160, Mile End Road. 24, Spring Garden Place. Dec. 5.—396, Mile End Road. Mann & Co.'s Stores, Raven Row. 1889. Jan. 23.—1 to 18, Louisa Gardens. Feb. 6.—Bruuswick Place. 81, Greenfield Street. 180, Whitechapel Road. 33 SCHEDULE II. Names of the Streets in which houses (in respect of which orders for the execution of Sanitary works were made) were situate. Date of Vestry Meeting. To provide proper watersupply to closets. To pave Yards. To provide dust-bins or pails or to repair existing dust-bins. To trap drains and sinks. To cleanse and purify. To provide proper drainage and abate nuisances. To discontinue use of underground rooms as sleeping-rooms. To provide proper W.C. accommodation and to repair same. To provide separate water supply to closets from that used for domestic purposed. 1888-April 11 Harlow-place Harlow-place Harlow-place ... ... ... ... ... ... Jubilee-street ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Clinton-road Clinton -road Clinton-road ... ... ... ... ... ... Skidmore-st. Skidmore-st. Skidmore-st. ... ... ... ... ... Skidmore-st. „ 25 Neat's-cottgs. Edwards-road Edwards-road Nottingham-pl Coke-street ... ... ... ... Mile End-pice Neat's-cottgs. Mile End-plce. Oxford-street Edwards-road ... ... ... ... ... Mile End-plce. ... ... ... ... ... ... May 9 Skidmore-st. St. Peter's-st. Skidmore-st. Skidmore-st. Skidmore-st. St. Peter's-st. ... ... Oxford-street Edwards-road Skidmore-st. Edwards-road Oxford-street Edwards-road ... ... ... ... Harlow House Edwards-road ... Copley-street ... ... ... ... ... „ 23 Brantridge-st. Brantridge-st. Brantridge-st. Brantridge-st. ... ... ... ... Bradwell-st. Shandy-street Shandy-street Shandy-street Shandy-street Shandy-street ... ... ... Buckeridge-st ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Brantridge-st. June 13 Globe-road Globe-road Globe-road ... Globe-road Eagle-place Plummers-row ... ... Leatherdale-S' Leatherdale-st. Leatherdale-st ... ... ... Greenfield-st. ... ... Shandy-street Shandy-street Shandy-street Shandy-street ... ... ... ... ... Settles _ street Settles-street Settles-street Settles-street ... ... ... ... ... July 4 Zion-house P lummers-row ... ... Plummers- row ... ... Norfolk-house . . . Norfolk-street Zion-liouse Norfolk-street Norfolk-street ... ... ... ... ... Rose-place Rose-place Rose-place ... ... ... ... ... ... Ferriers- court ... Ferriers-court ... ... ... .. . ... ... Black Boy-crt. ... Black Boy-crt. ... ... ... ... ... ... S t epney - green Stepney-green Stepney- green Stepney-green ... ... ... Stepney-green ... Beaumont-sq. ... Beaumont-sq. Beaumont-sq. . .. ... ... ... ... West Arbor-st ... West Arbor-st. ... ... ... ... ... West Arbor-st 34 SCHEDULE II.—Continued. Date of Vestry Meeting. To provide proper watersupply to closets. To pave yards. To provide dust-bins or pails or to repair existing dust-bins. To tmp drains and sinks. To cleanse and purify. To provide proper drainage and abate nuisances. To discontinue use of underground rooms as sleeping rooms. To provide proper W.C. accommodation and to repair same. To provide separate water supply to closets from that used for domestic purposes. July 18 Essex-place Jupp's-road ... Jupp's-road ... ... ... ... Jupp's-road Brunswick-pl. Essex-place Georgiana-pl. ... ... ... ... ... ... Stepney-green Georgiana-pl. Stepney-green Stepney-green Stepney-green ... ... ... ... Hayfield- pssge Brunswick-pl. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Aug. 1 Nelson-street Nelson-street Nelson-street Nelson-street Nelson-street Georgiana-pl. ... Greenfield-st. ... ... ... ... ... Greenfield-st. Mile End-road ... ... ... Sept. 19 Maplin-street Maplin-street Maplin-street ... . .. ... ... ... ... Nelson street ... Nelson-street ... ... ... ... ... ... Oct. 10 Maplin-street Maplin-street Maplin-street ... Maplin-street Coborn-road ... ... ... Lindley-street Lindley-street Lindley-street Lindley-street ... Victoria-tavern ... ... ... Hawkins-st. ... Hawkms-st. ... ••• ... ... ... ,, 24 Coke-street ... ... ... Coke-street ... ... ... ... Plummers-row ... Plummer3-row ... Plummers-row ... ... ... ... Yalford-street ... Yalford-street Yalford-street Yalford-street ... ... Yalford-street ... Oleveland-st. ... Cleveland-st. ... ... ... ... ... ... Coburg-court Coburg-court Coburg-court ... ... ... ... ... ... Lydia-street Lydia-street Lydia-street Lydia-street ... ... ... ... ... Wolsey-street ... Wolsey-street ... ... ... ... ... ... Richardson-st. ... Greenfield-st. ... ... ... ... ... ... Carlton-road ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Nov. 7 Bradwell-st. Bradwell-st. Bradwell-st. ... ... Grove-road ... Harlow-bouse Bradwell-st. Pole-street Pole-street Pole-street Pole-street Pole-street ... ... ... Pole-street Sampson's-pl. ... ... Sampson' s-pl. Sampson's-pl. ... ... ... ... „ 21 and Dec 5 Longnor-road Longnor-road Longnor-road Longnor-road ... Coborn-road Plummers-row Commercial-rd Lon gnor-road Sidney-street Sidney-street Sidney-street Sidney-street Sidney-street Cottage-grove Greenfield-st. ... ... Sidney-square ... ... ... ... ... Mulberry-st. . . . ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Sidney-square ... ... 35 SCHEDULE II.—Continued. Date of Vestry Meeting To provide proper watersupply to closets. To pave yards. To provide dust- bins or pails or to repair existing dust-bins. To trap drains and sinks. To cleanse and purify. To provide proper drainage and abate nuisances. To discontinue use of underground rooms as sleeping rooms. To provide proper W.C. accommodation and to repair same. To provide separate water supply closets from than used for domestic purpose. Dec. 19 Bancroft-road Bancroft-road Bancroft-road ... Bancroft-road ... ... ... ... Gray-street Gray-street Gray-street ... ... ... ... ... ... Cameron-place ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1889-Jan.23 Plummers-row ... Plummers-row Plummers-row Settles street Maidment-st. ... ... ... Redman's-rd. Redman's-rd. Redman's-rd. Redman's-rd. Plummers row ... ... ... ... Redman's-grds Pleasant-place ... ... Wilson street ... ... ... ... Pleasant-row ... Pleasant-place ... Redman's-rd. ... ... ... ... Charles street ... Charles-street Charles-street Pleasant place ... ... ... ... Feb. 6 Louisa street Greenfield-st. Greenfield-st. Greenfield-st. Greenfield-st. ... ... ... ... Hayfield-place Yalford-street Yalford-street Yalford street Yalford-street ... ... Yalford-street ... Plummers-row Plummers-row Plumme-row Louisa-street ... ... Plummers-row ... Hayfield-place Hayfield-place Hayfield pssge ... ... Coke-street ... „ 20 Carlton-road ... ... ... ... ... . . . ... Jubilee-street ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Mar. 6 Eaton-place ... ... Eaton-place Adelina-grove ... ... ... Eaton-place New-street New street New-street ... Swan-court ... ... ... ... Adehna. grove ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ,, 20 Lansdell-place Victoria place ... . . . ... ... ... ... ... rortescue-bdgs ... Fortescue-bdgs ... ... . . . ... ... ... Edgar-place ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Carlton-road ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Gharles-street ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Oxford-street ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ABSTRACT OF THK ANNUAL ACCOUNTS OF THE VESTRY, FOR THE Year ending 25th March, 1889. 38 39 ABSTRACT OF THE GENERAL PURPOSES ACCOUNT. Receipts. £ 8. d. Expenditure. £ s. d. From the Overseers on calls 34475 0 0 Street Improvements 15213 19 0 Capital Paving public roads under contracts 2738 4 0 ,, ,, ,, for contribution made in lieu of rates on Government property 6 6 2 „ „ footpaths 81 12 0 ,, materials 2519 9 1 5339 From the Metropolitan Board of works on mortagage rate, Carriage of materials and refuse 1286 1 11 (1) For carrying out street improvements £17,000 0 0 Water and Gas 421 16 6 ,, paving works 5,000 0 0 22000 0 5 Plumber's and smith' work and ironmongery 352 19 10 2061 131 6 0 From Bankers for interest Repaid owners in respect of amounts charged for paving new streets in excess of actual cost 50 0 5 50 Parliamentary grant in respect of disturnpiked roads 257 11 0 Regent's Canal, City and Dock's Railway Company, for maintenance of Mile End Road over the canal 37 10 0 Repairs to steam roller and crane 68 10 6 Hire of horses 205 14 0 For rent of premises in Canal Road 48 5 0 Harness and repairs to same, and veterinary and shoeing expenses 229 6 2 „ „ land at Edmonton 9 0 0 Food and fodder for horses 1204 19 10 1708 From owners of property for costs of paving new streets 216 6 5 Destructors and expenses at new Dust Wharf 403 19 11 404 „ sale of dust, ashes, and rubbish 111 9 6 Trees, shrubs, &c. 15 6 9 15 ,, „ horses and dung, and for removal of trade refuse 25 2 11 Shoots for deposit of refuse, &c. 65 15 0 66 ,, Police Courts for fines under the Adulteration Acta 6 0 0 Dust carts, sweeping machine and barrows and repairs, wheels tyring, &c. 324 15 8 325 „ deposits 14 19 2 280 2 0 Timber 197 11 1 „ Mr. Rutty for hire of steam road roller Sieves, baskets, brooms and hose 120 10 4 Oil, candles, coke, coals, and salt 111 10 9 449 Name-plates for streets 19 17 2 31 Compensations and incidentals 30 14 2 Advertisements 85 10 5 85 Notification of infectious diseases, removal of dead bodies, and disinfectants 113 8 0 113 Rates, taxes, repairs, and insurances 231 13 7 232 Returning Officer's precept for expenses of election of School Board for London 109 1 5 School Board for London 12166 9 0 12,275 Metropolitan Board of Works, Bridge expenses 1466 10 2 Interest on loans 1388 19 1 Repayment of loans 2362 0 0 3,751 Printing, stationery, stamping deeds, &c. 235 11 9 236 Refreshments for Committees and Auditors 39 15 3 40 Expenses of Assessment Committee (including £166 11s. l11d. legal expenses) 238 17 1 Legal costs and expenses of mortgage and leases 37 12 8 38 Expenses under Adulteration Acts 52 10 8 53 Proportion of salaries 1012 17 9 1013 Rent of stables, wharves, arch and shoots 477 10 0 477 Wages of labourers 7838 2 8 7838 Incidental expenses in Surveyor's department 52 14 5 £53571 18 0 £57618 18 7 SUMMARY. Balance brought forward from last account £1.828 18 2 Receipts as per this account 57618 18 7 15214 £59447 16 9 38358 Payments as per this account 53571 18 0 Balance in hand £5875 18 9 approved, this 21 st day of May, 188!). Audited, found correct. and JAMES FRANCIS HAINES, Auditors. GEORGE WEDLAKE, RICHARD WATERER, 40 41 ABSTRACT OF THE LIGHTING ACCOUNT. Receipts. £ s. a. Expenditure. £ s. d. From Overseers on calls 3330 0 0 Gas to public lamps 3397 8 10 ,, Bankers for interest 9 1 10 Lamp pillars, &c. 113 3 2 £3359 1 10 £3510 12 0 SUMMARY. Balance in hand on last account £868 15 2 Receipts as per this account 3339 1 10 4207 17 0 Expenditure as per this account 3510 12 0 Balance in hand £697 5 0 Audited, found correct and approved, this day of May, 1889. JAMES FRANCIS HAINES, GEORGE WEDLAKE, Auditors RICHARD WATERER. ABSTRACT OF THE SEWERS ACCOUNT. Receipts. £ s. d. Expenditure. £ s. d. From Overseers on calls for Sewers 3358 13 9 Metropolitan Board of Works 11369 7 0 12,836 ,, ,, ,, Consolidated Rate 11369 7 0 Gully grates 65 19 1 ,, Bankers for Interest 40 3 1 Flushing, flushing hose, repairs to urinal and drain testing apparatus 208 9 10 ,, Deposits (less amounts returnable) 20 3 1 Jobbing sewers work 531 16 5 Sewer in Edward's Road, &c. 435 8 11 Oil, candles, hose, &c. 35 0 3 Wages of labourers 598 12 0 Proportion of salaries of Clerk, &c., &c. 969 4 4 Expenses for refreshments 2 0 0 Proportion of incidental expenses in Clerk's office 29 15 1 Ditto ditto in Surveyor's office 7 13 0 37 8 1 £14253 5 11 £14788 6 4 SUMMARY Balance in hand on last account £1533 15 7 Receipts as per this account 11788 6 4 16322 1 11 2,884 535 72 Expenditure as per this account 14253 5 1 3511 Balance in hand £2068 16 0 14253 71,336 Audited, found correct and approved, this 21st day of May, 1889. JAMES FRANCIS HA INKS. GEORGE WEDLAKE, Auditors . RICHARD WATERER. 42 43 GENERAL PURPOSES ACCOUNT- STATEMENT OF LIABILITIES AND ASSETS. Liabilities. £ s. d. Assets. £ s. d. March 25th, 1889. March 25th, 1889. The Loudon County Council, in respect of the following:— Amount in hand on General Purposes Account (including balance of loan for Harford Street Improvement) 5875 18 9 Proportion of 16th Annual Instalment of £1,250 oft £25,000 loan, due 1st October, 1889 625 0 0 Amount due from Overseers on call 7375 0 0 Proportion of 11th Annual Instalment of £100 off £2,000 loan, due 1st January, 1890 25 0 0 ,, for rent of shop in Canal "Road 12 10 0 ,, for ashes, &c., sold (about) 50 0 0 Sixth Annual Instalment of £113 off £2,250 loan, due 1st April, 1889 113 0 0 Estimated amount of recoupment by sale of Manor House, and by contribution by the Metropolitan Board of Works towards the Proportion of 9th Annual Instalment of £286 off £4,000 loan, due 1st October, 1889 113 0 0 cost of the White Horse Lane Improvement 800 0 0 Estimated amount for hire of steam roller 18 0 0 Proportion of 4th Annual Instalment of £325 off £6,500 loan, due 1st July, 1889 243 15 0 Rents received from properties required for— (1) Harford Street Improvement 137 0 8 Proportion of 4th Annual Instalment of £50 off £1000 loan, due 1st October, 1889 25 0 0 (2) White Horse Lane ,, 16 0 0 Proportion of 2nd Annual Instalment of £125 off £2,500 loan, due 1st July, 1889 ... 93 15 0 Proportion of 1st Annual Instalment of £350 off £7,000 loan, due 1st July, 1889 262 10 0 Interest on Loans, due 1st April, 1889 379 4 5 Messrs. Thomas Gardner & Co., for Steam Coals 2 14 0 Mr. H. W. Caton, for veterinary attendance to and shoeing horses 33 0 0 Messrs. N. J. Powell & Co., for stationery 23 17 5 ,, Penny & Hull, for printing (about) 20 0 0 ,, Doulton & Co., for lime 8 5 6 ,, Ashton & Green, for cement (about) 30 0 0 Mr. T. Whittingham, for harness 15 16 0 Messrs. T. & W. Cole, for smith's work 66 15 9 Mr. E. Fen ton, for tools and ironwork for carts 15 5 2 The Commercial Gas Company, for gas to establishment ... (about) 8 0 0 „ „ „ for coke for crane and roller „ 5 0 0 „ „ „ for gas to stables and wharf 23 19 10 The East London Water Works Company, for water to establishment 5 19 0 Messrs. Wills & Packham, for Kentish flints (about) 190 0 0 ,, ,, ,, for hoggin 115 0 0 The Great Eastern Railway Company, for carriage of hardcore, &c 47 4 9 Messrs. Thos. Gardner & Co., for lighterage of refuse 103 14 0 Mr. A. Smith, for brooms 11 10 0 Messrs. J. Aird & Sons, for hydrants 15 4 4 Mrs. M. A. Shove, for bran 5 0 0 Mr. J. T. P. Peachy, for oats and beans ... 117 5 0 ,, J. East, for timber 9 1 3 ,, J. Brown, for plummer's work 7 14 6 The School Board for London, first moiety of precept 3205 5 1 The London County Council, proportion of Metropolitan Board of Works' precept in respect of bridges 340 3 6 Mr. T. G. Scott, for advertisements 15 9 4 ,, M. J. Mumford, for fodder (about) 110 0 0 Messrs. Buck & Hickman, for tools „ 15 0 0 Mr. T. G. Tuckwell, for oil, &c. 17 6 1 Carried forward £14284 9 5 Carried forward £6493 14 11 44 45 GENERAL PURPOSES ACCOUNT- STATEMENT OF LIABILITIES AND ASSETS. Liabilities. £ s. d. Assets. £ s. d. Brought forward 6493 14 11 Brought forward 14284 9 5 Mr. T. Jarvis, for new wheels, tyres, &c. 11 5 5 Messrs. H. & T. Allars, for barrows 2 10 0 „ W. Fox & Co., for repairing sieves 4 19 0 Mr. A Lovett, for repairs to baskets 10 4 6 „ T. Jarvis, on contract for dust carts (about) 8 5 0 G. G. Rutty, on contract for paving foot paths „ 365 0 0 „ „ ,, York paving 77 12 9 The French Asphalte Company, for repairs 95 6 8 Messrs. R. L. & J.Fennings, on contract for broken Guernsey granite and spalls 266 7 2 Mr. J. J. Griffiths, on contract for paving in Commercial Road (about) 217 0 0 The Hull Cart and Wagon Company, for three carts for carriage of stone 49 10 0 Mr. T. Lye, for erecting chimney shafts and furnaces as per contract 358 0 0 Messrs. Eraser and Fraser, for ironwork for ditto 172 10 0 The Teesæ Block Company, for blocks for channellings 237 4 0 The Vestry of Bethnal Green, for paving the portion of Whitechapel Road in this hamlet 30 0 0 Expenses for refreshments for Committee of Whole Board 3 9 9 Whitechapel District Board of Works, for paving so much of the west end of Commercial Road in this parish abutting on the Whitechapel District (about) 150 0 0 Messrs. Woodham & Fry, balance of contract for paving works „ 3500 0 0 4 £12082 19 2 £14284 9 5 SPECIAL LIABILITIES. Balance of £25,000, amount borrowed from the Metropolitan Board of Works, upon mortgage of the wholc of the Rates, for the PurPose of the expenses of repaying the Mile End and Commercial Roads Balance of £2,000, amount borrowed from the Metropolitan Board of Works' upon mortgage of the wholc of the Rates, for the improvement of Oxford Street and Diamond Row Balance of £4,000, amount borrowed from the Metropolitan Board of Works' upon mortgage of the whole of the Rates, for defraying the expenses incurred or to be incurred by the Vestry in executing certain granite paving works in the Hamlet Balance of £2,250,amount borrowed Form the Metropolitan Board of Works paving works in Devonshire Street l,680 0 0 incurred or to be incurred by the Vestry in executing certain new granite Balance of £6,500amount borrowed Form the Metropolitan Board of Works upon mortgage of the whole of the Rates, for defraying the expenses Balance of £amount borrowed from the Metropolitan Board of Works, works in hamlet incurred or to be incurred by the vestry in paving the carriageway of the unpaved portion in Devonshire Street, and in repaying the carriage- 5 525 0 0 way of White Horse Lane, within the Hamlet Balance of £1,000 amount borrowed from the Metropolitan Board of Works, upon mortgage of the whole of the Rates, for purchase of land at Balance of £1,000, amount borrowed from the Metropolitan Board of Works, 8,50 0 0 Edmonton, for disposal of the house refuse of the Hamlet Balance of £2,500,amount borrowed form the Metropolitan Board of works, upon mortgage of the whole of the Rates, for defraying the expenses Balance of £2,500, amount borrowed from the Metropolitan Board of Works, paving works on on either side of the tramway in Grove Road, and in incurred or to be incurred by the Vestry in executing certain new granite Union street, all within the Hamlet 2,375 0 0 that part of Sidney Street which was formerly known as Epping Place, and in Amount borrowed from the Metropolitan Board of works,upon mortgage of the Whole of the Rates, for defraying part of the expenses incurred or to Amount borrowed from the Metropolitan Board of Works, upon mortgage of the widening and improving the north end of Harford Stree 7,000 0 0 be incurred by the Vestry in affecting a street improvement in their Hamlet by Amount borrowed from the Metropolitan Board of Works, upon mortgage of the whole of the Rates, for defraying part of the expenses incurred or to Amount borrowed from the Metropolitan Board of Works, upon mortgage of the widening and improving the north end of Harford Street 10,000 0 0 be incurred by the Vestry in affecting a street improvement in their Hamlet by Amount borrowed from the Metropolitan Board of Works, upon mortgage of the whole of the Rates, for defraying the expenses incurred or to be Amount borrowed from the Metropolitan Board of Works, upon mortgage of the Road (between Stepney Green and Globe Road) and of the northern incurred by the vestry in executing certain granite paving works in Mile End 5,000 0 0 end of Globe Road, in this Hamlet" this 21s/ day of May, 1889. £41,397 0 0 Audited, and found correct, JAMES FRANCIS HAINES, ) GEORGE WEDLAKE. Auditors. RICHARD WATERER, 46 47 LIGHTING ACCOUNT- STATEMENT OF LIABILITIES AND ASSETS. Liabilities. £ s. d. Assets. £ s. d. March 25th, 1889. March 25th, 1889. Messrs. E. & F. Wright, for lamp-posts 47 10 0 Amount in band on Lighting Account 697 5 0 The Commercial Gas Company, for gas to public lamps (about) 900 0 0 Balance 250 5 0 £947 10 0 £947 10 0 Audited, and found correct this 21st day of May, 1889. JAMES FRANCIS HAINES, GEORGE WEDLAKE, Auditors. RICHARD WATERER, 48 49 LIST OF CONTRACTS ENTERED INTO FOR THE YEAR ENDED 25th MARCH, 1889. Date. Names of Contractors. Nature of Contracts. Amounts paid or to be paid to he Contractors 1888 £ s. d. April 6 Messrs. N. J. Powell & Company Supply of stationery for one year at schedule 86 16 11 May 8 Mr. Augustus Smith ,, brooms „ „ schedule of prices June 5 Messrs. Ashton & Green „ Portland cement for one year at per ton 1 11 0 „ 13 Mr. S. Reynolds „ fodder for three months at schedule 203 13 6 July 18 Messrs. R. L. & J. Fennings „ 1,500 tons of broken granite at 9/9 per ton, £7315/- „ 500 tons of spalls at 7/3 per ton, £181 5/- 912 10 0 „ 25 Mr. S. W. Hawkings Construction of sewer, Albion street, Bridge Street, and Edward's Road 396 0 0 Aug. 1 ,, ,, Jobbing sewers' work for one schedule of prices 1 Messrs. T. & W. Colo Smiths' work for one year ditto Sept. 19) Messrs wills& Packham Supply of Kentish flints for one year at per yard cube 5 2 „ hoggin for one year „ ,, 4 5 and the taking in return of ashes and breeze at 10/- per freight. Aug. 1 Mr. W. A. Pattison Supply of 100 quarters of oats at 13/6 per qr. 67 10 0 Sept. 10 Messrs. Vesper & Corner ., and putting down new carpet at Vestry Hall, at 4/3 per lineal yard 46 8 7 Oct. 10 Messrs. J. Gingell, Son & Cruickehank Supply of fodder for three months at schedule 296 16 9 „ 10 Mr. W. A. Pattison „ 100 quarters of oats at 15/6 per qr. 77 10 0 „ 31 Mr. Thomas Gardner Lighterage of refuse to Edmonton at per ton 2 0 Nov. 21 Messrs. Edward Rathbone & Son Supply of 100 quarters of oats at 16/3 per qr., £81 5/- ,, 25,, ,, beans at £4875/- 130 0 0 Dec. 5 Mr .G.G.Rutty Supply of 10,000ft. of 3in. tooled York paving, at 55/6 per 100ft. super 277 10 0 „ 19 Messrs. Woodham & Fry Repaving Mile End Road (between Stepney Green and Globe Road) and portion of Globe Road 5107 0 0 1889 _ _ Erection of shaft and furnaces of destructor at Mile End Dust Wharf 358 0 0 Jan. 9 Mr. T. Lye Supply and fixing ironwork of destructor at Mile End Dust Wharf 172 10 0 „ 9 Messrs. Fraser & Fraser Supply of three slop vans at £32 each 96 0 0 „ 9 Mr. J. Ruston „ „ carts for carriage of stone at £16 10/- each 49 10 0 ,, 9 lne Hull Cart and Wagon Company „ and fixing ironwork of two sheds at Mile End Dust Wharf, for 93 16 0 ,, 9 Messrs Wm. Whitford & Company ,, ,, ,, portable kitchen at ditto 55 0 0 „ 100 quarters of oats at 15/3 per qr., £76 5/- Feb. 6 Mr. J. T. P. Pechey . „ 20 „ „ beans at 41/- „ £41 1 1 7 5 0 „ 6 Mr. M. J. Mumford Supply of fodder for three months schedule of prices ,, 20 Mr. W.Finch Sewer work at Frederick Place and. Morgan Street 230 10 0 March 6 Mr. J. Fyfe Supply of 100 tons of 4 x 7 granite pitching at 26/-per ton 130 0 0 Wc, the undersigned Auditors of tbe Accounts of the Vestry of the Hamlet of Mile End Old Town in the County of London, Do hereby certify that the aforegoing are correct abstracts of the receipts and expenditure of the said Vestry for the year ended the 25th day of March, 1889, as audited and allowed by us, and correct statements of the monies owing to and debts and liabilities owing by the said Vestry on that day, and of all contracts entered into by the said V estry 111 that year. Bated this 21 st day of May, 1881). JAMES FRANCIS HAINES, ) GEORGE WEDLAKE, AtmtuKs. RICHARD WATERER, ) VESTRY OF THE Hamlet of Mile End Old Cown. SURVEYOR'S DEPARTMENT. THE A N N U A L R E P 0 R T OF THE SURVEYOR TO THE VESTRY, FOR THE YEAR ENDING 25th MARCH, 1 889. LONDON: PRINTED BY E. S. WHEATLEY, 176, MILE END ROAD, E. 1889. REPORT. To the Vestry of the Hamlet of Mile End Old Town. June, 1889. Gentlemen, In laying before you my 20th Annual Report I am gratified at being able to inform you that much useful work has been done during the past year, and a lasting benefit will ensue therefrom, but those long periods during which everything was" made to last a little longer" are now being felt with severity. The experiment tried of laying Rock Hill or Caithness flags I do not consider was eminently successful. No doubt it is very hard and durable, but owing to the fact that the faces are the natural cleavage of the rock, a certain amount of inequality must of necessity exist, and again, the difficulty in cutting and fitting it to footways of unequal widths is so great as almost to prohibit its use in such cases. The quantity of work executed during the year is as follows:— PAVING WORKS. The following works have been executed by your own workmen:— New Paving, squared and laid 10,863 ft. sup. Old do. taken up and relaid 17,260 „ „ Ditto, redressed and relaid 1,757 ,, ,, New Curb 100 ft. run. Old do. relaid 8,063 „ „ Curb redressed and relaid 1,885 „ ,, Old pitching relaid 13,431 ft. sup. Old channel relaid 691 ft. run. New Tees Scoriae Brick Channel laid 17,451 „ „ The cost of these works was for labour £594 & 7 „ „ material 897 17 2 54 The Welch paving laid about 25 years since in the Mile End Road which the Vestry bought from the Corporation of the City of London on its removal from Cheapside has been taken up on account of the large number of accidents which occured on it, and the space extending from Globe Road to Stepney Green laid with Scotch Granite. Globe Road has also been partly laid with new pitching. The serviceable old stone arising from these works has after redressing been laid in Settle Street, Fordham Street, Old Church Road and Canal Road. The cost of these works which were carried out by Messrs. Woodham & Fry under contract was .£5,107. HORSE-KEEPING. The cost of keeping the Vestry's horses was as follows:— Rent of Stables £130 0 0 Wages 266 17 10 Superintendent's Salary 200 0 0 Corn 399 17 2 Hay, Straw and Clover 863 11 0 Green-meat 11 3 9 Shoeing and Veterinary attendance 138 0 0 Repairs to Harness 63 15 5 Depreciation of Stock 332 4 0 Rates, Taxes, Coals, Gas, Water, &c. 158 11 8 Stock in hand 1888 48 13 3 2,612 14 1 Less amounts received for horses 6 4 11 £2,606 9 2 The work done was equal to 10,112 working days for one horse. The time was divided as follows:— 1,193 days for drawing materials for road repairs. 3,583 „ carting street refuse. 3,954 „ „ house refuse. 1,382 ,, watering roads. 10,112 This is equal to 5/2 per day per horse. 55 ROAD WATERING. 1887. 1888. 1889. £ S. d. £ S. d £ s. d. Wages of drivers 254 11 0 Wages of drivers 255 6 0 Wages of drivers 213 5 9 Horse hire 193 18 0 Horse hire 259 3 6 Horse hire 107 12 0 Keep of Vestry's Horses = 1,198 working days | 384 7 2 Keep of Vestry's Horses = 1,266 working days 369 5 0 Keep of Vestry's Horses = 1,382 working days 357 0 4 East London Water Co. for 10,116,000gls. of water 387 12 3 East London Water Co. for ll,646,000gls. of water 445 11 6 East London Water Co. for 7,739,000 gls. of water 313 13 10 £1,220 8 5 £1,329 6 0 £991 11 2 ROAD REPAIRS. Year ending March, 1887. Year ending March, 1888. Year ending March, 1889. Yards. £ s. d. Yards. £ s. d. Yards. £ S. d. 1852 Kentish Flints 478 16 8 628 Kentish Flints 162 4 8 1225 Kentish Flints 316 9 2 858 Gravel & Ballast 189 0 8 1074 Gravel & Hoggin 265 8 8 135 Gravel & Hoggin 30 7 6 1505 Broken Granite 777 11 8 1329 Broken Granite 825 1 9 2015 Broken Granite 992 2 10 £1445 9 0 £1252 15 1 £1338 19 6 SCAVENGING. 1887. 1888. 1889. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. Hor3e-hire for cleansing rds. 30 19 6 Horse-hire for cleansing rds. 31 0 0 Horse-hire for cleansing roads 7 17 0 Wages of Drivers & Fillers 985 0 5 Wages of Drivers & Fillers 985 0 3 Wages of Drivers & Fillers 1059 4 8 Keep of Horses 3181 work ing davs. 1020 11 5 Keep of horses = 3326 work ing days . 970 1 8 Keep of horses 3583 working days . 925 12 2 Horse hire for drawing materials, 400 horses & men 210 0 0 Horse-hire for drawing materials 382 horses & men 200 11 0 Horse-hire for drawing materials 56 horses & men 22 8 0 Wages of Drivers 277 7 2 Wages of Drivers 265 6 0 Wages of Drivers 238 12 0 Keep of Vestry's horses 992 working days 318 5 4 Keep of Vestry's horses = 1382 working days 403 1 8 horses = 1193 working days 308 3 10 Wages of vengers. 1604 19 6 Wages of vengers 1430 7 8 Wages of Seavengers . 1416 0 11 Rent of Riga Wf. 124 0 0 Rent of Riga Wf. 124 0 0 Rent of Riga Wf. 124 0 0 £4571 3 4 £4409 8 3 £4101 18 7 56 REMOVAL OF DUST. The quantity of refuse collected from houses by your carts and men during the year was 15,553 loads, being 3349 loads less than were collected in 1887-8. 1887. 1888. 1889. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. Wages of Dustmen 804 0 11 Wages of Dustmen 872 16 10 Wages of Dustmen 780 6 2 Keep of horses, =3631 working days. 1164 J 18 11 Keep of horses, = 4268 working days 1244 16 8 Keep of horses, = 3954 working days 1021 9 0 Horse hire for Dusting 21 14 0 Horse hire for Dusting 11 4 0 Horse hire for Dusting 3 3 0 £1990 13 10 £2128 17 6 £1804 18 2 This is equal to nearly 2/4 per load for collection and carting. The decrease in the quantity of dust collected and consequently the saving in the amount expended is owing to the increased use of gas cooking stoves in the better class houses. DISPOSAL OF HOUSE REFUSE. The quantity of Ashes sifted and put on rail was 6,340 tons, and 770 tons were loaded into barges and sold for brick making purposes. 3,402 tons were loaded into barges and sent to shoot. The total cost of disposing of the Refuse was as follows:— Carriage and other disposal of refuse £937 010 Sifting and loading 642 17 11 Rent of Wharf 130 00 Rent of Arch 1000 £1719 18 9 I hate designed a consuming furnace for the light material, which I estimate will nearly save its cost in a year. Two of these are being erected at the Devonshire Street Wharf. The amount received and receivable for sale of ashes and breeze was £194 14 3. DISPOSAL OF STREET REFUSE. 1887. 1888. 1889. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. Carpenters Co. Shoot at Stratford 66 0 0 Carpenters Co. Shoot at Stratford 66 0 0 Carpenters Co. Shoot at Stratford 66 0 0 £66 0 0 £66 0 0 £66 0 0 57 LIGHTING. The Publc Lamps, 959 in number, have been supplied, lighted, painted, cleaned and repaired by the Commercial Gas Co. at a cost of £3421 19 10. The sum of £1 70 has been paid to the Commercial Gas Co. for damage done to a 3" main by the Steam Roller. SEWERS. The cost of labour for cleansing sewers and gullies, and other matters chargeable to sewers, has been £606 0 10. Small works of construction and repairs to sewers, including cleansing and relaying pipe sewers have been carried out at a cost of £329 18 9 including 18 new gullies. During the year 38 houses have been connected with the sewers of the Hamlet. The quantity of material removed from the sewers was 157 yards, and from the gullies 326 yards cube. I must again repeat that the condition of the sewers in Commercial Road between Jamaica Street and Bedford Street is such as to cause the greatest uneasiness to the Sanitary Committee. An order was made by the Metropolitan Board of Works requiring the Vestry of St. George in the East to construct a new sewer, but up to the present time no steps have been taken for carrying out the work. I have the honour to be Gentlemen, Your obedient Servant, JNO. M. KNIGHT, Surveyor. VESTRY OF THE Homlet of Mile End Old Town. ANNUAL REPORT UPON THE PUBLIC HEALTH, AND SANITARY CONDITION OF THE DISTRICT, FOR THE YEAR 1888-9, BY THOMAS TAYLOR, Medical Officer of Health. LONDON: PRINTED BY K. S. WHEATLEY, 176, MII.E END ROAD, E. 1889. the thirty- third ANNUAL REPORT OF THE MEDICAL OFFICER OF HEALTH, For the Year 1888-1-889. TO THE VESTRY OF THE HAMLET OF MILE END OLD TOWN. Gentlemen, I have the honour to submit to you my Annual Report of the Vital Statistics and Sanitary Work carried out during the past twelve months. VITAL STATISTICS. In large districts like our own it becomes a considerable difficulty to estimate the changes that take place in the population. Although there has not been a large increase in the number of houses erected during the past few years, it will be generally admitted that a considerable influx of foreigners and others has taken place, and in many streets the houses of which were previously let to one family exclusively, there are now two and sometimes three families in each house ; but in the absence of a more frequent census, it seems to me that it is best to estimate the present population 011 the hypothesis that the rate of increase in the last intercensal period, has been maintained since 1881. By this method we may take the population of Mile End at 116,000. 62 BIRTHS AND BIRTH-RATE. The number of births registered during the year was 3953, giving a birth-rate of 34.0 per 1000. The birth-rate for the whole of London, during the last twelve months was 307, and that of the twenty-seven large provincial towns 31.5 per 1000. Although the birth-rate is 3.3 per 1000 higher than the whole of London, it is 1.6 per 1000 less than the birth-rate of Mile End for last year 1887-8. DEATHS AND DEATH-RATE. The number of deaths from all causes was 2022, giving a deathrate of 17*4 per 1000, per annum. This is after making allowance for both the proper distribution of deaths occurring in public Institutions outside and inside the Hamlet, among their various Sanitary areas, so that this rate is the correct rate of mortality, although the actual number of deaths registered in the Hamlet was only 1,899 during the twelve months. I may remark that the death-rate this year is the lowest on record during the last ten years, and, as the following table will show, is 0.4 per cent. less than that of the whole of London. This is eminently satisfactory, and demonstrates that notwithstanding the high birth-rate which prevails in this district, the healthful condition resulting from a gravel soil, a plentiful supply of good drinking water, a thorough main drainage, and the sanitary improvements which have been carried out with unremitting attention, have neutralized to a great extent, the tendency to a high death-rate, which annually results from a high birth-rate. death-rate in the four quarters. Quarter ending 1888. Mile End. London. 28 Provincial Towns. June 15.6 16.9 19.1 September 15.7 16.2 17.5 December 1889. 18.9 18.9 20.5 March 19.4 19.5 22.1 Total 69.6 7.5 79.2 Average for the Year 17.4 17.8 19.10 ZYMOTIC DISEASE. The following tables give the number of cases of Zymotic Diseases, which have proved fatal during the last twelve months, either at the patients' houses, or at public Institutions, and it is by intimation given to us of their existence that we are enabled to a great extent, to prevent their spread or recurrence; unfortunately, up to the present, there are 110 compulsory powers to compel house owners to notify to 63 the Sanitary authorities, the existence of these diseases. During the last twelve months the Society of Medical Officers of Health, many of the Vestries, and the Asylums Board, have memorialized the Local Government Board, with a view of getting powers for notification of infectious diseases, with the result that the Board have addressed a communication to the Sanitary authorities of the towns of Great Britain, (some fifty-six in number,) where compulsory notification is in force, in order to obtain information on the working of the system ; and as a result, the information is stated to be of a most satisfactory character, so that I think we may hope for something definite arising out of it, to enable the various Sanitary authorities, to deal more nromntlv with cases of infectious disease. In Mile End the voluntary. system of notification from medical men and the various Institutions continues to work very well, with the result that during the past twelve months, 133 cases have been notified to us, 59 of which were sent by medical men. Quarter ending June, 1888. Quarter ending Sept., 1888. Quarter ending Dec., 1888. Quarter ending March, 1889. Total. Small Pox - - - - - Measles 11 12 71 9 103 Scarlet Fever 7 15 11 7 40 Diphtheria 7 5 6 6 24 Whooping Cough 15 8 3 8 34 Typhoid Fever 6 5 2 3 16 Diarrhœa 5 32 6 4 47 Grand Total - - - - 264 ASYLUMS BOARD HOSPITALS. The preceding figures only give the mortality from the various epidemic diseases. In the absence of notification of all cases of the chief epidemic diseases, which cannot be obtained without compulsory powers, the following table of patients admitted in the Asylums Boad Hospitals during the past year, gives the only further available indication of the number of cases of infectious disease, in this district, and in the metropolis generally. 64 PARISHES AND UNIONS. SUMMARY. Mortality per cent. on all caese admitted. Enumerated Population in 1881. Admissions of all cases per 1,000 of enumerated Population. Scarlet. Diphtheria. Enteric. Typhus. Other Diseases. Grand Total Admissions. Grand Total Deaths. W . District. 'Kensington 108 17 12 ... 6 233 29 12.4 163,151 1.2 Fulham 148 6 22 ... 12 188 26 13.83 114,839 1.63 Paddington 106 0 3 ... 5 120 9 7.5 107,218 1.11 Chelsea 125 2 1 ... 3 134 10 7.46 88,128 1.52 St. George's 159 4 2 ... 10 175 24 13.79 149,748 1.17 Westminster 80 ... 6 4 90 11 12.23 46,549 1.93 N. District. St. Marylobouo 147 ... 9 5 161 9 5.59 154,910 1.04 St. Pancras 378 3 14 ... 7 402 31 7.71 236,258 1.70 Hampstead 21 1 ... ... ... 22 1 4.54 45,452 0.48 Islington 183 44 ... 8 235 17 7.23 282,865 0.83 Hackney 243 | 4 31 ... 8 286 41 14.33 186,462 1.53 Central Dist. St. Giles & St. George, Bloomsbury 45 ... 2 ... 1 48 4 8.34 45,382 1.05 Strand 40 ... 2 ... ... 42 8 19.04 33,582 1.22 Holborn 324 ... 26 10 360 43 11.94 151,835 2.36 London, City of 07 ... 1 ... ... 68 10 14.7 51,439 1.32 Shoreditch 105 ... 29 ... 8 142 23 16.19 126,591 1.12 Bethnal Green 140 9 18 1 3 117 46 25.98 126,961 1.39 E. Distbict. Whitechapel 102 4 4 ... 2 112 23 20.53 71,363 1.70 St. George-in-the-East 38 5 9 ... 3 55 12 21.81 47,157 1 .16 Stepney 24 1 6 ... 5 36 8 22.23 58,543 0.61 Mile End Old Town 85 3 10 ... 4 108 26 24.07 105,613 1.01 Poplar 157 3 54 ... 16 230 38 16.52 156,510 1.46 St. Saviour's 187 2 12 ... 8 209 29 13.87 195,164 1.07 St. Olave's 57 2 17 ... 6 82 12 14.63 134,632 1.60 S. Distbict. Lambeth 413 14 13 ... 14 454 53 11.07 253,699 1.79 Wandsworth & Clapham 311 4 12 ... 22 382 50 13.05 210,434 1.82 Camber well 220 9 16 ... 7 258 40 15.5 186,593 1.38 Greenwich 135 ... 22 ... 11 171 26 15.2 131,233 1.30 Woolwich 72 ... 11 ... 2 85 8 9.41 80,845 1.05 Lewisham 77 ... 1 3 ... ... 80 10 12.5 73,327 1.09 Beyond Met. Area 0 ... ... ... 0 1 ... ... ... Born in Hospital ... ... ... 1 1 1 ... ... ... Totals 4408 99 450 1 194 5152 679 13.17 3,816.483 1.34 65 SMALL POX. I am glad to say there has been no death from this disease during the past twelve months. These cases were notified to us:— one in Grove Road and one in Edwards Road in April, and one in the Mile End Road in August last, the one in Edwards Road being that of a servant who had evidently contracted the disease outside the hamlet who on entering into service in Grove Road conveyed it to one of the inmates who was attacked about a fortnight after she went to live with them. Both these cases were at once removed to the hospital and every precaution taken to prevent the spread of the disease, with the result that no other case occurred. The case in Mile End Road was that of a servant who went out for a holiday, stayed all night and slept with one of the nurses from the Small Pox Hospital-Ship. About a fortnight afterwards the disease showed itself, and she was promptly removed to the Hospital and the room disinfected as quickly as possible. I feel sure it was only owing to prompt measures being taken that the spread of the disease was prevented. SCARLET FEVER. We have been happily comparatively free from this disease during the last twelve months, only 40 deaths occurring. There were 85 cases sent to the Asylum Board Hospital, and altogether 107 notified to us. The houses where they occurred were at once disinfected and sanitary measures were taken to prevent the spread of the disease. The prejudice that formerly existed as to sending these cases away is rapidly subsiding, and the poorer people are beginning to see and feel that isolation is not only the very best thing for actual patients, but also for those at home; and when we go to inspect and disinfect, the people are only too pleased to render every assistance. MEASLES. As will be seen from the table there has been an exceptional mortality from this disease, especially during the quarter ending Dec. 1888. During that period an epidemic broke out, and owing to the want of compulsory notification we were comparatively powerless to prevent the spread of the disease. I was informed that it was particularly prevalent in the neighbourhood of Bow Common Lane Board Schools, and on visiting the locality I found a large number of children suffering from the disease, some 35 children attending the school were attacked in a fortnight, and altogether about 21 per cent. of the children were absent presumably from this disease. I nder such circumstances I found it necessary to ask the Vestry to put in force the powers conferred upon its Sanitary authority by the 98th article of the code of the educational department, which states "The Manager must comply with any notice of the Sanitary authority of the district in which the school is situate requiring them lor a specified time, with a view to preventing the spread of disease, either to 66 close the school or to exclude any scholar from attendance."This they did with the result that the school was shut up for a time, after which the disease subsided. This epidemic was by no means confined to one locality, for on referring to the Registrar General's Report I find that during the quarter ending Dec. 1888, the death-rate from Measles throughout the Country was not only more than 50 per cent. higher than the average rate for the preceding four quarters, but higher than any single quarter of the last 18 years. WHOOPING COUGH. The number of cases of this disease was 34 for the twelve months, most of which occurred during the quarter ending March, 1889, doubtless owing to the severe changes of the weather and to exposure. I am only surprised that the mortality from this disease is not greater considering the careless way in which many children are treated, neither isolation nor medical attention being sought until some such complication as Inflammation of the Lungs takes place. DIPTHERIA. The deaths from this disease were 24. In my report two years ago I said then "it is to be regretted that the Local Government Board do not authorise the reception of cases of this disease to the Asylum Board Hospital.'' Since then representations have been made by the Society of Medical Officers of Health, and many of the Vestries of the Metropolis to the Local Government Board, with a view of these cases being admitted to the Asylum Board Hospital, as it is the opinion of scientists that Diptheria is one ol the most contagious diseases with which we have to deal. I am happy to say that on the 24th October last, the Local Government Board approved of the reception of such cases to the aforesaid hospital and from that date to the end of the year 96 cases were admitted. ENTERIC FEVER. Only sixteen deaths took place from this disease, a very small number indeed for a district like Mile End, and on all these cases coming to our knowledge the drainage and sanitary condition of the locality was at once enquired into. We had only 19 other cases notified to us from the various sources. The following List show the various streets in which the principal Zymotic diseases occured. SMALL POX. Sidney Street. Edward Road. Mile End Road 67 SCARLET FEVER. Wellesley Street Canal Road Mossford Street Maplin Street (2) Nicholas Street Skidmore Street Gold Street (2) Longfellow Road Leatherdale St.(2) Commercial rd.(3) Shandy Street Duckett Street Charles Street Sidney Square Russell Street (2) Wilson Street Baythorne Street Mile End Rd. (4) Clark Street Oxford Street (2) Monteagle Street Sceptre Street (4) Maidment St. (3) Brunswick Place Bow Common La. Globe Road Turner Street Ocean Street Bridge Street (2) Grafton Street Grove Buildings Ben Jon son Rd.(2) Jubilee Street King John Street St. Thomas's Road White Horse Lane Brad well St. (3) Entick Street Dempsey Street Latimer Street (2) Nottingham Place Bancroft Road Cannon Place Double X Place Sidney Street Settles Street Nelson Street (2) Daniels Row Redmans Rd. (2) Bedford Strset Arbor Square Diggon Street West Street (2) New Rowsell St. Stepney Green (2) Victoria Buildings Toilet Street Eaton Place (2) St. Paul's Road Norfolk Bldngs(2) Portland Street ( 2) Maplin Street Eagle Place Medway Road (2) Cecil Street Single Place Alderney Road Knott Street Frimley Street Grove Road Carr Street Ropery Street Coutts Road TYPHOID. Bromehead Street Baker Street Clark Street Copperfield Road F. Block, South Grove Oxford Street Bradwell Street Myrdle Street Harford Street Skidmore Street Rutland Street Lyal Road Newbold Street Oley Place Silas Street Rhodeswell Road Emmott Street Shandy Street Longnor Road DIPHTHERIA. King John Street Bancroft Road West Street Nottingham Place St. Ann's Road Whitehead Street Coutt's Road Jupp's Road Cressy Place The numbers in brackets refer to streets in which there has been more than one case during the twelve months. 68 DISINFECTION. The system of disinfection which is carried out in all cases of infectious diseases is as thorough as possible. When a case is first reported as being removed to the hospital, Sulphur Fumigation is done thoroughly, after this the clothing is taken away in a special vehicle and submitted to a heated chamber up to 150 degrees, and afterwards taken back to the house. In the case of Typhoid Fever, Chloride of Zinc powder is used freely in and around the sinks and gullies, and proper attention paid to the trapping of the drains, and also the disconnecting of the drinking water from the cistern supplying the closet. Experience continues to prove the trustworthiness of these measures as on referring to the list of streets, it will be seen that in many of them there was only one case during the twelve months, and in only one house was there a second case after disinfection had been carried out and this was at a considerable interval. OVERCROWDING. In a densely populated neighbourhood like Mile End it is natural to suppose that a good deal of overcrowding takes place. During the past year we have been most vigilant to prevent the occurrence of "overcrowding," and with the inspectors I have visited numerous premises where this state of things was said to exist, and found that although the houses were occupied by a number of people yet they did not contravene the Act, and had the regulation amount of air space necessary. In the case of a Shelter for Homeless in Mile End Road it was found to be occupied by nearly double the number allowed by the Act, notice was at once served on the owner with the result the place was shut up as it was not found to be suitable for such purpose. COW HOUSES AND SLAUGHTER HOUSES. During the past twelve months the following Cow-houses and Slaughter-houses were re-licensed, they were all visited by the Inspector and myself, and found to be in such a satisfactory condition as require on opposition to their renewal. There were also two fresh applications for license to Cow-houses, one on Stepney Green, and the other in Joseph Street; after visiting them they were found to be unfit to be used as such, notice was sent to that effect and the owners withdrew their applications. SLAUGHTER HOUSES. 1. Boner, Henry, 88, Redman's Road. 2. Ditto 573, Commercial Rd. 3. Bull, William, 65, Mile End Road. 4. Cave, William, 5, Dempsey Yard. 5. Chambers, John Trappett, 39,Coborn Road. 6. Davis, William Branch, 50,Globe Rd. 7. Dixon, George John, 251, Oxford St. 8. Gomm,Charles, 169,Commercial Rd. 9. Gregory, William, 236, Devonshire Street. 10. Highmore, Frederick Joseph, 49, Bedford St. 11. Hollom, George Hy., 35, Ben Jonson Road. 12. Lyon, Alfred, 111, Jubilee Street. 13. Martens, Wm. Jas. & Robt. Chas., 197, Mile End Road 14. Perfect, Alfred, 60, Turner's Road. 15. Piummer, George, 3 (late 9), Port- man Place. 16. Simonds, John, St. Peter's Street. 17. Swann, William, 570, Mile End Rd. 18. Widger, Mary Ann, 187, „ 19. Wilson, John, 301, Commercial Rd. 20. Wright, Parker, 133, Oxford Street. 69 COW HOUSES. 1. Akam, Edward, 125, Turner's Rd. 2. Alexander, Albert Louis, 36, Old Church Road. No. 1. 3. Ditto Ditto No. 2. 4. Base, Henry & Christian, 21,West St. 5. Benjamin, John, 130, Charles Street. 6. Bull, Henry, 43, St. Ann's Road. 7. Burley, Anne, 75, New Road. 8. Cave, William, 42, Jubilee St. No. 1. 9. Ditto Ditto No. 2. 10 . Chambers, John Trappett, Montague Street. No. 1. 11. Ditto Ditto No. 2 12. Ditto Ditto No. 3. 13. Ditto Ditto No. 4. 14. Ditto Ditto No. 5. 15. Chandler, Frederick, 1, Sidney Street. 16. Clark, Henry William, 236, Bow Common Lane. 17. Coleman, William, 13, Patterson St. 18. Davis, Wm. Branch, 24a, Rectory Sq. 19. Ditto Black Boar Yard. 20. Dellevv, Harriet, 64, White Horse Lane. 21. Dennison, Peter, 408, Commercial Road. 22. Edwards, Abraham, 150, Sidney St. 23. Evans, Hugh, 28, Mile End Road. 24. Griffith, Emma, 6, Jamaica Street. 25. Grout, Charles, 7, Bridge Street. 26. James, Ann, 69, Shandy Street. 27. James, John, 11, Settler Street. 28. Jones, Richard, 98, Clark Street. 29. Kendon, Edwin, 147, West Street. 30. Lloyd, Evan, 6, Norfolk St. No. 1. 31. Ditto Ditto No. 2. 32. Lloyd,William,O. 13,Beaumort St. 33. Pricut, Ann, 1, Spring Garden Place. 34. Rees, John, 1, Hannibal Road. 35 Richards, Thomas, 5, Russell Street. 36. Richards, Wm. 3, Hawkins St. No. 1. 37. Ditto Ditto No. 2. 38. Roper, James, 66, Harford Street. 39. Wells, John, 109, Sidney Street. SANITARY IMPROVEMENTS during the year. On reference being made to the Inspector's Report, it will show the detailed Sanitary work carried out during the past year. This table embodies the measures, which are being taken to prevent the spread of disease and remove the local unsanitary conditions, to which disease is so frequently due. The number of houses supplied with water to closets were 1,494, nearly two hundred in excess of those of last year. The number of first visits paid to the different houses were 2,243, and altogether something like 1,845 sanitary defects remedied during the year. It must be remembered, to carry out all these improvements, entail very much tact, patience, and energy, on the part of the Inspectors. Latterly the work of the Sanitary Inspectors have been much facilitated, owing to a knowledge of the fact, that their visits are for the assistance and protection of the poorer classes, as well as for the more fortunate. Out of the large number of cases mentioned, we had only to seek magisterial aid in eight instances, most of which were for non-compliance with orders for drainage, these were at once ordered by the magistrate to be executed. The West Ward we find to be the most trouble from a sanitary point of view, owing to a great extent to the large proportion of foreigners which have invaded the district, thenhabits being of such a character as to require constant supervision. Owing to the vigilance exercised by your Inspector, the streets which a little time ago were almost uninhabitable, are now in a fairly healthy condition. In this ward we find underground rooms occupied as sleeping apartments, the inhabitants of which are from time to time served with notices to discontinue their use as such, but it not constantly watched continue to use them. 70 The question of defective drainage, plays a most important part in the sanitary condition of the Hamlet, and frequently we have had to encounter serious opposition from landlords, owing to the necessity of opening up drains to find the defects. Some months ago I recommended to the Sanitary Committee, the purchase of a Smoke Test Apparatus, by which the defects in the drains are at once shown ; it has been in use about six months, during which time we have had many opportunities of proving it to be a most valuable agent, in finding out the defects in drains, both to our own satisfaction, and to that of the landlord. The house to house visitation has been steadily going on during the past year with the result that now we are coming to the better streets the defects of which are not so numerous, but require visiting all the same. I hope that this time next year I may be able to report that all or nearly every house in the Hamlet has a proper water supply to the closet, dust bin provided and the drains properly trapped. I think that such a number of Sanitary Improvements have been carried out, (notwithstanding the fact of Mr. Leshaw the senior inspector was laid up with Typhoid Fever for several months, during which time the whole of the work was carried out by Mr. Cox,) shows the Sanitary department has not been idle. I have to thank the members of the Sanitary Committee, for their kindness and courtesy during the past twelve months ; they have always been most willing to take into consideration, anything that from a sanitary point of view, would improve the district. I have the honour to be your obedient servant, THOMAS TAYLOR, Medical Officer of Health. SANITARY INSPECTOR'S REPORT for the year 1888-9. Gentlemen, On referring to Schedule 2 of the General Report, will be found the names of the streets in which houses (in respect of which orders for the execution of Sanitary Works were made,) were situate. The following list shows the total of the various works completed during the past twelvemonths. Total number of houses inspected 2243 Water supply provided to closets 1494 Yards paved354 Receptacles for dust provided 155 Traps provided to sink and drains 74 Houses cleansed and repaired 79 Drains cleansed and repaired 128 New closets built 17 Waste pipes of sinks disconnected from drains 37 Water supplies for domestic purposes, separated from cistern used for flushing the closet 69 Offensive accumulations removed 23 Occupation of underground cellars as sleeping apartments discontinued 18 Swine removed 7 Persons summonsed before a magistrate for noncompliance with orders for Sanitary works 8 Houses disinfected in consequence of infectious diseases 133 Articles of bedding and clothing removed and disinfected 568 Very numerous inspections of premises where offensive works are carried on, have been made during the year, and the necessary orders given for the abatement of nuisances. The whole of the slaughter houses and cow houses in the Hamlet, have also been frequently visited during the year. I am, Gentlemen, Your obedient servant, HENRY LESHAW, Sanitary Inspector.