NEW 3 1895-96. FORTIETH Annual Report of the PROCEEDINGS OF THE VESTRY of the PARISH OF ST. MARY, NEWINGTON, LONDON, In the execution of the Act of the 18th and 19th years of Her present Majesty, intituled "An Act for the better Local Management of the Metropolis." and subsequent Acts amending the same, For the year ending MARCH 25th, 1896. London: Printed by order of the Vestry, by R. TILLING, 106, GREAT DOVER STREET, S.E. NEW 3 TABLE OF CONTENTS. Page List of Vestrymen, Auditors and Officers, 1895-6 1-5 Borough and Parish Boundaries 6 Area in Acres 6 Parliamentary Divisions 6 N umber of Electors 6 Members for the Borough 6 Mileage of Dedicated Roadways 6 Number of Street Lamps 6 ,, Inhabited Houses 6 ,, Inhabitants entitled to Vote for Vestrymen 6 Population of the Parish 6 Rateable Annual Value 7 Number of Assessments 7 Produce of a Penny Rate 7 Amount of Rates Made and Collected 7 Vestrymen 7 Vestry Hall 7 Death of Mr. William Saunders, M.P 8 ,, H.R.H. Prince Henry of Battenberg 8 Public Library Commissioners 9 Public Baths and Washhouses 10 Resignation of Surveyor 10 Liquor Traffic (Local Control) Bill 12 Metropolitan Municipalities 12 St. Saviour's Grammar School 12 Sale of Ice Creams 13 County Rate Basis for Hamlet of Penge 13 Hospital Saturday Fund 13 Standing Orders 13 Questions in Vestry 14 Vestry and Committee Meetings 19 Public Health and Sanitary Committee— 19 Infectious Diseases 19 New Disinfecting, Incinerator and Van Shed 21 New Disinfecting Van 22 Sanitary Staff 22 Insanitary Areas 26 Medical Officer's Report 26 Adulteration Acts 26 District Surveyors and Sanitary Work 26 Summonses 27 Coroner's Court 28 Sewer Works 28 Ventilation of Sewers 29 ii. Public Health and Sanitary Committee—continued. page House Drainage 29 Richardson v. The Vestry 31 Drainage of Mows, Yards, and other private places 32 New Parish Map and Drainage 32 Public Lavatories, Great Dover Street 32 Drinking Fountains and Cattle Troughs 32 Water Supply 33 Water Companies' Charges 34 Byelaws for Houses let in Lodgings 34 Building Plans 38 Metropolitan Asylums Board 39 Bakehouses 39 Licences for Cow and Slaughterhouses 39 Roads and Depot Committee— 40 Carriageways 40 Footway Paving Works 41 Paviours' ' Bus Cart 55 Carriage Crossings 55 Tramways 55 Broken Granite 55 Street Orderly Sand Bins 56 Removal of Snow 56 Cleansing of Red Lion Mews 56 Newington Causeway—Maintenance and Scavenging of 56 Salary of Cleansing Foreman 57 Work for Unemployed 57 Workmen—Permanent Staff 58 Strike of Loaders at Town Depot 59 Workmen's Annual Holiday 61 Gratuities 62 Claims for Compensation 62 Simpson v. the Vestry 62 Borrett Road Adoption 63 Clock Passage, Hampton Street 63 Penrose Street Property 64 Wandsworth Dust Contract 65 Collection of Dust 66 Disposal of Refuse 66 Depot, Manor Place 68 Depot Foreman 69 Salary of Storekeeper 69 New Stables and Fodder Stores 69 Railway Rates and Charges—Withdrawal of Rebate 70 Depot Inquiry 70 Sevenoaks Depot 71 iii. Roads and Depot Committee—continued. page Longfield Depot 73 Longfield National Schools 74 Meopham Depot 74 Inspection of Country Depots 74 Ploughing Matches 74 Cart Horse Parade on Whit Monday 74 Horses—Vestry's Stud 74 Return of Consignments 75 General Purposes and Lighting Committee— 77 Street Lighting 77 Gas—Quality and Price of, &c 79 Electric Lighting 79 Explosions in Electric Light Conduits 87 Street Obstructions—Carriageways 88 „ Footways 88 Sun Blinds 88 Advertising on Hoardings 88 Easements 88 Vacant Land in East Street and Orb Street 89 Kennington Park—Proposed Footway across 90 Trees 91 Penton Place Improvement 91 Union Road Improvement 91 Thurlow Street Improvement 92 Street Nomenclature 92 Local Government Act, 1894 93 Vestrymen Serving on Juries 103 London Equalisation of Rates Act, 1894 103 Shops (Early Closing) Bill 103 School Board Election Expenses 104 School Board Rates 104 Rating of Elementary Schools 104 Nuisances and London County Council 104 Remuneration of Clerks to Justices 104 Chairmen of Vestries as Justices of the Peace 105 New Ward Boundaries and Polling Districts 105 Disorderly Houses 106 Municipal Dwellings 106 Finance and Audit Committee— 107 Overdrawing Treasurer's Account 107 Parochial Rates 108 Refreshments to Vestrymen 112 Southwark and Vauxhall Water Company—Trenches Account .. 113 Vestry Clerk and Public Auditors 113 School Board for London—Precept of 113 iv. Finance and Audit Committee—continued. Page Demand upon Eating Authority 114 Vestry Expenditure—As to General Purposes 115 ,, —As to Sewer Purposes 116 Loans for Town Depot 115 ,, New Paving Works 116 ,, Walworth Road Forecourts 116 ,, Brockwell Park 116 Statement of Contracts 117 Abstract of Accounts 118-131 Report of Acting Surveyor of Roads 132 Report of Acting Surveyor of Sewers 134 Report of Medical Officer of Health 137 Causes of Death 138 Uncertified Deaths 139 Mortuary 139 Inquests 139 Cases of Infectious Disease notified during 1895 140, 143 Deaths in Sanitary Area and Death Rate in each Ward 141 Deaths from principal Zymotic Diseases 142,143 Small Pox 144 Scarlet Fever 144 Diphtheria 145 Typhoid Fever 145 Whooping Cough 146 Typhus Fever 146 Measles 146 Little Mount Street 147 Pullen's Buildings 148 Slaughterhouses and Cowsheds 149 Bakehouses 150 Nuisances abated 150 Sanitary Work 153 Sale of Food and Drugs and Margarine Act 154 Tables of Mortality, &c 159-175 List of Governors and Guardians and Officers, 1895-96 177 Burial Board—Members and Accounts of 179 Charity Accounts 180-199 Accounts of Public Library Commissioners 200-203 ,, ,, Baths and Washhouses Commissioners 204 Attendances of Vestrymen and Ex-officio Members—Return of 206 Depot Balance Sheet, re Sale of Mixture and Ashes 208-211 Return of Refuse Collected 212 A LIST OF THE VESTRYMEN of the PARISH OF ST. MARY, NEWINGTON, For the Year 1895-1896. Elected pursuant to the provisions of the Metropolis Local Management Acts, 1855 to 1890, as amended by the Local Government (England and Wales) Act, 1894, on the 15th, and taking office on the 28th, December, 1894. St. MARY'S WARD. To Serve for One Year. Oehrens, Frederick Thomas 5, Hampton House, Hampton Street. Empson, John James 46, Albert Street. Tomlin, William 26, Manor Place. Henley, George William 23, Thrush Street. Hammond, James Charles 48, Wansey Street. To Serve for Two Years. Mather, John Clayton 268, Walworth Road. Cole, Fred 90, Penrose Street. Curtis, Henry 167, Penton Place. Goold, Alfred 15, Delaune Street. Westcott, William 32, Lorrimore Square. To Serve for Three Years. Lamb, Ocean Alfred 4, New Street. Smithers, Alfred Ebenezer 112, Newington Butts. Clark, Joseph Padgett 39, Kennington Park Road. Amans, William Henry 31, Newington Crescent. Burrows, Frederick Samuel 48, Albert Street. A 2 St. PAUL'S WARD. To Serve for One Year. Rackett, Joseph Ernest 33, Lorrimore Road. Stapleton, Harry 19, Arthur Street. Littlefield, Isaac 100, Royal Road. Whiteman, Charles 54, Finchley Road. To Serve for Two Years. Chandler, Arthur Thomas 73, Inville Eoad. Newman, George 56, Sutherland Square. White, John 96, Lorrimore Road. Anton, George James 54, Beresford Street. To Serve for Three Years. Chalk, Henry 32, Grosvenor Street. Lane, Samuel 40, Camberwell Road. Cory, William Richard 106, Grosvenor Terrace. Emmett, Jonathan Gilbert 269, Beresford Street. St. PETER'S WARD. To Serve for One Year. Woosnam, William Belcher 34, Faraday Street. Simpson, Alfred Joseph 4, Trafalgar Street. Miller, Henry Knott 13, Alvey Street. Moreland, George Arthur 15, Larcom Street. Wallden, Charles Daniel - 29, Bagshot Street. To Serve for Two Years. Curtis, George - 25, Queen's Row. Pipe, William Willgress 31, Alvey Street. West, Francis 100, Thurlow Street. Bates, Henry 105, Boyson Road. Jones, James Horace 92, Thurlow Street. To Serve for Three Years. Dixon, William Seth 5a, Thurlow Street. Hibble, Charles 13, Surrey Grove. Harvey, Henry 54, Alvey Street. Cooper, Alfred Jabez . 83, Thurlow Street. Horsley, Rev. John William - St. Peter's Rectory, Liverpool Street. 3 St. JOHN'S WARD. To Serve for One Year. Wellard, Leonard 9, Bedford Street Youldon, John 2, Orb Street. Thomas, Henry Arthur 2, Turquand Street. Standeven, George 2, Little Trafalgar Place. Seager, John James 64, Pollock Road. Wilson, James 13, Chatham Street. To Serve for Two Years. Rowe, Alfred 100, Darwin Buildings. Waylett, John 35, Tisdale Place. Pearson, Edwin 78, Darwin Buildings. Grice, John Joseph 71, Orb Street. Bridges, John Arthur 119, Rodney Road. Evens. Walter Henry 136, New Kent Road. To Serve for Three Years. Morgan, John Henry 11, Hillery Road. Revitt, William 14, Henshaw Street. Elliott, James 35, Brandon Street. Edwards, William 89, Darwin Buildings. Revitt, Harry 62, Deacon Street. Dawes, James Arthur 144, Walworth Road. TRINITY WARD. To Serve for One Year. Rackham, George 57, New Kent Road. Sutch, Arthur Hawkins 147, New Kent Road. Wagner, Robert 28, Trinity Street. Hiam, George Thomas 30, Falmouth Road. To Serve for Two Years. Shorland, Thomas 177, Great Dover Street Green, Benjamin 73, Union Road. Longley, John William 35, Great Bland Street. Bryant, Joseph Charles 36, Great Dover Street. To Serve for Three Years. Lansdale, Dr. William 44, Trinity Square. Bunnett. Henry Samuel 138, Great Dover Street. Davis, Robert Charles 7, Falmouth Road. Fell, George Henry 29, Ralph Street. A2 4 Auditors of Accounts. (Elected pursuant to the Metropolis Local Management Acts.) For St. MARY'S WARD. Haselgrave, William Henry 178, Crampton Street. For St. PAUL'S WARD. Westcott, Eobert 16, Chapter Road. For St. PETER'S WARD. Smart, Edwin 2, Delaune Street. For St. JOHN'S WARD. Dobson, William John 138, New Kent Eoad. For TRINITY WARD. Hamel, Rev. Etienne Theodore - 138, New Kent Road. Representatives of the Parish on the London County Council. (Elected directly by the parishioners on the 2nd March, 1895, under the provisions of the Local Government Act, 1888.) For WEST NEWINGTON DIVISION. Russell, The Rt. Hon. Earl 2, Temple Gardens, Temple, E.C. Thompson, William Marcus 30, Russell Square, W.C. For WALWORTH DIVISION. Parker, Richard 404, Old Kent Road, S.E. Spokes, Russell 8, Victoria Street, Westminster, S.W. Chairman of the Vestry. The Rey. John William Horsley, M.A., J.P., St Peter's Rectory, Liverpool Street. 5 EX-OFFICIO MEMBERS. Rector of Newington and Rural Dean:— The Rev. Canon Palmer, M.A., The Rectory, Kennington Park Road. Churchwardens:— Gaul, George 95 Kennington Park Road. Vernon, George. 6, Wansey Street. Treasurer of the Vestry:— Fishwick, Frankland London and County Bank, Newington Butts. Officers of the Vestry:— Vestry Clerk Levi Joseph Dunham. Assistant, Minuting, and Correspondence Clerk Peter Leonard Lorkin. Statistical Clerk Walter Sutton. Depot Accountant Clerk Edwin Ifan Dunham. Medical Officer of Health George Millson, L.R.C.P., M.R.C.S. Chief Sanitary Inspector Alfred Long. St. Mary's Ward James Bullock. St. Paul's Ward- William George Selby. Sanitary Inspectors St. Peter's Ward- Spencer Bush. St. John's Ward- John James Sargent. Trinity Ward - Ernest Howes. Sanitary Clerk Herbert James Metcher. Acting Surveyor of Sewers Harry Baker. Acting Surveyor of Roads William George Coat. Surveyor's Clerk William John Leach. Dust Inspector Gordon P. Smith. Street Keeper Edward Allman. Hall Keeper and Messenger George James Reed. REPORT. THE Parliamentary Borough and Parish of St. Mary, Newington, adjoins the parish of St. George the Martyr, Southwark, on the north and east, Camberwell on the south, and Lambeth on the west; the superficial area being 632 statute acres. The borough has two divisions, the West Newington Division taking in the whole of Trinity, St. Mary's and St. Paul's Wards of the Parish. The number of electors in this division is 9,318. Member—Captain Cecil William Norton. The Walworth Division takes in the whole of St. Peter's and St. John's Wards. The number of electors in this division is 8,741. Member—James Bailey, Esq. The parish has 37 miles of dedicated roadways and 1,172 street lamps. The number of inhabited houses at Midsummer 1881 was 14,009 ; and at the Census of 1891, 13,392. The number of inhabitants entitled to vote for Vestrymen and Auditors at the election in December 1894, after the rearrangement of wards and abolition of the rating qualification by the operation of the Local Government Act of the foregoing session, was as follows:— St. Mary's Ward 3,518 Members 15 St. Paul's ,, 3,070 ,, 12 St. Peter's ,, 4,069 ,, 15 St. John's ,, 4,672 ,, 18 Trinity „ 2,730 ,, 12 Total 18,059 72 According to the Census taken in 1891, the population of the parish was 115,663. 7 The rateable annual value in April 1895 was £479,941, and the number of assessments 17,634; a penny rate producing £1,805. The rates made and collected during the year amounted to 6s. 8d. in the pound, viz.:—Poor Rate, including Police, County Rate, Public Library and Baths and Washhouses, 3s. 10d.; General Rate, including Lighting and Assessments by the London School Board, 2s. 7d.; and Sewer Rate 3d. Vestrymen.—Mr. H. Harvey (St. Peter's Ward) resigned his seat as a Vestryman on the 22nd January 1896, and Mr. T. Shorland (Trinity Ward) on the 19th February ensuing, each paying a fine of one shilling under the standing order of the Vestry. These vacancies having occurred within six months of the date fixed for the annual elections, did not necessitate an election. Vestry Hall.—The use of the building for the purpose of a public meeting was granted to the Secretary of the United Shop Assistants' Union on the 8th July 1895, and to the Early Closing Association for a similar purpose in January 1896. Also to Mr. W. R. Higson, Returning Officer, on the 12th and 16th of July 1895, for the nomination of candidates and counting of votes respectively at the Parliamentary General Election. The ironwork on the roof of the towers of the Hall, being in a rusty and defective condition, was repaired by Mr. J. Marsland. At the request of the Medical Officer of Health, who desired an additional room for his own accommodation which the existing space in the Sanitary Department would not permit of, the room on the landing adjoining the small Committee Room (allotted by the Vestry for the use of the Chairman) was with the consent of the latter repapered and furnished at the close of the year as a private office for the Medical Officer, who thereupon shared the use of the room with the Chairman of the Vestry. The following alterations and improvements in the gallery of the Vestry Hall were also decided upon at the end of the year:— Gas light to be fixed at back of clock; second and third seats raised four inches and extended to staircase, with gangway behind clock ; additional seat placed against wall; all lumber cleared out; partition at end raised 2½ feet higher; ventilator in end or back wall; and an extra step from stairhead to level of back platform. 8 Death of Mr. William Saunders, M.P.—The decease of the much-respected member for Walworth occurred on the 1st May 1895, and was reported to the Vestry on the same day, when a suitable resolution of condolence was proposed by the Chairman and unanimously adopted. The widow acknowledged the Vestry's letter in the following terms:— “ The Hollies,” Market Lavington, Wilts, Sir, May 27th, 1895. On behalf of the relations of Mr. William Saunders, will you please to convey my grateful thanks for your kind expressions of regret for his loss. He worked hard and conscientiously, as you say, in Parliament, at the County Council, and in temperance reform; and it is gratifying to know that he was really respected, even by those who differed widely from him. I am, yours faithfully, (Signed) CAROLINE SAUNDERS. Death of H.R.H. Prince Henry of Battenberg.—on receiving intelligence of this sad event, which occurred from fever on board ship as the Prince was returning home from the military expedition to Ashantee which he had voluntarily joined, the Vestry on the 22nd January 1896 unanimously adopted the following resolution moved by the Chairman (the Rev. J. W. Horsley, M.A.) That the Vestry of the Parish of Newington, in the County of London, would respectfully express its sympathy with the Queen, the Princess Beatrice, and the other members of the Royal Family in the great sorrow that has fallen upon them by the death of Prince Henry of Battenberg, while on active military service. This sympathy is but an echo of that which has ever prompted the Queen to express her ready and real interest in the sorrows of her people.' The following acknowledgment was received from the Home Secretary: — Whitehall, Sir, 7th February, 1896. I have had the honour to lay before the Queen the loyal and dutiful resolution of condolence which has been adopted by the Vestry of St. Mary, Newington, on the occasion of the death of His Royal Highness Prince Henry of Battenberg, K.G.; and I have to inform you that Her Majesty was pleased to receive the resolution very graciously. I have the honour to be, The Vestry Clerk, Your obedient Servant, Vestry Hall, (Signed) M. W. RIDLEY. Walworth, S.E. 9 Public Library Commissioners.—Upon the retirement of the Rector from the Board of Commissioners the Yestry on the 18th September 1895 passed the following vote of thanks, on the motion of Mr. Westcott:— That the best thanks of this Vestry be conveyed to the Rev. Canon Palmer for his past services as a Library Commissioner, and for the interest he has taken in promoting the work of the Library from its formation,— and elected Mr. Thomas Æneas Gilbert, of 66 Doddington Grove, to fill the vacancy. The Rector acknowledged the Vestry's vote of thanks as follows:— Newington Rectory, Kennington Park Road, October 1st, 1895. Dear Sir, I acknowledge gratefully the resolution passed by the Vestry at its last meeting and duly communicated to me by yourself, in which there is a very generous appreciation of such services as I have rendered to the Public Library movement in this parish. I value much such a recognition of my efforts, as an addition to the numerous proofs of kindly feeling which I have received from the representatives of the parish during my long association with them in the past. I am, dear Sir, L. J. Dunham, Esq., Very truly yours, Vestry Clerk. (Signed) GEORGE T. PALMER. The three Commissioners on the rota for retirement this year were Messrs. Simmonds, Jephson and Gilbert, the last named taking the place of the Rector. The Vestry supplied the vacancies on the 27th November by re-electing Messrs. Jephson and Gilbert, with Mr. J. A. Dawes in the place of Mr. Simmonds. In February 1896 the Rev. W. J. Mills resigned, and the Vestry on the 4th March appointed Mr. G. Newman in his stead. The Vestry was informed on the 19th February 1896 that the Commissioners had agreed to open the Library on Sunday evenings from 6 to 9 o'clock. The amount levied by precept upon the Rating Authority this year for the purposes of the Library Commissioners was £1,800, "or such other sum as might be the net proceeds of the said penny rate " ; and the quarterly instalments were paid direct to the Commissioners' Treasurer as heretofore. 10 Public Baths and Washhouses.— The retiring Commissioners this year were Messrs. Cannon, Cory and Hicks, who addressed a letter to the Vestry on the 3rd April 1895 in support of their claim to re-election, urging their past services in connection with the movement from the commencement, and the injustice which would be done them if new Commissioners were now appointed in their places, whose names would be inscribed on the memorial foundation stone without their having done anything in furtherance of the scheme. The three gentlemen named were re-elected by the Vestry on the above-named date. In response to an application from the Commissioners the Vestry on the 15th May 1895 agreed to the following recommendations submitted by the Roads and Depot Committee:— That a strip of ground 10 ft. wide and 42 ft. 9 in. in length, at the back of the cart shed at the Depot, be surrendered to the Baths and Washhouses Commissioners so as to secure ventilation and access to the new boiler house, upon the Commissioners undertaking to extend the cart shed so as to provide covering for the vans displaced. That the Commissioners be allowed to surrender the third railway arch from Manor Place, and take possession, at the convenience of the Yestry, of the fourth arch for the purpose of a coal store. On the 26th October 1895 the members of the Vestry were conducted over the new buildings by the Commissioners, by whose invitation the inspection was made. At the close of this Report the structural portion of the building was rapidly approaching completion. The engineering works and fittings will take at least another year to complete. The sum of £ 1,800 was levied by precept upon the rating authority on the 20th March 1895 to meet the expenses of the Commissioners for the year, and paid direct to the Treasurer in quarterly instalments as usual. Resignation of Surveyor.—The Engineer and Surveyor (Mr. J. A. Paget Waddington, C.E.) applied to the Vestry on the 15th May 1895 for a testimonial under seal, to assist him in prosecuting his candidature for the position of Surveyor to the Board of Works for the Whitechapel District; at the same time expressing his regret that the circumstances and conditions attaching to his 11 position as Surveyor to this Vestry obliged him to seek a situation elsewhere. A suitable testimonial was accordingly prepared and handed to Mr. waddington, who was successful in his candidature, and announced his resignation to the Vestry on the 12th June in the following terms:— Vestry Hall, Walworth Road, S.E., June 12 th, 1895. To the Chairman and Members of the Newington Vestry. Gentlemen, I have to inform you that from a large number of applicants for the position of Surveyor to the Board of Works for the District of Whitechapel, I have been elected to the office by an almost unanimous vote of the Board ; and in consequence I beg respectfully to tender my resignation of the office of Engineer and Surveyor which I have the honour to hold in your service, and I should esteem it a favour if you would kindly permit me to terminate my duties at the expiration of one month from this date. I have valued very highly the uniform courtesy and kindness which I have received from all members of the Vestry, and I feel great regret at the prospect of parting from those members and colleagues with whom I have worked pleasantly and amicably. It was my intention, when you did me the honour to appoint me to the position of Surveyor to your Vestry, to have remained in your service for some years at least; but, as I have already stated in my letter to you of a month ago, my sole reason for seeking another appointment was the conditions under which I have been obliged to carry on the work of my department, and of which I had no knowledge until I had entered upon my duties. I cannot take leave of the Vestry without bearing testimony to the loyalty and efficiency of the services rendered by the Foremen, Messrs. Baker and Coat, and the whole of the workmen under my charge. I have, from an intimate knowledge of their work, no hesitation in congratulating the Vestry on having in their service two such competent and trustworthy Foremen and a large number of steady, industrious and respectable workmen. One of the most gratifying recollections which I shall carry away will be the marked improvement in the character of the services rendered by the workmen in my department during the time they have been under my supervision and control, and I commend them to the Vestry as a body of men who have most readily and loyally responded to my requirements; and I venture to express the opinion that so long as they are treated with proper consideration the present standard of efficiency will be maintained, and the Vestry will have the satisfaction of knowing that they have a staff of workmen of which any local authority may justly be proud. I have the honour to be, Gentlemen, Your obedient Servant, (Signed) J. PAGET WADDINGTON, Engineer and Surveyor. 12 The term of Mr. Waddington's service with the Vestry was almost exactly two years, he having entered on his duties on the 26th Juno 1893 and finally relinquished them on the 13th July 1895, after taking leave of the Vestry three days previously. The question of filling up the vacancy was referred to a Committee of the whole Vestry, upon whose advice the Vestry on the 16th October appointed Messrs. Baker and Coat, the Foremen of Sewers and Roads engaged by Mr. Waddington in May 1894 (see last Annual Report, p. 34) as Acting Surveyors of Sewers and Roads respectively for a period of six months, at a salary of £3 per week each; and the business of the Surveyor's Department was conducted under the supervision of these two officers for the remainder of the year. Liquor Traffic (Local Control) Bill.—The following resolution, moved by Mr. Burrows, was adopted by the Vestry as a matter of urgency almost unanimously on the 15th May 1895, and copies were sent to the Prime Minister, the Chancellor of the Exchequer, and the Members of Parliament for the borough:— That this Vestry express its satisfaction that the Liquor Traffic (Local Control) Bill has been introduced into the House of Commons, and trusts that it will be pushed through all its stages with all possible speed. In acknowledging the resolution Mr. James Bailey, member for Walworth, stated that he could not support the Bill unless it provided for equitable compensation to the owners of any publichouses which might be closed. Metropolitan Municipalities.—During the year under report letters were received from the Vestries of St. James, Westminster, Streatham and Camberwell, with various suggestions or schemes having for their object the incorporation of those districts by charter. The Camberwell scheme was under the consideration of the General Purposes Committee at the close of the year, but the Yestry took no other action on the subject. St. Saviour's Grammar School.—On the 19th February 1896 the Vestry concurred in a resolution passed by the Guardians of St. Saviour's Union protesting against the proposal of the 13 Governors of St. Saviour's Grammar School to remove this ancient foundation to the Clapham Eoad, and asking the Charity Commissioners to withhold their consent thereto. Sale of Ice Creams.—In reply to a letter from the Yestry of Clerkenwell, with accompanying copy of analyst's report to the Local Government Board on bacteriological examination of water in which ice cream glasses had been washed, the Yestry on the 21st February 1896 sent a copy of its resolution of the 6th February 1895 on the subject, as printed at page 47 of the last Annual Report. County Rate Basis for Hamlet of Penge.—The notice sent down from the London County Council relative to the proposed reduction in the basis of standard of the hamlet of Penge from £153,224 to £151,820 for a County Rate was duly posted in February 1896 by the Clerk, and no objections thereto were received. Hospital Saturday Fund. The following sums were paid over to the Treasurer of the Fund on the dates named, being the proceeds of the penny-a-week collection among the workmen of the Vestry:— 1895, August 2nd £1 10 6½ 1896, January 3rd 1 12 8½ £3 3 3 Standing Orders.—The following additional Standing Orders were adopted by the Vestry during the year:— That copies of the agenda paper for each meeting be hung up in a suitable frame in the public gallery and other conspicuous positions within the Vestry premises, for the perusal and convenience of the public attending the meetings of the Vestry. (3rd April 1895.) That no person engaged by this Vestry be allowed to act either as presiding officer or poll clerk at any election without the permission of the Vestry. (17th April 1895.) That in future the Medical Officer of Health be requested to examine all workmen who are absent from their duties on account of illness, and supply the Committee under which such workmen are engaged with a certificate. (29th May 1895.) 14 That in future the Medical Officer of Health's Report, which is required for statistical purposes by the London County Council early in the year, be printed separately and sent to the Council within two months from the time it falls due; and that it be afterwards added to and included in the Vestry's Annual Report as heretofore. (24th July 1895.) That inasmuch as responsibility for the Vestry's undertakings attaches to each member of the Vestry, a card of membership be given to each Vestryman, on the production of which he will be entitled to enter or inspect any place belonging to or work being carried on by the Vestry. (2nd October 1895.) That after one month's notice, every sun blind of less height than 7 feet from the pavement level, and every side blind exceeding in width 1 foot 6 inches from the shop fascia, be deemed an obstruction under section 119 of the Metropolis Local Management Act, 1855. (2nd October 1895.) That any workman of the Vestry found using the Depot tools upon jobs other than Vestry work be instantly discharged. (30th October 1895.) Questions in Vestry.—The following is a list of all questions which, after due notice, were put and answered in Vestry during the year under report:— 1895. April 3. Mr. Newman to the Medical Officer of Health:— Q. Has your attention been drawn to a statement in the Echo of Tuesday last supplied by Mr. H. R. G. Gogay, to the effect that the death rate of Newington for the previous week was 52 per thousand -12 per thousand higher than any other South London parish ? A. On Wednesday (the 20th) I reported that the death rate for Newington during the fortnight ending March 9th was 52 per thousand, and that the death rate for the whole of London for the same two weeks was 39.8 per thousand. The death rate for the South London parishes is not yet known, and therefore it is impossible for Mr. Gogay to make the comparison he does correctly. He is confusing the death rate of London as a whole with that of the South London parishes. Newington has suffered severely from the late cold weather and the influenza. In the fortnight referred to 22 deaths arose from influenza, 78 from bronchitis, 34 from pneumonia and 21 from phthisis, making in all 155 deaths from inflammatory diseases of the lungs, out of a total of 239 deaths. The struggle for existence is very severe in the parish, and it is no figure of speech to say that the majority of the people in the parish, when they die, do so literally in harness. Our annual reports show that a fourth part of those who die of our parishioners do so away from home, in a hospital outside the boundaries of our parish. 15 April 3. Mr. Westcott to the Medical Officer of Health:— Q. Why do you not report to the Vestry under the Metropolis Management Act, 18 and 19 Vic. chap. 120, sec. 133, which clearly defines that it is the duty of Inspectors of Nuisances to report to the Vestry of scavenging and other nuisances P A. Section 133 of the Metropolis Local Management Act of 1855, 18 and 19 Vic. cap. 120, was repealed by the Public Health (London) Act of 1891. April 17. Mr. Bridges to the Clerk:— Q. What are the stabling and other erections in Kingston Street owned by Mr. Brown of Watling Street rated at, and how long have rates been paid for the same ? A. The rate books not being under the control of the Vestry, I have no means of answering this question. I should advise Mr. Bridges to look at the rate books as a ratepayer. May 1. Mr. Lane to the Clerk:— Q. When will our workmen receive their badges or numbers ? A. I shall feel obliged if Mr. Lane will repeat his question at the next Vestry. July 10. Mr. Westcott to the Clerk:— Q. Has a licence been granted to Messrs. Terry to post on the hoarding round the Baths site ? A. A licence was granted on the 5th inst., Messrs. Terry paying the usual fees and giving an undertaking to clear the hoarding of bills at the expiration of the licence; but had it occurred to me at the time of granting the licence that the hoarding was to be used for posting the bills of one political party only, I certainly would not have granted the licence. July 24. Mr. Green to the Clerk:— Q. Cannot something be done for the people in Devonshire Court and Uxbridge Court, who on Sunday got their furniture damaged by the overflow of the sewers during the storm ? A. (The Clerk stated that he could not answer the question ; but the Chairman stated that he understood from the Medical Officer that the houses had been visited, and the matter was receiving his attention.) Mr. Cole to the Clerk:— Q. How many of the officers of the Vestry acted as poll clerks or presiding officers at the recent Parliamentary Election, under the authority given at the last Vestry meeting ? A. Two. Q. Can you say how many officers of the Governors and Guardians held similar positions ? A. Can't say. 16 September 18. Mr. Edwards to the Clerk:— Q. Has any, and if so what, progress been made in the revision of the Byelaws and Standing Orders by the Committee appointed for that purpose, and when may we expect them to report thereon ? A. Considerable progress has been made with the revision and rearrangement of the Byelaws, and the Standing Orders have been also rearranged so as to bring them under the respective departments as controlled by the various Standing Committees and make them more easy of reference. No further progress, however, can now be made until the Vestry have settled the duties of the new Surveyor and the inquiry as to Depot control. October 2. Mr. Davis to the Clerk: — Q. What vacancies at present exist in the office of Vestrymen for St. Mary's, Newington ? A. Casual vacancies are to be notified to the Chairman in writing, or to the Clerk, by two Vestrymen. I have not received any such notification and am not aware therefore what, if any, vacancies exist. Q. If any exist, when and what steps will be taken to fill these vacancies? A. It would be my duty as Clerk to fix an early date for election when any vacancy is properly brought under my notice, provided it is not within six months of the date fixed for the next election. Q. What balance stands to the credit of the Vestry on September 30th 1895 at the Bank f If overdrawn, to what extent ? A. £319 15s. 5d. October 16. Mr. Newman to the Clerk :— Q. In the event of a publican refusing to provide sufficient sanitary accommodation for his customers, is the Vestry, as the Sanitary Authority, in a position to oppose the renewal of the licence ? A. Yes. Nov. 13. Mr. Green to the Clerk:— Q. What amount has been offered by the London County Council towards the widening of Union Road from the Causeway, and what is the cost of buying up the property required ? A. (The Clerk stated that he was unable to answer the question, and that the other question was a matter for notice of motion.) Nov. 13. A member to the Clerk:— Q. Is it a fact that the bad debts owing to the Depot Management amount to some thousands of pounds ; and if so, whether this fact does not point to bad management of the Depot business ? (The question was not answered, the subject forming part of the inquiry being made by a special Committee.) Nov. 13. Mr. Anton to the Clerk:— Q. What was the Vestry cash balance at the end of the year 1894, and 1895 to March 25th, and the Vestry's liability at the same date? 17 What was owing to the Vestry on the 2.5th March 1895. by tradesmen and others, and how much was received in the first quarter for the year 1896 from the amount due to the Vestry? (The questions were not answered, the matter being then under the consideration of the Finance Committee.) Nov. 27. The Rev. Canon Palmer to the Medical Officer of Health:— Q. Havo complaints been made concerning a defective drain at 57, New Street ? If so, on what date was the first of such complaints entered ? If the Sanitary Officers of the Vestry have been made aware of the defective drain mentioned, what steps have been taken to remedy its defects ? Is it not at the present time in a condition likely to be injurious to the health of the inmates of the house ? A. As this drain at 57, New Street is one of a combined system, and its condition is under the consideration of the Sanitary Committee, I hesitate to publicly answer these questions unless requested to do so by the Yestry. Mr. Burrows to the Chairman of the Finance Committee:— Q. Are you satisfied with the present condition of the Vestry's finances ? (Mr. H ammond declined to express any opinion, as the matter was under the consideration of the Finance Committee.) 1896. Feb. 5. Mr. Green to the Clerk:— Q. Has the banking account been overdrawn since January 1st ? and if so by what authority, seeing that the last resolution on the subject only remained in force till December 31st ? A. The General Cash Account has been overdrawn since the 1st January, but as the Treasurer has in hand upwards of £9,000 on Loans Current Account I declined to advise the Vestryto renew the resolution. Q. Is whatever remains of the money received a day or two ago from the London County Council under the Equalisation of Rates Act, and the £7,000 being paid to us in advance by the Governors and Guardians, sufficient to meet our last quarter's accounts, our weekly expenses to March 31st, and leave money in the bank to pay the accounts which fall due on the 31st March? A. No portion of the instalment due from the Governors and Guardians (£7,425) on the 28th instant has been received. This instalment, together with the contribution from the Equalisation of Rates Act, will not clear off all payments to the 31st proximo. The Vestry by Lady-day next have a further sum of £9,225 due from the Governors and Guardians, which so far as I can judge will leave the Vestry in quite as good a position, if not better, than they were in at Lady-day 1895. Feb. 5. Mr. Davis to the Clerk:— Q. Is the Vestry aware that nearly all the trees in Great Dover Street are dead, and if so when is it proposed to replace them ? b 18 A. Yes. The contractor repudiates his contract, on the ground that the Yestry killed the trees by the use of salt during frosty weather. The Yestry do not admit this, and pending the settlement of the question the trees will not be renewed. Q. What was the bank balance in favour of or against the Vestry on (a) 20th December 1894. (b) 20th March 1895. (c) 20th June 1895. (d) 20th September 1895. (e) 20th December 1895. (f) 20th January 1896 ? A. 1894, December 20th, £4,502 12s. 5d. in favour. 1895, March 20th, £2,084 16s. 6d. „ June 20th, £1,987 6s. 3d. against. September 20th, £4,093 1s. 5d. ,, December 20th, £5,518 14s. 2d. ,, 1896, January 20th, £5,638 3s. id. ,, Q. If the account is now overdrawn will the bank require another resolution, and if not why not ? A. The account is now overdrawn by £3,049 0s. 9d.; but the Treasurer will not require another resolution, because he has on the Loans Current Account a balance in favour of the Vestry of £9,200. Q. Does the agenda paper for February 5th 1896 represent all the outstanding accounts ? If not, about what amount is left over f A. Yes, at Christmas 1S95. Feb. 5. Mr. Hammond to the Clerk:— Q. What was the state of the banking account on the 12th December 1894 and 24th January 1896 ? A. £1,478 1s. 3d. overdrawn on 12th December 1894, and £617 2s. 9d. on January 24th 1896. Feb. 19. Mr. Burrows to the Clerk:— Q. How many of our present employees reside in the parish, and how many reside outside the parish ? A. The answering of the question will involve a return being made. No doubt many of the men, though living in the parish when they were put on, afterwards removed outside the parish. If it is the Vestry's wish I will make inquiries and 6ubmit a return. Mar. 4. Mr. H. Revitt to the Medical Officer of Health:— Q. Have the Vestry's Sanitary Inspectors power under the Food and Drugs Act to take samples from publichouses for the purpose of analysing ? If so, why is it not done ? A. It is done. I may state that during the last six weeks the following samples have been taken, viz.: — Whiskey, 6 samples, all genuine. Rum, 2 samples, all genuine. Gin, 3 samples, 2 genuine and 1 adulterated. The adulterated sample was 9 per cent. diluted with water. 19 Vestry and Committee Meetings.—The following is a return of the number of meetings held during the year:— Vestry (including 6 meetings in Committee) 28 Public Health and Sanitary Committee 24 Roads and Depot Committee 27 General Purposes and Lighting Committee 24 Finance and Audit Committee 29 Sub-Committees 126 Total 258 The return of attendances of members will be found at page 206 of this report. Public Health and Sanitary Committee.—The duties of this Committee are:—To enforce the provisions of the Public Health Act 1891 and any bye-laws made thereunder (except clauses 29 to 36); to control the administration of the Adulteration Acts; to manage the Mortuary buildings and Coroner's Court; to direct and supervise the construction, maintenance, repair and cleansing of all public sewers under the Vestry's control, also the public conveniences and urinals; and to enforce the Building and Metropolis Management Acts and Standing Orders and Regulations of the Vestry in regard to new buildings and house drainage. Infectious Diseases.—The Vestry declined on the 26th June 1895 to take any action on a letter from the Strand District Board of "Works suggesting the expediency of repealing the compulsory clauses of the Public Health Act of 1891 with regard to the provision of temporary shelters for persons during the process of disinfecting their dwellings, having already decided to provide such a shelter (see last Annual Report, page 35). It was stated by the Strand District Board that in their district the shelter provided had not been appreciated or made use of. The ground plan of proposed shelter, as referred to at page 36 of the preceding Report, was forwarded to the London County Council on the 31st August 1895, with a request that they would advise the Vestry, before the detail drawings were prepared, as to the extent of accommodation that should be provided, seeing that the loan to cover the cost of the shelter would have to receive their sanction. B2 20 On the 4th November 1895 the Public Health Committee were advised that the Council had no observations to make upon the plans; and with regard to the loan the Council were advised that the Sanitary Authorities had no power to borrow money for the purpose of providing such buildings, but that legislation would be promoted to enable money to be raised for such a purpose. The subject of the advisability of including measles among the notifiable infectious diseases was again brought before the Vestry upon the consideration of a letter from the Vestry of St. George-theMartyr. The Vestry decided on the 24th July 1895 against such proposed inclusion—on the grounds of (1) the early infectious nature of the disease; (2) the inability under ordinary conditions of isolating the patient; and (3) the want of hospital accommodation when isolation is impossible in the home. The Vestry thus recapitulated the reasons given for its previous similar decision in July 1892, in response to a circular from the London County Council (see Annual Report for 1892-3, page 41). Attention being called to an outbreak of small-pox in the shelters of the Salvation Army in the Whitechapel district, the Vestry resolved on the 2nd October 1895:— That the Vestry concur in the views expressed in the letters received from the Whitechapel District Board and the Wandsworth and Clapham Union, viz. that all shelters, including Salvation Array Shelters, should be placed under the provisions of the Common Lodging Houses Act; and that a letter be sent to the Local Government Board urging that Board to promote legislation for effecting this object. The hospital accommodation at the disposal of the Metropolitan Asylums Board being strained to the utmost, the Board inquired in November 1895 if the Vestry knew of any unoccupied premises in the parish which might be likely to serve as additional accommodation for fever and diphtheria patients: but after the matter had been considered by the Public Health Committee the Vestry was compelled to reply in the negative. A proposal to place the sanitary offices in telephonic communication with the Asylums Board was rejected by the Vestry on the 11th December 1895, the Medical Officer having reported that it would be of little use, as in times of epidemic, when repeated 21 cations had to be made to the Board, the only notice taken was of those applications which were made personally or by letter; and the Board advised that at such times a messenger be employed almost solely for that purpose. The total amount of fees payable by the Vestry to various medical practitioners for notification certificates during the year was £123 7s. 0d. Six wraps were provided for the removal of infected bedding, &c., also four suits of clothing at 15s. per suit for the use of the men engaged in such removal. In a case of small-pox which occurred in Beresford Street in October 1895 the bedding had to be destroyed, and the Vestry replaced it at a cost of £l 9s. 9d.; and in January 1896 the sum of 20s. was paid to Miss Hamer, 76, Elsted Street, as compensation for a quantity of milk destroyed by order of the Sanitary Officers in consequence of a case of small-pox on those premises. In November 1895 bills were printed giving directions for the prevention of the spread of infectious diseases, aud distributed among householders of the parish : and in the same month Messrs. Dawes, Hibble and Cole were appointed delegates to attend a conference convened by the Marylebone Vestry to consider the subject of the inability of the Asylums Board to provide sufficient hospital accommodation for the infectious sick, with instructions to support the election of members of the Board directly by the ratepayers. New Diiinfector, Incinerator and Van Shed.—For the accommodation of the two vans specially used for the removal of infected clothing and bedding to and from the Depot for disinfection, the Vestry on the 1st May 1895 accepted a plan prepared by Mr. Rowland Plumbe for the erection of two new sheds adjoining the disinfector building, under the old dust shed at the Depot. This work was carried out by Mr. J. Marsland under the schedule of prices attached to his original contract, the actual cost being £175 16s. The Public Health Committee appointed Thomas Garner (recommended by Messrs. Maxlove, Alliott & Co.) on the 15th July 1895, to take charge of the machinery and work the apparatus at a salary of 35s. per week; working hours 7 a.m. to 4 p.m. 22 The Architect's fees in connection with the whole structure amounted to £90 2s. 1d. The total cost of the building, with machinery and van shed, amounted to £1,339 17s. 9d. In November 1895 the boiler of the disinfector was protected by a covering of fossil meal composition two inches in thickness, this work being carried out by Messrs. Haacke & Co. for the sum of £4 13s. 2d. The apparatus was insured with the National Boiler Insurance Company as follows—Boiler for £500, annual premium £2 7s. 0d.; Disinfecting Chamber for £200, premium £1 6s. 0d.; total annual premium £3 13s. 0d. New Disinfecting Van.—On the 15th May 1895 the Vestry accepted the tender of Mr. W. Malttam to build a new covered van for the carriage home of clothing after the process of disinfection at the Depot, for the sum of £50. The van was satisfactorily completed and delivered during the summer recess, and sundry repairs to the old van were also executed; the total cost amounting to £62 10s. 0d. Sanitary Staff.—Upon the consideration of a report presented by the Public Health Committee on the 26th June 1895 the Vestry agreed to the following resolutions, for the purpose of recovering a moiety of the salaries of the Medical Officer of Health and Chief Sanitary Inspector from the County Fund:— That upon Mr. Alfred Long, the Chief Sanitary Inspector, resigning his appointment to enable the Vestry to recover a moiety of his salary from the County Fund, the Vestry undertake and agree to reappoint him on the date of his resignation to the same office, and on the same terms and conditions as heretofore; and that in the event of retirement from office through old age or other infirmity of body it is understood and agreed that the length of service of Mr. Long is to be reckoned, for the purpose of calculating his superannuation, from the date of his original appointment, viz. the 19th May 1869 ; and that this resolution be handed to Mr. Long under the seal of the Vestry. That the reappointment of Mr. Long take place at the meeting of the Vestry to be held on the 10th July next, in accordance with the requirements of Article 8 of the'General Order of the 8th December 1891 That upon Dr. George Millson, the Medical Officer of Health, resigning his appointment to enable the Vestry to recover a moiety of his salary from the County Fund, the Vestry undertake and agree to reappoint Dr. Millson on the date of his resignation at a commencing salary of £600 per annum, rising to £750 by annual increments of £25, on 23 the understanding that he devote the whole of his time to the duties of his office ; and that in the event of Dr. Millson retiring from office through old age or other infirmity of body it is understood and agreed that the length of service of Dr. Millson is to be reckoned, for the purpose of calculating his superannuation, from the date of his original appointment, viz. the 9th November 1887; and that this resolution be sealed by the Vestry and handed to Dr. Millson. That the reappointment of Dr. Millson take place at the meeting of the Vestry to be held on the 10th July next, in accordance with the requirements of Article 8 of the General Order of the 8th December 1891. At the same meeting the salaries of the four last appointed Sanitary Inspectors—Messrs. Bullock, Selby, Howes and Bush—were increased from £105 to £115 per annum, "having regard to the "fact that their salaries were somewhat below the average salaries "paid to Sanitary Inspectors in other metropolitan parishes." This increase of salary arose out of the application for extra remuneration in connection with the inspection of market places, as referred to at p. 42 of the preceding Report. The first annual increment of £5 on the salaries of these officers was just then coining due, and the additional £10 granted brought them two years nearer to the attainment of their maximum of £150. The resignations of Dr. Millson and Mr. Long were duly handed in and accepted on the 10th July, when the Vestry unanimously agreed:— That in accordance with the resolution of the Vestry of the 2Gth ultimo, Dr. George Millson be, and he is hereby reappointed Medical Officer of Health at the commencing salary of £600 per annum, rising to £750 by annual increments of £25, on the understanding that he devote the whole of his time to the duties of the office, as defined by the Sanitary Officers (London) Order of the 8th December, 1891. That in accordance with the resolution of the Vestry of the 26th ultimo, Mr. Alfred Long, the Chief Sanitary Inspector, be and he is hereby reappointed at his present salary of £200 per annum, on the understanding that he devote the whole of his time to the duties of his office as defined by the Sanitary Officers (London) Order of the 8th December, 1891. The sanction of the Local Government Board to the appointment of Mr. Long was communicated to the Vestry on the 27th November, and to that of Dr. Millson on the 11th December 1895. Mr. Spencer Bush, Sanitary Inspector for St. Peter's Ward, tendered his resignation on the 27th November 1895, having 24 obtained a more lucrative appointment under the Vestry of St. Pancras; and a testimonial under the seal of the Vestry was accorded him on his retirement. The vacancy was advertised in the usual course, and out of 44 applications the Committee brought up three candidates to the Vestry on the 8th January 1896, when after a show of hands Mr. William James Perrin was declared elected subject to confirmation by the Local Government Board: which was received by the Vestry at the following meeting, as from the 1st February at an initial salary of £110, to rise by annual increments of £5 to the maximum of £150. With regard to Mr. Sargent (Sanitary Inspector for St. John's Ward) the Local Government Board advised that before half his salary could be claimed from the County Fund he must resign and be formally appointed under the General Order of the 8th December 1891, as had already been done in the case of the Medical Officer of Health and Chief Sanitary Inspector; also that the appointment must be formally advertised pursuant to Article 3 of the Order, although candidates need not be invited to apply. The Vestry thereupon adopted the following resolutions on the 8th January 1896:— That upon Mr. John James Sargent resigning his appointment as Sanitary Inspector to enable the Vestry to recover a moiety of his salary from the County Fund, the Vestry undertake and agree to reappoint him on the date of his resignation to the same office, and on the same terms and conditions as heretofore; and that in the event of retirement from office through old age or other infirmity of hody, it is understood and agreed that the length of service of Mr. Sargent is to be reckoned, for the purpose of calculating his superannuation (if any), from the date of his original appointment, viz. 18th December 1889; and that this resolution be handed to Mr. Sargent under the seal of the Vestry. That the reappointment of Mr. Sargent take place at the meeting of the Vestry to be held on the 22nd January instant, in accordance with the requirements of Article 3 of the General Order of the 8th December 1891. Mr. Sargent accordingly formally tendered his resignation on the 22nd January, whereupon the Vestry resolved:— That in accordance with the resolution of the Vestry of the 8th instant, Mr. John James Sargent, Sanitary Inspector, be and is hereby 25 appointed at his present salary of £150 per annum, on the understanding that he devote the whole of his time to the duties of his office, as defined by the Sanitary Officers (London) Order of the 8th December 1891,— and the sanction of the Local Government Board to the appointment was duly notified to the Vestry at its next meeting on the 5th February 1896. The whole of the Medical and Sanitary Officers were now therefore formally appointed under the provisions of the Public Health (London) Act of 1891, by which one-half the salaries of such officers became chargeable to the County Fund; and the amount received from the London County Council in payment thereof up to Michaelmas 1895 was £296 5s. 9d. The wages of E. Webb, employed in disinfecting and repapering rooms, &c., after cases of infectious disease, were increased in September 1895 from 32s. 6d. to 35s. per week; and the wages of F. Churcher, the carman employed exclusively in driving the disinfecting vans and assisting to remove infected clothing and bedding, were also increased on the 4th March 1896 from 29s. to 31s. per week, in consideration of the hazardous and unpleasant nature of his work. On the 18th March 1896 the Vestry adopted the following resolution in respect of George Hart, who had for many years been employed in the removal of infected clothing, &c., and was now 78 years of age:— That George Hart, employed in removing infected clothing, be relieved from active duty on account of old age; and that he be paid 20/- per week in future on the understanding that he attend at the Sanitary Office daily to assist in light work, such as delivering notices, &c., if required. A Sanitary Inspector was appointed by the Vestry on the 3rd April 1895, in the person of Mr. Alfred Isaac Fairey, for the special and sole duty of obtaining samples under and carrying out the Adulteration Acts in the parish; the appointment being made upon the same terms and conditions as those of the other Inspectors, and to be subject to the confirmation of the Local Government Board. Mr. Fairey however withdrew on the 15th May before taking office, stating that he had accepted another engagement; and 26 having regard to the steps then being taken to secure the devotion of the whole of the time of the Medical Officer of Health to his duties it was not thought necessary to appoint a successor to Mr. Fairey, and the Vestry's resolution of the 20th February 1895 (see last Annual Report, p. 42) was accordingly rescinded at a special meeting on the 10th July 1895. On the 1st May 1895 the Medical Officer of Health incurred the censure of the Vestry for having inadvertently neglected to take steps to remove a dead body, after he had been requested by a member of the Vestry to do so, from a room in Henshaw Street in which another person was living. Insanitary Areas.— The cost incurred by the Vestry in applying for a closing order against the ten houses, Nos. 1 to 10, Little Mount Street, referred to in the last Annual Report (p. 45), were as follows:—Counsel's fees £10 1s. 6d.; Architect's survey £5 14s. 4d.; total £15 15s. l0d. Full particulars of the proceedings taken in this case will be found in the Annual Report of the Medical Officer of Health hereto annexed (see p. 147). Medical Officer's Report.—The London County Council having pointed out the inconvenience occasioned by the delay of certain Vestries in sending in their Annual Reports, which were required for reference—more particularly the statistics contained in the Report of the Medical Officer of Health—the Vestry on the 24th July 1895 adopted the Standing Order printed at page 14 of this Report, directing the Medical Officer to issue his Report separately and send to the Council within two months of the date it became due: such Report to be afterwards included and bound up with the Vestry's Annual Report as heretofore. Adulteration Acts.—The number of samples taken by the Vestry's Sanitary Inspectors for analysis during the year was 674, and comprised 449 of milk, 166 of butter, 27 of coffee, 14 of pepper, 7 of mustard, 10 of spirits, and 1 of lard. Proceedings for adulteration were taken in 102 cases, for particulars and results of which see pp. 154-8 of the Report of the Medical Officer of Health hereto annexed. District Surveyors and Sanitary Work.—In June 1895 a further letter was received from Mr. Bernard Dicksee drawing the Vestry's 27 attention to sec. 145 of the London Building Act 1894, whereby a Sanitary Inspector, being "a person causing or directing work to be executed," was required to give notice to the District Surveyor, and in default was liable to a penalty of £2 per day: and again threatening to take steps to enforce the same should his contention not be recognised. The matter was again considered by the Public Health Committee, which did not take the same view as Mr. Dicksee, being of opinion that the section referred to did not apply to a sanitary officer; and the Vestry on the 16th October endorsed this opinion and for the second time discharged the reference (see p. 47 of last Annual Report). No further proceedings were taken during the year. Summonses.—In addition to the before-mentioned adulteration cases and a large number of summonses in ordinary cases of noncompliance with sanitary notices, &c. (see Table 14, p. 174), the Sanitary Officers took proceedings in the following other cases in the course of the year under report with the undermentioned results:— Date of Hearing. NAME. OFFENCE. RESULT. 1895. May 1 Edward Frisby Exposing unsound fruit for sale Fined 20/. and 2/- costs May 1 Frederick Bailey Ditto ,, 20/- „ 2/- „ July 17 Harry Lees Ditto „ 40/- „ 2/- „ Sept. 10 William Jackson Ditto „ 10/- „ 2/- „ Oct. 2 Alfred Buckland Ditto „ 20/- „ 2/- „ Oct. 23 Joseph Isaacs Ditto ,, 100/- „ 7/- „ Oct. 23 Lewis Mordecai Ditto ,, 100/- ,, 7/- ,, Oct. 23 Coleman Isaacs Ditto ,, 100/- ,, 7/- ,, Oct. 23 John Peyton Ditto ,, 40/- „ 2/- „ Oct. 23 Alfred L. Shaw Exposing bad rabbits for sale Dismissed without costs Nov. 20 John Bowen Exposing had fruit for sale Fined 5/- and 2/- costs 1896. Jany. James Brown Exposing had meat for sale 1 month's imprisonment, being unable to pay penalty. 28 Coroner's Court.—The number of occasions on which the building was used for holding inquests during the year was 52, and the total amount received by the Vestry for hire £18 4s. 0d. Sewer Works.—On the 17th April 1895 the Vestry authorised the construction of a new 9 in. pipe sewer with the requisite manholes in Williams Grove, Aylesbury Street, at an estimated cost of £70; and on the 24th July also approved of the relaying of the sewer in Walcorde Avenue at an estimated cost of a like amount. These works were considered urgent. Other works included the extension of sewer in Bath Terrace; the diversion of sewer at north-east corner of St. Andrew's Church, New Kent Road, and construction of inspection chamber in connection with the drainage of St. Andrew's Mission Hall in Theobald Street (builders paying agreed sum towards cost) ; diversion of sewer and construction of flushing chamber in Portland Street; abolition of old disused sewer in County Terrace Street, &c , &c. Fuller particulars of works carried out in this department will be found upon reference to the Report of the Acting Surveyor of Sewers hereto annexed. The draughtsman engaged to prepare plans of the new sewer works intended to be carried out under the new loan of £5,000 (see last Annual Report, p. 52) continued at work until the Surveyor's retirement from office in July, without however completing the plans. Mr. Mark (engaged on the drainage map of parish) was afterwards approached on the subject, but declined to undertake to complete the plans without extra remuneration; and Mr. Baker (the Acting Surveyor of Sewers) having expressed his willingness to do the work with assistance, another draughtsman was engaged in November for a period of six weeks at the same salary as the first, viz. 50s. per week. The total amount of salary paid these draughtsmen was £47 10s. 0d. The plans having been duly completed ready to lay before the London County Council, the Vestry adopted the following resolutions on the 22nd January 1896:— 29 That the following new sewers he constructed, and the plans and estimates submitted herewith approved, viz.:— Estimate 1 Cost. Carter Street 1,336 ft. 15-in. pipe £1,083 9 4 Chapter Road 806 „ 12 „ „ 432 11 0 Grosvenor Terrace 552 „ 12 „ 448 9 3 Trinity Square 336 „ 12 ,, ,, 242 8 9 Union Road 632 „ 18 „ „ 1,877 9 9 Do. 784 „ 15 „ „ Do. 682 „ 12 „ „ Falmouth Road 670 ,, 15 ,, ,, 509 9 8 Rockingham Street 710 „ 15 „ „ 539 3 4 Do. 140 „ 12 „ „ £5,133 1 1 That the above new sewer works be carried out by means of a loan, and that application be made to the London County Council for £5,000 accordingly, repayable in 20 years. At the close of this Report the London County Council had approved of the plans and sanctioned the loan as from the 1st April 1896. Ventilation of Sewers.—To obviate a nuisance complained of from the sewer ventilator between Nos. 13 and 15, Harper Street, the Vestry on the 30th October 1895 ordered one of Miller's Patent Disinfecting Ventilators to be affixed thereto, the cost of which was £2 5s. 6d. House Drainage.—With reference to this subject the Vestry resolved on the 12th June 1895:— That the London County Council be informed, with reference to their letter stating their intention to promote a Bill for defining the words "sewer" and "drain" in the Metropolis Local Management Act by adding after the last words "District Board" in section 250 of the Local Management Act 1855 the words "or constructed at the expense of the owner without such order," that the Vestry concur in these words being added to the section, and suggest that the proposed legislation be made retrospective. At the next meeting on the 26th June the Vestry declined to support a request made to the London County Council by the Poplar District Board of Works to provide the local authorities with an index to the orders of the old Commissioners of Sewers relating to drainage plans of property in the metropolis, in cases where the 30 question of combined drainage was raised, the Council having intimated its inability to take any steps in the matter in the absence of any desire on the part of the local authorities generally to have such an index prepared at their expense. As in the preceding year, several claims were sent in during the year by persons for the return to them of money spent in carrying out the requirements of the Vestry's officers relative to drainage, upon the ground that the combined drains in question were in fact sewers under the control of the Vestry; but in no instance were they entertained, and except in the case of Richardson v. The Vestry hereafter referred to, no legal proceedings arose. In one or two doubtful cases of defective combined drainage the course was adopted of advising the owners that if they compelled the Vestry to do the necessary work the drain would be adopted by the latter as a parish sewer, and the owner would always afterwards lie under all obligations and penalties in respect of any interference with or building over the same. A difference arose between the Vestry and Messrs. Pullen & Son in January 1896 with regard to the drainage of their new buildings, the latter desiring to place the soil pipes inside the buildings, while the Vestry (in accordance with the byelaws of the London County Council) insisted on their being placed outside. Messrs. Pullen strenuously resisted the order of the Vestry, alleging the great inconvenience and nuisance likely to arise to the tenants in winter time through the liability of the exposed pipes to freeze; but after much correspondence and reference to the Council they were ultimately informed that the latter had no power to sanction any departure from the byelaws made under section 39 of the Public Health (London) Act 1891, which required that the soil pipes should be constructed outside new buildings. The Vestry resolved as follows on the 5th February 1896:— That the Vestry concur in the following resolutions passed by the Vestry of St. Pancras, in favour of amending the law upon the question of the supervision of house drainage to the following effect, viz:— (a) Before making any drain, and before relaying, reconstructing or amending the same, notice in writing shall be given to the Vestry or District Board by the person intending to make such drain. 31 (b) Before making any drain, or altering the level or course of, or making any addition to, or extending or curtailing any existing drain or any branch drain, a plan of the proposed drain and any existing drain shall be deposited with the Vestry or District Board by the person intending to make such drain or to alter or amend any existing drain,— and that a copy thereof be sent to the London County Council. At the close of the year the Council was promoting a bill in Parliament dealing with the question of combined drainage, which the local borough members were requested to support by every means in their power. The bill was drafted at the instance of a conference of Vestries and District Boards, for the purpose of more clearly defining the law for the protection of the ratepayers; and the Vestry concurred in the views of the Islington Vestry in support of the measure on the 27th November 1895. Richardson v. The Vestry.—This was the case referred to in the last Annual Report (page 53), wherein the owner of Nos. 3 to 19 Gurney Street refused to comply with notice to repair drainage on the ground that the drain was a sewer, and took out a summons against the Vestry for a nuisance under the Public Health Act of 1891. After several adjournments the case was finally heard on the 4th November, when the magistrate (Mr. Hopkins) dismissed the summons under the Public Health Act, but held that as the pipe sewer at the rear served several houses, and as no single occupier of any part of the estate could touch it without consulting with the other occupiers it was a common sewer to the houses, and that therefore the responsibility of keeping the sewer in order lay with the Vestry; but no process short of an indictment could be taken against the Vestry. Upon the initiative of Mr. Russell Spokes (one of the representatives for AValworth on the London County Council) the matter was then taken up by the Council, by whom pressure was brought to bear upon the Vestry to do the necessary work to put the drains into a proper sanitary condition; and an arrangement was ultimately arrived at by which the Vestry undertook to do all the work that was necessary, by reconstructing the three outlets into the 32 main sewer, and relaying the drain in the rear so far as the combined drain was concerned. The cost of this work amounted to £76 3s. 11d., and counsel's fees to £17. Drainage of Mews, Yards, and other private places.—The following resolution was agreed to on the 19th February 1896, upon the consideration of a letter from the Wandsworth District Board of Works:— That a reply be sent to the letter received from the Wandsworth District Board of Works concurring in the views expressed in their letter to the London County Council as to the desirability of the local authorities being empowered to drain mews, yards and other private places at the cost of the owners, upon the same basis as if they were adopting the same as parish highways under section 105 of the Metropolis Local Management Act 1855. New Parish Map and Lrainage.—The map of Trinity Ward having been completed, an arrangement was made in February 1896 with Mr. Mark by which he undertook to complete the maps of St. Mary's and St. Paul's Wards by Lady Day 1897 for the sum of £280, to be paid to him by weekly instalments of £4, and the balance at that date to be retained as security for the due completion of the work. Public Lavatories, Great Dover Street.—Having regard to the long hours of the attendants at this place of convenience an arrangement was made in May 1895 for the three men (including the attendant at the kiosk in Newington Butts, which was ordered to be closed on Sundays) to do duty in consecutive order in Great Dover Street on Sundays, with the assistance of a man from the permanent staff in the Sewers Department. By this means each man was enabled to be off duty entirely every third Sunday. Drinking Fountains and Cattle Troughs.—The stonework of the drinking fountain on the Elephant and Castle Headway was cleaned down, the inscription recut, and a second drinking cup fixed in July 1895. An offer was made by the Metropolitan Drinking Fountain and Cattle Trough Association in January 1896 to provide, erect and maintain a fountain and cattle trough, at the junction of Lower Kennington Lane and Newington Butts, by the kiosk: also to fix 33 a tap at one end so that pails could be used. After consultation however with its veterinary surgeon and officials of the London County Council, who were of opinion that there was danger of spreading infection amongst cattle by the use of these troughs, the Vestry on the 4th March declined the offer. Water Suply.—For the purpose of investigating complaints received respecting defective water supply during the late severe winter the Local Government Board appointed Major-General Scott, R.E., to hold a public inquiry at the Vestry Hall on the 20th May 1895. The Vestry was represented by Mr. Morton Smith, whose fees amounted to £6 16s. 0d. The inquiry resulted from three memorials, signed by 63 householders in the parish of Newington ; and from the exhaustive report issued by Major-General Scott it appeared that no less than 46 such memorials, signed by 1,486 persons in the various sanitary districts of the metropolis, had been presented to the Board. Careful measurements were made by the Surveyor (Mr. Waddington) of the depth of mains at various points, from which it transpired that the average depth was 1 ft. 5 in., varying from 5½ in. to 2 ft. 9 in. in the case of the Lambeth "Water Company, and average 1 ft. 3 in., varying from 7½ in. to 2 ft. 8 in., in the streets served by the Southwark and Vauxhall Water Company. The report of Major-General Scott stood referred to the Public Health and Sanitary Committee at the close of this Report. On the 29th May the Vestry declined to send delegates to a conference convened by the Vestry of Kensington to consider steps to be adopted for placing the control of the water supply in the hands of a representative body other than the London County Council, preferring that such control should be in the hands of the Council: and in response to a further similar invitation from the same body repeated this decision on the 2nd October, and again to the Vestry of Paddington on the 19th February 1896. Another conference convened by the Marylebone Vestry was also declined as premature, on the 18th March. With the view of meeting a similar difficulty with regard to the water supply to that experienced during the preceding winter, should it again arise, the Vestry on the 30th October and 13th C 34 November acceded to an application made by the Lambeth Water Company to lend the Company horses and vans, to aid in distributing water to the inhabitants in the event of a severe frost; the terms for such hire being fixed at 21s. per day for each horse and van, including the services of two men. The ensuing winter of 1895-6 proved, however, an exceptionally mild one, and the provision thus made was fortunately not needed. The following resolution was agreed to on the 5th February 1896:— That the Vestry concur in the resolution embodied in the letter received from the Paddington Vestry, instructing their representative on the London Water Supply Conference to press for such legislation as will throw upon the Water Companies the responsibility for the maintenance of the communicating pipe from the Company's main to the screw down valve or tap on the occupier's premises, instead of on the occupier as at present. The "Water Bills promoted in Parliament by the London County Council for the acquisition of the Companies' undertakings were rejected by the Government at the end of the year. Water Companies' Charges.— On the 8th January and 5th February 1896, the Vestry concurred in resolutions sent down by the Vestries of St. George, Hanover Square, and St. George-the-Martyr respectively, in favour of promoting legislation to prevent the Water Companies from increasing their charges according to increased values contained in the new Valuation Lists; and the borough members were asked to use their influence accordingly. Byelaws for Houses Let in Lodgings.—After considerable correspondence and negotiation with the Local Government Board upon the subject of the adoption of new model regulations framed by the Board under the Public Health (London) Act 1891 with regard to houses let in lodgings or occupied by members of more than one family, the following Byelaws were finally settled upon, and were sealed by the Vestry on the 19th February 1896. They repealed the regulations previously confirmed by the Local Government Board on the 26th March 1890 (see Annual Report for 1889-90, page 57), and at the close of this Report steps were being taken to comply with the provisions of the Public Health (London) Act in order to secure their confirmation by the Board:— 35 BYELAWS. Made by the Vestry of the Parish of St. Mary, Newington, being the Sanitary Authority for the said Parish— (a) For fixing the number of persons who may occupy a house or part of a house which is let in lodgings or occupied by members of more than one family. (b) For the registration of houses so let or occupied. (c) For the inspection of such houses. (d) For enforcing drainage for such houses, and for promoting cleanliness and ventilation in such houses. (e) For the cleansing and lime-washing at stated times of the premises. (f) For the taking of precautions in case of any infectious disease. 1. In these Byelaws, unless the context otherwise requires, the following words and expressions have the meanings hereinafter respectively assigned to them ; that is to say— "Sanitary Authority" means the Vestry of the Parish of St. Mary, Newington. "Lodging-house" means a house or part of a house which is let in lodgings or occupied by members of more than one family. "Landlord" in relation to a house or part of a house which is let in lodgings or occupied by members of more than one family, means the person (whatever may be the nature or extent of his interest in the premises) by whom or on whose behalf such house or part of a house is let in lodgings or for occupation by members of more than one family, or who for the time being receives, or is entitled to receive the profits arising from such letting. "Lodger" in relation to a house or part of a house which is let in lodgings or occupied by members of more than one family, moans a person to whom any room or rooms in such house or part of a house may have been let as a lodging or for his use and occupation. 2. A lodging-house shall be exempt from the operation of these Byelaws until the landlord of such lodging-house shall have been required in pursuance of Byelaw number 5 to furnish the statement of particulars therein mentioned. 3. The landlord of a lodging-house or a lodger therein shall not knowingly cause or suffer a greater number of persons than will admit of the provision of three hundred cubic feet of free air space for each person of an age exceeding ten years, and of one hundred and fifty cubic feet of free air space for each person of an age not exceeding ten years, to occupy at any one time as a sleeping apartment a room which is used exclusively for that purpose, and which is under the control of such landlord, or which has been let to such lodger respectively, as the case may be. 4. The landlord of a lodging-house, or a lodger therein, shall not knowingly cause or suffer a greater number of persons than will admit c2 36 of the provision of four hundred cubic feet of free air space for each person of an age exceeding ten years, and of two hundred cubic feet of free air space for each person of an age not exceeding ten years, to occupy at any one time as a sleeping apartment a room which is not used exclusively for that purpose, and which is under the control of such landlord or which has been let to such lodger respectively, as the case may be. 5. The landlord of a lodging-house, within a period of fourteen days after he shall have been required by a notice in writing, signed by the Clerk to the Sanitary Authority, and duly served upon or delivered to such landlord, to supply the information necessary for the registration of such house by the Sanitary Authority, shall himself, or by his agent duly authorised in that behalf, sign and furnish to the Sanitary Authority a true statement of the following particulars with respect to such house; that is to say, (a) The total number of rooms in the house. (b) The total number of rooms let in lodgings or occupied by members of more than one family. (c) The manner of use of each room. (d) The number, age, and sex of the occupants of each room used for sleeping. (e) The christian name and surname of the lessee of each room ; and (f) The amount of rent or charge per week payable by each lessee. 6. A register shall be kept by the Sanitary Authority of all lodginghouses in the parish of St. Mary, Newington, to which the Sanitary Authority from time to time resolve that these byelaws shall apply. 7. No lodging-house shall be placed upon the register to be kept in pursuance of the foregoing byelaw, except in accordance with a resolution passed at a meeting of the Sanitary Authority. Upon the passing of any such resolution the Sanitary Authority shall cause notice thereof to be served upon the landlord, and also upon every lodger in such lodginghouse, together with a copy of these byelaws; and these byelaws shall operate in respect of such lodging-house so long as the same is let in lodgings, or occupied by members of more than one family. 8. In any case where the landlord of a lodging-house occupies or resides in any part of the premises or retains a general possession or control of the premises, such landlord, and in any case where the landlord of a lodging-house does not occupy or reside in any part of the premises or retain a general possession or control of the premises, every lodger who is entitled to have or to exercise the control of the outer door of the premises shall, at all times when required by the Medical Officer of Health, the Sanitary Inspector, or any other officer specially appointed or authorised by the Sanitary Authority in that behalf, afford any such officer free access to the interior of the premises for the purpose of inspection. 9. Every lodger in a lodging-house shall at all times when required by the Medical Officer of Health, the Sanitary Inspector, or any other officer specially appointed or authorised by the Sanitary Authority in that 37 behalf, afford any such officer free access for the purpose of inspection to the interior of any room or rooms which may have been let to such lodger. 10. Where the Medical Officer of Health, the Sanitary Inspector, or any other officer specially appointed or authorised by the Sanitary Authority in that behalf has, for the purpose of inspection, obtained access to the interior of a lodging-house or to the interior of any room or rooms in such house, a person shall not wilfully obstruct any such officer in the inspection of any part of the promises, or without reasonable excuse neglect or refuse, when required by any such officer, to render him such assistance as may be reasonably necessary for the purpose of such inspection. 11. In any case where a lodger in a lodging-house is entitled to the exclusive use of any court, courtyard, area, or other open space within the curtilage of the premises, such lodger, and in any case where two or more lodgers in a lodging-house are entitled to the use in common of any court, courtyard, area, or other open space within the curtilage of the premises the landlord, shall cause such court, courtyard, area, or other open space to be thoroughly cleansed from time to time, as often as may be requisite for the purpose of keeping the same in a cleanly condition. 12. The landlord of a lodging house shall cause every drain or means of drainage with which any watercloset belonging to such house may communicate to be maintained at all times in good order and efficient action. He shall also cause all such means of ventilation as may be provided in or in connection therewith to be maintained at all times in good order. 13. Every lodger in a lodging-house shall cause all solid or liquid filth or refuse to be removed once at least in every day from every room which has been let to him, and shall once at least in every day cause every vessel, utensil, or other receptacle for such filth or refuse to be thoroughly cleansed. 14. In every case where a lodger in a lodging-house is entitled to the exclusive use of any staircase, landing or passage in such house, such lodger shall cause every part of such staircase, landing, or passage to be thoroughly cleansed from time to time as often as may be requisite. 15. A lodger in a lodging-house shall not cause or suffer any animal to be kept in any room which has been let to such lodger or elsewhere upon the premises in such a manner as to render the condition of such room or premises filthy. 16. The landlord of a lodging-house shall cause every common passage or staircase in such house to be thoroughly cleansed from time to time as often as may be requisite. 17. The landlord of a lodging-house shall, in the first week of the month of April in evory year, cause every part of the premises to be cleansed. He shall, at the same time, except in such cases as aye hereinafter specified, cause every area, the interior surface of every ceiling and wall of every watercloset belonging to the premises, and the interior surface of every ceiling and wall of evory room, staircase and passage in the house to be thoroughly lime-washed. 38 Provided that the foregoing requirement with respect to the limewashing of the internal surface of the walls of rooms, staircases and passages shall not apply in any case where the internal surface of any such wall is painted, or where the material of or with which such surface is constructed or covered is such as to render the lime-washing thereof unsuitable or inexpedient, and where such surface is thoroughly cleansed and the paint or other covering is renewed, if the renewal thereof be necessary for the purpose of keeping the premises in a cleanly and wholesome condition. 18. The landlord of a lodging-house shall provide adequate means of ventilation in or in connection with every common passage or staircase in such house, and shall cause such means of ventilation to be maintained at all times in good order. 19. The landlord of a lodging-house shall cause all sueh means of ventilation as may be provided in or in connection with any room in such house to be maintained at all times in good order. 20. In every case where, in pursuance of any statutory provision in that behalf, an order of a justice has been obtained for the removal from a lodging-house to a hospital of a person who is suffering from any dangerous infectious disease, and is without proper lodging or accommodation, the landlord of such house, and the lodger to whom any room whereof such person may be an occupant has been let, shall, on being informed of such order, forthwith take all such steps as may be requisite on the part of such landlord and of such lodger respectively, to secure the safe and prompt removal of such person in compliance with such order, and shall in and about such removal adopt all such precautions as in accordance with any instructions which such landlord and such lodger respectively may receive from the Medical Officer of Health of the Sanitary Authority may be most suitable for the circumstances of the case. 21. Every person who shall offend against any of the foregoing byelaws shall be liable for every such offence to a penalty of five pounds, and in the case of a continuing offence to a further penalty of forty shillings for each day after written notice of the offence from the Sanitary Authority. Provided nevertheless, that the justices or court before whom any complaint may be made or any proceedings may be taken in respect of any such offence may, if they think fit, adjudge the payment as a penalty of any sum less than the full amount of the penalty imposed by this byelaw. Repeal of Regulations. 22. From and after the date of the confirmation of these byelaws, the Regulations relating to houses or parts of houses which are let in lodgings or occupied by members of more than one family, which were confirmed on the 26th day of March in the year one thousand eight hundred and ninety by the Local Government Board, shall be repealed. Building Plans.—In giving its sanction to various building plans submitted during the year, the Vestry obtained the cession by the 39 owners of strips of ground in New Street, Adam Street and Delaune Street, to be thrown into the public way. Metropolitan Asylums Board.— On the 11th December 1895 the Vestry appointed Mr. Dawes to represent it on the deputation to the Local Government Board relative to the constitution and administration of the Asylums Board, proposed by the Vestry of Marylebone as a result of the conference which had taken place on the question. The following resolution was adopted on the 22nd January 1896:— That the Vestry concur in the following resolution passed by the Vestry of St. Pancras, viz:— That the Local Government Board be asked to hold an inquiry and take evidence as to the present administration of the Metropolitan Asylums Board: such inquiry to include its constitution, the mode of election and scope of duties, its largely increasing yearly expenditure, and its failure to provide for the requirements of the local sanitary authorities,— and that a copy of this resolution be forwarded to the Local Government Board. Bakehouses.—In December 1895 the London County Council wrote directing attention to Section 27 of the Factory and Workshop Act 1895, which came into operation on the 1st January 1896, and prohibited the use of any underground bakehouses except such as were actually in use at the commencement of the Act; and in accordance with the suggestion made by the Council a complete record or register of all bakehouses in the parish was prepared by the Medical Officer of Health. Licences for Cow and Slaughter-houses.—The following licences were granted by the London County Council on the 21st October 1895, in respect of premises situated in this parish:— COWHOUSES. No. Name of Licensee. Premises Licensed. 1 William Copps 17, Mina Road. 2 William David Evans Standard Street. 3 Richard Higgs Railway Arches, Grosvenor Street. 4 David Lloyd 21, Globe Street. 5 Charles Smith 8, Alvey Street. 40 SLAUGHTERHOUSES. No. Name of Licensee. Premises Licensed. 1 John Cuss 70, Union Road. 2 Thomas M. D. Ferris 244, Walworth Road. 3 Alfred James Mitchell 283 & 285, Walworth Road. 4 Charles Newbury 129, Hillingdon Street. 5 Charles Skinner 3, Lucas Road. 6 James Weble 11, Walworth Road. 7 George Gilbert Yates 98, Cambridge Street. 8 Robert George Knight 389, Walworth Road. 9 George Arthur Conway 15, Camber well Road. Roads and Depot Committee.—The duties of this Committee are:—To control the making, paving, repairing, cleansing and watering of all roads and footways throughout the parish; to supervise the collection of house dust and other refuse; to enforce the provisions of sections 29 to 36 of the Public Health (London) Act 1891 and any byelaws framed thereunder, dealing with the cleansing of roads and footways and the removal of house refuse; to manage the sale or disposal of all kinds of refuse, the traffic from the sidings, and the execution of all work at the town and country Depots; and to regulate the purchase and management of the Vestry's stud of horses. Carriageways.—The wood pavement in Walworth Road was repaired by the Improved Wood Company at an expense of £20 1s. 4d, and that in New Kent Road by St. Andrew's Church and Kennington Park Road by the parish church was also relaid under the contract. The account of £20 l.s. 4d. was paid by the Vestry in consideration of the fact that the work was only rendered necessary through an alteration in the levels of the tramway metals carried out by the Tramway Company at the request of the Vestry's Surveyor, in consequence of the sinking of a sewer trench. The asphalte in the New Kent Road was also repaired by the Val de Travers Company under their contract. Details of works carried out in this department both to roads and footways by the workmen of the Vestry will be found upon reference to the Report of the Acting Surveyor of Roads hereto annexed. 41 Footway Paving Works.—The Vestry resolved on the 26th June 1895 to relay the footways of Crampton Street from Newington Butts to Hodson Street with new 3 in. York stone, the cost to be defrayed out of the new paving loan. The list of paving works amounting to £30,000, as submitted by the late Surveyor (see page 67 of preceding Report) received careful consideration; and ultimately all the carriageway works were omitted, and the list of footway works reduced from £11,000 to £10,301 by substituting Norwegian curb for Guernsey, and relaying a few of the selected streets with old York to be removed from those footways proposed to be relaid with new Victoria stone. The Committee on the 2nd October 1895 submitted to the Vestry the following recommendations:— That application be made to the London County Council for a loan of £10,000, repayable in 15 years, to enable the Vestry to carry out certain footway paving works amounting to £10,301 3s. 3d., as per list submitted. That a contract be entered into with the Patent Victoria Stone Company, Limited. to carry out the work as per schedule of prices, upon the Company undertaking to guarantee the work for two years and make good any defects occurring within that period free of cost to the Vestry. The recommendations were carried, an amendment by Mr. Bridges to refer the second paragraph back until a new Surveyor was appointed, who should report upon the relative advantages of doing the work by contract or by the Vestry's staff under his own control, being lost upon a division by one vote only—24 against 25. The Committee observed in its report that the employment of labour direct would entail at least an extra cost upon the parish of 1½d. per foot including cartage, besides delaying the completion of the work. The loan of £10,000 was taken up with the Council on the 27th November at 27/8 per cent. interest payable quarterly, the principal to be repaid by 15 equal annual instalments on the 1 st October in each year. The costs paid by the Vestry amounted to £20. The following is the schedule of works adopted by the Vestry:— 42 Alvey Street—Western Side, from Aylesbury Street to Inville Road. £ s. d. £ s. d. 1,404 ft. sup. Victoria Stone Paving 46 16 0 99 ,, lin. New Edge Kerb 7 0 3 189 ,, ,, Kerb Reset, &c. 3 3 0 6 yds. cube Concrete 4 1 0 61 0 3 Aylesbury Street—North Western Side, from Thornton Street to South Street. 1,251 ft. sup. Victoria Stone Paving 41 14 0 21 „ lin. New Flat Kerb 2 0 3 240 ,, ,, Kerb Reset, &c. 4 0 0 7j yds. sup. New 3x6 Pitching (Crossing) 5 16 3 7 ,, cube Concrete 4 14 6 58 5 0 Baker Street—both sides throughout. 828 ft. sup. Victoria Stone Paving 27 12 0 201 ,, lin. New Flat Kerb 19 5 3 5 yds. cube Concrete 3 7 6 50 4 9 Barlow Street-South Western Side from Huntsman Street to East Street. 1,926 ft. sup. Victoria Stone Paving 04 4 0 150 ,, 1in New Flat Kerb 14 7 6 189 ,, ,, Kerb Reset, &c. 3 3 0 8 yds. cube Concrete 5 8 0 87 2 6 Barlow Street—North Eastern Side from Cottage Row to East Street. 5,526 ft. Bup. Victoria Stone Paving 184 4 0 231 ,, 1in. New Flat Kerb 22 2 9 630 „ ,, Kerb Reset, &c. 10 10 0 20 yds. cube Concrete 13 10 0 230 6 9 Bath Terrace—South Eastern Side from Devonshire Street to Board School. 1,548 ft. sup. Victoria Stone Paving 51 12 0 81 ,, 1in. New Edge Kerb 5 14 9 240 „ ,, Kerb Reset, &c. 4 0 0 6 yds. cube Concrete 4 1 0 65 7 9 Beckway Street—North East Side from Acre Street to Catesby Street. 2,763 ft. sup. Victoria Stone Paving 92 2 0 99 ,, 1in. New Edge Kerb 7 0 3 309 „ ,, Kerb Reset, &c. 6 13 0 10 yds. cube Concrete 6 15 0 112 10 3 Carried forward 664 17 3 43 £ 8. d. £ s. d. Brought forward 664 17 3 Beckway Street—South West Side to No. 31. 3,402 ft. sup. Victoria Stone Paving 113 8 0 99 ,, 1in. New Edge Kerb 7 0 3 510 ,, „ Kerb Reset, &c. 8 10 0 12 yds. cube Concrete 8 2 0 137 0 3 Borough High Street—South Eastern Side, from Great Dover Street to No. 319. 10,737 ft. sup. Victoria Stone Paring 357 18 0 99 ,, 1in. New Flat Kerb 9 9 9 801 „ ,, Kerb Reset, &c. 13 7 0 21 yds. cube Concrete 14 3 6 394 18 3 Brandon Street—Both sides, from Nursery Row to Townley Street. 1,854 ft. sup. Victoria Stone Paving 61 16 0 279 ,, lin. New Flat Kerb 26 14 9 126 ,, ,, Kerb Reset, &c. 4 0 0 10 yds. cube Concrete 6 15 0 99 5 9 Cancel Street—Northern side throughout. 1,368 ft. sup. Victoria Stone Paving 45 12 0 39 ,, 1in. New Edge Kerb 2 15 3 276 ,, ,, Kerb Reset, &c. 4 12 0 6 yds. cube Concrete 4 1 0 57 0 3 Carter Street—from Walworth Road to Penrose Street, both sides. 7,749 ft. sup Victoria Stone Paving 258 6 0 399 „ lin. New Flat Kerb 38 4 9 1,101 ,, ,, Kerb Reset, &c. 36 14 0 35 yds. cube Concrete 22 12 6 355 17 3 Catesby Street—South Side from Barlow Street to Beckway Street. 603 ft. sup. Victoria Stone Paving 20 2 3 159 ,, 1in. New Edge Kerb 11 5 3 3 yds. cube Concrete 2 0 6 33 8 0 Chatham Row—Western side from Chatham Street to Darwin Street 402 ft. sup. Victoria Stone Paving 40 4 0 81 „ lin. New Edge Kerb 5 14 9 180 ,, ,, Kerb Reset, &c. 3 0 0 5 yds. cube Concrete 3 7 6 52 6 3 Carried forward 1,794 13 3 44 £ s. d. £ s. A. Brought forward 1,794 13 3 Churchyard Row—by Longville Road. 333 ft. sup. Victoria Stone Paving 11 2 0 54 „ lin. New Edge Kerb 3 16 6 15 ,, ,, Kerb Reset, &c. 1 18 9 2 yds. cube Concrete 1 7 0 18 4 3 Chapter Terrace—both sides throughout. 1,998 ft. sup. Victoria Stone Paving 66 12 0 570 ,, 1in. Kerb Reset, &c. 9 10 0 11 yds. cube Concrete 7 8 6 83 10 6 Cramipton Street—both sides, from Newington Butts to Hodson Street. 8,408 ft. sup. 3 in. Tooled York Paving 385 7 4 1,192 ,, run New Kerb 114 4 8 55 yds. sup. New 3x6 Pitching 42 12 6 35 ,, cube Concrete 23 12 6 565 17 0 Dante Road—North Eastern Side from Newington Butts to Holyoak Road. 702 ft. sup. Victoria Stone Paving 23 8 0 12 „ lin. New Edge Kerb 0 17 0 81 ,, ,, Reset Kerb, &c. 2 14 0 2 yds. cube Concrete 1 7 0 28 6 0 Deacon Street—North Side from Gurney Street to Pollock Road. 540 ft. sup. Victoria Stone Paving 18 0 0 120 „ lin. New Flat Kerb 11 10 0 3 yds. cube Concrete 2 0 6 31 10 6 Devonshire Street—South and South Western Sides, from Newington Causeway to Tiverton Street. 2,043 ft. sup. Victoria Stone Paving 68 2 0 60 „ 1in. New Edge Kerb 4 5 0 381 ,, ,, Reset Kerb, &c. 6 7 0 9 yds. cube Concrete 6 1 6 84 15 6 Devonshire Street-North Eastern Side, from Tiverton Street to Bath Terrace. 1,935 ft. sup. Victoria Stone Paving 64 10 0 39 ,, 1in. New Edge Kerb 2 15 3 381 ,, ,, Kerb Reset, &c 6 7 0 8 yds. cube Concrete 5 8 0 79 0 3 Carried forward 2,686 17 3 45 £ s. d. £ s. #] Brought forward 2,685 17 3 Draco Street—both sides throughout. 2,124 ft. sup. Victoria Stone Paving 70 16 0 99 ,, lin. New Flat Kerb 9 9 9 330 „ „ Kerb Reset &c. 5 10 0 10 yds. cube Concrete 6 15 0 92 10 9 East Street—South Side, from Walworth Road to Bronti Place. 1,197 ft. sup. Victoria Stone Paving 39 18 0 201 ,, lin. New Flat Kerb 19 5 3 5 yds. cube Concrete 3 7 6 62 10 9 Flint Street—Eastern Side from Hearn's Buildings to East Street. 2,106 ft. sup. Victoria Stone Paving 70 4 0 30 „ lin. New Flat Kerb 2 17 6 249 ,, „ Kerb Reset, &c. .. .. 4 3 0 7 yds. cube Concrete 4 14 6 81 19 0 Flint Street—Western Side, from Rodney Road to opposite Hearn's Buildings. 2,214 ft. sup. Victoria Stone Paving.. 73 16 0 61 ,, lin. New Flat Kerb 4 17 9 321 „ „ Kerb Reset, &c. 5 7 0 9 yds. cube Concrete 6 1 6 90 2 3 Great Dover Street—South Western Side, from Boro' High Street to Trinity Street. 15,624 ft. sup. Victoria Stone Paving 620 16 0 699 ,, lin. Now Flat Kerb 66 19 9 651 ,, ,, Kerb Reset, &c. 21 14 0 32 yds. cube Concrete 21 12 0 631 1 9 Great Dover Street—North Eastern Side, from Nebraska Street to Long Lane. 4,230 ft. sup, Victoria Stone Paving 141 0 0 601 ,, lin. New Flat Kerb 48 0 3 12 yds. cube Concrete 8 2 0 197 2 3 Hampton Street—throughout. 2,403 ft. sup. Victoria Stone Paving 80 2 0 2,403 „ ,, „ „ „ Relaid 15 11 6 30 „ lin. New Flat Kerb 2 17 6 771 ,, „ Kerb Reset 12 17 0 111 8 0 Carried forward 3,952 12 0 46  £ s. d. £ s. d. Brought forward 3,952 12 0 Lawson Street—West Side, from Great Bland Street to Great Dover Street. 918 ft. sup. Victoria Stone Paving 30 12 0 30 ,, lin. New Flat Kerb 2 17 6 165 „ „ Kerb Reset, &c. 2 15 0 5 yds. cube Concrete 3 7 6 39 12 0 Liverpool Street—South Side, throughout. 6,562 ft. sup. Victoria Stone Paving 185 8 0 159 „ lin. New Flat Kerb 15 4 9 921 „ „ Kerb Reset, &c. 15 7 0 25 yds. cube Concrete 16 17 6 232 17 3 Liverpool Street—North Side, from Liverpool Terrace to Portland Street. 3,348 ft. sup. Victoria Stone Paving 111 12 0 39 „ lin. New Flat Kerb 3 14 9 360 „ „ Kerb Reset, &c. 6 0 0 10 yds. cube Concrete 6 15 0 128 1 9 Lorrimore Street—North Side, from Heiron Street to No. 53. 2,430 ft. sup. Victoria Stone Paving 81 0 0 69 „ lin. New Edge Kerb 4 17 9 366 „ ,, Kerb Reset, &c. 0 2 0 8 yds. cube Concrete 5 8 0 97 7 9 Lorrimore Street—North Side, from Draco Street to Olney Street. 1,215 ft. sup. Victoria Stone Paving 40 10 0 30 ,, lin. New Edge Kerb 2 2 6 201 „ „ Kerb Reset, &c. 3 7 0 5 yds. cube Concrete 3 7 6 49 7 0 Manor Place—South Side, from Walworth Road to Penton Place 4,284 ft. sup. Victoria Stone Paving.. 142 16 0 69 ,, lin. New Flat Kerb 6 12 3 610 „ ,, Kerb Reset, &c. 10 10 0 17 yds. cube Concrete 11 9 6 171 7 9 Carried forward 4,671 5 6 47  £ s. d. £ s. d. Brought forward 4,671 5 6 Merrow Street— Northern Side, from Little Liverpool Street to Portland Street 2,340 ft. sup. Victoria Stone Paving 78 0 0 150 ,, lin. New Flat Kerb 14 7 6 309 „ „ Kerb Reset, &c. 5 3 0 11 yds. cube Concrete 7 8 6 104 19 0 Monttelier Street—West Side, from opposite Graham Street to Beresford Street 1,485 ft. sup. Victoria Stone Paving 49 10 0 219 ,, lin. New Flat Kerb 20 19 9 5 yds. cube Concrete 3 7 6 73 17 3 Montpelier Street—East Side, from Graham Street to Beresford Street 1,467 ft. sup Victoria Stone Paving 48 18 0 219 ,, lin. New Flat Kerb 20 19 9 5 yds. cube Concrete 3 7 6 73 6 3 Mount Street—South Side, Horsley Street to Queen's Row 693 ft. sup. Victoria Stone Paving 23 2 0 21 „ lin. New Edge Kerb 1 9 9 111 ,, ,, Kerb Reset, &c. 3 14 0 3 yds. cube Concrete 2 0 6 30 6 3 New Kent Road—South Side, from Munton Road to Messrs. Thwaites' Crossing 3,249 ft. sup. Relay, &c., York Paving 36 2 0 5,418,, ,, Victoria Stone Paving 180 12 0 402 ,, lin. New Flat Kerb 38 10 6 10 yds. cube Concrete 6 15 0 261 19 6 New Kent Road—North Side, from "Rockingham" P.H. to Tarn Street 2,880 ft. sup. Victoria Stone Paving.. 96 0 0 189 „ lin. New Flat Kerb 18 2 3 5 yds. cube Concrete 3 7 6 117 9 9 New Kent Road—North Side, from Falmouth Road to County Terrace Street 954 ft. sup. Victoria Stone Paving 31 16 0 87 ,, lin. New Flat Kerb 8 6 9 2 yds. cube Concrete 1 7 0 41 9 9 Carried forward 5,374 12 3 48  £ s. d. £ s. d. Brought forward 5,374 12 3 New Street—South Western Side, from Doddington Grove to "Royal George" P.H. 2,106 ft. sup. Victoria Stone Paving 70 4 0 81 „ lin. New Edge Kerb 5 14 9 231 ,, ,, Kerb Reset, &c. 3 17 0 6 yds. cube Concrete 4 1 0 83 16 9 Newington Butts—South Eastern Side, from Ilurlbatt Place to Newington Crescent 4,014 ft. sup. Victoria Stone Paving 133 16 0 459 ,, lin. New Flat Kerb 43 19 9 11 yds. cube Concrete 7 8 6 185 4 3 Newington Butts—South Eastern Side, from Crampton Street to Draper Street 4,584 ft. sup. Victoria Stone Paving 151 16 0 99 ,, lin. New Flat Kerb 9 9 9 279 ,, „ Kerb Reset, &c. 4 13 0 9 yds. cube Concrete 6 1 6 172 0 3 Newington Butts—West Side, from No. 72 to St. Gabriel Street 1,854 ft. sup. Victoria Stone Paving 61 16 0 129 „ lin. New Flat Kerb 12 7 3 72 ,, „ Kerb Reset, &c. 2 8 0 5 yds. cube Concrete 3 7 6 79 18 9 Newington Causeway—South Eastern Side, from Palmer's Yard to "Rockingham" P.H. 25,056 ft. sup. Victoria Stone Paving 835 4 0 600 „ lin. New Flat Kerb 57 10 0 1,149 ,, „ Kerb Reset, &c. 19 3 0 41 yds. cube Concrete 27 13 6 939 10 6 Orb Street—East Side throughout 5,256 ft. sup. Victoria Stone Paving 175 4 0 51 ,, lin. New Edge Kerb 3 12 3 699 „ „ Kerb Reset, &c. 11 13 0 14 yds. cube Concrete 9 9 0 199 18 3 Orb Street—West Side, from Wadding Street to Bedford Street 486 ft. sup. Victoria Stone Paving 16 4 0 45 ,, lin. New Edge Kerb 3 3 9 45 „ ,, Kerb Reset, &c. 0 16 0 2 yds. cube Concrete 1 7 0 21 9 9 Carried forward 7,056 10 9 49  £ s. d. £ s. d. Brought forward 7,056 10 9 Phelp Street—Western Side throughout 2,205 ft. sup. Victoria Stone Paving 73 10 0 30 „ lin. New Flat Kerb 2 17 6 471 „ „ Kerb Reset, &c. 7 17 0 12 yds. cube Concrete 8 2 0 92 6 6 Ralph Street—Both Sides, from Union Bond to Circular Road 1,053 ft. sup. Victoria Stone Paving 35 2 0 159 „ lin. New Flat Kerb 15 4 9 141 „ ,, Kerb Reset, &c. 2 7 0 7 yds. cube Concrete 4 14 6 57 8 3 Rockingham Street—North Side, from Uxbridge Street to No. 45 2,016 ft. sup. Victoria Stone Paving 67 4 0 90 „ lin. New Edge Kerb 6 7 6 279 ,, „ Kerb Beset, &c. 9 6 0 7 yds. cube Concrete 4 14 6 87 12 0 Rodney Road—North Eastern Side, from Little Trafalgar Place to Chatham Street. 4,590 ft. sup. Victoria Stone Paving 153 0 0 600 „ lin. New Flat Kerb 57 10 0 14 yds. cube Concrete 9 9 0 219 19 0 Salisbury Row—South Side, from No. 26 to Chatham Street. 963 ft. sup. Victoria Stone Paving 32 2 0 21 ,, lin. New Edge Kerb 1 9 9 180 „ ,, Kerb Beset, &c. 6 0 0 4 yds. cube Concrete 2 14 0 42 5 9 Sandford Row—South Street to Blewitt Street. S45 ft. sup. Victoria Stone Paving. 31 10 0 939 „ lin. New Flat Kerb 89 19 9 22 yds. cube Concrete 14 17 0 136 6 9 Sandeord Row—from Blackwood Street to Portland Street. 234 ft. sup. Victoria Stone Paving 7 16 0 249 ,, lin. New Flat Kerb 23 17 3 6 yds. cube Concrete 4 1 0 35 14 3 Carried forward 7,728 3 3 50  £ s. d. £ s. d. Brought forward 7,728 3 3 Sayer Street-West Side, from Baker Street to New Kent Road. 1,377 ft. sup. Victoria Stone Paving 40 10 0 120 „ lin. New Flat Kerb 11 10 0 99 ,, ,, Kerb Reset, &c. 3 6 0 5 yds. cube Concrete 3 7 6 58 13 6 Saver Street—West Side, from Deacon Street to Board School. 999 ft. sup. Victoria Stone Paving 33 6 0 99 „ lin. New Flat Kerb 9 9 9 102,, ,, Kerb Reset, &c. 1 14 0 5 yds. cube Concrete 3 7 6 47 17 3 Sayer Street—East Side, from New Kent Road to No. 2. 567 ft. sup. Victoria Stone Paving 18 18 0 45 ,, lin. New Flat Kerb 4 6 3 45 ,, „ Kerb Reset, &c. 0 15 0 2 yds. cube Concrete 1 7 0 25 6 3 Sayer Street—West Side, from Board School to Baker Street. 531 ft. sup. Victoria Stone Paving 17 14 0 63 ,, lin. New Flat. Kerb 6 0 9 18 ,, ,, Kerb Reset, &c. 0 6 0 2 yds. cube Concrete 1 7 0 25 7 9 Shaftesbury Street—Southern Side throughout. 2,439 ft. sup. Victoria Stone Paving 81 6 0 123 ,, lin. New Edge Kerb 8 14 3 369 ,, „ Kerb Reset, &c. 6 3 0 9 yds. cube Concrete 6 1 6 102 4 9 South Street—Both Sides, from Thornton Street to Aylesbury Street. 1,755 ft. sup. Victoria Stone Paving 58 10 0 111 „ lin. New Flat Kerb 10 12 9 330 „ „ Kerb Reset, &c. 5 10 0 11 yds. cube Concrete 7 8 6 82 1 3 Carried forward 8,069 14 0 51  £ s. d. £ s. d. Brought forward 8,069 14 0 South Street—East Side, from Dean's Buildings to Northampton Street. 1,125 ft. sup. Victoria Stone Paving 37 10 0 96 ,, lin. New Edge Kerb 6 16 0 96 ,, „ Kerb Reset, &c. 1 12 0 4 yds. cube Concrete 2 14 0 48 12 0 South Street—West Side, from East Street to Stables. 909 ft. sup. Victoria Stone Paving 30 6 0 129 „ lin. New Flat Kerb 12 7 3 3 yds. cube Concrete 2 0 6 44 13 9 South Street—East Side, from Aylesbury Street to No. 115. 261 ft. sup. Victoria Stone Paving 8 14 0 90 „ lin. New Edge Kerb 6 7 6 9 yds. cube Concrete 6 1 6 21 3 0 Steedman Street—both sides, from Crampton Street to Railway Bridge. 3,906 ft. sup. Victoria Stone Paving 130 4 0 300 „ lin. New Flat Kerb 28 15 0 300 „ „ Kerb Reset 10 0 0 14 yds. cube Concrete 9 9 0 178 8 0 Theobald Street—West Side, from Arnott Street to Standard Street. 1,350 ft. sup. Victoria Stone Paving 45 0 0 21 „ lin. New Edge Kerb 1 9 9 240 ,, „ Kerb Reset, &c. 4 0 0 5 yds. cube Concrete 3 7 6 53 17 3 Theobald Street—West Side, from Arnott Street to Boundary. 1,017 ft. sup. Victoria Stone Paving 33 18 0 39 ,, lin. New Edge Kerb 2 15 3 186 „ ,, Kerb Reset, &c. 3 2 0 5 yds. cube Concrete 3 7 6 43 2 9 Trafalgar Street—Both Sides, from Walworth Road to Portland Street. 12,240 ft. Bup. Victoria Stone Paving 408 0 0 801 „ lin. New Flat Kerb 76 15 3 1,200 ,, „ Kerb Reset, &c. 20 0 0 47 yds. cube Concrete 31 14 6 536 9 9 Carried forward 8,996 0 6 D2 52  £ s. d. £ s. d. Brought forward 8,996 0 6 Union Road—South Western Side, from Bath Terrace to Sessions House Crossing 3,447 ft. sup. Victoria Stone Paving 114 18 0 99 „ lin. New Edge Kerb 7 0 3 381 „ ,, Kerb Reset, &c. 6 7 0 9 yds. cube Concrete 6 1 6 134 6 9 Villa Street—East Side, Westmoreland Road to Mann Street. 1,008 ft. sup. Victoria Stone Paving 33 12 0 60 ,, lin New Edge Kerb 4 5 0 144 „ „ Kerb Reset, &c. 2 8 0 4 yds. cube Concrete 2 14 0 42 19 0 Villa Street—West Side, from Brettell Street to Clandon Street 630 ft. sup. Victoria Stone Paving 21 0 0 9 „ lin. New Flat Kerb 0 17 3 114 „ „ Kerb Reset, &c. 1 18 0 3 yds. cube Concrete 2 0 6 25 15 9 Villa Street—West Side, from Wooler Street to Burton Street 414 ft. sup. Victoria Stone Paving 13 16 0 9 ,, lin. New Flat Kerb 0 17 3 105 ,, ,, Kerb Reset, &c. 1 15 0 3 yds. cube Concrete 2 0 6 18 8 9 Walworth Road—East Side, from York Street to East Street 6,570 ft. sup. Victoria Stone Paving 219 0 0 741 „ lin. New Flat Kerb 71 0 3 17 yds. cube Concrete 11 9 6 301 9 9 Walworth Road—West Side, from Manor Place to Penrose Street 5,724 ft. sup. Victoria Stone Paving 190 16 0 576 ,, lin. New Flat Kerb 55 4 0 14 yds. cube Concrete 9 9 0 255 9 0 Carried forward 9,774 9 6 53  £ s. d. £ s. d. Brought forward 9,774 9 6 Walworth Road—West Side, from Penny Bank to Short Street 3,204 ft. sup. Victoria Stone Paving 106 16 0 396 „ lin. New Flat Kerb 37 19 0 9 yds. cube Concrete 6 1 6 150 16 6 Walworth Road —East Side, from Deacon Street to Heygate Street 2,160 ft. sup. Victoria Stone Paving 72 0 0 225 „ lin. New Flat Kerb 21 11 3 6 yds. cube Concrete 4 1 0 97 12 3 Westmoreland Road—South Side, from Shops to Portland Street. 4,464 ft. sup. Victoria Stone Paving 148 16 0 30 ,, lin. New Edge Kerb 2 2 6 669 „ „ Kerb Reset, &c. 11 3 0 13 yds. cube Concrete 8 15 6 170 17 0 Wooler Street—Both Sides, throughout 2,340 ft. sup. Victoria Stone Paving 78 0 0 132 ,, lin. New Edge Kerb 9 7 0 399 ,, ,, Kerb Reset, &c. 13 6 0 10 yds. cube Concrete 6 15 0 107 8 0 £10,301 3 3 The Clerk submitted the contract with the Patent Victoria Stone Company, providing for the completion of the works by the 30th September 1896, to the Vestry for sealing on the 11th December 1895; but after a long debate an amendment proposed by Mr. Dawes, to defer sealing the agreement until after the appointment of a new Surveyor, was carried by 37 to 13. The Committee then selected from the list certain works urgently required, amounting to £424 2«. 9d. according to the estimate, and recommended on the 8th January 1896:— That the Committee be empowered to proceed with the footway paving works of Hampton Street, Steedman Street and Union Road, as recommended in the list of paving works to be executed out of the paving loan. 54 That the Acting Surveyor of Roads, in the execution of new footway works, have full power to engage and discharge the men employed on these works. That in paving the footways of Hampton Street, provision be made for a carriage crossing and entrance to Clock Passage. These recommendations were referred back to the Committtee, with the view of using York stone in place of Victoria stone. Application was then made to the London County Council to ascertain whether the Vestry could use any other material than Victoria stone for paving the several streets enumerated in the schedule ; but the Clerk was informed in reply that the Council would regard with suspicion any future applications for loans if the Vestry were to use any other description of material than that specified in the application upon which the money was advanced by the Council. The words used in the mortgage deed, viz. " Victoria, York stone, and other paving works," clearly referred (1) to the Victoria stone referred to in the enumerated list of streets submitted to the Council; (2) to the York paving laid down in Crampton Street; and (3) the words "and other paving works" to the new and relay curb specified in the said list. The Council's Solicitor also stated that the Council had never to his knowledge sanctioned any loan for the use of any other description of manufactured stone than Victoria. The estimate of the Acting Surveyor of Roads for doing the whole work by the Vestry's workmen was £1,618 4s. 6d. in excess of the contract price of the Victoria Stone Company, and if 2½-in. York paving were used the excess would amount to £3,236 9s. 0d. The Committee reported these facts to the Vestry on the 5th February, and again brought up the foregoing recommendations, which after considerable discussion were adopted. The actual cost of the work when completed was £435 10s. 5d., being £11 7s. 8d. in excess of the estimate. On the 18th March 1896 the Vestry adopted the following resolution:— That the Committee be empowered to proceed, by employment of direct labour, with the following additional Victoria stone paving works, as recommended in the list of paving works to be executed out of the paving loan, in order that the Vestry may be quite satisfied that no serious loss will accrue by dispensing with a contractor, viz.:— 55 Great Dover Street — North-eastern side from Nebraska Street to Long Lane £197 2 3 Liverpool Street — South side throughout 232 17 3 Ditto —North side from Liverpool Terrace to Portland Street 128 1 9 Walworth Road—West side from Penny Bank to Short Street 150 16 6 Ditto —East side from Deacon Street to Heygatc Street 97 12 3 £806 10 0 The footway in front of the "Elephant and Castle" tavern was relaid by the the Patent Victoria Stone Company free of cost to the Vestry. Paviours' Bns Cart.—To minimise the danger incurred by the men in the transport of heavy paving stones a paviours' 'bus cart was procured from the Bristol Waggon Company in the autumn of 1895, at a cost of £25 13s. 0d. Carriage Crossings.—Applications for the formation of these were granted upon certain conditions in the following places:—In front of " County Terrace" P.H., New Kent Road; to Mr. Waine's premises in Crampton Street; opposite No. 31, Bronti Place; crossing opposite 12, Lower Bland Street abolished and paved over; to Messrs. Lazenby's premises from Union Square ; to Mr. F. Newman's premises in Olney Street; to Mr. H. Newman's arches in Graham Street; to Mr. Evans' stable in Short Street, Elephant Road ; disused crossing in Sutherland Square abolished and paved over; to Dr. Pain's stable in Munton Road; to Messrs. Gill's premises in Harper Street; to Mr. Yates' premises in Hampton Street; and two to the Bishop's house, one in South Place and one in Cross Street. Tramways.—The lines in Newington Butts and Keunington Park Road were relaid by the Company early in the year to improved levels, and the paving of the margins affected by the tramway works was relaid and improved by the Vestry. Broken Granite.—The Vestry resolved on the 13th November 1895 56 to keep the stoneyard of the St. Saviour's Guardians clear of broken granite during the winter months, subject to its being properly broken, at the usual price of 10/- per ton. Street Orderly Sand Bins.— For the purpose of enabling the wood and asphalte pavements in the parish to be sanded more expeditiously, eight of these bins were purchased of Messrs. Beady & Co. in December 1895 for the sum of £19 4s. 0d. Removal of Snow.— On the 3rd April 1895 the Vestry decided to take no action upon a letter from the Marylebone Vestry asking the Vestry to concur in urging the Local Government Board to initiate legislation with the object of reimposing the duty of cleansing the footways, after a fall of snow, upon owners and occupiers of frontages as it existed prior to the passing of the Public Health (London) Act 1891, being of opinion that this duty, if left to the sanitary authorities, might be the means of affording some employment to a number of the unemployed during the winter months. The following resolution was adopted on the 11th December 1895:— That the Vestry concur in the views expressed in the resolution adopted at a conference of the Guardians of St. Saviour's Union, the Bermondsey and Rotherhithe Vestries, and St. Olave's Board of Works against the practice of shooting snow into the Thames, thereby closing the river to traffic and stopping the whole of the riverside labour. Cleansing of Red Lion Mews. — The owners of the property in this place having agreed to pay the sum of £12 per annum as the cost of cleansing, the work was undertaken by the Vestry's staff of scavengers at the close of the year. Newington Causeway — Maintenance and Scavenging of. — The boundary of the two parishes of Newington and St. George-theMartyr in this thoroughfare was the subject of an application from the latter on the 29th January 1896, asking the Vestry to join them in requesting the London County Council to readjust the boundaries for maintenance and cleansing purposes in Newington Causeway, Borough High Street, Long Lane and Tabard Street. It was contended that the original boundary line ran close to the footway kerb on the west or St. George's side of the Causeway, whereas the arrangement made between the two parishes in the year 1858 for 57 maintenance and scavenging was based upon the understanding that such boundary lino ran along the centre of the roadway, and that by it the parish of St. George was burdened with an undue and unfair share of the cost of this work. The claim set up was not however supported by documentary evidence in the Vestry's possession ; and seeing that the existing arrangement had worked satisfactorily from 1858 to the present time the Vestry was advised on the 19th February 1896 not to comply with the request of St. George's, aud the reference was discharged. Salary of Cleansing Foreman.—In October 1895 the salary of Mr. W. E. Crane was increased from 50s. to 55s. per week, in consideration of his ten years' efficient service, his long hours of duty, and the extra work thrown upon him each winter in supervising the work of the unemployed staff. He was at the same time relieved from duty on alternate Sunday mornings. Work for Unemployed.—The following resolution, moved by Mr. Westcott as a matter of urgency, was agreed to on the 3rd April, 1895:— That in view of the exceptional distress this winter the Government is urged to make arrangements in the preparation of their Estimates to provide sums of money to be distributed amongst the local bodies who have been forced to expend large sums to provide work for the unemployed. Copies to be sent to Lord Rosebery, Sir W. Harcourt, Captain Cecil Norton and William Saunders, M.P. On the 13th November 1895 the Vestry concurred in the following resolutions adopted by the Guardians of St. Saviour's Union for dealing with the unemployed during the ensuing winter:— 1. All applications for work will only be entertained from those who are found on enquiry to have lived in the parish during the whole of the preceding six months, and are married men. 2. Such applications to be made to the Relieving Officers of the district in which the applicants live, who will be required to bring them before the Relief Committee at their weekly meeting. 3. The Relief Committee will forward to the Vestry the names and addresses of the men they recommend for employment by the Vestry, in order that they may not be disenfranchised; and the Vestry to employ these men for any casual work to which they can be put. 58 4. The payment to such men to be at the rate of 6d. an hour, and ployment to be usually given for two or three days a week, according to the recommendation of the Guardians, which will be based on the number of their family, &c. 5. For those whom the Guardians cannot recommend to the Vestry for employment and cash payment, some labour will be provided by the Guardians, to be paid for only in kind. At the same meeting a series of resolutions on the general question of the unemployed, passed at a conference convened by the St. Olave's Board of Guardians, was considered; and it was resolved to advise that Board of the course taken by the Vestry in concurrence with the St. Saviour's Guardians, and to express the Vestry's readiness to co-operate in approaching the Government on the subject. Messrs. Morgan and Standeven were appointed delegates to attend a conference on the unemployed question convened by the North Camberwell Radical Club and Institute on the 13th December. Under the conditions detailed in the foregoing resolutions the Vestry continued to give relief work to the unemployed upon certificates from the Relieving Officers from the 30th November 1895 until the 11th April 1896, the amount of wages paid in the several departments being as follows:— Roads £57 13 9 Cleansing 73 15 0 Depot 12 9 3 Dust 4 0 3 Total £147 18 3 Workmen—Pet manent Staff.— An application from the Social Democratic Federation for a day's holiday to all the Vestry's workmen on the 1st May 1895, to enable them to join the Working Men's May-Day Demonstration in Hyde Park, was not acceded to by the Vestry. In accordance with the standing order of the 20th March 1895, 300 white metal badges, numbered and lettered and provided with straps and buckles, were purchased of Messrs. Jenrick & Crocker 59 at a cost of £17 10*. 0d.; and the men were instructed to wear their badges on the leg. The masons and paviours, objecting to wear badges in this form, were afterwards supplied with smaller badges to be worn on the arm. The standing order requiring the Medical Officer of Health to certify in cases of absence from illness on the part of any workman (see page 13) was adopted on the Committee's recommendation on the 29th May 1895. as was also the order with regard to workmen using the Depot tools upon other than Vestry work on the 30th October 1895. The whole of the workmen submitted a petition in June 1895 in favour of the total abolition of the hour system, and asked to be made weekly servants at a regular wage and allowed one week's holiday in summer; and the Roads and Depot. Committee was engaged throughout the year and down to the close of this Report in considering a scheme for meeting the wishes of the men and forming a provident or superannuation fund in connection therewith. A recommendation from the Committee to pay the men engaged at the Country Depots in unloading an additional halfpenny per ton was referred back by the Vestry on the 10th July 1895, with a view to their being paid a weekly wage. Strike of Loaders at Town Depot.—In connection with the petition above referred to the men engaged in loading the mixture and refuse into trucks at the Depot by piecework—hitherto regarded as jobbing men and not included in the permanent staff—claimed to be placed on the same footing as the other men, and struck work. The matter was brought before the Vestry by one of its members (Mr. Longley) on the 29th May 1895, and after some discussion his motion to allow the men to start work at the old rate of pay and refer the subject to the Depot Committee was carried. The Committee after careful consideration brought up a report on the 12th June explaining the working of the piecework system, urging that the adoption of a regular wage of 6d. per hour for the loaders as against the present rate of 2½d. per ton would entail a large increase on the estimates, and recommending:— That the conditions put into forcc by the Clerk for payment to loaders at 60 the Town Depot—viz. for loading mixture, rough dust, ground and materials into railway trucks at 1½d. per ton, and a payment of 6d. per hour for any loss of time through waiting for trucks or orders for loading, with a lad to trim the trucks—be approved. After a long debate the Vestry ultimately adopted with unanimity the following amendment proposed by Mr. Bridges:— That having considered the report of the Roads and Dep6t Committee the Vestry disagrees with it, and resolves that the old hands resume their loading work to-morrow (Thursday) on the old conditions, viz. 6d. per hour; and that the whole system of the working of the Depots he referred to a Committee of the whole Vestry for inquiry and report. The men were accordingly reinstated at 6d. per hour, and after an interval of some four months the Clerk read the following report to the Vestry at its meeting on the 30th October 1895:— My proposal to pay the Loaders engaged in the Town Depot 2½d. per ton, with a lad to trim the trucks, and day work at 6d. per hour when waiting for trucks or not fully engaged in loading, was rejected, you will remember, on the 12th June last, and you ordered the men to be reinstated at 6d. per hour. The cost of loading the mixture is now only a fraction under 7d. per ton. Even allowing 3d. per ton, the cost allowed in previous years, the extra price represents a loss to the ratepayers of £500 a year. It is manifestly unfair, in comparing our system attending the disposal of Town refuse with those systems adopted by other metropolitan Vestries, to saddle my management with an unnecessary charge of 4d. per ton. It is also impossible for the Yard Foreman, with his other duties, always to stand over these men ; and if he did, and reported any one of them to myself, what right have I, in the face of your order, to decide what is a fair day's work for these men to perform, which would simply mean piecework under a payment of 6d. per hour? I am not surprised at the letter read to the Vestry at its last meeting from Mr. Fitch, the General Secretary of the National Municipal Labour Union, nor do I blame the men for belonging to this Union to protect their interests; but the Vestry, as employers of labour, have a duty to perform to the general body of ratepayers, and have no right to expend money unnecessarily in support of their workmen or any particular Union. The Vestry must admit that it would place the Yard Foreman and myself in a very invidious position to pick out any one, two, or more of these men as not working fairly. The Union would intervene, an inquiry follow, and much unnecessary feeling be created ; whereas if a payment per ton was put into force the men themselves would take care that every man engaged in loading did his fair share of the work. 61 I am in hopes the Vestry will upon reconsideration agree with myself that 7d. per ton is an excessive price to pay for loading mixture; and as the loaders have imposed upon your kindness by not giving a fair day's work for a fair day's pay, that you will assert your authority over them by placing them again under a system of piecework at a fair remunerative price, in order that the cost of loading per ton may be kept within a reasonable limit. It was thereupon resolved, on the motion of Mr. Chandler:— That the Vestry take no action upon the report presented by the Clerk relating to the increased cost of loading refuse in the Town Depot, except calling upon him to carry out his duties as Depot Manager. Workman's Annual Holiday.—This was appointed by the Vestry to take place this year on Saturday, 20th July, and the sum of £40 was granted in aid of the expenses. The offices were closed for the day. The men elected to go to Margate, and sat down to the number of 263 to the dinner provided for them at the Hall-by-theSea. The men were charged 2/- each as their subscription, but notwithstanding this and the extra £10 granted by the Vestry the balance appeared on the wrong side, as will be seen from the following account:— Dr. £ s. d. Cr. To Balance in hand 2 5 1 By L.C. & D. Ry. Special £ s. d. ,, Contribution from Vestry 40 0 0 Train £76 4 0 „ Subscriptions from Less 10% 7 12 5 tractors, Vestrymen, and others 35 1 6 68 11 7 „ Woodward, Dinner 50 5 6 ,, Amount paid by Workmen for Railway and Dinner Tickets, 276 ,, Neale & Co , Tobacco 4 8 4 ,, Gratuities in lieu of Holiday 0 12 0 at 2s. 27 12 0 ,, Printing and Postage 3 1 4 ,, Railway Tickets sold to members and friends, 108 at 4s. 21 12 0 ,, Sundry expenses 1 10 0 „ Balance 1 18 2 £128 8 9 £128 8 9 The number attending this excursion was the largest ever experienced; but the number of Vestrymen was unusually small, and the fund had therefore to bear the cost of additional waiters and carvers. There was also a falling-off in the donations from 62 men, &c. The excursion altogether was not quite so successful as in previous years, perhaps owing to the day being Saturday and the largo number of excursionists thronging the town. Gratuities.—Gratuities were granted during the year to the widows of deceased workmen in the following instances :—Horace Kino, sewerman, many years' service, ten pounds on the 1st May 1896; and George Newman, carman, 14 years' service, ten guineas on the 13th November 1895. Claims for Compensation.—The Vestry paid the following sums as compensation to the various persons named in settlement of their claims for the causes enumerated, after full investigation by the Committee: — 1895. £ s. d. April 26. Mr. Speh—for hire of barrow while his own barrow was being repaired by Vestry's workmen, having been damaged by one of Vestry's vans 0 9 0 June 26. Miss Moody—for injuries sustained through defective condition of footway in Little Chatham Place 5 0 0 Sept. 10. Mr. Linney—for damage to horse and coal trolly through defective sewer trench in Ann's Row 1 5 0 A few other claims were sent in but not entertained by the V estry, and no proceedings ensued except in the following case. Simpson v. the Vestry.—This action arose out of an accident in Nursery Row on the 21st June 1895, when the horse attached to one of the Vestry's water vans became restive and collided with a vehicle belonging to Mr. Winfield, in so doing knocking down and injuring a child named Albert Simpson. The child was examined by the Medical Officer of Health and two other doctors, who found the injuries to be less severe than was at first feared. The father issued a writ against the Vestry, and delivered a statement of claim laying the damages at £500; but the Vestry was advised by its solicitors and the Clerk to pay the sum of £50 into Court with a denial of liability, and a cheque for this amount was drawn on the 24th July. If the plaintiff had elected not to accept this sum and to take further action, he would in the event of his failing to 63 recover larger damages have had to pay costs on both sides; hut after offering to accept £100 in full satisfaction and being informed that the Vestry would not admit any further liability beyond the amount already paid in, he was ultimately advised to accept the £50, and the action did not therefore come to trial. The costs incurred by the Vestry were as follows:— Damages paid into Court £50 0 0 Plaintiff's solicitors' costs 15 12 6 Vestry's ditto 16 11 6 Fees for medical examination of child 6 6 0 Total £88 10 0 Borrett Road Adoption.—This thoroughfare was adopted by the Vestry as a parish highway on the 29th May 1895, the owners having completed the road and footways to the satisfaction of the Surveyor. Clock Passage, Hampton Street.—Upon the receipt of an application from the Trustees of the Copyhold Charity Estates to make a permanent or temporary footway in front of the new almshouses in Clock Passage to enable the aged and infirm inmates to approach them with safety, the Roads and Depot Committee reported as follows on the 13th November 1895:— Your Committee have made inquiries of Mr. Yates as to his intention with regard to the hoarding on the opposite side of the passage, and Mr. Yates has replied that he is prepared to give up the undedicated land, upon the Vestry taking over and making up the road and footway free of cost. The widening of Clock Passage, it will no doubt he remembered, formed part of the Crampton Street Improvement scheme, but the London County Council rejected this part of the plan, stating that the widening could be dealt with when application was made by the builder to form a new road; and as the owners on both sides of the passage have ret back their building line 20 feet from the centre of the old court with the knowledge of the District Surveyor and the non-intervention of the London County Council, the owners can if they like now enclose the ground in front of their property by a post-and-rail fence. Mr. Yates however has expressed himself willing to give up the ground in front of the new houses, if the Vestry will pave a footway 64 and make up his portion of the roadway. Your Committee feel that the Vestry should agree to do this, as the Vestry would no doubt make up tho footway in front of the almshouses at the expense of the parish, in the same manner as they pave in front of places of worship ; and accordingly they beg to recommend : That upon Mr. E. Yates and the Trustees of the Copyhold Charity Estates giving up to the parish the land in front of their respective properties in Clock Passage and Hampton Street, the Vestry undertake to pave, after Lady-day next, on either sido of the passage a footway 6 feet in width, and form a paved crossing from Hampton Street and make up the roadway with macadam: the coat of this work to be. provided for in next year's estimates. The Vestry referred this recommendation hack to the Committee for further consideration, and the matter remained at this stage at the close of this Report. Penrose Street Property.—It being considered desirable, in view of the recent fire by which the Depot premises, sidings and signals were damaged, for the Vestry to acquire possession of the houses fronting on Penrose Street and having gardens adjoining the Depot, negotiations were entered into with the owners, resulting in the purchase by the Vestry of the freehold of the two houses, Nos. 26 and 28, for the sum of £900. Arrangements were made with the Treasurer (no provision having been made in the year's estimates for the purchase) to advance the money at 4 per cent. interest until it could be provided in the estimates for the ensuing year, the rents of the two houses, amounting to 25s. 6d. per week, paying a fair percentage for this additional expenditure. The agreement was sealed by the Vestry on the 30th October 1895, and the purchase was completed and balance of purchase-money paid on the 26th January 1896, from which date the rents became payable to the Vestry. The costs attending the conveyance amounted to £18 1s. 6d. These two houses having been secured, the Committee proceeded to open negotiations with the Brandons' Trustees for the acquisition of the other three houses between them and the railway, and also the two houses Nos. 22 and 24, so as to carry a straight line through into Penrose Street by the horsekeeper's cottage. It was urged that this property would be a valuable addition to the Depot 65 premises, which in the event of an installation station for electric lighting purposes being required would save the parish a large capital outlay, while the ground rental would scarcely he felt as a charge upon the estimates. The terms offered by the Trustees and submitted to the Vestry on the 13th November were to grant the Vestry a lease for 999 years at a ground rent of £150 per annum to the expiration of the existing lease in 1923 and £160 per annum for the remainder of term, the Vestry to acquire the lessee's interest of 28 years from Midsummer 1896 for the sum of £800, costs of transfer being agreed at £25. The matter was referred back for further consideration, whereupon the negotiations were resumed, in the course of which the property was valued by Mr. Douglas Young on behalf of the Vestry at a cost of £15 15s. 0d.; and on the 22nd January 1896 the Committee brought up the following recommendations, which were agreed to by the Vestry: — That the offer of the Brandons' Trustees to grant the Vestry a lease for a term of 999 years of the houses Nos. 22, 24, 30, 32 and 34, Penrose Street at a ground rent of £150 per annum be accepted, subject to the power of the Trustees to grant the lease being investigated by the Vestry's solicitors. That the Vestry acquire the lessee's interest of 28 years in Nos. 22, 24, 30, 32 and 34 Penrose Street for £650 as from Lady-day next, the costs of the transfer being agreed at £25. The sum of £900 was inserted in the estimates for 1896-7 to provide for the purchase of the property on these terms and costs ; but at the close of the year under report the title of the Brandons' Trustees was still under investigation. Wandsworth Dust Contract.—The renewal of this contract for another year to Lady Day 1897 on the same terms as heretofore (9d. per ton exclusive of railway charges) was agreed to by the Vestry on the 8th January 1896, and authority to seal it given on the 18th March. The tonnage received at the country depots under the contract during the year and amounts payable by the Wandsworth District Board to the Vestry in respect thereof were as follows:— 1895. June quarter '2094 tons 5 cwt. £78 10 8 ,, Sept. „ 1602 „ 17 „ 60 2 2 „ Dec. „ 2122 „ 16 „ 79 12 2 1896. March „ 2534 „ 5 „ 95 0 8 Total 8354 tons 3 cwt. £313 5 8 E 66 Collection of Dust.—On the 26th June 1895 the Vestry resolved:— That the dust and refuse from all model dwellings in the parish be collected twice a week, viz. on Wednesday and Saturday. The question of providing a permanent cover for the dust carts while collecting was urged upon the Vestry by the London County Council, and was receiving careful consideration. The standing order under which the Sanitary Inspectors are required to report the condition of all ash and dung pits had not been amended at the close of this Report, as no effectual improvements could be secured until the stud of horses for this work had been increased. Disposal of Refuse.—The Clerk read the following letter to the Vestry on the 18th September 1895, resigning his appointment as general agent for the disposal of refuse under the standing order of 16th February 1887 :— Vestry Hall, Walworth, S.E. Gentlemen, 18th September, 1895. As the Vestry are not only desirous hut appear determined to manage the affairs of the parish by giving directions, in preference to taking advice and leaving an official quietly to work out its resolutions, I have considered it advisable this morning to take legal advice as to my position with the Vestry in connection with the disposal of the house and street refuse arising from the parish ; and I have determined to act upon the opinion thus obtained. It is only fair to the present Vestry, however, to explain the growth of matters leading up to my appointment as General Agent for the disposal of this refuse. When the town sidings were opened in July 1873, a contract was entered into by Mr. James Allen and Mr. John Wood to clear all trucks consigned to them for the nine months ending Lady-day 1874, and pay the Vestry for such refuse at the rate of 1s. 6d. per ton. Upon the termination of this contract (the Vestry having no place to send the refuse) it was decided to appoint an agent, at a commission of 3d. per ton, to dispose of it to farmers and brickmakers, to regulate consignments, and make all necessary arrangements with the Railway Company for delivery. This appointment was made on the 17th March 1875 (all consignments from Lady-day 1874 to this date having been arranged by myself). On the 4th August 1875 the Vestry sanctioned a further commission to the agent of 25 per cent. on the amount realised by sales over and above tho cost of carriage. By the following December, however, in consequence of numerous complaints from farmers of irregular consignments, and also of the nondelivery by the agent of any return as to sales effected, the Vestry were obliged to investigate matters : the result being that the agent resigned, which the Vestry were glad to accept. 67 The Vestry then determined, as from the 16th February 1876, to appoint an agent to act under myself in obtaining orders and to regulate the delivery to farmers and others, at a salary of £100 per annum, with a free railway pass. This appointment however was determined on the 10th August 1877, as it was found upon inquiry that nearly all the consignments were made through orders obtained by myself direct from farmers without the knowledge of the agent. The Vestry then gave me an assistant clerk, and I undertook the regulation of the consignments upon orders sent in by the stationmasters and others, to whom a payment of 3d. per ton commission was authorised. This arrangement worked well for a period of nearly ten years, when in consequence of party feeling and a strong opposition to my Depot management I was compelled to place my resignation before the Vestry as from the 31st December 1886. Upon the recommendation of a committee of the whole Vestry the Vestry then appointed me as manager of the Town and Country Depots as from the 1st January 1887, at the maximum salary of £300 per annum. The managership however did not include any responsibility as to the disposal of the refuse, and this gave rise to the report presented to the Vestry by Mr. Nores on the 8th February 1887 (see page 78 of the Vestry's Annual Report) and the adoption of the standing order of the 16th February 1887 (see page 131 of Vestry's Pocket Book). The opposition to the dual appointment continued year by year until I was again forced to resign all control over Depot matters on the 7 th May 1890, but did not resign the agency created by the beforementioned standing order. After much pressure, and with great reluctance, I consented to the duties hitherto performed as Depot Manager being incorporated with my duties as clerk ; and this incorporation took effect as from the 18th June 1890, at a salary of £800 per annum. Although there is now no dual appointment, the opposition to that portion of my duty relative to Depot matters continues; and there is evidently a strong suspicion that all or the greater portion of the 2d, per ton commission finds its way into my pocket as an augmentation to my salary. I can assure the Vestry that at times the commission has been insufficient to meet the expenses necessary to secure the removal of the refuse from the town yard, and that taking the expenses year by year I am out of pocket by the agency. The agency being distinct, I am advised that I can give it up when 1 like; and I therefore beg to give you notice that I shall cease to act as your agent for the disposal of the mixture and ashes and breeze as from the 29th instant. I am, Gentlemen, Your most obedient servant, (Signed) L. J. DUNHAM. To the Vestry of St. Mary, Newington. E2 66 The letter was referred to the Committee of the whole Vestry sitting on Depot matters and also to the Roads and Depot Committee, who reported on the 2nd October that the Clerk had declined to withdraw his letter, but consented to keep the town yard clear of unnecessary accumulations until Christmas upon payment of £75, the amount of commission for the corresponding period in 1894. This was agreed to by the Vestry; and at the expiration of this quarter the Clerk continued to act under the old system and receive a payment of 2d. per ton as heretofore for distribution pending the investigation into Depot business and management hereafter referred to, although no fresh engagement or agreement was entered into upon the subject. The loan of £1,500 for new engine boiler and accumulator at the Town Depot (see p. 87 of last Annual Report) was taken up with the London County Council from the 1st May 1895, at 3½ per cent. for 15 years; costs paid by Vestry £9 4s. 6d. This new plant was erected by Sir W. G. Armstrong, Mitchell & Co. in the railway arch hitherto used as a fodder store, the actual cost being £1,168 0s. 0d. —£18 in excess of the tender. The foundations and other work in connection therewith executed by Mr. J. Marsland, iucluding the construction of a wood and glass partition between the engine and boiler to prevent damage to machinery from steam, amounted to £480 17s. 11d.; the total cost being therefore £1,648 17s. 11d. The necessary renewals and repairs to the old hydraulic engine, hoist and machinery, also carried out by Messrs. Armstrong, Mitchell & Co., cost the Vestry the total sum of £565 8s. 5d. The original estimate was £215, but this did not include labour at the Depot; and the large items under this head and additional works not at first contemplated accounted for this great apparent excess. Depot, Manor Place.—For the purpose of flushing the new slop bays and drains at the Depot the Vestry on the 26th June 1895 approved of a plan prepared by the Engineer of the London, Chatham aud Dover Railway Company for laying on a new water supply and fixing of hydrants, and the work was carried out by Mr. J. Marsland at a cost of £89 18s. bd. Asphalte was laid at the bottom of the new slop bays by the Val de Travers Co., the expense of this work being £176 18s. 9d. 69 The sum of £137 19s. 8d. was received from the Royal Insurance Company in October, in settlement of the Vestry's claim for damages caused by the fire in February 1895 to the Committee Room and siding. The new hydraulic boiler and steam piping, &c., were covered with fossil meal composition by Messrs. Haacice & Co. for the sum of £7 11s. 9d. Depot Foreman.—Mr. Joseph Haine, who had been for 21 years in the service of the Vestry, left after giving one week's notice in September 1895, and Mr. E. W. Bray was appointed to succeed him. This gentleman also resigned within a few weeks, finding himself unable to maintain his authority over the loaders; and the Clerk then placed Mr. P. Dale in the position of Foreman, at the same salary as his predecessor, viz. 50s. per week with house. Salary of Storekeeper.—In January 1896 the salary of Mr. Horsman was increased from 30/- to 35/- per week, on the understanding that his duties were to include making out the weekly Depot pay sheets on Fridays—a task which he had performed and received extra payment for since the retirement of Mr. Haine. New Stables and Fodder Stores.—In view of the necessity of increasing the plant and stud of horses to enable the Vestry to comply with the London County Council's byelaws with regard to a weekly house-to-house collection of refuse (see last Annual Report, p. 80), Mr. Rowland Plumbe was requested to prepare drawings and estimate for the erection of new stables and fodder stores, &c. at the rear of houses in Penrose Street, between the viaduct and the site leased to the Baths Commissioners for a second-class swimming bath. These were submitted to the Vestry on the 30th October 1895, when it was resolved: — That the drawings prepared by Mr. Rowland Plumbe for new stabling, fodder stores, &c., at an estimated cost of £7,500, be approved; and that application be made to the London County Council for a loan, repayable in 30 years, to cover the cost thereof. Fifteen tenders were sent in upon the specification prepared by Mr. Plumbe, ranging from £9,200 to £8,200, and all these being in excess of the estimate a bill of deductions was made and priced by the firms sending in the two lowest tenders, the result being 70 that the tender of Mr W Downs was reduced to £7,507 and that of Messrs Balaam Brothers to £7,360 ; and the latter was accepted by the Vestry on the 4th March, 1896 Railway Rates and Charges — Withdrawal of Rebate—Little progress was made during the year towards a settlement of the dispute between the Vestry and the Railway Company The Clerk reported at the end of the year that the Board of Trade had again extended the time for appearing before the Railway Commissioners, and that he was in negotiation with the Mansion House Association with the view of preparing a case to be brought before the Commissioners, failing an agreement with the Company A cheque for the Vestry's annual subscription of five guineas to the Mansion House Association on Railway and Canal Traffic was drawn on the 15th May 1895, and a further sum of £3 10s was paid the Association on 26th June for copies of minutes and proceedings in its test case as to private siding rebates On the 13th November the Vestry authorised the Clerk to accept the Association's invitation to him to become a member of the permanent special committee appointed by it to deal with private sidings, rebates and analysis of rates The Railway Company continued to bring forward in its quarterly accounts the rebate deducted by the Vestry, the sum total of which amounted to £4,248 0s 3d at the close of the year under report Depot Inquiry—The resolution of the Vestry of the 12th June 1895 reinstating the loaders at work (see p 60) contained the rider— "and that the whole system of the working of the Depots be "referred to a Committee of the whole Vestry for inquiry and "report" The first step taken by this Committee led to the adoption of the standing order printed at page 14, ordering a card of membership to be given to each Vestryman entitling him to inspect any premises belonging to or work carried on by the Vestry A special Sub-Committee of 15 members—five from each of the three standing Committees—was then appointed to consider the following subjects of reference :— 71 1 How far the proper carrying out of the duties of the office of Vestry Clerk is affected by the Clerk being manager of the Depot 2 What (if any) duties appertaining to the Surveyor's Department are carried on by the Vestry Clerk as manager of the Depot 3 The like inquiry in reference to the Sanitary Department 4 Whether the present system adopted by the Vestry in reference to the collection of dust, &c, and the disposal of the same, is the most beneficial system to the ratepayers 5 To inquire generally into the working of the whole system, and advise what steps, if any, might be taken to perfect the same G To consider letter from the Clerk resigning his position as agent for the disposal of the refuse as from the '29th September, so as to enable the Vestry to place the collection of house dust and road sweepings under a Surveyor without injury to his position as agent Upon the Committee's recommendation the Vestry resolved on the 16th October 1895 : — That in the interim during the settlement of the several matters under discussion Mr Bakeh be appointed as Acting Surveyor of Sewers, and Mr Coat as Acting Surveyor of Roads during six months, at a salary of £3 each per week The Committee held numerous sittings, and was still deliberating on the above references at the close of this Report Sevenoah Depot—The new cottages at this Depot were completed during the year, and a tablet inserted in the wall bearing the names of the Chairman of the Vestry and members of the Inspection SubCommittee, with the date of erection Six cottages were built at a cost of £1,274, and were readily let at a rental of 6s per week each, the Vestry paying rates and taxes Some trouble was caused in the autumn of 1895 by a noxious effluvium arising from the water in the pond which received the refuse, the Vestry having covenanted to fill it up in a given time; and complaints were made by surrounding inhabitants The water was analysed and the pond examined by Dr Muter, analyst to the Vestry, who explained that the smell was caused by the fermentation of decayed vegetable matter set up by the autumn rains after a long hot summer; and upon his advice and with the concurrence of the Sevenoaks Rural and Urban District Councils the water was deodorised by treatment with sulphate of iron and slaked lime, no further deposits 1'2 of refuse being made in the meantime The purchase of these materials, together with a quantity of permanganate of potash, cost the sum of £38 Is Ad On the 27th November the Roads and Depot Committee reported that in its opinion the time had arrived for the Vestry to have the right to drain the pond water into the stream on the boundary of the estate originally offered to the Vestry, also to provide this Depot with a small furnace for destroying vegetable and other offensive matter, as at Longfield ; and recommended that the question of the expediency of acquiring additional land should be referred to a Committee of the whole Vestry, having regard to the inquiry into Depot matters then in progress The Vestry agreed to this, and on the 11th December adopted the two following recommendations submitted by the Committee of the whole Vestry :— That the remaining portion of the Sevenoaks Estate offered to the Vestry for sale in the year 1891, viz 20 acres, with a house let at £20 per annum, be purchased for £2,300 That the Sevenoaks Depot, with the adjoining 20 acres of land agreed to be purchased, be mortgaged to secure the repayment of £2,500 by annual instalments of £500, with interest at 4 per cent, per annum on the balance from time to time remaining unpaid, the first of such instalments to become due on the 25th December, 1896 In submitting the agreement for purchase to the Vestry for sealing on the 19th February 1896 the Clerk read the following explanatory report, when the agreement received the seal of the Vestry: — It will be remembered that in order to secure the land at Sevenoaks lying between our Depot premises and the stream the Vestry agreed to mortgage the whole of the estate for £2,500, by a repayment of £500 per annum for 5 years, with 4 per cent interest on the balance for the time being remaining unpaid Some legal question having been raised as to the Vestry's power to mortgage, I have arranged for Mrs Murdock, the lady finding the money, to take up the conveyance from the Sevenoaks Estate Company for £2,300 and enter into an agreement with the Vestry to Bell the land to them at the same price, accepting payment in four instalments of £500 each at Christmas in each year and the last instalment of £300 at Christmas 1900, with interest at 4 per cent on the balance from time to time remaining unpaid By this arrangement the present Depot premises remain in the Vestry's possession unencumbered 73 The Vestry will upon completion of the agreement have all the rights of a freeholder over the land, merely indemnifying Mrs Murdoch against the covenants agreed to between the Vestry and the Sevenoaks Estate Company as to sidings and stream diversion Tf the Vestry should desire at any time to take up the conveyance they can by six months' notice pay off the balance of the consideration money, with interest to the expiration of the notice I advise the Vestry therefore to seal the agreement I may say that the tenancy of the cottage and land at £20 per annum will expire at Michaelmas next, from which date I have secured another tenant at £40 per annum The posts attending this purchase amounted to £83 558 0d Provision was made in the estimates for 1896-7 for extending siding on the newly-acquired land and erecting a furnace Longfield Depot—The boiler of the steam crane at this Depot, together with the steam pipes, was protected by a covering of fossil meal composition two inches thick in November 1895, the work being carried out by Messrs Haacke & Co for the sum of £6 108 On the 19th February 1896 the Vestry adopted the following report submitted by the Committee :— Your Committeee have considered the question of water supply, repairs and ventilations required to be canned out to the workmen's cottages under the viaduct at Longfield Depot, and they have arrived at the conclusion that it would be wiser to acquire the piece of land alongside the railway at this Depot whereon workmen's cottages can be erected rather than spend money in repairing the old cottages, with the prospect of their being condemned as unfit for dwellings in the near future by the Sanitary Authority for the district Your Committee have ascertained that the piece of land in question can be purchased for £'200, which they consider is very reasonable ; and under all the circumstances they have no hesitation in advising the Vestry to acquire the same, so that next year, when the estimates are under consideration, provision can be made for placing workmen's cottages thereon Your Committee therefore recommend : — That the triangular piece of freehold land, measuring la Ir 2p, alongside the railway at Longfield Depot as shown on plan submitted, be purchased for £200 for the erection of workmen's cottages Three cottages or huts, standing on the ground and let for 10s per week, were included in this purchase, which was completed from the 25th March 1896, the costs amounting to £6 2s 6d 74 Longfield National Schools—The Yestry granted its usual annual subscription of two guineas in aid of these schools on the 18th September 1895 Meopham Depot—The concrete bays at this Depot were completed during the year, except the cement facing to the first four bays, and arrangements were in progress with the Railway Company for extending the siding next the manure docks so as to afford standing room for ten additional trucks, and thus avoid the inconvenience of having to pull out loaded trucks in order to remove empty ones A tablet was also erected similar to the one at Sevenoaks Inspection of Country Depots—On the 12th June 1895 the Vestry resolved (on the motion of Mr Newman) to give those of its members who had not previously inspected the Country Depots an opportunity of doing so, on a Saturday afternoon The inspection accordingly took place on Saturday, 27th July, and was attended by 51 members of the Vestiy, representatives of the Press, and friends : the expenses amounting to £34 15s 0d Ploughing Matches—On the 18th September 1895 the Yestry agreed to the same two resolutions as in the previous year (see last Annual Report, page 96), giving five guineas to the Stonehill and ten guineas to the North Kent Agricultural Association for distribution in prizes at their respective annual ploughing matches Cart Horse Parade on Whit Monday — A special meeting was convened on the 15th May to consider the following motion by Mr Westcott :— That the Vestry subscribe to the Cart Horse Parade Society, and also give every opportunity to the carmen in the employ of the Vestry to take part in the Cart Horse Parade to be held on Whit Monday next After a debate the motion was lost on a division by 43 votes to 14 Horses— Vestry's Stud—There were 40 horses in the stud at the commencement of the year An old mare purchased in 1887 was slaughtered on the 11th March 1895, being worn out and having a chronic lameness in both fore feet ; and the stud at the close of the year therofore consisted of 39 horses The use of bearing reins was ordered to be discontinued in October 1895 75 Fodder consumed by the stud cost £1,302 17s 6d during the year under report, being an average of 12s 6½d per horse per week For shoeing, new harness and repairs, oils, veterinary fees, wages of horsekeeper and assistant, repairs to stables, &c, the Vestry expended a sum amounting to £531 15s 10d, or an average of 58 1d per horse per week The total cost for each horse was therefore 17s7½ d per week, as against 19s 1½d for the previous year Return of Consignments — The following return will show the quantity of sweepings, house dust and manure consigned to the various stations during the year ending Lady-day 1896 :— Station Description Tons Cwt Amount Realised Railway Carriagep £ s d £ 4 d Walworth to— Bekesbourne Mixture 74 8 22 6 6 20 3 0 Bromley Ditto 66 8 8 5 1 6 16 3 Ditto Rough Dust 13 9 — 1 8 0 Charing Mixture 16 10 — — Eynsford Ditto 1113 13 149 9 1 119 2 8 Ditto Ditto 11 7 — 1 3 8 Farningham Ditto 2543 8 327 3 6 264 18 8 Fawkham Ditto 1251 6 158 6 9 130 6 10 Ditto Ditto 6 15 — — Ditto Ashes 17 13 2 12 11 1 16 9 Graveeend Mixture 492 7 67 14 2 51 6 8 Hildenborough Ditto 9 7 1 5 9 0 19 6 Hollingbourne Ditto 209 2 46 3 9 39 4 1 Kemsing Ditto 606 18 86 3 6 68 5 7 Ditto Rough Dust 15 5 0 2 7 1 14 4 Lenham Mixture 159 9 38 10 9 33 4 4 Longfield Ditto 2057 8 261 14 6 214 6 3 Ditto Rough Dust 8040 11 — 837 11 3 Ditto Ground 1618 18 — 168 12 8 Ditto Materials 75 19 — 7 18 2 Maidstone Mixture 20 4 4 0 10 3 7 4 Ditto Ditto 7 8 0 7 6 Ditto Rough Dust 95 12 5 19 1 15 18 8 Mailing Ditto 61 6 2 11 2 8 18 9 Ditto Ditto 12 4 — 1 !6 7 May's Siding Mixture 374 18 51 11 2 39 1 0 Meopham Ditto 2054 18 260 14 5 214 1 0 Ditto Rough Dust 1876 7 — 195 9 0 C/o 22,931 18 1,495 3 5 2,447 9 0 76 Station Description Tone Cwt Amount Realised Railway Carriage £ i d £ s d B/o 22,931 18 1,495 3 5 2,447 9 0 Meopham Ground 213 19 — 22 5 9 Ditto Materials 250 14 — 26 2 5 Otford Mixture 830 5 110 0 5 86 9 9 St Mary Cray Ashes 18 9 2 15 4 1 18 5 Sevenoaks Mixture 1525 16 192 13 8 158 18 9 Ditto Ditto 16 6 — — Ditto Rough Dust 13083 19 — 1362 18 2 Ditto Ground 694 14 — 72 7 3 Ditto Materials 992 8 — 103 7 6 Shoreham Mixture 1084 15 140 1 1 112 19 11 Ditto Ditto 5 10 — — Sole Street Ditto 1787 13 260 14 1 201 2 0 Ditto Rough Dust 174 7 — 19 12 5 Southfleet Mixture 17 16 2 9 0 1 17 1 Swanley Ditto 3671 8 470 13 6 382 8 11 Ditto Mixture 276 14 — 28 16 6 Wrotham Ditto 758 10 120 2 5 94 16 2 18,335 1 2,794 12 11 5,123 10 0 Longfield to— Bircliington Ashes 119 1 30 15 1 29 4 4 Ditto Breeze 33 8 8 12 7 Chatham Ashes 47 12 7 14 9 ) 7 10 9 Ditto Breeze 27 15 4 17 2 Deal Ashes 227 11 73 19 2 90 17 9 Ditto Breeze 136 0 44 4 1 Fawkham Ashes 774 17 116 4 7 54 4 5 Ditto Breeze 92 15 16 4 7 Faversham Ashes 441 7 77 4 11 66 6 8 Ditto Breeze 148 6 25 IB 2 Maidstone Ashes 38 16 6 15 10 4 13 10 Meopham Hard Core 107 13 — 6 14 7 New Brompton Ashes 1798 14 269 16 0 221 7 10 Ditto Breeze 326 12 67 3 1 Ramsgate Ditto 12 18 4 1 9 2 18 1 Sevenoaks Hard Core 83 16 — 8 14 6 Sidcup Ashes 71 12 12 10 7 7 19 2 Ditto Breeze 4 16 0 10 9 St Mary Cray Ashes 417 10 62 12 6 64 1 3 Ditto Breeze 101 10 17 15 4 Swanley Hard Core 29 14 3 9 4 2 12 0 C/o 53,377 4 3,635 10 2 5,680 15 2 77 Station Description Tons Cwt Amount Realised Railway Carriage £ s. d £ s. d B/o 5 3,377 4 3,635 10 2 5,680 15 2 Sevenoaks to — Guestling Siding Breeze 44 14 8 18 10 4 9 5 Lenham Ditto 9 7 2 2 1 0 19 6 Longfield Forked Ashes 20 16 1 6 0 2 3 4 Maidstone Ashes 2G8 10 44 1 11 ) 30 15 4 Ditto Breeze 26 17 4 14 0 1 Mailing Ashes 25 7 4 8 9 2 12 10 St Mary Cray Breeze 25 2 4 7 11 2 12 3 Tonbridge A shes 16 4 2 16 9 1 12 5 Wrotham Ashes 346 6 52 12 Ditto Breeze 146 4 22 13 4 J Carted from— Town Depot Mixture 1 12 0 5 0 — Longfield ditto Ashes 7 12 1 3 9 — Ditto Breeze 245 19 43 0 10 — Ditto Dung 2 0 0 5 6 — Sevenoaks ditto Forked Dust 33 12 — — 5 4,597 6 £3,828 7 4 £5,762 19 4 Less Materials and Ground 4,038 1 — 416 2 10 50,559 5 £3,828 7 4 £5,346 16 6 Less Rebate allowed off accounts 246 1 10 1,152 11 10 £3,582 5 6 £4,194 4 8 Amount of Carriage in excess of sales 611 19 2 £4,194 4 8 £4,194 4 8 General Purposes and Lighting Committee— The duties of this Committee are :—To have entire control over the lighting of the parish (including electric light), all street obstructions, scaffolds and hoardings, easements, Vestry Hall and offices, recreation grounds and trees ; to consider and report upon all contemplated street improvements, alterations in street nomenclature, and communications affecting parliamentary or metropolitan procedure; and generally to deal with all matters not relating to the work of the other standing Committees Street Lighting—The following alterations and additions to the lighting of the parish were ordered by the Vestry on the dates named: — 76 1895 May 1 High Park Crescent—New column lump in position to be selected by Surveyor Oct 2 Union Road—One 10-ft burner, with new lantern similar to that in main roads, substituted for lamp No 588, opposite entrance to the Sessions House, by Messrs Rathboxe's premises ,, ,, Cole Street—Lamp No 647 at corner of this street removed to opposite corner ,, ,, Swan Street—One new column lamp fixed opposite Swan Court „ ,, Great Dover Street —Lamp No 536 removed about 6 feet nearer to Lawson Street ,, ,, Ripley Street—One new column lamp at entrance by Board School ,, ,, Globe Street—One new column lamp by wall about 10 feet beyond No 14, Globe Cottage, from Great Dover Street „ ,, Ralph Street —One new column lamp opposite No 39 ,, „ Borrctt Road and Marsland Road—Lamp No 558 in Borrett Road removed about 20 feet into Marsland Road, and two new column lamps erected on the east side of Borrett Road ,, ,, Berryfield Road — Lamp No 887 removed about 20 feet into Tarver Road, and two column lamps erected on the east side of Berryfield Road ,, 30 New Street Mews—One new column lamp at north end 1896 Jan 8 Royal Road—Lamp No 753 removed opposite St James's Hall, and a new column lamp erected on the same side of the road midway between St Agnes Place and St James's Hall ,, „ Chapter Terrace—Lamp No 1,047 removed opposite Nos 1 and 2, and a new column lamp placed between Nos 12 and 13 ,, ,, Sutherland Square—Lamp No 1,031 removed to the opposite corner ,, ,, Chatham Road—Lamp No 955 removed opposite No 19, and a new column lamp erected between Nos 11 and 12 ,, ,, Boyson Road—One new column lamp opposite to No 167 ,, „ Osborne Street— One new bracket lamp on factory wall, opposite No 11 ,, ,, Ash Street—Lamp No 87 at corner of Chatteris Road removed to opposite corner; lamp No 86 removed two blocks to the southward, and a new column lamp erected opposite to No 7 „ ,, Deverell Street —Bracket lamp over entrance to Salvation Army Barracks taken down, and a new column lamp erected on footway opposite entrance to barracks Feb 19 Hampton Street—Two new lamps to be erected during alteration of the paving Mar 18 De Laune Street—Lamp No 991 removed 32 feet to the south of its presont position 79 Provision was made in the estimates for the ensuing year for improving the lighting of the side streets in Trinity Ward by the erection of 35 new lamps and shifting the position of 27 existing ones, at an estimated cost of £107 88 9d, with an additional annual charge for maintenance of £111 l1s 3d Gas—Quality and price of, Sfc—On the 12th June 1895 the Vestry concurred in a petition presented to the House of Commons by the Vestry of Fulham, praying for an inquiry into the management and working of the various Gas Companies supplying the metropolis, also as to existing statutory rights and past financial and general results of the statutory sliding scale of price and dividend: such inquiry to include in its scope the question of obtaining an improved and uniform standard in the quality and illuminating power of the gas with increased facilities for testing, with the view of introducing a Bill into Parliament to provide for these objects and for the reduction of the existing standard price and statutory limit of dividend and an uniform charge throughout the metropolis for all gas supplied, including free use of meters The whole subject of the present arrangements with the Gas Company for lighting the streets and the desirability or otherwise of adopting the meter system was considered by the Committee, but no recommendation was submitted to the Vestry Electric Lighting—Upon this important subject the Committee brought up the following report to the Vestry, on the 3rd April 1895: — Your Committee beg to report that they have in pursuance of the reference to them and by the aid of a Sub-Committee, fully considered the provisional order promoted by the County of London and Brush Provincial Electric Lighting Company, Limited, for lighting powers over the whole parish, the compulsory area of supply being the main roads of the parish The report from their Sub-Committee is as follows:— Report from the Sub-Committee appointed to consider the application of the County of London and Brush Provincial Electric Lighting Company, Limited, for a provisional order Your Sub-Committee think it right in the first place to review the Vestry's action under the Electric Lighting Act of 1882, in order that members may fully realise the important step they will now be invited to adopt as an outcome of the present subject of reference 80 Upon the passing of this Act (which through its various stages, it may be mentioned, was strenuously opposed by the Gas Companies) the Vestry on the 20th September 1882 received no less than six notices from various companies of their intention to apply for provisional orders; and the question was at once raised whether the provisions of the Act should be put in force by a company or by the Vestry The Works Committee of the Vestry at that period came to the conclusion that it would certainly be more in the interests of the ratepayers for the Vestry to grow with the science of electricity by placing themselves in the position of undertakers under the Act than to allow a company to be established for 21 years, even although there was the power to purchase at the end of that period Accordingly the Vestry on the 1st November 1882, after one month's public notice, by a vote of 33 against 9 decided to apply for a licence It is not the intention of your Sub-Committee to review the opposition got up against the Vestry's action on this occasion, which ultimately prevented the Vestry obtaining their licence, but merely to remind members that at that period there were two very powerful agencies at work against the Vestry, viz the South Metropolitan Gas Company and the property owners ; the result being that the Board of Trade on the 28th July 1883 declined to proceed further with the application, and the ratepayers at the May election of 1884 rejected (practically speaking) every member who had supported the Vestry becoming the undertakers for the supply of electricity The cost of opposing the provisional order of the Metropolitan Brush Company and making the application for a licence amounted to £413 9s 2d, £250 of which was incurred through the opposition From the year 1884 to the year 1889, although notices were received from various companies of their intention to apply for provisional orders, no actual order was granted to any company, as the necessary deposit to ensure the mains being laid in the compulsory area was not forthcoming Upon the passing however of the Electric Lighting Act of 1888, the period of purchase by the local authority was extended from 21 to 42 years, which gave an impetus to capitalists : the result being that electric lighting companies that were practically unable to move for want of funds found themselves in a position again to promote schemes The London Electric Supply Corporation, during the session of 1889, obtained through the Board of Trade a provisional order which gave the Corporation lighting powers over the whole parish, the " compulsory area " being Newington Causeway, Newington Butts to Draper Street, and Walworth Road from the Elephant and Castle down to Wansey Street by the Vestry Hall The deposit fixed by the Board of Trade at this time was £1000 per mile, the deposit in the case of this Corporation being £1,500 This Corporation has only laid a main from St George's Church to the railway bridge in the 81 Walworth Road, and therefore the conditions of thp order hare not yet been complied with ; and the Vestry in promoting a scheme for a competitive supply would have reasonable grounds therefore in approaching the Board of Trade Upon the County of London Electric Supply Company promoting a provisional order during the session of 1894, the Vestry passed a resolution to the effect that if a competitive supply was considered necessary for the parish such supply should be placed in the hands of the Vestry, and not those of a public company The Vestry in this case was not called upon to give an undertaking to lodge a provisional order last November, as this company, in view of the decision of the Vestry, failed to lodge with the Board of Trade the requisite deposit, and their provisional order was allowed to drop The provisional order now before the Board of Trade is promoted by tho same company, strengthened by incorporation with the Brush Company The promoters are styled the " County of London and Brush Provincial Electric Lighting Company, Limited," and by clause 5 of their Order they seek lighting powers over the whole parish ; but the " compulsory area" is only to include under clause 21 Great Dover Street, New Kent Road, Borough High Street, Newington Causeway, Newington Butts, Kennington Park Road and Walworth Road, an area which practically includes all the main thoroughfares of the parish There is nothing special in the order to which public attention need be drawn besides mentioning that the order contains (1) the usual power for the purchase of the undertaking by the local authority, (2) the company are not to supply energy under the order in force in the parish without the authority of Parliament, (3) power to the Vestry to break up and reinstate streets for the purposes of the order at the expense of the company, (4) to complete the distributing mains for a general supply throughout the compulsory area within two years from date of order under a penalty of £5 per day, (5) the right of six or more owners or occupiers of any street or local authority to call upon the company to extend the distributing mains subject to the recognised guarantee to take a certain amount of energy, (6) a requisition from the Vestry to be accompanied by an agreement to take the energy for a period of three years for the purpose of street lighting, except to public lamps within a distance of 75 yards from any distributing main, the price to be charged to be settled by agreement or arbitration, and (7) revocation of order if undertakers become insolvent or unable to work at a profit, or by mutual consent with the local authority At the first meeting of your Sub-committee on the 13th ult, they considered a new clause proposed by the company for insertion in their provisional order, with reference to the transfer to the local authority of the undertaking By this clause the Vestry could by notice in writing require the company to sell their undertaking at any time after the F 82 commencement of the order and before the expiration of the 42 years, as provided by the Electric Lighting Act 1888, subject to all existing rights and contracts, at a price to be ascertained, viz:— (1) By capitalising the net profits of the undertaking at per cent. per annum upon the capital of the company shown by the books of the company to have been properly expended upon the undertaking at the date of such notice, or (2) Upon the basis of the actual expenditure on the undertaking so shown by the books of account of the company as aforesaid, if the net profits thereof do not exceed £5 per cent. per annum at the date of the notice Your Sub-committee did not regard this clause with any favour, as once the order was confirmed the Vestry were not likely to be advised to purchase the undertaking before the expiration of the order, viz 42 years hence, more especially as the generating station was not likely to be within the district Your Sub-committee at this meeting directed the Clerk to ascertain from those Vestries that had obtained provisional orders the initial cost of obtaining the order and what steps had been taken to give effect thereto, and to advise the solicitors to the company that the Vestry would not be advised to accept the clause submitted At the next meeting of your Sub-committee on the 13th instant, the solicitor and engineer of the company attended in support of a further proposed purchase clause (1) To enable the Vestry upon notice, after the expiration of 14 years from the date of the order, to purchase the distributing plant of the undertakers not to claim anything for severance (2) In the event of purchase the Vestry to be bound to the extent of the supply of current by the undertakers within the district for the previous 12 months to take all current required of the undertakers, and to the extent of twice the amount of current supplied by the undertakers during any previous 12 months be bound to give all the current required by the Vestry (3) Such supply to be given and the amount thereof determined by Watt Meters (4) The price for such eurrent to be 20 per cent, less than actually paid by consumers (5) The price to be paid to consumers not to exceed 8d per Board of Trade unit or other maximum price authorised by the order ; and (lastly) in the event of purchase by the Vestry the company to have the right to continue the use of their main cables for supplying electricity to other areas At this meeting it was ascertained that the installation station would be on the river in the district of St Olave's Whilst admitting that the Company have shown every desire to meet the objections of the Vestry as to handing over a competitive supply to a public company, your Sub-Committee cannot help feeling that even with such a clause as last proposed the competitive supply would be practically handed over to the Company for the lengthened period of 83 42 years, as the Vestry, however constituted, could never he advised to merely purchase the cables of a company and he dependent upon the company for the supply of current obtained from an installation station outside the district It is quite evident that the Vestry must now decide the main question, viz whether the competitive supply which the Company are now evidently most anxious to have the power to give to the parish should be left in the hands of this Company or undertaken by the Vestry There is now no alternative, as the present Company are not likely to fail in meeting all the requirements of the Board of Trade with regard to deposit or otherwise ; and unless an undertaking is given to the Board of Trade of the intention of the Vestry to apply to the Board for a provisional order next November, the order which is now formally before the Board will most assuredly be passed during the present session From a communication received from the Board of Trade dated the 8th January last, it appears that provisional orders have been granted to the following local authorities within the County of London, viz :— The Vestry of St Pancras Ditto Hampstead Ditto Lambeth Ditto Shoreditch Ditto Hammersmith Ditto Islington The Board of Works for the Whitechapel District Ditto Backney District The action taken by the Vestry of St Pancras is known to the Vestry by the printed reports which have been circulated among the members, the Vestry of St Pancras having obtained a loan of £60,000 for 42 years for their undertaking from sources outside the London County Council, although with the Council's permission The Council up to 1892 had no power to lend money for electric lighting purposes for a longer period than 30 years To obviate this difficulty the Council in the session of 1892 obtained power to lend for a period of 50 years, and in exercise of that power granted a further loan of £15,000 to St Pancras for 42 years on the 31st July 1893 The Vestry of St John Hampstead contemplate expending £30,000 on an installation, £9,000 for the building of the central station and £21,000 for machinery, plant, mains, etc; but they have been unable to proceed, as the London County Council will only grant a loan repayable in 25 years It was this decision on the part of the Council that induced this Vestry to appeal to the Treasury, the Vestry supporting the Vestry of Hampstead by appointing Messrs Smitheus and Dawes as delegates The Vestry of St Leonard Shoreditch is now taking action to give effect to its order, at a cost of £80,000 F2 84 In Lambeth and Islington your Sub-committee are without official information The Vestry of Hammersmith obtained their order on the 9th June 1893 at a cost of £250, and a Committee is now considering a report from a firm of electrical engineers The Whiteehapel Board of Works obtained their order on the '27th June 1892 at a cost of £284 18s 6d, but they have not yet proceeded with any works, the whole matter being still under the consideration of the Board The Hackney Board of Works obtained their order in the session of 1893 at a cost of only £121 2s 6d, and have not prepared any scheme The initial cost therefore of obtaining an unopposed provisional order may be put down at £200, and although the limit is usually fixed at two years for laying mains in the compulsory area, no other Vestry than St Pancras has, it is believed, given any particular effect to their orders, through the difficulty of obtaining a long period for the repayment of loans Whilst your Sub-Committee fully realise the difficulty of a Vestry undertaking to provide an installation station and to lay down distributing mains at a cost of from £30,000 to £40,000 on a 25 years' loan, they have not felt this part of the question to be momentous, as in the course of time both the Council and the Treasury will no doubt see that any undertaking would be crippled on Buch terms, and that if local authorities are to have any municipal life at all, the very shortest time for the repayment of loans for electric lighting must be 42 years, the limit given to public companies before they are compelled to sell their undertakings to the local authorities The vital question that has now to be considered is whether the electorate of the parish, so largely composed of working men, is sufficiently well informed and imbued with such a deep feeling of municipal life as to continue their support to a strong progressive party,when for a time they might be severely punished by increased rents Heretofore, as explained, the cry of increased rates placed in the hands of the property owners and the large ratepayers a strong weapon against any attempt on the part of the Vestry to move with the times, and place in the hands of the people undertakings which have made our corporate towns so large and powerful At the present time it must be admitted that the gas interest, as well as that of the large property owner, is better understood by the people ; and that any strong agitation from these quarters on the cry of increased rates would only raise a suspicion in the minds of the electorate that they were raising the cry as an excuse to serve their own ends by increasing the rents and putting money into their own pockets But will this knowledge continue among the working men ? Will they be prepared to support their own representatives to Such an extent and for a sufficiently lengthened period, notwithstanding 85 increased rents, to enable the Vestry to bring to a successful issue such a large undertaking as that of electric lighting ? These are queries that have given your Sub-committee serious thought, and although doubts have arisen in their minds upon the questions, they cannot advise your Committee and the Vestry to abandon a truly progressive policy by allowing the present company to step in and usurp the rights of the parishioners The Baths and Washhouses movement is one solely to promote the health and comfort of the working classes, but not so the electric lighting question The working men could not hope for many years to come to have the direct comfort of the electric light in their homes Their support to the undertaking would have to be purely from unsel6sh motives, and in support of a body that had in the past, and were bound in the future, to do all they can in other directions, such as increased wages and better and improved sanitary dwellings, to improve their condition in life Whether they can always be educated up to the high standard of thought and action it is most difficult to say, with a shifting population such as that of Newington, but your Subcommittee feel that they ought not at least to shrink from discharging a public duty ; and therefore whatever may be the ultimate opinion of your Committee, the Vestry and the electorate upon the serious question before them, they have determined to support a purely unselfish and progressive policy which would actuate all rightthinking working men and ratepayers, whatever their political views may be, by recommending : — That the provisional order promoted by the County of London and Brush Provincial Electric Lighting Company, Limited, be opposed, by the Vestry giving an undertaking to the Board of Trade to promote a provisional order in the next session of Parliament for supplying a competitive supply in the parish to that undertaken by the London Electric Supply Corporation Dated this 27th day of March, 1895 A SMITHERS, Chairman JAMES C HAMMOND, W WESTCOTT, O NEWMAN, GEO W HENLEY, J P CLARK Your Committee having unanimously adopted the foregoing SubCommittee's Report, beg to recommend:— That the provisional order promoted by the County of London and Brush Provincial Electric Lighting Company, Limited, be opposed, by the Vestry giving an undertaking to the Board of Trade to promote a provisional order in the next session of Parliament for supplying a competitive supply in the parish to that undertaken by the London Electric Supply Corporation (Signed) A E SMTTHERS, Chairman (Signed) 86 The resolution was agreed to unanimously ; and on the 1st May the Clerk reported that the Vestry's opposition to the provisional order of the County of London and Brush Provincial Company had been successful, the Board of Trade having advised him that the order would not be proceeded with Upon his suggestion the whole matter was then referred to the General Purposes Committee, with power to prepare a provisional order in accordance with the undertaking given to the Board of Trade and to obtain expert services in connection therewith, at an expense not exceeding £260 Messrs Kincaid, Waller & Manville, electrical engineers, of 29 Great George Street, Westminster, were accordingly engaged by the Committee on the 9th October at an agreed fee of 50 guineas, to assist the Vestry in obtaining the provisional order The statutory month's notice of the Vestry's intention to apply for a provisional order (as required by the provisions of the Electric Lighting Acts of 1882 and 1888) was given by advertisement in the South London Press and London Gazette in the month of November, at a cost of £34 Upon the expiration of this notice a special meeting of the Vestry was convened on the 11th December, when the following special report from the Committee was received:— Your Committee beg to report that the time has arrived for giving effect to the Vestry's resolution of the 3rd April last, whereby the provisional order promoted by the County of London and Brush Provincial Electric Lighting Company, Limited, was opposed, and an undertaking given to the Board of Trade that the Vestry would promote a provisional order themselves during this session to provide for competitive powers to those granted to the London Electric Supply Corporation in the year 1889 The Vestry, it will also be remembered, on the 1st May last empowered your Committee to take all necessary steps to procure a provisional order, at an expense not exceeding £250 Acting on this authority, your Committee retained the professional services of an electrical engineer to assist and advise them and the Vestry Clerk in the preparation of the necessary plans, memorial to the Board of Trade and draft provisional order, and also to support the same by evidence before the Board The statutory notice has been advertised as directed by the rules of the Board of Trade, and the draft provisional order has been prepared in accordance with the terms of this notice The draft memorial has also been prepared, and a copy furnished to each member of the Vestry 87 It is understood between your Committee and the London Electric Supply Corporation that they will not oppose the Vestry's order only for the purpose of preventing any portion of their own order being repealed, as although they object to another Company entering into competition with them they are not prepared to prevent the Vestry undertaking a competitive supply, although they are naturally anxious to supply the energy This however is a matter for future consideration All the Vestry is asked to do at the present moment is to secure their provisional order, the order when granted giving the Vestry ample time to decide whether it will be to their interest to contract with a company or provide their own generating station Your Committee beg therefore to recommend:— That the application to the Board of Trade of the County of London and Brush Provincial Electric Lighting Company, Limited, and of the Capital and Counties Electricity Supply Company, Limited, for a provisional order to supply electricity for public and private purposes within the area of the jurisdiction of the Vestry of St Mary, Newington, be opposed That the memorial submitted be sealed and forwarded to the Board of Trade, applying for a provisional order under section 4 of the Electric Lighting Act of 1882, for the supply by the Vestry of electricity for lighting purposes, both public and private, within the area of the parish That a cheque be drawn in favour of the Board of Trade for £50, to be lodged with the memorial as required by the rules of the Board Dated 4th December 1895 (Signed) A E SMITHERS, Chairman The resolutions were agreed to unanimously, and the cheque for £50 was drawn Objections to the proposals of the Vestry were subsequently lodged by the Electric Supply Corporation and the County of London and Brush Provincial Electric Lighting Company, and a strong opposition arose among the property owners and ratepayers, similar in character and purpose to that encountered by the Vestry on the previous occasion in 1883 At the close of the year the Board of Trade announced its intention of holding a public inquiry at the Vestry Hall, and the services of counsel were retained to represent the Vestry Explosions in Electric Lighting Conduits — In view of recent casualties from this cause the Vestry resolved ou the 17th 1895 88 That the Vestry concur in the communication addressed to the Board of Trade by the Vestry of St Mary, Islington, upon the subject of the escapes of gas from mains laid under the public streets, and the possible danger to persons and property resulting from explosions in electric lighting conduits ; and that a representation be made to the Board of Trade upon the Bubject Street Obstructions—Carriageways—Forty summonses were taken out throughout the year against various persons for creating obstructions in the roadways by erecting scaffolds, depositing refuse, &c, therein Convictions were obtained in nearly all the cases, the fines inflicted ranging from Is to 40s with costs, according to the nature and gravity of the offence Street Obstructions — Footways — Thirty-seven summonses were taken out during the year against tradesmen of the parish, for exceeding the limit of 18 inches recognised by the standing order of the 10th November 1886 for the display of their wares on the footways In four cases the defendants were let off upon payment of costs only, the rest being fined in addition in sums varying from 1s to 40s Sun Blinds—The standing order printed at page 14 of this Report, fixing the limit of height from the pavement for these blinds at 7 feet and of width for side blinds at 1 foot 6 inches, and declaring any blind exceeding these limits to be an obstruction, was adopted on the recommendation of the Committee on the 2nd October 1895 Advertising on Hoardings—From this source the Vestry received only the sum of £2 1s 2d during the year under report Easements—The following easements were granted on the dates named, subject to the customary terms and conditions :— 1895 April 3 Tablet bearing words "To Browning Hall " on arm of lamp at corner of York Street ,, 17 Coal plate in footway of Crampton Street at side of Nos 125 and 127 Newington Butts May 29 Tablet bearing words "The Reformers' Club, 7, St Agnes Place, first turning on right" on arm of lamp at corner of South Place 89 June 12 Tablet bearing words "Newington Reform Club, 3, Hampton Street (first door beyond the arch) '' on arm of lamp at corner of Hampton Street ,, 26 Two coal plates in front of Nos 63 and 64, Trinity Square, close to back line of footway July 24 Pillar letter box in Crampton Street Aug 22 Ditto Newington Causeway Oct 16 Coal plate at side of " Red Lion " PH in Westmoreland Road ,, 16 Ditto in front of No la, Manor Place 1896 Jan 8 Pillar letter box in Morrow Street, at corner of Little Liverpool Street Feb 5 Pillar letter box outside No 166, Great Dover Street Vacant Land in East Street and Orb Street — At the commencement of the year the Vestry was urged by Mr Russell Spokes (one of the pari-li representatives on the London County Council) to endeavour to induce the Council to acquire and lay out this open space as a recreation ground ; and the Earl of Meath (President of the Metropolitan Public Gardens Association) also wrote explaining the negotiations which had already taken place, and the readiness of his Association to continue them if the Vestry so desired The area of the land was about 37,000 square feet (nearly an acre), and the price asked by the mortgagees £6,000 The Association had no power to make a contribution towards the purchase, but would be most willing to assist in laying out the ground; and the cost of acquisition must therefore be borne by the rates, aided by a contribution from the Council On the loth May the Vestry declined to co-operate unless the purchase could be effected for considerably less than the sum named The General Purposes Committee then further considered the matter in conjunction with Mr Spokes, and on the 22nd January 1896 brought up the following recommendations, all of which were agreed to by the Vestry:— That the Vestry being of opinion that it is extremely desirable that the vacant land in East Street and Orb Street should be acquired and laid out as a recreation ground by the London County Council, the Vestry hereby agree to contribute one-half the cost of acquiring the land for that purpose That a memorial to the Parks and Open Spaces Committee of tho Council be prepared in favour of its acquisition, and a deputation appointed to present and support such memorial That 50 copies of the plan showing the area of the ground referred to be provided together with the memorial, for the use of members and the London County Council 90 A deputation of nine members was thereupon appointed, consisting of Messrs Smithers, Dawes, Horsley, Edwards, Cory, Youldon, Hammond, WESTCOTr and Vernon The memorial was sealed by the Vestry on the 18th March, praying the Council to have the ground valued and acquire the freehold upon the basis of such valuation, the Vestry contributing one-half of the cost: and to be heard by deputation when the matter was under the consideration of the Parks and Open Spaces Committee Kennington Park—Proposed Footway across —This subject was again brought under the Vestry's consideration on the 17th April 1895, by means of a memorial introduced by a deputation of seven ratepayers, asking the Vestry to unite with the Lambeth Vestry in using their joint influence in urging the London County Council to open up a thoroughfare across Kennington Park during the hours the park was closed to the public at night The General Purposes Committee then conferred with representatives appointed by the Lambeth Vestry and agreed upon the following recommendations, which were submitted to and adopted by the Vestry on the 10th July:— That in the opinion of this Vestry the proposed opening of a public footway throughout the night across Kennington Park is extremely desirable That the London County Council be petitioned by the joint Vestries of Newington and Lambeth to make this footway as a metropolitan improvement At the meeting of the Vestry on the 27th November it transpired that the Lambeth Vestry had independently approached the Council on the question and been met with a refusal, and a fresh reference to Committee ensued On the 5th February 1896 the Committee reported that the Lambeth Vestry was now willing to join in the proposed memorial and to contribute an equal moiety of such portion of the cost as might be fixed by the Council, and recommended :— That the seal of the Vestry be affixed to a joint memorial of the two Vestries of Newington and Lambeth, praying the London County Council to form, light and maintain a public footway across Kennington Park and to keep the same open throughout the night, upon both Vestries agreeing to contribute an equal moiety of such portion of the cost thereof as may bo fixed by the Council 91 This was agreed to; and the memorial having been duly sealed by both Vestries was presented to the Parks and Open Spaces Committee of the Council by a joint deputation of ten members— five from each Vestry—on the 6th March The decision of the Council had not yet been given at the close of this Report Trees—The General Purposes Committee had under consideration the very large number of troes in the public thoroughfares of the parish which were found in the spring and summer of 1895 to be dead The contractor (Mr Benedict) contended that numbers of the trees had been killed by the free use of salt by the Vestry during the previous winter for melting snow, and sought compensation; and the question remained at this stage at the end of the year, no proposal being submitted to the Vestry Penton Place Improvement—The valuation made on behalf of the Vestry of the property required for this improvement amounted to £823, as against the owners' claims of £1,070 On being applied to to bear half the cost the London County Council agreed to contribute a sum not exceeding £590, being a moiety of their estimated gross cost of £1,180, conditionally upon the Vestry reserving a strip of ground sufficiently wide to enable them to control the frontage to the road, instead of throwing the whole site of No 215, Newington Butts, into the public way as at first proposed and thus leaving a valuable side frontage to No 213 adjoining It was further stipulated that in the event of this strip of land not being sold at the time of completion of the improvement the Council should, upon such sale taking place, receive one-half of the amount realised These terms were accepted by the Vestry on the 30th October 1895 The Clerk subsequently, in conjunction with the Vestry's solicitors, induced the tenant and freeholders to agree to settle their various claims for sums amounting to £818 plus £46 costs—total £864, or a reduction of £206 on the original claims Completion of the matter was, however, deferred until after the ensuing Lady-day, no provision having been made in the estimates for the current year to meet the expenditure Union Road Improvement—This subject was again brought before the Vestry on the 27th November 1895, by a letter from inhabitants 92 in the vicinity asking the Vestry to widen the entrance to Union Road from the Causeway The London County Council was then again asked to undertake the widening as a metropolitan improvement, the Yestry renewing its offer to contribute £2,000 towards the cost (see Annual Report for 1893-4, page 97); but replied that having regard to the estimate of £17,200, in which no reduction could be made, the contribution offered by the Vestry was not large enough to j ustify the Council in undertaking the work, and inquired whether the Yestry could increase its contribution Assistance was then sought from the Vestry of St George-the-Martyr, but that Vestry pleaded its financial inability to co-operate, owing to its heavy loss of revenue from rates through extensive clearances of insanitary property in the parish The Vestry thereupon, on the 19th February 1896, discharged the reference to Committee, and the subject dropped for the second time Thurlow Street Improvement—A deputation attended before the Vestry on the 11th December 1895, introduced by Messrs Spokes and Parkek (representatives for Walworth on the London County Council), in support of a petition signed by 2,464 persons praying for the co-operation of the Vestry in bringing this matter before the Council with the view of securing the desired improvement The memorial was duly considered by the General Purposes Committee, upon whose advice the Vestry resolved on the 8th January 1896 :— That inasmuch as this Vestry have at the cost of the ratepayers of this parish effected their part of the Thurlow Street Improvement by securing the dedication of the land and making up the road from Sedan Street to the boundary, the consideration of the petition presented to the last meeting of the Vestry be deferred until the Camberwell Vestry are prepared to seek the co-operation of this Vestry in effecting the opening into Albany Road, and agree to contribute a much larger proportion than one-fourth of the cost The Camberwell Vestry having stated its intention of adhering to its original offer to bear only one-fourth of the cost not exceeding £500 (see Annual Report for 1890-91, page 92), the Vestry discharged the reference on the 19th February 1896 Street Nomenclature—On the 8th January 1896 the Vestry agreed to the proposal of the London County Council to rename Elizabeth 93 Place (Lawson Street), the new name selected being "Iris Place" The Council was also asked to issue orders for renumbering the houses in Manor Place and Tatum Street A number of the street name tablets in the parish having become weatherworn and partially obliterated, the work of rewriting them was entrusted in February 1896 to Messrs Strong & Fripp at the contract price of 1s 9d per tablet Local Government Act, 1894—The petition to the Local Government Board referred to in the last Annual Report (p 115), praying for the transfer to the Vestry of the right to appoint overseers and the powers and duties of the Governors and Guardians, Burial Board, Library Commissioners and Baths and Washhouses Commissioners, was sealed by the Vestry on the 1st May 1895, after a copy had been sent to every member The petition ran as follows:— To The Right Honourable Geohoe John Shaw-Lefevke, the President of the Local Government Board The petition of the Vestry of the Parish of St Mary, Newington, in the Administrative County of London, under their Common Seal Sheweth— 1 That in the year 1768 a Local Act (10 George 3rd, cap 72) was passed intituled " An Act for dividing certain Commons or Wastes " in the Parish of St Mary, Newington, commonly called " Newington Butts, in the County of Surrey, and disposing of the " same for the benefit of the Poor of the said Parish" The Parish at this period being burdened with a numerous and expensive Poor it was considered that it would be an advantage to the Parish and to those interested in the Commons or Wastes, if the Common or Waste called Lorrimore, otherwise Lattamoor, otherwise Lowermoor, containing about sixteen acres of dry land and about three acres covered with water, was allotted to the Lords of the Manor (the Lean and Chapter of the Cathedral and Metropolitical Church of Christ, Canterbury) and to their Lessee free from all Common Right which might be claimed by any other persons in lieu of the Right and Interest of the said Dean and Chapter, and their Lessee over the other of the said Commons or Waste ; and if the other of the said Common or Waste called Walworth Common, containing forty-eight acres or thereabouts, was also freed from Common Right and enclosed and let, and the produce thereof appropriated for the benefit of the Poor of the said Parish For putting this Act into execution the Rector and Churchwardens for the time 94 being, the Tenant of the said Manor for the time being, (who were to be perpetual Trustees) together with twelve other Trustees were appointed, the qualification of a Trustee, other than the Hector and Churchwardens, being that he should be an Inhabitant of the said Parish, and in his own right rated to the Land Tax Assessment for some estate, in lands, tenements or hereditaments to the amout of fifty pounds per annum, or possessed of a personal Estate to the amount of one thousand pounds 2 That in the year 1808 a further Local Act (48 Geo 3rd cap 21) was passed intituled "An Act for the better assessing and collecting the "Poor and other Rates in the Parish of St Mary, Newington, in "the County of Surrey, and regulating the Poor thereof," for the purpose of investing the Churchwardens and Overseers with special powers to make and collect the Rates to be levied in the Parish and to compound with the Owners of Houses for the rates of small houses 3 That in the year 1814 a further Local Act (54 Geo 3rd cap 113) was passed intituled " An Act for the better assessing and collecting "the Poor and other Rates in the Parish of St Mary, Newington, "in the County of Surrey, and regulating the Poor thereof; and "granting other powers in lieu thereof for rebuilding or repairing "the Workhouse and removing and preventing encroachments and "annoyances in the said Parish; and for other purposes relating " thereto" By this Act, the before-recited Act 48 Geo 3rd cap 21 was repealed, and the management and care of the Poor; the making and collecting of Rates ; the prevention of encroachments; the collection of House refuse and removal of nuisances; suppression of Street Obstructions, and other Parochial matters, became vested in the resident Justices of the Peace for the County of Surrey, the Rector, Churchwardens, Overseers and thirty-two Governors and Guardians, the election of the Governors and Guardians being vested in the Inhabitants in Vestry assembled on Easter Tuesday in every year The qualification of a Governor and Guardian (section 4) other than the Rector, Churchwardens, Overseers and resident Justices of the Peace, is that he should be a Tenant or Occupier of lands, tenements or hereditaments within the said Parish assessed to the Rates at the rent of thirty pounds per annum or upwards and be seised or possessed in his own right or in the right of his wife, or be in the actual possession or receipt of the rents or profits of Freehold or Leasehold lands, tenements or hereditaments of the clear yearly value of fifty pounds, or possessing a real or personal estate of the amount or value of one thousand pounds over and above the amount that would be sufficient to satisfy and discharge his just debts By sec 3 of this Act the Governors and Guardians in office have power to fill up any vacancy occasioned by death, removal, resignation, disqualification, refusal or neglect 95 to act until Easter Tuesday in every year, when the inhabitants in Vestry assembled fill up these vacancies by confirmation or otherwise. The inhabitants at the same meeting and under the same section are also required to nominate and choose twelve persons in the room or stead of twelve of the old Governors and Guardians thereby required yearly according to the priority of their election to go out of office. By section 40 of this Act the Governors and Guardians were invested with all the powers and authorities of Overseers of the Poor touching or concerning the relief or management or employment of the Poor or the application of any rates made for their use and maintenance, and by section 57 of the said Act the inhabitants assembled in Vestry on Easter Tuesday in each year were required to nominate eight substantial householders to serve the office of Overseers of the Poor, and to cause a list of such persons to be delivered to the Justices of the Peace for the County of Surrey at the next ensuing Petty Session, for the said Justices to appoint four of the said eight persons, when such four persons so appointed were required to act as overseers until the Easter Tuesday following and until the Petty Session then next following, when four other persons should be appointed in manner explained in their stead, and these four persons, together with the Churchwardens for the time being, were to be deemed Overseers of the Poor of the said Parish and were required respectively to take upon themselves the office of Governor and Guardian of the Poor of the said Parish. 4. That in the year 1851 a further Local Act (14th Vic. cap. 7) was passed intituled "an Act for altering and amending the Walworth "Common Inclosure Act, 10 Geo. 3 cap. 72; for authorising a partition " of the Walworth Common Estate; for incorporating the Governors " and Guardians of the poor of the Parish of Saint Mary, Newington, "in the County of Surrey, and for enabling such Governors and " Guardians to erect a new Workhouse; for altering and amending "the Acts 54 Geo. 3, cap. 113, and (a) 1 Geo. 4, cap. 41, relating to " the said parish and for other purposes," whereby the Governors and Guardians appointed under the Act 54 Geo. 3 cap. 113 were incorporated and made one Body Corporate by the name of "The "Governors and Guardians of the Poor of the Parish of Saint Mary, "Newington, in the County of Surrey " with a common seal, and had power to take, purchase and hold lands, tenements and hereditaments for the purposes of the said Acts 10 Geo. 3 cap. 72 ; the Act 54 Geo. 3 cap. 113, and of this Act 14 Vic. cap. 7. By section 5 of this Act all property belonging to and held by or upon trust for the Governors and Guardians of the Poor acting under the provisions of the said recited Local Acts became vested in the Governors and Guardians as thereby incorporated. (a) This was a Local Act for dividing the Parish of St. Mary, Newington. into three separate parishes or Ecclesiastical districts, and for building two new churches, viz. Trinity Church and Saint Peter's Church. 96 5. That the inhabitants in Vestry assembled on the 25th November 1853 appointed a Burial Board under the Act to amend the Laws concerning the burial of the dead in the Metropolis (15 and 16 Viccap. 85), and by Orders in Council made by virtue of the provisions of the Act 16 and 17 Vic. cap. 134, sec. 1, interments in the churchyards of St. Mary's and St. Peter's (the only two churchyards ever used for interments in this parish) were prohibited. 6. That by virtue of the provisions of the Metropolis Local Management Act, 1855 (18 and 19 Vic. cap. 120) and the Metropolis Local Management Amendment Act (19 and 20 Vic. cap. 112) the collection of house refuse, the removal of nuisances, suppression of street obstructions, the appointment of Churchwardens, Overseers of the Poor, and Governors and Guardians, together with all matters not pertaining to the making, levying and collecting of Rates, the management or relief of the poor, and the management of the Walworth Common Estate, became vested in your Petitioners. 7. That by the Metropolitan Poor Act, 1867 (30 Vic. cap. 6) provision was made for the establishment of District Asylums for the reception and relief of the sick, insane and infirm classes of paupers in the Metropolis, and for the building of dispensaries, and also for providing for the establishment of a Common Fund raised by contribution from the several Unions and Parishes according to their annual rateable value, out of which the relief of certain classes of paupers in the whole district should be paid. The Poor Law Board in pursuance of the powers conferred upon them by section 73 of this Act issued an order transferring the management and relief of the poor in the parish from the Governors and Guardians elected under the Local Act 54 Geo. 3 cap. 113, to a Board of Guardians elected under the provisions of the "Poor Law Amendment Act, 1854," and by section 75 of the Act of 1867 the property vested in the Governors and Guardians—i.e., the Walworth Common Estate — became vested in the new Board of Guardians. The Poor Law Board also issued an Order under the provisions of this Act for the formation of the Newington Asylum District, comprising the St. Saviour's Union and the parishes of St. George-the-Martyr, Southwark, and the Parish of your Petitioners, (St. Mary, Newington,) and a Board of Managers known as the "Managers of the Newington Sick Asylum District" was created under this Order. 8. That on the 9th August, 1869, the Metropolitan Poor Amendment Act, 1869 (32 and 33 Vic. cap. 63) was passed, which authorised the Poor Law Board to make an order (which the Board subsequently issued) uniting the Parish of St. Mary, Newington, with St. Saviour's Union, the result being that the Parish ceased to have a separate Board of Guardians, and the management and relief of the poor of the parish became transferred to the Guardians 97 of this Union. By section 5 of this Act, the Walworth Common Estate became re-invested in the Governors and Guardians appointed under the Local Act 54 Geo. 3rd cap. 113, and upon the trusts contained in the Walworth Common Inclosure Amendment Act, 14 Vic. cap. 7. 9. That the inhabitants on the 28th October, 1890, adopted the provisions of the Free Libraries Acts, and your Petitioners on the 21st October, 1891, adopted the provisions of the Baths and Washhouses Act, the Commissioners on both Boards being appointed by your Petitioners. 10. That in the Parish of St. Mary, Newington, there exist therefore:— (a) The Governors and Guardians of the Poor under the before recited Local Acts, with power to make and levy the Poor, General and other rates in the Parish, and to appoint and remunerate their collectors; power to appoint an Assessment Committee under the provisions of the Valuation of Property (Metropolis) Act, 1869, and also to manage the Walworth Common Estate and collect the ground rents thereof and apply the same in reduction of the Poor Rate of the Parish. (b) The Burial Board constituted under the provisions of the Burial Acts. (c) The Commissioners for Public Free Libraries and Museums. (d) The Commissioners for Baths and Washhouses, and (e) Your Petitioners, as the Sanitary, Highway, Lighting and Sewer authority of the Parish, who as such are entrusted with administrative functions under inter alia the following important Statutes of a municipal character, viz:— (1) The Metropolis Local Management Act, 1855, and the various Acts amending the same. (2) The Public Health (London) Act, 1891. (3) The Housing of the Working Classes Act, 1890. (4) The Sale of Food and Drugs Act. (5) The Margarine Act. (6) The Electric Lighting Acts. (7) The Factory and Workshop Acts. 11. That from the passing of the Metropolis Local Management Act, 1855, down to the passing of the Local Government Act, 1894 (56 and 57 Vic. cap. 73), the Vestry have almost invariably filled up the annual and casual vacancies occurring year by year on the Board of Governors and Guardians from among themselves, the Vestry consisting of seventy-two members. 12. That the existence of this second administrative body for the making and collecting of Rates in the Parish, has since the passing of the 98 Metropolis Local Management Act, 1855, caused much friction at various times between the Vestry and the Board of Governors and Guardians. 13. That among the statutory powers of the Governors and Guardians objected to by your petitioners is that contained in section 14 of the Metropolis Local Management (Amendment) Act, 1862. In order that this section may be understood, it should be mentioned that by section 158 of the Metropolis Local Management Act, 1855, the Overseers are required to levy and pay over to the Treasurer of the Vestry the amount required by them for defraying the expenses of the execution of this and the amending Acts, and by section 161 any excess beyond the amount levied in pursuance of an order from the Vestry is likewise to be paid over to such Treasurer. The expression "Overseers of the Poor" by section 250 of the same Act including any persons authorised to make and collect or cause to be collected the rate for the relief of the poor in any parish. By the operation of this Act the Governors and Guardians came within the expression " Overseers of the Poor," and until the passing of the Amendment Act of 1862 were subject to the provisions contained in sections 158 and 161 of the Act of 1855. The Metropolis Local Management (Amendment) Act, 1862 (25 and 26 Vic., cap- 102) further provided by section 14 that in addition to any such excess levied beyond the amount levied to meet the expenses of the Vestry, less the expenses of and incidental to the making and collecting of the rate, being handed over to the Treasurer of the Vestry, the Overseers were required to make out and deliver to the Vestry a true and perfect account in writing Signed by the Auditors appointed under the Act of 1855. It is provided however by this section:— " That where the term' Overseer' or ' Overseers ' shall extend " to and include any Vestry elected under the firstly " hereinbefore recited Act, or any Board of Trustees or " Governors of any parish or place chosen under any " Local Act now in force, the provisions of this clause " shall not be applicable to such Vestry or Board of " Trustees or Governors so long as the orders of the Vestry " or Board shall be duly complied with and satisfied, and in " every case in which the Vestry does not appoint a " collector or collectors to collect such rates, the said " Overseers are hereby authorised to employ and pay one " or more Collector or Collectors to collect all such rates, " and to take from every such Collector security for his '' duly collecting such rates and payingover and accounting " for the same, and such security shall ensure to the " benefit of the Overseers for tho time being of every " such parish or place who shall have all such and the " 6ame remedies thereon as the overseers to whom such " security was originally given." 99 The effect of this proviso has been to enable the Governors and Guardians to retain any excess realised by a rate levied to meet the requirements of the Vestry over and above the expenses of collection, and so unknown to the Vestry to accumulate large balances in reduction of the rates. This is to the exclusive benefit of the direct ratepayer and large property owners, but to the injury of the occupier of compound property; as the Vestry if they had known these balances had existed would have included the same in their Orders, without necessitating an increase of the General Rates, and thereby would have been enabled to carry out many sanitary and permanent improvements to the benefit of the Inhabitants in general. In Support of this statement it should be mentioned that in November 1891, a correspondence between the Vestry and the Governors and Guardians disclosed accumulated balances of £3,000 in the hands of the Governors and Guardians on the levying of local rates made under order of the Vestry, in addition to which a further balance of £875 was secured by the Vestry in April 1892, which gave the Vestry £3,875, an amount equal to a rate of 2d. in the £, in addition to the ordinary General Rate levied in the Parish of 2/8 in the £, the application of which amount enabled the Vestry to carry out works f6r the advantage of the inhabitants in general, whereas from past years' experience this excess money would have been applied in reduction of rates to the exclusive benefit of the direct shopkeeper, householder and large owners of property in the Parish. 14. That your Petitioners being directly responsible to the electorate for the amount of all local rates levied in the Parish, should be in a position, in preparing their estimates for each year, to know what balance there is in hand over and above the expenses of collection on the making, assessing, and levying of the preceding year's rates. 15. That section 57 of the Local Act 54 Geo. 3 cap. 113 is also objectionable, which prohibits the four Overseers appointed thereunder from serving for more than one year. Although the Overseers are required to take upon themselves the office of Governor and Guardian and the Governors and Guardians all the powers and authorities of Overseers, and they should therefore act as one body in carrying out the duties ordinarily discharged by Churchwardens and Overseers in those parishes not having a Local Act; the Churchwardens and four Overseers in this Parish by custom elect a Clerk to prepare the Jury Lists, the Register of Voters and other matters, for which Fees are allowed under the statutes relative to the duties of Churchwardens and Overseers, consequently at the expiration of the year of office, when the four Overseers have become acquainted with their duties, four fresh Overseers under section 57 of the Act are appointed, the effect of which has frequently been felt to operate against the interest of the Parishioners. g2 100 16. That as a further illustration of the injurious effect of there being a second Administrative body in the Parish, the Governors and Guardians entirely ignored the following resolution passed by the Vestry on the 6th October, 1869, viz :— " That the Owners of rateable hereditaments in the Parish of " St. Mary, Newington, to which section 4 of the ' Poor "Rate Assessment and Collection Act 1869' extends, " shall be rated to the Poor Rate in respect of such rate" able hereditaments instead of the occupiers in all rates " made after the date hereof." In this case the Vestry had only two alternatives before them, (1) either to move the Superior Court for a Mandamus, or (2) to rescind their resolution, which was done on the 25th January 1871, after being assured by the Governors and Guardians that the carrying out of the Order would entail a serious loss upon the Parishioners. From this period down to last January the Vestry were entirely ignored, for although the agreements entered into by the Governors and Guardians with owners of property were by section 3 of the Act subject to the control of the Vestry, these agreements were never submitted to the Vestry, and the Vestry had no power to enforce compliance with the Act. On the 20th December 1893, however, the Vestry passed a resolution calling upon the Governors and Guardians under the provisions of the Metropolis Local Management Acts to provide them with a return of all compound agreements, which when delivered disclosed the fact that the 25 per cent. composition allowable under section 3 of the Act amounted to no less a sum than £9,327 on the rates levied in the Parish for the year ending Lady-day 1894. Here again is direct evidence of the property owner being considered at the expense not only of the direct ratepayer, but also to the injury for a long period of years of by far the larger portion of the electorate, the occupier of small tenements rated under £20 annual value, because if the sliding scale of composition provided by section 4 of the Act had been adopted, a large annual sum would have been saved on every penny rate levied, and the Vestry thereby enabled to carry out much-needed sanitary improvements for the benefit of the artisan and labouring classes so largely predominating in the Parish. 17. That upon the qualification provided by section 4 of the Metropolis Local Management Act 1855 being removed by the provisions of the Local Government Act, 1894 (in this parish, occupancy and rating to the extent of £25 annual value), the electorate, feeling so much dissatisfaction with the general management of the affairs of the Parish, returned at the general election in December, 1894, a Vestry pledged to the abolition of the Board of Governors and Guardians. If any proof was wanting of the manifestly unfair and partial administration of the Governors and Guardians, it was shown 101 in a communication addressed to your Petitioners in January lust, wherein the opinion of your Petitioners was invited as to the adoption of a sliding scale of commission under section 3 of the Poor Rate Assessment and Collection Act 1869, at the same time reminding your Petitioners that the Agreements entered into with the owners were subject, to the control of the Vestry. Of course your Petioners readily agreed with any suggestion that would tend to secure an increase of revenue from every penny rate levied in the parish. 18. That the parish of St. Mary, Newington, of which your Petitioners are the Local Authority, comprises an area of 632 acres, containing 17,626 assessments and 13,392 inhabited houses, and a population of 115,663 according to the census of 1891, and possessing a rateable value as shown by the last list of totals published under the Valuation of Property (Metropolis) Act, of £479,941. The parish under the Redistribution of Seats Act, 1885, was constituted a separate Borough for Parliamentary purposes, and returns two members to Parliament. 19. That although your Petitioners have always taken considerable interest in the government of the Metropolis, they are not influenced by the Report of the Royal Commission appointed to consider the conditions under which the amalgamation of the City and County of London could be effected, their desire for being invested with full municipal life and privileges arising from their knowledge of the present administration of the affairs in their own particular parish. 20. That your Petitioners believe that great economy to the Inhabitants would arise by their being invested with control over the making, assessing, and collecting of the Poor and other Rates levied in the Parish, and the appointment of Collectors and the management of Walworth Common Estate ; and that means would be found, with the future approval of your Honourable Board, for the proceeds of this Estate, or at least a portion thereof, being applied more in accordance with the requirements of the present wants of the Parish, such as the payment of interest on capital required for the erection of municipal buildings, the existence of which would protect the Artisan and Labouring classes in this densely-populated parish from the ever-increasing rentals charged to them by the Property Owners of the parish. 21. That your Petitioners feel that the powers of the Burial Board might be more efficiently and economically discharged by a Committee of their body than by a distinct Corporate Board, and that if the duties of the Board were transferred to the directly-elected representatives of the parish, action would soon be taken to relieve the parishioners of the high rates of Burial fees charged to non-parishioners for interment in Cemeteries provided by Companies and by Burial Boards created by the adjoining Local Authorities. 102 22. That your Petitioners also have reason to believe that the provisions of the Burial, Free Libraries and Baths and Washhouses Acts could be more efficiently and economically managed by Committees appointed by them than as at present by separate Corporate bodies each with a separate sta ff of officers, and that the parishioners would benefit, in other respects than that of economy of management, by the functions of the Burial Board and the Institutions provided, or in the course of erection, by the Commissioners being transferred to your Petitioners as the directly-elected and responsible representatives of the parish. 23. That although it is understood that your Honourable Board have power under the provisions of the Local Government Act of 1894 to transfer the power of appointment of Overseers from the Justices to your Petitioners, likewise the duties of the Burial Board, the Commissioners for Public Free Libraries and Museums and the Commissioners for Baths and Washhouses, they are advised that the duties of the Governors and Guardians can only be transferred with the sanction of Parliament. Your Petitioners therefore humbly pray : — 1. That your Honourable Board will, during the next ensuing Session of Parliament, promote a Provisional Order for transferring to the elected Vestry as the Local Authority and District Council of the Parish, all the powers and duties of the Governors and Guardians under the hereinbefore recited Local Acts, including the vesting in your Petitioners of the Walworth Common Estate. 2. That your Honourable Board will issue an Order under sec. 33 of the Local Government Act, 1894, for transferring to your Petitioners all the powers and duties of the Burial Board; the Commissioners for Public Free Libraries and Museums ; the Commissioners for Public Baths and Washhouses; and the appointment of Overseers. 3. And your Petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray. The chairmen of the Vestry and of the four Standing Committees were appointed as a deputation to present the petition; but the Local Government Board in acknowledging the petition stated that it would not be necessary to trouble a deputation at present, as an inquiry would have to be held in the parish. The Board also required confirmation of the application for a provisional order by the vote of a majority at two successive meetings of the Vestry, and this requirement was complied with unanimously on tho 12th and 26th June. The Rev. J. W. Horsley and Mr. J. A. Dawes, with the Vestry 103 Clerk, were appointed delegates to represent the Vestry at a conference held on the 31st January 1896 at Spring Gardens on the subject of the powers exercised respectively by the London County Council and the Vestries and District Boards of the metropolis. The following resolution was agreed to by the Vestry on the 26th June 1895 :— That the Vestry concur in the letter from the Vestry of Kensington in favour of an amended rule being framed and issued by the Local Government Board for providing that all casual vacancies in the office of vestrymen occasioned by death, resignation or disqualification, shall be filled at the annual election next held for filling the vacancies created by the retirement of one-third of the body through effluxion of time; and that a copy of this resolution be forwarded to the Local Government Board. Vestrymen serving on Juries.—The Vestry on the 12th June 1895 disagreed with a suggestion made by the Vestry of St. Luke's in favour of promoting legislation to exempt members of Vestries and District Boards from liability to serve on juries in consideration of the onerous and responsible nature of their municipal duties. London Equalisation of Rates Act, 1894.—At the suggestion of the Governors and Directors of Bermondsey the Vestry on the 27th November 1895 resolved to address the Local Government Board, pointing out the unfair method of computing the number of dwellinghouses for the purposes of the Act by counting each block of model dwellings as one house only. The reply of the Board, with letter from the Registrar-General upon the subject, stood referred to the General Purposes Committee at the close of this Report. The total sum payable to the parish for the year out of the Equalisation Fund was £10,853 3s. 0d. Shops (Early Closing J Bill.—Upon the consideration of this Bill, which was intended to provide for the closing of shops at certain hours on one specified day of the week upon two-thirds of the shopkeepers in the district applying in writing to the local authority (which in London would be the London County Council), the Vestry resolved on the 18th March 1896 : — That the Vestry express their concurrence in the object of the Shops (Early Closing) Bill introduced into Parliament by Sir John Lubbock, and that the borough members be asked to support the same. 104 School Board Election Expenses.—On the 3rd April 1895 the Vestry decided to take no action on a letter from the Vestry of Kensington suggesting a revision of the scale of charges and a proper audit of the accounts, preferring to leave these matters to be dealt with by the Education Department. School Board Rates.-The following resolution was adopted by the Vestry on the 11th December 1895, and communicated to the Town Council of West Ham on the 24th January 1896, in reply to their letter stating that the rate in that borough had now grown to 2s. 4d. in the £ : — That the Vestry concur in the views expressed in the letter received from the Vestry of Hammersmith in favour of the amounts raised for School Board purposes being an Imperial charge and equalised throughout the Kingdom. Rating of Elementary Schools.—On the 18th March 1896 the Vestry concurred in the views expressed in resolutions passed at a conference of rating authorities held at Bethnal Green in opposition to the proposed exemption from rating of elementary schools. Nuisances and London County Council.—The following resolution was submitted by the Committee and adopted by the Vestry on the 3rd April 1895 : — That the Vestry concur in the resolution passed by the Board of Works for the Lee District, whereby an opinion is expressed that all complaints of local nuisances received by the London County Council should, in cases within the powers of Vestries and District Boards, be first referred by the Council to such Vestries and District Boards for inquiry and other necessary action : it being essential in the interests of proper and efficient local government of London that all such Vestries and District Boards, before being threatened by the Council with proceedings under Sec. 100 of the Public Health (London) Act 1891, should have an opportunity afforded them of dealing with such nuisances as the local sanitary authorities in their respective districts. Remuneration of Clerks to Justices.— On the 29th May 1895 the Vestry concurred in a memorial presented to the Home Secretary by the Vestry of Islington, praying for the removal of the legal prohibition whereby Clerks to Justices were precluded from receiving remuneration for public services rendered by them in connection 105 with sittings of Justices at Vestry Halls to hear cases arising out of the enforcement of the Adulteration and other Acts by the local sanitary authorities. Chairmen of Vestries as Justices of the Peace.—The Chairman (the Rev. J. W. Horsley, M.A.) informed the Vestry on the 15th May 1895 that he had received a letter from the Home Secretary establishing the fact that all Justices of the Peace holding office by reason of being chairmen of Vestries were entitled to visit and inspect prisons. Upon the consideration of a letter received from the Vestry of Chelsea the Vestry resolved on the 4th March 1896 :— That the Veslry concur in the views expressed in the communication received from the Vestry of Chelsea upon the question of Justices acting by virtue of their office as chairmen of Local Boards or Vestries not being eligible to sit on General Committees of Justices, and direct that a letter be addressed to the Home Secretary, the Local Government Board, the Lord Chancellor and the borough members seeking their co-operation in romoving the disability referred to, and suggesting that the difficulty might be overcome by the several Committees being elected in May instead of in January as at present. In reply to a question put by Captain Norton in the House of Commons the Home Secretary promised to inquire into the matter. New Ward Boundaries and Polling Districts.—The order of the Justices rearranging the Parliamentary electoral divisions of the borough in conformity with the new ward boundaries was made on the 17th July 1895, whereby the West Newington Division was ordered to consist of St. Mary's, St. Paul's and Trinity Wards, and the Walworth Division of St. Peter's and St. John's Wards. The necessary advertisements of the change required by the Justices were inserted iu the local press at a cost of £5 6s. 0d. Tho sealed order of the London County Council, altering the polling districts for the County Council electoral divisions of Newington and Walworth to correspond with the Parliamentary divisions, was sealed on the 30th July, 1895: and thenceforward tho divisions of the parish became identical and conterminous for all electoral purposes. 106 Disorderly House.—On the 22nd January 1896 the Vestry concurred in the following resolutions passed at a conference of the Vestries of the parishes of St. Anne and St. James, Westminster, St. Giles-in-the- Fields and St. George, Bloomsbury, and suggested that the Home Secretary should be asked to receive a deputation:— That in addition to the powers already possessed by the local authorities the police should have power to take the initiative to suppress disorderly houses, and that the law should be altered accordingly. That a petition be sent to the Home Secretary, asking him to amend the law, making it a criminal offence for men to live on the prostitution of women. Municipal Dwellings.—Upon the subject of this reference (see p. 117 of last Annual Report) the Committee on the 5th February 1896 submitted an exhaustive report from the Clerk, in which he recited the various Acts from 1868 to 1885 which had been repealed by and consolidated in the Housing of the Working Classes Act 1890 (53 and 54 Vic. cap. 70), this now comprising the whole law relating to municipal dwellings and lodging-houses. Part I. of this Act provided for the clearance of unhealthy areas by the local authority, which was defined for the administrative county of London to be the London County Council, and did not therefore affect the Vestries and District Boards ; Part II. dealt with unhealthy or obstructive buildings, and conferred certain powers upon the local sanitary authorities (i.e. the Vestries and District Boards) to close, demolish or reconstruct such houses when the area was too small for the application of a scheme under Part I., and to borrow money for 50 years for the purpose; and Part III. dealt with working-class lodging-houses, and conferred full powers to carry out the Act upon the local authority, which in this case also was defined to be the London County Council. Except in the matter of clearing and reconstructing small areas of less than ten houses, the Vestry possessed therefore no statutory power to secure sites and erect dwellings for the artisan and labouring classes. He reviewed and criticised the action of the large builders and property owners of the parish in the past in combining in their own interest to oppose the action of the elected representatives of the parishioners and increase their rents, which he maintained should be governed by 107 the general law of supply and demand; and expressed his regret that the local authority was unable to enter into competition with them in providing municipal dwellings for the artisan and labouring classes, at rentals sufficient to cover interest on loans and maintenance charges after putting aside a proper sinking fund for depreciation. In conclusion he suggested, as an outcome of the reference, the expediency of making a new street from Peacock Street through into Newington Butts, thus cutting through and removing several insanitary courts and enabling the London County Council and the Vestry to acquire land on either side suitable for the erection of dwellings. This would doubtless be an expensive scheme, but having been suggested by the Council would probably be assisted by it, both by contribution and sanction of loans. The Clerk's report was ordered to be printed and circulated amongst the members of the Vestry, copies also to be sent to the London County Council, the Vestries and District Boards of the metropolis and the local press. Finance and Audit Committee. — The duties of this Committee are:—To examine and check all contractors' and tradesmen's accounts ; to meet the precepts of the various bodies making demands upon the General Rates of the parish; to watch over the funds of the Vestry ; to audit the accounts of the Vestry and report the result quarterly ; to settle the annual demand to be made upon the Rating Authority ; and to advise the Vestry from time to time of cheques required to meet payments due. Overdrawing Treasurer's Account.—The Vestry on the 3rd April 1895 passed a resolution requesting the Treasurer to allow the account to be overdrawn until 31st May (when the first payment from the rating authority under the new precept would fall due), charging usual rate of interest on the overdraft. Another similar resolution was passed on the 24th July, asking for an extension of time till Michaelmas, to enable the quarterly accounts and other payments to be met as usual. At this time the overdraft amounted to about £3,500. Upon the expiration of this period a letter was received from the Treasurer upon the subject, with the result that 108 on the 2nd October a third resolution was adopted asking for a further indulgence until Christmas: the Clerk stating that in the event of the Vestry keeping within its estimates for the ensuing half-year and an additional penny rate being levied to meet the increased demand from the London School Board (amounting to £2,200), he saw no reason why the year's accounts should not be closed with a cash balance. The answers given by the Clerk in reply to questions asked by Messrs. Green and Davis in the Vestry on the 5th February 1896, printed at pages 17 and 18 of this Report, will sufficiently indicate the Vestry's financial position at that date. Parochial Rates.—Upon the motion of Mr. Lane the Finance Committee was instructed on the 1st May 1895 to draw up a statement showing cause for the increased rates, "so that the present "Vestry may be freed from the blame which is now being laid to " their charge all over the parish of increasing the rates " ; and on the 29th May accordingly brought up the following explanatory report, which was adopted by the Vestry, having previously been printed and circulated among the members :— Your Committee beg to report that they have considered the subject of reference instructing them to prepare a statement showing cause for the increased rates, so that the present Vestry may be freed from the blame which is being laid to their charge throughout the parish of increasing the rates. In the first place your Committee would point out that they were not responsible for the rates levied for the quarter ending Lady-day 1895 ; and that although the rates levied for the quarter ending 24th June 1895 are 2d. in the £ in excess of the preceding quarter, they are not higher than they were for the corresponding quarter last year, as the following extracts taken from tho demand notes issued to the ratepayers will prove : — 109 Quarter ending 24th June 1894. Rate in the £. Poor's Rate— £ s d. Three months' contribution to the Common Fund of St. Saviour's Union, including Instalment to the London County Council 15,559 10 0 Police Rate 2,473 0 0 Baths ,, 447 10 0 Library Rate 447 10 0 £18,927 10 0 11 d. Vestry Rate — Three months' contribution of General Rate 31,653 9 10 Lighting 4,019 18 6 School Rate 19,816 11 8 Sewer ,, 3,624 0 0 £59,014 0 0 9 d. 1s. 8d. Quarter ending 24th June 1895. £ s. d. Rate in the £. Poor's Rate— Three months' contribution to the Common Fund of St. Saviour's Union, including Instalment to the London County Council 19,069 6 6 Police Rate 2,499 15 0 Baths „ 450 0 0 Library Rate 450 0 0 £22,469 1 6 1s. Vestry Rate— Three months' contribution of General Rate 28,233 0 9 Lighting 4,231 7 0 School Rate 21,530 12 3 Sewer „ 5,400 0 0 £59,395 0 0 8d. 1s. 8d. 110 It is evident from these figures that there have been no increased rates levied during the current quarter on the demand of the present Vestry over the amount required by their predecessors for the corresponding quarter last year, and that the Vestry's demand for the year ending 25th March 1896 is only £381 in excess of the demand5 for the preceding year; an amount insufficient to affect the rates levied. The Sewer Kate shows an excess of £1,876, or equal to a rate of 1d. in the £ over the preceding year; but this would have been the same even if the old Vestry had remained in office, as admitted in a report presented to the Vestry in March 1894, when the demand for the year ending 25th March 1896 was adopted, the reduction at that period arising from receipts of accumulated balances. Your Committee have examined the demand notes issued to the ratepayers since the 25th March 1887, with the following result #]Rate in the £. Year ending 25th March 1888. 8. d. Poor Rates 2 2 Vestry Rates 2 7 Sewer Rates 0 11 Total 5 8 Year ending 25th March 1889. Poor Rates 2 6 Vestry Rates 2 5 Sewer Rates 1 0 Total 5 11 Year ending 25th March 1890. Poor Rates 2 10 Vestry Rates 2 3 Sewer Rates 0 6 Total 5 7 Year ending 25th March 1891. Poor Kates 2 10 Vestry Rates 2 5 Sewer Rates 0 3 Total 5 6 Tear ending 25th March 1892. Poor Rates 2 8 Vestry Rates 2 7 Sewer Rates 0 3 Library Rates Total 0 5 1 7 Year ending 25th March 1893. Poor Rates 3 0 Vestry Rates 2 8 Sewer Rates 0 3 Library Rates 0 1 Total 6 0 Year ending 25th March 1894. Poor Rates 3 4 Vestry Rates 2 8 Sewer Rates 0 3 Total 6 3 Year ending 15th March 1895. Poor Rates 3 7 Vestry Rates 2 5 Sewer Rates 0 2 Total 6 2 It does not follow because the present quarter's rate is 1s. 8d. in the £ that of necessity the rate for the year will be 6s. 8d. in the £. The same statement was made in the June quarter of 1894, when the first quarter's rate was 1s. 8d. in the £, and in several instances rents were increased in consequence; but the total rate for the year was only 6s. 3d. in the £, as shown by the above statement. It is quite evident that the Vestry's demand will not exceed a rate of 2s. 9d. in the £ for the year, viz. General Rate 2s. 6d. and Sewer Rate 3d. 2s. 9d.; but your Committee have no knowledge of what the Poor's Rate will amount to, neither have they any control over this expenditure ; and therefore should the rates for the present year exceed the rates of 1893-4, the Vestry will be in no way responsible. The present agitation appears to your Committee to have been brought about by the act of the old Vestry in reducing the General Rate by 2d. in the £ for the quarter ending 25th March 1895, in anticipation of a contribution under the Equalisation of Rates Act of £5,421 6s. 4d. This contribution was received on the 2nd February 1895, but the old Vestry reduced their demand upon the rating authority by £3,600 in December 1894, leaving only an increased income for the year ending Lady-day 1895 of £1,821 6s. id. This action on the part of the old Vestry was in the opinion of your Committee unwise, having regard to the fact that they had contracted for the construction of slop bays at the Town Depot at a cost of £2,100 Repairs to Hydraulic Machinery 300 School Board Precept, under-estimated by 900 Making a total of £3,300 111 112 not provided for by their estimates or loans. In addition they also increased tho wages of the dustmen from the 22nd November 1894, for which no provision had been made in the estimates. The following resolution was adopted on the 24th July 1895, on the motion of Mr. Fell: — That this Vestry urge on the Governors and Guardians to introduce a more economical scheme of rate collecting at the earliest opportunity. The following further resolution, moved by Mr. Westcott, was adopted on the 5th February 1896 :— That the Vestry enter a strong protest against the action of the Governors and Guardians in refusing to carry out the proposed reforms with reference to the collection of rates in this parish, and calls upon them as a body elected by the Vestry to respect their wishes. Refreshments to Vestrymen. — With regard to this subject of reference the Finance Committee reported on the 17th April 1895 that the items charged for refreshments had been extracted from the accounts for the previous year, and amounted to a total of £111 17s. 0d., of which £32 0s. 6d. was for wine, spirits, beer and cigars ; and deeming this to be not an excessive amount considering the amount of time members were called upon to give to the work of the parish submitted the following recommendation, which was agreed to by the Vestry :— That having regard to the smallness of the amount expended during the year in refreshments to members (and especially in liquid refreshments), the Vestry be advised not to alter the existing arrangements, and that the reference be discharged. The Public Auditors having again drawn attention to the subject in a letter to the Vestry dated 11th January 1896 upon the result of their audit of the accounts, the Committee reported on the 19th February that the amount spent on refreshments during the half-year ending September 1895 was £27 17s. 0d., including £3 8s. 1d. for alcoholic drinks and cigars; and feeling that the expenditure on refreshments was now kept within very reasonable limits, and that if any further reduction was to be made it would be better to do away with refreshments altogether, advised the Vestry to adhere to its former resolution above cited. This was agreed to after some discussion. 113 Southwark and Vauxhall Water Company—Trenches Account.—This dispute was finally settled early iu the year by the Vestry accepting the cheques as drawn by the Company—i.e. less the deductions made from the Vestry's accounts. The total amount in dispute was under £50, and it was thought better to sacrifice this rather than resort to legal proceedings. Vestry Clerk and Public Auditors.—The Auditors having made a complaint to the Vestry, in a letter addressed to the chairman on the 2nd October 1895, to the effect that they had been prevented from proceeding with their audit of the Vestry's accounts for 1894-5 through the refusal of Mr. Dunham to produce the books and vouchers, notwithstanding their repeated applications to him to do so, the matter was referred to the Finance Committee for investigation. The Clerk having explained the actual position of matters and his own action therein to the full satisfaction of the Committee, the latter reported the facts and submitted the following recommendation to the Vestry on the 16th October, when it was adopted:— That the Auditors be informed that the books will shortly be ready for their inspection ; and that in the meantime, in view of the fact that the Finance Audit Sub-Committee have satisfied themselves and the Finance Committee that the books are very satisfactorily kept, the Vestry regret that the Auditors should have taken such unnecessary strong steps to bring the matter before the Vestry. School Board for London—Precept of.—The Board's precept for the half-year ending Michaelmas 1895 (issued in December 1894) amounted to the sum of £10,317 14s. 7d., and for the second halfyear to Lady Day 1896 (issued in July 1895) to £12,580 15s. 2d.— total for the year £22,898 9s. 9d., the largest sum ever yet levied upon the parish. The excess of the second precept over the first was so considerable—being no less than £2,263 0s. 7d., nearly equal to a rate of 1 ¼d. in the £—that the Vestry resolved on the 13th November to make a special demand upon the Governors and Guardians for £1,800, and to state on the demand notes issued to the ratepayers the purpose for which the money was required, as no provision had been or could have been made in the estimates to meet this large unforeseen increase. h 114 Letters containing protests against the constantly increasing expenditure of the Board were received from several Vestries and District Boards, with suggestions for a conference, &c.; but the Vestry decided on the 2nd and 16th October to take no action thereon. The following return shows the amounts raised in the General Rates of the parish for educational and election purposes since the passing of the Elementary Education Act, 1870 :— For the year ending Lady-day, 1873 £1,120 12 0 do. do. 1874 926 7 3 do. do. 1875 2,481 14 8 do. do. 1876 3,995 18 1 do. do. 1877 6,063 17 9 do. do. 1878 7,605 11 9 do. do. 1879 7,591 4 5 do. do. 1880 8,203 18 3 do. do. 1881 9,526 18 9 do. do. 1882 9,844 17 5 do. do. 1883 9,828 11 0 do. do. 1884 11,567 7 11 do. do. 1885 13,704 5 4 do. do. 1886 15,040 14 0 do. do. 1887 16,482 2 7 do. do. 1888 15,729 8 10 do. do. 1889 15,109 10 2 do. do. 1890 16,616 5 6 do. do. 1891 19,987 10 4 do. do. 1892 21,050 11 1 do. do. 1893 20,276 12 2 do. do. 1894 20,067 14 9 do. do. 1895 20,868 1 0 do. do. 1896 22,898 9 9 Total £296,588 4 9 Demand upon Rating Authority.—This was sealed by the Vestry on the 20th March 1895, apportioned as follows:-Vestry purposes exclusive of Lighting and Sewers, £28,238 0s. 9d.; Lighting, £4,231 7s. Cd.; Sewers, £5,400 0s. 0d.; School Board, £21,530 12s. 3d.; total, £59,400 0s 0d., being an increase of £386 only on the amount of the previous year's demand. 115 Vestry Expenditure.—The actual expenditure for the year, as shown by the Abstract of Accounts annexed, was as follows : — The following balances remained unpaid at Lady-day, 1896 :— Loan No. 5 from the Friends' Provident Institution, dated £ s. d. 20th April, 1871 800 0 0 London County Council, Loan No. 17, dated 2nd May, 1894 3,135 0 0 Ditto Loan No. 18, dated 1st May, 1895 1,500 0 0 Total as shown at page 127 £5,435 0 0 AS TO GENERAL PURPOSES. Cash expended during the year ending 25th March 1896 £79,527 19 0½ Liabilities at end of year 6,667 2 6½ £86,195 1 7 Less Contractors' and Tradesmen's Accounts left unpaid last year and paid during the present 8,902 18 6 Net expenditure for the year £77,292 3 1 AS TO SEWER PURPOSES. Cash expended during the year ending 25th March, 1896 £6,748 0 8½ Liabilities at end of year 1,175 5 7 £7,923 6 3½ Less Contractors' and Tradesmen's Accounts left unpaid last year and paid during the present 904 5 9½ Net expenditure for the year £7,019 0 6 LOANS FOR TOWN DEPOT. h2 116 The balances remaining unpaid at Lady-day, 1896, were as follows :— £ s. d. London Life Association, Loan No. 9, dated 21st June, 1876 550 0 0 Ditto Loan No. 10, dated 14th March 1877 300 0 0 London County Council, Loan No. 12, dated 18th July, 1877 1,000 0 0 Ditto Loan No. 13, dated 3rd July, 1889 4,140 0 0 Ditto Loan No. 16, dated 24th February, 1892 2,932 0 0 Ditto Loan No. 19, dated 27th November, 1895 10,000 0 0 Total as shown at page 125 £18,922 0 0 LOAN FOR WALWORTH ROAD FORECOURTS. London County Council, Loan No. 14, dated 18th June, 1890, balance unpaid as shown at page 127 £3,750 0 0 LOAN FOR BROCK WELL PARK. London County Council, Loan No. 15, dated 25th March, 1891, balance unpaid as shown at page 127 £4,170 0 0 By order of the Vestry. L. J. DUNHAM, Clerk to the Vestry. October, 1896. LOANS FOR NEW PAVING WORKS. 117 Statement of Account of the amount of all Contracts entered into and Monies received and expended by the Vestry of the Parish of St. Mary, Newington, in the County of Surrey, and of all Monies owing to and due from the Vestry, between the 25th March, 1895, and the 25th March, 1896. Name of Contractor. Description of Work and Materials Contracted for. Amount of Materials and Work done under each Contract during the above period. Duration of Contract. £ s. d. Wandsworth District Reception of Dust at Board of Works Country Depots 313 5 8 1 year ,, E. & H. Beevers Broken Granite 4,334 15 10 Do. Paving Materials 1,516 4 6 ,, Patent Victoria Stone Co. Victoria Stone, &c 559 10 8 ,, F. Rosher & Co., Ltd. Lime and Cement .. 763 6 8 ,, W. A. Rose & Co. Oils, Carbolic Acid, &c 238 7 2 ,, Moser & Sons Ironmongery 281 10 0 ,, Addington Timber Co. Timber 64 2 10 ,, White & Co Drain Pipes 196 3 3 ,, Badham & Co Gulley Grates, &c 115 2 4 ,, A. Thompson Scavengers' Brooms . 209 15 0 ,, J. & S. Tree Winding, &c., Tower Clock 5 0 0 ,, Drake, Driver & Leaver, Ltd Stationery 107 10 7 ,, R. Tilling Printing 592 9 10 3 years W. C. Benedict Attending to Trees,&c 60 0 0 5 „ 118 Abstract of Accounts of the Vestry of from the 25th day of March, 1895, 1895. RECEIPTS. £ t. d. March 26th. Balance brought forward 2,773 18 9½ Balance—Clerk, Wages Accounts 176 14 2½ From the Governors and Guardians—Amount of Demand of 20th March, 1895 55,800 0 0 From Loans Account—Transfer 1,168 10 5 From various persons for Mixture and Ashes 4,785 19 1 From the London County Council—Equalisation of Rates Fund 10,853 3 0 Ditto, Moiety of Salaries of Sanitary Staff 296 5 9 Ditto, Loan for Hydraulic Machinery 1,500 0 0 From the Baths Commissioners—Ground Rent 203 0 0 From the Wandsworth District Board of Works— re Shoot for Rough Dust at Longfield & Sever.oaks 311 17 6 From the Metropolitan Asylums Board—Notification Fees 113 2 6 From the London Tramway Company—Maintenance 19 19 6 From Gas and Water Companies—Trenches 2,049 11 6 From Mr. Matthews and others—re Shoot for Rough Dust, Ground, &c., at Town Depot 220 14 5 From the Lambeth and Southwark Police Courts— Fines, &c. 282 13 0 From the Royal Fire Office—Damages from Fire to Town Depot premises 137 19 8 From the Cottages at Sevenoaks Depot—Rents 63 0 4 Ditto, Longfield Depot—Rents 26 0 0 From the Allotment Gardens at Meopham—Rents 8 0 0 From the Manor Place property—Rents 43 15 5 From the Coroner's Court—Fees 18 4 0 From the Fishmongers' Company—Cleansing 8 0 0 From the Owners of Red Lion Mews—Cleansing. 4 2 0 From various persons for Trade Refuse 49 10 0 Ditto—For Paving Works, Scaffold Fees, &c. 256 1 11 From the Sale of Old Stores 9 18 0 From Interest on Account 0 17 6 Balance against Clerk—Wages Accounts 170 19 5 Carried forward £81,351 17 11 the Parish of St. Mary, Newington, Surrey, to the 25th day of March, 1896. 1895. EXPENDITURE. £ s. d. March 26th. Public Street Lighting-South Metropolitan Gas Co. 4,024 12 7 Broken Granite—Beevers & St. Saviour's Guardians 4,426 16 7 Broken Pit and Surface Flints—Coulson, Freeman, Rogers, Cremer, Hickmott and Brice 468 15 0 Thames Ballast—Shelbourne & Co. 229 12 4 Road Grit and Sand-Thames Sand Co. and Balaam Bros. 60 3 6 Paving Material—Beevers and Victoria Stone Co. 1,693 11 1 Paving Works—Valde Travers Asphalte Company and Improved Wood Company 1,128 16 4 Water for Roads—Lambeth & Southwark Water Companies 635 5 3 Waste Salt—Burford & Co. 187 12 0 Horse Hire in addition to Stud—Bower & Murrell 500 12 2 Veterinary Fees—Price 50 2 3 New Harness and Repairs—Ede & Pinner 106 4 5 Fodder for Horses Ladds, Wellband, French, Winch, Tongue, Underwood, Taylor and Son, A. C. Taylor, Taylor & Gardiner, Paull & Son, and Howell & Co. 1,228 9 10 Plant for Cleansing Roads—Collection of Dust, including Repairs to Carts 923 9 9 Smith's Work and Ironmongery —Moser & Son, Lynda, Bartholomew and Smith 286 6 4 Lime and Cement—Rosher & Co. 596 10 0 Carriage of Mixture and Ashes, including Flints, Fodder, &c.—London, Chatham & Dover Railway Company 5,064 10 9 Depot—Coals, Coke, Oils. Gas and Water 512 4 3 Do. —Rope, &c., and Repairs to Machinery, including Fittings 136 4 7 Do. Alteration to Water Mains 44 11 11 Do. Agency Charges 250 8 2 Do. AdjustingWeighbridges,Repairs and New Bridge at Sevenoaks Depot 158 8 0 Do. Sevenoaks Cottages, Bricks, Timber, Stoves, &c. 404 12 9 Do. Lime, Sulphate of Iron, &c. 83 6 1 Do. New Hydraulic Machinery and Repairs— Armstrong & Co. and Marsland 2,214 6 4 Carried forward £25,415 12 3 119 120 RECEIPTS. Brought forward £81,351 17 11 Carried forward £81,351 17 11 121  EXPENDITURE. £ S. d. Brought forward 25,415 12 3 Depot—New Slop Bays — Marsland, Dorman, Young & Co., and Val de Travers Asphalte Co. 1,393 18 4 Do. Commission on Works—Roche 211 7 0 Do. New Incinerator — Marsland, Manlove, Alliott & Co. and Plumbe 999 17 3 Do. New Dock Walls — Meopham—Coping Bricks, &c. 89 8 0 Do. Rent of Telephone Wire 9 7 6 Do. Mansion House Association—Subscription 5 5 0 Do. Schools—Meopham, Longfield & Sevenoaks 4 4 0 Do. Ploughing Matches—Award for Roots, &c. 15 15 0 Do. Country Depots—Inspection 34 15 0 Medical Certificates—Notification Fees 112 5 0 Coroner's Court—Gas, Water, &c. 10 0 10 Disinfectants—New Bedding, &c. 44 2 8 Manor Place Property— Ground Rent 145 0 0 Analyst's Fees—Dr. Muter Tower Clock—Winding, Gas, and Wages 288 15 0 29 2 0 Tree Contract—Benedict 60 0 0 Mortality Returns 31 19 10 Sanitary Department—Telegrams—Petty Cash 54 10 0 Advertisements 48 12 3 Workmen's Holiday—Contribution 40 0 0 Sick and Funeral Donations—King, Newman 20 10 0 Electric Lighting—Board of Trade Advertisements, &c. 89 10 0 Law Charges—re Simpson—Mount Street Cottages —Water Inquiry— New Loans and Street Obstructions, &c. 180 0 6 Penrose Street Property—Purchase of Nos. 26 and 28, and Valuation 915 15 0 Uniforms—Minter 7 7 0 Rent and Insurance—Railway Arches £328 13 4 Do. Vestry Hall and Offices 64 13 4 393 6 8 Rates and Taxes—Depots 270 0 1 Do. Vestry Hall, including Gas and Water 136 9 3 Queen's Taxes—Income Tax deducted from Loans 33 3 5 Vestry Hall—Repairs and Fittings 30 6 7 Printing and Stationery 491 3 3 Stamps and Postages 61 4 8½ Carried forward £31,672 13 44 122 RECEIPTS. Brought forward £81,351 17 11 £81,351 17 11 ASSETS. £ s. d. Balance brought down 1,657 16 7½ Ditto — Clerk —Wages Accounts 166 2 3 From various persons for Mixture and Ashes 5,072 4 5 From Gas and Water Companies—Trenches 687 12 3½ From Metropolitan Asylums Board—Fees 29 17 0 £7,613 12 7 123 EXPENDITURE. £ s. d. Brought forward £31,672 13 4½ Salaries and Proportion of Salaries 3,506 0 4 Loans—Instalments and Interest—London County Council, London Life Association, and Friends' Provident Institution 3,623 5 4 School Board for London—Amount of Precepts 22,898 9 9 Manual Labour—Roads, including Wheelwrights' Shop and New Footway Works £5,868 0 5 Do. Cleansing and Watering 3,977 11 7 Do. Depot, including Dung collection and Structural Works 4,665 12 8 Do. Dust, including Collection and Disposal 3,037 17 5 17,549 2 1 Sundry small Payments, including Petty Cash 194 4 5 Interest on Overdraft 84 3 9 Balance in hands of Clerk on Wages and Petty Cash Accounts 166 2 3 Cash Balance 1,657 16 7½ £81,351 17 11 LIABILITIES. £ «. d. Contractors' and Tradesmen's Accounts outstanding 6,667 2 6½ Balance 946 10 0½ £7,613 12 7 124 LOANS 1895. £ s. d. Nov. 27.—Amount of Loan (No. 19) from the London County Council 1896. 10,000 0 0 Mar. 25th.—Interest on Account 7 12 3 £10,007 12 3 AS TO LOANS FOR 1895. £ s. d. March 26th.—Balance brought forward 10,999 0 0 Amount of Loan (No. 19) 10,000 0 0 £20,999 0 0 125 CURRENT ACCOUNT. 1896. £ s. d. Mar. 25th.—Amount transferred to General Current Account 1,168 10 5 Cash Balance 8,839 1 10 £10,007 12 3 NEW PAVING WORKS. 1895. £ s. d. April 1—London County Council—6th Instalment of Loan of 3rd July, 1889 460 0 0 June 21—London Life Association—19th Instalment of Loan of 21st June, 1876 550 0 0 July 1 —London County Council — 18th Instalment of Loan of 18th July, 1877 500 0 0 1896. Jan. 1—London County Council—4th Instalment of Loan of 24th February, 1892 267 0 0 March 4th—London Life Association—19th Instalment of Loan of 14th March, 1877 300 0 0 ,, 25th—Balance remaining unpaid 18,922 0 0 £20,999 0 0 126 AS TO LOANS FOR 1895. £ s. d. March 25th.—Balance brought forward 4,233 6 8 May 15th.—Amount of Loan (No. 18) 1,500 0 0 £5,733 6 8 AS TO LOAN FOR WALWORTH 1895. £ s. d. March 25th.—Balance brought forward 4,000 0 0 £4,000 0 0 AS TO LOAN FOR 1895. £ s. d. March 25th.—Balance brought forward 4,336 0 0 £4,336 0 0 127 TOWN DEPOT AND MACHINERY. 1895. £ s. d. April 1st.—London County Council—1st Instalment of Loan of 2nd May, 1893,. 165 0 0 ,, 17th.—Friends' Provident Institution — 24th Instalment of Loan of 20th April, 1871 133 6 8 1896. March 25th.—Balanco remaining unpaid 5,435 0 0 £5,733 6 8 £ t. d. 250 0 0 3,750 0 0 £4,000 0 0 BROCKWELL PARK. 1895. £ d. October 1st —London County Council - 5th Instal1896. ment of Loan of 25th March, 1891 166 0 0 March 25th. —Balance remaining unpaid 4,170 0 0 £4,336 0 0 128 AS TO SEWER 1895. RECEIPTS. £ d. March 25th.—From the Governors and Guardians— Amount of Demand of March 20th, 1895 5,400 0 0 From various persons for Branch Drains 700 18 10 Do. Pence, Public W.C's . 333 16 6 Balance against 681 4 1½ £ 7,115 19 5½ 129 PURPOSES ONLY. PAYMENTS. £ s. d. 1895. March 26th.—Balance brought forward 309 9 3½ 1896. March 25th.—Water for Flushing, including Service to Tank Lambeth and Southwark Water Companies 314 10 8 Drain Pipes—White & Co. and Albion Drain Co 245 12 8 Lime and Cement—Rosher & Co. 140 16 0 Timber—Ware & Son 87 14 2 Gulley Grates and Manhole Covers—Badham & Co. and Waller & Co. 141 3 9 Bricks—Hickmott 44 10 9 Ironmongery—Moser & Sons 32 2 11 Plumbing—Groves & Son and Finch 31 10 3 Paint, Oils, &c.—Rose & Co. Coke—Watching Trenches—South Met. Gas Co... 138 14 11 17 10 0 Gas—Public W C.'S 29 0 10 Drain Testers—Kemp 22 15 0 Drain Stoppers—Jones 8 8 6 Thames Ballast—Shellbourne & Co. 23 9 5 Horse Hire—Bower 36 14 6 Disinfecting Van—Malham 62 10 0 Gurney Street Houses—Smith, Fees 17 0 0 Brooms, Tools, &c.—Thompson & Hathway 11 9 6 Flusher's Boots—Clarke 13 16 0 Disinfectants—Adcock, Easton & Co. 14 12 7 Uniforms—Minter 9 3 6 Salaries and proportion of Salaries 927 3 1 Rates and Taxes, including Gas and Water 68 4 6 Rent and Insurance—Vestry Hall 32 6 8 Printing and Stationery 245 11 6 Manual Labour (including Smiths' Shop) 3,656 10 5½ Sundry other small paymens to Tradesmen and from Petty Cash 374 18 6 Balance—Clerk, Wages Account 58 9 6½ £7,115 19 5½ 130 ASSETS. £ d. Balance Wages Account 58 9 6½ From various persons for Branch Drains 288 7 10½ Balance against 828 8 2 £1,175 5 7 SUMMARY OF LOANS UNPAID. 1896. £ s. d. March 25th.—Nos. 5, 17 and 18, Town Depot 5,435 0 0 „ 9, 10, 12, 13, 16 & 19, Paving 18,922 0 0 No. 14, Walworth Road Forecourts 3,750 0 0 ,, 15, Brockwell Park 4,170 0 0 £32,277 0 0 131 LIABILITIES. £ s. d. Balance brought down 681 4 1½ Contractors' and Tradesmen's Accounts outstanding 494 1 5½ £1,175 5 7 CASH BALANCES. £ s. d. Balance in favour of General Purposes 1,657 16 7½ Less Balance against Sewers do 681 4 ½ 976 12 6 Balance on Loans Account 8,839 1 10 Balance as per Treasurer's Account £9,815 14 4 We, the Auditors of the Parish of St. Mary, Newington, hereby certify that we have examined this Balance Sheet in detail, and that it agrees with the Cash Book and is therefore correct. (Signed) E. T. HAMEL. ROBT. WESTCOTT. E SMART. W. J. DOBSON. October 23rd, 1896. ANNUAL REPORT OF ACTING SURVEYOR OF ROADS, 1895-6. Statement of Works performed in the Roads Department during the year ending 25th March 1896. The principal works of repair to the roads of the parish were executed in following streets, viz.:— Footways.—Kennington Park Road, St. Agnes Place, Newington Causeway, St. Paul's Road, Grosvenor Terrace, Royal Road, Chapter Road, Boundary Lane, Boyson Road, Montpelier Street, Crampton Street, Manor Place, Great Dover Street, Union Square, South Place, Paul's Passage, Sutherland Street, Globe Street, Alvey Street, Stopford Road, Lorrimore Road, Westmoreland Road, Heiron Street, Marsland Road, Dante Road, Cook's Road, Mina Road, Cross Street, Doddington Grove. Paved Carriagewayn and Channels.—Newington Butts, Camberwell Road, Draper Street, Newington Causeway, " Elephant and Castle " Headway, Walworth Road, Kennington Park Road, New Kent Road, Paul's Passage, Hearn's Buildings, Tisdale Place. Channels. — Boyson Road, South Place, Meadow Row, Wooler Street, Portland Street, Hampton Street, Morecambe Street, Elsted Street, Hurlbutt, Place, Union Road, Cross Street, Peacock Street, Hodson Street, Trafalgar Street. Macadamised Carriageways.—Beresford Street, Alsace Street, Munton Road, Grosvenor Park, Royal Road, Theobald Street, Pollock Road, Rockingham Street, South Street, Liverpool Street, Aylesbury 133 Street, Darwin Street, Merrow Street, Mina Road, Dante Road, Harper Street, Union Road, Elephant Road, Flint Street, Gurney Street, Trafalgar Street, Newington Crescent, Cavour Street, Delverton Road, Danson Road, Swan Street, Sayer Street, St. Agnes Place, Meadow Row, Chatham Street, Kingston Street, Crampton Street, Doctor Street, Queen's Row, Elizabeth Street, Larcom Street, Grosvenor Street, New Street, Ralph Street, Adam Street, Union Square, Great Bland Street, Alvey Street, Innis Place, East Street, Thurlow Street, Cotham Street, Tarver Road, Crail Row, St. Paul's Road, Penton Place, Surrey Square, Trinity Square, Brockliam Street, Falmouth Road, Rodney Place, Devonshire Street, Westmoreland Road, Merrick Square, Grosvenor Terrace, Chapter Terrace, Frederick Road, Cook's Road, Portland Street, Paragon Row, Hampton Street, Barlow Street, King and Queen Street, Boyson Road, Hillingdon Street, Sutherland Street, Fleming Road, Bronti Place, Lucas Road, Steedman Street, Rodney Road. In consequence of the numerous defects, a considerable area of the pitched carriageways of Newington Butts, Draper Street and Walworth Road was relaid during the year. The following footway paving works were executed under loan:— Hampton Street, Steedman Street, Union Road in front of Recreation Ground. In connection with the widening of Crampton Street (Improvement) the footways and carriageway of this street between Hampton Street and Newington Butts were newly formod; the footways being paved with 3-in. tooled York and 12 x 6 flat kerb and the carriageway entirely remade by macadam with 4x7 pitched channelling. The footways beyond Hampton Street were also regulated to meet the new lines formed by the improvement. During the year the work of the trench repairs has been unusually heavy, owing to the numerous openings in the roads made by the South Metropolitan Gas Company for laying supplies under the " penny-in-slot" arrangement. There has also been an extra number of crossings laid in footways for private gateway entrances. W. G. COAT, Acting Surveyor of Roads. ANNUAL REPORT OF ACTING SURVEYOR OF SEWERS, 1895-6. Statement of Works performed in the Sewers Department from 26th March 1895 to 25th March 1896, Pipe Sewers Constructed:— Merrick Square.—634 ft. of 12 in. pipe; 4 inspection chambers were constructed, and the old 18-in. brick barrel sewer abolished. Bath Terrace (extension).—179 ft. of 12 in. pipe; 1 inspection chamber constructed. Walcorde Avenue.—210 ft. of 12 in. pipe reconstructed; 1 inspection chamber constructed. Williams Grove.—169 ft. of 9 in. pipe; 2 inspection chambers constructed. Manholes Built. - Larcom Street, Wooler Street, Burton Street, Barlow Street, Portland Street, Amery Place and Gaza Street. Brick Sewers Cast.—Deacon Street, Swan Street, Devonshire Ditch, Newington Crescent, Albert Street, Amelia Street, Manor Place, Sutherland Square, Lorrimore Road, Chapter Road, Cook's Road, Arthur Street, Westmoreland Road, Villa Street, Inville Road, Alvey Street, Bagshot Street, Elsted Street, Rodney Road, Orb Street, York Street, Bedford Street, Gurney Street, Wansey Street, Lion Street, Heygate Street and Standard Street. 135 Pipe Sewers Cast.—Occupation Road, Larcom Street, Angle Street, Revesby Street, Ayliffe Street, Walcorde Avenue, Ventry Place, Ostend Place, Liverpool Street, rear of New Kent Road, Iliffe Street, rear of Victory Place, Deverell Street, Ripley Street, Queen's Row and Gaza Street. Number of gullies cleansed—6,495. Number of gullies constructed—20. Private drain connections were relaid at the public expense at 87, Beresford Street, rear of Nos. 228 to 232, Beresford Street, 169, Kennington Park Road, 178, Great Dover Street, 9, Alvey Street, 68, Deacon Street, 5, 9 and 15, Gurney Street, 93 and 95, Trafalgar Street, 9, Surrey Grove, 2 to 6, Arcot Place, 20, Portland Street and 41, 56 and 62, Arnott Street. Number of private drain connections laid—147. Number of private drains unstopped—41. H. BAKER, Acting Surveyor of Sewers. ANNUAL REPORT of the MEDICAL OFFICER OF HEALTH. I have the honour to submit the health statistics for the year 1895. The number of deaths registered in the Parish of St. Mary, Newington, during the year of 52 weeks, was 2243, and the number of births 4234. The population of the parish was estimated at the middle of the year to be 119,358. The registered deaths were 444, and the registered births 32 more than those of last year. Of the 2243 deaths, 80 died in the Newington Workhouse, Westmoreland Road, in this parish. They comprised 45 belonging to Newington, and 35 to other parishes of the St. Saviour's Union. 664 persons belonging to Newington died outside the parish, in the Asylums Board Hospitals, the General Hospitals, St. Saviour's Infirmary, Champion Hill, and various other institutions. When these have been properly apportioned, the actual or " corrected" number of persons who died belonging to the sanitary area will be found to be 2,872. The death rate, when calculated on this corrected number, is 24.0 per thousand, as against 19.9 last year. The birth rate, which was 35.4 per thousand last year, has been this year at the same point, viz. 35.4 per thousand. k 138 Death rate for the previous 10 years— 1885 21.7 1890 23.8 1886 20.8 1891 24.2 1887 20.6 1892 24.4 1888 17.4 1893 24.2 1889 19.5 1894 19.9 The mean death rate for the ten years, 1885-1894, is 21.6. Birth rate for the previous 10 years— 1885 37.2 1890 34.5 1886 35.0 1891 36.2 1887 33.9 1892 35.0 1888 32.8 1893 36.9 1889 31.9 1894 35. 4 Mean birth rate for the ten years, 1885-1894, 34.8. Deaths registered in the Parish— The following are the ages at death :—794 persons died under the age of 1 year, 470 from 1 to 5 years, 553 from 5 to 60 years, 163 from 60 to 70 years, 188 from 70 to 80 years, 71 from 80 to 90 years, and 4 from 90 years and upwards. Causes of Death in those Registered— 1. Measles 127 cases, Scarlet Fever 5, Whooping Cough 66, Diphtheria 30, Enteric FeVer 8, Diarrhoea 105, Syphilis 14, Erysipelas 4, Puerperal Fever 4, Alcoholism 7, Cancer 61, Tabes Mesenterica 44, Rheumatic Fever 4, Tubercular Disease of Brain 38, Phthisis 183, Premature Birth 75, Apoplexy and Brain Softening 79, Inflammation of Brain or Membranes 25, Convulsions 76, Heart Disease 99, Bronchitis 349, Pneumonia 225, Enteritis 43, Peritonitis 6, Bright's Disease 20, Influenza 48, and Old Age 87. 2. Fractures and Contusions 20, Burns 2, Children accidentally suffocated in bed 27, otherwise 3. 139 3. Suicide by Poison 2, by Stabbing 1. 4. Infants from Debility and Insufficient Food 177, Hoemorrhage 1, and not-specified causes 1. Uncertified Deaths.—The number of uncertified deaths was 34, or 1.2 per cent. of the total number of deaths. Mortuary.—During the year 161 bodies were received into the Mortuary. Number of Inquests held at Mortuary 143 ,, Infectious cases received 5 ,, Brought in for convenience 13 Inquests.—182 were held during the year; 18 in January, 20 in February, 11 in March, 19 in April, 18 in May, 12 in June, 19 in July, 10 in August, 12 in September. 12 in October, 22 in November, 9 in December. The cause of death was found to be Disease and Accidents, arising from excessive drinking, in 8 cases, Injury to Skull by a fall in 10, Injury to Body by a fall in 8, Run Over by a vehicle in 6, Injury to Head by a blow in 2, Children Accidentally Suffocated in bed in 27, otherwise Suffocated in 3, Heart Disease in 23, Apoplexy and Brain Softening in 5, Phthisis in 6, Bronchitis in 6, Accidental Burns through playing with matches in 1, by clothes catching fire in 4, by Explosion of paraffin lamp in 3, Pneumonia in 13, Administration of Chloroform in 2, Malnutrition in Children in 4, Peritonitis, in 2, Convulsions in 10, Syncope from an over-distended stomach in 1, Drowning in 2, Manslaughter in 1, Anthrax in 1, Diphtheria in 1, Embolism in 1, Suicide by stabbing in 1, by Drowning in 3, by taking Oxalic Acid in 2, by Laudanum in 1, by Chlorodyne in 1, by Cyanide of Potassium in 1, by Hanging in 1, and by Carbolic Acid in I. k2 140 CASES OF INFECTIOUS DISEASE Notified to the Medical Officer of Health for Newington, during each Month of the year 1895. Small Pox. 8carlet Fever. Diphtheria Enteric Fever. Typhus Fever. Other Continued Fevers. Puerperal Fever. | Erysipelas Merabranous Croup. Cholera. Total. January •• 29 23 15 •• •• 1 12 1 •• 81 February 1 22 6 6 •• •• 1 9 3 •• 48 March •• 19 6 4 •• •• •• 13 •• •• 42 April •• 14 10 5 •• •• • • 7 3 •• 39 May •• 30 14 4 •• •• • • 5 1 •• 55 June 2 19 33 3 •• •• 1 8 1 •• 67 July 6 41 41 7 •• •• • • 15 2 •• 112 August 4 29 30 9 •• •• 1 12 3 •• 88 September •• 34 21 6 •• •• 1 16 •• •• 78 October 2 73 25 14 •• •• 1 10 •• •• 125 November •• 53 38 9 •• •• 1 17 1 •• 119 December 4 51 15 5 •• •• 2 19 1 •• 97 Total 19 414 262 87 • • 1 9 143 16 •• 951 141 The total number of Deaths in the Sanitary Area with their Ages, apportioned to the several Wards, and the Death-rate in each Ward :— WARD. Kate per 1,000. Under 1 year. 1 to 5. 5 to 15. 15 to 25. 25 to 50. 50 to 60. 60 to 70. 70 and upwards Total. St. Mary's 21.9 132 83 12 16 82 39 42 69 475 St. Paul's 20.9 97 48 8 22 75 42 48 66 406 St. Peter's 25.1 210 129 20 20 121 48 63 91 702 St. John's 30.1 289 217 16 29 152 62 58 70 893 Trinity 22.0 128 55 8 13 68 29 46 49 396 Total 24.0 856 532 64 100 498 220 257 345 2872 142 DEATHS IN THE SANITARY AREA FROM THE PRINCIPAL ZYMOTIC DISEASES. With the Annual Rate per 1,000 persons living. Population at 1891 Census, 115,663. Estimated at middle of 1895, 119,358 Total Births in 1895, 4,234. Total Deaths in 1895, 2,872. Total. Small Pox. Measles. Scarlet Fever. Diphtheria. Whooping Cough. Typhus Fever. Enteric Fever. Diarrhoea. Cholera. Deaths under 1 year to 1,000 Births registered. 4 132 16 52 71 .. 15 110 .. •• The Zymotic Kate per 1000 a nd In fant Rate. 3.33 00.3 1.1 0.13 0.43 0.59 0.00 0.12 0.92 0.00 201 The Zymotic Rate for the w hole of London and lnfant Rate. 2.62 0.01 0.60 0.19 0.52 0.34 0.00 0.14 0.82 0.00 165 Birth Rate for London, 1895 30.5 Do. Newington 36.4 Death Rate for London 19.4 Do. Newington 24.0 Birth Rate for London, 1885-1894 31.8 Do. Newington 34.8 Death Rate for London 19.8 Do. Newington 21.6 143 CASES OF INFECTIOUS DISEASE Notified to Medical Officer of Health for Newington, during the year 1895, occurring in the several Wards:— Small Pox. Scarlet Fever. Diphtheria. Enteric Fever. Typhus Fever. Other Continued Fevers. Puerperal Fever. Erysipelas. Membranous Group. Cholera. Total. St. Mary's Ward 4 88 95 10 .. 1 5 31 5 .. 239 St. Paul's Ward 1 48 33 16 .. .. .. 24 3 .. 125 St. Peter's Ward 1 92 34 16 .. .. 1 42 3 .. 189 St. John's Ward 6 122 64 25 .. .. 2 29 4 .. 252 Trinity Ward 7 64 36 20 .. " 1 17 1 .. 146 19 414 262 87 .. 1 9 143 16 .. 951 DEATHS IN THE SANITARY AREA FROM THE PRINCIPAL ZYMOTIC DISEASES IN THE VARIOUS WARDS. WARD. Smallpox. Measles. Scarlet Fever. Diphtheria. Whooping Cough. Enteric Fever. Diarrhoea. Phthisis. Pneumonia and Bronchitis. Heart Disease. St. Mary's 1 12 1 21 13 4 17 45 98 29 St. Paul's .. 6 6 7 11 2 12 31 94 23 St. Peter's 1 38 3 8 20 1 33 75 178 49 St. John's .. 57 4 10 21 5 33 111 212 36 Trinity 2 19 2 6 6 3 15 42 103 22 Total 4 132 16 52 71 15 110 304 685 159 144 Small Pox.—The deaths from Small Pox were 4 during the year, the total number of cases notified was 19. As was the case last year, I am glad to say that in no single instance did the disease spread beyond the tenement in which the case occurred. All the cases were removed at once to the hospital and the bedding destroyed. Deaths from Small Pox during the last ten years— 1886 — 1891 — 1887 — 1892 — 1888 — 1893 6 1889 — 1894 2 1890 — 1895 4 Tho annual rate per 1.000 living was .03. Scarlet Fever. The deaths from Scarlet Fever were 16, as against 19 last year. The total number of cases notified was 414 this year, and 550 last year. All the houses in which the cases occurred were examined, and the sanitary defects found to exist were remedied. Deaths from Scarlet Fever during the last 10 years— 1886 33 1891 17 1887 91 1892 45 1888 36 1893 51 1889 43 1894 19 1890 37 1895 16 The annual rate per 1,000 living was .13. Of the 414 cases notified, 177 were removed to hospital with 11 deaths, a mortality of 6 per cent. 237 were treated at home with 5 deaths, a mortality of 2 per cent. ■« i* 8 5 - * < r , - 145 DIPHTHERIA. The deaths from this disease have diminished in the year, the number being 52 this year and 61 last year. All the houses were inspected and the drainage thoroughly examined. The number of notifications was 262 this year, and 295 last year. Deaths from Diphtheria during the last 10 years— 1886 13 1891 44 1887 27 1892 38 1888 18 1893 93 1889 55 1894 61 1890 32 1895 52 The annual rate per 1,000 living was .43. Of the 278 cases notified, 90 were removed to hospitals of the Asylums Board, with 12 deaths; a mortality of 13 per cent. 188 were treated at home and in general hospitals, with 40 deaths, a mortality of 21 per cent. TYPHOID FEVER. The number of cases notified during the year was 87, and the number last year 83. The deaths from Typhoid Fever were 15 this year, and 14 last year. Deaths from Typhoid Fever during the last 10 years— 1886 8 1891 12 1887 16 1892 10 1888 12 1893 13 1889 22 1894 14 1890 18 1895 15 The annual rate per 1,000 living was .12. Of the 87 cases notified, 40 were removed to hospitals of the Asylums Board, with 2 deaths, a mortality of 5 per cent. 47 were treated at home and in general hospitals, with 13 deaths, a mortality of 27 per cent. 146 WHOOPING COUGH. This disease has been responsible for 72 deaths. The number last year was 75. Deaths from Whooping Cough during the last 10 years :— 1886 68 1891 115 1887 138 1892 93 1888 74 1893 109 1889 72 1894 75 1890 87 1895 72 The annual rate per 1,000 living was -59. The monthly mortality was :— January, 3; February, 1; March, 12; April, 12; May, 7; June, 8; July, 7; August, 6; September, 5; October, 2; November, 2; December, 7. TYPHUS FEVER. No death from this complaint occurred during the year, and no case was notified. MEASLES. Many cases have been fatal in this complaint during the year. The total number of deaths was 132, as compared with 103 last year. Deaths from Measles during the last 10 years: — 1886 84 1891 31 1887 84 1892 182 1888 29 1893 34 1889 114 1894 103 1890 103 1895 132 The annual rate per 1,000 living was 1.1. . The monthly mortality was:— January, 1; February, 2; March, 0; April, 0; May, 0; June 2; July, 2; August, 6; September, 8; October, 17; November, 52; December, 42. 147 The locality most affected was that of St. John's, and owing to the crowded condition of that Ward, the mortality, as is seen, was exceptionally high. The Jewish Schools being situated in St. John's Ward and receiving pupils from all parts of London, it was thought advisable to close them for a short time. I am distinctly of opinion that, during this severe epidemic, had the complaint been a notifiable one, we should have been in a better position to render more effective assistance than we did, apart altogether from hospital accommodation for the infected sick. Little Mount Street.— On February 11th, 1895, I made the following report to the Public Health and Sanitary Committee: "I have inspected the houses, Nos. 1 to 10, in Little Mount Street, and whilst admitting that the Inspectors have done all in their power to render them habitable, I am of opinion that the houses are simply worn out and beyond repairing. I think also that it is useless to proceed against them under 'The Public Health Act,' and advocate the course of representing them to the Vestry under ' The Housing of the Working Classes Act.' The representation would be as follows: I have to represent that houses Nos. 1 to 10 Little Mount Street, Walworth Road, are in a state so dangerous or injurious to health as to be unfit for human habitation; and that opinion has been formed on the following grounds: (1) The houses are structurally worn out, the walls are cracked, the joints of the brickwork are perished, especially in the back walls, and there is no damp course; (2) The ground floor of each room is damp, and in Nos. 1 to 4 it is below the level of the adjoining pavement; (3) In Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 and 6 there is not sufficient light and ventilation; (4) In Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 and 6 the back yards are too small. I advise the Vestry to authorise proceedings to be taken for the closing of these houses." On February 20th the Vestry directed proceedings to be taken, The usual 28 days' notice was then served. During that period the owner took in hand house No. 1, in order to show that it could be repaired and made habitable. A damp course was put in, and the ground floor was covered with 6 inches of concrete and re-floored with wood, the roof and gutters were repaired and new sanitary appliances were put in, the 148 house walls re-pointed back and front, and the interior cleansed from top to bottom. On seeing this I was obliged to admit that if the other houses were treated in a similar way the Vestry would be satisfied and not consider demolition necessary. The owner, however, found the repairs to No. 1 house very costly, and objected to carrying out similar repairs in the others. The hearing of the case took place on May 20th. It was supported by the evidence of the Medical Officer of Health and the Chief Sanitary Inspector; and the owner had Mr. Wynter Blyth, Medical Officer of Health of Marylebone, and Dr. Corfield, Medical Officer of Health of St. George's, Hanover Square. On cross-examination, the Medical Officers appearing for the owner admitted that important repairs were very necessary. The Magistrate ultimately adjourned the case for 21 days to see if the owner complied with the requirements of the Vestry. Various adjournments took place to July 24th. The Magistrate was in favour of the action taken by the Vestry, and would have granted a closing order but for Counsel for Defendant expressing his willingness to carry out necessary repairs. In the end the case was adjourned sine die to enable the Defendant to meet the requirements of the Vestry, and on the work being completed the case ended. Pullen's Buildings. — A summons was taken out against Mr. Pullen in respect of an alleged nuisance arising from the sinks and closets of Nos. 90 and 104, Pullen's Buildings, Manor Place, and heard on May 1st. The original inspection was made, on complaint from the tenants of foul smells from the sinks in the washhouses and the waterclosets. The Medical Officer of Health and the Chief Sanitary Inspector investigated the complaint, and were satisfied that a nuisance calling for the intervention of the Vestry existed at these houses. The defective conditions were that the sink waste pipe emptied over a surface gully in the floor of the washhouse, the air of which was the same as that in the living room; that the pipe from the gully led directly into the soil pipe, and that the waterclosets were four in number to each soil pipe, and were situated one above the other in a vertical line without any 149 ventilating pipes to the closet traps. Mr. Hopkins, the magistrate, decided to visit the buildings, and after an adjournment of 14 days, and after his inspection, he agreed with the Vestry that the system of drainage was old-fashioned, and that they were quite right in trying to improve matters, but that at his visit he could not detect any offensive smell at the sink or closets, and therefore he felt bound to dismiss the summons This case shows that, although a foul gully in the house may be rightly complained of as dangerous to health, it is very difficult to prove it a nuisance before the magistrate, when the tenants are afraid to come forward, and the owner has had everything cleansed before his witnesses are allowed to see it. SLAUGHTERHOUSES AND COWSHEDS. The following Slaughterhouses were inspected during the year:— John Cuss 70, Union Road. Thomas Ferris 244, Walworth Road. Alfred J. Mitchell 283, Walworth Road. Alfred J. Mitchell 285, Walworth Road. Charles Newberry 129, Hillingdon Street. Charles Skinner 3, Lucas Road. James Webb 11, Walworth Road. George G. Yates 98, Cambridge Street. Richard Knight 389, Walworth Road. George A. Conway 15, Camberwell Road. Also the following Cowsheds:— William Copps 17, Mina Road. David Evans 2, Standard Street. Eichard Higgs Grosvenor Street. David Lloyd 21, Globe Street. Charles Smith 8, Alvey Street. They were all found, with the exception of three cases in which the paving had to be repaired, in a clean and satisfactory state. The Milkshops and Dairies were periodically examined throughout the year. 150 BAKEHOUSES. Three complete inspections were made by me during the year, independently of the visits made by the Sanitary Inspectors. I reported to the Vestry that "the number of Bakehouses now in the parish was 75. They comprised 51 on the ground floor, 21 in basements, and three eel pie shops in basements. With the exception of a few cases in which limewashing was necessary, and one in which insanitary conditions existed, they were all found to be in a clean and satisfactory state. The insanitary one has been closed for nearly two years, and is now about to be re-opened. A notice has been served to remedy the defects." The following Nuisances of a varied character were abated:— ST. MARY'S WARD. Overcrowding.— Ventry Place, Horse and Groom Court, Amelia Street, Dante Road (several cases), Pasley Road, Crampton Street, Longville Road, Albert Street, Wesley Place, Penton Place, Penrose Street, De Laune Street, Sturgeon Road, Delverton Road, and St. Paul's Road. Animals.— New Street (Cats), Holyoak Road (Fowls), Tarver Road (Cats), Collitch Place (Dog), Dante Road (Pigeons), Stopford Road (Rabbits), Walworth Road, Newington Crescent, Penton Place and St. Gabriel Street (Fowls); Black Prince Court and Amelia Street (Fowls and Ducks). Manure.— De Laune Street, Newington Butts, Hampton Street, Steedman Street, Amelia Street, Eagle Yard, Kennington Park Road, Penrose Street, Delverton Eoad, and Canterbury Mows. Offensive Refuse and Filth.— New Street, Ventry Place, New Kent Road, Marsland Road, Newington Butts, Churchyard Row, Crampton Street, St. Gabriel Street, Penrose Street, Steedman Street, Canterbury Place, Walworth Road, Peacock Street, Collitch Place and Holyoak Road. General.— Newington Butts (Bones), Walworth Road (Offensive Business); Manor Place, Steedman Street, Tarver Road, Newington Butts and Cavour Street (Offensive Gullies); Hampton Street 151 (Smoke); Walworth Road, Newington Butts, Cavour Street and Penton Place (Stagnant Water); Dante Road (Dirty Lodgers); Elephant Road (Fiscal Matter); Penton Place (Foul Mattresses); and Walworth Road (Smoke). ST. PAUL'S WARD. Overcrowding.— Hillingdon Street and Princes Street. Animals.— Otto Street (Horse); Aldred Road (Fowls); Hillingdon Street (Horse); Otto Street (Fowls). Manure or Offensive Refuse and Filth.— Hillingdon Street, Beresford Street, Lorrimore Street, Penrose Street, and Cook's Road. General.— Montpelier Street and Camberwell Road (Stagnant Water); Beresford Street and Lorrimore Road (Offensive Gullies); also Princes Street (Foul Room and contents). ST. PETER'S WARD. Overcrowding.— Westmoreland Road, Faraday Street, Burton Street, Kinglake Street, Amery's Place, and Cook's Cottages (several cases in each of these streets); also Claremont Terrace, Queen's Row, Hope Street, Eagle Cottages, Villa Street, Date Street, Mount Street, Mann Street, Trafalgar Street, Bronti Place, Ewhurst Court, Clandon Street, Grantham Place, Wooler Street, Sedan Street, Brettall Street, and Bagshot Street. Animals.— Blackwood Sheet, Merrow Street, Queen's Row, and Portland Street (Horses); Ewhurst Court (Ponies and Donkeys); Wooler Street (Donkeys), Westmoreland Road (Goats and Fowls); Walworth Road and Lebanon Street (Fowls); Eagle Cottages (Fowls and Ducks); Cook's Cottages (Rabbits); Little Mount Street (Pony); and Innis Place (Pigeons). Manure.— Westmoreland Road, St. Paul's Mows, Red Lion Mews, Aylesbury Street, Jesmond Street, Clandon Street, Wooler Street, Bronti Place, Brettall Street, Bagshot Street, Liverpool Street, Mann Street, Villa Street, Mina Road, and Queen's Row. Offensive Refuse and Filth.— Boyson Road, Merrow Street, Wooler Street, Queen's Row, Bagshot Street, Villa Street, Surrey Grove, High Park Crescent, Clandon Street, and Mount Street. 152 General.— Beckford Place, Red Lion Row, Walworth Road, and Hope Street (Offensive Gullies; Westmoreland Road and Beckford Place (Stagnant Water); Walworth Road (Offal and Bones); High Park Crescent, Villa Street, and Mount Street (Fish Offal). Red Lion Mews (Bad Meat); Villa Street, Westmoreland Road, Walworth Road, and Camberwell Road (Rotten Fruit and Tomatoes); Surrey Grove and South Street (Smoke); Inville Road (Sack of Onions, etc.); Burton Street (Haddock Smoking); Blackwood Street (Washing Fish); and Surrey Grove (Foul Room and contents). ST. JOHN'S WARD. Overcrowding.— York Street. Wadding Street, Barlow Street, Flint Street, Salisbury Row, East Street, North Row, Rodney Road, Nursery Row, Pollock Road, Elsted Street, Darwin Street, and Flora Terrace; also several cases in each of the following streets, viz.:—South Street, Henshaw Street, Lion Buildings, Beckway Street, Angle Street, Chatham Street, Brandon Street, Hearn's Buildings and Beddome Street. Animals.— Brandon Street and Townley Street (Horses); Henshaw Street (Fowls, Ducks and Rabbits); Townley Street and Angle Street (Ponies); Rodney Road (Pigs); Gurney Street (Goat) ; and Brandon Street (Rabbits). Manure.—Walworth Road, Winch Place, Deacon Street, and Rodney Road. Offensive Refuse and Filth.—Ash Street, Salisbury Buildings, Elsted Street, and Sayer Street. General.—Deacon Street, Osborn Street, and Barlow Street (Foul Room and Contents); Rodney Road and Walworth Road (Stagnant Water); Elsted Street (Fish Offal); Deacon Street (Smoke Hole) ; Rodney Road (Bones); and Townley Sheet (Rag Sorting). TRINITY WARD. Overcrowding.—Union Square, Brunswick Court, King's Place, Tabard Street, and Lower Bland Street. Animals.—Woodman's Place, Devonshire Street, Cole Street, Linwood Place, Union Road, Tabard Street, Gt. Bland Street, 153 Tiverton Street, Theobald Street, Paul's Passage, and Hearn's Buildings (Fowls); New Kent Road (Ducks and Fowls); Paul's Passage (Fowls and Rabbits); Tabard Street (Goat). Manure.— Adam Street, Newington Causeway, Trinity Street, Tabard Street, and New Kent Road. Offensive Refuse and Filth.— Tabard Street, Merrick Square, "Woodman's Place, Arnott Street, Gt. Bland Street, Gt. Dover Street, New Kent Road, Deverell Street, and Arch Street. General.— Gt. Dover Street (Cesspit); Violet Place (Fish); Devonshire Street, King's Place, and Standard Street (Stagnant "Water); County Terrace Street (Offensive Gully); Gt. Dover Street (Smoke); King's Place (Foul Room and Contents); and Harper Street (Offensive Business). Sanitary Work.—The period comprised in this report is from Lady-day, 1895, to Lady-day, 1896, and a summary of work done will be found in Table 14. The work chiefly consisted in providing new drains to houses, water supply and apparatus to closets, new dustbins; removing nuisances caused by accumulations of manure, trade refuse, and animals ill-accommodated; disinfection of rooms, clothing, and bedding; attending at Police Courts; the condemning of unwholesome food; and various other matters. Streets and blocks of houses have been inspected in the following places, viz.:—Camberwell, Pollock, Munton and Lorrimore Roads; Rockingham, Prince's, Great Dover and Larcom Streets; Royal and Kennington Park Roads; King's Place; Cottage Grove and Winch Place; Palmerston, Kinglake, Peacock, Shaftesbury, Townley and Hard Streets; Cook's Road; Beckford Place; Boyson Road and Newington Butts; Harper, Brandon, Darwin and Acre Streets; Mercer's Court, South Place and Merrick Square; Faraday, Beckway and New Streets; Ventry Place; Beresford, Hillingdon, East, Portland and Tarn Streets; Salisbury Buildings; Blendon Row; Ayliffe and Lion Streets; Hurlbutt Place; "Williams Grove; Heiron and Mann Streets; Surrey Square; Elsted, Brandon and Tabard Streets; Elephant Road; Chapter Terrace; De Laune and Thurlow Streets; "Westmoreland, New Kent and Union Roads; Halpin L 154 Place and Paul's Passage; Hodson Street; Marsland Road; Peacock Square; Crampton, Cancel and Angle Streets; Chatham Road; Date Street; Walworth Road; Clandon and Say or Streets; King's Arch Place; North Row; Holyoak Road; Burton, Deacon, Gurney, Graham and Blucher Streets; Cyril, Arthur, Nebraska and Globe Streets; Manchester Buildings, Villa Street and Little Trafalgar Place; Cavour, Olney, Wooler, Charleston and High Streets; Borrett and Sturgeon Roads; Nursery Eow and Lawson Street; Penton Place; Liverpool, Brettall and Arnott Streets; Long Lane, Newington Causeway and Red Lion Mews; Penrose, King and Queen and Otto Streets; Paragon Row, Swan Place, Salisbury Row and Black Prince Court; Eagle Yard, Rodney Road and Little Chatham Place; Dante and Avenue Roads; Kettle and Jerome Places; Bagshot Street, Claremont Terrace, Ewhurst Court and Lestock Place; Uxbridge, Tiverton and Carter Streets; Orb, Sedan, Aldbridge and Hope Streets; Sutherland Square, Namur Terrace, Chatham Row, Arcadia and Globe Buildings; Warren and Devonshire Places and Brunswick Court; St. Gabriel Street; Pullen's Buildings; Violet Place; Flora Terrace; Flinton, Revesby, Bedford and Henshaw Streets; Harmer's Buildings, Manor Place, Grosvenor Terrace and Ostend Place; Eagle and Cook's Cottages, Grantham and Northampton Places and Beddome Street; Goode's Court, Hurlock's and Deans' Buildings; Alvey Mews, Angel and Amery's Places, Falmouth Road and Woodman's Place; Arcot Place, Montpelier Street, Lucas and Longville Roads, Wesley Place and Ash Street. SALE OF FOOD AND DRUGS, AND THE MARGARINE ACTS. Milk. — Four hundred and forty-nine samples were taken. Three hundred and seventy-nine were genuine, and 13 were only slightly adulterated in which no prosecution could be proceeded with. In the latter cases the vendors were cautioned. Proceedings were taken in fifty-seven cases with the following results:— Milk deficient in Cream, 20 per cent.; penalty, 40/- and 12/6 costs. ,, ,, ,, 40 ,, ,, 40/- ,, 12/6 „ ,, ,, ,, 32 ,, ,, 5/- ,, 12/6 „ 155 Milk deficient in Cream, 40 per cent.; penalty, 10/- and 12/6 costs. „ ,, „ 30 „ „ 10/- „ 12/6 „ „ ,, „ 63 „ „ 40/- „ 12/6 „ „ ,, „ 60 „ „ 60/- „ 12/6 „ „ ,, „ 30 „ „ 10/- „ 12/6 „ „ ,, „ 50 „ „ 10/- „ 12/6 „ „ ,, „ 66 „ „ 200/- „ 12/6 „ „ ,, „ 25 ,, ,, 5/- ,, 12/6 „ „ „ „ 25 „ dismissed. „ ,, „ 34 „ withdrawn, sample burst. „ „ „ 93 „ penalty, 10/- and 12/6 „ „ ,, „ 33 „ ,, 40/- ,, 12/6 „ „ ,, „ 36 „ „ 40/- „ 12/6 „ „ ,, „ 80 ,, dismissed, sold as skimmed. „ ,, „ 50 „ penalty, 5/- and 12/6 costs. „ ,, „ 34 „ „ 20/- „ 12/6 „ Extraneous water in Milk 12 „ „ 40/- ,, 12/6 „ „ ,, „ 12 „ „ 20/- „ 12/6 „ „ ,, „ 9 „ 200/- „ 12/6 „ „ ,, „ 24 „ „ 100/- „ 12/6 „ „ ,, „ 10 „ „ 20/- „ 12/6 „ „ ,, „ 20 „ „ 40/- „ 12/6 „ „ ,, „ 20 ,, „ 10/- „ 12/6 ,, „ ,, „ 13 „ „ 10/- „ 12/6 „ „ ,, „ 13 „ „ 20/- „ 12/6 „ „ ,, „ 10 „ „ 20/- „ 12/6 ,, „ ,, „ 14 „ „ 100/- „ 12/6 „ „ ,, „ 20 ,, „ 40/- „ 12/6 ,, „ ,, „ 12 „ „ 20/- „ 12/6 „ „ ,, „ 10 „ ,, 40/_ „ 12/6 „ „ ,, „ 12 „ „ 40/- „ 12/6 „ „ ,, „ 7 „ „ 10/- „ 12/6 „ „ ,, „ 10 „ „ 40/- „ 12/6 „ „ ,, „ 20 „ „ 60/- „ 12/6 „ „ ,, „ 13 „ „ 20/- „ 12/6 „ „ ,, „ 10 „ „ 20/- „ 12/6 „ l 2 156 Extraneous water in Milk 33 per cent.; penalty, 100/- and 12/6 costs. „ ,, „ 20 „ „ 10/- „ 12/6 „ „ ,, „ 20 „ „ 10/- „ 12/6 „ „ ,, „ 10 „ „ 10/- „ 12/6 „ ,, ,, „ 8 withdrawn, sample burst in office. ,, ,, ,, 7 per cent., penalty, 40/- and 12/6 costs. „ ,, „ 17 „ ,, 40/- „ 12/6 „ „ ,, „ 15 „ „ 40/- „ 12/6 „ „ ,, „ 12 „ ,, 20/- „ 12/6 „ „ ,, „ 7 „ ,, 10/- „ 12/6 „ „ ,, „ 7 „ „ 10/- „ 12/6 „ „ ,, „ 15 „ „ 40/- „ 12/6 „ „ ,, „ 20 „ „ 20/- „ 12/6 „ „ ,, „ 13 „ ,, 20/- „ 12/6 ,, „ ,, „ 10 „ ,, 20/- ,, 12/6 ,, „ ,, „ 30 „ „ 20/- „ 12/6 „ „ ,, „ 20 ,, ,, 10/- „ 12/6 ,, „ ,, „ 10 „ „ 20/- „ 12/6 „ Butter.— One hundred and sixty-six samples were taken. One hundred and forty-one were genuine; and 25 were adulterated as follows:— Margarine in Butter 90 per cent.; penalty, 20/- and 12/6 costs. „ ,, 90 „ „ 40/- „ 12/6 „ „ ,, 90 „ „ 40/- „ 12/6 „ „ ,, 65 „ „ 60/- „ 12/6 „ ,, ,, 90 „ dismissed, error in purchase. ,, ,, 55 „ penalty, 20/- and 12/6 costs. „ ,, 75 ,, ,, 10/- ,, 12/6 ,, „ ,, 90 ,, „ 20/- ,, 12/6 „ „ ,, 90 „ „ 20/- „ 12/6 „ „ ,, 75 „ „ 60/- „ 12/6 „ ,, ,, 90 ,, dismissed, not exposed for sale. „ ,, 45 „ penalty, 10/- and 12/6 costs. „ ,, 85 „ „ 2/6 „ 12/6 „ ,, ,, 35 „ dismissed, not exposed for sale. 157 Margarine in Butter, 70 per cent.; penalty, 10/- and 12/6 costs. ,, ,, 40 ,, dismissed, not exposed for sale. „ ,, 84 ,, penalty, 60/- and 12/6 costs. 30 „ „ 40/- „ 12/6 „ „ ,, 85 ,, dismissed, notice on paper sufficient. ,, ,, 85 „ penalty, 100/- and 12/6 costs. „ ,, 85 „ „ 40/- „ 12/6 „ „ ,, 70 „ „ 20/- „ 12/6 „ „ ,, 90 ,, (costs only) 12/6 ,, „ „ 70 ,, „ 80/- and 12/6 „ „ ,, 75 ,, ,, 40/- „ 16/6 „ Coffee.— Twenty-seven samples were taken. Ten were genuine; and seventeen were adulterated as follows : — Chicory in Coffee .. 65 per cent.; penalty, 20/- and 12/6 costs. „ ,, 90 „ „ 40/- „ 12/6 „ ,, ,, 65 ,, dismissed, sold as mixture. ,, „ 70 „ penalty, 20/-and 12/6 costs. „ ,, 60 „ „ 60/- „ 12/6 „ „ ,, 75 „ „ 20/- „ 12/6 „ „ ,, 60 „ „ 60/- „ 12/6 „ „ ,, 60 „ „ 10/- „ 12/6 „ „ ,, 50 „ „ 60/- „ 12/6 „ „ ,, 75 ,, dismissed, label sufficient. „ ,, 60 ,, penalty, 40/-and 12/6 costs. „ ,, 30 ,, dismissed, label sufficient. „ ,, 30 ,, penalty, 100/-and 12/6 costs. „ ,, 70 „ „ 100/- „ 12/6 „ „ „ 40 ,, ,, 40/- ,, 12/6 ,, ,, ,, 56 ,, „ 40/- ,, 12/6 ,, „ ,, 50 „ „ 60/- „ 12/6 „ Mustard.— Seven samples were taken. Five were genuine; and two were adulterated as follows : — Flour and Turmeric in Mustard 40%; penalty, 40/- & 12/6 costs. „ ,, 25 „ „ 40/- „ 12/6 „ 158 Gin.— Three samples were taken. Two were genuine; and one was adulterated with 44 per cent. of water; penalty, 60/- and 12/6 costs. Pepper.— Fourteen samples were taken, all genuine. Whiskey.— Five samples were taken, all genuine. Rum.— Two samples were taken, both genuine. Lard.— One sample taken, genuine. 159 TABLE 1. Table of Population, Births, and of New Cases of Infectious Sickness, coming to the knowledge of the Medical Officer of Health during the year 1895, in the Urban Sanitary District of Newington; Classified according to Diseases, Ages and Localities. Names of Localities adopted for the purpose of these Statistics; public institutions being shown as separate localities. Population at all Ages. Registered Births. Aged under 5 or over 5. New Cases of Sickness in each Locality, coming to the knowledge of the Medical Officer of Health. Number of such Cases Removed from their Homes in the several Localities for Treatment in Isolation Hospital. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 Census 1891. Estimated to middle of 1895. Smallpox. Scarlatina. Diphtheria. Membranous Croup. Fevers. Cholera. Erysipelas. Smallpox Scarlatina. Diphtheria, Membranous Croup. Fevers. Cholera. Erysipelas. Typhus. Enteric or Typhoid. Continued. Relapsing. Puerperal. Typhus. Enteric or Typhoid. Continued. Relapsing. Puerperal. (a) (b) (c) (d) (e) PARISH. Under 5 1 128 87 14 ...... 4 1 ...... ...... ...... 13 ...... ...... 1 43 29 ...... ...... 1 ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... 115,663 119,358 4234 5 upwds. 18 286 175 2 ...... 79 ...... ...... 9 ...... 117 ...... ...... 18 134 61 ...... ...... 35 ...... ...... ...... ...... 5 ...... ...... St. Saviour's Workhouse, Westmoreland Road. Under 5 ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... 2 ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... 2 ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... .......... .......... ...... 5 upwds. ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... 2 ...... ...... ...... ...... 13 ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... 2 ...... ...... ...... ...... 7 ...... ...... Under 5 ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... .......... .......... ...... 5 upwds. ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... Under 5 ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... .......... .......... ...... 5 upwds. ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... Under 5 ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... .......... .......... ...... 5 upwds. ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... Under 5 ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... .......... .......... ...... 5 upwds. ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... Under 5 ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... .......... ...... 5 upwds. ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... Under 5 ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... .......... .......... ...... 5 upwds. ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... Under5 ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... .......... .......... ...... 5 upwds. ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... Under 5 ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... .......... .......... ...... 5 upwds. ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... Under 5 1 128 87 14 ...... 6 1 ...... ...... ...... 13 ...... ...... 1 43 29 ...... ...... 3 ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... .......... .......... ...... 5 upwds. 18 286 175 2 ...... 81 ...... ...... 9 ...... 130 ...... ...... 18 134 61 ...... ...... 37 ...... ...... ...... ...... 12 ...... ...... Totals .......... .......... ...... 19 414 262 16 ...... 87 1 ...... ...... 143 ...... ...... 19 177 90 ...... ...... 40 ...... ...... ...... ...... 12 ...... ...... o o Table 2. Table of Deaths during the year 1895, in the Urban Sanitary District of Newington, classified according to Diseases, Ages, and Localities. Names of Localities adopted for the purpose of these Statistics; public institutions being shown as separate localities. (Columns for Population and Births are in Table 1.) Mortality fbom all causes, at subjoined aoes. Mortality from subjoined causes, distinguishing Deaths of Children under Five Years of Age. 2 3 4 5 6 7 1 » 1 a 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 At all ages Under 1 year. 1 and under 5. 6 and under 15. 15 and under 25. 25 and under 65. 65 and upwards. Smallpox. Scarlatina. Diphtheria. Membranous Croup. Typhus. Fevers. Cholera. Erysipelas. Measles. Whooping Cough. Diarrhoea & Dysentery. Rheumatic Fever. Ague. Phthisis. Bronchitis Pneumonia & Pleurisy. Tleart Disease. Injuries. All Other Diseases. Total. Enteric or Typhoid. Continued. Relapsing. Puerperal. (a) (b) (c) (d) (e) (f) (g) (h) (i) PARISH. 2163 787 471 40 57 519 289 Under 5 ....... 3 26 ....... ....... ....... 1 ....... ....... ....... 2 125 65 95 ....... ....... 25 327 ....... 41 548 1258 5 upwds ....... 2 4 ....... ....... 7 ....... ....... 4 ....... 1 2 1 9 3 ....... 155 221 92 16 388 905 St. Saviour's Workhouse, Westmoreland Road. 80 7 2 ....... 1 24 46 Under 5 ....... ....... ....... ....... ....... ....... ....... ....... ....... ....... ....... ....... ....... 1 ....... ....... 1 1 1 ....... 4 8 5 upwds ....... ....... ....... ....... ....... 1 ....... ....... ....... ....... 1 ....... ....... ....... ....... ....... 2 35 6 ....... 27 72 ....... ....... ....... ....... ........ ........ ........ Under 5 ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ 5 upwds. ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ Under 5 ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ 5 upwds ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ Under 5 ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ 5 upwds. ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ Under 5 ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ 5 upwds. ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ Under 5 ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ 5 upwds. ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ Under 5 ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ 5 upwds. ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ Under 5 ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ 5 upwds. ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ Under 5 ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ 5 upwds. ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ Totals 2243 794 473 40 58 543 335 Under 5 ........ 3 26 ........ ........ ........ 1 ........ ........ ........ 2 125 65 96 ........ ........ 26 328 1 41 552 12661 5 upwds ........ 2 4 ........ ........ 8 ........ ........ 4 2 2 1 9 3 ........ 157 256 98 16 415 977 The subjoined numbers have also to be taken into account in judging of the above records of mortality. Deaths occurring outside the district among persons belonging thereto. 664 66 60 24 42 310 162 Under 5 ........ 6 16 ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ 3 3 3 ........ 10 30 2 4 55 134 5 upwds. 4 5 6 ........ ........ 7 ........ ........ 1 ........ 3 ........ 2 2 2 ........ 112 88 6) 23 217 532 Deaths occurring within the districtamong personsnotbelonging thereto. 35 4 1 ........ ........ 7 23 Under 5 ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ 1 1 ........ 3 5 5 upwds. ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ ........ 1 16 2 ........ 11 30 161 TABLE 3. Mortality in 1895, and Ages at Death. Week ending Births. Deaths. Under 1 year. 1 1 to 5. 5 to 60. 60 to 70. 70 to 80. 80 to 90. 90 & upwards. Week ending Births. Deaths. Under 1 year. 1 to 5. 5 to 60. 60 to 70. 70 to 80. 80 to 90. 90 & upwards.  1895 1895 Jan. 5 97 29 11 7 5 2 3 1 .. July 6 93 46 23 7 10 1 3 2 .. 12 103 38 11 2 17 4 3 1 .. „ 13 72 33 17 11 1 2 2 .. .. „ 19 85 33 11 5 10 2 4 1 .. „ 20 78 51 30 10 5 2 4 .. .. „ 26 74 35 13 1 13 4 4 .. .. „ 27 88 43 30 3 6 3 1 .. .. Feb. 2 88 35 6 6 11 7 4 1 .. Aug. 3 99 47 29 6 10 1 1 .. .. ,, 9 7v 39 13 4 15 4 3 .. .. „ 10 86 45 24 4 11 1 3 1 1 „ 16 89 67 21 2 27 7 9 1 17 73 34 16 12 3 1 2 .. ,, 23 83 81 22 14 18 10 9 7 .. „ 24 78 34 14 5 9 3 2 1 .. Mar. 2 88 96 16 17 28 11 18 6 .. „ 31 80 20 6 3 7 2 1 l .. ,, 9 85 103 21 21 26 0 16 9 .. Sep. 7 80 31 15 6 7 2 1 .. .. „ 16 90 83 9,5 17 18 9 9 5 .. ,, 14 76 18 6 4 6 1 1 .. .. ,, 23 82 57 141 10 16 6 8 3 .. „ 21 73 40 15 9 8 4 3 l .. ,, 30 77 48 14 12 9 8 5 .. .. „ 28 96 39 19 5 10 2 3 .. .. Totals 1120 744 98 118 213 84 95 35 1 Totals 1072 481 244 85 93 25 27 6 1 Apl. 6 101 38 19 6 10 .. 3 .. .. Oct. 5 78 21 10 1 7 .. 3 .. .. „ 13 65 16 15 15 11 .. 5 .. .. „ 12 82 38 18 5 12 2 1 „ 20 78 55 19 12 11 6 5 2 .. „ 1» 90 32 11 10 7 3 1 .. .. 27 97 40 14 9 7 3 4 3 .. „ 26 72 48 26 6 13 1 2 .. May 4 94 36 14 4 11 5 1 1 .. Nov. 2 80 36 11 12 7 1 3 2 .. .. 11 73 36 14 6 9 2 2 2 1 „ 9 66 59 13 22 10 3 8 2 1 „ 18 99 36 12 9 9 1 9 3 .. „ 16 77 49 15 22 10 1 1 .. „ 25 86 34 12 5 10 3 4 .. .. „ 23 75 36 7 17 8 1 3 .. .. June 1 73 32 13 6 9 2 .. 2 .. „ 30 73 51 14 22 9 1 2 3 ,, 8 87 30 9 6 8 3 4 .. .. Dec. 7 66 51 15 16 13 6I 1 .. .. „ 15 83 22 5 3 11 2 1 .. .. ,, 14 49 33 10 10 6 2 4 2 .. „ 22 81 23 0 4 9 3 2 .. .. „ 21 90 53 19 16 14 1 3 .. ,, 29 88 35 19 6 6 2 1 1 .. „ 28 39 48 13 17 11 4 3 .. .. Totals 1 1105 463 170 91 121 32 34 14 1 Totals 937 555 182 176 126 22 32 16 1 Births. Deaths. Under 1 to 5. 5 to 60. 60 to70. 70 to 80. 80 to 90. Over 90. In 1st Qtr 1120 744 198 118 213 84 95 35 1 In 2nd Qtr 1105 463 170 91 121 32 34 14 1 In 3rd Qtr 1072 481 244 85 93 25 27 6 1 In 4 th Qtr 937 555 182 17 126 22 32 16 1 Total in Year 4234 2243 794 470 553 163 188 71 4 162 TABLE 4. Births, Deaths, and Ages at Death in the Twenty-five Years, 1871 — 1895. Year. Births. Deaths. Under 1 1 to 5. 5 to 60. 60 to 70. 70 to 80. 60 to 90. 90 and upwrds. 1871 3463 2371 611 429 891 184 172 75 9 1872 3600 1903 552 291 663 180 161 52 4 1873 3797 2335 627 408 772 216 210 94 8 1874 3981 2326 605 410 767 245 208 84 7 1875 3891 2450 637 480 843 231 182 64 13 1876 4184 2179 593 402 723 206 172 78 5 1877 4205 2328 603 421 853 216 163 62 10 1878 4111 2662 721 499 926 227 193 88 8 1879 4329 2664 639 510 880 314 235 80 6 1880 4150 2510 655 474 841 245 191 97 7 1881 4149 2445 613 413 846 250 218 94 11 1882 4332 2704 716 617 836 251 194 81 9 1883 4225 2541 626 472 875 250 202 107 9 1884. 4302 2723 683 607 885 258 205 78 7 1883 4173 2132 643 352 857 288 199 85 8 1886 4165 2688 689 426 848 289 240 80 16 1887 4045 2381 680 455 739 264 165 73 5 1888 4046 1830 575 322 514 170 173 68 8 1889 3936 2110 654 468 533 172 199 77 7 1890 3877 2199 683 391 644 220 196 62 3 1891 4192 2254 752 34 5 660 234 189 68 6 1892 4094 2184 660 451 596 202 194 75 6 1893 4345 2217 721 360 655 207 178 89 7 1894 4202 1799 616 360 508 157 109 43 6 1895 4234 2243 794 470 553 163 188 71 4 163 TABLE 5. Deaths Registered from all Causes during the Year 1895. AGES. Under 3 months 3 months to 1 year 1 to 2 2 to 6 5 to 15 15 to 25 25 to 35 35 to 45 45 to 55 55 to 65 65 to 75 75 to 85 85 to 95 95 and Upwards Total. I. Specific Febrile, or Zymotic Diseases 53 96 134 55 8 11 12 12 4 11 10 11 ... ... 417 II. Parasitic Diseases 1 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2 III. Dietetic Diseases ... ... ... 1 4 1 ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... 7 IV. Constitutional Diseases 29 45 30 12 9 21 41 55 49 30 20 7 ... ... 348 V. Developmental Diseases 86 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 20 50 16 ... 174 VI. Local Diseases 109 168 175 52 19 24 36 71 102 106 119 68 10 ... 1059 VII. Deaths from Violence 22 12 1 6 ... 1 2 6 1 2 2 2 ... ... 57 VIII. Deaths from Ill-Defined and Not Specified Causes 123 48 7 ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... 179 Totals 423 371 317 126 40 58 91 144 157 151 171 138 26 ... 2243 I.—SPECIFIC FEBRILE, OR ZYMOTIC DISEASES. 1.—Miasmatic Diseases. Small Pox Unvaccinated ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... No Statement ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Measles ... 25 74 26 2 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 127 Scarlet Fever ... ... 1 2 ... 2 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 5 Typhus ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Whooping Cough 3 17 36 9 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 66 Diphtheria 1 1 9 15 3 ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... 30 Simple Continued & Ill-defined Fever ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 Enteric or Typhoid Fever ... ... ... ... ... 3 3 1 1 ... ... ... ... ... 8 Other Miasmatic Diseases ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 2.—Diarrhœal Diseases. Simple Cholera ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Diarrhœa, Dysentery 38 46 12 ... ... ... ... 2 ... 1 4 2 ... ... 105 3.—Malarial Diseases. Remittent Fever ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Ague ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Influenza 1 1 2 1 1 2 7 8 3 8 6 8 ... ... 48 4.—Zoogenous Diseases. Cowpox and effects of Vaccination ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Other Diseases (e.g. Hydrophobia, Glanders, Splenic Fever) ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 5.—Venereal Diseases. Syphilis 9 5 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 14 Gonorrhœa, Stricture of Urethra ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 6.—Septic Diseases. Erysipelas 1 1 ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... 4 Pyæmia, Septicaemia ... ... ... ... ... 1 1 ... ... 2 ... ... ... ... 4 Puerperal Fever ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 4 II.—PARASITIC DISEASES. Thrush, and other Vegetable Parasitic Diseases 1 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2 Worms, Hydatids, and other Animal Parasitic Diseases ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... III.—DIETETIC DISEASES. Want of Breast Milk, Starvation ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Scurvy ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Chronic Alcoholism ... ... ... ... ... 1 3 ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... 5 Delirium Tremens ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... 2 IV.—CONSTITUTIONAL DISEASES. Rheumatic Fever, Rheumatism of the Heart ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2 1 ... ... ... ... ... 3 Rheumatism ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 1 1 ... ... 3 Gout ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2 ... ... ... 2 Rickets ... 1 7 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 8 Cancer, Malignant Diseases ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 5 19 19 12 6 ... ... 61 Tabes Mesenterica 18 23 3 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 44 Tubercular Meningitis, Hydrocephalus 2 14 9 10 2 ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... 38 164 TABLE 5. —Continued.  A GES. Total. Under 1 3 months' 3 months to 1 year. 1 to 2 2 to 5 5 to 15 15 to 25 25 to 35 35 to 45 45 to 55 55 to 65 65 to To 76 to 85 85 to 95 95 and Upwards Phthisis 9 7 10 ... 7 21 40 48 29 10 2 ... ... ... 183 Other forms of Tuberculosis. Scrofula ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 Purpura, Hæmorrhagic Diathesis ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2 Anæmia, Chlorosis, Leucocytlitemia ... ... 1 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2 Glyeosuria, Diabetes Mellitus ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... 2 ... ... ... 3 Other Constitutional Diseases ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... V.—DEVELOPMENTAL DISEASES. Premature Birth 75 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 75 Atelectasis 3 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 3 Congenital Malformations 8 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 9 Old Age ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 20 50 16 ... 87 VI.—LOCAL DISEASES. 1.—Diseases of Nervous System. Inflammation of Brain or Membranes 1 9 7 3 2 1 ... ... 1 1 ... ... ... ... 25 Apoplexy, Softening of the Brain, Hemiplegia, Brain Paralysis 1 ... 1 ... 1 3 3 5 16 16 20 10 3 ... 79 Insanity, General Paralysis of the Insane ... ... ... ... ... ... 2 4 1 1 3 ... ... ... 11 Epilepsy ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 3 2 1 ... ... ... ... 6 Convulsions 38 24 10 4 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 76 Laryngismus Stridulus (Spasm of Glottis) ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Disease of Spinal Cord, Paraplegia. Paralysis Agitans ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 2 ... 3 ... ... ... 6 Other Diseases of Nervous System ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 2.—Diseases of Organs of Special Sense. (e.g. of Ear, Eye, Nose) ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 3.—Diseases of Circulatory System. Pericarditis ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 Acute Endocarditis ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... 2 Valvular Diseases of Heart ... ... ... ... 1 4 5 5 10 9 5 5 ... ... 44 Other Diseases of Heart ... ... ... 1 1 2 2 5 7 15 10 9 ... ... 52 Aneurism ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Embolism, Thrombosis ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... l ... ... 1 ... ... 3 Other Diseases of Blood Vessels ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 4.—Diseases of Respiratory System. Laryngitis ... 1 1 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 3 Croup ... ... 1 3 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 4 Emphysema, Asthma ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... 3 ... ... ... 4 Bronchitis 36 43 81 12 5 ... 5 14 27 32 52 35 7 ... 349 Pneumonia 10 59 61 25 3 3 8 15 15 12 10 4 ... ... 225 Pleurisy ... ... 1 ... ... 1 1 2 ... 1 ... ... ... ... 6 Other Diseases of Respiratory System ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... 2 5.—Diseases of Digestive System. Dentition ... 7 6 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 13 Sore Throat, Quinsy ... ... ... ... 2 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2 Diseases of Stumach ... 2 ... 1 ... 2 2 1 1 2 1 ... ... ... 12 Enteritis 11 22 5 1 ... 1 ... ... 1 ... 1 1 ... ... 43 Obstructive Diseases of Intestine 1 l ... ... 2 ... ... 2 ... ... 2 1 ... ... 9 Peritonitis 2 ... ... ... 1 ... 1 1 ... ... 1 ... ... ... 6 Ascites ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Cirrhosis of Liver ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... 2 5 5 2 ... ... ... 15 Jaundice and other Diseases of Liver 8 ... ... ... ... ... 1 2 ... 2 ... ... ... ... 13 Other Diseases of Digestive System ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 1 ... ... ... ... ... 2 6.—Diseases of Lymphatic System. (e.g., of Lymphatics and of Spleen) ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 7.—Diseases of Gland-like Organs of Uncertain Use. (e.g., Bronchocele, Addison's Disease) ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... 1 8.—Diseases of Urinary System. Nephritis ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 1 1 1 2 ... ... ... 6 Bnght's Disease, Albuminuria ... ... ... ... ... 3 1 1 8 7 ... ... ... ... 20 Disease of Bladder or of Prostate ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 2 ... ... ... 3 Other Diseases of the Urinary System ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 165 TABLE 5.—Continued. [####] AGES. Total. Under 3 months. 3 months to 1 year. 1 to a 2 to 5 5 to 15 15 to 26 25 to 35 35 to 45 45 to 55 55 to 65 65 to 75 75 to 85 85 to 95 95 and Upwwrd 9.—Diseases of Reproductive System. a. Of Organs of Generation. Male Organs ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Female Organs ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... 1 b. Of Parturition. Abortion, Miscarriage ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Puerperal Convulsions ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... 1 Placenta prævia, Flooding ... ... ... ... ... 1 2 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... 4 Other Accidents of Child Birth ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... 2 10.—Diseases of Bones and Joints. Caries, Necrosis ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 Arthritis, Ostitis, Periostitis ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Other Diseases of Bones and Joints ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... 1 11.—Diseases of Integumentary System. Carbuncle, Phlegmon 1 ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... 3 Other Diseases of Integumentary System ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... VII.-DEATHS FROM VIOLENCE. 1.—Accident or Negligence. Fractures and Contusions 4 1 l 5 ... ... 1 4 ... 2 1 1 ... ... 20 Gunshot Wounds ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Cut, Stab ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Burn, Scald ... ... ... 1 ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2 Poison ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2 ... ... ... ... ... ... 2 Drowning ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Suffocation 18 11 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... 30 Otherwise ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2.—Homicide. Manslaughter ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Murder ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 3.—Suicide. Gunshot Wounds ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Cut, Stab ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... 1 Poison ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... 2 Drowning ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Hanging ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Otherwise ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 4.—Execution. Hanging ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... VIII—DEATHS FROM ILL-DEFINED AND NOT SPECIFIED CAUSES. Dropsy ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Debility, Atrophy, Inanition 122 47 7 ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... 177 Mortification ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Tumour ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Abscess ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Hæmorrhage 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 Sudden Death (eause not ascertained) ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Causes not Specified or Ill-defined ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 166 SUMMARY OF TABLE 5. No. of Deaths. I.—Specific Febrile, or Zymotic Diseases, 1. Miasmatic Diseases 238 2. Diarrhœal ,, 105 3. Malarial ,, 48 4. Zoogenous ,, .. 5. Venereal ,, 14 6. Septic ,, 12 II.—Parasitic Diseases 2 III.—Dietetic Diseases 5 IV. Constitutional Diseases 350 V.- Developmental Diseases 174 VI.—Local Diseases. 1. Diseases of Nervous System 204 2. Diseases of Organs of Special Sense 1 3. Diseases of Circulatory System 102 4. Diseases of Respiratory System 593 5. Diseases of Digestive System 115 6. Diseases of Lymphatic System 1 7. Diseases of Gland-like Organs of Uncertain Use.. 1 8. Diseases of Urinary System 29 9. Diseases of Reproductive System .. (a). Diseases of Organs of Generation 1 {b). Diseases of Parturition 7 10. Diseases of Bones and Joints 2 11. Diseases of Integumentary System 3 VII.—Violence. 1. Accident or Negligence 54 2. Homicide .. 3. Suicide 3 4. Execution .. VIII. Ill-Defined and not Specified Causes 179 Total 2243 167 TABLE 6. Zymotic Mortality for the Sanitary Area, showing the localities where the Deaths occurred. Small Pox. Measles. Scarlet Fever. Diphtheria. Whooping Cough. Typhus Fever. Enteric Fever. Diarrhoea. Parish .. 127 5 30 66 .. 8 105 Asylums BoardHospitals 4 .. 11 12 1 .. 2 .. St. Saviour's Infirmary .. 2 .. 1 1 .. 1 2 Evelina Hospital .. 1 .. 2 3 .. .. 1 Guy's Hospital .. .. .. 1 .. .. 1 .. St. Thomas' Hospital .. 1 .. 3 .. .. 1 .. Royal Hospital .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 Mildmay House .. .. .. 1 .. .. .. .. West End Hospital (Weibeck St.) .. 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. London Hospital .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 .. St. Bartholomew's. Hospital .. .. .. 1 .. .. 1 .. Ilford Asylum .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 Westminster Hospital .. .. .. 1 .. .. .. .. Total 4 132 16 52 71 .. 15 110 168 TABLE 7. (Drawn up by the Registrar-General.) London.—Diminution ok Excess of Deaths in 1895, compared with the average annual deaths in 1885-94, corrected for increase of Population. Cause of Death. Diminution in 1895. Excess in 1895. Small-pox 134 .. Measles 112 .. Scarlet Fever 228 .. Typhus 8 .. Influenza .. 1,361 Whooping-cough 1259 .. Diphtheria .. 611 Simple Fever 33 .. Enteric Fever 13 .. Diarrhœal Diseases .. 615 Cancer .. 391 Phthisis and Tubercular Diseases 660 .. Premature Birth .. 241 Diseases of Nervous System 1,080 .. Diseases of Circulatory System 44 .. Diseases of Respiratory System 790 .. Diseases of Urinary System 17 .. Childbirth and Puerperal Fever 111 .. Accident .. 126 Homicide .. .. Suicide .. 54 All other Causes 173 .. 4,662 3,399 Balance of Diminution or Excess 1,263 .. 169 TABLE 8. (Drawn up by the Registrar-General.) Deaths belonging to the several Sanitary Areas of Registration London, registered in the 52 weeks of 1895. Sanitary Areas. Deaths. Deaths from Principal Zymotic Disease. Deaths from Phthisis. Deaths of Infants under Year of Ago. Deaths under Year to 1000 Births regd. Small-pox. Measles. Scarlet Fever. Diphtheria. Whoopingcough. Typhus. Enteric Fever. Simple and Ill-defined Fever. Diarrhœa. REGISTRATION LONDON 85,138 55 2,629 829 2,289 1,480 5 596 10 3,574 7,742 22,013 165 West. Paddington 2,107 .... 19 14 47 20 .... 13 .... 94 163 488 164 Kensington 2,759 .... 34 28 90 38 .... 15 1 116 253 623 172 Hammersmith. 1,810 1 27 17 44 43 .... 12 .... 81 160 483 166 Fulham 2,195 .... 51 21 77 50 .... 12 1 130 154 735 168 Chelsea 1,913 1 11 25 57 35 ... 13 ... 79 185 460 168 St. George Hanover Square 1,175 1 10 10 24 26 ... 9 1 36 105 203 138 Westminster 1,146 ... 25 6 21 15 ... 3 ... 41 125 238 185 St. James Westminster 411 ... 2 3 4 10 ... 6 ... 6 35 78 144 North. Marylebone 2,843 9 25 14 35 39 ... 23 1 93 299 607 138 IIampstead 931 ... 9 8 14 7 1 3 1 29 75 196 135 Pancras 4.778 1 228 52 131 94 ... 30 ... 205 428 1,239 174 Islington 5,753 1 141 67 146 79 1 30 2 219 532 1,411 143 Stoke Newington 471 ... 7 1 5 65 ... 4 ... 17 37 94 116 Hackney 3,735 1 120 41 83 65 1 45 ... 189 314 949 154 Central. St. Giles 859 2 13 6 13 13 ... 2 ... 28 127 179 160 St. Martin-in-the-Fields 244 1 2 2 7 6 ... 1 ... 5 24 50 265 Strand 569 2 6 9 13 3 ... 5 ... 11 76 107 175 Holborn 810 ... 45 6 7 8 ... ... ... 24 98 174 212 Clerkenwell 1,491 ... 93 17 34 41 1 11 ... 53 159 399 192 St. Luke's 1,226 ... 106 5 20 21 ... 6 ... 66 113 351 184 London City 720 ... 15 4 8 3 ... 13 ... 12 51 87 157 East. Shoreditch 2.856 2 106 30 58 87 ... 22 ... 155 283 864 199 Bethnal Green 2,769 4 116 30 101 34 ... 17 ... 139 245 772 162 Whitechapel 1,824 4 82 23 58 19 ... 10 ... 54 219 490 157 St. George-in-the-East 1,330 ... 88 20 50 21 ... 7 ... 60 113 386 196 Limehouse 1,547 1 86 20 45 40 ... 10 ... 59 136 411 202 Mile End Old Town 2,436 1 113 26 111 42 ... 17 ... 114 182 694 165 Poplar 3,865 1 216 48 152 80 ... 33 ... 14/ 273 1,113 183 South. St. Saviour Southwark 677 ... 17 6 13 13 ... 1 ... 26 84 170 205 St. George Southwark 1,524 ... 49 14 17 38 ... 7 ... 69 186 434 198 Newington 2,872 4 132 16 52 71 ... 15 1 110 263 852 201 St. Olave Southwark 314 ... 3 ... 4 7 ... 2 ... 15 32 88 206 Bermondsey 1,869 ... 114 16 29 20 ... 11 ... 80 190 520 162 Rotherhithe 783 1 19 8 31 10 ... 9 ... 32 76 193 148 Lambeth 5,567 2 151 53 112 132 ... 26 2 264 511 1,421 152 Battersea 2,872 1 98 30 92 53 1 22 ... 145 247 930 177 Wandsworth 2,747 2 30 16 46 24 ... 26 ... 106 213 623 132 Camberwell 4,610 7 111 46 179 68 ... 33 ... 204 394 1,235 164 Greenwich 3,305 3 49 36 184 55 ... 17 ... 121 268 823 150 Lee 561 ... 18 5 11 5 ... 3 ... 12 56 116 140 Lewisham (excluding Penge) 1,187 ... 12 9 14 32 ... 7 ... 52 76 274 135 Woolwich 748 ... 6 11 14 3 ... 9 ... 30 92 204 153 Plumstead 929 2 24 10 36 5 ... 30 ... 48 90 249 133 M 170 TABLE 9. Monthly Mortality in Newington Workhouse, 1895. January 9 May 6 September 4 February 5 June 5 October 3 March 25 July 3 November 6 April 4 August 6 December 4 1st Quarter of 1894 39 80 Males 38 2nd ,, ,, 15 3rd ,, ,, 13 Females 42 4th ,, ,, 13 TABLE 10. Ages at Death in Newinoton Workhouse, 1879 to 1895. 1879 1880 1881 1882 1883 1884 1885 1886 1887 1888 1889 1890 1891 1892 1893 1894 1895 Under 1 27 23 94 27 20 22 29 24 19 22 23 12 12 2 9 16 8 1 to 5 14 24 23 37 32 30 10 10 4 2 13 6 .. 1 .. .. 1 5 to 20 8 10 13 10 16 11 13 10 2 .. 2 .. .. .. .. .. .. 20 to 60 225 246 245 220 244 232 254 247 147 22 12 14 25 23 25 22 23 60 to 70 114 86 96 87 91 110 124 110 74 31 3? 30 ?4 36 22 30 12 70 to 80 63 81 75 59 76 76 86 79 67 54 51 47 41 27 34 22 27 80 to 90 24 38 40 25 51 27 34 31 27 21 22 17 11 12 17 9 8 .90 to 100 2 1 3 1, 9 3 4 3 1 2 .. 1 1 4 1 1 100 to 110 .. 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Total in the Year 477 510 519 467 532 511 555 515 343 153 157 126 114 102 111 100 80 171 TABLE 11. Principal Causes of Death in Newington Workhouse, Sixteen Years, 1880 to 1895. 1880 1881 1882 1883 1884 1885 1886 1887 1888 1889 1890 1891 1892 1893 1894 1895 Small-pox .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Scarlatina .. .. .. .. .. 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Diphtheria .. .. 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Measles 1 .. 15 12 13 .. .. .. .. 3 .. .. .. .. .. .. Whooping Cough 3 2 1 1 2 1 .. 1 .. 8 1 .. .. .. .. .. Diarrhœa 8 7 9 13 11 9 5 6 1 2 .. 1 3 .. 2 1 Enteric Fever 1 1 .. 3 1 .. 3 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 Erysipelas 6 4 3 2 1 5 8 2 4 .. 1 .. 2 2 .. 1 Acute Rheumatism .. .. 4 .. .. .. 2 2 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Carbuncle .. 1 .. .. .. 8 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Bronchitis 93 129 123 133 111 184 148 139 67 63 67 53 49 42 32 33 Phthisis 90 80 64 99 105 100 84 53 8 11 7 8 6 1 3 3 Pneumonia 5 9 14 9 10 18 14 14 8 6 8 1 8 6 5 3 Paralysis 15 26 25 26 4 8 11 7 10 7 3 5 3 4 6 .. Apoplexy 29 22 13 24 38 33 25 20 7 19 11 7 y 25 24 15 Disease of Heart 5 20 28 25 23 22 39 7 12 8 2 1 5 4 8 7 Blight's Disease 28 .. 13 2 4 .. 15 26 11 5 5 7 7 7 1 .. Natural Decay 46 40 18 22 7 5 .. 7 6 5 3 4 3 5 3 2 Cancer 24 26 27 21 38 18 29 .. 4 1 .. 1 .. .. .. .. Syphilis 5 8 13 4 4 7 .. 10 3 2 .. 1 .. .. 1 .. Convulsions 8 11 15 12 3 2 2 6 7 3 4 2 .. 3 2 1 Epilepsy 1 2 5 5 3 2 4 3 4 2 .. 1 2 1 3 3 Enteritis 1 .. .. .. .. .. 4 2 3 4 3 3 1 .. .. 3 Jaundice 1 .. 4 1 .. .. 2 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Other Diseases 141 131 72 118 133 140 119 37 8 8 11 9 5 11 10 6 Total 510 519 467 532 611 555 515 343 153 157 126 114 102 111 100 80 172 TABLE 12. Dr. Frankland's Averages for 1895, as supplied to the Eegistrar-General. Maximum Amount of Organic Matter. Year. Elements of organic matter in parts per 100,000. Months in which maximum pollution occurred. Year. Elements of organic matter in parts per 100,000. Months in which maximum pollution occurred. 1876 .44 December. 1876 .24 March. 1877 .40 J anuarv. 1877 .30 J anuary. 1878 .36 December. 1878 .26 June. 1879 .38 February. 1879 .33 July. 1880 .42 October. 1880 .33 February. 1881 .34 February. 1881 .34 February. 1882 .37 November. 1882 .26 December 1883 .32 January. 1883 .24 December. 1884 .27 February. 1884 .20 March 1885 .35 November. 1885 .28 December. 1886 .30 December. 1886 .21 February. 1887 .34 January. 1887 .31 January. 1888 .30 December. 1888 .25 December. 1889 .29 January. 1889 .16 March. 1890 .27 January. 1890 .19 January. 1891 .43 October. 1891 .27 November. 1892 .35 December. 1892 .27 December. 1893 .37 February. 1893 .23 March. 1894 .42 November. 1894 .22 November. 1895 .22 December. It is thus evident that the comparatively large amount of organic contamination in the Thames-derived water noted in 1894 was not repeated last year, whilst the maximum organic matter in the Lea was the same as in 1894, which was the smallest recorded since 1890. 173 TABLE 13. METEOROLOGICAL TABLE FOR LONDON, 1895. Deduced from Observations at Greenwich under the Superintendence of the Astronomer Royal, and compiled from Quarterly Tables furnished to the Registrar-General by James Glaisher, Esq., F.R.S.J Winter Jin., Feb., March. I Spring Apnl, May, June. Summer July, Aug., sept. Autumn Oct., Nov., Dec. Temperature of Elastic Force of Vapour. Weight of Vapour in a Cubic Foot of Air. Degree of Humidity. Reading of Barometer. Weight of a Cubic Foot of Air. Rain. Reading of Thermometer on Grass. Air. Evaporation. Dew Point. Air— Daily Range. No. of Nights it was Lowest Reading at Night. Highest Reading at Night. Mean. Diff. from Average of 124 years. Diff. from Average of 54 years. Mean. Diff. from Average of 54 years. Mean. Diff. from Average of 54 years. Mean. Diff. from Average of 54 years. Mean. Diff. from Average of 54 years. Mean. Diff. from Average of 54 years. Mean (Satn. = 100), Diff. from Average of 54 years. Mean. Diff. from Average of 54 years. Mean. Diff. from Average of 54 years. Amount. Diff. from Average of 80 years. At or below 30° Between 30° and 40° Above 40° 1895 o o o o o o o o o in. in. grs gr. in. in. grs. grs. Sums. Sums. o o m. in. YEAR. 40.3 +0.7 —0.1 15.9 —0.5 42.3 —1.2 16.2 +0.4 .284 —.009 32 —0.2 73 -4 29.748 — 026 541 0 19.73 -5.33 88 130 147 6 9 59.1 Winter Qtr. 35.2 -3.7 —4.6 33.3 -4.6 29.5 -5.7 11.8 0.0 167 —.039 2.0 —0.5 81 —3 29.664 —.109 556 44 3.27 .1.68 55 33 2 6.9 42.5 Spring do. 55.1 +2.8 +2.2 50.1 + 1.0 45.5 +0.2 20.9 +0.8 306 .001 3.4 —01 71 .7 29 846 4.064 537 —1 1.91 —3.79 6 43 42 25.3 54.3 Summer do. 62.3 +2.7 +2.2 57.6 +1.3 53.4 +0.4 20.7 + 1.0 409 +.005 45 —0.1 73 —5 29.812 +.019 528 -2 6.46 -0 83 0 7 85 30.8 59.1 Autumn do. 44.7 +1.0 +0.4 42.8 -0.3 40.7 +40.2 11.5 -0 255 -.001 2.9 —0.2 87 —3 29.671 —•079 545 -2 8.09 40.97 27 47 18 20.0 50.1 In this Table, + and — respectively signify that the numbers in the preceding column are above or below the average to the amount of the quantities to which these signs are affixed. 174 TABLE 14. Summary of Sanitary Work carried out between Lady-Day, 1895, and Lady-day, 1896.  Number of Entries in the Sanitary Work! Register. Number of Entries in the Duut Coir plaint Book. Notices given to drain into Sewer. Blocked or defective drains remedied. Drains reconstructed or Intercepters, &c., provided. Closets repaired, Apparatus, Water, &c., provided. Yards paved, Paving repaired Gullies, &c., provided. Sinks and Rain-pipes disconnected or altered, or traps provided. Roofs, Gutters and Rainpipes repaired. Dust-bins provided or repaired. Foul Rooms, &c., cleansed and whitewashed. Nuisances from Urinals, Manure, Animals, abated or receptacles provided Closets rebuilt or additional ones provided. Surface drains provided. Ventilation under Floors to Rooms, &c., provided. Dry Areas provided or extended. Nuisances from Overcrowding abated. Number of Prosecutions. St. Mary 1667 543 10 170 151 1106 1065 405 105 161 659 109 5 12 178 89 19 44 St. Paul 1274 267 1 40 230 636 694 529 497 481 639 22 12 31 99 16 2 29 St. Peter 1553 751 .. 128 211 1424 1181 591 381 568 1037 72 16 125 403 20 28 29 St. John 2247 313 .. 47 431 1138 1099 722 38 301 322 47 1 35 145 9 74 43 Trinity 1904 369 6 78 271 1073 1124 529 479 601 943 126 34 121 656 91 11 35 Total 8645 2243 17 463 1294 5377 5163 2776 1500 2112 3600 376 68 324 1481 225 134 180 Water laid on to houses (after supply had been withdrawn):— St. Mary, 16; St. Paul, 28; St, Peter, 34; St. John, 25; and Trinity, 8 ,, ,, ,, Total 106 Infected rooms whitewashed and disinfected 759 Beds, palliasses, bolsters, pillows, &c., disinfected at Depot 6375 Beds, palliasses, bolsters, pillows, &c., destroyed at Depot 211 Slaughter and cow-houses inspected 15 Bakehouses inspected 75 Number of bodies received into Mortuary 161 175 SUMMARY OF BEDDING DISINFECTED AND DESTROYED. Disinfected. Destroyed. Beds 749 24 Pallias es 601 29 Bolsters 461 7 Pillows, etc 4,564 151 Total 6,375 211 SUMMARY OF PROSECUTIONS. WAHD. Nuisances. Articles of Food Seized. Adulteration of Food. Total. St. Mary 24 3 17 44 St. Paul 3 2 24 29 St. Peter 10 5 13 29 St. John 18 1 24 34 Trinity 11 .. 24 35 Total 66 12 102 180 GEORGE MILLSON. LIST of GOVERNORS & GUARDIANS & OFFICERS, Under the Local Act, 54 Geo. III., Cap. 113. 1895-96. RECTOR. The Rev. GEORGE THOMAS PALMER, MA., Rectory House, Kennington Park Road. CHURCHWARDENS. Mr. GEORGE GAUL, 95, Kennington Park Road. ,, GEORGE VERNON, 6, Wansey Street. OVERSEERS. Mr. WILLTAM WESTCOTT, 32, Lorrimore Square. ,, ROBERT WAGNER, 28, Trinity Street. „ THOMAS HENRY BIGNELL, 138, Boyson Road. ,, HENRY CHALK, 32, Grosvenor Street. GOVERNORS AND GUARDIANS. Mr. MICHAEL ALEXANDER GABB, 6, Lorrimore Square. „ THOMAS WOOLLARD GRIMWOOD, 2, Arnott Street. ,, JONATHAN CHRISTOPHER EMMETT, 6, Doddington Grove. „ CHARLES DICK, 34, New Street. „ MATTHEW HENRY NEWTON, 100, Great Dover Street. „ JOHN WELLINGTON GROSE, 332-344, Walworth Road. „ HENRY SAMUEL BTINNETT, 138, Great Dover Street. ,, HENRY HICKS, 53, New Kent Road. „ JOHN NORMAN HEARN, 181, Manor Place. ,. CHARLES JAMES CHURCHER, 8, Lorrimore Square. „ WALTER JOHN CRISP, 109, Kinglake Street. „ ARTHUR JOSEPH HOLLEBONE, 51, Lorrimore Road. „ ALFRED LAMARTINE SHAW, 35, Sutherland Square. „ ALFRED OSMOND HOLMES, 36, Lorrimore Square. „ CHARLES HART, 61, Cambcrwell Road. n 178 Mr. WILLIAM BARNES, 21, Crampton Street. „ CHARLES JAMES JOLLAND, 145, Newington Butts. ,, WILLIAM SAYER, 86, New Kent Road. ,, JAMES BOYD, 19, Lorrirmore Road and 148, Walworth Road. „ JAMES CHARLES HAMMOND, 48, Wansey Street. ,, EDWIN DIPPLE, 150, Walworth Road. ,, JONATHAN GILBERT EMMETT, 269, Beresford Street. „ HENRY HARVEY, 54, Alvey Street. „ GEORGE THOMAS HIAM, 30, Falmouth Road. Rev. J. W. HORSLEY, J.P., St. Peter's Rectory, Liverpool Street. „ ETIENNE THEODORE HAMEL, 138, New Kent Road. ,, ARTHUR W JEPHSON, St. John's Vicarage, Larcom Street. Mr. OCEAN ALFRED LAMB, 4, New Street. ,, HENRY KNOTT MILLER, 13, Alvey Street. „ ARTHUR HAWKINS SDTCH, 147, New Kent Road. „ JOSEPH CHARLES BRYANT, 36, Great Dover Street. Mr. CHARLES HART, Chairman. Rev. A. W. JEPHSON, Vice-Chairman. TREASURER. FRANKLAND F1SHWICK, Esq., London & County Bank, Newington Butts. CLERK. Mr. HENRY BURGESS. Offices—Vestry Hall, Walworth Road. Collectors of the Poor, General, and Sewer Rates. 1st District—Mr. GEORGE ROBERTSON, Jun., 41, Kennington Park Road. 2nd ,, „ JOHN BEALE, 113, Grosvenor Park. 3rd ,, „ JAMES BOWDEN, 39a, Inville Road. 4th „ ,, WILLIAM POTTINGER, 49, Heygate Street. 5th ,, „ JOHN HATTERSLEY, 4, Harper Street. A n ear Collector. Mr. WILLIAM CHARLES STRATTON, Vestry Hall, Walworth Road. Auditor. T. BARCLAY COCKERTON, Esq., 1, Pump Court, Temple, E.C. 179 Members of the Burial Board for the Year ending November, 1896. Rev. Canon Palmer, M.A., Rectory House, Kennington Park Road. Mr. Jonathan Christopher Emmett, 6, Doddington Grove. ,, Charles Simmonds, 42, Albert Street Elected 29th November, 1893. „ Matthew Henry Newton, 100, Great Dover Street. ,, Henry Hicks, 53, New Kent Road. ,, WalterColbrook, 172, Great DoverStreet. Elected 28th November, 1894. ,, Alfred ebenezkr Smithers, 112, Newington Butts. ,, Edwin Pearson, 78, Darwin Buildings. ,, John Clayton Mather, 268, Walworth Road.' Elected 27th November, 1895. Statement of Receipts and Expenditure of the Burial Board of St. Mary, Newington, for the Year ending 25th March, 1896, £ s. d. £ s. d. To Cash from the Governors and Guardians By Garden Tools .. 4 4 0 900 10 5 ,, Brooms and Oil 0 12 6 ,, Manure 0 12 0 ,, Plants. Shrubs and Flowers 17 12 6 ,, Water 9 1 6 ,, Coals for Gardener's house 0 12 0 ,, Stamps, Stationery and Printing 6 18 3 ,, Gardeners' Wages 209 16 0 „ Repairs 600 4 6 „ Expenses to Brookwood 1 16 0 „ Yacancyre Under-gardener 1 14 2 ,, Metropolitan Police 10 10 0 ,, Clerk's Salary 5 0 0 ,, Surveyor's charges 31 2 0 ,, Vestry Hall Ke per 0 10 0 ,, Messenger 0 5 0 £900 10 5 £900 10 5 Audited and found correct this 8th July, 1896. E. SMART, C. H. CHAMPION, A. BOATWRIGHT, W. J. DOBSON, N2 180 CHARITY ESTATES, For the Year ending 31st December, 1895. Statement of the Accounts of the Charity called "The St. Mary, Newington, Copyhold Charity Estates," being the Elephant and Castle and King and Queen Estates, in the Parish of St. Mary, Newington, in the County of London, of which the following persons are the Trustees, viz.:— Charles James Jolland, 145, Newington Butts, Dyer. William Frederick Smith, 280, Walworth Road, Chemist. George Thomas Palmer, M.A., Rectory House, Kennington Park Road, Clerk in Holy Orders. Charles Hart, 61, Camberwell Road, Gentleman. John Marslasd, 1, York Street, Builder. George Robertson, 13, Vowler Street, Gentleman. John Hattersley, 4, Harper Street, Collector of Rates. Hugh Anderson Brydges, Field House, 61, Penrose Street, Registrar of Births and Deaths. Jonathan Christopher Emmett, 6, Doddington Grove, Cab Proprietor. Alfred Lamartine Shaw, 35, Sutherland Square, Provision Merchant. Charles James Churcher, Jun., 8, Lorrimore Square, Hatter. Thomas John Hester, 53, Lorrimore Road, Clerk, Board of Trade. Charles Simmonds, 42, Albert Street, Commercial Traveller. George Hickman Wavell, 40, Grosvenor Terrace, Commercial Traveller. 181 Income and Revenue for the Year ending on 31st December, 1895, whether actually paid or then due. Description of Property. Tenants of Real Property or Persons in whose names Personal Property invested. Term in Real Property. Gross Annual Income. Real Propehty. Copyhold. Elephant and Castle Tavern, 1, Newington Butts W. F. Hammond Quarterly Tenancy 1200 0 0 3, Newington Butts Joseph Ramsey do. 85 0 0 5, ,, ,, A. J. B. Squire do. 100 0 0 7, „ ,, Lockhart's, Ltd do. 200 0 0 9, Caroline Jane Wells . do. 60 0 0 11 Emile Nelken Weekly tenancy at 25/- per week 65 0 0 11, ,, ,, Walter Hill & Co. Quarterly Tenancy 8 0 0 13, ,, ,, Hannah Barnard do. 30 0 0 3, Short Street James Letton do. 60 0 0 8, Walworth Road Michael Ockmore do. 55 0 0 10, Walworth Road Eliza Myria Linge do. 40 0 0 12, ,, ,, Elizabeth Hyde do. 40 0 0 105, Newington Butts George Hart Howe 30 years from 25th March, 1867 at £175 per annum 175 0 0 Clock Passage James Knell 80 years from 25th December, 1870 at £8 per annum 8 0 0 Personal Property £3727 12s. 11d, £2 15s. per cent. Consolidated Stock. (£2,193 10s. 3d. of this Stock was sold Jan. 23rd, 1895, and realised £2,300 8 10) January Dividends .. 25 12 6 £1,534 2s. 8d. £2 15s. Consolidated Stock (This Stock was sold May 15th, 1895, and realised £1,622 6 11) £1,000, £2 15s. per per cent Consolidated Stock, (purchased May loth, 1895).... Invested in the names of Charles James Jolland, John Marsland, llev. Geo. Thomas Palmer, and 10 10 1 July & Oct. Dividends Alf d. Lamartine Shaw. 13 15 0 £2176 18 5 £500 £2 15s. Consolidated Stock was purchased on 29th November, 1895, and invested in the names of the aforesaid Trustees. 182 Receipts and Expenditure for the Year ending on the 31st December, 1895. Dates Receipts. £ s. d. Dates Expenditure. £ s. d. 1895 Jan 1. To balance in hand 716 6 6 1895 Jan 1. to Dec 31 By Payments to Pensioners. 600 0 0 Sep 29 ,, Rents received from the several Tenants during the year ending September 29th, 1895 £2126 0 0 ,, Candidates 188 0 0 ,, National School, as per order of Court of Chancery 300 0 0 Less Property Tax deducted by Tenants 51 14 9 2074 5 3 „ Schools conducted on principle of British and Foreign School Society as per order of Court of Chancery 130 0 0 ,, Dividends on Invested Surplus Income Dividends 49 18 5 ., Wages to "Watchmen for watching Almshouses from July 11 to Dec. 14 52 9 2 ,, Less Property Tax 1 13 4 18 5 1 ,, Boots supplied to indigent children attending Elementary Schools 6 15 0 „ Sale of £2193 10 3 Consols, which realised 2300 8 10 ,, Salaries, Poundage, and Allowances 62 12 0 „ Sale of £1534 2 8 Consols, which realised , £1622 6 11 3922 15 9 ,, Rates and Taxes, 11, Newington Butts 20 0 0 „ Printing, Stationery and Stamps 10 11 2 ,, Property Tax remitted by Commissioners of Inland Revenue 165 14 3 „ Repairs 0 7 11 „ Returns 2 12 0 „ Fire Insurance 6 3 6 „ Purchase of £1,500 £2 15 per cent. Consols 1593 2 6 ,, Brokerage 6 17 11 ,, Messrs. Burman & Son, on account of their contract for building Almshouse's 3500 0 0 ., Messrs. Lansdown and Son, Architects, for Specification, Plans, &c. of Almshouses (on account) 55 0 0 - „ Balance in hands of Treasurer 397 19 8 £ 6929 18 10 £ 6929 18 10 183 Balance Sheet containing a Statement of the Balance of the foregoing Account. Dr. £ s. d. Cr. £ s. d. To Balance 716 6 0 By Expenditure 6531 1 2 ,, Receipts from Rents less Property Tax 2074 5 3 ,, Balance 397 19 8 ,, Receipts from Dividends 48 5 1 ,, Sale of Consols 3922 15 9 ,, Property Tax remitted 165 14 3 ,, Returns 2 12 0 £ 6929 18 10 £ 6929 18 10 Arrears of Rent due on 31st December, 1895, £531 10«. 0d. We certify that this and the foregoing statements are correct. (Signed) GEORGE T. PALMER, JOHN MARSLAND, Trustees. CHAS. J. JOLLAND, Dated this 8th day of July, 1896. Audited and found correct. (Signed) E SMART, A. BOATWRIGHT, C. H. CHAMPION, Auditors. W. J. DOBSON, Dated this 8th day of July, 1896. 184 KENT STREET ESTATE. Statement of the Accounts of the Charity called " Kent Street (or Williams') Estate," belonging to the Parishes of St. George-the-Martyr, Southwark, and St. Mary, Newington, in the County of Surrey, of which the following persons are the Trustees for St. Mary, Newington, viz :— Rev. George Thomas Palmer, M.A., Rectory, Kennington Park Road, Clerk in Holy Orders. John Hattersley, 4, Harper Street, Rate Collector. George Millson, 135, Kennington Park Road, Physician. William Pottinger, 49, Hoygate Street, Rate Collector. Hugh Anderson Brydges, 61, Penrose Street, Registrar of Births and Deaths. William Richard Cory, 106, Grosvenor Terrace, Schoolmaster. And the Churchwardens for the time being. Gross Income arising or due from the endowments for the Year ending on the 31st day of December, 1895. Description of Real Property. Name of Tenant. For what term leased or held. Gross Yearly Income. Net Annual Income.[/##] From Real Estate. Freehold Public House, Messuage and Yard . John Jay £ s. d. £ s. d. 63 Years from Lady-day, 1837 92 0 0 197 4 0 Freehold House and Yard John Miles 63 Years from Christmas, 1843 4 4 0 Ditto William Booker 63 Years from Michlms., 1844 20 0 0 Ditto Martha Taylor 63 Years from Christmas, 1848 15 0 0 Ditto 27 Houses and Yards John Wilson 63 Years from Midsummer, 1850 . 66 0 0 £197 4 0 185 Dates. Receipts. £ s. d. Dates. Payments. £ $. d. 1895. Dec. To Moiety of Rents due to the Parish of Newington to Michaelmas, 1895 92 14 9 1895. Jan. 1 By Balance 10 11 0 „ Printing 0 6 0 Moiety of returned Income Tax 7 16 1 ,, Payments to Annuitants, 4 Quarters to Christmas, 1895 100 0 0 ,, Balance 10 6 2 £ 110 17 0 £ 110 17 0 186 TILBURY ESTATE. Statement of the Accounts of the Charity called "Tilbury (or Simmons') Estate, belonging to the Parishes of St. Georgethe-Martyr, Southwark, and St. Mary, Newington, in the County of Surrey, of which the following persons are the Trustees for St. Mary, Newington, viz.:— Hugh Anderson Brydges, 61, Penrose Street, Registrar of Births and Deaths. John Hattersley, 4, Harper Street, Glass Embosser. Alfred Lamartine Shaw, 35, Sutherland Square, Provision Merchant. James Grose, 340, Walworth Road, Draper. Matthew Henry Newton, 100, Great Dover Street, Bookbinder. George Hickman Wavell, 40, Grosvenor Terrace, Commercial Traveller. William George Cannon, 1, Penton Place, Electrical Engineer. Thomas John Hester, 53, Lorrimore Eoad, Clerk, Board of Trade. John Norman Hearn, 181, Manor Place, Butcher. William Richard Cory, 106, Grosvenor Terrace, Schoolmaster. William Tomlin, 26, Manor Place, Wheelwright. Jonathan Gilbert Emmett, 8, Doddington Grove, Cab Proprietor. Joseph Padgett Clark, 39, Kennington Park Road, Chef. Jonathan Christopher Emmett, 6, Doddington Grove, Cab Proprietor. Fred Cole, 90, Penrose Street, Commercial Traveller. Arthur Joseph Hollebone, 51, Lorrimore Ed., Licensed Victualler. 187 Gross Income arising or due from the Endowments for the Year ending on the 31st day of December, 1895. From Real Estate. Description of Real Property. Acreage. Name of Tenant. For what Term Leased or Held. Gross Income. A. R. p. £ s. d. Freehold Land and Farm Buildings. 60 0 0 James Wright 14 years from Lady-Day, 1888. 70 0 0 188 MANN'S ANNUITY FUND. Statement of the Accounts of the Charity called "Mann's Annuity Fund," administered by the Churchwardens for the time being of the Parish of St. Mary, Newington, and the Overseers for the time being of the Poor of that Parish, and the Churchwardens for the time being of any District Parishes which have been created out of the original Parish of St. Mary, Newington. For the year ended on the 31st day of December, 1895. Description of Stock in the Public Funds. Amount. Gross Yearly Income. Names and Descriptions of Persons in whose Names invested. £ 3. d. £ s. d. £2 15 per cent. Consols 4338 0 5 119 5 9 The Charity Commissioners. Dates. Receipts. £ s. d. Dates. Payments. £ s. d. 1895. Jan. 1st Balance 8 13 6 1895. Dec. By one year's salary to Clerk, pursuant to Clause 5 of the Scheme 3 3 0 ,, 11 To Three Months' Dividend 29 16 5 April 10 Ditto 29 16 5 Jan. 1 to Dec. 31. ,, Payments to Annuitants 120 0 0 J uly 11 Ditto 29 16 5 Oct. 15 Ditto 29 16 5 „ Balance 4 16 2 £ 127 19 2 £ 127 19 2 189 DE GUIFFARDIER'S LEGACY. Statement of the Accounts of the Charity called "De Guiffardier's Legacy," belonging to the Parish of St. Mary, Newington, in the County of London, of which the Churchwardens and Overseers are the Distributors. For the year ending on the 31st day of December, 1895. Description of Stock in the Public Funds. Amount. Gross Yearly Income. Names and Descriptions of Persons in whose Names Invested. £ s. d. £ s. d. £2 15s. per cent. Annuities 50 0 0 1 7 6 Date. Receipts. £ s. d. Date. Payments. £ s. d. 1895 Oct. 5 To five quarters' Dividends 1 14 2 1895 Jan. 1 By Balance 0 6 4 ,, Cash to Churchwardens and Overseers for distribution to the poor 1 7 6 Dec. 31 ,, Balance 0 0 4 £ 1 14 2 £ 1 14 2 190 SMITH'S GIFT. Statement of the Accounts of the Charity called "Henry Smith's Charity," belonging to the Parish of St. Mary, Newington, in the County of London, of which the Churchwardens and Overseers are the Administrators. For the Year ending the 31st day of December, 1895. DESCRIPTION OF REAL PROPERTY. One tenth of income derivable from the following properties vested in the Trustees of the lute Henry Smith:— Clay Hall Farm, near Reigate; Hale Oak Farm, near Sevenoaks; Fee Farm Rents at Mount Berres, Essex, and Heddington, Oxford; Rent-charge at Horley. Dates. Receipts. £ s. d. Dates. Payments. £ 3. d. 1895 To Balance 0 1 10 1895 By Printing 0 8 3 Feb.12 ,, Cash per Messrs. Warren, Clerks to the Trustees. One year's allowance to Michaelmas, 1894 35 0 0 ,, Cost of coal supplied to the poor 12 4 6 „ Cash distributed to: 179 poor persons in separate sums of 2/6 each 22 7 6 „ Balance 0 1 7 £ 35 1 10 £ 35 1 10 We hereby certify that the foregoing statements are correct. (Signed) G. GAUL, T.H. BIGNELL, Administrators. H. CHALK, Dated this 8th day of July, 1896. Audited and found to be correct. (Signed) E. SMART, A. BOAT WRIGHT, C. H. CHAMPION, Auditors. W. J. DOBSON, Dated this 8th day of July, 1896. 191 BRANDON'S GIFT. Statement of the Accounts of the Charity called "Samuel Brandon's Legacy," belonging to the parish of St. Mary, Newington, in the County of Surrey, of which the Overseers are the Administrators. For the Year ending 31st day of December, 1895. Description of Stock in the Public Funds. Amount. Gross Yearly Income. Names and Description of Persons in whose names invested. Consolidated £ s. d.. £ s. d. The Official Trustees of Charitable Funds. 166 13 4 4 11 8 Dates. Receipts. £ $. d. Dates. Payments. £ s. d. 1895 Jan. 1 To Balance 0 1 10 1895 Dec. 31 By Cost of Bread distributed to the Poor 4 15 8 Oct. ,, One Year's Dividend 4 11 8 ,, PrintingTickets 0 2 6 „ Balance 0 4 8 £ 4 18 2 £ 4 18 2 "We hereby certify that the foregoing statements are correct. {Signed) W. WESTCOTT, ) T. H. BIGNELL, ! Administrators. H. CHALK, ) Dated this 8th day of July, 1896. Audited and found to be correct. {Signed) E. SMAET, \ A. BOATWBIGHT, / . C. H. CHAMPION, i Auditors. W. J. DOBSON, j Dated this 8th day of July, 1896. 192 MASON'S GIFT. Statement of the Accounts of the Charity called " Mason's Gift," in the Parish of St. Mary, Newington, in the County of London, of which the Churchwardens and Overseers are the Administrators. For the Year ending the 31st day of December, 1895. From Personal Estate. Description cf Income. Amount. Gross Yearly Income. £ s. d. £ s. d. Annual charge of 40a. upon the Estate and House formerly in the occupation of the late John Robson, Esq., and now known and described as 203, 205, 207, 209, 211, 213 and 215, Newington Butts. 2 0 0 2 0 0 Dates. Receipts. £ s. d. Dates. Payments. £ s. d. 1895. Jan. 1 To Balance 0 0 8 Jan. 29 To One Year's Rent charge from Mr. Thin 2 0 0 1895. By cost of Bread supplied to the Poor 1 19 2 ,, Printing 0 1 6 £ 2 0 8 £ 2 0 8 We hereby certify that the foregoing statements are correct. (Signed) G. GAUL, W. WESTCOTT. T. H. BIGNELL, Administrators. H. CHALK, Dated this 8th day of July, 1896. Audited and found to be correct. (Signed) E. SMART, A. BOATWRIGHT, C. H. CHAMPION, Auditors W. J. DOBSON, Dated this 8th day of July, 1896. 193 MARSHALL'S GIFT. Statement of the Accounts of the Charity called "Marshall's Charity," belonging to the Parish of St. Mary, Newington, in the County of Surrey of which the Churchwardens are the Administrators. For the Year ending 31st December, 1895. From Heal Estate. Description of Property. Amount. GrossYearly Income. ' Persons in whose Names Property is invested. Rent-charge upon houses 2, 3, 4, 7, 8, 9, 15, 27, 28, Blackman Street; 2, 2 1/2 , 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, Great Dover Street; and premises in rear of these last-named houses let on lease to PostMaster General. £ s. d. £ s. d. Trustees of Marshall's Charity. 1 0 0 1 0 0 Dates. Receipts. £ 3. d. Dates. Payments. £ 8 d. 1895. Apl. 30. To One Year's Rent Charge £ 1 0 0 1895. Dee. 31. By CashDistributed to Poor Persons £ 1 0 0 1 0 0 1 0 0 We hereby certify that the foregoing statements are correct. (Signed) G. GAUL, Administrators. G. VEENON, ) Admtnistraators. Dated this 8th day of July, 1896. Audited and found to be correct. (Signed) E. SMAET, A. BOATWEIGHT, C. H. CHAMPION, Audtiors W. J. DOBSON, Dated this 8th day of July, 1896. o 194 MISS ATKINSON'S CHARITY. Statement of the Accounts of the Charity called "Miss Atkinson's Annuity Fund," belonging to the Parish of St. Mary, Newington, in the County of Surrey, of which the Rector and Churchwardens are the Administrators. For the Year ending 31st day of Dec., 1895. Description of Stock in the Public Funds. Amount. Names and Descriptions of Persons in whose Names Invested. Gross Yearly Income. £ 8. 4. £ at. d. £2 15s. per cent. Consols Ditto £ 1770 31 3 11 3 11 Paymaster General, Court of Chancery. Rev. Geo. Thos. Palmer, M.A. Edward Chester, Solicitor. William Snell (deceased). 49 10 11 1801 15 2 Dates. Receipts. £ 8. d. Dates. Payments. £ 8. d. 1895 Jan. 1. To Balance 28 17 7 1895 Paid Rector and Church wardens as per will of Donor 1 0 0 ,, One year's dividends 59 13 7 Stamps for Affidavit 0 3 0 Paid 6 annuitants 51 0 0 Dec. 31. 30 8 2 £ 88 11 2 £ 88 11 2 We hereby certify that the foregoing statements are correct. (Signed) GEORGE T. PALMER, ) G. GAUL, Administrators. G. VERNON, Dated this 8th day of July, 1896. Audited and found to be correct. (Signed) E. SMART, A. Boat WRIGHT, f C. H. CHAMPION, Auditors. W. J. D0B30N, ) Dated this 8th day of July, 1896. 195 DR. BARLOW'S GIFT. Statement of the Accounts of the Charity called "Dr. Barlow's Gift," belonging to the Parish of St. Mary, Newington, in the County of London, of which the following persons are the Administrators: Charles James Jolland, 145, Newington Butts, Dyer; John Marsland, 1, York Street. Builder; Hugh Anderson Brydges, 61, Penrose Street, Registrar of Births and Deaths; Rev. Canon Palmer, M.A., Rectory, St. Mary, Newington, Clerk in Holy Orders. For the Year ending 31st day of December, 1895. From Personal Estate. Description of Stock in the Public Funds. Amount. Gross Yearly Names and Descriptions of Persons to whom Securities made or Deposits due. £ s. d. £ s. d. £300 £215s.per cent. Annuities 277 2 6 8 5 0 Charles Janus .Tolland, Dyer. John Marsland, Builder. Hugh Anderson Brydges, Registrar of Births and Deaths. Rev. Canon Palmer, M.A., Clerk in Holy Orders. ' Dates. Receipts. £ s. d. Dates. Payments. £ s. a. 1895 Jan. 1. To Balance 1 12 8 1825 By Printing 0 12 3 ,, Cost of Coal supplied to the Poor 7 7 5 Four Quarter's Dividends, less Property Tax 7 19 6 ,, Balance 1 12 6 £ £ 9 12 2 9 12 2 We hereby certify that the foregoing statements are correct. (Signed) CHAS. J. JOLLAND, Administrators. JOHN MARSLAND, Dated this 8th day of July, 1896. Audited and found to be correct. (Signed) E. SMART, A. BOATWRIGHT, C. H. CHAMPION, Auditors. W. J. DOBSON, Dated this 8th day of July, 1896. 0 2 196 BROWN'S GIFT. Statement of the Accounts of the Charity called " Brown's Gift," belonging to the Parish of St. Mary, Newington, in the County of Surrey, of which the Rector and Churchwardens are the Administrators. For the Year ending the 31st day of December, 1895. From Personal Estate. Description of Stock in the Public Funds. Amount. Gross Yearly Income. Names and Descriptions of Persons in whose Names invested. £ s d. £ s. d. £140 £2 15s. per cent. Annuities. 134 17 3 3 17 0 Rev. Gr. T. Palmer, M.A., Rector, St. Mary, Newington. Henry William Clemow. John Hattersley. Dates. Receipts. £ s. d. Dates. Payments. £ s. d. 1895. Jan. 21 to Oct. 15 To Four Quarters' Dividends, per Charity Commissioners 3 17 0 1895. Jan. 1. to Dec. 31. By S. Watts for Coal supplied to the poor by 60 tickets of 1 cwt. each at 1/3 per cwt 3 15 0 ,, Lynn, Printer 0 1 6 „ Balance 0 0 6 £ 3 17 0 £ 3 17 0 We hereby certify that the foregoing statements are correct. (Signed) GEORGE T. PALMER, ) G. GAUL, Administrators. G. VERNON, ) Dated this 8th day of July, 1896. Audited and found to be correct. (Signed) E. SMART, A. BOAT WRIGHT, C. H. CHAMPION, Auditors. W. J. DOBSON, Dated this 8th day of July, 1896. 197 THE COPYHOLD CHARITY SCHOOL ESTATE. Statement of the Accounts of the Charity called the "Saint Mary, Newington, National Charity Schools," belonging to the Parish of St. Mary, Newington, in the County of London, of which the following persons are the Trustees, viz. :— Charles James Jolland, 145, Newington Butts, Dyer. William Frederick Smith, 280, Walworth Road, Chemist. George Thomas Palmer, M.A., Rectory House, Kennington Park Road, Clerk in Holy Orders. Charles Hart, 61, Camber well Road, Gentleman. John Marsland, 1, York Street, Builder. George Robertson, 13, Vowler Street, Gentleman. John Hattersley, 4, Harper Street, Collector of Rates. Hugh Anderson Brydges, Field House, 61, Penrose Street, Registrar of Births and Deaths. Jonathan Christopher Emmett, 6, Doddington Grove, Cab Proprietor. Alfred Lamartine Shaw, 35, Sutherland Square, Provision Merchant. Charles James Churcher, Junr., 8, Lorrimore Square, Hatter. Thomas John Hester, 53, Lorrimore Road, Clerk, Board of Trade. Charles Simmonds, 42, Albert Street, Commercial Traveller. George Hickman Wavell, 40, Grosvenor Terrace, Commercial Traveller. For the Year ending the 31st day of December, 1895. Description of Property. Lessees or Tenants of Real Property, and Persons in whose names Personal Property is Invested. Term in Real Property. GrossAnnual Income. £ s. d. Real Property. Freehold. 21 years from 25th December, 1884. 90 0 0 191, Fulham Road. 74, Arthur Street, Fulham Road Solomon Keppler. 70 0 0 89 " " Sarah Cobble. Yearly Tenancy. 50 0 0 96 " " Robert Lycetl. 21 years from 25th March, 1877. 60 0 0 Personal Property £1,157 lls.4d.,£2 15s per cent. Consols Invested iu name of Paymaster General, Court of Chancery 31 16 7 301 16 7 198 Dates. Receipts. £ s. d. Dates. Payments. £ s. d. 1895 1895 Jan. 1. To Balance 4 11 1 Jan. 1 to Dec. 31 By Printing Statement of Receipts and Expenditure and Receipt Book Stamps 2 4 2 Jan. 1 to Deo. 31 „ 1 year'sdividends on £1157 11s. id. £2 15s. per cent. Consols 30 15 4 ,, 2 quarters' rent 191, Fulham Rd. to Christmas 1894 less 3 quarters' property tax 25 7 6 ,, Payments to Treasurer of St. Mary,Newington National Schools, 217 14 11 ,, 4 quarters' rent 96, Arthur Street to Michaelmas, 1895, less propty. tax 58 9 6 ,, Renewal Premiums, Fire Insurance 0 10 6 ,, Do. 89, Arthur Street, to Michaelmas, 1895, less property tax 48 12 3 ,, 1 year's allowance to Clerk and Receiver 2 10 0 ,, 4 quarters' rent 74, Arthur Street to Michaelmas, 1895, less propty. tax 68 0 8 Dec. 31. „ Repairs 0 5 0 „ Balance 15 11 9 ,, Returnsby tenant for 2 years' Fire Insurance premiums paid by Trustees 3 0 0 £ 238 16 4 £ 238 16 4 199 Balance Sheet containing a Statement of the Balance of the foregoing Account Dr. £ s. d. Cr. To Balance 4 11 1 £ s. d. ,, Receipts from Rents. 200 9 11 By Educational Payments 217 14 11 ,, Receipts from Dividends 30 15 4 ,, Expenditure 5 9 8 ,, Balance 15 11 9 „ Returns 3 0 0 £238 16 4 £238 16 4 Arrears of Rent due on 31st December, 1895, £102 10s. 0d. We certify that this and the foregoing statements are correct. (Signed) GEORGE T. PALMER, JOHN MARSLAND, Trustees. CHAS. J. JOLLAND, ) Dated this 8th day of July, 1896. Audited and found to be correct. (Signed) E. SMART, A. BOATWRIGHT, C. H. CHAMPION, Auditors. W. J. DOBSON, Dated this 8th day of July, 1896. 200 Accounts of the Commissioners for Public Libraries and RECEIPTS—Part 1. Dr. £ s. i. d. £ s. d. Balance in hand at the commencement of the year 1,950 14 10 Library Rate (at 1d. in the £) 1,817 10 11 Donation— Thomas Pink, Esq 27 10 0 Fines and Penalties 164 11 10 Sales of Catalogues and Ticket cases 13 13 5 Interest on current account 19 9 6 Total Receipts - 2,042 15 8 Total Receipts and Balances £33,993 10 6 Copy op the Certificate of I hereby certify that I have compared the entries in this Financial regulations with respect to such Statement have been duly complied with. I hereby further certify that I have ascertained by audit the correctness the year ended the 26th day of March, 1896, included in such Statement and pounds, nine shillings and ninepence half-penny. 201 Museums for the Parish of St. Mary, Newington, 1895-96. EX PE NDITU RE—Part 1. Cr. £ s. d. A. Other than out of Loans— Buildings, Repairs and Maintenance (including Warming and Lighting, Cleaning, Rates and Taxes, &c.) 384 13 6 1/2 Books, Periodicals, Binding, &c. 212 9 3 Salaries and Remuneration of Officers and Assistants 444 18 4 Establishment charges not before included 25 3 11 Stamp for Audit of Accounts by the Local Government Auditor 5 0 0 Miscellaneous 5 5 0 In respect of loans:— Instalments £580 13 4 Interest 537 18 4 1,118 11 8 B. Expenditure out of Loans: — Furnishing176 8 1 176 8 1 Total Expenditure 2,372 9 9 1/2 Balances at the end of year, viz.:— In Treasurer's hands 1,612 9 11 In hands of other Officers Librarian, for Wages 8 7 0 „ Petty Cash 0 3 9 1/2 Nett Balance *1,621 0 8 1/2 Total Expenditure and Balances £3,993 10 6 202 Part II.— Statement with reference to the Loans obtained by the No. Purpose of Loans. Amount sanctioned to be borrowed. Date of sanction. Period authorised for repayment. Amounts originally borrowed. Date of original borrowing. Rate of Interest payable on Loan outstanding. £ £ £ s. d. 1 Purchase of Library Site 4,760 29 June, 1891 50 years 4,700 21 July, 1891 3 10 0 2 Library Furniture, &c. 1,200 20 July, 1892 10 years 1,200 12 Aug., 1892 3 10 0 3 Library Building 11,000 20 July, 1892 30 years 11,000 13 Oct., 1892 3 10 0 Totals 16,960 16,900 203 LOAN ACCOUNT. Commissioners. Year ended 25th day of March, 1896. Mode of repayment. Amount of Principal owing at the commencement of the year. Amounts paid this year, not including payments to or repayments out of Sinking Fund. Amount of Principal owing at the end of the year. Principal. Interest. £ s. d £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. Principal in equal Annual Instalments 4,324 0 0 94 0 0 151 6 8 4,230 0 0 Ditto 960 0 0 120 0 0 30 9 2 840 0 0 Ditto 10,266 13 4 366 13 4 356 2 6 9,900 0 0 15,550 13 4 580 13 4 537 18 4 14,970 0 0 (Signed) RICHARD W. MOULD, Librarian and Secretary. 18th day of June, 1896. Examined by me and found correct, (Signed) T. BARCLAY COCKERTON, District Auditor 27th day of July, 1896. 204 Statement of Accounts of the Commissioners for Public Baths and the 25th March 1895 to 1895. RECEIPTS. £ s. d. Mar. 25th. Balance brought forward 1,672 8 8 From the Governors and Guardians, amount of Demand made 20th March 1895 1,800 0 0 From Treasurer, Interest on Current Account 56 9 10 ,, London County Council Loan £10,000 0 0 " " " " " 15,000 00 25,000 0 0 Balance—Clerk, Petty Cash 8 6 11 £28,837 5 5 AS TO London County Council Loans. £ s. d. No. 1, dated 15th May, 1895 10,000 0 0 No. 2, dated 28th February, 1896 15,000 0 0 £25,000 0 0 205 Wash-houses' for the Parish of St. Mary, Newington, London, from the 25th March 1896. 1896. EXPENDITURE. £ s. d. Mar. 25th. Balaam Bros., Builders, on a/c of Contract 13,900 0 0 Galloways, Ltd., do. Boilers 896 0 0 I'Anson, Architect, do. Commission 550 0 0 Batstone Bros, for preparing Quantities 242 10 0 Durston, Clerk of Works, Salary 214 4 0 Newington Vestry—Ground Rent less Income Tax 203 0 0 Legal Expenses—London County Council and Messrs. Lowless & Co. 110 19 4 Interest on Loan of £10,000 231 1 3 Dunham—Allowance for services rendered as Clerk for year ending March 25th 1896 105 0 0 Printing and Stationery 4 15 0 Examination of Boilers, National Boiler Insurance Co. Sundry Small Payments from Petty Cash 18 35 0 4 0 5 Cash Balance 12,026 11 5 £28,537 5 5 LOANS. 1896. £ s. d. March 25th. Amount repayable 25,000 0 0 25,000 0 0 Examined and found correct. October 23rd, 1896. (Signed) E. T. HAMEL. W. J. DOBSON. ROBT. WESTCOTT. E. SMART. 206 ATTENDANCES OF VESTRYMEN AND EX-OFFICIO MEMBERS. From March 26th, 1895, to March 25th, 1896. Vestry Meetings including Six Meetings in Committee. Public Health, &c., Committee Meetings. Roads & Depot Committee Meetings. General Purposes &c.Co'mittee Meetings. Finance and Audit Co'mittee Meetings. Sub-Committee i Meetings. Total number of Attendances. Possible number of Attendances. Chairman of the Vestry:- Rev. J. W. Horsley, M.A., J. P. 26 16 6 1 8 5 62 140 Rector of the Parish Rev. Canon Palmer, M.A. 4 .. .. .. .. .. 4 28 Rector's Churchwarden:— Mr. G. Gaul (ex-officio) 9 3 2 4 9 .. 27 132 Parish Churchwarden:— Mr. G. Vernon (ex-officio) 23 20 16 14 18 .. 91 122 St. Mary's Ward:— Mr. Amans 28 .. 20 .. 18 5 71 98 ,, Burrows 27 22 .. 23 .. 7 79 83 „ Clark 25 20 .. 17 .. 18 80 94 ,, Cole 28 24 27 .. .. 30 109 109 ,, Curtis, H. 17 14 .. 11 .. 3 45 80 ,, Empson 25 .. .. 19 .. .. 44 52 „ Goold 25 .. .. 24 .. 3 52 55 ,, Hammond 24 3 5 17 24 24 97 152 ,, Henley 27 .. 23 19 .. 22 91 107 ,, Lamb 10 8 4 .. .. 1 23 84 ,, Mather 24 13 .. .. 22 18 77 102 ,, Oehrens 27 23 .. .. .. .. 50 52 ,, Smithers 21 2 12 24 19 14 92 149 ,,Tomlin 4 .. 2 .. .. 3 9 .. ,, Westcott 26 •• 27 21 .. 20 94 125 St. Paul's Ward:— Mr. Anton 26 21 .. .. .. .. 47 53 ,, Chalk 11 10 .. 9 .. 1 31 79 ,, Chandler 27 .. .. 21 27 28 103 112 " Cory 23 16 21 14 18 63 155 208 ,, Emmett, J. G. 15 .. 6 .. .. 26 47 117 ,, Lane 22 .. 14 .. .. 21 57 86 ,, Littlefield 12 .. 6 8 .. 2 28 84 ,, Newman 24 22 .. 17 .. 21 87 102 ,, Rackett 21 16 .. .. .. 9 46 61 ,, Stapleton 27 19 .. .. .. .. 46 52 ,, White 21 .. 20 .. .. 46 87 141 ,, Whiteman 16 12 13 •• .. 21 62 114 207 Vestry Meetings. including Six Meetings in Committee. Public Health, &c., Committee Meetings. Roads & Depot Committee Meetings. General Purposes &c. Co'mittee Meetings. Finance and Audit Co'mittee Meetings. Sub-Committee Meetings. Total number of Attendances. Possible number, of Attendances. St. Peter's Ward:— Mr. Bates 2 .. .. .. .. .. 2 52 ,, Cooper 13 .. 15 1 .. 19 48 105 ,, Curtis, G 10 10 .. .. .. 1 21 53 ,, Dixon 8 .. .. 7 6 9 30 102 ,, Harvey 7 .. 4 .. .. 2 13 50 ,, Hibble 25 22 .. .. 20 27 94 110 Rev. .T. W. Horsley (see above). — — — — — - — — Mr. Jones 20 .. 21 .. .. 27 68 90 ,, Miller 22 .. 20 .. .. 29 71 117 ,, Moreland 21 .. .. 17 .. 3 41 55 „ Pipe 5 .. 2 .. .. .. 7 55 ,, Simpson 11 10 .. .. .. 1 22 57 ,, Wallden 15 11 .. .. 11 .. 37 81 ,, West 18 .. 18 6 .. .. 42 79 ,, Woosnam 9 6 •• •• •• •• 15 .. St. John's Ward:— Mr. Bridges 26 .. .. 17 .. 4 47 56 ,, Dawes 27 23 19 18 21 33 141 165 ,, Edwards 25 .. .. 17 .. 4 46 58 ,, Elliott 16 .. 16 .. .. 2 34 60 ,, Evens 10 .. .. 4 .. .. 14 52 ,, Grice .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 55 ,, Morgan 26 8 20 .. .. 8 62 114 ,, Pearson 25 19 .. .. .. 3 47 55 ,, Revitt, H 27 .. 26 .. .. 39 92 94 ,, Revitt, W 19 .. .. 13 .. 1 33 54 ,, Rowe 27 .. 27 .. .. .. 54 55 ,, Seager 27 23 .. .. .. 1 51 53 ,, Standeven 27 22 .. .. .. 7 56 59 ,, Thomas 1 .. .. .. .. .. 1 52 ,, Waylett 20 .. .. 13 .. 1 34 53 ,, Wellard 28 .. .. 23 .. 8 59 60 ,, Wilson 15 .. .. 4 .. 1 20 55 ,, Youldon 17 .. 19 .. .. 36 72 118 Trinity Ward:— Mr. Bryant 7 11 3 .. .. 6 27 87 ,, Bunnett 11 .. 5 .. 2 10 28 144 ,, Davis 17 15 .. .. 8 9 49 93 „ Fell 27 .. 23 .. .. 36 86 91 ,, Green 26 18 .. 13 .. 6 63 82 ,, Hiam 4 .. .. 1 .. 1 6 83 Dr. Lansdale 2 1 .. .. .. .. 3 52 Mr. Longley 16 .. .. 5 6 .. 27 .. ,, Rackham 18 18 .. .. .. 1 37 54 ,, Shorland 20 .. .. 8 .. 3 31 48 ,, Sutch 25 .. 24 .. 28 30 107 114 ,, Wagner 28 2 27 3 29 71 160 160 208 Statement showing the actual quantity of Mixture and Ashes sold during the Year Dr. Amount received from the Wandsworth District Board of Works for shoot of House Dust at Longfield and Sevenoaks, 8,354 tons, 3 cwt. at 9d. £ 3. d £ s. d. 313 5 8 Ditto, various persons for removal of Trade Refuse and Shoot of Rubbish. &c., at Town Yard 94 12 9 Sales as under: - Mixture— Tons. Cwts. s. d. £ s. d. 74 6 6 0 22 6 6 159 9 4 10 38 10 9 209 2 4 5 46 3 9 20 4 4 0 4 0 10 760 2 3 2 120 7 5 2,114 1 2 11 308 6 2 5,192 4 2 9 714 0 7 12,212 19 2 6 1526 18 5 7 8 1 0 7 5 16 10 - - — — 20,766 7 2,781 1 10 Ashes and Breeze Tons. Cwts. 1,035 2 10 361 11 6 6 118 3 3 12 18 6 4 4 1 9 162 9 5 2 39 7 8 9 7 4 6 2 2 1 54 11 4 0 10 18 4 1,757 10 3 6 307 11 8 102 0 3 3 16 11 7 3,566 18 3 0 535 0 6 20 16 1 3 1 6 0 33 12 — — 6,073 12 Rough Dust— 95 12 1 3 5 19 7 8 13 4 61 6 10 2 11 2 15 5 2 2 7 172 3 Hard Core— 29 14 2 4 3 9 4 3 9 4 3,828 7 4 Rebate off Railway Company's account 1,152 11 10 Balance against • * Equal to 2s./2¼d. per ton for disposal of 50,268 tons 10 wt 5,487 12 2 Carried forward £10,876 9 9 209 and the expenditure attending its Preparation and Removal ending 31st March. 1896. Cr. £ s. d. Mixing and Loading Mixture 465 4 5 Sifting Dust (Longfield) 490 1 8 Do. (Sevenoaks) 81 10 1 Loading Ashes and Breeze (Longfield) 61 18 9 Do. do. (Sevenoaks) 7 1 9 Loading and Levelling Dust Trucks (Town Yard) 186 16 6 Unloading Dust (Longfield) 134 1 11 Do. (Sevenoaks) 175 0 9 Do. (Meopham) 7 9 10 Unloading Mixture (Longfield) 27 7 9 Do. (Sevenoaks) 11 1 6 Do. (Meopham) 16 9 7 Sundry Labour (Town Yard) Flushing, Sweeping, &c. 163 7 9 Do. (Longfield) 52 16 8 Do. (Sevenoaks) 48 16 4 Do. (Meopham) 5 10 0 Holidays and Sick Pay 39 7 6 Labor—Shunting Trucks at Longfield 60 6 0 Do. do. Sevenoaks 49 12 0 Horses employed in shunting and loading, Town Yard (2), Longfield (1), Sevenoaks (1) 200 0 0 Commission on sales and incidental expenses 236 15 6 Stable Dung 204 1 11 „ Unloading 104 0 2 „ "Wages of Collectors 275 2 2 „ Horses employed collecting (1½) 75 0 0 Wages of Workmen attending Hydraulic Machinery, Shunting, Weighing Trucks, Cleaning Docks, Turntables, &c. 442 15 3 Railway Carriage of Mixture:- Tons. Cwts. s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. 74 8 5 5 20 3 0 159 9 4 2 33 4 4 209 2 3 9 39 4 1 20 4 3 4 3 7 4 758 10 2 6 94 16 2 2,394 11 2 3 269 7 7 17,134 0 2 1 1,784 15 11 52 9 O.C.S. — — — 20,802 13 2,244 18 5 Ashes and Breeze Tons. Cwt. 363 11 5 0 90 17 9 12 18 4 6 2 18 1 152 9 3 10 29 4 4 38 16 2 5 4 13 10 589 13 2 3 66 6 8 3,132 15 2 1 326 6 8 136 5 2 0 13 12 7 492 10 1 6 36 19 1 867 12 1 3 54 4 5 5,786 9 625 3 5 Rough Dust:- 95 ' 12 3 4 15 18 8 73 10 2 11 10 14 4 189 12 2 3 21 6 9 23,291 0 2 1 2,426 2 11 23,649 14 2,474 2 8 Carried forward £5,344 4 6 £3,623 15 9 210 Statement showing the actual quantity of Mixture and Ashes sold during the Year ending s d Brought forward £10,876 9 9 £10,876 9 9 211 and the Expenditure attending its Preparation and Removal 31st March, 7896.—(continued). Brought forward £5,344 4 6 £ s. d. 3,623 15 9 Hard Core 29 14 1 9 2 12 0 2 12 0 5,346 16 6 Salary of Vestry Clerk 300 0 0 „ Depot Clerks 265 3 4 ,, Yard Foreman and Gate Keeper (half) 106 7 0 „ „ Longfield 78 0 0 ,, ,, Sevenoaks 78 0 0 Contribution towards Wages of Shunter 20 0 0 Advertisements at Railway Stations 26 0 0 Contribution—Stonehill Ploughing Association 5 5 0 „ North Kent Agricultural Association 10 10 0 „ Mansion House Association on Railway and Canal Traffic 8 15 0 „ Longfield and Meopham Schools 4 4 0 Coals, Coke and Firewood 195 4 0 Water (one third) 48 17 6 Gas (one fourth) 35 2 10 Rates and Insurance, Town Yard (half) 106 12 7 ,, Country Depots 36 9 5 Oils, Packing and Boiler Composition 58 19 4 Shovels, Forks, Baskets and Sieves 35 12 0 Dust Barrows 5 10 0 Small Repairs to Hydraulic Machinery and Crane 61 14 7 Rope for Shunting 13 18 7 Repairing and Adjusting: Weighbridges (two-thirds) 11 14 4 Rent of Telephone (half) 4 13 9 Rebates allowed off Customers' Accounts 246 1 10 "Sundry Small Payments, including Inspection of Country Depots 143 2 5 £10,876 9 9 212 Return showing the number of Loads and Quantity of Refuse Collected. Year Ending SLOP. DRIFT. DUST. DUNG. TOTAL FOE THE YEAR Loads. Tons. Cwts. Loads. Tons. Cwts. Loads. Tons. Cwts. Loads. Tons. Cwts. Loads. Tons. Cwts. March 1893 10,151 13,967 8 5,438 7,153 1 11,503 20,755 19 7,546 14,490 19 34,638 56,367 7 March 1894 8,670 12,195 15 6,864 7,984 16 11,095 19,037 11 6,867 12,816 17 33,496 52,034 19 March 1895 9,373 13,075 17 6,996 8,052 1 11,472 20,168 3 5,601 10,928 10 33,442 52,224 11 March 1896 8,675 11,709 19 8,383 8,724 12 13,303 21,303 14 3,638 7,565 5 33,999 49,303 10