Paddington METROPOLIS LOCAL MANAGEMENT ACT. REPORT OF THE VESTRY FOR THE YEAR ENDING 25TH MARCH, 1876. Paddington METROPOLIS LOCAL MANAGEMENT ACT. REPORT OF THE VESTRY, FOR THE YEAR ENDING 25TH MARCH, 18 7 6. PADDINGTON. WARD ONE. The Parish of Paddington, in the County of Middlesex, extends Northward from the Marble Arch to Kilburn Gate; and Westward from the Marble Arch to Kensington Palace Gardens; it is bounded on the North by Willesden; on the South by St. George's, Hanover Square, and St. Margaret, Westminster; on the East by Marylebone; and on the West by Kensington and St. Luke, Chelsea; its length from North to South being nearly Two Miles, and its superficial extent about 1,280 acres. The Parish is within the jurisdiction of the Metropolitan Board of Works, to which Board it returns One Member; and its management is vested in Seventy-Two Elected Vestrymen, who meet at the Vestry Hall, Harrow Road, on the first and third Tuesdays in each month (August excepted) for the transaction of their ordinary business. For parochial purposes the Parish is divided into Four Wards, the boundaries of which are as follow; viz.:— All that portion of the Parish which lies within a line drawn along the centre of Harrow Road from the point at which the same intersects the boundary of the said Parish, and thence along the centre of such Road to a point directly opposite the centre of the Road on Westbourne Terrace Bridge, and thence along the centre of such Road and of Westbourne Terrace, to the centre of Bishop's Road, and thence Westward along the centre of Bishop's Road and Westbourne Grove to the West boundary of the said Parish at the point where the same intersects the centre of Westbourne Grove, and thence Northward continuously along the said boundary to the point mentioned at the commencement of the foregoing description. 4 WARD TWO. WARD THREE. WARD POUR. All that portion of the said Parish which lies North of Ward No. 1 and a line drawn from the boundary of such Ward Southward along the centre of Westbourne Terrace to a point directly opposite the West end of the centre of Craven Road, and thence along the centre of Craven Road and Praed Street, and thence in a direct line to the boundary of the said Parish. All that portion of the said Parish which lies South of Ward No. 1 and a line drawn from the boundary of such Ward Southward along the centre of Westbourne Terrace, Sussex Gardens, and Westbourne Street, and thence in a direct line to the boundary of the said Parish. All that portion of the said Parish which is not comprised within the foregoing descriptions of the other Wards. Under the Reform Bill of 1832, Paddington was united with the adjoining Parishes of St. Marylebone and St. Pancras, such incorporation being called the Boro' of Marylebone, and returning Two Members to Parliament. In the year 1870, upon the passing of the Elementary Education Act, the Parish, together with St. Marylebone, St. Pancras, and St. John, Hampstead, were united into a District called the District of Marylebone, for the purposes of the School Board for London, such District returning Seven Members to the Board. There are at present in the Parish 14 Ecclesiastical Districts, viz.:— St. James', ,, John's, „ Mary's, Holy Trinity, St. Paul's, All Saints', St. Matthew's, St. Luke's, ,, Saviour's, ,, Michael and All Angels, Christ Church, St. Mary Magdalene, „ Peter's, ,, Stephen's. 5 The Parochial Workhouse is situated in the Harrow Road, near the Lock Hospital premises, its management being- in the hands of Eighteen Guardians, elected annually, together with the resident Justices of the Peace. The Schools for the Workhouse children are at Ashford, near Staines, Paddington having been united by the Poor Law Board with St. George, Hanover Square, and Fulham, to form a District called the West London School District. The Cemetery for the Parish is at Willesden, and is managed by a Board consisting of Nine Members appointed by the Vestry, such Board meeting at the Vestry Hall on the first Friday in each month. For Registration purposes, Paddington has been divided by the Registrar General into the St. Mary's District and the St. John's District. The divisional line of the two districts traverses the centre of the road in Praed Street from Edgware Road to the Canal Basin, continues thence along the centre of the Canal Basin as far as the Bishop's Road, and passes Westward from thence along the centre of the Bishop's Road and Westbourne Grove to the Western boundary of the Parish; the St. Mary's District lying on the North, and the St. John's District on the South of such divisional line. For the purpose of providing the Parish with Public Baths and Wash-houses, Commissioners have been appointed by the Vestry, and Baths in the Queen's Road were opened in May, 1874, on the site of premises formerly numbered 143 and 145. The Gas consumed in Paddington is supplied by the Imperial Gas Light Company, and the Water by two Companies, viz.:— the Grand Junction Water Works Company and the West Middlesex Waterworks Company. The population, as shewn by the Census taken in 1871, is as under, viz.:— Ward No. 1 21,793 „ 2 41,029 „ „ 3 18,469 „ „ 4 15,522 Making a total of 96,813 The number of inhabited houses being 11,874. 6 The Rates levied since the passing of the Metropolis Local Management Act to the end of the year 1875, are as under, viz.:— s. d. £ For the year 1856 2 1 based upon a rateable value of 522,570 1857 2 6 „ 538,879 1858 2 4 „ 582,995 1859 2 7 „ 605,382 1860 3 0 „ 625,479 186l 2 8 „ 643,063 1862 2 8 „ 617,840 1863 2 8½ „ 646,256 1864 3 0 „ 663,172 1865 3 0 „ 685,434 1866 3 2 „ 704,714 1867 3 6 „ 729,838 1868 3 5½ „ 740,686 1869 3 9 „ 759,158 1870 4 0 „ 773,524 Under the Provisions of the Valuation (Metropolis) Act, 1869. 1871 3 4 „ 954,868 1872 3 1½ „ 968,340 1873 3 7 „ 987,741 1874 3 7½ „ 999,245 11875 3 6 „ 1,086,900 There are certain Charities under the control of the Vestry, managed by Trustees appointed by the Vestry and the Charity Commissioners, and having an annual income of more than Fifteen Hundred Pounds, which is annually distributed to the Poor in Coals and Blankets, in Grants to the Parochial National Schools, in apprenticing sons and daughters of poor parishioners, and in Annuities to aged persons resident in the Parish, &c. REPORT. The following is a List of the Names and Addresses of the Vestrymen and Auditors of the several Wards, namely:— The Rev. James Moorhouse, 57, Sussex Gardens, Vicar of Paddington. Mr. William Urquhart 327, Edgware Road. Mr. James Flood 24, Burlington Road. Churchwardens. Mr. George Gwyn 28, London Street. Mr. James Porter Anderson 10, Richmond Road. Overseers. Charles Mills Roche, Esq 98, Gloucester Terrace. Representative of the Vestry at the Metropolitan Board of Works. WARD No, 1. FOR ONE YEAR. Ellerton, .John, Esq 3, Aldridge Road Villas. Rabbeth, Mr. George 13, Cornwall Road. Sawyer, Mr. Samuel 13, Frankfort Terrace. Sharp, James Wilson, Esq 46,LeamingtonRoadVillas. Vickerman, Mr. William John 82, Westbourne Grove. FOR TWO YEARS. Addison, Lieut.-Col. Henry 5, Shrewsbury Road. Chew, Thomas, Esq 15, Durham Terrace. Evans, Robert, Esq 48, Westbourne Park. Flood, Mr. James 24, Burlington Road. Moore, Enoch, Esq 13, Aldridge Road Villas. FOR THREE YEARS. Anderson, Mr. James Porter 10, Richmond Road. Bauke, Algernon, Esq 95 Talbot Road. Braid, Charles, Esq 13, Westbourne Park Rd. Goodwin, Mr. Benjamin 18, Jonson's Place. Lyne, Richard, Esq 44, Leamington Road Villas. Auditor— Brown, Mr. Henry Mark, 84, Westbourne Grove. 8 WARD No. 2. FOR ONE YEAR. Bicker-Caarten,A.lfredgerard,esq. 2, Warrington Gardens. Buckley, Rev. John Wall 1, St. Mary's Terrace. Ellis, William, Esq 40, Clifton Gardens. Roberts, Edward, Esq 36 Blomfield Road. Shaw, Benjamin, Esq 8, Cambridge Square. Tildesley, Edwin, Esq 8, Randolph Road. Wyatt, Hugh Penfold, Esq 18, Oxford Square. Young, Edward Parker, Esq 10, Delamere Crescent. FOR TWO YEARS. Burns, Rev. Jabez, D.D., LL.D., 17, Porteus Road. Collins, Henry Hyman, Esq 5, Randolph Road. Hann, Mr. Robert Barnicot 1, Paddington Green. Marshall, Mr. Francis 31, Elgin Road West. Philpot, Mr. Henry 32, Praed Street. Spencer, Mr. Henry Argyle 19, Shirland Road. Spencer,Rev.Robt,Franklin, LL.D. 22, Clarendon Road. Webb, Mr. Matthew 325, Edgware Road. FOR THREE YEARS. Angle, Mr. Henry Butler 22, Bishop's Road. Macmullen, Richd. H. BrisTow,Esq. 9, Frankfort Terrace. Naylor, William, Esq. 3, Manor Place. Richardson, Mr. Samuel 46, Chippenham Road. Seton, Miles Charles, Esq 10, Maida Hill West. Urquhart, Mr. William 327, Edgware Road. Williamson, John William, Esq 24, Warwick Road. Wingrove, Mr. Stephen 10, Chichester Street. Auditor— Knecht, Mr. George, 19, Chichester Road. WARD No. 3. FOR ONE YEAR. Davidson, Duncan, Esq 4, Lancaster Gate. Gold, Mr. Robert 24, St. Petersburgh Place. Kemshead, Henry Morris, Esq ,J.P. Westbourne. Phillipson, Mr. Michael 37, Craven Terrace. Smith, George James Philip, Esq. 55, Gloucester Place. York, Dr. James 26, Leinster Gardens. 9 FOR TWO YEARS. Brunel, Isambard, Esq., D.C.L. 15, Devonshire Terrace. Clarke, Henry Daniel, Esq Desboro' House, Harrow Road. Langridge, Mr. William 13, Craven Road. Longman, Mr. Thomas 1, Bathurst Mews. Roche, Charles Mills, Esq 98, Gloucester Terrace. Russell, Mr. Edward 97, Queen's Road. FOR THREE YEARS. Etherington, Mr. Stephen 18, Lancaster Street. Fisher, Mr. Thomas 24, Craven Terrace. Hawes, Mr Robert 1A, Moscow Road. Hobday, Mr. William 8, Coburg Place. Hunter, John Humphrey, Esq. 40, Gloucester Crescent. Whur, Mr. Robert 28, Craven Terrace. Auditor— Reid, Mr. John, 46, Craven Road. WARD No. 4. FOR ONE YEAR. Arbuthnot, Archibald Francis,Esq. 25, Hyde Park Gardens. Ferrier, Alexander John, Esq. 6, Somers Place. Gwyn, Mr. George 32, London Street. Hume, Col. Henry, C.B 29, Norfolk Square. Stratton, Mr. Stephen 34, Albion Street. FOR TWO YEARS. Gaselee, Mr. Serjeant Stephen 2, Cambridge Square. Griffith, Charles Marshall, Esq. 31, Hyde Park Square. Hall, Mr. Richard 9, Stranraer Place. Pa rry, Mr. Thomas 79, Oxford Terrace. Prescott, Frederick Joseph, Esq., 13, Oxford Square. FOR THREE YEARS. Baker, Sir George, Bart 4, Hyde Park Square. Locock, Charles Brodie, Esq 9, Cambridge Square. Peake, Frederick, Esq 3, Norfolk Crescent. Turner, Mr. Henry 139, Praed Street. Wilson, John, Esq 38, Norfolk Square. Auditor— Hewitt, Mr. George, 8, Albion Place. 10 The Officers of the Vestry are as follow, viz.:— Vestry Clerk Frank Dethridge. First Assistant William Davison. Second do John Mitchell Huish. Third do Arthur Wm. James Russell. Fourth do Gerard Bicker-Caarten. Surveyor George Frederick Stevens. First Assistant Rimell Gadsden. Second do Thomas White. Clerk of Works John Conway. Accountant John Alfred Liddard. Clerk (Surveyor's Department) Arthur James Garner. Superintendent of Stone Yard. James Stevens. Medical Officer of Health James Stevenson, M.D. Inspector of Nuisances Thomas Reeves Clifford. Ditto Charles John Biorn. Public Analyst Alfred George Anderson. Inspector under the provisions of the Adulteration of Food Act Thomas Reeves Clifford. Inspector of Public Lighting George Weston. Inspector of Dust and Refuse Isaac Gore {Resigned). Bookkeeper and Checking Clerk Henry William Sawyer. (Dust Department.) Assistant Overseer George Harttree. Ward 1 Reuben Farrow. A. Division. James William Cuff. Collectors "2 B Division. Robert Cheadle. „ 3 John Gordon. „ 4 John Barrable. Vestry Hall Keeper William Matthews. William Porter. Beadles George Darley Osterfield. The following Contracts have been entered into, namely:— Date when entered into. Name of Contractor. Nature of Contract. Price. 16th November, 1875 Mr. Neave For the Construction of a whole brick Sewer in Uxbridge Road, from Inverness Terrace to Queen's Road £597. 7th December, 1875 Mr. Studds For Unsifted Gravel and Hoggin 2s. 11d. per Ton. Ditto Ditto For Sifted Gravel 3s. 1d. per Ton. Ditto Mr. Boyer For Watering Roads— A District of the parish The Contractor to receive 10s. 6d. per day for each Man, Horse & Cart, and 10s. 6d. per day for Man and Horse with Harness, for working Water Vans. 4th January, 1876. Mr. Studds For Ditto B District of the Parish The Contractor to receive 12s. per day for each Man, Horse & Cart, and 12s. per day for Man, & Horse with Harness, for working Water Vans. 7th December, 1875 Mr. Boyer For Carting Road Scrapings and Street Sweepings— A District of the Parish The Contractor to receive £2,850. 4th January, 1876 Mr. Studds B District of the parish Ditto £2,380. 7 th December, 1875 Mr. Bunce For Carting Materials 9½ d. per Ton. Ditto Ditto For Day Work 10s. per Day. Ditto Ditto For Working Street Roller 39s. per Day for 2 Men and 4 Horses. Ditto Ditto For Working Road Scraper 10s. per Day for 1 Man and 1 Horse. 21st December, 1875. Messrs. Mowlem & Co For Paving Works As per Schedule of Prices. 21st March, 1876 Mr. Neave For Sewers Jobbing Works At 63 per cent, above the detailed Schedule Prices. 7th April, 1876 Messrs. A. &F. Manuelle For Guernsey Granite 15s. 10d. per Cubic Yard. 21st March, 1876 Messrs. Thomas & Butland For the erection of Stabling on No. 10 Wharf, Amberley Road £880. 12 The following Rates have been levied, namely:— Date. Poor. Lighting. General. Sewers. Consolidated. Total. d. d. d. d. d. s. d. April 1875 10 1 6½ - 3 1 8½ October 1875 11½ 1 6 4 24 1 9½ Total 1s. 9½d. 2d. 1s. 0½d. 0½d 5½d. 3s. 6d. The present Assessment of the Parish to the Poor Rate is £1,086,900. The number of Borough Voters according to the present Register is 6,971. The number of County Voters is 73. The number of persons returned in the Jury List presented to the Justices of the Peace on the Twenty-seventh day of September last, amounted to 5,123. During the year 25 Meetings of the Vestry and 136 Meetings of the various Committees have been held, making a total of 161 Meetings. The Works, Sanitary and otherwise, carried into effect during the year, appear in the reports of the respective Officers, hereunto annexed, and such reports are followed by the Documents required by the 198th Section of the Metropolis Local Management Act, with which Documents the present Report concludes. By Order, FRANK DETHRIDGE, Vestry Hall, Vestry Clerk. June 161th, 1876. Paddington SANITARY REPORT FOR THE YEAR 18 75. BY JAMES STEVENSON, M.D., Medical Officer of Health. REPORT. To the Vestry of the Parish of Paddington. Gentlemen, In presenting to you my first Annual Report, allow me to remind you that my predecessor, Dr. Hardwicke, did not retire from office until Midsummer of last year, at which period my duties commenced. The parochial year terminates at Ladyday. In dealing with the vital statistics of the parish, for purposes of comparison with the reports of other Metropolitan Medical Officers of Health, I have deemed it advisable to confine myself, as nearly as possible, to the calendar year, that is to say, from the 2nd day of January, 1875, to the 1st day of January, 1876, a period of 52 weeks, which will be found to correspond with the official year of the Registrar-General. The information as to the births, the mortality—its extent and causes—and the sanitary work done in the parish under the able superintendence of your Inspectors, is presented in the tabular forms recommended by the Society of Medical Officers of Health ; and will, I hope, be considered an accurate and compendious retrospect of all these important matters. With regard to other circumstances affecting the sanitary condition of the parish, though some of them occurred during the present year, I think it better to refer to them in this report, before they have lost their temporary interest. 4 I need not advert to the tables seriatim, as the facts indicated by them are sufficiently obvious. The figures are their own interpreters. The Census of 1871 showed the population of Paddington to be 96,813, the two sub-districts of St. Mary, and St. John, into which the parish is divided, having a population respectively of 58,728 and 38,085. During the preceding ten years, the average annual rate of increase was 2.7 per cent. Allowing for the annual increase from births and immigration at the same rate, the population may be estimated at the middle of the year, 1875, at 105,221, giving to St. Mary's District 66,612, and to St. John's 38,609. The increase of the parish in population, in the number and ratable value of the houses, and the average number of persons in each house, are shewn in the subjoined table:— The increase of the parish in population, in the number and ratable value of the houses, and the average number of persons in each house, are shewn in the subjoined table :— Year. Population. Inhabited Houses. Ratable Value. Average Number of Persons in each House. £ 1851 46,305 6,103 390,732 7.6 1861 75,784 9,729 643,063 7.8 1871 96,813 12,011 954,868 8.1 1875 105,221 12,746 1,004,095 8.3 The more rapid growth of the population in St. Mary's District during the last 25 years, as compared with that of St. John's, calls for remark. In the latter district there has not been for some years any extent of ground available for building purposes; and any increase of population will, of 5 necessity, involve increased density, with an increase of mortality; but the probability is that this result, when it occurs, would not long continue, seeing that, from the value of property in this neighbourhood, the inferior tenements will in time be replaced by houses of a better description, containing fewer inmates. Indeed, it is not unlikely that we may see in St. Johns, what is taking place in the central districts of the Metropolis, viz., a decrease of population, arising not from the same causes, the incursion of railways, the opening up of new streets, &c., but from that already stated, the wealthy displacing the more numerous poor. In St. Mary's District, owing to its situation, and the character of its streets and of many of the houses already erected therein, we may expect to see eventually a very dense population, with houses constantly deteriorating, and with an influx of a lower class of inhabitants,—the counterpart of much that we are in the habit of associating with the Parish of St. Giles. During the 52 weeks, 2,927 births, and 1,992 deaths were registered in Paddington, the excess of births over deaths being 935. This excess constitutes the natural increase of population, and together with that which the other parishes unitedly contribute, has made London in the matter of population a self-sustaining city, adding annually to the number of its inhabitants upwards of 41,000 souls. This increase, which is equivalent to the population of such provincial towns as Cheltenham, Oxford, or Ipswich, does not include the number contributed by immigration, which is not very large, 6 the difference in the number of persons coming to London, and of persons leaving it, being last year as nearly as could be ascertained 3,101. These remarks do not apply to Greater London,* where the conditions are reversed, the number contributed by immigration greatly exceeding the number of births. By the Registration Act, which came into operation on the 1st January, 1875, the registration of births is now made compulsory. Of the total births 2,927, there were registered in the sub-district of St. Mary 2,179, and in that of St. John 748. Of these, 1,500 were males, and 1,427 females, the proportion of the sexes being 100 males to 95 females, against 100 males to 96 females in London, and (for the year 1874) throughout England. In St. Mary's the proportion was 100 males to 99 females, and in St. John's 100 males to 86 females. The births in the parish were most numerous in the *The City of London has an area of one square mile, ruled over by the City Authorities. London (the registration division so called), has an area of 122 square miles, and is under the jurisdiction of the Metropolitan Board of Works. Greater London "extends over the City and over the Metropolitan Police District. It is a circle, including all parishes of which any part is within a radius of 12 miles, and all parishes which are entirely within a circle with a radius of 15 miles from Charing Cross. The area is 698 square miles, equivalent to that of a circle of 14.9 miles radius. It includes South of the Thames, Carshalton, Epsom, Croydon, Richmond, Kingston, in Surrey; Bromley, in Kent; North of the Thames, Chiswick, Brentford, Twickenham, Hampton, Staines, Uxbridge, Harrow, Barnet, Hornsey, in Middlesex; Cheshunt, in Hertfordshire; Stratford, Walthamstow, and Barking Town, in Essex. These bounds were fixed by Sir Robert Peel." 7 first quarter, and least so in the fourth quarter of the year. In Paddington the ratio of births to the population was 1 birth to 35.9 persons,the birth-rate thus being 27.8 per 1,000 persons living, as compared with 35.7 in London, and 28.2 in England and Wales. In St. Mary's District the ratio of births to the population was 1 to 30.6 persons, with a birth-rate of 32.7 per 1,000. In St. John's the ratio of births to the population was 1 to 51.6, with a birth-rate of 19.4 per 1,000. The above particulars are shewn in the subjoined table:— Sub-Districts. Population. Births. Ratio of Births to Population. Rate per l,000. St. John's 38,609 748 1 to 51.6 19.4 St. Mary's 66,612 2,179 1 to 30.6 32.7 105,221 2,927 1 to 35.9 27.8 The birth-rate for 1875 being 27.8, is below the average birth-rate of the ten years 1865-74, which was 29.2, and is, in point of fact, lower than any birthrate during those years. The low birth-rate in St. John's (Tyburnia), as compared with that of St. Mary's, and of London, may be in part explained by the difference in the two districts, and in the classes who reside therein. Tyburnia is the district of squares and mansions, with a fringe of shops, and of inferior tenements, occupied by the lower middle, and domestic servant class. St. Mary's District is the mart of the parish, and is. 8 made up of shop-keepers and artizans, with a margin of the upper middle class. It is the more populous, more prolific, and poorer section of the parish. It may be safely predicated of many of the residents in St. John's, that they had lived elsewhere in earlier life, and had only moved into this district after having achieved success in their calling. Hence many of the wives of the wealthier inhabitants would be of mature age before coming into the locality, and as a consequence, would afterwards bear few or no children. This district too, has its contingent of independent persons—bachelors and spinsters—who, in consideration of its higher situation, and the more bracing atmosphere of this side of Hyde Park, not to speak of its social advantages, choose it as a place of residence; and though as units they add to the population, they do not further contribute to its increase. The large number, moreover, of single men and women engaged in domestic service, must not be forgotten when considering the birth-rate. Of the 1,992 deaths, 137 or 7 percent. occurred in the two hospitals in the parish, viz., 3 in the Lock, and 134 in St. Mary's, leaving 1,855 deaths to be accounted for, of which 1,368 occurred in St. Mary's District, and 487 in St. John's.* *As only a traction of the 137 deaths were those of parishioners, and it being impossible to determine with accuracy the precise number, I have not included them in the tables, nor considered them in calculating the death-rates, believing that the deaths of non-parishioners within the parish were probably as numerous as the deaths of parishioners in the public Institutions, and that, therefore, the deaths of the one class may be fairly regarded as a set-off against the deaths of the other. The corrected number 1,855, includes the 168 deaths in the Workhouse, the inmates being decayed parishioners. 9 The deaths were most numerous in the first and least so in the third quarter of the year. The subjoined statement shows the ratio of deaths to the population, and the death rate per 1,000 in the whole parish, and in its two sub-districts:— Sub-Districts. Population. Deaths. Ratio of deaths to Population. Rate per l,000. St. John's 38,609 487 1 to 79.3 12.6 St. Mary's 66,612 1,368 1 to 48.7 20.5 Paddington 105,221 1,855 1 to 56.7 17.6 In 1875 the death-rate for London was23.7 per 1,000. „ „ Edinburgh 23.7 „ „ „ Dublin 27.0 „ „ „ England & Wales 22.8 „ The death-rate for 1875 being 17.6 per 1,000 persons living, is below the average death-rate of the preceding ten years 1865 — 74, which was 19.5, and is lower than any death-rate during those years. The low death-rate in St. John's, is in part due to the circumstance that many of its inhabitants are domestic servants, who, when seriously ill, are sent to their friends, and whose deaths therefore (should death supervene) do not figure in the returns of the district.* *In Paddington the ratio of deaths to the population, including the two Hospitals, was 1 death to 52.8 persons, equal to a death-rate of 18.9 per 1,000. 10 I think it must be conceded that our death-rate from all causes is so far satisfactory, being 6 per thousand less than that of London generally, and lower than that of any one of the twenty largest towns of the United Kingdom included in the Registrar-Generals returns. Nor does it suffer by comparison with that of any one of the five groups of districts into which London is divided, nor even with that of the most favoured sub-districts, so far as I have been able to ascertain. Deaths Registered in the London Districts. West Districts 22.1 per 1,000. North ,, 22.3 „ South ,, 24.0 „ East „ 25.5 „ Central „ 26.0 „ Paddington 17.6 „ But as the health of a population is shown not so much by its gross mortality, which may, or may not be affected by accidental circumstances, as by its comparative freedom from zymotic diseases, it is needful to examine more closely, with the aid of the death-returns, the causes of the mortality in our midst. It will be seen that of the total deaths (1,855) no fewer than 283, or about one-seventh (Table 4) arose from the seven principal zymotic diseases; that of this number, 2 were from small pox, 11 from measles, 108 from scarlet fever, and 63 from whooping-cough; in all 184 deaths. Now it is not too much to say, that every one of these 184 deaths might, and should have been prevented. None 11 of these diseases have any self-originating power; they are not generated in the system by any abnormal processes of nutrition or secretion; they are not begotten of dirt, poverty, or neglect, though these greatly aid their extension; they are the product of a distinct virus, conveyed directly or indirectly from one person to another, and they manifest their potency and individuality by producing the same diseases in others. Of them it may be said, to parody the aphorism of the homoeopath, similia similibus creantur, or to be more precise, eadem iisdem creantur. As Sir James Simpson has remarked, "We would no more expect this known species of disease or poison to originate de novo at the present day, under any combination of circumstances, than we would expect a known species of animal or plant, as a dog or a hawthorn to spring up de novo, and without antecedent parentage." Time was, when the occurrence of these diseases— children's diseases as they are termed—was expected with the certainty, if not with the regularity of teething. They were regarded as necessarily incidental to childhood. It may be that measles and scarlet fever were then of a milder type, and that an attack from either of them was accepted as a matter of course, and caused very little anxiety. The latter disease, however, seems to have acquired with time such an intensity of virulence—with an occasional capriciousness in its malignity—that it nowoften desolates whole families, and has come to be regarded as the plague of modern days. Of the ravages of small-pox, those who have passed life's meridian do not require to be informed. But Jenner 12 by his immortal discovery, showed that if the disease with which his name is associated, is one of "the penalties of Adam," the debt can be either evaded altogether, or discharged by the payment of a very small dividend. Of the two deaths from small-pox, one was certainly imported from Manchester. The deaths from measles were not very numerous. Measles may occur at all seasons of the year, though cold weather appears most favourable for its production. I am inclined to think that medical men are less solicitous to prevent the spread of this disease, than of scarlet fever or small-pox. This may be due to the fact, that whilst there is a very general susceptibility to measles,—most persons suffering from it at some period of their lives—the disease is, in ordinary cases, of so mild a type as not to beget anxiety. Of the 11 deaths, 9 occured in St. Mary's District, and 2 in St. Johns. We have seen that the parish suffered from scarlet fever in an epidemic form, though of a mild type, in common with other parts of the Metropolis and of the country. As the Registrar-General remarks, "The great increase of scarlet fever, forms the special feature in the returns of last year." Knowing that schools, more particularly day schools, are often centres of contagion, and thus contribute largely to its extension, the Sanitary and Public Health Committee had some months previously drawn the attention of school-masters and school authorities to the desirableness of not allowing any child that had been absent from infectious disease, to return to school without a medical certificate. The Committee had 13 also solicited the co-operation and important influence of ministers of religion, and of medical practitioners, in order to achieve this result. Impressed with the necessity of using every possible endeavour to prevent the spread of this disease, which had already assumed the proportions of an epidemic, I addressed, with the sanction of the Committee, a letter to the London School Board, calling their attention to a resolution, passed at my suggestion, and to an extract from my bi-monthly report. Both of these are subjoined:— Resolution. "That a communication be addressed to the London School Board, requesting that immediate instructions be given to the School Board Visitors to furnish a list to the Medical Officers of Health of their district, of every case of infectious disease coming under their notice, either through the absence of the children attending such schools, or through any other channel." Extract. "Furnished with such a list, the Inspector of Nuisances could visit the infected homes of such children, and supply, if necessary, disinfectants, &c., and the Medical Officer could suggest to the schoolmaster or school authorities, the desirableness of not allowing any child who had been absent from infectious disease, to return to school without a medical certificate." The School Board thereupon gave the required directions, and the result was, that through Mr. Honeybun, one of their visitors, the Sanitary 14 ment was informed of many cases of scarlet fever, of which it would not otherwise have heard. From whooping-cough, the other epidemic of the year, the deaths steadily increased as the year advanced, and with those from scarlet fever, greatly contributed to our comparatively high zymotic death-rate. The low temperature, and the continuance of heavy rains in the latter part of the year, favoured the occurrence of death from this disease. Of the 63 deaths, 48 occurred in St. Mary's District, 45 being those of children under two years of age, at which age, more particularly during the first twelve months, it has been observed to be most fatal, probably on account of its occurring during dentition. Not unfrequently it follows or co-exists with measles in the same locality. The Registrar -General calls attention to the "large proportion of deaths from this disease amongst the children of the working classes." In our own parish the deaths were almost exclusively confined to that class. The 22 deaths from fever include 2 from typhus, 16 from typhoid, and 4 from continued fever. Until there is greater exactitude shown in the use of the term "typhoid," I must be excused for not regarding every case reported as one of genuine typhoid fever. The term "typhoid" is frequently employed by medical men in a sense different to that intended by the Registrar-General and modern nosologists. By many practitioners it is often used to designate a prostrate condition of the system, with certain symptoms which 15 patients not unfrequently exhibit before death from any inflammatory or febrile disease, without heed as to whether or not the pathognomonic lesion of typhoid fever is present. The deaths from diarrhoea, producible by so many causes were, as might be expected, most numerous during the autumn months, and of the total number (68), 57 occurred during the first year of life. Only twelve deaths frem diarrhoea were recorded in St. John's during the year. To diseases of the respiratory organs 349 lives succumbed. The low temperature which prevailed during some weeks swelled the mortality from bronchitis and pneumonia. The deaths were most numerous during the first quarter of the year, being 145, and of the total number, 130 were those of children under 5 years of age. 15 occurred between 5 years and 25 34 „ „ 25 „ „ 45 69 „ „ 45 „ „ 65 94 „ „ 65 „ „ 85 7 „ ,, 85 „ „ upwards. Total 349 It may not be amiss to compare the mortality from the same causes in the two districts into which the parish is divided, and to see the advantages,—that is, the less liability to disease, and the greater probability of recovery,—which the well-to-do classes and their children have over their poorer neighbours. This is 16 more clearly seen, as might have been expected a priori, in connexion with those diseases, which require isolation to prevent their extension, or in the course of which some intercurrent inflammatory symptoms or other complications are apt to arise from the want of good nursing. I do not here refer to the creature comforts, or to the many adjuvants to health which wealth can command, but to the wholesome and purifying influences of light, fresh air, cleanliness, freedom from exposure to cold, &c., which are within the reach of all. VACCINATION. I am indebted to the courtesy of Mr. Dudman, the Vaccination Officer of this parish, for the contents of Table VII. From this table it will be seen that of the children whose births are therein mentioned as registered during the year 1875, a certain number was not vaccinated. 1 have reason, however, to believe, that a later return will shew that the lives of a small percentage only of such children were afterwards left unprotected by vaccination. Rate of Mortality per 1,000 oj the Population. st. mary's st. John's. Measles .135 .052 Scarlet Fever 1.156 .803 Whooping-Cough .721 .388 Bronchitis 2.312 1.243 17 SANITARY WORK. The nature, and, so far as figures can indicate it, the amount of the sanitary work done, directed, or superintended by the Inspectors during the parochial year is shewn in Table VI. So much of the time of the Inspectors has been occupied in investigating the complaints of parishioners, in attending to the removal of infectious cases, and the disinfection afterwards of their apartments, &c.; in discovering the defects and supervising the improvements of house drains, and of other work which some might think properly belonged to a Surveyor, that they have not been able to give that time to the systematic house to house inspection, which is imperatively necessary, and must be uninterruptedly bestowed, if the health and cleanliness of the parish are to be maintained. BAKE-HOUSES, COW-SHEDS, AND SLAUGHTER-HOUSES. The routine duties of the Inspectors in connexion with the bake-houses, cow-sheds, and slaughter-houses in the parish, have been duly performed. Whenever I inspected the cow-sheds, I found them, with two exceptions, in a fair sanitary condition. In these two cases the licenses on the application for their renewal were suspended by the magistrates for a month, but were afterwards granted, as the requirements I had made were complied with. Structural alterations in slaughter-houses, in compliance with the Bye-laws of the Metropolitan Board of Works, were in several instances required. The 18 representative of that Board, addressing the magistrates on the licensing-day, remarked that the slaughter-houses in Paddington were in a better sanitary condition than those in any other part of the Metropolis. In one case I deemed it necessary to oppose the application for a license, and it was accordingly refused. WATER. The parish is supplied with water by the Grand Junction and West Middlesex Companies, chiefly by the former: and they in turn draw their supplies from the Thames, as do the Chelsea, Southwark, and Lambeth Companies. Of the five Companies named, Dr. Frankland points out that the West Middlesex delivers the best water, and that during the past seven years he has on no occasion been able to discover from microscopic examinations any living organisms in it. The same cannot be said of the water from the Grand Junction Company, more particularly of that supplied during the year under review. He remarks, that the subsidence and filtration plant of the four Companies other than the Middlesex is altogether inadequate to the work required of it. He further points out, that the water of the Thames at its source is as free from pollution as the deep well water of the Kent Company, which for purposes of comparison he takes as the standard; but that in its downward course it becomes largely contaminated by the sewage of towns and the washings of cultivated land, especially during the winter months; and that, notwithstanding the greater care exercised now than formerly by most of the Companies, its deterioration, though subject to fluctuations, does 19 not diminish. Surely it is time that they whose business it is to supply us with water should look farther afield for their intake, instead of confining their efforts to the formation of new reservoirs and more filtering beds. Rivers, notwithstanding legislative enactments to prevent their pollution, are likely to remain ready-made channels for receiving the waste and more or less of the sewage of towns, and the surface drainage of lands manured with products natural and artificial. If water for drinking purposes, and that which is required in the preparation of food, were brought from some distant source, some lake "far from gay cities and the ways of men," that which is at present supplied by the Companies might be used for all other purposes. With the main constantly charged, and the supply-pipe carried up to every floor in a house, a draught of potable water, fresh and of more uniform temperature, could at all times be obtained. No receptacle for its storage would be required. This would in a sanitary point of view be no small gain, seeing that the water we drink ought never to be taken from cisterns which have any connexion direct or indirect with closets, as with our existing arrangements is too frequently the case. There are details as to fittings, to which I cannot now refer. The condition of cisterns and water-butts would then be of less moment. The most important complaint that came before me, in connexion with the water-supply, was from a parishioner in the neighbourhood of Westbourne Park. Inspector Clifford, having satisfied himself that the 20 cisterns were clean and the service-pipe sound, was driven to the conclusion that the supply from the main was foul. Singularly enough, it was found on inquiry, that the neighbours had no complaint to make regarding the water supplied to them. It turned out that the main terminated in a "blind end" or "dead head," opposite the complainant's house, which was the last of a row supplied by the Grand Junction Company. By the elongation of the main, to the extent of several feet, the evil was remedied. The Company, moreover, undertook to remove the plug more frequently. Inspector Clifford, having reason to suspect the purity of the water from the fountain near the enginehouse at the north end of the ornamental waters in Kensington Gardens, close to the Uxbridge Road, was directed, by the Sanitary and Public Health Committee, to place a sample of the water in the hands of Professor Anderson for analysis. Having ascertained that it was eminently unfit for drinking purposes, and knowing the same to be freely drunk by children and others frequenting the Park, I addressed a letter enclosing a copy of the certificate to the First Commissioner of Works, in which I called his attention to the impure condition of the water, and expressed the hope that the supply would be immediately discontinued. This was forthwith done. MILK. Information having reached me of the existence of Foot and Mouth Disease among cattle in Berkshire, 21 and of the probability of milk from cows so infected being sent by the Great Western Railway from the Farringdon District to Paddington for sale and distribution, I deemed it my duty to acquaint myself with the views of other Medical Officers of Health, as to the fitness of such milk for human consumption. I could, however, at that time get little information from them, their attention not having been specially directed to the question. But as I firmly believed that any animal secretion must be unfit for human food when the animal is suffering from a grave constitutional malady, I sought from the Medical Department of the Local Government Board such information as it could afford; and though it could furnish no definite and positive intelligence, I was assured, that if I adopted the view that milk from cows suffering from Foot and Mouth Disease is unfit for food, I should have the support of that Board, and of Sanitarians generally. With some difficulty I obtained from Dorsetshire three specimens of milk from diseased cows, and gave them to Professor Anderson, our Analyst, for examination. I felt the question to be one of very great importance and magnitude, since it involved to a large extent the milk supply of the Metropolis. Knowing that conflicting opinions were held as to the wholesomeness of such milk, and anticipating that legal questions would in all probability be raised, should the Officers of the Vestry seize it, or interfere with its sale, I conferred with the Vestry Clerk, and placed other samples of the milk in the hands of Dr. Burdon Sanderson and Professor Wanklyn, for microscopic and 22 chemical examination. I considered that the Committee would not be satisfied, nor be prepared to take any action, unless supported by the authority of men of the highest scientific eminence. I shortly obtained the result of the Analysis by Professor Anderson and Professor Wanklyn, and of a careful microscopical examination by Dr. Burdon Sanderson, and learned that the milk submitted to those gentlemen did not differ either chemically or microscopically from ordinary healthy milk. While I was not greatly surprised to learn this, I was gratified to find, as being confirmatory of my own view, that from the behaviour of one of the samples (No. 2), Mr. Wanklyn had no hesitation in declaring the milk to be unfit for food. I refer to the readiness with which it "turned" or became sour; that is to say, sample No. 2 in a very short time began to ferment and to generate acid, showing that, while chemical examination failed to detect any alteration, the milk was nevertheless contaminated. Mr. AVanklyn assured me that, though he had examined more than a thousand samples of milk, he had never seen one behave in such a manner before. Dr. Burdon Sanderson noticed the same peculiarity in the same sample (No. 2). I hoped to be able subsequently to show conclusively from further examination, that milk from cows infected with Foot and Mouth Disease may not exhibit chemically or microscopically anything different from ordinary healthy milk, but that it possesses a marked proneness to putresence, and is therefore tainted, and always unfit for food. The 23 difficulty of procuring samples of such milk, and other circumstances, to which I need not now more particularly refer, prevented my following up the enquiry. From Professor Wanklyn I afterwards learned, that he had subsequently examined other samples of milk taken from cows affected with Foot and Mouth Disease with the same result, and that his opinion had been confirmed by other observers. FOOD. In the spring of the present year, the Inspector under "the Sale of Food and Drugs Act" seized, in the shop of a tradesman in the parish, about 1 cwt. of putrid meat; and again, two days afterwards, on other premises of the same tradesman, about 1½ cwt. Both lots were about to be made into sausages. The Magistrate, after inspecting the meat, gave an order for its immediate destruction. The owner was subsequently prosecuted by the Vestry, and fined £12 and costs. Two barrels of crabs, weighing about 80 lbs., were recently seized by the Inspector, and were destroyed by him with the consent of the owner, to whom he gave a certificate enabling him to recover the purchasemoney from the salesman. THE CANAL. My attention has been frequently directed to the condition of the water, more particularly in the Basin. Last year it remained in a tolerable state, there being no smell from it, nor any sign of putrefaction. This year, owing to the exceptionally high 24 ture of the summer, the water, being stagnant and loaded with impurities, speedily became putrid, and gave off the most offensive odours. I learned, too, that it was affecting the health of the bargemen and of others in the neighbourhood, causing sickness and diarrhoea. It therefore became necessary to have the Basin emptied, and the water changed. This was accordingly done on two occasions, viz., on the 17th June, and on the 31st July. The deposit was found to be much less than the noxious state of the water had suggested. This is explained by the fact, that much of it had previously been removed by the dredging machine. On neither occasion was any of the deposit removed. It does not admit of doubt, that had the tropical heat continued, the water in a few days, perhaps in a few hours, would have been again in the same objectionable condition, imperilling the health of the surrounding inhabitants. In my opinion, the Canal must remain a nuisance so long as the offensive trades carried on upon its banks are permitted, and its bed is left in its present state. All attempts at disinfecting would be nugatory. If the mud in the Basin—charged with putrefying organic matter—were removed, a hard impermeable bottom provided, and the water changed as often as the necessity arose—measures which I believe have been suggested by my predecessors—the main condition would be secured for bringing about a better state of matters. The Vestry could take care that the sewers should not be choked with mud, and thus oblige the Canal Company, in their turn, to compel their tenants to carry on their business with some regard to the public health. For many years the wharves in Paddington have 25 been made the dust-bin, the receptacle of the refuse in transitu, of a large section of the Metropolis. At present the Vestry collects and removes the dust of the parish, without again depositing it upon the wharves, or in any part of the parish. Should the Vestry carry out the whole of its own scavenging after the same method—the removal of manure, slops, &c., in addition to the dust—would the parishioners be asking too much, if they demanded of Parliament the necessary powers to abolish the too long-continued nuisance gratuitously inflicted by the adjoining parishes. THE VENTILATION OF SEWERS. Much consideration has been bestowed upon this important question by the Sanitary Department. It has also been discussed in the Vestry. There have been frequent complaints of the bad smells from the ventilating openings (ventilators) in the streets. Wherever there are such openings, there is necessarily an escape of sewer air, charged, it may be, with more or less unpleasant odours. The law of the diffusion of gases necessitates this interchange or commixture of the sewer air and the external atmosphere. But the sewer air is composed of several gases of different specific gravities. If the law of diffusion be interrupted, the lighter gases, owing to their greater buoyancy, will rise to the higher levels while confined in the sewers. So also these lighter gases will pass through the ventilators into the external atmosphere— and while in the atmosphere will be diluted, and 26 wards dispersed by the wind, and probably rendered innocuous. Let us hope that any seeds of disease carried into the atmosphere by these gases are, like other organic particles, dried, disintegrated, oxidised, or, if brought down again to the earth by the rain, are, in the ceaseless chemistry of nature, decomposed and appropriated by the vegetable world.* The external air will, moreover, pass into the sewers. Temperature largely determines these movements of the air, both within and without the sewers. The higher the temperature in the sewers, the greater is the expansive force of the gases therein, and the more readily, therefore, do they pass into the atmosphere. When the temperature of the sewer is low, a contraction of the gases takes place, and favours the entrance of atmospheric air. But while the sewer air is confined in the sewer, it may be subjected to an increase of tension. This may be caused by heavier bodies, such as soil or water, passing into the sewer, or by gases generated in the sewer wherever there is any deposit for any length of time. Such deposit may be due to a continuance of dry weather, or to house drains being inadequately flushed, or, lastly, to an insufficient fall in the sewers themselves. I hope to be able, by *So far as I am aware, we have no positive evidence of small-pox, scarlet fever, or measles, having been propagated by sewer air. This remark does not apply to diarrhoea, cholera, or typhoid fever. I have known children to suffer from choleraic diarrhoea, induced by playing over and around the gullies in the streets. In this country the occurrence of typhoid fever has been traced, whenever the cause has been discovered, to drinking water or milk poisoned with typlioidal excretions' or to the emanations from sewers, or possibly to personal contagion. 27 means of the pressure gauge, to determine, with something like scientific precision, at what particular points in the parish sewers the tension is greatest, with the view of providing more ventilators for its relief. This announcement will probably occasion disappointment in the minds of those who would do away with all such openings: but seeing that sewers must be ventilated for the safety of those who work in them, for the efficient operation of the sewers as channels for carrying away sewage, and for the stability of the sewers themselves, which, charged with pent-up gases, might otherwise explode; and seeing that, with our present knowledge, all other modes of ventilation are inapplicable or impracticable ; the provision of ventilators in the middle of the roadways, where these are of sufficient width to admit them, is absolutely necessary. Accidental openings are insufficient. Were the ventilators done away with, and no other openings provided, it is certain that the house drains would act as ventilating shafts to the sewers to a greater extent than they now do, and that with every heavy fall of rain, and during certain trade operations, the traps in the houses would be forced. If the parishioDers would more freely use the water at their command, and in this way keep their own house drains clean; if certain sewers were flushed whenever the necessity arose, or even before the necessity arose; if more ventilators were introduced, so as to bring the air in the sewers into constant contact with the external air; the sewers would soon cease to annoy the atmosphere, smells from this source would be 28 removed from our borders, and there would be heard no longer complaints in our streets. DUST AND MANURE. The removal of the dust by the Vestry was a step in the right direction; and it is to be hoped it will be shortly followed by others, the next being the removal of the manure. In every large town this is properly the work of the parish or of the corporation. Both dust and manure, instead of being fertile sources of complaint and of disease in a parish, should be made sources of profit, and should contribute to the parochial exchequer, as is the case in Antwerp and certain other continental cities. With efficient organization, both might be removed daily, and dust-bins and dung-pits might be easily abolished. At my suggestion, a resolution was passed, requiring the removal of manure three times a week—that is to say, on alternate days. Summonses were taken out against two persons for "undue detention of manure' one of whom was committed to prison for a month, in default of payment of a fine of £2 and costs. He had been previously fined. The money was subsequently paid. HOUSES CONDEMNED AS UNFIT FOR HUMAN HABITATION. Rose Tree Cottage and Providence Cottage were closed under the Nuisances' Removal Act, 1855, sec. 13. The condition of Nos. 1, and 2, Vine Cottages, 29 Harrow Road, may be gathered from the subjoined extract from my bi-monthly report:— "The premises are occupied by a widow and family paying- 7s. per week rent. The floors of the rooms and passages, the treads and risers of the stairs, and the paving in the yard are broken. Some of the windows are without sashes, and the doors are without hinges. The drains are untrapped; the water-butt which forms one side of the two closets is uncovered, and the closets are without water supply. The walls and the ceiling's are crumbling- in ruin."— These premises were also closed. More would have been done in this direction, but for the circumstance that some of the worst property in the parish is vested in the Metropolitan Board of Works, and is about to be pulled down to make room for the Harrow Road Improvement. A penalty of £5 and costs was recovered from the owner of No. 25, Caroline Place, for not obeying an order of the Vestry, "To provide a properly paved or other impermeable surface to the whole of the yard, so as to insure the good and efficient surface drainage thereof." The proceedings were taken under the Metropolis Local Management and Amendment Acts. I have much pleasure in acknowledging the readiness, on all occasions, of the Inspectors, Mr. Clifford and Mr. Biorn, to acquaint me with such practical details as I have at any time desired to know, and their prompt attention to the matters which I have brought under their notice. My thanks are due to the Registrar-General, and to 30 other Gentlemen connected with Somerset House, for the manifest desire they have shown to afford me the information I have frequently had occasion to ask. In common with every one whose attention has been directed to the vital statistics of the country, I have to express my indebtedness to the writings of Dr. Farr for many of the figures embodied in this report. Having adverted to matters to which reference is commonly made in a report of this nature, I might here stop ; but for the sake of those who take an intelligent interest in vital statistics—in respect to their teachings, and the many questions they suggest as to what is remediable and what is inevitable,—I hope to be excused if I call more particular attention to Table III., which, in my opinion, will be found not only to be the most interesting and the most instructive, but also to merit a somewhat closer examination. It is an epitome of eighteen hundred and fifty-five lives. It is the register of lives ranging from an ephemeral duration of ten minutes to the "monumental " age of ninety-six years. It has the brevity and simplicity of patriarchal records. Under its proper heading as to age, and opposite the name of the disease as the cause of death, stands the numeral, indicating the "fuimus " of so many of our fellow-parishioners. From it one may learn the diseases to which, in the absence of accidental disturbing influences, a town population of upwards of 100,000 is subject, and more particularly those to which it is most prone, and also the 31 ages at which it is most apt to succumb to those diseases. It furnishes, at the same time, a very fair indication of the measure of health and comfort enjoyed by the lower-middle and working classes of such a population. The diseases to which I especially refer are small-pox, measles, scarlet fever, diphtheria, whooping-cough, diarrhoea, want of breast-milk, thrush, scrofula, tabes mesenterica, hydrocephalus, convulsions, diseases of the respiratory organs, atrophy, and debility. As some of these diseases are propagated by contagion, and are therefore preventible, while others are due to privation, their occurrence in most instances implies want of care in guarding against their inception, or inability, from lack of accommodation, to prevent their extension, or want of means to provide the comforts and remedial measures which are necessary to arrest their development. It shows that, of such a population, 413 die during the first year of their existence. At this age the precise causes of death are often obscure. The patient can give no information. The objective symptoms alone aid us in our diagnosis; and what we often call the disease—convulsions, diarrhoea, thrush, &c.,—is only the most prominent symptom. The deaths at this age mostly belong to the zymotic, the local, and the developmental classes. The zymotic diseases, when fully developed, are in general readily recognizable in infants. Not so the local. The organs themselves are in a transitional state from that of foetal to that of breathing life. They are in process of development. The struggles 32 of the patient, and the small size of the parts affected, often make a satisfactory examination difficult. The developmental diseases denote that the subjects of them have been born too early (premature birth), or have been imperfectly formed when born (cyanosis, spina bifida, and other malformations), or have been badly nourished after birth (atrophy). As might be expected, the deaths from these causes greatly preponderate during the first year of life. It will be observed, that not only is the mortality greatest during the first year of life, but that it is greatest during the first month, and rapidly declines month by month; and as, in every month, the deaths of male children are more numerous than those of female, at the end of the first year the disparity in the number of boys and girls, to which reference has been made, is greatly reduced. One is tempted to ask whether the provision of so much life, such a prodigality of being to be followed so soon by an almost Pharaoh-like sacrifice of it, is necessary to the multiplication of the race. It is to be observed, that if we follow the stream of embryonic life upwards, we are confronted month by month with an increasing apparent waste, until we arrive at the commingling of its sources, and the wholesale destruction of those elements of physical being which have been provided to secure the continuation of the species. In the vegetable world, we see the same law apparently at work, in the wealth of blossom which is frequently out of all proportion to the amount of fruit. The promise of the spring is not always redeemed when 33 the autumn has arrived. Does this ample provision of life imply a prevision of the subsequent sacrifice of so much of it? Is the supply in anticipation of the demand? Is it regulated to meet the demand that death has made, and is continually making? It may be, that in the circle of being, in the evolution of life and death, the same law of supply and demand operates as we see in connexion with other matters or commodities, be they man's follies, his necessities, or his vices. It is an historical fact, that devastations of the race, whether by plague, famine, or war, have been followed by a rapid and corresponding increase of births; and that, as Adam Smith remarks, "The demand for men necessarily regulates the production of men, quickens it when it goes on too slowly, and stops it when it advances too fast." In America, we see a large demand, and a rapidly progressive supply; in France, with the absence or rather the repression of the demand, there is a slowly decreasing population. Between one and two years of age. It will be seen that the deaths are much less numerous. One or other of the exanthemata (small-pox, measles, and scarlet fever), which are never entirely absent from the community, claims its complement of victims ; and the larger too, provided it exists in an epidemic form. This remark applies particularly to measles, which is most fatal at this age. The fatal local diseases are convulsions, bronchitis, and pneumonia. The developmental class exacts its contingent in the deaths of the few who survived the first year of E 34 their existence, and who were the subjects of the conditions already explained. Between two and Jive years of age. Causing the deaths of more boys than girls, and thus nearly disposing of the remaining difference in point of numbers between the sexes, the exanthemata are, at this age, the most potent death factors, particularly scarlet fever, which is most fatal during the third and fourth year. Constitutional diseases, the result of some hereditary taint, of debility connected with teething, or with some other ailment, of insufficient or improper food, or of the want of fresh air, cleanliness, good nursing, &c., —in a word, diseases arising from the absence of favourable sanitary conditions—add largely to the death-roll at this period. The same may be said of local diseases, such as convulsions, and others of an inflammatory type, which are oftentimes the consequence of needless exposure to cold. Thus we see, that, principally from the diseases - already named, no fewer than 712 children died in this parish, during the last twelve months, before the completion of their fifth year. This represents 38 per cent, of the entire mortality, or 6'77 deaths per 1,000 of the population. This death-rate, I am happy to say, is decreasing; and it must continue to do so, if sanitary science is to accomplish anything. If sanitary science fail to remove, so far as is practicable, those causes which strike down nearly one half of the race before it can be 35 said to have well begun to live, it will belie its name, and be comparatively worthless. Hygeia will then no longer be regarded as the health-giving goddess, but a myth, the creation of doctrinaires and idealists; or at best as a being overweighted by the labours imposed by ignorance and cupidity, and with energies paralysed needing the ministrations of her father iEsculapius. Spero meliora. We hope for better things, and believe that Hygeia, as the faithful handmaid of religion, will yet, with the help of the cognate sciences, make this earth a bud of which Paradise will be the blossom. AVe know that 140 of these deaths were occasioned by measles, scarlet fever, and whooping-cough. I have already expressed the opinion, that these deaths were preventible. Of how many more the same might be said, I leave it to others to determine. Nor let it be forgotten, that, while these figures represent the deaths, they imperfectly indicate the extent of the sickness which has at any time prevailed in the parish, or the amount of suffering and disease which preceded them, or the injuries—such as blindness, deafness, lung mischief, &c.,—which these diseases left behind them as perpetual reminders of their occurrence. These figures are the indices of death alone. Death, like birth, happening to every one but once, whether as an instrument or a state, has an importance entirely its own, refuses to be associated with other events, admits of no rival near its throne, and, whenever it asserts its prerogative, claims its right to speak for itself. 36 We are reminded of the conditions in the wellbalanced sentence of Herodotus—In peace, children bury their parents; in war, parents bury their children. The result is the same, the cause is different—not redhanded Mars, but hydra-headed disease.* Here, then, is the field for sanitary effort. This is our most urgent sanitary want. Here the energies of the sanitary reformer, wisely directed, will secure their largest results, and his labours meet with their amplest reward. The appeal to him. "uttered or unexpressed," for the preservation of their lives, is from the most helpless, the most numerous, and the most interesting portion of the race, the delicice humani generis. Great as is the interest attaching to such questions as the ventilation of sewers, the utilization of sewage, the improvement of the dwellings of the working classes, and other matters which are engaging the attention of sanitarians, such questions are subsidiary and of secondary importance to the inquiry how best to diminish the mortality of our infantile and juvenile population. Dealing with the exanthemata alone (measles, scarlet fever, and small-pox), the answer from Medical Officers of Health,—and it is within their purview that the ravages of these diseases most frequently come,— will, I venture to say, be formulated in the demand for *Of 1,000,000 children born in England, 263,182 die under five years of age; in the Healthy Districts 175,410; and in the Liverpool District, which represents the most unfavourable sanitary conditions, 460,370, or nearly one-half before they attain five years of age. 37 their compulsory registration, isolation, and for cottage hospitals, with full liberty of attendance upon his patient by the private practitioner. The annual cost to the public from the adoption of these measures would be considerably less than that now incurred in the painting, white-washing, papering, &c., of houses; in the replacing of bedding, furniture, &c.; in disinfecting, and in the separation and removal of families,—all of which are necessitated by the outbreak of these diseases. As to the hardship, against which some would cry out, of being compelled to place the patient in a hospital, it would very soon be found to be practically nil, as, the more rigorously the measures were worked, the less frequent would be the necessity for their adoption. There are details in connexion with these measures to which I cannot now advert, but I know of no insuperable objection to them. The history of medicine forbids us to expect the discovery of an immediate and effectual antidote to these disorders, there being few specifics at our command in the treatment of disease; nor are we able, when measles or scarlet fever appears, to induce a mild and harmless malady for an infectious and fatal one, as is done in the production of cow-pox by vaccination as a preventive of small-pox. The compulsory registration of all diseases which are capable of propagating contagion is thus most desirable. An exact knowledge of an evil is the first step towards its remedy. "Let there be light" was the prologue to Creation Registration does not necessarily involve nor 38 imply publicity. The knowledge of the cases in question could be confined exclusively to the Medical Officer of Health for the district. As a tentative measure, it might at first be adopted in connexion with the exanthemata only. Prevention is the essence of hygiene as an art, and the warrant for its cultivation as a science. "Forewarned, forearmed," the public through the press, as the occasion might arise, could thus be apprised of the occurrence of disease, and be given the opportunity, by increased surveillance, of preventing its extension; in a word, registration would have, in the sphere of its operations, all the advantages we see in meteorology in connexion with Admiral Fitzroy's signals, without their liability to error. With the knowledge of the huge mortality annually occurring from these diseases, both reason and feeling will be outraged if, in the absence of better remedies, those now indicated be much longer withheld. Between 5 and 15 years of age. At the commencement of this period, the child has been for some time able to make known its wants, possesses more vital energy, a greater tenacity of life, and an increased power of resisting disease. The deaths are much fewer. The mortality has steadily decreased from birth with every year of life, and will continue to do so until about the middle of the thirteenth year. To the zymotic diseases more than hall the deaths are due, scarlet fever being much more fatal than any other of that class. Constitutional diseases, to the origin of which I have already referred, such as scrofula, tabes, hydrocephalus, and phitisis, add their contingent. So, too, the local 39 diseases. Towards the end of this period, boys, being more exposed than girls, often die from injuries included in the class of violent deaths. This would be very apparent in the death returns of a manufacturing or mining district. Girls on the other hand, living less in the open air, suffer more than boys from phthisis. With the exception of scarlet fever, diphtheria, whoopingcough, and fever, all the zymoses are more fatal to boys than to girls. Annually in all England, from all causes, less than 5 out of every 1,000 boys die at this age (10—15), the mortality being slightly greater amongst girls. The difference is shown in the death-rate of .483 per cent, of boys at this age, as compared with .506 per cent, of girls. In the Stockbridge District, the mortality was at the rate of '198 per cent.; in Merthyr Tydvil, the rate was 1.089 per cent, which at this age was the highest rate in England. Between 15 and 25 years of age. Development is the characteristic of this period of life. Muscles are strengthened, bones are consolidated, and the body acquires its perfection of form and vigour. Of the zymoses fever is the most fatal at this age. The exanthemata, if they do occur so long after childhood, are generally severe. The effect of habits and occupations upon health is visible. Local diseases of the nervous system, and of the circulatory and respiratory organs, appear. Among women, half of the deaths are from phthisis, and a few in connexion with childbirth. Violent deaths of males, the result of accident or crime, are numerous at this age. The mortality at the ages 20—25 has gradually increased, being in all England .883 per cent, for men, and .853 for women. 40 Between 25 and 35 years of age. Phthisis is the most frequent cause of death at this age, women being the more numerous victims. Fever is less fatal; diarrhoea and local diseases more so. More women die from childbirth; this being the period in an Englishwoman's life during whicli most children are born. Between 35 and 45 years of age. Deaths from fever are generally fewer at this age than at any other. Phthisis is still the most fatal of the constitutional diseases. Deaths from local diseases have increased. There is little difference in the rate of mortality between the sexes, the difference (more particularly in London) being in favour of women, amongst whom, after the age of 39, a lower death-rate thenceforward prevails. Between 45 and 55 years of age. More men die than women. Fever is fatal to a certain number of lives. The various organs of the body, feeling the effects of prolonged tension, give way, and deaths from local diseases greatly exceed those from all other causes. Phthisis takes its toll at this age of more men than women, as do other pulmonary diseases owing their origin to the dust and bad air of workshops. Many women succumb to cancer—a disease of advancing years chiefly. Between 55 and 65 years of age. Constitutional and local diseases occasion more than three-fourths of the deaths at this period. Cancer claims the lives of more women, and brain affections of more men. From heart disease, from which not a few may have suffered many years, from bronchitis and disorders of the urinary organs, 41 to which men are more prone than women, and from violent deaths, many persons die. Suicides are most frequent at this age. Between 65 and 75 years of age. Autumn sheaves are gathered, the reaper using as his sickle the diseases referred to in the previous paragraph. The deaths from phthisis are fewer at this age. The mortality among men is double that of the previous decenniad, and is principally due to diseases of the heart, of the brain, and of the lungs. "The year of age 72," Dr. Farr remarks, "is that in which the greatest number of men die; but it is not necessarily the limit of healthy existence where the laws of life are observed." Cancer, and diseases of the generative organs, carry off many women. Between 75 and 85 years of age The mortality at this age is:—of men, 14.6 per cent,; and of women, 13.4. The same remarks apply to the causes of death at this period, as have been already made respecting the mortality of the first year of life. The causes of half the deaths are undistinguished or undistinguishable. The patient, from " second childishness and mere oblivion," is frequently unable to aid the physician in making his diagnosis. The zymoses claim few lives, local diseases the majority. One or other of the various organs of the body has given way, and it is not always easy to determine its precise condition;—whether the manifest impairment of power is consequent upon debility, the excitability of the organ to the proper performance of its functions being exhausted, or to organic disease. E 42 Between 85 and upivards. "The wheels of weary life at last stand still." As, in winter, withered leaves noiselessly fall from the topmost twigs of sapless boughs from natural decay, or on the mere shaking of the tree, so human lives at this period imperceptibly succumb to "natural death," or to ailments which, in earlier years, would have been regarded as trifling. At this age a few deaths are referred to bronchitis, and fewer to accident or negligence, under the class "violent deaths." This analysis of Table III. as to the times and the causes of the deaths in our midst, this commentary upon the mortality in the microcosm of our own parish, will be found, by those who choose to investigate the matter, to correspond with the deductions from the death returns of the country at large—our own being a copy and a counterpart on a reduced scale. The figures are changed, the facts are the same. Furthermore, this analysis shows, that many prematurely die either through their own acts or through the acts of others; and therefore, that the mortality could be greatly reduced—the payment of the universal debt postponed though not evaded—if the preventible causes which conduce to that mortality were avoided. It remains for one and all, availing themselves of the best hygienic measures, to save others, and to save themselves. I have the honour to be, Gentlemen, Your obedient Servant, JAMES STEVENSON. TABLE I. Table showing the Population, Inhabited Houses, Births and Deaths, for the Year 1875 and 10 years preceding. GROSS NUMBERS. Year. Estimated Population Number of Inhabited houses in the Parish. Registered Births. Deaths. St. Mary St. John St. Mary St. John St. Mary St. John 875 66,613 38,609 12,746 2,179 748 1,368 487 874 64,641 38,478 12,596 2,213 733 1,282 684 873 62,670 38,347 12,456 2,097 734 1,278 688 872 60,699 38,216 12,247 2,094 743 1,120 640 871 58,728 38,085 12,011 2,073 718 1,260 669 870 56,757 37,954 11,744 1,920 775 1,282 661 869 54,786 37,823 11,473 1,980 745 1,111 657 868 52,815 37,692 11,476 1,968 797 1,109 663 867 50,844 37,561 10,863 1,882 753 1,180 629 866 48,873 37,430 10,643 1,798 808 1,004 687 865 46,902 37,299 10,397 1,664 840 950 721 Average 10 year 1874. 55,771 37,888 11,591 1,969 764 1,158 670 NOTES. 1. Population at Census 1871—96,813. 2. Area in acres.—1,280. 3: Average No. of Persons in each house at Census 1871—8.1. For statistical purposes the Registrar-General estimates the population to the middle of the year on the basis of the rate of increase ruling between the two preceding Census periods. The estimate of population may be checked by the known number of inhabited houses, and by the average number of inmates per house, as ascertained at the preceding Census. The deaths of non-parishioners in public institutions within the parish are deducted for the year 1875; but not so for the previous years. TABLE II. Showing the Annual Birth Rate, Rate of Mortality, Death Rates among Children, and Deaths in Public Institutions, for the Year 1875, and 10 Years preceding. Birth Rate per 1000 of the Population. Annual Rate of Mortality, per 1000 living. Deaths of Children under 1 year: per centage of Total Deaths. Per centage of Deaths of Children under 1 year to Registered Births. Deaths of Children under 5 years : per centage of Total Deaths. Total Number of Deaths in Public Institutions. Saint Mary's Hospital. The Lock Hospital 1875. 27.8 17.6 22.3 14.1 38.4 141* 3 1874 28.6 19.1 214 1 1873 28.0 19.5 198 7 1872 28.7 17.8 178 5 1871 28.8 19.9 192 2 1870 28.5 20.5 178 10 1869 29.4 19.1 187 5 1868 30.6 19.6 209 7 1867 29.8 20.5 172 3 1866 30.1 19.6 199 7 1865 29.7 19.8 192 6 Average of 10 years, 1865-1874. 29.2 19.5 192 5 TABLE Deaths registered at several groups of ages from different causes during the year 1875. Note.—the Deaths in Public Institutions of non-Residents nre excluded. Cnuse of Death. AGES. 0 to 1 1 to 2 2 to 5 6 to 15 15 to 25 25 to 35 35 to 45 45 to 55 55 to 65 65 to 75 75 to 85 85 to 95 96 and Wards. Total under 5 Years Total Classes. I. Zymotic Diseases 121 38 87 51 12 16 15 10 9 8 7 .. .. 246 374 II. Constitutional Diseases 30 20 23 23 83 45 55 37 36 29 11 1 .. 73 343 III Local Diseases 114 58 49 21 41 41 62 101 120 115 89 15 1 221 811 v Developmhntal Diseases 128 17 5 1 1 3 1 .. 3 12 43 25 1 150 210 v violent DEATHS 18 .. 2 2 2 3 3 5 4 3 .. .. .. 20 44 Not Spacified or ill Defined 2 .. .. 1 1 1 2 3 .. .. .. .. .. 2 10 Totals 413 133 166 106 70 111 138 156 172 197 150 41 2 712 1855 Class 1.Zymotic Diseases. Order 1.—Miasmatic. 1. Smallpox .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 .. 1 .. .. .. .. .. 2 2. Meales 3 1 4 2 1 .. .. 1 .. .. .. .. .. 8 11 3. Scarlet Fever(Scarlatina) 7 11 52 36 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 70 11 4. Diphtheria .. 1 4 2 1j1 1 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. 5 9 5. Quinsy .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 6. Croup 2 6 8 6 .. .. .. .. 1 .. .. .. .. 16 22 7. Whooping Cough 30 15 17 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 62 63 8. Typhus Fever .. .. .. 1 .. .. 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 2 Enteric OR Typhold F .. .. 1 1 6 3 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 2 Simple oontinued F .. .. 1 .. .. 1 .. .. 1 .. 1 .. .. 1 16 9. Erysipolas 2 .. .. 1 .. 3 1 6 .. 4 2 .. .. 2 19 10. puerperal Fever (Metria) .. .. .. .. 1 3 3 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 7 11. Carbmncle .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 12. Influenza .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 13. Dysentory 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 .. .. 1 2 14. Diarrhœa 57 3 .. .. .. 3 1 .. 2 .. 2 .. .. 60 68 15. Cholera. .. .. .. .. 1 .. .. 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. 2 16. Ague .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 17. Remittont Fever .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 18. Khouroatism .. .. .. 1 1 .. 2 .. 2 .. .. .. .. .. 6 19 Other Zymotic Diseases .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Order 2.—Enthctic. 1. Syphilis 6 .. .. .. .. .. 1 1 .. 1 .. .. .. 6 9 2. Stricture of Urethrn .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 3. Hydrophohia .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 4 Glanders .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Order3.-Dieic 1 Privation .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 2 Want of Breast Milk 5 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 5 5 3 Purpura and Scurvy .. .. .. 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 4 Alcoholisn a. Del. Tremens .. .. .. .. .. 1 .. 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. 2 b. Intomponuice .. .. .. .. .. 1 3 1 1 1 .. .. .. .. 7 Order 4.— Parasitic. 1 Thrush 8 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 9 9 2 Worms, &c. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Constitutional Diseases. Order 1.—Diathetic. 1 Gout .. .. .. 1 .. .. 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 2 2. Dropsy .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 1 1 2 .. .. .. .. 5 3. Cancer .. .. .. .. .. 2 5 14 22 14 5 1 .. .. 63 4. Cunerum Oris (Noma) .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 5 Mnrtiliiition 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 4 2 .. .. 1 7 Order 2.—Tubercular. 1. Scrofula 2 4 1 2 1 1 .. .. 1 .. .. .. .. 7 12 2. Tabes Mesenterica 10 4 3 .. 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 17 18 3. phthisis 11 4 1 11 31 42 48 22 12 9 4 .. .. 16 195 4. Hydrocephalus 6 8 18 9 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 32 41 III Loaliseases. Order 1.—Nervous Suntcm. 1 Cephalitis 1 .. 5 1 1 1 .. .. 1 .. .. .. .. 6 10 2 Apoplexy .. .. 1 .. .. 2 3 7 12 6 6 2 .. 1 34 3. Paralysis .. .. .. 1 1 .. 1 7 6 14 13 .. 1 .. 44 4. Lnsanity .. .. .. .. .. 1 .. .. .. .. 1 .. .. .. 2 5. Chorea .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 6. Epilipsy .. .. .. 1 2 .. 2 1 .. .. 2 .. .. .. 8 7. Convulsions 27 7 6 1 .. .. .. 1 .. .. .. 40 42 8. Brain Disease, &c. 7 5 4 1 1 1 4 4 8 6 6 1 .. 16 48 Order 2.—Organs of Circulation. 1. Pericarditis .. .. 1 .. 1 1 .. .. 1 1 .. .. .. 1 5 2. Aneurism .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 3 2 .. .. .. .. .. 6 3. Heart Disease &c. .. .. 1 8 4 8 13 22 26 22 12 2 .. 1 118 Order 3.—Respiratory Organs. 1. Laryngitis 5 3 2 1 j 2 Bronchitis 34 24 13 2 3 A 3. Pleurisy .. .. .. .. .. 1 .. 2 1 .. .. .. .. .. 4 4. pneumonia 18 14 8 7 2 8 6 10 3 10 2 1 .. 10 89 5. Asthma .. .. .. .. .. 1 .. .. 2 .. .. .. .. .. 3 6. Lung Disease, &c 7 1 1 .. .. 1 2 6 4 10 7 .. .. 9 39 Order 4.—Digestive Organs. 1. Gastritis .. .. .. 1 .. .. .. .. .. 2 2 .. .. .. 5 2 Enteritis 3 .. .. 1 .. .. 1 1 1 1 .. .. .. 3 8 3. Peritonitis 3 2 1 .. 3 2 .. 1 .. .. .. .. .. 6 13 4. Ascites .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 5. Ulceration of Intestines 1 .. 1 .. .. 1 .. .. 1 1 .. .. .. 2 5 6. Hornia .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 2 1 .. .. .. 3 7. Heus .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. ... .. .. .. .. .. .. 8. Intussusccption .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 9. Striclure of Intestines 1 .. 1 .. .. .. 1 .. 2 .. .. .. .. 2 5 10. Fistula 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 11. Stomach Disease, &c. .. .. 1 1 .. .. 2 .. .. 1 1 .. .. 1 6 12. Pancreas Disease, &C. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 13. Hepatitis 1 .. 1 .. 1 .. 1 1 2 3 2 1 .. 2 13 14. Jaundice 2 .. .. .. .. 1 1 2 .. .. .. .. .. 2 6 15. Liver Disease, &c. 1 .. .. .. 1 .. 5 6 4 4 2 .. .. 1 23 16 Spleen Discasi, Sec 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 .. .. .. 1 2 Order 5.— Urinary Organs. 1. Nephritis .. .. 1 .. .. 1 1 .. 1 .. .. .. .. 1 4 2. Ischuria .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 3. Bright's Discaso (Nephria) .. 1 1 1 .. 3 2 6 6 4 4 .. .. 2 28 4. Dinbets .. .. .. .. .. 2 .. 1 1 3 2 .. .. .. 9 5. Calculus (Stone) .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 1 2 .. .. .. 2 6. Cystitis .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 2 1 5 1 .. .. .. 10 7. Kidney Disease, &c. .. .. .. .. 1 .. 1 3 6 4 1 1 .. .. 16 Order6.-Organs of Generation. 1. Ovarian Dropsy .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 .. 2 .. .. .. .. 3 2. Uterus Disease, &c. 1 .. .. .. .. .. 2 .. 2 .. .. 1 .. 1 6 Order 7.—Organs of Locomotion 1. Synovitis (Arthritis) .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 .. .. .. .. 1 2. Joint Disease, &c. .. 1 .. .. .. 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 2 Order 8.—Integumentary System 1. Phlegmon 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 2 .. .. .. .. 1 3 2. Ulcer .. .. .. .. .. 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 3. Skin Disease, &c. .. .. .. 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 IV.Developmental Diseases. Order 1.—Diseases of Children. 1.Premature Birth 11 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 11 11 2. Cyanosis 1 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 2 2 3. Spina Bifida .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 4. . Other Malformations 5 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 5 5. Teething 23 10 3 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 36 36 Order 2.—Adults. 1. Paramenia .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 2. ChildbirtlPuerpomlFiver .. .. .. .. .. 3 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 4 Order 3.—Old People. 1. Old Age .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 25 1 .. 76 Order 4.—Nutrition. 1. Atrophy and Debility 88 6 2 1 1 .. .. .. 3 3 2 .. .. 96 106 v. Vlolent Deaths Order 1.—Accident or Negligenc 1. Fractrues and Contusions .. .. 2 .. 1 1 .. 1 1 1 .. .. .. 2 7 2. Wounds Gunshot .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Cut, Stab .. .. .. 1 .. .. 1 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. 3 3. Burns and Scalds .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 2 .. .. .. .. 2 4. Poison .. .. .. .. .. 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 5. Drowing .. .. .. 1 .. 2 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 3 6. Suffocation 9 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 9 9 7. Otherwise 1 .. .. .. 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 2 Order 3.—Homicide 8 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 8 8 Order 4.—Suicide .. .. .. .. .. 1 2 3 3 .. .. .. .. .. 9 Causes not specified or ill defined 2 .. .. 1 1 1 2 3 .. .. .. .. .. 2 10 Deaths Registered from all Causes during each quarter of the year 1875, in each Sub-District. Note.— The Deaths in Public Institutions of non-Residents are excluded. Cause of Death. Sub-District. Total First Quarter. Sub-District. Total Second Quarter Sub-District. Total Third Quarter Sub-District. Total Fourth Quarter Total Deaths. Total. St. Mary. St. John. St. Mary. St. John. St. Mary. St. John. St. Mary. St. John. St Mary. St. John. Classes. I. Zymotic Diseases 38 19 67 55 25 80 106 27 133 82 22 104 281 93 374 II. Constitutional Diseases 64 22 86 79 28 107 49 18 67 67 16 83 259 84 343 III. Local Diseases 207 84 291 134 66 200 109 33 142 162 49 211 612 232 844 IV. Developmental Diseases 49 16 65 45 21 66 47 9 56 37 16 53 178 62 240 V. Violent Deaths 9 6 14 8 1 9 5 3 8 8 6 14 30 15 45 Not specified or ill defined 3 1 4 3 .. 3 2 .. 2 .. .. .. 8 1 9 Totals 370 147 517 324 141 465 318 90 408 356 109 466 1368 487 1855 Class I. Zymotic Diseases. Order 1.— Miasmatic. 1. Smallpox .. .. .. .. 1 1 .. 1 1 .. .. .. .. 2 2 2. Measles 1 1 2 2 .. 2 1 .. 1 5 1 6 9 2 11 3. Scarlet Fever (Scarlatina) 6 4 9 16 10 26 38 12 50 18 5 23 77 31 108 4. Diphtheria 2 .. 2 1 2 3 2 .. 2 1 1 2 6 3 9 5. Quinsy .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 6. Croup 7 1 8 2 1 3 1 1 2 6 3 9 16 6 22 7. Whoopine Couch 3 7 10 11 2 13 8 1 9 26 5 31 48 15 63 8. Typhus Fever .. .. .. .. 1 1 .. .. .. 1 .. 1 1 1 2 Enteric or Typhoid F 2 3 5 3 2 5 1 1 2 3 1 4 9 7 16 Simple continued F 1 1 2 .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 1 2 2 2 4 9. Erysipelas 3 .. 3 4 1 5 .. 3 4 4 3 7 12 7 19 10. Puerperal Fover (Mctria) 3 .. 3 1 .. 1 1 .. 1 2 .. 2 7 .. 7 11. Carbuncle .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 12. Influenza .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 13. Dysentery 1 .. 1 .. .. .. 1 .. 1 .. .. .. 2 .. 2 14. Diarrhoea 3 1 4 5 3 8 41 7 48 7 1 8 56 12 68 15. Cholera (English) .. .. .. .. .. .. 2 .. 2 .. .. .. 2 .. 2 16. Ague .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 17. Remittent Fever .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. ... .. .. .. 18. Rheumatism 3 1 4 2 .. 2 .. .. .. .. .. .. 5 1 6 19. Other Zymatic Disease .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Order 2.— Enlhetic. 1. Syphilis 3 .. 3 2 .. 2 1 .. 1 3 .. 3 9 .. 9 2. Stricturo of Urethra .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 3. Hydrophobia .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 4. Glanders .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Order 3.— Dietic. 1. Privation .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 2. Want of Breast Milk .. .. .. 1 .. 1 2 .. 2 2 .. 2 5 .. 5 3. Purpura and Scurvy .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 .. 1 .. .. .. 1 .. 1 4. Alcoholism a. Del. Tremens .. .. .. 1 1 2 .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 1 2 b. Intemperance .. .. .. 3 .. 3 2 .. 2 1 1 2 6 1 7 Order 4.— T'arasitic. 1. Thrush 1 .. 1 1 1 2 3 1 4 2 .. 2 7 2 9 2. Worms, &c .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. II. Constitutional Diseases. Order 1.— Diathetic. 1. Gout .. 2 2 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 2 2 2. Dropsy 1 .. 1 .. .. .. 3 .. 3 1 .. 1 5 .. 5 3. Cancer 6 6 12 11 8 19 8 4 12 13 7 20 38 25 63 4. Cuncrum Oris (Noma) .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 6. Mortification 2 2 4 1 .. 1 .. .. .. 2 .. 2 5 2 7 Order 2.— Tubercular. 1. Scrofula 2 2 4 3 .. 3 1 .. 1 2 2 4 8 4 12 2. Tnbes Mesenterica 5 1 6 4 .. 4 6 .. 6 2 .. 2 17 1 18 3. Phthisis 44 7 51 46 15 61 26 11 37 40 6 46 156 39 195 4. Hydrocopbalus 4 2 6 14 5 19 5 3 8 7 1 8 30 11 41 III. Local Diseases. Order 1.— Nervous System. 1. Cephalitis 4 2 6 3 .. 3 .. 1 1 .. .. .. 7 3 10 2. Apoplexy 6 5 11 6 4 10 6 .. 6 5 2 7 23 11 34 3. Paralysis 12 3 15 11 3 14 8 .. 8 6 2 7 36 8 44 4. Insanity .. 1 1 1 .. 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 1 2 6. Chorea .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 6. Epilepsy 1 .. 1 2 .. 2 1 .. 1 1 3 4 5 3 8 7. Convulsions 7 .. 7 8 6 13 6 3 9 10 3 13 31 11 42 8. Brum Disease, &c. 14 2 16 6 3 9 10 3 13 9 1 10 39 9 48 Order 2.—Organs of Circulation. 1. Pericarditis 1 1 2 1 .. 1 1 .. 1 1 .. 1 4 1 5 2. Aneurism 1 .. 1 2 .. 2 1 1 2 1 .. 1 5 1 6 3. Heart Disease. &c. 24 9 33 17 6 23 20 8 28 26 8 34 87 31 118 Order 3.—Respiratory Organs. 1. Laryngitis 7 1 8 2 .. 2 .. .. .. 2 .. 2 11 1 12 2. Bronchitis 66 22 78 33 14 47 19 3 22 46 9 55 154 48 202 3. Pleurisy .. .. .. .. .. .. 3 .. 3 1 .. 1 4 .. 4 4. Pneumonia 22 18 40 17 11 28 5 4 9 9 3 12 53 36 89 6. Asthma .. 2 2 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 1 .. 3 3 6. Lung Disease, &c. 12 5 17 6 4 10 1 1 2 7 3 10 26 13 39 Organ 4.—Digestive Organs. 1. Gastritis .. .. .. .. .. .. 2 .. 2 3 .. 3 5 .. 5 2. Enteritis 2 .. 2 3 .. 3 1 .. 1 2 .. 2 8 .. 8 3. Peritonitis 2 2 4 1 .. 1 4 1 5 1 2 3 8 5 13 4.Ascites .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 .. 1 .. .. .. 1 .. 1 5. Ulceration of Intestines 1 1 2 .. 1 1 1 .. 1 .. 1 1 2 3 6 6. Hernia 2 .. 2 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 1 2 1 3 7. Ileus .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 8. Intussusception .. .. .. .. .. .... .. .. .. 1 .. 1 1 .. 1 9. Stricturo of Intestines .. 1 1 1 .. 1 .. 1 1 2 .. 2 3 2 5 10. Fistula .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 11. Stomach Disease, &c 1 1 2 2 .. 2 .. .. .. 2 .. 2 6 1 6 12. Pancreas Disease, &c .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 13. Hepatitis 3 .. 3 .. 2 2 3 .. 3 4 1 5 10 3 13 14. Jaundice 3 .. 3 .. .. .. 2 .. 2 1 .. 1 6 .. 6 15. Liter Disease, &c 7 2 9 1 4 5 5 1 6 2 1 3 16 8 23 l6. Snleen Discus:. &c .. .. .. .. 1 1 1 .. 1 .. .. .. 1 1 2 Order 6.— Urinary Organs. 1. Nephritis 1 .. 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. 3 .. 3 4 .. 4 2. Ischuria .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 .. 1 1 .. 1 3. Bright's Disease (Nephria) 7 2 9 3 3 6 2 3 5 6 2 8 18 10 28 4. Diabetes 2 2 4 1 1 2 .. .. .. 2 1 3 5 4 9 5. Calculus (Stone) .. .. .. .. 1 1 .. .. .. .. 1 1 .. 2 2 0. Cystitis 2 .. 2 1 .. 1 2 1 3 2 2 4 7 .. 10 7. Kidney Disease, &c 3 1 4 3 1 4 2 1 3 4 1 5 12 4 16 Order 6.— Organs of Generation. 1. Ovarian Dropsy .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 .. 1 1 1 2 2 1 3 2. Uterus Disease, &c. 2 .. 2 3 .. 3 .. .. .. 1 .. 1 6 6 Order 7— Organs of Locomotion 1. Synovitis (Arthritis) .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 .. 1 1 .. 1 2. Joint Disease, &c 1 .. 1 .. 1 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 1 2 Order 8.—Integumentary System. 1. Phlcirmon .. 1 1 .. 1 1 .. 1 1 .. .. .. .. 3 3 2.Ulcer 1 .. 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 .. 1 3. Skin Disease, &c .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 .. 1 .. .. .. 1 .. 1 IV." Developmental Diseases. Order 1 .—Diseases of Children. 1 Premature Birth 3 .. 3 2 2 1 1 .. 1 3 .. 3 9 2 11 2. Cyanosis .. .. .. 1 .. 1 .. .. .. 1 .. 1 2 .. 2 3. Spina Bifida .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 4. Other Malforrontion 2 1 3 .. .. .. .. 1 1 1 .. 1 3 2 5 5. Teething 7 .. 7 11 2 13 7 1 8 8 .. 8 33 3 36 Order 2.—Adults. 1. Paramenia .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. I 2. Childbirth (aMPucrpoml Fever 2 .. 2 1 .. 1 1 .. 1 .. .. .. 4 .. 4 Order 3.—Old People. 1. Old Age 12 11 23 10 4 14 14 3 17 11 11 22 47 29 76 Order 4.—Nutrition. 1. Atrophy and Debility 23 4 27 20 13 33 24 4 28 13 5 18 80 26 106 v. Violent Deatus. Order 1.—Accident or Negligence. 1. Fractures and Contusions Order 4.—Nutrition. Order 4.—Nutrition."Order 4.—Nutrition. Order 4.—Nutrition. 1 Order 4.—Nutrition. 1 3 1 4 2 Order 4.—Nutrition. 2 6 1 7 2. Wounds Gunshot .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Cut, Stab .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 1 1 1 2 1 2 3 3. Burns and Scolds 1 .. 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 1 1 1 2 4. Poison .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 .. 1 .. .. .. 1 .. 1 6. Drowning 2 .. 2 1 .. 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. 3 .. 3 C. Suffocation 2 2 4 1 1 2 .. .. .. 3 .. 3 6 3 9 7. Otherwise 1 1 2 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 1 2 Order 3.—-Homicide 1 2 3 4 .. 4 .. .. .. 1 .. 1 6 2 8 Order 4.— Scicide 2 .. 2 1 .. 1 1 1 2 1 4 5 5 5 10 | Causes not specified or ill defined 3 1 4 3 .. 3 2 .. 2 .. .. .. 8 1 9 47 TABLE IV. Table showing the Mortality from certain classes of Diseases, and proportions to Population, and to 1,000 Deaths, 1875. Total Deaths Deaths per 1,000 of Population. Proportion of Deaths to 1,000 Deaths. 1. Seven Principal Zymotic Diseases 283 2.7 153 2. Pulmonary Diseases ( other than Phthisis) 349 3.3 188 3. Tubercular Diseases 225 2.1 121 4. Wasting Diseases of Infants 122 1.2 66 5. Convulsive Diseases of Infants 119 1.1 64 NOTES. 1. Includes Smallpox, Measles, Scarlet Fever, Diphtheria, Whooping Cough, Fever, and Diarrhoea. 3. Includes Phthisis, Scrofula, Rickets, and Tabes. 4. Includes Marasmus, Atrophy, Debility, want of Breast Milk, and Pi emature Birth. 5. Includes Hydrocephalus, Infantile Meningitis, Convulsions, and Teething. TABLE V. Showing the Number of Deaths from the seven principal Zymotic Diseases, in the 10 Years 1865 to 1874, and in the Year 1875. Disease. 1865. 1866. 1867. 1868. 1869. 1870. 1871. 1872. 1873. 1874. Annual Average of 10 years, 1865—1874. Proportion of Deaths to 1000 Deaths in 10 years, 1S65—1874. 1875. Proportion of Deaths to 1000 Deaths in 1875. Smallpox 2 1.08 Measles 11 5.93 Scarlet Fever 108 58.22 Diphtheria 9 4.85 Whooping Cough. 63 33.96 Fever 22 11.86 Diarrhoea 68 36.66 Total, Paddington 283 152.56 Total, London 14,299 14,760 11,817 14,797 17,476 16,489 19,454 12,722 . 11,226 11,327 14,437 190 13,411 164 England Wales. 92,030 82,692 72,587 97,352 91,379 100,527 103,801 91,743 70,402 88,200 89 071 181 Not published. TABLE VI. Inspectors' Report of the Sanitary work, &c., completed in the year ended March 31, 1876. Paddington. No. of Complaints received during the year. No. of Houses, Premises &c., inspected. Results of Inspection. House Drains. Privies and W.C.'s. Dustbins. Water Supply. Miscellaneous. Regularly Inspected. Orders issued for Sanitary Amendments of Houses and Premises. Houses and Premises, &c., Cleansed, Repaired and Whitewashed. Houses Disinfected after Infectious Diseases. Repaired, Cleansed, &c. Trapped or Ventilated. Repaired, Cleansed, &c. Supplied with Water. New provided. New provided. Repaired, Covered, &c. Cisterns, (new) erected. Cisterns Cleansed, Repaired, and Covered. No. of Lodging Houses registered under 35th Clause of Sanitary Act 1866. Removal of accumulation of Dung, Stagnant Water, Animal, and other Refuse. Removal of Animals improperly kept. Bakehouses. Licensed Cowhouses. Licensed Slaughterhouses. Other Proceedings, e.g. Legal Proceedings. Total 970 5,957 1,304 976 306 328 400 376 460 12 50 223 12 70 218 8 83 13 23 20 TABLE VII. Return respecting the Vaccination of Children whose Births were registered between the 1st January and the 31st December, 1875, inclusive. Registration Sub-Districts comprised in the Vaccination Officers' Districts. Number of Births returned in the Birth-list Sheets, as Registered from 1 January, to 31 December, 1875. Successfully Vaccinated. Insusceptible of Vaccination. Had Small Pox. Dead— Un-Vaccinated. Postponed by Medical Certificate. Removal to Districts, the Vaccination Officer of which has been duly apprized. Removal to Places unknown, or which cannot be reached; and cases not having been found. Number of these Births remaining on the 31 December, 1876, neither duly entered in the Vaccination Register's (Columns 3, 4, 5 and 6 of this Return) nor temporarily accounted for in the " Report Book" (Columns 8, 9 and 10 of this Return.) Prosecutions. 1 St. Mary 2,192 1,736 8 .. 168 68 35 172 • • 5 who have been fined 2 St. John 746 612 3 • • 52 26 9 44 • • 40s. and 6s. coats. Total 2,938 2,348 11 • • 220 94 44 216 .. 5 REPORT OF THE EXECUTED IN THE PAVING AND SEWERS DEPARTMENTS. BY GEORGE F. STEVENS, SURVEYOR. REPORT TO THE VESTRY OF PADDINGTON. Surveyor's Department, Vestry Hall ; 30th June, 1876. Gentlemen, I beg to submit this, my Annual Report, on the chief Works executed, and in reference to various business transactions in this department, during the year ended Lady-day, 1876. Highways. In Sussex Mews West, the Granite Paving1 laid down many years ago having become very much worn, the Stones have been taken up, re-dressed, and re-laid, and new ones provided to make good the deficiency caused by this operation. The surface is now in good condition, and greatly improved. A Cab Stand in Harrow Road has been paved with New Granite Cubes, and its condition rendered more efficient in a Sanitary point of view. 3 The Water Channels and Crossings in various parts of the Parish have, as usual, been paved and much improved by the use of the best description of Granite, and the Old Channel Stones, where necessary, have been taken up, re-dressed, and re-laid to advantage. The Footway Pavements requiring repair have been taken up, re-laid, and repaired, and are now in good condition. The Mastic Asphalte laid on certain portions of the Footways in Harrow Road, Edgware Road, and Praed Street, in November, 1870, having in man) parts been worn through by the traffic, it was found necessary in April, 1875, to remove the remainder, and re-pave the Footways in question with new three-inch Yorkshire Flags. The powers conferred by the Metropolis Management Acts in regard to the Paving of New Streets, were enforced by the Vestry in certain cases, and with the Works executed by Owners of Houses abutting on other New Streets, the length of Roads now under the control of the Vestry is increased to 43 miles. The closing of Streets for Carriage traffic during the repair of the Roadways, and the operations of the Steam Road Roller were, as heretofore, attended with success. The Streets were opened in 2,168 places by Gas and Water Companies and others, for laying and repairing Pipes, constructing Vaults, and making 4 additions to Houses, and the costs for reinstating the Pavements were paid to the Vestry. Buildings, Sewers, and Drains. In accordance with the 76th Section of the Metropolis Local Management Act, 1855, 51 Notices were received by the Vestry, for the erection of 157 Buildings, namely—1 Church, 1 Temporary Church, 1 Chapel, 1 Skating Rink, 142 Houses, and 11 Stables. The orders of the Vestry.for the drainage of these Buildings have been served upon the parties concerned, and copies thereof filed at the Vestry Hall. Three miles, two furlongs, and twelve yards of Stoneware Drain Pipes have been laid down to the above-mentioned New Buildings, at an estimated cost to the Owners of Property of £1,251. Eighty-one applications by various parties on behalf of the Owners or Occupiers of Premises have been received for the re-construction and repair of Drains under the Public Roads and Footways, and the Works were executed at the expense of the Applicants. Brick Sewers, with the necessary side entrances and air openings, have been constructed by private parties, at their cost, in Marmont Road, between Portsdown Road and Rudolf Road, Lauderdale Road, between Elgin Road and Sutherland Crescent, and in a portion of Pindock Mows, for the drainage of New Buildings. 5 A Brick Sewer has been re-constructed at a greater depth in Uxbridge Road, from Leinster Terrace to the second house West from Porchester Terrace, for the drainage of four large Mansions, erected on the sites of Nos. 4, 5, and 6, St. Agnes Villas, at the cost of the Owners thereof. Various complaints having been received from Occupiers of Houses in Bayswater Terrace, of the bad condition of the drainage into the old shallow pipe sewer on the North side of Uxbridge Road, between Inverness Terrace and Queen's Road, and the aforesaid sewer being found so defective as to cause stoppages in the Street Gullies, a Brick Sewer has been constructed at a lower level in lieu of the Pipes, and the House and Gulley Drains connected therewith, at the Vestry's expense. Four hundred and two distinct Works relative to the repair of Sewers and Gullies, laying Pipe Drains, fixing Traps, &c., have been executed at a cost of £1,631 18s. l0d. This sum includes £740 18s. 6d. received from various persons for fixing Traps at outlets of Drains, constructing Gullies in New Streets, laying Drain Pipes under Footways and Roadways in connection with House Drains, and for examining Drains as to cause of stoppage in them, and the want of Traps. One hundred and seven examinations of House Drains were made from Sewers, as to the cause of stoppage, and whether trapped at their outlets, at a cost to the Applicants of £21 8s. 0d. 6 In addition to the above-mentioned Works, one hundred and sixty-eight subjects of Complaint have been received and entered in a Book kept for that purpose, referring to stoppages in Gullies and Drains, and to other matters. Invariably the Drains were unstopped, and the remaining cases promptly attended to. The cleansing of the Sewers, Gulley Drains, and Catch-pits are still carried out by Workmen io the employ of the Vestry, who have during the year removed from the Brick Sewers 171 cubic yards of heavy deposits, which impeded the flow of the Sewage. The Catch-pits of the Street Gullies have been emptied and cleansed, and the deposits removed therefrom at the rate of 62 Gullies per day, or an aggregate of 18,949 removals during the year. The Pipe Sewers, which require periodical cleansing, have been flushed with water as often as considered necessary, and by such means were kept in a good Sanitary condition. The seven Public Urinals, capable of accommodating 29 persons at one time, erected and maintained at the cost of the Vestry, have been thoroughly scrubbed and flushed with water by hand, twice daily, and supplied with an additional quantity through a water dribbling apparatus affixed to each, which required much attention in preventing a large cousumption or waste of water. 7 Improvements in the Sewers and Street Gullies, as commenced by the Vestry in the year 1859, and continued at intervals, have been further carried out this year, viz. :— The construction of 11 side entrances; the formation of 16 air openings ; and the construction and re-construction of 43 Gulleys, and the repair of 41 others. Re-naming Streets and Re-numbering Houses. The following Orders of the Metropolitan Board of Works have been carried out in accordance with the 87th Section of the Act, 1862 : — date of order. locality. subsidiary names abolished. no. of houses re-numbered. 1875. March 25 23a Connaught Square to be renumbered 4 Upper Berkeley Street West. 1 May 7 Chippenham Road 21 „ „ Alexander Street Sunderland Place 15 July 23 9a Stanhope Place to be 46 Connaught Square 1 Dec. 7 91 Seymour Street to be 47 Connaught Square 1 1876. Feb. 4 Westmoreland Road Westmoreland Place 56 March 17 Porchester Road Pickering Terrace Westbourne Park Place Albert Terrace Celbridge Place 65 8 Schedules containing the names of the Occupier or Owner of each House have been forwarded to the Metropolitan Board of Works, and Copies of the Schedules are kept in this Department, for the identification of Property affected by such Orders. I am, Gentlemen, Your most obedient Servant, GEORGE F. STEVENS, surveyor. Paddington. SECOND ANNUAL REPORT OF THE INSPECTOR OF PUBLIC LIGHTING UPON THE SUBJECT OF THE AVERAGE METER SYSTEM. TO THE VESTRY OF THE PARISH OF PADDINGTON, Gentlemen, In submitting this Report as to the first Parochial year's working of the Average Meter System by which the consumption of Gas burnt by the Public Lamps has been ascertained by measurement, I beg to inform you that the system, after 18 months trial, still continues to work most satisfactorily, and with justice to supplier and consumer. Under section 7 of the Metropolitan Referees Notification, it is required once a year to take out all the Meters for the purpose of cleaning, examining and testing as to friction. The 30th September, 1875, being the close of the first twelve months' working, they were taken out, thoroughly examined as to friction, and at the same time I considered it necessary to test them as to registration, the results obtained are now submitted for your inspection. 3 ANNUAL TESTINGS OF 143 LAMP METERS. Reference No. Reading of Gasholder. Per Centage of Error. Pressure in tenths of an inch. Friction of Meter. Reference No. Reading of Gasholder. Per Centage of Error. Pressure in tenths of an inch. Friction of Meter. Fast. Slow. Fast. Slow. Feet. Feet. 1 5.0 - — 5/10 .125 45 4.98 .4 - 5/10 .125 2 4.95 1.01 — „ .1 46 4.98 .4 — „ .125 3 4.87 2.67 - „ .125 47 4 2 — „ .125 4 4.95 1.01 — " .075 48 5.04 - .79 " .125 5 4.99 .2 — „ .125 49 493 1.42 . " .1 6 4.94 1.21 — „ .125 50 5.0 - - „ .125 7 5. — - „ .125 51 4.98 .4 . „ .125 8 5. - - " 1 52 4.92 1.63 . „ .075 9 4.98 .4 — „ .1 53 4.93 1.42 . ' " .125 10 5. - - " .15 54 493 1.42 . „ .1 11 5. . — „ .1 55 4.99 .2 . „ .1 12 4.94 1.21 — " .125 56 4.98 .4 . " .1 13 4.99 .2 — " .1 57 5. . . „ .125 14 4.70 6.38 — „ .05 58 4.99 .2 . " .125 15 4.93 1.42 — „ .15 59 5. . . „ .1 16 4.96 .81 . „ .15 60 4.82 373 - „ .1 17 5. . . " .15 61 493 1.42 . " .1 18 4.99 .2 . " .125 62 4.95 101 . " .125 19 4.82 373 — " .1 63 4.94 1.21 . „ .1 20 5. . . " .125 64 5.02 . .4 „ .125 21 4.99 .2 — " .1 65 4.91 1.83 . „ .125 22 4.95 1.01 . " .125 66 4.92 1.63 . „ .1 23 4.98 .4 — " .125 67 5.05 . .99 „ .125 24 4.92 1.63 — " .1 68 5.04 . .79 „ .075 25 4.89 2.25 — " .15 69 5.01 — .2 „" .125 26 50 — — " .125 70 5. . . „ .1 27 4.97 .6 . " .1 71 4.99 .2 . „ .1 28 4.98 .4 — " .125 72 4.96 .81 . „ .075 29 4.98 .4 — „ .125 73 4 98 .4 . „ .075 30 4.95 1.01 — " .1 74 5.0 — . „ .125 3l 4.94 1.21 . ' .125 75 4.05 1.01 . „ .075 32 5.01 — .2 " .125 76 4.98 .4 . „ 1 33 50 — — " .125 77 5. . . „ .125 34 4.95 1.01 — " .125 78 5.02 . .4 „ .1 35 4 95 1.01 — „ .125 79 4.98 .4 . „ 1 36 4.97 .6 — " .125 80 5.06 . 1.19 „ .1 37 4.94 1.21 . " .125 81 5. . . „ .1 38 4.95 1.01 —< " .1 82 4.93 1.42 . „ .125 39 5.03 . .6 „ .125 83 4.99 .2 . „ .1 40 494 1.21 — " .1 84 5. . . „ 1 41 4.95 1.01 — " .125 85 4 .93 1.42 . „ 1 42 5.05 . .99 " .125 86 4.94 1.21 . „ .1 43 4.94 1.21 — " .125 87 4.95 1.01 . „ .1 44 4.92 1.63 - „ .125 88 4.99 .2 — „ .1 4 ANNUAL TESTINGS OF 143 LAMP METERS, continued. Reference No. Reading of Gasholder. Per Centage of Error. Pressure in tenths of an inch. Friction of Meter. Reference No. Reading of Gasholder. Per Centage of Error. Pressure in tenths of an inch. Friction of Meter. Fast. Slow. Fast. Slow. Feet Feet. 89 4.95 1.01 . 5/10 .125 117 4.95 101 . 5/10 . .1 90 4.98 .4 . „ 1 118 5. . — 9 » .1 91 4.99 .2 . „ .125 119 Out leaky water box 92 4.96 .81 . „ .125 120 4.98 .4 — „ .0 93 4.95 1.01 . „ .1 121 5. — — „ .l 94 5. - . „ .1 122 4.99 .2 — „ .1 95 4.94 1.21 . „ .1 123 493 1.42 — „ .1 96 4.98 .48 — „ .1 124 5.02 . .4 „ .1 97 4.99 .2 . „ .125 125 4.94 1.21 — „ .li 98 4.95 1.01 . „ .075 126 4.95 1.01 — „ .1 99 5.01 - .2 „ .1 127 4.99 .2 _ „ 1 100 4.98 .4 - „ .125 128 5. . — „ 11 101 4.93 1.42 - „ .125 129 5. — — „ .1 102 4.86 2.88 - „ .1 130 4.92 1.63 - „ .07 103 5.0 — - „ .1 131 5. — - „ 12 104 5. - - „ 1 132 4.96 .81 - „ .i : 105 4.94 1.21 - „ .125 133 5. — - „ .l 106 4 .93 1.42 - „ .125 134 5.03 . .6 „ .i : 107 5. - - „ .125 135 5. — - „ .07, 108 5. - - „ 1 136 5. — - „ .1 1 109 4.78 4.6 - „ .1 137 5'01 — .2 „ .12. 110 4.92 1.63 - „ .1 138 4.98 .4 - „ .1 111 4.93 1.42 - „ .075 139 5. — - „ .07, 112 4.94 1.21 - „ 1 140 5.01 — .2 „ 1 113 4.94 1.21 - „ .1 141 4.98 .4 - „ 1 114 495 1.01 - „ .075 142 5.03 — .6 „ .12! 115 5. - - „ .1 143 4.95 1.01 - „ 1 116 4.96 .81 - „ .125 1 „ The Meters were t'ested for accuracy of registration at five-tenth pressure with three lights, the consumption being at the rate of twelve cubic feet per hour. It will be seen that one Meter was faulty, having a leakage in the interior water box, 7 required re.adjustment, not any exceeded the limit permitted as to friction, viz. .15 of an inch of water, 32 were dead correct, 16 slow, and 87 fast, but within the limit of 5 the "Sales of Gas Act," which allows a variation of 2 per cent, fast, or in favor of the Gas Company, or 3 per cent, slow, being in favor of the consumer. The Referees also order by section 8 that all governors after twelve months working shall be taken down and tested as to accuracy, I have therefore tested %/ J all the governors in use, viz. 1725, and submit the following results :— Number of Governors Tested Pressure tested at Number of Governors requiring re-adjusting. 1725. 8/10th. 15/10th. Average Consumption per hour Cu. ft. 4.96 Cu. ft. 4.96 571 Maximum do. do. 5.8 5.6 Minimum do. do. 3.2 3.3 The following details will show the Annual Expenditure and gain between the Old and New Systems for the 12 months ending Lady-day 1876: — Plant and Stock - Parkinson & Co 46 14 3 Humfress 8 1 4 Stephens 2 13 10 Sundry Small Articles 1 11 6 H. Bowden 6 6 0 Imperial Gas Company 9 19 2 75 6 1 Carried forward £75 6 1 6  £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. 75 6 1 Tradesmen's Bills, Parkinson, Pressure Register Papers 2 17 0 Humfress,Sundry Fittings, &c. 32 13 10 W. Isacke, Stationery 4 17 11 E. Stacey,OilShopA.rticles 4 11 1 Morton & Co., Printing 5 10 0 W. B. King, Gas Journal. 0 4 9 G. Weston, Sundry Payments 5 6 1 General Rate Account— Paying 1 1 4 Price & Co., Glycerine, &c. 10 8 4 67 10 4 Oas, Imperial Gas Co , March Quarter 1797 10 1 June do. 1045 9 6 Sept. do. 1219 11 11 Dec. do. 1930 18 10 5993 10 4 Wages, Paid Lamplighters 1256 10 6 Inspector's Salary 195 0 0 1451 10 6 Repairs, Painting & Maintenance of Meters, Lamp Columns and Lanterns, &c. 416 5 7 8004 2 10 Deduct—Cash received for Private Lighting 39 15 0 Gas supplied to Urinals 27 11 5 Old Brass Castings 18 4 0 85 10 5 7918 12 5 The Vestry would under the Old System have paid the Gas Company for Gas, Lighting, Repairs and Painting March 2107 1 7 June 2109 18 1 Sept. 2110 13 5 Dec. 2113 10 2 8440 18 3 Net gain for the year ending Lady-day 1876 £522 5 10 The Number of Defective and Bad Lights daring- the twelve months will be seen by the tallowing Table:— METERED LAMPS. Knocked down and out of Lighting. Escape in Column, defective Stand-Pipe. Out of Lighting. Cocks turned off in the Night. Cocks turned on at Lighting time. Lights blown out and Gas escaping. All Night. Out part of the Night. Water. Naphthaline. Stoppages in Co.'b Services. Water. Naphthaline Stoppages in Co.'s Services. Lights. Lights. Lights. Out. Bad. Out. Bad. Out. Bad. 1875. June Quarter 1 1 ... ... ... 17 5 28 65 2 ... 7 3 11 Sept. do. 2 ... ... ... ... 33 10 27 49 1 ... 3 6 2 Dec. do. ... 1 ... ... ... 9 4 18 63 1 ... 12 3 22 1876. March do. 4 1 ... ... ... 1 ... 2 7 ... ... 5 3 19 Total for the year 7 3 ... ... ... 60 19 75 184 4 ... 27 15 54 SCALE LAMPS. 1875. June Quarter 3 5 29 ... 14 14 5 285 741 25 9 42 ... 79 Sept. do. 26 ... 2 ... ... 17 9 220 802 9 47 41 ... 110 Dec. do. 43 14 19 ... 11 69 24 484 483 30 10 37 ... 343 1876. March do. 18 7 1 1 ... 33 2 129 274 6 4 43 ... 186 Total for the year 90 26 51 1 25 133 40 1118 2300 70 70 163 ... 718 8 During the year 152 Notices for the rectification of defective supply pipes have been served on the Gas Company, all of which have been attended to by them. Fifteen additional lamps have been erected during the past year, making the total number of Public Lamps in lighting, including those on the Urinals, 1740. I am, Gentlemen, Your obedient Servant, GEORGE WESTON, Inspector of Public Lighting for the Pariah of Paddington. April, 1876. 1876. PADDINGTON, Middlesex. STATEMENT IN ABSTRACT of the Parochial Accounts, Contracts & Liabilities, FOR THE YEAR ENDING 25th MARCH, 1876, with the REPORT OF THE AUDITORS THEREON. ALSO A TABULAR STATEMENT of the PRINCIPAL WORKS EXECUTED under the direction of the HIGHWAY AND SANITARY COMMITTEES. PRINTED AND PUBLISHED FOR TEE INFORMATION OF TEE RATE-PAYERS. By order of the Vestry, FRANK DETHRIDGE, VESTRY CLERK. [A3 Account in Abstract, shewing the Receipt ???vditure for the Parish of Paddington, for the year ending 25th March, 1876, un??? of Receipts and Expenditure, viz.:— POOR R???OUNT. RECEIPTS. £ s d. EXPENDITURE. £ s. d. Balance in band brought from last year's Account 10,203 9 10½ Guardian Board 20,000 0 0 County Rate . 11,349 3 0 Received on account of Rates 89,087 18 5 Police Rate . 20,322 16 2 Metropolitan Common Poor Fund . 20,104 8 10 „ from the Burial Board, pursuant to Section 22 of the 15th and 16th Vic. Cap. 85 (Metropolitan Burials Act) 2,500 0 0 Metropolitan Asylum District Rate . 6,044 10 10 West London School District Rate . 5,800 0 0 Commissioners for Public Baths and Wash-houses . 3,958 5 0 Salary 20 0 0 Collectors' Commission 794 16 0¼ „ from sale of Borough Lists, &c. 0 7 6 Overseers' and Returning Officers' Expenses incurred in preparing Borough and County Lists 247 4 4 Expenses incurred in the Election of Vestrymen and Auditors of Accounts., 25 18 0 Jury Lists 51 5 3 Law Expenses 53 10 6 Magistrate's Clerk 4 12 6 Balance in hand 13,015 5 4¼ £101,791 15 9½ £101,791 15 9½ LIGHTING RA???COUNT. Received on account of Kates 8,584 14 2 Balance overpaid from last year's Account 554 7 7¾ 6,009 9 0 " " of other Sources 85 10 5 Lighting under Average Meter System 12 16 5 Lamp Removals 104 11 8 Balance overpaid 12 119 0 Lamp Columns, Brackets, &c. 391 5 3 Repair of Lamp Columns and Brackets 1,280 7 6 Wages to Lamplighters 195 0 0 Salary of Inspectors of Public Lighting 91 14 6¼ Maintenance of Meters 25 0 4 Repairing Governors 29 1 3 Tradesmen's Bills, &c. 104 10 0 £8,798 3 7 £8,798 3 7 GENERAL RA???COUNT. Balance in hand brought from last year's Account, 1,207 12 8¾ Materials 8,825 14 2 Received on account of Rates 52,855 6 4 Gully drains in New Streets 218 11 8 Maintenance of Water Meters, &c. 58 19 10 "from the Waywardens of the Edgware Highway Board 575 8 10 Street Roller. Road Scrapers, and Street Sweeping Machines 217 16 4 Steam Road Roller, and for working same 87 13 0 „ from the Trustees of the Freehold Charity Estates for making Carriageway and Footpaths in Hatherley Grove 715 1 2 Wages to Men employed at the Wharf and on the Roads 9,910 0 0 Paving Works 1,715 14 8 Watering Roads 3,090 4 1 Carting and Day Work 1,153 5 11 Cleansing Streets 5,010 0 0 „ from various parties for Repair of Roads 793 14 2 Removing Dust, Ashes, and Refuse 2,672 10 0 from various parties for Paving works 3,179 10 8 Balances due to Parishioners on Paving Accounts 265 13 10 „ from various parties for supply of Water to Private Roads 176 5 2 Salaries 3,397 12 0 Superannuation Allowance 180 0 o Rent, Rates, and Taxes 453 13 0 „ from the London and County Bank, Interest on the vestry General Account 157 12 9 Gas and Water Rates 25 17 11 Collector's Commission 532 6 5¾ Printing, Books, Stationery, Stamps for Rates, &c. 415 15 11 " on account of other sources 147 1 11 Law Expenses 194 2 0 Expenses incurred under Valuation (Metropolis) Act, 1869 365 5 11 School Board for London 12,353 8 5 Tradesmen's Bills 1,081 2 4 Petty Disbursements 115 19 0 Sundries 410 6 7 7,056 0 8 £59,807 13 8¾ £59,807 13 8¾ SEWER RA???UNT. £ s. d. £ s. d. Balance in hand brought from last year's Account . 2,271 13 4¾ Sewers Jobbing Works 2,082 12 10 Received on account of Rates 2,165 12 9 Wages 644 0 0 ,, on account of Drain Mouths and Gully Drains in New Streets 740 18 6 Collectors' Commission 20 10 8½ General Rate Account for Repair of Roads 80 1 0 ,, from the Trustees of the Freehold Charity Estates for the Construction of Sewer in Hatherley grove 364 0 10 Lighting Rate Account for Gas to Urinals 27 11 5 Public Urinals 57 14 7 Tradesmen's Bills, &c. 128 0 3 2,501 14 8¼ £5,542 5 5¾ £5,542 5 S3 4 METROPOLITAN CONSOLIDAT???E ACCOUNT. £ s. d. £ s. d. Received on account of Rates 22,710 15 3 Balance overpaid from last year's Account . 402 15 9¼ Metropolitan Board of Works 21,522 0 6 Commission 205 6 10¼ Balance in hand 520 12 1½ £22,710 15 3 £22,710 15 3 [B] Summary Statement of Contracts the Vestry of the Parish of Paddington, during the year ending o??? V March, 1876, namely:— Date when entered into. Name of Contractor. Nature of Contract. Price. 16th November, 1875 Mr. Neave ??? construction of a whole brick Sewer in ???idge Road, from Inverness Terrace to £597. 7th December, 1875 Mr. Studds lifted Gravel and Hoggin 2s. 11 d. per Ton. Ditto Ditto ???ed Gravel Ditto Mr. Boyer ???ering the Roads—A District of the Parish The Contractor to receive 10s. 6d. per day for each Man, Horse & Cart, and 10s. 6d. per day for Man and Horse with Harness, for working Water Vans. 4th January, 1876 Mr. Studds Ditto B District of the Parish The Contractor to receive 12s. per day for each Man, Horse & Cart, and 12s. per day for Man, & Horse with Harness, for working Water Vans. 7th December, 1875 Mr. Boyer ???ing Road Scrapings and Street Sweepings— A District of the Parish The Contractor to receive £2,850. 4th January, 1876 Mr. Studds Ditto B District of the Parish Ditto £2,380. 7th December, 1875 Mr. Bunce ting Materials 9½d. per Ton. Ditto Ditto ??? Work 105. per Day. Ditto Ditto rking Street Roller 39s. per Day for 2 Men and 4 Horses. Ditto Ditto rking Road Scraper 10s. per Day for 1 Man and 1 Horse. 21st December, 1875 Messrs. Mowlem & Co. ring Works As per Schedule of Prices. 21st March, 1876 Mr. Neave vers Jobbing Works At 63 per cent. above the detailed Scheduled Prices. 7th April, 1876 Messrs. A. & F. Manuelle ernsey Graniite 15s. 10d. per Cubic Yard. 21st March, 1876 Messrs. Thomas and Butland erection of Stabling on No. 10 Wharf, Aberley Road £880. [C.] Summary Statement of Moneys owing ??? and Liabilities, owing by the Vestry of the Parish of Paddington, on the March, 1876. £ s. d. £ s. d. Balance in Treasurer's hands on "General Account" 22,965 13 10 Guardian Board 2,000 0 0 Metropolitan Common Poor Fund 9,528 8 2 Outstanding Rates, as nearly as can be ascertained 3,629 0 0 Contractor for Sewer in Uxbridge Road 477 12 0 Salaries 876 10 1 Collector's Commission 449 17 2 Rent of Wharves 125 4 2 Superannuation Allowance 45 0 0 48 5 8 £26,594 13 10 £13,550 17 3 WE, the undersigned, being the Auditors appointed under the provisions of the "Metropolis Local Management Acts," for the purpose of auditing the Accounts of the Vestry of the Parish of Paddington, do state that we have audited and allowed the Accounts of the said Vestry for the year ending 25th March, 1876, of which the foregoing Account marked [A] is an Abstract And we state that the several Contracts entered into by the said Vestry during the year ending 25th March, 1876, are specified in the foregoing Statement of such Contracts marked [B]. And that the Moneys owing to, and the Debts and Liabilities owing and incurred by such Vestry respectively, are specified in the foregoing Statement of such Credits, Debts, and Liabilities respectively marked [C]. And we further wish to state that the manner in which the Accounts are kept have met with our entire approbation. And we beg to thank Mr. Dethridge, the Vestry Clerk, for the able and courteous assistance he has rendered us during the investigation. Dated this 14th day of June, 1876. JNO. R. DUNNING, FRANCIS PLIMLEY, WALTER HALLETT, \VM. BUCKLAND. Auditors house Debt (further). (do.). (do.) nissioners for blic Baths and sh-houses Original Debt. Rate of Interest. Paid off this year Total paid off. Remaining unpaid. 25,500 4,500 5,000 8,000 48,500 4 per Cent. 4½ " 4½ " £4 9s. per Cent. £4 9s. do. 450 150 166 13:4 266:13:4 - 25,500 1,050 1,000 266:13:4 - - 3,450 4,000 7,733:6:8 48,500 Tabular Statement of the Principal Works executed in the Highway Department, for the Year ending 25th March, 1876. New Streets taken to. Streets payed under the Metropolis Local Management Acts. Granite Crossings laid down. Old Footways repaved. Mews repaved. Cab-stand paved. MILE. FUR. YDS. MILE. FUR. YDS. MILE. FUR. YDS. MILE. FUR YDS. MILE. FUR. YDS. MILE. FUR. YDS. - 3 98 - 2 206 - 85 - 5 164 - - 52 - - 45 MILES. FUR. YD. Total length of Parish Roads 43 - 1 Tabular Statement of the Principal Works executed in the Sewers Department, for the year ending 25th March, 1876 Brick Sewers re constructed at the expense of Brick Sewers constructed at the expense of private parties. Air Shafts & Openings constructed at the expense of Number of Gulleys Number of side Entrances constructed at the expense of Cleansing Sewers. Constructed and Reconstructed. Repaired. Private parties the Vestry Private parties the Vestry FEET. 2,419 6 16 43 41 4 11 cubic TDS. of hravy deposits removed. 171 Private parties. The Vestry. Number of Drains constructed to Buildings. Total length of DrainPipe laid to New Houses and Stables and under Footpath and Roadway. Number of House Drains re-constructed under Footpath & Roadway. Number of Complaints received and attended to. Traps fixed to House and Gulley Drains. FEET. FEET. 250 300 157 mile. for. Yards. 81 168 289 3 2 12 ??? /// 25th March, 1876. I. Systematic Inspections. Houses inspected with reference to their Sanitary condition. 5,957 Works executed 1,304 Slaughter-houses under inspection during the year 23 Cow houses ditto ditto 13 Bake-houses ditto ditto 83 Urinals and Urinal Nuisances under Inspection 76 II. Inspections consequent on Complaints Houses or other Premises visited 974 850 The above Statement does not include the Premises and Places inspected as to the execution of the 22nd, 27th, and 35th Sections of the "Sanitary Act, 1866," and "The Diseases Prevention Act, 1855," nor Vaccination Inspections which have since 1868 been entrusted to the Board of Guardians. No. 31. REPORT ON THE HEALTH OF PADDINGTON FOR THE QUARTER ENDING LADY-DAY, 1875, BY WM HARDWICKE, M.D., Medical Officer of Health. Estimated Population 105,184. St. Mary's 66,456. St. John's 38,728. TABLE I. Summary of Weekly Return of Births and Deaths from January 2nd, to March 27th, 1875. Week ending St. Mart's. St. John's. Totals. Mean Temper. Births. Deaths. Births. Deaths. Births. Deaths. Jan. 2 52 43 7 24 59 67 28.8 „ 9 58 39 9 13 67 52 43.1 „ 16 47 33 23 6 70 39 46.0 „ 23 41 28 12 12 53 40 44.7 „ 30 50 21 13 12 67 33 43.2 Feb. 6 49 23 15 17 64 40 36.0 „ 13 46 20 19 25 65 45 34.0 „ 20 52 35 9 15 61 50 37.5 „ 27 36 32 10 15 46 47 33.5 March 6 56 31 12 18 68 49 33.9 „ 13 46 21 16 21 62 42 43.5 „ 20 51 25 12 18 63 43 37.0 „ 27 40 35 14 17 54 52 42.7 Total 624 385 175 213 799 599 38.7 The total deaths, and the death-rate, are this quarter higher than usual. In the district of St. John's, the rich district of squares and mansions, the deaths are actually more than the births for the quarter—the death-rate being 22 per 1,000 of the estimated population, with a birth-rate of only 17.04; if this went on long there would soon be a decrease of the population, but it is only a temporary event, owing to the severe cold of the first week in January, and a few days in February, cutting oft' the lives of many aged people, showing itself by increased mortality some weeks following. Thirty-seven persons, upwards 2 of eighty, died in this quarter, and as many as 121 are within the age of 60 to 80—48 of these were from bronchitis alone, and 27 from natural decay, accelerated by the cold. In St. Mary's district the death-rate is 23.3 per 1,000, and the birth-rate 37.5, and taking the two registration districts as a whole they are 22.78, and 30.56 per 1,000 of the estimated population. The deaths from zymotic diseases are 65. Scarlet fever was fatal to 12 children ; it was the prevailing epidemic of the season, and has not yet subsided. Diseases of the respiratory organs (not including consumption) were fatal to 164 persons, a proportion of acute and chronic bronchitis much higher than natural. Fifty-four inquests were held in the parish, about half being deaths from violence or unnatural, the other half sudden deaths, or from natural causes; in several instances inquests held upon old persons and' young children having no medical attendance previous to death, medical men therefore being unable to give a true certificate of the cause of death, a ground of suspicion of neglect arises. A larger number than usual of persons died in the Hospital and Workhouse this quarter, 108, or 18 per cent. of the total deaths, in fact more than one in every five of the dying are medically attended, and are buried at the public expense. TABLE II. Deaths from Zymotic and other Diseases, from January 2nd, to March 27th, 1875. Weeks. ending Small-Pox. Measles. Scarlatina. Diphtheria, Quinsy & Croup. Whooping Cough Typhus, Infantile and other Fevers. Carbuncle, Erysipelas and Pyaemia. Dysentery and Diarrhoea. Phthisis and Tubercular Dis. Bronchitis and Pneumonia. Other Diseases. Accidents and Violent Deaths. Total. Inquests. Workhouses. St. Mary's Hospital. Lock Hospital. Jan. 2 ... ... 1 1 ... 1(2) ... ... 4 21 39 ... 67 7 3 7 ... „ 9 ... ... 1 1 ... 1(1) ... ... 11 16 20 2 52 3 13 3 ... „ 16 ... ... 2 2 1 1(1) 1 ... 8 12 11 1 39 4 3 4 ... „ 23 ... ... ... 1 ... 2(2) 2 ... 2 15 15 3 40 5 6 3 ... „ 30 ... ... 1 ... ... 2 1 ... 8 7 12 2 33 4 3 5 ... Feb. 6 ... 1 2 1 1 ... ... ... 6 7 20 4 40 5 1 3 ... „ 13 ... ... ... 2 1 1 ... ... 2 14 22 3 45 3 2 1 ... „ 20 ... ... 1 2 ... 5 1 1 9 11 17 3 50 8 3 7 ... „ 27 ... ... 2 1 1 2 ... ... 12 13 16 ... 47 ... 1 3 ... Mar. 6 ... ... 2 2 ... ... 1 ... 11 9 22 2 49 4 2 6 ... „ 13 ... ... ... 1 1 1(2) ... ... 9 8 20 2 42 2 5 6 ... „ 20 ... ... 2 ... ... 2 ... 1 7 19 9 3 43 3 3 4 ... „ 27 ... 1 ... 2 1 2 1 ... 8 12 23 2 52 6 7 4 ... Total ... 2 12 16(5) 6 20(3) 7 2 97 164 2 46 27 599 54 52 56 ... (1) Typhoid Pneu. (2) Puerperal. (3) 2 Blood Poisoning cases. (4) Erysipelas. (5) 5 cases of Croup. 3 TABLE III. Mortality of the Parish of Paddington during the Quarter ending March 25th, 1875. Causes of Death. Ages. Total. Causes of Death. Ages. Total. Under 5 Years. 5 and under 20 20 and under 40 40 and under 60 60 and under 80 80 and above Under 5 Years. 5 and under 20 20 and under 40 40 and under 60 60 and under 80 80 and above. I. ZYMOTIC Brought forward 130 32 79 93 8? 20 ' 136 Order 1—Miasmatic. Order 4—Organs of Digestion. .. Small Pox .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Malignant Dis. of Stom. .. 1 1 1 1 .. 4 Measles 2 .. .. .. .. .. 2 Infl, of Bowels .. .. .. .. 1 .. 1 Scarletina 11 1 .. .. .. .. 12 Gastritis & Peritonitis 1 .. 1 1 .. .. 3 Diphtheria, Tonsilitis 1 .. 2 .. .. .. 3 Enteritis 2 .. .. .. .. .. 2 Croup 6 2 .. .. .. .. 8 Jaundice .. .. .. .. 2 .. 2 Whooping Cough 6 .. .. .. .. .. 6 Abdominal Tumour .. 1 1 .. 1 .. 3 Fevers .. 3 5 1 .. .. 10 Ulceration of Intestines 1 .. .. .. .. .. 1 Acute Rheumatism, Rh. Fever .. 1 2 .. .. .. 3 Hernia .. .. .. .. 1 .. 1 Cirrosis .. .. .. 2 1 .. 3 Blood Poisoning .. .. 1 1 .. .. 2 Hepatitis .. .. 3 4 .. .. 8 Erysipelas and Pyœmia .. .. 1 4 .. .. 7 Cancer of Rectum .. .. .. 1 .. .. 1 Metria (Puerperal Fever) .. .. 5 .. .. .. 5 Cancer of Liver .. .. 1 2 1 .. 4 Dysentery .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Disease of Spleen .. .. 1 1 .. .. 2 Distthœa 1 .. .. 1 .. .. 2 Order 2—Esthetic. Order 5—Urinary Organs. Syphilis 4 .. .. .. .. .. 4 Hydrophobia .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Bright's Disease .. .. 2 3 1 1 7 Order 3—Dietic. Disease of Kidneys .. .. 1 1 3 .. 5 Want of Breast Milk 2 .. .. .. .. .. 2 Disease of Bladder .. .. .. 2 1 .. 3 Hænirrage .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Diabetes .. .. .. 2 .. .. 2 Alcoholism:— Albumenuria .. .. 2 1 4 .. 7 a. Del. Tremens .. .. 1 .. .. .. 1 Disease of Prostate, &c. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. b. Intemperance .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Uraemia .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Lead Poisoning .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Order 6—Uterus and Ovaries. Order 4—Parasitic. Disease of Ovary .. .. 1 1 .. .. 2 Thrush .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Ovarian Dropsy .. .. .. .. .. .. .. ii. CONSTITUTIONAL. Cancer of Uterus .. .. .. 2 .. .. 2 Cancer of Ovary .. .. 1 1 .. .. 2 Order 1—Diathetic Order 7- Organs of Locomotion. Gout .. 1 .. 1 .. 1 3 Dropsy .. .. .. 2 1 .. 3 Disease of Bones .. .. 1 .. 1 .. 2 Hæmorrhage .. .. .. 1 1 .. 2 Order 8—Integument. Consumption .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Phlegmon .. .. 2 .. .. .. 2 Order 2-Tubercular Ulcers, Gangrene .. 1 .. 1 3 1 6 Scrofula 5 2 2 1 1 .. 11 Elephantiasis .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Tabes Mesenterica 14 .. .. .. .. .. 14 IV. DEVELOPMENTAL Consumption 1 7 31 10 4 .. 53 Order 1—of Children. Hydrocephalus and Scrof. Meningitis 16 2 .. 1 .. .. 19 Premature Birth 4 .. .. .. .. .. 4 Malform. of the Heart 2 .. .. .. .. .. 2 III. LOCAL. Ord.1-Nervous System Other Malformations 4 .. 1 1 .. .. 6 Apoplexy .. .. .. 3 6 1 10 Teething 3 .. .. .. .. .. 3 Paralysis .. .. 2 4 8 4 18 Atelectasis 2 .. .. .. .. .. 2 Epilepsy .. .. 1 1 1 .. 3 Order 2—Or Adults. Convulsions 10 .. .. .. .. .. 10 Childbirth .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Effus. of Serum & Blood on Brain 1 .. 2 2 4 .. 9 Order 3—Of Old People. Soft. of Brain Other Diseases •• 1 .. 2 3 3 1 2 8 Old Age, natural decay. .. .. .. .. 13 14 27 Order 2—Organs or Circulation. Order 4—Diseases of Nutrition. Pericarditis 1 2 .. .. .. .. 3 Atrophy, Debility 10 .. .. 1 1 .. 12 Embolism 1 .. .. .. .. .. 1 Exhaustion, Inanition 4 .. .. .. .. .. 4 Aneurism, &c. .. .. 1 .. .. .. 1 V. VIOLENT DEATHS. Fatty Heart .. 1 3 3 .. .. 7 Disease of Heart .. 4 3 11 4 1 23 Order 1—Accidents and Negligence. Order 3—Organs of Respiration. Fract. & Contusions from Rail. Street Accident, &c. 1 .. 6 3 2 .. 11 Bronchitis 22 3 6 25 36 11 103 Burns and Scalds 1 1 .. .. .. .. 2 Laryngitis 1 .. .. .. .. .. 1 Drowning—accident 1 .. .. .. .. .. 1 Larynigisimus 4 .. .. .. .. .. 4 Suffocation do. 4 .. .. .. .. .. 4 Pleurisy, &c. .. .. 1 1 .. .. 2 Poison do. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Pneumonia 16 3 5 7 3 1 35 Order 2.—Homicide. Asthma .. .. .. 3 5 .. 8 Hæmorrhage 1 .. .. .. .. • • 1 Influenza .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Suicide, Hang.,CutThroat 1 .. 1 2 2 .. 6 Pulmorary Congestion 5 .. 3 5 3 .. 16 Wilful Murder. 2 .. .. .. .. .. 2 Other Diseases .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Pistol-shot, &c. .. .. 1 .. .. .. 1 Carried forward 130 32 79 93 82 20 436 TOTALS 174 36 105 126 121 37 599 4 TABLE IV. Summary of Sanitary Work, Quarter ending March 27th, 1875. I.—Inspections consequent on Nuisances and Complaints, Offensive and Injurious Trades, inspection of cases of Contagious Diseases. Inspections of Offensive Trades, Marine Stores, &c. .. 60 „ Of Manure and Dust Wharves 26 „ Cow-houses 10 „ Slaughter-houses 20 „ Bake-houses 21 „ Mortuary or Dead-house almost daily .. — „ Provision Markets every Saturday —. „ Churches, Chapels, Schools, Factories, Work - rooms and other Public Institutions - ,, Contagious Diseases investigated 27 ,, Fever and Small-Pox Conveyance used times 11 Orders issued for Sanitary Works 227 Works done 87 Inspectors. 11.—Systematic Sanitary Inspection of Dwellings, Mews and Stables. Houses and Premises visited and inspected 1753 Re-inspections 745 Orders issued for Sanitary Works (15 Formal Orders of the Vestry) including disinfection of Rooms, &c. 12 Works executed 190 Works in progress 180 III.— Attendances upon Magistrates, Surveyor, at the Police,Corouer's Courts, and Licensing Meetings. Attendances 30 Summonses 1 4 For obtaninig Summonses 15 „ hearing „ 1 Letters written and received 112 Nuisances and Complaints investigated during the Quarter ending March 27th, 1875. The register of 185 cases, admits of the following classification:— Defects of drainage and untrapped gulleys. 54 „ „ water supply 8 Dirty state of premises, water closets, urinals, stagnant water, percolations, &c. 32 Offensive trades, marine stores, frying of fish, ballast burning, bad meat, and fruit 4 Overcrowding and bad ventilation 19 Smoke nuisances 2 Animals being dirtily kept, and noises from. 4 Smells from the Canal Basin — Accumulation and deposit of manure, garbage, refuse, dust, dung, &c. 14 Smells, offensive 6 Defective scavenging and watering of Roadways 5 Dangerous Structures and Places unfit 2 Miscellaneous, and complaints of Epidemic diseases, &c. 35 Total 185 These Complaints received almost immediate attention. 5 TABLE V. Localities in which Deaths from Zymotic and other Diseases have been recorde* during the Quarter ending March 25th, 1875. Streets, Districts and Hospitals. Small-Pox. Measles. Scarlet Fever. Diphtheria, &c. Whooping Cough. Typhus & other Fevers. Erysipelas, &c. Diarrhoea, &c. Phthisis, &c. Bronchitis, Pneumonia, &c. Violent Deaths. Other Diseases. Total. St. Mary's Hospital .. .. .. .. .. 4 1 .. 8 3 10 26 52 Paddington Workhouse .. .. .. .. .. .. 2 .. 7 22 .. 25 56 Lock Hospital .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Praed Street, including (1) .. .. 1 1 1 .. .. .. 3 9 3 13 31 Harrow Road & N. W. Road (2) .. .. 2 1 .. .. 1 1 7 8 .. 10 30 Hall Park District (3) .. .. .. 2 • • 2 1 .. 6 2 1 6 20 Amberly Road District (4) .. .. .. 1 1 1 .. 1 11 5 1 11 32 Kilburn District (5) .. 1 1 1 .. 1 • • ... 2 6 1 12 25 Clarendon Street, 107 h., 1788 p. .. .. 1 2 .. .. .. .. 5 6 .. 3 17 Woodchester Street, 95 h., 1427 p.. .. .. .. 1 .. .. .. .. 3 5 .. 4 13 Cirencester Street, 97 h., 1511 p. .. .. 1 1 .. 1 .. .. 2 6 .. 6 17 Hampden Street, &c. (6) .. .. .. 1 .. .. .. .. 7 4 1 6 19 Westbourne Park District (7) .. .. .. 1 .. 1 1 .. 11 14 2 28 58 Westbourne Terrace North, &c. (8) .. .. .. .. .. 1 .. .. .. 8 1 14 24 Kensal Road District &c. (9) .. .. .. .. .. 2 .. .. 6 6 .. 10 24 MoscowRoad,SalemGardens,&c.(10) .. .. 4 1 .. 2 .. .. 4 10 2 9 32 Squares and Mansions .. .. .. 1 .. 2 .. .. 5 16 2 19 45 Mews and Mansions (11) .. .. .. 1 4 1 • • • • 1 13 .. 4 24 Other Places, including (13) .. 1 2 1 .. 2 1 .. 9 21 3 40 80 Total .. 2 12 16 6 20 7 2 97 164 27 246 599 [1.] South Wharf Road, Union-Pi., Stanley-St., Francis-St., Cambridge-PL, Junction-PL, Newland Row, Market-St., Sale-St., Star-St., Bouverie-St., York Row, Titchborne Row, James-PL and Katherine-Pl. Population in 1871. 3223 [2.] Margaret, Romily & Wellington-Ter, Church-Pl., Hermitage-St., Dudley-St., Kent's-Pl., Willing's-Pl., Victoria & Albert-St., Green-St., North Wharf Road, Iron Gate Wh.-Rd., White Lion Place and Passage, Alfred Place, Vine Cottages 3238 [3] Hall-PL & Park, Hall-PL West, Cuthbert-St., Howell-St., Charlotte-PL, Church-St, Crompton-St, Braithwaite-Pl., Campbell-St., Hethpool-St, Hero-PL, Edgware-Pl. 3950 [4.] Netley-St., Ambery Whar. Rd. Mews, Formosa-St., Brandon-St.,Vale-Ter., Shirland-Rd., Pindock Mews, Bristol Mews & Elnathan Mews 2474 [5.] Andover-Pl., Kilburn Park-Rd., Queen's Arms Yard, Elgin-Ter., Maida Vale, Carlton-Pl., Canterbury-Ter., Clarendon-Ter. & Road, Lanark-PL & Villas, Elgin-Rd., Portsdown-Pl. and Mews. 2864 [6] Westbourne Park District; 54 Streets and Mews adjoining 12552 [7 ] Brindley-St., Alfred-Rd. & Pl., Orchard-St., Waverly-Ter. Waverly-Rd., Desboro'-Ter., & PL (197) Jonson's Mews Woodchester. Cirencester & Clarendon Streets 4069 [8.] Senior-St., Emily-St., Philip-Ter., Dartington-Ter., Hasboro'-St., RanelaghRd.. Westburv-Ter. & Rd., Cottage-Rd., Westbourne Park-Cres. & Bury-Ter. 2691 [9] Woodfield-Pl., Rd., Cottages & Ter., Windsor Gardens-Pl. & St. John-St, Chippenham-Ter. and Rd., Frankfort-Ter., Streets in Kensal New Town, r.arlton-Ter., Goldnev-Rd. & Edbroke-Rd. 3804 [10.] Queen's-Rd., Douglas-Pl., Caroline-PL & Mews, Dove Cottages, Bark-Pl., Poplar Pl. Chapel Side, Vincent-Pl., Salem-Gards. & Rd. & Cresc 3252 [11] Gloucester-PL, Sq., Ter., Porchester-Ter., & Sq.. Craven Hill and Gardens. Lancaster Gate, Hyde-Pk.-Sq., Gard., Ter., Inverness-Ter., Queensboro -Ter.. Kensington-Palace-Gardens and Kensington-Gards.-Sq., The-Terrace, Kensington-Gar.Sq., Kensington-Gar.-Ter., Cleveland-Ter., Sq., & Garda., Sussex-Gards, Westbourne-St., Cres. & Ter., Leinster-Sq. & Gardens, Princes-Sq., Queen's Gardens, Conuaught-Sq. & Pl., Stanhope-PL & Ter 14088 [12.] Mews adjoining and behind Squares & Mansions above mentioned 2211 [13 ] Other Houses, Streets & Mews not included in any of the above groups 33671 6 Books and Pamphlets received during the Quarter ending Lady-day:— Monthly Return of Births and Deaths and Marriages of Eight Towns in Scotland; by Registrar General, April 1875. Catalogue, with the Report of the Committee of Sanitary and Educational Exhibition to the Council of the National Association, for the Promotion of Social Science. On Improved Dwellings; by Charles Gatliff, Esq., F.S.E. Report on the Sanitary Condition of Whitechapel District, for the Quarter ending 2 January, 1875; by John Liddle. Report of St. Luke's Vestry, to Lady-day 1874, with List of Charities, &c. Report of the Parliamentary Committee on the Working Classes Dwellings Bills; Metropolitan Board of Works. A few Remarks on the High Rate of Mortality in Glasgow ; by James Morrison. Report of the Annual Meeting of Mercantile Marine Service Association, 66, Tower Buildings, Water Street, Liverpool. Report of a Meeting to consider the propriety of establishing a Home for the treatment of Inebriates of the Upper and Middle Classes, under the Presidency of the Earl of Shaftesbury. Report upon the Sale of Food and Drugs Amended Bill; by Sedgwick Saunders, M.D., April 1875. Speech of W. Newton, Metropolitan Board ofWorks, on the Municipality of London Bill, March 1875. Report of the Board of Health, Chicago, for the years 1870, 1871, 1872, 1873. Report of the Health of Liverpool; by W. S. Trench, M.D., for the year 1874. Annual Summary of Births and Deaths in London, and other large Cities, 1874; Registrar General. Charity Pauperism, and Self Helps; by Charles Lamport, F.S.S., reprinted from the Westminster Review, January 1875. Tobacco, and the Diseases it produces ; by C. Drysdale, M.D., &c. Printed. Reports of the Medical Officer of Health on the Vital Statistics and Health of the Parish of Paddington, &c. Annual Reports for 1868-69-70-71-72-73-74. Quarterly Reports and Statistical Returns—No. 1 to 31. Report on the Pollution of the Water and the cleansing of the Canal Basin—1868. Report on the means of carrying out Disinfection in an adequate and effectual manner in the Parish—1869. Report on the erection of a Public Mortuary in the Parish, and upon the Management thereof—1867. Report upon the Abolition of Private Slaughter Houses in Towns, 1874. Practical Sanitary Hints as to the best measures for preventing the spread of the catching or epidemic diseases. First, Second, Third and Fourth, Fifth and Sixth Quarterly Reports as Public Analyst, and of Proceedings under the Food Adulteration Act of 1872. First, (Second, not printed) and Third Report on the Condition of Sewers in the Parish, and causes of Nuisances therein, with recommendations for their removal. Report and Catalogue of Sanitary Articles exhibited at Leeds in 1871, prepared by Dr. Hardwicke. Also of the Sanitary and Educational Exhibition at Norwich in October, 1873. ON THE ABOLITION OF PRIVATE SLAUGHTER-HOUSES IN TOWNS, with suggestions for future legislation on noxious trades connected therewith. by WILLIAM HARDWICKE, M.D., M.E.C.S., &c., Medical Officer of Health for Paddington, Deputy-Coroner for Central Middlesex, and one of the Honorary Secretaries of the Public Health Section of the Social Science Association. A Paper Read at a Meeting of the Health Department of the Social Science Association, on Monday, March 30th, 1874. F. S. Powell, Esq., in the chair. LONDON: P. S. KING, BRIDGE STREET, WESTMINSTER. S.W. PRICE, SIXPENCE. PAPERS AND REPORTS ON PUBLIC HEALTH. By Dr. HARDWICKE. ON THE DWELLINGS OF THE POOR, AND THE EVILS OF OVER-CROWDING, WITH MEANS SUGGESTIVE FOR REMOVAL.—Sessional Proceedings, 1866. IN WHAT FORM, AND TO WHAT EXTENT IS IT DESIRABLE, THAT THE PUBLIC SHOULD PROVIDE FOR THE RECREATION OF THE WORKING CLASSES.—Social Science Transactions, 1868. HOW THE GOVERNMENT MAY BENEFICIALLY INTERFERE TO LIMIT THE SPREAD OF INFECTIOUS DISEASES—Social Science Transactions, 1869. ON THE RECENT OUTBREAK OF TYPHOID IN MARYLEBONE, ATTRIBUTED TO POISONED MILK, 1873.—Social Science Transactions. REPORT UPON THE ARTICLES IN THE SANITARY EXHIBITION AT LEEDS, 1871. ON ALLEGED STARVATION CASES, AND THE EFFECTS OF INSUFFICIENT NOURISHMENT.—Sessional Proceedings, 1870. ON PUBLIC MORTUARIES FOR LARGE TOWNS.—Paper read at the Royal Institute of British Architects, 1869. REPORT ON THE REGULATIONS FOR A PUBLIC MORTUARY FOR PADDINGTON, 1868. ON MEANS FOR CARRYING OUT DISINFECTION IN AN ADEQUATE AND EFFECTUAL MANNER IN THE PARISH OF PADDINGTON. ON THE POLLUTION OF THE WATER, AND TIIE CLEANSING OF THE CANAL BASIN AT PADDINGTON. MEMORANDUM ON OVER-CROWDING IN SINGLE ROOMS: AND ON HOUSES LET AND SUB-LET IN TENEMENTS BY ABSENTEE LANDLORDS. PRACTICAL SANITARY HINTS FOR PREVENTING THE SPREAD OF THE "CATCHING," OR EPIDEMIC DISEASES, SUCH AS SCARLET FEVER, SMALL-POX, MEASLES, TYPHOID, &c. A NNUAL AND QUARTERLY REPORTS ON THE VITAL STATISTICS AND HEALTH OF THE PARISH OF PADDINGTON, FROM 1867 TO 1874. ON THE ABOLITION OF PRIVATE SLAUGHTER-HOUSES IN TOWNS, AND ON FUTURE LEGISLATION FOR NOXIOUS TRADES, The present time is one peculiarly propitious for inviting discussion upon slanghter-house reform in the metropolis, and for urging upon Parliament the consideration of legislative measures affecting the slaughtering of cattle, as well as of several other noxious trades in close relation to the same. It is one of those departments of public health legislation in which the interests of many private persons are, more or less, affected on the one hand, and the health of people congregated in cities on the other. It would be a waste of time to enter minutely into all the legislative Acts bearing upon the regulation of offensive or noxious trades, for I may assume that most persons who are here present and disposed to take part in the discussion this evening are already informed upon the subject. The Metropolis Building Act of 1844, as far as the metropolis is concerned, has been very generally understood by the metropolitan vestries and the butchers themselves, to virtually abolish a greater part of the private slaughter-houses of the metropolis after the 9th of August this year, that is, thirty years after the passing of the Act. Although there may be some legal quibble as to the interpretation of clause 55, it enacts it will become illegal to erect or carry on any of the offensive or obnoxious trades specified in the Act in premises that are not beyond fifty feet of any first-class dwellinghouse or forty feet from any open way. The following is the clause:— "LV.—For the purpose of making provision concerning businesses, offensive or noxious, be it enacted, with regard to the following businesses, that is to say, blood-boiler, bone-boiler, fellmonger, slaughterer of cattle, sheep, or horses, soap-boiler, tallow-melter, tripe-boiler, and any other like business offensive or noxious, so far as relates to the erection of buildings 4 in the neighbourhood of any such business, and so far as relates to the carrying on of any such business in the neighbourhood of any public way or of other buildings of the first or dwelling-house class. That it shall not be lawful hereafter to erect any buildings of the first or dwelling-house class nenrer to than fifty feet from any building which shall be in use for any such offensive or noxious business; but if a building already existing within fifty feet be hereafter burnt, pulled down, or destroyed by tempest, such building may be rebuilt; and that it shall not be lawful for any person to establish or r.ewly carry on any such business, either in any building or vault, or in the open air, at a less distance than forty feet from any public way, or than fifty feet from any other such buildings of the first or dwellinghouse class, and that if any such business be now carried on in any situation within such distances, then from the expiration of the period of thirty years next, after the passing of this Act, it shall cease to be lawful to continue to carry on such business in such situation, save as is hereinafter provided; and that if any person erect any building in the neighbourhood of any such business contrary to this Act, then, on conviction thereof before two justices, he shall forfeit a sum not exceeding fifty pounds, for every day during which such building shall remain near to such offensive or noxious business; or if any person establish anew any such business, or carry on any such business contrary to this Act, then, on conviction thereof before two justices, such person is hereby made liable to forfeit, for every day during which such business shall be carried on, a sum not exceeding fifty pounds, as the justices shall determine, and that it shall be lawful for the justices also to award to the prosecutor such costs as shall be deemed reasonable." There are, however, provisions in the following clause of the Act for an appeal to justices at Special Sessions, for showing reasons to suspend any order for abolition, as well as to suspend orders for parties to adopt within reasonable time practicable means for preventing nuisances from arising in future from these businesses. The 55th clause, which would abolish about four-fifths of the private slaughter places now in existence, has been looked for by most of the butchers for some years past, who have had warning of the change impending. And it is more than probable that their private interests would have been stimulated to provide for the new state of things by establishing wellregulated abattoirs in lieu of the old places, had not an attempt at unwise legislation last year tended to frustrate their inclinations to use public abattoirs. The more intelligent citizens of several of the largest towns of the kingdom have seen fit to condemn the present system, after the most deliberate consideration, and have adopted the more modern system of killing and storing cattle in abattoirs, in preference to the old slovenly and obnoxious methods in vogue. Hitherto annual licenses have been granted by magistrates under the Metropolitan Local Management Amendment Act, 5 but this can no longer be done without acting in direct con- travention of the aforesaid building Act, nor will the attempt be made to do so, warning having been given in all the licences issued last October to this effect. Under ordinary circumstances it was rather singular that Dr. Brewer should have advised the Metropolitan Board of Works (who, by-the-bye, if they had had an officer of health to advise, would not have been persuaded to endorse such a Bill in the last Session of Parliament, in spite of the opinions of nearly all the metropolitan and provincial medical officers of health who have experience, and given attention to the slaughter-house question) to undertake to bring in a Bill to repeal the clause of the Metropolitan Building Act, prohibiting the carrying on of offensive and noxious trades, and thus endeavour to perpetuate the evils of private slaughter-houses, which in my opinion, are practically irremediable by any kind of regulation and inspection by local officials.* When the Bill was brought forward for second reading last Session, the House of Commons referred it to a Select Committee to inquire into the regulations of noxious trades, and the following recommendations were reported:— 1. Sec. 55 should be repealed; additional slaughter-houses be erected at Copenhagen Cattle Market. 2. Private slaughter-houses should be regulated by bye-laws. 3. That slaughter-houses should be made the means of detecting and preventing contagious disease of cattle. "With due deference to the members of the Select Committee, I must be allowed here to say, as one competent to speak on the subject, that the second recommendation is utterly impracticable. The Committee, as amateurs, visiting these places, were grossly deceived as to the facts and circumstances under their observation. They remarked almost one fact only, namely, that of cleanliness at the time of their visit. The officers of public health visiting these places at all hours, and seeing them when kept in the most perfect condition attainable by sanitary control and inspection,state most emphatically that they cannot be otherwise regarded than as nuisances at least, in all built up parts of town. In words used by medical officers of health, and in reports of inspectors * Dr. Brewer's short Bill consists of the following clause:—"From and after the passing of this Act, the slaughtering of cattle or sheep by a butcher, in his slaughter-house, duly licensed, shall not be held to be carrying on an offensive or noxious business within the meaning of thy said Act, 7 and 8 Viet. c. 84." 6 of nuisances, these places are described in strong language, as "atrocious nuisances, "abominable nuisances," "intolerable nuisances," and by myself as "virulent nuisances"—words that can be fully substantiated by anyone who frankly describes what he finds and sees in its true light. The following is a summary of defects found upon inspection of twenty-eight slaughterhouses visited by the Sanitary and Public Health Committee of Paddington in 1872, when previous notice had been given of their visit, and it might naturally be expected every effort was made to show the slaughter-houses as decent as possible, in order to have a renewal of the license.* What are these defects and objections? They may be classed under three distinct heads. 1. As to Site.—Nearly all the private slaughtering places have no air space surrounding them; they are close to, instead of being detached and away from inhabited dwellings; they are mostly old premises converted into a makeshift place. Stables in a mews, a cart shed, coachhouse, washhouse, kitchen, back yards, or vaults may be seen; often the entrance is through a shop, or passage of the house, or down steps into an area below. 2. As to the condition. —In hot weather slaughter-house nuisances are the worst, when the polluted air attracts swarms of bluebottle flies, which infest larders of adjoining houses; rats come up from untrapped drains, seeking blood and offal; a saturated subsoil reeks from leaking of joints in the paving; traps of drains are left up, or taken up to wash down as much refuse as possible, including blood, which contaminates the sluggish current of a sewer for miles in its course; the loading or carrying of blood and manure for removal in badly constructed uncovered carts; then come tallow melters' carts to collect fat which, by being kept several days, stinks, and so makes the * Twenty-four had defective paving, either in the floor of the slaughterhouse, or the cattle-pens. Scarcely any were defective in lime whiting or washing down, because the visit of inspection was daily looked for. Thirteen had untrapped drains, the cover being left up, or thrown aside Twenty were situate within twenty or thirty feet of inhabited dwellings. Fourteen were in mewses, or used as stables, or in a court. Three were approached through a public shop. In fourteen the killing and removal of offal could be witnessed from adjoining or opposite houses. Five had living rooms above formerly but not now occupied. Eight were in very confined positions, most of them a covered yard or premises at the back. One had a blood-well composed of porous bricks in an offensive state— since abolished. One was found where pigs were kept in the cattle-pens. One had a dust-bin in the slaughter-house itself. One had the sheep-pen roof only three feet from the floor. 7 tallow melting offensive, which it need not be if done properly. I say little about the improper layerage of cattle standing in their dung, and the meat, how it must be damaged by being exposed to this organic effluvia and that of their respiration. Here also I must not forget the cruel and degrading practice of killing the animals in each others presence, which is revolting, and cannot be sanctioned. What also mean the extravasations of blood observed frequently on parts of the carcase, but the blows and violence used in getting them into their place, or tumbling them down area steps? Who does not object to the dangers of driving cattle through the crowded streets, their loud bellowing, and the heavy blows of the drovers, conducted mostly now at night to escape observation? 3. As to construction.—None of the private slaughterhouses have been erected with a view to efficiency. It is nonsense saying, as one witness talked about before the Noxious Trades Committee, that capital had been expended upon the erection of these places. They are, as before stated, old premises converted into makeshifts. The pens for the cattle are close, ill-ventilated, dark, without water supply; the drainage is generally good, but the opening into the main sewer too often untrapped. No proper catchpit, no covered receptacle for dung, or barrels for blood, fat, and offal; floors instead of being sloped, or of impermeable asphalte, or well paved, are generally leaky at the joints from the cement giving way to frequent slushing. If I am permitted to enlarge upon the objectionable practice of private slaughtering in towns, the strongest reason I would urge against it, and in favour of a scheme of slaughter-house reform, is the absence of that guarantee or security for a proper quality of meat which the public ought to demand. The amount of meat sold in markets, and at third-rate shops, and made into sausages of a very inferior nutritive value, is something enormous, and that which is absolutely diseased and condemned is an almost fabulous quantity. This I might readily place before you in figures; the amount made known weekly in the press cannot be but a small part of what finds its way into the market. There is too much of lean meat generally used as food. Some cattle are mere scarecrows, to say nothing of being unhealthy when killed to save their Lives, or prevent death, from starvation. Efficient inspection of the slaughter-houses would greatly improve the trade in the 3000 butchers' shops of the metropolis, and as I am ready to prove without detriment to the poor, as has been alleged so strongly 8 The evidence of the medical officer of health of Whitechapel ought to be regarded on this point.* Close inquiry, by means of efficient methods of inspection, will discover that, at present, animals are killed when in a dying state, some having been exposed to overcrowding in railway trains, and get suffocated; others suffering from febrile changes from want of air, water, and food whilst in the cattle-trucks, or from bad layerage in transitu. The loss in this way is considerable, estimated by some butchers at eight shillings a day in the best bullocks. The damage to the meat from all these sources is well known to many butchers, who prefer country-killed meat for keeping longer and better than that from animals kept and killed in foul places, the flesh of which sooner commences a putrefractive change. The remedy for all this points in the direction of efficient inspection by officers competent to judge of the quality of meat, and constantly occupicd in this duty, which is expert work, and cannot be well entrusted to numerous local sanitary inspectors. For instance, in the northern districts there are 54 slaughter-houses in Kensington, 28 Paddington, 57 Marylebone, 90 St. Pancras, 110 Islington; and to inspect all these the cattle would have to be seen alive, what are daily going in, and all that goes out of the private slaughter-houses, night and day, at all hours—a matter of impossibility where the places are, as at present, isolated, and it must be remembered, are on private premises, where it would be too much to grant power of entry at all times. My own belief is that it is not possible in all cases to judge of the quality of the meat in the dead carcase; at any rate, it would be easier to judge from the living animal. These arguments in favour of special inspection apply with equal force to measures needful for detecting and preventing the spreading of cattle diseases—a matter of paramount importance not lost sight of by the Committee on Noxious Trades. Should it be thought advisable to condemn the old system of killing cattle in private slaughter-houses, and should a * "Mr. Liddle is of opinion that if private slaughter-houses were abolished, and only licensed public slaughter-houses were used, competent officers appointed to inspect the animals before and after killing, and with power to condemn all meat that was unfit for human food, then it is probable that much of the bad meat, which now finds its way into some of the butcher's shops in London, would be prevented, and the sanitary officers of all local boards would be saved the trouble and responsibility of inspecting and condemning the bad meat exposed for sale."—Quarterly Report, January, 1870, 9 commendation go forth from this Association in favour of establishing abattoirs in lieu thereof, the question worth consideration would then arise, in what manner and by what authority, the work could be best accomplished. The following is the resolution of the Medical Officers of Health Association, passed last year, and again re-affirmed during this month after a most dispassionate discussion, when the subject was again brought forward by Dr. T. Orme Dud field, of Kensington:— Moved and seconded— "That, in the opinion of this meeting, the slaughtering of cattle in the private slaughter-houses of London should be abolished, and that a certain number of public slaughter-houses should be created, either under the supervision of the Corporation of London, or the Metropolitan Board of Works; and that those corporations should be urged to undertake the erection of such buildings, and also the management of them, forthwith." The following amendment was moved and seconded— "That it is expedient that the 55th Section of the Metropolitan Buildings Act, 1844, be repealed, but that the number of slaughter-houses be gradually diminished by the abolition of many which are not in a thoroughly fit condition, and which have been in a measure tolerated on account of the uncertainty of the law; and that general, precise, stringent, and uniform regulations should be laid down to be adopted by the vestries; aud that greater power be given to the local authority to take proceedings at any time of the year in cases where untrapped drains, want of care and cleanliness, cruelty, and general deficient arrangements for layerage are found to exist, penalties being recoverable in any police-court; and that no slaughter-house be licensed until the owner has signed a copy of byelaws pledging himself to carry them out fully and faithfully." The amendment was supported only by the mover and seconder, and the original motion was carried. The only two members supporting the amendment have districts more of a suburban character than the rest of London. My own opinion is in favour of the Metropolitan Board of Works in the metropolis taking the entire charge of supervising the trade in cattle-killing, and noxious trades connected therewith; and in country places, for the Council of the corporation of a borough town, and the Local authority, whether urban or rural, taking charge of all such places, granting licences or permits for killing cattle for sale, and for the carrying on of other noxious trades. The framing of such regulations or bye-laws as may be needful for their efficient management, is not difficult, while, at the same time, it will be proper to leave to private speculation an opportunity of carrying out the work, provided it was under inspection. In the former case a Bill would have to be introduced by the Metropolitan Board of Works. 10 For the latter amended clauses in the promised Public Health Bill, to be considered in Parliament, would readily meet the case without special legislation. What clauses should be introduced to regulate all noxious trades 1 need not here occupy your time to consider more in detail, than remark that they must be based upon the known facts and experience now before Parliament and the public, and must afford a better guarantee for the prevention and removal of nuisances than we now possess. Another of the most objectionable features of private slaughtering of cattle not to be forgotten, and the cause of serious nuisances to a neighbourhood, arises from inefficient means for the disposal of blood and other kinds of offal, of which the quantity is very large. Blood is not only a valuable commodity wasted. It is worse than wasted, inasmuch as it is washed down into drains and sewers, creating and keeping up dangerous nuisances at a distance along the whole line of sewerage. Even when it is saved in barrels or tubs, and carted away with the fat in uncovered carts, it is in such a decomposed state as to be unfit for passing through public thoroughfares. The absence of any proper means at hand for utilizing this substance for its albuminous properties, or for making artificial guano, brings about another evil, namely, the blood and offal from many private slaughtering places is often in a partially decomposed state given to pigs. This rough and disgusting kind of pigfeeding brings into the market a low class of bacon, tempting to poor people for its low price, although far from being cheap at any price. The butcher's offal-fed pig would soon disappear from the market if facilities were placed at the disposal of butchers to use the blood for its albumen value or for artificial manure. As soon as economical methods of storage and proper apparatus are provided in the neighbourhood, of a well-regulated public abattoir, a large number of noxious trades will cease to be public nuisances. The products of slaughter-houses can not only with facility be converted into artificial manure by methods free from smells, if properly carried out, but have a high commercial value, and a ready sale as agricultural fertilizers in every place where they have been tried. Taking into consideration the blood and offal converted into artificial manure, the tallow and fat rendering-down, before it became putrid, and what are called the scraps, which can be sold for food for fowls and pigs, the butchers will find, upon due inquiry into the result attained in other large cities, that their own interests arc not so much, if at all, endangered, as 11 many of them allege who are opponents to a change in the plan recommended for the metropolis. Public health authorities ought not to be ignorant of the fact, that a good interest, as well as profits may be obtained for any capital expended upon works of this kind. There is scarcely any town of considerable size, where a slaughtering place, cattle-pens, a boiling-down shed, and a knacker's yard, are not needful receptacles for the deposit of offal and refuse, and their conversion into a saleable product, in the form of manure. It would be a profitable undertaking, either to the municipal authorities, or taken up by a private association. I say this from personal inquiry into the modes of dealing with the refuse of towns, and from reports in my possession, to which I have had occasion to refer.* Having denounced in rather strong language what I conscientiously believe to be the eradicable evils of the present cattle-killing sheds, my paper would be incomplete if I were to omit to mention what are the * A report from a visit to the Slaughtering, Fat-Melting, and Refuse-llendering establishment of New York, states:—"A hog-killing place, where 700 hogs had been killed the previous night, was found odourless, scrupulously clean, and not a trace of blood or offal seen. The blood is led by a simple contrivance to the cocks for removal; it is all caught by a fertilizing company, without trouble to the slaughterers, and they pay for it over 2000 dollars a year. Every provision is made for the comfort of the animals, excellent ventilation, &c. The tanks of the melting vats for condemned animals burn up offensive gases, and give out no bad smells during the process. In a Jewish slaughter-house the proprietor told the inspectors that the blood was sold for 6000 dollars a year. At the Butchers, Hide, and Melting Company the cattle were in pens as fresh and sweet as a model farm-yard—food and water in abundance. Every member of the party seemed convinced that the profits made through the utilization of blood were well worth having. This new and valuable way of treating scraps and blood is, as far as we are able to learn, a great improvement upon any method heretofore used, either in this country or in Europe. By this new process, the success of which seems to be proved, a similar result is reached without offensive odour, and a fertilizing produce worth forty to fifty dollars a ton, from 'tankings,' and also from blood, without the addition of chemicals, in the space of one or two hours. This method will be used at the Brighton (Mass.) abattoirs, and by means of it the blood and offal of all the animals slaughtered each day will, in the course of the same day, be reduced to the form of a simple and inodorous powder. If it can be shown at Brighton (Mass.), as we believe it will soon be done, that foul odours, which have been thought to be inseparable from slaughtering, bone-boiling, and fat-melting, are avoidable, and that, in the final treatment of refuse animal matter, the ammoniacal products of decomposition, instead of being wasted to pollute the air, may be saved to enrich the earth, it will be a sanitary and economical demonstration, whose good effects will not be limited to the (State of Massachusetts." 12 tial features of an establishment to cope with them, and capable of reducing to a minimum all nuisances that at present beset, and will in future embarrass, the sanitary authorities of cities that neglect to legislate for civic purification. I am satisfied that all noxious trades must sooner or later be regulated under stringent municipal bye-laws, and that they cannot be left entirely to private speculation. The site most convenient for the establishing of public abattoirs should be an open space or field, not farther distant in the suburbs of a town or citv than a short drive or walk; it should be suitable for one or more blocks of building; it should be near a railway, water communication, or the cattle market, and the following buildings should bo contiguous, but distinct from each other:— 1. Slaughter-house for bullocks, sheep, and pigs, with good water supply at high pressure; open ventilation, good drainage, asphalte floor, with convenience for the removal of blood, hides, offal, and carcases of animals. 2. A set of cattle pens, or layerage, with store for fodder, water trough, facility for cleansing, and the removal of manure, &c. 3. An engine and boiler house, with tall chimney for carrying off gases, according to the necessity of trade—with sufficient steam power for the tallow-melting tanks, grease works, bone-boiling, glue-making, &c.; hot water for washing and cleansing. 4. A store-house for hides, for bones, wool, hair, &c.; and the blood and offal, and all offensive materials, to be kept in covered tanks. The making of animal charcoal may be desirable, and other processes which I need not mention here. 5. In part of the same premises, or an adjoining field, should be a tanpit, the knacker's yard, with suitable appliances. 6. Dwellings for men and stabling for horses may have to be provided for those who have to be employed on the premises, or for carrying out the work. The main points I endeavour to prove arc these:— 1. The impracticability of attempting to reconstruct the old private slaughter-houses in built up parts of towns. 2. The impossibility of securing, in the present private slaughter-houses, sufficient air space, means of cleansing, and drainage to prevent them from becoming nuisances injurious to the health of people living in their vicinity—nuisances arising from the pollution of the air, drains, and subsoil. 3. The remedy I propose is the erection of abattoirs inconvenient suburban localities, or where the objectionable practice of driving cattle in streets and thoroughfares of towns can be avoided; where cattle can be kept sweet and clcan in well-kept 13 pens, duly provided with pure water, fresh air, shade in hot and shelter in cold weather; where they are less exposed to violence and brutality of drovers; and where the transport of blood, offal, hides, and tallow can be effected, without nuisance or complaint of neighbours, to places where they can either be sold, or preserved by methods free from objection, or utilized at once for the owners thereof. 4. And lastly, this is the most important recommendation, where, as I maintain, there is no difficulty in carrying out, viz., in the inspection, by competent judges, of the cattle before they are killed, or of the meat supplied, either in carcase or otherwise, to the public markets, or to retail dealers. In conclusion, permit me to remark, that it will neither be creditable to Parliament, nor to the local governing bodies of the metropolis and large towns, to endure the present state of things a day longer than is necessary. The Act, as I have said, will shortly come into operation, and a great achievement will be performed by simply remaining quiet and doing nothing at all. Should any efforts be made by persons interested in the prolongation of the Act, it will then, I urge, become the duty of this Association to make some representation to Government with a view of effectually putting a stop to a system so offensive, so injurious, and so repugnant to the feelings of all right-minded persons. Among those present at the discussion were the following:—Mr. R. T. Arnold, Dr. Bateson, Mr. J. J. Brown, Mr. Sneade Brown, Mr. R. Calvert, Dr. Carpenter, Mr. W. J. Cooper, Dr. Thomas Dudfield, Professor Gamgee, Mr. C. V. Game, Mr. P. C. Greatorex, Mr. C. J. Grece, Dr. Hardwicke, Mr. E. L. Jacob, Mr. D. Jarvis, Mr. H. N. Mozley, Mr. C. A. Ratcliffe, Dr. George Ross, Dr. Sarvis, Mr. G. W. Shaw, Mr. Joseph Smout, Mr. J. Smout, jun., Mr. Thomas Webber. Dr. Sarvis (Medical Officer of Health for Bethual Green), said he should give his vote against the total abolition of private slaughterhouses. In summer he thought it was an advantage to have them near where the meat was to be sold, for nothing was so injurious to the meat as its transit. We might keep the best of the slaughterhouses. Professor Gamgee was much astonished to hear a medical officer of health advocate the continuance for one day of a single private slaughter-house in any city of the world. It was also astonishing to him to find how hard it was for the public interest to be protected in opposition to that of a trade, which always would have advocates looking out for, and seeking in every possible way, to add to its 14 pecuniary advantages, and counting as nothing the sanitary wellbeing of the public at large. He was stating a fact, when he said that private slaughter-houses rendered it impossible to inspect animals, and prevent the sale of diseased meat. He was sorry to have to acknowledge the fact that even the government virtually sanctioned the trade in diseased animals, which was attended with such bad consequences. The private slaughter-houses offered facilities for keeping up this trade of supplying meat which was often poisonous. It was wrong to bring forward medical men to give evidence in regard to diseased meat. There was but one safe rule, and that was the one which had been given by the great law-giver, Moses, namely, that such meat should not be eaten. If we had had a law to suppress the trade in this kind of meat, we should probably have meat tweuty-five or thirty per cent. cheaper than it is now. Any rational method to put a stop to disease would, if successful, add largely to the food of the country, but it was very difficult to impress this fact on the public mind. The ignorance in the minds of those who were able to introduce a better state of things was, he thought, disgraceful, and it was intolerable that there should be no system of watchfulness, the want of which condemned our people, in many instances, virtually to starvation. Simple precautions, such as were mentioned in the paper, would obviate these evils. He would develope, as much as possible, the free-trade in meat, but stop that in disease, but its abolition was impossible so long as the private slaughter-houses existed. He had come to the conclusion, from what he had seen of the use made of diseased meat in sausages, and by the third-rate butchers, that it was with them impossible to have any system adequate to protect the public. Mr. Sneade Brown called attention to the evidence which had been given in a former number of the "Transactions" of the Society, in regard to Leith and other towns where private slaughter-houses were not allowed, and in which it was shown that there had been an advantage to everyone. In a Report of the Medical Officer of the Privy Council in 1860, where the slaughter-houses had been examined, in the course of an inquiry instituted for the purpose of devising measures for the prevention of a disease which had appeared on the continent, there were some terrible pictures of the condition of slaughter-houses. All of them were found to have objectionable features. Dr. Alfred Carpenter said the question ought to be taken up in reference to every large town in the kingdom. In the district with which ho was connected new slaughter-houses had been forbidden and public abattoirs erected. But he was sorry to say they had not been much used, the butchers preferred to continue using their private places; perhaps because they could slaughter their diseased cattle without being observed. The adoption of the public abattoirs would be an advantage for the poor. In the private slaughter-houses even good meat became tainted by contact with the 15 bad conditions which prevailed. As for the objection taken against their abolition, on the ground of the difficulty of transit in hot weather, he (Dr. Carpenter) thought there would be no harm done if at such a time meat were not eaten at all. Much of the disease that prevailed then was produced by eating animal food in a state of change, and people would be much better without it. The law required to be altered to meet the requirements of the case in many ways. He hoped this Society would make a strong effort against the continuance of such places. The evidence of the Parliamentary Committee which sat upon the subject was entirely one-sided— no one was heard adverse to them. Dr. George Ross (Medical Officer of Health for St. Giles') supported the views contained in the paper. Nothing was more abominable than the condition of the slaughter-houses, and there could be no doubt that if they were abolished it would be a great boon to the public. He was opposed to any compromise, because he could see no way to improvement short of entire abolition. There was a much greater difficulty in dealing with the subject in this metropolis than in small towns. There would be a great difficulty in providing for four abattoirs for the metropolis as proposed, and in his opinion it would be better that Copenhagen Market should be supplied with accommodation adequate to the wants of the whole metropolis. Under proper regulations for the prevention of nuisances, if this were the case, there would be no more then than there are now connected with the live cattle. Mr. Charles V. Game looked upon the paper as entirely theoretical, and denied that private slaughter-houses Avere necessarily injurious, he having lived for twenty years, and brought up a family, over one, and they were as healthy a family as any in London. The present slaughter-houses ought to bept in a cleanly and creditable manner. Mr. 11. C. Greatorex said that immense supervision was necessary, and that was one reason why private slaughter-houses should be abolished. Their position was bad, and all sanitary science agreed that they were injurious to the health of the people. On economical and other grounds he advocated the abolition of the private slaughter-houses. The Chairman said he had taken much interest in the subject, and a year ago had felt it his duty to take such parliamentary action as led to the defeat of Dr. Brewer's bill. Something more precise in the definition, and more stringent in the remedies, was required to meet the condition of the slaughter-houses in our large towns. The matter, as it concerned them, should not be left till found to be a nuisance, but taken as being, in a degree, a nuisauce per se. And the only question was whether these places should be under strict regulations in the heart of towns, or entirely forbidden. He had taken note of the evidence offered before the Select Committee of the House of Commons of 1873, on this subject, and of the 16 character of the witnesses, and had found that many frivolous and irrelevant questions were asked. A great experiment had been carried on at Edinburgh, which had resulted in a great saving financially, and an improvement in the public health, yet no one from that city was examined as to these matters. A great discussion had likewise been carried on at Liverpool on the subject, and definite results arrived at there; but no gentleman from that town was consulted. Most of the witnesses examined were interested persons carrying on the very trades, the nature and effect of which were under discussion. A medical man or two was among them, and examined; but he (the Chairman) feared their evidence was not respected. It was a misfortune that this inquiry should have led to so disappointing an issue. He was quite convinced, in his own mind, that we should have in our great cities slaughter-houses under the control of the public authority. He felt doubt, however, whether they should be open to any one to slaughter in them when he chose. He would have them let to individuals. If they were placed entirely and exclusively in the hands of the public authority, that authority would go to sleep, but if let to individuals under suitable conditions, it would take care that the tenants observed these conditions. If we were to have private places we must have a license on the one hand, and bye-laws on the other. The license must be granted by the authority which supervised, with rigid conditions and rigid bye-laws regulatiug the manner in which the business should be conducted. In this matter it was our duty to stimulate public opinion, and watch its operation. It was impossible to enforce such things greatly in advance of public sentiments, and before we could have what we desired in a really efficient manner, we must have a strong municipal authority—an authority possessing the public confidence. To the spread of scientific education he looked for good results, and he was convinced that one of the results of the public education of the country would eventually be far more effective than laws relating to the public health. Dr. Carpenter moved— "That the subject be referred to the Standing Committee of the Health Department, in order that the Council may be recommended to take action in the matter if necessary." Dr. T. O. Dudfield seconded the motion, and in doing so, called attention to the fact that a great many private slaughter-houses had been tolerated by the medical inspectors, which would never have been allowed to continue had it not been known that they were, as a whole, in consequence of the law, non-permanent. Mr. Sneade Brown proposed, and Dr. Carpenter seconded, a vote of thanks to the Chairman, which was carried unanimously. Printed by the London Co-operative Printing and Stationery Company, Limited, 2 and 3, Plough Court, Fetter Lane, London, E,C. PUBLIC VACCINATION. REPORT TO THE BOARD OF GUARDIANS OF THE PARISH OF PADDINGTON. August 10th, 1869. Gentlemen, After having been occupied six months in endeavouring to carry out the provisions of the Vaccination Act of 1867, I propose presenting a Report that may in some degree illustrate the working of this Act, now entrusted to you, in conjunction with the Public Vaccinators and Registrars of Births and Deaths in your Parish. I have ventured to embody in it some remarks and suggestions which I trust will be useful to you as well as other Guardians, who at the present time are directing enquiries into the manner in which local Authorities have been able to give full effect to the intentions of the legislature, and to show what proceedings have been taken under the provisions of this Act. This Report applies to the Vaccination of children born and registered in the parish, and returned as defaulters; that is, in the Sub-Districts of Kensington, viz:—St. Mary's and St. John's, Paddington, for the year 1868. The number of children born in Paddington in 1868, as shown by returns of the Registrar-General, is: 2735. 2 TABLE I. Showing the result of Inspection of Defaulters of Vaccination in the year 1868. No. of Births in 1868. No. of Defaulters on the Books. No. of Dead, unknown or gone away. No. successfully Vaccinated on Inspection, or by Order. No. too ill, neglected or postponed Vaccination. No. of Orders issued for Vaccination, or for Certificate of unfitness. In St. Mary's and St. John's District, 2735 1176, or 42.9 per Cent. of Births. 514, or 43.7 per Cent. of defaulters. 518, or 44.0 per Cent. of defaulters. 144, or 12.2 per Cent. of defaulters. 372, or 31.6 per Cent. of defaulters. If we compare this return of births with the number of children that have been returned as defaulters of Vaccination under the Act, it would appear that only 57.1 per cent. of all children born had been duly vaccinated when the return was made. That is, however, not the whole truth, but shows simply the number of parents or guardians and public Vaccinators who had taken the trouble of sending to the Registrar certificates of successful Vaccination. Upon actual inspection it was found that a much larger proportion of children had been actually Vaccinated by private practitioners, but the parents had neglected to send the required certificate, and had therefore subjected themselves to a penalty of 20s. according to the law. Out of the 1176 defaulters, it was found that a very large number had been duly vaccinated. This failure of sending certificates appears most to prevail in those families where children had been vaccinated by a private medical attendant, who in most cases had promised to send the certificate. As Public Vaccinators get paid by the Guardians for those cases only in which their certificates are duly returned, of course it happens that few or none are omitted to be forwarded to the Registrar. The following table No. II. shows the result of the actual inspections and defaulters in different Streets and places of the Parish. 3 TABLE No. II. Showing the result of Inspections in highly populated Streets, and other places of the Parish. Names of Streets. No. of Defaulters. Dead, unknown, and gone away. Cases since successfully Vaccinated. Cases too ill, or postponed and neglected. No of Orders issued. Cases standing for Reinspection. Woodchester Street 43 20 19 4 14 1 Cirencester Street 25 9 12 4 8 1 Clarendon Street 42 28 14 16 ... Senior Street 21 8 10 3 12 3 Dartington.Terr. and adjoining Streets 21 11 7 3 5 2 Westb.-Terr. North 14 4 8 2 7 2 Waverley Road 20 9 11 ... 10 4 Alfred Road 17 6 8 3 6 3 Brindley Street 11 3 6 2 4 2 Hampden Street 26 13 12 1 9 1 Amberley Road 36 18 16 2 17 2 Netley Street 10 2 5 3 3 ... Desboro' Terrace 12 5 5 2 5 ... Howell St. and Braithwaite-Pl. 11 4 4 3 6 4 Hethpool Street 11 5 3 3 4 ... Campbell Street 8 5 2 1 2 1 Cuthbert Street 12 6 5 1 2 ... Hall Place 24 12 8 4 5 1 North Wharf Road 11 2 4 5 5 3 Church Pl.GreenSt. Willing's Place, Hermitage - St., Kent's Place 23 14 5 5 13 5 Dudley Street 8 1 4 3 4 3 Albert Street 7 4 2 1 2 1 Edgware Place 9 1 7 1 3 1 Elgin Terrace 23 8 7 8 7 1 Canterbury Terrace 14 8 5 1 4 ... Andover Place 7 1 4 2 2 2 Richmond Road 12 4 8 .. 3 ... Edgware Road 21 8 10 3 5 1 Queen's Road 12 6 4 2 4 1 Pickering Place 8 3 5 ... 3 2 Moscow Road 6 4 2 ... ... ... Star Street 7 5 2 ... ... ... Stanley Street 7 3 4 ... 3 ... Douglas Place 8 4 3 1 2 ... Charles Mews 6 3 1 2 1 1 Brook Mews 5 3 1 1 1 1 Bristol Gardens 10 4 3 3 4 ... Ledbury Road 9 2 6 1 2 ... Other Places 599 258 276 64 169 7 Totals 1176 514 518 144 372 56 4 I cannot in this Report avoid alluding to those persons who object to Vaccination, and endeavour to spread erroneous and prejudicial doctrines regarding it amongst many who are willing to listen to them. If they were permitted to rule, we should again have the disfigurements, blindness, and all the horrors of the old small pox days. Whatever objections may be fairly urged against compulsory Vaccination, it is quite clear that it is a law established by no party purpose, but for the good of the whole people, and sanctioned by the enlightened opinion and experience of the whole civilized world. It is to the interest of society that unreasonable objectors should be put down, and that the law should be upheld. It has even been recommended that parents should not have their children registered, so that they may escape the inspection of the Public Vaccination Officer, a circumstance showing, with other facts that might be cited, the necessity of a national and more compulsory system of registration of births, from which complete lists can be obtained of all children born in any given district. Under the present registration a certain number of births escape registration altogether. Magistrates have very properly inflicted the penalty in all cases that have been recently brought before them by the Public Vaccination Officers. In one case I brought before Mr. D'Eyncourt, Vaccination itself was not objected to, but the defendant wished the lymph to be obtained from a cow. It may be a question whether, as in some continental states, a heifer might not be provided at the public expense for animal Vaccination, and thus give an opportunity for obtaining what is still thought by some persons to be more genuine lymph. The fact, however, is not perhaps generally known, that animal Vaccination is a far more virulent disease than arm-to-arm Vaccination, and it would with some delicate children, in all probability, be followed by results much to be deplored, and give rise to grave objection to Vaccination. The epidemic of small pox that passed over London in 1866 & 1867 is now declining, but there is no doubt it was 5 much favored in its ravage by the large number of unvaccinated children found in various parts of the Metropolis. I may give two istances of what frequently happens,— A few years since, a labourer came from Somersetshire to reside in this parish with his relatives, who were living in Salem Gardens; he became affected with small pox, although no cases had previously been known in the neighbourhood. The disease was shortly communicated to members of the family, and from them it extended to the neighbouring houses; twelve persons were attacked, six were unprotected cases ; upon inspection of 30 houses 8 children were found unvaccinated. Last year I traced four cases of mild small pox in Francis Street, originating from one imported case, and afterwards spreading to adjoining premises. Six inquests were held in 1868 on small pox cases in the Central District of Middlesex, all were on unvaccinated persons, and the medical evidence was given to the effect that these lives would in all probability have been saved if they had been vaccinated. Dr. Ballard, in his Sanitary Report of the Parish of Islington in 1868, gives a highly interesting account of the protective influence of Vaccination in this parish. It is peculiarly instructive, and confirmative of the experience of 70 years, showing the vast difference in which small pox attacks persons at different ages, or whether they have been badly or well vaccinated. Out of a population of 210,000 people, the ages of 1359 sufferers from small pox have been recorded. Thirty per cent., or one-third of cases have been between the ages of 15 and 25. Twenty-one per cent., or one-fifth of the attacks, in children under 10 years of age. Dr. Ballard concludes that not more than 10 per cent, ought to have suffered under good Vaccination, and he believes the infantile attacks to have been twice as numerous as they would have been had Vaccination been properly attended to. Still, we owe it to the general Vaccination of our population that the epidemic of 1862-68 was not a far more serious affair than it actually was. Since a more vigilant attention has been given to public Vaccination in this parish, as well as in all parts of the 6 country, and especially in Scotland and in Ireland, the mortal effects of this disgusting malady are less and less exhibited. This will be seen from the following Statements:— In 1866. In 1867. In 1868. Deaths in London 1388 1332 606 Deaths in Scotland 200 124 25 Deaths in Paddington 20 4 3 In Scotland, we find 25 deaths only out of nearly the same population as London, showing what may be achieved by compulsory vaccination. In the GOG deaths in London last year, 119 were in the small pox Hospital, brought from all parts of London. In different registration districts we find the numbers vary from 42 to 199 deaths; in the sub districts adjacent to our own, we find in Paddington 3 deaths; in Kensington 3 ; in Marylebone 4 ; in St. Pancras 15 ; indicating a marked annual diminution in each parish. Every small pox death represents 8 or 10 cases of the disease at least. It is an essential feature of success in the "stamping out" of contagious maladies generally, and for carrying out the Vaccination Act, now at the command of the authorities, that every surrounding district should act in concert; for a considerable number of the lower class of people are of a migratory character, as shown by Table I., in which 514 of the defaulters had either gone away ; or died. It is these persons that carry with them the germs of contagious diseases from one district into another. It is therefore highly satisfactory to find that in the large populations of Marylebone, St. Pancras, Chelsea, and Kensington, the Guardians are disposed to insist upon early systematic Vaccination, and avail themselves of their power of appointing a Public Vaccination Officer. 7 That these efforts of district and central authorities will shortly have a beneficial effect on public health cannot be doubted, and we have every reason to believe that after a few years small pox in England, as in Scotland and in some continental countries, will be gradually and completely annihilated. While the general supervision, which is now proposed for small pox, will be much less necessary then it is in the case of other contagious maladies. As my duties have hitherto not extended beyond the inspection of cases of defaulters, and to the insisting upon vaccination being performed as the law directs, I have not ventured upon any other details which this experience has enabled me to comment upon. I have simply had in view the object of legislation, viz.: that every child born in a district should be vaccinated before it arrives at the age of four months, or produce a certificate of temporary unfitness for the operation. This has been done, and the results duly recorded for the year. It will be seen that a certain number of cases still stand over for re-inspection, they are mostly exemptions 011 account of illness, or a delicate state of health of the children, but they are greatly diminishing. The records of inspection give strong testimony of a large proportion of sickly children ; in the more densely populate streets, and in houses of the poor, whooping cough, bronchitis, teething, and eruptive diseases were the principal maladies, from which many children were suffering. It appears to me that early vaccination for the infantine population of the lowest class of people is not so safely borne as in the better sphere of society. I11 Scotland, however, early vaccination is strongly recommended, and the success of vaccination in Scotland is strongly marked. I must mention, that with few exceptions the utmost courtesy has been shown to me, and the inspector who assisted me. Any friendly explanations calculated to remove objections and prejudices were willingly listened to, and promptly acted upon. Before the adoption of threatened legal proceedings, it is best to explain what grounds exist for legislative interference, and to give reasons for making vaccination compulsory. 8 This in ray opinion is attended with less loss of time, and succeeds in most cases in getting vaccination done before the expiration of the 14 days allowed in the notice issued. From table No. II. we find that a large proportion of 518 cases or about 24 per cent, of the cases returned as defaulters from neglect or delay, were vaccinated on request, or had been done before inspection, the rest were done by orders issued. When it becomes more generally known that the Guardians are in earnest in enforcing the provisions of the Act, less delay will take place; and as an enlightened public opinion tends daily to remove prejudice there will at no distant period be fewer cases for inspection. In conclusion, I beg to remark that considerable labour has been given to this work ; and as this is the first report of the kind that has been issued, I trust that it will give satisfaction to the Guardians, and meet the intention of the Legislature. I am, Gentlemen, Your obedient Servant, W^ HARDWICKE. Richmond Villa, Park Place, Maida Hill West. Memorandum of Overcrowding in Single Booms, and in Houses let and sub-let by absentee Landlords* In accordance with the request of the Sanitary and Public Health Committee the following is a brief summary of the grounds upon which I believe the Vestry ought to adopt the 35th Section of the Sanitary Act in the Parish:— I have strong reasons for believing that when a proposition of this kind was brought before the Vestry in 1867, it was withdrawn from want of due appreciation of the advantages which the poor as well as ratepayers would derive from it, perhaps also, in some measure, from misrepresentations and alleged injustice towards landlords of tenant house property. The Sanitary records of this and other Vestries, prove that houses let out in single rooms, or to several families, have endangered the life of people, Extreme density of population favors the spread of contagion, and is a prolific source of pauperism and degradation. The ordinary systematic Sanitary inspection once a year is not a sufficient remedy, for although we generally succeed in abating nuisances when discovered, it is much easier to prevent their frequent recurrence, by registration and inspection of the worst houses. This is what is wanted. The stringent rules proposed for adoption in this and other Parishes four years ago, resulted I believe, in failure, from requiring too much supervision in carrying out Sec. 35 of the Sanitary Act, and from trespassing somewhat upon the supposed rights of property and liberty of the subject; therefore it is that I now conceive a more simple set of rules may be adopted, which in no way can be complained of as unreasonable towards either landlords or tenants. It cannot be denied that it is only in certain house property to which we now refer, that dangerous and immoral overcrowding occurs; these houses are inhabited by the lowest class of people, and amongst them is the largest proportion of sickness and pauperism. There are persons who let out rooms to weekly tenants that take in, as a rule, a class of persons not to be tolerated in respectable tenant houses kept by a responsible landlord or landlady. The drinking and dirty people, for instance, seek out the former kind of house, where there is no resident landlord, and prefer it to any other. The Parochial Medical Officers and the Relieving Officers of Unions are able to show that they have on their books applicants always on the verge of pauperism, who chiefly live in back rooms and kitchens, paying rent under the most unfavorable sanitary conditions. * Reprinted from Quarterly Report (No. 18) to the Vestry of Paddington, by W. IIaudwicke, M.D., Medical Officer of Health. It is in these houses that we find a man, wife, and five or six children crowded together into one small back room of 700 cubic feet space ; or the front kitchen a little larger, but with less than 1000 cubic feet space, where there are not more than 100 to 150 feet for each person. A dog or two are often kept under these conditions. The following cases from my notes are illustrations:— No. 12 Bouverie Street—man, wife and 5 children in front kitchen, 770 cubic feet space; the beds, cupboards, chairs, tables, &c. reduce the cubic space less than 100 cubic feet to each person; the man is a journeyman butcher out of work. In the same house, first floor front, is a man (plumber and glazier) with his wife and 7 children, with cubic space of 1200 feet only. No. 56 Cirencester Street, was a man, wife and 5 children in a front room, choked up with furniture, and articles of wet linen hung all over the room; 2 fine children were suffering- from severe Whooping Cough, and 2 had died the previous week of same disease. At No.—, was found a small dirty back room, where some people kept 2 dogs, the man, and wife earning £ 3 a-week, and spending it in drink. No. 22 Cirencester Street, three instances of over-crowding in one house— 14 persons in excess. No. 46 in the same street, 16 persons in excess— front kitchen 6, back parlour 4; second floor back 6. No. 23 Netley Street, front parlour contains 5 persons; second floor front 7 persons. No. 2 Alfred Place, Harrow Road, 5 persons, with a cubic space of 560 feet. In Clarendon Street, nearly 100 persons have been displaced; and 17 persons were dislodged from pne house. In some of the kitchens and basements people may be said to be like Esquimaux, in underground cave dwellings—places with impure air, want of light, admitted only through a grating in front, the upper sash of the window being often out of repair, or nailed up. The Sanitary Officers are continually serving notices to abate overcrowding in single rooms (as the orders of the last few weeks fully testify), and it is to be regretted that in the newly built houses of Mews (in the Chippenham Road and Amberley Road District), rooms are beginning to be thickly populated with a pauperised class of persons, many of whom have removed from the worst part of other parishes, and from less cleanly dwellings in other places. These houses were originally constructed for the requirements of one middle class family only, while frequently there are now congregated in them 4, 5, and 6 families of artizans, labourers, &c. (for which they are unfitted). Hence the necessity for supervision. In tenant-house property of this kind, there is not the essential accommodation of a dwelling; no one looks after the accumulation of dust or offensive garbage, or sees that the closets are cleaned or drains kept trapped, or to attend to the general cleaning and ventilation of passages, stairs or rooms- Serious evils of a physical and moral character, are found to afflict the population of these over-crowded houses. The want of fresh air, habitual uncleanliness, bad washing accommodation, with other unsanitary conditions, favor the spread of contagion. There is a notable increase of tubercular and consumptive maladies in the tenant house population of large cities, and the low form of vitality engendered in people who do not enjoy fresh air, leads to the abuse of stimulants and tobacco. This condition of physical, mental and moral decline is so well recognized in America, that it has acquired a name, less elegant than expressive, of "tenant house rot." By measures such as I now advocate, these evils can be averted. It is for Local Boards to see that the time has now arrived for prudent and judicious action. The homes of the people cannot continue in their present disgraceful state, and people perish at high death rates, without trying effectual means to prevent them. It is a question whether rich citizens are to have in their midst a thriving and industrious population, living in indecent homes, or take the consequences of a sickly and semipauperised race, flocking from rural districts, to be supported by high rates, or trusting largely to the charitable doles of clergy and lady visitors of a wealthy Parish. REGULATIONS proposed to apply to houses or parts of houses let out in single rooms, or where several families live in one house, or where no resident landlord or agent is responsible for Sanitary regulations of the dwellings so let out. It is asked that the Sanitary authority shall have power, if they deem it expedient, to keep a register of any house, or part of a house, let out in single rooms to one family, or rooms in houses containing more than one family, where there is no resident and responsible landlord. The landlord or his agent shall be responsible for executing the following orders:— 1.—The cleansing and lime washing of rooms, stairs, walls, ceilings, area, yard or basement, at least twice a year. 2.—For providing a proper receptacle for dust, garbage, or refuse matters, and the removal at least once a week. 3.—For maintaining a proper water supply and receptacle, to the satisfaction of the Vestry. 4.—For keeping the w.c. and drains in proper order, such as regards traps, pans, water supply, and efficient accommodation (if in common) one for less than 20 persons. 5.—For the letting of rooms, where the cubic space for each adult individual shall be not less than 300 cubic feet in the sleeping room, or 350 feet if used for sleeping and living room. Two children under 10 years of age to be counted as one adult. The number of persons that each room will legally accommodate to be fixed by the Vestry Authority. 6.—To give notice, in the event of any infectious disease, to the Sanitary Department of the Vestry, and take measures for isolation or removal. 7.—For the ventilation of room or rooms in such a manner as may be deemed satisfactory to the Medical Officer of Health. 8.—The Inspectors to enter at all reasonable times; and the owner or agent to visit and inspect at least weekly. g. — For a breach or default in carrying out the above Regulations, a penalty of 40s. shall be incurred. Resolution of Sanitary and Public Health Committee, April 18 th, 1872. Resolved—That inasmuch as an amendment of the 35th Section of the Sanitary Act of 1866 is under the consideration of Parliament in the Public Health Bill, introduced by the Government, the question of putting1 in force the provisions of such Section be deferred until the fate of the Government measure be known. Extracts from the Sanitary Act of 18 66, Section 35. On application to one of Her Majesty's principal Secretaries of State by the Nuisance Authority of the city of London, or any district or parish included within the Act for the better local government of the metropolis, or of any municipal borough, or of any place under The Local Government Act, 1858, or any Local Improvement Act, or of any city or town containing, according to the census for the time being in force, a population of not less than five thousand inhabitants, the Secretary of State may, as he may think fit, by notice to be published in the London Gazette, declare the following enactment to be in force in the district of such nuisance authority, and from and after the publication of such notice the nuisance authority shall be empowered to make regulations for the following matters; that is to say, 1. For fixing the number of persons who may occupy a house or part of a house which is let in lodgings or occupied by members of more than one family : 2. For the registration of houses thus let or occupied in lodgings : 3. For the inspection of such houses, and the keeping the same in a cleanly and wholesome state : 4. For enforcing therein the provision of privy accommodation and other appliances and means of cleanliness in proportion to the number of lodgings and occupiers, and the cleansing and ventilation of the common passages and staircases: 5. For the cleansing and lime-whiting at stated times of such premises: The nuisance authority may provide for the enforcement of the above regulations by penalties not exceeding forty shillings for any one offence, with an additional penalty not exceeding twenty shillings for every day during which a default in obeying such regulations may continue; but such regulations shall not be of any validity unless and until they shall have been confirmed by the Secretary of State. But this section shall not apply to common lodging houses within the provisions of The Common Lodging Houses Act, 1851, or any Act amending the same. J. MORTON, PRINTER, STAR STREET, EDGM'ARE ROAD.