Borough of Paddington. JUNE, 1892. ANNUAL REPORT OF THE VESTRY. (For the Year ending March 25th, 1892.) WITH APPENDICES, Including the Annual Report of the Medical Officer of Health. VESTRY HALL, HARROW ROAD, W. Published by Order of the Vestry, Under the Metropolis Local Management Act, 1855. 1892. Printed by MORTON & BURT, 187, Edgware Road, & 103, Star Street, London, W. Contents. Map of Paddington facing page 9. Page I. Introduction 9 II. Parliamentary Electoral Divisions 9 III. Registration Districts 10 IV. Poor Law Administration 11 V. The School Board 11 Vl. Ecclesiastical Districts 12 VII. The County Council 12 VIII. Gas and Water Supply 13 IX. Municipal Electoral Divisions 13 X. Population 14 XI. The Vestry 15 XII. The Burial Board 15 XIII. The Baths and Wash-houses 15 XIV. The Parochial Charities 16 XV. Members of the Vestry 16 XVI. Parochial Auditors 18 XVII. Overseers 18 XVIII. Officers of the Vestry 19 XIX. Honorary Officers of the Vestry 20 XX. Meetings of the Vestry and its Committees . 20 XXI. Open Spaces :— St. Mary's Public Garden—Entrance from Cuthbert Street 21 XXII. St. Philip's Church ditto—Committee of Management 25 XXIII. Measures before Parliament 25 XXIV. Public Lavatory Accommodation:— Paddington Green 25 Harrow Road, Fernhead Road 26 XXV. Tree Planting 26 XXVI. Coal and Wine Dues 26 XXVII. Blomfield Road Hoarding 26 XXVIII. Electric Lighting 27 XXIX. Do. Vestry Hall 28 XXX. Public Health (London) Act, 1891, Bye-Laws 28 XXXI. Snow Clearing 47 XXXII. 26 Wharf—New Lease 48 4 Page XXXIII. Canal Purification 40 XXXIV. Constant Water Supply 40 XXXV. Cab Radius Extension 40 XXXVI. Assessment Appeals 50 XXXVII. Abstract of Vestry Accounts, Summary of Contracts, Statistical Tables, &c. 51 Poor Rate Account 52 Lighting Kate Account 52 General Rate Account 54 Sewors Rate Account 58 Metropolitan Consolidated Rate Account 58 Summary of Contracts 6O Debts and Liabilities 62 Loans 64 Sundry Paymonts made to or by the Vestry 65 Analysis of Rates Levied 66 Rates Levied since 1855 71 Principal Statutes re Rates 72 XXXVIII. Report of Surveyor:— Maintenance of Roads 73 Wood Paving Repairs 75 New Wood Paving and Repairs 77 Channels and Carriageway Paving 78 New Granite Crossings 78 Special Footway Paving Repairs 70 Reinstating Roads and Footpaths after Companies, &c. 70 Footway Paving Repairs 70 Property belonging to the Vestry, but not Valued 80 Street Refuge 81 Tree Planting 81 Blomfield Road Railings 82 Electric Lighting 83 Electric Light at the Vestry Hall 85 Decorating Board Room 86 New Sower and other Works 86 Special Repairs to old Sewers 88 Drains and other Works 00 Underground Public Lavatories 93 New Buildings 94 Lighting Department 95 5 Page XXXVIII. Report of Surveyor (continued). Dusting Department 96 Slopping Department 96 Carting Road Materials and General Work 97 Cleansing the Public Streets 97 Sanding Frosty Roads 98 Road Watering 98 Horses 99 Horse Fodder 100 Artizans' Work 102 Paddington Green and St. Mary's Old Churchyards 102 Accounts and Details appended to the Surveyor's Report:— A. Dusting, Slopping, Watering, Carting Roadway Materials, &c. 104 B. Plant Capital Account 110 C. Road Sweeping and Cleaning Account 111 D. Public Lighting Department 112 E. Miscellaneous Articles in Store 114 F. Miscellaneous Tools in use 115 G. Defects of Un-metered and Metered Lamps 116 H. List of Plant fixed in the Public Streets 117 I. Experimental and Testing Apparatus fixed at the Vestry Hall 117 J. List and Positions of Refuge and Special Lamps 118 K. Table of Lighting Hours, &c., &c. 120 XXXIX. Abstract of Quarterly Reports of Public Analyst 123 XL. Report of Burial Board 125 XLI. Report of Commissioners of Baths and Wash- houses 131 XLII. Schedule of Parochial Charities 148 XLIII. Accounts of Parochial Charities 155 6 Appendix No. I. Annual Report of Medical Officer of Health. Page Report— Births 169 Deaths 170 Zymotic Diseases 175 Disinfection 178 Canal Basin 179 Water 179 Tables 185 Appendix No. II. Page Inventory of Furniture, &c. 211 Appendix No. III. Page Regulations as to Letting of Vestry Hall 215 7 Appendix No. IV. Constitution of Vestry, &c., after the May Election of 1892. Page I. Members of the Vestry 216 II. Parochial Auditors 219 III. Overseers 219 IV. Committees of the Vestry 220 V. The Assessment Committee 222 VI. Members of the Burial Board 222 VII. Commissioners for Public Baths and Wash- houses 222 VIII. Meetings of the Vestry, Committees, &c. 223 IX. Alphabetical List of Members of the Vestry, with Dates of their first Election 224 Appendix No. V. Page Members of the Board of Guardians 226 Appendix No. VI. Page Managers of Board Schools 228 Borough of Paddington. June, 1892. Annual Report of the Destrn. (For the Year ending 25th March, 1892.) I. Introduction. THE PARISH OF PADDINGTON, in the County of London, extends Northward from the Marble Arch to Kilburn Gate; and Westward from the Marble Arch to Kensington Palace Gardens ; it is bounded on the North by Willesden ; on the South by St. George's, Hanover Square, and St. Margaret, Westminster ; on the East by Marylebone; and on the West by Kensington and the detached portion of St. Luke, Chelsea ; its length from North to South being nearly Two Miles and its superficial extent about 1,280 acres. II, Parliamentary Electoral Divisions. In 1885 Paddington was constituted a separate Parliamentary Borough by the Redistribution of Seats Act (48 and 49 Victoria, cap. 23). The Borough returns Two Members to Parliament, and for the purposes of election it is divided into Two Divisions, 10 BOROUGH OF PADDINGTON. under the names of North Paddington and South Paddington. North Paddington consists of Ward No. 2, and South Paddington of Wards Nos. 1, 3, and 4. The number of Borough Voters, according to the Register made in 1891, is as follows :— North Paddington 7,857 South Paddington 7,109 Total 14,966 The number of Parliamentary County Voters in Paddington is 104. The following particulars give the results of the Parliamentary Elections which have taken place in the Borough, viz.: — North Paddington. 1885, November.—Lionel L. Cohen, M.P. 1886, June.— „ ,, (deceased). 1887, July.—John Aird, M.P. South Paddington. 1885, November. — Right Hon. Lord Randolph Churchill, M.P. 1886, June.— ,, „ „ III. Registration Districts. The Registrar-General has divided Paddington into two Districts for the Registration of Births and Deaths, called respectively the St. Mary's District and the St. John's District. The divisional line of the two districts traverses the centre of the road in Praed Street, from Edgware Road to the Canal Basin, continues thence along the centre of the Canal Basin as far as the Bishop's Road, and passes Westward from thence along the centre of the Bishop's Road and Westbourne Grove to the Western boundary of the Parish ; the St. Mary's District lying on the North and the St. John's District on the South of such divisional line. REPORT, 1891-92. 11 Registrars of Births, Deaths, and Marriages. Superintendent Registrar—Henry F. Aveling. Register Office, 287, Harrow Road. Registrar of Marriages—William Kirk, 78, Westbourne Park Road. Registrars of Births and Deaths—St. Mary's District, William Kirk, 78, Westbourne Park Road. St. John's District, Matthew Batten Cranstone, 35, Spring Street, Sussex Gardens. IV. Poor-Law Administration. The Paddington Workhouse and Infirmary are situate in the Harrow Road; the management is in the hands of a Board of Guardians, Eighteen of whom are Elected Guardians (elected by the Ratepayers). The resident Justices of the Peace are ex-officio Members of the Board. Paddington is united with St. George, Hanover Square, and Fulham, to form a District called the West London School District, the Schools being at Ashford, near Staines. For list of Guardians see Appendix No. V. V. The School Board. In 1870, Paddington and the parishes of St. Marylebone, St. Pancras, and St. John, Hampstead, were formed into one of the Metropolitan Districts for the purposes of the Elementary Education Act (33 and 34 Victoria, cap. 75), under the name of the Marylebone Division of the School Board for London, which Division returns Seven Members to the School Board. For Managers of the Board Schools of the Marylebone Division see Appendix No. VI. 12 BOROUGH OF PADDINGTON. VI. Ecclesiastical Districts. Paddington is divided into Seventeen Ecclesiastical District viz. :— St. James', St. Matthew's, St. Mary Magdalen „ John's, „ Luke's, Westbourne „ Peter's, „ Mary's, Park, ,, Stephen's, Holy Trinity, ,, Saviour's, „ Augustine's, St. Paul's, ,, Michael and All Angels, Emmanuel, All Saints', Christ Church, St. Luke's, Kilburn, VII. The County Council, By the Local Government Act of 1888, the Metropolitan Board of Works was superseded by the London County Council, and the area which had hitherto been under the control of the Metropolitan Board, was formed into the Administrative County of London, each Parliamentary Electoral Division returning double the number of Members to the Council to that returned to Parliament, so that Paddington has Four Members on the Council. The number of County Council voters, according to the Register made in 1891, is as follows :— North Paddington 6,423 South Paddington 6,004 12,427 The following particulars give the results of the County Council Elections which have taken place in the Borough, viz.:— North Paddington. South Paddington. Elected 17th Jan., 1889. Elected 17th Jan., 1889. R. Melvill Beachcroft. T. G. Fardell. E. Parker Young. Sir George D. Harris. March, 1892. March, 1892. H. P. Harris. T. G. Fardell. W. Urquhart. Sir George D. Harris. REPORT, 1891-92. 13 VII. Gas and Water Supply. The Gas consumed in Paddington is supplied by The Gas Light anp Coke Comdany. » The Water is supplied by two Companies, viz.:—the Grand Junction Waterworks Company and the West Middlesex Waterworks Company. Ratepayers residing on the Bishop of London's Estate are entitled to a deduction of 15 per cent. A plan of the Estate may be seen at the Vestry Hall. IX. Municipal Electoral Divisions. Paddington is divided into Four Wards, as follows, viz. :— WARD No. 1:—All that portion of the Parish which lies within a line drawn along the centre of Harrow Road from the point at which the same intersects the N.W. boundary of the said Parish, and thence along the centre of such Road to a point directly opposite the centre of the Road on Westbourne Terrace Bridge, thence along the centre of such Road and of Westbourne Terrace, to the centre of Bishop's Road, thence Westward along the centre of Bishop's Road and Westbourne Grove to the West boundary of the said Parish at the point where the same intersects the centre of Westbourne Grove, and thence Northward continuously along the said boundary to the point mentioned at the commencement of the foregoing description. WARD No. 2:—All that portion of the said Parish which lies North of Ward No. 1 and a line drawn from the boundary of such Ward Southward along the centre of Westbourne Terrace to a point directly opposite the West end of the centre of Craven Road, thence along the centre of Craven Road and Praed Street, and thence in a direct line to the boundary of the said Parish. 14 BOROUGH OF PADDINGTON. WARD No. 3:—All that portion of the said Parish which lies South of Ward No. 1 and a line drawn from the boundary of such Ward Southward along the centre of Westbourne Terrace, Sussex Gardens, and Westbourne Street, and (hence in a direct line to the boundary of the said Parish. WARD No. 4:- All that portion of the said Parish which is not comprised within the foregoing descriptions of the other Wards. For the purposes of Rate Collection, Ward No. 2 has been sub-divided as follows :— Division No. 2a East:—All that portion of the Ward lying North of the canal and South of a lino drawn through the centre of Sutherland Avenue from Harrow Road to Shirland Road, and East of a lino drawn along the centre of Shirland Road from Sutherland Avenue to Kilburn Park Road. Division No. 2a West:—All that portion of the Ward lying North of a lino drawn along tho centre of Sutherland Avenue from Harrow Road to Shirland Road, and West of a lino drawn along the centre of Shirland Road from Sutherland Avenue to Kilburn Park Road. Division No. 2b:—All that portion of the Ward lying South of the line of the Grand Junction and Regents Canals from Maida Vale to Lock Bridge, Harrow Road. X, Population. The population of Paddington, at the Census taken in 1801 (unrevised) was as follows, viz.:— St. Mary's District 84,156 St. John's District 33,682 Total 117,838 Total number of inhabited houses, April Rate, 1892, 15,323. REPORT, 1891-92. 15 XI. The Vestry, In 1855 the Vestry of Paddington was reconstituted as the Local Authority of the Parish by the Metropolis Local Management Act (18 and 19 Victoria, cap. 120). The Vestry is the Board of Works for Paddington, and consists of Seventy-two Elected Members and the Vicar of Paddington, who is ex-officio Chairman of the Vestry. The ordinary meetings of the Vestry are held at the Vestry Hall, Harrow Road, Paddington Green, on the first and third Tuesdays in each month, the third Tuesday in August and the first Tuesday in September excepted. In 1852 the Vestry resolved to erect a new building for the Municipal purposes of the Parish, and in 1853 the Vestry Hall in the Harrow Road was opened. XII. The Burial Board. In 1854 the Paddington Cemetery, which is situated in the parish of Willesden, was purchased by the Parish. It is managed by a Burial Board, consisting of Nine Members appointed by the Vestry. The ordinary meetings of the Burial Board are held at the Vestry Hall on the first Friday in each month. For Report of the Burial Board see Section XL. XIII, The Baths and Wash-houses. In 1871 Paddington adopted the Baths and Wash-houses Act (9 and 10 Victoria, cap. 74), and the Baths and Wash-houses erected in the Queen's Road, on the site of premises formerly numbered 143 and 145 were opened to the public in 1874. The Baths and Wash-houses are under the management of Seven Commissioners appointed by the Vestry. For Report of the Commissioners of Baths and Wash-houses see Section XLI. 16 BOROUGH OF PADDINGTON. XIV. The Parochial Charities. There are certain charities under the control of the Vestry, managed by Trustees appointed by the Vestry and the Charity Commissioners. These Charities have an annual income of over Two Thousand Pounds, which is yearly distributed to the Poor in Coals and Blankets, in Grants to the Parochial National Schools, in apprenticing sons and daughters of poor parishioners, and in Annuities to aged persons resident in the Parish, &c. For the Schedule of the Charities, with names of Trustees, &c., see Section XLII. For the Accounts of the Charities see Section XLIII. XV. Members of the Vestry. During the year ending March 25th, 1892, the Vestry has been constituted as follows. (For present Vestry, &c., see Appendix No. IV.) :— Chairman (Ex-Officio). Eev. Walter Abbott, M.A., Vicar of Paddington. Deputy- Chairman (Elected). William Henry Mills. Churchwardens (Ex-Officio Members). Blair, Col. H. F., E.E. Jackson, Richard Henry. Elected Members. WARD No. 1. FOR ONE TEAR. Fletcher, John. Moore, Enoch. Gundry, Horace. Owen, William. Rossdale, James. 17 REPORT, 1891-92. FOR TWO YEARS. Bell, Samuel. Hills, John. Flood, James William. Plimley, Francis. Williams, John. FOR THREE YEARS. Jefferson, William Earle. Minchin, James Innes. Laurie, Lieut.-Gen. John Palmer, Maj.-Gen.WM.Hy.G. Wimburn. Shaw, Charles G. WARD No. 2. FOR ONE YEAR. Beverly, Michael Pilch. Seaman, William. Britton, George. Stewart, William Henry. Hawkey, Joseph Francis. Thomas,Dr. Geo. Danford Jervis, John. Toy, Charles Alfred. Judge, Mark Hayler. Wood, Peter. FOR TWO YEARS. Bicker-Caarten, Alfred G. Hunt, John George. Bonner-Maurice, Edward Jackson, Richard Henry. Arthur. Maggs, Uriah. Cole, Samuel. Mills, Halford L. Cooper, Henry. Murrell, William. Townsend, Solomon. FOR THREE YEARS. Boatfield, John. Kenyon, James Harold Burley, Charles. Moberly, Maj.-Gen. Arthur Ellerton, John. Scott, R.E. Harben, Henry Andrade. Moffatt,Col. JamesWilliam. Hodgkinson, Edmund Hugh. Young, Edward Parker. Jephson, Nathaniel Arlington. WARD No. 3. FOR ONE YEAR. Collins, Henry Hyman. Foxley, Frederick. Edmeston, James. Kilvert, James Smith. Farmer, James, J.P, Whur, Robert Frederick, 18 BOROUGH OF PADDINGTON. FOR TWO YEARS. Abbott, John. Mead, Col. Henry Eobert, Bicker-Caarten, Gerard. R.E. Harris, Sir George David. Stewart, Maj.-Gen. John Jessop, Deputy-Surgeon- Heron Maxwell Shaw, General, Charles Moore. R.E. FOR THREE YEARS. Barchard, Col. Charles Collins, Eugene. Henry, C.B. Williams, George Abraham. WARD No. 4. FOR ONE YEAR. Fardell, Thomas George. Hooper, William Swift. Hill, Charles John. Parry, Thomas. robertson, Peter steel. FOR TWO YEARS. Blair, Col. H. Francis, R.E. Ommanney, Admiral Sir Langridge, William. Erasmus, C.B., F.R.S. Mills, William Henry. Richardson, James. FOR THREE YEARS. Hill, James Eardley. Wyatt, Hugh Penfold, J.P. XVI. Parochial Auditors. Elected May, 1891. WARD No. 1. King, George, 12, Sunderland Terrace. WARD No. 2. Holmes, Montagu, 79, Warrington Crescent. WARD No. 3. Brunel, Isambard, D.C.L., 15, Devonshire Terrace. WARD No. 4. Calder-Turner, Francis, 1, Bathurst Street. XVII. Overseers. Jessop, Deputy-Surg.-Gen. Mead, Col. Henry Robert, Charles Moore. | R.E. 19 REPORT, 1891-92. XVIII. Officers of the Vestry. Vestry ClerkFrank Dethridge. Surveyor George Weston. Medical Officer of Health James Stevenson, M.D. Public Analyst Alfred Walter Stokes, Vestry Clerk's Department. Vestry Clerk's First Assistant and WlLlIAM Davison. Registration Clerk Do. Second do. and Chief Clerk, Vestry Clerk's Arthur Wm. James Russell. Department Do. Third do. Thomas William Turner. Do. Fourth do. Arthur James Croxford. Do. Junior do. William Frederick Abbiss. Vestry Hall Keeper William Matthews. John Croxford. Beadles James Bidmead. Works Department. Asssitant Surveyor Rimell Gadsden. Clerk of Works John Conway. Do. (Sewers Department) Edward Anthony. Accountant, Surveyor's Department, Gilbert Harnden. Clerk in Surveyor's Department .. Arthur John Garner. Wharf Superintendent (Works Dpt.) Henry William Sawyer. Assistant Clerk do William Townsend. Do. do Richard Owyns Burley. Sanitary Department. Inspector of Nuisances and Inspector under the Canal Boats Act Charles John Biorn. Inspector of Nuisances Thomas William Golds. Do. Edwin James Potter. Inspector under the provisions of the Sale of Food and Drugs Act Thomas Henry Beasley. Collecting Department. Ward No. 1 John Mitchell Huish. Ward No. 2a East Arthur. John White. Rate Ward No. 2a West Augustus Sales. Collectors Ward No. 2b James William Cuff. Ward No. 3 John Gordon. Ward No. 4 Robert Cheadle. 20 BOROUGH OF PADDINGTON. XIX. Honorary Officers of the Vestry. Chairman Rev. Walter Abbott, M.A. Deputy-Chairman William Henry Mills. Churchwarden Col. H. F. Blair, R.E. ,, Richard H. Jackson. Chairman of Works Committee John Williams. Vice-Chairman ,, Robert F. Whur. Chairman of Finance Committee A. G. Bicker-Caarten. Vice-Chairman „ James Innes Minchin. Chairman of Sanitary Committee Sir George D. Harris, L.C.C. Vice-Chairman ,, H. H. Collins. Chairman of Legal Committee Eugene Collins. Vice-Chairman „ Mark H. Judge. Overseer Dep.-Surg.-Gen. Jessop. ,, Col. Henry Robert Mead, R.E. XX. Meetings of the Vestry and its Committees. The return of Attendances of Vestrymen during the Vestry year 1891-92, shows the number of Meetings of Vestry and Committees to be as follow: — Committees. No. of Meetings. Vestry 28 Works Committee 29 Finance Committee 22 Sanitary Committee 29 Legal Committee 13 The Assessment Committee held 14 Meetings. 21 REPORT, 18S1-92. Four Special Committees have been appointed during the year, and have held meetings as follow :— Committees. No. of Meetings. Hall Park Entrance Committee 3 Public Health Amendment Committee 1 Canal Committee 3 Recreation Ground Committee 3 Total number of Meetings held during the year, 145. XXI.— Open Spaces.—St. Mary's Churchyard (North), entrance from Cuthbert Street. The premises situate 18, Cuthbert Street, having been purchased as reported last year, and a Faculty obtained for making an opening at this point into the Churchyard in lieu of the one closed against the public by the Trustees of the Hall Park Estate at the Northern end, they having leased, without consulting the Vestry, such pathway for building purposes, a new passageway was formed through No. 18, Cuthbert Street, and opened to the public in July last, which, it need hardly be said, has proved a great boon to the children and others residing in the vicinity of Hall Park. 22 BOROUGH OF PADDINGTON. A Committee of Management consisting of Rev. W. Abbott, Vicar. Mr. R. H. Jackson. Mr. A. G.Bicker-Caarten Church- ,, W. H. Mills. Col. H. R. Mead, R.E., wardens. John Williams. „ H. F. Blair, R.E. has been appointed in connection with the Ground, and a deed duly executed between the Rev. "Walter Abbott, as Vicar of Paddington, and the Vestry, containing the following provisions in pursuance of the powers set forth in the Metropolitan Open Spaces Act, 1881:— 1. "The Vestry undertakes the entire care, management, and control of the said Churchyard. 2. "The Vestry will defray the charges for maintaining and keeping up the said Churchyard, and will appoint and pay a fit and proper person or persons to maintain order. 3. "The Vestry may hold and administer the powers of management and control acquired by them under this agreement in manner and subject to the conditions prescribed by the said Act, and also subject to the terms of this agreement. 4. " The said Churchyard shall be and remain open daily to the public during the following hours, that is to say—from 7, a.m., to 8, p.m., during the month of August; from 7, a.m., to 9, p.m., during the months of June and July; 7, a.m., to 6, p.m., during the months of March, April, May, and September; and from 7, a.m., to 4, p.m., during the months 23 REPORT, 1891-92. of October, November, December, January, and February. 5. " The Vestry shall refer the consideration of all questions respecting the management of the said Churchyard to a Committee of not more than seven in number, of which Committee the Vicar and Churchwardens of Paddington shall be ex-officio members, but every resolution of such Committee in relation to such questions shall be subject to confirmation by the Yestry, and shall have no force until so confirmed. 6. "Nothing herein contained shall be constructed to limit the right of the said Walter Abbott and his successors in office as owners of the soil and freehold of the said Churchyard to have access at all times and for all purposes to the said Churchyard, or to limit the right of the Incumbent of St. Philip's Church, Paddington, for the time being, and the parishioners and others attending the said Church of St. Philip's, at all times to go to and from and over that part of the said Churchyard in which St. Philip's Church (shewn on the plan drawn hereon) is situated, and the Yestry shall furnish the said Yicar and Incumbent with all necessary keys of the gates to the said Churchyard. 7. " The Bye-Laws made by the said Vestry (a print of which is attached to this agreement, and is signed by the said Walter Abbott and by Frank Dethridge, the Yestry Clerk), for the regulation of 24 BOROUGH OF PADDINGTON. the said Churchyard, fixing the days and times of admission thereto, and for the preservation of order and prevention of nuisances therein, are hereby agreed to and approved, and it is hereby expressly agreed that no alteration shall be made in any of such Bye-Laws without the previous consent, in writing, of the Vicar of Paddington for the time being, but such consent shall not be unreasonably withheld. 8. "If any dispute shall arise between any Vicar of Paddington and the Vestry as to the construction of the agreement, or any clause or provision herein contained, or the rights or obligations of such Vicar and the Vestry respectively under the same, every such question in dispute shall be referred to the Chancellor for the time being of the Diocese of London, if willing to act, and if not, then to some other person to be named by him, and the decision of such Chancellor or nominee to be final. 9. "Nothing in these presents shall be deemed or constructed to in any way affect the right of the said Walter Abbott as such Vicar as aforesaid, or his successors to the soil or freehold of the said Churchyard. 10. "The Vestry shall pay all the costs, charges, and expenses of this agreement, and incidental to the negotiations for preparation and execution thereof." REPORT, 1891-92. 25 XII. St. Philip's Church. On the 1st March, 1892, the Yestry passed the following resolution:— "That inasmuch as the purpose for which the temporary iron Church (St. Philip's), erected in St. Mary's Churchyard in the year 1861, has been served, the Solicitor be instructed to take the requisite steps for obtaining a Faculty in the names of the Vicar, Churchwardens, and Vestry, for the removal of such temporary iron building." This matter is still in the hands of the Solicitor. XXIII. Measures before Parliament. The following Bills have received the attention of the Vestry during the year:— London County Council General Powers. Rating of Machinery. School Board Elections. Telephone Companies. Valuation (Metropolis) Act, 1869, Amendment. London Building Law Consolidation. XXIV. Public Lavatory Accommodation. PADDINGTON GREEN. This Lavatory is working satisfactorily, the money received in connection therewith being more than sufficient to cover working expenses. c 26 BOROUGH OF PADDINGTON. HARROW ROAD, FERNHEAD ROAD. On Octobor 6th, 1891, the Vestry approved the plan prepared by the Surveyor for the construction of an underground Lavatory at the junction of Fernhead and Walterton Roads, and the tender of Mr. John Bentley, of Leicester, for carrying out the work for the sum of £1,728 was accepted. In this Lavatory W.O. accommodation is provided for 5 males and 4 females. The work is expected to bo completed in August next. (See also page 93.) XXV. Tree Planting. The Yestry having accepted the sum of £100 from the Metropolitan Public Gardens Association for the same to bo expended in planting Plane Trees in tho Parish, 80 trees have been planted in Chippenham Road at a cost of £124. (Sco also page 81.) XXVI. Coal and Wine Dues. Several Metropolitan Yestries have considered tho question of re-imposing tho Coal and Wine Dues, and Paddington has concurred in adopting stops for a re-imposition of the dues in question, but up to the present time all attempts in such direction have been abortive. XXVII. Blomfield Road Hoarding. A Deputation of Ratepayers waited upon the Vestry on 15th September, 1891, with reference to REPORT, 1891-92. 27 the hoarding which was being erected by the Canal Company in the Blomfield Road, and requested that steps might be taken for the removal of the same. The Vestry having received the Memorial, passed the following Resolution:— “That in the opinion of the Vestry the erection of a permanent hoarding by the Regent's Canal Company in the Blomfield Road is most undesirable, and that the Memorial be referred to a Special Committee of 5 Members, with power to consult the Solicitor, to consider and report to the Vestry at its next Meeting what steps can be taken to prevent it. Further, that the Canal Company and the County Council be informed by the Solicitor of this Resolution in order that they may know of the objection of the Vestry to the erection of the said hoarding." The Committee, consisting of Mr. Mark H. Judge (Chairman), Col. H. F. Blair, R.E., Mr. H. Gundry, Mr. R. H. Jackson, Mr. R. F. Whur, at once put itself into communication with the Authorities mentioned in the Resolution, also with the Ecclesiastical Commissioners, the result being that prompt measures were taken by the Canal Company to remove the objectionable hoarding. XXVIH. Electric Lighting. Owing to the interposition of Col. C. H. Barchard, C.B., and Col. H. F. Blair, R.E., the charge c 2 28 BOROUGH OF PADDINGTON. to the Yestry for Electrical Energy supplied to all buildings belonging to the Yestry, the lighting of which is paid for out of the Rates, has been reduced from 7^d. to 7d. per Board of Trade unit. Col. Barchard and Col. Blair have also been successful in compelling the Metropolitan Electric Supply Company to keep separate accounts of undertakings authorised by different Provisional Orders, notwithstanding the application of the Company in question to the Board of Trade to be relieved from such obligation. The Vestry expressed satisfaction at the steps taken by Col. Barchard and Col. Blair. XXIX. Electric Lighting Vestry Hall. It having been decided to light the Yestry Hall by means of Electricity, tenders were invited, and that of Mr. Conolly, of 42, Hampstead Road, was accepted. A conversazione in commemoration of the installation was held in the Vestry Hall premises on the 10th December last. (See also page 85.) XXX. Public Health (London) Act, 1891. The Public Health (London) Act, 1891, which came into operation on the 1st of January, 1892, has cast upon the Vestry as the Sanitary Authority additional duties and responsibilities. This important measure is in the main a consolidating Act, and REPORT, 1891-92. 29 confers the same advantages upon the Metropolis as were conferred upon the rest of the country by the Public Health Act, 1875. Bye-laws have been formulated by the Sanitary Committee, and after much thought and consideration the Vestry passed the same. The Bye-laws are as follow:— Interpretation of Terms. 1.—Throughout these Bye-laws the expression "the Sanitary Authority" means the Yestry of the Parish of Paddington, and the expression "the District" means the Parish of Paddington. All words in these Bye-laws shall have the same meaning as the same words in the Public Health (London) Act, 1891, and as in the regulations made under the Metropolis Water Act, 1871. For the Prevention of Nuisances arising from any Snow, Ice, Salt, Dust, Ashes, Rubbish, Offal, Carrion, Fish, or Filth, or other matter or thing in any Street, (s. 16.) 2.—The occupier of any premises fronting, adjoining, or abutting on any street not repairable by the inhabitants at large shall, as soon as conveniently may be after the cessation of any fall of snow, remove or cause to be removed from the footways and pavements adjoining such premises, all snow fallen or accumulated on such footways and pavements in such a manner and with such precautions as will prevent any undue accumulation in any channel or carriage-way or upon any paved crossing. 30 BOROUGH OF PADDINGTON. In the case of any premises, the person in occupation of or having the charge, management, or control of the same, or if there is no such person, then any person in occupation of or having the charge, maintenance or control of any part of the premises, and in the case of any premises the whole of which are let to lodgers, the person receiving the rent payable by the tenants or lodgers, either on his own account or as the agent of another person, shall for the purposes of this bye-law be deemed to be the occupier. 3.—Every person who shall remove any snow from any premises shall deposit the same in such a manner, and with such precautions as to prevent any accumulation thereof in any channel or upon any paved crossing. If in the process of such removal any snow be deposited upon any footway or pavement, he shall forthwith remove such snow from such footway or pavement. 4.—Every person who shall throw any salt upon any snow on the footway or carriageway of any street shall do so in such quantity and in such manner as effectually to dissolve the whole of such snow, and he shall forthwith effectually remove from the footway or carriageway the whole of the deposit resulting from the mixture of the salt with the snow. He shall not place any part of such deposit on the carriageway of such street, other than any channel at the side of such carriageway, and he shall not remove the same into any such channel unless it is sufficiently liquid to flow along such channel. REPORT, 1891-92. 31 5.—The occupier of any premises who shall remove or cause to be removed any dust, ashes, rubbish, offal, carrion, fish in an offensive condition, or filth or other like matter or thing from his premises, shall for the purpose of such removal in every case use or cause to be used a suitable vessel or receptacle, cart, or carriage properly constructed and furnished with a sufficient covering, so as to prevent the escape of the contents thereof. The removal of offal, carrion, fish in an offensive condition, or any offensive trade refuse or other like matter or thing, shall be effected daily. If in the process of such removal any person shall slop or spill, or cause or allow to fall upon any footway, pavement, or carriageway, any such offal, carrion, fish in an offensive condition, or filth or other like matter or thing, he shall forthwith remove such offal, carrion, fish, or filth, or other matter or thing from the place whereon the same may have been slopped or spilled, or may have fallen, and shall immediately thereafter thoroughly sweep or otherwise thoroughly cleanse such place. 6.—No person shall lay or cause to be laid in any street any litter or other matter in case of sickness to prevent noise without the permission of the Sanitary Authority, and having obtained such permission, shall lay the same so that it may be evenly distributed over the surface of the part of the street intended to be covered, and shall, when the occasion ceases, within 24 32 BOROUGH OF PADDINGTON. hours, or upon notice from the Sanitary Authority, remove or cause to be removed from such street the litter or other matter so laid in such street. For preventing Nuisances arising from any offensive matter running out of any Manufactory, Brewery, Slaughter-house, Knacker's Yard, Butcher's or Fishmonger's Shop, or Dunghill, into any uncovered place, whether or not surrounded by a wall or fence, (s.16.) 7.—The occupier of a manufactory, brewery, slaughter-house, knacker's yard, butcher's or fishmonger's shop, or of any premises comprising a dunghill, shall not cause or suffer any offensive matter to run out of such manufactory, brewery, slaughter-house, knacker's yard, butcher's or fishmonger's shop, or dunghill, into any street or uncovered place, whether or not surrounded by a wall or fence. For the Prevention of the Keeping of Animals on any premises in such place or manner as to be a Nuisance or Injurious or Dangerous to Health. (s. 16). 8.—The occupier of any premises shall not keep nor allow to be kept any animal on such premises in such a place or in such a manner as to pollute, or to be likely to pollute any water supplied for use or used or likely to be used by man for drinking or domestic purposes, or for manufacturing drink for the use of man, or any water used or likely to be used in any dairy. REPORT, 1891-92. 33 9.—Every occupier of a building or premises wherein or whereon any horse or other beast of draught or burden, or any cattle or swine may be kept, shall provide, in connection with such building or premises, a suitable receptacle for dung, manure, soil, filth, or other offensive or noxious matter which may, from time to time, be produced in the keeping of any such animal in such building or upon such premises. He shall cause such receptacle to be constructed so that the bottom or floor thereof shall not, in anv case, be lower than the surface of the ground adjoining such receptacle. He shall also cause such receptacle to be constructed in such a manner and of such materials, and to be maintained at all times in such a condition as to prevent any soakage therefrom into the ground or into the wall of any building. He shall likewise provide in connexion with such building or premises a sufficient drain constructed in such a manner, and of such materials, and maintained at all times in such a condition as effectually to convey all urine or liquid filth, or refuse therefrom, into a sewer or other proper receptacle. He shall at such times as the Sanitary Authority may by notice require, periodically remove or cause to be removed from the receptacle provided in accordance with the requirements of this bye-law all dung, manure, soil, filth, or other offensive or noxious matter, produced in or upon such building or premises, and deposited in such receptacle. 34 BOROUGH OF PADDINGTON. As to the Paving of Yards and Open Spaces in connexion with Dwelling-Houses, (s. 16). 10.—The owner of every dwelling-house in connexion with which there is any yard or open space, shall, where, in the opinion of the Sanitary Authority, it is necessary for the prevention or remedy of insanitary conditions that all or part of such yard or open space shall be paved, forthwith cause the same to be properly paved with a hard, durable, and impervious pavement, evenly and closely laid upon a sufficient bed of good concrete, and so sloped to a properly constructed channel, and drain with properly trapped gulley and grating, as effectually to carry off all rain or waste water therefrom. With respect to the keeping of Water-closets supplied with sufficient Water for their effective action. (s. 39). 11.—The owner or the occupier of any premises in or for which any water-closet shall be provided, shall cause such water-closet to be at all times properly supplied with a sufficient quantity of water for securing its effective action, He shall cause such water supply to be served through a cistern separate from that used for any other purposes, or through a cast-iron or other approved flushing tank, so constructed as to discharge not less than two gallons of water at each flush, by means of a service pipe having an internal diameter of not less than one inch and a half, if the cistern or tank be less than five feet above the closet basin, or one inch REPORT, 1891-92. 35 and a quarter if more than five feet and less than eight feet above the closet basin, or one inch if eight feet or more above the closet basin. Where, however, any water-closet is provided for the use of persons occupying two or more separately occupied premises, the foregoing requirement shall apply to the owner of such premises instead of to any occupier thereof. For securing the Cleanliness and freedom from Pollution of Tanks, Cisterns, and other Receptacles used for Storing of Water used or likely to be used by man for drinking or domestic purposes, or for manufacturing drink for the use of man. (s. 50). 12.—The occupier of any premises on which a tank, cistern, or other receptacle is used for storing of water used or likely to be used by man for drinking or domestic purposes, or for manufacturing drink for the use of man, shall empty and cleanse the same, or cause to be emptied and cleansed, once at least every six months, and at such other times as may be necessary to keep the same in a cleanly state and free from pollution. He shall cause every such tank, cistern, or other receptacle which is erected outside a building, or which, being erected inside a building, is not placed in a suitable chamber, or otherwise constructed or placed so as to prevent the pollution of the water therein, to be provided with a proper cover, and to be kept at all times properly covered. 36 BOROUGH OF PADDINGTON. Provided that in every case where two or more tenants of any premises are entitled to the use in common of any tank, cistern, or other receptacle, used for storing of water used or likely to be used by man for drinking or domestic purposes, or for manufacturing drink for the use of man, the foregoing requirements shall apply to the owner of such premises instead of to any occupier thereof. Bye-laws with Respect to Houses Let in Lodgings, or OCCUPIED BY MEMBERS OF MORE THAN ONE FAMILY, AND FOR THE SEPARATION OF THE SEXES in THE HOUSE SO LET OR OCCUPIED. (s. 94). Registration. 1.—A Register shall be kept by the Sanitary Authority of Paddington of houses let in lodgings, or occupied by members of more than one family. 2.—No house shall be placed upon the Register until so resolved at a meeting of the Sanitary Authority. Upon the passing of any such resolution, Notice thereof shall be served on the landlord, together with a copy of these Bye-laws, and such Bye-laws shall operate in respect of such premises so long as the premises are let in lodgings, or occupied by members of more than one family. 3.—The landlord of a lodging-house within a period of seven days after he shall have been required by a notice in writing, duly served upon him, or his agent, or upon REPORT, 1891-92. 37 The premises, shall personally, or by his agent duly authorised in that behalf, attend at the office of the Sanitary Authority, during office hours, and then and there furnish and sign a statement of the following parti culars with respect to such house; that is to say: — (a) The total number of rooms in the house; (b) The total number of rooms let in lodgings or occupied by members of more than one family ; (c) How each room is occupied—whether as room, sitting-room, or otherwise; (d) The number and sex of the occupants of each room used for sleeping, and whether over or under 10 years of age ; (e) The Christian name and surname of the lessee of each room. Inspection. 1.— In every case where the landlord of a registered lodging-house occupies or resides in any part of the premises, or retains a general possession or control of the premises, such landlord shall, at all times when required by the Officer of the Sanitary Authority, afford any such Officer free excess to the interior of the premises for the purpose of inspection. 5.—In every case where the landlord of a registered lodging-house does not occupy or reside in any part of the premises, or retain a general possession or control of the premises, every lodger, who is entitled to have 38 BOROUGH OF PADDINGTON. or to exercise the control of the outer cloor of the premises, shall, at all times when required by the Officer of the Sanitary Authority, afford such Officer free access to the interior of the premises for the purpose of inspection. 6.—Every lodger in a registered lodging-house shall, at all times when required by the Officer of the Sanitary Authority, afford any such Officer free access for the purpose of inspection to the interior of any room or rooms which may have been let to such lodger. 7. —In every case where the Officer of the Sanitary Authority has, for the purpose of inspection, obtained access to the interior of a registered lodging-house, or to the interior of any room or rooms in such lodging-house, a person shall not wilfully obstruct any such Officer in the inspection of any part of the premises, or, without reasonable excuse, neglect or refuse, when required by any such Officer, to render him such assistance as may be reasonably necessary for the purpose of such inspection. Overcrowding. 8.—The landlord of a lodging-house shall not knowingly cause or suffer a greater number of persons than will admit of the provision of three hundred cubic feet of free air space for each person of an age exceeding ten years, and of one hundred and fifty cubic feet of free air space for each person of an age not REPORT, 1891-92. 39 ing ten years, to occupy at any one time, as a sleeping apartment, a room which is used exclusively for that purpose. 9.—The landlord of a lodging-house shall not knowingly cause or suffer a greater number of persons than will admit of the provision of four hundred cubic feet of free air space for each person of an age exceeding ten years, and of two hundred cubic feet of free air space for each person of an age not exceeding ten years, to occupy, at any one time, as a sleeping apartment, a room which is not used exclusively for that purpose. 10.—A lodger in a lodging-house shall not knowingly cause or suffer a greater number of persons than will admit of the provision of three hundred cubic feet free air space for each person of an age exceeding ten years, and of one hundred and fifty cubic feet of free air space for each person of an age not exceeding ten years, to occupy, at any one time, as a sleeping apartment, a room which is used exclusively for that purpose, and which has been let to such lodger. 11.—A lodger in a lodging-house shall not knowingly cause or suffer a greater number of persons than will admit of the provision of four hundred cubic feet of free air space for each person of an age exceeding ten years, and of two hundred cubic feet of free air space for each person of an age not exceeding ten years, to occupy, at any one time, as a sleeping apartment, a room which is not used exclusively for that purpose, and which has been let to such lodger. 40 BOROUGH OF PADDINGTON. 12.— No room shall be occupied as a living or sleeping room without it has one or more windows opening directly into the external air, with a total area, clear of the sash frames, equal to at least one-tenth of the floor area of the room, and so constructed that the sashes thereof shall open from top to bottom—from sill to head of such window or windows. No room shall be occupied as a living or sleeping room without it has a fire-place and flue unobstructed, or an otherwise efficient mode of ventilation to approval of Sanitary Authority. For enforcing the Drainage of such Houses, and for promoting Cleanliness and Ventilation in such Houses. 13.—The landlord of a registered lodging-house shall, to the satisfaction of the Sanitary Authority, cause every court and courtyard immediately adjoining or contiguous to the walls of such house to be properly paved with a hard, durable, and impervious pavement, evenly and closely laid upon a sufficient bed of good concrete and sloped to a properly constructed channel leading to a trapped gulley-grating, which shall be so constructed and placed as effectually to carry off all rain or waste water from such court or courtyard. He shall cause such pavement, channel, and grating to be kept at all times in good order and in proper repair. 11.—In every case where a lodger in a registered lodging-house is entitled to the exclusive use of any REPORT, 1891-92. 41 court, courtyard, area, or other open space within the curtilage of the premises, such lodger shall cause such court, courtyard, area, or other open space to be thoroughly cleansed from time to time, as often as may be requisite, for the purpose of keeping the same in a clean and wholesome condition. 15.—In every case were two or more lodgers in a registered lodging-house are entitled to the use in common of any court, courtyard, area, or other open space within the curtilage of the premises, the landlord shall cause such court, courtyard, area, or other open space to be thoroughly cleansed from time to time, as often as may be requisite, for the purpose of keeping the same in a clean and wholesome condition. 16.—The landlord of a registered lodging-house shall provide good and sufficient water-closet accommodation for such house. He shall provide such accommodation so that the number of water-closets in relation to the greatest number of persons who, subject to the restrictions imposed by any regulation in that behalf, may, at any one time, occupy rooms in the house as sleeping apartments, shall be in the proportion of not less than one water-closet to every twelve persons. 17.—In every case where, for the purpose of providing water-closet accommodation for a registered lodging-house, in pursuance of the requirements of any regulation in that behalf, the construction of a new watercloset is necessary, and where such construction, as far as regards the several details hereinafter specified, is D 42 BOROUGH OF PADDINGTON. not already the subject of regulation by any statute in force within the district, the landlord shall construct such water-closet in accordance with the following rules;— Every such new water-closet, if situated within a house, shall have at least on one side thereof an external wall, and shall have a window therein, opening into the external air, of at least eighteen inches by three feet, or where this is impracticable, some other sufficient communication to the outer air, to the approval of the Sanitary Committee. When the water-closet is situated exterior to a house, it shall be properly lighted and ventilated to the approval of the Sanitary Authority. Every water-closet shall be furnished with a separate cistern of at least two gallons capacity, which shall be so constructed, fitted, and placed as to admit of the supply of water for use in such water-closet without any direct communication with the drinking water used in such house; and that such water shall only be used for the purpose of flushing out such water-closet, and shall have a service pipe of an internal diameter of not less than one inch and a half if the cistern or tank be less than five feet above the closet basin, or one inch and a quarter if more than five feet and less than eight feet above the closet basin, or one inch if eight feet or more above the closet basin. He shall furnish the water-closet with a pan, basin, or other suitable receptacle of non-absorbent REPORT, 1891-92. 43 material, to the approval and satisfaction of the Sanitary Authority. He shall not construct or fix under such pan, basin, or receptacle, any "container," D traps, or other similar fitting. Every water-closet situated on the upper floors of such house shall have a soil pipe properly connected with the basin of same of at least four inches in internal diameter made of not less than six pounds to the foot super, lead or of stout iron, and the joints made to the approval of the Sanitary Authority—and all soil pipes shall be situated externally to the said house. Such soil pipe shall be open at the top to allow of proper ventilation, carried to such a height as shall be approved of by the Sanitary Authority. 18.—The landlord of a registered lodging-house shall cause every part of the structure of every watercloset belonging to such house to be maintained at all times in good order, and every part of the apparatus of such water-closet, and every drain or means of drainage with which such water-closet may communi-. cate, to be maintained at all times in good order and efficient action. He shall also cause all such means of ventilation as may be provided in or in connection with such watercloset to be maintained at all times in good order. 19.—In every case where a lodger in a registered lodging-house is entitled to the exclusive use of any d 2 44 BOROUGH OF PADDINGTON. water-closet belonging to such house, such lodger shall cause the pan, seat, floor, and walls of such water-closet to be thoroughly cleansed from time to time, as often as may be necessary for the purpose of keeping such pan, seat, floor, walls, and ceilings in a clean and wholesome condition. 20.—In every case where two or more lodgers in a registered lodging-house are entitled to the use in common of any water-closet belonging to such house, tho landlord shall cause the pan, seat, floor, walls and ceilings of such water-closet to bo thoroughly cleansed from time to time, as often as may be necessary for the purpose of keeping such pan, seat, floor, walls, and ceilings in a clean and wholesome condition. 21.—The landlord of a registered lodging-house shall provide the lodgers with a sufficient number of covered receptacles of galvanized iron, or other suitable material, for the temporary detention and subsequent removal of dust. 22.—A lodger in a registered lodging-house shall not cause or suffer any animal or other creature to be kept in any room which has been let to such lodger, or elsewhere upon the premises, in such a manner as to render the condition of such room or premises filthy or unwholesome. 23.—In every case where a lodger in a registered lodging-house is entitled to the exclusive use of any cistern or other receptacle for the storage of water supplied to tho premises, such lodger shall cause every REPORT, 1891-92. 45 part of the interior of such cistern or receptacle to be kept thoroughly cleansed and properly covered. 24.—In every case where two or more lodgers in a registered lodging-house are entitled to the use in common of any cistern or other receptacle for the storage of water supplied to the premises, the landlord shall cause every part of the interior of such cistern or receptacle to be kept thoroughly cleansed and properly covered. 25.—Wherever there is no constant supply of water afforded by the Water Company, the landlord shall supply a cistern or cisterns of such capacity as will afford a minimum of 25 gallons for each lodger occupying such house. 26.—The landlord of a registered lodging-house shall cause every common passage or staircase in such house to be thoroughly cleansed from time to time, as often as may be requisite. For Cleansing and Lime-washing, at stated times, of the Premises. 27.—The landlord of a registered lodging-house shall, at least once in every year, cause the premises to be properly cleansed and lime-washed. For the talking of Precautions in case of any Infectious Disease. 28.—The landlord of any lodging-house whatsoever, immediately after he shall have been informed, or 46 BOROUGH OF PADDINGTON. shall have ascertained, that any person in such house is ill of a dangerously infectious or contagious disease, shall give written notice thereof to the Medical Officer of Health of the Sanitary Authority, in pursuance of Section 55 of the Public Health(London) Act, 1891. 29.—In every case where a lodger in any lodginghouse has been informed, or has ascertained, or has reasonable grounds for believing, that an occupant of any room which has been let to such lodger is ill of a dangerously infectious or contagious disease, such lodger shall forthwith give written notice thereof to the landlord and to the Medical Officer of Health of the Sanitary Authority, in pursuance of Section 55 of the Public Health (London) Act, 1891. Penalties. 30.—Every person who shall offend against any of the foregoing bye-laws shall be liable for every such offence to a penalty of five pounds, and in the case of a continuing offence to a further penalty of forty shillings for each day after written notice of the offence from the Sanitary Authority. Provided, nevertheless, that the Justices or Court before whom any complaint may be made, or any proceedings may be taken in respect of any such offence, may, if they think fit, adjudge the payment as a penalty of any sum less than the full amount of the penalty imposed by this bye-law. REPORT, 1891-92. 47 XXXI. Snow Clearing. Section 29 of the Public Health Act has made provision for the cleansing of Footways as well as Carriageways by the Parochial Authorities. The impracticability of carrying out this work in the event of heavy falls of snow was the subject of a Conference of Delegates from Vestries and District Boards, such Conference being held at the instigation of Paddington, when a Resolution was passed and forwarded to the President of the Local Government Board. The Resolution and reply are as follow, viz.:— Resolution. "That this conference is of opinion that Section 29 of the Public Health Act, 1891, which directs the Sanitary Authorities to cleanse the footways, should be amended so as not to include the removal of snow, the Conference believing that snow removal from footways can be more readily, economically, and efficiently carried out by occupiers than by Sanitary Authorities, and that, moreover, the removal of snow should be made compulsory on occupiers under a recoverable penalty, and in cases of unoccupied property, tenements, or public buildings, the same duties and obligations should devolve upon the owuers thereof." Reply. "Local Government Board, Whitehall, S.W., "13th May, 1892. "Sir, "I am directed by the President of the Local Government Board to advert to your letter of the 29th ultimo, forwarding a copy of a resolution passed 48 BOROUGH OF PADDINGTON. at a Conference of Delegates from Vestries and District Boards in the Metropolis with reference to the removal of snow from footpaths. "Under the Public Health (London) Law Amendment Bill, as introduced into Parliament, the duty of removing snow from the footways rested with the occupiers, but the Clause embodying the provision was, contrary to the advice of Mr. Ritchie, struck out by the standing Committee on Law, to whom the Bill was referred. "On Report of the Public Health (London) Bill, in which the Amendment Bill was incorporated, it was proposed to reinstate the provision, but the proposal was rejected. "Under the circumstances, the President does not see his way to the introduction of a Bill for the amendment of the Public Health (London) Act, 1891, so as to make it the duty of occupiers to remove snow from the footways; and therefore ho does not think that, at the present time, he need trouble a Deputation from the Conference above referred to, to wait upon him on the subject. "I am, Sir, "Your obedient Servant, "S. A. Provis, " Assistant Secretary " F. Dethridge, Esq., "Vestry Clerk of the Parish of Paddington," XXXII. 26 Wharf, New Lease. On March 25th, 1891, the lease of these premises expired and an increase of £150 per annum (viz., £500) was domanded for a new lease. Upon negociations being entered into, the Vestry Clerk REPORT, 1891.92. 49 succeeded in inducing the Secretary and Engineer of the Grand Junction Canal Company to recommend the acceptance of a rental of £450 per annum for a 7, 14, or 21 years' lease, which has been done. XXXIII. Canal Purification. A Conference of Delegates from St. Marylebone, St. Pancras, and Paddington was convened by the Vestry of St. Marylebone with a view of joint action being taken to induce the Companies to place and maintain the Canals in a proper Sanitary condition. This very important question is still under consideration. XXXIV. Constant Water Supply. Upon the application of the Vestry, through the London County Council, the West Middlesex Water Co. has given a constant supply of water to the district which is bounded by the Harrow Road, Edgware Road, Praed Street, and Great Western Railway. XXXV. Cab Radius, Extension. This question has been considered at a Conference of Delegates from the Metropolitan Vestries and District Boards (General Shaw.Stewart, R.E., and Mr. J. F. Hawkey representing Paddington). The members of the Conference attended before the Home Secretary on the 22nd February last, and brought forward arguments in favour of an extension. The matter has not yet been determined. . . 50 borough of paddington. XXXVI. Assessment Appeals. The Quinquennial Re.Assessment of the property in the Parish came into force on April 6th, 1891, upon a total rateable value of £1,322,982, exclusive of new property and additions at Christmas, 1890, and Lady.Day, 1891. With regard to the appeals pending before the Court at the publication of the last AnDual Report, the G.as Company's case has been settled at £16,932, showing a reduction of £352 upon the rateable value as estimated by the Parish Valuers. The costs up to and including the first day of hearing were awarded to the Vestry, and notwithstanding the above.mentioned reduction, the Parish has gained considerably on its original assessment. The appeals by the Metropolitan Railway Company and the National Telephone Company are still pending. The works, Sanitary and otherwise, carried out during the year, appear in the Reports of the respective Officers, hereunto annexed, together with the Reports of the Burial Board and Commissioners of Baths and Wash.houses, and such Reports are followed by the documents required by the 198th Sec. of the Metropolis Local Management Act. Printed and published by order of the Yestry of Paddington. Vestry Hall, Harrow Road, Vestry Cleric. June, 1892. REPORT, 1891.92. 51 XXXVII.—ABSTRACT OF ACCOUNTS, SUMMARY OF CONTRACTS, STATISTICAL TABLES, to, The following Abstract of Accounts for the Year ending March 25th, 1892, Summary of Contracts, and Statistical Tables, &c., were submitted to the Vestry by the Vestry Clerk, Mr. Frank Dethridge, and ordered to be included in the Annual Report of the Yestry, in pursuance of Section 196, 18 & 19 Vic., c. 120, viz.:— "The auditor or auditors of the accounts of the Metropolitan Board of Works, and of every District Board and Yestry, shall, after such . audit of accounts as aforesaid, cause an account in abstract to be prepared, showing the receipt and expenditure under this Act for the preceding year, under the several distinct heads of receipt and expenditure, with the statement of the allowance of the auditor or auditors, if he or they has or have allowed such accounts, or of the parts, if any, which he or they have disallowed of such accounts, and also a summary statement of all contracts entered into by such Board or Vestry in such preceding year, and of the moneys owing to and debts and liabilities owing by such Board or Vestry on the 25th day of March next preceding." The Poor Rate Account. The Lighting Rate Account. The General Rate Account. The Sewers Rate Account. The Metropolitan Consolidated Rate Account. Summary of Contracts. Debts and Liabilities of the Vestry. Parochial Loans. Sundry Payments made to or by the Vestry. Analysis of Rates Levied by the Vestry. Rates Levied since 1855. The Principal Statutes under which Rates are Levied. 52 53 borough of paddington. 1 report, 1891.92. 53 [ A] Account in Abstract showing the Receipts ad the enditure for the Parish of Paddington, the Year ending 25th March, 1892, under is of Receipts and Expenditure, viz.:— POOR RAf COUNT. RECEIPTS. £ s. d. EXPENDITURE. £ s. d. Balance in hand at Bankers, Lady.day, 1891 1,510 3 1 London County Council, Metropolitan Common Poor Fund, Guardian Board, Metropolitan Asylums District, West London School District 30,095 0 0 Received from Her Majesty's Treasury, as a Contribution by way of Bounty to the Rates on Government Property 90 1 6 Police Rate 27,562 2 6 „ from the Burial Board, pursuant to Sec. 22 of the 15th and 16th Vic. Cap. 85 (Metropolitan Burials Act) 1,500 0 0 Baths and Wash.houses 3,234 12 6 Expenses of Election of Vestrymen and Auditors of Accounts 45 4 0 ,, from the sale of Borough Lists 1 2 8 Expenses of preparing and printing Borough, County and Jury Lists 457 11 8 ,, from the London County Council, Registration Expenses returned (2 years) G15 14 3 Returning Officers' Expenses (Registration) 255 1 7 ,, on Account of Rates 161,214 11 9 Balance in hand at Bankers, Lady.day, 1892 3,288 1 0 £164,937 13 3 £164,937 13 3 LIGHTING RATE AC C 0 U N T. £ s. d. £ s d. Gas to Public Lamps 4,024 16 0 Balance in hand at Bankers, Lady.day, 1891 279 0 11 „ to Refuge Lamps 526 3 7 Do. do. Wages Account 7 0 1 New Services and Removals 22 9 9 Received from Her Majesty's Treasury, as a Contribution by way of Bounty to the Rates on Government Property 4 11 6 New Lamp.posts, Lanterns, Head Irons, Meters, &c. 114 4 9 Lamplighters'Wages 1,762 1 10 Tradesmen's Bills 167 4 10 ,,from Sewers Rate Account for Gas to Urinals . 24 2 4 Inspector's Salary 35 0 0 „ on Account of Private Lighting 21 0 0 Lamplighters' Overcoats 52 10 0 „ on Account of Damage to Lamps 16 14 11 Maintenance of Meters. &c. 179 19 0 ,, on Account of Rates 7,759 2 3 Balance in hand at Bankers, Lady.day, 1892 1,222 4 0 Balance in hand, Wages Account 4 18 3 £8,111 12 0 £8,111 12 0 54 55 54 BOROUGH OF FADDINGTON. REPORT, 1891.92. 55 GENERAL RATE AC COUNT. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. Balance in hand to Lady.day, 1891 11,527 10 8 hway Department. Ditto Highway Wages Account 52 8 11 Ditto Works Account 216 17 0½ Granite 3,848 19 8 269 5 11½ Gravel and Hoggin 1,358 18 10 Highway. Kerb and York Paving 3,014 3 5 Received from Gas and Water Companies for Repair of R,oads Wood Blocks 6,195 3 11 ,591 8 5 Ballast, Sand, and Shingle 846 0 11 „ from other sources (Highway), including £51 3s. 4d. Balance of Wood Paving Wages returned Portland Cement 809 4 5 Wages—General 10,253 2 4 74 18 11 Do. —Wood Paving 476 1 c A er 16 8 ,, from the Sale of old Wood, &c 199 4 8 1,865 12 0 1,545 0 0 New Steam Roller 327 15 0 Interest on Loans 397 19 0 w orks. „ from the sale of ashes, breeze, &c. 1622 1 6 Instalment ditoo 2740 0 0 ,, from Watering Private Roads 165 18 6 Rent, Rates,. Taxes, Gas, Water, and Insurance 1,273 6 8 from Rent of Land 50 14 0 ,, from Rent of Boats 81 5 0 Tradesmen's Bills 1,174 1 8 from Smiths' Work, Highway Carting away surplus Earth (Wood Paving) 282 0 0 • Department 109 0 2 New Wood Paving Works—Richmond • X „from Sale of Horses 118 1 6 Road (£2,339 17s. 3d., cost included 7 7 ,, from Marion Mayne's Charity, in above items) 34,542 12 6 towards Maintenance of Paddington Green 35 0 0 ,, from Rent of 18, Cuthbert Street rks Department. 2,182 0 8 Wages—General 10,802 4 5 Sanitary. Do. —Sweepers 6,051 15 1 ,, from Fines and Fees 13 17 0 Do. —Loading Boats 493 14 6 „ from Metropolitan Asylums Board 101 19 0 Do. —Paddington Green 115 16 0 & Churchyard 468 19 4½ Vestry General. 17,816 13 4½ ,, from Harvists and Lyon's Estates 600 18 4 Officers' Salaries .400 18 9 ,, from Interest from Bank 300 19 3 Provender 2,501 1 3 ,, from Hire of Hall 28 17 6 Receiving Slop 4,209 9 2 „ from Her Majesty's Treasury 71 13 6 Rent, Rates, Taxes, Gas, Water, Insurance 1,432 17 10 ,, from other sources (Vestry Hall) 18 6 2 Horses Purchased 1,026 0 0 ,, from Metropolitan Public Gardens Association Horse Hire 881 12 4 100 0 0 1,120 14 9 Water for Roads 680 3 10 Maintenance of Water Meters 125 1 9 „ on Account of Rates • s 127,180 16 10 New Vans, Carts, Machines, and Wheels 441 0 0 Carried over • • • £ 144,261 16 10½ Carried over £29,514 18 3½ 34,542 12 6 56 57 BOROUGH OF PADDINGTON. REPORT, 1891.92. GENERAL RATe ACCOUNT.—Continued. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s d. Brought over 29,514 18 3½ 34,542 12 6 Brought over 144,261 16 3 10½ works Department ( Continued). Harness Materials 231 1 8 Iron Bolts, Nuts, &c. 107 1 5 Coal 124 11 6 Timber 110 8 5 Oils, Colors, and Grease 67 9 6 Ladders, Baskets, and Stable Utensils 130 6 11 Veterinary 90 14 6 Tradesmen's Bills —Works 804 14 2 Ditto —Paddington Green 31 8 2 Road Sweepers and Brooms 383 10 9 Interest on Balance of £3,200 Loan 51 0 0 Instalment on ,£3,200 Loan 160 0 0 Canal Dues 26 5 10 31,833 11 1½ Sanitary Department. Officers' Salaries 1,088 7 0 Disinfecting Bedding 371 16 8 Examination of Drains 122 10 7 Tradesmen's Bills 288 1 10 1,870 16 1 Vestry General. Salaries (Vestry Clerk's Department) 1,472 10 6 Do. (Collectors) 1,811 8 6 Wages (Beadles, &c.) 392 12 6 Law Expenses 934 12 2 Claims against Vestry 1,134 16 3 Tradesmen's Bills and Sundries 1,496 11 11 Electric Lighting Vestry Hall, and redecoration of Board Room 292 1 7 Public Library Poll 134 0 4 18, Cuthbert Street—Purchase & Repairs 711 7 10 London Water Supply Conference 25 0 0 Assessment Committee 777 13 3 School Board Election 395 5 4 9,578 0 2 School Board for London • • £59,250 9 8 Carried over £144,261 16 10½ Carried over • • 1357,075 9 E 6½ 58 59 BOROUGH OF PADDINGTON. REPORT, 1891.92. GENERAL RATI 2COUNT.—Continued. £ s. d. £ s. d. Brought over 144,261 16 l0½ Brought over 137,075 9 6½ Amount transferred to Metropolitan Consolidated Account 710 5 5½ Balance in hand at Bankers 6,235 8 3½ Ditto Highway Wages Account 99 6 7 Ditto Wood Paving (returned to Bank) 51 3 4 Ditto Works Wages Account 90 3 8 6,476 1 10½ £144,261 16 10½ £ 144,261 16 10½ SEWERS RATE CCOUNT. £ s. d. £ s. d. Sewers Jobbing Works 2,091 5 0 Balance in hand at Bankers, Lady.day, 1891 3,223 1 6½ Special Repairs to Sewers 9,183 14 10 Ditto Wasres account 13 2 11 Sewer Manholes 111 11 11 Received on account of contributions for Drains, Traps Gas to Urinals 24 2 4 and Gulleys 1,542 19 8 Water to ditto 141 17 4 „ ,, of Paddington Green Lavatory 118 2 0 Water for Flushing Sewers 4 19 6 ,, from Her Majesty's Treasury, as a Contribution l Urinal Repairs 4 1 3 by way of Bounty to the Rates on ment Property . Repair of Roads 94 0 3 4 11 6 Laborers' Wages 1,013 9 5 ,, on account of other sources 12 14 1 Tradesmen's Bills 124 0 8 ,, ,, of Rates 10,265 3 11 Paddington Green Lavatory—Wages 82 4 2 Ditto —Sundries 26 7 11 108 12 1 Balance in hand at Bankers, Lady.dav, 1892 2,264 11 8½ Ditto Wages Account 13 9 4 £15,179 15 7½ £15,179 15 7½ METROPOLITAN CONSOLIDATED RATE ACCOUNT. £ s. d. £ s. d. Received on account of Rates 5 11 2 Adverse Balance, Lady.day, 1891 715 16 7½ Amount transferred from General Rate Account 710 5 5½ £715 16 7½ £715 16 7½ E 2 60 61 borough of paddington. report, 1891.92. [B] Summary Statement of Contracts interact to by the Vestry of the Parish of Paddington, during the year ending the 25tl ay of March, 1892, viz.:— tender accepted. name of contractor. nature of contract. price. May 5th, 1891 Mr. Joshua Knights or the supply of about 770,000 Wood Paving Blocks At £5 17s. 6d. per 1,000. Do. Messrs. Robins & Co. Do. 4,500 sacks of Portland Cement At 2s. 11d. per sack. August 4th, 1891 Messrs. Radford & Co. Do. Coal and Coke As per Schedule of Prices. Do. Mr. Henry Covington Do. 800 yards Thames Shingle for At 5s. 6d. & 6s. cubic yd. Do. Mr. Henry Conolly Frosty roads. For the execution of certain Electric Lighting £180. October 20th, 1891 Messrs. J. Idiens & Sons Works at the Vestry Hall. For the supply of Hay, Straw and Clover As per Schedule of Prices. Do. Messrs. G. Reynolds & Son Do. Oats, Beans, Maize and Bran Ditto For the supply of Sifted Gravel At 3s. 5d. per ton. December 1st, 1891 Messrs. Wm. & Joseph Studds Do. Hoggin At 3s. 2½d. per ton. For the reception of Road Scrapings, &c. At 2s. 6½d. per ton. Do. Soft Core At 3s. 5½d. per ton. January 19th, 1892 Mr. John Bentley Do. Hard Core For the construction of a Public Underground At 3s. 4½d. per ton. Convenience at junction of Walterton Road and Elfin Avenue. £1,728. February 2nd, 1892 Messrs. Nowell & Robson For the supply of Granite Kerb and Cubes, and As per Schedule of Prices. Do. Do. York Paving. Do. about 2,000 yards of Enderby At 13s. 3d. per cubic yd. Do. Mr. Edwin Tildesley Granite. Do. do. At 13s. per cubic yard. Do. Messrs. A. & F. Manuelle Do. about 3,000 yards of Guernsey At 16s. l1d. per cubic yd. March 15th, 1892 Messrs. Knights, Son & Co. Granite. Do. about 1,891,960 Wood Paving At £6 7s. 6d. per 1000. Do. Messrs. Robins & Co. Blocks. Do. about 2,860 sacks of Portland At 2s. 6d. per sack, use of Do. Mr. Henry Covington Cement. Do. about 1,280 yards of Thames Sand sack 1d. At 6s. 9d. per cubic yard. Do. Do. Do. about 370 yards do. Shingle At 6s. per cubic yard. 62 borough of paddington. [C] Summary Statement of Moneys owing to, and Debts Parish of Paddington, on the £ s. d. Balance at Bankers, on General Account (including £736 8s. 2d., Moneys paid by the Owners of Property under 105th Sec. of the Metropolis Management Act, and £895 15s. l0d. Balance on Wood Paving Loan) October Rate. 1891. and Supplemental Rate— 13,010 5 0 Outstanding • • • • 15,464 13 0 Deduct Empties 9,070 7 7 Amount of deductions under Poor Rate Assmnt Act, Reduced Assmnts., Remissions, &c. » 967 6 11 10,037 14 6 5,426 18 6 Estimated further amount to he struck off at Michaelmas, 1892 600 0 0 4,826 18 6 Sundry Debtors— • Works Department 302 4 7 Highway do. 624 9 1 Sewers do. 2 0 7 Lighting do. 6 15 5 935 9 8 Balance of Wages Accounts— Works Department 90 3 8 Highway do. 64 11 10 Lighting do. 4 18 3 Sewers do. 16 11 9 176 5 6 Balance at Bankers, Highway and Sewers Departments (on account of Drainage and Paving Works) 247 2 0 Cash in hand of Mr. Harnden (on account of same work) 85 2 11 332 4 11 £19,281 3 7 63 report, 1891.92. id Liabilities owing by, the Vestry of the 5th day of March, 1892. £ s. d. Baths and Washhouses 500 0 ] Vestry Hall Bills 404 6 9 Highway do. 1,800 0 9 Sewers do. 1,539 15 0 Works do. 2,376 o 6 Lighting do. 1,647 2 8 Sanitary do. 236 14 2 Law Expenses 228 2 3 Ditto re Faculty, Churchyard 30 3 2 Liabilities under 105th Sec. Metropolis Management Acts 736 8 2 Liabilities on Drainage and Paving Works Liabilities under 105th Section Metropolis £253 12 6 Management Acts (due to Owners) 78 12 5 332 4 11 Assessment Committee— Law Expenses re Assessment Appeals (say) 943 12 0 Messrs. Dobbin & Cooke (Balance) 354 3 5 Clerk to Committee 60 0 0 1,357 15 5 Balance of £9,000 Loan (Wood Paving) 895 15 10 12,084 11 7 Balance of Assets 7,196 12 0 £19,281 3 7 We, the undersigned, being the Auditors appointed under the provisions of the "Metropolis Local Management Act," for the purpose of auditing the Accounts of the Vestry of the Parish of Paddington, do state that we have audited and allowed the Accounts of the Vestry for the year ending 25th March, 1892, of which the foregoing Account, marked a, is an abstract. And we state that the several Contracts entered into by the Vestry during the year ending 25th March, 1892, are specified in the foregoing Statement of such Contracts marked B. And that the moneys owing to, and the Debts and Liabilities owing and incurred by, such Vestry respectively, are specified in the foregoing Statement of such Credits, Debts, and Liabilities respectively, marked C. And we further wish to thank Mr. Dethridge, the Vestry Clerk, and his Officers, for the able and courteous assistance they have rendered during the investigation. L BRUNEL, F. CALDER.TURNER, F. C. BAUM, May 31st, 1892. Parochial Auditors. 64 64 BOROUGH OF PADDINGTON. LOAN. Original Debt. Rate of Interest per Cent. Paid off this year. Total paid off. Remaining unpaid. £ £ s. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. Workhouse Debt 4,500 4 10 150 0 0 3,450 0 0 1,050 0 0 Do. further 5,000 4 10 166 13 4 3,666 13 4 1,333 6 8 Do. do. 8,000 4 9 265 8 2 3,257 16 7 4,742 3 5 Do. do. 6,000 3 10 300 0 0 600 0 0 5,400 0 0 Do. Infirmary 12,000 3 10 304 17 4 2,396 9 4 9,603 10 8 Do. do 18,000 3 10 441 12 9 3,137 8 2 14,862 11 10 Do. do 10,000 3 10 666 13 4 4,666 13 4 5,333 6 8 Do. Furnishing do 3,000 3 10 428 0 0 2,572 0 0 428 0 0 Do. Erection of Medical Officer's House and Registration Offices 2,900 3 10 193 6 8 1,160 0 0 1,740 0 0 Commissioners for Public Baths and Wash. houses 43,500 4 9 2,015 8 6 22,619 10 7 25,880 9 5 Vestry—Purchase of Land at Alperton 3,200 3 15 160 0 0 1,920 0 0 1,280 0 0 Do. Wood Paving 4,700 3 10 940 0 0 2,820 0 0 1,880 0 0 Do. Do. 9,000 3 10 1,800 0 0 1,800 0 0 7,200 0 0 PADDINGTON LOAN ACCOUNT—NEW WOOD PAYING WORKS. 1890. £ s. d 1890. £ s. d. Balance (credit being allowed for value of old materials) 206 14 4 a. Preliminary Expenses of Loan 18 14 6 b. Harrow Road Wood Paving, from Green Street to Iron. gate Wharf Road 424 10 0 Loan from London County Council for Wood Paving— b. Harrow lload, from Green St. to Irongate Wharf lload 9,000 0 0 c. Queen's Road Wood Paving, 1891 4,904 1 7 c. Queen's Road d. Harrow Road Wood Paving, from Irongate Wharf Road to Edgware Road 623 15 2 f. Harrow Rd., from West. bourne Terrace Rd. Bridge to Waverley Road e. Richmond Road Wood Paving 2,339 17 3 f. Harrow Road, from Wes'bourne Terrace Rd. Bridge to Waverley Road (£4,482 10s.) not yet executed 8,310 18 6 Balance 895 15 10 £9,206 14 4 £9,206 14 4 REPORT, 1891.92. 65 SUNDRY PAYMENTS MADE TO OR BY THE VESTRY AND CHURCHWARDENS UNDER VARIOUS ACTS OF PARLIAMENT. 1. A sum of £12 is paid annually under 26 Geo. 2, cap. 43, to the Ecclesiastical Commissioners by the Churchwardens out of moneys supplied by the Vestry as rent for land granted by a former Bishop of London for the enlargement of the Churchyard. The Vestry is recouped a portion of this £12 by an annual payment of £3 under the same Act to the Churchwardens by the Vicar of Paddington, and of £3 by the Parish Clerk (if any). 2. A sum of £15 is paid annually under the private Act 35 Geo. 3, cap. 83, to the Churchwardens by the Ecclesiastical Commissioners as compensation for the enclosure of waste lands by a former Bishop of London, and is paid by the Churchwardens to the credit of the Vestry General Account. 3. A sum of £2 is paid annually under 3 Geo. 3, cap. 50, to the Vestry by the Churchwardens of St. George's, Hanover Square, in lieu of parochial rates for the burial ground in Uxbridge Road, and is placed to the credit of the Vestry General Account. 4. Harvist's Estate. A proportion of the rents of this Estate (amounting in the year ending Lady.day, 1892, to £125 0s. 8d.) is paid annually under 10 Geo. 4, cap. 59, and private Act 18 and 19 Vic., cap. 11, to the Ve&try by the Hendon Union Rural Sanitary Authority, and is applied towards the repair of the Highway of the Edgware Road. 5. Lyon's Estate. A proportion of the rents of this Estate (amounting in the year ending Lady.day, 1892, to £475 17s. 8d.) is paid annually to the Vestry under the same Acts and by the same Authority as in Harvist's Estate, and is applied towards the repair of the Highway of the Harrow Road. 66 67 66 BOROUGH OF PADDINGTON. REPORT, 1891.92. 67 RETURN showing the amount in the Pound levied by the Vestry during the .nty.five Years ending October, 1891, in respect of Rates n Liabilities of the Vestry, distinguishing those over which the has control from those over which it has no control :— nade for payment of Amounts over which the "Vestry has control. Amounts over which the Vestry has no co ntrol. Half.year commencing at Rate in the Pound. Poor. I. Lighting II. General. III. Sewers. IV. Main Drainage Church. VI. Total, POOR. SEWERS. GENERAL. MAIN DRAINAGE METRO. C0NS0LI. |DATED. and Metropolitan Consolidated. V. Police. VIII. County IX. Metropolitan Common Poor Fund. X. Metropolitan Asylum District Rate. XI. West London District Schools. XII. Metropolitan Fire Brigade. XIII. Baths and Wash. houses. XIV. Precepts from M. B. of Works. XV. School Board for London. XVI. Precepts from M.B.of Works. XVII. Precepts from M.B of Works. XVIII. TOTAL. s. d. d. d. d. d. d. d. d. c d. d. d. d. d. d. d. d. d. d. d. d. 1867, April 1 9 •61 1.5 6 .825 . .5 9 435 5. 3.453 1.64 . . . . 3.17 . . 11.54 ,, October 1 9 •16 1 5 •5 •047 •• • • 6.707 8. 4.87 2.005 . . . •501 . . 3.45 . 14.27 1868, April 1 8 •13 1.5 6 •72 . •• • • 8.85 3. 3.5 2.15 . •12 . . . 1.77 . . 11.11 „ October 1 9½ •18 1.5 5 •5 •04 •• • • 7.22 .3 5.28 1.98 • • • •11 •05 •46 . . 2.95 . 14.22 1869, April 1 9 1.19 1 5 4.5 •476 • • • •• • • 7.66 34 4.1 2.58 1.51 •13 •06 . 1.58 . . . 13.32 ,, October 2 0 •17 1 5.5 .5 •13 •• • • 7.3 31 5.59 1.79 1.59 •11 •05 •44 . . . . 3.36 16.62 1870, April 2 1 •13 1.5 6 . •14 •• • • 777 1 3'91 2.66 1.69 •46 •06 . . . • . . • 3.35 17.2 ,, October 1 11 •19 1 5 . •03 •• • • 6.22 .46 5.39 1.57 1.64 •4 •09 . . . . . 2.96 16.71 1871, April 1 6½ •11 1 4.5 . . • • • 6.11 .32 4.8 1.64 1.43 •48 •08 . . . . • . • • . . • . . . 12.35 ,, October 1 9½ •4 1.5 5.57 . •005 • • • 7.475 .17 3.45 1.89 1.71 •92 •12 • •• . . •43 . •49 13.98 1872, April 1 6½ •1 1.5 4.13 •38 •01 • • • 6.12 32 2.91 1.62 2.44 •14 •19 . •04 •11 •37 . 1.47 12.31 ,, October 1 7 •19 1 5 •5 •01 • • • 6.7 .31 3.13 1.47 2.6 •55 •24 . •04 . • . . . •98 12.22 1873, April 1 8 .45 1 4.7 •49 •07 • • • 6.71 5 3.29 1.46 2.64 .•61 •16 . •04 •006 •29 . 1.49 13.33 ,, October 1 8} •21 1 6.15 .5 •986 • • • 8.846 •9 3.29 1.46 2.12 •45 •39 . •15 •014 •35 . . 11.61 1874, April 1 11 •15 1.5 4.18 •49 •22 . 6.54 .7 2.77 1.23 4.22 •605 •52 . •19 •006 1.31 . 2.27 16.39 „ October 1 8½ •15 1.5 6.74 •5 •07 • • • 8.96 1 1.81 1.2 2.1 •34 •57 . •] 9 • • • •76 . 1.92 12 1875, April 1 8½ •09 1 513 . •13 • • • 6.35 1.74 1.26 3.81 •52 •53 . •19 . 1.36 . 2.86 14.17 ,, October 1 9½ •18 1 4.8 .5 •02 • • • 6.5 .9 2.52 1.44 2.44 •76 •65 . •68 . 1.19 . 2.48 14.95 1876, April 1 7 •07 1 4.38 •02 • • • 547 2 1.65 1.04 3.38 •64 •47 . . •18 . 1.62 . 2.47 13.47 „ October 1 11 •26 1 5.78 •5 •02 • • • 7.56 55 2.61 2.08 2.32 •63 •76 . • •25 . 1.71 2.47 15.38 1877, April 1 7½ •07 1 5.17 . • •02 • • • 6.26 16 1.66 1.03 3.1 •76 •52 . • •108 . 2.33 . 1.98 13.228 ,, October 1 11 •13 •5 5.83 •5 •02 • • • 6.98 13 2.2 1.3 3.96 •73 •69 •• •31 •• 2.16 . 2.47 15.95 N.B.—The Roman Numerals at the head of ich Column refer to the list on page 72. 68 69 BOROUGH OF PADDINGTON. • REPORT, 1891.92. RETURN showing the amount in the Pound levied by the Vestry during the twenty.five Years ending October, 1891, in respect of Rates made for payment of Liabilities of the Vestry, distinguishing those over which is Vestry has control from those over which it has no control (Continued):— Half.year commencing at Amounts over which the Vestry has control. Amounts over which the Vestry has no control. Rate in the Pound. Poor. I. Lighting II. General. III. Sewers. IV. Main Drainage and Metropolitan Consolidated. V. Church. VI. Total aril rd. I. POOR. SEWERS. GENERAL. MAIN DRAINAGE. METRO. CONSOLIDATED Police. VIII. County IX. Metropolitan Common Poor Fund. X. Metropolitan Asylum District Rate. XI. West London District Schools. XII. Metropolitan Fire Brigade. XIII. Baths and Wash. houses. XIV. Precepts from M.B. of Works. XV. School Board for London. XVI. Precepts from M. B. of Works. XVII. Precepts from M. B. of Works. XVIII TOTAL. 1878, April s. d d. d. d. d. d. d. d. d. d. d. d. d. d. d. d. d. d. d. d. 1 8 •06 1 5.77 •002 • • 6.832 18 1.68 •83 2.99 •73 •62 • • •08 • • 2.23 • • 2.47 13.11 ,, October 1 11 •12 •5 5.9 •5 •18 • • 7.2 38 2.91 •96 3.46 •65 •74 • • •27 • • 2.09 • • 2.81 15.77 1879, April 1 10 •08 1 6.02 .. •02 • • 7.12 8 2.09 1.04 1.84 •93 •86 • • •29 • • 3.6 • • 2.47 14.92 251 1.09 2.18 •84 •95 • • •35 • • 219 • • 2.98 15.49 ,, October 1 11 •16 1 5½81 •5 •02 • • 7.49 4 1880 Anril ?, 0 •09 •5 6.87 •025 6.485 42 3.3 •98 1.98 •98 •93 • • •32 • • 3.13 • • 3.475 17.515 „ October 1 11½ •15 1 6 •5 •03 • • 7.68 66 2.54 1.1 1.99 •87 •82 • • •37 • • 2½5 • • 2.97 15.87 1881, April 1 10 •005 1 6.3 .. • • • • 7.305 9 2.2 •93 1.97 •98 •72 • • •3 • • 2.7 • • 3 14.7 17 2.6 1.08 2.06 1.8 •9 • • •32 • • 3.024 • • 3 16.954 ,, October 2 0 •07 •5 5976 •5 • • • • 7.046 1882, April 1 10½ •007 1 5.42 .. • • • • 6.427 96 2.34 •98 2.052 1.61 •73 • • •32 • • 2.58 • • 3.5 16 072 •95 2.4 •975 1.856 1.404 •67 • • •18 • • 2.205 • • 3.5 15135 ,, October 1 11½ •08 1 6775 .5 • • • • 8.355 1883, April 1 11½ •007 •5 6.14 •5 • • • • 7.147 1.09 2.6 •8 2.39 1.68 •62 .. •32 • • 2.86 • • 3 16.36 .29 2.72 1.04 2.08 1.47 •64 • • •19 • • 3.87 • • 3 17.3 ,, October 2 0½ •07 1 5.63 .5 • • • • 7.2 1884, April 2 0 •007 1 6.16 .. • . • • 7.167 1/24 2.33 •88 2.16 1.55 •54 • • •29 • • 3.34 • • 3.5 16.83 •72 2.66 •79 2.03 2.41 •64 • • •18 • • 4.28 • • 3.5 19.21 ,, October 2 2 •07 1 5.22 •5 • • • • 6.79 1885, April 2 3½ •03 •5 7.1 • • • • • • 7.63 .92 2.63 •79 2.25 2.02 •53 • • •33 • • 4.4 • • 4 19.87 1.79 2.62 1.05 2.45 1.64 •46 • • •32 • • 4.9 • • 4 20.23 ,, October 2 3 •17 •5 5.6 •5 • • • • 6.77 1886, April 2 2½ •007 1 5.84 • • • • • • 6.847 1.54 2.57 •53 2.6 1.54 •49 .. •32 • • 4.66 • • 3.5 19.75 i.36 2.62 •79 2.63 •65 •49 • • •32 • • 4.7 • • 4 19.56 ,, October 2 2½ •11 •5 5.8 • • • • • • 6.41 1887, April 2 3½ •007 1 6.49 1 • • • • 8.497 5.84 2.67 •52 2.09 •9 .49 • • •32 • • 4.41 • • 4 19.24 3.18 2.64 •79 2.17 •66 •46 • • •32 • • 4.42 • • 4 18.64 „ October 2 1 •1 •5 5.08 •5 • • • • 6.18 1888, April 2 2½ •007 1 5.21 •5 • • • • 6.717 3.47 2.64 •53 1.66 2.21 •46 • • •32 • • 4.29 • • 4.5 20.08 2.77 2.63 •79 1.73 1.21 •42 • • •32 • • 4.34 • • 4.5 18.71 ,, October 2 1½ •13 •5 5.16 •5 • • • • 6.29 1889, April 2 5 •007 •5 5.17 .5 • • • • 6.177 2.2 2.63 •79 *L.C.C. 7.7 1.556 1.191 •4 • • •32 • • 4.426 • • 2.5 23.713 ,, October 2 3 •13 1 4.93 •5 • • • • 6.56 2.332 2.652 5.543 1.9 1.05 •45 • • •32 • • 4.98 • • . • 19.227 1890, April 2 5½ •008 •5 6.19 •5 • • • • 7.198 2.54 2.65 7.0 1.7 1.4 •44 • • •32 • • 5.62 • • • • 91.67 „ October 2 5 •13 . .5 5.89 •5 • • • • 7.02 2.45 2.65 7.0 20 1.01 •475 • • •32 • • 5.9 • • • • 21.805 1891, April 2 5 •008 1 6.32 1 .. .. 8.328 2.89 2.56 6.24 1.73 1.41 •52 • • •31 • • 5 66 • • • • 21.32 „ October 2 6 •13 •5 6.35 1 .• .. 7.98 2.28 2.65 6.23 2.09 1.15 •49 • • •31 • • 5.84 • • • • 21.04 * London County Council. N.B.—The Roman Numerals at the head o each Column refer to the List on page 72. 70 BOROUGH OF FADDINGTON. RETURN showing the amount in the pound levied by the Vestry during the Twenty.five Years ended October, 1891; also the number and Rateal. value of houses in the Parish, the average Rateable value per house, and I average amount of Parochial Rates paid in respect of each house, &c. Year. No. of Houses. Total Rateable value Average Rateable value per House. Rate per £. Average amount of Paroohial Rates paid per House. ITEMS OVER WHICH THE VERSTRY HAS CONTROL. items over which the versty has no control Rate per £. Average amount paid per House Rate per £. Average amount paid per House. s. d. £ s. d. s d £ s. d. s. d. £ s d. 1867 11,436 729,838 64 3 6 11 4 0 1 4¼ 4 6 8 2 12 0 17 4 1868 11,646 710,686 64 3 5½ 11 1 4 1 4 4 6 4 2 1½ 6 16 0 1801 11,623 769,158 65 3 9 12 3 9 1 2 3/4 3 19 10 3/4 2 6½ 8 3 10¼ 1870 11,806 773,624 65 4 0 13 0 0 1 2 3 15 10 2 10 9 4 2 1871 12,141 954,868 (Now Valuation) 068,310 78 3 4 13 0 0 1 1½ 4 7 9 2 2½ 8 12 3 1872 12,346 78 3 l½ 12 3 9 1 03/4 4 2 10½ 2 03/4 8 0 10½ 1873 12,548 984,682 79 3 4½ 13 6 7½ 1 3½ 6 2 0½ 2 1 8 4 7 1874 12,685 995,009 80 3 7½ 14 13 4 1 3½ 5 3 4 2 4 9 6 8 1875 12,804 1,001,095 80 3 6 14 0 0 1 0½ 4 5 0 2 5.¼ 9 15 0 1876 12,920 1,091,656 (Now Valu ation) 1,008,262 88 3 6 15 8 0 1 l 4 15 4 2 6 10 12 8 1877 12,953 84 3 6½ 14 17 6 1 1¼ 4 12 9 2 5.¼ 10 4 9 1878 13,125 1,115,550 84 3 7 15 1 0 1 2 4 18 0 2 5 10 3 0 1879 13,275 1,125,644 84 3 9 16 16 0 1 2½ 5 1 6 2 6¼ 10 13 6 1880 13,510 1,140,100 84 3 11½ 16 12 6 1 2 4 18 0 2 9½ 11 14 6 1881 13,776 1,214,844 (Now Valuation) 1,234,626 88 3 10 16 17 4 1 2½ 5 4 6 2 7 3/4 11 12 10 1882 14,122 87 3 10 16 13 6 1 2 3/4 5 6 11¼ 2 7.1 11 6 03 1883 14,335 1,243,708 87 4 0 17 8 0 1 2¼ 5 3 3 3/4 2 9 3/4 12 4 1884 14,639 1,249,968 86 4 2 17 18 4 1 2 5 0 4 3 0 12 18 0 1885 14,667 1,259,732 86 4 6½ 19 10 7 1 2½ 5 3 11 3 4 14 6 8 1886 14,738 1,276,254 (Now Valuation) 1,273,030 87 4 5 19 4 3 1 1½ 4 17 10½ 3 3½ 14 6 4½ 1887 14,819 86 4 4½ 18 16 3 1 2 3/4 5 5 8½ 3 13 13 10 0½ 1888 14,948 1,276,776 85 4 4 18 8 4 1 1 4 12 1 3 3 13 16 3 1889 15,053 1,280,348 85 4 8 19 16 8 1 1 4 12 1 3 7 16 4 7 1890 15,164 1,284,770 85 4 10½ 20 14 4½ 1 2½ 5 2 8½ 3 8 15 11 8 1891 15,257 1,326,162 87 4 11 21 7 9 1 4½ 6 19 7½ 3 6½ 15 8 l½ 71 REPORT, 1891.92. 71 Rates Levied since 1855. The Rates levied by the Vestry since the passing of the Metropolis Local Management Act in 1855 for all purposes, including those over which the Vestry has no control, have been as follow:— s. d. £ For the year 1856 2 1 ( based upon a rateable value of ) 522,570 1857 2 6 538,879 1858 2 4 582,995 1859 2 7 605,382 1860 3 0 625,479 1861 2 8 643,063 1862 2 8 617,840 1863 2 8½ 646,256 1864 3 o 663,172 1865 3 o 685,434 1866 3 2 704,714 1867 3 6 729,838 1868 3 5½ 740,686 1869 3 9 759,158 1870 4 0 773,524 Under the Provisions of the Valuation (Metropolis) Act, 1869. 1871 3 4 954,868 1872 3 1½ 968,340 1873 3 4½ 984,582 1874 3 7½ 995,009 1875 3 6 1,004,095 1876 3 6 1,091,656 1877 3 6½ 1,098,262 1878 3 7 1,115,550 1879 3 9 1,125,644 1880 3 11½ 1,140,100 1881 3 10 1,214,844 1882 3 10 1,234,626 1883 4 0 1,243,708 1884 4 2 1,249,968 1885 4 6½ 1,259,732 1886 4 5 1,276,254 1887 4 4½ 1,273,030 1888 4 4 1,276,776 1889 4 8 1,280,348 1890 4 10½ 1,284,770 1891 4 11 1,326,162 72 BOROUGH OF PADDINGTON. Rates Levied during 1891. Date. Poor. Lighting. General. Sewers. Total. s. d. d. s. d. d. s. d. April 1 3½ 1 0 11½ 1 2 5 October 1 3½ ½ 1 1 1 2 6 Total . 2 7 l½d. 2s. 0½d. 2d. 4s. l1d. The Rateable Value of the Parish, based upon the Rate made in October, 1891, was £1,326,162. List of the Principal Statutes under which Bates are Levied ½½ The earliest Acts are alone given in this List, the object being to she the dates at which the duty of levying a rate was in each case impos on the Parochial Authorities:— I. Poor Bate.—18 8c 19 Vic., Cap. 120 (a.d. 1855). (Transferor to the existing Vestry the powers and duties given or reserve to the Vestry elected under the Local Act of 182 5 Geo. IV., Cap. 126, which superseded the Open Commc Law Vestry). II. Lighting Rate.—The same. III. General Rate.—The same. IV. Sewers Rate.—The same. V. Main Drainage and Metropolitan Consolidated Rate.—The same. VI. Church Building Rate.—58 Geo. III., Cap. 45 (a.d. 1818). VII. Poor Rate proper.—43 Eliz., Cap. 2 (a.d, 1601). VIII. Police Rate. —10 Geo. IV., Cap. 44 (a.d. 1829). IX. County Rate.—12 Geo. II., Cap. 29 (a.d. 1738). X. Common Poor Fund Rate.—30 and 31 Vic., Cap. 6 (a.d. 1867). XI. Metropolitan Asylum District Rate.—The same. XII. West London District School Rate.—7 & 8 Vic., Cap. 101 (a.d. 1844] XIII, Metropolitan Fire Brigade Rate.—28 & 29 Vic., Cap. 90 (a.d. 1865 XIV. Baths and Wash.houses Rate. — 9 and 10 Vic., Cap. 74 (a.d. 1846) XV. Sewers Rate.—18 and 19 Vic., Cap. 120 (a.d. 1855). XVI. School Board Rate.—33 and 34 Vic., Cap. 75 (a.d. 1870). XVII. Main Drainage Rate.—18 and 19 Vic., Cap. 120 (a.d. 1855). XVIII. Metropolitan Consolidated Rate.—32 & 33 Vic., Cap. 102 (a.d. 1869) FRANK DETHRIDGE, Vestry Clerk REPORT, 1891.92. 73 XXXVIII.—REPORT OF THE SURVEYOR. The following Report on the Paving, Sewers, Lighting, and other works carried out during the year ending March 25th, 1892, was submitted to the Vestry by the Surveyor, Mr. George Weston, and ordered to be included in the Annual Report of the Vestry:— Vestry Hall, Paddington, 30th June, 1892. To the Vestry of Paddington. Gentlemen, I beg to submit my Annual Report on the principal works that have been executed and the chief business transacted in the Paving, Sewers, Lighting, and Works Departments during the year ending Lady.day, 1892. Maintenance of Roads. The following quantities of materials have been used in the general repairs of the various Macadam and Gravel Roads in the Parish. The surface, F BOROUGH OF PADDINGTON. wherever practicable, have been consolidated by the use of the three steam road.rollers:— Tons. Cwt. Guernsey Granite 4,354 16 Enderby Granite. 2,446 8 Aberdeen Granite 193 12 Sifted Gravel 6,710 8 Hoggin . 2,280 1 Thames Sand 1,515 3 Thames Ballast . 820 12 Pit Sand . 11 5 Materials used on frosty roads:— Tons. Cwt. Thames Shingle . 1,189 The cost of working and maintaining the two ten.ton and one six.ton steam road.rollers during the year has been as follows:— £ s. d. Wages to Drivers 264 3 4 1,746 Cwt. of Coke 85 16 10 97 Sacks of Coal 8 4 1 250 Quarts of Lard Oil 11 14 5 11 Pints of Cylinder Oil 0 4 10 30.lbs. of Tallow 0 12 6 261½.lb3. of Cotton Waste 3 10 0 44½ .lbs. of White Lead 0 9 2 3.lbs. of Rod Lead 0 0 9 54.yds. of Steam Packing 2 8 0 20 Quarts of Boiler Fluid 0 7 6 736 Nights Watchmen 122 13 4 254 Quarts of Colza Oil 6 19 11 Aveling & Porter:— New Funnel, &c £3 5 4 . Poller Repairs 13 6 6 16 11 10 London County Council, for three Poller Licenses 0 3 0 £525 19 6 REPORT, 1891.92. 75 During the early part of the year complaints were received as to the rough state of the repaired gravel roads, and asking the Vestry to have them rolled similarly as the broken granite roads. The ten.ton steam road.rollers being too heavy for this class of work, as by their weight the stones get crushed, and there being also a liability to damage the gas and water mains and service pipes, it was decided to hire a six.ton steam roller for three months with the option of purchase at the end of such time, the cost of hire to form part of purchase.money. The roller was found to do the work very satisfactorily, and it was deemed desirable to purchase it with a view of using it to assist in consolidating the gravel roads in future. Wood Paving Repairs. The general repairs during the twelve months, the quantity of materials used, and the expenses incurred in thirty.six streets has been as under:— £ s. d. Labour 635 4 11 6,517 New Wood Blocks 33 8 5 155,192 Old Wood Blocks 155 3 10 1,099½ Bushels of Cement 82 9 3 3,908 Bushels of Sand 97 14 0 169 Bushels of Shingle 4 4 6 38 Gallons of Tar 0 12 8 £1,008 17 7 The expenses incurred in making good and repairing pipe.trenches, &c., after Gas, Water, and f 2 76 76 BOROUGH OF paddington. Electric Light Companies, &c., in thirty.eight streets during the year has been as follows:— X s. d. Labour 132 7 6 4,502 New Wood Blocks 25 16 2 17,063 Old Wood Blocks 17 1 3 704½ Bushels of Cement 52 16 9 727½ Bushels of Sand 18 3 9 43 Bushels of Shingle 1 1 6 106 Gallons of Tar 1 15 4 £249 2 3 The undermentioned Wood Paving Renewals were carried out during the year, viz.:— Locality. Date when First Laid. Renewed in 1891. MEMO. For quantity of Materials used and cost thereof see the following page. Cambridge Place, from South Wharf Road to Praed Street Novem., 1879. May, 1891. Sale Street, Upper Por. chester Street, Norfolk Crescent, Lower Porchester Street, and Porchester Place. August, 1882. June, 1891. Westbourne Street . Decern., 1881. July, 1891. Chester Place and Hyde Park Square Septem., 1881. August, 1891. Connaught Street, Con. naught Square, N. side, and Cambridge Street by Connaught Street October, 1880. August, 1891. Praed Street Septem., 1879. First Renewal, Decern., 1886. Novem., 1891. 77 The quantity of Materials used and the cost thereof, and Labour for "Wood Paving "Works during the year has been as follows, viz. :— NEW WOOD PAYING. REPORT, 1891.92. 75 Locality. Superficial Area. Labour, Superintendence, &c. Wood Blocks. Portland Cement. Thames Ballast. Thames Sand. Thames Shingle. Water. Cartage. Total Cost. Richmond Road Yards. £ s. d. No. Sacks. C. Yards. C. Yards. C. Yards. Sq. Yds. Days. £ s d. 4,042 498 3 6 158,955 2,102 380| 259i 33 4,032 35| 2,310 17 4 WOOD PAYING KENEWED. Cambridge Place 896 51 18 2 35,450 76 — 254 5¼ 896 7¼ 302 2 8 Sale Street, Upper Porchester St., Norfolk Crescent, Lower Por. Chester St., & Porchester Place 4,968 268 5 1 199,505 378 — 144 44| 4,968 43 3/4 1,622 13 5 Westbourne Street 1,552 87 8 10 60,310 124 — 45 10½ 1,552 14½ 487 4 7 Chester Place and Hyde Park Square 2,499 144 0 10 93,633 233 — 83 11 3/4 2,499 26 776 12 11 Connaught Street, Connaught Sq. N. side), and Cambridge Street by Connaught Street 4,885 250 2 8 192,944 417 — 159 811 4,885 36¼ 1,530 13 0 Praed Street 7,239 254 18 8 293,328 766½ — 191¼ 55 7,407 28¼ 2,193 11 1 Totals 22,039 1,056 14 3 875,170 1,994½ — 647½ 1581 22,207 156 6,912 17 8 78 BOROUGH OF PADDINGTON. Channels and Carriageway Paving. The undermentioned Streets, &c., were repaired during the year:— ] Superficial Area. Cost. Feet. inches. £ s. d. Errington Road, by Fernhead Road 240 0 13 17 10 Shirland Road, by ditto 344 0 22 11 11 Bravington Road, by Shirland Road 240 0 14 10 0 Kilburn Park Road, by St. Augustine's Schools 280 0 17 2 3 Warwick Road, by Formosa Street 1,326 0 18 2 2 Ditto, between Mo. 53 and Clifton Villas 510 0 7 7 2 Inverness Terrace 7,228 0 272 16 11 Cornwall Road and Shrewsbury Road 648 0 9 14 6 Porchester Mews 17,300 0 387 16 7 Norfolk Square, round enclosure 1,003 6 20 3 3 Cambridge Place 1,290 6 21 5 3 Netley Street 937 6 11 11 4 Lanark Villas 1,415 6 19 8 4 Road at rear of Westbourne Grove 1,602 0 9 14 0 Chippenham Road 1,566 0 13 1 4 North Wharf Road, opposite No. 15 Wharf 699 0 22 12 10 Warlock Road 375 0 3 18 4 Porchester Terrace 11,809 6 322 17 4 Cleveland Square, round enclosure 1,857 0 18 0 10 Westbourne Park Road, N. side 1,982 0 14 3 2 Totals 52,653 6 l,240 15 4 New Granite Crossings. Superficial Area. Cost. Carlton Vale, by Portsdown Road Feet. ] 238 Inches. 0 £ 15 8. 15 d. 0 Inverness Terrace, by Inverness Place . 245 0 13 2 9 Sutherland Avenue, by Surrendale Place 322 0 17 18 10 805 0 £ 46 16 7 79 REPORT, 1891.92. Special Footway Paving Repairs have been carried out in the undermentioned streets during the year, viz.:— Richmond Road Passage between Hampden St. Inverness Terrace and Waverley Road Praed Street Cambridge Place London Street (South of Porchester Terrace Praed Street) Lanark Villas Netley Street Reinstating Roads and Footpaths after Companies, fyc. Trenches opened by Gas, Water, Electric Lighting and Postal Authorities and others, have been reinstated at their cost by the Vestry's workmen, the same amounting to £1,662 17s. 3d. No. of Openings. £ s. d. 194 For Sewers and Drains 90 14 9 507 West Middlesex Water Company 99 2 8 1,041 Grand Junction Water Company 426 17 8 1,113 Gas Light and Coke Company 415 0 1 81 The Lighting Department 7 15 9 250 Metropolitan Electric Supply Co. 555 18 8 8 Postal Telegraph Authorities 2 17 6 47 Various Parties 64 10 2 3,241 £1,662 17 3 Footway Paving Repairs. Length. Cost. Ft. in. £ s. d. Sutherland Avenue, between Lauderdale Road and Warwick Road 362 0 32 15 10 Richmond Road 2,471 6 528 4 2 Bishop's Road, by No. 86. 178 0 39 4 2 Warwick Road and Formosa Street 527 0 112 8 8 Ditto between Clifton Villas and No. 53 300 0 93 0 10 Cornwall Road and Shrewsbury Road . 357 0 102 5 1 80 BOROUGH OF PADDINGTON. Length. Cost. Passage between Hampden Street and Ft. in. £ s. d. Waverley Road 109 0 57 IS 8 Waverley Road, by passage 62 0 11 11 1 Cuthbert Street (No. 18), entrance to Churchyard . 39 6 19 4 9 Inverness Terrace . 4,219 0 795 1 0 Praed Street 4,206 0 631 16 7 London Street, South of Praed Street . 1,012 0 144 2 5 Cambridge Place . 1,464 0 200 5 9 Netley Street 609 0 108 9 4 Lanark Villas 863 0 155 1 8 Westbourne Street. 936 0 193 5 8 Chippenham Road. 907 0 145 2 9 Connaught Street, by Connaught Square 161 0 9 9 10 Edgware Road, by Praed Street . 200 0 27 18 11 Warlock Road 200 0 15 2 0 Porchester Terrace. 4,429 0 1,134 7 2 Westbourne Park Road, North side 408 0 200 6 4 24,020 0 4,756 17 8 The total length of roadways under the Vestry's maintenance is 50 miles, 6 furlongs, and 156 yards. The estimated value of Road Materials in hand on 26 Wharf, Bridge Wharf, and No. 10 Amberley Wharf £795 15 6 Estimated value of three Steam Road Rollers . 750 0 0 Do. Plant and Workmen's Tools . 598 1 10 Property belonging to the Vestry, but not Valued. Westbourne Terrace Road Bridge. Harrow Road Lock Bridge. Carlton Terrace Road Bridge. Ranelagh Road Foot.Bridge. Iron Guard.Posts in Streets. Garden Seats. Urinals in Public Streets. Underground Convenience, Paddington Green. Furniture in Offices on Wharves. Lease of No. 26 Wharf, Harrow Road. „ Bridge Wharf, Harrow Road. „ No. 10 Amberley Wharf. 81 REPORT, 1891-92. Street Refuge. Complaints having been received of the danger to pedestrians crossing the Edgware Road from Praed Street by the City Bank premises to Chapel Street, it was decided to fix a 14-ft. by 4-ft. Refuge, with a large Lambeth-pattern lamp-post and lantern and guardposts, in the centre of Edgware Road, North of line of footway in Chapel Street, and at the same time to set back the kerb and paving on the West side of Edgware Road, and to alter and widen up the entrance to Praed Street by setting back the kerb-line and inserting kerb of 20-ft. radius at the corners. Tree Planting. The Metropolitan Public Gardens Association presented the sum of £100 to be used for planting trees in Paddington, the road selected being the Harrow Road from Bridge House Wharf to the Northern end of Porchester Road, but it was found impracticable to do so in this locality, owing to a 24-in. gas main running under the footway, and very near the kerb. It was decided afterwards to plant the trees on both sides of Chippenham Road. Eighty trees were planted there in October last, the average cost per tree, including all expenses, viz.:—taking up and re-laying, paving, digging holes, cartage, trees, mould, tree-guards, iron footway plates, and men's time, was £1 11s. 82 BOROUGH OF PADDINGTON. The before-mentioned Association gave to the Vestry for the use of the public six new garden seats. These have been fixed in the Uxbridge Road, beside the park railings, between Leinster Terrace and Clarendon Place. Blomfield Road Railings. For a very long period these railings between Warwick Road Bridge and Westbourne Terrace Road Bridge, by the side of the canal towing path, had been in a very dilapidated condition. The Grand Junction Canal Company, after a deal of pressure, admitted their liability to repair their portion, but the Regent's Canal Company and Messrs. Budd, Son and Brodie denied their responsibility to repair the remaining length of railing. A considerable amount of correspondence had taken place from time to time, and the fencing becoming dangerous, the Vestry Solicitor was again consulted, and he failing to obtain a satisfactory arrangement, a Special Committee was called, at which the Engineers of the two Canal Companies and Mr. Budd attended. The Engineer of the Regent's Canal Company still maintained that they were not liable, and Mr. Budd promised to again look into the matter. Having done so, he found that the wall and railings in Blomfield Road did belong to the Trustees of the Paddington Charity Estate, and he stated that immediate steps should be taken to put the railing in thorough repair. This has now been done by the 83 REPORT, 1891-92. Grand Junction Canal Company doing their portion, and Messrs. Budd, Son and Brodie doing the Paddington Charity Estate portion; thus settling a question that has been in dispute for upwards of 21 years. Electric Lighting. During the past year the Metropolitan Electric Supply Company have made considerable progress in putting down mains in the public streets of this parish. Mains have been laid in all streets where a supply was required, and in anticipation of an increasing demand they have also been run under the pavement of both sides of the principal streets and thoroughfares. The following streets have been taken up for this purpose:— Alfred Road Albion Street Amberley Road Bathurst Street Brindley Street Bishop's Road Blomfield Road Blomfield Crescent Burwood Place Cambridge Square Cambridge Street Chester Place Chilworth Street Clarendon Place Cleveland Gardens Cleveland Square Cleveland Terrace Clifton Place Conn aught Place Connaught Square Connaught Street Craven Hill Craven Hill Gardens Craven Terrace Craven Road Devonport Street Devonshire Terrace Edgware Road Garway Road Gloucester Square Gloucester Place Gloucester Crescent Gloucester Terrace Grand Junction Road Harrow Road Hyde Park Square Hyde Park Street Hyde Park Gardens Hyde Park Terrace Hyde Park Place Hampden Street James Street 84 BOROUGH OF PADDINGTON. Kensington Gardens Sq. Kensington Garden Ter. Kildare Gardens Kildare Terrace Lancaster Gate Lancaster Street Leinster Place Leinster Terrace Leinster Gardens Leinster Square London Street Monmouth Road Moscow Road Norfolk Crescent Norfolk Square Newton Road Orsett Terrace Oxford Square Orchard Street Porchester Street, Upper Porchester Terrace Porchester Road Porchester Square Queen's Gardens Queensboro' Terraoe Praed Street Princes Square Radnor Place Seymour Street Somers Place Southwick Crescent Southwick Street Southwick Place St. Petersburgh Place Spring Street Stanhope Place Stanhope Street Stanhope Terrace Stanley Street Sussex Place Sussex Square Sussex Gardens Talbot Road Uxbridge Rd. (a portion) Warwick Road Westbourne Crescent Westbourne Street Westbourne Grove Westbourne Park Road Westbourne Terrace Waverley Road Westbourne Park Villas The total length of conductors now laid is 30½ miles, and for the purpose of obtaining easy access to the mains, 565 manholes have been provided. This enables additional conductors to be provided when required, without causing any disturbance to the pavement. A strict supervision has been exercised by my department over all this work, and care has been taken not to interfere with the street traffic during the progress of the work, and no accidents have occurred. Owing to bad weather during the winter, instructions 85 REPORT, 1891-92. were given to the Supply Co. to cease work until the paving could be reinstated satisfactorily, and in a manner that would last, which could not have been the case had the paving been relaid during the severe frosty weather. An uninterrupted supply has been given from the other stations of the Company, and in a few weeks the new Electric Light Station in Amberley Road will be ready for next winter's demand. Large and substantial buildings have been erected on the premises known as St. Peter's Wharf, thus securing the double advantage of canal and road deliveries of coal and other requisites. The buildings have been designed to suit the requirements of the work, and comprise a frontage of offices, store-rooms, &c., leading into a capacious engine room about 108-ft. by 55-ft., containing 5 large horizontal engines, each driving a dynamo by means of ropes, the boiler house being close behind the engines, and the coal bunkers facing the canal, a ready delivery of coals can be made either by barge or road. Electric Light at the Vestry Hall. In July it was decided to have the Vestry Hall premises wired for the supply of electric light. A contract was obtained for carrying out such work. Fittings were put up in the various public rooms on the ground floor to supply 78 16-candle power incandescent lamps, and in the basement floor 6 similar 86 BOROUGH OF PADDINGTON. lamps. On the first floor rooms and passages, 24 points were provided for the fixing of fittings, should the Vestry determine hereafter to extend the lighting. Decorating Board Room. After completion of the before-mentioned work, an order was passed to thoroughly clean down, paint, and decorate the Board Room. This work was completed by. the end of November, and arrangements were made for a public opening of the electric lighting installation in the Vestry Hall by holding a conversazione, the expenses of carrying out the same being borne by subscription from certain members of the Vestry. This was held on the 10th December, when all the lights were put on, and since that time the system has worked very satisfactorily. New Sewer and other Works. Five hundred and thirty feet of 3-ft. 9-in. by 2-ft. 6-in. 1-brick sewer has been constructed by Mr. Seaman in Bravington Road, North of Marban Road, in accordance with corrected levels approved by the London County Council, and the necessary side entrances and ventilating openings have been provided to this sewer. A further length of about 144-ft. will have to be constructed in order to complete the total length required in this road. In that part of Marban Road between Bravington Road and the Western boundary of the Parish, about 87 REPORT, 1891-92. 120-ft. of 12-in. glazed stoneware pipes have been laid as a sewer in connection with a system of main pipe drainage from a private yard at the rear of houses on the West side of Bravington Road. These drainage works, which are for buildings erected in this yard, together with all requisite inspection, chambers, manholes, and ventilating pipes, have been carefully supervised by the officials of my Department. 54 miles, 6 furlongs, and 148 yards is the total length of sewers under the jurisdiction of the Vestry. Portions of the brick sewer in Lanark Villas, a length of about 99-ft., was reported to be in an unsafe condition on account of the side walls and other parts having bulged in. In consequence of these defects the Vestry ordered that the same should be reconstructed, which was effected at an expense of £203 16s. 6d. One new side entrance has been constructed in Walterton Road, on flank of No. 174, Shirland Road, in order to improve the access to sewers in this locality. As much difficulty has hitherto been experienced by the Vestry's workmen, and at times possible danger to them, in cleansing the small brick sewer on the South side of Cleveland Square, a length of about 88 BOROUGH OF PADDINGTON. 700-ft., it was considered advisable to construct three brick manholes, with covers thereto, which can be opened for ventilating the sewer prior to the men entering for cleansing purposes, and also to enable them to get out in a more expeditious manner the accumulated heavy deposits from the sewer to the surface of roadway for carting away. Manholes have also been constructed to sewer in Elnathan Mews, and in Elgin Mews North at the West end of brick barrel sewer. The total cost of constructing the side entrance and manholes was £204 l1s. 2d. Special Repairs to Old Sewers. In the undermentioned streets further works have been carried out in the repair and improvement of old brick sewers in the Parish by the construction of new stoneware inverts, with regulated and improved levels ; also in narrowing the lower portions of side walls so as to enable the flow of sewage to pass freely away. In all sewers which have been thus treated, very little or no deposit accumulates to cause offensive smells to arise therefrom:— Length of Sewers. Feet. Edgware Road, from Praed Street to Church Street 1,197 Church Street, from Edgware Road to Hall Place 277 Hall Place, from Church Street 368 Devonport Mews 504 Market Street, East of Sale Street 340 89 REPORT, 1891-92. Length of Sewers Feet. Blomfield Road, between Randolph Road and Warwick Road; also East of Randolph Road and portion of sewer under canal 470 Cambridge Place 469 Southwick Mews 221 Bouverie Street, North and South of Market Street 152 Star Street, East and West of Sale Street 1,038 Cambridge Mews 334 Sale Street 463 Southwick Street, North and South of Grand Junction Road 436 Cambridge Square, North and South sides 803 Southwick Crescent, from Southwick Street to Southwick Place 311 Somers Mews 215 Oxford Mews 301 Sovereign Mews 187 Polygon Mews 432 Torrington Mews 55 Total length 8,573 The sum of £7,805 6s. 4d. has been expended for these works. In Cirencester Street sewer, which is included in the special sewer repairs, various portions of the brickwork have been re-pointed, 11 disused house drains bricked up, and 98 new stoneware block flap-traps fixed at outlets of drains, at a cost of £133 1s. 6d. Additional repairs, &c., to drain outlets in sewers have been also executed as follows:— G 90 BOROUGH OF PADDINGTON. Locality of Sewers. Disused Drain Mouths Bricked up. Now Traps fixed to Drain Outlets. Davenport Mews 6 3 Market Street 1 10 Edgware Road 9 2 Bouverie Street 3 7 Southwick Mews 1 3 Cambridge Place ... 2 Star Street 6 14 Southwick Street 4 1 Cambridge Mews 2 3 Sale Street ... 2 Cambridge Square, North & South sides 10 7 Oxford Mews 1 5 Somers Mews 5 7 Southwick Crescent 1 ... Polygon Mews 1 11 Sovereign Mews 1 1 Torrington Mews ... 2 Total 51 80 Drains and other Works. One hundred and twenty-two feet run of 9" stoneware main pipe-drain, embedded in concrete with outlet into sewer in Irongate Wharf Road, has been laid under footway pavement on the North side of Praed Street, with separate drain connections from ten new shop premises West of Irongate Wharf Road, recently erected by Messrs. Thomas & Taylor for the Grand Junction Canal Company. The main drain has three brick man-holes and intercepting syphoned trap, in accordance with order of Vestry. 91 REPORT, 1891-92. The whole of this work was executed by the Vestry's Contractor, and under the supervision of the Vestry's officials, at a cost of £102 3s. 8d. to Messrs, Thomas & Taylor. During the progress of re-constructing the drains of No. 46, Hyde Park Square, in December last, by Mr. Appleton, Builder, of Connaught Street, a portion of an old brick sewer or water conduit, three feet high and one foot six inches wide, partly filled in with earth, and water running therefrom, was discovered in the covered area of these premises when the ground was opened for the construction of an inspection, chamber by Mr. Appleton. This fact was reported to the Sanitary and Public Health Committee in January last, and I received instructions to continue the investigations with a view of discovering the commencement and termination of the conduit in question. In order to do so a. trench was opened through the kitchen of No. 46 to further ascertain the course of the conduit, when it was found to extend under the kitchens of Nos. 45, 44, and 43, where shafts were sunk for the purpose. I then submitted to the Sanitary Committee plans, shewing the position of the conduit and other particulars respecting the same, and reported to the Committee that I believed it to extend a distance of 800 feet beyond the premises No. 43, because at various points this conduit has been cut asunder—in one instance, in Stanhope Street, that being about the g 2 92 BOROUGH OF PADDINGTON. distance before-mentioned from No. 43. A 6" perforated pipe-drain was then laid at the bottom of the conduit in loose rubble, with concrete and ground filled in over same from No. 43 to the sewer in Hyde Park Street. I may mention that there was not any bad smell from the conduit when opened. The cost of this work to the Vestry was ,£9G 19s. 3d. The ordinary Jobbing Works carried out by the Vestry's Contractors during the last twelve months, amounting to the sum of £2,073 18s. 9d., include the re-construction and repair of gulleys and sandpits, the fixing of two hundred and eighty-three modern flaptraps to the outlets of drains from new and old buildings and gulleys, the construction of one hundred and fiftyseven new stoneware pipe-drains from sewers to old houses or other buildings. Where new drains are laid from existing buildings to the sewer the cost of so doing is defrayed by the parties requiring this work to be done. The amount received by the Accountant of the Surveyor's Department for the before-mentioned drains has been £1,490 18s. 6d., which is included in the total amount paid to Messrs. Neave & Son as Contractors for this work. One hundred and four applications have been made to the Sewers Department and the sum of £20 16s. 0d. received for examinations of private drains as to their state of repair, obstructions, or other defects. The 93 REPORT, 1891-92. obstructions have been removed where possible, and information given to the applicants as to the condition of the drains or if new ones were necessary. As many of the old sewers which used to require periodical cleansing have now been improved, there is a considerable less quantity of heavy deposit to remove. Ninety loads have been carted away this year from those sewers still remaining in their old condition, against one hundred and forty loads carted away last year from the sewers generally. There has also been carted away a considerable quantity of slop from the catchpits of gulleys. Underground Public Lavatories. The Public Lavatory at Paddington Green still maintains its utility, as shewn by the number of persons who paid for the accommodation:— Number of Persons. Amount Received. Use of Lavatory 1,222 at 1d. £5 1 10 Use of W.C.'s 27,122 at 1d. 113 0 2 Total 28,344 £118 2 0 The working expenses during the year amount to:— Two Attendants' Wages £80 14 2 Lavatory and Water Closet Expenses 35 14 6 £116 8 8 The above statement is exclusive of the great number of people using the urinals only. 94 BOROUGH OF PADDINGTON. The Works Committee considered the question of providing suitable urinal accommodation at the junction of Elgin Avenue, Fernhead and Walterton Roads, this place being considered a most suitable site for the construction of an Underground Lavatory, and I was instructed to prepare plans and specifications for carrying out this work. The accommodation provided being five W.C.'s and fourteen urinals for men and four W.C.'s for women, with lavatory accommodation in each. The construction of the above was commenced on the 16th March by Mr. J. Bentley, Contractor, of Leicester, whose tender was accepted for the same by the Vestry, and the work is still proceeding. The above-ground iron and slate urinals in different parts of the Parish are also much used by the Public, and are maintained in an efficient sanitary condition. New Buildings. Very extensive ranges of buildings have been erected by the Metropolitan Electric Supply Company on the East side of Amberley Road, by Harrow Road, as an Electric Light Station. In London Street, between Francis Street and Stanley Street, the Post Office Authorities are 95 REPORT, 1891-92. pleting a large building to be used as a District Sorting Office, with a subway under London Street to the arrival platform of Paddington Station. A large factory building has been erected on sites of late Nos. 225 and 227, Harrow Road, abutting on Marlborough Street, for Mr. C. Fox. In a private yard at the rear of houses on the West side of Bravington Road, buildings one storey high have been built by Mr. Seaman, to be used for laundry purposes. In addition to the above buildings, one hundred and fifty-eight houses have been erected and the drainage thereof carried out in accordance with submitted plans and orders of Vestry, under the direction of the Officers of my Department. LIGHTING DEPARTMENT. The number of public lamp columns and bracket lamps in lighting on the 25th March last was 2,017. They each consume 4.6 cubic feet per hour. The number of refuge and corner lamps and candle-power will be found on page 118. The Gas Company have been served with 108 notices during the year for the rectification of defective service pipes, &c. 96 BOROUGH OF PADDINGTON. During the year 7 lamp-posts were knocked down, 23 columns broken, and 20 head-irons and lanterns damaged by various parties; the restoration being made good by the Vestry's own staff of workmen, at the expense of those causing the damage, with the exception of 13 who escaped detection. DUSTING DEPARTMENT. Collecting Rough Dust.—During the year ended Lady-day, 23,781 loads of rough dust were collected, the number of working days being 308; 5,425 horses and vans were employed in this work, the daily average number of loads collected being 77.21, or 4.38 loads per horse per day, the maximum number of loads collected in one week being 632, and the minimum 317. Materials Abstracted.—The following miscellaneous materials were abstracted from the before-mentioned loads of rough dust, viz.:— Tons. Cwt. Qrs. 14,886 chaldrons of Ashes. 63 17 2 of Bones. 9,406 chaldrons of Breeze. 110 0 0 of Rags. 34 cart loads of Hard Core. 53 18 2 of Cast & Wrought Iron. 24 boat loads 35 tons of Coal. 4 0 3 of various Metals. 178 boat loads or 4,172 tons 14 11 3 of white sheet Glass. of Soft Core. 19 5 0 of black Glass, broken Bottles, &c. SLOPPING DEPARTMENT. The dry sweepings, slop, snow, &c., collected by the Vestry's carmen is brought to the Depot, and when dry is tipped into the boats direct. When in a 97 REPORT, 1891-92. fluid state it is deposited in the filtering tanks, so that the water may pereolate away, the mud portion being placed into boats and conveyed away by canal beyond Southall, under a contract with Messrs. Studds at 2s. 0½d. per ton, this amount being 8d. per ton more than last year, the increase being due to the difficulty in getting men to unload the boats at the old scale of wages. This amount includes haulage, tonnage, unloading, and for providing a shoot. During the year 28,745 loads were collected by 7,811 horses and vans, working 308 days, giving an average of 93.32 loads per day, or 3.68 loads per horse and van per day, the maximum number brought to the Depot in one week being 1,146 and the minimum 92 loads. 34,965 tons were taken away down the canal by means of 953 boats. Carting Road Materials and General Work. Daring the year 2,830 horses and carts were engaged in this class of work for 302 days, giving an average of 9.37 per day, Cleansing the Public Streets. As described in former Reports, this work is executed by gangs of sweepers, horse scraping and sweeping machines. Main thoroughfares and important 98 BOROUGH OF PADDINGTON. streets are swept daily, especially wood paved roads; other roads, where the traffic is not so great, are swept two or three times weekly. Sanding Frosty Roads. When necessary, men, horses, and sanding machines were sent out before midnight and in the early hours of the morning scattering sand and shingle, 515 horses and carts being out on 41 occasions, the total hours worked being 515, and 686 cubic yards of shingle, 326 chaldrons of ashes, and 100 cubic yards of hoggin being used. Road Watering. The vans and horses were out on 108 days, 3,438 being thus engaged, giving an average of 31.83 per day. The quantity of water used and the cost thereof, including that used for road-making purposes, being as follows:— Gallons. Grand Junction Water Co. 18,005,500 £525 3 2 West Middlesex Water Co. 4,732,430 £155 0 8 22,737,930 £680 3 10 On the mains of the Grand Junction Water Company there are 44 standposts, and on the West Middlesex Water Company, 13 meters being attached to each, the indices being taken fortnightly. 99 REPORT, 1891-92. Horses. The losses by deaths and sales during the year have been as follows, viz.:— DEATHS. No. Description. When Purchased. Date of Death. Cause of Death. 53 Brown Mare March, 1885 1891. June 27th Inflammation of bowels. 100 Roan Mare „ 1889 Sept. 10th Inflammation of lungs. 29 Black Gelding „ 1886 Nov. 25th 1892. Stoppage of bowels. 90 Bay Gelding „ 1888 Feb. 4th Ruptured intestines. 40 Roan Gelding „ 1884 March 1st Cankered foot. 149 Chestnut Mare „ 1892 March 11th Ruptured blood vessel. 134 Bay Gelding „ 1892 March 20th Hydro-thorax, result of pleuro-pneumonia. SALES. No. Description. When Purchased. Date of Sale. Reason for Selling. 20 Black Mare March, 1881 1892. March 4th Worn out. 24 Chestnut Gelding „ 1881 ,, ,, ,, 26 Grey Gelding „ 1881 ,, ,, ,, 43 Bay Gelding „ 1884 ,, ,, ,, 45 Black Gelding „ 1884 ,, ,, ,, 57 Chestnut Gelding „ 1886 ,, ,, ,, 61 Bay Gelding „ 1886 ,, ,, ,, 67 Black Mare „ 1886 ,, ,, ,, 81 Bay Gelding „ 1888 ,, ,, Worn out and lame. 114 Bay Gelding „ 1890 ,, ,, Worn out and lame from a strained hock. 100 BOROUGH OF PADDINGTON. The net average amount received per horse by sales was £13 0s. 4d., the average time per horse working being seven years and one month. Horse Fodder. Advertisements were issued on two occasions during the year for tenders for the supply of fodder. The following table will shew the cost per horse per week for keep and bedding, the average being 15s. 8.98d.:— 101 One Week's supply per Horse. Tenders Accepted. REPORT, 1891-92. February 3rd, 1891. October 6th, 1891. s. d. s. d. s. d. s. d. 1¼Trusses of Straw @ 0 10.33 = 1 0.91 @ 0 10.33 = 1 0.91 1 Truss of Hay @ 1 10.5 = 1 10.51 @ 1 10.66 = 1 10.66 2 Trusses of Clover @ 2 5.16 = 4 10.32 @ 2 5 = 4 10 3¼ Bushels of Oats @ 2 3 = 7 3.75 @ 2 5.62 = 8 0.26 ½ Bushel of Bran @ 0 8.81 = 0 4.40 @ 0 4.5 = 0 2.25 Cost per horse per week 15 5.88 16 0.08 Average 15s. 8.98d. 102 BOROUGH OF PADDINGTON. Artizans Work. The general work of the repairs at the several Depots have been carried out by the following Artizans, viz.:—The Millwright, Engineer, Wheelwrights, Farriers, Smiths, and Harness Makers; and all repairs to the engine, sifting machine, stand-posts, and general smithing work for repairs to carts, vans, scraping and sweeping machines, horse shoeing, &c., and miscellaneous repairs; also the following work for the Highway Department. Pickaxes lined and Steeled. Tools Sharpened. Paving Hammer Heads steeled. Pickaxes. Chisels. Paving Hammers. 200 9,980 1,869 3 18 Paddington Green and St. Mary's Old Churchyards. In June last the Vestry passed an order to purchase No. 18, Cuthbert Street, for the purpose of making a permanent passageway under same from Hall Park into the Old Churchyard. Plans, &c., were prepared and tenders obtained for carrying out this work, which was put in hand at once, completed, and opened to the public on the 18th July. 103 REPORT, 1891-92. The following list of Tables, Details, and Accounts accompanying this Report (see Appendix), will furnish interesting information connected with the several matters carried out by the Works and Lighting Departments:— A—Dusting, Slopping, Watering, Carting Roadway Materials, and General Expenses incidental to the Works Department. B—Plant Capital Account. C—Road Sweeping and Cleansing Account. D—Public Lighting Account. E—Miscellaneous Articles in Store. F—Miscellaneous Tools in use. G—Defects of Un-metered and Metered Lamps. H—List of Plant fixed in the Public Streets. I—Experimental and Testing Apparatus fixed at the Vestry Hall. J—List and positions of Refuge and Special Lamps. K—Table of Lighting Hours, &c., &c. I am, Gentlemen, Your obedient Servant, GEORGE WESTON, Surveyor, Professional Associate Surveyors' Institute. 104 105 borough of paddington. report, 1891-92. [A] DUSTING, SLOPPING, WATERING ??? CARTING MATERIALS, &c. Dr. Details of Expenditure and Receipts for t??? ended Lady-Day, 1892. Cr. MARCH 25th, 1892. Working Expenses— Total. Dusting. Watering Slopping, Etc. Carting Materials. Total MARCH 25th, 1892. ???es, Dusting Department, viz.:— Totals. Totals. £ s. d. £ s. d. Dusting. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d.??? Materials. Chaldrons. Loads. Tons. Cwts. Qrs. Amount. To Wages, Collecting 23,781 van loads of Dust ... 1,835 18 2 £ s. d. „ Working Sifting Machine ... 1,542 12 7½ ??? Ashes 14,886½ ... ... ... 269 15 7¾ ,, Haulage of Ashes and Breeze ... 17 10 0 ,, ,, of Soft Core ... 208 11 9 ??? Breeze 9,401½ ... ... ... ... 203 18 1½ Canal Dues, Ashes and Breeze ... 26 10 6 „ Soft Core ... 208 11 9 24,288 Unloading ,, ... 208 11 9 Loading and Unloading Hard Core ... 20 10 9 Coals ... ... 35 ... ... 17 10 4 77 17 5 ??? Haulage, and Canal Dues, Hard Core ... 43 12 8½ Bones ... ... 63 17 2 148 3 0 Unloading Ashes and Breeze ... 16 10 0 ??? Slopping, Snowing, and Sanding Frosty Roads. 4,206 17 4 ... ... ... 4,206 17 ??? Rags ... ... 110 ... ... 78 0 0 Old Iron ... ... 53 18 2¾ 49 18 10 To Haulage and Unloading Sweepings ... ... ... ??? Wages,Collecting 28,745 loads of Slop, Snow Clearing, and Sanding Roads i ... ... ... 2,321 17 8 ??? Metals ... ... 4 ... 3 49 19 3 Wages, Loading Boats ... ... ... 431 S 3 ??? White Glass ... ... 14 11 3 30 16 9 ,, Haulage of Boats ... ... ... 1,019 16 7 Canal Dues ... ... ... 1,129 1 8 ??? Green,do. ... ... 19 5 ... 5 14 4 Wages, Unloading Boats ... ... ... 1,459 9 6½ ??? Hard Core ... 24 boat loads, & 34 cart loads. 5 8 0 Road Watering 6,361 10 8½ ... 6,361 10 ??? To Wages paid Drivers ... ... 788 3 6 ... 788 3 ??? Sundries ... ... ... ... ... 391 3 0 Carting Road Materials. 1,250 7 3 To Wages paid Drivers ... ... ... ... 598 12 0 598 12 ??? Trade refuse Account ... ... ... ... 137 11 0 To Wages paid in connection with the above Department;— Total Sale s 1,387 18 3 To Horsekeeper, Stable Helps, and two "Watchmen ... 91 o 7 75 1 7 133 2 o 31 13 9 330 18 Cash Received 1,119 6 b Engineer and Assistants ... 112 0 1 13 16 6 6 4 7½ 4 0 6 136 1 Outstanding Balance to date 268 11 10 Stoker ... 52 14 0 12 10 2 12 11 4 6 11 0 84 6 Wheelwright ... 70 3 6 85 9 4 98 15 4 25 2 4 229 10 £1,387 18 3 Farriers and Smiths 255 13 O½ 75 0 7 49 9 9 105 15 2½ 25 7 6 421 9 Smiths' Work and Sharpening Picks. 165 16 3 ... ... ... Harness Maker and Repairs ... 41 10 3 25 10 0 56 19 6½ 17 5 10 141 5 ??? ???nts received for Boat Hire 81 5 0 Chaff Cutter and Boy ... 35 17 S 27 17 1 52 15 7 15 16 7 132 6 ??? Sundry Labor on Wharf ... 625 6 r, 247 4 3 510 5 1½ 88 5 10 1,471 1 ???sh from Highway Department for Smiths'Work—Cash Paid £132 3 6 Clerks and Foremen ... 216 9 6 75 6 1 241 4 1 27 2 2 560 1 Salaries— Outstanding Balance 33 12 9 165 16 3 To Booking Clerk 180 0 0 115 12 8 84 12 6 156 7 11 44 5 8 400 18 ??? ???ivate Roads Watering, Distribution 83 8 6 Office Clerk 125 12 6 Burley 85 6 3 Clerk of Works, Snow Clearing 10 0 0 Totals for Wages, Canal Dues, Haulage, Loading, & Unloading Boats, Wages to Artizans, &c., Carried forward ... 5,642 12 4 1 ,435 0 9 7,735 12 2½ 884 3 2 15,863 4 Carried forward £1,718 8 0 h 106 107 BOROUGH OF PADDINGTON. REPORT, 1891-92. Continued.] DUSTING, SLOPPING, WATERIN??? CARTING MATERIALS, &c. Dr. Details of Expenditure and Receipts for ??? ended Lady-Day, 1892. Cr. MARCH 25th, 1892. Total. Dusting. Watering. Slopping, Etc. Carting Materials. Total MARCH 25th, 1892. Totals. Totals. Working Expenses— £ s. d. £ 8. d. £ 8. d. £ 8. d. £ 8. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. Brought forward .. 5,642 12 4 1,435 0 9 7,735 12 2½ 884 3 2 15,863 ??? ??? Brought forward 1,718 8 0 To Provender .. 729 4 5 499 0 5 1,161 19 9 213 1 9 2,603 ??? ??? ,, Rates, Taxes, Gas, Water, and Insurance .. 126 17 7 53 7 5 113 10 9 32 11 9 326 ??? ??? „ Rent of Wharves, &c. .. 300 1 5 225 1 5 433 12 3 148 2 6 1,106 ??? |??? „ Veterinary Surgeon .. 61 16 6 11 8 8 17 1 7 6 8 6 96 ??? ??? „ Coals for Engine .. 68 9 5 18 11 8 24 4 8 10 11 3 121 ??? ??? „ ,, for Smiths .. 6 2 6 6 3 6 5 1 2 3 3 10 20 ??? ??? ,, Stationery and Printing .. 17 12 1 9 9 10 26 9 11 7 8 7 61 ??? ??? ,, Harness Maker's Materials .. 71 10 5 68 5 7 83 10 11 53 13 10 277 ??? ??? ,, Bolts, Nuts, Nails, and Screws .. 10 19 8 3 9 2½ 10 9 5 2 12 7 27 ??? ??? ,, Wrought Iron for Shoeing & other purposes .. 32 14 6 17 18 3 22 5 10 12 6 8½ 85 ??? ??? ,, Oils and Colors .. 7 15 0 16 10 3 11 10 6 6 14 6 42 ??? ??? „ Grease and Oils .. 10 3 4 10 5 3 7 9 8 5 7 3 33 ??? ??? „ New Buckets, Ladders & Repairs .. 132 17 9 .. .. .. 132 ??? ??? „ Timber for Repairs, Wheeling Planks, Slop Shoot, and Repairs .. 16 15 3 11 0 2 81 10 6 7 4 1 116 ??? ??? „ Sundries—per Petty Cash Book .. 18 16 4 10 3 6 18 16 6 4 10 0 52 ??? ??? „ Horse Hiring .. .. 300 17 0 176 11 0 .. 477 ??? ??? „ New Tipping Vans .. 159 0 0 .. 186 0 0 .. 395 ??? ??? „ Second-hand Brougham .. 12 10 0 12 10 0 12 10 0 12 10 0 „ New Wheels .. .. 16 0 0 .. .. 16 ??? ??? „ Sundry Repairs to Machines, Tools, Buildings, & Stables, Tyring Wheels, Artisans' Materials, &c. .. 200 6 5 165 4 0 324 6 0 111 2 0 800 ??? ??? ,, Horse Hiring, Wood Paving Works .. .. .. .. .. 324 ??? ??? ,, Horse Hiring, Snow Clearing .. .. .. 59 14 10 .. 59 ??? ??? ,, Interest Account—Land at Alperton. .. 25 10 0 25 10 0 .. .. 51 ??? ??? ,, Boat Repairs, &c. .. 47 15 6 .. 47 15 6 .. 95 ??? ??? „ Losses on Horses by Sales & Deaths, less Cash received 213 8 11 359 5 4 321 15 8 555 15 8 291 18 8 213 ??? ??? Depreciation of Horses 1,060 15 5 1,060 ??? ??? „ Do. Leases h Buildings on Leaseholds 216 2 10 216 ??? ??? ,, Do. Sundry details,Stable Fittings, and Office Furniture 38 8 2 38 ??? ??? 1,528 15 4 ??? ??? ,, Do. Van Shed & Stable Buildings, on land at Alperton .. .. .. .. .. ... ??? Expenditure & Carried forward £ .. 8,058 15 9 3,237 12 6½ 11,115 18 7½ 1,813 10 10½ 24,716 ??? ??? ???iipts with Outstanding Balances, Carried Forward .. 1,718 8 0 h 2 108 109 BOROUGH OF PADDINGTON. REPORT, 1891-92. Continued.] DUSTING, SLOPPING, WATERING, AND CARTING MATERIALS, &c. Dr. Detail of Expenditure and Receipts for the Tear ended Lady-Day, 1892. Cr. MARCH 25, 1892. £ s. d. £ s. d BACH 25, 1892. Brought forward £ s. d. £ 1,718 s. 8 d. 0 Brought forward 24,716 4 0 ayash, Sales of Horses 118 1 6 To Stores purchased but not used, per contra 658 13 16 tores in Stock, to date, viz.:— „ 18,005,500 gallons of Water from the Grand Junction Water Co. 525 3 2 Bolts, and Nuts 49 16 6 „ 4,732,430 gallons of Water from the West Middlesex Water Co. 155 0 8 Harness Maker's Materials 24 12 8 680 3 10 Wrought Iron, Bar and Steel 50 13 9 „ Repair and Maintenance of Water Meters and Stand Posts 127 14 9 Oils and Colours 7 3 3 26,182 16 5½ Timber, &c. 107 11 6 „ Expenses—Maintenance of the Disused Burial Ground Garden Paddington Green, and St. Mary's old Churchyard:— General Sundries, W. E. Account 418 16 2 658 13 10 Wages to Gardeners and Beadles 460 2 3 cash for Water used in Private Roads 82 10 0 Purchase of Tools, Plant, and Water 35 19 7 496 1 10 Dances, viz.:— 2,577 13 4 £ Depreciation and Losses 1,528 15 4 Interest on Loans 51 0 0 Water for Roads and Road Making 680 3 10 Maintenance and Repairs of Water Meters and Stand Posts 127 14 9 Highway Department—Smith's Work 165 16 3 Wepnses:- Wages and Maintenance of Disused Burial Ground, Paddington Green, &c. 496 1 10 3,049 12 0 Actual Working Expenses 21,051 12 11½ Dance—Being the Cost in carrying out all the before-mentioned Works, for the Year ending Lady-day, 1892. 24,101 4 11½ 26,678 18 3½ £ 26,678 18 3½ 110 111 BOROUGH OF PADDINGTON. REPORT, 1891-92. [B.] PLANT CAPITAL ACCOUNT, [C.] ROAD SWEEPING ACCOUNT. Dr. Cr. 1892. 1892. 1892. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ 8. d. March 25. £ s. d. March 25. £ s. d. March 25. Horses—Vestry's Stock, Lady-day, 1891 ... ... 6,045 16 1 To Wages paid— By Balance, being the cost incurred in Sweeping the Roads, &c., during the twelvemonths ended Lady- ,, Purchased during the Year ... ... 1,026 0 0 Road Sweepers 5,619 2 5½ Less—Deaths and Sales 213 8 11 7,071 l6 1 Orderly Boys 314 18 6 ,, Written off, 15 per cent 1,060 15 5 1,274 4 4 5,797 11 5,934 0 11½ Harness—Vestry's Stock, Lady-day, 1891 ... 329 18 Carts— Do. do. ... 2,852 11 ,, Hard Brooms 338 0 0 day, 1892 6,366 10 11½ Boats— Do. do. ... 285 0 15 „ Machine Brooms 41 2 0 Leases of Wharves, Nos. 11, 12, and 13 4,116 10 10 ,, Shovels and Scrapers 53 8 0 Stable Buildings, Workshops, Mess Room, Ticket Office, and Chimney Shaft 1,797 10 7 43?, 10 0 House, Cottage, Office, and Store 561 6 5 Slop Tank 804 10 8 Dust Sifting Machine 1,078 7 9 Twenty-Horse-power Engine, and two Cornish Boilers and Appendages, Condenser and Gearing 287 8 0 8,645 14 3 Less 1-40th written off 216 2 10 8,429 11 5 Machinery and Fittings, Bean, Maize, and Oat Crusher, Grindstone, Bands, and Shafting 28 5 8 Sundry details for Engine, Sifting Machine, Farriers, Wheelwrights, Smiths, Millwright, and Harness Maker's Tools, &c. 129 18 8 Stable Fittings 116 5 9 Office Furniture and Fittings 34 1 11 Plant and additions thereto 75 10 10 Less 10 per cent. written off 384 2 10 38 8 2 345 14 8 Value of Freehold Land, 12 acres, at Alperton ... 3,200 0 0 Value of Van Shed and.Stable Buildings erected on the above Land 110 0 0 Less written off 110 0 0 £6,366 10 11½ £6,366 10 11½ Memo.—Valub op Plant, &c., to date ... £21,350 7 11 112 BOROUGH OF PADDINGTON. PUBLIC LIGHTING DEPARTMENT.[D] Statement of Expenditure and Outstanding Balances from Lady-day, 1891, to Lady-day, 1892. Details of Expenditure. Cash paid during the year ending Lady-day, 1892. Outstanding Balances, 25th March, 1892. Annual Expenditure, including outstanding Balances. The Gas Light & Coke Co., for Gas supplied to Public and Refuge Lamps, as follows: £ s.. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. 1891, June Quarter 803 0 5 ,, Sept. ,, 912 4 1 ,, Dec. ,, 1,474 11 0 3,189 15 6 1892, March Quarter 1,379 12 4 4,569 7 10 Wages paid to Lamplighters 1,435 16 8 Total „ ,, to Fitter and Glazier, fixing knocked down LampWages posts, new Posts, and Repairs 1,728 17 0 1 235 17 4 Paid. „ „ for Washing and Painting Lamp-posts, Columns, and Lanterns 57 3 0 Inspector's Salary 35 0 0 Maintenance of Meters, Boxes, and Governors 134 8 8 45 4 4 179 13 0 Tradesmen's Bills:— The Gas Light & Coke Co., Lamp Removals, &c. 19 14 7 1 17 0 21 11 7 W. & B. Cowan, Refuge Meters and Repairs to same 23 17 0 .. 23 17 0 Wm. Sugg & Co., Refuge Lanterns and Repairs 33 9 9 28 19 6 62 9 3 J, Bartle & Co., Lamp-post Castings 68 17 6 15 5 0 84 2 6 Walter King, supply of " Gas Journal" 1 0 1 0 6 6 1 6 7 J. Matts, Ironmongery 2 0 4 3 14 8 5 15 0 Surveyor, Sundry Payments 3 15 2 1 1 3 4 16 5 Pontifex & Co., Lanterns, Head-irons, Glass, &c. 27 19 4 37 17 7 65 16 11 J. Stephens & Co., Ladder Repairs 1 4 6 .. 1 4 6 McCorquodale, Stationery, Books, &c. 3 7 8 0 9 0 3 16 8 Carried forward £ £ £ 113 REPORT, 1891-92. Statement of Expenditure and Outstanding Balances from Lady-day, 1891, to Lady-day, 1892—Continued. Cash paid during the year ending Lady-day, 1892. Outstanding Balances, 25th March, 1892. Annual Expenditure, including Outstanding Balances. Details of Expenditure. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. Brought forward Tradesmen's bills (continued):— E. Reakes, Oilman's Goods 0 13 6 2 2 0 2 15 6 Morton & Burt, Printing, &c. • . 0 8 0 0 8 0 Brooks, Phillips & Co., Paint, &c. 6 8 3 • • 6 8 3 J. Blackwood, Overcoats 52 10 0 • • 52 10 0 General Rate Account, Paving Works .. 7 15 9 7 15 9 Price & Co., Glvcerine 6 8 0 .. 6 8 0 Gay & Co., Paint and Tools .. 120 4 9 120 4 9 Parkinson & Co., Goods and Repairs 16 18 0 2 5 0 19 3 0 Tradesmen's and other Bills £402 12 4 „ ,, and Outstanding Balances to date .. £1,647 2 8 .. Cash Payments, including Outstanding Balances .. £7,003 7 6 Credit—Cash received for Private Lighting 21 0 0 ,, ,, Sewers Department, Gas to Urinals 24 2 4 ,, ,, Various Parties for replacing damaged and knockeddown Lamp-posts and Columns 16 14 11 .. 61 17 3 Total Cash Payments and Outstanding Balances to Lady-day, 1892, after deducting Credit .. £6,941 10 3 114 BOROUGH OF PADDINGTON. [E.] MISCELLANEOUS ARTICLES IN STORE IN THE PUBLIC LIGHTING DEPARTMENT (TO DATE). 9 New Cast-iron Lamp-posts 18 Lamp Columns 25 Meters, Second-hand 27 Meter Boxes, do. 5 Meters, Cowan's 2 Refuge Lamp-posts 2 Do. Column 2 Do. Guard-posts 2 Sugg's 100 C.P. Lambeth Lanterns 4 Sugg's York Pattern Lanterns 30 Sugg's Cocks, Spindles, Burners 12 Sugg's Burner Nipples 7 Lamplighters' Ladders 3 Pair Steps 1 Long Ladder 32 New Lanterns 8 Old Lanterns 60 ½-in. and ¾-in. Stand Pipes 12 Head Irons (various) 40 Lantern Cocks, Old and New 350 New and Old Governors 12 Lighting Torches 25 Old do. 2 Lighting Sticks 4 lbs. Sheet Copper 1000 Lantern Tents for Repairs 36 Do. Doors do. 1000 Do. Bottoms do. 500 Do. Earthenware Tops 1 Gross Lantern Glass Sides (various) 5 Gross Do. Opal Tops 36 Enamel Lantern Tops 50 lbs. Putty 12 Lead Pipes, with Caps, &c., 2-ft. long 40 Brass Caps and Linings 36 £-in. Sockets and Nipples 18 Bye-passes 6 f-in. Bends 6 f-in. Reducing Sockets 1000 Iron Spindles 24 Pair Plyers 1 Sand Post 70-ft. 1/8-in. Barrel 1 Large Meter Box 10 Sugg's Victoria Lanterns 2 Bracket Irons Estimated Value, £210. 115 REPORT, 1891-92. [F.] MISCELLANEOUS TOOLS IN USE IN THE PUBLIC LIGHTING DEPARTMENT. In daily use by Lamplighters. 25 Lighting Torches and Sticks 3 Hammers 25 Pairs of Plyers 1 Blow Pipe 25 Oil Cans 25 Burner Brushes 1 Glazing Knife 1 Hacking Knife 25 Ladders 4 Screw Drivers 25 Pairs of Ladder Spike Irons 1 Rule 1 Spirit Level 2 Tool Baskets 1 Flatting Plate and Folding Machine 1 Shave Hook 7 Pairs of Gas Tongs 1 Boxwood Mallet 1 Tube Vice 2 Pickaxes 1 Large Set Stocks, Dies and Taps 1 Rammer 2 Small do. do. do. 1 3-gall. Can 2 Large Vices 18 Paint Cans 2 Air Pumps and Service Cleaner 2 Glazing Frails 1 Pair of Cutting Plyers 1 Large Paint Bath 1 Pair of Compasses 2 Meter Hooks 3 Pairs of Plyers 6 Steel Chisels 6 Cross Handle Large Keys 2 Steel Sets 6 Do. do. Small do. 1 Crowbar, 5-ft. x 2-in. dia. 1 Meter Testing Table, for out-door use 1 Crease Iron India-rubber Tubing, do. 1 Hollow Punch 1 Box Truck 1 Lead Pot and Handle 1 Lantern Truck 1 Beak Iron 1 Trolly 2 Soldering Irons Sundry Paint Brushes, &c. 4 Stakes, various sizes 4 Double-action Syphon Pumps 2 Pairs Tinman's Snips Estimated Value, £30. 116 BOROUGH OF PADDINGTON. [G.] DEFECTS OF UNMETERED LAMPS REPORTED DURING THE YEAR. Knocked down and out of Lighting. Escapes in Columns or defective Stand Pipes. OUT OF LIGHTING. Cocks found turned off in the night. Lights blown or knocked out, and Gas escaping. All Night. Part of Night. Water. Naphthaline. Stoppage in Services. Water. Formation of Naphthaline. Stoppages in Services. Total for 12 months ended March 25, 1892. Out. Bad. Out. Bad. Out. Bad. 21 6 3 •• 15 135 130 388 868 20 58 336 314 DEFECTS OF METERED LAMPS REPORTED DURING THE YEAR. Total fur 12 months. ended March 25, 1892. ... 2 2 1 5 30 15 56 26 3 4 2 ... 117 REPORT, 1891-92. [H.] PUBLIC LIGHTING DEPARTMENT. LIST OF PLANT FIXED IN THE PUBLIC STREETS WITHIN THE PARISH, LADY-DAY, 1892. 2,017 Lanterns 2,017 Governors 2,017 Cocks and Spindles 1,722 Head Irons 1,722 Lamp-posts and Columns, with Stand Pipes 295 Bracket Head Irons and Lamp Fittings 100 Meter Boxes and Connections 100 Meters and Fittings 74 Refuge Lamp-posts and Columns 65 Refuge Meter Boxes, Meters, and Fittings 45 Sugg's Lambeth Pattern 100 C. P. Lamps 14 Sugg's York Pattern, with "Billingsgate" Burners 4 Bray's 80 Candle Power Lamps 5 Sugg's Victoria Lamps (15-feet) 4 Do. do. do. (10-feet) [I.] EXPERIMENTAL AND TESTING APPARATUS FIXED AND IN USE AT THE VESTRY HALL, LADY-DAY, 1892. 1-5½ cubic feet Testing Gas Holder and Connections 1 Meter for Testing Lamp Governors 1 Experimental Governor 1 Do. Minute Clock, "King's" 1 Do. 30/10ths "King's" Pressure Guage 1 Pair Inspector's Pocket Guages 50/10ths Pressure Register, Clock, Base, and Fittings 1 Fixed Table, for Testing purposes 1 Experimental Meter, for Testing by observations of one minute 1 Small Bent Glass Pressure Guage 2 Pressure Guage Lengthening Brass Tubes 1 Hullett's Patent Pressure Guage OFFICE FURNITURE. Closets, Shelves, and Fixtures Table for Experimental Purposes Office Table Fender and Fire-irons Linoleum and Chairs 118 BOROUGH OF PADDINGTON. [J.] Refuge and Special Lamps fixed within the Parish. Date when fixed. Locality. Sugg's 100 Candle Power Sugg's 15-ft. Victoria. Sugg's 10-ft. Victoria. Sugg's 10-ft. York. 1881. June 27 Harrow Road, juncture of Edgware Road 1 ... ... ... „ 27 Bishop's Rd., by WestbourneTer. (TrinityChurch) 1 ... ... ... Oct. 6 Edgware Road, by Church Street 1 ... ... ... Dec. 8 Porchester Road, by Westbourne Park Road 1 ... ... ... Nov. 11 Westbourne Park Road, by St. Stephen's Church 1 ... ... ... „ 10 Bayswater Road, opposite Inverness Terrace 1 ... ... ... Dec. 6 Bishop's Road, by Porchester Road (Royal Oak) 1 ... ... ... „ 7 1882. Bishop's Road, by Queen's Road (Redan) 1 ... ... ... Jan. 10 Sussex Gardens, by St. James's Church 1 ... ... ... 9 Harrow Road, by Blomfield Crescent 1 ... ... ... Feb. 4 Bayswater Road, opposite Porchester Terrace Harrow Road, by Dudley Grove 1 ... ... ... Mar. 8 1 ... ... ... „ 10 Praed Street and South Wharf Road Junction 1 ... ... ... „ 24 Uxbridge Road, by Kensington Gardens Terrace 1 ... ... ... „ 23 Southwick Crescent, by Cambridge Square 1 ... ... ... „ 23 Southwick Crescent, by Oxford Square 1 ... ... ... April 27 Cambridge Street, by Albion Street 1 ... ... ... „ 28 Junction of Connaught St. and Cambridge St. ... ... ... ... May 4 Lancaster Gate, by crossing Uxbridge Road 1 ... ... ... „ 5 Lancaster Gate, by Nos. 94 and 95 1 ... ... ... „ 6 Harrow Rd., by Blomfield Cres ... ... ... 1 June 17 Seymour Street, by Edgware Road ... ... ... 1 Sept. 20 Craven Road, opposite 45 (on private post) ... ... ... „ 25 Westbourne Crescent, by Gloucester Place ... ..... ... l Nov. 8 Bishop's Road, by N.W. corner of G.W.R. Wall 1 ... ... ... „ 8 Queen's Road, by centre entrance to Baths 1 ... ... ... „ 8 Queen's Rd.,byS.W.corner of kerb,oppositeBaths ... ... ... 1 „ 8 Queen's Rd., by N.W. corner of kerb, opposite Baths ... ... ... 1 Dec. 19 Westbourne Terrace Road Bridge (Weighbridge) •... ... ... l „ 19 Cornwall Road, opp. No. 13, by junc. G.W. Rd. 1 ... ... ... „ 21 1883. Harrow Road, opposite Stafford P.H., by Lord Hill Bridge 1 ... ... ... Jan. 11 Shirland Road, opposite Welford's Dairy 1 ... ... ... „ 16 Somers Place, flank of No. 15, Radnor Place ... ... ... ... „ 16 Radnor Place, by Oxford Terrace ... ... ... 1 June 18 Maida Hill Bridge 1 ... ... ... Nov. 22 Maida Vale, by Clifton Road 1 ... ... ... Dec. 10 1884. Connaught Street, by Edgware Road ... ... ... 1 May 20 Stanhope Terrace, Bayswater Road 1 ... ... ... Oct. 16 Tavistock Terrace Junction 1 ... ... ... 1885. Mar. 4 1886. Ranelagh Road Bridge ... ... ... 2 April 30 Bishop's Road, corner of Glo'ster Gardens 1 ... ... ... May 13 Warwick Road, opposite St. Saviour's Church 1 ... ... ... Carried forward 119 REPORT, 1891-92. Refuge and Special Lamps (continued.) Date when fixed. Locality. Sugg's 100 Candle Power Sugg's 15 ft. Victoria. Sugg's 10-ft. Victoria. Sugg's 10 ft. York. 1887. Brought forward Jan. 21 Cambridge Terrace, by London Street ... 1 ... ... Feb. 12 Orme Square ... ... ... 1 Feb. 24 Pickering Place, North End ... ... ... ... April 18 1886. Clifton Gardens and Portsdown Road 1 ... ... ... Mar. 16 Craven Hill Gardens, by Leinster Gardens 1 ... ... ... May 11 1888. Clifton Gardens, by Randolph Crescent 1 ... ... ... Nov. 21 1889. Westbourne Park Road, 31 ... 1 ... ... June 4 1890. Sussex Gardens, by Westbourne Street 1 ... ... ... June 12 Warwick Road, by Blomfield Road 1 ... ... ... Sussex Gardens, by Spring Street ... ... ... 1 Warwick Road, by side entrance to Church ... 1 ... ... Do. by Stranraer House ... 1 ... ... 1891. Do. by Warrington Lodge ... 1 ... ... Dec. 1 1892. Edgware Road, by Praed Street 1 ... ... ... Mar. 7 Blomfield Road, by Weighbridge ... ... 1 ... „ 7 Shirland Road, by Formosa Street ... ... 1 ... Total 36 5 4 14 Sutherland Avenue, Central Lights, 13 Sugg's 100 Candle-power Lambeth Lamps. 120 121 BOROUGH OF PADDINGTON. REPORT, 1891-92. [K.] TABLE showing the Hours of Burning and the Quantity of Gas per Lamp per Annum for which the Vestry would have paid under the Scale or Contract System. TABLE showing the Annum, under the the Lamps during actual Hours of Burning, the Quantity of Gas consumed per Lamp per Average Meter System. Also the Total Quantity of Gas Saved over all the Twelve Months. Month. Hours Burning Per Month. Average Hours per Night. Rate per Hour. Quantity of Gas Consumed. Average Hours. Estimated Consumption at 46 cubic feet per Hour Actual Consumption by Meter Average and modified hours. Difference gained by Meter. Consumption per Hour. Total quantity gained between Scale and Meter Systems. Total Quantity over all the Lamps. Burning per Month. Burning per Night. 1891. Hours. Hours. Cubic feet. Cubic feet. Hours. Hours. Cubic feet. Cubic feet. Cubic feet. Cubic feet. Cubic feet. Cubic feet. April 299. 9.96 5. 1,497 278.77 9.29 1,282.34 1,311.22 ... 4.70 185.78 371,374 May 254.8 8.21 5. 1,274 212.41 7.08 977.08 1,017.34 ... 4.78 256.66 513,833 June 220. 7.32 5. 1,100 171.49 5.53 788.85 816.32 ... 4.76 283.68 568,211 The Quarter 773.8 ... ... 3,871 662.67 ... 3,048.27 3,141.88 ... ... 726.12 1,453,418 July 240.8 7.76 5. 1,204 199.96 6.45 919.81 937.75 ... 4.68 266.25 533,032 August 288.8 9.57 5. 1,444 251.00 8.36 1,154.60 1,169.86 ... 4.66 274.14 549,376 September 337* 11.23 5. 1,685 314.87 10.15 1,448.40 1,464.60 ... 4.65 220.40 441,902 The Quarter 866.6 ... ... 4,333 765.83 ... 3,522.81 3,572.21 ... ... 760.79 1,524,310 October 409.8 13.21 5. 2,049 393.08 12.68 1,808.16 1,812.90 ... 4.61 236.10 474,088 November 450. 15. 5. 2,250 415.00 14.31 1,909.00 1,839.60 69.40 4.43 410.40 825,314 December 494.8 15.96 5. 2,474 472.66 15.24 2,174.23 2,084.10 90.13 4.40 389.90 783,699 The Quarter 1,354.6 ... ... 6,773 1,280.74 ... 5,891.39 5,736.60 159.53 ... 1,036.40 2,083,101 1892. January 478.8 15.44 5. 2,394 443.58 14.30 2,040.46 1,989.10 51.36 4.48 404.90 814,658 February 417.2 14.38 5. 2,086 380.97 13.13 1,752.46 1,719.80 32.66 4.51 366.20 737,160 March 369.8 11.92 5. 1,849 355.47 11.46 1,635.16 1,603.30 31.86 4.51 245.70 495,576 The Quarter 1,265.8 ... ... 6,329 1,180.02 ... 5,428.08 5,312.20 115.88 ... 1,016.80 2,047,394 The Year 4,260.8 11.66 5. 21,306 3,889.26 Average. 10.66 17,890.55 17,765.89 275.41 ... 3,540.11 7,108,22.3 123 REPORT, 1891-92. XXXIX. — ABSTRACT OF THE QUARTERLY TABULATED REPORTS OF THE PUBLIC ANALYST. For the Year eliding March 25th, 1892. Article Analyzed. No. of Samples. Milk ... ... ... ... 117 Butter ... ... ... ... 16 Lard ... ... ... ... 8 Cheese ... ... ... ... 1 Potted Meats ... ... ... ... 32 Tea ... ... ... ... 10 Coffee ... ... ... ... 9 Cocoa ... ... ... ... 3 Spirits ... ... ... ... 4 Bread ... ... ... ... 1 Sugar ... ... ... ... 3 Jam ... ... ... ... 8 Spice ... ... ... ... 2 Ginger ... ... ... ... 3 Sauce ... ... ... ... 2 Pepper ... ... ... ... 6 Mustard ... ... ... ... 6 Pills ... ... ... ... 3 234 Of these, the only adulterated articles were 13 samples of Milk. ALF. W. STOKES, F.C.S., F.I.C., Public Analyst. 12 MAP OF PADDINGTON 125 REPORT, 1891-92. XL.—REPORT OF THE BURIAL BOARD. Vestry Hall, Harrow Road, June 15th, 1892. Sir, I am instructed by the Burial Board to transmit to you Statements in abstract of the Account of the Board, and of the Incumbent of Paddington, for the Year ending 25th March, 1892, certified by Mr. Wilde (of Messrs. Wilde and Venables, Chartered Accountants), and audited by the Parochial Auditors. A Statement showing the amount of Fees received by the Incumbent and the Board during the past three years is likewise appended. From the balance at the commencement of the financial year a further sum of £1,500 was paid over to the Vestry account, making a total of £40,600 since 1870, when the loan raised for the purchase and laying-out of the ground was cleared off. The following shows the number of burials which took place from the 31st March, 1891, to the 1st April, 1892 :— CONSECRATED GROUND. Parishioners. Non-Parishioners. Total. 909 397 1,306 126 BOROUGH OF PADDINGTON. UNCONSECRATED GROUND. Parishioners. Non-Parishioners. Total. 752 411 1,163 During the same period there were 243 graves purchased. In the preceding year the number of interments in the Consecrated Ground was 1,166, and in the Unconsecrated Ground 1,170. I am, Sir, Your obedient Servant, HENRY CECIL, Clerk to the Board. To F. Dethridge, Esq., Vestry Clerk, Paddington, W. PADDINGTON BURIAL BOARD. AMOUNT OF FEES receivcd for the Years ending 25th March, 1890, 1891, and 1892:— Incumbent. Burial Board. Year. £ s. d. £ s. d. Ending 25th March, 1890. Gross Amount 742 9 0 3,177 10 4 Discount Allowed 1 12 0 4 15 0 740 17 0 3,172 15 4 Amount 792 10 0 3,195 14 3 Ending 25th March, 1891. Amount 849 19 0 3,545 9 2 Ending 25th March, 1892. 127 REPORT, 1891-92. Dr. THE PADDINGTON BURIAL BOARD IN ACCOUNT WITH THE INCUMBENT OF PADDINGTON For the Year ending 25th March, 1892. Cr. Receipts. Payments. 1891. £ s. d. 1892. £ s. d. £ s. d. March 25.—To Balance 1892. 260 4 6 March 25.—By payment to the Incumbent March 25.—To Fees 849 19 0 of Paddington 771 9 10 By Payment to the Burial Board by way of Commission 19 15 8 791 5 6 By Balance at Bank • • • • •• • • 318 18 0 £1,110 3 6 £1,110 3 6 I have examined the above account of the Incumbent of Paddington with the Books and Vouchers, and hereby certify it to be correct. I have also venfied the Balance at the Bank on the 25th March, 1892, and find it agrees with the amount stated in the Account. 69, Moorgate Street, E. T. R. WILDE, F.C.A., 4th April, 1892. (Wilde & Venables, Chartered Accountants). HENRY CECIL, Clerk to the Board. Examined and found correct, I. BEUMIL., F Caldee-Turxek Parochial May 31st, 1892. F C. baum, Auditors- 128 129 BOROUGH OF PADDINGTON. REPORT, 1891-92. PADDINGTON BURIAL BOARD. Dr. A Statement of the Receipts and Expenditure for the Year ending March 25th, 1892. Cr. Receipts. £ s. d. £ s. d. Expenditure. £ s. d. £ s. d. To Balance at Bank 360 1 6 By Bricks, Stone, Lime, and Sand 124 4 11 „ Cash on hand (Wages Account) 29 17 5 „ Bricklayer 16 17 6 Do. (Petty Cash) 5 19 5 395 18 4 „ Gravediggers' Wages 628 12 7 769 15 0 „ Cash on Deposit 1,500 0 0 „ Gardeners' Wages 501 0 2 „ Cemetery Fees 3,545 12 8 „ Plants and Shrubs 106 7 8 „ Gravel 14 5 1 Less returned 3 6 621 12 11 „ Planting and Turfing Graves 3,545 9 2 ,, Repairs 206 15 3 408 2 3 „ Carting Clay 51 10 0 „ Sale of Grass 5 0 0 ,, Coal 19 1 8 413 2 3 277 6 11 „ Interest—Deposit Account 23 4 9 „ Bates, Taxes, Gas, and Water ... ... 25 14 4 ,, Commission on Incumbent's Fees ... ... 19 15 8 „ Income Tax ... 12 ... 33 2 6 „ Miscellaneous ... ... 1 1 0 „ Printing and Stationery 34 10 „ Stamps for Grants of Ground, &c. 18 0 1 „ Sundries 41 0 11 „ Audit Fee 10 10 0 104 3 10 „ Solicitor's Charges ... ... 5 0 0 „ Salary of Clerk to the Board 220 0 0 „ „ Assistant „ 31 4 0 „ „ Superintendent 150 0 0 401 4 0 „ Attendance of Police on Sundays ... ... 19 10 0 ,, Vestry in aid of Poor Rates ... ... 1,500 0 0 ,, Balance at Bank 433 5 11 „ Cash in hand (Wages Account) 55 4 8 „ „ (Petty Cash) 2 11 1 491 1 8 „ Cash on Deposit ... ... 1,650 0 0 £5,898 11 2 £5,898 11 2 I have examined the above account of the Burial Board with the Books and Vouchers, and hereby certify it to be correct. I have also verified the Balances of the Current Account and Deposit Account at the Bank on the 25th March, 1892, and find them to agree with the amounts stated in the Accounts. 69, Moorgate Street, {signend) E. T. R. WILDE. F.C.A., 4th April, 1892, (Wilde & Venables, Chartered Accountants). Examined and found correct, I. BRUNEL, F. CALDER-TURNER, Parochial Auditors. HENRY CECIL, Clerk to the Board. F. C. BAUM, May 31st, 1892. 131 REPORT, 1891-92. REPORT OF THE Commissioners for Public Baths and Washhouses FOR THE PARISH OF PADDINGTON, For the Year ending 31 st March, 1892. The Commissioners in submitting their Annual Statement of Accounts to the 31st March, 1892, duly audited, have to report:— That there has been a slight increase in the Receipts for the year, amounting to £90 is. 8d. The Expenditure has been very heavy, owing to the necessity (foreshadowed in last Report) of laying down three new Boilers, which are further referred to under the head of Machinery. This has entailed an expenditure of upwards of £1,100, of which £646 has been paid in the Financial year under review, and with the extra charge of £313 for Rates and Taxes, in consequence of the increased Assessment on the premises, has obliged the Commissioners to make a Supplemental Call upon the Vestry for £500. Accounts. Comparative Statement of No. of Bathers and Washers. The Comparative Statement of the number of persons using the Baths and Washhouses during the past four years is as follows:— Year. Swimming Baths. Private Baths. Total No. of Bathers. Washhouses. Men. Women. Total. Men. "Women. Total. 1888-89 68,164 9,084 77,248 69,172 19,111 88,283 165,531 19,383 1889-90 73,407 12,439 85,906 69,830 21,036 90,866 176,7 72 18,793 1890-91 68,296 12,065 80,361 70,718 21,571 92,289 172,650 20,118 1891-92 76,631 11,847 •88,178 70,408 21,198 91,606 179,784 19,639 132 BOROUGH OF PADDINGTON. Building. The Building has been maintained in an efficient state of repair, much of the work being carried out by the employes during the winter months. The Roof of the Ladies' Swimming Bath being in a very defective condition, the Commissioners are considering the question of overhauling the same, and painting the interior. Gallery. A Gallery is now in course of erection in the Ladies' Swimming Bath, at a cost of £34 10s., and the Commissioners believe that it will be much appreciated by those who wish to watch the swimming. Machinery. The old Boilers, which, as mentioned in last Report, have been in constant work for 17 years, developed unmistakeable signs of breaking down, and being so dangerously thin in many places, as to be impossible of repair, the Commissioners, after due consideration, thought they would be following an economical course by laying down a set of three new Boilers. Advertisements were therefore issued, and Tenders with Plans received from twelve firms, extending over all parts of the Country. The deliberations on these occupied a considerable amount of time and attention and resulted in the acceptance of the Tender of Messrs. Rennie & Co., of Greenwich, for three Steel Multi-Tubular Highpressure Boilers of 50 h.p., for the sum of £970. In accepting this Tender, the Commissioners had regard to the reduced length of the Boilers, viz., 14-ft. 10-in. as against 26-ft., thus giving a much larger working space in the Boiler Room, which has hitherto been greatly 133 REPORT, 1891-92. needed. The alteration has involved a re-construction of the Hot and Cold Water Mains, at a cost of £66, and the fitting of an Iron Gallery in the Boiler Room, at a cost of £28 10s. With these improved appliances at their command, the Commissioners consider that it will be a great saving to heat the Swimming Baths by steam, and they are considering the question of introducing a Steam Injector into the First Class Swimming Bath. Heating Baths by Steam. The system adopted last year, of closing the Baths on Sunday Mornings during the months of November, December, January, and February, was again adopted this year, and a loss thereby avoided, without any apparent inconvenience to the public. Sunday Closing- The question of issuing Penny Tickets for Children attending the Board Schools, is occupying the attention of the Commissioners, and they hope that steps may be taken to bring this about, notwithstanding the fact that it must be attended with a loss. School Board Children Penny Tickets The Commissioners cannot close their Report without recording their deep sense of the loss the Parish has sustained by the death of their late colleague, Mr. William Clarke, whose practical knowledge rendered him peculiarly fitted for the position he held as a Commissioner. Death of Mr. Win Clarke. The following Statements are appended to this Report;— Statement of Accounts for the Year ending 31st 134 BOROUGH OF PADDINGTON. March, 1892, with Statement of Outstanding Assets and Liabilities. Number of Tickets in Stock, given out and sold, during the twelve months, which will be found to agree with the first three columns upon the Receipt side of the audited Cash Account. JOHN WILLIAMS, Chairman. William Langridge, Vice-Chairman, Henry Francis Blair, Colonel, R.E., Nathaniel A. Jephson, Henry Robert Mead, Colonel, R.E., Francis Plimley, Robert F. Whur, Commissioners. A. W. J. RUSSELL, Clerk to the Commissioners. 13th June, 1892. 135 REPORT, 1891-924 ADDENDA. REPORT OF ACCOUNTANTS. The following Report was received by the Commissioners, and ordered to be printed as an Addenda to the Report:— (Copy.) 69, Moorgate Street, E.C., 15 June, 1892. To the Chairman, Commissioners of Paddington Baths. Sir, We have to report that we have completed our Examination of the Tickets, and Audit of the Accounts for the Year ending 31st of March, 1892, and finding the same to be correct, we have so Certified the Statement of Accounts for the 12 months. Yours obediently, WILDE & VENABLES, Chartered Accountants. 136 137 BOROUGH OF PADDINGTON. REPORT, 1891-92. Paddington h???and Washhouses. STATEMENT OF ACCOUNTS FOR ??? YEAR ENDING 31ST MARCH, 1892. Dr. RECEIPTS. EXPENDITURE. Cr. Bathers. Washers. Soap, &c. Hire of Hall. Hire of Rooms. Other Receipts. 1d. ??? By Building Charges:— £ s. d. £ s. d. 1891. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ ??? Bone, for Repairs to Boilers 56 11 2 March 26th to 31st 17 15 9 6 1 11½ 1 3 11 25 Bradford, for Diving Stage 16 0 0 Brooks Phillips, for Glass and Paper 2 1 5 April 237 7 4 48 10 4½ 7 8 4 6 13 4 28 5 6 328 Buckingham, for Paper-hanging 1 2 3 May 328 17 11 44 5 11 8 1 11 12 18 4 0 1 0 394 Busby, for Wash-tubs and Fittings 5 17 6 June 529 15 7 41 12 1½ 9 18 5½ 7 1 10 588 Coker, for Bricklaying 0 19 3 July 477 1 9 43 4 6 8 18 1 6 13 4 28 5 6 564 Evan Davis, for Oilman's Goods 31 9 3 August 327 17 9 33 12 5½ 7 12 1 369 ??? Garrard, for Sand and Carting Rubbish 2 5 0 Gay, for Paint 2 14 0 September 362 9 10 34 9 9 7 11 11 6 3 4 0 6 0 411 ??? Lines for Timber 5 0 6 October 155 8 10 43 8 7½ 6 8 7 7 14 6 6 3 4 28 5 6 247 ??? Middleweek, for taking up Floor 14 5 0 November 89 18 11 47 8 4 5 17 9½ 18 7 6 7 3 4 169 ??? Ditto for Sanitary Works (Balance) 49 6 0 December 81 17 8 60 14 1½ 6 13 7½ 32 12 6 6 3 4 0 1 0 188 ??? Ditto for Wash-basin and Urinal Repairs 24 8 0 1892. Ditto for Bricklaying in Boiler Room 34 0 4 January 86 19 8 60 2 2 7 8 10½ 6 13 6 14 8 4 28 5 6 203 ??? Neaverson, for Carpenter's Work 15 19 8 Nettlefold, for Ironmongery 1 3 5 February 82 19 5 55 4 6 6 7 0 32 18 6 6 3 4 0 0 6 184 ??? Pearson, for ditto 9 1 8 March 99 11 0 59 5 7½ 7 0 8½ 12 12 0 12 8 4 0 8 0 191 1??? Richardson, for Lime and Cement, &c. 8 11 2 2,878 1 5 578 0 5½ 90 11 3½ 110 18 6 95 0 2 113 18 6 3,866 14 Rennie, on account of three Boilers, and Alterations to Pipes 646 0 0 September, 1891 To Paddington Vestry, Redemption of Loans and Interest 1.6l7 6 3 Trott, for Valves and Soap-trays 27 5 0 March, 1892 „ Do. do. 1,617 6 3 3,234 11 Whelpdale, for two Washstands and Fittings 3 10 0 957 10 7 Balance at Bank, 26th March, 1891 • •• 317 ??? By Interest and Redemption of Loans:— Do. in hands of Superintendent (Wages a/c), 26 March, '91 7,418 ll??? United Kingdom Temperance and General Provident Institution, Repayment of Principal and Interest on Loans 3,234 12 6 Do. (Petty Cash a/c) 5 2 7 Do. in hands of Money-Takers 1 1 8 6 1 Less Tax 30 9 7 3,204 2 11 Carried forward £7,424 15 Carried forward £4,161 13 6 K 138 139 BOROUGH OF PADDINGTON. REPORT, 1891-92. STATEMENT OF ACCOUNTS FOR THE YEAR ENDING 31ST MARCH, 1892. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. Brought forward £7.424 15 3 Brought forward 4,161 13 6 By Working Expenses:— Salary of Clerk 40 0 0 Do. of Superintendent and Matron 137 12 6 Wages of Fitter, Stokers, Money-Takers, Bath Attendants, Towel Washers, &c. 142 7 4 Grand Junction Water Works Company, for Water 405 8 0 Gas Light and Coke Co., for Gas 190 10 10 Radford, for Coal and Coke 659 14 4 2,575 13 0 Towels, Soap, Soda, Brushes, &c.:— Paton & Charles, for Soap 28 6 0 Evan Davis, for Blue and Washing Powder 8 14 0 May, for Washing Powder 1 15 0 Blind Association, for Brushes 21 8 6 60 3 6 Engineer's Department:— Franklin, for India Rubber, Cotton Waste, Oil, &c. 16 5 0 Feasey, for Boiler Composition 4 10 0 20 15 0 Printing, Stationery and Advertisements:— Morton & Burt, for Printing 4 10 6 Saunders, do. 27 13 6 Bell, for Stationery 10 7 2 Various parties, for Advertisements 7 12 5 Beveridge, for Rubber Stamps 1 15 6 51 19 1 Rates, Taxes, and Insurance:— Paddington Vestry, for Parochial Rates 307 5 10 Royal Insurance Co., Insurance 26 10 0 333 15 10 Law Charges Carried forward £7.424 15 3 Carried forward £7,203 19 11 K 2 140 141 BOROUGH OF PADDINGTON. REPORT, 1891-92. 141 STATEMENT OF ACCOUNTS FOR THE YEAR ENDING 31ST MARCH, 1892. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. Brought forward £7.424 15 3 Brought forward 7,203 19 11 General Charges:— Cettie, for Thermometers 0 11 6 Cook, for Winding and Repairing Clocks 6 6 0 Davies, for Attendants' Dresses, Bathing Drawers, &c. 15 17 8 Ewin, for Cork Mats and Matting 9 16 8 Kelly, for Directory 1 5 0 London and County Bank, for Country Cheque 0 0 Povey, for Sweeping Chimneys 6 15 0 Provident Clerks' Guarantee Association, for Superintendent's Guarantee 3 15 Todd, for Uniforms 16 16 0 Wilde & Venables, for Auditing Accounts 15 15 0 76 18 4 Petty Cash Disbursements 16 16 4 0 Balance at Bankers, 31st March, 1892 18 0 1 Do. in hands of Superintendent (Wages Account) 4 12 8 Do. do. (Petty Cash Account) 3 18 7 Do. in hands of Money-Takers 1 1 8 127 13 0 £7,424 15 3 £7,424 15 3 We have examined the above Account with the Books and Vouchers, and certify it to be correct. We have also verified the balances at the Bank. 09, Moorgate Street, WILDE * VENABLES ~ o Chartered Accountants, i^th June, 1892. Examined and found correct:— 1. BRUNEI., F. CALDER-TURNER, F. C. BAUM, Auditors of j Parochial Accounts 31 May, 1892 142 Paddington Public Baths and Washhouses. Balance Sheet, 31st March, 1892. BOROUGH OF PADDINGTON. LIABILITIES. ASSETS. £ s. d. £ s. d. To Sundry Creditors:— £ s. d. By Balance at Bankers 118 0 1 „ Radford 163 7 3 „ Cash in hands of Superintendent— Balance of Wages Account 4 12 8 „ Gas Light Co. 74 11 5 „ Grand Junction Water-Co. 85 1 4 „ Middleweek 42 16 8 Balance of Petty Cash Account 3 19 2 8 11 10 „ Evan Davis 4 11 9 „ Paton & Charles 7 12 0 „ Cash in Money-Takers' Offices 1 1 8 „ Bell 1 15 7 „ Rent due by Mr. Whiteley 28 5 6 „ Pearson 3 1 1 „ Value of Soap on hand 5 18 7 „ Feasey 2 5 0 „ „ Washing Powder on hand 3 8 6 „Gay 0 19 0 „ „ Blue on hand 0 7 6 9 14 7 „ Franklin 10 13 8 „Wilde & Venables 15 15 0 „ Saunders 3 10 6 165 13 8 „ Povey 2 18 0 „ Queen's Taxes 71 8 0 Balance of Liabilities 696 12 7 „ Rennie 372 0 0 £862 6 3 £862 6 3 REPORT, 1891-92. 143 The following Tables show— 1.—The number of Bathers' Tickets in Stock, given out, and sold during the year. 2.—The Liabilities of the Commissioners on March 25th, 1892, in respect of money borrowed under the authority of the Vestry, and with the sanction of the Local Government Board. 144 145 BOROUGH OF PADDINGTON. REPORT, 1891-92. statement showing the number of tickets in stock, given oct, and sold, From 26th March. 1801, to 31st March, 1892. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 No. Price. In Stock, 25th Mar., 1891. Added to Stock. Totals of Columns Nos. 1 and 2, 4 and 5. Given Out. In Stock, 31st March, 1892. Remaining in Money-Takers' Office, 25th Mar., 1891. Sold. Remaining in Office, 31st Mar., 1892. Amount Received. £ s. d. 1 6d. Gents. 1,000 28,000 29,000 24,000 5,000 370 24,027 343 600 13 6 2 3d. „ 1,000 ... 1,000 1,000 ... 399 523 876 6 10 9 3 2d. „ ... 46,000 46,000 44,000 2,000 852 44.477 375 370 12 10 4 1d. „ ... 2,000 2,000 2,000 ... 263 1,381 882 5 15 1 5 8d. „ 5,000 12,000 17,000 14,000 3,000 693 14,244 449 474 16 0 6 4d. „ 3,000 12,000 15,000 13,000 2,000 968 13.247 721 220 15 8 7 2d. ,, 4,000 18,000 22,000 22,000 ... 3i7 21,690 627 180 15 0 8 10 for 5/ ,, 5,000 5,000 10,000 7,000 3,000 430 7,110 320 177 15 0 9 10,, 2/6 ,, ... 6,000 6,000 3,000 3,000 660 2,720 940 34 0 0 10 100 „1/8 „ 10,000 ... 10,000 6,000 4,000 670 6,070 600 126 9 2 11 £3 3s.„ 250 ... 250 ... 250 ... ... ... — 12 6d. Ladies. 1,000 5,000 6,000 6,000 ... 183 5.745 438 143 12 6 13 3d. „ 2,000 ... 2,000 ... 2,000 389 22 367 0 5 6 14 2d. „ 4,000 10,000 14,000 14,000 ... 446 13.613 833 113 8 10 15 1. „ 3,000 ... 3,000 2,000 1,000 625 1,818 807 7 11 6 16 8d. „ 1,000 4,000 5.000 4,000 1,000 222 3.567 655 118 18 0 17 10 for 5/ „ 4,000 3,000 7,000 5,000 2,000 350 4.930 420 123 5 0 18 100 ,,41/8 „ 5.000 ... 5.000 1,000 4,000 1,010 2,010 ... 41 17 6 19 3s „ 250 ... 250 ... 250 ... ... ... 41 1½. Boys' 8,000 ... 8,000 1,000 7,000 410 950 260 5 18 9 100 for 10/- ... ... ... ... ... ... 200 ... 1 0 0 42 10 for 2/6 Ladies ... 1,000 1,000 1,000 ... 500 840 660 10 10 0 43 2½d. Gents. ... 14,000 14,000 10.000 4,000 900 10,100 800 105 4 2 44 100 for 33/4 ... 2,000 2,000 1,000 1,000 • • • 500 500 8 6 8 179,784 27 Laundry. 3,000 21,000 24,000 20,000 4,000 142 19.639 503 2,878 1 5 Wash-houses 578 0 5½ 668 11 9 Soap to Bathers 66 7 10 Soap to Washers 10 17 11½ £3,546 13 2 Powder to do. 6 1 11 N. A. JEPHSON. Blue to do. 7 3 7 £668 11 9 146 147 BOROUGH OF PADDINGTON. REPORT, 1891-92. Paddington Publi laths and Washhouses. Liabilities of the Commissioners for Public Baths and Wa uses, at 31 st March, 1892, in respect of Money borrowed under the Authority of the Vestry of Paddingto d sanctioned by the Local Government Board. BORROWED. REPAYABLE. Rate of Interest per cent. Amount of Loan. PRINCIPAL. INTEREST. TOTAL OF PRINCIPAL AND INTEREST. Loans Date. For In Half Years Half-yearly Instalment including Interest Repaid to 31st March, 1892. Remaining Unpaid at' 31st March, 1892. Paid to 31st March, 1892. Remaining Unpaid at 31st March, 1892. Repaid to 31st March, 1892. ning Unpaid at 25th March, 1892. 1 4th Mar., 1872 Freehold Site 50 £300 2 5 £4 9 0 £9.000 £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. 4,197 9 8 4,802 10 4 4,806 2 10 1.199 18 0 9.003 12 6 6,002 8 4 2 3rd June, 1873 Building and Furnishing the Establishment. 50 166 14 8 do. 5,000 2,331 18 1 2,668 1 11 2,670 1 11 666 11 5 5.002 0 0 3,334 13 4 3 30th Aug.,1873 50 166 14 8 do. 5.000 2,331 18 1 2,668 1 11 2,670 1 11 666 11 5 5.002 0 0 3,334 13 4 4 1st Dec., 1873 50 166 14 8 do 5,000 2,331 18 1 2,668 1 11 2,670 1 11 666 11 5 5,002 0 0 3.334 13 4 5 3rd Feb., 1874 50 166 14 8 do. 5,000 2,331 18 1 2,668 1 11 2,670 1 11 666 11 5 5.002 0 0 3.334 13 4 6 2nd Mar., 1874 50 166 14 8 do. 5,000 2,331 18 1 2,668 1 11 2,670 1 11 666 11 5 5.002 0 0 3.334 13 4 7 4th May, 1874 50 283 8 11 do. 8,500 3,964 4 5 4.535 15 7 4.539 3 1 1.133 2 9 8,503 7 6 5.668 18 4 8 12th Oct., 1874 50 200 1 7 do. 6,000 2,798 6 1 3,201 13 11 3.204 1 5 799 17 9 002 7 6 4,001 11 8 1,617 6 3 48,500 22,619 10 7 25,880 9 5 25,899 16 11 6,465 15 7 48,519 7 6 32,346 5 0 £48,500 0 0 £32,365 12 6 £80 865 12 6 148 BOROUGH OF PADDINGTON. XLII.—SCHEDULE OF THE PAROCHIAL CHARITIES. This Schedule gives the names and addresses of the Trustees, the description and income of the Property, and the mode of distributing the Funds; prepared by the Vestry Clerk, pursuant to the following Section of the "Metropolis Local Management Act, 1855" (18 and 19 Vic. c. 120):— "199.—Every such Vestry as aforesaid shall "cause to be made out once at least in every year, "a list of the several freehold, copyhold, and lease"hold estates, and of all charitable foundations and "bequests if any belonging to the parish, and under "the control of the Vestry, the list to contain a "true and detailed account of the place where such "estate or charitable foundation may be situate, or "in what mode and security such bequest may be "invested, specifying also the yearly rental of each, "and the particular appropriation thereof, together "with the names of the persons partaking of their "benefit (except where such benefit shall be allotted "to the poor of the parish generally), and to what REPORT, 1891-92. 149 "amount in each case, and also stating the name "and description of the persons in whom such "estates are vested, and the names and description "of the trustees for each charity; and such lists "shall be open for the inspection of the ratepayers "at the office of the Vestry Clerk at the same time "with the accounts when audited, according to the "provisions of this Act." BOROUGH OF PADDINGTON. REPORT, 1891-92. Name of Charity. Names and Descriptions of the Trustees for the Current Year. Detailed Description of the Property. Tames and Description of the Persons in whom the Property is vested. Present Annual Income of the Property. Mode of Distribution. Freehold Estate Abbott, Rev. W., M.A., 57, Sussex Gardens, W. Charles M. Roche,98, Glo'ster Terrace, W., solicitor Charles Braid, Braidswood, Linden Park, Tunbridge Wells. Freehold Ground Rents on Nos. 75 to 89, Lancaster Gate (both inclusive), and Ornamental Garden In closure By a deed dated 16th March, 1871, the ground rents of the estate were vested in the Rev. J. Moorhouse (now Bishop of Manchester) Benjamin Shaw (deceased) Charles M. Roche, solicitor R. C. Greatorex, (deceased) Charles Braid Wm. Ellis (deceased) £620 The Scheme of the 12th December, 1837, which regulates the Charity, provides that three-fifths are to be paid to the Chairmen of the Parochial National and Infant Schools in aid of such Schools, one-fifth to be applied in apprenticing Sons and Daughters of Poor Parishioners, and the remaining one-fifth in the distribution of bread, cheese, coals, blankets, and other necessary articles Freehold Ground Rents on Nos 4 to 36 on tho east side, and 7 to 27 on the west side of Hatherley Grove, and Nos. 10 and 12, Westbourne Grove £420 Harris, Sir George David, 32, Inverness Terrace, W. Farmer, James, J.P., 6, Porchester Gate. (1 Vacancy). Enfranchised Copyholds William Urquhart, 107, Portsdown Road, varnish manufacturer William Naylor, 107, Clifton Hill, St. John's Wood John H. Hunter, 40, ter Crescent Robert Frederick Whur, 28, Craven Terrace, tailor John Williams, 171, Portsdown Road, contractor Ground Rents on Nos. 82 to 87, Harrow Road (both inclusive) By a deed dated 10th Oct., 1873, the ground rents of the estate were vested in Henry Morris Kemshead, J.P. (deceased) John Wilson (deceased) Robt. Evans (deceased) Wm. Urquhart, varnish manufacturer Wm. Naylor John H. Hunter £280 Same as that of Freehold Estate (pursuant to Order of the Court of Chancery, dated 12th December, 1837) Dividends on £10,201 6s. 11d.—3 Cent. Consols The Paymaster-General on behalf of Chancery Division of the High Courtof Justice £298 7s. Sd. 150 151 152 153 BOROUGH OF PADDINGTON. REPORT, 1891-92 Name of Charity. Names and Description of the Trustees for the Current Year. Detailed Description of the Property. Names and Description of the Persons in whom the Property is Vested. Present Annual Income of the Property. Mode of Distribution. Almshouse Charity (As settled by scheme in Chancery dated 7th August, 1871) Rev. Walter Abbott, M.A. (as Vicar of Paddington) Rev. Alfred Scott (as Vicar of St. Mary's Paddington) James Corry Sherrard, J.P., 7, Oxford Square Edward Parker Young, 30, Westbourne Square, surgeon (1 Vacancy) The site of the Girls and Infants Schools of St. Mary Ground Rents on Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, and 5, Romilly Terrace, Harrow Road, (Now 111, 113, 115, 117 & 119, Harrow Road and Engine House, Hermitage Street, and Dividends on £350 14s. 8d., including £160 2s. 2d. (formerly King's Charity)—3 per cent. Consols The Charity Commissioners None To be held for use of such Schools. £190 £50 per Annum to the Treasurer of the Girls' and Infants' Schools in St. Mary's, Paddington, in aid of such Schools, so long as such payment does not cause a reduction in or disallowance of, any Government grant in aid of elementary education; should it do so the Trustees are to be at liberty to apply to the Judge in Chambers, or to the Charity Commissioners, as to the disposition of the said £50 per annum £10 10s. 4d. Augustus Frederick Smith's Bequest (under his will, proved 19 March, 1881) Rev. Walter Abbott, M.A. (as Vicar of Paddington) Col. H. F. Blair, R.E., 1, Clarendon Place Richard Henry Jackson,128, Elgin Avenue, victualler (as Churchwardens of Paddington) Deputy-Surg.-Gen. Charles Moore Jessop, 98, Sutherland Avenue Col. Henry R. Mead, R.E., 83, Glo'ster Terrace (as Overseers of Paddington) Dividends on £9,985 3s. 8d.—3 per Cent. Consols The Charity Commissioners £299 l1s. 1d. (paid in the first instance to the Trustees of the Almshouse Charity) Three Pensions of £12 per annum and Eleven Pensions of £10 per annum to decayed Inhabitants of the age of 65 or upwards, who shall have resided for the space of 15 years in this Parish, and shall not have been in receipt of relief from Poor's Rates Distributed amongst such or so many poor women (not being married at the time of the receipt thereof) above sixty years of age, resident in Paddington, and in such sums and proportions, not being more than £20 per annum, and not less than £10 per annum, for such persons as the Trustees shall in their discretion think fit and proper Marion Mayne's Charity Rev. Walter Abbott (as Vicar of Paddington) Rev. Alfred Scott (as Vicar of St. Mary's, Paddington) Col. H. F. Blair, R.E., 1, Clarendon Place Richard Henry Jackson,128, Elgin Avenue, victualler (as Churchwardens of Paddington) E. E. Cooper, 8, Howley Place Dr. Arthur Prince, 62, Harrow Road (as Churchwardens of St. Mary's, Paddington) Dividends on £5,516 7s. 7d.—3 per Cent. Consols The Charity Commissioners £165 9s. 8d. By the Scheme approved by the Master of the Rolls on the 22nd day of June, 1872, the Trustees are to apply the sum of £5 per annum in keeping in repair the tablets, tombstones, and gravestones of Marion Mayne and others; to pay the Vestry of the Parish of Paddington the sum of £35 per annum towards the maintenance in good order of Paddington Green; to distribute to poor deserving residents of Paddington a sum not exceeding £50 in any one year, and to grant annuities not exceeding six shillings per week each to poor aged persons, residents in Paddington. l 154 155 BOROUGH OF PADDINGTION. REPORT, 1891-92 Name of Charity. Names and Descriptions of the Trustees for the Current Year. Detailed Description of the Property. Names and Descriptions of the Persons in whom the Property is vested. Present Annual Income of the Property. Mode of Distribution. Abourne's Charity Col. H. F. Blair, R.E., 1, Clarendon Place Richard Henry Jackson, 128, Elgin Avenue, victualler (as Churchwardens of Paddington) Dividends on £300 reduced Bank Annuities The Charity Commissioners £9 The Donor directed the sum to be distributed by the Churchwardens of Paddington in Meat and Bread to poor Parishioners Johnson's Charity Col. H. F. Blair, R.E., 1, Clarendon Place Richard Henry Jackson,128, Elgin Avenue, victualler (as Churchwardens of Paddington) One year's quit rent, issuing out of Nos. 14, 15, 16, and 17, Paddington Green, and payable annually on St. Thomas's Day (21 Dec.) The Churchwardens for the time being £1 Distributed by the Churchwardens to the Poor in small sums XLIII.—ACCOUNTS OF THE PAROCHIAL CHARITIES. The following Accounts of the several Charities were presented to the Vestry by the Trustees, and ordered by Vestry to be included in the Annual Report of the Vestry:— L 2 156 157 BOROUGH OF PADDINGTON. REPORT, 1891-92. PADDINGTON FREEHOLD CHARITY ESTATE ACCOUNT FOR THE YEAR ENDING DEC. 31ST, 1891. 1891. RECEIPTS. £ s. d. 1891. EXPENDITURE. £ s. d. To Amount of Rents received 1,069 11 5 By Paid Budd, Son, & Brodie, a year's Tithe Rent Charge on Premises in „ Ditto, received per the Solicitor of the Trustees, being sums paid by them to Mr. G. Lockyer, for professional services, and repaid to them 10 10 0 Westbourne Grove, to April, 1891 0 12 9 „ „ Mr. E. T. R. Wilde, for Auditing the Accounts of the Trustees for the year 1890 3 3 0 „ „ Solicitor of the Trustees, for Law Expenses 11 5 2 „ „ Clerk to Trustees, a year's Salary to Christmas, 1891 30 0 0 „ „ Messrs Morton & Burt, for Printing 2 16 6 „ Cash carried to Apprenticing Fund Account 206 8 10 „ „ „ to Bread and Cheese „ 206 8 l0 „ „ „ to Charity School „ 619 6 4 £1,080 1 5 (Signed) E. T. R. WILDE, Auditor. £1,080 1 5 The Apprenticing Fund Account. 1891. £ s. d. 1891. £ s. d. To Amount brought from General Account 206 8 10 By Balance overpaid 38 12 3 „ Paid First Moiety of Premium with Two Apprentices 25 0 0 „ „ Second „ „ „ Ten „ 125 0 0 „ „ Solicitor for preparing Indentures of Apprenticeship 13 16 6 „ „ for Advertisements 1 5 0 ,, „ Mr. Walker, for Enquiries re Responsibility of proposed Masters and Mistresses, &c. 1 5 0 „ Balance in hand 1 10 1 £206 8 10 £206 8 10 The Bread and Cheese Fund Account. (Devoted to purchase of Coals and Blankets.) 1891. £ s. d. 1891. £ s. d. To Balance in hand, brought from last year's Account 211 9 0 By Paid Messrs. Radford, for 150 tons of Coals, at 17s. 8d. per ton 132 10 0 Amount brought from General Account 206 8 10 „ ,, Mr. Wm. Boyer, for delivery of Coals at abodes of recipients of Tickets 31 2 2 „ ,, Mr. Matthews, for distributing Blankets 1 8 0 „ ,, Mr. G. Harnden and another, for attendance at the Parish Wharf to deliver Coals, and for keeping account of same, &c. 8 0 0 „ ,, Carmen, for delivering Coals at Parish Wharf 0 10 6 „ Balance in hand 244 7 2 £417 17 10 £417 17 l0 158 159 BOROUGH OF PADDINGTON. REPORT, 1891-92. PADDINGTON FREEHOLD CHARITY ACCOUNT—Continued. The Charity School Fund Account. 1891. £ s. d. 1891. £ s. d. To Balance in hand brought from last Account 13 5 8 By Paid to the Chairmen of the several School Committees 626 18 11 „ Amount brought from General Account 619 6 4 Balance in hand 5 13 1 £632 12 0 £632 12 0 PADDINGTON ENFRANCHISED CHARITY ESTATE ACCOUNT, FOR THE YEAR ENDING 31st DECEMBER, 1891. 1891. £ s. d. 1891. £ s. d. To Amount of Rents received daring the year 273 0 0 By Cash Paid Mr. E. T. R. Wilde, for Professional Services in Auditing the Accounts of the Trustees for the year ending 31st Dec., 1890 •» 3 3 0 „ Dividends on £10,201 6s. lid. Consolidated 3 per cent. Annuities 273 10 4 7 0 ,, „ Clerk to the Trustees, a Year's Salary to Christmas, 1891 . 30 0 0 „ „ Solicitor to the Trustees, for Law Expenses 1 1 0 ,, Cash carried to Apprenticing Fund Account . 101 19 11 ,, „ ,, to Bread and Cheese „ . 101 19 11 ,, „ ,, to Charity School ,, . 305 19 6 £546 10 4 (Signed) E. T. R. WILDE, Auditor. £546 10 4 The Apprenticing Fund Account. 1891. £ s. d. 1891. £ s. d. 101 19 11 By Balance overpaid 23 6 2 20 1 3 „ „ Paid 1st Moiety of Premiums with Seven Apprentices 87 10 0 „ „ for Advertisements 1 5 0 „ „ Mr. J. Walker, for Enquiry Fees, &c. 1 5 0 „ „ Solicitor, for Preparation of Indentures of Apprenticeship 8 16 0 £122 1 2 £122 1 2 160 161 BOROUGH OF PADDINGTON. REPORT, 1891-92. 161 PADDINGTON ENFRANCHISED JHARITY ESTATE ACCOUNT.—Continued. The Bread and Jheese Fund Account. (Devoted to the Purchase f Coals and Blankets). 1891. £ s. d. 1891. £ s. d. 129 12 8 By Cash paid Messrs. D. Radford & Co., for 80 tons of Coals, at 17s. 8d 70 13 4 ,, Amount brought from General Account 101 19 11 „ „ Mr. W. Boyer, for delivery of Coals at abodes of recipients of Tickets 15 11 1 „ „ Mr. Matthews, for distributing Blankets 1 1 0 „ „ Mr. G. Harnden and another, for attendance at the Parish Wharf to deliver Coals, and for keeping an account of same, &c. 4 0 0 „ „ Carmen, for delivering Coals at the Parish Wharf 0 10 0 Balance in hand 139 17 2 £231 12 7 £231 12 7 The Charity School Fund Account. 1891. £ s. d. 1891. £ s. d. To Balance in hand brought from last Account 6 19 9 By Cash paid to the Chairmen of the several School Committees 310 1 7 „ Amountbrought from General Account 305 19 6 2 11 8 £312 19 3 £312 19 3 THE ALMSHOUSE GROUND CHARITY ACCOUNT FOR THE YEAR ENDING 31ST DECEMBER, 1891. 1891. £ s. d. 1891. £ s. d. £ s. d. To Balance in hand 99 2 5 By Cash paid Pensions, Five Months to the 1st day of June, „ Rents received 185 4 3 1891 3 at £1 15 0 0 11 at 16/8 45 16 8 „ Dividends received on £350 14s. 8d. Consolidated 3 per cent. Annuities 9 12 8 60 16 8 „ „ Ditto, Five Months to the 2nd day of Nov., 1891, 3 at £1 15 0 0 10 at 16/8 41 3 4 56 13 4 „ „ Ditto, Two Months to the 4th day of Jan., 1892, 3 at £1 6 0 0 12 at 16/8 20 0 0 26 0 0 „ „ Morton & Burt, for Printing 1 3 0 „ „ Treasurer of the Girls' and Infants' Schools of St. Mary's, Paddington, as compensation under Clause 12 of the Scheme, One Year to Michaelmas, 1891 50 0 0 „ „ Clerk to the Trustees a year's Salary to the 7th August, 1891 10 0 0 „ „ For insertion of Advertisements re Pensions 4 2 9 Balance in hand 85 3 7 293 19 4 £293 19 4 162 163 BOROUGH OF PADDINGTON. REPORT, 1891-92. THE MARION MAYNE CHARITY ACCOUNT FOR THE YEAR ENDING 31ST DECEMBER, 1891. 1891. £ s. d. 1891. £ s. d. £ s. d. To Balance in hand brought from last Account 72 0 4 By Cash paid Pensions, Four Months to the 4th day of May, 1891— 4 at £1 6s. 20 16 0 „ Dividends received on £5,516 7s. 7d. Consolidated 3 per cent. Annuities 151 14 0 4 at 17/4 13 17 4 „ Received of the Clerk to the Trustees, being amount drawn in favour of Pensioners, but not paid to them, owing to decease and other Causes 4 15 4 „ „ Ditto, Three Months to the 3rd day of Aug., 1891— 34 13 4 3 at £1 6s. 11 14 0 4 at 17/4 10 8 0 „ Ditto, Three Months to the 2nd day of Nov., 1891— 22 2 0 3 at £1 6s. 11 14 0 3 at 17/4 7 16 0 „ „ Ditto, Two Months to the 4th day of Jan., 1892— 19 10 0 3 at £1 6s. 7 16 0 6 at 17/4 10 8 0 18 4 0 „ „ Matthews, for Visiting and Reporting upon Pensioners 1 1 0 „ „ Morton & Burt, for Printing 0 13 0 „ „ Clerk to the Trustees, a year's Salary to the 4th day of September, 1891 10 0 0 „ „ Vestry of Paddington, a Year's Maintenance of Paddington Green, for the year 1891 35 0 0 „ „ For insertion of Advertisements, re Pensions 5 1 3 Balance in hand 82 5 1 £228 9 8 £228 9 8 SMITH'S BEQUEST (ALMSHOUSE GROUND TRUSTEES). 1891. £ s. d. 1891. £ s. d. To Balance in hand brought from last year's Account 247 9 5 Jan. 19. By Cash paid to the Governors of " Smith's Bequest," on account of Pensions 200 0 0 „ Amount received from the Charity Commissioners, Dividends on £9,985 3s. 8d., Consols at 3 per cent. per annum 274 11 8 July 23. By Ditto ditto ditto 200 0 0 Balance in hand 122 1 1 £522 1 1 £522 1 1 SMITH'S BEQUEST (GOVERNORS'). 1891. £ s. d. 1891. Feb. 2 By Cash paid Pensions, as under, for half-year to August, 1891, viz.:— £ s. d. To Balance in hand brought from last year's Account 79 4 9 1 at £10 £10 0 0 „ Cash received from the Trustees of the Almshouse Ground Estate (Smith's Bequest) 400 0 0 4 at £7 10s. 30 0 0 20 at £5 100 0 0 3 at £4 3s. 4d 12 10 0 1 at £4 10s. 4 10 0 157 0 0 By Cash, Paid Gratuities 2 10 0 July 31. „ „ Pensions, as under, for half-year to February, 1892 VIZ.:- 1 at £10 £10 0 0 3 at £7 10s. 22 10 0 21 at £5 105 0 0 4 at £3 6s. 8d 13 6 8 150 16 8 10 0 0 By Clerk to the Governors, a year's Salary to 29th October,1891 2 2 0 „ Matthews, for visiting Pensioners 1 9 9 „ Morton & Burt, for Printing 0 4 2 „ Bankers, for stamps for Cheque Book 115 2 2 Balance in hand £479 4 9 £479 4 9 164 165 BOROUGH OF PADDINGTON. REPORT, 1891-92. ABOURNE AND JOHNSON'S CHARITIES. Colonel Blair and Mr. R. H. Jackson, Churchwardens, 1891. 1891. £ s. d. 1891. £ s. d. to April. Balance in hand 4 7 0 Paid Messrs. McCorquodale & Co., for Printing Book of Tickets 0 8 6 Received—Johnson's Charity 1 15 0 7 18 0 6 3 9 Balance in hand 3 19 3 £12 5 9 £12 5 9 1892. 1892. to April. 3 19 3 Paid Mr. Ginger, for Meat 8 16 0 Received—Johnson's Charity 1 0 0 Balance in hand 4 8 3 8 5 0 £13 4 3 £13 4 3 SIMMOND'S CHARITY. 1891. £ s. d. £ s. d. to April. 3 11 0 3 11 0 1892. 1892. to April. 3 11 0 Jan. 8. Paid 30 old women of Paddington, at 10s. 6d. each 15 15 0 Received from Charity Commissioners 16 10 0 Balance in hand 4 6 0 £20 1 0 £20 1 0 Appendix No. 1. Borough of Paddington. SANITARY REPORT FOR THE YEAR 1891. BY JAMES STEVENSON, M.D., Medical Officer of Health. Borough of Paddington. REPORT of the MEDICAL OFFICER OF HEALTH For the Year 1891. To the Vestry of the Parish of Paddington. Gentlemen, I beg to lay before you the following Report on the Health of the Parish of Paddington during the year 1891:— Births and Deaths. During the fifty-two weeks of the registration year ending 2nd January, 1892, 2,952 births and 2,331 deaths were registered in Paddington. Births. Of the 2,952 births, comprising 1,536 male and 1,416 female children, 2,420 occurred in St. Mary's and 532 in St. Johns Sub-district. M 170 The proportion of males to females among the children born in the Parish was 100 males to 92 females, whereas in the Metropolis it was 100 males to 97 females. The births were most numerous during the first and least so in the fourth quarter of the year. The ratio of births to the entire population of the Parish was 1 to every 40 inhabitants, or 25.1 per 1,000 inhabitants of all ages. In St. Mary's Sub-district the ratio of births to the population was 1 to every 35 inhabitants, or 28.8 per 1,000 living. In St. John's the ratio of births to population was 1 to 63, or 15.8 per 1,000 inhabitants. Some of the preceding particulars are shown in the subjoined table:— Sub-Districts. Enumerated Population, (unrevised.) Births. Ratio of Births to Population. Rate per 1,000. St. Mary's 84,156 2,420 1 to 35 28.8 St. John's 33,682 532 1 to 63 15.8 Paddington 117,838 2,952 1 to 40 25.1 The Birth-rate in London was 31.8 „ „ England & Wales was 31.4 Deaths. The total number of deaths registered in Paddington during the year was 2,331. Of this number, 278 171 were of non-parishioners who died in St. Mary's Hospital, 43 were of non-parishioners who died in the Children's Hospital, and 5 were of non-parishioners who died in the Lock Hospital, making a total of 326 non-parishioners who died in the Parish. Deducting these non-parishioners, it will be seen that 2,005 parishioners died actually in Paddington. To this number must be added the deaths of 105 parishioners in extra-parochial hospitals and public institutions, making a corrected total of 2,110—1,000 males and 1,104 females—equivalent to an annual death-rate of 17.9 per 1,000 inhabitants. The natural increase of population from the excess of births over deaths was 842, as compared with 797 in the previous year. Of the 2,110 deaths, 1,590 occurred in St. Mary's and 520 in St. John's Sub-district. The subjoined table shows that the deaths were most numerous in the first, and least so in the third quarter of the year. Quarter. St. Mary's. St. John's. Paddington. First 447 154 601 Second 397 152 549 Third 370 107 477 Fourth 376 107 483 Total 1,590 520 2,110 m 2 172 In the Public Institutions in the Parish there were 695 deaths, viz., 56 in the Workhouse, 201 in the Paddington Infirmary, 62 in the Children's Hospital, 371 in St. Mary's Hospital, and 5 in the Lock Hospital. The 56 deaths in the Workhouse—23 males and 33 females, and the 201 deaths in the Paddington Infirmary—109 males and 92 females—being regarded as those of parishioners, are included in the 1,590 deaths in St. Mary's Sub-district; 278 of the deaths in St. Mary's Hospital, 43 of the deaths in the Children's Hospital, and the 5 deaths in the Lock Hospital, were of non-parishioners, and are therefore not dealt with in this Report. The following table shows the ratio of deaths to the population, together with the death-rate per 1,000 of the population of the parish and of its two Subdistricts :— Sub-Districts. Enumerated Population, (unrevised.) Deaths. Ratio of Deaths to Population. Death Rate per 1,000. St. Mary's 84,156 1,.590 1 to 53 18.9 St. John's 33,682 520 1 to 65 15.4 Paddington 117,838 2,110 1 to 56 17.9 In 1891 the Death.rate was in London ... ... 21.4 Do. do. in Edinburgh ... 21.6 Do. do. in Glasgow ... 25*3 Do. do. in Dublin ... 26*5 Do. do. in England & Wales 20*2 Do. do. in Paddington ... 17'9 173 The death-rate from all causes in each one of the five groups of districts into which London is divided is shown as under:— Per 1,000 Inhabitants. North Districts 20.0 West „ 19.5 South „ 20.2 East „ 23.9 Central „ 27.6 The subjoined figures showing the number of deaths from all causes in Paddington during each of the last ten years may be more intelligible to some than when expressed in the form of a death-rate:— Tears. No. of Deaths. 1882 1,766 1883 1,762 1884 1,802 1885 1,877 1886 1,909 1887 1,785 1888 1,916 1889 1,664 1890 2,104 1891 2,110 When considering these figures, not only must the annual increase of population be borne in mind, but also the fact that since 1885 the deaths of parishioners in out-lying Public Institutions have been included. The 105 deaths of parishioners—83 from St. Mary's Sub-district and 22 from St. John's — which occurred in 1891 in the following extraParochial Hospitals and Institutions, are throughout 174 this Report dealt with in the same manner as if they had actually taken place in the Parish, and are assigned in the Tables to the Sub-districts from which the deceased were admitted. These 105 deaths constituted 5.0 per cent. of the total corrected deaths. Hospitals and Institutions. Deaths. Hospitals and Institutions. Deaths. Brompton Hospital 5 University CollegeHospital 6 Cancer Hospital, Fulham Road 5 Victoria Hospital. 2 Western Fever Hospital 1 Cancer Hospital, Osnaburgh Street 1 West London Hospital 1 Westminster Hospital 2 Central London Throat Hospital 1 Banstead Asylum 6 Bethesda House, Kennington Road 1 Charing Cross Hospital 2 Children's Hospital, Great Ormond Street 2 Colney Hatch Asylum 9 Grove Hall Asylum 2 King's College Hospital 2 Han well Asylum 10 Lying-in Hospital, End ell Street 1 Hoxton House Asylum 5 Kensington Infirmary 1 Middlesex Hospital 9 Leavesden Asylum 2 North-Western Fever Hospital 10 Lunatic Asylum, Friern Barnet 1 Royal Chest Hospital 1 Marylebone Workhouse 1 St. Bartholomew's Hospital 3 Peckham House Asylum 1 St. Elizabeth's Hospital 1 Police Station, Broadway Hammersmith 1 St. George's Hospital 8 St. Thomas' Hospital 1 In Hyde Park 1 Mortality at different Ages. Sub-Districts. Under 1 Year. Under 5 Years. G5 Years and Upwards. Percentage of Deaths of Infants under 1 year to Registered Births. Percentage of Deaths of Children under 5 years of Total Deaths. St. Mary's 364 519 437 15.0 32.6 St. John's 73 110 163 13.7 21.2 Paddington 437 629 600 14.8 29.8 175 During the year there were 437 deaths of infants under one year of age, 629 of children under five years of age, and 600 of persons aged 65 years and upwards. The rate of infantile mortality in Paddington was 148 per 1,000 registered births. In London the rate was 154, and in the 27 largest provincial towns it ranged from 137 in Brighton to 227 in Preston. The 629 deaths of children under 5 years of age constituted 29'8 per cent. of the total deaths. 158 of these deaths were due to one or other of the seven principal zymotic diseases, of which 135 occurred in St. Mary's, and 23 in St. John's Sub-district. Zymotic Diseases. The number of deaths from the seven principal preventable (zymotic) diseases was 201, and was equivalent to an annual rate of 1.7 per 1,000 inhabitants. In London, the zymotic death-rate was equivalent to an annual rate of 2.30 per 1,000 inhabitants. In the 27 largest provincial towns, it ranged from 1.05 in Brighton to 3.77 in Preston. Small-pox caused no death in Paddington, nor did any case come under the notice of the Sanitary Department. In London only 8 deaths occurred, being the sixth successive year in which London has been practically free from the disease. Measles caused only 7 deaths—6 in St. Mary s and 1 in St. John's Sub-district—equivalent to an annual 176 rate of 0.6 per 1,000 inhabitants. The number of deaths from this disease during the preceding year was 77. In London there were 1,807 deaths, equivalent to a rate of 0'43 per 1,000 inhabitants, the average annual rate during the preceding decennium (18811890) having been 0.64. Scarlet Fever caused 7 deaths—5 in St. Mary's and 2 in St. John's Sub-district—equivalent to an annual rate of 0.06 per 1,000 inhabitants, as compared with 0.05 in the preceding year. 259 cases—209 in St. Mary's and 50 in St. John's Sub-district—were notified during the year to the Sanitary Department. 149 cases—124 from St. Mary's and 25 from St. John's Sub-district—were removed to Hospital, 110 cases—85 in St. Mary's and 25 in St. John's Subdistrict—being treated at home. In London there were 589 deaths, equivalent to an annual rate of 0.14 per 1,000 inhabitants, the average annual rate during the preceding decennium having been 0.34. Diphtheria caused 27 deaths in Paddington—19 in St. Mary's and 8 in St. John's Sub-district—as compared with 45 in the preceding year. The rate was 0.23 per 1,000 inhabitants. 184 cases—159 in St. Mary's and 25 in St. John's Sub-district—were notified to the Sanitary Department. 71 of these cases—59 from St. Mary's and 12 177 from St. John's Sub-district—were removed to Hospital. 113 cases—100 in St. Mary's and 13 in St. John's Sub-district—were treated at home. All the houses in which the deaths occurred were carefully inspected, attention being specially directed in each case to the condition of the water supply and to the soundness of the house-drain, as proved either by the water-test, or by the smoke-test, or by the peppermint-test. In the large majority of cases defects of some sort were discovered, and were subsequently made good. The localities in which deaths from this disease occurred are shewn in Table VA. In London there were 1,361 deaths, equivalent to an annual rate of 0.32 per 1,000 inhabitants, the average annual rate during the preceding decennium having been 0.26. Whooping Cough caused 67 deaths—57 in St. Mary's and 10 in St. John's Sub-district—equivalent to an annual rate of 0.6 per 1,000 inhabitants, as compared with 0'7 in the preceding year. In London there were 2,876 deaths, equivalent to a rate of 0.68 per 1,000 inhabitants, the average annual rate in the preceding decennium having been 0.69. Fever (Typhoid) caused 17 deaths—6 in St. Mary s and 11 in St. John's Sub-District—equivalent to an 178 annual rate of 0.14 per 1,000 inhabitants, as compared with 0.08 in the preceding year. 65 cases—49 in St. Mary's and 16 in St. John's Sub-district—were notified to the Sanitary Department. 29 of these cases—24 from St. Mary's and 5 from St. John's Subdistrict—were removed to Hospital, 36 cases—25 in St. Mary's and 11 in St. John's Sub-district—beingtreated at home. In London there were 597 deaths, equivalent to an annual rate of 0.14 per 1,000 inhabitants, the average annual rate during the preceding decennium having been 0.22. Diarrhoea caused 76 deaths—67 in St. Mary's and 9 in St. John's Sub-district—equivalent to an annual rate of 0.6 per 1,000 inhabitants, as compared with 0.52 in the preceding year. In London there were 2,437 deaths, equivalent to an annual rate of 0.59, the annual average rate during the preceding decennium having been 0.74. Disinfection. The disinfection of premises, of small articles of clothing, and of furniture, was, as hitherto, done without charge by the Sanitary Inspectors. Bedding, carpets, and large woollen fabrics belonging to the poor are cleansed and disinfected by Messrs. Armfield at the cost of the parish. 179 During the year 248-cwt. 3-qrs. 16-lbs. were thus disinfected by that firm, involving an expenditure of £371 16s. 8d. A further sum of £23 19s. 1d. was paid for chemicals and carbolic soap, thus raising the cost incurred by the Sanitary Department for disinfection to the sum of £395 15s. 9d. Canal Basin. The water in the Canal Basin was run off in March, 1891, when about 900 tons of mud were removed. The Basin was emptied again in July, but no mud was removed. Water. Paddington is supplied with water by the Grand Junction and West Middlesex Companies, which draw their supplies from the Thames, as do also the Chelsea, the Lambeth, the Southwark, and Vauxhall Companies. The remaining Metropolitan Water Companies are the Kent Company, whose water is drawn from the deep wells, and the New River Company and East London Company, both of which derive their water from the River Lea and other sources. For the purposes of comparison, Professor Frankland, in his annual report to the Registrar-General on the condition of these waters during 1891, includes also the results of similar examinations of the water supplied by the Colne Valley Water Company and the Tottenham Local Board of Health. He states that the operations of 180 those Companies which supply river waters have been most seriously interfered with by dense smoke— bearing fogs in the early part of the year—and by heavy floods in the Thames and Lea during the summer and autumn. In consequence of these unfavourable conditions, the river-derived waters have often been in a very undesirable condition, and well-founded complaints have repeatedly reached him from persons supplied with these waters. The storage, subsidence, filtration plant of these Companies who purvey river water were quite inadequate to deal with the exceptional pollution; and water of such bad quality, as regards organic matter in solution, has rarely been delivered by these Companies during the last 26 years. There appeared to have been no abnormal amount of sewage contamination in the river waters, the great additional amount of organic matter being derived from vegetable sources. Nevertheless, the water at the times of maximum pollution was, by reason of excessive quantity of organic and of clay in suspension, in some cases repulsive to both eye and palate. All the samples examined were taken directly from the mains of the several Companies. In addition to the chemical analysis to which each sample was submitted, the temperature of the water as it issued from the main, at the time of its collection, was determined, and the appearance which it exhibited 011 being viewed in a two-foot tube recorded. 181 Temperature: Although the average temperature differs but little for the several supplies, the monthly variation in the case of the river waters is very great, whilst the temperature of the deep-well water is practically constant throughout the year. Thus the water principally derived from the Thames and supplied by the Chelsea, West Middlesex, Southwark, Grand Junction, and Lambeth Companies, varied in temperature from 3 4°.9 Fahr. in January to 68°.5 Fahr. in July, and the water of the Lea distributed by the New Kiver and East London Companies fluctuated from 35.8° Fahr. in January to 65.3° Fahr. in July. The deep-well water of the Kent Company on the other hand, was free from these violent fluctuations, and practically maintained a constant temperature throughout the year. This uniformity of temperature of deep-well water is of considerable importance, as the water remains cool and refreshing in summer and is less likely to become frozen in the service-pipes in winter. The solid matters in the water are almost wholly composed of mineral substances, which, in the proportion in which they exist in Metropolitan waters, in no way diminish the fitness of the water for drinking. But the salts of lime and magnesia which constitute the principal part of these mineral ingredients are objectionable, not only because they impart to the water what is known as "hardness," and thus render it unsuitable for washing, but also 182 because they cause incrustations and deposits in steam and kitchen boilers and hot-water pipes. The saline matters dissolved in the deep-well water from the chalk is considerably greater in amount than those found in the river water, and inasmuch as this chalk-water is sent out in its natural condition by the Kent Company and by the Tottenham Lacal Board of Health, these supplies contain, in two out of the three cases, more solid matter than any of the others. The Colne Valley Company, on the other hand, by treating this chalk-water with lime before delivery, so reduced the solid matter that the latter was one-third less than the amount present in the river waters, and was less than one-half of that in the deep-well waters either of the Kent Company or of the Tottenham Local Board of Health. The comparatively small proportion of organic material which the solid matter invariably contains is, on the other hand, of the greatest importance in connexion with the use of the water for drinking purposes. For although the actual amount of this organic matter is often quite insignificant, yet it may be of the most objectionable character on account of its origin. Thus the water, both of the Thames and the Lea, receives, above the points where it is abstracted for the purposes of the Metropolitan supply, various contributions of organic matter of animal origin, such as the drainage 183 from manured land, the effluents from sewage works, and even raw sewage itself. This animal matter may, at any time, be accompanied by zymotic poisons dangerous to health, and although the chances of such substances reaching the water-consumer are greatly reduced, both by the filtration to which the water is subjected by the Companies and by the care which is exercised in excluding the flood-waters from their reservoirs ; yet, in spite of these protective measures, there is no absolute guarantee that the noxious ingredients, which may at any time be present, are wholly removed. Most of the Water Companies are endeavouring to substitute, as far as possible, water from subterranean sources for raw river water, whilst the Board of Conservators have almost completely stopped the discharge of untreated town sewage into the Thames. Table A gives the proportion of organic impurity present in the waters taken from the Thames, the Lea, and the deep-wells respectively, from 1868 to 1891. From the figures there given it will be seen that, the Thames water distributed during the year 1891 has not been equalled in respect of high average organic impurity since the year 1882. Of the water chiefly derived from the River Lea, that supplied by the New River Company contained, in every case, less organic matter than that of the East London Company, which was generally, in this respect, 184 somewhat superior to the best of the Thames waters. The Lea water delivered during the year 1891 was also of worse average quality, as regards organic contamination, than that delivered at any time since the year 1882. Table B shows the maximum, minimum, and average proportions of organic impurity in each of the waters, the average amount contained in the Kent Company's water during the nine years ending December, 1876, being taken as unity. In Table C are recorded the results of observations respecting the freedom from turbidity or otherwise of various waters, and for the purposes of comparison, the results of similar observations made in 1868 are also included. I have the honour to be, Gentlemen, Your obedient Servant, JAMES STEVENSON, . Medical Officer of Health. Vestry Hall, Paddington, June, 1892. 185 TABLE A. Taking the mean proportion of organic impurity in the Thames water delivered in London in 1868 as 1,000, in the subsequent years the following proportions were present respectively in the Thames water, in the Lea water, and in the Deep Well water. Year. Proportion of organic impurity present in Thames water as delivered in London. Proportion of organic impuritypresent in Lea water as delivered in London. Proportion of organic impurity present in Deep Well water as delivered in London. 1868 1,000 484 254 1869 1,016 618 312 1870 795 550 246 1871 928 604 150 1872 1,243 819 221 1873 917 693 250 1874 933 583 287 1875 1,030 751 250 1876 903 562 246 1877 907 596 243 1878 1,056 747 323 1879 1,165 947 387 1880 1,254 1,013 393 1881 993 765 405 1882 1,033 711 409 1883 850 620 321 1884 723 500 264 1885 839 603 200 1886 756 500 244 1887 690 473 249 1888 722 506 241 1889 677 504 268 1890 680 432 252 1891 1,002 684 357 N 186 TABLE B. TABLE showing the maximum, minimum, and average proportions of organic impurities in the water delivered by the several Companies and Authorities during 1891 Sourccs. Maximum.* Minimum.* Average. Deep Wells Kent 1.0 0.6 0.8 Colne Valley 5.7 1.1 1.9 Tottenham 1.8 1.2 1.5 East London 2.3 0.9 1.7 River Lea New River 4.1 1.1 2.0 East London 6.8 2.4 3.6 River Thames Chelsea 6.6 2.4 3.6 West Middlesex 7.9 2.4 4.2 South wark 8.5 2.6 4.1 Grand Junction 8.7 2.6 4.4 Lambeth 8.8 2.7 4.2 *For purposes of comparison the average yearly amount of organic element (organic carbon and organic nitrogen) found during the nine years ending 1876 in the water supplied by the Kent Company is taken as the unit. 187 TABLE C. Showing the relative efficiency of filtration of the water of the several Companies and Authorities in 1891, as compared with 1868:— Companies or Local Authorities. Number of occasions when clear and transparent. Number of occasions when slightly turbid. Number of occasions when turbid. Number of occasions when very turbid. 1868 1891 1868 1891 1868 1891 1868 1891 Thames. Chelsea 7 12 2 0 1 0 2 0 West Middlesex 12 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 Southwark 1 11 5 1 4 0 2 0 Grand Junction 9 11 2 1 1 0 0 0 Lambeth 6 12 1 0 2 0 3 0 Lea. New River 10 12 2 0 0 0 0 0 East London 3 12 8 0 1 0 0 0 Deep Wells. Kent 8 12 3 0 1 0 0 0 Colne Valley — 11 — 1 — 0 — 0 Tottenham Local Board of Health — 11 — 1 — 0 — 0 East London — 12 — 0 — 0 — 0 N 2 188 TABLE I. TABLE showing the Population, Inhabited Houses, Births, and Deaths, for the Year 1891, and 10 years preceding:— GROSS NUMBERS. Year. Estimated Population. Number of Inhabited Houses in the Parish. Registered Births. Deaths.** St.Mary's St. John's St.Mary's St. John's St.Mary's St. John's 1891 84,156* 33,682* 15,321‡ 2,420 532 1,590 520 1890 82,091 36,645 15,164 2,389 512 1,602 502 1889 80,324 36,736 15,083 2,346 517 1,266 398 1888 78,939 36,810 14,995 2,331 512 1,472 444 1887 77,578 36,884 14,864 2,368 548 1,346 439 1886 76,240 36,958 14,771 2,366 532 1,468 441 1885 74,925 37,032 14,680 2,379 619 1,394 483 1884 73,633 37,106 14,608 2,379 628 1,331 471 1883 72,363 37,180 14,422 2,251 598 1,284 478 1882 71,115 37,255 14,200 2,240 664 1,275 491 1881 , 69,888* 37,330* 13,908 2,172 679 1,224 455 Average of 10 years, 1881.1890 75,710 369,94 14,670 2,322 581 1,366 460 ‡April Rate, 1892. *Enumerated populations in 1881 and 1891. Notes. 1. Population at Census, 1861, 75,807 ; 1871, 96,813; 1881, 107,218; 1891 (unrevised), 117,838. 2. Area in Acres, 1,280. 3. Avera(je\No. of Persons in each House at Census, 1881, 8T. *For statistical purposes the Registrar-General estimates the population to the middle of the year on the basis of the rate of increase ruling between the two preceding Census periods. The estimate of population may be checked by the known number of inhabited bouses, and by the average number of inmates per house, as ascertained at the preceding Census. **The deaths of non-parishioners in public institutions within the parish (St. Mary's Hospital, Lock Hospital,and Children's Hospital, Paddington Green), are deducted; but those of parishioners in extra-parochial hospitals and outlying institutions are included. 189 TABLE II. TABLE showing the Annual Birth Rate, Rate of Mortality, Death Rates among Children, and Deaths in Public Institutions for the Year 1891, and 10 Years preceding. Year. % Birth Rate per 1,000 of the Population. Annual Rate of Mortality per 1,000 living. Deaths of Children under 1 year; percentage of Total Deaths. Percentage of Deaths of Children under 1 year to Registered Births. Deaths of Children under 5 years; percentage of Total Deaths. Total Number of Deaths in Public Institutions. St. Mary's Hospital. The Lock Hospital. The Children's Hospital. 1891. 251 17.9 20.7 14.8 29.8 371 5 62 1890 24.4 17.7 21.6 15.7 34.7 358 3 57 1889 24.5 14.2 23.8 13.8 33.3 344 2 70 1888 24.6 16.6 19.3 13.3 34.3 334 5 64 1887 25.5 15.6 20.0 12.2 31.6 347 6 50 1886 25.6 16.9 22.5 14.8 35.4 250 5 53 1885 26.8 16.8 23..1 14.5 36.5 264 4 50 1884 27.2 16.3 24.1 14.4 36.0 263 3 34 1883 26.0 16.1 21.9 13.5 37.7 258 5 4 1882 26.8 16.3 22.4 13.6 37.5 245 3 — 1881 26.6 15.7 22.8 13.4 34.7 253 4 — Average of 10 years, 1881.1890. 25.8 16.2 22.2 13.9 35.2 292 4 — 190 TABLE III. Deaths Registered from all Causes during the Year 1891. Note.—The Deaths of Non-Parishioners occurring in Public Institutions situated in the Parish are excluded, and the Deaths of Parishioners occurring in Hospitals and Public Institutions situated beyond the limits of the Parish are included. Cause of Death. AGES. TOTALS. 0 to 1 1 to 5 5 to 15 15 to 25 25 to 35 35 to 45 45 to 55 55 to 65 65 to 75 75 to 85 85 & upwards. Classes I. Specific Febrile, or Zymotic Diseases 105 66 19 9 15 14 13 18 15 16 4 294 II. Parasitic Diseases 1 ... ... ... 1 III. Dietic Diseases 1 ... • •• ... 3 2 2 8 IV. Constitutional Diseases 25 35 14 26 45 48 66 45 40 18 3 365 V. Developmental Diseases 58 ... ... ... ... ... 10 40 29 137 VI. Local Diseases 156 83 30 42 56 94 122 160 222 148 34 1,147 VII. Deaths from Violence 16 4 6 1 7 11 7 3 8 4 67 VIII. Deaths from Ill.Defined and Not Specified Causes 75 3 1 ... 1 2 1 4 3 1 91 Totals 437 191 70 78 127 169 212 227 299 229 71 2,110 I.—SPECIFIC FEBRILE, OR ZYMOTIC DISEASES. 1.—Miasmatic Diseases. Smallpox Vaccinated ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Unvaccinated ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... No Statement ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Measles ... 7 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Scarlet Fever 1 4 2 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 7 Typhus ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 7 Whooping Cough 28 32 7 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 27 191 Diphtheria 4 14 2 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Simple Continued and Ill-defined Fever ••• ... ••• ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Enteric or Typhoid Fever ... 1 4 4 3 3 2 ... ... ... ... 17 Other Miasmatic Diseases ... ••• ... ... ... ... ... ... ... .. ... ... Influenza ... 4 2 ... 7 6 10 15 9 13 3 69 2.—Diarrhœl Diseases. Simple Cholera ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Diarrhœa, Dysentery 64 3 ... ... ... 1 ... 1 3 3 1 76 3.—Malarial Diseases. Remittent Fever ... ••• ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Ague ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 4.—Zoogenous Diseases. Cowpox and effects of Vaccination ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Other Diseases (e.g., Hydrophobia,Glanders,) Splenic Fever) ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 5.—Venereal Diseases. Syphilis 8 1 ... ... 1 1 1 ... ... ... ... 12 Gonorrhœa, Stricture of Urethra ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... 1 6.—Septic Diseases. Erysipelas ... ... ... 1 1 ... ... ... 2 ... ... 4 Pyæmia, Septicæmia ... ... ... 2 ... 2 ... ... ... ... ... 4 Puerperal Fever ... ... ... 2 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... 3 II— PARASITIC DISEASES. Thrush, and other Vegetable Parasitic Diseases 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 Worms, Hydatids, and other Animal Parasitic Diseases ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... III.—DIETIC DISEASES. Want of Breast Milk, Starvation 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 Scurvy ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Chronic Alcoholism ... ••• ... ... 3 2 2 ... ... ... ... 7 Delirium Tremens ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 192 Cause of Death. AGES. TOTAL. 0 to 1 1 to 5 5 to 15 15 to 25 25 to 35 35 to 45 45 to 55 55 to 65 65 to 75 75 to 85 85 & upwards. IV.—CONSTITUTIONAL DISEASES. Rheumatic Fever, Rheumatism of the Heart. ... ... ... ... 3 2 3 1 ... 1 ... 10 Rheumatism ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... 1 Gout ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2 2 1 1 6 Rickets ... 2 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2 Cancer, Malignant Disease ... ... ... ... 4 12 27 22 25 9 2 101 Tabes Mesenterica 13 2 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 15 Tubercular Meningitis, Hydrocephalus 9 23 7 3 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... 43 Phthisis ... 1 4 23 36 31 32 19 6 3 ... 155 Other forms or Tuberculosis, Scrofula 3 6 2 ... 1 1 1 1 1 ... ... 16 Purpura, Hæmorrhagic Diathesis ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 Anæmia, Chlorosis, Leucocythæmia ... ... ... ... ... 1 1 ... 1 ... ... 3 Glycosuria, Diabetes Mellitus ... ... 1 ... ... ... 2 ... 5 3 ... 11 Other Constitutional Diseases ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... 1 V.-DEVELOPMENTAL DISEASES. Premature Birth 51 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 51 Atelectasis 3 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 3 Congenital Malformations 4 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 4 Old Age ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 10 40 29 4 79 VI.—LOCAL DISEASES. 1.—Diseases of Nervous System. Inflammation of Brain or Membranes 1 1 4 2 1 3 2 ... ... ... ... 14 Apoplexy, Softening of Brain, Hemiplegia, Brain Paralysis 1 ... ... ... ... 8 14 20 39 17 3 102 Insanity, General Paralysis of the Insane ... ... ... ... 1 7 2 2 1 2 ... 15 Epilepsy 1 ... ... ... 2 ... 2 1 2 ... ... 8 Convulsions 46 9 ... ... ... ... 2 1 2 ... ... 55 Laryngismus Stridulus (Spasm of Glottis) 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 193 Disease of Spinal Cord, Paraplegia, Paralysis Agitans ... ... ... 1 ... 1 1 1 5 ... ... ... Other Diseases of Nervous System 1 ... 1 1 1 2 ... ... l ... ... 7 2.—Diseases of Organs of Special Sense. {e.g., of Ear, Eye, Nose) 1 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2 3.—Diseases of Circulatory System. Pericarditis ... 1 2 • •• 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... 4 Acute Endocarditis ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 Valvular Diseases of Heart 1 ... 3 3 1 4 6 8 15 5 1 47 Other Diseases of Heart ... ... 5 2 4 9 16 30 21 20 2 109 Aneurism ... ... ... ... 1 ... 3 1 ... ... ... 5 Embolism, Thrombosis ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2 1 ... 4 Other Diseases of Blood Vessels ... ... ... ... l ... ... 1 2 1 1 6 4.—Diseases of Respiratory System. Laryngitis ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... 1 Croup 1 2 ... ... ... ... 3 Emphysema, Asthma 1 ... ... ... 2 2 2 2 4 ... ... 13 Bronchitis 46 17 1 2 2 11 21 36 69 57 16 278 Pneumonia 29 43 8 10 16 19 30 24 23 17 5 224 Pleurisy ... ... ... 2 1 1 1 2 3 1 ... 11 Other Diseases of Respiratory System 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 5.—Diseases of Digestive System. Dentition 7 5 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 12 Sore Throat, Quinsy ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Diseases of Stomach 1 ... ... 2 1 3 ... 1 1 1 ... 10 Enteritis 5 1 1 ... ... ... ... 1 2 1 ... 11 Obstructive Diseases of Intestine 4 ... 1 1 ... 1 1 5 4 2 1 21 Peritonitis 1 1 1 6 6 2 1 1 2 ... 1 21 Ascites ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... 1 Cirrhosis of Liver ... ... ... 1 ... 4 3 7 3 ... ... 18 Jaundice and other Diseases of Liver 4 ... ... ... 1 2 2 1 2 2 ... 14 Other Diseases of Digestive System ... 1 ... ... 1 ... 1 1 ... ... ... 4 194 Cause of Death. AGES. TOTAL. 0 to 1 1 to 5 5 to 15 15 to 25 25 to 35 35 to 45 45 to 55 55 to 65 65 to 75 75 to 85 85 & upwards. LOCAL DISEASES.—Continued. 6.—Diseases of Lymphatic System. [e.g., of Lymphatics and of Spleen) ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 7.—Diseases of Gland-like Organs of Uncertain Use. (e.g., Bronchocele, Addison's Disease) ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... 1 8.—Diseases of Urinary System. Nephritis 1 ... ... ... 2 1 2 3 1 1 ... 11 Bright's Disease, Albuminuria ... ... ... 4 4 4 5 7 9 7 1 41 Disease of Bladder or of Prostate ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 2 3 3 2 11 Other Diseases of the Urinary System ... ... ... ... 1 ... 2 1 ... 2 ... 6 9.—Diseases of Reproductive System. a. Of Organs of Generation. Male Organs ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Female Organs ... ... ... ... 1 4 1 1 ... 2 ... 9 b. Of Parturition. Abortion, Miscarriage ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Puerperal Convulsions ... ... ... 1 ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... 2 195 Placenta prævia, Flooding ... ... ... ... ... ? ? ? ? ? ? ? Other Accidents of Child-Birth 1 ... ... 2 4 1 ... ... ... ... ... 8 10.—Diseases of Bones and Joints. Caries, Necrosis ... 1 1 1 ... ... 1 ... 1 1 ... 6 Arthritis, Ostitis, Periostitis ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 Other Diseases of Bones and Joints ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 11.—Diseases of Integumentary System. Carbuncle, Phlegmon ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... 1 ... ... 2 Other Diseases of Integumentary System 1 ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... 5 4 1 12 VII-DEATHS FROM VIOLENCE. 1.—Accident of Negligence. Fractures and Contusions 1 2 4 1 3 4 ... ... 3 4 ... 22 Gunshot Wounds ... ... ... ... 1 ... 1 ... ... ... ... 2 Cut, Stab ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Burn, Scald ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... 2 Poison ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... 1 Drowning ... ... 2 ... ... ... 2 1 1 ... ... 6 Suffocation 14 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... 16 Otherwise ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... 1 ... ... ... 2 2.—Homicide. Manslaughter ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Murder 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 196 Cause of Death. AGES. TOTAL. 0 to 1 1 to 5 5 to 15 15 to 25 25 to 35 35 to 45 45 to 55 55 to 65 65 to 75 75 to 85 85 & upwards. DEATHS FROM VIOLENCE. (Continued.) 3.—Suicide. Gunshot Wounds ... ... ... ... ... 2 ... ... 1 ... ... 3 Cut, Stab ... ... ... ... * * * ... ... 1 ... ... 2 Poison ... ... ... ... 1 1 1 1 ... ... ... 4 Drowning ... ... ... ... 1 ... 2 ... ... ... ... 3 Hanging ... ... ... ... 1 ... 1 ... ... ... ... 2 Otherwise ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... 1 4.—Execution. Hanging ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... VIII.—DEATHS FROM ILL-DEFINED AND NOT SPECIFIED CAUSES. Dropsy ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Debility, Atrophy, Inanition 73 3 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 77 Mortification ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2 1 ... 4 Tumour ... ... 1 ... ... ... 1 1 2 2 ... 5 Abscess 1 ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... 2 Haemorrhage ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Sudden Death (cause not ascertained) ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Causes not Specified or Ill-defined 1 ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... 1 3 197 SUMMARY OF TABLE III. No. of Deaths. No. of Deaths. I-SPECIFIC FEBRILE, or ZYMOTIC DISEASES. Brought forward 1,838 1. Miasmatic Diseases 194 VI.—LOCAL DISEASES—continued. 2. Diarrhœal „ 76 3. Malarial „ - 6. Diseases of Lymphatic System - 4. Zoogenous „ 7. Diseases of Gland-like Organs of Uncertain Use 1 69 5. Venereal „ 13 8. Diseases of Urinary System 6. Septic „ 11 9. Diseases of Reproductive System 22 (a.) Diseases of Organs of Generation 9 II-PARASITIC DISEASES 1 (6.) Diseases of Parturition 13 III.—DIETIC DISEASES 8 10. Diseases of Bones and Joints 8 IV.—CONSTITUTIONAL DISEASES 365 11. Diseases of Integumentary System 14 V.-DEVELOPMENTAL DISEASES 137 VI.—LOCAL DISEASES. VII—VIOLENCE. 1. Diseases of Nervous System 212 1. Accident or Negligence 51 2. Diseases of Organs of Special Sense 2 2. Homicide . 1 3. Diseases of Circulatory System 176 3. Suicide 15 4. Diseases of Respiratory System 531 4. Execution - 5. Diseases of Digestive System 112 VIII—ILL-DEFINED & NOT SPECIFIED CAUSES 91 Carried forward 1,838 Total 2,110 198 TABLE IIIA. Deaths Registered from all Causes during each Quarter of the Year 1891 in each Sub-district of the Parish. Note.—The Deaths of Non-Parishioners occurring in Public Institutions situated in the Parish are excluded, and the Deaths of Parishioners occurring in Public Institutions situated beyond the limits of the Parish are included. Cause of Death. Sub-district. Total 1st Quarter. Sub-district. Total 2nd Quarter. Sub-district. Total 3rd Quarter. Sub-district. Total 4th Quarter. Total Deaths. TOTAL. St. Mary's. St. John's. St. Mary's. St. John's. St. Mary's. St. John's. St. Mary's. St. John's. St. Mary'b. St John's. Classes. I. Specific Febrile, or Zymotic Diseases 32 13 45 77 21 98 85 14 99 36 16 52 230 64 294 II. Parasitic Diseases ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 1 ... ... ... ... 1 1 III. Dietic Diseases 1 1 2 3 ... 3 2 ... 2 1 ... 1 7 1 8 IV. Constitutional Diseases 68 27 95 72 27 99 65 22 87 68 16 84 273 92 365 V. Developmental Diseases 28 9 37 31 9 40 26 5 31 24 5 29 109 28 137 VI. Local Diseases 301 94 395 187 84 271 157 53 210 206 65 271 851 296 1.147 VII. Deaths from Violence 8 5 13 12 6 18 13 6 19 15 2 17 48 19 67 VIII. Deaths from Ill-defined and Not Specified Causes 9 5 14 15 5 20 22 6 28 26 3 29 72 19 91 Totals 447 154 601 397 152 549 370 107 477 376 107 483 1,590 520 2,110 I.—SPECIFIC FEBRILE, OR ZYMOTIC DISEASES. 1.—Miasmatic Diseases. Smallpox Vaccinated ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Unvaccinated ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... No Statement ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Measles 1 • • • 1 3 ... 3 2 ... 2 ... 1 1 6 1 7 Scarlet Fever 1 ... 1 1 1 2 1 1 2 2 ... 2 5 2 7 Typhus ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Whooping Cough 10 6 16 18 2 20 15 ... 15 14 2 16 57 10 67 199 Diphtheria 9 1 10 5 ... 1 0 2 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Simple Continued and Ill-denned Fever ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Enteric or Typhoid Fever 4 2 6 ... 3 3 ... 1 1 2 5 7 6 11 17 Other Miasmatic Diseases ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Influenza ... ... ... 41 13 54 8 3 11 3 1 4 52 17 69 2.—Diabbhœal Diseases. Simple Cholera ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Diarrhœa, Dysentery 2 ... 2 7 ... 7 51 7 58 7 2 9 67 9 76 3.—Malabial Diseases. Remittent Fever ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Ague ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 4.—Zoogenous Diseases. Cowpox and effects of Vaccination ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Other Diseases (e.g.,Hydrophobia,Glanders, Splenic Fever) ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 5.—Vhnebeal Diseases. Syphilis 2 2 4 2 ... 2 1 ... 1 4 1 5 9 3 12 Gonorrhoea, Stricture of Urethra 1 ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... 1 6.—Septic Diseases. Erysipelas 1 ... 1 ... ... ... 2 ... 2 ... 1 1 3 1 4 Pyaemia, Septicaemia ... 2 2 ... ... ... 1 ... 1 1 ... 1 2 2 4 Puerperal Fever 1 ... 1 ... ... ... 1 ... 1 1 ... 1 3 ... 3 II—PARASITIC DISEASES. Thrush, and other Vegetable Parasitic Diseases ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 1 ... ... ... ... 1 1 Worms, Hydatids, and other Animal Parasitic Diseases ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... III—DIETIC DISEASES. Want of Breast Milk, Starvation ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... 1 ... ... ... 1 ... 1 Scurvy ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Chronic Alcoholism 1 1 2 3 ... 3 1 ... 1 1 ... 1 6 1 7 Delirium Tremens ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 200 Cause of Death. Sub-district. Total 1st Quarter. Sub-district. Total 2nd Quarter. Sub-district. Total 3rd Quarter. Sub-district. Total 4th Quarter. Total Deaths. TOTAL. St. Mary's. St. John's. St. Mary's. St. John's. St. Mary's. St. John's. St. Mary's St. John's. St. Mary's. St. John's. 1 IV.-CONSTITUTIONAL DISEASES. Rheumatic Fever, Rheumatism of the Heart 3 1 4 1 2 3 1 1 2 1 ... 1 6 4 10 Rheumatism 1 ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... 1 Gout 1 2 3 2 ... 2 ... ... ... 1 ... 1 4 2 6 Rickets 2 ... 2 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2 ... 2 Cancer, Malignant Disease 12 9 21 16 9 25 20 11 31 15 9 24 63 38 101 Tabes Mesenterica ... ... ... 1 1 2 8 ... 8 5 ... 5 14 1 15 Tubercular Meningitis, Hydrocephalus 7 6 13 12 3 15 8 4 12 2 1 3 29 14 43 Phthisis 34 5 39 32 12 44 22 5 27 41 4 45 129 26 155 Other forms of Tuberculosis, Scrofula 4 1 5 4 ... 4 5 ... 5 2 ... 2 15 1 16 Purpura, Hæmorrhagic Diathesis 1 ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... 1 Anæmia, Chlorosis, Leucocythæmia ... 1 1 2 ... 2 ... ... ... ... ... ... 2 1 3 Glycosuria, Diabetes Mellitus 3 2 5 2 ... 2 1 ... 1 1 2 3 7 4 11 Other Constitutional Diseases ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 1 ... ... ... ... 1 1 V.-DEVELOPMENTAL DISEASES. Premature Birth 11 2 13 10 1 11 10 2 12 15 ... 15 46 5 51 Atelectasis 1 ... 1 1 1 2 ... ... ... ... ... ... 2 1 3 Congenital Malformations 1 ... 1 1 ... 1 ... 1 1 ... 1 1 9 2 4 Old Age 15 7 22 19 7 26 16 2 18 9 4 13 59 20 79 VI.—LOCAL DISEASES. 1.—Diseases of Nervous System. Inflammation of Brain or Membranes 2 1 3 ... 1 1 2 1 3 4 3 7 8 6 14 Apoplexy, Softening of Brain, Hemiplegia, Brain Paralysis 20 2 22 18 6 24 20 10 30 18 8 26 76 26 102 Insanity, General Paralysis of the Insane 4 ... 4 3 ... 3 5 2 7 1 ... 1 13 2 15 Epilepsy 3 1 4 u 1 1 2 ... 1 14 1 ... 1 5 3 8 Convulsions 8 4 12 14 ... 14 15 3 18 7 4 11 44 11 55 Laryngismus Stridulus (Spasm of Glottis) ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... 1 ... ... ... 1 ... 1 201 Disease of Spinal Cord, Paraplegia, Paralysis Agitans 1 ... 1 3 ... 3 3 1 4 2 ... 2 9 1 10 Other Diseases of Nervous System 2 1 3 1 ... 1 1 ... 1 1 1 2 5 2 7 2.—Diseases of Organs of Special Sense. (e.g., of Ear, Eye, Nose) ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2 ... 2 2 ... 2 3.—Diseases of Cibculatory System. Pericarditis ... ... ... 1 ... 1 ... ... ... 2 1 3 a 1 4 Acute Endocarditis 1 ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... 1 Valvular Diseases of Heart 13 3 16 7 ... 7 7 1 8 14 2 16 41 6 47 Other Diseases of Heart 32 4 36 15 7 22 18 5 23 24 4 28 89 20 109 Aneurism 1 1 2 1 ... 1 1 ... 1 1 ... 1 4 1 5 Embolism, Thrombosis 1 1 2 ... ... ... 1 ... 1 ... 1 1 2 2 4 Other Diseases of Blood Vessels 1 1 2 1 1 2 1 ... 1 1 1 1 4 2 6 4.—Diseases of Respiratory System. Laryngitis 1 ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... 1 Croup ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... 1 1 1 2 2 1 3 Emphysema, Asthma 2 2 4 1 1 2 2 ... 2 4 1 5 9 4 13 Bronchitis 94 33 127 46 19 65 18 1 19 51 16 67 209 69 278 Pneumonia 75 25 100 40 27 67 14 6 20 32 5 37 161 63 224 Pleurisy 3 4 7 1 1 1 ... 1 1 1 2 5 6 11 Other Diseases of Respiratory System 1 ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... 1 5.—Diseases of Digestive System. Dentition 3 ... 3 5 1 6 ... ... ... 2 1 3 10 2 12 Sore Throat, Quinsy ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Diseases of Stomach 4 ... 4. 2 2 4 1 ... 1 1 ... 1 8 2 10 Enteritis 1 ... 1 2 ... 2 3 2 5 3 ... 3 9 2 11 Obstructive Diseases of Intestine 3 2 5 2 1 3 4 3 7 1 5 6 10 11 21 Peritonitis 1 ... 1 6 3 9 7 1 8 1 2 3 15 6 21 Ascites ... ... ... ... 1 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 1 Cirrhosis of Liver 3 1 4 1 1 2 1 3 4 6 2 8 11 7 18 Jaundice and other Diseases of Liver 3 1 4 2 1 3 2 1 3 4 ... 4 11 3 14 Other Diseases of Digestive System ... ... ... ...... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Cause of Death. Sub-district. Total 1st Quarter. Sub-district. Total 2nd Quarter. Sub-district. Total 3rd Quarter. Sub-district. Total 4th Quarter. Total Deaths. TOTAL. St. Mary's. St. John's. St. Mary's. St. John's. St. 1 Mary's. St, John's. St. Mary's. St. John's. St. Mary's. St. John's. LOCAL DISEASES.—Continued. 6.—Diseases of Lymphatic System. (e,g,, of Lympbatios and of Spleen) ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 7.—Diseases of Gland-like Organs of Uncertain Use. ... . (e.g., Bronchocele, Addison's Disease) ... 1 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 1 8.—Diseases of Urinary System. Nephritis 2 2 4 ... 3 3 2 2 4 ... ... ... 4 7 11 Bright's Disease, Albuminuria 7 2 9 4 3 7 13 6 19 3 3 6 27 14 41 Disease of Bladder or of Prostate 1 1 2 3 1 4 2 ... 2 2 1 3 8 3 11 Other Diseases of the Urinary System ... ... ... 1 ... 1 1 ... 1 3 1 4 5 1 6 9.—Diseases of Reproductive System. a. Of Organs of Generation. Male Organs ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Female Organs ... 1 1 ... 1 1 1 2 3 3 1 4 4 5 9 B. Of Parturition. Abortion, Miscarriage ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Puerperal Convulsions ... ... ... 1 ... 1 ... 1 1 ... ... ... 1 l 2 203 Placenta prævia, Flooding 2 ... 2 1 ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Other Accidents of Child-Birth 3 ... 3 1 1 2 1 ... 1 2 ... 2 7 1 8 10.—Diseases op Bones and Joints. Caries, Necrosis 2 ... 2 3 ... 3 ... ... ... 1 ... 1 6 ... 6 Arthritis, Ostitis, Periostitis ... ... ... ... 1 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 1 Other Diseases of Bones and Joints ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 1 ... ... ... 1 1 11.—Diseases of Integumentary System. Carbuncle, Phlegmon 1 ... 1 1 ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... 2 ... 2 Other Diseases of Integumentary System ••• ... ... ... ... ... 6 ... 6 6 ... 6 12 ... 12 VII.—DEATHS FROM VIOLENCE. 1.—Accident or Negligence. Fractures and Contusions 1 1 2 4 3 7 5 3 8 4 1 5 14 8 22 Gunshot Wounds 1 1 2 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 1 2 Cut, Stab ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Burn, Scald ... ... ... 1 ... 1 ... 1 1 ... ... ... 1 1 2 Poison ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... 1 1 ... 1 Drowning 1 1 2 2 ... 2 1 1 2 ... ... ... 4 2 6 Suffocation 4 1 5 2 ... 2 3 ... 3 6 ... 6 15 1 16 Otherwise ... ... ... ... 1 1 ... ... ... ... 1 1 ... 2 2 2.—Homicide. Manslaughter ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Murder ... ... ... 1 ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... 1 204 Cause of Death. Sub-district. Total 1st Quarter. Sub-district. Total 2nd Quarter. Sub-district. Total 3rd Quarter. Sub-district. Total 4th Quarter. Total Deaths. TOTAL. St. Mary's. St. John's. St. Mary's. St. John's. St. Mary's. St. John's. St. Mary's. St. John's. St. Mary's. St. John's. DEATHS FROM VIOLENCE. (Continued.) 3.—Suicide. Gunshot Wounds ... ... ... ... 1 1 ... 1 1 1 ... 1 1 2 3 Cut, Stab ... 1 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... 1 1 1 2 Poison 1 ... 1 1 ... 1 ... ... ... 2 ... 2 4 ... 4 Drowning ... ... ... ... ... ... 3 ... 3 ... ... ... 3 ... 3 Hanging ... ... ... 1 ... 1 1 ... 1 ... ... ... 2 ... 2 Otherwise ... ... ... ... 1 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 1 4.—Execution. Hanging ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... VIII.—DEATHS FROM ILL-DEFINED AND NOT SPECIFIED CAUSES. Dropsy ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Debility, Atrophy, Inanition 7 5 12 12 3 15 21 5 26 21 3 24 61 16 77 Mortification 2 ... 2 1 ... 1 ... ... ... 1 ... 1 4 ... 4 Tumour ... ... ... 1 1 2 ... 1 1 2 ... 2 3 5 Abscess ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... 1 1 ... 1 2 ... 2 Haemorrhage ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Sudden Death (cause not ascertained) ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Causes not Specified or Ill-defined ... ... 1 1 2 ... ... ... 1 ... 1 2 1 3 1 205 TABLE IV. TABLE showing the Mortality from certain classes of Diseases, and proportions to Population, and to 1,000 Deaths, 1891. Total Deaths. Deaths per 1,000 of Population. Proportion of Deaths to 1,000 Deaths. 1. Seven Principal Zymotic Diseases 201 1.7 95.3 2. Pulmonary Diseases (other than Phthisis) 531 4.5 251.7 3. Tubercular Diseases 188 1.6 89.1 4. Wasting Diseases of Children 129 1.1 61.1 5. Convulsive Diseases of Children 110 0.9 52.1 NOTES. 1. Includes Smallpox, Measles, Scarlet Fever, Diphtheria, Whooping Cough Fever, and Diarrhoea. 3. Includes Phthisis, Scrofula, Rickets, and Tabes. 4. Includes Marasmus, Atrophy, Debility, Want of Breast Milk, and Premature Birth. 5. Includes Hydrocephalus, Infantile Meningitis, Convulsiore and Teething. 206 TABLE V. TABLE showing the Number of Deaths from the seven principal Zymotic Diseases in the Ten Years 1881 to 1890, and in the year 1891. DISEASE 1881. 1882. 1883. 1884. 1885. 1886. 1887. 1888. 1889. 1890. Annual Average of 10 years, 1881—1890. Proportion of Deaths to 1,000 Deaths in 10 years, 1881—1890. 1891. Proportion of Deaths to 1,000 Deaths in 1891. Smallpox 7 0 0 0 11 0 0 1 0 0 2 1.0 — — Measles 20 71 37 31 63 66 33 66 11 77 48 26.0 7 3.3 Scarlet Fever 23 22 39 20 8 11 35 14 8 6 19 10.2 7 3.3 Diphtheria 14 15 37 28 25 28 27 75 39 45 33 17.9 27 12.8 Whooping Cough 53 72 46 48 59 55 19 74 26 82 53 29.2 67 31.8 Fever 23 20 16 17 21 17 10 15 16 11 17 9.2 17 8.1 Diarrhœa 66 41 48 64 65 92 63 38 63 62 60 32.9 76 36.0 TOTALS. Paddington 206 241 223 208 252 269 187 283 163 283 232 126.8 201 95.3 London 13,811 13,553 10,801 13,629 11,261 11,121 12,684 10,803 9,709 12,279 11,965 146.1 9,675 107.2 England & Wales 58,239 69,734 58,972 71,762 57,726 62,859 64,676 50,684 61,027 59,698 61,538 117 53,221 91 207 TABLE VA. Shewing the localities in which deaths from the seven principal Zymotic diseases occurred during the year 1891. Names of Places. Small Pox. Measles. Scarlet Fever. Diphtheria. Whooping Cough. Fever. Diarrhœa. Total. Typhus. Typhoid. Simple Continned Fever. St. Mary's Sub-District. Adpar Street ... ... ... ... ... ... 1‡ ... ... 1 Alexander Mews ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 Alfred Road ... ... ... 1 1 ... ... ... ... 2 Amberley Road ... ... ... 1 2 ... ... ... 1 3 Ashmore Road ... ... ... 1 3 ... 1‡ ... 1 6 Blomfield Terrace ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... 1 Braden Street ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... 1 Bravington Road ... ... ... 2* 2 ... ... ... 3 7 Brindley Street ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... 2 3 Campbell Street ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2 2 Carlton Mews ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... 1 Carlton Terrace ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... 1 Chippenham Mews ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2 2 Chippenham Road ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... 2 3 Church Street ... ... ... 1‡ ... ... ... ... ... 1 Cirencester, Street ... ... ... ... 3 ... ... ... 3 6 Clarendon Street ... ... ... 1 4 ... ... ... 3 8 Cuthbert Street ... ... ... ......... ... ... ... ... 1 1 Dudley Street ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2 2 Durham Terrace ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... 1 Feromoy Road ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... 1 Fernhead Road ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 4 4 Fordingley Road ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 1 Goldney Road ... ... ... ... 2 ... ... ... ... 2 Hall Place ... ... ... ......... ... ... 1† 1 2 Hall Place West ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... 1 Hampden Street ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... 2 3 Harrow Road ... ... ... 1* 2 ... ... ... 2 5 Hermitage Street ... ... ... ... l ... ... ... ... 1 Hethpool Street ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 1 Hormead Road ... ... ... ... l ... ... ... 2 3 Irongate Wharf Road ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... 1 1 Kensal Road ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... 2 3 Kilburn Park Road ... ... 1* 1† 2 ... ... ... 3 7 Lanark Villas ... ... ... ... 2 ... ... ... ... 2 Lanhill Road ... ... ... 2 ... ... ... ... ... 2 Lydford Road ... 1 ... l l ... ... ... 1 4 Maida Vale ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... 1 Marlboro Street ... ... ... ... l ... ... ... ... 1 Modena Street ... ... ... ... l ... 1‡ ... ... 2 208 Names of Places. Small Pox. Measles. Scarlet Fever. Diphtheria. Whooping Cough. Fever. Diarrhœa. Total. Typhus. Typhoid. Simple Continued Fever. Netley Street ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... 1 1 Oakington Road ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... 1 Offenham Terrace ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 Paddington Infirmary ... ... ... 1 1 ... ... ... 3 5 Porchester Terrace ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... 1 Portnall Road ... ... ... 1 3 ... ... ... ... 4 Portsdown Road ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 1 Pressland Street ... ... ... 1* ... ... ... ... ... 1 Queen's Arms Yard ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 1 Randolph Crescent ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 1 Randolph Road ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 1 Richmond Mews ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... 1 Senior Street ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... 1 2 Shirland Mews ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 1 Shirland Road ... 1 ... ... 5 ... ... ... 5 11 Southam Street ... 1 ... ... ... ... 1* ... ... 2 Stalham Street ... ... ... 1‡ ... ... ... ... ... 1 Sutherland Avenue ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2 2 Tamplin Mews ... ... 1* ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 Tavistock Crescent ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... 1 Walterton Road ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... 1 Waverley Road ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 1 Westbourne Park ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 Westbourne Park Crescent ... 1 ... ... .... ... ... ... ... 1 Westbourne Park Road ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... 1 Westbourne Park Villas ... ... ... 1† ... ... ... ... ... 1 Westbourne Terrace North. ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... 1 2 Windsor Street ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... 1 Woodchester Street ... ... ... 1 3 ... ... ... 4 8 Wood field Crescent ... ... ... ... 1 ... . .. ... ... 1 Woodfield Road ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... 1 Workhouse ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2 2 Total, St. Mary's District ... 6 5 21 57 ... 7 ... 67 163 Sr. Joan's Sub-District. Albion Mews East ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... 1 Arthur Mews ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... 1 Bathurst Mewa ... ... 1* ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 Bouverie Street ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... 1 209 Names of Places. Small Pox. Measles. Scarlet Fever. Diphtheria. Whooping Cough. Fever. Diarrhœa. Total. Typhus. Typhoid. Simple Continued Fever. Conduit Place ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 1 Connaught Square Mews ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... 1 Craven Hill Gardens ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 1 Devonport Mews ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 1 Eastbourne Terrace ... ... ... ... ... ... 1† ... ... 1 Elms Mews ... ... ... ... ... ... 1† ... ... 1 Gloucester Place ... ... ... 1 ... ... 1 ... ... 2 Harrow Road ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... 1 Hyde Park Gardens Mews ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... 1 Junction Place ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 1 Lancaster Gate ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... 1 2 Little Sussex Place ... ... ... ... 1 ... 1* ... ... 2 Norfolk Mews ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... 1 Poplar Place ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... 1 Queen's Road ... ... ... 1§ ... ... ... ... ... 1 Sale Street ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 Salem Gardens ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... 1 2 Sheldon Street ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... 1 South Wharf Road ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 1 Southwick Street ... ... ... l 1 ... ... ... ... 2 Spring Street ... ... 1* 1† ... ... ... ... ... 2 Sussex Place ... ... ... l ... ... ... ... ... 1 Union Place ... ... ... ... 11* ... ... ... ... 2 Westbourne Buildings ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 1 Westbourne Street ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... 1 Westbourne Terrace ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... 1 2 Total, St. John's Sub district ... 1 2 6 10 ... 10 ... 9 38 *Died in North-Western Fever Hospital. †Died in St. Mary's Hospital. ‡Died in Children's Hospital, Paddington Green. ||Died in Paddington Infirmary. *Died in Western Fever Hospital. §Died in Middlesex Hospital. 210 TABLE VI. Inspectors' Report of the Sanitary Work, &c., completed in the year ending December 31st, 1891. Paddington. No. of Complaints received during year. No. of Houses, Premises, &c., inspected, including re-inspections. Results of Inspection. House Drains. Privies and Water Closets. Dust Bins. Water Supply. Miscellaneous. Orders issued for Sanitary Amendments of Houses and Premises. Houses and Premises, &o., Cleansed, Repaired, and Whitewashed. Houses Disinfected after Infectious Diseases. Repaired, Cleansed, &c. Trapped or Ventilated. Repaired, Cleansed, &c. Supplied with Water. New provided. New provided. Repaired, Covered, &c. Cistern (new) erected. Separate Water Supply for potable purposes. Cisterns Cleansed, Repaired, and Covered. Removal of accumulation of Dung, Stagnant Water, Animal, and other Refuse. New Manure Pits provided. Removal of Animals improperly kept. Regularly Inspected. Other Proceedings, e.g. Legal Proceedings. Number of cases of Overcrowding abated. Waste Pipes and Rain-water Pipes disconnected from Drain. External Ventilation to W.C. provided. Water Supply to premises reinstated. Bakehouses. Licensed Cowhouses. Licensed Slaughterhouses. Total. 1,430 12,609 697 109 584 340 267 90 171 14 24 15 1 114 19 88 11 10 77 3 16 2 23 217 50 8 211 Appendix No. II. INVENTORY OF FURNITURE, &c. VESTRY CLERK'S DEPARTMENT, &c. VESTRY HALL. Board Room.—39 Chairs (leather); 2 Benches (leather); 10 Rout Seats; Large Table; 4 Small Tables; Screens; Curtains; Clock; Carpet; Canvas. Large Committee Room.—18 Chairs (leather); 21 Chairs (Windsor); Table Carpet; 2 Forms (cloth); Umbrella Stand; Clock. Small Committee Room.— 20 Chairs (leather); Table; Carpet; Clock Umbrella Stand. Burial Board Office.—Table; 2 Chairs (leather); 3 Chairs (Windsor); 2 Forms (cloth). Outer Hall.—Table; Bookcase: 2 Desks; 2 Stools; 2 Benches; 4 Forms; 4 Chairs (Windsor); Umbrella Stand; Clock. Vestry Clerk's Office.—1 Pedestal Table; 2 Tables; Pigeon Holes; 2 Waggons; 12 Deed Boxes; Carpet; Umbrella Stand; Clock; 6 Chairs (cloth); Pictures and Engravings; Table with Vestry Seal. Assistants' Office.—2 Pedestal Tables; Typewriter and Table; 2 Counter Desks ; 1 Slope Desk; 2 Book Cases; Copying Press; 3 Chairs (cloth); 2 Chairs (Windsor); 2 High Chairs; Clock; Umbrella Stand; Amberg'e Patent Letter File Cabinet. 212 SURVEYOR'S DEPARTMENT. SURVEYOR'S OFFICE. Office Table; Largo Office Desk; Small Office Desk; Four Chairs; Book Waggon; Cupboard; Barometer; Paper Basket; Map Great Western Railway; Date Box; Rug; Mat; Gas Pendant and Lamp; Two Tin Boxes; Office Stool; Umbrella Stand; Fender; Fire Irons; Fire Guard. ASSISTANT SURVEYOR'S OFFICE. Large Cupboard; Small Cupboard; Office Desk; Drawing Table; Drawing Board; Drawing Instruments, Scales, Curves, T and Set Squares; Date Stamp; Office Table; Counter, with Drawers; 3 Chairs; 4 Stools; Umbrella Stand; Waste-paper Basket; Fender and Fire Irons; Fire Guard; Mat; Gas Pendant; Gas Standard; Portable Standard; 2 Gas Brackets; 4 Hat Pegs; 1 Date Box. ACCOUNTANT'S OFFICE. Office Table; Small Table; 5 Chairs; Letter Copying Press and Stand; Bramah Safe; Cash Box; Cash Bags; Cash Board; Counter with Drawers; 2 Large Cupboards; Letter Weighing Scales; Fender; Fire-irons: Firs-guard; Gas Pendant; Standard Lamp; Mat; Date Box; Waste paper Basket. BRIDGE WHARF.—SURVEYOR'S OFFICE. 1 Office Desk; I Table; 2 Chairs; 2 Tin Boxes; 1 Lamp and Gas Fittings; 3 Lamp Shades; 1 Sot Fire-irons; 1 Fender; 1 Fire-guard; 1 Letter Clip; Office Carpet and Rug; 1 Small Mat. CLERKS' OFFICE. 1 Large Office Table; 1 Small Office Table; 4 Writing Slopes; 1 Desk; 7 Chairs; 2 Tin Boxes and Stands; 5 Tin Boxes and Stands; 1 Picture (Steam Roller); 1 Date Indicator; 1 Date Stamp; 1 Large Mat; 5 Small Mats; Gas Fittings (3 Brackets); 1 Umbrella Stand; 1 Fender; 1 set Fire-irons; 1 Fire Guard; 1 Coal Scuttle; 1 Fiie-screen; 7 Inkstands; 1 Window-screen; 3 Paper Baskets : 1 Paper Box (Stationery); 1 Measuring Tape; 2 Waste Paper Baskets; 2 Window Stops; 1 Office Clock; 2 5-feet Rods; 1 2-feet Rule; 1 Water Bottle and Glass; 3 Lamp Shades; 1 Bag; 1 Letter Copying Press and Stand. OFFICE, 26 WHARF. Large Dosk; Small Desk; 5 Stools; Coal Scuttle , Fender and Fire-irons; Fire-guard; Clock; Date Box; 4 Pay Boards; 2 Cash Boards; Form; Paybox to fit in Window; 4 Gas Globes; 2 Glass Shades, bell shaped; 2 Gas Fendants; 3 Gas Brackets; Wire Blind; 3 Window Blinds; Waste Paper Basket; Umbrella Stand; Drawing Board; Small Cupboard. 213 ACCOUNTANT'S OFFICE. Books. General Cash; Payments and Receipts; Summary of Monthly Payments and Receipts; Banking Account; Paying in; Cash Balances; Apportionments, New Streets; Balances to and from Owners; Notice to pave; First Notice for Estimated Expenses; Final Notice for Estimated Expenses; Receipt for Estimated Expenses; Notice and Receipt for Balances; Paving Works in progress; Gulley Drains constructed; Deposits and Returns, Drainage Works; Receipts for Deposits; Receipts for Cost of Work; Notice and Receipt for Balances; Contributions to Drains and Traps; Contributions to Cost of Sewers; Disbursements, Sewers Department; Estimate; Cost of Urinals and Supply of Gas and Water; Public Lavatories, Particulars and Account Books; Licenses for Hoardings, &c., and Advertising, Particulars and Account Book; Sewers Flushers and others—Time and Wages; Deposits and Returns, Paving Works; Receipts for Deposits; Receipts for Cost of Work; Notices and Receipts for Balances; Return Balances— Drainage and Paving Accounts; Accounts rendered to Gas and Water Companies and others; Cheques required and Wages Paid; Letter; Postage and Sundry Expenses. Papers and Documents. Monthly Statement of Receipts and Expenditure; List of Cases in the hands of the Vestry Solicitor; Returns of Notices Served under the 105th Sec. (New Streets); Letters; Closing Streets for Repairs, &c. ASSISTANT SURVEYOR'S OFFICE—VESTRY HALL. Books. Account; Report; Complaints; Memoranda of Complaints; Register of Sewers; Minutes; Estimates; Index of Plans and Documents; Clerk of Works Report; Re-naming Streets and Re-numbering Houses; Notices for connecting House Drains with Main Sewers : Specifications for Sewers; Specifications and Schedule of Prices, General Works; Gulley Drains and Sewers Cleansed; General Orders; Orders for Contractors; Water Orders; Paving Vouchers; Memoranda, Sewers Jobbing Works; Levels; Sketch Books. SURVEYOR'S DEPARTMENT.—STRONG ROOM. VESTRY HALL. Plans and Documents in Cases. New Streets; New Sewers; Alterations and Additions to Buildings; Renumbering Houses; Urinals, Street Refuges, Buildings, &c; Notices for Erection of Buildings; Vaults, Ovens, Lamps, &c.; Vouchers, Sewers Jobbing Works; Specifications, Tenders, and Contracts; Ordnance Maps of Streets; Ordnance Map showing Sewers; and Miscellaneous Plans and Documents; 3 Maps of Parish. 214 CLERK'S OFFICE.—BRIDGE WHARF. Books. Wages; Labour; Materials; Streets; Ledger; Journal; Day Work; Gas and Water Companies; New Streets—Day Work; New Streets—Labour arid Mttetials; Steam Rollers; New Streets taken to; Gravel and GuHeys; Estimates; Vestry Orders; Carting Materials—Orders; Rough Minutes; Disbursements (Two); Street Posts; Memoranda; Smiths' Work; Small Paving Accounts; Applications for Hoards; License for Hoards; Wood Paving Works —Labour and Materials; Wood Paving Works—Wages; Wood Paving Works—Materials and Men's Time; Wood Paving Works—Cartage; Surveyor's Report Book— Highway Department; Orders—Highway Department; Obstruction on Footways— First Notice; Obstruction on Footways—Last Notice; Coke, Coal, Oil, &c. Wood Paving Repairs; Letter Book. Papers. Letters; Gas and Water Companies' Vouchers; Canal Tickets; Men's Daily Time Sheets. SEWERS IMPLEMENTS IN STORE. 1 GO-feet length Flushing Hose; 1 50-feet length Flushing Hose; 2 20-feet Flushing Hose; 3 Standpipes, including Spanners; 3 Sewer Barrows; 5 Sewer Lamps; 1 4-gallon Oil Tank; 150 feet Sewer Rods; 2 Pails; 1 Hand Bowl; 2 40-feet Ropes; 14 Sewer Hoes; 2 Pairs Sewer Boots; 2 Sewer Frocks; 2 Sewer Hats; 1 Portable Fire-grate; 3 Shovels; 12 Setting-out Rods; 2 Iron Keys for Gulleys; 1 Tin Funnel; 6 Side Entrance Keys; 1 Crowbar; 1 2-feet Iron Measure; 1 Gulley Scoop; 1 Dumpy Level and Staff; 2 Tripod Stands for Staff; 1 100-feet Chain; 1 50-feet Chain; 2 50-feet Tapes; 1 Pair 5-feet Rods; 2 Egg-shaped Sewer Profiles; 1 12-in., 1 9-in., 2 6-in., 4 4-in. Botting's Plugs. SANITARY DEPARTMENT. INSPECTOR'S OFFICE. Large Desk; Writing Table; Deal Table and Slope; 8 Chairs; Copying Press; Stained Cupboards and Pigeon Holes. MEDICAL OFFICER'S ROOM. Pedestal Table; Large Desk; Small Desk; 1 Chair (cloth); 6 Chairs (Windsor); 1 Stool; Book Case; Carpet. ANALYST'S DEPARTMENT. Deal Table; 1 Chair (leather); 3 Chairs (Windsor). 215 Appendix III. PADDINGTON VESTRY HALL. Regulations and Conditions as to Letting. REGULATIONS. 1st.—All applications for the use of the Hall must be made in .writing to the Vestry Clerk, on forms to be obtained at the Hall, stating the nature of the purpose for which it is required. 2nd.—The Vestry will not consider the Hall engaged until the charges are paid, and no public announcement is to be made until the Hall is so engaged None but official receipts will be considered as valid. 3rd.—The person in whose name the Hall is engaged, and whose name is on the application and receipt, shall be held responsible for any damage. 4th.—Except by special permission of the Vestry, or one of its Standing Committees, the Hall will not be let for any Meeting, Lecture, Concert, &c., at which the doors will be required to be open before Seven o'clock in the Evening. Scale of Charges for the Use of the Vestry Hall. (PAYABLE IN ADVANCE.) PARTICULARS OF MEETING Outer Hall. Inner Hall. A. -Meeting of Ratepayers, to which admission is free and no collection is made, on Requisition signed by not less than One Hundred Ratepayers ; or to which use of the Outer Hall has been, or may be, granted rent free by the Vestry £ s. d. £ s. d. - 1 1 0 B.—Any Meeting, Lecture, Concert, &c., for which admission to any part of Hall is by Payment or Ticket 2 2 0 3 3 0 In every case a fee of One Guinea must be paid at the time of application to the Vestry to cover incidental expenses. By order, FKANK DETHKIDGE, Vestry Clerk 216 Appendix No. IV. Constitution of the Vestry, &c., after the May Election 1892. I.-MEMBERS OF THE VESTEY. Chairman (Ex-Officio.) The Rev. Walter Abbott, M.A., Vicar of Paddington. 57, Sussex Gardens. Deputy-Chairman (Elected.) William Henry Mills 19, Cambridge Terrace. Churchwardens (Ex-Officio Members.) Bicker-Caarten, Alfred G. 9, Upper Westbourne Ter. Mead, Col. Henry Robert, R.E 83, Gloucester Terrace. Elected Members. Ward No. 1. FOR ONE YEAR. Bell, Samuel 21, Porchester Road. Flood, James William 24, Burlington Road, and S, Westbourne Grove. Hills, John 70, Westbourne Park Villas. Plimley, Francis I, Richmond Road. Williams, John 171, Portsdown Road. 217 FOR TWO YEARS. Jefferson, William Earle 343, Harrow Road. Laurie, Lt.-Gen. John Wimburn. 47, Porchester Terrace. Minchin, James Innes8, Westbourne Park. Palmer, Maj.-Gen. Wm. Hy. G 22, Cornwall Road. Shaw, Charles G. ,, 89, Kensington Gardens Square. FOR THREE YEARS. Fletcher, John 70, Richmond Road. Gundry, Horace 8, Porchester Square. Mitchikson, Thomas 18, Richmond Road. Moore, Enoch 17, Gt. Western Terrace. Rossdale, James 12, Westbourne Grove. Ward No. 2. FOR ONE YEAR. Bicker-Caarten, Alfred Gerakd 9, Upp. Westbourne Terrace. Bonner-Maurice, Edward Arthur 177, Sutherland Avenue. Cole, Samuel Fernleigh, Fernhead Road, and 23, Porchester Road. Cooper, Henry 2, Errington Road. Hunt, John George 36 to 40, St. Mary's Terrace, Jackson, Richard Henry 128, Elgin Avenue. Maggs, Uriah 159, Church Street. Mills, Halford L 31, Cambridge Place. Murrell, William 174, Shirland Road. Townsend, Solomon 5, Chichester Place. FOR TWO YEARS. Boatfield, John 73, Fernhead Road. Burley, Charles 25, St. Mary's Terrace. Ellerton, John 3, Aldridge Road Villas. Harben, Henry Andrade 107, Westbourne Terrace. Hodgkinson, Edmund Hugh 8, Lancaster Gate. Jephson, Nathaniel Arlington 66, Portsdown Road. Jervis, John 55, Shirland Road. Moberly, Maj.-Gen. Arthur Scott, R.E 105, Sutherland Avenue. Moffatt, Col. James William 72, Marylands Road. Young, Edward Parker 30, Westbourne Square. 218 FOR TEREE YEARS. Blackwood, John 506, Harrow Road. Blount, Charles 90, Fernhead Road. Britton, George 3, Canterbury Mows. Hawkey, Joseph Francis 7, & 33, Marylands Road. Hunter, John Herbert 45, Blomfield Road. Kenyon, Frederick James 45, Edgware Road. Maberly, George Henry 121, Maida Vale. Seaman, William 132, Ashmore Road. Toy, Charles Alfred 79, Harrow Road. Wood, Peter 204, Fernhead Road, and 177, Ashmore Road. Ward No. 3. FOR ONE YEAR. Abbott, John Braemar House, Lancaster Gate. Bicker-Caarten, Gerard 25, Glo'ster Gardens. Harris,sirgeorgedavid,L.C.C. 32, Inverness Terrace. Jessop, Deputy - Surgeon-Gen. Charles Moore 98, Sutherland Avenue. Mead, Col. Henry Robert, R.E. 83, Glo'ster Terrace. Stewart, Maj.-Gen. John Heron Maxwell Shaw, R.E 61, Lancaster Gate. FOR TWO YEARS. Barchard,Co1. Charles Henry, C.B. 106, Glo'ster Terrace. Collins, Eugene 38, Porchester Terrace. Wuur, Robert Frederick 28, Craven Terrace, and 270, Harrow Road. Williams, George Abraham 21, Queen's Road. FOR THREE YEARS. Collins, Henry Hyman 5, Randolph Road. Farmer, James, J.P 6, Porchester Gate. Foxley, Frederick 26, Leinster Terrace. Kilvert, James Smith 72, Queen's Road. Rayner, William 33, Leinster Terrace, 219 Ward No. 4. FOR ONE YEAR. Blair, Col. Henry Francis, R.E. 1, Clarendon Place. Langridge, William 13, Craven Road. Mills, William Henry 19, Cambridge Terrace. Ommanney, Admiral Sir Erasmus, C.B., F.R.S 29, Connaught Square. Richardson, James 109, Westbourne Terrace. FOR TWO YEARS. Hill, James Eardley 6, Oxford Square. Robertson, Peter Steel 141, Edgware Road. Wyatt, Hugh Penfold, J.P 18, Oxford Square. FOR TEREE YEARS. Bannerman, Col. Patrick Wilson 8, Somers Place. Fardell, Thomas George, L.C.C, 26, Hyde Park Street. Hill, Charles John 43, Cambridge Street. Parry, Thomas 79, Oxford Terrace. II.—Parochial Auditors. WARD No. 1. — Hatter, George, 20, Richmond Road. „ No. 2.—Baum, Frederick C. P., L.C.C., 65, Thorngate Road. „ No. 3.—Brunel, Isambard, D.C.L., 15, Devonshire Terrace. „ No. 4.—Calder-Turner, Francis, 1, Bathurst Street. HI.—Overseers. Jephson, Nathaniel A 66, Portsdown Road. Plimley, Francis 1, Richmond Road. p 2 220 IV.—COMMITTEES OF THE VESTRY, 1.— Worhs Committee. Bannerman, Col. Patrick Wilson. Boatfield, John. Britton, George. Burley, Charles. Coopeb, Henry. Flood, James William. Foxi/ey, Frederick. Gundhy, Horace. Hawkey, Joseph Francis. Hills, John. Jackson, "Richard Henry. Jefferson, William Earle. Kilvert, James Smith. Jjangridge, William. Maberley, George Henry. Moberley, Maj.-Gen. A. S., R.E. Moffatt, Col. James William. Moore, Enoch. Palmer, Maj.-Gen. Wm. H. G. Rossdale, James. Seaman. William. Whur, Robert Frederick, Vice-Chairman, Williams, John, Chairman. Wood, Peter. Wyatt, Hugh Penfold, J.P. Ex-officio Members. Bicker-Caarten, Alfred G. Mead, Col. Henry R., wardens R.E. jephson.NathanielA. 0ver,nrs Plimley, Francis. uveneers• 2.—Finance Committee. Bannerman, Col. Patiuck Wilson.' Barciiard, Cel. Chas. Henry,C.B. Blai u, Col. Henry F., R.E. Britton, George. Hill, James Eardley. Hunter, John Herbert. Jervim, John. Laurie, Lieut.-Genl. John W. Maberley, George Henry. Maggs, Uriah. Minchin, James Innes, Vice-Chairman. Mjtciiinson, Thomas. Moffatt, Col. James William. Rayner, William. Stewart Major Gen. Siiaw, R.E. Wiiur, Robert Frederick. Ex-officio Members. Bicker-Caarten, Alfred G., Chairman. ( ChurchMead, Col. Henry r, ( wardens r.e. ; Jephson.NathanielA. 0ver$eerSt Plimley, Francis. 221 3.—Sanitary Committee. Abbott, John. Barchard, Col. Chas. Henry,C.B. Blair, Col. H. F., R.E. Burley, Charles. Collins, Henry Hyman, Vice-Chairman. Fletcher, John. Flood, James William. Harben, Henry Andrade. Harris, Sir George David, L.C.C. Chairman. Hawkey, Joseph Francis. Langridge, William. Moberly, Maj.-Gen. A. S., R.E. Ommanney, Adml.Sir Erasmus C.B., F.R.S. Parry, Thomas. Seaman, William. Williams, George Abraham. Ex-officio Members. Bicker-Caarten, Alfred G. Mead, Col. Henry R., R.E. Churchwardens Jephson,NathanielA. Plimley, Francis. Overseers. 4.—Legal Committee. Bonner-Maurice, Edward A. Collins, Eugene, Chairman. Ellerton, John. Farmer, James, J.P. Harben, Henry Andrade. Hill, Charles J. Jessop, Dep.-Sur.-Gen. C. M. Laurie, Lieut.-Gen. John W. Mills, William Henry. Minchin, James Innes. Murrell, William. Ommanney, Admiral Sir Erasmus, C.B.. F.R.S. Richardson, James. Robertson, Peter Steel. Stewart, Maj.-Gen. Shaw, R.E. Wyatt, Hugh Penfold, J.P. Vice-Chairman. Ex-officio Members. Bicker-Caarten Alfred G. Mead, Col. Henry R., R.E. Churchwardens. Jephson,Nathaniel A. Plimley, Francis. Overseers. 222 V.—Assessment Committee. APPOINTED PURSUANT TO THE PROVISIONS OF THE VALUATION (METROPOLIS) ACT, 1869. Barchard, Col. Chas. Henry,C.B. Collins, Henry Hyman. Chairman. Farmer, James, J.P. Foxley, Frederick. Gundry, Horace Jackson, Richard Henry, Vice-Chairman Langridge, William. Mead, Col. Henry R., R.E. Minchin, James Innes. Moore, Enoch. [R.E. Stewart, Maj.-Gen. Shaw, Whur, Robert Frederick. VI.—Members of the Burial Board. FOR ONE YEAR. Parry, Thomas, 79, Oxford Terrace. Plimley, Francis, 1, Richmond Road, Chairman. Laurie, Lieut.-Gen. J. W., 47, Porchester Terrace. FOR TWO YEARS. Abbott, Rev. Walter, M.A., 57, Sussex Gardens. Foxley, Frederick, 26, Leinster Terrace. Stewart, Maj.-Gen. Shaw, R.E., 61, Lancaster Gate. FOR THREE YEARS, Blair, Col. Henry, F., R.E., 1, Clarendon Place. Jackson, Richard Henry, 128, Elgin Avenue. Rayner, William, 33, Leinster Terrace, Vice-Chairman. VII—Commissioners for Public Baths and Wash-houses. FOR ONE YEAR. Blair, Col. H. F., R.E., 1, Clarendon Place. Plimley, Francis, 1, Richmond Road. Whur, Robert F., 28, Craven Terrace. FOR TWO YEARS. Jephson, Nathaniel A., 66, Portsdown Road. Mead, Col. Henry R., R.E., 83, Glo'ster Terrace. FOR THREE YEARS. Langridge, William, 13, Craven Road, Vice-Chairman. Williams, John, 171, Portsdown Road, Chairman. 223 VIII—MEETINGS OF THE VESTRY, COMMITTEES,&c. Meetings of the VESTRY are held on the first and third TUESDAYS in every Month (the third in August and the first in September excepted) at HALF-PAST NINE o'clock in the Morning, at the Vestry Hall Harrow Road. Meetings of the WORKS COMMITTEE are held on the second and fourth THURSDAYS in every Month (.August excepted) at TEN o'clock in the Morning, at the Vestry Hall. Meetings of the FINANCE COMMITTEE are held on the second and last TUESDAYS in every Month (August excepted) at TEN o'clock in the Morning, at the Vestry Hall. Meetings of the SANITARY COMMITTEE are held on the first and third THURSDAYS in every Month at TEN o'clock in the Morning, at the Vestry Hall. Meetings of the LEGAL COMMITTEE are held on the first WEDNESDAY in every Month, if necessary (August and September excepted), at TEN o'clock in the Morning, at the Vestry Hall. Meetings of the ASSESSMENT COMMITTEE are held on the first MONDAY in every Month (August and September excepted) at TEN o'clock in the Morning, at the Vestry Hall. Meetings of the BURIAL BOARD are held on the first FRIDAY in every Month, at TEN o'clock in the Morning, at the Vestry Hall. Meetings of the COMMISSIONERS for PUBLIC BATHS and WASHHOUSES are held every alternate MONDAY, at the Public Baths and Wash-houses, Queen's Road, at SEVEN o'clock in the Evening 224 IX-ALPHABETICAL LIST OF MEMBERS OF VESTRY WITH DATES OF THEIR FIRST ELECTION. When first Elected. Ward. 1876 Abbott, Rev. W., Chairman (ex-officio), 57, Sussex Gardens. 1881 Abbott, J., Bracmar House, Lancaster Gate 3 1892 Bannerman, Col. P. W., 8, Somers Place 4 1882 Barchard, Col. C. H., C.B., 106, Glo'ster Terrace 3 1878 Bell, Samuel, 21, Porchester Road 1 1857 Bicker-Caarten, A. G., 9, Upper Westbourne Terrace 2 1891 Bicker-Caarten, G., 25, Glo'ster Gardens 3 1888 Blackwood, John, 506, Harrow Road 2 1886 Blair, Col. H. P., R.E., 1, Clarendon Place 4 1892 Blount, C., 90, Fernhead Road 2 1891 Boatfield, J., 73, Fernhead Road 2 1891 Bonner-Maurice, E. A., 177, Sutherland Avenue 2 1889 Britton, G., 3, Canterbury Mews 2 1879 Burley, C., 25, St. Mary's Terrace 2 1884 Cole, Samuel, Fernleigh, Fernhead Road, and 23, Porchester Road 2 1882 Collins, Eugene, 38, Porchester Terrace 3 1871 Collins, H. H., 5, Randolph Road 3 1891 Cooper, H., 2, Errington Road 2 1871 Ellerton, J., 3, Aldridge Road Villas 2 1880 Fardell, T. G. (l.c.c.), 26, Hyde Park Street 4 1879 Farmer, J., J.P., 6, Porchester Gate 3 1889 Fletcher, J., 70, Richmond Road 1 1877 Flood, J.W., 24, Burlington Road, and 8, Westbourne Grove 1 1876 Foxley, F., 26, Leinster Terrace 3 1889 Gundry, H., 8, Porchester Square 1 1891 Harben, H. A., 107, Westbourne Terrace 2 1884 Harris, Sir G. D. (l.c.c.), 32, Inverness Terrace 3 1889 Hawkey, J. F., 7, Marylands Road 2 1885 Hill, Charles J., 43, Cambridge Street 4 1877 Hill, J. Eardley, 6, Oxford Square 4 1890 Hills, John, 70, Westbourne Park Villas 1 1891 Hodgkinson, E. H., 8, Lancaster Gate 2 1890 Hunt, J. G., 36, 38, & 40, St. Mary's Terrace 2 1892 Hunter, John H., 45, Blomfield Road 2 1878 Jackson, R. H., 128, Elgin Avenue 2 1890 Jefferson, W. E., 343, Harrow Road 1 1883 Jephson, N. A., 66, Portsdown Road 2 1891 Jervis, J., 55, Shirland Road 2 1886 Jessop, Deputy-Surg.General C. M., 98, Sutherland Avenue 3 1892 Kenyon, F. J., 45, Edgware Road 2 225 When first Elected. Ward. 1889 Kilvert, J. S., 72, Queen's Road 3 1874 Langridge, W., 13, Craven Road 4 1891 Laurie, Lt.-Gen. J. W., 47, Porchester Terrace 1 1888 Maberly, G. H., 121, Maida Vale 2 1890 Maggs, U., 159, Church Street 2 1890 Mead, Col. H. R., R.E., 83, Glo'ster Terrace 3 1890 Mills, Halford L., 31, Cambridge Place 2 1881 Mills, W. H., 19, Cambridge Terrace 4 1888 Minchin, J. I., 8, Westbourne Park 1 1883 Mitchinson. T., 18, Richmond Road 1 1891 Moberly, Maj.-Gen. A. S., R.E., 105, Sutherland Avenue 2 1891 Moffatt, Col. J. W., 72, Maryland's Road 2 1864 Moore, E., 22, Talbot Road 1 1890 Murrell, W., 174, Shirland Road 2 1890 Ommanney, Admiral Sir E., C.B., F.R.S., 29, Connaught Square 4 1891 Palmer, Maj.-Gen. W. H. C., 22, Cornwall Road 1 1868 Parry, Thomas, 79, Oxford Terrace 4 1881 Plimley, F., 1, Richmond Road 1 1888 Rayner, Wm., 33, Leinster Terrace 3 1888 Richardson, J., 16, Oxford Square 4 1890 Robertson, P. S., 141, Edgware Road 4 1890 Rossdale, J., 12, Westbourne Grove 1 1889 Seaman, W., 132, Ashmore Road 2 1891 Shaw, C. G., 89, Kensington Gardens Square 1 1890 Stewart, Major-General Shaw, R.E., 61, Lancaster Gate 3 1877 Townsend, S., 5, Chichester Place 2 1891 Toy, C. A., 79, Harrow Road 2 1875 Whur, R. P., 28, Craven Terrace 3 1888 Williams, G. A., 21, Queen's Road 3 1877 Williams, J., 171, Portsdown Road 1 1891 Wood, P., 177, Ashmore Road 2 1864 Wyatt, H. P., J.P., 18, Oxford Square 4 1871 Young, E. P., 30, Westbourne Square 2 226 Appendix No. V. MEMBERS OF THE BOARD OF GUARDIANS. ELECTED GUARDIANS. (18). Blair, Colonel Henry Francis, R.E. Charles, Mrs. Amelia Crofton, General James, R.E Dent, Rev. Charles Empson, Charles Wm., Vice-Chairman. Felce, Dr. Stamford Fuller, Stephen Drake, Chairman Hammond, Major Mark Hill, James Eardley Jephson, Nathaniel A Moberly, Maj.-Gen. Arthur Scott, R,E., Moffatt, Colonel James Wm. Moore, Mrs. Emily Popham, Dr. Benjamin Francis Raven, John Earle Swift, Herbert H. Thrupp, George A. Young, Edward Parker, M.R.C.S. 1, Clarendon Place. 16, Aldridgo Road Villas. 12, Westbourne Squaro. 76, Westbourne Terrace. 11, Palace Court. Kenmure Lodge, Elgin Avenue. 25, Invorness Terrace. 13, Norfolk Crescent. 6, Oxford Squaro. 66, Portsdown Road. 105, Sutherland Avenue. 72, Marylands Road. 19, Park Place Villas. 16, Kensington Gardens Squaro. 18, Durham Terrace. 45, Westbourne Terrace. 111, Maida Vale. 30, Westbourno Square. *EX-OFFICIO GUARDIANS. (18). Beddington, Maurice 91, Lancaster Gate. Collett, Sir Mark W., Bart 02, Sussox Square. Edlin, Sir Peter Henry, Q.C 64, Quoensboro' Terrace. 227 Goodson, James Johnston, Captain J. Gilbert Lawrence, Alderman Sir James Clarke, Bart. Lawrence, Alderman Sir William Lewis, Alfred D Lusk, Alderman Sir Andrew, Bart. Mews, John Montefiore, Joseph Sebag Nicholl, Captain Hume Noel, The Hon. Henry Lewis Pennington, Fredk Plucknett, George Ritchie, James T., Alderman Sherrard, James Corry Trench, Col.The Hon. William le Poer, R.E . White, Geo. Fredk 32, Kensington Gardens Square. 39, Hyde Park Square. 23, Hyde Park Gardens. 75, Lancaster Gate. 34, Leinster Gardens. 15, Sussex Square. 103, Westbourne Terrace. 4, Hyde Park Gardens. 23, Connaught Square. 17, Westbourne Terrace. 17, Hyde Park Gardens. 46, Connaught Square. 70, Queensboro' Terrace. 7, Oxford Square. 3, Hyde Park Gardens. 1, Porchester Gate. 0* Magistrates acting for the County of London, and resident in the Parish, are ex-officio Members of the Board of Guardians. Henry F. Aveling, Clerk to the Guardians. 228 Appendix No. VII. MANAGERS OF BOARD SCHOOLS. The Parish of Paddington, with the Parishes of Marylebone, St. Pancras, and Hampstead,form the "Marylebone Division" of the School Board for London. The several Schools in the Division overlap in regard to the areas from which the Scholars are drawn, and therefore it is thought desirable to give in this Appendix the complete List of the Managers for the whole Division up to the 15th July, 1892:— It may be added that the Members of the School Board are ex-officio Managers of all Schools in their Division, and that the other Managers are appointed by the Board. MARYLEBONE DIVISION. Correspondent for all Schools except Hawley-crescent:—Rev. M. E. Browne, M.A., Divisional Offices, 25, Stanhope-street,Hampstead-road, N.W. Honorary Correspondent for Hawley-crescent, Camden Town: — Mrs. Gale, 17, Park Village West, N.W. BARRETT-STREET, OXFORD-STREET. Mr. Joseph R. Diggle (Member in Charge) Rev. J. W. Ayre, M.A. St. Mark's Vicarage, North Clerk in Holy Orders (Chairman) Audley-street, W. Mr. F. Debenham 26, Upper Hamilton-ter.,N.W. Draper Dr. John Lowe 4, Gloucester Place, Portman- Physician squaro, W. Mr. W. Sutherland 18, Upper Montagu-street, W. Secretary 229 Miss Honor Brooke Miss Maud Brooke Miss Bryce Mrs. Radcliffe Hon. Mrs. E. L. Stanley Rev.Canon W.Barker,M.A. Rev. Ralph Percy Thompson, M.A. 1, Manchester-square, W. 1, Manchester-square, W. 15, Notting-hill-square, W 34, Chenistc n-gardens, Kensington, W. 18, Mansfield-street, Portland- place, W. 38, Devonshire-place, W. 16, Somerset-street, W. No occupation Ditto Ditto Ditto Ditto Rector of Marylebone Vicar of St. Thomas, Portman-sq., W. BARROW HILL-ROAD, PORTLAND TOWN. Rev. C. J. Ridgeway (Member in Charge) Mr. A. K. Connell (Chairman) Mr. T. Reed Miss Angus Mrs. A. K. Connell Miss M. B. Jackson Rev. Francis Kohler Povah, M.A. Miss Beatrice Maitland Mrs. Allen Pütz Miss Etheldred Allen 20, Elm Tree Road, N.W. Hampstead Lodge, Marlborough Hill, N.W. The College, Regent's Park 20, Elm Tree-road, N.W. 18, Seymour-st., Portman-sq. W. 11, St. Edmund's - terrace, Regent's-park, N.W. 18, Prinirose-hill-road, N.W. 5, Stanley-gardens, Hampstead, N.W. 2, Chester-1 errace, Regent'spark, N.W. Literary Gentleman No occupation Ditto Ditto Clerk in Holy Orders No occupation Widow Spinster BROOM SLEIGH-STREET, WEST HAMPSTEAD. Mr. Edmund Barnes (Member in Charge and Chairman) Gen. O. Douglas Hamilton, 46, Marylands - road, St. Major-General ( Vice-Chairman) Rev. E. Davys, M.A. Capt. R. Ellis Rev. W. J. Watkins Mrs. W. II. Edwards Dr. John Adam Watson Peter's - park, W. The Parsonage, West End, Clerk in Holy Orders Hampstead, N.W. 7, Abbot's-rd., Kilburn, N.W. Retired Officer 19, Fordwych - road, West Clerk in Holy Orders Hampstead, N.W. Fernyhurst, Hillfield-road, No occupation West End, N.W. 39, Dennington Park-road, Physician and West Hampstead, N.W. Surgeon Dr. Henry J. Thornton Madiesfield, Arol-road, West Surgeon Wharton, M.A., Oxon. Hampstead, N.W. 230 CAMDEN TOWN GROUP. CAMDEN-STREET, CAMDEN TOWN. HAWLEY-CRESCENT, CAMDEN TOWN. PRINCESS-ROAD, REGENT'S PARK. Sir Cameron Gull (Member in Charge) Rev. E. 13. Penfold, M.A. (Chairman) Mr. S. R. Starey Mrs. B. M. Bates Mrs. Gale Mrs. S. R. Starey Mr. A. Colpoys Beattie Mrs. Rickman Mr. Charles Downey Richardson Rov. W. J. Sparrow Simpson, M.A. Mrs. Charlotte A. Buck Mrs. Helen Pütz Rev. Alfred Spencer, M.A. 10, Gloucester-crescent, Re- Clerk in Holy Orders gent's Park, N.W. 53, Hilldrop-road, N. 3, Fellowes-road, N.W. 17, Park Village West, N.W. 53, Hilldrop-road, N. 8, Regent's Park-road, N.W. 10, St. George's-terrace, Regent's-park-road, N.W. 24, Ulysses-road, West Hamp- Electrical Engineer stead, N.W. 36, Regent's-park-road, N.W. Clerk in Holy Orders 48, Primrose-hill-road, N.W. No occupation 5, Stanley-gardens, Hamp- Ditto stead, N.W. 30, Primrosc-hill-road, N.W. Clerk in Holy Orders Gentleman Widow No occupation Ditto Solicitor No occupation EDGWARE-ROAD GROUP. CAMPBELL-STREET, MAIDA HILL WEST. CAPLAND-STREET, LISSON-GROVE. Rov. C. J. Ridgeway (Member in Charge and Chairman) Mr. Edward Blair Mr. Arthur K. Connell Rev. E. Adair Midwinter, M.A. Rev. Alfred Scott, M.A. Miss Charlotte E. Cobb Fretherne House,York-pl.,W. 20, Elm Tree-road, N.W. 35, Blandford-square, N.W. St. Mary's Vicarage, Pad- dington Green, W. 25, Randolph-crescent, W. Schoolmaster Literary Clerk in Holy Orders Clork in Holy Orders No occupation 231 Mrs. E. Moore 19, Park-place-villas, Maida Guardian (Padding- Hill West ton) Rev. John Vezey Mason, 26, Clifton-road, Maida Vale, Clerk in Holy Orders B.A. W. Mr. Charles Merivall 33, Blandford-square, N.W. Civil Servant FLEET-ROAD GROUP, HAMPSTEAD. BRECKNOCK, CAMDEN TOWN. FLEET-ROAD, HAMPSTEAD. GREAT COLLEGE-STREET, CAMDEN TOWN. Mr. E. Barnes (Member in Charge and Chairman) Dr. F. H. Gervis 1, Fellowes-road, Haverstock Doctor of Medicine Hill, N.W. Mr. T. W. Gittens Hill Yiew, The Vale, Hamp- Carrier stead, N.W. Rev. Gerard A. Horklots, St. Saviour's Vicarage, South Clerk in Holy M.A. Hampstead, N.W. Orders Rev. H. W. Reynolds,M.A. St. Thomas's Vicarage, Cam- Clerk in Holy Orders den Town, N.W. Hon. E. Lyulph Stanley 18, Mansfield-street, Portland- Barrister-at-Law place, W. Mrs. Heberden 63, Canfield Gardens, West No occupation Hampstead, N.W. Miss Julia C. Hill 5, Hyde Park Mansions, Ditto N.W. Mr. Joseph King, Jun., 6, Wedderburn-road, Hamp- Occupation not M.A. stead, N.W. stated Miss Jane Christie 54, Fellowes-road, South No occupation Hampstead, N.W. Mr. MarkWilks 12, St.Bartholomew-rd., Cam- Minister den-road, Islington, N. Mr. Henry William Chars- 17, Gillies-street, N.W.Pianoforte-maker ley Miss S. Louisa Reynolds St. Thomas's Vicarage, St. Voluntary Parish Paul's-road, N.W., and Work Hillside, 29, Charlton-rd., Tufnell-park, N. 232 GRAY'S INN-ROAD GROUP. MANCIIESTER-STREET, GRAY'S INN-ROAD. PROSPECT TERRACE, GRAY'S-INN-ROAD. Rev, John J. Coxhead, M.A. (Member in Charge and Ordinary Manager) Rov. R. H. A. Bradley, M.A. (Chairman) Mr. J. K. Garner (Vice-Chairman.) Mr. F. A. Birch Mr. J. S. Masterman Miss Margaret A. Eve Miss Hepburn Rov. Albert. Moore, M.A. Miss Elizabeth S. Lidgett Mrs. Blonifleld Jackson 1a, Russell-square, W.C. 1, Hastings-street, W.C. Clerk in Holy Ordors Manufacturer 12, Millman-st., Bodford-row, Churchwardon W.C. 16, Camden Ilouse-road, W. Assist. Master, University College School 107, Lansdowno-road, Notting No occupation Hill, W. 9, Portland-place, W. Ditto 24, Argyle-square, King's Clork in Holy Orders Cross, W.C. 40, Gordon-square, W.C. No occupation 29, Mecklonburgh - square, Ditto W.C. HAMPSTEAD-ROAD GROUP. NETLEY-STREET, HAMPSTEAD-ROAD. STANHOPE-STREET, HAMPSTEAD-ROAD. General Moberly (Member in Charge) Rev. T. Turner (Chairman) Rev. E. B. Hartley Mr. S. R. Starey Miss Edith Angus 50, Fitzroy-slriot., W. Clork in Holy Orders 49, Devonshire-street, Port- Ditto land-place, W. 53, Hilldrop-road, N. Gentleman The College, Regent's Park, No occupation N.W. 233 Miss Cadman Trinity Lodge, Grove-park, No occupation Denmark-hill, S.E. Miss M. E. Janvrin 41, York-ter., Regent's Park, Ditto N.W. Mrs. S. R. Starey 53, Hilldrop-road, N. Ditto Mrs. Heberden 63, Canfield-gardens, Finch- Ditto ley-road, N.W. Colonel Henry Heberden 63, Canfield-gardens, Finch Retired Officer,Royal ley-road, N.W. Artillery. Rev. J. Staffurtb, M.A. 21, Osnaburgh-street, N.W Clerk in Holy Orders HARROW ROAD GROUP, PADDINGTON. AMBERLEY-ROAD, HARROW-ROAD. HARROW-ROAD, PADDINGTON. General Francis J. Moberly (Member in Charge and Chairman) Dr. S. N. Bruce 43, Kensington Gardens-sq., Surgeon W. Rev. H. Yon der Heyde St. Paul's Vicarage, 21, West- Clerk in Holy Orders Cowell, B.A. bourne-square, W. Mr. Charles Mallet 6, Pembridge-place, W. Mr. J. J. Rees Williams 58, Sutherland-avenue, Maida Vale, W. Miss Honor Brooke 1, Manchester-square, W. Miss Bryce 15, Notting Hill-square, W Miss Kathleen Bryce 15, Notting Hill-square, W. Miss Mary G. Shepherd 8, St. Stephen's - crescent, Westbourne Park, W. Rev. Charles F. Reeks, 27, Delamere-terrace, W. Clerk in Holy Orders M.A. Mr. Arthur Mills 34, Hyde-park-gardens, W. Magistrate Rev. L. E. Bartlett, B.A. 22, Formosa-street, W. Clerk in Holy Orders Mr. F. C. Baum 59, Porchester-road, W. Upholsterer Mr. George Henry Maberly 121, Maida Vale, W. Coachbuilder H.M.'s Civil Service Gentleman No occupation Ditto Ditto Ditto HAVERSTOCK HILL. Sir Cameron Gull (Member in Charge) Mr. J. Gundry (Vice-Chairman) 108, Haverstock Hill, N.W. Gentleman Q 234 Rev. Edwin L. Cutts, D.D. Miss Annie E. Allen Miss Edith Angus Mrs. B. M. Bates Miss Mckee (Chairman) Mr. George C. Maile Mrs. Henry Nevisison Rev George Pearce Gould The Vicarage, Haverstock Hill, Clerk in HolyOrders N.W. 5, Albert-terrace, Regent's Ditto Park, N.W. The College, Regent's Park, No occupation N.W. 3, Fellowes-road, N.W. Ditto 2, Newman Mansions, Oxford- Ditto street, W. 19, Provost-road, Eaton-road, Monumental N.W. Sculptor 13, John-street, Hampstead, No occupation N.W. 47, Gloucester-road, N.W Tutor in Theology KENTISH TOWN GROUP. BURGHLEY-ROAD, KENTISH TOWN. CARLTON-ROAD, KENTISH TOWN. HOLMES-ROAD (LATE MANSFIELD-PLACE) KENTISH TOWN ROAD. Hon. E. Lyulph Stanley (Member in Charge) Mrs. H. Evelegh (Chairman) Miss Mckee Mr. Thomas Peard Mr. Henry Davies Mr. Matthew B. Sutton Miss R. Davenport-Hill Miss Gandar Rev. James Clement Cowd, M.A. Cantab. Mr. Samuel Richard Lamble Mr. Mark Wilks Mr. Richard Cooper Akers Mr. George Cox Mr. Stanton Coit, Ph. D 63, Canfied-gardens, Finchley-road, N.W. 2, Newman Mansions, Oxfordstreet, W. 33, Bartholomew-road, N.W. 149, Queen's-crescent, N.W. Roseneath, Dartmouth Park Hill, N.W. 25, Belsize-avenue, N.W. 157, Camden-road, N.W. Kentish Town Vicarage, N.W. Stanley House, 52, High gateroad, N.W. 12, St. Bartholomew-road, Camden-road, Islington,N. 167, Leigbton-road, N.W. 173, Camden-road, N.W. Leighton Hall, Leightoncrescent, Kentish-town, N.W. No occupation Ditto Manufacturer Outfitter Gentleman M.S.B.L No occupation Clerk in Holy Orders Builder Minister Bootmaker Wine Merchant Lecturer to the Southplace, Ethical Society 235 Rev. James Weyman, Mr. John William Dickson 14, Caversham-road, N.W. 33, Southgrove, Highgate, N. Minister Contractor LISSON-GROVE GROUP. BELL-STREET, EDGWARE-ROAD. NIGHTINGALE-STREET, PORTMAN MARKET. STEPHEN-STREET, LISSON-GROVE. Mr. Joseph R. Diggle (Member in Charge and Chairman) Rev. E. Adair Midwinter, M.A., Miss Eleanor C. Hart Miss Joyce C. Lee Mr. Edward Blair Mr. Francis Morris Mrs. Richard Wallace Mrs. A. J. Allen Rev. James Hutchons, M.A. Mrs. Emily Mary Oliver Rev. Henry James Wright Rev. 0. F. Wardell Yerburgh, M.A. St. Paul's Vicarage, 35, Blandford-square, N.W. 86, Hamilton-terrace, N.W. 18, Seymour-street, Portmansquare, W. Fretherne House, York-place, W. 246, Marylebone-road, N.W., and Pembroke-mansions, South Hampstead 24, Norfolk-crescent, Hyde Park, W. 31, Dorset-square, W. 7, Blandford-square, N.W 44, Harewood-square, N.W. 8, Randolph-road, Maidavale, W. 10, Dorset-square, N.W. Clerk in Holy Orders N o occupation Ditto Head Master of Preparatory School Gentleman No occupation Ditto Clerk in Holy Orders No occupation Clerk in Holy Orders Ditto NETHERWOOD-STREET, KILBURN. General Moberly (Member in Divisional Member Charge, Chairman) Mr. J. G. S. Fletcher Treherne House, West Hamp- J.P., and Member of stead, N.W. London County Council 236 Mr. Thomas Hobson Mrs. W. Sickert General Young Mrs. Clark Miss Anno Miles Miss Rawlings Mrs. D. S. Water low Rev. Charlos Mortimer MoAnally, M.A. Mrs. Mary Anno F. Foster, Mrs. Amy Barber Miss Kate Marion Hall Runnymede, West End-lane, N.W. 10, Hereford-square, South Kensington, S.W. 70, Finchley New Road The Beacon, Wost End-lane, N.W. 97, Priory-road, N.W. 184, Belsize-road, N.W. Tho Three Thorns, North- wood, Rickmansworth St. James's Vicarage, 133, Wost-end-lane, N.W. 18, Daloham-gardons, N.W Inglefield, Christ Church- road, Brondesbury 174, Broadhurst-gardens,Wcst Hampstead Gentleman No occupation General (Retired) No occupation Ditto Ditto Ditto Clerk in Holy Orders No occupation No occupation Science Student and Teacher ST. PANCRAS GROUP. ALDENHAM-STREET, ST. PANCRAS. MEDBURN-STREET, ST. PANCRAS. Hon. E. Lyulph Stanley (Member in Charge and Ordinary Manager) Mrs. Ilebordcn (Chairman) Mr. S. R. Starey Mrs. S. R. Staroy Miss E. Malcolm Kerr Mrs. Elizabeth W. Bell ltov. Zopbaniah Banks Woffendalo Mr. William Baylis Mr. Henry Starck Mis1* Anna Anderson Morton Rev. Edward W. Christie, G3, Canficld Garden?, Finch- lcy-road, N.W. 53, Hilldrop-road, N.W. 53, Hilldrop-road, N.W. 7, Chester-terrace, Regent's Park 15, Upper Park-road, N.W. Whito House, Dartmouth-park- avenue, N. 170, Ilampstcad-road, N.W. Florence-villa, Lewisham-rd., Dartmoutli-Park-hill, N. Hendra, St. John's-park, Blackheath 14, Camden-street, N.W. No occupation Gentleman No occupation Ditto Ditto Minister Cabinot Manufacturer Musical Instrument Maker No occupation Curate of Old St. Pancras 237 WHITFIELD STREET, TOTTENHAM COURT- ROAD. Rev. John J. Coxhead,M. A. (Member in Charge and Ordinary Manager) Rev. T. Turner (Chairman) Rev. Arthur R. Godson, M.A. Lieut.-Col. Chas. Hollway Mrs. Coxhead Mrs. Arthur R. Godson Miss Mildred Hammond 50, Fitzroy-street, W. All Saints' Vicarage, Gordon-street, W.C. 151, Regent-street, W. 12, Fitzroy-square, W. All Saints' Vicarage, Gordon-street, W.C. 13, Norfolk-crescent, Hydepark, W. Clerk in Holy Orders 1, Ditto Lieut.-Col. (Ret. List) No occupation 1, Ditto Ditto