AC. 4369 VON 101 Report of the Medical Officer of Health for the Port and City of London for 1975 To be presented on Thursday, 22nd July, 1976 CONSTITUTION AND JURISDICTION The governing body of the City of London, the Corporation of London, was originally constituted the Sanitary Authority of the Port of London by Section 20 of the Public Health Act, 1872. The cost of administration was met from the Corporation's private funds for close on fifty years, when it became rate (and grant) aided. By the Public Health (London) Act, 1936, the term "Port Sanitary" was changed to "Port Health", and the Port Health district is further defined by the Act as the "Port of London as established for the purposes of the law relating to the Customs of the United Kingdom" and by the Public Health Act, 1936 as "the Port as established for the purposes of the enactments relating to the Customs". The Public Health (London) Act 1936 was repealed by the London Government Act 1963 but Section 89 (1) of that Act defined the Port of London as "the Port of that name established for the purposes of the enactments relating to customs or excise." In accordance with the provisions of the London Port Health Authority Order 1965 made under Section 41 (1) of the London Government Act 1963 the Corporation of London shall have jurisdiction as Port Health Authority - (a) as respects functions, rights and liabilities of a local authority under the enactments mentioned in Part I of Schedule I of the Order over all waters within the Port and over such part of the district of any riparian authority as comprises the whole of any wharf and of the area within the gates of any dock and the buildings thereon respectively, forming part of or abutting upon the Port; (b) as respects any other functions, rights and liabilities assigned to them, within the Port (The Port of London established for the purposes of the enactments relating to customs or excise). The limits of the Port of London for the purposes of the enactments relating to customs or excise were originally defined by a Treasury Minute dated 1st August, 1883. They commence at high water mark in the River Thames at Teddington Lock, in the County of Surrey, and extend down both sides of the said River Thames to an imaginary straight line drawn from the Pilot mark at the entrance of Havengore Creek in the County of Essex, to the land's end at Warden Point, in the Isle of Sheppey, in the County of Kent, such point being the north-western limit of the Port of Faversham, and extend up and include both sides of the River Medway to an imaginary straight line drawn from the south-east point of land westward of Coalmouth Creek, thence across the said River Medway to the western-most point of the piece of land which forms the eastern side of Stangate Creek, or, in other words, the north-west point of Fleet Marsh and thence in a southerly direction to Iwade Church in the said County of Kent, and thence in a north-easterly direction to Elmley Chapel in the said Isle of Sheppey, a supposed direct line from Elmley Chapel to Iwade Church, being the western limit of the Port of Faversham, and the said Port of London includes the Islands of Havengore Creek aforesaid, called Potton and Rushley Islands, and so much of the said Creek and Watercourses as extends from it to the town of Rochford, and also includes all other Islands, Rivers, Streams, Creeks, Waters, Watercourses, Channels, Harbours, Docks and places within the before-mentioned limits contained. Following upon the extension of the area of jurisdiction of the Port of London Authority by the Port of London Authority (Extension of Seaward Limit) Act 1964 the area of jurisdiction of the Corporation of London as Port Health Authority was similarly amended by Section 31 of the City of London (Various Powers) Act 1965 which added at the end of the definition of "Port of London" in Section 89 (1) of the London Government Act 1963 the following words: "together with all such waters between the seaward limit of the Port as so established and imaginary straight lines drawn from latitude 51° 37' 00" north, longitude 00° 57' 19" east (Foulness Point in the County of Essex) to latitude 51° 46' 05" north, longitude 01° 20' 32" east (Gunfleet Old Lighthouse) and thence to latitude 51° 26" 36" north, longitude 01° 25' 30" east and thence to latitude 51° 24' 55" north, longitude 00° 54' 21" east (Warden Point in the County of Kent) as are for the time being within the territorial waters of Her Majesty's dominions." The Port of London Authority with which the Port Health Authority works in close cooperation was established as the administrative body of the Port of London including the docks and tideway of the River Thames, by Act of Parliament in 1909. PORT AND CITY OF LONDON HEALTH COMMITTEE (as at 31st December, 1975) Chairman Deputy Chairman Aldermen Commoners William Allan Davis Brig. Joseph John Packard Sir Gilbert Samuel Inglefield, G.B.E., T.D., M.A., D.Sc. Air Cdre. The Hon. Peter Vanneck, C.B., O.B.E., A.F.C., A.E., D.L., M.A. Neville Bernard Burston, M.A. Richard Christopher Larkins Charvet, R.D. Arthur Malcolm Bell, LL.B. Arthur Edward Chase Green, M.B.E., T.D., D.L. Capt. Frederick Arthur Kemmis Betty, O.B.E., V.R.D., R.N.R. Dennis Gordon Fisher Stanley Edward Cohen, C.B.E. Frank Sidney Pritchard Col. Frederick Arthur Sudbury, O.B.E., E.R.D., J.P. Herbert Twyneham Pike, Deputy Peter Philip Rigby, J.P. Sir Thomas Kingsley Collett, C.B.E., Deputy Dr. James Cope Lady Donaldson, J.P. Thomas Cuthbert Harrowing, Deputy Sir Stanley Graham Rowlandson, M.B.E., J.P. Iris Samuels Edwin Stephen Wilson Henry Duckworth, J.P., Deputy Henry Wimburn Sudell Horlock, M.A. John Edward Hoare John Clarence Lascelles, D.F.C. Henry John Spurrier Kenneth Alfred Ballard, M.C. 1 STAFF (as at 31 December, 1975) Commenced Service Any other Appointment held MEDICAL OFFICER OF HEALTH (for the Port and City of London) D.T. JONES, B.Sc., M.B., B.Ch., M.F.C.M., D.C.H., D.P.H., March 1958 D.C.T. Medical Inspector of Immigrants MEDICAL STAFF SECONDED FROM CITY AND EAST LONDON AREA HEALTH AUTHORITY W.T. ROUGIER CHAPMAN, V.R.D., M.R.C.S., L.R.C.P. Senior Assistant Port Medical Officer — Medical Inspector of Immigrants R.G.S. WHITFIELD, D.S.C., B.A., M.R.C.S., L.R.C.P. Assistant Port Medical Officer — Medical Inspector of Immigrants R.F. ARMSTRONG, L.R.C.P., L.R.C.S., Ed., L.R.F.P.S., Glas. Assistant Port Medical Officer (part-time) - Medical Inspector of Immigrants J.H. HUDSON, B.Sc., M.B., M.R.C.S., D.T.M. & H., D.P.H., M.F.C.M., (Acc.) Assistant Port Medical Officer (part-time) - Medical Inspector of Immigrants A.E.L. DE THIERRY, M.A., M.B., B.Chir., D(Obst), R.C.O.G., D.P.H. Assistant Port Medical Officer (part-time) - Medical Inspector of Immigrants R.M. BEST, M.B., B.S. (Lon.) Assistant Port Medical Officer (part-time) - Medical Inspector of Immigrants K. GEORGE, M.B., B.S., D.T.M. & H. Assistant Port Medical Officer (part-time) - - M.J. LITTLEWOOD, M.B., B.S., D.T.M. & H. Assistant Port Medical Officer (part-time) Medical Inspector of Immigrants Occasional Medical Inspectors of Immigrants DR. D.J. AVERY DR. P.J.R. WALTERS DR. D.W. KEYS Commenced Service ADMINISTRATIVE SECTOR R.C. RATLIFF Chief Administrative Officer March 1930 E.V. SMITH Deputy Chief Administrative Officer October 1938 R.G. RUTTER Principal Assistant July 1968 B.E. DAVIES Principal Assistant November 1972 P.J. JARVIS Senior Assistant July 1971 J.V. SMITH Senior Assistant June 1975 S.C. DARLISON Senior Assistant July 1928 Mrs. E.J.A. MORROW First Class Assistant March 1968 R.L. VALDINI First Class Assistant August 1972 Miss E.P.M. RUSSELL First Class Assistant April 1975 Miss K.A. BARFOOT First Class Assistant September 1975 Miss S.L.B. VALDINI Clerical Assistant September 1974 Mrs. J.E. GRAHAM Clerical Assistant (Temporary) (part-time) August 1971 K.A. UNDERDOWN Clerical Assistant January 1974 Mrs. A.H. MEALY Clerical Assistant May 1974 Miss E.E. HARVEY Clerical Assistant May 1975 1 Vacancy Clerical Assistant - Miss B. LOVATT Senior Shorthand Typist November 1969 Mrs. D.M. HARMAN Shorthand Typist (Temporary) (part-time) September 1972 Miss S.B. SMITH Shorthand Typist April 1974 Miss J.M. CAMP Audio Typist June 1974 E.J. PETERS Senior Assistant (Meat Inspector's Office) November 1935 J.E. CASH First Class Assistant (Meat Inspector's Office) March 1954 R.J.F. PARISSIEN Clerical Assistant (Meat Inspector's Office) March 1971 J.S. McCAFFERTY Clerical Assistant (Meat Inspector's Office) April 1974 2  Commenced Service ADMINISTRATIVE SECTOR (continued) Miss A.G. HARRISON Senior Assistant (Diseases of Animals Act) November 1975 Miss L.D. JONES Clerical Assistant (Diseases of Animals Act) February 1975 Miss C.A. LOVETT Clerical Assistant (Diseases of Animals Act) May 1974 H.T. LLOYD Senior Messenger/Driver November 1968 G.P. BIGMORE Messenger/Driver September 1975 K.C. BUTT Messenger/Driver September 1975 ENVIRONMENTAL HEALTH (CITY) SECTOR Environmental Health Officers E. THOMPSON, M.E.H.A. Chief Environmental Health Officer (City) September 1948 M.J. FLYNN, M.E.H.A. Deputy Chief Environmental Health Officer (City) July 1951 T.B. MEANEY, M.E.H.A., M.R.San.A., F.R.S.H. Principal Environmental Health Officer March 1968 J.H. RILEY, M.E.H.A. Senior Environmental Health Officer August 1962 J.B. WELLDON, M.E.H.A., M.R.S.H. Senior Environmental Health Officer August 1962 H.L. SHEPLEY, M.E.H.A. Senior Environmental Health Officer May 1964 W.G. SMITH, M.E.H.A. Senior Environmental Health Officer May 1972 P.L.S. CLARK, D.H.E., F.E.H.A., M.R.S.H. Senior Environmental Health Officer March 1974 W.J. BAXENDALE Environmental Health Officer January 1964 D.F. CORFIELD Environmental Health Officer June 1964 D. HITCHCOCK, M.E.H.A., M.R.S.H. Environmental Health Officer November 1967 B.L. NUNN Environmental Health Officer April 1968 B.J. DAWSON Environmental Health Officer February 1969 M.C.J. ELKINGTON, M.E.H.A. Environmental Health Officer February 1969 D.T. SPRINGATE Environmental Health Officer March 1974 R.J. FOULGER Environmental Health Officer July 1975 Technical Assistants D.T.W. FREEMAN Technical Assistant March 1968 P.J. FOX Technical Assistant June 1972 P.W. KERRIDGE, L.M.R.S.H., A.I .M.S.0. Technical Assistant July 1972 C.E.W. EASTMAN, L.M.R.S.H. Technical Assistant September 1972 Rodent Staff P.M. BERRY Foreman Rodent Operative June 1967 J. PEGRAM Rodent Operative September 1967 F.H. PRIEST Rodent Operative March 1969 J.E. KIDDY Rodent Operative February 1973 W.R. STRACHAN Rodent Operative May 1973 A. VELLA Rodent Operative November 1974 Mortuary and Disinfecting Station Staff F.H. LAWRENCE Superintendent of the City Mortuary and Disinfecting Station May 1936 W.T. STEELE Senior Disinfector and Mortuary Attendant August 1958 G.W. JACOBS (General Duties at Mortuary) December 1966 A. CUNNINGHAM (General Duties at Mortuary) April 1975 W.A. WALDMAN (General Duties at Mortuary) June 1975 Mrs. M.M. SHEEHAN (Bath Attendant and Cleaner) October 1962 ENVIRONMENTAL HEALTH (SMITHFIELD) SECTOR Environmental Health Officers W.R. LEE, M.lnst.M., M.E.H.A. Chief Environmental Health Officer (Smithfield) June 1929 K.S. SEYMOUR, M. lnst.M., M.E.H.A., M.A.M.I. Deputy Chief Environmental Health Officer (Smithfield) July 1935 J.C. WILSON, M.lnst.M., M.A.M.I. Senior Environmental Health Officer January 1936 H.C. FIELD, M.E.H.A., M.A.M.I. Senior Environmental Health Officer August 1954 G. GINGELL, A.R.S.H. Senior Environmental Health Officer August 1954 3  Commenced Service ENVIRONMENTAL HEALTH (SMITHFIELD) SECTOR (continued) Environmental Health Officers (continued) J.T. COX, M.E.H.A. Environmental Health Officer March 1975 B.G.F. PAYNE, D.F.C. Environmental Health Officer December 1960 4 Vacancies D.T. ALDRIDGE, M.A.M.I. Environmental Health Officers Authorised Officer under the Meat Inspection Regulations September 1975 Meat Porters R. HUDSON Senior Porter May 1963 E.A. HIGLEY (General Duties at Smithfield Market) September 1967 W.H. DALTON (General Duties at Smithfield Market) May 1970 A.J. FREW (General Duties at Smithfield Market) November 1970 E.G. HIGLEY (General Duties at Smithfield Market) October 1972 H. GROUT (General Duties at Smithfield Market) April 1973 PORT HEALTH SECTOR Port Health Inspectors A.H. MARSHALL, F.A.P.H.I. Chief Port Health Inspector March 1953 A.C. GOOD, M.R.S.H., M.E.H.A. Deputy Chief Port Health Inspector September 1951 P.A. TRAYNIER, F.R.S.H., M.E.H.A. Divisional Port Health Inspector October 1950 W.C.B. GILHESPY, M.E.H.A. Divisional Port Health Inspector January 1960 A. GAME, M.E.H.A. Divisional Port Health Inspector August 1961 A.W. BUCHAN, M.E.H.A. Divisional Port Health Inspector July 1955 J.A. STOKER, M.E.H.A. Senior Port Health Inspector June 1963 P.G. PRITCHARD, M.E.H.A. Senior Port Health Inspector June 1965 J.C. STRACHAN, M.E.H.A. Senior Port Health Inspector June 1968 F. SPENCER, M.E.H.A. Senior Port Health Inspector March 1957 J.I. ECKERSALL, M.E.H.A. Senior Port Health Inspector June 1966 R.W. GWYER, M.R.S.H., M.E.H.A. Port Health Inspector March 1960 G.J. BULL, M.E.H.A. Port Health Inspector June 1967 J.D. EDWARDS, M.E.H.A. Port Health Inspector June 1969 A.E. TERRIBILE, M.E.H.A. Port Health Inspector June 1969 A.M. GIBBS-MURRAY, M.E.H.A. Port Health Inspector June 1970 D.J. DURRANT, M.E.H.A. Port Health Inspector November 1971 8 Vacancies Port Health Inspectors — Student Health Inspectors K.B. WILSON Student Health Inspector December 196P 13 Vacancies Student Health Inspectors — Technical Assistants (Pests Act) W.G. STIMSON, L.M.R.S.H. Chief Technical Assistant February 1946 A.T. EVANS Senior Technical Assistant January 1953 H.A. BAXTER Senior Technical Assistant June 1945 G. CLARK Senior Technical Assistant January 1949 J.W.R. KENNEDY Technical Assistant/Class I December 1963 P.F. CARTER Technical Assistant/Class I March 1966 H. BROWN Technical Assistant/Class I August 1966 A.D. FARRANT Technical Assistant/Class I June 1969 D.S. SOUTHWOOD Technical Assistant/Class I June 1969 R.G. BUNGAY Technical Assistant/Class I September 1969 Technical Assistants (Rodent Control Scheme) A.H.J. SMITH Technical Assistant/Class II September 1972 H. BEASLEY Technical Assistant/Class II October 1972 K. STAMMERS Technical Assistant/Class II December 1969 T. SHEA Technical Assistant/Class II June 1974 R.S. SAMS Technical Assistant/Class II July 1975 F.W. PRIOR Technical Assistant/Class II November 1975 2 Vacancies Technical Assistants/Class II — 4  Commenced Service PORT HEALTH SECTOR (continued) Launch Crews C.R. SIMONS Navigator (Senior) August 1938 W.G.A. KING Navigator (Deputy Senior) September 1939 M.J. EAST Navigator September 1954 R.H. SIMMONS Navigator November 1960 A. RUSSELL Navigator August 1961 W.T.S. PARKINSON Navigator June 1966 W.M. McKEE Navigator January 1967 K. GITTENS Engineer (Senior) January 1955 C.R. HOLLMAN Engineer (Deputy Senior) October 1974 W. SIMMONS Engineer May 1955 B. JACOBS Engineer April 1956 D. ROBERTS Engineer November 1973 A.R.L. POTTER Deckhand July 1945 A.E. ALEWOOD Deckhand January 1947 D. KIELL Deckhand February 1965 P. RAYNER Deckhand November 1960 K.R. BLACKWELL Deckhand December 1973 P.A. SKELTON Deckhand February 1974 P. CORNELIUS Deckhand September 1968 D.L. WEBSTER Deckhand September 1968 K.J. SPILLETT Deckhand October 1968 T.W. STEVENSON Deckhand January 1973 N.J.S. STOYLE Deckboy June 1974 D. HOLMES Deckboy August 1974 M. ETOCK Deckboy September 1974 A.D. WILMOT Deckboy March 1975 M.A. McLEOD Deckboy May 1975 P.M. TESTER Deckboy October 1975 G. WEBB Deckboy November 1975 Launches Date Acquired "Alfred Roach" 1948 "Humphrey Morris" 1962 "Victor Allcard" 1965 DENTAL STAFF L.J. WALLACE, T.D., L.D.S., R.C.S. Dental Officer June 1965 Mrs. P.A. MIMMS, R.D.S.A. Clerk/Dental Surgery Assistant September 1965 VETERINARY OFFICE Veterinary Officers G.S. WIGGINS, M.R.C.V.S., F.R.S.H. December 1956 T.W. FRASER, B.V.S.M., M.R.C.V.S., (part-time) July 1973 J.R. SMITH, M.R.C.V.S., B.Vet.Med. (part-time) July 1973 V. JESSEN, B.V.Sc., M.R.C.V.S. (part-time) July 1973 Diseases of Animals Act Inspectors R.J. HAYHURST, D.F.C. Senior Diseases of Animals Inspector October 1964 K.W. KING, A.M.R.S.H. Senior Diseases of Animals Inspector April 1966 J.T. HADLEY, A.M.R.S.H. Diseases of Animals Inspector December 1964 ANALYTICAL SERVICES W.B. CHAPMAN, B.Sc., M.Chem.A., M.Ph.A., F.R.I.C., F.I.F.S.T. Public Analyst April 1971 E.H.W.J. BURDEN, B.Sc., Deputy Public Analyst April 1971 M.Chem.A., F.R.I.C., F.I.F.S.T. (Public Analyst services are provided for the Corporation by the Scientific Branch of the G.L.C.) J.H. HAMENCE, O.B.E., Ph.D., M.Sc., M.Chem.A., F.R.I.C. Agricultural Analyst July 1969 P.S. HALL, B.Sc., M.Chem.A., F.R.I.C. Deputy Agricultural Analyst July 1969 5 To:- THE RIGHT HONOURABLE THE LORD MAYOR, ALDERMEN AND COMMONS OF THE CITY OF LONDON IN COMMON COUNCIL ASSEMBLED My Lord Mayor, Ladies and Gentlemen, I have the honour to present my Second Annual Report, dealing with the year 1975. In my last Annual Report I described 1974 as being a year of general upheaval and change. I wish that I could describe 1975 as being a more placid year during which constructive efforts might have been made to stabilise the work of the Health Department. Unfortunately, this has not been so. It is, I suppose, a characteristic of the times in which we live that nothing is ever left well alone for long. At times, one cannot resist the impression that there is an element almost of panic in the way in which changes are made in well established systems for no discernible reason other than a desire for any change at any cost. The rate at which legislation pours forth from Central Government shows no signs of abatement. As a result, the volume of work which the Health Department is required to carry increases steadily, whereas sufficiently well qualified and experienced staff become fewer and fewer and the money available to pay them the salaries which they deserve becomes less and less. The detail of the work itself is also constantly changing and not for the better. It is my opinion that some of the standards and procedures which are being considered for proposed directives of the European Economic Community are so unnecessarily stringent and demanding that it will be quite impossible for port health authorities in this country to maintain a service capable of enforcing them. It appears that there is a view developing in Government circles, both in this country and in Europe, that legislation should be based upon an ideal situation. The fact that the situation is by no means ideal is well recognised, and some allowances are made by Governments for the fact, either by a tacit acceptance that standards set by the legislation will not be maintained or by delaying the bringing into force of parts of the legislation, presumably in the hope that the staff and money necessary to enforce them will materialise at some time in the future. An example of the latter attitude is the Health and Safety at Work etc., Act, 1974, certain elements of which came into force during the year in question. This Act is extensively discussed in the narrative of my Report, for which I make no excuse as its effects, particularly in the City of London, should be far reaching and of great significance. However, the main Act is merely an enabling instrument. Production of the Regulations and Orders which would produce action has been dilatory in the extreme for the very good reason that local authorities, and, in this case, Central Government itself, would find it most difficult to enforce all the requirements of the Act without great increases in staff and expenditure of money. The same problem has arisen in the bringing into force of the Control of Pollution Act 1974. Regulations and Orders filling out the various parts of this enabling Act have emerged in a way which one can only describe as reluctant. The work to be thrown upon the Health Department by these Acts will undoubtedly be considerable. Whether the staff or the money to carry out the work properly will be available immediately is doubtful. In the Port of London one of the developments during 1975 was the decision by the Minister of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food to restrict the importation of fresh meat to those ports which had the necessary facilities to carry out a proper examination. This restriction is not, as one might expect, based on a regard for the public health. It is intended to protect animals in this country from disease coming from abroad. No such restriction is possible, under present legislation, to prevent food which is unfit for human consumption from passing directly through a port to be examined inland. I find this incomprehensible. If the bypassing of examination at the port of entry represents such a danger to animal health that the risk cannot be taken, how much more important must it be to establish an even more stringent examination policy for human food? One of the characteristics necessary in the staff of the Health Department is adaptability,and I commented upon this last year. It is well illustrated by reference to the way in which the vagaries of trade can produce a new problem, almost out of the blue, to which the Department must respond by recognition, evaluation and appropriate action. An example is the increase in the imports of frozen rabbit meat from China. The subject is discussed in the narrative and I mention it here merely to illustrate the fact that health services in both the City and the Port must never become static. A dynamic attitude towards the work is a constant requirement. 6 Lastly, to end on a cheerful note, the Clipper Regatta and Festival of Sail took place during a week of magnificent summerweather in August 1975. The success of the week owes an enormous amount to those people who spent much time and energy in the meticulous organisation which was so evident. I regard the event as a prime illustration of what the River could come to mean in the lives of the people of London,and of thewhole country. It could become a centra I feature forsport, spectacle and entertainment which would be a worthy inheritance for our children. Much imagination and a fair amount of money would be needed. I am sure that, in this of all nations, the imagination is there. The money could be found if there were sufficient determination. From this introduction, My Lord Mayor, you will gather that it has been a year made up of a large amount of slogging work relieved brilliantly by some outstanding events. That the Department has succeeded in coping with the ups and downs of 1975 is due entirely to my colleagues on the staff, to the Chairman and Members of the Port and City of London Health Committee who have always been most helpful and understanding, and to all those 'sister services' in the City and the Port who have been unstinting in their willingness to cooperate and coordinate. I have the honour to be, My Lord Mayor, Ladies and Gentlemen, Your obedient Servant, DR. DILWYN T. JONES Medical Officer of Health Port and City of London. 7 The Port INFECTIOUS DISEASES Cholera in Portugal Information was received from the Department of Health and Social Security, during August to the effect that 135 cases of cholera had been notified in Portugal and that 2 deaths had occurred. Instructions were immediately given to the Boarding Medical Officers and Port Health Inspectors that all ships arriving in the District of the Port Health Authority within five days of leaving any Portuguese ports should be boarded and intensive investigations carried out to ensure that any cases with symptoms suggestive of cholera could be dealt with expeditiously and all other preventive measures taken. H.M. Immigration, Trinity House Pilots and H.M. Customs and Excise were also informed of the situation and asked for their assistance in the control measures instituted by me. Food Poisoning An organised party of approximately 114 people ate a cold buffet supper on a pleasure launch during an evening trip on the River Thames. It became apparent, five days later, that a number of people in the party had become ill with what appeared to be food poisoning. Speed is essential in the investigation and control of an outbreak of food poisoning and as time goes by it becomes more difficult to ascertain the true cause of the outbreak. In this case the lapse of five days was a considerable handicap. The investigation established that the catering had been arranged by the organisers of the trip and the food had been prepared in the kitchen of a restaurant, by the owner, who was a friend of the organiser. A paper plate was prepared for each guest and on it was placed:- 1 ham slice, 1 piece chicken, 1 chipolata sausage, 1 piece veal and ham pie, Vi scotch egg, 1 piece luncheon meat, roll and butter; and the whole was covered with plastic film. A plastic knife, fork and spoon with paper serviette was provided separately. Each guest was also to be served with:- Potato salad, cole slaw, russian salad and chocolate gateau. This food was prepared and placed on the plates at the restaurant with the exception of the salads which were prepared and placed in containers to be served on the launch. The gateau was ready sliced to be served on board. After preparation the food was conveyed from the restaurant to the Pier and, after some delay, put on board and subsequently served. The investigation had two urgent objectives — (1) To obtain stool samples from as many of the party as possible. (2) To obtain samples of food similar to the food served to the party. As nearly all the members of the party lived, and all the channels of distribution and preparation of the food were, outside the boundaries of this authority, some 29 other local authorities had to be contacted, some of them repeatedly, to cover these and further objectives in the investigation. These further objectives were to discover - 8 (1) the extent of the outbreak; (2) clinical features of illness; (3) evidence implicating particular food; (4) identification of agents contaminating or infecting food; (5) source and means of contamination of food by chemical or bacterial agent. The early concentration on the obtaining of stool samples produced relatively quick results and established that the outbreak was a Salmonella infection. Of 43 stool samples taken 28 were positive and all of those typed (26) were Salmonella enteritidis. The investigation into foods similar to those eaten did not produce any clear evidence, nor did the investigation of food handlers at various premises produce any positive results. Swabs of surfaces which were taken at these premises were also negative. The last sample to be obtained was of the small chickens 'poussin', which eventually were obtained on 14th October and these were negative for Salmonella. Specific Comment Of considerable interest in this case is the time factor and the temperature at which the food was heid during its distribution, preparation and final delivery. The investigation shows clearly that the ambient temperature at the kitchen, the unrefrigerated journey from the kitchen to the pier and the five hour time lapse which ensued between preparation and consumption produced conditions suitable for the growth and multiplication of the casual organisms. Furthermore, the hot humid weather and the fact that the meats were all together and covered with plastic film increased the incubator effect. The greater part of the food during this five hour period was together on plates and gave the opportunity for cross contamination. It is regretted that no notification was received by any local authority from any of the General Practitioners treating the patients. General Comment When parties are held on launches the food is generally not prepared on board and any remaining after the event is disposed of as soon as the launch returns to her berth the same evening. It is, therefore, not available for examination. There is very little likelihood of obtaining other samples of the food eaten. These factors coupled with any delay such as the five days which elapsed in this instance make a complete investigation extremely difficult. FERRY TERMINAL, SHEERNESS The terminal originally became operational in 1972 but was not in constant use until the latter part of 1974 when a daily sailing to Flushing was inaugurated. In April 1975 a twice daily sailing was commenced. The largest percentage of foodstuffs unloaded at the terminal was carried by driver-accompanied vehicles with the object of seeking H.M. Customs and Port Health clearance at the earliest opportunity. This requires the attendance of a Port Health Inspector for each foreign arrival. The total amount of foodstuffs inspected amounted to some 26,000 tons, involving 1,112 accompanied and 309 unaccompanied commercial vehicles. The type of foodstuffs imported, together with the number of trailers, is shown in the Statistical Section of the Report. 9 Passenger Traffic Two passenger ships, the "Olau East" and the "Olau West" operated on the route to Flushing during the year. The "Olau East" was replaced by the "Olau Dana" during November. This vessel can accommodate 25 twelve metre trailers, 150 motor cars and 860 passengers. Her arrival coincided with the opening of the passenger terminal. Sheerness Passenger Terminal Photo by courtesy of Medway Ports Authority M/V "Olau Dana" Photo by courtesy of Olau Line 10 During the year 220,879 passengers were cleared through the terminal. There were no cases requiring to be dealt with by Port Health and only one alien was refused entry by H.M. Immigration after being medically examined. The new Passenger Terminal was officially opened in November 1975 and it is anticipated that the number of passengers landing at the new terminal in 1976 will be double the 1975 figure. THE TILBURY CONTAINER TRADE No great changes were experienced during 1975 in the trades to the various terminals operating at Tilbury. The recorded container ship arrivals in 1973 of 1,489 vessels had dropped to 1,400 in 1974, and in 1975 this total was reduced again to 1,320. Industrial disputes from 11th February until the first week in April undoubtedly had their effect on the overall workings, and, allowing for these factors, it is reasonable to assume that the rate of container ship movements did not vary much from the 1974 figures. Of the near Continental Ports, Rotterdam continued to be the most used short sea trading port. Antwerp arrivals, on the other hand, almost ceased to exist, having dropped from 88 in 1973 to 10 in 1974, and only 4 arriving in 1975. The Hamburg service was maintained by about the same number of arrivals and another service to Zeebrugge also flourished. Eighteen short sea arrivals from Bremerhaven were also accounted for. Vessels under the Russian Flag trading to Leningrad produced a significant increase in the number of arrivals, from 75 in 1974 to 102 in 1975. East German vessels on the Rostock service also maintained a substantial trade. At the turn of the year a new service to Dunkirk was introduced, but only eight arrivals were dealt with and the service ceased in mid April. Shortly after this, on the 29th April a new service to Cuba commenced operated by Cuban Flag vessels. Up to the close of the year seven vessels had been dealt with, an average of one a month. Other Ocean trades to Australia and New Zealand, Canada (Quebec) and North American Pacific Ports continued to operate as in 1974, but the North American Atlantic arrivals (10) were not, in fact, regular Tilbury Dock services, and in the main came only to Tilbury when industrial troubles occurred in their normal United Kingdom terminals. The latter part of the year saw the first arrival of the Neptune Orient Container Ship's "Neptune Sapphire" to the multi-user container terminal. This vessel, with other ships of the same company, had previously been engaged in the Far East/Tilbury conventional cargo trade, but had recently been reconstructed as a container vessel. The Passenger/Ro-Ro/Unit Load service from Tilbury to Gothenburg was very busy throughout the year, and, while fewer arrivals were recorded than in 1974, the two unit-load carrying vessels were both lengthened to enable them to carry more cargo. The redevelopment of ground adjacent to the original terminal was completed to provide the operators with an even bigger and more efficient Passenger and Cargo handling complex. It is hoped that another new service from South American Ports and the Caribbean will be operating from Tilbury in the Summer of 1976, and this coupled with a large planned expansion of the O.C.L. Terminal will, it is hoped, help to maintain Tilbury as the leading Container Port in the United Kingdom. 11 TRANS-SIBERIAN CONTAINER LINE. T.S.C.L. FAR EAST TO UNITED KINGDOM CONTAINER SERVICE A distinctive funnel to be seen alongside the Port of London Authority's 41/43 Multi-User Container Terminal at Tilbury, is that of Soviet vessels of the Baltic, Estonian and Latvian Shipping Companies. These vessels maintain a weekly service carrying containers for the TransSiberian Container Line. This line became operational in 1971, and elected to use Tilbury as one of their continental terminal ports, this being the final link in the progressive concept of transporting containers from the Far East and the USSR, using the Trans-Siberian Railway which traverses the USSR, from Nakhodka in the East, to Leningrad, in the West. Containers from Japan, Manila and Hong Kong, are transported by container vessels to the ports of Nakhodka and Vladivostok. At these ports the containers are loaded onto rail cars, and then transported across the USSR to Leningrad via the Trans-Siberian Railway. At Leningrad they are off-loaded to await the final part of the journey to Tilbury by container vessel, the average time taken from East to West being 35 days. In addition to containers from the Far East, provision is made also for cargo originating in areas of the USSR, Iran and Afghanistan, to connect into the system after being containerised at Leningrad, prior to shipment to this country. Comparative distances for the conventional carriage of containers by sea from the Far East, as against the Trans-Siberian Container Line Route, speak for themselves:- Distance by sea, via the Cape of Good Hope .. .. 27,000Km Distance by sea, via the Panama Canal 20,000Km Distance by the Trans-Siberian Container Line .. .. 13,000Km Since the commencement of the service to Tilbury in 1971, continuous growth in traffic has been maintained. This can best be demonstrated by the number of Soviet container vessels arriving annually from Leningrad and Riga:- 1971 — 30 vessels; 1972 — 47 vessels; 1973 — 72 vessels; 1974 — 75 vessels; 1975 — 102 vessels. 12 The service from Leningrad and Riga to Tilbury, is maintained throughout the year, even when severe ice conditions restrict navigation in the Baltic, safe navigation being maintained by using ice breakers to keep the seaways open. Recently, in addition to carrying containers loaded in Leningrad and Riga, the vessels have called at Hamburg, to load cargo containerised at that port and destined for the United Kingdom. All the vessels on the service to Tilbury are fully containerised, among the more regular callers being the 'Pioner Vyborga' (260 TEU); 'Alexandr Prokofjiev' (360 TEU); 'Sestoretsk' (260 TEU); 'Novoya Ladoga' (140 TEU); 'Ivan Chernykh' (140 TEU); 'Manilaid' (100 TEU) and the 'Fricas Gaylis' (39 TEU). These vessels carry a vast variety of containerised cargoes. Of interest to the Port Health Authority, include foodstuffs such as canned fish from the USSR and the Far East, dried fruits from Iran and Afghanistan, and tea from the shores of the Caspian Sea. Since the inauguration of the service in 1971, a close liaison has been maintained with the Anglo-Soviet Shipping Company who operate the United Kingdom end of this service, and with associated services. Co-operation is essential for the rapid clearance of containers from the Tilbury Terminal to distribution points throughout the country. It must be appreciated that the Leningrad to Tilbury service is only a part of a much larger network extending throughout Europe and the Mediterranean, interconnecting with other services. M/S "Pioner Vyborga" Photo by courtesy of Anglo Soviet Shipping Co. Ltd., and Sky photos RO-RO TERMINAL - PURFLEET DEEP WHARF The Ferry service between London (Purfleet) and Kotka and Helsinki in Finland, continued throughout the year. The Finanglia Line has two ships on the service, the "Finnfellow" under the Finnish flag, and the "Baltic Progress" under the British flag. The "Baltic Progress" was built by the Rauma-Repola Shipyard with a cargo capacity of 290' x 20' cargo units, 5,600 tons D.W. with a speed of 19 knots and ice class 1 A. The "Finnfellow" was built by the 'Wartsilda' Turku Shipyard. Her cargo capacity is 288' x 20' equivalent units and 170 cars with a Deadweight tonnage of 5,300 tons and a speed of 19.5 knots, being classified in ice class 1A SUPER. Thus the ferry service is capable of being maintained in the severe ice conditions which frequently exist in the Baltic in winter time. 13 The vessels are suitable for all types of cargo whether mobile or loaded on ships, trailers or flats. There is excellent accommodation aboard the ship for lorry drivers. During 1975 the following was the through-put at the terminal:- Eastbound Westbound 20' Units 2,010 1,351 40' Units 878 576 Tilts 144 157 Flats 140 274 Tanks 2 18 The cargo consisted mainly of wood products and paper, but items of food consisting of dairy products, crispbread, beer, confectionery, cereals and animal casings were also carried. The Purfleet storage area is vast, with many cargo sheds to store the valuable newsprint for Britain's presses. Port Health officers have received most excellent co-operation in the exercise of their duties throughout the year. M/V "Finnfellow" Photo by courtesy of Finanglia Line INLAND CONTAINER DEPOT IN SURREY DOCKS Since the Surrey Docks closed, various areas have been leased by the Port of London Authority. The tenants now number over sixty and range from very large companies occupying more than one warehouse to small family concerns with only two or three workers. One of the larger companies has an area in Swedish Yard, south of Greenland Dock and entered by using number 16 gate. This company is known as S.L.I.C., South London Inland Clearance and it handles containers and trailers for other companies. Most of the containers are unloaded and the contents stowed in a warehouse where examination by H.M. Customs and Excise can then be done. A rotation number is given to each manifest handled by S.L.I.C., and a copy of each manifest is given to the Port Health Inspector. Details of the foodstuffs he wishes to inspect are then given to the clearing clerks at S.L.I.C., by the Inspector. By this method information concerning all containers and trailers entering S.L.I.C., is known to Port Health and full control can be exercised. If the containers are loaded witti foodstuffs, the Port Health examination is also carried out in the warehouse where the boxes and cartons can be opened and their contents inspected. Some of the containers and trailers are examined and cleared "on wheels". That is to say, on arrival in the depot they are inspected, but not unloaded. Examination under the Imported 14 Food Regulations is difficult if the container has many different types of food on board. When such cases arise,a list of contents is obtained and the container is unloaded until the Port Health Inspector is satisfied with the inspection or has obtained the samples he requires. The goods are then reloaded and the container allowed forward if allappears satisfactory. If required, a detention notice can be put on the foodstuff at the container depot or at the final unloading place. The depot also loads trailers and containers for export,but the Port Health Inspector is not normally involved with these. During 1975, South London Inland Clearance Depot handled over 1400 containers and trailers for twenty companies. They arrived at ports such as Tilbury and Southampton and then travelled by road to Surrey Docks. The main companies using the facilities at S.L.I.C., during 1975 dealt with trade from Japan, Taiwan, China, France, Germany and Portugal. The food imported by these and other concerns included such varied items as frozen carp from China, sweet and sour sauce from Hong Kong, sheep casings from New Zealand, honey from Brazil, saccharin powder from Korea, bottled wines from France, Italy and Germany. These foodstuffs required 527 inspections to be carried out by the Port Health Inspector. E.E.C. FOOD HARMONISATION PROGRAMME During 1975, copies of the following draft proposals for E.E.C. Directives and Council Regulations were received, through the Association of Sea and Air Port Health Authorities, with invitations for comment:- Draft Directives on - Food Labelling (3 drafts received) Fruit Juices and Similar Products (2 drafts received) Edible Fats and Oils (3 drafts received) Harmonization of Fine Bakers' Wares, Rusks, Pastry and Biscuits Maximum Levels of Long Chain Fatty Acids/Docosenoic Acids in Fats and Oils for Food and Margarine Coffee Extracts and their Substitutes Manufacture of and Trade in Starches intended for Human Consumption Erucic Acid Processing and Handling of Quick Frozen Foods Preserved Milk Natural Mineral Waters Approximation of the Laws of the Member States Relating to Fruit Jams, Jellies, Marmalades and Chestnut Purees Solvents for Use in Food Mayonnaise, Sauces derived therefrom and other Emulsified Condiments Sauces Proposal for a Council Regulation on - Water Content of Frozen and Deep Frozen Fowl Carcases The documents listed above were studied and anycomments considered appropriate were sent to the Association of Sea and Air Port Health Authorities, for onward transmission to the Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food. SAMPLING OF MALAYSIAN IMPORTED COOKED AND PEELED PRAWNS The bacteriological standard of cooked and peeled frozen prawns has, over the last few years, caused problems for Port Health Authorities and other Local Authorities who deal with this commodity. Until 1975, there was a bacteriological standard, mainly for colony count, which was applied only by a few local authorities. This caused confusion in many quarters, not least to the importers who looked to Port Health Authorities for guidance. 15 It was a relief therefore to all interested parties when a set of "guidelines" was agreed following several meetings held between representatives of the Association of Sea and Air Port Health Authorites, the Department of Health & Social Security, the Public Health Laboratory Service and the trade. These guidelines recommended standard methods for sampling, bacteriological examination and disposal of those consignments which were unsatisfactory in various ways and degrees. The practical aspects of following the sampling guidelines were dealt with at the docks and, as the majority of vessels importing this commodity carried large quantities split up into "Bills of Lading", it soon became apparent that as much information as possible before the vessel arrived would be an advantage to everyone involved in this operation. The importers co-operated in most cases. The prawns are usually packed in cardboard cartons each holding 30-36 x 1 lb packets or 8-10 x 5 Ib hard frozen slabs. Polythene bags are sometimes used, but these usually contain individually quick frozen prawns and may weigh anything from 1 -40lbs. The manifest for the vessel is received several days before arrival. Each Bill of Lading of frozen prawns is checked for mark, weight and quantity. The mark for each Bill of Lading gives a clue to the importer, in most cases, and he can be contacted for information regarding the size of prawn (number per lb.) brand, type and size of pack, quantities of each and destination for cold storage where goods will be detained. When all this information is received and it is common to have one Bill of Lading "split" i.e. containing several sizes and/or brands it is then possible to produce a sampling summary, a copy of which is given to P.L.A., with requirements as to the number of cartons for opening and examination. Samples are numbered when they are drawn and Detention Notices are sent to the importer, cold store and local authority where the goods are being held. Full particulars, together with the samples, are sent to the laboratory as quickly as possible, several laboratories being used if the number of samples drawn makes this necessary. When the results of samples are known, a decision is taken, after consulting the microbiological "guidelines" whether to release, re-export or have any particular consignment destroyed. IMPORTED RABBIT MEAT FROM CHINA The amount of imported rabbits and rabbit meat from the People's Republic of China increased during 1975. Rabbit meat is higher in protein and mineral salts, whilst containing less fat, than other types of meat. Enquiries made from various sources indicate that the rabbits are selected from carefully raised stock mainly in the area of the slaughter house, the breeds used being the Chinese Rabbit, Large White Rabbit and Chingtzulan Rabbit. The system of preparation is firstly that the rabbits are rested in cages. Only rabbits from disease-free areas are accepted and whilst in the pre-slaughter room they are inspected antemortem. The animals are then taken to another room electrically stunned, then bled, washed, the feet removed, skinned, eviscerated and finally washed, all of the processes being of a mechanical or semi-mechanical nature. During the process of evisceration, the carcasses and organs are inspected by experienced veterinarians and trained assistants and the meat plants have facilities for stringent laboratory inspection. After the inspection the rabbits pass through a cooler and are graded according to weight, packed in polythene bags, put into cartons and quick frozen. Chinese rabbit is packed to the following specifications:- 16 (1) Frozen Whole Rabbit Special 1,500 gram min nett each Large 1,000 gram min nett each Medium 600 gram min nett each Small 400 gram min nett each all in 20 kilo cartons (2) Frozen Boned Rabbit In cartons holding 4 blocks of 5 kilos each (3) Frozen Rabbit Portions In 1 kilo trays packed 10 trays to a 10 kilo carton. In addition cartons of rabbit heads, hearts, kidneys and legs have been discharged at the China Terminal. Routine examination of rabbit "bone in" and "boneless", takes place at the meat inspection block at "Z" shed where random samples are examined for fitness for human consumption. Boneless rabbit meat has been submitted from time to time for bacteriological examination, and during 1975 no Salmonellae were isolated. NEW ZEALAND APPLE TRADE - WEST INDIA DOCK The Port of London Authority again received the contract to discharge New Zealand apples and during 1975 some 588,000 boxes were landed, totalling 11,800 tons. This figure represents around 70% of the total United Kingdom import of New Zealand fruits. IMPORTED WINE TRADE - WEST INDIA AND SHEERNESS DOCKS The increase in consumption of wine in this country was reflected by the expansion of the bulk wine department. An existing shed was adapted at West India Dock and brought into use in 1975 to enable larger quantities of wine to be discharged from tankers into vats. Bulk wine is received from a number of countries including Spain, Cyprus and Italy. The total amount of wine imported through the West India and Sheerness Docks is 8,909,498 gallons. WATER SUPPLY There were three reports of contamination from hydrants during the year, twenty-five reports of contamination from standpipes and three reports of contamination from the ends of delivery hoses supplying fresh water to ships. The contamination from watering points was discovered during the normal course of routine sampling and indicates the necessity to continue routine bacteriological sampling of the water supplies in the District. No single attributable cause for the contamination was discovered after investigation and it must be assumed that the contamination had been introduced through unhygienic handling of the watering equipment. No ships received "unfit" water. There were twenty-four reports of contamination in the distribution supply system on board ships. Samples were drawn mainly from fresh water taps over galley and messroom sinks. The source of supply from these taps is from the "domestic fresh water" storage contained in double bottom tanks and peaktanks. The presence of this potential dangeron board stresses the necessity of ensuring that the standard of purity of "domestic" water supplies should be as high as the "potable" water supplies. Six samples were drawn directly from ships' storage tanks, two of which were found to be contaminated. Subsequently cleansing of these tanks was carried out. 17 Due regard is paid to the co-operation this Authority has received from other United Kingdom and Continental Ports through the interchange of adverse fresh water sampling reports in respect of those ships where some degree of contamination of the fresh water on board was discovered subsequent to departure for another United Kingdom or Continental Port. This interchange of information enables follow-up visits to be made by the Port Health Authorities concerned and enables remedial measures to be taken before the ship sails. VERY LARGE CRUDE CARRIERS (V.L.C.C's.) The arrival of V.L.C.C's. has now become established as a regular feature in the Port of London Health Authority district. The high standard of the crews' living conditions and the overall cleanliness aboard these vessels has continued. The operation of these vessels produced no difficulty in health control and the agreed procedures for health clearance and the provision of Declarations of Health by Masters, not only of the V.L.C.C's. but also of the lightening vessels, were applied in each case. After lightening, on some occasions, the V.L.C.C's. berthed in the Port of London, and on other occasions proceeded to another port to discharge the balance of cargo. Summary of V.L.C.C. Movement in 1975 (a) V.L.C.C's. arriving from prescribed lightening areas 48 (b) V.L.C.C's. arriving from Continental ports after lightening 35 (c) Health declarations received via the lightening vessel when V.L.C.C. has proceeded elsewhere 20 The largest shipment of crude oil to arrive during the year was 130,000 tons from the Arabian Gulf on board the S/S "Bergehus" in August. NORTH SEA OIL The first North Sea oil (107,000 barrels, 14,000 tons) to be landed in Britain arrived at the British Petroleum Refinery at the Isle of Grain on Wednesday, the 18th June, on board the S/S "Theogennitor", a vessel of 35,000 tons deadweight with a crew of 38. The oil was loaded from a rig located in the Argyll Field which lies 150 miles due east of Berwick. For the purposes of the Public Health (Ships) Regulations, 1970, as amended in 1974, the vessel was treated as though she had arrived from an island off the British coast, that is, in the same way as a coastwise arrival. It is understood that the oil from the Argyll Fieldwill be regularly carried to the Isle of Grain. THE TRANSPORTATION OF REFUSE BY LIGHTERS Routine Byelaw inspections of loaded refuse lighters continued throughout the year. The standard of covering with tarpaulins caused concern during the middle of the year. Two of the three companies in the trade were contacted concerning the deterioration which was due to the damage of new replacement tarpaulins by the grab cranes at loading and discharge points. Sharp objects in the rubbish also cause much damage to the tarpaulins. 18 Upper River The loading of refuse barges continued at the following wharves:- Feathers Wharf Walbrook Dock Cringle Street Depot Northumberland Wharf Grosvenor Dock Lower River Although there have been changes regarding the carriage of refuse in barges to tips situated in the lower river area the general overall picture remains the same as reported during 1974. The amount of traffic also remains much as before, but the destinations and places of discharge have changed in regard to the quantities of refuse received. Previously discharging wharves and tips existed at:- East Tilbury Mucking Flats Gobian Flats Pitsea Creek East Tilbury and Gobian Flats no longer receive any barge traffic. Tips receiving barge refuse are as follows:- Mucking Flats — 20 barges per week Pitsea Creek - 85 barges per week The number of barges per week varies, depending upon weather conditions. The average tonnage per barge is approximately 120 tons. Pitsea Creek tip now caters for the larger percentage of traffic and completion of another crane will bring the number of cranes operating on the discharging wharves to six. Various inspections of these wharves and barges in the course of discharge were made during the year. The normal procedure is that after discharge the barges are cleansed before the return passage up river. This is not always successful due to the construction of the barges, although new barges, recently being used by Thames and General Lighterage Company are proving easier to clean. While the tips were found to be in reasonable condition, extensive breeding of flies was found to exist on the barges during the summer months. This was thought to be due to two factors:- (1) Length of time on the river passage between loading and discharging (72 hours is the time permitted by the Bye-laws — apparently some of the barges took much longer.) (2) The insufficient treatment of refuse with an insecticide at loading wharves. Although the discharging wharves in Pitsea Creek are well away from any human habitation, the exposed conditions during high winds allow wind-blown waste paper to litter the banks and foreshore, as a result of which considerable cleaning of the Creek is required. RODENT CONTROL MEASURES CARRIED OUT ON LIGHTERS Rodent control measures on lighters have been carried out successfully during the past year. Of the 1,922 lighters inspected tor rodent indications, 1001 were inspected on the Upper, Middle, and Lower districts, the remaining 921 inspections being carried out in the respective dock groups. There has been a very slight increase in the number of lighters treated for rats, but the average number of rats recovered per lighter after treatment was less than one per lighter which is the lowest ever recorded. The reason for the increase in the number of lighters treated is that, through education regarding the importance of rodent control, the owners have treatment carried out by Contractors at their own request at the first signs or reports of rats aboard a lighter. 19 Rodent suppressive measures (1) (a) Fumigation - Methyl Bromide and Sulphur Dioxide (b) Poisoning — Sodium Mono-Fluoroacetate (c) Trapping (2) Cleanliness and hygiene (3) Rodent proofing The method of treatment is determined by the condition of the lighter and the degree of infestation at the time of inspection. In most instances there is a residue of water and foodstuffs in lighters even when empty. From past experience it has been found that, if treatment is required, it is far more efficient to fumigate than to use a rodenticide, because of the time factor. During the course of the year 56 lighters were fumigated with Methyl Bromide for insect control of the commodity. As the dosage required varies from 20 ozs. - 30 ozs. per 1,000 cubic feet depending on the species of insect pest present, the 24 hour exposure period required for Methyl Bromide is more than adequate to destroy any rodents that may be present in the lighter at the time of treatment. As a routine procedure, any rodents recovered from lighters after treatment were examined for any outward appearance of abnormality. If thought to be necessary, specimens are sent to the Public Health Laboratory, Dulwich, for bacteriological examination. One specimen was sent during 1975 and Y pestis was not isolated. Although there has been a further decrease in the number of lighters trading within the port, 1,676 in 1975,as compared with 1,921 in 1974, the lighterage industry still serves as an essential link in the services of the port, conveying cargoes from incoming ships to riverside wharves, factories, public utility undertakings and railheads, extending along both banks of the Thames, adjacent canals and creeks. With continued modernisation and more specialised craft the lighterage service is still very much an integral part of the life of the port and, as in the past, every assistance has been received from the lighterage industry in the effort to reduce rodent infestation to a minimum. LASH AND SEA BEE LIGHTERS During the course of the year, 257 Lash and Sea Bee lighters were transported by the "Mother Vessels" from the U.S.A. to the Port of London and then towed to various terminal wharves and docks within the port for discharge. In view of the fact that Lash and Sea Bee lighters trade between various ports on the inland waterway system of the U.S.A. and similar ports in Europe, carrying general cargo and cereal produce, it is important that there must be control regarding rodent infestation. Of the 257 Lash and Sea Bee lighters discharged in the Port during the course of the year, 34 were inspected for rodent infestation, equivalent to a 13% inspection, and only on one occasion was there any rodent evidence. One dead mouse was found. PORT OF LONDON CLIPPER REGATTA AND FESTIVAL OF SAIL, 1975 The last week in August saw an unique spectacle in the Pool of London when many of the world's sail-training vessels gathered for this event. The Regatta and Festival were held to celebrate the bicentenary of the Royal Thames Yacht Club, the centenary of the Royal Yachting Association, the Golden Jubilee of the Royal Ocean Racing Club and the Silver Jubilee of the Association of Sail Training. It also served as a prelude to the start of the Financial Times Clipper Race for ocean yachts from London to Sydney and back. 20 The large sail training vessels berthed in the Pool during the week were the German "Gorch Fock", Denmark's "Danmark"and "Georg Stage", the Russian "Tovarisch", Portugal's "Sagres", and the Roumanian "Mircea". Beside these were many other training ships including "Sir Winston Churchill", "Malcolm Miller", "Royalist", "Falken", "Gladan", "Zew Morza", "Eendracht" and "Bel Espoir", altogether representing most European countries. A considerable number of yachts and cruisers were attracted to the Festival, and together with H.M.S. "Londonderry", H.M.S. "Thames", a fleet of sailing barges and sundry other craft, an atmosphere was created which the Pool of London has not seen for many years. During the week a programme of activities took place including canoe and dinghy racing, whaler races, a barge-driving race, a sailing barge race from Gravesend to Cherry Garden, and one-man hovercraft racing in Kings Reach. In addition, a schedule of social and competitive events was provided for the Cadets from the training ships, and a River Cavalcade of craft associated with the Thames was held, the Corporation's launch "Victor Allcard" being one of the vessels taking part. The week closed with a Royal Review by H.R.H. Princess Alexandra on the Friday evening, and a Grand Procession of the vessels down river on Saturday morning for the start of the LondonSydney race on Sunday. For the period of the Regatta the launches "Alfred Roach" and "Victor Allcard" were occupied, the former as Duty Inspector's launch and the latter in attendance for Official visits by members of the Corporation who welcomed many of the assembled vessels. With the population of the Pool increased from Nil to over 1600 persons, many of whom were arriving from abroad, some care had to be taken with regard to water supplies, refuse and sewage disposal, and general health matters. As the vessels arrived, they were boarded either by the Boarding Medical Officer or Port Health Inspector to ascertain the health of the crews and the opportunity was taken to acquaint them with the health facilities being provided. These included fresh water supply from water barges (a dumb barge being moored for the smaller craft to gain supply) and a daily refuse collection service. A chemical toilet emptying service was provided by a motor tug equipped with a collecting tank and pump-out facility, disposal arrangements being afforded by a collecting tank and pump connected to the shore sewers at Cadogen Pier. General inspection of the Port Health District was maintained during the week to deal with any problems that may have arisen and to control any food retailing which might take place. A watch was also maintained during the hovercraft racing to deal with any noise nuisance that might occur. 21 Happily, the week passed without any difficulties arising from the Public Health point of view. This was very largely due to the generous cooperation received by the Port Health Officers from the Officers of the Port of London Authority, the Thames Water Authority, the Greater London Council and the Association of Sail Training organisations, through the months of organising prior to, and during the regatta week itself. "St. Katharine Yacht Haven" Photo by courtesy of the Port of London Authority STUDENT ENVIRONMENTAL HEALTH OFFICERS, AND VISITORS A full quota of visitors was maintained during the year. Many of the Provincial Local Authorities and the London Boroughs request that their own trainees spend some time with the Port. (This is a requirement of the Environmental Health Officers Education Board). These young men and women are then sent to all of the Dock Groups so that they get a broad, as well as a very detailed understanding of the complex duties of the Port Inspectors. Visitors from abroad (usually under the auspices of the World Health Organisation or the Royal Society for Public Health and Hygiene) came from many different lands including India, Mauritius, Malaysia, Sierra Leone, Bangladesh, Indonesia, Uruguay, Cyprus, Iran, Israel and Pakistan. Groups of student nurses from the Middlesex and Orsett Hospitals regularly visit Tilbury Docks. The Authority welcomes this policy, which broadens nursing training. The South East London Technical College and the Tottenham Technical College send groups of Environmental Health students,who are in their final year,for instruction, and a full day's programme is arranged for them. The Port Health Inspectors receive generous assistance from the major shipping companies. Lectures were also given by the Port Health Inspectors to various associations and societies outside the Port. 22 EXCHANGE VISIT OF PORT HEALTH INSPECTORS PORT OF LONDON AND PORT OF HAMBURG Exchange visits have been arranged annually since 1968 between Port Health Inspectors of this Authority and the Port of Hamburg, During the exchanges, which are for a period of two weeks, the Inspectors are accommodated in each other's homes. It is the general opinion that the cordial links between the two ports have been greatly enhanced by these exchanges. In a letter to this Authority last year, the Port Medical Officer for Hamburg, Dr. Kaerger, expressed his support for the visits and his wish that the tradition of the annual exchange be maintained. POWERS The principal Acts of Parliament and Statutory Instruments affecting the work of the Port Health Authority of the Port of London are:— ABATEMENT OF NUISANCES AND REMOVAL OF REFUSE London Government Act, 1963 Noise Abatement Act, 1960 Public Health Act, 1936 Public Health Act, 1961 Public Health (Recurring Nuisances) Act, 1969 ADMINISTRATION Appointment of Ports (Colchester, London, Medway, Ramsgate and Whitstable) Order 1973 City of London (Various Powers) Act, 1965, and 1971 Local Government Act, 1972 London Government Act, 1963 London Port Health Authority Order, 1965 Public Health Act, 1936 Public Health Officers Regulations, 1959 ALIENS AND IMMIGRANTS Commonwealth Immigrants Act, 1962 Immigration Act, 1971 CANAL BOATS Canal Boat Regulations, 1878 to 1931 Public Health Act, 1936 Public Health Act, 1961 CONSTITUTION OF THE AUTHORITY City of London (Various Powers) Act, 1965, 1971, and 1973 London Government Act, 1963 London Port Health Authority Order, 1965 Public Health Act, 1936 CREW ACCOMMODATION Public Health Act, 1936 Public Health Act, 1961 23 DANGEROUS DRUGS Dangerous Drugs (No. 2) Regulations, 1964 Misuse of Drugs Regulations, 1973 Merchant Shipping (Medical Scales) Regulations, 1974 FERTILISERS AND FEEDING STUFFS Agriculture Act, 1970 Fertilisers and Feeding Stuffs Regulations, 1973 FOOD Antioxidant in Food Regulations, 1974 Arsenic in Food Regulations, 1959 and 1960 Arsenic in Food (Amendment) Regulations, 1973 Artificial Sweeteners in Food Regulations, 1969 Authorised Officers (Meat Inspection) Regulations, 1974 Authorised Officers (Meat Inspection) (Amendment) Regulations, 1974 Authorised Officers (Meat Inspection) (Amendment) (No. 2) Regulations, 1974 Bread and Flour Regulations, 1963 Bread and Flour (Amendment) Regulations, 1972 Colouring Matter in Food Regulations, 1973 Colouring Matter in Food (Amendment) Regulations, 1975 Emulsifiers and Stabilisers in Food Regulations, 1962, 1970 and 1975 Fluorine in Food Regulations, 1959 Fluorine in Food (Amendment) Regulations, 1975 Food (Control of Irradiation) Regulations, 1967 Food (Control of Irradiation) (Amendment) Regulations, 1972 Food and Drugs Act, 1955 Food Hygiene (Docks, Carriers etc.) Regulations, 1960 Food Hygiene (General) Regulations, 1970 Ice Cream (Heat Treatment etc.) Regulations, 1959 and 1963 Imported Food Regulations, 1968 Imported Food (Amendment) Regulations, 1973 Lead in Food Regulations, 1961 Lead in Food (Amendment) Regulations, 1972 and 1973 Liquid Egg (Pasteurisation) Regulations, 1963 London Government Act, 1963 Meat (Sterilization) Regulations, 1969 Miscellaneous Additives in Food Regulations, 1974 Miscellaneous Additives in Food (Amendment) Regulations, 1975 Mineral Hydrocarbons in Food Regulations, 1966 Preservatives in Food Regulations, 1974 and 1975 Public Health (Imported Milk) Regulations, 1926 Solvents in Food Regulations, 1967 FUMIGATIONS Hydrogen Cyanide (Fumigation of Buildings) Regulations, 1951 Hydrogen Cyanide (Fumigation of Ships) Regulations, 1951 Hydrogen Cyanide (Fumigation) Act 1937 (Repeals and Modifications) Regulations, 1974 HOUSEBOATS City of London (Various Powers) Act, 1933 Part III Sections 6 & 7 Essex County Council Act, 1952, Section 212 INFECTIOUS DISEASES City of London (Various Powers) Act, 1971 Health Services and Public Health Act, 1968 London Government Act, 1963 Public Health Act, 1936 Public Health Act, 1961 24 INFECTIOUS DISEASES (Continued) Public Health (Fees for Notification of Infectious Diseases) Order, 1968 Public Health (Infectious Diseases) Regulations, 1968 Public Health (Infectious Diseases) (Amendment) Regulations, 1974 Public Health (Prevention of Tuberculosis) Regulations, 1925 Public Health (Ships) Regulations, 1970 Public Health (Ships) (Amendment) Regulations, 1974 Public Health (Aircraft) Regulations, 1970 Public Health (Aircraft) (Amendment) Regulations, 1974 Regulations as to the notification of Plague as an infectious disease, 1900 Regulations for preventing Plague by the destruction of Rats etc., 1910 RATS AND MICE Poisons Rules, 1971 Poisons Rules, 1972 Prevention of Damage by Pests Act, 1949 Prevention of Damage by Pests (Application to Shipping) Orders, 1951 to 1956 Public Health (Ships) Regulations, 1970 SHELLFISH Medway (Shellfish) Regulations, 1935 Order dated 23rd April 1936 made by the Port Health Authority under the Public Health (Shellfish) Regulations, 1934 in respect of a 'prescribed area' in Essex Order dated 25th July 1957 made by the Port Health Authority under the Public Health (Shellfish) Regulations, 1934 and 1948 in respect of a 'prescribed area' in Kent Order dated 14th December 1972 made by the Port Health Authority under the Public Health (Shellfish) Regulations, 1934 and 1948 in respect of a 'prescribed area' in Essex Public Health (Shellfish) Regulations, 1934 and 1948 CLEAN AIR Clean Air Act, 1956 and 1968 Clean Air (Arrestment Plant) (Exemption) Regulations, 1969 Clean Air (Emission of Dark Smoke) (Exemption) Regulations, 1969 Clean Air (Height of Chimneys) (Exemption) Regulations, 1969 Clean Air (Measurement of Grit and Dust from Furnaces) Regulations, 1971 Clean Air (Emission of Grit and Dust from Furnaces) Regulations, 1971 Height of Chimneys (Prescribed Forms) Regulations, 1969 Dark Smoke (Permitted Periods) Regulations, 1958 Dark Smoke (Permitted Periods) (Vessels) Regulations, 1958 Public Health Act, 1936 BYE-LAWS Bye-laws have been made by the Port Health Authority 1. For preventing nuisances arising from barges or vessels carrying offensive cargoes. 2. For removing to hospital any person suffering from dangerous infectious diseases, and for the keeping therein of such persons as long as may be deemed necessary. 3. With respect to houseboats used for human habitation within the limits of the Port of London. PUBLICATIONS 1. Handbook of Poultry Inspection. 2. Clean Food Handling. 3. Port of London Health Authority, 1872-1972. 25 The City ATMOSPHERIC POLLUTION It is a cause for some satisfaction to notice that the high levels of atmospheric pollution of recent years are still being steadily reduced, and the Corporation of London is greatly to be commended for its work in this field. Since 1954, when the whole of the City was made a smokeless area, reduction of smoke pollutants has been manifest. Again, in 1971, considerable concern was shown about the high levels of sulphur dioxide pollution, which culminated in the passing of the City of London (Various Powers) Act, 1971. Already this measure has had a marked effect in reducing the overall levels of sulphur dioxide pollution. A specialist section within the Health Department deals with all matters concerning air pollution and works in close co-operation with other sections of the Department. This is necessary because some types of noise nuisance have close associations with air pollution, and the new Control of Pollution Act, 1974, includes both these facets of the work. Provision has also been made in the Health and Safety at Work etc., Act, 1974, to deal with some air pollutants, but this is mainly concerned with emissions from certain trades and processes and levels of pollution within industrial premises. The initial survey conducted to gain information about types of appliances and fuel used, in order to ascertain maximum discharge rates of the various flue gas constituents, has now been completed and the results are being analysed. A continuous "up-dating" of this information will be necessary. In conjunction with this survey, monitoring of the two main pollutants, smoke and sulphur dioxide is carried out at five stations. Mobile equipment is also used when it is required for any particular problem. This activity is further organised to supply data to the Laboratory at Warren Spring for their country-wide survey. One station in the City is used by the World Health Organisation for comparison with others on a global basis. Other organisations interested in this information include the Greater London Council and the University of London. Weather reports received from the Holborn, London, Weather Centre are supplemented by information supplied from the air pollution section. These reports give daily information about local weather conditions and include wind speed and direction, temperature variations and periods of temperature inversion. The latter causes static air conditions and can lead to the build-up of fog, since the lack of wind over a period provides no natural scavenging effect. Sulphur Dioxide This is one of the more important pollutants, which results from the burning of fossilised fuels containing sulphur and sulphur compounds. Sulphur dioxide has caused concern in the past due to the increased concentration of this gas in the City area. Since the passing of the City of London (Various Powers) Act, 1971, a marked reduction in this concentration has been recorded and this improvement has continued during the past year. Carbon Monoxide Carbon monoxide is produced by the incomplete combustion of fuel, and is highly toxic. It can be emitted from all types of furnaces and also from petrol and to a lesser extent, from diesel engines. A careful check has been made of furnaces suspected of producing carbon monoxide,and, where necessary, effective remedial measures have been taken. An incident occurred in a road tunnel in the City on the 23rd October during an inversion period, when an accident-restricted traffic flow produced a build-up of vehicles within the tunnel and a consequential rise in carbon monoxide levels. Measurement of the gas indicated that it was safe to stay in the tunnel for brief periods only. On the advice of the Health Department the tunnel was closed until conditions improved. Smoke and Particulate Matter Levels of smoke and particulate matter usually vary very little from year to year, but appear to have fallen during the past year. Much work is carried out of a routine nature in an endeavour 26 to prevent emissions of smoke and to persuade operators of the various boiler plants to sustain a high level of efficiency and to burn fuels that do not produce smoke or sulphur dioxide. Constant surveillance by the air pollution staff is essential to maintain the necessary standard. Bonfires still present a small problem. When buildings are demolished, the resultant timber, asphalt and other combustible materials are sometimes burnt on site. This is not permissible in the City area because of the City of London (Various Powers) Act, 1954, which prohibits the emission of smoke from any premises within the City. This Act has been strengthened further by the provisions of the City of London (Various Powers) Act, 1971, which defines "premises" and ' 'occupier". All bonfire nuisances during 1975 were abated by verbal or written warnings and it was not found necessary to prosecute any offender. Height of Chimneys Application is made to the Corporation of London for the approval of the height of a chimney on a standard form in accordance with the provisions of the Clean Air Act, 1968. A report, then submitted to the Port and City of London Health Committee, includes a calculation of the maximum quantity of the products of combustion likely to be discharged into the atmosphere, the rate of that discharge and other relevant matters. These include the purpose of the chimney, the position and description of buildings near it, and the levels of the neighbouring ground. Upon consideration of the report, the Committee may either approve or reject the application. Stand-by Electricity Generators The number of stand-by electricity generators which have been installed has increased in the past year. These produce electric power in the event of a power failure and bridge the gap where office and other machinery is totally dependent on a constant supply. The size of these installations has tended to be larger than in previous years. The exhaust gases have to be discharged so as not to produce air pollution problems, which usually means that the generators exhausts should conform with the Clean Air Act, 1968, with regard to chimney height. It is important that these generators are properly maintained and operated at maximum efficiency, and it is the policy of the Health Department to offer help and advice in this respect. So far, this approach has produced successful results. Other Pollutants Perchlorethylene and other cleaning liquids are used in dry cleaning processes. The vapours from these liquids can be toxic if certain levels are exceeded and measurements are made of these discharges. Lead compounds from various industrial processes have been of some concern and paintspraying nuisances have been brought to light. Bankside Power Station The electricity generating station on the south of the river continues to present problems to the City. Due to the flue gas washing plant, the gases are discharged in a cooled condition, causing a situation known as "plume droop". When certain weather conditions prevail, this can be seen as a fine mist in the City streets. Consultations with the Engineers and other members of the Generating Board staff have brought about a partial improvement. With the active cooperation of the Central Electricity Generating Board further improvements will, it is hoped, be forthcoming. 27 CATERING ESTABLISHMENTS The catering industry renders an essential service to the City. However, seldom does one hear a word of praise or appreciation of its efforts. Like British Rail, it is taken for granted and is considered to be a justifiable target for criticism and complaint. Probably, within the City there is a greater variety of catering establishments and a wider range of prices than in any comparable area in the country. Some of the restaurants and clubs are indeed worthy of the highest commendation, and in addition, many City workers are fortunate enough to be in a position to enjoy the excellence of the facilities that their employers provide in staff restaurants and canteens, often at an unrealistically low price. Strictly speaking, the economics of the catering industry are not the concern of the Health Department, but, nevertheless, one cannot divorce oneself from the world of reality. If caterers are prosperous it is relatively easy to induce them to agree to expenditure on desirable improvements; but one cannot get blood out of a stone, and if profit margins are low or non-existent, as they are at the present time, it is extremely difficult to persuade a restauranteur to expend money even on essential work. The present economic depression, combined with the disaster of continued high inflation, has made life for a City caterer an unenviable one, and the number of popular restaurants providing cheap substantial meals has further declined. The fact that there is no longer a single Lyons tea shop within the area of the City is an indication of the present regrettable trend. Apart from one Oriental restaurant, it was not found necessary to institute legal action against any City caterer on the grounds of hygiene. The policy of the Department has continued to be one of education, advice and persuasion, and as a result of the co-operation extended by most City caterers it has been, on the whole, successful. This does not mean that all City restaurants are in perfect condition - it may be impossible for such an ideal state of affairs ever to be achieved - but it does mean that there is a constant and continuing effort being made to prepare and serve food under hygienic conditions. The regularity of routine inspections which has been sustained over the years has resulted in caterers' expecting at any time a visit from one or other of the Environmental Health Officers in the Department and the caterers realise that, whilst advice and help is available at all times, dirty conditions and negligence will not be tolerated. In this connection it was observed during the year that the practice of displaying unprotected food on service counters, particularly in snack bars, was increasing, as was the habit of smoking by staff whi 1st engaged in the preparation and service of food. Energetic measures were accordingly taken to stop these contraventions of the Food Hygiene Regulations. Generally, there is a spirit of co-operation between the City caterers and the officers of the Health Department. For the most part, caterers themselves make a determined effort to comply with statutory requirements, notwithstanding their many difficulties and problems, most of which arise from ever-increasing costs which are beyond their control and, of course, from the almost impossible task of exercising effective discipline and control over their staff. As with many desirable objectives, there is no short-cut or magical formula to the achievement and maintenance of a high standard of food hygiene. The efficiency of management, the willingness and interest of staff, the condition of premises and equipment; each of these factors influences, for good or ill, the ultimate result. However, whilst giving full credit to the efforts of the majority of City caterers it is nevertheless essential that the surveillance exercised by the Environmental Health Officers of the Department be continued at the existing level in order to ensure that the present reasonably satisfactory position does not deteriorate. SAMPLING During the year a total of 375 samples were submitted to the Public Analyst. Most of these were informal samples, covering a wide variety of items of food and drink. The sampling was generally carried out during normal office hours, but on occasions formal samples of spirits were purchased in the evenings and at weekends. 28 As far as milk samples were concerned, there were several cases of milk being found deficient in non-fat solids, but as on each occasion the Analyst expressed the opinion that this deficiency was a result of bovine ill-health, as opposed to adulteration, no further action was taken. There was one milk sample, taken from a cafe', which was found to have been adulterated with condensed or dried milk. On making enquiries it was discovered that reconstituted dried milk was used for coffee, a quite acceptable practice, but it would appear that some of this reconstituted milk had been introduced into the fresh milk dispenser. After due consideration a warning letter was sent to the cafe' proprietor. Subsequently further samples were taken, which proved to be satisfactory. Of 68 formal spirit samples taken, all but one proved to be satisfactory. In the case of the one exception, the licensees explained that this had occurred when a barman added some soda water to a customer's whisky, whereas water had been requested. The barman gave the customer another whisky and had then tried to rectify matters by pouring the offending whisky back into the bottle! The conclusion was reached that, although the barman had acted very foolishly, there was no criminal intent. The Health Committee therefore decided that a warning letter should be sent. Several complaints were received from members of the public who were of the opinion that drinks they had purchased had been watered. These drinks included table wines, beer, Cointreau, vodka and lime cordial. Samples were taken on each occasion but no evidence of adulteration was discovered. Numerous infringements of the Labelling of Food Regulations, 1970, and the Cheese Regulations, 1970, came to light. These Regulations can fairly be described as being somewhat complex, and it was found that in nearly every case the infringements were the result of misunderstanding. An exchange of correspondence and, in some cases, discussions, resulted in rectification of these technical offences. In September several informal samples of liqueur chocolates were purchased and found to be 'dried-out' and deficient in alcohol. This could be attributed to the fact that they were old stock and that temperatures during the summer had been unusually high. Needless to say, this could not be accepted as a valid excuse, but as the stocks of these liqueur chocolates were exhausted by the time the Analyst's report was received it was decided that verbal warnings would suffice. Further samples will be taken in due course, i.e. in the summer of 1976. Several other malpractices were brought to light as a result of informal sampling. A cream doughnut was found to contain artificial cream, and pork sausages to contain preservatives, without there being a notice to this effect displayed in the shop. In both instances the offenders were warned. On another occasion it was found that a packet of frozen peas was underweight and the matter was reported to the Chief Trading Standards Officer. Only one prosecution was taken during the year and this was in connection with a wholemeal loaf. As the result of an informal sample it was discovered that a firm of bakers was manufacturing and selling wholemeal bread with an insufficient fibre content. Two letters were written to this firm, enclosing a copy of the Public Analyst's certificate and inviting comments. As no replies were received a formal sample was taken. This also proved to be substandard and legal proceedings were instituted. The firm in question pleaded guilty and werefined £75 with £18 costs. FOOD COMPLAINTS Throughout the year 154 members of the public brought to the notice of this Department food which they had purchased in the City and which, for some reason or other, they felt was unsatisfactory. Of these complaints, six resulted in legal proceedings because the food was unfit for human consumption, and, in the case of another eight articles of food, because they contained extraneous material. The foreign bodies found included insects, cigarette ends and nails. Complaints of mould were most common in pre-packed meat products such as pork pies and steak and kidney pies. These pies had a date-stamp on their wrappings from which the last 29 permissible date of delivery could be ascertained. Unfortunately, it appears that these date-stamps are not always examined by the retailer on delivery, with the result that old stock is sold to members of the public and mould growth may well be found to be present. One unusual complaint concerned a carton of yoghurt, sold after the expiry date marked on the carton. The Public Analyst stated that fermentation had taken place and the yoghurt was unfit for consumption. In oneinstance the decomposed meat content of a beef sandwich resulted in court proceedings. The defendant explained to the Bench that he had been experimenting to discover how long a meat sandwich could be kept under refrigerated conditions before becoming unfit forhuman consumption! Unfortunately, he went on to say, one of his assistants had inadvertently sold the sandwich to a member of the public. He was given an absolute discharge but ordered to pay £20 costs. FOOD HYGIENE (MARKETS, STALLS & DELIVERY VEHICLES) REGULATIONS, 1966 Automatic Vending Machines Considerable work has been carried out by the Health and Safety at Work section of the Department in relation to automatic beverage-vending machines. The results from the recent survey of these machines in office premises were, to say the least, inconclusive. A large number of those which were surveyed, judged from the standards this Department set out to achieve, were found to be unsatisfactory with regard to design, siting, services, facilities for food storage, protection of food from contamination, cleanliness and maintenance. Extensive bacteriological surveys also showed unsatisfactory results in some cases. However, although results were inconclusive, the survey raised many questions as to how the hygienic and bacteriological quality of food from vending machines should be judged. No official bacteriological standards are available for these machines, and the Department, in looking for a hygienic purity similar to mains water, was perhaps setting its sights too high. Hot and cold drinks from vending machines are defined under the Food and Drugs Act as "food". Taking this as a wide definition, then our investigation does show that the bacteriological quality of beverages obtained from most machines which we surveyed was equal to, and in many cases surpassed, the bacteriological quality found in samples of cooked foods served in most food and catering premises. Once again, as with so many environmental health problems, constant routine inspection is the only effective way of ensuring consistently high standards in relation to foods dispensed from automatic machines. Our objective must be to get the best practicable standards in all forms of food service. HEALTH & SAFETY AT WORK ACT, 1974 OFFICES, SHOPS & RAILWAY PREMISES ACT, 1963 The Health & Safety at Work Act, 1974 The Health & Safety at Work Act was one of the most important developments of the year. It is an enabling measure which provides a legal framework on which to promote, stimulate and encourage high standards of health and safety at work. Great emphasis is placed on voluntary and approved Codes of Practice, and the intention of the Act is to encourage an approach which is total in concept. With a complete involvement and participation at all levels and with internal and external pressures and influences from many different sources, the Act aims to promote safety awareness, organisation and performance as built-in features of every work situation. 30 Its Introduction The Act was introduced following the Report of the Robens Committee in 1970/72. With some exceptions and modifications, it follows fairly closely the recommendations of the Committee, and provides protection for workpeople not previously covered by any specific safety legislation. An underlying feature of the Report is that the responsibility for the prevention of hazards at work should be placed fairly and squarely on those who create them. Health and Safety at Work, in short, should be regarded as an integral part of the job. The Act contains 85 sections and 10 schedules and became law in July 1974. It is superimposed over existing legislation, and most of the current legislation has remained in existence and will be progressively repealed and replaced by improved regulations and Codes of Practice. On 1st January, 1975, the important new powers relating to enforcement procedures came into operation. From that date authorised officers in the City were empowered to:- (a) Issue 'Immediate' Prohibition Notices. (b) Issue 'Delayed Time' Prohibition Notices. (c) Issue Improvement Notices. (d) Institute legal proceedings. (e) Seize, render harmless or destroy substances and articles. Although from 1st January, 1975, the new powers were in use, they were applied only to circumstances already subject to the provisions of existing Acts and regulations. Until 1st April, 1975, only those already covered by existing health and safety legislation were covered. From that date, general duties of care and protection were extended to everyone at work. The responsibility for implementation of these general duties rests with the Health and Safety Executive pending regulations which will allocate certain additional responsibilities to local authorities. These Allocation Regulations have not yet been issued. Work in the Department The Health and Safety at Work Act has caused the Department to adopt changes in its inspection technique. The Offices, Shops and Railway Premises Act, 1963, laid heavy emphasis on General Inspections as a measure of effective implementation. Greater priority, under the new Act, is given to advice, participation, consultation and self-regulation. In addition, fairly lively interest was shown in the new Act by employers and workpeople in the City. The previous high level of concentration on routine area inspections has therefore been modified. This type of inspection has gradually been scaled down this year. It has been slowly replaced by a programme of continuous sample inspections over the whole of the City. The annual sample rate is two-thirds of the previous General Inspection rate and covers approximately 20 per cent of the total office population. This form of inspection highlights the type of situation giving rise to the greatest concern and it provides a comprehensive breakdown of problems into types, sizes, premises, defects and people at risk. With this information, inspection staff are deployed in a more effective way, thus ensuring that priority situations receive first attention.lt alsogives the Department flexibility to deal with the advisory and consultancy requirements of the Act as and when they are needed. Consultations with owners, employers, unions, self-employed, landlords and general members of the public have increased dramatically during the year and Inspectors have been fairly heavily involved in talks, seminars, teach-ins and general requests to give group advice. A look at the pattern of work carried out by the Department during the year emphasises this change. For instance:- (a) Of all notified accidents during the year, in-depth investigations were completed in 10 per cent more cases than last year. (b) 50 per cent more complaints were received during the year about working conditions and the new Act, indicating increased safety awareness. (c) 7 per cent more major examinations of Hoists and Lifts were carried out and 38 per cent more defects were found. 31 Of all notices served in relation to Hoists and Lifts during the year, 178 per cent more than last year were pursued to a satisfactory conclusion. (d) Finally, the occasions on which Inspectors used their advisory and consultancy role increased this year by 20 per cent and represented a total of 1,737 occasions. Some Specific Questions Answered The Act has certainly evoked considerable interest and had a great initial impact on everyone's awareness of work and its essential link with Safety, Health and Welfare. From among the numerous issues raised by members of the public some stand out quite strongly as causing most concern. Employers, for instance, were very anxious to seek advice on their new responsibilities and seemed unaware that the Act did not immediately replace previous legislation. Most were concerned to know how the Act would affect their responsibilities under the Offices, Shops and Railway Premises Act. Inspectors spent considerable time advising enquirers that all the old legislation still remained in force, and that the new method of implementation, such as Improvement Notices and Prohibition Notices, now applied to the old legislation and would progressively apply to the new as Regulations and approved Codes of Practice were initiated. A further misconception arose about the new enforcement procedure in two ways. Firstly, some people were unaware that immediate prosecution for offences was still available to an Inspector and that he did not have to issue Improvement and Prohibition Notices as a necessary and escalating pre-requisite to prosecution. Equally, some employers were under the impression that these notices did mean prosecution and they seemed unaware of the facility of appeal. The question of how absolute was a person's responsibility under the Act was often raised by employers and employees alike. Under the new Act persons are liable if they fail to take such steps as are reasonably necessary to avoid risk at work. The new Act in its "general duties" requires that persons should do what is "reasonably practicable" for safety. Considerable discussion always arose during advisory meetings as towhat was meant by "reasonably practicable". One requirement under the Act which caused great concern among managers was the duty to issue a written safety policy. Proposals and drafts for many Safety Policies were received by Inspectors for their comment. These proposals ranged from fairly simple statements to very detailed documents. Perhaps it would be helpful, therefore, to consider what the Safety Policy statement is meant to achieve. The intention of this requirement is to ensure that rules and procedures for ensuring safety within a work situation are set out as fully as is necessary to enable Inspectors and employees to be aware of the adequacy of safety arrangements. The issue of a written statement of Safety Policy is not an end in itself. The intention must be backed up by a properly defined safety organisation, making the policy a workable, built-in and integral part of the whole enterprise. The View of Employees Reaction to the Act among organised labour has been mixed. Trade and professional unions in the City were at first active in their requests for information. However, as the year progressed it was noticed that many of the talks on the Act which were arranged by employers were no longer attended by staff representatives. The Balance Sheet In conclusion, it would appear that a fairly hard Balance Sheet on the Act has been drawn up by employers and employees in the City. On the Credit Side, the Act is a major step forward in providing a flexible, adaptable and acceptable framework on which to build a safe working environment. The participative and selfregulation aspects of the Act are welcomed by almost everyone. Although it is difficult to modify attitudes to legislation, people are beginning to think of Safety Legislation, not as a maximum acceptable level but as a minimum framework on which to improve those levels by co-operation. 32 On the Debit Side, the long delay in the issue of Allocation Regulations seriously hampers any positive work this Department can initiate in new areas. The formulation of voluntary Codes of Practice encouraged by the Act, together with the expected issue of Regulations, have lacked a degree of urgency, and if past experience is anything to go by there may be delays of several years. It is interesting to note that Robens sees an average of five years' delay on the issue of each set of Regulations. Finally, the self-regulating responsibility between employers and employed presupposes a mutually co-operative approach by employers andworkers.lt seems that unless the initial momentum and interest shown in this Act is maintained, the hoped for mutual co-operation between the various factors in the work situation may not develop. Inspectors could find themselves forced back into the old situation of finding people unwilling to go beyond their strict legal obligations, with a consequent need for this Department to deploy more of the staff on enforcement duties. SHOPS ACT, 1950 During the current year Environmental Health Officers carried out 203 inspections of shop premises. These inspections relate to those specific sections of the Act which concern the safety and comfort of shop workers, who in some instances are not protected even by the more comprehensive provisions of the Offices, Shops and Railway Premises Act, 1963. Progress with these premises, which are mainly situated within covered markets, is very satisfactory. The Health and Safety at Work Act, 1974, now provides general protection for these workers, but specific protection for those employed in covered markets has yet to be defined by regulation. During the year, structural and environmental improvements were continued in a block of shops in Leadenhall Market. Within the shops the ventilation, heating and lighting systems are being upgraded to modern standards and sanitary and washing facilities are being re-built. In the process a major rearrangement of the separate units will provide considerably better amenities in general and will ensure a place of work which will be both safe and comfortable. A traffic management scheme recently implemented within the Market area relieves the serious congestion which previously took place, but it is very pleasing to see that all these improvements in the Market do not spoil its essential character. Progressive improvement of other blocks of shops in the Market is also under consideration. CONTROL OF RODENT INFESTATIONS The Prevention of Damage by Pests Act, 1949 continues to be the basis for pest control work, with its requirement that local authorities take steps to ensure that their districts are kept free of rats and mice. Within the City first priority was given to the control of rats in the sewers, with a poison baiting programme repeated quarterly. Complaints of either rats or mice being found in buildings were dealt with as received and treatments were carried out by the Department's own operators or alternatively it was ensured that privately engaged pest control firms carried out effective eradication measures. Advisory and survey work continued as in previous years. The City sewers are currently vested in the Thames Water Authority and, exercising their prerogative, they have forbidden the use of sodium fluoroacetate and sodium fluoroacetamide, commonly known as 1080 and 1081 respectively, in sewers. Whilst admitting the danger of these two poisons to workers in the sewers it must be said that this action has deprived rodent operators of two most efficient poisons. Discussions are in progress between interested parties to resolve this issue and at the same time to formulate a plan of control which can be applied equally to all London Boroughs. 33 During the year the Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food introduced a new procedure for the national assessment of the incidence of rodent infestations and efficiency of the various rodenticides, using a random sampling method based on the valuation list. A pilot scheme was introduced from August to December, 1975, when four randomly selected premises were visited each month and questionnaires completed. The resulting forms were sent to the Ministry Pest Infestation Control Laboratory for inclusion in the National Survey. The scheme proper commences in January, 1976 and the results of the survey will be made available in due course. PIGEON CONTROL The Public Health Act, 1961, gives local authorities permissive powers to take steps to abate or mitigate nuisance from pigeons believed to have no owner. Nuisances from this source do occur in the City and the Health Department uses this permissive power accordingly. As complaints were received during 1975 they were investigated and, in a number of cases, remedial measures were taken by the owners and occupiers of the premises concerned. In others, where appropriate, the Corporation's pest control contractor secured an overall reduction of the pigeon population in specific areas. The feral pigeon, so far as the City is concerned, is called the London pigeon, but by whatever name it is known it is a descendant of the wild rock pigeon or dove which lived on ledges on cliffs, or in caves or similar remote habitats. From this wild state, and through centuries of domestication and many varieties,and reversal to the wild state, it has kept its liking for roosting on ledges with some sort of backing behind. It is most interesting to see that the pigeons are again proving their adaptability by finding ledges on new buildings which at first sight seem to be devoid of these features, in contrast to the heavily ornamented stonework facades of the buildings demolished in recent years. This is a point which could with advantage be kept in mind in designing new buildings. COMMON LODGING HOUSE There is one common lodging house situated in the City, which is run by the Salvation Army and provides basic living accommodation for men. The Public Health Act, 1936, defines a common lodging house as "a house (other than a public assistance institution) provided for the purposes of accommodating by night poor persons, not being members of the same family, who resort thereto and are allowed to occupy one common room for the purpose of sleeping or eating and includes where part of a house is so used the part so used." During the early part of the year, the visiting medical practitioner reported a case of suspected food poisoning. The organism Shigella sonne, the commonest of the dysentery organisms, was isolated from specimens submitted by some patients, but the number of persons affected could not be determined accurately. A number of men reported sick but only some of these were positive for Shigella sonne. These included one food handler, who was found to be a carrier. He was allocated other work until he was free from infection. The sanitary conditions at the hostel about that time had Seriously deteriorated due to sickness and staffing problems and strong representations were made to the headquarters of the Social Services Department of the Salvation Army. Ways and means of improving the conditions found in the hostel were discussed and during the year the measures taken were successful in effectively raising and maintaining standards. During theyear, new sanitary facilities on the fourth and fifth floors were put into commission. Each sanitary suite consisted of one water closet, two stall urinals and two wash-hand basins. These additions have proved to be very satisfactory and are regularly cleaned by the residents who use them. Improvements to the washing facilities in the basement have also taken place and shower baths are now available as well as the ordinary baths. 34 During the year underreview greater control was exercised over food hygiene. Instructions and talks were given to the food-handling staff during the dysentery outbreak and all engaged in food handling were screened in order to eliminate the possibility of the remaining food handlers being symptomless carriers. The use of the kitchen as a staff room was stopped and the kitchen generally was maintained in a better condition when day-room facilities were provided for the residents. It has been stated in previous reports that the high level of lice infestation at this common lodging house would persist as long as the then density of occupation was continued. With this in mind the Salvation Army authorities voluntarily reduced the number of beds during the year from 375 to 250. This, together with the steps which are taken continuously to deal with lice has resulted in some reduction of the lice problem. The larger of the ground-floor dormitories is now being used as a TV room; a quiet room for the elderly has been provided, as well as improved surgery facilities for the doctor, nurses and social workers who give their services to the residents. The reduction in the number of beds has also made possible the provision of a games room for the use of the staff. For the greater part of the year the number of occupants was less than the permitted number. At one time, weekly bookings for full board were enforced and as a result of that arrangement a large number of men left the premises. The old system of booking has since been reintroduced and men can again sleep at this common lodging house for one night only. Although there is day-time provision for the elderly and the unemployed, the hostel continues to be mainly a place for occupation by night. In addition to the improved facilities mentioned above, there has been a very definite improvement in the standard of cleanliness. The staircases no longer reek of urine and the pavements outside the premises no longer provide a restingplace forweary travellers. The facilities now provided are adequate, and one no longer has the impression that the hostel is grossly overburdened. The year ended with cleaner premises and better facilities. It is hoped that these standards will be maintained in the future. However, although standards have improved, regular visits and inspections by the Environmental Health Officer concerned will be essential to maintain the improvements achieved. NOISE During December, 1975, the Control of Pollution Act, 1974, (Commencement No. 4 Order, 1975) was made. This will bring into force on 1st January, 1976 the provisions of the Control of Pollution Act relating to Noise and Atmospheric Pollution. While some of the provisions regarding noise may prove to be an onerous task for local authorities, there is little doubt that the staff engaged on this work will welcome the challenge to deal with what has been a rather intractable problem in the past. During 1975, both formal and informal action was taken under existing legislation to secure some reduction of noise which is all too often associated with demolition and construction sites. Some of these noise sources can be trivial and complainants can foresee a reasonably quick end to their annoyance. Other noise nuisances, however, are quite long-term, such as the problems associated with the Barbican development where the impression is inevitably gained that, while tenants came with high ideals that Barbican would be an area in which they could enjoy a way of life which was near to their hearts, many have been disillusioned, and the noise of construction over the years has engendered a sense of despair and resentment. The Health Department is mindful of their dilemma, and well aware that there are some tenants who, because of long-term illness and other problems, cannot escape from their surroundings during the daytime or at weekends. Under normal circumstances, with the co-operation of the contractors, no noisy work is carried out after 7.00 p.m. on weekdays, after 12 noon on Saturdays, or at all on Sundays or Bank Holidays, in order to ensure that people have a reasonable degree of quietness during their leisure hours. To achieve the same degree of comfort for the more unfortunate people confined to their flats during the daytime, when normal buiIding operations ought to be aIlowed to proceed, is, for all practical purposes, impossible. On the other hand, when a particular case of illness and distress has been brought to the notice of the Department, informal approaches to contractors' representatives have resulted in the suspension of noisy operations on a temporary basis. 35 Housekeepers in the City are particularly vulnerable to noise nuisances at night. Often, contractors involved in the complete refurbishing of existing buildings are quite unaware that people live within yards of the site, and commit themselves to schedules which compel them to work throughout the night. Certainly, nobody can object to their working such hours, but if work during the night and at weekends causes noise which is a nuisance to local residents, it must stop. A considerable amount of work during 1975 was devoted to consultations directed towards ensuring the preservation of existing neighbourhood ambient noise levels against the increasing number of stand-by electricity generators which are being installed in the City. It is satisfying to reflect upon the measure of co-operation offered by all concerned in this type of operation, resulting in modifications which often bring about substantial improvements. Some difficulties were experienced with noise from existing plant, notably air-conditioning and ventilating equipment, and the necessary investigations involved a considerable amount of work by the staff of the Department during night hours. This, however, resulted in a measure of attenuation being achieved to the satisfaction of the complainants. HYGIENE IN HAIRDRESSING AND BARBERS SHOPS Section 77 of the Public Health Act, 1961, empowers local authorities to make Byelaws dealing with hygienic conditions in Hairdressers' and Barbers' shops. During the year 14 inspections were made. The Greater London Council (General Powers) Act, 1967, requires all persons who wish to carry on the business of a hairdresser or barber to be registered in respect of their premises. Three hairdressers and barbers were so registered making a total of 45 on the Register at the end of the year. PHARMACY AND POISONS ACT, 1933 This Act provides for registration, by the local authority, of persons, not already registered in respect of Part I of the Poisons List, who desire to sell poisons included in Part II. Part I of the Poisons List includes the more dangerous poisons, such as strychnine, which may be sold only by pharmacists registered by the Pharmaceutical Society of Great Britain, whereas Part II includes the less dangerous poisons, such as phenols, hairdyes, etc. Thirty-four inspections were made in connection with the administration of the Act. A few minor infringements were noted and were subsequently dealt with satisfactorily. In March 1975, a firm of general dealers, who in 1973 were fined a total of £105 for contravening Section 18 of the Act, by selling hairdyes improperly labelled, were fined a further £30 for a recurrence of the offence in two of their branch shops. Since this prosecution the two shops have come under new management and the requirements of the Act are now being complied with by both stores. No further contraventions of the Act were observed during the year under review. PHARMACY AND MEDICINES ACT, 1941 This Act has continued to have the attention of the responsible Environmental Health Officer. Its aims are to protect the public from misleading claims in advertisements or on labels. Routine inspections were made during the year but no contraventions came to the notice of the Officer. 36 FERTILISERS AND FEEDING STUFFS REGULATIONS, 1973 These regulations require sellers of certain specified fertilisers and feeding stuffs for cattle or poultry to furnish purchasers with a statutory statement indicating the name under which the article is sold and the amount, if any, of certain scheduled ingredients. Six inspections were made. No contravention was noted. SANITARY CIRCUMSTANCES The general sanitary supervision has been maintained and in this connection 16,883 inspections have been made. As a consequence of these inspections, it was necessary to serve 1,386 Intimation Notices. EXAMINATION OF WATER SUPPLIES AND SWIMMING BATH WATER The responsibility for the purity and potability of this water supply falls jointly upon the Corporation of London and the Thames Water Authority (Metropolitan Division). The powers used for this purpose are contained in the Public Health Act, 1936, the Water Acts, 1945, 1948 and 1955, and the Offices, Shops and Railway Premises Act, 1963. In the City there are two sources of supply:- (1) From the statutory water authority. (2) From the deep wells within the City. The Thames Water Authority's supply is completely safe and free from contamination when it reaches the premises, but it is often stored in tanks on the premises and can be subject to various forms of contamination before it reaches the user. For this reason the Environmental Health Officer concerned exercises continuous surveillance over the condition of all water supplies. City Byelaws require that water storage tanks be cleaned out every six months and be properly covered to prevent the contamination of the water supply by birds and rodents and the ingress of extraneous contaminated water. Routine inspections are made to ensure that this work is carried out and that the water supply is kept in a satisfactory state for drinking and food preparation purposes. Water can be contaminated by objectionable bacteria in many ways and as a result the consumer may be adversely affected. A constant check is therefore maintained by routine bacteriological sampling throughout the supply system within buildings. Other contaminants can include metal and organic matter. If this is suspected chemical sampling and analysis is carried out to discover the particular form of contaminant. The same kind of examination is carried out for the water obtained from the deep wells. In all cases chlorine is used as a sterilising agent and this fact is recorded when the sample is taken. A weekly visit is made to the three swimming pools in the City, when tests of the water are carried out for free, combined and residual chlorine. In addition, a bacteriological sample is taken, and pH values, which indicate the acidity or alkalinity of the water, are ascertained. This is essential in order to control the breakpoint chlorination process. This year's work has involved a painstaking effort to monitor the pools and guide the operators in the proper methods of ensuring safe swimming water. The Director of Scientific Services of the Thames Water Authority, has supplied the following Report:— "1 .(a) The supply was satisfactory both as to (i) quality, and (ii) quantity throughout 1975. 37 (b) All new and repaired mains are disinfected with chlorine; after a predetermined period of contact the pipes are flushed out and refilled; samples of water are then collected from these treated mains; and the mains are returned to service only after the analytical results are found to be satisfactory. The quality control from these laboratories is carried out by means of daily sampling from sources of supply, from the treatment works or well stations, from the distribution system, and through to the consumer. Any sign of contamination or any other abnormality is immediately investigated. During 1975 the surveillance of the distribution system has been improved. (c) No artificial fluoride is being added, and where the fluoride content is indicated in the analyses it represents the naturally occurring fluoride in the water. 2.(a) The supply was derived from the following works and pumping stations:— River Thames-derived water from Thames Valley grouped stations. New Riverderived water from Stoke Newington works. No new sources of supply were instituted and there were no changes to the general scheme of supply in your area. The number of samples collected and the bacteriological and chemical analyses of the supply from the above sources after treatment are shown on the attached sheets. (b) On account of their hardness content and alkaline reaction the Board's river and well water supplies are shown to be not plumbo-solvent. It should, however, be appreciated that all types of water pick up varying amounts of metal from the material of water piping particularly when it is newly installed—this applies to copper, zinc, iron and also to lead." SEWERAGE AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL Sewerage and sewage disposal in the City of London are the responsibility of the City Engineer who has supplied the following information:- "Under the Water Act, 1973, the authority for sewerage and sewage disposal in the City is the Thames Water Authority for which the Corporation acts as agent for these purposes and for which the City Engineer bears day to day responsibility. The sewerage system in the City is comprised mainly of ovoid shaped brick sewers, the average internal dimensions being 1219 mm. x 813 mm. wide, this size being adopted only to provide access for sewermen, as the normal dry weather flow depth of effluent is only about 228 mm. at average velocities between 609 mm. and 914 mm. per second. The sewers now managed by the Corporation discharge into the Thames Water Authority's intercepting sewers which flow eastwards across the City at lower levels to the Beckton Sewerage Treatment Works. In my opinion, the system of sewerage in the City is adequate, with ample margin for diverting flows from sewers during reconstruction and maintenance works." HOUSING Mr. K.R. Bailey, V.R.D., F.I.H.M., Housing Manager for the City of London, has submitted the following report:- "During the year 294 families were rehoused leaving 949 on the housing register at the end of December 1975 including 357 Corporation tenants who require accommodation more suited to their needs. 38 The Middlesex Street Redevelopment was completed apart from some finishings to the car parking areas. The estate provides a residential precinct of 181 flats with 80 dwellings in a tower block named Petticoat Tower and the remainder in the perimeter block named Petticoat Square. There are 38 shops with trading facilities at ground and podium levels. Parking and garage facilities are provided at basement, ground and mezzanine levels. At ground level there is also an internal estate road for servicing dwellings and shops. Included in the development are a number of guest flats and a fine Community Centre. The residents have formed a Community Association and are putting the Centre to good use. The older residents "Three Score Club" is expected to flourish in the new Centre, having had to put up with poor facilities whilst the development has been going on. Good progress was made on the fourth and final stage of the Holloway Redevelopment. This stage is being carried out in conjunction with John Grooms Association for the Disabled on a triangular site between Camden Road and Parkhurst Road. Of the 64 dwellings being erected twelve will be used for the disabled and the remainder for families on the Corporation's housing register. A Community Centre is being erected for use of the Holloway and York Way Estates. Progress on site has been good and completion is expected in May, 1976. The proposed redevelopment of the area appropriated from the Bridge House Estates, a site bounded by Kennington Road, Hercules Road and Cosser Street has been thwarted by planning problems but a satisfactory conclusion with the local authority in this respect is hoped for shortly. The Corporation is desirous of redeveloping the area by the erection of residential accommodation and some shops. Blake House, however, which has a frontage to Hercules Road, will be retained. The appropriate Committees have been giving a great deal of consideration to completely refurbishing the City of London Freemens, Gresham and Rogers Houses. This estate is situated in Ferndale Road, Brixton, S.W.9., and provides sheltered accommodation for old people with a qualified nurse in attendance. There are 46 self contained one bedroom dwellings, mainly in blocks giving ground and first floor accommodation and grouped round a large central grassed area. The properties are old and some improvements were carried out about twenty years ago. At one time it was envisaged that the occupiers would be re-accommodated at Mais House, Sydenham Hill, but legislation precluded this. The residents are mainly chosen by reason of being Freemen of the City of London or having close connections with the City. The Housing Committee extended the categories for acceptance of applicants on theHousing Register by introducing a special category for public service workers connected with City services. At present applications can be accepted from City residents, inadequately housed families in Corporation dwellings, former residents of the City or Corporation dwellings who are inadequately housed, those employed full time within the City of London for not less than two years and either inadequately housed or in circumstances such as to cause hardship in travelling to their employment. The additional category should materially assist those seekiny, and with a need for, accommodation close to their place of work. The Committee also decided to make a small separate allocation of dwellings during 1976 to essential staff at St. Bartholomew's Hospital. This arrangement will be reviewed after the first year's working." SMITHFIELD MARKET 233,967 tons of meat and poultry etc., were recorded as delivered to Smithfield Market in 1975, some 19,038 tons less than the previous year but increasing quantities of boneless meat cuts lessen the significance of these figures. Smithfield Market comprises the old markets, first opened in 1868 and later buildings including the Poultry Market opened in 1963. The meat trade, however, extends into the surrounding areas where catering suppliers, offal salesmen, meat buyers and other types of trader are found. The Inspectorate at Smithfield cover this area and places in the City such as Leadenhall Market where meat and poultry is handled by wholesalers. 39 Meat Inspection 269 tons 6 cwts of meat, poultry and otherfoods, about 34tons more than in 1974, was surrendered as unfit for food. In comparison with the previous year, less meat was surrendered for disease, undoubtedly due to animal health and efficient inspection at slaughter. Disease conditions found were mainly localised lesions in pigs, not apparent until the carcase was cut up, and degenerative conditions in carcases of mutton and veal. In accordance with past practice, information as to disease was passed to relevent local authorities. The Meat Inspection Regulations in England and Wales require carcases after inspection at slaughter to have the local authority stamp applied. Stamps are not always legible but it is rare for them to be missing. The same requirement does not apply in Scotland and, while it is not illegal to sell unstamped meat, a number of enquiries were received from officers of other local authorities who found in their district unstamped carcases from Scotland which had beenobtained in Smithfield. Consignments of imported lambs which were affected by moulds, oil damage or vermin damage were sent, by arrangement with the appropriate authorities, to Smithfield from outside cold stores for reconditioning and this added to the bulk of unsound meat surrendered. Present methods of production, packing and refrigeration promoted, rather than prevented, conditions of spoilage of most of the unsound meat and poultry taken; wet, or moist, products in impervious wrappings at temperatures above freezing can develop profuse microbial growth and spoilage which may be undetected until the package is opened.Much of the meat had been returned from retailers to the wholesalers. In the climate of discussion and proposals concerning bacteriological standards and refrigeration below 4°C. and considering the high total counts of organisms which may be found on some of these packaged meats, one can ponder on the definition of 'clean food' and the need, down to the point of retail sale, for monitoring the microbiological state of such meats. Poultry Poultry taken as unsound included stocks from cold storage which had been affected by spoilage in the form of mould on carcases in plastic wrappings, dehydration of unwrapped carcases and other forms of damage, and unfrozen carcases enclosed in packs in which moisture and humidity helped in the development of spoilage and decompostion. Inspection of poultry has continued in Smithfield since, some 40 years ago, the high incidence of disease, particularly tuberculosis in old hens, was shown and a case made for the inspection of poultry at time of slaughter. Disease found in poultry in Smithfield Market now, in proportion to the number of carcases handled, is minimal and for the most part is in young birds from production units which had health problems in the particular flock. Records were kept to show the pattern of poultry losses. Nearly 16 tons of chickens, turkeys and fowls were surrendered during 1975 and of these 2,465 lbs chickens, 7,972 lbs tutkeys and 293 lbs hens were diseased, the remainder being unsound mainly due to conditions of spoilage mentioned above. Export Certificates Meat, poultry and other articles of food intended for export were examined and 14 certificates issued. These exports were mainly to Bermuda and Hong Kong. Sampling At the request of the Central Public Health Laboratory Service, 24 samples of imported meat were taken and submitted for microbiological examination. 93 samples of fat from imported carcases were taken for pesticide research by the Government Chemist. 40 Education Specimens of pathological and other interest to students have become more scarce and difficult to obtain while the number of students desperately needing opportunities to see them increases. Efforts were made to use what was available to the best advantage. Specimens were provided for examinations and demonstrations in Colleges and examination centres. The Handbook of Poultry Inspection containing coloured plates of diseased carcases photographed by Mr. K.S. Seymour and published by the Corporation of London continued to be in demand and 118 copies were issued for sale. Hygiene Many people visit Smithfield and buyers vary from personal shoppers with deep freeze cabinets to the professional buyers from the large meat firms. Some, not being part of a food business are not within the scope of the law on hygiene. All meat has to be collected and taken away; transport varies from private cars to first class meat carrying vehicles. Owners of small cafes and restaurants buy meat in Smithfield. Many, if not most, are from overseas and generally politely cooperative. Two particular cases of infringements of the Food Hygiene Regulations have not been brought to the courts because, even with the help of the police and local authority col leagues, identification of men with several aliases could not be established. The Food Hygiene (Markets, Stalls and Delivery Vehicles) Regulations, 1966, require the name and address of the person carrying on the business to be displayed on the delivery vehicle but many are without it, which suggests that it is a requirement often overlooked by authorities. The following notice is issued to the personnel in charge of vehicles which can be criticised on the grounds of hygiene. NOTICE TO FOOD HANDLERS CORPORATION OF LONDON FOOD & DRUGS ACT, 1955 Food Hygiene (General) Regulations, 1970 Food Hygiene (Markets, Stalls & Delivery Vehicles) Regulations, 1966 (1) Persons engaged in the handling of food must not place food as to involve any risk of contamination. (2) Persons must keep clean all parts of themselves or clothing which are liable to come into contact with food. (3) Persons engaged in the handling of food must wear clean washable overclothing and clean washable head covering while carrying meat. (4) Cuts and abrasions must be covered with washable protective materials (First-aid materials, etc.). (5) It is an offence for any person to SMOKE, SPIT or take SNUFF while engaged in the work of handling meat which is open food, or in any food room in which there is open food. (6) All vehicles (including trucks) used in the transport of meat must be kept in a clean and hygienic condition. (7) No offal unless frozen hard and packaged shall be transported in any vehicle except in separate covered receptacles constructed of impervious materials. (8) Floors of vehicles used for the transporting of meat must be impervious or fitted with movable duckboards. (9) A delivery vehicle carrying food must have displayed conspicuously and legibly upon it the name and address of the person carrying on the business. 41 The penalty for infringement of the above regulations is a fine not exceeding £100 or three months imprisonment or both and in the case of a continuing offence a further fine of £5 each day during which the offence continues after conviction. HEALTH & SAFETY AT WORK ETC., ACT, 1974 This Act lays duties on Employers, Employees, and Self-Employed Persons; including those of avoiding such work practices, actions and omissions while working, which can endanger the health and safety of the public or other workers. Copies of the Food Hygiene (General) Regulations, 1970, The Food Hygiene (Markets, Stalls & Delivery Vehicles) Regulations, 1966 and the 'Health & Safety at Work Etc., Act, 1974 may be purchased at H.M. Stationery Office, 49 High Holborn, London WC1 6HB. *Guidance booklets for the Health & Safety at Work Etc., Act, 1974 "The Act Outlined" "Advice to Employers" "Advice to Employees" "Advice to the Self-Employed" are available FREE on application to Dept. S14B H.M. Stationery Office, Room 223, Cornwall House, Stamford Street, London SE1 9NY. MEAT INSPECTORS OFFICE, 79 Charterhouse Street, London, EC1M 6HJ Telephone: 01-253 3254 The cooperation of the City Police at Snow Hill in dealing with vehicles attending Smithfield is greatly appreciated. Protective Clothing The provision of sufficient laundered smocks, coats and hats to those engaged in handling meat has been a problem for some years and following a survey of the laundry problem the Smithfield Market Tenants Association started discussions which resulted in a revised system of collection and servicing by a laundry serving many of the market firms. Further discussions with other contractors are to be held. The situation is improving. Unfortunately it has not been possible to bring the self-employed or, as they may be described, the unmanaged meat handlers into any organised scheme for obtaining clean protective clothing. Porters' smocks with integral hoods dispensing with the need for a separate hat have been designed and are available but have yet to be tried. It is thought they are not likely to be a la mode amongst the Smithfield characters. Prosecutions One prosecution resulted in fines of £30 for not wearing a clean and washable head covering while carrying open meat and £10 for failing to display the name and address on a vehicle. Market Cleaning This unpopular chore is more accepted as an unavoidable duty, but the maintenance ol reasonable standards requires continual pressure by the Inspectors. Health and Safety at Work Act, 1974 A teach-in was organised by the Smithfield Market Tenants Association to introduce this Act and discuss its probable effect on Smithfield. The meeting was well attended and addressed by officers of the Health and Safety Executive and of the Health Department. 42 ANNUAL REPORT OF THE VETERINARY OFFICER FOR THE CITY OF LONDON FOR 1975 Diseases of Animals Act, 1950 and Associated Acts The individual London Boroughs are responsible for the administration of the Diseases of Animals Act 1950 and Associated Acts, but the Corporation of London acts on an agency basis for 18 of these authorities, comprising approximately half the Greater London Area. The London Borough of Waltham Forest have announced their intention of joining the scheme. Under the terms of the London Government Act 1963, however, the Corporation is responsible for the whole of Greater London in respect of the importation of animals. 1975 saw the agency arrangements in operation for the tenth year, when many and varied premises were visited for the purpose of inspection, including animal boarding establishments, dog breeding establishments, animal hospitals, cattle and poultry shows and exhibitions, circuses, dolphinariums, farms, kosher and other butchers and poulterers, market stalls, parks, pet shops, piggeries, research laboratories, riding establishments, slaughter-houses, theatres, zoos, etc. Much new legislation, issued by the Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food, concerning both the welfare of animals and the prevention and control of animal diseases, has entailed greater responsibilities when carrying out inspections. Outbreaks of Swine Vesicular Disease and Sheep Scab have occurred necessitating licensing requirements to be carried out. The Veterinary Officer is grateful to his staff for carrying out these extra duties, and working outside normal hours on many occasions. In 1969 the setting up of facilities for imported animals, in order to prevent the introduction of Rabies into the country and to provide for the enforcement of animal welfare legislation, was agreed to in principle by the Port and City of London Health Committee. The Rabies (Control) Order 1974, which came into operation on 5th February, 1975, states that the provisions of the Order are to be executed and enforced by the Local Authority and plans were revised accordingly. The building of the animal quarantine station at Heathrow Airport has now commenced and completion is expected in 1976. Riding Establishments Acts, 1964 and 1970 Under the terms of the above Acts annual inspections were carried out for the purpose of relicensing such establishments and some 33 inspections were made during the year. A number of visits were also carried out to investigate complaints and the Veterinary Officer liaised with the British Horse Society on several occasions which proved beneficial to both the Society and this department. Breeding of Dogs Act 1973 Animal Boarding Establishments Act 1963 Pet Animals Act 1951 Premises coming under the terms of the above Acts were inspected and visited regularly. Reports of findings and recommendations for re-licensing were submitted to the various boroughs. Many complaints were also investigated and reported upon. Various animals are sold at Club Row Market on Sunday mornings and visits were made to inspect the animals. Advice was given and suggestions made as to the welfare of these animals with particular emphasis on their quarters and protection during poor weather conditions, etc. The problem of unlicensed vendors continued but much support is being received from the police and R.S.P.C.A. in this and other matters at the market. Psittacosis or Ornithosis Order 1953 Several cases of Psittacosis were reported both in humans and parrots. The premises involved were visited and all necessary precautions instituted to prevent further disease occurring. In each case assurances were made that persons received medical treatment. Reports of findings were submitted to the Borough concerned. 43 Performing Animals (Regulation) Act 1925 Under the terms of this Act visits to circuses, television studios and theatres were undertaken to ensure that performing animals' certificates of registration were in order and to inspect the animals, their housing and feeding arrangements. Live Poultry (Restrictions) Order 1971 Live Poultry (Movement Records) Order 1958 Poultry (Exposure for Sale) Order 1937 Poultry Pens, Fittings and Receptacles (Disinfection) Order 1952 Frequent visits were made to kosher poulterers, markets, etc., to ensure that the terms of the above Orders were adhered to. In addition visits were made to three recently built slaughterhouses, two more having been built which conform to the E.E.C. regulations. A number of complaints concerning the conditions of poultry exposed for sale were received and full investigations were carried out in conjunction with the R.S.P.C.A. A visit was made to the Dagenham Town Show held in July and the poultry inspected. Other animals including budgerigars, pigeons, mice and fish were also inspected. The show was licensed by this department as in previous years and all the livestock found to be healthy and displayed in suitable conditions. The West Essex Bantam Society was also licensed by this department to hold its annual show in Bethnal Green. The birds were inspected and their conditions and accommodation found to be most satisfactory. Movement and Sale of Pigs Order 1975 Movement and Sale of Pigs (Amendment) Order 1975 Swine Vesicular Disease Order 1972 Movement of Pigs (Waste Food Precautions) 1973 Outbreaks of Swine Vesicular Disease continued and movements of pigs were subject to licence. This involved both the issuing of licences and verification of licences received. Swill fed pigs continued to require licensing irrespective of the disease situation and many licences were issued by this department. The Corporation's agency area continued to be free from Swine Vesicular Disease and farms were visited frequently to ensure that the stringent precautions were being adhered to. Licences were issued in connection with movements at the Royal Smithfield Show. Sheep Scab Order 1938 Sheep Scab (Amendment) Order 1948 Outbreaks of sheep scab occurred and the Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food declared "dipping zones" in many parts of England. This imposed restrictions on movements of sheep through many areas and necessitated the issuing of licences for such movements in connection with the Royal Smithfield Show.The issuing of such licences and verification of licences received coupled with the licensing of pig movements entailed members of staff being present throughout the entire Show. Importation of Animals The threat of rabies continued to cause great concern and many visits were made to the dock areas and vessels in the Port. Owing to increased legislation and the ever growing fear of rabies being introduced into this country, an inspector was appointed to enforce the regulations at Heathrow Airport. As mentioned earlier in my report the Corporation is responsible for imported animals throughout the whole of the Greater London Area and it is hoped that the building of the animal quarantine station at Heathrow will provide greater protection in this area and, as animals coming into Heath row go to many parts of the country, wi II also serve toprotect much of the United Kingdom. 44 Proceedings were instituted againstairlines and individuals duringthe year concerning animals which had been illegally imported or caused unnecessary suffering by improper carrying. The following cases occurred concerning imported animals:— January Three dogs and two cats were delivered to the R.S.P.C.A. without necessary details. The matter was taken up with the airline concerned. A cat was carried from an aircraft to the airport bus by the owner. The cat was placed into quarantine and the matter taken up with Customs & Excise. Details of illegal importation of two rabbits at Heathrow were received. A report was sent to the local authority of their destination. Dog delivered to R.S.P.C.A. on open vehicle. Details sent to Comptroller & City Solicitor who advised that no action be taken. Dog imported in box which was far too small and appropriate details sent to the Ministry. R.S.P.C.A. assistant bitten by an imported dog. Medical attention was received and a report on the animal was negative for rabies. February Dog illegally landed in a carton from Saudi Arabia. The animal was quarantined and investigations made. R.S.P.C.A. assistant bitten by monkey. Rabies tests proved negative. Medical attention received. Dog found dead in Kensington and an area was declared an infected area. These restrictions were lifted when rabies tests proved negative. Dog imported at Heathrow in a plastic bag. A suitable container was provided and the dog reexported to Australia. March Dog illegally landed after travelling in aircraft cabin. The dog was placed into quarantine but no evidence of attempted smuggling was found. Dog allowed to travel in cabin on owner's lap. This matter was reported to the airline concerned. A suspected illegally landed dog that had been brought to London was reported by Customs & Excise and after investigation the matter was referred to The Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food, Investigation Branch. R.S.P.C.A. assistant bitten by an imported dog. Medical attention was received and a report on the animal was negative for rabies. April An imported dog bit an airport worker but tests for rabies proved negative. An imported dog bit an R.S.P.C.A. assistant whereupon the dog was placed into quarantine and tests carried out which were negative for rabies. Medical attention was received by the assistant. A consignment of pigeons arrived dead and upon examination by the M.A.F.F. were found to be suffering from salmonellosis. May A cat arrived in poor condition and upon veterinary examination was euthanised. A fox was found dead in Southwark but later investigations and tests proved negative for rabies. June Fifteen monkeys were dead on arrival at Heathrow and possible causes of death were stress, poor storage and delays during transit. Whilst awaiting loading into plane a dog escaped from kennel and was free for short time. On veterinary examination it was found to be healthy and continued its' journey to U.S.A. The facts were forwarded to the Department of Health in Florida and a health report requested. A consignment of tortoises arrived at Sheerness and were brought to London. It was reported that they had been poorly crated but no proof could be ascertained. 45 June (cont.) A dog that had died at a Veterinary Surgeon's premises in Dulwich was tested for rabies but this proved negative. A cat died at the R.S.P.C.A. Hostel and the premises declared an infected area. Tests forrabies proved negative and the restrictions were lifted. July A rabbit was illegally imported by a fourteen year old boy. His mother reported this to her Veterinary Surgeon and the animal was humanely destroyed. Nobody had been bitten or scratched and no further action was taken. The boy's mother was thanked for her prompt action. A dog escaped from the cargo sheds at Heathrow before continuing its' journey to Germany. A health report was subsequently received. August A dog arrived dead at Heathrow and the post mortem showed congestion of the lungs but no signs of rabies. September An imported monkey escaped from a laboratory in Brent and was free for four days but was caught within the confines of the laboratory. The co-operation of the Police, R.S.P.C.A. and Ministry was greatly appreciated. October A cat escaped from an aircraft having been transported in an insecure wicker basket. It was caught after three days and quarantined at the R.S.P.C.A. Subsequent tests showed the cat to be free from rabies and the matter of improper carrying was taken up with the airline. An airport worker was bitten by a dog at Heathrow. Tests for rabies proved negative and medical attention was received. Four hundred and fifty mice were illegally landed at Heathrow and this was investigated by the Ministry with the airline concerned. A mixed consignment of birds arrived at the R.S.P.C.A. and upon veterinary examination were found to be in extremely unsatisfactory condition and of the 2,120 birds 2,031 were dead. This matter was investigated by the Ministry. A lady found a stray kitten in Kowloon and carried it in a plastic bag in the passenger cabin. On arrival at Heathrow she declared it to the Customs Officer and arrangements were made for it to be placed into quarantine. November Three containers arrived at Heathrow containing iguanas and tortoises and hidden in concealed compartments were twelve saki monkeys, two of which were dead. They were for re-export to Germany, obviously illegally, and the matter was reported to the Ministry. December No incidents. Where action could not be taken by the Corporation, as in cases involving foreign airlines, the facts were referred to the International Air Transport Association who enforce their own code of practice for the carriage of live animals. Post Mortem Examinations These were undertaken at an abattoir and at the Airport on animals which arrived dead or were destroyed and reports were submitted to the relevant authorities. Export Certificates Inspections were carried out at Smithfield Market and Cold Stores in London and export certificates issued accordingly. 46 Conferences Two Royal Society of Health Conferences were held during the year; one concerning Poultry Meat Hygiene with reference to the E.E.C. directives, the other having the theme "International Transportation of Animals with reference to their Welfare and the Threat of Rabies to the United Kingdom". A film concerning rabies was shown at this conference. During the congress emphasis was placed on the Corporation's projected new quarantine facility at Heathrow and full credit given to the efforts made by this Authority. The Veterinary Officer was appointed as delegate to the 20th World Veterinary Congress in Thessaloniki in July. The event was most interesting and stimulating. It was pleasing to note that your delegate was the only representative of a Local Authority from the United Kingdom. A one day course for local authority Diseases of Animals Inspectors was held at the Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food Headquarters at Guildford. Subjects included rabies, swine vesicular disease and other notifiable diseases, and general duties of a Diseases of Animals Inspector. One of the Corporation's Diseases of Animals Act Inspectors, who was one of the speakers at the meeting, found his attendance most useful and worthwhile. In October the Veterinary Officer chaired a one day conference at the Central Hall, Westminster on The Zoonoses Order - Its Potential Impact on Public Health. The Conference, which was organised by the Royal Society of Health, was well attended and provided great interest in the media. Acts and Orders 1975 Guard Dogs Act 1975 This act controls the keeping of guard dogs, and prohibits their use as such unless a handler who is capable of controlling such animals is present. It also orders that the presence of a guard dog must be clearly indicated by a sign at each entrance to the premises. Regulations are still to be issued under the Act. Diseases of Animals Act 1975 Extends the power of the local authority to prevent introduction and spread of diseases of animals and poultry by prohibition or regulating the import of animals and carcases. In this connection the Act confers powers of entry to any type of vessel or premises as deemed necessary. The Infectious Diseases of Horses Order 1975 The Dourine Order 1975 Apply to several diseases affecting horses and other equines and requires that such diseases must be notified. Gives powers for an area to be declared infected where the disease is present and for cleansing and disinfecting to be carried out to prevent spread of the infection. The Zoonoses Order 1975 An Order which serves to safeguard human health by enabling cases of infection to be investigated. Restrictions may be imposed to reduce the risk of infection spreading to humans. This Order applies particularly to salmonella and brucella infections. Transit of Animals (Road and Rail) Order 1975 This Order regulates the carriage by road and rail of farm animals and horses and lays down requirements with regard to the construction and maintenance of vehicles and also contains measures to safeguard the welfare of animals during loading, unloading and carriage. The Diseases of Animals (Approved Disinfectants) (Amendment) (No. 2) Order 1975 Contains a list of approved disinfectants approved for use in respect of various diseases of animals. 47 Movement and Sale of Pigs Order 1975 Under this Order restrictions are placed on the movements of pigs in order to reduce the risk of pig diseases, in particular Swine Vesicular Disease. Most movements are controlled by licence and disinfection provisions are laid down. The Order revokes the Movement of Pigs (Waste Food Precautions) Order 1973. The Brucellosis (Berks., S.W. Oxon, Surrey etc., Eradication Area) Order 1975 This Order declares certain areas to be eradication areas, restricts the movement of cattle when compulsory eradication comes into effect. Vaccination in some cases is prohibited. EDUCATIONAL ACTIVITIES Although there was only one Student Environmental Health Officer on the staff of the Department during the year, assistance was given in the training of students from other authorities. Lectures on lifts and atmospheric pollution have been undertaken at one of London's technical colleges by one of the Senior Environmental Health Officers. Student nurses from St. Bartholomew's Hospital were given the opportunity of accompanying inspectors on their visits and studying the environmental health problems in the City. Assistance has been rendered to catering firms interested in educating their staffs in good hygienic principles. This has taken the form of talks and supply of educational material for distribution. Numerous overseas public health officials visited Guildhall during the year and received explanatory talks from senior members of the staff. Other educational activities included a one-day course for students studying home economics, and a course of six lectures to students of the Missionary School of Medicine. 48 INDEX Page Animal Boarding Establishments Act, 1963 43 Atmospheric Pollution 26 Automatic Vending Machines 30 Catering Establishments Complaints 29 Prosecutions 28, 29 Sampling 28 Vending Machines 30 Clean Air 26 Clipper Regatta 20 Common Lodging House 34 Container Trade 11-15 Diseases of Animals Act, 1950 43,47 Educational Activities 22, 48 E.E.C. Food Harmonisation Programme 15 Exchange Visit 23 Ferry Terminal, Sheerness 9 Fertilizers and Feeding Stuffs 37 Food Complaints 29 Food Hygiene (Market Stalls and Delivery Vehicles) Regulations, 1966 30 Food Hygiene — Smithfield Market 41 Food Sampling 28 Hairdressers and Barbers Shops 36 Health and Safety at Work Act, 1974 30 Health Committee 1 Housing 38 Importation of Animals 44 Importation of Frozen Chinese Rabbits 16 Importation of Wine 17 Infectious Diseases 8 Inland Container Depot, Surrey Docks 14 Introduction 6 Lash and Seabee 20 Lighters 18, 19, 20 Malaysian Cooked Prawns 15 Meat and Food Inspections 40 New Zealand Apple Trade 17 Noise 35 North Sea Oil 18 Officers of the Health Department 2-5 Offices, Shops and Railway Premises Act, 1963 30 Passenger Ships 9 Performing Animals (Regulations) Act, 1925 44 Pet Animals Act, 1951 43 Pharmacy and Medicines Act, 1941 36 Pharmacy and Poisons Act, 1933 36 Pigeon Control 34 Port of London Clipper Regatta 20 Powers 23 Preface 6 Psittacosis or Ornithosis Order, 1953 43 Publications 25 Purfleet Deep Wharf 13 Rats and Mice 19, 33 Refuse Lighters 18 Riding Establishments Acts, 1964 and 1970 43 Rodent Control 19, 33 Ro-Ro. Terminal-Purfleet Deep Wharf 13 Sampling 15, 28, 40 Sanitary Circumstances 37 Sewerage 38 Sheerness Ferry Terminal 9 49 Page Ships of Interest 20 Shops Act, 1950 33 Smithfield Market 39 Smoke Control 26 Staff of Health Department 2-5 Student Environmental Health Officers 22, 48 Surrender of Unfit Food 40 Surrey Docks — Inland Container Depot 14 Swimming Baths 37 Tankers 18 Tilbury Container Trade 11 Trans-Siberian Container Line 12 Unsound Food 40 Very Large Crude Carriers 18 Veterinary Officer's Report 43-48 Visiting Ships 20 Visitors 22 Water Supply 17,37 50