AC, 4369 Lon 02 2nd com Report of the Medical Officer of Health for the Port and City of London for 1976 To be presented on Tuesday, 20th September, 1977. CONSTITUTION AND JURISDICTION The governing body of the City of London, the Corporation of London, was originally constituted the Sanitary Authority of the Port of London by Section 20 of the Public Health Act, 1872. The cost of administration was met from the Corporation's private funds for close on fifty years, when it became rate (and grant) aided. By the Public Health (London) Act, 1936, the term "Port Sanitary" was changed to "Port Health", and the Port Health district is further defined by the Act as the "Port of London as established for the purposes of the law relating to the Customs of the United Kingdom" and by the Public Health Act, 1936 as "the Port as established for the purposes of the enactments relating to the Customs". The Public Health (London) Act 1936 was repealed by the London Government Act 1963 but Section 89(1) of that Act defined the Port of London as "the Port of that name established for the purposes of the enactments relating to customs or excise." In accordance with the provisions of the London Port Health Authority Order 1965 made under Section 41(1) of the London Government Act 1963 the Corporation of London shall have jurisdiction as Port Health Authority— (a) as respects functions, rights and liabilities of a local authority under the enactments mentioned in Part 1 of Schedule 1 of the Order over all waters within the Port and over such part of the district of any riparian authority as comprises the whole of any wharf and of the area within the gates of any wharf and of the area within the gates of any dock and the buildings thereon respectively, forming part of or abutting upon the Port; (b) as respects any other functions, rights and liabilities assigned to them, within the Port (The Port of London established for the purposes of the enactments relating to customs or excise). The limits of the Port of London for the purposes of the enactments relating to customs or excise were originally defined by a Treasury Minute dated 1st August, 1883. They commence at high water mark in the River Thames at Teddington Lock, in the County of Surrey, and extend down both sides of the said River Thames to an imaginary straight line drawn from the Pilot mark at the entrance of Havengore Creek in the County of Essex, to the land's end at Warden Point, in the Isle of Sheppey, in the County of Kent, such point being the north-western limit of the Port of Faversham, and extend up and include both sides of the River Medway to an imaginary straight line drawn from the south-east point of land westward of Coalmouth Creek, thence across the said River Medway to the western-most point of the piece of land which forms the eastern side of Stangate Creek, or, in other words, the north-west point of Fleet Marsh and thence in a southerly direction to Iwade Church in the said County of Kent, and thence in a north-easterly direction to Elmley Chapel in the said Isle of Sheppey, a supposed direct line from Elmley Chapel to Iwade Church, being the western limit of the Port of Faversham, and the said Port of London includes the Islands of Havengore Creek aforesaid, called Potton and Rushley Islands, and so much of the said Creek and Watercourses as extends from it to the town of Rochford, and also includes all other Islands, Rivers, Streams, Creeks, Waters, Watercourses, Channels, Harbours, Docks and places within the before-mentioned limits contained. Following upon the extension of the area of jurisdiction of the Port of London Authority by the Port of London Authority (Extension of Seaward Limit) Act 1964 the area of jurisdiction of the Corporation of London as Port Health Authority was similarly amended by Section 31 of the City of London (Various Powers) Act 1965 which added at the end of the definition of "Port of London" in Section 89(1) of the London Government Act 1963 the following words: "together with all such waters between the seaward limit of the Port as so established and imaginary straight lines drawn from latitude 51° 37' 00" north, longitude 00° 57' 19" east (Foulness Point in the County of Essex) to latitude 51° 46' 05" north, longitude 01° 20' 32" east (Gunfleet Old Lighthouse) and thence to latitude 51° 26' 36" north, longitude 01° 25' 30" east and thence to latitude 51° 24' 55" north, longitude 00° 54' 21" east (Warden Point in the County of Kent) as are for the time being within the territorial waters of Her Majesty's dominions." The Port of London Authority with which the Port Health Authority works in close co-operation was established as the administrative body of the Port of London including the docks and tideway of the River Thames, by Act of Parliament in 1909. PORT AND CITY OF LONDON HEALTH COMMITTEE (as at 31st December, 1976) Chairman William Allan Davis, Alderman Deputy Chairman Brig. Joseph John Packard Aldermen Sir Gilbert Samuel Inglefield, G.B.E., T.D., M.A., D.Sc. Air Cdre. The Hon. Peter Vanneck, C.B., O.B.E., A.F.C., A.E., D.L., M.A. Anthony Stuart Jolliffe Commoners Richard Christopher Larkins Charvet, R.D. Arthur Malcolm Bell, LL.B. Arthur Edward Chase Green, M.B.E., T.D., D.L. Capt. Frederick Arthur Kemmis Betty, O.B.E., V.R.D., R.N.R. Dennis Gordon Fisher Stanley Edward Cohen, C.B.E. Herbert Twyneham Pike, Deputy Peter Philip Rigby, J.P. Sir Thomas Kingsley Collett, C.B.E., Deputy Dr. James Cope Lady Donaldson, J.P. Sir Stanley Graham Rowlandson, M.B.E., J.P. Iris Samuels Edwin Stephen Wilson Henry Duckworth, J.P., Deputy John Edward Hoare John Clarence Lascelles, D.F.C. Henry John Spurrier Kenneth Alfred Ballard, M.C. David Charles Girdlestone Brown David Colover Richard Saunders Alfred Maunder Parkin Henry Derek Balls, J.P. Francis Felkin Stunt, LL.B. Joseph Leonard Reed, M.B.E. June Evans, M.A. Janet Sheppard Robert Leith Turner Peter Anning Revell-Smith Peter Dudley Northall-Laurie Maurice Arthur Brian Jenks STAFF (as at 31st December, 1976) Commenced Service Any other Appointment held MEDICAL OFFICER OF HEALTH (for the Port and City of London) March 1958 Medical Inspector of Immigrants D.T. JONES, B.Sc., M.B., B.Ch., M.F.C.M., D.C.H., D.P.H., D.C.T. MEDICAL STAFF SECONDED FROM CITY AND EAST LONDON AREA HEALTH AUTHORITY W.T. ROUGIER CHAPMAN, V.R.D., M.R.C.S., L.R.C.P. Senior Assistant Port— Medical Officer Medical Inspector of Immigrants R.G.S. WHITFIELD, D.S.C., B.A., M.R.C.S., L.R.C.P. Assistant Port Medical Officer— Medical Inspector of Immigrants R.F. ARMSTRONG, L.R.C.P., L.R.C.S., Ed., L.R.F.P.S., Glas. Assistant Port Medical Officer— (part-time) Medical Inspector of Immigrants J.H. HUDSON, B.Sc., M.B., M.R.C.S., D.T.M. & H„ D.P.H., M.F.C.M., (Acc.) Assistant Port Medical Officer— (part-time) Medical Inspector of Immigrants A.E.L. DE THIERRY, M.A., M.B., B.Chir., D(Obst), R.C.O.G., D.P.H. Assistant Port Medical Officer— (part-time) Medical Inspector of Immigrants R.M. BEST, M.B., B.S.(Lon) Assistant Port Medical Officer— (part-time) Medical Inspector of Immigrants K. GEORGE, M.B., B.S., D.T.M. & H. Assistant Port Medical Officer— (part-time) — M.J. LITTLEWOOD, M.B., B.S., D.T.M. & H. Assistant Port Medical Officer— (part-time) Medical Inspector of Immigrants Occasional Medical Inspectors of Immigrants DR. D.J. AVERY DR. P.J.R. WALTERS DR. D.W. KEYS Commenced Service ADMINISTRATIVE SECTOR E.V. SMITH Chief Administrative Officer October, 1938 R.G. RUTTER Deputy Chief Administrative Officer July, 1968 B.E. DAVIES Principal Assistant November, 1972 P.J. JARVIS Principal Assistant July, 1971 J.V. SMITH Senior Assistant June,1975 S.C. DARLISON Senior Assistant July, 1928 Mrs. E.J.A. MORROW Senior Assistant March, 1968 R.L. VALDINI First Class Assistant August, 1972 Miss S.L.B. VALDINI First Class Assistant September, 1974 Miss E.P.M. RUSSELL First Class Assistant April, 1975 J.R.H. CLEMENTS First Class Assistant August, 1976 Miss E.E. HARVEY Clerical Assistant May,1975 Mrs. J.E. GRAHAM Clerical Assistant (Temporary) (part-time) August, 1971 K.A. UNDERDOWN Clerical Assistant January, 1974 Mrs. A.H. MEALY Clerical Assistant May,1974 N.A. FISHER Clerical Assistant August, 1976 1 Vacancy Clerical Assistant — Mrs. S. ALLKINS Senior Shorthand Typist August, 1976 Mrs. D.M. HARMAN Shorthand Typist (Temporary) (part-time) September, 1972 Miss S.B. SMITH Shorthand Typist April, 1974 Mrs. J.M. MORSE Audio Typist June, 1974 E.J. PETERS Senior Assistant (Meat Inspector's Office) November, 1935 J.E. CASH First Class Assistant (Meat Inspector's Office) March, 1954 R.J.F. PARISSIEN Clerical Assistant (Meat Inspector's Office) March, 1971 J.S. McCAFFERTY Clerical Assistant (Meat Inspector's Office) April, 1974 A.M. EVES Administrative Officer (Diseases of Animals Act) November, 1976 Miss L.D. JONES Administrative Assistant (Diseases of Animals Act) February, 1975 Miss C.A. LOVETT Clerical Assistant (Diseases of Animals Act) May,1974 3 ] Commenced Service ADMINISTRATIVE SECTOR (continued) Vacancy Administrative Assistant (Animal Quarantine Static - Vacancy Clerical Assistant (Animal Quarantine Station) - H.T. LLOYD Senior Messenger/Driver November, 1968 G.P. BIGMORE Messenger/Driver September, 1975 K.C. BUTT Messenger/Driver September, 1975 ENVIRONMENTAL HEALTH (CITY) SECTOR Environmental Health Officers E. THOMPSON, M.E.H.A. Chief Environmental Health Officer (City) September, 1948 J.H. RILEY, M.E.H.A. Deputy Chief Environmental Health Officer (City) August, 1962 J.B. WELLDON, M.E.H.A., M.R.S.H. Principal Environmental Health Officer August, 1962 Vacancy Senior Environmental Health Officer - H.L. SHEPLEY, M.E.H.A. Senior Environmental Health Officer May,1964 W.G. SMITH, M.E.H.A. Senior Environmental Health Officer May,1972 P.L.S. CLARK, B.A., D.H.E., F.E.H.A., M.R.S.H. Senior Environmental Health Officer March, 1974 D.F. CORFIELD Senior Environmental Health Officer June, 1964 D. HITCHCOCK, M.E.H.A., M.R.S.H. Environmental Health Officer November, 1967 B.L. NUNN Environmental Health Officer April, 1968 B.J. DAWSON Environmental Health Officer February, 1969 M.C.J. ELKINGTON, M.E.H.A. Environmental Health Officer February, 1969 D.T. SPRINGATE Environmental Health Officer March, 1974 3 Vacancies Environmental Health Officers - Technical Officers J.G. GALILEE Senior Technical Officer November, 1951 D.R. FALLEN Technical Officer March, 1971 Technical Assistants D.T.W. FREEMAN Technical Assistant March, 1968 P.J. FOX Technical Assistant June, 1972 P.W. KERRIDGE, L.M.R.S.H., Technical Assistant July, 1972 A.I.M.S.O. C.E.W. EASTMAN, L.M.R.S.H. Technical Assistant September, 1972 Rodent Staff P.M. BERRY Foreman Rodent Operative June, 1967 J. PEGRAM Rodent Operative September, 1967 J.E. KIDDY Rodent Operative February, 1973 W.R. STRACHAN Rodent Operative May,1973 A. VELLA Rodent Operative November, 1974 Mortuary and Disinfecting Station Staff N.J. TOON Superintendent of the City Mortuary and Disinfecting Station August, 1976 W.T. STEELE Senior Disinfector and Mortuary Attendant August, 1958 G.W. JACOBS (General Duties at Mortuary) December, 1966 A. CUNNINGHAM (General Duties at Mortuary) April, 1975 W.A. WALDMAN (General Duties at Mortuary) June, 1975 ENVIRONMENTAL HEALTH (SMITHFIELD) SECTOR Environmental Health Officers W.R. LEE, M.lnst.M., M.E.H.A. Chief Environmental Health Officer (Smithfield) June, 1929 K.S. SEYMOUR, M.lnst.M., M.E.H.A., M.A.M.I. Deputy Chief Environmental Health Officer (Smithfield) July, 1935 J.C. WILSON, M.lnst.M., M.A.M.I. Senior Environmental Health Officer January, 1936 H.C. FIELD, M.E.H.A., M.A.M.I. Senior Environmental Health Officer August, 1954 G. GINGELL, A.R.S.H. Senior Environmental Health Officer August, 1954 J.T. COX, M.E.H.A. Environmental Health Officer March, 1975 B.G.F. PAYNE, D.F.C. Environmental Health Officer December, 1960 4 Vacancies Environmental Health Officers — D.T. ALDRIDGE, M.A.M.I. Authorised Officer under the Meat Inspection September, 1975 Regulations 4  Commenced Service ENVIRONMENTAL HEALTH (SMITHFIELD) SECTOR (continued) Meat Porters R. HUDSON Senior Porter May,1963 E.A. HIGLEY (General Duties at Smithfield Market) September, 1967 W.H. DALTON (General Duties at Smithfield Market) May,1970 A.J. FREW (General Duties at Smithfield Market) November, 1970 E.G. HIGLEY (General Duties at Smithfield Market) October, 1972 H. GROUT (General Duties at Smithfield Market) April, 1973 PORT HEALTH SECTOR Port Health Inspectors A.H. MARSHALL, F.A.P.H.I. Chief Port Health Inspector March, 1953 A.C. GOOD, M.R.S.H., M.E.H.A. Deputy Chief Port Health Inspector September, 1951 W.C.B. GILHESPY, M.E.H.A. Divisional Port Health Inspector January, 1960 A. GAME, M.E.H.A. Divisional Port Health Inspector August, 1961 A.W. BUCHAN, M.E.H.A. Divisional Port Health Inspector July, 1955 P.G. PRITCHARD, M.E.H.A. Divisional Port Health Inspector June, 1965 J.I. ECKERSALL, M.E.H.A. Senior Port Health Inspector June, 1966 J.C. STRACHAN, M.E.H.A. Senior Port Health Inspector June, 1968 R.W. GWYER, M.E.H.A., M.R.S.H. Senior Port Health Inspector March, 1960 G.J. BULL, M.E.H.A. Senior Port Health Inspector June, 1967 J.D. EDWARDS, M.E.H.A. Senior Port Health Inspector June, 1969 J.A. STOKER, M.E.H.A. Port Health Inspector June, 1963 A.E. TERRIBILE, M.E.H.A. Port Health Inspector June, 1969 A.M. GIBBS-MURRAY, M.E.H.A. Port Health Inspector June, 1970 M.D. BARRETT Port Health Inspector January, 1976 J.B. SHAW Port Health Inspector March, 1976 M.A. BLACKBURN Port Health Inspector June, 1976 K.B. WILLSON Port Health Inspector December, 1968 K.E. DOUBLEDAY Port Health Inspector September, 1976 4 Vacancies Port Health Inspectors - 2 Vacancies Meat Inspectors — Vacancy Technical Assistant (Meat) (Authorised) - Student Environmental Health Officers Miss C.A. WILLIAMS Student Environmental Health Officer September, 1976 Miss G.E. ROSINDELL Student Environmental Health Officer September, 1976 J.E. MORRIS Student Environmental Health Officer September, 1976 A.V. SLAYMARK Student Environmental Health Officer September, 1976 C. HEWINS Student Environmental Health Officer September, 1976 Miss L. RENOUF Student Environmental Health Officer October, 1976 Technical Assistants (Pests Act) A.T. EVANS Chief Technical Assistant January, 1953 H.A. BAXTER Senior Technical Assistant June, 1945 G. CLARK Senior Technical Assistant January, 1949 J.R.W. KENNEDY Senior Technical Assistant December, 1963 P.F. CARTER Technical Assistant/Class I March, 1966 H. BROWN Technical Assistant/Class I August, 1966 A.D. FARRANT Technical Assistant/Class I June, 1969 D.S. SOUTHWOOD Technical Assistant/Class I June, 1969 R.G. BUNGAY Technical Assistant/Class I September, 1969 A.H.J. SMITH Technical Assistant/Class I September, 1972 Technical Assistants (Rodent Control Scheme) H. BEASLEY Technical Assistant/Class II October, 1972 T. SHEA Technical Assistant/Class II June, 1974 R.S. SAMS Technical Assistant/Class II July, 1975 F.W. PRIOR Technical Assistant/Class II November, 1975 G.W.J. SMITH Technical Assistant/Class II July, 1976 A.P. PRICE Technical Assistant/Class II November, 1976 Vacancy Technical Assistant/Class II — 5  Commenced Service PORT HEALTH SECTOR (continued) Launch Crews C.R. SIMONS Navigator (Senior) August, 1938 W.G.A. KING Navigator (Deputy Senior) September, 1939 M.J. EAST Navigator September, 1954 R.H. SIMMONS Navigator November, 1960 A. RUSSELL Navigator August, 1961 W.T.S. PARKINSON Navigator June, 1966 W.F. McKEE Navigator January, 1967 K. GITTENS Engineer (Senior) January, 1955 C.R. HOLLMAN Engineer (Deputy Senior) December, 1969 W. SIMMONS Engineer May,1955 B. JACOBS Engineer April, 1956 D. ROBERTS Engineer November, 1973 A.R.L. POTTER Deckhand July, 1945 A.E. ALEWOOD Deckhand January, 1947 D. KIELL Deckhand February, 1965 P. RAYNER Deckhand November, 1960 K.R. BLACKWELL Deckhand December, 1973 P.A. SKELTON Deckhand February, 1974 P.R. CORNELIUS Deckhand September, 1968 D.L. WEBSTER Deckhand September, 1968 K.J. SPILLETT Deckhand October, 1968 T.W. STEVENSON Deckhand January, 1973 N.J.S. STOYLE Deckboy June, 1974 D. HOLMES Deckboy August, 1974 M. ETOCK Deckboy September, 1974 A.D. WILMOT Deckboy March, 1975 M.A. McLEOD Deckboy May,1975 P.M. TESTER Deckboy October, 1975 G. WEBB Deckboy November, 1975 Launches Date Acquired "Alfred Roach" 1948 "Humphrey Morris" 1962 "Victor Allcard" 1965 DENTAL SECTOR L.J. WALLACE, T.D., L.D.S., R.C.S. Dental Officer June, 1965 Mrs. P.A. MIMMS, R.D.S.A. Clerk/Dental Surgery Assistant September, 1965 VETERINARY SECTOR Veterinary Officers G.S. WIGGINS, M.R.C.V.S., F.R.S.H. The City Veterinary Officer December, 1956 T.W. FRASER, B.V.S.M., M.R.C.V.S. (part-time) July, 1973 J.R. SMITH, M.R.C.V.S., B.Vet.Med. (part-time) July, 1973 M. HOLMES, B.V.Sc., M.R.C.V.S., (part-time) February, 1976 Diseases of Animals Act Inspectors R.J. HAYHURST, D.F.C. Senior Diseases of Animals Inspector October, 1964 J.T. HADLEY, A.M.R.S.H. Diseases of Animals Inspector December, 1964 Miss A.G. HARRISON Diseases of Animals Inspector November, 1975 Animal Quarantine Station, Heathrow K.W. KING, A.M.R.S.H. Manager April, 1966 J. TROLLOPE Assistant Manager November, 1976 Vacancy Assistant Manager - Vacancy Senior Animal Attendant — 16 Vacancies Animal Attendants - D. OSMOND Maintenance Man November, 1976 6  Commenced Service ANALYTICAL SERVICES W.B. CHAPMAN, B.Sc., M.Chem.A., M.Ph.A., F.R.I.C., F.I.F.S.T. Public Analyst April, 1971 E.H.W.J. BURDEN, B.Sc., M.Chem.A., F.R.I.C., F.I.F.S.T. Deputy Public Analyst April, 1971 (Public Analyst services are provided for the Corporation by the Scientific Branch of the G.L.C.) J.H. HAMENCE, O.B.E., Ph.D., M.Sc., M.Chem.A., F.R.I.C. Agricultural Analyst July, 1969 P.S. HALL, B.Sc., M.Chem.A., F.R.I.C. Deputy Agricultural Analyst July, 1969 7 To:- THE RIGHT HONOURABLE THE LORD MAYOR, ALDERMEN AND COMMONS OF THE CITY OF LONDON IN COMMON COUNCIL ASSEMBLED My Lord Mayor, Ladies and Gentlemen, I have the honour to present my Third Annual Report, dealing with the year 1976. The year in question has been one of unremitting activity. The stream of legislation from both Central Government departments and the European Economic Community has continued without detectable slackening, while the recruitment of adequately qualified staff from outside the Corporation has become very difficult indeed. This is a reflection of a general shortage of people of the right calibre but it cannot be denied that the rates of pay in the Corporation are not sufficiently high to attract officers to come to work here. If there is not to be a serious deterioration in the quality of staff and the work done, this problem will have to be solved sooner rather than later. Another problem which has proved particularly intractable is that of secondment of doctors from the City and East London Area Health Authority to carry out boarding duties in the lower reaches of the port. This is highly important work dealing, as it does, with the prevention of importation of infectious diseases from abroad and it needs medical men with the right qualifications and experience. Unfortunately, the National Health Service which, of course, has its own financial problems, has been unable to offer salaries which will bring the right men into the work. As a result, seventy per cent of the doctors carrying out this sometimes physically difficult task are over the age of retirement. In the City the work has gone steadily forward, if allowance is made for staff shortages. The detail of the work is dealt with in the narrative and it is to be hoped that there will shortly be a decision on the role of the local authority in the enforcement of the Health and Safety at Work etc. Act. In Smithfield it has been a year of reassessment of the function of the market and for a cool look at the part the market plays, firstly, in the meat trade and, secondly, in the environment and employment situation in the City. Your officers are doing everything possible to facilitate this reassessment and it is hoped that the market and its surroundings will develop a further importance in the coming years. In the veterinary sector the year has been one of great development. The Corporation has built an Animal Quarantine Station at Heathrow which is a highly important part of the country's protection against diseases carried by imported mammals and birds. The disease which immediately springs to mind, of course, is rabies but the precautions are equally important against psittacosis and against fowl pest. The building of the Station was an imaginative and bold decision by the Corporation and it is to be hoped that all those having to do with the Station will appreciate its important function. The long awaited upturn in trade in the ports of London and Medway has been greeted with enthusiasm by all concerned. There can be no doubt that the facilities available are as good as, and in many cases better than, at any other port. For its part, the Port Health Authority will do its utmost to ensure that, while protecting the public health, trade is never unnecessarily delayed. Once again, the number of available staff is of great importance, but the newer methods of cargo transport and the concentration of work at points further and further down the River, tend to make flexibility in staffing even more difficult. The problem which, this year, has overriden all others, in all sectors, has been that of money. The Health Department is now running on a budget which permits of no reserve at all. Those services which are of low priority have already been shed. However, it is a characteristic of work in the preventive field that it is quite impossible to look ahead and estimate precisely how much money will be needed in the future. Who is to say that a crisis will not develop tomorrow? There may be no warning today at all. It is, therefore, patently impossible to try to calculate the cost of crises which will blow up in the next year. A prime example of such a crisis was provided in 1976 by the outbreak of food poisoning due to consumption of cockles. This outbreak developed in an area which had been free from trouble for some twenty years. During all that time there had been full coordination and cooperation between the trade and the various authorities concerned and an efficient monitoring programme was running. Nevertheless, because of factors which were new and unforeseeable, the outbreak occurred. As a result, staff had to be taken from other work to deal with the new demands, which meant that the other work had to suffer. There is no method available by which these crises can be foreseen and, if staff and money are pruned too severely, the time will come when a crisis of sufficient size, or a number of small crises occurring together, will overrun the capacity of the department. That this has not happened yet is largely due to the willingness of your staff in all sectors to work in their own time and to accept a great deal of personal responsibility. I must put on record my gratitude to all members of staff for their unfailing willingness to see the public health and the welfare of the Corporation as coming before their own convenience. I should also like to thank the Chairman and Members of the Port and City of London Health Committee who have always been most understanding and helpful and have provided great support during this difficult time, and all our sister services who, although suffering similarly themselves, have always tried to make life a little easier for your staff. I have the honour to be, My Lord Mayor, Ladies and Gentlemen, Your obedient Servant, DR. DILWYN T. JONES Medical Officer of Health, Port and City of London. 8 The Port Sector INFECTIOUS DISEASES Chickenpox On 3rd August a vessel arrived at Tilbury Dock and the Master reported that a member of his crew had been suffering from Chickenpox. The seaman had been landed at Abidjan for hospitalisation on 22nd July but was returned to the vessel on the following day as a recovering case of Chickenpox. The Boarding Medical Officer, who examined the man on arrival of the vessel at Gravesend, was of the opinion that the attack of Chickenpox had been a mild one. Nevertheless the cabin was disinfected by formalin spray. As the seaman was proceeding on leave with other crew members it was decided, to prevent unnecessary worry at his, and his shipmates', home districts, to notify the diagnosis to the Medical Officers for Environmental Health for the areas to which the men were dispersing, firstly by telephone and then by a confirming letter. Typhoid On 19th August, 1976, the Boarding Medical Officer received a telephone message from H.M. Customs & Excise at Sheerness Dock that the wife of a crew member of a vessel, outward bound to Gibraltar, had been diagnosed by her local G.P. as suffering from a mild attack of typhoid (? paratyphoid). The crew member had been unwell with diarrhoea at home before joining the vessel but was apparently well when he went aboard. A message was passed to the Master of the vessel via Thames Navigation Service as she was enroute for Gibraltar, and it was suggested that the seaman be kept under surveillance as a possible carrier of typhoid and the Master was further advised that the seaman should be examined by a doctor at Gibraltar. There, he was found to be excreting Salmonella of the group C and a blood test indicated antibody levels which might have been due to infection or a previous inoculation with TAB. Information was later received that the seaman's wife was suffering from infection with Salmonella hadar and not from typhoid fever. On the return of the vessel on 6th September, 1976, the seaman was advised by the Boarding Medical Officer to return home and report to his own doctor for further investigation. The Medical Officer for Environmental Health for Woodspring District Council, who is the Proper Officer for the area of the seaman's home address, was informed. Salmonella Infection A vessel arrived at Sheerness on 18th September, 1976, from Bremen and was boarded by one of the Boarding Medical Officers. The Master had suffered symptoms of diarrhoea, vomiting and stomach pains and whilst in Bremen had seen a doctor who diagnosed that he was suffering from a salmonella infection. As a result of this information an inspection of the vessel was carried out and conditions on board were found to be satisfactory. However, as other members of the crew had suffered similar symptoms to the Master it was considered advisable that the crew should submit faecal specimens for bacteriological examination. The vessel sailed on the 20th September in the general direction of Rotterdam, before the results of these specimens were known. These were subsequently received and as they indicated that two of the crew were excreting Salmonella newport the agents were advised to notify the owners. Infective Hepatitis A vessel arrived in the Port of London on the 8th November, 1976, when it was discovered that the Master, had suffered an attack of infective hepatitis which commenced while the vessel was in Curacao on or about the 27th October, 1976. The patient was admitted to the Dreadnought Hospital at Greenwich and the vessel sailed at 1430 hours on the 9th November. There had, however, been a complete crew change in the Port of London. The addresses of the original crew were obtained and letters were sent to the Medical Officer for Environmental Health for the relevant districts. 10 Cockles — Food Poisoning Report Information that widespread outbreaks of food poisoning involving some 800 cases were reported over the Christmas holiday period and were associated with eating cockles. Where it was possible to trace the source of the cockles they were found to have come from Leigh-on-Sea. Although the attacks of food poisoning were generally of short duration, they were severe and a number of people were admitted to hospital. Tests carried out by the Public Health Laboratory Service failed to identify the casual organism. Common bacterial agents involved in food-borne diseases were eliminated. The cockles sold from Leigh-on-Sea are generally harvested from the area in and around the Thames Estuary. Part of the estuary is subject to three separate Orders made under the Public Health (Shellfish) Regulations by the Port of London Health Authority in 1936, 1957 and 1973. These Orders prohibit the sale of shellfish taken from the prescribed area unless they have been subject to a process of sterilisation in an apparatus approved by the Port Health Authority. Regular sampling and testing of the cockles, after processing, carried out weekly by Southend-on-Sea Environmental Health Department produced consistently good results throughout the year. A number of possible reasons for the outbreaks were investigated with the co-operation of the Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food, Shellfish Research Department at the Fisheries Laboratory, Burnham-on-Crouch, Essex, and at the Torry Research Station, Aberdeen. All the processors were informed that their apparatus was not approved, and this stopped the harvesting and sale of cockles taken in the prescribed areas. Also, the opinion was expressed that the whole Thames estuary should be considered polluted. In view of the difficulty of controlling the parts of the Thames estuary not at present subject to Orders and the likelihood of shellfish from the whole area being a danger to Public Health, investigations began with a view to recommending that an Order be made under the Port Health (Shellfish) Regulations prescribing the whole of the Port Health District. PUBLIC HEALTH (SHIPS) REGULATIONS 1970/74 Two Greek Cruise Liners, were given radio pratique on their way up river after each ship had stated over the radio that the answers to the health questions on the International Maritime Declarations of Health were all in the negative. However, upon actual sighting of the Declarations of Health by an authorised Officer it was noted that a "yes" appeared in each case. One vessel which arrived on 7th August, 1976, had a crew member suffering from suspected Glandula Fever and he was sent to Joyce Green Isolation Hospital. The second vessel, which berthed on 13th August, 1976, had had a passenger who had died at sea (coronary occlusion) and was buried at sea on 6th August, 1976. The agents for both these vessels were informed of the seriousness of the incidents and that instructions would be issued to the Boarding Medical Officers that all Greek Cruise Liners would be boarded before going alongside and before being given pratique. These instructions were issued. SHEERNESS DOCKS Fresh Fruit Trade As in previous years, the fresh fruit imports through the port of Sheerness, continued at a high level. Imports of citrus fruit from Israel, South Africa and the United States (California), deciduous fruit from South Africa and Tasmania and bananas from the West Indies, West Africa and Central America were handled in the port. A total of some 159,000 tons of fresh fruit, carried in eighty-six vessels, was discharged during the year. Details of this trade are given in the Statistical Section of the report. 11 New Zealand Meat Trade The importation of New Zealand meat through Sheerness continued during the year. This trade is made up of the traditional New Zealand imports that have been arriving in the United Kingdom for many years and includes lamb and mutton carcases, cartoned lamb cuts, cartoned beef cuts and a wide range of lambs, sheep and beef offals. Detailed examination of these imports, together with the inspection and reconditioning of any damaged meat, is carried out by the Port Health Inspectors in the meat inspection room provided for this purpose. Twenty-four vessels, carrying some 82,000 tons of New Zealand meat were handled in the year. Approximately 1,000 tons of this total were containerised. New Zealand Dairy Trade Thirteen vessels carrying some 24,300 tons of New Zealand dairy produce, butter, cheese, milk powder, arrived at Sheerness during the year. This includes the largest single importation of New Zealand dairy produce into the United Kingdom in one vessel. This vessel, the my 'Port Chalmers', arrived in December with a cargo of 14,300 tons on board. Wine Trade There has been a considerable increase in the importation of both bottled and bulk wine into Sheerness during the year, particularly in the bulk wine section. This has occurred during the latter half of the year and has been achieved by the use of purpose-built tankers being employed on the trade and by working these tankers on a second berth at No.1 quay. A total of 4,273,978 gallons of wine has been iimported during the year. The larger portion of these imports has been stored in the tanks provided for this purpose at Sheerness, with occasional consignments being delivered direct to road tankers. Future Developments During the year construction work commenced on a container berth at Sheerness. This berth is being provided by extending the existing No. 1. berth by some 180 feet. A 35 tons Liebher gantry is to be provided on the berth and a stacking area of some two acres will be available for containers. This new facility is scheduled for completion in the early part of 1977. Medway Lash Vessels The lash (lighter aboard ship) trade continued to use the Medway during the year. Fifteen vessels discharged a total of 290 lighters. On six occasions these lighters were laden with foodstuffs, all of which were due for discharge outside this 'Authority's' district. On all occasions the 'receiving authority' was accordingly notified. SHEERNESS FERRY TERMINAL The two daily sailings inaugurated by the Olau Line in April, 1975, continued throughout the year. In the early months of the year the vessels operating on the Sheerness — Flushing route were the "Olau Dana" and the "Olau West". On 1st April the "Olau West" was replaced by the "Olau Kent" and a month later the "Olau Dana" was replaced by the "Olau Finn". Both of these replacement vessels were maintained on this service throughout the remainder of the year. 12 M.V. OLAU FINN The "Olau Finn" can accommodate some 32 trailers, 150 cars and 1,400 passengers, whilst the "Olau Kent" can accommodate some 25 x 12 metre trailers, 40 cars and 1,200 passengers. Freight Traffic As in 1975, the greatest amount of foodstuffs imported through the terminal was carried on driveraccompanied vehicles. These vehicles require prompt clearance by both H.M. Customs and Port Health, requiring attendance by a Port Health Inspector for each arrival. The total quantity of foodstuffs inspected at the terminal during 1976 amounted to some 32,000 tonnes, involving 1,234 accompanied and 488 unaccompanied commercial vehicles. Details of the types of foodstuffs inspected, number of trailers involved, etc., is reported in the Statistical Section. Passenger Traffic During the year 439,708 passengers passed through the terminal. On five occasions H.M. Immigration Officers referred passengers to the Port Medical Officer for examination and on three occasions aliens were refused entry by H.M. Immigration, after they had been medically examined. In the latter part of the year, whilst surveillance for 'Marburg Virus Disease' was being carried out by the Authority, notices were displayed in both the passenger hall and the car/accompanied trailer clearance area. H.M. Customs and Immigration Services were alerted and assisted the Port Health Inspector on duty at the terminal whilst passengers were disembarking. Future Developments The Olau Line have announced that early in 1977, a service will commence from Sheerness to Dunkirk. It is their intention to initially use the two existing vessels on this service on a triangular link, with an additional vessel coming into service in April and this vessel will then commence a twice daily sailing from Sheerness to Dunkirk. 13 M.V. OLAU KENT TILBURY CONTAINER SERVICES The year has been one of growth in the number of new container services attraced to the Tilbury Container Terminals, although no new container berths became operational during the year. The number of container vessels arriving at Tilbury compared favourably with the arrivals during the previous year, slight variations on particular services can be noted from the statistical summary of arrivals for 1975/76. During 1976, the following container services commenced regular operations to the United Kingdom through Tilbury:— March 1976 SAFMARINE Serving South Africa April " GLE LINE Serving USA/Canada May " RECON Serving Red Sea July " BALT-ATLANTIC Serving USA East Coast November " ELLERMANS Serving South Africa December " CAROL Serving Caribbean Area GLE. Great Lakes & European Lines Inc. This service brought into being the first direct container link between the Great Lakes ports of Detroit and Chicago, and the Canadian ports of Toronto and Montreal, with Europe, through Tilbury and Amsterdam. Five new German Flag vessels were chartered to maintain this service across the North Atlantic via the Saint Lawrence Seaway; all the vessels being identical and of modern design, each capable of carrying approximately 195 T.E.U's. Of these, 25 containers can be refrigerated. 14 The service is maintained throughout the year. During the period from December to April, when the Saint Lawrence Seaway is closed for navigation due to ice, the alternative Eastern Seaboard ports of Norfolk and Sait John N.B. are used. Containers are transported from the Great Lakes by rail to these ports. SAFMARINE During March, the first arrival for the Safmarine Container Service from South Africa to the United Kingdom and Europe arrived at Tilbury, the latter being the United Kingdom Terminal port. Several vessels of conventional design, but having been adapted for the carriage of containers, are employed on the service. These are to be later replaced by purpose built container vessels. RECON. Red Sea Container Line This container service became the first to operate into Tilbury through the Suez Canal. Three vessels operate on the service to the Red Sea port of Jeddah, sailings being weekly. At Tilbury the vessels use the Swedish Lloyd Terminal at 26 berth as opposed to the Multi-user Container Berths. North-bound cargo on the service is machinery and similar type cargo. No foodstuffs are imported at present. BALT-ATLANTIC This service is operated by vessels of the U.S.S.R. Merchant Fleet, and all vessels are of the modern container and roll-on/roll-off type. The vessels trade between Northern Europe and the East Coast of the United States, a variety of general cargo being carried in addition to the capability for the carriage of refrigerated containers. The "CARIBIA EXPRESS" Photo by courtesy of Brown Jenkinson & Co. Ltd. Ellermans This became the second container service into Tilbury, connecting the United Kingdom with South Africa. At present only one vessel is engaged on the service, but it is understood that this will shortly be joined by additional tonnage. Carol The early part of December, saw the inauguration of the first regular container service between the United Kingdom and Europe with the Caribbean Area. The new German container vessel 'Caribia Express' sailed Westbound for the Caribbean. Therefore the early part of 1977 will see the first Eastbound arrival of the same vessel into Tilbury. This area is a completely new part of the world to be connected with Tilbury, and the types of foodstuffs to be imported will be an unknown factor for the present, but no doubt both fresh and preserved fruit and vegetables will be in abundance. Eventually a total of six vessels, similar to the 'Caribia Express' will be engaged on the service, each capable of carrying 1,500 T.E.U's, 100 of which could be refrigerated. Northfleet Hope Development Construction work on the new Container Terminal at Northfleet Hope commenced during the year, this being an extension of the present Overseas Container Terminal at 39 Berth, Tilbury. When the berth is completed in 1978, a new deep water quay will have been constructed on the riverside of the existing berth, and additional storage for both general and refrigerated containers will be provided. Vessels operated by OCL and ACT will use this terminal for all the Australian and New Zealand containerised cargo received into Tilbury, larger vessels already being in the course of construction. In addition the vessels of CP. Ships will still continue to use the berth for their Canadian container service. IMPORTED CHINESE FROZEN FOODSTUFFS Royal Docks 1976 There was again an appreciable trade in imported Chinese frozen foodstuffs during 1976. As in previous years, the principal item was frozen rabbit, either whole or in portions, the total importation amounting to approximately 53,300 tons. Numerous samples were drawn for inspection and all were found to be disease free and in good general condition. A few samples were also submitted for bacteriological examination and these, too, were satisfactory. Frozen prawn imports totalled almost 4,600 tons. Of these, the great majority were uncooked and all shipments arrived in sound condition. Of the cooked and peeled prawns received, a small number failed to meet the agreed U.K. bacteriological guide lines and were re-exported. In addition to frozen rabbits and prawns, there were a few shipments of frozen fish. Samples were drawn from each consignment and were submitted for examination for the presence of heavy metals. Where mercury was found it was within the limit of 0.5 p.p.m. One other frozen commodity was also received during the year, a single shipment in September of 120 tons of cauliflowers and runner beans. This was the first importation through London of frozen vegetables from China. Both items were in good condition and free from any non-permitted additives. 16 TEMPORARY SANITARY ACCOMMODATION - BNS UMAR FARUQ In December H.M.S. LLANDAFF berthed at No. 35 shed Royal Albert Dock. At an impressive ceremony, covered by the National News media, the White Ensign was lowered aboard for the last time, to be replaced by the new ensign of the Bangladesh Navy. The frigate was renamed BNS UMAR FARUQ, after one of the four Caliphs of Islam. Planning had been in progress well in advance of the ship's arrival. Meetings were held between the Port Health Authority, the Port of London Authority and the Fleet Hygiene Officer on the staff of the Flag Officer (Medway) to arrange for the provision of the necessary services of water supply, refuse disposal and sanitary accommodation for up to 300 officers and ratings. Various companies were contacted in respect of the type and number of portable building required. It was finally agreed that two units consisting of four W.C's, urinals, and wash hand basins with all services connected would be sited as near to the ship as possible. These facilities proved adequate for the ship's company during their stay in port. COMCLEAR TERMINAL AND 'F' SHED ROYAL VICTORIA DOCK Imported Food It is pleasing to report that trade increased through the two container terminals in the Royal Docks by as much as 40%. These terminals deal not only with containers of a conventional size but also road vehicles from as far afield as Iran. A great range of foodstuff has been imported through both terminals, including wines from Italy, Greece, France, Germany and China, exotic foodstuffs from the near and far east, including dried fruit and nuts from Iran and Iraq, canned and packaged foodstuffs from China, Japan and Malaysia and canned meats from France and Luxemburg. In addition, fresh fruits and vegetables are imported from the Mediterranean countries including Cyprus. The inspection of some of the foodstuff is not without its humerous side. Port Health Officers at the dock have noticed that certain importers of Mediterranean origin take a personal interest when their goods arrive and are presented for inspection. Indeed it has been noted that so many people have been present at the time of inspection, all of them trying to impress the Port Health Inspector with the superior quality of their goods, that it sounded more like the the High Street in Famagusta or Limassol rather than a cargo shed in the Docks. Rabies The National campaign has been linked with a local drive in the docks to make dock workers aware of the risk to the country from rabies. This has resulted in the inspectors being informed of any dog in the area, and incidentally highlighted the problem of guard dogs in the cabs of lorries being a possible risk when entering dock areas. LONDON MARINA - ALBERT DOCK BASIN Royal Docks This Marina has proved to be a very popular amenity in the Port of London. Many boat owners moor their boats for the winter. Repair and maintenance is available. Most of the berths are fitted with a water supply and mains electricity and facilities exist ashore for laundry and there are well maintained toilet facilities. 17 In the Marina there is a club house with meals available at a licensed bar. Water supply and refuse disposal arrangements are regularly inspected by this authority. No major problems have been encountered. In the last year, the publicity given to the dangers of an imported case of rabies was not overlooked and warning posters and notices declaring the area to be a Pet Free zone were displayed. There has been the further co-operation from the management of the Marina. There has also been much discussion concerning the establishment of an 'isolation buoy' in the basin, with no direct access to the shore, for vessels with animals found aboard. This did not come to fruition, as a similar scheme is already in being on the upper river. The management will not allow any craft into its Marina that carries any animal capable of carrying rabies. If a craft is suspected of having an animal on board, all interested parties are informed and the necessary steps taken. A successful prosecution resulted from this arrangement when a craft was refused entry, and, on checking further, contraventions of the Rabies (Importation of Dogs, Cats and other Mammals) Order were found and dealt with. INDIA AND MILLWALL DOCKS The beginning of the year 1976 was one of anxiety for all who worked in this dock group. In January the Port of London Authority issued a discussion document called 'Rationalization of Upper Docks' which included proposals for the transfer, by the end of 1976, of all general cargo handling in the India and Millwall Docks to the Royal Docks. The document set out the reasons, mainly financial, why this would take place, but also, more importantly, provided for discussions with customers, trade unions, Members of Parliament and other interested parties. These discussions took place during the first six months of the year during which time Aznar Lines, who operated a joint seasonal service with the Olsen Line to the Canary Islands, announced that they were transferring their ships to Southampton. This decision placed the Olsen Line in the position that they could not maintain their terminal at Nos. 1-3 Sheds, Millwall Dock without Aznar Line, who had used the terminal as Olsen's tenants. The Port of London Authority were faced with a new situation in which they would have to absorb Olsen's labour force. This fact, together with the outcome of discussions with the interested parties produced another document of alternative strategy for the Upper Docks. This revised policy was published in July and provided for the continuation of operations at India and Millwall Docks if agreement with the trade unions with regard to cost savings measures and the problem of working arrangements at the Olsen berths, which the Port of London Authority would take over, was reached. The Port of London Authority were able, after negotiation, to persuade Olsen Line to continue to bring their vessels to the Millwall Dock at their old berth. When agreement was finally reached a new fresh attitude and sense of urgency was apparent. This was reflected in the fast turn round of vessels which in turn attracted customers long since lost to other ports, to look again at the Port of London. The New Zealand apple trade will be maintained for the 1977 season and Hellenic Line returned after an absence of eight years, with imports of food from the Mediterranean. Cargoes of American onions, Israeli citrus fruit and South African fruit were imported in the face of stiff competition. P. & O. Lines have decided to concentrate all their conventional cargo trades to this dock and the Port of London Authority are providing five berths for this purpose. Facilities are being improved in the dock with the demolition of old warehouses, the paving of open sites for containers and the refurbishment of sheds which have been closed. During 1977 it is hoped that the new services can be built on, and, with the goodwill of all, can be maintained. The year 1976 which began so despondently ended happily with previously silent berths now busy and thriving on industry and with new hope for the future. 18 NEW ZEALAND POTATOES In June 1976, the reefer vessel "Mangocore" arrived at the India and Millwall Docks from New Zealand carrying a freight of 5,500 tons of potatoes under controlled conditions. This was the first ever cargo of potatoes to be imported from New Zealand, and it is claimed the largest ever such cargo anywhere in the world. The potatoes were imported as an experiment when our own crop had suffered from serious drought conditions. They arrived in excellent condition and the grower who flew over to see the discharge, which was completed in a record 4½ days, was very satisfied. He hopes to ship further cargoes in 1977. S.L.I.C. CONTAINER DEPOT, SURREY DOCK The container clearance depot in Surrey Dock handled 1,696 containers and 602 trailers during the year. This required the attendance of the Port Health Inspector at least once on most working days, to inspect food under the Imported Food Regulations. The trade includes food from U.S.A., Japan, China, Hong Kong and Europe and the various foods imported included frozen fish from the far east such as carp, pien fish, tuna, halibut, yellow croaker and skate wings. In addition to the normal wines from Europe, small quantities of wines were imported from China, Japan and Taiwan. Other items included cocoa powder from Holland, lychees, soy sauces, and cashew kernels from China, shelled almonds and walnuts, also sherbet powder from France, various food mixes, convenience foods, fruit drinks and juices from the U.S.A., pepper from Sarawak, and frozen convenience foods, soy sauces and speciality foods from Japan. Full trailer loads of macaroni were also imported from Turkey. Amongst the more exotic foods were snail meat, asparagus grass jelly, pickled plums, fried oysters, broiled eel, dried seaweeds and fungus, jasmine tea and fresh tientsin pears. During the year the Port Health Inspector received 642 manifests from S.L.I.C. and, of these, about 40% detailed food, requiring 651 inspections to be made, compared with 257 inspections last year. 68 chemical samples were taken, resulting in 34 satisfactory results, 21 label offences and 13 unsatisfactory results. The food to which the 13 unsatisfactory results related was either re-exported or destroyed. In addition to the chemical samples, 115 bacteriological samples were taken, mainly of cooked and peeled frozen prawns. These samples resulted in 189 cartons of prawns being re-exported, and 1,346 cartons being destroyed. Most of the containers and trailers contained "groupage" items i.e. goods belonging to several companies or owners in one container. This requires each container to be emptied and the goods warehoused awaiting collection. During 1976 15 companies used the depot. RABIES CONTROL ON RIVERSIDE WHARVES Early in the year posters and pamphlets about rabies were distributed to the river berths and associated places where it is possible for vessels to moor. Advantage was taken of the increased publicity and public concern about the disease to ask managers of wharves and landing places to display permanent notices at their own expense, and many companies have readily agreed. In addition to this public-spirited action by wharf managers, a great deal of co-operation was achieved by enclosing pamphlets in the wage packets of riverside workers, and by handing pamphlets out personally when visiting riverside areas. Many of the wharf workers became very interested in rabies control to an extent where they volunteered information about any animals on ships. One instance of this information occurred when the Port Health Inspector was asked by a jetty Foreman if he knew of a dog aboard a large cargo ship. The Captain of the ship had declared that no animals were on board, and after a negative search of the vessel by the Inspector, the Captain repeated this statement. However, the jetty foreman and several dockers were adamant that there was a dog on board. With assistance from HMC & E a dog was eventually found on the ship, hidden in the Engine Room. The problem had arisen because the crew thought that the animal would be destroyed on arrival in England. 19 Veterinary Officers from Chelmsford, Hertford and Maidstone have viewed stretches of the river banks from the Port Health launch "Alfred Roach". The river forms the boundary between Diseases of Animals Act Authorities, and is obviously a possible route for the illegal entry of animals. Publicity abroad, and visits by Police, HMC & E Officers, Port Health Inspectors and Ministry Veterinary Officers to ships with animals onboard has brought about a marked drop in the number of animals discovered. If there are any animals on board yachts from foreign ports arriving at St. Katharine's Marina, the vessels are not permitted to enter, but are required to moor on a buoy in the river. This was necessary because of the number of animals roaming free or being walked by the public within the Marina area. So far three yachts have used the buoy with a total of two cats and two dogs between them since the agreement in July, 1976 In the whole year there were 220 arrivals from foreign ports at the Marina, and a number of the Masters were given pamphlets about rabies control so as to spread the information amongst the yachting fraternity. THE TRANSPORT OF REFUSE BY LIGHTERS During the year, observations were maintained to ensure that loaded refuse barges were properly sheeted over in accordance with the Authority's Bye Laws. In general, a good standard was noted and on the occasions where infringements were evident, the Companies concerned were informed. Where possible, the reasons for the lack of sheeting were discovered to facilitate prevention of further occurrences. In the Summer, complaints were received from a member of the public in the Chelsea area concerning the smell from barges moored to a buoy. The unusually hot weather and wind direction were the two main factors causing these complaints. To ease the problem it was agreed that as few loaded barges as possible would be left on the buoy and for as short a time as possible. It was also found necessary to ensure that the barges were properly emptied as residues can also give rise to smell problems. During 1976, there were three companies with a total of over 150 barges in this trade. There are still five loading depots on the River Thames:— Feathers Wf at Wandsworth working 5½ days a week at 360 tons daily Grosvenor Dock at Chelsea " 7 " " 650 " " Cringle Dock at Battersea " 6 " " 630 " " Walbrook Wf near Southwark Bridge 7 " " 310 " " Northumberland Wf " 51/2 " " 340 " " This means that approximately 750,000 Tons of refuse are transported by lighter on the river annually which is about a quarter of the tonnage handled by the Greater London Council. In the latter part of the year several complaints were received from members of the public about rats seen aboard lighters, and information from lightermen confirmed that they, also, had seen some rats when approaching loaded lighters first thing in the morning. Previously, rats have not been a serious problem on the refuse barges as many of them have steel or concrete floors, but it would appear that the very hot summer had an effect on their numbers. Poison baits were laid in barges with slight infestations and gassing was required for the more serious problems. RODENT CONTROL MEASURES CARRIED OUT ON LIGHTERS A total of 2,387 lighters were inspected for rodent evidence on the River Districts and in the respective dock groups. Of these, 69 were treated, resulting in 196 rats being destroyed. A 'break-down' of the lighters inspected and treated is given in the statistical section of this Report. Suppressive Measures available are:— (1) Fumigation with methyl bromide and sulphur dioxide. (2) Poisoning with anti-coagulant baits. (3) Trapping and general hygiene. The Lighterage Companies were advised on rat-proofing and the general hygiene of their lighters with good results. 20 On the whole, fumigation of lighters has proved to be the best method of treatment, for, often, in lighters there is a residue of foodstuffs and a lot of water which is not the best condition for the use of poisons. However, where a very slight evidence of rats is noted, traps are set. If the condition of the lighter is a fairly dry one, then anti-coagulant baits are used. These operations prevent a very slight infestation becoming a moderate one! There has been a significate increase in the number of lighters inspected, indicative of the trade returning to the Port. There has also been a marked increase in the number of Lash and Sea-Bee lighters inspected; 133 as against 34 last year. This reflects the increased trade operating at Alexander Bruce's Wharf where most of these lighters were seen. The fact that none were found with any rodent infestation proves the value of being rat-proof. Rat Specimens to Laboratory:— No specimens were sent but rats were examined externally for any abnormalities. Abnormal specimens would be sent to the Laboratory at Portdown, Salisbury, Wiltshire. WATER SUPPLY There were two reports of contamination from hydrants during the year, two reports of contamination from standpipes and four reports of contamination from the ends of delivery hoses supplying fresh water to ships. The contamination from watering points was discovered during the normal course of sampling and indicates the necessity to continue routine bacteriological sampling of the water supplies in the District. No single attributable cause for the contamination was discovered after investigation and it must be assumed that the contamination had been introduced through unhygienic handling of the watering equipment. No ships received "unfit" water. There were twenty one reports of contamination in the distribution supply system on board ships. Samples were drawn mainly from fresh water taps over galley and messroom sinks. The source of supply from these taps is from the "domestic fresh water" storage contained in double bottom tanks and peak tanks. The presence of this potential danger on board stresses the necessity of ensuring that the standard of purity of "domestic" water supplies should be as high as the "potable" water supplies. Three samples were drawn directly from ships' storage tanks, all of which were found to be contaminated. Subsequently cleansing of these tanks was carried out. STUDENT ENVIRONMENTAL HEALTH OFFICERS, AND VISITORS A full quota of visitors was maintained during the year. Many of the Provincial Local Authorities and the London Boroughs request that their own trainees spend some time with the Port. (This is a requirement of the Environmental Health Officers Education Board). These young men and women are then sent to all of the Dock Groups so that they get a broad, as well as a very detailed, understanding of the complex duties of the Port Inspectors. Visitors from abroad (usually under the auspices of the World Health Organisation or the Royal Institute of Public Health and Hygiene) came from many different lands including India, Mauritius, Malaysia, Sri Lanka, Kenya, Spain, Indonesia, Iran and Pakistan. Groups of student nurses from the Middlesex and Orsett Hospitals regularly visit Tilbury Docks. The Authority welcomes this policy, which broadens nursing training. The South East London Technical College and the Tottenham Technical College send groups of Environmental Health students, who are in their final year, for instruction, and a full day's programme is arranged for them. The Port Health Inspectors receive generous assistance in this work from the major shipping companies. Lectures were also given, often in their own time, by the Port Health Inspectors to various associations and societies outside the Port. 21 The City Sector AIR POLLUTION REPORT FOR 1976 The Corporation has a considerable tradition of care in matters of air pollution and has long been in the van of enlightened policy and progressive legislation. In 1954 the whole of the City was made a smokeless area, the first of its kind in Britain to completely cover the area of one local authority's jurisdiction. Some advance was made by the Clean Air Act 1968 which extended and adapted a number of provisions of the Clean Air Act 1956. This enabled a stricter control on proposed chimney heights and by so doing aimed at the reduction of sulphur dioxide concentrations. The Act, however, contained no direct provisions against the emission of this gas. The Corporation had, for some time, viewed with concern the detectable rise in sulphur dioxide levels in the City. This rise in their view was due to many furnaces within the City burning residual fuel oils with a high sulphur content. As a result, the Corporation decided, on Mr. Deputy Cohen's proposals, to remedy this situation by private legislation. This legislation was passed by Parliament in 1971, and the substance of it was to prohibit the use of fuel oil with more than 1% sulphur content. It also included a generous changeover period for persons already burning oil with a greater sulphur content. The outcome of these measures has been dramatic, a considerable reduction in concentrations of sulphur dioxide being shown. It is also interesting to note that, when the Government introduced the Control of Pollution Act 1974, the first national provisions for controlling sulphur dioxide were included. Levels of sulphur dioxide pollution seem to have remained static in comparison with last year's pollution figures. It is also evident that there has been a slowing down of conversion to sulphur-free fuels, possibly due to the economic climate and the fact that much of this work has already been carried out. There has been a noted local increase in other forms of air pollutants. These include carbon monoxide from motor vehicles and badly operated boiler plants, emission of gases from various dry cleaning plants, amonia from photographic processers, chlorine from battery rooms and nitrous oxides from various sources. These forms of air pollution have been monitored and efforts have been made to keep down concentrations to more acceptable levels. Some concern has been shown about conditions at certain times in public car parks. Levels of carbon monoxide have been found to be unduly high and consequently unacceptable to employees in some of these premises. There is little doubt that the foresight of the Corporation in regard to atmospheric pollution, has brought substantial improvements locally. This must not lead to complacency. While smoke and sulphur dioxide are well under control, other forms of pollution are more intractable. The present policies and work of the department must be pursued with industry and vigour, otherwise the present gains may be eroded or even lost. CATERING ESTABLISHMENTS In spite of the current adverse economic conditions, it is observed that some new catering units continue to be established in various parts of the City. There are the occasional businesses which run into financial difficulties and close down, but these are exceptional. The number of routine inspections of food premises carried out this year has been below average. This is to be deplored, but is, unfortunately, unavoidable. Two Environmental Health Officers retired in June and another two resigned at the end of October 1976, and took up appointments with other London Authority's. The Corporation have been unable to attract people to fill these vacancies. The result has been that the two inspectors remaining to deal with this work have had to devote nearly all their time to dealing with complaints, new catering establishments and sampling. It is hoped that the staff shortage will be remedied in the not too distant future, as a lowering of standards must be expected if the frequent routine inspections, which have been undertaken over the years, are not carried out. Co-operation on the part of the City caterers, which I commented upon last year, has continued to be extremely satisfactory. Prosecution, under the Food Hygiene Regulations, for unhygienic premises was necessary in only one instance. Improvements in hygienic standards have been generally effected by explanation and persuasion. 23 Throughout the year, efforts have been made to ensure that food on display, especially in snackbars, is protected from possible contamination by customers coughing and sneezing over the sandwiches and other foodstuffs lying on counter tops. Once again, caterers have co-operated very well and no prosecutions have been considered necessary. Efforts to discourage food handlers from smoking while on duty have not been entirely successful. So many food handlers seem to be of the opinion that they have a perfect right to smoke as customers are allowed to do so. Both verbal and written warnings have been given in several instances, and if the situation does note improve, legal proceedings against persistent individual offenders will be inevitable. SAMPLING During the year a total of 328 samples was submitted to the Public Analyst. Most of these were informal samples covering a wide variety of foods and drink. The sampling was generally carried out during normal office hours, but, on occasions, formal samples of spirits were purchased in the evenings and at weekends. As far as the milk samples are concerned, they were all satisfactory except in a few cases where they found to be deficient in non-fat solids as the result of bovine ill health. Of 73 formal spirit samples taken, two samples of whisky were found to be unsatisfactory and legal proceedings were instituted. In both cases, the Licensed Victuallers concerned pleaded guilty and explained that the offences had occurred when members of their staff had added ice to drinks. For some reason or another customers had not accepted the drinks which had been put on one side and later been poured back into their respective bottles. The strength of the whisky had thereby been reduced to below the legal standard. Each of these prosecutions resulted in a fine of £25 with £30 costs. Several complaints were received from members of the public who were of the opinion that drinks they had purchased had been watered. These drinks included whisky, brandy and white wine. Samples were taken on each occasion but no evidence of adulteration was discovered. Numerous infringements of the Labelling of Food Regulations 1970 and Cheese Regulations 1970 came to light. An exchange of correspondence and, in some cases, discussions resulted in rectification of these technical offences. A tin of Korean oysters was found to contain an excessively high amount of cadmium. As there is no legal standard for cadmium in food, a representation was made to the Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food and a reply was received to the effect that the matter was receiving active consideration. It is understood that the question of fixing a legal standard was also being considered as part of the E.E.C. food harmonisation programme. Informal sampling of liqueur chocolates in the summer of 1975 brought to light the fact that these very expensive sweetmeats were being sold in a sub-standard condition, since, on examination they were found to be "dried up" and deficient in alcohol. Further samples were taken during the Autumn of 1976 and, in spite of the high temperatures experienced, they were found to be satisfactory. Informal sampling of salmon sandwiches confirmed the suspicion that the filling of these sandwiches did not always contain 100% salmon. This was followed up with formal sampling in two instances. One of these sandwiches was found to contain no salmon whatsoever and in the other case, the filling was found to be a mixture of salmon and other fish and this contained a prohibited dye, Orange RN. Legal proceedings were instituted and the defendants were fined £10 (£30 costs) and £35 (£20 costs) respectively. Numerous salmon sandwiches have since been sent for examination and it was gratifying to find that they were all satisfactory. FOOD COMPLAINTS 1976 was the year of the long hot summer and this was reflected in the nature of complaints received. 24 There were 32 complaints from members of the public regarding items of food which they had purchased in the City and felt to be unsatisfactory. In many cases the food in question was found to be mouldy. One can only conclude that this was the result of poor stock rotation on the part of the caterer, or of carelessness in failing to check the date stamping. In the odd case, greed may have been resposible, i.e. if the caterer refused to throw away perishable food which he had in stock too long. Rodent and cockroach infestation led to three prosecutions. These were followed up by ensuring that the necessary treatment was carried out to the premises concerned. Foreign bodies in food which included pieces of metal, wood and bristle resulted in several complaints. From time to time restaurant diners have complained that they were of the opinion that they have not been served with what they ordered. One such case concerned veal escallop, which the diner suspected was pork. (It must be borne in mind that pork is normally cheaper than veal). This was sent to the Public Analyst who confirmed that it was, in fact, veal. There was a complaint that milk was being delivered to City premises in a sour condition. Samples were purchased from roundsmen on several occasions and all were found to be fresh and palatable at the time of delivery. A dirty bottle of milk was brought to the attention of the department. This had some dark brown matter, adhering to the inside of the neck of the bottle, which, the Public Analyst reported, was mould hyphae and mould spores; and it had been present in the bottle prior to its having been filled with milk. The suppliers were very apologetic about this incident. They explained that they went to great lengths to prevent this sort of occurrence and that over three million bottles were washed and filled per week at their depot without there being any previous mishaps of this nature. In view of the circumstances, it was decided that legal proceedings should not be authorised, but that a warning letter should be sent. One complaint can be described as being decidedly unusual. An office worker brought along the remains of a cup of coffee which he had made at his place of work. He complained that it had a bitter taste and there was something that looked like a pepper corn at the bottom of the cup. This was duly sent to the Public Analyst, but, shortly afterwards, the complainant telephoned. It appeared that a colleague had put a "Carters Little Liver Pill" in the cup of coffee! A verbal warning, in appropriate terms, was issued. FOOD HYGIENE (MARKETS, STALLS AND DELIVERY VEHICLES) REGULATIONS 1966 Delivery Vehicles Several notices were served in respect of unhygienic food delivery vehicles. On one occasion, the City Police impounded an ice-cream van and asked for the Department's opinion as to its hygienic condition. It was found to be generally unsatisfactory and legal proceedings were instituted. Unfortunately, owing to a technicality, proof of ownership was not established. The case was therefore dismissed. HEALTH AND SAFETY AT WORK ETC. ACT, 1974 OFFICES, SHOPS AND RAILWAY PREMISES ACT, 1963 When these two Acts were placed on the Statute Book, local authorities appreciated that they were faced with an unprecedented additional work load, but few people realised that, even at the present time, some parts of the complicated machinery still need further adjustment and running in. Another year has passed and it is still not possible to report that the long awaited Health & Safety (Enforcing Authority Regulations) have been made. The delay in the introduction of the regulations in some directions, impedes the work of the Department. However, a good working liaison is maintained at officer level with the Health and Safety Executive and the work of the Department has continued at a satisfactory rate during the year. 25 An increasing amount of the time of my department's staff was devoted to work of an advisory nature. Calls came from all disciplines involved in occupational health, including employers, employees, owners of premises, architects, etc. It is felt that this aspect of the work is invaluable and can only result in a better over-all concept, and standard, of working conditions in premises in the City. Routine inspection of premises continued with particular attention being paid to certain sensitive areas. In one such area, i.e. hoists and lifts, the year 1976 saw a 35% increase over the previous year in the number of contraventions of the legislation dealt with. Usually the necessary work to the lifts was undertaken following informal action, but on one occasion it was necessary for Court proceedings to be taken to secure the enclosure of one lift shaft in office premises. It was disturbing to note the big increase in the number of occasions on which it was found necessary to draw attention to the existence of dangerous practices in offices and shops. Smaller increases were noted in the number of contraventions found to exist, particularly in relation to the cleanliness, overcrowding, temperature, ventilation and lighting of premises. It will be interesting to see if this trend continues or whether it is connected in any way with the move towards tighter budgetary control by companies, necessitated by present national economic difficulties. There was, happily, a reduction in certain types of contraventions dealt with, particularly in relation to floors, passages and stairs. There was, surprisingly, very little difference in the total number of accidents notified, compared with the previous year. During 1976 it was possible to investigate a much higher proportion (i.e. 62%) of the accidents notified. The biggest number of accidents involved persons injured by falling down, which accounted for half the total. A breakdown of this group showed that the major proportion were persons falling on or from fixed staircases. An increase in the number of accidents notified was observed in the groups dealing with the use of hand tools and the handling of goods. These figures, coupled with an increase in intimation notices served in relation to dangerous practices, do not give any grounds for complacency. The opinion is held that there is a need for a consistent co-operative approach by employers and employees. Employers and their management teams must be constantly aware of their duties under Section 2 of the Health and Safety at Work etc. Act, 1974, particularly in relation to the provision and maintenance of plant and systems of work, and to ensuring safety in the use, handling, storage and transport of articles and also of their obligation in relation to the provision of information and instruction to, and, training and supervision of, their employees. On the other hand, employees should also be constantly aware of their duty under the Act to take reasonable care for the health and safety of themselves and other persons who may be affected by their acts or omissions at work and also of their duty to co-operate with their employer in these matters. SHOPS ACTS 1950-1965 The law relating to shops was originally contained in a series of enactments dating back to 1912. These were consolidated in 1950 into one Act as the first step to subsequent amendment. Up to the present time only one amendment has been made, in 1965. This allowed the shopkeeper to choose his own Early Closing Day. The Acts not only control the hours of closing of shops but also the hours and conditions of employment in retail shops and wholesale premises. Whilst Parliament continues to be reluctant to amend the Acts there is no concensus of opinion amongst traders themselves as to the form the legislation should take to meet present day needs, and indeed the shop assistants own union is strongly against any change which might encourage longer working hours, for it must be remembered that, in the main, shops may legally remain open for trade until 8.00 p.m. and 9.00 p.m. on one late night, which is not generally appreciated by either traders or the public at large. Fortunately, retail trading in the City is confined in the main to 5 week-days each week and there is no incentive for shopkeepers to remain open late at night except for public houses, and a few restaurants and cafes, largely in the areas of Fleet Street and Liverpool Street, serving the press and main line stations respectively. 26 The Sunday trading provisions continue to be the most difficult to administer. These attract the most publicity, much of it ill informed and misleading to the public and traders alike. There was an attempt made during the year to modify one of these provisions relating to Holiday Resorts when Baroness Phillips succeeded in getting her Shops (Holiday Resorts — Sunday Trading) Bill through the House of Lords, but it did not proceed through the Commons due to the lack of Parliamentary time. If the Bill had succeeded it would have increased from 18 to 26, the number of Sundays on which under the Holiday Resort Orders which apply to the areas around St. Paul's Cathedral and adjacent to the Tower of London, shops may remain open. An officer of this Department was closely concerned in the drafting of this Bill. Despite the relaxation afforded to shopkeepers by the Holiday Resort Orders, certain traders in these areas continue to attempt to defy the law. This has necessitated regular observations being carried out. In contrast, the trading on Sundays in the Eastern part of the City, the area adjacent to and including Middlesex Street, which also receives regular inspections on a Sunday, continues to provide little in the way of difficulties in the enforcement of the Act, except for educating the shopkeepers occupying the new shops that they must cease trading by 2.00 p.m. THE CITY OF LONDON (VARIOUS POWERS) ACT 1965 PART III Duties under Part III of the City of London (Various Powers) Act, 1965, were confined to that part of Middlesex Street (Petticoat Lane) where street trading was established in 1969, and this work was carried out under the direction of the Planning and Communications Committee. Supervision has been exercised on practically every Sunday in the year which has ensured that the area has been controlled effectively. The orderly nature of this part of the Street Market appears to have an attraction for un-registered traders ('fly traders') who commence selling from any available space near to the stalls. The City Police on duty are very efficient at preventing these 'flies' from settling. There is little doubt that the original concept of eliminating street trading on Sundays from that part of Middlesex Street within the City, needs re-consideration. The elimination is to be achieved by allowing the original licence holder to specify a defined relative to continue trading after death or infirmity, but the specified relative has no such power to name a successor and the licence will lapse. The problem inherent in such a situation will be a decreasing number of traders to pay the ever increasing costs of maintaining the area. LONDON COUNTY COUNCIL (GENERAL POWERS) ACT, 1920 PART IV ESTABLISHMENTS FOR MASSAGE OR SPECIAL TREATMENT There has been no increase in the number of establishments giving chiropody, manicure and curative massage during the year. Public demand appears to be centred in the "keep fit", non-curative massage, and sauna bath centres. CONTROL OF RODENT INFESTATIONS It will be realised from the statistical report, and also from general experience that mouse infestations are far more common than rat infestations. Mice are easily introduced into buildings and there is some tolerance of them in small numbers. During these early stages the infestations are often inadequately treated by office staff, allowing the mice to spread to other offices and buildings. Many of these infestations are not notified. On the other hand rats seldom escape notification. It is not unusual for two or more complaints to be made about the same infestation particularly if it concerns an empty shop or derelict site which can be seen from the street. Rat infestations were all readily traced to a source and eradicated and it can be said that surface infestations do not present a problem. 27 The term surface infestation is used in contrast to sewer or below ground infestations. During 1976 a random test baiting of the sewers was carried out at the request of the Thames Water Authority (in which authority the sewers are currently vested) as part of a survey covering the Metropolitan Public Health Division. Using this survey and other information, a working party is considering the varying degrees of infestation throughout the area and it is expected that an overall strategy will be decided. Based on the test bait sample results, and as an interim observation, the sewers within the City apparently support a sizeable rat population which is not reflected in the low number of surface infestations and, also as an interim measure, sewer treatment methods are being varied to meet the change from the use of acute poisons to the use of chronic poisons with the need for more sustained periods of treatment. CONTROL OF PESTS OTHER THAN RODENTS Insects Some may think of the City as an ecological desert hardly likely to support insects in great variety. During an average year, however, notification is recieved of a fair cross-section of the full range of domestic and allied insect pests. Most infestations responded to accurate identification and treatment of the local source. Pigeon Control Complaints were dealt with as received, the premises inspected and the occupiers advised on clearance and proofing and the assistance of pest control contractors sought, as appropriate. Difficulty is still experienced with damage to plants and nuisance in the parks and open spaces, where the feeding of birds with plentiful supplies of food scraps militates against normal control methods. As a footnote to the remarks on insect control, few people would credit that the swarming of bees into the City occurs almost each year and equally surprising there are volunteer bee keepers amongst the office workers who are willing to handle the swarms and to transfer the bees to more rural surroundings. COMMON LODGING HOUSE There is one registered common lodging house in the City of London. This is owned and managed by the Salvation Army Social Services and provides accommodation for 250 men. When these premises were originally opened in 1906 the number of men listed in our records as using the accommodation was 453. (The model Byelaws prescribed a standard of 360 cu ft of air space per bed). For a considerable part of the year the numbers of men using the hostel were less than the prescribed number. Demand for this type of accommodation has decreased in recent years. Resulting from this lessening demand there is less pressure on the accommodation, and routine cleaning and sheet changing for each new occupant are easier procedures. It is a matter for speculation whether the more disciplined approach which now prevails in the hostel administration reduces the demand for a bed. The hostel was over subscribed two years ago with all of the 380 beds occupied every night, and unofficial "rough" sleeping in the basement. During the year 591 baths were provided at the Corporation's cleansing station in Milton Court for men resident in the common lodging house. The problems presented by the presence of head or body lice have decreased and the Salvation Army staff have the routine inspection and detailing of men for treatment on a sound basis. Early morning inspections are carried out by the Environmental Health Officer. On many occassions no lice are found in the beds, but, with regular inspection and control, this problem should never reach the proportions of previous years. The general state of cleanliness has improved and has been maintained at a reasonably high level during the year. The premises, because of age and design, will always cause maintenance problems but the combined determination of the Salvation Army authorities and the encouragement and requests of the Health Department over the last few years have paid dividends. 28 The change from "workhouse" colour schemes to bright colours (a different colour for each room) does much to remove the stigma that this type of accommodation had and gives to those who are forced to accept this type of accommodation, or perhaps prefer a communal life, more congenial surroundings. NOISE Some degree of noise, will always be associated with the life of a City. In the City of London it is now associated with the refurbishing of existing buildings, as opposed to the period after the last war when vacant sites were available for redevelopment. This aggravates the problem of controlling noise, since, almost invariably, the work sites are physically attached to adjoining buildings which often house a resident housekeeper. Residents are entitled to consideration as well as the daytime working population. Like any other living organism, a city dies unless there is a constant process of renewal, but unlike the trees of the forest, the renewal of a city is always associated with noise. The mere enactment of legislation to meet a problem by no means guarantees that the problem is solved, nor is there magic in the legislation which will make the noise go away. From the 1st January, 1976 Part III (Noise) of the Control of Pollution Act, 1974 came into force. The Noise Abatement Act, 1960 was repealed and relevant sections of the Public Health Act, 1936 and the Public Health (Recurring Nuisances) Act, 1969 no longer apply to noise nuisances. Duties corresponding to those contained in previous Acts are re-enacted and in some instances allow the Corporation wider powers of action:— Noise Abatement Zones I have given serious consideration to that part of the Act which allows a local authority, with the approval of the Secretary of State, to establish Noise Abatement Zones. Under the present circumstances of staff and money shortages and the extensive preliminaries required to justify the establishment of such zones, I do not feel I can ask the Corporation to proceed with this policy at the present time. Construction Sites The existing methods in the City of applying the criteria of "best practicable means" to minimise unavoidable noise has continued. Road Works Statutory Undertakers now have to observe the law and a closer working relationship is being built up. One example of this co-operation was the use of an acoustic shed for trenching work in the vicinity of Barbican estate. It was noticeable that, where the sheld could be used, the work was completed without nuisance. Machinery Noise Co-operation between my department and the department of the City Architect and Planning Officer has enabled my staff to advise on possible sources of complaint prior to the installation of ventilation and generating equipment, which are often the source of complaints investigated by my staff. The general public are now well aware that noise is irksome and, in the extreme, causes them considerable stress. In many instances they are justified in making their own "noises" about an intolerable situation. The problem of the local official is, too often, the contractors' men who are making the noise. Often they are indifferent to their own personal well-being. This being so, it is unlikely they will consider other people. There is a long way to go to effective co-operation from all concerned. The prime aim of the department is to safeguard neighbourhood ambient noise levels which are satisfactory, to secure a reduction in present unsatisfactory levels and to prevent the creation of new unsatisfactory levels. 29 WATER SUPPLY The Director of Scientific Services of the Thames Water Authority, has supplied the following Report:— "1. (a) The supply was satisfactory both as to (i) quality, and (ii) quantity from April 1975 to March 1976. (b) All new and repaired mains are disinfected with chlorine; after a predetermined period of contact the pipes are flushed out and refilled; samples of water are then collected from these treated mains; and the mains are returned to service only after the analytical results are found to be satisfactory. The quality control from these laboratories is carried out by means of daily sampling from sources of supply, from the treatment works or well stations, from the distribution system, and through to the consumer. Any sign of contamination or any other abnormality is immediately investigated. (c) No artificial fluoride is being added, and where the fluoride content is indicated in the analyses it represents the naturally occurring fluoride in the water. 2. (a) The supply was derived from the following works and pumping stations: — River Thames-derived water from Thames Valley grouped stations. New River-derived water from Stoke Newington works. No new sources of supply were instituted and there were no changes to the general scheme of supply in your area. The number of samples collected and the bacteriological and chemical analyses of the supply from the above sources after treatment are shown on the attached sheets. (See Statistical Report). (b) On account of their hardness content and alkaline reaction the Board's river and well water supplies are shown to be not plumbo-solvent. It should, however, be appreciated that all types of water pick up varying amounts of metal from the material of water piping particularly when it is newly installed — this applies to copper, zinc, iron and also to lead." A clean, pure and wholesome water supply is one of the most essential services to modern living and the most taken for granted, probably because high standards have been maintained for a long time. Legislation has been in existence for many years governing control, purity and distribution of our water, and is still being introduced in periods of drought or re-organisation. The practical work, as far as the Corporation is concerned, is to ensure that the users of the City's premises have access to a supply of wholesome and potable drinking water. Most premises are connected to the Thames Water Authority (Metropolitan Division) mains. However, there are a number of premises within the City which are supplied with water from artesian wells. These wells are sunk into the sub-strata in the form of bore holes some 200 metres below the surface, penetrating a hard grey chalk stratum which, in turn, forms part of the London Basin. The water table is, at present, about 90 metres below the surface. The water thus obtained is clear, sparkling, potable and free from bacteriological contamination. Iron oxide in the chalk stratum accounts for the slightly orange colour of the water and can easily be removed by filtration if required. A reduction in the total number of active wells has occurred during the year due to re-building programmes. Items of Particular Interest (a) Drought Conditions Due to the Summer drought, water in the large storage facilities in buildings in the City showed an increase in non-pathogenic micro-organisms which often account for complaints regarding taste and odours. The staff of the Metropolitan Water Board laboratories of the Thames Water Authority have carried extensive research into the problem associated with abnormal tastes and odours in water supplies, and have established that many of the traditional materials used in the jointing of pipes and for tap washers, etc., do provide a media for the growth of such micro-organisms. They offer valuable advice to everyone involved in the water service industry when such problems arise. There is little doubt that prolonged hot weather will encourage the proliferation of these undesirable organisms. 30 A considerable amount of work was carried out by the City's Environmental Health Officers to ensure that the bacteriological increases were reduced to normal levels. Every co-operation was given by the various organisations concerned. (b) Vending Machines The vending machine, to a degree, has replaced the "Tea Lady" as a means of providing various water and milk based beverages. It is not necessarily the complete substitute for the person who often brings a little humour into our lives. The machine is dull and unresponsive and it is only unremitting investigation which has brought about a higher standard of hygiene and essential changes in design of the machines. (c) Swimming and Paddling Pools All the pools in the City were crowded during the exceptionally fine Summer. This entailed extra work concerned with regulation of these pools and monitoring of bacteriological conditions and chlorine sterilisation. A fine balance had to be kept to ensure a suitable "break point" on chlorination at all times of use. The free, residual, and combined chlorines had to be carefully measured and the correct pH levels sustained. Otherwise bacteriological contamination would have taken place or unpleasant effects experienced due to over-chlorination. (d) Services partly covered by Thames Water Authority Monitoring of normal water supply services within buildings is dealt with by my Department. These services include storage tanks, supply pipes, wells and swimming pools. Systematic sampling has taken place from all these sources throughout the year. Back-Up Systems Apart from the visual examination and other tests carried out by the Environmental Health Officers, two methods of back-up are used — (1) bacteriological examination, which is carried out by the Public Health Laboratory at Dulwich Hospital, and (2) chemical analysis, which is dealt with by the Corporation's Public Analyst. Conclusion It must be borne in mind that the work associated with a clean and wholesome water supply is often of a routine nature and goes almost unobserved by the majority of the population. It must nevertheless be continued to preserve the present high standard which is expected, and achieved, at all times. SEWERAGE AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL Sewerage and sewage disposal in the City of London are the responsibility of the City Engineer who has supplied the following information:— "Under the Water Act, 1973, the authority for sewerage and sewage disposal in the City is the Thames Water Authority for which the Corporation acts as agent for these purposes and for which the City Engineer bears day to day responsibility. The sewerage system in the City is comprised mainly of ovoid shaped brick sewers, the average internal dimensions being 1219 mm. x 813 mm. wide, this size being adopted only to provide access for sewermen, as the normal dry weather flow depth of effluent is only about 228 mm. at average velocities between 609 mm. and 914 mm. per second. The sewers now managed by the Corporation discharge into the Thames Water Authority's intercepting sewers which flow eastwards across the City at lower levels to the Beckton Sewerage Treatment Works. In my opinion, the system of sewerage in the City is adequate, with ample margin for diverting flows from sewers during reconstruction and maintenance works." 31 HOUSING Mr. K.R. Bailey, V.R.D., F.I.H.M., Housing Manager for the City of London, has submitted the following report:— "During the year 189 families were rehoused leaving 1,025 on the housing register at the end of December 1976, including 325 Corporation tenants requiring accommodation more suited to their needs. The fourth and final stage of the Holloway Redevelopment was completed almost on time and the Corporation's section was quickly let. The flats in that part of the scheme built for John Groom's Association for the Disabled will be occupied by the time this report appears in print. The expectation expressed in last year's report, that the Middlesex Street estate's Community Association and the Three Score Club would be flourishing has certainly been borne out by experience during the year. Indeed, both the Corporation and its tenants are fortunate in having enthusiastic and active Community Associations and old people's clubs on a number of estates; their social and cultural contributions make the quality of life on a high density estate all the more tolerable for the residents. The City Corporation has always adopted a far sighted policy in providing the premises for such activities and, although most of the Associations make a substantial contribution to the running costs of the premises, the overheads are high. Such costs are an additional burden on the Housing Revenue Account — another contributing factor towards relatively high rents — but the benefits can be immeasurable. Unfortunately, the completion of the Holloway Redevelopment has almost brought to an end the Corporation's constructive contribution towards London's housing. In last year's report reference was made to the proposed redevelopment of a site in Lambeth, bounded by Kennington Road, Hercules Road and Cosser Street. The planning problems mentioned then were satisfactorily resolved and the redevelopment scheme was duly presented to the Department of the Environment for approval. Unfortunately, there is little to recount but frustration since then; it would seem that all the time and effort devoted towards designing an acceptable redevelopment scheme will be wasted through the Department of the Environment's desire to see refurbishment rather than redevelopment. Whilst the writer certainly does not quarrel with the principles of modernisation and improvement, it still remains to be seen whether it would be the correct treatment for this particular site. An area in which we still hope to see improvement and modernisation is in the City of London Freemen's and Gresham Houses at Brixton. The frustrations here are primarily financial but it is still very much a live issue so far as the Corporation is concerned. April 1976 saw a substantial increase in Corporation housing rents, the effect of which was to keep them at or close to the top of the table for municipal rents in Greater London. The current indications are that a similar level of increase will also be required in 1977. The year also saw increases in the charges for facilities such as the Golden Lane swimming pool, badminton and tennis courts. Individual members of the public and swimming clubs in the City may use the pool; details of opening hours and admission fees are available at the Housing Department or on the estate. Although the availability of accommodation is likely to decline with no other new schemes in the pipeline the categories for acceptance of housing applicants on the register remain unchanged at present. The categories are (1) City residents, (2) inadequately housed families in Corporation dwellings, (3) former City or Corporation dwellings' residents who are inadequately housed or in medical need (provided they apply within two years of leaving), (4) City workers of at least two years standing who are either inadequately housed or in circumstances such as to cause hardship in travelling to employment and (5) public service workers connected with City Services. The experimental separate allocation of a small number of dwellings to essential staff at St. Bartholomew's Hospital proved successful during the year and it is hoped to continue the arrangement during 1977. To conclude, the year 1976 has not been without its problems. The economies forced on the Corporation — indeed on every local authority — have meant, amongst other things, that only the most essential maintenance could be carried out on one of our most valuable assets, the housing stock. Tenants have had to pay more for their accommodation and to meet the cost of other services provided whilst at the same time the Corporation has had to economise in every conceivable field. In such circumstances it is gratifying to be able to record that the goodwill between the tenants generally and their landlord seems in no way to have diminished. This is due in no small measure to the dedication and interest of the resident estate superintendents, caretakers and supporting workers, and the matrons of the old people's schemes in representing the Corporation "in the field" and it is to be hoped that, despite the probable adversities of 1977, the relationship will remain as good." 32 The Smithfield Market Sector SMITHFIELD MARKET The main wholesalers of meat and poultry whose supplies come from the sources of production are situated within the market buildings. Some wholesalers, the businesses of catering butchers and poultry, game and other suppliers are situated in the areas around Smithfield and also in and around Leadenhall Market and Billingsgate Market. There is always a changing situation as far as businesses and tenancies are concerned and in Smithfield Market during the last year there have been more than the usual number of changes. At the end of 1976 there were the following food businesses: — In Smithfield: 77 handling meat 25 handling poultry 3 handling meat and poultry 9 handling provisions/bacon/tinned goods 3 catering butchers 3 retail meat/poultry/frozen foods 1 frozen foods Around Smithfield: 11 catering butchers 2 meat wholesalers 1 offal wholesaler 3 poultry wholesalers 1 provision wholesaler In Leadenhall, Billingsgate and elsewhere in the City: 5 butchers 5 poultry traders (Supermarket type stores are not included). The first duty of the inspectors is to see that all meat and poultry being distributed from the wholesalers is fit for food. Many changes have occurred in methods of meat production, packaging, transport and handling in recent years but from a meat inspection point of view an important development has been in the eradication or control of many of the specific diseases found in food animals which were a danger to public health and the "raison d'etre" for meat inspection in the City more than a century ago. All carcases arriving in Smithfield have been subjected to inspection at the time of slaughter but the conditions of disease mostly seen during 1976 were those occurring in present-day conditions of intensive rearing; in particular, abscesses in pigs which were deep seated and not seen on normal slaughterhouse inspection but disclosed when cutting up was done. Supplies are bulk broken for sale to visiting buyers and a valuable function of the 'market' is the cutting up of carcases providing cuts suitable to the requirements of buyers. Carcases are utilised to the best advantage in this way. At the same time, any abnormality is noted and the meat detained by the butcher for inspection. This cooperation is invaluable. Food and Drugs Act, 1955 sections 8/9 provide the legal sanction against depositing for sale, selling and being in possession of, for sale, unsound food. Food found to be unfit was commonly surrendered in accordance with normal practice and certificates provided for trade accounting purposes. One prosecution concerning eviscerated poultry carcases in which lesions of disease were evident, and which were consigned to Smithfield, was pending at the end of the year. The Meat Inspection Regulations, 1963 made meat inspection in the slaughter-houses necessary, with marked effect on the work of the Smithfield Inspectorate. They also require the inspected carcases to bear a stamp of the local authority. In accordance with the practice now established, notifications of condemnations for disease were sent to local authorities whose legible stamp was on the carcase. The regulations in Scotland do not require stamping to be done, consequently unstamped carcases are in distribution in England. Enquiries are received from other authorities about such meat. It does not seem to be generally realised that there is no offence in having unstamped meat in a butchers shop. The offence is in removing it from the slaughterhouse. 33 Another point to which attention had to be drawn is that meat from Scotland is not subject to customs examination or, the Imported Food Regulations with the requirement for accompanying health certificates. Unsound Meat, that is, meat which is otherwise than diseased but out of condition, mainly consisted of meat which had been subjected to refrigeration but, because of poor temperature control and humidity, developed spoilage. Lessons learned by the practising meat trader in the past tend, in the presence of todays experts, to be forgotten or treated somewhat disdainfully, maybe until the same lessons are learned again. An insulated rail container with sides of pork hung inside with no evidence of refrigeration such as cardice, arrived in Smithfield at Christmas-time after being refused acceptance at each delivery point during the previous week. The contents were completely unfit for food. This highlights the effects of opening containers of chilled carcase meat and allowing condensation of atmospheric moisture on the meat to occur, thus, promoting spoilage by slime which may develop before the meat arrives at its destination. The Smithfield wholesalers have facilities for reconditioning consignments of meat affected by spoilage and for the quick disposal of salvaged food. Damage by vermin, mould fungi, bacterial slime, fire damage and rancidity were types of spoilage on consignments which were sent for reconditioning by arrangement with local authority colleagues at the place of storage. Spoilage found in items exposed for sale or in course of distribution led in some cases to examination of the bulk stock held in cold stores. Poultry Meat (Hygiene) Regulations, 1976 Late in 1975 th Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food distributed proposals for these regulations to the trade organisations, local authorities and other interested bodies,for their examination and comment. These proposals conformed closely with E.E.C. Directives on the subject. The effect would be to introduce a mandatory system of poultry hygiene (including inspection) for the first time in this country, such as had been achieved in the case of 'red meat' by the introduction of the Meat Inspection Regulations of 1963. This provoked discussion and protest not without acrimony, overflowing during early summer into the mass media. Accommodations were made to relieve the producers of dry plucked poultry, principally turkeys and to give more responsibility to certain classes of local authority officers. This, together with exemptions from provisions of the regulations and anticipated difficulty in arranging recruitment and training, would seem to assure a prolonged 'phasing in' period, before the bite of the new regime could be felt — or, perhaps, its benefits be discernible. The dry plucked bird was conditionally permitted to survive on its merits. Laid before Parliament, subjected to debate, the Regulations became effective only in that part which allowed the application for exemption and determined classes of applicants, officials and other technicalities, from 1st September, 1976. The remaining regulations are enforceable from 1st January, 1977. The pattern of trade in Smithfield and elsewhere within the City can be expected to change, though slowly. The Regulations follow the E.E.C. Directives in prescribing a maximum internal temperature, + 4°C, of poultry meat during storage and transport. Anticipating these requirements, and others, including the evisceration of carcases, certain large firms, already accustomed to meeting similar specifications, and licensed accordingly, have, in 1976, consigned fresh (this includes chilled or frozen) eviscerated carcases to Smithfield Market for sale. In a few cases carcases have been rejected as unfit for human consumption because of bacterial spoilage. Reasons may have varied, but residual moisture, from processing no doubt, was available to contaminating organisms which find no difficulty in growing at temperatures above normal freezing point. The Poultry Meat (Hygiene) Regulations, 1976 have been studied to ascertain what demands would fall upon the poultry trade in the City from 1st January, 1977. To avoid confusion, the subject has been discussed with officers of adjoining local authorities who face a similar situation. Some conclusions could be reached firmly and quickly. For example, the Corporation will not have to license any establishments for there is no slaughtering and subsequent processing for wholesale within the boundary. Nor will retail businesses or those of catering suppliers boning and cutting carcases, with their own adjacent cold storage rooms, come within the scope of the regulations since by definition such concerns can be considered to supply direct to the "final consumer". On the other hand, remaining public cold stores in the City must be supervised by this Sector and comply with certain standards. Insurmountable difficulties here are unlikely. 34 Imported Food Regulations, 1968 Under these regulations the duties of enforcement are imposed on the Corporation of London as the receiving authority for containers of imported meat which are notified by Ports of Entry as unexamined on entry, the deferred examination being made at the destination. 1,238 containers from the Republic of Ireland and Holland were notified. The communication of notifications is not helped by the cost of telephoning or the delays in mailing. (Some Ports of Entry are border posts in Northern Ireland). It is not unusual either for meat containers to be subject to change of ownership while in transit and the original nominated destination may be an accommodation address. 131 containers were re-routed in transit and the notifications passed to the receiving authority at the new destination. 16 containers arrived and the meat went into distribution before the receipt of the notifications and 6 containers did not arrive. Wrong documentation for one container caused its detention until the Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food were informed and agreed to its release. Disease of Animals Act, 1950 Four cartons of lamb livers from Holland were detained and the attention of the Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food was called to their being prohibited meat under the Importation of Carcases and Animal Products Order, 1972; the Ministry arranged for them to be re-exported. Sampling Ten samples of tinned ham were collected for examination by the Central Public Health Laboratory. 90 samples of fat from imported carcases were taken for pesticide research by the Government Chemist, 60 samples of muscle from certain carcases were taken for research into other residues by the Food Science Division of the A.F.F. and one sample was sent to the Public Analyst. Export Certificates Meat, poultry and other articles of food intended for export were examined and 12 certificates issued. These exports were mainly to the Middle and Far East. Education Specimens of pathological and anatomical interest were provided for 4 professional examinations and to educational establishments for tuition purposes. Mounted specimens were provided to local authorities for public health displays. 85 demonstrations and lectures were given by members of the staff. 216 copies of The Handbook of Poultry Inspection' published by the Corporation of London containing colour plates of diseased poultry photographed by Mr. K.S. Seymour were issued for sale. Registration of Premises Among the businesses in the area of Smithfield are those who may produce processed items such as 'burgers'. Certain types of processing may have to be done in premises registered under section 16 of the Food and Drugs Act and the inspectors have advised on all aspects of hygiene in such premises. Problems have included noise and vibration from machinery affecting office tenants. Hygiene The Food Hygiene (Markets, Stalls and Delivery Vehicles) Regulations, 1966, apply to market premises and The Food Hygiene (General) Regulations, 1970 apply to other food premises. Firms taking new premises or changing the type of trade have been advised on alterations to structure, drainage and ventilation, etc. from the aspects of hygiene and health and safety at work. Within the market, information concerning structural or maintenance deficiencies which affect hygiene standards have been noted and passed to the Market Superintendent's Department of Works who in turn consult inspectors on hygiene aspects when the installation of refrigerators or structural alterations are proposed. This interdepartmental liaison is appreciated. 35 Smithfield is a public market and the large number and variety of daily visitors who may be "engaged in the handling of food" or who may be personal shoppers and not buying for resale tend to make a nonsense of hygiene standards and enforcement. Three prosecutions for dirty interior surfaces of meat vehicles were successful during the year. Considering the large quantities of meat and poultry handled daily in Smithfield the meat traders and handlers on the whole have maintained an awareness of the need for proper behaviour and care in the handling of food in the face of difficult circumstances. The upkeep and laundering of protective clothing has for some years been a major problem and the efforts of the laundry serving most of the market, in trying to resolve problems of supply and collection, have been appreciated. The laundry problem, as with other problems of hygiene, is not helped by the element of individuality among the personnel working in the market. The Food Hygiene (Docks and Carriers etc.) Regulations, 1960, apply to public cold stores; these have been inspected as a routine for the purpose of these regulations. Vermin Control A constant vigilance is necessary to keep infestation down. Possible harbourages in damaged structures, bad stowage in stores and so on, are drawn to the attention of the responsible persons. Use of the services of specialist firms who regularly bait and inspect have been encouraged and the situation is well controlled. Complaints and Inquiries from consumers, traders and officials were mostly of a technical nature to do with terminology of meat cuts. Examples are the buyer who thought a wholesale 'back of bacon' should be comparable to the 'long' back or 'short' back from a retailer; and the lady who thought she should not receive cuts of fresh meat for her deep freezer. 36 The Veterinary Sector ANNUAL REPORT OF THE VETERINARY OFFICER FOR THE CITY OF LONDON, 1976 Diseases of Animals Act 1950 and Associated Acts The administration of the Diseases of Animals Act 1950, with the exception of imported animals, is the responsibility of the individual London Boroughs, but the Corporation of London acts on an agency basis for 17 of these authorities, covering approximately half of London. The Corporation is responsible for the whole of Greater London, under the terms of the London Government Act 1963, in respect of the importation of animals. 1976 was the eleventh year in which agency arrangements were in operation, and many varied premises were visited including dog breeding establishments, boarding establishments, animal hospitals, poultry and cattle shows and exhibitions, circuses, television studios, guard dog premises, farms, Kosher and other butchers and poulterers, market stalls, parks, pet shops, piggeries, research laboratories, riding establishments, slaughter-houses, theatres, and zoos. Legislation regarding both the prevention and control of diseases of animals, and also for the welfare of animals, was issued by the Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food, and has led to greater responsibilities when visiting premises. Continuing outbreaks of swine vesicular disease and sheep scab necessitated licensing requirements to be carried out. The effect of this legislation brought about extra duties, which included working outside normal hours for which the Veterinary Officer would express his gratitude to those members of staff involved. Animal Quarantine Station — Heathrow Airport (London) During the year the construction has taken place of the Animal Quarantine Station at Heathrow Airport. This has been built in order to conform with the Rabies (Importation of Dogs, Cats and Other Mammals) Order 1974, in that from 5th February 1977, animals from abroad will be able to land in the United Kingdom only at ports provided with an approved holding facility. It will be appreciated that this project has been the subject of much planning, research and meetings since the scheme was agreed in 1969. During the planning stage the concept had to be enlarged to include the provisions of the Importation of Captive Birds Order 1976. It will also assure that staff are constantly on duty at the Airport so that other legislation such as the Transit of Animals (General) Order 1973 can be strictly enforced. The first animals will be accepted at the Station very early in 1977. Importation of Animals The Corporation's responsibility for imported animals covers the whole of Greater London and there is particular concern over incidents of rabies on the Continent gradually approaching the Channel. As already stated the Animal Quarantine Station at Heathrow Airport has been constructed to deal with animals landing at the Airport. There are, however, numbers of other duties carried out not only at Heathrow but throughout the rest of London. These duties include control of animals on vessels in that part of the Port of London which lies within Greater London and dealing with investigations of imported animals which have landed at other ports and have been brought to London. Numerous visits were made to Heathrow to investigate incidents, to arrange for the quarantining of animals and to carry out post mortem examinations when animals arrived dead. Where incidents of biting or scratching occurred, the health of the animal was verified before allowing it to continue its journey or a health report was obtained from the country of destination. The matter was reported to the appropriate health authority in each case. A number of prosecutions were taken during the year concerning illegally landed animals or incidents coming under the terms of the animal welfare regulations. Riding Establishments Acts 1964 and 1970 As required by the Acts, annual inspections were carried out for the purpose of relicensing such establishments, together with routine inspections throughout the year and investigations resulting from complaints. During the year it was necessary to hold consultations with the British Horse Society and the RSPCA on several occasions, which proved beneficial to all concerned. 37 Breeding of Dogs Act 1973 Animal Boarding Establishments Act 1963 Pet Animals Act 1951 Animal boarding establishments, dog breeding establishments and pet shops were visited regularly and recommendations regarding relicensing submitted to the Boroughs concerned. Several complaints were also investigated and reported upon. Evidence was given in a case brought against a Dog Breeding Establishment after a licence for this purpose was refused because the facilities were not of the required standard for the number of breeding bitches involved. The case was heard at a Magistrate's Court and a fine of £10 was imposed on the owner of the establishment. The owner lodged an appeal against the conviction and was successful in that a licence was not required in this case as the animals were being used for improving the breed but not on a commercial basis. Many kinds of animals are sold at Club Row Market on Sunday mornings and visits were made to inspect these. Suggestions were made and advice given concerning the welfare of these animals, with particular attention being paid to their quarters and protection during extreme weather conditions. The problem of unlicensed vendors continued but much support is being received from the police and RSPCA in this and other problems arising at this Market. Psittacosis or Ornithosis Order 1953 A number of cases of Psittacosis were reported both in humans and psittacines. In each case assurances were made that persons received medical treatment. The premises concerned were visited and the necessary precautions instituted to avert further disease arising. The Boroughs in which the disease occurred were informed of the findings. Guard Dogs Act 1975 Premises coming within the terms of the above Act were inspected and regular visits were made. A number of complaints were investigated, and reports of findings were submitted to the various Boroughs. Performing Animals (Regulation) Act 1925 Duties under this Act included visits to theatres, circuses and television studios to examine animals, feeding arrangements and quarters, and to ensure that performing animal certificates of registration were in order and that there was no misuse of the animals. Live Poultry (Restrictions) Order 1971 Live Poultry (Movement Records) Order 1958 Poultry (Exposure for Sale) Order 1937 Poultry Pens, Fittings and Receptacles (Disinfection) Order 1952 Visits were made to Kosher poulterers and markets, to ensure that the terms of the above Orders were being complied with. In addition, visits were made to five new slaughterhouses which are in full operation. Conditions are greatly improved, in comparison with the old premises. Two cases were reported under these orders. The first concerned the sale of quail on a stall in Club Row Market, Tower Hamlets, contrary to the Live Poultry (Restrictions) Order 1971. The case was heard at North London Magistrates Court and resulted in the imposition of a £110 fine. The second case was also heard at North London Magistrates Court and concerned dead poultry found in a slaughterhouse in Leyden Street, Tower Hamlets, contrary to the Poultry (Exposure for Sale) Order 1937. A fine of £65 was imposed. The West Essex Bantam Society held its annual show at Bethnal Green Institute and was licensed on behalf of the London Borough of Tower Hamlets. A visit of inspection was made and some 550 poultry were exhibited and all found to be in very good condition. The cages allowed ample space and adequate supplies of food and water were available. 38 CORRIGENDUM Page 11 — Paragraph 1, line 5. Page 15 — Paragraph 1, line 3. Page 21 — Paragraph 5, line 2. Page 25 — Paragraph 10, line 2. Page 30 — Paragraph 6, line 6. causal not casual. St. not Sait. Portondown not Portdown. To read '(Enforcing Authority) Regulations.' medium not media. INDEX Page Accidents 26 Air Pollution 23 Animal Boarding Establishments Act, 1963 38 Animal Quarantine Station — Heathrow Airport (London) 37 Breeding of Dogs Act 1973 38 Catering Establishments Complaints 24 Prosecutions 24 Sampling 24 Vending Machines 31 City of London (Various Powers) Act 1965 — Part III 27 Clean Air 23 Cockles — Food Poisoning 11 Comclear Terminal and 'F' Shed Royal Victoria Dock 17 Common Lodging House 28 Conferences 39 Container Trade 12,13,14,15 Control of Rodent Infestations 27,36 Control of Pests Other Than Rodents 28 Dangerous Wild Animals Act 1976 39 Diseases of Animals Act, 1950 35,37 Educational Activities 21,35 Export Certificates 35,39 Ferry Terminal, Sheerness 12 Food Complaints 24 Food Hygiene (Market Stalls and Delivery Vehicles) Regulations, 1966 25,35 Food Hygiene — Smithfield Market 35 Food Sampling 24 Guard Dogs Act 1975 38 Health and Safety at Work Act, 1974 25 Health Committee 2 Heathrow Airport 37 Hoists and Lifts 26 Housing 32 Importation of Animals 37 Importation of Chinese Frozen Foodstuffs 16 Importation of Wine 12 Imported Food Regulations, 1968 35 India and Millwall Docks 18 Infectious Diseases 10 Introduction 8 Lash and Seabee Lighters 12,21 Live Poultry (Restrictions) Order, 1971 38 Live Poultry (Movement Records) Order, 1958 38 London Airport 37 London County Council (General Powers) Act 1920 27 London Marina — Albert Dock Basin 17 Massage or Special Treatment Establishments 27 Meat and Food Inspections 33 Movement and Sale of Pigs 39 New Zealand Potatoes 19 Noise 29 Offices, Shops and Railway Premises Act, 1963 25 Performing Animals (Regulations) Act, 1925 38 Pet Animals Act, 1951 38 Pigeon Control 28 Post Mortem Examinations 39 Poultry (Exposure for Sale) Order, 1937 38 Poultry Meat (Hygiene) Regulations 1976 34 Poultry Pens, Fittings and Receptacles (Disinfection) Order, 1957 38 Powers 1 Preface 1 Psittacosis or Ornithosis Order, 1953 38 Public Health (Ships) Regulations 11 Page Rabies Control 17,19,37,39,40 Rats and Mice 20,27,36 Refuse Lighters 20 Registration of Premises 35 Riding Establishments Acts, 1964 and 1970 37 Rodent Control on Lighters 20 Royal Docks 16 Sampling 35 Sewerage and Sewage Disposal 31 Sheep Scab Order, 1938 39 Sheep Scab (Amendment) Order, 1948 39 Sheerness Docks 11 Sheerness Ferry Terminal 12 Ships of Interest 12,13,14,16,17,19 Shops Acts 26 S.L.I.C. Container Depot, Surrey Dock 19 Smithfield Market 33 Smoke Control 23 Staff of Health Department 3 Street Trading 27 Student Environmental Health Officers 21 Sunday Trading 27 Surrender of Unfit Food 33 Swine Vesicular Disease Order 1972 39 Swimming Baths 31,32 Tankers 12 Temporary Sanitary Accommodation — BNS Umar Faruq 17 Tilbury Container Services 14 Unsound Food 34 Vending Machines 31 Veterinary Officer's Report 37 Visitors 21 Water Supply 21,30