ack'd PLON 78 AC.4369 126 CORPORATION OF LONDON PORT HEALTH AUTHORITY ANNUAL REPORT OF THE MEDICAL OFFICER OF HEALTH To 31st DECEMBER, 1970. To be presented 2nd December, 1971. CONSTITUTION AND JURISDICTION The governing body of the City of London, the Corporation of London, was originally constituted the Sanitary Authority of the Port of London by Section 20 of the Public Health Act, 1872. The cost of administration was met from the Corporation's private funds for close on fifty years, when it became rate (and grant) aided. By the Public Health (London) Act, 1936, the term "Port Sanitary" was changed to "Port Health", and the Port Health district is further defined by that Act as the "Port of London as established for the purposes of the law relating to the Customs of the United Kingdom" and by the Public Health Act, 1936 as "the Port as established for the purposes of the enactments relating to the Customs". The Public Health (London) Act 1936 was repealed by the London Government Act 1963 but Section 89 (1) of that Act defined the Port of London as "the Port of that name established for the purposes of the enactments relating to customs or excise" In accordance with the provisions of the London Port Health Authority Order 1965 made under Section 41 (1) of the London Government Act 1963 the Corporation of London shall have jurisdiction as Port Health Authority— (a) as respects functions, rights and liabilities of a local authority under the enactments mentioned in Part I of Schedule I of the Order over all waters within the Port and over such part of the district of any riparian authority as comprises the whole of any wharf and of the area within the gates of any dock and the buildings thereon respectively, forming part of or abutting upon the Port. (b) as respects any other functions, rights and liabilities assigned to them, within the Port (The Port of London established for the purposes of the enactments relating to customs or excise.) The limits of the Port of London for the purposes of the enactments relating to customs or excise were originally defined by a Treasury Minute dated 1st August, 1883. They commence at high water mark in the River Thames at Teddington Lock, in the County of Surrey, and extend down both sides of the said River Thames to an imaginary straight line drawn from the Pilot mark at the entrance of Havengore Creek in the County of Essex, to the land's end at Warden Point, in the Isle of Sheppey, in the County of Kent, such point being the north-western limit of the Port of Faversham, and extend up and include both sides of the River Medway to an imaginary straight line drawn from the south-east point of land westward of Coalmouth Creek, thence across the said River Medway to the western-most point of the piece of land which forms the eastern side of Stangate Creek, or, in other words, the north-west point of Fleet Marsh and thence in a southerly direction to Iwade Church in the said County of Kent, and thence in a north-easterly direction to Elmley Chapel in the said Isle of Sheppey, a supposed direct line from Elmley Chapel to Iwade Church, being the western limit of the Port of Faversham, and the said Port of London includes the Islands of Havengore Creek aforesaid, called Potton and Rushley Islands, and so much of the said Creek and Watercourses as extends from it to the town of Rochford, and also includes all other Islands, Rivers, Streams, Creeks, Waters, Watercourses, Channels, Harbours, Docks and places within the before-mentioned limits contained. Following upon the extension of the area of jurisdiction of the Port of London Authority by the Port of London Authority (Extension of Seaward Limit) Act 1964 the area of jurisdiction of the Corporation of London as Port Health Authority was similarly amended by Section 31 of the City of London (Various Powers) Act 1965 which added at the end of the definition of "Port of London" in Section 89 (1) of the London Government Act 1963 the following words: "together with all such waters between the seaward limit of the Port as so established and imaginary straight lines drawn from latitude 51° 37' 00" north, longitude 00° 57' 19" east (Foulness Point in the County of Essex) to latitude 51° 46' 05" north, longitude 01° 20' 32" east (Gunfleet Old Lighthouse) and thence to latitude 51° 26' 36" north, longitude 01° 25' 30" east and thence to latitude 51° 24' 55" north, longitude 00° 54' 21" east (Warden Point in the County of Kent) as are for the time being within the territorial waters of Her Majesty's dominions." The Port of London Authority with which the Port Health Authority works in close co-operation was established as the administrative body of the Port of London including the docks and tideway of the River Thames, by Act of Parliament in 1909. Chairman Late Chairman Aldermen Commoners PORT AND CITY OF LONDON HEALTH COMMITTEE (as at 31st December, 1970) Henry Duckworth, J.P., Deputy Christopher Selwyn Priestley Rawson, J .P. The Rt. Hon. the Lord Mayor Lt.-Col. Sir Ian Frank Bowater, Kt., D.SO., T.D., D.Sc. Alan Pearce Greenaway Robin Danvers Penrose Gillett, R.D. Lindsay Roberts Ring Anthony Wallinger Goodinge Ernest Gordon Duffett, T.D. Arthur Patrick Mills Samuel Sheppard, O.B.E. Reginald Hugh Willard Thomas Cuthbert Harrowing, Deputy Dudley Recknell Clack Arthur John Osborn Thomas Ernest Chester Barratt, C.B.E.,M.A., LL.B., Deputy Lt-Col. Charles George Surtees Shill Eric Frederick Wilkins, C.B.E., Deputy Sir Stanley Graham Rowlandson, Kt., M.B.E., J.P., G.L.C. Matthew Henry Oram, T.D., M.A. Dennis Gordon Fisher William Ian Baverstock Brooks Leslie Joseph Walshaw Smith Alan Francis Gordon Stanham, Deputy Henry Wimburn Horlock, M.A. William Harold Wylie-Harris, Deputy Stanley Edward Cohen, C.B.E. Dr. James Cope William George Alfred Harries William Samuels, Deputy Percy John Dyter Cyril Edward Baylis David Ivor Evans, T.D., J.P., Deputy Ronald Arthur Ralph Hedderwick Herbert Twyneham Pike, Deputy Sir Thomas Kingsley Collett, Kt., C.B.E., Deputy Lady Donaldson, J.P. To:- THE RIGHT HONOURABLE THE LORD MAYOR, ALDERMEN AND COMMONS OF THE CITY OF LONDON IN COMMON COUNCIL ASSEMBLED My Lord Mayor, Lady and Gentlemen, I have the honour, as Medical Officer for the Port of London, to submit my Annual Report for the year ending 31st December, 1970. This Report has, as usual, been prepared in accordance with the directive issued in November 1963 by the Secretary of the Ministry of Health, and contains the full details required quinquennially. The year was one of considerable change. There has been a phased contraction in the number of traditional up River wharves and dock berths, including the closure of Surrey Commercial Dock, resulting in the transfer of shipping lines to facilities further down River. There has been an improvement and expansion of the accommodation down river to meet demands associated with the growth of containerisation, unitisation, and larger bulk Carrie's as well as of transferred shipping. A further notable change, which took place on 21st September, was the implementation of Devlin phase II, which extended the length of the working day of the Port From that date ships have loaded and discharged cargoes between 07.00 hours and 21.00 hours, from Monday to Friday and on occasions during Saturday and Sunday. This has necessitated the attendance of Port Health Inspectors to cover these additional hours. I wish to express my appreciation of the invaluable assistance which has been given by the numerous individuals and organisations whose work is so closely allied with ours in the Port. The co-operation which is displayed is of the utmost importance in carrying out the multitude of operations in which we are involved. A paper incorporating information obtained on the visit of the late Chairman and myself to inspect ports in the United States of America and Canada is included as an appendix. This was published in "The Medical Officer" of 20th June, 1970, pages 360-362. I have the honour to be, Lady and Gentlemen, Your obedient Servant, W.G. SWANN, M.D., B.Sc., Medical Officer of Health, Port and City of London. 2 SECTION I - STAFF (As at 31st December, 1970 TABLE A Name of Officer Nature of Appointment Commenced Service Any Other Appointment held MEDICAL STAFF W.G. SWANN, M.D., B.Ch., B.A.O.,B.Sc., D.P.H., D(Obst), R.C.O.G., D.P. A. Medical Officer of Health January, 1964 Principal School Medical Officer, and Acting Chief Welfare Officer City of London. Medical Inspector of Aliens and Commonwealth Immigrants. D.T. JONES, B.Sc.,M.B., B.Ch.,D.C.H.,D.P.H.,D.C.T. Deputy Medical Officer of Health March, 1958 (Deputy) ditto A.E.L. de THIERRY, M.A., M.B., B.Chir., D(Obst), R.C.O.G., D.P.H. Medical Officer March, 1967 Medical Officer City of London Medical Inspector of Aliens and Commonwealth Immigrants. W.T. ROUGIER CHAPMAN, V.R.D..M.R.C.S., L.R.C.P. Senior Assistant Port Medical Officer January, 1962 Medical Inspector of Aliens and Commonwealth Immigrants G.W. ASTON, L.M.S.S.A. Assistant Port Medical Officer October, 1962 ditto R.G.S. WHITFIELD, D.S.C., B.A.,M.R.C.S., L.R.C.P. Assistant Port Medical Officer (Part-time) December, 1966 ditto R.F. ARMSTRONG, L.R.C.P., L.R.C.S., Ed., L.R.F.P.S., Glas. ditto June, 1963 ditto R.M. BEST, M.B., B.S., (Lond.) ditto April, 1964 ditto R. TILLEY, M.R.C.S., M.R.C.P., D.P.H. ditto July, 1969 ditto K.C. MORRIS, M.R.C.S., L.R.C.P. ditto September, 1967 — H.M. WIL LOUGH BY, V.R.D., & Bar., M.R.C.S., L.R.C.P., D.P.H.,D.T.M. & H. Consultant in Infectious Disease and Quarantine Procedures May, 1929 — J.A. JONES, M.B.,Ch.B., D.P.H. ditto April, 1935 — W.T.G. BOUL, M.B.E.,M.D., Ch.B., D.P.H. ditto March, 1957 Medical Inspector of Aliens and Commonwealth Immigrants Occasional Medical Inspectors of Aliens and Commonwealth Immigrants. DR. D.J. AVERY DR. D.W. KEYS DR. W. STOTT DR. P.J.R. WALTERS VETERINARY OFFICERS G.S. WIGGINS,M.R.C.V.S., Veterinary Officer October, 1964 F.R.S.H. J.A. MORRIS, M.R.C.V.S. Veterinary Officer April, 1965 (Part-time) PUBLIC ANALYST Dr. H.A. WILLIAMS, Ph.D., (Lond.) M.ChemA., F.R.I.C., A.C.G.F.C., F.C.G.I., F.R.S.H. AGRICULTURAL ANALYST. Dr. H.J. HAMENCE, O.B.E., Ph.D., A.C.G.F.C., F.R.I.C. DEPUTY AGRICULTURAL ANALYST P.S. HALL, B.Sc., M.Chem.A., F.R.I.C. 3 Name of Officer Nature of Appointment Commenced Service Any other Appointment held ADMINISTRATIVE STAFF (Port and City of London) R.C. RATLIFF Chief Clerk March, 1930 — E.V. SMITH Deputy Chief Clerk October, 1938 — C.W.R. BETTS First Assistant Clerk April, 1926 — F.B. OSBORN, A.M.R.S.H, Senior Assistant May, 1952 — R.H. COLLINS, M.R.I.P.H.H., L.M.R.S.H. Senior Assistant January, 1963 — D.J. FLOOD Senior Assistant March, 1963 — Mrs. D.M. SHEPHERD Senior Assistant April, 1965 — S.C. DARLISON Senior Assistant April, 1963 — D.H. HADDON Senior Assistant November, 1968 — Miss M.L. GURNEY First Class Assistant May, 1939 — R.G. HEMING First Class Assistant August, 1965 - R.G. RUTTER First Class Assistant July, 1968 — R.G. FARRELL First Class Assistant July, 1965 — J.G. COX First Class Assistant August, 1970 — Mrs, I.H. HAMBLIN General Grade Assistant October, 1957 — Miss M.J. GOOLD General Grade Assistant October, 1969 — Mrs, E.J.A. MORROW General Grade Assistant March, 1968 — Mrs, J.E. GRAHAM General Grade Assistant June, 1966 — M.L. GORE General Grade Assistant June, 1970 — Miss L, MOWBRAY General Grade Assistant November, 1970 — Miss B. LOVATT Shorthand Typist November, 1969 — Miss L. SHARMA Shorthand Typist July, 1970 — Mrs. V.S. POOLE Shorthand Typist October, 1970 — Mrs, P, LAWSON Copy Typist August, 1970 — H.T. LLOYD Senior Messenger November, 1968 — J.A. LAMBERT Messenger/Driver November, 1968 — G. HAMMOND Messenger/Driver March, 1968 - PORT HEALTH INSPECTORS A.H. MARSHALL, F.A.P.H.I, Chief Port Health Inspector March, 1953 T.C.H. ROGERSON, M.A.P.H.I, Deputy Chief Port Health Inspector October, 1951 — A.C. GOOD, J.P., M.R.S.H. Divisional Port Health Inspector September, 1951 — P.A. TRAYNIER, F.R.S.H., M.A.P.H.I. Divisional Port Health Inspector October, 1950 — L.N. TOPE, M.A.P.H.I, Divisional Port Health Inspector April, 1946 — W.C.B. GILHESPY, M.A.P.H.I. Divisional Port Health Inspector January, 1960 — W.M. WALKER Senior Port Health Inspector October, 1954 — A.W. BUCHAN, M.A.P.H.I, Senior Port Health Inspector July, 1955 — J.A. STOKER, M.A.P.H.I, Senior Port Health Inspector June, 1963 — P.G. PRITCHARD, M.A.P.H.I. Senior Port Health Inspector June, 1965 — A. GAME, M.A.P.H.I. Senior Port Health Inspector August, 1961 — F. SPENCER Port Health Inspector March, 1957 — R.W. GWYER, M.R.S.H. M.A.P.H.I, Port Health Inspector March, 1960 — J.I. ECKERSALL, M.A.P.H.I. Port Health Inspector June, 1966 _ P. ROTHERAM, M.A.P.H.I, Port Health Inspector June, 1967 _ G.J. BULL Port Health Inspector June, 1967 _ J.C. STRACHAN, M.A.P.H.I. Port Health Inspector June, 1968 _ W.R. LEECH Port Health Inspector June, 1969 _ J.D. EDWARDS, M.A.P.H.I, Port Health Inspector June, 1969 _ J.E. OAKLEY, M.A.P.H.I. Port Health Inspector June, 1970 _ A.M. GIBBS-MURRAY, M.A.P.H.I, Port Health Inspector June, 1970 - A.E. TERRIBILE Port Health Inspector June, 1969 _ R.H. HEAD Meat Inspector April, 1964 _ K.B. WILSON Technical Assistant (Authorised) December, 1968 — STUDENT HEALTH INSPECTORS G.S. HAYNES Student Health Inspector September, 1968 B.F. ADAMS Student Health Inspector September, 1970 — R.W.P. MAGEE Student Health Inspector November, 1970 - RODENT CONTROL STAFF Technical Assistants W.G. STIMSON, L.M.R.S.H., Chief Technical Assistant February, 1946 — E.C. WATKINS Senior Technical Assistant June, 1929 — C. STOCKTON Senior Technical Assistant June, 1940 — D.J. DAVIS Senior Technical Assistant August, 1941 — H.A. BAXTER Technical Assistant/ Class I June, 1945 - G. CLARK Technical Assistant/Class I January, 1949 — A.L. SOUTHWOOD Technical Assistant/Class I January, 1949 - A.T. EVANS Technical Assistant/Class I January, 1953 — C.E.W. EASTMAN Technical Assistant/Class I April, 1954 — 4 Name of Officer Nature of Appointment Commenced Service Any other Appointment held RODENT CONTROL STAFF (Continued) Rodent Control Scheme J.W.R. KENNEDY Technical Assistant/Class I December, 1963 - P.F- CARTER Technical Assistant/Class II March, 1966 — H. BROWN Technical Assistant/Class II August, 1966 — D.S. SOUTHWOOD Technical Assistant/Class II June, 1969 - A.D. FARRANT Technical Assistant/Class II June, 1969 — R.G. BUNGAY Technical Assistant/Class 11 September, 1969 — LAUNCH CREWS C.R. SIMONS Navigator (Senior) August, 1938 _ W.G.A. KING Navigator (Dep. Senior) September, 1939 — M.J. EAST Navigator September, 1954 — R.H. SIMMONS Navigator November, 1960 — G. CUNNINGHAM Navigator September, 1957 — W.M. McKEE Navigator January, 1967 — A. RUSSELL Navigator August, 1961 — K. GITTENS Engineer (Senior) January, 1955 — R.N. WALKER Engineer (Dep. Senior) April, 1964 — W. SIMMONS Engineer May, 1955 — B. JACOBS Engineer April, 1956 - C. HOLLMAN Engineer December, 1969 — A.R.L. POTTER Deckhand July, 1945 — E. ALEWOOD Deckhand January, 1947 — W.T.S. PARKINSON Deckhand June, 1966 — P. RAYNER Deckhand November, 1960 — D. SIMMONS Deckhand December, 1963 — D.L. KIELL Deckhand February, 1965 - S. HOLMES Deckhand March, 1967 — V.T. COOK Deckhand January, 1969 - J.C. WRIGHT Deckhand April, 1966 — D.L. WEBSTER Deckhand September, 1968 K.J. SPILLETT Deckhand October, 1968 — P. CORNELIUS Deckboy September, 1968 - V.T. CHAPPELL Deckboy January, 1969 - I.J. ARROWS Deckboy December, 1969 — K.J. STAMMERS Deckboy December, 1969 _ R.R. HOPKINS Deckboy December, 1969 — T.P. REGAN Deckboy May, 1970 - A.W. SPILLETT Deckboy May, 1970 — E. HAYES Deckboy June, 1970 — LAUNCHES — Date acquired "ALFRED ROACH" 1948 "HUMPHREY MORRIS" 1962 "VICTOR ALLCARD" 1965 5 SECTION II AMOUNT OF SHIPPING ENTERING THE DISTRICT DURING THE YEAR TABLE B Ships from N umber Net Tonnage Number Inspected Number of ships reported as having, or having had during the voyage, infectious disease on board. by the Port Medical Officer By the Port Health Inspector Foreign Ports Coastwise 14,236 6,375 35,668,000 7,053,000 941 17 11,459 1,128 60 5 Total 20,611 42,721,000 958 12,587 65 SECTION III CHARACTER OF SHIPPING AND TRADE DURING THE YEAR TABLE C Passenger Traffic - foreign travel only Number of Passengers — Inwards 73,226 Number of Passengers — Outwards 70,787 Cargo Traffic Principal Imports All types of produce and merchandise Principal Exports Principal Ports from which ships arrive. The Port of London trades with all parts of the world. SECTION IV INLAND BARGE TRAFFIC 3,131 lighters, with an aggregate tonnage of some 322,342 tons, were registered by the Port of London Authority during the year. These lighters, which, by way of creeks and canals, operate throughout the Port and its environs, are made up of general purpose cargo carriers and craft specially designed for the carriage of bulk liquids and refrigerated cargoes. The bulk liquid carriers are constructed with steam heating coils incorporated in their tanks, whilst some of the refrigerated cargo lighters are fitted with refrigeration plant. There has been a further decrease in the number of lighters employed within the Authority's district during the year. This, as in previous years, has been brought about by the amalgamation of fleets and the scrapping of old units. The provisions of the Food Hygiene (Docks, Carriers, etc.) Regulations, 1960, control the carriage of food in lighters, barges and other vessels. A careful watch is kept on lighters-used for this purpose so that, as far as possible, any contamination of food during transportation can be eliminated. SECTION V WATER SUPPLY 1. Source of supply for: (a) The district- All the docks in the London area obtain their water supplies from the Metropolitan Water Board. Tilbury Dock and the "Havens" are supplied by the South Essex Water Company. The majority of the wharves are supplied by Public Water Authorities within whose area of jurisdiction they are situated though several wharves have their own deep wells. A few wharves have no water supplies available for shipping, in which case water required can be obtained from water barges. 6 (b) Shipping- Ships not able to obtain water from the shore supplies indicated above, or ships lying at buoys in the river, can obtain supplies from water barges. Shipping at the Isle of Grain and Tower Wharf obtain their supplies from The Medway Water Board and at Sheerness from the Sheerness Harbour Estate. 2. Reports of tests for contamination. The bacteriological examination of fresh water samples is carried out by St. Andrew's Hospital, Bow for the dock area and River districts on the North bank and by the Devonport Pathological Laboratory, Greenwich, for the dock areas and River districts on the South bank, while the Public Health Laboratory at Maidstone examines samples from the Medway area. There were four reports of contamination in samples drawn from hydrants during the year which were discovered as a result of routine sampling. In each case the supply of water to shipping was withheld until a potable standard was achieved. There were four reports of contamination in samples derived from standpipes and twenty four reports of contamination in samples drawn from the ends of delivery hoses used to supply ships. The cause of the contamination of standpipes and supply hoses, which was also discovered during the course of routine sampling, was investigated as a matter of normal procedure. No attributable cause was discovered and it was assumed that the contamination had been introduced through unhygienic handling of the watering equipment. No ship was supplied with "unfit" water. There were thirty five reports of contamination in the distribution supplies on board ships. These samples were drawn mainly from fresh water taps over galley and messroom sinks. The source of supplyto these taps is derived from "domestic fresh water storage" contained in double bottoms and peak tanks. One sample of fresh water drawn directly from a storage tank was found to be unfit for drinking. The possible sources of contamination in the cases of the domestic supply were investigated. The most likely causes were considered to be the possible introduction of contaminated water or the incorrect use of engineroom pumps used in the filling or topping up of the fresh water gravity feed tanks or the transfer of fresh water for the purpose of adjusting the stability or the trim of the ship. In each case the standard practice of cleaning followed by chlorination of the tanks and supply lines was adopted. Due regard is paid to the co-operation this Authority has received from other United Kingdom and Continental Ports through the interchange of adverse fresh water sampling reports in respect of those ships where some degree of contamination in the fresh water on board was discovered subsequent to departure for another United Kingdom or Continental Port. This interchange of information enables follow-up visits to be made by the Port Health Authorities concerned and enables remedial measures to be taken before the ship sails. The 90.72% of "satisfactory", "good", and "excellent" results in the fresh water supplied in the District as shown in Table 2 compares well with the percentage figure obtained in previous years. The number of "unfit", "unsatisfactory" and "suspicious" samples, however, indicates the importance of continual checks on the fresh water supplies to shipping. 3. Precautions taken against contamination of hydrants and hosepipes. The supply of fresh water from shore to ships CODE OF PRACTICE Equipment All components should be kept clean and maintained exclusively for this purpose. Equipment should be kept in a properly appointed store and transported to and from the watering point in a suitable and covered truck. No equipmentother than that especially provided for this purpose should be used for supplying fresh water. All hoses should be lined with rubber internally. Every precaution should be taken to preserve the clean condition of the hose during the watering operation. Those components taken to the watering point and not required should be left in the truck. Watering Points These points should be clearly identified by a number at the site and the hydrant-pit cover given a durable and conspicuous coat of paint. 7 The permanent hydrant-pit covers should be watertight and, when the hydrant is being used, a closely fitting temporary cover should be available to allow lor a standpipe and to shelter the hydrant-pit. All hydrant-pits should be effectively drained, rendered with a smooth and light-coloured surface, and always kept in a clean condition. The hydrant discharge should always be effectively capped when not in use. Operation Connections at the hydrant and on the ship should be supervised by an authorised officer. Standpipes should be used at the hydrant and hoses kept clear of quay and dock water. All connections at the ship must be made in order to avoid any possibility of back-syphonage from the ship installation to the shore mains supply. In any circumstances where a closed-connection must be made on the ship, an effective non-return device should be incorporated in the supply equipment to safeguard against backsyphonage. The water supply equipment should always be adequately flushed through before allowing the supply to enter the ship's filling lines. As far as practicable, the supply of fresh water should be supervised by an authorised person. Any contaminated equipment should not be used until it has been suitably cleansed. 4. Number and sanitary conditions of water boats and powers of control by the Authority. There are eleven water boats purveying fresh water to shipping within the District and all are maintained in a satisfactory sanitary condition. Twenty seven samples were drawn during the year from tanks, standpipe and delivery hose ends. One sample drawn direct from the tank of one water boat showeid contamination. The standard procedure of chlorination of the tank was carried out. The power to close, or restrict the use of water from a polluted source of supply, contained in Sections 140 and 141 of the Public Health Act 1936 was assigned to the Authority by the London Port Health Authority Order 1965. TABLE 1 FRESH WATER SUPPLY SAMPLES - SUMMARY 1970 HYDRANTS STAND PIPES DELIVERY HOSE ENDS TOTALS Unfit Unsat. Suspic. Satis. Good Excell. Unfit Unsat. Suspic. Satis. Good Excell. Unfit Unsat. Suspic. Satis. Good Excell. Surrey Docks 3 1 1 22 18 45 India and Millwall Docks 1 3 82 1 2 3 5 97 Royal Docks 1 2 20 6 2 16 2 17 1 67 Tilbury Docks 2 1 36 16 1 8 1 2 67 River Districts 1 17 1 1 1 23 44 Medway 2 6 8 TOTALS 1 3 3 78 16 3 1 3 118 4 20 6 71 1 328 Water Barges TANKS STAND PIPES DELIVERY HOSE ENDS 1 7 3 1 1 14 27 GRAND TOTAL 355 8 TABLE 2 FRESH WATER SUPPLY SAMPLE TOTALS & PERCENTAGES Unfit Unsat. Suspic. Satis. Good Excell Totals Hydrants 1 3 3 78 16 101 Stand Pipes 3 1 3 118 125 Delivery Hose ends 4 20 6 71 1 102 Water Barges 1 1 22 3 27 Totals 1 7 25 13 289 20 355 Percentages 0.28 1.97 7.03 3.66 81.40 5.66 100 90.72 Distribution aboard ships — Of 114 samples drawn in the crew and passenger accommodation and galleys on board ships:- 8 were excellent 68 were good 3 were satisfactory 20 were suspicious 14 were unsatisfactory 1 was unfit Storage aboard ships — Of 3 samples drawn direct from ships storage tanks:— 2 were good 1 was unfit Port Installations — Of 100 samples drawn from dock offices, dock canteens, drinking fountains, etc.:— 3 were excellent 88 were good 4 were satisfactory 4 were suspicious 1 was unfit River Thames Passenger Launches — 36 samples were drawn under the Food Hygiene (General) Regulations, 1960 from licensed bar taps and storage tanks on board River Thames Passenger launches:— 28 were good 7 were suspicious 1 was unfit Standards used in the Port of London — Quality Plate count per ml. Coliforms per 100 ml. Excellent Nil Nil Good Less than 100 Nil Satisfactory Less than 300 Nil Suspicious More than 300 Less than 5 Unsatisfactory More than 300 More than 5 Unfit — More than 5 and including faecal coli. SECTION VI - PUBLIC HEALTH (SHIPS) REGULATIONS 1966 1. List of Infected Areas (Regulation 6) — Arrangements for the preparation and amendments of the list, the form of list, the persons to whom it is supplied and the procedure for supplying it to those persons. This Regulation is complied with in such a way that Pilots, Customs Officers and Ships' Masters may be in no doubt as to their duties. The general areas in which quarantinable diseases may be found are set out in the Directions and Requirements printed with the International Maritime Declaration of Health. Any variation in these areas is notified immediately by telephone and confirming letter to Trinity House and the Waterguard Superintendent. 9 The Directions and Requirements on page 4 of the Declaration of Health (applying only to the Port of London) on Dec. 31, 1970 were as follows:— PUBLIC HEALTH (SHIPS) REGULATIONS, 1966 DIRECTIONS AND REQUIREMENTS These directions and requirements are made by the Medical Officer of Health for the Port and City of London in pursuance of the Public Health (Ships) Regulations, 1966 and compliance therewith is required by virtue of Regulation 36 of the said Regulations. TO THE MASTER OF ANY SHIP APPROACHING THE PORT OF LONDON FROM A FOREIGN PORT 1. You should ascertain the state of health of all persons on board. 2. You must complete, sign and deliver the foregoing Maritime Declaration of Health unless your ship has on this voyage been only to excepted Ports or has already been cleared at a Port in the United Kingdom. Make sure that all parts are completed and that is is countersigned by the ship's surgeon if one is carried. 3. If the answer to any question on page 1 is Yes OR if your ship has, during the last 28 days, been in any Port in all Asia, Africa (including transit through the Suez Canal) the Americas (excluding the U.S.A., Canada and transit through the Panama Canal) or any area locally infected quarantinable disease, you must:— (a) send a WIRELESS MESSAGE to "PORTELTH LONDON" stating (1) the name of the ship. (2) the estimated time of arrival in the Lower Hope Reach. If your ship is berthing or anchoring below the Lower Hope, give the estimated time of arrival and the name of the berth or anchorage. (3) numbers, ages and sex of all persons on board who are ill and your best estimate of what is wrong with them. This message must be sent not more than 12 hours and whenever practicable not less than four hours before the estimated time of arrival. (b) (1) If your ship is proceeding to a mooring or berth in the Port down river of No.l Mucking Buoy:— Show or give the following signals:— (a) the international two-flag signal ZW flown at the masthead or where it can best be seen from the shore until instructed by the Port Health Authority or a Customs Officer that it is no longer necessary; and (b) between sunset and sunrise, either:— (i) the signal ZW flashed in the Morse Code by lamp, at thirty second intervals, or (ii) a signal consisting of a red light over a white light, the lights being not more than six feet apart, shown at the peak or where the signal can best be seen from the shore; such signals to be given from No.l Sea Reach Buoy until an authorised officer of the Port Health Authority or a Customs Officer has boarded the ship. (2) If your ship is proceeding to a mooring or berth up river of No.l Mucking Buoy:— Show or give the following signals:— (a) the international two-flag signal ZW flown at the masthead or where it can best be seen from the shore until instructed by the Port Health Authority or a Customs Officer that it is no longer necessary; and (b) between sunset and sunrise, either:— (i) the signal ZW flashed in the Morse code by lamp, at thirty second intervals,or (ii) a signal consisting of a red light over a white light, the lights being not more than six feet apart, shown at the peak or where the signal can best be seen from the shore; such signals to be given from No. 1 Mucking Buoy until an authorised officer of the Port Health Authority or a Customs Officer has boarded the ship. 4. The procedure set out in III (B) (2) above will expedite the boarding of your ship by the Medical Officer and this will normally take place in the Lower Hope Reach. To avoid delay to your ship you should, on sighting the Medical Officer's Launch, reduce speed sufficiently for it to come along side. Hand this Declaration to the Medical Officer together with lists of names and addresses for all passengers and crew. You must not proceed up River beyond Gravesend Pilot Station until your ship has been cleared from health control. 5. If the answer to all the questions on page one is NO AND the ship has not called during the last 28 days at a Port in any of the places mentioned in paragraph III above, health clearance of your ship will be dealt with by an Officer of H.M. Customs on your arrival at your berth. In these circumstances you need not communicate with the Port Health Authority and your ship will not be boarded by the Medical Officer. 6. If your ship has been in any port in all Asia, Africa (including transit through the Suez Canal) or the Americas (excluding the U.S.A., Canada and transit through the Panama Canal), during the 10 last 14 days, OR any area locally infected with smallpox at any time during the same period, you must have ready for inspection by the Medical Officer as soon as he boards your ship:— (a) a valid International Vaccination Certificate against Smallpox for each person on board (passenger or crew). or (b) a list, signed by you, of all passengers and crew members, giving the date of last vaccination against smallpox for each person, as recorded in his certificate. (Provision of this list does not prejudice the Medical Officer's right to inspect the actual certificates if he considers it necessary, but will help considerably to cut down delay in clearing the ship). 7. The Master of a ship approaching the Port of London who has any doubts or difficulties over Port Health Regulations should obtain advice direct from the Medical Officer, through the Thames Navigation Service (V.H.F. R/T). It is also possible for ships without V.H.F. R/T to consult the Medical Officer through North Foreland Radio Station. Information and advice on any other Medical problems are available by the same channels. NOTE: Regulation 18 (1) of the Public Health (Ships) Regulations, 1966 states:— 'On the arrival of a ship from any foreign port or from any infected area which is not a foreign port, no person other than a Pilot, a Customs Officer, an Immigration Officer or an authorised officer shall, without the permission of the Medical Officer, board or leave the ship until it is free from control under these regulations, and the Master shall take all steps necessary to secure compliance with this provision'. W.G. SWANN, Guildhall, London, E.C.2. Medical Officer of Health, Port and City of London. 2. Radio Messages (a) Arrangements for sending permission by radio for ships to enter the district (Regulation 13) (b) Arrangements for receiving messages by radio from ships and for acting thereon (Regulation 14(l)(a) and (2). The Thames Navigation Service of the Port of London Authority has its Operation Room at at Gravesend and keeps in contact with ships coming up the' River Thames on radio frequencies allocated in accordance with international agreement. The Boarding vessels "HUMPHREY MORRIS", "VICTOR ALLCARD" and "ALFRED ROACH" are fitted with radio telephone equipment on the International frequencies, giving direct radio telephone communication with shippingand with other river services including H.M. Customs. In addition, the Port Health Authority has its own radio telephone link between the Quarantine Station at Denton Hospital and the three launches. As from 1st September, 1969, the London Port Health Authority was formally designated, by the Department of Health and Social Security, for the receipt and transmission of radio messages to and from ships prior to arrival in the District, under Regulation 12 of the Public Health (Ships) Regulations 1966. This is of particular importance, in view of the movement down river of the "centre of gravity" of the Port. More and more ships, including nearly all tankers, are berthing below Gravesend, and it is necessary that the Boarding Medical Officer on watch should be able to question the Master directly in order to determine whether action should be taken to clear the ship. Accordingly, a radio link has been set up from the Quarantine Station at Denton, which is connected by land line to the Operations Room of the Thames Navigation Service. By this means, the Boarding Medical Officer can talk to the Master before he enters the districtand decide whether to allow him to go alongside, where further checks can be carried out by Customs Officers and by Port Health Inspectors, or to go down river and clear the vessel himself. Masters of ships approaching London from a Foreign Port, whether or not fitted with radio equipment for contacting the Thames Navigation Service, are still required to send a radio message to "Portelth London" giving expected time of arrival at Gravesend and particulars of any infectious disease on board. All such messages are received by the North Foreland Radio Station and then telephoned direct by the G.P.O. to the Boarding Medical Officer on duty at Denton Hospital. At times when the Boarding Medical Officer is fully occupied, e.g. when there is a medical emergency or several ships to be visited urgently, or to avoid delay to a ship in exceptional circumstances, it is possible to check with the ship direct and with the co-operation of H.M. Customs arrange for "free pratique" to be granted immediately and without the ship being boarded by the Medical Officer. 11 3. Notifications Otherwise Than By Radio (Regulation 14(l)(h) In the event of a ship not being fitted with radio, display of the visual signals as set out in the Directions and Requirements would result in the appropriate action being taken. 4. Mooring Stations (Regulations 22 to 30) On arrival of an infected or suspected ship, or any other ship on which there has been during its current voyage and within the last four weeks before arrival, a case of quarantinable disease (plague, cholera, yellow fever, smallpox, typhus or relapsing fever), the medical officer may direct that the master take the ship to a "mooring station" so that the ship does not come into contact with other ships or the shore. It has been agreed with the Port of London Authority and the Waterguard Superintendent of Her Majesty's Customs and Excise that the Mooring Stations will be at suitable berths to be allocated by the Harbour Master as required. 5. Arrangements For — (a) Hospital accommodation for infectious diseases (other than Smallpox — see Section VII) Since Denton Hospital has been taken over by the South East Metropolitan Regional Hospital Board under the National Health Service Act, the Port Health Authority has continued to exercise, through the Senior Assistant Port Medical Officer, and the Assistant Port Medical Officers, the medical supervision of cases admitted to the hospital. The Nursing and administrative control lies with the Dartford Group Hospital Management Committee. Consultant advice is available through the Physician-Superintendent of Joyce Green Hospital, Dartford. Cases which are likely to require specialised treatment or laboratory investigation are sent direct, or via Denton Hospital, to Joyce Green Hospital or one of the larger hospitals in the Metropolis. If at all possible, cases of sickness are disembarked into one of the Port Health Authority's launches for conveyance to Denton Hospital, there to be admitted or else put into a waiting ambulance. Ships which are berthing at Tilbury Landing Stage can conveniently land sick cases there, either into a Port Health launch or into an ambulance. Should weather or other conditions make it inadvisable to land a case at Gravesend, the patient may be allowed by the Boarding Medical Officer to proceed up River in the ship to the dock, in which event arrangements are made with the Emergency Bed Service for the case to be removed by ambulance to a suitable hospital immediately the ship berths. Owing to shortage of night staff and the practical problems relating to the actual landing of patients during part of the year only 5 patients were admitted to Denton Hospital during 1970, as follows — 1.2.1970 1 case tonsillitis 31.5.1970 1 case chickenpox 29.6.1970 1 case influenza 20.9.1970 1 case for investigation 20.12.1970 1 case for investigation (b) Surveillance and follow up of contacts In the event of a vessel arriving on which there has been a case of a major infectious disease, all persons on board are considered to be possible contacts. Each contact is interrogated and asked to give full details as to name and the proposed address in the United Kingdom to which he is proceeding immediately on disembarkation. If necessary these particulars, together with an appropriate note of the circumstances, are then forwarded to the Medical Officer of Health of the district in which the address of the contact is situated. The details obtained by direct verbal contact are written on carbonised paper so that one copy can be forwarded to the Medical Officer of Health of the area to which the passenger/crew member is proceeding and one copy retained for reference. Additionally, the contact is given a reply paid card(s) so that he can notify the authority of any change of address during the surveillance period. Each change is notified to the appropriate local authority. (c) Cleansing and disinfection of ships, persons, clothing and other articles. Disinfection of infected quarters is usually arranged by the Port Health Inspector in whose area the vessel berths. If, however, the space requiring disinfection is large, a private firm is employed to carry out the disinfection under the supervision of the Port Health Inspector. 12 The Disinfection Station at Denton Hospital is, by arrangement with the South East Metropolitan Regional Hospital Board and the Dartford Hospital Management Committee, made available to the Port Health Authority for the disinfection of clothing, bedding, etc., and, if necessary, for the cleansing of persons. Arrangements have also been made for disinfected bedding from ships in the docks of the London Area to be sent to the disinfection station at Plaistow Hospital. Very Large Crude Carriers (V.L.C.C.'S.) Health clearance procedure, as in previous years, was maintained and no difficulties were encountered. The number of vessels dealt with increased by 50%, but no case of infectious disease was reported on any vessel engaged in this traffic during the year. Summary of V.L.C.C. Movements affecting the Port Health Authority during 1970 (1969 figures in brackets) (a) V.L.C.C's arriving direct to Thameshaven District 7 (10) (b) V.L.C.C's arriving after lightening at Lyme Bay 10 ( 4) (c) V.L.C.C's arriving after lightening at Seine Bay 8 ( 3) (d) V.L.C.C's arriving after lightening at Rotterdam 5 ( 3) Totals: 30 (20) On six occasions V.L.C.C's were lightened at Lyme Bay, and Health Declarations were received from them via the lightening vessels; the V.L.C.C's themselves did not enter the Port of London. LIGHTER ABOARD SHIP DEVELOPMENT ("LASH'' SHIPS) The arrival of the world's first "Lash" Ship into the Medway in December 1969 was referred to in last year's annual report. This service from New Orleans operated throughout 1970, and in September m.v. "ACADIA FOREST" was joined by her sister ship, m.v. "ATLANTIC FOREST" in this latest form of cargo transport. Between them, during the year under review, these two vessels made 14 voyages from the U.S. Gulf Ports to their mooring in the Medway, which is situated in the river between the Isle of Grain and Queenborough. On each voyage "lash" lighters were discharged with cargoes destined for wharves on the Thames and Medway and other lighters containing export cargoes, having been marshalled at Sheerness awaiting the arrival of one of the "Mother" Ships, were taken aboard. A total of 311 lighters were discharged from these vessels into the waters of the River Medway within the District, most of them containing wood pulp. Other cargoes carried were 7 lighters of synthetic resin and 2 lighters of ferro chrome and between October to December 19 lighters of soy bean meal for manufacture into animal feeding stuffs. All except five of this total were subsequently discharged within the Port of London, the others being towed up the Medway into the Port of Rochester. As a routine the barges were examined for rodent infestation or any other matters of port health significance, but no problems were encountered. Whilst no food cargoes arrived by lash lighter during 1970, such cargoes are expected during 1971. A rough estimate suggests that over 100,000 tons of cargo were imported by the "lash" system at Sheerness in its first year of operation. MEDICAL INSPECTIONS AT GRAVESEND No. of Vessels Jan. Feb. Mar. Apr. May June July Aug. Sept. Oct. Nov. Dec.  Boarded No. of Passengers 70 90 87 94 91 90 59 71 94 77 65 70 958 Medically Inspected (Inc. Commonwealth and Alien Passengers) 8 6 22 4 80 27 7 62 4 2 97 16 335 No. of Crew Medically Inspected 100 9 2 5 2 5 4 3 9 8 3 14 164 13 SECTION VII SMALLPOX 1. Name of Isolation Hospital to which smallpox cases are sent from the District. Long Reach Hospital is situated on the south bank of the River Thames about eight miles above Gravesend. The hospital consists of 10 ward blocks capable of accommodating 170 patients but, except in cases of emergency, only three ward blocks (2 of 20 beds and 1, a cubicle ward, of 10 beds, total 50 beds) are kept available for immediate use. The hospital includes residential quarters for the staff and laundry, although the administration and staffing is carried out from Joyce Green Hospital, Dartford. 2. Arrangements for transport of such cases to that Hospital by ambulance giving the name of the Authority responsible for the ambulance and the vaccinal state of the ambulance crews. A case or cases of smallpox would be removed from the vessel by one of this Authority's ambulance-launches and conveyed ashore via the pontoon at Denton and from thence conveyed by road ambulance direct to Long Reach Hospital. The Port Health Authority would be responsible for the vaccinal state of their ambulancelaunch crews, while the vaccinal state of the Road Ambulance personnel would be the concern of the ambulance authority, the Greater London Council. 3. Names of smallpox consultants available. Dr. W.T.G. Boul Dr. A. Melvin Ramsey Dr. C.F.L. Hill (Bexley, Greenwich & West Kent) Dr. G.D.W. McKendrick Dr. E. O'Sullivan Dr. J.C. McEntee Dr. J.C. Blake (Outer Kent) Dr. E.H. Brown Dr. J.D. Kershaw Dr. H.P. Lambert Dr. R.T.D. Emond 4. Facilities for laboratory diagnosis of smallpox. Facilities are available at the Virus Reference Laboratory at the Central Public Health Laboratory, Colindale, N.W.9. SECTION VIII VENEREAL DISEASE Venereal Disease is not compulsorily notifiable to Medical Officers of Health, but efforts are made both by the Boarding Medical Officers and the Port Health Inspectors to bring to the notice of seamen using the port the facilities available for free treatment and the importance of obtaining skilled treatment as early as possible. A leaflet has been produced and is issued as appropriate. A copy is set out below. Small posters giving similar information are put up in suitable dock premises, with permission from the Port of London Authority, and in accordance with the requirements of the Indecent Advertisements (Amendment) Act, 1970. It is usually possible to arrange for a patient to be referred to the Seamen's Hospital or other suitable hospital in the vicinity of the ship. VENEREAL DISEASES ALBERT DOCK HOSPITAL Alnwick Road, E.16 Telephone 01 -476 2234 Mon 2 pm - 4 pm Wed 2 pm - 4 pm Fri 2 pm - 4 pm DREADNOUGHT SEAMENS HOSPITAL Greenwich, S.E.10 Telephone 01 -858 3433 Mon 5 pm Wed 5 pm Fri 5 pm GUY'S HOSPITAL London, S.E.1 Telephone 01 -407 7600 Mon to Fri 9 am - 7 pm Sat 9 am - 12 noon SHEPPEY GENERAL HOSPITAL Sheerness Telephone Minster (Sheerness) 2116/7 Sat 11 am - 12 noon 14 Venereal Diseases - continued. TILBURY HOSPITAL Telephone Tilbury 2342 Tue 9.30 am - 11.30 am Fri 12.30 pm - 3.00 pm THE LONDON HOSPITAL Whitechapel, E.l Telephone 01 -247 7310 Mon to Fri 10 am - 7 pm Sat 10 am - 3 pm WESTCLIFF HOSPITAL Southend on Sea Telephone Southend on Sea 44415 Mon 10 am - 1 pm Tue 10 am - 1 pm and 2 pm - 4 pm Wed 10 am - 12 noon Fri 4 pm - 6.30 pm SPECIAL TREATMENT CENTRE St Bartholomew's Hospital, E.C.1 Telephone 01 -606 7777 Mon 11 am - 1.45 pm and 4 pm - 6 pm Tue 11 am - 1.45 pm and 4 pm - 6 pm Thur 11 am - 1.45 pm Fri 11 am - 1.45 pm and 4 pm -6 pm Sat 9.15 am - 11.15 pm 22 Cobham Street, Gravesend Telephone Gravesend 3061 Tue 11 am - 1 pm Sat 9 am - 10 am 36 New Road, Rochester Telephone Medway 43343 Mon 1.30 pm - 4.30 pm Thur 10.00 am - 1.00 pm No appointment necessary Treatment is free Complete Secrecy Ask at the outpatients for the Special Clinic ACT NOW - DELAY IS DANGEROUS SECTION IX CASES OF NOTIFIABLE AND OTHER INFECTIOUS DISEASES ON SHIPS TABLE D Category: Cases landed from ships from foreign ports. Disease Passengers Crew No. of ships concerned Chickenpox 2 2 3 Food poisoning — 3 3 German measles 3 — 1 Infective hepatitis - 5 5 Influenza — 1 1 Leprosy — 1 1 Malaria — 1 1 Measles — 1 1 Miscellaneous 1 5 6 Mumps 1 1 2 Pneumonia — 4 3 Scabies — 1 1 Tuberculosis : Pulmonary — 14 12 Typhoid or Paratyphoid Fever — 4 4 Tuberculosis : other — 1 1 Venereal disease - 4 3 TOTALS 7 48 48 15 Category: Cases which have occurred on ships from foreign ports but have been disposed of before arrival. Disease Passengers Crew No. of ships concerned Chickenpox 5 - 1 Dysentery (amoebic) - 1 1 Diarrhoea — 14 3 Infective hepatitis 1 1 2 Influenza - 11 1 Malaria — 2 1 Measles — 1 1 Pneumonia — 1 1 Tuberculosis : Pulmonary - 2 1 TOTALS 6 33 12 Category: Cases landed from ships arriving coastwise. Disease Passengers Crew No. of ships concerned Food poisoning — 3 2* Scabies — 1 1 Shigella sonne dysentery - 1 1* TOTALS NIL 5 4 Category: Cases on coastwise ships which have been disposed of before arrival. Disease Passengers Crew No. of ships concerned Typhoid fever - 2 1* TOTALS NIL 2 1 * One ship involved. Category: Cases remaining on board after the ship's arrival. Disease Passengers Crew No. of ships concerned Bronoho pneumonia 1 — 1 Chickenpox 1 1 2 Gastro-enteritis — 1 1 Influenza — 1 1 Infective hepatitis — 1 1 Measles — 1 1 Mumps — 1 1 Tonsillitis — 3 3 Scabies - 6 4 Venereal disease - 1 1 TOTALS 2 16 16 16 The following table gives a comparative picture of infectious diseases over the past ten years:— Disease (a) Cases reported on Ship's arrival 1961 1962 1963 1964 1965 1966 1967 1968 1969 1970 Amoebiasis _ — — — — 4 1 — — — Cerebrospinal Fever (epidemic Cerebrospinal meningitis) - - - - - - - 1 - - Chickenpox — — — — — 8 19 20 9 11 Diphtheria 2 — — — — — — — — — Dysentery — — — — — *1 2 3 2 2 Encephalitis (acute) — — — — — — — — 1 — Enteric (Typhoid or Paratyphoid) Fever - 2 2 - 6 8 - - 5 5 Enteritis — — — — — 1 — 14 — — Erysipelas — — — — — — 1 — — — Food Poisoning (or suspected) — - — — — — 7 51 1 4 German Measles 12 14 6 14 3 - 11 7 8 3 Infective Hepatitis/Infective Jaundice — — — — — 1 9 8 9 7 Leprosy — — — — — 1 — — 1 1 Malaria (including suspected) — — — — — *1 — 12 6 3 Measles 35 60 68 43 22 15 26 4 29 3 Meningitis (acute) (or Suspected) — — — — — — — — 1 — # Mumps — — — — — — — 2 3 3 Pneumonia acute primary — — — — — — — 3 4 4 Scarlet Fever (or Scarlatina) — 1 — — — — — — 3 — Smallpox (including suspected) 2 5 1 2 1 - - - - - Tuberculosis — pulmonary 26 33 24 17 9 19 5 8 11 14 Tuberculosis — non-pulmonary — — — — — — 1 — — 1 Yellow Fever (including suspected) 1 — — - — — — — — — Other diseases (including chickenpox up to and including 1965 only) 303 258 198 146 276 100 42 1 468* ¢ 46 TOTALS 381 373 299 222 317 158 124 134 561 107 ¢ This figure includes 366 cases of gastro enteritis from 3 ships and 87 cases of influenza from 4 ships (b) Total cases admitted to Hospital including those reported after arrival 1961 1962 1963 1964 1965 1966 1967 1968 1969 1970 Amoebiasis - - - - - 4 2 - - - Chickenpox — — — — — 7 5 5 4 2 Dysentery (including suspected) 1 4 9 4 3 4 7 — — — Encephalitis (acute) — — — — — — — — 1 — Enteric (typhoid or paratyphoid) Fever — 2 1 — 5 2 1 1 4 3 Enteritis — — — — — 1 — 1 — — # Food Poisoning (or suspected) — - — — — — — 2 1 2 German Measles — — — — — 3 1 1 1 — Infective Hepatitis/Infective Jaundice — — — — — 1 1 6 4 4 Leprosy — — — — — 1 — — 1 1 Malaria (including suspected) — — — — — 1 3 4 2 1 Measles 11 11 7 11 2 2 — — — — Meningitis (Acute) (or suspected) — — — — — — — — 1 Mumps 3 4 3 1 2 — — 1 1 1 Pneumonia, acute primary — — — — — — — 2 2 1 Scarlet Fever — 1 — — — 1 — — 3 — Smallpox (including suspected) — 3 1 1 - — — — — — Tuberculosis — pulmonary — — — — — 15 11 5 9 11 Tuberculosis — non pulmonary — — — — — — — — — 1 Other diseases (including chickenpox up to and including 1965 only) 65 86 86 72 44 - 5 - 4 9 TOTALS 80 111 107 89 56 42 36 28 38 36 * Same case — final diagnosis was multiple myelomatosis # Table amended 1966. Case of Leprosy (1) In April a man (a Brazilian national) on a tanker was seen by a doctor after the vessel had berthed. The man had had a rash on his face for about one year. A provisional diagnosis of leprosy was made and the man admitted to Seamen's Hospital. The Ministry was notified and further investigations carried out. In May it was confirmed that the man was suffering from tuberculoid leprosy and the appropriate registration and follow-up procedures took place. Pyrexia of Unknown Origin (2) A vessel was outward bound for Rotterdam on the 19th September, when it was reported that a member of the crew was ill. Another member of the crew had been reported as convalescing from chicken pox when the ship arrived in the Thames on 17th September. The Duty Medical Officer boarded the vessel and decided that the new patient was suffering from pyrexia of unknown origin. He was removed to Joyce Green Hospital with a diagnosis of ? chicken-pox ? typhoid fever, and arrangements were made for the Medical Officer of Health of Rotterdam to be notified of the incident. The case provided a complex puzzle but was eventually diagnosed as a respiratory infection. 17 Suspected Plague (3) On the 19th September a ship arrived in the Thames and the master reported that one man was ill. He was seen by the Boarding Medical Officer and removed to Joyce Green Hospital as a case of pyrexia of unknown origin ? Malaria. Subsequently it was found that another man was ill on board at the time of arrival. He too was admitted to Joyce Green Hospital. Diagnosis in the second case caused grave concern, as the man had signs which suggested a differential diagnosis of typhoid fever or plague. The hospital was unable to give a firmer diagnosis for either man and, after protracted discussion between Medical Staff of the Authority and the Consultant in Infectious Diseases at the hospital it was agreed that plague could not be ruled out. Despite the absence of firm diagnosis in either case the appropriate preventive measures had to be taken. In so far as the ? malaria case was concerned, there was no particular cause for concern, but in the case of suspected plague, stringent investigations were undertaken with regard to the possible rat population of the ship and a strict watch was kept on her whilst she was in Tilbury Dock. One rat was trapped and sent for examination. Extra care had to be taken with dock labour working on the ship. A further complication arose when the Hospital began to suspect that both cases were suffering from paratyphoid fever, although laboratory investigation at that stage was unable to disclose whether this was so or not. Eventually, on the 28th September a firm diagnosis was made that both men were, in fact, suffering from Lymphogranuloma inguinale. Typhoid Fever (4) A vessel arrived on 6th October from Liverpool. Prior to her arrival, notification had been received that a case of suspected typhoid fever had been taken off the ship on arrival in Liverpool, and, on routine investigation of the crew there, one excretor of the typhoid organism, two excretors of Salmonellae other than typhoid and one excretor of Shigella dysentery organisms were found. The typhoid excretor was removed to hospital in Liverpool, but the others were left on board. On arrival in London the ship was boarded and the three men were placed under treatment. The ship was kept under strict surveillance and food hygiene practices were subjected to close scrutiny. The vessel sailed for Rotterdam on the 12th October before the completion of the course of treatment and the necessary information was passed to the Medical Officer of Health of Rotterdam before the ship sailed. Paratyphoid Fever (5) This ship arrived in the Thames on the 15th October, was boarded by the Senior Boarding Medical Officer and was cleared to berth. On follow-up inspection by the Port Health Inspector it was reported that a crew member had been admitted to hospital in India before joining the ship. The diagnosis, according to the man, was paratyphoid fever, and he was discharged cured. This situation appeared potentially dangerous so a stool specimen was taken. This was found to contain typhoid organisms. The ship was kept under close surveillance after the case was discovered and the activities of the man were restricted. Immediately the diagnosis was made, he was admitted to Joyce Green Hospital and full preventive measures taken to protect the rest of the crew. These incidents demonstrate the need for constant vigilance on the part of Medical and Inspectorial staff. The days of serious infectious disease on ships are still with us, unfortunately, and difficult epidemiological problems arise when an immediate clinical diagnosis cannot be made. SECTION X OBSERVATIONS ON THE OCCURRENCE OF MALARIA ON SHIPS One case of Malaria (a seaman) was reported on a ship during the year under review. This compares with one case in 1969. A notice giving advice on the Chief Precautions and Treatment of Malaria is issued by the Ministry of Transport and should be on board every British ship. SECTION XI MEASURES TAKEN AGAINST SHIPS INFECTED OR SUSPECTED OF PLAGUE No ships infected with plague arrived during the year although one suspected case occurred see separate report: The Fourth Schedule to the Public Health (Ships) Regulations, 1966, reads as follows:- 18 SCHEDULE 4 ADDITIONAL MEASURES WITH RESPECT TO THE QUARANTINABLE DISEASES PART I - PLAGUE A. Infected ships and suspected ships (1) The Medical Officer may — (a) require any suspect On board to be disinsected and place him under surveillance, the period of surveillance being reckoned from the date of arrival of the ship; (b) require the disinsecting and, if necessary, disinfection of the baggage of any infected person or suspect, and of any other article on board and any part of the ship which the medical officer considers to be contaminated. (2) If there is rodent plague on board, the medical officer shall require the ship to be deratted in a manner to be determined by him, but without prejudice to the generality of this requirement the following special provisions shall apply to any such deratting:- (a) the deratting shall be carried out as soon as the holds have been emptied; (b) one or more preliminary derattings of a ship with the cargo in situ, or during its unloading, may be carried out to prevent the escape of infected rodents; (c) if the complete destruction of rodents cannot be secured because,only part of the cargo is due to be unloaded, a ship shall not be prevented from unloading that part, but the medical officer may apply any measure which he considers necessary to prevent the escape of infected rodents. B. Ships which have been in infected areas (3) The Medical Officer may — (a) place under surveillance any suspect who disembarks, the period of surveillance being reckoned from the date of the departure of the ship from the infected area; (b) require the destruction of rodents on the ship if he considers the circumstances so exceptional as to justify such a requirement, but he shall give the master notice in writing of the reasons for the requirement. Plague being primarily a disease of rats all vessels are inspected immediately on arrival at their berths in the docks and river for the presence of any mortality among the rats on board which is not attributable to any known cause, such as trapping, poisoning, etc. Incidentally one of the "Health Questions" on page 1 of the "Maritime Declaration of Health" requires the Master to answer "Yes" or "No" to the question "Has plague occurred or been suspected amongst the rats or mice on board during the voyage, or has there been an abnormal mortality among them?" Any dead rats are immediately sent to the Central Public Health Laboratory at County Hall for examination for pasteurella pestis, each being accompanied by a label on which is given precise information as to where the rat was found in order to pinpoint the focus of infection should the examination prove positive. In the event of a positive result the "additional measures" referred to above would be put into operation - the discharge of the cargo would be promptly stopped and arrangements made for the vessel to be fumigated throughout with hydrogen cyanide, with the cargo in situ, the vessel being moved to an approved mooring. Following the initial fumigation and collection of dead rats resulting therefrom, further samples of such rats would be submitted for examination and the discharge of cargo would be permitted under observation. The destination of the cargo would be forwarded to the Medical Officer of Health of the district to which it was proceeding, together with an explanatory note. If any of the cargo had already been discharged overside into lighters before the discovery of plague infection, the lighters would be fumigated immediately. On completion of the discharge of cargo from the vessel a second fumigation would be carried out, again using hydrogen cyanide, to destroy the residual rat population, if any. 19 SECTION XII MEASURES AGAINST RODENTS IN SHIPS FROM FOREIGN PORTS (i) Procedure for inspection of ships for rats The Port Health Authority employs an experienced and competent team of fifteen Technical Assistants, who exercise control measures on all ships and shore premises within the Port area under the supervision of the Port Health Inspectors. The Technical Assistants first duty is to visit all ships arriving in his district as soon as possible after arrival and search for evidence of rodents. Priority is given to ships which have arrived from plague endemic areas. Further visits to these ships are made during the discharge of cargo to ascertain the degree of infestation on board, if any, and to ensure that reasonable measures are adopted to reduce the number of rodents on board to a negligible number and prevent any rodents escaping ashore. His second duty is the inspection of ships in his area for the specific purpose of issuing Deratting or Deratting Exemption Certificates or Rodent Control Certificates. His third duty is the inspection of shore premises and lighters for signs of rodent infestation. The Port Health Authority has continued to operate a Rodent Control Scheme inaugurated twenty-nine years ago, covering all the docks and including all the premises of the Port of London Authority on behalf of that Authority and premises of tenants of the Authority on behalf of the occupiers. (ii) Arrangements for the bacteriological examination of rodents with special reference to rodent plague including the number of rodents sent for examination during the year. All dead rats to be examined for evidence of plague are promptly dispatched in cylindrical aluminium containers with a screw cap to the Public Health Laboratory at County Hall. Specimen rats are placed in polythene bags previously dusted with gammaxene powder to kill any parasites, labelled and placed inside the cylinder for delivery by hand. During the year forty-two rats were sent to the Laboratory at County Hall and were examined for plague with negative results. (iii) Arrangements in the district for deratting ships, the methods used and if done by a commercial contractor, the name of the contractor. (a) The burning of sulphur at the rate of 3 lbs per 1,000 cubic feet of space for a minimum period of 6 hours. This method is seldom used now in the Port of London. (b) The generation of hydrocyanic acid gas by various methods. For the destruction of rats a minimum concentration of H.C.N. at the rate of 2 ozs per 1,000 cubic feet of space is required with a minimum of two hours exposure. (c) Sodium-fluoroacetate ("1080") and "Warfarin" The employment of "1080" as a rodenticide has been regularly used throughout the docks for some time with highly satisfactory results. The prohibition on the use of "1080" and "1081" (Sodium Fluoroacetamide) except in ships and sewers, which was imposed in June 1965 was amended during the year to permit their use also in enclosed dock premises. A substantial number of ships have been deratted by "1080" in preference to the use of cyanide resulting in a considerable saving of time and cost to the ship owner. (d) Trapping. This method is seldom used except as an expedient to eliminate isolated rats and/or to secure specimens for the laboratory. (e) Methyl Bromide Methyl bromide is a gas at ordinary temperatures but can be liquefied by pressure, and it is in the liquid form in the cylinders in which it is usually distributed. The gas is heavier than air, consequently heavy concentrations are often found at floor level in the early stages of a treatment. However, the gas is not difficult to disperse after an operation. Apart from this density effect, the gas has greater powers of penetration than most other fumigants in common use and this applies not only to penetration into commodities but also through walls and sealing materials. A high standard of maintenance and sealing is necessary in rooms to be used for fumigations using methyl bromide. The penetration powers of methyl bromide, the absence of smell, the lack of immediate symptoms of poisoning and the long term effect of poisoning, make it essential that 20 adequate precautionary measures should be taken at all stages from the manufacture of the fumigant to the declaration of freedom from danger at the conclusion of operations. The precautionary measures and the additional precautions for the treatments of ships which are to be followed are laid down in a Home Office Pamphlet dated 1960. The fumigation of ships by methyl bromide, usually for disinsection purposes, occurs only occasionally in the Port of London. The exposure to the gas depends on the concentration and on the period and purpose of the exposure. For example in the case of a ship with completely empty holds, 12 ozs of liquid per 1,000 cu. ft. for 12 hours would eradicate a rodent infestation in the holds, whereas a minimum concentration of 32 ozs per 1,000 cu. ft. for 24 hours would be required in the case of Khapra beetle infestation. The following are the names of the firms approved for carrying out the deratting of ships:— Contra-Pest Service Ltd. Rentokil Laboratories Ltd. (iv) Progress in Rat Proofing of Ships Lloyds Register of Shipping Statistical Tables 1970, show the ocean fleets of the World to be comparatively new, that is 57% (per cent) are less than 10 years old. The introduction of rat proofing measures in ships first adopted by the Maritime nations some twenty years ago has become standard practice over the years and rat proofing of the vulnerable parts of the ship, for example the provision store room, is now almost always present. When the rat proofing is found to be defective, usually through non-replacement after refit, every endeavour is made to have it made good before the vessel sails. Rodent control measures on lighters have been carried out successfully during the past year. Of the 2,649 lighters inspected for rodent indications, 1,525 were inspected on the Upper and Middle River Districts, the remaining 1,124 inspections being carried out in the respective dock groups. It will be observed that there has been a decrease in the number of inspections carried out on the Upper and Middle River Districts, this was due to the fact that as a result of the sale of the "Frederick Whittingham" in November 1969 the Technical Assistant now shares the m.v. "Alfred Roach" with the Port Health Inspector and the time spent on lighter inspections is therefore curtailed. It will be noted by referring to the attached table that the degree of infestation is still decreasing. There were 81 lighters deratted last year with an average of 2.9 rats recovered per lighter treated which is the lowest figure on record. Importance of Rodent Control on Lighters — no change. Economic Burden — no change. Rat Suppresive Measures Fumigation, poisoning and trapping — no change. Cleanliness and hygiene — no change. Harbourage and rat-proofing — no change. The methods of deratting employed throughout the year were:- The method of treatment is determined by the condition and degree of infestation of the lighter at the time of inspection. In view of the fact that in nearly all instances there is a residue of water and foodstuffs in lighters when empty, it has been found from past experience that if treatment is required, it is far more efficient to fumigate the lighter than to use a rodenticide. During the year, eleven of the rats recovered from treated lighters were sent to the Public Health Laboratory, County Hall for routine bacteriological examination and on each occasion Pasteurella pestis was not isolated. RODENT CONTROL MEASURES CARRIED OUT ON LIGHTERS Fumigants 1. Sulphur Dioxide 2. Methyl Bromide Rodenticid.es Sodium mono-fluoroacetate Multiple dose poisons. 21 Throughout the year, 352 lighters were fumigated with Methyl Bromide for insect control of the commodity and, as the dosage required varies from twenty to thirty ounces per 1,000 cubic feet according to the species of insect pest present, the chemical properties of this fumigant and the twenty-four hour exposure period required for Methyl Bromide is more than adequate to destroy any rats that may be present in the lighter at the time of the fumigation. The reason for the reduction in the number of lighters fumigated for the commodity within the port is due to the containerisation of some commodities especially dried fruits which are now fumigated in the container in the country of origin prior to loading aboard the ship. Although there has been a further reduction in the number of Thames lighters trading within the port, great strides have, however, been made by the lighterage industry in recent years to increase the unit capacity of their fleets, in order to serve customers more efficiently. Lighters have been lengthened to accommodate 16 containers at a time, and the latest development of a car catamaran barge, capable of the speedy movement of 57 motor cars from factory to export vessel, are all examples of changes which are designed to compete efficiently and economically with land transport. The lighterage service in the Port of London is still very much an integral part of the life of the Port and carries nearly seven million tons of cargo per annum. The number of dumb lighters trading within the Port of London Health Authority's jurisdiction is as follows:- Open Craft 1,264 Hatched Craft 1,191 Insulated Craft 125 Refrigerated Craft 5 Tank Craft 200 Grating Craft 20 Contractors Craft 57 Pontoon Craft 44 Punt 14 Canal Craft 209 Bow Section 1 Catamaran 1 TOTAL 3,131 INTERMODAL WATER BORNE TRANSPORTATION SYSTEM Lash Lighters During the course of the year 306 lash lighters were transported by the two "mother" ships from the United States of America to the Thames Estuary and then towed to various terminal wharves within the port. In view of the fact that lash lighters trade between various places on the inland waterway systems in the United States of America and Europe, it is important that there must be a system of control regarding rodent infestation. Of the 306 lash lighters that discharged in the port during the year 1970, 127 were inspected equivalent to a 41.5% inspection and on each occasion there was no evidence of rodents. These lighters are constructed of steel, including the ceiling. The hold is completely clear of any obstruction with no pillars, webs, frames or stringers and apart from any cargo that may be in the hold, there is no harbourage for rats to live in and breed. As in the past, every assistance has been received from the lighterage industry in the efforts to reduce rats to a minimum in lighters. 22 SUMMARY Number of Lighters inspected 2,649 Number of Lighters without any evidence of rat infestation 2,404 Number of Lighters with negligible fresh or old evidence, No action taken 164 Number of Lighters treated for rats 81 Number of dead rats recovered after treatment 238 Number of rats sent for bacteriological examination P/pestis. All results were negative. 11 TABLE SHOWING FIGURES AND STATISTICS FOR THE PAST TEN YEARS Year No., of Lighters Inspected % of Lighters without any Evidence % of Lighters with negligible fresh or old Evidence No Action Taken % of Lighters Treated for Rats — No. of Dead Rats recovered after Treatment Average No, of Rats recovered per Lighter Treated 1961 6366 84.9% 13.5% 1.6% 848 8.1 1962 3793 86.8% 11.7% 1.5% 483 8.5 1963 5408 89.0% 9.4% 1.6% 732 8.4 1964 2062 91.7% 6.0% 2.3% 195 4.0 1965 4565 79.0% 19.5% 1.5% 377 5.4 1966 3294 90.1% 8.5% 1.4% 172 3.7 1967 3153 92.1% 6.1% 1.8% 277 4.9 1968 3487 92.2% 6.0% 1.8% 248 3.9 1969 2686 91.3% 5.5% 3.2% 263 3.1 1970 2649 90.7% 6.2% 3.1% 238 2.9 Average 1961-1970 3746 88.0% 10.2% 1.8% 3833 5.3 TABLE E Rodents destroyed (bodies recovered) during the year in ships and in shore premises. (1) On Vessels Number of. Jan Feb. Mar. April May June July Aug. Sept. Oct. Nov. Dec. Total Black Rats 27 68 43 37 59 13 11 17 26 18 13 13 345 Brown Rats — — — — — — — — — — -3 1 4 Rats Examined 4 8 3 4 2 1 2 1 — 2 2 7 36 Rats infected with Plague - - - - - - - - - - - - - (2) In Docks, Quays, Wharves and Warehouses Number of Jan. Feb. Mar. April May June July Aug. Sept. Oct. Nov. Dec. Total Black Rats 12 12 6 6 14 23 27 14 12 19 41 15 201 Brown Rats 29 32 26 70 47 24 32 17 25 36 61 10 409 Rats Examined — 2 — — 1 — 2 — — — — — 5 Rats Infected with Plague - - - - - - - - - - - - - 1182 Mice were also destroyed, 41 in vessels and 1141 in shore premises. 23 TABLE F Deratting Certificates and Derailing Exemption Certificates Issued during the Year for Ships from Foreign Ports. NO. OF DERATTING CERTIFICATES ISSUED Number of Deratting Exemption Certificates Issued Total Certificates Issued After Fumigation with After Trapping After Poisoning with "1080" Total HCN Other Fumigants L 2, 3. 4. 5. 6, 7. Nil 2 1 7 10 809 819 RETURN OF RATS CAUGHT AND DESTROYED DURING YEAR 1970 Jan. Feb. Mar. Apr. May June July Aug. Sept. Oct. Nov. Dec. Total SURREY COMMERCIAL DOCK - Warehouses — — — — — 1 — — 1 — — — 2 Vessels — - 1 - - - - 1 — - 5 3 10 REGENTS CANAL DOCK - Warehouses 1 - - - 7 - - - - - - - 8 Vessels - - - - - - - - - - - - - WEST INDIA DOCK - Warehouses 2 1 4 8 13 4 20 10 7 11 36 2 118 Vessels 1 50 - - 9 - - - - - - 2 62 MILLWALL DOCK- Warehouses 7 3 1 21 13 - 1 1 3 3 2 1 56 Vessels 1 - - - - - 3 - - - - 4 ROYAL VICTORIA DOCK - Warehouses 19 16 10 43 24 15 18 16 22 20 22 8 233 Vessels - - - - - - - - - - - - - ROYAL ALBERT DOCK - Warehouses 10 10 2 4 - 7 9 1 3 6 5 2 59 Vessels - 2 - - - 5 - - - - - - 7 KING GEORGE V DOCK - Warehouses 2 1 - - 4 1 1 3 - - - - 12 Vessels - - - - - - - - - - - - - TILBURY DOCK - Warehouses - 13 15 - - 19 10 - 1 12 37 12 119 Vessels 22 3 33 - 3 2 2 - - 6 3 3 77 MIDDLE RIVER - Warehouses - - - - - - - - - 3 - - 3 Vessels 3 13 9 37 47 6 6 16 26 12 8 6 189 TOTAL 68 112 75 113 120 60 70 48 63 73 118 39 959 24 PREVENTION OF DAMAGE BY PESTS (APPLICATION TO SHIPPING) ORDER 1951-56 During the year 34 Rodent Control Certificates were issued to coastwise ships as provided for the terms of the Prevention of Damage by Pests (Application to Shipping) Order 1951-56. SECTION Xlll INSPECTION OF SHIPS FOR NUISANCES TABLE G Inspection and Notices Number of vessels visited by Port Health Inspectors 12587 Number of vessels on which sanitary defects were found, and details reported to the Master, Owners and/or Board of Trade 223 Number of Statutory Notices served - Number of Informal Notices served 25 Number of vessels on which sanitary defects were remedied 223 Summary of Structural and other Defects Nature of Inspection No, of Defects Inadequate Ventilation 2 Defective Lighting — Natural - — Artificial - Defective or Insufficient Heating 1 Dampness — Condensation 2 — Leaking Decks 1 — Leaking Ports, Decklights etc. 1 — Leaking Sideplates - — Leaking Hawse or Chain Pipes 1 — Defective or Obstructed Floor Drainage 7 — Water lodging on top of Peak Tanks 3 Defective — Bulkheads 8 — Floors 23 — Doors 2 — Chain pipes - — Bunks - — Clothes Lockers - — Food Lockers 13 — Food Storage 18 — Cooking Arrangements 25 Defective or Uncleanly Drinking Water Storage 3 Water Closets — Obsolete - — Defective 26 — Foul or choked 18 — Inadequate Flush 5 Wash Basins — Defective 16 — Foul 7 Neglected Paintwork or Distemper 27 Absence of Washrooms - of Messrooms - Misappropriation of Crew Spaces 2 Verminous Quarters 156 Miscellaneous 78 TOTAL 445 25 General Summary Analysis of the Sanitary Inspections etc. in the Port of London for the year ended 31st December, 1970:- Type of Vessel/Premises Inspected Defective To be cleaned Foreign Going: Steam 11,459 191 150 Sail - - - Coastwise: Steam 1,126 13 2 Sail 2 - - 12,587 204 152 Inland Navigation: Steam 206 7 1 Sail - - - Lighters 405 59 89 Canal Boats: - - - Shore Premises: 9,544 196 111 10,155 262 201 TOTAL 22,742 466 353 Areas where Foreign Going and Coastwise vessels were inspected. Dock and River No. of Inspections No. of Vessels inspected in Launches Surrey and Regents Canal Dock 710 "Victor Allcard" "Humphrey Morris" Lower River 921 India Dock (ioup 1,762 Royal Dock Group 1,622 Tilbury Dock 3,024 "Alfred Roach" Upper and Middle River 2,759 Upper River 1,187 Middle River 1,572 Lower River 921 No. of Vessels inspected in Medway 1,046 Docks etc. 8,907 Thameshaven 743 TOTAL 12,587 12,587 Countries of Origin of Foreign Going and Coastwise vessels inspected. No. of Inspections No. of Inspections Argentina 9 Brought Forward 8,267 Australia 6 Kuwait 26 Bahamas 2 Lebanon 2 Belgium 114 Liberia 340 Bermuda 5 Malaysia 4 Brazil 12 Malta 1 Bulgaria 16 Mauritius 7 Burma 4 Mexico 2 Canada 1 Morocco 3 Chile 1 Netherlands 1,450 China 16 Nigeria 24 Cuba 10 Pakistan 66 Curacao 4 Panama 86 Cyprus 76 Persia 1 Denmark 360 Peru 1 Eire 3 Poland 164 Ethiopia 12 Portugal 48 Finland 269 Rumania 56 France 127 Singapore 28 Germany 2,181 Somalia 6 Ghana 48 Spain 195 Great Britain 4,247 South Africa 32 Greece 374 Sudan 10 Honduras 1 Sweden and Norway 1,356 Hongkong 2 Switzerland 6 Iceland 4 Tanzania 4 India 194 The Phillipines 5 Iraq 8 Turkey 34 Israel 41 United Arab Republic 10 Italy 65 United States of America 51 Japan 48 U.S.S.R. 254 Kenya 3 Yugoslavia 48 Korea 4 Carried forward 8267 Total 12,587 During 1970 Port Health Inspectors referred 20 sick seamen to Hospital. 26 SECTION XIV PUBLIC HEALTH (SHELLFISH) REGULATIONS 1934 AND 1948 The Medway (Shellfish) Regulations 1935, which came into operation on the 1st February 1936, cover all shellfish layings on or near the banks and creeks of the Rivers Medway and Swale from the seaward limit Garrison Point to Grain and the north western limit of the Faversham Port Health Authority. The Regulations are enforced by the Port of London Health Authority and the Rochester Port Health Authority in their respective Districts. Two Orders under the Public Health (Shellfish) Regulations 1934 and 1948 have been made. The first Order, which came into operation on the 1st June, 1936 covers the public and private layings on the foreshores or waters, creeks and sands immediately bordering on that part of the Estuary of the River Thames between Canvey Island and Shoeburyness. The second Order, which came into operation on the 2nd September 1957, covers the public and private layings on the foreshores or waters immediately bordering on that part of the Estuary of the River Thames between Garrison Point and Warden Point. For some time the Authority has been concerned that they have no control over certain parts of the District where shellfish layings are known to exist. Accordingly, investigations were made in that part of the Port Health District which includes the River Roach and its tributaries and certain parts of the estuary of the River Thames and indications were found of pollution of the River Roach (due largely to a fifteen to twenty per cent increase in the local population in the last five years). "Unfit for bathing" notices have been erected by Rochford R.D.C. at twelve access points to the River Roach on the advice of their Medical Officer of Health. It is now considered that the River Roach and such tributaries as fall within the jurisdiction of the Port Health Authority and certain areas of the River Thames which are not covered by the existing Orders and Regulations should be treated in a like manner. A bacteriological sampling survey of water and shellfish is to be undertaken in the Spring of 1971 in these areas in collaboration with the Ministry of Agriculture Fisheries and Food, Fisheries Research Laboratory at Burnham on Crouch. Oyster Industry This continued within the Authority's jurisdiction in the waters of the River Roach, Barling Creek, Pagglesham Pool and the Middleway which forms part of the Havengore Creek, all in the County of Essex. The various layings are worked by four companies and in addition the Fisheries Laboratory of the Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries & Food at Burnham on Crouch has an interest in various layings in the area, for research purposes. There were no applications for "Certificates of Purity" for export purposes. Cockle Industry There were no problems associated with the cockle industry at Leigh-on-Sea. The eight approved establishments continue to operate and visits were made from time to time to ensure that the requirements of the 1936 Shellfish Order were being complied with. The experimental suction type dredge used for gathering cockles has proved to be so successful that it is now used by all of the firms engaged in this trade. There were no reports during the year, of sickness attributable to the consumption of cockles sterilised in the Leigh sheds. Mussels There was no request by the Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries & Food during the year to sample mussels for research purposes. SECTION XV MEDICAL INSPECTION OF ALIENS AND COMMONWEALTH IMMIGRANTS 1. List of Medical Inspectors holding warrants of appointment at the 31st December, 1970:- Dr. W.G. Swann, Dr. D.T. Jones, Dr. W. Stott, Dr. A.E.L. de Thierry Dr. W.T. Rougier Chapman, Dr. G.W. Aston, Dr. R.F. Armstrong, Dr. R.G.S. Whitfield, Dr. R. Tilley, Dr. R.M. Best, Dr. W.T.G. Boul, Dr. D.J. Avery, Dr. D. Keys, Dr. P.J.R. Walters. 27 2. List of other staff engaged on the work:Clerical staff at the central office. 3. Organisation of the work:- Aliens and Commonwealth Immigrants are examined by one of the above panel of doctors, at the request of an Immigration Officer. The majority of ships carrying immigrants are dealt with by the Boarding Medical Officer but a part-time Medical Inspector may be called in to deal with a particular ship. 4. Alien Arrivals (a) Total number of arriving ships carrying aliens 1,885 (b) Total number of aliens — (i) arriving at the port 36,360 (ii) medically examined 307 (c) Certificates issued 2 Commonwealth Immigrant Arrivals (a) Commonwealth citizens subject to control 2,023 (b) Commonwealth citizens examined 11 (c) Certificates issued NIL 5. Medical examination of aliens and Commonwealth immigrants is carried out on board ship. SECTION XVI MISCELLANEOUS Arrangements for the burial on shore of persons who have died on board ship from infectious disease. The body of any person dying on board ship, or in Denton Hospital, from infectious disease would normally be removed from the ship or Denton Hospital for burial by a Private Undertaker acting on the instructions of the shipping company or the next-of-kin, the local police being kept informed. In the event of the death being one of smallpox, special instructions as to precautions to be taken would be given to the undertaker by the Port Health Authority. THE CLEAN AIR ACTS 1956 AND 1968 THE DARK SMOKE (PERMITTED PERIODS) (VESSELS) REGULATIONS 1958 It has been found that formal smoke observations are very time consuming and often in the end do not necessarily establish evidence that an apparent contravention of the Regulations has been committed. It is the policy, therefore, of the Authority to seek the co-operation of shipmasters to maintain so far as possible a smoke free Port. To this end port health inspectors immediately notify the master of any ship which starts to make smoke of such density as to be likely to contravene the Regulations, so as to terminate the emission. In this connection one hundred and forty seven verbal notifications were given. However, during the year it was found necessary to carry out one hundred smoke observations and in eighty eight cases there was a minor infringement of the permitted periods. There were seventy one inspections of plant and equipment with a further twenty six revisits to ensure that defects had been rectified. Five notices were served on the masters of foreign owned vessels and a copy of the notice was sent to the country's Consulate. The reasons for these contraventions were fully investigated and in view of the explanations received, no legal action was taken. Warning letters were, however, sent to each owner. Similar action was taken in the case of the master and owner of a port tug. From time to time during the year dark smoke was emitted at a ship-breaking yard on the River, as a result of burning oil sludge and timber on board a ship or barge being broken up. Dark smoke emissions from industrial or trade premises are a contravention of the Clean Air Act 1968. The matter was taken up with the ship breakers and as a result tank cleaning equipment was later installed at the yard in order to prevent or minimise the emission of dark smoke and in addition the hazard of fire on board. 28 THE TRANSPORT OF REFUSE BY LIGHTERS Regular inspections of all lighters employed in this trade and routine visits to the loading wharves were maintained during the year. Early in the year one of the loading wharves was closed down by the Greater London Council, leaving a total of seven, together with two enclosed loading docks still in operation at the end of the year. Further work on the modernisation of one of the loading wharves continued during the year. The construction of the new refuse transfer station at Cringle Street, Battersea, commenced in the early part of the year. Spillage of refuse into the river still remains a problem, although with the gradual closure of the older wharves in the last few years, the amount of spillage has diminished. Proceedings were instituted against one of the refuse lighter companies on one occasion during the year, for contravention of the Authority's Refuse Byelaws. HOUSEBOATS The old houseboat moorings at Benfleet Creek (West), which have supported a houseboat population for many years, were totally cleared of craft during the year. Benfleet Urban District Council's refuse tip now occupies the site originally used. One unauthorised mooring of a houseboat at Ferry Road referred to in last year's report, can be discounted as the craft is no longer used by its owner for sleeping, but only during the day as a workshop. An application was received from Canvey Island Urban District Council .requesting our assent to a "consent to moor" the Benfleet Yacht Club clubhouse boat in Benfleet Creek East, following its reconstruction. The craft was inspected early in November and consent was agreed for the period ending 31st December, 1971. Upper River Areas. There are 133 houseboats moored in the Upper Reaches of the River between London Bridge and Teddington. This is a decrease of nine on the previous year. DANGEROUS DRUGS During the year eleven certificates authorising the purchase of scheduled Dangerous Drugs were issued under the Dangerous Drugs (No. 2) Regulations, 1964, Regulation 13 (2) of which is as follows (a) The master of a foreign ship which is in a port in Great Britain shall be authorised to procure such quantity of drugs and preparations as may be certified by the medical officer of health of the port health authority within whose jurisidiction the ship is or, in his absence by the assistant medical officer of health, to be necessary for the equipment of the ship until it reaches its home port. (b) A person who supplies a drug or preparation in accordance with a certificate given under this paragraph shall retain the certificate and mark it with the date on which the drug or preparation was supplied and keep it on his premises so as to be at all times available for inspection. THE FOOD HYGIENE (GENERAL) REGULATIONS 1960/62 The Board of Trade survey of the River Thames passenger carrying launches is carried out during the early part of the year. The renewal of fittings, together with all necessary repairs, cleaning and repainting is attended to at the same time. The fresh water storage tanks are also cleaned and together with the distribution system, chlorinated prior to use. There are now operating within the Authority's district, seven floating restaurants and thirty-one launches, to which these Regulations apply, Regular inspections of all these were carried out during the year. The high standard of food hygiene on these craft has been maintained. 54 water samples were drawn from the launches and their watering points during the year. Adverse results were obtained on 11 occasions. In each case the sources of contamination was traced and eliminated. 29 A total of 224 inspections under these Regulations were carried out during the year. Minor infringements were corrected at the time of inspection and it was not found necessary to institute any legal proceedings. TILBURY GRAIN TERMINAL The year 1970 saw the first full year of operation on the Tilbury Grain Terminal together with full production by the three associated Flour Mills — Sunblest, Co-op and Hudson Ward & Sons. In 1970 the sources of imported grains (wheat, barley, maize and soya bean) were the United States, Canada, Brazil, Australia and Eastern Europe, also a small amount of home grown grain was received through the Terminal. The number of vessels arriving with imported grain during the year was 65; this accounted for a total tonnage imported of 1,473,728 tons. Distribution of imported grain from the Terminal was by the following outlets: coastal vessels, lighters, road transport, rail transport and direct to the associated Mills. During the year the Grain Terminal has required constant attention by the Authority's Technical Staff, virtually requiring a daily visit to keep rodent activity to a minimum. For the year the following number of bodies were recovered:- Trapped Poisoned Black Rat 33 14 Brown Rat 17 3 Mice 123 43 Due to the nature of the premises it has been necessary to use several methods of control using multi-dose anti-coagulant rodenticides, '1080' and trapping, all of which have been successful in part. The use of multi-dose poisons has been the least successful due to the amount of grain that is available for natural feeding. It has been found that although rather time consuming, trapping has produced very good and positive results. With regard to the use of '1080', two operations were carried out on a limited scale, and these produced a total of 14 Black Rats recovered. Owing to the working arrangements of the Terminal, the availability of the premises to carry out '1080' operations without interfering with production is limited. Toward the end of last year the Port of London Authority purchased "Nandel" Sonic Vermin Scarers and installed these in the false ceilings of the office accommodation where there is a persistent mouse problem. Insufficient time has elapsed since installation to assess the efficacy or otherwise of the device, but the experiment is being kept under close observation. Rodent control in the three flour Mills has been undertaken on a contract basis by a servicing company who make regular visits every six weeks, but attend more frequently if required. The Technical Assistants are keeping a close watch on these premises in conjunction with the Grain Terminal. Further '1080' operations will be carried out during 1971 as and when necessary. It is anticipated that the Bank Holiday periods would be ideal times for these, as the Terminal will close for the extended weekends, thus allowing for an adequate exposure period. DISEASES OF ANIMALS ACT 1950 & ASSOCIATED ACTS Mr. G.S. Wiggins, M.R.C.V.S. Veterinary Officer for the City of London, has submitted the following report:- Under the terms of the London Government Act 1963, the Corporation of London is the authority for the administration of the Diseases of Animals Act 1950, in respect of the importation of animals, for the whole of Greater London. Quarantine Facilities at Heathrow Airport In the annual report for the year 1969, it was stated that the Port and City of London Health Committee had agreed in principle to the Corporation of London setting up proper facilities for handling imported animals at Heathrow Airport. In June the Chairman of the Port and City of London Health Committee presided at a meeting at Guildhall at which all interested organisations were represented. A sub-committee was formed 30 to determine such things as; the precise responsibilities of the Corporation and British Airports Authority; space required for the project and space and sites available and financial arrangements. A number of meetings were held by the sub-committee and a visit was made by your Chairman and Veterinary Officer to Amsterdam to view the facilities at Schipol Airport. The visit gave great insight as to the handling of animals abroad and was particularly helpful with regard to financial arrangements, but on the whole the facilities were quite unsuitable for the problem at Heathrow. Certain conclusions were reached by the sub-committee with regard to size, positioning and staffing of the hostel and financial arrangements. Recommendations will be made at a meeting to be held in the near future when all interested organisations will once again be represented. Work carried out under the various Orders concerning imported animals included the following:- Discases of Animals Act — Importations Once again there were numerous cases of dogs and cats being landed illegally at Heathrow Airport. Many visits were made in connection with these and arrangements were made for 160 animals to be placed in quarantine. There were five instances of animals arriving dead at the airport. The animals included a Pekingese and dachshund dog, five leopard cats and five monkeys. Post mortem examinations were carried out and the carcases properly disposed of. Reports were submitted to the airlines concerned. In February, information was received that a person had been bitten by a dog in Prague. The dog had since been imported and placed into quarantine. Health reports, showing that the dog had remained healthy, were transmitted to Prague. Two further incidents of biting occurred in November and December. In November an assistant at the R.S.P.C.A. Hostel was bitten by a dog which was in transit at the Airport and in December a dog broke out of its box and bit two handlers. In both cases the dogs were detained for 14 days and, having remained healthy, were allowed to continue their journeys. The Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food and Medical Officer of Health, Hillingdon, were informed in each case. Importation ol Dogs and Cats Orders 1928 to 1970 In March, it was reported that a dog had been brought into this country contrary to the terms of the above Orders.The animal had been imported through Dover and brought to Farnborough in the London Borough of Bromley. Investigations were carried out concerning possible contacts. The dog was re-exported. Also in March, a dog which had been imported from Dusseldorf escaped at Heathrow and was free for several days before being re-captured. The dog was removed to a quarantine kennel to which it was originally consigned. Several cases occurred which resulted in animals having to be destroyed. In March a cat was landed illegally at Heathrow. The owner did not want it placed into quarantine and asked for it to be destroyed. In May a dog, suspected to be imported, was found in the river Thames. The animal was taken to Battersea Dogs Home and as the owner could not be traced, it was destroyed. A dog was also found in the river in September. It was placed on the vessel from which it had escaped but a few days later it followed a person from the vessel. Again it was taken to Battersea Dogs Home and, at the owners request, was destroyed. Also in September a dog was landed illegally at Heathrow. The owner stated that she did not want to keep the dog and wished it to be destroyed and this was carried out. A report was received in December that a dog had been illegally landed at Heathrow. Attempts were made to place the animal into quarantine or have it re-exported but this was unsuccessful and the animal was therefore destroyed. There were two cases of illegally landed animals which resulted in owners being prosecuted and fined. In April, information was received from the Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food that a dog at an address in Belvedere was suspected of having rabies. The premises were visited and it was ascertained that the dog had been taken to France for one week in October 1969. Restrictions were served and the dog removed to quarantine where it was later destroyed. In June a person was observed by a Police Officer attempting to smuggle a kitten into this country at Heathrow Airport. A statement was taken from the person and the police officer and again the animal was destroyed. In both cases proceedings were instituted. Both defendants pleaded guilty and were fined £20 with £15 costs and £80 with £15 costs respectively. 31 Enquiries were carried out in July concerning a dog which had been brought into this country illegally. The owner was staying in an hotel in London where she was keeping the dog, but despite the assistance of the Police, attempts to contact her proved unsuccessful and she returned home to America. The owners address in America was eventually obtained and a letter was sent to the American Authorities requesting a health report on the dog. This was received and showed the dog had remained healthy. A yacht which had berthed at Tunnel Pier, Wapping, with several dogs on board during 1968 and 1969, returned once again this year and was visited in November. The dogs, as on the previous occasions, were kept on a lower deck from which there was no possibility of escape. The terms of the above Order were explained to the Captain of the vessel. Animals (Sea Transport) Order 1930 — Horses (Sea Transport) Order 1952 These Orders contain regulations designed to prevent unnecessary suffering and for the protection of animals, To ensure that the terms and conditions of the Orders were complied with, numerous visits were made to docks in connection with the exportation of animals to various countries. The animals comprised 9 bulls, 8 heifers, 16 pigs and one pony and were exported to South Africa, Portugal, Malta and Finland. All were exported for breeding purposes. Export Certificates 84 certificates of health were issued to ten firms enabling them to export such varied commodities as pheasants, horsemeat, hog casings, ducks feet, dog biscuits, wood pigeon, beef striploins, hares-, mallard, ducks liver, sheep carcases, chickens, ducks, poussin, ostrich feathers, grouse and woodcock. A health certificate was also issued for a toy poodle dogwhich was being exported to Zambia. Exotic Animals (Importation) Order 1969 This Order imposes a prohibition on exotic animals (prescribed in the Order) and required such animals brought to Great Britain in contravention of the Order (with exceptions) to be slaughtered. In preference to slaughter, homes were found for such animals and in one case great difficulty was experienced in finding a home for an African Colobus Monkey, but eventually it was accepted by a breeding establishment in Jersey. Rabies Order 1938 A Committee of Inquiry was set up by the Minister of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food following two cases of rabies which occurred at Camberley and Newmarket and, at their request, several suggestions were made to the Committee concerning security of imported animals and those kept on vessels in the Port of London. There were several cases of suspected rabies requiring the action of Corporation Officers. In May an imported monkey at an address in Islington died and was suspected of having rabies. Two cases occurred in June; one concerning a dog in N.W.I, and the other a cat and a rabbit at an address in Brixton. There was also the unfortunate case when a baby was mauled by an alsatian dog. The animal was not in fact suspected of having rabies but precautions were taken nevertheless. In each of these cases tests were carried out and all proved negative for rabies. Restriction notices were served on contact animals and these were withdrawn following the results of the tests. Diseases of Animals (Therapeutic Substances) Order 1952 Under the terms of this Order, the importation of therapeutic substances which are defined therein, is prohibited except under the authority of a licence. In October information was received that some rabies vaccine had been imported contrary to the terms of the Order and arrangements were made for the vaccine to be collected and destroyed. It was not possible to ascertain the identity of the importer. Acts and Orders 1970 The following Orders, affecting the work of the department, came into operation during the year. Export of Horses (Excepted Cases) Order 1969 Export of Horses (Protection) Order 1969 These Orders, which came into operation on 1st January, contain regulations for veterinary examination of certain horses intended for export. Amongst other things there is a requirement that horses should be rested at approved premises for at least 10 hours before loading on to a vessel or aircraft in which they are to be exported. 32 Importation of Dogs and Cats (Amendment) No. 1 Order 1970 Importation of Dogs and Cats (Amendment) No. 2 Order 1970 Importation of Dogs and Cats (Amendment) No. 3 Order 1970 These three Orders were issued as a result of the outbreak of rabies in Camberley. The first Order extended the quarantine period for dogs and cats to twelve months. The second imposed a total ban on the importation of such animals. The third removed the total ban, reduced the quarantine period to nine months for animals already in quarantine and, from 16th September permitted the import of dogs and cats subject to 6 months quarantine and vaccination. The Orders came into operation on the 12th March, 21st March and 1st September respectively. FOOD INSPECTION 1970 The total amount of foodstuffs detained for examination and either condemned as unfit for human consumption and destroyed or otherwise disposed of under guarantee and supervision was 1279 tons 18 cwts. 3 qrs. 2 lbs. The following is a summary showing methods of disposal:- Weight 1970. Comparable Weight 1969. Tons. Cwts. Qrs. Lbs. Tons. Cwts. Qrs. Lbs. Burnt 75 10 1 20 51 9 2 8 Buried 417 14 1 0 496 13 1 7 Contractor 135 13 3 1 17 13 1 20 *Other Districts 529 9 3 27 155 8 2 11 *Animal Feeding 46 0 1 27 1,214 0 2 4 Re-exported 75 9 3 11 158 19 0 11 1,279 18 3 2 2,094 4 2 5 Items marked * were released with the agreement of and under the supervision of local Medical Officers of Health. Of the above mentioned 1279 tons, the principal methods of disposal with weights, were as follows Burnt Tons. Cwts. 1,744 Tins and 87 Cartons of fuit, meat, vegetables, pulps and juices, burst, blown, leaking and broken. 4 12 41 Cartons dried fruit — wasty, wet damaged. 10 3,036 Baskets Tomatoes — smashed and broken 21 6 158 Boxes Cucumbers — wasty, smashed, and broken 19 32 Bags, 809 boxes, and quantity of onions — rotten and wasty. 71 6 Bags Chillies — dock water damaged. 3 40 Bags Michigan Peas — extraneous contamination 10 3 Bags Wheat Gluten — vermin infested. 3 34 Bags Chestnuts — wasty. 7 604 Crates and quantity Fruit — wasty, wet damaged 24 12 38 Boxes, 76 Cartons, 7 Pallets and quantity of Apples dock water damaged and oil contaiminated 84 9 Cases Dried Apples — wet and rodent damaged. 2 40 Bags Copra — unwholesome. 1 0 1 Bag Dhal meal — rodent damaged. 1 15 Cartons Macaroni — wet and rodent damaged 1 1 Drum Honey — contaminated. 3 1 Cask Ginger in Syrup — contaminated by extraneous matter. 1 6 Bags Rice — rodent damaged. 6 2 Bags Desiccated Coconut — sweepings. 1 16 Cheeses — mineral sand contaminated. 4 19 Cartons and 1 crate Smoked bacon and ham — mouldy and decomposed. 1 4 2 Bales Ham — unsound and uncertificated. 2 12 Cases Gull Eggs — rotten. 3 38 Chests and 3 bags Tea — dock water damaged. 1 18 3 Barrels Herring Fillets - contaminated by extraneous matter. 2 5 Cartons Sweets — rain water damaged. 1 33 Buried Tons Cwts. 18,434 Tins, 6,113 Cartons and 1,493 Jars of fruit, fish, meat, vegetables, pulps and juices — burst, blown, leaking, broken and containing excess lead and tin. 158 15 Quantity of Almond Kernels - Sweepings. 2 51 Bags Desiccated Coconut — dirty and rodent damaged. 2 5 30 Bags Groundnuts in Shell — wet, stained and mouldy. 7 40 Bags Areca Nuts — insect infested. 2 1 3 Bags Sago Seeds — vermin damaged. 3 26 Bags Rice — Sweepings. 1 4 450 Packets Spaghetti and Macaroni — vermin soiled stained and mouldy. 4 8 Bags Cocoa Beans — Sweepings. 5 159 Bags and 176 Cases Onions — wasty. 42 0 4 Drums Dried Onions — broken, dirty and vermin infested. 2 84 Bags Peas and Beans — oil stained and contaminated by extraneous matter. 3 4 70 Baskets tomatoes — smashed and broken. 10 22 Nets and 1,745 bags carrots — wasty. 22 1 70 Bags Potatoes — wasty and damaged. 1 15 2,639 Cartons Radishes — wasty. 13 5 4 Trays Cucumbers — wet damaged. 1 19 Bags Lentils — stained and contaminated 17 9 Cartons Pickled Cucumbers — crushed and broken. 4 664 Casks Pickles and Chutney — mouldy, deteriorating and contaminated by extraneous matter. 40 9 33 Cartons Lemons — wasty. 15 359 Cartons Oranges and Grapefruit — wasty, decomposed and mouldy. 5 1 441 Boxes Oranges — wasty. 9 0 744 Barrels Grapes — wasty. 10 12 26 Cartons Apples — wasty. 12 8 Barrels Apricot Pulp — contaminated with extraneous matter. 2 0 45 Cartons Solid Pack Apricots — burst and leaking 14 138 Boxes Dried Apricots — vermin damaged. 1 16 40 Cartons and 7 Bags Dehydrated Bananas — wet damaged. 10 18 Cartons Bananas — wasty. 4 5,054 Cartons Melons — wasty. 66 17 683 Cartons Plantains (fruit) — wasty. 9 8 154 Cartons Prunes — unwholesome, wet damaged, mouldy and fermenting. 1 16 31 Cartons Sultanas — dirty, damaged and infested 7 32 Cartons Currants — wet damaged and mouldy. 8 17 Cases and 4 Bags Figs — squashed, dirty and contaminated. 4 80 Cartons Vine Leaves — burst and leaking. 1 14 1 Cask Lime Skins — contaminated. 4 20 Cases Poppadums — contaminated by extraneous matter. 18 2 Barrels Lemon Juice — contaminated by extraneous matter and deteriorated. 8 2 Casks Orange Juice — deteriorated and dock water damaged. 6 1 Cask Lemon Juice — dock water damaged. 5 10 Cartons Cake Mix - contained prohibited emulsifier. 1 182 Chests of Tea - contaminated by oil, mouldy and dock water damaged. 8 7 10 Boxes Bombay Duck — insect infested. 7 2 Boxes Frozen Sheep Casings — defrosted and fly infested. 1 4 Cartons Frozen Prawns - dock water damaged. 1 8 Bags Green Gram (meal) — mouldy and rodent infested. 4 34 Buried (cont) Tons. Cwts. 40 Bags Powdered Corn Starch & Glucose — damaged and contaminated. 1 16 16 Bags Monosodium Glutamate - torn and damaged 7 Animal Feeding 154 Bags White Maize Flour — sweepings. 4 12 19 Bags Corn Kernels - oil stained and contaminated by extraneous matter. 9 20 Bags Lentils — vermin infested. 1 0 22 Bags Canneloni Beans — Rodent damaged 1 2 37 Bags White Bean Sweepings - dirty. 2 4 6 Drums Bone Fat — no official certificate. 1 1 20 Bags Groundnut Kernels — sweepings. 12 10 Bags Desiccated Coconut - sweepings. 8 138 Cartons and quantity of Sultanas — wet damaged, mouldy and oil stained. 34 9 Contractors Various quantities of meat and offal — unfit for human consumption. 135 13 Other Districts 612 Cartons Honeydew Melons — wasty. Released for sorting. 9 0 466 Cartons Apples — wet damaged. Released for sorting. 9 7 1,903 Boxes Grapes — wasty. Released for sorting 21 15 960 Cartons Sliced Peaches — crushed. Released for sorting. 16 1 495 Cartons Fruit Cocktail — blowing. Released for sorting. 7 19 62 Bundles Prunes — maggot infested. Fumigated and released for washing and re-processing 1 13 37 Cartons Char Magaz (dried fruit) — insect infested. Released for fumigation. 17 17 Cases Red Dates - dirty. Released for cleaning. 4 40 Bags Shelled Almonds — stained. Released for cleaning. 2 0 100 Bags Cumin Seeds — insect infested. Released for fumigation. 4 17 5 Bags Coriander Seeds — sweepings. Released for re-conditioning. 3 123 Cartons Potatoes — wet stained. Released for sorting. 16 2,261 Crates Vegetables — wasty. Released for sorting. 15 11 56 Bales Cinnamon Chips — wet and fire damaged. Released for reconditioning. 4 1 9,993 Cartons Tomato Paste — contained tin, some cans blown. Released for sorting. 291 12 3 Bags Coffee Beans — sweepings. Released for cleaning.1 179 Chests and 172 bags of Tea — wet damaged and oil stained. Released for sorting and reconditioning. 13 1 1,150 Cartons Sweets with Toys — contained prohibited colouring matter. Sweets released for destruction 20 19 7 Containers Cheddar Cheese — unwholesome. Released for sorting, and processing. 104 6 15 Cartons Butter — dock water and rodent damaged. Released for reconditioning. 7 10 Cartons Choice Grade Factory Butter — dock water damaged. Released for processing. 5 25 Cases Dried Fish - insect infested. Released for fumigation. 1 5 25 Cartons Boneless Beef — no official certificates. Released for sterilization and pet food manufacture. 12 35 Re-Exported Tons. Cwts. 100 Cases Karela — contained excess tin. 2 17 56 Cases and 50 Cartons Chutney — contained prohibited preservative and colouring matter 2 13 2 Cartons Preserved Ginger — contained prohibited colouring matter. 1 30 Cartons Preserved Mustard — contained prohibited preservative. 8 19 Cartons Pickled Radishes and Preserved Vegetables — contained prohibited preservative 4 7 Cases Bean Curd — contained excess arsenic 3 800 Cartons Bean Paste — contained prohibited preservative. 17 16 Cartons Dressing and 100 Cartons Red Kidney Beans — contained prohibited preservative 16 400 Cartons Bamboo Shoots — contained excess tin 4 5 50 Cartons Canned Vegetable with Sausage Meat — incorrect official certificates. 13 22 Cartons various Japenese Vegetables — contained prohibited preservative. 5 20 Packs Japenese Foods — contained prohibited preservative. 6 130 Cartons Tomato Paste — contained excess tin. 1 12 25 Cartons Dried Fruits — contained prohibited preservative. 3 5 Cases Brown Dates — insect infested. 2 2,916 Bags Groundnuts in Shell — aflatox in contaminated 33 19 112 Bags Desiccated Coconut — contained prohibited preservative. 5 0 20 Cases Sate Puree — contained prohibited preservative. 4 20 Cartons Horseradish — contained excess preservative. 17 665 Cartons Sweets — contained prohibited colouring matter. 10 16 210 Cartons Chocolate Topping — contained prohibited preservative. 9 20 Cartons Frosting Mix — contained prohibited preservative and emulsifier. 1 45 Cartons Cocktail Mix — contained prohibited preservative. 10 256 Cartons Canned Roast Beef — incorrect official certificates. 4 12 50 Cases Canned Silver Carp with Meat Filling — no official certificates. 14 8 Casks Casings — no official certificates. 2 4 30 Cases Pork Sausages — no official certificates 1 The following figures have been given by the Port of London Authority and acknowledgement is made for their help. The figures are in respect of the year 1970 and are tonnages.of foodstuffs landed on their quays and their tenants quays, and handled by them during the year. Tons. Meat, chilled and frozen 307,946 Dairy Produce 36,413 Fresh and froze fruit 174,996 Fresh and frozen vegetables 105,384 Dried Fruit and nuts 34,247 Canned and bottled foods 174,400 Grain and animal foodstuffs in bulk 1,790,618 Grain, flour, animal feeds tuffs and seed in bags 60,979 Tea 73,896 Other foodstuffs not included above 65,539 2,824,418 Taking the total weight of items in the first table as 1,279 tons, the amount dealt with expressed as a percentage of imports for the same period equals 0.045%. 36 FOOD SAMPLING Sampling - Public Analyst During the year 964 samples were sent to the Public Analyst as follows:- Sample Satisfactory Unsatisfactory Action Preserved Vegetables 1 3 Contained prohibited preservative. Re-exported. Preserved Radish 3 1 Contained prohibited preservative. Re-export notice served. Preserved Turnip 2 1 Contained prohibited pre servati ve. Re -ex ported. Preserved Mustard 1 3 Contained prohibited preservative. 3 Re-exported. 1 Inadequately labelled. Letter to merchant and local M.O.H. Preserve (Indian) 2 0 Preserved Lemons 0 1 Contained prohibited colouring matter. Re-exported. Preserved Ginger 0 1 Contained prohibited colouring matter. Re-exported. Pickled Vegetables (Various) 14 16 Contained prohibited preservative. Re-exported. Pickled Fungus (Nametake Chazuke) 1 0 Pickled Egg Plant 0 1 Contained prohibited preservative and colouring matter. Re-exported. Pickled Ginger 4 0 1 Inadequately labelled. Letter to merchant and local M.O.H. Pickled Melon 1 0 Pickled Plum 0 1 Excess Salt. Re-exported. Beans (Various) 11 0 2 Inadequately labelled. Letter to merchant and local M.O.H. Vegetables Dehydrated and Canned (Various) 28 1 1 Contained prohibited preservative. Re-exported. 2 Inadequately labelled. Letter to merchant and local M.O.H. Seaweed 2 0 1 Inadequately labelled. Letter to merchant and local M.O.H. Bamboo Shoots 0 1 Contained excess tin. Re-exported. Pickles and Chutney 25 2 1 Contained prohibited preservative. Re-exported. 9 Inadequately labelled. Letter to merchant and local M.O.H. 1 Contained prohibited colouring matter. Re-exported Karela (Pickles) 4 9 Contained excess tin. 7 Destroyed. 2 Re-exported. Peppers 2 0 Soup Powder 5 0 3 Inadequately labelled. Letter to merchant and local M.O.H. Dehydrated Apple Powder 1 0 Dumpling Mix 1 0 Mustard Bran 1 0 Spice P owder 8 0 2 Inadequately labelled. Letter to merchant and local M.O.H. 37 Sample Satisfactory Unsatisfactory Action Chilli Powder 8 4 2 Contained salt. 1 Contained salt and prohibited colouring matter. Letter to merchant and local M.O.H. 1 Contained prohibited colouring matter. Released trade sample. Curry Powder 7 0 Fried Rice Seasoning Mix 1 0 Inadequately labelled. Letter to merchant and local M.O.H. Scarlet Powder 0 1 Insufficient dye content. Re-exported. Onion Powder 0 1 Insect infested. Destroyed. Fish Powder 4 0 Baking Powder 0 1 Adulterated with alum. Re-exported. Flour 25 2 2 Insufficient Chalk content. Released - industrial purposes. Bean Cuid 16 4 Contained arsenic. Re-exported. Bean Jelly 0 1 Contained prohibited colouring matter. Re-exported Bean Powder 6 8 1 Likely to deteriorate. Letter to merchant and local M.O.H. 5 Contained prohibited preservative:4 Re-exported. 1 Destroyed, under supervision of local M.O.H. 2 Contained excess lead. Letter to merchant and local M.O.H. Instant Soy Paste Mix 1 0 Chilli Paste 1 0 Curry Paste 5 0 Grass Jelly 1 0 Fish Paste 2 0 Pure Butter Ghee 1 0 Tomato Paste 28 4 2 High mould counts. Released as further samples satisfactory. 2 Contained excess tin:1 Re-exported. 1 Letter to merchant and local M.O.H. Salad Dressing 11 0 3 Inadequately labelled. Letter to merchant and local M.O.H. Seasoning 4 0 1 Inadequately labelled. Letter to merchant and local M.O.H. Vinegar 1 0 Fish Gravy 2 0 Inadequately labelled. Letter to merchant and local M.O.H. Brown Gravy Mix 1 0 Amboda Curry in Oil 0 1 Contained lead. Letter to merchant and local M.O.H. Tomato Ketchup 0 1 Contained prohibited preservative. Released, trade sample. TCK Sauce 0 1 Contained prohibited preservative. Released, trade sample. 38 Sample Satisfactory Unsatisfactory Action Sauce (Various) 37 0 7 Inadequately labelled. Letter to merchant and local M.O.H. Mayonnaise 2 3 Contained prohibited preservative. 1 Re-exported. 2 Destroyed. Pepper Sauce 3 1 Contained prohibited preservative. Re-exported. Sweet and Sour Sauce 0 1 Contained prohibited colouring matter. Re-exported. Horseradish 1 2 Contained prohibited preservative. Re-exported. Oyster Sauce 4 4 Contained prohibited preservative. 3 Re-exported. 1 Destroyed. Gourd Slices 1 0 Gourd Shavings 1 0 Inadequately labelled. Letter to merchant and local M.O.H. Red Dates 4 0 Dirty. Letter to merchant re cleansing. Brown Dates 1 1 Insect damaged. Re-exported. Olives 2 0 Lemons 1 0 Contained thiourea. Released. Letter to M.A.F.F. Fruit and Fruit Juices (Tinned, 42 0 Frozen and dehydrated) Grapefruit Juice 0 1 Contained excess tin and lead Destroyed. Vegetable Juice 2 0 Rum Cakes 2 0 Cake Mixes 5 0 Karamell Pudding 1 0 Inadequately labelled. Letter to merchant and local M.O.H. Assorted Fruit Rolls 1 0 Crepes Suzettes 1 0 Angel Food Cake Mix 0 1 Contained prohibited emulsifier. Destroyed. Chocolate, Vanilla and Butterscotch Puddings 1 2 Contained prohibited colouring matter. Released trade samples. Fruit Flavour Pastries 1 1 Contained prohibited colouring matter. Destroyed. Apple Cake 1 0 Instant Puddings 3 0 Apple Turnovers 1 0 Inadequately labelled. Letter to merchant and local M.O.H. Gelutin Desserts 6 2 Contained prohibited colouring matter. Destroyed. Fruit Pie Filling 4 3 Contained prohibited colouring matter. Released trade samples. Chocolate, Vanilla and 3 0 Cherry Nutriments Frosting Mixes 3 5 1 Contained prohibited emulsifier. Re-exported. 4 Contained prohibited preservative :3 Re-exported. 1 Released - trade sample Syrups (Various) 5 0 Artificial and Natural Honey 3 1 Contained iron and zinc. Letter to merchant and local M.O.H. Fruit Pulps, Jams and Jelly 10 0 39 Sample Satisfactory Unsatisfactory Action Peanut Butter with Grape 1 0 Haw Jam 0 1 Insufficient soluble solids. Letter to merchant and local M.O.H. Bread Dough 1 0 Cereals 2 0 Fun Pack Cereal 0 1 Contained prohibted colouring matter. Re-exported. Vanilla, Strawberry and Chocolate 3 0 Inadequately labelled. Milk Shake Letter to merchant and local M.O.H. Soft Drink Powder 6 5 3 Contained prohibited colouring matter & 2 Prohibited stabiliser. Destroyed. Instant Breakfast Drink 2 0 Mushroom, Chicken, Beef and 4 0 2 Inadequately labelled. Tomato/Beef Flavoured Letter to merchant and drink mixer . local M.O.H. Coffee Charm 1 0 Flavourings 4 0 Carbonated Beverage 0 1 Contained prohibited preservative and stabiliser. Re-exported. Fruit Drink 5 0 Coconut Milk 1 0 Riesling Wine 1 0 Hock Wine 1 0 Granulated Sugar Substitute 1 0 Inadequately labelled. Letter to merchant and local M.O.H. Salvison Protein Extract 1 0 Mu Beverage (Broken Spices) 1 0 inadequately labelled. Letter to merchant and local M.O.H. Colouring Matter 1 0 Kingto (Flavouring Emulsifier) 1 0 Inadequately labelled. Letter to merchant and local M.O.H. Swedish Crispbread Sandwich 1 0 Pizza (Pastry) 1 0 Liquorice Lemon 1 Contained prohibited colouring matter. Destroyed. Liquorice 1 0 Crystallised Fruit Segments 1 0 Inadequately labelled. Letter to merchant and local M.O.H. Candied Mixed fruits 1 0 Confectionery/Sweets 18 0 Confectionery Bits 0 1 Contained prohibited preservative. Released trade sample. Life saver Sweets 4 1 Contained prohibited colouring matter. Destroyed. Assorted Sweets 11 2 Contained prohibited colouring matter: 1 Re-exported. 1 Destroyed under supervision of local authority. Chocolate Fudge 0 1 Contained prohibited colouring matter. Released trade sample. Sweets with toys 39 20 Sweets contained prohibited colouring matter:- 9 Re-exported. 10 Destroyed. 1 Released - trade sample. 40 Sample Satisfactory Unsatisfactory Action Bubble Gum 6 2 Contained prohibited colouring matter:1 Re-exported. 1 Destroyed. Chewing Gum 1 0 Groundnuts 63 6 1 30% damaged by species of bean weevil, to be used for animal feeding or manufacturing purposes. 5 Aflatoxin contaminated. Re-exported. Sopari (Indian Nut) 1 0 Silver Coated Sopari 0 1 Contained prohibited colouring matter. Re-exported. Desiccated Coconut 68 63 Contained Sulphur Dioxide Released after court ruling. Russian Borscht (Meat) 1 0 Chicken Pate, 1 with 2 0 1 Inadequately labelled. Truffle Paste Letter to merchant and local M.O.H. Boneless Chicken 1 0 Inadequately labelled. Letter to merchant and local M.O.H. Meats, Canned (Various) 19 0 Papain (Meat Tenderiser) 1 0 Trinidad Callaloo (Stew) 1 0 Tuna Fish 1 0 Sliced Smoked Saithe 0 1 Contained prohibited colouring matter. Letter to merchant and local M.O.H. Saury Fish Seasoned with 1 0 Sweet Wine Salted Jelly Fish 1 0 Inadequately labelled. Letter to merchant and local M.O.H. Salted Fish 1 0 Fish Cake 3 1 Contained prohibited preservative. Re-exported. 2 Inadequately labelled. Letter to merchant and local M.O.H. Cod Roe Caviar 0 1 Contained prohibited preservative. Released as foreign ships stores. Fish, Tinned, Dried (Various) .21 0 2 Inadequately labelled. Letter to merchant and local M.O.H. Rolled Scrambled Egg 1 0 Inadequately labelled. Letter to merchant and local M.O.H. Cheese Flavoured Korn Kurls 1 0 Parmesan Cheese 1 0 Rice Crackers 1 0 Prawn Crackers 2 0 Snack Sticks 1 0 Noodle Roni Almondine 1 0 Hima Food Mix 4 0 Butter 1 0 Edible Tallow 1 0 Refined and Steamed Lard 9 0 Tea 33 1 Contained excess lead. Re-exported. 41 Sample Satisfactory Unsatisfactory Action Animal Feeding Stuffs (Examined by the Agricultural Analyst) 16 0 2 Contained Urea - No Declaration of protein equivalent was given. 1 Contained added copper No Declaration was given. 3 Contained protein beyond the prescribed limits of variation. Merchants warned that these products must conform with the Act and Regulations. Bacteriological Sampling Dried Flake and Spray Egg Albumen 347 0 Frozen Egg Albumen 5 0 Pasteurised Whole Egg 29 1 Contained salmonella. Re-exported. Pasteurised Egg Yolk 5 0 Dried Whole Egg 132 0 Whole Egg 4 0 Powdered Egg White Solids 26 0 Preserved Duck Eggs 4 0 Prawn Powder 1 0 Frozen Cooked Peeled Prawns 289 63 63 High plate counts. Letters to merchants with warning to keep deep frozen and to use immediately on thawing. Frozen Cooked Peeled Shrimps 44 17 17 High plate counts. Letters to merchants with warning to keep deep frozen and to use immediately on thawing. Frozen Potted Shrimps 2 0 Frozen Fish 3 0 Fish Cakes 8 0 Frozen Longostinos (Lobster tails) 3 0 Frozen Chicken skin 1 0 Frozen Beef Mince 14 0 Minced Beef 10 5 1 Salmonella typhimurium and salmonella Derby. 3 Salmonella typhimurium. 1 Salmonella Ohlstedt. Released for manufacture into pet food. Frozen Platter Steaks 1 0 Chilled Beef Cuts 58 0 Cooked Boneless Mutton 1 0 Cooked Shoulder Picnic 6 0 Frozen Corned Meat 2 0 Corned Beef 1 0 Boneless Beef 8 2 Salmonella present. Released for manufacture into pet food. Fried Rice ) 3 0 Contained small amount of CL. Spring Roll ) Frozen 3 0 Welchii and aerobic sporing bacilli. Letter to merchant with warning to keep deep frozen and to use immediately on thawing. Ravioli ) 2 0 Yam Starch Jelly 2 0 Fermented Milk 1 0 Milk Powder 3 0 Frozen Soy Bean 2 0 Apple Cake 1 0 Custard Powder 1 0 Desiccated Coconut 4 0 Hickory Smoked Torula Yeast 0 2 Contaminated and infested. Destroyed. 42 CONTAINER TRAFFIC This method of transporting cargoes continued to expand during 1970. Despite the dock strike which lasted for three weeks during the summer, the number of imported containers increased by 50 per cent, from 45,840 to nearly 70,000. Although at the beginning of the year it had been hoped that the labour difficulties being experienced at the new 39 Berth Container Terminal would be speedily resolved and allow it to become operational, a settlement was not reached until May and the berth received its first ship from Australia, S.S. "ENCOUNTER BAY" on the 1st June. In the remaining 7 months of the year, 21 vessels in this consortium arrived at Tilbury to discharge and load and in that period container imports over 39 Berth exceeded a quarter of a million tons. This particular container service from Australian ports to Tilbury añd the Continent commenced operations with nine vessels, eight registered in the United Kingdom and one in Australia and these were joined later in the year by two ships registered in Germany. During 1971 three further vessels, one each from France, Holland and Italy are expected to be engaged in this trade which eventually will give a service allowing for an arrival to Tilbury every five days. The Continental container berth No. 43 continued to flourish throughout the year. When 39 berth became operational the need for transhipping containers through this berth was no longer required and a fairly quiet period followed the loss of this trade, but a gradual build up of both old and new services took place and by the end of the year, each week, on average, seventeen smaller container ships were being handled. Regular services were operating to Rotterdam, Dunkirk, Antwerp, Hamburg, Rostock, Helsinki and Leningrad. Tilbury Container Terminal. In the middle of October, to relieve the pressure on 43 berth, the berth adjacent, No. 41, was developed, and by the end of the year the two berths were being operated as one unit to handle the very large number of containers being received for the various trades. At the end of 1970, a shipping company previously operating a weekly container service to Canada from 40 Berth transferred operations to 41 Berth, to alleviate the position on the U.S. Line Terminal which also continued to expand. In 1969 this U.S. Line Terminal handled 109 vessels, in 1970 this number had risen to 162, approximately two thirds of these being ocean traders and the balance being small container ships trading to Spain, Portugal and Finland. 43 Inside the container stack at Tilbury Terminal, two overhead 45-ton twin lift stack cranes handle the arrival and despatch of containers. Interior of the Refrigeration Plant at Tilbury Container Terminal. 44 The trade to the Scandinavian ferry terminal also increased during the year and in November a further passenger roll on roll off container ship entered the service to cater for the build up in this trade. The total number of arrivals to this berth rose from 118 in 1969 to 150 in 1970 and a further increase is expected in 1971. A Swedish company operating a container trade to the Pacific ports of Canada and North America brought into service more container vessels to replace conventional tonnage during the year. This resulted in the number of food containers being imported over 4 berth rising from 680 in 1969 to over 1800 in 1970. By the end of the year all the operational container berths at Tilbury were very busy; the Port of London Authority estimated that they were handling 150,000 Containers per annum and hoped to double this figure by 1972. Two new berths No.45 and No.47 are yet to be commissioned. Table 1 gives a breakdown of container imports during the year, the figures in brackets being those for 1969, and Table II gives a breakdown of vessels arriving from various areas, with the 1969 figures bracketed. The total number of container ship arrivals is inclined to give a misleading picture of the overall position. Whilst it does show an increase from 944 to 1,000 there was a decrease in the number of small vessels and an increase in the number of large, this in fact is reflected in the tonnage figures given which show that the tonnage of containers nearly doubled. The total number of food containers imported also rose from 7,801 to 20,803. In September shift working commenced in the Port of London and this necessitated the working of shift hours by the Port Health Inspectors. Whilst this was necessary throughout all the enclosed dock systems, it was particularly important on the container terminals where urgent food clearances are required at short notice. It was also necessary for routine weekend attendances to be carried out, to expedite health clearance of foods, which were not even in the port on Friday night and yet were destined for delivery to all parts of the country before Monday morning. As mentioned in earlier reports, the control of imported foods in containers takes up a great deal of the time of those officers engaged in this work, very much longer than that involved with cargo from a conventional ship. It has been found from experience that the system requires an inspector's constant attention and availability. Clearances required at short notice with vehicles waiting to leave, appears to be the pattern of the future. We must, in this respect, keep in step with the dock industry, which is now geared for speedy delivery. TABLE I Types of Container Terminal, showing Total Container Imports compared with Total Food Container Imports. (Tonnages are approximate.) 1970. TYPE OF BERTH Total Containers Imported Total Food Containers Imported Total Tonnage All Containers Total Tonnage Food Containers Total Number Arrivals OCEAN CONTAINER TERMINAL HANDLING SOME SHORT SEA TRADERS 13,824 2,730 202,428 32,500 162 (10,130) (1,280) (130,200) (14,000) (109) SHORT SEA CONTAINER TERMINAL ALSO RECEIVING TRANSHIPPED AUSTRALIAN CONTAINERS UNTIL JUNF. 26,640 5,303 301,830 63,000 626 (24,500) (5,588) (223,500) (80,000) (679) SCANDINAVIAN FERRY TERMINAL 3,838 431 40,000 4,000 150 (9851, Included flats) (253) (114,000) (2,150) (118) CONVENTIONAL BERTH ALSO HANDLING CONTAINERS 2,647 1,839 33,500 22,000 41 (1,329) (680) (10,000) (6,000) (38) NEW TERMINAL OPERATIVE FROM JUNE CONTAINERS FROM AUSTRALIA 22,693 10,500 285,500 112,500 21 - — — — - TOTALS 69,642 20,803 863,258 234,000 1,000 (1969 Figures In Brackets) 45 TABLE 11 Summary of Shipping Arrivals into Tilbury 1970. Discharging Containers, Major Operators. 1969 Figures in Brackets. FROM Number of Arrivals Number of Containers No. of Food Containers Re marks CONTINENTAL PORTS 498 22,480 5,164 Included Australian Containers (560) (22,100) (5,429) Transhipped from Continent until June. AUSTRALIA 21 22,693 10,500 See Above Comment. Australian Container Terminal Received First Ship 1st June. NORTH AMERICA & CANADA 138 15,126 4,156 More Container Ships Entered Services, and replaced Conventional Vessels that had carried some Containers. (108) (11,159) (1,920) EAST GERMANY & FINLAND 125 4,124 139 (119) (2,400) (159) SCANDINAVIA 150 3,868 431 1970 Figure for Containers does not Include Flats as 1969 Figure. (118) (7,583) Included Flats (253) OTHERS 68 1,351 413 Included Ships from Spain Portugal and Russia. (39) (300) (40) 1970 TOTALS 1,000 69,642 20,803 Photographs by permission of Overseas Containers Ltd. 46 1970 Summary of Food Containers received at Tilbury via joint O.C.L./A C T Australian Service. 1970 VESSEL HARD FROZEN FOODSTUFFS CHILLED FOODS GENERAL FOODS X.S.147's. ACT OCL A O A O A O A O A O A O A O A O A O A O A O A O A O A O A O A O A O VOYAGE No. N'BOUND ARRIVALS TOTAL No. CONTAINERS OF FOOD PER VESSEL CLEARED AT TILBIJRY 1 LAMB & 1 MUTTON CARCASES BONELESS BEEF & JOINTS BONELESS MUTTON & LAMB CUTS VARIOUS OFFALS INEDIBLE MEATS RABBITS VEAL & BEEF STEAKS & MINCE FISH & CRUSTACEA EGG PRODUCTS BEEF & PIG QUARTERS FRESH FRUIT FRESH VEGETABLES DAIRY PRODUCE CANNED GOODS DRIED FRUITS CEREAL PRODUCTS MISCELLANEOUS FOODS Containers Notified to Other Regional I.C.D's. by F.10. or by Guildhall. 0922 Botany Bay 72 69 11 3 6 2 * 2 1 3 2 1 2 * 1 1 * * ♦ * * * * * * * * 4 44 26 * * 4 26 1 1 118 0923 Act. 1. 95 69 14 5 5 22 * 2 5 2 * 3 * * * 3 * * * * * * * ♦ * * 1 7 68 11 * * 2 14 * ♦ 182 0924 Moreton Bay 154 185 2 12 14 21 2 4 6 7 2 6 * 1 * * * * 7 7 * ♦ * 1 * * * 4 ill 108 * * 5 13 5 1 177 0925 Discovery Bay 18 51 8 8 4 10 * ♦ * 6 1 5 1 1 * * * ♦ 1 * * ♦ * * * * ♦ 10 * * * 7 3 4 * * 35 0926 Flinders Bay 43 24 5 * 6 2 * 1 2 1 3 2 1 * 1 * * * * * * * * 1 * * 1 11 9 * 14 * 1 3 * 3 13 0927 Act. 2. 40 48 2 3 2 4 1 4 3 3 7 5 * 1 * * * * * * ♦ * * * * 15 2 6 * ♦ * 2 21 1 6 60 0001 Encounter Bay 92 106 7 6 8 5 * 4 4 6 6 1 1 * 2 * * * * * * * * * 3 * 15 22 44 37 * 15 1 9 1 1 78 0002 Australian Endeavour 107 153 5 3 13 2 1 2 6 1 7 3 1 * 2 * 1 * * * * ♦ * 4 3 15 7 34 36 67 14 * 11 22 * * 293 0003 Act. 1. 168 90 3 * 24 10 7 4 7 9 6 1 * * ♦ ♦ 1 * 10 * * * 18 11 ♦ 14 4 33 76 29 8 * 4 7 * 2 289 0004 Botany Bay 170 132 1 * 12 9 2 * 13 2 8 1 1 * * * * * 2 * * * 30 28 * 10 2 10 87 66 * 1 12 2 * 3 181 0005 Moreton Bay 96 112 * * 2 9 * 4 3 6 5 1 ♦ * * * * * 10 * * * 30 31 * * * ♦ 39 39 * * 7 17 * 5 30 0006 Discovery Bay 118 202 3 * 2 3 1 3 2 4 3 4 * * * * 2 1 * * * * 41 55 * * * 4 46 104 14 18 4 2 * 4 239 0007 Flinders Bay 163 229 * 1 1 2 4 2 4 6 7 3 * * * * * * * * * * 70 49 * * 5 8 43 114 27 39 2 3 * 2 262 0008 Act. 2. 194 134 * 1 2 3 1 5 4 10 2 5 * ♦ 1 * 2 * 10 ♦ * * 77 59 * * * 8 86 23 9 10 * 8 * 2 221 0009 Encounter Bay* 187 155 ♦ 6 2 5 ♦ 3 3 3 * 3 * * * * * * * 2 * * 55 61 ♦ * 22 3 84 38 17 8 2 20 2 3 0010 Australian Endeavour** 230 162 1 2 6 6 * 2 7 10 * 6 1 * 1 * * * * 2 * * 64 65 * * 21 4 99 37 20 22 2 5 8 1 0011 Botany Bay 156 249 * 1 8 8 1 5 12 8 4 4 * 2 2 * 1 * 10 * * ♦ 59 42 * * * 12 44 104 9 21 4 34 2 8 0012 Act. 1. 149 245 1 5 10 7 * 7 10 14 * 8 * * 1 * * * * 3 * * 57 58 * 1 1 7 47 127 18 * 4 8 * * 0013 Moreton Bay 161 270 1 5 4 11 1 * 8 10 * 7 * * 1 * 1 * 2 2 * * 59 86 * 12 4 9 59 99 21 21 * * ♦ 8 0014 Discovery Bay*** 29 43 * 6 8 1 8 12 14 5 2 2 * * 2 1 * o 1 2 0015 Flinders Bay 38 36 * 3 5 10 3 4 27 11 3 4 * 3 ♦ 1 * * * * * * * ENCOUNTER BAY First ship to discharge at 39 Berth Frozen Cargo only. 0016 Jervis Bay 63 42 7 * 4 8 4 10 40 14 6 3 * 4 1 * 1 ♦ * 2 * 0017 Encounter Bay 16 30 * 2 5 4 * * 5 15 6 3 * 5 * * * * * 1 * * ** AUSTRALIAN ENDEAVOUR First ship to complete discharge at 39 Berth. 0018 Act. 2 59 43 1 6 13 12 17 4 14 14 3 4 3 * * 2 * 4 * * * 0019 Botany Bay 23 13 4 3 * 4 7 2 2 4 * * * * * * ♦ * 10 * * * *** DISCOVERY BAY Orsett. I.C.D. operational all general foods for London Region now cleared at this I.C.D., other than hard frozen. 0020 Australian Endeavour 63 91 17 9 18 40 4 1 9 19 2 5 4 9 * 1 * 2 9 5 * * 0021 Act. 1. 78 76 33 39 18 21 * * 13.10 3 1 4 4 * * 2 * 5 1 * * 0022 Moreton Bay 103 85 44 15 35 26 12 16 7 9 * 1 * * * 1 1 1 3 16 0023 Discovery Bay 114 83 49 28 16 20 16 18 10 8 3 1 4 * 1 2 * * 15 6 * * 0024 Jervis Bay Nil Nil No Frozen Cargo due to labour dispute in Australia. Total Food Containers Cleared at Tilbury 7100 0025 Encounter Bay 135 67 71 28 20 17 26 14 10 7 4 * * * 1 2 * * ♦ * * Total Food Containers Cleared at Orsett 2692 0026 Melbourne Express 38 25 19 5 3 9 11 6 5 4 * 1 * * * * * * * * * * Total Food Containers Cleared at I.C.D.'s. 4983 0027 Botany Bay 66 119 27 55 12 16 17 23 9 10 * ♦ * 5 1 2 * * * 8 * * 0028 Australian Endeavour 46 114 17 71 5 9 14 15 7 6 * * * 1 ♦ 1 * 1 3 10 * * 0029 Act. 1. 95 104 34 44 22 25 26 11 11 13 * * 1 4 1 3 ♦ * * 4 * * 0030 Sydney Express 31 34 6 16 9 2 9 6 4 4 * * * * * * * 2 3 4 * * ACT OCL 3410 3690 Total food Containers from Australia cleared at Tilbury 1970. 1970 TABLE 1 The Meat (Sterilization) Regulations 1969 Investigation and Disposal of Pet Foods Commodity Packages Approximate Weight (Tons) Inedible Meats & Offals 241,313 6,033 Horsemeat & Offals 272,855 6,822 Kangaroo Meat 5,974 150 Minced Rabbit Meat 2,824 71 Whalemeat & Offals 887 19 Totals 523,853 13,095 Goods not marked as required by the above Regulations were detained and marked at No. 6 Cold Store Total 22,700 packages Approximate Weight 568 Tons. TABLE II Imported Food Regulations 1968 Examination for Fitness for Human Consumption Commodity Country Beef Livers Other Beef Offals B/in & B/less Beef Sheep & Lambs B/L Lamb & Mutton Sheep & Lamb Offals B/L Veal Pork & Offals Chilled Beef Cuts Other Meats Argentine - - Ctns. 108 - - - - - 297 Ctns. 39 Cooked Beef 10 Hares 5 Beef Suet Australia Ctns. 230 Ctns. 75 Ctns. 430 300 Ctns. 180 - Ctns. 10 Ctns. 4 - Ctns. 10 Cooked B/L Mutton Brazil - - Ctns. 10 - - - - - - Ctns. 5 Cooked Ox Kidneys Ctns. 5 Cooked Beef. New Zealand Ctns. 190 Ctns. 59 Ctns. 432 800 Ctns. 113 Ctns. 25 Ctns. 20 — - Ctns. 5 Venison China - - - - - - - - - Ctns. 10 Rabbits S.W. Africa - — Ctns. 9 — — — — — — — Totals 420 134 989 1,100 293 25 30 4 297 89 T T T T T T T Weights (Approx) 11 4 25 35 8 11 cwt 14 cwt 1 ½ cwt 8 2½ Total Weight 94½ Tons (approx) Total Packages 3,371 TABLE III Damaged Meats detained in Royal Docks and subsequently dealt with at Smithfield Market Commodity Weight (approx.) 307 Ctns. B/L Beef Cuts IVi Tons 48 TABLE IV Damaged Meats detained at No. 6 Cold Store for Destruction or Reconditioning Commodity Sheep & Lambs Sheep & Lamb Offals Sheep & Lambs Cuts B/in & B/less Beef Beef Livers Other Offals Various Packages Packages 30,135 287 13 1,553 720 876 223 (Ctns. Rabbits) Approx Wt. (Tons) 471 7½ ¼ 39 18 22 5½ Total Weight (approx) 563½ Tons Total 33,807 Packages TABLE V Meat rejected by U.S.A. — Detained at other Cold Stores pending Inspection of samples held at No. 6 Cold Store Commodity B/Less Beef B/Less Mutton Lamb Cuts Calf Livers Pork B/in Cuts Packages 34,293 8,672 6,684 502 58 Approx. Wt. (Tons) 858 217 167 12½ 1½ Total Weight (approx) 1,256 Tons Total 50,209 Packages Importation of Bulk Lark and Edible Tallow in Ships' Tanks During 1970 Country No. of Ships Approx Tonnages Number Sampled U.S.A. 21 38,002 9 Lard Belgium 4 1,813 — Lard Netherlands — — — Lard Italy — — — Lard New Zealand — — — Lard Australia 1 109 1 Edible Tallow Totals 26 39,824 10 THE FOOD HYGIENE (DOCKS, CARRIERS, etc.) REGULATIONS, 1960 The sophisticated and modern practices, including containerisation, now generally applied to the packaging of food have considerably reduced the risk of contamination of food during transit, discharge and delivery. However, the contamination during the traditional carriage of carcase meat in refrigerated holds of ships still remains, although there has been a diminution of this problem due to the present conditions under which all meat from South America is now cartoned. Constant supervision during discharge to ensure the cleanliness of quays and cargo handling equipment is a matter of routine. 49 Vehicles used for the carriage of carcase meat are now generally of modern design and construction. The larger transport companies also operate an acceptable system for routine cleansing. During 1970 a total of 10,712 inspections were recorded which resulted in 239 vehicles receiving additional cleansing at the loading banks, and a further 71 vehicles being rejected for complete cleansing. Protective clothing is issued to personnel engaged in carcase meat handling and the provision by the Port of London Authority of an increasing number of amenity blocks of a very high standard has greatly enhanced the existing washing and toilet facilities. FERTILISERS AND FEEDING STUFFS ACT, 1926 FERTILISERS AND FEEDING STUFFS REGULATIONS 1960 & 1968 FERTILISERS AND FEEDING STUFFS (AMENDMENT) REGULATIONS 1970. Sixteen samples of Feeding Stuffs were submitted to the Agricultural Analyst. No sample of Fertiliser was sent. Three of the samples, namely Capon Finishing Pellets, In Pig Sow Rolls and Broiler Finishing Pellets contained an excess of protein beyond the prescribed limits of variation, 1.00%, 0.85% and 0.65% respectively, but the difference is not to the prejudice of the purchaser. Two further samples, namely Prime Beef Supplement and Calf Rearing Cubes, contained Urea as claimed by the vendor but no declaration of the protein equivalent of Urea was given as is required by the Fertilisers and Feeding Stuffs Regulations 1968. Added copper was found in Fast Growing Pig Pellets, but no declaration of the amount or presence was given as is required by the Fertiliser and Feeding Stuffs Regulations 1968. Details of the variations and labelling omissions were brought to the attention of the Merchants concerned, who were warned that they must ensure that these products meet the requirements of the Act and Regulations. STUDENTS AND VISITORS Student Public Health Inspectors Three student public health inspectors were employed by the Authority during the year. Requests are received from other Local Authorities for training in port health duties (as required by the Public Health Inspectors Education Board) to be given to their students. These requests are always met and the visiting students usually spend two or three days receiving individual tuition in the Docks. Parties of students from the technical colleges have been accepted during the year and altogether 81 students each received two days training in this way. Visitors Other visitors who were shown various aspects of port health control work included doctors, public health inspectors and students from places such as Thailand, Uganda, India, Ethiopia and the British West Indies. "PORT HEALTH'' The film "Port Health" which shows many varied aspects of the Corporation's health control work in the Port, was screened on 322 occasions during the year to a total audience of 13,120. The film is issued on loan to establishments such as hospital training schools, technical colleges, secondary and grammar schools and health authorities throughout the country. LEGAL PROCEEDINGS (i) In May 1970 a vessel berthed at a jetty in the river and although clearance had not been given by H.M. Customs, a number of dock workers were on board discharging cargo. Legal proceedings were therefore instituted against the Master under Regulation 18(1) of the Public Health (Ships) Regulations 1966. A summons was issued in respect of the offence, but by this time the Master had returned abroad and it was not until October that he returned to this country for a sufficient length of time for it to be served. The case was proved against the Master in his absence, and the maximum fine of £100 was imposed, with costs in addition. However, the Master lodged an appeal and in view of his previous good character, the fine was reduced to £50. 50 (ii) In April 1970 a vessel berthed at a wharf and although clearance had not been given by H.M. Customs, one of the Agent's representatives went on board. Proceedings were therefore instituted under Section 18(1) of the Public Health (Ships) Regulations 1966 against both the Master and the man who had boarded. However, the Master had returned, abroad and investigation showed that it was unlikely that he would return to this country for some time. The summons against each individual was therefore withdrawn. (iii) In April 1970 a vessel landed at Gibraltar a patient suspected to be suffering from hepatitis. On entering the Port of London the Master failed to send a wireless message and did not show or give the appropriate signals to indicate that there had been a sick person on board, thus contravening Regulation 15 of the Public Health (Ships) Regulations 1966. In view of the particular circumstances, it was thought adequate to deal with this case by means of a warning letter to the Master. (iv) During 1970 legal proceedings were instituted against two firms in respect of offences under the Port of London Refuse Byelaws involving four barges which had each remained in the Port Health district for a period longer than 72 hours while loaded with refuse. In each case the defendant company pleaded guilty and fines totalling £19 were imposed, together with payments towards costs. POWERS The principal Acts of Parliament and Statutory Instruments affecting the work of the Port Health Authority of the Port of London are:— ABATEMENT OF NUISANCES AND REMOVAL OF REFUSE London Government Act, 1963 Noise Abatement Act, 1960 Public Health Act, 1936 Public Health Act, 1961 Public Health (Recurring Nuisances) Act 1969 ADMINISTRATION City of London (Various Powers) Act, 1965 Local Government Act, 1933 London Government Act, 1963 London Port Health Authority Order, 1965 Public Health Act, 1936 Public Health Officers Regulations, 1959 ALIENS Aliens Order, 1953 Aliens Order, 1968 CANAL BOATS Canal Boat Regulations, 1878 to 1931 Public Health Act, 1936 Public Health Act, 1961 COMMONWEALTH IMMIGRANTS Commonwealth Immigrants Act, 1962 and 1968 Hovercraft Act, 1968 CONSTITUTION OF THE AUTHORITY City of London (Various Powers) Act, 1965 London Government Act, 1963 London Port Health Authority Order, 1965 Public Health Act, 1936 CREW ACCOMMODATION Public Health Act, 1936 Public Health Act, 1961 DANGEROUS DRUGS Dangerous Drugs (No. 2) Regulations, 1964 51 FERTILISERS & FEEDING STUFFS Fertilisers and Feeding Stuffs Act, 1926 Fertilisers and Feeding Stuffs Regulations, 1968 Fertilisers and Feeding Stuffs (Amendment) Regulations 1970 FOOD Antioxidant in Food Regulations, 1966 Arsenic in Food Regulations, 1959 and 1960 Artificial Sweeteners in Food Regulations, 1969 Bread and Flour Regulations, 1963 Colouring Matter in Food Regulations, 1966 Colouring Matter in Food (Amendment) Regulations 1970 Emulsifiers and Stabilisers in Food Regulations, 1962 Emulsifiers and Stabilisers in Food (Amendment) Regulations 1970 Fluorine in Food Regulations, 1959 Food (Control of Irradiation) Regulations, 1967 Foods (Control of Irradiation) (Amendment) Regulations 1969 Food and Drugs Act, 1955 Food Hygiene (Docks, Carriers etc.) Regulations, 1960 Food Hygiene (General) Regulations, 1960 and 1962 Ice Cream (Heat 'treatment etc.) Regulations, 1959 and 1963 Imported Food Regulations, 1968 Lead in Food Regulations, 1961 Liquid Egg (Pasteurisation) Regulations, 1963 London Government Act, 1963 ivleat (Sterilization) Regulations, 1969 Mineral Hydrocarbons in Food Regulations, 1966 Preservative in Food Regulations, 1962 Public Health.(Imported Milk) Regulations, 1926 Soft Drinks Regulations, 1964 Soft Drinks (Amendment) Regulations, 1969 Soft Drinks (Amendment) Regulation, 1970 FUMIGATIONS Hydrogen Cyanide (Fumigation of Buildings) Regulations, 1951 Hydrogen Cyanide (Fumigation of Ships) Regulations, 1951 HOUSEBOATS City of London (Various Powers) Act, 1933, Part III, Sections 6 and 7 Essex County Council Act, 1952, Section 212 INFECTIOUS DISEASES Health Services and Public Health Act, 1968 London Government Act, 1963 Public Health Act, 1936 Public Health Act, 1961 Public Health (Fees for Notification of Infectious Diseases) Order, 1968 Public Health (Infectious Disease) Regulations, 1968 Public Health (Prevention of Tuberculosis) Regulations, 1925 Public Health (Ships) Regulations, 1966 Public Health (Ships) (Amendment) Regulations, 1968 Regulations as to the notification of Plague as an infectious disease, 1900 Regulations for preventing Plague by the destruction of Rats etc., 1910 RATS AND MICE Hovercraft Act, 1968 Poisons Rules 1970 Prevention of Damage by Pests Act, 1949 Prevention of Damage by Pests (Application to Shipping) Orders, 1951 to 1956 Public Health (Ships) Regulations, 1966 Public Health (Ships) (Amendment) Regulations, 1968 SHELLFISH Medway (Shellfish) Regulations, 1935 Order dated 23rd April 1936 made by the Port Health Authority under the Public Health (Shellfish) Regulations, 1934 in respect of a 'prescribed area' in Essex. 52 Order dated 25th July 1957 made by the Port Health Authority under the Public Health (Shellfish) Regulations, 1934 in respect of a 'prescribed area' in Kent. Public Health (Shellfish) Regulations, 1934 and 1948 CLEAN AIR Clean Air Acts, 1956 and 1968 Clean Air (Arrestment Plant) (Exemption) Regulations 1969 Clean Air (Emission of Dark Smoke) (Exemption) Regulations 1969 Clean Air (Height of Chimneys) (Exemption) Regulations 1969 Clean Air (Measurement of Grit and Dust) Regulations, 1968 Clean Air (Prescribed Forms) Regulations 1969 Dark Smoke (Permitted Periods) Regulations, 1958 Dark Smoke (Permitted Periods) (Vessels) Regulations, 1958 Public Health Act, 1936 Smoke Control Areas (Authorised Fuels) Regulations, 1969 Smoke Control Areas (Authorised Fuels) (No. 2) Regulations,1970 Smoke Control Areas (Exempted Fireplaces) Order 1970 Smoke Control Areas (Exempted Fireplaces) (No. 2) Order 1970 Alkali etc. Works Order 1966 BYE-LAWS Bye-laws have been made by the Port Health Authority 1. For preventing nuisances arising from barges or vessels carrying offensive cargoes. 2. For removing to hospital any person suffering from dangerous infectious diseases, and for the keeping therein of such persons as long as may be deemed necessary. 3. With respect to houseboats used for human habitation within the limits of the Port of London. PUBLICATIONS (1) Handbook of Poultry Inspection. (2) Clean Food Handling 53 THE FUTURE OF THE PORT HEALTH SERVICES [Abridgment of a paper given to the Association of Sea and Air Port Health Authorities' annual meeting, Kingston upon Hull, 2nd April, 1970. By W.G. Swann, M.D., B.Ch., B.A.O., B.Sc., D.P.H., D(Obst), R.C.O.G., D.P.A., Medical Officer of Health, Port and City of London] In many ways the Port Health Services are in a period of unusually rapid change and one can only select a few of the many factors involved in this change and endeavour to foresee the likely effect on the Port Health Services. What I have to say concerns of course, primarily the Port of London, but much of our experiences is analogous to that found in other Ports. The two major trends in port transport are, firstly, an explosive growth in bulk traffic, especially oil but also bulk grain and forest products, and secondly in unit load traffic such as containers, palletized loads, and dumb lighters. Consequently there has been a major reduction in the level of conventional general cargo, though on balance the total tonnage handled in the Port of London will increase in the future. From a Port Health Authority point of view the decrease in conventional general cargo trade effected by the container revolution has meant such a loss of traffic at conventional berths in the Upper Docks that the "centre of gravity" of the port is moving down river towards the Estuary, with deeper draughted, faster ships needing to operate at high throughput berths. This creates new problems regarding boarding duties, especially boarding from launches by Medical Officers. The Gravesend Reach was a most suitable place for boarding vessels by medical officers from launches en passage to the Docks up-river. However the deep sea tankers berthing at the Havens or the Isle of Grain do not pass Gravesend. This problem is partly met by endeavouring to board in Lower Hope Reach somewhat difficult in an S bend in the River where the ships arefinding navigation more difficult — or Sea Reach. Following on Container Ships, which may in the future become nuclear powered, we come to the LASH ships — (Lighter Aboard Ships), now arriving in London from New Orleans with some 73 dumb lighters each carrying 300-400 tons of cargo. The lighters are discharged by a gantry crane in the Medway and towed to Thames-side berths. The operation takes about 15 minutes per barge so that the vessel can discharge and be back at sea in one day. From a Port Health aspect these dumb lighters can be treated as containers, each lighter coming within the official definition of a container. Only the mother ship per se is required to carry a current deratting or deratting exemption certificate; the lighter is considered an integral part of the vessel itself. So independent inspection and certification of individual lighters is not required for the issue of deratting certificates. Inspection of the lighters should be carried out whenever the mother vessel's deratting or deratting exemption certificates are renewed. Inspection of each lighter at the time or arrival whenever a piague-infected port has been visited must be particularly borne in mind in view of the wide ramification of the Mississippi River and its tributaries and canals into the heart of the USA. Human plague has been recorded in the State of Louisiana as recently as 1920 (eight cases and three deaths reported). Bearing in mind the precautions taken against plague in connection with container traffic in the USA, especially when rat infestation was found in sealed containerized cargo received from Viet-Nam, where plague is widespread, and military supplies are being shipped via the Eastern Ports with sylvatic plague endemic even today in California. Similar precautions are necessary to have up-to-date epidemiological reports of the States in the Mississippi basin and measures for rat control instituted. Lighters, when necessary, may have to be treated with diazinon dust 2% and anticoagulant bait be placed in each lighter prior to its being closed and/or sealed. It is envisaged that LASH ships will operate to the Far East, Malaya and West Africa in the future. They will be complementary to rather than replace container ships. In certain cases combined usage will occur, LASH ships carrying containers in lighters. Already there are developments of the original LASH ship such as the Seabee Clipper, in which an elevator loads and unloads the lighters, and the BOB ship in which the lighters are floated out of an opening in the mother vessel amidships. The Olsen Line are developing palletized loading, using side-doors through which the loaded pallet can be off-or un-loaded using a sophisticated fork lift truck. Other minor developments are the use of a 120-foot-long dumb barge for conversion into a floating restaurant, involving the Port Health Department in regard to compliance with the Food Hygiene Regulations. Daily collections of refuse, mains sewerage or water are to be laid on when the conversion is complete and the ship arrives at moorings off Battersea Park. Similarly the holiday paddle steamer Princess Elizabeth has been moved from Chichester Harbour to London for conversion into a restaurant and conference centre. Airports The possibility of London's third Major Airport being sited at Foulness opens the prospect of greatly increased Port Health responsibilities, This is a major proposal which cannot be dealt with at this juncture. There is an existing heliport at Battersea - Westland Heliport - which opened in 1959. A recent development has been flights from abroad from Holland and France when clearance was given byHM Customs.A check is being kept to ensurethat port health responsibilities will be undertaken if or when necessary. There is a proposal to provide facilities for Vertical Take-Off (Jump Jets) within the region of the Surrey Docks, as an internal passenger feeder service to the main international airports. This development requires to be watched because of the Port Health implications of the links with international air traffic. Other likely developments are such things as floating landing sites which could be situated in the Estuary, and again may involve international regulations as well as food hygiene in connection with restaurants. Container and passenger traffic conveyed by airships is once again being studied as a possibility, Maritime Area Control The congestion of some sea areas with restriction on "freedom of the sea" will be necessary in the interests of general safety. This has led to the concept of maritime area control. This system of control will provide navigational assistance in maintaining a strategically planned route, relieving congestion, avoiding collision and so on, and in speeding up the vessel's turn round. This concerns the Port Health Service in that health clearance by radio is likely to be incorporated into this system. A Port Data Handling Centre collects and disseminates all data concerning the ship and shore services in order to enhance the overall efficiency of the port. This information is passed to the Port Area Control Centre which co-ordinates and then sequences and controls ships from sea to berth. The Master of the ship in addition to other information will radio details of the Health Declaration Form to the Port Data Handling Centre. This part of the information will be sent by radio to the Port Medical Officer for a decision to be made. This may be Health Clearance or otherwise. This message is sent back to the Port Data Handling Centre by radio and eventually inward transmitted to the Port Area Control Centre. The total information is computerized and programmed so there is a controlled sequence of movement of all vessels as permission is given to enter the port, The ships are phased according to tonnage, tide, draught and other data. Large tankers have to be scheduled according to tide clearance of channels and the momentum of these vessels is so great that undue slowing down or manipulation is impossible — hence the difficulty of boarding from launches. The objective is that each ship should not be delayed or interfered with till it reaches its berth, otherwise the total programme is upset. Health Clearance by Radio in the USA During the past year official recognition has been given to the Port of London as a port which can give health clearance to ships by radio. Experience was gained of the use of Radio Pratique during a visit to USA ports with the late Chairman of the Port and City Health Committee. Radio Pratique has been in operation for certain passenger vessels arriving in New York for many years — since the early nineteen-thirties, As well as being limited to.passenger vessels it was also confined to ships having a ship's surgeon or an approved competent purser-pharmacist. In addition it was only granted to certain passenger vessels such as those on a fixed run between non-infected and non-endemic ports, such as the Cunard Line's between Southampton and New York. In this instance the risk of importation of quarantinable disease is negligible. The recent development in connection with radio pratique is that it is being offered to all vessels, cargo and passenger, and whether coming from endemic ports or not. This system has already been introduced in New York, Los Angeles, San Francisco and Porto Rico, and it is being gradually introduced in all major ports throughout the USA. The Radio Pratique is a quarantine clearance by radio granted by the officer-in-charge of a US Quarantine Station. The clearance permitsa vessel to proceed directly to berth and begin normal business activities, in many cases without inspection by a quarantine officer. The granting of radio pratique clears a vessel only for US Public Health Service requirements: it does not exempt the vessel from the requirement of other governmental agencies prior to commencing operations, nor does it exempt a vessel from quarantine inspection or other control measures subsequently deemed necessary by the quarantine station. It is important to note that this is the kind of health clearance by radio that has been introduced in London in 1969 subsequent to our USA visit. The vessel subsequently will be given pratique by customs and clearance by immigration if necessary. The determination to grant or deny this health clearance is based upon information received from the vessel prior to its arrival in port, and upon past experience with the vessel and its personnel. Any vessel subject to quarantine inspection entering a port under the control of the United States may apply for radio pratique to the quarantine station administratively responsible for the port. The request comes from the master of the vessel, through his agent, not less than 12 hours nor more than 24 hours prior to arrival at the first port in the USA. When the agent telephones the request to the quarantine station he provides all the applicable information requested on the Radio Pratique Transaction Record. Upon arrival in port the ship's master/surgeon/purser-pharmacist mate gives a copy of the radio message to the agentif the vessel is not boarded or to the quarantine Inspector if the vessel is boarded. Any suspected infectious illness which occurs after the request is made is reported immediately through the agent to the quarantine station. If radio pratique has been granted, the quarantine officer notifies the ship's agent and other US inspectional agencies of any additional quarantine measures to be imposed or of any change in radio pratique status. Upon receiving the request through the ship's agent, the quarantine station evaluates the the information. Additional information may be requested from the ship through the agent. The Quarantine Station advises the ship's agent and other US governmental agencies of the ship's status, i.e. "Radio Free Pratique", "Radio Provisional Pratique", or "Radio Pratique Denied". The agent transmits the reply to the ship and notifies the pilot and others concerned. If Radio Free Pratique is granted the vessel may proceed directly to the dock or berth and begin normal business activities subject to the requirements of other US governmental agencies without the boarding of a quarantine inspector. If Radio Provisional Pratique is granted the agent is advised of requirements to be fulfilled and/or if the vessel falls within a random sample to undergo complete inspection for the purpose of ensuring that quarantine standards are maintained. Provisional pratique is granted when a condition exists on board which requires further action by the ship's master or the quarantine officer. The vessel may proceed to dock or berth and begin normal business activities except as advised by the quarantine station and subject to the requirements of other US governmental agencies. A vessel which falls within the random sample must await complete inspection prior to commencing business activities. If Radio Practique is denied, the agent is advised and the vessel undergoes inspection in the anchorage or at the berth in accordance with normal procedures at the port or as advised by the quarantine station. Prior to arrival of the Vessel in Port the ship's master/surgeon/purser-pharmacist mate is responsible for the following activities for quarantine clearance purposes:- (0) Preparation of a list of persons (passengers and crew) who do not possess a valid smallpox vaccination certificate. (b) Preparation of a list of persons (passengers and crew regardless of smallpox vaccination status) who have been in a smallpox infected area within 14 days prior to arrival in the United States — underlining the names of persons who do not possess a valid smallpox vaccination certificate. (c) Entering certain information in the ship's log. e.g., illnesses and deaths of persons, and animals, including birds, details of the rodent control measures applied if thevessel has been in a plague infected port. Information and copies of forms are available upon request for vessels which routinely carry importation items of public health importance, such as psittacine birds, dogs, cats, monkeys, dead bodies (human — in cargo), shipments of aetiological agents or vectors. (d) Ensuring that the ship is maintained in a rat-free and sanitary condition. (e) Applying any additional control measures as advised by the quarantine station. When the vessel granted Radio Free Pratique arrives in Port the responsible official on board gives the Quarantine Declaration Form and the copy of the radio message requesting radio pratique documents on admissible importations to the ship's agents for delivery to the quarantine station on the day of arrival. When a vessel is granted Radio Provisional Pratique these documents are given to the quarantine officer when he boards and the ship's log and lists detailed above and deratting or deratting exemption certificate. The persons in lists (a) and (b) are to be presented to the quarantine officer for inspection. The animals and importation items remain on board till released by the quarantine officer. Comment on Port Health Administration in General in the U.S.A. (1) Until five years ago medical officers were employed for boarding to carry out quarantine duty, e.g., there were five in New York alone. Today these have been entirely replaced by non- medical quarantine inspectors. There is only one Medical Officer retained in the whole of the U.S.A. for this duty at the ports, viz., Dr. Vanderhook in New York. The quarantine inspectors are recruited for the most part from orderlies of the medical service of the U.S. Navy. They receive an intensive eight-weeks course of training for their duties. There are nominated medical officers for each Port who can be called in if required by the quarantine officers to help in the medical aspects, e.g., diagnosis of doubtful infectious disease. The Medical Officers may be skin specialists, US PHS doctors, or other medical specialists. (2) In addition to the downgrading of the professional staff employed on quarantine duty, sweeping changes are in process of being introduced in the mode of inspection carried out. The rationale on which the new system, as advocated by its supporters, is based, is on such considerations as the following:- International inspection procedures. (a) These are often totally ineffective, e.g., smallpox is not seen or diagnosed at the time of the inspection, but invariably declares itself after being imported into the country, and even then it is often not discovered till a number of other persons have been infected. (b) Persons who defend the newly proposed system consider the whole inspection procedure as a barrier against a non-existent threat. The last case of imported smallpox in the U.S.A. occurred in New York in 1947. (c) The procedures are considered unduly involved. (d) They form part of a pipeline, yet are completely unco-ordinated with the operations of contiguous units of other governmental agencies acting before or after in the process. (e) They are laws unto themselves, are dictatorial in their treatment of the passengers, and inclined towards self-preservation. (f) They are unable to accept modern technological change owing to fragmented organization. (g) They are a significant factor in economic cost of travel. "Primary Line Inspection" As a consequence what is called "primary line inspection" is being introduced to ports in the U.S.A. and also in Canada. The quarantine, customs, animal health and agriculture agencies inspection services are being integrated. A passenger on arrival will be inspected at the primary line inspection with regard to the requirements of all these four agencies. It is known from experience that over 90% of passengers can be cleared quickly. Any passenger having some matter requiring attention that will hinder the rapid flow through will be referred to a secondary line inspector. He will be a quarantine officer if referred for health reasons, a customs officer if for a customs matter, and so on. It is considered that these arrangements will facilitate the operation of the services without loss of efficiency. Some such arrangement is becoming imperative with the great continental increase of traffic at airports and this will be aggravated by the introduction of jumbo-jets. The Green Paper and the British Port Health Service The second Green Paper on the future structure of the National Health Service lists port health as one of the responsibilities which will be retained by Local Authorities. While this is clear, the situation of the Medical Officer of Health is by no means as specifically outlined. The ambiguous phrase "for a time" is used in relation to the allocation of limited responsibilities now exercized by Medical Officers of Health as well as new duties in relation to preparation for the new health service structure. But there is no clear indication of his responsibilities after the elapse of time or whether in fact he will continue to have port health responsibility. It is stated that the medical staff will be transferred to the service of the area health authorities. Though it is accepted that local authorities will need medical officers for examination of persons arriving at sea ports and airports, it is suggested that such staff might be seconded to the local authority by the area health authority. Senior medical officers of the area health authority will also be available to advise. Another form of association between the area health authority medical officers and the local authority suggested is the appointment on an honorary basis of medical officers who are in the employment of the area health authority. As it is also stated that most of the present work of the medical officer of health will be included in the wider functions of the chief administrative medical officer it would appear that the traditional medical officer of health will be phased out in the future. The basic duties and responsibilities of the medical officer of health stem from local authority legislation. It is most unlikely that all this legislation will be unscrambled, so one can see these functions pass to public health and port health inspectors if the principles of the second Green Paper are followed in the future legislation amending the structure of the National Health Service.