AC 4369 88856 4511, 30. SANITARY. REPORT, POET OF LONDON SANITARY COMMITTEE. with the HALF-YEARLY REPORT OF the MEDICAL OFFICER OF HEALTH FOR THE PORT OF LONDON, To 30th June 1888. Presented 4th October, 1888. PLON 14 30. SANITARY. REPORT, PORT OF LONDON SANITARY COMMITTEE, WITH THE HALF-YEARLY REPORT OF THE MEDICAL OFFICER OF HEALTH FOR THE PORT OF LONDON, To 30th June, 1888. Presented 4th October, 1888. 79 b DE KEYSER, Mayor. A Common Council holden in the Chamber of the Guildhall of the City of London, on Thursday, the 4th day of October, 1888. THE Port of London Sanitary Committee did this day deliver into this Court a Report in writing under their hands with the Half-yearly Report of the Medical Officer of Health of the Port of London to the 30th June, 1888, and recommending the appointment, till Lady Day, 1889, of William Anderson as one of the Sanitary Inspectors of the Port in the room of William Gilles, resigned ; which was read. Resolved, That the consideration thereof be adjourned, and it is Ordered that the Report be printed, and a copy sent to every Member of this Court. MONCKTON. To the Right Honourable the Lord Mayor, Aldermen and Commons of the City of London in Common Council assembled. WE, whose names are hereunto subscribed, of your Port of London Sanitary Committee, to whom it has been referred to carry into execution the Public Health Acts, 1872 and 1875, beg to submit for the consideration of your Honourable Court the Report of Dr. William Collingridge, the Medical Officer of Health of the Port of London, for the half-year ending 30th June, 1888, which Report contains a full and detailed account of the work done during that period in the Port of London by the Medical Officer of Health and the Inspectors. b 2 4 During the months of February and March last, an outbreak of Scarlet Fever occurred on board the Training Ship " Shaftesbury," and sixteen cases were removed to the Hospital at Gravesend. The subject of our future action in regard to outbreaks of a similar character occupied our serious consideration. It appeared to us undesirable that the Hospital should be used for the reception of practically unlimited numbers of patients from Training Ships within the Port, and that however much the Corporation might desire to extend the usefulness of the Hospital, the important necessity of reserving accommodation (which might be required at any moment) for the isolation of other infectious cases was obvious. Under these circumstances we arrived at the determination not to admit any further cases to the Hospital from Training Ships moored within the jurisdiction of the Port, and we instructed the Medical Officer accordingly. Further particulars in relation to the outbreak in question will be found in the Medical Officer's Report. In the said Report will also be found information in connection with:— (1.) The River. (2.) Small-Pox. (3.) Cholera. (4.) Enteric Fever. (5.) Other Infectious Diseases. (6.) The Hospital. (7.) Infected Clothing. (8.) Unsound Meat. (9.) Canal Boats. (10.) Canvey Island. Acting under the authority given to us by your Honourable Court, we appointed Mr. E. A. Tyler to fill the position of Clerk at the Port Sanitary Office, Greenwich, at a salary of One Guinea per week. We beg also to report that from a considerable number of applicants we selected William Anderson to fill the vacancy created by the resignation of Inspector Gilles, and we appointed him accordingly at a salary of 30s. per week, subject to the approval of your Honourable Court. All which we submit to the judgment of this Honourable Court. Dated this second dav of October, 1888. J. Sheppard Scott. G. W. Dray. Wm. H arvest. Geo. T. Thornes. A. C. Morton. G. E. Wood. J. E. Walford. Benj. Turner. A. Wagstaff. Frank Tayler. E. Atkinson. W. G. Howard. Thos. R. Bone. INDEX. Page Introduction 5 The River 8 Small-pox 9 Cholera 10 Enteric Fever 11 Scarlet Fever 12 Other Diseases 15 Infected Clothing 16 The Hospital - 17 Unsound Meat, &c. 18 Canal Boats 18 Canvey Island 19 Index to Appendices 21 7 PORT OF LONDON SANITARY OFFICES, GREENWICH, S.E., August, 1888. TO THE WORSHIPFUL THE PORT OF LONDON SANITARY COMMITTEE. Mr. Chairman and Gentlemen, I have again the honour of presenting you with a brief report of the sanitary work carried out in the Port of London during a period of six months. The figures are given in the Appendices, and, as usual, I shall limit my remarks to those points which require special attention or explanation. It will be seen that in all 9,693 vessels have been visited during the halfyear, and that of these no fewer than 8,524 (equal 87.93 per cent.) of the total number carried the British flag ; the next nationality in point of numbers being the Scandinavian, with a total of 422 (equal 4.35 per cent.). By far the larger number of these were found to be in a satisfactory sanitary condition, and in only 676 (equal 6.9 per cent.) was it necessary to order any cleansing or whitewashing to be carried out. As heretofore, such orders when given verbally are, as a rule, promptly attended to, and only in two instances was it necessary to serve the formal notice under the Public Health Act, while in none was it required to carry the matter any further. So thoroughly does the question of cleanliness now seem to be understood, that there is an actual spirit of rivalry among masters of vessels, especially those of the same line, as to who shall have the cleanest and best appointed forecastle. In 16 cases only has fumigation been considered necessary (vide Appendix C), and in all this was carried out gratuitously by your Inspectors. In consequence of serious delay in this operation in one case, a formal order is now served on the master of every vessel, when requisite, calling upon him, under the powers of Section 120 of the Public Health Act, to fumigate the vessel, or part thereof, within a definite specified time, and a note at the foot of the order states that on the written request of the master such fumigation will be carried out gratuitously by the Port Sanitary Authority. In this way we are able to guard against delay, as a summons can be 8 taken out at the end of the specified time in case of refusal, without the necessity of serving a second notice. At the same time, by offering to fumigate without expense, uniformity and thoroughness are ensured. Fumigation, to be efficient, must be very thorough, and cannot easily be satisfactory unless performed by those who have had special experience and training. Generally speaking, the quantity of sulphur employed is far too small, and the time of exposure to its action too short, and thus what should be a protection becomes not simply a farce but an actual danger, inasmuch as it creates a feeling of confidence and security for which there is no real foundation. As an instance of this, I may quote the case of the master of a large vessel who was perfectly satisfied with the fumigation of a space of nearly 40,000 cubic feet with five pounds of sulphur burning therein for about one hour, whereas a reasonable quantity would be nearly ½ cwt., and the time about five hours. The number of structural alterations required for the improvement of the hygienic condition of vessels gradually increases, but happily the willingness of masters and owners to comply with these requirements fully keeps pace with our demands. In 224 vessels 265 such alterations have been made. Of these, 114 were for the purpose of giving increased ventilation in various parts of the vessel, 19 required the provision of new water-tanks or vessels to replace those condemned as unfit for use, and 132 related to alterations required for improved lighting, heating, and means for ensuring cleanliness. See Appendix E. In 133 cases alterations have been ordered, but not yet returned as carried out. THE RIVER. The condition of the river water, owing to the low temperature, has happily not been so continuously bad as in former seasons. The temporary measures which the Board of Works are adopting seem, however, to have practically no effect in checking the serious nuisance which presents itself whenever the temperature rises even for a short time. Sir Henry Roscoe, who was consulted by the Board of Works on the question, in an elaborate and exhaustive report arrives at the following important conclusion :— " I feel that sooner or later the recommendations of Lord Bramwell's " Commission (see conclusions 10 and 13 in the Report of the Royal Com- 9 " mission) will have to be adopter!, and that the sewage, whether previously " clarified or not, must either be filtered through land, or discharged into the " Estuary at a point not higher than sea reach." This, your Worshipful Committee will remember, has been the opinion of your Medical Officer from the first. SMALL-POX. On 22nd January the s.s. " Malwa " arrived in London having had smallpox on board during the voyage. Four distressed seamen were embarked at Hong Kong on 4th December. The vessel reached Bombay on 23rd and left on 30th, one only of these four going on shore. On 10th January one of them developed a rash, and high temperature, and was sent to hospital at Port Said for " Typhus." On 18th an undoubted case of small-pox was reported, and another on 21st. On arrival at Plymouth these two men, with two other suspected cases, were removed to the hospital hulk Pique " with all their effects. It was thus, from the history, tolerably certain that the first man contracted small-pox and not typhus in Bombay. I therefore communicated with the Surgeon to the hospital at Port Said, and from him learned that the patient died the day after admission from hœmorrhagic small-pox. On the 22nd January the Metropolitan Asylums Board reported that a seaman suffering from small-pox had been admitted from s.s. " Rowena." On enquiry it was found that the vessel had sailed on 13th, the patient had left his ship on arrival, and had stayed at a Scandinavian lodging-house from 7th to 20th. On 19th he was taken ill, and on 20th went to the Seamen's Hospital, whence, two days later, he was removed to the small-pox hospital. It is clear, therefore, that he contracted the disease in London. On 24th a second case, from the same ship (probably infected from the first), was sent from the London Hospital. On 26th February the s.s. " Prometheus" on arrival reported having had two cases small-pox on voyage. She left Shanghai on 1st January, and both cases were attacked on 5th ; they were landed with all their effects at Swatow the following day, and the vessel fumigated. Small-pox was reported to be very prevalent at Shanghai at that time. c 10 On 29th February, notice was received from Local Government Board, Ireland, that s.s. "Oceana" was on her way from Belfast with small-pox on board. On her arrival it was found that her crew had joined on 17th, from another vessel, and that on 18th one of them had been attacked with small-pox and had been removed to hospital. She had not, however, been fumigated, and this was carried out on her way up the river. On the 18th March the s.s. " Glenorchy " came into the West India Dock having had a case of small-pox on the voyage. The vessel left Shanghai on 11th January, and the Chief Engineer was attacked on the following day. He was sent to hospital on 15th at Hong Kong, and the vessel fumigated. On 14th April a seaman was sent to the small-pox hospital from the Seamen's Hospital, and the case reported to your Medical Officer. He had left his vessel, " Ben Voirlich," in Hull, and had been staying at the Sailors' Home, Well Street. On the 14th May, the barges " Perseverance," " Belvedere," and " Spry," were fumigated on account of small-pox, under the following circumstances :— The Mate of "Belvedere" having joined on 22nd April was taken ill on 11th May, complaining of bad cold. He went home and was in bed till 14th, when he was seen by a medical man and sent to the Sanatorium, Gravesend. During the period of incubation of the disease he had slept on the " Spry " and also on the " Perseverance." They were therefore all fumigated. CHOLERA. During the half-year only two vessels were reported as cholera infected, and in both cases the disease had occurred some time previously. The s.s. " Rohilla," which arrived on 18th March, had a saloon passenger who was attacked on the 9th, and died on the following day. All the bedding and effects were thrown overboard. The s.s. " Astronomer," arriving on 7th April, had a case of " Choleraic Diarrhoea" at Calcutta on 23rd. 11 He was taken on shore and died the following day. Both the above vessels were visited by Dr. Whitcombe, under the Cholera Regulations, but no further action was deemed necessary, and they were at once admitted to free pratique. ENTERIC FEYER. On the 22nd January the s.s. " Celerity," screw fish carrier, brought up a patient from smack " Hero," fishing in North Sea, and sent him to London Hospital, where he was found to be suffering from enteric fever. The case was, therefore, reported to the Medical Officer of Health for Yarmouth, to which port the smack belonged. On 29th February the s.s. " Laertes,", on arrival, reported seven cases on her homeward voyage. She left Shanghai on 7th January, and three persons were attacked on the following day : one on the 10th, one on 17th, one on 19th, and one on the 1st February. Three cases were sent to hospital at Singapore on 21st January, the others being treated on board. On arrival, all were well. The vessel was thoroughly fumigated, and the water-tanks emptied and cleansed. On 12th March the s.s. " Orizaba," on arrival, reported a fatal case of enteric fever on the voyage. The patient was taken ill on 11th February (3 weeks after leaving Sydney) and died on 19th, having been carefully isolated in the ship's hospital. This was fumigated, and all bedding and clothes destroyed by the ship's Surgeon. On the 20th the Authorities of the London Hospital reported that a case of enteric fever had been admitted from s.s. " Arisaig." This vessel came in on 16th, and a seaman with '' bad cold " was admitted into hospital on 17th. As soon as the nature of the disease was known the vessel was fumigated, and the water-tanks emptied and cleansed. On the 8th June the s.s. "Mirror" reported a death from enteric fever on 24th November after a month's illness. c 2 12 The only point of interest was the disposal of the deceased's effects which although fumigated, had been handed over to the Authorities without any notice to that effect. SCARLET FEVER. A serious outbreak of scarlet fever occurred on board the London School Board Training Ship " Shaftesbury," lying off Grays, during the months of February and March. The facts are as follows :— On 17th January, a boy who had been on the tender " Themis " for about three weeks was reported sick. He complained of sore throat, gradually becoming worse until on the 20th he was admitted to the Infirmary on shore. On admission both tonsils were enlarged, and his temperature was 104°, rising to 105.2° at night. On the 21st his temperature was 105°, and an eruption appeared, described by Dr. Male (the Medical Officer of the ship) as " con" sisting at first of a number of large bright red raised papules (evidently "much enlarged and congested papillae), and becoming generally diffused " over his whole body." The high temperature continued until the 24th, when it gradually fell, becoming normal on the 26th. The rash faded, and desquamation occurred. He was discharged after six weeks. It was considered that the case, although not definitely diagnosed as scarlet fever, was yet of a sufficiently suspicious character to require that the boy should be isolated, and as he was too ill to be moved, this isolation was carried out so far as practicable in the ship's infirmary on shore. On the 20th February an undoubted case of scarlet fever occurred on board. And a 2nd on February 21st „ 3rd on February 23rd ,, 4th and 5th on February 25th „ 6th, 7th, and 8th on February 27th „ 9th on February 29th „ 10th and 11th on March 1st „ 12th on March 5th „ 13th on March 10th „ 14th on March 14th „ 15th on March 16th ,, 16th on March 20th The patients were at once removed to the Port Sanitary Hospital at Gravesend. 13 The first few cases were taken down in the ship's boat, but afterwards your Medical Officer placed the launch at the disposal of the ship. During the outbreak sixteen cases were thus removed, all proving of a mild type, and recovering satisfactorily. On the appearance of the outbreak I at once visited the ship, and after consultation with the Captain-Superintendent, advised :— (1). That every case should be removed to hospital immediately on diagnosis, and that the bedding and clothes should accompany them, and be there dealt with. (2). That the admission of new boys should be stopped. (3). That no visiting should be allowed, and (4). That the washing 'tween decks should be dispensed with, dry scrubbing being employed in lieu thereof. These suggestions were at once adopted. The Medical Officer visited the vessel twice daily, and a general inspection of all the boys was made by him twice a week. At the same time the sleeping deck was occasionally fumigated by the burning of a small quantity of sulphur. On the 28th March, no case having then occurred for eight days, I ordered the thorough fumigation of the vessel, and offered to send an Inspector on board to supervise and direct. This was carried out on 31st by an Inspector, when the whole ship was thoroughly fumigated for five hours, 145 lbs. of sulphur being employed for the purpose. The convalescents, on their return from hospital, were detained in isolation at the ship's infirmary before being allowed to go on board. In a report to the ship's authorities I made the following remarks :— " The origin of the outbreak is somewhat doubtful. I am certainly of " opinion that the first case was one of scarlet fever, though Dr. Male, who " carefully watched the boy, was unable to make a positive diagnosis. If this " were so the extension to the ship would almost certainly follow. Isolation " is practicably impossible in the building under any circumstances, and " absolutely so when other boys are living therein, and daily communication " with the shore takes place, as was the case. " Under the circumstances it is a matter for great congratulation that the " prompt measures taken should have proved so successful in checking the " progress of the disease. 14 " The outbreak itself suggests certain obvious precautionary measures for " the future. With regard to the general condition of the ship there are two " points of special importance. In the first place, the officers' steerage is " decidedly close and stuffy, and requires thorough ventilation. This can " easily be obtained by passing a large air-shaft up through the board-room " to the upper deck, and capping the same with a proper exhaust cowl. This " ventilator should be at least 18 inches in diameter. Secondly, on the " sleeping deck, the exposure of so much bare iron, with the consequent " dampness arising from condensation, is undoubtedly prejudicial to the health " of the boys, especially at night. The whole of this surface should be " covered with composition to prevent altogether this condensation. This " could best be done by cork and varnish. " With regard to actual precautionary measures to prevent, or at any rate " minimise, the possibility of the introduction of infection for the future :— "(1). Every boy on being sent down from London should be at once " bathed, and dressed in a fresh suit of clothes, the old ones being destroyed " or returned. " (2). He should then be detained on shore for at least eight days, strictly " isolated from the ship. " (3). The present infirmary should on no account be used for any cases " of an infectious character, inasmuch as isolation is not practicable. " (4). Fresh arrangements should be at once made for the provision of a " certain number, say ten beds, for cases of an infectious character. " Nos. 1 and 2 will greatly tend to check the importation of disease, " Nos. 3 and 4 its extension." " These are all simple suggestions, but obviously of great importance to " the health of the ship, and I would therefore urge upon your Honourable " Committee the necessity of carrying them into effect. In this I feel sure " that I shall be supported by your own Medical Officer and the Captain" Superintendent." These recommendations were at once acted upon, with the exception of the last relating to the provision of hospital accommodation. This important question was brought before your Worshipful Committee, and after some discussion, it was reluctantly resolved that no further cases should be admitted into the Port Sanitary Hospital from any of the training ships. I still, however, trust that some arrangement will be made whereby hospital accommodation may be provided under the care of the Port Sanitary uthority, and at the cost of the ship requiring it. 15 The matter was referred to the City Solicitor, who, after consultation with the Local Government Board, reported that the training ships were within the jurisdiction of the Port Sanitary Authority, who had the same power of compelling persons suffering from infectious desease to be removed to hospital from them, or from any other vessels, but that there was no legal obligation to compel the Corporation to receive them into their hospital, any more than there was in the case of a vessel arriving from a foreign country. In short, Section 124 of the Public Health Act, 1875, providing that " where any suitable hospital is provided, any person who is suffering from " any infectious disease on board any ship or vessel may, on a certificate " signed by a legally qualified medical practitioner, and with the consent of the " superintending body of such hospital, be removed by order of any Justice " to such hospital," applies equally to all vessels in the port, whether permanently stationary or engaged in commerce. OTHER DISEASES. On the 8th February two Lascars were taken to Port Sanitary Hospital from s.s. " Ravenna " for measles. The vessel left Bombay 6th January. On the 25th Januarv one Lascar was attacked, on 31st another Lascar and two children, and on 3rd February a Sedee boy. The Lascars were shipped in Bombay, and were there infected. The vessel was detained at Plymouth for twelve hours, and finally allowed to come on with the cases on board. v On 8th March the s.s. " Clan Macgregor," on arrival, reported a case of measles on voyage. Convalescent on arrival. On 9th May the s.s. " Chusan " arrived at Gravesend. She left Melbourne on 23rd March, and on 7th April a case of measles appeared, a second on the 19 th, and a third on May 2nd, a case of continued infection. The first recovered on board, the second was landed at Colombo, and the third at Plymouth. On the 18th May the s.s. "Iberia" passed into the Tilbury Dock after having sent two cases of measles to the Port Hospital. The first case occurred on 9th April, and was followed by nine others. They were all isolated on board, and eight were convalescent on the arrival of the ship. 16 On 21st June the s.s. "Orient," on arrival, reported a case of measles two days out from Sydney, which was successfully isolated on board. On the 11th April the s.s. "Rome" reported a case of chicken-pox on board The patient refused to go to hospital voluntarily, and was allowed to leave because chicken-pox is not included in the list of diseases under the regulations of your Worshipful Committee. At the time I protested against this view, and the matter was referred to your Solicitor, who reported that chicken-pox not coming under the regulations, the master of a vessel could not be punished for not reporting it, but that if the authority were cognisant of the existence of the disease, as in this case by the report of the Captain, an order could be obtained from a Justice of the Peace, under section 124, to compel the patient to go to hospital. This is not only law, but sound common sense, although much depends upon the magistrate before whom the case is taken. On the 13th April the s.s. "Beethoven" reported a fatal case of erysipelas on voyage, and buried at sea. The forecastle and effects were fumigated on the way up river. On the 8th June three cases of mumps were removed from s.s. "Peshawur," which had been lying in Royal Albert Dock for a fortnight. They were sent to the Port Hospital at the request of the owners. INFECTED CLOTHING. In two instances the effects of deceased seamen have been sent home without any notification or evidence as to the cause of death, and in two other cases where the cause of death was known to be infectious (one smallpox and the other malarial fever), no information was given as to their disinfection. All these consignments were therefore detained and thoroughly fumigated, the facts being, as usual, reported to the Board of Trade. As in all these cases the Board writes to the Consul or other official who transmits the clothes, the dangerous custom is gradually dying out, and in the great majority of cases full and complete information is now sent with the effects. This may at first sight seem a very small matter, but I think it must be regarded as a most important safeguard against the transmission of infectious disease, and I have to thank your Worshipful Committee for the very energetic manner in which you have supported me in attempting to put a stop to what was not only a dangerous but a growing practice. 17 THE HOSPITAL. The hospital staff remains the same, and excepting the presence of any severe outbreak is ample for the work. The building, which has now been erected nearly five years, requires the interior painting and renovating, and this work is already in the hands of the Sub-Committee, who have also decided to recommend that wooden louvred shutters be placed outside the windows. This, though expensive at first, will be a distinct improvement, inasmuch as it will do away with a certain risk of detention of infection by the inside blinds. In all, during the half-year, 23 cases have been treated at the hospital, viz.:— 4 cases measles, 16 „ scarlet fever, and 3 „ mumps. Fortunately Ave have not had to deal with more than one disease at a time, nor have we had to receive cases of small-pox. It is my duty here to call attention once again to the imperfect hospital provision at Gravesend. The existing wards, excellently constructed as they are, do not give sufficient accommodation for the separation of different varieties of disease. It might at any time occur that a case of small-pox and a case, say, of scarlet fever should be admitted at the same time, and if so, then the hospital would be at once fully occupied, and no more cases of any other disease could be safely admitted. In the provision of hospitals grave responsibilities are undertaken by sanitary authorities, and I am anxious only to place this important matter in its true light. Whether in a separate ward or no. it is certainly conceded as an indefensible act to place small-pox under the same roof as any other disease. And, further, I am of opinion that it would not be safe to place small-pox patients in either of our buildings while other cases were in any part of the hospital. This difficulty has occurred, but happily during hot weather, and was then got over by the purchase, at an expense of about 50l., of a hospital marquee. This is still available for the summer, but it is obvious that we cannot calculate on such cases occurring only in hot weather. As a matter of fact, epidemics occur during the winter months. D 18 It does seem, therefore, as I have previously urged upon your Worshipful Committee, absolutely necessary that another ward should be erected at a safe distance to be used for small-pox patients only. It will be remembered that this was the original plan of the Hospital as first submitted, and that one pavilion was dropped as a matter of economy, it being an understood thing that extension would be required at a later date. UNSOUND MEAT. During the last half-year a considerable quantity of meat has been seized by your officers as unfit for food, and destroyed by the order of a Magistrate. This quantity has been largely contributed to by one or two unfortunate consignments. The total amount of mutton thus dealt with was 73,301½ stones, which, although large, bears only a small proportion to the whole importation through the Docks, viz.: 1.4 per cent. Of Beef, only 512 sides were condemned, 3.4 per cent. of that which came under the notice of your officers. In addition to fresh meat, a few small parcels of salted meat, tinned meat, condensed milk, poultry, game, fruit, kidneys, and pigs' feet, have been seized as unwholesome, and dealt with in the same manner. Further particulars are given in detail in Appendix H. CANAL BOATS. Inasmuch as an Annual Report is required by the Canal Boats Act, I give, herewith, only a few brief notes as to the working thereof in the Port during the last six months. 371 boats have been inspected, the greater part being in good condition. Overcrowding is rare. These 371 boats, registered for a total number of 1343, carried only 952 on board. In five cases only were proceedings taken under the Act. 87 barges were for the first time registered under the Act. No case of infectious disease has been known to occur on a registered boat within the limits of the Port. 19 CANYEY ISLAND. The Island has received careful attention, and from time to time visits of inspection are made by your officers. The principal points which require attention are the provision and condition of closet accommodation, and the cleansing of cesspools and ditches in the immediate neighbourhood of the houses. A considerable number of orders for the carrying out of improvements have been given, and in the majority of cases have been already complied with, while some others are still in hand. During the month of June your Worshipful Committee made an inspection of the Island, and special attention was then called to the very unsatisfactory water supply. There are a few good wells on the Island, but these are not sufficient for the supply, apart from the difficulty of conveying water long distances by road. Most of the inhabitants obtain water from adjacent private wells, for which they pay, and the quantity and quality of which is in most cases deficient. What is really needed is a good Artesian Well for public supply in the centre of the village. To this owners of property are inclined to contribute, and I have reason to believe that, with the assistance of the Port Sanitary Committee, such a project can easily be carried out. I am now engaged in the organization of a scheme which I trust to be able to lay before you in a few weeks' time. I have the honour to be, Gentlemen, Your obedient Servant, WILLIAM COLLINGRIDGE, M.D., Medical Officer of Health, Port of London. D 2 21 INDEX TO APPENDICES. Appendix. Page A Number of Vessels inspected, in each Dock and on the River, from 1st January to 30th June, 1888 22 B Number and Nationality of Vessels inspected, from 1st January to 30th June, 1888 23 C Effects Disinfected, from 1st January to 30th June, 1888 - 24 D Vessels Fumigated, from 1st January to 30th June, 1888 - 25 E Number of Structural Alterations made, from 1st January to 30th June, 1888 26 F Number of Vessels in which Alterations have been ordered, from 1st January to 30th June, 1888 26 G Cases of Infectious Diseases in the Port of London, from 1st January to 30th June, 1888 27 H Unsound Meat, &c., during the Half-year ending 30th June, 1888 29 I Number of Canal Boats inspected under the Canal Boats Act during the Half-year ending 30th June, 1888 31 J Alterations ordered and carried out on Canvey Island 32 22 APPENDIX A. Number of Vessels Inspected in each Dock and on the River, from January 1st to June 30th, 1888. Docks. Number. Number to be Cleansed or Whitewashed. No. of Foul Cargoes. No. of Outward Bound. No. of Sick referred to Hospital. St. Katharine 277 15 — 2 2 London 485 58 — 8 1 Regent's Canal 288 27 — 1 2 Millwall 945 104 2 6 — West India 753 65 1 83 8 East India 293 25 — 25 1 Victoria 369 38 — 33 5 Royal Albert 494 19 — 17 5 Commercial 728 66 — 4 6 Gravesend District 2,459 123 — 79 2 River 2,602 ' 136 7 89 11 Total 9,693 676 10 347 43  Number. No. to be Cleansed, &c. Total to end of 1887 269,652 16,869 From January 1st to June 30th, 1888 9,693 676 Total since commencement 279,345 17,545 23 APPENDIX B. Number and Nationality of Vessels Inspected, from January 1st to June 30th, 1888. Nationality. Number. Proportion per cent. of the Total Number. American 7 .07 Austrian 16 .16 Belgian 15 .15 British 8,524 87.93 Danish 81 .83 Dutch 99 1.02 Finnish 13 .13 French 30 .30 German 398 4.10 Greek 3 .03 Italian 15 .15 Portuguese 2 .02 Russian 13 .13 Spanish 55 .56 Swedish and Norwegian 422 4.35 Total 9,693 24 APPENDIX C. Effects Disinfected from January 1st to June 30th, 1888. Date. Ship's Name. Where from. Date and Cause of Death. Where Disinfected. Date. Cause. Feb. 27 Graphic Palermo Jan. 13,'88 Sickness St. Katharine Dock House. Mar. 1 Lord Charlemont Port Said Unknown Unknown Tilbury Dock. „ 27 Midlothian Ioana Java Oct, 8,'87 Smallpox West India Dock. May 10 Grappler St. Thomas Jan. 24,'88 Malarial Fever South West India Dock. June 28 Dundela Cette Jan. 9,'88 Smallpox Port Sanitary Offices.  Number. Total to end of 1887 638 From January 1st to June 30th, 1888 5 Total since commencement 643 25 APPENDIX D. Vessels Fumigated, from January 1st to June 30th, 1888. Date. Ship's Name. Steam or Sailing. Where from. Cause of Fumigation. Jan. 22 Malwa Steam Shanghai Smallpox Feb. 8 Ravenna ,, Hong Kong Measles „ 29 Oceana ,, Ravenna Variola „ 29 Laertes ,, Shanghai Enteric Fever Mar. 8 Clan Macgregor ,, Calcutta Measles „ 10 Glenorchy ,, Shanghai Variola „ 20 Arisaig ,, Demerara Enteric Fever „ 31 Shaftesbury School ship Lying off Grays Scarlet Fever April 11 Rome Steam Sydney Chickenpox „ 13 Beethoven ,, New York Erysipelas May 10 Iberia ,, Sydney Measles „ 14 Belvedere and Perseverance Barges Lying off Northfleet Smallpox 19 Angler Sailing Lying off Greenwich Scarlet Fever June 8 Peshawur Steam Lying in Royal Albert Dock Mumps „ 11 Shannon ,, Patient embarked at Malta Enteric Fever e  Number. Total to end of 1887 248 From January 1st to June 30th, 1888 15 Total since commencement 263 26 APPENDIX E. Alterations made from January 1st to June 30th, 1888. Month. No. of Vessels in which Alterations have been made. Ventilations. Water tanks. Lighting, heating, cleansing. &c. Total No. of Alterations. January 35 15 2 29 46 "February 45 24 4 25 53 March 40 16 5 25 46 April 52 34 3 24 61 May 32 17 2 18 37 June 20 8 3 11 22 Total 224 114 19 132 265 APPENDIX F. Alterations ordered from January 1st to June 30th, 1888. Month. No. of Vessels in which Alterations have been ordered. Ventilations. Water tanks. Lighting, heating, cleansing, &c. Total No. of Alterations. January 15 5 4 8 17 February 16 7 3 12 22 March 8 2 3 3 8 April 29 18 4 12 34 May 21 7 4 14 25 June 22 6 3 18 27 Total 111 45 21 67 133 27 e 2 APPENDIX G. Cases of Infectious Diseases in the Port of London, from 1st January to 30th June, 1888. Date. Name of Vessel. Description. Official No. Owners or Brokers. Where lying. Disease. Source of Infection. Where case removed to. Jan. 22 Malwa Str. 68,380 Peninsular and Oriental S. N. Co., Leadenhall-st. Royal Albert Dock Small-pox (3)Enteric Fever (2). Bombay Port Said, Shanghai. „ 22 Rowena Str. 87,673 Harris & Dixon, 81, Grace church-street. Platform Smallpox (2) London Seamen'sHospital. „ 22 Celerity Str. 79,086 Hewett & Co., Limited. Shadwell Fish Market Enteric Fever (?) London Hospital. Feb. 8 Ravenna Str. 82,300 Peninsular and Oriental S.N. Co., Leadenhall-st. Gravesend and Royal Albert Dock. Measles? Rotheln (5) Bombay Port Sanitary Hospital. „ 26 Prometheus Str. 91,278 Ocean Steam Shipping Co., Liverpool. Royal Albert Dock Small-pox (2) Shanghai Swatow. „ 29 Oceana Str. — Peninsular and Oriental S. N. Co., Leadenhall-st. Gravesend Small-pox (1) London Belfast Hospital. „ 29 Laertes Str. 81,318 ' Ocean Steam Shipping Co., Liverpool. Royal Albert Dock Enteric Fever (7) Shanghai 3 to Singapore. Mar. 8 Clan Macgregor Str. 86,692 Cayzer, Irvine & Co., Leadenhall Buildings, Gracechurch-street. Tilbury Dock Measles (?) Convalescent on Board. „ 10 Glenorchy Str. 68,382 McGregor, Son & Co., 1, East India-avenue. South-West India Dock Small-pox Shanghai Hong Kong. „ 12 Orizaba Str. 93,688 Anderson, Anderson & Co., 5, Fenchurch-avenue. Tilbury Dock Enteric Fever (1) Sydney Died at Sea. „ 20 Arisaig Str. 85,950 R. Gordon & Co., 44, Palmerston Buildings. London Dock- Enteric Fever (?) London Hospital. „ 18 Rohilla Str. 81,798 Peninsular and Oriental S.N Co., Leadenhall-st. Royal Albert Dock Cholera (1) Calcutta (?) Died at Sea. „ 31 Shaftesbury School - London School Board Grays Scarlet Fever (16) (?) Port Sanitary Ship Probably from Hospital. London by 1st doubtful case. 28 APPENDIX G.—continued. Date. Name of Vessel. Description. Official No. Owners or Brokers. Where lying. Disease. Source of Infection. Where case removed to. Mar. Exmouth School Ship — Metropolitan Asylums Board. Grays Scarlet Fever (?) "Shaftesbury" (?) Ship's Infirmary. April 7 Astronomer Str. 87,923 Temperley,Carter & Darke, 21, Billiter-street. Gravesend "Choleraic Diarrhœa" Calcutta Calcutta. „ 11 Rome Str. 81,820 Peninsular and Oriental S. N. Co., Leadenhall-st. Ditto Chicken-pox (2) Malta Travelled to Liverpool. „ 12 Beethoven Str. 61,475 John Black and Co., 19, Change Alley. Ditto Erysipelas New York Died at Sea. „ 14 Ben Voirlich Sail 68,067 H. J. Watson, 5, Oswald street, Glasgow. Hull Small-pox (?) Small-pox Hospital May 9 Chusan Str. 87,414 Peninsular and Oriental S, N. Co., Leadenhall-st. Royal Albert Dock Measles (3) Melbourne - Colombo and Plymouth. „ 10 Iberia Str. 69,336 Pacific Steam Navigation Company, Liverpool. Tilbury Dock Measles (10) - Sydney Port Sanitary Hospital. „ 13 City of Calcutta Str. 85,862 M ontgomerie & Workman, Gracechurch-street. Victoria Dock Continued Fever (?) London Hospital. „ 4 Belvedere and Per Barges (43,993) Knight. Bevan & Sturge. Northfleet Small-pox (1) (?) Sanatorium, Gravesend. severance (60,892) Northfleet. „ 19 Angler Sail 63,342 H. G. Rattle, Greenwich Greenwich Scarlet Fever London Deptford Fever Hospital. June 8 Peshawur Str. 65,641 Peninsular and Oriental S. N. Co., Leadenhall-st. Royal Albert Dock Mumps (3) London Port Sanitary Hospital. „ 8 Mirror Str. 91,900 Eastern Telegraph Co., 50, Old Broad-street. South-West India Dock Enteric Fever (?) Died at Sea. „ 11 Shannon Str. 83,934 Peninsular and Oriental S. N. Co., Leadenhall-st. Royal Albert Dock Enteric Fever Malta St. Thomas' Hospital. „ 21 Orient Str. 82,254 Anderson, Anderson & Co., 5, Fenchurch-avenue. Tilbury Dock Measles Sydney Convalescent on arrival. 29 APPENDIX H. Unsound Meat, &c., during the Half-year ending June 30th, 1888. Date. Ship's Name. Official Number. Where lying-. Where from. Amount condemned. Jan. 4 Bulimba 86,726 Royal Albert Dock Brisbane 1 cask salted Beef. 4 Dorunda 73,795 Ditto Ditto 1 cask salted Beef. , 4 Faith Barge Victoria Dock Hulk, " Prince of Wales." 5 Lambs. „ 7 Rimutaka 89,652 Royal Albert Dock New Zealand 1 carcase Mutton. „ 18 Teviotdale- 85,949 West India Dock River Plate 44 carcases, 26 pieces Mutton. „ 25 Tainui 90,001 Royal Albert Dock New Zealand 3½ carcases and 21 legs Mutton. Feb. 6 Garonne 65,855 Tilbury Dock Sydney 184† carcases Mutton. „ 28 Kaikoura 89,627 Royal Albert Dock New Zealand 92 carcases Mutton. „ 29 Tainui 90,001 Ditto Ditto 4 cases, 10 tins Beef; 4 tins Corned Beef, 6 tins Mutton Mar. 16 Dacca 85,910 Ditto Brisbane 380 cases, 105 tins Beef. „ 20 Opawa 73,740 West India Dock New Zealand 3 carcases, 5 pieces Mutton. „ 24 Tongariro 75,148 Royal Albert Dock Ditto 1 leg Mutton. „ 20 Arawa 89,953 Ditto Ditto 24 carcases, 35 parts, and 32 boxes Kidneys. April 7 Denmark 54,945 Ditto New York 42 cases Condensed Milk. „ 28 Ionic 86,299 Royal Albert Dock New Zealand 4 carcases Mutton. „ 30 Austral 85,923 Tilbury Dock Melbourne 4 Sheep. 30 APPENDIX H.—continued. Date. Ship's Name. Official Number. Where lying. Where from. Amount condemned. May 3 Marlborough 73,858 East India Dock New Zealand 3½ carcases of Lamb. „ 10 Christianborg Danish Millwall Dock Liban 6 cases Ducks, 2 cases Hares, 1 case Capercailzies. „ 10 Iberia 69,336 Tilbury Sydney 137 cases Apples. „ 22 Dunstan Borough 65,387 Commercial Dock Revel 49 cases Game. „ 23 Selembria 86,288 West India Dock New Zealand 10,910 carcases of Mutton. „ 28 Alexander II. German St. Katharine Dock Revel 508 sides Beef, 8 quarters Beef. „ 28 Ormuz 93,341 Tilbury Sydney 138 cases unsound Fruit. „ 30 Coptic 84,164 Royal Albert Dock New Zealand 1 piece Beef, 50 carcases Mutton, 35 part carcases, and 1 case Kidneys. „ 30 Rimutaka 89,652 Ditto Ditto 19 carcases Mutton and 4 parts. June 5 Hesperides 87,978 South West India Dock. River Plate 19 carcases Mutton, 1 hind half, 1 leg. „ 5 Belgrano French London Dock Buenos Ayres 6 carcases Mutton. „ 16 Tainui 90,001 Royal Albert Dock New Zealand 99 carcases Sheep and 10 Lambs. „ 16 Thorsten Swedish Millwall Dock Gottenburg 6 casks Pigs' Feet. „ 18 Ruapehu 76,069 Royal Albert Dock New Zealand 22 Lambs and 1 leg. „ 16 Oceana Ditto Melbourne 48 cases Apples. „ 26 Zarate 89,783 West India Dock Buenos Ayres 3 hind quarters Sheep. 31 APPENDIX I. Number of Canal Boats Inspected under the Canal Boats Act, from January 1st to June 80th, 1888. Months. No. of Canal Boats Inspected. Registered No. of Persons to live on board. No. of Persons living on board. No. of Canal Boats without Certificates on board. No. of Prosecutions against Masters and Owners. No. of Cases of Infectious Disease on board. No. of Barges Registered by the Port of London Sanitary Authority. January 40 148 109 — — — 27 February 56 206 131 l — — 25 March 67 222 167 4 5 — 16 April 71 252 198 3 — — 3 May 90 350 241 5 — — 1 June 47 165 106 — — — 15 Total 371 1343 952 13 5 — 87 32 APPENDIX J. CANVEY ISLAND. Alterations, &c., ordered and carried out, to 30th June, 1888. Cesspits, ditches, &c., to be cleaned out. Cesspits to be made. Closets to be repaired. Closets to be built. Other alterations. Total. Ordered 26 25 5 1 5 62 Carried out 26 6 1 1 4 38 Charles Skipper & East, Printers, St. Dunstan's Hill. E.C. 31. SANITARY. REPORT, PORT OF LONDON SANITARY COMMITTEE, WITH THE HALF-YEARLY REPORT OF THE MEDICAL OFFICER OF HEALTH FOR THE PORT OF LONDON, To 31st December, 1888. Presented 22nd March, 1889. PLON 14 31. SANITARY. REPORT, PORT OF LONDON SANITARY COMMITTEE, WITH THE HALF-YEARLY REPORT OF THE MEDICAL OFFICER OF HEALTH FOR THE PORT OF LONDON, To 31st December, 1888. Presented 22nd March, 1889. b WHITEHEAD, Mayor. A Common Council holden in the Chamber of the Guildhall of the City of London, on Friday, the 22nd day of March, 1889. THE Port of London Sanitary Committee did this day deliver into this Court a Report in writing, under their hands, of Proceedings of the Committee, and submitting the Report of the Medical Officer of Health of the Port of London for the Halfyear ending 31st December, 1888, and recommending the following re-appointments for One Year, from Lady Day, 1889, viz.:— William Collingridge, Esq., M.D., as Medical Officer of Health, t his present Salary of 700/. per annum ; William Henry Lewis, Henry Spadaccini, William Baillie, William Anderson, as Sanitary Inspectors; also for authority to re-appoint— Philip Whitcombe, Esq., Medical Officer of the Hospital at Gravesend, at his present rate of remuneration, viz.:— Two hundred Guineas per annum; which was read. Resolved, That the same be agreed to, and it is Ordered, that the Report be printed and a copy sent to every Member of this Court. MONCKTON. 4 To the Right Honourable the Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and Commons of the City of London, in Common Council assembled. WE whose names are hereunto subscribed, of your Port of London Sanitary Committee, to whom it has been referred to carry into execution the Public Health Acts, 1872 and 1875, beg to submit for the consideration of your Honourable Court the Report of Dr. William Collingridge, the Medical Officer of Health of the Port of London, for the Half-year ending 31st December, 1888, which Report contains a full and detailed account of the work done during that period in the Port of London by the Medical Officer and the Inspectors. Your Committee note with much satisfaction the particularly healthy condition of the Port during the past Half-year, only a very few cases of infectious disease having been reported. As will be seen by the Medical Officer's Report, the work of inspection and registration of Canal Boats within the jurisdiction recently conferred upon the Port Sanitary Authority is being carefully carried out, and it is satisfactory to find that a decided improvement in the condition of Canal Boats has been effected. In the Report will also be found, amongst other matters, important information on the following subjects :— (1.) Diphtheria. (2.) Compulsory Notification. (3.) Emigrants. (4.) Water Supply. (5.) Nuisances. (6.) Infected Clothing. (7.) Unsound Meat. We beg further to report that it becomes necessary that the Medical Officer and the Inspectors of Nuisances of the Port of London should be re-appointed for a period of twelve months from the 25th March, 1889 ; we accordingly recommend that William Collingridge, Esquire, M.D., should be re-appointed for that period as the Medical Officer of Health for the Port of London, at his present salary of 700/. per annum, and that William Henry Lewis at 175/. per annum, Henry Spadaccini at 55s. per week, William Baillie at 45s. per week, and William Anderson at 40s. per week, be re-appointed Inspectors. As stated in our Reports, agreed to by your Honourable Court, great advantage has been found from having a Medical Officer to take charge of the Hospital at Gravesend ; and, as Mr. Philip Whitcombe continues to perform his duties in a most satisfactory manner, we are of opinion that his services 5 should be retained for the same period as the other officers, and that we should be authorized to re-appoint him accordingly at his present rate of remuneration, viz., Two hundred Guineas for one year. All which we submit to the judgment of this Honourable Court. Dated this fifth day of February, 1889. C. H. Stewart. W. G. Howard. John Layton. A. Wagstaff. Frank Tayler. Benj. Turner. David Burnett. David Greenaway. Wm. Courtney, Junr. C INDEX. Page Introduction 9 Infectious Diseases 11 Diphtheria13 Compulsory Notification 13 Emigrants 16 Water Supply 18 Nuisances 18 Infected Clothing 19 Unsound Meat 20 The Launch 20 The Staff 21 Report on Canal Boats Act for 1888 21 Index to Appendices 26 C 2 9 PORT OF LONDON SANITARY OFFICES, GREENWICH, S.E., January 4th, 1889. TO THE WORSHIPFUL THE PORT OF LONDON SANITARY COMMITTEE. Gentlemen, I have the honour to present you herewith a brief Report of the sanitary work carried out in the Port of London by your officers during the second half of the year 1888. During this period the various duties of the department have been performed to my satisfaction by your Inspectors, and, although many minor changes have been made, with a view to greater efficiency of supervision, it has not been my duty to report any need for alteration either in the staff or the general arrangements. On reference to the Appendices at the end of this Report it will be seen that a total of 10,050 vessels of all classes have been inspected by your officers, and I would point out that only complete inspections are included in this number. Where, for any reasons, as sometimes happens (for instance when a vessel is actually moving into dock), this cannot be thoroughly carried out, a few important leading questions are put to the officer in charge at the time, and the sanitary visitation carried out as soon as possible afterwards. Of this number (10,050) no fewer than 8,738 (= 86.94 per cent.) carried the British flag; the Scandinavian, with 483 (= 4.8 per cent.) being the next in order of frequency. In 329 cases, or 3.2 per cent. of those visited, it was necessary to order whitewashing or cleansing of some kind to be carried out, and in all this was done without any serious trouble. The masters of two British vessels refused to carry out a verbal cleansing order, and the formal notice, under the Public Health Act, was therefore served. This had at once the desired effect. In one or two instances the masters of foreign vessels refused at first on the ground that, not being under the British flag, the Port Sanitary Authority had no power to give such orders. 10 An appeal to the Consul of their country was quite sufficient to convince them of the equal liability of all nations to the provisions of the Public Health Act while in British waters. Ten vessels were fumigated on account of infectious disease having occurred on board : two for small-pox, three for enteric fever, two for malaria, two for intermittent fever, and one for measles. On reference to Appendix E it will be seen that a very large number of structural alterations have been ordered and carried out. 214 such alterations have been made on 180 vessels, several often being required on the same ship. These, which comprise improvements for the sake alike of seamen and owners, involve the important question of ventilation, water storage, lighting, and heating. Thus, on an average, it will be seen that one structural alteration has been carried out every working day : some of these trifling it may be, some involving a considerable expense, but all alike tending to improve the hygienic condition of ships. Moreover, when it is remembered that in no single case has it been necessary to take any proceedings to enforce these requirements to be carried out, the valuable assistance and co-operation of shipowners will be at once self-evident. And, as I have frequently remarked in previous Reports, the tendency is for owners to pay increased attention, not only to demands for alterations, but also to suggestions, knowing, as they do, that these are only made when considered really necessary for the health and comfort of those concerned. The merchant seaman of the present day is far more cared for and looked after than he ever was, and, if sufficient care be taken to prevent his being too much spoiled, there can be no doubt that the owner in the long run will reap the benefit. In connection with this subject of improvements I would mention the great advantage that results to the crews of barges by the substitution of slate or galvanized-iron water tanks for the old cask so frequently in use. It is our rule, whenever calling upon an owner to cleanse or condemn a water cask, to insist upon the economy and sanitary benefit of a properly constructed tank, with the result that these are gradually coming into common use. A considerable number of sailing and other barges have already adopted them. From Appendix F it will be noticed that in 64 vessels 70 alterations have been ordered but not yet carried out, for various reasons. Some few have been lost sight of, and, in the majority, we know by experience that the work has been done, though not officially reported. 11 INFECTIOUS DISEASES. I am happy to be able to report that the health of the Port has been most satisfactory. Practically no disease of any importance has existed during the past half-year. Below I give brief particulars of the few cases reported :— On the 3rd July a doubtful case of small-pox was removed to the Port Sanitary Hospital from the steamship " Oceana," lying in the Royal Albert Dock. The vessel had been lying in London since 11th June, and the infection must, therefore, have originated here. After arrival at Hospital the disease developed, and was recognised as chicken-pox. On the 8th of August a patient left the steamship " Cartagena," feeling unwell, went to the Seamen's Hospital, Greenwich, and was at once sent on to the Metropolitan Asylums Board's Hospital for small-pox, and the case reported to your Medical Officer. The vessel had arrived on the previous day, and had sailed from Genoa and Carthagena, and it was possible that the disease was contracted at either of these Ports. The vessel was at once fumigated, re-vaccination offered to the crew gratuitously, and notice sent to the Sanitary Authority at Granton, to which place she was bound. On 9th July the steamship " Kaikoura " reported, on arrival, a convalescent case of enteric fever. Nothing was necessary beyond the fumigation of cabin and effects. On 14th September a case of enteric fever was taken to the Metropolitan Asylums Board's Hospital from the barge " Minnie," lying at Woolwich. She left the Colne on 8th, and the mate's wife was taken ill the same day, and was supposed to be suffering from sea-sickness. On the 14th she was visited by a medical man, who certified the disease to be enteric fever. She was removed to Hospital by the Woolwich Local Board of Health, who applied for payment of expenses incurred in so doing. This I refused on the ground that, had the case been reported to the Port Sanitary Authority, the patient would have been removed to Hospital in the ordinary way without any expense. 12 On the 30th October the steamship " Garth Castle " came into Grave send, and reported a case of enteric fever on board. She was, therefore, at once visited by Dr. Whitcombe, who pronounced the patient to be convalescent, and he was allowed to go to his home in London. On 15th September a Norwegian, suffering from measles, was taken to the Port Hospital from the " Thetis" on her arrival at Gravesend. The vessel left Kotka on the 16th August, and ran into Lillesand on 29th, where she remained a week wind-bound. The patient went to visit his family (then suffering from measles) on the 29th August, and remained with them till the 1st September. He was attacked with the ordinary symptoms on the 13th,—which must have been either the 13th, 14th, or 15th day after infection. On the 14th July a patient with malarial fever was taken to the Port Hospital from the steamship " Start Point," then lying at Fresh Wharf. The ship left Sherboro on the 18th May, having been lying there for more than a month, during which time 12 cases had occurred on board, with one death. Five other cases occurred on the voyage, four of which were landed at Marseilles, and sent to Hospital ; the fifth, on arrival, was convalescent, but still very weak. On 27th July the steamship " British Queen" came in with a convalescent case of malaria on board. The patient was taken ill on the 14th, the day of leaving Boston. On 27th October the steamship "Derwent" arrived at Gravesend, and on the same day a patient, who was said to be convalescent from intermittent fever, died on board. The bedding and clothes of the patient were at once destroyed, and the cabin fumigated. On 14th November the steamship " Pallas," on arrival, reported having had a fatal case of intermittent fever on 18th October, seven days out from Calcutta ; the cabin and effects were therefore fumigated. On 18th December the steamship " Purnoea" came round from Glasgow, and on the same day a seaman was sent to Hospital suffering from erysipelas of hand and arm, which supervened on an injury received on 16th; but no report w7as made to this Authority. Inasmuch as the vessel came coastwise, no visit was made by Her Majesty's Customs. I, therefore, at once wrote to the owners, Messrs. Gray, Dawes and Co., pointing out that a serious breach of our regulations had occurred, and calling upon them to give reasons or explanation why the master should not be at once proceeded against for 13 this offence. In reply to this letter the master stated (1) that he was not aware that the man was suffering from erysipelas, and (2) that he was ignorant of the regulation requiring notification. He further expressed his regret that, through want of knowledge, he had committed any breach of regulations. Taking into consideration the extreme likelihood of a master being entirely ignorant of the nature of erysipelas, and of his regarding it simply as an injury, I have advised your Worshipful Committee that a warning would be sufficient, and that no further proceedings be taken in the matter. DIPHTHERIA. I have to call attention to the fact that diphtheria is one of the diseases now admitted to the Metropolitan Asylums Board's Hospitals. For some time pressure (led chiefly by the Vestry of Kensington) has been brought to bear upon the managers to induce them to admit cases of this disease, which was gradually gaining ground in London. A communication from the Kensington Vestry was sent to every Sanitary Authority in the Metropolis, asking them to support an application to the Local Government Board to bring in a Bill giving the Metropolitan Asylums Board power to admit diphtheria. The managers stated that they were willing to admit such cases with the sanction of the Local Government Board, but that the Board felt unable to give this sanction. Eventually, after the managers had considered the question of Hospital accommodation, and stated that they were prepared to cope with the disease, the Local Government Board announced that, although they had no legal power to give sanction, still such cases might be at once admitted ; and that, pending the obtaining of formal authority from Parliament, the managers would be indemnified against proceedings for illegal expenditure of public money. COMPULSORY NOTIFICATION. The great advantage of notification of infectious disease in any district is now too well realized to be any longer a matter for discussion, and the only difficulty is the machinery by which it can best be effected. Notification becomes of more vital importance in dealing with disease on board ship, when every case may become the starting point of a fresh outbreak to an extent scarcely realizable on shore. D 14 In the early part of 1881 regulations were drawn up for the guidance of masters of emigrant ships for dealing with cases of infections, but no compulsory powers were obtainable. In February, 1883, I called the attention of your Worshipful Committee to section 125 of the Public Health Act, 1875, which provides that "any Local "Authority may make regulations (to be approved of by the Local Govern"ment Board) for removing to any Hospital to which such Authority are "entitled to remove patients, and for keeping in such Hospital so long as may "be necessary, any persons brought within their district by any ship or boat "who are infected with a dangerous infectious disorder; and such regulations "may inflict a penalty on any offenders." It appeared that such regulations might reasonably demand notification as one of the most important elements in dealing with such cases. At my request it was, therefore, resolved that, in conjunction with the City Solicitor, I should draw up certain regulations which were approved by the Local Government Board, and still remain in force. They require that, when a vessel arrives at Gravesend with infectious disease on board, the officer in charge shall report to the Medical Officer of Health the existence of such disease ; and, when required, shall convey the sick person to Hospital, under a penalty of five pounds. This is a most useful measure, and one which has been found to work well, having since been copied by many other Port Sanitary Authorities. But, as I have frequently pointed out, it is incomplete. There are a large number of vessels, such as sailing barges, which trade within the limits of the Port, and, therefore, although constantly plying to and fro, can never strictly be said to " arrive " in the Port of London. The whole of this class of vessel is, therefore, at the present moment, exempt from compulsory notification. In the regulations under the Canal Boats' Act, 1877, it is provided that " in every case where a person on a canal "boat is seriously ill, or is evidently suffering from an infectious disease, the "master of the boat, if at the time the boat is proceeding on a journey, shall, as "soon as may be practicable, give information thereof to the Sanitary Authority "within whose district is situate the canal, or the part of the canal along "which the boat may at the time be passing, and, on the arrival of the boat at "its Port or place of destination, to the Sanitary Authority within whose "district such Port or place is situate, and also to the owner of the boat, and "the owner of the boat, on receiving such notice, shall himself notify to the "Sanitary Authority having jurisdiction in the place to which the boat "may have been registered as belonging." Unfortunately, the sailing barges trading in the Port are already registered under the Merchant Shipping Act, and, therefore, cannot at present 15 be compelled to register as canal boats. Section 10 of the Canal Boats' Act, 1884, enacts that, " if it shall at any time appear to the Local Government "Board, on the representation of any registration or Sanitary Authority, or of "any Inspector appointed under this Act, that the principal, and this Act "ought to apply to any vessel or class of vessels which would be within the "definition of canal boat, contained in section 14 of the principal Act, if such "vessel or class of vessels were not registered under the Merchant Shipping "Act, 1854, and the Acts amending the same, the Local Government Board "may declare that the principal Act, and this Act may apply to such vessel or "class of vessel although the same may be registered as aforesaid, and there"upon the same shall be deemed to be a canal boat or canal boats within the "meaning of the Act; and the definition contained in section 14 of the "principal Act shall be amended accordingly." The necessity of ensuring notification of infectious disease on so large a class of vessel, so well calculated to ensure extension of infections, appeared to be a reasonable ground for representing to the Local Government Board the advisability of including the sailing barges (already under the Shipping Act) under the Canal Boats' Act ; and such representation was accordingly made. After considering the question, unhappily the Local Government Board found insurmountable difficulties in the way, and they therefore refused the extension. Obviously it is still open to the Corporation, as the Port Sanitary Authority, to promote a Bill in Parliament providing for the compulsory notification of infectious disease on every vessel within the limits of the Port, irrespective of class ; and, judging from the experience of other Authorities, this would in all probability become law. But the expense would be considerable, and it moreover seems very hard to put an Authority to a large outlay to obtain that which they ought to be able to obtain by asking. To avoid this difficulty, I would suggest that the Port Sanitary Authority should call upon the Local Government Board to obtain powers from Parliament to sanction Bye-Laws for the notification of diseases, when applied to by a Sanitary Authority, in the same way and under the same restrictions as Bye-Laws are now made under the Public Health Act for other purposes. I believe this to be possible, and, if carried out, would not only give the Port Sanitary Authority that power which is absolutely needed for the protection of the Port, but would also enable other Local Authorities to obtain the same, if desired, with but little trouble and practically no expense. It would be of course a much simpler plan for the Government to bring in a Bill for the notification of disease throughout the country, but, unfortunately, D 2 16 the time is not yet come for so advanced a measure ; and, moreover, compulsory powers are worse than useless to any Authority which does not wish to make use of them. EMIGRANTS. From time to time, on inspection of emigrants by the Medical Officer of the Board of Trade, cases of infectious diseases are discovered ; and the disposal of these is a very important consideration, inasmuch as they are always examined within the limits of the Port, and, therefore, happily, the Port Sanitary Authority has the power to compel their removal to Hospital. According to the regulations in force, if on board any vessel, the master is bound to effect their removal ; but the question of liability for their maintenance in Hospital has always been a debated one. Owners have always held that if the passage-money were returned on rejection, before they come on board, they were no longer called upon to pay for their support. The usual rule has been for an account to be sent in due form, and, although this has been sometimes paid, it has always caused a great amount of friction. Recently this has much increased, and finally culminated in one large firm refusing to afford any facilities unless they were formally declared free from any liability on behalf of emigrants whom they had never received on board, and to whom they had returned all moneys paid. Taking into consideration the small amount at issue, and the vastly more important question of checking outbreaks of infectious disease, your Medical Officer undertook, provisionally, to hold owners free from any liability, and to obtain a decided legal opinion. This was at once agreed to, and accordingly the matter was referred to the City Solicitor, who reported as follows :— " To the Worshipful the Port Sanitary Committee, " Gentlemen,—In obedience to your Reference of the 2nd October last, that " I should report as to whether the owners of outward-bound Emigrant " Ships are legally responsible for the maintenance in Hospital of cases of " infectious diseases rejected by the Medical Officer of Board of Trade on " examination when the passage-money has been refunded, I have the " honour to report that by section 45 of the Passengers' Act Amendment " Act, 1855, it is provided that 'if the Emigration Officer at any Port from " ' which a vessel is about to proceed to sea is satisfied that any person on " ' board any passenger ship is, by reason of sickness, unfit to proceed, or " ' is for that or any other reason likely to endanger the health or safety of " ' other persons on board, such Emigration Officer shall prohibit the " ' embarkation of such person, or, if embarked, shall require him to be " ' re-landed, and the master shall thereupon re-land such person with his 17 " ' effects' ; and, by the next section, 46, it is provided that ' the whole of the " ' moneys which may have been paid by or on account of such passenger " ' for his passage shall be refunded him.' " This re-landing, coupled with the fact of the return of the passage-money, " in my opinion nullifies any contract which might exist between the owner " of a vessel and a passenger or emigrant, and that, in consequence, such " owner is in no way liable for the maintenance in Hospital; and there are " no circumstances which take the case out of the provisions of section 132 " of the Public Health Act, 1875, which makes a person in a Port Sanitary " Hospital liable for his maintenance while there. " While upon this subject, I may call the attention of your Committee to " section 47 of the Passengers' Act Amendment Act, 1855, which provides " that ' subsistence money shall be paid by the master of a passenger ship to " ' any person so re-landing at the rate of One shilling and sixpence a day " ' for each statute adult until he shall be re-embarked, or decline, or neglect " ' to proceed, or until his passage-money, if recoverable under the previous " ' section of the Act, be returned to him.' " It might be, therefore, that if the passage-money is not returned to him, " the passenger in Hospital, although even then primarily liable to the " Port Sanitary Authority for his maintenance, would have power to recover " One shilling and sixpence a day subsistence money from the owner of " the vessel ; but this, of course, would only apply if the passage-money were " not returned. " I have the honour to be, Gentlemen, " Your most obedient Servant, "H. HOMEWOOD CRAWFORD, " City Solicitor. " Guildhall, November 7th, 1888." This is, from a public health point of view, a most satisfactory decision, as it removes the only objection of shipowners to afford every possible facility in dealing with such cases. Naturally, by the return of the passage-money, the owner of the vessel will at once relieve himself of the liability, and, obviously, in the case of an emigrant, it is not possible to recover the expense from the patient himself. We have made, therefore, one more step in the direction of free Hospital treatment in cases of infectious disease. Here the patient is compulsorily isolated for the public good, and it seems only just and logical that the public should be called upon to pay for its own protection. 18 WATER SUPPLY. The water supply in the Port has, as usual, received careful attention. Arrangements have been made whereby the barges used for its conveyance in some of the docks are periodically emptied and overhauled, the result being that in the majority of cases extensive repairs are found to be necessary. The barges used for this purpose are, as a rule, old wooden ones, generally almost worn out before being adapted. This, in itself, is a great mistake, and I have tried, so far unsuccessfully, to induce the owners to employ iron barges for this purpose. Although obviously more expensive to start with, it is very easy to show that in a few years' time, taking into consideration the constant expense of repairs caused by the rapid perishing of wood, alternately wet and dry, they would prove cheaper, and, what is still more important, the water itself would be far less liable to contamination. A far better plan would be for those Dock Companies who still allow water barges to exist in their docks to abolish them altogether, and to lay water on to all the quays, so that the tanks of vessels could be filled by a proper hose direct from the main. This is already done in the most important docks, and certainly obviates some of the most probable chances of pollution, while furnishing a revenue to the Company. Twenty-four water barges have already been registered by this Authority. Of these, ten had been inspected at the end of the year, and in all, repairs (in some almost equal to re-construction) were ordered before the craft were again used. Five of these have since been put into proper order, and five are still out of use. NUISANCES. The chief nuisances dealt with during the last half-year have been those caused by unloading manure barges, and by smoke from tugs on the river. In the case of the first, but little can be done ; the unloading is expedited as much as practicable, but inasmuch as the riparian inhabitants themselves give no support, but rather seem to encourage the proceeding, it is clear that no good is likely to result from any energetic action on the part of your officers. Six tug owners have been warned as to emission of black smoke from their vessels, and in all cases the warning has been sufficient to abate the nuisance. A serious nuisance, caused by a foul ditch running from the Soap Works at Hammersmith parallel to the river, has been abated in consequence of pressure brought to bear by your Authority upon the Local Board in whose district it is situated. 19 This ditch received sewage from certain houses, and in hot weather became a great nuisance to the public, and doubtless an injury to public health. The Local Board have constructed a sewer parallel with it which carries the sewage away from the houses that were formerly connected with it, and have also diverted the waste-pipe from the Soap Works. The ditch itself has been partly filled in, and is now very nearly dry. If there should be any trouble at all arising therefrom in hot weather it will be an easy matter to have the ditch filled. INFECTED CLOTHING. Notwithstanding the action of your Worshipful Committee and the Board of Trade, in endeavouring to minimise as far as possible danger of infection by means of clothing of deceased seamen brought in vessels to this country, three cases have been discovered during the half-year where this offence has been committed. As this question is of serious import, I give below details of the cases :— On 28th July, steamship " Orizaba " arrived in Tilbury Dock, having on board the effects of A. Mulroa, late seaman of steamship " Callirrhoe," of Liverpool, No. 54,927, who died of typhoid fever in William Town Hospital, Sydney, during April, 1888. The effects were sent home by the shipping master at Adelaide, addressed to the shipping master in London as cargo, without any information as to their being the clothes of a person who had died of typhoid fever. They were, therefore, fumigated and the facts reported to the Board of Trade. On 14th September, steamship " Frisia" arrived in London Dock with the effects on board of John Edwards, late of the " Faichion," and Wm. Pikes, late of the " Hankow," who died at Hong Kong in January, 1888, of smallpox. No evidence of disinfection having taken place accompanied these effects. They were, therefore, fumigated and notice given to the Board of Trade. A letter was afterwards, on 13th December, received from Board of Trade, covering one from the harbour master at Hong Kong, which stated, in answer to their inquiries, that the omission to report the non-disinfection of these clothes was due to an oversight, to prevent which care would be taken for the future. On the 11th September information was given by the shipping master at Tidal Basin of deceased seamen's effects lying in Royal Albert Dock, brought home on board steamship " Shannon." 20 The effects were those of W. Napier, chief officer of steamship "Lombardy," who died at sea July 7th, 1888, and those of W. T. Farmer, storekeeper of the same vessel, who died at Hong Kong July 5th, 1888. Both died from cholera. No evidence as to whether disinfection had or had not taken place accompanied them. They were also fumigated. As these clothes were not reported to your Inspector on his boarding the vessel on her arrival, the matter was reported to the owners (The Peninsular and Oriental Steam Navigation Company), with the result that they replied that they "have instructed their Secretary to communicate with all their "agents abroad in order that effects of seamen may not, in future, be " forwarded to this country without proof of disinfection." ' UNSOUND MEAT. The particulars given in Appendix H will show that although during the half-year no considerable seizures have been made, still that the quantity is a large and increasing one. The articles of food thus dealt with include fresh meat, tinned meat, onions, sardines, pigs' heads, plums, pears, hams, herrings, poultry, and dates. In all cases where a large quantity is seized at one time it is in consequence of some accident. The cause of the sardines being condemned, on September 11th, was a fire in London Dock. In the case of a large seizure of herrings, on November 26th, from steamship " Sitona," the cause of the consignment being unfit for food was the fact of the vessel being detained for a week on account of heavy weather ; and again in the case of the dates, seized on December 28th, the vessel herself had been sunk in the river, and the damage was caused by sewage-polluted salt water. With these exceptions, the damaged food forms an extremely small percentage of the quantity coming into the Port. THE LAUNCH. The Launch continues to perform her work satisfactorily, and requires but very small expenditure for necessary repairs. On the 13th August last she came into collision with the barge " Isis," and sustained some slight damage to the house ; the owners of the barge in question at once admitted their liability, and had all the necessary repairs carried out at their expense. The only change in the staff has been that the boy Grilles has voluntarily left the service in order to go to sea, and Alfred Brown has been engaged by your Worshipful Committee to take his place at the same salary. 21 THE STAFF. It is my duty to record with satisfaction the fact that two of your Inspectors, Mr. Henry Spadaccini and Mr. William Baillie, have been examined by the Sanitary Institute, and have received certificates of competency to act as Inspectors of Nuisances. This is a sound, practical, and theoretical test, and the fact of their being so qualified is not only highly creditable to them, but cannot fail to be of value to the Port Sanitary Authority. CANAL BOATS. I have the honour to report upon the working of the Canal Boats Acts, 1877 and 1884, in the Port of London during the year 1888. The work of inspection has been carried on as usual by the Inspectors in charge of the various districts, who visit every canal boat met with in their daily tour. The number thus inspected during the year was 698, the number during 1887 being 721. Inasmuch as every dock is visited daily, I am of opinion that very few boats escape observation, except those, perhaps, which are simply passing through the district en route for some other Canal ; as, for instance, those going from the Surrey Canal and Regent's Canal up the river, or vice versd. No doubt some of these, which merely pass through the docks and remain in the district only a few hours, would not be visited by the Inspectors of the Port Sanitary Authority. As long, however, as they are visited at their starting point and again at their destination but little advantage would accrue from an inspection during the course of a short voyage. Moreover, I believe the number thus escaping to be but small. The knowledge of the provisions of the Acts, and the penalties incurred by their violation, is gradually extending among the owners, and therefore less difficulty arises with the masters. These are, as a rule, uneducated men, many of them unable to read, and but few caring to do so ; and, therefore, unless the owners thoroughly understand that the Acts are to be carried out, breaches of regulation must constantly be met with. e 22 It is satisfactory to note that, at the present, support in enforcing these regulations is afforded, and even offered in some cases by the very firms who two years ago most strenuously opposed them, and incited their masters to disregard them. This has been brought about in the Port of London by steady pressure and considerable expenditure of time and trouble in the explanation of the meaning of the Acts, and, in certain cases, by an appeal to the strong arm of the Law. It is found by experience that, unless the breach is a wilful one, remonstrance at the first is far more efficacious than an immediate appeal to a Magistrate ; and, moreover, if eventually such a course has to be taken, it has much more weight both with the Magistrate and the offender. In one instance, where after due warning three summonses were taken out against one owner, this proceeding has resulted in converting an enemy of the Act into a staunch upholder thereof. Overcrowding is rare on these boats. The 698 examined during the year were registered for 2,570, and carried only 1,837. This difference is partly owing to the fact that some registration Authorities are in the habit of registering a boat to carry one adult for every 60 cubic feet the cabin contains, so that one class of wide boat is uniformly licensed for eight statute adults. This, however, certainly was not the intention of the Act; nor, according to my opinion, is it consistent with the regulations of the Local Government Board, Section I., No. 3. d., which states distinctly that "every cabin, "if intended to be used as a dwelling, shall be so constructed or fitted as to 11 provide adequate and convenient sleeping accommodation for the persons " allowed by these regulations to dwell in the boat." In fixing the number of persons to be carried in a boat, I have specially considered this provision of sleeping accommodation, and, where two bunks only are provided or available, have limited the number, whatever the cubic contents of the cabin may have been. Where it has been desired to carry more than the number of bunks in existence I have had the extra accommodation added before carrying out the registration. However, overcrowding does still occur. These are mostly cases of a poor man with a large family, always very difficult to deal with; where a man has only just sufficient money to support a young family, it stands to reason that he cannot afford to pay for the keep of one or two on shore, even if the children are old enough to be left. Clearly the children should be under the care of the mother, and it seems a cruel thing to deprive her of them, even where the extra expense can be borne. 23 At the same time it is, naturally, almost impossible to obtain a conviction for the offence of carrying one, or even two, extra where the family are all young. I have often shrunk from the responsibility of ordering a father to leave a young girl, the eldest of a family, with friends or neighbours, on shore, or the alternative of requiring the infant to be removed from the boat. In spite of what has been done to render canal-boat life more civilized, and more in accordance with the requirements of modern ideas of humanity and common decency, there can be no question that it is not an existence which is in any way desirable for either women or children ; and the sooner this is clearly realized the better for the physique and morals of the rising generation. Nearly every woman on a canal boat will tell the same story : "It is not fit for us or our children, but what are we to do ? " The failure of the Education Acts to reach these children is quite a sufficient argument for this view. In twenty-five instances boats have been found without the proper certificates on board, and, on inquiry in all, this was due to either carelessness on the part of the owners (which was at once remedied), or to ignorance on the part of the masters, in which case a warning has always been found sufficient. In none of these cases was there found any other breach of the Act, and therefore no proceedings were necessary. No case of infectious disease has come under my notice in the port during the past twelve months, and none has been reported to me by any other Authority. In five instances it has been found necessary to take out summonses, the master only being prosecuted in all. Four of these were for indecent occupation, under Regulation III. b., and the master in each case was fined ; the fines with costs ranging from 5s. &d. to 16s. 6<i., a sufficiently heavy punishment for a poor man (see Appendix II). I give, very briefly, particulars of these cases :— The " Violet " was registered for man, wife, and two children ; and was occupied by man, wife, and two boys, both being 16 years of age. The " Caroline," registered for three men ; was occupied by man, wife, child of two, and girl of 15 years. " Alice," registered for man, wife, and two children ; was occupied by master, his wife, and boy of 15 years. " Harry," registered for man, wife, and two children ; was occupied by master, his wife, her sister, 20 years old, and boy of 11 years. e 2 24 " Hettie," registered for man, wife, and two children ; was occupied by man, wife, and four children, this last case being a sample case of overcrowding. Without doubt there is a steady improvement going on in the condition of canal boats. They are kept more cleanly, and the masters take more pride in their vessels, and are more anxious to carry out the suggestions made to them by the inspectors. None of the Inspectors of the Port Sanitary Authority have ever experienced the slightest difficulty in making inspections, but there is rather a desire on the part of the masters to show their boats, and especially any defect therein, as they feel that the Authority can obtain improvements in their condition which they, unaided, are unable to. One " monkey boat" only, during the year, was found to be unregistered, and this came under the Act as soon as attention was called to it. During the year 88 barges were registered for the first time by this Authority. These are all wide boats, of the class known as dumb barges. There is still some difficulty in getting the owners of these craft to register, though I believe that this objection is gradually declining in force. One owner was summoned for failing to register, and, upon hearing at Dartford, the Bench dismissed the case on the ground of " there being no evidence of habitation." Evidence had been given that the men in charge had slept on board for three consecutive nights. This has naturally not increased the desire of owners to register. The obvious course now open to your Worshipful Committee appears to me to report this case and decision to the Local Government Board for their consideration, and to try a similar case in each Police Court available for this purpose, lengthening the time until some practical definition of habitation is arrived at. At the present moment I have a case where a barge has been slept in for 14 nights out of 16 during which she was visited, and I would suggest that a summons be taken out against both owner and master. The regulation which requires the change of master to be notified to the Registration Authority has in no single case been complied with, although it is known that changes have taken place. In the class of vessels which are now being registered it does not appear practicable to enforce such notification, which frequently would be a great hardship to owners. 25 It ofttimes happens that a man is in charge of one barge only for a few. days, and is then changed to another to suit the convenience of the firm ; and in some cases the number of hands employed varies, and is less than the number of craft. This point has, therefore, not been insisted upon. There still remains the great difficulty of notification of disease on sailing barges under the Merchant Shipping Act, and, therefore, not liable to registration under the Canal Boats Acts. The Corporation has endeavoured, at my suggestion, to induce the Local Government Board, under the powers of Section 10 of the Canal Boats Act of 1877, to make a regulation bringing them under the latter Act, but there are, apparently, insurmountable difficulties in the way. I have the honour to be, Gentlemen, Your obedient Servant, WILLIAM COLLINGRIDGE, M.D., Medical Officer of Health, Port of London. 26 INDEX TO APPENDICES. Appendix. Page. A Number of Vessels inspected in each Dock and on the River, from July 1st to December 31st, 1888 27 B Number and Nationality of Vessels inspected, from July 1st to December 31st, 1888 28 C List of Effects Disinfected 29 D List of Vessels Fumigated, with Causes 30 E Number of Structural Alterations carried out 31 F Number of Vessels in which Alterations have been ordered, but not yet completed 31 G Cases of Infectious Diseases in the Port of London 32 H Particulars of Unsound Food condemned by Port Sanitary Authority 33 I Number of Canal Boats inspected 34 J Prosecutions under Canal Boats Acts 35 27 APPENDIX A. Number of Vessels Inspected in each Dock and on the River, from July 1st to December 31st, 1888. Docks. Number. Number to be Cleansed or Whitewashed. No. of Foul Cargoes. No. of Outward Bound. No. of Sick referred to Hospital. St. Katharine 202 3 — 6 — London 298 13 — 24 — Regent's Canal 208 5 — 42 — Millwall 721 19 — 10 — West India 760 41 — 104 1 East India 240 8 1 36 1 Victoria 563 38 1 35 — Royal Albert 629 25 — 23 2 Commercial 728 23 — 15 6 Gravesend District 2,578 44 — 65 1 River 3,123 110 — 177 6 Total 10,050 329 2 537 17 Number. No. to be Cleansed, &c. Total to June 30th, 1888 279,345 17,545 From July 1st to December 31st, 1888 10,050 329 Total since commencement 289,395 17,874 28 APPENDIX B. Number and Nationality of Vessels Inspected, from July 1st to December 31st, 1888. Nationality. Number. Proportion per cent, of the Total Number. American 5 04 Austrian 9 .08 Belgian 6 .05 Brazilian 1 .0 British 8,738 86.94 Costarican 1 .00 Danish 118 1.17 Dutch 130 1.29 Finnish 6 .05 French 34 .33 German 427 4.24 Greek 2 .01 Italian 11 .10 Portuguese 1 .00 Russian 17 .16 Spanish 61 .60 Swedish and Norwegian 483 4.80 Total 10,050 29 APPENDIX C. Effects Disinfected, from July 1st to December 31st, 1888. Date. Ship's Name. Where from. Date and Cause of Death. Where Disinfected. Date. Cause. July 29 Orizaba Sydney April, '88 Typhoid Fever Tilbury Dock. Sept. 14 Frisia Hong Kong January, 1888 (2) Small-pox On Board. „ 19 Shannon Bombay July 5, '88 Cholera Royal Albert Dock. „ 7, '88 Number. Total to June 30th, 1888 638 From July 1st to December 31st, 1888 3 Total since commencement 641 F 30 APPENDIX D. Vessels Fumigated, from July 1st to December 31st, 1888. Date. Ship's Name. Steam or Sailing. Where from. Cause of Fumigation. July 3 Oceana Steam --- Chicken-pox 9 Kaikoura - „ Lyttelton Enteric Fever 14 Start Point „ Sherboro Malarial Fever 27 British Queen - „ Boston „ Aug. 8 Cartagena - „ Genoa Small-pox Sep. 15 Minnie Barge Colne Enteric Fever „ 15 Thetis Sailing Kolka Measles Oct. 27 Derwent Steam West Indies Intermittent Fever „ 30 Garth Castle „ Natal Enteric Fever Nov. 14 Pallas „ Calcutta Intermittent Fever Number. Total to June 30th, 1888 248 From July 1st to December 31st, 1888 10 Total since commencement 258 31 APPENDIX E. Alterations made, from July 1st to December 31st, 1888. Month. No. of Vessels in which Alterations have been made. Ventilations. Water tanks. Lighting, heating, cleansing, &c. Total No. of Alterations. July 31 14 4 18 36 August 27 16 4 13 33 September 24 13 3 13 29 October 32 12 4 21 37 November 38 20 1 27 48 December 28 14 3 14 31 Total 180 89 19 106 214 APPENDIX F. Alterations ordered, from July 1st to December 31st, 1888. Month. No. of Vessels in which Alterations have been ordered. Ventilations. Water tanks. Lighting, heating, cleansing, &c. Total No. of Alterations. July 13 — — 13 26 August 7 5 2 2 16 September 4 — 1 3 8 October 7 1 1 6 15 November 17 5 5 9 36 December 16 3 2 12 33 Total 64 14 11 45 70 F 2 APPENDIX G. Cases of Infectious Diseases in the Port of London, from July 1st to December 31st, 1888. Date, Name of Yessel. Description. Official No. Owners or Brokers. Where lying. Disease. Source of Infection. Where case removed to. July 3 Oceana Str. 93,170 Peninsular and Oriental S. N. Co., Leadenhall-st. Royal Albert Dock Chicken-pox (?) London Port Sanitary Hospital. „ 9 Kaikoura Str. 89,627 New Zealand Shipping Co., Leadenhall-street. Royal Albert Dock Enteric Fever - - Convalescent on arrival. „ 14 Start Point Str. 86,678 Laming and Co., 8, Leadenhall-street. Fresh Wharf Malarial Fever - Sherboro Seamen'sHospital. „ 27 British Queen Str. 8,468 Ronald son and Co., 34, Leadenhal 1-street. Gravesend Malarial Fever - Boston (?) Convalescent on arrival. Aug. 8 Cartagena Str. 81,574 William McMurray, 39, Queen-street, Cheapside. Hanover Hole Small-pox Genoa or Carthagena (?) Metropol. Asylums' Board Hospital. Sept. 15 Minnie Barge 45,650 W. C. Murrell, 16, Dockhead, Bermondsey. Barth's Wharf, Woolwich. Enteric Fever Colchester Metropol. Asylums' Board Hospital. „ 15 Thetis - Sing. Norwegian. J. Gronsund and Co., 36, Seething-lane. Gravesend Measles Lillesand Port Sanitary Hospital. Oct. 27 Garth Castle Str. 82,849 Donald Currie and Co., F en church- street. Gravesend Enteric Fever ---- Convalescent on arrival. Nov. 14 Pallas Str. 93,775 Rathbone Brothers, 21, Water-street, Liverpool. Tilbury Intermittent Fever ---- Died at Sea. Dec. 24 Purnea Str. — Gray, Dawes and Co., 13, Austin-friars. Royal Albert Dock Erysipelas Traumatic Seamen'sHospital. 32 APPENDIX H. Unsound Food, &c., during the Half-year ending December 31st, 1888. Date. Ship's Name. Official Number. Where lying. Where from. Amount condemned. July 17 Tula Danish Millwall Dock Copenhagen 31 tons Onions. „ 26 Dunedin- 68,085 East India Dock New Zealand 3 carcases Mutton. Aug. 21 Arawa 89,953 Royal Albert Dock Ditto 722 tins Mutton, 39 tins Rabbit. „ 21 Tongariro 76,067 Ditto Ditto 618 tins Mutton, 20 tins Rabbit. Sep. 11 ---- London Dock ---- 162,500 tins Sardines. damaged by fire „ 19 Coptic 84,164 Royal Albert Dock New Zealand 242 tins Beef and Mutton. „ 27 Bele Swedish Millwall Dock Gottenborg 6 casks Pigs' heads. Oct. 3 Ulunda 90,491 Victoria Dock Halifax, N.S. 2 barrels Plums. „ 16 Coptic 84,164 Royal Albert Dock New Zealand 4 carcases Mutton, 3 pieces Beef. „ 25 Ruapehu- 76,069 Ditto Ditto 7 carcases Mutton. „ 31 Stockholm City 89,466 Victoria Dock Boston 1 barrel Pears. Nov. 1 Tamise F rench Royal Albert Dock Havre 2 barrels Hams. „ 1 Mary Hough 76,365 Regent's Canal Dock Liverpool 12-j tons Tinned Meat. „ 6 Tainui 90,001 Royal Albert Dock New Zealand 3 carcases Mutton. „ 9 Kaikoura 89,267 Ditto Ditto 47 carcases Mutton, 5 boxes Kidneys. „ 23 Orizaba 93,688 Tilbury Dock Sydney 2 carcases Mutton. „ 26 Sitona Swedish Commercial Dock Uddevalla 749 cases Herrings. „ 30 Stannington 67,297 London Dock Guerusey 19 tins Corned Beef. Dec. 4 Narva 88,157 Millwall Dock Reval 10 cases Geese, 3 packages Poultry. „ 12 China 60,963 Ditto Ditto 5 crates Geese. „ 28 Tongariro 76,067 Royal Albert Dock New Zealand 229 carcases Mutton, 121 part carcases, and 31 legs. „ 28 Govino 85,019 Tilbury Dock Bussorah Dates, about 600 tons. 33 34 APPENDIX I. Number of Canal Boats Inspected under the Canal Boats Acts during 1888. Months. No. of Canal Boats Inspected. Registered No. of Persons to live on board. No. of Persons living on board. No. of Canal Boats without Certificates on board. No. of Prosecutions against Masters and Owners. No. of Cases of Infectious Disease on board. No. of Barges Registered by the Port of London Sanitary Authority. January 40 148 109 — — — 27 February 56 206 131 l — — 25 March 67 222 167 4 5 — 16 April 71 252 198 3 — -- 3 May 90 350 241 5 — — 1 June 47 165 106 — — — 15 July 69 260 183 3 — — — August 34 117 82 2 — — — September 48 186 131 1 — — — October 64 225 173 — — — 1 November 64 240 169 4 — — — December 48 199 147 2 — — — Total 698 2,570 1,837 25 5 — 88 APPENDIX J. Prosecutions under the Canal Boats Acts, from January 1st to December 31st, 1888. Date when Case was heard. Name of Boat. Reg. No. Registration Authority. Owner's Name. Fine. Remarks. Mar. 15 Violet 32 Berkliampsted Fellows, Morton and Co., Wharf Road, City Road. Is., and 4s. 6d. costs. Master summoned. Indecent occupation, III. b. „ 15 Caroline 51 Warwick John Franks Is., and 4s. 6d. costs. Master summoned. Indecent occupation, III. b. „ 28 Alice 453 Birmingham J. Griffiths 5s., and Us. 6d. costs. Master summoned. Indecent occupation, III. b. „ 29 Harry 489 Birmingham T. Griffiths, Brentford Is., and 6s. 6d. costs. Master summoned. Indecent occupation, III. b. „ 29 Hettie 251 Wolverhampton Fellows, Morton and Co. Dismissed with caution. Master summoned^ Overcrowding. 35 LONDON: CHARLES SKIPPER AND EAST, PRINTERS, ST. DUNSTAN'S HILL, E.C. 1889.