S. 2220. 861a. F. 1.1000 11.1902. PORT OF LONDON SANITARY AUTHORITY. telegraphic Address:— MEDOFF, LONDON. Telephone Deptford 36. GREEN WICH, 190 To From The Medical Officer of Mealth Port of London. Offices:- KING WILLIAM STREET, GREENWICH, S.E. With the compliments of the Medical Officer of Health, PLON 11 REPORT, For the Year ended 31st December, 1905, OF THE MEDICAL OFFICER OF HEALTH FOR THE PORT OF LONDON. BY HERBERT WILLIAMS, M.D., M.D. (State Medicine), London University, M.R.C.S.Eng., L.R.C.P.Lond., D.P.H.Camb., medical officer of health, port of london, medical inspector for purposes of the aliens act, 1905, port op london, fellow and member of council, royal sanitary institute, fellow of the incorporated society of medical officers of health, fellow of the royal geographical society. LONDON: Printed 3y Charles Skipper & East, 49, Great Tower Street, E.C. 1906. VAUGHAN MORGAN, Mayor. A Common Council holden in the Chamber of the Guildhall of the City of London, on Thursday, the 5th day of April, 1906. THE Port of London Sanitary Committee did this day deliver into this Court a Report in writing under their hands, of their proceedings, and submitting the Annual Report of the Medical Officer of Health of the Port to the 31st December, 1905; which was read. And a Motion being made and Question put, That this Court doth agree with the Committee in their said Report, the same was resolved in the Affirmative. Ordered, That the Report be printed, and a copy sent to every Member of this Court. BELL. To the Right Honourable the Lord Mayor, Aldermen and Commons of the City of London, in Common Council assembled. WE, whose names are hereunto subscribed, of your Port of London Sanitary Committee, to whom it has been referred to cany into execution the powers assigned to the Corporation, as the Port of London Sanitary Authority, by the Local Government Board, under the Public Health (London) Act, 1891, beg to submit for the information of your Honourable Court the Annual Report of Dr. Herbert Williams, the Medical Officer of Health for the Port of London, for the year ended the 31st December, 1905, which Report contains a full and detailed account of the work done in the Port during that period by the Medical Officers and Inspectors. The Report deals very fully with the work of medical inspection carried out with a view to the prevention of the introduction of Infectious Disease into this country. It will be noted from the Report that Cholera appeared on the Continent of Europe, and that special precautions were necessary during the months of August, September and October, especially with a view to keeping under observation passengers arriving from Cholera-infected districts. It is satisfactory to report that the precautionary measures adopted were most successful, and that the arrangements made and work done by the Port Sanitary Authority and its Officers received the approval of the Local Government Board. Reference is made in the Medical Officer's Report to the Aliens Act, 1905, which came into force on the 1st January, 1906, and to the fact that the Medical Officer of Health was appointed Medical Inspector under the Home Office for the purpose of carrying out the medical inspection under that Act of alien immigrants arriving in the Port of London. Under the order of your Honourable Court we have made all necessary arrangements for the proper execution of the Act in the Port, and have engaged the services of a temporary Assistant Medical Officer in connection therewith. Details are also given by the Medical Officer as to the imperfect accommodation provided on vessels bringing alien immigrants into the Port of London. Your Committee have made strong recommendations on the subject to the Board of Trade and to the Russian Consul-General in London. Assurances have been received from the Consul-General that the facts will be brought to the notice of the Russian Government for such action as may be considered necessary. Mention is also made of the unsatisfactory accommodation provided on ships for crews. We have directed a communication to be forwarded to the Board of Trade, expressing the hope that in the Merchant Shipping Bill, which has been introduced into Parliament, the Board will introduce clauses which will deal effectively and satisfactorily with this matter. The Medical Officer also refers in his Report to the subject of the medical inspection of ships at Sheerness. His Majesty's Customs proposed to the Rochester Port Sanitary Authority that vessels should no longer be required to " bring to " at Garrison Point, Sheerness, for the purpose of inspection, but should be allowed to proceed direct to Rochester, and be dealt with there. The Rochester Port Sanitary Authority viewed this suggested alteration with some apprehension, and your Committee also expressed strongly the opinion that the alteration proposed was undesirable, and was not in the interests of public safety. His Majesty's Customs accepted this view, so that no alteration was made, and the arrangements, therefore, remain as before. The Medical Officer of Health points out that, owing to the extension of the jurisdiction of the Port Sanitary Authority granted in 1898, many premises within the area of the Docks, including factories, workplaces, workshops, private residences, &c., have required and received inspection, and an application has been made to the Local Government Board for the assignment of further powers under the Public Health (London) Act, 1891, with a view to dealing effectually with nuisances arising thereon. Among other matters included in the Report is an account of the large quantities of unsound food stuffs which have been detected by the Food Inspectors during the year, and destroyed as unfit for human food. The Hospital at Denton, which has hitherto been lighted with oil, has been recently connected by main with the Gas Company's works at Gravesend, and the grounds and interior of the Hospital are now satisfactorily lighted. In accordance with the Order of your Honourable Court, an account of Receipts and Expenditure in connection with the Port of London Sanitary Authority for the year ended the 31st December last, is appended for the information of the Court. All which we submit to the judgment of your Honourable Court. Dated this third day of April, 1906. Edward Hughes. J. J. Baddeley. S. Spencer. Benj. Turner. David Haydon. Robt. Gresley Hall. T. Hastings Miller. Richard Stapley. Walter Dennis. S. Alderton. Horace S. Dove. E. Horace Green. Thos. Goldney. Tyson Crawford. 1905. PORT OF LONDON SANITARY COMMITTEE. Mr. Richard Stapley, Cripplegate Within, Chairman. ALDERMEN. Sir Horatio Davies, K.C.M.G., M.P. Frederick Prat Alliston, Esq. Thomas Boor Crosby, M.D. Howard Carlile Morris, Esq. David Burnett, Esq. Sir Thomas Vezey Strong, Knt. (Sheriff). COMMONERS. Mr. David Haydon Aldersgate. Pearse Morrison, Esq., Deputy Aldgate. Mr. James Banks Pittman Bassishaw. Thomas Hastings Miller, Esq Billingsgate. Daniel Greenaway, Esq., Deputy Mr. Edward Ardley Bishopsgate. Mr. Charles Cheers Wakefield Bread Street. William Henry Williamson, Esq Bridge. Mr. Walter Frederick Pankhurst Broad Street. Mr. Walter Dennis Candlewick. Mr. Edward Constantine Castle Baynard. Mr. William Henry Thomas Cheap. Mr. Horace Spencer Dove, F.A.I. Coleman Street. Mr. Edward Hughes Cordwainer. Mr. Thomas Goldney Cornhill. Mr. James Lake Cripplegate Without. Mr. Robert Betson Warrick Dowgate. Mr. D. George Collins N.S. Farringdon Within. William Rome, Esq., J.P., F.S.A., F.L.S. S.S. Farringdon Within. Benjamin Turner, Esq., Deputy Farringdon Without. Nathaniel Fortescue, Esq., J.P. S.S. Farringdon Without. James Cloudsley, Esq., J.P Langbourn. Joseph Barrett, Esq., Deputy Lime Street. John Harris, Esq., J.P. Poctsoken. Mr. Sigismund Pollitzer Queenhithe. Captain Robert Gresley Hall, D.L Tower. Mr. Samuel Spencer, A.I.C.E Vintry. Mr. Edmund Horace Green Walbrook. Corporation Representatives on the Thames Conservancy Board (ex-officio Members of the Committee) :— Sir David Evans, K.C.M.G., Alderman. Edward Eyre Ashby, Esq., Deputy. William Henry Pannell, Esq., J.P., Deputy. Sir Walter Wilkin, K.C.M.G., Alderman. Mr. William Cooper. Alpheus Cleophas Morton, Esq. 4 INDEX. page. Aliens Act, 1905 11-18, 24 Ditto (Rules and Appendix) 19-23 Alien Immigrants—Diseases of 28 Ditto Ships—Reports on 25-27 Beri-Beri 45-46 Bye-laws 8, 62, 65 Ditto (proposed) 65-66 Canal Boats Acts 71-75 Chicken-pox 44 Cholera 30-33 Committee—List of Names 3 Crew Spaces 66-68 Diphtheria 41 Enteric Fever 41-43 Health of Crews 46-47 Hospital 69-70 Infectious Disease 29-48 Introductory 7 Launches 70-71 Measles 44 Medical Inspection 7-9 Merchant Shipping Act 68 Nuisances 58-62, 64 Offensive Cargoes 62 Plague 33-35 Public Health (London) Act, 1891 65-66 River Thames 64 Sanitary Conveniences 62 Sanitary Inspection 10-11 Scarlet Fever 39-40 Scurvy 46-47 Small-pox 37-39 Smoke Nuisances 58, 59, 60 Staff 71 Ditto—List of 6 Structural Alterations 58, 59, 61 Thames, River 64 Training Ships 45 Unsound Food 49-57 Yellow Fever 33 5 INDEX TO TABLES. table. page. I. Medical Inspection—Gravesend 9 II. Ditto —Sheerness 9 III. Sanitary Inspection—Summary 10 IV. Infectious Disease—-Summary 29 V. Cholera 33 VI. Plague 34 VII. Rats destroyed—Return of 36 VIII. Small-pox 37 IX. Scarlet Fever 40 X. Diphtheria 41 XI. Enteric Fever 42,43 XII. Infectious Disease—Training Ships 45 XIII. Beri-Beri 46 XIV. Vessels and premises disinfected 47 XV. Effects disinfected 48 XVI. Unsound Food destroyed 49 XVII. Nuisances 58 59 XVIII. Sanitary Works 63 XIX. Hospital—Admissions, Discharges and Deaths 69 XX. Canal Boats 75 Appendix. Receipts and Expenditure—Account of 76 6 STAFF. List of Officers forming the Staff of the Port of London Sanitary Authority, 31st December, 1905. Office. Name of Officer. Date of Appointment. MEDICAL OFFICER OF HEALTH - Herbert Williams, M.D.Lond., M.R.C.S., L.R.C.P., D.P.H. Camb. June, 1901. ASSISTANT MEDICAL OFFICERS— GrAVESEND G.C. Hancock, M.R.C.S..L.R.C.P, D.P.H.Lond. October, 1897. W. M. Willoughby, B.A., M.D., B.C., D.P.H.Camb. May, 1901. J. S. Warrack, M.A., M.D..C.M. Aberdeen, D.P.H.Lond. April, 1903. Sheeunehs - E. V. Legge, M.A., M.D., B.C., B. A.O.,L.M. (Temporary),Dublin. September, 1902. GREENWICH OFFICES— Clerk W. J. Albrow March, 1890. 1st Assistant E. A. Sorrell October, 1894. 2nd ditto W. C. Barham June, 1903. Junior ditto H. N. Jones June, 1903. FOOD INSPECTORS *H. Spadaccini, Cert.R.San.Inst. - July, 1898. *W. Anderson, Cert.R.San.Inst. - July, 1898. *T. W. Bailey, Cert.R.San.Inst. - July, 1901. SANITARY INSPECTORS - *W. G. Romeril, Cert.R.San.Inst.- August, 1892. *A. Garland, Cert.R.San.Inst. May, 1894. *W. G. Wetjen, Cert.R.San.Inst. - August, 1898. *W. W. Burr, Cert.R.San.Inst. August, 1898. *H. R. Hopkins, Cert.R.San.Inst. - February, 1899. P. R. Lambe. Cert.R.San .Inst. - January, 1900. DENTON HOSPITAL— J. H. Rolfe, Cert.R.San.Inst. September, 1901. Medical Officer G.C.Hancock, M.R.C.S..L.R.C.P., D.P.H.Lond. July, 1901. Nurse Matron J. Hughes April, 1904. Assistant Nurse I. Deehan July, 1904. Nurse Probationer N. 0venden March, 1905. Ditto I. Walker March, 1905. Maidservant E. Batchelor September, 1905. Caretakers R. Adams September, 1905. E. Adams September, 1905. STEAM LAUNCHES— " David Burnett "— Master J. G. True July, 1893. Engineer G. H. Bagshaw July, 1893. Deckhand C.Boyd July, 1902. Stoker E. Coppin July, 1903. " Clotho "— Master W. Jarvis June, 1902. Engineer W.J. Hardman July, 1901. Deckhand E. Patrick July, 1903. " Denton "— Master C. Strange June, 1902. Engineer G. Lane July, 1901. Deckhand S. Bromby July, 1903. GREENWICH MOORINGS— Watchmen W. Howell April, 1897. HULK " HYGEIA "— W. Shaw Shipkeeper i. Rogers April, 1893. Ditto A. Salter July, 1898. * These Inspectors possess the Special Certificate of the Royal Sanitary Institute for Inspectors of Food. PORT OF LONDON SANITARY OFFICES, GREENWICH, S.E. TO THE WORSHIPFUL THE PORT OF LONDON SANITARY COMMITTEE. Gentlemen, I have the honour to present herewith my Annual Report for the year ending 31st December, 1905. With regard to the medical inspection of vessels entering the Port, a reference to Table I. will show that, while the number of vessels arriving from "foreign " ports during 1905 was somewhat below the average for the preceding five years, and 749 less than in 1903, yet the number of vessels medically inspected was very much above the average, the principal reason for this being the appearance of Cholera in Europe during the autumn, which increased considerably the number of infected ports, and in consequence the number of vessels requiring to be medically inspected. The conditions affecting the medical inspection at Sheerness, shown in Table II., remain practically the same. At the end of the year some re-arrangements of the Staff of Medical Officers became necessary for reasons which are fully set out in the section of this Report which deals with Alien Immigration. In November, the Board of Customs sent a circular letter to the Collectors at various ports stating that they had had under consideration the principles under which vessels from " foreign " are required to " bring to " for health purposes at the boarding stations fixed by the Board. They proposed that at every port the boarding station should be not only the place at which infected vessels are required to " bring to," but also the place at which vessels with dangerous infectious disorders should stop for visitation by the Medical Officer of the Local Authority. This order did not materially affect the Port of London, inasmuch as Gravesend Reach is the boarding station for all vessels passing there to London, and it is also the place at which vessels with dangerous infectious disorders on board are required to moor for the purpose of examination, landing of patients and the necessary disinfection. Vessels proceeding to Leigh, Romford and Southend are interrogated by Officers of His Majesty's Customs off Southend Pier. These are small vessels 8 coming from ports on the Continent, and during the past ten years no disease has been brought by any of them. With regard to vessels bound for places within the Port of Rochester, these have always been required to " bring to " off Garrison Point at Sheerness, where they have been examined by the Medical Officer of this Authority stationed there. It was proposed that only vessels with infectious diseases on board should be required to "bring to " at this place, all others being allowed to pass up to the Port of Rochester. It was obvious that this would have thrown the responsibility of deciding whether a person was suffering from an infectious disorder or not on the shoulders of the Master of the vessel, who could not be expected to have the necessary skill to diagnose such complaints, and who could not be expected to " bring to " in any case of doubt, inasmuch as should it turn out not to be a case of infectious disease, he would incur the blame of his owners for any delay the vessel may have been put to. The Rochester Port Sanitary Authority were naturally opposed to any alteration in the existing arrangement, and in this they were supported strongly by the Port Sanitary Committee, who stated that, " the Committee " recognise that they have no right of criticism of any arrangement made " between His Majesty's Customs and the Port Sanitary Authority of " Rochester as affecting the Port of Rochester, but they wish to place on " record their opinion that the arrangement proposed is undesirable and is not " in the interest of public safety ; should, however, the alterations be insisted il on by His Majesty's Customs, the Port of London Sanitary Authority will " be prepared to make such arrangements as may be necessary and consequent " thereon." The Town Clerk of Rochester has since received a letter from the Collector of Customs at Rochester to the effect that, " having regard to the views u expressed by the Local Sanitary Authority on the subject, it has been " decided that no alteration be made in the boarding station for the Port of " Rochester, which will remain as at present, Garrison Point in the Isle of " Sheppey.", It will therefore be seen that there has been no alteration as regards the examination of vessels from " foreign " arriving in the Port of London, which will remain as heretofore, and which has been found to work very satisfactorily. An application, however, will be made to the Local Government Board to extend the Bye-laws made by the Port of London Sanitary Authority relating to dangerous infectious disorders, so as to make them applicable to all vessels arriving from " foreign " in the Port of London, whether they are bound for places above Gravesend or to any place below, including the Port of Rochester. 9 TABLE I. MEDICAL INSPECTION—GRAVESEND. From 1st January to 31st December, 1905. JaD. Feb. March April May June July Aug. Sept. Oct. Nov. Dec. Total. Number of foreign arrivals 746 720 788 797 824 925 921 938 826 872 786 819 9,962 Number medically inspected 229 217 231 230 249 241 214 212 268 271 233 218 2,813 Number of passengers 3,308 5,794 2,800 1,540 2,441 2,634 2,536 2,628 4,107 1,797 1,597 2,593 33,775 Number of crew 5,215 5,656 5,244 6,024 5,319 5,191 4,890 4,938 5,775 6,304 5,149 6,349 66,054 COMPARATIVE TABLE. GRAVESEND. 1900. 1901. 1902. 1903. 1904. Mean annual number for the 5 years. 1905. Number of foreign arrivals 10,394 10,521 10,520 10,711 10,030 10,435.2 9,962 Number of vessels medically inspected 1,256 1,080 1,668 2,522 2,559 1,817 2,813 Total number medically inspected at Gravesend— From August, 1892, to December, 1904 23,402 „ 1st January to 31st December, 1905 2,813 Total 26,215 TABLE II. MEDICAL INSPECTION—SHEERNESS. From 1st January to 31st December, 1905. Jan. Feb. March April May June July Aug. Sept. Oct. Nov. Dec. Total. Number of foreign arrivals 15 20 18 39 32 54 35 34 25 24 25 28 349 Number medically inspected 14 15 13 31 32 46 31 27 17 23 21 22 292 Number of passengers — 3 1 8 12 12 31 13 2 5 2 1 90 Number of crew 154 117 122 303 390 432 366 240 222 247 187 243 3,023 COMPARATIVE TABLE. SHEERNESS. 1900. 1901. 1902. 1903. 1904. Mean annual number for the 5 years. 1905. Number of arrivals 374 330 387 402 344 367.4 349 Number of vessels medically inspected 243 212 244 342 308 269.8 292 Total number medically inspected at Sheerness— From 1st September, 1894, to 31st December, 1904 3,023 „ 1st January to 31st December, 1905 292 Total 3,315 TABLE III. General Summary, and Analysis, of the Sanitary Inspection of Vessels, &c in the Port of London, for the year ending 31st December, 1905. Foreign. Coastwise. Inland Navigation. Shore Premises. Sick Seamen referred to Hospital, Water Bargeb. Steam. Sail. Steam. Sail. Steam. Sail. Lighters (Uninhabited). Canal Boats Inspected. Defective. To be Cleaned. Inspected. Defective. To be Cleaned. Inspected. Defective. To be Cleaned. Inspected. Defective. To be Cleaned. Inspected. Defective. To be Cleaned. | Inspected. Defective. To be Cleaned. Inspected. Defective. To be Cleaned. Inspected. Defective. To be Cleaned. Inspected. Defective. To be Cleaned. No. in District in good condition, 31st December, 1904. New Barges. Condemned. No. in District, 31st Dec., 1905. 12017 126 1572 2262 24 264 2741 24 279 1396 25 214 688 4 30 11437 141 615 1285 2 98 1087 83 29 1341 31 148 — 24 1 1 24 Total Inspections to 31st December, 1904 721,472 Docks and River. No. Nationality. No. Per cent, of Total Total Inspections from 1st January to 31st December, 1905 — St. Katharine's 798 London 1,379 American 6 01 " Foreign " 14,279 Eegent's Canal 735 Austrian 13 03 " Coastwise " 4,137 Millwall 2,053 Belgian 328 95 " Inland Navigation " 14,497 West India 1,766 British 27,765 81.05 Premises on shore 1,341 Poplar 182 Danish 340 99 34,254 East India 563 Dutch 674 1.96 Total 755,726 Victoria 1,521 Finnish 68 19 Cleansing of Crew's Quarters, &c. :— Total to 31st December, 1904 43,302 Royal Albert 1,846 French 262 76 Commercial 1,682 German 1,255 3.66 Total No. of Vessels from 1st January to 31st December, 1905 3,101 Tilbury 2,339 Greek 8 02 Gravesend District 3,670 Italian 79 23 Total 46,403 River—* Upper District 5,417 Russian 316 92 Number of vessels inspected In the Launches— " David Burnett " 4,293 *Middle „ 4,819 Spanish 122 32 * Lower „ 4,087 Swedish & Norwegian 1,677 4.89 "Clotho" 4,394 Medway 56 " Denton " 4,375 Total vessels 32,913 Total vessels 32,913 Total 13,062 Shore premises 1,341 Shore premises 1,341 3.91 In the Docks, &c. 19,851 Total 34,254 Total 34,254 Total 32,913 *Upper District extends from Limehouse to Teddington. *Middle „ „ „ Limehouse to Erith. * Lower „ „ „ Erith to outer limits of Port of London. COMPARATIVE TABLE. Total number of Inspections of vessels from— 1900. 1901. 1902. 1903. 1904. Yearly average for tlie 5 years ending 31st December, 1904. 1905. "Foreign" 14,966 16,844 16,336 15,989 15,685 15,964 14,279 " Coastwise," " Inland Navigation," and other Inspections 15,839 15,231 17,270 19,496 19,700 17,507.2 19,975 Total 30,805 32,075 33,606 35,485 35,385 33,471.2 34,254 11 The sanitary inspection of vessels, &c., in the Port of London, set out in Table III., is satisfactory. The number of vessels from " foreign " ports inspected is somewhat less than the average for preceding years, but, as previously mentioned, this is accounted for by the diminished number of arrivals from such ports. This diminution in number being due partly to slackness of trade, partly to a large number of the sailing vessels formerly arriving in the Port of London having been sold to foreign owners and replaced by steamers, which carry about the same number of hands, but are able to carry nearly three times as much cargo. The attention given to "coastwise" and other vessels compares very favourably with the average for the preceding five years. Of the inspections made, it will be seen that 81 per cent. were of British vessels, 4.89 per cent. of these were Swedish and Norwegian, 3.66 per cent. were German, the Dutch coming next with 1.96 per cent. Other nationalities were in proportion as shown in the Table. In addition to vessels, 1,341 visits of inspection were made to shore premises, that is to say, workplaces, factories, &c., situated in the area within the gates of the Docks. (See Tables VII. and XVIII.) This is a department of the work which is becoming very important owing to the erection each year of many such places within the Dock areas, and in order to enable your officers to more efficiently deal with any defective sanitary conditions, an application to the Local Government Board for further powers under the Public Health (London) Act, 1891, has been ordered by your Worshipful Committee. The number of Water Barges employed in the Port remains as at the end of the previous year, namely, 24. One barge has been condemned, and has been replaced by a new one. ALIENS ACT, 1905. This Act, which received the Royal Assent during the last Session of Parliament, will come into operation on January 1st, 1906. I append herewith the full text of the Act, and the Rules and Orders made in accordance therewith by the Secretary of State for the Home Department. 12 A.D. 1905. ALIENS ACT, 1905. [5 Edw. 7. Ch. 13.] ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS. Regulation of Alien Immigration. Section. 1. Power to prevent the landing of undesirable immigrants. 2. Immigration board and rules. Expulsion of Undesirable Aliens. 3. Power of Secretary of State to make an expulsion order. 4. Expenses of return of alien, &c. General. 5. Returns as to aliens. 6. Appointment of officers, and expenses. 7. Supplemental provisions. 8. Definitions. 9. Application of Act to Scotland and Ireland. 10. Short title and commencement, and repeal. Chapter 13. An Act to amend the Law with regard to Aliens. [11th August, 1905.] Be it enacted by the King's most Excellent Majesty, by and with the advice and consent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons, in this present Parliament assembled, and by the authority of the same, as follows:— Power to prevent the landing of undesirable immigrants. Regulation of Alien Immigration. 1.—(1) An immigrant shall not be landed in the United Kingdom from an immigrant ship except at a port at which there is an immigration officer appointed under this Act, and shall not be landed at any such port without the leave of that officer given after an inspection of the immigrants made by him on the ship, or elsewhere if the immigrants are conditionally 13 A.D. 1905. disembarked for the purpose, in company with a medical inspector, such inspection to be made as soon as practicable, and the immigration officer shall withhold leave in the case of any immigrant who appears to him to be an undesirable immigrant within the meaning of this section. (2) Where leave to land is so withheld in the case of any immigrant, the master, owner, or agent of the ship, or the immigrant, may appeal to the immigration board of the port, and that board shall, if they are satisfied that leave to land should not be withheld under this Act, give leave to land, and leave so given shall operate as the leave of the immigration officer. (3) For the purposes of this section an immigrant shall be considered an undesirable immigrant— (а) if he cannot show that he has in his possession or is in a position to obtain the means of decently supporting himself and his dependents (if any) ; or (b) if he is a lunatic or an idiot, or owing to any disease or infirmity appears likely to become a charge upon the rates or otherwise a detriment to the public ; or (c) if he has been sentenced in a foreign country with which there is an extradition treaty for a crime, not being an offence of a political character, which is, as respects that country, an extradition crime within the meaning of the Extradition Act, 1870 ; or 33 & 34 Vict, c. 52. (d) if an expulsion order under this Act has been made in his case ; but in the case of an immigrant who proves that he is seeking admission to this country solely to avoid prosecution or punishment on religious or political grounds or for an offence of a political character, or persecution, involving danger of imprisonment or danger to life or limb, on account of religious belief, leave to land shall not be refused on the ground merely of want of means, or the probability of his becoming a charge on the rates, nor shall leave to land be withheld in the case of an immigrant who shows to the satisfaction of the immigration officer or board concerned with the case that, having taken his ticket in the United Kingdom and embarked direct therefrom for some other country immediately after a period of residence in the United Kingdom of not less than six months, he has been refused admission in that country and returned direct therefrom to a port in the United Kingdom, and leave to land shall not be refused merely on the ground of want of means to any immigrant who satisfies the immigration officer or board concerned with the case that he was born in the United Kingdom, his father being a British subject. (4) The Secretary of State may, subject to such conditions as he thinks fit to impose, by order exempt any immigrant ships from the provisions of this section if he is satisfied that a proper system is being maintained for preventing 14 A.D. 1905. the embarkation of undesirable immigrants on those ships, or if security is given to his satisfaction that undesirable immigrants will not be landed in the United Kingdom from those ships except for the purpose of transit. Any such order of exemption may be withdrawn at any time at the discretion of the Secretary of State. (5) Any immigrant who lands, and any master of a ship who allows an immigrant to be landed, in contravention of this section shall be guilty of an offence under this Act, but an immigrant conditionally disembarked shall not be deemed to have landed so long as the conditions are complied with. Immigration board and rules. 2.—(1) The immigration board for a port shall consist of three persons summoned in accordance with rules made by the Secretary of State under this Act out of a list approved by him for the port comprising fit persons having magisterial, business, or administrative experience. (2) A Secretary of State may make rules generally with respect to immigration boards and their officers, and with respect to appeals to those boards, and with respect to the conditional disembarkation of immigrants for the purpose of inspection, appeals, or otherwise, and may by those rules amongst other things provide for the summoning and procedure of the board, and for the place of meeting of the board, and for the security to be given by the master of the ship in the case of immigrants conditionally disembarked. Rules made under this section shall provide for notice being given to masters of immigrant ships and immigrants informing them of their right of appeal, and also, where leave to land is withheld in the case of any immigrant by the immigration officer, for notice being given to the immigrant and the master of the immigrant ship of the grounds on which leave has been withheld. Expulsion op Undesirable Aliens. Power of Secretary of State to make an expulsion order. 3.—(1) The Secretary of State may, if he thinks fit, make an order (in this Act referred to as an expulsion order) requiring an alien to leave the United Kingdom within a time fixed by the order, and thereafter to remain out of the United Kingdom— 55 & 56 Vict. C. 55. 17 & 18 Vict, c. 103. 2 & 3 Vict, c. 47. (a) if it is certified to him by any court (including a court of summary jurisdiction) that the alien has been convicted by that court of any felony, or misdemeanour, or other offence for which the court has power to impose imprisonment without the option of a fine, or of an offence under paragraph twenty-two or twenty-three of section three hundred and eighty-one of the Burgh Police (Scotland) Act, 1892, or of an offence as a prostitute under section seventy-two of the Towns Improvement (Ireland) Act, 1854, or paragraph eleven of section fifty-four of the Metropolitan Police Act, 1839, and that the court recommend that an expulsion order should be made in his case, either in addition to or in lieu of his sentence : and 15 (b) if it is certified to him by a court of summary jurisdiction after proceedings taken for the purpose within twelve months after the alien has last entered the United Kingdom, in accordance with rules of court made under section twenty-nine of the Summary Jurisdiction Act, 1879, that the alien— A.D. 1905. (i) has within three months from the time at which proceedings for the certificate are commenced been in receipt of any such parochial relief as disqualifies a person for the parliamentary franchise, or been found wandering without, ostensible means of subsistence, or been living under insanitary conditions due to overcrowding : or 42 & 43 Vict, c. 49. (ii) has entered the United Kingdom after the passing of this Act, and has been sentenced in a foreign country with which there is an extradition treaty for a crime not being an offence of a political character which is as respects that country an extradition crime within the meaning of the Extradition Act, 1870. (2) If any alien in whose case an expulsion order has been made is at any time found within the United Kingdom in contravention of the order, he shall be guilty of an offence under this Act. 4.— (1) Where an expulsion order is made in the case of any alien, the Secretary of State may, if he thinks fit, pay the whole or any part of the expenses of or incidental to the departure from the United Kingdom and maintenance until departure of the alien and his dependents (if any). Expenses of return of alien, &c. (2) If an expulsion order is made in the case of any alien (not being an alien who last entered the United Kingdom before the commencement of this Act, or an immigrant in whose case leave to land has been given under this Act) on a certificate given within six months after he has last entered the United Kingdom, the master of the ship in which he has been brought to the United Kingdom and also the master of any ship belonging to the same owner shall be liable to pay to the Secretary of State as a debt due to the Crown any sums paid by the Secretary of State under this section in connection with the. alien, and shall, if required by the Secretary of State, receive the alien and his dependents (if any) on board his ship, and afford them free of charge a passage to the port of embarkation and proper accommodation and maintenance during the passage. (3) If the master of a ship fails to comply with the provisions of this section as to giving a passage to an alien or his dependents, he shall be guilty of an offence under this Act. General. 5.—(1) The master of any ship landing or embarking passengers at any port in the United Kingdom shall furnish to such person and in such manner as the Secretary of State directs a return giving such particulars with respect Beturns as zo aliens 16 A.D. 1905. to any such passengers who are aliens as may be required for the time being by order of the Secretary of State, and any such passenger shall furnish the master of the ship with any information required by him for the purpose of the return. (2) If the master of a ship fails to make the return required by this section, or makes a false return, he shall be guilty of an offence under this Act, and if any alien refuses to give information required by the master of the ship for the purpose of the return under this section, or gives any false information for the purpose, he shall be liable on summary conviction to imprisonment for a term not exceeding three months with hard labour. (3) The Secretary of State may by order exempt from the provisions of this section any special class of passengers or voyages, or any special ships or ports, but any such order may be withdrawn at any time at his discretion. Appointment of officers, and expenses. 6.— (1) The Secretary of State shall appoint, at such ports in the United Kingdom as he thinks necessary for the time being, immigration officers and medical inspectors, and may appoint or employ such other officers or persons as may be required for the purposes of immigration boards, or for the purpose of the returns to be given under this Act, or otherwise for carrying this Act into effect, and the salary and remuneration of any officers, inspectors, or persons so appointed or employed, and any expenses otherwise incurred in carrying this Act into effect (including such payment as may be sanctioned by the Treasury for the attendance of any person as a member of an. immigration board to hear appeals), shall, up to an amount approved by the Treasury, be paid out of moneys provided by Parliament. (2) The Secretary of State may arrange with the Commissioners of Customs or any other Government Department or any port sanitary authority for the appointment or employment of officers of Customs or officers of that department or authority as officers under this Act. (3) The Secretary of State shall make known, in such manner as he thinks best suited for the purpose, the ports at which immigration officers are for the time being appointed under this Act. Supplemental provisions. 7.—(1) Any person guilty of an offence under this Act shall, if the offence is committed by him as the master of a ship, be liable, on summary conviction, to a fine not exceeding one hundred pounds, and, if the offence is committed by him as an immigrant or alien, be deemed a rogue and vagabond within the meaning of the Vagrancy Act, 1824, and be liable to be dealt with accordingly as if the offence were an offence under section four of that Act. 5 Geo. 4. c. 83. 57 & 58 Vict, c, 60. (2) Sections six hundred and eighty-four, six hundred and eighty-five, and six hundred and eighty-six of the Merchant Shipping Act, 1894 (which relate to the jurisdiction of courts and justices), shall apply with respect to jurisdiction under this Act as they apply with respect to j urisdiction under 17 that Act, and section six hundred and ninety-three of the Merchant Shipping Act, 1894 (which relates to the levying of sums ordered to be paid by distress on a ship), shall apply with respect to any fines or other sums of money to be paid under this Act by the master of a ship as it applies with respect to fines and other sums of money to be paid under that Act. A.D. 1905. (3) Any immigrant who is conditionally disembarked, and any alien in whose case an expulsion order is made, while awaiting the departure of his ship, and whilst being conveyed to the ship, and whilst on board the ship until the ship finally leaves the United Kingdom, and any alien in whose case a certificate has been given by a court, with a view to the making of an expulsion order under this Act, until the Secretary of State has decided upon his case, shall be liable to be kept in custody in such manner as the Secretary of State directs, and whilst in that custody shall be deemed to be in legal custody. (4) If any immigrant, master of a ship, or other person, for the purposes of this Act, makes any false statement or false representation to an immigration officer, medical inspector, immigration board, or to the Secretary of State, he shall be liable on summary conviction to imprisonment for a term not exceeding three months with hard labour. (5) If any question arises on any proceedings under this Act, or with reference to anything done or proposed to be done under this Act, whether any person is an alien or not, the onus of proving that that person is not an alien shall lie on that person. (6) In carrying out the provisions of this Act, due regard shall be had to any treaty, convention, arrangement, or engagement with any foreign country. 8.—(1) The expression "immigrant" in this Act means an alien steerage passenger who is to be landed in the United Kingdom, but does not include— Definitions. (a) Any passenger who shows to the satisfaction of the immigration officer or board concerned with the case that he desires to land in the United Kingdom only for the purpose of proceeding within a reasonable time to some destination out of the United Kingdom ; or (b) Any passengers holding prepaid through tickets to some such destination, if the master or owner of the ship by which they are brought to the United Kingdom, or by which they are to be taken away from the United Kingdom, gives security to the satisfaction of the Secretary of State that, except for the purposes of transit or under other circumstances approved by the Secretary of State, they will not remain in the United Kingdom, or, having been rejected in another country re-enter the United Kingdom, and that they will be properly maintained and controlled during their transit. 18 A.D. 1905. (2) The expression " immigrant ship " in this Act means a ship which brings to the United Kingdom more than twenty alien steerage passengers, who are to be landed in the United Kingdom, whether at the same or different ports, or such number of those passengers as may be for the time being fixed by order of the Secretary of State, either generally or as regards any special ships or ports. (3) The expression " passenger " in this Act includes any person carried on the ship other than the master and persons employed in the working, or service, of the ship, and the expression " steerage passenger" in this Act includes all passengers except such persons as may be declared by the Secretary of State to be cabin passengers by order made either generally or as regards any special ships or ports. (4) If any question arises under this Act on an appeal to an immigration board whether any ship is an immigrant ship within the meaning of this Act, or whether any person is an immigrant, a passenger, or a steerage passenger, within the meaning of this Act, or whether any offence is an offence of a political character, or whether a crime is an extradition crime, that question shall be referred to the Secretary of State in accordance with rules made under this Act, and the board shall act in accordance with his decision. (5) The Secretary of State may withdraw or vary any order made by him under this section. Application of Act to Scotland and Ireland. 9.—(1) In the application of this Act to Scotland and Ireland the words '' be liable on summary conviction to imprisonment for a term not exceeding three months with hard labour" shall be substituted for the words "be " deemed a rogue and vagabond within the meaning of the Vagrancy Act, " 1824, and be liable to be dealt with accordingly as if the offence were an " offence under section four of that Act." 27 & 28 Vict, c. 53. (2) Section thirty-three of the Summary Procedure (Scotland) Act, 1864, shall be substituted as respects Scotland for section twenty-nine of the Summary Jurisdiction Act, 1879 ; and the Lord Chancellor of Ireland may, as respects Ireland, make rules for the purposes of this Act for which rules may be made under section twenty-nine of the Summary Jurisdiction Act, 1879 ; and all rules so made shall be laid, as soon as may be, before both Houses of Parliament. Short title and commencement, and repeal. This Act may be cited as the Aliens Act, 1905, and shall come into operation on the first day of January, nineteen hundred and six. 6 & 7 Will, 4, c. 11. (2) The Registration of Aliens Act, 1836, is hereby repealed. 19 ALIENS ACT, 1905. Rules and Appendix. In pursuance of the provisions of the Aliens Act, 1905, I hereby make the following Rules, which shall have effect at the ports (hereinafter called Immigration Ports) of Cardiff, Dover, Folkestone, Grangemouth, Grimsby, Harwich, Hull, Leith, Liverpool, London (including Queenborough), Newhaven, Southampton, and the Tyne Ports (comprising Newcastle, North Shields and South Shields, which are to be deemed to constitute one Port for the purpose of these Rules) Immigration Porta. at which Immigration Officers and Medical Inspectors have been appointed and Immigrations Boards have been established, and at such other ports as may from time to time be designated as Immigration Ports. 1. Where leave to land is given (otherwise than after an appeal to the Immigration Board), it shall be given by the Immigration Officer to the immigrant, and may be given verbally Leave to land given. 2. Where the Medical Inspector is of opinion that an alien is an undesirable immigrant within the meaning of Section 1 (3) (6) of the Aliens Act, 1905, he shall state his opinion in the Form No. 1 in the Appendix to these Rules, and deliver the Form to the Immigration Officer. Opinion of Medical Inspector. 3. Where leave to land is withheld by the Immigration Officer, notice thereof and of the grounds of refusal and of the right of appeal against the refusal shall be given by him to the master of the ship, and to the immigrant, and shall be in the Form No. 2 in the Appendix to these Rules. Leave to land withheld. 4. Where an immigrant or other person entitled to appeal against the refusal of leave to land, desires to appeal, he shall, if practicable, give notice to the Immigration Officer before he leaves the ship or other place of inspection, and such notice may be given verbally ; provided that the master, owner, or agent of the ship may (and shall if required by an immigrant) within 24 hours after the refusal of leave to land give written notice of appeal either by delivering to the Immigration Officer a notice in the Form No. 3 in the Appendix to these Rules, or by sending a similar notice to the nearest Custom House or Customs Watchhouse. Notice of Appeal to Immigration Officer. 5. Where the Immigration Officer receives notice of appeal from an immigrant or other person entitled to appeal he shall forthwith send notice to the Immigration Board Clerk. Such notice may be in the Form No. 4 in the Appendix to these Rules. Notice of Appeal to Immigration Board Clerk. 20 w^tlTregard ^or ParPose of enabling the Immigration Officer to satisfy himself to Trans- that any passenger included in a Return of Transmigrants in respect of any migrants. j r o or j immigrant ship is an alien passenger within the meaning of Section 8(1) (6) of the Aliens Act, 1905, no passenger so included shall, except where the Secretary of State has sanctioned conditional disembarkation for the purpose, be allowed to leave the ship before the Immigration Officer has satisfied himself of the accuracy of that Return. Conditional 7. Conditional disembarkation of immigrants may be sanctioned by the Disembarka- 0 J J ti°n- Secretary of State when he is satisfied that proper provision has been made in a place and under conditions approved by him for the accommodation, maintenance, control, and safe custody of the immigrant so disembarked. Security 8. Where security is required by the Secretary of State to be given for the tionai Dis- conditional disembarkation of immigrants it shall .be by bond, and shall be given by the master of the ship unless in any case the owner of a ship has given, to the satisfaction of the Secretary of State, security by bond covering all ships owned by him arriving at the port or ports where conditional disembarkation has been sanctioned. Conditional 9. Where an immigrant should, in the opinion of the Port Medical Officer Disembarka- hitit tiontoa of Health or Medical Inspector, be removed from an immigrant ship for treatment or observation at a hospital, he shall be conditionally disembarked for the purpose, and shall be liable, before release from the hospital, to inspection for the purposes of the Act. Conditional ] 0. Where an immigrant, or the master, owner, or agent of a ship, appeals Disembarka- tion for against a refusal of leave to land, the immigrant shall, unless otherwise A nnpfl 1 ordered, be disembarked for the purpose of being brought before an Immigration Board, and shall be dealt with as conditionally disembarked until leave to land has been given or he has been re-embarked for the purpose of leaving the United Kingdom. immigration 11. For every Immigration Port there shall be an Immigration Board Board Clerk. , Clerk. Assistants to 12. The Medical Inspector and the Immigration Board Clerk, when unable personally to perform their duties under the Act or these Rules, may act through a duly qualified assistant under such conditions as the Secretary of State may from time to time impose. Duties of 13. The duties of the Immigration Board Clerk shall be to act as clerk to the Immigration Board, and in particular— (a) To keep a list of the persons nominated by the Secretary of State for service on the Immigration Boards. CD (b) To summon Boards for the purpose of considering any appeals of which he receives notice from the Immigration Officer. 21 (c) To attend the meetings of the Boards. (d) To take minutes of the proceedings of the Boards, and to furnish such information or returns as the Secretary of State may require. (e) In the case of any reference to the Secretary of State under Section 8 (4) of the Aliens Acts, 1905, to furnish a report on the question in dispute, accompanied by any statements in writing made by any party to the dispute. 14. When a notice of appeal has been received by the Immigration Board immigration Clerk he shall, unless a Board has already been summoned by which the Boardappeal can be considered, forthwith summon a Board, to be held, if practicable, not more than 24 hours after receipt of the notice. In calculating the 24 hours, Sundays and Bank Holidays shall be excluded. The notice summoning a Board may be in the Form No. 5 in the Appendix to these Rules. 15. The Clerk shall, so far as practicable, summon every member on the summoning list in turn : provided that, where possible, a Magistrate shall always be a ^"ft1'ers of member of the Board. 16. The Boards shall meet at the places appointed by the Secretary of Place of o .. , . Meeting of State from time to tune tor such meetings. Board. 17. The Chairman of a Board shall, where any Magistrate is a Member of of the Board, be a Magistrate ; and, subject thereto, the Members shall choose the Chairman. 18. In the event of any disagreement between the Members of a Board Majority °to the opinion of the majority shall prevail. prevail. 19. Where a Board is of opinion that it is desirable to make further Adjournment inquiries before deciding a case, it shall have power to adjourn the hearing. 20. Notice of the time and place of every meeting of a Board shall be Notice of 1 J ... Meeting to given to the Immigration Officer by the Clerk, and, if any immigrant whose immigration case is to be heard by a Board has been rejected on medical grounds, also to Medical . _ Inspector. the Medical Inspector. The notices may be respectively in Forms Nos. 6 and 7 in the Appendix to these Rules. 21. When the Immigration Officer receives notice of the meeting of a Notice of Board he shall forthwith communicate the time and place thereof to the Bo^u'/^ immigrant concerned, and to any other person who may be an appellant. Appellant. 22. The Immigration Officer shall attend the meetings of the Boards, and Attendance at D ° _ Board of the Medical Inspector, when the case of any immigrant who has been rejected immigration L J ° Officer and on medical grounds is to be considered, shall also attend unless he receives Medical ° # # Inspector. notice dispensing with his attendance. 22 Procedure of 23. The immigrant (and the master, owner, or agent of the ship if an Board, appellant), the Immigration Officer and the Medical Inspector, if present, shall be entitled to be heard, and the Board may put such questions to the alien or or other appellant, and make such inquiries, if any, as they think fit. No other person shall be entitled to be heard without special leave from the Board. Subject as aforesaid, the procedure of the Board shall be such as the Board may determine. Leave to land 24. Where a Board confirms the refusal of leave to land, the Clerk shall withheld by Board. countersign the copy of the original refusal of leave to land retained by the Immigration Officer, and shall forthwith give notice of the decision of the Board to the master of the ship and to the owner or agent, if an appellant. The notice shall be in the Form No. 8 in the Appendix to these Rules. Leave to land 25. Where a Board gives leave to land, the Clerk shall mark with the word given by Board. "Cancelled" and sign the copy of the Immigration Officer's refusal of leave to land retained by the Immigration Officer, and shall forthwith give notice of the decision of the Board to the master of the ship and to the owner or agent, if an appellant. The notice shall be in the Form No. 9 in the Appendix to these Rules. (Signed) H. J. GLADSTONE, One of H.M. Principal Secretaries of State. Whitehall, 19th December, 1905. 02 FORM No. 1. ALIENS ACT, 1905. OPINION OF MEDICAL INSPECTOR. I am of opinion that the Alien Immigrant named . brought to the United Kingdom in the ship Strike out the words which do not apply. / is a lunatic or idiot; or is suffering from and appears likely on that account to become a charge upon the rates, or otherwise a detriment to the public. Signature of Medical Inspector, and Date. TO THE IMMIGRATION OFFICER. ALIENS ACT, 1905. OPINION OF MEDICAL INSPECTOR. I am of opinion that the Alien Immigrant named brought to the United Kingdom in the ship— is a lunatic or idiot; or is suffering from and appears likely on that account to become a charge upon the rates, or otherwise a detriment to the public. Signature of Medioal Inspector, and Date. 24 In accordance with Section 6, Sub-section 2, the Secretary of State has arranged with the Port of London Sanitary Authority for the appointment and employment of the Medical Officer of Health as a Medical Inspector under this Act, with the services of the Assistant Medical Officers at Gravesend to help him in the work of medical inspection. An immigrant ship has been defined as any ship bringing more than 12 alien steerage passengers to be landed in the United Kingdom. The expression "alien steerage passenger" includes all alien passengers other than first-class passengers. Every immigrant ship on arrival at Gravesend will have to " bring to " for examination by the Medical Inspector in conjunction with the Immigration Officer. An examination will be made of all alien steerage passengers with a view to determining— 1. Whether any of them are lunatics or idiots; 2. Whether, owing to disease or infirmity, any of them are likely to become a charge upon the rates, or otherwise a detriment to the public. Should any such person be found, the Medical Inspector will sign a form stating that, in his opinion, the passenger in question should not be allowed to land for the reason stated. Such form will be handed to the Immigration Officer, who will thereupon serve a notice upon the master of the vessel informing him that the person mentioned on the form is not to be allowed to land. All such passengers, whether detained on medical or other grounds, have to be kept on board the ship, but the master, owner or agent of the ship may (and shall if required by an immigrant), within 24 hours after refusal of leave to land, give written notice of appeal either to the Immigration Officer or by delivering it at the nearest Custom House or Custom Watch House. If any person lands or is allowed to land without permission, the person so landing, and also the Master of the ship, is guilty of an offence under the Act, and liable to a fine not exceeding 100/. Persons detained have to be kept on board the ship, and if they appeal they have to appear at the office of the Immigration Board, which is situated at Brunswick Quay, Blackwall, they being conditionally disembarked for that purpose. The Immigration Board consists of twenty persons summoned in accordance with the Regulation made by the Secretary of State, under the Aliens Act, 1905, out of a list provided by him for the Port, comprising fit persons having magisterial, business or administrative experience. A meeting of the Board must be held within 24 hours of the receipt of notice to appeal, Sundays and Bank Holidays not being reckoned, consisting 25 of three members, one of whom at least is a magistrate, and by virtue of that position acts as Chairman. The appellant, the Medical Inspector and the Immigration Officer have a right to be heard by the Immigration Board, and after making the fullest enquiries the Board decides whether the appellant shall be allowed to land or shall be deported. With the approval of the Committee, Mr. Hancock, one of the Assistant Medical Officers at Gravesend, has been appointed to devote his whole time to the work of medical inspection under the Aliens Act. He will be assisted each day by one of the other Medical Officers in rotation and in case of emergency, and if the duties of the Medical Officer on boarding duty permit, he will be available also for this work, so that in the unlikely event of three vessels coming up at one time, the services of a Medical Officer will be available for each. This has necessitated the appointment of another Assistant Medical Officer at Gravesend, namely, Dr. J. E. Sandilands, who is an M.A., M.D., D.P.Ii. of Cambridge University. He has had considerable experience in the Metropolitan Asylums Board for Infectious Diseases, and has acted as Plague Inspector in India.* I append herewith short reports made by Inspector Romeril on two alien steerage passenger vessels which arrived during the month of December, 1905, which will give a good idea of the conditions under which alien steerage passengers are brought to this country in some vessels, and of the accommodation provided for them on board:— " The s.s. ' WOLOGDA,' of Windau, from St. Petersburg, arrived in " London on 6th December, 1905, with 40 first-class and 305 alien " steerage passengers, the latter consisting of 80 males, 95 females and " 130 children. " It was not possible to make a thorough inspection of the aliens' " quarters on the arrival of the vessel owing to the filthy and offensive " condition of the same. Food stuffs (including fish) and filth were " scattered about the whole place, on the bedding, in the bunks, and " on the deck, which was damp and dirty. Straw mattresses, many of " which were soiled, were lying about the quarters. " On a table in the after part of the fore 'tween deck were piled dirty " dishes, plates, discarded food, &c. " The men's lavatory and closets could not be approached owing " to their offensive condition, even human excrement was noticed in two " of the lavatory basins. * Since writing this, Mr. Hancock has been granted six months' leave of absence in order that his services may be at the disposal of the Local Government Board as temporary Medical Inspector. Dr. Willoughby has been appointed to perform his duties, and Dr. A. H. Hogarth, B.A., M.B., Oxford University, has been appointed temporarily to act as Assistant Medical Officer at Gravesend. 26 " Orders were given for the quarters to be thoroughly cleansed, and " when this had been carried out, a detailed inspection was made. " It was found that the total cubic capacity of the aliens' quarters was " 16,269 cubic feet. This, reckoning two children as one adult, gives " 67.74 cubic feet per head, but making deductions for lavatories, beds, " &c., the available air space per head was only 60.84. The available " floor space clear of the bunks was 963 square feet, and the available " floor space per head 8.8 square feet. " Twelve cubicles were stated to have been occupied by families, but " beyond these no provision was made for the separation of sexes. " The ventilation and lighting of the quarters were unsatisfactory. " Only two water-closets (neither of which were ventilated) were " provided for the 80 male passengers, and two for the 95 females and " 130 children passengers. Ventilators were fitted to the latter closets, " but they were obstructed by lifebelts. " The only lavatory accommodation for the males consisted of three " basins fitted in the lobby of the closet, and two for the females. "The quarters were found to be very damp owing to the leaky " condition of the deck overhead, and condensation of moisture on bare " iron surfaces overhead and at the sides of the vessel. " The mean length of the bunks was only about 5 feet 4 inches, and " the mean width about 21 inches. " In the event of bad weather the alien passengers would be confined " to their quarters, as the after main deck was entirely occupied by horses." " The s.s. "IRKUTSK," of Windau, from Libau, arrived in London " on 13th December, 1905, with 239 passengers. " Five of them, namely, 3 females and 2 children, were first-class " passengers, and 234, consisting of 61 males, 91 females and 83 children, " were steerage passengers. " The total cubic capacity of the quarters occupied by the steerage " passengers was 16,135 cubic feet, and, counting two children as one " adult, this works out at 83'60 cubic feet per head, but making " deductions for fittings &c., the available cubic space per head was " 76.14. " The total available floor space was 774 square feet and the available " floor space per head 4 square feet. " No provision whatever was made for the separation of sexes. 27 " The closet accommodation provided consisted of two for males and " two for females, approached by lobbies, but as no notice was posted " up to direct the sexes, both sexes were using the same closets. " The lavatory accommodation consisted of three basins for males " and two for females. These were fitted in the lobbies of the closets, " and provided with a constant water supply. " The ventilation and lighting of the quarters were unsatisfactory, and " a nuisance existed from the condensation of moisture on the bare iron " in the quarters. " The whole of the after deck was occupied by 147 Russian ponies, " the result being that in the event of bad weather, the passengers would " be entirely confined to their own quarters." The facts were reported to the Board of Trade, and, as they were Russian vessels, also to the Russian Consul in London, who has written to St. Petersburg asking that these reports should be investigated. On the 19th August, the s.s. "Sergei," from Riga, arrived at Gravesend with 257 alien immigrants on board. The Master reported that two infants had died amongst the Russian immigrants on the 18th, the day before the ship's arrival at Gravesend, and that both the bodies were on board. After inspection of the bodies by your Boarding Medical Officer, the facts were communicated to the Gravesend Borough Coroner, who ordered the removal of the bodies to the Gravesend Mortuary for subsequent inquest. As a result of a post-mortem examination the bodies were found to be extremely emaciated, and in both cases the lungs were found to be affected with BronchoPneumonia. In the course of examination of the alien immigrants, a child was found to be very ill with Pneumonia. On an inspection of the alien quarters they were found to be in a filthy condition owing to the accumulation of food and other refuse on the floor of the quarters. Little or no attempt had been made to clean the quarters, whilst the atmosphere was described by the Boarding Medical Officer as unbearable. Weakly children, especially those suffering from any lung trouble, would necessarily suffer as a result of having to live under such conditions even for a short time. It will be seen that the wording of the Act as to those forms of disease which would render an alien immigrant an undesirable alien, is of the most general description. Each case must be considered on its merits in the 28 wording of the Act, but I append an extract from the Report of the Commissioner-General of Immigration, U.S.A., for the year ending 30th June, 1904, which indicates the most frequent diseases, &c., which caused the medical officers to certify alien passengers as undesirable from a medical point of view. It will be seen that on subsequent appeal and enquiry it was found possible to allow a large number of these to land. Extkact from Report of the Commissioner-General of Immigration, U.S.A., for the Year ended 30th June, 1904. Disease. Total Cases certified. Deported. Landed. Remaining. Per cent. deported. Trachoma 825 756 51 18 91.63 Tubercle of lung 12 10 2 — 83.33 Insanity 24 22 1 1 91.66 Idiocy- 13 12 — 1 92.30 Epilepsy 5 3 1 1 60.00 Syphilis 7 7 — — 100.00 Pavus 28 28 — — 100.00 Weakmindedness 18 6 12 — 33.33 Gonorrhoea 3 3 — — 100.00 Extensive chancroids 3 2 — 1 66.66 Poor physique 150 58 91 1 38.66 Valvular disease of heart 140 60 78 2 42.85 Irregular action of heart 6 3 3 — 50.00 Hypertrophy of heart 2 — 1 1 — Debility 13 4 7 2 30.76 Senile debility 1,231 20 1,201 10 1.62 Paralysis 61 8 53 — 13.11 Curvature of spine 127 9 118 — 7.08 Hip joint disease 10 2 8 — 20.00 Defective vision 62 11 50 1 17.74 Injuries with loss of limb 77 10 66 1 12.98 Deformities 160 26 131 1 16.25 Ankylosis 59 8 51 — 13.55 Dislocations 79 9 70 — 11.39 Ozaena 3 1 2 — 33.33 Lameness 43 5 37 — 11.62 Club feet 36 3 33 — 8.33 Psoriasis 26 7 19 — 26.92 Chronic skin disease 3 2 1 — 66.66 Hernia 1,234 216 997 21 17.50 Total 4,460 1,311 3,084 62 Per cent. of Total 29.38 69.16 1.38 Percentage deported 29.38 „ landed 69.16 „ remaining 1.38 29 TABLE IV. INFECTIOUS DISEASE. Disease. 1900. 1901. 1902. 1903. 1904. Mean Annual number for the 5 years. 1905. (a) Cases reported : Cholera (including suspected cases) 1 ... 20 9 4 6.8 6 Yellow Fever (ditto) ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 Plague (ditto) 6 19 10 6 6 9.4 9 Small-pox 15 13 93 13 11 29.0 24 Scarlet Fever 14 27 13 11 11 15.2 26 Diphtheria 20 28 26 7 3 16.8 8 Enteric Fever 126 78 66 88 50 81.6 65 Measles 67 83 36 14 38 47.6 36 Erysipelas 2 5 2 4 1 2.8 9 Typhus Fever ... ... ... 1 ... 0.2 ... Continued Fever 2 5 2 13 12 6.8 11 Other diseases (includingChicken-pox) 12 9 14 9 17 12.2 16 Total 265 267 282 175 153 228.4 211 (b) Treated in Port Sanitary Hospital: Cholera (including suspected cases) ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Yellow Fever (ditto) ... ... ... ... ... ... Plague (ditto) 3 13 4 3 4 5.4 3 Small-pox 9 7 29 11 5 12.2 4 Scarlet Fever 2 5 2 5 7 4.2 3 Diphtheria 1 5 2 4 ... 2.4 2 Enteric Fever 55 37 27 55 33 41.4 23 Measles 4 5 11 7 8 7.0 13 Erysipelas ... 1 1 1 ... 0.6 2 Typhus Fever ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Continued Fever 2 5 4 13 12 7.2 9 Other diseases (includingChicken-pox) 8 1 8 4 4 5.0 1 Total 84 79 88 103 73 85.4 60 30 CHOLERA. The distribution and the westward advance of Cholera in Europe during the year 1905 is of great interest. In my Annual Report for 1904, I was able to show the progress of this disease from Syria and the Eastern Levant by way of Arabia and Mesopotamia, and from Persia via the Russian Transcaspian provinces into Europe. During the past year Cholera has been prevalent in Southern and Central Russia, and, following the course of the River Vistula, appeared in Germany during the month of August. At this stage it became necessary to observe strictly the Regulations of the Local Government Board, for the prevention of the introduction of this disease from Baltic ports, especially into the Port of London. Accordingly all ports on the Rivers Vistula and Oder and those on the Russian and German littoral were considered " infected," a detailed medical inspection of all persons on board vessels arriving from these ports was carefully carried out, and the names and addresses in this country of all such persons arriving were taken and notified to the Medical Officer of the district to which they were proceeding. A large number of persons so arriving were, of course, Jewish immigrants from Russia and Germany, and with a view to a better control of the movements of these persons after landing, in company with a Medical Inspector of the Local Government Board I visited the Poor Jews' Temporary Shelter in Whitechapel, and discussed the question with the people in authority there. It must be understood that many of these alien immigrants arrive in this country without any definite address to which they intend to go, and, owing to the unsatisfactory nature of the addresses furnished by these alien immigrants—nearly 30 per cent. of the addresses given were found on enquiry to be incorrect—it became necessary to detain all the alien steerage passengers on board the vessel until I could be satisfied that they would go to the addresses furnished. An arrangement was therefore made with the Committee of the Poor Jews' Temporary Shelter in Leman Street, Whitechapel, that these people should be formally released to the officials of the Shelter who would personally conduct them there, and from whence they would proceed to the addresses given, the accuracy of the same being guaranteed by these officials, either by personal knowledge of the persons to whom they intended going, or by personally conducting them thither. A list of these addresses was furnished to me each day, and these were notified to the Medical Officers of Health of the Local Authorities concerned. 31 As many of these persons proceeded to lodging-houses under the control of the London County Council, I had the advantage of the co-operation of the Medical Officer of Health for the County of London, and of the Lodging-House Inspectors of the London County Council, who were able to check the working of the arrangements by the Poor Jews' Temporary Shelter and other agents, by visiting the addresses given and ascertaining whether the same were correct, and I gratefully acknowledge their cordial co-operation. In the end, the results attending this procedure were most satisfactory as regards London. The total number of Alien passengers thus detained and allowed to land, under supervision, was 6,036. Of these, 277 were notified as proceeding to the provinces; of these provincial addresses 212 were correct and 75 were incorrect, about 25 per cent. being incorrect addresses. In London only three or four of these passengers were subsequently untraced. The special precautions were relaxed on the 18th November, on receipt of the following letter from the Local Government Board:— " Local Government Board, " Whitehall, S.W., " 13 th November, 1905. " Sir, " I am directed by the Local Government Board to state that " during the recent appearance of Cholera in Prussia they have had " before them from time to time reports from their Medical Officer on the " precautionary measures adopted in the Port of London on the arrival " of alien immigrants and transmigrants. " The Board are now advised that there is no imminent danger of the " introduction of Cholera into this country from these immigrants, and " the Board concur in the opinion of their Medical Officer that the " arrangements made for taking the names and addresses of all aliens " arriving in the Port of London may now be safely abandoned. " The Board at the same time take this opportunity of expressing " their appreciation of the work done in the above respect by the Port " Medical Officer of Health, Dr. Williams, and the staff of the Port " Sanitary Authority. " I am, Sir, " Your obedient Servant, " JOHN LITHIBY. " The Clerk to the " Assistant Secretary. " Port of London Sanitary Authority." 32 There were one or two cases of attempted evasion of the regulations by detained passengers who escaped from the vessel, but in each case the person was traced by the master of the vessel and brought back to the ship. These persons were liable to a penalty not exceeding one hundred pounds, but legal proceedings were not taken as there was no evidence of wilful neglect, and the trouble and expense entailed in tracing the fugitives had had the effect of teaching the master and officers a severe lesson. It is extremely probable, however, that during next year Cholera will reappear on the Continent in the Autumn, especially if the weather should be warm, in which event it will be necessary to observe strictly every possible precaution to ensure that persons coming from infected ports are kept under observation, during the incubation period of the disease, after landing in this country. It may be necessary to place greater restrictions on the landing of alien immigrants. Those going to the Provinces may have to remain on board until the Medical Officer of Health of the district in which the address given is situated has been communicated with, and information received from him to the effect that such persons are known or are expected to arrive at the addresses given. The Aliens Act, 1905, may also afford an additional safeguard; a heavy penalty may be inflicted and even sentence of imprisonment may be passed on those who give incorrect information. The Portuguese authorities at the Azores refused to admit cargo from Hamburg which had been transhipped in London, unless it was accompanied by a certificate from the Medical Officer of Health of the Port of London to the effect that such cargo had been duly fumigated and disinfected to his satisfaction. The owners of the cargo having duly indemnified the Port Sanitary Authority and its officers against claims for any damage, actual or alleged, that might be done, the fumigation was carried out, and an official certificate to that effect was issued, vised by the Portuguese Consul-Greneral, and conveyed to the Azores in the ship. This disease has been prevalent also in China, India, Japan, Philippine Islands and Straits Settlements, but no actual or suspected cases were brought into the Port of London, although the following cases occurred on vessels arriving here:— 33 TABLE V. (Cholera.) Date. Name of Vessel, Port of Registry, and Official Number. Where from. Number of Cases. How dealt with. 1905. 24th Jan. - s.s. " Ismaila," of Glasgow, 111,276. Calcutta. 1 Removed to Hospital at Madras. 28th April s.s. " Bohemia," of Glasgow, 98,622. Calcutta. 1 Died—Buried at Sea. 1st May s.s. " Avoca," of Glasgow, 98,663. Calcutta. 1 Ditto. 24th Sept. s.s. " Huntsman," of Liverpool, 118,103. Calcutta. 1 Ditto. 21st Oct. - s.s. " City of Manchester," of Glasgow, 115,742. Calcutta. 1 Removed to Hospital at Suez. 26th Nor. s.s. " Euphrates," of London, 114,805 Bussorah. 1 Ditto. Total 6 YELLOW FEVER. This disease has been practically confined to the vicinity of the Gulf of Mexico, but cases have also been reported on the West Coast of Africa, Canary Islands, Brazil, British Honduras, Columbia, Ecuador, Guatemala, Peru, Venezuela and Panama, during the past year. One case was reported on a vessel arriving in London from New Orleans. The s.s. "Mexican Prince" left New Orleans on the 2nd September for London, and during the voyage one of the crew was taken ill with symptoms which in the Master's opinion were those of Yellow Fever. He therefore reported the fact on arrival at Thames Haven, and his description of the symptoms was quite consistent with those of a person suffering from a mild attack of this disease. All persons on board were medically inspected and found to be in good health. All the crew's effects were removed to Denton Hospital for disinfection by steam, and the vessel thoroughly fumigated. The patient was convalescent on arrival, and no further cases of sickness occurred during the stay of the vessel in the Port. PLAGUE. Plague has continued in an epidemic form throughout India during the year 1905, in the first half of which year the largest number of deaths that were ever recorded in any similar period occurred in India. In the latter half 34 of the year, however, the disease so diminished that notwithstanding the high record obtained in the first half of the year, the total for the twelve months probably falls below the total for the year 1904. It is also probable that the total number of deaths in India from this disease during the year will be found, when the returns are published, to be not less than 1,000,000. This number was largely exceeded in the previous year. In addition to India, Plague has been also prevalent in Persia, Turkey in Asia, Southern Asiatic Russia, China and the Philippine Islands. In Africa, Algeria, Egypt, Mosambique, Zanzibar, South Africa and Mauritius. In South America, Peru, Brazil and Chili, and in Queensland in Australia. Imported cases have also been reported at Hamburg, and a small outbreak at Leith. Four actual cases were landed at foreign ports from vessels which subsequently arrived in the Port of London, whilst three suspected cases were landed at the Port Sanitary Hospital at Denton. Bacterioscopic examination was made in each case by Professor Klein, F.R.S., but in each instance the results were of a negative character. TABLE VI. (Plague.) Date. Name of Vessel, Port of Registry and Official Number. Where from. Number of Cases. How dealt with. 1905. Jan. 19 s.s. " City of Agra," of Liverpool, 118,053. Calcutta 1 Removed to Hospital at Suez. Mar. 10 s.s. " Clan Leslie," of Glasgow, 115,697. Bombay 1 Removed to Port Sanitary Hospital. May 23 s.s. " Warwickshire," of Liverpool, 115,258. Rangoon 1 Ditto. June 18 s.s. " Arabia," of Greenock, 105,587. Bombay 1 Removed to Hospital at Suez. Aug. 8 s.s. " Mombassa," of Glasgow, 96,082. Calcutta 1 Removed to Port Sanitary Hospital. Oct. 3O s.s. " Dalmatia," of Glasgow, 99,791. Do. 1 Removed to Hospital at Port Said. Nov. 24 s.s. " Banca," of Sunderland, 109,708. Sebu - 2 Removed to Hospital at Sebu. Total - 8 On 13th May the daily newspapers contained a notice that four persons had been attacked with Plague at Leith. This information was confirmed by the Local Government Board ; accordingly Leith was declared an "infected" port, 35 and all vessels arriving in the Port of London from that place were medicallyinspected, the names and addresses of passengers taken, and the same were notified to the Medical Officers of Health of the districts to which they were proceeding. Vessels arriving from ports in this country are not usually visited by His Majesty's Customs on arrival at Gravesend, but by the kindness of the Inspector of Waterguard at Gravesend, instructions were given for the launch of His Majesty's Customs to convey the Medical Officer of this Authority to vessels arriving from Leith. No cases were, however, discovered on any vessel arriving from Leith, and as no further cases occurred there, it was not necessary to continue the precautionary measures for a longer period than a month. The s.s. "Hylas," of Liverpool, 110,619, arrived at Hamburg from Rosario, River Plate, on the 25th May. The discharge of cargo was stopped on the 27th owing to the presence of dead rats. The vessel was fumigated and disinfected, and sailed on the 7th June for Middlesbrough, arriving there the following day. The second cook left the ship at night and proceeded to Manchester, where he was taken ill and died. Bacteriological examination revealed the fact that the man had died of Plague. From Middlesbrough the vessel proceeded to London, arriving on the night of the 20th June. The crew were medically inspected and found all well. I visited the vessel in dock, examined the crew, and arranged for a daily muster. On June 24th, as the vessel was on the point of sailing, one of the crew was reported ill. A Sanitary Inspector proceeded in the vessel, which was boarded at Gravesend, and the man examined by the Medical Officer on duty, who found that the man was not suffering with any disease of an infectious nature, and the vessel was allowed to proceed on her voyage to Cape Town. The following Table gives the total number of rats returned as destroyed on Vessels and in the Docks for the five years ending the 31st December last. 36 TABLE VII. Return of Rats caught and destroyed during 1905. Jan. Feb. Mar. April. May June. July. Aug. Sept. Oct. Nov. Dec. Totals. Milhvall Dock— Warehouses 166 108 123 128 112 115 110 118 141 104 106 138 1,469 Vessels during voyage 118 — — — — — 40 — — — — — 158 ,, in dock - — — — 121 — 29 88 — — — 20 223 481 Surrey Commercial Dk.— Warehouses 109 112 94 109 42 50 117 63 77 72 59 73 978 Vessels during voyage — — — — — — — — — — — — ,, in dock - 78 150 75 292 155 175 265 1,190 Regent's Dock— Warehouses 9 12 9 17 10 7 31 25 24 19 21 16 200 Vessels during voyage - - - - - - - - - - - - - „ in dock - - - - - - - - - - - - - - St. Katharine's Dock— Warehouses 49 51 79 67 60 72 77 88 58 47 35 8 741 Vessels during voyage - - - - - - - - - - - - „ in dock - - - - - - - - - - - - - - London Dock— - - - - - - - - - - - - - Warehouses 68 82 109 106 100 126 124 98 82 71 93 75 1,134 Vessels during voyage 20 — — — — — — — — — — — 20 „ in dock - 14 66 176 146 131 59 131 69 55 69 179 141 1,236 Albert and Victoria Dk.— Warehouses 573 518 524 648 589 513 668 533 871 573 557 713 7,280 Vessels during voyage 800 105 400 672 323 705 580 283 244 425 513 153 5,203 „ in dock - 628 452 290 376 231 558 858 473 784 244 444 462 5,800 West India Dock— Warehouses 138 183 164 268 290 157 130 105 173 126 110 140 1,984 Vessels during voyage 165 — — — 32 30 98 66 — — — — 391 „ in dock - 258 351 135 149 218 339 271 114 431 36 316 348 2,966 East India Dock— W arehouses 25 8 7 4 2 15 19 32 57 38 33 38 278 Vessels during voyage — — — — — — — — 1 1 20 22 „ in dock - 86 61 95 9 — — — 94 47 2 394 Tilbury Dock— W arehouses 290 297 240 242 207 162 226 200 338 327 374 318 3,221 Vessels during voyage 748 1,249 710 1,424 1,056 770 985 310 1,412 888 1,252 1,470 12,274 „ in dock - 528 549 761 927 693 941 1,036 - 841 1,085 638 724 642 9,365 Poplar and Midland Dks. — — — — — — — — — — — — - - - - - - - - - - - - - Totals - 4,792 4,204 3,916 5,413 4,096 4,726 5,739 3,493 6,219 3,881 5,011 5,295 56,785 Total from February, 1901, to 31st December, 1904 328,377 Total from 1st January to 31st December, 1905:— In Dock Warehouses - 17,285 ) On Vessels while in dock 18,068 56,785 On Vessels during voyage - 21,432 ) Total 385,162 37 SMALL-POX. There were 24 cases of this disease reported on vessels during the year, of which four were treated in the Port Sanitary Hospital. I append particulars of the ships on which the cases occurred, stating where the patients were isolated. Careful inquiry was made as to the measures of disinfection carried out in foreign ports, and the crews were kept under observation during the stay of the vessel in the Port of London. TABLE VIII. (Small-pox.) Date. Name of Vessel, Port of Eegistry and Official No. Where from. No. of cases. How dealt with. 1905. 20 th January - s.s. " Benalder," of Leith, 104,908. Yokohama 2 Removed to Hospital, one at Singapore and one at Suez. 31st January - s.s. " Haddon Hall," of W.Hartlepool, 106,979. Busreh 1 Removed to Hospital at Suez. 25th February s.s, " Sigyn," of Stockholm Alexandria 1 Removed to Port Sanitary Hospital. 6th March s.s. " India," of Greenock, 105.572. Sydney 1 Removed to Hospital at Port Said. 9 th March s.s. " Palawan," of Greenock, 102,400. Yokohama 1 Removed to Hospital at Kobe. 25t,h March - s.s. " Macedonia," of Belfast, 116,012. Bombay 3 Two removed at Suez, one at Marseilles. 4th April s.s. " Tyne," of Newcastle, 83,890. Santander 1 Removed to Metropolitan Asylums Board Hospital. 20th April s.s. " Clan Murray," of Glasgow, 106,077. Calcutta 1 Removed to Hospital at Colombo. 23rd April s.s. " Clan Macneil," of Glasgow, 115,770. V izagapatam 1 Removed to Hospital at Bimlipatam. 25th May s.s. " Merionethshire," of London, 104,830. Yokohama 2 Removed to Hospital at Colombo. 27th May s.s. " Cheshire," of Liverpool, 9,930. Rangoon 5 Two removed at Dover, two at Suez, one in London. 7th July s.s. " Assyria," of Glasgow, 113,927. Calcutta 1 Removed to Hospital at Suez. 11th August - s.s. •'Muristan," of Swansea, 109,644. Bussorah 1 Removed to Port Sanitary Hospital. 16 th August - s.s. " Batavier IV.," of Rotterdam. Rotterdam 1 Removed to Port Sanitary Hospital. 19th September s.s. " Cid," of Barcelona - Yaleticia 1 Removed to Port Sanitary Hospital. 20th October - s.s. " Galeka," of Southampton, 110,265. East London 1 Removed to Hospital at Southampton. Total 24 On the 25th February, the barque "Jeanie Woodside" arrived at Gravesend from Ghent. One of the men had been ill for two days, and on being examined by the Medical Officer he was of the opinion that the illness was not that of any dangerous infectious disorder. On arrival in London it was thought advisable for the man to be seen by a doctor, who pronounced the man to be suffering from Small-pox. He was accordingly removed to the Hospital of the Metropolitan Asylums Board, where, on careful examination, he was found not to be suffering from Smallpox or any other notifiable disease. 38 The s.s. "Tyne," of Newcastle, Official No. 83,890, arrived at Gravesend at 10.10 a.m. on the 3rd April, from Santander, the Master reported "all well on board," and the vessel proceeded to Mill Hole Tier, Bermondsey. On arrival of the vessel in London, one of the crew, a fireman, went on shore to consult a doctor ; his complaint was diagnosed as Small-pox, and he was removed forthwith to the Isolation Hospital of the Metropolitan Asylums Board. The vessel was disinfected with all the crew's effects, and vaccination offered to each person on board; this was declined except in one instance. The vessel sailed for Gateshead on the 7th April, and the facts were reported to the Medical Officer of Health for that Port. The two firemen, who occupied the same place as the patient, stated to me that the man bad been ill for three or four days, and had been given medicine by the Captain ; moreover, they had noticed a rash on his face before the vessel arrived at Gravesend. The fact of the man being ill should have been reported, and the facts were laid before Mr. Solicitor with a view to the prosecution of the Master for an offence against the Bye-laws of the Port Sanitary Authority relating to dangerous infectious disorders; but the evidence in his opinion was not sufficient to obtain a conviction. The s.s. " Cheshire," Liverpool, 99,310, arrived at Gravesend on Saturday, the 27th May. The vessel left Rangoon on April 27th. The previous day a fireman joined the ship, and was discovered to be in the scabbing stage of Small-pox. He was forthwith sent ashore. On May 6th the third engineer became ill, and on the 7th an unvaccinated Lascar was also taken with illness. These were isolated, and the persons ailing were diagnosed as suffering from Small-pox. They were landed at Suez on May 14th, and on arrival at Marseilles, several passengers were allowed to land and proceeded overland to this country. At Dover two of them were seen by the Medical Officer of Health, and were diagnosed as suffering from Small-pox. One child proceeded to Deptford, where the mother called in a doctor, who notified the patient as suffering from Small-pox. On arrival of the vessel at Gravesend, all persons on board were carefully inspected, and the names and addresses of the persons leaving the ship were taken, and these were notified to the Medical Officers of Health of the districts to which they were proceeding. I ascertained the addresses of several of the passengers who landed at Marseilles and proceeded to this country; these were also duly notified and were kept under observation during the incubation period of the disease. 39 The s.s. "Cid" arrived at Gravesend at 11.40 p.m. on September 17th from Valencia. The Master had been complaining of slight headache and ''sickness" for two days previously, but he did not think it of sufficient importance to mention to the Medical Officer at Gravesend. On the 19th instant, Inspector Hopkins, when making the usual sanitary inspection of the ship, observed that the Master had a rash upon his face, which, in his opinion, was very suspiciously like Small-pox. He telephoned the fact to me, and I proceeded to the vessel, where I found the Master on the bridge navigating the vessel into dry dock. There was no doubt that he was in an early stage of the disease, and I had him removed forthwith, with all infected effects, to the Port Sanitary Hospital at Denton. All persons on board, with the exception of four who refused, were vaccinated by me. The vessel was thoroughly disinfected, and sailed for Cardiff on the 29th September, all being well on board. The facts were notified to the Medical Officer of Health for that Port, and during the stay of the vessel there, it is satisfactory to learn that no further cases occurred. SCARLET FEVER. There were 26 cases of Scarlet Fever notified during the year, of which three were treated in the Port Sanitary Hospital. The majority of the cases notified are accounted for by an outbreak which occurred on the Thames Nautical Training College, H.M.S. "Worcester," at Greenhithe. There were 16 cases in all. The first cases were discovered on the 18th February. It is the wise practice on this ship, whenever any boy feels ill, to at once isolate him until he has been seen by the Medical Officer in charge of the ship. It appears that on the 17th February several boys who had complained of cold were removed to the shore sanatorium, and one on the 18th. Subsequently four of these boys were found to be suffering from Scarlet Fever ; three more cases were found on the 19th, two on the 23rd, one on the 24th, one on the 27 th, one on the 28th, two on March 4th, one on the 9th, and one on the 11th. I visited the ship as soon as possible after receiving the first notification, and arranged for the daily medical inspection of every boy on the ship. Any boy found with a temperature above the normal was at once isolated until it was decided whether or no he was suffering from any infectious disease. Investigations failed to locate the source of the original infection, but a few cases had occurred at Swanscombe, a place on shore about three miles off, 40 and it is possible that the first case was infected from that place during a visit ashore. I learned that the cadets returned from leave on the 26th January, and in accordance with the usual practice the Superintendent had received from each boy a certificate countersigned by the family medical attendant that no case of infectious disease had occurred at the house of which he had been an inmate. The disease was of a mild type, and all the patients recovered. I have pleasure in acknowledging the courteous co-operation of Captain Wilson Barker, the Superintendent, and also the prompt action on the part of Dr. H. T. Sells, in detecting and immediately isolating any boy found suffering from any complaint of a febrile nature. TABLE IX. (Scarlet Fever.) Date. Name of Vessel, Port of Registry, and Official Number. Where from. Number of Cases. How dealt with. 1905. Jan. 17 Tilbury Dock Station Restaurant — 1 Removed to Port Sanitary Hospital. Feb. 17 " Worcester " Training Ship, lying off Greenhithe. — 3 Removed to Ship's Hospital on Shore. 18 Ditto — 1 Ditto. 19 Ditto — Ditto. „ 22 Ditto _ 1 Ditto. 23 Ditto — Ditto. March 17 " Enterprise," of Folkestone, 52,632 Hartlepool 1 Removed to Seamen's Hospital, Greenwich. „ 21 s.s. "Afric," of Liverpool, 110,537 Sydney 1 Removed to Port Sanitary Hospital. „ 27 " Worcester " Training Ship, lying off Greenhithe. — 1 Removed to Ship's Hospital on shore. „ 28 Ditto — 1 Ditto. „ 4 Ditto — Ditto. „ 9 Ditto — 1 Ditto. „ 11 Ditto — 1 Ditto. July 23 s.s. "Vesta," of Hamburg Hamburg - 1 Removed to Port Sanitary Hospital. „ 28 " Warspite " Training Ship, lying off Greenhithe. — 1 Removed to Ship's Hospital on shore. August 8 Norway Cottage, Surrey Commercial Dock. — 1 Removed to Hospital of MetropolitanAsylums Board. Sept. 1 s.s. " Montrose " Montreal - 1 Ditto. Oct. 8 s.s. " Oruba," of Liverpool, 96,310 Sydney 1 Convalescent on arrival at Plymouth. „ 17 s.s. " Fusilier,"of Manchester, 110,367 Manchester 1 Removed to Hospital at Manchester Dec. 30 s.s. "Moultan," of Greenock, 117,397 Bombay - 1 Removed to Hospital at Port Said. Total - 26 41 DIPHTHERIA. Eight cases of Diphtheria were notified, of which two were treated in the Port Sanitary Hospital; two cases were accounted for by training ships, and the remainder as shown in the following Table:— TABLE X. (Diphtheria.) Date. Name of Vessel, Port of Registry and Official No. Where from. No. of cases. How dealt with. 1905. 27th January - s.s. " Runic," of Liverpool, 113,441. Sydney 1 Removed to Port Sanitary Hospital. 27th May s.s. " Moldavia," of Greenock. Sydney 1 Removed to Hospital at Fremantle. 13th July s.s. " Medic," of Liverpool, 110,573. Sydney 2 Removed to Port Sanitary Hospital. 18th July Barge " Concord" - Faversham 1 Removed to Hospital at Faversham. 26th July s.s. "Nineveh," of Aberdeen, 104,505. Brisbane 1 Convalescent on arrival at Plymouth. 23rd November Training ship " Arethusa " — 1 Removed to Hospital at Dartford. 24th November Training ship "Arethusa" — 1 Removed to Hospital at Dartford. Total 8 ENTERIC FEVER. The incidence of this disease shows a slight increase as compared with the preceding year, but is substantially below the mean average number for the five years preceding the year now under review. There was a total of 65 cases notified, of which 23 were treated in the Port Sanitary Hospital. Excepting three cases reported on the training ship "Cornwall," there was no outbreak of this disease on any training ship in the Thames during the year. On August 31st I received a notification that a boy from the training ship "Cornwall" was suffering from Enteric Fever. This boy joined the ship on August 10th, and it is stated that on August 7th (Bank Holiday) he purchased and ate some cockles from a stall in Putney. A second case was notified on December 7th, and a third on the 25th. The boys were at once isolated on shore with all effects, which were subsequently disinfected. 42 TABLE XI. (Enteric Fever.) Date. Name of Vessel, Port of Registry, and Official Number. Where from. No. of Cases. How dealt with. 1905. January 19 s.s. " Douro," of Marseilles Marseilles 1 Removed to Port Sanitary Hospital. „ 20 s.s. " Mesaba," of Liverpool. 109,392. New York 1 Ditto. „ 25 s.s. " Inanda," of Aberdeen. 118,187. Natal 1 Ditto. February 2 s.s. " Highland Ghillie," of London. 98,081. Las Palmas 1 Ditto. „ 9 s.s. " Candia," of Greenock. 105,574. Shanghai 1 Ditto. „ 9 s.s. " Braemar Castle," of London. 108,381. Algoa Bay One removed to Hospital at Algoa Bay and one at Port Elizabeth. March 1 s.s. "Kintuck," of Liverpool. 105,749. Yokohama 1 Buried at Shanghai. „ 11 s.s. " Caledonia," of Greenock. 102,390. Bombay 1 Removed to Hospital at Aden. April 19 s.s. " British Isles," of Liverpool. 87,992. San Francisco 1 Died, and buried at sea. „ 21 s.s. " Vesta," of Hamburg Hamburg Removed to Port Sanitary Hospital. „ 22 s.s. " Sardinia," of Glasgow. 115,696. Calcutta 1 Convalescent on arrival. „ 23 s.s. " Mackinaw," of Liverpool. 97,837. Philadelphia 1 Removed to Port Sanitary Hospital. „ 28 s.s. " Sussex," of London. 112,686. Buenos Ayres 1 Ditto. May 2 s.s. " Newark Castle," of London. 115,806. Cape Town - 1 Removed to Hospital at Southampton. „ 6 s.s. " Orontes," of Glasgow. 115,709. Sydney 1 Removed to Hospital at Naples. „ 19 s.s. " Syria," of Glasgow. 113,959. Calcutta 1 Convalescent on arrival. „ 24 Barge " Hornet," of London. 118,269. Swanscombe 1 Removed to Hospital at Erith. „ 26 s.s. " Oswestry Grange," of Greenock. 114,066. Buenos Ayres 1 Removed to Branch Seamen's Hospital. June 6 s.s. " Tintagel Castle," of London. 105,900. Algoa Bay 1 Removed to Hospital at Southampton. „ 6 s.s. " Urmston Grange," of London. 104,813. Buenos Ayres 1 Removed to fort Sanitary Hospital. „ 16 s.s. " Persian Prince," of Newcastle. 96,128. Smyrna 1 Ditto. „ 20 s.s. " Durham," of London. 118,499. Buenos Ayres 1 Ditto. „ 26 s.s. "Kurgan," of Windau St. Petersburg 1 Ditto, July 2 s.s. " Persia," of Greenock. 109,258. Bombay 1 Died, and buried at sea „ 11 s.s. " Orotava," of Liverpool. 106,838. — 1 „ 12 s.s. " Somali," of Greenock. 114,006. Calcutta 1 Convalescent on arrival. „ 12 s.s. "Avoca," of London. 87,339 Smyrna 1 Removed to Port Sanitary Hospital. August 12 s.s. " Mount Temple," of Liverpool. 113,496. Montreal 1 Ditto. „ 20 s.s. " Marmora," of Belfast. 116,011. Sydney 1 Ditto. „ 27 s.s. " Arabia," of Greenock. 105,587. Bombay 1 Removed to Hospital at Plymouth. „ 28 s.s. " Tintagel Castle," of London. 105,900. Cape Town 1 Removed to Hospital at Southampton. Forward - 34 43 Date. Name of Vessel, Port of Registry, and Official Number. Where from. No. of Cases. How dealt with. 1905. Brought forward 34 September 3 s.s. " Commonwealth," of London. 115,903. Sydney 1 Removed to Port Sanitary Hospital. „ 3 s.s." China," of Belfast. 104,467 Sydney 1 Ditto. „ 4 s.s. " Cheshire," of Liverpool. 99,310. Rangoon 1 Convalescent on arrival. „ 5 " Cornwall," Training Ship Lying off Purfleet 1 Removed to Ship's Hospital on shore. „ 11 s.s. " Montezuma," of Liverpool. 110,604. Montreal 1 Removed to Port Sanitary Hospital. „ 12 s.s. " Illmari," of Bjorneburg - St. Petersburg 1 Removed to Seamen's Hospital, Greenwich. „ 12 s.s. " Gairloch," of Glasgow. 108,796. — 1 Ditto. „ 18 s.s. " Alexey Morsch," of St. Petersburg. St. Petersburg 1 Ditto. „ 19 s.s. " Syria," of Goole. 104,222 Boulogne 1 Ditto. „ 19 s.s. " John Fothergill," of Sunderland. 99,606. — 1 Ditto. „ 24 s.s. " Huntsman," of Liverpool. 118,103. Calcutta 1 Removed to Port Sanitary Hospital. „ 25 s.s. " Guelph," of Southampton. 104,040. Cape Town 1 Removed to Hospital at Southampton. „ 25 s.s. " Haddon Hall," of West Hartlepool. 106,979. Bussorah 1 Removed to Hospital at Suez. „ 25 s.s. " Statia," of London. 115,847. Belize 1 Removed to Hospital at Belize. „ 28 s.s. " City of Dundee," of Glasgow. 97,668. Odessa 1 Removed to Seamen's Hospital, Greenwich. October 3 s.s. " Joshua Nicholson," of North Shields. 79,243. Antwerp 1 Ditto. „ 11 Bary e " Lucy," of Rochester. 81,844. Rochester 1 Removed to Hospital at Rochester. „ 16 s.s. " Grebe," of London. 94,312. Rotterdam 1 Removed to Seamen's Hospital, Greenwich „ 23 s.s. "Vauxhall," of London. 77,098. - 1 Ditto. „ 24 s.s. " Sergei," of Riga Riga 1 Ditto. „ 26 s.s. " Kirkcaldy," of Kirkcaldy. 117,571. Kirkcaldy 1 Ditto. „ 28 s.s. " Himalaya," of Greenock. 97,776. Sydney 1 Removed to Port Sanitary Hospital. November 22 s.s. " Papanui," of Plymouth. 108,562. Sydney 1 Convalescent on arrival. „ 25 s.s. " Britannia," of Greenock. 93,196. Sydney 1 Landed at Marseilles. December 7 " Cornwall," Training Ship, lying off Purfleet. — 1 Rpmoved to Ship's Hos pital on shore. „ 11 s.s. " Peter Melkinoff," of St. Petersburg. St. Petersburg Removed to Seamen's Hospital, Greenwich. „ 24 s.s. " Derbyshire," of Liverpool. 106,876. Rangoon 1 Removed to Hospital at Port Said. „ 25 " Cornwall," Training Ship,lying off Purfleet. — 1 Removed to Ship's Hospital on shore. „ 26 s.s. " Sussex," of London. 112,686. Buenos Ayres 1 Removed to Port Sanitary Hospital. „ 26 s.s. " Afric," of Liverpool. 110,537. Sydney 1 Removed to Hospital at Durban. Total - 65 44 MEASLES. The s.s. "Vectis," of Greenock, Official No. 81,820, arrived at Gravesend from Marseilles on the l0th April, when a case of Measles was landed at Denton Hospital, with all effects. The patient embarked on the vessel at Marseilles on the 22nd March, and was taken ill on the 4th April. The patient is stated to have received a letter on the 22nd March from a friend in England who was engaged in nursing a patient suffering from Measles. If this be correct, and the period of time between the receipt of the letter and the onset of the illness agrees with the usual incubation period of Measles, it is interesting to note, by this illustration, a possible means of conveyance of infection. CHICKEN-POX. Chicken-pox was made a notifiable disease in the Port of London for a period of six months, from 30th November, 1905, to 31st May, 1906. This precaution was deemed desirable in order that every case of Chicken-pox may come under notice with a view to determining that it was not a mild case of modified Small-pox. INFECTIOUS DISEASE. In the early part of the year it was found, on vessels usually bringing alien immigrants from Continental ports, that several persons were suffering from infectious disease. All these people were examined as a matter of routine, but it was ascertained that in nearly every instance the Master knew nothing personally of the state of health of those people, although he was prepared to state that all persons were well on board. The following circular letter was sent to the owners of these steamers, with a view to bringing home the importance of this matter prominently before their notice:— " I have to point out that during the last few months several cases of " infectious disease have occurred on your vessels arriving in the Port of " London. Some of these, fortunately, were detected by the Medical " Officer of this Authority at Gravesend, but others have been landed at " great risk to the public health of this country. " I enclose a copy of the Bye-laws made by this Authority with regard " to cases of infectious disease arriving in the Port of London, from " which you will see that the Master is responsible for reporting every " case of illness on his vessel when he arrives at Gravesend. In the " absence of a surgeon, the Master must, before arriving at Gravesend, " satisfy himself—by personal examination or otherwise—that every person on board is in good health. 45 "In future, should any case of infectious disease be found on board "your vessels after the Master has declared every person to be in good "health, I shall advise the Authority to take legal proceedings against "the Master for an offence against the enclosed Bye-laws." TRAINING SHIPS. With the exception of an outbreak of Scarlet Fever on the training ship "Worcester," particulars of which will be found under "Scarlet Fever," these ships have been remarkably free from infectious disease, as is shown by the accompanying Table. Two well-known training ships, the "Exmouth" and the "Shaftesbury," were removed from the River during the year. In the case of the "Shaftesbury," the boys were distributed to various schools throughout the country, and will not again be accommodated in a floating school. In the case of the "Exmouth," a new vessel was constructed, and the boys were kept on shore until the new vessel was ready for their reception. The new "Exmouth" was taken over in July, and I took that opportunity of having a thorough sanitary inspection made of the vessel ; several suggestions as to improved ventilation, &c., were made and were carried out, and the sanitary arrangements now, for a vessel, may be considered to be satisfactory. TABLE XII. Name of Vessel. Diphtheria. Enteric Fever. Scarlet Fever. Total. "Arethusa" 2 ... ... 2 "Cornwall" ... 3 ... 3 " Warspite " ... ... 1 1 ''Worcester" ... ... 16 16 Totals 2 3 17 22 BERI-BERI. The origin and cause of this disease remains clothed in obscurity, but two important facts stand out prominently, namely, that the cases occur either in Europeans on Scandinavian sailing ships or amongst the native Asiatic crews of steamers. In the case of Scandinavian sailing ships, these vessels make very long voyages, much of their food supply is taken out with them, and in a large measure consists of fish. 46 It is probable, nay likely, that the condition of their food deteriorates, either due to living organisms or to mere chemical change. It is well known that Asiatics, especially Chinamen and Malays, are fond of eating fish in a semi decomposed condition, and this is a possible source of the disease. In the Straits Settlements a very large proportion of the total number of deaths are due to this disease. The symptoms point to the circulation of an organic poison in the blood which affects the nerves, producing Paralysis in a more or less marked degree. The result is analogous to that associated with Diphtheria and Tetanus. In the former disease living organisms grow in the throat, produces a poison which is absorbed into the blood and acts upon the nerves, producing Paralysis. In the case of Tetanus, the organism grows in some superficial wound producing its poison, which, after absorption into the blood, acts upon the nervous system, producing violent convulsions. A more simple illustration is that of the yeast plant, which, growing in a solution of saccharine matter, produces alcohol, which, when absorbed into the blood, has its effect on the nervous system, producing in some persons a state of excitement, and, if taken in sufficiently large quantities, ultimately a condition of temporary Paralysis. The following cases have occurred on vessels arriving during the year TABLE XIII. (Beri-Beri.) Date. Name of vessel. Where from. Number of cases. 1905. 4th January Barque "Lota," of Bristol, 98,826. Java 1 2nd February " Ruby," of Skien Pensacola 1 7th February s.s. " Euphrates," of Port Pirie 3 10th June London, 114,805. "Paul Isenberg," of Bremen. Caleta Bueno 4 17th October s.s. "Strombus," of London, 112,650. Singapore 2 23rd December s.s. Clan Lindsay," of Glasgow, 115,470. Vizagapatam 1 24th December s.s. "Ching Wo," of Livernool. 104.799. Manila 1 Total 13 HEALTH OF CREWS (SCURVY). On the 28th October the sailing ship "Esmeralda," of Nordby, from Lobos de Terra, arrived at Gravesend, and the Master reported that a death had occurred on board a fortnight previously, and further, that most of the crew were complaining of illness. The crew of 13 were medically inspected by the Boarding Medical Officer, who found six of them ill and suffering with Scurvy. They were referred to the Seamen's Hospital. I understand that on the 29th October two of the men were admitted to the Seamen's Hospital at Greenwich, and on the 31st five more were admitted to the same hospital, all suffering with Scurvy. 47 The cases were reported to the Board of Trade, who stated that as the vessel was not a British ship, they had no power to take any action in the matter. TABLE XIV. Vessels and Premises Disinfected, from 1st January to 31st December, 1905. Month. Reason for Disinfection. Total Number of Disinfections. Chicken-pox. Continued Fever. Diphtheria. Enteric Fever. Erysipelas. Measles. Plague. Scarlet Fever. Small-pox. Yellow Fever. Precautionary Measure. J anuary ... I 1 3 ... ... ... 1 1 ... 2 9 February 1 ... ... 3 1 1 ... ... 2 ... 1 9 March 2 l ... ... 1 ... 1 2 1 ... 3 11 April 3 ... ... 5 ... 2 ... ... 1 ... ... 11 May ... I ... 3 1 1 1 ... ... ... ... 7 June 1 ... ... 4 1 2 ... ... ... ... 2 10 July ... 1 1 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 4 August ... I ... 4 ... 2 ... 1 2 ... 4 14 September ... ... ... 6 ... 1 ... ... 1 1 4 13 October ... 1 ... 4 ... 2 ... ... ... ... 1 8 November ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... 3 4 December ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... 1 ... 3 5 Totals 7 6 2 35 4 11 2 4 9 1 24 105 48 TABLE XV. Effects Disinfected, from 1st January to 31st December, 1905. Month. Reason for Disinfection. Hospital Bedding, &c. Total Number of Disinfections. Chicken-pox. Continued Fever. Diphtheria. J Enteric Fever. Erysipelas. Measles. Plague. Scarlet Fever. Small-pox. Yellow Fever. Precautionary Measure. January ... 1 1 4 ... ... ... I ... ... ... 3 10 February 1 ... ... 2 1 1 ... 2 1 ... ... 2 10 March 2 1 ... ... 1 ... 1 6 1 ... ... 3 15 April 1 ... ... 5 ... 2 ... 1 1 ... ... 4 14 May ... 1 ... 3 1 1 1 ... 1 ... ... 3 11 June 1 ... ... 4 1 2 ... ... ... ... ... 2 10 July ... 1 1 1 ••• ... ... 1 ... ... ... 1 5 August ... 1 ... 4 ... 2 ... ... 3 ... ... 4 14 September ... 1 ... 9 ... 2 ... ... 1 1 ... 4 18 October ... 1 ... 3 ... 2 ... ... ... ... ... 5 11 November ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 3 4 December ... ... ... 3 ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 1 5 Totals 5 7 2 39 4 12 2 11 8 1 1 35 127 49 TABLE XVI. Quantity and Description of Unsound Food Seized and Destroyed for the Year ending 31st December, 1905. Original packages. Sundry quantities by weight. Loose Articles. No. Description. Tons. cwts. qrs. lbs. No. Description. MEAT— Fresh and Frozen— Beef 3,517 quarters ... ... ... ... 1,463 pieces Mutton and Lamb 15,070 carcasses ... ... ... 784 „ Yeal, Pork and Offal 437 cases ... ... ... ... 52 loose Preserved— Tinned 5 „ ... ... ... ... 1,121 tins Smoked and Salted ... ... 0 4 0 0 ... RABBITS— Frozen 524 crates ... ... ... ... ... Tinned ... ... ... ... ... ... 168 tins POULTRY and GAME— Frozen ... ... ... ... ... ... ... FISH— Wet 8 barrels ... ... ... ... ... Preserved, Tinned ... ... ... ... ... ... 5,404 tins „ Dried ... ... ... ... ... ... ... FRUIT— Fresh 7,259 packages 1 11 2 0 ... Preserved, Dried 88 boxes ... ... ... ... ... „ Tinned and Bottled . . . ... ... ... ... ... 5,488 tins „ Jam and Marmalade 185 jars ... ... ... ... 27 „ VEGETABLES— Fresh 526 packages 9 5 0 16 ... Preserved, Dried 3 „ ... ... ... ... ... NUTS - Cocoanuts, whole ... ... 0 5 0 0 ... „ desiccated ... ... ... ... ... ... ... PROVISIONS— Tea ... ... 0 0 2 0 ... Coffee ... ... o 1 0 0 ... Cocoa ... ... 0 1 0 14 ... Butter, Cheese, Lard, Margarine 4 cases 1 1 3 26 ... Condensed Milk 588 „ ... ... ... ... 104 tins Prepared Foods 151 „ ... ... ... ... ... Biscuits and Confectionery 4 „ 1 0 0 3 154 „ Sugar 4,100 bags 11 7 0 0 ... GRAIN— Wheat, Maize, Rice, Barley, &c. 162 „ 4093 15 1 5 ... MEAL and FLOUR 25 „ 0 8 0 0 ... CONDIMENTS and SPICES ... ... ... ... ... ... ... EGGS ••• ... ... ... ... ... 166860 SUNDRIES 18 cases 0 0 2 0 213 loose Total 32,674 - 4119 1 0 8 181838 50 UNSOUND FOOD. The Report of the Medical Officer of Health for the City of London, presented to the Court of Common Council in November last, stated that some carcasses of pigs had been imported into this country from Belgium and had been seized by the City Meat Inspectors as being "markedly infected with tuberculosis." I append some correspondence which took place in the Spring of this year between the Consul-General for Belgium and myself, on the subject of the importation of meat from Belgium, and it will be noted that if the examination had been carried out as carefully as is therein stated, there should have been no possibility at all events of pigs "markedly infected with tuberculosis" being imported into this country. " 16th November, 1905. " Sir, "Dr. Collingridge, the Medical Officer of Health for the City of "London, in his last Report to the Sanitary Committee mentions that "the Food Inspectors for the City had seized some carcasses of pigs "imported from Belgium which were 'markedly infected with " tuberculosis.' "In each instance the carcasses bore impressions in aniline ink, made "by a rubber stamp, which presumably showed that the carcasses had " been subjected to inspection in Belgium. "You will remember some correspondence I had with you dated "3rd April and 3rd May last on this subject, and you were good enough "to furnish me with some information which indicated that all meat "exported to this country from Belgium was subjected to a rigorous " inspection. "It would appear, therefore, that this inspection is not so carefully "done as was indicated by your letters to me, and I have to suggest "that you bring these facts to the notice of the responsible Authority in "Belgium, with a view to the examination of all meat exported from " there to this country being performed in so rigorous a manner that it " will not be possible for diseased meat to be exported. "I have no desire to place any restrictions on the exportation of meat "to this country, and I only desire to indicate that should the 51 "exportation of diseased meat be permitted, it may be found necessary to "make a minute detailed examination of every carcass on arrival in this "country. "As you perhaps know, on arrival of the meat here it is at once " carried away and sold, and such minute examination would necessitate " delay. "I have to request that this letter may receive careful consideration, "and that I may be favoured with a reply thereto, which may be placed "before the Port of London Sanitary Committee at their next meeting "on the 5th December next. "I am, Sir, "Your obedient Servant, "HERBERT WILLIAMS, "The Consul-General for Belgium, " Medical Officer of Health, "29 Great St. Helen's, E.C." "Port of London." "29, Great St. Helen's, "London, E.C., "20th November, 1905. "Sir, "In reply to your communication of the 16th instant, I beg to inform "you that I have forwarded a copy of it to the Belgian Government, "whose reply I will communicate to you as soon as I receive it. "I am, Sir, "Your obedient Servant, "The Medical Officer of Health, "Consul-General for Belgium. " Port of London, "King William Street, Greenwich, S.E." The examination of carcasses of animals enclosed in boxes and crates cannot be carried out on shipboard without considerable delay. Although this may become necessary, I think it advisable that the country of exportation should have the opportunity of so rigorously inspecting the meat before it is exported—that such meat can be allowed to land with the confidence that none of it is diseased or unfit for food. 52 "3rd April, 1905. "Sir, "With reference to the exportation of meat to this country "from Belgium, I shall be obliged if you kindly favour me with "information on the following point:— "(1) Are all beasts slaughtered in public abattoirs ? "(2) Is all meat inspected by a Medical Officer or Veterinary "Surgeon before being placed on shipboard ? "(3) Is the inspection carried out in accordance with the "recommendations of the Tuberculosis Commission in this country ? "I am, Sir, "Your obedient Servant, "HERBERT WILLIAMS, "The Consul-General for Belgium, "Medical Officer of Health, "29, Great St. Helen's, "Port of London. "London, E.G. "29, Great St. Helen's, "London, E.C., "5th April, 1905. "Sir, "I have the honour to acknowledge receipt of your letter of the "3rd instant, and regret to inform you that I have not in my possession "the information you desire. I shall be very pleased to try and get the "same for you, if you wish me to do so, but I think that the quickest "and simplest way for you to obtain the same would be to write direct "to H. B. M. Consul-General at Antwerp, who will probably be in a "position to reply to you by return of post. "I am, Sir, "Your obedient Servant, "The Medical Officer of Health, "Consul-General for Belgium. "Port of London, "King William Street, "Greenwich, S.E." 53 "April 6th, 1905. "Sir, "I am obliged for your letter of the 5th instant, and shall be "obliged if you will furnish me officially with the information requested "in my letter of the 3rd instant. "I am, Sir, "Y our obedient Servant, "HERBERT WILLIAMS, The Consul-General for Belgium, "Medical Officer of Health, "29, Great St. Helen's, E.C." "Port of London. "Sir "29, Great St. Helen's, "London, E.C., "25th April, 1905. "I beg to hand you herewith the reply to the different points "raised in your letter of the 3rd instant, with reference to the exportation "of meat to England. "I am, Sir, "Your obedient Servant, The Medical Officer of Health, "Consul-General for Belgium. "Port of London, "King William Street, "Greenwich, S.E." ( Translation.) "EXPORTATION OF MEAT. "SANITARY MEASURES, VETERINARY SUPERVISION. Note. "1 and 2. All animals are not slaughtered at the public Slaughter"houses; the greater portion of the animals whose meat is intended for "exportation is killed at the Slaughterhouse at Antwerp. All other "meat is submitted, immediately after being slaughtered, to examination "by the Veterinary Surgeon (for abnormal cases) or by the meat "expert (for normal cases). "All meat imported from the interior into the town of Antwerp is "submitted, at the Communal Slaughter-house, to an obligatory second "expert examination. "It results, from these regulations, that all the meat exported from "the Port of Antwerp has necessarily been submitted to veterinary "inspection. "3. As regards the animals which suffer from tuberculosis, the "regulations concerning the matter are contained in the Ministerial "Decree dated 31st. March, 1901, which appeared in the 'Moniteur "Beige' of the 13th April of the same year. 54 "According to this Ministerial Decree the meat of animals suffering "from tuberculosis is seized either totally or partially in the following "cases : "Cases in which the Meat, Offal, Sfc., must be declared dangerous "to Health. "Total Seizure. "Meat of animals suffering from tuberculosis in the following cases:— "(a) Muscular tuberculosis or tuberculosis of the intra-muscular "ganglions. "(b) Miliary tuberculosis in the thickness of the milt and of "the loins. "(c) Extended lesions of tuberculosis in the chest and in the "abdomen at the same time. "(d) Tuberculosis lesions of the thorax and abdomen less "developed than in the cases referred to under (c), but still "important in their character (softened tuberculosis portions "purulent in great number in the two cavities). "(e) Extended lesions of tuberculosis in the breast 01* in the "abdomen with extended lesions of tuberculosis outside these cavities. "( /) Tuberculosis discovered in no matter what portion of the "body and no matter what may be the number of tubercles when "the animal is in a marked state of emaciation. "In the cases referred to under letters (b), (c), (d) and (e), which "precede, the meat may be admitted for consumption after having "been submitted to the inspection of a veterinary expert at a moist "temperature of 110 centigrade, during three hours at least, in a "sterilising apparatus approved of by the Ministry. "Partial Seizures. "In cases of tuberculosis which do not entail the total seizure, the "organs affected must be seized, no matter what may be the extent of "the lesions." "28th April, 1905. "Sir, "I have to acknowledge with thanks the receipt of your letter of "the 25th instant, enclosing replies to the points raised in my letter of "the 3rd. "I am, Sir, "Your obedient Servant, "HERBERT WILLIAMS, "Medical Officer of Health, "The Consul-General for Belgium, "Port of London. "29, Great St. Helen's, "London, E.C." 55 "3rd May, 1905. "Sir, "With further reference to your letter of the 25th ultimo, and "the enclosure relating to the Veterinary and other supervision of meat "intended for exportation to this country, I note that the precautions "taken appear to apply exclusively to the Port of Antwerp. "I shall be obliged if you will inform me whether these precautions "apply equally to other parts of Belgium, especially Ostend, from which "large quantities of meat are sent to this country. You perhaps are "aware that it is the practice in this country to seize and destroy the "carcass of any pig which is found affected with any tuberculous "lesions whatever. "I cannot gather that that is the practice in Belgium, and I shall also "be obliged for further information on this point. "I am, Sir, "Your obedient Servant, "HERBERT WILLIAMS. "The Consul-General for Belgium, "29, Great St. Helen's, E.C." "8 th May, 1905. "Dear Sir, "In reply to your letter of the 4th instant, requesting information "from the Medical Officer of Health of the Port of London, I have the "honour to inform you that all the sanitary precautions mentioned in "the note which was attached to my letter of the 19th April last are "applicable to all Ports of Belgium, including Ostend. "As regards the tuberculosis of pigs, the arrangements which regulate "the matter are those enumerated in No. 3 of the above-mentioned note. "I believe I ought to add that all the meat seized on account of "tuberculosis is disinfected on the spot and destroyed. "Believe me, Dear Sir, etc. "The Consul-General." "11th May, 1905. "Sir, "I am obliged by your letter of the 10th instant, with enclosure "respecting Veterinary and other supervision of meat intended for "exportation to this country. "I am, Sir, "Your obedient Servant, "HERBERT WILLIAMS, "Medical Officer of Health, "The Consul-General for Belgium, "Port of London. "29, Great St. Helen's, "London, E.C." 56 On the 8th August, an Inspector visiting the Norwegian barque " Orion," lying in the West India Dock, noticed on the vessel a live pig, which was being kept on board for future consumption by the crew. The pig was in a very emaciated condition, had a cough, and its body was covered with sores. The Inspector suggested to the Master that the pig should be killed and the carcass destroyed. This the Master declined to do, stating that in his opinion the animal was quite fit for food, and that he intended to kill it and use the carcass as food for the crew during the voyage. Although intended for the food of man, yet the pig was not deposited for sale or for the purpose of preparation for sale, and therefore, could not be interfered with by your officers. The Board of Trade were communicated with, but owing to the fact that it was a foreign vessel they were powerless, and the Inspector of the Board of Agriculture could not interfere before the animal was landed or slaughtered. The case is of some interest as showing the position with regard to diseased animals not deposited for sale or for the purpose of preparation for sale. It need hardly be said that the prospect of eating this pig was not anticipated with any degree of relish on the part of the crew. In the latter part of December, 1904, the French steamer " Caravellas " was in collision below Gravesend during a fog, and was put ashore. This vessel had a cargo of 20,372 bags of coffee, and 2,250 bags of cocoa, the whole of which was saturated with river water, which is in some degree contaminated with sewage. The vessel was patched and went to dock, where, on discharging the cargo, the condition of the coffee and cocoa was found to be not very bad, and although saturation of these articles of food with sewage-contaminated water cannot be considered as desirable, yet it would be difficult to advance scientific reasons which would justify a magistrate in condemning them on this score alone, taking into consideration the fact that both coffee and cocoa are exposed to a high temperature in the process of kiln drying and roasting, a temperature sufficient to sterilize the articles respectively. The Public Health (London) Act gives power to any Medical Officer or Inspector to seize any article which appears to be diseased, or unsound, or unwholesome, or unfit for the food of man, and if it appears to a Justice that the article seized is diseased, or unsound, or unwholesome, or unfit for the food of man, he shall condemn the same. It will be, therefore, seen that the only reason for condemning these berries would have been on account of their unsoundness, and a quantity of coffee berries was allowed to go after having been inspected with a view to determining the soundness or otherwise ; the information as to the release of the same being forwarded to the Medical Officer of Health of the district to which the coffee proceeded. In the course of a few weeks the remainder of the coffee, being wet, began to ferment, decompose, and to be covered with mould, and as the coffee 57 berries then appeared to be unsound, they were seized and the owners notified that they could no longer be used for human food, but that if they could realise any value for any purpose, other than that of being used for human food, I was prepared to consider any proposal they might put before me. Application was made for 160 tons of it to be kiln-dried in London, and then exported to Holland, written guarantees being given that the same should not be used for the food of man. This quantity was released, dried, and exported to Holland. I placed myself in communication with the Consul-General for the Netherlands, in London, reporting the whole facts to him, and he arranged for its supervision after its arrival in Holland. With regard to the remainder, some 500 tons, it was decided by His Majesty's Customs that when mixed with an adequate proportion of slaked lime to their satisfaction, it should be considered as denatured, and could then be dealt with for manurial purposes. This was accordingly done under the joint supervision of Officers of His Majesty's Customs and of the Port Sanitary Authority, and subsequent applications to dispose of the mixture for manurial purposes were received, and after an enquiry, acceded to. It became apparent, however, that the persons interesting themselves in this mixture of lime and coffee were incurring expenses which appeared out of proportion to the value of the material as manure. Observations were carefully kept, and the subsequent history is that the whole of it was shipped to Antwerp where, I have reason to believe, the material was carefully washed to remove the lime, dried, and afterwards roasted and was probably used for the purpose of " bulking" with other coffee. During the year, acquaintance was made with an article known as "Renovated Butter." In appearance this was quite satisfactory, and analysis proved it to be genuine butter with a certain amount of free acid, in no way infringing the Acts. Large quantities of this substance continue to be imported. 58 TABLE XVII. NUMBER OF NUISANCES ON VESSELS REPORTED AND DEALT WITH during the year ending 31st December, 1905. Description of Nuisances. January February March April May June July August September October November December Total. Smoke Nuisances:— Number of complaints received 19 17 16 19 12 28 46 18 11 38 25 8 257 Number of recurrences reported ... ... 1 4 1 ... 1 3 1 ... 6 2 19 Offensive Cargoes (Bye-laws):— Number of Infringements reported 37 2 ... 2 10 2 11 ... 4 6 7 1 82 Structural and other Defects:— Ventilation 7 5 4 4 15 12 10 ... 4 15 13 7 96 Lighting 11 6 5 10 11 6 6 2 6 9 10 9 91 Heating 10 6 3 5 5 1 ... 1 1 5 7 13 57 Bare iron in crew's quarters ... 4 1 1 2 ... ... ... ... 2 2 5 17 Leaky decks, hawsepipes, cable casings, &c. 10 13 11 7 16 16 7 2 7 11 10 6 116 Defective bulkheads and floors 2 2 3 4 8 10 5 ... 3 10 14 5 66 Sanitary conveniences ... 2 ... 2 ... 1 1 1 ... 3 ... 1 11 Ship's gear or stores stowed in crew's quarters ... ... ... 2 1 2 2 ... ... • • • 1 2 10 Foul bilges or peaks 2 2 4 1 8 11 8 1 5 16 23 3 84 Storage of drinking water (defective or dirty tanks) ... 5 4 3 5 1 • . . 1 ... 1 2 1 23 Dirty quarters 273 269 316 249 320 276 236 210 187 258 267 240 3,101 Accumulation of offensive matter ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2 ... 2 ... ... 4 Miscellaneous Nuisances 1 3 8 3 8 9 4 5 5 4 3 8 61 Totals 372 336 376 316 422 375 337 246 234 380 390 311 4,095 Total number of vessels on which structural alterations were ordered 28 28 28 23 36 38 22 10 19 31 39 31 333 Total number of vessels on which structural alterations were reported as carried out 18 16 55 19 37 21 37 19 6 11 38 15 292 NUMBER OF NUISANCES IN THE RIVER REPORTED AND DEALT WITH during the year ending 31st December, 1905. From discharge of foul liquid, sewage, &c., into the River ... 1 1 ... 1 ... 3 1 3 ... ... ... 10 Carcasses of animals, &c., floating in the River ... ... ... ... 1 ... 1 1 ... ... ... ... 3 Totals ... 1 1 ... 2 ... 4 2 3 ... ... ... 13 59 TABLE XVII.—continued. NUMBER OF NUISANCES ON SHORE PREMISES REPORTED AND DEALT WITH during the year ending 31st December, 1905. Description of Nuisances. January. February. March. April. May. June. July. August. September. October. November. December. Totals. Smoke Nuisances:— Number of complaints received 3 1 ... ... 1 1 4 ... ... ... 3 1 14 Number of recurrences reported ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Structural and other Defects:— Ventilation ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... 1 Lighting ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Heating ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Dilapidations 2 ... 1 ... ... ... ... 1 ... .... 1 ... 5 Sanitary conveniences 4 4 ... 1 2 3 ... 2 ... 4 1 ... 21 Water supply ... ... 1 ... ... ... 1 ... 1 ... ... ... 3 Dirty premises 14 11 9 21 21 14 14 6 6 4 23 9 152 Accumulation of offensive matter 2 ... 1 1 1 1 1 1 ... ... 4 1 13 Drainage 2 ... 1 1 ... 2 ... ... ... ... ... ... 6 Foul cesspits, latrines, &c. 2 2 1 ... 2 ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... 8 Miscellaneous nuisances 1 2 3 1 ... 1 1 1 ... ... 3 1 14 Totals 30 20 17 25 27 22 22 12 7 8 35 12 237 Number of shore premises on which structural alterations were ordered 5 2 1 2 2 4 ... 3 1 2 3 ... 25 Number of shore premises on which structural alterations were reported as carried out... 8 1 ... 1 2 3 ... 3 1 ... 2 1 22 SUMMARY. Smoke. Structural. Offensive Cargoes. Sewage, Drainage, &c. Floating Carcasses, &c. Total. Number of Nuisances reported— (a) On vessels 276 3,737 82 ... ... 4,095 (b) On shore 14 223 ... ... ... 237 (c) On the River ... ... ... 10 3 13 Total 290 3,960 82 10 3 4,345 Number of written Intimations— (a) On vessels 225 274 82 ... ... 581 (b) On shore 0 12 ... ... ... 17 (c) On the River ... ... ... 10 ... 10 Total 230 286 82 10 ... 608 Number of Statutory Notices— (a) On vessels 110 50 ... ... ... 160 (b) On shore 4 4 ... ... ... 8 (c) On the River ... ... ... ... ... ... Total 114 54 ... ... ... 168 POLICE COURT PROCEEDINGS. January. February. March. April. May. June. July. August. September. October. November. December. Total. Total number of cases in which legal proceedings were recommended ... ... ... ... 2 1 1 ... 1 ... 10 4 19 Total number of cases in which legal proceedings were taken ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 60 NUISANCES. In Table XVII. will be found summarised the numbers of different matters dealt with during the year under the clauses of the Public Health Act relating to nuisances. The largest proportion in the case of vessels, equal to 75 per cent., will be seen to be nuisances arising from the dirty and offensive condition of occupied living quarters. In the case of dwellings on shore, the proportion is equal to 64 per cent, of the total number. This class of nuisance, more particularly on vessels, is dealt with promptly and personally by the Inspector in charge of each district, who gives his verbal orders for the necessary cleansing, and sees that it is carried out. Comparing the total number of these nuisances with the total number of vessels inspected, which is given by Table III., it will be seen that the proportion of dirty crews' quarters on vessels is equal to 21 per cent. of the total number of inspections. Allowing for repeated visits, this probably means that on about every third vessel the crews' quarters require cleaning. Reference to the summary of Table XVII. will show that 290, or 6 per cent. of the total, referred to smoke nuisances, and 3,960, or 91 per cent., to structural and other defects. Eighty-two, or 1.88 per cent., to infringements of the Byelaws relating to offensive cargoes, and 13 nuisances from the presence in the River of offensive matter. Deducting those nuisances which, as stated above, were dealt with on the spot and required no written notice, in dealing with the remainder it will be seen that 608 written intimations were sent, and in 168 cases it was necessary to follow this up with a statutory notice. In nearly every case this was effective. In 19 cases, however, I advised that the matter should be placed before Mr. Solicitor, with a view to further legal proceedings, but in no case was this stage reached, apparently a letter being sufficient to impress upon the delinquents the desirability of prompt action. With regard to smoke nuisance from vessels, I think it quite safe to report that this, during the past year, has been greatly modified. Recurrences after service of a statutory notice have been comparatively few, and the circumstances in each case have made it difficult to procure evidence sufficiently conclusive to ensure a conviction. 61 A deputation of the Coal Smoke Abatement Society attended a meeting of the Port Sanitary Committee and urged them to take action against the owners of chimneys emitting dense black smoke. These chimneys were not situated within the jurisdiction of the Port Sanitary Authority, and it was pointed out that it would be necessary to prove that a nuisance was caused to the inhabitants of the Port Sanitary district, but if the Coal Smoke Abatement Society would forward to the Medical Officer of Health a list of such chimneys offending, these would be kept under observation, and if •evidence of nuisance could be obtained, the matter would be placed in the hands of the City Solicitor for the necessary legal action to be taken. From time to time long lists have been received, especially as to smoke emitted from chimneys situated in West Ham ; but although the result of the Port Sanitary Inspectors' observations confirmed that of the Coal Smoke Abatement Society's Inspectors, yet in no instance was it found possible to obtain the evidence necessary to procure a conviction. The structural alterations and defects in relation to living quarters on board ships and habitations on shore are analysed in the Table, and shown against the various headings under which they fall. As might perhaps be expected, in the case of vessels, a large number appear under the headings of ventilation, lighting, heating, leaky decks, defective hawsepipes, cable casings, bulkheads and floors, and from the foul condition of bilges and peaks in the immediate vicinity of crew's quarters. In the case of premises on shore, from defective sanitary conveniences, accumulations of offensive matter, and from defective drainage, foul cesspits and the like. Improper vessels for the storage of water for drinking on board vessels are not apparently so often met with now as formerly. Galvanised iron tanks have, in practically all cases, superseded the old-fashioned and insanitary wooden casks. The total number of cases in which it was necessary to make orders with regard to defective or dirty tanks or casks was 23 during the year. That portion of the Table dealing especially with shore premises will be found of use in reference to my remarks in another portion of the Report, in which I have set forth the desirability of conferring upon the Port Sanitary Authority further powers under the Public Health (London) Act, 1891, for the special purpose of dealing with these matters. (See also Table XVIII., page 63.) With such powers as are sought, I am of opinion that many of the matters referred to in these Tables could be more expeditiously and effectively dealt with. 62 BYE-LAWS—OFFENSIVE CARGOES. Careful watch continues to be kept on barges engaged in the conveyance of household refuse, stable manure, and other cargoes of an offensive nature. During the year 82 infringements have been reported. The largest number will be seen to have occurred during the month of January. During the week ending the year 1904, very dense fogs had prevailed, causing a great accumulation of domestic refuse on barges, which were unable to proceed to the place of discharge, consequently the supply of coverings ran short. In 13 instances the facts were reported to the City Solicitor, but in no case was it found necessary to summon the offenders before a court of summary jurisdiction. Generally speaking, the Bye-laws have been observed. In the majority of instances the offence is caused through the negligence of the men employed on the barges. The owners have provided cloths, but the men neglect to cover the cargo up. The s.s. "Kildona" arrived at Deptford, 10 p.m., on April 16th, discharged the cattle at the Cattle Market, Deptford, and entered the Surrey Commercial Dock the same evening. The owners proposed keeping the manure on board until the vessel left for Leith, and stated that the discharge of manure would be done during the voyage to that port. A notice was served on the owners requiring them to comply with the Bye-laws of this Authority, and to keep the manure properly and securely covered so as to prevent any nuisance arising therefrom. The manure was forthwith covered with lime, and the vessel left dock the evening of the 18th instant. These boats are very offensive, especially during the summer months, and whilst I have no desire to interfere with trade interests, it is not too much to expect shipowners to do what is necessary to prevent their vessels being a nuisance to other people, and perhaps the service of the Notice in this instance will have a good effect in the future. SANITARY CONVENIENCES. Some large flour mills have been erected in the course of the past year It was found that the sanitary conveniences in connection therewith were of an old and insanitary type which could not be approved of by this Authority. The facts were laid before Mr. Solicitor, and the result has been that suitable water-closets will be erected at an early date, and connected with a sewer. 63 TABLE XVIII. Part I. Sanitary Works and Alterations in connection with Buildings, Premises, and Vessels within the Docks, &c., completed during the year :— Date completed. Works. 1905. March 30 Midland Railway Company's Goods Depot at Poplar Dock. Reconstruction of drainage, closets, &c. April 10 London and India Docks Company. Alterations to drains at General Office, West India Dock. April 13 London and India Docks Company. Reconstruction of drain at Western Department Offices, North end of Central Branch Dock, Tilbury Dock. June 6 London and India Docks Company. Construction of water-closets at Dry Docks, Royal Albert Dock. June 20 London and India Docks Company. Construction of drain to connect closet at Messrs. Rait and Gardiner's premises in Royal Albert Dock with new 6-inch main drain. Nov. 2 London and India Docks Company. Construction of drains at New Dockmaster's Office, Royal Albert Dock. Nov. 3 Surrey Commercial Dock Company. Construction of drains in the vicinity of the Canadian Produce Warehouses, West. Part II, Sanitary Works and alterations, not yet reported as completed:— Date Plan submitted. Works. 1905. July 19 Alteration and reconstruction of private trough, water-closet and drainage thereof, at Messrs. Rait and Gardiner's Works, Royal Albert Dock. August 8 - Reconstruction of drains, Midland Railway Goods Depot, Poplar Dock. August 25 - Construction and alteration to private and workmen's closets at Albert Dock Engine Works. October 18 - W. Vernon and Sons. Construction of closets and drains at flour mills in Royal Victoria Dock. November 24 Joseph Travers and Sons. Construction of closets, and drainage connected therewith, in St. Katharine's Dock. November 28 Surrey Commercial Dock Company. Construction of trough closets in the neighbourhood of Greenland Dock. November 29 Messrs. Gelder and Kitchen. Proposed drain in connection with the premises of Messrs. J. Rank, Ltd., Royal Victoria Dock. Dec. 1 and 17 Surrey Commercial Dock Company. Construction of drainage at the Surrey Commercial Dock Company's Electric Generating Station. December 15 Millwall Dock Company. Construction of a lavatory, water-closet, and drainage connected therewith, adjacent to the Inner Dock Refreshment Room, Millwall Dock. 64 RIVER THAMES. The condition of the River Thames daring the past year has been fairly good. I have received no complaints as to smells arising therefrom, but no further marked improvement in the condition of the River can be expected to take place until the sewage effluent poured into the Thames at the Northern Outfall at Barking and the Southern Outfall at Crossness respectively has undergone a more satisfactory process of purification. To give an idea of the improvement which has taken place in the condition of the water, the words of a Cabinet Minister may be quoted, who, writing in July some fifty years ago from the House of Commons, stated that "the Thames was, as usual, pestilential, and that it ivas under careful consideration to remove the Legislature elsewhere, probably in the direction of St. James\" In present years the Terrace of the House of Commons, during the month of July, is thronged with Members of Parliament with their lady friends partaking of tea and other light refreshments; this clearly indicates that there is not much cause for complaint now on account of the condition of the River in the vicinity of Westminster. The condition of the water in the Docks has been very fair; the Millwall Dock, owing to continued dredging and repeated change of water, has given rise to no complaint. On July 22nd, when landing at Blackfriars Pier, I observed an enormous quantity of human excrement floating in the River. On enquiry I found that this had been noticed for a fortnight, and that it had come from the storm outfall of the London County Council, which discharge under the northern end of the bridge. I immediately communicated with the Thames Conservancy by telephone, and an Inspector was sent to confirm my observation. The facts were also forwarded to the Thames Conservancy by letter, and the Secretary informed me that he had communicated with the London County Council on the subject, with the result that the discharge of sewage ceased forthwith. At the time of my observations the tide was quite low, and the incoming tide would carry the collection of tilth higher up the River to be. in all probability, deposited on the foreshore. On the 13th September I received information that the dead body of a whale was stranded on the shore in the vicinity of Crossness. The carcass was removed and destroyed at once. 65 PUBLIC HEALTH (LONDON) ACT, 1891. By an Order of the Local Government Board, dated 30th June, 1898, it was ordered that the Port of London Sanitary Authority should have the powers, rights, duties, capacities, liabilities and obligations assigned by the Orders of the Local Government Board, dated 25th March, 1892, and 29th December, 1894, as well in and over the whole of any wharf, and of the area within the gates of any dock and the buildings thereon respectively, forming part of or abutting upon the Port of London as in and over all waters within the limits of the said Port. The Order of the Local Government Board, dated 25th March. 1892, and 29th December, 1894, assigned to the Port Sanitary Authority various sections of the Public Health Acts. Inasmuch as the jurisdiction of the Port Sanitary Authority was, until 1898, only legally exercised over the waters within the docks, the sections of the Public Health Act relating to water-closets and other sanitary conveniences, factories, workshops and workplaces were not assigned. In consequence of the Order of June 30th, 1898, many private residences, offices, factories, workshops, workplaces, &c., and sanitary conveniences came within the jurisdiction of this Authority, and received careful inspection by your Sanitary Inspectors, with the result that many sanitary defects have been found and remedied (see Tables XVII. and XVIII.). In order to facilitate the work of your officers, it has, however, been found necessary to apply to the Local Government Board for an extension of powers. This was brought before your Committee, and after being carefully reported on by Mr. Solicitor and myself, he has been instructed to apply to the Local Government Board for the assignment of additional sections of the Public Health Act, 1891. The Bye-laws made by the Port Sanitary Authority under section 66, sub-section 3, of the Public Health (London) Act, 1891, relating to Infectious Diseases, state that every Master or other person having charge of a vessel arriving in the Port of London with any person on board suffering from a dangerous infectious disease shall stop on arrival off the Custom House at Gravesend, and forthwith send notice to the Medical Officer of the Port Sanitary Authority stationed at Gravesend. When this Bye-law was made, it was not apparently realised that vessels arriving in the Port of London, that is, crossing a line drawn from Havengore Creek in Essex, to Warden Point in the Isle of Sheppey, and 23 miles below Gravesend, might be proceeding to the Port of Rochester or to any intermediate place between that imaginary line and Gravesend. 66 It is therefore proposed to amend the Bye-law so as to compel every vessel arriving in the Port of London, and having on board a person suffering from a dangerous infectious disorder, whether bound for any place within the jurisdiction of the Port of London Sanitary Authority below Gravesend, or to any place within the jurisdiction of the Port of Rochester Sanitary Authority, to proceed to Gravesend, stop off the Custom House there, and forthwith send notice to the Medical Officer of the Port Sanitary Authority stationed at Gravesend. If the Master of any vessel, whether from foreign or coastwise, and bound for a place either in the Port of Rochester or in the Port of London below Gravesend, has on board any sick person, the nature of whose illness he is uncertain, he should proceed to Garrison Point, Sheerness, where the disease will be diagnosed by the Medical Officer of this Authority stationed there, and thus he will relieve himself of all responsibility. This Bye-law also requires amending so as to make provision for keeping in the hospital of the Port Sanitary Authority, so long as may be necessary, any person brought within their district by any vessel, who is infected with a dangerous infectious disorder. The hospital for infectious diseases is situated at Denton, below Gravesend, and within the jurisdiction of the Rural District Council of Strood. If there should be any difficulty as to making or amending Bye-laws under the Public Health (London) Act, 1891, so as to apply them to the aforesaid district, this may possibly be met by placing the hospital and grounds within the jurisdiction of the Port of London Sanitary Authority for the purpose of the Act. CREW SPACES. I have continued to devote particular attention to the inspection of crew's quarters on board vessels, more particularly with a view to obtaining some improvement in the lighting, heating and ventilation of the same. I regret to say that there is little or no improvement, and it is a common experience to find that little attention appears to be paid to these important details, not only in old vessels, but in those of recent construction. The ventilation is nearly always insufficient, and frequently non-existent. The commonly accepted necessary amount for an adult person is 3,000 cubic feet of fresh air per hour. In order to obtain this, in the case of most ordinary forecastles, it would be necessary to change entirely the whole of the 67 air inside the forecastle about forty times per hour. This, of course, is impracticable owing to the small space to be dealt with, and to the deficiency of means for the extraction of foul and introduction of fresh air is due in a great measure the foetid atmosphere characteristic of the ordinary forecastle. The common practice is to place a six-inch cowl ventilator through the deck, and this frequently opens immediately over a bunk. This type of ventilator generally acts as an "intake," with the result that the occupant of the bunk receives the bulk of the supply of fresh air and promptly stops up the ventilator. Any suggestions for its removal are usually met by a protest from the owners that it has been put there by direction of the Board of Trade. The practice of stopping up the ventilators is very common, and arises from the fact that the ventilators used are of a wrong type, being inlets instead of outlets, and also from their being placed in an unsuitable position. What should be aimed at is the removal of the heated foul air from the upper portion of the crew's quarters, and a supply of fresh air from outside through ventilators placed in the doors, or, in the case of lower forecastles, by "downtake" ventilators carried through the deck and opening near the floor. The practice of placing ventilators over bunks, or rather bunks under ventilators, is so obviously wrong, that it is not easy to understand why such an arrangement should ever have been sanctioned, even by any person with the most elementary knowledge of the principles of ventilation. It is generally found that when the first rough weather is experienced, the ventilators are in danger of being washed away; they are thereupon removed and the opening covered over with canvas, which is securely fixed and painted. On many vessels it is found that, during the winter months, the stove funnel is led up through the ventilator and the space between this pipe and the ventilator is blocked in, the polluted air which collects generally in the upper part of the quarters thus has no possible way of being removed and is respired over and over again. Many sailors suffer from tuberculosis of the lungs, and in consequence expire numbers of bacilli at each expiration; it is obvious that the risk of the other occupants being infected under these conditions is very great. On the question of the lighting of crew spaces, the following instance occurred during November last. A steamer of 1,108 tons, which was built in 1900, was lying in the Upper Pool, and on the Inspector going into the crew's quarters he found that all the available lamps, namely, four in number, had been lighted in order to provide sufficient light for the crew to see. The visit was made in broad daylight. 68 The crew's quarters were of the usual pattern, namely, divided in the centre by a fore and aft bulkhead, the starboard side being allotted to sailors and the port side to firemen. Each side was provided with two seven-inch glazed ports in the side of the vessel, but not otherwise provided with any means of admitting daylight. As is also usual, the bunks occupied the same side of the quarters as the glazed ports, and consequently greatly obstructed what little daylight could be admitted by this means. The floor space was also found to be very limited. In reply to my letter to the owners, they stated that "the same has been built to the requirements of the Board of Trade and duly passed by them." A letter on the subject to the Surveyors' Department, Board of Trade, obtained the reply that the Board's Officer at Cardiff, where the vessel subsequently went, had inspected the crew's quarters and had certified that "both floor area and the light were equal to the Board's requirements."{These are 12 square feet per head, and also that there shall be "so much provision for light, when the ship is new and the paint clean, that if one"third of it be closed, it will be possible to read the print of an ordinary "newspaper in any part of the space.") I have not yet had an opportunity of ascertaining whether any alteration was made by the owners as a result of my representations and previous to the visit of the Board of Trade's Officer at Cardiff, but in view of the conditions found and reported by your Sanitary Inspector, this point will be carefully gone into whenever the vessel again returns to the Port of London. I understand the Merchant Shipping Act will be amended during the next Session of Parliament, and the Board of Trade should be urged to introduce clauses which will improve the present conditions of life for seamen, especially in the following direction :— (a) Crew's quarters should not be placed in the fore part of the ship. (b) Improved and efficient ventilation, lighting and heating. (c) Increase of cubic space. (d) Separate mess room and wash-house. If crews were berthed aft, all these requirements could be carried out with the greatest facility. 69 HOSPITAL. TABLE XIX. Number of Cases Admitted, Cost of Maintenance, &c. Patients remaining in Hospital on 31st December, 1904 7 Admitted. Discharged. Died. Bubonic Plague 0 0 0 Suspected ditto 3 3 1 Small-pox 4 4 0 Scarlet Fever 3 4 0 Enteric Fever 23 19 5 Continued Fever 9 8 l2 Diphtheria 2 2 0 Measles 13 15 0 Erysipelas 2 2 0 Chicken-pox 1 1 0 Totals 60 58 8 Remaining in Hospital on 1st January, 1906 1 Total number of days' treatment during the year 1,175 Average number of days' treatment for each case 17.53 The average daily cost of maintenance per head was 1s.11¾d. From the foregoing Table it will be seen that the total number of patients remaining in the Hospital on the 31st December, 1904, was seven. That 60 had been admitted during the year, of whom 58 had been discharged as cured. There were eight deaths, and one patient undischarged at the end of the year. The water pump, which has been working satisfactorily for the past three years, was overhauled, when it was found that the pistons required repacking and generally overhauling. The necessary work was done, and the Hospital continues to be supplied with an adequate quantity of water of excellent quality. The new block has been thoroughly repainted inside and out. The subsidence which was noticed during the first year after the building was completed has not increased. The Hospital of the Port Sanitary Authority at Denton, situated about a mile below Gravesend on the bank of the Thames, has hitherto been lighted by means of oil lamps. Much inconvenience has arisen in connection with the landing of patients with their effects at night, and it has been very difficult to carry out the disinfection of infected effects for want of sufficient light. This was brought 70 to the notice of your Worshipful Committee, who carefully considered the various methods of lighting institutions. It was decided that ordinary coal gas should be used if it could be obtained at a reasonable cost. The Gravesend and Milton Gas Company were communicated with, and it was ascertained that they were willing to lay a gas main to the Hospital under certain conditions, the chief one being a contribution of money towards the cost of laying the main. The sum of 100l. was agreed upon to be paid them, and also the sum of 2l. 10s. per annum to be paid to the South Eastern and Chatham Railway Company, in consideration of the main being allowed to be laid along the canal bank, which is the property of the Railway Company. Every room and ward will now be lighted with incandescent gas burners, whilst provision will be made for a large external light at the entrance gate, which will light up the whole causeway and the entrance to the Hospital. An external light will also be provided in the neighbourhood of the disinfector, which will enable the process of disinfection to be carried on at night, and thus avoid any delay to shipping on this account. Other external lights will be fitted up in the grounds, so that a very great improvement will have been effected. LAUNCHES. The launch "Denton" has been thoroughly overhauled in accordance with the recommendation of your Consulting Engineer. The boiler has been removed and re-tubed, the engines overhauled, and the whole of the defects made good at a cost of 110l. The launches have worked very satisfactorily during the year, the total number of inspections made in launches being 13,062, as follows:— "David Burnett" 4,293 "Clotho" 4,394 "Denton" 4,375 13,062 "David Burnett."—On November 18th an opportunity presented itself of testing the launch "David Burnett" over the measured nautical mile in the Lower Hope. This launch was built in 1893, and has been in constant work since, but was thoroughly overhauled in 1904; when she left the builders' hands in 1893 she had a speed of ten knots per hour. The recent trial could not be said to have taken place under the most favourable circumstances, inasmuch as the boat had been running continuously for nearly two months, the boiler was dirty, and on the bottom was an accumulation of weeds and 71 barnacles; moreover, the bunkers had been filled with coal, which increased the displacement. Notwithstanding this, her time for the mile against the tide was 7 minutes 20 seconds, and with the tide 5 minutes 43 seconds, giving a speed of 8.02 knots per hour against the tide and 10.5 knots with the tide, or a mean of 9.26 knots per hour. She ran from the West River Middle Buoy off Leigh to Gravesend Town Pier, a distance of nearly fifteen miles, in 1 hour 21 minutes 10 seconds. The result of these trials must be considered as quite satisfactory. STAFF. Henry Carter, who had been employed as watchman on the mooring barge "Collingwood" for five years, fell overboard on the 27th December, 1904, and was drowned. His body was recovered on the 17th January; an inquest was held, the verdict being "accidentally drowned." His place has been filled by the appointment of William Shaw. Hospital.—Nellie Ovenden and Isabel Walker were appointed in April as Probationers in the place of Bridget Reilly and Grace Deehan, who had resigned. Thomas and Laura Bradley resigned their position as Hospital Caretakers in August. The vacancy has been filled by the appointment of Robert and Emily Adams. Clara Bates, the Cook-maidservant, also resigned her position in September, the vacancy being filled by the appointment of Ellen Batchelor. CANAL BOATS ACT. I beg herewith to present my Annual Report on Canal Boats, in accordance with Section 3 of the Canal Boats Act, 1884. (1.) Arrangements for the inspection of canal boats in the Port of London remain the same as in preceding years. No Inspector is appointed solely for the work of inspecting canal boats, but each Port Sanitary Inspector, of whom there are seven, has a district of the Port allotted to him, as follows :— Inspector Romeril - 195/. per annum. Central District. West India Dock. South West India Dock. Poplar Dock. Millwall Dock. 72 Inspector Garland 195l.per annum. Western District. London Dock. St. Katharine's Dock. Regent's Dock. Surrey Commercial Dock. Inspector Wetjen 169l. per annum. Eastern District. East India Dock. Royal Albert Dock. Royal Victoria Dock. Inspector Lambe 143l. per annum. Gravesend District. Tilbury Dock. North Shore—from Purfleet down. South Shore—from Erith down. RIYER. Inspector Hopkins 169l. per annum. Upper District. Teddington to Limehouse. Inspector Burr 169l. per annum. Middle District. Limehouse to Erith. Inspector Rolfe 143l. per annum. Lower District. Erith to seaward limits of Port of London (including part of River Medway). (2.) I append herewith a Table from which it will be seen that the number of boats inspected during the year 1905 was 1,087, and 961 of them were found to conform with the Canal Boats Acts and Regulations. (3.) Of the remaining 126 boats, twenty did not comply with the requirements as to registration, thirty had no certificate on board, in five the certificate did not identify the owner with the boat, seventeen were not properly lettered, marked and numbered. On two boats, the number of persons on board exceeded that for which the boat was registered. 73 On one boat an adult male was found unlawfully occupying the cabin used as a sleeping place by a female, and on one other an adult female was unlawfully occupying a cabin not registered for the purpose. Nine cabins were found in a dirty condition, whilst two infringed the regulations requiring the re-painting every third year. On seven boats the ventilation was found to be insufficient, while thirty-four were found in bad repair. On one boat foul bilge water was discovered under the cabin, and twenty-one boats were without any proper vessel for containing drinking water. (4.) On the 18th December, 1903, the canal boat "Hope," owned by James Jeffries, of 37, Thames Street, Kingston, was inspected and found to be unregistered. The owner was called upon to register the boat as required by the Canal Boats Acts, and he undertook to have the boat registered at Reading. This was not done, and the matter was again brought to the notice of the owner. The boat was again inspected on the 11th November, when it was found to be still unregistered inasmuch as there was no certificate on board the boat. The facts were accordingly brought before the Port Sanitary Committee, and the matter placed in the hands of the City Solicitor, and as a result of his enquiries it was ascertained that the boat was registered on the 13th July last by the Reading Urban Sanitary Authority, and the certificate produced for his inspection. 9 It was evident that a technical offence had been committed, but the Solicitor did not, under the circumstances, advise proceedings. (5.) With regard to the infringements enumerated in paragraph (3), these involved the issue of 123 written cautions, of which 122 are known to have been complied with. (6.) No cases of infectious disease have been met with during the year on canal boats. (7.) It has not been necessary to detain any boat for cleansing and disinfection. (8.) The actual number of canal boats on the Register, 31st December, 1905 was 271. In January, 1905,1 received an application from the owners of a number of registered canal boats, stating that they had registered these boats under the Merchant Shipping Act, and requesting that the registration under the Canal 74 Boats Act might be cancelled. It appeared, by Section 14 of the Canal Boats Act, 1877, that ships duly registered under the Merchant Shipping Act, 1854, and the Acts amending the same, were exempt from the operation of the Canal Boats Act, but there was a doubt in my mind as to whether, in the case of vessels, which were entirely within the definition of "canal boat" as defined in the Section here referred to, should be registered under the Merchant Shipping Act, and the responsibility of the owners of such boats under the Canal Boats Act, thereby evaded. This question affected twenty-five canal boats which had been on the register for many years. As the power of the Registration Authority to continue to regard these vessels as canal boats after registration under the Merchant Shipping Act appeared very doubtful, they were accordingly struck off the Register. This, to my mind, is to be regretted, inasmuch as I have pointed out in previous Reports with regard to this class of vessel, which is employed solely in the River and inland waters, and cannot be "ships," that closer control is very desirable from a sanitary, physical, and moral point of view. I dealt with this question at length in my Annual Report for the year 1902. (9.) The number of boats registered during the year 1905 was nine, of which one only was a new boat. I have the honour to be, Gentlemen, Your obedient Servant, HERBERT WILLIAMS. Medical Officer of Health, Port of London. 75 TABLE XX. SUMMARY OF CANAL BOATS FOR THE YEAR ENDING 31ST DECEMBER, 1905. January. February. March. April. May. June. July. August. September. October. November. December. TOTAL. total for the year. 1900. 1901. 1902. 1903. 1904. New boats registered ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 4 1 1 3 3 Registration owing to structural alterations ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Registration for other purposes ... 1 2 ... 1 ... 1 ... 1 1 1 ... 8 14 23 11 5 7 Inspected 91 93 103 89 105 88 86 47 46 89 135 115 1,087 655 530 894 1,139 1,022 Conforming to Acts and Regulations 77 83 91 83 86 72 76 45 39 79 121 109 961 601 465 748 989 905 Infringements to:— Registration 5 2 2 ... 3 3 2 ... 1 1 1 ... 20 12 12 22 21 19 Notification of change of master ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Absence of certificate 3 4 4 3 4 3 ... 2 1 2 3 1 30 14 11 38 28 16 Certificate not identifying owner with boat ... ... 1 ... 2 1 ... ... ... ... ... 1 5 7 19 18 10 9 Marking, &c. 1 ... 1 1 2 3 1 ... 2 2 2 2 17 6 8 24 19 10 Overcrowding ... ... ... ... ... 1 1 ... ... ... ... ... 2 1 3 3 5 6 Partition separating sexes ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Males over age ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... 1 1 1 1 Females over age ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... 1 2 4 2 Cleanliness 6 2 ... ... 4 4 1 ... ... 2 1 3 29 6 10 33 28 37 Painting ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 1 ... 2 1 ... 1 1 1 Ventilation 3 ... ... ... ... 3 1 ... ... ... ... ... 7 2 6 8 11 6 Dilapidation 4 4 ... ... ... 5 3 ... ... 3 2 3 34 17 16 47 47 38 Removal of bilge water ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 1 ... ... ... ... ... Without pump ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Refusal to admit Inspector ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... No proper water vessel 2 1 ... ... ... ... 3 ... ... 1 ... 3 21 6 6 23 21 13 Without double bulkhead ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Notification of infectious disease ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Detained for cleansing ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Proceedings taken ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2 ... Cautions given 14 9 11 4 18 18 11 1 7 8 15 7 123 54 55 138 126 91 „ attended to 10 12 12 2 10 16 16 3 7 4 19 11 122 42 55 114 119 89 Total registered by Port Sanitary Authority since 1887 433 Cancelled 162 Actual number oil Register, 31st December, 1905 271 Registered for 3,881 persons. Carrying 2,198 persons. 76 APPENDIX. PORT OF LONDON SANITARY AUTHORITY. Receipts and Expenditure under the Public Health (London) Act, 1891, for the Year ending 31st December, 1905. RECEIPTS. £ s. d. PAYMENTS. £ s. d £ s. d. To Fees in respect of Health Certificates 32 0 6 By Salaries, Wages and Disbursements, viz.:— „ Ditto of disinfection of Vessels 80 7 9 Dr. H. Williams, Medical Officer of Health, one year 650 0 0 ,, Ditto of the utilisation of Condemned Meat 1,057 2 11 Boarding Medical Officers' Salaries and Locum Tenens 1,490 6 8 „ Metropolitan Asylums Board, Fees under 1891 Act 1 2 6 Medical Officer at Gravesend Hospital, one year 109 4 0 ,, Rochester Port Sanitary Authority, Reimbursement of proportion of W. J. Albrow, Clerk, ditto 218 6 8 Salary of Medical Officer at Gravesend, one year £100 0 0 Dr. H. Williams, for Wages .£3,500 0 0 ,, Ditto, for forwarding Telegrams 1 4 2 Ditto, for Disbursements 1,000 0 0 101 4 2 4,500 0 0 „ Fees in respect of Canal Boat Registration 2 7 6 Guarantee Premium, re Dr. H. Williams 1 16 0 „ Reimbursement of balance of Committee's Expenses of Inspections in 1904 0 4 0 6,969 13 4 „ Officers' Pension Fund 197 10 3 ,, Thames Conservancy, for Screw and Chain from Launch "David Burnett" 15 0 0 „ Uniforms 107 19 8 „ Expenses of Launches, Hulk, &c., viz.:— „ Sundry and Miscellaneous Reimbursements 5 0 0 Insurance 122 10 3 Coal and Coke 232 9 6 1,294 9 4 Repairing Piles, East Greenwich Moorings 7 1 11 Repairs and Stores 276 6 3 638 7 11 ,, Offices at Greenwich, viz.:— Rent, three quarters of a year 37 10 0 Rates and Taxes 30 4 2 Fire Insurance 0 17 9 Telephone Rent 27 0 0 Gas 7 15 11 Deficit defrayed out of City's Cash 7,933 16 0 Water 3 2 6 Coal 6 18 0 Repairs, &c. 147 0 10 260 9 2 ,, Hospital at Denton, viz.:— Expenses of Nursing Staff 117 13 6 Rent of Causeway 2 5 0 Rates and Taxes 43 6 8 Fire and Boiler Insurance 6 5 6 Telephone Rent 7 0 6 Coal 60 0 6 Oil 13 14 5 Funerals and conveyance of Patients 21 8 0 Painting Contract 83 10 9 General Repairs 19 6 2 Amount provided for installation of Gas Lighting 200 0 0 Purchase of a Skiff 12 0 0 586 11 0 ,, Printing and Stationery ... 121 7 7 „ Telegrams and Maintenance of Private Wire 19 14 11 ,, Expenses in relation to condemning Unsound Food 49 10 2 „ Disinfectants 13 0 4 „ Subscriptions, London Bills of Entry, &c. 11 11 0 „ Committee's Allowance 150 0 0 ,, Ditto, Inspection of River 90 0 0 „ Law Charges, viz. :— 240 0 0 Mr. Comptroller 8 19 9 Mr. Solicitor 2 9 3 11 9 0 „ Sundries 1 1 0 Chamber of London, JOSEPH C. DIMSDALE, 5th March, 1906. Chamberlain. £9,228 5 4 £ 9,228 5 4