PLON 31 85. PORT OF LONDON SANITARY COMMITTEE. ANNUAL REPORT of the MEDICAL OFFICER OF HEALTH, To 31st December, 1929. Presented 19th June, 1930. REPORT, For the Year ended 31st December, 1929, of the MEDICAL OFFICER OF HEALTH for the PORT OF LONDON. by CHARLES FRANCIS WHITE, M.B., Ch.B., D.P.H.Vict., D.T.M.Liverpool, Medical Officer of Health, Port of London. LONDON: Printed by Charles Skipper and East, 49, Great Tower Street, E.C. 3. 1930. WATERLOW, Mayor. A Common Council holden in the Chamber of the Guildhall of the City of London, on Thursday, the 19th day of June, 1930. THE Port of London Sanitary Committee did this day deliver into this Court a Report in writing under their hands of their proceedings, and submitting the Annual Report of the Medical Officer of Health of the Port to the 31st December, 1929; which was read. Ordered—That the Report be printed and a copy sent to every Member of this Court. BELL. To the Right Honourable the Lord Mayor, Aldermen and Commons of the City of London, in Common Council assembled. We, whose names are hereunto subscribed, of your Port of London Sanitary Committee, to whom it has been referred to carry into execution the powers assigned to the Corporation, as the Port of London Sanitary Authority, beg to submit for the information of your Honourable Court the Annual Report of Dr. Charles Francis White, the Medical Officer of Health of the Port of London, for the year ended the 31st December, 1929, which Report contains a full and detailed account of the work done in the Port during that period by the Medical Officers and Inspectors. An Account of Receipts and Expenditure in connection with the Port of London Sanitary Authority for the year ended the 31st March, 1930, is appended, in accordance with the Order of your Honourable Court, for the information of the Court. All which we submit to the judgment of this Honourable Court. Dated this fourteenth day of June, 1930. T. Howard Deighton. V. Allcard. John F. Bennet. W. N. Wright. Fred. W. Berry. Arthur W. Bray. John D. Laurie. J. S. Pearse. Fred. Whittingham. B. S. Dunn. OFFICES of the Port of London Sanitary Authority and Medical Officer of Health 5, CHURCH PASSAGE, GUILDHALL, LONDON, E.C.2. Telegraphic Address "MEDOFF, CENT, LONDON." Telephone No. METROPOLITAN 3636. BOARDING STATIONS. RIVER THAMES Hulk "Hygeia," Gravesend. RIVER MEDWAY Garrison Point, Sheerness. Telephone No. (Hulk "Hygeia") - GRAVESEND 325. HOSPITAL FOR INFECTIOUS DISEASES at DENTON, near GRAVESEND. Telephone No. (Hospital) GRAVESEND 257. „ (Medical Officer of Health) CATERHAM VALLEY 73. „ (Deputy Ditto) GRAVESEND 373. LIMITS OF THE PORT OF LONDON. The limits of the Port of London as at present defined commence at High-Water Mark in the River Thames at Teddington Lock, in the County of Surrey, and extend down both sides of the River Thames to an imaginary straight line drawn from the Pilot Mark at the entrance of Havengore Creek, in the County of Essex, to the land's end at Warden Point, in the Isle of Sheppey, in the County of Kent, such point being the North-Western limit of the Port of Faversham, and shall extend up and include both sides of the River Medway to an imaginary straight line drawn from the South-East point of land westward of Coalmouth Creek, thence across the said River Medway to the Westernmost point of the piece of land which forms the Eastern side of the Stangate Creek, or, in other words, the North-West point of Fleet Marsh, and from thence in a Southerly direction to Iwade Church, in the said County of Kent, and thence in a North-Easterly direction to Elmley Chapel in the said Isle of Sheppey, a supposed direct line from Elmley Chapel to Iwade Church, being the Western limit of the Port of Faversham, and the said Port of London shall include the Islands of Havengore Creek aforesaid, called Potton and Rushley Islands, and so much of the said Creek and watercourse as extends from it to the town of Rochford, and shall also include all other islands, rivers, streams, creeks, waters, watercourses, channels, harbours, docks and places within the before-mentioned limits contained. 2 INDEX. A. page Actinomycosis in Ox Tongues 26 Action under Public Health (Imported Food) Kegulations, 1925 24 Aliens Order, 1920 34, 35 Ambulance Transport 12 Amount of Shipping Entering the Port (Table "A") 10 Analyst's Reports 30,31 B. Bacteriological Examination 12,13,19 Beef 26 Bye-Laws—Offensive Cargoes 9,36, 37 Bye-laws of Port Sanitary Authority 84 C. Canal Boats Acts and Regulations 37-41 Cargo Traffic (Table " B") 10 Caseous Lymphadenitis in Mutton 26 Certificates—Fumigation Issued (Tables "H") 22 Certificates under Public Health (Imported Food) Regulations, 1925 28 Cholera 13,43 Classification of Nuisances (Table "J") 22 Cleansing of Persons 12 Crews' Spaces—Hygiene of 22,23 D. Dangerous Drugs 32 Deratisation—Methods of 20,21 Destruction of Rats on Vessels (Table "E") 21 „ „ in Docks, Quays, &c. (Table "F")22 „ „ on Vessels from Plague Infected Ports (Table "H")22 Detection of Rodent Plague 8,12,19 „ Rat Prevalence on Ships and Shore 19,20,21 „ Infectious Disease on Vessels 11 Detention of Fat under Public Health (Imported Food) Regulations, 1925 25 „ Foodstuffs 25 Disinfection of Infected Quarters 12 Division of Docks for purposes of Food Inspection 25 E. Enteric Fever (including Typhoid Fever and Paratyphoid Fever) 8,18,45 Exportation Notices under Public Health (Imported Food) Regulations, 1925 29 F. Fats—Detention and Control under Public Health (Imported Food) Regulations, 1925 25 Fertilisers and Feeding Stuffs Act, 1926 29 Fish 27 Food Inspection 23,24 „ „ —Arrangement of Districts 25 „ „ —Detentions and Seizures 25 Fruit 27 Fruit Pulp, &c. 27 „ Tinned and Bottled 27 Fumigation Certificates (Tables "H" "I") 22 G. Grain, &c. 28 Gravesend Sewage Disposal Works 35 H. Ham 26 Hospital (new Works) 8 Hygiene of Crews' Spaces 22 3 I. page Infected Ports 11 „ „ —Vessels from (Table "H") 22 " Infected " Vessels (Table "G") 22 Infectious Disease, Detection of 11 „ Sickness Landed from Vessels (Table "C")I3 „ „ Occurring during Voyage (Table "D") 13 International Sanitary Convention of Paris, 1926 32,73 Introduction 8 L. Legal Proceedings 9,36 Limits of Port of London 1 M. Measures of Rat Destruction on Vessels from Plague Infected Ports (Table "H") 22 „ „ „ „ other Ports (Table "I") 22 Medical Inspection of Aliens 34,35 Methods of Deratisation 20 Mutton—Caseous Lymphadenitis 26 Mutton and Lamb 26 N. New Legislation 32,83 Notices of Exportation under Public Health (Imported Food) Regulations, 1925 29 Nuisances—Classification of (Table "J") 22 Nuts 27 O. Offal—Seized and Destroyed 26 Offensive Cargoes—Bye-laws 9,36,37 Offices 1 Official Certificates recognised under the Public Health (Imported Food) Regulations, 1925 28 Ox Tongues affected with Actinomycosis 9 P. Passenger Traffic (Table "B") 10 Plague 8,14,43 Pork 26 Port of London, Limits of 1 Powers of Port Sanitary Authority 83,84 Prepared Foods, &c. 28 Prevention of Passage of Rats 20 Provisions, &c. 28 Psittacosis 8, 18 Public Health (Deratisation of Ships) Regulations, 1929 32-34 „ „ (Imported Milk) Regulations, 1926 29 „ „ (Imported Food) Regulations, 1925 9, 29 „ ,, ,, „ „ —Notices served under Article II. (4) 29 „ ,, (Shellfish) Regulations, 1915 29 ., „ (Preservatives, &c., in Food) Regulations, 1925 to 1927 29 R. Rats Destroyed on Vessels (Table "E") 21 , „ in Docks, Quays, &c. (Table "F") 22 Rat Proofing 21 Rats and Rat Destruction (Tables "H" and "I") 22 „ —Measures of prevention of passage from Ship to Shore 19,20 ,, -—Detection of prevalence on Ships and Shore 19,20,21 Rat-searchers (Duties, &c.) 19,20 Rodent Plague, Detection of 8,12,19 4 S. page Samples 30 Seizure of Foodstuffs 25 Shellfish 29 Shipping Entering the Port (Table "A") 10 Small-pox 8,14,15,16,17,18,34,43 Smoked Sausage 28,29 Source of Water Supply 10,11 Staff 7, 9 Sugar 28 Sundries (Foodstuffs, &c.) 28 "Suspected" Vessels (Table "G") 22 T. Table "A" Shipping Entering the Port 10 „ "B" Cargo and Passenger Traffic 10 „ "C" Infectious Sickness Landed from Vessels 13 „ "D" „ „ occurring during Voyage 13 „ "E" Destruction of Rats on Vessels 21 „ "F" „ „ in Docks, Quays, &c 22 „ "G" "Infected" Vessels. Measures of Eat Destruction 22 „ "H" Vessels from Infected Ports. Measures of Eat Destruction 22 „ "j" Measures of Eat Destruction on other Vessels 22 „ "J" Classification of Nuisances 22 Tallow—Seized and Destroyed 26 Telegraphic Address 1 Telephone Numbers 1 Training Ships 31 U. Unsound Food, Quantity Destroyed 24 V. Veal 26 Vegetables 27 Venereal Disease 12,55 W. Water Barges 11 Water Supply, Source of 10 5 INDEX TO APPENDICES. B. page Bedding Disinfected (Appendix XXIV.) 65 C. Chicken-pox (Appendix XIX.) 54 Cholera (Appendix IV.) 43 Classification of Miscellaneous Diseases (Appendix XXI.) 61 Compulsory Notification of Infectious Disease (Appendix III.) 43 Crew Medically Inspected at Gravesend (Appendix I.) 42 „ „ „ Sheerness (Appendix I.) 42 Certificates under International Sanitary Convention (Appendices XXIX. and XXX.) 73 D. Deaths from Infectious Disease (Appendix III.) 43 Destruction of Unsound Meat, Weights, &c. 81 Diphtheria (Appendix VIII.) 44 Diseases, Miscellaneous—see "M" (Appendix XXI.) 61 Disinfecting Operations for Infectious Disease (Appendix XXIII.) 63 Disinfection of Vessel and Premises (Appendix XXII.) 62 „ Effects, Bedding, &c. (Appendix XXIV.) 65 „ Second-hand Bags (Appendix XXXI.) 77 Dock Areas (Appendix XXXVII.) 82 Dysentery (Appendix XVII.) 52 Deratisation Exemption Certificates (Appendix XXX.) 73 E. Effects Disinfected (Appendix XXIV.) 65 Enteric Fever (including Typhoid Fever and Paratyphoid Fever) (Appendix IX.) 45 Erysipelas (Appendix II.) 47 Exemption Certificates (Appendix XXX.) 73 F. Fumigation of Vessels for the Destruction of Bats (Appendix XXIX.) 68 G. German Measles (Appendix XI.) 46 Gravesend—Medical Inspection at (Appendix I.) 42 H. Hospital—Cases Admitted and Cost of Maintenance, &c. (Appendix XXV.) 65 I. Infectious Disease (Appendices II.-XXI.) 42, 61 „ „ Cases Reported (Appendix II.) 42 „ „ „ Treated in Port Sanitary Hospital (Appendix II.) 42 „ „ „ Notified to Ministry of Health (Appendix III.) 43 „ „ Compulsory Notification with Number of Deaths (Appendix III.) 43 „ „ Disinfecting Operations (Appendix XXIII.) 63 Influenza (Appendix XVI.) 51 International Sanitary Convention of Paris, 1926 (Appendix XXX.) 73 M. Malaria (Appendix XVIII.) 53 Measles (Appendix X.) 46 „ German (see "G") (Appendix XI.) 46 Medical Inspection—Gravesend and Sheerness (Appendix I.) 42 Miscellaneous Diseases Classified (Appendix XXI.) 61 6 N. page New Buildings and Sanitary Works (Appendix XXXVI.) 82 Notification of Infectious Disease (Appendix III.) 43 Nuisances on Vessels (Appendix XXXIII.) 79 „ the River (Appendix XXXIII.) 79 „ Shore Premises (Appendix XXXIV.) 80 P. Passengers Medically Inspected—Gravesend (Appendix I.) 42 „ „ „ —Sheerness (Appendix I.) 42 Paratyphoid Fever (Appendix IX.) 45 Plague (Appendix V.) 43 Pneumonia (Appendix XV.) 50 Powers (Appendix XXXVIII.) 83 Premises Disinfected (Appendix XXII.) 62 „ —Nuisances on (Appendix XXXIV.) 80 R. Eats Caught and Destroyed (Appendix XXVI.) 66 „ Examined (Appendices XXVII. and XXVIII.) 68 ,,—Fumigation of Vessels for Destruction of (Appendix XXIX.) 68 „ —Fumigation of Vessels for (Appendix XXII.) 62 River, Nuisances on (Appendix XXXIII.) 79 S. Sanitary Inspections—Summary (Appendix XXXII.) 78 „ „ —Nuisances on Vessels (Appendix XXXIII.) 79 „ „ — „ River (Appendix XXXIII.) 79 „ „ — „ Shore Premises (Appendix XXXIV.) 80 Sanitary Works (Appendix XXXVI.) 82 Scarlet Fever (Appendix VII.) 44 Second-hand Bags—Disinfection of (Appendix XXXI.) 77 Sheerness—Medical Inspection (Appendix I.) 42 Small-pox (Appendix VI.) 43 Statutory Notices Served (Appendix XXXIV.) 80 T. Tuberculosis, Pulmonary (Appendix XIII.) 47 „ Other kinds (Appendix XIV.) 50 Typhoid Fever (Appendix IX.) 45 U. Unsound Meat Destroyed, Weight. &c. (Appendix XXXV.) 81 V. Venereal Diseases (Appendix XX.) 55 Vessels Disinfected (Appendix XXII). 62 „ Fumigated for Rats (Appendix XXII.) 62 „ ,, „ (Appendix XXIX.) 68 „ —Nuisances on (Appendix XXXIII.) 79 ,, arriving from "Foreign" at Gravesend (Appendix I.) 42 „ „ „ „ Sheerness (Appendix I.) 42 W. Water Barges (Appendix XXXII.) 78 Weight, &c., of Unsound Meat Destroyed (Appendix XXXV.) 81 7 STAFF. List of Officers forming the Staff of the Port of London Sanitary Authority,. 31st December, 1929. Office. Name of Officer. Date of entering the Service. Date of appointment to present position. MEDICAL OFFICER OF HEALTH . C. F. White, M.B., Ch.B., D.P.H.Vict., D.T.M.Liverpool. September, 1928 September, 1928. DEPUTY Col. J. S. Warrack, A.M.S., T.D., M.A., M.D., C.M.Aberdeen, D.P.H.Camb., Barrister-at-Law. April, 1903 February, 1916. BOARDING MEDICAL OFFICERS— Gravesend A. Kidd, M.R.C.S., L.R.C.P., D.P.H.Lond. October, 1908 October, 1908. H. M. Willoughby, M.R.C.S., L.R.C.P., D.T.M.&H. May, 1929 May, 1929. D. A. Cadman, M.B., Ch.B., D.P.H. June, 1929 October, 1929. Sheerness †H. A. Madwar, L.R.C.P., L.R.F.P.S. January, 1928 February, 1928. CLERICAL STAFF— Principal Clerk E. A. Sorrell October, 1894 January, 1929. Principal Assistant W. C. Barham March, 1901 January, 1929. 1st Class „ J. A. Gillis March, 1914 January, 1929. 2nd „ „ A. W. Moore January, 1920 January, 1929. 3rd ,, ,, W. L. McLorg February, 1927 January, 1929. Charwoman Mrs. E. Kail November, 1922 November, 1922. FOOD INSPECTORS, Grade I(a) *A. Garland May, 1894 January, 1929. *W. G. Wetjen August, 1898 January, 1929. *J. H. Rolfe September, 1901 January, 1929. *W. W. Burr August, 1898 January, 1929. SANITARY INSPECTORS, Grade I(b) *P. R. Lambe January, 1900 January, 1929. *W. Elward March, 1909 January, 1929. *F. J. Massie March, 1909 January, 1929. *W. J. Berry February, 1914 January, 1929. SANITARY INSPECTORS, Grade II *W. Gray September, 1921 January, 1929. *P. W. Coombe December, 1924 January, 1929. *R. Clifford July, 1925 January, 1929. *E. H. Johnson August, 1929 July, 1929. RAT SEARCHERS †C. F. Woodrow November, 1928 November, 1928. †P. J. Wilkins November, 1928 November, 1928. †C. W. Moody February, 1929 February, 1929. †E. C. Watkins May, 1929 May, 1929. †S. A. Croft May, 1929 May, 1929. †G. F. Boult May, 1929 May, 1929. DENTON HOSPITAL— Medical Officer in Charge Col. J. S. Warrack April, 1903 February, 1916. Matron J. Jackson February, 1910 February, 1910. Staff Nurse † — — Senior Assistant Nurse † — - Assistant Nurse † - - Cook-General † - - Wardmaid † - - Wardmaid † - - Housemaid † - - Handyman, &c †F. R. Wenham June, 1929 June, 1929. Laundress †B. A. Wenham June, 1929 June, 1929. Gardener † - - LAUNCHES— "Joseph White"— Master W. Jarvis July, 1893 April, 1911. Engineer J. J. Steen May, 1908 January, 1926. Mate A. F. Rough November, 1914 November, 1914. "James Howell"— Master C. H. Price May, 1912 May, 1912. Engineer J. A. Hardman July, 1893 December, 1911. Deckhand † — "George Briggs"— Master C. A. Strange December, 1898 October, 1913. Acting Engineer A. E. Howard February, 1912 November, 1926. GREENWICH MOORINGS— Barge "Ella Vicars"— Watchmen E. Ditch January, 1915 November, 1917. A. F. Clements January, 1927 January, 1927. GRAVESEND—Hulk "Hygeia"- Shipkeepers H. A. Clarkson May, 1912 January, 1927. J. C. Row January, 1927 January, 1927. * These Inspectors possess the Special Certificate of the Royal Sanitary Institute for Inspectors of Food, † Temporary Staff. 8 5, Church Passage, Guildhall, E.C. 2, January, 1930. TO THE WORSHIPFUL THE PORT OF LONDON SANITARY COMMITTEE. Gentlemen, I have the honour to submit herewith my Annual Report as Medical Officer of Health of the Port of London. The tonnage of vessels entering the Port of London during 1929 was 28,911,898, showing an increase of 1,170,164 tons over that for the previous year. Of the 15,932 vessels arriving from foreign ports, 1,952 vessels, carrying 73,050 passengers and 58,996 members of crews, were boarded and inspected by your Medical Officers. Three hundred and sixty-four vessels arrived, on which there were, or had occurred during the voyage, a total of 573 cases of notifiable infectious disease. The number of these cases actually landed in the Port was 233, of which 87 were removed to the Port Sanitary Authority's Hospital at Denton. The remainder were sent to other hospitals or were allowed to proceed home. No cases of Plague arrived, and no Plague-infected rats were found on shore or on ships in the Port. The arrangements described on page 19 should lead to the prompt detection of any sign of the existence of rodent Plague, and in this, as in other respects, you are fully discharging your obligations under the International Sanitary Convention of 1926. Sixteen vessels on which 22 cases of Small-pox had occurred entered the Port, and 4 cases were removed to your Isolation Hospital, one of which, being a very virulent form of this disease, proved fatal. An epidemic of Typhoid Fever occurred on one vessel, 10 cases being treated at your Hospital, where two died. The disease was apparently introduced by a passenger who was infected ashore, but it was not found possible to explain how the infection was communicated to the other patients. One case of Psittacosis, a ship's carpenter, was removed to your Hospital, where he recovered. A new bathing and disinfecting station was erected at your Hospital, which will prove of great value in facilitating the bathing of contacts with Small-pox and other diseases and the disinfection of their clothing and effects. A new mortuary and post-mortem room was also provided. Your Sanitary Inspectors made 15,616 inspections of vessels and 5,450 inspections of shore premises. Orders to cleanse crew's quarters were made on 1,417 vessels, and it was found necessary to call for structural alterations and repairs on 703 vessels. Orders to remedy structural defects were made in respect of 50 shore premises. Thirty-five Statutory Notices were issued, as shown in Appendix XXXIV. The number of vessels fumigated for rat destruction, under the supervision of your Inspectors, was 214, and 3,208 rats were thus destroyed. In addition, 5,327 rats were trapped on ships and 9,370 on shore in the Port. Two hundred and twenty-three Certificates of Deratisation and 202 of Exemption from Deratisation were issued, in accordance with the terms of Article 28 of the International Sanitary Convention of 1926. 9 Twenty infringements of the Bye-laws relating to offensive cargoes were reported. Twenty Intimation Notices were sent to the offenders, and legal proceedings were taken in respect of 8 vessels, a conviction being obtained in each case. Legal proceedings were also taken in respect of nuisance from smoke from 2 vessels, convictions being obtained. The carrying out of the provisions of the Public Health (Imported Food) Regulations, 1925, formed an important part of the work of the Port Sanitary Authority. The control of imported mutton, on account of the prevalence of Caseous Lymphadenitis, referred to in my last Report, was continued throughout the year, but the improvement in the condition of consignments resulting from the institution of a system of examination in the countries of origin made it possible, in June, to reduce the percentage of carcases examined from 100 per cent. to 10 per cent. The Medical Officers of Health of the City of London and certain Metropolitan Boroughs continued to accept whole consignments for examination in cold stores in their districts. Consignments for provincial destinations were only released under guarantee that they would be held in cold store for examination by the Medical Officer of Health of the district concerned, who was notified by me of the despatch of the consignment in each case. Ten per cent. of every consignment for districts other than the City of London and the Metropolitan Boroughs referred to above, was detained in Dock Store for examination by your Inspectors. The importers have given every facility for inspection, and have closely co-operated with your officers. It is satisfactory to be able to report that the standard of inspection abroad is steadily improving; research is being carried out into the cause of the disease and the manner in which sheep become infected, and there is reason to believe that the precautions taken in the great exporting countries will be so effective that it will be possible to reduce still further the examinations here. The inspection of imported ox-tongues from South America was continued during the year, but those coming from Brazil were found to be so consistently free from disease that they have been exempted from routine sampling. The percentage of tongues from other sources which were found to be affected with Actinomycosis was 0.9 per cent. The total weight of Foodstuffs destroyed or disposed of for purposes other than human consumption on account of disease or unsoundness during the year was approximately 1,743 tons. The Annual Report on the working of the Canal Boats Acts and Regulations is appended. I have pleasure in reporting that all grades of your Staff carried out their duties in a highly satisfactory manner, and maintained cordial relations with all those with whom their work brought them in contact during the year, and that, as in former vears, the Officers of His Majesty's Customs, the Port of London Authority and the Pilots have alwavs been ready and willing to co-operate in the health work of the Port. 1 have the honour to be, Gentlemen, Your obedient Servant, CHARLES F. WHITE. 10 I.—AMOUNT OF SHIPPING ENTERING THE PORT DURING THE YEAR 1929. Table A. Number. Tonnage. Number Inspected Number reported to be Defective. Number of Vessels on which Defects were Remedied. By the Medical Officer of Health. By the Sanitary Inspector. Foreign Steamers 12,721 19,375,122 1,889 11,959 251 181 *Motor 2,690 2,337,731 58 5 2 Sailing 521 214,240 5 227 — 1 Fishing See Note. — — — — Total Foreign 15,932 21,927,093 1,952 12,186 256 184 Coastwise Steamers 9,483 6,705,292 1,674 89 40 *Motor 607 142,012 - 7 1 Sailing 1,861 137,501 - 1,756 28 24 Fishing See Note. — — — — Total Coastwise 11,951 6,984,805 — 3,430 124 65 Total Foreign and Coastwise 27,883 28,911,898 1,952 15,616 380 249 * Includes mechanically propelled vessels other than Steamers. See also Appendix i. Note.—British Fishing Vessels are excluded from the Returns of the Navigation of the United Kingdom. Foreign Fishing Vessels are included, but not separately distinguished. II.—CHARACTER OP TRADE OP PORT. Table b. (a) Passenger Traffic during 1929:— To and from NON-EUROPEAN Countries. Number of Passengers. 1st Class. 2nd Class. 3rd Class. Inwards 18,595 11,162 21,431 Outwards 19,694 10,795 22,312 To and from CONTINENT OF EUROPE. Inwards 106,624 (including 16,162 Transmigrants). Outwards 92,377. Countries from which passengers principally arrive: North America, Australia, Europe, British South Africa, India and the Far East. (b) Cargo Traffic :— Principal Imports—Merchandise of all kinds, principally Provisions, Fruit, Grain and Flour, Hides and Skins, Meat, Oil and Fats, Rubber, Textile Materials, Tobacco, Wood and Wool. Principal Exports—Manufactured Goods of all kinds. Countries with which the Port principally trades—The Port of London trades with all parts of the world. III.—SOURCE OF WATER SUPPLY. Inasmuch as the Port of London from West to East extends for a distance of nearly 69 miles and passes through the following Counties :— On the North Bank, Middlesex, London and Essex, On the South Bank, Surrey, London and Kent, it necessarily follows that there are various sources of water supply. The warehouses and offices in the docks, all of which are within the jurisdiction of the Port of London Sanitary Authority, are supplied direct from mains. Shipping in the docks is chiefly supplied with water from the mains ashore. 11 In some cases, however, for instance where vessels are not lying near a dock quay, water is supplied from water barges. Vessels lying in the River obtain their supplies direct from water mains on shore or from water barges. Water Barges.—As the majority of vessels obtain their water direct from hydrants on shore, water barges are not numerous in the Port of London, there being only 20 in all. These water barges are filled with pure water from the mains. It is, therefore, only necessary to ensure that no contamination of the water takes place during the filling of the tanks or while it is stored in the barges. This object is best achieved by a thorough inspection of the barges when empty, special attention being paid to the interior of the tanks and to the hoses and equipment. The water barges must be registered annually with the Port of London Authority, and before re-registration they must be inspected as to their fitness for navigation on the River and in the docks. During 1929 the Port of London Authority agreed to co-operate with the Port Sanitary Authoritv by informing them when each water barge was due for their annual inspection, and by making re-registration conditional, not only upon the fitness of the barge for navigation, but also upon a favourable report from the Port Sanitary Authority as to the fitness of the barge for the carriage of drinking water. This arrangement has worked smoothly and well, and whenever your officers have reported defects on any water barge the Port of London Authority have withheld re-registration until they have received from your Medical Officer a report to the effect that such defects have been remedied. IV.— INFECTIOUS DISEASE. For the prevention of the importation of infectious disease it is necessary to arrange for the medical inspection of vessels :— (1) Proceeding up the River Thames. (2) Proceeding up the River Medway. Vessels proceeding up the Thames.—The Port Sanitary Authority maintain a hulk, the " Hygeia," moored in the River, off Gravesend, about 26 miles below London Bridge, on which there is a Medical Officer on duty day and night. No arrangements have been made for the notification by wireless to the Port Sanitary Authority of the time of arrival of inward vessels requiring the attention of the Boarding Medical Officer, but advance information is frequently given to the Authority by shipowners, agents and others who have been in wireless communication with such ships, particularly when infectious sickness has occurred on board. A Customs launch is always on duty in Gravesend Reach, and the Boarding Medical Officer goes off with the" Preventive Officer to hail every vessel arriving from "foreign." The Preventive Officer questions the Master as to where the vessel is from, where berthing, the nature of the cargo, whether all are well on board and whether any sickness has occurred during the voyage. If the Master reports the occurrence of sickness or if the vessel has called at an infected port, the Medical Officer goes on board and makes such enquiries and examinations as are indicated. To avoid frequent changes in the list of infected ports, which would lead to confusion, the Medical Officers are instructed to board all ships which have come from ports in the Eastern Hemisphere, South of latitude 45° N. (except European ports West of longitude 20° E.) and ships from ports in the Western Hemisphere South of latitude 30° N. 12 Cases of infectious disease are removed in the Port Sanitary Authority's motor launch to the Authority's Isolation Hospital, which is situated on the River bank at Denton, just below Gravesend. This Hospital consists of an administrative block, four ward blocks providing accommodation for 50 cases, a bathing and disinfecting station, laundry, mortuary and post-mortem room and a porter's cottage. When it is deemed necessary for the prevention of the spread of infection, contacts are removed to hospital for observation, or more commonly for bathing and disinfection of their personal effects. In this connection the bathing and disinfecting station erected during this year will prove invaluable. The station consists of an undressing room connected with the infected side of the disinfector, four spray and two slipper baths and a dressing room connected with the clean side of the disinfector. The whole building can be kept thoroughly warm, so that contacts who have been through the baths can wait, without discomfort, to receive their disinfected clothing. A causeway runs from the Hospital down to the River, and during the year this has been raised and made broader by building a strong wooden causeway over the old stone one, so that the launch can come alongside at almost any state of the tide, and patients can be landed with greater comfort and safety in any weather. When vessels arrive on which dangerous infectious disease has occurred, and the period that has elapsed since the landing of the last case is less than the maximum incubation period of the disease in question, not only are passengers and crew carefully inspected, but their names and addresses are obtained and forwarded with the necessary information to the Medical Officers of Health of the districts to which they are proceeding. If time permits, infected quarters are put under disinfection by the Sanitary Inspector who removes the case in the River, otherwise they are sealed and disinfected by the Sanitary Inspector who visits the vessel when she arrives at her berth. The usual method of disinfection of quarters is spraying with Izal solution, followed by fumigation with Sulphur Dioxide. Infected bedding, clothing, &c., is removed by launch for disinfection by steam at the Isolation Hospital. Vessels proceeding up the River Medway are dealt with by a part-time Medical Officer from Sheerness, whose duty it is to visit, as soon as possible, every vessel on which sickness is reported by His Majesty's Customs, and to board within about twelve hours of arrival every other vessel from ''foreign'' remaining within the jurisdiction of the Port of London Sanitary Authority. Cases of infectious disease from such vessels would be removed to the Port Sanitary Authority's Hospital at Denton. The cleansing of persons can now be carried out efficiently and promptly at the new bathing and disinfecting station at the Authority's Hospital. Three motor launches are available for the transport of cases of infectious disease within the Port. The Boarding Medical Officers always make enquiries in regard to the occurrence of venereal disease on the vessels they board, and give advice as to when and where treatment is obtainable. Handbills showing where free treatment can be obtained by seamen suffering from venereal disease are distributed on vessels. The Port Sanitary Authority do not provide a clinic, but there are clinics at Sheerness, Rochester, Southend, Gravesend, Faversham, Dartford, Royal Albert and Victoria Docks, Greenwich and London. Bacteriological examination of rats is carried out at the new laboratories of the Seamen's Hospital, Greenwich, under the direction of Professor Hewlett. These laboratories are equipped with every modern appliance, and, if Plague is suspected, rats can be examined at any time of the day. 13 Other bacteriological examinations are now also carried out at the above laboratories. Table C. Cases of Infectious Sickness landed from Vessels. Disease. No. of Cases during 1929. Average No. of Cases for last five years. Small-pox 5 2.0 Scarlet Fever 7 11.2 Diphtheria 12 15.4 Enteric, Fever 27 20.8 Measles 13 14.4 German Measles 4 13.2 Erysipelas 1 2.0 Continued Fever — 0.6 Pulmonary Tuberculosis 87 53.0 Tuberculosis (other kinds) 5 3.6 Pneumonia 11 12.6 Influenza 5. 3.8 Cerebro-spinal Meningitis — 0.4 Dysentery 13 6.2 Encephalitis Lethargica — 0.2 Malaria 31 19.6 Chicken-pox 12 21.6 Remittent and Relapsing Fever — 0.2 Table D. Cases of Infectious Sickness occurring on Vessels during the Voyage, but disposed of prior to arrival. Disease. No. of Cases during 1929. Average No. of Cases for last five years. Cholera 2 7.6 Plague 1 1.4 Yellow Fever — 0.4 Small-pox 17 15.2 Scarlet Fever 4 2.6 Diphtheria 5 2.4 Enteric Fever 19 31.0 Measles 35 42.6 German Measles 5 8.6 Erysipelas 3 1.6 Continued Fever — 1.4 Pulmonary Tuberculosis 39 32.2 Tuberculosis (other kinds) 2 1.2 Pneumonia 26 22.0 Influenza 104 47.2 Cerebro-spinal Meningitis — 0.2 Dysentery 9 20.4 Encephalitis Lethargica — 0.6 Malaria 31 105.0 Chicken-pox 38 29.4 Remittent and Relapsing Fever — 0.2 See also Appendices II. to XIX. inclusive. Venereal Diseases and other non-notifiable sickness, see Appendices XX. and XXI. Cholera. The ss. "Mulbera" arrived at Gravesend, from Calcutta, on the 7th April, having landed a lascar at Madras on the 5th March, suffering from Cholera. The diagnosis was confirmed bacteriologically at Madras. The necessary sanitary measures were taken at Madras, and again at Colombo and Suez. No other case occurred. The ss. "Maidan" arrived at Gravesend on 5th June, having landed the ship's surgeon to hospital at Madras on the 4th May, suffering from Cholera. The patient had been resident in Calcutta, and joined the ship in that port on 27th April. Two days after the ship left Calcutta he was taken suddenly ill with diarrhoea, vomiting and cramp, and on arrival of the vessel at Madras the Port Medical Officer diagnosed Cholera. 14 On arrival in London the Master received a letter from the patient reporting that he was convalescing. At Madras the patient's personal effects were landed with him, his bedding destroyed and his cabin disinfected. The native crew's quarters and latrines were also disinfected. The whole of the crew—European and native—were inoculated against Cholera. The fresh water which had been taken in at Calcutta was pumped out, and the tanks were cleansed and refilled with Madras water. No further action in this port was deemed necessary, and no other case occurred. Plague. The ss. "City of Tokio" arrived off Gravesend on 11th November, 1929, and the Boarding Medical Officer ascertained that the chief steward had developed Bubonic Plague on board on 12th July, and died on 21st July. The vessel was fumigated with carbon dioxide at Woosung Forts on 22nd July, and again at Nagasaki on 6th August, with sulphur dioxide. No further cases occurred. On arrival in London all the crew were well, and careful examination revealed no suspicion of rodent Plague on board. Though the vessel was not, on arrival in London, either a Plague-infected or Plague-suspected ship, the history of the occurrence is interesting and instructive, and is therefore detailed below :— The chief steward went ashore at Singapore on 9th July to purchase stores at a ship's chandlers. He was only away from his ship for about an hour. On 12th July he was taken ill with fever (temperature 103° F.), but no localising symptoms. On 16th July the vessel arrived at Hong Kong, and the patient was seen by a doctor on that and the following day. Plague was not diagnosed. On 19th July the patient complained of pain in his right groin, and a bubo was found with a small black ring in the centre of the inflamed area. The next day both the area of inflammation and the central black patch had considerably increased in size, but the man no longer complained of pain. Early the next morning he was found dead in his bunk. The same day the vessel proceeded to Woosung Quarantine Station, where the Port Medical Officer ordered the bodv to be taken ashore for examination. The case was subsequently pronounced to have been one of Bubonic Plague, the diagnosis being confirmed bacteriologically by culture and inoculation. One lascar was found at Woosung to have a bubo in the groin. He was taken ashore at Shanghai, but the bubo was proved to be of venereal origin, and he was returned to the ship. No evidence of rat Plague was discovered on board at anv time, and there is very little doubt that the chief steward contracted the disease in Singapore while ashore, probably in the ship's chandlers stores. Apparently a week elapsed between the onset of illness and the appearance of the bubo, so that the case was not diagnosed as Plague at Hong Kong on the fourth and fifth days. Small-pox. On 9th January information was received from the Medical Officer of Health of Poplar that a fireman who had landed in London from the ss. "Guildford Castle," on 6th January, had developed the symptoms of Small-pox at home on 7th January. The "Guildford Castle" had left London for Continental ports on 22nd December, 1928, and it is probable that the patient was infected in Poplar before he left, though it is possible that the disease may have been contracted at the first Continental port visited or from a missed case on board. The disease was of a mild type. The names and addresses of the remainder of the crew were obtained, and notified to the Medical Officers of Health of the districts concerned. The quarters which had been occupied by the patient were disinfected and his bedding burned. As the "Guildford Castle" was sailing again on 10th January, the ship's surgeon and the Board of Trade were informed. A careful inspection of all members of the crew who had been on board with the patient was carried out, and all immediate contacts were vaccinated, as were also as many others of the crew as would consent to the operation. 15 The wife of the patient, who refused vaccination, developed Small-pox on 20th January, 1929. No information was received of the occurrence of any other secondary case. The ss. "Karmala" arrived at Gravesend on the 10th January, from Yokohama, having landed a case of Small-pox to hospital at Colombo. The native and European crew and all the passengers, with the exception of one woman and two children, were vaccinated, and the infected quarters, &c., fumigated at Colombo. No further case occurred. The ss. "Hector" arrived at Gravesend on the 30th January, from Darien, having landed a case of Small-pox at Colombo, on 6th January. All the crew and passengers were vaccinated by the ship's surgeon and the infected quarters disinfected by the Colombo Port Authority. No other case occurred. On the 13th February a telephone message was received from the London Agents of the MV. "Tantalus," reporting the outbreak of Small-pox on this vessel. At the time of the report the vessel was at Amsterdam, and was expected to leave for London on the 16th-17th February. Further information to the effect that the cases had been removed to hospital in Amsterdam, the crew isolated in the quarantine station and disinfection carried out was received on the loth February. On the arrival of the vessel at Gravesend, on the 19th February, she was boarded by the Boarding Medical Officer, who carefully examined the crew. No suspicious case was discovered. The names and addresses of the crew were carefully checked and forwarded by post the same evening to the Medical Officers of Health concerned. The crew were all paid off in London. History of Outbreak.—The vessel came from the Dutch East Indies, and had carried pilgrims thence to Jeddah. No case of Small-pox was detected amongst the pilgrims, but one pilgrim, a child of 10 months, was reported to have died of "Vaccinia" on 7th January, 1929. The cases were all amongst the white crew, infection being contracted at Batavia or Padang Name of Case. Rating. Age. Reported Sick. Eruption appeared. Diagnosed Small-pox. Isolated S. H. Assistant Steward 20 25.1.29 1.2.29 5.2.29 5.2.29 G. H. Second Cook 21 28.1.29 1.2.29 5.2.29 5.2.29 T. M. Assistant Steward 21 29.1.29 1.2.29 5.2.29 5.2.29 J. M. Greaser 51 12.2.29 13.2.29 14.2.29 15.2.29 As the vessel had not been to any port known to be infected with Small-pox, the illness was first diagnosed as Dengue Fever, and not until the eruption became pustular was Small-pox diagnosed. The cases were isolated in the ship's hospital and the infected living quarters were disinfected. All the crew were vaccinated by the ship's surgeon on 5th February. T. M. died on 9th February, and was buried at sea. On arrival at Amsterdam, on 13th February, S. H. and G. H. were removed to hospital; J. M. and J. R. were put in observation isolation, as they had a slight rise in temperature. The remaining 52 members of the crew were taken to the quarantine station and given disinfectant baths. Their bedding and clothing were disinfected by steam. The living quarters and hospital were fumigated with formalin. On 14th February J. M. was diagnosed as Small-pox, and on 15th February all the crew were re-vaccinated by the Port Medical Officer of Health, Amsterdam. J. R. was detained in Amsterdam, but had not been declared as a case of Small-pox when the ship left on the 18th February. 16 ss. "Ranpura": This vessel arrived off Gravesend on 1st March. Information had been received that the saloon barman had been landed to hospital at Marseilles, where he had died four hours after admission. The Medical Officer of the hospital had suggested that the case was one of Hæmorrhagic Small-pox, death occurring before the appearance of the typical eruption. The ship's surgeon did not agree with this diagnosis, but as consideration of all the available information made it impossible definitely to exclude the possibility of the case having been one of Hsemorrhagic Small-pox the immediate contacts were vaccinated, and the names and addresses of passengers and crew were forwarded to the Medical Officers of Health of the districts of destination. If the disease was Small-pox, no secondary case occurred in this country. ss. "Æneas": On arrival of this vessel at Gravesend, on the 2nd March, it was ascertained that a case of Small-pox and four contacts had been landed at Hong Kong. The ship had been put into quarantine, and all the passengers and crew vaccinated. Complete disinfection had been carried out by the Hong Kong Health Authority. No other case occurred. ss. "Laverock" : On 6th March the Medical Officer of Health of West Ham telephoned that he had just seen N. H., a fireman from the ss. "Laverock," at his home, and that the man was suffering from a mild attack of Small-pox. Enquiries showed that the man had been infected at home and had gone to sea during the incubation period of the disease, the eruption appearing just as the vessel arrived in the Port of London on 6th March. The Master had reported "all well" at Gravesend, as N. H. was then carrying on with his work, having, so far as the Master knew, recovered from an attack of "influenza," for which he had reported sick on 3rd and 4th March. The usual precautions were taken. ss. "Hatimura": This vessel arrived at Gravesend on the 14th March, from Bombay. Three cases of Small-pox were removed from the vessel in the Port of London. The following is the history of the cases :— Case 1.—On the 1st March a lascar reported sick, and a rash was noticed on his face the same day. He was at once isolated on board, as Small-pox was suspected. On arrival of the vessel at Oran, on the 7th March, free pratique was granted, as the case was considered to be venereal disease. On arrival in the Port of London the patient had numerous scars on the face; on the body there were many scars and also some small crusts. There was one vaccination mark on each arm. Date of vaccination not known. This was a mild case of Small-pox, modified by vaccination. Case 2.—On the 10th March another native seaman was taken ill with fever, pain in back and limbs, and headache. He was immediately isolated, and a rash appeared on 13th March. On arrival he had the typical eruption of Small-pox. He showed indistinct marks of vaccination. This case proved to be a severe hæmorrhagic type of Small-pox, and died on 20th March. Action taken.—The two patients were removed to the Port Sanitarv Hospital. All the crew were vaccinated. The 25 members of the deck crew were removed to hospital and there bathed, and their clothing and personal effects disinfected by steam. The infected quarters were disinfected by spraying with strong Izal solution, followed by fumigation with Sulphur Dioxide. The names and addresses of the white crew who left the ship were forwarded to the Medical Officers of Health concerned. Case 3.—On the 16th March, while the vessel was in dock, a native scullion was discovered with a rash on forehead and wrists. He was immediately removed to the Port Sanitary Hospital. This was a mild case of Small-pox, modified by vaccination. The vessel left London for Hull on the 19th March, and the Medical Officer of that Port was informed of the circumstances. 17 ss. "City of Bristol": This vessel, from Rangoon, arrived at Gravesend on the 17th March, having landed a case of Small-pox at Eangoon. The vessel was placed in quarantine at that port, the entire crew were vaccinated, and the ship, bedding and effects thoroughly disinfected. No other case occurred. ss. "Manora": Arrived at Gravesend, from Calcutta, on the 22nd March. A case of Small-pox was landed at Colombo, where vaccination and complete disinfection were carried out. No other case occurred. ss. "Mashobra": This vessel arrived off Gravesend on 22nd April, from Calcutta, via Marseilles and Plymouth. On 1st April two native seamen reported sick, and the disease was diagnosed as Chicken-pox by the ship's surgeon and the Port Medical Officer at Aden. This diagnosis was confirmed by the Port Medical Officers at Suez and Port Said, but on arrival of the vessel at Marseilles, on 13th April, the disease was in each case considered to be modified Small-pox, and the patients were removed to hospital ashore. The native crew had all been vaccinated on 12th April. All the passengers who landed at Marseilles were vaccinated before leaving the ship, and during the next three days the remainder of the passengers and the European crew were vaccinated on board by the ship's surgeon. When the vessel arrived in the Port of London every person on board was medically inspected, and their names and addresses were carefully checked and forwarded to the Medical Officers of Health of the districts to which they were proceeding. The native deck-crew were taken ashore to Denton Hospital and bathed while their clothing was being disinfected by steam. The native quarters were disinfected. No extension of the infection occurred. ss. "Ranchi": This vessel arrived off Gravesend on 26th April, from Bombay, via Marseilles and Plymouth. A first-class passenger was on board suffering from modified Small-pox. The patient joined the ship at Bombay on 5th April, and was first taken ill on 11th April. He reported on 14th April to the ship's surgeon, who diagnosed Chicken-pox and isolated him in the ship's hospital. At Marseilles the diagnosis was considered to be doubtful, but probably Chicken-pox. After leaving Marseilles the ship's surgeon vaccinated nearly everybody on board. On arrival in the Port of London the case was considered to be Small-pox, and was removed to Denton Hospital. The usual preventive measures were adopted, including the transmission to the Medical Officers of Health of the districts of destination of the names and addresses of the 288 passengers and 146 European crew then' on board. This work was all completed in the evening of the day the " Ranchi " arrived. The ss. "City of Venice" arrived at Gravesend at 8.30 a.m. on the 27th May, and was boarded by the Boarding Medical Officer, who ascertained that the vessel had left Calcutta on 27th April, calling at Colombo, Suez, Port Said and Marseilles. A native fireman was landed at Suez on 14th May, suffering from Small-pox. The patient was reported to have been unsuccessfully vaccinated before the vessel left Calcutta. There was no initial illness, but on 13th May papules developed on the face, chest and back. The case was diagnosed as Small-pox at Suez, and was landed there with the patient's bedding and effects. The firemen's quarters were disinfected, and the crew, numbering 30 Europeans and 114 natives, and the passengers, numbering 119, were vaccinated. The infection appears to have been contracted in Calcutta. On arrival at Gravesend all persons on board were inspected, and a native fireman was found to be suffering from an eruption which was considered to be undoubtedly due to Secondary Syphilis. This patient was later transferred to another ship, and subsequently admitted to a Venereal Disease Clinic in Liverpool. He had been successfully vaccinated on 27th April, and had developed the eruption on 17th May. All other persons on board were well. The names and addresses of the passengers and European crew were obtained and checked and forwarded on the day of arrival to the Medical Officers of Health of the districts concerned. The native crew were kept under observation on board. No other case occurred while the vessel was in the Port of London. 18 The ss. "Collegian" arrived at Gravesend on the 3rd October, from Calcutta. A coal trimmer was taken ill during the homeward voyage, and was landed at Port Said on 19th September as a suspected case of Small-pox. The whole of the crew of the vessel, including the patient, had been vaccinated at Calcutta on 26th August. The crew were inspected on arrival and found to be all well. Typhoid Fever. The ss. "Llandovery Castle" arrived off Gravesend on 4th September, from ports on the East Coast of Africa, via the Suez Canal, Genoa and Marseilles. The Boarding Medical Officer ascertained that there were ten cases of Typhoid Fever on board, and that another case had been landed at Marseilles. The ten cases were removed to Denton Hospital, and the necessary disinfection of clothing, bedding and infected quarters was carried out. As it was possible that other persons on board might be in the incubation stage of the disease, the names and addresses of all passengers and crew were forwarded to the Medical Officers of Health of the various districts to which they were proceeding. A few passengers, who had given only addresses of agents or banks, were written to personally and advised that, if, during the three weeks following their disembarkation, they suffered from any illness, they should inform their medical attendant that they had landed from a ship on which there had been an epidemic of Typhoid Fever. Although there was no evidence that the water on board was the source of infection or was in any way contaminated, it was deemed advisable to have all water tanks emptied and cleaned. Owing to the fact that the ship's surgeon was landed at Marseilles on account of illness, not Typhoid Fever, it was very difficult to get a clear history of the outbreak. The infected persons comprised three first-class passengers, an engineer, the bandmaster, five stewards and one ordinary seaman. Of these, one passenger died at Marseilles, and an engineer and a steward died in Denton Hospital. The first case was that of a passenger, aged 14, who was probably infected ashore in Durban before joining the ship, and was taken ill on 11th August. The remaining cases all sickened between 22nd August and 28th August. It was not possible to come to a definite decision as to how the infection was disseminated on board. Psittacosis. The circumstances of the following case strongly suggest that it was one of Psittacosis :— On 9th December, A. C., ship's carpenter ex ss. "Bellailsa," was removed to the Port Sanitary Hospital, Denton, as a suspected case of Typhoid Fever. The symptoms, though suggesting Typhoid Fever, were by no means typical of that disease. Certain allegations were made by a member of the crew in regard to the condition of one of the water tanks on board. Careful investigation showed these allegations to be unfounded. Moreover, there was no sickness amongst the remainder of the crew. It was, however, ascertained that the patient had bought two parrots in Buenos Aires and kept them in his room while the vessel went to Rosario, and subsequently returned to Buenos Aires. Two days after the vessel left Buenos Aires, on the voyage to London, one parrot became ill with diarrhoea and drowsiness, and was killed by the patient. A few days later the second bird developed similar symptoms and died. The patient began to be ill some four or five days after the death of the second bird. A number of outbreaks of Psittacosis had been reported in the Argentine Republic, and, in view of this, the necessary specimens from the patient were sent to the Seamen's Hospital, Greenwich, and to the Laboratories of the Ministry of Health for bacteriological examination. Both laboratories reported that the tests gave negative results for the Typhoid group of organisms and the Psittacosis bacillus. But in the present state of our knowledge of Psittacosis these negative results cannot be held 19 definitely to exclude this diagnosis. The patient, after a severe illness lasting over a month, made a complete recovery, and was discharged from hospital on 1st January, 1930. The clinical history of this case was reported in the "British Medical Journal" of 18th January, 1930. V.—MEASURES AGAINST RODENTS. (1) Steps taken for the detection of rodent Plague :— During the year six rat-searchers were appointed. Each rat-searcher has his own district, corresponding to the district of a Sanitary Inspector, under whose guidance he works. A rat-searcher's first duty is the examination of such ships in his district as are due for inspection under Article 28 of the International Sanitary Convention relative to the granting of Deratisation and Deratisation Exemption Certificates. His second duty is to visit ships arriving in his district from Plague-infected ports, to search for dead rats and, if possible, to obtain specimens of live rats trapped on board. He is required to re-visit, such vessels daily during the discharge of cargo, to ascertain whether dead rats have been found in the holds. The existence of rodent Plague on board any vessel in the Port should thus be detected at the earliest possible moment. The rat-searcher's third duty is the examination of shore premises for signs of rat infestation or rat Plague, paying particular attention to premises adjoining the berths of vessels from Plague-infected ports. For this purpose he maps out his district into sections, each of which will take him about a week to examine thoroughly. He then advises the warehouse keepers that a certain section will be under inspection for a week, and requests him to carry out intensive trapping during that week and to keep all rats caught until collected each day by the rat-searcher. In this way the whole of the Docks will be systematically and regularly inspected for signs of rat-infestation or of rodent Plague, and specimens of the shore rat population in all parts of the Port will be regularly examined bacteriologically, so that, in the rare event of Plague infection being communicated to the rats on shore, it should be quickly detected and stamped out before it has spread extensively. Moreover, when rat-infestation of premises is reported, the responsible persons are required to take energetic measures of rat-destruction, for rat Plague will spread rapidly in a rat-infested area, whereas where rats are few it may never spread at all. It is of the greatest importance, not only from the public health, but also from the commercial point of view, that the Port of London should be kept free from rat Plague. Bacteriological Examination of Rats.—Owing to the fact that the Port of London is so extensive, it is not easy to arrange for rats to be conveyed to a suitable bacteriological laboratory. The new laboratories at the Seamen's Hospital, Greenwich, are most conveniently situated, and there is a Staff of skilled bacteriologists under the direction of Professor Hewlett. Rat-searchers collect rats from ships and shore premises in their district each day. They tie to one leg of each rat a small label, on which is a letter combination indicating the Dock where the rat was obtained (thus R.A.D. indicates Royal Albert Dock, S.C.D. Surrey Commercial Dock, &c.) and a number. In their daily report sheets the rat-searchers enter each letter-number combination, with notes opposite showing exactly where and how each rat was obtained. They then place the rats in a linen bag, which they put in a tin box. At the end of the day they deliver the tin boxes at the laboratory of the Seamen's Hospital. Greenwich, and receive in exchange empty bags and boxes for the next day's rats. Rats are delivered about 5 p.m., and examined next morning. If any rats were found Plague-infected the letters and number on the label attached would be telephoned to your Medical Officer, who, on reference to the rat-searcher's reports, could at once ascertain exactly where such rats were obtained and institute Plague preventive measures there. If rats are found dead under circumstances suggesting that they have died of Plague, they are taken at once to the laboratory, and an immediate examination and report is requested. 20 The rats from Tilbury Dock are sent by train from Gravesend to Greenwich, where they are collected each morning by one of the Staff and taken to the laboratory on his way to work. It was not found possible to dip the rats on the Docks in a flea-killing solution, but it has been arranged that the bags containing the rats should be dipped in kerosine at the laboratory. The bags returned empty to the rat-searchers are therefore saturated in kerosine, which is sufficient to destroy the fleas on the subsequent batches of rats placed in the bags. Before these arrangements were put into operation, on 1st August, details were discussed with the Docks and Warehouse Manager of the Port of London Authority, the Secretary of the Seamen's Hospital and Professor Hewlett, who cordially co-operated in the scheme, which is now working smoothly and efficiently, thanks to their assistance. (2) Measures taken to prevent the passage of rats between ships and shore:— The Port of London Authority have made Bye-laws requiring the Master of every ship to cause all ropes and mooring tackle used for securing ships, either to the shore or mooring buoys, to be fitted with guards, approved by the Authority, to prevent rats passing from the ship to the shore, and to cause all empty cases, packages and barrels to be examined before landing, to ensure that no rats are contained therein. The removal of rats (alive or dead) from ships without previous consent in writing of the Superintendent, is prohibited. Bye-laws also prescribe that, when the discharge or loading of cargo or the landing or embarking of passengers is not actually proceeding, one gangway, whitened for a length of 10 feet at the end next the vessel, may be used as a communication between the ship and the shore, and that the Master shall not have or allow anv other communication with the shore, unless the same be i/ fitted with guards, approved by the Authority, to prevent the passage of rats. These Bye-laws are enforced by the officers of the Port of London Authority, and the Sanitary Inspectors of the Port Sanitary Authority also call upon Masters to put guards on their mooring ropes. But the well-known difficulties in regard to the proper application and maintenance of position of rat-guards constantly occur, and it cannot be said that the mooring ropes of the majority of ships in the Port of London are at all times so guarded that a rat could not use them as a means of reaching the shore. There is no doubt that rats very seldom voluntarily run along mooring ropes, and the view is held that such rats as get ashore do so usually by some easier means or accidentally in cargo. (3) Methods of deratisation of (a) Ships. The methods employed for the deratisation of ships are:— (1) The burning of Sulphur at the rate of 3 lbs. per 1,000 cubic feet of space, the period of exposure of vessels to the Sulphur Dioxide gas thus generated being not less than six hours. Poll Sulphur, of good quality, is used, and is burned in large shallow trays. Owing to the large burning surface thus obtained, considerably more Sulphur can be completely burned in one container within the six hours than is possible when buckets or pots are used. (2) The generating of Hydrocyanic Acid gas from "Zyklon 'B'" or from liquified Hydrogen Cyanide, there being several modifications of the latter process. If any new method of application of Hydrogen Cyanide is brought forward, the Port Sanitary Authority always test its efficiency by concealing test animals on board the ship, and, further, require to be satisfied that the method does not expose the fumigating Staff to any unavoidable danger. The concentration of Hydrogen Cyanide required is approximately 0.2 per cent., and the shortest period of exposure two hours. 21 The figures given in Tables "H" and "I" are no indication of the relative efficiency of Sulphur Dioxide and Hydrogen Cyanide as fumigants, because one large passenger line fumigate their vessels regularly every voyage with Cyanide for the destruction of insects, and these vessels are almost, if not absolutely, rat free. (3) Trapping. All vessels from Plague-infected ports are required to have traps set on board, in order that specimens may, if possible, be obtained for bacteriological examination. All other vessels, on which there is evidence of rats, but not of such a number as to justify a demand for fumigation, are required to have traps set in all spaces where signs of rats are discovered. The trapping may be carried out by professional rat-catchers or, in some cases, by members of the crew, under the supervision of the officers of the Port Sanitary Authority. (b) Premises in the vicinity of Docks and Quays. The Port of London Authority constantly carry out methods of rat-destruction ashore in the Port. Trapping is the method principally employed, but the Authority are always ready to test any new method of rat-destruction that is brought to their notice. The condition of all shore premises is under the constant supervision of the Sanitary Inspectors and rat-searchers of the Port Sanitary Authority, who draw the attention of the officers of the Port of London Authority to any signs of rat-infestation they may discover. (4) Measures taken for the detection of rat prevalence in ships and on shore:— Examination by Inspectors and Rat-searchers, as already described. (5) Rat-proofing:— The Port of London Authority have, during the year, continued their scheme of rat-proofing in the Docks and Warehouses. No rat Plague has occurred on shore in the Port for 13 years, and the policy of the Port of London Authority in constantly applying methods of rat-destruction and progressively rat-proofing the Docks and Warehouses has been an important factor in keeping the Port of London free from Plague infection. Rats Destroyed during 1929. TABLE E. (1) On Vessels. Number of Jan. Feb. Mar. April. May. June. July. Aug. Sept. Oct. Nov. Dec. Total in Year. Black Rats - — - - - - - 41 71 72 88 43 315 Brown Rats - - - - - - - 20 3 13 16 46 98 Species not Recorded 862 681 871 852 540 1,038 484 809 409 295 393 88 8,122 Eats examined — - (See below.) — — — 61 74 85 104 89 413 Eats infected with Plague nil nil nil nil nil nil nil nil nil nil nil nil nil See also Appendices XXVI., XXVII. and XXVIII. * Total includes 2,969 Rats not accounted for in Tables "G," "H" and "I," being a number of Rats voluntarily notified by Private Rat Catchers as having been trapped on vessels from non-infected ports. 22 TABLE F. (2) In Docks, Quays, Wharves and Warehouses. Number of Jan. Feb. Mar. April. May. June. July. Aug. Sept. Oct. Nov. Dec. Total inYear. Black Rats — — — — — — — 18 56 121 107 88 390 Brown Rats — — — — — — 128 66 85 110 83 472 Species not Recoeded 818 678 1,357 1,011 869 1,004 828 758 206 291 472 216 8,508 Rats examined — - (See below.) — — — 146 122 206 217 171 862 Rats infected with Plague nil nil nil nil nil nil nil nil nil nil nil nil nil RATS EXAMINED—Vessels, Docks, Quays, &c 1,981 See also Appendices XXVI., XXVII. and XXVIII. TABLE G. Particulars relating to Plague "Infected" or "Suspected" Vessels arriving in the Port during 1929. Name of Vessel. Date of arrival. Whether "Infected " or " Suspected." Method of Rat Destruction employed. Number of Dead Rats recovered. Whether a Certificate of Deratisation was issued. Remarks. 1, 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. Nil TABLE H. Measures of Rat Destruction on Vessels from Plague-infected Ports (other than those included in Table G) arriving in the Port during 1929, and number of Certificates issued in respect of such Vessels. Total Number of Vessels arriving from Plagueinfected ports. Number of sucli Vessels fumigated by S02. Number of Dead Rats recovered. Number of such Vessels fumigated by HCN. Number of Dead Rats recovered. Number of such Vessels on which Trapping, Poisoning, &c., were emploj'ed. Number of Dead Rats recovered. Number of such Vessels on whioli measures of Rat Destruction were not employed. Number of Fumigation Certificates issued on Form "Port 11." Number of other Certificates issued. Deratisation. Exemption. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 1,141 59 790 12 351 1,141 2,358 Nil 74 55 Nil TABLE I. Measures of Rat Destruction on Vessels (other than those included in Tables G and H) and number of Certificates issued in respect of such Vessels during 1929. Number of Vessels Fumigated by S02. Number of Dead Rats recovered. Number of Vessels Fumigated by HCN. Number of Dead Rats recovered. Number of Vessels on which Trapping, Poisoning, & c., were employed. Number of Dead Rats recovered. Number of Certificates issued on Form "Port 11." Number of other Certificates issued. Deratisation. Exemption. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 92 1,631 51 436 No record. No record. 149 147 Nil For details of Fumigation of Vessels, see Appendix XXIX. For details of Deratisation Exemption Certificates, see Appendix XXX. VI.—HYGIENE OF CREWS' SPACES. TABLE J.—Classification of Nuisances. Nationality of Vessel. Number inspected during 1929. Defects of original construction. Structural defects through wear and tear. Dirt, Vermin and other conditions prejudicial to health. British 11,037 180 523 1,546 Other Nations 4,579 See Appendices XXXII., XXXIII. and XXXIV. 23 Crew Accommodation. In lable "J" the number of defects reported by Sanitary Inspectors has not been divided between those reported on British ships and those on ships of other nations, because any figures available would be useless for purposes of comparison. To make this Table of any value special investigations would have to be carried out throughout the year, and the information obtained would require to be very carefully tabulated. During 1929 the necessary data have not been collected. The question of crew accommodation, however, is receiving careful consideration by a Standing Joint Committee of the Ministry of Health and the Board of Trade, by the Association of Port Sanitary Authorities and by the Shipping Federation. The Port of London Sanitary Authority have been able to put the results of their experience at the service of these Committees. Though on many ships there are already provided for the crew accommodation and amenities far in excess of the minimum required by the Merchant Shipping Act and Board of Trade Instructions, there are others where the crew's quarters can hardly be regarded as reasonably fit for habitation when judged by modern standards of hygiene and comfort. New minimum standards are overdue, for in this respect we have already fallen behind some other countries. There is every reason to believe that great improvement, in new ships at least, can be achieved without imposing an intolerable burden of expense on the shipping industry, and that the setting-up of new standards in crew accommodation will not be long delayed. VII.—FOOD INSPECTION. The facts that the Port of London extends over such a wide area and that Foodstuffs may be landed at almost any point makes it impossible to divide the Staff strictly into Food Inspectors and Sanitary Inspectors. There are certain parts of the Docks where the nature and quantity of the Foodstuffs landed are such that a whole-time Food Inspector is essential, but there are many districts where the food inspection and sanitary inspection must be combined. For this reason every Sanitary Inspector in the Port of London is required to qualify as a Food Inspector, and at the present time every member of the Staff of Inspectors is qualified in both respects. So great are the food imports in London that it is obviously impossible for everything to come under inspection. At the same time, the control is greater than might at first appear possible, for Inspectors have not only the information contained in the Customs Bill of Entry at their disposal, but, from the fact that they are constantly on the Docks, they have many sources of information open to them, and they receive the assistance of Customs Officers and others. From experience also, they know what has proved consistently sound and what needs their careful attention. They recognise what is new, and therefore to be carefully examined. Above all, they receive every assistance from the importers, who do not wish to put food of even doubtful quality on the market. There is, however, another way in which a Port Sanitary Authority may act if, from their own observation or from reports received from other Sanitary Authorities, it appears necessary to exercise complete control over any particular class of imported food. All imports of such foods can be detained within the district of the Authority for examination by their Inspectors. Such action is from time to time taken, but in order to avoid complete dislocation of the trade concerned it is usual to allow consignments to leave the Docks, on the understanding that they will be held for examination by the Medical Officers of Health of the districts of destination, who must have previously expressed their willingness to receive and take responsibility for the inspection of the goods. This was the principle put into practice in regard to imported Mutton and Lamb during the latter part of 3928, and was continued until June, 1929. when the improvement resulting from the institution of examination in the countries of origin was so marked as to make it possible to reduce the routine examination to 10 per cent. 24 Importers realise that it is in their interests to attain a high standard of examination at the source, and, in addition, to have goods so prepared and packed as to facilitate examination here. Thus, Ox Tongues arrive dressed so as to have the lymphatic glands easily accessible. Pig carcases have the submaxillary glands incised and drawn forward in an exposed position, so that no difficulty is experienced in examining the carcases in the frozen state. Imported Offal is packed with a view to rapid inspection, as is also boneless Veal, in which care is taken to expose the serous membranes. As regards Canned Goods, a considerable proportion is submitted for examination by expert examiners, on behalf of the merchants. From experience, the Port Sanitary Authority have complete confidence in this examination, which is of great assistance to their Inspectors. When diseased or unsound food is discovered it is almost invariably voluntarilysurrendered, and it is very rare indeed that it is necessary for the Port Sanitary Authority to go through the formal procedure of seizure and condemnation by a Magistrate. The majority of Foodstuffs condemned as unfit for human consumption is not destroyed, but is used for some industrial purpose, such as the manufacture of poultry food, soap, grease, &c. In every case the Port Sanitary Authority obtain guarantees and require to be satisfied that there is no danger that such condemned food, when it leaves their district, will be sold elsewhere for human food. Thus it comes about that, though such vast quantities of food are imported, and the number of Inspectors is few, the amount of food which goes into consumption in an unsatisfactory innditinn is infinitesimal. (1) Action under the Public Health (Imported Food) Regulations, 1925, resulted in 1,743 tons 5 cwts. 8 qrs. 19 lbs. of unsound food- being destroyed or disposed of for industrial purposes. Tons. cwts. qrs. lbs. Boiling down (recovery of Fats, &c.) 390 6 3 22 Cattle and Poultry Foods 341 8 3 25 Distillation 5 6 2 9 Refining 166 5 3 5 Experiment (laboratory work) — 1 1 20 Exportation 449 5 1 16 Caffeine manufacture 17 18 3 27 Soap-making 7 16 3 25 Jam-making — 8 1 26 Fishing Bait 5 16 0 0 Removed to other districts 23 2 1 10 Confectionery — 7 2 13 Destroyed—Buried 280 13 0 23 „ —Burnt 54 7 0 22 Total weight 1,743 5 3 19 The following is the quantity destroyed in each Dock:— Tons. cwts. qrs. lbs. Boyal Albert Dock 111 7 3 21 Boyal Victoria Dock 1,034 17 2 4 King George V. Dock 95 2 1 25 East India Dock 34 0 0 13 West India Dock 214 10 0 8 Millwall Dock 14 17 1 21 Poplar Dock and Cold Store 22 3 3 13 Surrey Commercial Dock 72 6 2 15 London Dock 51 10 1 7 St. Katharine Dock 9 12 1 13 Eegent's Canal Dock 4 16 3 26 Tilbury Dock 78 0 0 21 Total weight 1,743 5 3 19 Tons. cwt qrs. lbs Approximate weight of goods destroyed during the year 1920 4,102 4 1 6 „ „ „ „ 1921 2,616 17 0 16 „ „ „ „ 1922 3,989 12 2 3 „ „ „ „ 1923 1,751 9 0 19 „ „ „ „ 1924 2,998 11 2 17 „ „ „ „ 1925 1,423 11 0 19 „ „ „ „ 1926 4,011 15 3 5 „ „ „ „ 1927 1,813 14 2 4 „ „ „ „1928 6,018 3 1 22 „ „ „ „ 1929 1,743 5 3 19 25 The Docks are divided into the following districts for the purposes of Food Inspection:— District. Inspector. Royal Albert Dock—North side J. H. Rolfe. Royal Victoria Dock—North side Royal Albert Dock—South side W. W. Burr. Royal Victoria Dock—South side King George V. Dock East India Dock West India Dock A. Garland. South West India Dock Millwall Dock Poplar Dock and Cold Store Regent's Canal Dock Surrey Commercial Dock London Dock W. J. Berry (W. G. Wetjen on sick leave) St. Katharine Dock Tilbury Dock F. J. Massie (H. R. Hopkins superannuated). River Thames Assistance as required. The number of detentions and seizures made during the year was 1,569. The number of seizures of Foodstuffs made by the individual Inspectors during the year was as follows:— Inspector Garland 206 „ Wetjen 37 „ Rolfe 473 „ Burr 185 „ Hopkins 16 Sanitary Inspectors doing temporary Food Inspection 652 1,569 The annual number of detentions and seizures since 1908 is as follows:— Year. No. of Seizures. Year. No. of Seizures. 1908 437 1919 449 1909 578 1920 634 1910 839 1921 586 1911 747 1922 932 1912 694 1923 848 1913 781 1924 992 1914 791 1925 1,196 1915 639 1926 1,620 1916 690 1927 1,369 1917 473 1928 1,436 1918 359 1929 1,569 Districts in which Foodstuffs were seized during the year:— Royal Albert Dock 412 Royal Victoria Dock 257 King George V. Dock 95 East India Dock 13 West India Dock 109 Millwall Dock 15 Surrey Commercial Dock 61 Poplar Dock and Cold Store 35 London Dock 402 St. Katharine Dock 56 Regent's Canal Dock 12 Tilbury Dock 97 River Thames 5 Total Seizures 1,569 The detention and control of Fats under the Public Health (Imported Food) Regulations, 1925, during the year was as follows:— No. of casks, &c., reported as imported into the district 36,904 No. of casks, &c., found to be officially certificated 269 No. of casks, &c., released to wharves under Notice of Exportation 15,193 No. of Exportation Notices served 499 No. of casks, &c., released for exportation 7,619 No. of casks, &c., released for soapmaking, &c 20,096 No. of casks, &c., in transit on through Bills of Lading 657 26 15,473 barrels of whale oil also arrived in the Port; this material was released. Tons. cwts. qrs. lbs. Beef—1,098 hinds, fores, &c. 8 17 3 4 Mutton and Lamb—21,652 carcases, pieces ex 1,878 carcases. 367 12 1 8 Mutton Legs—1 bag — — 2 10 Caseous Lymphadenitis.—Mutton and lamb from Australia, New Zealand and South America. The arrangements made for the control and examination of mutton and lamb remain in force. The following carcases were examined by your officers during the year Where from. Carcases examined. Carcases found to be Diseased. Carcases found to be wit bout Glands (included in Diseased). Australia 14,259 775 114 New Zealand 17,449 147 9 South America 192,428 3,831 267 Totals 224,136 4,753 390 Percentage found Diseased. Australia 5.4 New Zealand 0.8 South America 1.9 Tons. cwts. qrs. lbs. Veal—3 bags - 2 l 9 Pork—14 carcases and 14 bags - 11 l 3 Rabbits—1 crate - — 9 10 Hams—19 cases - 15 3 27 A careful examination was made of a percentage of pig carcases arriving in the district, the number of carcases examined being 2,260. Two carcases were found to be diseased. Actinomycosis in Ox Tongues.—A percentage examination was made of every consignment of ox tongues arriving in the district. 328 consignments were put into Dock Store, where a careful examination was made of some 50,946 tongues by your officers ; 468 tongues were found to be affected with Actinomycosis. Offal:— Tons, cwts. qrs. lbs. Ox Tongues—468 diseased, 32 unsound, 65 bags unsound 3 1 3 1 „ Cheeks—10 bags — 3 3 6 „ Skirts—42 bags 1 2 1 0 „ Hearts—5 bags — 2 1 21 „ Livers—97 bags 2 5 1 12 „ Tails—2 bags — 1 2 o o „ Kidneys—53 bags — 17 3 10 Mixed Ofi'al—71 bags 1 13 0 6 Bungs, Casings, &c.—3i casks, 712 loose — 18 0 11 Pancreas Glands—20 cases — 5 1 0 Lambs' Hearts—12 bags — 2 2 25 Lambs' Tongues—5 bags — 3 2 11 Pigs' Livers—5 bags — 3 3 0 Pigs' Hearts—1 bag — — 3 24 Sheep Hearts—16 bags — 4 2 0 Sheep Livers—273 bags 2 6 0 0 Tripe—7 bags — 3 2 2 Calf Kidneys—1 case — — 1 26 Calf Skirts—1 bag — — 1 14 Total weight 13 17 1 4 Tallow, &c.— Tons. cwts. qrs. lbs. 17 casks 7 17 2 25 27 Fish— Tons. cwts. qrs. lbs Anchovies—19 cases, 1 tin — 16 0 19 Sardines—2 cases, 1,035 tins — 6 3 10 Various—4 tubs — 1 1 0 Various (tinned)—1 case — — 3 20 Dried Fish—590 boxes 5 16 0 0 Total weight 7 1 0 21 Fruit— Tons. cwts. qrs. lbs. Bananas—9,137 packages 170 17 0 7 Mangoes—4 cases — — 3 14 Melons—20 cases 1 0 0 0 Oranges—11 cases — 7 1 12 Pears—5,643 cases 84 12 2 26 Dates—1,053 cases 27 13 1 0 Mirabelles—11 cases — 9 3 8 Currants—95 bags 3 4 3 17 Raisins—1 bag — — — 22 Sultanas—144 bags 2 11 3 25 Figs — — — 6 Prunes—1 bag — — 2 19 Muscatels—7 cases — 1 2 16 Mixed Fruits—105 cases 1 7 3 25 Total weight 292 8 2 1 Fruit (Tinned and Bottled)— Tons. cwts. qrs. lbs. Cherries—37 cases, 82 tins — 15 3 5 Grapes—16 tins — — 1 15 Gooseberries—220 cases, 75 tins 7 3 2 18 Tomatoes—15 cases, 440 tins 1 2 2 22 Various—49 cases, 307 tins 1 15 2 19 Fruit Pulp, &c.— Apricot—100 tins — 11 2 13 Black Currant—41 cases,12 tins 2 1 1 4 Blackberry—22 tins — — 1 16 Orange—11 cases, 66 tins — 14 3 8 Raspberry—5 casks — 15 0 0 Cherry—6 cases, 7 tins — 6 2 26 Strawberry—102 cases, 111 tins 3 5 1 20 Tomato Puree—266 tins — 15 0 2 Tomato Paste—2 cases, 61 tins — 5 1 12 Various—48 cases, 3 tins 2 7 1 21 Total weight 22 1 1 5 Vegetables— Tons. cwts. qrs. lbs Onions 3 15 2 0 Peas—108 bags 6 7 2 9 Beans 1 8 0 27 Lentils — — 1 4 Various—264 crates 3 0 0 0 Tinned Peas—166 cases, 1,080 tins 8 17 0 20 Tinned Vegetables (various)—73 cases, 383 tins 3 7 2 1 Total weight 26 16 1 5 Nuts— Tons. cwts. qrs. lbs. Almonds—18 bags — 18 1 25 Cashew Nuts — — — 26 Ground Nuts — 2 0 11 Mixed — 1 0 18 Total weight 1 1 3 24 28 Provisions, &c.— Tons. ovvts. qrs. lbs. Butter—1 case — — 2 0 Margarine—8 cases — 6 3 0 Cheese—366 cases 5 13 1 14 Cocoa—7 bags — 7 3 24 Confectionery (various)—148 cases 8 11 0 11 Condensed Milk—804 cases 16 17 2 14 Cream—85 cases — 7 2 13 Jam—36 cases — 18 0 0 Coffee—7 bales — 11 1 14 Tea—434 cases 14 15 2 27 Tea Sweepings 3 5 0 0 Yeast—40 cases 1 1 3 0 Sterilised Milk—2 cases — — 1 2 Milk Powder—23 cases 1 3 2 0 Cow's Milk—24 bottles — — 1 2 Evaporated Milk—501 cases 13 10 2 4 Biscuits—95 cases 7 5 3 11 Sugar—671 bags 47 14 0 8 Sugar Sweepings—1,345 bags 119 1 3 6 Total weight 241 13 0 10 Grain, &c.— Tons, cwts. qrs. lbs. Wheat 718 2 1 1 Barley — 13 0 18 Flour—90 bags 5 18 3 4 Maize 2 17 3 1 Rice 12 5 3 17 Oats — 11 2 10 Total weight 740 9 1 23 SUNDRIES Tons. cwts. qrs. lbs. Potted Paste—4 cases — 2 3 7 Marzipan Substitute—7 bags — 7 0 22 Squills — 1 0 19 Various—122 packages 11 7 0 6 Total weight 11 18 0 26 Official Certificates, recognised by the Ministry of Health, under the Public Health (Imported Food) Regulations, 1925 :— (1) In respect of Pork and other edible portions of the pig, Items (a) and (c) of Second Schedule Argentine Eepublic. Australia. Belgium. Brazil. Canada. Denmark. Esthonian Republic. Latvian Republic. Netherlands. New Zealand. Sweden. United States of iVmerica. Uruguayan Repbulic. Union of South Africa. (2) Item (b), Second Schedule, Lard, Dripping, Edible Tallow and similar rendered Fats:— Australia. Argentine Republic. Brazilian Republic. Canada. Denmark. Hong Kong. Italy. New Zealand. Netherlands. Sweden. Switzerland. United States of America. Uruguayan Republic. Smoked Sausage. On 29th November one of your Inspectors detained a consignment of smoked Sausages from Bremen, because there were on the casings a large number of dark red circular patches from one-eighth to one-quarter of an inch in diameter, and it appeared possible that these might have been produced by the larvse of a round worm, (Esophagostomum Columbianum, the cause of a condition known as "Pimply Gut," on account of which consignments of salted casings are from time to time condemned in the Port. 29 Specimens were sent for examination to the London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, and also to the Ministry of Health. The former replied that no evidence of infection with (Esophagostomum could be found. The latter forwarded their specimen to the British Museum, Natural History Branch, from whom the following very interesting reply was received:— "I have cultured various fungi from the skin of the smoked Sausage which you submitted to this Department for examination. 'The small dark red spots are apparently caused by the fungus Aspergillus candidus. The mycelial threads of the fungus form a pad, which can be seen on sectioning the darkened skin. In no case has penetration of the skin taken place. A similar spot is produced after eight to ten days' growth after inoculation. "I have no record of any human or animal complaint due to this fungus, and have not been able to trace any record of the production of deleterious substances during its growth on organic material." It seems desirable to record the fact that these spots on smoked Sausage are not due to an animal parasite, but to a harmless mould, in order that the information may come to the notice of other Medical Officers of Health and Food Inspectors. PUBLIC HEALTH (IMPORTED FOOD) REGULATIONS, 1925. In accordance with Article 11 (4) of the above-mentioned Regulations, Notices were served for the exportation of the following material:— Description and Quantity of Meat and Fats. Where from. Number of Notices served. 5,810 casks Tallow, &c Australia 69 21,290 „ „ New Zealand 415 2,105 „ „ South America 7 311 „ „ Other ports 8 106 cases Pork Legs South America 5 10 ,, ,, Loins 49 „ Pigs' Kidneys 78 ,, „ Livers 5 ,, Pork Fat Backs 189 bags Pigs' Livers New Zealand 1 „ ,, Hearts 2 23 „ „ Kidneys - 16 „ „ Tongues 506 PUBLIC HEALTH (IMPORTED MILK) REGULATIONS, 1926. No importation of milk requiring action under these Regulations was reported during the year. PUBLIC HEALTH (PRESERVATIVES, &c., IN FOOD) REGULATIONS, 1925 TO 1927. For action under these Regulations, reference is directed to the list of foodstuffs submitted for analysis. FERTILISERS AND FEEDING STUFFS ACT, 1926. No samples were taken under this Act during the year. (2) SHELLFISH. PUBLIC HEALTH (SHELLFISH) REGULATIONS, 1915. ORDERS OF NOVEMBER, 1916. The Shellfish beds, for which orders for relaying of shellfish for human food and for efficient sterilization of cockles and winkles have been made, "reach from Canvey Island on the West to N. Shoebury on the East. No case of Infectious Disease attributed to shellfish from these beds has been notified to your Medical Officer during the year. 30 (3) SAMPLES OF FOOD EXAMINED DURING THE YEAR. (a) Bacteriologist— Date. 1929. Sample. Analyst's Report. Action taken. Jan. 25 Potted Meat "I have not finished examining the pot of partridge paste you sent yesterday, and I shall not be able to report finally till the beginning of next week, as I am feeding mice on it. Meanwhile you may like to know that I can find nothing amiss with it. There is a little gas in the crevices, and that is all. On opening, I find the meat perfectly sweet, normal to taste and smell, and sterile on aerobic culture on agar plates and in broth. Stained films show no micro-organisms. Two mice fed exclusively on the meat since yesterday are to-day normal, but I must give them till Monday, and the anaerobic cultures must wait till then before I examine them. "It will be interesting if you can find out why the stuff was returned." Consignment released for examination purposes only. „ 29 "I can now add to my first report the fact that the material is not absolutely sterile, but contains an anaerobic bacillus (probably as spores). All aerobic cultures—four in number— show no sign of any growth—but both the tubes of chopped meat medium (designed for anaerobic growth) showed yesterday growth of a spore-bearing anaerobe and had a somewhat offensive smell. It would involve a good deal of time and trouble to determine the species, though 1 could doubtless do it if you thought it worth while. But there is one species which it is vital to exclude, and that is B. botulinus. This, I think, I have done. The two mice fed exclusively on the paste for two days have remained in good health, though, in addition, each received on the fourth day a subcutaneous injection of the anaerobic chopped meat broth culture. Yesterday I gave a guinea-pig an injection of 1 c.cm. of this same culture. It is perfectly well to-day. The culture was four days old, and there had been ample time for the formation of toxin. The toxin is so potent, and the dose was so large, that, had it been present, serious results must have ensiled inside 24 hours. There is thus a strong presumption that the anaerobic is not B. botulinus, but I shall watch the animals for another day or two. "Mv reading of the matter is this: A few spores of some anaerobe capable of breaking down protein, escaped destruction in sterilizing the paste. Slight chemical changes have since occurred—hence the gas bubbles in the crevices in the paste, but no change (in the pot sent to me) sufficient to cause smell or unpleasant taste. "Of course, other samples, taken abroad, may have been much worse and led to the rejection of the consignment." Feb. 11 Black Currant Pulp. "I opened this tin on February 8th. It was, as you say, blown, but there was not much pressure of gas inside. The contents appeared to me good, and I could detect nothing abnormal in smell or taste. The material was intensely acid. It is difficult to determine the exact p H by colorimetric methods in such deeply-coloured material, but as far as I can determine it is between p H 3 and 4, at which acidity I conceive that few pathogenic organisms could grow. "I found no yeasts and no obvious bacteria in stained films, and cultures have remained sterile (three days), both aerobic and anaerobic. I do not think there could be any objection to the use of this pulp for making jam." Consignment released. Aug. 30 Cream The tin was opened under aseptic conditions. The contents had separated into three elements: almost clear yellow fat, curd-like semi-solid material and a thin milky fluid. Reaction —faintly acid (PH—6-2). Wet Films: Besides fat globules, the material contains masses of acicular crystals having a radial arrangement, the physical properties of which show that they are either neutral fats or fatty acids. Stained Films (Gram & Ziel Neelsen): No micro-organisms are distinguishable. Cultures were made as follows:— Shake cultures from decimal dilutions in 1. Agar at 37° C. 2. Gelatin at 20° C. In milk (aerobic and anaerobic) at 37° and 20°. In meat broth. In Brilliant Green broth. All these cultures were sterile. Animal Experiment: Three mice were fed on liberal amounts of the material for three days. They have developed no Consignmentreleased for manufacturing purposes. 31 Date. Sample. Analyst's Report. Action taken. 19-29. signs of disease. Conclusions: The material is free from bacteria : and it appears improbable that its condition is due to bacterial action. The destruction of the emulsion, with the deposition of fat in a crystalline form, which is what has apparently taken place, could have been caused by freezing, as is suggested, or by excessive heating during sterilisation. There is no objection, other than its unpalatable and probably indigestible character, to its use as food. Dec. 5 Smoked Sausage No evidence of resophagostomum found in the sausage skin. (See special article on page 28.) Consignment released. (b) Analyst— Feb. 11 Orange No preservatives could be detected Consignment released. Mar. 14 „ (2) „ „ 99 „ 18 „ (2) „ „ 99 „ 22 „ (2) „ „ 99 April 10 „ (2) „ „ 94 May 17 Tinned Peas No preservatives could be detected. No prohibited colours, metallic or organic, and no aniline dye were present. The tin on opening evolved a small amount of gas which was non-inflammable and did not contain sulphuretted hydrogen. The contents of the tin had no objectionable odour. A trace of alcohol was present. „ July 9 Strawberries in Water. Sulphur Dioxide 1,674 parts per million, equivalent to 0.1674 %. The determination was made on a "mash" of the water and strawberries as a whole. 99 Aug. 29 Cream Fat derived from milk 32.3 %. No preservatives could be detected. The fat was completely separated from the cream and the casein, &c., was in a flaky condition. I do not see any reason why the cream should not be used for the purpose you mention. The above condition may have been due to the extreme cold. The tin was very faintly discoloured. 99 Sept. 9 Liquid Egg I am of the opinion that the sample was free from preservatives, and contained only constituents normal to liquid egg. 99 „ 9 Vegetable Fat No preservatives could be detected 99 Oct. 10 Sardines in Brine Only a small amount of tin (0.415 grains per lb.) could be detected in the sample. „ TRAINING SHIPS. The Training Ships enjoyed a remarkable freedom from infectious sickness during the year. On the "CornAvail" the Schick testing of new boys was continued, the susceptibles being subsequently immunised. In this work the Wellcome Physiological Research Laboratories again gave invaluable assistance. Dr. O'Brien sent two of his staff to carry out the testing and reading the reactions. The following cases of Infectious Disease were reported during the year:— Name of Vessel. Erysipelas. Pneumonia. Chicken-pox. Total. " Arethusa " — — 3 3 " Cornwall" — — — — " Exmouth " 1 1 — 2 " Warspite " — — - - " Worcester " — — — — " Stork " — — — Totals 1 1 3 5 32 DANGEROUS DRUGS. On the 16th September your Medical Officer certified that the Master of the ss. " Georgian " was authorised to purchase and be in possession of 24 x 0-25 grain tablets of morphine for the use of the ship until it next reaches its home port. The certificate was issued under the Dangerous Drugs (No. 3) Regulations, 1923, amending the Dangerous Drugs Regulations, 1921, Regulation 1-5 of which is as follows :— " If a foreign ship in any port in Great Britain requires to obtain a supply of any of the drugs in order to complete the necessary equipment of the ship, the Master of the ship is authorised to purchase and be in possession of such quantity of any of the drugs as may be certified by the Medical Officer of Health of the Port where the ship is (or in his absence by the Assistant Medical Officer of Health of the Port) to be necessary for the purpose, the quantity not to exceed what is required for the use of the ship until it next reaches its home port. The certificate given by the Medical Officer or Assistant Medical Officer of Health of the Port shall be marked by the supplier with the date of the supply and shall be retained by him and kept available for inspection." PUBLIC HEALTH (DERATISATION OF SHIPS) REGULATIONS, 1929. These Regulations come into operation on 1st January, 1930, and will put into effect the terms of Article 28 of the International Sanitary Convention, 1926. They refer only to those ports which are authorised by the Minister of Health to issue Deratisation and Deratisation Exemption Certificates, and which have been notified to other countries through the Office International d'Hvgiene Publique as approved for this purpose. Every vessel arriving from foreign countries at an approved port will be required to produce a valid certificate of deratisation or of exemption from deratisation—-that is to say, a certificate issued at an approved port at home or abroad within, the previous six months or, in the case of a vessel proceeding to a home port, within seven months. If no valid certificate is produced, the vessel must be inspected as to the prevalence of rats on board. If the Medical Officer of Health is satisfied; that there are very few or no rats in the ship, a Deratisation Exemption Certificate must be issued. But if there are more than a minimum number of rats on board, the vessel must be deratised, and when this has been done to the satisfaction of the Medical Officer of Health he must issue a Deratisation Certificate. Provision is also made for the inspection of vessels at the request of the Master or Owner and for the issue of the appropriate certificates. Certificates must be in the form prescribed by the Minister of Health, to whom a copy of every certificate must be sent. The Owner or Master of the ship must pay to the Port Sanitary Authority such fee for the inspection of his ship and the issue of the appropriate certificate as the Authority may, with the approval of the Minister, require. Note.—For the past year your Officers have been carrying out the inspection of ships and the issue of Certificates under Article 28 of the International Sanitary Convention, but only at the request of the Owners or Master of vessels sailing to countries where the production of a valid certificate of deratisation or exemption from deratisation is already compulsory. From 1st January, 1930, all foreign-going ships arriving in approved ports in this country will be required to be in possession of a valid certificate. This will mean more inspections and the issue of more certificates. It is anticipated that the staff already appointed for the purpose will be sufficient for the work of inspection, though it is not possible to forecast to what extent Owners or Masters will elect to obtain the necessary certificates in the Port of London. But it appears highly probable that an addition to the clerical staff will be necessary. The forms of certificate are elaborate and need very careful preparation. Moreover, it will be necessary to keep records which will enable the dates and results of previous inspections to be consulted easily and quickly. In order to prevent difficulties arising from the fact that many Shipping Companies would probably not be acquainted with the Regulations, your Medical Officer circulated 33 the following Letter to all Shipowners, Agents and Brokers in the Port on 12th December:— 12th December, 1929. Dear Sirs, PUBLIC HEALTH (DERATISATION OP SHIPS) REGULATIONS, 1929. I beg to draw your attention to the above Regulations, which come into operation on 1st January, 1930, and to certain local arrangements designed to enable the Port of London Sanitary Authority to carry out their responsibilities with the minimum of delay and inconvenience to shipping. From 1st January, 1930, every vessel arriving in the Port of London from a foreign port will be required to produce a valid certificate of deratisation or exemption from deratisation granted in conformity with Article 28 of the International Sanitary Convention, 1926. A valid certificate means a certificate not more than six months old issued in the approved international form at a port in the United Kingdom or abroad which has been authorised to issue such certificates by the Government of the country in which such port is situated. If no valid certificate is produced, an officer of the Port of London Sanitary Authority will inspect the vessel. If he finds little or no evidence of rats on board, a Deratisation Exemption Certificate will be issued by this Authority at a charge of £2 2s., which will include the cost of inspection. If the officer is of the opinion that there are more than a very few rats on board, the vessel must be deratised to the satisfaction of the Port of London Sanitary Authority, who will then issue a Deratisation Certificate at a charge of £2 2s., which will include the cost of inspection and the supervision of deratisation, but not of the actual process of deratisation, which may be carried out by any approved private company under the supervision of the Port Sanitary Authority, but at the expense of the ship. The Port of London Sanitary Authority will recognise Certificates of Exemption or Deratisation issued at approved ports abroad. But in exceptional circumstances, where there is grave and imminent risk of the importation of rat plague, deratisation of a ship may be required in spite of the fact that a valid certificate has been produced. When such exceptional circumstances exist, they will be notified in writing to the Master of the ship concerned. You will appreciate that the Certificates issued in the Port of London will be liable to be checked abroad. It is, therefore, of the highest importance that every opportunity should be given to the officers of the Port Sanitary Authority to form an accurate opinion as to the degree of ratinfestation of the ships they are called upon to examine, otherwise the Port Sanitary Authority may unwittingly issue certificates which do not represent the true condition of the ships, and which may bring the name of this Authority into discredit abroad, with unhappy consequences to London Shipping interests. I have, therefore, to request that:— (1) When a first issue or renewal of a certificate is required, application for inspection should be made to this office as soon as possible after the ship arrives in the Port of London and at least 24 hours before the discharge of cargo is completed. (2) Evidence of rats shall not be deliberately removed within 48 hours prior to the visit of the inspector. Such action will inevitably cause delay in the issue of the appropriate certificate, and may result in a certificate of exemption from deratisation being refused on the grounds that the inspecting officer cannot give an opinion as to the number of rats on board. (3) Your officers both ashore and afloat shall be instructed that they must not withhold relevant information from, and must afford every facility to, the inspecting officers of the Port Sanitary Authority. (4) Any certificates of Exemption or Deratisation which your vessels may hold shall be kept on board and be available at any reasonable time for inspection by an officer of the Port Sanitary Authority. (5) Attention should be paid to preventing rats gaining access to your ships while they are lying in any port, to the elimination of rat-harbourage, the closing of rat runs, trapping, the keeping of cats and every other means of keeping down to a minimum the number of rats on board, as thus only can your ships be so maintained as to entitle them to Exemption Certificates. Officers of the Port Sanitary Authority will willingly help with advice on rat-proofing. The Port Sanitary Authority desire to discharge their International obligations faithfully and at the same time to avoid any unnecessary delay and inconvenience to shipping, and they feel sure they can count upon your close co-operation. Copies of the Public Health (Deratisation of Ships'* Regulations, 1929, can be obtained (price Id.) from His Majesty's Stationery Office, Adastral House, Kingsway, W.C. 3, or through any bookseller. Yours faithfully, CHAS. F. WHITE, Medical Officer of Health, Port of London. 34 The demand for further copies of this Letter for transmission to Shipowners on the Continent and to the Masters of ships was so great that it was necessary to have the Letter printed. About 600 copies were sent out, and* the result was an immediate request for Certificates. SMALL-POX CONTACTS PROCEEDING ABROAD. Ministry of Health Circular, 1,021, date 8th July, 1929. When persons who have been in direct contact with cases of Small-pox intend to proceed to destinations abroad before the incubation period of the disease has elapsed, it is desirable that the appropriate Public Health Authorities of the country to which such persons are proceeding should be notified, in order that they may be kept under medical supervision for the necessary period. The Ministry of Health, therefore, request to be supplied with the following particulars referring to such contacts :— (а) Full name and address. (б) Last probable date of exposure to infection. (c) Address of destination abroad. (d) Intended date of arrival at address abroad. (e) Probable duration of stay abroad. (/) Vaccinal condition. The Ministry of Health will forward the information to the appropriate Public Health Authority abroad. ALIENS ORDER, 1920. Medical Inspection of Aliens. The arrival of aliens in the Port of London is fairly constant, the principal sources being:— From Dunkirk 1 vessel daily. ,, Rotterdam 1 ,, ,, ,, Ostend and Antwerp Exceeding 1 daily. ,, Gothenburg 2 vessels weekly. ,, Russia and Danzig Free State 2 ,, „ Other pots Severn! weeklv. MEDICAL INSPECTION OF ALIENS FOR THE YEAR ENDED 31st DECEMBER, 1929. Total number of Aliens arriving at the Port, including those in transit and transmigrants but excluding Alien Seamen. No. of temporary visitors, i.e., Aliens whose stay in this country will not exceed 3 months. No. of Aliens who intend to settle permanently or remain in this country for more than 3 months. Aliens in Transit. Transmigrants. (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) Total Number. No. subjected to Medical Inspection.* Total Number. N umber subjected to Medical Examination .† Number of Certificates issued. Total Number. Number subjected to Medical Examination.† Number of Certificates issued. Total Number. N umber subjected to M edical Examination.! Number of Certificates issued. Total Number. Number subjected to Medical Exami nation.† 46,078 44,307 22,732 296 2 4,489 4,489 — 2,690 577 12 16,162 16,162 * The term "Inspection" relates to the preliminary inspection of Aliens as they pass before the Medical Inspector. fThe term "Medical Examination" relates to detailed Medical Examination. PARTICULARS RELATING TO THE DETAILED EXAMINATION OF ALIENS. 6. Aliens, who were subjected to detailed medical examination, and were not certified by Medical Inspector 21,510 7. Number of each of the following certificates issued by the Medical Inspector of Aliens:— (a) Certificate that an Alien is a lunatic, idiot or mentally deficient (ib) Certificate that, for medical reasons, it is undesirable that an Alien should be permitted to land (Gonorrhoea 1, Syphilis 1) 2 2 (c) Certificate that an Alien is suffering from some disease, defect or deformity which may interfere with his capacity to support himself or his dependants 3 (d) Certificate that an Alien is suffering from one of the acute infectious diseases 2 (e) Certificate that for the purposes of an adequate medical examination it is necessary for the Alien to land in order that he may be examined ashore - 35 TRANSMIGRANTS. 8. Number of Certificates of the cleansing of verminous transmigrants given by the Medical Inspector of Aliens to the Immigration Officer — 9. Number of Medical Certificates in respect of transmigrants suffering from Trachoma, Favus, &c., given to the Immigration Officer (Trachoma 1, Scabies 4, Varicella 3, Measles 11, Dysentery 3, Pediculosis 1) 23 PARTICULARS RELATING TO ALIEN TRAFFIC. 10. Total number of passenger vessels carrying Aliens which arrived during the year 1,167 Number of passenger vessels dealt with by the Medical Inspector of Aliens 1,167 11. Total number of cargo vessels carrying Alien passengers which arrived during the year 208 Number of cargo vessels dealt with by the Medical Inspector of Aliens 208 12. Any other vessels in connection with which the Medical Inspector has had to take action in regard to Aliens — GRAVESEND SEWAGE DISPOSAL WORKS—PUBLIC INQUIRY. In accordance with the Resolution of your Worshipful Committee, the Public Inquiry held at the Town Hall, Gravesend, into an application for sanction to borrow £2,000 for extension of the Gravesend Sewage Works, was attended by your Medical Officer and Mr. Earle, of the City Solicitor's Department, on 12th February, 1929. Your Medical Officer had an opportunity of visiting the Sewage Works. The method of treatment is, briefly, as follows: The crude sewage, after screening, passes into a series of settling or sedimentation tanks, through which it takes some 12 or 13 hours to flow. The liquid effluent from these tanks passes into the River without further treatment. The sludge which collects in the tanks is periodically run off into drying beds, of which there are six. These beds are under-drained, and drying of the sludge takes place partly by the draining off of the liquid and partly by evaporation. The rapidity of drying depends, of course, on weather conditions. The dried sludge is dug out and tipped in a dump at the Eastern end of the works. At certain seasons of the year farmers cart the dried sludge away for manure, but at other times there is a large accumulation on the dump. The quiescent sludge on the beds does not give rise to much smell, but when it is being dug out and tipped on the dump a stench arises. The drier the sludge the less the smell. At the present time the volume of sewage is so great in proportion to the area of the beds that emptying is necessary before the sludge has dried sufficiently, and the object of the Loan is to construct six more drying beds similar in size to the existing ones. Fear was expressed that the doubling of the area of sludge exposed would increase the nuisance from smell. But it was contended that the principal nuisance arose from the emptying of imperfectly dried beds, and that the addition of six more beds, by making more satisfactory drying possible, and by reducing the frequency of emptying, would tend to reduce the nuisance. Mr. A. J. Martin, an engineer of great experience in sewage disposal, who appeared on behalf the Strood Rural District Council, opposing the application, said that, in his opinion, the addition of further sludge-drying beds could not increase, and would probably to some extent decrease, the existing nuisance, but considered that the provision of sludge-digestion tanks would have been a more satisfactory method of treatment. The Inspector of the Ministry of Health appointed to hold the Inquiry noted the complaints of your Representatives, but it appears that the present proposals cannot make matters any worse, and may result in some improvement. It was revealed that, within about twelve months' time, as more and more of the town of Gravesend is taken off the cesspool system and put on to the sewage system, the Corporation of the Borough will have to consider the whole question of their Sewage Disposal Works, which are only designed to deal with the sewage of a population of 20,000, whereas the population of Gravesend is approximately 32,000. They will then need a further Loan, and your Worshipful Committee will be able to press for the installation of a method of treatment which will not cause nuisance to residents in the vicinity. 36 LEGAL PROCEEDINGS. Date. Name of Vessel. Ofienee. Police Court. Result. 1929. April 9 Ltr. "Tay" Carrying an offensive cargo, to wit, house refuse, not properly and securely,, covered so as to prevent any nuisance arising therefrom. Tower Bridge 20s. fine on each summons and £1 Is. costs on first summons. Ltr. "Derg" Ltr. "Celt" Ltr. "Achilles" „ 11 Ba. "Lawyer" Greenwich 40s. fine on each summons and £2 2s. costs on first summons. Ba. "Burmese" Ba. "Mohican" Ba. "Windermere" May 7 ss. "Export" Failure to comply with the terms of a Statutory notice served, requiring the abatement of a smoke nuisance and the prevention of a recurrence of same. Tower Bridge Fine 40s. Costs £2 2s. Abatement and Prohibition Order issued. 7 ss. " London Shipper" „ „ „ Fine 40s. Costs £2 2s. BYE-LAWS—OFFENSIVE CARGOES Twenty cases of infringement of the above-mentioned Byelaws were reported during the period covered by this Report. Written notices were sent to the owners of the barges:— Date. 1920. Name of Vessel. Owner. Infringement. Jan. 30 Ltr. "Teaser" Messrs. W. R. Cunis, Ltd. Carrying an offensive cargo, to wit, dustbin refuse, not properly and securely covered so as to prevent any nuisance arising therefrom and loaded above the coamings. Feb. 1 Ltr. "Octavia" Messrs. Hudson, Ltd. Carrying an offensive cargo, to wit, dustbin refuse, dock and warehouse sweepings, not properly and securely covered so as to prevent any nuisance arising therefrom and loaded above the coamings. „ 1 Ltr. "Negro" Messrs. Cory Lighterage, Ltd. Carrying an offensive cargo, to wit, house refuse, not properly and securely covered and loaded about three feet above the coamings. „ 1 Ltr. "Dane " „ „ „ „ „ „ „ 20 Ltr. "Celt" „ „ Carrying an offensive cargo, to wit, house refuse, not properly and securely covered so as to prevent any nuisance arising therefrom. „ 20 Ltr. "Tay" „ „ „ „ „ „ „ 20 Ltr. "Achilles" „ „ „ „ „ „ „ 20 Ltr. "Dery" „ „ „ „ „ „ „ 21 Ltr. "Ventura" C. Burley, Ltd „ „ „ „ „ 21 Ltr. "Madras" Tilbury Coaling Co., Ltd. Carrying an offensive cargo, to wit, ashes and ship's refuse, not properly and securely covered so as to prevent any nuisance arising therefrom. „ 27 s.b. "Our Boys" C. Burley, Ltd Carrying an offensive cargo, to wit, not properly and securely covered so as to prevent any nuisance arising therefrom, and loaded to a height of about three feet above the coamings. 37 Bye-Laws—Offensive Cargoes (continued). Date. 1929. Name of Vessel. Owner. Infringement. Mar. 20 s.b. "Eliza" . T. E. Ward Carrying an offensive cargo, to wit, not properly and securely covered so as to prevent any nuisance arising therefrom. „ 20 Ltr. "Aralia" . Flower & Everett „ „ „ „ „20 Ltr. "Myrtle" „ „ „ „ „ „ 20 s.b. "Our Boys" . C. Burley, Ltd Carrying an offensive cargo, to wit, house refuse, which was totally uncovered. „ 22 Ltr. "Beverley" Hudsons, Ltd Carrying an offensive cargo, to wit, dock and ship refuse, not properly and securely covered so as to prevent any nuisance arising therefrom, and remaining in the district for a longer period than forty-eight hours. „ 26 Ltr. "Air" W. R. Cunis, Ltd. Carrying an offensive cargo, to wit, house refuse totally uncovered and loaded to a height of about five feet above the coamings. April 16 s.b. "Muriel" . Wm. H. Howlett Carrying an offensive cargo, to wit, house refuse uncovered and loaded above the coamings. June 20 Ltr. "Air" W. R. Cunis, Ltd. Loaded with an offensive cargo, to wit, trade and house refuse, not properly and securely covered so as to prevent any nuisance arising therefrom and loaded to a height of about five feet above the coamings. Sept. 16 Ltr. "Joan" „ „ „ „ Loaded with an offensive cargo, to wit, trade and house refuse, which was not properly and securely covered so as to prevent any nuisance arising therefrom. CANAL BOATS ACTS. In accordance with Section 3 of the Canal Boats Act, 1884, I beg to present herewith the Annual Report on the working of the Canal Boats Acts and Regulations within the district of the Port of London Sanitary Authority during the year ended 31st December, 1929. The Acts and Regulations apply within the whole of the district under the jurisdiction of the Port of London Sanitary Authority, including the River and Docks, as a " canal," for the purposes of the Act, " includes any river, inland navigation, lake, or water being within the body of a county, whether it is or not within the ebb and flow of the tide." The navigation, in addition to the enclosed Docks, includes the following navigable tributary waters and creeks of the River Thames:— On the right bank— From Teddington downwards :— Wandsworth Creek (River Wandle). Hay's Dock St. Saviour's Dock. Part of the Grand Surrey Canal within the Surrey Commercial Dock. Deadman's Dock. Deptford Creek (River Ravensbourne). Dartford Creek (Rivers Cray and Darenth). The entrance to Gravesend Canal. Cliffe Creek. Yantlet and Coalmouth Creeks. Part of the River Medway, and of the Swale. On the left bank— From Teddington downwards :— The entrance of the River Brent. Hammersmith Creek. Chelsea Dock. Grosvenor Dock. Limekiln Creek. Bow Creek (River Lea). Barking Creek (River Roding). Rainham Creek (River Ingrebourne). Mucking Creek. Thames Haven. Hole Haven. Havengore Creek. River Roach as far as Rochford. 38 RIVER, The whole of this area is divided into three districts, known as the Upper, Middle and Lower, each district being in charge of an Inspector, as follows:— Upper District Teddington to Greenwich Acting Inspector Edwards, £5 per [week. Middle District Greenwich to Erith Ditto, ditto. Lower District Erith to seaward limits of the Port of London (including part of the Eiver Medway). Inspector Clifford, £220 per annum. The Docks are divided into four districts, known as the Central, Eastern, Western and the Gravesend District;— Central District West India Dock Inspector Elward, £320 per annum. South West India Dock Poplar Dock Millwall Dock Eastern District Royal Victoria Dock Inspector Gray, £230 per annum. Inspector Lambe, £320 per annum. East India Dock Royal Albert Dock King George V. Dock Western District London Dock Inspector Coombe, £210 per annum. Inspector Johnson, £200 per annum St. Katharine Dock Regent's Dock Surrey Commercial Dock Gravesend District Tilbury Dock Inspector Massie, £320 per annum. Left Shore, from Purfleet down Right Shore, from Erith down The total number of inspections for the year was 127, representing a nett number of 82 boats. The remainder—45—represents repeated visits by Inspectors of this Authority. The number of boats not conforming to the Acts and Regulations was 24 (inspected on 27 occasions), or 2.1-26 of the total inspections, the percentage for the previous five vears being 43-29 per cent. New Boats Registered. 1929. Mar. 8 *" Bronze " Registered, Port of London, No. 531 June 14 *" Crimson " „ „ „ No. 532 Oct. 5 *" Drab " „ „ „ No. 533 „ 5 *" Hope " „ „ „ No. 534 „ 5 *" Josephine " „ „ „ No. 535 Nov. 8 *" Stanley " „ „ „ No. 536 Dec. 13 *" Emerald " „ „ „ No. 537 With reference to the various infringements of the Act reported :— Notification of Change of Master. Nil. Absence of Certificate of Registration. May 9 * "Sarah " Registered, Brentford, No. 472 Aug. 16 * "Sarah " „ „ No. 472 Nov 7 "Lily" „ (?) „ 7 "Stour" „ Uxbridge, No. 419 Dec. 2 "Bluejacket" „ Berkhampf stead, No. 478 Certificate not Identifying Owner with Boat. May 3 "Trent" Registered, Uxbridge, No. 392 Marking. Oct. 24 "Victor" Registered, Uxbridge, No. 470 Nov. 7 "Lily" „ (?) 39 Overcrowding. Nil. Females over Age. Nil. Cleanliness. Feb. 26 ''Henley" Registered, Brentford, No. 410 Ventilation. Jan. 8 "Tay" Registered, Brentford. No. 470 Dilapidation. Feb. 26 ''Henley" Registered, Brentford, No. 410 April 17 *"Ada" „ Berkhamps ead, No. 404 „ 19 "Humber" „ Brentford, No. 415 Oct. 24 "Providence" „ Tring, No. 99 Nov. 7 "Lily" „ (?) Painting. Feb. 26 '' Henley " Registered, Brentford, No. 410 April 19 '' Humber " „ „ No. 415 July 8 *" Unity " „ Port of Lc ndon, No. 427 Oct. 21 *" Hilton " „ Ware, No. 53 „ 24 '' Providence " „ Tring, No. 99 Removal of Bilge Water. Nil. Provision of Water Case. Nil. Notification of Infectious Disease. Nil. Admittance of Inspector. No difficulty was experienced in regard to the visits of Inspectors of this Authority. Legal Proceedings. Nil. Double Bulkheads.—There was no infringement with regard to the condition of these. No boat was detained for cleansing. On 31st December, 1929, there were 314 boats on the Register :— Propelled by Tugs and Oars 292 ,, ,, Steam 15 ,, ,, Motors 7 * Information received that infringement has been remedied. Seven boats were registered during 1929. 40 TABLE OF CANAL BOATS CARRYING CHILDREN ON BOARD. Year. No. of Boats. No. of Boats with Children. No. of Children. Average No. of Children per Boat. Percentage of Boats with Children 1920 89 19 81 4.26 21.34 1921 65 14 48 3.42 21.53 1922 86 20 108 5.40 23.25 1923 199 24 81 3.37 12.06 1924 164 27 73 3.04 ±16.46 1925 279 67 168 2.50 24.01 1926 120 31 157 5.06 25.08 1927 83 19 66 3.04 22.89 1928 79 15 66 4.15 18.98 1929 82 20 96 4.80 24.39 I have the honour to be, Gentlemen, Your obedient Servant, CHAS. F. WHITE, Medical Officer of Health, Port of London. 41 SUMMARY OF CANAL BOATS FOR THE YEARS ENDED 31ST DECEMBERS, 1929 Jan. Feb. March. April. May. June. July. Aug. Sept. Oct. Nov. Dec. TOTAL 1924. Total for Years 1925. 1926. 1927. 1928. New boats registered - - 1 - - 1 - - - 3 1 1 7 6 4 7 9 7 Registration owing to structural alteration - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - Registration for other purposes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - No. of Inspections 6 9 14 8 8 8 5 14 14 15 21 5 127 164 279 222 136 128 Conforming to Acts and Regulations 5 7 14 6 4 7 3 12 13 11 17 4 103 96 194 185 92 76 Infringements in respect to:— Registration - 1 - - 1 - 1 1 1 1 1 - 7 14 8 9 10 8 Notification of change of Master - - - - - - - - - - - - - - Absence of Certificate - — - — 1 - — 1 - — 2 1 5 11 29 7 17 10 Certificate not identifying owner with boat - - - - 1 - - - - - - - 1 2 9 - 1 6 Marking, &c. - - - - - - - - - 1 1 - 2 16 2 3 7 12 Overcrowding - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 1 1 - 1 Partition separating sexes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - Males over age - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - Females over age - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 1 3 - - Cleanliness - 1 - - - - - - - - - - 1 15 7 2 3 - Painting - 1 - 1 - - 1 - - 2 - - 5 6 4 6 2 10 Ventilation 1 - - - - - - - - - - - 1 2 - - - 3 Dilapidation - 1 - 2 - - - - - 1 1 - 5 36 36 21 21 21 Removal of bilge water - - - - - - - - - - - - - 2 4 - - - Without pump - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - Refusal to admit Inspector - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - No proper water vessel - - - - - - - - - - - - - 10 3 1 2 - Double bulkheads - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - Notification of infectious disease - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 1 - - Detained for cleansing Proceedings taken - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 1 Cautions given 1 1 - 2 1 - 1 - 3 2 - 11 52 66 37 32 43 „ attended to 1 3 4 2 4 3 — 3 2 5 2 3 32 25 52 19 28 20 Total registered with the Port Sanitary Authority since 1887 537 Cancelled 223 Actual number on Register, 31st December, 1929 314 Registered for 461 persons. Carrying—Males 145. Females 42. Children 96. 42 APPENDIX I. MEDICAL INSPECTION. From 1st January to 81st December, 1929. (a) Gravesend. Jan. Feb. Marcli A pril May June July August Sept. Oct. Nov. Dec Total. No. Medically Inspected 163 119 104 147 136 138 176 154 173 131 134 123 1,698 No. of Passengers .3,204 2,185 3,114 4,336 7,101 7,376 13,576 14,093 6,005 4,841 3,619 3,600 73,050 No. of Crews 4,694 3,430 3,977 4,137 5,575 3,418 6,467 4,470 6,174 3,554 3,782 4,145 53,823 No. of Foreign Arrivals 1,029 729 902 988 1,106 1,077 1,154 1,130 1,094 1,069 964 974 12,216 (b) Sheerness. Jan. Feb. March April May J une July August Sept. Oct. Nov. Dec. Total- No. Medically Inspected 17 9 15 18 20 23 34 25 30 28 23 12 254 No. of Passengers - - - - - - - - - - - - - No. of Crews 326 191 352 381 390 438 710 506 576 597 475 231 5,173 No. of Foreign Arrivals 43 24 48 54 60 42 53 26 33 29 39 36 487 APPENDIX II. Infectious Disease. Disease. 1920. 1921. 1922. 1923. 1924. 1925. 1926. 1927. 1928. Mean Annual No. for 10 years ending 31st Dec., 1929. 1929. (a) Cases Reported : Cholera (including suspected cases) 10 — 1 3 1 — 26 6 5 5.4 2 Yellow Fever (ditto) 2 — — — — — 2 — — .4 — Plague (ditto) 6 8 9 4 1 3 1 — 2 3.5 1 Small-pox 27 9 17 12 17 27 20 14 8 17.3 22 Scarlet Fever 11 28 11 6 8 22 6 17 16 13.6 11 Diphtheria 21 20 44 29 23 23 13 13 13 21.6 17 Enteric Fever 51 44 29 49 42 49 50 36 72 46.8 46 Measles 513 60 20 82 46 77 94 21 47 100 .8 48 German Measles 12 8 — 19 18 14 7 5 65 15.7 9 Erysipelas 3 1 — 2 5 2 5 2 4 2.8 4 Typhus Fever 1 1 1 — — — — — — .3 — Continued Fever 1 4 2 4 2 — 4 2 2 2.1 — Relapsing Fever — — — 2 — — — — 1 .3 — Tuberculosis:— Pulmonary 67 54 44 83 90 82 86 82 86 80.0 126 Other kinds 2 2 4 6 6 11 2 1 4 4.5 7 Other diseases (including Chickenpox) 766 310 348 336 319 363 471 667 499 473.2 653 Total 1,493 549 530 637 578 673 787 866 824 788.3 946 (b) Treated in Port Sanitary Hospital: Cholera (including suspected cases) - - - - - - - - - - - Yellow Fever (ditto) - - - - - - - - - - - Plague (ditto) 2 1* - - - - - - - 0.3 — Small-pox 10 — — 3 — 3 5 3* — 2.8 4 Scarlet Fever 3 13 2 — 6 16 8 5* 5 6.5 7 Diphtheria 4 3 3 1 1 4 2 6 9 3.8 5 Enteric Fever 11 13 9 10 13 6 14 6 20 12.5 23 Measles 35 6 5 1 8 7 9 7† 11 10.7 ‡18 Erysipelas 1 — — 2 1 — 2 1 . Typhus Fever — — — — — — — — — — - Continued Fever 1 3 — 2 . - Other diseases (including Chickenpox) 13 9 14 10 31 39 23 20 29 21.8 30 Total 80 48 33 29 60 75 63 47 75 59.7 87 * Includes one contact. ‡ Includes two contacts. ‡ Includes six contacts. 43 APPENDIX III. Return of the number of cases of Infectious Disease notified to the Ministry of Health during the year 1929, and of deaths from the diseases notified. This Table includes all cases actually introduced or occurring within the Port, but does not include cases reported as having occurred on vessels during the voyage which had either recovered or been removed from the vessel before arrival at Gravesend. Number. Deaths. Number. Deaths. Small-pox 4 1 Brought forward 68 5 Scarlet Fever 7 — Continued Fever — — Diphtheria (including Membranous Croup) 11 - Trench Fever — — Dysentery 12 — Enteric Fever (Typhoid and Ophthalmia Neonatorum — — Paratyphoid) 34 4 Erysipelas 1 — Pneumonia 12 — Tuberculosis— Cholera — — Respiratory 79 3 Plague — — Other kinds 3 — Puerperal Fever — — Malaria 33 — Puerperal Pyrexia — — Chicken-pox 13 — Acute Poliomyelitis — — Measles (including German Measles) 17 Acute Polioencephalitis — — Encephalitis Lethargica — — Whooping Cough 2 — Typhus Fever — — Other diseases 38 Relapsing Fever — — Carried forward 68 5 Total 266 8 APPENDIX IV.—Cholera. Date. 1929 Name of Vessel, Port of Registry and Official No. Where from. No. of Cases. How dealt with. April 7 ss. "Mulbera," Glasgow, 146298. Calcutta 1 Landed at Madras. June 5 ss. "Maidan," Liverpool, 147321. „ 1 „ „ Total 2 APPENDIX V.—Plague. Date. 1929. Name of Vessel, Port of Registry and Official No. Where from. No. of Cases How dealt with. Nov. 11 ss. "City of Tokio," Liverpool, 145886. Darien 1 Landed at Woosung Forts. Died, buried ashore. Total 1 APPENDIX VI.—Small-pox. Date. 1929 Name of Vessel, Port of Registry and Official No. Where from. No of Cases How dealt with. •Jan. 10 ss. "Karmala," Liverpool, 135590. Yokohama 1 Landed at Colombo. „ 30 ss. "Hector," Liverpool, 147282. Darien 1 „ „ Feb. 19 ss. "Tantalus," Liverpool, 147222. Macassar 4 1 died; buried at sea. 3 removed to hospital at Amsterdam. „ 20 ss. "Gleniffer," London, 139052. Yokohama 1 Landed at Singapore. „ 21 ss. "City of Lahore," Liverpool, 131336. Darien 1 „ „ Mar. 1 ss. "Ranpura," Newcastle, 148119. Bombay 1 Landed and died at Marseilles. „ 2 ss. "(Eneas," Liverpool, 131305. Taku Bar 1 Landed at Hong Kong. „ 8 ss. "Laverock," London, 129042. Amsterdam 1 Removed to hospital at West Ham. „ 14 ss. "Hatimura," London. 142722. Bombay 3 Removed to Port Sanitary Hospital. Denton. Carried forward 14 44 Small-pox—continued. Date. 1929. Name of Vessel, Port of Registry and Official No. Where from. Brought forward No. of Case 14 is. How dealt with. Mar. 17 ss. "City of Bristol," Liverpool, 135427. Rangoon 1 Landed at Rangoon. „ 27 ss. "Manora," Glasgow, 133129. Calcutta 1 „ Colombo. April 22 ss. "Mashobra," Glasgow, 144222. „ 2 „ Marseilles. „ 26 ss. "Ranchi," Newcastle, 148130. Bombay 1 Removed to Port Sanitary Hospital, Denton. May 27 ss. "City of Venice," Glasgow, 147890. Calcutta 1 Landed at Colombo. July 24 ss. "Conway," Newcastle, 118636. (Outward bound) 1 „ Bermuda. Oct. 2 ss. "Collegian," Liverpool. 133073. Calcutta 1 „ Port Said. Total 22 APPENDIX VII.—Scarlet Fever. Date. 1929. Name of Vessel, Port of Registry and Official No. Where from. No. of Cases How dealt with. June 21 ss. "Osterley," Glasgow, 118287. Brisbane 2 1 landed at Melbourne. 1 „ Colombo. „ 26 ss. "City of Valencia," Glasgow, 143087. Durban 2 Removed to Port Sanitary Hospital, Denton. Aug. 27 ss. "Berrima," Greenock, 135332. Brisbane 2 Well on arrival. Sept. 8 ss. "Rondo," Newcastle, 149443. Igilatgah 1 Removed to Port Sanitary Hospital, Denton. Oct. 3 ss. "Anchoria," Glasgow, 125958. Middlesbrough 1 „ „ Nov. 19 ss. "Morvada," Glasgow, 136319. Calcutta 1 „ „ Dec. 2 ss. "Ascania," Liverpool, 147307. Montreal 1 „ „ „ 13 ss. "Macedonia," Belfast, 110612. Yokohama 1 „ „ Total 11 APPENDIX YIII.—Diphtheria. Date. 1929. Name of Vessel, Port of Registry and Official No. Where from. No. of 3ases. How dealt with. March 6 ss. "Ascania," Liverpool, 147307. New York 1 Landed at Plymouth. „ 15 ss. "Razmak," Greenock, 147816. Bombay 1 Algiers. May 9 Houseboat" Harry." (Surrey Comm Dock) srcial 1 Removed to Metropolitan Asylums Board North-Eastern Hospital. „ 19 ss. "Carmania," Liverpool, 120901. New York 1 Removed to Port Sanitary Hospital, Denton. Aug. 6 ss. "Kashima Maru," of Yokohama. Yokohama 4 1 died ; body cremated at City of London Crematorium. 3 removed to Port Sanitary Hospital, Denton. Sept. 3 ss. "Mongolia " Newcastle, 145517. (In Dock) 1 Removed to Port Sanitary Hospital, Denton. „ 6 ss. " Marna," of Oslo. - 1 Removed to Seamen's Hospital, Greenwich. „ 24 ss. "Edward Nessen " - 1 Removed to Metropolitan Asylum Board Brook Hospital, Woolwich, S.E. Oct. 23 ss. "Jervis Bay," London, 150187. (In Dock) 1 Removed to Port Sanitary Hospital, Denton. Dec. 1 ss. "Kalyan," Liverpool, 137443. Yokohama 1 Landed at Penang. „ 3 Houseboat " Tay " Benfleet Creek 1 Removed to Sutton Ford Isolation Hospital. „ 5 „ „ „ 1 „ „ „ 8 ss. "Jason," Liverpool, 115297. Macassar 1 Landed at Batavia. „ 19 ss. "Otranto," Barrow, 146025. Brisbane 1 Well on arrival. Total 17 45 APPENDIX IX.—Enteric Fever. Date. Name of Vessel, Port of Registry and Official No. Where from. No. of Cases. How dealt with. 1929. Jan. 5 ss. " Caraciro," Glasgow, 147852. Buenos Aires 1 Removed to Port Sanitary Hospital, Denton. „ 6 ss. " Hesperides," Liverpool, 144694. Batoum 1 Landed at Cape Town. „ 12 ss. " Carnarvonshire," Belfast, 132049. Yokohama 1 died ; buried at sea. 1 well on arrival. „ 25 ss. "Naldera," Greenock, 142257. „ 1 Removed to Port Sanitary Hospital, Denton. Mar. 13 ss. "Carmarthenshire," Belfast, 136347. „ 1 Landed at Vladivostock. „ 13 ss. "Lawbeath," Glasgow, 147944. Buenos Aires 1 Removed to Port Sanitary Hospital, Denton. „ 13 ss. "Ruapehu," Plymouth, 111357. Wellington 1 Removed to Seamen's Hospital, Royal Albert Dock. „ 15 ss. "Duquesa," Liverpool, 140578. Buenos Aires 1 Removed to Seamen's Hospital, Greenwich. „ 22 ss. "Cheshire," Liverpool, 149625. Rangoon 1 Removed to Port Sanitary Hospital, Denton. „ 28 ss. "Poelan Boebian," Amsterdam. Dutch East Indies 1 Landed at Aden. April 3 ss. "Megantic," Liverpool, 127981. New York 1 Removed to Seamen's Hospital, Royal Albert Dock. May 5 ss. "Navasota," Southampton, 135702. Buenos Aires 1 Removed to Port Sanitary Hospital, Denton. „ 13 ss. "Ascania," Liverpool, 147307. Montreal 1 Landed at Havre. „ 24 ss. "Viceroy of India," Glasgow, 160238. Bombay 1 Removed to Port Sanitary Hospital, Denton. „ 26 ss. "Gloucester Castle," London, 132592. Lorenzo Marques 1 „ „ „ June 11 ss. "London Merchant," London, 147482. Philadelphia 1 „ „ „ Aug. 9 ss. "El Paraguayo," La Plata 1 „ „ „ Sept. 3 „ 4 Liverpool, 131434. ss. "Suwa Maru," Yokohama 1 Landed at Port Said. of Yokohama, ss. "Llandovery Castle," Lorenzo Marques 11 1 ,, ,, London, 148678. 10 removed to Port Sanitary Hospital, Denton. Oct. 2 ss. "Narkunda," Belfast, 142496. - 1 Attended Hospital for Tropical Diseases, Endsleigh Gardens, W.C. „ 7 ss. "Minnewaska," Belfast, 145433. New York 1 Removed to Port Sanitary Hospital, Denton. „ 12 ss. "British Empress," London, 140297. Abadam 1 Landed at Gibraltar. „ 16 ss. "Manreale," of Genoa. Buenos Aires 1 Removed to Port Sanitary Hospital, Denton. „ 18 ss. "Highland Brigade," of London. „ 1 Landed at Bio de Janeiro. » 24 ss. "Orama," Barrow, 146024. Brisbane 1 Removed to Port Sanitary Hospital, Denton. „ 24 ss. "City of Lahore," Liverpool, 131336. Calcutta 1 Landed at Colombo. Nov. 5 ss. "Hororata," Plymouth, 132757. Wellington, N.Z. 1 „ Panama. „ 12 ss. "Newby Hall," Liverpool, 120848. Durban 1 Died ; taken ashore at Algoa Bay. „ 18 ss. "Minnetonka," Belfast, 145438. New York 1 Convalescent on arrival. „ 21 ss. "Hyacinthus," Liverpool, 115279. Bosario 1 Removed to Port Sanitary Hospital, Denton. „ 25 ss. "Demosthenes," Aberdeen, 129362. Brisbane 4 Landed at Durban. Dec. 20 ss. "Nagpore," Hull, 144054. Yokohama 1 „ Marseilles. Total 46 46 APPENDIX X.—Measles. Date. Name of Vessel, Port of Registry and Official No. Where from. No. of Cases. How dealt with. 1929. Jan. 16 ss. "Moreton Bay," Brisbane, 130169. Brisbane 1 Landed at Southampton. „ 16 ss. "Ausonia," Liverpool, 145970. New York 1 Removed to Port Sanitary Hospital, Denton. „ 16 ss. "Llanstephan Castle," London, 135315. Mombasa 1 Proceeded home. Mar. 14 ss. "Orsova," Glasgow, 128278. Brisbane 1 Landed at Sydney. 22 ss. "Osman," of Sweden Valentia 1 Remained on board. April 2 ss. "Kaisar-I-Hind," Greenock, 128653. (In Dock) 1 Removed to Port Sanitary Hospital, Denton. „ 10 ss. "Ascania," Liverpool, 147307. New York 1 Landed at Plymouth. „ 12 ss. "Llanstephan Castle," London, 135315. Mombasa 1 Removed to Port Sanitary Hospital, Denton. „ 23 ss. "Patroclus," Liverpool, 147218. Chefso 1 Well on arrival. „ 25 ss. "Ormonde," Glasgow, 141866. Brisbane 3 ,, May 3 ss. "Banpura," Newcastle, 148119. Bombay 1 Landed at Port Said. „ I3 ss. "Ascania," Liverpool, 143707. Montreal 1 „ Plymouth. „ 20 ss. "Alaunia," Liverpool, 147315. „ 1 Removed to Port Sanitary Hospital, Denton. „ 23 ss. "Oronsay," Glasgow, 147948. Sydney 5 Proceeded home. ,, 27 ss. "Warszawa," of Poland Danzig 1 Removed to Port Sanita'ry Hospital, Denton. „ 28 ss. "Benalla," Greenock, 135322. Brisbane 6 Well on arrival. June 9 ss. "Corminster," London, 160366. Blyth 1 Removed to Metropolitan Asylums Board South-Eastern Hospital, New Cross. „ 11 ss. "Corinthic," Liverpool, 115296. New York 2 Landed at Plymouth. „ 14 ss. "Clan MacTaggart," Glasgow, 144223. Calcutta 1 „ Chittagong. „ 14 ss. "Narkunda," Belfast, 142496. Sydney 2 1 „ Aden. 1 convalescent on arrival. „ 27 ss. "Rimutaka," Plymouth, 111355. Wellington 1 Bemoved to Port Sanitary Hospital, Denton. July 15 ss. "Baltonia," London, 115268. Danzig 3 „ „ „ „ 30 ss. "Baltonia," London,115268. Memel 1 „ „ „ Aug. 12 ss. "Premjer," of Poland Danzig 1 „ „ „ Sept. 13 ss. "Ballarat," Greenock, 145596. Sydney 5 Well on arrival. „ 23 ss. "Moldavia," Liverpool, 145973. „ 1 Removed to Port Sanitary Hospital, Denton. Oct. 7 ss. "Kashmir," Greenock, 128655. Yokohama 1 Landed at Marseilles. Nov. 15 ss. "Chitral," Glasgow, 148861. Sydney 1 Well on arrival. Dec. 27 ss. "Naldera," Greenock. 142257. 11 1 Landed at Bombay. Total 48 APPENDIX XI.—German Measles. Date. 1929 Name of Vessel, Port of Registry and Official No. Where from. No. of Cases. How dealt with. Feb. 14 ss. "Africstar," London, 149755. Fray Bentos 1 Removed to Seamen's Hospital, Royal Albert Dock. April 29 ss. "Megantic," Liverpool, 127981. Halifax 3 2 proceeded home. 1 removed to Port Sanitary Hospital, Denton. May 6 ss. "St. Joseph," of Norway. Punta Arenas Carried forward 1 5 Removed to St. Andrew's Hospital, Poplar. 47 German Measles—continued. Date. Name of Vessel, Port of Registry and Official No. Where from. No. of Cases. How dealt with. 1929. Brought forward 5 June 23 ss. "Megantic," Montreal 1 Landed at Southampton. Liverpool, 127981. „ 25 ss. "Alaunia," „ 1 Convalescent on arrival. Liverpool, 147315. July 16 ss. "Sicilian Prince," (In Dock) 1 Removed to Port Sanitary London, 145963. pital, Denton. Sept. 9 ss. "Herefordshire," Colombo 1 Landed at Plymouth. Liverpool, 120903. — Total 9 APPENDIX XIII.—Pulmonary Tuberculosis. Date. 1929. Name of Vessel, Port of Registry and Official No. Where from. No.of Cases. How dealt with. Jan. 2 ss. "Maloja," Belfast, 145437. Sydney 1 Removed to Seamen's Hospital, Tilbury. „ 9 ss. "Khiva," Liverpool, 135533. Calcutta 1 Removed to Seamen's Hospital, Greenwich. „ 10 ss. "Otranto," Barrow, 146025. Sydney 1 Removed to Seamen's Hospital, Tilbury. „ 11 ss. "City of Lille," of Liverpool. ,, Landed at Sydney. „ 12 ss. "Mahsud," Liverpool, 140553. Calcutta 1 Attended Seamen's Hospital, Tilbury. „ 13 ss. "Balranald," Greenock, 145597. Sydney 1 Died ; buried at sea. „ 17 ss. "Orford," Barrow, 146026. Brisbane 1 " " „ 19 ss. "Nagpore," Hull, 144054. Calcutta 1 Removed to Seamen's Hospital, Greenwich. „ 31 ss. "Ascania," Liverpool, 147307. New York Proceeded home. Feb. 2 ss. "Ingoma," Liverpool, 135475. - 1 Removed to Seamen's Hospital, Greenwich. „ 6 ss. "Prometheus," Liverpool, 147335. Macassar 1 Died ; buried at sea. „ 6 ss. "Vedic," Liverpool, 140588. Gladstone 1 „ „ „ 8 ss. "Mantua," Greenock, 127544. Yokohama 1 Removed to Naval Hospital, Plymouth. „ 8 ss. "Gloucestershire," Liverpool, 131296. Rangoon 1 Proceeded home. „ 13 ss. "Helenus," Liverpool, 135519. Yokohama 1 Proceeded to a Sanatorium. „ 18 ss. "Atsuta Maru," of Tokio. „ 1 Landed and died at Marseilles. „ 24 ss. "Kalyan," Liverpool, 137449. „ 1 Proceeded to Naval Hospital, Chatham. March 7 ss. "City of Derby," London, 146i75. Rangoon 1 Removed to Seamen's Hospital, Tilbury. „ 11 ss. "Morvada," Glasgow, 136319. Calcutta 1 Attended Seamen's Hospital, Greenwich. „ 13 ss. "Lycaon," Liverpool, 135467. Cebu 1 Attended Seamen's Hospital, Royal Albert Dock. Carried forward 22 APPENDIX XII.—Erysipelas. Date. Name of Vessel, Port of Registry and Official No. Where from. No. of Cases. How dealt with. 1929. Jan. 15 ss. "Ingoma," of Liverpool. Demerara 1 Landed at Barbados. Mar. 27 ss. "Manora," Glasgow, 133129. Calcutta 1 „ Marseilles. Sept. 26 ss. "Gloucester Castle," London, 132592. Lorenzo Marques 1 Died; buried at sea. Nov. 1 T.S. "Exmouth " Grays 1 Removed to Ship's Infirmary. Total 4 48 Pulmonary Tuberculosis—continued. Date. Name of Vessel, Port of Registry and Official No. Where from. No. of Cases. How dealt with. 1929. Brought forward 22 Mar. — ss. "Benarty," Leith, 148256. (Outward bound) 1 Paid off and proceeded home. „ 21 ss. "Viceroy of India," of Glasgow. - 1 Removed to Seamen's Hospital, Tilbury. „ 22 ss. "Gity of Milan," Glasgow, 143141. - 1 Removed to Seamen's Hospital, Greenwich. „ 23 ss. " Kashgar," Greenock, 128654. Yokohama 2 1 removed to Royal Herbert Hospital, Woolwich. 1 removed to Naval Hospital, Chatham. „24 ss. " Zaanland," of Amsterdam. Rosario 1 Remained on board for transit to Holland. „ 25 ss. " Marconi," Liverpool, 137532. „ 1 Proceeded to Westminster Hospital, London. „ 25 ss. " Beechwood," Liverpool, 110629. (Outward voyage) 1 Died ; buried at sea. April 4 ss. " Fort Alma," London, 160615. Wellington 1 Proceeded home. „ 5 ss. " Macedonia," Belfast, 116012. Yokohama 4 2 landed at Plymouth. 1 removed to Seamen's Hospital, Greenwich. 1 proceeded home. „ 6 ss. " Glengorm Castle," Southampton, 109290. Lorenzo Marques 1 Removed to Seamen's Hospital, Greenwich. „ io ss. " Ascania," Liverpool, 147307. New York 3 1 en route for Poland. 2 proceeded home. „ 13 ss. " Clan Sinclair," Glasgow, 124222. Chittagong 1 Landed at Aden. „ 13 ss. " Lycaon," Liverpool, 135467. - 1 Removed to Seamen's Hospital, Greenwich. „ 21 ss. " Phemius," Liverpool, 145896. Cebu 1 Proceeded home. May 10 ss. " Nankin," Greenock, 131857. Calcutta 1 Removed to Seamen's Hospital, Tilbury. „ 13 ss. " Ascania," Liverpool, 147307. Montreal 1 Convalescent on arrival. „ 15 ss. " Clam," London, 149784. Batoum 1 Died ; buried at Thameshaven. „ 16 ss. " Hydaspas," Liverpool, 108840. — 1 Removed to Seamen's Hospital, Tilbury. „ 20 ss. " Alaunia," Liverpool, 147315. Montreal 1 Deported ; proceeded to Riga. „ 28 ss. " Benalla," Greenock, 135322. Brisbane 1 Landed at Colombo. June 6 ss. " Orama," Barrow, 146024. ,, 1 Proceeded home. „ 11 ss. " Minnekahda," New York, 218741. New York 1 ,, „ 19 ss. " Beltana," Greenock, 131853. Brisbane 1 Proceeded to Ventnor, Isle of Wight. „ 20 ss. " Grantully Castle," London, 129058. Lorenzo Marques 1 Proceeded home. „ 22 ss. " Korean Prince," Newcastle, 137266. Buenos Aires 1 ,, ' „ 25 ss. " Alaunia," Liverpool, 147315. Montreal 1 ,, July 1 ss. " Minnetonka," Belfast, 145438. New York 1 Proceeded home. „ 1 ss. " Wandle," London, 146694. South Shields 1 Removed to Seamen's Hospital, Greenwich. „ 5 ss. " Carmania," Liverpool, 120901. - 1 ,, ,, ,, „ 6 ss. " Megantic," Liverpool, 127981. - 1 ,, ,, ,, „ 6 ss. " London Corporation," London, 145913. 1 '' '' '' „ 13 ss. " Matra," Liverpool, 149603. Calcutta 1 Proceeded home. „ 15 ss. " Ascania," Liverpool, 147307. Montreal 2 „ „ 18 ss. " Esperance Bay," Fremantle, 140148. Brisbane 3 „ Carried forward 65 49 Pulmonary Tuberculosis—continued. Date. Name of Vessel, Port of Registry and Official No. Where from. No. of Cases. How dealt with. 1929. Brought forward 65 July 24 ss. "City of Sparta," Glasgow, 106082. Durban 1 Proceeded home. „ 26 ss. "Rajputana," Greenock, 149361. Yokohama 1 Taken in charge by Naval Authorities. Aug. 7 ss. "Gleniffer," London, 139052. Vladivostock 1 Well on arrival. „ 15 ss. "Jervis Bay," Sydney, 150187. Brisbane 9 All landed at Southampton. „ 16 ss. "Balranald," Greenock, 145597. Sydney 4 All proceeded home. „ 23 ss. "Viceroy of Lidia," Glasgow, 160238. Venice 1 Removed to Seamen's Hospital, Tilbury. „ 27 ss. "Berrima," Greenock, 135332. Brisbane 4 1 died ; buried at sea. 3 proceeded home. „ 27 ss. "Khiva," Liverpool, 135533. Yokohama 1 Proceeded home. „ 29 ss. "Ormonde," Glasgow, 123578. Brisbane 5 „ „ 30 ss. "Macedonia," Belfast, 116012. Bombay 1 Proceeded to Victoria Barracks, Portsmouth. Sept. 2 ss. "Manora," Glasgow, 133129. - 1 Removed to Greenwich and Deptford Hospital. „ 6 ss. "Naldera," of Greenock Sydney 1 Removed to Seamen's Hospital, Tilbury. „ 6 ss. "Clan McFee," Buenos Aires Removed to Seamen's Hospital, Royal Albert Dock. „ 9 ss. "Khyber," Liverpool, 135564. Yokohama 1 „ „ „ „ 26 ss. "Hardwicke Grange," London, 146177. La Plata 1 Removed to Seamen's Hospital, Royal Albert Dock. Oct. 3 ss. "San Jose," of Oslo Norway 1 Returned to Norway. „ 7 ss. "Kashmir," Greenock, 138655. Yokohama 1 Landed at Marseilles. „ 9 ss. "Bendigo," Greenock, 145603. Sydney 2 Proceeded home. „ 12 ss. "Clan MacBeth," Glasgow, 133120. Chittagong 1 Removed to Seamen's Hospital, Tilbury. „ 18 ss. "Morea," Glasgow, 128232. Yokohama 1 Taken over by Military Authorities. „ 22 ss. "Acton Manor," London, 143193. Igarla 1 Removed to Seamen's Hospital, Greenwich. ,, 22 ss. "Tuscania," Glasgow, 146307. New York 1 „ „ „ „ 24 ss. "Llandaff Castle," Mombassa 1 Attended Seamen's Hospital, „ 25 London, 149752. ss. "Merkara," Calcutta 1 Royal Albert Dock. Landed at Port Said. „ 25 Glasgow, 136332. ss. "Viceroy of India," Bombay 1 Proceeded to Royal Naval Glasgow, 160238. pital, Chatham. „ 31 ss. "Sagaing," Glasgow, 148845. Rangoon 1 Died ; buried at sea. Nov. 2 ss. "Mantua," Greenock, 125544. Shanghai 1 Removed to Royal Naval Hospital, Chatham. „ 7 ss. "Osterley," Glasgow, 128287. Brisbane 1 Died; buried at sea. „ 7 ss. "Guildford Castle," London, 132611. Beira 1 Proceeded home. „ 16 ss. "Mineric," Glasgow, 129443. Bombay 1 Removed to Seamen's Hospital, Tilbury. „ 19 ss. "Morvada," Glasgow, 136319. Calcutta 1 removed to Seamen's Hospital, Royal Albert Dock. 1 landed at Colombo. „ 23 ss. "City of Sparta," Glasgow, 106082. „ 1 Landed at Port Said. „ 24 ss. "Glaucus," Liverpool, 145852. Sydney 1 Died ; buried at sea. Dec. 1 ss. "Asphalian," Liverpool, 147289. Hankow 1 Landed at Port Said. „ 6 ss. "Ranchi," Newcastle, 148130. Bombay 1 „ Marseilles. „ 9 ss. "City of Halifax," North Shields, 123777. Calcutta 1 „ Colombo. Carried forward 122 50 Pulmonary Tuberculosis—continued. Date. Name of Vessel, Port of Registry and Official No. Where from. No. of Cases. How dealt with. 1929. Brought forward 122 Dec. 14 ss. "Barrabool," Belfast, 145424. Brisbane 1 Proceeded home. „ 14 ss. "Barrhill," Glasgow, 133093. Mauritius 1 Removed to Seamen's Hospital, Greenwich. „ 18 ss. "Tuscania," Glasgow, 146307. New York 1 Landed at Havre. „ 20 ss. "Nagpore," Hull, 144054. Yokohama 1 „ Shanghai. Total 126 5 APPENDIX XIV.—Tuberculosis (other kinds). Date. 1930. Name of Vessel, Port of Registry and Official No. Where from. No. of Cases. How dealt with. Feb.14 ss. "Orama," Barrow, 146024. Sydney 1 Proceeded home. March1 ss. "Ranpura," Newcastle, 148119. Bombay 1 Landed at Plymouth. April 13 ss. "Hermione," Liverpool, 124120. - 1 Removed to Seamen's Hospital, Royal Albert Dock. May 28 ss. "Benalla," Greenock, 135322. Brisbane 1 Landed at Plymouth. June 21 ss. "Africstar," London, 149755. Santos 1 Remained on board. Aug. 1 ss. "Avelonastar," London, 149821. Buenos Aires 1 Removed to Seamen's Hospital, Royal Albert Dock. Sept. 23 ss. "Lancashire," Liverpool, 102053. Rangoon 1 Removed to Guildford Sanatorium. Total 7 APPENDIX XV.—Pneumonia. Date. 1929. Name of Vessel, Port of Registry and Official No. Where from. No. of Cases. How dealt with. Jan. 3 ss. "Ormonde," Glasgow, 141866. Brisbane 1 Died; buried at sea, „ 4 ss. "Mandala," Glasgow, 137806. Calcutta 1 „„ „ 8 ss. "Istar," Southampton, 106047. — 1 Removed to St. Andrew's Hospital, Poplar. „ 16 ss. "Refrigerant," of L'Orient. Shanghai 1 Landed at Gibraltar. „ 20 ss. "Nankin," Greenock, 131857. Calcutta 1 „ Colombo. Feb.5 ss. "Fantee," London, 144410. Lagos 1 „ Takoradi. „ 5 ss. "Katori Maru," of Tokio. Yokohama 1 Died; body cremated at Port Said. „ 6 ss. "Prometheus," Liverpool, 147335. Macassar 1 Died; buried at sea. „ 26 ss. "Calgary," Liverpool 143707. Mauritius 1 Landed at Mauritius. March 7 ss. "Cathay," Glasgow, 148843. Sydney 1 Removed to Port Sanitary Hospital, Denton. „ 14 ss. "Orsova," Glasgow, 128278. Brisbane 1 Landed at Gibraltar. April 13 ss. "Bancher," Liverpool, 149653. Calcutta 1 Died ; buried at sea. „ 16 ss."Alaunia," Liverpool, 147315. New York 1 died ; buried at sea. 1 convalescent on arrival. May 4 ss. "Demodocus," Liverpool, 131435. Yokohama 1 Died; buried at sea. „ 7 ss. "Tairoa," Southampton, 145569. Wellington 1 Died; buried at Napier. „ 11 ss. "Calchas," Liverpool, 143742. Yokohama 1 Removed to Seamen's Hospital, Royal Albert Dock. Carried forward 17 51 Pneumonia—continued. Date. Name of Vessel, Port of Registry and Official No. Where from. No. of Cases How dealt with. 1929. Brought forward 17 May 15 ss. "Llandovery Castle," London, 148678. Beira 2 1 died; buried at sea, 1 removed to Seamen's Hospital Tilbury. „ 28 ss. "Benalla," Greenock, 135322. Brisbane 1 Removed to Seamen's Hospital Royal Albert Dock. June 14 ss. "Tainui," Southampton, 124507. Wellington 1 Landed at Southampton. „ 22 ss. "Macedonia," Belfast, 116012. Bombay 2 1 „ Aden. 1 removed to Seamen's Hospital Tilbury. July 18 ss. "Esperance Bay," Fremantle, 140148. Brisbane 1 Landed at Plymouth. „ 19 ss. "Piako," Plymouth, 132766. Oamaru 1 Died; buried at sea. Aug. 14 ss. "Picard," of Dunkirk Dunkirk 1 Proceeded home. „ 23 ss. "Viceroy of India," Glasgow, 160238. Venice 1 Well on arrival. Sept. 15 ss. "Auditor," Liverpool, 147260. Colombo 1 Landed at Colombo. „ 20 ss. "Princesa," Liverpool, 140585. La Plata 1 Removed to Seamen's Hospital Royal Albert Dock. „ 27 ss. " Rawalpindi," Greenock, 147827. Bombay 1 „ „ „ Oct.25 ss. "Viceroy of India," Glasgow, 160238. „ 1 Landed at Plymouth. Nov.1 T.S. "Exmouth" Grays 1 Admitted to Ship's Infirmary. „ 3 ss. "Ascania," Liverpool, 147307. Montreal 1 Removed to Bermondsey Hospital. „ 22 ss. "azmak," Greenock, 147816. Bombay 1 Landed at Gibraltar. Dec.7 ss. "Garth Castle" Beira 1 „ St. Helena. „ 14 ss. "Barrabool," Belfast, 145424. Brisbane 1 Removed to Seamen's Hospital. „ 24 ss. "Ausonia," Liverpool, 145079. New York 1 Convalescent on arrival. Total 37 APPENDIX XVI.—Influenza. Date 1929. Name of Vessel, Port of Registry and Official No. Where from. No. of Cases. How dealt with. Jan.1 ss. "Antenor," Liverpool, 147292. Taku Bar 1 Convalescent on arrival. „ 7 ss. "Minnewaska," Belfast, 145433. New York 21 All well on arrival, „ 18 ss. "Randsfjord," of Oslo Madagascar 2 1 convalescent. 1 to obtain treatment in London. „ 20 ss. "Nankin," Greenock, 131857. Calcutta 3 1 died; buried at sea. 2 well on arrival. „ 20 ss. "City of London," London, 149965. Brussels 1 Convalescent on arrival. „ 31 ss. "Ascania," Liverpool, 147307. New York 1 Well on arrival. „ 31 ss. "Teal," London,146150. Hamburg 2 1 „ 1 proceeded home. Feb. 2 ss. "Ariosto," Hull, 129280. Fiume 1 Well on arrival. „ 4 ss. "Minnewaska," Belfast, 145433. New York 3 „ „ March 2 ss. "Alsacien," of Dunkirk Dunkirk 1 Remained on board. „ 3 ss. "Nebraska," London, 144628. Rotterdam 1 „ „ „ 4 ss. "Alexandre Andre," of Belgium. Batoum 6 All recovered. April13 ss. "Rajputana," Greenock, 149361. Bombay 41 „ „ 16 ss. "Alaunia," Liverpool, 147315. New York 6 „ Carried forward 90 52 Influenza—continued. Date. Name of Vessel, Port of Registry and Official No. Where from. No. of Cases. How dealt witn. 1929. Brought forward 90 April 26 ss. "Ranchi," Newcastle, 148130. Bombay 3 Convalescent on arrival. May 3 ss. "Mongolia," Newcastle, 145517. Sydney 7 6 recovered. 1 convalescent on arrival. Aug. 1 ss. "Avelonastar," London, 149821. Buenos Aires 4 All recovered. Nov. 3 ss. "Foyle," London, 139093. Basrah 1 Sent home on arrival. Dec. 23 ss. "Poelan Roebiah," of Amsterdam. Batavia 3 Died ; buried at sea (pilgrims). „ 24 ss. "Llandovery Castle," London, 148678. Beira 1 Convalescent on arrival. Total 109 APPENDIX XVII.—Dysentery. Date. 1929. Name of Vessel, Port of Registry and Official No. Where from. No. of Cases. How dealt with. Jan. 9 ss. "Clan Ranald," Glasgow, 137833. Chittagong 1 Removed to Seamen's Hospital, Tilbury. Feb. 6 ss. "Prometheus," Liverpool, 147335. Macassar 1 Well on arrival. April 8 ss. "Dunluce Castle," London, 118490. - 1 Removed to Hospital for Tropical Diseases, Endsleigh Gardens, W.C. „ 8 ss. "Morvada," Glasgow, 136139. — 1 „ „ „ „ 22 ss. "Mashobra," Glasgow, 144222. Calcutta 1 „ „ „ June 15 ss. "Athelbeach," London, 142613. Demerara 1 Removed to Seamen's Hospital, Greenwich. „ 21 ss. "City of Calcutta," Glasgow, 115759. Calcutta 1 Landed at Madras. „ 23 ss. "Roepat," of Amsterdam. Bakik Papan 2 „ Amsterdam. July 10 ss. "Mantua," Greenock, 127544. - 1 Removed to Hospital for Tropical Diseases, Endsleigh Gardens, W.C. „ 10 ss. "Antenor," Liverpool, 147292. - 1 „ „ „ „ 10 ss. "Lancashire," Liverpool, 140529. - 1 „ „ „ „ 10 ss. "Narkunda," Belfast, 142496. - 1 „ „ „ „ 11 ss. "Sagaing," Glasgow, 148845. Rangoon 1 Convalescent on arrival. Aug. 30 ss. "Clan MacNeil," Glasgow, 146281. Calcutta 1 Landed at Colombo. Sept. 1 ss. "Nortonian," Liverpool, 135514. Halifax 1 Attended Seamen's Hospital, Royal Albert Dock. „ 6 ss. "Naldera," of Greenock Sydney 1 Attended Hospital for Tropical Diseases, Endsleigh Gardens, W.C. „ 19 ss. "Alcinous," of Amsterdam. Macassar 1 Landed at Batavia. Oct. 2 ss. "Narkunda," Belfast, 142496. - 1 Admitted to Hospital for Tropical Diseases, Endsleigh Gardens, W.C. „ 3 ss. "City of Durham," Liverpool, 131317. Calcutta 1 Convalescent, proceeded home. „ 25 ss. "Merkara," Glasgow, 136332. „ 1 Well on arrival. Nov. 1 ss. "Samaria," Liverpool, 149523. - 1 Removed to Hospital for Tropical Diseases, Endsleigh Gardens, W.C. Total 22 53 APPENDIX XVIII.—Malaria. Date. Name of Vessel, Port of Registry and Official No. Where from. No. of Cases. How dealt with. 1929. Jan. 3 ss. "Planter," Liverpool, 149645. Beira 1 Attended Hospital for Tropical Diseases, Endsleigh Gardens, W.C. „ 3 ss. "Ormonde," Glasgow, 141866. Brisbane 2 „ „ „ „ 7 ss. "Yama," of Glasgow Rangoon 1 „ „ „ „ 10 ss. "Domala," Glasgow, 146266. Karachi 3. Well on arrival. „ 11 ss. "Malwa," of Greenock Yokohama 1 „ „ „ „ 12 ss. "City of Venice," Glasgow, 147890. Calcutta 1 Remained on board. „ 13 ss. "Roker," Sunderland, 106424. Alexandria 1 Convalescent on arrival. „ 18 ss. "Kaisar-I-Hind," Greenock, 128653. Bombay 2 „ „ Feb. 5 ss. "Fantu," London, 144410. Lagos 1 Attended Hospital for Tropical Diseases, Endsleigh Gardens, W.C. „ 8 ss. "Gloucestershire," Liverpool, 131296. Rangoon 1 „ „ „ „ 15 ss. "Aurania," Liverpool, 147277. New York 1 Removed to Plumstead and District Hospital, S.E. Mar.10 ss. ''City of Valencia," Glasgow, 143087. Durham 1 Attended Seamen's Hospital, Royal Albert Dock. „ 18 ss. "City of York," Glasgow, 119100. Calcutta 1 Well on arrival. April 3 ss. "Wangaratta," Glasgow, 141910. Brisbane 1 „ 7 ss. "Sapele," Liverpool, 124076. Sapele 1 landed at Takoradi. 1 attended Hospital for Tropical Diseases, Endsleigh Gardens, W.C. „ 10 ss. "Novara," Greenock, 131860. Calcutta 1 Recovered. „ 24 ss. "Poelau Laut," of Amsterdam. Borneo 1 Well on arrival. „ 29 ss. "Khyber," Liverpool, 135564. Shanghai 1 „ „ May1 ss. "Portgwarra," Cardiff, 139625. River Plate 1 „ „ „ 3 ss. "Ingoma," Liverpool,135475. Georgetown 1 Attended Hospital for Tropical Diseases, Endsleigh Gardens, W.C. „ 6 ss. "Mandala," Glasgow, 137806. Calcutta 1 Removed to Seamen's Hospital, Royal Albert Dock. June 12 ss. "New Toronto," Liverpool, 140658. Dakar 1 Removed to Seamen's Hospital, Greenwich. „ 23 ss. "Prometheus," Liverpool, 147335. Macassar 2 Convalescent on arrival. July 1 ss. "Cheshire," Liverpool, 146925. Rangoon 1 Landed at Plymouth. „ 9 ss. "Malda," Glasgow, 146286. Beira 1 „ Marseilles. „10 ss. "Gloucestershire," Liverpool, 131296. - 1 Admitted to Hospital for Tropical Diseases, Endsleigh Gardens, W.C. „ 10 ss. "Mantua," Greenock, 127544. Yokohama 1 „ „ „ „ 10 ss. "Matiana," Glasgow, 146294. - 1 „ „ „ „ 15 ss. "Devon," London, 139098. Wellington 1 Removed to Seamen's Hospital, Royal Albert Dock. Aug. 1 ss. "Modasa," Glasgow, 146272. Beira 1 Attended Hospital for Tropical Diseases, Endsleigh Gardens, W.C. Sept. 13 ss. "Razmak," Greenock, 147816. Bombay 5 Convalescent on arrival. „ 25 ss. "Manipur," Liverpool, 143661. Calcutta 1 Well on arrival. „ 26 ss. "Bendu," Liverpool, 123995. Sapele 2 1 died ; buried at sea. 1 removed to Seamen's Hospital, Royal Albert Dock. Carried forward 44 54 Malaria—continued. Date. Name of Vessel, Port of Registry and Official No. Where from. No. of Cases. How dealt with. 1929. Brought forward 44 Oct. 2 ss. "Rajputana," Greenock, 149361. - 1 Attended Hospital for Tropical Diseases, Endsleigh Gardens, W.C. „ 2 ss. "Berrima," Greenock, 135332. — 1 „ „ „ „ 22 ss. "Bendu," Liverpool, 123995. Beira 2 Removed to Seamen's Hospital, Greenwich. ,, 25 ss. "Viceroy of India," Glasgow, 160238. Bombay 1 Attended Hospital for Tropical Diseases, Endsleigh Gardens, W.C. „ 27 ss. "Boutry," London, 143295. Africa 1 „ „ „ Nov.1 ss. "Nankin," Greenock, 131857. Yokohama 1 Removed to Hospital for Tropical Diseases, Endsleigh Gardens, W.C. „ 1 ss. "Khiva," Liverpool, 135533. „ 1 „ „ „ „ 1 ss. "Malwa," Greenock, 127543. „ 1 „ „ „ „ 8 ss. "Kaisar-I-Hind," Greenock, 128653. Bombay 1 Convalescent on arrival. „ 15 ss. "Ranpura," Newcastle, 148119. Bombay 1 Well on arrival. „ 21 ss. "Andaluciastar," London, 149782. Buenos Aires 1 Removed to Seamen's Hospital, Greenwich. „ 22 ss. "Euryades," Liverpool, 135488. Macassar 1 Well on arrival. Dec. 2 ss. "City of Palermo," Liverpool, 143078. Durban 3 „ „ „ 17 ss. "Rassay," Newcastle, 120605. Sante F'e 1 Removed to Seamen's Hospital, Royal Albert Dock. „ 26 ss. "City of Exeter," Glasgow, 136297. Calcutta 1 Removed to Seamen's Hospital, Tilbury Dock. Total 62 55 Chicken-pox—continued. Date. Name of Vessel, Port of Registry and Official No. Where from. No. of Cases. How dealt with. 1929. Brought forward 29 May 28 T.S. "Arethusa." Greenhithe 3 Removed to ship's hospital ashore. June 17 ss. "Baltonia," London, 115268. Danzig 2 Removed to Port Sanitary Hospital, Denton. „ 24 ss. "Minnesota," Liverpool, 113460. New York 1 „ „ „ „ 26 ss. "Almedastar," London, 149751. Buenos Aires 1 Landed at Boulogne. Aug. 2 ss. "Manora," Glasgow, 133129. Calcutta 1 Removed to Hospital at Madras. „ 27 ss. "Berrima," Greenock, 135332. Brisbane 2 Well on arrival. Sept. 2 ss. "Umvuma," London, 136725. (In Dock) 1 Removed to Port Sanitary Hospital, Denton. „ 6 ss. "Naldera," of Greenock. Sydney 1 Well on arrival. „ 9 ss. "Ascania," Liverpool, 147307. Montreal 1 „ „ Oct. 24 ss. "Llandaff Castle," London, 149752. Mombasa 1 „ „ „ 24 ss. "Orama," Barrow, 146024. Brisbane 6 Landed at Fremantle. Dec. 7 ss. "City of Manchester," Glasgow, 115942. Calcutta 1 Removed to Port Sanitary Hospital, Denton. Total 50 APPENDIX XX.—Venereal Diseases. Date. 1928. Name of Vessel. Nature of Case. No. of Cases. Passenger or Crew Rating. Advice given. Dec. 7 ss. "Silver Grey " Gonorrhœal Rheumatisn 1 L. Crew To attend Seamen's Hospital, Royal Albert Dock. „ 12 „ 20 ss. "Zera" ss. "Seelandia" Gonorrhœa Soft Sore and 2 1 „ „ To be treated in Hull. Proceeded to Rotterdam. „ 20 ss. "Maid of Corfu " Bubo. Soft Sore 1 „ Proceeded to Antwerp. „ 22 „ 24 ss. "Hypatia " ss. "Haruna Maru " Gonorrhœa „ 1 1 Passenger „ To be treated by private doctor. „ „ „ „ 25 „ 30 ss. "Clan Mackenzie " ss. "Ejaika " Syphilis Gonorrhœa 1 3 Crew D.B.S. Landed at Port Said. Proceeded to Liverpool. „ 31 1929. ss. "Usedom " Chancre 2 Crew Landed at Oran. Jan. 3 ss. "Plantor " Chancre 1 „ To attend Seamen's Hospital, Royal Albert Dock. „ 3 ss. "Borderer " Soft Sore and Bubo. 1 „ To attend Seamen's Hospital, Tilbury Dock. „ 4 ss. "Razmak " Gonorrhœa 1 „ „ „ „ „ 6 ss. "Hesperides " Syphilis 1 „ „ „ „ „ 9 ss. "Eastgate " Gonorrhœa 1 „ To attend Seamen's Hospital, Royal Albert Dock. „ 12 ss. "Historian " „ 1 „ To attend Seamen's Hospital, Tilburv Dock. „ 16 ss. "Llanstephan Castle " „ 1 „ „ „ „ „ 19 ss. "Madura " „ 2 „ To attend Seamen's Hospital, Royal Albert Dock. „ 20 ss. "Nankin " Chancre 1 „ To attend Seamen's Hospital, Tilbury Dock. „ 21 ss. "Llandovery Castle " Syphilis 1 „ To attend V.D. Clinic, Gravesend. „ 21 ss. "War Sepoy " Gonorrhœa 1 D.B.S. To attend home Clinic. „ 24 ss. "Dortmund " Syphilis 1 Crew To be treated in Hamburg. „ 25 ss. "City of Paris " Gonorrhœa 1 „ Landed at Madras. „ 28 ss. "Naldera " „ 1 „ To attend home Clinic. „ 29 ss. "Imani " Gumma of Tongue. 1 „ To attend Seamen's Hospital, Tilbury. „ 30 ss. "Capulet " Gonorrhœa 1 „ Landed at Durban. „ 31 ss. "Assyrian " „ 1 „ To attend Seamen's Hospital, Royal Albert Dock. Carried forward 31 56 Venereal Diseases—continued. Date. Name of Vessel. Nature of Case. No. of Cases. Passenger or Crew Rating. Advice given. 1929. Brought forward 31 Jan. 31 ss. "Oronsay" Gonorrhcea 2 Crew To attend Seamen's Hospital, Tilbury. Syphilis 1 „ Landed at Sydney. Feb. 1 ss. "Katari Maru" Soft Chancre 1 „ Treated on board. 5 ss. "Nerma" Tabes 1 „ To attend Seamen's Hospital, Greenwich. 8 ss. " Gloucestershire" Chr. Gleet 1 „ To attend Seamen's Hospital, Tilbury. „ 11 ss. "Magellan" Chancre 2 „ To attend Seamen's Hospital, Royal Albert Dock. 15 ss. "Tampanoeli" Gonorrhoea 1 „ Treated on board. „ 15 ss. "Ranchi" „ 1 „ „ „ „ 18 ss. "Ballarat" „ 3 Passengers To be treated by a private doctor at home. „ 14 ss. "Clan Alpine" „ 1 Crew To attend Seamen's Hospital, Tilbury. „ 18 ss. "Pear Brand" „ 1 „ To attend Seamen's Hospital, Greenwich. „ 20 ss. "Kemmendine" „ 1 „ „ „ „ 24 ss. "Kalyan" „ 1 Passenger Naval ratings invalided home to Inguinal Bubo Syphilis 1 1 „ „ R.N. Hospital, Chatham. „ 26 ss. "Kellerswald" „ 1 Crew Treated on board. „ 27 ss. "Calgary" „ Gonorrhoea 1 1 „ „ To attend Seamen's Hospital, Royal Albert Dock. Mar. 6 ss. "Ascania" „ 1 „ „ „ „ 7 ss. "Jason" Syphilis 1 „ „ „ „ „ 12 ss. "City of Mandalay" Gonorrhoea Bubo. 1 „ To attend Seamen's Hospital, Tilbury. „ 12 ss. "Alaunia" Gonorrhoea 1 „ To attend Seamen's Hospital, Royal Albert Dock. „ 13 ss. "Lycaon" „ 2 „ „ „ „ „ 13 ss. "Portcurnow" Syphilis 1 „ To attend Seamen's Hospital, Greenwich. „ 14 ss. "Orsova" Gonorrhoea 1 „ Landed at Sydney. „ 15 ss. "Duquesa" .„ Syphilis 1 1 „ „ To attend Seamen's Hospital, Greenwich. „ 17 ss. "Clan Buchanan" „ 1 „ To attend Seamen's Hospital, Tilbury. „ 17 ss. "Idarwald" Gonorrhoea 3 „ To attend hospital in Hamburg. „ 22 ss. "Malda" Hard Chancre Venereal Bubo 1 2 „ „ Treated on board. Convalescent on arrival. „ 22 ss. "Siberian Prince" Svphilis 1 „ Landed to hospital at Durban. „ 25 ss. "City of Palermo" „ 2 „ To Seamen's Hospital, Greenwich. „ 27 ss. "Sarpedon" Gonorrhcea 1 „ To attend Seamen's Hospital, Royal Albert Dock. ., 29 ss. "Orvieto" „ 1 Passenger To attend private doctor. „ 31 ss. "Golden Gate" Syphilis 1 Crew Landed to hospital at Valparaiso. April 3 ss. "Megantic" Gonorrhoea 1 Passenger Landed at Southampton. 7 ss. "Planet" Syphilis 2 Crew 1 landed at San Antonio. 1 to Hamburg. „ 13 ss. "City of Harvard" Soft Sore 1 „ To attend Seamen's Hospital, Tilbury. „ 13 ss. "Rancher" „ Gonorrhoea 1 1 „ „ (D.B.S.) „ „ „ „ „ „ „ 16 ss. "Burma" Syphilis 2 „ To attend Seamen's Hospital. „ 19 ss. "Africstar" Gleet 1 „ To attend Seamen's Hospital, Royal Albert Dock. „ 19 ss. "Highland Chieftain" Syphilis Gonorrhoea 1 2 „ „ „ „ „ „ „ „ ,, 21 ss. "Phemius" Soft Sore and Bubo. Soft Sore 1 „ Convalescent on arrival. 2 „ 1 landed to hospital at Singapore. 1 treated on board. „ 24 ss. "Barrabool" Syphilis 1 „ To attend Seamen's Hospital, Royal Albert Dock. „ 25 ss. "Assiout" Gonorrhoea 1 „ „ „ „ „ „ 26 ss. "Queenswood" „ 1 „ Treated on board. „ 28 ss. "Hakozaki Maru" „ 3 „ „ „ „ Carried forward 97 57 Venereal Diseases—continued. Date. Name of Vessel. Nature of Case. No. of Cases. Passenger or Crew Rating. Advice given. 1929. Brought forward 97 April 29 ss. "Khyber" Soft Sore and Bubo. 1 Crew To attend Seamen's Hospital, Royal Albert Dock. „ 29 ss. "Megantio" Gonorrhoea 1 „ „ „ „ „ 0000000011130 ss. "Navigator" Gonorrhoea Bubc 1 „ To attend Seamen's Hospital, Greenwich. May 1 ss. "Portgwarra" „ „ „ 1 „ To attend " Dreadnought" Hospital. 3 ss. "Malwa" Gonorrhoea 1 „ Treated on board. „ 3 ss. "Dunluce Castle" „ 1 „ To attend Seamen's Hospital, Royal Albert Dock. 3 ss. "Mongolia" „ 1 „ „ „ „ „ 4 ss. "Tabanan" „ 1 „ Treated on board. 4 ss. "Demodocus" Gonorrhoea 1 „ Landed to hospital at Singapore. „ 6 ss. "Mandala" Epididymitis. Syphilis 1 „ To attend Seamen's Hospital, Royal Albert Dock. 6 ss. "Jamaican Producer" Gonorrhoea 1 „ „ „ „ 7 ss. "Llandaff Castle" „ 1 „ „ „ „ „ 9 ss. "Madura" Gonorrhoea Ophthalmia. 1 „ „ „ „ Squamous Syphilide. 1 „ „ „ „ „ 13 ss. "Glenamoy" Gonorrhoea 1 „ „ „ „ „ 15 ss. "Llandovery Castle" Soft Sore 1 „ To attend Seamen's Hospital, Tilbury Dock. „ 15 ss. "Domala" Gonorrhoea 1 „ To attend Seamen's Hospital, Royal Albert Dock. „ 23 ss. "Radja" Gonorrhoea Bubo. 2 „ Treated on board. „ 24 ss. "Bereby" Gonorrhoea Syphilis 1 1 „ „ To attend London Hospital. „ „ „ „ 27 ss. "City of Venice" „ Soft Sore 1 „ To attend Seamen's Hospital, Tilbury. 1 „ Treated on board. „ 28 ss. "Benalla" Gonorrhoea Syphilis 3 „ „ „ 2 „ „ „ „ 31 ss. "Highland Monarch" Gonorrhoea 1 Passenger Landed at Vigo. June 2 ss. "City of Khartoum" Bubo and Sore 1 Crew To attend Seamen's Hospital, Tilbury. „ 5 ss. "Maidan" Gonorrhoea Syphilis 1 „ „ „ „ „ „ „ „ „ 6 ss. "Upwey Grange" Gonorrhoea 1 „ Landed at Buenos Aires. „ 6 ss. "Frankenwald Syphilis 2 „ To attend hospital in Hamburg. „ 7 ss. "Preussen" „ Gonorrhoea 2 1 „ „ „ „ „ „ „ „ „ 7 ss. "Kaisar-I-Hind" Syphilis 1 „ To attend Seamen's Hospital, Tilbury. „ 9 ss. "Blairadam" Gonorrhoea 1 „ To attend Seamen's Hospital, Greenwich. „ 9 ss. "Glenshiel" „ 1 „ Treated on board. „ 9 ss. "Designer" Soft Sore 1 „ To attend Seamen's Hospital, Royal Albert Dock. „ 10 ss. "City of Khios" Syphilis 1 „ To attend Seamen's Hospital, Tilbury. „ 11 ss. "Minnekahda" Gonorrhoea 1 Passenger To attend private doctor. „ 14 ss. "Durham Castle" Syphilis 1 Crew Landed at Durban. „ 15 ss. "Author" Gonorrhoea 1 „ To attend Seamen's Hospital, Tilbury. „ 15 ss. "Kalyan" „ 1 „ Well on arrival. „ 16 ss. "Carmania" Soft Sores 2 D.B.S. Treated at Ellis Island, New York, and deported. Gonorrhoea 1 Crew To attend hospital. „ 20 ss. "Meissonier" Syphilis 1 „ Landed at Colon. „ 21 ss. "Osterley" „ 1 Passenger To attend own doctor. „ 22 ss. "Athel Price" „ 1 Crew To receive attention at Falmouth. „ 22 ss. "Korean Prince" Gonorrhoea 2 Passengers To attend hospital. „ 23 ss. "Prometheus" „ 1 Crew Treated on board. „ 24 ss. "Paraguay" Soft Chancre 1 „ Well on arrival. „ 27 ss. "Port Hunter" Gonorrhoea 1 „ „ „ Carried forward 157 58 Venerea Diseases —continued. Date. Name of Vessel. Nature of Case. No. of Cases. Passenger or Crew Rating. Advice given. 1929. Brought forward 157 June .29 ss. "Morea" Gonorrhœa 1 Crew Landed at Colombo. „ 1 „ To attend Clinic in Oxford. Climatic Bubo 1 „ Landed at Shanghai. July. 1 ss. "Cheshire" Syphilis Gonorrhœa 1 1 Passenger Crew For private treatment. To attend Clinic near home. „ 2 ss. "Jamaica Settler" „ 1 „ Treated on board. „ 6 ss. "Inventor" „ 1 „ „ „ „ 7 ss. "Diomed" „ 1 „ „ „ „ 7 ss. "Ausonia" Orchitis 1 „ „ „ „9 ss. "Katori Mara" Soft Chancres 2 „ „ „ „9 ss. "Malda" Gonorrhœal Geet 2 „ „ „ „ 10 ss."Haliartus" Gonorrhœa 1 „ Landed at Madras. ,, 11 ss. "Dardanus" Soft Chancre 1 „ To attend hospital. „ 12 ss. "City of Newcastle" Syphilis 1 „ Landed at Port Said. „ 13 ss. "Rodney star" Gonorrhœa 1 „ Treated on board. „ 13 ss. "Councillor" Climatic Bubo 1 „ To attend Seamen's Hospital. „ 13 ss. "Mooltan" Gonorrhœa 1 „ Passengers Treated on board. „ „ „ 13 ss. "Matra" „ 1 Crew „ „ „ 15 ss. "City of Carlisle" Syphilis 1 „ To attend Seamen's Hospital, Tilbury. „ 15 ss. "Delta" „ 2 Passenger Proceeded to R.N. Hospital, Chatham; Gonorrhœa 3 „ 2 to attend Military Hospital, Netley. 1 to attend private practitioner. „ 15 ss. "Suecia" „ 1 „ Refused leave to land (Alien). „ 18 ss. "Baradine" Syphilis 1 Crew Landed at Sydney. „ 19 ss. "Rotti" Gonorrhœa 1 „ To attend hospital in Amsterdam. „ 21 ss. "American Trader" Cerebral Syphilis 1 „ Treated on board. „ 23 ss. "Aeneas" Climatic Bubo 1 ” To attend Seamen's Hospital, Royal Albert Dock. „ 23 ss. "Glamorganshire" Syphilis Gonorrhœa 1 1 ” ” Landed at Curacao. „ Colon. „ 23 ss. "Lahoie" Syphilis 1 ” To attend Seamen's Hospital, Royal Albert Dock. „ 24 ss. "Chancellor" Gonorrhœa 1 ” ” ” ” „ 27 ss. "Gltngorm Castle" ” 1 Passenger Well on arrival. Syphilis 1 Crew To attend Seamen's Hospital, Royal Albert Dock. „ 28 ss. "Clan Lindsay" Gonorrhœa 1 ” Landed at Madras. „ 28 ss. "Jason" Syphilis 1 ” To attend private hospital in London or Bristol. „ 29 ss. "Hazelside" ” 1 ” To attend Seamen's Hospital, Royal Albert Dock. „ 30 ss. "Llandaff Castle" ” 2 ” Treated on board. To attend Clinic. Gonorrhœa 2 ” Treated on board. „ 31 ss. "Historian" Soft Sore 1 ” Treated on board and cured. Aug. 1 ss. "Myrmidon" Climatic Bubo 1 ” To attend Seamen's Hospital, Royal Albert Dock. „ 1 ss. "Modasa" Syphilis and Gonorrhœa. 3 ” ” ” ” „ 2 ss. "Mantua" Gonorrhœa 1 ” Landed at Bombay. „ 3 ss. "Manora" ” 1 ” To attend Seamen's Hospital, Royal Albert Dock. „4 ss. "Atreus" ” 1 ” Landed at Port Said. „ 4 ss. "Ausonia" Syphilis 1 D.B.S. To attend home Clinic. „ 7 ss. "Perseus" ” 1 Crew To attend Seamen's Hospital, Royal Albert Dock. „ 10 ss. "Tantalus" Syphilis and Gonorrhœa. 1 ” ” ” ” „ 11 ss. "Cinderley" Syphilis 2 ” ” ” ” „14 ss. "Georcios M" Bubo 1 ” ” ” ” „ 16 ss. "Eurybates" Gonorrhœa Syphilis 1 2 ” ” Treated on board. ” ” „17 ss. "Matadin" Gonorrhœa 1 ” Landed at Colombo. „ 17 ss. "Garth Castle" Syphilis 2 ” Treated on board. „20 ss. "City of Johannesberg." Gonorrhœa 1 ” To attend Seamen's Hospital, Tilbury. Carried forward 224 59 Venereal Diseases—continued. Date. Name of Vessel. Nature of Case. No. of Cases. Passenger or Crew Rating. Advice given. 1929. Brought forward 224 Aug. 22 ss. "Dunluce Castle" Gonorrhœa 1 Crew Treated on board. „ 23 ss. "Highland Monarch" I 1 D.B.S. ” ” „ 23 ss. "Ranpura" Syphilis 1 Crew ” ” „ 24 ss. "Balaena" Gonorrhoea 1 ” ” „ 24 ss. "Trojanstar" ” ” To attend Seamen's Hospital, Royal Albert Dock. „ 26 ss. "Staffordshire" ” 1 ” Treated on board. „ 27 ss. "Clan Chaitan" ” 1 ” To attend Seamen's Hospital, Tilbury. „ 29 ss. "Ormonde" ” 1 ” Landed at Plymouth. „ 29 ss. "Almedastar" Syphilis 1 ” Landed at Buenos Aires. „ 30 ss. "City of Chester" Orchitis 1 ” To attend Seamen's Hospital, Tilbury. Oct. 1 ss. "Nortonia" Gonorrhoea 1 ” To attend Seamen's Hospital, Royal Albert Dock. „ 1 ss. "King Malcolm" ” 1 Passenger ” ” ” „ 3 ss. "Suwa Mara" ” ” Treated on board. 5 ss. "Azul" ” 1 ” ” ” „ 6 ss. "Amarapoora" ,, 1 ” ” ” ”66 ss. "Naldera" ” 1 Passenger Landed at Colombo. „ 8 ss. "Gladiator" Soft Chancre 1 ” Landed to hospital at Port Said. „ 8 ss. "Quarrington Court" Gonorrhoea 1 Crew To attend Seamen's Hospital, Royal Albert Dock. „ 8 ss. "Teiresias" ” 1 Passenger Treated on board. „ 8 ss. "Arracan" ” 1 Crew ” ” „ 12 ss. "City of Windsor" Syphilitic Rupia] 1 ” To attend Seamen's Hospital, Tilbury Dock. „ 12 ss. "Patroclus" Gonorrhoea 1 ” Treated on board. „ 13 ss. "Cheniston" ” 1 ” To attend Seamen's Hospital, Royal Albert Dock „ 13 mv." Paulo Laut" ” 1 ” Treated on board. „ 13 ss. "Bazmak" Syphilis 1 ” To attend Seamen's Hospital, Tilbury Dock. Gonorrhoea 2 ” ” ” ” „ 16 ss. "Nagoya" Soft Chancre 1 ” ” ” ” „ 19 ss. "Chindwin" Gonorrhoea 2 ” Treated on board. „ 21 ss. "Llanishen" 1 ” To attend Seamen's Hospital, Royal Albert Dock. „ 21 mv. "Glenogle" Syphilis 1 ” Treated on board. „ 22 ss. "Normanstar" Gonorrhoea 1 ” Landed to hospital at Buenos Aires. ,, 22 ss. "Leuna" ” ” ” 1 1 1 ” ” ” Landed at Hamburg. „ Sourabaya. „ Batavia. „ 24 ss. "Mandala" ” 1 D.B.S. To attend Seamen's Hospital, Royal Albert Dock. „ 26 ss. "Clan Malcolm" Syphilis 1 Crew Landed at Bombay. Gonorrhoea 1 ” „ Malabar. „ 26 ss. "Gloucester Castle" Soft Sore 1 D.B.S. To attend Clinic in Manchester. „ 26 ss. "Bendu" Primary Syphilis 2 Crew To attend Seamen's Hospital, Royal Albert Dock. „ 28 ss. "Stuartstar" Gonorrhoea 1 ” ” ” ” Nov. 1 ss. "Achilles" Soft Chancre 1 ” Treated on board. „ 1 ss. "Umkuzi" Syphilis 1 ” ” ” „ 3 mv."Highland Chieftain" ” 1 ” To attend Seamen's Hospital, Royal Albert Dock. Gonorrhoea 1 ” ” ” ” „ 4 ss. "Narkunda" ” Syphilis 1 1 ” ” Landed at Bombay. ” ” „ 5 ss. "Manilia" Soft Sore 1 ” To attend Seamen's Hospital, Royal Albert Dock. „ 7 ss. "Carmania" Gonorrhoea 1 ” Treated on board. „ 7 ss. "Kashmir" ” 1 ” ” ” „ 7 ss. "City of Bristol" Primary Syph. Syphilis ilis 1 1 ” ” ” ” To attend Seamen's Hospital, Tilbury Dock. „ 10 ss. "Mangalore" Gonorrhœa 1 ” ” ” ” „ 13 ss. "Alaunia" Syphilis 1 ” To attend Seamen's Hospital, Greenwich. „ 14 ss. "Hakusan Maru" Gonorrhœa 1 ” To attend Seamen's Hospital, Royal Albert Dock. Carried forward 287 60 Venereal Diseases—continued. Date. Name of Vessel. Nature of Case. No. of Cases. Passenger or Crew Rating. Advice given. 1929. Brought forward 287 Nov. 16 ss. "London Merchant" Syphilis 1 Crew To attend Seamen's Hospital, Greenwich. „ 18 ss. "Loriga" Gonorrhœa 1 „ Treated on board. „ 20 ss. "Laomedon" Syphilis 1 „ To attend Seamen's Hospital, Royal albert Dock. „ 22 ss. "Cay of Kimberley" Gonorrhœa Bubo 1 „ To attend Seamen's Hospital, Tilbury Dock. „ 22 ss. "Cay of Bedford" Soft Chancre 1 „ Treated in New York. „ 24 ss. "Cay of Lahore" Syphilis 2 „ To attend Seamen's Hospital, Tilbury Dock. „ 24 ss. "Orama" G.P.I. 1 Passenger Proceeding home. Oct. 25 ss. "Merkara" Syphilis 1 Crew To attend Seamen's Hospital, Royal albert Dock. „ 25 ss. "Winneton" Gonorrhœa 1 „ To attend Seamen's Hospital, Greenwich. „ 30 ss. "Alban" Syphilis 1 „ Treated on board. Gonorrhœa and Soft Sore. 1 „ Treated at Ellis Island. ., 30 ss. "Bimutaka" Gonorrhœa 1 „ Treated on board. „ 31 ss. "Sagaing" Syphilis 1 „ Landed at Rangoon. Nov. 1 ss. "Rhexenor" „ Gonorrhœa 1 1 „ d.b.s. „ Colombo. Well on arrival. 2 ss. "Nestor" Syphilis 1 „ „ 3 ss. "Margha" „ 2 Crew To attend Seamen's Hospital, Royal albert Dock. 3 ss. "Carmania" Gonorrhœa 1 „ Treated on board. 5 ss. "Kelvinia" soft Chancre 1 „ To attend Seamen's Hospital, Royal albert Dock. 7 ss. "Osterley" Gonorrhœa 3 „ To attend Seamen's Hospital, Tilbury Dock. 7 ss. "Eurymedon" Gonorrhœa Bubo 2 „ Treated on board. 8 ss. "Dayrose" Gonorrhœa 1 „ To attend Seamen's Hospital, Chronic Gleet 1 „ Royal albert Dock. „ „ „ ., 11 ss. "Tuscania" Gonorrhœa 2 „ „ „ „ „ 11 ss. "City of Tokio" Soft Sore and Bubo. 2 „ Treated on board „ 15 ss. "Highland Monarch" Gonorrhœa 1 „ To attend Seamen's Hospital, Royal albert Dock. „ 15 ss. "Pegu" „ 7 „ Landed at Liverpool. „ 15 ss. "Chitral" „ 1 „ To attend Seamen's Hospital, Tilbury Dock. „ 16 ss. "Rodneystar" „ 1 „ To attend Seamen's Hospital, Royal albert Dock. „ 16 ss. "Glengorm Castle" „ 2 „ To attend Seamen's Hospital, Greenwich. „ 16 ss. "Shropshire" Syphilis 1 „ Landed at Liverpool. „ 19 ss. "Cay of Birmingham" „ Gonorrhœa 1 1 „ Treated on board. „ „ „ 19 ss. "Morvada" „ 1 „ To attend Seamen's Hospital, Royal albert Dock. „ 19 ss. "Batavier V." „ 1 D.B.S. To attend Seamen's Hospital, Greenwich. „ 21 ss. "Orsova" Syphilis 1 Passenger Treated in Australia. „ 21 ss. "Cay of Pekin" Gonorrhœa 1 Crew Treated on board. „ 22 ss. "Helenus" Syphilis 1 „ Landed at Sourabaya. „ 27 ss. "Burma" „ 1 „ Treated on board. „ 30 mv. "Fionia" Soft Chancre Climatic Bubo 1 1 „ „ „ „ „ „ Dec. 1 ss. "Asphalion" Soft Chancre Gonorrhœa 1 1 „ „ „ „ „ „ 1 ss. "Manora" Syphilis 1 „ „ „ 11 ss. "alaunia" Gonorrhœa 1 „ „ „ „ 13 ss. "Macedonia" Soft Sore 1 „ „ „ „ 14 ss. "Barrhill" Syphilis 1 „ To attend Seamen's Hospital, Greenwich. „ 14 ss. "Barrabool" General Paralysis of the Insane. 1 „ Proceeded under escort. Syphilis 2 „ To attend Seamen's Hospital, Royal albert Dock. Syphilis and Gonorrhœa. 1 Passenger To be treated at home Clinic. Carried forward 351 61 Venereal Diseases—continued. Date. Name of Vessel. Nature of Case. No. of Cases. Passenger or Crew. Rating. Advice given. 1929. Brought forward 351 Dec. 15 ss. "Craftsman" Gonorrhœa 1 Crew Treated at Port Said. „ 18 ss. "Royal Star" Syphilis 1 D.B.S. Treated on board. „ 18 ss. "Malakuta" „ 1 Crew „ „ Syphilis 1 Crew To attend Seamen's Hospital, Royal Albert Dock. „ 2c ss. "Capitaine Maurice Eugene" Soft Sore 1 „ Landed at Oran. „ 21 ss. "Madura" Syphilis Gonorrhoea 1 1 „ „ „ Mombasa. „ „ „ 22 ss. "Clan Buchanan" „ 1 „ Treated on board. „ 23 ss. "Crane" „ 1 „ To attend Seamen's Hospital, Greenwich. „ 24 ss. "Llandovery Castle" " 1 „ „ „ „ „ 26 ss. "City of Exeter" Syphilis 1 „ To attend Seamen's Hospital, Tilbury. Climatic Bubo 1 „ „ „ „ „ 28 ss. "Lancashire" Syphilis 1 „ Treated on board. Soft Sore 1 „ „ „ „ 28 ss. "Mashobra" Gonorrhoea 1 „ To attend Seamen's Hospital, Royal Albert Dock. „ 3c ss. "Martaban" Syphilis 3 „ To attend Seamen's Hospital, Greenwich. „ 3c ss. "Holmlea" „ 1 „ To attend Seamen's Hospital, Royal Albert Dock. Gonorrhoea 1 „ „ „ Total 373 APPENDIX XXI.—Miscellaneous Diseases (Classified). OTHER INFECTIOUS DISEASES. NERVOUS AND MENTAL DISORDERS. Mumps 7 C, 6 P. Whooping Cough 5 C., 6 P. Amentia, Primary 1P. Asthma 2 P. (1 died). Cerebral Inflammation 1C. (died). Dementia Paralytica IP. Epilepsy 1 P. General Paralysis 1C. (died). Heat Apoplexy 1C. (died), 3 P. (died). Insanity 1 C., 7 P. Melancholia 1 c., 2 P. Neurasthenia 1 C., 2 P. Psychosthenia 2 P. TROPICAL DISEASES. Beri-beri 5 C. (2 died), 1 P. (died). Bubo, Climatic 3 . Dengue Fever 2 C. Dracunculosis 1C Sprue 3 P. (1 died). CATARRHAL CONDITIONS. DISEASES OF THE SKIN. Febricula Tonsillitis 2 C. 7 C., 3 P. Acne 1 C. Dermatitis 1C Herpes Zoster 3 C. Impetigo 2 P. Scabies 2 C., 5 P. Seborrhoea 1 C. RHEUMATIC CONDITIONS> Rheumatism 1C. Rheumatic Fever 3C.,1P SEPTIC CONDITIONS. DISEASES OF CIRCULATORY SYSTEM. Abscess 1 C. ,, Rectal 1c. ,, Axillary 1c. Cellulitis 2 C. Septicaemia 1c. (died), 2 P. (1 died). Sepsis 2 C. Septic Foot 2 C. ,, Arm 1c. ,, Hand 1 C. Aortic Aneurysm IP. (died). Angina Pectoris 1 C. (died). Arterio-sclerosis IP. Cerebral Haemorrhage 4 C. (2 died). ,, Embolism . 5 P. (3 died). Embolism IP. (died). Heart Failure 5 C. (died), 11 P. (died). Hemiplegia 1 C. Myocardial Degeneration 1C. (died), 1 P. (died) Phlebitis 1 C., 1 P. Ruptured Aneurysm C. (died). 62 Miscellaneous Diseases—continued. DISEASES OF RESPIRATORY SYSTEM. DISEASES OF RENAL SYSTEM. Bronchitis 12C. (2 died), 10P. Coma, Ursemic 1P. (died). Hsematuria 1P. Bronchiectasis 1P. Nephritis 1P. Congestion of Lungs 1C., IP. Pyelitis 1P. Haemoptysis 1P. Pyonephrosis 1P. (died). Pleurisy 2.C, IP. Renal Calculus 1C., 1P. INJURIES. Hernia DISEASES OF DIGESTIVE SYSTEM. Injury 14C. (5 died), 1P. Appendicitis 6C. (3 died), 3P. OTHER DISEASES (not Classified). Carcinoma of Stomach . 2C., 1P. (died). Adenitis 1P. ,, Liver 1C. (died), 2P. (died 1).Alcoholic Poisoning 1C. (died). Cholelithiasis 1C. Chill 2C. Cholecystitis 2P. Conj unctivitis 1P. Cirrhosis of Liver 1C. (died), 2P. (died Cyst 1C. Colitis 1P. Debility 1P. (died). ,, Mucous 1P. Enlarged Prostate 1C. Constipation, Chronic 1C. Epistaxis 1P. Diarrhoea ... 3P. Fibrosis 2P. Duodenal Ulcer ... 1C. (died). Fireman's Cramp 1C. Enteritis 2C., 4P. Inanition 1P. ,, Gastro- ... 2C. Malaise 1C., 1P. ,, Influenzal 1C. Marasmus 1P. (died). Gastric Ulcer 2C. (1died). Pediculosis 1P. Gastritis 5C. Premature Birth 1P. (died). Intestinal Obstruction 3C. (1died). Pyrexia 6C., 2P. Jaundice 2C. Senility 5P. (died). ,, Catarrhal 1C. Suicide 3C., 2P. Peritonitis 1C., 1P. Synovitis 1C. Trachoma 1P. C. signifies Crew; P. signifies Passenger. APPENDIX XXII. Vessels and Premises Disinfected from 1st January to 31st December, 1929. Reason for Disinfection. Month. Encephalitis Lethargica. Erysipelas. Continued Fever. Cholera. Mumps. Dysentery. Whooping Cough. Chicken-pox. Scabies. Diphtheria. Enteric Fever. Plague. Measles. Scarlet Fever. Small-pox. Pulmonary Tuberculosis. Influenza and Pneumonia. Fumigation for Rats, &c. Total. January - - 1 1 2 3 - 24 31 February - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 5 - 12 17 March - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 22 22 April — - - — - - - 6 1 - 2 - 5 - 1 6 - 13 34 May — - - — - - - 2 — 2 3 - 6 - — 2 - 16 31 June — - - — - - - 3 — — 1 - 4 1 — 6 - 12 27 July — - - — - - - — — — —- - 3 - — 10 - 24 37 August — - - — - - - — — 2 1 - 1 - - 7 - 23 34 September - - - - - - - 1 - 4 1 - 1 1 - 6 - 22 36 October - - - - - - - 1 - 1 7 - 1 - - 6 1 16 33 November — - - — - - - - — - 3 - 1 1 — 4 - 18 27 December — - - — - - - 1 — — — - 1 2 — — - 12 16 Totals - - - - - - - 15 1 9 19 - 25 5 1 55 1 214 345 63 APPENDIX XXIII.—Disinfecting Operations for Infectious Disease. Date. Fumigated. Name of Vessel. Necessity for Disinfection. Action taken. 1929. Jan.11 ss. "City of Lille" Pulmonary Tuberculosis Fumigated with sulphur and washed down. „ 15 ss. "Mahsud" „„ Washed down with carbolic solution. „17 ss. "Ausonia" Measles Fumigated with Formaldehyde and washed down. „ 18 ss. "Llanstephan Castle" Measles and Chicken-pox Fumigated with sulphur and washed down. „ 19 ss. "Orford" Pulmonary Tuberculosis „ „ „ „ 26 ss. "Naldera" Enteric Fever „„„ Feb. 8 ss. "Mantua" Pulmonary Tuberculosis „„ „ „ 9 ss. "Vedic" „ „ „ Washed down with a disinfectant. „ 12 ss. "Gloucestershire" „ „ „ Fumigated with sulphur and washed down. „ 14 ss. "Helenus" „ „ „ „ „ „ „ 15 ss. "Llandaff Castle" „ „ „ „ „ „ April 4 ss. "Wanderer" Chicken -pox Fumigated with sulphur dioxide and washed down. „ 4 ss. "Megantic" (?) Typhoid Fever „ „ „ „ 5 ss. "Kaisar-I-Hind" Measles Fumigated with sulphur dioxide. „ 5 ss. "Macedonia" Pulmonary Tuberculosis Fumigated with sulphur dioxide and washed down. „ 6 ss. "Port Alma" „ „ „ „ „ „ „ 11 ss. "Glengorm Castle" „ „ „ Fumigated with sulphur dioxide. „13 ss. "Ascania" Pulmonary Tuberculosis and Measles. Fumigated with sulphur dioxide and washed down. „ 15 ss. "Llanstephan Castle" Measles „ „ „ „ 15 ss. "Pegu" Chicken-pox „ „ „ „ 16 ss. "Clan Sinclair" Pulmonary Tuberculosis „ „ „ „ 16 ss. "Alaunia" Chicken-pox Washed down with disinfecting solution. „ 18. ss. "City of Salford" Fumigated with sulphur and washed down. „ 20 ss. "Shropshire" ,, „ „ „ „ 22 ss. "Phemius" Pulmonary Tuberculosis „ „ „ „ 22 ss. "Mashobra" (?) Small-pox „ „ „ „ 25 ss. "Patroclus" Chicken-pox and Measles „ „ „ „ 25 ss. "Baltonia" Scabies „ „ „ „ 30 ss. "Megantic" German Measles and suspect Typhoid. „ „ „ May 3 ss. "Malwa" Chicken-pox „ „ „ „ 6 ss. "Navasota" Enteric Fever „ „ „ „ 8 ss. "Baltonia" Chicken-pox „ „ „ „ 9 C.B. "Harry" Diphtheria „ „ „ „ 11 ss. "St Joseph" German Measles Fumigated with sulphur dioxide. „ 17 ss. "Ascania" Measles and Pulmonary Tuberculosis. Fumigated with sulphur dioxide and washed down. „ 20 ss. "Alaunia" Measles „ „ „ „ 21 ss. "Carmania" Diphtheria „ „ „ „ 24 ss. "Viceroy of India" Enteric Fever „ „ „ „ 25 ss. "Oronsay" Measles „ „ „ „ 26 ss. "Gloucester Castle" Enteric Fever „ „ „ „ 27 ss. "Warszawa" Measles „ „ „ „ 28 ss. "Benalla" Measles and Pulmonary Tuberculosis. „„„ June 10 ss. "Orama" Pulmonary Tuberculosis „ „ „ „10 ss. "Corminster" Measles „ „ „ „ 11 ss. "London Merchant" Enteric Fever „ „ „ „ 12 ss. "Minnekahda" ... Pulmonary Tuberculosis „ „ „ „ 17 ss. "Narkunda" Measles „ „ „ „ 18 ss. "Baltonia" Chicken-pox „ „ „ „ 21 ss. "Beltana" Pulmonary Tuberculosis „ „ „ „ 22 ss. "Grantully Castle" „ „ „ „ 24 ss. "Megantic" German Measles „ „ „ „ 24 ss. "Africstar" Pulmonary Tuberculosis „ „ „ „ 25 ss. "Minnesota" Chicken-pox „ „ „ „27 ss. "Korean Prince" Pulmonary Tuberculosis „ „ „ „ 27 ss. "Rimutaka" Measles „ „ „ „ 28 ss. "Almedastar" Chicken-pox „„ „ „ 28 ss. "City of Valencia" Scarlet Fever „ „ „ 64 Disinfecting Operations for Infectious Disease—continued. Date. Fumigated 1929. Name of Vessel. Necessity for Disinfection. Action taken. July 2 ss. "Minnetonka" Pulmonary Tuberculosis Fumigated with sulphur dioxide and washed down. „2 ss. "Wandle" „ „ „ „ „ „ „ 6 ss. "Carmania" „ „ „ „ „ „ „7 ss. "Megantic" „ „ „ „ „ „ „7 ss. "London Corporation" „ „ „ „ „ „ „ 14 ss. "Matra" „ „ „ „ „ „ „15 ss. "Baltonia" Measles „ „ „ „ 16 ss. "Sicilian Prince" German Measles „ „ „ „ 16 ss. "Esperance Bay" Pulmonary Tuberculosis „ „ „ „ 16 ss. "Ascania" „ „ „ „ „ „ „ 25 ss. "City of Sparta" „ „ „ „ „ „ „ 27 ss. "Rajputana" „ „ „ „ „ „ „ 31 ss. "Baltonia" Measles „ „ „ Aug. 6 ss. "Kashina Maru" Diphtheria „ „ „ „ 9 ss. "El Paraguayo" Typhoid Fever „ „ „ „ 11 ss. "Maloja" Diphtheria „ „ „ „ 13 ss. "Premier" Measles „ „ „ „ 16 ss. "Jervis Bay" Pulmonary Tuberculosis „ „ „ „ 17 ss. "Balranald" „ „ „ „ „ „ „ 23 ss. "Viceroy of India" „ „ „ „ „ „ „ 26 ss. "Berrima" „ „ „ „ „ „ „ 28 ss. "Khiva" „ „ „ „ „ „ „ 29 ss. "Ormonde" „ „ „ „ „ „ „ 31 ss. "Macedonia" „ „ „ „ „ „ Sept. 1 ss. "Umvuma" Chicken-pox „ „ „ „ 3 ss. "Mongolia" Diphtheria „ „ „ „ 4 ss. "Llandovery Castle" Typhoid Fever „ „ „ „ 6 ss. "Naldera" Pulmonary Tuberculosis „ „ „ „ 6 ss. "Clan McFee" „ „ „ „ „ „ „ 6 ss. "Mamora" „ „ „ „ „ „ „ 6 ss. "Marna" Diphtheria „ „ „ „ 8 ss. "Rondo" Scarlet Fever „ „ „ „ 9 ss. "Kyber" Pulmonary Tuberculosis „ „ „ „ 23 ss. "Lancashire" Generalised Tuberculosis „ „ „ „ 24 ss. "Moldavia" Measles „ „ „ „ 25 ss. "Edward Nessen" Diphtheria „ „ „ „ 26 ss. "Hardwicke Grange" Pulmonary Tuberculosis „ „ „ „ 25 ss. "Edward Nissen" Diphtheria „ „ „ Oct. 2 ss. "Warzawa" Suspected Typhoid „ „ „ „ 5 ss. "Narkunda" Typhoid Fever „ „ „ „ 7 ss. "Minnewaska" „ „ „ „ „ „ „ 7 ss. "Kashmir" Pulmonary Tuberculosis Fumigated with Formaldehyde. Measles Fumigated with sulphur dioxide and sprayed with Formalin. „ 11 ss. "Lovoy" Pneumonia and Pleurisy Fumigated with sulphur dioxide and washed down. „ 11 ss. "Bendigo" Pulmonary Tuberculosis „ „ „ „ 14 ss. "Clan Macbeth" „ „ „ „ „ „ „ 15 ss.."British Empress" Typhoid Fever Sprayed out with Izal. „18 ss. "Morea" Pulmonary Tuberculosis Fumigated with sulphur dioxide and washed down. „21 ss. "Morreale" Typhoid Fever „ „ „ „ 25 ss. "Orama" „ „ „ „ „ „ „ 25 ss. "City of Lahore" „ „ „ Washed down with disinfecting solution. „ 26 ss. "Viceroy of India" Pulmonary Tuberculosis Fumigated with sulphur and washed down. „ 26 ss. "Jervis Bay" Diphtheria Fumigated with Formalin and sprayed. „ 28 ss. "Llandaff Castle" Pulmonary Tuberculosis and Chicken-pox. Fumigated with Formaldehyde. Nov. 1 ss. "Sagaing" Pulmonary Tuberculosis Washed down with disinfectant. „ 4 ss. "Mantua" „ „ „ Fumigated and sprayed with Formalin. „ 5 ss. "Hororata" Typhoid Fever Fumigated with sulphur and sprayed. „ 9 ss. "Osterley" Pulmonary Tuberculosis „ „ „ 65 Disinfecting Operations for Infectious Disease—continued. Date. Fumigated. 1929. Name of Vessel Necessity for Disinfection. Action taken. Nov. 19 ss. "Chitral" Measles . Fumigated with sulphur and washed down. „ 20 ss. "Morvada" Pulmonary Tuberculosis and Scarlet Fever. „ „ „ „ 22 ss. "Minnetonka" Typhoid Fever „ „ „ „ 27 ss. "Hyacinthus" „ „ „ „ „ „ Dec. 5 ss. "Ascania" Scarlet Fever Fumigated and sprayed with Formalin. „ 10 ss. "City of Manchester" Chicken-pox Sprayed with disinfecting solution. „ 16 ss. "Macedonia" Scarlet Fever Fumigated with sulphur dioxide and washed down. „ 30 ss. "Naldera" Measles „ „ „ In all cases where fumigation is carried out, if necessary, the close spaces infected are washed down with Izal, &c., in water, the infected articles having been removed for steam disinfection. APPENDIX XXIV. Number of Disinfections of Effects, Bedding, &c., from 1st January to 31st December, 1929. Month; Reason for Disinfection. Hospital Bedding, &c. Total. No. of times Disinfect or was used. Fumigated in Cabin of Vessel. Small-pox. Malaria. Chicken-pox. Dysentery. Diphtheria. Enteric Fever. Measles. Pulmonary Tuberculosis. Mumps. Pneumonia. Erysipelas. Scarlet Fever. Seven-day Fever. January - - - - - 2 - - - - - - - - 2 2 1 February - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 1 March 2 - — - — 1 — — - — - — — — 3 3 3 April 1 - 1 - — 1 3 — 1 — - — — 2 9 7 2 May - 1 - 1 3 1 - - - - - - 2, 8 7 2 June 1 - 2 - - 1 1 — - — - 1 — 1 7 7 1 July - - — - — — 1 — - — - — — 1 2 2 3 August - - - - 1 - 1 - - 1 - 2 - 2 7 5 1 September - - 1 - I 2 1 - 1 - 6 6 3 October - - — 1 I 4 - - - - - 1 — 3 10 10 2 November - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 2 December - - 1 - - - - - - - - - - - 1 1 1 Totals 4 - 6 1 4 14 8 — 1 1 — 5 — 11 55 50 22 APPENDIX XXV.—Hospital. Number of Cases Admitted, Cost of Maintenance, &c. Patients remaining in Hospital on 31st December, 1928 2 Admitted. Discharged. Died. Remaining under treatment. Enteric Fever 24 20 4 1 Scarlet Fever 8 8 Diphtheria 6 6 — — Measles 18 18 — — Small-pox 4 3 1 — Chicken-pox 15 15 — — Other Diseases 12 13 — — Total 87 83 5 1 Remaining in Hospital on 31st December, 1929 Total number of day,s treatment during the year 1,093 Average number of day's treatment for each case 1.16 Average daily number of patients in Hospital .24 Average daily cost of maintenance per patient Is. 8¾.d Average total cost of maintenance per patient £1 Is. 5d. 66 APPENDIX XXYI.—Return of Rats Caught and Destroyed during 1929. The entire cost of destroying these rats has been borne by the Shipowners and Port of London Authority. Jan . Feb. Mar. April. May. June. July. Aug. Sept. Oct. Nov. Dec. Total. Millwall Dock— Warehouses 154 150 528 196 180 200 113 247 61 95 78 25 2,027 Vessels while in dock 97 48 64 210 15 4 292 91 16 51 22 43 953 Surrey Commercial Dock— Warehouses 48 50 108 84 103 119 160 93 22 125 138 87 1,137 Vessels while in dock - 85 --- - - - - - 17 58 - - 160 Regent's Canal Dock— Warehouses 10 4 12 14 11 15 17 15 4 9 65 41 217 Vessels while in dock - - - - - - - - - - - - - St. Katharine's Dock— Warehouses 172 172 170 164 146 223 215 137 54 100 39 72 1,664 Vessels while in dock - - - - - - - - - - - - - London Dock— Warehouses 114 83 127 160 96 160 107 84 40 29 70 20 1,090 Vessels while in dock - 70 - - - 56 - - - 9 - - 135 Royal Albert Dock— Warehouses 68 72 114 98 107 103 72 83 58 4o 146 35 1,001 Vessels while in dock 162 141 146 245 169 269 79 70 200 28 123 21 1,653 Roval Victoria Dock— Warehouses 122 42 95 119 37 42 125 86 32 21 38 24 783 Vessels while in dock 31 28 88 22 92 101 22 52 20 25 28 27 536 Kins Georee V. Dock— Warehouses 27 36 37 40 74 35 24 21 14 16 46 14 384 Vessels while in dock 268 167 97 181 45 144 67 79 113 51 163 148 1,523 West India Dock— Warehouses 43 26 91 75 52 41 46 43 29 41 36 34 557 Vessels while in dock 18 39 28 17 80 61 - 38 39 9 14 26 369 East India Dock— Warehouses 5 1 3 8 2 8 4 4 - - 9 18 62 Vessels while in dock 208 46 48 27 51 108 165 68 32 103 32 81 969 Tilburv Dock— Warehouses 55 42 72 53 61 58 21 15 14 16 24 17 448 Vessels while in dock 78 57 80 150 88 126 245 78 46 21 104 29 1,102 River— While in River - - 320 - - 169 - 8 - 25 11 602 1,135 Totals 1,680 1,359 2,228 1,863 1,409 2,042 1,774 1,312 811 877 1,186 1,364 17,905 Total from 1st January to 31st December, 1929 :— In Dock Warehouses 9,370 On Vessels while in Dock and River 8,535 Total 17,905 APPENDIX XXVII. ANALYSIS OF THE RETURN OF RATS EXAMINED DURING JANUARY TO AUGUST, 1929. Dock. No. from eachDock. Found Dead. Trapped. Found Dead. Trapped. Infected. NonInfected. Infected. Non-Infected. Infected. NonInfected. Millwall Dock 154 - 154 M.D. - M.R. - M.A. - M.M. - M.D. 141 M.R. 13 M.A. - M.M. - - 154 M.D. - M.E. - M.A. - M.M. - M.D. 141 M.R. 13 M.A. - M.M. - Found Dead. - Trapped - Found Dead. - Trapped Royal Albert Dock 92 4 88 - 4 - - 52 36 - - - 92 - - - - 52 40 - - - - 4 88 West India Dock 14 - 14 - - - - 12 2 - - - 14 - - - - 12 2 - - - - - 14 East India Dock 10 - 10 - - - - 6 4 - - - 10 - - - - 6 4 - - - - - 10 Victoria Dock 108 - 108 - - - - 85 23 - - - 108 - - - - 85 23 - - - - - 108 Tilbury Dock 161 - 161 - - - - 60 101 - - - 161 - - - - 60 101 - - - - - 161 King George V. Dock 38 - 38 - - - - 30 8 - - - 38 - - - - 30 8 - - - - 38 Surrey Commercial Dock 109 3 106 - 3 - - 78 28 - - - 109 - - - - 78 31 - - - - 3 106 SouthWest India Dock 17 - 17 - - - 9 8 - - - 17 - - - - 9 8 - - - - 17 London & St. Katharine Docks - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - Unknown 3 - 3 - - - - 3 - - - - 3 - - - - 3 - - - - - - 3 706 7 699 - 7 - - 476 223 - - - 706 - - - - 476 230 - - - - 7 699 706 706 706 r f06 706 M.D. = Mus decumanus (Norvegicus)i M.R.= Mus Rattus. M.A. = Mus alexandrinus, M.M. = Mus Musculus. 68 APPENDIX XXVIII. BACTERIOLOGICAL EXAMINATION OF RATS DURING MONTHS OF AUGUST TO DECEMBER, 1929. Source. Total Examined. Black Rats. Brown Rats. Species Unknown. Mice. Found Dead. Trapped, Poisoned, &c. Found Dead. Trapped, Poisoned, &c. Found Dead. Trapped, Poisoned, &c. Found Dead. Trapped. Poisoned, &c. Bats Infected with Plague. Vessels 413 6 309 - 98 - - - - Nil. London Dock 115 - 15 5 95 - - - - Nil. St. Katharine Dock 124 - 71 - 53 - - - - Nil. Regent's Canal Dock 73 - 18 - 55 - - - - Nil. Surrey Commercial Dock 42 - 33 - 9 - - - Nil. Poplar Dock 60 - 3 1 56 - - - - Nil. West India Dock 45 - 37 - 8 - - - - Nil. South West India Dock 36 - 18 - 18 - - - - Nil. East India Dock 5 - 3 - 2 - - - - Nil. Royal Victoria Dock 32 - 19 1 12 - - - - Nil. Royal Albert Dock 38 - 8 - 30 - - - - Nil. King George V. Dock 18 1 10 - 7 - - - - Nil. Tilbury Dock 49 - 22 - 27 - - - - Nil. M illwall Dock 222 1 128 2 91 - - - - Nil. St. Katharine Wharf 3 - 3 - - - - - Nil. Totals 1,275 8 697 9 561 - - - - Nil. APPENDIX XXIX.—Fumigation of Vessels for the Destruction of Eats. Date Fumigated, 1929. Name of Vessel. Necessity for Fumigation. Action taken. No. of Rats reported found dead after Fumigation. Jan. 1 ss. "Port Darwin" Owners' request for Deratisation Certificate. Fumigated with sulphur dioxide. Nil. „5 ss. "Alaunia" „ „ „ „ Nil. „ 5 ss. "Minnetonka" „ „ „ „ 54 „5 ss. "Ruahine" „ „ Fumigated with hydrogen cyanide. Nil. „6 ss. "Napierstar" „ „ Fumigated with sulphur dioxide. Nil. „7 ss. "Largs Bay" „ „ „ „ Nil. „ 8 ss. "Port Darwin" „ „ „ „ Nil. „ 11 ss. "Umvoti" „ „ Fumigated with hydrogen cyanide. Nil. „ 11 ss. "Port Hunter" „ „ Fumigated with sulphur dioxide. 16 „ 11 ss. "Aurania" „ „ „ „ Nil. „ 11 ss. "Megantic" „ „ „ „ 134 „ 12 ss. "Rimutaka" „ „ Fumigated with hydrogen cyanide. Nil. „ 12 ss. "Ormonde" „ „ „ „ Nil. „ 12 ss. "Hesperides" „ „ Fumigated with sulphur dioxide. 11 „ 12 ss. "Athelmere" „ „ Fumigated with hydrogen cyanide. Nil. „ 12 ss. "Dunluce Castle" Rat Infested „ „ 138 „ 14 ss. "Borderer" Owners' request for Deratisation Certificate. Fumigated with sulphur dioxide. 42 22 ss. "Ferndale" „ „ „ „ Nil. „ 23 ss. "Campeador" Rat Infested Fumigated with hydrogen cyanide. 70 24 ss. "Moreton Bay" Owners' request for Deratisation Certificate. Fumigated with sulphur dioxide. 65 „ 25 ss. "Port Campbell" „ „ „ „ Nil. „ 26 ss. "Port Napier" „ „ „ „ 42 „ 26 ss. "Orford" „ „ Fumigated with hydrogen cyanide. Nil. „ 31 ss. "Highland Piper" „ „ „ „ Nil. Feb. 9 ss. "Oronsay" „ „ „ „ Nil. „ 10 ss. "War Sepoy" „ „ „ „ Nil. 69 Fumigation of Vessels foe the Destruction of Rats—continued. Date Fumigated. 1929. Name of Vessel. Necessity for Fumigation. Action taken. No. of Eats reported found dead after Fumigation. Feb. 12 ss. "Bassa" Owners' request for Deratisation Certificates Fumigated with sulphur dioxide. 6 „ 16 ss. "Minnewaska" „ „ „ „ 24 „ 28 ss. " Baronesa" „ „ „ „ Nil. „ 23 ss. "Hobson's Bay" „ „ „ „ Nil. „ 23 ss. "Taranaki" „ „ „ „ Nil. „ 23 ss. "Port Wellington" „ „ „ „ Nil. „ 23 ss. "Orama" „ „ Fumigated with hydrogen cyanide. Nil. ,, 24 ss. "Africstar" „ „ Fumigated with sulphur dioxide. Nil. „ 26 ss. "Highland Pride" „ „ Fumigated with hydrogen cyanide. Nil. „ 28 ss. "Port Nicholson" „ „ Fumigated with sulphur dioxide. Nil. „ - ss. "Carlow Castle" Rat Infested Deratised by trapping 81 Mar. 2 ss. "Almeda" Owners' request for Deratisation Certificate. Fumigated with sulphur dioxide. Nil. „ 4 ss. "Rotorna" „ „ Fumigated with hydrogen cyanide. 5 ,, 6 ss. "H ighland Rover" „ „ „ „ Nil. „ 7 ss. "Port Hardy" „ „ Fumigated with sulphur Nil. 7 ss. "London Exchange „ „ dioxide. 7 „ 7 ss. "Ranpura" Rat Infested Deratised by trapping and poisoning. 36 „ 9 ss. "Osterley" Owners' request for Deratisation Certificate. Fumigated with hydrogen cyanide. Nil. „ 11 ss. "Upwey Grange" „ „ Fumigated with sulphur dioxide. Nil. „ 14 ss. "Fotinia" Rat Infested „ „ 144 „ 14 ss. "Kent" Owners' request for Deratisation Certificate. Fumigated with hydrogen cyanide. 1 „ 16 ss. "Rodneystar" „ „ Fumigated with sulphur dioxide. Nil. „ 18 ss. "Ruapehu" „ „ „ „ Nil. „ 22/23 ss. "Uba" „ „ „ „ 160 „ 23 ss. "Andalucia" „ „ „ „ Nil. „ 24 ss. "Petrel" „ „ „ „ 15 „ 23 ss. "Orsova" „ „ Fumigated with hydrogen cyanide. Nil. ,, 23 ss. "Mahia" „ „ Fumigated with sulphur dioxide. 25 „ 23 ss. "Esperance Bay" „ „ „ „ Nil. „ 25 ss. "Remuera" „ „ Fumigated with hydrogen cyanide. Nil. „ 26 ss. "Patani" Rat Infested Fumigated with sulphur dioxide and trapped. 60 (8 fum.) (52 traps) „ 26 ss. "Duquesa" Owners' request for Deratisation Certificate. Fumigated with sulphur dioxide. Nil. „ 30 ss. "Surrey" „ „ „ „ 21 „ 30 ss. "Stuartstar" „ „ „ „ Nil. April 2 ss. "Hardwicke Grange" „ „ „ „ Nil. „ 4 ss. "Port Hobart" „ „ „ „ Nil. „ 5 ss. "Kaisar-I-Hind" Rat Infested Trapped and poison baits laid. 14 „ 9 ss. "Marquesa" Owners' request for Deratisation Certificate. Fumigated with sulphur dioxide. Nil. „ 12 ss. "Orvieto" „ „ Fumigated with hydrogen cyanide. Nil. „ 13 ss. "British Prince" „ „ Fumigated with sulphur dioxide. Nil. „ 15 ss. "Mahana" „ „ „ „ 28 „ 16 ss. "El Argentino" „ „ „ „ Nil. „ 18 ss. "Jervis Bay" „ „ „ „ Nil. „ 19 ss. "Minnesota" „ „ „ „ 89 „ 20 ss. "Avila" „ „ „ „ Nil. „ 19 ss. "Jekri" Rat Infested Trapped 11 to May 7 70 Fumigation of Vessels for the Destruction of Rats—continued. Date Fumigated 1929. Name of Vessel. Necessity for Fumigation. Action taken. No. of Rats reported found dead after Fumigation. April 24 ss. "Port Huon" Owners' request for Deratisation Certificate. Fumigated with sulphur dioxide. Nil. „ 25 ss. "Tabaristan" Bat Infested „ „ 151 „ 28 ss. "Harunui" Owners' request for Deratisation Certificate. Fumigated with hydrogen cyanide. Nil May 1 ss. "Port Pirie" „ „ „ „ Nil. „ 6 ss. "Beldis" „ „ „ „ Nil. „ 9 ss. "Magician" „ „ „ „ Nil. „ 10 ss. "Diplomat" „ „ „ „ 3 „ 10 ss. "Ormonde" „ „ „ „ Nil. „ 11 ss. "Hororata" „ „ „ „ Nil. „ 12 ss. "Albatross" „ „ Fumigated with sulphur dioxide. 12 „ 14 ss. "El Uruguayo" „ „ „ „ Nil. „ 14 ss. "Cano" „ „ Fumigated with hydrogen cyanide. 44 „ 17 ss. "Largs Bay" „ „ Fumigated with sulphur dioxide. 14 „ 21 ss. "Port Alma" „ „ „ „ Nil. „ 23 ss. "El Paraguayo" „ „ „ „ Nil. „ 25 ss. "Sutherland Grange" „ „ „ „ Nil. „ 28 ss. "Ruahine" „ „ „ „ Nil. „ 25 ss. "Chepstow Castle" Bat Infested Fumigated with sulphur dioxide, traps set and poison baits laid. 132 (85 fum.) (47 traps, &c.) „ 29 ss. "Orator" Owners' request for Deratisation Certificate. Fumigated with sulphur dioxide. 30 „ 31 ss. "Moldavia" Rat Infested Trapped 30 June 4 ss. "Pangbourne" „ „ Fumigated with sulphur dioxide. 56 „ 7 ss. "Coptic" Owners' request for Deratisation Certificate. „ „ Nil. „ 8 ss. "Oronsay" „ „ Fumigated with hydrogen cyanide. Nil. „ 12 ss. "Elstree Grange" „ „ Fumigated with sulphur dioxide. Nil. „ 13 ss. "Port Curtis" „ „ „ „ Nil. „ 15 ss. "Maryland" „ „ „ „ 94 „ 15 ss. "Herminius" „ „ „ „ 67 „ 15 ss. "Upwey Grange" „ „ „ „ Nil. „ 18 ss. "Istina" Rat Infested Fumigated with hydrogen cyanide. 100 „ 22 ss. "Orama" Owners' request for Deratisation Certificate. „ „ Nil. „ 22 ss. "Rimutaka" „ „ „ „ Nil. „ 28 ss. "Hobson's Bay" „ „ Fumigated with sulphur dioxide. Nil. July 1 ss. "Africstar" „ „ „ „ Nil. „ 1 ss. "Macedonia" Rat Infested Traps set 21 „ 3 ss. "Pont de Dunkerque" Owners' request for Deratisation Certificate. Fumigated with hydrogen cyanide. 57 „ 4 ss. "Port Napier" „ „ Fumigated with sulphur dioxide. 18 „ 5 ss. "Osterley" „ „ „ „ Nil. „ 5 ss. "Port Hunter" „ „ „ „ Nil. „ 7 ss. "Almedastar" „ „ „ „ Nil. „ 9 ss. "Highland Warrior" „ „ Fumigated with hydrogen cyanide. Nil. „ 10 ss. "Baltriger" „ „ „ „ 8 „ 11 ss. "Hardwicke Grange" „ „ Fumigated with sulphur dioxide. Nil. „ 13 ss. "Karamea" „ „ „ „ Nil. „ 13 ss. "Napierstar" „ „ Fumigated with hydrogen cyanide. Nil. Nil. „ 15 ss. "Galvan" „ „ „ „ Not known. „ 20 ss. "Rotorua" „ „ „ „ 5 „ 20 ss. "Port Victor" „ „ Fumigated with sulphur dioxide. Nil. „ 20 ss. "Orsova" „ „ Fumigated with hydrogen cyanide. Nil. 71 Fumigation of Vessels for the Destruction of Rats—continued. Date. Fumigated. 1929. Name of Vessel. Necessity for Fumigation. Action taken. No. of Rats reported found dead after Fumigation. July 20 ss. "Student" Owners' request for Deratisation Certificate. Fumigated with sulphur dioxide. Nil. „ 21 ss. "Rodneystar" „ „ „ „ Nil. „ 24 ss. "Duquesa" „ „ „ „ Nil. „ 26 ss. "Marquesa" „ „ „ „ Nil. „ 26 ss. "El Argentino" „ „ „ „ Nil. „ 26 ss. "Bakana" „ „ Fumigated with sulphur dioxide and trapping. 16 „ 27 ss. "Guildford Castle" „ „ Fumigated with hydrogen cyanide. 49 „ 28 ss. "Andaluciastar" „ „ Fumigated with sulphur dioxide. Nil. „ 29 ss. "Helenus" „ „ „ „ Nil. Aug. 1 ss. "Highland Chieftain" „ „ Fumigated with hydrogen cyanide. Nil. „ 3 ss. "Stuartstar" „ „ Fumigated with sulphur dioxide. Nil. „ 3 ss. "Pengreep" Rat Infested „ „ 135 „ 6 ss. "Taranaki" Owners' request for Deratisation Certificate. „ „ Nil. „ 6 ss. "Sutton Hall" Rat Infested „ „ 47 (28 fum.) (19 trap) „ 8 ss. "Port Wellington" Owners' request for Deratisation Certificate. „ „ Nil. „ 9 ss. "Duquesa" „ „ „ „ Nil. „ 10 ss. "Dunster Grange" „ „ „ „ Nil. „ 10 ss. "Avelonastar" „ „ „ „ Nil. „ 10 ss. "Orvieto" „ „ Fumigated with hydrogen cyanide. Nil. „ 10 ss. "Remuera" „ „ „ „ Nil. „ 10 ss. "Moreton Bay „ „ Fumigated with sulphur dioxide. 11 „ 12 ss. "Highland Brigade" „ „ Fumigated with hydrogen cyanide. Nil. „ 16 ss. "Port Nicholson" „ „ Fumigated with sulphur dioxide. Nil. „ 18 ss. "Edda" Rat Infested „ „ 172 „ 23 ss. "El Argentino" Owners' request for Deratisation Certificate. „ „ Nil. „ 24 ss. "Mississippi" „ „ „ „ Nil. „ 24 ss. "Ruapehu" „ „ Fumigated with hydrogen cyanide. Nil. „ 25 ss. "Avilastar" „ „ „ „ Nil. „ 28 ss. "Balranald" „ „ „ „ Nil. „ 30 ss. "Port Hobart" „ „ „ „ Nil. „ 31 ss. "Clan Chattan" „ „ „ „ 33 (31 fum.) (2 trap) „ 31 ss. "Africstar" „ „ „ „ Nil. Sept. 3 ss. "Kaisar-I-Hind" Rat Infested Fumigated with sulphur dioxide. 169 (110 fum.) (59 trap) „ 4 ss. "Maimoa" Owners' request for Deratisation Certificate. „ „ Nil. „ 6 ss. "St. Andrew" „ „ „ „ 8 „ 6 ss. "Malatian" „ „ „ „ 37 „ 7 ss. "Upwey Grange" „ „ „ „ Nil. „ 7 ss. "Otranto" „ „ Fumigated with hydrogen cyanide. Nil. „ 8 ss. "Almedastar" „ „ Fumigated with sulphur dioxide. Nil. „ 10 ss. "El Paraguayo" „ „ „ „ Nil. „ 10 ss. "Highland Monarch" „ „ „ „ Nil. „ 11 ss. "Rangitiki" „ „ Fumigated with hydrogen cyanide. 32 „ 13 ss. "Port Dunedin" „ „ Fumigated with sulphur dioxide. Nil. „ 16 ss. "Traveller" „ „ „ „ 9 „ 20 ss. "Nigaristan" „ „ „ „ 14 „ 20 ss. "Baronesa" „ „ „ „ Nil. „ 20 ss. "Port Huon" „ „ „ „ Nil. 72 Fumigation of Vessels foe the Destruction of Rats—continued. Date. Fumigated 1929. Name of Vessel. Necessity for Fumigation. Action taken. No. of Rats reported found dead after Fumigation. Sept. 21 ss. "Baltavia" Owners' request for Deratisation Certificate. Fumigated with hydrogen cyanide. Nil. „ 22 ss. "Eodneystar" „ „ Fumigated with sulphur dioxide. 9 „ 22 ss. "Missouri" „ „ „ „ — „ 26 ss. "Princesa" „ „ „ „ Nil. „ 21/26 ss. "Moldavia" Slight Eat Infestation Trapping 11 „ 28 ss. "Esperance Bay" Owners' request for Deratisation Certificate. Fumigated with sulphur dioxide. Nil. „ 28 ss. "San Andres" „ „ „ „ 4 „ 28 ss. "Andaluciastar" „ „ „ „ Nil. „ 19/30 ss. "Razmak" Rat Infestation Trapping 19 rats. 99 mice. „ Oct. 4 ss. "Ruahine" Owners' request for Deratisation Certificate. Fumigated with hydrogen cyanide. Nil. „5 ss. "Llangorse" Rat Infestation Fumigated with sulphur dioxide. 47 „ 6 ss. "Stuartstar" Owners' request for Deratisation Certificate. „ „ „ „ Nil. Nil. „ 7 ss. "St. Dunstan" „ „ „ „ 16 „ 8 ss. "Arundale" Eat Infestation „ „ Not known „ 13 ss. "Avelonastar" Owners' request for Deratisation Certificate. „ „ Nil. „ 17 ss. "Patani" „ „ Fumigated with sulphur dioxide and trapping. 23 (18 fum.) (5 trap) „ 18 ss. "Port Gisborne" „ „ Fumigated with sulphur dioxide. Nil. „ 18 ss. "Director" „ „ „ „ Nil. „ 19 ss. "Dunster Grange" „ „ „ „ Nil. „ 20 ss. "Vestalia" Eat Infestation „ „ 100 „ 27 ss. "Avilastar" Owners' request for Deratisation Certificate. „ „ Nil. „ 27 ss. "Jamaica Producer" „ „ Fumigated with hydrogen cyanide. 5 „ 30 ss. "Eedstart" „ „ Fumigated with sulphur dioxide. 35 „ 30 ss. "Baltonia" „ „ Fumigated with hydrogen cyanide. Nil. „ 31 ss. "Hardwicke Grange" „ „ Fumigated with sulphur dioxide. Nil. Nov. 1 ss. "Rangitata" „ „ Fumigated with hydrogen cyanide. 6 „ 2 ss. "Africstar" „ „ Fumigated with sulphur dioxide. Nil. „ 3 ss. "Ingoma" „ „ Fumigated with hydrogen cyanide, and trapping 108 (65 fum.) (43 trap) „ 4 ss. "Rodneystar" „ „ Fumigated with sulphur dioxide. Nil. „ 5 ss. "Rimutaka" „ „ „ „ Nil. „ s ss. "Largs Bay" „ „ „ „ 47 „ 9 ss. "Almedastar" „ „ „ „ Nil. „ 10 ss. "Jamaica Settler" „ „ Fumigated with hydrogen cyanide, and trapping 65 (51 fum.) (14 trap) „ 15 ss. "El Argentino" „ „ Fumigated with sulphur dioxide. Nil. „ 16 ss. "Tainui" „ „ „ „ 56 „ 24 ss. "Jamaica Planter" „ „ „ „ 49 „ 25 ss. "Merkara" „ „ Fumigated with hydrogen cyanide. 1 „ 27 ss. "Hurunui" „ „ „ „ Nil. „ 29 ss. "Carmania" „ „ Fumigated with sulphur dioxide. 45 „ 29 ss. "Rotorua" „ „ Fumigated with hydrogen cyanide. 6 „ — ss. "Stork" Eat Infestation Trapped 7 73 Fumigation of Vessels for the Destruction of Rats—continued. Date Fumigated. 1929. Name of Vessel. Necessity for Fumigation. Action taken. No. of Rats reported found dead after Fumigation. Nov. 29 ss. "Upwey Grange" Owners' request for Deratisation Certificate. Fumigated with sulphur dioxide. Nil. „ 30 ss. "Baradine" „ „ „ „ 57 „ 30 ss. "Glaucus" „ „ „ „ Nil. Dec. 1 ss. "Andaluciastar" „ „ „ „ Nil. „ 8 ss. "Port. Brisbane" „ „ „ „ Nil. „ 9 ss. "Napierstar" „ „ „ „ Nil. „ 9 ss. "Defender" „ „ Fumigated with sulphur dioxide and trapping. 4 (2 fum.) (2 trap) „ 11 ss. "Moreton Bay" „ „ Fumigated with sulphur dioxide. Nil. „ 13 ss. "Duquesa" „ „ „ „ Nil. „ 13 ss. "Biafra" Rat Infested Fumigated with sulphur dioxide and trapping. 58 (28 fum.) (30 trap) „ 13 ss. "Port Melbourne" Owners' request for Deratisation Certificate. Fumigated with sulphur dioxide. 25 „ 15 ss. "Avelonastar" „ „ „ „ Nil. „ 16 ss. "Campeador" „ „ Fumigated with hydrogen cyanide. 110 „ 18 ss. "Tamaroa" „ „ Fumigated with sulphur dioxide. Nil. „ 28 ss. "Avilastar" „ „ „ „ Nil. APPENDIX XXX. INTERNATIONAL SANITARY CONVENTION OF PARIS, 1926. Deratisation Exemption Certificates. In compliance with application made by shipowners, deratisation exemption certificates were issued in accordance with the provisions of the above Convention in respect of the following vessels, after thorough examination of the vessels had been made by officers of the Port Sanitary Authority:— Date Certificate issued. 1929. Name of Vessel. Where lying. Jan. 1 ss. "Ascania" King George V. Dock. „ 3 ss. "Glenbank" Victoria Dock. „ 8 ss. "Olyeric " Thameshaven. „ 8 ss. "San Leopolda" „ „ 15 ss. "Sapele" Millwall Dock. „ 21 ss. "Bakana" „ „ „ 21 ss. "Ariano" Surrey Commercial Dock. „ 22 ss. "Mongolia" Tilbury Dock. „ 29 ss. "Saltersgate" South West India Dock. „ 29 ss. "Llanstephan Castle" Tilbury Dock. „ 31 ss. "London Mariner" Surrey Commercial Dock. Feb. 5 ss. "Nowshera" Royal Albert Dock. „ 7 ss. "Moldavia" Tilbury Dock. „ l7 ss. "Celticstar" Victoria Dock. „ 8 ss. "Treherbert" Bellamy's Wharf. „ 11 ss. "Missouri" Royal Albert Dock. „ 13 ss. "Llandovery Castle" Tilbury Dock. „ 15 ss. "Comorin" „ „ „ 15 ss. "Crane" Fresh Wharf. „ 20 ss. "Bampton Castle" South West India Dock. „ 20 ss. "Mantua" King George V. Dock. „ 20 ss. "Baharistan" Millwall Dock. „ 21 ss. "Gloucester Castle" East India Dock. „ 22 ss. "Valemore" Gravesend Buoys. „ 22 ss. "Dromore Castle" East India Dock. „ 22 ss. "Llandaff Castle" Royal Albert Dock. 74 Deratisation Exemption Certificates—continued. Date Certificate issued. 1929. Name of Vessel. Where lying. Mar. 1 ss. "London Shipper" Surrey Commercial Dock. „ 4 ss. "Kurdistan" Bellamy's Wharf. „ 7 ss. "Narkunda" Tilbury Dock. „ 7 ss. "Beaverbrae" Surrey Commercial Dock. „ 12 ss. "Durham Castle" East India Dock. „ 18 ss. "Bandah Shahpaur" Millwall Dock. „ 18 ss. "Cathay" Tilbury Dock. „ 18 ss. "Morea" King George V. Dock. „ 22 ss. "Beaverford" Surrey Commercial Dock. „ 25 ss. "Beaverhill" „ „ „ 28 ss. "Highland Monarch" Royal Albert Dock. April 2 ss. "London Merchant" Surrey Commercial Dock. „ 4 ss. "Mooltan" Tilbury Dock. „ 8 ss. "Tekoa" Victoria Dock. „ 8 ss. "Avelona" „ „ „ 9 ss. "Mittlemeer" River Medway. „ 12 ss. "Normanstar" Victoria Dock. „ 12 ss. "Empirestar" „ „ „ 17 ss. "Cumberland" Royal Albert Dock. „ 17 ss. "Rajputana" King George V. Dock. „ 18 ss. "Chitral" Tilbury Dock. „ 18 ss. "Banbury Castle" East India Dock. „ 19 ss. "Nagara" Victoria Dock. „ 23 ss. "Svinta" Morocco Wharf. „ 24 ss. "San Eduardo" South West India Dock. „ 24 ss. "Bradenburg" „ „ „ 26 ss. "Inverarder" Purfleet. „ 26 ss. "Ripley Castle" East India Dock. „ 26 ss. "Adjutant" Fresh Wharf. „ 30 ss. "Jersey City" Surrey Commercial Dock. May 2 ss. "Berwick Law" Victoria Dock. „ 3 ss. "Maloja" Tilbury Dock. „ 7 ss. "Balranald" King George V. Dock. „ 7 ss. "Barrabool" „ „ „ 8 ss. "Darino" London Dock. „ 10 ss. "Razmak" Royal Albert Dock. „ 18 ss. "Highland Chieftain" „ „ „ 13 ss. "San Zotico" South West India Dock. „ 16 ss. "Ranpura" Tilbury Dock. „ 16 ss. "Dundee Castle" East India Dock. „ 17 ss. "Card Maru" „ „ „ 23 ss. "Rawalpindi" Tilbury Dock. „ 24 ss. "Nortonian" Royal Albert Dock. „ 29 ss. "Naldera" King George V. Dock. „ 29 ss. "Viceroy of India" Tilbury Dock. „ 29 ss. "War Nizam" Thameshaven. June 3 ss. "Natia" Victoria Dock. „ 5 ss. "Gloucester Castle" East India Dock. „ 6 ss. "Llandovery Castle" Tilbury Dock. „ 12 ss. "British Ardour" Gravesend Reach. „ 14 ss. "Beaverburn" Surrey Commercial Dock. „ 14 ss. "Arandora Star" Victoria Dock. „ 17 ss. "Highland Monarch" Royal Albert Dock. „ 25 ss. "Grantully Castle" East India Dock. „ 26 ss. "Karmala" „ „ „ 26 ss. "Narkunda" Tilbury Dock. „ 26 ss. "Megantic" King George V. Dock. „ 27 ss. "Beaverdale" Surrey Commercial Dock. „ 29 ss. "Campeador" London Dock. July 3 ss. "Electrician" West India Dock. „ 8 ss. "Cathay" King George V. Dock. „ 11 ss. "Morea" „ „ „ 17 ss. "Llanstephan Castle" Royal Albert Dock. „ 17 ss. "Mentor" King George V. Dock. „ 18 ss. "Shahristan" Millwall Dock. „ 22 ss. "San Leopoldo" Thameshaven. „ 23 ss. "Nellore" East India Dock. „ 24 ss. "Kalyan" „ „ „ 24 ss. "Comorin" Tilbury Dock. „ 25 ss. "Delta" Royal Albert Dock. „ 25 ss. "Baradine" King George V. Dock. „ 29 ss. "Piako" Royal Albert Dock. 75 Deratisation Exemption Certificates—continued. Date Certificate issued. 1929. Name of Vessel. Where lying. Aug. 6 ss. "Chitral" Tilbury Dock. „ 12 ss. "Glengorm Castle" East India Dock. „ 12 ss. "Norfolk" Victoria Dock. „ 12 ss. "Dagland" Isle of Grain „ 13 ss. "Bulgarian" Millwall Dock. „ 13 ss. "Llandaff Castle" Royal Albert Dock. „ 14 ss. "Crane" Fresh Wharf. „ 21 ss. "Badagry" Millwall Dock. „ 27 ss. "London Exchange" Surrey Commercial and Victoria Docks. „ 28 ss. "Crawford Castle" East India Dock. „ 30 ss. "Beaverbrae" Surrey Commercial Dock. „ 30 ss. "Garth Castle" East India Dock. Sept. 3 ss. "Mongolia" Tilbury Dock. „ 7 ss. "British Light" Greenwich Buoys. „ 9 ss. "Invergail" Thameshaven. „ 11 ss. "Dromore Castle" East India Dock. „ 16 ss. "Prahsu" Millwall Dock. „ 16 ss. "Fordsdale" King George V. Dock. „ 16 ss. "Surrey" Royal Albert Dock. „ 23 ss. "City of Oxford" Millwall Dock. „ 23 ss. "Petrel" Butler's Wharf. „ 23 ss. "Beaverhill" Surrey Commercial Dock. „ 24 ss. "London Corporation" „ „ „ 24 ss. "Brandenburg" London Dock. „ 25 ss. "Orford" Tilbury Dock. „ 25 ss. "Svinta" Regent's Canal Dock. Oct. 4 ss. "Oronsay" Tilbury Dock. „ 4 ss. "Rawalpindi" King George V. Dock. „ 8 ss. "Ballarat" „ „ „ 9 ss. "Geddington Court" East India Dock. „ 9 ss. "Capri" London Dock. „ 10 ss. "Ranchi" Tilbury Dock. „ 14 ss. "Bendigo" King George V. Dock. „ 15 ss. "Nardana" East India Dock. „ 16 ss. "Narkunda" Tilbury Dock. „ 16 ss. "Gloucester Castle" East India Dock. „ 17 ss. "Oliva" Surrey Commercial Dock. „ 24 ss. "London Merchant" „ „ „ 25 ss. "Beaverford" „ „ „ 25 ss. "Orontes" Tilbury Dock. „ 29 ss. "Cathay" „ „ „ 29 ss. "Grantully Castle" East India Dock. „ 31 ss. "Darino" London Dock. „ 31 ss. "Rajputana" Tilbury Dock. „ 31 ss. "Walter Leonhardt" Surrey Commercial Dock. Nov. 4 ss. "Orama" Tilbury Dock. „ 6 ss. "Viceroy of India" „ „ „ 6 ss. "Drake" London Dock. „ 7 ss. "Demodocus" King George V. Dock. „ 7 ss. "San Lamberto" Thameshaven. „ 8 ss. "Durham Castle" East India Dock. „ 11 ss. "Mooltan" Tilbury Dock. „ 13 ss. "Barracoo" Millwall Dock. „ 15 ss. "Umvoti" East India Dock. „ 18 ss. "Mantua" King George V. Dock. „ 20 ss. "Ormonde" Tilbury Dock. „ 21 ss. "Kashmir" Royal Albert Dock. „ 21 ss. "Bandah Shahpour" Millwall Dock. „ 26 ss. "Jekri" „ „ „ 27 ss. "Guildford Castle" East India Dock. „ 27 ss. "Treport" Regent's Canal Dock. „ 27 ss. "Chitral" Tilbury Dock. „ 29 ss. "Telamon" King George V. Dock. Dec. 3 ss. "Llangibby Castle" Royal Albert Dock. „ 5 ss. "Ranpura" Tilbury Dock. „ 5 ss. "Orsova" „ „ „ 5 ss. "Glengorm Castle" East India Dock. „ 6 ss. "City of Birmingham" Millwall Dock. „ 9 ss. "Jolly Norman" Britannia Dry Dock. „ 9 ss. "City of Palermo" East India Dock. 76 Deratisation Exemption Certificates—continued. Date Certificate issued. 1929. Name of Vessel. Where lying. Dec. 9 ss. "Dagmar" Hay's Wharf. „ 9 ss. "Mongolia" Surrey Commercial Dock „ 11 ss. "Carlow Castle" East India Dock. „ 11 ss. "San Quirino" Thameshaven. „ 11 ss. "Hontestroom" Hay's Wharf. „ 11 ss. "Maloja" Tilbury Dock. „ 13 ss. "Ingerfire" Surrey Commercial Dock. „ 16 ss. "Vidar" Hay's Wharf. „ 16 ss. "Hangland" Surrey Commercial Dock. „ 17 ss. "Lingestroom" Fenning's Wharf. „ 17 ss. "Orvieto" Tilbury Dock. „ 17 ss. "Margrethe" Mill wall Dock. „ 18 ss. "Whitgift" Victoria Dock. „ 18 ss. "Comorin" Tilbury Dock. „ 19 ss. "Tamnamore" Regent's Canal Dock. „ 19 ss. "Jolly Guy" Britannia Dry Dock. „ 19 ss. "Jolly Frank" „ „ „ 19 ss. "Silverthorn" Victoria Wharf. „ 20 ss. "Arandorastar" Royal Albert Dock. „ 20 ss. "Scottish Chief" Thameshaven. „ 23 ss. "Vilja" Port Victoria. „ 23 ss. "Conifer" Prince's Tier. „ 23 ss. "Corea" Victoria Wharf. „ 27 ss. "Wilton" Surrey Commercial Dock. „ 30 ss. "Barrabool" King George V. Dock. „ 30 ss. "Remuera" Royal Albert Dock. „ 30 ss. "Grebe" London Dock. „ 30 ss. "Bur" Surrey Commercial Dock. „ 31 ss. "Ascania" King George V. Dock. „ 31 ss. "Otranto" Tilbury Dock. „ 31 ss. "Calgaric" Royal Albert Dock. „ 31 ss. "Laverock" London Dock. „ 31 ss. "Raven" Norwood Buoys. „ 31 ss. ''Macedonia" Surrey Commercial Dock. 77 APPENDIX XXXI. Fumigation of Second-hand Bags. For the purpose of exportation the undermentioned bales of Second-hand Bags were fumigated under the supervision of the Port Sanitary Authority and Certificates issued in respect thereof:— Date Fumigated. 1929. Contained in. Lying at. Quantity. Jan. 5 Ba. "Ceylon" London Dock 15 bales. „ 5 Ba. "Cromer" Regent's Canal Dock 14 „ „ 5 Ba. "East Ham" „ „ 12 „ „ 9 Ba. "Argo" Tilbury Dock 450 „ „ 26 Ltr. "Madria" Regent's Canal Dock 65 „ Feb. 13 Ba. "Battersea" „ „ 65 „ „ 16 Ltr. "Cork" „ „ 21 „ „ 28 Ba. "Kinross" „ „ 56 „ Mar. 1 Ba. "Cromer" „ „ 24 „ „ 1 Ba. "Fulham" „ „ 60 „ „ 14 Ba. "Acorn" „ „ 15 „ „ 16 Ba. "Perth" „ „ 55 „ „ 22 Ba. "Chelsea" „ „ 50 „ April 13 Ba. "Chelsea" „ „ 50 „ „ 29 Ba. "Battersea" „ „ 41 „ „ 29 Ba. "Clan" „ „ 13 „ May 28 Ba. "Chelsea" „ „ 10 „ „ 28 Ba. "Cork" „ „ 37 „ „ 31 Ba. "Kitty" „ „ 20 „ June 6 Ba. "Marzetti" Tilbury Dock 2,000 bales. Ba. "McMarron" „ „ Ba. "Duncan" „ „ Ba. "Doris" „ „ „ 10 Ba. "Hackney" Regent's Canal Dock 20 „ „ 28 Ba. "Cromer" London Dock 34 „ July 2 Ba. "Greenwich" Greenwich Reach 34 „ „ 24 Ba. "Cork" London Dock 25 „ Aug. 9 Ba. "Summer" Tilbury Dock 200 „ „ 10 Ba. "Corporal" Deptford Creek 60 „ „ 13 Ba. "Poplar" London Dock — „ 16 Ba. "Perth" Regent's Canal Dock 60 „ Sept. 3 Ba. "Rhine" Lower Pool 21 „ „ 3 Ba. "East Ham" Millwall 13 „ „ 14 Ba. "Cutlass" Deptford Creek 47 „ „ 25 "A" Shed West India Dock 20 „ „ 26 Ba. "Stromness" Royal Albert Dock 66 „ „ 26 Ba. "Dream" „ „ 50 „ Oct. 1 Ba. "Hackney" Millwall Wharf 20 „ „ 5 Ba. "Stromness" Royal Albert Dock 34 „ „ 7 Ba. "Leo" Silvertown Wharf 17 „ „ 8 Ba. "Hackney" Millwall Wharf 42 „ „ 22 Ba. "Inverness" Limehouse Cut 25 „ „ 22 Ba. "White Rose" „ „ 13 „ „ 23 Ba. "Caithness" Dundee Wharf 40 „ „ 25 Ba. "Linwood" East India Dock 20 „ Nov. 6 Ba. "Joan" Limehouse Cut 7 „ „ 6 Ba. "India" Deptford Creek 25 „ „ 7 Ba. "Leo" Silvertown 10 „ Dec. 3 Ba. "Howe" East India Dock 75 „ 78 APPENDIX XXXII.—General Summary, and Analysis, of the Sanitary Inspections of Vessels, &c., in the Port of London, for the year ended 31st December, 1929. Foreign. Coastwise. Inland Navigation. Shore Premises. Sick Seamen referred to Hospital Water Barges. Steam. Sail. Steam. Sail. Steam. Sail. Lighters [uninhabited) Canal Boats Inspected. Defective. To be Cleaned Inspected. Defective. To be Cleaned. Inspected. Defective. To be Cleaned. Inspected. Defective. To be Cleaned. Inspected. Defective. To be Cleaned. Inspected. Defective. To be Cleaned. Inspected. Defective. To be Cleaned. Inspected. Defective. To be Cleaned. Inspected. Defective. To be Cleaned. No. in District in good condition 31st December, 1929 New Barges. Condemned. Use discontinued Temporarily. Previously withdrawn and since resumed work. No. in District 31st December, L929. 11,959 256 1,256 227 - 1 1,528 93 92 132 28 1 146 3 5 1,212 — 5 285 — 52 127 9 5 5,450 122 914 75 20 — — — — 20 Inspections. Docks and River. No. Nationalities No. Total Inspections from 1st January to 31st December, 1929:— St. Katharine 849 American 220 London 358 Argentine Republic 3 Brazilian 3 Regent's Canal 400 BRITISH 11,037 Foreign 12,186 Millwall 1,028 Belgian 545 Coastwise 1,660 Dutch 804 West India 635 Danish 320 Inland Navigation 1,770 Danzig Free State 8 Poplar 152 Premises on shore 5,450 Esthonian 17 French 241 East India 551 Total 21,066 Finnish 164 Victoria 1,290 German 709 Greek 68 Royal Albert 1,315 Italian 82 King George V 1,058 Icelandic 1 Cleansing of Crew's Quarters, &c. Japanese 131 Surrey Commercial 986 Latvian 15 Norwegian and Swedish 1,059 Total No. of Vessels from 1st January to 31st December, 1929 1,417 Tilbury 1,346 Polish 38 Gravesend District — Portuguese 29 Russian 87 River—*Upper District 2,595 Roumanian 11 Number of Vessels inspected:— In the Launches— „ *Middle „ 1,044 Spanish 14 Yugo-Slavakian 10 „ *Lower 2.009 15,616 „ Medway - "Joseph White" 2009 " James Howell" „ Total Vessels 15,616 "George Briggs" 3,639 Shore Premises 5,450 Shore Premises 5,450 Total 5,618 Total 21,066 Total 21,066 In the Docks, &c. 15,418 *Upper District extends from Greenwich to Teddington. *Middle „ „ „ „ Erith. *Lower „ „ „ Erith to outer limits of the Port of London. Total 21,066 1920 1921. 1922. 1923. 1924. 1925 1926. 1927 1928. 1929. Yearly Average for the 10 years ending 31st Dec., 1929. Total number of Inspections of vessels from— "Foreign" 11,778 11,076 12,601 13,040 13,634 12,187 12,239 11,806 12,345 12,186 12,289.2 "Coastwise," "Inland Navigation," and other Inspections 15,74 1 14,916 13,291 [1,932 10,133 11,39 7 10,215 11, 427 9,94 7 8.88( 11,787.9 Total 27,519 25,992 25,892 24,972 23,767 23,584 22,454 23,233 22,292 21,066 24,077.1 79 APPENDIX XXXIII. NUMBER OP NUISANCES ON VESSELS REPORTED AND DEALT WITH during the year ended 31st December, 1929. DISCRIPTION OF NUISANCES January. February. March. April. May. June. July. August. September. October. November. December. Totals. Smoke Nuisances:— Number of complaints received 2 2 6 1 5 2 1 5 2 5 1 2 34 Number of recurrences reported - - - - - - - - - - - - - Offensive Cargoes (Bye-laws):— Number of Infringements reported 1 10 6 1 — 1 — — 1 — — — 20 Structural and other Defects:— Ventilation 3 3 1 11 26 4 3 7 12 23 13 10 116 Lighting 2 3 5 3 20 6 6 4 19 17 19 18 122 Heating 14 11 15 5 1 1 2 1 2 6 30 12 100 Bare iron in crew's quarters 4 2 — 1 2 — — — — — 3 2 14 Leaky decks, hawse-pipes, cable casings. &c. 6 5 5 5 17 7 8 4 22 20 16 19 134 Defective bulkheads and floors 7 2 6 1 2 3 4 2 10 15 9 6 67 Sanitary conveniences 2 1 1 6 9 4 3 4 10 11 5 6 62 Ship's gear or stores stowed in crew's quarters — 1 — 1 — — 1 1 — — 1 2 7 Foul bilges and peaks - - - - - - - - - - - - — Storage of drinking water (dirty or defective tanks) 1 — — 2 1 1 — 1 1 — 2 — 9 Dirty quarters 113 109 117 110 130 100 89 103 114 158 150 124 1,417 Verminous quarters 2 6 3 1 4 5 2 3 9 5 5 1 46 Accumulation of offensive matter 3 1 — 1 2 — 1 1 3 — — — 12 Miscellaneous Nuisances 10 8 2 7 8 5 2 2 9 17 11 8 89 Totals 170 164 167 156 227 139 122 138 214 277 265 210 2,249 Total number of vessels on which structural alterations were ordered 32 28 21 25 34 24 20 20 47 49 48 32 380 Total number of vessels on which structural alterations were reported as carried out 32 19 45 19 5 2 25 12 4 12 17 57 249 (Includes Orders made in previous years and reported carried out during 1929.) NUMBER OF NUISANCES IN THE RIVER REPORTED AND DEALT WITH during the year ended 31st December, 1929. Offensive accumulation on Foreshore — — — — — 2 - — — — — — 2 Totals - — — — — 2 — — — — — — 2 80 APPENDIX XXXIV. NUMBER OF NUISANCES ON SHORE PREMISES REPORTED AND DEALT WITH during the year ended 31st December, 1929. DESCRIPTION OF NUISANCES. January. February. March. April. May. June. July. August. September. October. November. December. Totals. Smoke Nuisances:— Number of complaints received - - 1 - - - - - - 1 - - 2 Number of recurrences reported - - - - - - - - - - - - - Structural and other Defects:— Ventilation - 1 - - - - - - 1 - - - 2 Lighting - - - - - - - - - - - - - Heating - - - - - - - - 1 - - - 1 Dilapidations - 1 1 - - - - - 1 1 - - 4 Sanitary Conveniences 2 2 2 - 1 1 2 4 1 2 - 3 20 Water Supply - - - - - - - - - - - - - Dirty Premises 82 84 85 75 89 94 84 71 11 92 78 74 914 Accumulation of Offensive Matter - - - - 1 2 3 - - - - 1 7 Drainage 1 - - 2 - 1 1 1 — 1 — 1 8 Foul Cesspits, Latrines, &c. - - - - - - - - - - - - - Miscellaneous Nuisances - - - - 2 3 — 1 — — — — 6 Totals 85 88 89 77 93 101 90 77 15 97 73 79 964 Number of shore premises on which structural alterations were ordered 2 3 4 2 4 9 6 3 3 4 - 4 44 Number of shore premises on which structural alterations were reported as carried out 5 1 3 3 3 - 4 1 1 12 - 5 38 SUMMARY. ] Smoke. Structural Offensive Cargoes. Drainage, Sewage, &c. Miscellaneous. Dirty Conditions Totals. Number of Nuisances reported— (a) On Vessels 34 331 20 - 447 1,417 2,249 (b) On Shore 2 12 — 8 28 914 964 (c) On the River — — — — 2 — 2 Totals 36 343 20 8 477 2,331 3,215 Number of written Intimations— (a) On Vessels 33 161 20 — 52 - 266 (b) On Shore 2 3 — 1 2 — 8 (c) On the River — — — — — — — Totals 35 164 20 1 54 - 274 Number of Statutory Notices— (a) On Vessels 33 - - - - - 33 (b) On Shore 2 - - - - - 2 (c) On the River — — — — — — — Totals 35 — — — - - 35 81 APPENDIX XXXV.—Description of Meat Destroyed. Year. Beef. Mutton and Lamb. Veal, Pork, Offal. Tinned. Smoked and Salted, &c. Total. Tons. cwts. qrs. lbs. Tons. cwts. qrs lbs. Tons. cwts. qrs. lbs. Tons. cwts qrs. lbs. Tons. cwts. qrs. lbs. Tons. cwts. qrs. lbs. 1920 116 1 3 2 122 12 0 19 Pork and Veal— 88 6 2 19 82 3 3 5 455 18 1 1 16 13 1 24 Offal— 30 0 1 16 1921 212 9 3 1 267 6 2 3 Pork and Veal— 12 16 0 24 0 11 1 0 634 14 8 0 51 17 3 8 Offal— 89 13 0 20 1922 51 5 0 25 52 11 2 2 Pork and Veal— 14 12 2 5 0 4 2 5 139 6 2 14 7 18 1 21 Offal— 12 14 1 12 1923 30 18 1 2 84 16 3 23 Pork and Veal— 9 14 1 9 0 0 3 10 146 17 0 11 1 18 3 17 Offal— 19 7 3 6 1924 141 8 2 17 13 11 1 5 Pork and Veal— 0 16 0 15 0 3 0 7 183 8 2 0 0 9 2 19 Offal- 26 19 2 21 1925 64 19 2 7 6 1 3 13 Pork and Veal— 1 15 1 6 0 9 0 9 109 4 2 24 4 2 0 18 Offal— 31 16 2 27 1926 51 10 3 25 44 19 3 26 Pork and Veal— 1 3 0 16 0 1 1 0 135 13 2 20 0 16 1 3 Offal— 37 2 0 6 1927 311 12 0 2 263 4 1 13 Pork and Veal— 0 2 0 6 Nil. 605 12 2 16 3 9 2 8 Offal— 27 4 2 15 1928 7 1 0 3 155 18 3 6 Pork and Veal— 0 0 1 26 4 17 2 13 184 6 1 13 u 6 1 22 Offal— 16 1 3 27 1929 8 17 3 4 367 12 1 8 Pork and Veal— Nil. 0 15 3 27 391 16 3 27 0 13 2 12 Offal— 13 17 1 4 Total for ten years 996 5 0 4 1,378 15 3 6 393 4 1 26 129 6 3 14 89 7 1 20 2,986 19 2 14 82 APPENDIX XXXVI.—New Buildings and Sanitary Works. Date Plans submit/ted. Works. Date Work reported as completed. REGENT'S CANAL DOCK— June, 1929. Extension to the existing convenience at Messrs. Geo. Cohen & Sons, Ltd., Yard, by the provision of two pedestal closets 18th September, 1929. WEST INDIA DOCK- - One standard convenience consisting of five pedestal closets (public) and four pedestal closets (private) at North Quay between 8 and 9 Warehouses March, 1929. SURREY COMMERCIAL DOCK— 17th August, 1928. New conveniences consisting of two private and four public water-closets and a four-stall urinal, replacing old cesspits in the following yards:— Baltic Yard. Lower Quebec Yard. Upper „ „ Russia Yard. August, 1929. New soil pipe in connection with the erection of conveniences at Lady Dock, Baltic Yard and Quebec Yard July, 1929. KING GEORGE V. DOCK— 30th November, 1929. New drain connecting sink and lavatory to existing main drain at the Peninsular and Oriental Steam Navigation Co.'s Branch Offices 31st December, 1929. ROYAL ALBERT DOCK— - One convenience consisting of ten water-closets for female staff and one convenience of ten water-closets and a six-stall urinal for male staff of Messrs. Kenneth, Poster & Co., at the North side July, 1929. - One standard convenience for the use of Europeans at rear of Nos. 2 and 2a Sheds, South of Lock, Royal Albert Dock Basin 13th May, 1929. 27th July, 1929. New surface drain from lavatory connecting with existing main drain at Peninsular and Oriental Steam Navigation Co.'s Office, North side 3rd July, 1929. — One standard convenience for Europeans and Natives on South side May, 1929. The Eiver distance between the Western and Eastern limits of the Port is about 68½ miles. APPENDIX XXXVII. DOCKS WITHIN THE JURISDICTION OF THE PORT OF LONDON SANITARY AUTHORITY. Docks. Water Area. Lineal Quayage. Acres. Yards. Miles. Yards. Regent's Canal 11 38 — 966 St. Katharine 10 784 — 1,500 London 35 2,245 2 480 Surrey Commercial 164 4,395 5 575 West India 92 1,007 4 209 East India 31 2,878 1 757 Millwall 35 382 1 1,280 Royal Victoria 93 3,731 5 200 Royal Albert 87 213 3 220 King George V. 64 997 2 702 Tilbury 89 4,390 3 214 83 APPENDIX XXXVIII. POWERS. The work of the Port of London Sanitary Authority is carried out under the following Acts of Parliament and Statutory Rules and Orders:— Existing Acts and Orders applicable to the Port of London Sanitary Authority. CONSTITUTION OF THE AUTHORITY. Public Health (London) Act, 1891. ASSIGNMENT OF POWERS. L.G.B. Order, Port Sanitary Authority Assignment of Powers, Port of London 25th March, 1892. L.G.B. Order, Port Sanitary Authority Assignment of Further Powers, Port of Londonq 29th December, 1894. L.G.B. Order, Port Sanitary Authority Assignment of Powers, Port of London 30th June, 1898. S.R. & O. 1922, No. 781. London Port Sanitary (Additional Powers) Order, 1922 18th July, 1922. S.R. & O. 1923, No. 812. London Port Sanitary (Additional Powers) Order, 1923 16th July, 1923. ADMINISTRATION. Port Sanitary Administration and Medical Inspection of Aliens under the Aliens Order. 1920 (Grants in Aid) 14th July, 1920, Public Health (Officers) Act, 1921. City of London (Various Powers) Act, 1922. S.R & O. 1926, No. 552. Sanitary Officers Order, 1926 27th May, 1926. INFECTIOUS DISEASE. Infectious Disease (Notification) Acts, 1889 to 1899. Public Health Act, 1896. Public Health (Ports) Act, 1896. S.R. & 0. 1907, No. 694. Regulations as to Cholera and Plague on Coasting Ships, 1907 9th September, 1907. S.R. & O. 1907, No. 695. Regulations as to Cholera and Plague on Outward Bound Ships, 1907 9th September, 1907. S.R. & O. 1907, No. 710. Regulations as to Cholera, Yellow Fever and Plague Ships arriving from Foreign Ports, 1907 9th September, 1907. L.G.B. Order. Prevention of Epidemic Diseases Regulations as to Plague, Destruction of Rats, 1910 10th November, 1910. S.R. & O. 1912, No. 1226. Public Health (Cerebro-spinal Fever and Acute Poliomyelitis) Regulations, 1912 15th August, 1912. S.R. & O. 1918, No. 67. Public Health (Notification of Infectious Diseases) Regulations, 1918 19th January, 1918. S.R. & O. 1920, No. 1924. Port Sanitary Authorities (Infectious Diseases) Regulations, 1920 14th July, 1920. S.R. & O. 1926, No. 972. Public Health (Notification of Puerperal Fever and Puerperal Pyrexia) Regulations, 1926 31st July, 1926. S.R. & O. 1927, No. 1207. Infectious Diseases (London) Regulations, 1927. 22nd December, 1927. S.R. & O. 1929, No. 830. The Public Health (Deratisation of Ships) 12th October, 1929. Regulations, 1929. 84 CANAL BOATS. Canal Boats Acts, 1877 and 1884. L.G.B. Order. Canal Boats Regulations 20th March, 1878. L.G.B. Order, Canal Boats (Registration Authorities) Order 7th June, 1887. L.G.B. Order, Canal Boats (Sale of Regulations) Order 26th July, 1887. S.R. & O. 1923, No. 451. The Canal Boats Order, 1922 10th July, 1922 S.R. & O. 1925, No. 843. Canal Boats (Amendment) Regulations, 1925 9th June, 1925 FOOD. Public Health (Regulations as to Food) Act, 1907. S.R. & O. 1924, No. 1432. Public Health (Meat) Regulations, 1924 (Part IV.) 20th December, 1924. S.R. & O. 1925, No. 775 Public Health (Preservatives, &c., in Food) Regulations 1928. „ 1926 No 1577 „ „ „ „ 1927, No. 577 „ „ „ „ S.R. & O.1925, No. 273. Public Health (Imported Food) Regulations, 1925 23rd March, 1925. S.R. & O. 1926, No. 820. Public Health (Imported Milk) Regulations, 1926 6th July, 1926. SHELLFISH. S.R. & O. 1915, No. 125. Public Health (Shellfish) Regulations, 1915 ... 16th February, 1915. RATS AND MICE. Rats and Mice (Destruction) Act, 1919. SMOKE ABATEMENT. Public Health (Smoke Abatement) Act, 1926. ABATEMENT OF NUISANCES and REMOVAL OF REFUSE. Public Health (London) Act, 1891. FERTILISERS AND FEEDING STUFFS. Fertilisers and Feeding Stuffs Act, 1926. S.R. & O.1928, No. 421. Fertilisers and Feeding Stuffs Regulations, 1928 23rd May, 1928. S.R. & O. 1928, No. 439. Order appointing 1st July, 1928, as the date for the coming into operation of the Fertilisers and Feeding Stuffs Act, 1926 30t,h May, 1928. DANGEROUS DRUGS. S.R. & O. 1923, No. 1095. Dangerous Drugs (No. 3) Regulations, 1923 10th September, 1923. ALIENS. S.R. & O. 1920, No. 448. The Aliens Order, 1920. BYE-LAWS. Bye-laws have been made by the Port of London Sanitary Authority:— 1. For preventing nuisances arising from barges or vessels carrying offensive cargoes. 2. For removing to hospital any person suffering from dangerous infectious disorders, and for keeping therein of such persons as long as may be deemed necessary. 3. With respect to Houseboats used for human habitation within the limits of the Port of London. 85 PORT OF LONDON SANITARY ADMINISTRATION ACCOUNT. Dr. REVENUE ACCOUNT for Year ended 31st March, 1930. Cr. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. Salaries—Medical Officer, Deputy and Assistants … … … … 5,784 16 2 Contribution from General Rate 9,001 0 0 Travelling Expenses—Ditto … … … … 58 19 7 Contribution from Ministry of Health 11,870 13 4 Salaries—Inspectors … … … … 4,983 9 8 Sundry Fees 74 3 4 Uniforms, Travelling Expenses—Inspectors … … … … 262 0 2 Proceeds, Sale of Unsound Food 2,643 8 10 Clerical Assistance:— Deratisation Receipts 1,532 9 6 Salaries … … 1,875 2 11 Miscellaneous Receipts 303 13 1 Other Expenses … … 35 15 4 Rent re Mooring Launch 7 10 0 Rat Searchers:- 1,910 18 3 £25,432 18 1 Salaries … … 954 15 0 Other Expenses … … 87 6 7 Balance to Balance Sheet . 2,187 14 3 Provision and Maintenance of Hospital:— 1,042 1 7 Capital Expenditure … … 311 1 10 Rent, Rates, Taxes and Insurance … … 163 6 8 Furniture, Equipment and Renewals … … 146 7 4 Repairs … … 982 18 11 Heating, Lighting and Cleansing … … 289 6 11 Interest on Loan re new Quarters 20 3 4 re Isolation Ward 226 8 10 re Disinfecting Station 23 16 0 270 8 2 Salaries—General 292 11 7 Nursing 501 2 6 Domestic 125 3 9 918 17 10 Cost of Food … … 287 18 7 Drugs and Medical Requisites … … 36 13 9 Uniforms … … 39 10 1 Miscellaneous … … 57 5 1 Expenses of Launches:- 3,503 15 2 Wages … … 3,247 7 9 Uniforms … … 87 16 3 Upkeep and Running Expenses … … 1,538 19 6 Capital Expenditure … … 532 19 11 Interest on Loans … … 185 8 9 5,592 12 2 Laboratory Facilities, Chemical and Bacteriological Examinations … … … … 348 10 2 Examination and Analysis of Food … … … … 31 1 2 Disinfections … … … … 147 4 6 Office Expenses:— Rent, Rates, Water, Taxes and Insurance … … 158 2 6 Furniture and Equipment … … 12 7 6 Repairs … … 44 1 5 Lighting, Heating and Cleansing … … 98 14 2 Printing and Stationery … … 621 4 10 Postages, Telegrams, Telephones … … 243 18 1 1,178 8 6 Part Proceeds of Sale of Unsound Food returned to Consignees … … … … 2,553 1 7 Expenses of Delegates to Congresses … … … … 78 0 10 Miscellaneous … … … … 83 6 4 Legal Expenses … … … … 3 0 0 National Insurance … … … … 59 6 6 Chamber of I.ondon, £57,620 12 4 £27,620 12 4 14th June, 1930. 2341-6 ■