. ■ -;r-: ■ - - - ■ ' ■ ■ ■■ "j - • 8 8 8 5 8 57. SANITARY. EEPOET, PORT OF LONDON SANITARY COMMITTEE. WITH THE HALF-YEARLY REPORT 07 THB MEDICAL OFFICER OF HEALTH FOR THE PORT OF LONDON, To 31st December, 1901. Presented 13th March, 1902, 57. SANITARY. EEPORT, PORT OF LONDON SANITARY COMMITTEE, WITH THE HALF-YEARLY REPORT OF THE MEDICAL OFFICER OF HEALTH FOR THE PORT OF LONDON, To 31st December, 1901. Presented 13th March, 1902. DIMSDALE, Mayor. A Common Council holden in the Chamber of the Guildhall of the City of London, on Thursday, the 13th day of March, 1902. THE Port of London Sanitary Committee did this day deliver into this Court a Report in writing under their hands of their proceedings, and submitting the Report of the Medical Officer of Health of the Port of London for the Half-year to the 31st December, 1901; also for confirmation of the appointment of John Henry Rolfe as a Sanitary Inspector and an Inspector of Canal Boats under the Canal Boats Acts ; which was read. And a Motion being made and Question put, That this Court doth agree with the Committee in their said Report, the same was resolved in the Affirmative, and it is Ordered accordingly. Ordered, That the Report be printed, and a copy sent to every Member of this Court. PRIOR GOLDNEY, Officiating Town Clerk. To the Eight Honourable the Lord Mayor, Aldermen and Commons of the City of London, in Common Council assembled. \\JE, whose names are hereunto subscribed, of your Port of London Committee, to whom it has been referred to carry into execution the powers assigned to the Corporation as the Port of London Sanitary Authority by the Local Government Board, under the Public Health (London) Act, 1891, beg to submit for the consideration of your Honourable Court the Report of Dr. Herbert Williams, the Medical Officer of Health for the Port of London, for the Half-year to the 31st December, 1901, which Report contains a full and detailed account of the work done in the Port during that period by the Medical Officers and Inspectors. 4 In our Report presented on the 26th September last, we stated that in accordance with the authority given to us by your Honourable Court we had appointed John Henry Rolfe a Sanitary Inspector on probation, in the place of Thomas Wm. Bailey, who had been promoted to the position of a Food Inspector. Having obtained the Certificate of the Sanitary Institute, Inspector Rolfe has been placed by us on the Staff at the usual salary of 40s. per week, and we now beg to recommend that his appointment be confirmed by your Honourable Court, such appointment, as in the case of the other Inspectors, to be subject to one month's notice on either side, your Committee being empowered to give such notice on behalf of your Honourable Court, and that he be also appointed an Inspector of Canal Boats under the Canal Boats Acts on the same conditions. We have to report that Mr. W. Monds Fox, who, since March, 1898, has held the position of Boarding Medical Officer at Sheerness, has recently resigned. Temporary arrangements for the performance of the duties have been made by your Committee pending the appointment of a successor to Mr. Fox. In accordance with the Order of your Honourable Court, an Account of Receipts and Expenditure in connection with the Port of London Sanitary work for the year ended the 31st December last is appended (see Appendix N). In submitting the same we may mention that the Receipts show an increase of 447l. 17s. 6d. as compared with the previous year, whilst the Expenditure is 791l. 9s. less. All which we submit to the judgment of your Honourable Court. Dated this fourth day of March, 1902. J. Cloudsley. J. S. E. cotman. W. Cooper. D. George Collins. Edward Ardley. Geo. Taylor. S. Pollitzer. INDEX. page. Introductory 7 Medical Inspection 8 Infections Diseases— Plague 9 Small-pox 19 Chicken-pox 22 Scarlet Fever 24 Enteric Fever 24 Diphtheria 24 Training Ships 24 The Hospital 25 Nuisances 28 Insanitary Barges 39 Bye-laws—Offensive Cargoes 43 Sanitary Works 44 Condemned Food 47 Biverside Wharves 48 Canal Boats Acts 52 Summary of Canal Boats 57 Appendices 59 DON SANITARY OFFICES. GREENWICH, S.E. TO THE WORSHIPFUL THE PORT OF LONDON SANITARY COMMITTEE. Gentlemen, I have the honour to present to you my first Half-yearly Report, and, as you are aware, it will be the last of that series which have been presented bi-annually by your Medical Officers since 1873. In future the Report will be presented annually, in addition to a printed Report for each month. During this period 15,699 visits of inspection have been made to vessels of all classes : 6,629 lying in the River (including the mouth of the Medway), and 9,070 in the various Docks at the time of inspection. Of these, 1,240 (equal to 7.8 percent.) required cleansing, and the usual Notices were given and complied with. Of the total number, 8,617 were from "foreign,"and 7,082" coastwise." Of the total number, 12,636 (equal to 80.48 percent.) carried the British flag, the Norwegian coming next in order of number with 1,333 (equal to 8.49 percent.). Twenty-eight sick seamen were referred to Seamen's Hospital on account of non-infectious disease. In Appendix F will be found a record of 177 structural alterations carried out on vessels for the improvement of their sanitary condition. These alterations, which affect 142 vessels, were in 58 cases for the improvement of ventilation; in 110 for increased lighting and heating ; and nine involved arrangements for the carriage and storage of drinking water. Appendix G gives particulars of 171 alterations, involving 102 vessels, which have been ordered, but which are not yet reported as carried out. The launches were employed in the inspection of vessels as follows:— "David Burnett" - 2,227 vessels. "Clotho" 1,975 „ " Denton " 1,798 „ Total 6,000 vessels. 8 MEDICAL INSPECTION. The Medical Inspection carried out at Gravesend, in conjunction with His Majesty's Customs, has resulted in 5,380 vessels being visited by your Boarding Medical Officers, 604 of which were medically inspected, this involving the personal examination of 38,486 persons, 5,582 of whom were passengers. On the resignation of your late Medical Officer, consequent on his appointment as Medical Officer of Health to the City of London, Dr. Herbert Williams was appointed to the post of Medical Officer of Health for the Port of London. The positions of Senior Medical Boarding Officer and Medical Officer to the Hospital became vacant; the former post, by Resolution of your Honourable Committee, was abolished, placing each Medical Boarding Officer on the same footing, and Messrs. Hancock and Warren were appointed jointly Medical Officers of the Hospital, as a temporary measure, under the supervision of your Medical Officer, for a term of six months. W. G. Willoughby, B.A., M.B.Cantab., was temporarily appointed as Medical Boarding Officer to fill the vacancy. With reference to vessels detained by your Medical Officers at Gravesend for the purpose of disinfection, &c., it has been pointed out that owing to the rapid shoaling on the south side of the River below Gravesend, it is unsafe for large vessels to anchor there when there is any probability of their swinging to the southward. The Thames Conservancy and representatives of the leading Steamship Companies of this Port were approached on the subject of placing a buoy in the lower end of Gravesend Reach for the convenience of such vessels. The Thames Conservancy offered to place such a buoy for the convenience of the shipowners, and after due consideration this offer has been accepted. A Notice has been issued by the Thames Conservancy, of which I append a copy. The placing of this buoy is solely in the interests of shipowners, and involves no expense to the Port Sanitary Authority. THAMES CONSERVANCY. NOTICE TO PERSONS IN CHARGE OF VESSELS. Notice is hereby given that vessels required by the Port of London Sanitarv Authoritv to be disinfected are to lie at the lower buoy in Gravesend Reach, and Masters and Pilots are requested to moor quarantine vessels accordingly. By Order, Thames Conservancy Office, R. PHILIPSON, Victoria Embankment, E.C., Secretary. 2nd December, 1901. 9 INFECTIOUS DISEASES. The following cases have been dealt with during the half-year:— Plague, including suspected cases 12 Small-pox 6 Scarlet Fever 22 Diphtheria 14 Enteric Fever 44 Measles 4 Other Diseases 8 Total 110 PLAGUE. During the year 1901 there has been reason to believe that Plague has existed at, or in the country adjacent to, the following foreign ports:— Brisbane. Constantinople. Oporto. Singapore. Colon. Hong Kong. Port Limon. Sydney. Ports of— Argentine Republic. Cape Colony. India. New Caledonia. Asia Minor. China. Japan. Persian Gulf. Bay of Naples. Egypt. Madagascar. Philippine Islands. Brazil. Honolulu. Mauritius. Red Sea. There have been three suspicious cases brought by three vessels into the Port of London, all of which have been dealt with at the Port Sanitary Hospital. There have been no deaths from this disease. I give below short notes of some suspected cases, the remainder possessing no points of special interest:— The s.s. "Ormuz" left Sydney on the homeward voyage on June 8th, and all went well until after leaving Colombo on June 27th. On July 7th, a coal trimmer reported himself as sick with an enlarged gland in the right groin. A swelling subsequently appeared in left groin, and he became feverish. He was isolated on this date. On July 17th, the glands in upper part of left thigh became swollen, and the fever persisted, and on July 22nd he was landed at Plymouth. On July 17th, an assistant baker reported ill with swelling in each armpit, also in neck; later the glands in upper part of right thigh became swollen. He was landed at Plymouth. After landing the cases at Plymouth the vessel 10 proceeded to Gravesend, and on her arrival there was boarded by your Medical Officer. The passengers having been found healthy and free from any suspicion of Plague, were allowed to land by tender on giving their names and addresses. The whole of the crew's effects, with the ship's bedding, &c., were then landed at the Hospital at Denton, off which the "Ormuz" was moored. The crew's effects and vessel were then disinfected. The bilges, water-closets, and urinals were also disinfected. By working all day and night the vessel was disinfected, and she proceeded into Dock the next, morning, leaving the remainder of the ship's effects on shore for disinfection. This was completed in the course of the next three days, and an estimate of the amount of labour entailed may be gathered from the following list of articles disinfected:— 16,218 pieces of Linen. 405 Mattresses. 62 Bolsters. 537 Pillows. 1,150 Blankets. Every person on board was notified to the Medical Officer of Health of the district to which he was proceeding, and the greatest precaution was taken to prevent rats going on shore. When the cargo was discharged the vessel was thoroughly fumigated, and it is believed that every rat on board was killed. A bacteriological examination was made of the cases landed at Plymouth, but the result was. negative. It must not be assumed from this that the cases were not true Plague, but merely that the organism of Plague was not discovered in the specimens examined. Every bacteriologist knows that in examining sputa of patients whose clinical signs and symptoms undoubtedly point to pulmonary tuberculosis, and whose lungs must contain numbers of the tubercle bacilli, that very often the result of the examination is negative. So in cases of suspected Plague, the clinical history and signs must receive the most careful consideration apart from the results of bacteriological examination, and in these two cases landed at Plymouth the history and symptoms were so suspicious that I felt it my duty to adopt every practical precaution. On the 6th September, the s.s. "Glenesk," of Glasgow, from Tacoma, arrived at Gravesend. On the 8th, a Chinaman died suddenly. Medical evidence, based on necropsy, gave Pneumonia as the cause of death. As 11 Plague frequently is pneumonic in form, and the vessel had called at Plagueinfected ports, your Medical Officer obtained portions of lung and spleen, and submitted them to bacteriological examination by Dr. Klein. The results were negative as regards Plague. As a precautionary measure, however, the whole of the crew were carefully examined, and the forecastle, with the effects of the deceased, disinfected. On the 8th October, a suspicious case of sickness was found on the " Oakwell," lying at Rotherhithe. He was removed to the Port Sanitary Hospital. The vessel and all effects were disinfected, but the case was not established as one of Plague. On 11th November, the s.s. "Cygnet,'' of London, arrived at Fresh Wharf from Naples, where Plague has been known recently to exist, and while there laid not far from the actual place where Plague broke out. On opening the hatches of the after-hold, a number of dead rats in a fairly advanced state of decomposition were discovered on the top of the cargo. This was at once reported to your Medical Officer, who gave instructions that all dead rats were not to be handled, but were to be placed in a bucket containing a solution of corrosive sublimate, and to be forthwith conveyed to and destroyed in the ship's furnace. Precautions were taken to prevent the rats from the ship getting on shore. The names and addresses of the men working in the ship were obtained daily, and several dead rats were forwarded to the Local Government Board for the purpose of bacteriological examination. This was carried out by Professor Klein, who reported that he was unable to find the Plague bacillus. The presence of dead rats on a vessel coming from a port where Plague has been known to exist recently, demands that the vessel, pending the result of bacteriological investigations, should be treated as suspected. This was the method of procedure conducted in this case—although there were certain facts which indicated that the death of these rats might be due to another and more innocent cause : (1) the great bulk of the rats were discovered on the top of the cargo under the hatches, as if endeavouring to get towards the fresh air ; (2) a part of the cargo in that hold consisted of wine lees which emits carbonic acid1 gas ; (3) no live rats were seen in this hold ; (4) all the rats presented the same appearance, namely, a fairly advanced state of decomposition, which made it appear likely they had all died on practically the same day. It is reasonable, therefore, to infer that the rats were killed by the gas evolved from the wine lees. On the other hand, if the rats had been killed by Plague, the disease probably would have spread gradually, and rats would have been found in all stages, namely, healthy, sick, dying and dead, and the distribution of dead bodies would not, in all probability, have been confined to the afterhold only. 12 On the 13th November, I received information from the Medical Officer of Health for Hammersmith, that a man had been admitted to the West London Hospital with symptoms strongly suggestive of Plague, viz., swellings in the groin, neck and armpits, with fever. The man had come from the steam tug "Fox,'' which was employed between Woolwich and Brentford. The vessel was at once traced, and found on her way to Brentford. Your Medical Officer communicated by telephone to the Local Authority there, and arranged, pending the result of the bacteriological examination which was in progress, for the immediate and thorough disinfection of the vessel, which was done. The tug was further kept under observation whilst in that district, and subsequently while within the jurisdiction of the Port Sanitary Authority. The bacteriological examination, however, failed to demonstrate Plague. Outbreaks of Plague have occurred in other parts, notably at Glasgow and Liverpool. These outbreaks may have been due to cases imported from abroad and unrecognised, or from rats. At Glasgow the last outbreak was clearly associated with the existence of Plague amongst the rats in the basement of an hotel. At Liverpool there were a few cases from September to October. The source of infection could not be traced to rats. There is a distinct danger of importation of Plague by means of rats from infected places on ships, and every possible precaution is necessary in order to minimise this danger. The means to be adopted in the case of vessels trading with infected ports, for the prevention of this danger from rats, should be as follows:— 1. At the port of departure the vessel should be thoroughly fumigated with a view to the destruction of any rats there may be on board. Obstructions should be raised to the passage of rats from the shore to the vessel by placing large metal discs, funnels or brushes on all mooring ropes, cables, and the like; by keeping the vessel away from the quay, raising the gangways at night, the use of fresh tar on the edge of the quay and on all fenders and like objects suspended over the side, and by closing scuttles and ports. All persons to be medically examined before going on board, and none to be allowed to sail with suspicious symptoms. After embarkation, re-landing to be prohibited. 2. On the voyage any person exhibiting suspicious symptoms to be at once isolated, and disinfection of quarters, bedding and effects, should take 13 place. Evidence of the presence of rats should be sought, and every possible means adopted for their capture and destruction. 8. On arrival at any port in the United Kingdom all hands should be medically inspected. If any suspects are found they must be removed and the vessel disinfected. Subsequent observation should be directed, especially when unloading, to the presence of sick or dead rats. It is now widely recognised that Plague is a disease of rats and other rodents, communicable to man. It therefore follows that if all these rodents could be exterminated, the only risk remaining would be from the importation of cases from abroad. I give below an extract from the proceedings of the Intercolonial Plague Conference at Melbourne in April 1900, which illustrates the thorough manner in which this question has been dealt with by the Commonwealth of Australia:— Ship-berthing regulations which had been in operation at Melbourne and Sydney, and which were adopted at the Intercolonial Plague Conference held at Melbourne in April, 1900. The following Ship-berthing regulations, or similar ones, are to be enforced by each Government:— Conditions to be observed by all Vessels, whether Steamboats or Sailing Ships. Bond between the Owner or Agent or Master of * * * * with the * * * * Government. I hereby agree to observe the following conditions relative to the vessel * * * * if allowed to proceed to her berth at the * * * * and to take her back into the Bay at once, on directions being given to that effect by any person authorised thereto, in the event of any of the conditions being contravened, the conditions being— 1. To keep the vessel off from the wharf or pier by a distance of at least four feet by means of fenders, and to prevent listing towards wharf or pier. 2. To apply and keep applied to each end of every hawser and rope connecting the vessel with the wharf or pier, tar kept constantly in a sticky condition (by repeated applications), and either a thick brush of metal bristles, or a funnel, or a stout metal disc at least twelve inches in diameter, and so constructed and so placed as to prevent transit of rats, the application of tar being made just beyond the side of the vessel and just above the end attached to the wharf or pier, the tar being applied over a length of at least one foot at each end of each hawser and rope, and the 14 application of the brush, funnel, or disc, being made near the tarred portion and towards the centre of the hawser or rope. (The tar may be applied on bagging fixed round the hawser ropes.) 3. To tar the fender and fender slings on such parts as to prevent migration of rats, and to keep the tar in a sticky condition by repeated applications. 4. Not to use any net between the ship and the wharf or pier, whether in connection with the gangway or the hatches, unless the same be thoroughly tarred, and the tar be kept in a sticky condition by repeated applications, and to remove any such net, though tarred, between 7 p.m. and 6 a.m., except only in case cargo is being discharged or delivered during that time. 5. To draw up, and keep drawn up, all gangways, when not required for the discharging or the receiving of cargo, from 7 p.m. until 6 a.m., and to apply tar to each gangway while down, over a length of at least one foot at each end, just beyond the side of the vessel, and just above the end resting on the wharf or pier, and to keep the tar in a sticky condition, by repeated applications. 6. To suspend over the side along the wharf or pier, four sets (or more if required) of electric or other lights, distributed so as to afford thorough illumination fore and aft along the whole length of the side of the vessel. 7. To supply three watchmen by night, and one, or in the case of a mail boat two, by day; to supply the same with sticks, and to see that they constantly parade on the wharf or pier alongside the vessel from stem to stern, and that they take all practicable measures to prevent the passage of rats between the wharf or pier. To supply the watchmen with a pot of tar and brush, and to direct them to renew the tarring of gangways, nets, hawsers, and ropes, so as to keep the tar in a sticky condition. 8. To completely obstruct all pipes, ports, cabin scuttles and other holes in the sides of the vessel next to the wharf or pier, and to keep the same obstructed while the vessel is alongside, in order to prevent both ingress and egress of rats. 9. To prevent any refuse matter from being discharged into the river. 10. Not to allow any vessel or lighter alongside unless specially permitted to do so by the Health Authority, and then to observe precisely the same conditions on the lightering side as set out on the wharf or pier side of the vessel. 11. Not to allow the landing of any rags, or of any old cordage or second-hand clothing or bedding, or of any used or returned produce bags whatever. 15 12. To tar the wharf the whole of the length of the moorings to a width from the edge of one foot, and also the face of the wharf along the upper edge of each of the planks down to the water level. 13. To thoroughly disinfect the bilges to the satisfaction of the Health Authority's inspecting officer. N.B.—It will be of advantage to mix with the tar a little oil or tallow. I also hereby certify that I have received a copy of the above. (Signed) * * * * * At the time of the issuing of the Order of the Local Government Board of the 9th November, 1896, placing the responsibility of dealing with Plague, Cholera, and Yellow Fever in the hands of Port Sanitary Authorities, the possibility of infection by rats was not recognised, and is, therefore, not mentioned. This was, however, recognised by the issue in April, 1901, of a Memorandum dealing with the question, which was published in the last Half-yearly Report of your Medical Officer. It is conspicuous that infection is readily conveyed by the mere handling of the dead bodies of infected rats, and this has been attributed to the agency of fleas and other vermin which would readily attach themselves to a fresh host. The sputa and other excretions of infected persons are also highly infectious, but especially from the pneumonic form of the disease. In the Port of London the work of controlling the destruction of rats was taken in hand by the Port Sanitary Authority in March, 1901, since which date a total of 96,371 rats is known to have been destroyed. This result has been attained principally by the systematic use of traps and poison. Number destroyed on vessels:—56,621. Number destroyed in warehouses:—39,750. I would point out that the whole expense of rat-catching in the Docks is paid by the Dock Companies and shipowners. The London and India Docks Company pay 700l. annually for the destruction of rats, and I gratefully acknowledge their co-operation in connection with this matter. The experiments instituted by your late Medical Officer with the Danysz rat bacillus have been continued by me. Professor Klein has cordially co-operated. The point to be determined was whether, as Danysz maintains, the culture of this bacillus is capable of causing death in a large percentage of rats fed on 16 it. On this point the opinions of various observers differ: while, for instance, Kister and Kottgen, of Hamburg, to a certain extent confirm Danysz's statement, others, like Krause, failed to confirm it. 1. Experiments in the Laboratory.—There is no difficulty in showing the high virulence of the Danysz bacillus for rats, mice, and guinea pigs, if inoculated subcutaneously or intraperitoneally, but it is different when the material is administered by ingestion. While it is a fact that virulent culture injected subcutaneously in a five division dose into each of 24 mice caused death of all the animals in between 20 and 48 hours, when administered to other mice by ingestion in large doses it caused death of these animals in three, five, and eight days respectively. But the results were different with rats, for in these the feeding experiments with culture produced death in only 33 per cent, between 8 and 14 days. There appeared, however, to be a chance of causing the death of a larger percentage of rats by feeding these on rodents dead of the disease after subcutaneous injection. Rats were fed on mice which had died 48 hours after being subcutaneously injected with virulent culture. None of these rats became ill or died. A number of rats were fed on guinea pigs which had died after inoculation with virulent culture, and here the percentage of dead rats was certainly increased. Of six rats fed with the material from the guinea pigs (subcutaneous fluid, peritoneal fluid, and spleen), four died from the disease in 11, 12, 11 and 18 days respectively, and of three rats fed with one whole guinea pig, two died from the disease in 7 and 11 days respectively. So much for the laboratory experiments. 2. Experiments in the Warehouse.—The accompanying Table gives the results of experiments of feeding on a large scale carried out in a Dock Warehouse in the Port of London, instituted by Dr. W. Collingridge, the late Medical Officer of Health, and continued by your present Medical Officer of Health. It ought to be stated in explanation of this Table that the 60 tubes of Danysz rat virus used between April 26th and May 31st were culture tubes (on agar), which had been directly obtained from the Pasteur Institute of Paris, and that the guinea pigs, mice, and rat used for the feeding experiments from June 14th to July 17th had all been inoculated subcutaneously in the laboratory with virulent culture of the Danysz bacillus, and immediately after death from the typical disease were laid on the floors of the warehouse. We would also draw attention to the fact that one rat which had died after subcutaneous injection of the typical disease was offered to the rats in the warehouse, but was not touched by them, whereas all the mice and the majority of the guinea pigs were readily eaten by the rats of the warehouse. The Table shows that, unlike the laboratory experiments, those carried out in the warehouse were wholly negative, and therefore the expectation of a wholesale destruction of rats by Danysz rat bacillus as a preventive measure against Plague cannot be considered from the results of the experiments to be of a promising nature. This virus has been tried in various localities recently, and the results practically correspond with those obtained by your Medical Officer and Dr. Klein. 17 Table showing the results of experiments of feeding rats on materials mixed with Danysz bacillus. Date. Material used. How used. Remarks. Result. 1901. April 23" 24 tubes Dr. Danysz Rat Virus. Mixed with bread and laid on floors of warehouse. April 24: Negative. „ 26 April 27: Bread laid down Negative. „ 30 May 1: previous day eaten. Negative. May 3 May 4: Negative. „ 81 24 tubes ditto Ditto ditto. May 10: Bread eaten. Negative. „ 11 Ditto ditto. May 13: Ditto. Negative. „ 15 Mixed with water and laid ou floor in tins. Mixed with bread and laid on floor of warehouse. May 16: Water not drunk by rats. May 17: Bread eaten. Negative. „ 16 Negative. „ 22 12 tubes ditto Ditto ditto. May 24: Ditto. Negative. „ 25 Ditto ditto. May 26: Ditto. Negative. „ 28 Ditto ditto. May 29: Ditto. Negative. „ 31 Ditto ditto. June 3: Ditto. Negative. June 14 5 guinea - pigs dead after subcutaneous injection with Danysz culture. Laid on floors of warehouse. June 15: 4 guinea-pigs eaten. June 17: 1 guinea-pig eaten. Negative. „ 26 22 mice dead after Ditto ditto. June 27: 9 mice eaten. June 28:9 mice eaten. Negative. „ 27 subcutaneous injection with Danysz culture. June 29: 1 mouse eaten. July 1: 3 mice eaten. July 15 4 guinea-pigs and 1 rat dead after subcutaneous injection with Danysz virus. Ditto ditto. June 16: 3 guinea-pigs eaten. June 17: 1 guinea - pig eaten. July 19: rat untouched; being putrid was burnt. Negative. „ 17 8 guinea - pigs dead after subcutaneous injection with Danysz virus. Ditto ditto. July 18: 2 guinea-pigs eaten. 19: 1 eaten. 20: remaining guinea pigs found untouched and full of maggots, therefore were burnt. Negative. Negative means that no dead rats have been found, and there has not been noticed any diminution in the number of rats, as evidenced by tracks, damage, dung, &c. 18 Sulphur di-oxide is probably the safest and best gas for the destruction rats on board ship, and several methods of using it have been tried :— First. Sulphur has been burned in the holds of ships. It is difficult to ensure a more than 5.5 percentage of gas by this means, and there is the additional risk from fire. Second. Compressed and liquefied gas has been used, but owing to the low diffusion power and density of the gas in this state it has not been found very successful. In one instance, although dead rats were found, yet live rats in cages within six feet of the empty cylinders were uninjured. I purpose repeating this experiment when a favourable opportunity occurs, and hope to obtain better results. Third. By pumping or forcing into vessels gas generated in a special apparatus carried on a barge or other conveyance and ranged alongside the vessel. Twenty-eight vessels have been fumigated with sulphur di-oxide, and a great number of rats have been destroyed in this manner. On one vessel over 1,000 rats have been destroyed by this method. It would seem that this is the most efficient way of dealing with rats, but inasmuch as it cannot be done while cargo remains in the ship without running great risk of damaging the cargo, it has, therefore, to be done when the vessel is empty, and, it is to be feared, many of the rats have got ashore. During the past year, owing to actual or suspected cases of Plague occurring on board vessels, it has been necessary to take the names and addresses of all persons on board, which names and addresses have been sent to the Medical Officer of Health of the district to which the said persons are proceeding. In a small percentage of cases these notifications are returned by the Medical Officer of Health, with the remarks :— " Not known at address given." " Formerly lived here, but not so at present." " No such street or address known." As the practice of quarantine has been abolished in this country and the above precautions substituted, it will be seen that a defect exists. The Medical Officer, when inspecting persons, asks for their names and addresses, and unless he has any reason to doubt their good faith they are allowed to land, with the result that it is often impossible to trace some persons, and if the practice is found to continue and increase it will become necessary to adopt stronger measures, e.g., the detention of all persons on board whilst enquiries are made as to whether the addresses given are genuine, and the persons known or expected to arrive home. 19 When an actual or suspected case of Plague exists or has occurred on a vessel, each person on board is given a handbill, as follows :— PORT OF LONDON SANITARY AUTHORITY. (Public Health Act, 1896.) Take Notice that you are required by the Regulations of the Local Government Board to (i) Furnish the Port Medical Officer with your name, intended place of destination, and intended address at such place ; and (ii) That if within forty-eight hours after landing you shall arrive at any place of destination or address other than such place or address as aforesaid, you shall forthwith, upon such arrival, notify in writing your place of destination and address to the Medical Officer of Health of the Sanitary Authority, or to the Local Authority of the District in which such place is situate. Any person who being required to give the Medical Officer, or to notify to any Local Authority, his name and intended place of destination, and address, who shall knowingly give, or notify, a false or fictitious name, place of destination or address, or refuse or fail to give or notify his true name, intended place of destination and address, is liable to a penalty of £100, and in the case of a continuing offence, to a further penalty of £50 for every day during which the offence continues. By Order, HERBERT WILLIAMS, Port Sanitary Office, Medical Officer of Health, King William Street, Port of London. Greenwich, S.E. This has had a good result, many notifications of subsequent change of addresses having been forwarded to your Medical Officer. SMALL-POX. Notwithstanding the severity of the outbreak in the Metropolis (about 2,000 cases having occurred since August last up to the end of the year), only six were reported in relation to vessels in the Port ; and of these, two only came into the Port Sanitary Hospital for treatment. Both of these made a good recovery. The greatest number of cases in the early days of the outbreak occurred in the districts of St. Pancras and St. Marylebone, though the origin of the outbreak seems to be at present obscure. On referring to the history of 20 previous outbreaks I think the following facts from the Report of the Metropolitan Asylums Board are of special interest at the present time, as illustrating the danger which may arise from the uncontrolled landing of persons from infected vessels, who are apparently in good health. On the 29th March, 1900, the s.s. " Caledonia," from Bombay, arrived at Gravesend ("all well" on board, but had landed two cases of Small-pox at Marseilles). Subsequently, after the vessel was in Dock, a steward and a ship's clerk returned to their homes in St. Pancras and St. Marylebone. There they developed Small-pox within a few days of one another. Five persons with whom they came into contact afterwards developed the disease. On 21st May, a woman was removed from the Westminster district with Small-pox. She was a widow, and her husband had recently died, it was supposed from Measles, but there is now little doubt his death was due to hæmorrhagic Small-pox, and it appears probable he caught the disease from one of the cases originally from the " Caledonia." Three persons with whom this man's widow came into contact developed Small-pox, while about the same time a woman who lived in the same house, and a contact with either the deceased man or his widow, died in St. Mary's Hospital from severe confluent Small-pox. The nature of the patient's illness was unfortunately not at first recognised, and five other persons were infected. From the house in Westminster, where the man previously referred to had died, some linen had been sent to a laundry at Chiswick. The earlier cases were again not recognised ; result, nine more cases of Small-pox were removed. This is not all. The man's brother visited him at Westminster, and took the disease to the provincial town where he dwelt, and four or five cases resulted. Thus at least 30 cases in London could be traced back to the " Caledonia," and at least 20 to the man who had died in Westminster from " Measles," and who, as previously stated, in all probability derived the disease from the same source. Stronger evidence than this it would be difficult to conceive for the immediate necessity of adding Small-pox to the diseases to be dealt with under the Order of the Local Government Board of 9th November, 1896, referring to Cholera, Yellow Fever and Plague. At present, although the Port Sanitary Authority can remove actual, or even suspected cases of Small-pox, persons who, although apparently healthy are infected, must go free, and no power exists to demand names or addresses for the purpose of notification. Had this power been in the hands of your Medical Staff, it is quite possible that instead of the outbreak which did occur, the cases would have been limited to the earlier ones alone. 21 It does not appear logical that precautions which are regarded as necessary to prevent the introduction of Plague, Yellow Fever, and Cholera into this country should not be equally applied in the case of other dangerous infectious disorders, to wit, Small-pox and Scarlet Fever. VACCINATION. It cannot be too strongly urged on everyone, in view of the present epidemic, the importance of vaccination. It is not commonly realised that vaccination is protective against vaccinia, and it seems that almost every person on contemplating vaccination is convinced that they will have a " bad arm." This is not a fact. I vaccinate myself personally once every year, and have done so three times within the last six months. In no case have I been able to raise more than a very immature form of papule, which has caused me not the slightest inconvenience. I have performed the operation with lymph at the time of vaccinating other people, who, being unprotected by previous recent vaccination, have in due course exhibited symptoms of more or less severe vaccinia, so that there has been no doubt that the lymph used was active. It may, therefore, be stated as an axiom that the severity of the results of vaccination is directly proportional to the unprotected condition of the patient against Small-pox, and is an indication of the liability to contract Small-pox if exposed to the risk of infection. It is interesting in relation to this question to point to the training ship Cornwall," which is moored on the opposite shore of the River to the Small-pox ship, at a distance of less than 600 yards. The vessel is occupied by 255 boys, and is exposed to aerial and other infection of Small-pox, there having been over 70 cases in the village and neighbourhood immediately adjacent to the ship. Notwithstanding this, and the fact that the age of the boys is most favourable to infection, not one case of Small-pox has occurred on this ship during the present epidemic, nor for many years past. Every boy is vaccinated as soon as possible after joining the ship, and in my opinion the immunity enjoyed by the inmates is a good object lesson in the protection afforded by vaccination. On other training ships where similar precautions have been adopted no cases of Small-pox have occurred. To ensure success in vaccination it is important that the lymph be of recent date, and it must not be assumed in the case of a person vaccinated in infancy that because no result is obtained immunity is assured. It is probable in these cases that the lymph is inert. The active properties of the lymph are readily destroyed by exposure to light and heat. Vessels take on board a supply at the commencement of a voyage, and it is almost certain that in a voyage, say through the Red Sea, or one occupying a protracted period, the lymph has become inert, and in this way may be explained many of the failures of so-called vaccination. 22 Another error in relation to vaccination is the fact that people state they have been vaccinated recently, and on enquiry whether they have any scars to show, none are found to exist, it being evident that the so-called vaccination was not successful. Any person who desires to be rendered absolutely proof against Small-pox should be vaccinated at short intervals until the result obtained is practically negative. The protective power of vaccination can only be said to begin with the development of the papules, and protection should date from that time. It is frequently the case that persons are vaccinated who have already incubating within them the germs of Small-pox, and are admitted into hospital with Small-pox and vaccinia co-existing. CHICKEN-POX. Chicken-pox was added to the list of notifiable diseases by order of the Court of Common Council dated 17th October, 1901, for a temporary period, viz., to the 31st December, 1901, as shown in the following Notice which was extensively circulated in the Port and adjacent districts. CORPORATION OF LONDON. PORT OF LONDON SANITARY AUTHORITY. COMPULSORY NOTIFICATION OF INFECTIOUS DISEASES. Notice is Hereby Given that as a matter of emergency, in consequence of the outbreak of Small-pox, the Mayor, Commonalty, and Citizens of the City of London, as the Port Sanitary Authority of the Port of London, do hereby, by virtue of the power vested in them by Section 56 of the Public Health (London) Act, 1891, order that as from the 25th October instant, the provisions of the said Act with respect to Infectious Diseases shall apply in the district of the said Port Sanitary Authority to the Disease known as Chicken-pox, in addition to the diseases specifically mentioned in Section 55 of the said Act or any Order extending or amending the same, and that such order shall remain in force until the 31st December next. Ry Order of the Port Sanitary Authority, MONCKTON. Guildhall, London, 17th October, 1901. The addition of Chicken-pox is made with a view to aiding diagnosis and the detection of obscure cases of Small-pox. It is interesting to know that so far back as 1889 your Committee was alive to the necessity of precautions in this direction, as the following extract shows. 23 Report of Medical Officer of Health, Port of London, Half-year ending 30th June, 1889. MEMORANDUM. " It appears to me to be highly desirable from various points of view " that Chicken-pox should be included in the list of those dangerous " infectious disorders for which special regulations may be made by the " Port Sanitary Authority and confirmed by the Local Government " Board, under Section 125 of the Public Health Act of 1875, mainly " because there is always a close and dangerous similarity between " Chicken-pox at a certain stage and cases of modified Small-pox, a " similarity which it is within the knowledge of the Board has on more " than one occasion lead to disastrous results, and, as the Board are " aware, is so close that for some statistical purposes the Registrar" General has found it necessary to include Chicken-pox with Small-pox. " Another point is that, inasmuch as Lascars and other natives who " are especially subject to infantile diseases of a severe type form a con" siderable percentage of the crews of the large ocean-going passenger " steamers, this notification becomes of great moment when the importance " and character of our ocean passenger traffic is taken into consideration. " It has happened that Chicken-pox has spread on board these vessels " and given rise to much trouble. A memorandum of cases of Chicken" pox occurring within the Port of London has already been submitted " to the Local Government Board, and a copy is hereto appended. From " this it will be seen that the number of cases occurring is extremely " small, and not likely to interfere to any extent with the commercial " interests of the Port ; and, moreover, it must be distinctly understood " that if powers of notification and removal such as we seek were granted " to the Port Sanitary Authority, the Medical Officer would, of course, " have a discretionary power to carry out removal, &c. " I would further call the attention of the Board to the fact that the " arrangements of the Authority are such that no delay or detention of " any kind occurs in removal of cases of infectious disease from vessels in " the Port. The Medical Officer and proper officers remove cases " immediately on notification at Gravesend, and the vessel is fumigated " on her way up the River, if possible, to avoid the loss of a tide, and I am " able to state as a fact, that in no single instance has detention occurred." An application was made to the Local Government Board accordingly by your Worshipful Committee in April, 1889, for their approval to the inclusion of Chicken-pox among the dangerous infectious disorders specified in the Regulations made by the Committee in 1885, but the Board " were not at present prepared to assent to the proposed amendment of the Regulations." While this Report is being revised the London County Council have made the notification of Chicken-pox compulsory within the administrative County of London, and your Committee are making application to the Court of Common Council to add same to the list of notifiable diseases within the Port. 24 SCARLET FEVER. Twenty-two cases of this disease have been reported, three only of which have been admitted for treatment into the Port Sanitary Hospital. Fifteen cases were reported from training ships, three were convalescent on arrival in the Port, and one was isolated at own residence. ENTERIC FEVER. Forty-four cases have been reported during the half-year. Of these, twentyfour have been under treatment in the Port Sanitary Hospital. Two have occurred on training ships, while sixteen were notified from the Seamen's Hospital, and two from other hospitals. DIPHTHERIA. Fourteen cases have been notified during the half-year. One was admitted to the Port Sanitary Hospital, one was an inmate of the Metropolitan Asylums Board Hospital, and one was convalescent on arrival in the Port. Eleven cases were from the training ship " Warspite,'' being a small outbreak traceable to a boy who was ailing with sore throat, &c., when the vessel was lying at Charlton, and was taken on board when she was moved to Greenhithe, and in all probability infected the subsequent cases. During the past few years at Charlton, where the water was often in a more or less offensive condition, the boys suffered to a large extent from sore throat and tonsillitis. This condition has almost ceased since the removal of the vessel to the more salubrious region of Greenhithe. TRAINING SHIPS. The following cases of infectious disease have been reported :— Name of Vessel. Diphtheria. Enteric Fever. Scarlet Fever. " Arethusa — 1 8 " Cornwall" — 1 6 "Shaftesbury" — — 1 "Warspite" 11 — — Total 11 2 15 25 The practical immunity of these vessels from Small-pox is noticeable, and is alluded to in my previous remarks relative to this disease. The question of hospital accommodation arising from infectious disease in these vessels has called for special attention. Some of the ships have provided for their own needs, but others, notably the " Warspite," are practically without any isolation. In the case of the " Warspite " the only isolation the ship possesses is some buildings at Charlton, near the former berth of the vessel, which buildings were then used as baths. The primary difficulty in connection with this arrangement is, of course, transport, the distance being about twelve miles. I am strongly of opinion that there should be co-operation between the various training ships with a view to the construction and maintenance of a general hospital for infectious diseases occurring on the vessels. The training ships principally affected are the " Warspite," "Worcester," and " Arethusa." I therefore felt it advisable to urge upon your Committee the desirability of placing before the Authorities of the training ships the expediency of combining and erecting and maintaining a common hospital for the treatment of cases of infectious disease. This was done, but with the result that as two of the Bodies concerned declined to see the advisability of this course, the scheme fell through. I am convinced that the proposal would have been the best solution of the difficulty, as it must be borne in mind that with a number of boys congregated together, all of an age particularly liable to contract infectious disease, it is probable that an epidemic may occur with which the present means are incapable of dealing. HOSPITAL. During the half-year the following cases have been treated in Hospital :— Remaining in Hospital, 30th June, 1901—0. Admitted. Discharged. Died. Bubonic Plague 0 0 0 Suspected ditto 3 3 0 Small-pox 2 2 0 Enteric Fever 24 17 0 Scarlet Fever 3 3 0 Diphtheria 1 1 0 Other Diseases 10 10 0 Totals 43 36 0 Remaining in Hospital, 1st January, 1902—7. Total number of days' treatment during the half-year was 618 Average number of days under treatment for each case 14.04 The average daily cost of maintenance per head was 17.14d. 28 NUISANCES. Complaints of nuisances to the number of 169 have been dealt with during the half-year. Prominent amongst these is one which existed in a small tributary of the River known as Rainham Creek, in the County of Essex. Briefly summarised, the nuisance was caused by the foul condition of the water in the creek and of the mud at the margins, especially at the head of the creek. Investigation showed this insanitary state of affairs to be brought about principally :— (1.) By dung being allowed to fall into the creek from barges when discharging manure at the quay-side. (2.) From the wharves where the manure was discharged being submerged at high water. (3.) From the pollution of the water by sewage from the village of Rainham. (4.) From filthy and offensive matter leaking from barges lying on the mud at low water. (5.) From the pumping of filthy water from such barges into the creek. (6.) From the possible discharge of offensive liquid from barges discharging putrid fish at the fish oil works of the London Fish and Guano Company at the mouth of the creek, or from the factory itself. The point which chiefly concerns the Port Sanitary Authority is the discharge of offensive liquid from barges. Accordingly the owners of all barges conveying offensive cargoes into the creek were informed that they were not to allow foul liquid to pass into the creek under any pretence. Your Medical Officer met in conference the Medical Officer of Health for the Romford Sanitary Authority, with the result that there was co-operative action on the part of the shore people, and means were taken to prevent pollution of the water from that direction. By the end of August there was a great improvement in the condition of the creek, and if the precautions indicated are adhered to there is little question but that the nuisance is not likely to recur, but the locality will receive careful attention before the advent of the hot weather. 29 The condition of the water in the River and the Docks has, during the half-year, given rise to several very serious complaints. During July and August especially, the water was dark in colour and very offensive to the smell. This was particularly noticeable in that part of the River between Limehouse and Woolwich, where it was very bad, resembling practically the contents of a sewer. Every year it has been observed that the River water becomes offensive during the hot months of July and August, but this year it became offensive during the month of October, which month was not distinguished by any rise in temperature or by any undue deficiency in rainfall. Numerous complaints were received from persons in the vicinity of Woolwich, especially from persons who had to cross the River by the ferry daily to reach their occupation. The vicinity was visited by your Medical Officer on several occasions, and the complaints received were indeed fully justified. A sample of the River water was taken and submitted for analysis to the City Analyst, with the result that one-third, approximately, was found to consist of sewage. It is interesting to compare this with analyses of samples taken from about the same locality before the precipitation works were completed at Barking and Crossness, from which it will be seen that the condition of the River water in the month of October last, at this point, was even worse than it was at the time mentioned. (Table showing results of analyses given at foot.) In the absence of absolute evidence of any direct pollution of the River in the month of October last, one can only speculate as to the possible cause of the pollution. About this time there were many dense fogs on the River which would effectively prevent the boats of the London County Council from proceeding to sea to discharge their cargoes of sewage sludge. The number of these boats being limited, it is probable that they were filled with sludge, and at the Northern and Southern outfalls no boats being available in which to deposit the sludge, crude sewage was allowed to flow direct into the River. Table showing Comparison between the Results of Analyses of River Thames Water. Figures express parts per 100,000. Date taken November 23rd, 1881. October 24th, 1901. Time „ 4.20 p.m. 2.10 p.m. Position Barking. Beckton. Depth 3 ft. About 3 ft. Wind N.S.W. N.E. Free Ammonia .500 1.02 Albuminoid Ammonia .100 .306 Nitrogen as Nitrates ...... Absent. Oxygen absorbed ...... 5.36 Total Solids 814.0 1,282.0 Chlorine 400.0 619.5 30 SMOKE NUISANCE. An important decision with reference to steam vessels and smoke nuisance was obtained at the Greenwich Police Court on the 2nd October, when the General Steam Navigation Company were convicted and fined for the sending forth of' black smoke from the chimney or funnel of their s.s. " Eagle " in such quantities as to be a nuisance. Public Health (London) Act, 1891, Sec. 24 (b). Application for a summons had not previously been made under this section, but the magistrate held that the shipowner was liable, and convicted the owners (see Appendix L). A list of the Notices which have been served under this section will be found in the body of this Report, but no further prosecutions have been found fo be necessary. I would call attention to the method of working of the sections of the Public Health (London) Act, 1891, relating to the abatement of Nuisances and the service of Notices. On receipt of complaint of a nuisance, such nuisance must be investigated, and upon your officers being satisfied of the existence of a nuisance, the same is reported to your Worshipful Committee, and if the evidence is considered satisfactory, instructions are given that a Statutory Notice shall be served. In practice this does not work well, e.g., the vessel may be lying near one of the bridges or other public place, creating a serious nuisance. To carry out strictly the above method would mean that the nuisance would continue for some time without any action being possible. The position is one requiring careful consideration. Meanwhile the practice adopted is to write a formal letter calling upon the persons responsible for the nuisance to abate the same within a definite period. In the case of the "Eagle" above mentioned, the nuisance was first reported on the 23rd July, and by the instructions of your Committee Statutory Notice was served on the 25th July. Subsequent recurrences of the nuisance were reported, but it was not until the 10th September that the facts of the non-compliance with the Notice could be reported. Then it was ordered that a summons be applied for, which was done, and conviction obtained, as stated, on the 2nd October. The season for these steamboats was then over, and the owners could regard a conviction with equanimity. The owners of the various pleasure boats plying on the Thames have been notified of the conviction of the master of the s.s. " Eagle," and warned that should a nuisance arise from the funnels of their steamers in the course of the next season, the facts would be reported to your Worshipful Committee with a view to such action being taken as may be deemed necessary. 31 NUISANCES. The following complaints of Nuisances, &c., were received during the Half-year:— Date. Premises. Nuisances arising from Remarks. 1901. July 4 Nos. 14 and 16 Quays, Royal Albert Dock. Foul water under defective planking. Foul water removed and new ballast laid down. „ 11 " T 2 " Warehouse, Millwall Dock. 86 bags rotten potatoes ex s.s. " Berlin." Potatoes destroyed. „ 11 Patent Fodder Factory, Poplar. Offensive smells from factory. Referred to Medical Officer of Health for Poplar. „ 17 No. 26 Shed, Royal Albert Dock. 7 tins of corned mutton ex s.s. " Waimate." Goods destroyed. „ 18 East Quay, London Dock. 4 bags rotten potatoes ex s.s. "Strauss" and s.s. "Schwann." Ditto. „ 24 "F" Warehouse, St. Katharine's Dock. 8 bags rotten potatoes ex s.s. " Ophelia." Ditto. Aug. 3 Royal Albert Dock 8 tins rabbit ex s.s. " Tongariro." Ditto. „ 3 Barge "Elizabeth Ann." Foul smell given off from barge lying at North fleet. Barge removed. ,, 8 Russia Yard, North Side, Surrey Commercial Dock. A quantity of refuse Refuse covered with lime and removed. „ 10 Station Yard, Surrey Commercial Dock. Foul condition of 3 cesspits. Nuisance abated by increasing quantity of lime used. „ 13 London Dock A rotten cheese ex s.s. " Arrage." Goods destroyed. „ 15 North Side, Blackwall Entrance, South West India Dock. Insanitary condition of urinal. Urinal cleansed. „ 15 Millwall Dock Foul liquid in lighter " York." Lighter cleansed. „ 15 South Quay, London Dock. A quantity of wool damaged by fire. Wool removed. „ 17 Trafalgar Hotel, East Greenwich. Alleged discharge of sink pipe into the River. The premises were inspected when it was found that the pipe in question was only used for clean overflow water, and that no nuisance arose from same. „ 27 Regent's Canal Dock. Deposits of excreta, &c., in a disused hut. Dock Company's attention called to the matter, and the nuisance abated by cleansing the hut. A permanent boarding was also erected round hut to prevent recurrence of nuisance. Sep. 10 Royal Albert Dock Dirty condition of 3rd class compartment at Central Hotel. Nuisance abated by thoroughly cleansing the compartment. „ 11 East India Dock Accumulation of refuse, and insanitary condition of urinal and W.C. at Naval Yard. Nuisance abated by removal of refuse and cleansing of W.C. 32 Date. Premises. Nuisances arising from Remarks. Sep. 12 " F " Warehouse, Millwall Dock. A quantity of rotten grain. Nuisance abated by removal of grain. „ 16 Royal Albert Dock Defective lavatory fittings at Office of No. 7 Group. Reconstructed. „ 20 Victoria Dock Pumping foul bilge water into Dock from s.s. " Europe." The master was cautioned, and the discharge of bilge water into dock discontinued. „ 23 Royal Albert Dock Filthy condition of cattle fittings on s.s. " Brazilian." Nuisance abated by cleansing the cattle fittings. „ 30 Victoria Dock Cattle dung under wooden sheathing of cattle deck on s.s. " Strathnevis." Sheathing lifted, and dec??? underneath cleansed. Oct. 2 " C 13 " Warehouse, West India Dock. 200 boxes of rotten cheese ex s.s. " North Eastern." Goods destroyed. „ 8 Barge "Hebe," London, 84,380. Accumulation of foul mud under cabin floor. Mud removed and barge cleansed. „ 9 Victoria Dock Cattle dung on deck of s.s. "Nordfarn. Dung removed. Cattle fittings cleansed and Line washed. „ 10 Barge "Walter," in Rainham Creek. Cargo of manure and a quantity of stinking water in barge. Barge cleansed. ,, 11 Lighter "Prospero" Insanitary condition of lighter. Lighter cleansed. „ 11 Lighter "Emma," lying at Rainham. Waste fish liquor and foul water in bilges. Ditto. „ 11 " Fred " barges. Discharge of offensive liquid into Rainham Creek. (See special report.) "Walter " „ 14 Lighter " Hebe " - Foul water and rubbish in fore and aft compartments of lighter. Lighter cleansed and disinfected. , „ 15 Hemplemen's, Blood Wharf, Rainham. Closet discharging into River. Closet nailed up. Use of same discontinued. „ 15 "A" Jetty, Victoria Dock. A quantity of stagnant water in gutterway. Matter brought to the notice of Dock Superintendent, who had the nuisance abated. „ 18 s.s. " Cervona," of Dundee. Alleged dirty condition of fresh water tanks. Vessel arrived in London on 2nd August. The drinking water was examined on 21st September and found to be clear and odourless. „ 18 Royal Albert Dock Alleged insanitary condition of Atlantic Transport Company's offices. Premises inspected on 19th and 21st October, but no nuisance could be detected. „ 22 s.s. " Dantzic," of Banff. Insanitary condition of lower forecastle. Forecastle cleansed. „ 23 Barge " Sarah Ann," Faversham, 4252 Foul liquid in bilges under cabin floor. Barge cleansed. 33 Date. Premises. Nuisances arising from Remarks. Nov. 6 s.s." Manora," Glasgow, 89,908. Filthy condition of Lascars' quarters. Lascars' quarters cleansed. 7. 7 Surrey Commercial Dock. Inefficient drainage provided at a urinal at Pier Head. Dock Company's attention called to the matter, and they abolished the urinal. „ 21 Schooner " Jane Gray." Alleged filthy condition of the vessel. Vessel inspected. The forecastle required cleaning and the deck overhead whitewashing. „ 27 East India Dock - Dirty and insanitary condition of police lobbies at main gate, export gate. Dock Company called upon to abate the nuisance. „ 29 s.s. " Skalligrim " - Leakage of egg flip into forepeak. Nuisance abated by cleaning the forepeak. Dec. 2 Barge " Ted " Pumping foul bilge water into Victoria Dock. Master warned and nuisance abated. ,, 12 Millwall Docks Nuisance arising from wet and dirty condition of roadway alongside western portion of McDougall's works. Arrangements made with Dock Company to make up and drain roadway in question. „ 12 West Quay, East India Dock About 500 bales of damaged wool and skins ex " Loch Vennachar." The attention of the owners of the goods was called to the matter and the nuisance abated by removing the goods. „ 14 Concordia Wharf, Blackwall. A quantity of tainted tinned salmon being sold for consumption. Examined and found in good order. „ 31 Millwall Dock Percolation of urine through the walls of Nos. 4 and 5 warehouses owing to defective condition of urinal. Dock Company undertook to abate nuisance. „ 31 Millwall Dock Dirty condition of police boxes at— 1, Wood gate. 2, General office gate. 3, Export gate. Ditto. „ 31 s.s. " Sicilia " Emptying the contents of ship's closet over the clothing of a labourer working alongside the steamer. The matter was brought to the notice of the master, who gave the man £1 as compensation. The master was also warned against using the ship's closets while in dock. 34 The following cases of Smoke Nuisance were reported during the half-year :— Date. Premises (or Vessel). Owners or Occupiers. 1901. July 2 " Avon," of Grangemouth, 90,917 Carron Company, Larbert, Stirling. „ „ " Floresco," of London, 108,387 W. H. Shepherd, St. George's House, Eastcheap, E.C. „ 5 " Surprise." „ 15 " Richmond," of London, 95,485 Tough and Henderson, 66, Upper Ground Street, S.E. „ 16 " Avon," of Grangemouth, 90,917 - Carron Company, Larbert, Stirling. „ „ " Richmond," of London, 95,485 Tough and Hendersen, 66, Upper Ground Street, S.E. „ 18 Hydraulic Pumping Station, South West India Dock. London and India Docks Company, 109, Leadenhall Street, E.C. „ „ " Robert Forrest," of Newport, 98,884 C. Murrell, 5, Albion Place, Blackfriars, S.E. „ „ " Urania," of Norway J. W. Jepps and Co., 3, Fenchurch Avenue, E.C. 22 "Auk," of London, 77,194 General Steam Navigation Company, 55, Great Tower Street, E.C. „ „ South West India Dock Refrigerator London and India Docks Company, 109, Leadenhall Street, E.C. „ 24 " Forsete," of Bergen Birchfeldt and Co., 16, Water Lane, E.C. „ „ " Eagle," of London, 108,355 General Steam Navigation Company, 55, Great Tower Street. E.C. „ „ " Oriole," of London, 95,435 Ditto „ 25 South West India Dock Refrigerator London and India Docks Company, 109, Leadenhall Street, E.C. „ 26 Ditto Ditto „ 27 Ditto Ditto „ „ " John Christie," of Christiania Sanders, Wake and Co., 23, Great St. Helen's, E.C. „ 29 " Monica," of Hull Crofton Shipping Company, Saville Street, Hull. „ „ South West India Dock Refrigerator London and India Docks Company, 109, Leadenhall Street, E.C. „ 30 " Portia," of Germany Drolenvaux and Bremner, 36, Great Tower Street, E.C. „ 31 " Mary Hough," of Liverpool, 76,365 S. Hough, 25, Water Street, Liverpool. August 3 " Somerford," of Sunderland, 109,702 S. Marshall, 38, West Sunniside, Sunderland. „ „ " Oriole," of London, 95,435 General Steam Navigation Company, 55, Great Tower Street, E.C. „ 6 " Somerford," of Sunderland, 109,702 S. Marshall, 38, West Sunniside, Sunderland. „ „ " Eagle," of London, 108,355 General Steam Navigation Company, 55, Great Tower Street, E.C. „ 9 South West India Dock Refrigerator London and India Docks Company, 109, Leadenhall Street, E.C. 10 Ditto Ditto „ „ " Oriole," of London, 95,435 Ditto „ 12 " Eagle," of London, 108,355 General Steam Navigation Company 55, Great Tower Street, E.C. „ „ " Oriole," of London, 95,435 Ditto „13 "Eagle," of London, 108,355 Ditto „ 14 Ditto Ditto „ 15 " Halcyon " of London, 94,300 Ditto „ 16 " Sea Serpent," of London, 110,005 C. F. Leach, Mark Brown's Wharf, Tooley Street, S.E. „ „ " Floresco," of London, 108,387 W. H. Shepherd, St. George's House, Eastcheap, E.C. „ 20 " Eclipse," of London, 79,671 J. D. Hawkins, 70, Lower Road, Rotherhithe, S.E. „ 21 " Hornby Grange," of London, 98,048 Houlder Brothers and Co., 146,Leadenhall Street, E.C. 85 Date. Premises (or Vessel). Owners or Occupiers. 1901. August 22 " Eagle," of London, 108,355 General Steam Navigation Company, 55, Great Tower Street, E.C. „ 27 " Oreole," of London, 95,435 Ditto „ 30 "Avon," of Grangemouth, 90,917 Carron Company, Larbert, Stirling. September 2 " Eagle," of London, 108,355 General Steam Navigation Company, 55, Great Tower Street, E.C. „ 5 " Phyllis," of London, 98,999 Thames Steamboat Company (1897), Ltd., 17, Philpot Lane, E.C. „ 6 Ditto Ditto „ „ " Seamew," of London, 95,446 General Steam Navigation Company, 55, Great Tower Street, E.C. „ „ " Starling," of London, 94,307 Ditto „ 7 "Yarmouth Belle," of London, 108,358. Coast Development Company, Ltd., 33, Walbrook, E.C. „ 9 "Eagle," of London, 108,355 General Steam Navigation Company, 55, Great Tower Street, E.C. „ „ " Southend Belle," of London, 105,824. Coast Development Company, Ltd.. 33, Walbrook, E.C. „ 10 " Eagle," of London, 108,355 General Steam Navigation Company, 55, Great Tower Street, E.C. „ „ " Royal Sovereign," of London, 102,763. The New Palace Steamers, Limited, 50, King William Street, E.C. „ 11 Ditto Ditto „ „ " Eagle," of London, 108,355 General Steam Navigation Company, 55, Great Tower Street, E.C. „ „ " A. H. K.," of London, 95,483 A. H. Keep and Co., 90, Lower Thames Street, E.C. „ 12 " Eagle," of London, 108.355 General Steam Navigation Company, 55, Great Tower Street, E.C. „ „ "Kestrel," of London, 108,252 J. P. Knight, 27, Great Tower Street, E.C. „ 14 " Eagle," of London, 108,355 General Steam Navigation Company, 55, Great Tower Street, E.C. „ 17 " Gnat," of London, 109,964 C. E. Gaslee, 19, St. Dunstan's Hill, „ „ " Eagle," of London, 108,355 General Steam Navigation Company, 55, Great Tower Street, E.C. „ 18 " Yarmouth Belle," of London, 108,358. Coast Development Company, 33, Walbrook, E.C. „ 19 " Beatrice," of London, 89,528 London and India Docks Company, 109, Leadenhall Street, E.C. 3 3 33 " Hotspur," of London, 108,382 Ditto „ 23 '' Swan," of London, 82,344 General Steam Navigation Company, 55, Great Tower Street, E.C. „ „ "Eagle," of London, 108,355 Ditto „ 24 " Southwold Belle," of London, 112,717. Coast Development Company, Limited. 33, Walbrook, E.C. „ 33 " Shah," of London, 91,960 R. Watkins, 2, London Street, E.C. „ „ Ditto Ditto October 7 " Hotspur," of London, 108,302 London and India Docks Company, 109, Leadenhall Street, E.C. „ 8 " Richmond," of London, 95,485 Tough and Henderson, 66, Upper Ground Street, S.E. „ 10 Pumping Station, Shadwell Entrance, London Dock. London and India Docks Company, 109, Leadenhall Street, E.C „ „ " Hotspur," of London, 108,302 Ditto „ 11 Pumping Station, St. Katharine's Dk. Ditto „ 14 "Plover," of London, 70,720 General Steam Navigation Company, 55, Great Tower Street, E.C. „ 15 " Seagull," of London, 112,642 Leach and Co., Limited, Tooley Street, S.E. „ 18 " Rajah," of London, 105,757 W. Cory and Son, Limited, 52, Mark Lane, E.C. „ „ " Mizpah," (Not traced.) „ 19 Pumping Station, St. Katharine's Dock. London and India Docks Company, 109, Leadenhall Street, E.C. 36 Date. Premises (or Vessel). Owners or Occupiers. 1901. October 19 " Heckla," of Bergen- Beechfeldt and Co., 16, Water Lane, E.C. „ „ " Capulet," of London, 70,382 General Steam Navigation Company, 55, Great Tower Street, E.C. „ 21 " Fœdrelandet," of Bergen T. G. Beatley and Son, 53, Leadenhall Street, E.C. „ 22 " Cliff," of London, 98,891 Francis and Co., Limited, 4, Eastcheap, E.C. „ 24 " Pawhatan," of West Hartlepool, 112,428. British Maritime Trust, Limited, 4, Fenchurch Avenue, E.C. „ „ Pumping Engine, Surrey Commercial Dock. Pearson and Sons, Limited, 10, Victoria Street, S.W. „ „ "Frank," of London, 108,184 A. H. Keep, 90, Lower Thames Street, E.C. „ 25 " Scorpion," of London, 91,943 C. E. Gaslee, 90, Lower Thames Street, E.C. „ 28 " Excelsior," of London, 105,826 J. Clements, 272, High Street, Brentford. „ 29 " Ovingdean Grange," of London, 98,051. Houlder Brothers and Co., 146, Leadenhall Street, E C. „ „ " Iona," of London, 73,659 W. Watkins, 75, Mark Lane, E.C. „ „ " Widgeon," of London, 73,657 General Steam Navigation Company, 55, Great Tower Street, E.C. November 2 "Hampton," of Southampton,104,035 Tough and Henderson, 66, Upper Ground Street, S.E. „ 5 " Hotspur," of London, 108,302 London and India Docks Company, 109, Leadenhall Street, E.C. „ 6 Ditto Ditto „ 9 Ditto Ditto „ 11 " Gull," of London, 110,052 General Steam Navigation Company, 55, Great Tower Street, E.C. „ „ " Rosalind," of Rochester, 87,912- J. Stone, 71, West Street, Erith. „ „ " Floresco," of London, 108,387 W. H. Shepherd, St. George's House, Eastcheap. „ „ " Kestrel," of London Kaiser Steam Tug Company. „ „ "Cassell," of London, 98,926 Mead, Son and Hussey, St. Dunstan's Buildings, E.C. „ 14 Hydraulic Engine House, North side, Royal Albert Dock. London and India Docks Company, 109, Leadenhall Street, E.C. „ 15 " Starling," of London, 94,307 General Steam Navigation Company, 55, Great Tower Street, E.C. „ 18 " Little Britain," of London, 54,676 J.Clements, 63, High Street, Brentford. „ „ " Yeoman," of Newcastle, 114,432 - Fisher, Renwick and Co., Newcastleon-Tvne. „ „ " Ramesis," of London, 108,162 W. Cory and Son, Limited, 52, Mark Lane, E.C. „ „ " Richmond," of London, 95,485 Tough and Henderson, 66, Upper Ground Street, S.E. „ 20 " Fury," of London, 81,602 J. Clements, 7, Brook Road, Brentford. „ „ " Hotspur," of London, 108,302 London and India Docks Company, 109, Leadenhall Street, E.C. „ 25 " Diana," of London, 91,930 Vokins and Co., Limited, 37 and 38, Mark Lane, E.C. „ „ "Bee," of London, 101,946 C. E. Gaslee, 90, Lower Thames Street, E.C. „ 26 "Alexandra," of London, 81,544 London and India Docks Company, 109, Leadenhall Street, E.C. „ „ " Hotspur," of London, 108,302 Ditto „ 28 "Volunteer," of Newcastle, 114,401 Fisher, Renwick and Co., 15, Great St. Helen's, E.C. „ 29 " Hotspur," of London, 108,302 London and India Docks Company, 109, Leadenhall Street, E.C. December 3 " Rossija," of Libau - H. G. Harper and Co., 32, Great St. Helen's, E.C. „ 5 "Umvoti," of London, 105,857 Bullard, King and Co, 14, St. Mary Axe, E.C. „ „ " Excelsior," of London, 105,826 J. Clements, 272, High Street, Brentford. „ 6 Hydraulic Engine House, North Side, Victoria Dock. London aud India Docks Company, 109, Leadenhall Street, E.C. „ 17 " Plover," of London, 70,720 - General Steam Navigation Company, 55, Great Tower Street, E.C. „ 23 "Virgo," of London, 63,694 - Ditto „ „ " Tern," of London, 73,563 Ditto 37 The following Notices to abate Nuisances have been served during the half-year :— Date. Premises or Vessel. . Requirements of Notice. Date reported complied with. 1901. 1901. July 2nd s.s. " Patrie," of Oporto. To remove a quantity of offensive rubbish from the main deck and port alleyway, within 24 hours. 3rd July. „ 9th Lighter " Queen " To thoroughly cleanse and disinfeet lighter within 24 hours. 13th „ „ 11 th Lighter "Minnie" Ditto 13th ,, „ 17th Tilbury Dock To remove and destroy two cases of preserved meats lying at " O " Shed, Tilbury Dock, ex s.s. " Roland," within 12 hours. 18th ,, Aug. 3rd Lighter " Rose " To empty, cleanse and disinfect, stop all leaks, repair and make watertight the said lighter within 48 hours. 4th Sept. Sept. 21st London Dock To remove and destroy 20 bags of rotten potatoes lying at No. 10 Warehouse, Eastern Department, London Dock, ex s.s. " Granton," within 24 hours. 24th ., „ 28th Lighter " Superb " To thoroughly cleanse and disinfect lighter within 24 hours. 17th Oct. Oct. 17 th s.s." Bothal," Newcastle, 76,225. 1. To caulk and make tight the whole of forecastle deck. 2. To re-glaze and repack all ports in forecastle. 3. To insulate bare iron over and alongside men's bunks. 4. To efficiently ventilate food lockers in forecastle. 5. To remove all machinery from forecastle. 6. To repair leaky closet pipe leading through firemen's mess room. 7. To remove broken stove from firemen's forecastle. 8. Mid-ship ventilator in seamen's forecastle to be unplugged and fitted with a cowl. 9. Port ventilator in seamen's forecastle to be fitted with a cowl, and the use of ventilator as a stove funnel discontinued, within 28 days. 19th Nov. 38 SMOKE NUISANCES—NOTICES. Date. Premises or Vessel. 1901. July 25th *s.s. " Eagle," of London, 108,355. „ 25th *s.s. " Oriole," of London, 95,435. „ 25th *South West India Dock Refrigerator. „ 25th s.s. " Forsete," of Bergen. „ 26th *s.s. " Avon," of Grangemouth, 90,917. „ 26 th *s.s. "Richmond," of London, 95,485. August 7th s.s. " Somerford," of Sunderland, 109,702. „ 17th *s.s. " Floresco," of London, 108,387. September 7th s.s. " Phyllis," of London, 98,999. „ 12th s.s. " Royal Sovereign," of London, 102,763. „ 19th s.s. " Yarmouth Belle," of London, 108,358. „ 25th s.s. " Shah," of London, 91,960. October 10th *s.s. "Richmond," of London, 95,485. „ 11th *s.s. " Hotspur," of London, 108,302. In the case of the above vessels and premises, a notice to abate a nuisance, arising from the sending forth from the chimney or funnel of the vessel black smoke in such quantity as to be a nuisance, within 24 hours, was served upon the owners or occupiers, and except in the case of those marked * there has been no recurrence. 39 INSANITARY BARGES. Nuisance Notices have been served in respect of the following barges by order of your Worshipful Committee. Owing to deficient and defective bulkheads, filthy liquids and gases were allowed to pass into the cabins, thus causing a serious nuisance :— Date. Premises or Vessel Date reported complied with. 1901. Aug. 13th Barge " Russell," Rochester, 79,895 1901. „ 27th „ " Gillman," Rochester, 49,846 11th Oct. ,, 28th „ " Roberta," Rochester, 58,508 12th Nov. Sept. 7th „ " William and Eleanor," Rochester, 67,056 12th Dec. „ 9 th „ " Butterfly," London, 79,649 22nd Oct. „ 11th „ " Katyre," Faversham, 80,517 11th Sept. Barge cleaned ; no longer used for offensive cargoes. „ 12th „ " Luddesdown," Rochester, 78,508 7th Oct. „ 25th „ " William Hordle, " Harwich, 17,804 ... Oct. 1st ,, " Herbert Tomkins," London, 54,768 25th Oct. „ 4th „ "Landfield," London, 50,175 ... „ 7 th „ " Fanny," Maldon, 62,784 - 13th Nov. „ 7th „ " Pioneer," Faversham, 44,094 4th Nov. „ 7th „ '' Elizabeth," Rochester, 26,255 ... „ 9th „ " Havengore," London, 81,563 25th Oct. „ 14th „ " Mary," London, 26,551 ... „ 14th „ " Victoria," Rochester, 52,842 ... „ 14 th „ " Brent," London, 76,954 27th Nov. „ 18th „ " Champion," Maldon, 49,848 ... „ 23rd „ "Echo," Rochester, 58,519 ... „ 23rd „ " Hope," Rochester, 28,849 ... „ 24th „ " Three Sisters," London, 82,882 ... „ 24th „ " Fritz," Rochester, 79,699 ... „ 25th „ " Samuel," Rochester, 99,916 ... „ 25th „ " Ernest and Ada," London, 54,586 ... „ 31st „ " Two Friends," Maldon, 50,458 ... „ 31st „ " Albion," Maldon, 50,453 ... 40 Date. Premises or Vessel. Date reported complied with. 1901. Nov. 2nd Barge "Cassar," Rochester, 55,136 1901. „ 2nd ,, " Blackwater," Maldon, 45,649 ... „ 2nd „ " William and Martha," Rochester, 25,487 ... „ 2nd „ " Milton," Faversham, 44,096 ... ,, 4 th „ " Dora," London, 77,015 ... ,, 5th „ " Pride of Essex," Maldon, 11,913 17th Dec. „ 5th „ " J. D. Drake," Rochester, 109,916 ... „ 5th „ "William and Arthur," Maldon, 62,777 18th Dec. „ 6th „ " Livingstone," Rochester, 81,883 ... ,, 6th „ "George and Francis," Rochester, 55,189 ... „ 6th ,, " Olley Field," London, 43,996 ... Dec. 14th „ " Vange," London, 94,282 ... „ 14th „ " Colne," London, 77,100 16th Dec. „ 14th ,, " Emily and Matilda," Rochester, 11,236 ... „ 14th „ " Winnie," Rochester, 81,896 ... „ 14th „ " Fobbing," London, 98,915 ... „ 14th „ " Jane Mead," Rochester, 90,981 ... „ 14th „ " Foxgrove," Rochester, 55,146 ... „ 14th „ " Alert," Faversham, 45,236 ... „ 14th „ " Shorne," London, 18,073 18th Dec. „ 14th „ " Sarah and Helen," London, 56,872 ... „ 14th „ " Sunbeam," Rochester, 79,852 ... „ 14th „ " Milestone," Rochester, 67,108 ... „ 14th „ Faith," London, 56,759 ... „ 14th „ " William," London, 60,888 ... „ 14th „ " Harriett Howard," London, 73,731 ... „ 14th „ " James," Rochester, 43,536 ... „ 14th „ " Garibaldi," Faversham, 28,459 ... „ 14th „ " Thomas and Edward " ... „ 14th „ " George," Maldon, 16,390 ... „ 14th „ " Emerald," London, 73,662 ... 41 Date. Premises or Vessel. Date reported complied with. 1901. Dec. 14 th Barge*" Water Lily," London, 19,099 1901. ... „ 14th ,, " Owner's Delight," Rochester, 16,969 ... „ 14th „ " Emma Mizzen," Rochester, 90,990 ... „ 14th „ " Mundon," Maldon, 62,776 ... „ 14th ,. " Mosquito," Rochester, 67,101 ... „ 14th „ "Star" ... „ 14 th „ " Nelson" ... , 17th „ " Fritz," Rochester, 79,699 ... „ 28th „ " Sarah Ann," Faversham, 4,252 ... „ 31st „ " William and Mary," London, 47,944 ... In the case of the above vessels the nuisance has been abated where shown, and to prevent any recurrence the following structural alterations have been specified :— 1. Fixed floor in cabin to be removed, and relaid in such a manner that it can be removed in sections at any time. 2. The space under cabin floor to be filled to the level of the timbers with concrete of cement and coke, or other suitable material impervious to water. 3. The defective bulkhead to be removed, and replaced by two bulkheads of substantial construction, which shall be separated by a space of not less than six inches, such space to be freely ventilated to the external air, and furnished with a pump. Both bulkheads shall be watertight, and shall extend from the level of the deck to the skin, that is, the outer planking of the vessel at the sides and bottom. The space between the bulkheads should be filled to the same height, and with a similar mixture as the space under cabin floor. There shall be no limber holes or other communication or access between the cabin and the hold admitting the passage of liquids or gases. 4. The cabin to be fitted with a skylight of not less than 2 ft. 6 in. by 1 ft. 6 in. 42 The following Notices to abate Nuisances were served prior to the date of this Report, but have been complied with since 1st July, 1901 :— Date. Premises or Vessel. Requirements of Notice. Date reported complied with. 1. To thoroughly cleanse and disinfect bilges under cabin floor. 1901. April 22nd Barge " William and Arthur,'' Maldon, 62,777. 2. Fixed floor in cabin to be removed, and relaid in such a manner that it can be removed in sections at any time. 1901. 12th Dec. „ 22nd Barge " Elizabeth," London. 3. The space under cabin floor to be filled to the level of the timbers with concrete of cement and coke or other suitable material impervious to water. 28th Sept. June 1st Barge " Myrtle," Rochester, 81,864. 13th „ 4. The defective bulkhead to be removed and replaced by two bulkheads of substantial construction, which shall be separated by a space of not less than six inches, such space to be freely ventilated to the external air, and furnished with a pump. Both bulk heads shall be watertight, and shall extend from the level of the deck to the skin, that is, the outer planking of the vessel at the sides and bottom. The space between the bulkheads should be filled to the same height and with a similar mixture as the space under cabin floor. There shall be no limber holes or other communication or access between the cabin and the hold admitting the passage of liquids or gases. 22nd July „ 1st Barge " S. Taylor," Rochester, 44,099. „ 13th Barge " Providence," Rochester, 76,596. 13th Sept. „ 14th Barge " Gratitude," Rochester, 58,484. 22nd July. „ 21st Barge " Charles and Esther," London, 89,660. 7th Aug. „ 27th Barge " Rogue in Grain," Maldon, 18,801. 1st „ 5. The cabin to be fitted with a skylight of not less than 2 ft. 6 in. by 1 ft. 6 in. 43 BYE-LAWS—OFFENSIVE CARGOES. The number of infringements reported during the half-year amounted to 26, as follows:— Date. Name of Vessel. Contravention. 1902. July 5 "Sam"- Carrying an offensive cargo which was not properly and securely covered. 19 "Four Sisters" Ditto. „ 29 "Baby"- Carrying an offensive cargo which was wholly uncovered. Aug. 8 "Rose"- Carrying an offensive cargo which was not properly and securely covered. Sept. 10 "Sue"- Failure to cause the barge to be thoroughly cleansed and deodorised within six hours after the discharge therefrom of an offensive cargo. „ 11 „ 10 "Frank Bateman"- Ditto. „ 11 „ 11 "Superb" Ditto. „ 12 „ 11 "Leslie"* Carrying an offensive cargo which was wholly uncovered. „ 13 "Louie"- Failure to cause barge to be thoroughly cleansed and deodorised within six hours after the discharge therefrom of an offensive cargo. „ 13 "Silvertown"- Ditto. „ 14 "Roberta" Ditto. „ 23 "Sarah"- Carrying an offensive cargo which was not properly and securely covered. „ 24 "Louie" Failure to cause the barge to be thoroughly cleansed and deodorised within six hours after the discharge therefrom of an offensive cargo. „ 25 „ 24 "Edith" Ditto. „ 25 „ 26 26 "Superb" Ditto. Oct. 15 "Sunbeam" Carrying an offensive cargo which was not properly and securely covered. „ 22 "Baby"* Ditto. „ 23 „ 22 "Rebecca" Failure to cause the craft to be thoroughly cleansed and deodorised within six hours after the discharge therefrom of an offensive cargo. „ 23 „ 24 "Frank Bateman"- Ditto. „ 30 "William"- Carrying an offensive cargo which was not properly and securely covered. Nov. 22 "Sunshine"- Ditto. „ 22 "Whiththorn" Ditto. „ 23 "Hugh" Ditto. „ 25 "Bertie" Ditto. Dec. 2 "Lucient" Carrying an offensive cargo which was wholly uncovered. „ 3 „ 5 "Eva" Carrying an offensive cargo which was not properly and securely covered. * Prosecuted. See Appendix " L." 44 On the 27th September there occurred another fatality on a barge ("Herbert Tomkins") laden with an offensive cargo. This makes the fifth death since January, 1900. As in previous cases, death was from suffocation produced by carbonic acid gas evolved from the foul and putrid matter comprised in the cargo. The victim was the master of the barge. An inspection was made by your Medical Officer some hours after the discovery of the body. The air in the cabin was so bad that a match would not burn in any situation lower than three feet from the floor, and the bilge under the floor contained filthy and offensive liquid. Prompt action was taken, and the barge has since undergone structural alteration in accordance with the requirements of your Medical Officer. The question of dealing with this class of vessel is dealt with at length under the heading of "Canal Boats." SANITARY WORKS. The following Sanitary Works and Alterations in connection with Buildings and Premises within the Docks, &c., have been completed during the half-year:— Date completed. Works. 1901. July 31 Victoria Dock. North side of Tidal Basin. Drainage. August 29 Millwall Dock. London Pressed Hinge Company. Erection of' Closets and Construction of Drainage for same. Plans for the following works have been approved:— Date plans submitted. Works. Date plans approved. 1901. 1901. July 13 Millwall Dock. New Granary to be erected by Messrs. Holliday and Greenwood at "F" Yard. Drainage. July 16. October 1 Millwall Dock Company. South East corner of "P" Warehouse, Millwall Dock. Construction of Closets. December 3. 14 Great Western Railway Company. Victoria Dock. Drainage at New Offices. „ 3. 24 Millwall Dock Company. New Wood Department, Millwall Dock. Construction of Closets. „ 3. November 21 Millwall Dock. Drainage for Stables being erected at Messrs. McDougall's Flour Mills. 45 By the Local Government Board Order of June 30th, 1898, this Authority was given jurisdiction over the docks, and the area within the gates thereof and the buildings thereon respectively. In each dock, closet accommodation has to be provided, not only for the large number of men engaged in connection with the unloading and loading of vessels, but on the arrival of vessels in dock the closets on board are closed (to avoid unnecessary pollution of the dock water), and so provision has to be made for the crews of these vessels. Some vessels have a crew of over 200, and it will be realised that a great responsibility rests on this Authority, not only to see that the proper amount of water-closet accommodation is provided, but that the disposal of the excreta is carried out in a proper manner so as to prevent a nuisance arising. Moreover, there are many factories, workshops, and work places within the dock gates, also dwelling bouses for dock officials, and temporary buildings for dock employes, police, Custom House officers, &c., and for all of these closet accommodation has to be provided. Owing to the majority of these closets, drains, cesspools, &c., having been constructed many years ago, and without any proper supervision, your inspectors find that much of this work is of faulty construction, e.g.. drains are jointed with tow and clay, cesspits exist which are not constructed of impervious material, and, as a consequence, the contents escape and pollute the surrounding soil. Section 39 (1) Public Health (London) Act, 1891, states that the (London) County Council shall make Bye-laws with respect to water-closets, earthclosets, privies, ash-pits, cesspools, and receptacles for dung, and the proper accessories thereof in connection with buildings, whether constructed before or after the passing of this Act. Section 39 (2). Every sanitary authority shall make Bye-laws with respect to the keeping of water-closets supplied with sufficient water for their efficient action. Under the Metropolitan Management Act Amendment Act, 1899, the London County Council has power to make Bye-laws requiring the deposit with the Sanitary Authorities of plans of drains, and giving notice as to construction and reconstruction thereof. The London County Council have made Bye-laws under the Section, but the Public Health (London) Act expressly exempts the City of London from the application thereof; and Section 112, Public Health (London) Act, 1891, states that the Local Government Board may, by Order, extend to the said Port (i.e., Port of London) a Byedaw made under the Act, otherwise than by the Port Sanitary Authority, and any such Bye-law, until so extended, shall not extend to the said Port. 46 Section 40, Public Health (London) Act, gives power to Sanitary Authority to authorise examination of water-closets, drains, &c., and even to open the ground. If not found in accordance with this Act and the Bye-laws of County Council and Sanitary Authority respectively, the expense of examination shall be repaid to the Sanitary Authority by the person offending. If found in accordance, the Sanitary Authority shall reinstate and make good everything, and pay all costs and full compensation for damage, &c., done. It is obvious that without an adequate reason for believing that these sanitary conveniences, &c., are defective, your officers will not incur such responsibility; and if Bye-laws requiring plans, &c., are made, it will be ensured that such work in the future is done in a proper manner. Section 42 says : If a water-closet or drain is so constructed or repaired as to be a nuisance or injury, or dangerous to health, the person who undertook or executed such construction or repair shall be liable to a fine not exceeding 20l. This is intended for protection of an employer against the wrongful acts of his workmen, and is of no use to a Sanitary Authority for dealing with offences committed many years ago. Section 16 (b) Public Health (London) Act: The London County Council shall make Bye-laws, &c., as to the closing and filling up of cesspools and privies, and as to removal and disposal of refuse. I have therefore to bring before your Honourable Committee the fact that the absence of such Bye-laws hampers the action of this Authority in respect to sanitary conveniences and drainage works, and to ask your earnest consideration of this subject. I would suggest that if the Bye-laws applicable to the City of London are adequate, that application should be made to the Local Government Board for them to apply to the Port of London, but if not, that the whole question be considered by the Corporation of the City of London, and when made they should apply within the jurisdiction of the Port Sanitary Authority. Bye-laws are required— 1. For deposit of plans and notices of works of a sanitary nature. 2. Regulating construction of water-closets, earth-closets, privies, and all sanitary works above and below ground. 3. Emptying of cesspits, earth-closets, privies, &c. 4. Water supply to closets and urinals. 5. Maintenance of sanitary conveniences in a proper state. 47 CONDEMNED FOOD. During the half-year a large quantity of articles of food have been condemned by your officers, of which the following is a brief summary : Description. Quantity Condemned. Meat—Frozen Mutton - 2,784 carcasses „ „ 147 legs „ „ 4 shoulders „ „ 913 pieces „ Beef 189 quarters „ „ 100 pieces „ „ 1 cwt. 14 lbs. trimmings ,, Lamb 4 carcasses ,, Yeal 112 lbs. ,, Kidneys 16 boxes Corned Mutton - 7 tins Preserved 7 cases, 3 tins Rabbits—Frozen 20 cases „ 492 crates „ 41,192 loose Tinned 162 tins Fish—Tinned - 154 cases „ 1,096 tins In Jars - 127 cases Fruit—Green - 5,362 packages „ 153 loose pears „ 50 loose apples Dried - 244 packages Preserved 2,837 packages Pulp 204 cases „ 828 tins Poultry 8 loose Vegetables—Green 676 packages Preserved 3 cases „ 135 tins Flour - 1,000 bags Grain—Wheat - 214 tons, 729 lbs. Maize - 25 barge loads „ 74 tons, 2,080 lbs. Rice - 20 tons 698 lbs. Dholl 530 lbs. Mixed Rice, Maize, Barley, &c. 305 tons, 2 barge loads Sugar 141 tons „ 20 tons drainings „ 452 casks „ Milk 715 cases Sundries : Cocoa, Cheese, Lard, Con fectionery, Arrowroot, &c., &c. 150 packages, a quantity of biscuits, 728 lbs. sweets 48 The number of your inspectors has been supplemented by one, viz., Inspector Bailey ; there are thus three food inspectors now employed in their special duties. The present arrangement of their districts is as follows:— Inspector Spadaccini: Royal Albert Dock. Royal Victoria Dock. East India Dock. Inspector Anderson: West India Dock. South West India Dock. Millwall Dock. Regent's Dock. St. Katharine's Dock. London Dock. Inspector Bailey: Surrey Commercial Dock. Tilbury Dock. Vessels in the River and lying at Wharves. The arrangement has been found to work satisfactorily. The question of the disposal of tinned goods condemned by the City Authorities and shot into barges at Letts' Wharf has called for the attention of your Medical Officer, and arrangements have been made with the Medical Officer of Health of the City for the notification to your Medical Officer of the departure of barges from Letts' Wharf, that the same may be kept under observation by your Inspectors, in order that condemned tinned goods are not tampered with, but are landed at the place of destination and the contents destroyed in suitable manner. Further, the Medical Officer of the district in which the place where the stuff is shot is situated is also notified by your Medical Officer, in order that he may take any precautions he may deem necessary on the arrival of such tinned food within his district. Up to the present this arrangement has worked satisfactorily. RIVERSIDE WHARVES. At an interview held at the Offices of the Local Government Board on the 27th September last, between representatives of the Local Government Board and Members of your Committee, attended by the City Solicitor and your Medical Officer, information was requested upon this subject. I accordingly 49 give below a list of Wharves between Nine Elms and Deptford Creek on the south side of the Eiver, and from Blackfriars Bridge to North Greenwich Eailway Station on the north side of the River. There are probably many similar Wharves lying without the limits covered by this Return, but probably these will be sufficient to give some idea of the extra work which would require to be done were these Wharves to be placed under the jurisdiction of the Port Sanitary Authority. This Return, by direction of your Worshipful Committee, was furnished to the Local Government Board. WHARVES, SOUTH SIDE. GROSVENOR RAILWAY BRIDGE. Burnett's Bonded. Mumfords. WESTMINSTER BRIDGE. Crosse and Blackwell's. India Stores Depdt. Sufferance. CHARING CROSS RAILWAY BRIDGE. Lion Brewery. WATERLOO BRIDGE. Griersone. Waterloo. Nelson's. Hope. Hamlyn's. Vestey's. BLACKFRIARS BRIDGE. Queen's. Travers'. SOUTHWARK BRIDGE. Anglo-Swiss Milk. Belvedere. Southwark. Red Lion. Barclay, Perkins'. CANNON STREET RAILWAY BRIDGE. South Eastern Railway. Clink. Winchester. Pickfords. West Kent. New Hibernia. Fenning's. Topping's. Cotton's. Beat's. South Thames. Symons'. Stantons (Lower). Mark Brown's. Sampson's Cold Air Stores. New. Horseshoe. St. Mary's Overy. Old Hibernia. Sun. Chamberlain's. Hay's. Wilson's. Gun and Shot. Stantons. Pickle Herring. Davis. 50 TOWER BRIDGE. Courage and Co. Butler's. Coventry. Newell's. Coles (Upper). Coles (Lower). Landels. Wests. Mesnards. Dudin's. St. Olave's Board of Works. Java. Crown. Bengal. St. Andrew's. St. George's. Burmah. Shuter's. Dockhead. Scott's. Unity. Mill. St. Saviour's. Reed's. Deacrells. Reed's (Lower). Springalls. Bermondsey. Sunderland. Montreal Granaries. Bond's. Darnell's. Fishen's. Powell's. Fafrant's. SURREY DOCK ENTRANCE. Surrey Commercial. Rotherhithe Vestry. Bellamy's. King and Queen. PRINCES DRY DOCK. Upper Globe. Globe. Mc'DOWALL'S DRY DOCK. Lavander Dock. Lavander. LAVENDER ENTRANCE TO SURREY COMMERCIAL DOCK. Canada. NELSON DRY DOCK. Trinity. METROPOLITAN ASYLUMS BOARD WHARF. His Majesty's Customs Salvage. Odessa. CHERRY GARDEN PIER. Lucas and Spencer's. Platform Sufferance. Corbetts. Mathews. Yardley's. Fountain. Rotherhithe. Cannon. Abbot's. Gordon's. Princess. East India. Hope. Tunnel Buildings. Grice's. Brandram's. Fisher's Sufferance. Cumberland. 51 ENTRANCES TO SURREY COMMERCIAL DOCK. London, Brighton and South Coast Railway. HIS MAJESTY'S VICTUALLING YARD. FOREIGN CATTLE MARKET. General Steam Navigation Company's Yard. » DEPTFORD CREEK. WHARVES, NORTH SIDE. BLACKFRIARS BRIDGE. Purfleet. Victoria. Rutland's. Paul's Pier. Lyon's. Upper Brooks. Brook's. Bull. Abbey. Kennet's. Hambro. SOUTHWARK BRIDGE. Red Lion and Three Cranes. Cannon Street Railway Arches. City of London Brewery. Red Bull. Monument Bonded. Old Swan. Old Shades. LONDON BRIDGE. London Bridge. Fresh Wharf. Cox's Quay. Hammond's. Botolph. Nicholson's. FISH MARKET. CUSTOM HOUSE. Custom House Wool Quay. Custom House Quay. Brewer's Quay. Chester's Quay. Galley Quay. ENTRANCE TO ST. KATHARINE'S DOCK. Harrison's. South Devon. British and Foreign. Miller's. Carron. London and Continental Steam. HERMITAGE ENTRANCE TO LONDON DOCK. Hermitage. Granite. Colonial and Granite. Globe. Seaward's. Watson's. Black Eagle. Brewer's and Albion. Hastie's. 52 WAPPING ENTRANCE TO LONDON DOCK. Oliver's. Gun Wharf. Dundee. Eagle Sufferance. Baltic. St. John's. Old Dundee. King Henry. Trinity. Sharp's. Middleton's. St. Bride's. New Crane. Lusk's. Jubilee. Metropolitan. Thorp's. SHADWELL ENTRANCE TO LONDON DOCK. New Star. Linde. SHADWELL FISH MARKET. Free Trade. Hubbuck's. Marine Brewery. Pinchin's. Moore's. Eagle. New Sun. Oporto. ENTRANCE TO REGENT'S DOCK. Yictoria. Dunbar. New Dundee, Perth and London. Aberdeen. ENTRANCE TO WEST INDIA DOCK. UNION DRY DOCKS. Morton's. REGENT'S DRY DOCK. Yictoria. Maconochies'. NORTH GREENWICH RAILWAY STATION. CANAL BOATS ACTS. The Port of London Port Sanitary District is arranged for purposes of inspection into seven divisions, each in charge of an Inspector, as follows:— Docks. 1. Central District—Inspector Romeril: West India Dock. South West India Dock. Poplar Dock. Millwall Dock. 2. Western District.—Inspector Garland: London Dock. St. Katharine's Dock. Regent's Dock. Surrey Commercial Dock. 53 3. Eastern District.—Inspector Wetjen: East India Dock. Royal Albert Dock. Royal Victoria Dock. 4. Gravesend District.—Inspector Lambe: Tilbury Dock. N. Shore—from Purfleet down. S. Shore—from Erith down. River. 5. Upper District.—Inspector Hopkins: Teddington to Limehouse. 6. Middle District.—Inspector Burr: Limehouse to Erith. 7. Lower District.—Inspector Rolfe: Erith to seaward limits of Port of London (including part of River Med way). These districts are, with the exception of portions of the Gravesend, Upper and Lower River Districts, visited daily by the Inspector in charge. No Inspector is appointed solely for the work of inspecting Canal Boats. It is the duty of the Port Sanitary Inspectors to inspect every Canal Boat seen by them when making their daily round of inspection, and for this purpose each is formally appointed as an Inspector of Canal Boats in accordance with the Acts relating to the same. During the year 1901 the number of Canal Boats inspected was 530. These boats were registered to carry a total number of 1,599 persons, but were occupied by 1,032 only. Boats still continue to be met with which are registered to carry a number of persons grossly in excess of the sleeping accommodation provided, or the requirements for navigation purposes. No breach of the law is, however, committed, provided the total cubic space is sufficient to allot 60 cubic feet to each registered person. Of the total number of boats inspected, 67 were found infringing the Acts and Regulations. Written notice has been sent in 55 cases to the person in default, and in all cases this course has been successful in remedying the cause of complaint. In no case have legal proceedings become necessary. 54 No new boats have been registered during the year, but 24 have been re-registered, principally on account of change of ownership, one by reason of structural alterations. No case of infectious disease has been met with. It is satisfactory to report that the question of ventilation of cabins in special relation to certain boats registered by the Brentford Registration Authority, as referred to in the last Report of my predecessor, Dr. Collingridge, has been settled in a manner favourable to the view adopted by the Port of London Registration Authority, and supported by His Majesty's Inspector of Canal Boats. The cabins of boats, which hitherto had no ventilation except by means of the scuttle hatch, have now, in a few cases, been fitted with ventilation in the fore side of the cabin. This has been done in the case of the— Canal Boat "Edith," Registered Brentford 229. Canal Boat "Diligent," Registered Brentford 65. Canal Boat "Kate," Registered Brentford 253. In the case of the Canal Boat "Kate," Registered Brentford 253, which boat was not only badly ventilated, but was not lettered, marked, and numbered, I received the following letter from the Clerk to the Registration Authority:— "Brentford Urban District Council, "Clerk's Office, "Brentford, "10th September, 1901. "Dear Sir, "Canal Boat " Kate." "Your letter of the 1st ulto. was laid before the Council at their "meeting on Tuesday last. In reply I am to inform you that the "barge 'Kate' has been inspected here within the last two or three "days, when it was found to be duly lettered, marked, and numbered, "but that with regard to the ventilation the Owner insists that the "same is sufficient. "Yours truly, "STEP. WOODBRIDGE, Clerk." In reply it was pointed out that the Registration Authority, and not the Owner, should decide the question of adequate ventilation. 55 I have to call attention to a class of vessels, practically peculiar to the Port of London, in regard to which an anomaly appears to exist. These vessels are the well-known sailing barges. They are in all cases used as dwellings. Frequently women and children are carried, and they trade almost entirely within the limits of the Port of London, and in a large number of cases entirely above Gravesend, penetrating also by means of tugs the upper reaches of the Thames, its tributaries, and the canals. The majority of these vessels are registered under the Merchant Shipping Act, but some are registered as canal boats. During the past four years the working of the Bye-laws of the Port of London Sanitary Authority with reference to the carriage of offensive cargoes has drawn particular attention to this class of vessel, which is largely employed in the conveyance from the Metropolis of municipal and trade refuse, offensive and otherwise. Many, in fact practically all, wooden vessels carrying offensive cargoes have been found utterly unfit for the purpose, in combination with their use as dwellings. Free communication exists between the hold and cabin, not only by way of the sides and bilges, but through the bulkhead, which frequently is in bad repair, and constructed of one thickness of planks only, and sometimes perforated by a door. Since January, 1900, five persons have lost their lives on the River Thames by sleeping in the cabins of vessels laden with offensive cargoes, in free communication with the cabins in the manner described, death being caused in every case by suffocation from foul gases given off from the cargo. Were these boats registered under the Canal Boats Act, and it were proposed that they should carry offensive cargoes, the following requirements would have to be complied with:— "The boat, if intended to be ordinarily used for the conveyance of any "foul or offensive cargo, shall contain between the space to be occupied "by such cargo and the interior of any cabin intended to be used as a "dwelling, two bulkheads of substantial construction, which shall be "separated by a space not less in any part than four inches, and open "throughout to the external air, and furnished with a pump for the "removal of any liquid from such space, and the one next adjoining the "space to be occupied by the cargo shall be watertight." I am of the opinion that these requirements are not sufficient, and would require amplification. It would be quite possible for a sailing barge, as at . present constituted, to fulfil these conditions without undergoing any structural alteration, and gases, &c., may pass freely from the cargo space into the cabin. I would suggest that the following words be added :— "The two bulkheads shall be so constructed and placed as to "effectually prevent any matter, effluvium, or gas passing between the "cargo space and the interior of any cabin used as a dwelling." 56 The Merchant Shipping Act, 1894, Schedule VI., provides that— "Every place in a ship occupied by seamen or apprentices, and "appropriated to their use, shall be such as to make the space which is "required by the second part of this Act to contain proper and available "accommodation of the men who are to occupy it, and shall be securely "constructed, properly lighted and ventilated, properly protected from "weather and sea, and as far as practicable properly shut off and protected "from effluvium which may be caused by cargo or bilge water." If boats not complying with this regulation were erased from the register they would automatically come within the scope of the Canal Boats Acts and Regulations. This, and the better control given by the Canal Boats Acts in the matter of occupation by both sexes, would conduce to a great improvement in the sanitary and moral condition of the inhabitants of sailing barges. I append a Table giving details of inspections for the year ending 31st December, 1901. In submitting my first Half-yearly Report, I take this opportunity of thanking your Worshipful Committee for the kind and courteous attention you have paid to my various suggestions, and also to express my appreciation of the loyalty and excellence of the work done generally by your Inspectors and other Officers. I have the honour to be, Your obedient Servant, {Signed) HERBERT WILLIAMS, Medical Officer of Health, Port of London. 57 SUMMARY OF CANAL BOATS FOR THE YEAR ENDING 31st DECEMBER, 1901. January. February. March. April. May. June. July. August. September. October. November. December. TOTAL. TOTAL FOR THE YEARS 1897. 1898. 1899. 1900. New boats registered ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 5 8 4 Registration owing to structural alterations ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... 1 2 ... ... ... Registration for other purposes ... 1 ... ... 2 7 5 4 1 2 ... 1 23 19 16 6 14 Inspected ... 68 56 31 38 55 31 35 44 18 42 54 58 530* 597 595 781 655 Conforming to Acts and Regulations 63 54 29 36 42 24 28 38 17 36 48 48 463 497 471 683 601 Infringement in respect to:— Registration ... 1 ... ... 8 ... 1 ... ... ... ... 2 12 27 27 14 12 Notification of change of master ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Absence of certificate ... 1 1 ... ... ... ... ... 2 ... 2 1 4 11 21 27 16 14 Certificate not identifying owner with boat ... 1 ... ... 4 7 4 2 ... 1 ... ... 19 5 1 1 7 Marking, &c. 2 ... ... ... ... ... 2 ... ... ... 4 ... 8 9 7 10 6 Overcrowding ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 1 ... ... ... 1 3 ... 1 2 1 Partition separating sexes ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... Males over age ... 1 1 ... Females over age ... ... ... ... ... ' ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 1 ... 1 ... ... Cleanliness ... 2 ... ... 4 ... ... 1 ... ... ... 1 10 25 17 6 6 Painting ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 6 ... 2 1 Ventilation ... 1 ... ... 3 ... 1 ... ... ... ... 1 6 6 12 8 2 Dilapidation ... ... ... ... 4 ... ... 1 1 4 ... 2 16 23 20 18 17 Removal of bilge water ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Without pump ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Refusal to admit Inspector ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... No proper water vessel ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... 6 21 15 18 ... Without double bulkhead ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 4 ... ... Notification of infectious disease ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Detained for cleansing ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Proceedings taken ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Cautions given 6 2 2 1 15 4 4 1 5 6 9 55 83 76 60 54 „ attended to 5 3 2 3 5 8 2 6 3 6 6 6 55 75 70 54 49 Total registered by Port Sanitary Authority since 1887 396 Cancelled 121 Actual number on Register, 31st December, 1901 275 *Registered for 1,599 persons. Carrying 1,032 persons. 58 INDEX TO APPENDICES. Appendix Page A Number of Vessels Inspected in each Dock and on the River 59 B Number of Vessels Medically Inspected at Gravesend 60 „ ,, ,, ,, at Sheerness 60 C Number and Nationality of Vessels Inspected 61 D Effects Disinfected 62 E Vessels Disinfected 64 F Alterations made 67 G Alterations ordered, but not yet carried out 67 H Infectious Disease 68 J Articles of Food condemned 74 K Water Barges 85 L Notices to abate Nuisances 85 ,M Return of Rats caught and destroyed in the Docks 86 N Receipts and Expenditure under the Public Health (London) Act, 1891, for the year ended 31st December, 1901 87 59 APPENDIX A. Number of Vessels Inspected in each Dock and on the River, from 1st July to 31st December, 1901. Dock. Number. To be Cleaned. Outward Bound. Sick referred to Hospital. St. Katharine's 324 27 — — London 802 56 11 2 Regent's Canal - 343 20 3 — Millwall 889 64 2 5 West India 898 42 2 9 Poplar 29 — — — East India 374 10 21 — Victoria 603 70 39 4 Royal Albert 1,504 74 31 4 Commercial 871 88 26 1 Tilbury 1,364 159 31 — Gravesend District 1,069 31 20 — River * Upper 1,906 6,501 242 585 259 439 2 3 Middle 1,952 188 102 1 Lower 2,643 155 78. — Medway 128 14 1 — Total 15,699 1,240 626 28 "The Upper District extends from Limehouse upwards. „ Middle „ „ „ „ to Erith. „ Lower „ „ „ Erith to the outer limits of the Port of London. Total to 30th June, 1901 601,297 From 1st July to 31st December, 1901 Foreign 8,617 15 699 Coastwise 7,082 TOTAL 616,996 To be cleaned, &e., to 30th June, 1901 - 32,481 From 1st July to 31st December, 1901 - 1,240 TOTAL 33,721 Medically inspected at Gravesend: From August, 1892, to 30th June, 1901 16,019 From 1st July to 31st December, 1901 604 TOTAL 16,623 Medically inspected at Sheerness: From 1st September, 1894, to 30th June, 1901 2,015 From 1st July to 31st December, 1901 114 Total 2,129 60 APPENDIX B. Number of Vessels Inspected and visited in conjunction with H.M. Customs at Gravesend, from 1st July to 31st December, 1901. Month. No. of Vessels visited in conjunction with His Majesty's Customs. No. of Vessels Medically Inspected. No. of Passengers. No. of Crew. July 962 81 3,007 6,230 August 953 98 1,979 6,871 September 915 88 121 5,343 October 888 114 126 5,299 November 773 103 149 4,454 December 889 120 200 4,707 Totals 5,380 604 5,582 32,904 Number of Vessels Medically Inspected, &c., at Sheerness, from 1st July to 31st December, 1901. Month. No. of Vessels Medically Inspected. No. of Passengers. July 29 — August 27 4 September 25 — October 17 — November 9 — December 7 — Totals 114 4 61 APPENDIX C. Number and Nationality of Vessels Inspected, from 1st July to 31st December, 1901. Nationality. Number. Proportion per cent. of Total Number. American 13 08 Austrian 8 — Belgian 165 1.05 British 12,636 80.48 Danish 228 1.45 Dutch 259 1.64 Finnish 52 .33 French 127 .80 German 535 3.40 Greek 21 .13 Italian 39 .24 Japanese 76 .48 Portuguese 30 .19 Russian 74 .47 Spanish 102 .64 Swedish and Norwegian 1,333 8.49 Venezuelan 1 — Totals 15,699 62 APPENDIX D. Effects Disinfected from 1st July to 31st December, 1901. Date. Ship's Name. Where from. Nature of Sickness. Where Disinfected. 1901. July 13 Paparoa Wellington, N.Z. Scarlet Fever Port Sanitary Hospital. „ 13 Phoebe Northfleet Enteric Fever Ditto. „ 16 City of Corinth Calcutta Adenitis Ditto. „ 23 Storm Cock London Scarlatina Ditto. „ 23 Warspite (Lying at Greenhithe) Diphtheria Ditto. „ 25 Cayo Romano New Orleans Enteric Fever Ditto. „ 26 Ormuz Sydney Adenitis Ditto. „ 26 Klar Moss Enteric Fever Ditto. „ 27 Princess May Eling, near Southampton Scarlet Fever Ditto. „ 27 Nautilus Gefle Enteric Fever Ditto. „ 28 Ingeli Ditto Ditto. Aug. 2 Worcester (Lying at Greenhithe) Ditto. „ 6 Nautilus Gefle Enteric Fever Ditto. „ 14 Ovidia Quebec Ditto Ditto. „ 20 Austral Sydney Erysipelas Ditto. „ 30 Eva Archangel Enteric Fever Ditto. „ 30 Magnus St. Petersburg Ditto Ditto. Sept. 10 Langesund Porsgrund Ditto Ditto. „ 11 Glenesk Tacoma Pneumonia On board. „ 30 Elvira Fremantle Small pox Port Sanitary Hospital. Oct. 5 Olivemoor Braila Continued Fever Ditto. „ 7 Fishren Manchester Enteric Fever Ditto. „ 12 Oakwell Seaham Harbour Continued Fever Ditto. „ 13 Insizwa Port Natal Enteric Fever Ditto. „ 24 Jamaican New Orleans Ditto Ditto. „ 24 Rome Sydney Ditto Ditto. „ 25 Nautilus Antwerp Adenitis On board. Nov. 7 Cervona Montreal Enteric Fever Port Sanitary Hospital. 63 APPENDIX D—continued. Date. Ship's Name. Where from. Nature of Sickness. Where Disinfected. 1901. Nov. 7 Nineveh Port Sanitary Hospital. „ 11 Shahristan Bussorah Enteric Fever On board. „ 12 Fremona Montreal Ditto Port Sanitary Hospital. „ 12 Ormuz Sydney Measles Ditto. „ 12 Arethusa (Lying at Greenhithe) Scarlet Fever Ditto. „ 12 Conqueror Newhaven Small-pox Ditto. „ 12 Waikato Bluff Harbour Scarlet Fever Ditto. „ 13 Ino Valencia Small-pox Ditto. „ 19 Edith Fremantle Scarlet Fever Ditto. „ 19 Victor Small-pox Ditto. „ 25 Peninsular Bombay Plague Ditto. „ 29 Inchanga Durban Enteric Fever Ditto. Dec. 4 Fort Salisbury Cape Town Ditto Ditto. „ 4 Lake Erie Ditto Ditto Ditto. „ 4 Nord Pol Kronstadt Diphtheria Ditto. „ 13 Clan Macfarlane Calcutta Continued Fever Ditto. „ 13 Sophocles Melbourne Enteric Fever Ditto. „ 13 Morayshire Sydney Ditto Ditto. „ 14 Concordia Tonsberg Ditto Ditto. „ 20 Arabia Bombay Ditto Ditto. „ 24 Arethusa (Lying at Greenhithe) Scarlatina Ditto. „ 26 Manitou New York Measles Ditto. „ 28 Katharine Small-pox Ditto. „ 29 Goorkha Calcutta Plague Ditto. 64 APPENDIX E. Vessels Disinfected, from 1st July to 31st December, 1901. Date Ship's Name. Steam or Sailing. Where from. Cause of Disinfection. 1901. July 4 Phoebe Barge Northfleet Enteric Fever. „ 6 Clan Macaulay Steam Madras Coast Precautionary Measure. „ 15 Clan Maclntyre „ Calcutta Ditto. „ 15 Canton „ Yokohama Ditto. „ 16 Oily of Corinth „ Calcutta Ditto. „ 17 Warspite Training Ship (Lying at Greenhithe) Ditto. „ 18 Storm Cock Steam London Scarlatina. „ 22 Clan Macalister „ Madras Coast Precautionary Measure. „ 22 Palawan „ Yokohama Ditto. „ 23 Ormuz „ Sydney Ditto. „ 23 Cayo Romano „ New Orleans Enteric Fever. „ 24 Hurona „ Montreal Ditto. „ 26 Princess May Sailing Southampton Scarlet Fever. „ 26 Ceylon Steam Yokohama Precautionary Measure. „ 27 Clan Macpherson „ Madras Coast Ditto. „ 31 Nautilus Sailing Gefle Enteric Fever. August 6 Ditto „ Ditto Ditto. „ 12 Socotra Steam Yokohama Precautionary Measure. „ 13 Ovidia „ Quebec Enteric Fever. „ 14 Clan Mackay „ Madras Precautionary Measure. „ 16 Clan Campbell „ Ditto Ditto. „ 18 Austral „ Sydney Erysipelas. „ 22 Eva „ Archangel Enteric Fever. „ 22 Japan „ Yokohama Precautionary Measure. „ 25 Magnus „ St. Petersberg Enteric Fever. 65 APPENDIX E.—continued. Date. Ship's Name. Steam or Sailing. Where from. Cause of Disinfection. 1901. September 5 Borneo Steam Calcutta Precautionary Measure. „ 7 Langesund Sailing Porsgrund Enteric Fever. „ 13 Sunda Steam Shanghai Precautionary Measure. „ 17 Clan Chisholm „ Madras Coast Ditto. „ 18 Wasdale Sailing Wellington Enteric Fever. „ 20 Clan Menzies Steam Madras Coast Precautionary Measure. „ 24 Persic „ Sydney Small-pox. „ 29 Elvira Sailing Fremantle, W.A. Ditto. October 1 Clan Sutherland Steam Madras Coast Precautionary Measure. „ 2 Java „ Yokohama Ditto. „ 2 Olivemoor „ Braila Continued Fever. „ 5 Fishren „ Manchester Enteric Fever. „ 12 Clan Macleod „ Madras Coast Precautionary Measure. „ 13 Insizwa „ Port Natal Enteric Fever. „ 16 Malacca „ Yokohama Precautionary Measure. „ 18 Manhattan „ Cape Town Ditto. „ 21 Jamaican „ New Orleans Enteric Fever. „ 22 Rome „ Sydney Ditto. „ 25 Nautilus „ Antwerp Precautionary Measure. „ 28 Cervona „ Montreal Enteric Fever. „ 30 Shanghai „ Yokohama Precautionary Measure. November 2 Clan Cameron „ Madras Coast Ditto. „ 8 Fremona „ Montreal Enteric Fever. „ 9 Conqueror Steam Tug Newhaven Small-pox. „ 9 Ormuz Steam Sydney Measles. „ 11 Shahristan „ Bussorah Enteric Fever. „ 12 Waikato „ Bluff Harbour Scarlet Fever. „ 13 Ino „ Valencia Small-pox. „ 14 Banca „ Y okohama Precautionary Measure. 66 APPENDIX E.—continued. Date. Ship's Name. Steam or Sailing. Where from. Cause of Disinfection. 1901. November 14 Edith Sailing Fremantle Scarlet Fever. „ 19 Victor Steam Tug London Small-pox. „ 21 Bombay Steam Yokohama Precautionary Measure. „ 21 Clan Frazer „ Chittagona Ditto. „ 25 Peninsular „ Bombay Plague. „ 28 Inchanga „ Natal Enteric Fever. „ 28 Clan Alpine „ Madras Coast Precautionary Measure. „ 29 Mesaba „ New York Scarlet Fever. December 1 Fort Salisbury „ Cape Town Enteric Fever. „ 2 Nord Pol „ Kronstadt Diphtheria. „ 4 Lake Erie „ Cape Town Enteric Fever. „ 5 Greek „ Ditto Ditto. „ 10 Clan Macfarlane „ Calcutta Ditto. „ 11 Sophocles „ Sydney Ditto. „ 12 Canton „ Yokohama Precautionary Measure. „ 13 Morayshire „ Sydney Enteric Fever. „ 14 Cornucopia „ Tonsberg Continued Fever. „ 20 Arabia „ Bombay Enteric Fever. „ 24 Ceylon „ Yokohama Precautionary Measure. „ 27 Manitou „ New York Measles. „ 28 Katharine „ Shoeburyness Small-pox. „ 29 Goorkha „ Calcutta Precautionary Measure. 67 APPENDIX F. Aletrations made, from 1st July to 31st December, 1901. Month. No. of Vessels in which Alterations have been made. Ventilation. Water Tanks. Lighting, Heating, &c. Total No. of Alterations. July 25 7 2 20 29 August 14 8 — 7 15 September 22 10 3 17 30 October 27 12 2 20 34 November 30 11 1 27 39 December 24 10 1 19 30 Totals 142 58 9 110 177 APPENDIX G. Alterations ordered, but not yet carried out, from 1st July to 31st December, 1901. Month. No. of Vessels in which Alterations have been made. Ventilation. Water Tanks. Lighting, Heating, &c. Total No. of Alterations. July 2 — — 2 2 August 3 1 1 2 4 September 3 2 — 3 5 October 17 15 — 16 31 November 42 34 — 41 75 December 35 19 3 32 54 Totals 102 71 4 96 171 68 APPENDIX H. CASES OF INFECTIOUS DISEASE DEALT WITH DURING THE HALFYEAR. Date. Name of Vessel. Port of Registry and Official No. Where from and date. Disease. Date of Attack. Probable source of Infection. Remarks. 1901. 1901. 1901. July 5 Barge Phoebe Rochester, 84,384 Northfleet, 26th June Enteric Fever 26th May (?) Inmate of Seamen's Hospital. Vessel and effects disinfected. 6 s.s. Iberian Liverpool, 113,367 Boston, Do. (?) (?) Inmate of Seamen's Hospital. Vessel sailed before receipt of notification of the case. „ 9 s.s. Paparoa Plymouth, 111,346 Wellington, 23rd May Scarlet Fever (2 cases) 27th May 29th „ Wellington, N.Z. Convalescent on arrival and allowed to proceed in the vessel. Effects removed for disinfection. „ 16 s.s. City of Corinth Glasgow, 108,758 Calcutta, 13th June Adenitis (2 cases) (? Plague) One on 21 st June, one not known. Calcutta Removed to Port Sanitary Hospital for observation. Vessel and effects disinfected. „ 18 s.s. Storm Cock London, 82,892 London, (?) Scarlatina 17th July Previous case Isolated at own residence. Vessel and effects disinfected. „ 23 s.s. Cayo Romano London, 102,800 New Orleans, 26th June Enteric Fever 16th ,, Newport News Inmate of Seamen's Hospital. Vessel and effects disinfected. „ 24 s.s. Hurona Dundee, 99,214 Montreal, 11th July Do. (?) (?) Inmate of Branch Seamen's Hospital. Vessel disinfected. „ 24 s.s. Klar Christiania, Norwegian Moos, 14th July Do. (2 cases) 22nd July 23rd „ Drobak Removed to Port Sanitary Hospital with all effects. Vessel disinfected. „ 26 Ketch Princess May Poole, 95,658 Eling, near Southampton, 10th July Scarlet Fever 24th „ (?) Ditto. „ 31 Schooner Nautilus Uddevalla, Swedish Gefle, 11th July Enteric Fever 21st „ 24th „ Gefle Removed to Port Sanitary Hospital with bedding and effects. Vessel disinfected . Aug. 4 Warspite Training Ship, lying off Greenhithe Diphtheria 29th „ (?) Removed to Charlton. Baths with effects. „ 9 Do. Do. Do. Do. 8th Aug. Previous case Ditto. 69 APPENDIX H—continued. Date. Name of Vessel. Port of Registry and Official No. Where from and date. Disease. Date of Attack. Probable source of Infection. Remarks. 1901. 1901. 1901. Aug. 24 Warspite Training Ship, lying off Greenhithe Diphtheria 24th Aug. Previous case Removed to Charlton Baths with effects. „ 28 Do. Do. Do. Do. 27 th „ Do. Ditto. „ 6 Schooner Nautilus Uddevalla, Swedish Gefle, 11th July Enteric Fever 6th „ Previous cases Removed to Port Sanitary Hospital with effects. Vessel disinfected. .. 12 s.s. Socotra Newcastle, 106,612 Yokohama, 27th May Adenitis (? Plague) 10th June Kobe Patient removed to Hospital at Foochow, where vessel was disinfected. „ 13 s.s. Ovidia Stockholm, Swedish Quebec, 21st July Enteric Fever 11th Aug. Montreal Removed to Port Sanitary Hospital with effects. Vessel disinfected. „ 14 s.s. Johanne Do. 5th „ (?) Inmate of German Hospital, Dalston. Vessel sailed before receipt of notification. „ 18 s.s. Austral Glasgow, 85,923 Sydney, 6th July Erysipelas 29th July Colombo Removed to Port Sanitary Hospital with bedding and effects. Vessel disinfected. „ 22 Schooner Eva Rudkjobing, Danish Archangel, 13th July Continued Fever 11th Aug. Archangel Ditto. „ 25 s.s. Magnus Copenhagen, Danish St. Petersburg, 18th Aug. Enteric Fever 22nd „ St. Petersburg Ditto. „ 28 Cornwall Training Ship, lying off Purfleet Scarlatina (4 cases) 17th „ 21st „ 22nd „ 27th „ .(?) Previous cases Removed to Wennington Hospital. Isolation bay disinfected by ship's authorities. Sept. 7 Langesund Langesund, Norwegian Porsgrund, 30th Aug. Enteric Fever 6th Sept. Porsgrund Removed to Port Sanitary Hospital with effects. Vessel disinfected. „ 10 Cornwall Training Ship, lying off Purfleet Scarlatina 5th ,, Previous case Removed to Wen nington Hospital with effects. Sick bay disinfected. 16 Do. Do. Do. Enteric Fever 5th „ (?) Ditto. „ 11 s.s. Glenesk Glasgow, 98,632 Tacoma, 26 th May Pneumonia 29th Aug. (?) Patient died suddenly on September 8th. At the inquest held the verdict was "Death from natural causes." The result of bacteriological examination of the lung und spleen was negative as regards Pestis and Anthrax, The forecastle was disinfected. 70 APPENDIX H—continued. Date Name of Vessel. Port of Registry and Official No. Where from and date. Disease. Date of Attack. Probable source of Infection. Remarks. 1901. 1901. 1901. Sept. 16 s.s. West Point Liverpool, 110,582 Philadelphia, Enteric Fever (?) Philadelphia Patient an inmate of Seamen's Hospital. Vessel sailed prior to receipt of notification of the case. „ 18 Wasdale London, 84,165 Wellington, 14th May Do. (?) ? London Patient an inmate of Seamen's Hospital. Vessel disinfected. „ 23 s.s. Mesaba Liverpool, 109,392 New York, 2nd Sept. Do. (?) (?) Patient an inmate of German Hospital. Vessel sailed before receipt of notification of case. „ 24 ss. Kenmore Glasgow, 108,754 North Shields Do. (2 cases) (?) (?) Patients inmates of Seamen's Hospital. Vessel disinfected at North Shields. „ 24 s.s. Persic Liverpool, 110,620 Sydney, 23rd July ? Variola ? Diphtheria (?) 25th Sept. (?) (?) Inmate of Metropolitan Asylums Board's Hospital. Vessel disinfected. „ 29 s.s. Elvira Lisbon, Portuguese Fremantle, 1st June ? V arioloid (?) (?) Removed to Port Sanitary Hospital with effects. Vessel disinfected. Oct. 2 s.s. Olivemoor London, 108,241 Braila, 12th Sept. Continued Fever 20th Sept. Ibrail Ditto. „ 5 s.s. Fishren Manchester, 97,549 Manchester, 28 th Sept. Enteric Fever 30th „ Manchester Inmate of Seamen's Hospital. Vessel and effects disinfected. „ 7 Barge Elizabeth London, 77,023 Wakering, 2nd Oct. Do. (2 cases) 30th „ 2nd Oct, Cargo of offensive refuse. Inmate of Metropolitan Asylums Board's Hospital. Barge disinfected by City of Westminster Authority. „ 7 s.s. Oakwell Stockton, 84,649 Seaham Harbour, 5th Oct. Adenitis 6th „ (?) Removed to Port Sanitary Hospital with effects. Vessel disinfected. „ 13 s.s. Insizwa Aberdeen, 108,673 Port Natal, 15th Sept. Enteric Fever 22nd Sept. Cape Town Ditto. „ 17 s.s. Manhattan Belfast, 108,630 Cape Town, 17th Sept. Diphtheria 20th „ Do. Convalescent on arrival and allowed to proceed in vessel. Vessel disinfected. „ 1 Cornwall Training Ship, lying off Purfleet Scarlatina 27th „ Previous case Removed to Wen nington Hospital. Ship's hospital disinfected by the crew. 71 APPENDIX H—continued. Date. Name of Vessel. Port of Registry and Official No. Where from and date. Disease. Date of Attack. Probable source of Infection. Remarks. 1901. 1901. 1901. Oct. 5 Warspite Training Ship, lying off Greenhithe Diphtheria 5th Oct. Previous case Removed by Port Sanitary Authority to Charlton Baths. Ship's hospital disinfected by crew. „ 14 Do. Do. Do. Do. 12th „ Do. „ 7 Arethusa Training Ship, lying off Greenhithe Scarlet Fever (3 cases) 27th Sept. 2nd Oct. 6th „ Do. Do. Do. Removed to Hospital at Greenhithe. Ship's hospital disinfected by crew. „ 12 Do. Do. Do. Do. (3 cases) 8th „ 8th „ 10th „ Do. Do. Do. Ditto. „ 19 s.s. Mashona London, 99,053 Tyne, 5th Oct. Enteric Fever (?) (?) Inmates of Seamen's Hospital. Vessels sailed before receipt of notification of the cases of sickness. „ 19 s.s. North. Point Liverpool, 113,438 Philadelphia, 27th Sept. Do. (?) (?) „ 21 s.s. Jamaican Liverpool, 102,085 New Orleans, 30th Sept. Continued Fever 30th Sept. New Orleans Removed to Port Sanitary Hospital with effects. Vessel disinfected. ,, 22 s.s. Rome Greenock, 81,820 Sydney, 9th Sept. Enteric Fever 6th Oct. (?) Ditto. „ 25 s.s. Nautilus London, 70,681 Antwerp, 23rd Oct. (?) (?) (?) Patient was removed to Metropolitan Asylums Board's Hospital, supposed to be suffering from Smallpox, but was discharged the same day. The vessel and effects were disinfected. „ 28 s.s. Cervona Dundee, 104,736 Montreal, 13th Oct. Enteric Fever 20th Oct. Montreal Removed to Port Sanitary Hospital with effects. Vessel disinfected. „ 30 s.s.Nineveh Aberdeen, 104,505 Outward Bound Y aricella (?) (?) Removed to Port Sanitary Hospital for observation. Nov. 8 s.s. Fremona Dundee, 93,470 Montreal, 24th Oct. Enteric Fever 1st Nov. Montreal . Removed to Port Sanitary Hospital. Vessel and effects disinfected. „ 9 s.s. Ormuz Glasgow, 93,341 Sydney, 28th Sept. Measles (3 cases) 2 on 2nd Nov., 1 on 5th. Colombo Ditto. „ 9 s.s. Conqueror London, 108,177 Newhaven, 7th Nov. Smallpox 2nd Nov. London Admitted to Borough Sanitorium, Graves end . Vessel and effects disinfected by the Port Sanitary Authority. „ 11 s.s. Shahristan Swansea, 106,842 Bussorah, 9th Oct. Enteric Fever 20th Oct. (?) Removed to Hospital at Port Said. ,, 11 Ditto ditto ditto Small pox 11th „ (?) Removed to Hospital at Aden. Vessel disinfected by Port Sanitary Authority. „ 12 s.s. Waikato Plymouth, 99,263 Bluff Harbour, 2nd Aug. Scarlet Fever 11th Nov. London Removed to Port Sanitary Hospital with effects. Vessel disinfected. 72 APPENDIX H—continued. Date. Name of Vessel. Port of Registry and Official No. Where from and Date. Disease. Date of Attack. Probable source of Infection. Remarks. 1901. 1901. 1901. Nov. 13 s.s. Ino Stavanger, Norwegian Valencia, 4th Nov. Smallpox 9th Nov. V alencia Removed to Port Sanitary Hospital with effects. Vessel disinfected. ,, 14 s.s. Edith Hamburg, German. Fremantle, 27th July Scarlet Fever 23rd Sept. (?) Ditto. „ 14 st. tug Fox London, 91.880 Woolwich, 13th Nov. Adenitis (?) See special Report under the heading of " Plague." „ 19 st. tug Victor London, 105,172 Plying on River Smallpox 17th Nov. London Admitted to Borough Sanitorium, Graves end. Vessel and effects disinfected by Port Sanitary Authority. Oct. 28 Training Ship War spite, lying o ff Greenhithe Diphtheria 26th Oct. Previous "j case | Removed by Port Sanitary Authority to Charlton Baths. Ship's hospital disinfected. Nov. 6 Ditto ditto ditto ditto 6th Nov. ditto ^ „ 11 Ditto ditto ditto ditto 9th „ ditto J „ 11 Training Ship Are thusa, lying off Greenhithe Scarlet Fever 30th Oct. Previous case Removed to Hospital at Greenhithe. Ship's hospital disinfected. „ 25 s.s. Peninsular Greenock, 93,208 Bombay, 2nd Nov. Plague (2 cases) 16th Nov. Bombay Landed at Marseilles. Vessel and all effects disinfected by Port Sanitary Authority. „ 26 Training Ship Are thusa, lying o ff Greenhithe Enteric Fever 15th „ (?) Inmate of Seamen's Hospital. Ship's hospital disinfected. „ 28 s.s. Inchanga Aberdeen, 104,507 Durban, 27th Oct. ditto (3 cases) 5th „ 26th „ 28th ,, Durban Removed to Port Sanitary Hospital. Vessel and effects disinfected. „ 29 s.s. Mesaba Liverpool, 109,392 New York, 7th Nov. Scarlet Fever 23rd „ New York Convalescent on arrival. Vessel disinfected. Dec. 1 s.s. Fort Salisbury London, 104,851 Cape Town, 5th Nov. Enteric Fever 3rd „ Cape Town Removed to Port Sanitary Hospital. Vessel and effects disinfected. „ 2 s.s. Nord Pol Copenhagen, Danish Kronstadt, 22nd Nov. Diphtheria 1st Dec. Kronstadt Ditto. „ 4 s.s. Lake Erie Liverpool, 110,631 Cape Town. 8th Nov. Enteric Fever (?) Cape Town Landed at Southampton. Vessel and effects disinfected. „ 5 s.s. Greek Southampton, 98,870 Cape Town, 10th Nov. Do. 8th Nov. Do. Convalescent on arrival. Vessel disinfected. 73 APPENDIX H—continued. Date. Name of Vessel. Port of Registry and Official No. Where from and date. Disease. Date of Attack. Probable source of infection. Remarks. 1901. 1901. 1901. Dec. 10 s.s. Clan Macfarlane Glasgow, 108,742 Calcutta, 5th Nov. Continued Fever 15th Nov. Calcutta Removed to Port Sanitary Hospital. Vessel and effects disinfected. „ 11 s.s. Sophocles Aberdeen, 86,299 Sydney, 11th Oct. Enteric Fever 12th „ Albany Ditto. „ 13 s.s. Morayshire Glasgow, 108,778 Sydney, 11th Oct. Do. (4 cases) 27th „ 1st Dec. 10th „ Durban Ditto. „ 14 s.s. Concordia Helsingborg, Swede Tonsberg, 5th Dec. Enteric Fever 11th „ Tonsberg Ditto. „ 14 Training Ship Sha ftesbury, lying off Grays Scarlet Fever 11th „ London Removed to Eastern Hospital,Homerton. Hospital cabin disinfected. „ 20 s.s. Arabia Greenock, 105,587 Bombay, 30th Nov. Enteric Fever 3rd „ Bombay Removed to Port Sanitary Hospital. Vessel and effects disinfected. „ 25 s.s. Manitou W. Hartlepool 106,971 New York, 14th Dec. Measles 16 th „ New York Ditto. „ 27 Training Ship Are thusa, lying off Greenhithe Scarlatina 16th „ (?) Isolated on shore. Infected quarters disinfected by Greenhithe Sanitary Authority. „ 28 s.s. Katharine H. M. S. Shoeburyness, 14th Dec. Smallpox 18th „ Purfleet Removed to Hospital at Purfleet. Vessel and effects disinfected. „ 29 s.s. Goorkha Glasgow, 85,932 Calcutta, 19 th Nov. Plague (2 cases) (?) (?) One patient died and was buried at sea; one patient was landed at Aden. Vessel and all effects disinfected. „ 13 „ 14 Training Ship Warspite, lying off Greenhithe Diphtheria (2 cases) 24th Nov. 12th Dec. Previous cases Removed to Charlton Baths. Ship's hospital disinfected. „ 19 s.s. City of Bombay Glasgow, 90,098 Calcutta, 15th Nov. Plague (?) Calcutta Two cases of Plague landed at Suez. „ 22 s.s. Clan Robertson Glasgow, 108,684 Calcutta, 13th Nov. Do. 2nd Dec. Do. One case of Plague landed at Suez. 74 APPENDIX J. CONDEMNED FOOD . Goods marked * were rejected by the owners and seized by the Port Sanitary Authority to prevent sale to small buyers. Date. Name of Vessel. Official No. Where lying. Where from. Amount condemned. 1902. July 1 Stentor 110,572 R. A, Dock China 3 bags pepper. „ 1 Bombay 93,212 Do. Singapore 69 tins pines. „ 1 Candia 105,574 Vic. Dock Do. 17 tins pines. „ 2 At Nos. 4 and 5 Warehouses, Millwall Dock, ex s.s. "Tripoli" 326 boxes dates. „ 5 Orizaba 93,688 Til. Dock Sydney 15 cases tinned rabbits. „ 6 Telde 105,363 Lon. Dock Las Palmas 15 crates bananas. „ 6 Surrey Vic. Dock New Zealand 990 carcasses and 634 pieces mutton. „ 8 At Nos. 4 and 5 Warehouses, Millwall Dock, ex— "John Fothergill" 22 skins dates. „ 9 Maori 104,031 R. A. Dock Las Palmas 1 crate bananas. „ 9 Rangatira 97,216 Do. Do. 1 crate bananas. „ 10 Aberdeen 84,356 Do. Sydney 12 boxes raisins. „ 10 At West India Dock Refrigerator, ex— s.s. "Ovingdean Grange". 22 quarters and 5 pieces beef. „ 11 Mamari Vic. Dock New Zealand 4 pieces beef. „ 11 At "T2" Warehouse, Mill wall Dock, ex "Berlin" 86 bags potatoes. „ 11 At No. 10 Warehouse, Lond on Dock, ex— "Crown of Arragon" 11 bags cocoa. „ 12 At South Quay, London Dock, ex— "Earl of Dunmore" "Arthur Sewell" *2 cases tinned pears. *2 cases tinned apricots. „ 16 At Nos. 4 and 5 Warehouses, Millwall Dock, ex— "John Fothergill" 26 mats and 44 skins dates. „ 17 Cathcart Park 102,385 St. Ka. Dk. Las Palmas 53 crates bananas. „ 17 Morocco 79,660 Lon. Dock Do. 28 crates and 11 bunches bananas. „ 17 Zweena 113,366 Do. Do. 9 crates bananas. „ 17 Inanda 94,523 W. I. Dock Do. 6 crates bananas. „ 17 Waimate 105,276 R. A. Dk. New Zealand 7 tins corned mutton. „ 17 Telde 105,363 Lon. Dock Las Palmas 23 cratesand74 bunches bananas. 75 APPENDIX J—continued. Date. Name of Vessel. Official No. Where lying. Where from. Amount condemned. 1901 July 17 At East Quay, London Dock, ex— "Strauss "Schwan 2 bags potatoes. 2 bags potatoes. „ 18 Yarrawonga 99,007 R. A. Dk. Las Palmas 79 crates bananas. „ 19 At "G" Warehouse, South West India Dock 134 cases tinned lobsters. ,, 19 Warrigal 102,791 Vic. Dock Australia 28 tins apricot pulp. „ 22 Wakanui 108,566 R. A. Dk. New Zealand 1 carcass and 1 piece mutton. „ 23 At No. 10 Warehouse, London Dock, ex— s.s. "Ovingdean Grange" 6 crates bananas. „ 24 At "F" Ware house, St. Katharine's Dock, ex— s.s. "Oplielia" 8 bags potatoes. 24 At "A" Quay, St. Katharine's Dock 58 bags potatoes. „ 24 At "F" Warehouse, St. Katharine's D ock 13 bags potatoes. „ 26 At Victoria Dock Cold Stores, exs.s. "Surrey" 25 carcasses and 5 pieces mutton. „ 27 Orotava 106,838 Lon. Dock Las Palmas 4 crates bananas. „ 27 Wazzan 102,115 Do. Do. 5 crates and 1 bunch bananas. „ 27 Ifafa 94,534 W. I. Dk. Do. 1 basket oranges and 1 crate bananas. „ 29 Suevic 113,456 Til. Dock Sydney 122 cases apples. Aug. 1 Suevic 113,456 Do. Do, 153 pears. „ 1 Ormuz 93,341 Vic. Dock Australia 5 cases and 24 tins rabbits. „ 3 At St. Katharine's Dock, ex "Cathcart Park" 9 crates bananas. „ 6 Saevic 113,156 Til. Dock Sydney 4 crates pears. „ 6 Warrnambool 101,917 Vic. Dk. Australia 11 crates rabbits. „ 8 „ 8 Tokomaru Gothic 99,624 102,119 R. A. Dock Do. Canary Islands Las Palmas 4 crates grapes. 20 boxes grapes. „ 9 Ortegal French Do. Marseilles 1 case eggs. „ 12 At St. Katharine's Dock, ex various Ships 17 bags potatoes. „ 12 Calchas 110,586 R. A. Dock Singapore 12 tins pineapples. „ 12 Indraghiri 105,384 Vic. Dock New Zealand 1 part quarter beef. „ 12 At Victoria Dock (Rummage Sale Goods), ex— s.s. "Java" | 9 tins pineapples. 76 APPENDIX J—continued. Date. Name of Vessel. Official No. Where lying. Where from. Amount condemned. 1901. Aug. 12 Duke of Sutherland. 68,220 R. A. Dk. Australia 461 crates and 431 loose rabbits. „ 12 Glencaird 96,306 S.W. I. Dk. Frisco 4 tins salmon. „ 12 Evangeline 112,425 Vic. Dock Halifax 1 piece cheese. „ 13 At London Dock, exs.s. "Arnage" 1 cheese. „ 14 Morocco 79,660 Lon. Dk. Canary Islands. 19 crates bananas. „ 14 Duke of Norfolk 97,607 R. A. Dk. Queensland 173 cases condensed milk. „ 16 At London Dock, ex various ships (Rummage Sale Goods.) 1 box dates, 4 boxes raisins, 2 boxes muscatels, 4 boxes sultanas, 3 cases salmon, 3 cases and 10 tins sardines, 1 box valencias, 2 bags tamarinds. „ 16 At Royal Alber t Dock (Rummage Sale Goods.) 1 tin pears and 3 pails lard. „ 16 At East India Dock, ex— ''Arundel Castle" ''Gaika'' "Umtali" 1 crate bananas. 1 crate bananas. 1 crate bananas. „ 17 Machaon 110,599 R. A. Dock China 19 cases green peas. „ 17 At St. Katharin e's Dock, ex s.s. "Engineer'' 4 crates bananas. „ 19 At St. Katharine's Dock, ex various ships (Rummage Sale Goods.) 1 box apricots, 3 boxes prunes, 1 case apples, 3 packages and 1 bag almonds, tins biscuits, 1 package cheese, 1 case milk, 3 cases cakes, 1 box dates. „ 19 At St. Katharine's Dock, ex— "Olivia" "Ophelia" 13 bags potatoes. 208 bags potatoes. „ 20 Manitou 106,971 R. A. Dock New York 92 tins lobsters. „ 21 Wazzan 102,115 Lon. Dock Canary Islands. 17 crates and one bunch bananas. „ 21 At No. 1 Warehouse, West India Dock (damaged by fire and water). 1,000 bags flour. „ 21 At Millwall Dock, ex. s.s. "Tripoli" 51 skins dates. „ 22 At Victoria Dock, per land carriage, ex Great Western Railway, Truck 59,974. 3 carcasses lamb. 77 APPENDIX J—continued. Date. Name of Vessel. Official No. Where lying. Where from. Amount condemned. 1901. Aug. 22 At St. Katharine's Dock, ex various vessels 250 bags potatoes. „ 22 Matatua 96,168 R. A. Dk. New Zealand 16 boxes sheep kidneys. „ 22 Raglan Castle 108,187 E. I. Dk. Canary Islands 4 crates bananas. „ 22 Menominee 108,688 R. A. Dk. New York 1,588 pots jam, marmalade and jelly. „ 22 Cathcart Park 105,583 St. Ka. Dk. Canary Islands 42 crates bananas. „ 23 At West India Dock, exs.s. "Cheltenham" About 20 tons sugar drainings. 26 At Victoria Dock Cold Stores,exs.s. "Surrey" 25 carcasses and 5 part carcasses mutton. „ 23 At South Quay, London Dock, ex— s.s. "Ceylon" s.s. "Calchas" 32 tins pineapples. 75 tins pineapples. „ 23 Hornby Grange 98,048 Lon. Dk. Las Palmas 2 crates and 1 bunch bananas. „ 23 Telde 105,363 Do. Canary Islands 42 crates and 3 bunches bananas. „ 23 At South Quay, London Dock— s.s. "Spring burn" s.s. "Osborne" s.s. "Orissa" 5 cases and 28 tins salmon. 3 cases and 29 tins salmon. 96 cases apricot pulp. „ 23 At No. 3 Warehouse, London Dock 6 cases sardines and 4 boxes almonds. „ 27 At Nos. 4 and 5 Warehouse, London Dock, ex— "John Poth ergill" 80 skins dates. „ 28 At Victoria Dock Refrigerator, ex s.s. "Austral" 17 pieces mutton. „ 28 Kumara 110,258 Vic. Dk. New Zealand 1 crate rabbits. „ 28 At No. 12 Shed Royal Albert Dock, ex— s.s. "Adalia" s.s. "Adalia" 742 lbs. wheat. „ 29 164 lbs. wheat. „ 30 Hornby Grange 98,048 Lon. Dk. River Plate 1 part quarter beef and 1 carcass mutton. „ 30 Guelph 104.040 E. I. Dock Canary Islands 13 crates bananas. „ 30 Zweena 113,366 Lon. Dk. Las Palmas 12 crates and 14 bunches bananas. „ 30 Inchanga 104,507 W. I. Dk. Natal 91 cases condensed milk. „ 30 At No. 1 Warehouse, West India Dock (damaged by fire and water). 10 cases confectionery. 78 APPENDIX J—continued. Date. Name of Vessel. Official No. Where lying. Where from. Amount condemned. 1901. Sept. 1 Denbighshire 112,630 Til. Dock Java 452 casks sugar drain ings. „ 4 At Drug Warehouse, London Dock (Rummage Sale Goods.) 17 bags locust beans. „ 6 Machaon 110,599 R. A. Dk. China, &c. 6 cases jelly squares. „ 6 Tongariro 1] 1,356 Do. New Zealand 1 case apples. „ 6 Dahome 106,984 Vic. Dock Halifax 20 lbs. cheese. „ 6 Indramayo 98,302 Do. New Zealand 941 carcasses, 108 pieces, 146 legs and 4 shoulders mutton. „ 7 Rosarian 95,012 Do. Montreal 101 tins lobsters. „ 7 Fremona 93,470 Do. Do. 12 tins lobsters. „ 9 At East Quay, London Dock, ex s.s. "Arabistan" 584 skins, 32 mats and 4 packages dates. „ 9 At Nos. 4 and 5 Warehouses, ex "Gledhow" 330 skins dates. „ 10 Orotava 106,838 Lon. Dock Las Palmas 9 crates and 4 bunches bananas. „ 11 At South Quay,, London Dock, ex— s.s. "Annie Hough" 18 tins lobsters. „ 11 At Nos. 4 and 5 Warehouses, Millwall Dock, ex— s.s. "John Fothergill" 102 skins dates. „ 12 Rakaia 105,262 R. A. Dk. New Zealand 1 case and part case apples. „ 12 Cuzco 65,901 Til. Dock Sydney 19 crates rabbits. „ 12 Mombassa 96,082 R. A. Dk. Calcutta 4 cases condensed milk. „ 12 Jelunga 93,394 Do. Naples 9 tins tomato pulp. „ 12 Maehaon 110,599 Do. Shanghai 3 cases tinned peas. „ 14 „ 16 Morocco Narrung 79.660 105,873 Lon. Dk. R. A. Dk. Las Palmas Australia 50 crates and 18 bunches bananas. 1,300 rabbits. „ 16 Gulf of Venice 87,389 Vic. Dk. Do. 757 rabbits. „ 16 Cathcart Park 105,583 Lon. Dk. Las Palmas 9 crates bananas. „ 16 At East Quay, London Dock (Rummage Sale Goods ) 1 box dates, 5 bags currants, and 1 box almonds. „ 18 Cathcart Park 105,583 Lon. Dk. Las Palmas 2 crates bananas. „ 19 Golconda 95,098 R. A. Dk. Marseilles 158 tins apricot pulp. „ 20 Devona 104.738 Vic. Dk. Montreal 12 tins red currants. 79 APPENDIX J—continued. Date. Name of Vessel. Official No. Where lying. Where from. Amount condemned. 1901. Sept. 20 Machaon 110,599 R. A. Dock Shanghai 1 case tinned coffee and milk. „ 23 Telde 105,363 Lon. Dock Las Palmas 24 crates and 1 bunch bananas. „ 24 Engineer 112,658 Do. Do. 24 crates bananas. „ 25 Cervona 104,736 Vic. Dock Montreal 1,000 cases plums. „ 25 At Canada Wharf, Rotherhithe, in Barges "Jute," ''Harriett," "Don," "Rescue," "Star,'' "Indian," "Celtic," "Fred," "Cambrian," "Dunbar." 10 barge loads of damaged maize. „ 25 Springburn 98,318 Vic. Dock San Francs co 9 tins fruit. „ 25 Deucalion 113,433 R. A. Dock Shanghai 10 cases milk. „ 26 At South Quay, London Dock (Damaged by fire.) 119 tons wheat and 141 tons sugar. „ 26 Golconda 95,098 R. A. Dock Calcutta 698 lbs. rice, 530 lbs. dholl. „ 27 At No. 3 Shed, West India Dock, ex "Eagle Point" 3 quarters maize. „ 28 At West India Dock Refrigerator 5 pieces beef, 1 carcass lamb. „ 28 Ceylon 98,785 Vic. Dock Singapore 56 tins pineapple. „ 28 Evangeline 112,425 Do. Halifax 31 tins lobster. „ 28 At Victoria Dock, ex s.s. "Dahome" and s.s. " Evangeline" 170 tins lobster. „ 28 Zweena 113,366 Lon. Dock Las Palmas 40 crates and 7 bundles bananas. „ 28 Virginian 84,184 R. A. Dock Boston, U.S.A. 40 tins lobster. „ 28 At Victoria Docks, ex Sundry Ships 250 tins lobster. „ 28 At East Quay, London Dock, ex "Arabistan" 33 boxes dates. Oct 1 At Canada Wharf, Rotherhithe, in Barges "Quebec," "George,'' "Jessie," "Queen," "Fred," "Cambria." 6 barge loads of damaged maize. „ 1 At Canada Wharf, Rotherhithe, in Barge "Veteran" 1 barge load of damaged maize. „ 2 Do. Do. do. "Stanley" 1 barge load of damaged maize. „ 2 Avondale Castle 108,160 E. I. Dk. Canary Islands 8 crates bananas. „ 4 Kent 110,127 Vic. Dock Australia 3 tins meat. 80 APPENDIX J—continued. Date. Name of Vessel. Official No. Where lying. Where from. Amount condemned. 1901. Oct. 4 At Victoria Dock, ex various ships 50 tins lobster. „ 4 At East Quay, London Dock 15 boxes dates. „ 4 Cathcart Park 105,583 Lon. Dock Las Palmas 47 crates bananas. „ 5 At Canada Wharf, Rotherhithe, in Barge "Star" 1 barge load of damaged maize. „ 7 Orotava 108,838 Lon. Dock Las Palmas 51 crates bananas. „ 8 At West India: Dock Refrigerator, ex s.s. "Persic" 370 rabbits. „ 8 Gascon 806,907 E. I. Dock Canary Islands 19 crates bananas. „ 8 Papanui 108,562 R. A. Dock Do. 51 crates bananas. „ 8 Wilcannia 110,154 Do. Do. 1 crate bananas. „ 9 J. W. Taylor 95,216 W. I. Dock Do. 2 crates bananas. „ 9 Inanda 94,523 Do. Do. 28 crates bananas. „ 9 At South Quay, London Dock *594 tins pineapples and 142 tins lobsters. „ 9 At Canada Wharf, Rotherhithe, in Barges "Don" and "Delta." 2 barge loads of damaged maize. „ 11 Morocco 79,660 Lon. Dock Canary Islands 15 crates and 1 bunch bananas. „ 11 German 109,290 (Ship's Stores.) E. I. Dock Cape Town 50 carcasses mutton and 44 pieces beef. „ 14 Fernfield 105,704 Vic. Dock Montreal 7 pails lard. „ 15 Wazzan 102,115 Lon. Dock Las Palmas 9 crates bananas. „ 15 Mombassa 96,082 Vic. Dock Naples 135 tins beans and 202 tins tomato pulp. „ 16 At South Quay, London Dock *119 tins lobsters, 44 tins peaches and 72 tins pines. „ 18 Arabia 105,587 R. A. Dock Gibraltar 4 baskets grapes. „ 18 Golconda 95,098 Do. Aden 117 cases condensed milk. „ 18 Peleus 113,467 Do. Kobe 17 cases condensed milk. „ 18 Rosneath 97,609 Vic. Dock West Indies 16 cases condensed milk. „ 18 At Canada Wharf, Rotherhithe, in Lighters "James" and "Jessie." 1 about 70 tons damaged J maize. „ 19 At Canada Wharf, Rotherhithe, in Lighter "Star" 1 barge load of damaged maize. 81 APPENDIX J—continued. Date. Name of Vessel. Official No. Where lying. Where from. Amount condemned. 1901. Oct. 18 Telde 105,363 Lon. Dock Las Palmas 8 crates and 3 buuches bananas. „ 22 Candia 105,574 R. A. Dk. Port Said 728 lbs. sweets. „ 22 Engineer 112,653 Lou. Dk. Las Palmas 69 crates bananas. „ 22 At Canada Wharf, Rotherhithe— In Lighter "Don" 1 barge load of damaged maize. „ 23 In Lighter "Percival" 1 barge load of damaged maize. „ 25 At P Warehous ex s.s. "Georg" Millwall Dock— 1 goose, 50 apples and a quantity of vegetables. „ 25 Recta 85,131 Lon. Dk. Smyrna 1 basket pears. „ 25 Zweena 113,366 Do. Las Palmas 2 crates and 1 bunch bananas. „ 25 Papanui 108,562 R. A. Dk. New Zealand 38,334 rabbits. „ 26 Mohawk (Ship's sur 91,208 plus stores.) Do. Cape Town 3 quarters and 19 pieces beef, 8 carcasses and 1 leg mutton and 7 fowls. „ 16 Surrey 110,184 Vic. Dock Australia 1 carcass mutton. „ 26 At Canada Wharf, Rotherhithe— In Lighter ''Veteran" 1 barge load of damaged maize. „ 28 At No. 4 Ware house, Lond on Dock, ex s.s. "Cadiz" 10 barrels grapes. „ 28 At No. 10 Warehouse, London Dock, ex— s.s. "Thomasina McLellan" 6 cwts. wheat. „ 28 Cathcart Park 115,583 Lon. Dk. Canary Islands. 74 crates bananas. „ 30 At Nos. 4 and 5 Warehouses, Millwall Dock—ex s.s. "Edenhall" 93 skins dates. „ 31 Ortona 110,613 Til. Dock Sydney 138 tins rabbits. Nov. 1 Orotava 106,838 Lon. Dk. Canary Islands. 15 crates and 4 bunches bananas. „ 1 At Nos. 4 and 5 Warehouses, Millwall Dock, ex— s.s. "Gledhow" 506 skins dates. „ 2 Jumna 93,291 R. A. Dk. Brisbane 50 packets arrowroot. „ 2 Pinemore 109,475 Do. Quebec 273 lbs. damaged wheat. 82 APPENDIX J—continued. Date. Name of Vessel. Official No. Where lying. Where from. Amount condemned. 1901. Nov. 4 Lismore Castle 98,199 E. I. Dock Canary Islands. 17 crates bananas. „ 7 Wazzan 102,115 Lon. Dk. Do. 2 crates bananas. „ 8 Buluwayo 104,874 Til. Dock Cape Town 2 crates bananas. „ 8 Minnehaha 110,520 Do. New York 32 barrels pears. „ 11 At "C" Warehouse, St.Katharine's Dock, ex— s.s. "Adler" 114 cases condensed milk. „ 12 Nineveh 104,505 R. A. Dk. Australia 7 cases potted meats and essence of anchovies. „ 13 At East Quay, London Dock, ex s.s. "Arabistan" 50 boxes dates. „ 14 Morocco 79,660 Lon. Dk. Canary Islands. 74 crates and 10 bunches bananas and 1 basket fruit. „ 15 At Eastern Dock, London Dock, ex s.s. "Orissa" 200 boxes currants. „ 15 Pinemore 109,475 R. A. Dk. Quebec 496 lbs. wheat. „ 15 Engineer 112,653 Lon. Dk. Canary Islands. 6 crates bananas. „ 15 Hermonthis German Til. Dk. Teneriffe 2 crates bananas. „ 15 Illovo 94,543 W. I. Dk. Canary Islands. 1 crate bananas. „ 16 At South Quay, London Dock *80 tins pines. „ 16 Galician 113,334 E. I. Dock Canary Islands. 1 crate bananas. „ 16 Peleus 113,467 R. A. Dk. Singapore 16 tins pineapples. „ 16 At Canada Wha rf, Rotherhi the, in lighte r "Victory" 20 tons damaged rice. „ 16 Waikato 99,263 R. A. Dk. New Zealand 3 carcasses mutton. „ 18 Cayo Romano 102,800 Mill. Dk. Jamaica 172 cases condensed milk. „ 20 Caledonia 113,363 R. A. Dk. Boston 437 qrs. damaged wheat. „ 20 Telde 105,363 Lon. Dock Canary Islands 7 crates bananas. „ 21 Loyalist 112,431 Vic. Dock Halifax 2 barrels apples. „ 21 Iona 99,216 Do. Montreal 2 halfbarrels apples. „ 21 Warrigal 102,791 R. A. Dk. Australia 1 case oranges. „ 21 Chorley 113,545 Do. Odessa 5 cases tomatoes. „ 22 Cathcart Park 105,583 Lon. Dk. Canary Islands 39 crates bananas. „ 23 Abril Spanish Do. Tarragona 63 boxes lemons. 83 APPENDIX J—continued. Date. Name of Vessel. Official No. Where lying. Where from Amount condemned. 1901. Nov. 22 At Canada Wharf in lighter "Ladysmith" 80 tons damaged rice, maize meal, and rolled oats. „ 24 Do. Do. Do. 65 tons ditto. „ 25 Ormuz 93,341 Til. Dock Sydney 21 pieces beef, 23 carcasses and 20 pieces mutton, and 112 lbs. veal. „ 26 Zweena 113,366 Lon. Dk. Canary Islands. 1 crate bananas. „ 27 Karamea 110,264 R. A. Dock Do. 28 crates bananas. „ 27 At Canada Wharf in lighter "Atlanta" 1 barge load damaged maize meal, rolled oats, and barley. „ 29 At South Quay, London Dock *51 tins peaches. „ 29 At No. 10 Warehouse, London Dock 33 bags cocoa. Dec. 2 At "G" Warehouse, South West India Dock 127 cases lobsters in jars. 2 Orotava 106,838 Lon. Dk. Canary Islands. 4 bunches bananas. „ 2 At Globe Wharf in lighter "Ethel" 40 tons damaged maize meal, barley, and rolled oats. „ 3 Whakatane 111,348 R. A. Dock New Zealand. 3 carcasses of mutton. „ 3 Inchanga 104,507 W. I. Dk. Canary Islands. 7 crates of bananas and 3 boxes oranges. „ 4 At Canada Wharf in lighter "Ladysmith" 80 tons damaged maize meal, rice, &c. „ 4 Yarrawonga 99,007 R. A. Dock Australia 144 carcasses and 9 pieces mutton. „ 6 Duke of Argyll 68,419 Do. Queensland 161 quarters, 61 pieces, and 1 cwt. 14 lbs. trimmings beef, and 158 carcasses mutton. „ 7 At Canada Wharf in lighter "Ethel" 40 tons damaged rice and barley. „ 7 Morocco 79,660 Lon. Dk. Canary Islands. 9 crates bananas. „ 9 Ajax 113,395 R. A. Dock China, &c. ½ barrel shaddocks. 84 APPENDIX J—continued. Date. Name of Vessel. Official No. Where lying. Where from. Amount condemned. 1901. Dec. 9 Umvoti 105,857 E. I. Dk. Natal, &c. 1 case pines and bananas. „ 9 Pakeha 97,215 R. A. Dock Canary Islands. 1 crate bananas. „ 9 Umgeni 108,314 E. I. Dk. Natal 1 barrel lard. „ 10 Engineer 112.653 Lon. Dk. Canary Islands. 6 crates bananas. „ 11 At East Quay, London Dock, ex "Goolistan" 22 cases dates. „ 11 At East Quay, London Dock, ex "Arabistan" 229 cases dates. „ 11 At No. 2 Warehouse, West India Dock, ex— "North Point" 20 qrs. maize, 3 qrs. wheat. „ 11 At Nos. 4 and 5 Warehouses, Millwall Dock, ex— "Tripoli" 71 cases dates. ,, 11 Arcadia 93,172 R. A. Dock Australia 567 tins raspberry pulp. „ 11 Yarrawonga 99,007 Vic. Dk. Do. 197 carcasses and 13 pieces mutton. » 11 At No. 10 Warehouse. London Dock, ex— "Mandalay" 1 case figs. „ 16 At Canada Wharf, in lighter "Ladysmith" 1 barge load of damaged maize meal, rice, &c. „ 17 Wazzan 102,115 Lon. Dk. Canary Islands. 3 crates bananas. „ 18 At No. 5 Warehouse, London Dock, ex "Marzo" 69 tins apricot pulp. „ 21 At Meat Department, Victoria Dock, ex— "Yarrawonga" 214 carcasses and 101 pieces of mutton. „ 21 At South Quay, London, Dock, ex— "Moravian" 108 cases tinned fruit pulp. „ 27 Afric 110,537 Til. Dock Sydney 3 crates bananas. „ 27 Sophocles 86,299 R. A. Dock Canary Islands. 22 crates bananas. „ 27 Anubis German Til. Dock Teneritfe 70 crates bananas. „ 28 Orizaba Vic. Dk. Australia 6 tins raspberry pulp. „ 28 Zweena 113,366 Lon. Dk. Canary Islands. 6 crates bananas. „ 28 Cathcart Park 105,585 Do. Do. 39 crates bananas. „ 31 In lighter "James," at West India Dock, ex— "Inchanga" 634 cases condensed milk. 85 APPENDIX K. Water Barges. No. in District 30th June, 1901. New Barges. Condemned. No. in District in good condition, 31st Dec., 1901. 21 — — 21 APPENDIX L. Police Court Proceedings, 1st July to 31st December, 1901. Date. Name of Vessel. Offence. Police Court. Penalty. Fine. Costs and Expenses. 1901. £ s. d. £ s. d. Oct. 2 s.s."Eagle." Causing a smoke nuisance on the River, while lying at Greenwich Pier, on 10th, 13th, 24th, and 31st August and 2nd September, 1901. Greenwich 9 0 0 5 5 0 Nov. 28 Lighter "Leslie." Carrying an offensive cargo in the lighter (the same being wholly uncovered) at Strand Vestry Wharf on 11th September, 1901. Southwark 2 0 0 1 1 0 „ 29 Lighter "Baby." Carrying an offensive cargo in the lighter (the same not being properly covered) at Rainham on the 22nd October, 1901. Grays . Summons dismissed, each side paying its own costs. 86 APPENDIX M. Return of Rats caught and destroyed in the Docks. 1901. Totals. July. Aug. Sept. Oct. Nov. Dec. Millwall Dock— Warehouses 735 750 944 737 929 715 4,810 Vessels 157 — 358 268 90 96 969 Surrey Commercial Dock— Warehouses 172 104 166 217 154 99 912 Vessels — — — — — — — Regent's Dock— Warehouses 6 20 26 33 29 14 128 Vessels — — — — — — — St. Katharine's Dock— Warehouses 18 40 26 47 45 25 201 Vessels — — — — 10 — 10 London Dock— Warehouses 141 198 222 195 199 128 1,083 Vessels .199 39 46 61 102 108 555 Albert and Victoria Dock— Warehouses 1,255 694 2,130 1,745 1,849 676 8.349 Vessels 3,210 3,919 5,133 4,468 5,802 3,879 26,411 Tilbury Dock— Warehouses 650 622 945 740 710 542 4,209 Vessels 312 488 564 296 301 308 2,269 West India Dock— Warehouses 970 977 1,447 1,312 1,174 707 6,587 Vessels 710 303 1,080 583 714 473 3,863 East India Dock— Warehouses 36 115 719 479 180 21 1,550 Vessels 296 48 644 590 396 385 2,359 River (Vessels) — — — — 98 — 98 Poplar and Midland Docks Totals 8,867 8,317 14,450 11,771 12,782 8,176 64,363 Total brought forward from last Report 32,008 Total from 1st July to 31st December, 1,902 64,363 Total 96,371 87 APPENDIX N. PORT OF LONDON SANITARY AUTHORITY. Receipts and Expenditure under the Public Health (London) Act, 1891, for the Year ended 31st December, 1901. RECEIPTS. PAYMENTS. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. To Fees in respect of Health Certificates 19 19 0 By Salaries, Wages and Disbursements:— 5,488 18 3 „ Ditto in respect of disinfection of Vessels 168 7 6 Dr. W. Collingridge, Medical Officer of Health, Salary, ¼ year and 30 days 332 3 10 „ Fees, &c., in respect of the utilisation of Condemned Meat, &c. 686 13 1 „ Ditto in respect of Breaches of Public Bye-Laws re Offensive Cargoes, &c. 49 10 5 Ditto, ditto, Grant per order of Common Council, 25th July, 1901 76 18 8 „ Rochester Port Sanitary Authority, Reimbursement of proportion of Salary of Medical Officer at Gravesend, 1 year £100 0 0 Dr. H. Williams, ditto, Salary, 5 months and 11 days 290 8 5 W. J. Albrow, Clerk, Salary, 1 year 191 13 4 ,, Ditto, ditto, for forwarding Telegrams 1 17 9 Dr. W. Collingridge and Dr. H. Williams, for Wages 2,450 0 0 101 17 9 „ Pees for Registration of Canal Boats 5 15 0 Ditto ditto, for Disbursements 750 0 0 ,, Metropolitan Asylums Board, Fees under 1891 Act 2 4 0 Assistant Medical Officers' Salaries 1,288 0 0 „ Maintenance of a Patient 4 5 0 Medical Officer at Gravesend Hospital, Salary, 1 year 109 14 0 „ Compensation for damage done ot Hulk "Hygeia" and Launch "clotho" 6 5 0 Officers' Pension Fund 164 10 4 Uniforms 124 18 3 „ Offices at Greenwich, viz.:— 176 8 9 Rent (less Income Tax) 47 10 0 Fire Insurance 0 8 0 Telephone Rent 12 15 0 Water 2 8 9 Rates and Taxes 23 10 0 Gas 11 6 11 Repairs, &c. 72 10 1 Coals 6 0 0 „ Hospital at Denton, viz.:— Rent of Causeway 2 5 0 298 7 4 Fire and Boiler Insurance 3 12 3 Rates and Taxes 28 1 9 Repairs, Coals, &c. 264 8 4 „ Epidemic Precautions 89 2 5 91 4 5 „ Disinfectants 2 2 0 „ Expenses of Launches, Hulks, &c.:— Insurance 119 12 5 703 6 11 Coals and Coke 330 15 6 Repairs, &c. 252 19 0 „ Printing, Stationery, &c. ... 58 3 9 „ Committee's Allowance 150 0 0 240 0 0 „ Ditto re Inspections of River 90 0 0 „ Law Charges, viz.:— Mr. Comptroller 3 12 0 Mr. Solicitor 75 0 3 78 12 3 Chamber of London, 29th January, 1902 £1,044 16 9 „ Sundries ... ... 33 6 10 £7,457 17 1 LONDON: Chaarles Skipper and East, Printers, 49, Great Tower Street, E.c.