Journal Rebind Co. Ltd. Unit 4, Pier Wharf, Grays Essex. 6369 PLON 4 93 PORT OF LONDON HEALTH COMMITTEE. ANNUAL REPORT of the MEDICAL OFFICER OF HEALTH, To 31st December, 1937. Presented 23rd June, 1938. 68698 REPORT For the Year ended 31st December, 1937, OF THE MEDICAL OFFICER OF HEALTH for THE PORT OF LONDON (CHARLES FRANCIS WHITE, M.D., D.P.H.Vict., P. T.M.Liverpool). (Acting.) TWYFORD, Mayor. A Common Council holden in the Chamber of the Guildhall of the City of London on Thursday, the 23rd day of June, 1938 THE Port of London Health Committee did this day deliver into this Court a Report in writing under their hands of their proceedings, and submitting the Annual Report of the Medical Officer of Health for the Port to the 31st December, 1937; which was read. Ordered—That the Report be printed and a copy sent to every Member of this Court. ROACH. To the Right Honourable the Lord Mayor, Aldermen and Commons of the City of London, in Common Council assembled. WE, whose names are hereunto subscribed, of your Port of London Health Committee, to whom it has been referred to carry into execution the powers assigned to the Corporation, as the Port of London Health Authority, beg to submit for the information of your Honourable Court the Annual Report of the Medical Officer of Health for the Port of London for the year ended the 31st December, 1937, which Report contains a full and detailed account of the work done in the Port during that period by the Medical Officers and Inspectors. An Account of Income and Expenditure in connection with the Port of London Health Authority for the year ended the 31st March, 1938, is appended, in accordance with the Order of your Honourable Court, for the information of the Court. All which we submit to the judgment of this Honourable Court. Dated this eleventh day of June, 1938. R. Scott Hewett. Raymond D. Poland. A. Robertson. Sidney H. Greenaway. Arch. Galloway. Harold E. Jowsey. W. R. Nelthropp. D. E. Williamson. Richard Brodie. R. W. Vice. C. R. Heiser. Francis J. Gaunter. Port of London Health Authority, 5, CHURCH PASSAGE, GUILDHALL, E.C.2. Telegraphic Address "PORTELTH LONDON." Telephone No. METROPOLITAN 3636. BOARDING STATIONS. RIVER THAMES Hulk "Hygeia," Gravesend. RIVER MEDWAY Garrison Point, Sheerness. Telegraphic Address "PORTELTH LONDON." Telephone No. (Hulk "Hygeia") GRAVESEND 325. HOSPITAL FOR INFECTIOUS DISEASES at DENTON, near GRAVESEND. Telephone No. (Hospital) GRAVESEND 257. „ (Medical Officer) GRAVESEND 626. LIMITS OF THE PORT OF LONDON. The limits of the Port of London as at present defined commence at High-Water Mark in the River Thames at Teddington Lock, in the County of Surrey, and extend down both sides of the River Thames to an imaginary straight line dra wn from the Pilot Mark at the entrance of Havengore Creek, in the County of Essex, to the land's end at Warden Point, in the Isle of Sheppey, in the County of Kent, such point being the North-Western limit of the Port of Faversham, and extend up and include both sides of the River Medway to an imaginary straight line drawn from the South-East point of land westward of Coalmouth Creek, thence across the said River Medway to the Westernmost point of the piece of land which forms the Eastern side of the Stangate Creek, or, in other words, the North-West point of Fleet Marsh, and from thence in a Southerly direction to Iwade Church, in the said County of Kent, and thence in a North-Easterly direction to Elmley Chapel in the said Isle of Sheppey, a supposed direct line from Elmley Chapel to Iwade Church, being the Western limit of the Port of Faversham, and the said Port of London includes the Islands of Havengore Creek aforesaid, called Potton and Rushley Islands, and so much of the said Creek and watercourse as extends from it to the town of Rochford, and also includes all other islands, rivers, streams, creeks, waters, watercourses, channels, harbours, docks and places within the before-mentioned limits contained. 2 INDEX. A. PAGE Actinobacillosis in Ox Tongues 10,40 Action under Public Health (Imported Food) Regulations, 1925 40 Admissions to Denton Hospital 9 Air-Raid Precautions 57 Aliens Order, 1920 53 Ambulance Transport 13, 14, 20, 56 Amount of Shipping Entering the Port (Table "A") 11 Analyst's Reports 46-53 Arrangements for Dealing with Declarations of Health 12,13 Articlel6—Experience of Working 18,19 Assignment of Powers 86-88 Association of Port Health Authorities of the British Isles 55, 56 B. Bacon 41 Bacteriological Examinations 9,21 Beef 41 Board of Trade—Instructions as to the Survey of Masters' and Crews' Spaces 30-32 Boarding of Vessels on Arrival 13,14 Boarding Station 1 Bye-laws—Offensive Cargoes 9,54 Bye-laws of Port Health Authority 88 Bye-laws for the Protection of Food 38,39 C. Canal Boats Acts and Regulations 58-61 Canned Foods, Inspection of 10,36, 37 Cargo Traffic (Table "B") 11 Caseous Lymphadenitis in Mutton 10, 40 Certificates—Fumigation Issued (Table "II") 30 Certificates under Public Health (Imported Food) Regulations, 1925 44, 45 Classification of Nuisances (Table "J") 30 Cleansing of Persons and Clothing 19 Condemned Food—Disposal of 10,41 Conditions Prevailing in Coasting Vessels 33 Confectionery 44 Contacts, Surveillance of 18,19,21 Contamination of Sardines by Lead 10 Crews' Spaces—Hygiene of 30-35 D. Dangerous Drugs 57 Declarations of Health 12, 13 Deratisation Certificates (Table "H") 30 „ Exemption Certificates (Table "H") 30 „ Methods of 28 Destruction of Rats on Vessels (Table "E") 29 „ „ in Docks, Quays, &c. (Table "F") 30 „ „ on Vessels from Plague-infected Ports (Table "G") 30 Detection of Rodent Plague 27 „ Infectious Disease on Vessels 9,13 Detention of Fat under Public Health (Imported Food) Regulations, 1925 42 „ Foodstuffs 41 Diphtheria 9 9 Disinfection of Persons and Clothing 19 Disposal of Condemned Food 41 E. Enteric Fever 25, 26 Exemption Certificates (Table "H") 30 Exportation Notices under Public Health (Imported Food) Regulations, 1925 45 F. Fats—Detention and Control under Public Health (Imported Food) Regulations, 1925 42 Fertilisers and Feeding Stuffs Act, 1926 53 Fish 42 Food Inspection 35-53 „ „ —Detentions, Seizures and Destruction 10,41 3 PAGE Fruit 42 Fruit Pulp, &c. 43 Tinned and Bottled 43 Fumigation Certificates (Table "H") 30 „ of Vessels for Eat Destruction 9 G. Grain, &c. 44 H. Ham 41 Hospital 1, 9, 20, 21, 26, 27 Houseboats 9 Hygiene of Crews' Spaces 10,30-35 I. Improvements in Crew Accommodation in existing Ships 33-35 Infected Ports—Vessels from (Table "G") 30 "Infected" Vessels (Table "G") 30 Infectious Disease, Detection of 9,13 „ Sickness Landed from Vessels (Table "C") 23 „ „ Occurring during Voyage (Table "D") 23 Infectious Disease, Prevention of Importation 13 Inspection of Canned Foods 10,36,37 Inspection of Imported Meat 10 Instructions as to the Survey of Masters' and Crews' Spaces 30-32 Interment of Dead 23 Introduction 9, 10 L. Launches 10 Lead Contamination of Sardines 10 Legal Proceedings 54,55 Limits of Port of London 1 M. Measures against Rodents 27-29 Measures of Rat Destruction on Vessels from Plague-infected Ports (Table "G") 30 Meat Inspection 10, 35 Meats, Tinned 42 Medical Inspection of Aliens 19 Medical Inspection of Vessels 9 Methods of Deratisation 28 Mooring Stations 15-17 Mutton—Caseous Lymphadenitis 10 Mutton and Lamb 41 N. Notices of Exportation under Public Health (Imported Food) Regulations, 1925 45 Notification of Inward Vessels requiring special attention 14,15 Nuisances—Classification of (Table "J") 30 Nuts 43 O. Offal — Seized and Destroyed 42 Offensive Cargoes—Bye-laws 9,54 Offices 1 Official Certificates recognised under the Public Health (Imported Food) Regulations 44,45 Ox Tongues affected with Actinobacillosis 10,40 P. Parrots (Prohibition of Import) Regulations, 1930 9,54 Passenger Traffic (Table "B") 11 Pathological Examinations 21 Plague 9, 24,25 Pollution of the River 10 Pork 40,41 Port of London, Limits of 1 Port Sanitary Regulations, 1933 12 4 PAGE Port Welfare Advisory Council 22, 23 Poultry 41 Powers of Port Health Authority 86,88 Prepared Poods, &c. 44 Protection of Food, Bye-laws 38,39 Provisions, &c. 43 Public Health (Imported Milk) Regulations, 1926 45 „ „ (Imported Food) Regulations, 1925 44 „ „ „ „ „ —Notices served under Article II. (4) 45 „ „ „ Amendment Regulations, 1933 44 „ „ (Shellfish) Regulations, 1915 and 1934 45 „ ,, (Preservatives, &c., in Food) Regulations, 1925 to 1927 45, 46-53 Pulmonary Tuberculosis 9 R. Rat Destruction by Fumigation 9 Rats Destroyed on Vessels (Table "E") 29 „ „ in Docks, Quays, &c. (Table "F") 30 Rats Examined 9 River, Pollution of 10 Rodent Plague—Detection of 24, 25, 27 S. Samples 46-53 Sanitary Inspections 9,11 Sardines—Contamination by Lead 10 Sausages 41 Seizure of Foodstuffs 41 Shellfish 45 Shipping Entering the Port (Table "A") 11 Smoke Nuisance 9 Source of Water Supply 11,12 Staff 7, 8, 10, 57 Standing Exemptions 18 Statutory Notices 9 Structural Defects 30 Sundries (Foodstuffs, &c.) 44 Supervision of Contacts 21 Surveillance of Contacts 18, 19 Surveillance of Persons Landing 18,19 "Suspected" Vessels (Table "G") 30 T. Table "A" Shipping Entering the Port 11 „ "B" Cargo and Passenger Traffic 11 „ "C" Infectious Sickness Landed from Vessels 23 „ "D" „ „ occurring during Voyage 23 „ "E" Destruction of Rats on Vessels 29 „ "F" „ „ in Docks, Quays, &c 30 „ "G" "Infected" or "Suspected" Vessels or Vessels from Plague-infected Ports 30 „ "H" Deratisation and Deratisation Exemption Certificates 30 „ "J" Classification of Nuisances 30 Telegraphic Address 1 Telephone Numbers 1 Tinned Meats 42 Tonnage of Vessels Entering Port 9 Training Ships 9, 54 Tuberculosis, Pulmonary 9 U. Unsound Food, Disposal of 41 „ „ Quantity Destroyed 41 V. Veal 41 Vegetables 43 „ Tinned 43 Venereal Disease 21 W. Water Barges 10,12 „ —River 10 „ Supply, Source of 11,12 Watering Vessels—Facilities 10 Welfare of Seamen 22,23 5 INDEX TO APPENDICES. B. PAGE Bacteriological Examination of Rats (Appendix XXIII.) 77 Bye-laws (Appendix XXX.) 88 C. Cerebro-Spinal Meningitis (Appendix XIV.) 70 Certificates under International Sanitary Convention (Appendix XXIV.) 77-81 Chicken-pox (Appendix XVII.) 72, 73 Classification of Miscellaneous Diseases (Appendix XIX.) 74 Crew Medically Inspected at Gravesend (Appendix I.) 63 „ „ „ Sheerness (Appendix I.) 63 D. Deratisation Certificates (Appendix XXIV.) 77-81 „ Exemption Certificates (Appendix XXIV.) 81 Destruction of Unsound Meat, Weights, &c. (Appendix XXVIII.) 85 Diphtheria (Appendix V.) 64 Diseases, Miscellaneous—see "M" (Appendix XIX.) 74 Dock Areas (Appendix XXIX.) 86 Dysentery (Appendix XV.) 71 E. Enteric Fever (including Typhoid Fever and Paratyphoid Fever) (Appendix VI.) 64, 65 Erysipelas (Appendix IX.) 67 Exemption Certificates (Appendix XXIV.) 81 F. Fumigation of Vessels for the Destruction of Rats (Appendix XXIV.) 77-81 G. German Measles (Appendix VIII.) 66,67 Gravesend—Medical Inspection at (Appendix I.) 63 H. Hospital—Cases Admitted and Cost of Maintenance, &c. (Appendix XXI.) 75 I. Infectious Disease (Appendix II.) 63 „ „ Cases Reported (Appendix II.) 63 „ „ „ Treated in Port Sanitary Hospital (Appendix II.) 63 Influenza (Appendix XIII.) 70 International Sanitary Convention of Paris, 1926 (Appendix XXIV.) 77-81 M. Malaria (Appendix XVI.) 71, 72 Measles (Appendix VII.) 65,66 „ German (see "G") (Appendix VIII.) 66, 67 Medical Inspection—Gravesend and Sheerness (Appendix I.) 63 Miscellaneous Diseases Classified (Appendix XIX.) 74 Mumps (Appendix XVIII.) 73 6 N. PAGE Nuisances on Vessels (Appendix XXVI.) 83 „ the River (Appendix XXVI.) 83 Shore Premises (Appendix XXVII.) 84 P. Passengers Medically Inspected—Gravesend (Appendix I.) 63 „ „ „ —Sheerness (Appendix I.) 63 Pneumonia (Appendix XII.) 70 Powers (Appendix XXX.) 86,88 Premises—Nuisances on (Appendix XXVII.) 84 Pulmonary Tuberculosis (Appendix X.) 67-69 R. Rats Caught and Destroyed (Appendix XXII.) 76 „ Examined (Appendix XXIII.) 77 ,, —Fumigation of Vessels for Destruction of (Appendix XXIV.) 77-81 River, Nuisances on (Appendix XXVI.) 83 S. Sanitary Inspections—Summary (Appendix XXV.) 82 „ „ —Nuisances on Vessels (Appendix XXVI.) 83 „ „ — „ River (Appendix XXVI.) 83 „ „ — „ Shore Premises (Appendix XXVII.) 84 Scarlet Fever (Appendix IV.) 64 Sheerness—Medical Inspection (Appendix I.) 63 T. Tuberculosis, Pulmonary (Appendix X.) 67-69 Tuberculosis (other kinds) (Appendix XI.) 69 Typhus Fever (Appendix III.) 64 U. Unsound Meat Destroyed, Weight, &c. (Appendix XXVIII.) 85 V. Venereal Diseases (Appendix XX.) 74 Vessels Fumigated for Rats (Appendix XXIV.) 77-81 „ —Nuisances on (Appendix XXVI.) 83 „ arriving from "Foreign" at Gravesend (Appendix I.) 63 „ „ „ „ Sheerness (Appendix I.) 63 W. Water Barges (Appendix XXV.) 82 Weight, &c., of Unsound Meat Destroyed (Appendix XXVIII.) 85 7 STAFF. List of Officers forming the Staff of the Port of London Health Authority, 31st December, 1937. Office. Name of Officer. Date of entering the Service. Date of appointment to present position. MEDICAL OFFICER OF HEALTH ‡C. F. White, M.D., D.P.H.Vict., D.T.M.Liverpool. (Acting.) September, 1928 July, 1928. DEPUTY Do. ‡Col. J. S. Warrack, M.A., M.D., C.M.Aberdeen, D.P.H. Camb., Barrister-at-Law. April, 1903 (Retired 11th November, 1937.) BOARDING MEDICAL OFFICERS— Gravesend ‡Surg. - Lieut. - Cmdr. H. M. Willoughby,M.R.C.S.,L.R.C.P., D.P.H., D.T.M. & H., R.N.V.R. May, 1929 May, 1929. Do. Do. P. B. P. Mellows, L.M.S.S.A., Lond.. D.T.M.&H. October, 1934 June, 1934. Do. Do. J. A. Jones, M.B., Ch.B., D.P.H. April, 1935 April, 1935. Sheerness †H. A. Madwar, L.R.C.P., L.R.F.P.S. December, 1927 February, 1928. OFFICE STAFF— Principal Clerk E. A. Sorrell, M.B.E. October, 1894 January, 1929. Principal Assistant W. C. Barham March, 1901 January, 1929. 1st Class „ J. A. Gillis March, 1914 January, 1929. 2nd „ „ A. W. Moore January, 1920 January, 1929. 3rd ,, ,, W. L. McLorg February, 1927 January, 1929. „ „ „ R. C. Ratliff March, 1930 March, 1930. Charwoman †Mrs. E. Veale September, 1935 February, 1936. SANITARY INSPECTORS (Senior) *F. J. Massie March, 1909 July, 1936. *W. J. Berry February, 1914 July, 1936. *W. Gray September, 1921 July, 1936. *R. Clifford July, 1925 July, 1936. *P. W. Coombe December, 1924 July, 1936. *E. H. Johnson August, 1929 July, 1936. *T. G. Edwards June, 1929 July, 1936. SANITARY INSPECTORS (Junior) ... *D. E. Madeley September, 1932 July, 1936. *C. E. Wright July, 1931 July, 1936. *J. S. Beattie May, 1931 July, 1936. *L. A. R. Hundy January, 1934 July, 1936. *T. L. Mackie, A.M.I.N.A. November, 1934 July, 1936. *L. F. J. McDermott June, 1934 July, 1936. G. Dring February, 1937 May, 1937. ASSISTANT RAT OFFICERS C. F. Woodrow November, 1928 November, 1928. C. W. Moody February, 1929 February, 1929. E. C. Watkins June, 1929 May, 1929. S. A. Croft June, 1929 May, 1929. G. F. Boult June, 1929 Mav, 1929. W. J. Reader November, 1934 December, 1934. DENTON HOSPITAL— Medical Officer in Charge Col. J. S. Warrack April, 1903 (Retired 11th November, 1937.) Matron J. Jackson February, 1910 February, 1910. Staff Nurse † — — Senior Assistant Nurse † — — Assistant Nurse † — — Cook-General † — — Wardmaid † — — Do. † — Housemaid — Do. † — - Handyman, &c. F. R. Wenham June, 1929 June, 1929. Laundress B. A. Wenham June, 1929 June, 1929. Gardener W. H. James January, 1931 December, 1930. 8 S T A F F—continued. List of Officers forming the Staff of the Port of London Health Authority, 31st December, 1937. Office. Name of Officer. Date of entering the Service. Date of appointment to present position. LAUNCHES— "Howard Deighton"— Master C. A. Strange December, 1898 December, 1930. 1st Mate C. H. Price May, 1912 December, 1930. 2nd Mate A. J. Humphreys April, 1931 March, 1931. Chief Engineer R. J. Roberts April, 1931 October, 1931. Engineer F. H. Yeo August, 1932 August, 1932. „ J. H. Meredith February, 1936 July, 1936. Deckhand and Relieving Navigating Officer. A. F. Clements January, 1927 September, 1933. Deckhand J. R. Steen March, 1926 December, 1930. „ H. J. Debnam April, 1931 April, 1931. „ A. F. Clements January, 1927 September, 1933. Boy †L. J. Youngs April, 1931 April, 1931. „ †D. Potter October, 1937 October, 1937. „ †C. Miles May, 1937 July, 1937. "James Howell"— Master A. F. Rough November, 1914 December, 1930. Engineer J. C. Row December, 1926 February, 1935. Boy †H. R. Page September, 1937 October, 1937. "Frederick Whittingham"— Driver P. J. Wilkins November, 1928 October, 1934. Boy †S. H. Strange November, 1934 November, 1934. GRAVESEND—Hulk "Hygeia"— Shipkeeper H. A. Clarkson May, 1912 January, 1927. E. W. S. Edmonds September, 1933 September 1933. GREENWICH MOORINGS— Barge "Ella Vicars"— Watchman E. Ditch January, 1915 ... November, 1917. „ A. E. Howard February, 1912 February, 1935. * These Inspectors possess the Special Certificate of the Royal Sanitary Institute for Inspectors of Food. † Temporary Staff. ‡ On 16th December, 1937, Dr. White was appointed Medical Officer of Health for the City of London. Since that date he has been Acting Medical Officer of Health for the Port of London, pending a new appointment to that position being made. Dr. Warrack retired on 11th November, 1937, and since that date Dr. Willough by has been Acting Deputy Medical Officer of Health. 9 5, Church Passage, Guildhall, E.C. 2, January, 1938. TO THE WORSHIPFUL THE PORT OF LONDON HEALTH COMMITTEE. Gentlemen, I have the honour to submit my Annual Report as Medical Officer of Health of the Port of London. The tonnage of vessels entering the Port of London during 1937 showed an increase of 381,082 tons as compared with 1936, the total being 31,249,463 tons. 14,832 vessels arrived from Foreign Ports, and of these 2,384 were boarded and inspected by your Medical Officers. Infectious Disease was reported as having occurred during the voyage on 194 vessels, the total number of cases being 367, of which 195, including 80 of Pulmonary Tuberculosis, were landed in the Port. In the Training Ships moored in the River there occurred 30 cases of Measles. One case of Diphtheria and one case of Scarlet Fever occurred on Houseboats moored in the district, and one case of Diphtheria occurred in a residence within the dock area. One hundred and fifteen cases, particulars of which are given in Appendix II., were admitted to your Hospital at Denton. No case of human Plague occurred during the year on any vessel bound for London. Of the 2,646 rats examined bacteriologically, 1,476 were from ships and 1,170 were from shore premises. Two rats from a vessel which arrived in the Port in July were reported to be infected with Plague. The circumstances are fully recorded on page 24. The Parrots (Prohibition of Import) Regulations, 1930, continued in operation, and the work done thereunder is reported on page 54. Your Sanitary Inspectors made 15,478 inspections of vessels and 6,004 inspections of shore premises. Five thousand four hundred and twenty-nine defects were reported in 3,103 vessels, in 2,442 of which the defects were remedied. Six hundred and eighty-one nuisances were reported in 679 shore premises, in 674 of which the nuisances were abated. Nuisances from smoke were reported in 26 vessels, and in four instances a Statutory Notice was served on the Master. The number of vessels fumigated for rat destruction under the supervision of your Inspectors was 138, 84 by hydrogen cyanide and 54 by sulphur dioxide. By the former method 1,261 rats and 199 mice, and by the latter 535 rats and 97 mice, were destroyed. One vessel was granted deratisation by trapping, 45 rats being trapped on board during the vessel's stay in the Port. The average number of rats killed per fumigation was 13. If mice are taken into consideration also, the average number of rodents destroyed per fumigation was 15.1. In addition 4,067 rats were trapped in ships and 4,613 on shore in the Port. Intimation Notices were served in respect of 110 cases of infringement of the Bye-laws relating to Offensive Cargoes. 10 The number of water barges in use in the Port remained at 12. As heretofore the registration of these craft by the Port of London Authority was made conditional upon the report of your officers as to the fitness of the barges for the carriage of drinking water. These arrangements continued to work smoothly. The launches "Howard Deighton" and "Frederick Whittingham" have given very satisfactory service during the year. Your Worshipful Committee decided at the end of last year to build a new launch to replace the "James Howell." Difficulties in regard to the delivery of steel, consequent upon the re-armament programme, have delayed the construction of this vessel, but it is expected that she will be in commission before the middle of next year. During the year 4,776 tons of foodstuffs were condemned as unfit for human consumption and were either destroyed or disposed of for industrial purposes under guarantee. The proportion of carcases of mutton examined for Caseous Lymphadenitis remained at 5 per cent. throughout the year, while pieces of mutton continued to be subjected to 100 per cent. examination. Evidence of this disease was found in only 29 of the 28,943 carcases examined by your Inspectors. A proportion of frozen ox tongues imported from South America was examined on arrival, the percentage found to be affected with Actinobacillosis being 0.77. In connection with the inspection of canned foods, with the object of securing, as far as possible, uniformity at Ports throughout the British Isles, the Association of Port Health Authorities issued a memorandum for the guidance of Pood Inspectors. These recommendations are set out in full on pages 36 and 37. The examination of canned sardines for lead contamination was continued during the year, and although the maximum amount of lead permitted had been reduced to five parts per million, it was only found necessary to order the re-export of two of the 38 consignments examined. During the year the Board of Trade issued new instructions as to the survey of Masters' and Crews' spaces which will, in new ships, effect most of the improvements for which Port Health Authorities have pressed for many years. The principal new requirements are listed on pages 31 and 32. No complaints were received during the year as to pollution of the Biver by sewage discharged from the Northern and Southern Outfalls. Dr. J. S. Warrack, your Deputy Medical Officer of Health, retired on 11th November, 1937, after 35 years in your service, and on the 16th December, 1937, your Medical Officer was appointed to be Medical Officer of Health of the City of London, but to continue to act as Medical Officer of Health of the Port until a new appointment is made to that position. I have pleasure in recording that all grades of your Staff carried out their duties in an entirely satisfactory manner. The health work of so large a Port could not be carried out efficiently without the co-operation of the Officers of H.M. Customs and of the Port of London Authority, the Pilots, and the Members of the Staffs of the Shipping Companies and Merchants whose assistance and courtesy are gratefully acknowledged. I have the honour to be, Gentlemen, Your obedient Servant, CHABLES E. WHITE. 11 I.—AMOUNT OF SHIPPING ENTERING THE PORT DURING THE YEAR 1937. Table A. Number. Tonnage. Number Inspected. Number reported to be Defective. Number of Vessels on which Defects were Remedied. Number of Vessels reported as having or having had, during the voyage Infectious Disease on Board. By the Medical Officer of Health. By the Sanitary Inspector. Foreign Steamers 9,757 16,635,751 2,006 10,569 1,992 1,690 190 * Motor 4,981 5,888,594 378 — Sailing 94 48,678 — 11 1 — — Fishing — — — — — — — Total Foreign 14,832 22,573,023 2,384 10,580 1,993 1,690 190 Coastwise Steamers 10,976 7,874,304 4 2,491 718 510 4 *Motor 3,169 677,268 — — Sailing 1,636 124,868 — 649 122 85 - Fishing — — — — — — — Total Coastwise 15,781 8,676,440 4 3,140 840 595 4 Total Foreign and Coastwise 30,613 31,249,463 2,388 13,720 2,833 2,285 194 Inland Navigation — — — 1,758 270 157 4 * Includes mechanically propelled vessels other than Steamers. See also Appendix I. Note.—British Fishing Vessels are excluded from the Returns of the Navigation of the United Kingdom. Foreign Fishing Vessels are included, but not separately distinguished. II.—CHARACTER OF TRADE OF PORT. Table B. (a) Passenger Traffic during 1937:— To and prom NON-EUROPEAN Countries. Number of Passengers. 1st Class. 2nd Class. 3rd Class. Tourist. Inward 18,146 7,178 5,811 16,914 Outward 17,739 7,056 1,569 18,592 To and from CONTINENT OF EUROPE. Inward 66,163 (all classes). Outward 59,717 (all classes). Countries from which passengers principally arrive: North America, Australia, Europe, British South Africa, New Zealand, India and the Far East. (b) Cargo Traffic:— Principal Imports—Merchandise of all kinds, principally Provisions, Fruit, Grain and Flour, Hides and Skins, Meat, Oil and Fats, Rubber, Textile Materials Tobacco, Wood and Wool. Principal Exports—Manufactured Goods of all kinds. Countries with which the Port principally trades—The Port of London trades with all parts of the world. III.—SOURCE OF WATER SUPPLY. (a) For the Port:— In all the docks, except Tilbury, water is supplied by the Metropolitan Water Board. Tilbury Docks take water from the South Essex Water Company. The majority of the wharves are supplied by the Public Water Companies within whose areas of distribution they are situated, but several have their own deep wells and some have no water available for ships, in which case any water required may be obtained from water boats. (b) For Shipping:— Ships usually obtain water from the shore supplies as indicated above, but when no water is available at the berth or if a ship is lying at moorings in the river, supplies are obtained from water boats. 12 (c) Number of water boats and their sanitary condition:— There are twelve water boats working in the Port. All are of steel construction and of the "single skin" type, i.e., the skin of the boat forms the sides and bottom of the tanks and the deck forms the top. The manholes are raised from 6 inches to 1 foot above the level of the deck and the steel covers are fitted with locks and should be secured whenever the boat is unattended, to prevent unauthorised persons dipping water from the tanks in buckets which may be dirty. Each boat should be provided with a small domestic tank for use of the crew, as otherwise they will obtain water from the main tank usually by lowering a bucket into it. Manhole covers should have proper filling caps, so that there is no need to open the tanks during loading. It is particularly undesirable that the manhole covers of tanks should be opened when a water boat is lying alongside a ship, as there is risk of foul water from the ship's scuppers being accidentally discharged into the tanks. For the same reason all hoses not actually in use should be kept under cover. It is the usual practice to clean tanks every three months and to cement-wash them every six months, and the boats come under the supervision of your Inspectors at these times. All water boats must be registered annually with the Port of London Authority, and before a certificate is granted they must be inspected as to their fitness for navigation in the river and docks. The Port of London Authority notify the Port Health Authority when water boats are coming up for re-registration, and will not issue a certificate to any water boat until your Medical Officer has certified that it is fit for the carriage of drinking water. This arrangment has now worked quite smoothly for several years, and has enabled your Officers to get repairs and improvements carried out without difficulty. IV.—PORT SANITARY REGULATIONS, 1933. Arrangements for Dealing with Declarations of Health. Ships bound for London coming up the English Channel take on a pilot off Dungeness, those coming across the North Sea take on a pilot at the Sunk Lightship, near Harwich. The Elder Brethren of Trinity House kindly agreed that pilots should deliver copies of the Declaration of Health to the Masters of the ships they boarded, but stipulated that pilots should not be held responsible for any failure on the part of the Masters to comply with the instructions of the Port Health Authority. Accordingly supplies of the form of Declaration of Health are sent from time to time as necessary to Trinity House, whence they are sent to the Pilot Stations for distribution. Although the pilots accept no responsibility they have co-operated willingly and conscientiously, and consequently the arrangements are working satisfactorily. The Customs Officers at Gravesend and Sheerness are kept supplied with Declarations of Health, as also are the Boarding Medical Officers and the Sanitary Inspectors. When the Regulations first came into force copies of the Declaration of Health were sent to the Shipping Companies having vessels trading regularly into London, for distribution to their ships, but since the pilots have played their part so well there have been no calls for renewal of these supplies. The instructions to Masters are printed on page 4 of the Declaration of Health, and are as follows:— INSTRUCTIONS. The Master of a foreign-going ship approaching a Port in England or Wales from a Foreign Port must ascertain the state of health of all "persons on board and fill in and sign a Declaration of Health in the prescribed form. If the answer to any of the questions on page 1 is "YES," or if the ship has sailed from, or during the voyage called at, any of the following Ports:— Ports in ASIA, including JAPAN, the EAST INDIES and CEYLON, AFRICA, including MADAGASCAR, the CANARY ISLANDS and CAPE VERDE ISLANDS, TURKEY, GREECE, BLACK SEA, AZORES, SOUTH AMERICA, CENTRAL AMERICA, GULF OF MEXICO, WEST INDIES free pratique will not be granted by His Majesty's Customs until the vessel has been visited by the Port Medical Officer. 13 The Master must therefore:- (1) Send a wireless message to "PORTELTH," LONDON, stating the name of his vessel and the time* she is expected to arrive off Gravesend. This message must be sent off not more than 12 hours and not less than 4 hours before the arrival of the ship. (If wireless is not carried the Port Health Authority must be notified of the arrival of the ship as soon as possible.) (2) By day, when within the Port of London, hoist the flag signal L I M, meaning "Port Medical Officer required"; By night, when approaching Gravesend, flash letter "Q" repeatedly from the morse lamp. (3) Be prepared to muster the crew for inspection by the Port Medical Officer. (4) In the case of vessels bound for the Medway, the wireless message must be sent to "PORTELTH," LONDON, but must be as follows "(Name of vessel) (Time of arrival) Sheerness." (If the answers to all the questions on page 1 are "NO" and the vessel has not called at any of the ports mentioned above the Master need not communicate with the Port Health Authority unless directed to do so by a Customs Officer.) The maximum penalty for breach of the Port Sanitary Regulations, 1933, is £100. CHAS. F. WHITE, Medical Officer of Health, Port of London. *Name of ship as one word. Time on 24-hour clock. Every vessel from "foreign" is hailed by His Majesty's Customs off Gravesend. When a ship is boarded by one of your Medical Officers he collects the Declaration of Health. The Customs Officers take the forms from the ships which are not medically inspected and the Boarding Medical Officer collects them each evening when he makes up his list of arrivals from the Preventive Officer's log. The day's batch of forms are then posted to the Port Health Office together with the Medical Officer's other records and reports. At Sheerness the Declarations of Health are collected by the Medical Officer or the Customs and forwarded by the former with his weekly report. Boarding of Vessels on Arrival. The Port Health Authority maintain at Gravesend a hulk, the "Hygeia," on which the Boarding Medical Officers live during their tours of duty. In November, 1935, the old "Hygeia," which was the hull of a two-masted schooner built in New Brunswick in 1873, was replaced by the new "Hygeia," a double-bowed lighter built of steel in 1918 for the Admiralty, on which a steel deckhouse has been constructed providing a sitting-room, three cabins, an office, a galley and a shipkeeper's cabin. The interior of the hull has been fitted up as a storeroom and engineers' workshop. The vessel is permanently moored fore and aft, is connected to the shore by telephone, and is lighted by electricity from the Gravesend Corporation electricity supply. The boarding launch "Howard Deighton," which has an ambulance room on deck, lies alongside the "Hygeia." There are three Boarding Medical Officers and three crews for the launch, each having 24 hours afloat and 48 hours ashore. Ships are boarded at any time of the day or night as soon as they arrive off Gravesend. The Customs also maintain a launch constantly on duty in this reach of the river, and it is here also that the sea pilot hands over to the river pilot. Thus all three services are in close touch with one another. The only criticism is that all these activities take place at the extreme eastern limit of the Boarding Station, which may lead to some congestion when there is a rush of shipping after fog. Consideration has been given to a scheme whereby the Boarding Medical Officer would live in the Hospital during his tour of duty. This would be an advantage in that there would always be a Medical Officer at the Hospital; the cost of maintenance of the "Hygeia" would be saved; visual signals from approaching ships would be more quickly and easily observed and there would be less congestion at busy times. On the other hand, it Avould be very expensive to construct at the Hospital a jetty at which the boarding launch could lie at any state of the tide and in any weather, for it would be necessary to run out some 420 feet from the shore, and the situation would be much 14 more exposed than that of the "Hygeia," close contact with the Customs would be more difficult to maintain and the Port Health Authority's Staff would be about a mile from Gravesend and so out of touch with valuable sources of information in regard to the movements of ships. When the boarding launch is undergoing overhaul the Medical Officers board from the Customs launch, but the new launch "Alfred Robertson," which will normally be used by the Sanitary Inspector for the inspection of vessels in the middle river district, will be suitable for use as a boarding launch, when necessary, and when she comes into commission there should no longer be any necessity to depend upon H.M. Customs for assistance in this respect, except occasionally when a ship requiring medical inspection arrives unexpectedly and the boarding launch is away from her station conveying the Sanitary Inspector to vessels lying in the lower river district. Vessels proceeding up the River Medway are dealt with by a part-time Medical Officer from Sheerness whose duty it is to visit, as soon as possible, every vessel in which sickness is reported by H.M. Customs, and to board, within twelve hours of arrival, every other vessel from "foreign" remaining in the jurisdiction of the Port of London Health Authority. The list of scheduled ports on page 4 of the Declaration of Health covers, broadly speaking, the whole of Asia, Africa, South and Central America and the Eastern Mediterranean. To attempt to supply to Pilots and Customs Officers a weekly list of infected ports based on the Record of Infectious Diseases in Ports, &c., at Home and Abroad, issued weekly by the Ministry of Health, would lead to chaos and to much more delay and inconvenience to shipping than the system of inspecting, as a routine, ships from any part of the world in which dangerous infectious diseases are endemic or. from time to time, epidemic. I still hope that some day the routine boarding of ships from infected ports will be discontinued, and that we shall be able to substitute the boarding, not only of ships on which infectious or doubtful sickness or deaths have occurred during the voyage, but also of all those which have on board at the time of arrival any cases of sickness of any sort whatever, however trivial such cases may appear to be. It might be possible to extend some concessions to ships carrying surgeons who fully comprehend the requirements of Port Health Authorities and who could be relied upon to notify any case of sickness which might conceivably be of an infectious nature. But I am of the opinion that the Master of a ship should not be required to carry the responsibility of diagnosis in any case of illness once his ship is within a Port Health district. When the Port Medical Officer sees a case of sickness his first thought is "May this be a case of infectious disease?" and only when he is confident that it is non-infectious is he prepared to allow the patient to proceed. Neither the Master nor the Surgeon approach the question of diagnosis from this angle, and therefore they will, from time to time, miss infectious cases which the Port Medical Officer would at least remove to hospital for observation. Many cases of Typhoid Fever, some of Small-pox and a few of Plague have been landed in this country as Influenza, a diagnosis which should always be regarded with suspicion by every Port Medical Officer. Notifications to the Authority of inward Vessels requiring special attention. By arrangement with the General Post Office, wireless messages sent in accordance with the instructions on the Declaration of Health are received by the North Foreland Radio Station and telephoned direct to the Medical Officer on duty on the "Hygeia.'' Ships have not, up to the present time, been required to send the standard Quarantine Message prescribed in the Second Schedule to the Regulations. There is always a Medical Officer on duty, a launch available and a hospital ready for the reception of cases, so that all that is absolutely necessary in the Port of London is advance notification of the name of the ship and the time she is expected to arrive on the boarding station. A number of ships voluntarily send the full Quarantine Message in code, which is deciphered by the Medical Officer from Volume II. (Radio) of the 15 International Code of Signals and the Liste Alphabetique des Indicatifs D'Appel des Stations Fixes, Terrestres et Mobiles. The practice of sending messages through Agents has been discouraged, because they were frequently not forwarded promptly during the night or at week-ends. Practically all messages are now received direct from ships, but when some serious infectious sickness has occurred on board, Shipping Companies and Agents usually communicate the news as soon as they receive it, and ask if there are any special instructions which they can Avireless to the ship concerned. Ships requiring medical inspection are required to fly the L I M signal during the day and to flash "Q" on their Morse lamp by night when approaching Gravesend. No use has been made of land signal stations. It would be convenient to receive messages from Lloyd's Signal Station at Southend, as they would enable the Medical Officer to time the arrival of ships more accurately than do the wireless messages. Such an arrangement would, however, involve expenditure which I have not felt justified in asking the Port Health Authority to incur. Information that ships are expected on certain tides is obtained from Shipping Companies and their Agents, the Harbour Master, Lloyd's Agent, Customs Officers, Pilots and the Masters of Tugs. All this news is welcome and useful, but cannot be regarded as an efficient substitute for the Avireless messages from the actual ships which require our attention. Mooring Stations Designated under Article 10. After negotiations with H.M. Customs and the Port of London Authority, inner and outer mooring stations have been designated as shown in the following Table, which has been prepared by the Inspector-General of the Waterguard for the information of his officers, and which I have his permission to reproduce. 17 16 VESSELS BOUND TO POETS OF LONDON AND ROCHESTER. Mooring Stations appointed by Port Medical Officer under Article 10 (1) and (2) of the Port Sanitary Regulations, 1933. (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) Destination of Ship. Types of Ship. Under Article 10(1). Under Article 10 (2). Special Arrangements. London and St. Katharine Docks ALL Non-available. Vessel to be moored to nearest available River Moorings by arrangement with the Harbour Authorities. Gravesend Reach. East India Docks Regent's Canal Dock Surrey Commercial Docks All Quebec Dock Buoys West India and Millwall Docks All Mark Lane Buoys, Millwall Docks Royal Victoria Dock ALL (a) Between "A" Jetty and No. 9 Granary, Royal Victoria Dock Royal Albert Dock King George V. Dock (b) "C" Jetty Buoys, Royal Victoria Dock Tilbury Dock All The most suitable quay berth available River Buoys, e.g., All The buoy at which the vessel is moored Charlton Buoys Erith Buoys, &c. River Wharves and Creeks All The nearest available River Moorings by arrangement with the Harbour Authorities. Dry Docks All The Dry Dock in which the vessel is lying Thameshaven and the oil wharves at Holehaven end of Canvey Island. Oil Tankers Place of mooring, discharge or loading Place of mooring, discharge or loading. Standing exemption from detention for tankers from "Listed Ports," but otherwise clean, i.e., where all the questions 1-6 are answered in the negative. In these cases full pratique may be given. Vessels other than Oil Tankers The North side of the river opposite the Jetties. The North side of the river opposite Jetties. When only questions 4 and/or 6 are answered in the affirmative and the vessel is not from a "Listed Port," modified pratique may be given, the M.O.H., Gravesend, to bo informed immediately. Chapman Anchorage All Place of mooring, discharge or loading Place of mooring, discharge or loading. Standing exemption from detention for vessels from "Listed Ports," but otherwise clean, and vessels unhealthy other than by reason of the five major diseases. Modified pratique to be given and Medical Officer, Gravesend, informed by telephone. Southend and Leigh (a) "Infected" or "Suspected" vessels (other than as at (b)), and vessels unhealthy by reason of the five major diseases. Nil Gravesend Reach. (b) Vessels from "Listed Ports," but otherwise clean, and vessels unhealthy other than by reason of the five major diseases. Place of mooring, discharge or loading Do. Standing exemption from detention for vessels specified in Column 2 (b). Modified pratique to be given, and Medical Officer, Gravesend, informed by telephone. Sheerness, Ridham Dock, Chatham, Rochester, Strood, &c. Oil Tankers Place of mooring, discharge or loading Place of mooring, discharge or loading. Standing exemption from detention in the case of tankers from "Listed Ports," but otherwise clean, i.e., where all questions 1-6 are answered in the negative. In these cases full pratique may be given. This exemption does not, however, apply to vessels other than tankers. Vessels other than Oil Tankers:— (a) If unhealthy only because of affirmative replies to questions 4 and/or 6. Place of mooring, discharge or loading Garrison Point These vessels may proceed to the place of mooring, discharge or loading, modified pratique being given and the Medical Officer at Sheerness or Rochester, as appropriate, being informed immediately. (b) For all other unhealthy vessels including "vessels from 'Listed Ports' whether otherwise clean or not." None Do. 18 Particulars of any standing Exemptions from the provisions of Article 14 All ships which are required to be visited on arrival by the Port Medical Officer are dealt with in the Boarding Station at Gravesend. Any found to be "infected" or "suspected" can be sent to the mooring station by the Boarding Medical Officer himself. If there are on board cases of the minor infectious diseases, it would be no advantage to anyone to let ships proceed to their berths before being medically inspected because they can be cleared promptly at Gravesend, whereas it might take several hours to get a Medical Officer to them in the docks, at wharves or at moorings in the River. No standing exemptions have therefore been made in regard to ships proceeding above Gravesend. But in the case of ships bound for Thameshaven and the oil wharves at the Holehaven end of Canvey Island, the Chapman Anchorage, Southend, Leigh, Sheerness, Ridham Dock, Rochester and Strood, special arrangements have been made and are set out in Column 5 of the above-mentioned Table. Experience of working Article 16. (1) As ships are cleared in the River immediately on arrival, no difficulty has been experienced in preventing the embarkation or disembarkation of unauthorised persons. (2) When a ship arrives which has on board a case of one of the major infectious diseases or on which such a case has died or has been landed abroad within the incubation period of the particular disease, it is the practice to regard every person on board as a contact and accordingly to arrange for his observation or surveillance. Observation is only applied to members of the crew who are standing by the ship in port. Those who are intending to leave the ship must give their names and addresses before leaving. Experience has shown that it is useless to take the address from the passenger manifest and the crew's articles. Passengers frequently give a business address or a destination to which they will not be proceeding for several days. A member of the crew will frequently give the address of his next of kin or of some person who is to be informed if he becomes a casualty. Everyone on board must, therefore, be seen individually and asked the address to which he is proceeding immediately on disembarkation. This interrogation is conveniently made at the time of medical inspection, and when there are a large number of passengers one or two clerks accompany the Medical Officers to the ship and assist in this work. The introduction of a double post card, one half of which is for the notification of the immediate address and the other half for the notification of any change of address, has proved very successful in expediting the clearing of ships and the transmission of the necessary information to the Medical Officers of Health of the districts of destination and in making passengers realise their obligations under the Regulations. The two halves of the post card are as under:— PORT SANITARY REGULATIONS, 1933. Penalty for Breach of Regulations, £100. In accordance with the above Regulations you are permitted to disembark on the following conditions:— 1. That you give to the Medical Officer of Health of the Port of London the precise address to which you are proceeding immediately on landing. 2. That if you change your address at any time within 14 days of disembarkation you shall notify forthwith your new address to the Medical Officer of Health of the Port of London on the attached card. I and members of my family are proceeding to the following address Name and forthwith : Full Address House in No. or Name of House Block Letters. Street Postal District County Signature 19 PORT OF LONDON HEALTH AUTHORITY, PORT SANITARY REGULATIONS, 1933. Penalty for Breach of Regulations, £100. NOTIFICATION OF CHANGE OF ADDRESS WITHIN 14 DAYS OF DISEMBARKATION. Having disembarked from the s.s on (date) my address from (date) to (date) will be as under. Name Name and No. or Name of House Full Address Street Postal District in Block Letters County Signature This Card may be sent through the post unstameped, but if It Is enclosed In an Envelope Postage must be Prepaid. Each half is addressed to the Medical Officer of Health of the Port of London. The section on which the immediate address is written is collected by the Medical Officer when he inspects the passenger. The section for notification of change of address is on the "Business Reply Card" system so that the passenger need not stamp it. The importance of forwarding to Medical Officers of Health without delay the names and addresses of contacts proceeding to other districts is fully appreciated, and the clerical Staff work continuously until this task has been completed. Probably few Medical Officers of Health realise the labour involved when there are seven or eight hundred passengers and crew proceeding to destinations scattered all over the British Isles. There is no difficulty in the case of contacts going to the towns, but in the case of those going to rural areas it is necessary to find out first the sanitary district in which the place is situated and then to ascertain the address of the Medical Officer of Health. I have been asked to indicate on the notifications the vaccinal state of the contacts, but in the first place this would frequently delay the posting of the notifications and in the second place the information would not relieve the Medical Officer of Health of the responsibility of exercising surveillance, and so would not save him any trouble. What, if any, arrangements have been made for:— (a) Premises and waiting rooms for medical examination. Medical examinations are usually carried out on board ship, but there are rooms for the medical inspection of aliens on Tilbury Landing Stage and West Street Pier, Gravesend. (b) Cleansing and disinfection of ships, persons and clothing and other articles. When cases of infectious disease are removed from ships on arrival during the day time the Sanitary Inspector on the lower district puts the infected quarters under fumigation with Sulphur Dioxide or Formalin, if he has time. If a case is removed at night when the Sanitary Inspector is not on duty or if the ship is proceeding to dock immediately, the infected quarters are sealed and disinfected after the ship has berthed. Disinfections of large spaces are usually carried out by private firms under the supervision of a Sanitary Inspector. A supply of sulphur candles, formalin lamps, disinfectant solutions and a spray are available for every Sanitary Inspector. At the Port Isolation Hospital there is a disinfecting station with spray and slipper baths and a Washington Lyons Steam Disinfector. Close contacts with infectious disease, clothing, bedding, &c., are taken by the boarding launch to this station, disinfected and then returned to the ship. 20 (c) Premises for the temporary accommodation of persons for whom such tion is required for the purposes of the Regulations. Passengers or crew to be kept under observation are sent to the Port Isolation Hospital. So far it has not been necessary to make special provision on a large scale, and if the necessity did arise the ship would be detained until temporary accommodation ashore had been found. (d) Hospital accommodation available for Plague, Cholera, Yellow Fever, Small-pox and other infectious diseases. The Port Health Authority maintain a hospital for infectious diseases on the South bank of the River about a mile below Gravesend. Patients can be landed from the boarding launch at a jetty and be wheeled straight into the hospital. This jetty was built in 1931 to replace the old concrete causeway, and in 1934 was further improved, but it is still not possible to bring the boarding launch alongside the jetty at dead low water. To do so would necessitate carrying the jetty out to about double its present length, an expenditure which would not be justified because on the rare occasions when it so happens that a patient must be removed from a ship at dead low water, he can be accommodated quite comfortably in the ambulance room on the boarding launch until it is possible to land him at the Hospital. The Hospital buildings comprise an Administrative Block, rebuilt in 1935; three Ward Blocks, one containing eight cubicles, built in 1934; one built in 1902 containing two wards, one of eight beds and the other of four, and a special block built in 1927 of two four-bedded wards for the isolation of cases of small-pox. There is also a disinfecting and bathing station and mortuary built in 1930, a small mechanical laundry built in 1935, and a caretaker's cottage with storerooms beneath built in 1930. The Hospital is now lighted with electric light and supplied with water from the Gravesend Corporation supplies. Sewage from the administrative block, cubicle ward block, laundry and bathing station is treated in a small purification plant erected in 1935. The waste water from the other two ward blocks also comes through this plant but they are still provided with pail closets, and excreta from these two ward blocks is disposed of by burning in an incinerator. No charge is made for the maintenance and treatment in this hospital of either passengers or members of the crews from merchant ships of any nationality. A small charge is made for patients from Training Ships and the Sea School. The hospital site is below Thames high water mark, and was formerly waterlogged during the winter. Through the generosity of the City Corporation some £2,000 of City's Cash has been spent in raising the level of the ground by the tipping of loam to an average depth of 3 feet. The City Corporation have also, at the expense of City's Cash, built a facade wall along the river frontage. (e) Ambulance Transport. The boarding launch "Howard Deighton" has an ambulance room on deck with accommodation for four stretcher cases or eight walking cases. This room can be warmed by an electric radiator and patients can be transferred from ships to hospital in comfort and safety. The launch "Frederick Whittingham," built in 1934 for the inspection of ships in the upper river district, has a small cabin aft in which cases of sickness can be removed ashore, if necessary. The launch "James Howell," built in 1923 of wood and having a petrol engine, and which is used for the inspection of shipping in the middle river district, is being replaced by a new steel-built launch with a Diesel engine. It is proposed that when the "Howard Deighton" is for any reason out of commission, this new launch, the "Alfred Robertson," shall take over her duties and she has a large cabin aft in which cases of infectious sickness can be removed to hospital. 21 If cases of infectious sickness arise in vessels lying in the docks or moored in the River, and it is deemed inadvisable to transport them to the Port Isolation Hospital by River, arrangements are made with the London County Council for their removal by road in one of the Council's Ambulances. (f) Supervision of contacts. Contacts remaining on board are kept under daily supervision by the Deputy Medical Officer of Health, unless the Shipping Company have a Medical Officer ashore who is able and willing to undertake the daily inspection and to notify immediately any cases of illness. Arrangements for the Bacteriological or Pathological Examination of Eats for Plague. The bacteriological examination of rats for Plague is carried out in the laboratories of the Seamen's Hospital, Greenwich, where there is a Staff of skilled Bacteriologists under the direction of Dr. Arthur Davies. Assistant Rat Officers collect rats from ships and shore premises in their district each day. They tie to one leg of each rat a small label, on which is a letter combination indicating the Dock where the rat was obtained (thus R.A.D. indicates Royal Albert Dock, S.C.D. Surrey Commercial Dock, &c.) and a number. In their daily report sheets the Assistant Rat Officers enter each letter-number combination, with notes opposite showing exactly where and how each rat was obtained. They then place the rats in a linen bag, which they put in a tin box. At the end of the day they deliver the tin boxes at the laboratory of the Seamen's Hospital, Greenwich, and receive in exchange empty bags and boxes for the next day's rats. Rats are delivered about 5 p.m., and examined next morning. If any rats were found Plague-infected, the letters and number on the label attached would be telephoned to your Medical Officer, who, on reference to the Assistant Rat Officer's reports, could at once ascertain exactly where such rats were obtained and institute Plague preventive measures there. If rats are found dead under circumstances suggesting that they have died of Plague, they are taken at once to the laboratory, and an immediate examination and report is requested. The rats from Tilbury Dock are sent by train from Gravesend to Greenwich, where they are collected each morning by one of the Staff and taken to the laboratory. It is not found possible to dip the rats on the Docks in a flea-killing solution, but it has been arranged that the bags containing the rats should be dipped in kerosine at the laboratory. The bags returned empty to the Assistant Eat Officers are therefore saturated in kerosine, which is sufficient to destroy the fleas on the subsequent batches of rats placed in the bags. Arrangements made for other Bacteriological and Pathological Examinations. All bacteriological and pathological examinations are carried out at the laboratories of the Seamen's Hospital, Greenwich. Arrangements for the Diagnosis and Treatment of Venereal Diseases among Sailors, under International Arrangements. The Venereal Diseases are not compulsorily notifiable, but efforts are made to bring to the notice of all seamen in the Port the facilities for free treatment under the Brussels Agreement. When the Medical Officers board ships on arrival they always enquire whether there are any cases of Venereal Disease on board, and if any are reported they endeavour to see the infected men to point out to them the importance of obtaining skilled treatment as soon as possible and to acquaint them with the situation of the clinic nearest the ship's berth and the times at which cases may attend. 22 The Port Health Authority have printed the following notice in English, French, German, Dutch, Danish, Norwegian, Swedish, Finnish, Italian, Spanish, Portuguese, Greek, Latvian, Estonian, Russian, Japanese, Chinese, Hindustani, Bengali, Marathi and Gujarati. The translations were kindly undertaken by the Consuls of the various countries, and the Peninsular and Oriental Steam Navigation Company generously printed, in Bombay, the notices for Indian seamen. VENEREAL DISEASES. Syphilis (Pox) and Gonorrhœa (Clap) can be cured by skilful treatment in the early stages. If treatment is neglected or unskilful these diseases become difficult to cure and there is grave risk of years of ill-health and premature death to the sufferer and of the spread of infection to others. Skilled treatment free of charge and under conditions of secrecy can be obtained at the following clinics at the times stated:— London. Seamen's Hospital, King William Syphilis—Monday and Wednesday, Street, Greenwich, S.E. 10. 7 p.m. Gonorrhoea—Tuesday, 6 p.m.; Friday, 7 p.m. (Merchant Seamen may attend at any other time.) Miller General Hospital, Greenwich Daily, 8 a.m. to 8 p.m. Road, Greenwich, S.E. 10. Seamen's Hospital, Royal Albert Monday, Tuesday, Thursday, Friday, Dock, E. 16. 9 a.m. to 6 p.m.; Wednesday 9 a.m. to 2 p.m.; Saturday, 9 a.m. to 12.30 p.m. (Merchant Seamen may attend at any other time.) London Hospital (Whitechapel Daily, 8 a.m. to 9 p.m.; Sunday, Clinic), Turner Street, Mile End, 10 a.m. to 1 p.m. and 4 p.m. to 7 p.m. E. 1. Guy's Hospital, St. Thomas Street, Daily, 9 a.m. to 8 p.m. Borough, S.E. 1. St. Thomas's Hospital, Westminster Daily, 8 a.m. to 10 p.m.; Sunday, Bridge, S.E. 1. 10 a.m. to 12 noon. St. Paul's Hospital, Endell Street, Daily, 8 a.m. to 10 p.m.; Sunday, Covent Garden, W.C. 2. 10 a.m. to noon and 6 p.m. to 8 p.m. St. Bartholomew's Hospital, 20, Monday, 5 p.m. to 7 p.m.; Thursday, Golden Lane, E.C. 1. 12 noon to 2 p.m. Gravesend. 22, Cobham Street, Gravesend. Tuesday, 11 a.m. to 12.45 p.m.; Thursday, 4.45 p.m. to 6.30 p.m. The Sanitary Inspectors carry with them copies of this notice and leave one, in the appropriate language, on every ship they visit. By courtesy of the Port of London Authority this notice is also posted in all the latrines on the dock estate. It is the duty of the Sanitary Inspectors to see that the notices are in the languages of the seamen on board ships in the vicinity, and also that they are renewed when necessary. Though they are not protected in any Avay, the notices have suffered much less defacement than was anticipated. Port Welfare. The Port of London Health Authority are represented on the Port Welfare Committee which was constituted in 1935 to promote the welfare of seamen ashore in the Port of London. This organisation is still in its infancy but it has already carried out a preliminary survey of the needs of seamen in the Port of London, has published and issued free a Seafarers' Guide to London, and has, with the co-operation of the British Sailors' Society, established in the vicinity of the docks, information bureaux for the benefit of visiting seamen. Through these bureaux 23 arrangements have been made for numerous parties of seamen to visit places of interest and also sporting events. It is hoped to be able to carry out an inspection of seamen's lodgings, cafes, &c., and to award a special badge to be displayed by those which can be recommended. A great deal of very valuable work on behalf of seamen is carried out by the Missions to Seamen and other voluntary organisations, but there remains a wide field of welfare work Avhich is outside their scope and indeed beyond their powers. It is in this field that Port Welfare Committees hope to be able to extend their work, but so far their activities have been restricted by lack of funds. The City Corporation made a generous grant of £500 from City's Cash in 1936, and the following year the Port Health Authority made a contribution of 100 guineas. Arrangements for the Interment of the Dead. When cases of infectious sickness die in the Port Isolation Hospital, arrangements for interment are made with an undertaker in Gravesend. Table C. Cases of Infectious Sickness landed from Vessels. Disease. Number of Cases during the Year. Number of Vessels concerned. Average Number of Cases for previous 5 years. Passengers. Crew. Typhus Fever — — 0.2 Small-pox — — — 0.4 Scarlet Fever 2 1 3 3.0 Diphtheria 1 1 2 5.8 Enteric Fever 2 8 10 13.0 Measles 10 33 7 7.2 German Measles — — — 0.8 Erysipelas 1 — 1 0.6 Pulmonary Tuberculosis 51 29 58 94.4 Tuberculosis (other kinds) — 2 2 2.0 Pneumonia 1 3 4 8.6 Influenza — 7 2 5.0 Cerebro-spinal Meningitis — 1 1 0.8 Dysentery 3 7 9 7.8 Encephalitis Lethargica — — — — Malaria 2 9 9 12.8 Chicken-pox 6 12 8 13.2 Mumps 1 1 2 5.0 Note.—The following cases of infectious disease occurred on Training Ships moored in the Thames:— Measles 30. In addition 1 case of Scarlet Fever and 1 case of Diptheria occurred on Houseboats; and 1 case of Diptheria occurred at the Police House, Millwall Dock. Table D. Cases of Infectious Sickness occurring on Vessels during the Voyage, but disposed of prior to arrival. Disease. Number of Cases during the Year. Number of Vessels concerned. Average Number of Cases for previous 5 years. Passengers. Crew. Cholera — — — 0.8 Plague — — — — Typhus Fever — 1 1 — Small-pox — — — 7.8 Scarlet Fever 2 — 1 3.2 Diphtheria — 1 1 3.8 Enteric Fever 5 13 13 11.2 Measles 12 2 10 21.4 German Measles 4 2 5 5.8 Erysipelas 1 — 1 1.0 Pulmonary Tuberculosis 7 7 12 35.8 Tuberculosis (other kinds) — — — 0.8 Pneumonia 4 4 8 12.8 Influenza 4 21 4 89.0 Cerebro-spinal Meningitis — 1 1 0.8 Dysentery 7 6 8 7.6 Malaria 6 40 20 31.2 Chicken-pox 3 8 10 19.2 Mumps 6 5 5 9.8 24 SUSPECTED RODENT PLAGUE—ss. "SOMALI"—KING GEORGE V. DOCK. The ss. "Somali" arrived at Gravesend on Thursday, 1st July, from Yokohama, Kobe, Shanghai, Hong Kong, Singapore, Port Swettenham, Penang, Colombo, Bombay, Aden, Port Said, Marseilles, Le Havre, with a general cargo including tea, rubber, beans, peas, coffee, timber, frozen eggs in tins, chilled eggs in crates, dried hides, bales of rags and felt cuttings, canned goods, bristles, chutney in casks, lentils, cotton yarn, silk in bales, copra in bags, oil cake in bags, groundnut kernels and pepper. She was boarded by the Boarding Medical Officer at Gravesend, the Declaration of Health was " all clear " and no sickness was discovered on medical inspection. The ship proceeded to No. 2 Shed, King George V. Dock, and was visited next morning by a Sanitary Inspector and Rat Officer. The Sanitary Inspector ascertained that the ship was in possession of a Deratisation Certificate issued in Kobe on 28th April, the fumigant being a CO-CO2 mixture, and 13 dead rats recovered. The Rat Officer did not detect anything suspicious of rodent plague on his first examination. The vessel continued to discharge cargo over the week-end but was not visited again until Monday morning, 5th July. The Sanitary Inspector was then informed that a number of dead rats had been discovered amongst the cargo and that the stevedores had complained of the smell of decomposing rats. On further enquiry from the ship's officers he was told that 261 rats had been caught and destroyed on board during the voyage. The Inspector promptly obtained two dead rats and sent these, together with one freshly killed by the Rat Officer, to the Bacteriological Laboratory at the Seamen's Hospital, Greenwich. Meanwhile the Peninsular and Oriental Steam Navigation Company were informed that, despite the valid certificate of deratisation issued at Kobe, the vessel would, under the circumstances, have to be fumigated on completion of discharge. At about 1.15 p.m., the Bacteriologist at the Seamen's Hospital, telephoned to say that, of the three rats submitted, one showed no signs of B.pestis infection but the other two showed enlarged lymphatic glands containing thick yellow pus. The spleens of these two rats were enlarged and soft and the post mortem appearances were strongly suggestive of B.pestis infection. On examination of films from glands and spleens he found non-motile, Gram-negative, short bacilli with bi-polar staining morphologically identical with B.pestis. On receipt of this message all work on the ship was stopped and the Shipping Company were informed that she must be fumigated immediately. The vessel was already boomed off about six feet from the pontoon and rat-guards were on all the mooring ropes, but a special door was erected at the ship end of the permanent gangway leading from the pontoon to the quay. By this time practically all the London cargo was discharged, but there remained on board some 2,500 tons of cargo for Hamburg including about 20,000 cases of chilled eggs. The Shipping Company were further informed that after the preliminary fumigation all the cargo would have to be discharged, all rat-harbourage opened up and then the vessel be fumigated again empty. After this the Hamburg cargo might be reloaded. Some discussion arose in regard to the 20,000 cases of chilled eggs and it was agreed that the refrigerated space in which these eggs were contained should be omitted from the first fumigation. It was further arranged that the fumigation should be begun in the engine room so that the engineers might get back to maintain the refrigeration of the eggs. It was, however, made clear that, thereafter, the eggs would have to be discharged and the refrigerated spaces treated with the rest of the ship at the final fumigation. 25 The fumigation was carried out with hydrogen cyanide (spray method) by Messrs. Fumigation Services, Ltd., and the vessel was finally put under gas about 10 p.m. The period of exposure given was four hours. The ship took all the next day to clear and it was not until about 10 a.m., on Wednesday the 7th instant that discharge of cargo commenced, the stevedores all wearing overalls and gloves. Large numbers of dead rats were found and a few live ones were seen. In all about 432 dead rats were taken from the ship after the first fumigation and sent to the Seamen's Hospital for examination. Five cases of eggs in the refrigerated chamber were found to be rat damaged and there was also rat excreta in the chambers. Several empty nests Avere also found and one live rat seen in this space. When the holds were empty it was discovered that the ceiling was raised on battens about 1½ to 2 inches above the tank tops. It was obvious that this space provided extensive rat-harbourage. Consequently it was decided to lift every third timber in the ceiling and, while this was being done, a number of dead rats were found and live rats were also seen. On completion of the opening up of the harbourage the vessel was again put under fumigation on the evening of Thursday, 8th July, hydrogen cyanide by the spray method again being the fumigant. The dose given was 3 ozs. per 1,000 cubic feet and the exposure four hours. One hundred and three rats were recovered after this second fumigation, all from the holds. Re-loading of the Hamburg cargo was commenced at 3.30 p.m. on the 9th July. A Certificate of Deratisation was issued on the second fumigation. The London cargo had been discharged largely into lighters, and some into the dock side sheds. The lighters, 50 in number, were distributed throughout the Port but were all traced. Forty-three of the lighters were still loaded and were fumigated with hydrogen cyanide with their cargoes in situ. Seven had discharged their cargoes. Of these three showed evidence of rat infestation and were fumigated. The remaining four showed no evidence of rats and were thoroughly cleansed. The Medical Officers of Health of the districts in which these seven lighters had discharged their cargoes were notified by telephone of the circumstances. The total number of dead rats recovered from the lighters after fumigation was three. These were sent to Seamen's Hospital for examination. The sheds on the South side of the King George V. Dock were searched on Monday, 5th July, and daily subsequently. All stores were turned over but there was no evidence of rat infestation. The sheds are transit sheds of a good type. About 120 traps were set in No. 2 and the adjacent sheds. Two rats were caught in the middle of No. 2 Shed and it seems probable that they had landed from the ship. One rat was caught in an adjacent shed. These were submitted for bacteriological examination but were negative for plague. The names and addresses of all the stevedores and of the employees of the Shipping Company and of the Port of London Authority working on the ship or on the adjacent quays were obtained and forwarded to the Medical Officers of Health of the men's home districts with a short note of the circumstances. Owing to the degree of decomposition of the two rats which gave a macroscopic and microscopic appearance of plague, it was not found possible to confirm the diagnosis by culture and animal inoculation, and of the other rats, five hundred and ninety-five in all, submitted for examination by the bacteriologist, none were reported to be infected. ENTERIC FEVER. ss. "Strathaird."—The ss. "Strathaird" arrived at Gravesend on the 15th October, 1937, having called at the following ports:— Outwards—Tangier, Gibraltar, Marseilles, Port Said, Port Sudan, Aden, Bombay, Colombo, Fremantle, Adelaide, Melbourne, Sydney and Brisbane. 26 Homewards—Suva, Sydney, Melbourne, Adelaide, Fremantle, Colombo, Bombay, Aden, Port Sudan, Suez, Port Said, Marseilles, Gibraltar, Tangier and Plymouth. The vessel was boarded by Dr. R. H. Barrett, your Temporary Boarding Medical Officer, who was informed by the Ship's Surgeon of the occurrence of six cases of Typhoid Fever during the voyage, as follows:— Class or Rating. Date of onset of illness. Disposal of case. Assistant Purser 11th September Landed at Fremantle. Steward 17th September Landed at Bombay. Steward 26th September Landed at Aden. Pantry Boy 26th September Landed at Aden. 2nd Class Waiter 27th September Still on board. Tourist Passenger 29th September Landed at Port Said. The 2nd Class Waiter, who had been isolated in the ship's hospital since the onset of the disease, was examined by Dr. Barrett and removed to the Authority's Isolation Hospital at Denton. His personal effects and bedding were also taken ashore for steam disinfection and the infected cabins and isolation hospital were fumigated on the vessel's arrival in dock. The date of onset and isolation of the last case was 29th September—16 days before the arrival of the vessel—and it was therefore hoped that no further cases would occur. At the same time, after consideration of all the circumstances, it was deemed wise to circulate the Medical Officers of Health of the districts of destination, the names and addresses of the 329 passengers and 233 European crew, together with a brief history of the occurrence. On Monday, 18th October, Dr. H. Willoughby was instructed to visit the vessel with the object of ascertaining the cause of the outbreak. It appeared that the ship's surgeon had gone carefully into the question of the spread of the infection by a carrier and had narrowed the possibilities down to six members of the catering department. These six men had all been examined at Aden with negative results. Water had been taken in at every port during the voyage with the exception of Adelaide, and on arrival of the vessel at Aden the drinking water was adversely reported upon. On this evidence chlorination of all tanks was carried out and the filtration plant was washed out and steamed twice daily between Aden and Port Said. In the circumstances it was suggested to the Shipping Company that they should chlorinate all water taken on board for drinking or cooking purposes throughout the next voyage and this they undertook to do. On 27th October, a letter was received from the Warden and Secretary of the British Federation of University Women, Ltd., Crosby Hall, Chelsea, to the effect that a lady resident had returned to the Hall on 15th October from the ss. "Strathaird," that she was ill on arrival and was later diagnosed to be suffering from Typhoid Fever. On enquiry it was ascertained that this passenger bad never reported to the Ship's Surgeon. Had she given any indication that she was ill she would have been removed to Denton Hospital for observation. CASES TREATED IN THE PORT ISOLATION HOSPITAL. Dr. Hugh Willoughby, who took over medical charge of the Hospital on the 10th March, owing to the illness of Dr. J. S. Warrack, the Deputy Medical Officer of Health, reports as follows:— During the year 1937, 115 patients were treated in the Port Isolation Hospital. These included a number of cases admitted for observation as a definite diagnosis could not be made on board. In all 27 different diseases were represented. Only one fatality occurred, an Asiatic suffering from Pneumonia who lived only one day after admission. No cases of the so-called "major infectious diseases" occurred during 1937 in the Port of London, and none were admitted to the Hospital. 27 The diseases treated with the number of cases of each were as follows:— Typhoid Fever 7 Pneumonia 1 Pulmonary Tuberculosis 5 Specific Disease 1 Chickenpox 20 Erysipelas 1 Mumps 2 Diphtheria 1 Enteritis 4 Bacillary Dysentery 1 Influenza 1 Septicaemia 1 Tonsillitis 9 Urticaria 1 Furunculosis 1 Scarlet Fever 2 Malaria 6 Amœbic Dysentery 4 Eczema 1 Parotid Abscess 1 Catarrhal Jaundice 1 Glandular Fever 1 Measles 37 Appendicitis 1 German Measles 1 Scabies 3 Bullous Erythema 1 It is remarkable that only one case of Diphtheria came under our care, and also only two cases of Scarlet Fever during 1937. In the former illness this is largely due to the immunisation practised on all new entrants into the T.S. "Cornwall," which in former years was a constant source of such cases. The Measles epidemic in the Cadet Ship "Worcester" moored at Greenhithe provided 30 cases who received treatment at Denton, apart from six further cases which were removed direct from the "Worcester" to their homes. This outbreak was characterised by the extreme severity of the disease. Of the 30 boys admitted to Denton no less than 12 ran temperatures of 105° F., during the first two days of the disease. All the cases recovered fully, but at the expense of the following complications:— Double otitis media 1. Single otitis media 2. Double otitis media and double mastoid 1. Pleurisy 1. This epidemic started by one of the boys bringing the infection back after the Easter vacation and infecting the others, the cases occurring in batches at intervals. Other noteworthy cases during the year were Glandular Fever, a rare disease of an infectious nature characterised by generalised enlargement of the lymph glands of the body and an interesting blood picture microscopically diagnostic, and a case of Malaria exhibiting symptons of Cholera in which the true diagnosis was only arrived at by a chance microscopic examination of the blood on account of apparent concomitant anaemia. V.—MEASURES AGAINST RODENTS. (1) Steps taken for the detection of rodent Plague:— (a) The Port Health Authority employs six Assistant Rat Officers. Each Assistant Rat Officer has his own district, corresponding to the district of a Sanitary Inspector, under whose guidance he works. An Assistant Rat Officer's first duty is the examination of such ships in his district as are due for inspection under Article 28 of the International Sanitary Convention relative to the granting of Deratisation and Deratisation Exemption Certificates. His second duty is to visit ships arriving in his district from Plague-infected ports, to search for dead rats and, if possible, to obtain specimens of live rats trapped on board. He is required to re-visit such vessels daily during the discharge of cargo to ascertain whether dead rats have been found in the holds. The existence of rodent Plague on board any vessel in the Port should thus be detected at the earliest possible moment. (b) The Assistant Rat Officer's third duty is the examination of shore premises for signs of rat infestation or rat Plague, paying particular attention to premises adjoining the berths of vessels from Plague-infected ports. The whole of the Dock area is systematically and regularly inspected, and specimens of the shore rat population in all parts of the Port are regularly examined bacteriologically, so that, in the rare 28 event of Plague infection being communicated to the rats on shore, it should be quickly detected and stamped out before it has spread extensively. Moreover, when rat-infestation of premises is reported, the responsible persons are required to take energetic measures of rat destruction, for rat Plague will spread rapidly in a rat-infested area, whereas where rats are few it may never spread at all. It is of the greatest importance, not only from the public health but also from the commercial point of view, that the Port of London should be kept free from rat Plague. (2) Measures taken to prevent the passage of rats between ships and shore:— The Port of London Authority have made Bye-laws requiring the Master of every ship to cause all ropes and mooring tackle used for securing ships, either to the shore or mooring buoys, to be fitted with guards, approved by the Authority, to prevent rats passing from the ship to the shore, and to cause all empty cases, packages and barrels to be examined before landing, to ensure that no rats are contained therein. The removal of rats (alive or dead) from ships without previous consent in writing of the Superintendent is prohibited. Bye-laws also prescribe that, when the discharge or loading of cargo or the landing or embarking of passengers is not actually proceeding, one gangway, whitened for a length of 10 feet at the end next the vessel, may be used as a communication between the ship and the shore, and that the Master shall not have or allow any other communication with the shore, unless the same be fitted with guards, approved by the Authority, to prevent the passage of rats. These Bye-laws are enforced by the officers of the Port of London Authority, and the Sanitary Inspectors of the Port Health Authority also call upon Masters to put guards on their mooring ropes. But the well-known difficulties in regard to the proper application and maintenance of position of rat-guards constantly occur, and it cannot be said that the mooring ropes of the majority of ships in the Port of London are at all times so guarded that a rat could not use them as a means of reaching the shore. There is no doubt that rats very seldom voluntarily run along mooring ropes, and the view is held that such rats as get ashore do so usually by some easier means or accidentally in cargo. (3) Methods of deratisation of:— (a) Ships. The methods employed for the deratisation of ships are :— (1) The burning of Sulphur at the rate of 3 lbs. per 1,000 cubic feet of space, the period of exposure of vessels to the Sulphur Dioxide gas thus generated being not less than six hours, and whenever time permits twelve hours or even longer. Boll Sulphur, of good quality, is used, and is burned in large shallow trays standing in larger trays containing water. Owing to the large burning surface thus obtained, considerably more Sulphur can be burned in one container within six hours than is possible when buckets or pots are used. Cylinders of liquid SO2 (Sulphume) are employed in small compartments and life-boats. (2) The generation of Hydrocyanic Acid Gas by various methods. For the destruction. of rats a concentration of 0.2 per cent. of HCN is attempted, and the minimum period of exposure is two hours. If the fumigation is for the destruction of insect life, bed-bugs and cockroaches, two or three times this concentration is employed and the exposure is twelve to twenty-four hours, according to the time available. The methods of generating HCN employed are the spraying of liquid HCN, the scattering of "Zyklon 'B'" or "Celophite Units" and the pouring of liquid HCN into trays (Galardi process). "Celophite Units" are thin discs of wood pulp saturated with liquid HCN. Each unit holds half an ounce of liquid HCN and they are packed in strong containers each holding 32 discs. They provide an easy and effective method of distributing HCN, since they can be "sailed" into 'tween decks or wings of holds, and they are also useful for the accurate dosage of small compartments. Moreover, the spent units can easily be collected and removed after the fumigation. 29 In the hands of a competent Staff of fumigators all the methods mentioned are effective, and can be applied to small cargo vessels or large passenger liners without undue risk. But, if the fumigators are inexperienced or careless or there is imperfect organisation or lack of discipline, any method of Cyanide fumigation may not only be ineffective, but is very likely to result in fatal accidents. In London, ships are fumigated only when the holds are empty, or very nearly so, except when there is definite evidence or strong suspicion of the existence of rodent Plague on board. In the latter event a preliminary fumigation with HCN is undertaken immediately, whether the holds are full or partly discharged, with the object of destroying as many rats and fleas as possible and thus diminishing the risk of the spread of the infection to the shore rats. But, since complete deratisation of a loaded ship cannot be guaranteed, the vessel is again fumigated throughout when empty. (3) Trapping. All vessels from Plague-infected ports are required to have traps set on board, in order that specimens may, if possible, be obtained for bacteriological examination. All other vessels, on which there is evidence of rats, but not of such a number as to justify a demand for fumigation, are required to have traps set in all spaces where signs of rats are discovered. The trapping may be carried out by professional rat-catchers or, in some cases, by members of the crew, under the supervision of the officers of the Port Health Authority. (b) Premises in the vicinity of Docks and Quays. The Port of London Authority constantly carry out methods of rat destruction ashore in the Port. Trapping is the method principally employed, but the Authority are always ready to test any new method of rat-destruction that is brought to their notice. The condition of all shore premises is under the constant supervision of the Sanitary Inspectors and Assistant Rat Officers of the Port Health Authority, who draw the attention of the officers of the Port of London Authority to any signs of rat-infestation they may discover. (4) Measures taken for the detection of rat prevalence in ships and on shore:— Examination by Inspectors and Assistant Bat Officers, as already described. (5) Ratproofing:— Constant attention is devoted to ratproofing in ships and on shore premises. The Port of London Authority fully appreciate that rat-proofing is the only rat repressive measure of permanent value and in addition to issuing orders that all new constructions on the docks shall be rat-proof, they have carried out all the recommendations of the Port Health Authority in existing buildings. In ships the appreciation of ratproofing is steadily spreading and Sanitary Inspectors have been able to get much useful work done in ships, particularly in the direction of opening up pipe casings and other structural harbourage. Bats Destroyed during 1987. TABLE E. (1) On Vessels. Number of Jan. Feb. Mar. April. May. June. July. Aug. Sept. Oct. Nov. Dec. Total in Year. Black Rats 57 66 66 76 60 45 658 64 56 96 104 118 1,466 Brown Rats nil 8 1 nil nil nil 6 nil nil nil nil nil 10 Species not Recorded 195 108 298 215 242 128 334 120 136 375 250 190 2,591 Rats examined 57 69 67 76 60 45 664 64 56 96 104 118 1,476 Rats infected with Plague nil nil nil nil nil nil 2 nil nil nil nil nil 2 See also Appendices XXIII. and XXIV. 30 TABLE F. (2) In Docks, Quays, Wharves and Warehouses. Number of Jan. Feb. Mar. April. May. June. July. Aug. Sept. Oct. Nov. Dec. Total in Year Black Rats 28 53 56 57 34 43 43 25 67 59 65 44 574 Brown Rats 53 54 59 60 47 61 44 53 51 37 31 46 596 Species not Recorded 285 182 181 228 279 251 412 258 305 442 333 287 3,443 Rats examined 81 107 115 117 81 104 87 78 118 96 96 90 1,170 Rats infected with Plague nil nil nil nil nil nil nil nil nil nil nil nil nil RATS EXAMINED—Vessels, Docks, Quays, &c. 2,646 See also Appendices XXIII. and XXIV. TABLE G. Measures of Bat Destruction on Plague "Infected" or "Suspected" Vessels or Vessels from Plague Infected Ports arriving in the Port during the Year. Total Number of such Vessels arriving. Number of such Vessels fumigated by S02. Number of Rats Killed. Number of such Vessels fumigated by HCN. Number of Rats Killed. Number of such Vessels on which Trapping, Poisoning, &c., were employed. Number of Rats Killed. Number of such Vessels on which measures of Rat Destruction were not carried out. 1. 2. 3. 4. 6. 6 7. 8. 2,503 52 533 (97 mice.) 72 1,156 (123 mice.) 1,094 1,986 1,409 TABLE H. Deratisation Certificates and Deratisation Exemption Certificates issued during the Year. net tonnage. Number of Ships. Number of Deratisation Certificates Issued. Number of Deratisation Exemption Certificates issued. Total Certificates issued. After Fumigation with After Trapping, Poisoning, &c. Total. HCN. Sulphur. HCN. and Sulphur. 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. Ships up to 300 tons 269 — — — — — 269 269 „ from 301 „ to 1,000 tons 299 4 1 — — 5 294 299 „ „ 1,001 „ „ 3,000 „ 209 12 18 — — 30 179 209 „ „3,001 „ „ 10,000 „ 330 46 34 — — 80 250 330 „ over 10,000 „ 51 22 1 — 1 24 27 51 Totals 1,158 84 54 — 1 139 1,019 1,158 VI.—HYGIENE OF CREWS' SPACES. TABLE J.—Classification of Nuisances. Nationality of Vessels. Number inspected during the year. Defects of original construction. Structural defects through wear and tear. Dirt, Vermin and other conditions prejudicial to health. British 9,850 1,298 1,361 1,748 CREW ACCOMMODATION. During the year the Board of Trade issued new Instructions as to the Survey of Masters' and Crews' Spaces which will, in new ships, effect most of the improvements which the Association of Port Health Authorities has advocated for many years. 31 The principal new requirements are as follows:— 1. Submission of Plans. Accommodation must be constructed in accordance with plans approved by the Board of Trade. A plan showing the general arrangement of the ship is to be submitted before construction is commenced. Before construction of the accommodation is commenced plans must be submitted drawn to a scale of one quarter inch to one foot showing in detail the allocation of space, the disposition of furnishings and fittings, the means of lighting, ventilation and heating and the sanitary arrangements. In the case of large passenger ships plans may be to a scale of one-eighth inch to one foot. 2. Position of Accommodation. The whole of the accommodation is to be situated above the load line and amidships or aft. The Board of Trade may sanction departure from these requirements where they consider compliance to be unreasonable or impracticable and particularly in large passenger ships where there is an approved system of lighting and ventilation. 3. Height of Accommodation is not to be less than seven feet six inches, in ships of 1,600 tons gross and over, nor less than seven feet in smaller ships. 4. Construction. Internal bulkheads are to be of steel, plywood or other approved material. The use of tongued and grooved boarding or any other form of construction which may tend to harbour vermin will not be permitted. 5. Separate Accommodation for Different Eatings. Separate sleeping accommodation is to be provided for each category of the ship's personnel as follows:—officers, petty officers, apprentices, seamen, firemen and stewards. Separate messroom accommodation is to be provided for the following categories: officers, petty officers, apprentices and ratings, with certain exemptions in the case of passenger ships and small ships. Separate sanitary accommodation is to be provided for officers, petty officers, apprentices and ratings. 6. Sleeping Rooms. Each watch of seamen, firemen and similar ratings on duty in watches is to be provided with a separate sleeping room or rooms with exemption for small ships in special cases. Each member of the crew must be provided with a clothes locker in the sleeping room. The locker is to be properly ventilated and at least five feet six inches high, twenty-one inches wide and fifteen inches deep. Beds must be of metal or hardwood and of approved design. Every bed must be so situated that it can be conveniently entered from the side, access across an adjoining bed not being allowed. Whenever possible beds are to be placed inboard, but if it is necessary to place them at the ship's side only one tier will be permitted in this position. Inboard beds should preferably be in a single tier. 7. Messrooms. Must be of such size as to accommodate at a single time all the men who use them. Tables must provide a dining space of at least twenty inches per person. Seats must be provided with reasonably sloped back rests. Where men provide their own food each man must be provided with a suitable locker. Food lockers must not be placed in sleeping rooms. 8. Washplaces and Bathrooms. Must be in close proximity to the accommodation or alternatively for engine-room ratings near the stokehold. Fixed wash basins must be supplied as follows:— Stewards—one for every ten men for the first hundred, and thereafter one for twenty men. Sailors' and firemen—one wash-basin for every two men in a watch. Wash buckets may be provided in lieu of wash basins but these must be one for each man, and there must be a rack for stowage. Baths or showers supplied with hot and cold water must be provided in or adjoining each washplace. An adequate supply of hot and cold fresh water must at all times be readily available for washing purposes. 9. Drying Boom. Must be provided unless there are other adequate facilities for drying clothes. 10. Privy Accommodation. Water closets are to be of the single pedestal type of glazed stoneware or enamelled iron, and each must have individual and constantly available flush. Provision must be in the proportion of not less than one water closet for every ten men up to one hundred, and four per cent0 thereafter. 32 11. Hospitals. Every foreign-going ship over 2,500 tons gross must be provided with a hospital, the minimum equipment of which is laid down. In foreign-going ships under 2,500 tons gross a space should be made available for use as a temporary hospital when necessary. A pilot's room will be accepted for this purpose. 12. Lighting. The minimum standard requires that in clear weather the print of an ordinary newspaper can be read anywhere in the space. Every space appropriated to the crew is to be efficiently illuminated at night and in dull weather by electric light or other approved form of artificial lighting. Light points must be arranged so as to give the maximum benefit to the occupants. 13. Ventilation. No system of ventilation can be regarded as efficient unless the arrangements are such as will not only maintain the air in the spaces in a satisfactory condition of purity but will also ensure a comfortable temperature and a sufficiency of movement under all conditions of weather. In vessels trading regularly to the Tropics some mechanical aid to natural ventilation is strongly recommended. Plans of mechanical ventilation must be submitted to the Board of Trade. Particular attention must be paid to ventilation in port. For natural ventilation inlet ventilators must provide for a variation between three square inches and six square inches per man and outlet ventilation similarly. The system proposed is passageway ventilation with cowl ventilators, and comparatively large openings at the top and bottom of the bulkheads dividing the rooms from the passageway with, in addition, an exhaust ventilator in each room. It is considered that in cold weather if the room ventilators are closed one of the passage ventilators should function as an inlet and the other as an outlet, while in warm weather both passageway ventilators should be trimmed to act as inlets and the room ventilators, being open, would provide outlets, thus ensuring a comfortable movement of air through the rooms. Inlet ventilators must be of the cowl type. Mushroom, goose-neck and torpedo vents are unsatisfactory as inlets. (There is much more detail in regard to ventilation to which three full pages of the instructions are devoted.) 14. Heating. Proper provision is to be made for heating all living and washing places. Heating may be by steam, electricity, hot water or warm air. Stoves are not generally approved. The heating system must be in operation when required during the whole period the crew are on board. 15. Protection from Mosquitoes, by the fitting of suitable screens to side scuttles, ventilators and doors, should be provided in ships trading regularly to the mosquito infested ports. 16. Painting. The interior of accommodation must be painted white or a tint which will not materially absorb light. 17. Recreation Spaces. A space or spaces of adequate size must be available on an open deck to which the crew have access when off duty. 18. Care and Upkeep of Crew's Spaces. The duty of seeing that accommodation is properly maintained falls primarily on the Master, who should make frequent and regular inspections and enter the results in the Official Log. Disclipinary action should be taken against any member of the crew who fails to keep his quarters in a proper condition after being ordered to do so by the Master. 18. Existing Ships. Whenever substantial alterations or repairs are made to accommodation the Board of Trade must be informed and they may require such alterations and improvements as are reasonably practicable and within these Instructions. Apart from substantial alterations crew's spaces in existing ships can often be improved by attention to ventilation and lighting. 19. Personal Hygiene. It is observed that self-respect and due regard to the cleanliness and upkeep of their quarters cannot be expected from the crew if reasonable facilities are not provided for personal cleanliness, if their quarters are so arranged and fitted as readily to harbour vermin; if no other place than their living rooms is available for storing their working clothes; if no encouragement is given them to change their underwear because of the lack of suitable arrangements for washing and drying their clothes or to wash themselves except in their accommodation. In existing ships wooden bunks should be replaced by bunks of metal or hard wood of approved design; tongued and grooved boarding should be replaced by steel or strong plywood; a supply of insecticide and an efficient spray should be carried; dry places for hanging working clothes should be provided near wash-places, particularly for engine-room staff; wash-places should be provided in every ship and should be warm; privies should be provided with a constantly available flush; water closets should not be in or open to wash-places and should provide reasonable privacy. These new Instructions which I have only summarised, mark a great advance in the hygiene of crew's spaces in British ships. It will be interesting to see how they are carried into effect in new ships and to note the reactions of the men to the improved conditions. The life of a ship is 20 to 30 years, and it may be thought that the requirements in regard to existing ships are somewhat meagre, and that it will be a long time before the crews of all British ships are housed in accordance with these standards.+ 83 It would be neither reasonable nor practicable to insist that all the requirements for new ships should be applied to existing ships; nevertheless, a new standard has been set. Those shipowners, naval architects and shipbuilders who have not in the past studied the welfare and comfort of the crews of ships will have to do so in the future; marine superintendents and Masters who have taken up the attitude that what was good enough for them is good enough for the seamen of to-day will find it less easy to stand in the way of progress, crews will expect better conditions and your officers will feel justified in making recommendations that they would have regarded as hopeless hitherto. There is little doubt therefore that, even in existing ships, such improvements as are reasonable and practicable will be made as opportunity offers. There will be individual cases in which the response of owners or men will be disappointing and discouraging, but they will be the exception, and will become fewer as time goes on and our admiration and pride in the British mercantile marine will no longer be qualified by reservations in regard to crew accommodation. IMPROVEMENTS IN CREW ACCOMMODATION IN EXISTING SHIPS. ss. "Redstone."—On the 28th October this vessel was inspected in this Port, when no less than 28 defects were reported by Inspector Dring. The Owners were communicated with, and replied that they could not understand the condition of their ship, as the crew accommodation was supposed to have been put into an entirely satisfactory condition in another port. They gave instructions that the work should be put in hand forthwith, and asked that Inspector Dring should supervise it. This was done, and Inspector Dring visited the ship daily and insisted on the work being thoroughly carried out. As a result I received the following letters from two members of the crew:— "Dear Sir, "I have been asked by all members of the crew of the above-named vessel to thank you and your staff for your efforts in looking after our health and comfort. "When your inspector visited us he spared himself no trouble, and had some improvements made which are greatly appreciated by all, and in particular those most affected. "Wishing you and your staff every success in your good work, "I am, Sir, "Yours faithfully." "Dear Sir, "The Sailors and Firemen of the above-named ship wish to express their sincere thanks and appreciation for the many improvements your department has caused to be made for their safety and comfort. If every Port Authority were as efficient as London's, the lot of the seaman would be considerably improved. Again thanking you on behalf of my shipmates, "I beg to remain, "Yours respectfully." I wrote to the Shipping Company to express our appreciation of the manner in which they had co-operated with your Staff. COASTING VESSELS. In my last Annual Report I recorded some observations by Mr. J. S. Beattie your Inspector in the Middle River District, in regard to unsatisfactory conditions in coasting vessels. Mr. Beattie has continued to take a close interest in this class of vessel and has submitted a long report of which the following is a summary. Observations have been made on 135 different ships and 546 officers and 765 men have been interviewed. 34 The principal points on which Mr. Beattie comments in coasting vessels are:— 1. Unhygienic accommodation. 2. Inadequate and unsatisfactory provision for the storage of food. 3. Individual messing and cooking. Unhygienic Accommodation. In small coasting vessels the crew accommodation is under the forecastle head, and consists of two triangular spaces containing bunks for a certified number of seamen, a table, forms, a small Board of Trade food locker for each man and a coal bogie stove. Forward of the sailors' forecastle is a bow locker for ship's ropes and gear. Whatever is needed from this store must be dragged through the forecastle. On deck at the break of the forecastle is the crew's water closet, usually of the insanitary trough type, flushed by a bucket from overside. In the small ship there are no messrooms, no wash-place, no clothes lockers, no drying rooms, no oilskin lockers. The seaman hangs his working clothes on the bulkhead, his oilskins on the wooden partition, his shore suit on a spare bunk or on his bunk rail, his washing on a line by the bogie stove to dry. The coal bogie stove is responsible for most of the dirt in the quarters throughout the winter months. Its position is governed by the space allotted to the funnel flange on the forecastle head. There is rarely a proper or adequate box for the coal, which becomes scattered and trodden all over the place. In this cramped compartment the seamen sleep, eat, wash, bath, and in wet weather do their laundry and take such recreation as their hours of duty permit. Inadequate and Unsatisfactory Provision for the Storage of Food. Vessels on the coast have insufficient storage for food. The only fitting when the ship is built is a Board of Trade locker for each man. Its size is about that of a four-gallon petrol tin. Its position depends on the space left on the bulkhead and it is useless when placed too near the bogie stove or at the ship's side. No locker is fit for the storage of meat and butter and few are even suitable for bread. Consequently food is kept in all sorts of places, in boxes in alleyways, in wash-places, under bunks, in spare bunks, in lifeboats and has even been found in water-closet compartments. Individual Messing and Cooking. The crews of coasters usually buy their own food and store it in the unsatisfactory conditions to which reference has been made above. This system is really uneconomical and unsatisfactory for the men do not spend their money to the best advantage and do not obtain an adequate diet. Cheapness, ease of storage and the minimum of trouble in preparation are their principal considerations. Further, there is often no cook, or at most an unskilled cook, and galleys are often small, inconvenient and dirty. In 128 vessels on which the special enquiry was made 30 had no cook; six had an ordinary seaman cook (usually an inexperienced boy) for officers only, eight a similar cook for all hands; 30 had an A.B. cook (usually with no special training) for officers only and 13 a similar cook for all hands; 19 had a steward for officers only and 22 had a steward and a messroom steward. Of the 546 officers interrogated 534 were in favour of the employment of an experienced cook for all hands and 12 gave only a qualified approval; of 765 men, 730 were in favour of an experienced cook and 35 preferred to cook for themselves. But in the matter of rationing themselves it appeared that there was not the same desire for a change because the men feared that it would be likely to involve a deduction from their wages of more than they themselves spent on food and that they would not get the quality or quantity to which they were entitled. Further, they liked to be free to indulge their individual preferences Avithin the limits necessarily imposed by their small means and the lack of facilities for storage and cooking. 35 The crews of colliers often bring ready cooked food from home and heat it as required, but in general, cooking is all done in a frying pan, little use being made of the oven which is frequently defective. Much tinned food is consumed. The usual beverage is tea, and when the men are too tired to be bothered to prepare a meal strong tea takes its place. Probably fried food and strong tea are mainly responsible for the digestive troubles which appear to be very common amongst the crews of coasters. Long Hours of Duty. Coasters are quickly loaded and discharged so that many have only a day or only a few hours in port. The two or three seamen have to strip hatches, rig cargo gear, tally, buy stores, cover up, sweep holds and prepare to load further up or down the river. This routine means working long hours and then carrying on sea watches as soon as the cargo is completed. There are steam vessels with no fireman. The engineers must then do their own firing. To ascertain the exact number of hours worked per week is difficult, as there are differences of opinion as to how they should be counted. Masters are not inclined to include "stand-by" periods when the crew expect to be turned out in an hour or so to some essential duty to facilitate loading or discharging. At sea everyone works 84 hours per week, but work in port adds very considerably to this figure, and Mr. Beattie has records of 120 hours per week, and states that the average on the coast is 110 hours per week. These conditions of cramped living quarters, with the absence of reasonable comfort and convenience, long hours of work, unsatisfactory and ill-cooked food must be detrimental to the health of the officers and men. No one would expect life on a coaster to be easy, it must be strenuous and at times dangerous, more so indeed than on foreign-going vessels, but because the life is hard it is the more important that everything possible should be done to keep the men engaged in the coasting trade physically fit. VII.—FOOD INSPECTION. The fact that the Port of London extends over such a wide area and that Foodstuffs may be landed at almost any point makes it impossible to divide the Staff strictly into Food Inspectors and Sanitary Inspectors. There are certain parts of the Docks where the nature and quantity of the Foodstuffs landed are such that a wholetime Food Inspector is essential, but there are many districts where food inspection and sanitary inspection must be combined. For this reason every Sanitary Inspector in the Port of London is required to qualify as a Food Inspector, and at the present time ten of the total Staff of twelve Inspectors are qualified in both respects. So great are the food imports in London that it is obviously impossible for everything to come under inspection. At the same time, the control is greater than might at first appear possible, for Inspectors have not only the information contained in the Customs Bill of Entry at their disposal, but, from the fact that they are constantly on the Docks, they have many sources of information open to them, and they receive the assistance of Customs Officers and others. From experience also, they know what has proved consistently sound and what needs their careful attention. They recognise what is new, and therefore to be carefully examined. Above all, they receive every assistance from the importers, who do not wish to put food of even doubtful quality on the market. There is, however, another way in which a Port Health Authority may act if, from their own observation or from reports received from other Sanitary Authorities, it appears necessary to exercise complete control over any particular class of imported food. 36 All imports of such foods can be detained within the district of the Authority for examination by their Inspectors. Such action is from time to time taken, but in order to avoid complete dislocation of the trade concerned it is usual to allow consignments to leave the Docks on the understanding that they will be held for examination by the Medical Officers of Health of the districts of destination, who must have previously expressed their willingness to receive and take responsibility for the inspection of the goods. This was the principle put into practice in regard to imported Mutton and Lamb during the latter part of 1928, and was continued until June, 1929, when the improvement resulting from the institution of examination in the countries of origin was so marked as to make it possible to reduce the routine examination to ten per cent., and later to five per cent. Importers realise that it is in their interests to attain a high standard of examination at the source, and, in addition, to have goods so prepared and packed as to facilitate examination here. Thus, Ox Tongues arrive dressed so as to have the lymphatic glands easily accessible. Pig carcases have the submaxillary glands incised and drawn forward in an exposed position, so that no difficulty is experienced in examining the carcases in the frozen state. Imported Offal is packed with a view to rapid inspection, as is also boneless Veal, in which care is taken to expose the serous membranes. As regards Canned Goods a considerable proportion is submitted for examination by expert examiners, on behalf of the merchants. From experience, the Port Health Authority have complete confidence in this examination, which is of great assistance to their Inspectors. When diseased or unsound food is discovered it is almost invariably voluntarily surrendered, and very rarely is it necessary for the Port Health Authority to go through the formal procedure of seizure and condemnation by a Magistrate. The majority of Foodstuffs condemned as unfit for human consumption is not destroyed, but is used for some industrial purpose, such as the manufacture of poultry food, soap, grease, &c. In every case the Port Health Authority obtain guarantees and require to be satisfied that there is no danger that such condemned food, when it leaves their district, will be sold elsewhere for human food. Thus it comes about that, though such vast quantities of food are imported, and the number of Inspectors is few, the amount of food which goes into consumption in an unsatisfactory condition is infinitesimal. INSPECTION OF CANNED FOODS. In order to secure, as far as possible, uniformity in the inspection of Canned Foods at ports throughout the British Isles the Association of Port Health Authorities issued the following Memorandum for the guidance of Food Inspectors:— (1) Inspection in Relation to Customs Examinations. Customs Officers are only required to detain for inspection by the Medical Officer of Health prohibited meat or meat product without an "Official Certificate" and foodstuffs which are manifestly unsound, but they can and do give invaluable assistance in many other ways. Indeed, the inspection of imported foods cannot be efficiently carried out unless there is the closest co-operation between the Food Inspectors and the Customs Officers. (2) Proportion of Canned Foods to be Examined and Action to be Taken. It is undesirable to attempt to fix a minimum percentage of canned foods to be examined in all cases. The extent of examination must depend on the Food Inspector's knowledge and experience of the condition of previous consignments of similar foods from the same source. It is, however, desirable to make certain recommendations, as follows:— 37 (a) Freshly Canned Goods.—Freshly canned goods, when correctly processed and packed, should reveal an almost complete absence of unsound cans. The Food Inspector may exercise his discretion as to the extent of his inspection and he will, in the first place, be guided by the appearance of the cases. If the cases show no evidence of staining and he has previous satisfactory evidence of the same foods from the same source, he may be satisfied to open a few cases and a few cans at random. If cases are stained he should open all cases so affected and a minimum of 5 per cent. of unstained cases as well. A similar percentage of cases should be opened if previous consignments of the same product from the same source have proved unsatisfactory. If in the cases examined 3 per cent. or more of the cans are found to be unsound, he should examine a further 5 per cent. and so long as the percentage of unsoundness continues to be 3 per cent. or over he should carry on through the whole consignment, all unsound cans which come under his notice being condemned as he proceeds. Food inspectors should also ensure that from time to time samples are taken from every type of canned foods from every source for such analysis as may be appropriate (metallic contamination, prohibited preservatives or colouring matters, deficiency in essential constituents, &c.). (b) Old Stock.—Old Stock demands careful inspection and the preliminary examination should extend to a minimum of 5 per cent. of each parcel. A few cans should always be opened for inspection of the contents and of the interior of the can itself. (c) Reconditioned Stock.—By reconditioned stock is meant cans which appear to have been vented and re-sealed or to have had leaks re-soldered. Since it is impossible to say at what stage in the history of the can, from the factory to the consumer, such re-soldering has been done, all reconditioned cans should be condemned. In exceptional cases venting of sanitary cap cans or the strengthening of seams by additional soldering may be normal factory practice, but the Food Inspector should be very cautious in accepting this explanation and, even if he is satisfied to do so in any particular case, he should discourage the continuance of the practice. (3) "Blown" Cans. The contents of all "blown" cans must be regarded as unsound and should be condemned as unfit for human consumption. This decision should be taken irrespective of whether the contents are for direct consumption or to form part of a manufactured article, e.g., milk in toffee or fruit pulp in jam. No attention should be paid to arguments as to the wholesomeness of the contents of "blown" cans. Bacteriological examination of the contents may take too long, the results are not always reliable and, in any event, are applicable only to the cans so examined. Hydrogen swells are "blown" cans and should be condemned as such. Cans in the condition known to the trade as "springers," "slack caps" and "puffy cans" should be regarded as early stages in the development of " blown " cans and should be condemned. (4) Cans opened by Customs Officers. Cans opened by "spitting" for Customs examination should be disposed of for immediate use only and should not be allowed to pass into circulation in the ordinary way. (5) Leaky Cans. The leaky can, however slight the leakage, and even if the leak appears to have been sealed by the contents, should always be condemned. (6) Trade Examinations. A trade examination of canned goods is the rule and efforts should be made to keep in touch with all trade inspections to take advantage of the opportunities thus afforded to extend the inspection of canned goods without duplication. (7) Foodstuffs released for Industrial Purposes. Certain condemned foodstuffs may have a commercial value and in these circumstances their removal may be permitted for manufacture into feeding stuffs for cattle, pigs, dogs and poultry or for other purposes, provided the Medical Officer of Health is satisfied that they will be so used and that there is no risk of their being disposed of for human consumption in whole or in part or in any form. When condemned foods are to be released for industrial purposes to the district of another Authority the consent of the Medical Officer of Health for such district should first be obtained in every instance unless he has given a general consent to a particular person in his district receiving a particular type or types of foodstuffs. Condemned foodstuffs should always be detained until the Medical Officer of Health of the district to which it is proposed to send them has signified his approval for their release, except when the Medical Officer of Health has given a general consent and, even then, he should be notified of the particulars and the destination of each consignment. (8) Sweepings of Flour, Bice, &c. Sweepings of flour, rice, &c. (except sugar) should be released for industrial purposes only and should not be allowed to go for human consumption in any form. Sugar sweepings should be carefully controlled. If sugar sweepings are subjected to a satisfactory process of refining there is no objection to the final product being used for human food. 38 BYE-LAWS FOR THE PROTECTION OF FOOD. By the Port of London (Assignment of Powers) Order, 1933, the Minister of Health assigned to the Port Sanitary Authority all the powers, rights, duties, capacities, liabilities and obligations of a Sanitary Authority under Part II (Public Health) of the London County Council (General Powers) Act, 1932. These powers include the right to make Bye-laws for promoting sanitary and cleanly conditions in the manufacture, preparation, storage, transport or exposure for sale of any article intended to be sold for food. The London County Council have made the following Bye-laws for these purposes as regards the County of London, except the City and the Port, and your Worshipful Committee have recommended that similar Bye-laws be made applicable in your district:— LONDON COUNTY COUNCIL (GENERAL POWERS) ACT 1932. BYE-LAWS FOR THE PROTECTION OF FOOD. Bye-laws made by the London County Council under section 6 of the London County Council (General Powers) Act, 1932, for promoting sanitary and cleanly conditions in the manufacture, preparation, storage, transport, or exposure for sale of any article intended to be sold for food. Interpretation. 1. In these Bye-laws, unless the context otherwise requires:— "Food" means the food of man; "Premises" except in the proviso to Bye-law 4 of these Bye-laws, means any room, shop, store, shed, yard, and any part of a building in which any article intended to be sold for food is manufactured, prepared, stored or exposed for sale, and in the said proviso means any continuous area of land and buildings in one occupation; "Stall" means any stall, vehicle, barrow, tray or other receptacle; "Suitable and sufficient" and "reasonably necessary" mean, respectively, in relation to any premises or stall suitable and sufficient and reasonably necessary having regard to the circumstances and conditions affecting the premises or stall; and "Infectious disease" means any infectious disease to which for the time being section 55 of the Public Health (London) Act, 1891, applies or which is for the time being notifiable to the medical officer of health of the district under any regulation of the Minister of Health. Premises. 2. The occupier of any premises shall :— (a) Cause the internal surface of the walls and ceilings, all woodwork, and the floors of the premises to be kept in such good order, repair and condition as to prevent, as far as is reasonably necessary, the absorption therein of any food material or refuse which may be spilled, splashed, deposited thereon, or brought into contact therewith. (b) Cause the walls, ceilings and woodwork of the premises to be limewashed, distempered, painted, or otherwise treated or cleansed, and all floors, fittings, articles, apparatus and utensils cleansed, as often as may be reasonably necessary to keep them in a clean state. (c) Except in the case of a yard, or a room used as a cold store, provide and maintain suitable and sufficient means of ventilation in every part of the premises. (d) Provide and maintain suitable and sufficient means of lighting in every part of the premises. (e) Not knowingly cause or permit any person suffering from an infectious disease to be engaged in handling any article of food on the premises. (f) Not knowingly cause or permit any article on the premises intended to be sold for food to be wrapped in paper or other material that is not clean and reasonably suitable for the purpose. (g) Take such steps as may be reasonably necessary to prevent risk of contamination of food on the premises. Stalls. 3. Where any food is exposed for sale on any stall, the person exposing such food shall (a) Cause every part of the stall to be kept in such good order, repair and condition as to prevent, as far as is reasonably necessary, the absorption therein of any food material or refuse which may be spilled, splashed, deposited thereon or brought into contact therewith. (b) Cause all surfaces of the stall which may be brought in contact with any food exposed for sale, and all fittings, articles, apparatus and utensils thereon, to be cleansed as often as may be reasonably necessary to keep them in a clean state. (c) Not knowingly cause or permit any person suffering from an infectious disease to be engaged in handling any article of food on the stall. (d) Not knowingly cause or permit any article on the stall intended to be sold for food to be wrapped in paper or other material that is not clean and reasonably suitable for the purpose. (e) Take such steps as may be reasonably necessary to prevent risk of contamination of food on the stall. 39 Transport. 4. Every person who transports or causes to be transported:— (a) Any article intended to be sold for food, unless such article is entirely enclosed in a tin, jar, receptacle, container or other adequate protective covering, or is transported in a suitably covered vehicle completely enclosed except only for any necessary ventilators, shall cover and keep covered or cause to be covered and kept covered such article during transit with suitable clean material or shall otherwise adequately protect such article during transit from dust, dirt, flies and other sources of contamination. (b) Any article intended to be sold for food in any receptacle or container not entirely enclosed, or any vehicle, shall maintain or cause to be maintained such receptacle or container and the interior of any such vehicle in a reasonably clean condition, having regard to the nature of the article being transported. Provided always that this Bye-law shall not apply to the transportation of any article within the same premises or to any article in course of delivery to any premises from, or in course of loading from any premises to, a vehicle standing at the nearest available point on the highway adjoining such premises. Penalties. 5. Every person who shall offend against any of the foregoing Bye-laws shall be liable on summary conviction to a fine not exceeding the sum of five pounds, and in the case of a continuing offence to a further fine not exceeding the sum of forty shillings for each day during which the offence continues after conviction. Savings. 6. The penalties prescribed by these Bye-laws shall not apply in any case where the offence committed is an offence against:— (a) The provisions of the Factory and Workshop Act, 1901, as amended by any subsequent enactment. (b) The provisions of section 42 (for regulating manufacture and sale of ice creams, etc.) of the London County Council (General Powers) Act, 1902. (c) The provisions of section 8 (sanitary regulations for premises used for sale, etc., of food) of the London County Council (General Powers) Act, 1908. (d) The provisions of the Shops Act, 1934. (e) Any regulation made under or partly under the Public Health (Regulations as to Food) Act, 1907. (f) Any Bye-law made under section 19 (Bye-laws as to offensive businesses) of the Public Health (London) Act, 1891. (j) Any Bye-law made under section 9 (vendors of fried fish, fish-curers and rag and bone dealers) of the London County Council (General Powers) Act, 1908. (h) Any Bye-law made under Part VI (Regulation of Street Trading) of the London County Council (General Powers) Act, 1927; or is an offence in respect of milk punishable under any enactment or order or regulation. Exemptions. 7. Nothing in these Bye-laws shall apply to:— (a) Spitalfields Market in the Metropolitan Borough of Stepney so long as such Market is vested in and under the control of the Corporation of the City of London; and (b) The slaughterhouses, and the chill rooms, lairs and other buildings used in connection therewith at the Metropolitan Cattle Market in the Metropolitan Borough of Islington so long as such slaughterhouses, chill rooms, lairs and other buildings used in connection therewith are vested in and under the control of the Corporation of the City of London and are used for the purposes of or in connection with, the slaughtering of animals. The foregoing Bye-laws were made by the Council on 28th July, 1936, and will be duly submitted to the Minister of Health for confirmation. 40 Caseous Lymphadenitis.—During the year the proportion of carcases of imported mutton examined for Caseous Lymphadenitis irrespective of the country of origin, remained at 5 per cent., and that for pieces of mutton at 100 per cent. The results of examination during the year of mutton and lamb, weight 43 lbs. and over, from Australia, New Zealand, South America and Iceland, were as follows:— Where from. Carcases examined. Carcases found to be diseased. Carcases found to have Lymphatic Glands missing. Australia 6,564 9 — New Zealand 12,221 10 — South America 10,101 10 — Iceland 57 — — Totals 28,943 29 — Percentage condemned. From Australia 0.13 „ New Zealand 0.08 „ South America 0.09 „ Iceland Nil. The Ministry of Health, under date September, 1937, issued the following Memorandum on the inspection of carcases of sheep and lambs for evidence of Caseous Lymphadenitis "Detailed instructions for routine inspection of carcases of sheep and lambs, and action to be taken in the event of Caseous Lymphadenitis being found. "The prescapular, superficial-inguinal or supra-mammary, precrural, iliac, lumbar and renal lymph glands shall be exposed and examined by incision, and the kidneys shall be freed and examined, but not necessarily detached from the enclosing fatty tissue. "Viscera.—The viscera shall be condemned if they are infected in any degree or if the whole carcase is condemned. If the viscera are free from any lesions they shall be passed unless the whole carcase is condemned. "Carcase (including the Head).—If on examination as indicated above, more than one lesion is found, the whole carcase, including the head, and the viscera shall be condemned. If one lesion only is found the carcase shall be cut into the following sections, carrying the lymphatic glands indicated:— Section. Associated glands. "1. Pair of legs Precural. Superficial-Inguinal or Supra-Mammary. Iliac. "2. Shoulders (2) Prescapular. "3. (a) Breasts. (b) Flanks. (c) Scrag ends. "4. Saddle (2 Loins unsplit) Renal and Lumbar. "These sections shall be further examined, and if no further lesion is found, all the sections, except that in which the one lesion found at the first examination is situated, shall be passed, and the affected section condemned. If one or more further lesions are found, whether in the same section as that in which the first was found or in another section or sections, the whole carcase, including the head, and the viscera shall be condemned." Hitherto the Ministry of Health have required total condemnation of a carcase of mutton or lamb in which any evidence of Caseous Lymphadenitis was found. The new instructions are in the nature of a relaxation, but in my opinion the new standard is more reasonable than the old one, and provides adequate safeguards. Pig Carcases.—A careful examination was made of a percentage of pig carcases arriving in the Port, the number of carcases examined being 3,280. Five carcases were found to be diseased. Actinobacillosis in Ox Tongues.—A percentage examination was made of every consignment of frozen ox tongues arriving in the Port. Two hundred and sixty-one consignments were put into dock store, where a careful examination was made by your Officers of 9,961 tongues and 77 were found affected with Actinobacillosis, a percentage of 0.77. Action taken under the Public Health (Imported Food) Regulations, 1925, and the Public Health (Imported Food) Amendment Regulations, 1933, resulted in 4,776 tons 6 cwts. 3 qrs. 1 lb. of unsound food being destroyed or disposed of for purposes other than human consumption. 41 Disposal of Condemned Foods:— Tons. cwts. qrs. lbs Boiling Down (recovery of Fats, &c.) 138 4 2 25 Cattle and Poultry Foods 940 2 3 5 Refining 175 10 1 20 Exportation 71 2 1 10 Soap-making 11 10 2 26 Removed to other districts 1 9 3 1 Reconditioning 21 16 3 14 Technical purposes — 8 0 21 Distillation 14 19 2 23 Destroyed—Buried 3,366 18 2 2 „ —Burnt 34 2 2 22 Total weight 4,776 6 3 1 Foodstuff Condemned:— Dock. Tons. Quantity. No. of seizures. cwts. qrs. lbs. Royal Albert Dock 149 1 0 7 276 Royal Victoria Dock 650 0 1 19 296 King George V. Dock 205 17 1 19 153 East India Dock 1,165 15 2 12 103 West India Dock 993 12 0 4 167 Millwall Dock 597 0 0 11 61 Surrey Commercial Dock 323 8 0 19 71 London Dock 382 7 0 7 180 St. Katharine Dock 24 0 2 11 14 Regent's Canal Dock 223 10 0 10 38 Tilbury Dock 61 17 1 19 186 Total weight 4,776 6 3 1 1,545 The approximate weight of goods condemned and the number of detention and seizures made annually during the last ten years were as follows:— Year. Approximate weight. No. of seizures. Tons. cwts. qrs. lbs. 1928 6,018 3 1 22 1,436 1929 1,743 5 3 19 1,569 1930 2,572 10 3 1 1,574 1931 1,408 8 1 17 1,375 1932 2,654 13 1 16 1,593 1933 1,303 17 2 23 1,359 1934 1,825 14 2 10 1,567 1935 2,368 13 3 20 1,454 1936 3,288 14 0 26 1,588 1937 4,776 6 3 1 1,545 The detention of Fats under the Public Health (Imported Food) Regulations, 1925, during the year was as follows:— No. of Exportation Notices served 191 No. of casks, &c., released for exportation 413 No. of casks, &c., released for soapmaking, &c. 11,061 No. of casks, &c., released to wharves under Notice of Exportation 9,905 Foodstuffs disposed of as unfit for human consumption:— Tons. cwts. qrs. lbs Mutton and Lamb—5,364 carcases, parts ex 5,688 carcases. 112 15 3 21 Beef—37 hinds, crops, &c., parts ex 459 hinds, crops, &c., 25 bags and a quantity trimmings. 4 16 3 1 Bacon—3 bales, 7 sides and part of 1 back — 10 1 11 Pork—41 carcases and parts of 77 — 17 1 7 Poultry—43 cases 2 — — — Veal—24 bags and parts of 16 bags 1 5 — 6 Hams—15 hams — 2 — — Sausages—2 packages — — 1 2 Total weight 122 7 2 22 42 Meats (Tinned):— Tons. cwts. qrs. lb.s. Ox Tongues—191 tins — 10 — 17 Corned Beef—54 tins — — 1 26 Pork—6 tins — — 1 24 Veal—58 tins — 2 — 8 Total weight — 13 0 19 Fats:— Tons. cwts. qrs. lbs. Tallow and Fat 60 18 2 16 Offal:— Tons. cwts. qrs. lbs. Ox Tongues—diseased, 5 bags — 6 2 11 „ Cheeks—201 bags 4 12 — 27 „ Sweetbreads—5 crates — 5 — 20 „ Skirts—1 bag and parts of 15 — 2 — 17 „ Hearts—1 bag — — 1 17 „ Livers—447 bags, cases, etc., parts of 83 bags and 26 loose 9 - 3 17 „ Tails—12 loose — — — 26 „ Kidneys—602 bags and 8 loose 8 19 1 21 Sheep Sweetbreads—2 cases — 2 2 9 „ Tongues—1 bag — — — 22 „ Kidneys—26 packages — 16 — 18 „ Hearts—1 bag — — 1 16 „ livers—1 box and part of 1 case — — 3 16 Tripe—109 packages and parts of 30 bags — 14 2 11 Calf Tongues—4 packages — 2 2 13 „ Livers—34 bags and parts of 3 — 15 2 1 „ Kidneys-—15 packages and a quantity loose — 1 2 9 „ Hearts—1 bag — — 1 23 Lamb Hearts—8 bags and 72 loose — 2 — 25 „ Livers—1 bag and 2 loose — — — — 25 „ Tongues—6 bags — 1 2 — „ Sweetbreads—2 cases and parts of 6 crates — — 1 27 Pig Heads—2 Heads — — — 22 Total weight 26 6 2 27 Fish:— Tons. cwts. qrs. lbs. Anchovies—137 packages 9 7 1 1 Lobster—1 barrel — — 1 17 Sardines—65 cases, 624 tins 7 18 3 20 Fresh Fish—2 cases — 2 2 20 Oysters-—1 barrel — 1 2 — Various—521 cases, 980 tins 14 7 2 22 Total Weight 31 18 1 24 Fruit:— Tons. cwts. qrs. lbs Currants—20 cases — 1 1 2 Raisins—8 packages — 2 3 16 Apples—87 packages 2 — 1 23 Figs—2 bags — — 1 3 Grapes—10 cases — 1 2 23 Melons—660 packages 33 7 2 25 Pears—38 packages — 16 2 15 Prunes—1 box — — 1 — Tomatoes—1,590 packages 18 13 1 18 Olives—24 packages — 15 1 14 Dates—625 cases, &c. 19 2 2 10 Mandarins—666 packages 28 18 — 24 Lemons—48 cases 1 6 3 — Orange Peel—2 pipes — 13 — — Lemon Peel—2 pipes — 9 — — Grapefruit Juice—52 barrels, 31 tins 6 18 — 24 Bananas—loose collected 1,052 17 2 — Oranges—47,187 cases 1,701 18 — 25 Various—3,426 packages 139 4 1 7 Citrons—515 cases 12 18 — — Sundry—181 boxes 2 6 1 2 Total weight 3,022 12 — 7 48 Fruit (Tinned and Bottled):— Tons. cwt8. qrs. lbs. Tomatoes 15 18 1 19 Cherries — 2 — 3 Various 14 16 — 12 Total weight 30 16 2 6 Fruit Pulp, &c.:— Tons. cwts. qrs. lbs. Apricot Pulp—218 cases, 174 tins 18 11 2 9 Tomato Puree—40 cases, 1,680 tins 7 19 3 25 „ Paste—6 cases, 4 tins — 6 2 — „ Soap—6 cartons, 108 tins — 2 3 19 „ Pulp—1 case, 298 tins 1 — 3 14 „ Ketchup—6 tins — — 1 14 Blackcurrant Pulp—10 tins — — 3 25 Plum Pulp—4 tins — 1 1 26 Orange Pulp—15 barrels 5 8 3 6 Fruit Juice—67 casks, &c. 6 14 3 7 Total weight 39 18 1 5 Vegetables:— Tons. cwts. qrs. lbs. Onions—1,893 packages 61 12 3 8 Peas—Quantity loose collected — 1 2 7 Beans—213 cases 12 7 — 1 Potatoes—4,457 packages 223 13 2 19 Cucumbers—3 cases and 2 loose — 3 1 — Cauliflowers—10 cases 2 1 — 4 Various—105 packages — 16 — 8 Total weight 300 15 1 19 Vegetables (Tinned):— Tons. cwts. qrs. lbs. Gherkins—15 tins — 1 3 14 Various—49 tins — — 1 21 Total weight — 2 1 7 Nuts:— Tone. cwts. qrs. lbs. Almonds—214 packages 3 4 3 5 Ground Nuts—1 bag — — 2 17 Various—7 packages — 3 2 2 Walnuts (shelled)—41 cases 2 — 2 10 Chestnuts—15 bags — 7 2 Total weight 5 17 — 6 Provisions :— Tons. cwts. qrs. lbs. Sugar Sweepings—1,192 bags 113 12 2 6 Butter—7 packages — 7 2 14 Cheese—21 packages — 5 2 12 Cocoa-—2 bags, and parts of 33 — 3 2 9 Coffee—25 bags — 2 1 10 Sugar—939 bags 85 6 1 4 Tea—319 bags and a quantity loose collected 15 1 1 — Milk Powder—18 bags — 15 — — „ Evaporated—183 tins — 1 3 9 „ Condensed—21 cases, 70 tins — 13 2 14 Eggs—1 case, 55 tins, and ex 96 cases — 16 3 26 Total weight 217 6 2 20 44 Grain, Flour, &c.:— Tons. cwts. qrs. lbs. Wheat 737 5 3 14 Barley 5 1 2 24 Flour — 4 2 — Oats 1 17 — 17 Tapioca Root 107 19 1 3 Rice 26 2 3 16 Maize 8 10 — 1 Rye 1 4 — 22 Total weight 888 5 2 13 Confectionery:— Tons. cwts. qrs. lbs. Confectionery—5 packages — 9 — 10 Prepared Foods:— TonB. cwts. qrs. lbs. Rolled Oats—56 sacks 3 10 - - Macaroni—21 packages — 4 3 22 Almond Substitute—2 cases — — 2 — Various—75 packets — — 1 12 Total weight 3 15 3 6 Sundries:— Tons. cwts. qrs. lbs. Vinegar—30 barrels 2 9 1 1 Various—441 packages, &c. 21 13 3 17 Total weight 24 3 — 18 PUBLIC HEALTH (IMPORTED FOOD) REGULATIONS, 1925, AND PUBLIC HEALTH (IMPORTED FOOD) AMENDMENT REGULATIONS, 1988. Official Certificates from the following countries are recognised by the Ministry of Health, under the above-mentioned Regulations:— (1) In respect of Items (a) and (e) of the Second Schedule of the Amendment Regulations, i.e.:— (a) A severed part of the carcase of an animal (including the head thereof, and the whole carcase without the head, but not including any part of the carcase of a pig which has been salted, cured, pickled, dried and smoked, or otherwise prepared in the manner in which bacon or ham is ordinarily prepared) from which no submaxillary, pre-scapular, pre-crural, superficial inguinal, supramammary, or popliteal gland has been taken out; (c) All edible parts of an animal other than (i) the head or other severed parts of the carcase, (ii) the intestines prepared in the form of sausage casings and (iii) meat which has before importation been made ready for human consumption in the form of a sausage or other prepared or manufactured article of food. Argentine Republic. Australia. Bechuanaland Protectorate. Brazil. Canada. Chilian Republic. French West Africa. Madagascar and Dependencies. New Zealand. Iceland. South West Africa. Southern Rhodesia. United States of America. Uruguayan Republic. Union of South Africa. 45 (2) In respect of Item (b) of the Second Schedule of the Amendment Regulations, i.e., lard, dripping, edible tallow and all other rendered animal fats, except oleo oil, oleo stearine and premier jus:— Australia. Canada. Denmark. French West Africa. Italy. Madagascar. New Zealand. Netherlands. Rou mania. Sweden. Switzerland. United States of America. Argentine Republic. Hong Kong. Uruguayan Republic. Brazilian Republic. Hungary. Poland. Lithuania. Bulgaria. Estonia. Latvia. Belgium. Danzig Free State. France Yugo Slavia. Shanghai International Settlement. In accordance with Article 11. (4) of the above-mentioned Regulations, Notices were served for the exportation of the following material:— Description and Quantity of Meats and Fats. Where from. Number of Notices served. 8,178 casks, &c. New Zealand 126 5,249 „ Australia 57 37 „ South America 2 1,55/ „ Other Countries 5 PUBLIC HEALTH (IMPORTED MILK) REGULATIONS, 1926. No importation of milk requiring action under these Regulations was reported during the year. PUBLIC HEALTH (PRESERVATIVES, &c., IN FOOD) REGULATIONS, 1925 to 1927. For action under these Regulations, reference is directed to the list of foodstuffs submitted for analysis. SHELLFISH. Shellfish taken from the North side of the Estuary of the Thames between Shoeburyness and Holehaven are subject to an Order under the Public Health (Shellfish) Regulations, 1934, made by the Port of London Health Authority on the 11th April, 1934, prohibiting the sale or exposure or distribution or offer for sale for human consumption of such shellfish unless they have been:— (1) Subjected to a satisfactory process of cleansing at an establishment which is for the time being approved by the Minister of Health for the purpose; or (2) Relaicl in pure water for such period, and in such places as may from time to time be approved for the purpose by the said Port Health Authority; or (3) Subjected to a process of sterilisation by steam under pressure for at least six minutes in an apparatus which is for the time being approved by the said Port Health Authority. Shellfish taken from such portion of the River Medway as is within the district of the Port Health Authority are controlled by The Medway (Shellfish) Regulations, 1935. There are in addition shellfish layings in the River Roach and in Paglesham, Potton and Yokefleet Creeks, but there has, up to the present time, been no occasion to make an Order relative to these layings. 46 (3) SAMPLES OF FOOD EXAMINED DURING THE YEAR. (a) Bacteriologist— Date. 1937. Sample. Result of Analysis. Action taken. Jan. 11 Toheroas Shell Fish Condition of Sample—1 small piece of tin, about 1¼ in. square, found amongst contents of can. None. General appearance—Strong-smelling brownish fluid (?? curried). No. of micro-organisms developing on gelatin (aerobically) at 68° F. (3 days) averaged 96 per c.c. No. of micro-organisms developing on agar (aerobically) at 98° F. (48 hours) averaged 256 per c.c. B. Coli absent from 50 to 0.001 c.c. of sample. Coliform organisms not present. Other organisms—Streptococci and B. Welchi not present. Films show a gram positive coccus only. Remarks.—From a bacteriological point of view this is a satisfactory specimen. Oct. 15 Drinking water Condition of water—Cloudy. All drinking- water tanks were emptied and thoroughly cleansed before taking in fresh water. General appearance—Slight deposit. No. of micro-organisms developing on gelatin (aerobically) at 68 deg. F. (three days), averaged 360,000 per c.c. No. of micro-organisms developing on agar (aerobically) at 98 deg. F. (48 hours), averaged 439,000 per c.c. Bacillus coli (typical) absent from 50 to 0.001 per c.c. of sample. Coliform organisms—B. lactis aerogenes and B. acidi lactici isolated from water. Other organisms—Streptococci not present. B. Welchi not present. Negative for typhoid group. Remarks—In view of the high bacterial contents and the presence of coliform organisms, I consider that this water is unfit for drinking purposes. (b) Analyst:— 1937. Jan. 1 Sugar Contained 0.17 grains of tin per pound. None. „ 7 Sugar Strands Free from the presence of prohibited colouring matter. None. „ 8 Sardines Contained 7 parts of lead per million. None. „ 9 Yeast Tablets Found to be free from the presence of arsenic, B. Coli Communis, and other deleterious ingredients. In addition the yeast was found to be in an active condition. None. „ 11 Sardines Contained 4 parts of lead per million. None. „ 12 Dried Apple Pomace The sedimentation test in carbon tetrachloride, when applied to this sample, gave 0.85 % of a black substance, of which 35.6 % was carbonaceous matter, the remainder being sand and siliceous matter, no poisonous metals were detected. None. „ 12 Smoked Salmon Contained 40 parts of benzoic acid per million. Re-exported. „ 12 Smoked Salmon Contained 35 parts of benzoic acid per million. Ditto. „ 15 Sardines Contained 5 parts of lead per million. None. „ 18 Tinned Fish (3) These samples on examination gave the following results :— None. Sample. Tin, Grains per pound. Lead, parts per million. Sild 0.5 2 Kipper Snacks None 1 Sild None 1 „ 18 *Smoked Salmon Contained 870 parts of benzoic acid per million. Be-exported. 47 Date. 1937. Sample. Result of Analysis. Action taken Jan. 20 Sardines Contained 9 parts of lead per million. None. 22 „ Yeast Free from presence of arsenic. None. „ 22 Foie Gras Free from metallic contamination and prohibited preservatives. None. „ 28 Smoked Salmon Contained 1,610 parts of benzoic acid per million. Be-exported. Feb. 8 Smoked Salmon Lax Free from the presence of preservatives. None. „ 9 Tomato Paste Free from the presence of copper. None. „ 10 Brisling in Tomato Sauce Free from metallic contamination. None. „ 11 Preserved Cherries (Cocktail). Free from the presence of prohibited colouring matter and preservatives. None. „ 11 Canned Peas Free from the presence of copper. None. „ 23 Marmalade Free from the presence of prohibited colouring matter and preservatives. None. „ 24 Sardines Contained 7 parts of lead per million. None. 26 Orange Marmalade Pulp Contained 1,048 parts of sulphur dioxide per million. None. „ 26 Sardines Contained seven parts of lead per million. None. „ 26 Tomato Puree Contained 0.42 grains of tin per pound. Free from the presence of other metallic contamination. None. Mar. 9 Sardines Contained 22 parts of lead per million. Consignment re-exported. „ 9 Sugar Contained 0.17 grains of tin per pound. None. „ 10 Tinned Cheese Contained 5.4 grains of tin per pound. The sample was also somewhat rancid. Destroyed. „ 10 Canned Fish (4) These samples on examination gave the following results:— None. Sample. Tin, Grains per pound. Lead, parts per million. Sild 0.14 4 Brisling 0.22 None Sild 0.12 None Sild 0.15 2 „ 13 Canned Fish (5) These samples on examination gave the following results:— None. Sample No. Tin, Grains per pound. Dressed Crab None. Brisling 0.44 Sild 0.12 Herrings in Tomato None. Herring Roes None. All samples free from the presence of lead. Herrings in tomato free from copper. April 1 Sugar (2) These samples on examination were found to contain 0.33 and 0.33 grains of tin per pound respectively. None. „ 2 Sardines Contained 12 parts of lead per million. None. „ 7 Sardines Contained 7 parts of lead per million. None. „ 9 Limes Contained 1,055 parts of sulphur dioxide per million. None. „ 15 Vegetables (tinned) Free from the presence of preservatives and prohibited colouring matter. None. „ 23 Smoked sealax Free from the presence of preservatives and prohibited colouring matter. None. „ 23 Smoked Sea Salmon Free from the presence of preservatives and prohibited colouring matter. None. „ 23 Macedoines de Legumes Free from the presence of copper salts. None. „ 23 Apricot Pulp Contained 0.33 grains of tin per pound None. „ 23 Shrimp Extract Free from the presence of prohibited colouring matter and preservatives. None. „ 23 Anchovy Fillets Free from the presence of metallic contamination. None. „ 23 Sardines Contained 5 parts of lead per million. None. „ 23 Sardines (2) Contained 17 and 4 parts of lead per million respectively. Warning Letter to Importer. 48 Date. 1987. Sample. Result of Analysis. Action taken. April23 Canned Fish (7) These samples on examination gave the following results:— Sample No. 3 detained for further sampling. Sample Tin, Grains per pound 1 Brisling 0.2 2 Dressed Crab 0.25 Sample No. 4 Result of Analysis forwarded to Medical Officer of Health. Holborn. (see below) *3 Sild in Oil 2.67 4 Sild in Oil 1.91 5 Smoked Salmon Paste None 6 Anchovy Paste None 7 Brisling 0.15 All samples free from the presence of prohibited colouring matter and preservatives. Samples Nos. 1,2, 5,6 and 7 None. „ 23 Margarine This sample on examination gave the following result:— None. Sample Tin, Grains per pound Moisture 10.0% Reichert value 4.3 In addition, the sample was found to be free from the presence of prohibited preservatives and colouring matter. „ 29 Canned Fish (12) These samples on examination gave the following results:— Samples Nos. 2 and 6, consignments destroyed. Sample Lead, parts per million Tin, grains per pound 1 Brisling in Oil None 0.15 (see above) *2 Sild in Oil None 1.66 3 Sild in Oil None 0.5 Remainder None. 4 Sild in Tomato 2 None 5 Sild in Tomato 2 None 6 Sild in Oil None 2.46 7 Sild in Tomato 3 None 8 Sild in Oil None 0.45 9 Sild in Tomato 3 None 10 Dressed Crab 3 None 11 Sild in Tomato 2 None 12 Sild in Oil None 1.25 In addition, all samples containing tomato were free from the presence of copper. May 3 Dressed Crab This sample was free from the presence of tin, but contained 2 parts of lead per million. None. „ 7 Brislings This sample was found to contain tin compounds equivalent to 0.35 grains of tin per pound, and 3 parts of lead per million. Free from the presence of prohibited preservatives. None. „ 7 Quencheas Contained 1 part of lead per million. None. „ 8 Milk Powder Free from the presence of prohibited preservatives and metallic contamination. None. „ 20 Smoked Sea Salmon (2) Free from the presence of prohibited colouring matter, preservatives and tin. None. „ 20 Canned Fish (4) These samples on examination gave the following results:— None. Sample Tin, Grains per pound Sild None Brisling 0.10 Sild 0.15 Sild 1.83 „ 20 Soft Roes Contained 2 parts of lead per million. None. „ 20 Dressed Crab Contained 3 parts of lead per million. None. „ 27 Tomato puree Free from the presence of prohibited colouring matter, preservatives and metallic contamination. None. June 3 Canned Peas Contained 0.08 grains of tin per pound. None. „ 3 Prepared Mustard Free from the presence of prohibited colouring matter, preservatives and metallic contamination. None. „ 9 Black Cherry Jam Free from presence of prohibited preservatives. None. „ 9 Passion Fruit Juicie Free from presence of benzoate preservative. None. 11 Apricot Pulp Contained 1,355 parts of sulphur dioxide per million. None. 11 "Cheez" Free from the presence of prohibited colouring matter and preservatives. None. 49 Date. 1937. Sample. Result of Analysis. Action taken. June 15 Pilchards in Tomato Sauce. Contained 4 parts of lead per million. Free from the presence of preservatives, copper and other colouring matter. None. „ 18 Sild (2) These samples on examination were found to contain 0.46 and 0.37 grains of tin per pound respectively. None. „ 19 Orange Pulp Contained 3,420 parts of sulphur dioxide per million. Consignment re-exported. „ 30 Sardines Contained 8 parts of lead per million. None. July 1 Sea Salmon Free from presence of prohibited perservatives and colouring matter. None. „ 1 Canned fish (9) These samples on examination gave the following results:— Samples 1-4 and 6-9, none. Sample No. Tin, grains per pound Sample 5 detained for analysis of further sample (see * below). 1 Herring roes 0.15 2 Mackerel in wine sauce 0.20 3 Dressed crab 0.10 4 Dressed crab None *5 Sild in oil 2.71 6 Sild in tomato 0.22 7 Sild in oil 0.29 8 Crab None 9 Sild in oil 0.25 In addition the sild in tomato was free from presence of copper and other colouring matter. „ 6 Sild (*see above) Contained 2.56 grains of tin per pound. Consignment re-exported. „ 12 Sardines Contained 3 parts of lead per million. None. 14 Canned fish (9) These samples on examination gave the following results :— None. Sample No. Tin, grains per pound 1 Sild in tomato None 2 Dressed crab None 3 Sild in oil 0.20 4 Dressed crab None 5 Brisling 0.16 6 Sild in oil 0.13 7 Dressed crab None 8 Brisling 0.25 9 Sild in oil 0.11 „ 16 Tomato juice Free from prohibited preservatives. None. „ 20 Sardines (4) On examination these samples were found to contain 8, 7, 9 and 8 parts of lead per million, respectively. Warning letter to importers. „ 20 Caviare Free from prohibited preservatives and colouring matter. None. „ 20 Jam Contained 660 parts of benzoic acid per million. None. Personal gift. Not for Sale. „ 20 Sardines Contained 4 parts of lead per million. None. „ 26 Sardines Contained 12 parts of lead per million. Warning letter to importer. „ 28 Anchovies Contained 0.42 grains of tin per pound. None. „ 28 Canned fish (8) These samples on examination gave the following results:— Samples Nos. 1, 2, 3, 5, 6 and 8, None. Sample No. Tin, grains per pound 1 Brisling None Sample 7 re-exported. 2 Sild in tomato 0.15 3 Sild in oil 0.21 4 Sild in oil 2.1 5 Sild in oil 0.09 6 Sild in oil 0.12 *7 Sild in tomato 2.5 8 Brisling 0.15 In addition the two sild in tomato were free from copper. „ 30 Sardines Contained 5 parts of lead per million. None. 50 Date. 1937. Sample. Result of Analysis. Action taken. Aug. 4 Corned beef (4) The tins were incubated at blood heat for 12 days, after which they were examined with a view to measuring the volume of gas which might have formed during this period. One of the tins still retained a vaeuum, whilst two others did not evolve any gas on being punctured, although there was no vacuum. The fourth tin showed no further blowing after being kept at blood heat for eight days. To Bermondsey for sorting under supervision of Medical Officer of Health. „ 5 Sardines Contained 6 parts of lead per million. None. „ 5 Tunny fish Contained 0.15 grains of tin per pound. None. „ 5 Sild in tomato Contained 2.50 grains of tin per pound. „ 6 Apple juice Free from the presence of prohibitive colouring matter and preservatives. None. „ 12 Canned fish (4) These samples on examination gave the following results:— None. Sample No. Tin, Grains per pound. 1 Shrimps None 2 Sild 0.05 3 Dressed crab None 4 Brisling 0.1 „ 12 Blackcurrant juice Contained 1,060 parts of sulphur dioxide per million. Free from presence of prohibited colouring matter. Released under guarantee in accordance with Article 11 (1) (iii) (b) of the Regulations. „ 17 Pectin Contained 325 parts of sulphur dioxide per million. Released under Article 11 (l)(iii)(6) of the Regulations. „ 19 Grapefruit squash Contained 95 parts of sulphur dioxide per million. Free from prohibited preservatives. None. „ 19 Sugar (2) These samples contained 0.92 and 0.58 grains of tin per pound respectively. None. „ 19 Blackcurrant pulp Contained 856 parts of sulphur dioxide per million. None. „ 20 Salmon substitute Free from the presence of prohibited colouring matter and preservatives. None. „ 24 Salmon substitute Free from the presence of prohibited colouring matter and preservatives. None. „ 26 Apricot pulp Contained 1,900 parts of sulphur dioxide per million. Re-exported. „ 26 Canned fish (4) These samples on analysis gave the following results:— None. Sample No. Tin, Grains per pound 1 Sild in oil 0.10 2 Gaffelbiter None 3 Sild in oil 0.17 4 Brisling 0.21 In addition, the sample of Gaffelbiter (herring titbits) was free from the presence of prohibited colouring matter and preservatives. „ 28 Grape juice Free from prohibited colouring matter and preservatives. None. „ 31 Diner-Boco (mixed vegetables and meat). Contained 0.25 grains of tin per pound. Free from prohibited preservatives. None. Sept. 1 Cauliflower Contained 150 parts of sulphur dioxide per million. Free from prohibited preservatives. Released for pickle manufacture only. „ 8 Mango pulp Contained 4,638 parts of sulphur dioxide per million. Released under Article 4 (l)(iii)(6) of the Regulations. „ 8 Cauliflower Free from prohibited preservatives. None. 51 Date. 1937. Sample. Result of Analysis. Action taken. Sept. 8 Canned fish (10) These samples on examination gave the following results:— None. Sample No. Tin, grains per pound 1 Sild None 2 Crab None 3 Sild None 4 Sild 0.55 5 Herrings 010 6 Crab None 7 Sild 0.67 8 Sild 1.37 9 Sild None 10 Dressed crab None „ 10 Trimoline (sugar invert from molasses). Free from prohibited preservatives and arsenic. None. „ 10 Ham roll Free from metallic contamination and prohibited preservatives. None. „ 14 Angelica Contained 22 parts of sulphur dioxide per million. None. „ 14 Drained cherries Free from prohibited preservatives and colouring matter. None. „ 14 Trennfix (oil compound) Contained 380 parts of benzoic acid per million. Unable to detect any other deleterious ingredients. None (not for consumption), „ 27 Sardines Contained 4 parts of lead per million. None. „ 30 Pate de foie gras Free from metallic contamination, prohibited preservatives and colouring matter. None. „ 30 Sild in sauce Ditto. None. „ 30 Mackerel fillets Contained 2 parts of lead per million. None. „ 30 Gherkins Contained 5 parts of copper per million. None. „ 30 Slab chocolate Unable to detect anything of a deleterious nature. Free from metallic contamination and alkaloids and the fat seems to be a cocoa butter with some milk fat. None. Oct, 5 Sardines Contained 11 parts of lead per million and 1.2 grains of tin per pound. Consignment re-exported. „ 8 Canned fish (10) These samples on examination gave the following results:— None. Sample. Tin, grains per pound Copper, parts per million Sild in tomato None. None. Herrings in tomato None. None. Herrings in tomato None. None. Sild in oil 0.21 —- Brisling 0.1 - Sild in oil 0.15 - Sild in tomato None. 5 Sild in oil 0.2 — Crab None. None. Kipper snacks None. — „ 8 Currants Contained 10 parts of copper per million. Reported to the Ministry of Health. „ 8 Candied peel Contained 50 parts of sulphur dioxide per million. None. „ 8 Doughnut flour Free from the presence of prohibited preservatives. None. „ 13 Currants (4) These samples were found to contain 5, 6, a trace and 6 parts of copper per million respectively. Reported to the Ministry of Health. „ 8 Orange juice Contained 675 parts of sulphur dioxide per million. None. „ 15 Sardines (2) These samples contained 4 and 5 parts of lead per million respectively. None. „ 16 Chocolate wafers (4) These samples were all found to contain traces of boric acid. (Boric acid is a normal constituent of the cocoa bean.) None. „ 23 Currants (2) These samples showed 2 parts per million and a trace of copper respectively. None. „ 28 Boneless Herrings This sample was found to be free from metallic contamination and prohibited preservatives. None. „ 28 Turkish Delight This sample was found to be free from metallic contamination and prohibited preservatives. None. „ 28 Sardines Contained 3 parts of lead per million. None. „ 28 Apricot paste Contained 483 parts of sulphur dioxide per million. None. 52 Date. 1937. Sample. Result of Analysis. Action taken. Nov. 5 Raisins and powder On examination the raisins were found to be covered with a powder containing asbestos and boric acid. (The cargo of the ship included asbestos and boric acid in bags.) The consignment of 800 boxes was reconditioned at the Dock. „ 11 Grape juice Contained 540 parts of sulphur dioxide per million. Beleased under Part 11. 4 (1) (iii) (b) of the Regulations. „ 11 Macaroni Free from the presence of prohibited preservatives. None. „ 16 Mustard Contained 6 parts of lead per million. Free from the presence of prohibited preservatives. Letter to Importer and Report to Ministry of Health. „ 16 Sardines (2) These samples contained 5 and 3 parts of lead per million respectively. None. „ 17 Raisins Free from the presence of both boric acid and asbestos powder. None. „ 18 Canned Fish (7) These samples on examination gave the following results None. Sample No. Tin, Grains per pound Brisling 0.25 Crab None Sild in Oil 0.06 Ditto 0.8 Ditto 0.15 Ditto 0.5 Sild in Tomato None „ 19 Mustard Contained 9 parts of lead per million. Letter to Importer. „ 24 Sardines (2) These samples were found to contain 7 and 4 parts per million of lead, respectively. The former was reported to the Medical Officer of Health of Bermondsey. „ 24 Butter Free from the presence of prohibited colouring matter and preservatives, including boron. None. „ 26 Canned Fish (3) All 3 samples were found to be free from the presence of prohibited preservatives, colouring matter, tin and lead. None. „ 26 Sugar Contained 0.12 grains of tin per pound. None. „ 26 Powdered yeast Free from the presence of arsenic. None. „ 29 Fruit in mustard Contained 0.08 grain of tin per pound. Free from lead and prohibited preservatives. None. „ 30 Sardines (2) These samples contained 1 and 2 parts of lead per million, respectively. None. Dec. 2 Maggi flavouring paste (meat essence). Contained 5 parts of lead per million and 0.25 grain of tin per pound. Free from the presence of prohibited preservatives. Letter to Importer. „ 7 Mustard Contained 5 parts of lead per million. Letter to Importer. „ 7 Whey powder Free from the presence of prohibited preservatives. None. „ 7 Canned fish (8) These samples on examination gave the following results:— None. Sample No. Tin, Grains per pound. Crab None. Sild 0.10 Brisling 0.25 Sild 0.10 Brisling 0.54 Brisling 1.33 Sild 0.15 Sild 1.92 „ 8 Sardines (2) These samples each contained 4 parts of lead per million. None. „ 8 Sild Contained 2.1 grains of tin per pound. Further samples taken ( see * below). 53 Date. 1937. Sample. Result of Analysis. Action taken Dec. 8 Tomato paste Contained 60 parts of copper per million. None. 10 Sild* (6 tins) Contained 1.1 grains of tin per pound. None. „ 10 Sardines (2) These samples contained 4 and 5 parts of lead per million respectively. None. .. 13 Mustard Contained 2 parts of lead per million. None. „ 14 Sardines (2) These samples contained 4 and 2 parts of lead per million respectively. None. „ 15 Canned tomatoes (2) Both tins were found to contain small quantities of gas, under 1 cubic centimetre in each case. Consignment sorted. „ 16 Cheese (2) Both samples were found to be free from prohibited preservatives and metallic contamination other than traces only of tin. None. „ 17 French mustard Contained 4 parts of lead per million. None. „ 17 Sardines Contained 2 parts of lead per million. None. 17 Tomato powder Contained 10 parts of lead for million. None. Consignment had left the dock. „ 22 Soup powder These samples on examination gave the following results:— None. Sample. Lead, parts per million. Kidney 4 Tomato 4 Mushroom 2 All samples free from the presence of copper. „ 29 Tomato puree Contained 10 parts of copper per million. Sampled for Ministry of Health. 30 Tomato powder This sample contained 12 parts of copper per million and 12 parts of lead per million. Consignment re-exported. FERTILISERS AND FEEDING STUFFS ACT, 1926. The following samples were examined by the Agricultural Analyst:— Date. 1937. Sample. Result of Analysis. Action taken. Feb. 9 Yeast Meal Nitrogen 7.04% Consignment released. Albuminoids (Protein) 44.0% Free from the presence of arsenic. „ 9 Bone Meal Nitrogen 6.16% Result of analysis forwarded to Medical Officer of Health, City of London. Phosphoric Acid (P205) 15.18% The sample contained 8% of sandy matter and 5% of woody fibre. „ 9 Bone Meal Nitrogen 6.16% Ditto. Phosphoric Acid (P205) 15.18% The sample contained 10% of sandy matter and 5% of woody fibre. ALIENS ORDER, 1920. Medical Inspection of Aliens. During the year 26,546 Aliens (excluding Alien Seamen) and 7.161 Transmigrants landed in the Port of London. Medical Certificates under the Aliens Order were issued in respect of four Aliens as follows:— Lunatic, Idiot, or Mentally Deficient 1 Undesirable for Medical reasons 1 Suffering from acute Infectious Disease 2 Total 4 54 TRAINING SHIPS. The six Training Ships now within the district of the Port of London Health Authority are as follows:— " Cornwall" Lying at Denton. "Exmouth" Grays. "Warspite" Grays. "Worcester" „ Greenhithe. "Stork" „ Hammersmith. "Triton" „ Gravesend. The following eases of Infectious Disease occurred on these vessels during the year:— T.S. " Worcester" 30 cases Measles. BYE-LAWS—OFFENSIVE CARGOES. One hundred and ten cases of infringement of the above-mentioned Bye-laws were reported during the year. Written intimation was sent to the owners of the barges concerned. During the year the desirability of amending the Bye-laws made by the Port Sanitary Authority of the Port of London under the Order made by the Local Government Board on the 29th December, 1894, was under consideration and new Bye-laws are at present in the course of preparation. PARROTS (Prohibition of Import) REGULATIONS, 1930. 540 parrots, &c., came under the notice of your Officers during the year. 85 Notices were issued in respect of 241 parrots, &c. Number exported in respect of Notices served 230 Number destroyed (Notice served to export) 11 Number destroyed (Notice not served) 4 Number admitted under Ministry of Health permits 285 Bodies of birds sent for investigation to the Ministry of Health 10 540 In addition, one parrot was reported as having died in a vessel during the voyage, the body being destroyed before arrival in the Port. LEGAL PROCEEDINGS. Date. 1937. Name of Vessel. Offence. Police Court. Result. Jan. 1; is. "Umona" Attempt to import two parrots in contravention of the Parrots (Prohibition of Import) Regulations, 1930. Thames Summons dismissed under the Probation of Offenders Act. Defendant to pay one guinea towards the cost of the prosecution. On the 17th December, 1936, a report was received from the Inspector of Police, West India Dock, that a member of the crew of the ss. "Umona" when leaving the dock premises had been stopped and searched by a police constable, and found to have in his jacket pockets two wireless valve boxes, each containing a live African Budgerigar, the importation of which is prohibited under the above-mentioned Regulations. The previous day, the owner of the birds on being questioned by a Preventive Officer of H.M. Customs, produced a cage of birds of a variety of South African Canary, and declared that he had no budgerigars or other birds of the love bird species. As this was clearly an attempt to contravene the above-mentioned Regulations, your Chairman authorised reference of the case to the City Solicitor with a view to the taking of legal proceedings. 55 Mr. Solicitor issued a summons which was heard at the Thames Police Court on the 1st January, 1937, when the Magistrate, in dismissing the summons under the Probation of Offenders Act, observed that in view of defendant's previous good character he would not record a conviction against him. He was of opinion that justice would be met by defendant paying a sum of one guinea towards the cost of the prosecution. Date. 1937. Name of Vessel. Offence. Police Court. Result. Jan. 22 ss. "Arcturus" Application for an order to destroy as unfit for human consumption 160 cases of canned sild in oil, seized on account of metallic contamination (tin). Thames Order to destroy granted by Magistrate. On the 22nd January, 1937, an application was made to the Magistrate at the Thames Police Court for an Order to destroy 160 cases of canned sild in oil which had been under detention since November, 1934, in the Regent's Canal Dock as unfit for human consumption on account of excessive metallic contamination. The Magistrate examined the goods at the Regent's Canal Dock and granted the necessary Order. Date. 1937. Name of Vessel. Offence. Police Court. Result. Sept. 16 and Sept. 23 ss. "Sardinia" Importing 15 barrels of orange pulp containing excess sulphite preservative in contravention of Article 11 (I) of the Public Health (Preservatives, &c., in Food) Regulations. Thames Defendant through his Solicitor pleaded guilty, and in view of his previous record urged that no conviction be recorded against him. The Magistrate accepted Defendant's explanation that there was no mala fides, and dismissed the summons under the Probation of Offenders Act, on condition that the Defendant paid a sum of 20 guineas towards the costs of the Prosecution. ASSOCIATION OF PORT HEALTH AUTHORITIES OF THE BRITISH ISLES, AUTUMN MEETING. The Autumn Meeting of the above-mentioned Association was held in London on Thursday and Friday, 16th and 17th September. The business meeting was held in the London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine on Thursday, the 16th September, at which your Medical Officer gave a practical demonstration of "The Inspection of Canned Foods." On Friday, the 17th September, at the invitation of your Chairman and by courtesy of the Port of London Authority, the Delegates to the Meeting embarked on the Steam Yacht "St. Katharine" at Tower Pier, and proceeded down River to the Royal Docks. The Launch entered and sailed round the Docks, the Delegates being greatly impressed by the amount of shipping using the Docks. Thirty-nine vessels, representing a total of 376,646 nett tons, were either discharging or loading in the Docks during the visit. 56 On leaving the Docks the Launch proceeded down the River to Gravesend. During the journey Lunch was served. The Toast List was as follows:— THE KING. Proposed by the Chairman. The Lord Mayor and Corporation of the City of London. Proposed by Colonel P. G. Stock, C.B., C.B.E., M.B. Response by Major J. Lockhart Gow, M.C., C.C. The Association of Port Sanitary Authorities of the British Isles. Proposed by the Chairman. Response by Alderman J. Moore, J.P., President of the Association. The Ladies. Proposed by F. Whittingham, Esq., J.P., C.C. Response by Alderman Mrs. L. M. Foster Welch, J.P. The Chairman. Proposed by Alderman H. J. Maggs, J.P. Response by the Chairman. At the conclusion of Lunch the Delegates inspected the Authority's Isolation Hospital at Denton, the Ambulance Launch "Howard Deighton" and the Boarding Station Hulk "Hygeia." The return journey was made by Launch and the company disembarked at Tower Pier. The Delegates all expressed their appreciation of a very interesting and instructive visit, and their gratitude for the very generous hospitality extended to them by the Port of London Health Authority. AMBULANCE SERVICES RENDERED BY M.L. "HOWARD DEIGHTON." At about 3 a.m. on the 23rd September, 1937, a message was received by the Medical Officer on duty on the Hulk "Hygeia" to the effect that the Master of the London County Council Sludge Vessel "G. W. Humphreys" had collapsed while on duty on the bridge. The vessel had been anchored in Gravesend Reach, and medical assistance was requested. Owing to thick fog the Medical Officer was unable to reach the "G. W. Humphreys" until 10 a.m. The patient was found to be suffering from cerebral hæmorrhage, and was transferred by the Motor Launch "Howard Deighton" to Gravesend General Hospital. At noon on the 25th September, 1937, the Ruler of Pilots, Gravesend, informed the Medical Officer on duty on the Hulk "Hygeia" that he had received a message from the ss. "Horsted" that the Chief Engineer of that vessel had met Avith an accident and required medical assistance. The vessel arrived off Gravesend at 12.15 p.m., and Avas immediately boarded by the Medical Officer on duty. He found the patient suffering from severe scalding on the forearms, hands and face. First aid was rendered, and the patient transferred by the Motor Launch "HoAvard Deighton" to Tilbury Hospital. On 27th October, 1937, whilst the ss. "Avila Star" was proceeding up River in the Gravesend Reach, the Pilot collapsed on the bridge. Your Boarding Medical Officer was informed that the Pilot was dying, but on arrival at the ship he was found to be dead. The body was taken off by the "HoAvard Deighton," and subsequently conveyed to a mortuary, your Boarding Medical Officer duly notifying the Gravesend Coroner. On the 1st November I received a letter from the Cinque Ports Pilots' Representative and the Honorary Secretary, expressing the sincere gratitude of the Committee of the Cinque Ports Pilots for the assistance rendered by your Gravesend Staff. On 27th October, folloAving a collision betAveen the ss. "Dalmuir" and m.v. "Jean L.D.," the "Howard Deighton" ran alongside the "Dalmuir" and offered medical assistance. Subsequently, three of the crew were taken to the "Hygeia," where they were treated for shock and abrasions, after which they proceeded to their homes in Gravesend. 57 AIR-RAID PRECAUTIONS. Although up to the present no duties in connection with the Air-Raid Precautions Scheme for the Port of London have been assigned to the Port Health Authority, there is no doubt that in the event of war all our activities would have to be carried on, and that in addition we should have to deal with special problems arising from ships and docks being attacked by hostile aircraft. It is quite possible that mustard gas both in bombs and in spray would be used in attacks on the Port and even on shipping entering the Port. It therefore seemed desirable that the Staff of the Port Health Authority should have some training in anti-gas measures both for their own protection and in the interests of the work of the Authority. Through the courtesy of the General Manager of the Port of London Authority, it was arranged that 52 volunteers from your Staff should attend a course of lectures on Air-Raid Precautions given by the Authority's Medical Officer, Dr. T. Harris White. STAFF. Sanitary Inspectors.—I am pleased to report that Mr. Reginald Clifford, one of your Sanitary Inspectors employed on Food Inspection, succeeded in passing the final examination of the City and Guilds of London Institute in the Chemical and Bacteriological Control of Milk and Milk Products. DANGEROUS DRUGS. During the year six Certificates authorising the purchase of scheduled Dangerous Drugs were issued by your Medical Officer as follows:— Date. 1937. Person authorised. Drugs specified. Mar. 6 Master of ss. "Everhope" 4 oz. Laudanum (Tinct. Opii). „ 16 Master of ss. "Schwarzes Meer" Tincture of Opium 50 gr. April 1 Master of ss. "Snar" „ „ „ 4 oz. Oct. 26 Master of ss. "Utsire" „ „ „ 3 oz. Nov. 25 Master of ss. "Betancuria" „ 3½ oz. Morphine Hydrochloride 12½ gr. Cocaine Hydrochloride 10 gr. Dec. 29 Master of ss. "Thermopylae" Medinal, 50 tabs., 7½ gr. These Certificates were issued under the Dangerous Drugs (No. 3) Regulations, 1923, amending the Dangerous Drugs Regulations, 1921, Regulation 15 of which is as follows:— "If a foreign ship in any port in Great Britain requires to obtain a supply of any of the drugs in order to complete the necessary equipment of the ship, the Master of the Ship is authorised to purchase and be in possession of such quantity of any of the drugs as may be certified by the Medical Officer of Health of the Port where the ship is (or in his absence by the Assistant Medical Officer of Health of the Port) to be necessary for the purpose, the quantity not to exceed what is required for the use of the ship until it next reaches its home port. The certificate given by the Medical Officer or Assistant Medical Officer of Health of the Port shall be marked by the supplier with the date of the supply, and shall be retained by him and kept available for inspection." CANAL BOATS ACTS. In accordance with Section 249 (3) of the Public Health Act, 1936, I beg to present herewith the Annual Report on the working of the Canal Boats Acts and Regulations and Part X. of the Public Health Act, 1936, within the district of the Port of London Health Authority during the year ended 31st December, 1937. The Acts and Regulations apply within the whole district under the jurisdiction of the Port of London Health Authority, including the River and Docks, as a "canal" for the purposes of the Acts "includes any river, inland navigation, lake or water being within the body of a county, whether it is or not within the ebb and flow of the tide." 58 The navigation, in addition to the enclosed Docks, includes the following navigable tributary rivers and creeks of the River Thames:— On the right bank— From Teddington downwards:— Wandsworth Creek (River Wandle). Hay's Dock. St. Saviour's Dock. Part of the Grand Surrey Canal within (he Surrey Commercial Docks. Deadman's Dock. Deptford Creek (River Ravensbourne). Dartford Creek (Rivers Cray and Darenth). The entrance to Gravesend Canal. Cliffe Creek. Yantlet and Coalmouth Creeks. Part of the River Medway and of the Swale. On the left bank— From Teddington downwards:— The entrance of the River Brent. Hammersmith Creek. Chelsea Creek. Grosvenor Dock. Limekiln Creek. Bow Creek (River Lea). Rainham Creek (River Ingrebournt). Mucking Creek. Thames Haven and Hole Haven. Havengore Creek. River Roach as far as Rochford. RIVER, The whole of this area is divided into three districts, known as the Upper, Middle and Lower; each district is in charge of an Inspector, as follows:— Upper District Teddington to Greenwich Inspector McDermott, £340 per annum. Middle District Greenwich to Erith Inspector Beattie, £355 per annum. Lower District Brith to the seaward limits of the Port (including part of the River Medway). Inspector Dring, £300 per annum. DOCKS. The Docks are divided into four districts, known as the Central, Eastern, Western and Gravesend Districts:— Central District West India Dock South West India Dock Poplar Dock Millwall Dock East India Dock Inspector Wright, £355 per annum. Eastern District Royal Albert Dock Royal Victoria Dock King George V. Dock Inspector Gray, £500 per annum. Inspector Hundy, £340 per annum. Western District London Dock St. Katharine Dock Regent's Canal Dock Inspector Madeley, £370 per annum. Gravesend District Tilbury Dock Left Shore of the River,from Purfleet down Right Shore of the River, from Northfleet down. Inspector Edwards, £440 per annum. INSPECTIONS. The total number of inspections for the year was 380, representing a nett number of 252 boats. The remainder—78—represents repeated visits by Inspectors of this Authority. The number of boats not conforming to the Acts and Regulations was 56 (inspected on 76 occasions), or 23.3 per cent. of the total inspections, the percentage for the previous five years being 14.24 per cent. NEW BOATS REGISTERED. Three new boats were registered during the year. REGISTRATIONS CANCELLED. Thirty-one boats were removed from the Register during the year. These had been either converted into uninhabited lighters or mooring pontoons or broken up. 59 Infringements in respect of:— Registration. 1937. Feb. 4 "Aboyne." Feb. 29 "Stanstead." „ 4 "Buston." May 3 "Fenny." „ 14 "Elstree." „ 13 "Fenny." „ 14 "Buckden." „ 13 "Gainsborough." „ 15 "Barnet." „ 13 "Hawkesbury." „ 15 "Barrhead." „ 31 "Perseverance IV" „ 21 "Edgware." June 8 "Coleshill." „ 21 "Cordite." July 29 "Tipton." "Coleshill." „ 28 "Naburn." Sept. 10 „ 28 "Traigulum." Absence of Certificate of Registration. 1937. Jan. 8 "Kildare" Registered Birmingham No. 1287. „ 8 "Leonard" „Uxbridge No. 593. Feb. 4 "Beading" „Rickmansworth No. 111. „ 4 "Penelope" „ „ No. 587. „ 4 "Leonard" „ Uxbridge No. 593. „ 25 "Franklin" „ Berkhampstead No. 338. Mar. 4 "Themis" „ Brentford No. 90. Apl. 14 "Capella" „ „ No. 572. „ 14 "Bude" „ „ No. 617. May 6 "Leonide" „ Bickmansworth No. 141. „ 13 "Leonide" „ „ No. 141. „ 13 "Cheam" „ „ No. 152. „ 27 "Chalfont" „ „ No. 150. „ 27 "Dunstable" „ „ No. 154. June 8 "Bawtry" „ Brentford No. 591. „ 8 "Gemini" „ „ No. 516. „ 16 "Greenlaw" „ Bickmansworth No. 157. „ 16 "Chipstead" „ „ No. 156. „ 16 "Enceladus" „ „ No. 538. „ 16 "Lyra" „ „ No. 539. Aug. 18 "Gemini" „ Brentford No. 516. Sept. 9 "Ashworth" „ Rickmansworth No. 178. „ 23 "Blake" „ Tamworth No. 140. „ 23 "Irene" „ Tring No. 119. „ 23 "Colin" „ No. 93. „ 23 "Iver" „ Birmingham No. 1260. Oct. 22 "Nunhead" „ Rickmansworth No. 90. „ 22 "Nuneaton" „ „ No. 155. „ 26 "Nell" „ Brentford No. 192. Nov. 11 "Perseverance" „ Port of London, No. 541. „ 16 "Fox" „ Uxbridge No. 554. „ 16 "Yeading" ,, Birmingham No. 1250. „ 16 "Duteous" „ „ No. 1448. „ 25 "Photos" „ Brentford No. 508. ,. 25 "Irene" „ Tring No. 129. Notification of Change of Master. Nil. Marking, &c. 1937. Feb. 17 "Prince" Registered Birmingham No. 1534. Apl. 14 "Banbury" „ Coventry No. 533. „ 13 "Buckden" „ Rickmansworth No. 621 „ 13 "Badsey" „ Brentford No. 619. „ 27 "Camborne" „ „ No. 625. June 3 "Chertsey" „ Coventry No. 539. „ 8 "Badsey" „ Brentford No. 619. Sept. 3 "Angel" „ Coventry No. 538. Oct. 6 "Tricot" „ Port of London No. 471 Certificate not Identifying Owner with Boat. Nil. 60 Overcrowding. 1937. Dec. 22 "Orion" Registered Daventry No. 463. Partition Separating Sexes. Nil. Males over Age. 1937. Dec. 22 "Orion" Registered Daventry No. 463 Females over Age. Nil. Cleanliness. 1937. Apl. 13 "Wye" Registered Brentford No. 466. Aug. 18 " Gemini" „ „ No. 516. Sept. 9 " Coronis" „ „ No. 578. 9 "Uskworth" „ Ricksmanworth No. 17 „ 10 "Bawtry" „ Brentford No. 591. Painting. 1937. Oct. 6 "Tricot" Registered Port of London No. 471. Ventilation. Nil. Dilapidations (including defective bulkheads). 1937. Jan. 8 "Milner" Registered Uxbridge No. 354. Feb. 4 "William" „ Brentford No. 441. „ 17 "Aster" „ Uxbridge No. 579. „ 17 "William" „ Brentford No. 441. „ 17 "Una" Tring No. 111. Aug. 18 "Gemini" „ Brentford No. 516. Oct. 6 " Tricot" „ Port of London No. 471. Nov. 22 "Nunhead" „ Rickmansworth No. 90. „ 22 "Nuneaton" No. 155. Dec. 13 "Slinfold" „ „ No. 112. Removal of Bilge Water. Nil. Without Pump. 1937. Jan. 8 "Liege" Registered Uxbridge No. 495. No proper Water Vessel. 1937. Mar. 4 "Themis" Registered Brentford No. 90. „ 4 "Milky Way" „ Bickmansworth No. 67. Aug. 18 "Gemini" „ Brentford No. 516. Nov. 22 "Nunhead" „ Bickmansworth No. 90. „ 22 "Nuneaton" No. 155. Double Bulkheads. Nil. Register. On the 31st December, 1937, there were 214 boats on the Register:— Propelled by Tugs and Oars 189 „ „ Steam 15 „ „ Motor 7 61 TABLE OF CANAL BOATS CARRYING CHILDREN ON BOARD. Year. No. of Boats. No. of Boats with Children. No. of Children. Average No. of Children per Boat. Percentage of Boats with Children 1928 79 13 66 4.15 18.98 1929 82 20 96 4.80 24.39 1930 91 13 35 2.70 14.29 1931 108 20 40 2.00 18.52 1932 94 12 28 2.33 12.77 1933 87 14 28 2.00 16.09 1934 79 16 39 2.45 20.25 1935 93 29 53 1.81 31.18 1936 136 49 80 1.63 36.03 1937 252 105 162 1.54 40.24 62 SUMMARY OF CANAL BOATS FOB THE YEAR ENDED 31st DECEMBER, 1937. Jan. Feb. March. April. May. June. July. Aug. Sept. Oct. Nov. Dec. TOTAL 1932. Total for Years 1936. 1933. 1934. 1935. New boats registered - - - - 2 1 - - - - - - 3 2 - 1 2 2 Registration owing to structural alteration - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 1 Registration for other purposes - — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — - No. of Inspections 23 43 8 52 72 17 3 9 38 24 33 8 330 236 205 131 129 167 Conforming to Acts and Regulations 19 32 6 38 60 8 2 7 29 20 27 6 254 200 189 117 106 132 Infringements in respect of:— Registration - 2 - 9 5 1 1 - 1 - - - 19 2 - - 2 2 Notification of change of Master - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - Absence of Certificate 2 4 1 3 5 6 - 1 5 3 6 - 36 7 6 6 6 25 Certificate not identifying owner with boat - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - Marking, &c. - 1 - 1 3 2 - — 1 1 - - 9 4 2 2 3 9 Overcrowding - - - - - - - - - - - 1 1 - - - - - Partition separating sexes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - Males over age - - - - - - - - - - - 1 1 - - - - - Females over age - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - Cleanliness - - - 1 - - - - 3 - - - 5 - - - 1 2 Painting - - - - - - - - - 1 - - 1 6 2 - 1 2 Ventilation - - - - - - - - - - - - - 3 - - 3 1 Dilapidations (including defective bulkheads) 1 4 - - - - - 1 - 1 2 1 10 18 7 7 10 5 Removal of bilge water - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - Without pump 1 - - - - - - - - - - - 1 - - - - - Refusal to admit Inspector - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - No proper water vessel - - 2 - - - - 1 - - 2 - 5 1 1 1 3 1 Double bulkheads - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - Notification of infectious disease - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - Detained for cleansing - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - Proceedings taken — - — — - - - - - - - - - - - - - - Written cautions given 6 - - 10 11 8 1 2 5 3 4 2 52 11 6 8 11 29 *Cautions attended to 1 2 5 3 3 3 2 1 5 5 5 5 40 13 9 12 15 24 Total registered by Port Health Authority since 1887 562 Cancelled 348 Actual number on Register, 31st December, 1937 214 * Includes cautions given during previous years and attended to during 1937. 68 APPENDIX I. MEDICAL INSPECTION. From 1st January to 31st December, 1937. (a) Gravesend. Jan. Feb. March a pril May June July August Sept. Oct. Nov. Dec. Total. No. Medically Inspected 199 189 232 199 229 191 194 207 175 210 170 189 2.384 No. of Passengers 1,640 1,201 1,631 2,009 3,373 3,433 4,436 3,528 3,798 2,350 1,815 1.705 30,919 No. of Crews 7,244 7,116 8,136 6,572 7.186 6,344 6,435 6,674 4,939 7.745 6,342 7,162 81,895 No. of Foreign Arrivals 1,013 949 1,139 1,097 1,195 1,220 1,237 1,255 1,193 1,200 1,112 1,112 13,722 (b) Sheerness. Jan. Feb March April May June July August Sept Oct. Nov. Dec. Total. No. Medically Inspected 9 12 13 13 12 22 28 31 19 25 21 26 231 No. of Passengers - - - - - - - - - - - - - No. of Crews 208 295 306 303 239 538 666 631 375 499 454 615 5,129 No. of Foreign Arrivals 46 50 55 62 64 72 76 85 77 77 81 76 821 APPENDIX II. Infectious Disease. disease. 1928. 1929. 1930. 1931. 1932. 1933. 1934. 1935. 1936. Mean Annual No. for 10 years ending 31st Dec., 1937. 1937. (a) Cases Reported: Cholera (including suspected cases) 5 2 1 1 3 — - — — 1.2 — Yellow Fever (ditto) - - - - - - - - - - - Plague (ditto) 2 1 — — — — — — — 0.3 — Small-pox 8 22 11 14 14 4 11 4 9 9.7 — Scarlet Fever 16 11 29 7 12 21 7 9 10 12.8 6 Diphtheria 13 17 9 16 10 7 13 5 16 10.9 3 Enteric Fever 72 46 25 23 23 29 23 16 29 31.4 28 Measles 47 48 50 11 25 26 38 41 16 35.9 57 German Measles 65 9 6 3 22 4 5 8 4 13.2 6 Erysipelas 4 4 2 2 2 1 2 2 2 2.3 2 Typhus Fever - - - - - - - 1 — 0.2 1 Continued Fever 2 — 1 - - - - - - 0.3 — Relapsing Fever 1 - - - - - - - - 0.1 — Tuberculosis:— Pulmonary 86 126 116 147 135 148 114 133 120 121.9 94 Other kinds 4 7 4 4 4 1 9 1 — 3.6 2 Other diseases (including ChickenPox) 499 653 904 1,118 791 460 516 647 543 663.9 508 Total 824 946 1,158 1,346 1,041 701 738 867 749 907.7 707 (b) Treated in Port Sanitary Hospital: Cholera (including suspected cases) - - - - - - - - - - - bellow Fever (ditto) - - - - - - - — — - - Plague (ditto) — - - - - - - — — - - Small-pox — 4 — — — — - — - 0.4 - Typhus Fever - - - - - - - 2* - 0.2 Scarlet Fever 5 7 12* - 4 15 5 2 1 5.3 2 Diphtheria 9 5 3 1 4 4 2 1 14* 4.4 1 Enteric Fever 20 23 9 4 9 6 11 6 9 10.4 7 Measles 11 18‡ **12 — 1 2 13 10 5 10.9 37 Erysipelas 1 - 1 - - - - - - 0.3 1 Parotitis - - - 21 2 4 4 5* 1 3.9 2 Continued Fever - - - - - - - - - - - Other diseases (including Chicken- Pox) 29 30 19* 23* 33 22 21 26 36 30.4 65 Total 75 87 56 49 53 53 56 52 66 66.2 115 * Includes one contact. **Includes three contacts. † Includes two contacts. ‡ Includes six contacts. 64 APPENDIX III.—Typhus Fever. Date. 1937. Name of Vessel. Where from. No. of Cases. Passenger or Crew Rating. How dealt with. (a) Landed from Vessels—Nil. (b) Died, Landed elsewhere or well on Arrival— Apl. 14 ss. "Glenfinlas" Dairen 1 Crew Landed at Singapore. Total 1 (1 Crew) APPENDIX IV.—Scarlet Fever. Date. 1937. Name of Vessel. Where from. No. of Cases. Passenger or Crew Rating. How dealt with. (a) Landed from Vessels— Sept. 30 Houseboat "Totherhome" Lying at Benfleet Creek. 1 Resident Remained on board. Oct. 31 ss. "Ascania" Montreal 1 Pass. Admitted to Port Isolation Hospital, Denton. Dec. 28 ss. "Corbrook" Seaham Harbour 1 Crew Admitted to Port Isolation Hospital, Denton. Total 3 (1 Passenger) (1 Residenl) (1 Crew) (b) Died, Landed elsewhere or well on Arrival— Oct. 4 ss. "Ascania" Montreal 2 Pass. Landed at Montreal. Total 2 (2 Passengers) APPENDIX V.—Diphtheria. Date. 1937. Name of Vessel. Where from. No. of Cases. Passenger or Crew Rating. How dealt with. (a) Landed from Vessels— June 2 ss. "Sapper" Lying in London Dock. 1 Crew Admitted to London County Council Isolation Hospital, Homerton. Nov. 2 Houseboat "May" Lying off Bankside 1 Resident Admitted to London County Council Park Hospital. Dec. 13 Police House Millwall Dock 1 Resident Admitted to London County Council Park Hospital. (2 Residents) Total 3 (1 Crew) (b) Died, Landed elsewhere or well on Arrival— Jan. 28 ss. "Highland Chieftain" Buenos Aires 1 Crew Well on arrival. Total 1 (1 Crew) APPENDIX VI.—Enteric Fever. Date. 1937. Name of Vessel. Where from. No. of Cases. Passenger or Crew Rating. How dealt with. (a) Landed from Vessels— Apl. 17 ss. "Maloja" Brisbane 1 Crew Admitted to Port Isolation Hospital Denton. June 22 ss. "Jamaica Producer" Kingston 1 Pass. Admitted to Seamen's Hospital, Greenwich. Carried forward 2 65 Enteric Fever—continued. Date. 1937. Name of Vessel. Where from. No. of Cases. Passenger or Crew Rating. r How dealt with. Brought forward 2 July 1 ss. "Highland Princess" Buenos Aires 1 Crew Admitted to Port Isolation Hospital, Denton. „ 23 ss. "Carmelfjell" Rimouski 1 Crew Admitted to London County Council Park Hospital. Oct. 4 ss. "City of Baroda" Calcutta 1 Crew Admitted to Hospital for Tropical Diseases, London, W.C.1. „ 9 ss. "Patroclus" Tsingtao 1 Crew Admitted to Seamen's Hospital, Royal Albert Dock. „ 15 ss. "Strathaird" Brisbane 1 Crew Admitted to Port Isolation Hospital, Denton. Dec. 2 ss. "Oronsay" Brisbane 1 Pass. Proceeded home in care of Medical Attendant. „ 5 ss. "Siris" West Indies 1 Crew Admitted to Port Isolation Hospital, Denton. „ 31 ss. "Banchi" Yokohama 1 Crew Admitted to Port Isolation Hospital, Denton. Total 10 (2 Passengers) (8 Crew) (b) Died, Landed elsewhere or well on Arrival— Jan. 12 ss. "Perseus" Dairen 1 Pass. Well on arrival. „ 27 ss. "Lakenby" Takerodi 1 Crew Landed at Takerodi. May 18 ss. "Clan Cameron" Pondicherry 1 Crew Well on arrival. Aug. 26 ss. "Orama" Brisbane 1 Crew Landed at Colombo. Sept. 7 ss. "Katori Maru" Yokohama 1 Pass. Landed at Port Said. „ 24 ss. "Chirdwin" Bangoon 1 Crew Well on arrival. Oct. 9 ss. "Mashobra" Calcutta 1 Pass. Well on arrival. ,, 15 ss. "Strathaird" Brisbane 4 Crew 1 landed at Fremantle, 1 landed at Bombay, 2 landed at Aden. 1 Pass. Landed at Port Said. „ 17 ss. "Castilian" Hull 1 Crew Landed at Hull. „ 20 ss. "City of Bangoon" Colombo 1 Crew Landed at Port Said. Dec. 4 ss. "Derbyshire" Bangoon 1 Crew Landed at Colombo. 5 ss. "Siris" West Indies 2 Crew Landed at Horta Fazal. „ 18 ss. "Shropshire" Bangoon 1 Crew Landed at Colombo. (5 Passengers) Total 18 (13 Crew) APPENDIX VII.—Measles. Date. 1937. Name of Vessel. Where from. No. of Cases. Passenger or Crew Rating. How dealt with. (a) Landed from Vessels— Apl. 4 ss. "Baltrover" Gdynia 1 Pass. Admitted to Port Isolation Hospital, Denton. „ 20 ss. "Baltrover" Gdynia 2 Pass. Admitted to Port Isolation Hospital, Denton. May 3 ss. "Melrose" Leith 1 Crew Admitted to Port Isolation Hospital, Denton. Carried forward 4 66 Measles—continued. 1937. Date. Name of Vessel. Where from. No. of Cases. Passenger or Crew Rating. How dealt with. Brought forward 4 May 3 ss. "Baltrover" Gdynia 1 Pass. Admitted to Port Isolation Hospital, Denton. „ 8 ss. "Fulham II" Fulham 1 Crew Admitted to London County Council South Western Hospital. „ 20 ss. "Jamaica Producer" West Indies 1 Crew Admitted to London County Council South Western Hospital. „ 23 Training Ship "Worcester" Lying at Greenhithe 1 Boy Admitted to Port Isolation Hospital, Denton. June 3 „ „ 2 Boys Admitted to Port Isolation Hospital, Denton. „ 4 „ „ 5 Boys Ditto. „ 5 „ „ 2 Boys Ditto. „ 6 „ „ 2 Boys Ditto. „ 7 „ „ 6 Boys Ditto. „ 8 „ „ 2 Boys Ditto. „ 13 ss. "Baltrover" Gdynia 2 Pass. (1 contact) Ditto. „ 14 Training Ship "Worcester" Lying at Greenhithe 3 Boys Ditto. „ 15 „ „ 5 Boys Ditto. „ 16 „ „ 2 Boys Ditto. July 5 ss. "Oxfordshire" Bangoon 2 Pass. Proceeded home by private conveyance. „ 23 ss. "Atlantis" Norwegian Cruise 1 Pass. Proceeded home by private conveyance. Dec. 27 ss. "Baltrover" Gdynia 1 Pass. Admitted to Port Isolation Hospital, Denton. Total 43 (10 Passengers) (30 Boys) (3 Crew) (b) Died, Landed elsewhere or well on Arrival— Jan. 6 ss. "Llangibby Castle" Mombasa 1 Pass. Landed at Southampton. Feb. 10 ss. "Erria" Bangkok 1 Pass. Well on arrival. May 31 ss. "Alaunia" Quebec 2 Pass. Landed at Quebec. June 1 ss. "Jamaica Pioneer" Kingston 1 Pass. Well on arrival. „ 4 ss. "Bajputana" Yokohama 1 Crew Well on arrival. 3 Pass. Landed at Colombo. „ 11 ss. "Narkunda" Brisbane 1 Pass. Well on arrival. „ 25 ss. "Mongolia" Brisbane 1 Pass. Well on arrival. July 5 ss. "Oxfordshire" Bangoon 1 Pass. Well on arrival. Aug. 26 ss. "Orama" Brisbane 1 Crew Well on arrival. Oct. 9 ss. "Mashobra" Calcutta 1 Pass. Well on arrival. Total 14 (12 Passengers) (2 Crew) APPENDIX VIII.—German Measles. Date. 1987. Name of Vessel. Where from No. of Cases. Passenger or Crew Rating. How dealt with. (a) Landed from Vessels—Nil. (b) Died, Landed elsewhere or well on Arrival— May 28 ss. "Strathaird" Australia 1 Pass. Well on arrival. June 11 ss. "Narkunda" Brisbane 2 Pass. Landed at Sydney. ,, 24 ss. "Llangibby Castle" Port Natal 1 Crew Well on arrival. Oct. 15 ss. "Waiwera" Opua 1 Crew Well on arrival. Dec. 16 ss. "Orion" Sydney 1 Pass. Landed at Tailar. Total 6 (4 Passengers (2 Crew) 67 APPENDIX IX.—Erysipelas. Date. 1937. Name of Vessel. Where from. No. of Cases. Passenger or Crew Rating. How dealt with. (a) Landed from Vessels— Aug. 2 " City of Exeter " Laurenco Marques 1 Pass. A .Admitted to Port Isolation Hospital, Denton. Total 1 (1 Passenger) (b) Died, Landed elsewhere or well on Arrival— Oct. 15 ss. " Strathaird " Brisbane 1 Pass. Convalescent on arrival. Total 1 (1 Passenger) APPENDIX X.—Pulmonary Tuberculosis. Passenger Date. Name of Vessel. 1937. Where from. No. of Cases. or Crew Rating. How dealt with. (a) Landed from Vessels— Jan. 8 ss. " Batavier IV " Rotterdam 1 Pass Admitted to Port Isolation Hospital, Denton. 55 8 ss. " Strathnaver " Brisbane 1 Pass Admitted to Military Hospital, Woolwich. 55 15 ss. "Ranchi " Yokohama 1 Pass Admitted to Military Hospital, Woolwich. j j 25 ss. " Andania " New York 1 Crew Proceeded home. 29 ss. " Pakeha " Lyttleton 1 Crew Admitted to Seamen's Hospital, Royal Albert Dock. Feb. 6 ss. " Silvio 1 Crew . Remained on board. 55 12 ss. " Rajputana " Yokohama 6 Pass. Landed in charge of Service Medical Authorities. Mar. 12 ss. " Bangalore " Otaru 1 Crew Admitted to Seamen's Hospital, Royal Albert Dock. „ 19 ss. " Mooltan " Brisbane 1 Pass Proceeded home. Apl. 1 ss. " Waimana " Auckland 1 Crew Proceeded home. 55 2 ss. " Australia Star " Australia 1 Crew Admitted to Seamen's Hospital, Royal Albert Dock. " 8 ss. " Orion " Brisbane 1 Pass. ... Admitted to Seamen's Hospital, Greenwich. » 9 ss. " Naldera " Kobe 2 Crew Landed in care of Naval Authorities. 55 13 ss. " Aurania " New York 1 Crew Admitted to Seamen's Hospital, Greenwich. 5) 14 ss. " Orion " Brisbane 1 Crew Admitted to Seamen's Hospital, Greenwich. 53 17 ss. " Moreton Bay " Australia 1 Crew Admitted to Seamen's Hospital, Royal Albert Dock. May 1 ss. " Strathnaver " Australia. 1 Crew Admitted to Port Isolation Hospital, Denton. )> 20 ss. " Cathay " Hong Kong 1 Pass. Proceeded home. ?? 21 ss. " Kaisar-I-Hind " Bombay 3 Pass. Proceeded home. 5 j 28 ss. " Glenogle " Shanghai 1 Crew Admitted to Seamen's Hospital, Royal Albert Dock. Carried forward 28 68 Pulmonary Tuberculosis—continued. Date. Name of Vessel. Where from. No. of Cases. Passenger or Crew Rating. How dealt with. 1937. Brought forward 28 May 28 ss. " Strathaird " Australi 6 Pass 1 Proceeded home. 5 Proceeded in care of Military Authorities. June 2 ss. " Malda " Yokohama 1 Crew Admitted to Seamen's Hospital, Royal Albert Dock. „ 4 ss. " Eajputana " Yokohama 2 Pass. Landed in care of Naval Authorities. „ 11 ss. " Narkunda " Brisbane 1 Crew Admitted to Seamen's Hospital, Greenwich. „ 18 ss. " Eanpura " Yokohama 1 Pass. Landed in care of Military Authorities. „ 25 ss. " Mongolia " Brisbane 1 Pass. Landed in care of Military Authorities. „ 25 ss. " Matiana " Africa 1 Pass. Proceeded home. July 9 ss. " Mooltan " Bombay 1 Pass. Landed in care of Military Authorities. „ io ss. " Dalgoma " Calcutta 1 Crew Admitted to Seamen's Hospital, Royal Albert Dock. 16 ss. " Corfu " Yokohama 2 Pass. Landed in care of Military Authorities. „ 16 ss. " Highland Brigade " . Buenos Aires 1 Crew Admitted to Seamen's Hospital, Royal Albert Dock. » 26 ss. " Macgregor Laird " . West Africa 1 Crew Admitted to Seamen's Hospital, Royal Albert Dock. „ 27 ss. " Lochgoil " Vancouver 1 Crew Admitted to Seamen's Hospital, Royal Albert Dock. Aug. 6 ss. " Maloja " Sydney 1 Pass Landed in care of Military Authorities. „ 27 ss. " Banchi " Yokohama 1 Pass Landed in care of Military Authorities. Sept. 3 ss. " Comorin " Brisbane 2 Pass Landed in care of Military Authorities. » 4 ss. " Rangitiki " Port Chalmers 1 Pass Admitted to Port Isolation Hospital, Denton. „ io ss. " Kaisar-I-Hind " Yokohama 2 Pass Landed in care of Military Authorities. „ 10 ss. " Llanstephan Castle " Beira 1 Crew Admitted to Seamen's Hospital, Greenwich. „ 16 ss. " Carinthia " New York 1 Crew ... Admitted to Seamen's Hospital, Greenwich. „ 17 ss. " Cathay " Brisbane 5 Pass. ... Landed in charge of Military and Air Force Authorities. „ 28 ss. " Rangitata " ... New Zealand 1 Crew . Admit ted to Seamen's Hospital, Royal Albert Dock. Oct. 15 ss. " Samaria " .. New York 1 Crew ... Admitted to Seamen's Hospital, Royal Albert Dock. 21 ss. " Otranto " .. Brisbane 1 Crew .. Proceeded home. 22 ss. "Rawalpindi " ... .. Yokohama 2 Pass .. Landed in care of Naval Authorities. Carried forward 67 69 Pulmonary Tuberculosis—continued. Date. Name of Vessel. Where from. No. of Cases. Passenger or Crew Rating. How dealt with. 1937. Brought for war d 67 Oct. 29 ss. " Durham Castle " Cape Town 1 Pass. Proceeded home. „ 30 ss. " Daphne " Archangel 1 Crew Admitted to St. Olave's Hospital, Bermondsey. Nov. 5 ss. " Corfu " Yokohama 1 Pass Admitted to Military Hospital, London. „ 11 ss. " Matiana " Dar-es-Salaam 1 Pass Proceeded home. „ 17 ss. " Pankraft " Quebec 1 Crew Admitted to Seamen's Hospital, Greenwich. „ 18 ss. " Manwarri " Antwerp 1 Crew Admitted to Seamen's Hospital, Greenwich. „ 18 ss. " Ormonde " Brisbane 1 Crew Proceeded home. „ -20 ss. " Naldera " Hong Kong 1 Pass. Proceeded in care of Air Force Authorities. Dec. 6 ss. " Matiana " Middlesbrough 1 Crew Admitted to Seamen's Hospital, Royal Albert Dock. „ 7 ss. " Domala " Calcutta 1 Pass Proceeded home. 15 ss. " Perseus " Otaru 1 Pass Proceeded home. „ 23 ss. " Eangitiki " Wellington 1 Pass Landed in care of Naval Authorities. „ 30 ss. " Highland Monarch " Buenos Aires 1 Pass Proceeded home, gers) — (51 Passen Total 80 (29 Crew) (b) Died, Landed elsewhere or well on Arrival— Mar. 6 ss. " Dunluce Castle " Beira 1 Crew Landed at Genoa. „ 25 ss. " Oronsay " Brisbane 1 Pass Died. Buried at sea. May 7 ss. " Ranchi " Yokohama 1 Pass Landed at Plymouth. „ 11 ss. " Llanstephan Castle Port Sudan 1 Crew Landed at ton. Aug. 10 ss. " Arantzazu Mendi " Vancouver 1 Crew Landed at Newport News. „ 27 ss. " Ranchi " Yokohama 1 Pass Landed at Plymouth. Sept. 13 ss. " Huntingdon " Wanganui 1 Crew Landed at Dakar. Oct. 9 ss. " Orama " . Port Said 1 Crew Died. Buried at sea. 21. ss. " Highland Monarch Buenos Aires 2 Pass Landed at Lisbon. Nov. 5 ss. " Corfu " Yokohama 1 Pass Landed at Bombay. 16 ss. " Umkuzi " Laurenco Marques 1 Crew Landed at Cape Town. Dec. 4 ss. " City of Marseilles " Calcutta 1 Pass Fit to travel. 1 Crew Fit to travel. — (7 Passengers) Total 14 (7 Crew) APPENDIX XI.—Tuberculosis (c )THER kinds). Date. Name of Vessel. Where from. No. of L'aaee. Passenger or Crew Rating. How dealt with. 1937. (a) Landed fiiom Vessels— Feb. 1 ss. " Llanstephan Castle " Durban 1 Crew Proceeded home. Nov. 1 ss. " Morea " .. Oran 1 Crew Remained on board. Total 2 (2 Crew) (b) Died, Landed elsewhere or well on Arrival—Nil. 70 APPENDIX XII.—Pneumonia. Date. 1937. Name of Vessel. Where from. No. of Cases. Passenger or Crew Rating. How dealt with. (a) Landed from Vessels— Feb. 9 ss. " Ascania " . Halifax 1 Pass Admitted to Seamen's Hospital, Green wich. „ 15 ss. " Clan MacGillivray " . Calcutta 1 Crew Admitted to Seamen's Hospital, Tilbury. „ 17 ss. " Sicilian Prince " 1 Crew Admitted to Seamen's Hospital, Roya Albert Dock. Mar. 12 s. barge " Dorothy " Lying in River. the 1 Crew Admitted to Seamen's Hospital, Roya Albert Dock. er) — (1 Passeng Total 4 (3 Crew) (b) Died, Landed elsewhere or well on Arrival— July 30 ss. " Naldera " . Yokohama 1 Pass. Died. Buried ashore. Oct. 22 ss. " Inanda " . Demerara 1 Pass. Landed at Barbadoes „ 28 ss. " Mathura " . Calcutta 1 Crew Landed at Port Said Nov. 17 ss. " Burma " Rangoon 1 Crew Landed at Port Sudan .. 22 ss. " Poelau Roebiah " . Batavia 1 Pass. "Well on arrival. Dec. 2 ss. " Adjutant " . Mediterranean 1 Pass. Landed at Gibraltar „ 6 ss. " Defender " . Calcutta 1 Crew Landed at Suez. „ 23 ss. " City of Wellington " Beira 1 Crew Died. Buried at sea — (4 Passengers) Total 8 (4 Crew) 71 APPENDIX XY.—Dysentery. Date. 1937. Name of Vessel. Where from. No. of Cases. Passenger or Crew Rating. How dealt with. (a) Landed from Vessels— Mar. 6 ss. " Ramsey " Vancouver 1 Crew Admitted to Seamen's Hospital, Royal Albert Dock. „ 12 ss. " Tower Ensign " Mauritius 1 Crew Admitted to Seamen's Hospital, Royal Albert Dock. Apl. 10 ss. " Diomed " Yokohama 1 Crew Admitted to Seamen's Hospital, Royal Albert Dock. July 22 ss. " Durham Castle " Beira 1 Pass Admitted to a London Hospital. Aug. 17 ss. " Saya " Susak 1 Crew Admitted to Port Isolation Hospital, Denton. Sept. 13 ss. " Dunluce Castle " Mombasa 1 Pass Admitted to Port Isolation Hospital, Denton. Oct. 29 ss. " Durham Castle " Cape Town 1 Pass Admitted to Hospital for Tropical Diseases, London. W.C 1. Nov. 11 ss. " Aaro " Huelva 2 Crew Admitted to Port Isolation Hospital, Denton. 28 ss. " Leonian " Africa 1 Crew Admitted to Port Isolation Hospital, Denton. Total 10 (3 Passengers) — (7 Crew) (*>) Died, Lan ded elsewhere or well on Arrival Jan. 1 ss. " Manaar " Calcutta 5 Crew 4 landed at Colombo, 1 landed at Lisbon. Mar. 11 ss. " Highland Patriot " . La Plata 1 Pass Convalescent on arrival. Apl. 8 ss. " Siris " Buenos Aires 1 Crew Landed at Santos. „ 30 ss. " Strathnaver " Bombay 1 Pass Well on arrival. June 18 ss. " Ranpura " Yokohama 1 Pass Landed at Aden. Aug. 1 ss. " Manela " Beira 2 Pass Well on arrival. Oct. 16 ss. " Madura " Beira 1 Pass Landed at Marseilles. Nov. 22 ss. " Poelau Roebiah " Batavia 1 Pass Well on arrival. — (7 Passengers) Total 13 (6 Crew) Malaria—continued. Date Name of Vessel. Where from. No. of Cases. Passenger or Crew Rating. How dealt with. 1937. Brought forward 5 Aug. 9 ss. " Hakusan Mara " Yokohama 2 Pass Proceeded home. Nov. 12 ss. " Monkleigh " Nikolaev 1 Crew Proceeded home. „ 28 ss. " Leonian " Africa 2 Crew Admitted to Port Isolation Hospital, Denton. Dec. 14 ss. " British Councillor " Abadan 1 Crew Admitted to Port Isolation Hospital, Denton. — (2 Passenger) Total 11 (9 Crew) (b) Died, Landed elsewhere or well on Arrival— Jan. 3 ss. " Belpamela " Kaolack 5 Crew 4 landed at Fecamp, 1 landed at Rotterdam. 22 ss. " Mount Helikan " Buenos Aires 1 Crew Well on arrival. Feb. 8 ss. " Edward Blyden " Africa 3 Crew Well on arrival. „ 20 ss. " Eboe " Duala 2 Crew Well on arrival. Mar. 20 ss. " Mary Slessor " Africa 4 Crew All well on arrival. May 11 ss. " City of Exeter " Laurenco Marques 1 Pass Convalescent on arrival. June 4 ss. " Edward Blyden " Africa 1 Crew Landed at Liverpool. 5 ss. " Godfrey B. Holt " Kumassi 1 Crew Proceeded in ship to Liverpool. „ 21 ss. " David Livingstone " Sapele 1 Crew Died. Buried at sea. „ 25 ss. " Matiana " Africa 1 2 Crew Pass Well on arrival. Well on arrival. „ 30 ss. " Kumasian " Calabar 1 Crew Landed at Lagos. July 14 ss. " Lalandia " Bangkok 1 Pass. Convalescent on arrival. „ 2G ss. " Macgregor Laird " West Africa 4 Crew Well on arrival. Sept. 2 ss. " Hans Arp " ... Sapele 6 Crew Recovered. 6 ss. " Egori " Warai 5 Crew Recovered. Oct. 1 ss. " Viceroy of India " Bombay 1 Crew Died. Buried at sea. » 9 ss. " City of Tokio " Calcutta 1 Crew Landed at Aden. Nov. 27 ss. " Sarthe " Brazil 2 Pass. Well on arrival. Dec. 5 ss. " Mary Slessor " Warri 2 Crew Landed abroad. „ 21 ss. " Nigerian " Africa 1 Crew Well on arrival. — (6 Passengers) Total 1 46 (40 Crew) APPENDIX XVII.—Chicken-pox. Passenger No. of or Crew Date. Name of Vessel. Where from. Cases. Rating. How dealt with. 1937. (a) Landed from Vessels— Jan. 13 ss. " Antonia " New York 1 Pass. Admitted to Port Isolation Hospital, Denton. Feb. 26 ss. " Clan Macllwraith " Calcutta 3 Crew Admitted to Port Isolation Hospital, Denton. May 3 ss. " Baltrover " Gdynia 1 Pass. Admitted to Port Isolation Hospital, Denton. June 21 ss. " Strathaird " Cruising 2 Crew Admitted to Port Isolation Hospital, Denton. 29 j, ss. " Strathaird " Cruising 3 Crew Admitted to Port Isolation Hospital, Denton. Aug. 6 ss. " Nevasa " Cruising 1 Pass Admitted to Port Isolation Hospital, Denton. „ 20 ss. " Nevasa " Cruising 1 Pass. Admitted to Port Isolation Hospital, Denton. 1 Crew Admitted to Port — Isolation Hospital, Denton. Carried forward 13 72 78 Chicken-pox—continued. Date. Name of Vessel. Where from. No. o! Cases. Passenger or Crew Rating. How dealt with. 1987. Brought forwarc 13 Sept. 23 ss. " Orford " Australia 1 Pass. Admitted to Port Isolation Hospital, Denton. Dec. 27 ss. " Baltrover " Gdynia 1 Pass. Admitted to Port Isolation Hospital Denton. „ 28 ss. " Clan Graham " Antwerp 3 Crew Admitted to Port Isolation Hospital. Denton. Total — (6 Passengers) 18 (12 Crew) {!>) Died, landed elsewhere or well on Arrival— Feb. 12 ss. " Eajputana " Yokohama 1 Crew Landed at Singapore. „ 26 ss. " Ranpura " Yokohama 1 Pass Landed at Marseilles. „ 26 ss. " Clan Macllwraith " Calcutta 1 Crew Landed at Chittagong. Mar. 12 ss. " Rawalpindi " Yokohama 1 Crew Landed at Aden. May 28 ss. " Strathaird " Australia 2 Crew Landed at Bombay. June 3 ss. " Alaunia " Quebec 1 Pass Landed at Plymouth. Aug. 25 ss. " Avila Star " Rio de Janeiro 1 Pass Well on arrival. Sept. 27 ss. " Clan Macgillivray " Calcutta 1 Crew Landed at Chittagong. Oct. 21 ss. " Otranto " Brisbane 1 Crew ... Well on arrival. Dec. 1 ss. " Highland Brigade " La Plata Total 1 11 Crew ... Well on arrival. (3 Passengers) (8 Crew) APPENDIX XVIII.—MUMPS. Date. 1937. Name of Vessel Where frorm No. of ases. Passenger or Crew Rating. How dealt with. (a) Landed from Vessels— Jan. 80 ss. " Humberarm " Cornerbrook 1 Crew Admitted to Port Isolation Hospital, Denton. Aug. 26 ss. " Orama " Brisbane 1 Pass. Admitted to Port Isolation Hospital, Denton. Total 2 (1 Passenger) (1 Crew (b) Died, Landed elsewhere or well on Arrival— May 9 ss. "Warfield" Bombay 4 Crew Landed at Middlesbrough. June 11 ss. " Narkunda " Brisbane 4 Pass. 2 landed at Port Said 2 well on arrival. Aug. 3 ss. " Clan Macneil " Chittagong 1 Crew Landed at Madras. „ 13 ss. " Strathmore " Cruising 1 Pass. Well on arrival. Dec. 30 ss. "Orontes" Brisbane 1 Pass. Well on arrival. Total 11 (6 Passngers) (5 Crew) 74 APPENDIX XX.—Venereal Diseases. Number of Crew. Cases reported. Passengers. Syphilis 45 12 Gonorrhoea 205 15 Soft Sore 50 6 Climatic Bubo 6 1 306 34 Total, 340 APPENDIX XIX.—Miscellaneous Diseases (Classified). Landed from Vessels. Died, Landed elsewhere or Well on arrival. Landed from Vessels. Died, Landed elsewhere or Well on arrival. OTHER INFECTIOUS DISEASES. DISEASES OF THE DIGESTIVE SYSTEM. Acute Poliomyelitis — 1 P. Ascariasis - 1 c. Glandular Fever 1 P. — Abdominal Pain 3 C. 2 C. Nodular Leprosy 1 P. — Appendicitis 8 C., 1 P Whooping Cough - 5 P., 1 C. Colitis 1 C., 1 P. (died) 1 P. (died) CATARRHAL DISEASES. Carcinoma of Liver — 1 P. (died) Tonsillitis 6 P. 2 C. 7 P. Catarrhal Jaundice 1 C. - Diarrhoea - 1 C. Enteritis 4 C. 2 C. (died) 1 P. SEPTIC CONDITIONS. Gastro-enteritis — 1 C. (died) Gastric Ulcer 1 C. Abscess 1 C. — Helminthiasis 1 c. - Furunculosis 3 C. — Hœmatemesis 1 c. 1 P. (died) Inguinal Adenitis — 1 C. Intestinal Obstruction 1 c. 2 P. (died) Parotid Abscess 1 C. — Intestinal Catarrh - 2 C. Quinsy 1 P., 1 C — Jaundice 1 c. 1 C. Septicaemia 1 c. — Peptic Ulcer 1 c. - Septic Sore 1 c. — Post -dysenteric Colitis 1C - Septic Lymphadenitis 1C. — DISEASES OF THE GENITO-URINARY SYSTEM. NERVOUS AND MENTAL DISORDERS. Asthm 1 c. — Hallucinations 1 p. — Cystitis 1 c. Melancholia 1 c. — Pyelo-nephritis 1 c. Status Epilepticus — 1 C. (died) Pyonephrosis — 2 C. (died) DISEASES OF THE SKIN. INJURIES. Dermatitis 1 c. 1 P. Eozema 1 C., 1 P. — Penmhieus Foliaceus - 1 P. Injury 12.C l P. (died) DISEASES OF THE CIRCULATORY SYSTEM. DISEASES OF THE EYE. Angina Pectoris — 1 p. (died) Cerebral Hœmorrhage 1 c. 1 P., 1 C. (died) Conjunctivitis 2 C. 1 C. Cerebral Thrombosis 1 c. — Coronary Thrombosis — 1 C., 1 P. (died) DISEASES OF BONES AND JOINTS. Heart Disease — 3 P., 1 C. (died) Heart Failure — 4 P., 8 C. Pernicious Anaemia — 1 P. (died) Arthritis 1 C. — Ruptured Aneurism — 1 P. Synovitis 1 C. Splenomegaly 1 c. — DISEASES OF THE RESPIRATORY SYSTEM OTHER DISEASES (not classified). Asphyxiation - 1 P. (died) Actinomycosis 1 P. - Bronchiti 1 c. — Acute Alcoholism 1 C. - Haemoptysis 1 p. 1 P. (died) Chill — 1 c. Influenzal Bronchitis 1 c. — Pyrexia 5 P., 11 C. 10 c. Pleuris 2 C. — Sunstroke — 1 c. 75 APPENDIX XXL—Hospital. Number of Cases Admitted, Cost op Maintenance, &c. Patients remaining in Hospital on 31st December, 1936 2 Admitted. Discharged. Died. Remaining under treatment. Chicken-pox 20 15 — 5 Diphtheria 1 1 — — Enteric Fever 7 5 — 3 Measles 37 37 — 1 Mumps 2 2 — — Scarlet Fever 2 1 — 1 Other Diseases 46 45 1 — Total 115 106 1 10 Remaining in Hospital on 31st December, 1987 10 Total number of days' treatment during the year 1,134 Average number of days' treatment for each case 96 Average daily number of patients in Hospital 31 Average daily cost of maintenance per patient 1s. 2d. Average total cost of maintenance per patient 11s. 5d. 76 APPENDIX XXII.—Beturn of Eats Caught and Destroyed during 1937. The entire cost of destroying these rats has been borne by the Shipowners and Port of London Authority. Jan. Feb. Mar. April. May. June. July. Aug. Sept. Oct. Nov. Dec. Total. MilJwall Dock— Warehouses 41 28 59 65 68 50 68 48 36 88 73 52 676 Vessels while in dock 21 53 68 88 44 87 49 11 87 260 87 80 985 Surrey Commercial Dock— Warehouses 16 16 9 29 29 34 89 69 63 72 35 45 506 Vessels while in dock 6 4 — 14 8 — 60 36 — 7 7 6 148 Regent's Canal Dock— Warehouses 34 28 25 30 30 40 35 24 33 36 27 30 372 Vessels while in dock — — — — — — 1 — — — — — 1 St. Katharine's Dock— Warehouses 81 70 74 72 73 66 65 51 68 75 59 70 824 Vessels while in dock — — — — — — — — — — — — - London Dock— Warehouses 50 43 41 56 55 43 83 40 82 85 53 57 688 Vessels while in dock — — 10 2 21 4 2 — — 22 1 4 66 Royal Albert Dock— Warehouses 8 10 9 5 20 20 18 5 27 12 24 5 163 Vessels while in dock 9 — 6 — — 4 3 — 7 — 84 69 182 Royal Victoria Dock— Warehouses 41 14 22 20 19 13 20 9 24 24 54 33 293 Vessels while in dock 188 55 117 67 185 — 49 15 30 102 47 17 872 King George V. Dock— Warehouses 10 11 11 10 12 13 30 9 8 23 12 13 162 Vessels while in dock — — — — — 2 595 8 4 — 1 — 610 West India Dock— Warehouses 40 23 17 24 13 15 18 32 38 64 51 35 370 Vessels while in dock 19 65 114 66 44 9 102 52 50 51 124 126 882 East India Dock— Warehouses — 1 1 2 1 4 — 4 15 7 6 41 Vessels while in dock — — — — — — — — — — — — — Tilbury Dock— Warehouses 45 45 28 32 40 57 73 49 40 44 34 31 518 Vessels while in dock 9 — 8 54 — 1 77 — 14 — 3 6 172 River— Vessels while in River 42 — — 66 — 62 — 29 — — 199 Totals 618 466 661 636 662 528 1,497 520 615 1,009 783 685 8,680 Total from 1st January to 31st December, 1937:— In Dock Warehouses 4.613 On Vessels while in Dock and River 4,067 Total 8,680 Warehouse 366 289 296 345 360 355 499 336 423 538 429 377 4,613 Vessel 252 177 365 291 302 173 998 184 192 471 354 308 4,067 618 466 661 636 662 528 1,497 520 615 1,009 783 685 8,680 77 APPENDIX XXIII. BACTERIOLOGICAL EXAMINATION OP RATS DURING 1937. Black Rats. Brown Rats. Species Unknown. Mice. Source. Total Examined. Found Dead. Trapped Poisoned, &c. Found Dead. Trapped, Poisoned, &c. Found Dead. Trapped, Poisoned &c. Found Dead. TrappedPoisoned, &c. Rats Infected with Plague. Vessels 1,476 6 1,460 1 9 - - - 12 2 London Dock 201 — 139 1 61 - - - — Nil. St. Katharine Dock 178 — 105 — 73 — - — Nil. Regent's Canal Dock 32 — 2 - 30 - — - — Nil. Surrey Commercial Dock 139 7 — 132 - - — Nil. Poplar Dock — — — — - - — Nil. West India Dock 107 92 — 15 - - — Nil South West India Dock 19 — 10 — 9 - - — Nil. East India Dock 3 — 2 - 1 - - — Nil. Royal Victoria Dock 71 — 7 - 64 - - — Nil. Royal Albert Dock 52 3 46 — 3 — - — Nil. King George V. Dock 125 — 124 — 1 - — - — Nil. Tilbury Dock 56 — 12 - 44 - - — Nil. Millwall Dock 187 — 25 162 Nil. Totals (12 mice) 2,646 9 2,031 2 604 — — — 12 2 APPENDIX XXIY. INTERNATIONAL SANITARY CONYENTION. Deratisation Certificates. The number issued during the period covered by this Report was 139 :— Date. 1937. Name of Vessel. Reason for Deratisation. Action taken. No. of llats reported found dead after Fumigation or Trapping. Jan. 2 ss. " Ascania " Owner's request for Certificate. Fumigated with Hydrogen Cyanide. Nil. „ 2 mv. " Rangitiki " 33 33 Nil. „ 2 ss. " Port Gisborne " 33 Fumigated with Sulphur Dioxide. Nil. „ 9 ss. " Orontes " 33 Fumigated with Hydrogen Cyanide. Nil. „ 15 ss. " Stavros Coumantaros " Rat infested 33 17 by trapping, 75 by fumigation. „ 16 ss. " Baltrover " Owner's request for Certificate. " 3. „ 18 ss. " Norman Star " 33 33 Nil. „ 38 ss. " Port Melbourne " 3) Fumigated with Sulphur Dioxide. Nil. „ 27 ss. " Duquesa " 33 33 2. „ 27 mv. " Rangitata " 33 Fumigated with Hydrogen Cyanide. Nil. „ 29 ss. " Emmy " 33 Fumigated with Sulphur Dioxide. Sailed before count could be made. „ 29 ss. " Hardwicke Grange " 33 33 Nil. „ 30 ss. " Mataroa " 33 Fumigated with Hydrogen Cyanide. Nil. Feb. 6 ss. " Port Campbell " 33 Fumigated with Sulphur Dioxide. Nil. „ 8 mv. " Edward Blyden " Rat infested Fumigated with Hydrogen Cyanide. 53 „ Jl ss. " Llandovery Castle " No. 2 Hold rat infested 33 38 by trapping, 5 by fumigation. .. 14 ss. " Jamaica Pioneer " Owner's request for Certificate. 33 5 „ 15 ss. " Beaverbrae " 33 33 47 mice. 18 ss. " Ruahine " ,, j » Nil. 78 Deratisation Certificates—continued. Date. 1937. Name of Vessel. Reason for Deratisation. Action taken. No. of Rats reported found dead after Fumigation or Trapping. Feb. 25 mv. " Dunster Grange " Owner's request for Certificate. Fumigated with Sulphur Dioxide. Nil. „ 27 mv. " Rangitane " it Fumigated with Hydrogen Cyanide. Nil. Mar. 1 mv. " El Argentino " » Fumigated with Sulphur Dioxide. 2 „ 6 ss. " Port Hunter " „ tt Nil. 6 ss. " Jamaica Producer " " Fumigated with Hydrogen Cyanide. 3 „ B ss. " Mourino " " Fumigated with Sulphur Dioxide. 2 „ 9 ss. " Corsican Prince " Bat infested tt 25 by trapping, 24 by fumigation. „ 10 ss. " Auk " ff Fumigated with Hydrogen Cyanide. 18 „ IB ss. " Jamaica Planter " Owner's Bequest for Certificate. tt Nil. „ 13 ss. " Beaverburn " tt If 29 mice. 13 ss. " Port Alma " ff Fumigated with Sulphur Dioxide. Nil. „ 10 ss. " Alexandra " Bat infested ft 21 by trapping, 81 by fumigation. „ 18 ss. " Kingsborough " Owner's request for Certificate. it 20 „ 20 ss. " Dunluce Castle " Holds Nos. 1 and 2 rat infested. Fumigated with Hydrogen Cyanide. 17 by trapping, 20 by fumigation. „ 20 ss. " Ormonde " Owner's request for Certificate. ft Nil. „ 31 ss. " Arinda Mendi " Rat infested Fumigated with Sulphur Dioxide. G by trapping. 32 by fumigation. April 7 ss. " Norfolk " Owner's request for Certificate. Fumigated with Hydrogen Cyanide. Nil. 9 ss. " Baronesa " ft Fumigated with Sulphur Dioxide. Nil. „ 10 ss. " Bemuera " ft Fumigated with Hydrogen Cyranide. Nil. „ 10 ss. " Beaverdale " ft Nil. „ 14 mv. " Macgregor Laird " Rat infested 31 „ 17 ss. " Oronsay " Owner's request for Certificate. " Nil. „ 17 ss. " Port Adelaide " ft Fumigated with Sulphur Dioxide. Nil. „ 19 ss. " Moldavia " Rat infested Trapping. 45 „ 24 ss. " Botorua " Owner's request for Certificate. Fumigated with Hydrogen Cyanide. Nil. „ 28 ss. " Port Fremantle " ft Fumigated Avith Sulphur Dioxide. Nil. May 1 ss. " Ausonia " ft Fumigated with Hydrogen Cyanide. Nil. „ 4 ss. " Sabor " Rat infested tt 83 „ 5 ss. " Harmonic " It Fumigated with Sulphur Dioxide. 42 6 mv. " Rangitiki " Owner's request for Certificate. Fumigated with Hydrogen Cyanide. Nil. „ 6 ss. " Princesa " It Fumigated with Sulphur Dioxide. Nil. „ 20 ss. " Macdonald " tt 6 „ 29 ss. " Port Darwin " ft it Nil. 79 Deratisation Certificates—continued. Date. 1937. Name of Vessel. Reason for Deratisation. Action taken. No. of Hats reported found dead after Fumigation or Trapping. June 5 mv. " Upwey Grange " Owner's request for Certificate. Fumigated with Sulphur Dioxide. Nil. 9 mv. " Brenas " it ii 47 „ 10 mv. " Rangitata " „ Fumigated with Hydrogen Cyanide. Nil. „ 11 ss. " La Rosarina " fi Fumigated with Sulphur Dioxide. 2 „ 11 ss. " Orford " ii Fumigated with Hydrogen Cyanide. Nil. „ 16 ss. " Cambridge " ii a 4 „ 17 ss. " Nebraska " if it Nil. „ 17 mv. " William Wilberforce " ii ii Nil. „ 18 ss. " Orontes " if it Nil. „ 18 ss. " Marquesa " fi Fumigated with Sulphur Dioxide. Nil. „ 23 ss. " Somme " ii Fumigated with Hydrogen Cyanide. Nil. „ 26 ss. " Orion " ii it Nil. July 7 sv. " Lawhill " Rat infested Fumigated with Sulphur Dioxide. 49 by trapping, 10 by fumigation. „ 8 ss. " Somali " ii Fumigated with Hydrogen Cyanide. 103 Nil. „ 10 ss. " Otranto " Owner's request for Certificate. ii „ 11 mv. " Rangitane " ii ii Nil. „ 11 ss. " Cid " Rat infested Fumigated with Sulphur Dioxide. Sailed before count could be made. „ 13 ss. " Gourko " ii Fumigated with Hydrogen Cyanide. 65 „ 17 ss. " Hardwicke Grange " Owner's request for Certificate. Fumigated with Sulphur Dioxide. Nil. .. 17 ss. " Mooltan " No. 3 Hold rat infested ii 9 by trapping, 25 by fumigation. .. 22 ss. " Michael J. Goulandris " Owner's request for Certificate. ii 38 „ 24 ss. " Ormonde " „ Fumigated with Hydrogen Cyanide. Nil. „ 29 ss. " Dunrobin " a Fumigated with Sulphur Dioxide. Nil. „ 30 ss. " Orcades " a Fumigated with Hydrogen Cyanide. Nil. „ 31 ss. " Duquesa " a Fumigated with Sulphu Dioxide. 3 Aug. 4 ss. " Remuera " „ Fumigated with Hydrogen Cyanide. Nil. » l> ss. " Rabaul " „ Fumigated with Sulphur Dioxide. 51 6 ss. " Njegos " „ ii 10 rats and 60 mice. „ 7 ss. " Discovery II." tt Fumigated with Hydrogen Cyanide. Nil. „ 10 ss. " Middlesex " tt it Nil. „ 13 ss. " Dunster Grange " tt Fumigated with Sulphur Dioxide. Nil. „ 14 ss. " Port Chalmers " „ ii Nil. „ 17 ss. " Henry Stanley " „ Fumigated with Hydrogen 11 Cyanide. ,, 19 ss. " Mersington Court " „ Fumigated with Sulphur Dioxide. Nil. „ 20 ss. " Oronsay " „ Fumigated with Hydrogen Cyanide. Nil. Nil. „ 20 ss. " Gaelic Star " tt it „ 21 ss. " Westmoreland " n it Nil. „ 21 ss. " Ruahine " it ii Nil. 80 Deratisation Certificates—continued. Date. 1987. Name of Vessel. Reason for Deratisation. Action taken. No. of Rats reported found dead after Fumigation or Trapping. Aug. 27 ss. " Baltraffic " Eat infested Fumigated with Hydrogen Cyanide. 1 „ 28 ss. " Port Fairy " Owner's request for Certificate. Fumigated with Sulphur Dioxide. Nil. Sept. 8 ss. " Siretul " Eat infested ii 27 by trapping, 31 by fumigation. „ 11 mv. " Eangitiki " ii Fumigated with Hydrogen Cyanide. Nil. „ 11 mv. " El Argentino " Owner's request for Certificate. Fumigated with Sulphur Dioxide. Nil. „ 16 ss. " Gibraltar " if ii Nil. » 20 ss. " Jamaica Progress ' tt Fumigated with Hydrogen Cyanide. 19 by trapping, 2 by fumigation. „ 25 ss. " Eotorua " „ it Nil. „ 25 ss. " Strathmore " tt it 14 Oct, 1 mv. " Edward Blyden " tt ii 10 „ 2 ss. " Arawa " tt ,, Nil. „ 2 mv. " Araby " Eat infested ii 68 „ 7 mv. " Eangitata " Owner's request for Certificate. t > Nil. „ 10 ss. " Jamaica Producer " tt a 9 „ 11 mv. " Palacio " Eat infested " 2 by trapping, 18 by fumigation. „ 13 ss. " San Giovanni Ballista " Owner's request for Certificate. „ Nil. „ 13 ss. " Turakina " tt it Nil. „ 13 ss. " Constantinos Louloudis ' Eat infested Fumigated with Sulphur Dioxide. 26 by trapping, 72 by fumigation. „ 14 ss. " Aegens " Owner's request for Certificate. it Nil. „ 23 mv. " David Livingstone " it Fumigated with Hydrogen Cyanide. 9 29 ss. " Princesa " ft Fumigated with Sulphur Dioxide. Nil. „ 30 ss. " Orford " it Fumigated with Hydrogen Cyanide. Nil. Nov. 2 ss. " Stuart Star " ii Nil. „ 3 mv. " Eangitane " it it Nil. 5 mv. " Betancuria " ii Fumigated with Sulphur Dioxide. 37 mice. „ io ss. " Moorby " Eat infested Fumigated with Hydrogen Cyanide. 84 „ 11 ss. " Nicolaou Virginia " ii Fumigated with Sulphur Dioxide. 56 by trapping, 8 by. fumigation. „ 13 ss. " Otranto " Owner's request for Certificate. Fumigated with Hydrogen Cyanide. Nil. „ 13 ss. " Largs Bay " ii a 76 mice. „ 14 mv. " Highland Chieftain " ii a Nil. 20 ss. " Northumberland " n tt Nil. „ 24 mv. " Ponzano " a 1 rat and 2 mice. 81 Deratisation Certificates—continued. Date. 1937. Name of Vessel. Reason for Deratisation. Action taken. No. of Rats reported found dead after Fumigation, or Trapping. Nov. 27 ss. " Ormonde " Owner's request for Certificate. Fumigated with Hydrogen Cyanide. Nil. Dec. 4 ss. " Port Auckland " ii Fumigated with Sulphur Dioxide. Nil. „ 4 mv. " Upwey Grange " ii ,, 3. „ 5 mv. " Bajamar " ii ii 15. „ 10 ss. " Remuera " ii Fumigated with Hydrogen Cyanide. Nil. „ u ss. " Oronsay " ii ii Nil. „ 11 ss. " Tuscan Star " ii a Nil. „ 13 ss. " Nymphe " ii Fumigated with Sulphur Dioxide. Nil. » 13 mv. " Brenas " ii 7. >, 18 ss. " Beaverford " i i Fumigated with Hydrogen Cyanide. 45 mice. „ 19 ss. " Jamaica Pioneer " ii " 2 by trapping, 12 by fumigation. „ 20 ss. " Afric Star " ii ii Nil. „ 24 ss. " Orion " (British) ss. " Port Alma " ii a Nil. „ 24 ii Fumigated with Sulphur Dioxide. Nil. „ 28 ss. " Egori " a Fumigated with Hydrogen Cyanide. 30. „ 29 ss. " Orion " (Greek) Rat infested ii 62. „ 31 ss. " Hardwicke Grange ' ii Fumigated with Sulphur Dioxide. 2. Deratisation Exemption Certificates.—The number issued during the year was 1,019. 82 APPENDIX XXV.—General Summary, and Analysis, of the Sanitary Inspections Vessels, &c., in the Port of London for the year ended 31st December, 1937. Foreign. Coastwise. Inland Navigation. Shore Premises. SickSeamenreferred toHospital Water Baeues. Steam. Sail. Steam. Sail. Steam. Sail. Lighters (uninhabited) CanalBoats Inspected. Defective. To be Cleaned. Inspected. Defective. To be Cleaned. Inspected. Defective. To be Cleaned. Inspected. Defective. To be Cleaned. Inspected. Defective. To be Cleaned. Inspected. Defective. To be Cleaned. Inspected. Defective. To be Cleaned. Inspected. Defective. j To be Cleaned. Inspected. Defective. To be Cleaned. No. in District in good condition 31st December, 1936. New Barges. Condemned. I Use discontinued. Previously withdrawn and since resumed work. / No in destiot | 10,569 | 708 1,284 T—1 ■ T—1 - — 2,491 401 317 649 73_ 49 137 28 10 145 33 5 1,146 18 100 330 71 1 5 1 6,004 ! 25 654 12 - - 1 12 Inspections. Docks and River. No. Nationalities. I, NO Total Inspections from St. Katharine 97 American 241 1st January to 31st London 1,209 BRITISH 9,850 December, 1937:— Brazilian - Foreign 10,580 Eegent's Canal 610 Bulgarian 1 Coastwise 3,140 Millwall 650 .Belgian 1,264 Dutch 345 Inland Navigation . 1,758 West India 696 Danish 3 Danzig Free State 8 Premises on shore... 6,004 Poplar 48 Egyptian 96 East India 115 Estonian 65 Total 21,482 French 575 Victoria 944 Finnish 604 Eoyal Albert 1,437 German 172 Greek - Cleansing of Crew's King George V ... 692 Hungaria 97 ters, &c.:— Surrey Commercial 2,165 Italian 4 Icelandic 97 Total No. of Vessels Tilbury 1,062 Japanese 54 from 1st January Latvian 6 to 31st December, 1937 1,771 Gravesend District — Lithuanian 1,478 Norwegian and Swedish 5 Number of Vessels inspected:— River—*Upper District 1,858 i ««n Panama 27 Polish 21 Portuguese 122 " Howard Deighton" 2 035 „ *Lower „ 2,035 Russian 8 Roumanian 48 „ Medway Spanish 1 Turkish 113 -tiredericic 3,718 Total Vessels 15 478 Yugo-Slavakian 15,478 Whittingham " "James Howell" Shore Premises 6,004 Shore Premises 6,004 Total In the Docks, &c. Total 5,753 9,725 Total 21,482 Total 21 21,482 15,478 *Upper District extends from Greenwich to Teddington. *Middle „ „ „ „ Erith. "Lower „ „ „ Erith to outer limits of the Port of London. 1928. 1929. 1930. 1931. 1932. 1933. 1934. 1935. 1936. 1937. Yec Avera the 1( endin Dec., Total number of Inspections of vessels from— "Foreign" 12,34 12,186 12,489 11,071 11,090 12,02: 10,052 11,685 11,133 10,580 11,4 " Coastwise," " Inland Navigation," and other Inspections 9,94 1 8,880 8,613 9,429 9,883 9,52£ 10,804 10,826 10,468 10,902 9,9 Total 22,2! 21,066 21,102 20,500 20,973 21,55C 20,856 22,511 21,601 21,482 21,3 88 APPENDIX XXYI. NUMBER OF NUISANCES ON VESSELS REPORTED AND DEALT WITH during the year ended 31st December, 1937. description of nuisances. January. February. March. April. May. June. July. August. September. October. November. December. Totals. Smoke Nuisances :— Number of complaints received — - - 2 4 1 - 4 1 3 8 3 26 Number of recurrences reported - - - - - - - - - - - - - Offensive Cargoes (Bye-laws):— Number of Infringements reported 10 6 94 - - - - - - - - - 110 Structural and other Defects:— Ventilation 9 12 4 7 3 5 30 34 38 16 9 19 186 Lighting 33 42 28 31 20 22 34 33 34 32 41 41 391 Heating 27 46 28 25 29 12 10 4 11 9 14 24 239 Bare iron in crew's quarters 3 1 - - - - - 3 2 1 5 8 23 Leaky decks, hawse-pipes, cable casings, &c 9 33 10 21 10 5 8 10 15 14 17 16 168 Defective bulkheads and floors 14 25 16 14 7 16 15 18 18 17 18 17 195 Sanitary conveniences 14 22 15 26 13 10 101 50 180 66 47 52 596 Ship's gear or stores stowed in crew's quarters 1 1 2 — — — — 5 4 2 2 2 19 Foul bilges and peaks - - - - - - - - - - - - - Storage of drinking water (dirty or defective tanks) 4 2 2 5 2 3 5 8 3 5 2 2 43 Dirty quarters 168 195 139 256 111 135 110 110 112 159 131 145 1,771 Verminous quarters 6 10 11 8 6 10 20 21 27 28 16 9 182 Accumulation of offensive matter 7 13 2 1 - - - - - - - - 23 Miscellaneous Nuisances 16 19 17 17 14 12 261 250 280 229 162 180 1,457 Totals 321 427 368 413 219 231 594 550 725 581 472 528 5,429 Total number of vessels on which sanitary defects were reported 267 328 312 354 169 172 248 253 258 293 213 236 3,103 Total number of vessels on which sanitary defects were remedied 232 293 196 329 167 165 140 149 158 246 175 192 2,442 (Includes Orders made in previous years and reported carried out during 1937.) NUMBER OF NUISANCES IN THE RIVER REPORTED AND DEALT WITH during the year ended 31st December, 1937. Offensive condition of River Water - - - - - - - - - - - - - Totals - - - - - - - - - - - - - 84 APPENDIX XXVII. NUMBER OP NUISANCES ON SHORE PREMISES REPORTED AND DEALT WITH during the year ended 31st December, 1937. description of nuisances. January. February. March. April. May. June. July. August. September. October. November. December. Totals. Smoke Nuisances :— Number of complaints received - - - - - - - - - - - -— — Number of recurrences reported - - - - - - - - - - - - — Structural and other Defects :— Ventilation - - - - - - - - - - - . - Lighting — 1 - - - - - - - - - - 1 Heating - - - - - - - - - - - - - Dilapidations — 2 1 — 1 — - — — — 1 1 5 Sanitary Conveniences - — 2 1 1 - - 1 - — - — 5 Water Supply — — — — — — - — — — - — Dirty Premise 88 74 70 90 40 49 37 30 30 55 50 40 654 Accumulation of Offensive Matter — — — — — — — — — — — — — Drainage 2 — 2 1 1 — 2 2 — 1 11 Miscellaneous Nuisances 3 — — 1 — — — 1 — — — — 5 Totals 93 77 75 94 42 50 37 32 32 57 50 42 681 Number of shore premises on which sanitary defects were reported 93 77 74 94 42 50 37 32 32 57 50 41 679 Number of shore premises on which sanitary defects were remedied 91 76 74 93 42 50 37 32 32 57 50 40 674 APPENDIX XXVIII.-DESCRIPTION OF MEAT DESTROYED. Year. Beef. Mutton and Lamb. Veal Pork , Offal. Tinned. Smoked and Salted, &c. Total. Tons. cwts. qrs. lbs. Tons. cwts. qrs. lbs. Tons. Pork cwts. and V qrs. sal— lbs. Tons. cwts. qrs. lbs. Tons. cwts. qrs. lbs. Tons. cwts. qrs. lbs. 0 6 1 22 1928 7 1 0 3 155 18 3 6 Offal16 1 3 27 0 0 1 26 4 17 2 13 184 6 1 13 Pork and Veal— 0 13 2 12 1929 8 17 3 4 367 12 1 8 Offal- N il. 0 15 3 27 391 16 3 27 13 17 1 4 Pork and Veal— 1 10 0 25 1930 21 12 0 16 52 18 0 21 Offal18 11 3 0 0 4 1 27 1 0 2 27 95 17 2 4 Pork and Veal— 1931 1 14 1 16 65 4 2 24 1 2 0 15 0 1 2 19 0 10 2 20 81 12 3 22 Offal12 19 1 12 Pork and Veal— 1 3 3 22 0 2 2 19 72 6 3 12 0 6 2 16 1932 3 19 3 15 56 8 3 9 Offal 10 4 3 15 Pork and Veal— 1 10 2 8 1933 2 19 1 7 18 3 0 13 Offal6 3 3 9 0 0 2 19 0 1 1 3 28 18 3 3 Pork and Veal— 0 15 2 4 1934 10 10 3 20 17 14 1 21 Offal 3 15 0 27 1 5 3 9 33 0 2 15 67 2 2 12 Pork and Veal— 1 9 2 19 1935 15 2 1 15 15 17 3 16 Offal 4 2 27 7 16 0 11 0 19 1 23 48 10 0 27 Pork and Veal— 1 3 0 20 1936 15 11 0 18 18 3 3 5 Offal13 3 2 3 0 17 2 21 0 12 2 12 49 11 3 23 Pork and Veal— 2 2 1 13 1937 4 16 3 1 112 15 3 21 Offal26 6 2 27 0 13 0 19 0 12 2 15 147 7 2 12 Total for ten years 92 5 3 3 880 18 0 4 140 9 2 25 12 4 0 5 42 14 1 6 1,168 11 3 15 85 86 APPENDIX XXIX. DOCKS WITHIN THE JURISDICTION OF THE PORT OF LONDON HEALTH AUTHORITY. Docks. Water Acres. Area. Yards. Lineal Miles. Quayage. Yards. Regent's Canal 11 38 — 966 St. Katharine 10 488 — 1,654 London 34 4,460 3 119 Surrey Commercial 161 2,717 16 200 West India 97 3,957 4 1,134 East India 31 2,878 1 1,242 Millwall 35 3,217 2 155 Royal Victoria 95 1,772 5 1,479 Royal Albert 87 213 3 905 King George V 64 997 3 663 Tilbury 104 2,166 3 1,667 The River distance between the Western and Eastern limits of the Port is about 68J miles. APPENDIX XXX. POWERS. The work of the Port of London Health Authority is carried out under the following Acts of Parliament and Statutory Rules and Orders:— Existing Acts and Orders applicable to the Port of London Health Authority. CONSTITUTION OF THE AUTHORITY. Public Health (London) Act, 1936 ASSIGNMENT OF POWERS. L.G.B. Order, Port Sanitary Authority Assignment of Powers, Port of London 25th March, 1892. L.G.B. Order, Port Sanitary Authority Assignment of Further Powers, Port of London 29th December, 1894. L.G.B. Order, Port Sanitary Authority Assignment of Powers, Port of London 30th June, 1898. S.R. & 0. 1922, No. 781. London Port Sanitary (Additional Powers) Order, 1922 18th July, 1922. S.R. & 0. 1923, No. 812. London Port Sanitary (Additional Powers) Order, 1923 16th July, 1923. S.R. & 0. 1933, No. 803. The Port of London (Assignment of Powers) Order, 1933 11th August, 1933. ADMINISTRATION. Port Sanitary Administration and Medical Inspection of Aliens under the Aliens Order, 1920 (Grants in Aid) 14th July, 1920. City of London (Various Powers) Act, 1922. Part IV. Section 30. City of London (Various Powers) Act, 1933. Part III. Sections 6 and 7. S.R & 0. 1926, No. 552. Sanitary Officers Order, 1926 27th May 1926. 87 INFECTIOUS DISEASE. Infectious Disease (Notification) Acts, 1889 to 1899. Public Health Act, 1896. Public Health (Ports) Act, 1896. S.R. & 0. 1910, No. 1165. Prevention of Epidemic Diseases Regulations as to Plague, Destruction of Rats, 1910 10th November, 1910. S.R. & O. 1912, No. 1226. Public Health (Cerebro-spinal Fever and Acute Poliomyelitis) Regulations, 1912 15th August, 1912. S.R. & O. 1918, No. 67. Public Health (Notification of Infectious Diseases) Regulations, 1918 .19th January, 1918. S.R. & O. 1926, No. 972. Public Health (Notification of Puerperal Fever and Puerperal Pyrexia) Regulations, 1926 31st July, 1926. S.R. & 0. 1927, No. 1207. Infectious Diseases (London) Regulations, 1927. 22nd December, 1927. S.R. & 0. 1930, No. 299. Parrots (Prohibition of Import) Regulations, 1930 24th April, 1930. S.R & 0. 1933, No. 38. The Port Sanitary Regulations, 1933 4th February, 1933. CANAL BOATS. Public Health Act, 1936. FOOD. Public Health (Regulations as to Food) Act, 1907. S.R. & 0.1924, No. 1432. Public Health (Meat) Regulations, 1924 (Part IV) 20th December, 1924. S.R. & 0.1925, No. 775 1926 No 1577 Health (Preservatives, &c., in Food) " ' J Regulations 1928. 1927, No. 577 ) S.R. & 0. 1925, No. 273. Public Health (Imported Food) Regulations, 1925 23rd March, 1925. S.R. & 0. 1933, No. 347. Public Health (Imported Food) Amendment Regulations, 1933 25th April, 1933. S.R. & 0. 1926 No. 820. Public Health (Imported Milk) Regulations, 1926 6th July, 1926. SHELLFISH. S.R. & 0. 1934, No. 1342. Public Health (Shellfish) Regulations, 1934 7th December, 1934. S.R. & 0. 1935, No. 1221. The Medway (Shell-Fish) Regulations, 1935 11th December, 1935. RATS AND MICE. Rats and Mice (Destruction) Act, 1919. SMOKE ABATEMENT. Public Health (London) Act, 1936. ABATEMENT OF NUISANCES and REMOVAL OF REFUSE. Public Health (London) Act, 1936. FERTILISERS AND FEEDING STUFFS. Fertilisers and Feeding Stuffs Act, 1926. S.R. & 0. 1932, No. 658. Fertilisers and Feeding Stuffs Regulations, 1932 11th August, 1932. S.R. & 0. 1928, No. 439. Order appointing 1st July, 1928, as the date for the coming into operation of the Fertilisers and Feeding Stuffs Act, 1926 30th May, 1928. DANGEROUS DRUGS. S.R. & 0. 1923, No. 1095. Dangerous Drugs (No. 3) Regulations, 1923 10thSeptember. 1923. ALIENS. S.R. & 0. 1920, No. 448. The Aliens Order, 1920. 88 IMPORTATION OF CATTLE. Ministry of Agriculture and Fisheries Animals (Importation) Order, 1930, dated 4th November, 1930. Part III, Article 22 ; Part IV, Articles 23, 24 and 25. Ministry of Agriculture and Fisheries Animals (Landing from Ireland, Channel Islands and Isle of Man) Order, 1933, dated 17th January, 1933. Part II, Article 17. BYE-LAWS. Bye-laws have been made by the Port of London Health Authority :— 1. For preventing nuisances arising from barges or vessels carrying offensive cargoes. 2. For removing to hospital any person suffering from dangerous infectious disorders, and for keeping therein of such persons as long as may be deemed necessary. 3. With respect to Houseboats used for human habitation within the limits of the Port of London. Dr. REVENUE ACCOUNT for Year ended 31st March, 1938. Cr. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. Salaries—Medical Officer, Deputy and Assistants ... ... ... ... ... 5,374 18 7 Contribution from General Rate 15,500 7 9 Travelling Expenses—Ditto ... ... ... ... ... 83 6 8 Contribution from Ministry of Health 14,449 0 0 Salaries—Inspectors ... ... ... ... ... ... 3,786 0 8 Sundry Fees 158 15 2 Uniforms, Travelling Expenses—Inspectors ... ... ... ... ... 224 5 10 Proceeds, Sale of Unsound Food 811 0 7 Clerical Assistance :— . Deratisation Receipts 2,187 3 3 Salaries ... ... 2,566 14 1 Miscellaneous Receipts 27 14 7 Other Expenses ... ... 73 8 3 Repayment by Hospital Patients 43 7 10 Assistant Rat Officers :— 2,640 2 4 Reimbursement of Damage to Launches 12 7 3 Salaries ... 1,115 4 0 / / / Other Expenses ... ... 119 0 11 Provision and Maintenance of Hospital :— ... ... 1,234 4 11 Capital Expenditure ... ... 1,251 0 1 Rent, Rates, Taxes and Insurance ... ... 214 9 10 Furniture, Equipment and Renewals ... ... 51 18 0 Repairs ... ... 118 8 0 Heating, Lighting and Cleansing ... ... 396 19 10 Interest on Loans ... ... 473 8 9 Salaries—General 428 15 7 Nursing 603 16 2 Domestic 124 2 9 1,156 14 6 Cost of Food 336 12 10 Drugs and Medical Requisite 40 6 5 Uniforms 21 9 1 Miscellaneous 174 7 2 Expenses or Launches:— 4,23£ 14 6 Wages 4,243 0 6 Uniforms 152 3 7 Upkeep and Running Expenses 1,165 15 3 Capital Expenditure 1,458 13 4 Interest on Loans 237 13 7 7,25' 6 3 Laboratory Facilities, Chemical and Bacteriological Examinatio ns ... ... ... 348 13 6 Examination and Analysis of Food ... ... ... ... 27S 11 4 Disinfections ... ... ... ... 152 16 3 Office Expenses :— ... Rent, Rates, Water, Taxes and Insurance ... ... 277 4 0 Furniture and Equipment ... ... 7 8 10 Repairs ... ... 15 16 4 Lighting, Heating and Cleansing ... ... 14' 7 I Printing and Stationery ... ... 428 0 7 Postages, Telegrams, Telephones ... ... ... 296 11 10 ... ... 1,172 8 8 Part Proceeds of Sale of Unsound Food returned to Consignees ... ... ... 741 17 10 Expenses of Delegates to Congresses ... ... ... ... 19C 16 0 Miscellaneous ... ... ... ... 21 5 11 Legal Expenses ... ... ... ... 8 7 1 National Insurance ... ... ... ... 6C 0 6 Corporation's Contribution to Pension Funds ... ... ... ... 2,34C 19 7 Central Administration Charges ... ... ... ... 1,03 0 0 Chamber of London, July. 1938 ... £,53,18f 16 5 £33,189 16 5 89