>g/ imw ly^f) ' . - AC.43 PLON 38 86. PORT OF LONDON SANITARY COMMITTEE. ANNUAL REPORT of the MEDICAL OFFICER OF HEALTH, To 31st December, 1930. Presented 4th June, 1931. REPORT For the Year ended 31st December, 1930, of the MEDICAL OFFICER OF HEALTH for the PORT OF LONDON (CHARLES FRANCIS WHITE, M.B., Ch.B., D.P.H.Vict., D.T.M.Li verpool). NEAL, Mayor. A Common Council holden in the Chamber of the Guildhall of the City of London, on Thursday, the 4rth day of June, 1931 THE Port of London Sanitary Committee did this day deliver into this Court a Report in writing under their hands of their proceedings, and submitting the Annual Report of the Medical Officer of Health of the Port to the 31st December, 1930; which was read. Ordered—That the Report be printed and a copy sent to every Member of this Court. BELL. To the Right Honourable the Lord Mayor, Aldermen and Commons of the City of London, in Common Council assembled. WE, whose names are hereunto subscribed, of your Port of London Sanitary Committee, to whom it has been referred to carry into execution the powers assigned to the Corporation, as the Port of London Sanitary Authority, beg to submit for the information of your Honourable Court the Annual Report of Dr. Charles Francis White, the Medical Officer of Health of the Port of London, for the year ended the 31st December, 1930, which Report contains a full and detailed account of the work done in the Port during that period by the Medical Officers and Inspectors. An Account of Receipts and Expenditure in connection with the Port of London Sanitary Authority for the year ended the 31st March, 1931, is appended, in accordance with the Order of your Honourable Court, for the information of the Court. All which we submit to the judgment of this Honourable Court. Dated this fifteenth day of May, 1931. B. S. Dunn. L. E. Martin. Fredk. Youldon. S. Leader. Fred. W. Berry. John D. Laurie. V. Allcard. W. N. Wright. Francis H. Green. J. S. Pearse. W. J. M. Burton. Fred. Whittingham. R. W. May. Arthur W. Bray. A. M. Hay. Wm. H. Thomas. H. Percy Shepherd. OFFICES of the Port of London Sanitary Authority and mediacal officer of health 5,CHURCH PASSAGE, GUILDHALL, LONDON, E.C.2. Telegraphic Address "MEDOFF, CENT, LONDON." Telephone No. METROPOLITAN 3636. BOARDING STATIONS. RIVER THAMES Hulk "Hygeia," Gravesend. RIVER MEDWAY Garrison Point, Sheerness. Telephone No. (Hulk "Hygeia") - GRAVESEND 325. HOSPITAL FOR INFECTIOUS DISEASES at DENTON, near GRAVESEND. Telephone No. (Hospital)GRAVESEND 257. „ (Medical Officer) GRAVESEND 373. LIMITS OF THE PORT OF LONDON. The limits of the Port of London as at present defined commence at High-Water Mark in the River Thames at Teddington Lock, in the County of Surrey, and extend down both sides of the River Thames to an imaginary straight line drawn from the Pilot Mark at the entrance of Havengore Creek, in the County of Essex, to the land's end at Warden Point, in the Isle of Sheppey, in the County of Kent, such point being the North-Western limit of the Port of Faversham, and extend up and include both sides of the River Medway to an imaginary straight line drawn from the South-East point of land westward of Coalmouth Creek, thence across the said River Medway to the Westernmost point of the piece of land which forms the Eastern side of the Stangate Creek, or, in other words, the North-West point of Fleet Marsh, and from thence in a Southerly direction to Iwade Church, in the said County of Kent, and thence in a North-Easterly direction to Elmley Chapel in the said Isle of Sheppey, a supposed direct line from Elmley Chapel to Iwade Church, being the Western limit of the Port of Faversham, and the said Port of London includes the Islands of Havengore Creek aforesaid, called Potton and Rushley Islands, and so much of the said Creek and watercourse as extends from it to the town of Rochford, and also includes all other islands, rivers, streams, creeks, waters, watercourses, channels, harbours, docks and places within the before-mentioned limits contained. INDEX. A. page Actinomycosis in Ox Tongues 9,28 Action under Public Health (Imported Food) Regulations, 1925 26 Aliens Order, 1920 34, 35 Ambulance Transport 13 Amount of Shipping Entering the Port (Table "(A%") 10 Analyst's Reports 32,34 Apples with Arsenic 31 B. Bacon 28 Bacteriological Examination 8,14,19 Beef 28 Boarding Station 1 Bye-Laws—Offensive Cargoes 8, 36 Bye-laws of Port Sanitary Authority 82 C Canal Boats Acts and Regulations 37-41 Canned Spinach 31 Cargo Traffic (Table" B") 10 Caseous Lymphadenitis in Mutton 9,27, 28 Certificates—Fumigation Issued (Tables "H" &"I ") 23 Certificates under Public Health (Imported Food) Regulations, 1925 31 Cholera 8, 15 Classification of Nuisances (Table " J") 23 Cleaning Orders 8 Cleansing of Persons 13 Crews'Spaces—Hygiene of 24 D. Dangerous Drugs 36 Deratisation Certificates 8 „ Exemption Certificates 8 Deratisation—Methods of 20 Destruction of Rats on Vessels (Table " E ") 22 „ ,, in Docks, Quays, &c. (Table " F") 23 „ ,, on Vessels from Plague Infected Ports (Table " H") 23 Detection of Rodent Plague 19 „ Rat Prevalence on Ships and Shore 21 „ Infectious Disease on Vessels 11 Detention of Fat under Public Health (Imported Food) Regulations, 1925 27 „ Foodstuffs 26,27 Disinfection of Infected Quarters 13 Division of Docks for purposes of Food Inspection 26 E. Exportation Notices under Public Health (Imported Food) Regulations, 1925 30 F. Fats—Detention and Control under Public Health (Imported Food) Regulations, 1925 27 Fertilisers and Feeding Stuffs Act, 1926 32 Fish 29 Food Inspection 24-32 „ „ —Arrangement of Districts 26 „ „ —Detentions and Seizures 26,27 Fruit 29 Fruit Pulp, &c 29 ,, Tinned and Bottled 29 Fumigation Certificates (Tables " H"&" I ") 23 G. Grain, &c 30 H. Ham 28 Hospital 1,13 Hospital (new Works) 9 Hygiene of Crews' Spaces 24 »> ."> I. vage Infected Ports 12,13 „ „ —Vessels from (Table" H") 23 " Infected" Vessels (Table " G") 23 Infectious Disease, Detection of 1 „ Sickness Landed from Vessels (Table " C") 14 „ „ Occurring during Voyage (Table " D") 14 Infectious Disease. Prevention of Importation 11 International Sanitary Convention of Paris, 1926 21 Introduction 8 Legal Proceedings 9,31,36 Leprosy 18,19 Limits of Port of London 1 M. Measures of Eat Destruction on Vessels from Plague Infected Ports (Table " H ") 23 ,, „ „ „ other Ports (Table " I") 23 Medical Inspection of Aliens 34,35 Medical Inspection of Vessels 8 Methods of Deratisation 20 Mutton—Caseous Lymphadenitis 9,27,28 Mutton and Lamb 28 N. New Launch 12 New Legislation 8,21 Notices of Exportation under Public Health (Imported Food) Regulations, 1925 30 Notifiable Infectious Diseases 8 Nuisances—Classification of (Table " J") 23 Nuts 30 O. Offal—Seized and Destroyed 28,29 Offensive Cargoes—Bye-laws 8 Offices 1 Official Certificates recognised under the Public Health (Imported Food) Regulations, 1925 31 Ox Tongues affected with Actinomycosis 9, 28 P. Parrots (Prohibition of Import) Regulations, 1930 8 Passenger Traffic (Table " B") 10 Plague 8 Pork 28 Port of London, Limits of 1 Powers of Port Sanitary Authority 81,82 Prepared Foods, &c 30 Prevention of Passage of Rats 20 Provisions, &c 30 Psittacosis 8 Public Health (Deratisation of Ships) Regulations, 1929 21 „ „ (Imported Milk) Regulations, 1926 31 „ „ (Imported Food) Regulations, 1925 9, 30 „ „ ,, ,, ,, —Notices served under Article II. (4) 30 „ „ (Shellfish) Regulations, 1915 32 „ „ (Preservatives, &c., in Food) Regulations, 1925 to 1927 32 R. Rabbits 28 Rats Destroyed on Vessels (Table " E") 22 „ „ in Docks, Quays, &c. (Table " F") 23 Rat Proofing 21 Rats and Rat Destruction (Tables " H" and " I") 23 „ —Measures of prevention of passage from Ship to Shore 20 „ —Detection of prevalence on Ships and Shore 21 Rat-searchers (Duties, &c.) 19 Rodent Plague, Detection of 19 4 S. PAGE Samples 32-34 Sanitary Inspections 8 Scarlet Fever 18 Seizure of Foodstuffs 27 Sheerness Boarding Station 13 Shellfish 32 Shipping Entering the Port (Table" A") 10 Small-pox 8, 15-18 Source of Water Supply 10,11 Staff 7, 9 Statutory Notices 8 Structural Defects 8 Sugar 30 Sundries (Foodstuffs,&c.) 30 Surveillance of Passengers and Crews 13 " Suspected " Vessels (Table " G ") 23 T. Table " A" Shipping Entering the Port 10 „ "B" Cargo and Passenger Traffic 10 „ "C" Infectious Sickness Landed from Vessels14 „ "D" „ „ occurring during Voyage14 „ "E" Destruction of Rats on Vessels22 „ " F" „ „ in Docks, Quays, &c 23 „G ,,"infected" Vessels. Measures of Rat Destruction 23 „ " H " Vessels from Infected Ports. Measures of Rat Destruction 23 „ "J" Measures of Rat Destruction on other Vessels23 ,, " J" Classification of Nuisances 23 Tallow—Seized and Destroyed 29 Telegraphic Address 1 Telephone Numbers 1 Tinned Meats 28 Tonnage of Vessels Entering Port 8 Training Ships 35, 36 U. Unsound Food, Quantity Destroyed 26 V. Veal 28 Vegetables 30 Vegetables, Tinned 30 Venereal Disease 13 Visitors to Port Sanitary District 37 W. Water Barges 8,11 Water Supply, Source of 10,11 5 INDEX TO APPENDICES. B. page Bedding Disinfected (Appendix XXV.) 67 Bye-Laws (Appendix XXXVII.) 82 C. Chicken-pox (Appendix XIX.) 55 Cholera (Appendix IV.) 43 Classification of Miscellaneous Diseases (Appendix XXII.) 63 Compulsory Notification of Infectious Disease (Appendix III.) 43 Crew Medically Inspected at Gravesend (Appendix I.) 42 „ ,, „ Sheerness (Appendix I.) 42 Certificates under International Sanitary Convention (Appendix XXIX.) 69-74 Continued Fever (Appendix XII.) 47 D. Deaths from Infectious Disease (Appendix III.) 43 Destruction of Unsound Meat, Weights, &c (Appendix XXXIV.) 79 Diphtheria (Appendix VII.) 44 Diseases, Miscellaneous—see " M " (Appendix XXII.) 63 Disinfecting Operations for Infectious Disease (Appendix XXIV.) 65 Disinfection of Vessel and Premises (Appendix XXIII.) 65 „ Effects, Bedding, &c (Appendix XXV.) 67 „ Second-hand Bags (Appendix XXX.) 75 Dock Areas (Appendix XXXVI.) 80 Dysentery (Appendix XVII.) 52 Deratisation Exemption Certificates (Appendix XXIX.) 74 E. Effects Disinfected (Appendix XXV.) 67 Enteric Fever (including Typhoid Fever and Paratyphoid Fever) (Appendix VIII.) 45 Erysipelas (Appendix XI.) 47 Exemption Certificates (Appendix XXIX.) 74 F. Fumigation of Vessels for the Destruction of Bats (Appendix XXIX.) 69-74 G. German Measles (Appendix X.) 46 Gravesend—Medical Inspection at (Appendix I.) 42 H. Hospital—Cases Admitted and Cost of Maintenance, &c (Appendix XXVI.) 68 I. Infectious Disease (Appendices II.-XXII.) 42-64 „ „ Cases Reported (Appendix II.) 42 „ „ „ Treated in Port Sanitary Hospital (Appendix II.) 42 „ „ Notified to Ministry of Health (Appendix III.) 43 „ „ Compulsory Notification with Number of Deaths (Appendix III.) 43 „ „ Disinfecting Operations (Appendix XXIV.) 65 Influenza (Appendix XVI.) 51 International Sanitary Convention of Paris, 1926 (Appendix XXIX.) 69-74 Leprosy (Appendix XX.) 56 M. Malaria (Appendix XVIII.) 53-55 Measles (Appendix IX.) 45 „ German (see " G") (Appendix X.) 46 Medical Inspection—Gravesend and Sheerness (Appendix I.) 42 Miscellaneous Diseases Classified (Appendix XXII.) 63 6 N. page New Buildings and Sanitary Works (Appendix XXXV.) 80 Notification of Infectious Disease (Appendix III.) 43 Nuisances on Vessels (Appendix XXXII.) 77 „ the Biver (Appendix XXXII.) 77 „ Shore Premises (Appendix XXXIII.) 78 P. Passengers Medically Inspected—Gravesend (Appendix I.) 42 „ „ „ —Sheerness (Appendix I.) 42 Paratyphoid Fever (Appendix VIII.) 45 Pneumonia (Appendix XV.) 50,51 Powers (Appendix XXXVII.) 81 Premises Disinfected (Appendix XXIII.) 65 „ —Nuisances on (Appendix XXXIII.) 78 R. Rats Caught and Destroyed (Appendix XXVII.) 68 „ Examined Appendix XXVIII.) 69 „ —Fumigation of Vessels for Destruction of (Appendix XXIX.) 69-74 River, Nuisances on (Appendix XXXII.) 77 S. ( Sanitary Inspections—Summary (Appendix XXXI.) 76 „ „ —Nuisances on Vessels (Appendix XXXII.) 77 „ „ — „ River (Appendix XXXII.) 77 „ „ — „ Shore Premise pendix XXXIII.) 78 Sanitary Works (Appendix XXXV.) 80 Scarlet Fever (Appendix VI.) 44 Second-hand Bags—Disinfection of (Appendix XXX.) 75 Sheerness—Medical Inspection (Appendix I.) 42 Small-pox (Appendix V.) 43 Statutory Notices Served (Appendix XXXIII.) 78 T. Tuberculosis, Pulmonary (Appendix XIII.) 47-50 „ Other kinds (Appendix XIV.) 50 Typhoid Fever (Appendix VIII.) 45 U. Unsound Meat Destroyed, Weight, &c (Appendix XXXIV.) 79 V. Venereal Diseases (Appendix XXI.) 56-63 Vessels Disinfected (Appendix XXIII.) 65 „ Fumigated for Rats (Appendix XXIII.) 65 „ „ „ (Appendix XXIX.) 69-74 „ —Nuisances on (Appendix XXXII.) 77 „ arriving from " Foreign" at Gravesend (Appendix I.) 42 „ „ „ „ Sheerness (Appendix I.) 42 W. Water Barges (Appendix XXXI.) 76 Weight, &c., of Unsound Meat Destroyed (Appendix XXXIV.) 79 7 STAFF. List of Officers forming the Staff of the Port of London Sanitary Authority, 31st December, 1930. Office. Name of Officer. Date of entering the Service. Date of appointment to present position. MEDICAL OFFICER OF HEALTH C. F. White, M.B., Ch.B., D.P.H.Vict., D.T.M.Liverpool. September, 1928 September, 1928. DEPUTY Col. J. S. Warrack, A.M.S., T.D., M.A., M.D., April, 1903 February, 1916. deen, D.P.H.Camb., Barrister-at-Law. BOARDING MEDICAL OFFICERS October, 1908 October, 1908. A. Kidd, M.R.C.S., L.R.C.P., D.P.H.Lond. Gravesend Surg,-Lieut. H. M. Willoughby, M.R.C.S., L.R.C.P., D.T.M.& H., R.N.V.R. May, 1929 May, 1929. Sheerness D. A. Cadman,M.B.,Ch.B.,D.P.H. June, 1929 October, 1929. fH. A. Madwar, L.R.C.P., L.R.F.P.S. January, 1928 February, 1928. CLERICAL STAFF— Principal Clerk E. A. Sorrell October, 1894 January, 1929. Principal Assistant W. C. Barham March, 1901 January, 1929. 1st Class J. A. Gillis March, 1914 January, 1929. 2nd A. W. Moore January, 1920 January, 1929. 3rd W. L. McLorg February, 1927 January, 1929. R. C. Ratliff March, 1930 March, 1930 Charwoman Mrs. E. Kail November, 1922 November, 1922. FOOD INSPECTORS, Grade I(a) A. Garland May, 1894 January, 1929. J. H. Rolfe September, 1901 January, 1929. W. W. Burr August, 1898 January, 1929. W. J. Berry February, 1914 January, 1930. SANITARY INSPECTORS, Grade I(b) P. R. Lambe January, 1900 January, 1929. W. Elward March, 1909 January, 1929. F. J. Massie March, 1909 January, 1929. SANITARY INSPECTORS, Grade II W. Gray September, 1921 January, 1930. P. W. Coombe December, 1924 January, 1929. R. Clifford July, 1925 January, 1929. E. H. Johnson August, 1929 July, 1929. T. G. Edwards June, 1929 January, 1930. RAT SEARCHERS †C. F. Woodrow November, 1928 November, 1928. †P. J.Wilkins November, 1928 November, 1928. †C. W. Moody February, 1929 February, 1929. †E. C. Watkins May, 1929 May, 1929. †S. A. Croft May, 1929 May, 1929. † G. F. Boult May, 1929 ' May, 1929. DENTON HOSPITAL— Medical Officer in Charge Col. J. S. Warrack April, 1903 February, 1916. Matron J. Jackson February, 1910 February, 1910. Staff Nurse † — - Senior Assistant Nurse † — — Assistant Nurse † —. Cook-General † — — Wardmaid † — Warmaid † — - Housemaid † - Handyman, &c. †F.R.Wehman June, 1929 June, 1929. Laundress †B. A. Wenham June, 1929 June, 1929. Gardener † — - LAUNCHES— " Joseph White "— Master W. Jarvis July, 1893 April, 1911. Engineer J. J. Steen May, 1908 January, 1926. Mate ... A. F. Rough November, 1914 November, 1914. " James Howell "— Master C.H.Price May, 1912 May, 1912. Engineer J. A. Hardman July, 1893 December, 1911. Deckhand † — — " George Briggs "— Master C. A. Strange December, 1898 October, 1913. Acting Engineer A. E. Howard February, 1912 November, 1926. GREENWICH MOORINGS— Barge " Ella Vicars "— Watchmen E. Ditch January, 1915 November, 1917. A. F. Clements January, 1927 January, 1927. GRAVESEND—Hulk " Hygeia "— Shipkeeper H. A. Clark May, 1912 January, 1927. J. C. Row January, 1927 January, 1927. * These Inspectors possess the Special Certificate of the Royal Sanitary Institute for Inspectors of Food. •J- Temporary Staff. 8 5, Church Passage, Guildhall, E.C. 2, January, 1931. TO THE WORSHIPFUL THE PORT OF LONDON SANITARY COMMITTEE. Gentlemen, I have the honour to submit herewith my Annual Report as Medical Officer of Health of the Port of London. The tonnage of vessels entering the Port of London during 1930 was 29,232,914, showing .an increase of 321,016 tons over that for the previous year. Of the 16,085 vessels arriving from foreign ports, 1,816 vessels, carrying 78,551 passengers and 49,422 members of crews, were boarded and inspected by your Medical Officers. Two hundred and forty-eight vessels arrived on which there were or had occurred during the voyage a total of 639 cases of notifiable infectious disease. The number of these cases actually landed in the Port was 278, of which 41 were removed to your Hospital at Denton. The remainder were sent to other hospitals or were allowed to proceed home. Thirty-four cases of infectious disease occurred on the Training Ships, of which 15 were treated in your Hospital. Two cases of infectious disease also occurred amongst residents in the Dock area. No cases of Plague arrived, and no Plague-infected rats were found on ships or on shore in the Port. One thousand four hundred and thirty-five rats from ships and 2,693 rats from shore premises were bacteriologically examined, but in no case was there any suspicion of Plague infection. One vessel arrived on which there had been a case of Cholera abroad. One case of Small-pox occurred on a vessel in the Port, and eight vessels arrived which had landed cases of Small-pox abroad. The Parrots (Prohibition of Import) Regulations came into operation on the 20th May, 1930, and 141 notices to export were issued in respect of 226 parrots. Your Sanitary Inspectors made 15,764 inspections of vessels and 5,338 inspections of shore premises. Orders to cleanse crew quarters were made on 1,670 vessels, and it was found necessary to call for structural alterations and repairs on 421 vessels. Orders to remedy structural defects were made in respect of 77 shore premises. Eighteen Statutory Notices were issued in respect of nuisances from smoke, as shown in Appendix XXXIII. The number of vessels fumigated for rat destruction, under the supervision of your Inspectors, was 233, and 3,398 rats were thus destroyed. In addition, 3,603 rats were trapped on ships and 6,356 on shore in the Port. On 1st January, 1930, the Public Health (Deratisation of Ships) Regulations, 1929, made by the Ministry of Health in accordance with the Internatonal Sanitary Convention, 1926, came into operation, and during the year 240 Certificates of Deratisation and 999 of Exemption from Deratisation were issued. Only two infringements of the Bye-laws relating to offensive cargoes were reported. Two Intimation Notices were sent to the offenders, who took such steps as to render further action unnecessary. The arrangements made with the Port of London Authority whereby the annual re-registration of Water Barges was made conditional upon a satisfactory report from your officers as to the fitness of the barges for carrying drinking water, worked smoothly and efficiently during the year. 9 The new Disinfecting Station at your Hospital at Denton has proved to be of great value, particularly in regard to the bathing and disinfection of Small-pox contacts. During the year the Hospital has been further improved by the re-building of the Caretaker's Cottage and the installation of central heating apparatus in the wards. The carrying out of the provisions of the Public Health (Imported Food) Regulations, 1925, formed an important part of the work of the Port Sanitary Authority. The control of imported mutton, on account of the prevalence of Caseous Lymphadenitis, referred to in my Report of 1928, was continued throughout the year. The Medical Officers of Health of the City of London and certain Metropolitan Boroughs continued to accept whole consignments for examination in cold stores in their districts. Consignments for provincial destinations were only released under guarantee that they would be held in cold store for examination by the Medical Officer of Health of the district concerned, who was notified by me of the despatch of the consignment in each case. Ten per cent, of every consignment for districts other than the City of London and the Metropolitan Boroughs referred to above was detained in Dock Store for examination by your Inspectors. The importers have given every facility for inspection, and have closely co-operated with your officers. It is satisfactory to be able to report that the standard of inspection abroad is steadily improving; research is being carried out into the cause of the disease and the manner in which sheep become infected, and there is reason to believe that the precautions taken in the great exporting countries will be so effective that it will be possible to reduce still further the examinations here. As in former years, a percentage of all ox-tongues imported from South America was examined on arrival, the proportion found to be affected with Actinomycosis being the same as last year, viz., 09 per cent. Legal proceedings were taken in respect of an infringement of the Public Health (Preservatives, &c., in Food) Regulations. The Magistrate dismissed the summons, under the Prohibition of Offenders Act, upon payment of the costs by the defendants. The total weight of Foodstuffs destroyed or disposed of for purposes other than human consumption on account of disease or unsoundness during the year was approximately 2,572 tons. The Annual Report on the working of the Canal Boats Acts and Regulations is appended. I have pleasure in reporting that all grades of your Staff carried out their duties in a highly satisfactory manner, and maintained cordial relations with all those with whom their work brought them in contact during the year, and that, as in former years, the Officers of His Majesty's Customs, the Port of London Authority and the Pilots have always been ready and willing to co-operate in the health work of the Port. I have the honour to be, Gentlemen, Your obedient Servant, CHARLES F. WHITE. 10 1.—AMOUNT OF SHIPPING ENTERING THE PORT DURING THE YEAR 1930. Table A. Number. Tonnage. Number Inspected Number of Vessels reported as having or having had, during the voyage Infectious Disease on Board. By the Medical Officer of Health. By the Sanitary Inspector. Number reported to be Defective. Number of Vessels on which Defects were Remedied. Foreign Steamers 12.756 19,256,165 1,739 12,359 294 197 227 Motor 2,941 3,156,653 73 2 1 18 Sailing 388 169,196 4 130 1 — 1 Fishing See Note. — — — — — Total Foreign 16,085 22,582,014 1,816 12,489 297 198 246 Coastwise Steamers 9,516 6,385,634 2 1,387 97 55 2 Motor 718 135,708 - 1 1 — Sailing 1,718 129,558 — 130 26 27 — Fishing See Note. — — — — — Total Coastwise 11,952 6,650,900 2 1,517 124 83 2 Total Foreign and Coastwise 28,037 29,232,914 1,818 14,006 421 281 248 * Includes mechanically propelled vessels other than Steamers. See also Appendix I. Note.—British Fishing Vessels are excluded from the Returns of the Navigation of the United Kingdom. Foreign Fishing Vessels arc included, but not separately distinguished. III.—SOURCE OF WATER SUPPLY. Inasmuch as the Port of London from West to East extends for a distance of nearly 69 miles and passes through the following Counties :— On the North Bank, Middlesex, London and Essex, On the South Bank, Surrey, London and Kent, it necessarily follows that there are various sources of water supply. The warehouses and offices in the docks, all of which are within the jurisdiction of the Port of London Sanitary Authority, are supplied direct from mains. Shipping in the docks is chiefly supplied with water from the mains ashore. II. -CHARACTER OF TRADE OF PORT. Table B. (a) Passenger Traffic during 1930:— ' To and from NON-EUROPEAN Countries. Number of Passengers. 1st Class. 2nd Class. 3rd Class. Inwards 17,785 11,991 22,738 Outwards 18,789 9,140 14,484 To and from CONTINENT OF EUROPE. Inwards 117,399 (including 12,455 Transmigrants). Outwards 105,801. Countries from which passengers principally arrive: North America, Australia, Europe, British South Africa, India and the Far East. (b) Cargo Traffic :— Principal Imports—Merchandise of all kinds, principally Provisions, Fruit, Grain and Flour, Hides and Skins, Meat, Oil and Fats, Rubber, Textile Materials, Tobacco, Wood and Wool. Principal Exports—Manufactured Goods of all kinds. Countries with which the Port principally trades—The Port of London trades with all parts of the world. 11 In some cases, however, for instance where vessels are not lying near a dock quay, water is supplied from water barges. Vessels lying in the Eiver obtain their supplies direct from water mains on shore or from water barges. Complaints were received through the Medical Officers of Health at Middlesbrough and Hull that members of the crews of two ships had suffered from stomach pains, vomiting and diarrhoea, alleged to be due to drinking water which had been taken in from a wharf in London. Your Medical Officer caused enquiries to be made, and ascertained that the water was obtained from an artesian well, 402 feet deep, situated on private premises and used for the supply of water for all purposes in the works. The water had a somewhat unfavourable appearance, but there seemed to be no possibility of contamination by sewage or trade matter. A sample of the water was submitted to your Analyst, who reported in detail, his conclusion being as follows :— " This water contains a heavy deposit of iron, &c., and a microscopical examination revealed the presence of mould growths and other vegetable and mineral debris. On the other hand, the water itself shows evidence of considerable organic purity. I am, therefore, of opinion that, if suitable means are adopted to remove these deposits, it would be suitable for all dietetic purposes." Your Medical Officer brought the matter to the notice of the owners of the wharf, who replied that they had decided to discontinue the use of water from this well and take their supplies in future from the Metropolitan Water Board mains. Water Barges.—As the majority of vessels obtain their water direct from hydrants on shore, water barges are not numerous in the Port of London. At the beginning of the year there were 20 in commission, and at the end of the year 16 only. These water barges are filled with pure water from the mains. It is, therefore, only necessary to ensure that no contamination of the water takes place during the filling of the tanks or while stored in the barges. This object is best achieved by a thorough inspection of the barges when empty, special attention being paid to the interior of the tanks and to the hoses and equipment. The water barges must be registered annually with the Port of London Authority, and before re-registration they must be inspected as to their fitness for navigation on the River and in the docks. The arrangement made last year whereby the Port of London Authority agreed to co-operate with the Port Sanitary Authority by informing them when each water barge was due for their annual inspection, and by making re-registration conditional, not only on the fitness of the barge for navigation, but also upon a favourable report from the Port Sanitary Authority as to the fitness of the barge for the carriage of drinking water, has worked smoothly and well. The Port of London Authority cancelled the registration of four barges during the year. IV.—INFECTIOUS DISEASE. For the prevention of the importation of infectious disease it is necessary to arrange for the medical inspection of vessels :— (1) Proceeding up the River Thames. (2) Proceeding up the River Medway. Vessels proceeding up the Thames.—The Port Sanitary Authority maintain a hulk, the " Hygeia," moored in the River, off Gravesend, about 26 miles below London Bridge, on which there is a Medical Officer on duty night and day. 12 No arrangements have up to the present been made for the notifipation by wireless to the Port Sanitary Authority of the time of arrival of inward vessels requiring the attention of the Boarding Medical Officer, but advance information is frequently given to the Authority by shipowners, agents and others who have been in wireless communication with such ships, particularly when infectious sickness has occurred on board. A Customs launch is always on duty in Gravesend Reach, and the Boarding Medical Officer goes off with the Preventive Officer to hail every vessel arriving from " foreign." The Preventive Officer questions the Master as to where the vessel is from, where berthing, the nature of the cargo, whether all are well on board and whether any sickness has occurred during the voyage. If the Master reports the occurrence of sickness or if the vessel has called at an infected port, the Medical Officer goes on board and makes such enquiries as are indicated. But owing to the increasing trade of the Port and to the improvements which the Port of London Authority have carried out in the River and docks it has, in recent years, become more and more difficult for the Officers of His Majesty's Customs and your Medical Officers to carry out their respective duties from the same launch. The Preventive Officer of His Majesty's Customs must hail every ship from "foreign," and your Medical Officers must examine carefully ships in which cases of sickness have occurred or which have come from ports where the more serious infectious diseases are prevalent. Consequently, if the Customs launch remains alongside until the Medical Officer has completed his inspection of a big ship or examined an obscure case of illness, other ships which arrive in the meantime must wait for pratique even if they have no sickness on board and are not from scheduled ports. If, on the other hand, the Customs launch leaves the Medical Officer and carries on with her normal duties, the Medical Officer may have considerable trouble in getting back to his station. These difficulties may occur at any time, but are particularly serious when fog or stormy weather have already caused delay. Towards the end of 1929, therefore, your Worshipful Committee, after very careful consideration, decided to build a boarding launch for the use of the Medical Officers at Gravesend. During 1930 plans and specifications were drawn up by your Consulting Engineers, Messrs. Dudgeon & Gray, Ltd., in consultation with your Medical Officer, and, having approved these, your Worshipful Committee placed the Contract for building the launch with Messrs. W. J. Yarwood & Sons, of Northwich. The launch is expected to be delivered during April, 1931, and will be named the " Howard Deighton." She will be a steel-built, twin screw vessel, having a length of about 70 feet and a beam of 14 ft. 6ins. She will be fitted with two Gardner Diesel Engines of 96 B.H.P. each, and have a guaranteed speed of 10½ knots per hour. Aft there will be a Medical Officer's cabin fitted with two bunks, a settee, table and chairs, a dispensary cupboard, lavatory basin, crockery cupboard and book shelf. Forward there will be sleeping accommodation for the crew, with separate single cabins for the Navigating Officer and Engineer and a double cabin for the deckhand and boy. On deck there will be an ambulance room fitted very much on the lines of a police ambulance, so that either four stretcher cases or eight sitting cases can be carried. When the new launch comes into commission it is hoped, with the assistance of the Pilots, to arrange for wireless messages to be sent to the Port Sanitary Authority from ships which are required to be boarded by the Medical Officer on arrival at Gravesend and for such ships to fly, when within the limits of the Port, a flag signal by day and a light signal by night indicating that the Port Medical Officer is required. When a healthy ship from an infected port has only just sufficient time to catch the tide she may be permitted to proceed up stream above the Boarding Station with the launch in attendance while the Medical Officer completes his inspection. Such an arrangement will increase the efficiency of the work of the Port Sanitary Authority while avoiding delay to shipping. To avoid frequent changes in the list of infected ports, which would lead to confusion, the Medical Officers are instructed to board all ships which have come from 13 ports in Asia, including the Islands of Japan, the East Indies and Ceylon; Africa, including the Island of Madagascar, the Canary Islands and Cape Verde Islands; Turkey; Greece; the Black Sea; the Azores; the whole of South America; the whole of Central America; the Gulf of Mexico; the Islands of the West Indies. Cases of infectious disease are removed in the Port Sanitary Authority's motor launch to the Authority's Isolation Hospital, which is situated on the River bank at Denton, just below Gravesend. This Hospital consists of an administrative block, three ward blocks providing accommodation for 32 cases, a bathing and disinfecting station, laundry, mortuary and post-mortem room and a porter's cottage. When it is deemed necessary for the prevention of the spread of infection, contacts are removed to hospital for observation, or more commonly for bathing and disinfection of their personal effects. In this connection the bathing and disinfecting station erected during last year has proved very useful. The station consists of an undressing room connected with the infected side of the disinfector, four spray and two slipper baths and a dressing room connected with the clean side of the disinfector. The whole building can be kept thoroughly warm, so that contacts who have been through the baths can wait, without discomfort, to receive their disinfected clothing. During the month of March alone 106 natives from three ships on which Small-pox had occurred were disinfected at the station. A causeway runs from the Hospital down to the River. It will be necessary to raise this in order to enable the new launch to go alongside for the landing of patients. When vessels arrive on which dangerous infectious disease has occurred, and the period that has elapsed since the landing of the last case is less than the maximum incubation period of the disease in question, not only are passengers and crew carefully inspected, but their names and addresses are obtained and forwarded with the necessary information to the Medical Officers of Health of the districts to which they are proceeding. The addresses are carefully checked by the Medical Officer by personal interrogation of each passenger and member of the crew, as passenger manifests and crew articles are not sufficiently accurate. Those who are liable to change their addresses within the prescribed period of surveillance are given post cards addressed to the Port Medical Officer of Health and told that they must notify promptly thereon any change of address. If time permits, infected quarters are put under disinfection by the Sanitary Inspector who removes the case in the River, otherwise they are sealed and disinfected by the Sanitary Inspector who visits the vessel when she arrives at her berth. The usual method of disinfection of quarters is spraying with Izal solution, followed by fumigation with Sulphur Dioxide. Infected bedding, clothing,&c., is removed by launch for disinfection by steam at the Isolation Hospital. Vessels proceeding up the River Medway are dealt with by a part-time Medical Officer from Sheerness, whose duty it is to visit, as soon as possible, every vessel on which sickness is reported by His Majesty's Customs, and to board within about twelve hours of arrival every other vessel from " foreign " remaining within the jurisdiction of the Port of London Sanitary Authority. Cases of infectious disease from such vessels would be removed to the Port Sanitary Authority's Hospital at Denton. The cleansing of persons can now be carried out efficiently and promptly at the new bathing and disinfecting station at the Authority's Hospital. Three motor launches are available for the transport of cases of infectious disease within the Port. The Boarding Medical Officers always make enquiries in regard to the occurrence of venereal disease on vessels they board, and give advice as to when and where treatment is obtainable. 14 Handbills showing where free treatment can be obtained by seamen suffering from venereal disease are distributed on vessels. The Port Sanitary Authority do not provide a clinic, but there are clinics at Sheerness, Rochester, Southend, Gravesend, Faversham, Dartford, Royal Albert and Victoria Dock, Greenwich and London. Bacteriological examination of rats is carried out at the new laboratories of the Seamen's Hospital, Greenwich, under the direction of Professor Hewlett. These laboratories are equipped with every modern appliance, and, if Plague is suspected, rats can be examined at any time of the day. Other bacteriological examinations are now also carried out at the above laboratories. Table C. Cases of Infectious Sickness landed from Vessels. Disease. Number of Cases during 1930. Average Number of Cases for Number of vessels Passengers. Crew. previous 5 years. concerned. Small-pox — 1 3.0 1 Scarlet Fever 1 — 11.2 1 Diphtheria 1 4 13.8 5 Enteric Fever 5 14 22.4 19 Measles 5 4 14.6 8 German Measles — — 14.0 - Erysipelas 1 — 1.4 1 Continued Fever — — 0.6 — Pulmonary Tuberculosis 42 42 58.0 70 Tuberculosis (other kinds) 3 — 3.6 3 Pneumonia 3 8 13.4 10 Influenza 2 — 4.0 2 Cerebro-spinal Meningitis — — 0.4 — Dysentery 15 6 7.8 20 Encephalitis Lethargica — — 0.2 — Malaria 15 7 16.0 20 Chicken-pox 1 5 18.8 6 Remittent and Relapsing Fever — 0.2 — Note.—The following cases of infectious disease occurred on board Training Ships moored in the River Thames:— Scarlet Fever 24, Diphtheria 3, Pneumonia 1, Chicken-pox 1. The following cases of infectious disease occurred amongst persons resident in the dock areas:— Scarlet Fever 1, Pneumonia 1. Table D. Cases of Infectious Sickness occurring on Vessels during the Voyage, but disposed of prior to arrival. Disease. Number of Cases during 1930. Average Number of Cases for Number of vessels Passengers. Crew. previous 5 years. concerned. Cholera — 1 7.8 1 Plague — — 1.4 — Yellow Fever — — 0.4 — Small-pox 1 9 15.2 8 Scarlet Fever 2 1 3.2 3 Diphtheria 1 - 2.8 1 Enteric Fever 1 5 30.1 6 Measles 38 3 42.8 18 German Measles 5 1 6.4 5 Erysipelas ... 1 — 2.0 1 Continued Fever — 1 1.0 1 Pulmonary Tuberculosis 16 16 34.2 28 Tuberculosis (other kinds) 1 — 1.4 1 Pneumonia 29 14 24.2 26 Influenza 16 63 62.0 12 Cerebro-spinal Meningitis — — 0.2 - Dysentery 10 5 18.8 11 Encephalitis Lethargica — — 0.6 - Malaria 44 146 80.6 51 Chicken-pox 19 5 34.4 19 Eemittent and Relapsing Fever ... — - - 15 Cholera. The ss. "Director" arrived at Gravesend on the 25th July, from Calcutta. On the 2nd July, the second mate was taken ill while the vessel was lying at Calcutta. The Port Medical Officer diagnosed the case as Cholera, and the patient was removed to hospital ashore, where he was treated and discharged as cured on the 15th July. The patient rejoined the vessel on the date of sailing. The quarters were disinfected at Calcutta, and the whole of the crew were inoculated with anti-Cholera serum. No other case occurred. Small-pox. The ss. "Ranchi" from Bombay, via Marseilles and Plymouth, arrived off Gravesend on 14th February, 1930. Information had previously been received from the Peninsular and Oriental Steam Navigation Company that a case of Small-pox had been landed from this vessel at Suez on 2nd February. The Boarding Medical Officer ascertained that the case was that of a Goanese steward who joined the ship at Bombay on 25th January, and who reported sick with a rash on 30th January. The ship's surgeon diagnosed Small-pox, and isolated the patient until he was landed at Suez on 2nd February. The case was a mild one, the disease being modified by previous vaccination. Infection was probably acquired ashore in Bombay. The ship's surgeon vaccinated all the immediate contacts and all the remainder of the crew and passengers except those who had been successfully vaccinated within one year. On arrival in the Port of London all persons on board were carefully examined, but no other case was found. The names and addresses in this country of the white crew and the passengers were obtained and forwarded to the Medical Officers of Health of the districts of destination, as the incubation period had not fully expired. The personal effects and bedding of the patient were taken ashore for steam disinfection at Denton Hospital, and the quarters which had been occupied by the case were sprayed with disinfectant solution and fumigated with Sulphide Dioxide gas. No spread of the infection took place. The ss. "Mantua" from Japanese, Chinese and Indian ports via Marseilles, Gibraltar and Plymouth, arrived off Gravesend at 9 a.m., on 7th March, 1930, and was boarded by Dr. Warrack and Dr. Cadman. The following particulars were obtained in regard to the occurrence of cases of Small-pox on board, notification of which had already been received:— 1st Case.—Mr. H. G., 1st Class passenger, embarked at Shanghai on 28th January, 1930. An eruption appeared on 2nd February, and a diagnosis of confluent Small-pox was made. He was landed to hospital at Singapore on 6th February. He presumably contracted the infection ashore. 2nd Case.—A Lascar member of the crew, who joined the ship in Bombay on 14th February, reported sick on 20th February with the eruption of modified Small-pox. Apparently he was infected ashore and cannot be connected in any way with the case of Mr. G., who had been landed at Singapore a week before this man joined the ship. This Lascar was landed to hospital at Suez on 23rd February. 3rd Case.—A Lascar member of the crew reported sick with an eruption on 5th March. The vessel arrived the next day at Plymouth, where the disease was diagnosed as Chicken-pox. Precautionary Measures.—After the first case all persons on board were vaccinated by the ship's surgeon, and the Port Health Authority at Singapore carried out disinfection of the patient's effects and the quarters occupied by him. After the second case, since the European crew had been vaccinated after the occurrence of the first case, and the native crew had been vaccinated in Bombay before joining, further vaccination was confined to those passengers who could not 16 produce evidence of having been successfully vaccinated within two years. The native quarters were fumigated with Formalin and washed with a carbolic solution. The patient's bedding was destroyed and his personal effects landed at Suez. After the 3rd Case (Chicken-pox).—The patient was removed to hospital at Plymouth. In London all persons on board were medically inspected and their names and addresses obtained. These addresses were all posted to the Medical Officers of Health of the districts of destination on the day the vessel arrived in London. All the Lascar contacts, 49 in number, together with their kits, were removed by launch to Denton Hospital for bathing and steam disinfection respectively at the new disinfecting station. During their absence from the ship their quarters were thoroughly sprayed with Izal solution. The bathing and disinfection was completed, and the crew returned to the ship in a little over three hours. No extension of the infection occurred. The ss. "Margha" from Calcutta, Madras, Colombo, Aden, Suez and Port Said via Marseilles and Plymouth, arrived off Gravesend at 8.30 a.m. on 9th March, 1930, and was boarded by Dr. H. Willoughby. The master reported that two cases of Small-pox had occurred on board during the voyage. The circumstances were as follows:— On 2nd February a Lascar developed Small-pox and was landed to hospital at Madras on 3rd February, where all necessary disinfection was carried out. The patient contracted the disease ashore in Calcutta. On 11th February a native cook developed Small-pox and was landed to hospital at Aden on 16th February. This man could not have been infected on board from the previous case, but must have been infected in Calcutta a day or two before joining the ship. Precautionary Measures.—After the first case every passenger and member of the crew who had not been successfully vaccinated within one year was re-vaccinated. The native quarters were washed down with Lysol solution, the bedding of the patients was destroyed, and their personal effects were landed with them. On arrival in the Port of London all persons on board were medically inspected and their names and addresses' obtained. These addresses were not forwarded to the Medical Officers of Health of districts of destination as 21 days had elapsed since the last case was removed from the ship, and there was no evidence that any other persons were likely to develop the disease. The 53 contacts of the case were, however, landed, together with their kits, at Denton Hospital. The men were all bathed and their kits disinfected by steam. This took three hours, and no delay was occasioned to the ship. No extension of the infection occurred. The ss. "Maloja" arrived off Gravesend at 6.45 a.m., on 21st March, from Australian ports, via Bombay, Aden, Suez, Port Said, Marseilles and Plymouth. She was boarded by Dr. Cadman, who ascertained the following particulars regarding a Goanese steward landed at Suez on 9th March. This man joined the ship at Bombay on 1st March. On 6th March he reported to the ship's surgeon with fever and a discreet papular eruption, principally on the face, but also on the trunk and limbs. Small-pox was diagnosed and the case was landed to hospital at Suez. Infection must have been contracted ashore before the man joined the ship. 17 On arrival of the vessel in London all persons on board were inspected, their names and addresses were obtained, and their vaccinal condition enquired into. Seven Goanese stewards, immediate contacts, were taken to Denton Hospital for bathing and disinfection of their personal effects, meamvhile their quarters and the isolation hospital on board were disinfected by spraying with Izal solution, followed by fumigation with Sulphur Dioxide. The names and addresses of person on board were forwarded to the Medical Officers of Health of the districts concerned the same day. No extension of the infection occurred. The ss. "Glenamoy" arrived at Gravesend on the 1st April, reporting having landed a sailor's boy at Colombo on the 1st March, suffering from Small-pox. Complete disinfection of the infected quarters and vaccination of all passengers and crew were carried out at Colombo. On arrival of the vessel at Gravesend, all the crew were thoroughly examined, and the passengers inspected. As no secondary cases had occurred during the voyage no further action was taken in this Port. The ss. "Rancher" arrived off Gravesend at 2.30 a.m. on the 14th April, 1930. and was boarded by Dr. Cadman. The vessel left Calcutta on 13th March, 1930, Colombo 18th March, 1930, Port Sudan 28th March, 1930, Suez 1st April, 1930, and Port Said 2nd April, 1930. The Master reported that one case of Small-pox, a Lascar, had been landed at Suez. The man reported sick on 24th March. He then had a temperature of 99.8 degrees and a rash. He was forthwith isolated on board. At Port Sudan the case was diagnosed as Chicken-pox, but at Suez the case was considered to be Small-pox and the patient was taken to hospital on 1st. April. The crew's quarters were disinfected and the whole of the crew were re-vaccinated. Infection apparently took place ashore before embarkation. During his inspection of the crew Dr. Cadman discovered another Lascar suffering from typical Chicken-pox. This man had, with two others, shared the cabin occupied by the Lascar landed at Suez. He stated that he had been ill since 3rd April, but had not reported sick. He had no constitutional disturbance. The lesions were superficial, oval in shape and of all ages. In distribution the eruption was principally on the face and trunk, slight on the upper arms and thighs, very scanty on the forearms and legs. He was landed to Denton Hospital as Chicken-pox, and the two other occupants of his cabin were also landed for bathing and disinfection. The remainder of the crew, both white and coloured, remained on board and were kept under observation while the vessel was in the Port. The ss. "Comedian" arrived at Gravesend on 12th May, from Calcutta, having landed the native cook at Suez on 30th April, suffering from a mild attack of Small-pox. The whole of the crew and passengers were vaccinated and disinfection was carried out at Suez. The names and addresses of the passengers, three in number, were forwarded to the Medical Officers of the districts concerned. No other case occurred. About 4.45 p.m., on 16th May, a telephone message was received from the Medical Officer of Health of Stepney that a fireman on the ss. " Petrel " which had arrived the same afternoon off Butler's Wharf, had reported at the Public Health Department, and had been found to be suffering from Small-pox. 18 Your Medical Officer visited the vessel, which was lying in the river off Butler's Wharf, with the intention of vaccinating the remainder of the crew, but found that, as the vessel could not berth until 3 p.m., all except the captain and six of the crew had rowed ashore and gone home. He vaccinated five of these men and one who had been on board from a vessel alongside. The captain refused vaccination and one sailor, who had marks of an obviously recent and successful vaccination, was excused. The names and addresses of the whole crew (18, including the patient) were obtained and were telephoned next morning to the Medical Officers of Health of the districts concerned, the messages being afterwards confirmed in writing. All the bedding and clothing from the firemen's and sailors' quarters Avere removed by launch to Denton Hospital, and there disinfected by steam, meanwhile the quarters were disinfected by spraying with Izal and subsequently fumigated with SO2. The circumstances of the occurrence are as follows:—The ss. "Petrel" trades regularly between London and Hamburg. Her previous movements were: Left Hamburg 25th April; arrived London 27th April: left London 1st May; arrived Hamburg 3rd May; left Hamburg 5th May; arrived London 7th May; left London 9th May; arrived Hamburg 11th May; left Hamburg 14th May, arrived London 16th May. The patient reported sick in Hamburg on 11th May, and was seen by a shore doctor, who said he had a chill. Subsequently he returned to work and did not report sick again on board. Other members of the crew stated that he developed a rash on 14th May, but the captain was not aware of this and consequently reported " all well " when his vessel was hailed at Gravesend. The man went home to 80, Salmon Lane, E. 14, when the vessel was moored off Butler's Wharf. As several cases of Small-pox had occurred in the same house, he went to the Public Health Department of Stepney to report that he had a rash. It appears'that the first case of small-pox was removed from 80, Salmon Lane, on 1st May, so there is no doubt that this man was infected at home while his ship was in London, between 27th April and 1st May. Arrangements were made for the vessel to be boarded at Gravesend each time she arrived, up to and including 31st May, but no contacts who continued to sail in the vessel developed Small-pox. The ss. "Clan Buchanan" arrived at Gravesend on the 3rd June, having landed a native sailor at Cochin on the 18th April suffering from a mild and doubtful attack of Small-pox. The crew had been vaccinated before joining the ship at Bombay on the 9th April. Disinfection was carried out under the supervision of the Port Medical Officer for Cochin. No other case occurred during the voyage. Scarlet Fever. A small epidemic of Scarlet Fever occurred on board the Training Ship "Arethusa," lying in the Thames off Greenhithe. There were 16 cases, all being boys under training. The first six cases were sent to the Dartford Urban and Rural Districts (Joint) Infectious Disease Hospital, at Bow Arrow Lane, Dartford, the 10 subsequent cases being removed to the Port Sanitary Authority's Hospital at Denton. The disease was uniformly mild in type. It was not found possible to trace the original source of infection, which was probably a "missed" case. A consideration of the dates of onset showed that the disease spread on board by "caseto-case infection." Leprosy. A Chinese cook, suffering from leprosy, arrived at Shell Haven on the ss. "Megara," from Curacao, on 26th May. The patient originally came from Singapore. Arrangements were made with the Seamen's Hospital Society to accommodate the patient 19 in the Royal Albert Dock Hospital pending his repatriation to China, and he was accordingly removed from the vessel at Shell Haven to the Royal Albert Dock Hospital in the motor launch " James Howell." The case appeared to be an early one, the symptoms having first been noticed in December, 1929. He was isolated on board, and the Director of Public Health at Emmastad, in Curacao, had prescribed the precautions to be taken during the voyage. The necessary disinfection of quarters and effects was carried out by your Sanitary Inspector after the removal of the patient. After considerable difficulty and delay the patient Avas repatriated to China. V.—MEASURES AGAINST RODENTS. (1) Steps taken for the detection of rodent Plague:— The Port Sanitary Authority employs six rat-searchers. Each rat-searcher has his OAvn district, corresponding to the district of a Sanitary Inspector, under whose guidance he works. A rat-searcher's first duty is the examination of such ships in his district as are due for inspection under Article 28 of the International Sanitary Convention relative to the granting of Deratisation and Deratisation Exemption Certificates. His second duty is to visit ships arriving in his district from Plague-infected ports, to search for dead rats and, if possible, to obtain specimens of live rats trapped on board. He is required to re-visit such vessels daily during the discharge of cargo, to ascertain whether dead rats have been found in the holds. The existence of rodent Plague on board any vessel in the Port should thus be detected at the earliest possible moment. The rat-searcher's third duty is the examination of shore premises for signs of rat infestation or rat Plague, paying particular attention to premises adjoining the berths of Vessels from Plague-infected ports. The Avhole of the Dock area is systematically and regularly inspected, and specimens of the shore rat population in all parts of the Port are regularly examined bacteriologicallv, so that, in the rare event of Plague infection being communicated to the rats on shore, it should be quickly detected and stamped out before it has spread extensively. Moreover, when rat-infestation of premises is reported, the responsible persons are required to take energetic measures of rat-destruction, for rat Plague will spread rapidly in a rat-infested area, Avhereas Avhere rats are few it may never spread at all. It is of the greatest importance, not only from the public health, but also from the commercial point of vieAv*, that the Port of London should be kept free from rat Plague. Bacteriological Examination of Rats.—Owing to the fact that the Port of London is so extensive, it is not easy to arrange for rats to be conveyed to a suitable bacteriological laboratory. The new laboratories at the Seamen's Hospital, GreenAvich, are most conveniently situated, and there is a Staff of skilled bacteriologists under the direction of Professor Hewvlett. Rat-searchers collect rats from ships and shore premises in their district each day. They tie to one leg of each rat a small label, on which is a letter combination indicating the Dock where the rat Avas obtained (thus R.A.D. indicates Royal Albert Dock, S.C.D. Surrey Commercial Dock, &c.) and a number. In their daily report sheets the rat-searchers enter each letter-number combination, with notes opposite shoAving exactly Where and hoAv each rat was obtained. They then place the rats in a linen bag, which they put in a tin box. At the end of the day they deliver the tin boxes at the laboratory of the Seamen's Hospital, GreenAvich, and receive in exchange empty bags and boxes for the next day's rats. Rats are delivered about 5 p.m., and examined next morning. If any rats were found Plague-infected the letters and number on the label attached Avould be telephoned to your Medical Officer, Avho, on reference to the rat-searcher's reports, could at once ascertain exactly Avhere such rats were obtained and institute Plague preventive measures there. If rats are found dead under circumstances-suggesting that they have died of Plague, they are taken at once to the laboratory, and an immediate examination and report is requested. 20 The rats from Tilbury Dock are sent by train from Gravesend to Greenwich, where they are collected each morning by one of the Staff and taken to the laboratory on his way to work. It is not found possible to dip the rats on the Docks in a flea-killing solution, but it has been arranged that the bags containing the rats should be dipped in kerosine at the laboratory. The bags returned empty to the rat-searchers are therefore saturated in lerosine, which is sufficient to destroy the fleas on the subsequent batches of rats placed in the bags. (2) Measures taken to prevent the passage of rats between ships and shore The Port of London Authority have made Bye-laws requiring the Master of every ship to cause all ropes and mooring tackle used for securing ships, either to the shore or mooring buoys, to be fitted with guards, approved by the Authority, to prevent rats passing from the ship to the shore, and to cause all empty cases, packages and barrels to be examined before landing, to ensure that no rats are contained therein. The removal of rats (alive or dead) from ships without previous consent in writing of the Superintendent, is prohibited. Bye-laws also prescribe that, when the discharge or loading of cargo or the landing or embarking of passengers is not actually proceeding, one gangway, whitened for a length of 10 feet at the end next the vessel, may be used as a communication between the ship and the shore, and that the Master shall not have or allow any other communication with the shore, unless the same be fitted with guards, approved by the Authority, to prevent the passage of rats. These Bye-laws are enforced by the officers of the Port of London Authority, and the Sanitary Inspectors of the Port Sanitary Authority also call upon Masters to put guards on their mooring ropes. But the well-known difficulties in regard to the proper application and maintenance of position of rat-guards constantly occur, and it cannot be said that the mooring ropes of the majority of ships in the Port of London are at all times so guarded that a rat could not use them as a means of reaching the shore. There is no doubt that rats very seldom voluntarily run along mooring ropes, and the view is held that such rats as get ashore do so usually by some easier means or accidentally in cargo. (3) Methods of deratisation of:— (a) Ships. The methods employed for the deratisation of ships are:— (1) The burning of Sulphur at the rate of 3 lbs. per 1,000 cubic feet of space, the period of exposure of vessels to the Sulphur Dioxide gas thus generated being not less than six hours. Roll Sulphur, of good quality, is used, and is burned in large shallow trays. Owing to the large burning surface thus obtained, considerably more Sulphur can be completely burned in one container within the six hours than is possible when buckets or pots are used. (2) The generating of Hydrocyanic Acid gas from "Zyklon 'B'" or from liquified Hydrogen Cyanide, there being several modifications of the latter process. If any new method of application of Hydrogen Cyanide is brought forward, the Port Sanitary Authority always test its efficiency by concealing test animals on board the ship, and, further, require to be satisfied that the method does not expose the fumigating Staff to any unavoidable danger. The concentration of Hydrogen Cyanide required is approximately 0.2 per cent., and the shortest period of exposure two hours. The figures given in Tables "H" and "I" are no indication of the relative efficiency of Sulphur Dioxide and Hydrogen Cyanide as fumigants, because one large passenger line fumigate their vessels regularly every voyage with Cyanide for the destruction of insects, and these vessels are almost, if not absolutely, rat free. (3) Trapping. All vessels from Plague-infected ports are required to have traps set on board, in order that specimens may, if possible, be obtained for bacteriological examination. All other vessels, on which there is evidence of rats, but not of such a number as to justify a demand for 21 fumigation, are required to have traps set in all spaces where signs of rats are discovered. The trapping may be carried out by professional rat-catchers or, in some cases, by members of the crew, under the supervision of the officers of the Port Sanitary Authority. (b) Premises in the vicinity of Docks and Quays. The Port of London Authority constantly carry out methods of rat-destruction ashore in the Port. Trapping is the method principally employed, but the Authority are always ready to test any new method of rat-destruction that is brought to their notice. The condition of all shore premises is under the constant supervision of the Sanitary Inspectors and rat-searchers of the Port Sanitary Authority, who draw the attention of the officers of the Port of London Authority to any signs of rat-infestation they may discover. (4) Measures taken for the detection of rat prevalence in ships and on shore:— Examination by Inspectors and Rat-searchers, as already described. (5) Rat-proofing:— The Port of London Authority have, during the year, continued their scheme of rat-proofing in the Docks and Warehouses. No rat Plague has occurred on shore in the Port for 14 years, and the policy of the Port of London Authority in constantly applying methods of rat-destruction and progressively rat-proofing the Docks and Warehouses has been an important factor in keeping the Port of London free from Plague infection. PUBLIC HEALTH (DERATISATION OF SHIPS) REGULATIONS, 1929. On 1st January, 1930, there came into operation the Public Health (Deratisation of Ships) Regulations made by the Ministry of Health in accordance with Article 28 of the International Sanitary Convention, 1926. By these Regulations every ship arriving from a foreign port at a port in England or Wales, is required to be in possession of a valid certificate of Deratisation or Exemption from Deratisation. By a valid certificate is meant one issued not more than six months previously in a port either in this country or abroad which has been notified to the Office Internationale d'Hygiene Publique by the Government concerned as having such personnel and equipment as will enable the Port Health Authority to make an efficient inspection as to the number of rats on board, and to carry out deratisation when necessary. If no valid certificate is produced the Medical Officer of Health must inspect the ship, and if he finds that the conditions are such that the number of rats on board is kept down to a minimum, he must issue a Deratisation Exemption Certificate. If, on the other hand, he finds that there is evidence of more than a minimum number of rats on board he must require the ship to be deratised to his satisfaction, and on the completion of this operation must issue a Deratisation Certificate. Such Certificates are accepted in the Ports of all other countries which have ratified the International Sanitary Convention. Article 28 of the International Sanitary Convention should solve satisfactorily the vexed question of the fumigation of ships ; should lead to a great reduction in the number of rats afloat and should greatly diminish the risk of spread of Plague by sea-borne commerce, without imposing any unreasonable restrictions on shipping. It is obvious that, if there is rat Plague or even a suspicion of rat Plague on board a ship, fumigation must be carried out promptly as a Public Health measure, regardless of the fact that the vessel may be in possession of a valid certificate of Deratisation or exemption from Deratisation and the International Sanitary Convention provides for this. During the year the new Regulations have worked quite smoothly in the Port of London, and this is in no small measure due to the way in which the Shipping Companies have co-operated with the Port Sanitary Authority. 22 The greatest possible care is taken in the inspection of ships, and in the completion of the Certificates which are in the form approved for International use by the Office Internationale d'Hygiene Publique. In order that the Port Sanitary Authority may know as soon as possible after a ship has arrived whether she is in possession of a valid certificate, a card index has been prepared with a separate card for every ship entering the Port of London. Among other entries on such cards is the nature, date and port of the certificate last issued. Every morning the list of arrivals is gone through by a clerk, who picks out the corresponding cards and notifies the Sanitary Inspectors of the names of the vessels which require examination. It is also desirable to know the previous rat history of ships. This is kept in the form of a graph, the number of rats destroyed being shown vertically, and the date of fumigation or exemption horizontally. Such a graph is attached to the office copies of certificates of each ship, and thus it is possible at a glance to take in the past history. Difficulty has been experienced in regard to foreign-owned vessels, by reason of the Agents refusing to accept responsibility for the fee charged for the certificates. To overcome this a form of request for inspection and the issue of the appropriate certificate, and an agreement that the fee payable should be chargeable to the ship's account, has been prepared for signature by the master. Since inspection cannot be completed until a vessel is empty, it often happens that ships leave the port before the certificate on the official form can be completed. In such cases a temporary certificate is issued certifying that a Deratisation or Exemption Certificate, as the case may be, has been granted and will be forwarded to the ship in due course. Owing to the fact that there are some ships which are only completely empty at long intervals, no hard and fast rule has been made that Deratisation Exemption Certificates will only be issued to ships which are completely empty at the time of inspection, but on the other hand no such certificate is issued unless the ship is either empty or has remaining on board only cargo of such a nature and in so small a quantity that a thorough inspection can be carried out. Although the form of certificate provides for Deratisation by Trapping, this is rarely practised in the Port of London, and then only when the evidence of rats is localised to one or two small compartments. Similarly local fumigations are only permitted under exceptionally favourable circumstances. Your Officers always keep in mind the fact that this work is of International importance, and make every effort to ensure that certificates issued in the Port of London shall give the Port Medical Officers abroad an accurate and clear record of the results of inspection, and that there shall be no reasonable grounds for adverse criticism of the decision to grant an Exemption Certificate, or of the measures of Deratisation taken, as the case may be. Eats Destroyed during 1930. TABLE E. (1) On Vessels. Number of Jan. Feb. Mar. April. May. June. July. Aug. Sept. Oct. Nov. Dec. Total in Year. Black Eats 113 83 45 83 ; 104 78 65 69 167 204 106 142 1,259 Brown Rats 27 7 11 3 44 3 - 4 42 10 17 8 176 Species not Recorded 519 546 543 463 337 355 668 653 213 297 512 460 5,566 Rats examined 140 90 56 86 148 81 65 73 209 214 123 150 1,435 Rats infected with Plague nil nil nil nil nil nil nil nil nil nil nil nil nil See also Appendices XXVI., XXVII. and XXVIII. Total includes 1,751 Rats not accounted for in Tables " G," " H " and " I," being a number of Rats voluntarily notified by Private Rat Catchers as having been trapped on vessels from non-infected ports. 23 TABLE F. (2) In Docks, Quays, Wharves and Warehouses. Number of Jan. Feb. Mar. April. May. June. July. Aug. Sept. Oct. Nov. Dec. Total inYear. Black Eats 52 64 48 30 57 43 67 39 94 165 101 75 835 Brown Eats 145 106 85 89 159 135 128 90 228 206 213 174 1,758 Species not Recorded 198 422 488 431 404 213 205 422 132 281 393 174 3,763 Rats examined 197 170 133 119 216 178 195 129 322 471 314 249 2,693 Eats infected with Plague nil nil nil nil nil nil nil nil nil nil nil nil nil EATS EXAMINED—Vessels, Docks, Quays, &c 4,128 See also Appendices XXVI., XXVII. and XXVIII. TABLE G. Particulars relating to Plague "Infected" or "Suspected " Vessels arriving in the Port during 1930. Name of Vessel. Date of arrival. Whether " Infected " or " Suspected." Method of Rat Destruction employed. Number of Dead Rats recovered. Whether a Certificate of Deratisation was issued. Remarks. 1. 2. 3. 4. Nil 5. 6. 7. TABLE H. Measures of Eat Destruction on Vessels from Plague-infected Ports (other than those included in Table G) arriving in the Port during 1929, and number of Certificates issued in respect of such Vessels. Total Number of Vessels arriving from Plagueinfected ports. Number of such Vessels fumigated by S02. Number of Dead Rats recovered. Number of such Vessels fumigated by HCN. Number of Dead Rats recovered. Number of such Vessels on which Trapping, Poisoning, &c., were employed. Number of Dead Rats recovered. Number of such Vessels on which measures of Rat Destruction were not employed. Number of Fumigation Certificates issued ou Form "Port 11." Number of other Certificates issued. Deratisation. Exemption. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 71 1,391 59 297 12 98 1,821 1,852 Nil By fumigation. 79 Nil 4 By trapping. TABLE I. Measures of Eat Destruction on Vessels (other than those included in Tables G and H) and number of Certificates issued in respect of such Vessels during 1930. Number of Vessels Fumigated by S02. Number of Dead Rats recovered. Number of Vessels Fumigated by HCN. Number of Dead Rats recovered. Number of Vessels on which Trapping, Poisoning, &c., were employed. Number of Dead Rats recovered. Number of Certificates issued on Form "Port 11." Number of other Certificates issued. Deratisation. Exemption. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 162 123 2,832 39 171 No record. No record. By fumigation 3 By trapping. 920 Nil For details of Fumigation of Vessels, see Appendix XXIX. For details of Deratisation Exemption Certificates, see Appendix XXX. VI.—HYGIENE OF CREWS' SPACES. TABLE J.—Classification of Nuisances. Nationality of Vessel. Number inspected during 1930. Defects of original construction. Structural defects through wear and tear. Dirt, Vermin and other conditions prejudicial to health. British 10,422 208 561 1,767 Other Nations 5,342 24 Hygiene of Crew Accommodation. The hygiene of living accommodation on board ships in the Port receives the constant attention of the Sanitary Inspectors, but it is not possible to complete the above table because defects on foreign-owned ships, which cannot be remedied whilst such ships remain within the Port Sanitary district, but which would have to be the subject of correspondence with the owners abroad, have not been reported. On the other hand the Inspectors invariably report sanitary defects on British ships because it is possible to get them put right either immediately, or on the next occasion when time and place permit of the work being done. But even if records had been available from which the information required in the above table could be supplied, the figures would be of no value whatever as a basis of comparison between the crew accommodation in British ships, and that in ships of other nations. In regard to dirty conditions, British ships would always appear at a disadvantage because frequently the crew are paid off on arrival and leave their quarters in an untidy and dirty-looking condition, whereas in the case of foreign ships the crew are living on board and their quarters, therefore, have a more cleanly appearance. As regards structural defects, and defects due to wear and tear, can any Port Medical Officer judge the standard of hygiene of the whole Mercantile Marine of any nation from the samples he sees in his own port? The opinions of the Sanitary Inspectors in the Port of London as to how British ships compare with those of other countries, differ according to the part of the Port in which their work lies. They are agreed that there are some nations whose ships are consistently unsatisfactory as judged by our own standards of hygiene, but when it comes to saying whether there are other nations whose ships of all classes are consistently superior to ours, they find it difficult to be dogmatic. It is true that there are a few countries whose legal standards in regard to crew accommodation are higher than ours. But there are many British ship owners who go far beyond the minimum requirements of the Merchant Shipping Act and the Regulations of the Board of Trade in regard to the provision they make for the crews of their ships. On the other hand there are some who provide the bare minimum, and it is disappointing to come across new ships in the designing and construction of which there has been a complete absence of consideration for the welfare and comfort of the crew. Criticisms are met by statements regarding trade depression, international competition, low freights and high operating costs. These difficulties are admitted, but every ship must carry a crew (though this seems to be an afterthought with some ship designers) and since capital expenditure must be incurred in housing the men, surely it is desirable that the money should be spent to the best advantage. It is contended that at the present time much more satisfactory crew quarters could be provided without serious additional expense if in the drawing up of the plans, and in the specification of fittings more careful consideration were given to what are to-day accepted as reasonable standards of hygiene. There are ship owners who can point with justifiable pride to the living quarters of the officers and men on every ship of their fleet, and there is no doubt that there is also a general all round improvement. But there are notable exceptions which demonstrate very clearly that our present standards are too low. This question is receiving consideration, for a Standing Joint Committee of the Board of Trade and Ministry of Health on the hygiene of the Mercantile Marine was set up over a year ago. Moreover, the Manning Committee of the Shipping Federation has produced three most excellent Reports on "Officers and Crew Accommodation in Cargo Vessels," but nothing has so far been done to raise the minimum standards, and meanwhile ships are being launched which, so long as they remain afloat, will be, from the point of view of hygiene, a disgrace to the British Mercantile Marine. VII.—FOOD INSPECTION. The facts that the Port of London extends over such a wide area and that Foodstuffs may be landed at almost any point makes it impossible to divide the Staff strictly into Food Inspectors and Sanitary Inspectors. There are certain parts of the Docks where the nature and quantity of the Foodstuffs landed are such that a whole-time Food Inspector is essential, but there are many districts where the food inspection and sanitary inspection must be combined. For this reason every 25 Sanitary Inspector in the Port of London is required to qualify as a Pood Inspector, and at the present time every member of the Staff of Inspectors is qualified in both respects. So great are the food imports in London that it is obviously impossible for everything to come under inspection. At the same time, the control is greater than might at first appear possible, for Inspectors have not only the information contained in the Customs Bill of Entry at their disposal, but, from the fact that they are constantly on the Docks, they have many sources of information open to them, and they receive the assistance of Customs Officers and others. Prom experience also, they know what has proved consistently sound and what needs their careful attention. They recognise what is new, and therefore to be carefully examined. Above all, they receive every assistance from the importers, who do not wish to put food of even doubtful quality on the market. There is, however, another way in which a Port Sanitary Authority may act if, from their own observation or from reports received from other Sanitary Authorities, it appears necessary to exercise complete control over any particular class of imported food. All imports of such foods can be detained within the district of the Authority for examination by their Inspectors. Such action is from time to time taken, but in order to avoid complete dislocation of the trade concerned it is usual to allow consignments to leave the Docks, on the understanding that they will be held for examination by the Medical Officers of Health of the districts of destination, who must have previously expressed their willingness to receive and take responsibility for the inspection of the goods. This was the principle put into practice in regard to imported Mutton and Lamb during the latter part of 1928, and was continued until June, 1929, when the improvement resulting from the institution of examination in the countries of origin was so marked as to make it possible to reduce the routine examination to 10 per cent. Importers realise that it is in their interests to attain a high standard of examination at the source, and, in addition, to have goods so prepared and packed as to facilitate examination here. Thus, Ox Tongues arrive dressed so as to have the lymphatic glands easily accessible. Pig carcases have the submaxillary glands incised and drawn forward in an exposed position, so that no difficulty is experienced in examining the carcases in the frozen state. Imported Offal is packed with a view to rapid inspection, as is also boneless Veal, in which care is taken to expose the serous membranes. As regards Canned Goods, a considerable proportion is submitted for examination by expert examiners, on behalf of the merchants. From experience, the Port Sanitary Authority have complete confidence in this examination, which is of great assistance to their Inspectors. When diseased or unsound food is discovered it is almost invariably voluntarily surrendered, and it is very rare indeed that it is necessary for the Port Sanitary Authority to go through the formal procedure of seizure and condemnation by a Magistrate. The majority of Foodstuffs condemned as unfit for human consumption is not destroyed, but is used for some industrial purpose, such as the manufacture of poultry food, soap, grease, &c. In every case the Port Sanitary Authority obtain guarantees and require to be satisfied that their is no danger that such condemned food, when it leaves their district, will be sold elsewhere for human food. Thus it comes about that, though such vast quantities of food are imported, and the number of Inspectors is few, the amount of food which goes into consumption in an unsatisfactory condition is infinitesimal. 26 (1) Action under the Public Health (Imported Food) Regulations, 1925, resulted in 2,572 tons 10 cwts. 3 qrs. 1 lb. of unsound food being destroyed or disposed of for purposes other than human consumption. Tons. owts. qrs. lbs. Boiling down (recovery of Fats, &c.) 85 6 3 3 Cattle and Poultry Foods 353 11 2 8 Distillation 37 2 3 13 Refining 125 1 0 18 Experiment (laboratory work) - 16 3 2 Exportation 1,539 8 1 3 Caffeine manufacture 18 10 1 26 Soap-making 16 9 3 1 Jam-making 2 7 3 0 Removed to other districts 28 2 1 18 Confectionery - 15 0 3 Reconditioning 2 18 0 5 Manure - - 3 5 Destroyed—Buried 291 4 3 8 „ —Burnt 70 14 1 0 Total weight 2,572 10 3 1 The following is the quantity condemned in each Dock:— Royal Albert Dock 157 12 0 1 Royal Victoria Dock 1,593 12 2 0 King George V. Dock 21 7 2 3 East India Dock 33 19 3 19 West India Dock 183 4 0 14 Millwall Dock 240 13 1 9 Poplar Dock — 9 2 0 Surrey Commercial Dock 127 19 1 22 London Dock 76 13 3 25 St. Katharine Dock 42 3 0 13 Regent's Canal Dock 52 10 0 12 Tilbury Dock 42 5 0 23 Total weight 2,572 10 3 1 Approximate weight of goods condemned during the year 1921 2,616 17 0 16 ,, ,, ,, ,, 1922 3,989 12 2 3 ,, ,, ,, ,, 1923 1,751 9 0 19 ,, ,, ,, ,, 1924 2,998 11 2 17 ,, ,, ,, ,, 1925 1,423 11 0 19 ,, ,, ,, ,, 1926 4,011 15 3 5 ,, ,, ,, ,, 1927 1,813 14 2 4 ,, ,, ,, ,, 1928 6,018 3 1 22 ,, ,, ,, ,, 1929 1,743 5 3 19 ,, ,, ,, ,, 1930 2,572 10 3 1 The Docks are divided into the following districts for the purposes of Food Inspection:— District. Inspector. Royal Albert Dock—North side J. H. Rolfe. Royal Victoria Dock—North side Royal Albert Dock—South side Royal Victoria Dock—South side W. W. Burr. King George V. Dock East India Dock W. Gray. West India Dock South West India Dock Millwall Dock A. Garland. Poplar Dock Regent's Canal Dock Surrey Commercial Dock London Dock W. J. Berry. St. Katharine Dock Tilbury Dock R. Clifford. River Thames Assistance as required. The number of detentions and seizures made during the year was 1,547. 27 The number of seizures of Foodstuffs made by the individual Inspectors during the year was as follows:— Inspector Garland 107 „ Rolfe 435 „ Burr 142 „ Berry 479 Sanitary Inspectors during temporary Food Inspection 384 1,547 The number of detentions and seizures made annually during the last ten years were as follows:— Year. No. of Seizures. Year. No. of Seizures. 1921 586 1926 1,620 1922 932 1927 1,369 1923 848 1928 1,436 1924 992 1929 1,569 1925 1,196 1930 1,547 Districts in which Foodstuffs were seized during the year:— Royal Albert Dock 389 Royal Victoria Dock 185 King George Y. Dock 73 East India Dock 5 West India Dock 78 South West India Dock 9 Millwall Dock 33 Surrey Commercial Dock 76 Poplar Dock 1 London Dock 429 St. Katharine Dock 139 Regent's Canal Dock 38 Tilbury Dock 89 River Thames 3 Total Seizures 1,547 The detention and control of Fats under the Public Health (Imported Food) Regulations, 1925, during the year was as follows:— No. of casks, &c., reported as imported into the district 29,052 No. of casks, &c., found to be officially certificates - No. of casks, &c., released to wharves under Notice of Exportation 11,340 No. of Exportation Notices served 363 No. of casks, &c., released for exportation 4,935 No. of casks, &c., released for soapmaking, &c. 19,719 No. of casks, &c., in transit on through Bills of Lading 535 9,446 barrels of whale oil also arrived in the Port; this material was released. Imported Mutton Infected with Caseous Lymphadenitis. The control of imported Mutton on account of Caseous Lymphadenitis, was continued throughout the year, as described in the introduction to this Report. Two conferences of Medical Officers of Health principally concerned in the inspection of imported Mutton, were held at the Ministry of Health during the year, one in March and one in December. At the March meeting it was decided that although a very great improvement in the condition of the Mutton arriving in English ports had resulted from the institution of examination of carcases for Caseous Lymphadenitis in the countries of origin, the standard of such examination was not yet uniformly good enough to justify any further relaxation of the stringency of the examination in this country. At the December meeting it was agreed that the standard of examination in Australia and New Zealand had improved to such an extent that the routine sampling might be reduced to live per cent, of imports from these two countries. In regard 28 to Mutton imported from South America, it appeared that the standard was not so satisfactory, and that therefore the examination of 10 per cent. of such carcases on arrival should be continued. It was further decided to continue the 100 per cent. examination of pieces of Mutton whatever the country of origin. Caseous Lymphadenitis.—Mutton and lamb, weight 43 lbs. and over, from Australia., New Zealand and South America. The following carcases were examined by your officers during the year:— Where from. Carcases examined. Carcases found to be Diseased. Carcases found to have Lymphatic Glands missing. Australia 18,457 42 19 New Zealand 33,682 37 5 South America 96,701 760 262 Totals 138,840 839 286 Percentage condemned. From Australia 0.33 „ New Zealand 0.12 „ South America 1.05 Pig Carcases.—A careful examination was made of a percentage of Pig carcases arriving in the Port, the number of carcases examined being 5,311. Three carcases were found to be diseased. Actinomycosis in Ox Tongues.—A percentage examination was made of every consignment of Ox tongues arriving in the Port. 241 consignments were put into Dock store, where a careful examination was made by your officers of 31,968 tongues, and 286 tongues were found to be affected with Actinomycosis. Foodstuffs disposed of as unfit for human consumption:— Mutton and Lamb—2,308 carcases, parts ex 2569 carcases. Tons. cwts. qrs. lbs. 52 18 - 21 Beef—14,206 quarters, &c., parts ex 777, 25 bags. 21 12 - 16 Pork—3 carcases, parts ex 21 - 3 - 14 Veal—42 sides, 9 bags 1 7 - 11 Bacon—6 cases - 14 2 10 Hams—5 cases — 6 — 17 Rabbits—1 crate — — 9 6 Total weight 77 1 3 11 Tinned Meats : — Tons. cwts. qrs. lbs. Corned Beef—24 tins — — — 24 Bacon—3 cases — 2 1 12 Poultry—2 cases, 37 tins — 1 3 5 Potted Meat—1 box — — — 14 Total weight 4 1 27 Offal:— Tons. cwts. qrs. lbs. Ox Tongues—296 loose (286 diseased, 10 unsound), 55 bags 2 8 1 11 „ Cheeks—61 bags 2 7 0 17 „ Skirts—51 loose, 2 bags 1 1 1 5 „ Hearts—3 loose, 31 bags — 16 3 10 „ Livers—181 loose, 6 bags 5 2 1 12 „ Tails—57 loose, 3 bags 1 9 2 11 „ Kidneys—427 bags 2 10 2 8 29 Offal—continued.  Tons. cwts. qrs. lbs. Casings, &c.—7 casks, 96 loose 1 1 3 6 Sweetbreads—7 cases — 1 1 25 Sheep Hearts—10 bags — 5 1 13 Sheep Tongues—1 bag — — 3 2 Calf Tongues—3 bags — — 3 21 Lambs' Hearts—17 bags — 3 3 20 Lambs' Livers—13 crates — 8 1 10 Pigs' Livers—14 crates — 9 2 13 Pigs' Hearts—5 crates Pigs' Heads—4 — 2 2 12 — — 1 16 Hog Stomach Linings—lease — — 1 12 Total weight 18 11 3 0 Tallow, &c.— Tons. cwts. qrs. lbs 95 casks 13 6 2 22 Fish:— Tons, cwts. qrs. lbs. Shrimps—7 jars — — — 2 Lobster—14 cases, 204 tins — 7 2 10 Various—214 cases, 12 tins 5 5 2 1 Anchovies—62 cases, 5 tins 2 18 2 12 Sardines—16 cases, 309 tins — 14 0 3 Total weight 9 5 3 0 Fruit— Tons. cwts. qrs. lbs. Currants—22 bags 1 4 2 25 Sultanas—932 bags 17 14 1 27 Apples—2,555 cases 60 16 0 11 Lemons—11 cases — 7 3 14 Figs—7 cases — 3 0 0 Grapes—5 cases — 1 2 21 Melons—18 cases — 13 0 0 Oranges—2,781 boxes 112 18 0 6 Pears—1,424 cases 25 15 3 6 Prunes—1,185 cases 16 11 1 16 Tomatoes—2 cases — 1 2 0 Dates—306 cases 10 11 1 2 Mixed—650 cases 20 7 2 10 Mandarins — — — 27 Total weight 267 6 2 25 Fruit (Tinned and Bottled)— Tons. cwts. qrs. lbs. Cherries—16 cases, 106 tins — 12 2 23 Fruit Juice—20 bottles — 1 1 17 Peaches—1 case, 8 tins — — 1 16 Mixed—153 cases, 230 tins 5 9 3 26 Tomato Puree—103 cases, 144 tins 5 19 3 18* Tomatoes—21 cases, 345 tins — 18 1 1 Tomato Paste—1 case, 55 tins — 6 2 25 Total weight 13 9 1 n Fruit Pulp:— Tons. cwts. qrs. lbs. Apricot—64 cases, 212 tins 3 4 0 23 Black Currant—59 cases—109 tins 2 19 0 3 Tomato—5 cases, 65 tins — 8 2 8 Orange—10 cases, 20 tins — 11 3 8 Peach—7 tins — — 2 14 Raspberry—1 tin — — — 20 Cherry—4 cases, 9 tins — 5 3 21 Strawberry—16 cases, 15 tins — 14 3 1 Myrtille—4 cases, 2 tins — 4 0 2 Mixed—2 cases, 7 tins — 1 1 25 Total weight 8 10 2 13 30 Vegetables— Tons. cwts. qrs. lbs. Gherkins—11 casks 2 1 0 0 Onions—2,085 bags 76 0 0 0 Potatoes—97 bags 2 18 1 23 Peas 1 17 2 27 Beans 13 13 1 22 Various—788 packages 41 1 1 0 Total weight 137 11 3 16 Vegetables (Tinned):— Tons. cwts. qrs. lbs. Peas—10 cases, 220 tins — 7 2 0 Various—8 cases, 275 tins — 10 2 25 Total weight — 18 0 25 NUTS— Tons. cwts. qrs. lbs. 285 bags 11 9 2 7 4 boxes — 3 1 0 — 11 1 24 Total weight 12 4 1 3 Grain:— Tons cwts. qrs. lbs. Wheat 1,798 15 0 3 Barley — 8 3 8 Flour 6 16 1 23 Wheat Germs 6 8 1 24 Oats 6 9 1 13 Rice 14 14 3 23 Maize 6 13 1 24 Total weight 1,840 6 2 6 Provisions, &c.— Tons cwts. qrs. lbs. Sugar—637 bags 38 16 0 25 Sugar Sweepings—998 bags 86 15 1 16 Butter - - - 14 Margarine—323 boxes 3 2 3 15 Cheese—274 boxes 2 14 1 21 Cocoa—1 bag — — 3 6 Tea — 15 3 21 Tea Sweepings 17 11 3 24 Jam—1 case — — 2 10 Condensed Milk—118 cases 2 9 0 0 Evaporated Milk—300 cases, 142 tins 9 0 2 14 Cream—16 cases — 3 1 25 Biscuits—2 cases — — 3 12 Confectionery—3 cases — 1 2 19 Total weight 161 13 3 26 Prepared Foods:— Tons cwts. qrs. lbs. 66 packages 1 10 1 20 Sundries:— Tons cwts. qrs. lbs. 169 packages 10 8 0 21i PUBLIC HEALTH (IMPORTED POOD) REGULATIONS, 1925. In accordance with Article II (4) of the above-mentioned Regulations, Notices were served for the exportation of the following material:— Description and Quantity of Meat and Fats. Where from. Number of Notices served. 13,720 casks Tallow New Zealand 248 3 cases Pigs' Livers, 195 bags Boston Butts, 41 bags Picnic Hams ,, ,, 2 8,077 casks Tallow Australia 101 1,735 casks Tallow South America 9 10 Headless Pigs, 7 cases Pork Kidneys, 1 case Pork Loins, 1 case Hog Stomach Linings ,, ,, 3 168 casks Tallow Other Countries 5 11 casks Pork Rinds ,, ,, ,, 1 369 81 CONTAMINATION OF APPLES WITH ARSENIC. A consignment of apples arrived in the Port during the year, some of which, on examination, showed a white powder in the stem and calyx, and also on the general surface of the fruit. In view of the possibility of this condition being the result of spraying the fruit with some solution containing arsenic, three of the worst specimens were taken to your Analyst, who reported arsenic to be present to the extent of 1/89 grain per pound. These apples were removed from the docks to Covent Garden, the Medical Officer of Health of Westminster being informed of the result of the analysis. A later consignment, which appeared to be contaminated in a similar way but to a much less degree, was detained pending examination of samples by your Analyst. In this case arsenic was present only to the extent of 1/635 of a grain per pound. The amount being insignificant, the consignment was released without restriction. CANNED SPINACH. On 15th July a sample was taken from a consignment of ten cases of canned spinach lying at Brussels Wharf, London Dock. The Public Analyst reported that this sample contained Copper to the extent of 0.015 per cent., equivalent to 4.15 grains Crystallised Copper Sulphate per pound. Under the Public Health (Preservatives) &c., in Food) Regulations, it is illegal to import food to which Copper has been added as a colouring agent. With the approval of your Chairman, the matter was placed in the hands of Mr. Solicitor, with a view to the taking of legal proceedings against the importers. The Belgian manufacturers explained that they prepared canned spinach coloured by Copper Sulphate for certain Continental customers, but the Spinach they prepared for the English market was not so coloured. The inclusion in a consignment for England of Spinach of the former class was an accident. In view of this statement, sample tins were taken from the other nine cases. None of these samples contained Copper. Therefore a summons was issued against the importers in respect of one case only, and was heard at the Thames Police Court on 5th August. The magistrate dismissed the summons under the Probation of Offenders Act upon payment by the defendants of £10 10s. costs. The case of 50 tins from Avhich the sample containing Copper was taken was destroyed. The importers returned the other nine cases to the manufacturers. Official Certificates, recognised by the Ministry of Health, under the Public Health (Imported Food) Regulations, 1925:— (1) In respect of Pork and other edible parts of the pig, Items (a) and (c) of Second Schedule:— Argentine Republic. Latvian Republic. Australia. Netherlands. Belgium. New Zealand. Brazil. Sweden. Canada. United States of America. Denmark. Uruguayan Republic. Esthonian Republic. Union of South Africa. (2) Item (b), Second Schedule, Lard, Dripping, Edible Tallow and similar rendered Fats:— Australia. New Zealand. Argentine Republic. Netherlands. Brazilian Republic. Sweden. Canada. Switzerland. Denmark. United States of America. Hong Kong. Uruguayan Republic. Italy. PUBLIC HEALTH (IMPORTED MILK) REGULATIONS, 1926. No importation of milk requiring action under these Regulations was reported during the year. 32 PUBLIC HEALTH (PRESERVATIVES, &c., IN FOOD) REGULATIONS, 1925 TO 1927. For action under these Regulations, reference is directed to the list of foodstuffs submitted for analysis. FERTILISERS AND FEEDING STUFFS ACT, 1926. No samples were taken under this Act during the year. (2) SHELLFISH. PUBLIC HEALTH (SHELLFISH) REGULATIONS, 1915. ORDERS OF NOVEMBER, 1916. In November, 1916, the Port of London Sanitary Authority made an Order under the Public Health (Shellfish) Regulations prohibiting the distribution of shellfish from layings on the North side of the Estuary of the Thames unless the said shellfish have been relaid in pure water for a period of at least four weeks, except that cockles may be sold after sterilization by steaming under pressure for at least six minutes and winkles after boiling in water for at least fifteen minutes. During the year it was reported that fishermen were collecting mussels from the foreshore of Leigh Creek, but on enquiry it was ascertained that the mussels were, before sale, steamed under pressure in a manner similar to that prescribed for cockles. The Ministry of Health have made Regulations under the Public Health (Regulations as to Food) Act, 1907, relative to shellfish layings in certain other districts which permit the sale of mussels after sterilization by steaming under pressure. It was, therefore, proposed to amend the Order of the Port of London Sanitary Authority so as to permit the steaming of mussels, but it was found that the Public Health (Shellfish) Regulations, 1915, do not provide for the amendment of an Order made thereunder, but only for its withdrawal "if at any time the Local Authority are satisfied that the conditions of the layings have so changed that any Order may be withdrawn without prejudice to the public health." Conditions certainly do not justify withdrawal of the Order, and it must therefore remain in its present form until the Ministry of Health amend or repeal the Public Health (Shellfish) Regulations, 1915. (3) SAMPLES OF FOOD EXAMINED DURING THE YEAR. (a) Bacteriologist— Date. Sample. Analyst's Report. Action taken. 1930. May 9 Potted Meat and Fish. "The preparation was put up in a glass pot with a tin lid and rubber sealing. The surface of the paste was greyish in colour as compared with the depth, which was pinkish. There was no foul odour. Consignment released. "Films prepared from both the surface and the depth shbwed very few bacteria. "Ærobic plate cultures made from the surface and the depth both showed very few colonies of the same organisms as follows:— "Ærobic spore-bearing bacilli. "Staphylococci. "Anaerobic meat broth cultures remained sterile. Although the material is not completely sterile, there are no bacteria of a putrefactive nature present or any likely to cause disease. In my opinion the paste is fit for human consumption as regards bacteriological content." (b) Analyst— Mar. 3 Imported Sweets No poisonous metals or prohibited colouring matter could be detected. Consignment released. May 2 Canned Spinach "This sample, on analysis, was found to contain Copper (Cu) to the extent of 0.04 per cent., equivalent to 10.9 grains of crystallised Copper Sulphate per pound, and, in addition, Tin to the extent of 3.5 grains per pound of spinach." Consignment destroyed. 33 Date. Sample Analyst's Report. Action taken 1930. May 9 Potted Meat and Fish. "On opening the above sample a minute black deposit was found, which proved to be Sulphide of Iron. On examination of a section of the paste cut from top to bottom of jar, it was noticed that the meat was discoloured, the discolouration being more marked at the top and gradually lessening towards the bottom. The rubber ring round the inside of the lid was found to contain free Sulphur (0.29 per cent.), while the paste itself contained a small amount of iron. Although this amount of free Sulphur does not usually cause trouble of this kind. I have had one sample that gave trouble where the free Sulphur was only 0.28 per cent., and I have little doubt that, possibly owing to unusual heat conditions, the Sulphur has reacted with the iron, thus producing the discolouration of the paste." Consignment released. July 22 Copper. 10 tins Spinach Equal to Crystallised Tin. Grains per Pound. Copper Sulphate. Grains per Pouud. 0.015 4.15 Trace Magistrate's order „ 31 None None 0.55 obtained for Aug. 1 0.016 6.03 Trace condemnation None None 0.22 of one case None None 0.55 taining 50 tins. None None Trace Balance, 9 cases, None None 0.33 released. None None 0.44 None None Trace None None 0.55 Sept. 4 2 tins Turtle Soup Tin equal to 1.77 grains per pound and 2.65 per pound detected in samples. Preservatives were not detected. Consignment released. „ 10 1 tin Peas Sample free from presence of Copper, Tin, preservatives and other deleterious ingredients. ,, „ 13 1 tin Peas ,, ,, ,, ,, ,, Oct. 16 Apples (3) Arsenious oxide, 1/89 grain per pound Allowed to go forward. „ 21 Apples (6) Arsenious oxide, grain per pound Consignment released. „ 23 1 tin Vegetables Traces of tin. Free from the presence of Copper and other prohibited colouring matter, preservatives and other deleterious ingredients. ,, „ 23 1 tin Vegetables Crystallised Copper Sulphate, 0.66 grain per pound. Free from the presence of preservatives. ,, Nov. 3 Brine Total solid matter 12.91 % Consignment destroyed (decomposing). Solids in suspension 0.23% Ammonia, free and saline 0.0082 % Chlorine 6.41 % Chlorine as Sodium Chloride 10.71 % "A microscopical examination revealed the presence of a considerable number of motile bacteria of the B. Subtilis type and Infusoria. "From the above results it is evident that, if sea water has been used, for the pickling, salt has been added (sea water contains about 3-4 % of chlorine as sodium chloride). I am of opinion that the amount of ammonia present and the microscopical examination suggest that the Gherkins have been pickled under somewhat unhygienic conditions." „ 20 Compound Lard Beichert-Wollny Value 0.3 Consignment released. Polenske Value 1.0 Acidity None. Iodine Value 82.12% Melting Point 26.31.2°C. Nickel Trace. Refractive Index at 40° C 1.462 Hexabromide Test Turbidity, no precipitate. "Although it is not possible to fix definitely the composition of this sample, the above figures show that Cocoanut and Palm Kernel Oils are both absent, and the Hexabromide Test also points to the absence of animal (including fish) oils. "I am of opinion that the most probable composition is hardened Vegetable Oils other than the above, possibly Cottonseed Oil or Stearin." „ 25 Peas Free from the presence of any prohibited colouring matter. Traces only of Tin. Consignment released. 34 Date. Sample. Analyst's Report. Action taken. 1930. Dec. 10 Turtle Soup (2 samples.) 1.40 and 1.54 grains of Tin per pound. Preservatives not detected. Consignment released. „ 23 Peas Traces only of Tin. Free from the presence of Copper and prohibited colouring matters. The Tin itself had a number of black stains, probably Tin Sulphide. " ALIENS ORDER, 1920. Medical Inspection of Aliens. Total. Number inspected by the Medical Inspector. Number subjected to detailed examination by the Medical Inspector. Certificates Issued. Transmigrants. Lnnatic, Idiot or M.D. Undesirable for Medical reasons. Physically Incapacitated. Suffering from Acute Infectious Disease. Landing necessary for adequate Medical Examination. Verminous. Trachoma, Favus, &c. 1. (a) Total number of Aliens (excluding Alien Seamen) landing at the Port 39,096 28,139 4,121 (a) 11 (b) 4 (c) 6 (d) - (e) - - Measles 5 ,, Contacts 6 Impetigo 1 (b) Aliens refused permission to land by Immigration Officer 193 Scarlet Fever 1 „ Contact 1 (c) Transmigrants 12,455 Mumps ..." 1 2. Total Aliens arriving at the Port 51,744 28,139 4,121 11 4 6 - — — 15 (a) Total number of vessels carrying Alien Passengers 2,768 (b) Number of such vessels dealt with by the Medical Inspector 1,191 TABLE A. Total. Analysis of Aliens landing [see 1 (a) ]. Residents returning 2,971 In Transit 3,064 Visitors 21,268 Business 6,476 Diplomatic 392 Seamen 639 Contract Seamen 825 Ministry of Labour Permit (M.L.) (a) Males 547 (b) Females 1,328 (c) Children 43 Aliens coming to settle not holding M.L. Permits: (a) Males 653 (b) Females 718 (c) Children 172 Total 39,096 TABLE B. Examined. No. of Certificates issued. Classification of Aliens referred to the Medical Inspector by the Immigration Officer for detailed examination: (i) holding Ministry of Labour permits 1,633 — (ii) intending to take up employment and remain in the country over three months 19 — (iii) intending to make their home in this country 627 — (iv) students coming for educational purposes 817 — (v) in regard to whom there is any mention of health as a reason for their visit 17 3 (vi) who appear to the I.O. (a) not to be in robust health; (b) to be mentally or physically abnormal or sub-normal; (c) to be dirt in their person, or (d) are selected for special reasons (a) 13 6 (b) 18 15 (c) — — (d) 258 2 (vii) seamen travelling as passengers 552 — 35 MEDICAL INSPECTION OF ALIENS. Every alien landing in this country is examined by an Immigration Officer. The objects of the medical inspection of aliens are:— (1) to secure the exclusion of aliens (or their temporary isolation in appropriate cases) whose state of health is such that that may be a danger to persons in this country; and (2) to assist the Immigration Officer in deciding whether an alien should be refused leave to land on the ground that his medical condition may impair his existing or probable future capacity to support himself and his dependents, or may require treatment which he will be unable to provide from his own resources. The Medical Inspector is required, as far as possible, to submit all alien passengers arriving to visual inspection either on the ship or when they land, as is most convenient. He must select for closer examination, as the result of this superficial inspection, any alien who he thinks should be so examined, and if he finds such alien to be suffering from some disease or deformity which would make the alien a danger to the public health or which renders him likely to become a public charge, the Medical Inspector must issue the appropriate certificate to the Immigration Officer, who will refuse the alien leave to land. But, in addition to this preliminary inspection, the Immigration Officer, during his subsequent examination of the aliens, is required to refer to the Medical Inspector any who are coming to take up employment in this country for more than three months or who propose to reside here permanently, and any who appear to be mentally or physically abnormal or sub-normal or in regard to whom he has any suspicion that they are not in a sound state of health. The Medical Inspector, having examined an alien so referred to him, must consult with the Immigration Officer as to whether all the circumstances make it desirable to refuse the alien leave to land. New instructions on the above lines were issued to Medical Inspectors in December, 1929, and came into operation on 1st January, 1930. They are based on suggestions put forward by your Medical Officer some years ago, he having found from experience that to carry out the previous instructions, which required that all aliens who intended to. remain in this country for over three months should be medically examined, was impracticable without causing delay and inconvenience to passenger traffic out of all proportion to the advantages accruing. In the Port of London it is difficult for the Medical Officers and the Immigration Officers to work in close co-operation, because alien passengers are landed at so many widely separated places in the River and Docks. But a Medical Officer always attends at the landing of passengers who have arrived by the regular services from the Continent, and many other vessels carrying alien passengers are boarded by the Boarding Medical Officer on duty at Gravesend. When the new boarding launch is in commission it is hoped that it may be possible to arrange for all vessels carrying alien passengers to be boarded, so that the Medical Officer may inspect them. There are a number of Immigration Officers attending to the landing of passengers from vessels at docks, quays and river wharves, and it is obviously impossible for a Medical Officer to accompany each one. But if an Immigration Officer is not satisfied as to the health of any alien, he telephones to the Port Sanitary Office and a Medical Officer is sent to the ship as quickly as possible. On the new landing stage at Tilbury accommodation has been built for the inspection of aliens by the Immigration Officers, and medical examination rooms have been provided. The more the landing stage is used for the landing of passengers the easier it will be to carry out the Aliens Order, 1920. TRAINING SHIPS. There were small outbreaks of Scarlet Fever on the "Arethusa," Mumps on the "Cornwall," and Diphtheria and Scarlet Fever on the "Stork." The "Exmouth" had one case of Scarlet Fever, one of Chicken-pox and one of Pneumonia. "Warspite" and "Worcester" remained free from notifiable infectious sickness throughout the year. 36 The following cases of Infectious Disease were reported during the year:— Name of Vessel. Mumps. Scarlet Fever. Diphtheria. Pneumonia. Chicken-pox. Total. "Arethusa" — 16 — — — 16 " Cornwall " 5 — — — — 5 " Exmouth " — 1 — 1 1 3 " Warspite " — - — — — — "Worcester" — — — — — " Stork " — 7 3 - — 10 Totals 5 24 3 1 1 34 DANGEROUS DRUGS. No application was received during the year for a Certificate under the Dangerous Drugs (No. 3) Regulations, 1923, amending the Dangerous Drugs Regulations, 1921, Regulation 15 of which is as follows.— "If a foreign ship in any port in Great Britain requires to obtain a supply of any of the drugs in order to complete the necessary equipment of the ship, the Master of the ship is authorised to purchase and be in possession of such quantity of any of the drugs as may be certified by the Medical Officer of Health of the port where the ship is (or in his absence by the Assistant Medical Officer of Health of the port) to be necessary for the purpose, the quantity not to exceed what is required for the use of the ship until it next reaches its home port. The certificate given by the Medical Officer or Assistant Medical Officer of Health of the port shall be marked by the supplier with the date of the supply, and shall be retained by him and kept- available for inspection." LEGAL PROCEEDINGS. Date. Name of Vessel. Offence. Police Court. Result. 1930. Aug. 5 ss. "City of Brussels" Importing an article of food, to wit, tinned Spinach, which contained an added colouring matter, namely, Copper, being one of those specified in Part II. of the First Schedule to the Public Health (Preservatives, &c., in Food) Regulations, contrary to Clause II. (2) of the said Regulations. Thames. Dismissed under the Probation of Offenders Act, with 10 guineas costs. Condemnation order for 1 case 50 tins. BYE-LAWS—OFFENSIVE CARGOES. Two cases of infringement of the above-mentioned Bye-laws were reported during the period covered by this Report. Written notices were sent to the owners of the barges:— Date. Name of Vessel. Owner. Infringement. 1980. Feb. 3 Barge "Tam" Messrs. W. R. Cunis, Ltd. Carrying an offensive cargo, to wit, bouse refuse, which was not properly and securely covered so as to prevent any nuisance arising therefrom and loaded to a height of about four feet above the coamings. June 30 Barge "Dakota" Cory Lighterage, Ltd Carrying an offensive cargo, to wit, ships' refuse, ashes, &c., not properly and securely covered so as to prevent a nuisance arising therefrom and, further, allowing the said barge with the offensive cargo to remain in the district of the Port of London for a period longer than 48 hours. 37 VISITORS TO THE PORT SANITARY DISTRICT. In July the Minister of Health (The Right Honourable Arthur Greenwood, M.P.) visited the Port. He sailed down the River and into the King George Y. and Royal Albert Docks in the Launch "Joseph White." Short addresses on the commercial development and on the sanitary administration of the Port of London were given by Mr. Wildey, of the Port of London Authority, and your Medical Officer respectively. The Port of London Authority graciously co-operated with the Port Sanitary Authority in arranging a programme of visits and demonstrations, in all of which the Minister took the keenest interest. On leaving he expressed his gratitude for all that had been done to make his visit a success, and his appreciation of all that he had seen and heard. During June and July Dr. E. B. Young, of Newchang, spent six weeks in studying the sanitary administration of the Port of London preparatory to taking up the appointment of Medical Officer of Health of the Port of Shanghai. He spent days with the Boarding Medical Officers at Gravesend, with the Sanitary Inspectors, Food Inspectors and Rat Searchers on the Docks and River, and with your Medical Officer and the clerical staff in the Office. Arrangements were also made for him to visit various hospitals, the new London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, Smithfield Market, a modern abattoir, the works of Messrs. Burroughs, Wellcome & Co. and of Messrs. Allen and Hanbury and the Wellcome Research Laboratories. Dr. Young expressed his appreciation of the efforts made to explain to him the details of English Port Sanitary Administration, and since taking up his duties in Shanghai has kept in touch with your officers. Other visitors who came during the year to study the Sanitary Administration, either in general or in some particular respect, were:— Members of the Staff and Students of the Royal Army Medical College. Dr. C. L. Park (formerly Director of Quarantine in Australia), at present attached to the Health Committee, League of Nations. Dr. Y. Wigh, of Kalmar, Sweden. Dr. J. S. Saunders, Medical Officer of Health of Cork, Ireland. Dr. Med. G. Gothlin, of Gothenburg. CANAL BOATS ACTS. In accordance with Section 3 of the Canal Boats Act, 1884, I beg to present herewith the Annual Report on the working of the Canal Boats Acts and Regulations within the district of the Port of London Sanitary Authority during the year ended 31st December, 1930. The Acts and Regulations apply within the whole of the district under the jurisdiction of the Port of London Sanitary Authority, including the River and Docks, as a "canal," for the purposes of the Act, "includes any river, inland navigation, lake, or water being within the body of a county, whether it is or not within the ebb and flow of the tide." The navigation, in addition to the enclosed Docks, includes the following navigable tributary waters and creeks of the River Thames:— On the right bank— On the left bank— From Teddington downwards:— From Teddington downwards:— Wandsworth Creek (River Wandle). The entrance of the River Brent. Hay's Dock. Hammersmith Creek. St. Saviour's Dock. Chelsea Dock. Part of the Grand Surrey Canal within the Grosvenor Dock. Surrey Commercial Dock. Limekiln Creek. Deadman's Dock. Bow Creek (River Lea). Deptford Creek (River Ravensbourne). Barking Creek (River Roding). Dartford Creek (Rivers Cray and Darenth). Rainham Creek (River Ingrebourne). The entrance to Gravesend Canal. Mucking Creek. Cliffe Creek. Thames Haven. Yantlet and Coalmouth Creeks. Hole Haven. Part of the River Medway, and of the Swale. Havengore Creek. River Roach as far as Rochford. 38 RIVER. The whole of this area is divided into three districts, known as the Upper, Middle and Lower ; each district is in charge of an Inspector, as follows :— Upper District ... Teddington to Greenwich Inspector Johnson, £210 per annum. Middle District ... Greenwich to Erith Ditto, ditto. Lower District ... Erith to seaward limits of the Port of ) London (including part of the Eiver > Inspector Edwards, £200 per annum. Medway). ) DOCKS. The Docks are divided into four districts, known as the Central, Eastern, Western and the Gravesend District;— Central District ... West India Dock J Inspector Elward, £340 per annum. South West India Dock ( Poplar Dock ( Millwall Dock ) Eastern District ... Royal Victoria Dock ) Inspector Gray, £300 per annum. Inspector Lambe, £340 per annum. East India Dock ( Royal Albert Dock j King George V. Dock ) Western District ... London Dock ) Inspector Coombe, £230 per annum. Inspector Massie, £340 per annum. St. Katharine Dock ( Regent's Canal Dock ... ... ... f Surrey Commercial Dock ) Gravesend District ... Tilbury Dock J Inspector Clifford, £230 per annum. Left Shore, from Purfleet down V Right Shore, from Erith down ) The total number of inspections for the year was 147, representing a nett number of 91 boats. The remainder—56—represents repeated visits by Inspectors of this Authority. The number of boats not conforming to the Acts and Regulations was 39 (inspected on 43 occasions), or 29-24 of the total inspections, the percentage for the previous five vears being 37-16 per cent. New Boats Registered. 1930. Feb. 4 *" Fawn " Registered, Port of London, No. 538 Mar. 14 *" Geoffrey " ... ... ... ... ... • > j> ;> No. 539 May 10 *" Basingstoke " ... ... ... ... ... 5} >> No. 540 „ 10*" Ethel" ... ... ... ... ... > t tt if No. 541 June 14 *" Aldershot " ... ... ... ... ... >> )i if No. 542 Oct. 10 *" Avon " ... ... ... ... ... jj j f ff No. 543 „ 10 *" Grey " ... ... ... ... ... > j ft it No. 544 Nov. 14 *" Helio " ... ... ... ... ... jj it it No. 545 With reference to the various infringements of the Act reported :— Notification op Change op Master. Nil. Absence of Certificate of Registration. 1930. Jan. 1 " Lena " Awaiting Registration by Brentford Authority. „ 19 " Franklin " Registered, Berkhampstead, No. 338 Feb. 19 *" Geoffrey " " Emerald " „ Port of London, No. 539 „ 26 „ „ „ No. 537 April 28 " Dufton " „ Ware, No. 55 May 3 " Blue Jacket " ,, Berkhampstead, No. 478 „ 8 " Evelyn Maud " „ Brentford, No. 203 „ 30 " Fawn " ,, Port of London, No. 538 Julv 1 *" Avon " „ „ ,, No. 543 „ 16 *" Fannv " ,, Brentford, No. 451 „ 28 *" Grey " ,, Port of London, No. 544 Sept. 3 " Kate " „ Brentford, No. 477 „ 23 " Evelyn Maud " „ „ No. 203 „ 27 *" Stour " ,, Uxbridge, No. 419 „ 27 *" Trent " „ „ No. 392 Oct. 1 *" Helio " ,, Port of London, No. 545 39 Certificate not Identifying Owner with Boat. April 2 "Dart" Registered, Brentford, No. 453 Marking. April 25 " Dart" Registered, Brentford, No. 453 June 28 "Ribble" „ No. 454 Sept. 5 "Reform" Port of London, No. 510 Overcrowding. Nil. Females over Age. Nil. Cleanliness. Jan. 19 *" Geoffrey " Registered, Port of London, No. 539 Mar. 19 " Dee" „ Brentford, No. 469 July 5 *" Scott" ,, Port of London, No. 416 Sept. 27 *" Stour" Uxbridge, No. 419 „ 27 *" Trent" „ „ No. 392 Ventilation. Feb. 19 *" Geoffrey " Registered, Port of London, No. 539 April 11 "Lucy" „ Brentford, No. 442 May 6 "Blue Jacket" „ Berkhampstead, No. 478 Aug. 15 " Calia" „ Port of London, No. 516 Painting. Jan. 18 "Sara" Registered, Brentford, No. 85 „ 27 " Prudence" ,, Ware, No. 38 Feb. 19 " Geoffrey" ,, Port of London, No. 539 March 8 " Ada" ,, Brentford, No. 404 April 11 " Lucy" „ „ No. 442 Sept. 5 " Reform" ,, Port of London, No. 510 Dilapidation. Jan. 10 "Ada" Registered, Brentford, No. 404 „ 17 *" Marion" „ Port of London, No. 506 „ 18 "Sara" „ Brentford, No. 85 ,, 24 " Humber" ,, Berkhampstead, No. 433 „ 27 "Prudence" „ Ware, No. 38 Feb. 17 *" Wey " „ Port of London, No. 478 „ 19 *" Geoffrey" „ „ „ No. 539 Mar. 5 "Ada" ,, Brentford, No. 404 ,, 14 *" Victor" „ Uxbridge, No. 470 April 11 " Lucy" ,, Brentford, No. 442 ,, 28 " Dufton" „ Ware, No. 55 May 6 " Blue Jacket" ,, " Berkhampstead, No. 478 „ 19 *" Marion" ,, Port of London, No. 506 „ 22 " Sarah" „ Brentford, No. 472 June 11 " Nellie" ,, „ No. 472 „ 26 "Ribble" „ „ No. 454 July 5 *" Scot " „ Port of London, No. 416 Sept. 19 *" Amber" „ „ „ No. 530 Oct. 17 " Milner" „ Berkhampstead, No. 354 Dec. 31 " Liege" „ Uxbridge, No. 495 Removal of Bilge Water. Nil. Provision of Water Case. Jan. 27 " Prudence" Registered, Ware, No. 38 Sept. 13 " Kate" „ Brentford, No. 477 40 Notification of Infectious Disease. Nil. Admittance of Inspector. No difficulty was experienced in regard to the visits of Inspectors of this Authority. Legal Proceedings. Nil. Double Bulkheads.—There was no infringement with regard to the condition of these. Cleanliness.—No boat was detained for cleansing. On 31st December, 1930, there were 322 boats on the Register:— Propelled by Tugs and Oars 300 „ Steam 15 ,, ,, Motors 7 * Information received that infringement has been remedied. Eight boats were registered during 1930. TABLE OF CANAL BOATS CARRYING CHILDREN ON BOARD. No. of No. of Boats No. of Average No. of Percentage of Year. Boats. with Children. Children. Children per Boat Boats with Children. 1921 65 14 48 3.42 21.53 1922 86 20 108 5.40 25.25 1923 199 24 81 3.37 12.06 1924 164 27 73 3.04 16.46 1925 279 67 168 2.50 24.01 1926 120 31 157 5.06 25.08 1927 83 19 66 3.04 22.89 1928 79 15 66 4.15 18.98 1929 82 20 96 4.80 24.39 1930 91 13 35 2.70 14.29 I have the honour to be, Gentlemen, Your obedient Servant, CHAS. F. WHITE. Medical Officer of Health, Port of London. 41 SUMMARY OP CANAL BOATS FOR THE YEAR ENDED 31st DECEMBER, 1930. Jan. Feb. March. April. May. June. July. Aug. Sept. Oct. Nov. Dec. TOTAL 1925. Total for Years 1926. 1927. 1928. 1929. New boats registered — 1 1 2 1 - - - 2 1 - 8 4 7 9 7 7 Registration owing to structural alteration - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - Registration for other purposes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - No. of Inspections 30 8 14 11 14 8 8 5 21 10 11 7 147 279 222 136 128 127 Conforming to Acts and Regulations 22 4 10 7 8 6 4 4 15 8 10 6 104 194 185 92 76 103 Infringements in respect to:— Registration 1 2 1 1 1 — 2 — 1 — — — 9 8 9 10 8 7 Notification of change of Master — — — — — - - — — — - - - - - Absence of Certificate 2 2 1 3 3 4 1 1 17 7 17 10 5 Certificate not identifying owner with boat 1 - _ - - - - _ 1 9 1 6 l Marking, &c 1 1 1 3 2 3 7 12 2 Overcrowding - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - Partition separating sexes - _ _ _ - - - - - - - - - - - - - Males over age __ - - - - - - - Females over age __ - - - - 1 3 - - - Cleanliness 1 1 1 2 5 7 2 3 1 Painting 2 1 1 1 _ 1 6 4 6 2 10 5 Ventilation - 1 - 1 1 - — 1 — — - 4 - - - 3 1 Dilapidation 5 2 2 2 3 2 1 1 1 1 20 36 21 21 21 5 Removal of bilge water — — - - - - - — - - - - - 4 - - - - Without pump - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - Refusal to admit Inspector - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - No proper water vessel 1 - - - 1 - - 2 3 1 2 Double bulkheads - - - - - - - Notification of infectious disease - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 1 - - - Detained for cleansing _ - - - - - - - - - - 1 - Proceedings taken Written cautions given 4 - 1 2 3 2 2 — 1 — 1 - 16 66 37 32 43 11 Cautions attended to 1 1 3 - 3 1 — 2 2 5 3 - 20 52 19 28 20 32 Total registered with the Port Sanitary Authority since 1887 ... 545 ... ... ... ... ... ... Registered for 477 persons. Cancelled ... 223 ... ... ... ... ... ... Carrying—Males 179. Actual number on Register, olst December, 1930 ... 322 ... ... ... ... ... ... Females 37 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Children 74. 42 APPENDIX II. Infectious Disease. disease. 1921. 1922. 1923. 1924. 1925. 1926. 1927. 1928. 1929. Mean Annual No. for l0 years ending 31st Dec.. 1930. 1930. (a) Cases Reported: Cholera (including suspected cases) — 1 3 1 — 26 6 5 2 4.5 1 Yellow Fever (ditto) — — — — — 2 — — — .2 - Plague (ditto) 8 9 4 1 3 1 — 2 1 2.9 - Small-pox 9 17 12 17 27 20 14 8 22 15.7 11 Scarlet Fever 28 11 6 8 22 6 17 16 11 15.4 29 Diphtheria 20 44 29 23 23 13 13 13 17 20.4 9 Enteric Fever 44 29 49 42 49 50 36 72 46 44.2 25 Measles 60 20 82 46 77 94 21 47 48 54.5 50 German Measles 8 — 19 18 14 7 5 65 9 15.1 6 Erysipelas 1 — 2 5 2 5 2 4 4 2.7 2 Typhus Fever 1 1 .2 - Continued Fever 4 2 4 2 — 4 2 2 — 2.1 1 Relapsing Fever — — 2 — — — — 1 — .3 — Tuberculosis:— Pulmonary 54 44 83 90 82 86 82 86 126 84.9 116 Other kinds 2 4 6 6 11 2 1 4 7 4.7 4 Other diseases (including Chickenpox) 310 348 336 319 363 471 667 499 653 487.0 904 Total 549 530 637 578 673 787 866 824 946 754.8 1158 (b) Treated in Poet Sanitary Hospital: - - - - - - - - - - - Cholera (including suspected cases) - - - - - - - - - - - Yellow Fever (ditto) - - - - - - - - - - - Plague (ditto) 1* - - - - - - - - .1 - Small-pox - - 3 — 3 5 3* — 4 1.8 . Scarlet Fever 13 2 - 6 16 8 5* 5 7 7.4 *12 Diphtheria 3 3 1 1 4 2 6 9 5 3.7 3 Enteric Fever 13 9 10 13 6 14 6 20 23 12.3 9 Measles 6 5 1 8 7 9 7† 11 ‡18 8.4 **12 Erysipelas — — 2 1 — 2 — 1 — .7 1 Typhus Fever - - - - - - - - - - - Continued Fever 3 — 2 — — — — — — .5 - Other diseases (including Chickenpox) 9 14 10 31 39 23 20 29 30 22.4 *19 Total 48 33 29 60 75 63 47 75 87 57.3 56 * Includes one contact. ** Includes three contacts. † Includes two contacts. ‡ Includes six contacts. APPENDIX I. MEDICAL INSPECTION. From 1st January to 31st December, 1930. (a) Gravesend. Jan. Feb. March A pril May June July August Sept. Oct. Nov. Dec. Total. No. Medically Inspected 1ll 111 119 115 124 147 139 171 166 146 138 107 1,594 No. of Passengers 3,297 2,832 4,986 8,257 6,370 8,913 11,837 17,166 4,251 4,661 2,870 3,111 78,551 No. of Crews 2,714 2,638 3,180 3,498 4,009 3,975 3,099 5,863 5,099 4,810 3,993 1,904 44,782 No. of Foreign Arrivals 1,150 1,103 1,202 1,147 1,284 1,386 1,350 1,325 1,212 1,244 1,185 1,116 14,705 (b) Shbernbss. Jan. Feb. March April May June July August Sept. Oct. Nov. Dec. Total. No. Medically Inspected 17 18 14 16 25 19 27 19 17 21 19 10 222 No. of Passengers - - - - - - - - - - - - - No. of Crews 374 377 241 283 574 432 568 406 362 450 395 178 4,640 No. of Foreign Arrivals 45 44 43 38 52 44 55 42 47 50 41 30 531 43 APPENDIX III. Return of the number of cases of Infectious Disease notified to the Ministry of Health during the year 1930, and of deaths from the diseases notified. This Table includes all cases actually introduced or occurring within the Port, but does not include cases reported as having occurred on vessels during the voyage which had either recovered or been removed from the vessel before arrival at Gravesend. Number. Deaths, Number. Deaths. Small-pox 1 — Brought forward 70 2 Scarlet Fever 25 — Continued Fever — — Diphtheria (including Membranous Croup) 8 Dysentery 21 — — Ophthalmia Neonatorum — — Enteric Fever (Typhoid and Paratyphoid) 19 Erysipelas 1 — 1 Tuberculosis— Pneumonia 17 1 Respiratory 87 8 Cholera — — Other kinds 3 — Plague — — Malaria 29 — Puerperal Fever — — Chicken-pox Measles (including German 12 — Puerperal Pyrexia — — Acute Poliomyelitis — — Measles) 29 1 Acute Polioencephalitis — — Whooping Cough 2 — Encephalitis Lethargica — — Other Diseases 11 . Typhus Fever — — Relapsing Fever Total 265 11 Carried forward 70 2 - - APPENDIX IV.—Cholera. Date. Name of Vessel, Port of Registry and Official No. Where from. No. of Cases. Passenger or Crew Rating. How dealt with. 1930. Aug. 29 ss. " Director," Liverpool, 147362. Calcutta 1 Crew Landed at Calcutta. Recovered and returned to duty. APPENDIX V.—Small-pox. Date. 1930. Name of Vessel, Port of Registry and Official No. Where from. No. of Cases. Passenger or Crew Rating. How dealt with. Feb. 14 SS. Ranchi," Newcastle, 148130. Bombay 1 Crew Landed at Suez. Mar. 7 ss. "Mantua," Greenock, 127544. Yokohama 2 Passenger Crew 1 landed at Singapore. 1 „ Suez. „ 9 ss. "Margha," Calcutta 2 ,, 1 „ Madras. Glasgow, 141867. ,, 1 ,, Aden. 21 ss. "Maloja," Bombay 1 ,, Landed at Suez. Belfast, 145437. ,, April 1 ss. "Glenamoy," Glasgow, 139826. Dalny 1 ,, ,. Colombo. „ 14 ss. "Rancher," Liverpool, 149653. Calcutta 1 (?) ,, ,, Suez. May 12 ss. "Comedian," Liverpool, 161119. f) 1 ,, ,, ,, „ 19 ss. "Petrel," London, 145095. Hamburg 1 ,, Admitted to London County Council Hospital. June 3 ss. "Clan Buchanan," Glasgow, 124232. Bombay 1 ,, Landed at Cochin. (10 Crew) Total 11 (1Passenger) 44 APPENDIX VII.—Diphtheria. Date. 1930. Name of Vessel, Port of Registry and Official No. Where from. No. of Cases. Passenger or Crew Rating. How dealt with. Jan. 15 ss. ''Brockley," London, 145012. Coastwise 1 Crew Removed to Seamen's Hospital, Greenwich. May 13 ss. ''Matiana," Glasgow, 146294. (In dock) 1 „ Admitted to Port Sanitary Hospital, Denton. June 5 ss. ''Orama," Barrow, 146024. Brisbane 1 Passenger Convalescent on arrival. Aug. 30 ss. ''Princesa," Liverpool, 140585. Buenos Aires 1 Crew Admitted to Port Sanitary Hospital, Denton. Sept. 5 ss. "Minnekahda," New York. New York 1 „ „ „ „ „ 15 T.S . "Stork" (Lying at Hammersmith.) 1 „ Admitted to Western Hospital (L.C.C.) Oct. 23 ss. "Otranto," Barrow, 146025. Brisbane 1 Passenger Landed at Plymouth. „ 18 T.S. "Stork" (Lying at Hammersmitth.) 1 Crew Admitted to L.C.C. Western Hospital. Nov. 20 „ „ 1 (7Crew.) „ „ „ Total 9 (5 Passengers.) APPENDIX VI.—Scarlet Eever. Date. 1930. Name of Vessel, Port of Registry and Official No. Where from. No. of Cases. Passenger or Crew Rating. How dealt with. April 23 ss. "Orford," Barrow, 146026. Brisbane 1 Passenger Landed at Fremantle. May 5 ss. "Baltonia," London, 115268. Danzig 1 „ Admitted to Port Sanitary Hospital, Denton. June 12 T.S. "Stork " (Lying at Hammersmith.) 2 1 Crew (suspected case) Admitted to Western Hospital, Seagreaves Road, Hammersmith. „ 19 T.S. "Exmouth" (Lying at Grays) 1 Crew Admitted to ship's hospital ashore. „ 24 T.S. "Stork" (Lying at Hammersmith.) 3 „ Admitted to Western Hospital, Seagreaves Road, Hammersmith. „ 30 „ „ 1 „ „ „ „ Aug. 15 Sea Ltr. "Sido II.," Antwerp. At Deptford Buoys. 1 Passenger Proceeded in vessel to Antwerp. Oct. 5 ss. "Alaunia," Liverpool, 147315. Montreal 1 Crew Landed at Plymouth. „ 30 T.S. "Arethusa" (Lying at Greenhithe.) 2 „ Admitted to Port Sanitary Hospital, Denton. „ 31 „ ,, 1 „ „ „ „ Nov. 1 „ „ 1 „ „ „ „ „ 4 „ ,, 1 „ „ „ „ „ 6 „ „ 1 „ „ „ „ „ 7 „ „ 6 „ Admitted to Bow Arrow Hospital, Dartford. „ 11 „ „ 2 „ Admitted to Port Sanitary Hospital, Denton. „ 16 „ „ 1 „ „ „ „ „ 18 „ „ 1 ,, „ „ „ Dec. 14 (East Flat, Police Office, Royal Albert Dock.) - 1 Occupier of shore Admitted to West Ham Isolation Hospital. Total premises. (25 Crew.) 29 (3 Passengers.) (1 Resident.) 45 APPENDIX IX.—Measles. Date. 1930. Name of Vessel, Port of Registry and Official No. Where from. No. of Cases. Passenger or Crew Rating. How dealt with. Feb. 19 ss. "Ascanius," Liverpool, 131312. Newcastle, N.S.W. 1 Passenger Landed at Durban. Mar. 14 ss. "Viceroy of India," Glasgow. 160238. Bombay 1 „ ,, Plymouth. „ 25 ss. "Baltonia," London, 115268. Libau 1 „ Removed to Port Sanitary Hospital, Denton. „ 25 ss. "Minnewaska," Belfast, 145433. New York 1 „ Landed at Cherbourg. „ 28 ss. "Kaisar-i-Hind," Greenock, 128653. Bombay 1 „ Taken in charge by Military Authorities. Carried forward 5 APPENDIX VIII.—Enteric Fever. Date. 1930. Name of Vessel, Port of Registry and Official No. Where from. No. of Cases. Passenger or Crew Rating. How dealt with.  Feb. 14 ss. "Ranchi," Newcastle, 148130. Bombay 1 Crew Convalescent and proceeded home. Mar. 16 ss. "Nowshera," Glasgow, 141897. Adelaide 1 „ Removed to Seamen's Hospital, Royal Albert Dock. „ 22 ss. "Baradine," Belfast, 145149. Brisbane 1 Passenger Removed to Port Sanitary Hospital, Denton. „ 31 ss. "Kitano Maru," of Tokio. Kobe 1 Crew „ „ „ April 18 ss. "Knight of St. George," British. Rio Janeiro 1 „ Died: buried at sea. „ 20 ss. "Eurylochus," Liverpool, 131424. Macassar 1 „ „ „ May 1 ss. "Highland Chieftain," Belfast, 148161. Buenos Aires 1 Passenger Died; buried at Las Palmas. „ 2 ss. "Rawalpindi," Greenock, 147827. Yokohama 1 Crew Admitted to Seamen's Hospital, Royal Albert Dock. „ 15 ss. "Durham Castle," London, 118387. Beira 1 Passenger Admitted to Port Sanitary Hospital, Denton. „ 21 ss. "Barcelona," of Hamburg. Carthagena 1 Crew „ „ „ June 5 ss. "Rawalpindi," Greenock, 147827. Bombay 1 „ Admitted to Seamen's Hospital, Greenwich. „ 5 ss. "Arclight," Greenock, 145595. - 1 „ „ „ „ July 28 ss. "Hessa," of Aalesund - 1 „ „ „ Aug. 2 ss. "Diomed," Liverpool, 145930. Otaru 1 „ Admitted to Port Sanitary Hospital, Denton. „ 8 ss. "City of Lahore," Liverpool, 131336. - 1 Passenger Admitted to Hospital for Tropical Diseases, London. Sept. 7 ss. "Sorrento," Hull, 133382. Constanza 1 Crew Admitted to Port Sanitary Hospital, Denton. „ 9 ss. "Mantola," Glasgow, 146274. Calcutta 1 „ Landed at Aden. „ 25 ss. "Orama," Barrow, 146024. Brisbane 1 Passenger Admitted to Port Sanitary Hospital, Denton. Oct. 30 ss. "Timios Stavros," of Chios, Greece. - 1 Crew Admitted to St. Olave's Hospital, Bermondsey. Nov. 2 ss. "Oluf Maersk," of Svendborg, Denmark. Archangel 1 „ Admitted to Keykol Isolation Hospital, Sittingbourne. „ 14 ss. "Malwa," Greenock. 127543. Kobe 1 „ Landed at Shanghai. „ 18 ss. "Cooperatzia." of Leningrad, Russia. Leningrad 1 „ Admitted to Seamen's Hospital, Greenwich. Dec. 9 ss. "Ausonia," Liverpool, 145970. New York 1 Passenger Admitted to Port Sanitary Hospital, Denton. „ 17 ss. "Nankin," Greenock, 131857. Calcutta 1 Crew Landed at Aden. „ 30 ss. "Mulbera," Glasgow, 146298. „ 1 „ Admitted to Port Sanitary Hospital, Denton. (19 Crew.) Total 25 (6Passengers.) 46 Measles—continued. Date. Name of Vessel, Port of Registry and Official No. Where from. No. of Cases. Passenger or Crew Rating. How dealt with. 1930. Brought forward 5 April 2 ss "Dunluee Castle," London, 118490. Beira 1 Passenger Recovered; well on arrival. „ 4 ss. Macedonia," Belfast, 116012. Yokohama 1 „ " „ 9 ss. "Otranto," Brisbane 1 „ „ „ „ 17 ss. Barrow, 146025. "Alaunia," Liverpool, 147315. New York 1 „ Landed at Havre. „ 17 ss. "Mulbera," Calcutta 2 „ 1 landed at Marseilles. Glasgow, 146298. 1 „ Plymouth. „ 28 ss. "Baltonia," Danzig 2 „ Admitted to Port Sanitary Hospital, Denton. London, 115268. May 2 ss. "Mashobra," Calcutta 1 „ Well on arrival. Glasgow, 144222. „ 12 ss. "Calgaric," Montreal 1 „ Landed at Southampton. Liverpool, 140579. „ 25 ss. "Hunterfield," — 1 Crew Paid off by Master and Leith, 84684. ceeded home to Leith. „ 31 ss. "Montrose," Montreal 1 Passenger Convalescent; allowed to Liverpool, 145919. ceed to Antwerp. June 22 ss. ''Megantic," Liverpool, 127981. „ 3 „ Landed at Havre. „ 30 ss. ''Carmania," New York 1 Crew Convalescent on arrival. Liverpool, 120901. July 18 ss. "Baradine," Sydney 1 Passenger Landed at Plymouth. Belfast, 145419. Aug. 19 ss. "Dunbar Castle," of London. Beira 1 „ „ Southampton. Sept. 11 ss. "0Balranald," Greenock, 145597. Sydney 17 „ Convalescent on arrival. „ 25 ss. "Llandaff Castle," London, 149752. Mombasa 1 „ Crew All landed at Southampton. Oct. 13 ss. "Geraldine Mary," St. John's, Bolwood 1 „ Admitted to Port Sanitary Hospital, Denton. Newfoundland. Nov. 20 ss. "Estrellano," Liverpool, 143689. Oporto 1 „ „ „ „ „ 21 ss. "Rajputana," Greenock, 149361. Bombay 1 Passenger Convalescent; proceeded to a Nursing Home. „ 22 ss. "Calchas," Liverpool, 143742. Otaru 1 Crew Admitted to Port Sanitary Hospital, Denton. Dec. 22 ss. "Nerma," of Esbjerg, Denmark. Castelar 1 „ „ „ „ - (7Crew.) Total 50 (43 Passengers.) APPENDIX X.—German Measles. Date. 1930. Name of Vessel, Port of Registry and Official No. Where from. No. of Cases. Passenger or Crew Rating. How dealt with. Feb. 10 ss. "Manela," Glasgow, 144250. Calcutta 2 Passenger Landed at Marseilles. Mar. 26 ss. "Novara," Greenock, 131860. „ 1 Crew Well on arrival. April 6 ss. "Manora," Glasgow, 133129. „ 1 Passenger Landed at Plymouth. „ 22 ss. "Ausonia," Liverpool, 145970. New York 1 „ ,, Havre. „25 ss. "Ranchi," Newcastle, 148130. Bombay 1 „ „ Marseilles. — (1 Crew.) Total 6 (5 Passengers.) 47 APPENDIX XIII.—Pulmonary Tuberculosis. Date. 1930. Name of Vessel, Port of Registry and Official No. Where from. No. of Cases. Passenger or Crew Rating. How dealt with. Jan. 8 ss. Almeda Star," London, 149751. Buenos Aires 1 Crew Removed to Seamen's Hospital, Greenwich. ii 9 ss. Kota Baroe," of Rotterdam. Macassar 1 Passenger Died ; buried at sea. ii 12 ss. Mantola," Glasgow, 146274. Calcutta 1 a Proceeded home. ii 14 ss. Bassano," Hull, 129250. a 3 Crew Landed at Calcutta. ii 15 ss. Aurania," Liverpool, 147277. New York 1 Passenger Proceeded home. : i 17 ss. Perseus," Liverpool, 147194. Vladivostock 1 ii D.B.S.; deserted ship at Marseilles. it 19 ss. Tosari," of Rotterdam. Macassar 1 it Died ; buried at sea. ii 23 ss. Highland Monarch," Belfast, 148158. Buenos Aires 1 a Vigo. ii 24 ss. Parkhill " Coastwise 1 Crew Removed to Seamen's Hospital, Greenwich. Feb. 2 ss. Adrastus," Liverpool, 147201. Manila 1 Passenger Died ; buried at sea. (Pilgrim.) » 6 ss. Durham Castle," London, 118387. Beira 1 it Proceeded to Royal Naval Hospital, Chatham. 1! 9 ss. Alcinous," of Amsterdam. Macassar 1 ii Died ; buried at sea. a 13 ss. Nitonian," Liverpool, 131460. Port Lemon 1 Crew Removed to Seamen's Hospital, Greenwich. a 19 ss. Bassano," Hull, 129250. Dunkirk 1 it a a a a 19 ss. Aurania," Liverpool, 147277. New York 3 Passengers 1 proceeded to Naval Hospital, Plymouth. Crew ii 1 convalescent on arrival. 1 proceeded home. i i 20 ss. Merkara," Glasgow, 136632. Calcutta 1 it Removed to Seamen's Hospital, Royal Albert Dock. a 20 ss. Highland Chieftain," Belfast, 148161. Buenos Aires 1 Passenger Proceeded home. ii 21 ss. Stentor," Liverpool, 149613. Macassar 1 ii Died ; buried at sea. (Pilgrim.) a 26 ss. Albion Star," London, 143286. Vancouver 1 Crew ii ii » 28 ss. Morea," Glasgow, 128235. Bombay 1 Passenger Proceeded to Royal Naval Hospital, Chatham. Mar. 9 ss. Clan McVicar," Glasgow, 141878. a 1 Crew Landed at Cochin. Carried forward 25 APPENDIX XI.—Erysipelas. Date. 1930. Name of Vessel, Port of Registry and Official No. Where from. No. of Cases. Passenger or Crew Rating. How dealt with. Feb. 10 ss. " Baltonia," Danzig London, 115268. 1 Passenger Removed to Port Sanitary Hospital, Denton. April 10 ss. " Hardwicke Grange," Buenos Aires 1 Well on arrival. London, 146177. Total 2 (2 I Passengers.^ 1 APPENDIX XII.—Continued Fever. Date. 1930. Name of Vessel, Port of Registry and Official No. Where from. No. of Cases. Passenger or Crew Rating. How dealt with. Mar. 21 ss. " Karmala," Liverpool, 135590. Yokohama 1 Crew Landed at Aden. 48 Pulmonary Tuberculosis—continued. Date. Name of Vessel, Port of Registry and Official No. Where from. No. of Cases. Passenger or Crew Rating. How dealt with. 1930. Brought forward 25 Mar. 11 ss. "City of Johannesburg," Bombay Liverpool, 143712. 1 Crew Removed to Seamen's Hospital, Greenwich. „ 15 ss. ''Clan Malcolm," Glasgow, 137837. „ 1 „ „ „ „ „ 21 ss. "Maloja," Belfast, 145437. „ 1 „ Landed at Fremantle. „ 22 ss. "Baradine." Belfast, 145419. Brisbane Passengers Proceeded home. „ 28 ss. "Edith," of Gothenburg. — 1 Crew Remained on board for repatriation. April 1 ss. "Jamaica Merchant," of London. Kingston 1 „ Proceeded home. „ 2 ss. "Dunluce Castle," London, 118490. Beira 1 Passenger Proceeded to Royal Naval Hospital, Chatham. „ 2 ss. "Lancastria," Liverpool, 145943. New York 1 " Proceeded home. „ 4 ss. "Macedonia," Belfast, 116012. Yokohama 1 Crew Landed at Aden. „ 9 ss. "Llandaff Castle," London, 149752. Mombasa 2 „ Proceeded home. „ 10 ss. "Ariel," of Helsingfors — 1 „ Admitted to Seamen's Hospital, Greenwich. „ 10 ss. "Rangitata," Plymouth, 149564. Calcutta 1 „ „ „ „ „ 11 ss. "Ranpura," Newcastle, 148119. Bombay 1 „ Proceeded home. „ 16 ss. "Ithaki," Ithaca, Greece. In dock 1 „ Repatriated to Greece. „ 25 ss. "Ranchi," Newcastle, 148130. Bombay 2 Crew Passenger 1 admitted to Seamen's Hospital Greenwich. 1 admitted to Private Nursing Home. „ 29 ss. "Ranchi," Newcastle, 148130. „ 1 Crew Admitted to Seamen's Hospital, Greenwich. „ 30 ss. "Manora," Glasgow, 133129. „ 1 „ „ „ „ May 8 ss. "Pacific Reliance," London, 149888. Vancouver 1 Passenger Admitted to hospital at Malmesbury. „ 16 ss. "Manipur," Liverpool, 143661. Calcutta 1 Crew Proceeded home. „ 17 ss. "Mantola," Glasgow, 146274. „ 1 Passenger „ „ 17 ss. "Balranald," Greenock, 145597. Brisbane 1 „ „ „ 20 ss. "Corvus," of Bergen Trondjheim 1 Crew Died; landed at Sheerness. 21 ss. City of Brisbane," Brisbane 1 „ Proceeded home. Liverpool, 143641. „ 29 ss. "West Lynn," Vancouver 1 „ „ Bideford, 148837. „ 30 ss. "Cathay," Glasgow, 148843. Sydney 1 „ Died; buried at sea. June 10 ss. "Llanstephan Castle," London, 135315. Beira 1 Passenger Proceeded home. „ 12 ss. "Ballarat," Brisbane 1 „ Admitted to hospital at Greenock, 145596. Plymouth. 14 ss. Kashgar," Yokohama 1 „ Proceeded home. Greenock, 128654. „ 20 ss. "Macedonia," Bombay 1 „ „ Belfast, 116012. „ 30 ss. "Merkara," Calcutta 1 Crew „ Glasgow, 136332. July 2 ss. "Inanda," Demerara 1 Passenger Admitted to Nursing Home, Liverpool, 147310. Portland Place, London, W. 1. „ 12 ss. "American Trader," New York 1 „ Proceeded home. of New York. „ 13 ss. "Khiva," Yokohama 1 „ „ Liverpool, 135533. „ 20 ss. "Ausonia," Montreal 1 Crew Landed at Havre. Liverpool, 145970. Carried forward 62 49 Pulmonary Tuberculosis—continued. Date. Name of Vessel, Port of Registry and Official No. Where from. No. of Cases. Passenger or Crew Rating. How dealt with. 1930. Brought forward 62 July 25 ss. "Ranpura," Newcastle, 14S119. Yokohama 1 Passenger Proceeded home. „ 31 ss. "Andalucia Star," London, 149782. Buenos Aires 1 „ „ Aug. 1 ss. "Malwa," Greenock, 127543. Bombay 4 „ 3 proceeded to Royal Herbert Hospital, Woolwich (Military), „ 2 ss. "Diomed," Liverpool, 145930. Otaru 2 „ 1 proceeded home. 1 landed at Singapore. 1 proceeded home. „ 12 ss. "Historian," Liverpool, 147290. Cuba 1 Crew Admitted to Seamen's Hospital, Greenwich. „ 14 ss. "Anchoria," Glasgow, 129598. Calcutta 1 „ Landed at Port Said. „ 15 ss. "Barrabool," Belfast, 145424. Sydney 2 Passengers Both proceeded home. „ 20 ss. "Felspar," Glasgow, 128199. — 1 Crew Admitted to Seamen's Hospital, Greenwich. „ 22 ss. "Morea," Glasgow, 128235. Yokohama 1 Passengers Crew 1 died: buried at sea. 1 in transit to Norway. 1 en route to Military Hospital. „ 29 ss. "Oronsay," Glasgow, 147948. Australia 4 Passengers 1 proceeded home. 1 in transit for Bulgaria. 2 to Netley Military Hospital. Sept. 4 ss. "Alsia," of Copenhagen. Bangkok 1 „ To attend Brompton Hospital. „ 7 ss. "Kalyan," Yokohama 1 Crew Admitted to Seamen's Hospital, Liverpool, 137449. Royal Albert Dock. „ 11 ss. "Balranald," Sydney 1 Passenger Proceeded to Military Hospital, Greenock, 145597. Southampton. „ 13 ss. "Megantic," Liverpool, 127981. Montreal 1 „ Landed at Havre. „ 19 ss. "Rajputana," Greenock, 149361. Yokohama 1 „ Proceeded to Whitby, Yorks. „ 19 ss. "Padua," London, 144312. Calcutta 1 Crew Landed at Djibouti. „ 25 ss. "Orama," Barrow, 146024. Australia 2 Passengers In charge of Military Authorities. Oct. 1 ss. "Balranald," Greenock, 145597. „ 1 Crew Admitted to Seamen's Hospital, Greenwich. „ 19 ss. "Batavier V.," of Rotterdam. Rotterdam 1 „ Proceeded to Glasgow. „ 25 ss. 'Umvoti," London, 118342. — 1 „ Admitted to Seamen's Hospital, Greenwich. „ 25 ss. "Hyacinthus," — 1 „ „ „ „ Liverpool, 115279. „ 25 ss. "Cadillac," Newcastle, 140703. - 1 „ „ „ „ „ 27 ss. "Ascania," Liverpool, 147307. Montreal 1 Passenger Proceeded home. „ 31 ss. ''Comorin," Glasgow, 148848. Brisbane 1 Crew Landed at Aden. Nov. 2 ss. "Kashgar," Greenock, 128654. Yokohama 2 Passengers Crew 1 in charge of Naval Authorities. 1 isolated on board for return. „ 2 ss. Merkara," Glasgow, 136332. Calcutta 1 „ Remaining on board for return to Calcutta. „ 6 ss. "Baradine," Belfast, 145419. Brisbane 1 Passenger Proceeded home. „ 10 ss. "Narkunda," Belfast, 142496. Bombay 1 Crew Admitted to Seamen's Hospital, Tilburv. „ 13 ss. "Highland Monarch,'' ' Buenos Aires 1 „ Proceeded home. „ 13 ss. Belfast, 148158. "Clan Monroe," Glasgow, 141882. Majunga 1 „ Died; buried at sea. „ 14 ss. "Moldavia," Brisbane 2 „ 1 proceeded home. Liverpool, 145973. Passenger 1 „ 14 ss. "Malwa," Greenock, 127543. Kobe 2 Crew Passenger 1 landed at Bombay. 1 ,, Marseilles. „ 14 ss. "Dunluce Castle," London, 118490. Beira 1 Crew Admitted to Naval Hospital, Gillingham, Kent. „ 20 ss. "Jamaica Settler," London, 129082. Jamaica 1 „ Admitted to Seamen's Hospital, Greenwich. Carried forward 110 50 Pulmonary Tuberculosis—continued. Date. Name of Vessel, Port of Registry and Official No. Where from. No. of Cases. Passenger or Crew Rating. How dealt with. 1930. Brought forward 110 Nov. 21 ss. " Raiputana," Greenock, 149361. Bombay 1 Crew Landed at Malta. „ 24 ss. " Grantully Castle," London, 129058. Beira 1 Passenger Proceeded home. Dec. 12 ss. " Macedonia," Belfast, 116012. Kobe 1 „ Died ; buried at sea. „ 18 ss. " Orontes," Barrow, 146027. Brisbane 1 „ Proceeded home. „ 25 ss. " Narkunda," Belfast, 142496. „ 1 „ (58 Crew.) Landed at Marseilles. Total 115 (58 Passengers.) APPENDIX XV.—Pneumonia. Date. 1930. Name of Vessel, Port of Registry and Official No. Where from. No. of Cases. Passenger or Crew Rating. How dealt with. Jan. 2 ss. ''Almeda Star," London, 149751. Buenos Aires 1 Crew To attend Seamen's Hospital, Royal Albert Dock. 7 SS. ''Arandora Star," London, 149837. Mediterranean Cruise. 1 Passenger Convalescent on arrival. „ 9 ss. ''Kota Baroe," of Rotterdam. Macassar 2 „ Died; buried at sea. (Pilgrims.) „ 14 ss. ''Phrontes," of Amsterdam. „ 1 „ „ „ 14 ss. ''Bassano," London, 129250. Calcutta 2 Crew 1 landed at Madras. 1 „ Perim. „ 25 ss. ''Idomeneus," London, 149597. Yokohama 1 „ Landed at Singapore. „ 26 ss. ''Rondo," of Amsterdam. Macassar 2 Passengers Died; buried at sea. (Pilgrims.) Feb. 10 ss. ''Manela," Calcutta 1 Crew Landed at Madras. „ 21 ss. Glasgow, 144250. ''Stentor," Liverpool, 149613. Macassar 2 Passengers Died; buried at sea. (Pilgrims.) „ 28 ss. ''Morea," Glasgow, 128235. Bombay 2 1 Passenger 1 Crew Convalescent on arrival. „ „ March 4 ss. ''City of Lahore," Liverpool, 131336. Calcutta 1 Passenger Landed at Port Said. „ 4 ss. ''Kota Inten," of Rotterdam. Balik Papan 10 „ Pilgrims; landed abroad. „ 7 ss. ''Mantua," Greenock, 127544. Bombay 1 „ Convalescent on arrival. „ 8 ss. ''Martin " — 1 „ Admitted to London Hospital, E. „ 14 ss. ''Princesa," Liverpool, 140585. Buenos Aires 1 Crew Died; buried at sea. „ 25 ss. ''Aurania," Liverpool, 147277. New York 1 Passenger Landed at Havre. April 14 ss. ''Rancher," Liverpool, 149653. Calcutta 1 Crew Removed to Port Sanitary Hospital, Denton. Carried forward 31 APPENDIX XIY.—Tuberculosis (other kinds). Date. 1930. Name of Vessel, Port of Registry and Official No. Where from. No. of Cases. Passenger or Crew Rating. How dealt with. March 3 SS. "Kota Inten," of Rotterdam. Balik Papan 1 1 Passenger Died; buried at sea. Sept. 11 SS. "Balranald," Greenock, 145597. Sydney 1 „ D.B.S.; proceeded home. Oct. 5 SS. "Alaunia," Liverpool, 147315. Montreal 1 Passenger In transit for Poland. Nov. 20 ss. "Ormonde," Glasgow, 141866. Brisbane 1 „ Proceeded home. Total 4 (4Passengers.) 51 APPENDIX XVI.—Influenza. Date. 1930. Name of Vessel, Port of Registry and Official No. Where from. No. of Cases. Passenger or Crew Rating. How dealt with. April 28 ss. "Britannia," of Gothenburg. Gothenburg 1 Passenger Proceeded home. June 6 ss. "Malda," Glasgow, 146286. Beira 3 Crew All recovered. „ 14 ss. "Kashgar," Glasgow, 128654. Yokohama 28 Crew and Passengers „ „ 14 ss. "Margha," Glasgow, 141867. Calcutta 1 Passenger To attend Seamen's Hospital, Royal Albert Dock. „ 23 ss. "Dunluce Castle," London, 118490. Beira 1 „ Well on arrival. „ 30 ss. "Manora," Glasgow, 133129. Calcutta 1 Crew Landed at Port Said. Aug. 1 ss. "Malwa," Greenock, 127543. Bombay 4 „ Well on arrival. 2 ss. "Diomed," Liverpool, 145930. Otaru 1 „ „ „ Sept. 25 ss. "Fionia," of Copenhagen. Bangkok 3 „ „ „ Carried forward 43 Pneumonia—continued. Date. Name of Vessel, Port of Registry and Official No. Where from. No. of Cases. Passenger or Crew Rating. How dealt with. 1930. Brought forward 31 April 23 bs. "Orford," Barrow, 146026. Brisbane Passengers Died; buried at sea. „ 25 ss. "Jason," Liverpool, 115297. Batavia 1 Crew Recovered: well on arrival. May 4 ss. "Runic," Liverpool, 113441. Fremantle 1 „ Landed at Southampton. 7 ss. " Magdapur," Liverpool, 143719. Calcutta 1 „ Admitted to Seamen's Hospital, Tilbury. „ 8 ss. "Oronsay," Glasgow, 147948. Brisbane 1 Passenger Admitted to Great Ormond Street Hospital, London,W.C. „ 10 ss. "Jet Black," London, 145083. - 1 Crew Admitted to Seamen's Hospital, Greenwich. „ 16 ss. "Manipur," Liverpool, 143661. Calcutta 1 „ Landed at Colombo. „ 16 ss." Leicestershire," Liverpool, 127995. Rangoon 1 „ Admitted to Seamen's Hospital, Greenwich. „ 17 ss. "City of Canterbury," Glasgow, 146325. Calcutta 1 „ Landed at Colombo. June 4 ss. "Rawalpindi," Greenock, 147827. Port Said 1 „ Well on arrival. „ 5 ss. "Orama," Barrow, 146024. Brisbane 1 Passenger Landed at Southampton. July 10 ss. "Alcinous," of Amsterdam. Batavier 1 Crew Recovered. „ 18 ss. "Llanstephan Castle," London, 135315. Hamburg 1 Passenger Proceeded home. Aug. 1 ss. "Malwa," Greenock, 127543. Bombay 1 Crew Recovered. „ 26 ss. "City of Cairo," Liverpool, 137423. Calcutta 1 1 „ Passenger Both landed at Colombo. „ 29 ss. "Oronsay," Australia „ Convalescent on arrival. Sept. 4 Glasgow, 147948. T.S. "Exmouth " (Lying at Grays 1 Crew Admitted to ship's hospital ashore. „ 5 ss. " Mentor," Liverpool, 137408. Vladivostock 1 Passenger Died; buried at sea. Oct. 23 ss. "Jamaica Settler," London, 129082. Kingston 1 Crew To attend Seamen's Hospital, Royal Albert Dock. „ 29 (No. 9, Pier Head Cottages, West India Dock.) — 1 — Remained at home. Nov. 24 ss. "Madura," Glasgow, 146268. Beira 1 Crew Advised to attend Seamen's Hospital, Royal Albert Dock. — (22 Crew.) Total 55 (32 Passengers.) (1 Resident.) 52 I nfluenz a—continued. Date. Name of Vessel, Port of Registry and Official No. Where from. No. of Cases. Passenger or Crew Rating. How dealt with. 1930. Brought forward 43 Oct. 20 ss. "Royal Star," London, 142772. Otaru 20 Crew 10 landed at Shanghai; mainder well on arrival. „ 21 ss. "Tuscan Star," London, 161395. Buenos Aires 1 Passenger Well on arrival. Nov. 2 ss. "Merkara," Glasgow, 136332. Calcutta 1 Crew „ „ „ 6 ss. "El Argentino," London, 160405. Rosario 12 „ „ „ „ 24 ss. "Poelau Roebiah," of Amsterdam, Macassar 4 „ „ „ Holland. - (63 Crew) Total 81 (18 Passengers.) APPENDIX XVII.—Dysentery. Date. 1930. Name of Vessel, Port of Registry and Official No. Where from. Passenger No. of or Crew Cases. Rating. How dealt with. Jan. 3 ss. "Llanstephan Castle," London, 135313. Beira 1 Passenger Removed to Hospital for Tropical Diseases, Endsleigh Gardens, W.C. „ 3 ss. 'Mantua," Greenock, 127544. Bombay 1 „ „ „ „ „ 3 ss. "Samaria," Liverpool, 145923. — „ „ „ „ „ 10 ss. "Rawalpindi," Greenock, 147827. Yokohama 1 „ „ „ „ Feb. 4 ss. "Llandovery Castle," London, 148678. Beira „ „ „ „ „ 4 ss. "Llanstephan Castle," London, 135315. „ „ „ „ „ „ 23 ss. "Phemius," Liverpool, 145896. Manila „ D.B.S. Recovered; proceeded home. Mar. 13 ss. "City of Exeter," Glasgow, 132697. „ „ Removed to Hospital for Tropical Diseases, Endsleigh Gardens, W.C. April 11 ss. "Ranpura," Newcastle, 148119. Bombay 1 „ Landed at Marseilles. „ 24 ss. "Avila Star," London, 149791. Buenos Aires 1 „ Admitted to Hospital for Tropical Diseases, Endsleigh May 17 ss. "Balranald," Greenock, 145597. Brisbane 1 „ dens, W.C. 1. Well on arrival. Aug. 7 ss. ''City of Roubaix," Liverpool, 149661. Vladivostock 1 Crew To attend Hospital for Tropical Diseases, W.C. 29 ss. ''Oronsay," Glasgow, 147948. Australia 1 Passenger Well on arrival. „ 30 ss. "Ashleigh," London, 148560. Port Arthur 1 Crew To attend Seamen's Hospital, Royal Albert Dock. Sept. 2 ss. "Empress of India," Leith, 77197. Bombay 1 Passenger Admitted to Hospital for Tropical Diseases, W.C. „ 2 ss. "Malwa," Greenock, 127543. Calcutta 1 „ „ „ „ „ 2 ss. "City of Sparta," Glasgow, 106082. — 1 „ „ „ „ „ 5 ss. "Mentor," Liverpool, 137408. Vladivostock 1 „ Died; buried at sea. „ 9 ss. "Eurybates," Liverpool, 149668. Java 5 „ „ „ „ 24 ss. "Mashobra," Glasgow, 144222. Calcutta 1 Crew Well on arrival. „ 29 ss. "City of York," Glasgow, 119100. „ 1 „ „ „ Oct. 5 ss. "Mandala," „ 1 „ „ „ Glasgow, 137806. Carried forward 26 53 Dysentery—continued, Date. Name of Vessel, Port of Registry and Official No. Where from. No. of Cases Passenger or Crew i. Rating. How dealt with. 1930. Brought forward 26 Oct. 9 ss. "Chindwin," Glasgow, 129521. Rangoon 1 Passenger Admitted to Hospital for Tropical Diseases, W.C. „ 9 ss. "City of Exeter," Glasgow, 136297. Calcutta 1 „ „ „ „ Nov. 13 ss. "Macedonia," Belfast, 116012. Bombay 1 „ „ „ „ „ 13 ss. "Manela," Glasgow, 144250. Calcutta 1 „ „ „ „ „ 26 ss. "Andalusian," Liverpool, 140557. Alexandria 2 Crew Advised to attend Seamen's Hospital, Greenwich. „ 27 ss. "Batna," London, 160569. Busrah 1 „ To attend Hospital for Tropical Diseases, W.C. 1. „ 30 ss. "Autolycus," Liverpool, 147176. Yokohama 1 „ Well on arrival. Dec. 12 ss. "Macedonia," Belfast, 116012. Kobe 1 „ To attend Seamen's Hospital, Royal Albert Dock. „ 24 ss. "Amur Maru," of Osaka, Japan. Otaru 1 „ Landed at Port Said. — (25 Passengers.) Total 36 (11 Crew.) APPENDIX XVIII.—MALARIA . Date. 1930. Name of Vessel, Port of Registry and Official No. Where from. No. of Cases. Passenger or Crew Rating. How dealt with. Jan. 3 ss. "Viceroy of India," Glasgow, 160238. Bombay 1 Crew Well on arrival. „ 10 ss. "Rawalpindi," 147827. Yokohama 1 Passenger Landed at Plymouth. „ 14 ss. "Phrontes," of Amsterdam. Macassar 4 Crew 1 landed at Java. 3 well on arrival. „ 24 ss. "Malwa," Greenock, 127543. Yokohama 1 „ Well on arrival. „ 26 ss. "Rondo," of Amsterdam. Macassar 2 Passengers Died; buried at sea. (Pilgrims.) Feb. 4 ss. "Cheshire," Liverpool, 149625. Rangoon 1 „ Removed to Hospital for Tropical Diseases, Endsleigh Gardens, W.C. „ 6 ss. "Durham Castle," London, 118387. Beira 3 Crew Convalescent on arrival. „ 7 ss. "Rajputana," Greenock, 149361. Yokohama 1 Passenger Died; buried at sea. „ 14 ss. "Vesta," of Amsterdam. Marcarbo 1 Crew Remained on board, convalescent. „ 27 ss. "Ranenfiord," of Oslo Tamatave 7 „ Well on arrival. Mar. 4 ss. "Kota Inten," of Rotterdam. Balik Papan 2 Passengers Pilgrims, landed abroad. „ 16 ss. "Modasa," Glasgow, 146272 Beira 1 Crew Well on arrival. „ 27 ss. "Dunster Grange," London, 149981. Buenos Aires 1 „ To attend Seamen's Hospital, Royal Albert Dock. „ 31 ss. "Marie Leonhardt," of Hamburg. West Africa 12 „ All recovered. April 2 ss. "Glaucus," Liverpool, 145852. Macassar 1 " Landed at Batavia. „ 2 ss. "Mahagi," of Antwerp West Africa 2 „ Well on arrival. „ 9 ss. "Llandaff Castle," London, 149752. Mombasa 1 „ „ „ „ 11 ss. "Nankin," Greenock, 131857. Calcutta 3 „ „ „ „ 22 ss. "Torsol," of Oslo — 2 „ Recovered: remained on board. May 15 ss. "Durham Castle," London, 118387. Beira 1 Passenger Well on arrival. „ 25 ss. "Pontypridd," London, 147719. Buratu 14 Crew „ „ June 6 ss. "Malda," Beira 2 Passengers 1 landed at Marseilles. Glasgow, 146286. — 1 well on arrival. Carried forward 64 54 Malaria—continued. Date. Name of Vessel, Port of Registry and Official No. Where from. No. of Cases. Passenger or Crew Rating. How dealt with. 1930. Brought forward 64 June 10 ss. "Llanstephan Castle, London. 135315. „ 1 Passenger Well on arrival. „ 10 ss. "Sagaing " Rangoon 2 Crew „ „ „ 11 ss. "Jamaica Planter," London. 129182. Kingston 1 „ To attend Seamen's Hospital, Royal Albert Dock. „ 19 ss. "Rossum " Sapele 2 „ 1 landed at Las Palmas. 1 convalescent on arrival. „ 21 ss. "Barbara Marie," Newcastle. 149464. Burutu 9 „ Landed at Sierre Leone. July 5 ss. "Modasa," Glasgow, 146272 Beira 12 Passengers and Crew All recovered. „ 13 ss. "Bassa," London, 142341. Lagos 1 Crew To attend Hospital for Tropical Diseases, W.C. „ 13 ss. "Khiva," Liverpool, 135533. Yokohama 44 „ All recovered. „ 14 ss. "Margha," Glasgow, 141867. Calcutta 1 Passenger To attend Seamen's Hospital, Royal Albert Dock. „ 23 ss. "Dunluce Castle," London, 118490. Beira 1 „ Well on arrival. „ 30 ss. "Manora," Glasgow, 133129. Calcutta 1 Crew Landed at Port Said. Aug. 1 ss. "Malwa," Greenock, 127543. Bombay 4 „ Well on arrival. „ 2 ss. " Diomed," Liverpool, 145930. Otaru 1 „ „ „ „ 3 ss. "Barrabool," London, 143914. Antwerp 1 " To attend Seamen's Hospital, Greenwich. „ 4 ss. "Ingoma," Liverpool, 135475. Demerara 1 Passenger Well on arrival. „ 5 ss. "Poelau Roebiah," of Amsterdam. Batavier 1 Crew „ „ „ 7 ss. "Llandovery Castle,'' London, 148678. ' Beira 2 Passengers „ „ „ 8 ss. "Kaisar-I-Hind," Greenock. 128653. Bombay 1 „ Admitted to Hospital for Tropical Diseases, W.C. „ 8 ss. ss. "Naldera," Greenock, 142257. Calcutta 1 1 „ „ „ „ „ 8 "Bassa," London, 142341. - 1 „ „ „ „ „ 15 ss. "Rawalpindi," Greenock, 147827. Bombay 2 „ Well on arrival. 25 ss. "Marie Leonhardt," Port Harcourt 7 „ 1 landed at Port Harcourt. of Hamburg. 6 recovered. „ 29 ss. "Kaisar-I-Hind," Greenock, 128653. Bombay 1 „ Convalescent on arrival. Sept. 2 ss. "Maron," of Liverpool. Java 1 Crew „ „ „ „ 5 ss. "Mentor," Liverpool, 137408. Vladivostock 5 Passengers Died; buried at sea. „ 5 ss. "Narkunda," Belfast,142496. Bombay 1 Crew „ „ „ „ 7 ss. "Kashgar," Greenock, 128654. — 1 Passenger Admitted to Hospital for Tropical Diseases, W.C. „ 7 ss. "Kalyan," Liverpool, 137449. Yokohama 11 „ and Crew Well on arrival. „ 16 ss. "Harmodius," Liverpool, 140657. Madagascar 1 Crew To attend Seamen's Hospital, Tilbury. „ 16 ss. "Rottum," of Groningen. Sapele 2 „ To attend Seamen's Hospital, Royal Albert Dock. Oct. 4 ss. "Argyllshire," Glasgow, 129581. Auckland 1 „ „ „ „ „ 8 ss. "Sarpedon," Liverpool, 147214. Dalny 2 „ Well on arrival. „ 9 ss. "Otranto," Barrow, 146025. Mediterranean ports. 2 Passengers Admitted to Hospital for cal Diseases, W.C. „ 9 ss. " Gloucester Castle " London, 135592. Beira 1 „ „ „ „ „ 9 ss. "Morea," Yokohama 1 „ „ „„ Glasgow, 128235.Carried forward 191 55 APPENDIX XIX.—Chicken-pox. Date. 1930. Name of Vessel, Port of Registry and Official No. Where from. Passenger No. of or Crew Cases. Rating. How dealt with. Jan. 14 ss. "Phrontes" of Amsterdam. Macassar 1 Passenger Died; buried at sea. (Pilgrim.) „ 31 ss. "Ranpura," Newcastle, 148119 Bombay 1 „ Removed to Military Hospital at Malta. Feb. 28 ss. "Morea," Glasgow, 128235. Bombay 1 Crew Landed at Bombay Mar. 7 ss. "Oxfordshire," Liverpool, 131454. Rangoon 1 Passenger ,, Plymouth. „ 7 ss. "Mantua." Greenock, 127544. Yokohama 1 „ „ „ April 2 ss. "Lancastria," Liverpool. 145943. "Ranpura," Newcastle, 148119. New York 1 Crew Removed to Port Sanitary Hospital, Denton. „ 11 ss. Bombay 1 Passenger Convalescent; allowed to proceed home. „ 14 ss. "Rancher," Liverpool, 149653. "Naldera," Greenock, 142257. Calcutta 1 Crew Removed to Port Sanitary Hospital, Denton. „ 17 ss. Sydney 1 Passenger Convalescent; proceeded home. „ 21 ss. "Megantic," Liverpool, 127981. Halifax 1 „ Landed at Halifax. „ 29 ss. "City of Exeter," Glasgow, 136297. Calcutta 1 Crew „ Colombo. May 3 ss. "Llangibby Castle," London, 161329. Mombasa 1 Passenger Convalescent on arrival. „ 9 ss. "Razmak," Greenock, 147816. Bombay 1 Crew Landed at Malta. „ 15 ss. "Durham Castle," Beira 1 Passenger Well on arrival. June 22 ss. London, 118387. "Guildford Castle," Cape Town 4 „ 3 convalescent on arrival. London, 132611. Carried forward 18 1 admitted to Port Sanitary Hospital, Denton. Malaria—continued. Date. Name of Vessel, Port of Registry and Official No. Where from. No. of Cases. Passenger or Crew Rating. How dealt with. 1980. Brought forward 191 Oct. 24 ss. "Modasa," Glasgow, 146272. Beira 3 Crew Well on arrival. „ 24 ss. "Viceroy of India," Glasgow, 160238. Bombay 2 „ „ „ „ 28 ss. "Poelau Bras," of Amsterdam, Holland. Macassar 1 Passenger „ „ Nov. 7 ss. "Kaisar-I-Hind," Greenock, 128633. Bombay 3 Crew „ „ „ 13 ss. "Orama," Barrow, 146024. Brisbane 1 Passenger Admitted to Hospital for Tropical Diseases, Endsleigh Gardens, W.C. 1. „ 13 ss. "Ranchi," Newcastle, 148130. Bombay 1 „ „ „ „ „ 13 ss. "Morea," Glasgow, 128235. Yokohama 1 „ „ „ „ „ 24 ss. "Madura," Glasgow, 146268. Beira 1 „ Landed at Marseilles. „ 24 ss. "Badagry," Liverpool, 143602. Dorai 2 Crew Well on arrival. „ 28 ss "Naldera," Greenock, 142257. Brisbane 3 Passengers 1 to attend Hospital for Tropical Diseases, W.C. 1. 2 well on arrival. Dec. 13 ss. "Morvada," Glasgow, 136319. Calcutta 1 Crew Well on arrival. „ 13 ss. "Peisander," Liverpool, 147304. Macassar 1 Passenger Died ; buried at sea. „ 25 ss. "Kemmendine," Glasgow, 147892. Rangoon 1 „ Landed at Marseilles. — (53 Crew.) Total 212 (59 Passengers.) 56 Chicken-pox—continued. Date. Name of Vessel, Port of Registry and Official No.' Where from. No. of Cases. Passenger or Crew Rating. How dealt with. 1930. Brought forward 18 „ 25 ss. "Bendigo," Greenock, 145603. Brisbane 1 Passenger Landed at Plymouth. July 4 ss. "Nesttun," of Bergen. Mesane 1 Crew Admitted to Municipal Hospital, Upney Lane. Barking, Essex. „ 18 ss. "Baradine," Belfast, 145419. Sydney 1 Passenger Well on arrival. „ 28 T.S. "Exmouth," (Lying at Grays) 1 Crew Admitted to Ship's Hospital, Grays, Essex. Aug. 5 ss. "Poelau Roebiah," of Amsterdam. Batavier 1 „ Landed at Suez. „ 11 ss. "Ascanius," Liverpool, 131312. Newcastle, N.S.W. 2 Passengers „ Cape Town. Oct. 18 ss. "Bendigo," Greenock, 145603. Brisbane 3 it Well on arrival. „ 24 ss. "Gloucester Castle," London, 135592. Antwerp 1 Crew Admitted to Port Sanitary Hospital, Denton. Nov. 16 ss. "Port Hobart," London, 148631. Adelaide Total 1 - (1 30 (3 it 0 Crew.) 0 Passenger Well on arrival. s.) APPENDIX XXI.—Venereal Diseases. Date. 1930. Name of Vessel. Nature of Case. No. of Cases. Passenger or Crew Rating. Advice given. Jan. 1 ss. "Ashworth " Gonorrhoea 2 Crew To attend Seamen's Hospital, Greenwich. „ „ Gonorrhcea and Epididymitis. 1 „ „ „ „ „ 1 SS. ''Sarpedon" Gonorrhoea and Syphilis 2 1 „ „ Treated on board. „ „ 2 ss. ''Orford" Gonorrhoea 2 „ To attend Seamen's Hospital, Tilbury Dock. „ 3 ss. ''Viceroy of India" „ 1 „ Treated on board. „ 3 ss. ''Arandora Star" „ 2 „ To attend Seamen's Hospital, Royal Albert Dock. „ 4 ss. ''Maid of Crete" Syphilis 1 „ To attend Seamen's Hospital, Greenwich. „ 5 ss. ''Bushpool" 1 „ Landed to hospital at Buenos Aires. 5 ss. "Metagama" Gonorrhoea 1 „ Treated on board. „ 7 ss. ''Glaciere" „ 2 „ „ „ „ 7 ss. ''Uranienborg" „ Soft Chancre 1 3 „ „ Landed to hospital at Mauritius. Treated at hospital in Mauritius. 8 ss. ''Millpool" Gonorrhoea 1 „ Treated in Boston. 8 ss. ''Port Hunter" 1 „ Treated on board. „ 9 ss. ''Kota Baroc" Epididymitis, Soft Sore. 1 „ „ „ „ 9 ss. ''Anchises" Gonorrhoea 2 „ To attend Seamen's Hospital, Royal Albert Dock. „ 10 ss. ''Rawalpindi" „ Gonorrhoea and Syphilis. 1 1 „ „ „ „ „ „ „ „ „ 11 ss. ''Chindwin" Syphilis 1 „ To attend Seamen's Hospital, Tilbury. Gonorrhoea 1 „ „ „ „ Carried forward 29 APPENDIX XX.—Leprosy. Date. 1930. Name of Vessel, Port of Registry and Official No. Where from. No. of Cases. Passenger or Crew Rating. How dealt with. May 26 ss. "Megara" (Dutch) Curacao 1 Drew Admitted to Seamen's Hospital, Royal Albert Dock, awaiting repatriation. 57 Venereal Diseases—continued. Date. Name of Vessel. Nature of Case. No. of Cases. Passenger or Crew Rating. Advice given. 1930. Brought forward 29 .Tan. 11 ss. "Gloucester Castle" Gonorrhœa 1 Crew Well on arrival. „ 17 ss. "Perseus" Soft Chancre Climatic Bubo 1 1 „ „ Landed at Shanghai. To attend Seamen's Hospital Royal Albert Dock. „ 17 ss. "Matiana" Gonorrhœa 1 Passenger To attend private doctor. „ 19 ss. "Domala" Syphilis and Gonorrhceal Bubo. 1 Crew Treated on board. „ 23 ss. "Mandala" Syphilis Soft Sore 1 1 „ „ „ „ „ 25 ss. "Grantully Castle" Gonorrhœa 1 „ To attend Guy's Clinic. Feb. 3 ss. "Gaelic Star" „ 1 „ To attend Seamen's Hospital Royal Albert Dock. „ 4 ss. "Khyber" „ 1 Passenger To attend private doctor. „ 5 ss. "Alaunia" Syphilis 1 Crew To attend Seamen's Hospital, Royal Albert Dock. ,, 6 ss. "Clan Macfarlane" „ 1 „ Landed at Port Said. „ 7 ss. "Avelona Star" „ 1 „ To attend Seamen's Hospital, Royal Albert Dock. „ 7 ss. "Rajputana" Gonorrhœa „ 2 2 Passengers Crew Treated on board. 1 „ 1 landed at Port Said. „ 7 ss. "Leicestershire" Syphilis 1 „ Landed at Colombo. „ 9 ss. "Alcinous" „ Gonorrhœa 1 „ „ Treated on board. Treated: well on arrival. „ 10 ss. "Manela" „ 1 „ Deserted at Madras. „ 10 ss. "Mangalore" Syphilis 1 „ To attend Seamen's Hospital, Tilbury. „ 11 ss. "Mari" „ 1 „ To attend Gravesend Clinic. Jan. 13 ss. "Diomed" Chancroid 1 Passenger Landed at Marseilles. „ 14 ss. "Ranchi" Chancre Gonorrhœa 1 1 Crew „ To attend Seamen's Hospital, Tilbury. Convalescent. „ 15 ss. "Malda" „ 1 „ Treated on board. „ 16 ss. "Skogrik" Syphilis 1 „ Landed Norfolk, U.S.A. „ 17 ss. "Reinbek" Gonorrhœa 1 „ Treated on board. „ 17 ss. "City of Adelaide" "Fushima Maru" „ 1 „ In transit to Rotterdam. „ 18 ss. „ „ Treated on board. „ 18 ss. "Jamaica Producer" Syphilis 1 „ To attend Seamen's Hospital, Royal Albert Dock. „ 18 ss. "Uarda" Soft Sore 1 „ Landed at Valparaiso. „ 18 ss. "Sagaing" Syphilis „ To attend Glasgow Hospital. „ 19 ss. "Macharda" „ Gonorrhœa 1 1 „ „ Treated on board. „ „ Feb. 19 ss. "Ascanius" „ 1 „ „ „ „ 19 ss. "Aurania" Syphilis 1 Crew To attend Seamen's Hospital, Royal Albert Dock. „ 20 ss. "Avila Star" Gonorrhœa 1 „ To attend Seamen's Hospital, Greenwich. „ 21 ss. "Mooltan" „ 1 „ To attend Seamen's Hospital, Tilbury. „ 21 ss. "Stentor" Syphilis 2 Passengers Landed at Jeddah. „ 23 ss. "Somme" Gonorrhœa 2 Crew To attend Seamen's Hospital, Royal Albert Dock. „ 23 ss. "Hoflaan" „ 3 „ To attend Seamen's Hospital, Greenwich. „ 25 ss. "Deansway" Syphilis Gonorrhœa 1 1 „ „ „ „ „ „ „ „ 27 ss. "Ormonde" Syphilis Gonorrhœa 1 1 „ „ Landed at Fremantle. To attend clinic in home town. „ 27 ss. "Ranenfjord" „ 1 „ Treated on board. „ 27 ss. "Duquesa" Soft Sore 1 „ To attend Seamen's Hospital, Royal Albert Dock. Mar. 28 ss. "Morea" Gonorrhœa 1 Passenger Landed at Plymouth. 3 ss. "Guildford Castle" Soft Sore 1 Crew To attend Seamen's Hospital, Royal Albert Dock. „ 3 ss. "City of Lahore" Gonorrhœa 1 „ Treated on board. „ 4 ss. "Baron Newlands" „ 1 „ Landed at Mauritius. „ 4 mv . "Kota Inten" „ 1 „ Treated on board. Carried forward 91 58 Venereal Diseases—continued. Date. Name of Vessel. Nature of Case. No. of Cases. Passenger or Crew Eating. Aclvice given. 1930. Brought forward 91 „ 4 ss. "Warszawa" Syphilis 1 Passenger Transmigrant; refused leave to land. „ 7 ss. "Kilnsea" Climatic Bubo 1 Crew Treated on board. „ 7 ss. "Jamaica Planter" Soft Sore 1 „ „ „ „ 7 ss. "Highland Brigade" Gonorrhœa 1 „ To attend Clinic. „ 7 ss. "Inventor " Soft Sore 1 „ To attend Seamen's Hospital, Tilbury. „ 8 ss. "Cape Cross" Syphilis 1 ,, Landed at Jamaica. „ 9 ss. "Margha" Gonorrhœa 2 „ Treated on board. „ 10 ss. "Norman Star" „ 1 „ To attend Seamen's Hospital, Royal Albert Dock. „ 11 ss. "Arniinco" „ 1 „ To attend Seamen's Hospital, Greenwich. „ 11 ss. "Luneburg" Syphilis 1 „ Landed at Port Said. „ 13 ss. "Clan Macwraith" Gonorrhœ 2 „ Treated on board. „ 13 ss. "Eurymedon" „ 2 „ „ „ „ 13 ss. "Orsova" „ 1 Passenger Well on arrival. „ 13 ss. "Eurymedon" „ 2 Crew Treated on board. „ 14 ss. "Princesa" „ 3 „ 2 treated on board. 1 to hospital at Montevideo. „ 14 ss. "Achilles" Soft Sore 1 „ Treated on board. „ 14 ss. "Athel Princess " Syphilis 1 „ To attend Seamen's Hospital, Royal Albert Dock. „ 14 ss. "Inanda" Gonorrhœa 1 „ Treated on board. „ 16 ss. "Hessen" Syphilis 1 „ „ „ „ 17 ss. "Mathura" Soft Sore 1 „ To attend Seamen's Hospital, Tilbury Dock. „ 18 ss. "Burma" Gumma 1 „ „ „ „ „ 20 ss. "City of Sparta" Gonorrhœa 1 „ Treated on board. „ 21 ss. "Bodney Star" „ 1 „ „ „ „ „ 22 ss. "Comtesse de Flandre" „ 1 „ To attend hospital in Antwerp. „ 22 ss. "Glengorm Castle" Syphilis 1 „ Treated on board. „ 23 ss. "Doilius" Gonorrhoea 2 „ „ „ „ 31 ss. "Winneton" „ 6 " 3 landed at Le Havre. 3 to attend Seamen's Hospital, Greenwich. „ 31 ss. "Marie Leonardt" „ 1 „ To attend hospital in Germany. April 2 ss. "Lancastria" „ „ Treated on board. „ 3 ss. "Carlow Castle" „ 1 „ To attend Seamen's Hospital, Greenwich. „ 4 ss. "Macedonia" „ 1 „ To attend Seamen's Hospital, Royal Albert Dock. Climatic Bubo 1 „ Landed at Aden. „ 4 ss. "Gloucestershire" Soft Sore 1 „ To attend Seamen's Hospital, Tilbury Dock. „ 4 ss. "Macedonia" Gumma 1 „ To attend Seamen's Hospital, Royal Albert Dock. „ 4 s3. "Nord Atlantic" Gonorrhœa 1 „ To attend hospital in Hamburg. „ 8 ss. "Yomea" Syphilis 1 „ To attend hospital in Liverpool. „ 10 ss. "City of Durham" Gonorrhœa 1 „ Landed at Suez. „ 11 ss. "Port Pirie" „ 1 „ Treated on board. „ 11 s3. "Ranpura" „ 1 „ „ „ „ 11 ss. "Lancastria" Syphilis 1 „ „ „ „ 11 ss. "Frankenwald" Gonorrhœa „ 5 treated on board. 1 proceeding to Hamburg. „ 13 ss. "Westmoreland" „ 1 „ Treated on board. „ 13 ss. "Amerika" Soft Sores „ „ „ „ 14 ss. "Poelau Boebiah" 1 „ „ „ „ 15 ss. "Euginia Chandois" Gonorrhœa 1 „ To attend Seamen's Hospital, Tilbury Dock. „ 15 ss. "Jamaica Producer " „ 1 „ Treated on board. „ 19 ss. "Kalyan" „ „ „ „ „ 22 ss. "Orford" „ 1 „ „ „ „ 26 ss. "Rotti" „ 1 „ To attend clinic. „ May 29 4 ss. ss. "City of Exeter" "Eurybates" „ Suppurating Bubo. 1 1 Passenger Crew Treated on board. To attend Seamen's Hospital, Greenwich. Gonorrhœa 2 „ Treated on board. „ 7 ss. "Maplegrove" Syphilis 1 „ To attend Seamen's Hospital. Greenwich. Carried forward 165 59 Venereal Diseases—continued. Date. Name of Vessel. Nature of Case. No. of 3ases. Passenger or Crew Rating. Advice given. 1930. Brought forward 165 May „ 8 ss. ''Oronsay " Gonorrhœa 1 Crew Treated on board. 12 ss. ''Lancastria" „ 2 „ „ „ „ 12 ss. "Kemmendine" „ 5 „ To attend Seamen's Hospital, Tilbury. „ J „ 15 ss. "Durham Castle" Syphilis 1 Passenger To attend private doctor. „ 20 ss. "Corinthic" Gonorrhœa 1 „ Landed at Southampton. „ 20 ss. "Jamaica Merchant" Syphilis Crew To attend clinic. „ 22 m.v. "Viceroy of India" Gonorrhoea 1 „ Treated on board. „ 25 ss. "Lagarto" Soft Sore 1 „ To attend Seamen's Hospital, Royal Albert Dock. „ 29 m.v. "Highland Brigade" G.P.I. 1 Passenger Proceeded home. June 4 ss. "Rawalpindi" Gonorrhœa 2 Crew To attend St.Thomas'sHospital. „ 6 ss. "Malda" „ Passengers Proceeded home. „ 9 ss. "Perim" Soft Sore 1 1 Crew To attend clinic. „ „ 10 ss. "Calchas" Syphilis 1 „ To attend Seamen's Hospital, Royal Albert Dock. „ 10 ss. "Poelau Laut" Gonorrhœa 2 „ 1 treated on board. 1 to hospital at Rotterdam. „ 10 ss. "Llanstephan Castle" „ 4 „ Treated on board. „ 12 ss. "Avelona Star" „ 2 „ To attend Seamen's Hospital, Royal Albert Dock. „ 12 ss. "Nitrokris" „ 6 „ Treated on board. Syphilis 4 „ „ „ „ 13 ss. "Mooltan" Gonorrhœa 2 „ „ „ „ 15 ss. "Oxfordshire" „ 2 „ Landed at Rangoon. „ 15 ss. "San Valerio" „ 2 „ To attend Seamen's Hospital, Tilbury. „ 15 ss. "Assyrian" Soft Sore 1 „ Landed to hospital at Malta. „ 15 ss. "Viking Star" Gonorrhœa 1 „ To attend Seamen's Hospital, Royal Albert Dock. „ 16 ss. "Coracero" „ 1 „ „ „ „ „ 18 ss. "Janeta" Syphilis 1 „ To attend clinic. „ 19 ss. "Ormonde" Gonorrhœa 3 „ 1 to attend Seamen's Hospital, Tilburv. 2 to attend clinic. 1 Passenger Treated on board and in Melbourne. „ 20 sr. "Macedonia" „ 1 Crew To hospital at Bombay. „ 22 ss. "Guildford Castle" „ 1 „ Treated on board. „ and Orchitis. 1 „ To attend Seamen's Hospital, Boyal Albert Dock. „ 25 ss. "Bendigo" Gonorrhœa, Epididymitis and Orchitis. 1 Passenger „ „ „ „ 25 ss. "Meissonier" Soft Sore 1 Crew To hospital at Tsingtau. July 1 ss. "Staffordshire" Syphilis 1 Crew To attend Seamen's Hospital, Tilbury Dock. „ 1 ss. "Queen Tailte" Gonorrhœa and Epididymitis. 1 „ „ „ „ „ 2 m.v. "Highland Bover" Gonorrhœa 2 „ Treated on board. „ 4 ss. "Perseus" „ 2 „ 1 „ „ 1 to attend Seamen's Hospital, Royal Albert Dock. „ 6 ss. "Mathura" ,, and Orchitis. 1 „ Landed at Port Said. „ 7 ss. "Khyber" Syphilis 1 „ To attend Seamen's Hospital, Soft Sore 1 „ Royal Albert Dock. „ 8 s3. "Clan Macquarrie" Gonorrhœa and Bubo. 1 „ To hospital at Chittagong. „ „ 10 13 m.v."Highland Chieftain ss. "Caronia" "Gonorrhœa „ 1 2 Passenger Crew To attend private doctor. Treated at New York. „ 13 ss. "Saxon Star" „ 1 „ To attend Seamen's Hospital, Royal Albert Dock. „ 14 ss. "Thurso" Syphilis 1 „ „ „ „ „ 16 ss. "Burma" Soft Sore 1 „ Treated on board. „ 19 ss. "Stuart Star" Gonorrhœa 1 „ To attend Seamen's Hospital, Royal Albert Dock. „ 19 ss. "Megantic" „ 2 „ „ „ „ „ Carried forward 243 60 Venebeal Diseases—continued. Date. Name of Vessel. Nature of Case. No. of Cases. Passenger or Crew Rating. Advice given. 1930. Brought forward 243 July 25 ss. "Rodney Star" Gonorrhœa 1 Crew To attend Seamen's Hospital, Royal Albert Dock. „ 25 ss. "Ranpura" „ 1 „ Treated on board. Syphilis 1 Passenger Landed at Plymouth for treatment. „ 25 ss. "Moldavia" Chronic Gleet 1 Crew To attend V.D. Clinic. „ 26 ss. "Auditor" Acute Gononrrhœa 1 „ To attend Seamen's Hospital, Royal Albert Dock. „ 28 ss. "Aurania" Gonorrhœa 1 Passenger To attend St. Pancras Infirmary. „ 31 ss. "Orvieto" „ 1 Crew Treated on board. „ 31 ss. "Andalusia Star" „ 1 „ To attend Seamen's Hospital, Royal Albert Dock. Aug. 4 ss. "Ascania" „ 1 „ To attend local clinic. „ 4 ss. "Sea Glorv" Acute Gonorrhœa 1 „ Landed to hospital at Bermuda. „ 7 ss. "Umvuma" Gonorrhœa Bubo. 1 „ „ „ Capetown. „ 8 ss. "Amarapoona" Syphilis 1 „ Treated on board. „ 11 ss. "Albion Star" „ 1 „ To attend Seamen's Hospital, Royal Albert Dock. „ 13 ss. "Portloe" Soft Sore 1 „ „ „ „ „ 13 ss. "Hector" Gonorrhœa Passengers Treated on board. „ 13 ss. "Sheaf Mead" Chronic tis and Left Orchitis. 1 Crew To attend Dreadnought pital. „ 15 ss. "Roepat" Gonorrhœa 1 „ Treated on board. „ 16 ss. "Clan McNeil" Soft Sore 1 „ To attend Seamen's Hospital, Royal Albert Dock. „ 18 ss. "Ausonia" Gonorrhœa „ „ „ „ „ 18 ss. "Tongariro" „ „ „ „ „ „ 19 m.v "Dunbar Castle" „ 1 Passenger To attend private clinic. „ 19 m.v "Jumna" and „ Bubo. 1 Crew Landed to hospital at Trinidad. „ 22 ss. "Mongolia" „ 1 Passenger Crew Treated on board. „ „ „ 22 ss. "Morea" Syphilis Gonorrhœa 1 1 „ „ To attend Seamen's Hospital, Royal Albert Dock. „ 22 ss. "Montrose" „ 1 „ To attend Seamen's Hospital, Greenwich. 2 Passengers To patten V.D. Clinic. „ 25 ss' "Carmania" „ 1 „ To attend Seamen's Hospital, Greenwich. „ 25 ss. "Marie Leonhardt" „ 1 Crew „ „ „ „ 27 m.v "Panama" Soft Sore 3 „ Treated at Port Said. „ 30 ss. "Princesa" Gonorrhœa 3 „ Treated on board. Sept. 1 ss. "Djambi" „ 1 „ „ „ „ 1 ss. "Lancastria" „ Syphilis 2 „ „ To attend Seamen's Hospital, Royal Albert Dock. „ 2 ss. "Maron" „ 1 „ „ „ „ Soft Sore 2 „ „ „ „ „ 2 ss. "Manipur" ,, and Bubo. 1 „ Treated on board. „ 3 ss. "Jamaica Planter" Acute Gonorrhœa 1 „ „ „ „ 4 ss. "City of Bagdad" Syphilis 1 „ To attend Seamen's Hospital, Tilbury Dock. „ 7 ss. "Kalyan" „ 1 „ To attend Seamen's Hospital, Gonorrhœa 4 „ Royal Albert Dock. „ 7 ss. "Logician" „ 1 „ Treated on board. „ 8 m.v "Shropshire" Syphilis 1 „ To attend Seamen's Hospital, Tilbury Dock. „ 10 ss. "Hobsons Bay" Gonorrhœa 1 „ Treated on board. 1 Passenger „ „ „ 11 ss. "Clan Macbride" ,, and Epididymitis. 1 Crew To attend hospital at Glasgow. „ 11 ss. "Balaranalda" Gonorrhœa 1 „ Treated on board. „ 11 ss. "Almeda Star" „ and 1 „ To attend Seamen's Hospital, Soft Sore. Royal Albert Dock. „ 12 ss. "Macedonia" Gonorrhœa 1 „ Treated on board (cured). Syphilis 1 „ To attend hospital at Plymouth. „ 12 ss. "Juliet" „ 1 „ Landed to hospital at Oran. Carried forward 312 61 Venereal Diseases— continued. Date. Name of Vessel. Nature of Case. No. of Cases. Passenger or Crew Rating. Advice given. 1930. Rroiiffht, forward 312 Sept. 13 ss. "Megantie" Gonorrhœa 2 Crew Landed to hospital at Southampton. „ 14 ss. "Duquesa" Syphilis 1 „ To attend Seamen's Hospital, Royal Albert Dock. „ 16 ss. "Menestheus" Gonorrhœa Syphilis 2 1 „ „ „ „ ,, 17 ss. "Harmodius" Tertiary Syphilis 1 „ To attend Seamen's Hospital, Tilbury Dock. „ 18 m.v. "Highland Chieftain" Gonorrhœa 1 „ To attend V.D. Clinic. „ 18 ss. "Sultan Star" it 1 „ „ „ „ „ 18 ss. "Markhor" Syphilis 1 „ „ „ „ 19 ss. "Raiputana" Gonorrhœa 1 Passenger To attend private doctor. „ 19 ss. "Padua" Syphilis 1 Crew To attend Seamen's Hospital, Tilbury Dock. „ 19 ss. "Hildegaard" Gonorrhœal Rheumatism 1 „ To attend Seamen's Hospital, Greenwich. „ 20 ss. "Assyrian" Gonorrhœa 1 „ To attend doctor at Liverpool. Syphilis 1 „ To attend doctor at Hull. „ 21 ss. "Antilochus" „ Gonorrhœa 1 1 „„ To attend Seamen's Hospital, Royal Albert Dock. Cured. „ 22 ss. "Aurania" A cute 1 „ Treated on board. „ 22 ss. "Rotorua" „ 2 „ „ „ „ 24 ss. "Deike Reimens" „ 1 „ tt tf „ 25 ss. "Port Denison" Tabes dorsalis 1 „ To attend clinic in London. „ 25 ss. "Orama" Gonorrhœa 1 „ tf it tt „ 25 ss. "Llandaff Castle" Chronic Glee Syphilis Soft Chancre t 1 1 1 „ „ To attend Albert Dock Hospital. a it ff tt n tt „ 25 ss. "Fionia" Gonorrhœa 1 „ Treated on board. „ 27 ss. "Glenapp" Climatic Bubo 1 „ To attend Albert Dock Hospital. „ 27 ss. "Clytoneus" Soft Sore 1 „ Landed at Amsterdam. „ 28 ss. "Calgaric" Gonorrhœa 1 „ „ Havre. „ 29 ss. "Llanstephan Castle" "Friedreich" „ „ Treated on board. „ 30 ss. Syphilis 1 „ „ „ „ 30 ss. "Bura Bellhaven" „ 1 „ To attend Greenwich Hospital. Oct. 1 ss. "Vassillios Pandelis" Gonorrhœa Soft Sore 1 „ „ „ „ „ „ „ „ „ 1 ss. "Colonial" Gonorrhœa 1 „ Treated on board. „2 ss. "Saigaing" Syphilis „ To attend Liverpool Hospital. „ 2 ss. "Doric Star" Gonorrhœa 1 „ To attend hospital in Newport. „ 5 ss. "Kalimin" „ „ Returning to Russia. „ 5 ss. "Kashmir" „ General Parsysis of the Insane. 1 „ Passenger Treated on board. To Royal Naval Hospital, Chatham. „ 5 ss. "Mandala" Syphilis 1 Crew To attend hospital in London. 5 ss. "Moliere" Soft Sore 1 „ To attend Albert Dock Hospital. ,, 5 ss. "Alaunia" Gonorrhœa 1 „ „ „ „ „ 7 m.v. "Lalandia" Soft Sore 1 „ Treated on board. Syphilis 1 „ „ „ Gonorrhœa 1 „ „ „ „ 8 ss. "Sarpedon" "Ranchi" „ Syphilis 1 1 Passenger „ „ „ 10 ss. Crew To attend Albert Dock Hospital. „ 10 ss. "Stuart Star" „ 1 „ „ „ „ „ 10 ss. "Malakand" Gonorrhœa 1 „ Treated on board. „ 10 ss. "Montcalm" „ 2 „ „ „ „ 14 ss. "Tuscania" Syphilis 1 „ To attend Greenwich Hospital. „16 ss. "Belmar" Soft Sore Gonorrhœa 1 1 „ „ To attend Albert Dock Hospital. „ „ „ „ 19 ss. "Carmania" „ 2 „ To attend Greenwich Hospital. „ 19 ss. "Behar" „ 1 Passenger Treated in hospital at Calcutta. „ 20 ss. "Boyal Star" „ 1 „ To attend Albert Dock Hospital. Syphilis 1 Crew Landed to hospital in Singapore. „ 21 ss. "City of Newcastle" Soft Sore 1 „ To attend Albert Dock Hospital. „ 21 ss. "Gloucestershire" Bubo 1 „ To attend Tilbury Hospital. „ 23 ss. "Inanda" Gonorrhœa 1 Passenger Landed to hospital at Trinidad. „ 23 ss. "Otranto" „ Crew Treated on board. „ 23 ss. "Hardwicke Grange" „ 1 „ „ „ „ 24 ss. "Modasa" Syphilis „ Landed at Suez. „ 25 ss. "Menelaus" Soft Sore 1 „ Treated on board. Carried forward 388 62 Venereal Diseases—continued. Date. Name of Vessel. Nature of Case. No. of Cases. Passenger or Crew Rating. Advice given. 1930. Brought forward 388 Sept. 25 ss. "Olympus" Gonorrhœa 1 Crew Landed at Oran. „ 28 ss. "Poelau Bras" Soft Sore 1 „ „ Tandjong. „ 28 ss. "Clan Ogilvy" Gonorrhœa 1 „ To attend Tilbury Hospital. „ 29 ss. "Burma" Climatic Bubc 1 „ „ „ „ Syphilis 1 „ „ „ „ Gonorrhœa 1 „ Treated on board. Soft Sore 1 „ „ „ Oct. 29 ss. "Dragon" Syphilis 1 „ To attend Seamen's Hospital, Royal Albert Dock. „ 31 ss. "Avila Star" „ 1 D.B.S. To attend private doctor. „ 31 ss. "Malancha" Soft Sore and Bubo. 1 Crew To attend Seamen's Hospital, Tilbury Dock. Nov. 1 ss. "Matakana" Gonorrhœa 1 „ Treated on board. „ 1 ss. "Garth Castle" „ 2 „ To attend Seamen's Hospital, Royal Albert Dock. „ 2 ss. "Merkara" „ 2 „ 1 landed at Colombo. 1 to attend Seamen's Hospital, Royal Albert Dock. Syphilis 1 „ „ „ „ „ 2 ss. "Caronia" Gonorrhœa 1 „ To attend Seamen's Hospital, Greenwich. „ 6 m.v "El Argentino" Gonorrhœal Rheumatisim. 1 „ To attend hospital in Buenos Aires. „ 10 ss. "Nestor" Syphilis 1 „ To attend hospital in Liverpool. „ 11 ss. "Kota Gede" Gonorrhœa „ Treated on board. 12 ss. "Atreus" Syphilis 1 „ Treated on board and to attend Seamen's Hospital, Royal Albert Dock. „ 14 ss. "Moldavia" Gonorrhœa „ Treated on board. „ 14 ss. "Dunluce Castle" Syphilis 1 „ To attend Seamen's Hospital, Royal Albert Dock. „ 14 ss. "Malwa" „ 1 „ „ . „„ „ 15 ss. "Margha" Gonorrhœa 1 „ „ „ „ Oct. 29 ss. "Dragon" Syphilis 1 „ To attend Seamen's Hospital, Royal Albert Dock. „ 31 ss. "Avila Star" „ 1 D.B.S. To consult private practitioner. „ 31 ss. "Malancha" Soft Sore and Bubo. 1 Crew To attend Seamen's Hospital, Tilburv Dock. Nov. 1 ss. "Matakana" Gonorrhœa 1 „ Treated on board. „ 1 ss. "Garth Castle" „ „ „ „ „ 2 ss. "Merkara" „ 2 „ 1 landed to hospital at Colombo. 1 to attend Dreadnought Hospital, Greenwich. Syphilis 1 „ „ „ „ „ 2 ss. "Caronia" Gonorrhœa 1 „ „ „ „ „ 6 m.v. "El Argentino" Gonorrhœal Rheumatisn 1 a. „ To attend hospital in Buenos Aires. „ 10 ss. "Nestor" Syphilis 1 „ To attend hospital in Liverpool. „ 11 ss. "Kota Gede" Gonorrhœa „ Treated on board. „ 12 ss. "Atreus" Syphilis 1 „ To attend Seamen's Hospital, Roval Albert Dock. „ 14 ss. "Moldavia" Gonorrhœa „ Treated on board. „ 14 ss. "Dunluce Castle" Syphilis 1 „ To attend Seamen's Hospital, Royal Albert Dock. „ 14 ss. "Malwa" „ 1 „ „ „ „ „ 15 ss. "Margha" Gonorrhœa 1 „ „ „ „ „ 16 ss. "Adrastus" „ Chancroid 1 1 D.B.S. „ „ „ Treated on board. „ 17 ss. "Minnetonka" Gonorrhœa 1 Passenger To attend Seamen's Hospital, Royal Albert Dock. „ 20 ss. "Lucistan" „ 1 Crew To attend Seamen's Hospital, Greenwich. „ 21 ss. "Elsa" Soft Sore 1 „ „ „ „ „ 21 ss. "Nagoya" Climatic Bubc 1 „ To attend Hospital for Tropical Diseases, Endsleigh Gardens, W.C. „ 21 ss. "Contractor" Gonorrhœa Soft Sores 1 1 „ „ To attend hospital in Liverpool. „ „ „ Carried forwarc 443 68 Venereal Diseases—continued. Date. Name of Vessel. Nature of Case. No. of Cases. Passenger or Crew Rating. Advice given. 1930. Brought forward 443 Nov. 22 ss. "Calchas" Syphilis 1 Crew To attend Seamen's Hospital, Boyal Albert Dock. „ 24 ss. "Ascania" Gonorrhœa 1 „ Treated on board. „ 24 ss. "Grantully Castle" „ 1 Passenger „ „ „ 26 ss. "Tydeus" Syphilis 1 Crew To attend Seamen's Hospital, Boyal Albert Dock. „ 27 m.v "Highland Chieftain" „ 1 „ „ „ „ „ 28 ss. "Naldera" Gonorrhœa,with Bubo. 1 „ Landed to hospital in Bombay. „ 30 ss. "Fresno Star" Syphilis Soft Sore 1 1 „ „ To attend hospital in Liverpool. „ „ „ „ 30 ss. "Antonia" Gonorrhœa 1 „ To attend Seamen's Hospital, Greenwich. Dec. 1 ss. "Khyber" „ 3 „ Treated on board. Syphilis 1 „ To attend Seamen's Hospital, Boyal Albert Dock. „ 1 ss. "Buahine" Gonorrhœa 1 D.B.S. Treated at Colon; well on arrival. „ 1 ss. "Mansepool" Soft Sore 1 Crew To attend Seamen's Hospital, Boyal Albert Dock. „ 3 ss. "Jamaica Planter" Gonorrhœa 1 „ „ „ „ „ 7 ss. "Banpura" „ 1 „ To attend clinic at home. „ 7 ss. "Andalucia Star" „ 1 „ To attend Seamen's Hospital, Boyal Albert Dock. „ 12 ss. "City of Harvard" Soft Chancre 1 „ To attend Seamen's Hospital, Tilbury Dock. „ 13 ss. "Clan Alpine" Climatic Bubo 1 „ „ „ „ „ 13 ss. "Rangitata" Soft Sore 1 „ Treated on board. Gonorrhœa 2 „ „ „ „ 13 ss. "Bellucia" Soft Sore, with 1 „ To attend Seamen's Hospital, Bubo. Greenwich. „ 14 ss. "Llandaff Castle" Gonorrhœa 2 „ Treated on board. „ 2 Passengers Landed at Southampton. „ 15 ss. "Minnetonka" „ 1 Crew To attend Seamen's Hospital, Boyal Albert Dock. „ 17 ss. "Avelona Star" „ 1 „ „ „ „ „ 18 m.v "Pacific Trader" Soft Sore 1 D.B.S. Treated at Vancouver: now cured. „ 19 ss. "Mantua" Gonorrhœa 2 Crew Treated on board. „ 21 ss.4 "Matiana" Soft Sore 1 „ „ „ „ 24 m.v "Highland Brigade" Gonorrœa 1 „ To attend Seamen's Hospital, Royal Albert Dock. „ 24 ss. "Prometheus" „ 2 „ „ „ „ „ 25 ss. "Narkunda" Gonococcal 1 Passenger To consult private practitioner. Epididymitis „ 26 ss. "Sado" Gonorrhœa 1 „ Treated on board. „ 27 ss. "Oxfordshire" Syphilis 2 „ To attend Seamen's Hospital, Boyal Albert Dock. „ 27 ss. "Glenluce" Gonorrhœa 1 „ Treated on board. „ 29 ss. "Hector" „ 2 „ To attend Seamen's Hospital, Royal Albert Dock. „ 30 ss. "Mulbera" Syphilis 1 „ Landed to hospital at Madras. „ 30 ss. "Jamaica Merchant" Gonorrhœa 1 „ Treated on board. Total 489 APPENDIX XXII.—Miscellaneous Diseases (Classified). OTHER INFECTIOUS DISEASES. Dengue Fever 8C. Mumps 14 0., 12 P. Hepatitis 10. Kala Azar 1 P. Whooping Cough 6 P. Schistosomiasis 2 C. TROPICAL DISEASES. Sprue 1 C., 2 P. Three-day Fever 1C. Ankylostomiasis 2 C. Tropical Abscess 2 C., 4 P. Beri-beri 3 C. (1 died), 5 P. (1 died). Filariasis 1 C. Hepatic Abscess 1 P. Blackwater Fever 2 0. (1 died). Undulent Fever 1 P. 64 Miscellaneous Diseases—continued. CATARRHAL CONDITIONS. Febricula 4 C. Pharyngitis IP. Tonsilitis 9 C., 5 P. RHEUMATIC CONDITIONS. Arthritis 1 C. Eurythema Nodosum IP. Rheumatic Fever 1 C. Rheumatism 3 C., 2 P. SEPTIC CONDITIONS. Abscess 2 C. Bursitis, Prepatellar IP. ,, Septic 1 C. Carbuncle 1 C. Furunculosis IP. Inguinal Bubo 1 C. Osteo-myelitis IP. Perinal Abscess 1 C. Peritonsillar Abscess 1 C. Septicaemia 1 C., 1 P. (died). Septic Hand 2 C. ,, Finger 10. ,, Foot 1 C. ,, Rash IP. NERVOUS AND MENTAL DISORDERS. Antenor Polio-myelitis IP. Asthma 2 C. Bell's Paralysis 1 C. Cerebral Tumour 1 C. Convulsions 1 P. (died). Dementia Praecox 4 P. Disseminated Sclerosis 1 P. Epilepsy 2 P. General Paralysis 2 C. (1 died), 2 P. (1 died). Insanity IP. Mania 2 P. Melancholia IP. Mental Disease IP. Neurasthenia IP. Paralysis 1 C. DISEASES OF THE SKIN. Eczema 2 C., 1 P. Dermatitis 1 C. Impetigo 3 P. Ringworm 1 C., 4 P. Urticaria 1 C. DISEASES OF THE CIRCULATORY SYSTEM. Aortic Aneurysm 1 C. (died). Cerebral Haemorrhage 1 C. (died), 5P. (died). Dropsy 1 C. Heart Failure 7 C., 13 P. Hemiplegia 1 C. Myeloid Leukaemia IP. Myocarditis IP. (died). Ruptured Aneurysm 1 C. DISEASES OF THE RESPIRATORY SYSTEM. Bronchitis 2 C. (1 died), 6 P. Haemoptysis 2 C. Pleurisy 6 0., 1 P. DISEASES OF THE DIGESTIVE SYSTEM. Abdominal Adhesions IP. Cyst 1 C. ,, Tumour 1 C. Appendicitis 8 C. Carcinoma of Gall Bladder. 1 C. ,, Jaw IP. ,, Stomach 1 C. (died). Cirrhosis of Liver IP. (died). Colic 29 C. Cholecystitis IP. Colitis 1 C., 4 P. (1 died). Constipation 1 C., 1 P. Diarrhoea 7 0., 8 P. Duodenal Ulcer 1 C. Dyspepsia 10. Enteritis IP. ,, Gastro 2 C. (1 died). Gastric Ulcer 2 C. (1 died), 2 P. Gastritis 1 0 , 1 P. Gall Stone Colic IP. Intestinal Colic 1 C. Jaundice 1 C. ,, Catarrhal IP. Pancreatitis 10. (died). Peritonitis 2 C., 2 P. DISEASES OF THE RENAL SYSTEM. Cystitis IP. Haematuria 1 C. Kidney Trouble 1 C. Nephritis 2 0. (died). Pyelitis 1 C. INJURIES. Fracture of the Pelvis 10. Hernia 1 C. Injury 10 C. (4 died). DISEASES OF THE EAR. Otitis Media, Chronic 2 P. DISEASES OF THE EYE. Abscess of the Eyelid 10. Conjunctivitis IP. Iritis IP. OTHER DISEASES (not Classified). Adenitis 2 C., 1 P. Alcoholism 10. Anaemia 1 C. Balanitis 1 C. Chill 1 C. Debility 3 P. died). Epistaxis 10. Fireman's Cramp 10. (died). Food Poisoning 5 P. Goitre 1 P. Hydrocele 1 C. Hydrocephalus, Congenital 1 P. (died). Marasmus IP. Pyrexia 2 C. Sciatica 10. Senility 1 C., 29 P. Suicide 3 0., 3 P. Vaccinia 1 C. Vertigo 10. 65 APPENDIX XXIII. Vessels and Premises Disinfected from 1st January to 31st December, 1930. Month. Reason for Disinfection. Fumigation for Rats, &c. Total. Encephalitis Lethargica. Erysipelas. Continued Fever. Cholera. Mumps. Dysentery. Whooping Cough. Chicken-pox. Leprosy. Diphtheria. Enteric Fever. Plague. Measles. Scarlet Fever. Small-pox. Pulmonary Tuberculosis. Influenza and Pneumonia. January - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 2 - 33 35 February — 1 - — — - — — — — 1 — 2 - 1 4 - 22 31 March — - - — 1 - — 3 — — 2 — 5 - 1 5 — 24 41 April — - - — — - — 4 — — 2 — 6 - 1 7 — 18 38 May — - - — — - — — 1 1 2 — 1 1 - 8 3 19 36 June - - 1 - 1 - - 3 - 19 9,4 July — - - — — - — — — — - — 1 - - 3 - 21 25 August - - - - - - - 1 - - - - 5 1 16 23 September — - - — — - — — — 1 2 — 1 - - 3 — 14 21 October — - - — — - — — — — — — 1 3 - 1 — 13 18 November - - - - - - - 2 — 1 8 - 6 1 16 34 December — - - — — - — — — — 2 — 1 1 - 2 — 18 24 Totals — 1 — — 2 - — 8 1 2 14 — 19 13 3 49 5 233 350 APPENDIX XXIY.—Disinfecting Operations for Infectious Disease Date. 1930. Name of Vessel.- Reason for Disinfection. Action taken. Jan. 13 ss. "Mantola" Pulmonary Tuberculosis Fumigated with Formalin and washed down. „ 21 ss. "Aurania" „ „ „ „ „ Feb. 11 ss. "Manela" German Measles Fumigated with sulphur dioxide and washed down. „ 12 ss. "Baltonia" Erysipelas „ „ „ „ 15 ss. "Banchi" Small-pox and Enteric „ „ „ „ 20 ss. "Ascanius" Measles „ „ „ „ 20 ss. "Aurania" Pulmonary Tuberculosis Fumigated and sprayed with Formalin. 22 „ ss. "Merkara" „ „ Fumigated with sulphur dioxide and washed down. „ 24 ss. "Aurania" „ „ Fumigated with Formalin gas and washed down. „ 27 ss. "Albion Star" „ „ Washed down with disinfecting solution. Mar. 4 ss. "Morea" Pulmonary Tuberculosis and Chicken-pox. Fumigated with sulphur dioxide and washed down. „ 8 ss. "Mantua" Small-pox and Chicken-pox Fumigated with Formalin and washed down. 11 ss. "Clan McVicar" Pulmonary Tuberculosis Washed down with disinfectant. „ 11 ss. "Oxfordshire" Chicken-pox Fumigated with sulphur dioxide and washed down. 17 ss. "Viceroy of India" Measles „ „ „ 18 ss. "City of Johannesburg" Pulmonary Tuberculosis „ „ „ „ 20 ss. "Nowshera" Pulmonary Tuberculosis and Enteric Fever. „ „ „ „ 24 ss. "Baradine" „ „ „ „ „ „ „ 25 ss. "Baltonia" Measles „ „ „ „ 25 ss. "Morvada" Mumps Disinfected by Formalin spray. „ 26 ss. "Novara" German Measles Washed down with Izal solution. „ 26 ss. "Minnewaska" Measles Disinfected by Formalin spray. „ 29 ss. "Kaisar-I-Hind" ... ... ... Fumigated with sulphur dioxide and washed down. April 1 ss. "Kitano Maru" Enteric Fever „ „ „ „ 3 ss. "Lancastria" Pulmonary Tuberculosis and Chicken pox. Sprayed with Formalin and washed down. „ 5 ss. "Macedonia" Measles Fumigated and sprayed with Formalin. „ 8 ss. "Jamaica Merchant" Pulmonary Tuberculosis „ „ „ „ 12 ss. "Banpura" Pulmonary Tuberculosis and Chicken-pox. „ „ „ „ 14 ss. "Dunluce Castle" Pulmonary Tuberculosis „ „ „ 66 Disinfecting Operations foe Infectious Disease—continued. Date. Name of Vessel. Reason for Disinfection. Action taken. April 15 ss. "Rancher" Small-pox (?) and Chicken-pox Sprayed out with disinfecting solution. „ 17 ss. "Naldera" Chicken-pox Fumigated with sulphur dioxide and washed down. „ 17 ss. "Llandaff Castle" Pulmonary Tuberculosis Fumigated with Formalin and washed down. „ 19 ss. "Mulbera" Measles Fumigated with sulphur dioxide and washed down. „ 19 ss. "Alaunia" „ Fumigated with Formalin and washed down. „ 22 ss. "Eurylochus" Enteric Fever Fumigated with sulphur dioxide and washed down. „ 24 ss. "Ausonia" German Measles Fumigated with Formalin gas and washed down. » 25 ss. "Ranchi" German Measles and Pulmonary Tuberculosis. „ „ „ 26 ss. "Ithaki" Pulmonary Tuberculosis Washed down with disinfecting solution. „ 28 ss. "Baltavia" Measles Fumigated with Formalin gas and washed down. May 2 ss. "Manora" Pulmonary Tuberculosis Washed down with disinfecting solution. „ 2 ss. "Ranchi" ... ?„ ... Fumigated with Formalin. „ 3 ss. "Mashobra" Measles „ „ „ 3 ss. "Rawalpindi" Typhoid Fever Fumigated with sulphur dioxide and washed down. „ 5 ss. "Runic" Pneumonia Fumigated with Formalin and washed down. „ 6 ss. "Baltonia" Scarlet Fever Fumigated with sulphur dioxide and washed down. „ 7 ss. "Magdapur" Pneumonia Washed down with disinfecting solution. „ 10 ss. "Pacific Reliance" Pulmonary Tuberculosis Fumigated with Formalin and washed down. „ 18 ss. "Matiana" Diphtheria „ „ „ „ 19 ss. "Leicestershire" Pneumonia Washed down with disinfecting solution. „ 19 ss. "Balranald" Pulmonary Tuberculosis Fumigated with Formalin and washed down. „ 20 ss. "Mantola" „ „. Fumigated with sulphur and washed down. „ 21 ss. "Barcelona" Enteric Fever „ „ „ „ 22 ss. "City of Brisbane" Pulmonary Tuberculosis Washed down with disinfecting solution. „ 27 ss. "Megara" Leprosy Fumigated with sulphur dioxide and washed down. 30 ss. "Cathay" Pulmonary Tuberculosis „ „ „ „ 30 ss. "West Lynn" „ „ Washed down with disinfecting solution. June 3 ss. "Premjer" Mumps „ „ „ „ 13 ss. "Ballarat " Pulmonary Tuberculosis Fumigated with Formalin. „ 18 ss. "Kashgar " .„ „ „ „ „ „ 21 ss. "Macedonia" „ „ Washed down with disinfecting solution. „ 26 ss. "Bendigo" Chicken-pox Fumigated with Formalin. July 4 ss. "Nesttun" Chicken-pox (suspected Fumigated with sulphur dioxide pox). and sprayed with disinfecting solution. „ 6 ss. "Khiva" Pulmonary Tuberculosis „ „ „ „ 21 ss. "Baradine" Measles „ „ „ „ 24 ss. "Ausonia" Pulmonary Tuberculosis „ „ „ „ 29 ss. "Ranpura" ... „ „ .... „ „ „ Aug. 2 ss. "Diomed" Enteric Fever „ „ „ „ 5 ss. "Malwa" Pulmonary Tuberculosis „ „ „ 7 ss. "Diomed" „ „ „ „ „ „ 12 ss. "Historian" „ „ (/) Washed down with disinfecting solution. „ 15 ss. "Barrabool" .„ „ Fumigated with Formalin and sprayed. „ 23 ss. "Morea" .„ „. „ „ „ „ 27 ss. "City of Cairo" Pneumonia Washed down with disinfecting solution. 67 Disinfection Operations for Infectious Disease—continued. Date. 1930. Name of Vessel. Reason for Disinfection. Action taken. Sept. 5 ss. "Minnelcahda" Diphtheria Fumigated with Formalin. „ 9 ss. "Sorrento" Enteric Fever Fumigated with sulphur dioxide. „ 12 ss. "Balranald" Pulmonary Tuberculosis and Measles. Fumigated with sulphur dioxide and sprayed. „ 19 ss. "Raj put ana" Pulmonary Tuberculosis Fumigated with Formalin and sprayed. „ 25 ss. "Orama" Enteric Fever and Pulmonary Tuberculosis. Fumigated with sulphur dioxide and washed down. Oct. 7 ss. "Alaunia" Scarlet Fever „ „ „ „ 14 ss. "Geraldine Mary" Measles „ „ „ „ 28 ss. "Ascania" Pulmonary Tuberculosis „ „ „ „ 30 T.S. "Arethusa" Scarlet Fever Disinfected with Izal spray. „ 31 „ „ „ „ „ Nov. 1 „ „ „ „ „ 4 ,, „ „ „ „ 4 ss. "Oluf Maersk" Typhoid Fever Fumigated with sulphur dioxide and washed down. „ 5 No. 9. Pier Head Cottages, West India Dock. Pneumonia Washed down with disinfectant. 6 T.S. "Arethusa" Scarlet Fever Disinfected with Izal spray. 7 ,, „ „ „ „ 7 ss. "Baradine" Pulmonary Tuberculosis Fumigated with sulphur dioxide and sprayed. „ 11 T.S. "Arethusa" Scarlet Fever Disinfected with Izal spray. „ 14 ss. "Clan Monroe" Pulmonary Tuberculosis Washed down with disinfectant. 14 ss. "Moldavia" „ „ Fumigated with sulphur dioxide and washed down. „ 15 ss. "Highland Monarch" „ „ „ „ „ 16 T.S. "Arethusa" Scarlet Fever Disinfected with Izal spray. ,, 18 „ „ „ „ „ „ 18 ss. "Cooperatzia" Enteric Fever Fumigated with sulphur dioxide and washed down. „ 21 ss. "Rajputana" Pulmonary Tuberculosis „ „ „ „ 21 ss. "Malwa" „ „ „ „ „ „ 21 ss. "Estrellano" Scarlet Fever „ „ „ „ 26 ss. "Calchas" Measles „ „ „ Dec. 11 ss. "Ausonia" Enteric Fever „ „ „ „ 13 ss. "Macedonia" Pulmonary Tuberculosis „ „ „ „ 17 East Flat, Police Office, Royal Albert Dock. Scarlet Fever „ „ „ „ 22 ss. "Nerma" Measles „ „ „ „ 30 ss. "Narkunda" Pulmonary Tuberculosis „ „ „ 31 ss. "Mulbera" Enteric Fever „ „ „ APPENDIX XXV. Number of Disinfections of Effects, Bedding, &c., from 1st January to 31st December, 1930. Month. Reason for Disinfection. Hospital Bedding, &c. Total. No. of times Disinfector was used. Fumigated in Cabin of Vessel. Small-pox, Chicken-pox. Malaria. Diphtheria. Enteric Fever. Measles. Pulmonary Tuberculosis. Mumps. Pneumonia. Erysipelas. Scarlet Fever. January - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 2 February 1 — - — — — — — - 1 — — 2 2 4 March 6 — - — 2 2 — 2 - - — I 13 5 3 April — 2 - — 1 — — - - I 2 5 4 1 May 1 1 - — 2 — — — - - I 2 7 4 2 June — 1 - — — — — 1 - - — 3 6 3 - July — 1 - — — — — 2 - - — 1 4 2 4 August 1 — - 1 1 - - 2 5 3 3 September — — - — 2 — — 1 - - — 1 4 3 3 October — 1 - — — 1 — 1 - - 2 1 6 1 2 November — — - — 1 2 — 4 - - 6 2 15 5 3 December — — - — 1 1 — 1 - - 1 3 7 4 4 Totals 9 6 — 1 9 7 — 12 — 1 11 18 74 36 31 68 APPENDIX XXVI.-Hospital. Number of Cases Admitted, Cost of Maintenance, &c. Patients remaining in Hospital on 31st December, 1929 1 Admitted. Discharged. Died. Remaining under treatment. Enteric Fever 9 7 1 2 Scarlet Fever 12 12 - - Diphtheria 3 3 — — Measles 12 11 1 - Chicken-pox 7 7 — — Other Diseases 13 13 — — Total 56 53 2 2 Remaining in Hospital on 31st December, 1930 2 Total number of days' treatment during the year 948 Average number of days' treatment for each case 16-93 Average daily number of patients in Hospital 15 Average daily cost of maintenance per patient 1s. 6¼d. Average total cost of maintenance per patient £1 5s. l0d. APPENDIX XXVII.—Return of Rats Caught and Destroyed during 1930. The entire cost of destroying these rats has been borne by the Shipowners and Port of London Authority. Jan. Feb. Mar. April. May. June. July. Aug. Sept. Oct. Nov. Dec. Total. Millwall Dock— Warehouses 55 57 114 86 87 50 72 32 51 54 77 52 787 Vessels while in dock 64 28 47 14 106 4 45 15 15 36 6 7 387 Surrey Commercial Dock— Warehouses 13 90 82 98 98 23 18 44 33 73 81 37 690 Vessels while in dock — — — 28 — 37 365 355 85 100 102 110 1,182 Regent's Canal Dock— Warehouses 33 27 63 70 57 32 26 19 26 31 46 43 473 Vessels while in dock — — — — — — — — — — — — — St. Katharine's Dock— Warehouses 76 78 102 79 105 87 97 143 83 86 96 95 1,127 Vessels while in dock - - - - - — 7 — 2 19 17 6 51 London Dock— Warehouses 53 51 55 64 69 58 63 116 90 66 73 50 808 Vessels while in dock 127 — 14 — 22 3 — — 1 1 8 — 176 Royal Albert Dock— Warehouses 85 91 52 42 73 58 51 65 39 68 76 48 748 Vessels while in dock 127 114 91 30 85 125 30 55 122 66 49 21 915 Royal Victoria Dock— Warehouses 10 51 51 58 71 26 29 70 72 152 108 37 735 Vessels while in dock 183 23 83 72 43 45 18 33 18 30 221 88 857 King George V. Dock— Warehouses 23 12 12 11 12 16 3 6 6 12 6 2 121 Vessels while in dock 53 64 17 207 113 12 24 60 25 94 42 215 926 West India Dock- Warehouses 31 90 37 18 22 21 19 26 23 75 98 33 493 Vessels while in dock 26 2 22 125 15 55 7 65 6 87 4 14 428 East India Dock— Warehouses 4 39 45 19 19 10 15 8 22 23 6 7 217 Vessels while in dock 15 99 96 32 31 36 30 32 75 54 43 121 664 Tilbury Dock— Warehouses 12 6 8 5 7 10 7 22 9 12 40 19 157 Vessels while in dock 64 169 60 29 50 112 20 111 35 24 88 26 788 River— While in River " 137 169 12 20 7 187 - 38 — 55 2 627 Totals 1,054 1,228 1,220 1,099 1,105 827 1,133 1,277 876 1,163 1,342 1,033 13,357 Total from 1st January to 31st December, 1930:— In Dock Warehouses 6,356 On Vessels while in Dock and River 7,001 Total 13,357 69 APPENDIX XXVIII. BACTERIOLOGICAL EXAMINATION OF EATS DURING 1930. Source. Total Examined. Black Rats. Brown Rats. Species Unknown. Mice. Rats Infected with Plague. Found Dead. Trapped Poisoned, &c. Found Dead. Trapped, Poisoned. &c. Found Dead. Trapped, Poisoned &c. Found Dead. Trapped Poisoned, &c. Vessels 1,435 19 1,240 4 172 - - - - Nil. London Dock 351 — 25 5 321 - - - - Nil. St. Katharine Dock 455 — 77 2 376 - - - - Nil. Regent's Canal Dock 101 — 12 1 88 - - - - Nil. Surrey Commercial Dock 198 2 92 1 103 - - - - Nil. Poplar Dock 104 — 39 — 65 - - - - Nil. West India Dock 190 — 129 — 61 - - - - Nil. South West India Dock 68 — 31 — 37 - - - - Nil. East India Dock 49 — 27 — 22 - - - - Nil. Royal Victoria Dock 394 4 216 4 170 - - - - Nil. Royal Albert Dock 288 — 21 1 266 - - - - Nil. King George V. Dock 42 — 2 — 40 - - - - Nil. Tilbury Dock 56 — 34 — 22 - - - - Nil. Millwall Dock 397 — 124 1 272 - - - - Nil. Totals 4,128 25 2,069 19 2,015 - - — — Nil. APPENDIX XXIX. INTERNATIONAL SANITARY CONVENTION. Deratisation Certificates. The number issued during the period covered by this Report was 240:— Date 1930. Name of Vessel. Reason for Deratisation. Action taken. No. of Rats reported found dead after Fumigation or Trapping. Jan. 1 ss. "Port Victor " Owner's request for Certificate. Fumigated with sulphur dioxide. Nil. „ 2 ss. "Teal" Rat Infested „„ 120 „ 3 ss. "Raranga " Owners' request for Certificate. „„ Nil. „ 3 ss. "Meranhnio " Rat Infested „„ 47 „ 4 ss. "Sandgate Castle " „„ „„ 67 „5 ss. "Afric Star " Owners' request for Certificate. „„ Nil. „ 6 ss. "Minnewaska " „„ „„ Nil. „ 7 ss. "Bereby " Rat Infested Fumigated with sulphur dioxide and trapped. 47 (29 fum.) (18 trap) „ 8 ss. "Warszawa " Owners' request for Certificate. Fumigated with sulphur dioxide. 14 „ 9 ss. "Lapwing " Rat Infested „„ 28 „ 9 ss. "Pangbourne " if „„ 42 „ 10 ss. "Stuart Star " Owners' request for Certificate. „„ Nil. „ 10 „ 11 ss. "Zealandic " ss. "Corinthic " „„ „„ Nil. Nil. „ 12 ss. "Madura " „„ Fumigated with hydrogen cyanide. Nil. „ 12 ss. "Almeda Star " „„ Fumigated with sulphur dioxide. Nil. „ 13 ss. "Uranienborg " Rat Infested „„ 53 „ 13 ss. "Port Hunter " Owners' request for Certificate. „„ Nil. „ 14 ss. "Arandora Star " „ „ Fumigated with hydrogen cyanide. Nil. 70 Deratisation Certificates—continued. Date. 1930. Name of Vessel. Reason for Deratisation. Action taken. No. of Rats reported found dead after Fumigation or Trapping. Jan. 15 ss. "Sutherland Grange" Owners' request for Certificate. Fumigated dioxide. with sulphur Nil. „ 16 ss. "Seamew" Bat Infested „„ „ 68 „ 17 ss. "Fordsdale" Owners' request for Certificate. „„ „ Nil. „ 20 ss. "Mulbera" „„ Fumigated cyanide. with hydrogen Nil. „ 22 ss. "Aghios Gerasimos" Bat Infested Fumigated dioxide. with sulphur 160 „ 23 ss. "Saint Dunstan" Owners' request for Certificate. „„ „„ 12 „ 24 ss. "Dunster Grange" „ „ „ „ Nil. „ 25 ss. "Piako" „ „ Fumigated cyanide. with hydrogen Nil. ., 25 ss. "Inanda" „ „ „ „ Nil. „ 26 ss. "Eodneystar" „ „ Fumigated dioxide. with sulphur Nil. ,, 27 ss. "Baronesa" „ „ 2 „ Nil. „ 29 ss. "Kaisar-I-Hind" Bat Infested Trapping 52 „ 29 ss. "Port Nicholson" Owners' request for Certificate. Fumigated dioxide. with sulphur Nil. „ 27 ss. "Baronesa" „ „ „ „ Nil. „ 31 ss. "Esperance Bay" „ „ „ „ Nil. Feb. 1 ss. "Ionic" „ „ „ „ 85 „ 1 ss. "Andalucia Star " „ „ „ „ Nil. ,, 1 ss. "Stork" Bat Infested „ „ 105 „ 3 ss. "San Carlos " Owners' request for Certificate. „ „ Not known „ 6 7 ss. "Port Auckland " ss. "Hardwicke Grange " „ „ „ „ Nil. Nil. „ 8 ss. "Orontes " „ „ Fumigated cyanide. with hydrogen Nil. „ 8 ss. "Jamaica Merchant " „ „ Fumigated dioxide. with sulphur 16 „ 8 ss. "Taranaki " „ „ „ „ Nil. „ 8 ss. "Port Adelaide" „ „ „ „ Nil. „ 11 ss. "Sultan Star" „ „ „ „ Nil. „ 13 ss. "Port Hardy " „ „ „ „ Nil. „ 14 ss. "Jervis Bay " „ „ „ „ Nil. „ 15 ss. "Avelona Star " „ „ „ „ Nil. „ 15 „ 18 ss. "Minnetonka " ss. "Canonesa " „ „ „ „ 31 Nil. „ 19 ss. "Bazmak " „ „ Trapping 30 „ 20 ss. "Auk " „ „ Fumigated dioxide. with sulphur 29 „ 20 ss. "Ranchi " „ „ Trapping 20 „ 21 ss. "Britannica " „ „ Fumigated dioxide. with sulphur Nil. 21 ss. "El Argentino" „ „ „ „ Nil. 22 „ ss. "Hororata" „ „ „ „ Nil. „ 2 ss. "Napier Star " „ „ „ „ Nil. „ 28 ss. "Port Campbell" „ „ „ „ Nil. Mar. 1 ss. "Norfolk" „ „ Fumigated cyanide. with hydrogen Nil. „ 1 ss. "Avila Star" „ „ Fumigated dioxide. with sulphur Nil. „ 4 ss. "Otso" „ „ Fumigated cyanide. with hydrogen 1 „ 6 ss. "Mahia" „ „ Fumigated dioxide. with sulphur 25 ,, 7 ss. "Maimoa" „ „ „ „ 24 ... 7 ss. "Llanstephan Castle" Bat Infested Fumigated cyanide a with hydrogen nd trapping 99 (96 trap) (3 fum.) „ 8 ss. "Buena Vista" Owners' request for Certificate. Fumigated dioxide. with sulphur 42 „ 9 ss. "Afriestar" „ „ „ „ Nil. „ 10 ss. "Port Darwin" „ „ „ „ Nil. „ 10 ss. "Upwey Grange" „ „ „ „ Nil. „ 11 ss. "Duquesa" „ „ „ „ Nil. „ 11 ss. "Mataroa" „ „ „ „ Nil. 71 Dekatisation Certificates—continued. Date. 1930. Name of Vessel. Reason for Deratisation. Action taken. No. of Rats reported found dead after Fumigation or Trapping. Mar. 12 ss. "Washington Maru" Bat Infested Fumigated with sulphur dioxide. Not known. „ 14 ss. "San Lucar" Owners' request for Certificate. „ „ 27 „ 15 ss. "Almeda Star" „ „ „ „ Nil. „ 18 ss. "Port Sydney" „ „ „ „ Nil. „ 19 ss. "Largs Bay" „ „ „ „ 27 „ 22 ss. "Stuart Star" „ „ „ „ Nil. „ 22 ss. "Guildford Castle" „ „ Fumigated with hydrogen cyanide. 24 „ 24 ss. "Princesa" „ „ Fumigated with sulphur dioxide. Nil. „ 25 ss. "Ferndale" „ „ „ „ Nil. „ 26 ss. "Mahana" „ „ „ „ 89 „ 27 ss. "Corinaldo" „ „ „ „ Nil. „ 28 ss. "Highland Brigade" Bat Infested Trapping „ 29 ss. "Bodney Star" Owners' request for Certificate. Fumigated with sulphur dioxide. Nil. April 1 ss. "Baradine" Bat Infested tt ft 67 „ 4 ss. "Atlantis" It tt a 76 „ 5 ss. "Orvieto" Owners' request for Certificate. Fumigated with hydrogen cyanide. Nil. „ 5 ss. "Moldavia" Bat Infested Fumigated with sulphur dioxide. 15 „ 6 ss. "Andalucia Star" Owners' request for Certificate. „ „ Nil. „ 7 ss. "Dunster Grange" „ „ „ „ Nil. „ 12 ss. "Coptic" „ „ „ „ Nil. „12 ss. "Otranto" „ „ Fumigated with hydrogen cyanide. Nil. „ 12 ss. "Tuscan Star" „ „ Fumigated with sulphur dioxide. Nil. „ 15 ss. "Port Denison" „ „ „ „ Nil. „ 16 ss. "Port Pirie" „ „ „ „ Nil. „ 17 ss. "London Exchange" „ „ „ „ 9 „ 17 ss. "Moreton Bay" „ „ „ „ 46 „ 21 ss. "Avelona Star" „ „ „ „ Nil. „ 22 ss. "Hardwicke Grange" „ „ „ „ Nil. „ 24 ss. "Ithaki" Bat Infested Fumigated with hydrogen cyanide and trapped. 8 (3 fum.) (5 trap) „ 26 ss. "Herminius" Owners' request for Certificate. Fumigated with sulphur dioxide. 15 „ 29 ss. "Napier Star" „ „ Fumigated with hydrogen cyanide. Nil. May 4 ss. "Marquesa" „ „ Fumigated with sulphur dioxide. Nil. „ 4 ss. "Avila Star" „ „ „ „ Nil. „ 10 ss. "Botorua" „ „ Fumigated with hydrogen cyanide. 3 „ 12 ss. "Ai'ric Star" „ „ Fumigated with sulphur dioxide. Nil. „14 ss. "Hobsons Bay" „ „ „ „ Nil. „ 15 ss. "Mamilius" „ „ „ „ 41 „ 16 ss. "Sutherland Grange" „ „ „ „ Nil. „ 17 ss. "El Argentino" „ „ „ „ Nil. „ 21 ss. "Bemuera" „ „ Fumigated with hydrogen cyanide. Nil. „ 21 ss. "Almeda Star" „ „ Fumigated with sulphur dioxide. Nil. „ 21 ss. "Borda" Bat Infested „ „ 18 „ 22 ss. "Port Caroline" Owners' request for Certificate. „ „ Nil. „ 24 ss. "Campeador" Bat Infested Fumigated with hydrogen cyanide. 18 „ 24 ss. "Balranald" Owners' request for Certificate. Fumigated with sulphur dioxide. 72 „ 24 ss. "Port Melbourne" „ „ „ „ 35 „ 26 ss. "Stuartstar" „ „ „ „ Nil. 72 Deratisation Certificates—continued. Date. 1930. Name of Vessel. Reason for Deratisation. Action taken. No. of Ra.ts reported found dead after Fumigation or Trapping. May 27 ss. "Barracoo" Rat Infested Fumigated with sulphur dioxide and trapped. 21 (10 fum.) (11 trap) „ 28 ss. "Eoyal Star" Owner's request for Certificate. Fumigated with sulphur dioxide. 6 „ 29 ss. "Jamaica Producer" „ „ Fumigated with hydrogen cyanide. 2 June 2 ss. "Rodney Star" „ „ Fumigated with sulphur dioxide. Nil. „ 2 ss. "Upwey Grange" „ „ „ „ 2 „ 3 ss. "Port Bowen" „ „ „ „ Nil. „ 6 ss. "Maryland" „ „ „ „ 81 „ 7 ss. "Port Alma" „ „ „ „ Nil. „ 7 ss. "Andalucia Star" „ „ „ „ Nil. „ 13 ss. "Esperance Bay" „ „ „ „ Nil. „ 14 ss. "Rangitiki" „ „ Fumigated with hydrogen cyanide. 1 „ 14 ss. "Fordsdale" „ „ Fumigated with sulphur dioxide. Nil. „ 16 ss. "Tuscan Star" „ „ „ „ Nil. „ 21 ss. "Somerset" „ „ „ „ Nil. „ 23 ss. "Port Hobart" „ „ „ „ Nil. „ 25 ss. "Ramon" Rat Infested „ „ Not known. ,, 27 ss. "Bisley" „ „ „ „ Not known. „ 21 ss. "Kaisar-I-Hind" „ „ Fumigated with hydrogen cyanide and trapping. (7 trap) (37 fum.) (88 mice) „ 25 ss. "Baltonia" Owners' request for Certificate. Fumigated with hydrogen cyanide. Nil. „ 27 ss. "Duquesa" „ „ Fumigated with sulphur dioxide. Nil. „ 28 ss. "Port Auckland" „ „ „ „ Nil. „ 28 ss. "Port Napier" „ „ „ „ Nil. Julv 3 ss. "Teal" Rat Infested „ „ 54 „ 8 ss. "Jervis Bay" Owners' request for Certificate. „ „ Nil. „ 4 ss. "Ruapehu" „ „ Fumigated with hydrogen cyanide. Nil. „ 6 ss. "Avila Star" „ „ Fumigated with sulphur dioxide. Nil. „ 7 ss. "Lapwing" Rat Infested „ „ 102 „ 10 ss. "Trojan Star" Owners' request for Certificate. „ „ Nil. „ 12 ss. "Taranaki" „ „ „ „ Nil. „ 15 ss. "Dunster Grange" „ „ „ „ Nil. 15 ss. "Afric Star" „ „ „ „ Nil. 17 ss. "Seamew" Rat Infested „ „ 27 „ 18 ss. "Fulham" „ „ „ 268 „ 18 ss. "Baronesa" Owners' request for Certificate. „ „ Nil. „ 20 ss. "Almeda Star" „ „ „ „ Nil. „ 22 ss. "Ranchi" Rat Infested Trapping 54 „ 23 ss. "Baltavia" Owners' request for Certificate. Fumigated with hydrogen cyanide. Nil. „ 23 ss. "Warszawa" „ „ Fumigated with sulphur dioxide. 37 ,, 25 ss. "Northborough" Rat Infested „ „ 73 „ 26 ss. "Sultan Star" Owners' request for Certificate. „ „ Nil. „ 26 ss. "Largs Bay" „ „ „ „ 1 „ 26 ss. "Ruahine" „ „ Fumigated with hydrogen cyanide. Nil. „ 30 ss. "Georgios G." Rat Infested Fumigated with sulphur dioxide. 149 „ 31 ss. "Timios Stavros" „ 103 Aug. 2 ss. "Rodney Star" Owners' request for Certificate. Fumigated with sulphur dioxide. Nil. „ 2 ss. "Stuart Star" „ „ „ „ Nil. „ 8 ss. "Port Nicholson" „ „ „ „ Nil. 73 Deratisation Certificates—continued. Date. 1930. Name of Vessel. Reason for Deratisation. Action taken. No. of Rata reported found dead after Fumigating or Trapping. Aug. 9 ss. "Bangitata" Owners' request for Certificate. Fumigated with hydrogen cyanide. Nil. „10 ss. "Andalucia Star" „ „ Fumigated with sulphur dioxide. Nil. „ 11 ss. "Hardwicke Grange" „ „ „ „ Nil. „ 11 ss. "Port Sydney" „ „ „ „ Nil. „ 12 ss. "Slotlaan" Bat Infested „ „ Ill „13 ss. "Serbino" „ Fumigated with sulphur dioxide and trapping. 35 (22 fum.) (13 trap) „ 16 ss. "Mahia" Owners' request for Certificate. Fumigated with sulphur dioxide. 20 ' „ 18 ss. "Port Adelaide" „ „ „ „ Nil. „ 21 ss. "Auk" Bat Infested „ „ 86 „ 22 ss. "El Argentino" Owners' request for Certificate. „ „ 2 „ 23 ss. "Avelona Star" „ „ „ „ Nil. „ 25 ss. "Moreton Bay" „ „ „ „ 5 „ 30 ss. "Tuscan Star" „ „ „ „ Nil. Sept. 3 ss. "Marquesa" „ „ „ „ Nil. „6 ss. "Bangitane" „ „ Fumigated with hydrogen cyanide. Nil. „ 11 ss. "Inanda" „ „ „ „ (1 mouse) „ 13 ss. "Turakina" „ „ „ „ 10 „ 13 ss. "Maimoa" „ „ Fumigated with sulphur dioxide. Nil. „13 ss. "London Citizen" „ „ „ „ 18 „ 13 ss. "Oronsay" „ „ Fumigated with hydrogen cyanide. Nil. „ 13 ss. "Maloja" Bat Infested Fumigated with sulphur dioxide. 17 „ 16 ss. "Missouri" Owners' request for Certificate. „ „ 35 „ 19 ss. "Karamea" „ „ „ „ Nil. „ 19 ss. "Upwey Grange" „ „ „ „ Nil. „ 19 ss. "Port Pirie" „ „ „ „ Nil. „ 20 ss. "Ferndale" „ „ „ „ Nil. „ 20 ss. "Hobsons Bay" „ „ „ „ 5 Oct. 1 ss. "Botorua" „ „ Fumigated with hydrogen cyanide. 3 „ 2-14 ss. "Pikepool" Bat Infestation Trapping 18 „3 ss. "Princesa" Owners' request for Certificate. Fumigated with sulphur dioxide. Nil. „ 4 ss. "Ingoma" „ „ Fumigated with hydrogen cyanide and trapping. 44 (37 fum.) ( 7 trap) „ 4 ss. "Orama" „ „ Fumigated with hydrogen cyanide. Nil. „ 4 ss. "Llandaff Castle" Bat Infestation Fumigated with hydrogen cyanide and trapping. 14 (13 fum.) (1 trap) „ 8 ss. "Cygnus" „ Fumigated with sulphur dioxide. 58 „ 11 ss. "Orford" Owners' request for Certificate. Fumigated with hydrogen cyanide. Nil. „ 15 ss. "Bemuera" „ „ Nil. „ 15 ss. " Esperance Bay " „ „ Fumigated with sulphur dioxide. Nil. ... 17 ss. "Dunster Grange " „ „ „ „ Nil. „ 18 ss. "Limerick" „ „ Fumigated with hydrogen cyanide. Nil. „ 21 ss. "Duquesa" „ „ Fumigated with sulphur dioxide. Nil. „ 25 ss. "Bendigo" Bat Infested „ „ 44 Nov. 1 ss. "Bangitiki" Owners' request for Certificate. Fumigated with hydrogen cyanide. Nil. „ 1 ss. "Otranto" „ „ „ „ Nil. „ 1 ss. "Guildford Castle" „ „ „ „ 12 74 Deratisation Certificates—continued. Date. 1930. Name of Vessel. Reason for Deratisation. Action taken. No. of Eats reported found dead after Fumigating or Trapping. Nov. 4 ss. "Baronesa" Owners' request for Certificate. Fumigated with sulphur dioxide. 2 „ 6 ss. "Ungheria" Bat Infested „ „ 161 „ 8 ss. "Bein " „ „ 63 „ 12 ss. "Jamaica Merchant" Owners' request for Certificate. „ „ 26 „ 12 ss. "Hardwicke Grange" „ „ „ „ Nil. „ 15 ss. "Jervis Bay" „ „ „ „ Nil. „ 19 ss. "Cocosleaf" Bat Infested „ „ 42 „ 25 ss. " Scottish Maiden" Owners' request for Certificate. Fumigated with hydrogen cyanide. Nil. „ 27 ss. "El Argentino" „ „ Fumigated with sulphur dioxide. Nil. „ 28 ss. " Largs Bay" „ „ „ „ 10 „ 29 ss. "Arandora Star" „ „ Fumigated with hydrogen cyanide. Nil. „ 29 ss. "Ormonde" „ „ „ „ 1 „ 29 ss. "Port Caroline" „ „ Fumigated with sulphur dioxide. Nil. Dec. 1 ss. "Marquesa" „ „ „ „ Nil. „ 4 ss. "Malwa" Bat Infested „ „ 44 „ 4-17 ss. "Navigator" „ „ Trapping 17 „ 4 ss. "Idomeneus" Owner's request for Certificate. Fumigated with hydrogen cyanide. Nil. „ 5 ss. "Cambridge" „ „ „ „ Nil. 5 ss. "Buapehu" „ „ „ „ Nil. „ 5 ss. " Jamaica Planter" Bat infested „ „ 49 „ 6 ss. "Ruahine" Owners' request for Certificate. „ „ Nil. „ 9 ss. "Mississippi" „ „ Fumigated with sulphur dioxide. Nil. „ 12 ss. "Upwey Grange" „ „ „ „ Nil. „ 12 ss. "Port Curtis" „ „ „ „ Nil. „ 12 ss. "Orsova" „ „ Fumigated with hydrogen cyanide. Nil. „ 13 ss. "Caronia" „ „ Fumigated with sulphur dioxide. Nil. „ 13 ss. "Llandilo" Bat Infested „ „ 39 „ 20 ss. "Jamaica Settler" „ „ Fumigated with hydrogencyanide. 52 „ 27 ss. "Moreton Bay" Owners' request for Certificate. Fumigated with sulphur dioxide. 18 „ 29 ss. "Orontes" „ „ Fumigated with hydrogen cyanide. Nil. „ 29 ss. "Bangitata" „ „ „ „ Nil. „ 29 ss. "Princesa" „ „ Fumigated with sulphur dioxide. Nil. Deratisation Exemption Certificates.—The number issued during the year was 999. 75 APPENDIX XXX. Fumigation of Second-hand Bags. For the purpose of exportation the undermentioned bales of Second-hand Bags were fumigated under the supervision of the Port Sanitary Authority and Certificates issued in respect thereof:— Date Fumigatec Contained in. Lying at. Quantity. 1930. Jan. 20 Ba. "Caithness" Dundee Wharf 40 bales. Feb 11 „ „ „ 40 „ „ 18 Ba. "Sword" De[tfprd Creek 40 „ Mar. 10 Ba. "Sutherland" Dundee Wharf 40 „ „ 19 Ba. "China" Caledonian Wharf 112 ., „ 27 Ba. "Boxburgh" Dundee Wharf 40 „ April 2 Ba. "London" Caledonian Wharf 125 „ „ 16 Ba. "Inflexible" East India Dock ... 50 ., „ 16 Ba. " Pike " Caledonian Wharf 125 „ May 1 Ba. "Musketeer" „ „ 125 .. „ 16 Ba. "Era" „ „ 37 „ June 5 Ba. "Banff" Dundee Wharf 24„ „ 26 Aug. 1 Ba. "Boxburgh" Fenchurch Wharf 16 „ Ba. "Banff" „ „ 125 „ „ 15 Ba. "Mayfield " Silvertown 50 „ „ 15 Ba. "Peeble" Fenchurch Wharf 29 „ Sept. 1 Ba. "Kestrel" Silvertown 25 „ „ 1 Ba. "Kincardine" Fenchurch Wharf 82 „ „2 >9 Ba. "Boxburgh" „ „ 50 „ „ 3 Ba. "Wasp" Blackwall 33 „ „ 24 Ba. "Italy" „ „ 33 ., „ 24 Ba. "Moselle" West India Dock 31 „ „ 26 Ba. "Dart" Blackwall Wharf 50„ „ 29 Ba. "Spear" Caledonian Wharf 20 „ „ 30 Ba. "Peebles" Fenchurch Wharf 50 „ Oct. 9 Ba. "London" Caledonian Wharf 100 „ „ 10 Ba. "Zulu" Silvertown 51„ „ 11 Ba. "London" Caledonian Wharf 15 „ „ 11 Ba. "Peebles" Fenchurch 'Wharf 30 „ „ 11 Ba. "Boxbury" „ „ 33 „ „ 24 Ba. "France" Silvertown 50 „ „ 29 Ba. "Milton" Fenchurch Wharf 40 „ „ 29 Ba. "Cutlass" Caledonian Wharf 15 „ „ 29 Ba. "Hackney" Empire Wharf 20 „ Nov. 5 Ba. "Dumfries" Fenchurch Wharf 40 „ „ io Ba. "Dirk" Caledonian Wharf 82 „ , 15 "Boxburgh" Fenchurch Wharf 40 „ „ 17 " Pike" Caledonian Wharf 15 „ „ 18 "Peebles" Fenchurch Wharf 46 „ „ 26 "India" Caledonian Wharf 125 „ Dec. 1 Ba. "Berwick" Fenchurch Wharf 38 „ „ 15 Ba. "Cranley" Silvertown 68 „ For the purpose of exportation the undermentioned goods were subjected to steam disinfection under the supervision of the Port Sanitary Authority:— Date Disinfected. 1930. Nov. 13 3 bales Washed Eags (Engine Wipers). 76 APPENDIX XXXI.—General Summary, and Analysis, of the Sanitary Inspections of Vessels, &c., in the Port of London, for the year ended 31st December, 1930. Foreign. Coastwise. Inland Navigation. Shore Premises. |Sicfe Seamenreferred toHospital Water Barges. Steam. Sail. Steam. Sail. Steam. Sail. Lighters (uninhabited) CanalBoats Inspected. Defective. To be Cleaned. Inspected. Defective. To be uieanea. | Inspected. Defective. To be Cleaned. Inspected. Defective. To be Cleaned. Inspected. Defective. To be Cleaned. Inspected. Defective. To be Cleaned. Inspected. Defective. To be Cleaned. Inspected. Defective. To be Cleaned. Inspected. Defective. To be Cleaned. No. in District in good condition 31st December, 1930 New Barges. Condemned. Use discontinued Temporarily. Previously withdrawn and since resumed work. No. in District 31st December, L930. 12,359 328 1,492 130 — - 1 1,387 1 114 120 130 4 1 | 159 3 1 5 1,069 1 21 7 383 5 35 147 21 10 1 5,338 156 966 — 20 — 4 — — 16 Inspections. Docks and River. No. Nationalities. No. Total Inspections from 1st January to 31st December. 1930:— St. Katharine 428 American 239 London 977 Austrian 3 BRITISH 10,422 Foreign 12,489 Regent's Canal 541 Belgian 364 Dutch 955 Coastwise 1.517 Millwall 1,097 Danish 362 Inland Navigation 1,758 West India 745 Danzig Free State 11 Esthonian 50 Premises on shore 5,338 Poplar 212 French 194 Finnish 241 Total 21,102 East India 504 German 882 Victoria 1,225 Greek 137 Royal Albert 1,238 Hungarian 2 Italian 128 King George V 1,031 Icelandic 2 Cleansing of Crew's Japanese 157 ters, &c.:— Surrey Commercial 1,505 Latvian 49 Total No. of Vessels from 1st January to 31st December, 1930 Tilbury 1,065 Lithuanian 3 Norwegian and Swedish 1,354 Gravesend District — Polish 55 Portuguese 24 1,670 River—*Upper District 2,328 Russian 105 „ *Middle „ 945 Roumanian 6 Spanish 12 Number of Vessels inspected: „ *Lower „ 1,923 Yugo-Slavakian 7 In the Launches— ,, Medway "Joseph White" 1,923 Total Vessels 15,764 15,764 "James Howell" " George Bnggs ... 3.273 Shore Premises 5,338 Shore Premises 5,338 Total ... 5,196 Total 21,102 Total 21,102 In the Docks, &c. 15,906 *Upper District extends from Greenwich to Teddington. Total ... 21,102 *Middle „ „ „ „ Erith. *Lower „ „ „ Erith to outer limits of the Port of London. 1921. 1922. 1923. 1924. 1925. 1926. 1927. 1928. 1929. 1930. Y early Average for the 10 years ending 31st Dec., 1930. Total number of Inspections of vessels from— "Foreign" 11,076 12,601 13,040 13,634 12,187 12,239 11,806 12,345 12,186 12,48< 12,360-3 " Coastwise," " Inland Navigation," and other Inspections 14,916 13,291 11,932 10,133 11,397 10,215 11,427 9,947 8,880 8,615 11,075-1 Total 25,992 25,892 24,972 23,767 23,584 22,454 23,233 22,292 21,06f 21,101 23,435-4 77 APPENDIX XXXII. NUMBER OF NUISANCES ON VESSELS REPORTED AND DEALT WITH during the year ended 31st December, 1930. description of nuisances. January. February. March. April. May. June. July. August. September. October. November. December. Totals. Smoke Nuisances :— Number of complaints received 2 2 I 2 4 I 1 3 1 - 17 Number of recurrences reported - - - - - - - - - - - - - Offensive Cargoes (Bye-laws):— Number of Infringements reported — 1 — — — 1 — - — — — — 2 Structural and other Defects :— Ventilation 8 12 14 4 14 13 13 6 12 11 n 6 124 Lighting 6 17 15 7 12 4 4 4 9 14 13 4 109 Heating 6 14 6 8 11 4 1 5 9 12 19 4 99 Bare iron in crew's quarters 4 3 2 1 2 1 1 1 4 3 1 2 25 Leaky decks, hawse-pipes, cable casings. &c 13 13 21 23 15 7 13 5 3 15 16 9 153 Defective bulkheads and floors 9 7 6 8 11 10 9 3 11 6 8 2 90 Sanitary conveniences 4 4 7 3 5 8 3 7 7 3 6 1 58 Ship's gear or stores stowed in crew's quarters 2 1 — 1 1 — 2 — — 2 — 1 10 Foul bilges and peaks — — — — — — — — — — — — Storage of drinking water (dirty or defective tanks) - — — - - 1 — — — — 1 — 2 Dirty quarters 145 143 160 137 154 139 109 112 14S 144 149 130 1,670 Verminous quarters 3 4 3 2 4 4 0 5 7 4 5 3 49 Accumulation of offensive matter 1 1 2 — 4 3 — — 1 — — 1 13 Miscellaneous Nuisances 19 9 16 13 13 5 20 3 4 5 6 2 115 Totals 222 231 253 209 250 201 181 151 21S 220 235 165 2,536 Total number of vessels on which structural alterations were ordered 44 41 43 27 44 37 32 20 40 36 40 17 421 Total number of vessels on which structural alterations were reported as carried out 21 31 17 35 20 19 21 17 13 43 11 33 281 (Includes Orders made in previous years and reported carried out during 1930.) NUMBER OF NUISANCES IN THE RIVER REPORTED AND DEALT WITH during the year ended 31st December, 1930. Offensive accumulation on Foreshore - - - - 1 - - - 1 - - - 2 Totals — — — — 1 — — — 1 — — — 2 78 APPENDIX XXXIII. NUMBER OF NUISANCES ON SHORE PREMISES REPORTED AND DEALT WITH during the year ended 31st December, 1980. description of nuisances. January. February. March. April. May. June. July. August. September. October. November. December. Totals. Smoke Nuisances:— Number of complaints received — — — 1 — — — — — — — — 1 Number of recurrences reported - - - - - - - - - - - — — Structural and other Defects:— - - - - - - - - - - - - - Ventilation - - - - - - - - 1 - - - 1 Lighting - - - - - - - - - - - - - Heating - - - - - - - - - - - - - Dilapidations — — — 2 1 3 1 3 8 — — — 18 Sanitary Conveniences 4 — — 2 5 — 3 — 6 2 — 1 23 Water Supply - - - - - - - - - - - - - Dirty Premises 68 80 83 90 79 55 76 72 98 100 84 81 966 Accumulation of Offensive Matter 1 —- 3 3 4 1 1 13 Drainage 4 1 — — 1 2 — 6 3 2 4 1 24 Foul Cesspits, Latrines, &c - - - - - - - - - - - - - Miscellaneous Nuisances — 4 1 1 7 1 — 1 1 1 — 2 19 Totals 77 85 87 99 97 62 81 82 117 105 io CO GO GO 1065 Number of shore premises on which structural alterations were ordered 7 5 4 9 16 6 5 6 8 4 4 3 77 Number of shore premises on which structural alterations were reported as carried out 4 3 5 10 2 3 3 4 5 7 4 3 53 SUMMARY. Smoke. Structural. Offensive Cargoes. Drainage, Sewage, &c. Miscellaneous. Dirty Conditions Totals. Number of Nuisances reported— (a) On Vessels 17 332 2 — 515 1,670 2,536 (b) On Shore 1 1 — 24 73 966 1,065 (c) On the River — — — — 2 — 2 Totals 18 333 2 24 590 2,636 3,603 Number of written Intimations— (a) On Vessels 17 126 2 - 102 - 247 (b) On Shore 1 1 — 4 17 — 23 (c) On the River — — — — — — — Totals 18 127 2 4 119 - 270 Number of Statutory Notices— (a) On Vessels 17 — — — 17 (b) On Shore 1 — — 1 (c) On the River — — — — — — — Totals 18 — — — — — 18 79 APPENDIX XXXIV.—Description of Meat Destroyed. Year. Beef. Mutton and Lamb. Veal, Pork, Offal. Tinned. Smoked and Salted, &c. Total. Tons. cwts. qrs. lbs. Tons. cwts. qrs lbs. Tons. cwts. qrs. lbs. Tons cwts. qrs. lbs. Tons. cwts. qrs. lbs. Tons. cwts. qrs. lbs. 1921 212 9 3 1 267 6 2 3 Pork and Veal— 12 16 0 24 0 11 1 0 634 14 3 0 51 17 3 8 Offal— 89 13 0 20 1922 51 5 0 25 52 11 2 2 Pork and Veal— 14 12 2 5 0 4 2 5 139 6 2 14 7 18 1 21 Offal— 12 14 1 12 1923 30 18 1 2 84 16 3 23 Pork and Veal— 9 14 1 9 0 0 3 10 146 17 0 11 1 18 3 17 Offal— 19 7 3 6 1924 141 8 2 17 13 11 1 5 Pork and Veal— 0 16 0 15 0 3 0 7 183 8 2 0 0 9 2 19 Offal- 26 19 2 21 1925 61 19 2 7 6 1 3 13 Pork and Veal— 1 15 1 6 0 9 0 9 109 4 2 24 4 2 0 18 Offal— 31 16 2 27 1926 51 10 3 25 44 19 3 26 Pork and Veal— 1 3 0 16 0 1 1 0 135 13 2 20 0 16 1 a Offal— 37 2 0 6 1927 311 12 0 2 263 4 1 13 Pork and Veal— 0 2 0 6 Nil. 605 12 2 16 3 9 2 8 Offal— 27 4 2 15 1928 7 1 0 3 155 18 3 6 Pork and Veal— 0 0 1 26 4 17 2 13 184 6 1 13 0 6 1 22 Offal— 16 1 3 27 1929 8 17 3 4 367 12 1 8 Pork and Veal— Nil. 0 15 3 27 391 16 3 27 0 13 2 12 Offal— 13 17 1 4 1930 21 12 0 16 52 18 0 21 Pork and Veal— 0 4 1 27 1 0 2 27 95 17 2 4 1 10 0 25 Una!— 18 11 3 0 Total for ten years 901 15 1 18 1,309 1 3 8 366 12 2 11 41 4 2 22 8 4 1 14 2,626 18 3 17 80 APPENDIX XXXY.—New Buildings and Sanitary Works. Date Plans Date Work reported submitted. Works. as completed. LONDON DOCK— — A new double glazed brick urinal between Nos. 17 and 21, Warehouse at South Quay 28rd June, 1930. — A new standard convenience at the rear of No. 10 Warehouse September, 1930. — A new convenience consisting of three pedestal closets and a three-stall urinal and three washing basins at No. 10 Section Office 29th October, 1930. — A new convenience consisting of three pedestal closets and a six-stall urinal, and two trough closets (each with three seats) at East End of North Quay ... 29th October, 1930. SOUTH-WEST INDIA DOCK— —- A new convenience consisting of four private pedestal closets, eight public closets, and a six-stall urinal South of " E " Wood Department July, 1930. — A new convenience consisting of four private pedestal closets, eight public closets, and a six-stall urinal at East end of South side, South Dock July, 1930. July, 1930. A new convenience consisting of six public pedestal closets, four private pedestal closets, and a three-stall urinal South of " E " Wood Office August, 1930. August, 1930. A new convenience consisting of eight pedestal closets and a four-stall urinal for use of Office Staff at " E " Wood Department September, 1930. — A new convenience consisting of six public pedestal closets, four private pedestal closets, and a three-stall urinal South of "0" Warehouse — September. A new standard convenience for Lascars, South of " N " Warehouse — POPLAE DOCK— August. A new convenience consisting of three pedestal closets, replacing old iron trough closet at Great Western Railway Depot — SURREY COMMERCIAL DOCK— August. A new convenience consisting of a pedestal closet at No. 5 Shed, Greenland Dock 23rd August, 1930. — A new convenience consisting of two private pedestal closets, four public pedestal closets, and a four-stall urinal at " G " Shed, Acorn Yard 1st October, 1930. A new convenience consisting of two private pedestal closets, a two-stall urinal, and three washing basins fitted with hot and cold water taps for use of Office Staff at Port of London Authority's Office (Timber) Acorn Yard 30th September, 1930. ROYAL ALBERT DOCK— 14th May. Drainage in connection with the erection of Barclay's Bank on the North side of Dock at rear of Meat Sheds June, 1930. May. New convenience for use of Employees at Messrs. Barclay's Bank at rear of No. 33 Shed on the North side 1st July, 1930. APPENDIX XXXVI. DOCKS WITHIN THE JURISDICTION OF THE PORT OF LONDON SANITARY AUTHORITY. Docks. Water Area. Lineal Quayage. Acres. Yards. Miles. Yards. Regent's Canal 11 38 — 966 St. Katharine 10 488 — 1,654 London 34 4,460 3 119 Surrey Commercial 161 2,717 16 200 West India 97 3,957 4 1,134 East India 31 2,878 1 1,242 Millwall 35 3.217 2 155 Royal Victoria 95 1,772 5 1,479 Royal Albert 87 213 3 905 King George V 64 997 3 663 Tilbury 104 2,166 3 1,667 The River distance between the Western and Eastern limits of the Port is about 68½ miles. 81 APPENDIX XXXVII. POWERS. The work of the Port of London Sanitary Authority is carried out under the following Acts of Parliament and Statutory Eules and Orders:— Existing Acts and Orders applicable to the Port of London Sanitary Authority. CONSTITUTION OF THE AUTHORITY Public Health (London) Act, 1891. ASSIGNMENT OF POWERS. L.G.B. Order, Port Sanitary Authority Assignment of Powers, Port of London 25th March, 1892. L.G.B. Order, Port Sanitary Authority Assignment of Further Powers, Port of London 29th December, 1894. L.G.B. Order, Port Sanitary Authority Assignment of Powers, Port of London 30th June, 1898. S.R. & 0. 1922, No. 781. London Port Sanitary (Additional Powers) Order, 1922 18th July, 1922. S.R. & 0. 1923, No. 812. London Port Sanitary (Additional Powers) Order, 1923 16th July, 1923. ADMINISTRATION. Port Sanitary Administration and Medical Inspection of Aliens under the Aliens Order, 1920 (Grants in Aid) 14th July, 1920. Public Health (Officers) Act, 1921, City of London (Various Powers) Act, 1922. S.R & 0. 1926, No. 552. Sanitary Officers Order, 1926 27th May, 1926 INFECTIOUS DISEASE. Infectious Disease (Notification) Acts, 1889 to 1899. Public Health Act, 1896. Public Health (Ports) Act, 1896. S.R. & 0. 1907, No. 694. Regulations as to Cholera and Plague on Coasting Ships, 1907 9th September, 1907. S.R. & 0. 1907, No. 695. Regulations as to Cholera and Plague on Outward Bound Ships, 1907 9th September, 1907. S.R. & 0.1907, No. 710. Regulations as to Cholera, Yellow Fever and Plague Ships arriving from Foreign Ports, 1907 9th September, 1907. L.G.B. Order. Prevention of Epidemic Diseases Regulations as to Plague, Destruction of Rats, 1910 10th November, 1910. S.R & 0. 1912, No. 1226. Public Health (Cerebro-spinal Fever and Acute Poliomyelitis) Regulations, 1912 15th August, 1912. S.R. & 0. 1918, No. 67. Public Health (Notification of Infectious Diseases) Regulations, 1918 19th January, 1918. S.R. & 0. 1920, No. 1924. Port Sanitary Authorities (Infectious Diseases) Regulations, 1920 14th July, 1920. S.R. & 0. 1926, No. 972. Public Health (Notification of Puerperal Fever and Puerperal Pyrexia) Regulations, 1926 31st July, 1926. S.R. & 0. 1927, No. 1207. Infectious Diseases (London) Regulations, 1927. 22nd December, 1927. S.R. & 0. 1929, No. 830. The Public Health (Deratisation of Ships) 12th October, 1929. Regulations, 1929. S.R. & 0. 1930; No. 299. Parrots (Prohibition of Import) Regulations, 1930 24th April, 1930. 82 CANAL BOATS. Canal Boats Acts, 1877 and 1884. L.G.B. Order. Canal Boats Regulations 20th March, 1878. L.G.B. Order, Canal Boats (Registration Authorities) Order 7th June, 1887. L.G.B. Order, Canal Boats (Sale of Regulations) Order 26th July, 1887. S.R. & 0.1923, No. 451. The Canal Boats Order, 1922 10th July, 1922. S.R. & 0. 1925, No. 843. Canal Boats (Amendment) Regulations, 1925 9th June, 1925. FOOD. Public Health (Regulations as to Food) Act, 1907. S.R. & 0.1924, No. 1432. Public Health (Meat) Regulations, 1924 (Part IV.) 20th December, 1924. S.R. & 0.1925, No. 775 1926 No 1577 Public Health (Preservatives, &c., in Food) ' ( Regulations 1928 1927, No. 577 ) S.R. & 0. 1925, No. 273. Public Health (Imported Food) Regulations, 1925 23rd March, 1925. S.R. & 0. 1926, No. 820. Public Health (Imported Milk) Regulations, 1926 6th July, 1926. SHELLFISH. S.R. & 0. 1915, No. 125. Public Health (Shellfish) Regulations, 1915 16th February, 1915. RATS AND MICE. Rats and Mice (Destruction) Act, 1919. SMOKE ABATEMENT. Public Health (Smoke Abatement) Act, 1926. ABATEMENT OF NUISANCES and REMOVAL OF REFUSE. Public Health (London) Act, 1891. FERTILISERS AND FEEDING STUFFS. Fertilisers and Feeding Stuffs Act, 1926. S.R. & 0.1928, No. 421. Fertilisers and Feeding Stuffs Regulations, 1928 ... 23rd May, 1928. S.R. & 0. 1928; No. 439. Order appointing 1st July, 1928, as the date for the coming into operation of the Fertilisers and Feeding Stuffs Act, 1926 30th May, 1928. DANGEROUS DRUGS. S.R. & 0. 1923, No. 1095. Dangerous Drugs (No. 3) Regulations, 1923 10thSeptember, 1923. ALIENS. S.R. & 0. 1920, No. 448. The Aliens Order, 1920. BYE-LAWS. Bye-laws have been made by the Port of London Sanitary Authority:— 1. For preventing nuisances arising from barges or vessels carrying offensive cargoes. 2. For removing to hospital any person suffering from dangerous infectious disorders, and for keeping therein of such persons as long as may be deemed necessary. 3. With respect to Houseboats used for human habitation within the limits of the Port of London. 83 PORT OF LONDON SANITARY ADMINISTRATION ACCOUNT. REVENUE ACCOUNT for Year ended 31st March, 1931. Dr. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. Salaries—Medical Officer, Deputy and Assistants 5,815 13 8 Contribution from General Rate 14,267 0 0 Travelling Expenses—Ditto 56 12 7 Contribution from Ministry of Health 11,790 16 3 Salaries—Inspectors 4,889 19 11 Sundry Fees 140 9 2 Uniforms, Travelling Expenses—Inspectors 277 19 7 Proceeds, Sale of Unsound Food 306 15 3 Clerical Assistance:— Deratisation Receipts 2,424 9 0 Salaries 1,939 18 2 Miscellaneous Receipts 16 0 0 Other Expenses 46 17 2 Rent re Mooring Launch 7 10 0 Rat Searchers:— 1,986 15 4 Repayment by Hospital Patients 49 18 6 Salaries 1,088 10 0 Other Expenses 91 17 4 Provision and Maintenance of Hospital:— 1,179 17 4 Capital Expenditure 520 16 9 Rent, Rates, Taxes and Insurance 152 7 2 Furniture, Equipment and Renewals 85 8 2 Repairs 934 15 9 Heating, Lighting and Cleansing 291 4 10 Interest on Loans 257 14 6 Salaries—General 308 15 0 Nursing 484 9 5 Domestic 106 17 10 900 2 3 Cost of Food 264 8 11 Drugs and Medical Requisites 19 13 10 Uniforms 24 16 0 Miscellaneous 51 14 2 Expenses oe Launches:— 3,503 2 4 Wages 3,121 6 6 Uniforms 99 15 0 Upkeep and Running Expenses 1,057 14 3 Capital Expenditure 1,399 3 11 Interest on Loans 214 11 10 5,892 11 6 Laboratory Facilities, Chemical and Bacteriological Examinations 378 4 6 Examination and Analysis of Food 47 2 4 Disinfections 180 14 6 Office Expenses:— Rent, Rates, Water, Taxes and Insurance 158 19 1 Furniture and Equipment 26 4 6 Repairs 74 0 4 Lighting, Heating and Cleansing 125 3 11 Printing and Stationery 542 18 9 Postages, Telegrams, Telephones 249 15 5 1,177 2 0 Part Proceeds of Sale of Unsound Food returned to Consignees 258 1 8 Expenses of Delegates to Congresses 111 16 6 Miscellaneous 61 2 6 Legal Expenses 4 5 11 National Insurance 57 8 9 £25,878 10 11 Balance to Balance Sheet 3,124 7 3 Chamber of London, 9.Ht.h. Man. 1931. £29,002 18 2 £29,002 18 2 LONDON: Printed by Charles Skipper & East, 49, Great Tower Street, E.C. 3.