Name of Officer Nature of Appointment Date of Appointment Any other Appointment held LAUNCHES j.r. steen Navigator (Senior) March, 1926 w.s. stimson Navigator (i/c Woolwich Station) March, 1944 - c.r. simons Navigator (Deputy Senior Navigator) August, 1938 w.g.a. king Navigator September, 1939 — h.j. mason ditto August, 1946 — m.j. east ditto September, 1924 — s.j. crutchley, d.s.m. Engineer (Senior) June, 1939 — k. gittens Engineer (Deputy) Senior) January, 1955 - w. simmons Engineer May, 1955 — b. jacobs ditto April, 1956 — a.r.l. potter Deckhand July, 1945 — e.alewood ditto January, 1947 — g. cunningham ditto September, 1957 _ j.l. pay ditto April, 1956 — f.sandys Deckboy (acting deckhand) May, 1959 - p.rayner Deckboy November, 1960 — j. ballard ditto December, 1960 _ k.w. brooker ditto January, 1961 — s.k. hogwood ditto July, 1961 _ a. russell ditto August, 1961 — d.j. o'sullivan ditto March, 1962 — a.j. franklin ditto August, 1962 — a.r. burge Shipkeeper August, 1945 — l.c. parish ditto May, 1958 — r.h. simmons Shipkeeper/Deckhand November, 1960 — f.b. morris Steward (Part-time) October, 1957 — LAUNCHES - Date acquired "howard deighton" 1931 "frederick whittingham" 1934 "alfred robertson" 1938 "alfred poach" 1948 "humphrey morris" 1962 HULK - "hygeia" 1935 9 section ii AMOUNT OF SHIPPING ENTERING THE DISTRICT DURING THE YEAR TABLE B Ships from Number Net Tonnage Number Inspected Number of ships reported as having, or having had during the voyage, infectious disease on board. By the Port Medical Officer By the Port Health Inspector Foreign Ports 17,156 35,665,096 1,688 12,615 144 Coastwise 10,629 10,602,736 5 1,678 5 Total 27,785 46,267,832 1,693 14,293 149 section iii CHARACTER OF SHIPPING AND TRADE DURING THE YEAR TABLE C Passenger Traffic Number of Passengers — Inwards 89,685 Number of Passengers — Outwards 100,100 Cargo Traffic Principal Imports All types of produce and merchandise Principal Exports Principal Ports from which ships arrive. The Port of London trades with all parts of the world. section iv INLAND BARGE TRAFFIC Numbers and tonnage using the district and places served by the traffic. These barges are of all types and are registered annually with the Port of London Authority. They number approximately 7,000 and their tonnage is some 500,000. The traffic of these crafts extends throughout the length of the Port while a number of them are employed carrying goods and merchandise via the canals to all parts of the country. section v WATER SUPPLY 1. Source of supply for — (a) The District — No Change. (b) Shipping — No Change. 2. Reports of tests for contamination — No Change. 3. Precautions taken against contamination of hydrants and hosepipes — No Change. 4. Number and sanitary conditions of water boats and powers of control by the Authority — No Cha nge. Strict supervision has continued during the year and there has been no untoward occurrence involving the quality of the supply. There is a growing awareness among those engaged in handling the equipment and connecting the supply from hydrant to ship that drinking water is a precious commodity worthy of the highest respect and there is a growing adherence to the "Code of Practice" agreed between the purveyors and this Authority. Many more samples have been taken this year and the results indicate a high standard of quality. The owners of waterboats have continued to pay attention to hygiene in the conduct of their business and leave little to be desired in the storage and distribution of drinking water to ships. Attention has also been given to the two Deep Wells in the Sheerness Dockyard which has been vacated by the Admiralty and is used to a limited extent for merchant shipping. From the records of sampling and testing there is reason for growing satisfaction and both seafarers and dockworkers are assured of a clean and wholesome drinking water supply. 10 For the purpose of assessment and in comparison with standards acceptable to the Ministry of Housing and Local Government, the following grades have been adopted:— Physical Properties — Clear, Colourless, Odourless Quality Plate count per ml Coliforms per 100 ml Excellent Nil Nil Good < 100 Nil Satisfactory < 300 Nil Suspicious > 300 With < 5 Unsatisfactory > 300 With > 5 Unfit > 300 With > 5 including faecal coli Supplies from Waterboats— All samples drawn from waterboats were found to be of excellent quality. Distribution aboard ships— Of 137 samples drawn in the crew and passenger accommodation and galleys of ships:— 95 were excellent 24 were good 10 were satisfactory 4 were unsatisfactory, and 4 were unfit. Storage aboard ships— Of 6 samples drawn direct from ships' storage tanks:— 5 were excellent, and 1 was good. Port Installations— Of 49 samples drawn from dock offices, dock canteens, drinking fountains, etc.: — 48 were excellent, and 1 was satisfactory. Deep wells- Three samples were drawn from deep wells in Sheerness Dockyard, of which:— 2 were satisfactory, and 1 was unsatisfactory. River Thames passenger launches— Of 31 samples taken under the Food Hygiene (General) Regulations, I960, from storage tanks and galley and licenced bar taps in River Thames passenger launches:— 9 were excellent 6 were good 1 was satisfactory 7 were unsatisfactory, and 8 were unfit. FRESH WATER SAMPLE TOTALS AND PERCENTAGES 1962 Unfit Suspic. Unsat. Satis. Good Excell. Totals Hydrants 0 0 0 7 9 91 107 Stand Pipes 4 1 0 0 6 50 61 Hose Ends 1 0 1 3 27 149 181 Water Boats 0 0 0 0 0 22 22 5 1 1 10 42 312 371 Percentages 1.35 0.27 0.27 2.69 11.32 84.10 100 98.11 11 FRESH WATER SAMPLES - SUMMARY - 1962 HYDRANTS STAND PIPES DELIVERY HOSE ENDS TOTALS Dirty Unfit Suspic. Unsat. Satis. Good Excell. Dirty Unfit Suspic. Unsat. Satis. Good Excell. Dirty Unfit Suspic. Unsat. Satis. Good Excell. Victoria Dock 0 0 0 0 0 0 2 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 2 6 28 39 Royal Albert Dock 0 0 0 0 0 0 3 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 1 6 56 68 King George V Dock 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 7 20 28 Tilbury Dock 0 0 0 0 2 4 25 0 0 0 0 0 0 4 0 0 0 0 0 4 22 61 West India Docks 0 0 0 0 0 0 36 0 4 1 0 0 6 42 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 89 Surrey Com. Docks 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 11 11 Regents Canal Dock 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 2 London Dock 0 0 0 0 0 0 15 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 2 1 18 River Districts 0 0 0 0 5 0 6 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 7 19 Isle of Grain Area 0 0 0 0 0 5 3 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 2 3 14 TOTALS 0 0 0 0 7 9 91 0 4 1 0 0 6 50 0 1 0 1 3 27 149 349 TANKS HOSE ENDS Water Boats 0 0 0 0 0 0 15 0 0 0 0 0 0 7 22 GRAND TOTAL 371 section vi PUBLIC HEALTH (SHIPS) REGULATIONS, 1952/1961 1. List of Infected Areas (Regulation 6) — No change. 2. Radio Messages — No change. 3. Notification otherwise than by Radio (Regulation 14(1)(b)) — No change. 4. Mooring Stations (Regulations 22 to 30) — There has been considerable change in the use of the berths designated as Mooring Stations and it has been agreed with the Harbour Authority that the Mooring Stations appointed by the Medical Officer of Health in accordance with the provisions of Regulations 22 to 30 of The Public Health (Ships) Regulations, 1952 to 1961 shall be the most suitable berths available at the time. THE BOARDING MEDICAL OFFICER (With acknowledgements to "Scottish Public Services" — Jan. 1963) The duties of a Port Health Authority have steadily widened since the war, the latest additions being in relation to clean air and Commonwealth immigrants. At the same time the world wide incidence of quarantinable disease has greatly decreased, so that cases now arriving in our seaports are relatively few and far between. This has led port health authorities to consider the strength and deployment of their staff, and particularly to re-examine the methods by which they carry out the original quarantine responsibility. The common practice over many years has been to employ doctors to board, on arrival and often by launch, all vessels that were potential carriers of cases of plague, smallpox, cholera, typhus and yellow fever. (Relapsing fever is a comparatively recent addition.) Stringency of international rodent control, and improvements in preventive medicine and sanitation in endemic areas, allied with our geographical position, have now virtually reduced the danger for Britain to smallpox alone. Indeed the whole of Europe is now officially regarded as completely free from all quarantinable disease, and ships from European ports are largely exempt from Port Health Regulations. Some port health authorities have progressively modified their control measures. "On arrival" has become interpreted as after berthing. Doctors have been partially replaced by other staff, and routine inspections reduced to "sampling". In the seaports there have been, so far, no disastrous consequences. Why then does the Port of London continue with the "old fashioned" routine? Primarily because we believe that the prevention of the importation of disease is still a port health authority's most important function, and that the old proven practices still offer the most likely means of attaining this object, especially when operated with every modern means of communication and diagnosis. 12 There can be no doubt that when a ship has a case of smallpox, the earlier the port medical officer gets aboard the more probable the success of his control measures. So much so, that when a ship bound for London gives early notification of suspected smallpox it is the practice for the London control team to board the ship off Brixham in Devon. Failing this the ship is boarded as near to the entrance to the port as possible. To allow a ship with a declared case of infectious disease, that might be smallpox, to proceed into the heart of London would be taking an unjustifiable risk with the public health. Doctors cannot be entirely replaced by other staff for, smallpox apart, there are occasions when a port medical officer must go to a ship. The Public Health (Ships) Regulations, 19521961, state "The medical officer may, and if so requested by the master or required by the Minister shall, examine any person on board a ship on arrival or already in the district, when there are reasonable grounds for suspecting that the person is suffering from an infectious disease or has been exposed to infection." In relation to outward bound ships the same principle applies, but here a time limit of three hours is specified. To meet only the basic responsibilities mentioned it is necessary, in London, to have a launch capable of going to any part of the seaport at any time. It is also necessary to have, in a port as busy as the Port of London, at least one medical officer available at all times. Consideration of tide, the extent of the port and co-operation with Her Majesty's Customs, mean that for his availability to be effective the medical officer has to be on duty with the launch at Gravesend. Here is the inner "gateway" to the port —the point which all ships, except tankers, entering the port have to pass, and where the pilot is changed and the Customs issue pratique. That a doctor is the first representative of the port health authority to board an incoming ship has many advantages. Not the least of these is the establishment of mutual confidence, so that the master will always declare his cases in the knowledge that he will get a prompt decision, balanced by experience and precedent to take into consideration the needs of the public health, the patient and the ship. In addition to the boarding of incoming ships in the control of infectious disease, the medical officer on duty attends to the medical needs of patients in the port isolation hospital, and assists with the medical inspection of immigrants. With the staff and equipment ever present it is only natural that other services develop. Perhaps the most appreciated of these is in connection with accidents and emergencies,either arising in Gravesend Reach or in ships coming to that reach on passage in or out of the port. With all these activities there inevitably occasions when calls coincide, but we have no hesitation in giving absolute priority to infectious disease. DENTON HOSPITAL Although Denton Hospital nas Deen taken over oy the South East Metropolitan Regional Hospital Board under the National Health Services Act, the Port Health Authority continues to exercise, through the Senior and Assistant Port Medical Officers, the medical supervision of cases admitted to the hospital. The nursing and administrative control lies with the Dartford Hospital Management Committee. Consultant advice on difficult cases is available through the Physician-Superintendent of Joyce Green Hospital, Dartford, who whenever necessary transfers cases there for special investigation and treatment. The number of cases admitted to Denton Hospital in 1962 was as follows:— Chickenpox 13 Dysentery 1 Gastro Enteritis Pneumonia 1 Herpes Zoster 1 Malaria 3 Measles 9 Measles Contacts 2 Miscellaneous 4 Mumps 2 Primary Vaccination 1 Pneumonia 2 Rubella 1 Salmonella Infection 3 Smallpox 1 Smallpox contacts 3 Paratyphoid 1 Whooping Cough 1 49 Unsuccessful vaccination 47 96 13 section vii SMALLPOX 1. Name of Isolation Hospital to which smallpox cases are sent from the District. Long Reach Hospital is situated on the south bank of the River Thames about eight miles above Gravesend. The hospital consists of 10 ward blocks capable of accommodating 170 patients but, except in cases of emergency, only three ward blocks (2 of 20 beds and 1, a cubicle ward of 10 beds), total 50 beds, are kept available for immediate use. The hospital includes residential quarters for the staff and a laundry, although the administration and staffing is carried out from Joyce Green Hospital, Dartford. 2. Arrangements for transport of such cases to that hospital by ambulance giving the name of the Authority responsible for the ambulance and the vaccinal state of the ambulance crews. A case or cases of smallpox would be removed from the vessel by this Authority's Ambulance launch and conveyed ashore via the pontoon at Denton and from thence conveyed by road ambulance direct to Long Reach Hospital. The Port Health Authority would be responsible for the vaccinal state of their Ambula ice Launch crews, while the vaccinal state of the Road Ambulance personnel would be the concern of the South-East Metropolitan Regional Hospital Board under whose jurisdiction both Joyce Green and Long Reach Hospitals fall. 3. Names of smallpox consultants available. Dr. J.V. Armstrong Dr. H.S. Banks Dr. W.T.G. Boul Dr. W.J. Coughlan Dr. J.P. Marsden 4. Facilities for laboratory diagnosis of smallpox. Facilities are available at the Virus Laboratory at the Central Public Health Laboratory at Colindale. sectionVIII VENEREAL DISEASE Venereal Disease is not compulsorily notifiable to Medical Officers of Health but efforts are made both by the Boarding Medical Officers and the Port Health Inspectors to bring to the notice of seamen using the port the facilities available for free treatment and the importance of obtaining skilled treatment as early as possible. Should there be a known case, it is usually possible to arrange for the patient concerned to be taken at once to the nearest clinic of the Seamen's Hospital or other hospital in the vicinity of the ship. section ix CASES OF NOTIFIABLE AND OTHER INFECTIOUS DISEASES ON SHIPS TABLE D Category — Cases landed from ships from foreign ports Disease No. of cases during the year No. of ships concerned Passengers Crew Chickenpox 30 4 12 Dysentery 20 5 6 Enteric Fever — 2 2 Fever of Unknown Origin 1 3 4 Gastro-Enteritis - 4 4 German Measles - 5 2 Herpes Zoster 1 - 1 Infective Hepatitis 1 3 4 Influenza 2 1 2 Malaria 3 17 9 Measles 18 — 5 Miscellaneous 1 8 9 Mumps 3 6 9 Pneumonia 1 4 5 Pulmonary Tuberculosis 1 29 28 Scabies - 2 2 Scarlet Fever — 1 1 Smallpox 3 - 1 Typhoid - 4 3 Whooping Cough 2 — 2 Totals 87 98 111 14 TABLE D (Cntd.); Category — Cases which have occurred on ships from foreign ports but have been disposed of before arrival Disease No. of cases during the year No. of ships concerned Passengers Crew Chickenpox 22 5 16 Dysentery 2 1 3 Gastro-Enteritis 2 16 3 German Measles 6 2 5 Infective Hepatitis — 1 1 Influenza — 12 1 Leprosy - 1 2 Malaria 1 — 1 Measles 41 1 10 Miscellaneous 1 42 4 Mumps 10 1 4 Pneumonia 1 - 1 Pulmonary Tuberculosis - 3 3 Smallpox 1 1 2 Typhoid - 9 3 Totals 88 95 59 Cases landed from other ships Chickenpox - 1 1 German Measles — 1 1 Miscellaneous — 2 2 Pneumonia — 1 1 Totals - 5 5 SMALLPOX - S.S. "ORONSAY" The Deputy Port Medical Officer in his capacity as Medical Inspector of Commonwealth Immigrants boarded s.s. "Oronsay" at Plymouth on the 14th August. During the course of the voyage round to the London River, he visited an Indian child who was ill in his cabin. On examining this child, who was apparently suffering from chickenpox, he decided that there were certain symptoms which did not exclude the possibility of smallpox. The Senior Boarding Medical Officer made the following detailed report:— "History Concerns an Indian family resident in Ireland, the mother and children going to India on holiday a year ago. "30th July, 1962. Embarked in "Oronsay" at Bombay to return to Ireland via London. "P.M. Thursday 9th August. Youngest child aged 3 years vomited. "A.M. Friday 10th August. Seen by Ship's Surgeon. T.100. throat, ears, abdomen, chest, All N.A.D. "A.M. Saturday 11th August. Apyrexial N.A.D. "P.M. Saturday 11th August. T.103 a few spots (6) present left upper chest. Isolated spots rest of chest and back and right groin. Diagnosed Chickenpox. "Sunday 12th August. Apyrexial. Many more lesions on chest and now also lesions abdomen and face, few only on limbs. "Monday 13th August. Rash now profuse and present all over body including scalp and palms of hands. Still apyrexial. "Tuesday 14th August. Still further lesions now including soles of feet. T.100 in evening. Vesicles now present in mouth. "Vaccinal State Primary vaccination in Ireland one year ago. Mother describes development of typical primary reaction but scar is small. Vaccinations of two other children, boy 4 primary, and girl 11 revaccination, are of same size, on same site and this must be accepted as a successful vaccination. "Clinically The case is very atypical and full of contradictions. Vaccination scar has been mentioned. 15 "Distribution Whilst there are more to the upper than lower back, and more on chest than abdomen, there are more on the thighs than shins and more on upper arm than lower. Whilst there are numerous lesions on the palms of hands and soles of feet, there are also lesions in flexures. "Nature of Lesions The very clear history of cropping is not fully supported by the present state of the rash, the "early" lesions having been slow to develop and the later lesions quicker developing. Thus there is a rather uniform state of rash but still evidence of cropping. The lesions are very irregular in size, but are all sound. Some are quite superficial but others were "fleshy". The most worrying factors were the severity of the rash in a child of 3 and the approximate uniformity (size and shape) of the appearance of the lesions. Against this is the successful vaccination and the clear history of cropping. On balance it was decided to treat the case as one of chickenpox, but with the reservation that smallpox had to be eliminated. The family (mother plus 3) were admitted to Denton Hospital "Smallpox" block with all reasonable precautions at 11.30 a.m. on 15th August. A Smallpox Consultant was informed of the case and kindly examined the case in Denton Hospital at 12.30 p.m. on 15th August. He agreed with the opinion of the Deputy Port Medical Officer, the Senior Boarding Medical Officer and the Ship's Surgeon. Specimens were sent to the Central Public Health Laboratory at Colindale by messenger (2.18 p.m. train), 3 slides of fluid and scrapings. "At 7 p.m. Colindale reported that result was positive to Variola-Vaccinia group. " (1) The Smallpox Consultant was informed. The case was then treated as Smallpox and was transferred to Long Reach Hospital by L.C.C. Ambulance at 8.30 a.m. on 16th August. " (2) The Ministry of Health were informed. " (3) Mother and other 2 children were revaccinated. Staff available at Denton Hospital were revaccinated. " (4) Further Information The child patient's movements before embarkation were as follows:— 26.7.62 Left Home — Punjab. 26.7.62 — 28.7.62. Train to Bombay. (48 hrs.) 28.7.62 — 30.7.62. In Bombay. 30.7.62 Embarked. 11.8.62 Rash. Child was in cabin from Thursday 9th except for visit to Ship's Surgeon a.m. 10th and visits to lavatory. (Otherwise confined to cabin.) Other children coming and going and mother out of cabin after child asleep in evening. Only one visitor, a woman unknown, for 1 minute not near the child. All passengers were seen by the Deputy Port Medical Officer on 14th and only three declared were ill. All passengers reported as having valid International Certificate of Vaccination at time of embarkation. " Approximately 1,100 passengers, and 400 members of the crew, had of course disembarked and proceeded to their destinations, some of which were out of this country in for instance Paris, Ireland the the United States. It was, however, understood that all these passengers and crew were in possession of valid Vaccination Certificates. By the last post out of London on the 16th August, communications had been sent to the Medical Officers of Health of the appropriate local authorities in this country in respect of every passenger and member of the crew who had disembarked at Tilbury, informing him of the circumstances. The Ministry of Health was at the same time informed of the names and destinations of those persons who had left the country and proceeded abroad. The Medical Officer of Health for Plymouth was informed of the circumstances as 60 passengers had disembarked at that Port. The majority of these passengers and crew were traced and placed under surveillance for 16 clear days from the date of removal of the patient and his family to Denton Hospital. This period was completed by the 1st September and no illness in any of those under surveillance has been reported to the Ministry of Health. 16 On the 3rd September the Ministry of Health stated that the patient's brother and sister, who were still in Long Reach Hospital, were regarded clinically to be suffering from highly modified smallpox, and in the boy's case, that this had been virologically confirmed. They, however, had also been in isolation since the 15th August, so there was no danger that they had infected anybody. SMALLPOX - s.s. "ORION" Reports were received that s.s. "ORION" (Australia — London) due to dock at Tilbury on 29th October, landed a Malayan passenger at Suez after diagnosis of modified smallpox. The passenger boarded at Singapore on 3rd October and at Aden on 14th October was diagnosed as suffering from Chickenpox, the Port Medical authorities at Suez later diagnosing modified Smallpox on 18th October. All passengers and crew were vaccinated or re-vaccinated on 18th October. The ship was placed in quarantine upon arrival at Naples and passengers desiring to land were refused permission to do so, later disembarking with other passengers at Marseilles. Four members of the administrative staff, together with the two Medical Inspectors under the Commonwealth: Immigration Act travelled to Plymouth on Saturday, 28th October and boarded s.s. "ORION" on 29th. The addresses at which the 1,100 passengers and 663 crew would be staying for the fourteen days after disembarkation were taken during the voyage to Tilbury where she berthed at 10 a.m. on 29th October and all names and addresses had been sent to the Medical Officers of Health of the areas concerned by 7 p.m. SUSPECTED SMALLPOX -s.s. "PACHECO" A message was received that a member of the crew of the s.s. "PACHECO" was removed to hospital at Tarrogona on 22nd October as a case of suspected smallpox. All members of the crew — there were no passengers — were vaccinated at Valencia on 25th October. ; Instructions were given for the ship on arrival in the Thames to anchor at Higham Bight, below Gravesend, pending medical clearance. The ship arrived at 9 p.m. on 1st November and was boarded by the Boarding Medical Officer and a Port Health Inspector. The crew were inspected and found to be well; medical clearance was given at 1 a.m. on 2nd November. The ship berthed in London Dock where necessary disinfection was carried out. Names and addresses of members of the crew who were going on leave were forwarded to district Medical Officers of Health on the same day. Those not leaving the ship were kept under surveillance on board. The ship sailed from London on 6th November. There were no more cases. section x OBSERVATIONS ON THE OCCURRENCE OF MALARIA ON SHIPS Twenty-one cases of Malaria (seventeen seamen and four passengers) were reported on ships during the year under review. This compares with ten cases in 1961. One passenger and two seamen were well on arrival, three passengers and fourteen seamen were admitted to hospital and one seaman was allowed to proceed home. A notice giving advice on the Chief Precautions and Treatment of Malaria is issued by the Ministry of Transport and should be on board every British ship. section xi MEASURES TAKEN AGAINST SHIPS INFECTED OR SUSPECTED OF PLAGUE The Fourth Schedule to the Public Health (Ships) Regulations, 1952 to 61, under the heading "Additional measures in respect to the quarantinable diseases" — Part I — Plague, reads as follows: — "(1) The Medical Officer may — (a) require any suspect on board to be disinsected and place him under surveillance, the period of surveillance being reckoned from the date of arrival of the ship; 17 (b) require the disinsecting and, if necessary, disinfection of the baggage of any infected person or suspect, and of any other article on board and any part of the ship which the medical officer considers to be contaminated. (2) If there is rodent plague on board, the medical officer shall require the ship to be deratted in a manner to be determined by him, but without prejudice to the generality of this requirement the following special provisions shall apply to any such deratting — (a) the deratting shall be carried out as soon as the holds have been emptied; (b) one or more preliminary derattings of the ship with the cargo in situ, or during its unloading, may be carried out to prevent the escape of infected rodents; (c) if the complete destruction of rodents cannot be secured because only part of the cargo is due to be unloaded, a ship shall not be prevented from unloading that part, but the medical officer may apply any measure which he considers necessary to prevent the escape of infected rodents. " Plague being primarily a disease of rats all vessels are inspected immediately on arrival at their berths in the docks and river for the presence of any mortality among the rats on board which is not attributable to any known cause, such as trapping, poisoning, etc. Incidentally one of the "Health Questions" on page 1 of the "Maritime Declaration of Health" requires the Master to answer "Yes or No" to the question "Has plague occurred or been suspected amongst the rats or mice on board during the voyage, or has there been an abnormal mortality among them?" Any dead rats are immediately sent to the Central Public Health Laboratory at Colindale for examination for bacillus pestis, each rat being accompanied by a label on which is given precise information as to where the rat was found in order to arrive at a focus of infection should the examination prove positive. The information is, of course, far more vital when the rat has been found ashore than when found on board a ship. In the event of a positive result the "additional measures" referred to above would be put into operation — the discharge of the cargo would be promptly stopped and arrangements made for the vessel to be fumigated throughout with hydrogen cyanide, with the cargo in situ, the vessel being moved to an approved mooring. Following the initial fumigation and collection of dead rats resulting therefrom, further samples of such rats would be submitted for examination and the discharge of cargo would be permitted under observation. The destination of the cargo would be forwarded to the Medical Officer of Health of the district to which it was proceeding, together with an exaplanatory note. If any of the cargo had already been discharged overside into lighters before the discovery of plague infection, the lighters would be fumigated immediately. On completion of the discharge of cargo frorr the vessel a second fumigation would be carried out, again using hydrogen cyanide, to destroy the residual rat population, if any. MOSQUITO CONTROL AT THE ISLE OF GRAIN Operational control has been vigorously carried out within the perimeter of the B.P. Refinery during the breeding period from March until October, actual spraying commencing in late March. The area under control comprises 1,200 acres and includes marshy stretches with pools dispersed around the perimeter particularly, providing ideal breeding grounds if not properly dealt with. Once again Dieldrin has been applied for larvicidal treatment. The relatively dry conditions enabled the operator to maintain a three week cycle of the whole area from the start. Weekly meetings with the operator were conducted when difficulties and progress were discussed. During the season, a representative of the Malaria Reference Laboratory visited the Refinery. He inspected the control sites and expressed satisfaction with the operational progress, declaring that he considered the anopheline species had been eliminated. Apparently this success is not entirely due to the annual spraying, a significant contribution having been made by the absence of the piggeries which, hitherto, provided sites for hibernation and a blood meal during the cold weather. The commonest species discovered in order of their appearance were Aedes detritus, Aedes caspius, Theobaldia annulate and Culex Pipiens. No complaints were received from Marine personnel or site employees about mosquitos. section xii MEASURES AGAINST RODENTS IN SHIPS FROM FOREIGN PORTS (1) Procedure for inspection of ships for rats The Port Health Authority employs sixteen Rodent Operatives working in conjunction with and under the supervision of the Port Health Inspectors. 18 The Rodent Operative's first duty is to visit all ships arriving in his district to search for evidence of rodents, paying particular attention to vessels which have arrived from plague infected ports and to visit such vessels during the discharge of cargo and to ascertain that reasonable measures are adopted to prevent any rodents escaping ashore. His second duty, is the examination of ships in his area which are due for inspection under Article 19 of the Public Health (Ships) Regulations, 1952-61, and the Prevention of Damage by Pests (Application to Shipping) Order, 1951-6, relating to the granting of Deratting and Deratting Exemption Certificates and Rodent Control Certificates respectively. The Rodent Operative's third duty is the examination of shore premises for signs of rat infestation paying particular attention to premises adjoining the berths of vessels from plague infected ports. Some twenty ye ars ago the Port Health Authority instituted a Rodent Control Scheme in all docks and premises of the Port of London Authority on behalf of that Authority and in the premises of the tenants of the Authority on behalf of the occupiers. (2) Arrangements for the bacteriological examination of rodents, with special reference to rodent plague, including the number of rodents sent for examination during the year. As described in Section XI above, all rats for examination for plague, either by post mortem and subsequently, if necessary, by bacteriological examination, are promptly sent to the Central Public Health Laboratory at Colindale. The bodies are placed in polythene bags which in turn are placed inside metal boxes, sealed and labelled so that there is no risk of the escape of any rat fleas during their transit to the Laboratory. The boxes are, of course, delivered by hand. The rat population of the Port is now so small and is under such strict control that it can be said to be almost certain that the arrival of a plague infected rat, even should it manage to get ashore, would be highly unlikely to have any serious significance. In other words, an epizootic could not be introduced into the Port for the simple reason that there are insufficient rats to enable the spread of infection. Nevertheless, one hundred and twelve rats were sent to the Laboratory and were examined for plague with negative results. (3) Arrangements in the district for deratting ships, the methods used, and if done by a commercial contractor, the name of the contractor. (a) The burning of sulphur at the rate of 3 lbs. per 1,000 cubic feet of space for a period of not less than six hours. This method is seldom used in the Port of London. (b) The generation of hydrocyanic acid gas by various methods. For the destruction of rats a concentration of HCN at the rate of 2 ozs. per 1,000 cubic feet of space is required with a minimum of two hours contact. (c) "1080" and "Warfarin". The employment of "1080" has been used regularly throughout the docks for some time with highly satisfactory results both on shore and in-ships. A substantial number of ships have been deratted by this method in preference to the use of cyanide, resulting in a considerable saving of time and cost to the shipowner. Although satisfactory results have been obtained from the use of "Warfarin" a suitable bait has yet to be found, particularly in granaries, with which to mix the poison, so that rats will take it continuously in preference to grain and other forms of cereal on which they are normally feeding. (d) Trapping. Trapping is seldom employed save for the destruction of isolated rats which have escaped a major poisoning operation or which have not yet established themselves. (e) Methyl Bromide. This is a very effective and lethal fumigant which has been used in this Port as an insecticide, particularly in the dry fruit industry. It has considerable penetrating powers and is not difficult to disperse after an operation. It is also possible to use this gas as a rodenticide and where there is an infestation of rodents and insects the combined problem can be solved with one operation. The following are the names of the firms approved for carrying out the deratting of ships Messrs. London Fumigation Co. Ltd. Rentokil Laboratories Ltd. The P. & O. Orient Line Contra-Pest Service Ltd. RODENT CONTROL ON LIGHTERS Effective control in this particular field assumes special significance when considered as an indicator of conditions in the whole port. These craft ply between ships, wharves and docks, and therefore, could act as transports for rodents to and from the many warehouses and ships. The 19 possibility of carrying infected rodents cannot be ruled out emphasising the need to keep the floating rodent population to a minimum and to take regular specimens for bacteriological examination. "Rat-proofing" of lighters deprives the pests of harbourage in which to live and breed as well as cutting lines of communication between obscure hiding places, and should be the first step in proper control. This measure has been successfully advocated to the Industry and is responsible for the gradual reduction in resident rats afloat. When the benefits of "rat proofing" become obvious the owners of lighters become more willing to co-operate. None of the rats sent for bacteriological examination have been found to be infected with B.pestis. Number of Lighters inspected 3,793 Number without evidence of rodents 3,291 Number with negligible evidence of rodents 445 Number treated for rats 57 Number of dead rats recovered after treatment 483 PREVENTION OF DAMAGE BY PESTS (APPLICATION TO SHIPPING) ORDERS 1951-56 During the year 13 Rodent Control Certificates were issued to coastwise ships as provided for by the terms of the Prevention of Damage by Pests (Application to Shipping) Order, 1951-56. TABLE E Rodents destroyed (bodies recovered) during the year in ships and in shore premises (1) On vessels Number of Jan. Feb. Mar. April May June July Aug. Sept. Oct. Nov. Dec. Total Black Rats 156 123 105 125 205 132 70 161 132 104 73 106 1,492 Brown Rats 1 - 15 - - - - - - - - - 16 Rats examined 20 11 7 12 6 6 6 9 4 3 6 2 92 Rats infected with plague - - - - - - - - - - - - - (2) In Docks, Quays, Wharves and Warehouses Number of Jan. Feb. Mar. April May June July Aug. Sept. Oct. Nov. Dec. Total Black Rats 44 84 64 24 64 33 44 33 60 64 57 17 588 Brown Rats 35 30 25 81 67 60 94 62 76 72 39 46 687 Rats examined — 2 4 — 3 2 2 1 1 2 3 — 20 Rats infected with plague - - - - - - - - - - - - - Mice : 1,633 mice were also destroyed ; 282 in ships and 1,351 in shore premises. TABLE F Deratting Certificates and Deratting Exemption Certificates issued during the year for Ships from Foreign Ports No. of Deratting Certificates Issued Number of Deratting Exemption Certificates Issued Total Certificates Issued After Fumigation with After Trapping After Poisoning After Trapping and Poisoning Total HCN Other Fumigants (state Method) 1. 2. 3. 4. 4(a) 5. 6. 7. 4 "Methyl Bromide" 1 Nil "1080" 70 "Warfarin" 2 Nil 77 1,004 1,081 20 section xiii INSPECTION OF SHIPS FOR NUISANCES TABLE G Inspections and Notices No. of Vessels Number of vessels visited by Port Health Inspectors 15,411 Number of vessels on which sanitary defects were found, and details reported to the Master, Owners and/or Ministry of Transport 732 Number of Statutory Notices served Nil Number of vessels on which sanitary defects were remedied 724 Summary of Structural and other Defects Inadequate ventilation 3 Defective Lighting — natural - Do. Do. — artificial — Defective or Insufficient Heating 4 Condensation 5 Leaking Decks 13 Leaking Ports, Decklights, etc 14 Leaking Sideplates 2 Leaking Hawse or Chain Pipes 1 Defective or Obstructed Floor Drainage 15 Water lodging on top of Peak Tanks — Defective Bulkheads 7 Do. Floors 29 Do. Doors 4 Do. Chain Pipes - Do. Bunks 1 Do. Clothes Lockers — Do. Food Lockers 5 Do. Food Storage 25 Do. Cooking Arrangements 32 Defective or Uncleanly Drinking Water Storage 2 Water Closets — Obsolete 3 Do. — Defective 47 Do. — Foul or Choked 16 Do. — Inadequate Flush 7 Wash Basins — Defective 19 Do. — Foul 4 Neglected Paintwork or Distemper 48 Absence of Washroom 1 Absence of Messrooms 1 Misappropriation of Crew Spaces - Verminous Quarters 387 Dirty Quarters 537 Miscellaneous 106 TOTAL 1,338 section xiv PUBLIC HEALTH (SHELLFISH) REGULATIONS, 1934 The Public Health (Shellfish) Regulations, 1934, confer powers on a local authority whereby on receipt of a report of their Medical Officer of Health that the consumption of shellfish taken from a laying is likely to cause danger to public health, they may make an Order prohibiting the distribution for sale for human consumption of shellfish taken from the laying either absolutely or subject to such exceptions and conditions as they think proper, having regard to the interests of the public health. Two such Orders have been made. The first in 1936, covering the public and private layings bordering that part of the foreshore of the Estuary of the River Thames between Canvey Island and Shoeburyness ; and the second, in 1957, covering the foreshore or waters bordering on that part of the Estuary of the River Thames or any tributary thereof, between Garrison Point, Sheerness, and Warden Point in the Isle of Sheppey, was made following an outbreak of Typhoid Fever at Scrapsgate in the Isle of Sheppey. This Order enabled the display of notices in various parts of the Scrapsgate area which, whilst bringing to notice the legal provisions of the new Order, also helped health propaganda against the gathering of shellfish for human consumption in that area. Unfortunately since the original outbreak four more cases have occurred, but as a result of eating shellfish gathered for private consumption and not for sale, hence the legal powers in the new Order could not apply. The latest outbreak involving three cases occurred in July, and all necessary measures were taken by the local health authorities for the isolation and treatment of patients and their contacts, an additional notice was displayed immediately by the open end of the outfall pipe at Scrapsgate. A proposal was discussed with local officers to re-organise entirely the system of sewage disposal in the area, so that there would no longer be at low tide on any beach used by holidaymakers, etc. an exposed open end of a sewer outfall pipe. 21 THE COCKLE INDUSTRY AT LEIGH-ON-SEA Samples of cockles continue to be taken regularly by the Public Health Department of the County Borough of Southend-on-Sea for bacteriological examination. It is gratifying to report that there have been no adverse findings during the year. The general conduct and hygiene of the sterilising establishments remain satisfactory and this is reflected in the bacteriological standard of the end product. section xv MEDICAL INSPECTION OF ALIENS 1. List of Medical Inspectors of Aliens holding warrants of appointment on 31st December 1962:— Dr. J. Greenwood Wilson, Dr. W.T. Rougier Chapman, Dr. G.W. Aston, Dr. P.J. Roden, Dr. D.T. Jones, Dr. P.S. Greaves, Dr. W.D.L. Smith, Dr. A.J. Fairrie, Dr. H. Willoughby, Dr. J.A. Jones, Dr. Marion Rave 11, Dr. C.D. MacCarthy, Dr. A.W. Hagger, Dr. R.G. Dewhurst, Dr. R.G.W. Moore, Dr. A.G. Rickenback, Dr. D.J. Avery, Dr. J.B. Maguire, Dr. B. Dalton, Dr. J. Oakley, Dr. P.R. Browne, Dr. J.C. Wishart, Dr. M.J. Catton, Dr. W. Stott, Dr. A. Robinson, Dr. J.F. Lown, Dr. S. Zador, Dr. R.N. Herson, Dr. W.T.G. Boul, Dr. W.E. Hutchinson. 2. List of other staff engaged on the work:— Clerical staff at the Central Office. 3. Organisation of the work : — A11 vessels carrying aliens are intercepted on arrival in the Port (since the inception of the Commonwealth Immigrants Act the larger passenger ships have been boarded at Brixham, or Plymouth, etc.) and the aliens are examined by the Medical Inspector, who is either the Boarding Medical Officer or a part-time Medical Inspector called in to deal with a particular ship. A 24 hour a day boarding service is maintained at Gravesend. The Medical Inspectors of Aliens are also appointed as Medical Inspectors of Commonwealth Immigrants. 4. Nature and amount of alien traffic : — i (a) Total number of arriving ships carrying aliens 3,215 (b) Total number of aliens — (i) arriving at the port 31,041 (ii) medically examined 198 (c) Certificates issued 2 5. Medical examination of aliens is carried out on board ship. Where necessary Red Cross nurses are engaged as chaperons. THE COMMONWEALTH IMMIGRANTS ACT, 1962 The Commonwealth Immigrants Act came into operation on the 1st July 1962. The Act provides that certain categories of Commonwealth Immigrants have an entitlement to admission into the country and others may be refused admission on medical or social grounds. The Immigration Officer, who is usually the first officer to meet arriving immigrants is entitled to refer any immigrant subject to control to a Medical Inspector. The Medical Inspector of course examines every immigrant who is reported to be ill on arrival. Provision for the necessary medical inspection presented special difficulties in the Port of London. Passengers arriving may be disembarked in any of the dock groups and sometimes at riverside wharves where there are no facilities ashore for medical inspection and consequently these formalities must be carried out on board ship. Since medical inspection is complementary to the Immigration examination, the ideal arrangement is for the Medical Inspector and the Immigration Officer to work side by side and it is on this basis that arrangements have been set up for passengers arriving by sea in London. For some time Immigration Officers have been boarding the larger passenger ships at Brixham and Plymouth and sometimes farther afield and since the inception of the Commonwealth Immigrants Act a team consisting of two doctors, a Red Cross nurse to act as chaperon when a female passenger is examined, and an administrative officer, has accompanied them to carry out the necessary medical inspections during the voyage to London. In the case of a ship coming direct 22 to London, a medical inspector and a chaperon, if required, is provided on telephone application by the Immigration Officer to the Boarding Medical Officer on the Hulk "Hygeia" at Gravesend, where a 24 hour medical service is maintained. A panel of doctors, duly authorised as Medical Inspectors has been instituted to carry out these duties on a fee basis. These doctors are also appointed as Medical Inspectors of Aliens. During the six months to 31st December 1962, the arrangements worked very satisfactorily. Statistics are as follows Commonwealth citizens subject to control arrived 5,846 do. examined 578 Certificates issued None Ships boarded by members of the panel of doctors at Plymouth 7 Brixham 4 Le Havre 1 London 28 40 In addition, a certain number of medical inspections are performed by the Boarding Medical Officers when their other duties permit. section xvi MISCELLANEOUS Arrangements for the burial on shore of persons who have died on board ship from infectious disease. The body of any person dying on board ship, or in Denton Hospital, from infectious disease would normally be removed from the ship or Denton Hospital for burial by a Private Undertaker acting on the instructions of the shipping company or the next-of-kin, the local police being kept informed. In the event of the death being due to smallpox, special instructions as to precautions to be taken would be given to the undertaker by the Port Health Authority. PIGEON CONTROL Although feral pigeons have inhabited the Port for a long time as accepted guests, their presence and activities are becoming increasingly resented due to the enlarged population of the flocks and the increasing damage involved. The damage is associated with structures as well as equipment and culminates in losses of foodstuffs, directly and otherwise. There is ample evidence of this in the neighbourhood of granaries and on the tarpaulins of lighters which are frequently grossly contaminated with the birds' droppings. Clearly, the menace is not confined to one specific area, for it involves both the feeding site and the roosting site, which may be a considerable distance apart, even on opposite banks of the River. It is felt that the Port Health Authority should be actively engaged in the elimination of this problem, but there is no enabling legis lation to this effect and, unless there are ample grounds to prove that there is a danger to public health the problem is one for those directly aggrieved. Probably greater concern is aroused when foodstuffs become contaminated or there is danger from contamination of food handling or storage premises. At present, spasmodic operations are carried out by private enterprise with a license to narcoticise the birds and then destroy them, and other minor schemes include the trapping of birds and destruction of the nests and eggs. These localised and spasmodic efforts are not intended to control an area, but specific premises. The former method has been successfully used at meat discharging quays and the other in timber storage sheds used as roosting places. For example, it is recorded from the Millwall Dock that 1,191 birds and 801 eggs were destroyed during the year. Inspectors from this Authority have been present at various demonstrations which have nor produced conclusive evidence that the principles of elimination by doping with narcotic baits such as alpha-chlorolose will effectively control flocks of birds in industrial areas. It is evident that effective control in the Port must be carried out by systematic area controlled operations to cover both roosting and feeding sites and trained personnel will be needed for this purpose. Another important factor to be overcome is the strong public sentiment for the preservation of these pigeons. 23 CLEAN AIR ACT, 1956 The Dark Smoke (Permitted Periods) Regulations, 1958 Control is now almost entirely concerned with vessels, since the trend to convert cargo cranes to electric power and replace old steam locomotives with diesel-driven types has continued to the stage when little trouble is experienced from this source. Where reconstruction of buildings has taken place incorporating new heating installations, these have been notified and surveyed in compliance with the Act. Progress in this field is quite satisfactory. The behaviour of vessels in the Port gives reason for satisfaction, although observation must be continuously maintained. Changing of crews and vessels that are irregular visitors to the Port will always confront the Inspector with those who plead ignorance of the Regulations and such incidents require a tactful approach. In these circumstances, verbal warning is supplemented by giving the Master a relevant printed advice card. Whenever possible, the practice of boarding an offending vessel immediately to suppress the nuisance has been maintained, thereby minimising the volume of smoke emitted and obviating recourse to possible legal action. Observations of moving vessels, particularly outward bound, remains an almost hopeless task and it would be a great advantage to reduce the period of observation to one hour. The available 'defences' provided by Sec. 1 (3) which are quite comprehensive, will always require a sound knowledge of marine boiler practice to counter excuse with technical reasoning, and especially in regard to the defence of 'best available fuel' which can be very elastic in its application to coal burning ships. It is apparent that any relaxation on the part of the Inspectors would rapidly be interpreted to mean that the Regulations have lost their significance and the progress that has been steadily achieved over the last five years could be nullified. Vigilance is needed, also, in respect of the smoke eliminator and observation equipment provided aboard should proper maintenance be neglected. It is generally agreed that much of the visible pollution hitherto hanging over the Port has been drastically reduced by constant control and the increased adoption of electrical and diesel engine power. If this trend continues, it may obviate the necessity for any major alteration in the existing legislation when it is brought forward for review. Statutory action has been taken as indicated:— 1962 1961 No. of vessels infringing Regulations 11 19 No. of Notices served 5 12 No. of Prosecutions Nil 3 LOADING AND TRANSPORT OF REFUSE BY LIGHTERS Bye-laws for the Prevention of Nuisance arising from Refuse in or upon any Ship, Boat or Vessel The Port Health Inspectors stationed on the River Districts keep watch upon the loading conditions at the refuse wharves and also ensure that the refuse lighters are properly covered during their passage down river. During the year three infringements of the Bye-laws were reported. Successful legal proceedings were taken in one case. PUBLIC HEALTH ACT 1936, PART X - CANAL BOATS Sixty-six inspections of canal boats were made during the year. Thirteen canal boats were found to have a total of twenty defects, as follows : — Cabin in need of cleaning and/or painting 10 Defective condition of cabin top and/or sides 8 Defective condition of cabin hatch doors 1 Defective and dangerous structure 1 Total 20 The Owners and Master of the defective craft were in each case notified and required to carry out the necessary repairs. The following infringements of the Act were also found:— Certificate of Registration not produced 8 Certificate of Registration requiring renewal 1 9 The Owners and Masters were informed of the requirements of the Act in these respects. 24 The above figures show a considerable reduction in the number of inspections made by the Port Health Inspector at Regent's Canal Dock during the year compared with last year. It can be assumed that this was due to the rapid decline in canal boat traffic, which, as reported by the British Waterways Authority, has been reduced from 80 operating pairs of two years ago to about 50 pairs at the present time. One of the principal factors responsible for this decline was the shortage of experienced crews to operate the craft as well as the inability to retain or recruit younger members into the service. The Authority was thus compelled to rely on the veteran crews whose numbers are constantly diminishing. It would seem that, along with many other traditional institutions, the Inland Waterways of this country are beginning increasingly to feel the wind of change. The dearth of personnel has been brought about, it was reported, mainly by greater educational enlightenment coupled with opportunities — lacking to the earlier generation — which now attracted the younger generation away from the canals. They had an emerging consciousness of other and more exciting possibilities in the way of careers. Another reason was that crammed living conditions aboard the narrow boats contrasted very poorly with housing accommodation to be had ashore in other occupations, especially for families, and it was in this respect that consideration was being given by British Waterways to a new operational scheme. The scheme proposed a system of shore based crews who would pass the boats from one stage to another, thus eliminating the need to live aboard as they did at present. Although there has been no definite statement regarding this project other than in the Press, there was some evidence of such an operational scheme being tried out on the Grand Union and Regents Canals at the beginning of the year. The Port Health Inspector reported the simultaneous arrival of several canal boats without their Registration Certificates aboard. The Public Health Act, 1936, provides that these certificates should be available for inspection by an authorised officer, and failure to produce them renders the owner or master liable to a fine. The excuse in each case was a bona-fide presumption on the part of the Master that, as the boat was manned by one person who was making a single journey only and as it was not being used for sleeping purposes, no certificate was necessary. The Medical Officer of Health wrote to the owners and pointed out that such temporary relaxation of the Regulations was not provided for, and that when a canal boat was registered for use as a dwelling the certificate should always accompany the boat when it was in service, whether inhabited or otherwise. From a subsequent memorandum prepared by the Port Health Inspector it became apparent that British Waterways have surmounted this administrative difficulty quite effectively. He has reported the appearance of a new type of "hybrid''" narrow boat with a portable cabin which can be dismantled when necessary. Divested of its cabin, it becomes in effect a lighter or dumb barge, which need not be registered as it is devoid of living accommodation. However, when used with a cabin, it will have to be registered as a habitable dwelling subject to the Regulations under the Act. It can be said unequivocally that this type of craft was not envisaged when the provisions of the Public Health Act were laid down nearly thirty years ago. In previous years there have been a number of complaints from Masters of canal boats regarding the unhealthy conditions of their living quarters attributed to condensation, which was caused by bad ventilation or insufficient insulation in the structural material of which the cabins were built. This condensation is usually caused by the humid atmosphere inside a cabin which is occupied, being subjected to the effect of the very cold atmosphere outside through walls whrich are not adequately insulated against it. The sharp drop in temperature causes the internal moist air to condense in droplets on the inside walls. The moisture generally permeates the whole cabin making everything damp and in some cases mouldy, thus having a most deleterious effect upon the contents of cupboards, bed-linen and furniture. In one reported instance it was stated to be the direct cause of illness (influenza). As a result of complaints and representations by the Medical Officer of Health, the British Waterways Authority, after trying various forms of improved ventilation which did not always prove successful, produced what is considered by the Port Health Inspector to be a completely satisfactory form of insulation. The cabin structure, instead of being constructed from single plywood, consists of a "double skin" which provides an air space as an efficient insulating medium. It was carefully pointed out, however, that this construction could only be incorporated into new boats as the cost of modification or conversion of existing boats would be prohibitive. It is to be hoped that the disappearance of reports of this class of defect from this year's report is an indication that it has happily been abated. 25 HOUSEBOATS AT BENFLEET The Essex County Council Act, 1952, provides that the mooring of any houseboat within the County shall not be lawful without the consent of the Council of the district in which the houseboat is situated, and that the Council may require the owner or occupier to remove or demolish any houseboat not authorised by them. The Port and City of London Health Committee are, however, still responsible under the Public Health (London) Act, 1936, for the sanitary supervision of houseboats coming within the jurisdiction of the Port Health Authority, although under the Essex County Council Act, 1952, the local Council in Essex are now responsible for the licensing and drawing up of conditions under which they are prepared to grant licences to houseboats. The duties of the Committee in regard to the sanitary supervision of houseboats are safeguarded by Section 212 of the Essex County Council Act, 1952, which provides inter alia that no consent shall be given to the mooring of any houseboat within the Port of London without the previous written consent of the Corporation of London as the Port Health Authority of the Port of London. During the year the Benfleet Urban District Council granted temporary consents, subject to the approval of the Port Health Authority, to twenty-one houseboats. No objection to these consents was raised by the Port and City of London Health Committee. CUTTER "HUMPHREY MORRIS" The completed vessel was officially accepted from the Builders in June after successful operational speed trials had been conducted in the Estuary under normal conditions. Eight runs over the measured mile were made, with and against the tide, and an average of 12.31 knots obtained thus providing a working margin in excess of the specified 12 knots. Before and during the propulsion trials, all the auxiliary units were tested to complete satisfaction and the vessel arrived on the Gravesend Station fully equipped for service on 5th June. The high standard anticipated has been fully realised during the six months service, both in operational service and generally improved amenities for the Boarding Medical Officers and Crews. The boarding platform and the radio-telephone sets have proved to be particularly useful and the standard of comfort much appreciated by all concerned. There is good reason to believe that she will justifiably represent the Authority in dignity and prestige for many years. DANGEROUS DRUGS During the year twenty-four certificates authorising the purchase of scheduled Dangerous Drugs were issued under the Dangerous Drugs Regulations, 1953, Regulation 13 (2) of which is as follows (a) The master of a foreign ship which is in a port in Great Britain shall be authorised to procure such quantity of drugs and preparations as may be certified by the medical officer of health of the port health authority within those jurisdiction the ship is or, in his absence, by the assistant medical officer of health, to be necessary for the equipment of the ship until it reaches its home port. (b) A person who supplies a drug or preparation in accordance with a certificate given under this paragraph shall retain the certificate and mark it with the date on which the drug or preparation was supplied and keep it on his premises so as to be at all times available for inspection. STUDENTS AND VISITORS During the year visitors from Australia, African territories, Germany, Greece, Hong Kong, Iran, Malta, Malaya, Singapore, the West Indies and Yugoslavia visited the Port to see the work of the Authority. In addition visitors from Government Departments, Local Authorities, including student Public Health Inspectors, and from centres of health education have received short term instruction in port health activities. Although this instruction absorbs valuable time of the port health staffs, there is no doubt that it helps to widen their outlook and emphasises the international aspect of the work. 26 Boardiag Cutter "Humphrey Morris" The Deputy Port Medical Officer, Dr. H. Willough by, examining a patient in the ambulance room of the cutter "Humphrey Morris" THE FOOD HYGIENE (DOCKS, CARRIERS, ETC.) REGULATIONS, 1960 The application of these Regulations at the Docks has been given considerable thought and discussion at preliminary meetings with representatives of the many interests upon whom the new Regulations impose responsibilities in regard to the handling and transport of food. The policy has been to demand compliance with the requirements of the Regulations as far as reasonably practicable without requiring specific uniformity in some aspects, e.g. design of protective clothing — personal preferences must be expected in these matters. Generally, there is a willingness co-operate and progress has been achieved over a broad field which includes the following:— (a) The allocation of berth and cleaned quay to receive the ship with meat cargo and the maintenance of hygienic conditions throughout the period of discharge. (b) The provision of suitable discharging equipment and satisfactory transports such as road and rail vehicles and insulated lighters. (c) Protective clothing for port workers when handling meat not so packed as to obviate the possibility of contamination. (d) Provision of adequate washing facilities and sanitary accommodation at reasonably accessible points on the discharging berth, specifically for those handling the meat cargo. Genera! Application (a) All berthing arrangements are negotiated through the Port of London Authority and some major shipping companies have agreed to rent particular berths on a permanent basis, thereby enabling the routine cleansing of quays and other necessary preparation for the arrival of the ship. In these circumstances, no real difficulty arises to meet hygienic standards, and those who rent these berths undertake to keep the berths clean from ship to ship. There are, however, less fortunate circumstances when there are more ships arriving than there are suitable berths available leading to diversion to general cargo berths where drastic cleaning measures must be adopted to prepare for the landing of meat cargoes. More difficulties arise when a ship discharges both general and meat cargo on the same quay and a constant watch must be maintained to ensure that conditions at the meat discharge section are not adversely affected, particularly in wet weather. Probably the worst feature of the meat landing quays is the presence of rail tracks for travelling cranes and trucks. Inevitably, they are difficult to clean and maintain as such. (b) Sufficient and clean working equipment is vital, and this aspect receives the amount of attention that it deserves. Landing tables, cargo slings and trucks are involved. Slings are either of metal fabrication or plain canvas and both must be systematically cleaned, especially the canvas pattern. As for landing tables, all are constructed of hardwood, some having a smooth metal sheathing fitted on the landing surface which lends itself to easy cleaning when compared with the wood surface. Metal sheathing is being encouraged for this reason. Meat transport vehicles have given much trouble, but pressure and persuasion has achieved considerable improvement — vehicles have been rejected as totally unfit for transport of meat — the trends are to construct more suitable trucks and containers to meet the requirements and modify others as found expedient. It is unfortunate that chilled meat is still transported in the stack rather than bend properly hung on rails, and although this may require more effort on the part of the loaders it is hoped that this method will in turn be generally adopted. (c) Efforts have been made by employers to provide the most suitable protective clothing and the current practice is for those at the landing tables to wear full aprons for frozen meat and those engaged on chilled beef to wear shoulder and head coverings. These are collected and cleaned on completion of discharge and cleaned for each cargo engagement. To what extent the Authority can enforce the provisions of the Regulations aboard ship has yet to be decided, but, meanwhile, the stevedores wear foot coverings to minimise the contamination of the stacked meat in the holds. This type of footwear is easy to wash. Although protective clothing is provided proper cleansing in use must not be overlooked. There is scope for improvement in a general sense and further consultation with the Industry may be necessary in order to review the various efforts that have been made. (d) The provision of adequate washing facilities and sanitary accommodation involved considerable work and large capital outlay by the Port of London Authority preceded by an extensive survey of the existing amenities. Here again was shown the advantage of discussions to clarify this mutual responsibility. Eventually, it was agreed to start work on the Royals group and substantial improvements have been carried out with more to follow. The schemed allocation should be completed by mid-summer next. Some controversial issues such as the provision of hand-drying facilities, soap and towel, etc. remain for discussion although liquid soap dispensers are already fitted here and there. Favourable reports have been received on the real progress made and the public spirited response and co-operation of the Industry in spite of many frustrations. It would appear that there are two fronts on which operations must continue, to consolidate the progress already made and to push forward to complete the statutory requirements throughout the Port, wherever the Regulations apply. 27 THE FOOD HYGIENE (GENERAL) REGULATIONS, 1960 AND 1962 A complete survey of all passenger carrying vessels operating the Summer Service on the River was carried out early this year during the normal period for re-fitting. Liaison was maintained with other interested Local authorities in whose districts the re-fitting was undertaken. Approval was sought from the Ministry of Transport in respect of two vessels where conversions from pail closets to W.Cs. was decided. This completes the necessary conversions on all the larger vessels. No more major structural alterations were required among the fifty vessels operating. An important requirement on these launches concerns the retail service of 'open food' and involves the fitting of wash-hand facilities. Owing to limited space behind the bar, it has been found expedient to instal the plastic type of 'tip up' basin and to connect the waste pipe to that of the existing dish washing sink. With this arrangement, it has been impossible to provide water supply taps and the supply of hot and cold water by suitable and clean utensils such as jugs is required. All other requirements have been met to ensure cleanliness and hygiene. During the year 200 inspections have been made to check operating conditions and rectify any minor failures. Samples of fresh water for use in the catering sections were taken from time to time for physical and bacteriological examination:— Unfit Susp. Unsat. Sat. Good Excellent 4 0 4 0 2 1 Tanks 4 0 3 1 4 8 Bar Taps Of the three vessels engaged on excursions to coastal resorts and the Continent, two have been re-fitted to a standard in excess of statutory requirements and this will be maintained in future modifications and replacements. The third vessel has not yet achieved this high standard, but efforts will be continued and an undertaking by the Owners has been accepted to this effect. Wash-up sinks are involved and it is agreed that some wooden sinks will be suitably replaced in the next programme of modifications, probably next year. Exemption Certificates have been granted to these three vessels in respect of hot water supplies to the licensed bars because of the limited fresh water storage capacity. These Certificates may be withdrawn at the discretion of the Port Health Authority. The restricted fresh water storage capacity on the launches and excursion vessels will remain a difficult problem. On the other hand, the increasing sale of wrapped foods supplied to these vessels considerably reduces the demand for fresh water in cooking aboard and consequent cleansing of utensils and crockery. Printed instructions relating to procedure for notification of certain infectious diseases and requirements of personal hygiene and cleanliness have been issued to Masters of all catering vessels. These have been suitably displayed behind the catering bars. The working relations established between the Inspectors and Owners in the initial stages have been maintained and a steadily rising standard of hygiene is evident. Plans for new construction and the complete modernisation of the existing vessels by stages will, it is hoped, provide the amenities and service with due attention to hygiene that the public have a right to expect. FOOD INSPECTION The total amount of foodstuffs detained for examination and either condemned as unfit for human consumption and destroyed or otherwise disposed of under guarantee and supervision was 5,065 tons. 3cwts. 3 qrs. 91bs. The following is a summary showing the methods of disposal W eight Comparable Weight 1961 tons. cwts. qrs. lbs. tons. cwts. qrs. lbs. Burnt 70 17 — 14 66 2 0 15 Buried 3,403 6 2 2 2,513 7 2 7 Boiling down 49 13 3 15 61 17 1 27 * Animal feeding 76 5 1 9 176 0 1 19 * Other districts 914 10 1 21 93 17 2 11 * Refining 66 9 1 19 299 6 3 0 Re-exported 460 6 1 3 61 19 1 7 * Industrial purposes 23 14 3 10 56 14 2 18 5,065 3 3 9 3,329 5 3 20 Items marked * were released with agreement of and under the supervision of Local Medical Officers of Health. 28 Of the 5,065 tons listed above the principal items and methods of disposal consisted of:— Tons. Cwts. Burnt 140 ctns. & approx. 2,455 tins, tubes, fruits, juices, pulps, vegetables, meats and fish — burst, blown or leaky 10 10 Bananas — wasty 29 2 425 ctns. fresh peas, beans, carrots — wasty & wet damaged 2 19 1,244 tins crude black molasses — dock water damaged — 16 10 cases, 70 bags and quantity loose potatoes — wasty 9 3 Ships rejected stores 4 11 51 cases oranges — damaged and wasty 1 15 61 bags ground nuts in shell — wet damaged — 15 Boiling Down 420 lambs, 593 sheep, 5 qrs. Beef, 9 veal sides, 206 ctns. lambs livers, 275 ctns. offal and quantity other carcase meat and offal — stained, diseased, dock water damaged, dirty soft, decomposed and mouldy. 49 12 Buried 1,997 ctns. 21 cases and 17,482 cans fruits, juices, pulps vegetables, meats and fish — burst blown and leaky .... 58 19 Wasty Bananas — Banana Waste 2,291 8 11,471 bags onions — wasty 258 9 Quantity of Raw Sugar — contaminated by riverwater 83 12 2,040packages various vegetables — wet and wasty 13 3 2,l6lboxes, bags and quantity loose potatoes — wasty 68 17 46 casks Apricot Pulp — damaged with extraneous matter discoloured and mouldy 37 19 3,000 cases wasty clemantines 57 9 189 ctns. maize cob — wet and mouldy 5 - 100 ctns. wasty mangoes 3 13 28 barrels orange juice — decomposed 5 2 934 cases melons, 1,675 cases pomegranates, 14,449 bags onions, 1,976 cases onions, 2,975 ctns. canned fruits, 3 casks wine — salvaged cargo from sunken vessel 500 5 Animal Feeding 426 bags flour — ships rejected stores and wet damaged 18 12 Quantity rejected stores 4 6 2,700ctns. and 233 cases shrimps — decomposed 20 13 1,050 bags and boxes potatoes — wasty 24 1 21 ctns. and 1 bag milk powder — wet and dirty - 10 Quantity damaged peas and beans 1 16 Released to other Districts 2,299 bags flour 142 12 3,000 ctns. wasty grapefruit — for sorting 56 14 13,892 bags and boxes tuber moth grub infested, wasty potatoes & for sorting 401 10 3,069 ctns. boneless veal — salmonella contaminated — for sterilization 85 15 1,940 smoke damaged lambs — for reconditioning 25 14 1,068 bags diseased livers — for 100% examination 48 12 1,048 bags rice — for cleaning and fumigation 53 5 540 crates carrots — for sorting 7 19 146 bags coffee — for sorting 6 10 500 ctns, wasty lemons — for sorting 8 18 Refining 965 bags dirty sugar sweepings 66 5 Re-Exported 583 bags damaged sugar 43 19 8,850 boxes tuber moth grub infested and wasty potatoes — for animal feeding 261 6 31 bags and quantity of tea — for chemical use 111 11 26 casks hog casings — no official certificates 2 - 11 barrels sheep casings — no official certificates 5 11 260 ctns. frozen beef kidneys - do - 6 5 557 ctns. livers - do - 6 9 29  Tons. Cwts. Re- Exported Cont. 170 ctns. smoked saithe — prohibited preservative 3 1 275 ctns. meat Ravioli — no official certificates 2 19 100 ctns. plum povidl — prohibited preservative .2 3 52 bags desiccated coconut—Salmonella contaminated 2 6 160 ctns. meat products — no official certificates 2 — 79 pieces beef - do - 1 2 95 cases pork suasages - do - 2 7 20 ctns. meat - do - 4 20 ctns. ham roll - do - 6 10 cases dried sausage 3 Industrial Purposes Quantity damaged tea — for fertiliser manufacture 21 11 119 ctns. skinned rabbit — decomposed 1 11 1 cask tallow — dock water damaged — released for greasing — 8 5 cases Pork Sausages — no official certificates - 2 The following figures have been given by the Port of London Authority and acknowledgement is made for their help. They are in respect of the year 1962 and are tonnages of foodstuffs landed on their quays and handled by them during the year. Tons Butter, cheese and margarine 12,137 Canned goods 117,383 Flour 49,367 Fruit, dried 30,530 Fruit, green and vegetable 383,721 Grain and seed 154,125 Meat, chilled and frozen 468,255 Other provisions 34,296 Sugar 14,016 Tea 19,882 1,283,712 Taking the total weight of items in the first table as 5,065 tons, the amount dealt with expressed as a percentage of imports for the same period equals 0.394% T ea Sampling During the year 2,365 Samples have been taken and submitted for examination. MEAT INSPECTION Mr. A.C. Good, Senior Inspector in charge of meat inspection in the Royal Docks, reports as follows : During the year 423 ships discharged meat in the Royal Docks. The purpose of the controls exercised by the inspectors has been to ensure that meats brought into the country are (1) free from disease, (2) sound and undamaged, (3) handled in a hygienic manner, and (4) free from food poisoning organisms. Of the foregoing, it has become apparent that the problem of examining certain boneless meats for food poisoning organisms has overshadowed all other considerations. The administration of the machinery of detention, examination and subsequent disposal of great quantities of these meats has kept the dock staff fully extended. That this problem is being dealt with effectively reflects credit on the officers concerned. Examination for disease Although all imported meats must bear an official certificate of inspection in the country of origin the only real check on the efficiency of such inspection is by thawing the meat or offal for subjection to a detailed examination. Table I is a summary of this work. It will be seen that as wide a range as possible of meats from the world's producing areas is examined. 30 TABLE I MEATS DETAINED FOR EXAMINATION Commodity Argentine Australia New Zealand U.S.A. Yugoslavia Bechuanaland & S. Africa Uruguay T otal Bags/Ctns. Beef/Ox Livers 4,228 220 92 30 10 1,068 5,648 Carcasses of Sheep and Lamb 1,996 511 2,558 5,065 Bags of Brisket 10 93 11 114 Ctns. of Beef Tongues 20 10 3 5 38 Bags of Beef Hearts 5 5 10 Ctns. of Bone-in and Boneless Beef and Veal 105 96 17 15 10 243 Ctns. of Boneless Mutton and Lamb 17 51 68 Ctns. of Bonelss Pork 2 2 Ctns. of Pork Offals 12 12 Ctns. of Beef Kidneys 5 2 7 Bags of Beef Tripe 2 2 11,209 Damaged and Unsound Meats — — Meats found unsound (other than diseased) on arrival in this country and detained and subsequently destroyed are listed in Table II. The cause of condemnation may be any one of many conditions, for example, mould, decomposition, brine damage, vermin damage, etc. An example of one such occurrence was a fire on board the "Corinthic" homeward bound from New Zealand which broke out in the ship's lower hold while discharging in King George V Dock. The subsequent action necessary to ensure that no fire or smoke-damaged meat was allowed forward was the subject of a report which is given in precis below. s/s "Corinthic" commenced discharge on Tuesday, 17th July. When No. 1 hold was reopened on the 23rd July to continue discharge of the lower hold, the meat was found to be on fire in the middle of the hatch square. The fire brigade was called to extinguish the fire and clear the smoke. In the space concerned there were 13,765 lamb and sheep carcases and 1,681 quarters of beef. The damage to the meat was of three kinds — burnt, water-damagedand smoke tainted. The inspector decided on three courses of action. (1) Carcases so fire damaged as to render them totally unfit to go direct to contractor for destruction, (2) Carcases slightly damaged to go to dock store for ozone treatment and re-conditioning. (3) All other smoke-damaged carcases to go forward to London Cold Stores for ozone treatment under supervision of local authority. As a consequence 5 tons, 7 cwts. of meat were taken direct from the ship for destruction. 2,134 carcases were reconditioned and 12,006 carcases were treatedwith ozone. TABLE II TOTAL QUANTITY OF MEAT DESTROYED AS UNFIT FOR HUMAN CONSUMPTION Tons Cwts. Qrs. Lbs. Lambs and sheep 6,513 carcases & parts 58 8 0 1 Lamb and sheep cut 160 cartons 6 1 2 Lamb and sheep offal 2,532 cartons 13 9 1 9 Bee f cuts 616 pkgs. 7 2 3 21 Beef offal 2,910 pkgs. & 1,832 loose 71 0 0 20 Pork cuts 94 pkgs. 19 2 18 Pork offal 659 cartons 7 9 2 24 Veal 8,186 cartons & pkgs. 83 18 0 18 Rabbits 9 crates 3 0 9 Stewed meats 17 cartons 2 2 24 242 0 0 6 * for 'destroyed' read 'dealt with' 31 Bacteriological Sampling The investigation of imported meats for the presence of food poisoning organisms has steadily grown over recent years due to what appears to be a change in the type of meat in demand. A greater quantity of boneless manufacturing meats and meats intended for the pets trade now form part of the regular imports and it is these boneless meats which give greatest cause for concern. The process of boning out would appear to spread contamination and unless the greatest care is exercised in the killing establishments to maintain the highest standards of hygiene considerable quantities of these meats will need to be detained and considerable quantities subsequently diverted to uses other than for human food. The present position is as below. (1) Bulgarian horsemeat All offals detained. (2) Australian boneless Beef Subject to investigation (3) New Zealand boneless Veal All detained except one establishment. (4) Argentine Horsemeat All detained except one establishment. (5) Argentine boneless Beef All detained. Other activities Numerous parties of students were conducted round the docks and taken to the Cold Store Examination Room for lectures on meat control methods. A paper was presented to the Annual Conference of the Association of Public Health Inspectors at Southport by Mr. A.C. Good, Senior Inspector, on Public Health Problems Associated with Imported Meats. A film was made by the British Broadcasting Corporation in the Royal Docks in collaboration with the inspectors to form part of a series 'Microbes and Man' to be shown on the Schools Television Programme. The film showed some of the precautions taken to ensure that imported meats were fit and safe to eat. CHEMICAL AND BACTERIOLOGICAL EXAMINATIONS Public Analyst Commodity No of Samples Remarks Tea 296 294 satisfactory, 1 excessive stalk 1 slight moulds. Of these 296 samples 10 were submitted for tests for atomic radiation and all were satisfactory. Fresh Meat 1 Satisfactory. Canned Meat 2 Satisfactory. Unidentified Powder 1 Found to be a powder used for cleansing bulk lard tanks. Bombay Duck 1 Satisfactory. Canned Fish 25 Some samples contained excessive or prohibited preservative and goods were re-exported. Fresh Apples 2 Satisfactory. Feeding Stuffs 11 Satisfactory. Cake Mixes 3 Satisfactory. Bulk Lard 17 Satisfactory. Sauces 11 1 contained prohibited preservative and goods were re-exported. Canned Fruit 33 Some contained excessive tin & goods were destroyed. Bean & Beancurd 5 2 contained prohibited preservative and goods were re-exported. P rawn s 3 Satisfactory. Dried Prawns 1 Satisfactory. Wine 1 Satisfactory. Fruit Juice & Syrup 9 Satisfactory. Dried Egg albumen 1 Satisfactory. Dehydrated Banana Powder 1 Satisfactory. Kibbled Onions 2 Satisfactory. Plum Preserve 2 1 contained excess preservative and goods were re-exported. Fresh Oranges 4 Satisfactory. Powdered Bacon Rind 1 Satisfactory. Mixed Pickles 2 Satisfactory. Cream Topping in pressurised can 1 Contained thickener not allowed by Emulsifiers and Stabilisers Regulations. Firm warned and local Medical Officer of Health notified. Caviar Style Salmon Roe 1 Satisfactory. Tomato Puree, paste etc., 41 17 Samples had excessive moulds. Consignments were re-exported. Mock Caviar 1 Contained prohibited colouring matter and goods were re-exported. 479 32 Bacteriologist — other than carcase meat Commodity No of Samples Remarks Desiccated Coconut 530 8 positive for salmonella. Shrimp flavoured Slices 1 Satisfactory Samples in connection with food poisoning on ships 31 29 satisfactory. Canned Fish 7 Satisfactory. Canned Meat 6 Satisfactory. Bamboo Shoots 3 Satisfactory. Cake Mixes 25 1 Positive Salmonella. Dried senna pods damaged by sea & harbour water following fire on board ship 10 High plate counts. Goods released for processing. Frozen Shrimps 5 Satisfactory. Frozen Prawns 21 Satisfactory. Dried bitter leaves 6 4 positive salmonella. Of 12 bags seized 2 small bags eventually released Dried Noodles 4 to owner for personal consumption. Satisfactory. Egg products 51 13 positive salmonella and consignment released for return to supplier and authorities in county of origin notified. Canned boned chicken 8 Satisfactory. Dried banana Powder 8 High plate counts. Goods eventually surrendered for destruction. Cheese 23 Satisfactory. Egusi 1 Salmonella positive and goods were destroyed. Apon 1 Satisfactory. Agar Agar powder 1 Satisfactory. Tamarinds in molasses — barrel fell in dock 1 Satisfactory. Dried Prawns 1 Satisfactory. Egg noddles 4 Satisfactory. Cream topping in pressurised cans 4 Satisfactory. Caviar style salmon roe 1 Satisfactory. Pieces carton — ? damaged by sewage or sea water 6 Satisfactory. 759 During the year, over 4,000 samples were examined, and it is perhaps an interesting exercise to examine what has been achieved as a result of this advance in the assessment of the fitness of food for human consumption — freedom from harmful bacterial contamination, in addition to the usual criteria — freedom from disease, wholesomeness and soundness. Comparison of examination results for the years 1959, I960, 1961 and the present year respectively give some indications of the value of bacteriological examination. Meat of all categories (including poultry) Samples taken Salmonella positive % positive 1959 328 6 1.8 1960 366 31 8.5 1961 for human consumption 650 33 5.1 for animal feeding 1,372 620 45.2 1962 for human consumption 930* 193* 20.8* for animal feeding 2,449 1,100 45.3 * Heavy sampling was occasioned in regard to one category of meat from a certain country — disregarding this item which may unduly distort the position, the figures would read — 184 11 6.0 In attempting to interpret the significance of these figures, attention must be given to the particularly large numbers of samples from shipments likely to have a high contamination rate. It should also be noted, however, that in some instances contamination rates for batches of meat for human consumption have been as high as 55% (boneless veal, 1962 — the average contamination rate of this particular item being 24% for the year). It may be asked whether the detention of shipments, delays occasioned by sampling, condemnations and conditional releases had a worthwhile effect in receiving cleaner food. Two categories of meat are concerned, imports for human consumption which over the four years gives results of 1.8, 8.5, 5.1 and 6 per cent salmonella contamination respectively, if badly contaminated batches are disregarded. Considering the present day trend to increasing imports of boneless meat, including beef, veal and mutton cuts, the production of which appear inevitably to introduce the possibility of higher contamination rates due to the increased handling involved, the results give no cause for complacency. Figures for 1963 may well be higher owing to heavily contaminated batches of a fairly recent import of boneless beef for human consumption. Furthermore, this type of boneless meat is used as a cheap source of protein in hospitals and schools and also for manufacturing purposes including raw products such as sausages and the hamburger type of product. The other category, meat imported for animal food, is consistently contaminated at a high rate, i.e. 45.2% and 45.3% for 1961 and 1962 respectively. In spite of promised controls in the countries of origin no real improvement is apparent, and although the Authority has no power to limit or prohibit the importation of this type of meat, the time and effort spent by the inspecting Officers on sampling and the application of the rigid requirements of the Meat (Staining and Sterilization) Regulations, 1960, could better be directed to the examination of foods for human consumption. Yet there is an obvious risk involved both in the sale of this material and its handling in many domestic kitchens. Methods of treatment of the frozen blocks, such as by irradiation with x-rays have been proposed. Desiccated Coconut — Ceylon Samples taken Salmonella positive % Positive 1959 70 8 11.4 1960 1,067 68 6.4 1961 507 19 3.7 1962 530 8 1.5 In this instance the steady reduction in the contamination rate reflects the results of the efforts primarily of importing firms in this country, and finally of the Ceylon Government, completely to transform an entire incfyistry. Two or three years ago, the Ceylon desiccated coconut industry consisted of a few fairly well-conducted factories and a host of small ramshackle concerns, observance of any principles of hygiene in the various processes mainly being non-existent throughout the industry and it was not surprising that many shipments showed alarmingly high percentages of contamination. How different is the position to-day with exported coconut coming only from mills registered after satisfactory Government inspection and subject to frequent check sampling. An adverse report upon any shipment imported into this country results in immediate closure of the mill concerned until the source of contamination is removed and the output is again proved to be free of salmonellae. 34 Egg Products Samples taken Salmonella positive % Positive 1959 213 26 12.2 1960 82 3 3.7 1961 209 11 5.3 1962 51 13 25.5 A number of food poisoning and enteric fever outbreaks throughout the country in 1955 resulted in the incrimination of imported egg products contaminated with salmonellae as the causative factor, and bacteriological examination on an extensive scale not only confirmed that this imported food was indeed a highly potential source of food poisoning organisms and also of paratyphoid bacilli causing the more serious enteric fever, but drew attention to the fact that other items of food might also be similarly contaminated. It is clear that hen's eggs are occasionally infected with salmonellae and even one contaminated egg amongst thousands will spread contamination throughout large volumes of the broken out liquid product. Subsequent batches may be contaminated and there may be a build-up of infection in the plant. Shipments are divided into batches according to production factors at the plant. Condemnation is limited to contaminated batches rather than to shipments. The pasteurisation of liquid whole egg at 48°F for 2½ minutes successfully eliminates salmonella and this is best done immediately after breaking out and before freezing. Otherwise whole egg must be thawed, pasteurised and refrozen, which is a costly procedure. It is hoped that legislation will be introduced early in 1963 to ensure the pasteurisation of all imported and home-produced liquid whole egg. The pasteurisation of liquid whole egg and yolk before spray-drying should protect these products. Egg white needs further research before methods of pasteurisation are proved satisfactory for heat-treatment in the liquid state. For many years the pan-dried product resulting in flaked or crystal albumen has been heat treated in the dried state at 130°F for approximately 9 days including warming up and cooling. This treatment is satisfactory normally but has failed in the presence of heavy contamination ; it is seldom satisfactory for spray-dried albumen. Prawns Samples taken Excessive plate count and/or coagulase — positive staphylococci % excessively contaminated 1959 — — — 1960 29 6 20.7 1961 32 3 . 9.4 1962 21 Nil Nil In the case of this food, the rapid reduction of bacteriological contamination has completely justified the controls imposed. Plate counts as high as 75 million per gram were found during the initial survey, and the presence of coagulase-positive staphylococci of food poisoning strains was commonly found. Today plate counts not exceeding 500 per gram are the rule rather than the exception, and great credit is due to the producers for the energetic approach to and rapid solution of the problem with which they were confronted. The figures quoted are insufficient to enable-reliable conclusions to be drawn but the trend is unmistakable. In addition to the sampling of the foods referred to, all new foods or foods from a new source are checked as to bacteriological condition over a period sufficient to eliminate or incriminate them as potential sources of food poisoning. All this sampling serves to attain two main objectives, firstly to demonstrate the potentially dangerous food and deal with it in such a way as to destroy the bacteria and thus render it harmless, or if this is not practicable, to prevent its distribution as an article of foodeither by destruction or allowing its use for purposes other than for food and with proper safeguards. Secondly, the attention of the producers is directed to their unsatisfactory product and the processing, handling, packaging and the method of transport used, in order that investigation may trace the point at which contamination is introduced. In some cases by strict observance of hygiene the contamination has been eliminated, in others the problem appears difficult to solve. 35 The economics of the position — detention, delays for sampling and condemnation of cargoes exert strong pressures on the producer and the importer to put his house in order. To sum up, there are still many who maintain that as the evidence of this or that food ever having been directly responsible for food poisoning is at most flimsy or non-existent, there is no justification for any control — this was the attitude encountered during a survey of all types of imported cheese, some of which gave extremely unfavourable results — in fact during the survey a particular type of cheese under investigation was found to have been directly responsible for outbreaks of food poisoning in two hospitals affecting 120 patients. Of course a contaminated food does not always cause food poisoning, but it could, and it is just this possibility that justified the controls applied. The real justification of all this additional expense of money, time and effort must be that large quantities of contaminated food that would normally have reached the public not many years ago are now prevented from appearing on the market, and that producers must now apply sound hygienic principles to the production of food should they wish to avoid the condemnation of their cargoes. LEAD IN TEA Dr. H. Amphlett Williams, Public Analyst to the Corporation of London reports as follows:— A significant improvement appears to have resulted from the measure taken to reduce contamination of tea by lead and its compounds. When the inspection of imported tea was taken over from the Department of Customs and Excise in January 1959 by the City and Port Health Authorities the presence of lead was occasionally found in consignments from certain countries, notably China, Formosa and Indonesia, Quantities ranging from 10 to 30 parts per million were found in several consignments, and in single ones, respectively, 35, 45, 55, 60, 55-70, 80, 130-140 and 250-280 parts per million. In one special Formosa green tea, 350 parts per million of lead was found, probably introduced by the "facing". Having regard to the large quantities of tea consumed by a considerable section of the population and to the fact that lead is a cumulative poison, these proportions of lead might present a serious health hazard if the consignments were released for unrestricted use. Recognition by the Government of the dangers of consuming food contaminated by lead resulted in the passing of the Lead in Food Regulations, 1961, which came into force on 16th April, 1962. The regulations lay down a general limit for lead in food of 2 parts per million, although.tea has been treated more leniently, with a limit of 10 parts per million. This higher limit takes into account that only a proportion of the lead, estimated at about one third, has been found to pass into the infusion. As soon as the Regulations had been approved and before they came into force the attention of all principal London Importers and Tea Merchants was drawn to the new legal requirement for tea by circular letter, and an article on the occurrence of lead in tea, explaining in simple terms its danger to health and suggesting possible sources of contamination and means of prevention, was published in the Tea and Rubber Mail on 4th January, 1962. A comparison of the incidence of lead contamination in imported samples of tea with that of previous years is therefore of particular interest. Sampling of Tea on Importation CITY WHARVES 'PORT WHARVES TOTAL Number of samples Number with excess lead Number of samples Number with excess lead Number of samples Number with excess lead 1959 661 21 137 1 682 22 1960 1503 5 1688 24 3191 29 1961 1305 2 1330 43 2635 45 1962 1506 0 296 0 1796 0 The abseace of a single instance of excessive lead contamination in the consignments of tea samples at the City and Port wharves in 1962 is noteworthy. 36 It is also of interest to record an apparent fall in the average lead content of all samples taken since the Regulations came into force. The following Table shows the averages for the principal tea exporting countries, the 1962 averages being calculated separately for comparison with those of the proceeding years, 1959-1961, and all samples containing lead in excess of 10 parts per million being excluded. Average Lead Content of Tea Samples Exporting Country Lead, parts per Million 1959-1961 1962 Africa 3.2 2.3 Ceylon 3.2 2.0 China 3.9 2.4 F ormosa 4.4 3.0 India 2.6 2.5 Indonesia 3.8 2.1 Japan 5.2 4.2 Malaya 2.7 1.9 Pakistan - 2.6 South America 3.7 2.5 In quoting the above averages it should be apprehended that they are based upon the samples submitted for analysis. The true average lead contents of all tea imported from the countries mentioned will in all probability be slightly lower, because of the preponderance of dusts, fannings, damaged and lower grades of tea in the samples selected for analysis; but while the Port Inspectors' practice continues a comparison between successive year's averages should be valid. Although the exact origin of every parcel of tea is not always known, information available has been sufficient to enable the public analyst to compile records showing the lead content of tea from 330 different estates. From these records it would appear that variations between different grades at the same estate do occasionally occur, some of the dusts tending to give higher lead figures. RADIOACTIVITY OF TEA SAMPLES During May a number of samples of tea, selected at random, from Japan, India, Congo, Tanganyika, Kenya, Ceylon, Argentina, China and Indonesia, were submitted to examination for assessment of radioactive contamination and possible radiation hazard. At the same time, samples of a particular shipment which had passed through an area of possible fall-out were also submitted. The examinations were carried out by Dr. F.H. Kendall, F.R.I.C., at the Sir John Cass College, Jewry Street, E.C.3. who reported as follows:— "Comparison of the activities of the supposedly contaminated specimens with.those from a range of normal un-contaminated samples shows that there is no detectable difference. Since the measurement technique is sensitive to all forms of radiation except very low energy beta radiation (e.g. tritium) it may be safely concluded that contamination by fall out is negligible. The low level of activity present in all samples probably consists of naturally occurring radionuclides taken up from the soil, air and water of the tea plants enviroment". FERTILISERS AND FEEDING STUFFS ACT, 1926 FERTILISERS AND FEEDING STUFFS REGULATIONS, 1955 Eleven samples of Feeding Stuffs were submitted to the Agricultural Analyst. In each case the sample was found to be within the limits of variation permissible under the Regulations. 37 APPENDIX I MEDICAL INSPECTION — From 1st January to 31st December 1962 GRAVESEND Jan. Feb. Mar. April May June July Aug. Sept. Oct. Nov. Dec. Total No. of ships medically inspected 146 110 142 141 147 142 146 154 148 158 138 121 1,693 No. of passengers 24 25 557 814 777 3,351 3,674 3,006 2,902 719 379 595 16,823 No. of crew 1,039 691 505 688 362 208 578 564 784 327 151 293 6,190 No. of ships arriving from abroad 1,126 1,001 1,247 1,223 1,268 1,256 1,395 1,217 1,334 1,267 1,121 1,023 14,478 APPENDIX II INFECTIOUS DISEASES Disease 1953 1954 1955 1956 1957 1958 1959 1960 1961 1962 (a) Cases reported — Cholera (including suspected) — — — — — — — — — — Plague do. - - - - - - - - - - Yellow Fever do. — — — — — — — — 1 — Typhus Fever do. - - - - - - - - - - Smallpox do. 1 1 1 - - - - 1 2 5 Enteric Fever 8 6 8 5 3 7 5 1 — 2 Scarlet Fever 2 — 2 2 2 1 4 1 — 1 Measles 97 31 64 67 91 71 63 109 35 60 German Measles 6 7 5 3 7 25 2 8 12 14 Diphtheria — — 1 — — 1 — 1 2 - Erysipelas 1 — — 1 — — — — — — Pulmonary Tuberculosis 46 43 35 32 39 45 42 39 26 33 Other diseases (including chickenpox) 184 347 368 212 1,328 659 313 956 303 258 TOTALS 345 435 484 322 1,470 809 429 1,116 381 373 (b) Admitted to Hospital — Cholera (including suspected) - - - - - - - - - - Plague do. — — — — — — — — — - Yellow Fever do. — — — — — — — — — — Typhus Fever do. - - ' - - - - - - - - Smallpox do. — 2 — — — — — - — 3 Scarlet Fever - - - - 2 - - - - 1 Diphtheria - - - - - 1 - 1 - - Enteric Fever 1 — 3 — 2 3 3 3 — 2 Measles 16 21 12 20 35 5 8 10 11 11 Mumps 2 1 10 5 3 7 — 9 3 4 Dysentery — 6 6 — 1 4 7 1 1 4 Ot Other diseases (including chickenpox) 48 32 53 63 271 114 75 86 65 86 TOTALS 67 62 84 88 314 134 93 110 80 111 APPENDIX III RETURN OF RATS CAUGHT AND DESTROYED DURING THE YEAR 1962 Jan. Feb. Mar. April May June July Aug. Sept. Oct. Nov. Dec. Total LONDON DOCK - Warehouses 2 16 17 12 13 23 12 7 24 26 22 5 179 Vessels — — — — — — - - - — - - - ST. KATHARINE DOCK - Warehouses - - - - - - 1 - - - - - 1 Vessels — — — — - — — — — — — - - SURREY COMMERCIAL DOCK - Warehouses 1 40 1 3 11 1 - 4 5 17 1 5 89 Vessels 5 — 11 — 8 — - — - - - - 24 REGENT'S CANAL DOCK - Warehouses — - - - - - - - - 1 - - 1 Vessels - - - - - - - — - - - - - EAST INDIA DOCK - Warehouses 1 - - - - - - - 7 — 10 — 18 Vessels — — — — - — - - - - - - - WEST INDIA DOCK - Warehouses 14 9 15 - 31 6 14 5 11 16 7 14 142 Vessels - 1 8 - 14 74 1 20 4 - - 7 129 MILLWALL DOCK - Warehouses 1 14 11 36 6 26 10 7 23 10 6 5 155 Vessels - 28 39 17 1 - 1 7 - 42 22 - 157 ROYAL VICTORIA DOCK - Warehouses 28 21 23 29 46 32 71 47 29 40 7 19 392 Vessels 9 5 9 38 - 15 11 16 11 25 7 8 154 ROYAL ALBERT DOCK Warehouses 13 — 13 21 16 3 8 15 28 13 19 3 152 Vessels 56 — 27 1 11 10 1 13 1 5 19 17 161 KING GEORGE V. DOCK - Warehouses 10 2 1 1 — 1 8 3 6 6 - 3 41 Vessels 1 3 - 6 3 3 - - - 8 - 5 29 TILBURY DOCK - Warehouses 9 12 8 3 8 1 14 7 3 7 24 9 105 Vessels 58 47 9 18 88 21 10 5 41 21 4 — 322 RIVER - Vessels 28 39 17 45 80 9 46 100 75 3 21 69 532 TOTALS 236 237 209 230 336 225 208 256 268 240 169 169 2783 ) APPENDIX IV General Summary and Analysis of the Sanitary Inspections, etc. in the Port of London for the year ended 31st December, 1962. Type of Vessels/Premises Inspected Defective To be cleaned Foreign Going : Steam 12,615 173 502 Sail Nil Nil Nil Coastwise : Steam 1,678 22 8 Sail Nil Nil Nil Sub-Total 14,293 195 510 Inland Navigation: Steam 260 Nil 2 Sail 2 Nil Nil Lighters 856 11 25 Canal Boats : 86 19 3 Shore Premises : 10,243 103 114 Sub-Total 11,447 133 144 TOTAL 25,740 328 654 Areas where Foreign Going and Coastwise vessels were inspected Dock and River No. of Inspections London & St. Catherine 1,214 Regents Canal 417 Surrey Commercial 1,437 Fast India 297 West India 1,159 No. of vessels inspected in launches Millwall 682 Royal Albert 1,227 ("Alfred Roach" Royal Victoria 693 862 ("Howard Deighton" King George V 705 ("Humphrey Morris Upper River 1,398 Middle River 1,354 2,752 ("Frederick Whittingham" Lower River 862 ("Alfred Robertson" River Medway 1,157 Tilbury 1,691 10,679 Inspected in Docks, etc. TOTAL 14,293 14,293 Nationalities of Foreign Going and Coastwise Vessels Inspected No. of inspections No. of inspections American 105 Brought forward 11,835 Argentine 29 Italian 51 Bahamen 1 Japanese 59 Belgian 103 Javanese 2 British 7,604 Kuwait 3 Brazilian 12 Lebanese 23 Bulgarian 17 Levant 1 Canadian 1 Liberian 123 Costa Rica 4 Monrovian 7 Danish 304 Moroccan 3 Dutch 1,634 Nat. China 3 Egyptian 8 Nigerian 11 East German 2 Pakistan 39 Finnish 242 Panama 43 French 110 Persian 12 German 1,210 Polish 119 Ghana 60 Rumanian 2 Greek 214 Sudanese 4 Honduras 1 Spanish 170 Icelandic 4 South African 12 Indian 110 Sweden & Norway 1,478 Indonesia 4 Swiss 12 Iraqui 4 Turkish 62 Irish 2 Uruguay 9 Israeli 50 U.S.S.R. 124 Carried fordward 11,835 Yugoslavian 86 14,293 During 1962 Port Health Inspectors referred 136 sick seamen to hospital. APPENDIX V DOCKS WITHIN THE JURISDICTION OF THE PORT HEALTH AUTHORITY Dock Group Docks Water Area Acres Lineal Quayage Miles I London 34 3 St. Katharine 10 1 Regent's Canal 11 ½ II Surrey Commercial 135 8 III West India 97 4 East India 23 1 Millwall 35 2 IV Royal Victoria 85 4 Royal Albert 84 3 King George V 64 3 V Tilbury 106 4 The River distance between the Western and Eastern limits of the Port is about 68½ miles. POWERS The Principal Acts of Parliament and Statutory Instruments affecting the work of the Port Health Authority of the Port of London are:— ABATEMENT OF NUISANCES AND REMOVAL OF REFUSE Public Health (London) Act, 1936 ADMINISTRATION Public Health (London) Act, 1936 Order of the Local Government Board dated 30th June 1898, assigning further powers of the Port Sanitary Authority of London Public Health Officers Regulations, 1959 S.I. No. 962 ALIENS Aliens Order, 1953, S.I. No. 1671 Ministry of Health Instructions to Medical Inspectors, 1955 ANIMALS Export Cattle Protection Order, 1957, S.I. No. 170 Export Cattle Protection (Amendment) Order, 1957. S.I. No. 1254 CANAL BOATS Public Health Act, 1936 Public Health Act, 1961 COMMONWEALTH IMMIGRANTS Commonwealth Immigrants Act, 1962 Ministry of Health Instructions to Medical Inspectors, 1962 CONSTITUTION OF THE AUTHORITY Public Health (London) Act, 1936 CREW ACCOMMODATION Public Health (London) Act, 1936 DANGEROUS DRUGS Dangerous Drugs Regulations, 1953. S.I. No.499 Dangerous Drugs Regulations 1957. S.I. No.704 FERTILISERS AND FEEDING STUFFS Fertilisers and Feeding Stuffs Act, 1926 Fertilisers and Feeding Stuffs Regulations, 1960. S.I. No. 1165 FOOD Public Health (Imported Milk) Regulations 1926, S.R. & O. No.820. Public Health (Imported Food) Regulations, 1937 and 1948. S.R. & O. 1937, No.329: S.I, 1948, No. 886. S.I. 1948, No.1121 The Preservatives in Food Regulations, 1962. S.I. 1962, No. 1532 APPENDIX V (continued) The Meat (Staining & Sterilization) Regulations, 1960. S.I. No. 1268 Food and Drugs (Whalemeat) Regulations, 1949 and 1950. S.I. 1949, No.404; 1950, No.189 Food and Drugs Act, 1955 The Lead in Food Regulations, 1961. S.I. 1931 The Emulsifiers & Stabilisers in Food Regulations, 1962. S.I. No.720 Colouring Matter in Food Regulations 1957. S.I. No.1066 Antioxidant in Food Regulations, 1958. S.I. No. 1454 Fluorine in Food Regulations, 1959. S.I. No.2106 Arsenic in Food Regulations, 1959 and 1960. 1959 S.I. No. 831. 1960 S.I. No. 2261 The Food Hygiene (Docks carriers etc.) Regulations, 1960. S.I. No. 1602 The Food Hygiene (General) Regulations, 1960 and 1962. 1960 S.I. No.1601. 1962 S.I. No.228 FUMIGATIONS Hydrogen Cyanide (Fumigation of Ships) Regulations, 1951. S.I. No.1760 Hydrogen Cyanide (Fumigation of Buildings) Regulations, 1951. S.I. No.1759 HOUSEBOATS Public Health (London) Act, 1936 City of London (Various Powers) Act, 1933, Part III. Sections 6 and 7 INFECTIOUS DISEASE Public Health (London) Act, 1936 Public Health (Ships) Regulations, 1952 to 1961. S.I. 1952, No.1411; S.I. 1954, No.675; S.I. 1961, No. 13 Public Health (Infectious Disease) Regulations, 1953. S.I. No.299 RATS AND MICE Public Health (Ships) Regulations, 1952 to 1961. S.I. 1952, No.1411; S.I. 1954, No.675; S.I. 1961, No.13 Prevention of Damage by Pests Act, 1949 Prevention of Damage by Pests (Application to Shipping) Order, 1951. S.I. No.967 Prevention of Damage by Pests (Application to Shipping) (Amendment No.2) Order, 1956 Poison Rules, 1960 and 1961. S.I. 1960, No.699; S.I. 1961, No.1612 SHELLFISH Public Health (Shellfish) Regulations, 1934, S.R. & O. No.1342 Order dated 23rd April 1936 made by the Port Health Authority under the Public Health (Shellfish) Regulations, 1934 in respect of a "prescribed area" in Essex Order dated 25th July 1957 made by the Port Health Authority under the Public Health (Shellfish) Regulations, 1934 in respect of a "prescribed area" in Kent Medway (Shellfish) Regulations, 1935, S.R. & O. No.1221 SMOKE ABATEMENT Public Health (London) Act, 1936 Clean Air Act, 1956 Dark Smoke (Permitted Periods) Regulations, 1958. S.I. No.498 Dark Smoke (Permitted Periods) (Vessels) Regulations, 1958, S.I. No.878 BYE-LAWS Bye-laws have been made by the Port Health Authority: 1. For preventing nuisances arising from barges or vessels carrying offensive cargoes. 2. For removing to hospital any person suffering from dangerous infectious diseases, and for the keeping therein of such persons as long as may be deemed necessary. 3. With respect to houseboats used for human habitation within the limits of the Port of London. PUBLICATIONS OF THE PORT HEALTH AUTHORITY Corporation of London as the Port Health Authority of the Port of London: A Summary of Powers and Duties. Clean Food Handling. Social Services: Information as to National and Voluntary Organisations ready to assist the seafarer and his family. APPENDIX VI PESTICIDE RESIDUES IN FOOD. PROPOSED PUBLIC HEALTH CONTROL MEASURES (Extracted from "Pesticides Abstracts and News Summary", Section A, 1962) H. AMPHLETT WILLIAMS, Ph.D., A.C.G.F.C., F.R.I.C., F.R.S.H., Public Analyst, City of London Laboratories, King's Head Yard, Borough High Street, London, S.E.1. The possible occurrence in foodstuffs of residual traces of insecticides, fungicides and other agricultural chemicals that might constitute a danger to public health presents a problem of increasing difficulty to Food & Drugs and Port Health Authorities. The problem, which arises from the continuing production and use of an immense variety of new and highly complext pesticides, affects three fundamental aspects of food administration which may conveniently be dealt with under Sampling, Analysis and Enforcement. Sampling Until quite recently a non-volatile insecticidal spray applied to fruit could be relied upon to leave a visible residue when it dried. If the spray happened to be too strong or applied too near harvesting time the residue would be sufficiently noticeable to be seen by a food inspector, and the fruit could be sampled and tested for toxic substances. Many of the newer insecticides, however, might leave little or no residue when applied to fruit or vegetables. Visual evidence can therefore no longer be relied upon, and the absence of such a useful guide renders the job of the sampling officer, whether at the port or in the market, haphazard and wasteful. Analysis It has to be admitted that small, but possibly toxic, proportions of many of the new pesticides would escape detection in fruit and vegetable products in a general analysis of the kind hitherto carried out for the purposes of the Food & Drugs Act. Although methods for the analysis of residues of some of the new pesticides have, indeed, been worked out and published by the manufacturers they are usually difficult, lengthy and unsuitable for routine control in a general food laboratory. Moreover, the necessity for carrying out control determinations on similar plant material to that under test, with and without the pesticide for which the sample is to be tested, considerably increases the time required. The main difficulty, however, is that the analyst will not know which method to adopt unless he is informed which pesticide has been used. In the case of food sampled upon importation, the disposal of which may be held up for a time not exceeding 48 hours, it would be difficult for one such method of analysis to be completed satisfactorily within the time allowed; in the case of other samples perhaps two or three such methods could be completed. Unless, therefore, the analyst happens to select the appropriate method a toxic residue of one of the complex new pesticides might well be missed. No information is made available to the public analyst as to which insecticides are currently in use in the district where it was grown for the kind of produce of which he may have a sample. But, to take apples as an example, tolerances for no less than 45 different pesticides are mentioned in the Current Food Additives Legislation of the U.S.A., according to the F.A.O. Bulletin No. 34 of 15/5/60. Enforcement Although the toxicity of some of the new organic pesticides would appear from their literature to be as high as that of the most poisonous of the older inorganic insecticides, no safe limits for their residues in food have been laid down, nor even suggested, by either of the Ministries concerned, for the use of Local Authorities. Neither the analyst, nor any of the other officers of a Local Authority is usually in a position to ascertain by trial what is a safe limit for a chemical in food. Little useful information on toxicity to human beings is available in the literature, for there is not as yet sufficient case history of poisoning by the new products on which their minimum toxic dosage could be assessed. Limits for residues have, indeed, been published in the U.S.A. and elsewhere, but they are said to be based rather upon how much remains when the spray has been correctly applied than upon toxicity data. In the absence of official limits it would obviously be difficult to establish in a Court of Law that a residual trace of an insecticide was injurious to health. Hence, even if a sampling officer happened to procure a sample of contaminated produce, and the Analyst to detect the contaminant, the Local Authority might still be in no position to assess the danger, if any, nor to take suitable action. Proposed Remedies Consideration of the problems outlined above leads inevitably to the conclusion that they can only be solved by some measure of Government control of the use of potentially toxic pesticides. Three measures are suggested below, which, taken together, would seem to offer a possible solution: APPENDIX VI (continued) (1) Restriction of Choice of Pesticide That consideration should be given to a policy of reducing the number of potentially toxic residues by limiting the choice of remedies for any particular crop to, say, two or three products which shall have been recommended by an independent authority, e.g., one of the agricultural or horticultural research stations acting in conjunction with the General Medical Council, as having the lowest toxicity to human beings whilst affording adequate control of the pests to which the crop is subject. It is recognised that such a policy would involve drastic re-organisation among the manufacturers concerned. But it is felt that the interference and disadvantages to the chemical trade would be more than balanced by the following advantages : (a) the advantage to the farmer or market gardener in having the best and safest known remedies or prophylactices for his purposes ; (b) the reduction in manufacturing costs that should result from the larger quantities of fewer products required ; (c) the safeguarding of public health by avoiding as far as possible the more toxic products; (d) the simplifying of such analytical control as might still be necessary; (e) permitting the thorough toxicity trials necessary for a basis of official limits by reducing the immense number of pesticides now in use to a manageable few. It is not, of course, suggested that the search for better and safer pesticides should be suspended, but merely that use should be restricted to the two or three most suitable compounds at any given time. (2) Addition of Tracers Secondly, that consideration should be given to a policy of requiring by Government Order the incorporation of an easily detectable substance with any toxic pesticide before sale to a user. The use of a different tell-tale, or tracer, for each pesticide would enable an analyst, perhaps any other interested person, to discover by a simple examination or test what compound, or at least what class of compounds, was likely to have been used. The appropriate method of analysis could then be carried out, without loss of time; and the absence of the respective tracers would save laborious, time-consuming and unnecessary analyses for compounds which had not been used. Precedents for the addition of tracers to aid analysis exist in the addition of cornflour to margarine during the War (to distinguish between "Standard" and "Special" grades), and in the addition of diphenylamine and a red dye to "Commercial" petrol. To be suitable for the purpose the tracers selected would have to satisfy the following requirements, viz. to be — (1) non-toxic; (2) stable, and at least as resistant to weathering as the pesticide; (3) readily available and inexpensive; (4) capable of identification in microgram quantities; (5) uncommon substances and not normally associated with the crops on which they might be used; (6) non-reactive with either the crop or the pesticide, including its solvent or emulsifier, spreader, sticker, or water. It is suggested that a selection might be made from the following groups of substances:— (a) Pigments. Two pigments (carbon black and ultramarine) and 30 coal tar dyes are regarded as non-toxic and permitted in foods. The solubility of the dyes can be reduced by the formation of the calcium or aluminium lakes (also permitted), or, alternatively, by absorbing the dyes on suitable powdered resins, as in the manufacture of printing inks. (b) Starches. A wide choice of starchy powders that are easily recognisable under a microscope, such as potato, maize, rice, sago, bean, ginger, etc., is available. Turmeric powder falls under both headings. Such starches can readily be coloured, with permitted dyes. Thus the nature of a selected starch could be used to denote a particular group of pesticides, and the dye to denote the specific member of the group. This system might permit the marking of well over a hundred different pesticides; and, since the number of starch grains per microgram ranges from 70 in the case of potato to 10,000 in rice, there should be little difficulty in recognising sub-microgram quantities on the surface of fruit or vegetables. (c) Chemicals. Substances that are capable of detection by a simple chemical test, and unlikely to be toxic, in microgram quantities are known. The following might be considered:— Aluminium powder (which can be produced in many colours); zinc dust; manganese dioxide; indicators, soluble, insoluble and fluorescent; calamine and many other powdered minerals. APPENDIX VI (continued) It should perhaps be emphasized that the use of tracers is not suggested as affording a means by which a foodstuff could be condemned; it is solely to indicate to an analyst, or, if possible, to a sampling officer or even to the consumer, which particular pesticide, should be looked for and which would be absent. The use of tracers of the insoluble kinds mentioned in the first two groups above would not be suitable for use with systemic insecticides. But in view of the fact that insecticidal compounds can be produced which are absorbed by the plants through leaves and roots it would seem likely that other systemic chemical compounds could also be devised which could be utilised as tracers for such insecticides. Obviously, experiment would be necessary before suggestions could be made; but it is thought that the problem might be well within the capacity, if not within the present highly specialised knowledge, of the research organisations of the manufacturing companies. It is submitted that for the protection of the public the compulsory addition of suitable tracers should be considered as an alternative to banning the use of potentially toxic pesticides. (3) Advisory Service It is suggested that where no legal standards have been laid down Local Authorities should be kept advised by the Central Government on the following matters:— (i) If the use of tracers is adopted, as suggested above (2), which tracers are specified for each permitted pesticide; (ii) If the number of pesticides is restricted, as suggested above (i), which ones are permitted; (iii) Maximum safe limits, based solely upon public health considerations, for all permitted pesticides in food. It is recognised that a weakness of any system put forward for controlling the use of pesticides in this country would lie in its inability to cover imported produce. It is felt, however, firstly, that if the system suggested above could be successfully applied in this country the public would, at least, be able to rely upon home-grown produce. Secondly, that since Great Britain is one of the major exporting countries for agricultural chemicals its application to pesticides for export as well as to those for home use would automatically extend the same system of control to a substantial proportion of imported produce. Thirdly, it has been made abundantly clear, in numerous papers and speeches, as for example at the International Conference at the Pure Food Centenary last year (where these proposals were first made public), that other countries are faced with precisely the same problems; and, indeed, that public health administrators elsewhere are equally disturbed and actively seeking a practicable solution. It is hardly to be expected that any drastic proposals for pesticide control would be adopted internationally without adequate trial. But if the system proposed were adopted and found satisfactory in this country there is little doubt that it would receive careful consideration by F.A.O., and its adoption by the major chemical manufacturing countries should automatically extend the cover to the more agrarian countries and place the Port Health Authorities in a position to insist upon its application to all Imported produce.