ROMR 012 Romford Rural District Council. ANNUAL REPORT of the Medical Officer of Health, 19 13. To the Romford Rural District Council. Gentlemen, I have the honour to put before you my Annual Report on the Sanitary Condition of the Romford Rural District for the year ending December 31st, 1913. In accordance with the plan adopted in previous Reports, this Report is arranged in the following Divisions :— I. Summary of Action taken during the year for Preventing the Spread of Disease. II. An Account of the Sanitary Condition of the District generally. III. Statement of Enquiries tnade into Conditions Injurious to Health and Proceedings thereon. IV. Table of Sickness and Mortality. V. Action taken under the " Factory and Workshops ACT." VI. Reports of Sanitary Inspector to County Council. RECORDERS, LTD., ROMFORD. Summary of fiction taken during the year to prevent the spread of infectious disease. No Date. Locality. Disease. Action Taken. Result. 1. Jan. 4. Dagenham Scarlet Fever One case. Origin obscure. Removed. No other case. 2. „ 11. Dagenham Scarlet Fever One case. Contact with a case in New Road. Removed. No other case. 3. „ 14. Dagenham Scarlet Fever One case in a farmhouse, where milk is sent awav to London. Removed. Contact with milk from anyone in house discontinued for a fortnight. Removed. No other case. 4. „ 15 Great Warley Scarlet Fever One case in a large private house. Isolated at home. Room and bedding in disinfection. In hospital. Disinfected. No other case. 5. „ 20. Upminster Scarlet Fever One case. A return ease. Removed. No other case. 6. „ 28. Emerson Park Scarlet Fever One case. Contracted in London. Removed. No other case. 7. Feb. 6. Upminster Scarlet Fever One case. Infection presumably brought from London. Removed. No other case. 8. „ 10. Chadwell Health Diphtheria One case. Local sanitary defect. Removed. No other case. 9. „ 11. Brentwood Road Scarlet Fever One case notified. Not confirmed. 3 No. Date. Locality. Disease. Acttion Taken. Result. 10. Feb. 24. South Hornchurch Scarlet Fever One case. Origin obscure. Removed. . No other case. 11. „ 34. South Hornchurch Scarlet Fever Another case in an adjacent house. Origin obscure. Removed. See No. 12. 12. Mar. 3. South Hornchurch Scarlet Fever One case. Contact with No. 11. Re- moved. . No otiher case. 13. „ 6. North-West Hornchurch Scarlet Fever One case. A girl of 14. Works in a blouse factory at Romford. On visiting factory, I found a girl showing susnicious signs of having have Scarlet Fever lecently. This girl's attendance was stopped. Removed. Premises, etc., disinfected. . No other case. 14 „ 9. Dagenham Diphtheria One case. Cesspool and drain open for some days, in process of being connected with sewer. Removed. . No other case. 15. „ 15. North-West Hornchurch Scarlet Fever One case notified. Not confirmed. 16. „ 17 Emerson Park Scarlet. Fever One case. Origin obscure. Removed. No other oase. 17. „ 17. North-West Hornchurch Scarlet Fever One case. Contracted at a school in Romford, where several cases had occurred. Isolated at home. . See No. 19. 4 18. Mar. 22. Dagenham Scarlet Fever . One case. Origin obscure. Isolated at home. 18(a) „ 22. Rainham Scarlet Fever . One case. Origin obscure. Removed. . . No other case. 10. „ 22. North-Weat Hornchurch Scarlet, Fever . Another case in same house as No. 17. . Isolated at home. No other case. 30. „ 28. South Hornchurch Scarlet Fever . One case. Origin obscure. Removed. . . No other case. 21. „ 28. Dagenham Scarlet Fever . One case. Origin obscure. Removed. . . See No. 22. 22. „ 31. Dagenham Scarlet Fever . One case. Contact with No. 21. Re- . moved. No other case. 23. Ap4. 2. Dagenham Scarlet Fever . One case notified. Not confirmed. 24. „ 2. Rain ham Scarlet Fever . One case. Origin obscure. Removed. . . No other case. 25. „ 8. South Hornchurch Scarlet Fever . One case. Presumably infected by No. 20. Removed . No other case. 2G. „ 20. Upminster Scarlet Fever . . One case. Infection brought from . London. Removed. . No other case. 27. May 3. Great Warley Scarlet Fever . Two cases in one house. Infection imported. Removed. No other case. 28. „ 16 North-West Hornchurch Scarlet Fever . One case. A nurse from the Dartford . Isolation Hospital visited the house a few days ago. Removed. No other case. 29. June 11. Emerson Park Scarlet Fever . One case. Contracted in London. . Isolated home. No other case. 30. „ 18. Chadwell Heath . Scarlet Fever . One case. Contracted in adjoining . district of 11ford. Removed. No other case. 5 No. Date. Locality. Disease. .Action Taken. Result. 31. June 21. Rainham Scarlet Fever One case. Origin obscure. Removed. No other case. 32. July 8. Hornchurch Diphtheria One case A dubious one. 33. „ 12. Great Warley Scarlet Fever One cse. Origin obscure. 34. „ 29. New Road, Dagenham Diphtheria One case. Local sanitary defect. Removed. . No other case. 35. Aug. 1. Chadwell Heath Diphtheria One ease. Local sanitary defect. Removed. No other case. 36. „ 4. Havering Diphtheria One case. An elderly man, employed in emptying cesspools. A fatal case. Removed. No other case. 37. „ 21 and 22. Corbets Tey Scarlet Fever One case of two or three weeks' dura- tion. Not recognised. Another in an adjoining house. A contact, removed. No other case. 38. „ 22. Chadwell Heath Scarlet Fever A case notified from the London Hoe- pital, and removed to Metropolitan Asylums Board Hospital. . No otherase. 39. „ 22. North-West Hornchurch Poliomyelitis Notified from the London Hospital. 40. „ 25. North-W est Hornchurch . Scarlet Fever A case of ten days' duration. Not recognised. Removed. 6 41. Aug. 26. North-West Hornchurch . Scarlet Fever . Sister of last oase, who had been . visiting the patient. Removed. No other case. 42. „ 27. Dagenham . Scarlet Fever . Two cases. Infection imported. Removed. . No other case. 43. Sept. 1. Oh ad well Heath . . Acute Poliomyelitis . One case. Removed to the London Hospital. 41. „ 2. Emerson Park . Scarlet Fever . One case. Infection imported. Isola- . tion at home. No other case. 45. „ 2. Wennington . Scarlet Fever . A oase notified as Diphtheria. Re- . moved. Child recently discharged from Fulham Isolation Hospital visiting here. No other case. 46. „ 9. Squirrels Heath . Scarlet Fever One case. Brother came home from Plaistow Isolation Hospital a few days ago. Removed. . Mother also contracted Scarlet Fever. Not recognised, and infected three cases in adjacent urban district of Romford. 47. „ 14. South Hornchurch Scarlet Fever One case. Origin obscure. Removed. . No other case. 48. „ 18. Clydesdale Road Scarlet Fever One case. Infection imported, Removed. 49. „ 18. Squirrels Heath . Scarlet Fever Another case in same house as No. 46. Removed. . Mother subsequently developed Scarlet Fever, and three persons in adjacent urban district. 50. „ 27. South Hornohurch Scarlet Fever One oase. Removed. . See No. 60. 7 No. Date. Locality. Disease. Action Taken. Result. 51. Got. 3. Chadwell Heath Scarlet Fever One case. Presumably contracted at school in urban district of Ilford. Removed. No other case. 52. „ 4. Beacontree Heath Enteric Fever One case. A very severe one. Pre- sumably contracted by eating shell-fish. Removed. No other case. 53. „ 10. Upminster Scarlet Fever One case. Origin obscure. Removed. No other case. 54. „ 13-20. Dagenham Scarlet Fever Three cases in one house. Infection presumably brought by father. Removed. See No. 61. 55. „ 24. Park Lane, NortlhWest Hornchurch Scarlet Fever One case. Infection imported. Removed. No other case. 56. „ 24. Chadwell Heath Scarlet Fever One oase. Child attends Goodmayes School, where several children have had Scarlet Fever. Removed. No other case. 57. „ 22. Brentwood Road Poliomyelitis One case. Admitted to London Hospital. 58. Not. 13. Park Lane Scarlet Fever One case. An adult. Infection pre- sumably taken in London. Removed. . No other case. 8 59. Nov. 13. Dagenham Scarlet Fever One case. Contracted in London. Removed. . No other case. 60. „ 22. South Hornohurch Scarlet Fever Another oase in same house as No. 50. A return case. Removed. . No other case. 61. „ 22. Dagenham Diphtheria One case. Origin obscure (several cases of Scarlet Fever in the house). October 13 to 20. Removed. . No other case. 62. „ 29. Chadwell Heath Diphtheria One case. Local sanitary defects. Removed . No other case. 63. „ 30. Chadwell Heatlh Scarlet Fever One case. Child attends same Softool as No. 51. Removed. . A return case from this occurrence in January, 1914. 61 Dec. 8. Rainham Diphtheria A doubtful case. No D.B. found in culture from swab. Several cases of Scarlet Fever subsequently occurred in this house. . See No. 65. 65. „ 15 and 21. Rainham Scarlet Fever The first case in the house of suspected case of Diphtheria. No. 61. Others occurred in January, 1911. Removed. 66. „ 23, 24, 25, 27. Great Warley Scarlet Fever Eight cases in four houses. Or. investigation, I found. in one of the affected houses, a child desquamating. wiho had been attending School. Removed. Several other cases followed in January, 1914. 62. „ 20. Upminster Scarlet Fever One case. Removed. No other case. 9 10 Rather more cases of infectious disease, excluding Measles, were notified during the past than in the previous year—106 cases during 1913, 85 in the previous year—this increase being due to the greater prevalence of Scarlet Fever. The epidemic of Measles, reported as prevailing during the latter months of 1912, continued, as was the case pretty generally all over the country, for a considerable time, and did not cease until the end of July, 1913, the number of infectious diseases, not including Measles, being Scarlet Fever 64 Diphtheria 10 Erysipelas 28 Enteric Fever 1 Poliomyelitis 3 Total 106 The number for the three previous years were:— 1910 91 cases 1911 97 cases 1912 85 cases The following represents the different infectious diseases requiring action by your Sanitary OXcials during the year :— Small-Pox.—No case of this disease was notified during the year. I received several notices from Port Medical Officers giving names and addresses of those passengers or crew of vessels arriving in port, and in which Small-Pox had occurred during the voyage, who have stated their intention of coming into this district. In all such cases the individual is visited to see if he is free from the disease. Scarlet Fever.—61 cases of this disease were notified during the year, the several parishes of the district being affected as shown in the following table :— Dagenham 18 Hornchurch 22 Upminster, Cranham and Corbet's Tey 6 Great Warley 11 Rainham and Wennington 7 Total 64 11 With regard to Hornchurch Parish, most of these cases occurred in outlying parts of the parish, notably in North-West Hornchurch (practically a portion of the town of Romford). In the actual village of Hornchurch itself only three cases were notified. In all cases I endeavour to ascertain the source of infection, a matter in many cases practically impossible, no evidence of contact with previous cases being in such instances obtainable. I don't think that school attendance had as much to do with the occurrence of this disease as it has had in previous years, as reported by me, the School Masters and Mistresses being energetic in reporting to me all instances of suspected infectious disease. Scarlet Fever did not assume the form of an epidemic, all the cases notified occurring in a more or less isolated manner. Of the 64 cases notified, 50 were removed to the Isolation Hospital; the rest were treated at home, most of them being capable of being isolated in a satisfactory manner during their period of infection. In these latter cases instructions are given as to the precautions to be observed by persons living in the same house. In some instances, in the case of working people and when isolation could not be properly effected, I have succeeded, on visiting, in persuading the parents to have the case removed to the Isolation Hospital. Where cases are not removed, I receive, in most instances, notice from their Medical Attendant when the premises, etc., are ready for disinfection, and when this does not occur 1 instruct the Sanitary Inspector to call and make the necessary enquiries. Diphtheria.—10 cases were notified as under:— Dagenham 7 Hornchurch 2 Havering 1 Total 10 Several cases were reported to me, which, on bacteriological examination, were not confirmed. Most of these cases were associated with local sanitary defects, which were remedied. In all reported cases, the Sanitary Inspector makes a strict examination of the premises, testing the drains, etc. Measles.—A very large number of cases of this disease occurred, pretty nearly all over the district; 602 cases, in the following parishes : 12 Dagenham 214 Hornchurch 120 Upminster, etc. 166 Great Warley 2 Rainham, etc. 100 Total 602 Although this disease has been made a notifiable one, I cannot flatter myself that this precaution of the Council, adopted on my advice, has had the desired effect of checking the progress of this disease when once established. School attendance is undoubtedly the principal source of infection, and although advice was given to authorities of schools not to admit children suspected of showing symptoms of an impending attack of Measles, these symptoms being explained to them, and although the Council went to the expense of distributing pamphlets to all parents who had school-attending children, explaining the signs of the onset of Measles and cautioning them not to send such children to school until satisfied by their doctor (or by me, who undertook to visit all suspicious cases when a doctor was not called in), none of these steps seemed to have much influence in checking the disease until the schools affected were closed. This closure of schools was effected in various localities, after conference with the School Medical Officer. In any future threatened outbreak of this disease, I think it will be a matter of consideration whether the particular school affected should not be closed at an earlier period of a threatened outbreak, should the ordinary proceeding recommended by the Education Board not prove to be successful. Fortunately the mortality was low—only five deaths resulting from this disease, a result probably due to the comparatively mild weather during which the epidemic prevailed, thus preventing the occurrence of Bronchitis and Pneumonia, which are the most potent factors in causing death from Measles. Possibly the distribution by the Council of leaflets (as before mentioned) giving instructions as to the management of cases of Measles in children whose parents (of whom they are many) consider Measles too trivial a disease to require the calling in of medical aid, may have contributed to the low mortality. On the notification of a case of Measles occurring in a family where there were children attending school, a printed notice is sent to the school authority advising the exclusion of any member of the family from school for a fortnight following the outbreak of the disease. Whooping Cough (not a notifiable disease) prevailed to a considerable extent in various parts of the district and caused six deaths. 13 Diarrhoea.—This disease was but slightly prevalent, undoubtedly due to the absence of any period of sustained heat during the summer months. Nine deaths resulted from this disease, seven of which occurred in children under two years of age. The subjoined table shows the degree in which infectious disease occurred in the various parishes of the district:— Dagenham, Beacontree and Chadwell Heath. Havering. Hornchurch. Upminster, Cranham and Corbets Tey. Great Warley. Rainham and Wennington Scarlet Fever 18 ... 22 6 ... 7 Diphtheria 7 1 2 ... ... ... Enteric Fever 1 ... ... ... ... ... Puerperal Fever ... ... ... ... ... ... Erysipelas 14 ... 9 1 2 2 Measles '214 ... 120 166 2 100 In accordance with your instructions, I visit all cases notified by their Medical Attendant as requiring removal to the Isolation Hospital before such removal, with the exception of cases (very few) of urgency, when speedy removal is essential to the welfare of the patient, a practice which prevents the admission of unconfirmed cases into the Hospital, and one which is not in the least resented by the Medical Attendant. When I see doubt in confirming the diagnosis, I communicate with the Medical Attendant, and, either after a personal consultation or otherwise, a satisfactory arrangement is made. In doubtful cases of Diphtheria, swabs are, as a rule, taken from the throat of the suspected cases by their Medical Attendants (who are supplied by the Hospital with sterile swabs), and are sent to me for bacteriological examination in the Hospital Laboratory for cultivation and examination without charge. Antitoxin is supplied, free of charge, to Doctors applying for it, for the use of poor persons. In all cases of Scarlet 14 Fever, Diphtheria, and Enteric Fever, the rooms occupied by the patient, the bedding-, etc., are disinfected, without unavoidable delay, by the Sanitary Inspector, after removal, at the patient's house, except in cases which have been treated at home; in the latter case, the bedding-, clothing, and everything requiring disinfection, otherwise than can be washed in disinfectants, are removed in the special van of the Hospital to the steam disinfector and, after disinfection, returned to the owner. The adoption of this practice is deemed to be sufficiently effective, it being very rare for a second case to occur in the same house subsequently to this action. II.—An account of the sanitary condition of the district at the end of 1913. In complying with this section of the Local Government Board's instructions to Medical Officers of Health, I proceed to give a short account of the sanitary state of the district under the same heads of localities as are given in the statistical tables. Dagenham, Beacontree and Chadwell Heaths.—Villages and scattered groups of houses, all situate in the parish of Dagenham and occupying a very wide area, standing on gravel and London clay, some (part of Dagenham village and immediate neighbourhood) on alluvium. Mainly agricultural, some (Dagenham village and adjacent locality) employed in a large telephone factory, in enginering works and on river-side labour. Water supply mainly from South Essex Water Co. A few private wells. The sanitary condition of the village of Dagenham has been, the last few years, much more satisfactory than it was previous to the establishment of the very extensive system of sewerage for the main portion of this wide parish. Houses (working-class) have been, when found to fee insanitary, put into decent habitable condition. There is, decidedly, a want here of house accommodation for the working class, and this want, although it is now being met by the laying out of a building estate for this class of house, near the Railway Station, the class of house being erected is hardly suitable for the labouring classes. This is being done by a private company on Cambey farm, and it is proposed to erect about 250 cottages here. So far about 12 have been built or are in process of being built. A systematic inspection of cottages under the provision of the " Housing and Town Planning Act " is carried out fey the Sanitary Inspector, who reports to me failures in sanitary condition, and to the Council, and the necessary improvements have hitherto been effected by the owner, sometimes with much 15 perseverance on the part of the Inspector, without resort to legal proceedings. Scavenging is done by the Council's contractors', pail closets where existing, owing to the impracticability of connection with the main sewer, being regularly carted away by the contractor and the pails sprinkled with lime; cesspools existing for the same reason emptied by the Council's motor cesspool emptier, or by private contract. Estimated population, 8,250. Birth rate, 21.8. Death rate, 10.1. Infantile mortality, 1.6. Death rate from zymotic disease, 0.4. Hornchurch.—Large village and scattered groups of houses, extending over a large parochial area. Part of the parish (North West Hornchurch) adjoining and actually forming part of the town of Romford. Stands mostly on gravel, partly on clay, and some small part, running down to the River Thames, on alluvium. Principally agricultural. Foundry and Brewery in the village. Bone boiling and soap factory and a very extensive refuse shoot for condemned tinned provisions from the Port of London, situated on the banks of the Thames. An increasing number of residents, mostly engaged in London. Water supply mainly from South Essex Co.'s mains. A few private wells in the more isolated parts of the parish. The village and all but the most out-lying parts of the parish are sewered. Pail closets (periodically emptied by contract) existing for the most part where the sewer is unavailable. Scavenging by contract. Dustbins being emptied weekly in summer, fortnightly in winter. Population, 9,820. Birth rate, 20.4. Death rate 8.3. Infantile mortality, 1.1 Death rate from zymotic disease, 0.4. In this parish there is an undoubted want of dwellings for the working class. This deficiency is being met, to a certain extent, bv the erection of 18 cottages in Abbs Cross Lane, by the Council. Upminster, Cranham, and Corbets Tey.—Adjoining villages standing on high ground. Mostly brick earth, some gravel. Population (estimated), 3,400. Mainly agricultural. An increasing number of good class residences and villas being erected on the "Garden City Estate," Upminster. The occupiers, for the most part, engaged in London. Water supply mainly from South Essex Co. 's mains, a few private wells in the more outlying part of the district. Sewers, except in some parts. Scavenging and collection of pail closet contents by contract. Birth rate, 16.7. Death rate, 7.3. Death rate from zymotic disease, 0.6. Infantile mortality, 0.5. 16 Great Warley.—Stands high on London clay. The most thickly populated part of the parish forms part of the town of Brentwood, the large and less populated area having scattered houses and groups of houses. Population, 2,180. Agricultural. Water supply mainly from South Essex Co.'s mains. Birth rate, 29.3. Death rate, 8.7. Death rate from zymotic disease, nil. Infantile mortality, .004. Rainham and Wennington.—Lie low on gravel and alluvium, at the edge of the Thames. Marshy. Villages of 2,560 inhabitants, employed in agricultural, factory and riverside works. Tidal stream runs through Rainham to the Thames, about a mile distant. Very much improved in its sanitary condition and its freedom from zymotic disease since the provision of a sewer scheme a few years ago. Scavenging by contract. Water supply mainly from South Essex Co.'s mains. Birth rate, 25.7. Death rate, 10.1. Infantile mortality, 1.1. Death rate from zymotic disease, 0.3. Havering.—Stands high on pebble sand, bounded by London clay. Population, 400. Agriculture and good class residents. Water supply by private wells. Recently Lord O'Hagan has extended the South Essex main to his residence and adjacent cottages, allowing the public elementary school to be connected. Birth rate, 25. Death rate, 10. Infantile mortality, nil. Death rate from zymotic disease, 2.5. Noak Hill.—Stands high on London clay. Agricultural. Water supply indifferent, the water area being very difficult to tap, several boring attempts in recent years having failed to obtain supplies. Recently an old well has been opened in Smith's Lane, where most of the inhabited dwellings are, which has been, on analysis, found to be good, and which promises a fair supply. The South Essex water main is now (February) being laid in the village. Population, 230. Death rate, nil. Infantile mortality, nil. Death rate from zymotic disease, nil. In sparsely populated districts statistics, of course, show no sign of healthiness or otherwise. III.—An account of Enquiries as to the Conditions Injurious to Health, existing in the district, and of the proceedings relating to such conditions in which advice has been given, etc., etc. Dagenham, Beacontree, and Chadwell Heath. Jan. 1st.—Dagenham.—Swine kept so as to be a nuisance. Notice Remedied. 17 Jan. 2nd.—Dagenham.—Foul drain and overflowing cesspool. Notice. Remedied. Jan. 2nd.—Chadwell Heath.—Swine kept so as to be a nuisance. Notice. Remedied. Jan. 2nd.—Marks Gate.—'Defective drain and closet, etc. Notice. Remedied. Jan. 4th.—Dagenham.—Damp and dilapidated house. Notice. Remedied. Jan. 4th.—Ditto.—Deposit of manure near dwellings. Notice. Remedied. Jan. 6th.—Chadwell Heath.—Complaint of black smoke issuing from shop chimney. Notice. Remedied. Jan. 7th.—Dagenham.—Swine kept so as to be a nuisance. Notice. Remedied. Jan. 10th.—Ditto.—Foul ditch. Notice. Remedied. Jan. 13th.—Chadwell Heath.—Defective drain to stables. Notice. Remedied. Jan. 15th.—Dagenham.—Two cottages damp and insanitary. Notice. Closed. Jan. 17th.—Ditto.—Defective drain. Notice. Remedied. Jan. 20th.—Five Elms.—Fowls kept so as to be a nuisance. Notice. Remedied. Jan. 29th.—Marks Gate.—Defective cesspool. Notice. Remedied. Jan. 29th.—Collier Row.—Hainault School cesspool overflowing into roadside ditch, causing a nuisance. School now being reconstructed. Feb. 5th.—Dagenham. — Accumulation of manure. Notice. Remedied. Feb. 12th.—Beacontree Heath.—Two houses insanitary, foul cesspool. A case of diphtheria here. Notice. Drain connected with sewer. Feb. 14th.—Chadwell Heath.—Two damp and dilapidated houses. Notice. Remedied. Feb. 17th.—Five Elms.—Three foul privy pits. Notice. Connected with sewer. Feb. 22nd.—Dagenham.—Filthy premises. Notice. Remedied. Feb. 25th.—Ditto.—Three houses not connected with sewer. Notice. Remedied. Mar. 5th.—Chadwell Heath.—House with no drains, etc. Notice. Remedied. Mar. 5th.—Ditto.—Defective w.c. and yard paving. Notice. Remedied. Mar. 11th.—Ditto.—Ten houses with defective drainage. Now being connected with a new sewer laid. Mar. 10th.—Dagenham.—Three dilapidated houses. After much trouble, now being repaired. Mar. 10th.—Station Road.—Eight houses damp and dilapidated. Notice. Remedied. 18 Mar. 10th.—Chigwell Road.—Six houses with foul privy pits. Pits filled in and pail closets provided. Mar. 14th.—Dagenham.—Insanitary cow shed. Notice. Remedied. Mar. 28th.—Chadwell Heath.—Defective surface drain. Notice. Remedied. Mar. 31st.—Dagenham.—Four damp houses. Notice. Remedied. April 5th.—Chadwell Heath.—Two houses with blocked drains. Notice. Remedied. April 7th.—Marks Gate.—Insufficient sanitary appliances. Notice. Remedied. April 14th.—Chadwell Heath.—Insanitary slaughter house. Notice. Remedied. April 15th.—Marks Gate.—Two houses with bad sanitary arrangements. Notice. Remedied. April 25th.—Dagenham.—Swine kept so as to be a nuisance. Notice. Remedied. May 2nd.—Chigwell Road.—Accumulation of manure near dwellings. Notice. Remedied. May 8th.—Dagenham. do. do. do. Notice. Remedied. May 13th.—Chadwell Heath.—Accumulation of offal. Notice. Remedied. May 14th.—Dagenham.—Ducks kept so as to be a nuisance. Notice. Remedied. May 21st.—Ditto.—Dilapidated premises. Notice. Remedied. May 26th.—Ditto.—Defective cesspool and drain. Notice. Connected with sewer. May 29th.—Marks Gate.—Two houses with insanitary privies. Notice. Pail closets provided. June 4th.—Ditto.—Defective cesspool. Notice. Remedied. June 9th.—Ditto.—Defective privies. Notice. Pail closets provided. June 13th.—Chadwell Heath.—Premises with no sanitary convenience, Notice. Remedied. June 24th.—Dagenham.—Foul drain. Notice. Connected with sewer. June 28th.—Ditto.—Blocked drain and defective w.c. Notice. Remedied. June 28th.—Chadwell Heath.—Foul w.c. Notice. Remedied. July 18th.—Ditto.—Defective drain. do. do. July 24th.-—Ditto.—Three damp and dilapidated houses. Notice. Remedied. July 25th.—Ditto.—Two houses with defective drain. Notice. Remedied. July 31st.—Dagenham.—Insanitary cow shed. Notice. Remedied. 19 Aug. 2nd.—Chadwell Heath.—Foul water cistern. Notice. Abolished and direct supply put on. Aug. 9th.—Dagenham.—Blocked drain. Notice. Remedied. Aug. 12th.—Chadwell Heath.—Deposit of filth near dwelling. Notice. Remedied. Aug. 18th.—Dagenham.—Filthy house. Notice. Remedied. Sept. 17th.—Ditto.—Six damp and dilapidated houses. Notice. Remedied. Sept. 19th.—Chadwell Heath.—Two ditto. Notice. Remedied. Sept. 22nd.—Dagenham.—One house dilapidated and with no water supply. Notice. Remedied. Oct. 2nd.—Ditto.—Accumulation of manure near dwelling. Notice. Remedied. Oct. 3rd.—Ditto.—Overcrowding. Notice. Remedied. Oct. 10th.—Chadwell Heath.—House damp. Notice. Remedied. Oct. 13th.—Dagenham.—Four houses with blocked drains. Notice. Remedied. Oct. 15th.—Chadwell Heath.—Swine kept so as to be a nuisance. Notice. Remedied. Oct. 16th.—Ditto.—Blocked drain. Notice. Remedied. Oct. 16th.—Ditto.—Accumulation of refuse. Notice. Remedied. Nov. 1st.—Ditto.—Animal kept so as to be a nuisance. Notice. Remedied. Nov. 13th—Dagenham.—Two houses damp and dilapidated. Notice. Remedied. Nov. 17th.-—Ditto.—Three houses do. Closing order made. Houses now (February) being restored. Nov. 17th.—Ditto.—Dilapidated premises. Notice. Remedied. Nov. 17th.—Halbutt Street.—Cow shed and yard insanitary. Notice. Remedied. Nov. 19th.—Dagenham.—Blocked drain. Notice. Remedied. Nov. 25th.—Chadwell Heath.—Defective surface water drain. Notice. Remedied. Dec. 3rd.—Dagenham.-—Eight houses insanitary. Notice. Remedied. Dec. 3rd.—Chadwell Heath.—Two houses do. do. medied. Dec. 8th.—Ditto.—Defective drain. Notice. Remedied. Dec. 20th.—Ditto. do. do. do. do. Dec. 31st.—Ditto.—Filthy house. do. do. Rainham and Wennington. Jan. 6th.—Rainham.—Five houses damp and dilapidated. Notice. Remedied. Jan. 8th.—Wennington.—One do. do. do. Remedied. 20 Jan. 13th.—Rainham.—Four houses dilapidated, etc. Notice. Remedied. Jan. 13th.—Ditto.—Two cottages with defective drains, etc. Notice Remedied. Jan. 21st.—Ditto.—Foul ditch from cesspool overflowing. Notice. House connected with sewer. Jan. 31st.—Ditto.—Damp premises. Notice. Remedied. Feb. 7th.—Ditto.—Six houses insanitary. Notice. Remedied. Feb. 10th.—Wennington.—House damp and dilapidated. Condemned, but not obeyed, as there is no other house for the occupier to take. Feb. 10th.—Ditto.—Six houses damp and dilapidated. Notice. Remedied. Feb. 13th.—Rainham.—Dilapidated house. Notice. Remedied. April 4th.—Ditto.—Two houses with blocked drains and w.c. Notice. Remedied. April 5th.—Wennington. do. do. do. Remedied. May 3rd.—Rainham.—Two houses with blocked drains. Notice. Remedied. May 3rd.—Ditto. do. do. do. do Remedied. May 16th.—Ditto.—Eight houses ditto and with insanitary w.c. Notice. Remedied. May 16th.—Ditto. Damp premises. Notice. Remedied. May 28th.—Ditto.—Two houses with blocked drain. Notice. Remedied. May 30th.—Ditto.—Two houses with insanitary yards. Notice. Remedied. June 21st.—Wennington.—Blocked drain. Notice. Remedied. July 4th.—Ditto.—Five houses with defective cesspools. Notice. Remedied. July 14th.—Rainham.—Filthy and overcrowded house. Notice. Remedied. July 17th.—Wennington.—Accumulation of refuse near house. Notice. Remedied. July 17th.—Rainham.—Four houses with blocked drains. Notice. Remedied. July 26th.—Ditto.—Four dilapidated houses. Now being rebuilt. Aug. 15th.—Rainham Ferry.—Manure factory burnt down. Business being carried on with very faulty conditions. It is now amended, on notice being served on owner, and premises now being rebuilt. Aug 25th.—Wennington.—Swine kept so as to be a nuisance. Notice. Remedied. Sept. 18th.—Ditto.—Eleven houses damp and dilapidated. Notice. Remedied. 21 Sept. 25th.—Rainham.—Blocked drain and insanitary yard. Notice. Remedied. Oct. 1st.—Ditto. do. do. do. do. Remedied. Oct. 6th.—Ditto.—Insanitary house and yard. Notice. House closed. Oct. 6th.—Ditto.—Four houses with insanitary yards. Notice. Remedied. Oct. 6th.—Ditto.-—Foul w.c. Notice. Remedied. Oct. 6th.—Ditto.—Dilapidated house. Notice. Remedied. Oct. 6th.—Ditto.—Block drain do. do. Oct. 9th.—Wennington.—Damp and dilapidated house. Notice. Remedied. Oct. 18th.—Ditto.—Dirty premises, etc. Notice. Remedied. Nov. 3rd.—Ditto.—Four houses damp. do. do. Nov. 14th.—Rainham.—Five houses with blocked drains, etc. Notice. Remedied. Dec. 12th.—Ditto.—Four houses damp and dilapidated. Notice. Remedied. Dec. 12th.—Wennington.—Four houses with insufficient sanitary accommodation. Notice. Remedied. Dec. 12th.—Ditto.—Foul pig-styes. A nuisance. Stable used as a dwelling. Notice served to close stable, and to remedy the swine nuisance. Now (February) being slowly carried out, but stable still used as dwelling. Closing order served. Hornchurch. Jan. 1st.—Park Lane.—Defective w.c. Notice. Remedied. Jan. 7th.-—Ditto.—Offensive manure pit. Notice. Remedied. Jan. 11th.—Wingletye Lane.—Complaint of manure. Remedied. Jan. 13th.—Ardleigh Green.—Blocked drain, owing to an obstruction in main sewer. Remedied. Jan. 16th.—Wingletye Lane.—Bad drainage. Pollution of well water. Drain remedied. Well cleansed. Jan. 24th.—Squirrels Heath.—Blocked drain and overflowing cesspool. House connected with sewer. Jan. 24th.—Ardleigh Green.—Blocked drain. Notice. Remedied. Jan. 25th.—High Street.—Dilapidated dwelling. Report to Council. Notice. Repaired. Jan. 30th.—Lower Richmond Street.—Blocked drain. Notice. Remedied. Feb. 1st.—South Hornchurch.—Blocked drain. Notice. Remedied. Feb. 14th.—Ditto. do. do. do. do. Feb. 17th.—North Street, Hornchurch.—Foul drain. Notice. Remedied. 22 Feb. 17th.—Station Lane.—No dustbin to two houses. Notice. Remedied. Feb. 19th.—Slewins Lane.—Dust shoot complained of. Report to Council. Feb. 26th.—High Street.—Dirty slaughter-house. Notice. Remedied. Feb. 26th.—South Hornchurch.—Latrines at rifle range insanitary. Notice. Remedied. Feb. 28th.—North Street.—Damp and dilapidated cottage. Closed voluntarily by owner. Mar. 3rd.—Harold Wood.—Cow shed insanitary. Notice. Remedied. Mar. 7th.—Douglas Road.—Defective drain. Notice. Remedied. Mar. 12th.—Lower Richmond Street.—Defective w.c. Notice. Remedied. Mar. 13th.—Globe Road.— Defective w.c. Notice. Remedied. Mar. 13th.—Claremont Road.—No dustbin to house. Notice. Remedied. Mar. 14th.—Osborne Road.—Defective drain. Cases of sore throats. Notice. Remedied. Mar. 25th.—Hornchurch Road—Gravel pit used as a shoot for dustbin refuse. Too near to dwelling. Refuse covered with earth, and practice discontinued. Mar. 28th.—Hornchurch.— Manure overflow into road from defective manure pit. Notice. Remedied. Mar. 31st.—Harold Wood.—Nuisance complained of owing to blowing about of waste paper from dust shoot. Nuisance abated, and refuse covered with earth. April 4th.—South Hornchurch.—Damp and dilapidated cottage. Notice. Remedied. April 4th.—Ditto. do. do. do. Notice. Remedied. April 9th.—Ditto.—Dirty cottage. Notice. Remedied. April 10th.—Station Lane.—Defective drain. Notice. Remedied. April 10th.—Ditto.—House without dustbin. do. do. April 10th.—Blind Lane.—Pail closet refuse deposited on ground too near road. Deposit covered with earth and contractor warned to put refuse in the field further from road. April 14th.—Hornchurch.—Accompanied Local Government Board Inspector in inspection of cottage accommodation in village, prior to his public inquiry on the matter. April 23rd.—Harold Wood.—House disinfected and cleansed after a death from phthisis. April 28th.—Slewins Lane.—Dust shoot complained of. Report to Council that no nuisance existed. May 2nd.—Harold Wood.—Dirty dairy and cow shed. Notice. Remedied. 23 May 14th.—Claremont Road.—Defective drain to two houses. Notice. Remedied. May 16th.—South Hornchurch. do. do. do. Notice. Remedied. May 16th.—Ditto.—Dirty dairy. Notice. Remedied. May 19th.—Douglas Road.—Drain and sewer blocked. Notice. Remedied. May 26th.—Brentwood Road.—Manure accumulation near house. Notice. Remedied. May 26th.—South Hornchurch.—Defective pail closet. Notice. Remedied. May 26th.—Douglas Road.—Dirty dairy and milk store. Notice. Remedied. May 26th.—Brentwood Road.—Defective drain. Notice. Remedied. May 28th.—Ardleigh Green. do. do. do. do. June 13th.—South Hornchurch.—Defective cesspool. Notice. Remedied. June 13th.—Ditto.—Defective cesspool. Notice. Remedied. June 21st.- -Ditto.—Notice to provide proper sanitary accommodation and water to pea pickers' encampment. June 27th.—Hornchurch.—Verminous children sent from school. Two dwellings visited, and instructed parents. June 27th.—Ditto.—Pea pickers' encampment foul. Notice. Remedied. July 3rd. -Ditto.—Bedroom of cottage filled with heap of hay. Notice. Remedied. July 8th.—South Hornchurch.—Dilapidated cottage. Notice. Remedied. July 10th.—Lower Richmond Street.—Blocked drains, etc. Notice. Remedied. July 21st.—Globe Road. do. do. do. Remedied. July 21st.—Wheatsheaf Road. do. do. do. Remedied. July 25th.—South Hornchurch. do. do. do. Remedied. Aug. 11th.—North-West Hornchurch. do. do. do. Remedied. Aug. 22nd.—Harold Wood.—Foul cottages. Notice. Remedied. Sept. 3rd.—Hornchurch.—Lavatory at brewery foul. Notice. Remedied. Sept. 3rd.—Lower Richmond Street.—Dirty cottages. Notice. Remedied. Sept. 10th.—Harold Wood.—Nuisance caused by deposit of stable manure. Notice. Remedied. Sept. 12th.—Ditto.—Dilapidated houses in Station Road. Now being restored. 24 Sept. 16th.-—Hornchurch.—Defective drain. Notice. Remedied. Sept. 17th.—South Hornchurch.—Water supplying cottages examined and found to be good. Sept. 17th.—Ditto.—Ditto, ditto. Sept. 17th.—Ditto.—Ditto, ditto. Sept. 22nd.—Hornchurch.—Dirty premises. Notice. Remedied. Sept. 23rd.—Lower Richmond Street.—Defective drain. Notice. Remedied. Sept. 29th.—Hornchurch.—Blocked drain. Notice. Remedied. Oct. 12th.—Dymoke Road. do. do. do. Oct. 16th.—Kyme Road.—No dustbin and defective drain. Notice. Remedied. Oct. 24th.—Park Lane. Blocked drain. Notice. Remedied. Oct. 30th.—Osborne Road. do. do. do. Oct. 30th.-—Hornchurch.—Defective w.c. do. do. Oct. 30th.—Ditto.—Dirty premises. do. do. Nov. 14th.—Lower Richmond Street.—Blocked drain and water fittings defective. Notice. Remedied. Nov. 19th.—South Hornchurch.—Dirty premises. Notice. Remedied. Nov. 22nd.—Harold Wood.—Two cottages with no dustbin. Notice. Remedied. Nov. 22nd.—Ditto.—One cottage with no dustbin. Notice. Remedied. Nov. 22nd.—Ditto. do. do. do. do. Remedied. Dec. 3rd.—Park Lane do. do. do. do. Remedied. Dec. 17th.—Harold Wood.—Filthy premises and water fittings defective. Notice. Remedied. Havering and Noak Hfll. Feb. 1st.—Noak Hill.—Well out of working owing to defective pump. Notice. Remedied. April 23rd.—Ditto.—Cow shed and dairy insanitary. Notice. Remedied. April 23rd.—Ditto.—Dilapidated w.c. Notice. Remedied. May 22nd.—Havering.—Water from village pump analysed and found to be good. Aug. 11th.—Ditto.—Defective cottage. Notice. Remedied. Sept. 13th.—Noak Hill.—Defective w.c. do. do. Sept. 19th.—Ditto.—Water from school well analysed. Good. Water from Baker's cottages analysed. Good. Water from well opposite church analysed, Good, 25 Sept. 26th.—Havering Brickfields.—.Swine kept so as to be a nuisance. Notice. Remedied. Oct. 3rd.—Havering.—Water from Goodwin Cottages well and Orange Tree Cottages analysed. Good. Nov. 30th.—Ditto.—Two damp and defective cottages. Notice. Remedied. Upminster, Cranham, and Corbets Tey. Jan. Gth.—Upminster Hall.—A case of diphtheria. Defective drain. Notice. Remedied. Jan. 21st.—Upminster.—Cottage insanitary. Notice. Remedied. Feb. 12th.—Cranham.—Dilapidated cottage and foul cesspit. Notice. Remedied. Feb. 21st.—Upminster.—Insanitary cow shed. Notice. Remedied. Mar. 12th.—Ditto.—Defective w.c. do. do. Mar. 25th.—Upminster Common.—Dilapidated cottage. Noticc. Remedied. April 3rd.—Ditto.—Foul ditch and cesspool. Notice. Remedied. May 2nd.—Ditto.—Dairy and cow shed insanitary. Notice. Remedied. May 30th.—Ditto.—Cesspool overflowing. Notice. Remedied June 2nd.—Cranham.—Foul ditch from overflow of cesspool.—cesspool disconnected and provided with a pump. Aug. 18th.—Upminster.—Complaint of dirty cottages. Visited, but found no reason to interfere. Aug. 18th.—Ditto.—Accumulation of refuse near cottage. Notice. Remedied. Sept. 16th.—Ditto.—Three cottages with no dustbin. Notice. Remedied. Sept. 30th.—Cranham.—Foul ditch. Notice. Remedied. Oct. 2nd.—Pot Kilns. do. do. do. Oct. 9th.—Upminster.—Foul lavatory to workshop. Notice. Remedied. Oct. 12th.—Pot Kilns.—Defective drain. Notice. Remedied. Oct. 18th.—Cranham.—Defective w.c. do. do. Oct. 28th.—Upminster.—Two dilapidated cottages. Notice. Remedied. Oct. 29th.—Corbets Tey.—Water from Keeling Cottages analysed and found good. Oct. 29th.—Ditto.—Water from Smith's Cottage analysed and found good. Oct. 31st.—Upminster.—Bakery insanitary. Notice. Remedied. Nov. 6th.—Ditto.—Defective drain. do. do. Nov. 28th.—Station Road, Upminster.—Stable manure near dwelling. Notice. Remedied. 26 Dec. 9th.—Upminster.—Water from Hunt Hill Cottages, Bramble Cottages, and Wheal Hall Cottages analysed. Good. Dec. 10th.—Cranham School.—Lavatories insanitary. Notice. Remedied. Dec. 24th.-—Cranham.—Foul ditch. Notice. Remedied. Great Warley. Jan. 9th.—Great Warley, Ingrave Road.—Several houses, good class, and cottages drain into cesspool, which overflowed and polluted ditches. Water in danger of becoming contaminated, though found to be good at present. Sewerage of locality not practicable at present, owing to expense. Negotiations with the South Essex Water Co. as to extending their service here failed, also owing to prohibitive cost. Arrangements made to periodically cleanse cesspools. Jan. 9th.—Ditto.—Foul ditch. Notice. Remedied. Jan. 31st.—Ditto.—Defective w.c. Notice. Remedied. Feb. 7th.—Great Warley.—Urinal connected with public-house close to barrack gates foul. Caused by a blocked drain on barrack grounds. Notice. Remedied. Feb. 7th.—Ditto.—Foul ditch. Notice. Remedied. Mar. 6th.—Ditto.—Water from cottage analysed and found good. April Nth.—Ditto.—Cow shed and dairy insanitary. Notice. Remedied. April 24th.—Ditto.—Foul ditch from cesspool overflow. Ditch piped so as to conduct the sewage further away. April 30th.—Ditto.—Foul pond on private ground. Fouled by sewage overflow from neighbouring works (Ilford, Ltd.). Notice. Remedied. May 3rd.—Ditto.—Four cottages without dustbins. Notice. Remedied. May 7th.—Ditto.—Cow shed and dairy insanitary. Notice. Remedied. June 12th.—Ditto.—Defective drain. Notice. Remedied. June 12th.—Ditto.— Refuse accumulation. Notice. Remedied. Sept. 24th.—Ditto.—Overflowing cesspool. do. do. Oct. 8th.—Ditto.—Six cottages insanitary. do do. The various bake-houses, workshops, cow sheds and dairies, and slaughter-houses have been periodically inspected, and where sanitary defects (few) have been found these have been remedied under notice served by the Sanitary Inspector, as detailed in the preceding account of work done in the various parishes of the district. The Council receives at its meetings reports from the Sanitary Inspectors as to work done in removal of sanitary defects, and is prompt in giving instructions and authority to carry out all steps necessary to amend insanitarv conditions as they occur. A report of the work done by the Inspectors during the 27 year is printed with this report, and will show the energy displayed by Messrs. Cornell and Carter in the discharge of their duties. Personal visits are paid by me in many of the insanitary conditions reported, and periodical visits are made by me in the various parts of the district. When instructed by the Council, special reports are made by me, in regard to insanitary conditions of dwellings and other matters, as occasion requires. These special reports have referred mainly to houses insanitary and requiring amendment, a few cases of overcrowding, complaint of nuisance caused by the Council contractor's dust shoot, the deposit of scavenging refuse from the Ilford Urban District in an unsuitable locality in this district, the recent formation of an enormous refuse shoot at Rainham Ferry, the fish-manure factory of Mr. Hempleman at Rainham Ferry, a fish skin drying business at Wennington, samples of well water taken for analysis, etc., etc. These subjects have received the consideration of the Council, and with the exception of the Rainham dust shoot, satisfactory amendment of the insanitary conditions has been effected. 1.—Physical features and general character of the district and general conditions of its population, the chief occupations of the inhabitants and the influence of any particular occupation on public health. This information is given in Part II. of this Report. There is no particular occupation of the inhabitants influencing to any special degree the public health. 2.—House accommodation, etc., especially for the working classes. House accommodation is fairly good, except in certain localities, for the working classes. I think it is the need of those of the working classes whose work lies in the locality that is most patent; the better class of artizan dwellings are, to a considerable extent,- taken up by those whose work is not in the locality, and it is mainly the people whose work is local who find difficulty in obtaining house accommodation. The building of cottages has, for some reason or other, in recent years, been very limited. The Council is erecting eighteen cottages close to Hornchurch village, the money being borrowed by consent of the Local Government Board. It is to be hoped that, if this experiment proves successful, 28 it may be repeated in localities where working class house accommodation is required. These cottages are now all but completed. They are commodious cottages, with a nice bit of garden ground and, I believe, are to be let at a rental of five and threepence weekly. In my last Annual Report, I mentioned that a private company was about to build something like two hundred cottages at Dagenham, near the Railway Station. Up to the present time about twelve have been erected, or are in course of erection, but 1 am afraid that these houses are beyond the means of the ordinary labourer. With regard to the sanitary condition of existing working class dwellings, there is, as a rule, sufficiency of open space about houses and cleanliness of surroundings. This latter condition, and the sanitary condition of the dwellings generally, receive the attention of the Sanitary Inspectors, who call in my aid in the case of defects found, and these are reported to the Council, who direct (when necessary) orders to be served on the owners to carry out the repairs, etc. necessary to make the dwellings sanitary. The following represents the action taken in carrying out the L.G.B. regulations respecting the Housing, etc., Act:— 1.—No. of houses inspected 2,295 2.—No. of houses unfit for occupation 22 3.—No. of representations made to the Council for closing orders 3 4.—No. of closing orders made 3 5.—No. of houses remedied without closing orders 56 6.—No. of houses remedied after closing orders were made — 3.—Water supply of the district. The whole of the district is well supplied by the South Essex Water Co., except in a few localities where, owing to their small population and distance, the water mains do not exist. Particulars of these are given under the several heads of localities in Part II. of this Report. Private wells, many of which were found on analysis by me to give impure water, have been in recent years for the most part abolished, and the Sanitary Inspectors keep a vigilant eye on such as still exist, bringing me, from time to time, samples of water for analysis when any suspicion exists of the purity of the water. In such cases order is made by the Council for the provision of the South Essex Co.'s water when practicable, or for the cleansing of the well and removal of its source of pollution when the other course is not practicable. The public supply is a constant one. 29 4.—Milk supply, etc. The supply of milk is sufficient and good. The County Council have an officer who visits the district and causes the milk, from time to time, to be tested as to its freedom from added water, and, where necessary, takes proceedings against the defaulter. Pending the passing of a Milk Bill by Parliament, no arrangement is made for the bacteriological examination of milk. The several dairies, milk shops, and cow sheds are periodically visited, and have been found to be satisfactory, except in a few minor instances (detailed in a previous part of this Rebort), and which have been remedied under the action of the Sanitary Inspectors. In cases where these officers think that the cows should be kept in a more cleanly condition, especially as to their udders, instructions are given in this respect. 5.—Other foods; unsound food and food inspection; meat inspection; condition of slaughter-houses, etc. The Sanitary Inspectors visit premises where food is prepared. These have been found satisfactory. A few bake-houses have been reported to me by the Inspector as not being cleanly, and have always been remedied under notice served upon the occupier. This insanitary condition has usually been due to a want of cleanliness in action on the part of the occupier. 6.—Sewerage and drainage, etc. Dagenham. This system embraces Chadwell Heath, Beacontree Heath and the Village. Main sewer No. 1 commences at Chadwell Heath and flows southwards to the outfall works on the Marshes. Main sewer No. 2 also commences at Chadwell Heath, passes through Beacontree Heath and the Village, and joins main sewer No. 1 in Broad Street. The sewer from the low part of the Village falls to a tank at Beam Bridge, and is pumped from thence into the gravitating sewers. At the outfall works the sewer flows into tanks and is then pumped on to the filters and land beds, and the effluent discharged into the Thames. A short sewer has been laid in Bull Street, Dagenham, 30 Hornchurch. Here there are three systems of sewers—North-West Hornchurch, the Village, and Harold Wood. From Harold Wood the sewers flow by gravitation into a septic tank, and from thence through clinker filters on to the land, and the effluent discharged into the Ingrebourne, near Upminster. The sewers from the Village and North-West Hornchurch gravitate to the outfall works at Primrose Wood, the former sewer at a high level and the latter at a low level. Upminster. The sewers from the Village gravitate to the outfall on the banks of the Ingrebourne, and the sewage is treated by passing through septic tanks and over clinker filters. The sewers from the low level areas, one at Cranham Lane and the other at Corbets Tey, fall into tanks, and are pumped from thence into gravitation sewers. As mentioned before, the Council are now considering the enlargement of this system of sewerage, owing to the great extension of building (not working class dwellings) which has taken place recently in Upminster. Great Warley. The system here is the same as at Upminster, except that no pumping is required. The effluent discharges into a small stream. Rainham. All the sewers gravitate to a tank, and the sewage is pumped through sedimentation tanks on to clinker filters and is treated with a precipitate as it passes into the tanks. The filtered sewage flows on the land beds and from thence to the Thames. 7.—Excrement disposal; system in vogue; defects, if any. In all but the outlying or sparsely inhabited parts of the district excrement disposal is by the sewers, the w.c. connected with the drains having means of flushing, except in old houses. Cesspools receive the sewage from houses where there is no system of sewerage, and are periodically emptied by the Council's "Motor Cesspool Engine." In the smaller houses in localities where there are no sewers pail-closets are provided, these being emptied by the Council contractors weekly, each pail after being emptied being sprinkled with carbolic powder. 31 paratively few privy pits now exist in the district; where they do exist they are periodically inspected by the Sanitary Inspectors, and when found to be insanitary, the defect is remedied under notices served. 8.—Removal and disposal of house refuse. This is done by the Council's contractors. Sanitary bins or ashpits are required by the Council to be provided, and where this is neglected the Sanitary Inspectors, on the Council's instruction, ensure their provision by serving notices on the owners to supply them. House refuse is removed by the contractors, weekly in summer and fortnightly in winter. The refuse is deposited in approved localities and the dustbins, on being emptied by the contractor, are sprinkled with carbolic powder. The Council have now (February) decided to have weekly collections, both in winter and summer, with the exception of Upminster Parish. 9.—Nuisances ; proceedings for their abatement, etc. Information under this head will be found in a previous part of this Report, as to special proceedings taken by the Sanitary Inspectors and myself, under the heads of the different " localities " of the district, and in the Sanitary Inspector's reports, which are printed with this Report. Nuisances are constantly occurring, requiring the vigilant attention of the Inspectors, who report regularly their action to the Council, and call in my assistance where necessary. A manufactory for the conversion of fish offal into artificial manure has existed for many years at Rainham Ferry, on the bank of the Thames. This has caused many complaints of a nuisance and has had the anxious consideration of the Council for a long time past, who, whilst desirous of enforcing all mitigation of the nuisance possible, have been loath to take legal measures to stop an industry which is most useful and employs a fair number of men. After a good many visits from me, suggestions as to how an improved system of destroying the noxious vapour arising from the process of manufacture were made to the proprietor, and after a good deal of threatening action on the part of the Council, these measures were adopted, so that the nuisance was considerably abated. Then the premises were destroyed by fire, and the proprietor has, I understand, arranged to rebuild with all the necessary safeguards against causing such a nuisance as has existed for a long time past. Recently, a serious nuisance has been created in the same neighbourhood by the bringing down from London of street and shop 32 ings and refuse, and depositing it on land adjoining the road leading from Rainham to the river. This accumulation has now reached to such an enormous extent, that combustion takes place in various portions, causing the emission of foul smelling smoke. The condition has been reported by me to the Council (as mentioned in a previous part of this Report). The Council has also called for and received a report of this matter from the County Medical Officer of Health, Dr. Thresh, which confirms my report, and the subject is now in course of negotiation between the proprietor and the Council. 10.—Bye-laws as to houses let in lodgings; offensive trades, etc. There are bye-laws, but there are no common lodging-houses in the district. There are no offensive trades carried on in the district, with the exception of a fish manure factory and a soap factory at Rainham Ferry, on the banks of the Thames. The former has been dealt with above. (Nuisance, etc.) The latter, owing to the bone boiling, in the course of soap manufacture, is very offensive. 11.—Schools ; Sanitary condition, water supply, etc. All the public elementary schools in the district are in good sanitary condition. With the exception of a few in the more remote parts of the district, which have private wells (the purity of the supply being periodically examined by me), all are supplied by the South Essex Water Co. The education authority has a special Medical Inspector, who reports to me children excluded from school owing to their verminous condition, and these are visited and instructions given as to cleansing, etc. When a child, on school attendance, is notified to me as suffering from infectious disease, the school authorities are written to and advised to exclude children from the same family from school for a definitely mentioned period. When the school master or mistress notifies to me the exclusion of a child for suspected infectious disease, such child is visited and the disorder from which it is suffering verified. I have recently drawn up a simple sheet of instructions to parents, advising as to their action in sending children to school who present suspicious symptoms of Scarlet Fever or Measles. This has been printed and, by approval of the School Medical Officer, sent to the heads of the various schools in the district, for distribution amongst the children attending school, with instructions to give it to their parents. A good many children have been sent to school who have been found to be suffering from infectious disease unrecognized by their parents, and have been the means of infecting others. It is hoped that this may tend to 33 mitigate this occurrence, which, from personal investigation, I have been able to satisfy myself is unconsciously caused by the ignorance of the parents of their children's condition. 12.—Method of dealing with infectious diseases; notification; isolation hospital accommodation; disinfection. Infectious diseases, with the exception of whooping cough, are notifiable. Measles has been during the past two years notifiable. Cerebro-spinal meningitis and poliomyelitis have also been made notifiable. The hospital accommodation (Romford Joint Urban and Rural) is very good and well regarded by the people, there being little difficulty in persuading parents to avail themselves of its treatment, and I am quite sure that not only are lives saved by the superior nursing, etc., cases receive to what many would receive in their own homes, but infectious disease is undoubtedly checked, it being very rare for a second case to occur in a family where the first case has been promptly removed. The Council requires me to visit all cases notified for removal, in order to confirm the diagnosis before admission to the hospital, and this is done with few exceptions and when the case is represented (by wire or telephone) as being urgent and admitting no delay. The hospital contains 42 beds, and is available for the following diseases:—Scarlet fever, diphtheria, and enteric fever. Arrangements are made with the West Ham Corporation for the admission of cases of small-pox (should such occur). The practice of disinfection is as fallows:—When a case is removed to hospital, the room, bedding, etc., is promptly disinfected by the Sanitary Inspector; when a case is isolated at home, the bedding, clothing, etc., such as cannot be washed at home, is sent, at the Council's expense, to the hospital disinfector, in a special vehicle kept for that purpose, and is returned to the home by the same means, after disinfection. 13.—Method of control of Tuberculosis, etc. Cases of Pulmonary Tuberculosis, as notified to me, are visited either by myself or the Sanitary Inspector, and the various items of information specified entered in my "Tuberculosis Journal." The requisite advice as to the management of the patient (except in the case of persons in a superior position to the artizan class) is given and a pamphlet of instructions left with the patient. Any insanitary condition of house and premises is rectified by direction of the Sanitary Inspector. The rooms occupied by the case are disinfected after the termination of the case or its removal elsewhere. 34 With regard to provision for sanatorium treatment of Tuberculosis, the County Council has established a dispensary at Romford, which serves the rural district, and the Tuberculosis Officer for this part of the county attends twice a week. The County Council has also built a pavilion in the Isolation Hospital grounds for eight beds, four male, four female (now, February, 1914, exclusively for females) by arrangement with the Joint Hospital Board. This began work in May last; it is doing well. There is, also, at the Union Workhouse, accommodation for the following pauper cases—14 beds for males and 5 for females; 7 shelters for males and 5 for females. ISOLATION HOSPITAL. This hospital, serving both the Rural and Urban Districts, is controlled by the "Joint Hospital Board," a body composed of members of both Councils, to whom I beg to express my warmest thanks for the readiness with which all suggestions from the matron and myself for the well-being of the hospital and its patients are responded to. The hospital continues to work satisfactorily, holds a good position in public favour, and is undoubtedly the means not only of preventing the spread of infectious disease, but of saving lives which would be sacrificed, in many cases, if left to the home nursing, etc., of parents. The number of cases admitted from the Rural district during the year was 57. Of these 50 were cases of Scarlet Fever, 6 of Diphtheria, and 1 of Enteric Fever. One death was caused by Scarlet Fever and one by Diphtheria. Disease of a zymotic character proved fatal in 13 instances. The death rate for this class of disease for the entire district being 0.4 per 1,000. The following table shows the nature and distribution of fatal zymotic disease in the different localities of the district :— Dagenham. Havering. Upminster. Hornchurch. Rainham. Great Warley. Whooping Cough ? — — 4 — — Measles 3 — — — — — Diphtheria 1 — — — — — Scarlet Fever 1 — — — — — 35 I have, as in previous reports, much pleasure in testifying to the satisfactory way in which the duties of Sanitary Inspector (Messrs. Cornell and Carter) are carried out. Tables of mortality and sickness, compiled according to the requirements of the Local Government Board, are included in this Report. Also a copy of Annual Report of the Inspectors, which has to be forwarded to the County Council. Also the Annual Report under the Factory and Workshop's Act, which has to be sent to the Home Secretary. Locality. 1909. 1910. 191 1. 1912. 1913. The birth rate and death rate of the several localities in the district for the past five years are shown in the following table :— BirthRate. Death- Rate. Birth Rate. Deathliate. BirthRaie. DeathRate. BirthRate. Death- Rate. BirthKate. DeathRate. Dagenham, Beacontree, and Chadwell Heath 34.1 11.9 31.8 8.5 26. 8 11.3 24.4 9.9 21.8 10.1 Havering 18.4 18.4 18.4 4.7 17.5 7.5 150 15.0 25.0 10.0 Hornchurch 24.5 9.8 22.5 9.9 22.08 9.2 18.4 9.06 20.4 8.3 Upminster, Cranham, and Corbets Tey 15.4 7.9 16.06 12.4 16.6 8.3 17.3 10.3 16.7 7.3 Noak Hill ... ... 36.3 10.8 26.08 4.3 34.3 13.04 — — Great Warley 23.5 7.5 21.1 8.6 33.4 5.5 17.3 9.3 25.7 10.1 Rainham & Wennington 28.1 16.5 27.1 7.9 27.1 13.3 26.6 7. 9 25.7 10.1 36 Area and Population of District— Area, in acres 29,951 Population (estimated) 26,840 General death rate per 1,000 8.7 Infant death rate (under 1 year) per 1,000 1.3 I am, Gentlemen, Your obedient Servant, ALFRED WRIGHT. Romford. March 3rd, 1914. 37 TABLE I. VITAL STATISTICS OF WHOLE DISTRICT DURING 1913 AND PREVIOUS YEARS. ROMFORD RURAL DISTRICT. Year. Population estimated to Middle of each Year. Births. Total Deaths Registered in the District. Transferable Deaths. Net Deaths belonging to the District. Uncorrected Number. Nett. Under 1 Year of Age. At all Ages. Number. Rate. of Nonresidents registered in the District. of Residents not registered in the District. Number. Rata per 1,000 Nett Births. Number. Rate. Number. Rate. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 1908 23,280 ... 622 26.7 214 9.1 7 30 55 88 237 10.1 1909 24,000 ... 641 26.6 239 9.9 6 30 57 88 263 10.9 1910 24,530 ... 595 23.4 232 9.4 ... 22 42 76 254 10.5 1911 25,500 ... 633 24.8 214 8.3 3 44 68 107 255 10.0 1912 26,000 573 575 22.3 214 8.6 5 45 49 717 254 9.7 1913 26,840 575 583 21.8 193 7.1 13 54 35 6003 236 8.7 Area of District in acres (Laind and inland water), 32,245. Total population of all ages, 25,287 Number of inhabited houses, 5,159 Average number of persons per house 5 At Census of 1911. 38 TABLE II. CASES OF INFECTIOUS DISEASES NOTIFIED DURING THE YEAR 1913. ROMFORD RURAL DISTRICT. Notifiable Disease. Number of Oases Notified. Total Casps Notified in each Locality. At Ages—Yeare. Pagenham, Beacontree and Chadwell Heath. Havering. Hornchurch. Upmins'er, Cranham and Corbets Tey. Great Warley. Rainham and Wennington. Total Cases Removed to Hospital. At all Ages. Under 1 year. 1 and under 5 years. 5 and under 15 years. 15 and under 25 years. 25 and under 45 years. 45 and under 65 year-. 65 and upwards. Small-pox ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Cholera (C) Plague (P) ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...... ... ... ... ... ... Diphtheria (including Membranous croup) 10 ... 2 6 ... ... 2 ... 7 2 1 ... ... ... 6 Erysipelas 28 ... 1 1 18 6 2 14 9 ... 1 2 2 ... Scarlet fever 64 ... 7 49 5 3 ... ... 18 22 ... 6 11 7 50 Typhus fever ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Enteric fever 1 ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... 1 Relapsing Fever (R) Continued (C) ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Puerperal fever ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Cerebro-spinal Meningitis ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Poliomyelitis 3 ... 3 ... ... ... ... ... 1 2 ... ... ... ... ... Pulmonary Tuberculosis 53 ... 1 9 11 27 3 2 21 22 1 3 3 3 ... Other forms of Tuberculosis 28 ... 3 15 8 1 1 ... 11 14 ... 1 ... 2 ... Measles 602 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 214 120 ... 166 2 100 ... Totals 789 ... 16 80 26 49 12 4 287 191 2 177 18 114 57 Isolation Hospital.—Romford Joint Hospital (Urban aud Rural), Rash Green, Dagenliam. 39 TABLE III. CAUSES OF AND AGES AT DEATH DURING THE YEAR 1913. ROMFORD RURAL. Causes of Death. Nett Deaths at the Subjoine ' Acres of " Residents " whether occurring within or without the District. Total Deaths whether of " Residents " or Non" Residents " in Institutions in the District. All ages. Under 1. 1 and under 2. 2 and under 5. 5 and under 15. 15 and under 25. 25 and under 16. 15 and under 65. 65 and upwards. All Causes Certified 231 32 15 9 7 12 26 46 84 Uncertified 5 3 - - - - - 1 1 Enteric Fever ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Small-pox ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Measles 5 2 ... 2 1 ... ... ... ... ... Scarlet Fever 1 ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... 2 Whooping Cough 6 4 2 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Diphtheria and Croup 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... 2 Influenza 2 ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 1 ... Erysipelas 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... Phthisis (Pulmonary Tuberculosis l6 ... 1 1 1 3 4 2 4 9 Tuberculous Meningitis 2 ... ... 1 1 ... ... ... ... ... Other Tuberculous Diseases 4 ... 1 ... I ... 2 ... ... ... Cancer, malignant disease 21 ... ... ... ... ... 2 7 12 ... Rheumatic Fever ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Meningitis ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Organic Heart Disease 28 ... ... ... 1 2 3 11 11 ... Bronchitis 16 1 5 1 ... 1 1 ... 7 ... Pneumonia (all forms) 17 8 1 2 ... ... 3 3 ... ... Other diseases of respiratory organs ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Diarrhoea and Enteritis 9 4 3 1 ... ... ... ... 1 ... Appendicitis and Typhlitis 2 ... ... ... ... 1 ... 1 ... ... Cirrhosis of Liver 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... Alcoholism ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Nephritis & Bright's Disease 6 ... 1 ... ... ... ... 2 3 ... Puerperal Fever ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Other accidents and diseases of Pregnancy and Parturition 2 ... ... ... ... 1 1 ... ... ... Congenital Debility and Malformation, including Premature Birth 12 12 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Violent Deaths, excluding Suicide 10 ... ... ... 2 1 3 3 1 ... Suicide ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Other Defined Diseases 49 4 ... 1 ... 3 7 15 19 ... Senile Decay 2'5 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 25 ... Totals 236 35 15 9 7 12 26 47 85 13 40 TABLE IV. INFANTILE MORTALITY DURING THE YEAR 1913.—ROMFORD RURAL DISTRICT. NETT DEATHS FROM STATED CAUSES AT VARIOUS AGES UNDER ONE YEAR OF AGE. Causes of Death. Under 1 week. 1-2 weeks. 2 3 weeks. 3-4 weeks. Total under 4 we»ks. 4 weeks & under' 3 months. 3 months & under 6 months. 6 months & under 9 months. months & under 12 months. Total Deaths under 1 year. All Causes Certified 9 2 1 ... 12 3 2 10 5 32 Uncertified 2 ... ... ... 2 ... 1 ... ... 3 Small-pox ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Chicken-pox ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Measles ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 1 2 Scarlet Fever ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Whooping-Cough ... ... ... ... ... 2 1 1 ... 4 Diphtheria and Croup ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Erysipelas ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Tuberculous Meningitis ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Abdominal Tuberculosis ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Other Tuberculous Diseases ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Meningitis (not Tuberculous) ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Convulsions 1 1 ... ... 2 ... ... ... ... 2 Laryngitis ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Bronchitis ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... 1 Pneumonia (all forms) ... ... ... ... ... 1 1 4 2 8 Diarrhœa ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 2 ... 3 Enteritis ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 1 Gastritis ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Syphilis ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Rickets ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Suffocation, overlying ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Injury at birth ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Atelectasis ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Congenital Malformations ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Premature birth 10 1 1 ... 12 ... ... ... ... 12 Atrophy, Debility and Marasmus ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Other Causes ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 1 2 Totals 11 2 1 ... 14 3 3 10 5 35 Nett Births in the year, legitimate 565; illegitimate 10. Nett Deaths in the year, legitimate infants, 31; illegitimate infant", 1. 41 ROMFORD RURAL DISTRICT. 1st District.—Hornchurch, Upminster, Cranham, Great Warley, Havering, and Noak Hill. Summary of work done through the Sanitary Inspector and under the H.W.C. Acts, in the Rural District of Romford, during the year ending December 31st, 1913. Total Number for Year. Notes, Results of Inspection, &c. 1 Complaints received 28 2 Nuisances detected without complaint 132 3 Nuisances abated 159 4 Nuisances remaining unabated 5 Formal notices served 124 6 Summonses issued Nil. 7 Convictions obtained Nil. 8 No. of cottages inspected 1,250 9 No. of cottages found unfit for human habitation 19 10 No. of representations made with the view of Closing Orders being made Nil. 11 No. of Closing Orders made Nil. 12 No. of cottages in which defects were remedied without a Closing Order 19 13 No. of cottages in which defects were remedied after making Closing Order Nil. 14 No. of cottages closed Nil. 15 No. of cottages demolished by Order Nil. 16 No. of Common Lodging Houses in District. Frequency of Inspection None. 17 No. of Slaughter Houses in District. Frequency of Inspection 9 Monthly 18 No. of Bakehouses in District. Frequency of Inspection 10 Monthly 19 No. of Dairies and Milkshops. Frequency of Inspection 32 Monthly 20 No. of Cowkeepers Frequency of Inspection 26 Monthly 42 1st District—continued. Total Number for Year. Notes, Results of Inspection, &c. 21 No. of samples of milk taken for examination for cleanliness, etc. Nil. 22 Filthy houses cleansed 11 23 Houses disinfected 32 24 Cases of overcrowding abated None. 25 New houses. No. of water certificates applied for ... Work of Surveyor. 26 No. of certificates granted ... Do. 27 Public wells sunk None. 28 Privies. No. in district. No. abolished during the year 4 29 No. of pail closets in district 98 30 No. of W.C. 's with proper flushing arrangement 2,589 31 No. of hand-flushed W.C.'s. 224 32 Animals improperly kept removed 2 33 Samples of water taken for analysis 27 34 Compensation paid for bedding, clothing, etc., destroyed £2:10:0 35 Seizures of unsound food Nil. ARTHUR CORNELL, Sanitary Inspector. 43 2nd District.—Dagenham, Chadwell Heath, Beacontree Heath, Rainham, and Wennington. Summary of work done through the Sanitary Inspector and under the H.W.C. Acts, in the Rural District of Romford, during the year ending December 31st, 1913. Total Number for Year. Notes, Results of Inspection, &c. 1 Complaints received 49 2 Nuisances detected without complaint 250 3 Nuisances abated 253 4 5 Nuisances remaining unabated Formal notices served 14 201 6 Summonses issued 7 Convictions obtained 8 No. of cottages inspected 1,045 9 No. of cottages found unfit for human habitation 3 10 No. of representations made with the view of Closing Orders being made 3 11 No. of Closing Orders made 3 12 No. of cottages in which defects were remedied without a Closing Order. In hand 28 37 13 No. of cottages in which defects were remedied after making Closing Order 14 No. of cottages closed. Three in operation 15 No. of cottages demolished by Order 16 No. of Common Lodging Houses in District. Frequency of Inspection 17 No. of Slaughter Houses in District. Frequency of Inspection 6 18 No. of Bakehouses in District. Frequency of Inspection 5 19 No. of Dairies and Milkshops. Frequency of Inspection. Frequent Intervals 7 20 No. of Cowkeepers Frequency of Inspection 9 44 2nd District—continued. Total Number for Year. Notes, Results of Inspection, &c. 21 No. of samples of milk taken for examination for cleanliness, etc. 22 Filthy houses cleansed 5 23 Houses disinfected 30 24 Cases of overcrowding abated 2 25 New houses. No. of water certificates applied for 26 No. of certificates granted 27 Public wells sunk 28 Privies. No. in district. No. 9 abolished during the year 12 29 No. of pail closets 145 30 No. of W.C.'s with proper flushing arrangement 979 31 No, of hand-flushed W.C.'s. 39 32 Animals improperly kept removed 18 33 Samples of water taken for analysis 5 34 Compensation paid for bedding, clothing, etc., destroyed 35 Seizures of unsound food GEORGE T. CARTER, Sanitary Inspector. 45 1.—Inspection of Factories, Workshops, and Workplaces. Premises. Number of Inspections. Written Notices. Prosecutions. Factories (including Factory Laundries) 20 ... ... Workshops (including Workshop Laundries) 21 ... ... Workplaces (other than Outworkers' Premises included in Part 3 of this Report) 6 1 ... Total 47 1 2.—Defects Found. Particulars. Number of Defects. Number of Prosecutions. Found. Remedied. Referred to H.M. Inspector. Nuisances under the Public Health Acts: Want of cleanliness 8 8 ... ... Other Nuisances 1 1 ... ... Total 9 9 ... ... 46 3.—Home Work. NATURE OF WORK. OUTWORKERS' LIST. List received from Employers once in the year. Lists. Outworkers. Contractors. Workmen. Wearing Apparel—Making, &c. ... ... 7 Brush Making ... 3 ... Total ... 3 7 4.—Registered Workshops. Workshops on the Register (s. 1,1) at the end of the year. Number. Bakers 14 Tailors 5 Bootmakers 2 Milliners and Dressmakers 3 Draper 1 Linen Collar Maker 1 Laundries 5 Plumber 1 Farriers and Coach Builders 7 Harness Maker 1 Total number of Workshops on Register 40 5.—Other Matters. Class. Number. Matters notified to H.M. Inspector of Factories Reports (of action taken) sent to H.M. Inspector