RUL 5 E RUISLIP-NORTHWOOD Urban District Council ANNUAL REPORT OF THE Medical Officer of Health FOR THE YEAR 1925 L. W. HIGNETT, M.B., C.M., M.R.C.S., L.R.C.P., D.P.H. (CAMB.), Medical Officer of Health. RUISLIP-NORTHWOOD Urban District Council ANNUAL REPORT OF THE Medical Officer of Health FOR THE YEAR 1925 L. W. HIGNETT, M.B., C.M., M.R.C.S., L.R.C.P., D.P.H. (CAMB.), Medical Officer of Health. Annual Report OF THE Medical Officer of Health 1925 To the Chairman and Members of the Urban District Council of Ruislip-Northwood. Gentlemen, I beg to submit my twenty-first Annual Report, which is in accordance with the instructions contained in the circular of the Ministry of Health dated December 10th, 1925. This report is somewhat fuller, special reference being made to the progress in the improvement of the public health in the past five years. General Characteristics of the District. The Ruislip-Northwood Urban District is situated at the North-West extremity of the County of Middlesex bounded on the North by the Watford Rural District, and the Rickmansworth Urban District in the County of Hertford ; on the South and West by the Uxbridge Rural District; and on the East by the Hendon Rural District and the Harrow-on-the-Hill Urban District. The Urban District is divided into three wards, namely:— 1. Northwood. 2. Eastcote. 3. Ruislip. (These wards are represented on the Urban District Council by the following members:— Northwood nine, Eastcote two, and Ruislip four.) 1. Northwood is situated in the Northern portion of the District. 2. Eastcote. This village is situated towards the East side of the centre of the District. 3. Ruislip, on the West side of the centre of the District, is losing its characteristics as a country village and becoming a residential district, owing to the extension of two Railways, the Metropolitan and Great Western and London and North-Eastern Joint Line, with Stations in proximity to the centre of the village. 3 The Urban District of Ruislip-Northwood is an almost entirely residential one, the occupiers of the larger and middle-sized houses being employed in London, the smaller cottages and Council houses being largely occupied by those employed by the inhabitants of the larger houses and tradesmen. The land at South Ruislip is mostly agricultural. There are no large factories. A Royal Air Force Aerodrome and Stores Depot occupy many acres of South Ruislip. The nature of the land throughout the whole of the RuislipNorthwood area is clay, but in several places there are patches of sand and gravel, apparently portions of the Reading beds. These sand and gravel beds are on the surface in Northwood at the Golf Links, in the village of Ruislip, and along the bed of the River Pinn, at Eastcote. With these exceptions the land is stiff, heavy clay, of varying thickness, with loam above it. This clay holds up the water during and after wet weather, and thus tends to make the atmosphere damp, and causes ground mists in Autumn and Winter. It is, therefore, very essential for the health of the dwellers that sufficient land drainage be provided, and that existing water-courses and drains be kept open. Houses built upon clay are not necessarily unhealthy, provided that the surface of the land around is well drained, good damp-proof courses are used, and the sites covered with some impervious material. The levels of the land in the District vary from 120 feet at the South, to 360 feet at the North. The River Pinn flows from East to West through the centre of the District. General Statistics. Acreage of the District 6585 Population at the time of the Census, 1901 3560 ,, ,, ,, ,, 1911 6217 ,, ,, ,, ,, 1921 9113 Estimated population at the end of June, 1922 10822 ,, ,, ,, ,, 1923 11352 ,, ,, ,, ,, 1924 12117 ,, ,, ,, ,, 1925 12847 Number of Inhabited Houses at the end of June, 1921 1921 ,, ,, ,, ,, 1925 2519 Rateable value, £94,754 0s. 0d. Rateable value Land, £5,306 0s. 0d. Sum represented by a 1d. Rate, £392 6s. 0d. Extracts from Vital Statistics for the Year 1925. Births registered during 1925 M. F. Totals. Legitimate 90 59 149 Illegitimate —- 4 4 90 63 153 4 Birth Rate. Birth rate per 1,000 of population 11.9 Illegitimate ,, ,, ,, ,, .31 Birth rate per 1,000 of population in 1924 was 14.2 The Birth rate for 1921 was 16.6 1922 „ 13.9 1923 ,, 11.5 1924 ,, 14.2 1925 ,, 11.9 The Birth rate for England and Wales for 1925 was 18.3 Death Rate. Total Deaths registered 81 Subtracting deaths of non-residents dying in Public Institutions in the District 23 58 Adding deaths of residents dying outside the District 19 The net number of deaths is 77 The corrected death rate is 5.9 The death rate for 1924 was 6.18 The Death rate for 1921 was 7.2 1922 ,, 7.9 1923 „ 5.1 1924 ,, 6.18 1925 „ 5.9 The Death rate from all causes for the whole of England and Wales for 1925 was 12.2. Infant Mortality. Deaths of Infants under one year of age:- Legitimate 4 Illegitimate — Total 4 Total Births 153 Infant Mortality Rate per 1,000 births 26.1 Total Births for 1924 was 174 Infant Mortality Rate for 1924 was 22.98 The Infant Mortality Rate for 1921 was 52.6 1922 „ 52.9 1923 „ 22.9 1924 „ 22.98 1925 „ 28.1 5 The growth of the Urban District has been very rapid during the last five years. The number of inhabited houses at Midsummer, 1921, was 1921, at Midsummer 1925, 2,519. The population at the time of the Census of 1921 was 9,113; in 1925 it is estimated to be 12,847. Poor Law Relief. The amount of outdoor relief paid in Ruislip Parish during the year ending December 31st, 1925, was £437 8s. 0d. General Provisions of Health Services in the Area. Hospitals. The Permanent Buildings of the Northwood, Pinner and District. Hospital (Northwood War Memorial) were opened in November. The accommodation provided is as follows:— Public Wards—Mens (5 Beds. Women's 8 ,, Childrens 4 ,, Three Private Wards Operating Theatre. Administrative Block. This Hospital is maintained entirely by voluntary subscriptions and not subsidized by the Local Authority. Tuberculosis Hospital. Provided and maintained by the Middlesex County Council. Maternity Hospital. Arrangements have been made by the Middlesex County Council for admission of cases to St. Thomas's Hospital. The Northwood, Pinner and District Hospital will admit cases to private wards for operative midwifery. Children's Hospital. There is a small four-bedded ward provided in the Northwood, Pinner and District Hospital. Fever Hospital. The Isolation Hospital is situated outside the district at Hillingdon, Uxbridge. Ruislip-Northwood is one of the Authorities included by the Joint Hospital Board. The accommodation provided at this Hospital is:— Scarlet Fever: 50 beds and cots. Diphtheria: 20 ditto. Enteric, &c.: 10 ditto 6 The much needed alterations and additions to the administrative block were completed during August in addition to the re-arrangement and furnishing of the staff quarters. The following accommodation was provided:- Eight Bed Rooms, Servants' Hall, Sewing Room, Linen Store and Lavatory. A new Motor Ambulance was purchased in October. Small Pox Hospital. The Small Pox Hospital is situated at Yeading. The alterations and additions which comprise a new wing, communicating buildings and repairs to roof of existing buildings, are now well in hand and going on satisfactorily, in spite of the floods which very much handicapped the contractors. Ambulance Facilities. A Motor Ambulance is provided for the removal of infectious cases, bedding and clothing. The arrangements made are very good ; the motor ambulance is very prompt in attending. The Red Cross Motor Ambulance owned by the Uxbridga Urban District Council is available for use of this district (for noninfectious cases) upon application to the Clerk, Ruislip-Northwood Urban District Council Offices, Northwood (Telephone No. Northwood 77). Also the Pinner V.A.D. Motor Ambulacne can be obtained upon application to the Commandant, Mrs. I. J. Causton, M.B.E. (Telephone Pinner 9) Clinics and Treatment Centres. Maternity and Child Welfare. There are three Clinics holding meetings weekly:— Locality and Address Day Time Present Arrangements for Medical Supervision. Northwood— St. John's Hall Tuesday 3 p.m. Medical Officer Attends Eastcote— Church Room Wed. 3 p.m. Do. Ruislip— Church Room Thurs. 3 p.m. Do. In the Winter months, November to the end of March, the meetings are held at 2.30 p.m., at all centres. 7 8 Attendances at Maternity and Child Welfare Centres. Number of Sessions held. Total No. of Attenances. New Cases. Old Cases. Mothers. Babies under 1 year. Children 1 to 5 Mothers. Babies under 1 year. Children 1 to 5. A. B. C. A. B. C. Northwood 52 2902 1 0 22 22 8 4 28 1148 834 835 Eastcote 52 1065 - - 7 8 5 — 6 431 188 420 Ruislip 51 1326 1 32 32 10 — 7 457 369 418 A. Expectant Mothers. B. Expectant Mothers who are also attending with babies or children under 5 years, C. Mothers who are attending with babies or children under 5 years, North wood Eastcote. Ruislip. Highest attendance 121 48 43 Lowest attendance 12 2 11 Average attendance (Mothers) 23 9 10 Average attendance (Children) 33 12 16 Home Visits by Health Visitor. First Visits Re- Visits. Expectant Mothers. Babies under 1 year. Children 1 to 5. Expectant Mothers. Babies under 1 year. Children 1 to 5. No. of Hones visited. Northwood 23 74 25 50 380 636 800 Eastcote 4 25 7 11 37 97 117 Ruislip - 60 23 25 310 459 443 Nurse A. A. Carpenter was appointed midwife for the whole urban district, and Health Visitor for Northwood and Eastcote. During the year the Midwife attended 22 confinements: as Midwife 18, as Nurse, 4. Nurse Carpenter also attends the clinics at Northwood and Eastcote. Her address is 14, Reginald Road, Northwood. Telephone No. Northwood 616. Miss K. Austin, of 74, Hallowell Road, Northwood, is Health Visitor for Ruislip and attends the Clinic there. School Clinics. The School Clinics are held at the Northwood and Ruislip Schools under the management of the Middlesex County Council. Tuberculosis Dispensary. The Tuberculosis Dispensary is also provided by the Middlesex County Council, No. 3 Area. The Tuberculosis Medical Officer is Dr. o. Bruce, 3, Priory Park, Road, Kilburn, N.W.6. Telephone No. Willesden 619. Venereal Diseases Treatment Centres. Arrangements have been made by the Middlesex County Council with the principal London Hospitals for the treatment of these cases. Information as to times of attendances can be obtained from the Medical Officer of Health. 9 Public Health Officers of the Local Authority. Medical Officer of Health (Part time)— L. W. Hignett, M.B., C.M., M.R.C.S., L.R.C.P., D.P.H. (Camb). Sanitary Inspector, Meat and Food Inspector (whole time)— S. P. Bristow, C.R.S.I., M.S.I.A. Public Health Department and Office— Council Offices, Oaklands Gate, Northwood (Tel. Northwood 77). Time of attendance of Medical Officer of Health and Sanitary Inspector—Mornings, 9 a.m. to 10 a.m., or by appointment. Maternity and Child Welfare. District Officers, Middlesex County Council : Medical Officer—L. W. Hignett, M.B., C.M., M.R.C.S., L.R.C.P., D.P.H. (Camb.). Health Visitors— Northwood—Nurse A. A. Carpenter, S.R.N., C.M.B. Eastcote ,, ,, „ Ruislip —Nurse K. Austin, S.R.N., C.M.B. Midwife— Northwood Nurse A. A. Carpenter, 14 Reginald Road, Eastcote Northwood. Telephone Northwood 616. Ruislip Professional Nursing in the Home. General Nursing. Northwood.—The Church Army Nurse. Name and address: Sister M. Holmes, 168, Hallowell Road, Northwood. Eastcote.—A Nurse maintained by the Eastcote Nursing Association, visits in Eastcote. Name and address: Nurse G. Petch, The Bungalow, Field End Road, Eastcote. Ruislip.—The Ruislip and Ickenham Nursing Association employ a Nurse for Ruislip. Name and address : Nurse M. Rutledge, 5, Manor Close, Ruislip. In addition to the above there are several private Nurses working in Northwood. Nursing of Infectious Diseases. No special arrangements are made. Midwives. Middlesex County Council Midwife—Nurse A. A. Carpenter. Midwives in Private Practice- Nurse K. Austin, 74, Hallowell Road, Northwood. Nurse F. M. C. Jackson, Resthaven, The Drive, Northwood. Nurse A. J. Serginson, 2, West End Buildings, Ruislip. 10 Legislations in Force. Adoptive Acts and Bye-Laws. Public Health Acts Amendment Act, 1890. Private Street Works Act, 1892. Public Health Acts Amendment Act, 1907. Bye-Laws, New Streets and Buildings. Ditto, Dairies, Cowsheds and Milkshops. Ditto, Slaughterhouses. Ditto, Houses Let in Lodgings. Ditto, Removal of Snow. Sanitary Circumstances of the Area. Water Supply. The Colne Valley Water Company's mains supply the whole district except five cottages at Northolt Road, Eastcote, two houses St. Martin's Lane, Ruislip, and three cottages at Raysons Hill, Eastcote. The supply is constant. At the Northolt Junction area, most of the wooden bungalows are supplied bv standpipes. Rivers and Streams. The effluent from the Ruislip-Northwood Sewage Works flows into a stream which joins the River Pinn. Samples are taken from the effluent by the Thames Conservancy. No complaints were received. The effluent from the Pinner Sewage Farm flows into a small stream which runs under the Northolt Road into the Ruislip-Northwood Urban District area. Drainage and Sewerage. The sewers are laid on the dual system. The foul sewers are as follows: 1. The Northwood sewage flows by gravitation through a main sewer which is laid under the poors field to the outfall works at St. Martin's Lane, Ruislip Common. 2. The Eastcote Sewage flows by gravitation to a well at the Pumping Station on the main Eastcote and Ruislip Road, and from thence it is pumped up a rising main to the level of Ruislip Village and flows on by gravitation to the Outfall Works. 3. All the Ruislip sewage flows by gravitation to the Sewage Works. 4. The whole of the area South of the Metropolitan branch line from Harrow to Uxbridge is without main drainage. This includes the Northolt Junction Building Estate, where there are 207 buildings of all classes, brick and timber bungalows, several brick houses and many small timber hutment dwellings. The method of sewage disposal for this part of the area, is cesspool drainage or earth pail closets. 11 The Sewage Outfall Works. The Sewage Works are situated in St. Martin's Lane, Ruislip Common, between Bury Street and Breakspear Road. The works comprise: Five percolating filters. Four contact beds. Two equalising tanks. Two dortmund tanks. Two septic tanks. Two humus tanks. Two storm water settling tanks. Manager's house. Engine house (two oil engines). Workshop, &c. Scavenging. Collection of House Refuse. A weekly collection of House Refuse was carried out during the year by motor dust-vans. The refuse from the whole of the District is conveyed to the destructor site at Eastcote, where it is sorted, screened, the inflammable part (paper, &c.) is burnt in the open. This tip is some distance away from any inhabited houses, and no nuisance has been caused by this method of disposal. Portable sanitary dustbins are provided and maintained by the house owners. The removal and disposal of house refuse has been very satisfactory. No nuisance has been caused and only 13 complaints of a trivial nature were received during the year. Cleansing of Earth Closets. At the Northolt Junction Estate the earth pail closets are collected by the Council's employee, the contents are trenched into areas of land especially allotted for the purpose. This method has worked quite satisfactorily. Schools. All the Schools in the Urban District are under the management of the Middlesex County Council. The building of a new School at Ruislip was commenced at the end of the year, and an Institute at Eastcote is almost completed. An Infant School for Eastcote will be held in this building. On the notification of any case of infectious disease occurring amongst the school children, I visit the home and if necessary examine children at the Schools. 12 Housing. General Housing Conditions. Northwood. All the houses with the exception of seven Cottages in Hills' Lane and two in Jackett's Lane, are modern and in good condition. All have main drainage except twelve and constant water supply. The Council provided 114 houses under their original Housing Scheme of 1919, a further 12 were erected and occupied during the year, and it is hoped to commence a further number early in the new year. Eastcote. There are many old country cottages at Eastcote. Housing Scheme, Coteford Close.—The 1919 scheme provided for 34 houses which were erected. The Council purchased a site in Wiltshire Lane and prepared plans for the erection of a further 16 houses which they expect to commence in 1926. Near Eastcote Station (Met. and District Railway) there has been considerable building of middle class property some 168 houses having been erected during the past five years. Ruislip. This old country village is fast becoming a suburban district, the building of middle class houses is going on very rapidly. There are several old cottages in the village and on Ruislip Common. Housing Scheme.—The original scheme of 1919 provided for 59 houses at Clack Lane and 22 at Ruislip Common. Northolt Junction Estate. This Estate is situated between West End Road and the Great Western and L. & N.E. Joint Railway Line, close to Northolt Junction Station. There are the following buildings on the Estate:— 1. Permanent buildings erected under the Byelaws42 2. Buildings erected under the Housing Acts (licensed for a long period) 6 3. Temporary occupied buildings 58 4. Temporary Buildings (Tool Sheds, Summer Houses, &c.) 101 207 Twelve of the permanent buildings have cesspool drainage. All the remaining occupied buildings have earth closets, which are emptied by a man employed by the Council. The contents are dug into trenches on land allotted for this purpose by the Estate 13 Company There has been no nuisance caused and no complaints received by this method of disposal. The bath and sink water where there is no cesspool, is dealt with on the land in the gardens of the hutments and by soakaways. Though the system adopted on this Estate has so far worked satisfactorily, it was only a temporary measure. I recommend that main drainage for this area be considered by the Council. The house refuse is collected by the Council and conveyed to the destructor site at Eastcote. Overcrowding. It has not been necessary to take any action. Fitness of Houses. The standard is good in the whole district, except as regards the old country cottages in Eastcote and Ruislip, which are out of repair owing to old age, the principal defects being dampness. These cottages are being put in a satisfactory condition or closing orders issued as other accommodation becomes available. The defects found in the modern small class property are mostly due to neglect and lack of proper management. Little difficulty has been experienced in remedying unfitness, no legal proceedings were necessary. The Sanitary Inspector always endeavours to instruct occupiers in the proper use of sanitary fittings, and the cleansing of same, with a view to prevent drain stoppages. He also encourages occupiers to dispose of as much household refuse as possible. Milk Supply. There are 20 cowsheds and 6 dairies on the register. The average number of cows in milk during the year was 248. The bulk of the milk sold in the district is locally produced. Four supplementary licences were granted during the year under the Milk (Special Designations) Order, 1923, viz.: Certified 2 Grade "A" Tuberculur tested 1 Pastureised 1 It is my practice to personally inspect all cowsheds at frequent intervals. The Sanitary Inspector accompanies me and I have found that many improvements can be obtained by encouraging the owners to endeavour to attain a high standard of milk production. Mr. A. Barr, M.R.C.V.S., the Veterinary Surgeon appointed by the Council, visits the cowsheds very frequently, he inspects all the cows in milk, and makes a report once a month to the Public Health Committee. There was only one cow dealt with under the tuberculosis order. 14 Meat and Food Inspection. Meat. All meat slaughtered in the district is inspected at the time of slaughtering. Diseased meat is disposed of by arrangement with the Borough of Watford. The amount of meat surrendered and number of inspections made are contained in the Sanitary Inspector's Report. All the butcher's shops, 7 in number, have provided glass windows for their shops, and 4 have cold storage. Slaughterhouses. Public Slaughterhouses Nil. In 1920. In January 1925. In December 1925. Registered Licenced 2 2 2 Total 2 2 2 The Local Government Board Model Regulations controlling the management of Slaughterhouses are in force. The two Slaughterhouses are situated at Northwood. The premises are kept clean and the work is carried out as satisfactorily as possible under the circumstances. The buildings in neither case are suitable for the purpose. Bakehouses. Four in number, these are kept in a satisfactory condition. Food Shops and Stores. Visits are paid to premises where food is prepared, stored, and sold. Sale of Food and Drugs Act, &c. This is administered by the Middlesex County Council. Infectious Diseases. Disease. Total Cases Notified. Cases admitted to Hospital. Total Deaths. Small Pox Nil - - Scarlet Fever 18 4 Diphtheria 1 1 Enteric Fever (including Paratyphoid) 1 Puerperal Fever 1 Pneumonia 7 — 2 Encephalitis Lethargicia 3 1 2 15 Scarlet Fever. A small outbreak occured at one of the private schools in February and March. In September several cases were notified among the children attending the County Council School. Diphtheria Antitoxin. A supply is kept at the office of the Medical Officer of Health and is supplied to medical practitioners. This is supplied free of charge to those patients in necessitous circumstances. Encephalitis Lethargicia. Of the three cases notified one recovered and two died. Arrangements for the examination of pathological and bacteriological specimens are made with the Clinical Research Associations. Tuberculosis. New Cases and Mortality during 1925. Age Periods. New Cases. Deaths. Pulmonary. Non\Pul. Pulmonary. Non-Pul. M. F. M. F. M. F. M. F. 0 1 5 10 15 20 1 2 25 35 1 2 1 45 1 55 1 1 05 1 and upwards Sanitary Inspection of District. Premises inspected on complaint 117 Premises inspected re infectious disease 42 ,, ,, non-infectious disease, &c. 15 Premises under periodical inspection, about 100 Visits to Cowsheds 134 ,, Dairies 20 ,, Bakehouses 16 ,, Offensive Trades 8 ,, Slaughterhouses 276 ,, Private Slaughtering 14 ,, Factories 17 ,, Workshops 65 Food Shops 30 16 Sanitary Work. Drains tested 37 Drains unstopped and cleansed 26 Drains cleansed and repaired 13 Drains re-constructed or part reconstructed 12 Premises disinfected after illness or infectious disease 78 Clothing and bedding disinfected after illness or infectious disease 75 Refuse Removal complaints 13 New Sanitary Dustbins provided by Owners 95 Number of Statutory Notices Served 12 Number of Informal Notices Served 202 Methods of Disinfection. House Disinfection.—Walls are sprayed with 5 per cent. Lysoforra. The rooms are then sealed up and fumigated with Formalin. After twelve hours the rooms are opened and soap and disinfecting solution is provided for the occupier to wash down with. This work is personally supervised by the Sanitary Inspector. Ditches, Water Courses and Ponds of Stagnant Water. As in previous years spraying with a special solution has been carried out, in order to prevent as far as possible, the breeding of mosquitos and stinging insects. Meat Inspection. Animals and Carcases Inspected. Cattle 21 Calves 51 Sheep and Lambs 665 Pigs 136 Unsound Food Destroyed. Beef 95 stone 4 lbs. Mutton 4 lbs. Pork 5 lbs. Rabbits (1 case — 18) Housing. Number of new houses erected during the year: With State assistance under Housing Acts 35 By Local Authority 12 By other bodies or persons 100 Total 147 Unfit Dwelling-houses:— Inspection—Total number of dwelling-houses inspected for housing defects (under Public Health or Housing Acts) 133 17 Number of dwelling-houses which were inspected and recorded under the Housing (Inspection of District) Regulations, 1910, or the Housing Consolidated Regulations, 1925 63 Number of dwelling-houses found to be in a state so dangerous or injurious to health as to be unfit for human habitation 8 Number of dwelling-houses (exclusive of those referred to under the preceding sub-heading) found not to be in all respects reasonably fit for human habitation 5 Remedy of Defects without service of Formal Notices:— Number of defective dwelling-houses rendered fit in consequence of informal action by the Local Authority or their Officers 5 Action under Statutory Powers:— Proceedings under Section 3 of the Housing Act, 1925 Nil. Number of dwelling-houses in respect of which notices were served requiring repairs Nil. Number of dwelling-houses which were rendered fit after service of formal notices: (a) By Owners Nil. (b) By Local Authority in default of Owners Nil. Number of dwelling-houses in respect of which Closing Orders became operative in pursuance of declarations by Owners of intention to close Nil. Proceedings under Public Health Acts:— Number of dwelling-houses in respect of which notices were served requiring defects to be remedied 8 Number of dwelling-houses in which defects were remedied after service of formal notices:— (a) By Owners 8 (b) By Local Authority in default of Owners Nil. Proceedings under Sections 11, 14 and 15 of the Housing Act, 1925:— Number of representations made with a view to the making of Closing Orders 8 Number of Dwelling-houses in respect of which Closing Orders were made 8 Number of dwelling-houses in respect of which Closing Orders were determined, the dwelling-houses having been rendered fit Nil. Number of dwelling-houses in respect of which Demolition Orders were made 6 Number of dwelling-houses demolished in pursuance of Demolition Orders 1 Number of dwelling-houses demolished without Demolition Orders Nil. Number Re-constructed Nil. 18 Factories, Workshops and Workplaces. 1. Inspection of Factories, Workshops and Workplaces. Including Inspections made by Sanitary Inspectors or Inspectors of Nuisances. Premises. (1) Number of Inspections (2) Written Notices. (3) Prosecutions. (4) Factories (Including Factory Laundries) 21 1 — Workshops (Including Workshop Laundries) 59 — - Workplaces (Other than Outworkers' premises) - - - Total 80 1 2.—Defects found in Factories, Workshops and Workplaces. Particulars. No. of Defects. No. of offences in respect to which Prosecutions were instituted Found. Remedied Referred to KM. Inspector. (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) Nuisances under the Public Health Acts:— Want of cleanliness - 1 - - Want of ventilation Overcrowding Want of drainage of floors Other nuisances - 1 - - Sanitary accommodation Insufficient unsuitable or - 1 - - defective not separate for sexes - 1 - - Offences under the, Factory and Work shop Acts:— Illegal occupation of underground bakehouse (s. 101) Other offences (Excluding offences relating to outwork and offences under the Sections mentioned in the Schedule to the Ministry of Health (Factories and Workshops Transfer of Powers) Order, 1921). Total - 4 - - 19 There are 17 Factories in the district and 51 Workshops, which are inspected at frequent intervals. The sanitary work of the Urban District has been carefully supervised during the past year by Mr. Bristow, the Sanitary Inspector, and I am indebted to him for figures contained in the Sanitary Inspection Report. I am, Your obedient servant, L. W. HIGNETT, M.B., C.M., M.R.C.S., L.R.C.P., D.P.H. (Cambs.), Medical Officer cf Health. 20 RAW LINSONS' PRINTING WORKS NORTHWOOD MIDDX.