RUI 1 Ruislip-Northwood Urban District Council. ANNUAL MEDICAL REPORT, FOR THE YEAR 1905. L. W. HIGNETT, M.B., M.R.C.S., Medical Officer of Health. Hortbwood: E. P. Marshman, Printer and Stationer, The Library. Annual Medical Report of The Medical Officer of Health. 1905. To the Chairman and Members of the Ruislip-Northwood Urban District Council. Gentlemen, I beg to submit to you the first Annual Medical Report upon the Sanitary condition of your District. As the result of an enquiry held on January 23rd, 1904, powers were granted by the Local Government Board for the conversion of the Rural Parish of Ruislip into an Urban District under the control of the Ruislip-Northwood Urban District Council. I was appointed Medical Officer of Health for this District on January ist, 1905. General Character of the District. This District consists of a narrow strip of land lying at the North-west corner of Middlesex, bounded on the North by the County boundary between Middlesex and Hertfordshire; on the West by Harefield and Ickenham Parishes ; on the East by Pinner and Harrow Parishes; and on the South by Northolt Parish. The majority of the inhabitants reside at North wood on the Northern edge of the District; the villages of Ruislip and Eastcote are situated in the centre of the District. 4 The inhabitants of Northwood are mostly residential, the smaller class property being occupied by workmen engaged in the building trade, and those in the employ of the owners of the larger houses. The inhabitants of Ruislip and Eastcote are partly residential and partly agricultural. There are no factories in the District. The soil is mostly clay though in some of the highest parts gravel and sand crops out. The levels vary from 120 feet at the Southern boundary to 300 feet at the Northern side. The River Pinn flows from east to west through the centre of the District. Acreage of the District 6585 Number of Inhabited Houses at the end of June, 1901 704 „ „ „ „ „ „ „ 1905 903 Population at the time of the Census, 1901 3560 Estimated Population at the end of June, 1905 4515 (The average number of inhabitants per house is taken as 5.) House Accommodation for the working classes in Northwood is amply sufficient, but there is considerable difficulty in finding cottages at a moderate rental and in a sanitary condition for the needs of the agricultural population around Ruislip. Vital Statistics. Estimated population at the end of June, 1905 4515 Number of Births registered in the year 115 Birth rate per 1000 of estimated population 25.46 Number of Deaths registered in the year 35 Subtracting deaths of non residents dying in public institutions in the district (6) and adding deaths of residents dying outside the district (3) the nett number of deaths at all ages is 32 Death Rate per 1000 of estimated population 7.08 5 Causes of Deaths. The number of deaths due to Consumption seems large (8), (see Table IV) but of these five were of non-residents dying at the Consumption Sanatorium. Infectious Diseases. Eight cases of Infectious Diseases were notified. (See Table III.) (I) Small Pox. One case occurred on June 6th. A labourer, of no fixed abode, presented himself at the Ruislip Police Station complaining that he felt too ill to go any further ; the Officer in charge very wisely isolated him in an empty stable and sent for the Police Surgeon, who notified the case as Small Pox. The man was removed to the Small Pox Hospital at Yeading the same day. Together with the Sanitary Inspector I visited the premises and supervised the disinfection ; I also visited a shed in which the man was supposed to have slept the previous night, and caused the rags, sacking and hay in this shed to be burnt. No further case occurred. (II) Diphtheria. One case was notified on October 25th. On visiting the premises I found that the child was isolated, and the Medical man attending told me the child was practically convalescent, therefore the case was not removed to Hospital. Eight other children from these cottages attended the Pinner Schools. I notified the case to the Medical Officer of Health of the Hendon Union and the School Master at Pinner, and these children were kept away from school for the necessary period of quarantine. No further case occurred. 6 (III) Erysipelas. Five cases were notified, none were removed to Hospital. (IV) Scarlet Fever. One case was notified on June 25th in a Private House at Eastcote. I visited the house and found that the means of isolation were satisfactory ; the case was not removed to Hospital. No further case occurred. Sewage and Drainage. The system of sewers laid is the dual system. (1.) Northwood.—This part of the District is sewered by 8-in. mains conveying to a 10-in. main at Hills Lane; this runs under the Poor's Field and Breakspear's Road to the Sewage Works ; gravitating to within a quarter of a mile of the outfall, and thence through a cast iron rising main to the Detritus chamber at the works. With very few exceptions all houses in Northwood are connected, and 76 new connections were made during the year. New Extensions of Sewer during the Year : — (1.) Sixty-seven yards on the Rickmansworth Road, beyond the manhole at the Sanatorium gates. (2.) Five hundred and fifty yards in the new road called Hilliard Terrace. (3.) Two extensions, namely one in Watford Road, the other in Davenham Avenue ; these are in the Watford Area but drain into our Sewers through arrangement between this Council and the Watford Rural Council. 7 Flushing Chambers (three). (a.) In the Watford Road. (b.) In the Rickmansworth Road. (c.) At Batchworth Heath. Two cases of Surface Water entering the Sewer were found and remedied. All Manholes and Sewers have been inspected, cleansed, and flushed at regular intervals. (2.) Eastcote and Ruislip.—There is an 8-in. main running from Cuckoo Hill to Eastcote Pumping Station ; feeders run into this from Cheney Street, Catlin's Lane, Wiltshire Lane, Maggott's Hill, Field End, and Chapel Hill. From the pumping well at Eastcote, the sewage is forced up through a 4-in. cast iron main to a point near the Ruislip Schools, from this point it again gravitates by an 8-in. main through Ruislip Village to the pumping well at the Sewage Works. A short length of old existing sewer connects with this main in Bury Street, and another sewer runs down Bury Street connecting with the main near Ruislip Vicarage. A large number of houses are not connected in this part of the District; this is due to their scattered distribution. No extensions were made in this part. Sewage Disposal. The Sewage from Northwood falls into the Detritus Chamber at the highest point of the works, that from Ruislip and Eastcote is pumped from the receiving well at the lower side of the works up to the same Detritus Chamber. 8 After screening in the Detritus Chamber, the Sewage passes into six sedimentation tanks (divided into two series of three in each), these tanks are filled alternately, and the sludge from them is run on to a sludge area, where it is dried and then sold to the farmers. The fluid portion from the tanks falls over a weir on to the contact beds, and after treatment in these beds it falls on to the irrigation areas. The final effluent from these areas passes into a stream which joins the river Pinn. The effluent is of a fairly satisfactory nature but as some secondary decomposition was observed in the above mentioned stream, the Council are considering some suggested improvements to the present contact beds and irrigation areas. Water Supply. Northwood.—The Colne Valley Water Company supplies a constant service to all of this part of the District except Jacket's Lane and Duck's Hill. Eastcote.—The Colne Valley mains are laid along the following roads: Joel Street, Wiltshire Lane, part of Cheney Street, Eastcote Main Road from Pinner Green to Ruislip Village, Chapel Hill, Field End Road, Bridle Road, Frog Lane (the main in this lane is now being laid), and Catlin's Lane. Ruislip.—The Colne Valley main runs from Ruislip Village to the boundary of the parish at West End, also along Wood Lane. Sharp's Lane and Ickenham Road. Along Bury Street to Ruislip Common, and it has been recently extended up Duck's Hill to Horsen's House. Also along Reservoir Lane and from Ruislip Common to the "Woodman" Public House. 9 Wells.—There is one public well in the District in the centre of Ruislip Village; as very few of the Cottages in Ruislip are connected to the Water Company's main, the majority of the inhabitants of the village fetch water from this well. On July the 7th, the water from this well failed, the Surveyor found that the pump was not working owing to some leakage in the pipe. As the well was opened up I took the opportunity to obtain some particulars, and as a result I found that it was a deep well, a boring going through the chalk; I had two samples analysed, and the water proved to be an excellent one. Samples of water from a well in Frog Lane were analysed and condemned ; the Water Company have laid their main up the Lane and the houses are now being connected up. Samples from a well in Sharp's Lane were analysed and condemned; proceedings are being taken to compel the owner of the property to close this well. The water main runs down the lane close to the cottage. Samples at Sherley's Farm were analysed and condemned; arrangements are being made for the water supply. There are still many suspicious shallow wells in the District and I hope soon to have analyses made of all. As the Colne Valley Water Company's mains ramify thoroughly throughout the district, I recommend that in all cases where the water from these wells is proved by analysis to be unsuitable for drinking purposes, the owners of the properties be urged to connect on to the Water Company's mains. Isolation Hospital. The Uxbridge Joint Hospital is situated at Kingston Lane, Hillingdon East. In consequence of the conversion of the parishes of Ruislip and Hayes into Urban Districts, a Local Government Board Enquiry was held on February 14th, 1905. 10 At this Enquiry the Urban District of Ruislip-Northwood applied for an order to separate from the Uxbridge Joint Hospital Board, and at the same time put forward a proposal to accommodate cases at the Hendon Joint Hospital situated at Stanmore. The Clerk to the Ruislip-Northwood Urban District Council brought forward the following points : 1.—That the number of beds provided was not sufficient for the population of the district, The Clerk to the Hospital Board stated that 29 scarlet fever and 21 diphtheria cases could be accommodated, but this number of beds if fully occupied would cause overcrowding as allowing 2000 cubic feet of space per bed, there is at present only room for 21 beds in all. The report of the Medical Officer of Health of the Rural District of Uxbridge for 1904, drew attention to the lack of the bed accommodation. The estimated population of the district in the middle of 1904 was 27,809. The population is increasing rapidly. 2.—That the administration block was unsuitable. The buildings in use for this purpose at the present time are : (a) A cottage used partly for the staff" and partly as kitchens. (b) Bedrooms for nurses in old wooden buildings one of which is occasionally used for scarlet fever convalescents. 3.—That no modern disinfection apparatus was provided. Clothing is fumigated with formalin; there is no steam disinfection. 4.—That the laundry buildings were in a very bad state of repair and insufficient. The buildings were falling to pieces and have been shored up with timber. 11 5.—The discharge block was only reached by passing through one of the wards. The Local Government Board did not see their way to grant a separation order, but the Ruislip-Northwood Council were allowed two representativ.es on the Board. At the suggestion of these two representatives, the County Medical Officer and the Medical Officer of the Hospital have recently drawn up a most instructive report upon the deficiencies of the present Hospital and the requirements necessary to bring it into an efficient state. It is to be hoped that the Board will very soon see their way to carry out these necessary alterations. I may add that owing to the lack of disinfecting arrangements the Ruislip-Northwood Council have arranged with the Hendon Union to have bedding, clothes, &c., from infectious cases disinfected in the steam disinfector at Stanmore. Small Pox Hospital. Accommodation for these cases is provided at Yeading, one case was removed there during the year. Cowsheds and Milkshops. The Model Regulations of the Local Government Board have been adopted. There are 16 Cowkeepers and Dairymen on the register. Together with the Sanitary Inspector I have personally inspected the premises of all those on the register, with a few exceptions the sanitary conditions were good. 12 The water supply was found insufficient and unsuitable in six cases, in two or three of which the Colne Valley water is being laid on and arrangements are being made to obtain a better supply in the other cases. In some cases limewashing had evidently not been carried out very frequently, and notices are being sent to all calling attention to these and other requirements. In one case the cowshed accommodation was very faulty, no water supply or drainage being provided. The owner has had notice served of the requirements. I had two cows inspected by the Veterinary Surgeon, and the milk from one cow was found of very poor quality. The owner signed an agreement not to sell the milk from this cow. Slaughter Houses. The Model Regulations have been adopted. There are three Slaughter Houses in the District. I have inspected these at intervals with the Sanitary Inspector. The flooring and ventilation were found imperfect in one case; these defects have been remedied. Methods of Disinfection. 1.—Rooms are sprayed with lysoform by means of the Invicta Sprayer. The room is sealed up fumigated with formalin in the Alformant Lamp (25 tablets per 1,000 cubic feet), after 12 hours the room is opened and the paint washed with carbolic lotion. 2.—Necessary disinfectants are provided for cases treated at home. 13 3 Clothing.—As there is no steam disinfector at the Uxbridge Isolation Hospital the Council have entered into an agreement with the Hendon Union to disinfect clothing, bedding, etc., in their steam disinfector at Stanmore Hospital. 4..—Transport of articles.—The Hendon District Council collect and distribute after disinfection. New Streets. Hilliard Terrace 607 yards. New Buildings.—70 new houses (either completed or in the course of erection.) 3 Stables. 2 Workshops. 2 Churches. 2 Pig styes. 1 Milk store. House Refuse. The collection of House Refuse is carried out under the supervision of the Sanitary Inspector. The former contract for collection having expired, a new contract has been entered into, and a new dust cart purchased by the Council. At the present time 280 houses are on the list for collection. The refuse is carted to the brickfields, there it is screened, the ashes being used in the Kilns and the remainder burnt. Common Lodging Houses. None in the District. 14 Houses Let in Lodgings. I recommend that the Council adopt the Model Bye-laws relating to Houses Let in Lodgings of the Local Government Board. Overcrowding. No cases found. Factories, Workshops, etc. Factories nil Workshops, including Laundries, (not including Bake Shops) 12 Bake Shops (one underground) 3 Workplaces:— Home Workers Premises none Inspections 36 Written Notices none Prosecutions (all conforming with the Regulations) none Sanitary arrangements in three cases were found insufficient and arrangements are being made to remedy this. Slaughter Houses. Slaughter Houses 3 Inspections 8 Defective Premises—(Notice served on owner to lay down concrete floor and provide extra ventilation) 1 15 TABLE I. Vital Statistics of Whole District during 1905 and previous Years. RUISLIP-NORTHWOOD URBAN DISTRICT. These figures are for the whole Uxbridge Rural District. Year. Population estimated to Middle of each Year. Births. Total Deaths Registered in the District. Total Deaths in Public Institutions in the District. Deaths of Nonresidents registered in Public Institutions in the District. Deaths of Residents registered in Public Institutions beyond the District. Nett Deaths at all Ages belonging to the District. N umber. Rate.* Under I Year of Age. At alt Ages. N umber. Rate per 1,000 Births registered. N umber. Rate.* Number. Rate.* 1 2 3 1 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 1900 15642 439 27 70 159 238 15.2 48 220 14 1901 17294 501 29 59 117 249 38 228 13.4 1902 17598 516 29.2 70 130 290 16.4 81 47 243 13.8 1903 18093 539 289 60 111 267 13.6 56 23 5 244 13.4 1904 18206 498 23.5 65 1304 264 14.7 51 36 1 168 14.7 Averages for years 1900-1904. — — - — — - - — — — - 1905. 4515 115 25 4 8 69 35 7.7 6 6 3 32 7.08 * Rates in Columns 4, 8, and 13 calculated per 1,000 of estimated population. Area of District in acres (exclusive of area covered by water), 6,585. Total population at all ages 3,566 Number of inhabited houses 703 Average number of persons per house 5 At Census of 1901. 91 I. Institutions within the District receiving sick and infirm persons from outside the District. II. Institutions outside the District receiving sick and infirm persons from the District. III. Other Institutions, the deaths in which have been distributed among the several localities in the District. Mount Vernon Consumption Hospital, Northwood (6 deaths of nonresidents) Hillingdon Workhouse (2 deaths of residents) Nursing Home, 57, Beaumont Street, Marylebone (1 death of resident) Li TABLE III. Cases of Infectious Disease notified during the Year 1905. RUISLIP-NORTHWOOD URBAN DISTRICT. Notifiable Diseases. Cases Notified in Whole District. At all Ages. At Ages—Years. Under 1. 1 to 5. 5 to 15. 15 to 25. 25 to 65. 65 and upwards. Small-pox 1 .... .... .... .... 1 .... Cholera Diphtheria 1 .... 1 Membranous croup Erysipelas 5 .... .... .... .... 5 Scarlet fever 1 .... .... 1 Typhus fever Enteric fever Relapsing fever Continued fever Puerperal fever Plague Totals 8 — 1 1 - 6 - Isolation Hospital: Uxbridge Joint Hospital, Hillingdon. 18 TABLE IV.—Causes of, and Ages at, Death during Year 1905. RUISLIP-NORTHWOOD URBAN DISTRICT. Causes of Death. Deaths at the subjoined ages of " Residents," whether occurring in or beyond the district. Total Deaths whether of Residents or nonResidents in Public Institutions in the District. All Ages. Under 1 year. 1 and under 5. 5 and under 15 15 and under 25 25 and under 65 65 and upwards Small-pox Measles Scarlet fever Whooping-cough Diphtheria and membranous croup Croup Fever Typhus Enteric other continued Epidemic influenza 1 ... ... ... ... ... 1 Cholera Plague Diarrhoea 2 1 1 Enteritis Puerperal fever Erysipelas Other septic diseases Phthisis (pulmonary tuberculosis) 8 ... ... ... 1 7 ... 5 Other tubercular diseases Cancer, malignant disease 1 ... ... ... ... ... 1 Bronchitis 3 ... ... ... ... ... 3 Pneumonia I ... 1 Pleurisy Other diseases of respiratory organs Alcoholism C'rrhosis of liver Venereal diseases Premature birth 1 1 Diseases and accidents of parturition Heart diseases 2 ... ... ... ... 1 1 1 Accidents Suicides All other causes 16 6 2 ... ... 1 7 Ail causes 35 ... ... ... ... ... 6 19 RUISLIP-NORTHWOOD URBAN DISTRICT. TABLE V. INFANTILE MORTALITY DURING THE YEAR 1905. Deaths from stated Causes in Weeks and Months under One Year of Age. CAUSE OF DEATH. Uuder 1 Week. 1-2 Weeks. 2-3 Weeks. 3-4 Weeks. Total under 1 Month. 1-2 Months. 2-3 Months. 3-4 Months. 4-5 Months. 5-0 Months. 0-7 Months. 7-8 Months. 8-9 Months. 9.10 Months. 10-11 Months. 11-12 Months. Total Deaths under One Year. All Causes. Certified Uncertified 2 ... ... ... ... 1 1 1 2 ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 8 Common Infectious Diseases. 'Small-pox Chicken-pox Measles Scarlet Fever Diphtheria: Croup Whooping Cough Diarrhoeal Diseases. Diarrhoea, all forms ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 Enteritis {not Tuberculous) Gastritis, Gastro- intestinal Catarrh Waisting Diseases. Premature Birth Congenital Defects Injury at Birth Want of Breast-milk Atrophy, Debility, . Marasmus 1 Tuberculous Diseases. Tuberculous Meningitis Tuberculous Peritonitis Tabes Mesenterica Other Tuberculous Diseases Erysipelas Syphilis Rickets Meningitis (not Tuberculous) ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... Convulsions 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 1 Bronchitis Laryngitis Pneumonia Suffocation, overlaying Other Causes 1 2 2 ... 1 2 ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 8 Births in the year legitimate 113 totals 115 Population. Estimated to middle of 1905. 4515. illegitimate 2 Deaths from all Causes at all Ages 35. 20 Factories, Workshops, Laundries, Workplaces and Homework. 1.- INSPECTION Including Inspections made by Sanitary Inspector of Nuisances. Inspections. Written Notices FACTORIES (Including Factory Laundries.) None in District WORKSHOPS (Including Workshop Laundries.) 36 — WORKPLACES — - HOMEWORKERS' PREMISES None in District Total 36 — 2. —DEFECTS FOUND. Nuisances tinder the Public Health Acts :— Found. Remedied. W7ant of Cleanliness — — Want of Ventilation — — Overcrowding — — Want of Drainage of Floors — — Other Nuisances — — Sanitary Accommodations:— Insufficient — — Unsuitable or Defective 3 2 Not Separate for Sexes - — Offences under the Factory and Workshop Act:— Illegal Occupation of Underground Bakehouse (s. 101) Breach of Special Sanitary Requirements for Bakehouses (ss. 97 to 100) Failure as Regards Lists of Outworkers (s. 107) — - Giving out Work to be done in Premises which are:— Unwholesome (s. 101) — Infected (s. no) — — Allowing wearing apparel to be made in premises infected by scarlet fever or smallpox (s. 109) - Other offences — - Total 3 2 21 3.—OTHER MATTERS. Number Matters notified to H.M. Inspectors of Factories : — Failure to affix Abstract of the Factory and Workshop Act (s. 133) — Action taken in matters referred by H.M. Inspectors as remediable under the Public Health Acts, but not under the Factory Act (s. 5):— Notified by H.M. Inspectors — Reports (of action taken) sent to H.M. Inspectors — Other — Underground Bakehouses (s. 101): — Certificates granted during the year Renewed one In use at the end of the year 1 Homework : — Number of Lists of Outworkers (s. 107):— Lists. Outworkers. Lists received — - Addresses of Outworkers :— Forwarded to other Authorities — — Received from other Authorities — — Homework in Unwholesome or Infected Premises:— Wearing Apparel. Other. Notices Prohibiting Homework in Unwholesome Premises (s. 108) - - Cases of Infectious Disease notified in Homeworkers' Premises - - Orders Prohibiting Homework in Infected Premises (s. no) — — Workshops 011 the Register (s. 131) at the end of the year 12 Bakehouses (one underground) 3 Laundries 2 Workshops 7 Total number of Workshops on Register 12 I am, Gentlemen, Yours faithfully, L. W. HIGNETT, M.B., Medical Officer of Health. 23 Annual Report of The Sanitary Inspector, For the Year 1905. February 19th, 1906. To Dr. L. W. Hignett, Medical Officer of Health for the Urban District of Ruislip-Northivood. Sir, I herewith present my first Annual Statement, shewing the particulars of the action taken in the suppression of Nuisances &c., and various improvements effected during the past year. The amount of Sanitary work which has been done is satisfactory, under the circumstances, seeing that I only took up this appointment on the 1st January, 1905, and the Council had only obtained Urban powers about three months previous to this, thus causing a large amount of work to be attended to. Now the affairs of the Council are in good working order, the Scavenging, Drainage and other necessary work under this head is being efficiently carried out, and systematic inspections made of the District. The Nuisances left in abeyance till I took up my duties have now been disposed of. A Water Supply has been laid to connect fourteen houses in Frog Lane, which is most satisfactory. There are still some cesspools in the District but they are gradually being done away with and the drainage connected to the main sewer. 24 Twenty-three Statutory Notices have been served, and I am glad to report that only one summons has had to be issued. On outbreaks of Infectious Disease, all drains were examined and disinfected. The Sewers have been periodically examined and flushed. The scavenging of the District has not been satisfactory, but now we have got a New Dust Cart no trouble should arise. Tabulated below is a list of Nuisances visited and abated and other matters in connection with the Sanitary work of the District. I remain, Your obedient Servant, W. LOUIS CARR, Sanitary Inspector. SANITARY WORK, 1905. Ruislip-Northwood Urban District Council. INSPECTIONS— Number of Premises Inspected on Complaint 118 Number of Premises Inspected in connection vviih Infectious Diseases 4 Number of Premises under Periodical Inspection 40 Houses Inspected from House-to-House 30 Total Number of Houses, Premises, &c., Inspected 187 NOTICES— Cautionary Notices Given 60 Statutory Orders Issued 23 Summonses Served 1 Convictions Obtained (Premises closed) 1 DWELLING HOUSES— Houses, Premises, &c., Cleansed, Repaired, &c. 20 Closed as Unfit for Habitation 4 Ke-openel after Repairs, Alterations, &c. Demolished - Illegal Underground Dwellings Vacated — 25 HOUSES LET IN SEPARATE DWELLINGS OR LODGINGS - Number Registered under Bye-Laws — Number of Contraventions — COMMON LODGING HOUSES — Number Registered under Bye-Laws — Number of Contraventions — CANAL BOATS USED AS DWELLINGS — Number Registered under the Acts . — Number of Contraventions of Regulations — MOVABLE DWELLINGS, CARAVANS, TENTS, ETC.- Number Observed during the Year 2 Number of Nuisances therefrom Abated — Number Removed from District 2 WORKSHOPS AND WORKPLACES— Number in District 7 Contraventions of Factory Acts — LAUNDRIES— Number in District 2 Contraventions of Factory Acts — BAKEHOUSES— Number in District 3 Contraventions of Factory Acts — SLAUGHTER-HOUSES— Number on Register 3 Contraventions of Bye-Laws — COW-SHEDS— Number on Register 14 Contraventions of Regulations 1 DAIRIES AND MILK-SHOPS— Number on Register 2 Contraventions of Regulations — UNSOUND FOOD- Animals seized — Articles or Parcels seized — Articles or Parcels surrendered — ADULTURATED FOOD- Samples taken — Found adulturated — 26 OFFENSIVE TRADES— Number of Premises in District — Contraventions of Bye-Laws — WATER SUPPLY AND WATER SERVICE— Wells—New Sunk — Cleansed, Repaired, &c.1 Closed as Polluted 4 Percentage of Houses supplied from Public Water Service 80 % Cisterns—New, Provided — Cleansed, Repaired, Covered, &c — Overflow Pipes Eisconnected from Drains — Draw-Taps removed from Cisterns to Mains — Constant System laid throughout the District — DRAINAGE AND SEWERAGE— Water Closets New Constructed 70 Number of Water Closets substituted for Dry Receptacles — Repaired, Supplied with Water, or otherwise Improved — Percentage of Houses provided with Water Closets 80% Drains—Examined, Tested, Exposed, &c. 74 Unstopped, Repaired, Trapped, &c 56 Waste Pipes, Rain Water Pipes Disconnected, Repaired, &c. 4 Soil Pipes and Drains Ventilated 10 Disconnecting Traps or Chambers Inserted 1 Reconstructed 6 Cesspools —Rendered Impervious, Emptied Cleansed, &c. 5 Abolished, and Drain connected to Sewer 5 Percentage of Houses Draining into Sewers 70% DISINFECTION— Rooms Disinfected 10 Rooms Stripped and Cleansed 10 Articles Disinfected or Destroyed 12 dust— New Bins provided 12 Periodical Frequency of Dust Removal Weekly Number of Complaints c.f Non-Removal received 32 SUNDRY NUISANCES ABATED— Overcrowding — Smoke — Accumulations of Refuse 6 Foul Ditches, Ponds, &c., and Stagnant Water 10 Foul Pigs and other Animals Dampness 6 Other Nuisances 20