1897-98. Borough of Shoreditch. Municipal Reports AND Accounts, FROM 25TH MARCH, 1897, TO 25TH MARCH, 1898. VOL. XLII. printed and published for the vestry of the parish of st. leonard, shoreditch, by A. T. ROBERTS, SON & CO., 5, HACKNEY ROAD, LONDON, N.E. CONTENTS. Reports of— Folio. Clerk Assessment Committee 61 Medical Officer of Health 67 Public Analyst 123 Chief Sanitary Inspector 134 Surveyor 145 Lighting Engineer 193 Chief Electrical Engineer 211 Chief Librarian 216 Superintendent of Technical Schools 241 Accountant 283—406 Abstract of the Accounts 283—406 Annual Contracts 260 Auditors of Accounts 266 Assessment Committee 61 Members of the Vestry 261 Officials 388—392 Overseers of the Poor 266 Standing and Special Committees 267 Statistics 257 Year Book of Local Information 273 BOROUGH OF SHOREDITCH The Vestry of the Parish of St. Leonard, Shoreditch, IN THE COUNTY OF LONDON. ANNUAL REPORT OF SOLICITOR AND CLERK. To the Chairman and Members of the Shorediteh Vestry. Gentlemen, The past year has been a most important one in the history of Shoreditch, having been marked by the completion of three main sections of the Vestry's heavy combined scheme, namely, the Electricity Station, Dust Destructor, and Public Library, leaving only the Baths and Washhouses and Technical Institute (both of which will be completed in the ensuing year) to finish this unique collection of municipal institutions upon one site. The Electricity undertaking has been an unqualified success, far exceeding the estimates made of it, for in the nine months of working, ending Lady-Day 1898, there was a balance of income ever expenditure of £3,893 19s. 10d., which in the case of a private company would have provided a dividend of about 5½ per cent. upon the loan capital of £71,032 involved in the undertaking, but a municipal autherity is under the disadvantage of not only having to pay the interest on its capital borrowed for the undertaking (which in the case of a Company is paid by way of dividend), but is also bound to pay off annually such a portion of the debt as corresponds to the life of the object for which it is borrowed. Such a repayment of capital corresponds to a heavy depreciation fund in the case of a Company, and renders it unnecessary for the Vestry to set aside a fund for such a purpose, as at the end of forty-two years they will present to the future ratepayers of Shorediteh an undertaking absolutely free of debt (which must then be in full working order), including a site of improved B 2 value, and goodwill of a value equal at least, to ten years' profits; so that if the Vestry were to set aside such a depreciation fund as would renew the whole of the undertaking at the end of forty-two years, they would be presenting such future ratepayers with the value of the undertaking twice over, besides burdening the ratepayers of this generation with a debt twice as large as is necessary to provide the Parish with electricity. As the repairs and maintenance of the plant have to be borne out of each year's revenue before a profit is declared, the works are thus kerpt up to full working order, and the increased profits each year will certainly suffice to meet any increasing repairs or maintenance. The Dust Destructor has also succeeded in destroying the whole of the dust in this Parish, and more besides, rp to a total of 18,842 tons in nine months, and the heat produced therefrom, and from an expenditure of coal costing £279, has thus produced all the steam required for the generation of 491,107 B.T. units of electricity, and if £500 be credited to this undertaking as the value of the steam supplied, the Chief Electrical Engineer makes the total cost of the destruction amount to £2,837 (including repayment and interest on capital), whereas under the old system of barging it would have cost £2,904, to have disposed of such refuse. After allowing, therefore, out of the electricity profits £2,192 2s. 1d. for repayment of interest and capital, and £500 for the cost of steam, there is a net profit, including saving of previous expenditure, on the joint schemes for the first nine months of working of £1/268 17s. 9d. This is sufficient to wipe off all the accummulated advances from the rates, which amount to £1,255 8s. 2d., being deficits from 1895, to the working of the undertaking, and then leaves a small surplus as the nett result of the scheme, which is a very remarkable performance for an electricity undertaking. An idea seems to have prevailed that the estimates of the success of this scheme were over rated, so that I should like to take this opportunity of referring the Vestry to page 13 of my Report of 1892 on the Vestry's Electric Lighting Order, where I stated that "From a consideration of the above three cases it may be concluded that altheugh some small preliminary loss may in the first year or two fall on the rates, the undertaking rapidly becomes a paying one," and again in my memorandum on the report of Mr. Manville of 1893 1 estimated on page four that the nett annual profit, including saving of previous expenditure on the combined works, when working at their full capacity, would amount to £1,590 per annum, or at the rate of £1,193 for nine months, whilst the first nine months' actual profit is £1,268, despite a loss of about £500 on the first quarter's working, when little electricity was sold, so that I venture to consider this result proves that the only estimate I made fell below the mark. Moreover, the cost of refuse destruction has been greatly increased during the past nine months, by the high price which had to be paid at first for disposing of clinker by haulage to the Canal. This cost is now greatly reduced, and when the Committee have the appliances for dealing with the clinker for commercial purposes as at other places, the cost of disposal will be very greatly reduced. The Vestry have at the same time the satisfaction of knowing that they have by then enterprise been the first to solve the great economic problem of the successful utilization oi town's refuse for the generation of electricity, which has inundated 3 my office with enquiries from other municipal autherities all over the world, and has led to visits to the works by deputations from nearly every town of importance in the country, a result which, I am confident, has never been before attained by any metropolitan Vestry. A verbatim report of the proceedings of the opening of the combined undertakings by Lord Kelvin will be found in the appendix to this report, and fuller details are provided in the report of the Chief Electrical Engineer, included in this volume. The Vestry have also during the past year completed the acquisition and demolition of the whole of the property on the Moira Place and Plumbers Place area, at a cost of £52,724 2s. 3d., and plans have been prepared and a contract accepted for the erection of model artisan dwellings, the cost of which will be defrayed by a loan of £19,400, and according to the estimate of the Vestry's Architect, these buildings will let at rents which will pay all expenses of maintenance, repayment of interest and capital, and even then provide a slight margin of profit. The surplus land is letting at such a satisfactory figure that after taking credit for the contribution of the London County Council of £27,50) towards the expanse of this scheme the net cost to this Vestry should be nothing even if they do not make some profit by the transaction as shewn in my fuller report set out hereafter. An important scheme for the utilization of the heat from the exhaust steam of the engines in the Electricity Station in heating the baths and washhouses adjoining has been worked out, and a contract for the necessary condensers, steam pipes and plant has been entered into for its execution at a cost of £4,695. This outlay, which will complete the economy of the Electricity and Dust Destructor undertaking, will save the Baths Committee a capital expenditure of £4,500 for boilers, which they would otherwise require, and an annual maintenance charge of £1,575 for fuel and up-keep of boilers, whilst the condensation of the steam of the electricity engines will be an advantage to their working and the scheme adopted will cost nothing beyond the provision and up-keep of the condensers and plant. The Vestry have also provided the Parish with two more handsome underground conveniences at a cost of £4,100; considerable improvements in the sewerage works have been executed at a cost of £3,041 10s. 4d., whilst new paving works costing £12,843 17s. 9d. have been completed. Two more open spaces have been acquired by the Parish, one in Ivy Street, Hoxton, which has been acquired and will be laid out by the Council and maintained for ever by the Vestry, and another known as Charles Square, the cost of purchasing and the laying out of which was borne equally by the Vestry and Council. The Vestry's Housing Committee have also overhauled the present open spaces in the Parish with much energy, and have greatly improved and beautified them. The Vestry's Technical School has continued to make very satisfactory progress, its students having earned scholarships to the total amount of £275 during the year, bringing their total earnings during the four years of the Schools' career to £925. It is expected that the Schools will be transferred to their b1 4 splendid new quarters in the transformed Aske's Haberdashers Schools in the coming autumn. A highly satisfactory feature of the last year's work from a ratepayer's point of view is that all this increased municipal activity and its resulting advantages added to an increase of the Vestry's assets to a total of £270,714, has been attained by the levying during the year of a total rate of 5s. 10d. in the £, as against 6s. 3d. in the previous year, 1896-7, or a reduction of 5d. in the £. It may reasonably be anticipated (unless the precepts of central autherities increase largely) that the increased profits of the electricity undertaking will secure a further decrease of the rates in future. SHOREDITCH LOCAL DEBT. The heavy schemes which the Shoreditch Vestry have recently completed and have still in hand, make the question of the local debt an important and interesting one, and as there is an essential difference between capital sunk in municipal work, which is unremunerative from a financial standpoint (such as paving and sewer work), and capital which is financially remunerative as an investment by producing a profit, it is important that the growing debt of this Parish should be analysed from this point of view to appreciate the present financial position of the Vestry. From this standpoint the municipal autherity which has a million sterling sunk in undertakings which produce 5 per cent. nett profit thereon is much better off from a financial point of view than one which has £1,000 sunk in the construction of a new sewer. The balance of debt outstanding on Lady-Day, 1898 (to the nearest pound sterling) was £292,574, of which sum £104,815 is due for paving works, street improvements and sewers, which may be regarded as unremunerative capital expenditure, altheugh expenditure even under these heads frequently leads to decrease in the cost of annual maintenance in respect of the streets or sewers affected, or, in the case of street improvements, by enhancing the value of adjoining property enables a higher rateable value to be obtained, which, in cases like the Great Eastern Street Improvement, is a very great financial gain to the Parish. \ The bulk of the Shoreditch debt, however, is represented by remunerative capital expenditure which is really a liquid asset, and could be turned into money if occasion required. Thus: £16,505 of the above debt is represented by Public Libraries, £48,970 by Public Baths, £9,750 balance of debt of Town Hall and old Fire Brigade Station, £3,034 by stables and buildings at the Scavenging Wharf, £20,000 by freehold land at Moira Place, £13,491 by Dust Destructor buildings and plant, £69,997 by the Electricity undertaking, £4,252 by Public Underground Conveniences. Thus it will be seen that out of a total debt of £292,574, as much as 64 per cent. is due in respect of realisable assets, whilst 36 per cent. only is unremunerative capital expenditure. Comparing this with the Shoreditch debt ten years ago in 1888, I find that out ot a debt of £59,787, only £7,667 or less than 13 per cent. was due in 5 respect of liquid assets, whilst in 1878 out of a debt of £112,414 only £17,133, or 15 per cent. was due for liquid assets, whilst going back as far as 1858, when the debt was £3 000, there were no liquid assets at all. The Vestry, moreover, now has some very valuable assets (such as the Town Hall) which are free of their original debts, and which will be seen from the appendix to this report, where the total value of the Vestry's freehold land and buildings is shewn at £260,714, at a very low valuation, as the land and buildings are taken at cost price, whereas, for instance, since the site of the Town Hall was purchased it has immensely improved in value, and if the present value of the leasehold buildings be added, the Vestry has a total realisable asset of £270,714, as against a debt of £292,574, which can only be regarded as a most favourable financial position, whilst if an addition of £25,000 were made for the goodwill of the Electric Lighting undertaking, the Vestry's total assets would then actually exceed their liabilities. That the above estimate is not an excessive one for such goodwill is shewn by the fact that the Sheffield Electric Lighting Company, who have only been at work about three years, have agreed to sell their undertaking to the Corporation for double what the Company have so far laid out upon it, whereas the above estimate is only a little over 25 per cent. of the capital outlay. BATHS. HEATING OF BATHS BY EXHAUST STEAM FROM ELECTRICITY STATION. The Baths Committee in their original scheme made provision for the use of steam from the Dust Destructor and Electricity Station adjoining their site, but it was thpught that live steam would be used by the engineers who were arranging for the heating of the Baths and Washhouses. The Electricity Station and Destructor having been got to work in the meantime, it was suggested that sufficient exhaust steam would be available from the electricity engines for such heating, witheut drawing on the live steam except to a small extent, and the Baths Committee accordingly instructed the Vestry's Consulting Electrical Engineer to report on this matter, which Mr. Manville did as follows, on the 6th November, 1897:— 'With reference to the instructions of your Committee we have now considered the relative merits of heating the water for the Baths and Washhouses, &c., by means of either steam produced in the Electric Light Station, or steam and heat produced by boilers specially installed for the purpose. In order to arrive at a conclusion as to the amount of heating required, we have decided to assume that the following represents the number of times the water will have to be changed in the Swimming Ponds, and the degree to which it will require to be heated, and likewise the amount of water and degree of heating required for the slipper baths and washing troughs. SWIMMING PONDS. "There are two swimming ponds, one of 137,000 gallons capacity, the other of 100,000 gallons capacity. The water in these requires to be changed nightly during the three summer months, or for say 90 days during the summer, and the 6 temperature of the water from the water company's mains will have to be raised 25 degrees Fahrenheit during these three months. This would involve 60,000 lbs. of steam being utilized on each evening to so raise the temperature of the bath water. There are eight hours available in which to empty, clean and fill the ponds, of which six hours would be utilized for filling and heating; this would involve a supply of steam equal to 10,000 lbs. per hour. "Sixty theusand pounds of steam per night for 90 days would involve the burning of about 300 tons of coal. During six weeks in spring and autumn respectively bordering on the summer months the ponds might require to be filled 45 times, and on the same basis as before this would involve the burning of about 150 tons of coal. "For the remaining six months in the year the large pond would not be used at all, and the smaller pond would have its water renewed twice in a week, but during these winter months the water in the supply company's mains would be colder than in the summer time, and therefore the water would require to be raised in temperature say 35 degrees Fahrenheit. These 35 degrees would require 35,000 lbs. of steam in six hours as before, or say 6,000 lbs. of steam per hour. Assuming on the above basis that the small pond has to be filled 45 times in the winter months, this would involve the burning of about 100 tons of coal. "In addition to the fuel so consumed a further small amount will be required for maintaining the temperature of the pond after filling, whether it is accomplished by live steam injected into the water, or by circulation through a heater. SLIPPER BATHS AND WASHING TROUGHS. "There are 75 slipper baths, which if used as often as possible would be re-filled twice in an hour. Each bath takes 20 gallons of water, and if filled twice in an hour would take 40 gallons. Assuming that this maximum rate of usage were kept up for an average of 10 hours per day, the 75 slipper baths would use 30,000 gallons of hot water per day. "There are 50 washing troughs taking 25 gallons of water for a charge, assuming that they too were used twice in an hour each washing trough would take 50 gallons of water per hour, and on the previous assumption that this maximum rate would be maintained for 10 hours per day, the 50 washing troughs would use 25,000 gallons per day. Slipper Baths 30,000 Washing Troughs 25,000 55,000 “To raise 55,000 gallons of water from the normal temperature of the supply company's mains to 150 degrees Fahrenheit would involve the use of 60,000 lbs. of steam, which divided over the 10 hours assumed would mean 6,000 lbs. of steam per hour. The production of this 60,000 per day for 300 days per annum means a consumption of about 1,000 tons of coal per annum. 'The above calculations as to fuel take no consideration as to steam required to heat the drying horses, or the boiling coppers, or maintaining the temperature of the swimming ponds, or heating such parts of the building as require it during winter time. It is somewhat difficult to ascertain what amount of steam would be required for this, but believe it to be small, and have taken it as involving a consumption of 200 tons of coal per annum. 7 "The following then is a resume of the fuel required:— Tons per annum. Swimming Ponds 550 Slipper Baths and Washing Troughs 1,000 Steam for Drying Horses, &c. 200 1,750 "On the assumption that a range of three Lancashire boilers as suggested, together with both flues and chimney shaft were erected at a cost of £4,500 to supply the heat, the following would be on the above figures the annual maintenance cost:— MAINTENANCE PER ANNUM. £ s. d. 1,750 tons of coal, at 15/- delivered 1,300 0 0 Two stokers at 30/- per week each 150 0 0 Maintenance of boilers and steam pipes, 5 per cent. on say £2,500 125 0 0 Capital charge, being Interest at 27/8 per cent. and Sinking Fund on the 26 years annuity basis, say 5 per cent. on £4,500 225 0 0 £1,800 0 0 "The amount of fuel allowed for depends of course upon the amount of water to be heated. The figures given for the swimming ponds are easily checked, since you yourselves will determine how many times the ponds will be filled in the year. As regards the water used in the slipper baths and washing troughs, you will observe that we have pointed out that our calculations are made on the basis of their being used at maximum rates for 10 hours per day, and this figure may be much modified with the result of reducing the fuel used proportionately. The last three items in the maintenance estimate (£500 per annum) are charges which in any case must be incurred quite outside the question of the amount of fuel used. In any case it is clear that the annual maintenance under the scheme will be a very considerable sum, since taking the standing charges and the coal to be used for the swimming ponds alone, the total would reach £1,050 per annum, witheut any hot water at all for the slipper baths or washing troughs, or the steam heating of the drying horses, &c. "ECONOMIES OF SUPPLYING STEAM FROM EXISTING "ELECTRIC LIGHT STATION. "Referring to the three last items in the above-mentioned estimate, it will be seen that if steam were supplied from the Electric Lighting Station the greater portion of these items, amounting to £500, would be at once saved witheut any consideration for the economy in fuel that would undoubtedly be achieved. "We would point out to you that exhaust steam (i.e., the steam discharged from the Electric Light Station after having performed its duty there) is practically equally efficient as live steam in heating the bath water of all descriptions so long as the temperature to which it is required to be raised does not exceed say 180 degrees Fahrenheit, or even something greater than this. It therefore follows that so long as the above-mentioned quantities of steam are produced from the exhaust of the Electric Light Station engines, this could be utilised for heating the bath water witheut any extra expense for fuel. At present the output of the Electric Light Station is less than the steam required to heat all the water as set forth above, theugh in a short time it will almost certainly be equal to the whole duty required of it. Until this time is reached it will of course be necessary to make up the heat required by live steam direct from the Electric Light boilers, and 8 not passed through the engines, and this may even involve the burning of fuel at times in addition to the heat obtained from the refuse, theugh, of course, at the worst a very much smaller quantity than in the case of separate boilers fired altogether by coal; and it must be borne in mind that, when the output of the Electric Light Station has reached that figure at which the exhaust steam would supply all the heat for the baths, fuel would in no case have to be burnt for the Baths and Washhouses, so that in the end the complete heating of the baths, with the exception of the live steam required for the washing troughs, might be effected by the utilisation of what would be a waste product from the Electric Light Station. Finally, as regards the metheds adopted for the utilisation of exhaust steam only, 01 exhaust and live steam only, for the heating of the baths, this can be effected witheut in any way dirtying or damaging the bath water. The metheds of doing this are well known, and the details of the manner in which it is to be effected should be left as a proposition from the Heating Engineer, who would of course guarantee results to be obtained. E. MANVILLE." The Committee carefully considered this report in conjunction with their Architect and Messrs. Berry & Sons, the heating engineers then engaged on the Baths engineering work, and on January 5th, after communicating with the Lighting Committee, they reported on the matter to the Vestry as follows:— "Your Committee have had under consideration the question of the heating arrangements of the Baths and Washhouses, so as to utilise in the most economical manner the steam supplied from the Electric Lighting and Dust Destructor Engines. "In the original specification for the Engineering Work at the Baths provision was made for using live steam only at a pressure of about 80 lbs., but after consultation with the Vestry's Electrical Engineers, Messrs. Kincaird, Waller and Manville, it appears that there will be ample heat available from the exhaust steam passing out of the Electric Lighting Engines to provide all the exhaust steam required for the Baths, live steam only being necessary for the washing troughs and engines. Such exhaust steam would be passed into condensers, where it would heat water which would be available for heating the Baths. This would be an advantage for the Electric Lighting Engines, as well as a permanent saving in annual maintenance to the Baths' Committee, as, in the estimate submitted to the Committee, it was found that, to provide the necessary heat for the Baths and Washhouses by separate plant, boilers, shafting &c., would cost about £4,500, in addition to a sum of £1,800 per annum for maintenance and fuel. "Your Committee have received an estimate and scheme from Messrs. Berry and Sons, Contractors (who are executing the Engineering Work connected with the Baths) for supplying the necessary condensers and plant for utilizing the exhaust steam from the Electric Lighting Engines at a cost of £4,695. Your Committee think hat this matter is of such great importance to the success of the Baths that they should be advised by a Consulting Engineer as to the reasonableness of the estimate, efficiency of the plant, and that he should supervise the execution of the work proposed by Messrs. Berry & Sons, as such technical engineering matters are outside the province of the Architects to undertake. "As the matter was urgent your Committee have approached Mr. Henry Ward, C.E., of No. 110, Cannon Street, who has had exceptional experience with the uniting of Public Baths (not usually possessed by Consulting Engineers, as such work generally carried out by the Contractor direct), and Mr. Ward would be prepared o undertake the work at the same commission of 5 per cent., which would otherwise have een payable to the Architects if this work had been placed under their control. Your Committee therefore 9 " Recommend—That they be autherised to engage Mr. Henry Ward to act as their Consulting Engineer, to advise them upon this work, and supervise its execution, at a fee equal to 5 per cent. upon the cost of the work." This recommendation was approved by the Vestry, and Mr. Ward was accordingly engaged, and he prepared specifications and working drawings for carrying out the work on the lines suggested, which he advised, would be entirely satisfactory. FOUNDATION STONE. On the 1st May, 1897, the ceremony of the laying of the foundation stone of the Baths and Washhouses was performed, in the presence of a large number of people, by Mr. H. T. Sawell, J.P., the then Chairman of the Vestry. A report of the proceedings, which appeared in a local paper at that time, will be found in the appendix to this report. ACCOMMODATION. The accommodation provided in the Shoreditch Baths is as follows :— Men's 1st Class.—20 private baths, 1 public swimming bath 100 feet long and 40 feet wide. There are 68 dressing boxes around this bath, and these are made to fold back apainst the wall, so that the space they occupy is then added to the area of the hall. Men's 2nd Class.—36 private baths, 1 public swimmine bath 75 feet long and 35 feet wide. There are 56 dressing boxes around this bath, and a foot bath is also provided. Ladies' 1st Class.—5 private baths. Ladies' 2nd Class.—15 private baths. All the above departments, with their separate waiting rooms attached, are placed on the ground floor level, and each department has a separate entrance from the public streets. The large swimming bath will be licensed by the London County Council as a public hall for entertainments, and ample and direct ingress and egress has been provided by the three separate entrances in Pitfield Street, Coronet Street, and Bowling Green Walk. The necessary cloak and retiring rooms and other accommodation is afforded by the utilization of the club and waiting rooms. The public hall when floored over will accommodate about 1,200 persons on the ground floor and 530 seats are provided in the gallery. Good residential accommodation is provided for the Superintendent in the upper part of the Pitfield Street building, and is approached by a separate staircase. The Board room and office is on the first floor, and is approached by a separate staircase from the entrance hall. 10 The public laundry is also on the ground floor level, and contains 50 washing compartments and 50 steam drying horses, and other necessary fittings for ironing and mangling. The public entrance to this department is from Bowling Green Walk, and it is practically completely separated from the baths portion of the establishment. Ample accommodation is provided in the basement for the storage of the movable floors and platforms when these are not required during the bathing season. The buildings have frontages to three separate streets, viz., Pitfield Street, Coronet Street and Bowling Green Walk, the first-named being the main front, which has been designed to group with the adjoining Free Library. The whole of the elevations are faced with best red-facing bricks with buff terra-cotta dressings supplied by the Burmantofts Company, and the roofs are covered with red tiles. In the interior of the building glazed bricks and tiles have been very largely used, and the woodwork in the main corridors and large swimming bath is of teak. The whole of the floors and flat roofs are of fireproof construction, and the roofs over the swimming baths, laundry, etc., are constructed with wrought iron principals. CLERK OF WORKS. In consequence of the unsatisfactory conduct of the officer at first appointed as Clerk of Works, the Committee found it necessary to consider the matter in relation to his position, and as a result he was summarily dismissed, and Mr. W. C. Gardner, who had superintended the erection of the buildings and plant at the lighting station, was appointed to the position at a salary at the rate of £4 4s. Od. a week, which appointment was subsequently confirmed by the Vestry. EXTRA WORKS. The following are the principal additions to the original specification for the orection of Baths and Washhouses which have been decided upon by the Baths Committee up to date, viz.:— Additional depth of subways in front block. Substitution of marble divisions in lieu of slate in 1st class private baths. Glazed brick facing to all private baths, 2nd class swimming bath, staircases, corridors, w.c.'s, and public laundry, &c., in lieu of plastering. Substitution of rubber and gauged arches oxternally in lieu of axed arches. Iron and teak doors to public hall to comply with L.C.C. regulations. Extra involved in gallery to 1st class swimming bath for similar reason. Do. in roof over do., in consequence of adoption of amended design. Do. by using "collapsible " dressing boxes in 1st class bath. Re arrangement of stairs to gallery in Coronet Street, by order of the L.C.C. Sundry small alterations in the design of the Pitfield Street front. Extra involved in lowering basement floor, in ordor to form boiler house. 11 LONDON COUNTY COUNCIL REGULATIONS. The following is a copy of a communication which was received from the London County Council addressed to the Architects with regard to the plans of the Baths Buildings and which was communicated to the Baths Committee on the 23rd November, 1897. LONDON COUNTY COUNCIL. Gentlemen,— I have to inform you that the Council has approved the nine drawings, seven dated 15th May, and two dated 11th August,' 1897, in regard to the Shoreditch Public Baths on the following conditions:— (1) That the Balcony be constructed to the satisfaction of the District Surveyor. (2) That a space of 2ft. 4 inches by 1ft. 8 inches be allowed for each of the balcony seats. (3) That the works be commenced within six months and be carried out in all respects in accordance with the London Building Act, 1894. I am to add that upon the satisfactory completion of the building in accordance with the approved drawings and the above conditions a certificate under the Metropolis Management and Building Act Amendment Act, 1878, will be sealed and issued to the owners of the premises. I am, Gentlemen, Messrs. Spalding & Cross, Your obedient servant, 15, Queen Street, (Signed) F. BELL, Cheapside, E.C. For the Clerk of the Council. HOUSING OF THE WORKING CLASSES. (a) MOIRA PLACE AND PLUMBER'S PLACE AREA. During the year the Vestry completed the acquisition of all the property on this area, and demolished all the buildings thereon. Upon the clearance of the site, the Housing Committee instructed me to report upon the position of the undertaking at that stage, and on the 13th January, 1898, I made the following report upon the progress of the scheme. "Gentlemen, "In accordance with your instructions, I beg to submit the following report upon the completion of the purchase of Moira Place and Plumber's Place Area. "It will be remembered that under the original order of the Home Secretary with regard to this scheme, the London County Council were ordered to pay half the expenses of carrying it out, and a dispute arose between the Council and the Vestry whether these expenses meant "gross" expenses of acquiring the property, or "nett" expenses after allowing for recoupment from the value of the land used for re-building purposes. I advised the Vestry that, owing to the construction of the Housing of the Working Classes Act, 1890, "expenses" meant "gross" expenses, and this opinion was confirmed by counsel's opinion taken by the London County Council. Nevertheless, the Council would not concede the point, which was not free from doubt, and the Vestry accordingly petitioned the Home Secretary to make an order on the London County Council to pay a lump sum, which was, after a great deal of negotiation and correspondence, fixed at £27,500, the total cost of the scheme being taken at £55,000, a valuation agreed to by the Council's valuer and the Vestry. From a memorandum of the Accountant, under date 13th 12 January, 1898, it appears that the nett payments and liabilities to 31st December 1897 in respect of this scheme have been £51,779 12s. 3d., but in this sum is included the sum of £970 6s. 8d., being a proportion of the cost of my salary and that of my staff, in addition to £595 17s. 9d. for the salary of the conveyancing clerk, Mr. Nicholl, and his successor employed especially upon this scheme. The sum of £970 6s. 8d. for my department, is a book transfer and would have been paid by the Vestry for my staff whether this scheme had been carried out or not. Something should be added for the Accountant's services and staff, but this would be balanced by the other office work and conveyancing done by Mr. Nicholl, not chargeable to this scheme. "The whole of the purchases having been completed and the property demolished, the only further expense to be contemplated, apart from the rebuilding, is the cost of making and sewering the new street, estimated by the Surveyor at £945, which will make a total outlay by the Vestry of £52,724 12s. 3d., towards which they are entitled to £27,500 from the London County Council, and have in addition the whole of the vacant land as a valuable asset in their favour, which, at 9s. per foot (a fair valuation of the whole, allowing a lower price for the site of the Vestry's Model dwellings to counter-balance a higher price for the land for commercial purposes facing Nile Street and East Road), works out at £20,257. Thus the Vestry's contribution of £25,224, after setting off against it the value of the land, which is the Vestry's sole property, makes the nett cost of the scheme to the Vestry only £4,967. After allowing for the book transfer for my staff (payable by the Vestry even if the scheme had not existed), the nett payment is reduced to £3,997. In addition, a valuable street improvement, distinct from the re-housing scheme, has been effected, 25,084 square feet having been used for the new street and widening others, and valuing this land for this purpose at only 5/- per foot, the housing scheme should be credited with £6,271 in respect thereof, thus shewing a nett credit balance or profit of £2,274 on the housing scheme alone. An important factor in this reduction of cost below the estimate is the strenuous resistance offered by your Committee to all extravagant claims and bills of costs, necessitating arbitration and taxation in a number of cases. Thus total claims of £76,000 were reduced to £45,300, the compensation actually paid, whilst the claims that went to arbitration amounted to £12,104, and the total amount awarded in settlement was only £5,126. This action naturally caused increased office work, and consumed much time. The buildings for Model Dwellings, according to Mr. Plumbe's estimate, will pay for themselves; the rents, after all usual deductions for repairs, loss, collection, rates, taxes, insurance, &c., are estimated to pay interest and repayment of capital borrowed to build them, and still leave a profit of three-fifths per cent., or £142 15s. per annum. It would thus appear there is not much risk of the Vestry losing by the rebuilding part of the scheme, especially as Mr. Plumbe has allowed for a sinking fund to pay off the cost of the buildings and the land at the end of 60 years, whereas at that time the land will remain as a valuable asset worth not less than it is now. Adjusting Mr. Plumbe's Table to provide for present rates (underestimated by him), but for lower interest of 27/8 (estimated by him at 3 per cent.) on capital value of land and buildings, and limiting the sinking fund to replace buildings only, the dwellings would just pay for themselves if the land were put at a value of 9s. per loot. Owing to the Plumber's Place area, where the property of larger rating existed, having only been recently cleared, tbe loss of rates will not be heavy, and will be more than compensated by the future increased ratings of the property to be erected. "I think this result is one that the Vestry may congratulate itself upon, and in view of the complaints that have been frequently expressed as to the apparently excessive delay in carrying this scheme through, I think it due to my department to point out some of the chief causes of this delay. “The Vestry made the scheme which has now been carried out, on the 28th June, 1692, and the necessary plans were at once prepared and application made by me to the London County Council and Local Government Board on the 30th June, 1892, for 13 their approval, which was necessary before the Vestry could do anything to carry out the scheme. The Local Government Board enquiry was not held until 22nd February, 1893, and the actual sanction of the Board was not received until 2nd April, 1894, when the Vestry's scheme was sanctioned with certain modifications as to the number of persons to be re-housed. "Upon this Order being made, the solicitor to the London County Council raised doubts as to its validity on the ground of it being ultra vires and that it had not been made in strict accordance with the Housing of the Working Classes Act,' 1890, and to remove the difficulties thus raised, and before the Vestry could proceed with the scheme, it became necessary for the Local Government Board to promote and get passed, the Housing of the Working Classes Amendment Act, 1894, specially to remove the difficulties in this case. "Another delay arose upon the dispute between the Vestry and the London County Council as to the apportionment of the expenses of the scheme before-mentioned, and this dispute was not settled until 13th April, 1896, when the Council, upon an Order of the Home Secretary, agreed to a contribution of £27,500, the Vestry taking the chance whether the scheme worked out at a greater or less nett cost than the amount estimated. The wisdom of this course (and its consequential delay) is apparent from the above statement as to how this scheme is actually working out, for it will result in the Vestry bearing a very much less final charge than the Council will have to do, and it is quite possible that it may yet yield a better return than that before estimated. "Further difficulty arose as to the powers of the Vestry to borrow for any expenses other than purchase money or compensation, and altheugh this point had been anticipated and pointed out by me in a letter of the 22nd January, 1894, when the original order was being prepared, the Local Government Board issued the original Order witheut providing for it, thinking that the Vestry had sufficient powers to borrow for the laying out the ground and making the new street, under the Metropolis Management Act, but this view was doubted by the London County Council, and before their sanction to the necessary loan could be obtained, it became necessary for the Vestry to apply to the Local Government Board for a further modification of the Order, on the lines first suggested by the Vestry, and this further modified Order was obtained on the 24th March, 1896. The appointment of an Arbitrator by the same Board, and his proceedings on arbitration, caused much loss of time. "Mr. Plumbe was appointed in July, 1895, when he prepared schemes for the Model Dwellings to be erected as required by the Order, and further serious delays occurred in getting the sanction of the Local Government Board and London County Council to these plans, and meeting the views of the Council, as to alterations of dust shoots, etc., on which an appeal was made by the Vestry to the Local Government Board, entailing more delay. 'Furthur delay arose on the question as to whether the Vestry should themselves erect the buildings, or let. or sell the land under covenants to others to erect them, and this question was under the consideration of the Vestry, and on its agendas from 7th April, 1896, until 16th June, 1896. "Upon the Vestry deciding to build themselves, it was necessary to get the Local Government Board's sanction to this proposal, which, after an inquiry held on 23rd December, 1896, was sanctioned in April, 1897, this being the first moment when the Vestry could legally enter into a contract for the building. After working drawings and quantities had been prepared, advertisements were at once issued, and a tender accepted on 7th December, 1897. "Beyond the delay caused by the deliberations of the Vestry on the question of erecting dwellings themselves, the whole ©f the slow movement attendant on this 14 scheme has been due to the inevitable delays of the Local Government Board and the London County Council, both of whom have had to approve each step taken by the Vestry after protracted inquiries, cross-correspondence, and the taking of legal advice by both official bodies. In advising the Vestry to persist in a line of action which caused unavoidable delays with the central autherities (theugh not at a time when any pecuniary loss was incurred thereby), I think the result fully justifies the advice I gave, and more than compensates for the delay, which could hardly have caused the complaints and irritation it has in connection with my department if the full facts of the case had been borne in mind by the complainants." This report was approved by the Committee on the 27th day of January, 1898, who were kind enough to pass a resolution conveying to me their thanks for my services in this matter which was approved by the Vestry on the 15th day of February, 1898. (b) SHOREDITCH MODEL DWELLINGS. Under the order of the Local Government Board sanctioning the Moira Place Scheme the Vestry were required to provide accommodation for members of the Working Classes displaced, to the number of 400, and on application to the Board as required by the Housing Acts, the Vestry obtained permission to erect the necessary dwellings themselves. The purchases having all been completed, and the houses demolished, a hoarding was erected enclosing the area and the portion facing East Road was let to Messrs. Willing & Co., for advertising, at a rental of £5 10s, Od. per month. Mr. Rowland Plumbe, F.R.I.B.A., was appointed Architect of the proposed dwellings, at a commission of 5 per cent., and prepared the working drawings and specification; Mr. A. Cross, of the Outer Temple, was appointed Quantity Surveyor, and Tenders for the erection of the Model Dwellings were invited by public advertisement. The following Tenders were received :— Name. Moira Place. Plumber's Place. Total. £ Extras. £ Extras. £ Steed, J. 13,967 673 2,467 115 17,222 Lawrance & Co. 15,164 598 2,644 103 18,504 Ilolloway Bros. 15,436 635 2,751 122 18,944 Smith & Son 15,400 660 2,800 110 18,970 Wall, C. 15,575 635 2,840 125 19,175 Shepherd, W. 15,725 623 2,740 110 19,198 Saunders, E. J. 16,088 305 2,769 49 19,211 Whitehead & Co. 15,750 479 2,925 84 19,238 Leslie & Co. 15,957 525 2,842 92 19,416 Hill C. Gray 15,995 573 2,750 103 19,421 Perry & Co. 15 900 635 2,800 115 19,450 Chessum & Son 15,865 723 2,810 127 19,525 15 Dove Bros. 15,855 750 2,900 130 19,635 Johnson & Co. 16,289 474 2,797 82 19,642 Todd & Co. 16,273 664 3,125 115 20,177 Marsland, J. 16,650 635 2,880 117 20,282 Harris & Waidrop 16,597 711 2,883 127 20,318 Parnell & Son 17,047 592 3,074 120 20,833 Kilby & Gayford 17,236 674 2,955 117 20,982 Lovatt, H. 17,093 592 3,331 105 21,121 Irwin, W. 17,950 825 3,250 140 22,165 and the Vestry on 7th December, 1897, accepted Mr. J. Steed's tender of £17,222. The buildings were commenced on 28th February, 1898, and the work is now proceeding. A new street about 460 feet run in length and 40 feet wide throughout has been cut and formed through the Plumber's Place area from East Road to Provost Street which will in addition to facilitating vehicular traffic tend to open up the whole area to light and ventilation. A 15 inch pipe sewer has been laid for the full length of the new street at a cost of £300. Mr. Alexander, the Vestry's Chief Sanitary Inspector, submitted to the Vestry his Patent Water Storage Cistern as specially suitable for these dwellings. This cistern is so constructed that no dirt or sunlight can get into it and is self-cleaning. The Vestry on 4th January last, resolved to adopt this cistern in the Model Dwellings now being erected. The Working Class Dwellings now in course of erection for the Vestry of Shoreditch, on the areas known as the Moira and Plumber's Place sites, consist of three blocks of buildings each five stories high. The Moira Place site will contain the two largest blocks, each to be built fronting on to streets widened to forty feet and set back three feet from the same, and with large paved courtyard between. The Plumber's Place Dwelling is similarly situated as regards the street, and also has a courtyard in the rear. The Moira Place site has a superficial area of about 17,796 feet, of which 7,841 feet will be taken up by the buildings. These will contain twenty-five two-room sets, and forty three-room sets, thus accommodating 340 persons. The Contractor's price for building the two blocks complete, with yards, paving, and boundary walls, is £14,640. The Plumber's Place site has an area of 3,416 superficial feet, of which 1,367 feet will be taken up by the building. It will contain ten three-room sets, being accommodation for 60 persons. The contract price complete for this building is £2,582. Thus the total accommodation on both sites is for 400 persons. 16 The total contract for the three blocks amounts to £17,222, and deducting from this £650, provided for contingencies and works to adjoining properties, gives a price of 7fd. per foot cube for the buildings complete, or £41 10s. 0d. per person accommodated. The tenements are quite self contained, and consist of a living room of 167 feet in area, looking in every case on to the street, and fitted with well ventilated food cupboard, dresser with potboard under, a 2 foot 6 inch self setting range with open and close fire, a scullery 9 feet by 6 feet, approached from the living room and overlooking the courtyard, fitted with sink and draining board, with coal bunk for 2 cwts. under same; a six gallon copper, and a 2 foot open cottago range, so that the scullery can bo used as a kitchen should the tenants wish. There are no dust shoots, but a galvanized iron dust pail is provided for each tenement. Those will bo put out on the landings by the tenants twice a week, and the refuse removed by the Vestry's dusting department. The bedrooms are approached direct from the living room, and in the case of the throo-room tenements, one bedroom has an area of over 120 feet and the other over 96 feet. The two-room tenements havo a bedroom of an average area of 127 feet. Each bedroom is fitted with a mantel register stove. The height of the rooms will ho 8 feet 6 inches throughout. The living and bedroom walls will be plastered and distempered in fancy tints with a darker dado and separating line. The scullery walls are to be in Fletton bricks. Each tenement has its own w.c. disconnected from the rooms by a short lobby. The w.c.'s are well lit and ventilated, and look on to the courtyard. The tenements are approached direct from the staircases, (there being no corridors in the buildings) two tenomonts on each floor from a staircase, the entrance to the tenement being through an iron railing and gate into a lobby, having the living room door on the one side and the lobby leading to the w.c. on the other. The lobby is well lit and ventilated from the staircase and by a fanlight over the w.c. door. The object of the iron railing is to allow of the w.c. being inspected without going into the rooms of tho tenants. The staircases approached through an open archway from the courtyards are of good width, easy, and well lit and ventilated, having a large window to every floor, and an extra casement window which can be left permanently open for ventilation at the highest point. The staircases to he finished with a glazed brick dado, and Fletton bricks above. The construction of the buildings will be fire proof throughout, all internal walls being of brick, and the floors composed of iron joists embedded in concrete. Staircases and landings will bo of granolithic. The sanitary arrangements have been most carefully studied with due regard to cost. Each Bcullery and w.c. is fittod with a gulley discharging into a rain water 17 head outside the building, so that both can be sluiced out with water, or in case of mishap with the water fittings the tenements would not be flooded. The w.c.'s are fitted with the "Oatley Patent overflow soil and anti-syphonage pipe junction," so that should one w.c. become blocked the others will not be put out of action, or w.c.'s at a lower level than the one used, flooded. The rain water and sink wastes discharge into gullies having cleaning caps, so that all short lengths of drains can be cleaned, and manholes are placed on the main drains at all bends and junctions. The whole of the water used will be stored in Alexander's patent self-cleansing air-tight cisterns, placed in the roof space, and easily accessible. The staircases and tenements will be lit by electric light, and a proposal is being considered for the latter being supplied by means of penny-in-the-slot meters. The Elevations will be carried out with a brown glazed brick plinth for one storey, and yellow stock brickwork above, picked out with red quoins and bands, and a small amount of brown Portland stone in the gables. The roofs are constructed on the Mansard principle, and covered with green slates. In this class of building, the plan is of necessity the first consideration, but in the external design of these dwellings, the monotonous repetition of small windows has been overcome by the introduction of boldly massed gables of distinctly picturesque outline, obviously influenced by the remains of ancient work to be found in the old coast towns of East Anglia. The rents to be charged for tenements will be 8s. 6d. for the three-room and 6s. 6d. for the two room sets, and there are in the buildings five cupboards, which it is proposed to let to tenants at 3d. per week. The total annual rental for the three blocks will amount tc £1,530 15s. This rental, taking the total cost of erecting the buildings and the value of the two plots of land at £22,917, and allowing for all rates, lighting, supervision, and collection of rents, empties and losses, insurance and sinking fund to reproduce the total outlay at the termination of 60 years at 2½ per cent., repairs and incidental outgoings will produce an interest of 3.3/5 per cent, on the total outlay. The question of the tenants purchasing an interest in the dwellings has been reported on by the Architect who is taking some considerable interest in the question. He states that if tenants will pay an extra shilling per week, they can practically purchase a long leasehold interest in their houses in the space of 30 years. They would of course, still have to contribute towards the rates and taxes and the keeping up of the premises, but this could all be provided for, the Vestry keeping that in their own hands, and also charging for the work done in administering the Estate. The matter is in abeyance until the buildings are nearly complete. c 18 (c) SURPLUS LAND, PLUMBER'S PLACE AREA. After providing for the erection of Working Class Dwellings and Street Improvements the Vestry had 18,554 superficial feet of surplus land available on the Plumber's Place Area for Commercial purposes. . Mr. Rowland Plumbe, F.R.I.B.A., was appointed consulting Architect in connection with this portion of the work at a commission of one per cent. on the cost of the Buildings to be erected, and he was instructed to prepare sketch Plans for developing Plumber's Place Area, plotting out the ground to the best advantage, and designing a facade for the shops facing Nile Street to secure uniformity. The surplus land has been accordingly divided into 17 Building Plots, and the Vestry is inviting Tenders for Annual Ground Rents for the Plots on building leases of 80 years for Shops facing Nile Street, and Shops, Warehouses, Dwellings, or Factories on the Plots facing the New Street. OPEN SPACES. In June, 1897, the Housing Committee appointed an Open Spaces Sub-Committee, consisting of 8 members, including the Chairman and Vice-Chairman, to take charge of the open Spaces under the control of the Vestry. The Housing Committee resolved that the grounds should be open seven days a week all the year round, and an extra man was appointed in July, 1897, in order to relieve the caretakers at the various grounds one day in the week. As several of the open spaces had no dwarf railings to the paths to protect the grass and flower beds, the Housing Committee invited Tenders for the supply of the railings necessary, and the Vestry on 21st December, 1897, accepted the Tender of Messrs. Rayboulds & Co., to supply and fix railings at a cost of £171 4s. 5d., in the Churchyards of Shoreditch, Hoxton, and Haggerston, and Goldsmiths Square Recreation Ground, and the work has been commenced and is being proceeded with. (a) ST. LEONARD CHURCHYARD, The London County Council in carrying out the Boundary Street Scheme found it necessary to widen Calvert Street (now Calvert Avenue), and the opportunity was taken by the Vestry to arrange with the Council to rectify the southern boundary of the churchyard which was very irregular in outline. The London County Council erected a new boundary railing on the southern side of the churchyard and placed a gate in the railings opposite Boundary Street. In August last the Housing Committee advertised for a gardener at the churchyard and Mr. G. Bance, who had valuable experience in landscape gardening and nursery garden work, was appointed. 19 During the past year an improvement has been carried out at this churchyard which will not only make it an extremely pleasant resort as a recreation ground, but will be a valuable addition to the smaller open spaces of the Metropolis. By means of raised flower beds and the concealment of gravestones by shrubs and trees a very picturesque effect has been obtained which is enhanced by stretches of good turf and well-gravelled walks provided in places with ornamental archways. On 1st February, 1898, the Vestry voted the sum of £200 to be expended in laying out the grounds with shrubs, flowers, gravel, &c., and including the provision of two greenhouses, and the Housing Committee, by very careful attention to details and by purchasing at public auctions, have succeeded in securing shrubs, plants, bulbs, &c., at less than half their usual retail price. The erection of greenhouses is believed to be a novel departure for a Metropolitan Vestry, and as the two erected in St. Leonard's Churchyard should be sufficient to raise enough stock for the maintenance of the other open spaces in Shoreditch, the experiment should prove a saving upon the present system of purchasing all bedding-out plants. A number of handsome shrubs has been kindly presented to the churchyard by Mr. W. Hawley, of 112, Philip Lane, Tottenham, to whom the thanks of the Committee have been conveyed. The Rev. S. Buss has kindly given permission for the whipping posts and stocks considered to be about 200 years old, which have been stored underneath the church to be placed on exhibition in the churchyard. The Housing Committee agreed to offer a 1st prize of £1 and a 2nd prize of 10s. to students of the Technical Schools for the best designs for a shelter for the posts and stocks, and the students are now at work preparing their designs. The Metropolitan Gardens Association offered to place a drinking fountain in the railings of the churchyard. A site adjoining the new gate on Hackney Road side has been decided upon, and the fountain will shortly be fixed. A new gate in Hackney Road has been erected, thus affording additional facilities for people using the churchyard for recreation. (b) CHARLES SQUARE. The London County Council in March, 1897, agreed to contribute one-half of the cost, estimated at £950, of acquiring and laying out the Square, for use by the public, being £300 for purchase money, £455 for boundary railings and £194 for laying out, such contribution however not to exceed £475 and subject to the Vestry agreeing to maintain the Square when acquired and laid out. Tenders for the supply and erection of boundary railings were received and the tender of Messrs. Mallett & Co. of Lawrence Pountney Hill at £493 was accepted by the Vestry on the 15th June, 1897. This sum was amended by the addition of 10 per cent. bringing the total up to £542. The work is nearing completion. c1 20 The Metropolitan Public Gardens Association agreed in November, 1896, to lay out the Square as a garden and provide caretaker's box, eight garden seats and a drinking fountain for the sum of £194. The Vestry resolved to accept the offer and the work is in hand. (c) ST JOHN'S CHURCHYARD. The Housing Committee have had the improvement of this churchyard under consideration, and after interviewing the Rev. G. P. Pownall, agreed to proceed to obtain a Faculty for the removal of the tombstones, and to obtain permission to lay out the churchyard as a public recreation ground. The draft petition has been prepared, advertisements, as required by the Open Spaces Act, 1887, of the intention of the Vestry to apply for the Faculty will shortly be issued. (d) ST. MARY'S CHURCHYARD, HAGGERSTON. The condition of the paths of this churchyard rendered it necessary to lay in a proper system of drainage thereto. Plans and specifications have been prepared and tenders invited for the work. The dwarf railings in the churchyard are being straightened and repaired. PARLIAMENTARY MATTERS. (a) LONDON CANALS PROTECTION. In consequence of an agitation initiated by the Shoreditch Vestry, set out at length in my report of 1896, on page 39, as to the dangers of the fences of the Regent's Canal passing through this parish, a Bill was introduced into Parliament in 1897 providing for the proper fencing of all dangerous water-ways of the canals in London, and giving powers to the Vestries to summon Canal Companies neglecting to erect such fencing after notice from a Board of Jurisdiction, who are to have powers to make, order and require the necessary fencing to be erected, and such cost to be borne by the local authority; but the Bill, however, was not passed into law, and has been re-introduced in the first Session of 1898, and is still under the consideration of Parliament. (b) METROPOLITAN SEWERS AND DRAINS BILL. The Vestry considered a letter of the London County Council pointing out the difficulties met with in regard to the introduction of this Bill, which was intended to get over the difficulties raised as to what combined sewers and drains were repairable by the Vestry or by the owners, and asked for the views of the Vestry upon the matter. As the Holborn Board of Works convened a conference upon this subject the Vestry supported this movement, and appointed the Chairmen of the Public Health and Works Committees, together with the Chief Sanitary Inspector and myself, to attend such conference which was duly convened at the Holborn Town Hall, when the lines of the previous Bill were generally 21 approved, and it was referred to a Committee, upon which I was appointed a member, to consider the details of the measure. The Committee approved the details of the previous Bill, adding clauses suggested by the representatives of Islington, which gave power to local authorities to treat any combined drain as a sewer which they had thought ought to be so treated. The Bill by providing that any combined drains should be treated as a sewer unless it had been approved as a sewer by the Local Authority, or the London County Council, or their predecessors, threw upon the owners the onus of repairing all these combined drains, which under the present law have to be treated as sewers. The conference approved the bill in this form, and steps were taken for it to be introduced again into Parliament. A proposal made by the Shoreditch delegates upon the instruction of the Vestry that the law should be simplified by providing that all drains laid on private property including connection with sewers should be the private property of the owners, repairable by them, whilst all other drains laid under the highways should be treated as sewers, was submitted to the conference, but only received the support of the minority, and was not adopted. It is certain that the present complicated definitions of drain and sewer require to be simplified in some such way as that above proposed, so that laymen may know what is drain and what is sewer without having to seek legal opinion upon the details of every case. (c) BUTLER'S CHARITY. On the 14th June, 1897, the Parliamentary Committee considered the draft of the proposed scheme for the future regulation of this charity, providing that the income of the charity was to be equally divided between 12 parishes (of which Shoreditch was one) for the benefit of children attending the public elementary schools, the scheme providing for the award of exhibitions of the yearly value not exceeding £20, nor less than £5, and in the placing out of apprentices to suitable trades, the cost not exceeding £30, nor less than £10, and provision was made for five ex-officio and four co-optative trustees. The Vestry on the recommendation of the Parliamentary Committee resolved to represent to the Charity Commissioners that the scheme should be amended by providing that the trustees to be appointed should be representatives of the ratepayers, and that in the selection of schools for the exhibition preference should be given to such institutions supported by the municipal authority, so that in Shoreditch the Vestry's muncipal and technical school might be selected. The Commissioners replied on the 18th January, 1898, that in accordance with the system under which the Charity had been governed for many years the Commissioners were unable on the present occasion to place it on a representative basis, having regard to the large numbers of Parishes equally interested in the appropriation of its benefits, and whilst they hesitated to limit the discretion of the trustees confined to the Shoreditch Charity and the Vestry's Municipal and Technical School they pointed out that it was within the power of the trustees themselves to adopt such a course if satisfactory 22 to both the institution and the charity. The amended scheme was scaled and adopted on the 14th January, 1898. (d) PAROCHIAL CHARITIES. Under the provisions of the Local Government Act of 1894, the Shoreditch Vestry are empowered with the sanction of the Charity Commissioners to appoint additional trustees on parochial non-ecclesiastical charities, upon the management of which there are no representatives directly appointed by the rate payers. After communication with the Charity Commissioners upon the subject the Vestry were requested to name the Charities for which they desired to appoint additional trustees, and on the 20th April, 1897, I was instructed to submit the following list of such Charities:—The Metropolitan North-Eastern Hospital, Aske's Charity, Shoreditch New Almshouses, Shoreditch Exhibition Fund, and Christ's Hospital. The Charity Commissioners replied on the 13th November, 1897, expressing the opinion that the Metropolitan Hospital itself was not a parochial charity, but that Jackson's Shoreditch Hospital, by which twelve beds in the Hospital are maintained, and confined to Shoreditch patients, was a parochial charity within the meaning of the act, and consequently one for which the Vestry was entitled to appoint additional trustees. The Commissioners also thought that the Shoreditch New Almshouses and the Shoreditch Exhibition Fund were also parochial charities, but that the NorthEastern Hospital, Christ's Hospital and the Hoxton School (Aske's) charities were non-parochial charities. The Parliamentary Committee upon this recommended the Vestry to ask leave to appoint three additional trustees for Jackson's Charity, three for the Shoreditch Exhibition Fund, of which there were at present ten trustees, and one for the Shoreditch New Almshouses, of which there were at present three trustees. This course was approved by the Vestry and I applied to the Charity Commissioners accordingly, but on the 26th April, 1898, they expressed opinion that as to the Shoreditch Exhibition Fund it would be convenient if only two additional governors were appointed by the Vestry, and one for the New Almshouses, but that with respect to the Jackson's Hospital Charity the Charity Commissioners thought that the provisions of Section 14, sub-Section 8 of the Local Government Act of 1894 precluded the Vestry from appointing additional trustees on the ground that forty years had not elapsed from the foundation of this Charity. The necessary decision of the Board with respect to the Shoreditch Exhibition Fund and the New Almshouses is in course of preparation. (e) STANDING ORDERS AND BYE-LAWS. The Bye-laws and standing orders of the Vestry originally revised on the 21st June, were only in force for six months, to test their working and the Parliamentary Committee proceeded to revise them on the instructions of the Vestry, and made certain alterations therein, suggested by the expediency of their working. The Bye-laws and standing orders as so revised were approved by the Vestry and sealed on the 18th May, 1897, and a copy of them will be found in the Vestrymen's Pocket Book. 23 (f) THE METROPOLIS WATER ACT, 1897. On the recommendation of the Parliamentary Committee, the Vestry on the 2nd November, 1897, instructed me to prepare and issue a short resume of the circular setting forth the provisions of the above Act published by the Local Government Board, by means of a perforated slip attached to the demand note, and this was done in the quarter ending Lady-Day, 1898, in the following form:— The Metropolis Water Act, 1897. SYNOPSIS OF PROVISIONS APPLICABLE TO SHOREDITCH. Complaints to Railway and Canal Commission. Jurisdiction is conferred by the Act upon the Railway and Canal Commission to hoar and determine complaints which may be made by water consumers or by the Shoreditch Vestry with respect to defaults of the water companies in Shoreditch, viz.:—the New River Co. and the East London Waterworks Co. The Act is in addition to and not in substitution for any proceedings or remedy existing at the passing of the Act. [Section 1.] The term "water consumer" means any person supplied with water by any company, or who pays or is liable to pay any money charged in respect of the supply of water, whether as rent, rate, or otherwise, and includes any householder or owner or occupier of a house entitled to make a communication with the mains or pipes of any of those companies. Nothing in the Act, however, is to affect the terms of any agreement existing at the time of the passing of the Act between a water company and a water consumer as to the supply of water. [Section 5.] The Act provides that any water consumer or the Shoreditch Vestry may complain to the Railway and Canal Commission that any of the water companies has failed to perform some statutory duty of the company, and the Commission may hear and determine the complaint. If they are satisfied of the failure of duty, they may order the Company within the time limited by the order to fulfil the duty, and they may impose any penalty for the failure which can be imposed under any Act. [Section 1 (1)]. If at any time complaint as to the quality or quantity of the water supplied by any of the water companies for domestic use is made to the Commission by any water consumer or local authority, the Commission may hear and determine the complaint. If they are satisfied that the complaint is well founded, they may order the Company, within a reasonable specified time, to remove the ground of complaint, and they may award damages to the complainant. [Section 1 (2)]. Provisions for enforcing orders of the Commission are made by the Act. The Commission have full jurisdiction to hear and determine all matters, whether of law or of fact, and they may order two or more companies to carry into effect an order of the Commission, and to make mutual arrangements for that purpose. The costs of proceedings before the Commission are in the discretion of the Commission. [S. 19.] Power of Local Authorities to Aid Water Consumers. Section 2 of the new Act enables the Shoreditch Vestry to aid any water consumer in obtaining the determination of any question which appears to them to be of interest to water consumers in Shoreditch, with respect to the rights, duties, and liabilities of any of the water companies, in reference to the quantity or quality of water supplied, or the charges made by them. The Vestry may, if the Court think fit, be made a party to the proceedings, and they will be liable for costs accordingly. Printed by Order op the Shoreditch Vestry, Clerk's Department, H. MANSFIELD ROBINSON, Shoreditch Town Hall, Solicitor and Clerk. Old Street, London, E.C. 3rd January, 1898. 24 (g) LEVERINGTON CHARITY. The Vestry on the 10th October, altered rule 7 of the regulations as to applications for the above charity, which prohibited poisons in receipt of parochial relief from applying for the charity, and such rule now reads as follows:— "Applicants must bo over 10 years of ago and have resided in the Parish of St. Leonard, Shoreditch, at least three years. Not more than one member of a family can participate in this charity." The number of applications received for this Charity was 76; these were considered by the Parliamentary Committee on the 19th November, 1897, and 37 candidates were recommended to the Vestry, and appointed as recipients of £1 for one year on 7th December, 1897, and the Charity has been disbursed as usual by the Vicar and Churchwardens in weekly sums of 2s. each. (h) LAND TRANSFER ACT, 1897. The Vestry on the 4th January, 1898, resolved to inform the London County Council in answer to their enquiry that they were in favour of the proposal for establishing compulsory registration of title to land in the Metropolis. This Act will shortly bo put into force so far as relates to a portion of London in accordance with the decision of the Council. (i) LONDON WATER SUPPLY. On the 18th February, 1898, the Parliamentary Committee considered a letter from the Royal Commission on Water Supply within the limits of Metropolitan Water Companies, asking for an expression of the views of this Vestry, and whether the Vestry desired to offer evidence upon the subject. The Terms of Reference to the Commission were as follows:— To inquire— (1) Whether having regard to financial considerations and to present and prospective requirements as regards Water Supply in the Districts within the limits of supply of the Metropolitan Water Companies, it is desirable in the interests of the Ratepayers and Water Consumers in those Districts that the undertakings of the Water Companies should be acquired and managed either— (a) by one Authority; or (b) by several Authorities; and if so, what should be such Authority or Authorities. To what extent physical severance of the works and other property and sources of supply of the several Companies, and the division thereof between different Local Authorities within the limits of supply, are practicable and desirable; and what are the legal powers necessary to give effect to any such arrangements. 25 (2) If the undertakings are not so acquired, whether additional powers of control should be exercised by Local or other Authorities; and if so, what those powers should be. (3) Whether it is practicable to connect any two or more of the different systems of supply now administered by the eight Metropolitan Companies; and if so, by whom, and in what proportion, should the cost of connecting them be borne, and what are the legal powers necessary to give effect to any such arrangement. \ The Committee referred the letter to the Chief Sanitary Inspector who presented a lengthy report upon the "various difficulties and shortcomings in connection with the water supply of this parish that have come under the notice of the Sanitary Inspectors." The Committee thereupon decided to recommend the Vestry to pass the following resolutions with regard to the terms of reference to the Commission:— (1) That this Vestry are of opinion that the management of the Water Supply of the Metropolis should be under one authority and that authority should be the London County Council. (2) That unless and until the Water Supply is placed under the management Of the London County Council this Vestry are of opinion (a) That the Local Authorities should have the power to approve or disapprove from a sanitary standpoint, of the cisterns or other means of storage enforced by the Water Companies, and to require a sufficient pressure to supply the highest dwellings in their respective districts. (b) That Local Authorities should be empowered to expend money for the purpose of having the water analysed from time to time. (3) That this Vestry are of opinion that the area of supply of the East London Waterworks Company in this parish should be transferred to the New River Company (in accordance with the Vestry's resolution of September 15th, 1896). Mr. Alexander was appointed to give evidence on behalf of the Vestry on the lines of his report. This report was approved by the Vestry on the 1st March, 1898, and the resolutions were duly sent to the Commissioners. Mr. Alexander gave evidence and produced samples of polluted water actually taken from cisterns in Shoreditch (in one of which was the carcase of a mouse) showing the present insanitary system of domestic water storage. 26 (i) HOXTON SQUARE. Further negotiations have been made with the Trustees of this Square but the Trustees referred the Vestry to their letter of October 2nd, 1896, which required the Vestry to close the entrance to the Destructor Works in Hoxton Square as a condition of transferring the Square to the Vestry. The Lighting Committee were of opinion that this requirement could not be conceded owing to the exigencies of the work, and the Parliamentary Committee agreeing with this the negotiations dropped. Efforts were made to induce the London County Council to insert clauses in their General Powers Bill to acquire the Square and hand it over to the Vestry, but the Parks Committee of the Council were of opinion that such a course was not advisable and that further negotiations with the Trustees should be tried. It is certain that the transference of the Square to the Vestry as a recreation ground would be the best safeguard against any annoyance from dust carts, and I am in further correspondence with the Trustees on the subject. (k) MUNICIPALITIES FOR LONDON. Upon receipt of a letter from a Conference of certain Metropolitan Parishes enclosing draft memorial to Her Majesty's Government praying for the introduction of a Bill in the ensuing Session of Parliament to effect an improvement in the status of local governing bodies, the Vestry on the recommendation of the Parliamentary Committee on the 18th January, 1898, passed the following resolution. \ "That this Vestry re-affirms its decision of agreement with the Royal Commission of 1894, which reported in favour of unification of London with the London County Council as its Municipal Body, and firmly believes that the sub-division of the Metropolis into several separate Municipalities would be disastrous to its good government and a great injustice to the poorer Parishes." (l) SUPERANNUATION (METROPOLIS) BILL. The vexed question of Superannuation of Officials of Local Authorities was again brought before Parliament by the introduction of a Bill, upon which, on the 29th March, 1898, the Vestry passed the following resolution on the recommendation of the Parliamentary Committee:— "That this Vestry considers the passing of the Poor Law Officers Superannuation Amendment Act, 1896, was a gross injustice to the overburdened ratepayers, the great majority of whom are unprovided for in their old age, and hereby most emphatically condemns the Bill to amend the same, so as to extend its provisions to the Officers of Vestries and other Parochial Bodies, and instructs the Vestry Clerk to prepare a petition to the House of Commons against the Bill. That other Metropolitan Vestries and District Boards be asked to take similar action, and the Members of Parliament for the Borough be requested to strenuously oppose the Bill." 27 A petition against the Bill was duly presented to Parliament. The majority of the Vestries and District Boards of London appear to be in favour of the Bill. (m) PARLIAMENTARY SCHEMES, 1898. Plans and Books of Reference with regard to the following schemes to which the sanction of Parliament was proposed to be asked in the 1898 Session were duly lodged in my office. i.—London County Council (General Powers Bill). ii.—London County Council (Northern Tramways Bill). iii.—Great Northern and City Railway Bill. Also Notices for Extension of Time with regard to iv.—London, Walthamstow and Epping Forest Railway. v.—City and South London Railway. And a notice of abandonment of Undertaking re vi.—London, Wathamstow and Epping Forest Railway. i.—London County Council (General Powers) Bill. This was a Bill to enable the London County Council to carry out the Rosemary Branch Bridge Improvement, and for the removal of a wall and posts in Cæsar Street and Long Street on the lines suggested by the Vestry. The Vestry decided to petition in favour of the Bill. ii.—London County Council (Northern Tramways) Bill. The Council sought power by this Bill to lay a double line of tramway along Bethnal Green Road on similar lines to those proposed by the North Metropolitan Tramways Company last session. The Vestry informed the Council that if they would agree to repave the whole of that portion of Bethnal Green Road in this Parish the Vestry would petition in favour of the Bill, otherwise the Vestry would oppose. The Bill has, however, been abandoned owing to the strenuous opposition of the Bethnal Green Vestry, whose consent was necessary. iii.—Great Northern and City Railway Bill.—Proposed Extension. The Surveyor and myself presented reports on the above. The Railway Company are proposing to acquire land in New North Road, Eagle Wharf Road, and adjoining thoroughfares for the erection of a generating station for electricity, and for an extension of their railway which will be worked by electricity or other mechanical power not steam. The Parliamentary Committee directed me to request the Company to make provision for the widening of New North Road and 28 Bridge should the buildings abutting thereon be required to be pulled down so as to allow a double line of tramway between this Parish and Islington. Also to require clauses to be inserted in the Bill against the ingress of steam into the sewers, for the re-housing of persons disturbed, and for the payment of all deficiencies of rates. Also that the Company shall be prohibited from supplying electricity to any other persons, and that protective clauses should be inserted in the Bill with regard to the Vestry's Electric Lighting mains, and their powers as the Local Authority having control of the highways. The negotiations in connection with the above clauses have not at the time of writing been completed. THE TOWN HALL. The lettings of the large Hall during the past year have amounted to 139 in number, and of the Council Chamber 34, or a total of 173 lettings, from which a rental has boon received of £641 1s. 0d. This compares with 184 lettings last year, from which £572 2s. 6d. was received, and 130 lettings in the previous year, 1895-6, producing £555 16s. 8d. The effect of improvements in the Town Hall is distinctly seen in improved lettings. Thus the lettings in the year preceding the alterations in staircases, lavatories, &c., in 1893, reached only £398 5s. 2d., whilst in the year succeeding that improvement, they rose to £467 17s. 5d., being an increase of £69 12s. 3d. In like manner the re-decoration and cleansing of the Hall in 1895, was followed by an increase of £87 19s. 3d. in the yearly lettings, and the installation of the Electric Light was followed by a corresponding increase of £68 18s. 6d. in the produce of lettings over the previous year, the joint result of all the improvements being an annual increase of £226 10s. 0d. in the Vestry's income from this source, in addition to the extra comfort, safety and convenience of the ratepayers and public attending the Hall. Owing to the large increase in the Vestry's work and staff of recent years, the Town Hall Committee have had to consider on several occasions the question of the insufficiency of the present accommodation of thee Town Hall, and they considered a scheme put forward by the Chief Sanitary Inspector for the erection of offices for the Sanitary Department at the back of the east side of the Town Hall. The opportunity, however, occurred for the acquisition of the fine premises adjoining the Town Hall, heretofore used as the Fire Brigade Station of the London County Council, which came into the market owing to the acquisition by the Council of new premises in Tabernacle Square. The Vestry, therefore,instructed me to negotiate with the London County Council for the purchase of the old Fire Brigade Station, which was built on the site originally sold to the Metropolitan Board of Works for the purpose of erecting a station in the year 1867, for the sum of £1550. The area of land covered by this site is about 4,000 square feet, and a frontage on to Old Street of 42 lineal feet, whilst the building contains about 80,000 cubic feet, and consists of a ground floor and two upper stories. The Vestry wore met very fairly by the Corporate Property Committee of the London County Council having the matter in hand, who had fixed on £4,500 as the minimum 29 price as a basis of transfer between the Committee and the Council, and after an offer on behalf of the Vestry of £4,000 had been declined, the Vestry finally agreed to purchase the property for this price, and a loan of £4,550 was taken up for this purpose from the London County Council on the 29th day of October, 1897, when the conveyance to the Vestry was completed. The price paid was certainly a reasonable one, considering the good state of repair of the building, as it only amounted to about 22s. 6d. per foot super, whereas shortly after the purchase, a large block of property immediately adjoining the station was sold by public auction for 30s. per foot. A scheme has been prepared by the Vestry's Surveyor in consultation with the Town Hall Committee for making the necessary alterations in the buildings to make them suitable as offices for the Public Health and Surveyor's Departments, whilst some additional buildings at the back of the station will provide additional Cloak-room and Lavatory accommodation (which is much needed for the Town Hall), as well as three additional Committee Rooms. Meanwhile the ground floor rooms of the Fire Brigade Station have been temporarily lent to the Technical Schools Committee for use as extra School rooms, which were much needed for the School. WORKS. (a) FRENCH COURT. As mentioned in my last Annual Report tenders were invited by advertisement for a 99 years' lease of the vacant ground. A moderate number of enquiries were received from persons who contemplated tendering, but only two tenders were actually sent in before the 15th February last, when the tender of Mr. Gates, to take a 99 years' lease of the vacant land, at an annual rental of £14 15s., and to spend £400 in building a warehouse, was accepted by the Vestry, and the draft lease has been submitted to the lessee for approval. (b) MURRAY STREET AND CUSTANCE STREET IMPROVEMENT. This improvement for extending Custance Street (at present a cul de sac) into Murray Street by removal of the obstructing property, was dealt with in the last Annual Report, so far as related to the interest of Mr. Kipling, who was the sublease holder and immediate landlord of the occupier of No. 16, Murray Street, and who had executed an assignment of his interest for £475. The occupier, Mr. Amos, who was a yearly tenant, gave up possession on receiving £5 from the Vestry for his unexpired interest. The Committee then entered into negotiations with the Ecclesiastical Commissioners and Bull's Trustees owners respectively of the Freehold and chief Leasehold interest in the same house, and also with those interested in other properties involved in the improvement. These latter properties included parts of Nos. 74 and 79, Custance Street, and the interests of the persons variously interested therein are tabulated below in a form shewing, in each case where the terms for acquisition of the interest have been concluded, the cost to the Vestry of such acquisition. 30 With a view to making the list as complete as possible, it includes not only the interests of which conveyances and assignments have been obtained since the date of the last report, but that of Mr. Kipling concluded before that date. The following is a list of the interests above referred to MURRAY STREET AND CUSTANCE STREET IMPROVEMENT. Property Acquired. Vendor's Name. Purchase Money Costs Situation. Interest of. (1) 16, Murray Street Freeholder Ecclesiastical Commissioners £ £ s. d. 120 Solicitor's 25 4 0 Surveyor's 8 8 0 (2) Do. Chief Leaseholders Bull's Trustees 82 Solicitor's 36 15 0 Surveyor's 5 5 0 (3) Do. Sub-Leaseholder R. G Kipling 460 Solicitor's 15 0 (3a) Do. Occupier James 5 Nil. (4) 74, Custance Street Chief Leaseholder Walter Hall 50 Solicitor's 26 5 0 Surveyor's 5 5 0 (5) Do. Sub-Leaseholder John Davies 50 Solicitor's 10 10 0 Surveyor's 5 5 0 (6) Do. Occupier (trade) J. Dalloway Nil Nil. N.B.—The Freeholder is unknown, and is supposed to have abandoned his interest. (7) 79, Custance Street Sub-Leaseholder R. Maskall 60 Solicitor's 3 5 0 Surveyor's 5 5 0 (8) Do. Occupier (trade) J. Giddens 10 Nil. (9) Do. Note.—The Chief Leaseholders are said to be Messrs. J. T. and R. W. Leage, who have not hitherto furnished proper particulars of their claim. (10) Do. The Freeholder is not known to the Vestry, but Messrs. Leage have been asked to furnish the information. (11) Princess Alice Passage (part) The portion required for new Road has been arranged for on the Vestry executing the necessary fencing work. The above figures will not only shew approximately the cost of the improvement, but will indicate the number of interests which are frequently involved in improvements affecting only a small area, while the expenses are usually as great when a small portion of a property is acquired, as they would be on purchase of the entirety. The new roadway was declared open to the public on April 21st, 1898, by the Chairman of the Committee. An important feature of the improvement is that it renders unnecessary the alley nown as Princess Alice Passage, frequent complaints of which as a public nuisance 31 had been received. The closing of this alley in view of the new roadway was effected upon the certificate of two Magistrates, and the passage has been closed. (c) GOLDSMITHS ROW. The negotiations previously reported with owners and occupiers of the frontages in Goldsmiths Row and Dove Row have now been completed by obtaining legal assurances to the Vestry of the various portions of the frontages to the above named thoroughfares, the subject of those negotiations. The lengths of the frontages thus acquired amount altogether to 434 feet in Goldsmiths Row, and 153 feet 6 inches in Dove Row, by depths varying between about five and seven feet, and the improvement must be considered most valuable to the neighbourhood. The value of this improvement is curtailed by the unfortunate fact that it does not embrace the Goldsmiths Arms property, but, as mentioned in the last report, so large a price was asked by the Leaseholder that it appeared better to leave the improvement incomplete than to pay anything like the price asked for it. The amounts paid for compensation and costs respectively, are as follows:— Name. Interest. Compensation. £ s. d. Mr. Jas. Smith (First portion) Leaseholder 308 2 4 Messrs. H. & C. Winkley Do. 459 7 3 Mr. Siggins Do. 33 15 0 Mr. Matthews Do. 59 10 0 Trustees of Chapel Do. 65 6 8 Mr. Jas. Smith (Second portion) Do. Nil. Mrs. Beken Do. Nil. Rev. C. J. Scott Freeholder (costs only) 54 4 10 Total £980 5 1 (d) VAULT AT No. 38 AND 40, CURTAIN ROAD. It having come to the knowledge of the Works Committee that a vault had been constructed at these premises without their consent having first been applied for and obtained, the builder was called upon to sign an undertaking to permit any pipes, conduits, &c., to be laid by the Vestry to pass through the vault and to remove the same at any future time when called upon by the Vestry so to do, and to pay to the Vestry the sum of £10 for the privilege of being permitted to retain the vault, failing 32 which the same would be removed. These terms were agreed to and an agreement embodying same was executed on the 15th June, 1897. (e) No. 62, SHOREDITCH HIGH STREET. The possibility of commencing a desirable improvement in Shoreditch High Street by the widening of the eastern side of that street from the corner of Bethnal Green Road to Church Street offered itself by the falling in of a lease on the 25th March, 1897, and in view of the heavy cost of such work and the public benefits which would obtain as a result of the widening of any portion of a street such as this (which forms a main artery from the City to the North of London) the Works Committee thought it desirable to approach the London County Council with a view to the scheme being carried out as a Metropolitan Improvement, in the same manner in which the portion of the street near the Parish Church was widened sometime previously. The matter however was abandoned owing to the fact that the Council could not see their way to undertake the work as a County or Metropolitan Improvement for the present. (f) Re JOHN STREET. In April, 1897, the Works committee considered a letter from the managing director of the Wenlock Brewery Company, Ltd., offering the sum of £1,000 to the Vestry for the closing of John Street and the conveyance to the Company by the Vestry of the Freehold, the Vestry first obtaining the necessary authority. After some correspondence it was agreed by the Company that the sum of £1,250 should be paid to the Vestry for this concession. The recommendations of the Works Committee upon being submitted to the Vestry, after having been first deferred for the purpose of giving members of the Vestry an opportunity of viewing, was on 6th July, 1897, defeated, and the proposal was consequently not proceeded with. \ (g) MESSRS. WATERLOW'S PREMISES—EARL STREET AND APPOLD STREET. On the 10th June, 1897, the Works Committee considered an application from Messrs. Waterlow to erect certain premises adjoining Earl Street and Appold Street, upon a passageway not required as a thoroughfare, which application was granted by the Vestry upon the recommendation of the Works Committee, subject to Messrs. Waterlow's executing an agreement providing for the payment of an annual acknowledgment rent of £10. This decision was accordingly conveyed to the applicants, who replied by stating that they would much prefer to be permitted to pay to the Vestry a lump sum of £150 for all rights and privileges over the passageway, instead of the sum of £10 per annum. The Committee after carefully considering the question, recommended that a sum of £200 be accepted, which was agreed to by Messrs. Waterlow and adopted by the Vestry on the 7th September, 1897. A conveyance was drawn up and duly executed on the 28th September, 1897, when a cheque for £200 was paid to the Vestry. 33 (h) VAULTS AT MESSRS. ROTHERHAM'S PREMISES, HIGH STREET. An application having been received from Messrs. Rotherham & Co. for leave to construct vaults under the footway and to drain their premises into the Boundary Street sewer—the vaults being below the level of the sewer—the Committee recommended to the Vestry that permission should be given on condition that the applicants should acquire no right to retain the vaults as against the Vestry, should indemnify the Vestry against flooding from the sewer, and that the right of the Vestry should remain to lay through the vaults such mains or wires as they should find necessary at any time. The Vestry approving these terms an agreement was prepared to give effect to them. (i) PIPES ACROSS FINSBURY AVENUE. The London and North-Western Railway Company being desirous and asking the permission of the Vestry to lay hydraulic service pipes across Finsbury Avenue, the Committee recommended, and the Vestry sanctioned the making as conditions of consent the payment of an acknowledgment rent of £1 1s. per annum, and the removal when required by the Vestry. An agreement embodying these terms was subsequently prepared. (j) ACCIDENT IN PITFIELD STREET. MR. PETER LYONS' CLAIM. The Works Committee had before them on the 5th July, 1897, a claim for damages by one Peter Lyons for injury sustained by falling over a pile of stones in the roadway in Pitfield Street, on the 28th January of the same year. Mr. Lyons produced a medical certificate and stated he would accept £25 by way of compensation. The Committee made an offer of £20 which he ultimately accepted and the matter was settled. (k) BRIDGE IN ANNING STREET, As mentioned in the last Annual Report an application was received from Messrs. Clark, Hunt & Co., for the erection of this bridge and granted subject to certain conditions and the payment of an annual acknowledgment of £5. The matter has been in abeyance, however, owing to the applicants, desire for an alteration in the height of the bridge, and owing to objections raised by the London County Council. The bridge is now practically completed and the agreement will shortly be signed. (l) ACCIDENT IN PRINCESS ALICE PASSAGE. The Works Committee having received from Mrs. Church, a widow, a claim for compensation for injuries sustained through a fall over some defective pavement and the consequent loss of eight weeks employment thereby, the Committee although admitting no liability, decided as a matter of charity, the case being a hard one, to recommend that the sum of £10 be paid to her which action was approved by the Vestry on the 19th October, 1897. P 34 Several other minor claims for compensation for alleged accidents were received by the Works Committee during the past year but were disposed of by the Committee refusing to take up the cases as it was proved that they were under no legal or moral obligation. (m) loynes buildings. It having come to the knowledge of the Committee that the owners of the property on the west side of Loynes Buildings had erected a barrier across the entrance to Old Street thereby encroaching upon the rights of this Vestry as the highway authority, the Committee, after drawing the attention of the owners to the Vestry's rights, gave instructions for a door to be placed next the street with a notice that the key is at the office of the Surveyor to the Vestry. The Committee also learning that certain old cottages, which being insanitary had been closed for some time, were being occupied as warehouses, drew attention to the fact with a view to getting them assessed to local rates. Subsequently the property was put up for sale by order of the Freeholders (Penprases Trustees) and inasmuch as the vendors in their particulars of sale claimed to sell a portion of the soil in which the Vestry has rights, notice was given to the Solicitors and Auctioneers who mentioned the matter at the sale held at the Mart. The Vestry being no parties to the sale forfeit no right by the property changing hands, and it remains open to the purchaser to approach the Vestry if he desires to come to an arrangement in the matter. Re COST OF LAYING ELECTRIC LIGHT CONDUITS. In consequence of a statement made by the Chairman of the Electric Lighting Committee, as to the excessive cost of the trenching work done by the Works Committee for electric lighting conduits as compared with contractors' prices, the Vestry on the 20th July, 1897, appointed a Special Committee consisting of the following members, viz., Messrs. C. Hyatt, E. H. Knight, F. M. Wenborn, C. G. Helsdon, E. Moffatt, J. T. Clark, and S. G. Porter, to investigate and consider the question of the cost of making the trenches for the Electric Light Conduits, and after several lengthy meetings had been held, the following report was presented to the Vestry, and adopted by them on the 19th October, 1897. "REPORT OF THE SPECIAL COMMITTEE re TRENCHES FOR "THE ELECTRIC LIGHTING UNDERTAKING. "Your Committee having appointed Major Wenborn as their Chairman, have held six meetings, and beg to report as follows:— Your Committee being charged to inquire into the accuracy of statements made as to the cost of trenches for the electric conduits, have thought it right to delay their report in order to ensure the attendance of the member who made the statement m question, and have now unanimously arrived at the conclusions set out below. 35 "The original statement of £5,000, as being the difference of cost, cannot be maintained, and has since been modified to the extent of nearly one-half, i.e., £2 525 15s., plus the cost of accidents, legal and other incidental expenses, amounting to £459 4s. "The information and figures given in the Surveyor's report, made at the request of the Works Committee, appear substantially accurate and reliable, and could it be demonstrated that the work carried out by the Works Committee was precisely identical with that subsequently performed by the contractors, your Committee's task would have been easy, and the two sums last quoted would represent exactly the extra cost involved in employing our own labour, but this identity is not manifest, and upon this point turns the whole question. "Other parishes have been consulted, but, working on quite different bases, they help us but little It is strongly urged, as partly accounting for the contractor's price, that the deepest and most difficult portions were known to be already done, while, per contra, it is stated that the contractors would have done the whole of the work at the same price. "It must be noted that there is really no sealed contract existing; also that the Company's arrangement of 8/6 per yard is for two-way conduits, and 9/8 for three-way. The Company's work appears to have been mostly two-way, while of the Committee's work fully half has been three-way. This may, perhaps, somewhat enhance the value of the Committee's work, but it is impossible to say how far. The contractor's work appears to have been mostly under footways, the Committee's apparently about half foot and half roadway. "On reviewing the whole question we cannot but think that the cost of the work has been somewhat excessive. The quality of the work done is admitted all round to be satisfactory. "We think had the extent and costliness of the work required been fully realised beforehand, that more complete arrangements for supervision would have been made, and the Vestry might well have required an approximate estimate of the cost before instructing the Committee to execute the work. "When the Vestry ordered fresh gangs to be put on we consider the supervision was still inadequate, and there was loss through superfluous labour being employed. In Kingsland Road a considerable length of trench appears to have been opened in error, and thus much work was wasted, but we cannot fix the responsibility for this, the evidence being so directly conflicting. It seems that occasionally some incompetent men were employed, and that several were discharged during the progress of the work. "We have considered this matter quite apart from personal considerations, but we cannot ignore the evident fact that friction and opposition have prevailed between the representatives of the two Committees. This has had the usual effect of retarding progress and tending to increase the cost. "We think it should not be hastily assumed that no Board can do its own work profitably. It is solely a question of management, and direct interest in the exercise of care and economy. If employment is given as "relief" in any sense, or if supervision is lax, the attempt will fail. The experiment under absolutely similar conditions has yet to be tried. "We can see no useful service to the Vestry in making any other recommendation than that this report be received, and that the facts of the case should be borne in mind by the members, in order that a recurrence of similar circumstances may be prevented. "F. M. WENBORN, "October 12th, 1897." "Chairman. d1 30 OFFICIAL STAFF. VESTRY CLERK'S DEPARTMENT. As foreshadowed in my last annual report, it became necessary to re-arrange the duties of the staff in my department so as to cope efficiently with the largely increased duties thrown upon them by the important additional schemes undertaken by the Vestry in recent years. Upon the appointment of Mr. D. A. Nicholl, of my department, to the Deputy Town Clerkship of Scarborough, in April, 1897,1 reported fully to the Officers' Committee upon this question, and made the following proposals for the re-arrangement of my staff. " Gentlemen, " I beg to submit the following report upon the re-arrangement of the staff in my office consequent upon the resignation of Mr. D. A. Nicholl, and the largely increased work of the Vestry. "My present staff consists of— "Permanent:— "(a) Assistant Vestry Clerk. He takes the Minutes, and attends to the correspondence of, and incident to: (1) Vestry meetings; (2) Public Health Committee; (3) Law and Parliamentary Committee; (4) Officers' Committee; (5) Lighting Committee; (6) Assessment Committee. He also assists me in Litigation and Police Court work. "(b) Shorthand and Minuting Clerk, Mr. J. A. D. Milne (partial services). Part of Mr. Milne's time is taken up with checking Rate Collectors' books, etc., in the Accountant's Department. He also takes the Minutes, and attends to the correspondence of: (1) Works Committee; (2) Town Hall Committee; (3) Technical Instruction Committee; (4) Baths Committee. He also keeps a register of the Vestry's Deeds and Documents. "(c) Junior Clerk, Mr. R. M. Malcolm, who keeps a record of all 'Letters Received,' and takes (in shorthand) general correspondence connected with the Valuation Committee, Finance Committee, Library Committee, Local Government Board, and London County Council, and letters from other Boards requiring information and statistics. He also attends Committee meetings, and takes minutes in the unavoidable absence of other Clerks. He also copies letters sent out, and copies and reproduces Agenda of Committees and other documents, and does general office work, as there is no office boy in this department. "Temporary:— "(a) Mr. D. A. Nicholl, appointed temporarily to do the special conveyancing and other work in connection with the Moira Place Scheme, and the attendance on and minuting of the Housing of the Working Classes Committee, to which has recently been transferred the duties of the Burial Board. Owing to the delays caused by the London County Council and the Local Government Board, in completing this scheme, the rapid growth of the Vestry's general Business, consequent upon the Electric Lighting Scheme, and the exceptional amount of litigious work, Mr. Nicholl has been performing conveyancing and legal work connected therewith which otherwise would have necessitated the appointment of an Assistant Clerk some time ago. "No addition has been made to my permanent staff for 5 years, nor has any temporary assistance been engaged since Mr. Nicholl's appointment about three years ago, although the work of the Vestry has increased enormously since that time, 37 In addition to the work of the Moira Place Scheme, this increase has taken place under the following heads:— "(1) Electric Lighting undertaking in connection with which 58 Special Contracts have been entered into during the past year, all of them requiring the most careful consideration and drafting at my hands. The acquisition of the Pitfield Street Site and generating sub-stations has involved the examination of about 20 titles, some of which are still unfinished. In connection with claims for compensation for injuries to persons falling down electric Lighting trenches, and injury to property, there have been six actions in the High Court, some of which are still progressing. A large additional amount of correspondence and minute work has been entailed by this Committee. " (2) Street Improvements and the schemes of the Works Committee, of which the Goldsmiths' Row, Murray Street, and French Alley Improvements have involved the examination of 15 titles, some of which are still in progress. The erection of several Underground Conveniences, and two New Bridges improvements are still pending, besides heavy sewerage and paving schemes involving several loans. "(3) Loans. A large additional amount of work has been involved in connection with the Loans. The Special Loans Accounts number 17 more than five years ago, and the number during the past year has meant heavy correspondence with the London County Council, and the Local Government Board. "4. General Litigation.—In addition to current Police Court cases which have been largely increased (owing to the additional Sanitary Inspectors appointed) there are at present in the office 13 distinct actions pending in the High Court in connection with the different departments of the Vestry, all of which consume a large amount of time and clerical labour which is not apparent to members of the Vestry. "5. The general growth of the Vestry's Work.—Additions have been caused by such matters as the preparation and circulation of Committees' Agenda, preparation of Pocket Book, opposition to Licences by Overseers (4 cases in the last fortnight); and the recent Transfer of the Powers of the Baths and Library Commissioners, Burial Board and Parochial Charities to the Vestry. "After carefully considering the matter and in view of the fact that all the property on the Moira Place Site is not yet acquired and that the Local Government Board have sanctioned the Vestry's reconstructing the area which in the opinion of the Housing Committee will require at least half the time of one Clerk I beg to " Recommend :— "1. That an Assistant Clerk with experience in a solicitor's office be appointed in Mr. Nicholl's place at a salary of, say, £160 per annum, his duties to be to take over the work of the Housing Committee and the reconstruction of the Area and attend to the work of the Lighting Committee and assist in general litigious work, "2. The appointment of an Office Boy at 10/- per week. " 3. The devotion by Mr. Milne of the whole of his time to the duties of my department, the checking work now performed by him to be done by the extra Clerk in the Accountant's Department as already settled by the Officers Committee on 17th July, 1896. "In case these recommendations are adopted the total salaries of my staff will then be £5 per annum less than the salaries at present." 38 The Committee considered this Report and made the following recommendations to the Vestry which were approved on the 20th April, 1897. "1. That an Assistant Clerk with experience in Solicitor's office be appointed in Mr. Nicholl's place at a salary commencing at £150 per annum, and rising by annual increments of £5 to £200, his duties to include Minuting, Litigation, and general office work under the supervision of the Vestry Clerk. "2. That Mr. Milne devote the whole of his time to the duties of the Vestry Clerk's department, the checking work now performed by him to be done in the Accountant's Department, as already settled by your Committee on the . 17th day of July, 1896. "3. That an Office Boy be appointed in the Clerk's Department at a salary of 8/- per week, his age not to exceed 16 years," with the result that the position of an Assistant Clerk was advertised, and Mr. M. Gardner appointed to the vacancy on the 18th May, 1897. In the following month it again became necessary to make some slight alteration in the duties of the office, as owing to the resignation of Mr. A. O. Clarke, upon his appointment as Assistant Clerk to the Lewisham District Board, so much of Mr. Clarke's duties as related to the work of an Assistant Vestry Clerk were assigned to Mr. J. A. D. Milne, who was promoted to the position of Chief Clerk in view of his 5 years' service in my Department, whilst the legal work was provided or by a separate appointment of an Assistant Solicitor, at a salary commencing at £200, and rising by annual increments of £10 to £250 per annum, and this arrangement was confirmed by the Vestry on the 6th July, 1897. Applications for the post having been invited by advertisement, Mr. Francis S. Robinson, Solicitor, of Wenden, Essex, was duly appointed by the Vestry on the 7th September, 1897. At the same Meeting, Mr. Gardner's resignation upon his appointment to a Conveyancing Clerkship in a private firm of solicitors was received, and the question of filling the vacancy having been referred to the Officers' Committee, I pointed out that, in view of the assistance now granted me, it would be sufficient to appoint a Clerk without legal knowledge, with experience in Municipal Work, and knowledge of Shorthand, at a salary commencing at £120 and rising by annual increments of £5 to £150 per annum. Owing to the urgency of the matter, this appointment was forthwith advertised, and on the 8th October, 1897, Mr. Walter L. Black, of 25, Lawrence Road, Bow, E., was appointed to the vacancy. I arranged for the necessary assistance in the work of the Assessment Committee to be performed by Mr. R. M. Malcolm. My staff now consists of an Assistant Solicitor, a Chief Clerk, two Assistant Clerks, and an Office boy. I have to thank the Vestry for thus placing my staff upon an efficient basis, as I think it will suffice to deal with the work for many years to come. I feel that I have been a good deal handicapped in the past by trying to cope with duties at least doubled, with insufficient staff, and I trust in future to keep all sections of the Vestry's work promptly and efficiently executed without any arrears. 39 ACCOUNTANT'S DEPARTMENT. In response to a request from the Officers' Committee the Accountant, on the 22nd October, 1897, submitted the following statement as to the temporary assistance employed in his Department:— Accountant's Offices, Shoreditch Town Hall, Old Street, London, E.C. To the Chairman and Members of the 20th October, 1897. Officers' Committee of the Vestry of Shoreditch. Gentlemen, In pursuance of your instructions of the 8th inst., I beg to report that the work of this Department has increased very rapidly of late, owing to many duties having to be now performed which were not originally contemplated. This work mainly arises from the new schemes introduced into the Parish in connection with the Electric Lighting and Dust Destruction Undertaking, Public Libraries and Museums, Underground Conveniences, &c. It must also be borne in mind that the volume of the work has also materially increased in almost every department of the Vestry, which necessitates the detailed examination of additional accounts, and a corresponding increase on the number of cheques drawn, together with the necessary account keeping, correspondence, and other work arising therefrom. No permanent provision has been made for work under the following heads:— I.—Dusting and Scavenging Department. Collection of monies for trade refuse. Note.—This work was transferred to the Accountant's Department by order of the Vestry as and from 29th September, 1897. II. Dust Destructor. Collection of monies for refuse destroyed. III.—Electric Lighting Undertaking. (a) Collection of monies for Electricity Supply. (b) Audit and Quarterly Balancing of two sets of Stores Books. IV.—Wiring and Fitting Work. Account Keeping and Collection of Monies for work done in the Lighting Department. V.—Arrears Clerk. Checking of Arrears and Loss of Rates by an Arrears Clerk. VI.—Artizans' Dwellings. Provision will have to be made for the rent collection of the dwelling to bo erected at Moira Place. VII.—Payment of Wages, Provision has to be made for Payment of Wages in all Departments. 40 It has been found absolutely necessary, in order to cope with temployed foi this purpose:— Name. Commencement of Service. Mr. Arthur Fawcett From 80th July, 1896. "Mr. John Trebilcock From 17th November, 1896. * Replaced Geo. Skinner (who was found unsuitable for the service). The duties hereinbefore detailed, together with the numerous Statistical Returns, Statements of Account, Minuting work and Agendas and Reports which are now so constantly required, and the continuous Audit of the Finances necessitate that this assistance should be made permanent, and I therefore Recommend'.—(1) That the temporary Clerks, Messrs. Fawcett and Trebilcock, be placed upon the permanent staff of the Vestry as Clerks in the Accountant's Department, and that they be required to devote the whole of their time to the duties assigned to them. It will be necessary to engage the services of an Oflice Youth (preferably one who has had previous office experience) to assist in the general routine work of the department, e. copying letters and statements, indexing and filing, messages, pasting away invoices, receipts and cheques, &c., and I therefore Recommend (2) Your Committee to appoint an office youth in this Department. % Should your Committee adopt these suggestions, I should be able to re-arrange the duties of each member of the Staff, inter alia, making provision for the carrying out of the order of the Vestry whereby owners of property are now required to make half-yearly returns of inhabitant occupiers, entailing the examination and correction of nearly 8,000 assessments, the work of the Valuation List Committee and other general business of the Department—thus enabling the multifarious duties of this office to be discharged with greater efficiency and despatch. I am, Gentlemen, Your obedient Servant, ERNST A. R. ADAMS, Accountant. Upon this report the Officers Committee made the following recommendations to the Vestry:— (1) That this report be received, and that Messrs. Fawcett and Trebilcock be appointed permanently on the Accountant's staff; that Mr. Fawcett's salary be at the rate of £105 per annum, rising by biennial increments of £5 to a maximum of £120 ; that Mr. Trebilcock's salary be at the rate of £95 per annum, rising by biennial increments of £5 to a maximum of £120 per annum. Your Committee further recommend (2) That an office boy be advertised for between the ages of 14 and 16 years, at l()s. per week salary, rising by annual increments of 2s. per week to a maximum of 18s. per week, so long as he holds that office, and that it be referred to this Committee to make the appointment. these recommendations were adopted by the Vestry on the 7th December, 1897. 41 PUBLIC HEALTH DEPARTMENT. The resignation of Mr. S. H. Brown, Sanitary Inspector, in October of last year, caused a vacancy in this Department, the usual advertisement was inserted, and on the 2nd November, 1897, the Vestry appointed Mr. Alfred A. Linden, of No. 91, Warren Road, Walthamstow, E., Sanitary Inspector for Sanitary District No. 4 of the Parish, subject to the formal approval of the Local Government Board, which was received on the 3rd December, 1897. Alterations in the emoluments of the Staff will be found in the List of Official Salaries comprised in the Abstract of Accounts. PUBLIC HEALTH. The greater portion of Public Health work executed during the past year is fully dealt with by the Medical Officer of Health in his report, and it remains only for me to deal with a few matters of general interest. COMBINED DRAINAGE. The Public Health Committee has constantly kept in view the present state of the law which casts upon the local authority the heavy expense of reimbursing the owners of private property for drains laid on the 'combined' system, where the owners have succeeded in making the combination without the knowledge of the Sanitary Authority, and in many cases where, presumably, they did not even know that they were acquiring any rights against the public by laying such drains. On the one hand the owners may succeed in casting such expense on the public but on the other hand, as no owner can build over a Sewer without the sanction of the Vestry, there appears to be a strong probability of the value of the property being materially prejudiced by allowing a Sewer (as opposed to a private drain) to exist thereon. The Committee, therefore, in addition to the effort being made through the Public Health Conference to get the law amended, are pursuing the course of apprising the freeholder, where a leaseholder makes a claim alleging right to repayment of such drainage expenses from the Local Authority, in the hope that the former may adopt means to prevent the leaseholder from allowing such free easement to be be acquired. SALE OF FOOD AND DRUGS BILL. The Bill lately introduced into Parliament was carefully considered by the Public Health Committee and was referred by them to me for examination and report, with the result that the Committee advised the Vestry to present a petition to Parliament in due course praying that the Law might be amended in such respect as to make it accord with the views of the Committee and the Society of Public Analysts. The Committee were of the opinion that the Bill was defective in the following respects, viz., that Sec. 12 does not make the Public Analyst's Certificate prima facie evidence when the analyst is called and would encourage groundless demands for the 4'2 analyst's attendance at the Vestry's expense: Moreover, the Royal Commission which sat on the question dealt with by the Bill recommended the following further alterations in the law which find no place in the Bill. The obligatory labelling of all mixed articles, and definition of warranty. The taking of samples at ports of entry, and empowering of retailers to refuse to break manufacturers' tins or packets. The extension of powers for taking samples of all articles in transit. The increase of maximum penalty for refusal to sell. The division of the sample, and the extension of provisions of the Margarine Act as to punishment of an assistant. The definition of food, and the constitution of a Court of Reference. The colouring of margarine and the sale of mixtures of margarine and butter. The proper qualifications of persons appointed as public analysts. The remuneration to bo approved by the Central Authority. PUBLIC CONVENIENCES. The benefit conferred upon a district by the provision of public conveniences is in those days acknowledged to bo so groat that the Committee recently caused a return of receipts and payments to bo laid before the Vestry, feeling certain that it would ho gratifying to them to ho assured that the benefit of these conveniences is obtained at no cost to the public funds but on the contrary that experience has proved them to show an absolute profit. Some vigilance is required to prevent improper use of the conveniences, and reports have from time to time reached the Committee that persons resort there for purposes of gambling. In order to ensure that the attendants shall prevent any . improper use of the conveniences under their charge, a Sub-Committee has been appointed with a roving commission to visit the conveniences as frequently as they may find it possible and thus to ensure that the regulations in force shall bo strictly observed. NORFOLK BUILDINGS. PILBROW V. VESTRY. This long outstanding matter was settled on the 21st September, 1897, the real awners of the property providing the sum of £200 (£50 of which was to bo paid to Mr. Pilbrow in respect to his costs) and the remaining £150 was accepted in settlement of the Vestry's claim. OWNERS' RETURNS. Proceedings were taken against owners of property for failing to return a list of their tenants as required by the Statutes for registration purposes, with the result that convictions were obtained, linos of £5 10s. and 10s. costs being inflicted. Particulars of other prosecutions with regard to matters of public health will be found in the report of the Public Health Department. 1 have the honour to bo, Gentlemen, Your obedient Servant, Shoreditch Town Hall, H. MANSFIELD ROBINSON, Old Street, London, E.C. Solicitor and Vestry Clerk. APPENDIX TO THE VESTRY CLERK'S REPORT. ST. LEONARD'S, SHOREDITCH.—WORKING CLASS DWELLINGS. Moira and Plumber's Places. Scheme. Schedule of Rents, Cost and Net Profit, &c., showing detailed calculations. (Britannia and Provost Street Sites.) December 12th, 1897. Site. Total No. of Rooms . No. of Tenements. Rooms, Living and Bed (average). Total Areas averaeed Weekly. Rentals. Yearly Total Annual Particulars of Estimate. Cost, Detail of and Total. Particulars of Deductions from Annual Rentals. Annual Rentals, Amount deducted from and Total Annual. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. MOIRA PLACE. Lowest Estimate—Cost of Building 17,221 0 0 Rates, 5/11 in the £ on rateable value, less 25 per cent. for compounding £645 15s. 8d. 191 0 0 1 50 25 2-room sets 12.3×13.6 12.6×10.6 296 6/6 432 10 0 Architect's Commission 861 0 0 Quantity Surveyor 215 0 0 Property Tax at 8d. in the £ on gross value, less one-sixth £956 14s. 5d. 32 0 0 120 40 3-room sets 12.3×13.6 12.0 × 9.6 397 8/6 884 0 0 Clerk of Works, say 200 0 0 11.9×10.0 Inhabited House Duty at 3d. in the £ on tenements having a gross Nil No. 5 Cupboards 3d. 3 5 0 Gross Cost of Building £ 18,497 0 0 value of not less than £20 per annum, less 25 per cent I Value of Land—Site 1 3,708 0 0 Water Rate, 4 per cent, on gross value. 46 0 0 Do. —Site 2 712 0 0 Electric Light Allowance. 24 0 0 Caretaker — Supervision and collection, cleaning utensils, & incidentals, 5 per cent on annual 77 0 0 2 30 10 3-room sets 12.0×13.6 10.0×13.0 402 8/6 221 0 0 Total Outlay £ 22,917 0 0 9.6×11.6 rental. Empties and loss of rent, 3½ per cent. on do. 54 0 0 200 rooms. Total Annual Rental £ 1530 15 0 Repairs 10/- per room on 200 100 0 0 Deduct 25 per cent. for total gross value 1148 1 3 Insurance 1/6 per £100 on cost of dwellings, less 50 per cent. £8,700 say. 7 0 0 Do. do. rateable do 861 0 11 Interest, 3 per cent, on total outlay, £22,917. 688 0 0 531 0 O Balance equals about 3/5-ths per cent. on Total Outlay. ROWLAND PLUMBE, F.R.I.B.A., Architect, 13, Fitzroy Square, W. Sinking Fund to duce total outlay of £22,917 at termination of 60 years at 2½ per cent. 169 0 0 857 0 0 1,888 0 0 Balance 142 15 0 142 15 0 £ 1,530 15 0 1,530 15 e MOIRA PLACE AND PLUMBERS SCHEME.—PURCHASES COMPLETED. No. Situation of Place or Street. Description Property. Former Owner. Lessees. Pdbcha.sk Money. Date of Completion. Freehold. Leasehold. Total. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. Brought forward 26,358 0 0 11,390 18 0 37,748 18 0 66 Nile Street House and Shop 250 0 0 250 0 0 6th July, 1897 6 Moneyer Street House 100 0 0 100 0 0 13th July, 1897 5 to 21 odd Nos. Custance Street Houses \ 4,245 0 0 4,245 4 0 0 29th July, 1897 2 to 17 Moneyei Street Do Do. 1 to 7 Plumbers Place & Court adjoin. Do Do. 54 to 68 even Nos. j- Provost Street Houses & Shops Do. 62 to 78 even Nos. Nile Street Do Do. 70,72,74 Nile Street Do Arthur Bagley 13 0 0 13 0 0 11th Aug. 1897 2 to 8 Moneyer Street Houses Do 5 to 15 odd Nos. Custance Street Do Do 62 & 64 Provost Street Houses & Shops Alice Dennis and others 366 0 0 366 0 0 20th Aug. 1897 56 Do. House and Shop Alfred Stone 185 0 0 185 0 0 20th Aug. 1897 58 Do. Do Charles Neal 175 0 0 175 0 0 20th Aug. 1897 2 Moneyer Street House Miss E. M. Sowter 56 0 0 56 0 0 15th Sept.1897 9 D . Do John Tythe 186 0 0 186 0 0 17th Sept.1897 10 Custance Street Do Mrs. Alice Tebbutt 1,977 0 0 1,977 0 0 22nd Sept.1897 80 & 82 Nile Street Houses & Shops Do. - Total purchases £ 26,358 0 0 18,943 18 0 45,301 18 0 45 FREEHOLD PROPERTY OWNED BY THE VESTRY. Description and Situation of Property. Tenure. Purpose. Value. Remarks. £ Town Hall, Old Street, E.C Freehold Public Hall and Vestry Offices 28,000 Amount of Loan to Cover Cost. Do. do. Do Additions to do 6,000 Do. Old Fire Brigade Station, Old Street, E.C Do Vestry Offices 4,550 Do. Library, Kingsland Road Do Public Library 4,280 Gift of Mr. Passmore Edwards. Do. do. Do Additions to do 2,963 Do. Library, Pitlield Street Do Public Library 4,526 Land Cost 10,934 Buildings, &c.. Cost. Part Gift of Mr Passmore Edwards. Baths do Do Public Baths 15,700 Land Cost 44,800 Buildings Cost Electricity Station Do Land and Undertaking 87,802 Cost being Capital Outlay to. Lady Day, 1898. Dust Destructor, Coronet Street, N Do Buildings and Furnaces 14,240 Cost Raised by Loan. Underground Conveniences— High Street Do Public Convenience 1,900 Do. Old Street Do Do. 2.500 Do. High Street Do Do. 2,450 Do. New North Road Do Do. 1,650 Do. Moira Place Land Do Artizans' Dwellings 4,420 Mr. Plumbe's Valuation 15,580 Other Land, 28 years' purchase on Mr. Eve's valuation of ground rents. Goldsmith's Square Do Open Space 2,000 Cost—Land, Wall, &c. Charles Square Do Do 1,024 Cost for Land and Laying out Hackney Road Burial Ground Do Do 5,000 20,000 sq. ft. at 5/- per foot. French Alley Do Surplus Land 400 Let to Mr. Gates. Ground rent £14 5s Valued at 28 years' purchase. LEASE HOLDS. £200,714 Dusting Wharf and Stables Leasehold Wharf, Stables, Workshops, &c 10,000 Cost of Buildings, Plant, Ac., Raised by Loan. Total £270,714 46 47 [From The Hackney Express and Shoreditch Observer of 8th May, 1897.] A MEMORABLE MAY DAY. SUNSHINE ON THE SCHEME. THE BATHS FOUNDATION STONE WELL AND TRULY LAID. The growing public confidence in the great work which the Shoreditch Vestry have in hand at Pitfield Street was pleasantly manifested on Saturday afternoon. It was most appropriate that the first public function in the history of the baths and laundry—the laying of the foundation stone—should be memorialized in the memory by glorious sunshine and happy auguries of success. The men who have unreservedly thrown their wisdom and energy into the work were supported by a representative assembly of parishioners; the speeches were short and bright; and the actual ceremony was performed by Mr. Sawell with that grace and dignity which have won general esteem for him during his year's work in the chair. The company assembled in a marquee on the site of the men's private baths, and at the upper end near Pitfield Street, embowered in choice flowers and bright flags, sat the Chairman of the Vestry, supported on the right by Mrs. Sawell, and on the left by the Chairman of the day, Mr. E. J. Wakeling. Grouped around the stone were the members of the Baths Committee, the Member for Hoxton, Prof. Stuart, Mr. J. Lowles, M.P., Mr. H. Ward, C.E.,L.C.C., Mr. Graham Wallas, M. A., M.L.S.B., Mr. Edwin Austin, J.P., and the Architects, Messrs. Cross and Hare. The general company included Mr. R. G. Alabaster, M.A.B., J.P., Mr. R. Marshall, J.P., Mr. J. Little (Chairman of the Board of Guardians), Mr. J. D. Grout and Mrs. Grout, Mr. W. Beasley and Mrs. Beasley, Mr. Jas. Rowlands, Dr. Garnett, Mr. J. W. Vandy, Mr. E. A. R. Adams and Mrs. Adams, ,Mr. Plant (librarian), and Mrs. Plant, Messrs. J. W. Vandy, J. A. Clark, W. Sm ther, H. E. Kershaw, J. Hurlin, J. T. Clark, J. King, R. A. Reeve, J. J. Clark, F. W. Hall, J. Bootman, E. Biggs, J. Hyatt, J. Harverson, J. Styman, H. Alexander, A. Degerdon, G. A. Clark, A. Little, F. M. Case, A. Carnall, F. C. Pond, T. Errington, and other ladies and gentlemen. The Baths Committee were represented by their Chairman, Mr. Wakeling, the ViceChairman, Mr. Porter, and Messrs. W. C. Elsdon, W. Elven, J. J. Freeman, J. Frost, E. H. Knight, T. Martindill, J. Cox, E. Moffatt H. Morris, T. Noble, W. F. Norton, A. Springett, W. Steel, J. J. Trowbridge, H. Winkler, and Dr. H. Mansfield Robinson, Solicitor and Vestry Clerk. These gentlemen welcomed the guests and superintended the proceedings. The ceremony was fixed for three o'clock and a short delay in commencing was admirably filled up with several selections by the band from the Hornchurch Cottage Homes, who were present by permission of the Guardians. As usual the boys look well and played well, doing credit to their excellent band master, Mr. Larter, and to the institution with which they are connected. The Chairman, Mr. Wakeling, gave an interesting review of the history of the public baths movement in Shoreditch. In 1852 the Vestry adopted the Act and even went so far as to appoint commissioners who further rose to the dignity of a seal, which was reproduced on the programme. In 1882 the Vestry went through the same formality. In 1887 a committee was 48 appointed and visited several baths, but the price of the proposed site was too much for the Vestry. In 1892 the Borough of Shoreditch Liberal Club urged the Vestry to proceed in the matter, and in October of that year the Acts were adopted for the third time ; since then the gentlemen who took the matter in hand had been hard at work, and they were thoroughly satisfied with the progress of the building and the work which had been done. (Cheers.) The architects having presented a silver trowel to Mr. Sawell, beautifully engraved with the name and date and enclosed in a handsome case, a choice bouquet of (lowers was handed to Mrs. Sawell by Miss Beatrice Freeman, daughter of a member of the committee. The stone was then steadied into its position by Prof. Stuart, Mr. Lowles, Mr. Ward and Mr. Wallas, the commissioners standing round, and the function of the day having been duly performed, Mr. Sawell, amid the applause of the company, declared the stone well and truly laid. The block of granite, which will face Pitfield Street, is suitably inscribed and the bottle placed inside contains coins of the realm, a document signed by the committee, copies of the current issues of The Times, and The Hackney Express and Shoreditch Observer. A "Snapshot" having been taken, the speeches were proceeded with. I Prof. Stuart, M.P., who was heartily received, said it was his pleasing duty to propose a vote of thanks to Mr. Henry T. Sawell, J.P., Chairman of the Shoreditch Vestry, for laying the stone on the present occasion. Mr. Sawell had nearly fulfilled a year of office as Chairman of this important Vestry, and he felt sure he only expressed the feelings of those present and of those of the Vestry in saying he had filled it to the public satisfaction. (Cheers.) It was a great pleasure therefore to be able to move a vote of thanks to him, inasmuch as he had taken part in one of the most important ceremonies likely to be connected with that important borough. They had seen the laying of the foundation stone of the baths and washhouses, but that was only part of a large and important undertaking on which the Vestry of Shoreditch had entered with general approval. (Cheers.) Where they were now standing was about to arise a group of important municipal buildings, containing not only these baths and washhouses, but also an electric lighting undertaking, and means for destroying the dust and for utilizing the power created ; and last but not least a great and important public library. The public effort bound up in these various undertakings was of no mean character and order. As he was returning from abroad this year it was his fortune to pass through some of the ancient cities of Italy, and he could not but have his attention called, as that of any traveller there must be called, to the great enterprise of the public hundreds of years ago, which placed those cities in the front rank of civilization. And it was not that only ; alongside of the public enterprise was private enterprise, of which the whole city was proud. And he ventured to say that in Shoreditch to-day—no mean city, although not separated by walls from the rest of London—they had as in the Italian cities of old, a union of public and private enterprise which did credit to their citizens. (Cheeis.) There was room for both ; there were regions in which private enterprise was best and most efficient, and regions in which public enterprise was best and most efficient. Such regions they were occupying to-day in their public undertakings ; matters in which the whole public right and convenience were interested, matters which fairly belong to the public as a whole and which public spirit alone can carry through. (Cheers.) They had to-day an embodiment of that in the very best form in the undertaking whose foundation they were met to celebrate, and whose completion doubtless before very long they would have an opportunity of celebrating. He called the attention of that gathering, representing all sections and classes of opinion in that great borough, to the fact that what they were carrying through of a public kind in Shoreditch was carried through by the general consent of the people. Looking around on that meeting it would be seen that in the public undertakings of Shoreditch they recognise no denominational or political differences, but they had a noble and noteworthy instance of a great community acting agreeably with one another in great public undertakings for the public 49 good. (Cheers ) Long might the Borough with which they were all connected and of which they were all so proud, lead the way in the future as it had done in the past in so many public and private enterprises. (Cheers.) Mr. J. Lowles, M.P. cordially seconded the vote of thanks, observing that he felt it a great privilege to take part in such an important function as they were met to inaugurate. Having been for many years a keen supporter of baths and washhouses, he rejoiced that this was one of the important schemes in which Shoreditch had led the way, or at all events where they had not been far behind in following the lead of others, and he rejoiced that baths and washhouses were taking so prominent and deserved a place in the scheme. It was a wonderful enterprise and an important experiment to utilize waste material instead of carting it away a long distance at a great expense, and to give a new illuminant to Shoreditch, which he felt sure would be appreciated and widely used. They also proposed to give healthful recreation to the people by the public library; and all these things were going to be monuments of the enterprise and foresight of Shoreditch men. (Hear, hear.) He ventured to say that the increased education of their time brought with it increased self-respect, and that of course at once created a demand not merely for more attention to the needs of the mind and the supply of literature, but for increased attention to the needs of the body in the provision of such establishments as they were met to celebrate. (Hear, hear.) He joined in the testimony of respect to Mr. Sawell, not merely for his personal qualities, but because he represented a body doing so much for Shoreditch, a body which would have his respect and every possible support he could give in everything it undertook. (Cheers.) Mr. Sawell thanked the assembly most heartily for their cordial vote of thanks, and the last two speakers for the kind and too flattering things they had said about him. He could not either let the opportunity pass without expressing his thanks to the Vestry of Shoreditch for the honour conferred upon him as their Chairman in selecting him to perform this ceremony. He was glad to find that the Vestry were taking a high ideal of their duty and their powers with regard to other matters besides this scheme ; but the boon and blessing of these baths and washhouses to the inhabitants he believed to be incalculable. They would better appreciate this, when he reminded them, that the large proportion of the inhabitants of that densely populated district, through the force of circumstances were compelled to live in one or two rooms, and those not of very large dimensions. Even among the larger houses of that district he did not believe one in 50 could boast of a bath room. Therefore he was convinced that these baths would be well patronised, and that as Mr. Wakeling had said, they would create a demand What with baths, washhouses, libraries, and technical schools, Shoreditch would soon be a place much better worth living in than it had been. (Cheers.) Mr. Henry Ward said he had been asked to move a vote of thanks to Mr. Wakeling, Chairman of the Baths and Washhouses Committee. As an engineer it had been his lot to design the engineering work for half a dozen or so London baths constructed in the last dozen years, and after a close examination of the plans, in which he took a great interest, he could cordially confirm all Mr. Wakeling had said, that the inhabitants of Shoreditch would have baths and washhouses second to none. They had so many specialities about these baths, and the very excellent idea of utilising the heat from their dust destructor, which would otherwise be lost, would make their working expenses less than any bath he knew of in London. He looked upon washhouses as almost a greater boon than baths. Those living in the East End knew the difficulties wives had to contend with. When living in one or two rooms, and when the clothes had to be hung on the top of an asphalte roof in the smoky air they dried as dirty as before. Under such conditions people could appreciate the advantages of a public institution, where for something like three halfpence per hour house wives could do all their washing in E I 50 from one to two hours, and he was glad to know that steps had been taken to see that wash houses were really used by those most in need of them. (Cheers.) Mr. Graham Wallas seconded the vote of thanks observing that their chairman was an intensely practical man, and they were looking forward to the time when the baths would be completed, and when on the top of the spring-board should be seen Mr. Wakeling's manly form preparing to take the first plunge into the new bath. (Laughter and cheers.) He wished to thank Mr. Wakeling personally and most heartily for the work he had done as honorary judge and a member of the Committee of the London Schools Swimming Association. In one thing the town boy was equal to the country boy, and that was in swimming. Shoreditch already, with very small advantages, was leading London in that respect, and out of the swimming trophies open to all London three were held by the Hoxton Schools Swimming p ssociation; and the one trophy presented by Mr. Synge, H.M.I , open to all Hackney, was also held by Hoxton. It was quite astonishing to see the skill, the force, the real delight with which the boys of Hoxton had thrown themselves into swimming. Because he believed that not only would this good work go forward, not only would the boys ot Hoxton and Haggerston show the way to all London as they do now, and because he believed it possible to develop the Association so that the girls would be equally successful—(hear, hear)—as the representative of the educational interests of Shoreditch he thanked the Vestry with all his heart, and especially Mr. Wakeling, for the care, thought and enthusiasm with which they were providing for the physical education of the rising generation. (Cheers.) The Chairman briefly replied, assuring the company that he was delighted to help the schools. He meant to stick to this work and make the baths and washhouses a success—not the largest in London, but the best. (Cheers.) This concluded the formal part of the proceedings, and light refreshments having been served in a satisfactory manner by Mr. Thos. Burnell and his staff, the larger part of the company interested themselves for half an hour in personally inspecting the completed and the progressing parts of the combined scheme. [From The Hackney Express and Shoreditch Observer of 3rd July, 1897.] LIGHT FEOM DUST. OPENING OF THE SHOREDITCH DUST DESTRUCTOR AND ELECTRIC LIGHTING STATION BY LORD KELVIN. In Jubilee weather and practically in Jubilee week the people of Shoreditch celebrated on Monday last the completion of the sanitary and lighting scheme, which is so full of promise to brighten and purify the parish, to invigorate its industries and prosper its commerce. The fact that Lord Kelvin's master hand was to inaugurate the new light, and the uniquo character of the undertaking brought together a distinguished scientific and municipal gathering and stimulated a wide-spread interest in this bold effort in local self-government. The Electric 51 Lighting Committee admirably carried out the wishes of the Vestry, and the main centre of municipal life was made gay with banners, crests and streamers, floating between Venetian masts, quite in City style. The citizens of Hoxton Market had quite a jubilee on their own account. The roadway had been carpeted with clean sand, and a large part of the Vestry's stud, with the rolling stock of the scavenging department, were drawn up in review order, reflecting great credit on all concerned. The men had decorated their horses with jubilee splendour, the animals were in fine fettle, and the display, superintended by Mr. Freeman and Mr. Taplin, gave great delight to the assembled populace. A spacious marquee, erected in the yard adjacent to the lighting station, served to accommodate the host of visitors and local guests, the platform being environed with choice plants and flowers, while music was supplied by the band of the First Tower Hamlets Rifle Volunteers. Lord Kelvin had a kindly and appreciative reception on his arrival, and amongst those present were the Chairman of the Vestry, Mr. E. J. Wakeling (who ably presided over the ceromony), Professor Stuart, M.P., and Mrs. Stuart, Mr. Passmore Edwards, the Rev. S. Buss and Mrs. Buss, Mr. J. Lowles, M.P., and Mrs. Lowles, Mr. Edwin Austin J.P., Mr. Nathan Moss, J.P., L.C.C., Mr. W. R. Cremer, Mrs. Macdonald, Mr. H. T. Sawell and Mrs. Sawell, Mr. F. Snowden, Mr. R. Dummett, Dr. Garnett, Mr. J. Little (chairman of the Shoreditch Board of Guardians), Mr. Manville (Kincaid, Waller, and Manville), Mr. J. B. Alliott, M.I.C.E., and Mr. J. Paton, M.I.C.E., Mr. H. B. Ransom, A.M.I.C.E. (in charge of the works for Messrs. Manlove, Alliott and Co.), Mr. Cross (Spalding and Cross, Architects of the Baths and Washhouses), Mr. F. J. Smith, F.R.I.B.A., Mr. Roland Plumbe, F.R.LB.A., Mr. W. Griffiths, Mr. Henry Lovegrove, C.E. (district surveyor), Mr. Enos Howes, J.P. (chairman of St. Luke's Vestry), and many of the Shoreditch Vestrymen and ratepayers with their ladies. The Bethnal Green Vestry was represented by its Chairman, Mr. C. Hurley, J.P., and there were present from Hackney Mr. Lovegrove (chief surveyor), Mr. G. Bethell Holmes J.P., Mr. Sheehan (chairman of the Electric Lighting Committee), Dr. King Warry, Messrs. H. Hulland, J. B. Kyffin, and J. W. Whiter. The arrangements were zealously carried out by the Vestry Clerk, Mr. J. Rush Dixon (the Vestry's Surveyor), Mr. C. H. Doughty (electric lighting inspector), Mr. C. N. Russell (chief engineer to the Vestry), and the members of the Electric Lighting Committee: Messrs. H. E. Kershaw (chairman), J. J. Trowbridge (vice-chairman), E. J. Wakeling, J.P. (chairman of the Vestry), A. S. D. Arundel, J. T. Clark, A. Cocking, H. E. Ellis, W. C. Elsdon, J. J. Freeman, J. Frost, W. R. Graham, F. W. Hall, J. Hurlin, E. H. Knight, T. Martindill N. Moss, J.P., L.C C., W. F. Norton, C. A. Pickett, H. T. Sawell, J. W. Vandy, and F. M. Wenborn. Mr. Wakeling having taken the chair, the Rev. S. Buss, vicar of Shoreditch read an appropriate dedicatory prayer. Then came the intensely interesting moment. Lord Kelvin left the tent, the destructor apparatus was set in motion, and in a few moments the lighting up of the two arc lamps pendant from the roof of the marquee signalised the switching on of the light. The result was received with enthusiastic applause. Lord Kelvin said:—Ladies and Gentlemen : During our short absence we have performed two operations of very great importance and interest. In the first place we passed two brightly caparisoned horses and a brilliant looking cart. By an electrical signal that cart emptied its load into the stores of the electric lighting station to be brought to its proper place, put into the furnaces, and its energy converted into light and power for the parish of Shoreditch. (Hear, hear.) I take it that all these dust carts are here to celebrate this jubilee, and I think you will say those words are not exaggerated when I spoak of the brilliant appearance of these horses and carts that are to be employed daily to bring their loads here from the dust bins of this parish. In the admirable system now being tried on a large scale for the first time the E1 52 energy of dust is used as fuel; it will do work for the parish instead of being a substance which costs a great deal to got rid of. (Hear, hear.) Till now it has cost 3s. 2d. per ton, paid to bargemen to carry it away and sink it in the depths of the son. Now it comes hero and does work of which I will not say how much per ton is the value, but which will bo good, beneficial work for all the inhabitants of this parish. the next thing we did was to open the Shoreditch Electric Lighting Station. That I did by moving a needle about 40 yards from the place whore we stand, and you saw the result in the instantaneous lighting up of these lamps. the undertaking which is thus auspiciously opened I think I may safely say is well worthy of the Victorian era. It is an example of the combination of scientific knowledge and forethought with mechanical and engineering skill, and with courage in the entering upon new undertakings, courage which does not belong to the classes of gambling and adventure, courage to bring into practice carefully worked out engineering results and capabilities. (Hear, hear.) Shoreditch may well bo proud of what its Vestry has done for thorn. it is the premier Vestry, preceding all municipal bodies in this bold undertaking. There are many interesting features in the Shoreditch system of electric lighting. Destructors have boon tried by various municipalities and other bodies for several years, but they have hitherto not accomplished more or scarcely accomplished more than getting rid of the refuse of the dust bins at a lower cost than that which is required for carrying it out and laying it on the land or emptying it in the sea. As an economy merely for the purpose of getting rid of the dust and refuse the tentative efforts of the furnace method of burning have boon made with very promising success ; but hitherto practically nothing has boon done in the way of getting up steam from these crematories. the Shoreditch electric light commences with dust and dust only for its fuel. the contractors undertake to give 120,000 tons of steam per annum from about an equal weight of dust. There can bo no doubt that more and more will be done. We only see a small beginning to-day, but I believe the dust of this parish will very soon bo all used for the purpose, and what is more, unless neighbouring vestrie and municipalities are very quick in following the example of Shoreditch they will come to Shoreditch and offer I will not say how much, but I think I might suggest 2s. a ton for taking their refuse, and Shoreditch will gladly take it and make light and power of it. Shoreditch Vestry has gone in advance in another important direction. It has made arrangements for the supply of electric light and power in a district occupied by the working classes and largely filled with mechanism for carrying out their work. Shoreditch has within its bounds the centre of gravity of the cabinet-making work of London and of a much larger area than London. the work in cabinet makers' shops is partly by hand, but largely at present by gas engines. I think I may say it is almost certain that what the Vestry can now do for them will load to the substitution of electric motors for gas engines, and that a largo part of the power work of Shoreditch will be done by power drawn from the fuel here and transmitted through electric wires to the place where the energy is to be applied. That Which wo think of most habitually in respect of electric lighting stations is that they wore begun for electric lighting ; but in the future and not I think the dim and distant future the supply of power also. All electric light companies and corporations are waking up to the capabilities scientitically demonstrated, theoretically 50 years ago by Joule, and practically 20 years ago by Sir William Siemens and many other far-seeing men of that time, of the prospect of using electricity for the transmission of power. Do not imagine that electricity is a power in itself, it is only a moans for the transmission of power and as such it is brought into use by the Shoreditch Vestry. But there are other important matters connected with the realities of this electric lighting station that I am sure you will be interested to hear of. This is a district very much occupied by working men who could not afford the luxury of electricity as used and paid for in the west of London. the system which this Vestry begins is to supply electric light at sixpence per unit for the first two hours and fourpence per unit afterwards. At those prices I believe the people of Shoreditch may safely outer upon the employment of the electric light. I believe they will find it to bo loss costly than gas at 2s. 10d. per thousand cubic feet, which I believe is the present price of gas in this district. I would advise all the people of Shoreditch to try it. You I 53 may not get it if you all determine to try it at once, but if one out of every ten applications is granted the other nine will not have to wait long. Those who get it will tell how good it is, and if a little pressure is put on the Vestry they will respond to it and very soon make arrangements to supply electric light and power to all who demand it. (Hear, hear.) This Vestry have boldly undertaken to give during the day time till half-past three or four in the winter and till sunset in the summer electrical energy at 3d. per Board of Trade unit, which brings the power within the range of small users. Every worker in Shoreditch can economically use it at that price. (Cheers.) A very important novelty is Druitt Halpin's heat storage system, in virtue of which part of the steam raised will be used to meet the daily demand, and part laid up in store. That store is a cylinder of water, ready to feed the steam engines when night comes on and a greater supply is wanted. Thus the engines will get water into their boilers ready heated up to the full temperature and pressure, and only the heat of evaporation will have to be supplied by the combustion of the dust during the lighting hours. In this great work Shoreditch has been advised by Kincaid, Waller and Manville, and it is largely to their knowledge and skill in taking the best of what has been done elsewhere and adapting it to the special needs and the novel experiments of this Vestry that this very great step has been made. What the Shoreditch Vestry has done is well worthy indeed of the enterprise of the 60 years reign of Queen Victoria, of which we have had so happy a commemoration during the past week. (Cheers.) Prof. Stuart, M.P., who was cordially greeted, said the resolution he had the pleasure to move was a vote of thanks to Lord Kelvin for all he had done that day. His presence was a guarantee to the public and also to Shoreditch itself that this undertaking was a great reality, for Lord Kelvin stood at the head of science, not only in England, but in the known world. (Cheers.) They might take it for granted that every word his lordship said was well weighed—a nail fastened in a sure place;—and what he had said to-day, both of the electric lighting undertaking and of the enterprise of the borough of Shoreditch was well worthy of their attention and must certainly make them feel very proud of the position he had described. In this year of general rejoicing it well befitted such a great and popular borough that it should celebrate the occasion by the opening of an undertaking due to their common municipal enterprise. The enterprise of Shoreditch had been characterised by Lord Kelvin in words better than he could use, but he would remind both his lordship and the assembled company that the population which had undertaken this great thing, which so eminent a man was able to characterise so well, was a population of working men and working women. It was a population of small shopkeepers and of persons, except in a few instances, who were not of great wealth, and he thought it was to their honour and credit above all things, that they had been, as Lord Kelvin described, the premier body to lead the way in such a work. It was public enterprise directed to that which public enterprise could best and most effectively be directed to, for there was no place in which public enterprise, personal enterprise and vigour of personal undertaking were more to be found than in this borough. They knew, as the people of all times in this great nation, what it was fitting to deal with both in public enterprise and private enterprise. Both were hand in hand in that great borough, and it was for the credit of the borough, of the metropolis and of England that they were found together. (Cheers.) That was not a time to be occupied with a laudation of themselves, but he could not help calling their attention to what surrounded them. They had on that site a public library, the electric lighting station, and the dust destructor, the superfluous heat of which was to be used for the baths and washhouses; and over the way they were going to have, arising from a municipal undertaking, the best and the largest, and the most efficient technical institution in London—(cheers)—an institution separated from that place by a beautiful garden and open space, the whole forming a credit to the borough and a something for other places to imitate. He could not forbear letting Lord Kelvin know that they had in Shoreditch a technical school adapted to cabinet-making and other trades, prized alike by masters and workmen, and utilized by them because it made them more efficient in the trades. They had here then in short a centre of great public enterprise of which they might worthily be proud, worthy of the sixtieth year of the reign of their Queen, and \ 54 which they were glad to have had graced by the presence of the foremost representative of English science. (Cheers.) Mr. J. Lowles M.P., said it was an especial pleasure to him to second this vote of Thanks, and to witness another stage in this magnificent enterprise. the United States might have its Edison, and other nations their great men, hut they did not envy them, because they had their Lord Kelvin, who stood at the head of the science of the world. No one could travel across the great oceans of the world as bo bad done without hearing the name of Lord Kelvin, or, as he used to be better known, Sir William Thompson ; every captain was full of praise for the magnificent work he had done to make navigation easier, more precise and therefore safer, and thousands of lives had probably been saved by the magnificent instruments of precision which his lordship had invented. His work had won him a groat place in the nation's history, and the esteem of his countrymen, and also been of widespread benefit to the nations of the world. (Cheers.) They would recognise, too, accompanying this greatness, that modesty which is after all the better part of groat statesmen, unlike some inflated politicians and orators of whom he had hoard. (I tear, hear.) It must bo gratifying to Lord Kelvin to initiate such a groat work in that groat hive of industry of which they were all proud, and it was gratifying to them to receive the greatest scientist of their time to give his benediction on what ho hoped would be a profitable and successful enterprise. (Cheers.) Lord Kelvin was again heartily cheered on rising to reply. He said it was indeed a great pleasure to him to bo present. He thanked the Vestry for their kindness in allowing him to have the honour of formally opening the electric lighting station at Shoreditch, and in calling upon him to toll of some of its working. He must admit that it was a groat credit indeed to the Vestry of Shoreditch to enter upon this work so soon after Vestries began to discover that they could act like municipalities and do work on a great scale; he congratulated them that so soon after Vestries came practically into life they had gone on boldly, courageously and wisely in this work, which was destined ho thought to be of the utmost benefit to the whole community, rich and poor alike. He thanked Professor Stuart and Mr. Lowles for their kind words regarding himself, and he thanked the company for the cordial manner in which they had received him. (Cheers.) His lordship shortly afterwards withdrew, having to fulfil another engagement; and Mr. H. E. Kershaw followed with a further explanation of the scheme, remarking that it was one of the proudest moments of his life as a ratepayer of Shoreditch and a humble member of the Vestry. They had present representatives from all over the world, and they wore indebted to the representatives of the London County Council for enabling Shoreditch to borrow their capital of something like £70,000 at the very low rate of 21 per cent. interest. Considering they based their calculations at 3½ per cent. from the commencement, they could got a very good idea of the profits which the parish would make. So satisfactory had been the result of their primary tests that they had obtained from the six boilers 200 lbs. of steam, generated absolutely from the ashbin refuse of the parish burned in the 12 cells below the boilers. If they could maintain that pressure it would give them all the power required for generating their electric plant. Up to the present they bad been able to consume all the refuse the scavenging department had sent in, the previous cost of barging being 3s. 2d. per ton. They had no guarantee as to what was done with the refuse carted and ho had a strong suspicion that some of it was used to make plague spots in the suburbs or foundations for villa residences. They might congratulate themselves upon a scheme, the far reaching effect of which from a sanitary point of view they would never know. the cost of burning, interest on capital, wear and tear, plant and wages, came to 1s. 2d. per ton, a direct saving of 2s. 0d. on the cost of barging. They were told the scheme would break the backs of the ratepayers, but they started with an initial profit of £2,200 per annum, the difference in the cost of burning and barging. In addition to that thoy would got their electricity much cheaper than anyone had over been able to produce it bofore, 55 the oxygen in the air would not be consumed, and they would effect a great saving by substituting electric light for gas. It need not cost a ratepayer a single penny to have an installation of electric light and power in his premises. The Vestry had entered into two contracts with large syndicates, one to fix prepayment meter on the penny in the slot system, while the other gave ratepayers the opportunity of having their premises wired free of cost. They would get for the penny a six hours light of eight.candle power similar to the lights outside the Town Hall. By an arrangement with another syndicate consumers could have their premises wired free of cost, with the option of purchase in three years, by either the Vestry or the consumer. The destructor and lighting buildings were reliable and strong, only costing £8,000, and up to the present the scheme had not put any charge upon the rates. (Cheers.) Mr. W. H. Preece, C.B., F.R.S., said it was his duty to propose a vote of thanks to the consulting engineers, Messrs. Kincaid, Waller and Manville, for the skill with which they had designed this installation and for the care with which they had overlooked its execution. Lord Kelvin was good enough to refer to the courage of the Vestry in carrying out such an installation, but some thanks were due to these who had the boldness to propose such an installation and the persistence to succeed in convincing what was as a rule a very obstinate body of gentlemen, the Vestry of any Corporation. But there were no men so active and energetic in carrying out a work when once convinced of the necessity of it. They had been convinced in Shoreditch, and there was no doubt that success would reward their boldness. A previous speaker had referred to the new illuminant as the poor man's light, but it was more than that: the poor woman would curl her hair, and cook her husband's chop with it. (Hear, hear.) There was no household use to which electricity could not be applied. It was to cost sixpence per unit in Shoreditch, but to his mind electrical energy produced from dust at sixpence per unit was very dear indeed, and the day would come when they would find from actual experience that the sixpence would drop to fourpence, and perhaps the fourpence to threepence. (Hear, hear.) With electrical energy at such a figure as that the poor men and women might indeed erect a monument in some prominent place to the chairman of the Committee who gave them the benefit of this economical measure. Electric light was a great rival to the doctor, for wherever the light was introduced health was the result. They had in their post offices in the country introduced the electric light to an enormous extent, and wherever that was done they found that the average number of days absence through sickness was very considerably diminished indeed, so much so that in many places the introduction of the electric light had paid for itself. He assured the Vestry that they could place implicit confidence in their engineers, than whom they could not have better guides or truer friends. (Cheers). Professor Geo. Forbes, F.R.S.E., said the people of Shoreditch had reason to be proud of this day in having not only made up their minds as to what would be beneficial to the people, but also in having taken such admirable steps to see this work carried out in a proper way and finished with such great success. The Vestry had reason to be proud and to congratulate themselves ; but he might also say that the Consulting Engineers had the very greatest reason to congratulate themselves and to be extremely happy on this auspicious occasion. There was nothing in the world that gave an engineer greater pleasure than to be acting in the service of men who had the courage of their opinions to carry out a great and novel kind of work. There was no greater pleasure than to be permitted to promote the development of one of the great forces of nature hitherto lying dormant and going to waste, and that he should be allowed to bring power out of that wasted force. The engineers must have felt a pride in working out this great development. Some of them were hardly aware of the importance of this great experiment made by the Vestry of Shoreditch: it was the first serious attempt made to practically use these great laws of force which they had recognised for years. Eight years ago there was hardly a destructor in the country which was making any use whatever of the power. One of the most important then existing was at Southampton, where the waste heat passing through the flues a long distance away from the furnace was made to pass through some 56 tubular boilers and generate steam to light up a few arc lamps and do some sewage power work; but that was a most wasteful use of the heat. The other was at Birmingham. where boilers were placed right over Manlove, Alliott & Co.'s furnaces, and deprived the fuel of the rever. beratory arch which is of the greatest assistance in consuming the fuel. All these attempts were futile, but everybody saw that there was a vast amount of power in the dust bin refuse. He could not help saying that any thanks given to the engineers were simply as nothing to the joy they felt in having completed this glorious work which would bo the basis ho made bold to say of similar work in every parish in England. (Cheers). Ho had the utmost pleasure in seconding the vote of thanks. Mr. E. Manville. M. Inst. E.E., expressed the grateful thanks of his partners and himself for the kind way in which the company had endorsed this vote of thanks, of which they were very proud. In his modesty the last speaker had not told them that ho was the man who originally appreciated the vast amount of energy that was being allowed to go to waste in the cremation of ashbin refuse, and the reasons why it should bo brought into use. Prof. Forbes actually proposed schemes for the Corporation of Edinburgh and the Vestry of Paddington, but was unfortunate in the bodies he had to deal with, for while these bodies had not the enterprise to proceed with his suggestions, the Shoreditch Vestry had the enterprise and were soon to enjoy the fruits thereof. Whilst acknowledging their votes of thanks, he thought the thanks of his partners and himself were rather due to the Vestry, for had they not shown the enterprise and had not the ratepayers had confidence in them the engineers would never have had the opportunity of carrying this work to completion. Then again, the engineers were less than nothing with out the help of reliable and skilful contractors. Manlove, Alliott & Co., the contractors for the most important part of this scheme, had had a very large experience in this work, but had departed somewhat out of the usual groove in erecting a destructor of this kind. They had shewn the greatest skill and the warmest desire to help the scheme, and they were very largely instrumental in assuring the successful results that would be obtained. They had also to thank the Electrical Construction Company, who had provided all the electrical machinery, and who were so well known in connection with work of this kind; also Messrs. Glover and Company and the British Insulated Wire Company, who had put away many thousand pounds beneath the ground to carry the current; also to the contractors for other portions of the work. On their behalf and on behalf of his partners and himself ho again thanked the Company for their hearty vote of thanks. (Cheers). Mr. Passmore Edwards had a hearty greeting on rising to propose a vote of thanks to the Shoreditch Lighting Committee for their services to the Borough. The gentlemen who asked him to propose this vote of thanks said, " We look upon you almost as one of ourselves." (Hear, hear.) That was one of the greatest compliments ever paid to him. Ho looked upon Shoreditch as a model parish, and to be almost a citizen of a model parish was in his mind a great honour. They had been doing something in the way of providing wash.houses for the people, and he believed they had done something in the way of providing public libraries. (Hear, hear.) He believed they were also going to have a splendid technical institution, and to.day they had seen the inauguration of an enterprise which in all probability would carry its name and fame around the world. He had, therefore, great pleasure in moving that their hearty thanks be given to the Electric Lighting Committee. Mr. F. Snowden (Rotherham and Co.) seconded the vote of thanks saying he was a born native of Shoreditch. He and his partners believed that the Vestry had conscientiously done their duty in the interest of the whole of Shoreditch. As the largest ratepayers in the parish Rotherham and Co. were prepared to utilise the light if it could be shown that they could do so to advantage. It behoved every ratepayer who possibly could to support the Vestry and shew their appreciation by using the light in every possible way. (Cheers.) 57 Mr. J. J. Trowbridge, vice-chairman of the Lighting Committee, cordially acknowledged the compliments on behalf of his colleagues. They were all proud of the position in which Shoreditch stood, especially their chairman and the older members, who in the first inception of the scheme did not want any convincing. They were proud to think their scheme was a success and an example to other parishes. Their Vestry Clerk had been heart and soul in the work, and they were all gratified to be so near the realisation of their hopes. (Cheers.) Mr. Nathan Moss, J.P., L.C.C., said it was his pleasing duty to move a vote of thanks to their worthy chairman for his services in the chair, and for the great interest he had taken in the work from the commencement. Mr. Wakeling had devoted a large amount of time and energy to the successful carrying out of this important work. Mr. Edwin Austin, J.P., seconded the proposition with the greatest heartiness, observing that the recipient of the compliment was an earnest and thorough public worker. The Chairman tersely responded. He had worked as a member of the Vestry for nine years, and he intended to work hard for a long time to come. (Cheers.) THE BANQUET. During the evening a good many visitors availed themselves of the opportunity of looking over the destructor and lighting station, and at seven o'clock a large company sat down to dinner in the Town Hall under the presidency of Dr. W. J. Collins, chairman of the London County Council. In addition to many of the gentlemen whose names are given in connection with the afternoon proceedings, the following were present at the dinner: Mr. T. E. Waller, M.I.C.E. and Mr. E. Manville, M.I.C.E., Consulting Engineers to the Vestry, Captain Sankey, R.E., Alderman Bell, C.C., Mr. Graham Wallas, M.L.S.B., Mr. J. B. Alliott, M.I.C.E., Mr. Alderman Elliot, Prof. Smith. President of Inst. of Public Health, Rt. Hon. Shaw Lefevre, L.C.C., Mr. Jas. Bailey, Mr. Henry Ward, C.E., L.C.C., the Mayor of West Ham, the Mayor of Swansea. the Chairmen of Newington, Camberwell, Westminster, and Clerkenwell Vestries, Mr. H. M. Robinson, LL.D., Colonel Wallis, Alderman Ellis, Dr. P. J. Allan, Mr. E. A. R. Adams, Accountant to the Vestry, Mr. H. B.Ransom, A.M.I.C.E., Mr. C. Aburrow, C.E., Johannesburg, Mr. C. Martin, C.E., Streatham, Mr. A. Botterill, C.E., Fulham, and others. The toast of "The Queen," was received with a verse of the National Anthem, and " The Army, Navy, and Reserve Forces," was responded to by Captain Sankey, R.E., and Major Wenborn. At this juncture the "light of other days" was turned down, and amidst the hearty applause of the company the chairman switched on the "light of the future." Glowing from the handsome electroliers the new light gave additional effect to the brilliance of the tables, and the beautiful flowers with which the hall was adorned. In proposing the toast of the evening, "Success to the Shoreditch Municipal Electricity and Dust Destructor Undertaking," the Chairman said so far as he was permitted to speak on behalf of the central municipal body of London, they viewed the civic zeal of Shoreditch with admiration. The undertaking on which they had embarked would contribute to satisfy that growing civic pride for which Shoreditch was rapidly becoming famous. It was stated in ancient history that Prometheus stole the heavenly fire of the sun and with it animated the dust of the earth, but he ventured to think that Prometheus had been surpassed that day, for it had been reserved for Shoreditch in this Jubilee year to use the dust of the earth for the production 58 of light and power for the service of man. (Cheers.) There might be critics who would tell them that in this now departure they were outstepping the limits of municipal duty, and embarking upon a perilous enterprise. Ho would reply to them in the words of Lowell — Now occasions make now duties, Times makes ancient forms uncouth ; They must upward be and onward, Who would be abreast of truth. (Cheers.) No truth was more definitely established than the fact that each member of the community had joined in the venture inaugurated to.day. They ought to be proud of their public representatives who had shown deep interest in forwarding these objects. The Council only wished other bodies would emulate the example that had been set them by the Shoreditch Vestry. (Cheers.) Mr. H. E. Kershaw, chairman of the Electric Lighting Committee, having cordially responded, Mr. E. J. Wakeling, J.P., affably proposed the health of the Guests, remarking that they lived to teach one another and to learn from one another. The toast was appropriately acknowledged by the Mayor of West Ham and Alderman Ellis, chairman of the Portsmouth Electric Lighting Committee, who both warmly congratulated the Vestry on what had been achieved. Mr. H. T. Sawell proposed The Consulting Electrical Engineers." He could say a great deal personally, but it was not necessary after the high praise Mr. Manville received from such distinguished men that afternoon. He believed that in a short time the Vestry would have to raise a loan to extend their works. (Cheers.) Mr. E. Manville, in reply, remarked that his partners and himself felt that the success of the scheme was assured. Thanks were due to Mr. Newton Russell, the chief electrical engineer, and to Mr. Gardner, clerk of the works, for their energy and skill. The Contractors had also done their work well, and he had great pleasure in proposing their health. Mr. Alliott cordially acknowledged the compliment, remarking that he and his partners had felt it an honour to be permitted to take part in this work. The health of the Chairman was heartily drunk on the proposition of Mr. Shaw Lefevre and Mr. Henry Ward, L.C.C., the distinguished Haggerston Councillor being greeted with musical honours as he stood up to propose the toast. Dr. Collins appropriately returned thanks, and the proceedings terminated at half.past ten. The catering was satisfactorily carried out by the eminent firm of Buzzard, Oxford.street. The proceedings were witnessed by a large number of ladies and gentlemen from the gallery, and they were supplied with refreshments by a staff from Mr. T. Burnell's restaurant. He also supplied light refreshments at the afternoon ceremony. The now arc lamps in the streets, the pretty illuminations at the Town Hall, and the three arc lamps hung effectively on the Shoreditch steeple excited a great deal of interest and gave a great deal of pleasure to the general public. REPORT OF ASSESSMENT COMMITTEE- 61 BOROUGH OF SHOREDITCH. The Parish of St. Leonard, Shoreditch. IN THE COUNTY OF LONDON. REPORT OF ASSESSMENT COMMITTEE. To the Vestry of the Parish of St. Leonard, Shoreditch. Your Committee beg to make the following report of the work of the past year for the information of the Vestry. Your Committte were appointed on the 20th day of April, 1898, and have held 16 meetings during the year. The members of your Committee have attended meetings as under:— Ward. Name. No. of Attend ances. Moorfields Mr. J. Hepburn 14 ,, W. Law 11 Church ,, N. Moss J.P. 11 ,, J. W. Vandy 12 Hoxton ,, E. Moffatt 7 „ H. T. Sawell L.C.C. 4 Wenlock ,, F. M. Wenborn (Chairman ) 15 ,, E. J. Wakeling J.P. 1 Whitmore ,, S. Fordham 1 Kingsland ,, A. C. Exley 11 Haggerston ,, J. Little 9 Acton „ W. Steel 9 62 Your Committee have held 16 meetings for hearing 139 objections to the Provisional Lists for the year with the result that they have reduced Assessments in 111 cases, and confirmed Assessments in 28 cases. VALUATION (METROPOLIS) ACT, 1869. The following return shows the alteration effected in the total gross and rateable value of the Parish during the year :— Particulars. Value as finally determined by Assessment Committee. Gross. Rateable. £ £ Valuation (6th April, 1897) upon which the County and Police Rates were levied 845,155 693,732 Add— Increased Valuation effected by Supplemental Valuation List, 1897, as finally deposited 741 595 Total Valuation (6th April, 1897) upon which the County and Police Rates are levied 845,896 694,327 Less— Amount carried to the City of London, in respect of the General, Sewers and Consolidated Rates pursuant to Act 11 & 12 Vict., cap. 163 7,708 6,166 Total Valuation (6th April, 1898) upon which the Rates for School Board and Local Purposes were levied 838,188 688,161 SUPPLEMENTAL LIST, 1897. (a) PUBLIC LIBRARIES. By the Supplemental List, 1897, the Public Libraries, 236, Kingsland Road and 91, Great Eastern Street were taken out of Assessment and the London County Council lodged a Notice of Objection but afterwards withdrew same, as Public Libraries have been held by the Courts to come within the exemption from Rates of Scientific Institutions. (b) RIGA WHARF, CANAL ROAD. An appeal against the Supplemental List, 1897, was made by Messrs. King & Co., whose premises, Riga Wharf, Canal Road, were entered in that List at the increased assessment of £200 Gross £167 Rateable (the previous figures being £150 Gross £125 Rateable). This appeal was heard at the Special Assessment Sessions held at the Town Hall on the 6th December, 1897. The appellants asked for £120 Gross £100 Rateable and were represented by Mr. Montefiore (instructed by Messrs. Mills, Lockyer and Co.), and the Vestry Clerk represented your Committee. Mr. Eve as valuer to the Committee gave evidence that the alterations made since the last quinquennial valuation would only justify an increase of about £5 on the rateable value. The 63 Court thought that the last quinquennial valuation could not be altered except to the extent of this increase and decided to reduce the assessment to £156 Gross, £130 Rateable, but made no order as to costs, so that the appellants had to pay their own costs. (g) Re SCALE OF FEES FOR SURVEYORS AND ENGINEERS ON ASSESSMENT APPEALS. On the 19th January, 1898, I submitted the following report to the Committee, upon a request from the Justices of Quarter Sessions to suggest a scale for Valuers' fees and expenses in assessment appeals, which might be adopted by the Court:— "Gentlemen, "I beg to report as follows upon the letter of the Clerk to the Court of Quarter Sessions, of the 10th November, 1897. "The usual scale settled for compensation cases for Surveyors and Valuers is known as Ryde's scale, in illustration of which— £ s. d. For property valued up to £100, the fee allowed is 5 5 0 Ditto ditto £500, ditto 13 13 0 Ditto ditto £1,000, ditto 18 18 0 "This scale, however, is a very liberal one, seeing the remuneration allowed to Solicitors for deducing and investigating title on Sale up to £1,000 is— £ s. d. For property valued up to £100, the fee allowed is 5 0 0 Ditto ditto £500, ditto 7 10 0 Ditto ditto £1,000, ditto 15 0 0 and it cannot be said that there is more work in valuing property, than in deducing title, &c., the former being more a matter of judgment than work. In practice, leading Surveyors are usually content with a fee of two.thirds of the above scale. "Ryde's scale is, of course, based upon capital value, and is specially applicable to compensation cases, whereas valuation for assessments based upon yearly rentals. "The Valuation Committee in 1894 received tenders from certain valuers, the three lowest of which varied from 13/6 per cent. to 17/6 per cent. for properties valued up to £500 rateable value, and from 11/6 to 15/. per cent. for properties at £2,000, but these figures are specially low, as the whole Quinquennial Valuation work was offered at that time, and valuers estimated on doing a large amount of work in one locality. "I would suggest that a scale of fees upon the following basis would be an equitable one, i.e., £1 1s. per cent. on property to the gross rental value of £1,000, or less, with a minimum fee of three guineas, and for each additional hundred pounds over £1,000, a further fee of 10.6 to be allowed. "For example :— Property valued £500 Gross a fee of 5 5 0 to be allowed. Do. £600 do. 6 6 0 do. Do. £1,000 do. 10 10 0 do. Do. £1,500 do. 13 2 6 do. Do. £2,000 do. 15 15 0 do. Do. £10,000 do. 57 15 0 do. "An allowance of one guinea for any plan required, would also be reasonable. 64 "There is the further question of conferences with other expert witnesses and with the Solicitor in the Case, consultations with Counsel, advice upon the evidence given by the qualifying witnesses on the other side during the trial and suggestions for their cross.examination, nor should the scale include attendance in Court to give evidence, the allowance for which is already settled. For each consultation with Counsel solicitor or other valuers attended on days when the fee for attendance in Court is not charged it would I think be reasonable to allow half a guinea. The work of advising on evidence of other witnesses and suggestions for cross.examination is generally done in Court when the Surveyor is being paid at the rate of 8 guineas per day for attendance and I cannot see that any extra payment for these items should be allowed as the Surveyor is already being paid for doing nothing when such evidence is being given." The Committee on the 16th March, 1898, adopted the above report altering the suggested scale to £1 per cent. on property to the Gross Rental Value of £500 or less (minimum £3) and a fee of 15/. for every additional £100 up to £1,000 and for properties of greater value a fee of 10/. per cent. thereafter. For example :— £ s. d. Property valued £500 Gross a fee of 5 0 0 to be allowed. Do. £600 do. 5 15 0 do. Do. £1,000 do. 8 15 0 do. Do. £2,000 do. 13 15 0 do. The Clerk to the Justices, in acknowledging receipt of the above views of the Committee, convoyed the thanks of the Justices for the trouble the Committee had taken in this matter, and stated that it had been found impossible, after careful consideration of the difficulties presented, to fix any scale for these expenses, so that the present practice would be continued of taxing each bill of costs upon the merits of each case. CHAIRMAN. Your Committee have passed a vote of thanks to the Chairman, Major F. M. Wenborn, for his conduct of the business of the Committee during the past year. Submitted by order of the Committee, H. MANSFIELD ROBINSON, Cleric to the Assessment Committee. Assessment Committee Offices, Shoreditch Town Hall, Old Street, E.C. 18th April, 1898. PUBLIC HEALTH DEPARTMENT- 67 BOROUGH OF SHOREDITCH. The Vestry of the Parish of St. Leonard, Shoreditch, IN THE COUNTY OP LONDON. ANNUAL REPORT OF THE MEDICAL OFFICER OF HEALTH. Public Health Department, January, 1898. To the Vestry of the parish of St. Leonard, Shoreditch. Gentlemen, I have the honour to submit my report on the public health, sanitary condition, and vital statistics of the parish, for the year ending December 31st, 1897. Effort has been made as far as possible to proceed on the same lines as adopted in previous annual reports. POPULATION. Shoreditch has, according to the census returns, a decreasing population. The decrease between the years 1861 and 1896 amounts to 7,006. The diminution is due very largely to the exodus of people from the southern portion of the parish, owing to the extensive demolition of dwellings, and the sweeping away of numerous crowded ani insanitary courts and alleys to make room for large warehouses, factories, workshops, and business premises. The population of the northern portion of the parish has increased during this period, and especially so, is this the case, with regard to the Haggerston Registration District, the population in that district being 6,693 more in 1896 than it was in 1861. f1 68 The estimated population of the parish for the year 1897 is 122,058, distributed in the four registration districts as follows TABLE I. Shoreditch South 17,575 Hoxton New Town 29,630 Hoxton Old Town 27,505 Haggerston 47,348 The population of the New Town registration district includes the inhabitants of the Holborn Union Workhouse, estimated at 1,350. These are excluded for statistical purposes, as they do not belong to this parish. The corrected number of inhabitants for this district is, therefore, 28,280, and the corrected population for the whole parish is 120,708. BIRTHS. During the year 4,325 births were registered; 2,198 of males, and 2,127 of females, the males being 71 in excess of the females. In the Shoreditch Infirmary there were 77 births—45 of males, and 32 of females. In the Holborn Union Workhouse 92 births took place; of these 52 were males, and 40 females, 35 being legitimate, and 57 illegitimate. The births were distributed in the parish as follows:— TABLE II. Sub.District. Males. Females. Total. Shoreditch South 265 286 551 Hoxton New Town 535 500 1,035 Hoxton Old Town 504 486 990 Haggerston 894 855 1,749 Total 2,198 2,127 4,325 The births occurring in the Holborn Union Workhouse were of children whose parents did not belong to Shoreditch; deducting these, the birth.rate was 35.0 per 1,000 inhabitants. The London birth.rate for the year 1897 was 29.9. In the subjoined table is shewn a comparison of the birth.rates of London and Shoreditch during the years 1891—96 :— TABLE III. Year. 1891. 1892. 1893. 1894. 1895. 1896. Shoreditch 36.7 35.7 35.5 34.5 34.8 35.5 London 31.8 30.9 31.0 30.1 30.5 30.2 69 A comparison of the birth-rates in the several sub-districts of Shoreditch is shewn in table XXXI. (see Appendix). MARRIAGES. The number of marriages registered in Shoreditch during the year, 1897, was 1,145. A comparison of the numbers of marriages during the last five years in London and Shoreditch, is contained in the subjoined table :— TABLE IV. Year. Shoreditch. London. Number of Marriages. Rate per 1,000 Population. Number of Marriages. Rate per 1,000 Population. 1893 970 7.9 36,971 8.6 1894 1,036 8.4 36,902 8.5 1895 1,086 8.8 37,593 8.5 1896 1,189 9.8 39,869 9.0 1897 1,145 9.4 DEATHS. The number of persons belonging to Shoreditch who died during the year was 2,626, as compared with 2,622 in 1896, 2,860 in 1895, 2,466 in 1894, 3,146 in 1893, 2,828 in 1892, and 3,042 in 1891. The distribution of the deaths amongst males and females in the four registration districts of the Parish was as follows:— TABLE V. Registration District. Males. Females. Total. Shoreditch South 220 215 435 Hoxton New Town 291 284 575 Hoxton Old Town 303 307 610 Haggerston 535 471 1,006 Total 1,349 1,277 2,626 The deaths of males exceeded these of females by 72. The death-rate was 21.76 per 1,000 inhabitants,* being 1.03 below the average for the last ten years. The Metropolitan death-rate during 1897 was 18.2 per 1,000 population. In the subjoined table the death-rates of London and Shoreditch for the years 1887.96 are compared. The death-rate corrected for age and sex in the population was 22.58 per 1,000 inhabitants. 70 TABLE VI. Year. Shoreditch. London. Year. Shoreditch. London. 1887 23.35 21.25 1892 23.09 20.50 1888 21.47 20.38 1893 25.70 21.38 1889 19.31 19.48 1894 20.14 17.80 1890 24.99 23.50 1895 23.43 19.8 1891 24.80 21.07 1896 21.65 18.6 The mean annual death-rate for Shoreditch during the 10 years ending 1896 was 22.93 as compared with 20.34 for the whole of London. An analysis and comparison of the death-rates of London and Shoreditch with its sub-districts, for the year 1897, is contained in table XXXII (see Appendix). The death-rate was highest in Shoreditch South, and lowest in Hoxton New Town. The death-rate was below the average for the past 10 years during the first six months of the year. It was especially low during the months of May and June, the rate for these two months being 14.9 per thousand. From the middle of July to the middle of September the death-rate was above the average, the rate for the eight weeks being 27.4 per thousand. From the middle of September to the end of October the death-rate was again below the average, then it rose above the average for the rest of the year. The high death-rate during July, August and September was due to the prevalence of summer diarrhœa, and the high rate during November and December, was mainly caused by measles, whooping cough, and chest complaints. The fewest deaths recorded during any single week of the year occurred during the third week of October, when 26 deaths were registered, the death-rate for that week being only 11 per thousand. The largest number of deaths and the highest death. rate occurred during the last week of the year, the deaths numbering 102, being at the rate of 43.8 per thousand of the population per annum. The principal waves of variation in the Shoreditch death-rate accompany waves of variation in the Metropolitan death-rate, apparently being determined by influences common to the whole of London. The differences in the altitude of the Metropolitan and Shoreditch waves as shewn upon a chart depend upon local influences. The age distribution and causation of the deaths in the parish and its four sub-districts are set forth in tables XXX and XXXI. Table A, which is appended, is a form of classification according to diseases, ages, and localities, which is required by the Local Government Board. (See Appendix.) In order to obtain the correct number of deaths in any of the age-groups or under any of the headings, in table A. it is necessary to add to the total the number of deaths occurring outside the district among persons belonging thereto, and to 71 deduct the number of deaths occurring within the district among persons not belonging thereto. The deaths of children under one year of age numbered 789, of which 412 were of males and 377 females. Of these 264 were due to zymotic diseases, principally diarrhoea, measles and whooping cough, 135 to disease of the respiratory organs, principally pneumonia and bronchitis, 28 to enteritis, 90 to various forms of developmental diseases, 99 to convulsions, and 100 to ill-defined causes and causes not specified, including 72 attributed to marasmus. There were 40 deaths attributed to violence, 35 of which were caused by suffocation in bed through accident or negligence. The deaths of children under one year formed 29.6 per cent. of the total deaths in the parish as compared with 29.5 per cent. in 1896; 30.3 per cent. in 1895; 28.1 per cent. in 1894; 25.7 per cent. in 1893; 25.6 in 1892, and 26.36 in 1891. The mortality amongst infants under the age of one year was at the rate of 186.3 per 1000 births in the parish during the year as compared with a rate of 183.3 for last year. The infant mortality for the whole of London during 1897 was 159 per 1000 births. In the following table the infant mortalities of London and Shoreditch, for the ten years ending 1896, are set out so that comparison can readily be made :— TABLE VII. Year. Infant Mortality per 1,000 Birth3. London. Shoreditch. 1887 157.8 188.8 1888 146.4 163.3 1889 141.3 158.1 1890 154.3 179.6 1891 162.6 174.4 1892 154.7 169.3 1893 156.7 186.0 1894 142.5 166.3 1895 166.0 203.7 1896 161.0 183.3 The average yearly mortality amongst infants in Shoreditch during the ten years ending 1896 was 177.2 per 1,000 births, as compared with a Metropolitan mortality of 154.3 during the same period. Of children, aged from one to five years, 453 deaths were registered, as compared with 502 last year. Zymotic diseases caused 271 deaths, 81 of which were due to measles, 58 to diphtheria, 39 to whooping cough, 24 to scarlet fever, 30 to diarrhœa, and 38 to various forms of tuberculosis. Pneumonia caused 79 deaths, and bronchitis 72 40; 5 deaths were attributed to enteritis, 10 to marasmus, and 9 to violence, including four cases of death from scalds or burns. The total number of children under five years of age dying during the year was 1242 or 47.2 per cent. of the total deaths in the parish. In previous years the numbers were 1288, or 49.1 per cent. in 1896; 1394 or 48.7 per cent. in 1895; 1109 or 49.9 per cent. in 1894; 1400, or 44.5 per cent., in 1893; and 1264, or 44.6 per cent. in 1892. There were 85 deaths of children aged between 5 and 15 years, 46 of which were due to zymotic diseases, including 19 from diphtheria, 9 from various forms of tuberculosis, 4 from scarlet fever, 4 from measles, and 3 from enteric fever. Heart disease caused 8 deaths, diseases of the respiratory organs 9, and 6 deaths were due to various forms of violence. Of persons between the ages of 15 and 25 years there were 73 deaths, 29 of which were from zymotic diseases, including 20 from various forms of tuberculosis, 6 from enteric fever, 1 from small-pox, 1 from whooping cough, and 1 from influenza. Heart disease caused 10 deaths, diseases of the respiratory organs 6, Bright's disease 8, and various forms of violence 5. Of the 128 deaths amongst persons aged between 25 and 35 years, 69 were due to zymotic diseases, tuberculosis causing 60 deaths, 57 which were attributed to consumption, enteric fever 5 deaths, influenza 2 deaths, and blood poisoning 2 deaths. Heart disease caused 11 deaths, disease of the respiratory organs 13, cirrhosis of the liver 4, Bright's disease 4, apoplexy 2, and violence 7, including two cases of suicide. There were 213 deaths amongst persons aged between 35 and 45 years, of which 79, including 68 from consumption, and 4 from enteric fever, were due to zymotic diseases. Alcoholism caused 5 deaths, cancer 8, apoplexy 11, heart disease 15, diseases of the respiratory organs 27, cirrhosis of the liver 2, Bright's disease 13, parturition 6, and various forms of violence 12, including 5 from falls, 2 from burns, and one case of homicide, and one of suicide. Of the 269 deaths amongst persons aged between 45 and 55 years, 60, including 51 from consumption, were caused by zymotic disease. Cancer caused 16 deaths, apoplexy 27, heart disease 40, alcoholism 5, diseases of the respiratory organs 54, diarrhoea 4, cirrhosis of the liver 3, Bright's disease 8, and violence 11, including 5 from falls, 1 from burns, and one case of suicide. There were 117 deaths of persons aged between 55 and 60 years. Consumption caused 15 deaths, alcoholism 2, cancer 10, apoplexy 16, heart disease 19, diseases of the respiratory organs 27, Bright's disease 4, and violence 2. 73 There were 246 deaths of persons from 60 to 70 years of age. Consumption caused 16 deaths, diarrhœa 7, cancer 16, apoplexy 23, heart disease 30, diseases of the respiratory organs 72, including 57 from bronchitis, diseases of the digestive organs 22, Bright's disease 6, violence 9, including 4 cases of suicide, old age 5, and causes not specified or ill-defined 17. Of persons aged from 70 to 85 years, 223 died. Influenza caused 4 deaths diarrhœa 4, erysipelas 2, cancer 10, apoplexy 17, heart disease 18, diseases of the respiratory organs 69, including 56 from bronchitis, Bright's disease 6, violence 4, and old age 64. There were 30 deaths of persons over 85 years of age, of which 1 was attributed to cancer, and 1 to apoplexy, 5 were due to bronchitis, and 3 to pneumonia, 1 died of of weakness, and 19 of old age. Diseases classed as zymotic caused 874 deaths, as compared with 866 in 1896, 950 in 1895, 759 in 1894, and 1,048 in 1893; these will be dealt with more especially later on. Local diseases (see table XXX. Appendix) caused 1,202 deaths, as compared with 1,194 in 1896, 1,347 in 1895, 1,132 in 1894, and 1,446 in 1893. Of these, diseases of the respiratory organs caused 542 deaths, mostly due to bronchitis and pneumonia, which were more prevalent in Shoreditch during the fourth quarter of the year. The deaths from pneumonia numbered 234, as compared with 220 last year, and the deaths from bronchitis were 285, or three more than in 1896. Diseases of the nervous system accounted for 303 deaths, 149 of which were of children under five years of age. Of these, convulsions caused 115 deaths, apoplexy and paralysis 97, and various forms of insanity 28. This latter figure does not represent the number of persons belonging to Shoreditch dying in Asylums whilst insane, as a reference to table XIX. will shew. A large number of persons who are suffering from mental disease die from intercurrent bodily disorders. Diseases of the circulatory system caused 170 deaths, 40 of which were attributed to valvular disease and 111 to heart disease not stated to be due to valvular trouble. Disorders of the digestive organs caused 109 deaths. Of these 41 were attributed to enteritis, 33 being of children under five years of age. The majority of these deaths occurred during the time summer diarrhœa was prevalent. There were 19 deaths due to peritonitis, 14 to obstruction of the intestines, and 19 to cirrhosis of the liver. Bright's disease of the kidneys accounted for 49 deaths, as compared with 70 in 189G, and 57 in 1895. Developmental diseases caused 178 deaths, 70 of which were attributed to prematurity or debility at birth, and 88 to old age, of which 83 were of persons aged 70 years and upwards, 19 being over 85 years of age. 74 Various forms of violence resulted in 105 deaths, of which 96 were due to accident or negligence, 1 to homicide, and 8 to suicide. Cancer was certified as causing the death of 62 persons, as compared with 57 in 1896, 62 in 1895, 80 in 1894, and 67 in 1893, the death rate being 0.51 per 1,000, as against 0.45 in 1896, 0.50 in 1895, 0.65 in 1894, and 0.54 in 1893. The deaths due to cancer registered in the metropolis during 1897 give an annual rate of 0.88 per thousand inhabitants. In addition to the 62 deaths certified as due to cancer, 13 deaths were registered from malignant disease of the various organs of the body, and 5 from tumours. Of the deaths attributed to cancer, 20 were of males and 42 of females. The majority of the deaths occurred amongst persons aged between 35 and 70 years. Of persons over the age of 70 years 11 deaths were attributed to this cause. One child, a female, died from cancer of the kidneys, at the age of six years, and one old lady from cancer of the breast, at 86 years of age. Alcoholism is given as the cause of death in 16 instances, but the majority of the deaths from cirrhosis of the liver and other liver diseases, and from Bright's disease of the kidneys, and a large percentage of the deaths from apoplexy and insanity, from diseases of the heart and blood vessels, and from diseases of the respiratory organs may be directly or indirectly attributable to the abuse of alcohol. The numbers and distribution of the deaths of residents and non-residents occurring during the year 1897 in the public institutions situate within the parish are shewn in TABLE VIII. Institution. Residents. Non-residents. Total. Holborn Union Workhouse 0 226 226 Shoreditch Workhouse 370 11 381 Hoxton House Asylum 3 51 54 North Eastern Hospital 27 87 114 Convent Hospital 1 7 8 Total 401 382 783 Elsewhere than in the above institutions, 6 persons died in Shoreditch who were not resident in the parish, viz.:—1 suddenly in the Curtain Road from syncope, 1 in Lee Street from rupture of an aneurism, and 1 in Shepherdess Walk from heart disease, and 3 were drowned in the Regent's Canal. In the following table are set forth the various public institutions outside Shoreditch, and the numbers of persons belonging to the parish dying therein:— 75 TABLE IX. Asylums. No. of Deaths. General Hospitals-continued. No. of Deaths. Bethnal House 1 Freidenheim 1 St. Luke's House 3 Middlesex 1 Banstead 3 Mildmay Mission 4 Grove Hall 1 St. Mary's 1 Colney Hatch 11 Bolingbroke 1 Cane Hill 5 St. Thomas' 9, Darenth 5 Westminster 1 Leavesden 11 Hospitals for Special Diseases. Ilford 20 Hanwell 3 Royal Chest 13 Claybury 2 City of London Chest 3 City of London 1 City of London Lying-in 3 Licensed Victuallers 1 Evelina (children) 2 Middlesex 1 Great Ormond Street (children) 11 Metropolitan Asylums Board Hospitals. St. Marks' 1 Ca,ncer 1 Hospital for Women, Euston Road 1 Eastern (Homerton) 30 North Eastern (Haverstock Hill) 13 Maternity Hospital, Hackney 1 Infirmaries and Workhouses South Western 3 South Eastern 14 City of London Infirmary 1 North Western 14 Kensington Infirmary 1 "Castalia" (ship) 1 Holborn Infirmary 1 General Hospitals. Hackney Infirmary Bethnal Green Workhouse St. Bartholomew's 73 Islington Infirmary 1 Metropolitan Free 35 St. Olave's Workhouse 1 London 15 Other Institutions. London Temperance 1 German 5 Brixton Orphanage 1 Royal Free 2 H.M. Prison, Holloway 1 Guy's 4 St. Peter's Home 1 King's College 3 Aged Pilgrims' Asylum 1 St. George's 1 Gresham Almshouses (Brixton) 1 Of 344 deaths in public institutions, 150 occurred in the various general hospitals, 75 in the fever hospitals of the Metropolitan Asylums Board, 68 in lunatic asylums, 36 in hospitals for special diseases, 10 in workhouses and infirmaries, and 5 in other institutions. Elsewhere than in public institutions twelve residents of Shoreditch died without the parish, viz.:—One accidentally drowned in the River Lea, and one in the Regent's Canal, one through being run over in Holborn, and one who was run over by a train on the North London Railway, a case of suicide, one on the way to St. Bartholomew's Hospital, one at a house in Brunswick Close from rupture of an aneurism, one in a cab in the Kingsland Road, and five at houses situate in Commercial Road, Whitechapel, Upper Wimpole Street, Devonshire Street, Marylebone, Mayton Street, Highbury, and Derby Road, Hackney. 76 Altogether 356 persons, residents in Shoreditch, died outside the parish. Of the 2,626 persons belonging to Shoreditch, who died during the year, 745 or 28.5 per cent. died in public institutions, as compared with 25.5 per cent. last year. For the whole of London the percentage was 29.1. Of the 745 persons dying in public institutions, 276 belonged to Haggerston, 149 to Hoxton New Town, 141 to Hoxton Old Town, and 179 to South Shoreditch (Appendix, see table XXXII.). SICKNESS AMONGST THE POOR. In forming an opinion upon this subject it is necessary to take into consideration the state of trade, the abundance, or otherwise, of employment, but judging from the number of patients coming under the treatment of the district medical officers of the parish, it would appear that sickness was less prevalent amongst the poor during the year 1897, as compared with previous years; some 3,526 persons received medical advice and treatment, as against 4,032 in 1896, 4,690 in 1895, 4,297 in 1894, and 5,383 in 1893. An analysis of the cases treated during 1897 is shewn in table XXXIII. (see Appendix). There was a marked decrease in the number of persons suffering from the various zymotic diseases, 530 coming under the treatment, as compared with 697 in 1896, 921 in 1895, 740 in 1894, and 909 in 1893. Cases of rheumatism, rheumatic fever and gout were somewhat more numerous than last year. Cases of diseases of the heart and blood vessels were increased, as compared with the number for 1896. There were 919 cases of persons suffering from various diseases of the organs of respiration, as compared with 1,083 in 1896, 1,250 in 1895, 1,092 in 1894, and 1,495 in 1893. Cases of bronchitis numbered 832, as compared with 963 in 1896, and 1,122 in 1895. The cases diagnosed as cancer numbered 15 as compared with 21 in 1896, 15 in 1895, 27 in 1894, and 23 in 1893. Cases of diseases of the locomotive system, including chronic ulcers of the legs, numbered 112, as compared with 145 last year; there was also a diminution in the number of cases of skin diseases treated. The number of cases of disorder due to violence shew a slight decrease as compared with last year. Under the heading poison are included cases of lead poisoning. Causes other than those specified in the table accounted for 411 cases, as compared with 578 in 1896, and 655 in 1895. i ZYMOTIC DISEASES. Of the 874 deaths due to diseases classed under the above heading, which form 32.5 per cent. of the total deaths in the parish, 535 or 61.2 per cent. were of children under the age of five years. In Shoreditch South the deaths numbered 126; in Hoxton New Town 188; in Hoxton Old Town 197, and in Haggerston 363. The principal zymotic diseases, viz., small pox, measles, scarlet fever, diphtheria, including membranous croup, whooping cough, enteric fever, including continued fever, and diarrhœa caused 513 deaths, being at the rate of 4.2 per 1,000 inhabitants as compared with 4.3 in 1896 and 3.8 in 1895. The death-rate of the Metropolis due to the principal zymotic diseases for the year 1897 was 2.58. In 77 Shoreditch the zymotic death rate was highest in the Haggerston sub-district, and lowest in the New Town sub-district. (See Appendix, table XXXII.) The notifications of infectious disease received during 1897 numbered 1331; the numbers received during previous years are contained in the following table:— TABLE X. Year. Number of Notifications. Attack rate per 1,000 population. 1890 1158 9.4 1891 862 7.0 1892 1478 12.0 1893 1987 16.2 1894 1104 9.0 1895 1157 9.4 1896 1473 12.1 The number of notifications received during 1897, was equal to an annual attack rate of 10.9 per 1,000 inhabitants. The rates for previous years are contained in the third column of the above table. During 1897 in the Metropolis 45,465 cases of infectious disease were notified under the provisions of the Public Health (Lond.) Act, 1891. With a metropolitan population estimated at 4,463,169, this figure gives an attack-rate of 10.1 per thousand inhabitants. The subjoined table contains a list of the notifiable infectious diseases, the numbers of cases of the several diseases notified during the four quarters of the year in Shoreditch, together with the numbers and percentages of cases notified which were removed to the hospitals of the Metropolitan Asylums Board from Shoreditch. TABLE XI. Disease. First Quarter. Second Quarter. Third Quarter. Fourth Quarter. Total. Deaths. Small Pox ... 1 ... ... 1 1 Scarlet Fever or Scarlatina 119 116 196 197 628 31 Diphtheria&Membranous Croup 103 74 95 89 361 80 Typhus ... ... ... ... ... ... Cholera ... ... 1 ... 1 ... Enteric Fever (Typhoid) 11 16 45 35 107 19 Continued Fever 1 ... ... ... 1 ... Relapsing Fever ... ... ... ... ... ... Puerperal Fever ... ... 1 ... 1 ... Erysipelas 58 44 56 73 231 5 Totals 292 251 394 394 1331 136 Numbers and percentages of cases removed to hospitals 173 160 243 209 785 59.2% 63.7% 61.6% 50.2% 58.9% 78 As compared with the figures for 1896, the numbers of cases of the several diseases notified are less, with the exception of diphtheria, which shows a slight increase. The number of cases of smallpox remains the same as last year. The deaths from notifiable infectious diseases numbered 136, as compared with 135 in 1896, 117 in 1896, and 123 in 1894. The deaths from notifiable infectious diseases were at the rate of 1.1 per 1,000 inhabitants in Shoreditch; the deaths from the principal zymotic diseases which are not notifiable wore at the rate of 3.1 per 1,000 inhabitants. The deaths due to scarlet fever show a decrease, these due to diphtheria, enteric fever and erysipelas an increase. Nino instances came under my observation in which, following upon the return of persons, who had been suffering from scarlet fever, from the hospitals of the Metropolitan Asylum Board, recurrences of the disease took place in the families to which they belonged. The circumstances pointed in nearly all the cases to the recurrence being in some way connected with the return of the patients. There was no conclusive evidence that any of the patients were in an infectious condition when discharged from hospital, but two or three were open to very considerable suspicion. ISOLATION OF CASUS OF DANGEROUS INFECTIOUS DISEASE. In the vast majority of cases of dangerous infectious disease in Shoreditch, the only means of isolation in the strict sense of the term, is removal to a hospital for infectious disease. As a rule but little difficulty through objections on the part of parents and others is now experienced in obtaining such removals. Occasionally, however, objection is raised, in cases where isolation at home is quite impossible, and delay in the removal, attended by danger to the inmates of the house and others, arises in consequence. Should such delay occur in connection with a dangerous infectious disease like smallpox, it is hardly necessary to point out how grave would be the risks to the public health. It appears to bo open to question whether in the Metropolis there is any statutory power given for enforcing the removal to hospital of persons suffering from dangerous infectious disease who are improperly isolated. The sixtysixth section of the Public Health (London) Act, 1891, empowers a justice on a certificate signed by a legally qualified medical practitioner to order to be removed to a hospital, with the consent of the superintending body of such hospital, any person suffering from dangerous infectious disease who is without proper lodging or accommodation, or is lodged in a tent or van, or is on board a vessel. It is, however, possible that a person suffering from dangerous infectious disease may have proper lodging or accommodation so far as he himself is concerned, and yet be so lodged and accommodated as to be a danger to others. The sixty-seventh section gives a justice power to direct that a person suffering from dangerous infectious disease who is in a hospital to be detained in the hospital if he "would not on leaving the hospital bo provided with lodging or accommodation, in which proper precautions could be taken to prevent the spreading of the disease 79 by such person." As to whether the words "without proper lodging or accommodation" contained in Section 65, may be construed as having the meaning of "lodging or accommodation in which proper precautions could not be taken to prevent the spreading of the disease " is open to question. There is no ambiguity, however, as to the powers given for the removal of persons suffering from dangerous infectious diseases in the Public Health (Scotland) Act, 1897. Section 54 (1) of that Act lays it down that "a person suffering from any dangerous infectious disease who is without proper lodging or accommodation, or is so lodged that proper precautions cannot be taken for preventing the spread of the disease, or is lodged in a room occupied by others besides those necessarily in attendance on such person may on a certificate signed by the medical officer or other legally qualified medical practitioner be removed by order of a justice." Considering the public health interests of a vast city like the Metropolis there ought not to be any ambiguity with respect to the power of enforcing the removal to hospital of persons suffering from dangerous infectious disease, when necessary, and it would be well if the 66th Section of the Public Health (London) Act, 1891, were re-modelled on the lines of the 54th Section of the recent Scottish Act. METROPOLITAN ASYLUMS BOARD. The cases of infectious disease which are received into the hospitals of the Metropolitan Asylums Board include small-pox, scarlet fever, 'fever' (enteric, continued, and typhus), and diphtheria. The number of cases of these diseases notified in Shoreditch was 1,099, and the number removed to the Hospitals of the Board was 785, being a percentage of 71.4 as compared with 65 in 1896, 57.7 in 1895, and 61.0 in 1894. The percentages would, without doubt, have been larger, had there not been difficulty in obtaining the 'prompt removal of cases of scarlet fever and diphtheria, owing to the exhaustion of the accommodation of the Board's hospitals. New cases could only be admitted as vacancies occurred, and preference was given to the most urgent cases. In Shoreditch, there were many urgent cases which were obliged to wait several days before admission could be obtained. The difficulty in securing the prompt removal of cases lasted from August to the end of November, and numerous complaints were received from persons anxious to secure the removal of their infectious sick. The Public Health Committee directed a letter to be sent to the Board expressing their opinion that additional accommodation for infectious cases was urgently required, and ought to be provided by the Managers of the Board with as little delay as possible. A reply, dated October 25th, 1897, was received to the effect that the Managers had added over 1,000 beds during the past four years to their available accommodation for fever and diphtheria patients; that another 548 beds would be added when the Park Hospital was opened, and that it was anticipated that the Grove Hospital would be completed in the summer of 1898, when further 80 accommodation for 520 patients would be provided. It was also contemplated to erect a southern Convalescent Hospital for 720 patients. The Park Hospital, which was opened for the reception of patients late in the year, is situate on an elevated site close to Hither Green Station on the South Eastern Railway. The average level is between 90 and 100 feet above high water mark. The site occupies an extent of about 20 acres, and the buildings for the reception of patients are generally about 100 feet from the boundaries of the site. The institution, which is probably one of the finest fever hospitals in existence, is lighted throughout by electricity. It has accommodation for 368 patients suffering from scarlet fever, 120 patients suffering from enteric fever and diphtheria, and 36 small wards have been provided for the isolation of 60 patients whom it may be necessary for various reasons to keep separate from the other patients in the larger wards. The following is a list of the hospitals of the Metropolitan Asylum's Board now open, and in use for the reception of fever and diphtheria cases:— Eastern Hospital 356 beds North-Eastern Hospital 584 „ North-Western „ 440 „ Western „ 498 „ South-Western „ 368 „ Fountain „ 402 „ North-Eastern „ 438 „ Brook „ 488 „ Northern „ 680 „ The last is for convalescent patients. At the present time the Managers have at their disposal 4,802 beds. When the Grove Hospital and the Southern Convalescent Hospital have been erected, this accommodation will be increased to 6,022 for fever and diphtheria cases. For the accommodation of small-pox patients, the Managers have 300 beds in the ships, and 1,192 beds at Gore Farm Hospital, and it is proposed to erect a hospital at Joyce Green, near Dartford, for the accommodation of 400 patients. It is stated in the report of the medical superintendents of the Board's hospitals on the use of antitoxic serum in the treatment of diphtheria during the year, 1896, that the results obtained are somewhat better than those of 1895. The superintendents express the opinion that antitoxic serum is of much greater value as a remedy in the treatment of diphtheria than any other with which they are acquainted, and they emphasize the great importance of commencing the treatment as early as possible. In order to allow of patients suffering from diphtheria having the benefit of the treatment with the least possible delay, in cases where it may be impossible for them 81 to be immediately received into the Board's hospitals, the Managers are making arrangements, should it become necessary, for placing a supply of antitoxic serum in the hands of the several Metropolitan medical officers of health, as well as in the hands of the Board's medical superintendents for distribution. It is anticipated that this arrangement will enable medical practitioners, who may desire to make use of the remedy, to obtain a supply of the antitoxin with the least possible loss of time. SMALLPOX. One case of this dangerous malady was notified in Shoreditch during the year. On May 16th, a young man, aged 22, residing at a house in Shepherdess Walk, where he was a lodger, was certified to be suffering from smallpox, and removed to the ship Castalia. He was a carpet-planner by trade and worked for a firm in Stanhope Street, Euston Road. From enquiries made he appears to have beaten carpets belonging to a house in the West End where some cases of illness had occurred which were subsequently found to be cases of smallpox. This patient had been vaccinated in infancy. The case was one of the hæmorrhagic variety and terminated fatally in a few days. All the necessary steps were taken with as little loss of time as possible, with regard to disinfection and the premises were visited at frequent intervals and the inmates kept under observation until the danger of the occurrence of further cases was past. According to the report of the Ambulance Committee of the Metropolitan Asylums Board 95 cases notified as smallpox were received into the hospitals of the Board, 84 of which were during the first five months of the year. The total number of cases certified in the Metropolis and removed to the wharves during the year was 121, a considerable percentage of these were found by the Board's medical officers not to be suffering from smallpox and were returned to their homes. The majority of the cases occurred in the sanitary districts on the south side of the Thames. VACCINATION IN SHOREDITCH. The official returns for the year 1893 shew that of 4,460 children born in Shoreditch, 3,172 were successfully vaccinated, 11 were insusceptible of vaccination, 556 died unvaccinated, and the vaccination of 23 was postponed, leaving 698 or 16.2 percent. unaccounted for; the returns for 1894 shew that of 4,362 children born, 2,366 were successfully vaccinated, 13 were insusceptible, 505 died unvaccinated, and the vaccination of 15 was postponed, leaving 1,463 or 33.9 per cent. unaccounted for. G 82 The percentages of the births registered during the several years, 1887-94, not finally accounted for in Shoreditch, the Metropolis, and the rest of England and Wales, are contained in the subjoined table. TABLE XII. Year. Shoreditch. Metropolis. Rest of England.  1887 5.6 9.0 6.7 1888 3.7 10.3 8.2 1889 5.5 11.6 9.6 1890 9.3 13.9 10.9 1891 8.8 16.4 12.9 1892 10.8 18.4 14.3 1893 16.2 18.2 15.7 1894 33.9 20.6 19.0 The number of children born during 1894 who apparently escaped vaccination shews a very great increase on the number for the preceding year. There is an increase also observable in the figures for England and Wales and for the Metropolis. The figures for 1895, 1896 and 1897 are not available, but there is very little doubt that a large number of the children born in Shoreditch during these years have escaped vaccination. SCARLET FEVER (Scarlatina). There were 628 cases notified, as compared with 697 in 1896, 592 in 1895, 487 in 1894, and 1,007 in 1893. The deaths numbered 31, as compared with 38 in 1896, 29 in 1895, 26 in 1894, and 38 in 1893. The scarlet fever death-rate for the whole parish was 0.25 per 1000 inhabitants; the highest rate being 0.37 in Haggerston, and the lowest, 0.07 per 1000 inhabitants in Hoxton Old Town. The scarlet fever attacks in Shoreditch were at the rate of 5.2 per 1000 inhabitants, the attack-rate being 51 per 1000 in Shoreditch South, 4.4 in Hoxton New Town, 4.4 in Hoxton Old Town, and 6.0 in Haggerston. As compared with last year the fatality was somewhat lower, 4.9 per cent. of the cases terminating fatally during 1897, as compared with 5.4 per cent. in 1896. Of those attacked with the disorder, 235 were children under the age of five years; of these 27 died, the mortality being 11.0 per cent., as compared with 12.0 per cent. last year. The mortality amongst those attacked who were over five years of age was 1.0 per cent. The whole of the fatal cases were of children who were under fifteen years of age. In the subjoined table is contained the distribution of the notifications and fatal cases amongst males and females in the parish and its four sub-districts. 83 TABLE XIII. Sub-District. SCARLET FEVER. Notifications. Fatal Cases. Male. Female. Total. Male. Female. Total. Shoreditch South 43 48 91 3 3 6 Hoxton New Town 54 73 127 2 4 6 Hoxton Old Town 65 57 122 2 — 2 Haggerston 131 157 288 8 9 17 Total for the whole Parish 293 335 628 15 16 31 During the year 1897, 75 per cent. of the cases of scarlet fever certified in Shoreditch were removed to hospitals of the Metropolitan Asylums Board. In 1896 the percentage was 70, in 1895 60, in 1894 65, and in 1893, it was 37. During some portions of the years 1895 and 1893, owing to lack of accommodation at the hospitals, numbers of cases were treated at home which would otherwise have been removed to hospital. Scarlet fever was more prevalent in Shoreditch during the third and fourth quarters of the year. The maximum number of cases notified during any single week was that ending August 21st, when 23 cases came under my notice. The fewest cases notified were during the week ending May 8th and June 19th, when 3 cases were notified in each week. The cases of scarlet fever notified in the metropolis during 1897 numbered 22,850, the attack rate being 5.1 per 1000 population. The deaths in the metropolis attributed to scarlet fever numbered 780, compared with 942 last year, and the death rate due to this cause was 0.17 per 1000 inhabitants, as against 0.21 in 1896. DIPHTHERIA (Including Membranous Croup.) The cases notified as diphtheria during 1897 numbered 361, as compared with 356 in 1896, 244 in 1895, 303 in 1894, and 513 in 1893. The disease was most prevalent in Shoreditch during the first quarter of the year. The deaths, which were 149 in 1893, 76 in 1894, 59 in 1895, 75 in 1896, were 80 this year. The mortality amongst those attacked in Shoreditch, which was 290 percent. in 1893, 25-0 in 1894, 24.1 in 1895, 21 0 in 1896, rose slightly this year to 22.1 per cent. g1 84 Of 169 cases amongst children under five years of age, 61 terminated fatally, or 36.0 per cent. as compared with 31.8 per cent. in 1896, 47.5 per cent. in 1895, 43 per cent. in 1894, and 61.8 per cent. in 1893. Of 192 cases amongst persons aged 5 years and upwards, 19 terminated fatally, or 9.9 percent. as compared with 12.8 per cent. in 1896 7.0 per cent. in 1895, 11.5 per cent. in 1894, and 11.4 per cent. in 1893. The nineteen deaths of persons over five years of age, wore all of children aged between five and fifteen years. The number of children aged between 5 and 15 years, who were notified as suffering from diphtheria was 119 and the mortality amongst them, therefore, was 15.9 per cent. None of the 73 cases amongst persons aged 15 years and upwards terminated fatally. The diphtheria death-rate for the whole parish was 0.64 per 1,000 inhabitants, as compared with 0.61 in 1896. The rate was highest in Shoreditch South, and lowest in the Hoxton New Town registration district. (See Appondix, table XXXII.) In the following table is shewn the distribution of the cases notified and the deaths amongst males and females in the four sub-districts of the parish:— TABLE XIV. DIPHTHERIA. Notifications. Fatal Cases. Male. Female. Total. Male. Female. Total. Shoreditch South 18 31 49 5 8 13 Hoxton New Town 31 36 67 6 11 17 Hoxton Old Town 36 59 95 9 11 20 Haggerston 64 86 150 13 17 30 Total 149 212 361 33 47 80 The cases of diphtheria notified were at the rate of 2.94 per thousand inhabitants Of the 361 cases notified in Shoreditch, 242 or 67.0 per cent. wore removed to the hospitals of the Metropolitan Asylums Board. Last year 55 6 per cent. wore so removed. The number of cases notified in the Metropolis was 12,803, which gives with the estimated population an attack-rate of 2.87 per thousand inhabitants during the year 1897. The deaths in the Metropolis due to diphtheria numbered 2,240, the death-rate being 0.50 per thousand. 85 During the year 282 of the cases of diphtheria notified in Shoreditch were specially enquired into; in 168 the sufferers were females and in 114 they were males. The following table shews the distribution of the cases amongst males and females at certain age periods:— TABLE XV. Age Period. Male. Female. Total. Under 1 year 2 3 5 Between 1 and 2 years 9 9 18 „ 2 „ 3 „ 16 15 31 „ 3 „ 4 „ 19 23 42 „ 4 „ 5 „ 14 20 34 „ 5 „ 10 „ 28 41 69 „ 10 „ 25 „ 20 43 63 Over 25 years 6 14 20 Total 114 168 282 Of the children attacked under five years of age 60 were males and 70 females; of those attacked who were aged between five and ten years 28 were males and 41 females; of persons aged between ten and twenty-five years 20 attacked were males and 43 females; and of those attacked who were over twenty-five years 6 were males and 14 females. These figures shew that under five years 53.8 per cent. of those attacked were females; between five and ten years 59.4 per cent. were females; between ten and twenty-five years 68.2 per cent. were females, and over twenty-five years 70 per cent. of those attacked were women. It is probable that the increasing frequency of the attacks amongst females as compared with the males, which is observable as age increases after the tenth year, is due to their having to look after the sick ones of the family, and thus being more exposed to infection. The habit of kissing, which is more common amongst females than males, is also no doubt an important factor in rendering them more liable to be attacked. Of the cases investigated, in 130 instances the patient was a school-going child. In 105 the patient had been attending school within one week of the onset of symptoms. In a few instances the patient was apparently suffering from the disease before it was recognised as diphtheria, whilst attending school. In 95 cases the patients were not school-going children, but children, members of the same family or living under the same roof, were attending school. In 208 instances the house where the patient lived was occupied by members of more than one family; in 18 instances the patients lived in artisans dwellings, and in 56 instances the whole house was occupied by the patient family. 86 In 175 cases the patients resided in houses, the sanitary conditions of which were satisfactory. In 107 cases insanitary conditions of major or minor importance were discovered In 39 instances, there were histories of throat illness amongst other persons living in the houses where the patients resided. DIARRHŒA. This disorder, which is so fatal in infancy, was prevalent in Shoreditch from the beginning of July to well on in September, and caused a marked rise in the parish death-rate. From the middle of July to the end of August the deaths in Shoreditch from diarrhœa averaged 24 per week. Diarrhœa was generally prevalent during July, August and September, and caused a marked elevation in the metropolitan death rate during the month of August. Excluding 41 deaths registered as due to enteritis, the deaths from diarrhœa numbered 211, of which 162 were of children under one year, 33 of children aged between one and fifteen years, and 16 were of persons aged forty-five years and upwards. The death-rate due to this disorder was 1.74 per 1000 inhabitants. The deaths due to diarrhœa in the Metropolis, not including those attributed to enteritis, amounted to 4,099, of which over 3,000 occurred during the months of July and August. The metropolitan diarrhœa death-rate was 0.91 per 1000 inhabitants. In the subjoined table are contained, for the years 1892-97, the numbers of deaths from diarrhœa, together with the death-rates due to this cause in Shoreditch and London. TABLE XVI. SHOREDITCH. LONDON. Year. Number of Deaths. Rate per 1,000 Inhabitants. Number of Deaths. Rate por 1,000 Inhabitants. 1892 93 0.75 2546 0.60 1893 170 1.38 3446 0.80 1894 73 0.59 1780 0.42 1895 172 1.24 3600 0.83 1896 151 1.24 3223 0.72 1897 211 1.74 4099 0.91 From the above figures it will be seen that the variations from year to year in the mortality from diarrhœa in Shoreditch accompany variations in the diarrhœa mortality 87 of the Metropolis. These variations are without doubt due to some condition or conditions common to the whole Metropolis. The yearly excess of the Shoreditch rate as compared with that of London is due to the existence of conditions in Shoreditch, which favour the prevalence of diarrhœa to a greater extent than is the case with London as a whole; probably the density of the population and the large number of births which yearly occur are the principal factors in determining the yearly excess of the Shoreditch diarrhœal death-rate over that of the Metropolis. During August I received information respecting two cases of suspected cholera. One was the case of a man aged 35 years, who was received into the Holborn Workhouse on August 22nd, at 12.30 a.m. On rising in the morning he had slight diarrhœa which became worse and was accompanied by vomiting. When he was seen by the doctor in the afternoon he was in a state of collapse. His condition, however, improved during the night and when I saw him the next morning he was convalescent. The results of bacteriological examination so far as Asiatic cholera was concerned were negative. The other case was that of a man aged 60, a stationary engine driver who lived and worked in Shoreditch. So far as could be ascertained he had not partaken of anything likely to have caused his symptoms nor had he been away from home for a considerable length of time previously. His illness commenced on the morning of August 15th, and terminated fatally on August 20th, vomiting, diarrhœa and cramps were present but there was no reason for regarding the case as other than one of English cholera. ENTERIC or TYPHOID FEVER. The cases notified numbered 107, six less than in 1896. The following table contains the number of cases notified in Shoreditch during the vears 1890-96:— TABLE XVII. Year. Number of Cases. 1890 202 1891 111 1892 91 1893 111 1894 85 1895 99 1896 114 Ot the cases notified in 1897, 103 were of persons aged 5 years and upwards. The attacks, which shewed no special incidence in any particular portion of the district, were at the rate of 0.85 per thousand inhabitants. The deaths of which 10 occurred in hospitals outside the parish, numbered 19, the death-rate being 0.15 per 1,000 as compared with 0.14 in 1896, and 017 in 1895. Of the attacks 17.7 per cent. 88 terminated fatally, as compared with 15.7 in 1896, 21.2 in 1895, 14.1 in 1894, and 15.3 in 1893. The distribution of the cases and deaths amongst males and females in the four registration districts of the parish, are shewn in the subjoined table:— TABLE XVIII. Sub-District. TYPHOID FEVER. Notifications. Fatal Ca3es. Male. Female. Total. Male. Female. Total. Shoreditch South 12 5 17 1 ... 1 Hoxton New Town 13 8 21 4 1 5 Hoxton Old Town 11 13 24 3 1 4 Haggerston 28 17 45 7 2 9 Total for the whole Parish 64 43 107 15 4 19 Eleven cases were notified amongst children under 10 years of age; 35 amongst persons 10 to 20 years; 32 amongst persons aged between 20 and 30 years; 20 amongst persons aged between 30 and 40 years; 8 amongst persons aged between 40 and 50 and there was one case in which the patient was over 50 years of age. Of the cases notified 62.6 per cent. were removed to various hospitals, mostly those of the Metropolitan Asylum's Board. The cases of enteric fever notified in the Metropolis during 1897 numbered 3,113, which gives with the population an attackrate of 0.69 per 1,000 inhabitants. The Metropolitan death-rate due to enteric fever was 0.12 per 1,000 of the estimated population. So far as could be ascertained the great majority of the cases in Shoreditch appeared to have been contracted within the parish. In none of the cases was there any evidence pointing to the milk consumed being the source of infection. In one instance it is possible that infection may have been conveyed through eating a portion of a pear which had been handled by a patient who was suffering from an attack of enteric fever. In two cases in which it is probable that the disease was contracted outside the parish, it was thought that some oysters, which had been consumed might have been the cause, but the evidence as to this was not conclusive. None of the cases of enteric fever which occurred in Shoreditch during the fourth quarter of the year were traceable to the Maidstone outbreak. 89 This very severe outbreak, which appears to have resulted from contamination of the water supply, afflicted Maidstone during September, October, November and December. Over 1,900 case3, with between 150 and 200 deaths occurred amongst a population of 32,000. Severe outbreaks also occurred at King's Lynn and Clifton near Bristol, the former due to a water supply which was exposed to pollution and the latter to an infected milk supply. In connection with the subject of enteric fever I would draw attention to the recent investigations made by Dr. Sidney Martin, F.R.S., as to THE BEHAVIOUR OF THE BACILLUS OF ENTERIC FEVER IN THE SOIL. These researches, an account of which is contained in the report of the medical officer of the Local Government Board for 1896-7, so far as they have been pursued, tend to shew that in earth, which is organically polluted, as is likely to be the case in the vicinity of defective drains, leaky cesspits, or in the neighbourhood of dwellings in crowded and poor localities, the micro-organisms which give rise to enteric fever, are not only capable of retaining their vitality for months,but of increasing and multiplying in numbers. On the other hand, in soils which are not exposed to pollution, the micro-organisms are unable to flourish, and rapidly become extinct. Similar results have been obtained by at least one other investigator in the same field of research, and they go to emphasize the very great importance of the sanitary work such as is executed under the supervision of your sanitary officers, in respect to the proper paving and drainage of yards and areas in connection with dwellings, and in securing the proper construction of drains and other sanitary arrangements so as to prevent the soil from being polluted. The very great importance, from a public health standpoint, of the extensive works which have been or are being executed by the Vestry, such as the construction and reconstruction of sewers, the paving and repaving of streets, the provision of public open spaces, and of public underground conveniences, is generally recognised. A word might, however, be said with reference to the paving of courts, cul-de-sacs and narrow streets, in localities occupied by poor people who find life a hard struggle, with impervious material. There are many such in the parish which have already been so paved, and every shower of rain helps to wash them clean, but many still remain which require to be dealt with in a similar manner. The importance of this as a sanitary precaution in narrow thoroughfares in the more densely populated portion of the parish cannot have too much stress laid upon it. By facilitating cleansing and preventing the pollution of the soil, it adds to the comfort of the people, and goes along way towards raising the standard of health in such localities. ERYSIPELAS. The cases notified as erysipelas numbered 231, being at the rate of 1.9 per thousand inhabitants, as compared with 295 in 1896, 201 in 1895, 195 in 1894, 315 in 90 1893, and 243 in 1892. The cases notified in the Metropolis numbered 5,801, the attack-rate being 1.2 per thousand inhabitants. The deaths numbered five as compared with three in 1896, five in 1895, five in 1894, 15 in 1893, and 11 in 1892. The case-mortality was 2.1 per cent. of the cases notified as compared with 1.0 in 1896, 2.48 in 1895, 2.5 in 1894, 4.7 in 1893, and 4.5 in 1892. The distribution of the cases and the deaths amongst males and females in the four subdivisions of the Parish during the year 1897 is set forth below:— TABLE XIX. Sub-District ERYSIPELAS. Notifications. Fatal Casks. Male. Female. Total. Male. Female. Total. Shoreditch South 15 12 27 1 ... 1 Hoxton New Town 20 32 52 3 ... 3 Hoxton Old Town 20 30 50 1 ... 1 Haggerston 43 59 102 ... ... ... Total for the whole Parish 98 133 231 5 ... 5 Two of the deaths were of infants under one year. The death-rate due to erysipelas was 0.04 per thousand, as compared with 0.02 in 1896. Pyæmia and septicemia, or blood poisoning, which are included in the same group of diseases as erysipelas caused 8 deaths. PUERPERAL FEVER. There was only one case notified which recovered. The attack-rate and death-rate per 1000 births during the past six years are contained in TABLE XX. Year. Attack-rate per 1000 births. Death-rate per 1000 births. 1892 1.3 1.3 1893 1.8 1.3 1894 1.1 0.4 1895 0.4 0.2 1896 0.9 ... 1897 0.0 ... 91 MEASLES. This disorder was prevalent in Shoreditch during several months of the year. Deaths were most numerous in June, November and December. In the latter two months 72 deaths were registered as duo to measles. The total number of deaths for the year was 111, of these 13 belonged to Shoreditch South, 24 to Hoxton New Town, 26 to Hoxton Old Town and 48 to Haggerston. The death-rate from measles in the parish was 0.91 per 1,000 inhabitants as compared with 1.10 in 1896, 0.84 in 1895, 0.52 in 1894, and l.04 in 1893. The number of deaths attributed to measles in London during 1897 was 1,927, and the death-rate was 0.43 per 1,000 inhabitants- In the subjoined table are shewn the number of deaths due to measles, together with the total deaths from all causes in Shoreditch during the past six years:— TABLE XXI. Year. Deaths from Measles. Total deaths from all causes. 1892 100 2,828 1893 128 3,146 1894 65 2,466 1895 103 2,860 1896 134 2,622 1897 111 2,626 Only four of the 111 deaths were of children over live years of age and the whole of the children who died were under fifteen years. In most instances complications were the immediate cause of death. Patients suffering from measles are very liable to inflammatory disorders of the lungs and air passages, and especially so, if due precautions are not exercised in the treatment of, and attention bestowed upon the nursing of such patients, No case ought to be regarded as a slight affair. Measles is oftentimes a very dangerous infectious disorder and may be attended with a mortality as high, or even higher than those of most of the infectious diseases which are classed as dangerous in the Public Health Acts. The number of deaths directly or indirectly attributed to measles which annually occur in Shoreditch early in the year came under the consideration of the Public Health Committee who directed handbills to be circulated about the Parish, calling the attention of parents and others who have the management of children to the great importance of exercising due care in all cases of measles, and pointing out the great liability to bronchitis and inflammation of the lungs to which children so suffering were subject. Every person suffering from measles ought to be confined to bed in a warm, well-ventilated room, and kept in bed until convalescence is well established. Attention was also drawn to the importance of keeping children belonging to an infected household from attending school for at least a month from the date the last person in such household was attacked. 92 WHOOPING COUGH. The deaths attributed to this disorder numbered 60, as compared with 115 in 1896, 83 in 1895, and 86 in 1894. With a single exception all were of children under five years of age. Complications, especially bronchitis and inflammation of the lungs were in most instances the immediate cause of death. The death-rate from whooping cough was 0.49 per 1000 inhabitants, as compared with 0.94 in 1896, 0.67 in 1895, 0.70 in 1894, and 0.54 in 1893. The deaths due to this disorder registered in the metropolis during the year numbered 1837, the death-rate being 0.41, as compared with 0.65 for last year. INFLUENZA. The deaths registered as due to influenza numbered 16, as compared with 7 in 1896, 57 in 1895, 15 in 1894, and 36 in 1893. The deaths were most numerous in Shoreditch during the month of April. In the metropolis 671 deaths were attributed to influenza during 1897; they were most numerous during the months of March and April. TUBERCULAR DISEASES. The above group of diseases (see Appendix, table XXX.) due to the tubercle bacillus caused 321 deaths or approximately one-eighth of the total number of deaths which occurred in the parish, the death-rate being 2.65 per 1,000 inhabitants. The number of deaths from tubercular diseases and the death-rates for the years 1892-96 are contained in the subjoined table:— TABLE XXII. Year. Number of Deaths. Death-rate per 1,000 Inhabitants. 1892 392 3.20 1893 384 3.13 1894 362 2.95 1895 394 3.20 1896 301 2.48 Of the 321 deaths registered in 1897, 237 were attributed to phthisis or consumption of the lungs, 23 to tabes mesenterica or abdominal tuberculosis, the whole of which were of children under five years, 32 to tubercular meningitis, and 29 to other forms of tuberculosis, including several cases of general tuberculosis. Phthisis or consumption is an infectious disease. The micro-organisms are given off, especially in the later stages of the disease, in vast numbers in the material coughed up by persons suffering from consumption, and it is a preventive measure of 93 the greatest importance, not only in the interests of the patients and family, but also of the community generally, that this material (sputum) should be received in bits of rag or paper which can be burnt, or a suitable receptacle containing water or some disinfectant, so that measures may be taken to destroy the infectious matter. Infection may also be conveyed by milk. It is not improbable that many of the cases of abdominal tuberculosis result in this manner. It is, therefore, very important that the milk upon which infants are fed should be scalded. Boiling, if only for a very short time, is sufficient to render the milk safe, not only in regard to the tubercle bacillus, but possibly most other nocuous micro-organisms also. Circumstances which favour the prevalence of diseases due to the tubercle micro-organism are insanitary conditions, such as overcrowding, overwork, irregularity of life, intemperance, uncleanliness, and want of light and ventilation in dwellings, contamination of soil in the neighbourhood of dwellings, and dampness of the foundations and walls of dwellings. DISINFECTION. During the year 1897 the number of premises visited and disinfected by the Vestry's officers amounted to 1,106. The number of articles brought to the Vestry's disinfecting station and disinfected was 11,093, and included 956 beds, 1,810 pillows, 679 palliasses, 622 bolsters, and 7,026 miscellaneous articles, including clothing, curtains, carpets, and various other textile and leather goods. In addition to those disinfected, it was necessary to destroy 15 beds, 8 palliasses, 4 pillows, and 2 bolsters, as being so contaminated or in such bad condition as to render it inadvisable to return them. These were replaced by the Vestry. There were no cases of damage, either to the articles passed through the disinfecting apparatus or due to the measures taken with regard to the disinfection of any of the 1,106 premises dealt with, brought to my notice. The results of the measures taken with regard to disinfection in the parish during the year were satisfactory. In none of the nine cases of recurrent scarlet fever which I have alluded to (see ante p. 14) was there any evidence that the disinfection was at fault. In the following table are contained the numbers of premises and articles disinfected during the six years, 1891-96:— TABLE XXIII. Year. Number of Premises. Number of Beds. Number of Pillows. Number of Palliasses. Number of Bolsters. Number of Other Articles. Total Number of Articles. 1891 816 833 1,602 568 504 6,123 9,630 1892 1,027 1,157 1,801 545 559 6,758 10,820 1893 1,363 1,313 2,186 645 767 6,918 11,829 1894 912 843 1,522 647 549 7,474 11,035 1895 828 774 1,459 548 404 8,179 11,364 1896 1,116 1,117 2,034 818 600 8,660 13,229 94 The boiler of the disinfecting apparatus was examined oxternally and internally as far as practicable by one of the inspecters of the National Boiler and General Insurance Company, and as far as could be soon it was found to be in order. The engineer suggested that at the next thorough inspection the boiler should be tested by hydraulic pressure to 40 lbs. per square inch. During the past year the disinfecting properties of formic aldehyde gas have been brought under my notice. According to the reports of bacteriologists who have experimented with it, this gas possesses marked germicidal properties distinctly superior to those of sulphurous acid gas. It appears to have little or no effect upon coloured textile articles, and is recommended as a valuable disinfecting agent. Formic aldehyde gas can be conveniently generated by heating a substance known as "paraform" in a specially-constructed methylated spirit lamp (alformant). I have used this disinfecting agont in two or three special cases, where coloured articles had to be dealt with, and as far as could be judged the results were satisfactory. Various disinfecting agents have boon employod for the purpose of fumigating rooms after infectious disease, the commonest of these boing chlorine gas. bromine fumes, and nitrous and sulphurous acid gases. The one used in Shoreditch (and I believe it is in very general use in the metropolis) is sulphurous acid gas. In some districts sulphur candles and cylinders of liquified gas are used for generating the gas. In Shoreditch ordinary roll sulphur is burnt in iron vessels specially constructed for the purpose. Sulphurous acid gas is very cheaply produced, is well adapted for general use as a fumigating agent, and, so far as my experience goes, there does not appear to be any reason to be dissatisfied with the results obtained from its use combined with the othor moasuros as to disinfection adopted in the district. Towards the end of the year the Vestry decided to purchase a horse for use at the disinfecting station. It was suggested that motor cars should be used for the purpose of conveying goods to and from the disinfecting station, but after enquiring into the matter, the Public Health Committee were of opinion that inasmuch as motor cars were at present an innovation, and attracted the attention of the public hi the streets, it was not advisable to employ them for this purpose. Vehicles for conveying infected goods should be of such construction as to attract attention as little as possible. THE CLEANSING OF PERSONS ACT, 1897, which is now in force, gives the Vestry power to allow, if thoy shall see fit, any person who may make application to them, on the ground that he is infested with vermin, to have the use, free of charge, of the disinfecting apparatus, for the purpose of freeing himself from such vermin. The use of the apparatus is in no way to be considered parochial relief or charitable allowance, and no person by reason thereof is to be deprived of any right or privdeges, or to be subject to any disqualification or disability. 95 THE SHELTER. The temporary accommodation provided by the Vestry at No. 18, Branch place, Hoxton, for persons obliged to vacate their dwellings to allow of efficient measures being taken as to disinfection was made use of during the year on five occasions. The particulars are contained in the subjoined table:— TABLE XXIV. Date of Admittance. Length of Stay. Number of Persons. Address. Disease. Jan. 9 3 nights 8 22, Wellington Street Diphtheria Aug. 25 2 „ 7 9, Hare Walk Scarlatina Sept. 29 4 hours 2 59, Queen's Road „ Nov. 30 6 „ 7 83, Hackney Road „ Dec. 7 2 nights 4 50, Laburnum Street „ Altogether twenty-three persons made use of the Shelter. DISINFECTANTS. From June 8th to October 8th packets of disinfecting powder were distributed free of charge to persons making application to the department at the Town Hall. Enquiries as to the purpose for which the powder was intended to be used was made in each instance, and numbers of insanitary conditions thus came under the notice of the Vestry's sanitary officers. Altogether 1,699 half pound packets or 8 cwt. of "Sanitas" Powder were given away at a cost of £4 16s. and 2 cwt. were used at the mortuary. In addition 26 gallons of carbolic acid disinfecting fluid was used at a cost of £5 17s., mainly in connection with special cases of disinfection, for flushing house drains, for the cleansing of flooring and wood work of dwelling room in certain cases, for cleansing at the public mortuary aud for other purposes. PUBLIC MORTUARY. The number of dead bodies received into the public mortuary during the year was 421. The bodies were those of parishioners, with the exceptions in the cases of non-parishioners who have met their deaths through disease or accident within the parish. By order of the sanitary authority the bodies of eight persons dying of infectious disease were removed to the mortuary. 96 There were 331 inquests held, as compared with 301 in 1896, and 313 in 1895. The post-mortem examinations made in the post-mortem room attached to the mortuary numbered 159 as compared with 128 in 1896, 109 in 1895, 60 in 1894, and 29 in 1893. In the following table are contained the number of bodies yearly received into the public mortuary during the years 1876-96. TABLE XXV. Year. No. of Bodies. Year. No. of Bodies, 1876 95 1887 295 1877 124 1888 288 1878 147 1889 300 1879 130 1890 337 1880 183 1891 346 1881 208 1892 375 1882 183 1893 471 1883 249 1894 350 1884 135 1895 384 1885 232 1896 404 1886 290 These figures show that there is an increasing disposition on the part of the people to make use of the mortuary. This is a matter of great importance from a public health point of view, when one considers the large numbers of families in Shoreditch who, for various reasons, are obliged to dwell iu one, two, or three rooms. WATER SUPPLY. During the year, 1897, the rainfall in inches measured at Oxford, was 25.10; the mean fall for thirty years was 26.24. The total deficit for the year was 1.14 inches. No complaints were received in the Public Health Department of deficiency of supply, in either of the two water districts for the parish. The East London Waterworks Company have largely augmented their storage capacity for unfiltered water during the year. In December, 1896, according to the Official Report of the Water Examiner appointed under the Metropolis Water Act, 1871, the Company possessed storage capacity for 16.9 days, having 9 subsiding and storage reservoirs for unfiltered water, with an area of 238 acres, and an available capacity of 815,000,000 gallons. In September, 1897, the official figures shew that the storage had been increased to a capacity sufficient for 30.3 days, the Company possessing eleven reservoirs, covering an area of 316 acres, with an available capacity of 1,215,000,000 gallons. 97 There has been no increase in the storage capacity of the New River Water Company, but that Company supplies water largely from wells, and the River Lea above its intake is less subject to pollution than it is lower down the Valley. The waters of the several Metropolitan Water Companies have, during the year, 1897, been subjected to much more frequent bacteriological examinations than formerly. This is a matter of very great importance, where the safeguarding of the health of millions of people depends upon the efficiency with which filtration is carried out, frequent bacteriological examination enabling early information being obtained as to any deterioration in the action of the filters. According to expert opinion the various London waters taken as a whole were, bacteriologically, highly satisfactory, combined storage and filtration being very efficient in producing waters fitted for domestic use. In accordance with the requirements of Section 48 of the Public Health (London) Act, 1891, 15 dwellings were certified as having a proper and sufficient supply of water. The Water Companies require the, provision of storage cisterns before they will lay the water on. Such cisterns should be so constructed and placed that they may be conveniently inspected and cleansed, and where used for domestic purposes it is preferable that they should be of a self-cleansing pattern, that they should be so placed as not to be liable to exposure to foul emanations of any description, and they should be properly covered, to exclude dust and other extraneous matters as far as possible. A tap should be provided on the rising main so as to enable water for drinking and dietetic purposes being obtained direct from the Water Companies' pipes. The waste preventing apparatus for flushing water closets should be supplied through the storage cistern, and not directly from the Water Companies' pipes. The advantage of this is, that should from any reason the water be cut off, the water closets will not be without water so long as there is water in the storage cistern. During the year 115 communications were received from the Water Companies with respect to the cutting off of the water supplies to dwelling houses, 79 from the New River, and 36 from the East London Company. These communications referred to 182 premises, 44 of which were empty. The laws respecting the Metropolitan Water Companies have been amended during the year by the passing of the METROPOLIS WATER ACT, 1897 (60 and 61 VICT., C. 56), Which confers powers upon the Railway and Canal Commission to deal with complaints made by water comsumers or by local authorities respecting defaults of Water Companies. If on hearing any such complaint, the Railway and Canal Commission are satisfied that the Water Company has failed in its duty, they have power to impose a penalty. If the Commission are satisfied that any complaint as to H 98 quantity or quality of the water supplied for domestic use by any of the Water Companies well founded, they may make an order on the Company to remove the ground of complaint, and they may award damages to the complainant. By this Act also power is given to local authorities to aid water consumers; section 2 enables a local authority to aid any water consumer in settling any question, which generally interests the water consumers of their district, respecting the rights, duties and liabilities of any Water Company with reference to the quantity or quality supplied and the charges made for it. A Court of Law may make a local authority aiding any legal proceedings a party to the proceedings and they will be liable to costs. The aid a local authority may give to a water consumer is not limited to cases before the Railway and Canal Commission nor is there any restriction as to the class of water consumers who may be aided, nor is it necessary that the water consumer raising any question should be a ratepayer or resident in the district. The numerous outbreaks of enteric fever in different parts of the country which have been attributed to contamination of the water supplies point to the immense importance of closely and constantly observing the characters of the water supplied. Considering the sources of its water supply especially so is this the case with regard to the Metropolis. At the present time the waters of the several Metropolitan Water Companies are subjected to examination at frequent intervals by experienced analysts, both on behalf of the Local Government Board and of the Directors of the several Water Companies. No doubt great care is exercised with regard to the quality of the supply generally. The fact, however, ought not to be lost sight of, that in a vast city like the Metropolis, undermined as it is in all directions with pipes of various descriptions including sewers, drains, water pipes and water mains, there is more or less a risk by no means inconsiderable of local contamination. It was pointed out by Sir George Buchanan the late medical officer of the Local Government Board that where water pipes are broken and leaky there is a risk of insuction into such pipes. Should material containing the specific infection of such diseases as enteric fever or cholera be sucked into the water pipes or mains disastrous results might ensue. The possibility of localized outbreaks of waterborne diseases being due to this cause has been pointed out by more than one observer. In such cases examination of the water would be of valuable service in obtaining early information as to the causation of the outbreaks. It is, therefore, in the interests of the public health that sanitary authorities should be empowered to expend money for the purposes of having the waters supplied in their several districts examined both chemically and bacteriologically. SANITARY WORK. In the subjoined table is contained a summary of the works executed under the supervision of the department, which has been compiled from the abstracts prepared 99 by the sanitary inspectors, of the work carried out for the abatement of insanitary conditions during the year 1897:— TABLE XXVI. Chief Inspt'r. Insp. Lear. Insp. Quelch. Insp. Firth. Insps. Brown and Lindon Insp. Jordan Total. New drains constructed 19 12 5 24 6 16 82 Drains re-constructed or repaired 93 97 115 158 84 83 630 Sink waste pipes trapped and disconnected 39 80 184 179 63 143 688 Stack pipes provided or repaired 11 102 85 134 31 21 384 Eaves, gutters re-instated 13 99 71 148 35 11 377 Stack pipes disconnected from drains 18 52 101 113 18 124 426 Accumulation of sewage dealt with 17 25 12 32 7 8 101 Cesspools abolished 1 4 — 8 — — 13 New water closets constructed 105 42 6 24 11 96 284 Old water closets re-constructed or repaired 120 105 244 170 132 113 884 Water closets cleaned and white-washed 15 188 152 12 37 107 511 Water restored or newly laid on to water closets 1 39 32 20 49 18 159 Obstructions in water closets removed — 25 22 6 2 20 75 Overcrowding in houses abated — 11 7 5 2 4 29 Damp courses in houses provided — 5 28 51 5 — 89 Walls pointed 54 6 25 5 9 1 100 Roofs repaired 56 24 65 48 21 22 236 Stairs repaired 68 4 40 15 7 1 135 Floors repaired 73 15 57 104 9 6 264 Ventilation under floors 9 78 76 162 45 21 391 Doors repaired 68 1 32 1 7 4 113 Door cills provided 107 99 119 129 123 70 647 Sashes 65 6 25 1 19 — 116 Walls and ceilings cleansed throughout 172 20 38 97 10 63 400 Walls and ceilings partly cleansed 58 168 162 113 80 154 735 Total number of rooms cleansed 928 399 573 571 235 325 3031 Yard or areas lime-washed 42 218 77 3 10 129 479 Yards paved 83 141 175 187 75 68 729 Areas and forecourts paved 25 67 64 77 11 19 263 New areas constructed 1 8 15 26 4 7 61 Sculleries paved 31 23 85 98 11 22 270 Dustbins provided 66 102 109 81 67 50 465 Dungbins provided — 6 2 5 2 4 19 Insanitary cisterns removed — 36 6 — 3 27 72 H1 100 In connection with the work of the department 1,727 letters were written. Notices as to insanitary conditions were served with respect to 2,209 premises, viz.: 408 by the chief inspector, 428 by inspector Lear, 387 by inspector Quelch, 344 by inspector Firth, 359 by inspector Jordan, and 283 by inspectors Brown and London. Inspector Brown left the Vestry's service in September, and his successor, inspector London, did not commence his duties in his district until December 1st. Statutory notices under the Public Health (Lond.) Act, 1891, and the Metropolis Local Management Act, were served by order of the Public Health Committee upon the owners of 140 premises. LEGAL PROCEEDINGS. For non-compliance with the requirements of statutory notices served, and for infringement of bye-laws, it was necessary to take out summonses in respect of the premises contained in the list set out below:— TABLE XXVII. Premises. Result of Proceedings. 85, Wilmer Gardens Abatement Order, 3s. costs. 89, Wilmer Gardens Abatement Order, 3s. costs. 25, Hackney Road Fined 3s., with 2s. costs. 44, Shaftesbury Street Summons withdrawn, 3s. costs. 37, Grange Street Summons withdrawn, 10s. costs. 41, Broke Road 3s. Costs allowed. 112, Laburnum Street Fined 3s. with 2s., costs. 85, Wilmer Gardens Abatement Order, 6s. costs. 87, Wilmer Gardens Abatement Order, 6s. costs. 89, Wilmer Gardens Abatement Order, 6s. costs. 15, Brunswick Street Abatement Order, 6s. costs. 18, Harriett Square Abatement Order, 6s. costs. 18, Harriett Square Fined 40s., with 3s. costs. 9, Phillip Street Abatement Order, 6s. costs. 11, Phillip Street Abatement Order, 6s. costs. 58 and GO, Brougham Road Summons dismissed, £5 5s. costs. The first two summonses in respect to Nos. 85 and 89, Wilmer Gardens were taken out by inspector Quelch against the owner by reason of there not being a proper and sufficient supply of water; the last three, in respect to Nos. 85, 87 and 89, were or failing to comply with a notice as to the cleansing of the premises. The proceedings in connection with Nos. 25, Hackney Road, 41, Broke Road, and 112, Laburnum Street were in consequence of infringement of the by-laws 101 made by the London County Council under Section 39, (1) of the Public Health (Lond.) Act, 1891. Builders were summoned for failing to comply with by-law No. 14 which requires that " every person who shall intend to construct any water- closet, earth-closet or privy, or to fit or fix in any water-closet any apparatus or any trap or soilpipe connected therewith shall before executing any such work give notice in writing to the clerk of the Sanitary Authority." The summons against the owner of No. 44, Shaftesbury Street was taken out by inspector Lear in consequence of non-compliance with a notice served under the Metropolis Management Act, with respect to the drainage of an area. The owner of No. 18, Harriett Square was summoned by inspector Quelch in the first instance for failing to comply with a notice under the Public Health (Lond.) Act 1891, served by the Sanitary Authority in respect to a nuisance, and in the second, for not complying with an order made by a magistrate for the abatement of the nuisance. The summons in connection with No. 37, Grange Street was taken out by the chief inspector against the owner for non-compliance with the requirements of a notice as to a drain served by the Vestry under the Metropolis Management Act. HOUSES CLOSED. The following list comprises the houses which were closed either in consequence of the service of sanitary notices as being unfit for habitation, or in order to enable the necessary works to be executed to put them in a sanitary condition:— Watsons Place Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7 and 8. Foundry Place Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15 and 16. Boundary Street No. 13. Phillip Street Nos. 9, 11, 13 and 15. Canal Road No. 15. The houses in Watson's Place and Foundry Place were dealt with under the supervision of the chief sanitary inspector. With respect to Foundry Place extensive structural works were executed in connection with the drainage, water closet accommodation and yards, and the light and ventilation were greatly improved, and altogether a most satisfactory piece of sanitary work was executed. The houses in Phillip Street and Canal Road were in an extremely dirty, dilapidated and insanitary state, and it was impossible to carry out the necessary works which were requisite to render the houses fit for habitation whilst they were in occupation. The houses were dealt with in a very satisfactory manner under the supervision of inspector Quelch, being thoroughly cleansed throughout, redrained and provided with new floors properly ventilated. Structural alterations were effected to improve the light and ventilation of the rooms, damp courses were provided in the walls and the yards were properly paved and drained. 102 STANDARD THEATRE. Early in January I visited and inspected this theatre, and the dressing-rooms attached to it, and I was pleased to learn that extensive alterations were to be carried out, including the provision of new dressing-rooms and the re-construction of the drainage and sanitary arrangements generally. From time to time for several years past complaints had been received with reference to nuisances arising in connection with the sanitary conveniences, and a great deal of work had been executed one way and another in endeavouring to obtain adequate light and ventilation of the urinals and water closets. This, however, in many ways was practically impossible owing to the positions in which they had been placed, and they could only be satisfactorily dealt with by removing them to more suitable positions. Temporary measures were taken to prevent as far as possible the recurrence of the nuisances, and frequent visits were made by the sanitary inspector to the premises. Later on in the year the theatre was closed for several weeks, and a large amount of structural work was carried out, most excellent alterations being effected. Under the supervision of the chief sanitary inspector, extensive works were executed in connection with the sanitary arrangements, the drains, water closets, urinals and lavatories, being remodelled, and constructed in accordance with modern requirements, and altogether a satisfactory piece of work was carried out. COMBINED DRAINS. On several occasions during the past three years and especially this year delays in the execution of works in connection with combined drains taking the drainage of two or more houses have arisen, it being contended on the part of owners that such drains were sewers and that it was the duty of the Vestry to repair and keep them in order. In some of these cases owing to the absence of any proof that the combinations were sanctioned by the Vestry or by the old Commissioners of Sewers or Metropolitan Board of Works, the contentions, according to the present state of the law were correct, and it was necessary for the Vestry to repair or relay these combined drains as they were legally sewers. Now, sewers in the Metropolis are vested in the local authority and it is illegal to interfere with any sewer or part of a sewer which is vested in any vestry or district board without the previous permission in writing of the vestry or board. If any person interferes with a sewer vested in a vestry or district board he is subject to a heavy penalty and is liable for the cost of repairing or restoring or making good any damage which may be done to the sewer. It seems to me therefore, that if the multiplication of small sowers belonging to the vestries or district boards, laid upon property belonging to private individuals is allowed to continue, disputes and difficulties will in all probability arise in the future between the owners of the ground in which such sewers are laid and the local authorities to whom they belong, and that it is in the interests of all parties concerned that the definitions of the words "drain" and "sewer" should be so 103 amended that such difficulties and disputes may be avoided. The matter has been engaging the attention of the Metropolitan Local Authorities for some two or three years past, and efforts are now being made to get a Bill through Parliament during the current session which it is hoped will settle the question in a satisfactory manner. HOUSES LET IN LODGINGS. During the year 34 houses, let in lodgings, or occupied by members of more than one family, were ordered to be registered by the vestry under the by-laws. The houses were situate in Georges Square, Essex Street, New Norfolk Street, Harvey Street, Hyde Road, and Kingsland Road. There are now 114 houses on the Vestry's register. Under the Vestry's by-laws a lodging house is exempt from the operation of the by-laws until notice in writing, signed by the vestry clerk, has been delivered to the landlord, to supply the necessary information for the registration of such house by the Vestry, the particulars as to the information required being set out on the Vestry's notices. CUSTOMS AND INLAND REVENUE ACTS. Under the above Acts applications were received from the owners of house property for certificates as to sanitary fitness with respect to 184 sets of dwellings. Dwellings so certified are exempt from inhabited house duty. These were all inspected, and 62 were certified as being so constructed as to afford suitable accommodation for each of the families or persons dwelling therein, due provision being made for their sanitary requirements. Certificates are only granted in such cases where a very satisfactory standard of sanitation is maintained with respect to the living and sleeping rooms, water supply, water closet accommodation, and drainage which must comply with the Vestry's requirements. FOOD CONDEMNED AND DESTROYED. The usual supervision has been exercised by the Vestry's sanitary inspectors over the street markets, and steps were taken to prevent animal and vegetable refuse as far as practicable being deposited in the roads and on the footways. The various food stuffs exposed for sale were generally of most excellent quality and only a few complaints were received from purchasers as to the bad or inferior quality of the articles sold to them. The unsound articles of food which came under the observation of your officers and were condemned and destroyed as unfit for human consumption comprised 18 turkeys, 1 barrel and 1½ cwt. of skate, 1 kit of crabs, 1½ trunks of haddocks, 2 mackerel, 28 lbs. of rabbits, one case of poultry 104 weighing 2 qtrs. 21 lbs., 75½ stone of mutton, 9½ shoulders of mutton, 3 breasts of mutton, 14 lbs. of mutton cuttings, 8 lbs. of beef, 24 lbs. of mixed cuttings, 2 doz. bananas and 14 baskets of cherries. These were burnt in the furnaces of the Vestry's dust destructor. SMOKE NUISANCES. During the year eight intimations were received from the London County Council with reference to the emission of black smoke from chimneys in such quantities as to be a nuisance, and several complaints were received from other sources. In all cases notices were served and the necessary steps taken by inspector Quelch who is charged with this duty to secure the abatement of the nuisances complained of. In all 25 notices were served, and the nuisances abated. SLAUGHTERHOUSES. There are seventeen licensed slaughterhouses in the Parish which were found on inspection to be kept in a satisfactory condition. In one case extensive drainage works were found to be necessary on the premises, though not in connection with the slaughterhouse itself; these were duly carried out under the supervision of the Vestry's sanitary inspector. In thirteen of the seventeen slaughterhouses sheep 'only are killed. COWHOUSES. The licensed cowhouses number fourteen. On inspection twelve were found to be kept in a satisfactory condition and two were fairly satisfactory. In one instance the drainage of the premises was found to be defective and it was necessary to reconstruct the drains. In March the proprietor of a milk shop in connection with a cowhouse was fined £5 and two shillings costs for infringements of the Council's regulations as to milk shops through allowing milk utensils to be kept in a dirty condition. In this case an objection was offered by the Council's inspector on the proprietor's application for a cowhouse license, the license was however granted. It is necessary according to the regulations of the London County Council, and it is a matter of very great importance in the interests of the public that these regulations should be duly observed, that every place used for keeping or storing milk and everything used in connection with the keeping or sale of milk shall always be kept clean; that all utensils and vessels used in any way in connection with milk should always be kept clean and sweet, being as often as may be necessary cleansed with steam or boiling water; and that every cowkeeper or dairyman shall at all times ado??? such precautions as may be necessary to preserve the purity of the milk. 105 BAKEHOUSES. The bakehouses on the Vestry's register for the year 1897, numbered 88, and are situate at the addresses contained in the following list:— Bevenden Street, No. 2. Brunswick Place, No. 13. Brunswick Street, Nos. 100 and 126. Bridport Place, Nos. 2, 65, 88 and 109. Britannia Street, No. 94. Bristow Street, No. 2. Broadway, London Fields, No. 33. Clifton Street, Nos. 32, 63, and 94. Cropley Street, Nos. 13 and 58. Dunloe Street, No. 41. Dunstan Street, No. 25. East Road, Nos. 52, 82, and 103. Essex Street, No. 25. Finsbury Market, No. 10. Goldsmith Bow, Nos. 62, 117, & 136. Great Cambridge Street, No. 35. Hackney Road, Nos. 55, 151, & 305. Haggerston Road, Nos. 9, 48, & 78. Harwar Street, No. 42. High Street, Nos. 2, & 189. Holms Street, No. 38. Hows Street, No. 48. Hoxton Street, Nos. 61, 74,130, 141, 167, 179, 192, 221, & 271. Kiugsland Road, Nos. 41, 77, 164, 200, & 273. Lee Street, No. 33. Leonard Street, No. 91. Mansfield Street, No 43. Marlborough Road, No. 36. Murray Street, No. 92. New North Road, Nos. 59, & 93. Newton Street, No. 46. Nile Street, No. 65. Old Street, No. 249. Paul Street, No. 98. Pearson Street, Nos. 7, & 78. Phillip Street, No. 86. Pitfield Street, Nos. 2, 30, 17, & 76. Pownall Road, No. 102. Shaftsbury Street, No. 87. Shepperton Road, No. 1. Shepherdess Walk, Nos. 5, 28, & 96. St. John's Road, Nos. 16, 39, 86, & 169. Sturt Street, No. 12. Sun Street, No. 37. Union Street, No. 7. Whitmore Road, Nos. 2 and 7. Whiston Street, No. 44. The bakehouses situate at No. 249, Old Street, and No. 2, Pitfield Street, belong to the same business, and for purpose of inspection are reckoned as one. As the result of inspection, 69 were found to be satisfactory, 17 were fairly so, and 2 were unsatisfactory; 25 are situate above the level of the ground adjoining, 57 are under ground, and 6 are partly under ground. During the year the use of two bakehouses was discontinued, and two new bakehouses erected. The latter have been constructed 106 above ground and in accordance with the statutory requirements as to bakehouses. One new bakehouse has been constructed in connection with an existing bakehouse, and another also in connection with an existing bakehouse is in process of construction. Under the supervision of the Vestry's sanitary inspectors drainage works were carried out in connection with six bakehouses; 12 were cleansed and limewashed, and in three other sanitary works were found to be necessary. The unsatisfactory bakehouses have been dealt with and the necessary works were executed to put them in a satisfactory sanitary condition. The following figures are interesting as shewing the results of the work done by your sanitary officers during the past five years in dealing with the condition of the bakehouses in the parish:— TABLE XXVIII. Year. No. of Bakehouses on the Register. On inspection sanitary condition satisfactory. 1892 104 30 1893 99 27 1894 93 50 1895 92 73 1896 88 73 Two things are noticeable from the above figures, firstly a decrease in the number of the bakehouses, and secondly an increase in the number of bakehouses found on inspection to be in a satisfactory sanitary condition. FACTORIES AND WORKSHOPS. A large number of workshops and workplaces have received the attention of the Vestry's sanitary staff, and a large amount of sanitary work in connection with them has been carried out. During the year, written notices were received from the factory inspectors referring to insanitary conditions in forty-three workshops and factories. These were all attended to and the factory inspectors were informed of the steps taken in accordance with the requirements of the Factory and Workshops Act, 1895. 107 The insanitary conditions referred to in the factory inspector's notices, included absence of, or insufficient water-closet accommodation, foul and defective waterclosets, and defective water supply apparatus, want of proper separate sanitary accommodation for the sexes, overcrowding, defective ventilation of work-rooms, dilapidations of walls, ceilings, staircases and roofs, general want of attention to cleanliness and neglect of limewashing of the walls and ceilings of workshops. In several instances in addition to the defects specified in the factory inspector's notices, on the visit of the Vestry's inspectors, further serious insanitary conditions were found to exist, necessitating the execution of extensive works to rectify them. SANITARY ACCOMMODATION IN FACTORIES AND WORKSHOPS. In this Parish we have for some few years past been accustomed to regard in factories, workshops and workplaces a proportion of one water-closet to every fifteen male employees and one to every twelve female employees as a reasonable basis to work upon; where there are very large numbers of employees some reduction in the number of water-closets required being made according to circumstances. From enquiries I have made with regard to other sanitary districts in the Metropolis it appears that in eighteen out of thirty-two districts from which I obtained information, in factories and workshops where males are employed one water-closet is required for every twenty persons employed; in four districts the proportion is one to twelve, in three districts it is one to twenty-five, in three other districts the proportions are one to eighteen, one to sixteen and one to fifteen, and in four districts there are no fixed proportions but each case is dealt with on its own merits. In the case of factories and workshops where females are employed, in 17 districts the proportion is one water-closet to every 20 persons, in 6 it was one to 12, in 2, one to 25, in 3 it was one to 18, one to 16, and one to 15 respectively, and in 4 there were no fixed proportions. These figures give an average for 29 of the sanitary districts in the metropolis (including Shoreditch, and excluding the districts having no fixed proportions) of one water-closet to every 18.8 persons in the case of males, and one to every 18 persons in the case of females. The provision of proper and sufficient water-closet accommodation in places where people are engaged in work—and it should be remembered that a very large proportion of people in many of our large cities and towns spend the major portion of the day-time in factories and workshops, oftentimes too far away to enable them to go home in the dinner hour—is a matter of great importance in connection with the public health. Deficient and improper sanitary accommodation in work places, especially where young persons are employed, exerts a very potent influence in inducing habits of constipation, with all its attendant evil results and the probability of laying the foundation of ill-health in after life. 108 FOOD AND DRUGS ACTS. The reports of the public analyst, Dr. Stevenson, copies of which are appended (see p. 59-69) shew that 184 samples were taken under the above Acts by the Vestry's inspector, Mr. Quelch, and submitted to him for analysis. The number of samples yearly taken, and the percentage of those found adulterated, since 1890 are Contained in. TABLE XXIX. Year. Number of Samples. Percentage of samples found adulterated. 1890 105 29.9 1891 95 31.5 1892 102 32.3 1893 119 20.1 1894 103 18.4 1895 190 17.8 1896 156 17.9 1897 184 22.8 Of 1,054 samples taken during the past eight years 241 or 21.9 per cent. were found to be adulterated or not of the substance, nature and quality demanded by the purchaser. The samples' taken by the inspector during 1897 included 47 of butter, 69 of of milk, 15 of coffee, 15 of whiskey, 9 of gin, 8 of Demerara sugar, 6 of rum, 6 of mustard, 6 of vinegar, 2 of preserved green peas, 1 of sugar and 1 of condensed milk. In addition the public analyst analysed three samples of butter and one of condensed milk which were taken in Shoreditch by private persons. As the result of the analyses proceedings were successfully instituted in 12 instances for adulteration of milk, 9 for butter, 3 for selling sugars other than that known as Demerara which was asked for, 3 for selling whiskey diluted with water in excess of the quantity which may be legally added, 1 for rum, 1 for coffee, and 1 for mustard which was adulterated with flour and coloured with turmeric. In one case of milk adulteration the summons was withdrawn on payment of the Vestry's costs. In one case where the summons had been taken out in respect to the dilution of whiskey with water it was dismissed with two guineas costs against the Vestry, and in another case the summons was dismissed without costs. In one case where gin was found to contain an excess of water the summons was also dismissed without costs. In one case where diluted whiskey had been sold no proceedings were taken as due warning appeared to have been given by a tablet fixed in the bar. In a case where adulterated coffee had been sold no proceedings were taken as the wrapper bore a label that the coffee had been sold as a mixture. In two cases of adulteration, one of milk and one butter, the vendor absconded before the summons could be served. In three instances the analyst did not advise proceedings being takeD. 109 Of the 184 samples taken by the Vestry 42 were found to be adulterated or not of the nature, substance and quality demanded by the purchaser. In addition to these five samples of milk were found to contain a small percentage of water beyond what is normal to milk. Proceedings were taken by the Vestry's inspector in 33 cases, and convictions obtained in 30. Pines were inflicted amounting to £66 7s. 6d., and costs were allowed amounting to £12 1s. In 1894 a Select Committee of the House of Commons was appointed on food products adulteration, and during their sessions a large amount of evidence was collected from various sources upon the subject, the results being embodied in a report presented to Parliament in 1896. Towards the close of the session of 1897, a Bill to amend the Acts relating to the sale of Food and Drugs was introduced into the House of Commons by the Eight Hon. W. H. Chaplin, M.P., and Mr. T. W. Russell, M.P. This Bill has been considered by the Council of the Society of Public Analysts, who, in a report on the Bill, point out that in most essential particulars the recommendations of the Select Committee appear to have been passed over, and attention is drawn to the most important omissions in the Bill, the chief of which is the failure to carry out the recommendation of the Select Committee with respect to the constitution of an authority "who should act as a Court of Reference, upon scientific and other questions arising under the Act, and should be empowered at their discretion to prescribe standards and limits of the quality and purity of food." The Court of Reference suggested, was to consist of "the principal officers of the Government Laboratory, nominees of the Local Government Board and Board of Agriculture, one or more analysts of repute, and representatives of the General Medical Council, the Institute of Chemistry, and the Pharmaceutical Society," and other scientific men whose services may be found necessary. It was also suggested that the trading and manufacturing community should be represented, and that the court should be a standing departmental committee appointed by the Board of Trade. It appears to me that the formation of such a court of reference would be to the advantage of the public authorities and of vendors, in the saving of time and money spent over settling scientific points in connection with cases now fought out in courts of justice. The recommendations contained in the report of the Food Products Adulteration Committee should with as few modifications as possible be embodied in any Bill which may be introduced into Parliament during the Session of 1898. SANITARY STAFF. The following officers comprise the Vestry's stanitary staff:— 1. A medical officer of health. 2. A public analyst. 3. A chief inspector and 5 inspectors. 4. A clerk, an assistant clerk, and a messenger. 5. A disinfecting officer and 2 assistants. 6. A mortuary keeper. 7. A caretaker for the Vestry's shelter. 110 Early in the year the sanitary districts numbered 2 and 5 wore modified with regard to their extents, 32 acres being taken off district No. 5 and added to district No. 2. Thus altered, district No. 2 has its area increased to 141 acres, and its population to 17,975, the number of inhabited houses being estimated at 2,512, and the density of its population at 127.4 persons to the acre. The area of district No. 5 was diminished to 105, and its population to 22,037, the estimated number of inhabited houses being 2,267, and the density of population per acre, 215.7. Mr. Jordan, who had recently boon appointed a sanitary inspector in the parish, was transferred from No. 5 to No. 2 district, Mr. Quelch taking his place as inspector in charge of No. 5 district. In September, Mr. Brown, the inspector in charge of No. 4 district, resigned his appointment on the ground of ill-health, and Mr. Lindon, formerly sanitary inspector at Walthamstow, was, early in November, appointed by the Vestry inspector to take charge of No. 4 district. Mr. Lindon entered on his duties on December 1st. During the months of October and November, the sanitary work of No. 4 district was undertaken by the chief inspector and the inspectors of the adjoining districts. Consequent upon the transference of Mr. Flaxman to another department of the Vestry, Mr. Hayes was appointed to fill his place as assistant clerk. Owing to absence from duty through illness of two of the disinfecting officers, it was necessary to obtain temporary assistance in the work of disinfection two or three times during the year. In Nevember one of the assistant disinfecting officers (W. Blott) died after a short illness, and J. Innes was appointed temporarily to fill his place. In conclusion, I beg to thank the members of the Public Health Committee and sanitary staff for the assistance rendered me in the work of the past year. I have the honour to be, Gentlemen, Your obedient Servant, LEWIS T. ERASER BRYETT, Medical Officer of Health. APPENDIX TO THE REPORT OF THE MEDICAL OFEICER OF HEALTH. 112 TABLE XXX. DEATHS REGISTERED FROM ALL CAUSES IN THE PARISH OF SAINT LEONARD, SHOREDITCH, AND IN EACH SUB-DISTRICT, DURING THE YEAR ENDING DECEMBER 31ST, 1897. Note.—The Deaths of Non-Parishioners occurring in Hospitals, &c., in the Parish, are excluded; and the Deaths of Parishioners occurring in Hospitals, &c., situated in London beyond the limits of the Parish, are included. DEATHS REGISTERED FROM ALL CAUSES DURING THE YEAR ENDING _ DECEMBER 31st, 1897. DEATHS REGISTERED IN EACH SUB-DISTRICT FROM ALL CAUSES. CAUSES OF DEATH. AGES. Total Deaths under Five. Shoreditch South. Hoxton New Town. Hoxton Old Town. Haggerston. Total. Under 1 1 to 5. 5 to 15. 15 to 25. 25 to 35. 35 to 45. 45 to 55. 55 to 60. 60 to 70. 70 to 85. 85 and upwards. (Classes.) I.—ZYMOTIC DISEASES 264 271 46 29 69 79 60 18 26 13 ... 535 126 188 197 363 874 II.—PARASITIC „ 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... 1 1 III.—DIETIC 1 ... ... ... ... 5 0 2 2 1 ... 1 2 4 4 8 18 IV.—CONSTITUTIONAL DISEASES ... 3 5 4 3 . 13 25 10 19 11 1 3 15 20 18 41 94 V.—LOCAL 293 157 27 34 47 100 100 81 168 126 9 450 223 259 276 444 1202 VI.—DEVELOPMENTAL 90 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 5 64 19 90 30 46 51 51 178 VII.—VIOLENT DEATHS 40 9 6 5 7 12 11 2 9 4 ... 49 15 26 26 38 105 VIII.—NOT SPECIFIED 100 13 2 1 1 4 7 4 17 4 1 113 24 32 38 60 154 Total 789 453 85 73 128 213 269 117 246 223 30 1242 435 575 610 1006 2626 113 ??? (1) Miasmatic. Small Pox ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... 1 Measles 26 81 4 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 107 13 24 26 48 111 Scarlet Fever (Scarlatina) 3 24 4 .. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 27 6 5 2 18 31 Diphtheria (including Membranous Croup) 3 58 19 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 61 13 17 20 30 80 Influenza 1 ... ... 1 2 3 3 1 1 4 ... 1 3 3 7 3 16 Whooping Cough 20 39 ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 59 9 15 9 27 60 Typhus ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Enteric or Typhoid Fever ... ... 3 6 5 4 1 ... ... ... ... ... 1 5 4 9 19 Simple Continued Fever ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Other Miasmatic Diseases ... 1 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... 2 2 (2) Diarrhœl Diseases. Diarrhœa and Dysentery 162 30 3 ... ... ... 4 1 7 4 ... 192 26 42 58 85 211 Simple Cholera (Choleraic Diarrhœa) ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Asiatic Cholera ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... (3) Malarial Diseases. Ague ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... .. ... ... ... ... ... ... Remittent Fever ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... (4) Zoogenous Diseases. Hydrophobia ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Glanders ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Cowpox and effects of Vaccination ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Other Diseases ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... • • ••• ... ... (5) Tubercular Diseases. Tabes Mesenterica 18 5 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 23 3 1 8 11 23 Phthisis 5 2 2 18 57 68 51 15 16 3 ... 7 42 48 50 97 237 Tubercular Meningitis 7 22 3 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 29 3 11 6 12 32 Other forms, Scrofula 7 9 4 2 3 2 ... 1 1 ... ... 16 4 9 5 11 29 (6) Venereal Diseases. • Syphilis 9 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 9 1 2 ... 6 9 Gonorrhœa, Stricture of Urethra ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... (7) Septic Diseases. Erysipelas 2 ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... 2 ... 2 1 3 1 ... 5 Pyaemia, Septicaemia 1 ... 2 ... 2 2 ... ... 1 ... ... 1 1 2 1 4 8 Puerperal Fever ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Carbuncle ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 114 DEATHS REGISTERED FROM ALL CAUSES DURING THE YEAR ENDING DECEMBER, 1897. DEATHS REGISTERED IN EACH SUB-DISTRICT FROM ALL CAUSES. CAUSES OF DEATH. AGES. Total Deaths under Five. Shoreditch South. Hoxton New Town. Hoxton Old Town. Haggerston. Total. Under 1. 1 to 5. 5 to 15. 15 to 25. 25 to 35. 35 to 45. 45 to 55. 55 to 60. 60 to 70. 70 to 85. 85 and upwards. II.—PARASITIC DISEASES. Thrush and other Vegetable Diseases 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... 1 1 Worms, Hydatids, and other animal parasites ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... III.— DIETIC DISEASES Privation 1 ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... 1 1 2 Want of Breast Milk ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Scurvy ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Alcoholism a. Del. Tremens ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 1 b. Intemperance ... ... ... ... ... 5 5 2 2 1 ... ... 2 4 3 6 15 IV.—CONSTITUTIONAL DISEASES. Gout ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... l ... ... ... ... 1 ... 1 2 Rheumatic Fever and Rheumatism of Heart ... ... 3 2 1 4 5 ... ... ... ... ... 3 4 2 6 15 Rheumatism ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Cancer ... ... 1 ... ... 8 16 10 16 10 1 ... 9 11 14 28 62 Rickets ... 3 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 3 2 1 ... ... 3 Anaemia, Chlorosis, &c. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Leucocythæmia ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Diabetes ... ... 1 1 ... 1 2 ... 1 ... ... ... 1 2 ... 3 6 Other Constitutional Diseases ... ... ... 1 2 ... 1 ... 1 1 ... ... ... 1 2 3 6 V.-LOCAL DISEASES. (1) Diseases of the Nervous System. Inflammation of the Brain or Membranes 10 5 3 1 1 1 1 ... ... 1 ... 15 2 7 7 7 23 Hydrocephalus 1 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2 1 ... ... 1 2 Apoplexy, Brain Paralysis, Hemiplegia ... ... ... ... 2 11 27 16 23 17 1 ... 19 27 23 28 97 Insanity, General Paralysis of the Insane ... ... ... ... 3 8 6 2 4 5 ... ... 6 1 5 16 28 Chorea ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Epilepsy ... ... 1 1 ... 1 3 1 1 ... ... ... 2 1 1 4 8 115 V.—LOCAL DISEASES—continued. (1) Diseases of the Nervous System—cont. Convulsions 99 16 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 115 19 30 29 37 115 Dentition 11 5 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 16 3 2 4 7 16 Diseases of Spinal Cord ... ... ... ... ... ... 4 2 ... ... ... ... ... ... 2 4 6 Other Nervous Diseases 1 ... ... ... 1 2 3 1 ... ... ... 1 3 2 1 2 8 (2) Diseases of Circulatory System. Pericarditis 1 1 1 ... ... ... 1 ... 1 1 ... 2 2 ... 3 1 6 Acute Endocarditis ... ... ... ... ... 1 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 1 2 Valvular Disease of the Heart ... ... 4 4 4 3 8 7 2 8 ... ... 4 10 10 16 40 Other Diseases of the Heart ... ... 4 6 7 12 32 12 28 10 ... ... 26 21 28 36 111 Aneurism ... ... ... ... 1 2 2 1 2 ... ... ... ... 3 2 3 8 Other Diseases of Blood Vessels ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... 1 1 ... ... ... ... 3 ... 3 (3) Respiratory Organs. Laryngitis 1 3 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 4 ... ... 2 2 4 Bronchitis and Emphysema 69 40 3 ... 2 8 27 18 57 56 5 109 66 66 57 96 285 Pleurisy 1 ... ... 2 1 1 ... 1 3 1 ... 1 1 ... 6 3 10 Pneumonia 64 79 5 4 10 17 25 6 11 10 3 143 34 51 48 101 234 Asthma ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... 2 ... ... 2 ... ... 1 3 Other Lung Diseases ... ... 1 ... ... 1 1 2 1 ... ... ... ... ... 3 3 6 (4) Digestive Organs. Quinsy ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Diseases of Gullet and Stomach 3 ... 1 ... ... 2 ... 1 3 1 ... 3 3 2 2 4 11 Enteritis 28 5 1 ... ... 2 1 1 3 ... ... 33 5 6 8 22 41 Peritonitis ... ... 3 3 3 3 1 1 5 ... ... ... 4 3 1 11 19 Hernia ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... 1 Obstruction of Intestines 3 ... ... 1 2 1 ... 2 3 .2 ... 3 4 1 4 5 14 Disease of Pancreas ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Cirrhosis of Liver ... ... ... ... 4 2 ... 1 6 3 ... ... 3 3 7 6 19 Ascites ... ... ... ... ... ... 3 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Other Liver Diseases and Jaundice ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 2 1 ... ... ... 1 1 2 4 Disease of Spleen ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... (5) Urinary Organs. Bright's Disease (Nephritis) ... ... ... 8 4 13 8 4 6 6 ... ... 11 10 9 19 49 Other Diseases of the Urinary System ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... 1 ... 1 2 Diseases of Bladder or Prostate ... ... ... ... ... 1 1 ... 3 1 ... ... ... 1 4 2 6 I1 116 DEATHS REGISTERED FROM ALL CAUSES DURING THE YEAR ENDING DECEMBER 31st, 1897. DEATHS REGISTERED IN EACH SUB-DISTRICT FROM ALL CAUSES. CAUSES OF DEATH. AGES. Total Deaths under Five. Shoreditch South. Hoxton New Town. Hoxton Old Town. Haggerston. Total. Under 1. 1 to 5. 5 to 15. 15 to 25. 25 to 35. 35 to 45. 45 to 55. 55 to 60. 60 to 70. 70 to 85. 85 and upwards. V—LOCAL DISEASES—continued. (6) Diseases of Reproductive System. a. Organs of Generation— Male ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Female ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... 1 ... ... ... ... 2 ... ... 2 b. Parturition— Abortion, Miscarriage ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Puerperal Convulsions ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Placenta Plævia, Flooding ... ... ... ... ... 2 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... 1 2 Other accidents of child-birth ... ... ... 1 1 4 ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 2 2 1 6 (7) Diseases of Bones and Joints. Synovitis, Arthritis, Ostitis, Periostitis ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Caries and Necrosis ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 1 ... ... ... 1 Other Diseases of Bones and Joints ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... 1 (8) Diseases of Integumentary System. Ulcer ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Other Skin Diseases I ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... 1 ... ... 1 (9) Diseases of Organs of Special Sense. Ear ... 1 ... 3 ... 1 1 1 ... ... ... 1 ... 4 2 1 7 Eye ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... . . . 1 ... ... ... 1 (10) Diseases of Glandular Organs ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... VI.—DEVELOPMENTAL DISEASES. Premature Birth (Debility at Birth) 70 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 70 8 19 17 26 70 Atelectasis 10 ... ... ... ... • . • ... ... ... ... ... 10 2 2 3 3 10 Congenital Malformations 10 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 10 3 1 4 2 10 Old Age ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 5 64 19 ... 17 24 2/ 20 88 117 VII.—VIOLENT DEATHS, &c. (1) Accident or Negligence. By Falls ... 3 2 1 2 5 5 ... 2 1 ... 3 2 6 4 9 21 „ Railways ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... „ Horses and Vehicles ... ... 2 2 1 ... ... 1 1 3 ... ... 2 2 2 4 10 ,, Wounds—Gunshot, Cut, and Stab ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... 1 In Building operations ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... „ Conflagrations ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... By Burns and Scalds 1 4 1 ... ... 2 1 ... l ... ...... 5 2 1 6 1 10 „ Poison ... ... ... ... ... 2 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2 1 3 „ Drowning ... ... 1 1 ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... 2 1 ... 3 „ Suffocation 3 ... ... ... 1 1 1 ... ... ... ••• 3 ... 2 1 3 6 ,, Suffocation (in bed) 35 2 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 37 5 10 6 16 37 ,, Negligence at Birth ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Otherwise 1 ... ... ... 1 ... 2 1 ... ... ... 1 ... 3 1 1 5 (2) Homicide. Murder ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... 1 Manslaughter ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... (3) Suicide. Wounds—Gunshot, Cut, Stab ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... 1 Poison ... ... ... ... 1 1 ... ... 1 ... ... ... 1 ... 1 1 3 Drowning ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Hanging ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... 1 ... 1 ... 2 Otherwise ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2 ... ... ... ... ... ... 2 2 (4) Execution. Hanging ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... VIII.—DEATHS FROM ILL-DEFINED AND NOT SPECIFIED CAUSES. Marasmus 72 10 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 82 10 19 22 31 82 Debility, Atrophy, Inanition 23 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 3 ... 1 23 6 5 6 10 27 Mortification l ... ... ... ••• ... ... ... 2 2 ... 1 ... 2 1 2 5 Dropsy ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 1 Haemorrhage ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... 1 Malignant Disease ... ... ... 1 1 1 2 2 6 ... ... ... 3 3 3 4 13 Tumour ... 1 ... ... ... 2 ... 1 1 ... ... 1 3 ... ... 2 5 Abscess ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... 1 Other causes not specified 4 2 2 ... ... ... 4 1 4 2 ... 6 2 3 4 10 19 Total 789 453 85 73 128 213 269 117 246 223 30 1242 435 575 610 1006 2626 118 TABLE XXXI. SUMMARY OF THE DEATHS IN THE PARISH OF SAINT LEONARD, SHOREDITCH, AND IN EACH SUB-DISTRICT, FOR THE YEAR 1897. CAUSES OF DEATH. DEATHS IN EACH SUB-DISTRICT. Shoreditch South. Hoxton New Town. Hoxton Old Town. Haggerston. Total. I.—ZYMOTIC DISEASES. 1. Miasmatic Diseases 45 70 68 137 320 2. Diarrhœal ,, 26 42 58 85 211 3. Malarial ,, ... ... ... ... ... 4. Zoogenous ,, ... ... ... ... ... 5. Tubercular ,, 52 69 69 131 321 6. Venereal „ 1 2 ... 6 9 7. Septic ,, 2 5 2 4 13 Total Zymotic Diseases 126 188 197 363 874 II.—PARASITIC DISEASES ... ... ... 1 1 III.— DIETIC „ 2 4 4 8 18 IV.—CONSTITUTIONAL „ 15 20 18 41 94 V.—LOCAL DISEASES. 1. Diseases of the Nervous System 55 70 72 106 303 2. ,, ,, Circulatory ,, 32 34 47 57 170 3. ,, ,, Respiratory Organs 103 117 116 206 542 4. ,, ,, Digestive ,, 19 16 24 50 109 5. ,, ,, Urinary ,, 11 11 13 22 57 6. ,, ,, Generative System 1 5 2 2 10 7. ,, ,, Bones and Joints 1 1 ... ... 2 8. „ ,, Integumentary System .. 1 ... ... 1 9. „ „ Organs of Special Sense 1 4 2 1 8 10. ,, ,, Glandular Organs ... ... ... ... ... Total Deaths Local Diseases 223 259 276 444 1202 VI.—DEVELOPMENTAL DISEASES 30 46 51 51 178 VII.—VIOLENT DEATHS. 1. Accident or Negligence 12 26 23 35 96 2. Homicide 1 ... ... ... 1 3. Suicide 2 ... 3 3 8 Total Violent Deaths 15 26 26 38 105 VIII.—CAUSES ILL-DEFINED 24 32 38 60 154 Total Deaths from all causes 435 575 610 1006 2626 119 TABLE XXXII.—ANALYSIS AND COMPARISON OF LONDON AND SHOREDITCH BIRTHS AND DEATHS FOR THE YEAR ENDING 31st DECEMBER, 1897. Districts. Estimated population 1897. BIRTHS Annual Rate per 1000 persons living. Deaths under 1 year to 1000 Births. percentage to total deaths. TOTAL DEATHS DURING DEATHS FROM Inquest Cases. Deaths in Public Institutions. Uncertified Causes of Death. Principal Zymotic Diseases. Small-Pox. Measles. Scarlet Fever. Diphtheria Whooping Cough. *Fever. Diarrhœa. Tubercular Diseases. Violence. 1894 1895. 1896. 1897. London 4,463,169 30.0 17.8 19.8 18.6 17.7 2.58 0.00 0.43 0.17 0.50 0.41 0.12 0.91 0.78 159.0 9.3 29.1 0.6 Shoreditch §120,708 35.0 20.14 23.43 21.6 21.7 4.2 0.00 0.91 0.25 0.64 0.49 0.15 1.74 2.65 0.86 186.3 12.3 28.5 - Sub-Districts. Shoreditch South 17,575 31.3 15.9 20.6 21.1 24.7 3.8 — 0.73 0.34 0.73 0.51 0.05 1.46 2.95 0.85 186.9 10.8 41.1 — Hoxton New Town 28,280 33.3 20.2 25.3 20.8 20.3 3.7 0.03 0.84 0.17 0.60 0.51 0.17 1.48 2.43 0.91 178.7 15.8 25.9 — Hoxton Old Town 27,505 35.9 19.1 22.4 19.9 22.1 4.3 — 0.94 0.07 0.72 0.32 0.14 2.10 2.50 0.94 189.1 13.7 23.1 - Haggerston 47,348 36.9 22.5 24.3 23.3 21.2 4.5 — 1.01 0.37 0.63 1.56 0.19 1.79 2.76 0.80 178.3 10.2 27.4 - * Fever includes Typhus, Typhoid, and continued Fevers. §The inhabitants of the Holborn Union Workhouse, which is situated in Hoxton New Town, are not included. Note.—Where the deaths under any heading are too few to express as a rate per 1000 within two places of decimals, 0.00 is inserted where no deaths have occurred, a line is placed in the space under the heading. 120 TABLE XXXIII. ANALYSIS of the Cases Treated by the District Medical Officers of the Parish during the Year ending December 31st, 1897. Diseases. Diseases. All Causes 3526 38 Congenital malformations - ZYMOTIC DISEASES. 39 Old age 111 40 Apoplexy 5 1 Small Pox Vaccinated — 41 Epilepsy 22 Unvaccinated — 42 Convulsions 9 No Statement — 43 Other diseases of brain and nervous system 194 2 Measles 58 3 Scarlet fever 28 44 Diseases of organs of special sense 18 4 Typhus — 5 Relapsing fever -— 45 Diseases of circulatory system 168 6 Influenza 60 7 Whooping Cough 25 46 Laryngitis 9 8 Diphtheria 4 47 Bronchitis 832 9 Simple, Continued, and illdefined fever 9 48 Pneumonia 44 10 Enteric fever 7 49 Pleurisy 17 11 Simple cholera — 50 Other respiratory diseases 17 12 Diarrhœa, Dysentery 117 51 Dentition 10 13 Remittent fever 1 52 Quinzy, sore throat 33 14 Hydrophobia — 53 Enteritis 24 15 Glanders — 54 Peritonitis 8 16 Cow pox and effects of vaccination - 55 Diseases of liver 3 17 Venereal affections 19 56 Other diseases of digestive system 193 18 Erysipelas 18 19 Pyaemia and Septicæmia — 57 Diseases of lymphatic system and ductless glands 18 20 Puerperal fever — 21 Tabes Mesenterica 1 58 Diseases of urinary system 40 22 Tubercular Meningitis 1 23 Phthisis 147 59 Diseases of generative system 38 24 Scrofula, Tuberculosis 12 25 Other Zymotic diseases 23 60 Accidents of childbirth 4 DISEASES OTHER THAN ZYMOTIC. 61 Diseases of locomotive system 112 26 Thrush 1 62 Diseases of integumentary system 74 27 Worms and other parasitic diseases 6 28 Starvation, want of breast-milk 6 VIOLENCE.—Accident. 29 Alcoholism 19 30 Rheumatic fever and Rheumatism of heart 35 63 Fracture and contusion 28 64 Gun shot wounds — 31 Rheumatism 276 65 Cut, stab 1 32 Gout 50 66 Burn or scald 2 33 Rickets 4 67 Poison 11 34 Cancer 15 68 Drowning — 35 Other constitutional diseases 73 69 Suffocation — 36 Premature birth - 70 Otherwise 55 37 Atelectasis - 71 Other Causes 411 121 (A.) TABLE OF DEATHS during the 52 Weeks ending December 31st, 1897, in the Metropolitan Sanitary District of Saint Leonard, Shoreditch, classified, according to Diseases, Ages, and Localities. Names of Localities adopted for the purpose of these statistics; public institutions being shown as separate localities. (Columns for Population and Births are in Table B.) (a) At all ages. (b) Mortality from all causes, at subjoined ages. (i) Mortality from subjoined causes, Distinguishing Death of Children under Five Years of Age. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 Under 1 year. (c) 1 and under 5 (d) 5 and under 15 (e) 15 and under 25 (f) 25 and under 65 (g) 65 and wards. (h) Smallpox. Scarlatina. Diphtheria. Membranous Croup. Fevers. Cholera. Erysipelas. Measles. Whooping Cough. Diarrhæa and Dysentery. Rheumatic Fever. Ague. Phthisis. Bronchitis, Pneumonia and Pleurisy Heart Disease. Injuries. All other Diseases Total. Typhus. Enteric or Typhoid. Continued. Relapsing. Puerperal. St. Leonard, Shoreditch 1,879 718 355 53 36 508 209 Under 5 .. 5 20 4 .. .. .. .. .. .. 2 105 53 182 .. .. 8 227 2 45 419 1072 5 upwds. .. 1 5 1 .. 9 .. .. .. .. 2 4 1 11 10 .. 139 178 98 32 316 807 Shoreditch Infirmary and Workhouse. 381 26 4 1 10 206 134 Under 5 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 4 4 .. .. .. 3 .. .. 18 30 5 upwds. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 .. .. 7 .. .. 76 77 39 1 150 351 Holborn Union Workhouse 226 21 4 1 .. 45 155 Under 5 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 2 1 2 .. .. .. 1 .. 2 17 25 5 upwda. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 2 .. .. 3 .. .. 7 32 2 7 148 201 Hoxton House Asylum 54 .. .. .. .. 38 16 Under 5 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 5 upwds. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 6 4 5 1 38 54 North Eastern Hospital 114 55 46 12 1 .. .. Under 5 .. .. 9 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 .. .. 8 .. .. 1 23 1 1 56 100 5 upwds. .. .. 2 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 1 2 1 7 14 Convent Hospital 8 .. 3 3 2 .. .. Under 5 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 2 .. .. 1 3 5 upwds. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 .. 4 5 Totals 2,662 820 412 70 49 797 514 Under 5 .. 5 29 4 .. .. .. .. .. .. 3 108 58 196 .. .. 9 256 3 48 511 1,230 5 upwds. .. 1 7 1 .. 9 .. .. .. .. 5 4 1 21 10 .. 229 292 147 42 663 1,432 The subjoined numbers have also been taken in judging of the above records of mortality. Deaths occurring outside the district among persons belonging thereto. 356 39 78 31 25 141 42 Under 5 .. 22 35 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 2 6 .. .. .. 13 1 4 33 117 5 upwds. 1 3 13 .. .. 10 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 5 .. 18 22 21 27 119 239 Deaths occurring within the district among persons not belonging thereto. 392 70 37 15 2 93 175 Under 5 .. .. 7 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 2 1 10 .. .. 2 16 2 3 65 109 5 upwds. .. .. 2 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 2 .. .. 2 .. .. 17 38 11 13 198 283 122 FOR THE YEAR 1897. (B.) TABLE OF POPULATION, BIRTHS, and of NEW CASES OF INFECTIONS SICKNESS, coming to the knowledge of the Medical Officer of Health, during the Year ending December. 31st, 1897, in the Me???ropolitan Sanitary District of Saint Leonard, Shoreditch, classified according to Diseases, Ages, and Localities. Names of Localities adopted for the purpose of these statistics; Public Institutions. being shown as separate localities. Population at all ages. Registered Births. Aged under 5 or over 5. New Cases of Sickness in each Locality coming to the knowledge of the Medical Officer of Health. Number of such Cases Removed from their Homes in the several Localities for Treatment in Isolation Hospital. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Census 1891. Estimated to middle of 1897. Smallpox. Scarlatina. Diphtheria Membranous Croup. Typhus. Fevers. Cholera. Erysipelas. Total. Smallpox. Scarlatina. Diphtheria. Membranous Croup. Fevers. Cholera. Erysipelas. Total. Enteric or Typhoid. Continued Relapsing. Puerperal. Typhus. Enteric or Typhoid. Continued Relapsing Puerperal (a) (b) (c) (d) (e) Sub-Districts— (1) Shoreditch South 20,098 17,285 551 Under 5 .. 32 23 2 .. 1 .. .. .. .. .. 58 .. 19 19 1 .. 1 .. .. .. .. .. 40 5 upwards .. 60 24 .. .. 16 .. .. .. .. 27 127 .. 50 18 .. .. 7 .. .. .. .. .. 75 (2) Hoxton New Town 29,313 28,280 943 Under 5 .. 43 31 4 .. .. .. .. .. 7 85 .. 35 21 2 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 58 5 upwards 1 79 36 .. .. 21 1 .. .. .. 35 173 1 61 29 .. .. 15 1 .. .. .. .. 107 (3) Hoxton Old Town 28,354 27,505 990 Under 5 .. 50 41 4 .. 2 .. .. .. .. 5 102 .. 34 32 1 .. 1 .. .. .. .. .. 68 5 upwards .. 72 49 .. .. 22 .. .. .. .. 45 188 .. 52 30 .. .. 12 .. .. .. .. .. 94 (4) Haggerston 46,244 46,088 1,672 Under 5 .. 108 56 8 .. 1 .. .. .. .. 9 182 .. 87 33 4 .. 1 .. .. .. .. .. 125 5 upwards .. 179 83 .. .. 44 .. .. 1 .. 70 377 .. 136 52 .. .. 30 .. .. .. .. .. 218 Shoreditch Infirmary and Workhouse .. 1,200 77 Under 5 .. 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 5 upwards .. 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 26 27 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Holborn Union Workhouse .. 1,350 92 Under 5 .. 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 5 upwards .. 2 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 7 10 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Hoxton House .. 250 .. Under 5 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 5 upwards .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. North-Eastern Hospital for Children .. 60 .. Under 5 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 5 upwards .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Convent Hospital .. 40 .. Under 5 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 5 upwards .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Total 124,009 122,058 4,325 Under 5 .. 235 151 18 .. 4 .. .. .. .. 21 429 .. 175 105 8 .. 3 .. .. .. .. .. 291 5 upwards 1 393 192 .. .. 103 1 .. 1 1 210 902 1 299 129 .. .. 64 1 .. .. .. .. 494 123 The Vestry of the Parish of St. Leonard, Shoreditch, in the County of London. ALE OF FOOD AND DRUGS ACT, 1875.|.L/L. The Report of the Analyst appointed under the above Act for this County, of the number of articles of Food, Drink, and Drugs, which have been received and analysed by such Analyst, specifying the nature and kind of foreign ingredients detected in such articles, &c., during the Quarter ending the 31st day of March, 1897. Date of receipt by Analyst of the Article to be Analysed. Name of Person from whom the Article was received. Number marked on the parcel containing the Article by which it is to be identified by the Inspector in lieu of the name of the person from whom it was procured. Article received. Fines and Costs imposed. Result of Analysis specifying the nature and kind of foreign ingredients detected in such article (if any). Observations. Fee payable for Analysing such Article. 1897. £ s. d. £ s. d. Jan. 21 C. H. Quelch Q 16 Preserved Green Peas Copper, 0.24 grains per pound 0 10 0 „ „ „ „ Q 17 Butter Genuine Not decomposed 0 10 0 „ „ „ „ Q 18 Preserved Green Peas Copper, 0.27 grains per pound 0 10 0 Feb. 4 „ „ Q 19 Milk Genuine Not decomposed 0 10 0 „ „ „ „ Q 20 Milk Genuine Not decomposed 0 10 0 „ „ „ „ Q 21 Milk Genuine Not decomposed 0 10 0 „ „ „ „ Q 22 Milk Genuine, of low quality Not decomposed 0 10 0 „ „ „ „ Q 23 Milk Genuine Not decomposed 0 10 0 „ „ „ „ Q 24 Milk Genuine Not decomposed 0 10 0 „ „ „ „ Q 25 Butter Genuine Not decomposed 0 10 0 „ „ „ „ Q 25 Butter Genuine Not decomposed 0 10 0 „ „ „ „ Q 27 Butter Genuine Not decomposed 0 10 0 „ „ „ „ Q 28 Butter Genuine Not decomposed 0 10 0 „ „ „ „. Q 29 Butter Genuine Not decomposed 0 10 0 „ „ „ „ Q 30 Butter Genuine Not decomposed 0 10 0 Feb. 5 John More, 19, Monument Station Buildings 18 Butter Foreign fats, i.e., fats other than butter fat 73 per cent. Water, curd, and salt 24 per cent. Butter fat not exceeding 3 per cent. A sample of margarine 0 10 (paid) 6 Feb. 18 C. H. Quelch Q 31 Milk Genuine, of low quality Not decomposed 0 10 0 „ „ „ „ Q 32 Milk Genuine Not decomposed 0 10 0 „ „ „ „ Q 33 Milk Deficient in butter fat 12 per cent. Not decomposed 0 10 0 „ „ „ „ Q 34 Milk Genuine Not decomposed 0 10 0 124 Analyst's Report for the Quarter ending the 31st day of March, 1897—continued. Date of receipt by Analyst of the Article to be Analysed. Name of Person from whom the Article was received. Number marked on the parcel containing the Article by which it is to be identified by the Inspector in lieu of the name of the person from whom it was procured. Article received. Fines and Costs imposed. Result of Analysis specifying the nature and kind of foreign ingredient detected in such article (if any). Observations. Fee payable for Analyling such Artices. 1897. £ s. d. £ s. d. Feb. 18 C. H. Quelch Q 35 Milk .... 3 percent. of water beyond the normal, also deficient in butter fat 9 per cent. Not decomposed 0 10 0 „ „ „ „ Q 36 Milk .... Genuine Not decomposed 0 10 0 „ „ „ „ Q 37 Butter .... Genuine Not decomposed 0 10 0 „ „ „ „ Q 38 Butter .... Genuine Not decomposed 0 10 0 „ „ „ „ Q 39 Butter .... Genuine Not decomposed 0 10 0 „ „ „ „ Q 40 Butter .... Genuine Not decomposed 0 10 0 „ „ „ „ Q 41 Butter .... Genuine Not decomposed 0 10 0 „ „ „ „ Q 42 Butter .... Genuine Not decomposed 0 10 0 March 20 „ „ Q 43 Coffee .... Genuine Not decomposed 0 10 0 „ „ „ „ Q 44 Coffee F2 0 0 Chicory 30 per cent., Coffee 70 per cent. ................ 0 10 0 C0 12 6 „ „ „ „ Q 45 Coffee .... Genuine ................ 0 10 0 „ „ „ „ Q 46 Coffee .... Genuine ................ 0 10 0 „ „ „ „ Q 47 Coffee .... Genuine ................ 0 10 0 „ „ „ „ Q 48 Coffee .... Chicory 45 per cent. Coffee 55 per cent. ................ 0 10 0 „ „ „ „ Q 49 Coffee .... Genuine ................ 0 10 0 Q 50 .. Coffee . .. Genuine n 10 o yy yy y y yy .. Q 51 Coffee .... Genuine 0 10 ft yy y yy yy .. Q 52 .. Sugar .... Genuine 0 10 0 »» >> n yy .. Q 53 .. Demerara FO 7 6 Sugar crystals, 99^ per cent, foreign.. The sample was one of dyed sugar crystals.not the article known as genuine Demerara sugar .. 0 10 0 Sugar cO 12 6 dye a trace. Moisture J per cent. >» »* yy yy • s! *. Demerara Sugar .... Genuine n in 0 »• »> »» :y .... . Q 55 .. Demerara Sugar .... Genuine o 10 0 yy yy » . . c .. Q 56 Demerara Sugar .... .... Genuine 0 10 0 125 Analyst's Report for the Quarter ending the 31st day of March, 1897—continued. Date of receipt by Analyst of the Article to be Analysed. Name of Person from whom the Article was received. Number marked on the parcel containing the Article by which it is to be identified by the Inspector in lieu of the name of the person from whom it was procured. Article received. Fines and Costs imposed. Result of Analysis specifying the nature and kind of foreign ingredients detected in such article (if any). Observations Fee payable for Analysing such Article. 1897. £ s. d. £ s. d. March 20 C. H. Quelch Q 57 Demerara Sugar f0 7 6 Sugar crystals 99½per cent. Foreign due a trace The sample was one of Dyed sugar 0 10 0 c0 12 6 Moisture ¼ per cent stals, not the article known as genuine Demerara Sugar Demerara f0 7 6 Sugar crystals, 99¼ per cent. Foreign The sample was one 0 10 0 Sugar c0 12 6 dye a trace. Moisture ¾ per cent.. of Dyed Sugar crystals, not the article known as genuine „ „ „ „ Q 59 Demerara Sugar Genuine Demerara Sugar 0 10 0 „ „ „ „ Q 60 Demerara Sugar Genuine 0 10 0 March 25 C. H. Quelch Q 61 Milk Added water 8 per cent., boracic acid or a preparation thereof a trace The Boracic Acid or preparation thereof is an added preservative 0 10 0 „ „ „ „ Q 62 Milk F1 0 0 Added water 11 per cent. 0 10 0 „ „ c0 2 0 „ „ „ „ Q 63 Milk Genuine 0 10 0 „ „ „ „ Q 64 Milk f2 0 0 Added water 13 per cent. 0 10 0 c0 12 6 „ „ „ „ Q 65 Butter f5 0 0 Foreign fats, i.e. fats other than A sample of margarine 0 10 0 c0 2 0 butter fats 54 per cent.,water, curd and salt 11 per cent, butter fat not exceeding 35 per cent. „ „ „ „ Butter Foreign fats, i.e , fats other than butter fats 82 per cent., water, curd and salt 13 per cent., butter fat not exceeding 5 per cent. A sample of margarine 0 10 0 Q 67 Butter f1 0 0 Foreign fats, i.e., fats other than Asample of margarine 0 10 0 c0 2 0 butter fat, 80 per cent , water, curd and salt 15 per cent., butter fat not exceeding 5 per cent. „ „ „ „ Q 68 Butter Genuine 0 10 0 126 Analyst's Report for the Quarter ending the 31st day of March, 1S97—continued. Date of receipt by Analyst of the Article to be Analysed. Name of Person from whom the Article was received. Number marked on the parcel con taining the Article by which it is to be identified by the Inspector in lieu of the name of the person from whom it was procured. Article received Fines and Costs imposed. Result of Analysis specifying the nature and kind of foreign ingredients, detected in such article (if any). Observations. Fee payable for Analysing such Article. 1897 March 30 C. H. Quelch Q 69 Milk Genuine Not decomposed 0 10 0 „ „ „ „ Q 70 Milk F 0 0 0 Added water 27 per cent. Not decomposed 0 10 0 C0 12 6 „ „ „ „ Q 71 Milk .... 2 per cent. of water beyond the normal Not decomposed 0 10 0 „ „ „ „ Q 72 Milk .... 1 per cent. of water beyond the normal Not decomposed 0 10 0 „ „ „ „ Q 73 Milk f8 0 0 Added water 24 per cent. Not decomposed 0 10 0 „ „ „ „ c0 2 0 „ „ „ „ Q 74 Milk .... 4 per cent. of water beyond the normal Not decomposed 0 10 0 Chemical Laboratory, Guy's Hospital, S.E. Note. Total number of samples analysed during the Quarter, 60. THOMAS STEVENSON, M.D., Public Analyst. 127 SALE OF FOOD AND DRUGS ACT, 1875. The Report of the Analyst appointed under the above Act for this County, of the number of articles of Food, Drink, and Drugs which have been received and analysed by such Analyst, specifying the nature and kind of foreign ingredients detected in such articles, &c., during the Quarter ending the 30th day of June, 1897. Date of receipt by Analyst of the Article to be Analysed. Name of Person from whom the Article was received. Number marked on the parcel containing the Article by which it is to be identified by the Inspector in lien of the name of the person from whom it was procured. Article received. Fines and Costs imposed. Result of Analysis specifying the nature and kind of foreign ingredients, detected in such article (if any). Observations. Fee payable for Analysing such Article. 1897. £ s. d. £ s. d. April 1 Daniel Burgess, 65, Pitfield Street, Hoxton None Condensed Milk Genuine sweetened condensed skimmed milk 0 10 6 April 29 C. H. Quelch Q 75 Milk .... Deficient in butter fat 10 per cent. Not decomposed 0 10 0 „ „ „ „ Q 76 Milk .... Genuine Not decomposed 0 10 0 „ „ „ „ Q 77 Milk .... Boracic acid or a preparation thereof traces. Artificial colouring matter, traces Not decomposed 0 10 0 „ „ „ „ Milk .... Genuine Not decomposed 0 10 0 „ „ „ „ Q 79 Milk .... 4 per cent. water beyond the normal. Not decomposed 0 10 0 „ „ „ „ Q 80 Milk .... Artificial colouring matter traces Not decomposed 0 10 0 May 3 „ „ Q 81 Milk .... Genuine Not decomposed 0 10 0 „ „ „ „ Q 82 Milk .... Genuine Not decomposed 0 10 0 „ „ „ „ Q83 Milk .... Genuine Not decomposed 0 10 0 „ „ „ „ Q 84 Milk .... Genuine Not decomposed 0 10 0 „ „ „ „ Q 85 Milk Genuine Not decomposed 0 10 0 „ „ „ „ Q 86 Milk .... Genuine Not decomposed 0 10 0 „ „ „ „ Q 87 Milk .... 3 per cent. of water beyond the normal Not decomposed 0 10 0 „ „ „ „ Q 88 Milk .... 2 per cent of water beyond the normal Not decomposed 0 10 0 „ „ Q 89 Milk .... Genuine Not decomposed 0 10 0 May 7 „ „ Q 90 Whiskey f1 0 0 Water over and above that contained in 25° U.P. Whiskey 5¼ per cent. Strength 301° U.P. 0 10 0 c0 12 6 „ „ „ „ Q 91 Whiskey .... Water over and above that contained in 25° U.P. Whiskey 17 per cent. Strength 42° U.P. 0 10 0 „ „ „ „ Q 92 Whiskey .... Genuine Strength 19° U.P. 0 10 0 „ „ „ „ Q 93 Whiskey .... Genuine Strength 25° U.P. 0 10 0 „ „ „ „ Q 94 Gin .... Genuine Strength 34£° U.P. 0 10 0 128 Analyst's Report for the Quarter ending the 30ih day of June, 1897—continued. Date of receipt by Analyst of the Article to be Analysed. Name of Person from whom the Article was received. Number marked on the parcel containing the Article by which it is to be identified by the Inspector in lieu of the name of the Person from whom it was procured. Article received. Fines and Costs imposed. Result of Analysis specifying the nature and kind of foreign ingredients detected in such article (if any). Observations. Fee payable for Analysing such Article. 1896. £ s. d. £ s. d. May 7 C. H. Quelch Q 95 Whiskey .... Water over and above that contained in 25° U.P. Whiskey 3½ per cent. Strength 28½° U.P. 0 0 0 „ „ „ „ Rl Whiskey .... Genuine Strength 23¾° U.P. 0 1 0 0 „ „ „ „ R 2 Whiskey .... Genuine Strength 23° U.P. 0 1 0 0 „ „ „ „ R 3 Whiskey .... Genuine Strength 24°U.P. 0 10 0 „ „ „ „ R 4 Gin .... Genuine Strength 33½° U .P. 0 1 0 0 „ „ „ „ R 5 Gin .... Water over and above that contained in 35° U.P. Gin 3½ per cent. Strength 35½°U .P. 0 1 0 0 „ „ „ „ R 6 Gin .... Genuine Strength 32½° U.P. 0 1 0 0 „ „ „ „ R 7 Whiskey .... Genuine Strength 25° U.P. 0 1 10 0 „ „ „ „ R 8 Gin .... Water over and above that contained in 35° U.P. Gin 2 per cent. Strength 37° U.P. 0 1 10 0 „ „ „ „ R 9 Gin .... Genuine Strength 33½°U.P. 0 10 0 „ „ „ „ R10 Gin .... Genuine Strength 34½° U.P. 0 10 0 „ „ „ „ R 11 Gin .... Genuine Strength 34° U .P. 0 10 0 „ „ „ „ R 12 Gin .... Water over and above that contained in 35° U.P. Gin 1 per cent. Strength 36° U.P. 0 0 10 10 0 0 May 18 „ „ R 13 Butter .... Genuine Not decomposed 0 10 0 „ „ „ „ R 14 Butter .... Foreign fats,i.e. ,fats other than butter fat 75 per cent. Water, salt, and curd 24 per cent. Butter fat not exceeding 1 per cent. A sample of Margarine 0 10 0 „ „ „ „ R 15 Butter .... Genuine Not decomposed 0 10 0 „ „ „ „ R 16 Butter .... Genuine Not decomposed 0 10 0 „ „ „ „ R 17 Butter .... Genuine Not decomposed 0 10 0 „ „ „ „ R 18 Butter .... Foreign fats,i.e.,fats other than butter fat 82 per cent. Water, curd and salt 15 per cent. Butter fat not exceeding 3 per cent. A sample of Margarine 0 10 0 „ „ „ „ R 19 Milk .... Genuine Not decomposed 0 10 0 „ „ „ „ R 20 Milk f2 0 0 Deficient in butter fat 35 per cent. Not decomposed 0 10 0 „ „ „ „ R 21 Milk f5 0 0 Deficient in butter fat 47 per cent. Not decomposed 0 10 0 „ „ „ „ R 22 Milk c0 12 6 „ „ „ „ R 23 Milk .... Genuine Not decomposed 0 10 0 „ „ R 23 Milk .... Genuine Not decomposed 0 10 0 „ „ „ „ R 24 Milk .... 3 per cent. of water beyond the normal Not decomposed 0 10 0 129 Analysis Report for the Quarter ???.............. Date of receipt by Analyst of the Article to be Analysed. Name of Person from whom the Article was received. Number marked on the parcel containing the Artie by which it is to be identified by the Inspector in lieu the name of the persons from whom it was procured. Article received. Fines and Costs Imposed Result of Analysis specifying the nature and kind of foreign Ingredients detected in such article (if any). Observations. Fee Payable for Analysing such Article. 1896 £ s. d. £ s. d. May 22 C. H. Quelck 25 Whiskey Genuine Strength 23 U.P. 0 10 0 „ „ „ „ 26 Whiskey f 3 0 0 Water over and above that contained in 25° U.P. Whiskey 5f per cent. Strength 30¾Q U.P. 0 10 0 „ „ „ „ R 27 Whiskey f3 0 0 Water over and above that contained in 25° U.P. Whiskey 2 per cent. Strength 27 U.P. 0 10 0 c0 2 0 „ „ „ „ R 28 Whiskey .... Genuine btrengtn 23¼Q U.P. 0 10 0 „ „ „ „ R 29 Whiskey .... Water over and above that contained in 25S U.P. Whiskey 7¾ per cent. Strength 32¾Q U.P. 0 10 0 „ „ „ „ R 30 Whiskey .... Waterover and above that contained in 25° U.P. Whiskey 2 ¼ per cent. Strength 27¼U.P. 0 10 0 „ „ „ „ R 37 Rum .... Genuine Strength 25°. U.P. 0 10 0 „ „ „ „ R 38 Rum .... Genuine Strength 20° U.P. 0 10 0 „ „ „ „ R 39 Rum f3 0 0 Water over and above that contained in 25° U.P. Rum 8¾per cent. Strength 33¾° U.P. 0 10 0 „ „ „ „ R 40 Rum .... Genuine Strength 20 U.P. 0 10 0 „ „ „ „ R 41 Rum .... Water over and above that contained in 25° U.P. Rum 1½ per cent. Strength 26½ U.P. 0 10 0 „ „ „ „ R 42 Rum .... Genuine Strength 3° U.P. 0 10 0 June 28 „ „ R 31 Milk f3 0 0 Added water 28 per cent. Not decomposed 0 10 0 „ „ „ „ c0 12 6 „ „ „ „ R 32 Milk .... Genuine, of low quality Not decomposed 0 10 0 „ „ „ „ R 33 Milk .... Genuine Not decomposed 0 10 0 „ „ „ „ R 34 Milk .... Genuine Not decomposed 0 10 0 „ „ „ „ R 35 Milk .... Genuine Not decomposed 0 10 0 „ „ „ „ R 36 Milk .... Added water 15 per cent. Boracic acid or a preparation thereof traces The boracic acid orpreparation thereof is an 0 10 0 „ „ „ „ R 43 Butter .... Genuine added preservation Not decomposed 0 10 0 „ „ „ „ R 44 Butter .... Genuine Not decomposed 0 10 0 „ „ „ „ R 45 Butter .... Genuine Not decomposed 0 10 0 „ „ „ „ R 46 Butter .... Genuine Not decomposed 0 10 0 „ „ „ „ R 47 Butter .... Genuine Not decomposed 0 10 0 „ „ R 48 Butter f1 0 0 Foreign fats,i.e.,fats other than butter fat 75 per cent. Water,curd and salt 19 per cent. Butter fat not exceeding 6 per cent. A Sample of Margarine 0 10 0 c0 12 6 Chemical Laboratory, Guy's Hospital, S.E. THOMAS STEVENSON, M.D., Public Analyst. Note.—Total number of samples analysed during the Quarter, 70 130 SALE OF FOOD AND DRUGS ACT, 1875. The Report of the Analyst appointed under the above Act for this County, of the number of articles of Food, Drink, and Drugs which have been received and analysed by such Analyst, specifying the nature and kind of foreign ingredients detected in such articles, &c., during the Quarter ending the 30th day of September, 1897. Date of receipt by Analyst of the Article to be Analysed. Name of Person from whom the Article was received. Number marked on the parcel containing the Article by which it is to be identified by the Inspector in lieu of the name of the person from whom it was procured. Article received. Fines and Costs imposed Result of Analysis specifying the nature and kind of foreign ingredients detected in such article (if any;. Observations. Fee payable for Analysing such Article. ✓ • — Chemical Laboratory, Guy's Hospital, S.E. THOMAS STEVENSON, M.D., Public Analyst. Note.—Total number of samples analysed during the Quarter, none. 131 SALE OF FOOD AND DRUGS ACT, 1875. The Report of the Analyst appointed under the above Act for this County, of the number of articles of Food, Drink, and Drugs, which have been received and analysed by such Analyst, specifying the nature and kind of foreign ingredients detected in such articles, &c., during the Quarter ending the 81st day of December, 1897. \ Date of receipt by Analyst of the Article to be Analysed. Name of Person from whom the Article was received. Number marked on the parcel containing the Article by which it is to be identified by the Inspector in lieu of the name of the person from whom it was procured. Article received. Fines and Costs imposed. Result of Analysis specifying the nature and kind of foreign ingredients detected in such article (if any). Observations. Fee payable for Analysing such Article. 1897. £ s. d. £ s. d. Oct. 13 C. H. Quelch R 49 Butter .... Genuine Not decomposed 0 10 0 „ „ „ „ R 50 Butter F2 0 0 Foreign Fats, i.e., fats other than butter fat, 83 per cent., water, curd, and salt, 14 per cent., butter fat not exceeding 3 per cent. A sample of margarine. 0 10 0 c0 2 0 „ „ „ „ R 51 Butter .... Genuine Not decomposed 0 10 0 „ „ „ „ R 52 Butter .... Genuine Not decomposed 0 10 0 „ „ „ „ R 53 Butter .... Genuine Not decomposed 0 10 0 „ „ „ „ R 54 Butter f0 10 0 Foreign Fats, i.e., fats other than butter fat, 82 per cent., water, salt, and curd 15 per cent., butter fat not exceeding 3 per cent. A sample of margarine. 0 10 0 c0 2 0 „ „ „ „ R 55 Milk .... Genuine Not decomposed 0 10 0 „ „ „ „ R 56 Milk .... Genuine Not decomposed 0 10 0 „ „ „ „ R57 Milk f0 0 0 Added water 22 per cent., boracic acid or a preparation thereof, traces. The boracic acid or preparation thereof is an added preservative. 0 10 0 c0 2 0 „ „ „ „ R 58 Milk .... Genuine Not decomposed 0 10 0 „ „ „ „ R 59 Milk .... Genuine Not decomposed 0 10 0 „ „ „ „ R 60 Milk f5 0 0 Added water 14 per cent., boracic acid or a preparation thereof, traces. The boracic acid or preparation thereof is an added preservative. 0 10 0 c0 2 0 J 132 Analyst's Report for the Quarter ending the 31st day of December, 1897—continued Date of receipt by Analyst of the Article to be Analysed. Name of Person from whom the Article was received. Number marked on the parcel containing the Article by which it is to be identified by the Inspector in lieu of the name of the person from whom it was procured. Article received Fines and Costs imposed. Result of Analysis specifying the natnre and kind of foreign ingredients detected in such article (if any). Observations. Fee payable for Analysing such Article. 1897. £ s. d. £ s. d. Oct. 28 C. H. Quelch R 61 Butter f3 0 0 Foreign Fats, i.e., fats other than butter fats 74 per cent., water, curd, and salt, 14 per cent., butter fat not exceeding 12 per cent. A sample of margarine. 0 10 0 c0 2 0 „ „ „ „ R 62 Butter .... Genuine Not decomposed 0 10 0 „ „ „ „ R 63 Butter .... Genuine Not decomposed 0 10 0 „ „ „ „ R 64 Butter .... Genuine Not decomposed 0 10 0 „ „ „ „ R65 Butter .... Genuine Not decomposed 0 10 0 „ „ „ „ R 66 Butter .... Genuine Not decomposed 0 10 0 „ „ „ „ R 67 Milk .... Genuine Not decomposed 0 10 0 „ „ „ „ R 68 Milk f3 0 0 Added water 20 per cent. Not decomposed 0 10 0 c0 2 0 „ „ „ „ R 69 Milk .... Genuine Not decomposed. 0 10 0 „ „ „ „ R 70 Milk .... Genuine Not decomposed. 0 10 0 „ „ „ „ R 71 Milk .... Genuine, of low quality Not decomposed. 0 10 0 „ „ „ „ R 72 Milk .... Genuine Not decomposed. 0 10 0 Nov. 9 „ „ R 73 Butter .... Genuine Not decomposed. 0 10 0 „ „ „ „ R 74 Butter .... Genuine Not decomposed. 0 10 0 „ „ „ „ R75 Butter .... Genuine Not decomposed.. 0 10 0 „ „ „ „ R 76 Butter .... Foreign Fats, i.e., fats other than butter fat, 74 per cent., water, curd, and salt 18 per cent., butter fat not exceeding 8 per cent. A sample of margarine. 0 10 0 „ „ „ „ R 77 Butter .... Genuine Not decomposed. 0 10 0 „ „ „ „ R 78 Butter .... Genuine Not decomposed. 0 10 0 „ „ „ „ R 79 Milk .... Genuine Not decomposed. 0 10 0 „ „ „ „ R 80 Milk .... Genuine, of low quality Not decomposed. 0 10 0 „ „ „ „ R 81 Milk .... Genuine Not decomposed. 0 10 0 „ „ „ „ R 82 Milk .... 5 per cent. of water beyond the normal Not decomposed. 0 10 0 „ „ „ „ R 83 Milk .... Genuine Not decomposed 0 10 0 „ „ „ „ R 84 Milk .... Genuine Not decomposed. 0 10 0 Dec. 1 „ „ R 85 Coffee .... Genuine Not decomposed. 0 10 0 „ „ „ „ R 86 Coffee .... Genuine Not decomposed. 0 10 0 „ „ „ „ R 87 Coffee .... Genuine Not decomposed. 0 10 0 133 Analyst's Report for the Quarter ending the 31st day of December, 1897—continued. Date of receipt by Analyst of the Article to be Analysed. Name of Person from whom the Article was received. Number marked on the parcel containing the Article >y which it is to be identified by the Inspector in lieu of the name of the person from whom it was procured. Article received. Fines and Costs imposed. Result of Analysis specifying the nature and kind of foreign ingredients detected in such article (if any). Observations. Fee payable for Analysing such Article. 1897. Dec. 1 C. H. Quelch R 88 Coffee £ s. d. Genuine Not decomposed £ 0 s. 10 d. 0 „ „ R 89 Coffee Genuine Not decomposed 0 10 0 „ „ „ „ R 90 Coffee Genuine Not decomposed 0 10 0 „ „ „ „ R 91 Mustard Genuine Not decomposed. 0 10 0 „ „ „ „ R 92 Mustard Genuine Not decomposed 0 10 0 „ „ „ „ R 93 Mustard Genuine Not decomposed 0 10 0 „ „ „ „ R 94 Mustard Genuine Not decomposed 0 10 0 „ „ „ „ R 95 Mustard c0 12 6 Wheaten flour 12 per cent., tumeric traces. Not decomposed 0 10 c „ „ „ „ Mustard Genuine Not decomposed 0 10 0 „ „ „ „ R 97 Vinegar Genuine Not decomposed 0 10 0 „ „ „ „ SI Vinegar Genuine Not decomposed 0 10 0 „ „ „ „ S 2 Vinegar Genuine Not decomposed 0 10 0 „ „ „ „ S3 Vinegar Genuine Not decomposed. 0 10 0 „ „ „ „ S 4 Vinegar Genuine Not decomposed 0 10 0 „ „ „ „ S 5 Vinegar Genuine Not decomposed 0 10 0 Dec. 11 „ „ S 6 Milk E5 0 0 Added water 20 per cent., boracic acid or a preparation thereof, traces. The boracic acid, or a preparation thereof,is an added preservative. 0 10 0 c2 0 0 „ „ „ „ s7 Milk • Boracic acid, or a preparation thereof, traces. The boracic acid, or a preparation thereof,is an added preservative. 0 10 0 Dec. 14 Alfred Ward, 19, Momument 147 Butter • Genuine Not decomposed.... 0 10 6 (paid) „ „ Station Buildings. 154 Butter • • Genuine Not decomposed.... 0 10 6 (paid) \ Chemical Laboratory, Guy's Hospital, S.E. THOMAS STEVENSON, M.D., Public Analyst. Note. Total number of samples analysed during the Quarter, 58. 134 \ borough of shoreditch. The Vestry of the Parish of st. Leonard, shared, IN THE COUNTY OF LONDON. CHIEF SANITARY INSPECTOR'S REPORT. Public Health Department, 1st January, 1898. Gentlemen, I beg to present the following report on the work of the Public Health Department during the year ending 31st December, 1897, showing the number of premises inspected, the nature of nuisances under notice, and the orders made for their abatement. Notices were served requiring the abatement of nuisances in 2,209 premises. PREMISES UNDER NOTICE. No. 1 District—Mr. Lear, Inspector . 428 premises „ 5 ,, Mr. Quelch, Inspector, conjoined with duties under the Food and Drugs Act 387 ,, „ 3 ,, Mr. Firth, Inspector 344 ,, „ 2 ,, Mr. Jordan, Inspector 359 ,, „ 4 ,, Messrs. Lindon and Brown 283 „ Chief Inspector, comprising all special cases, conjoined with general superintendence 408 , Total 2,209 WORK DONE TO SECURE ABATEMENT OF NUISANCES. Glazed pipe drains provided in lieu of dilapidated brick drains in 1896. 1897. 47 76 premises Defectively constructed pipe drains repaired or re-laid in 787 630 „ 135  1896. 1897. Drains provided where there were none before in 170 82 premises Rats infesting, and sewer gas impregnating (cured) in 238 177 n Cesspools emptied and filled up in 15 13 99 Accumulations of sewage removed from 141 101 tj Stack pipes (having their heads dangerously close to bedroom windows) disconnected from drains in 555 426 n Stack pipes provided in 648 384 >i Eaves gutters provided in 524 877 91 Waste Pipes of sinks within doors have been securely trapped, or otherwise disconnected from drains, and have now their ends in the open air, and immediately over the yard sink in 815 688 I 1 Back fronts re-pointed in 204 100 * 19 Damp courses inserted in walls in 156 89 II Door cills provided in 970 647 II Window cills provided in 85 32 II Roofs repaired in 438 236 II Stairs repaired in 415 135 99 Doors repaired in 252 118 >1 Sashes repaired in 269 116 II Sashes provided for ventilation in 27 10 II Floors repaired in 601 264 II Ventilation provided under ground floors in 470 391 II Walls and ceilings cleansed, whitened and repaired throughout in 376 400 II Ditto ditto in part in 391 735 1» Total number of rooms in 3,239 3,031 II Water closets (foul and dilapidated) cleansed, repaired, and fitted to " Shoreditch Model " in 878 884 / II Water restored or newly laid on to water closets in 136 74 II Obstructions in water closets removed in 84 75 > I Water closets in close, dark and otherwise injurious situations removed into light and air in 65 37 11 Water closets' light and ventilation improved in 259 103 II New w.c.'s constructed 136 284 Water supplied direct from the main in lieu of cisterns in 23 72 II Leaking water pipes, causing dampness, repaired in 98 56 II Water restored in 156 85 11 Yards and areas lime-washed in 631 394 99 Dust bins provided in 615 465 II Yards paved imperviously with stone or cement concrete in 882 729 II Areas and forecourts ditto ditto in 324 263 11 Sculleries ditto ditto in 329 270 II Areas constructed in 78 61 II Dung Bins provided in 17 19 136  1896. 1897. Premises unfit for habitation closed 31 30 disinfected after infectious disease 1,116 1,106 J f Textile articles disinfected 13,229 11,093 MISCELLANEOUS. Overcrowding abated ^8 29 premises Dead bodies removed from 9 8 „ Animals kept so as to be a nuisance, removed from 18 13 ,, Accumulations of dung and rubbish removed from 50 28 ,, Smoke nuisances abated in 29 26 ,, FOOD CONDEMNED AND DESTEOYED. Turkeys 18 Skate 1 cwt. Skate 1 barrel Crabs 1 kit Haddocks 1½ trunks Mackerel 2 trunks Rabbits 28 lbs. Poultry one case 2qtrs.211bs. Mutton 75½ stone Mutton Shoulders 9½ shoulders Mutton Breasts 3 breasts Mutton Cuttings 14 lbs. Beef 8 lbs. Mixed Cuttings 24 lbs. Bananas 2 doz. Cherries 14 baskets FOOD AND DRUGS ACTS. . SAMPLES PROCURED. Mllk 69 Butter 47 Coffee 25 Whiskey Gin q *7 Sugar Rum n o Mustard 0 Vinesar 6 Condensed Milk 1 1 Preserved Green Peas 2 Total 185 137 PROSECUTIONS. Fines. Costs. £ s. d. £ s. d. Milk 12 (one withdrawn) 34 15 0 5 14 6 Butter 9 19 10 0 2 9 6 Mustard 1 0 12 6 Coffee 1 2 0 0 0 12 6 Sugar 3 1 2 6 1 17 6 Whiskey 3 (two dismissed) 7 0 0 0 14 6 Hum 1 3 0 0 30 £67 7 6 £12 1 0 LEGAL PROCEEDINGS FOR ABATEMENT OF NUISANCES. Premises. Result of Proceedings. 89, Wilmer Gardens Abatement Order, 3s. costs. 25, Hackney Road... Fined 3s., with 2s. costs. 44, Shaftesbury Street Summons withdrawn, 3s. costs. 37, Grange Street ... Summons withdrawn, 10s. costs. 41, Broke Road 3s. Co^ts allowed. 112, Laburnum Street Fined 3s. with 2s., costs 85, Wilmer Gardens Abatement Order, 6s. costs. 87, Wilmer Gardens Abatement Order, 6s. costs. 89, Wilmer Gardens Abatement Order, 6s. costs. 15, Brunswick Street Abatement Order, 6s. costs. 18, Harriett Square Abatement Order, 6s. costs. 18, Harriett Square Fined 40s., with 3s. costs. 9, Phillip Street ... Abatement Order, 6s. costs. 11, Phillip Street ... Abatement Order, 6s. costs. 58 and 60, Brougham Road Summons dismissed, £5 5s. costs. HOUSES WHICH HAVE BEEN CLOSED AS UNFIT FOR HABITATION. Watsons Place, Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7 and 8 8 Foundry Place, Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15 and 16 16 Boundary Street, No. 13 1 Phillip Street, Nos. 9, 11, 13 and 15 4 Canal Road, No. 15 ... 1 Total ... 30 In addition to the ordinary notices served for the abatement of nuisances, 1,421 letters were written, and to ensure the work being as far as possible of a durable 138 character, many re-inspections had to be made, which took up much time, resulting, however, 'in the owners of the property having their work generally well done. A few of the more important cases are again mentioned in detail to shew the character of the work done during the year. WATER CLOSET TROUGHS v. SEPARATE PANS AND TRAPS. Very filthy trough accommodation for school children and for employees, male and female, has been abolished in the following Board Schools and also in the following Factories, and proper closets, fitted with proper pans, traps and syphonic action cisterns have been provided instead. " BOARD SCHOOLS." It will be in the recollection of the Vestry that in the report for the year 1895 I presented an extract from the Agenda of the School Board for July 10th, 1895, containing favourable reports from the Masters of the Scrutton Street and Wenlock Road Schools in this parish, on the substitution of pans and traps for troughs ; and also similar reports from the Masters of the Schools in Fetter Lane, Sloane Square, Caledonian Road, and Canning Town, in which schools the Board had also abolished the trough system, and introduced the improved water closet arrangements, as inaugurated in Shoreditch, and set forth in the above-mentioned report for the year 1895: and now in addition to the two schools mentioned above, I have to report that the Board has given further effect to the objections urged upon them against troughs by removing those receptacles entirely from the Schools in Chatham Gardens, Canal Road, and Hammond Square, and in the greater part from the Schools in Napier Street and St. John's Road, and substituting pans and traps. The Board having resolved that all new Schools shall be fitted like the improved Shoreditch ones, I may add that the new School recently opened in Grange Street has been fitted in a proper manner. Whilst admitting the progress that has been made, and the good work that has been done by the Board in this direction, it is necessary to say that the Schools in Catherine Street, Curtain Road, Maidstone Street, Shap Street and Haggerston Road are fitted throughout with troughs, and that the Schools in Napier Street and St. John's Road are partly fitted in the same manner, and that I frequently observe large accumulations of excrementitious matters in these troughs,accompanied with a most disgusting stench. Having regard to these facts, and to the circumstance that the foul vapours referred to must be inhaled by children having occasion to use these troughs, it may well be that, under certain conditions,' they constitute a positive danger to health— indeed, medical evidence, on behalf of the Vestry, to that effect, was adduced on the appeal made by the School Board to the London County Council (February, 1892), against the Vestry's order in reference to Shap Street School. In conclusion, 1 venture to express the hope that before another Annual Report becomes due, the Board will have caused the whole of the objectionable trough receptacles to be removed from their Schools in this Parish. 139 " FACTORIES." Messrs. DE LA RUE'S (Luke Street). Two troughs have been removed used by not less than 150 females Two do. do. do 150 males New arrangements provided are as follows:— Twelve water closets of the Shoreditch pattern have been fitted up for females. Eight do. do. do. do. males. Proper and sufficient urinal accommodation has also been provided. Messrs. WATERLOW'S (Skinner Street). Three troughs have been removed used by not less than 200 males New arrangements provided are as follows:— Ten water closets of the Shoreditch pattern have been fitted up. FOUNDRY PLACE. The above place consists of eighteen six-roomed houses, nine on the west and nine on the east, with a paved footway between, they have all been built within the last 25 years on the site of small old ruinous cottages. In constructing them a great mistake was made in building workshops in the small yards at the back of the houses on the west side ; and in management a further mistake was made in letting all the houses in tenements. As a result of these mistakes the houses on the west side being overshadowed by the workshops were very gloomy, and all of them being let in tenements, they were fast degenerating into a very slum-like condition. Notices were served requiring the ordinary cleaning and repairs to be effected and it was intimated that the houses would be registered under the regulations made for tenement houses, and that was all that could be accomplished under the powers of the Public Health Act, but the owner having had 25 years' experience of bad construction and mismanagement, was somewhat prepared to listen to suggestions, which could not be enforced at law. That being so, he was advised to eject all the tenement holders, to take down and cart away the whole of the workshops at the back of the houses on the west side, giving thereby a decent open yard to each house accompanied with an entire reconstruction of w.c.'s and drainage, to thoroughly cleanse and renovate walls and ceilings and internal fittings, all of which had suffered greatly at the hands of destructive tenants, to provide wide concrete cills to front doors after the Shoreditch pattern, and to let each house to one respectable responsible tenant. All this has been done in a very complete and satisfactory manner. The improvements effected stand as a model and an encouragement to owners to deal with such troublesome bad property in a comprehensive manner. ALMA MUSIC HALL. A memorial from the inhabitants of the adjoining houses having been received, complaining of the commission of nuisances by persons (male and female) attending 140 the performances at the above music hall, led to an inspection of the premises, when it. was found that the hall had seating accommodation for 200 persons for whom no lavatory accommodation of any kind had been provided on the premises. In accordance with my suggestions and under my superintendence a considerable alteration in the structure has been effected, and, in conjunction therewith, two w.crs have been constructed for females and two for men. This accommodation appears to have had the effect of abating the nuisance complained of. STANDARD THEATRE. In my report of 1893, to the Vestry, it was mentioned that the proprietor of the above Theatre had rectified the unclean and defective urinals and water-closets then existing, and so far as it was possible to do so, without remodelling the whole establishment, that had been done; but further experience proved the inherent defects in the original construction to be so great, that in the summer of 1896, it became necessary again to complain, and a communication was addressed to the proprietor, showing among other defects:— (1) That the position of the urinals, close to the auditorium, caused the house to be impregnated with the most offensive smells. (2) That the space under the stage (containing stage machinery and properties) was unpaved, covered very thickly with dust, and was very deficient in head room. (3) That this space extending under the whole area of the stage, was unventilated, that its atmosphere was very impure, and that it contributed largely to the general impurity of the atmosphere of the house. I i \ The proprietor was interviewed, and comprehensive alterations were suggested, including the removal of the floor to a sufficient depth, giving moderate headroom, the provision of a concrete floor, and the construction of an underground passageway (about thirty feet in length) to Holywell Lane, to secure a current of fresh air, through the space under the stage. The reasonableness of all these suggestions was admitted, nevertheless much delay ensued, and many consultations, and some pressure had to take place, and then it was finally decided (the County Council having also intervened), to reconstruct and remodel the entire premises. In conjunction therewith, water closets and urinals are now properly ventilated into the open air. The space under the stage has been dug out to provide headroom, the floor has been paved with concrete so that it may now be kept clean, and the whole space properly ventilated by the construction of an underground passage-way to Holywell Lane, in accordance with my suggestions, its contribution of air to the atmosphere of the house is therefore no longer of a noxious character. It is very gratifying to state that the Theatre—which was opened again for the last Christmas season—is now probably one of the best appointed place3 of amusement in East London. 141 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, LOWER JOHN STREET. A letter was received from a Surveyor, representing the owner of the above bouses, setting forth that he was about to build detached sculleries and new w.c.'s in the forecourts of the above houses, and that the combined drain of the premises came within the definition of the word sewer, that it needed reparation, and that it was the duty of the Vestry to do the necessary repairs. As the Vestry has no record of the original construction of the drain, this contention could probably have been upheld in the present condition of the law, but there was abundant reason for suggesting that the time had come when, in the interest of the owner and occupants, the houses should be demolished. An interview was therefore sought, and -obtained with the Estate Surveyor, with the result that my suggestions were all accepted, the worn out old cottages, which had been very troublesome to the department for many years, were taken down and carted away, and very superior houses have been erected in their place, fitted with a new system of drains properly registered so as to preclude any attempt in the future to impose private responsibilities as to drainage on the Vestry. TENEMENT HOUSES. During the past year 40 premises let to more than one family have been registered under the regulations made by the Vestry for houses let in lodgings. It may be mentioned that these regulations, including registration, are only applied in accordance with the Vestry's instruction to houses where the rooms are let separately by non-resident landlords, and that the number of such registrations would have been much increased, but, as in such tenement houses no individual tenant can be held responsible for injury done to property, or neglect to preserve commo conveniences in decent condition, a little more trouble is therefore generally taken than the simple registration would involve, with the result that owners are often persuaded (sometimes with difficulty) to see their own interest in letting their houses to one responsible tenant; for instance, see Foundry Place page 139, the owner of which has completely altered the character of his 18 houses. As tenement houses they were a disgrace to the neighbourhood, under the new order of management they are a credit to the Parish. Again, the eight houses, Nos. 1 to 8, Watson's Place; in several of these houses there were separate tenants in each room, and as usual in such cases, they were of the most impoverished, dirty and destructive character. The owner had bought the houses as tenement houses, and without experience to guide him continued to let them in tenements, until acting under my advice he ejected all the tenement holders, closed the houses for repairs, and has now let each of them to one tenant. OFFICE ACCOMMODATION. A special Report was presented to the Public Health Committee, showing that the existing office accommodation is of a very insanitary character, being underground, dark, defective in ventilation, and inadequate in size for the accommodation of 142 the increased staff, now numbering six Inspectors, two Clerks and a Messenger. It was also shown that the deficiency in office accommodation prevents the Vestry's business being done in a proper manner, inasmuch as a set of books are required in which to register the action taken by the Vestry, and the conditions from time to time of each house in the Parish; such a record would obviously be of the greatest value in the future, but with the present office utterly inadequate as it is for general purposes, such a record is not possible. Following upon the presentation of the Report, plans were prepared by order oi the Committee for the construction of a new set of offices at the south-east angle of the Council Chamber. The plans showed, conjoined with other requirements, a welllighted, lofty, commodious general office (which is a primary requirement) measuring 34 ft. by 22 ft. The plans referred to met with the approval of the Committee, were recommended to the Vestry, and would have fully met every requirement of the Department, but their acceptance by the Vestry was checked by the purchase of the adjoining Fire Station for the extension of offices. I am, Gentlemen, Your obedient Servant, HUGH ALEXANDER, Chief Sanitary Inspector. HIGHWAYS DEPARTMENT. ' ' 145 \ BOROUGH OF SHOREDITCH. The Vestry of the Parish of St. Leonard, shared, IN THE COUNTY OF LONDON. REPORT OF THE SURVEYOR. WORKS DEPARTMENT, Surveyor's Office, Town Hall, 25th March, 1898. Gentlemen, I have the pleasure to submit the following Report enumerating and describing the progress of the matters and works which have been entrusted to this Department during the year ended 25th March, 1898. The work of repairing the footways, kerbs, paved and macadam carriage-ways and channels, has been kept steadily in hand during the year. In comparing any cost of street maintenance with that of previous years, it becomes necessary to take into account the great increase of the heavy and constant traffic through this Parish during recent years. STEAM ROLLER. J The constant use of the Vestry's steam roller has kept the unpaved roads in a fairly satisfactory condition, your adoptiou of the suggestion made in my last report, to extend the granite paved streets where possible, in place of macadam, having 146 already made an appreciable difference in the area of each, and a great improvement and saving in the general scavenging, and cost of maintenance. The Vestry's roller is now regularly examined by the National Boiler Insurance Company, and on last inspection was certified to be in good condition. It has been at work 254 days during the past year, with about 11 men on an average employed in scoring, rolling, sweeping, and watching, and also upon ballast footways, and other incidental works, particulars of which will be found on page 148, &c.. MAINTENANCE OF ROADS. The following quantities of materials were supplied by the Contractors and Guardians at the cost stated, and used on the macadam and ballast roads in the parish during the year:— £ s. d. 52 yards cube Broken Granite 39 4 4 170 ,, ,, Ballast 51 0 0 671 ,, ,, Hoggin 201 6 0 225 „ ,, Shingle 73 2 6 ROAD FOREMEN. There are three Road Foremen, whose duties include the supervision of works in progress, the directing of the Steam Roller work and men, also the Masons and Paviors employed by the Vestry. MASONS. Four Masons on an average, and their Labourers, were employed in repairing the footways and over trenches opened by the Gas and Water Companies, Electric Lighting, and Post Office Telegraphs. PAVIORS. Three Paviors on an average, and their labourers, were employed in repairing the paved roads, and over trenches similarly opened. Watchmen were also employed for the Mason's work and Steam Roller, also for Ebenezer Street. 147 The opening and filling in the trenches for laying certain Electric Lighting conduits done by direct labour under the supervision of the second road foreman, at the cost below stated, together with the work done by the Vestry's contractor, has been transferred to the Electric Lighting account. YARD LABOUR. One foreman and eleven labourers on an average were employed in the yard and on the general repairs of the unpaved roads, also over trenches opened by the Gas and Water Companies. WAGES. The wages of pickers and labourers generally were increased from the 1st January, 1898, by resolution of the Vestry after consideration of a return compiled by your Surveyor. The summary statement of same will be found on page 183. HOLIDAYS AND SICK PAY. The Vestry agreed to allow to their regular employees an annual holiday of one week with full pay; also to allow the men sick pay at the rate of one-half of their weekly wages for a period of one month, upon the production of a Doctor's certificate. STATEMENT OF COST OF LABOUR. Road Foremen. Masons' anc Labourers. Paviors' and Labourers. Yard Foreman and Labourers. Steam Holler Driver, Ganger and Labourers. Watchmen. Labour on Electric Lighting Conduits. Totals. For Labour 376 15 0 680 10 2\ 514 12 14 933 9 9 1,107 2 7 272 8 0 73 9 4 3,958 7 10½ ,, Holidays 13 2 6 11 16 0 14 12 0 14 11 0½ 2 8 0 56 9 6½ ,, Sick Pay 5 4 0 0 14 7 11 5 4 14 8 6 2 8 0 34 0 5 £ 376 15 0 698 16 84 527 3 64 959 7 1 1,136 2 14 277 4 0 73 9 4 4,048 17 10 Various Companies contribute the sum of £989 10s. 5d., this including for material. Work has also been done under the Vestry's instructions for the Committees, as follows :— £ s. d. Baths and Washhouses 5 19 10 Housing Committee 735 15 8 Dusting and Scavenging Committee 21 4 0 Other Contributions for reinstatements, private paving, &c., amount to £1,015 13s. l1d., part of which was due and paid to the Vestry's Contractor. K 148 The following Table gives the roads that have been rolled, with the cost of the same and other required details MATERIALS AND COSTS IN CONNECTION WITH VESTRY ROADS. LOCALITY. Hoggin. . Siftings, &c., from Yard. Wages for Labour and Watchmen. Water and Horsing Water Cart. Roller Expenses, Sharps and Steels. Superficial Area. Total Cost. Cost per yard. £ s d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. Yards. £ s. d. Livermere Road 12½ yds. Contractor Granite, 17 10 6 2 18 0 5 15 2 1596 54 10 1½ /8 19 19 11½ Broken Pebbles 11¾ yds. 3 15 0 4 11 0 Ground ¾ yd 0 1 / 8 Laburnum Street 7½ yds. Broken Pebbles 26 ½ yds. 10 13 3 1 13 0 1 18 1½ 637 27 13 10* /10¼ 10 12 0 2 5 0 | Ground l yd. 0 2 6 Brunswick Street 27 yds. Broken Pebbles 180¼ yds. 44 15 6½ 10 2 2 15 5 10½ 5618 150 7 7 /6¼ 8 2 0 72 2 0 Gt. Chart Street 15½ yds. Broken Pebbles 29½ yds. 28 17 0½ 8 1 7½ 10 18 1½ 2248 64 3 3* /6¾ 11 6 0 4 13 0 Urouna 3 yds. v0 7 6 Audrey Street 9 yds. Broken Pebbles 21¾ yds. 6 7 9½ 1 17 10 3 4 0 403 22 17 7¼ 1/1½ 2 14 0 8 14 0 149 LOCALITY. Hoggin. Siftings, &c., from yard. Wages for Labour and Watchmen. Water and Horsing Water Cart. Roller Expenses, Sharps and Steels. | Superficial Area. Total Cost. Cost per yard. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ B. d. Yards. £ s. d. Weymouth Terrace 9½vds. Broken Pebbles 8¾- yds. 4 8 0 12 1 1 13 3½ 337 13 0 6 /9¼ 2 17 0 3 10 0 Pownall Road 3 yds. Broken Pebbles 2½ yds. 5 13 11 0 16 10½ 2 0 0 403 10 8 9i /6 0 18 0 1 0 0 Shaftesbury Street 3¾ yds. Broken Pebbles 3¾ vds. 14 13 0 /7 1 2 6 7 8 11½ 1 13 0 2 18 6½ 495 1 10 0 Hay Street. 5 vds. Broken Pebbles 3 vds 9 12 6 /6¼ 1 10 0 4 4 10 1 1 2 1 12 6 368 1 4 0 Ipswich Road l6¼ yds. Broken Pebbles 36¼ yds 30 18 0 /9¼ 4 17 6 6 3 8 2 3 5 3 3 5 786 14 10 0 Wenlock Street 19¾ yds. Broken Pebbles 181 vds. 44 16 4 7 17 6 12 7 5 3003 143 17 14 /11¼ 18 6 72 8 0 Ground 3¾ yds. 0 9 4½4½ 150 LOCALITY. Hoggin. Siftings, &c., from Yard. Wages for Labour and Watchmen. Water and Horsing Water Cart. Roller Expenses, Sharps and Steels. * Superficial Area. Total Cost. Cost per yard. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. Yards. £ s. d. Nile Street 18½ yds. Broken Pebbles 27 yds. 7 15 6 2 12 6 3 6 6 603 30 0 0 /11¾ 5 9 6 10 16 0 Cropley Street 39½ yds. Broken Pebbles 86 yds. 47 2 7 9 5 0 10 11 2 3615 114 16 9 /7½ 11 17 0 34 8 0 Ground 12 yds. 1 10 0 Forston Street 26¼yds. Broken Pebbles 81 yds. 10 15 0 3 19 7 5 5 7½ 1837 66 8 2½ /8 7 17 6 32 8 0 Ground l yd. 0 2 6 Poole Street 19½ yds. Broken Pebbles 49 ½vds. 15 1G 9 2 10 7 Including hiiwl rnllpr 1513 54 1 1 /8½ 5 17 0 9 15 9 19 15 0 De Beauvoir Crescent 29½ yds. Broken Pebbles 32 vrls. 22 7 11 3 8 5 including hired roller 2004 58 12 4 /6½ 8 17 0 11 3 0 12 16 0 151 LOCALITY. Hoggin. Sittings, &c., from yard. Wages for Labour | and Watchmen. Water and Horsing ! Water Cart. Roller Expenses, Sharps ! and Steels. Superficial Area. Total Cost. - Cost per yard.[/333] £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. Yards. £ s. d. York Street 17¼ yds. . Broken Pebbles 72½ yds. 20 0 10 3 8 3 • Including aired roller 1663 68 13 0 /9¾ 5 3 6 28 18 0 10 17 5 Ground 2 vds. 0 5 0 Suffolk Road 18¼ yds. Broken Pebbles 47 vds. 13 2 1½ 3 18 3 4 6 0½ 1021 45 11 11 /10½ 5 9 6 18 16 0 Fellows Street 17½ yds. Broken Pebbles 134¾ yds 25 15 5 6 11 3 10 4 9 2383 103 5 8 /10¼ 5 5 0 53 18 0 Ground 12½ yds. 1 11 3 Penn Street 20 yds. Broken Pebbles 31¼ yds. 1G 13 3½ 3 13 11 4 17 6 1196 37 17 10 /7¾ 6 0 0 -6 10 0 Ground 1¼ vds. 00 3 1½ Acton Street 20 vrls. Broken Pebbles 81¼ - yds 26 12 10 a 17 10 6 11 0 1575 75 17 11 /11½ 6 0 0 32 01 0 Ground 2½ vds. 0 6 3 152 LOCALITY. Hoggin. Siftings. &c., from yard. Wages for Labour and W atchmen. Water and Horsing Water Cart. Roller Expenses. Sharps and Steels. Superficial Area. T C ota ost t . Cost per yard. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s d. £ s. d. £ s. d. Yards. £ s. d. 15 yds. Broken Pebbles 48¾ rds. 11 8 4½ 3 5 1 4 0 6 1050 42 17 1 /9¾ 4 10 0 9 10 0 Ground 11 yds. 0 3 1¼ 10 yds. Broken Pebbles 73¾ yds. 27 2 9 5 5 4 8 0 8 924 73 2 10 1/7 3 0 0 29 10 0 Ground 11 yds. 0 3 1½ Trinity Place 8 yds Broken Pebbles 26¼ yds. 11 10 0 2 18 9 4 12 10 907 31 19 7 /8¼ 2 8 0 10 10 0 Eagle Wharf Road 25 yds. Broken Pebbles 142½ yds. 46 0 6½ 10 1 3 14 13 11½ 3351 135 5 9 /9½ 7 10 0 57 0 0 Witchampton Street 8 yds. Broken Pebbles 39¾ yds. 8 11 3 2 7 0 3 4 10 513 29 13 6 1/0¼ 2 8 0 13 2 0 Gopsall Street 24 yds. Broken Pebbles 111¼ yds. 40 2 8 8 19 2 12 9 4 2415 113 14 2 /11¼ 7 4 0 44 14 0 Ground 2 yds 0 5 0 153 LOCALITY. Hoggin. Siftings, &c., from Yard. Wages for Labour and Watchmen. Water and Horsing Water Cart. Roller Expenses, Sharps and Steels. Superficial Area. Total Cost. Cost per yard. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. Yards. £ s. d. Sturt Street 12 yds. Broken Pebbles 35 yds. ... 16 17 10½ 3 4 1½ 4 3 9 727 41 17 9 1/2 3 12 0 14 0 0 Myrtle Street 15 yds. Broken Pebbles 48¾ yds. ... 16 10 8½ 3 4 1½ 4 14 9 997 48 9 7 /11½ 4 10 0 19 10 0 Angrave Street 27 yds. Broken Pebbles 44¾ yds. ... 23 7 11 5 17 4 7 14 0 1989 69 16 9 /8¾ 5 2 0 17 18 0 Broken York 27½ yds. 6 17 6 Rushton Street 10 yds. Broken Pebbles 31¼ yds. ... 25 12 1 4 17 7 8 2 7 2060 54 2 3 /6¼ 3 0 0 12 10 0 Clarence Terrace 9 yds. Broken Pebbles 10 yds. ... 11 17 2 2 9 4 4 2 1 847 25 2 7 /7 2 14 0 4 0 0 Tuilerie Street 11 yds. Broken Pebbles 18¾ yds. ... 13 11 6½ 3 5 5 5 11 9 1287 33 17 /6¼ 3 6 0 7 10 0 Broken York 2½ yds. 0 12 6 154 FOOTWAY AND CARRIAGEWAY PAYING, 1897—8. The following works at the cost stated have been executed by the Vestry Contractors during the past year. Bridport Place, East side— £ s. d. A portion of old York Paving squared and relaid, new 2½ York Paving supplied and laid, a length of Kerb dressed and refixed, a length of new straight and circular supplied and fixed, new 3"x 6" Granite pitchings supplied and laid, a portion of old pitchings relaid. new 12" x 6" flat channel Kerb supplied and fixed and pitchings laid on 6" Portland cement concrete and grouted, 53 Coal plates let in, 32 holes rebated, 3 Lamps and 2 Boxes let in, 1 Post fixed including cutting on York Granite also Mason and Labourer 41 hours each 560 5 3 East Road (from Brunswick Place to Sturt Arms, Public House)— Kerb redressed and reset on Portland cement concrete, a portion of York paving squared and relaid, and 3" York paving supplied and laid,new 6" x 12" edge kerb, supplied and fixed, a portion of Carriageway relaid and grouted, cutting on Granite and York, 10 holes cut in, 3 ditto rebated, 5 Lamps and 2 Boxes let in and 2 corners rounded 289 13 4 Moye Street— Kerb dressed and refixed, old pitchings dressed and relaid on Portland cement concrete and grouted, a length of new Kerb supplied and fixed, including cutting on Granite 61 4 9 Dove Row— Kerb dressed and reset on Portland cement concrete 3 9 4 Hare Walk (portion between Kingsland Road and Gilford Street)— Kerb dressed and refixed, York Paving squared and relaid, channel dressed and refixed, a portion of new 2½" York Paving supplied and laid, 5 24" Quadrant blocks supplied and fixed, 1 ditto and 2 spur stones carted and fixed, 2 corners rounded 174 13 4 Oakford Place— Kerb dressed and refixed, new 6"xl2" ditto supplied and fixed, 1 18" Quadrant block supplied and fixed, 1 ditto redressed and refixed, old York Paving squared and relaid, pitchings carted, dressed, relaid and grouted 77 9 4 155 Worship Street (by Home and Colonial Stores)— £ s. d. Kerb reset and York Paving relaid, new 3" York supplied and laid, new 5" hardwood blocks supplied and laid to Carriageway on Portland cement concrete 10 1 9 Curtain Road (from Gt. Eastern Street to Worship Street)— New 3" York Paving supplied and laid, Moorstone dressed and refixed, kerb dressed and reset, a length of new 6"x 12" kerb supplied and fixed, a portion of old York relaid and old kerb refixed, old pitchings taken up and carted to Depot, new 12" x 9" Norway flat berb to Channels supplied and fixed, a portion of old pitchings selected, dressed and relaid, new 3" X 6" and 3" x 7" Granite pitchings supplied and laid, a portion of old ditto relaid on Portland cement concrete, old York Paving squared and relaid, cutting on Channel and York, 4 corners rounded, 9 Lamps and 20 Boxes let in, 3 Posts fixed, 2 24" Quadrant blocks supplied and fixed 2,510 10 8 Hoxton Street (Footways both sides from Fanshaw Street to Essex Street)— Kerb dressed and refixed, new 6"x 12" circular kerb supplied i and fixed all on concrete, York paving squared and relaid, new 3" York and Liscannor paving supplied and laid, cutting on York and granite, new Moorstone supplied and fixed, a portion of old pitchings dressed and relaid, kerb and pitchings on Portland cement concrete, No. 23 boxes, 6 posts let in, 2 corners rounded, 2 new 24" Quadrant blocks supplied and fixed 354 18 7 Tabernacle Street (new Refuge) New Aberdeen circular and straight kerb supplied and fixed, new 3" York paving supplied and laid, old pitchings carted including cutting on York, 2 lamps let in and 4 spur stones fixed 16 14 2 Tuilerie Street (from Hackney Road to opposite Drysdale Street)— Old York paving squared and relaid, a portion of new 2½ ditto supplied and laid, kerb dressed and refixed, pitchings a portion relaid, others dressed, carted and laid. New 12" x 8" and 12" x 6" flat kerb supplied and fixed to channel all on Portland cement concrete and grouted; 12 24" Quadrant blocks supplied and fixed, 3 corners rounded, 1 coal plate, and 1 lamp let in, 1 hole cut for box, including cutting on York and granite 418 2 3 156 Albert Mews (private Court)— £ s. d. Old pebbles taken up and carted, old pitchings dressed, carted and laid, kerb refixed, a length dressed, carted and fixed, and new 12" x 6" Norway flat kerb supplied and fixed to channel all on Portland cement concrete and grouted; York paving squared and relaid; 2 24" Quadrant blocks supplied and fixed; York paving squared and relaid, including cutting on granite, and excavation 127 10 4 Shepherdess Walk (from Shaftesbury Street to parish boundary)— New 2½ York paving supplied and laid, portions of York relaid or squared and relaid, old kerb refixed, lengths of new 6"x 12" kerb supplied and fixed, 13 coal holes and 3 lamps let in, 9 coal holes rebated, new 12" x 6" flat and circular kerb supplied and fixed to channels, old pebbles taken up and carted, ground excavated and carted to shoot, pitchings dressed, carted and rolaid on Portland cement concrete, including all necessary cutting 1,256 2 0 Long Street (public portion)— Kerb dressed and fixed, and new 6" x 12" straight and circular kerb supplied and fixed on Portland cement concrete, ground excavated and carted, and pitchings dressed and relaid on Portland cement concrete and grouted, York paving squared and relaid, 1 post carted and fixed 52 11 4 Long Street (private portion)— New 6"x 12" granite edge straight and circular kerb supplied and fixed, other kerb dressed, carted and fixed, all on Portland cement concrete, York paving squared and relaid, 1 post carted and fixed, 2 18" Quadrant blocks dressed and fixed, 1 new 24" ditto and 2 18" ditto supplied and fixed, ground excavated and carted, and pitchings dressed, carted from depot, and laid on Portland cement concrete. *117 1 10 Ceasar Street (private portion)— Ground excavated and carted, and new 6"xl2" Guernsey straight and circular kerb supplied and fixed on Portland cement concrete, 1 24" block supplied and fixed, 2 posts carted and fixed, new York stone supplied and fixed, old York paving in passageway taken up, loaded and carted, and replaced by other York paving, squared and relaid *108 5 5 * The whole or a portion repaid to the Vestry. 157 Union Buildings— £ s. d. Kerb dressed and fixed, pitchings dressed and relaid all on Portland cement concrete, and pitchings grouted, York paving squared and relaid, old York and kerb carted, new 12" x 8" flat kerb supplied and fixed to portion of channel, 1 post carted, 2 posts fixed and 2 boxes let in 66 5 2 Luke Street— Kerb dressed and refixed, new 12" x 6" Norway flat kerb supplied and fixed to channels all on Portland cement concrete, pitchings carted, dressed and relaid on Portland cement concrete and grouted, old York paving squared and relaid, new 2½" ditto supplied and laid 204 19 4 Shoreditch High Street— Pitchings to crossings (where wood paved) relaid or made good with new 3"x7" Aberdeen Granite Cubes, and grouted 22 13 4 Ditto ditto— Footways on both sides (where wood paved) kerbs dressed and refixed, or new kerb supplied and fixed on Portland cement concrete, York paving relaid, and new 2½" ditto supplied and laid, Victoria paving relaid, Moorstone relaid, a portion dressed, carted and laid, new Victoria stone supplied and laid, new 3"x7" Aberdeen pitchings supplied and laid, and new 12" x 8" Norway flat kerb supplied and fixed on Portland cement concrete 630 5 3 Hackney Road (from No. 351 to 357)— Footway repaved with new 2£" York, and old York taken up, squared and relaid. Kerb dressed and refixed on Portland cement concrete 14 1 0 Bateman's Row (by Shoreditch High Street)— Kerb dressed and refixed on Portland cement concrete, pitchings relaid, some dressed and relaid, all on Portland cement concrete and grouted, old York relaid, a portion squared and relaid, 1 coal hole let in, 5 posts carted and fixed 49 2 1 Garden Walk— York paving squared and relaid, new 2½" ditto supplied and laid, old kerb refixed, a portion dressed and refixed, new 12" x 6" flat curb supplied and fixed to channels, pitchings dressed and relaid on Portland cement concrete and grouted, including ground dug, sifted and carted, 2 Quadrant blocks re-fixed, 1 post carted and fixed 89 9 6 158 Norfolk Place (Public Improvement)— £ s. d. York paving squared and relaid, kerb dressed and re-fixed, pitchings dressed, carted and laid on Portland cement concrete, 2 24" Quadrant blocks supplied and fixed, 2 posts carted and fixed, one corner rounded, including cutting and excavation 49 0 8 Total £7,259 10 0 ASPHALTE WORK. Oakford Place— £ s. d. Footways paved with ¾" Mastic Asphalte on 3" Portland cement concrete 23 17 11 Moye Street— Footways paved with ¾" Mastic Asphalte on 3" Portland cement concrete, and Roadway with 1½" Compressed Asphalte on 12" Portland cement concrete 626 11 8 New Norfolk Street and Goldsmith Row— Footways repaired 13 2 4 Hoxton Street (from Fanshaw Street to Essex Street)— Old Cubes taken up and carted, space repaved with 2" Compressed Asphalte on 12" Portland cement concrete 979 12 3 Albert Mews (Private Court)— Paved with Mastic Asphalte on 3" Portland cement concrete *9 4 7 Land of Promise, Hoxton Street (part, for Guardians)— Carriageway repaved with 1½" Compressed Asphalte on 6" Portland cement concrete *69 18 11 Castle Place— Paved with ¾" Mastic Asphalte on 3" Portland cement concrete *30 2 2 Bath Place— Footway and Carriageway trenches, Asphalte reinstated *14 14 10 Long Street (for Owners and Vestry)— Carriageway paved with 1½" Compressed Asphalte on 6" Portland cement concrete, and footways with ¾" Mastic Asphalte on 3" Portland cement concrete *460 8 8 Ditto ditto (dedicated portion)— Carriageway and footways (as above) 279 18 5 * The whole or a portion repaid to the Vestry. 159 Ceasar Street (for Owners and Vestry)— £ s. d. Carriageway and footways (as above) 501 17 9 Union Buildings— Carriageway paved with l½" Compressed Asphalte on 6" Portland cement concrete 84 13 3 Total £3,094 2 9 WOOD PAVING. Shoreditch High Street (Old Street to Church Street)— Old Cubes taken up and carted, space repaved with new 3"x5"x9" Jarrah Wood blocks on Portland cement concrete £2,490 5 0 REPAIRS TO FOOTWAYS AND CARRIAGE-WAYS. The undermentioned is for the repairs—consisting chiefly of York paving relaid, kerbs refixed, and pitchings relaid and grouted—necessary to the Footways and Carriageways, after work done for the Electric Lighting Mains, &c. TRENCHES, DRAIN, ELECTRIC LIGHT AND OTHERS. £ s. d. Hyde Road, Drain Trench *0 14 3 Dunloe Street „ *1 13 0 Opposite No. 41, Wilson Street, National Telephone Co. 10 2 3 Rufus Street, Electric Light Co., B Insulated Wire Co. *7 18 11 Great Eastern Street by Refuge, Electric Light 8 14 0 277, Old Street, Electric Light 0 4 4 82, Great Eastern Street and corner Worship Street and Paul Street, Electric Light 5 13 9 Opposite Hackney Road and Shoreditch High Street, Electric Light 1 10 8 Opposite Shoreditch High Street, Electric Light 2 17 1 Shoreditch High Street by London Music Hall, Electric Light 5 1 10 Do. do. Raising Covers, Electric Light 0 11 10 Paul Street by Mark Street, Electric Light 3 17 5 Do. by Macnamara's, Hoxton Street by Asylum, Electric Light 9 14 9 Paul Street and Calvert Avenue, Electric Light 0 18 0 42, Curtain Road, 3, Shoreditch High Street and others, Electric Light 1 2 2 Various places, Electric Light 6 3 6 162. Hoxton Street, Electric Light 4 11 4 Eagle Wharf Road opposite City Iron Works, Electric Light 3 12 6 * The whole or a portion repaid to the Vestry. 160 CROSSINGS. Paved granite crossings (private) laid as follows:— £ s. d. By Fire Brigade Station, Tabernacle Street cost *6 10 0 ,, Feaist's Bakery, Witchampton Street *9 5 0 ,, Wenlock Brewery, Robert Street „ *8 5 10 „ „ „ John Street „ *8 16 0 „ „ „ Wenlock Road „ *9 14 5 „ Hoxton Brewery, Turner's Square „ *4 18 9 ,, Baths,'Taplow Street „ *5 12 4 Total £53 2 4 MATERIAL USED IN GENERAL REPAIRS. The Contractor supplied for use in repairing the footways:— Super Feet. £ s. d. 2,100 Patent Victoria Stone 61 5 0 16,900 2½-in. Tooled York Stone 688 15 0 124 Lineal 6" x 12" Edge Kerb 9 6 3 100 12" x 6" Norway do 7 1 8 Quantity. Size and Particulars, Cost. £ s. d. Sacks. 12 supplied, and Super yds. 228 redressed. Granite Sittings 0 18 0 Pitchings at Moira Place 6 13 0 Owing to the large quantity of old pitchings taken up from various streets, and their having been dressed and relaid in other streets, new setts have not been required. * The whole or a portion repaid to the Vestry. 161 The following Schedules furnish a Statement of the Wood and Asphalte Paved Streets of the Parish up to date :— WOOD PAYING. Name of Street. Position of Paving. Dates when paved and repaved. Area of Wood Paving. Cost per Yard. Terms of Maintenance. Description of Paving and by whom laid. Yards. s. d. 1. Old Street Opposite Town Hall .. 419 15 years from 25 March, 1892, 1s. per yd. per annum. 6-in. blocks on 6-in Portland cement concrete, grouted in lime. Improved Wood Pavement Company. 2. Goldsmith's Row Facing Children's Hospital Oct., 1883 333 10 0 Free 15 years 1s. per yd. per annum from 18 September, 1889. 5-in. blocks laid on 6-in. Portland cement concrete. The Improved Wood Pavement Company. 3. Hoxton Street Opposite Hoxton House Asylum Sept., 1889 2043/9 9 0 1 year free; 16 years 1s. per yd. per annum. The Improved Wood Pavement Company under their contract for maintenance. 4. Paul Street and Leonard Square Prom Worship Street to New Fire Station Nov., 1896 4253 14 0 1 year free. 3-in. x 5-in. x 9-in Jarrah blocks laid on 6-in. Portland cement concrete. Mr. W. Griffiths. 5. Wilson Street From Eldon Street to Worship Street Nov., 1896 3455 14 0 1 year free. 3-in. X 5-in. x 9-in. Jarrah blocks laid on 6-in. Portland cement concrete. Mr. W. Griffiths. 6. Leonard Street From Great Eastern Street to Tabernacle Street Dec., 1896 2243$ 13 11 1 year free. 3-in. x 5-in. x 9-in. Jarrah blocks on Portland cement concrete. Improved Wood Pavement Company. 7. Worship Street Opposite Home and Colonial Stores Dec., 1896 3611/3 14 0 1 year free. 3-in. x 5-in. x 9-in. Jarrah blocks on Portland cement concrete. Mr. W. Griffiths. 8. Shoreditch High Street. From Hackney Road to Church Street Nov., 1897 3700 10 8 1 year free. 3-in. x 5-in. x 9-in. Jarrah Blocks on Portland cement concrete. Mr. W. Griffiths. 162 ASPHALTE. Name of Street. Position of Paving. Dates when pav d. Area super. yards. Cost per super yard. Contractor's Terms of maintenance. Description of Paving. Norfolk Gardens Next New Norfolk Street, All the Footway Nov., 1884 1475/9 7/- One year free 1 in. Compressed Asphalte on 3 in. Portland cement concrete. Nichols Square All the Footway June, 1889 13792/9 6/6 Do. ¾ in. Mastic Asphalte on 3 in. and 6 in. Portland cement concrete. Lower John Street From Upper John Street to Turner's Square April, 1890 2367/9 9/- Do. Carriageway—1½ in. Compressed Asphalte on 6 in. Portland cement concrete. Do. Do. do. do. June, 1895 1194/9 812/3 5/6 5/6 Do. Footway — ¾ in. Mastic Asphalte on 3 in. Portland cement concrete, Bath Place, Old Street Feb., 1891 157/18 9/- 5/6 Do. Do. Carriageway— 1½ in. Compressed Asphalte on 6 in. Portland cement concrete. Footway— ¾ in. Mastic Asphalte on 3 in. Portland cement concrete. Castle Place, Paul Street From Castle Street to Macnamara's March, 1891 104 5/6 Do. ¾ in. Mastic Asphalte on 3 in. Portland cement concrete. Do. do. From Macnamara's to Paradise Street Sept., 1897 91 5/9 Do. Do, do. do. Styman Street From East Road to Baches Street April, 1891 ' 25 9/- Do. Carriageway—1½ in. Compressed Asphalte on 6 in. Portland concrete cement. Do. Do. do. 3022/3 5/6 Do. Footway- ¾ in. Mastic Asphalte on 3 in. Portland cement concrete. Red Lion Street From Kingsland Road to end by Board School April, 1891 4714/9 9/3 Do. Carriageway—1½ in. Compressed Asphalte on 6 in. and 12 in. Portland cement concrete. Goldsmith's Row Narrow Portion, from Dove Row to Whiston Street July, 1891 1801/3 11/7 Do. 2 in. Compressed Asphalte on 6 in. Portland cement concrete. 163 ASPHALTE—continued. Name of Street. Position of Paving. Dates when paved. Area super. yards. Cost per super yard. Contractor's Terms of maintenance. Description of Paving. Ivy Lane From near Hoxton Street and Ivy Street to St. John's Road July,1893 225 9/3 One year free. Carriageway—l½ in. Compressed Asphalte on 6 in. Portland cement concrete. Do. Do. do. do. 4305/9 5/9 Do. Footway—¾ in. Mastic Asphalte on 3 in, Portland cement concrete. Bath Place, Old Street From Old Street to Rivington Street June, 1893 1988/9 9/9 Do. Carriageway—1½ in. Compressed Asphalte on 6 in. Portland cement concrete. Do. do. Do. do. do. 542/9 5/9 Do. Footway—¾ in. Mastic Asphalte on 3 in. Portland cement concrete. Ormesby Street From Pearson Street to Dunloe Street do. 2111/3 5/9 Do. Footway—¾ in. Mastic Asphalte on 3 in. Portland cement concrete. Essex Place, Hackney Road Fronting the " Colts " do. 385 5/9 Do. Do. do. do. Alfred Place, Whiston Street All May, 1895 1932/9 5/9 Do. Do. do. do. Alfred Terrace All do. 252/3 9/9 Do. Carriageway — l½ in. Compressed Asphalte on 6 in. Portland Cement concrete. 731/3 9/9 Do. Footway—¾ in. Mastic Asphalte on 3 in Portland cement concrete. Dove Row From near to Goldsmith's Row to Moye Street Oct., 1895 1612/3 5/9 Do. ¾ in. Mastic Asphalte on 3 in. Portland cement concrete. Henrietta Street From Sarah Buildings to Catherine Street Feb., 1896 2826/9 9/9 Maintenance for 10 years free. SPECIAL CONTRACT. Carriageway—1½ in. Compressed on 6 in. Portland cement concrete. 1367/9 5/9 Do. Footway - ¾ in. Mastic on 3 in. Portland cement concrete. L 164 ASPHALTE—continued. Name of Street. Position of Paving. Dates when paved. Area super. yards. Cost per super yard. Contractor's Terms of Maintenance. Description of Paving. Welsh Street From Henson Street to Catherine Street Feb., 1896 183 9/9 Maintenance for 10 years free. Carriageway—1½ in. Compressed on 6 in. Portland cement concrete. 941/9 5/9 Do. Footway—¾ in. Mastic on 3 in. Portland cement concrete. Staff Street From Sarah Buildings to Catnerine Street do. 2941/3 9/9 Do. Carriageway—1½ in. Compressed on 6 in. Portland cement concrete. 1482/9 5/9 Do. Footway—¾ in. Mastic on 3 in. Portland cement concrete. Sarah Street From Drysdale Street to end April, 1896 200 9/9 Do. Carriageway—1½ in. Compressed Asphalte on 6 in. Portland cement concrete. 117 * 5/9 Do. Footway—¾ in. Mastic Asphalte on 3 in. Portland cement concrete. Drysale Place From Drysdale Street to blank end Mar., 1896 323 9/9 Do. Carriageway—1½ in. Compressed Asphalte on 6 in. Portland cement concrete. 170 5/9 Do. Footway—¾ in. Mastic Asphalte on 3 in. Portland cement concrete. Dunloe Street By St. Chad's Church May, 1896 684/9 5/9 Do. Do. do. do. Do Between N.L. Railway and Fellowes Street do. 5947/9 12/6 Do. Carriageway—2 in. Compressed on 6 in. and 9 in. Portland cement concrete. 1382/3 5/9 Do. Footway—1½ in. Mastic on 3 in. Portland cement concrete. Goldsmiths Row Opposite Pereira's Industrial Dwellings do. 1871/3 5/9 Do. Footway—¾ in. Mastic on 3 in. Portland cement concrete. 155/9 9/9 Do, Carriageway— 1½ in. Compressed on 6 in. Portland cement concrete. 165 ASPHALTE—continued. Name of Street. Position of Paving. Dates when Paved. Area super yards. Cost per super yard. Contractor's Terms of maintenance. Description of Paving. Haggerstort Road By All Saints Church May, 1896 991/9 5/9 One year free. 3/4 in. Mastie Asphalte on 3 in. Portland cement concrete. George's Place, Hoxton Street Passageway and Place Aug., 1896 212 5/9 Do. Do. do. do. New Norfolk Street From Bateman Row to end July, 1896 365 9/9 Do. Carriageway—11/2 in. Compressed Asphalte on 6 in. Portland cement concrete. Do. Ditto ditto do. 175 Footway-3/4 in. Mastic on 3 in. Portland cement concrete. Wilmer Gardens Prom Hoxton Street co opposite Industrial Dwellings Aug., 1896 1154 12/6 Do. Carriageway—2 in. Compressed Asphalte on 6 in. Portland cement concrete. 56 5/9 . Footway—3/4 in. Mastic Asphalte on 3 in. Portland cement concrete. Goldsmith's Square By Messrs. Winkley's new houses Jan., 1897 268 5/9 Do. Footway—3/4 in. Mastic Asphalte on 3 in. Portland cement concrete. Turner's Square Prom Hoxton Street to Lower John Street do. 5382/3 9/9 Do. Carriageway—1½ in. Compressed Asphalte on 6 in. Portland cement concrete. 353 5/9 Footway—¾ in. Mastic Asphalte on 3 in. Portland cement concrete. Oakford Place All footways do. 83 5/9 Do. Footway—¾ in. Mastic Asphalte on 3 in. Portland cement concrete. Moye Street Between Audrey Street and Dove Row May, 1897 833 9/9 Do. Carriageway—1½ in. Compressed Asphalte on 6 in. Portland cement concrete. 792 5/9 Footway—¾ in. Mastic Alphate on 3 in. Portland cement concrete. L1 166 ASPHALTE—contin ued. * Name of Street. Position of Paving. Dates when paved. Area super. yards. Cost per super yard. Contractor's Terms of maintenance. Description of Paving. Hoxton Street From Fanshaw Street to Essex Street Sept., 1897 1559 12/6 One year free. Carriageway—2 in. Compressed Asphalte on 6 and 12 in. Portland cement concrete. Albert Mews A portion of footway on North side Oct., 1897 32 5/9 Do. ¾ in. Mastic Asphalte on 3 in. Portland cement concrete. Land of Promise, Hoxton Street Vestry and Guardians' portion Aug., 1897 132 9/9 Do. Carriageway—1½ in. Compressed Asphalte on 6 in. Portland cement concrete. Long Street All Nov., 1897 992 9/9 Do. Do. do. do. 747 5/9 Footway—¾ in. Ma-tic Asphalte on 3 in. Portland cement concrete. Caesar Street All do. 721 9/9 Do. Carriageway—1½ in. Compressed Asphalte on 6 in. Portland cement concrete. 450 5/9 Footway—¾ in. Mastic Asphalte on 3 in. Portland cement concrete. Union Buildings From Long Street to Caesar Street do. 173 9/0 Do. Carriageway—l½ in. Compressed Asphalte on 6 in. Portland cement concrete. 167 REPORT ON THE UTILIZATION OF CLINKER CONCRETE FOR PAVING OF FOOTWAYS. Town Hall, Old Street, London, E.C. November, 1897. Mr. Chairman and Gentlemen, As instructed, I have the pleasure of submitting the following for your consideration. Concrete, either laid in situ or in the form of slabs, cannot be recommended as a suitable paving for important and busy thoroughfares. In either case it is brittle and inferior to stone or asphalte in porosity, and when subjected to having heavy material unloaded on to, or drawn over it, it cracks ; and further, on account of the inelastic nature of its component parts, there is always a tendency to fissuring and upheaval with any contraction or expansion of its surroundings or of itself. It is decidedly inferior to stone paving in regard to affording a stable foot-hold, but in this instance it may be classed on an equal with asphalte under the same conditions. Otherwise it is found to withstand ordinary abrasion and wear well under foot. IN SITU WORK. When composed of clinker and Portland cement in the usual proportions as if with ballast, concrete has been found to answer extremely well for the majority of purposes in which it has been used ; but the Use of concrete laid in situ on footways in the heart of London is so unusual as to afford no opportunity of ascertaining its merits, and where I have been able to see the same in our suburbs, or in less busy places, the question of its usefulness or otherwise is so unsettled as to lead me to suggest that the Vestry would be well advised in laying a sufficiently large area for an experiment before generally adopting the idea on what may be termed thoroughfares of secondary importance. The natural appearance is decidedly dull, and any attempt to relieve it by blending the surface when in a soft state with granite chippings, or small broken-up crockery, is not found to be permanent or satisfactory after wear. Clinker pavement is found to be especially affected by the heat of the sun, and spreads for some five or six years at least after laying. In this kind of work, it is impossible to execute trench or other small repairs without permanently disfiguring the whole of the surface, unless, of course, the full width of the footway is taken up and relaid. In trying the use of a clinker-formod paving, I would suggest that the same be laid in the following manner:— The ground to be excavated to a depth of 6 inches, a bed of clinker ash about 1 inch thick being then spread over the bottom, then a thickness of broken clinker to pass through a 3 inch ring to be laid in up to within 2 inches of the finished surface level, and this to be rolled with an ordinary hand roller after well wetting and packing up the interstices. On this foundation 168 lay for a thickncss of 1 inch a carefully prepared concrete composed of two parts of clinker (broken to pass through a 1 inch screen) to one part of Portland cement, and then finish off up to the required level with a coat of richer concrete well trowelled and smoothed over the whole aroa. The paving should be laid in alternate bays of a no greater width than 4 feet, between narrow soft wood screeds, which should be loft in for some time during the setting of material, and when taken out eventually, have the joints filled up with fine ash or sand. At least a fortnight's interval should elapse after laying before the traffic is allowed to pass over. The cross falls should not be more than 3/8 inch to the foot. I would not generally advise the laying of concrete in situ on footways having a greater width than 6 feet including kerb, and on no account at a time when there is a possibility of frost. The passing of a small wooden, light roller (having its circumference specially formed) over the paving while in a plastic state might bo advantageously done to form a pattern surface and help to relieve the sombre appearance, but this requires to be very carefully done. CLINKER SLAB PAVING. Both in London (principally suburban) and the Provinces, slabs made from clinker and cement have now been used for several years with fairly satisfactory results, especially when compared with the cost and durability of the materials in more general use for this purpose. The slabs are generally made from 2 inches to 3 inches thick, and having a surface area of about 6 square feet. The ingredients are usually from two to three parts of clinker, crushed to a size of about i or g of an inch, to one part of Portland ccment, mixed together with water, filled into moulds, and then subjected to a very high pressure by hydraulic machinery until the flag has become perfectly solid and the surplus water is squeezed out. The slab is thon taken out of the mould, and placed on a board to set for two or three days, after which it is up ended in a covered shed, and left to harden for at least three months boforc being laid. In laying they require to be carefully and solidly bedded over the whole surface in half an inch of good lime mortar, and the joints should be swept in with lime mortar. The space required for the machinery for making the slabs as described is about 1,000 squaro feet, to which must of course be added sufficient space for the stacking of the greatest quantity that is likely to bo made at one time. Tho total cost of the plant complete is estimated at £1,500, the number of men required boing three at least and these should be able to manufacture thirty to forty slabs por diem. 1 The Hornsey Local Board are at the present time having an improvod apparatus fixed at a cost of about £2,000, which will give a hydraulic pressure of l,0001bs. per square inch, and which it is claimed will minimiso the cost of production, and bo able to turn out at least 100 slabs per diem. 169 \ COMPARISON OF COST. The estimated cost of clinker paving, also ordinary concrete paving, and tar paving, compared under similar conditions as to traffic, with York Stone, Patent Victoria Stone, or Mastic Asphalte, as laid under contract during this year, is as follows:— IN SLABS. Material. Thickness. .trice per Super. Yard Laid complete. Estimated Life. Cost ot re-laying per Square Yard complete. Years. York 3 inch 8/7½ 18 1/1½ York inch 8/0¾ 15 1/1½ Patent Victoria 2 inch 6/- 15 1/1½ Clinker 2 inch 2/9 10 1/3 IN SITU. Material. Thickness. Price per Super. Yard Laid complete. Estimated Life. Cost of repairs per Square Yard complete Years. Mastic Asphalte ¾ inch, on 3-in. P.C. concrete 5/9 8 7/9 Ordinary Concrete 6-in., including bottoming 4/- 6 4/- Clinker Concrete 6-in., including bottoming. 3/4 6 3/4 Tar Paving 4-in., including bottoming. 2/6 5 3/6 The Works Committee having recommended that the footway round St. John's Churchyard, Hoxton, having an area, excluding kerb, of 413 square yards, should be paved with asphalte, at an estimated total cost of £217 15s. 6d., made up as follows:— For Asphalte £118 14 9 „ Kerb and channel redressed, including new as required, and sett paved crossing, all on P.C. concrete 99 0 9 £217 15 6 And the Vestry having referred the matter back until this report has been submitted, a suitable opportunity is afforded for experimenting during next spring with the in situ concrete as described herein, and covering the same area at an estimated total cost of £167 17s. 5d., made up as follows :— For Concrete paving in situ £68 16 8 ,, Kerb, Channel, crossing, &c., as before 99 0 9 £167 17 5 And as the portion of Coronet Street, opposite the Destructor Works and Electric Lighting Station is proposed to be covered with the slabs made at Hornsey from clinker supplied from Shoreditch Vestry's works, an examination and comparison of both from time to time would afford the most practical proof of the advantages or otherwise by their use as paving material. I am, Gentlemen, Your obedient Servant, J. RUSH DIXON, .4ssoc. M. Inst. C.E. Surveyor to the Vestry. 170 The footway paving in the following streets is in bad condition, and should be re-paved:— Allerton Street Forston Street Bacchus Walk (portion of) Hackney Road (portions of) Bracklyn Street Holms Street Britannia Street Hows Street Catherine Street Huntingdon Street Cavendish Street Ivy Street Clifton Street (portion of) Kingsland Road (portions of) Crondall Street (portion of) Laburnum Street Curtain Road (portion of) Mintern Street (portion of) Custance Street Rushton Street Dunston Street Upper John Street Fellows Street Whiston Street/(portions of) The carriageway or channel paving in the following streets is in an unsatisfactory condition, and should be repaired :— Aske Street macadam Ivy Street setts Bevenden Street setts Laburnum Street „ Britannia Street „ Marlborough Road macadam Brougham Road macadam Mill Row ,, Buttesland Street ,, Murray Street setts Catherine Street setts New North Road „ Great Eastern Street „ Old Street (portion) „ Hoxton Square pebbles Shrubland Road macadam CUSTANCE STREET. The extension of above through into Murray Street, and the abolition of the objectionable passageway known as Princess Alice Passage, is in progress, and will be formally opened to the public by the Chairman of the Works Committee on the 24th April, 1898. HYDRAULIC MAINS AND CONNECTIONS. The applications to lay hydraulic mains have been few, and the desire for connections to the existing mains has fallen off. The Vestry agreed to grant certain applications conditionally on compliance with the terms embodied in the agreement with the Hydraulic Power Company. 171 ROSEMARY BRANCH AND GAT AND MUTTON BRIDGES. The widening of these bridges having received the consideration of the London County Council, Parliamentary power is being sought for the reconstruction of Rosemary Branch Bridge, and there is now every likelihood that the much needed improvement between Bridport Place and Southgate Road will be carried out. The Cat and Mutton Bridge involves a much larger outlay, and has not yet been included in the Council's general order, but your Works Committee have every hope that with the aid of contributions from the Hackney and Bethnal Green Vestries, both of which have been waited upon by deputations from your Committee, this improvement will also be effected in due course, and the suggestions contained in your Surveyor's report carried out in their entirety. MOUNT PLEASANT—EAST ROAD. The cul de sac which existed at the west end will be removed, and a passageway made into Provost Street. LONG STREET AND CÆSAR STREET. These streets have been re-paved and re-sewered, as stated under previous headings, but considerable portions were private, and it having been agreed that the owners contribute their share of the cost; the work was done upon agreed terms, and the Vestry took over the same on the 6th January, 1898, as a highway repairable by the inhabitants at large. UNDERGROUND CONVENIENCES. New underground conveniences and lavatories for both sexes have been constructed in High Street, opposite Shoreditch Church, and in New North Road by East Road, at a total cost of about £4,100, under the supervision of the Works Committee and your Surveyor. Mr. G. Jennings, of Lambeth, was the contractor. SHOREDITCH HIGH STREET. This convenience is triangular in form, being 40 ft. long x 40 ft. extreme width, the floor level being about 10 ft. below the adjoining carriageway. The men's portion is situate at the north end, and contains 18 urinals (in four ranges), 8 w.c.'s, and a lavatory to accommodate 2 persons, fitted with hot and cold water. The women's portion is situate at the south end, and comprises 6 w.c.'s, 2 urinettes, and lavatory accommodation for 2 persons, also supplied with hot and cold water. To each department there is a separate attendant's office. 172 The staircases are of York stone, 4 ft. wide, the steps being faced with Mason's safety treads. Bostwick's patent folding gates are fixed at the bottom of the staircases in addition to wrought iron ornamental gates and railings on top. The internal fittings are of the latest type, the urinals being radial stalls, and the w.c.'s of Jenning's Special Midland pattern. Three lamp columns serve as ventilators to the drains. The convenience is lighted by electricity, a gas supply being also supplied for emergency. The Cab rank, which stood on a portion of the site now occupied by this convenience, has been removed by the Police Authorities to Calvert Avenue. NEW NORTH ROAD. This convenience, also for both sexes, is 31 ft. long by 24 ft. wide at one end, and 9 ft. wide at the other end, the floor level being about 10 ft. below the surface of the adjoining carriageway. A portion extends under the carriageway of New North Road, which is carried by means of glazed brick arches and concrete on girders. The men's portion is situate at the south end, and contains 11 urinals (in two ranges), 4 w.c.'s, and a lavatory to accommodate 2 persons, fitted with hot and cold water. The women's portion is situate at the north end, and comprises 3 w.c.'s, 2 urinettes, and a lavatory, also supplied with hot and cold water. The staircases are four feet wide with steps, gates, and all fittings similar to to those previously described. There are two lamp columns serving as ventilators to the drains, and this convenience is also lighted by electricity (with gas supply if required). GENERAL DETAILS OF BOTH CONVENIENCES. The conveniences are ventilated by " Blackman's air propellors," the fans being driven by water power, the air discharging into the ornamental shafts which serve also as lamp columns, the waste water from ventilating fan re-used for flushing the urinals, &c. The floors are paved with black and white vitreous tiles which give a clean and cheerful appearance. The divisions between w.c.'s, &c., are of marble, and the whole of the wood work used is teak. The roofs of the conveniences are constructed of glazed pavement lights with rectangular lenses fixed upon granite kerbing which is carried by steel girders. 173 The railing surrounding the entrances to the Conveniences is of the Vestry's special pattern in wrought iron. Enamelled iron screens are fixed inside same. The drainage has been carried out in an approved manner and subjected to severe tests. All the pipes are bedded in concrete, each main line being intercepted from the main sewer, and the whole system amply ventilated. Every section of the drains can be separately examined, tested and cleansed by means of inspection eyes at various points. Access chambers with white glazed inverts are provided at all intersections, these being covered with double sealed and tiled covers at floor level. Shoreditch High Street was commenced on 20th October, 1897, and New North Road on 2nd November, 1897. Both were completed within the stipulated time. The conveniences were opened on the 10th March, 1898, and formally handed over by the Chairman of the Works Committee. The administration of the Conveniences is now under the control of the Public Health Committee, and the superintendence of both intrusted to Mr. C. H. Doughty. Designs and Estimate for another Convenience in Hoxton Street by Workhouse, will be submitted to you later on. SEWER WORK. VESTRY'S ' SEWER MEN. One foreman, three mechanics and four flushers, on an average, with labourers, were employed in cleansing, disinfecting, reconstructing, repairing, &c., the sewers, drains and gullies in the Parish; also in constructing or reconstructing the required combined or private drains from the sewers to the line of frontage (details of which will be found on page 176), and watchmen were engaged for the work as required. Three men have been constantly employed cleansing the Parish urinals (including Sundays and holidays) in the early morning, but as the public accommodation has been so largely increased by the new underground conveniences, and consequently necessitated an increase of staff, the arrangements as to these men have now been transferred to the Public Health Department. 174 URINALS, SEWER AND PRIVATE DRAIN WORK.—LABOUR. ] Urinal. Foreman, Sewer Mechanics and Labourers. Sewer Flashers and Labourers. Watchmen. Totals. For Labour 221 4 9½ 726 9 7½ 538 15 3½ 157 1 0 1,643 10 8½ For Holidays 3 15 0 14 18 0 9 14 0 _ 28 7 0 For Sick Pay — 9 % 13 9 4 10 0 — 14 3 9 224 19 9½ 751 1 4½ 552 19 8½ 157 1 0 £1,686 1 5½ Manholes have been constructed on the sewers, and other works done as follows:— Land of Promise (by Workhouse) for Vestry and Guardians— Four Gullies constructed *20 14 1 At 128, Hoxton Street, two head walls built in old unused sewer 1 5 2 Long Street— Manhole and two Gullies constructed 28 17 1 Nicholas Street— One Manhole constructed 11 19 0½ Red Lion Street— One Manhole constructed 12 8 11½ Watsons Place— One Manhole constructed 20 3 0 Clifton Street and Granville Buildings— Making connections from sewer to patent sewer-gas destructor lamp 12 1 3 Bowling Green Walk— Making connection from sewer to fans connected with dust destructor cells 13 6 4 *The whole or part repaid to the Vestry 175 JOBBING SEWERS AND PRIVATE DRAIN WORK. The undermentioned sewers have been cleansed and flushed by the Vestry's workmen, the deposit removed and carted to the Vestry's wharves and barged away Situation. Description. Feet. Gopsall Street Brick Sewer 780 Kingsland Rd. (N. of Canal Bridge) „ „ 600 Broke Road „ „ 1524 Commercial Street „ „ 300 East Road „ „ 1800 Lee Street „ „ 880 Audrey Street „ „ 378 Essex Street „ „ 235 Norfolk Gardens „ „ 800 Felton Street „ „ 350 Huntingdon Street „ „ 642 Ipswich Road „ „ 296 Norwich Road „ „ 314 Pownall Road „ „ 1734 Nil Street „ „ 310 Bracklyn Street „ „ 510 Wimbourne Street „ „ 574 Clifton Street „ „ 500 Scrutton Street „ „ 670 Garden Walk „ „ 177 Bristow Street „ „ 350 Harvey Street „ „ 350 Buttesland Street „ „ 900 Brunswick Street „ „ 460 Scawfell Street „ „ 316 Curtain Road „ „ 1732 Great Eastern Street „ „ 1550 Britannia Street „ „ 1141 Holywell Lane „ „ 710 Nicholas Street „ „ 936 Shepherdess Walk „ „ 1666 Marlborough Road „ „ 472 Mundy Street Pipe Sewer 160 Red Lion Street „ „ 470 Old Street „ „ 500 Watsons Place „ „ 274 Regents Row „ „ 540 Harman Street „ „ 676 Parr Street „ „ 264 Bacchus Walk „ „ 462 Bevenden Street „ „ 250 Gloucester Row „ „ 313 Norfolk Gardens „ „ 250 Bath Place, Whiston Street „ „ 200 Ilva Place „ „ 280 Waterloo Place „ „ 280 Ormsby Street „ „ 436 176 Sixty-four new patent gullies, and seventeen 15" x 36" stoneware pan gullies have been fixed. Thirty new gullies constructed, and others reconstructed. The jobbing sewers and private drain work continues to be executed by the Vestry's own staff in a satisfactoiy manner. 63 new house drains from sewer to line of frontage have been constructed; 65 reconstructed; 31 stoppages in drains removed; 26 intercepting traps fixed; 5 openings made for inspection of drains; and five old drains built off. These works were carried out by our men at the owner's expense, the cost of the work amounting to £706 11s. 2d., payment having been first deposited by the parties interested, in accordance with the Vestry's regulations. COMBINED DRAINAGE. The question of a just definition of "what is a sewer or drain" is still the subject of much dispute, and the Vestry's support might well be given to any Parliamentary Bill which will be the means of satisfactorily disposing of this litigious and harassing question. Upon the direction of the Public Health Committee, certain (27) combined systems have been opened for inspection or reconstructed as required by the Vestry's men, at a cost of £343 17s. 6d. SEWERAGE AND DRAINAGE WORKS DONE BY CONTRACT. Anning Street— £ s. d. The old defective and shallow brick sewer has been removed, and replaced by 350 ft. run 12 in. stoneware pipe, all necessary drains connected, and 2 manholes constructed (cost) 381 8 3 New North Place and at rear of Granville Buildings— Old brick sewers removed, and replaced by 260 feet run of 15 inch stoneware pipe, 280 feet run 12 inch stoneware pipe, and 185 feet run of 9 inch stoneware pipe, 2 manholes constructed, and all necessary house drains connected 551 4 11 Felton Street and Holt Place— Old brick sewer replaced by 100 lineal feet of 12 inch stoneware pipe in Felton Street, and 294 lineal feet of 9 inch stoneware pipe in Holt Place, and all necessary drains connected 364 19 3 Ceasar Street and Long Street— Old pipe sewers removed, and replaced by 360 lineal feet of 12 inch stoneware pipe in Long Street, and 405 lineal feet of 9 inch stoneware pipe in Ceasar Street, and all necessary drains connected *407 6 6 *A portion repaid to the Vestry. 177 Fanshaw Street— Old brick sewer replaced by 300 lineal feet of 12 inch stoneware pipe; all necessary house drains connected 286 12 4 Mr. John Jackson, of Plaistow, was the Contractor for the for the foregoing works. Harman Street and Essex Street— Old brick sewers removed, and replaced in Harman Street by 165 feet run of 12 inch and 170 feet run of 9 inch stoneware pipe, in Essex Street by 162 feet run of 12 inch and 162 feet run of 9 inch stoneware pipe, including all house connections 679 10 5 Mr. T. Adams, of Wood Green, was the Contractor. Willow Street— Old brick sewer replaced by 212 lineal feet of 12 inch stoneware pipe, all house connections made, new gullies 147 14 5 Moira Place (New street from East Road to Provost Street)— A new 15 inch pipe sewer, a length of 460 lineal feet has been constructed, with manholes and connections provided for subsequent use 222 14 3 Messrs. C. W. Killingback & Co., of Camden Town, were the Contractors for these works. The sewers in the following localities are in a very unsatisfactory condition, and should be reconstructed Angrave Street Aske Street Ashford Street (a portion) Avebury Street Bateman's Row Belgrave Terrace Buttesland Street Britannia Street Clifford Street (a portion) Earl Street (a portion) East Road Flemming Street Grange Street Great Chart Street (a portion) Gifford Street (a portion) Hare Walk (a portion) Haberdasher Street Hammond Square Hilcot Street John Street St. John's Terrace New North Road (a portion by Poole Street) Poole Street Taplow Street Tyssen Street Wickham Street 178 HAGGERSTON DISTRICT. (Section V.) In accordance with the intimation mentioned in last year's report, I reported upon certain sewers in the above district as follows : Proposed Scheme for Re-Sewering the Acton District. Town Hall, Old Street, E.C , May, 1897. Report to Works Committee. Mr. Chairman and Gentlemen, Necessity for ReSewering The constant complaints of the inhabitants, and various reports form the Medical Officer and Sanitary Inspectors as to the unsatisfactory state of the sewers in this district, having been referred to in the Surveyor's Annual Reports for some time past, and having received instructions from this Committee to bring up without further delay a scheme for the re-sewering of this district, I now have the pleasure to submit the following for your consideration:— District. The District proposed to be dealt with is that east of Queen's Road to Brougham Road, and north of the Regent's Canal as far as Shrubland Road. The chief defect in the existing sewers is the insufficient depth at which they are laid, but which depth was, at the time of their construction, the most that could be obtained, as the Queen's Road sewer, belonging to the County Council, into which they discharge, was at that time also very shallow. The deepening of this main intercepting sewer about 12 years ago has afforded means of considerably improving the depth of the tributary sewers. Present Sewers. The present sewers are of brick of various sizes and sections, and for the most part unsuitable for the required service of the district. The natural fall of the ground is away from Queen's Road, and the sewers falling in the opposite direction it was necessary to keep the gradients small, so as to got a sufficient covering at the summit. The Broke Road sewer, which is the worst in this respect, has a gradient of about 1 in 2,840, being practically an elongated cesspool, and at no time is it found capable of clearing itself. The same remarks apply to tho sewers in that portion of Pownall Road, east of Ipswich Road, Norwich Road, and Brougham Road between Norwich Road and the Broadway. The sewers in Brownlow Road, Brougham Road, Suffolk Road, Ipswich Road, and Marlborough Road (north of Broke Road), and Regent's Row (east of No. 33) are at insufficient depths and gradients, the depth (7 ft.) at Regent's Row being insufficient to drain two basements at No. 33 and 34, and it is now proposed to make the depth of the now sewer 10ft. 0 in. opposite these premises, so as to be sufficiently deep to efficiently drain the basements, which are at a level of 7 ft. 6 in. below the carriage-way. The sewers in Shrubland Road, Marlborough Road (south of Broke Road), Pownall Road (west of Ipswich Road), and Regent's Row (west of No. 33) are in good condition, and at a sufficient depth for the drainage of the lowest floors of the adjoining houses, and though their gradients are capable of improvement their condition is hardly such as to require their re-construction at present, it is therefore now proposed only to construct 179 certain manholes and minor works to allow of their more efficient ventilation and cleansing. Broke, Brougham (Part) and Norwich Roads. In place of the defective 3 ft. 9 in. x 2 ft. G in. brick sewer in Broke Road, 2 ft. 0 in. x 2 ft. 0 in. barrel in Brougham Road (between Broke and Pownall Roads), and 3 ft. 0 in. X2 ft. 0 in. and 2 ft. 0 in.x2 ft. 0 in. brick sewers in Norwich Road at depths varying from 5 ft. 6 in. to 14 ft. 0 in., it is proposed to construct a main 3 ft. 9 in. x 2 ft. 6 in. brick sewer having a gradient of 1 in 350 between Queen's Road and Marlborough Road, 1 in 300 between Marlborough Road and Brougham Road, and 1 in 250 between Broke Road and Regent's Row. The gradients are sufficient to allow of the sewer being self-cleansing, and would give depth enough for the drainage of the basements before referred to. This brick sewer is advisable so as to afford ponding room during heavy storms when the Queen's Road sewer is gorged, and would further prevent the basements of the houses in Marlborough Road being flooded at such times. The invert of this sewer at its outfall will be 3 ft. 0 in. above that of the intercepting sewer in Queen's Road, and it will be 24 ft. 6 in. deep at that point; at Marlborough Road 19 ft. 6 in. deep; at Brougham Road 16 ft. 0 in. deep; at Pownall Road 14 ft. 0 in. deep and Regent's Row 12 ft. 0 in. deep. Regent's Row. Along a portion of Regent's Row a new 15 in. pipe sewer is proposed, extending from the end of the brick sewer to Ipswich Road, and thence a 9 in. pipe sewer to a manhole, opposite No. 33, which joins up to the present 12 in. pipe sewer, at which point the new sewer will be 10 ft. 0 in. deep as before stated, allowing of a gradient of 1 in 150. This sewer will supersede the present short lengths of 12 in. pipe. Suffolk Road. A 12 in. pipe at a gradient of 1 in 120 will be substituted for the present 2 ft. 0 in. x 2 ft. 0 in. barrel at depths varying from 11 ft. 0 in. to 12 ft. 0 in., and discharging into the new brick sewer. Pownall Road. A 15 in. pipe at a gradient of 1 in 120 will be substituted for the present 3 ft 9 in. X2 ft. 6 in. sewer between Ipswich and Norwich Road ; its depth being from 12 ft. 0 in to 13 ft. 0 in., this also discharges into the new brick sewer. Ipswich Road. A 12 in. pipe at a gradient of 1 in 120 will be substituted for the existing 3 ft. 0 in. x 2 ft. 0 in. brick sewer, its depth being from 10 ft. 0 in. to 12 ft. 0 in. and points of discharge the summit of the new 15 in. pipe sewer in Pownall Road, and the 15 in. pipe sewer in Regent's Row. Brougham Road. The new main arterial 3 ft. 9 in. x 2 ft. 6 in. brick sewer at a gradient of 1 in 250 will be substituted for the existing 2 ft. 0 in. X 2 ft. 0 in. barrel, at a depth of from 14 to 16 feet, between Broke Road and Pownall Road. Between Broke Road and Marlborough Road 12 in. and 15 in. pipe sewers at gradients of 1 in 120, and at depths varying from 10 ft. 9 in. to 15 ft. 0 in., will be substituted for the existing 2ft. 0 in. x 2 ft. barrel, and will discharge into the new brick main sewer in Broke Road, 180 A now 9 in. pipe sewer, discharging into the now brick sower at a gradient of 1 in 100, will bo substituted for the present short length of 3 ft. 9 in. x 2 ft. 6 in. brick sower in that portion of Brougham Road between Norwich Road and the parish boundary at a depth of 12 ft. 0 in. Marlborough Road. Between Broke Road and Brownlow Road a 8 ft. 9 in. X 2 ft. 6 in. brick sewer at a gradient of 1 in 250, and depth varying from 19 ft. 0. to 19 ft. 6 in. will bo substituted for the existing 4 ft. 0 in. x 2 ft 8 in. sewer, the now sewer discharging into and forming a continuation of the now main brick sewer in Broke Road, the junction between the two being by a boll mouth. A 12 in. pipe sower at a gradient of 1 in 100 will bo substituted for the existing 3 ft. 9 in x 2 ft. 6 in. brick sewer between Brownlow Road and Shrubland Road and will discharge into the now brick sewer in the lower portion of this road as before stated. The depth will vary from 12 ft. 6 in. to 14 ft. 6 in., and it is proposed to join this sewer up to the Shrubland Road Sewer in such a manner that the water can bo diverted down it for flushing or other purposes as may bo required. The 12 in. pipe sewer between Broke and Pownall Roads to bo deepened. Brownlow Road. East of Marlborough Road a 12 in. pipe sewer, at a gradient of 1 in 75, will be substituted for the existing 3 ft. 9 in. x 2 ft. 6 in. sewer; it will discharge into the new brick sower in Marlborcugh Road and its depth will vary from 11 ft. 6 in. to 16 ft. 6 in. West of Marlborough Road it is proposed to substitute for the existing 3 ft. 9 in. x 2 ft. 6 in. brick sower, a 15 in. pipe sewer for two-thirds of the length and a 12 in. pipe sewer for the remainder, both at gradients of 1 in 120 and at depths varying from 12 ft. 0 in. to 17 ft. 3 in., the former being the depth at its summit which will be situated at its point of junction with the existing sewer opposite the end of the gardens to the houses fronting Queens Road which present sewer will remain undisturbed between such point and Queens Road, to which it fails. Outfall. It will bo noticed that the proposed sewerage of the whole of those streets is served by one outlet to the County Council's main line sewer in Queens Road. Removal of Present Sewers. The present sewers will for the most part be demolished and removed to give place to the now sewers; but where they do not come in the line of cutting, or are not affected by the excavation for the now sowers, they will have all sediments removed therefrom, and bo left in and packed up solid with hard dry filling. Inspection and Ventilation. Manholes are proposed to bo placed at the intersections of all streets, and at all bends or breaks in lino, either horizontally or vertically, and where the distance between such chambers exceed 300 ft. lamp-holes will be placed. Upright ventilation shafts are proposed to be erected at suitable points against the gable ends of certain properties by permission of the owners. All manholes and lampholes will bo provided with open surface gratings for the purpose of ventilation, except where the upright shafts will bo affected thereby. 181 Gullies. The majority of the present gullies are old brick cesspool gullies and are in a defective condition, many of them being in unsuitable positions and their number altogether insufficient, it is proposed to properly arrange for the drainage of the channels and to provide new Cast Iron Gullies of 19 gallon capacity as required. Yours obediently, J. RUSH DIXON, Assoc. M. Inst. C.E., Surveyor to the Vestry. SEWER VENTILATION With a view to the adoption of some uniform system of dealing with complaints of offensive emanations from gratings connected with both local and main sewers, a conference of the Engineers and Surveyors of all the Metropolitan Local Boards was convened and presided over by Sir Alexander Binnie, the Chief Engineer to the County Council, in February last, some 40 vestries and district boards being represented, and after a careful discussion, the following resolutions were adopted by the conference:— (1) That the closing of sewer ventilators in response to complaints increases the general evil, the diminution of which is to be attained by the multiplication of the ventilators at regular frequent intervals. (2) That in connection with any interceptor hereafter fixed on a main house drain, it is advisable to carry up a ventilating pipe from the sewer side of the interceptor, up the front, side or back of the house to the satisfaction of the local sanitary authority, and that the outlet drain from the interceptor shall not be flap-trapped in sewer unless required by the local sanitary authority. (3) That pipe ventilators up buildings or otherwise should, when possible, be always adopted in addition to surface ventilators. It is very important that the above suggestions should receive the Vestry's most careful consideration, as it is remarkable what scant means of ventilation exists in many of the sewers in this parish, and until something more is provided and the generally prevailing ignorance and objection of the owners and occupiers of premises, where permission is sought for the erection of vent shafts, is overcome, the many complaints of nuisance from surface gratings will continue to be received and no doubt increase with the age of the sewers. DRAIN VENTILATING PIPES. In consequence of the fresh air inlets to drains by means of stack pipes erected in front of the buildings projecting beyond the lines of frontage it was decided by your Works Committee to issue directions that in future these vent pipes should be placed in a recess or chase in the wall to prevent encroachment upon the public footway. EARL STREET SEWER. The Vestry having received an offer of £100 from Messrs. Bliss towards the cost of lowering the sewer in a portion of Earl Street, and the requirements of the neigh- M1 182 bourhood necessitating an alteration of same, it has been resolved to proceed with the work in accordance with your Surveyor's plan and estimate. NEW BUILDINGS—BUILDINGS RE-DRAINED. Notices of intention to build, and applications for permission to drain have been received, considered by your Works Committee, and approved by the Vestry for 143 various premises, and 125 applications for lamps, sign-boards, pavement lights, &c. have been dealt with. COMBINED DRAINAGE. Fifty-seven orders for draining by means of a combined operation have been made by the Vestry upon plans deposited for approval, in accordance with section 74 of 18 and 19 Vic., cap. 120, which will hereafter prevent their being construed as sewers repairable by the Vestry. LICENSES, &c. Two hundred and fifty-three licenses and renewals for erecting scaffolds or hoardings, &c., have been issued, and the paving works connected therewith measured, and the costs paid by the builders. The undermentioned is a table of comparison with the number of drainage works executed, and plans deposited and approved, and number of licenses, &c., granted during the last three years, from which will be seen the activity of building operations generally in the parish, and the great increase in the work of your Surveyor's department to deal with same. TABLE OF COMPARISON. 1894-95. 1895-96. 1896-97. 1897-98. Number. Number. Number. Number. New drains constructed 77 55 60 63 Drains re-constructed 47 50 67 65 Stoppages removed 18 30 25 31 Interceptings traps fixed — - 30 26 Total cost of works £542 3 2½ £462 11 7 £964 2 7 £706 11 2 Notice to build or re-build Not tabulated. 69 72 143 Applications for lamps and signboards 46 58 125 Orders for combined drains 33 15 57 Licenses and renewals for scaffolds, hoards, &c. 264 236 253 183 WAGES OF EMPLOYEES. (Referred to on page 147). The following is the summary of the resolution adopted by the Vestry on December 21st, 1897, after recommendation of the Works Committee, the increase commenced on January 1st following. The hours of labour were not altered. Class. Previous Wages and Hours. Wages recommended and resolved upon. Masons 5/10 per day 56 hours per week summer 48 hours per week winter The same Paviors 5/10 per day. Hours the same The same Rammermen 4/6 per day do. 5/- per day Mason's Labourers.. 4/2 per day do. 4/6 per day Pickers 4/2 per day do. General Labourers 4/2 per day do. Sewermen 36/- per week 45 hours per week Men find Boots and Slops 36/- per week Boots and Slops to be provided by the Vestry Watchmen 4/- per day with 4d. per day for firing in winter The same Steam Roller Driver 6/4 per day Hours as Pickers The same PARLIAMENTARY POWERS, SESSION 1898. The proposed Acts and Parliamentary Plans for the reconstruction of Rosemary Branch Bridge. The extension of tramways along Bethnal Green Road, and the construction of the Great Northern and City Underground Railway have been the subject of a report by your Surveyor. The conditions therein suggested were recommended to and adopted by the Vestry in January last, and there seems every probability that in the case of the new Railway a much needed widening of New North Road against the Canal will result. 184 INVENTORY OF PLANT AND MATERIAL ON HAND AT FLEMMING STREET DEPOT, at 25th MARCH, 1898. For Highways— 1 steam roller 1 tarpaulin for same 1 set leather hose for ditto 1 hand roller 12 masons' and paviors' trucks 2 box barrows 14 navvy barrows 1 stone trolley 1 water cart 3 wooden shelters for watchmen 136 lamps and lanterns for watchmen 5 iron posts (taken from refuge by Shoreditch Church) 8 cast iron street posts 175 iron trestles 25 galvanized pails 4 masons' beetles 60 „ chisels 6 „ bedding hammers 6 „ trowels 6 „ levels 8 „ straight edges 3 yard measuring boxes 1 „ „ „ 2 setting out square 1 vice and bench, complete 6 twivels 11 spalling hammers 9 paviors' hammers 4 rammers 35 punners 27 crowbars 30 stone breakers' hammers 130 pickaxes 1 sot boning sticks 25 steel wedges 28 shovels 2 wire screens 1 weighing machine 72 brooms 6 notice boards For Highways (continued)— 14 sieves 2 concrete measures 1 step ladder 1 lifting jack 2 branding irons 2 iron back stays 1 grindstone 5 tarpaulins for trucks / For Sewers— 1 side entrance screen 1 centre 6 iron sewer trucks 4 rakes 6 sewer lamps 200 feet cane sewer rods 7 Men's sewer suits complete 100 feet ash sewer rods 3 machines and scoops 1 ladder 4 saws 1 set sheer legs 1 gully bowl and fork 3 tarpaulins for sewer use Material at yard— 50 feet run tram stone 45 „ dressed do. 250 feet re-dressed edge and circular curb 300 feet old edge and circular curb 300 super feet Victoria stone 2532 „ clinker paving 60 cube yards old York 200 super feet York stone 200 lineal „ „ edge stone 30 cube yards broken York 5 „ „ „ granite 150 tons old granite cubes 70 „ „ pebbles 6 sacks granite chippings 185 Material at yard (continued)— 4 cast iron side entrance covers 4 „ large gully grates 1 drain stopper 5 cast iron medium gully grates 7 „ small „ 2 „ ventilating grates 17 „ „ (with catchpits) 6 „ manhole covers complete 20 cast iron flushing boxes Patterns for castings (various) 8 6 inch stoneware block traps 12 9 „ „ „ „ 2 15" x 36" „ gully pans 7 patent iron gully pans 15 15 inch stoneware junctions 8 12 „ „ „ 14 9 „ 4 club hammers 28 sledge hammers 37 15 inch stoneware pipes 8 12 „ 46 9 „ „ „ 24 6 „ „ 37 4 „ „ „ 9 12 to 9 reducing stoneware pipes 6 9 „ 6 „ „ „ 12 6 „ 4 „ „ „ 41 4 inch bends \ Material at yard (continued)— 38 6 inch bends 33 9 „ „ 4 12 „ 1 15 „ 2 6" on 12" saddle junctions 7 9" on 12" „ 1 hose reel 7 lengths hose 3 grafting tools 1800 feet scaffold poles 20 12 feet battens 40 6 „ 200 „ „ odd lengths ½ fathom polling boards 100 feet 5" x 5" struts 2 tons Portland cement 1 ton blue lias lime 1000 bricks 5 cwt. carbolic powder 22 prepared coal plate stones 10 „ channel stones 80 yards rope 15 cube yards sand 25 „ „ ballast 5 „ „ shingle 15 coke sacks 4 tubs 1 Jack roll complete GENERALLY. In addition to the heavy current work appertaining to the Works Committee which has so materially increased, and which necessitates mu6h care and consideration, various undertakings by other Committees, such as new buildings for the Scavenging wharf, the heating of the Town Hall, the acquisition of the old Fire Brigade Station and its suggested alteration for Vestry purposes, the improvements, drainage and new erections at the Churchyards and Open Spaces carried out for the Housing Committee, besides matters of proposed private undertakings under the consideration of the Parliamentary Committee, have been reported upon, plans prepared for, and the work directed by me, without the aid of the usual outside assistance, and this has been the means of a considerable saving in professional fees to the Vestry. 186 It would bo to the interest of the Parish if in all possible instances the constructive work resolved to be done upon the recommendation of many of the Committees, were referred to the Works Committee to carry out, as at times it is very unsatisfactory and inconvenient for my department to be required to perform work under so many different Committees, and tends to confusion in tho several accounts and records. I again acknowledge very gratefully the assistance which has been kindly afforded me by the Chairman (Mr. H. Winkler,) and tho members of tho Works Committee, also the confidence and consideration with which I have been favoured during the year by the members of the Vestry generally. I have the honour to remain, Gentlemen, Your obedient Servant, J. RUSH DIXON, Assoc. M. Inst. C.E., Mem. San. Inst., Engineer and Surveyor. Shoreditch Town Hall, Old Street, London E.C. 25th March, 1898. 187 DUSTING AND SCAVENGING DEPARTMENT. 287, Kingsland Road, N.E., 25th March, 1898. (a) REPORT ON THE PRESENT ARRANGEMENT AND THE PROPOSED RE-ORGANISATION OF THE WORK OF DUSTING, SCAVENGING AND WATERING. The Committee have had under consideration a lengthy report prepared by the Surveyor, of which eventually a copy was sent to every member of the Vestry, and after several meetings the report was recommended to, and adopted by the Vestry, and came into operation on August 9th last. Since the re-arrangement came into force, a marked improvement has taken place in the appearance of the streets, and complaints generally have been less frequent. (b) NEW CONTRACT FOR BARGING STREET SWEEPINGS, &c. On November 10th, 1897, a new contract was entered into with Messrs. Flower and Everett for three years at 3s. per ton, being the lowest tenders of two which were received after advertising. It is obvious that the facilities for the disposal of the refuse of London are decreasing year by year. (c) DEPOSITING RUBBISH IN PUBLIC THOROUGHFARES. As reported last year, this practice is still on the increase, notwithstanding the large circulation of reward bills. One or two captures were made during the year, and resulted in successful prosecutions. (d) HORSES. 3 horses have been purchased during the year of Mr. J. Burton of Enfield, at a cost of £62, £67 and £64 respectively. Two have been sold at the Elephant and Castle Repository, being no longer fit for the work of the department and realised £10 1s. 6d. and £20 9s. 6d. respectively. One died and the carcase realised 30/- 188 The cost for hiring during the year is as follows For watering the Streets £103 15 0 For Dusting £39 1 0 For Cartage of Clinkers from Dust Destructor 89 15 0 £232 11 0 (e) ROLLING STOCK. An addition to the rolling stock has been made in the shape of six new vans built by Messrs. E. and H. Hora, of Peckham, on the same terms and specifications as before, viz., £38 10s. per van. (f) UNEMPLOYED AND SNOW. On account of the mild winter it has not been necessary to employ temporary labour for the removal of snow. (g) TRADE REFUSE. The charge for the removal of trade refuse remains unaltered, viz., 5/6 per ton; or if brought in by parishioners 3/2 per ton. The removals of trade refuse and the quantities brought to the wharf by parishioners are still increasing. (A) COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL OF REFUSE. 16,805 loads of House and Trade Refuse, and 11,898 loads of Street Sweepings wero collected during tho year, making a total of 28,703 loads, and were disposed of as follows:— Tons. Cwt. Qrs. Lbs. By barge 24,379 5 0 21 To Destructor 18,378 18 3 21 To Great Eastern Railway 951 0 0 0 / Total 43,709 4 0 14 (i) COST OF WORK. The total not payment for collecting and disposing of the refuse of the parish, and watering the streets for the year, from March 25th, 1897, to March 25th, 1898, has boon £18,107 8s. 2d. (j) WORKMEN'S HOLIDAYS. The cost of the week's holiday granted to regular employes was about £134 16s. 6d. 189 (k) WAGES OF EMPLOYES. After consideration of a return of wages paid by other Metropolitan Authorities prepared and presented by your Surveyor, the Vestry on the 21st December, 1897 adopted the recommendation of the Committee, and resolved upon the following increases of wages to date from January 1st, 1898. The hours of labour were not altered. Class. Previous Wages. Wages Recommended and Resolved upon. Day Sweepers 24/- per week. / 25/- per week. Night do. 24/- do. 26/- do. Machine do. (night) 26/6 do. 28/- do. Gullymen do. 25/6 do. 27/- do. Slopping Carmen (Day) 25/- do. 26/- do. Do. do. (Night) 25- do. 27/- do. Horsekeeper 31/- do. 34/- do. Night Horsekeeper 28/- do. 31/6 (7 nights) Stablemen 24/- do. 25/- per week Weighmen 25/- do. 26/- do. F. Clarke (Mechanic) 24/- do. 28/- do. Dustmen (carriers) 24/- do. No increase recommended Do. (carmen) 25/- do. do. do. Watchmen do. do. PARTICULARS OF STAFF, PLANT, &c. STAFF. Wharf Manager 1 Street Inspector 1 General Clerk 1 Dusting Foreman 1 Scavenging Day Foremen 2 ,, Night Foreman 1 WAGES (Actual Payments). £ s. d. Wharf staff 360 0 6 Dusting 2,779 16 2 Slopping 5,133 9 11 Horsekeepers 169 17 8 Mechanics 624 16 10 Street watering 276 16 0 Miscellaneous 774 18 10 Total £10,119 15 11 DISPOSAL OF CLINKERS, &c., FROM DUST DESTRUCTOR. Tons. cwts. qrs. lbs. By Barge 2,138 8 2 21 To Baths 406 10 0 0 By Rail 10 11 0 14 2,555 9 3 7 DISPOSAL OF MANURE FROM VESTRY'S HORSES, AND BROUGHT TO WHARF BY PARISHIONERS. By Barge 430 tons PAID TO CONTRACTORS For £ s. d. Barging Refuse 3,795 15 6 ,, Manure 32 5 0 £3,828 0 6 190 FODDER PURCHASED. Hay trusses 1,803 Straw 3,213 Clover 1,748 Mixture 1,600 Oats sacks 1,448 Bran 340 Greenmeat doz. bundles 357 Carrots tons 10 Average cost per horse per week, 13/5 HORSES AND PLANT. Horses 45 Water vans 15 Slop and dust vans 42 Carts 6 Horse machine brooms 6 Snow plough 1 8 horse power gas engine 1 Chaff cutter 1 Drilling machine 1 9 ton weighing machine 1 Tyering machine 1 Ferry boat 1 My thanks are tendered for the consideration and assistance given by the Chairman (Mr. J. J. Freeman) and the Members generally of the Scavenging Committee. Your obedient Servant, J. RUSH DIXON, A.M.I.C.E., Engineer and, Surveyor, 283, Kingsland Road, London, N.E., 25th March, 1898. LIGHTING DEPARTMENT. ' - > 193 BOROUGH OF SHOREDITCH. The Vestry of the Parish of St. Leonard, Shoreditch, IN THE COUNTY OF LONDON. REPORT OF THE LIGHTING ENGINEER. Lighting Department, 25th March, 1898 Gentlemen, PUBLIC STREET LIGHTING. I have much pleasure in presenting the following Annual Report and tables showing the work done by this department. The price of gas supplied to the Public Lamps is 2/3 per 1,000 cubic feet. No alteration has been made in the price of gas during the past four years. The total amount paid for gas, lamplighter's wages, lighting, extinguishing cleaning and for fitters and materials used for repairs and painting for the year, including the provision of twenty additional lamps and fittings, 260 improved lamps of increased illuminating power, fixed at refuges and in position where increased light was required, and the removal and re-arrangement of the positions of 37 lamps, amounted to £6,234 16s. 7d. Twenty additional lamps have been fixed and put in lighting during the year, 160 have been discontinued, and removed to stores and the positions of 37 have been altered. ELECTRIC LIGHTING. 67 public arc lamps, and 132 incandescent public lamps of 32 candle power, are in use in the following streets. The arc lamps are switched off half an hour after midnight, and the incandescent lamps are then switched on until daybreak. High Street Pitfield Street Kingsland Road Gt. Eastern Street New North Road Bethnal Green Road Old Street 194 The cost for current trimming and maintenance charged for the three quarters amount to £1682 12s. 11d, 85 more public arc lamps and 170 incandescent lamps are on order, and will soon be erected in the following streets. Kingsland Road New North Road Bridport Place Hoxton Street East Road 167 consumers' private premises have been wired and fitted for the electric light, with an equivalent of 25,698 eight candle power lamps, including 70 arc lamps and 327 horse power motors. 86 premises have been wired and fitted for the electric light, with an equivalent to 5,840 eight candle power lamps, including 3 horse power motors and 38 arc lamps, by the Vestry's staff of wiremen, at a cost of £3,648 15s. 8d. or labour and materials, repaid to the Vestry by the consumers. COST OF NEW WORKS AND MATERIALS FOR THE YEAR. £ s. d. Macfarlane & Co., supplying eight electric columns and two brackets 72 18 5 The General Electric Co., lamp shades and fittings 104 11 0 Thames Iron Works Co., erecting and fitting one arc column 1 7 6 Works Department, reinstating foot and carriageways around lamp columns 39 17 0 French Asphalte Co., reinstating Asphalte footways around lamp columns 1 14 0 Reason & Co., waterproof switches for street lamps 5 17 6 Gas Light Co., removing services 26 6 0 Now River Co., removing water mains, for fixing electric columns 12 10 9 Cohen, lamp globes 1 0 8 Parry, tools 2 15 1 Ell & Co., ladders, steps and hire of materials for repairs 11 14 0 Trestles and boards 6 8 6 Clark & Hunt, ironmongery 4 11 6 Parkinson, lever cocks and gas governors 18 16 0 Sugg & Co., burners and glasses 4 16 0 Tilley, lamps and fittings 95 12 9 Evered & Co., fittings 24 10 9 Nicholl's & Clark, glass and paint 49 9 8 G. Smith, rubber stamps 2 2 3 Dr. Oliver, medical fee 0 10 6 W . Gibbs, street name tablets 1 4 0 £488 13 5 195 Two columns and five brackets have been run against and broken, all of which have been re-instated. The following tabular statement shows the number of lamps at present in use, and the cost per lamp per year. NUMBER OF LAMPS IN USE, AND COST PER LAMP FOR THE YEAR. No. of Lamps in use. Description of Lamp. Consumption of Gas per lamp per hour. Cost of Gas per lamp for the year. Cost of lighting cleaning and maintenance per lamp. Total cost per lamp for the year. Cubic feet. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. 1352 14 in. Ordinary 4.6 2 1 5 1 0 0 3 1 5 4 24 „ Globe 8.0 3 7 11 0 15 0 4 2 11 143 17 „ Square 8.0 3 7 11 0 15 0 4 2 11 27 18 „ „ 12.0 5 1 11 0 15 0 5 16 11 31 18 „ „ 15.0 6 7 4½ 0 15 0 7 2 4½ 4 24 „ Hexagon 16.0 6 15 11 0 15 0 7 10 11 7 30 „ „ 20.0 8 9 10 0 15 0 9 4 10 4 33 „ „ 24.0 10 3 10 0 15 0 10 18 10 5 33 „ „ 30.0 12 4 9 0 15 0 13 9 9 6 33 „ „ 33.0 14 0 3 0 15 0 14 15 3 1583 DETAILS OF THE HOURS OF LIGHTING PER LAMP DURING THE YEAR. Month. Number of Hours per Month. Average Number of Hours burning per Night. January 480.21 15.00 February 363.70 12.98 March 332.05 11.06 April 268.93 8.96 May 206.69 6.66 June 167.37 5.57 July 172.65 5.75 August 241.22 7.53 September 296.35 9.87 October 394.86 12.34 November 416.00 14.34 December 470.97 15.19 The Year 3811.00 10.40 N 196 1,155 of these lamps are fixed upon columns on the footways, 9 are fixed upon columns at refuges in the carriageways, 419 aie fixed upon biackets. Twenty additional lamps have been fixed and put in lighting during the year in the following streets:— 1 in Moye Street 1 „ Holywell Lane 2 „ Boundary Street 1 „ Brunswick Square 5 „ High Street 1 „ Kay Street 2 „ Long Street 2 „ Ceasar Street 1 „ Kent Street 1 „ Shepherdess Place 1 „ Kingsland Road 2 „ New Rorth Road 20 160 lamps were discontinued during the year as follows: — 49 in Shoreditch High Street 25 „ Old Street 39 „ Great Eastern Street 13 „ Pitfield Street 1 „ Clifton Street 19 „ Curtain Road 1 „ Hackney Road 3 „ Worship Street 2 „ Custance Street 1 „ Moneyer Street 2 „ Plumbers Place 1 „ Appold Street 3 „ Kingsland Road 1 „ George Street 160 197 DETAILS OF THE CONSUMPTION AND COST OF GAS FOR THE YEAR. Quarter ending Number of hours charged for. Average Consumption per hour charged cu. ft. Consumption per lamp per quarter cu. ft. Number of Lamps. Consumption per quarter cu. ft. Rate per 1000 cu. ft. £ s. d. Total £ s. d. March, 1897 1175.96 x 4. = 5,450.92 x 1430. 7,892,914 x 2/3 = 876 18 4 „ 1004.73 x 4. = 4,633.28 x 1. = 4,633 x „ = 0 10 5 „ 1173.25 x 8. = 9,386.00 x 149. = 1,398,514 x „ = 157 6 8 „ 525.56 x 8. = 4,204.48 x 1. = 4,204 x „ = 0 9 5 „ 1173.25 x 12. = 14,079.00 x 27. = 380,133 x „ = 42 15 3 „ ,, X 15. = 17,598.75 x 68. = 1,196,715 x „ = 134 12 7 „ „ X 16. = 18,772.00 x 4. = 75,088 x „ = 8 8 11 „ „ x 20. = 23,465.00 x 5. = 117,325 x „ = 13 4 0 „ „ x 24. = 28,158.00 x 5. = 140,790 x „ = 15 16 9 „ „ x 30. = 35,197.50 x 12. = 422,370 x „ = 47 10 4 „ „ x 33. = 38,717.25 x 17. = 658,193 x „ = 74 0 11 „ „ x 50. = 58,662.50 x 2. = 117,325 x „ = 13 4 0 „ „ x 58. = 68,048.50 x 1. = 68,048 x „ = 7 13 1 „ „ x 60. = 70,39500 x 1. = 70,395 x „ = 7 18 4 =. 1,400 9 0 N1 198 DETAILS OF THE CONSUMPTION AND COST OF GAS—Continued. Quart ending Number of hours charged lor. Average Consumption per hour charged cu. ft. Consumption per lamp per quarter cu. ft. Number of Lamps. Consumption per quarter cu. ft. Rate per 1000 cu. ft. £ s. d. Total. £ s. d. June, 1897 643. x 4. = 3,092.19 X 1425. = 4,406,370 x 2/3 = 495 14 3 „ 589.36 x 4. = 2,593.78 x 1. = 2,593 x „ = 0 5 10 „ 64055 x 8. = 5,124.40 x 156. = 799,406 x ,, = 89 18 7 „ „ X 12. = 7,686.60 x 27. = 207,538 x „ = 23 6 11 „ „ x 15. = 9,608.25 x 68. = 653,361 x „ = 73 10 0 „ „ X 16. = 10,248.80 X 4. = 40,995 x ,, = 4 12 2 „ „ x 20. = 12,811.00 X 4. = 51,244 x „ = 5 15 3 „ 242.71 x 20. = 4,854.20 x 1. = 4,854 x ,, = 0 10 10 „ 640.55 x 24. = 15,373.20 X 5. = 76,866 x ,, = 8 12 11 „ „ x 30. = 19,216.50 X 11. = 211,381 x „ = 23 15 7 „ 441.63 x 30. = 13,248.90 x 1. = 13.248 x ,, = 1 9 9 „ 640.55 x 33. = 21,13815 x 17. = 359,348 x „ = 40 8 6 „ „ x 50. = 32,027.50 x 2. „ 64,055 x „ = 7 4 1 „ „ X 58. = 37,151.90 x 1. = 37,151 X „ = 4 3 7 „ 441.63 x 60. = 26,497.80 X 1. = 26,497 x ,, = 2 19 7 = 782 7 10 199 DETAILS OF THE CONSUMPTION AND COST OF GAS .—Continued. Quarter ending Number of hours charged for. Average Consumption per hour charged,. cu. ft. Consumption per lamp per quarter cu. ft. Number of Lamps. Consumption per quarter cu. ft. Rate per 1000 cu. ft. £ S. d. Total £ s. d. Sept. 1897 710.21 x 4. = 3,537.28 x 1,398 4,945,117 x 2/3 = 556 6 5 „ 381.54 x „ = 1,901.00 x 1. = 1,901 x „ = 0 4 3 „ Leakage 1,500 x „ = 0 3 4 „ 713.15 x 8. = 5,705.20 x 152. = 867,190 x „ = 97 11 2 „ 272.11 x „ = 2,176.88 x 1. = 2,176 x „ = 0 4 10 „ 713.15 x 12. = 8,557.80 x 27. 231,060 x ,, = 25 19 10 „ „ x 15. = 10,697.25 x 51. = 545,559 x „ = 61 7 5 „ 519.10 x „ = 7,786.50 x 1. = 7,786 x ,, = 0 17 6 „ 713.15 x 16. = 11,410.40 x 4. = 45,641 x „ = 5 2 8 „ „ x 20. = 14,263.00 x 2. = 28,526 x ,, = 3 4 2 „ 194.33 x „ = 3,886.60 x 1. = 3,886 x „ = 0 8 9 „ 713.15 x 24. = 17,115.60 x 4. = 68,462 x ,, = 7 14 0 „ 415.6 x „ = 9,974.40 x 1. = 9,974 x 1, = 1 2 5 „ 713.15 x 30. = 21,394.50 x 9. = 192,550 x ,, = 21 13 2 „ 236.10 x „ = 7,083.00 x 1. = 7,083 x „ = 0 15 11 „ 713.15 x 33. = 23,533.95 x 13. = 305,941 x „ = 34 8 3 „ 174.65 x „ = 5,763.45 x 1. = 5,763 x „ = 0 13 0 „ 713.15 x 50. = 35,657.50 x 1. = 35,657 x „ = 4 0 2 „ 415.6 x „ = 20,780.00 x 1. = 20,780 x „ = 2 6 9 415.6 x 58. = 24,104.80 x 1. 24,104 x — 2 14 3 . = 826 18 3 200 DETAILS OF THE CONSUMPTION AND COST OF GAS.—Continued. Quarter ending Number of hours charged for. Average Consumption per hour charged cu. ft. Consumption per lamp per quarter cu. ft. Number of Lamps. Consumption per quarter cu. ft. Rate per 1000 cu. ft. £ s. d. Total. £ s. d. Dec. 1897 1281.85 x 4. = 6,150.18 x 1,355. = 8,333,493 x 2/3 = 937 10 3 „ 14.90 x 4. = 71.64 x 1. = 71 X „ = 0 0 2 „ Leakage 1,500 X „ = 0 3 4 „ 1284.38 x 8. = 10,275.04 x 148. = 1,520,705 x „ = 171 1 7 „ „ x 12. = 15,412.56 x 27. = 416,139 x „ = 46 16 3 „ „ X 15. = 19,265.70 x 29. = 558,705 x „ = 62 17 1 „ „ x 16. = 20,550.08 x 4. = 82,200 x „ = 9 4 11 „ „ x 20. = 25,687.60 x 2. = 51,375 x „ = 5 15 7 „ „ x 24. = 30,825.14 x 4. = 123,300 x „ = 13 17 5 „ „ x 30. = 38,531.40 x 6. = 231,188 x „ = 26 0 2 „ 133.45 x 30. = 4,003.50 x 1. = 4,003 x „ = 0 9 0 „ 1284.38 x 33. = 42,384.54 x 8. = 339,076 x „ = 38 2 11 „ 315.30 x 50. = 15,765.00 x 1. = 15,765 x „ = 1 15 5 = 1,313 14 1 Total for the year £4,323 9 2 201 The annual cost of fifteen Lamps situated under railway bridges is paid for by the Railway Companies, 12 by the North London Railway Company, and three by the London and North Western Railway Company, amounting together to £45 6s. 3d. The sum of £1 0s. Od. has been recovered from persons causing damage to lamps by driving against them, or by projections from their vehicles. Seven shillings has been paid to the police and others for giving particulars and detecting persons extinguishing and damaging the public lamps, and £3 7s. 9d. has been received by sale of old metal. The maintenance and keeping in repair of the lamps, columns, brackets and fittings, re-glazing, fitting and fixing up new lamps, columns and brackets, lighting, extinguishing, and cleaning the lamps is done by the Vestry's own staff of men, consisting of fifteen lamplighters, three spare men, one fitter, and one assistant, extra men are put on during the summer months to paint the lamps, urinals, water posts, tree guards, seats, and any additional work. Each lamplighter has on an average 108 lamps to light, extinguish and clean. They are started night and morning from three mustering places in the parish by a foreman who keeps the time, &c. The amount paid for wages is £1,141 11s. 0d., and for repairs, painting and fitting up lamps, £281 3s. 0d. The following statement shows the particulars of repairs and renewals to street lamps, &c., for the year:— REPAIRS and RENEWALS TO LAMPS foe the Year, 1897. month. Governors Tested and Exchanged. Lamps repaired in Street or Shop. Panes of Glass used. New Stand- pipes, Cocks, &c. Defective Lights attended to. Lights turned off by the public. Lamps, Cradles and Chair-irons removed. Columns broken and renewed. Brackets broken and renewed. January 114 50 208 1 20 2 2 • • • 1 February 108 90 204 1 14 1 0 1 2 March 129 98 150 3 27 3 2 • • • ... April 150 48 150 1 30 4 1 • • • ... May 150 60 442 4 22 1 • • • • • • • • June 120 27 107 2 10 • • • • • • • • • • • July 120 34 155 • • • 9 • • • 3 • • • .. August 90 17 182 1 11 • • • 5 • • • ... September 100 31 83 3 14 2 7 . . . ... October 160 20 73 2 14 2 6 • • • 1 November 80 13 325 1 26 3 8 1 1 December 50 10 350 ... 30 4 3 ... ... Total for the year 1371 498 2429 19 227 22 42 2 5 202 PRIVATE LIGHTING. The price of gas its 2s. 10d. por 1,000 cubic foot. The quantity of gas consumed during the yoar is as follows:— DEPARTMENT. Gas consumed in cubic foot. Rent of Stoves. Total Cost for the Year. £ s. d. £ s. d. Town Hall and Offices 1,184,400 0 15 0 168 10 10 Disinfecting Station 8,000 ...... 1 2 8 Public Mortuary Nil ...... ...... Do Beauvoir Wharf 274,400 0 6 0 39 3 5 Reliance Wharf 118,600 ...... 16 16 1 Technical School 162,100 0 8 3 23 7 5 Kiosk Convenience 50,200 0 4 0 7 6 3 Total 1,797,700 1 13 3 256 6 8 ELECTRIC LIGHTING SINCE JUNE, 181)7. Town Hall and Offices units. 14,132 @ 6d. ...... 353 6 0 1,546 „ 4d. ...... 25 15 4 Meter rent 0 7 6 0 7 6 Do Beauvoir Wharf 4,991 @ 6d. ...... 124 15 6 Motor rent 0 5 0 0 5 0 20,669 0 12 6 504 9 4 203 GAS CONSUMED IN SEWER VENTILATING LAMPS. Gas, 2/3 per 1000 cubic feet. SITUATED. Gas consumed in cubic feet. Total Cost for the Year. £ s. d. Sun Street 108,200 12 3 6 Curtain Road 133,600 15 0 8 Essex Street 108,200 12 3 6 Clifton Street 38,400 4 6 5 Total 388,400 43 14 1 GAS CONSUMED IN UNDERGROUND CONVENIENCES. Gas, 2/3 per 1000 cubic feet. SITUATED. Gas consumed in cubic feet. Total Cost for the Year. £ s. d. High Street (No. 1) 122,100 13 14 9 Do. (No. 2) 11,900 1 6 9 Old Street 106,300 11 19 1 New North Road 11,400 1 5 8 Total 251,700 28 6 3 204 LIGHTING PUBLIC URINALS. These conveniences are situated and lighted as under:- Situation. No. of Lamps. Description of Lamp. High Street, opposite Shoreditch Church 1 Electric arc High Street, by Great Eastern Railway 1 „ „ Old Street, by Pittield Street 1 „ „ Rivington Street Ordinary gas lamps Anning Street 1 „ „ Great Eastern Street 1 „ „ King John Court 1 „ „ Wood's Buildings 1 „ „ Mills Court 1 „ „ Grove Walk 1 „ „ Pitfield Street 1 Electric Phipp Street 1 50 candle power Haberdasher Street 1 50 „ ,, Wenlock Street 1 50 „ „ Great Chart Street 1 50 „ „ Hoxton Street, opposite Infirmary 1 70 „ „ Hoxton Market 1 30 „ „ Shepherdess Walk 2 50 „ „ Cavendish Street 1 50 „ „ Hyde Road 2 Ordiuary lamps Nil Street 1 „ „ Bacchus Walk 1 „ „ Hudson Court 1 „ „ Union Walk 1 „ „ Maria Street 1 „ „ Hows Street 2 „ „ Nuttal Street 1 „ „ Dunston Road 2 „ „ Acton Mews 1 „ „ Whiston Street 1 „ „ Edith Street 1 „ „ Weymouth Terrace 1 „ „ Fanshaw Street l „ „ New North Road, by East Road l Electric arc 205 INVENTORY OF TOOLS, LAMPS, BRACKETS, AND MATERIALS in stock at 25th March, 1898. 1 Testing Apparatus, complete 11 pairs Gas Tongs 18 pairs Gas Pliers 1 Pipe Cutter 2 Screw Plates 1 Leg Vice 2 Drill Stocks and Drills 3 Hammers 2 Soldering Irons and Stove 1 Melting Pot 1 Ladle 21 Ladders 12 pairs Steps 1 pair Trestles 1 Spring Truck 2 Crow Bars 9 Files 2 Augers 19 Lighting Torches 91 Lamp Columns 29 Lamps 12 Cradle Irons 12 Chair Irons 5 Brackets 3 Wire Cages 20 Lever Cocks 80 Gas Governors 400 feet Gas Barrel 220 Glass sides and tops for lamps 9 Paint Cans ¼ cwt. Red Lead ½ cwt. White Lead ¼ cwt. Purple Brown ¼cwt. Green 12 Porcelain Cones 1 gross Steatite Burners 26-ft. of 1-in hose 3 Enamelled Iron " Caution " Tablets 234 Opal Street Name Tablets 7 lbs. Solder 3 Scrubbing Brushes 1 gross Bolts, Nuts, Screws, &c. 1 doz. ¾ Bends ¼ „ ¾ Tees 1 „ ¾ Nipples 1 „ ¾ Plugs ½ cwt. Compo Pipe 1 gall. Boiled Oil ½ Turps ADVERTISING ON LAMP COLUMNS. / All the lamp columns are let for advertising purposes to Messrs. Heath, Limited, of Manchester, for the sum of £200 for the first 800 lamps used, and 5/- per lamp beyond that number, they are to paint the columns and brackets. The character and sample of the advertisements is under the supervision of the Lighting Committee. 206 PUBLIC URINALS. The 36 public urinals are situated as follows:- No. Situation. Description. No. of Compartments. 1 High Street, opposite Shoreditch Church Underground 18 2 Old Street Underground 13 3 Rivington Street, under railway bridge Iron & glass enamel'd 6 4 Anning Street, by New Inn Yard Iron and slate 2 5 High Street, opposite Gt. Eastern Railway Underground 12 6 Groat Eastern Street, by railway bridge Iron and slate 12 7 King John Court, by railway bridge Slate 3 8 Wood's Buildings, by Great Eastern Street Iron 2 9 Phipp Street Iron 2 10 Mills Court, Curtain Road Slate 4 11 Grove Walk, Hoxton Square Slate 2 12 Pitfield Street Iron 6 13 Great Chart Street Iron & glass enamel'd 4 14 Hoxton Market Iron 6 15 Haberdasher Street, by East Road Iron and slate 4 16 Shepherdess Walk Iron and slate 6 17 Wenlock Street Iron and glass 2 18 Cavendish Street, by New North Road Iron & glass enamel'd 4 1!) Nil Street, by Alma Street Iron and glass 2 20 Hyde Road, by Rosemary Branch Iron 5 21 Hoxton Street, opposite Infirmary Iron 6 22 Bacchus Walk, by Hoxton Street Iron and slate 4 23 Hudson Court, by Kingsland Road Iron and slate 6 24 Union Walk, by Union Street Iron and glass 2 25 Maria Street, by Harwar Street Iron and slate 4 26 Hows Street, by Kingsland Road Iron & glass enamel'd 4 27 Nuttall Street, by Kingsland Road Iron and Slate 4 28 Dunston Road, by Kingsland Road Iron & glass enamel d 6 29 Acton Mews, by Haggerston Station Slate and brick 4 30 Whiston Street Iron and slate 3 31 Edith Street, by Great Cambridge Street Iron and slate 3 32 Weymouth Terrace, near Hackney Road Slate and brick 3 33 Fanshaw Street Slate and brick 3 34 Hoxton Square Slate and brick 4 35 New North Road Underground 11 36 Moye Street Slate and brick 4 207 Twenty-four enamelled iron caution tablets and other enamelled iron plates were provided and fixed in various places complained of, with a view of abating nuisances committed in these places, at a cost of £4 16s. WATER SUPPLY TO URINALS. 13,196,000 gallons of water were used in the public urinals situated in the New River Company's district, and 6,381,000 gallons in the East London Water Company's district. The total cost for water and rent of meters amounted to £532 17s. 4d. WATER SUPPLY TO MORTUARY. The cost of water used at public mortuary, including rental of meters, was £3. FLUSHING COURTS AND GULLIES. The cost of flushing courts and gullies in the parish with water direct from the mains through a 2¼-inch hose was, for water £197 18s. 6d., and for labour £73 7s. The East London Company's district was done in the day time, and the New River Company's district at night. New hose and repairs £23 8s. 6d. WATER USED IN ROAD WATERING. The amount paid for water for road watering and rent of meters during the season in the New River Company's district was £265 9s. 6d., being for 6,547,000 gallons of water at the rate of 8½d. per 1,000 gallons, and the rent of 16 meters £2 2s. each. The amount paid for water used in the East London Company's district was £108 Is. 6d., being for 2,490,000 gallons at 9d. per 1,000 gallons, and the rent of seven meters at £2 2s. each. WATER USED AT DE BEAUVOIR WHARF. The amount paid for water used at this wharf and the rental of meter was £22 18s. for the year. REPAIRS AND PAINTING URINALS. The sum of £131 18s. 3d. was paid during the year for repairs and painting urinals, and for plumber's work and supplying new armoured hose. The sum of £3 13s. was paid for repairs to water posts during the year. 208 UNDERGROUND CONVENIENCES. The total receipts during the year at the underground conveniences amount to £1,244 15s. 4d., and the expenditure for Attendants' Wages and other expenses, including the proportion of repayment of loan and interest, amount to £1,201 14s. 5½d. as follows:— HIGH STREET BY GREAT EASTERN RAILWAY. £ s. d. £ s. d. Gentlemen's Lavatory— Wages of Attendants 285 8 0 Use of Lavatory 17 5 2 Do. for washing and mangling towels 4 18 0 Convenience Fees 329 9 7 Uniforms and costumes 14 0 0 Tickets 3 12 11 346 14 9 Royalty on Bell Punches 6 0 0 Ladies' Lavatory— Towels 1 0 0 Use of Lavatory 5 11 3 Gas 17 14 3 Incandescent Mantles 2 8 0 Convenience Fees 283 1 8 Electric Light — December Quarter 9 1 6 Urinette Fees 2 15 9 Electric fittings 19 13 9 291 8 8 Water 28 16 3 Rubber Mats 2 8 8 Brooms, Mops, and Squeegees 2 4 6 Combs and Brushes 14 6 Enamelled iron screens, painting and hose 2 18 6 Soap and toilet paper 8 12 2 Proportion of repayment of loan and interest 117 13 5 Profit 111 4 0 £638 3 5 £638 3 5 OLD STREET BY PITFIELD STREET. £ s. d. £ s. d. Gentlemen's Lavatory— Wages of Attendants 285 18 6 Use of Lavatory 13 2 0 Do. for washing and mangling towels 4 0 6 Convenience Fees 285 1 6 Uniforms and Costumes 7 0 0 Tickets 8 2 11 298 8 6 Royalty on Bell Punches 6 0 0 Ladies' Lavatory— Towels 0 19 0 Use of Lavatory 2 17 104 Gas 15 8 10 Incandescent Mantles 1 17 11 Convenience Fees 127 13 8 Electric Light, 2 quarters 10 15 10 Electric Fitting 19 13 9 Urinette Fees 2 8 Water 28 6 3 182 19 6 Rubber Mats 2 8 8 Brooms, Mops & Squeegees 1 7 8 Combs and Brushes 0 15 6 Soap and Toilet Paper 6 3 7½ Loss 118 0 11½ Proportion of repayment of Loan and Interest 155 5 5 £549 8 11½ £549 3 11½ 209 kiosk opposite shoreditch church, Removed 29th October, 1897. £ s. d. £ s. d. Gentlemen's Lavatory— Wages of Attendants 58 9 6 Use of Lavatory 7 4 8 do. for Washing and Mangling Towels 1 10 6 Convenience Fees 138 15 0 Uniforms and Caps 2 10 0 Gas 7 6 4 145 19 8 Water 11 2 9 Soap and Toilet Paper 2 3 4 Profit 62 17 3 £145 19 8 £145 19 8 high street, opposite shoreditch church, Opened 10th March, 1898. £ s. d. £ s. d. Gentlemen's Lavatory— Wages of Attendants 12 0 0 Use of Lavatory 0 18 3 Soap, &c. 0 5 8 Proportion of other expenses for 2 weeks . 10 0 0 Convenience Fees 12 18 5 Profit 0 17 7 13 16 8 Ladies' Lavatory— Use of Lavatory 0 2 4¼ Convenience Fees 9 1 1 Urinette Fees 0 3 1½ 9 6 7 £23 3 3 £23 3 3 new north road, by east road, Opened 10th March, 1898. £ s. d. £ s. d. Gentlemen's Lavatory— Wages of Attendants 12 0 0 Use of Lavatory 0 2 Proportion of other expenses for 2 weeks 8 0 0 Convenience Fees 3 11 1 Soap, &c. 0 3 0 3 13 5½ - Ladies' Lavatory— Use of Lavatory 0 0 6 Convenience Fees 2 10 9 Urinette Fees 0 1 2 12 6½ Loss 13 17 0 £20 3 0 £20 3 0 Shoreditch Town Hall, Old Street, London, E.C., 25th March, 1898. I am, Gentlemen, Your obedient Servant, C. H. DOUGHTY, A.I.E.E. Lighting Engineer. 211 BOROUGH OF SHOREDITCH. , / The Vestry of the Parish of St, Leonard, Shoreditch, in the county of london. REPORT OF CHIEF ELECTRICAL ENGINEER. Electricity Supply Department 25th March, 1898. To the Chairman and Members of the Shoreditch Vestry. Gentlemen, The combined undertaking, formally opened by Lord Kelvin, on the 28th June, 1897, from which date, the two Departments, viz., Electricity Generating Station and Refuse Destructor, have been at work continuously. At the date of making up this report, it is impossible to show as complete a record as is usual in such cases, inasmuch as the accounts only cover a period of nine months, and not a complete year's working. Moreover, as several very important items in connection with the various Contractors' obligations and guarantees have not been yet completed, I am, therefore, for obvious reasons, unable to give such a full account as I should have wished. I am, however, pleased to be able to report that the whole of the plant and apparatus is in first-class repair and thorough working order, the amount spent on repairs being naturally very small. o 212 The number of consumers connected to the mains when the works were opened was 1, as against 151 at the end of March quarter, 1898. The following figures will serve to indicate the rapid increase in demand for current. During the quarter ending 29th September, 1897, 24,585 units were sold. 25th December, 1897, 96,326 „ 25th March, 1898, 163,384 Owing to the large demand for current at the heaviest part of the load, it has been found necessary to increase the plant in all directions. The Vestry have, therefore, decided to procure additional Boilers, Engines, Dynamos, Transformers, &c., which it is hoped will be supplied and be in working order by October next. The supply of current has been given constantly night and day since the station was opened, with the exception of a period of about 15 minutes on the 12th February, 1898, owing to an accident which occurred to one of the engines which was in use at the time. The cause of the accident was, no doubt, due to the want of relief valves being fitted in the H.P. cylinders, an omission on the part of the Contractors, for which, I must say, they promptly acknowledged their responsibility, and effected all the necessary repairs at their sole expense. The following figures show the number of lamps, &c., connected to the Vestry's supply mains on the 25th March, 1898 :— 14700 8-c.p. Lamps, Private Lighting. 114 32-c.p. Lamps, Public Lighting. 57 Arc Lamps, Public Lighting. 68 Arc Lamps, Private Lighting. 27 Electric Motors, representing in the aggregate 344 brake horse power. With the exception of Clerical Department and Mains Department, the works are run on the 8-hours' shift system, the number of men employed in the various departments being as follows :— GENERATING STATION. 1 Chief Assistant Engineer 4 Electricians in Charge 1 Fitter 3 Engine Drivers 3 Cleaners salaries and wages. G. Kemp, £3 per week. Three 35/- each, and one at 30/- a week. at 10d. per hour. at £2 each per week. Two at £1 5s. 8d. each, and one at £1 per week 213 Mains Department. Salaries. 1 Mains Superintendent H. ,J. Roscoe, £3 per week. 3 Arc Lamp Trimmers 30s., 28s., and 17s. a week respectively. 1 Meter Reader 15s. a week. 1 Jointer At 9½d. a hour. 1 Jointer's Mate 15s. a week. 1 Labourer 6½d. an hour. 3 Labourers 6d. an hour. Clerical Staff, Etc. Salaries, Clerk J. W. Hammond, at £2 a week. 2 Junior Clerks 30s. and 20s, a week respectively. 2 Office Boys 10s. and 8s. a week respectively. 1 Storekeeper '... 30s. a week. Refuse Destructor Staff. Salaries. 1 Engineer-in-charge E. Willshear, £4 a week. 1 Fitter At 8d. per hour. 3 Charge Men 35s, each per week. 15 Stokers 32s. 8d. each per week. 6 Top Men At 28s. each per week. 2 Cleaners One at 15s. and one at 10s. per week. 1 Weighbridge Clerk 21s. per week. 4 Labourers At 24s. each per week. Total amount of refuse of all descriptions received at the destructor during nine months ending 25th March, 1898, 18,842 tons, approximate percentage of residue to refuse 32%. The Vestry's charges for the supply of electric current are as follows:— The private lighting, 6d. per unit for the 1st two hours' consumption, 4d. per- unit afterwards, on the Wright maximum demand system. For public lighting, 5d. per unit, to include maintenance. For motive power during daytime, 2d. per unit. For motive power, 3d. per unit for all hours. For hire of meter per quarter, from 2s. 6d., according to size. The following is a List of Streets in which the Vestry's supply mains are laid or in course of being laid. Name of Street. Side of Street. Name of Street. Side of Street. Bateman's Row N. Charlotte Street w. Brunswick Place N. Charles Square N. Cropley Street W. Church Street (to Boundary) S. City Road E Commercial Street N.E. Calvert Avenue s. Curtain Road Both Sides. Coronet Street N. ol 214 Name of Street. Side ok Street. Name of Street. Side of Street Mast Road W. Now Inn Yard Both Sides. Eagle Wharf Road W. Nile Street N. Great Eastern Street Both Sides. Old Street (from City Road to Pitfield St.) N. Garden Walk B. Hackney Road N. Old Stroot (Pitfield St. to High Street) N. and S. Hoxton Street E. and W. Hoxton Square N. and S. Paul Street and Wilson S.W. High Street Street (to Boundary) N. and S. Pitfield Street E. and W. Holywell Lane S. Rivington Street W. Huntingdon Street S. Rufus Street W. Kingsland Road E and W. Sun Street N. Leonard Street Shepherdess Walk E. (Sq. to Boundary) „ „ Now North Road (from) N. S. Tabernacle Street (to Boundary) Both Sides, East Road to Eagle Wenlock Street N. Wharf Road) W. Worship Street S. Motley Street s. Ware Street S. Now North Road (Pitfield Street to East Road) E. and W. A full statement of income and expenditure in connection with the Electric Lighting Department will bo found in the accounts, as supplied by the Accountant. The accounts in connection with the Destructor will not bo ready until the end of Juno next, when the works will have been in operation for a full twelve months, and when the complete accounts will be presented to a Joint Committee of the Electricity and Scavenging Department. I am, Gentlemen, Your obedient Servant, C. NEWTON RUSSELL, Chief Electrical Engineer. Electricity Supply Dept., Coronet Street, London, N. 25th March, 1898. PUBLIC LIBRARIES AND MUSEUMS. SEVENTH ANNUAL REPORT, 1897-98. 216 Committee. J. J. TROWBRIDGE (Chairman). BOUCHARD, C. J. MARTINDILL, T. BOWTON, J. G MOFFATT, E. COX, JOSEPH MORRIS, H. DEWELL, H. C. NOBLE, T. ELLIS, H. E. PAWLEY, T. H ERRINGTON, T. REEVE, R. A. FORDHAM, S. SAWELL, H. T.,L.C.C. (Vice-Chairman) GRAHAM, W. R. VANDY, J. W. HELSDON, C. G. WAKELING, E. J., J.P. (Ex-Officio HURLIN, J. WENBORN, MAJOR F. M. Officers. Chief Librarian and Clerk. WM. C. PLANT. Senior Assistants. G. VICARS BROWN G. E. ROEBUCK J. WILSON BROWN. Assistants. W. BRACE G. M. MORGAN A. M. J. STEED W. HOWE A. M. THOMAS D. THOMAS Caretakers. T. DUDDLES J. T. CHARLESWORTH. 217 1897-98. SEVENTH ANNUAL REPORT OF THE SHOREDITCH PUBLIC LIBRARIES. To the Vestry of the Parish of St. Leonard, Shoreditch. Gentlemen, I beg to submit my report of the past year's work of the Libraries of this parish. The year has again proved to be an eventful one, inasmuch as its termination saw the practical completion of the Passmore Edwards Public Library in Pitfield Street, Hoxton. The opening took place on Wednesday, April 20th, and the function was performed by the Right Hon. Sir John Lubbock, Bart., M.P., in the Reference Department on the first floor. Mr. J. Passmore Edwards and a number of other distinguished guests attended and took part in the proceedings. The ceremony was a brilliant success—a good account of which will be found reproduced in this report from the "Hackney Express and Shoreditch Observer." It is estimated that the cost of the Library including site, fitting-up, furnishing, and stock of books will be about £20,000, but the exact figures cannot be given yet, as a number of accounts for extras have not been rendered. The Library, inside and out, will compare favourably. with any other in the Metropolis; and, as every inducement is being considered to make it popular, it is hoped that inhabitants will make good use of it and thoroughly appreciate its numerous privileges. The building is beautifully decorated, furnished throughout with Riga Wainscot Oak Tables and Stands and American Oak Chairs, and specially designed fittings for the Electric Light have been provided. 218 The walls of entrance hall, staircase and landing are of polished marble from Hopton Wood quarries, Derbyshire. A decorative frieze, due to the generosity of Mr. Passmore Edwards, representing scenes from Shakespeare's "Macbeth," "Merchant of Venice," "Merry Wives of Windsor," and "The Tempest" surrounds the entrance hall to a depth of 4ft. Gin. from the ceiling. On the first floor landing are two stained windows containing suitable quotations on books and reading, and a central group representing Caxton showing specimens of his printing to Edward IV. The library contains news and magazine rooms with a liberal supply of papers and periodicals, ladies' reading room, boys' reading room, lending and reference libraries, storerooms, librarian's office and committee room, &c. The building is heated by steam conveyed from the electric light station. A white marble bust of the late Mr. Charles Bradlaugh, M.P., has been placed in the newsroom. The bust was executed by Mr. F. Verheyden, and is supported by a pedestal bearing the following inscription:—"'Thorough'—Charles Bradlaugh, of this parish, born September 26th, 1833, died January 30th, 1891—erected by subscription, 1898." The lending library is the first in London entirely fitted up with iron bookcases and perfectly adjustable oak shelves. Each Parliamentary Division of Shoreditch now possesses a handsome, commodious and well-equipped public library; and, considering that the amount of the rate levied for the purpose of their maintenance and repayment of loans and interest is only ¾d. in the £, no one will venture to assert that the ratepayers do not get full value for their money. The Vestry having by resolution consented to allow ¾d. in the £ on the full rateable value of the parish without deductions of any kind, the annual income will thereby be increased by about £130. The lending and reference departments of the temporary premises were closed after December 24th for cataloguing and removal of books. The premises have now been vacated after a tenancy of four and a half years, during which time they admirably answered the purpose for which they were required, and some 1,650,000 visits were made by readers or a daily average of 1,578 for the whole period. Two important .alterations have been made by a revision of the rules; one of which is, that persons employed in the parish though residing elsewhere are now allowed to borrow books; and the other is, that all borrowers are privileged to hold an additional ticket exclusively for works of music. Many of the books through constant circulation are becoming much dilapidated; in fact, a good number are already irreparable and incomplete, and as they are the most popular will require to be replaced by other copies. 219 Nineteen Ordinary Meetings of the Committee and 18 Sub-Committee Meetings were convened; the names and attendances of each member will be found annexed. Mr. J. J. Trowbridge was elected chairman, and Mr. Henry T. Sawell vice-chairman for the year. The Libraries now contain 23,988 volumes, showing an increase of 5,871 volumes compared with the 18,117 mentioned in my last report. 11,677 volumes are located at the Haggerston Library and 12,311 at the Hoxton Library including 634 bequeathed to the parish in 1765 by Mr. John Dawson, which have been transferred from Haggerston. 458 volumes have been presented during the year; no fewer than 178 being from Mr. T. Errington, whose total gifts to the libraries now number 727 volumes. Among other valuable donations received may be mentioned a large set of European Guide Books from Mr. C. N. Nicholson, the present Chairman of the Guardians, and five beautifully printed volumes, productions of the Kelmscott Press, from Mrs.Wm. Morris, in memory of her late husband. A list of donors is appended herewith. A catalogue of the whole of the books in the Hoxton Library, consisting of 576 pp. demy 8vo. has been published. It is estimated by actual count that upwards of 800,000 visits have been made to the libraries during the year, or a daily average of 2779; being 1,425 at Haggerston and 1,354 at Hoxton; showing a slight increase compared with the previous year's figures. The attendance on Sundays averaged 40 at Haggerston and 92 at Hoxton. 60,953 volumes were issued at the Haggerston Library for home-reading, and 13,013 for reference. At the temporary premises, Hoxton, 26,400 volumes were issued for home-reading, and 1,143 consulted in the reference department; being a total issue of 101,509, or a combined daily average of 361, showing a slight falling off compared with the previous year's total. The Library Garden in Kingsland Road continues to be much appreciated by the readers. A classification of the borrowers' occupations and a list of the periodicals taken at each library are also given. The receipts for catalogues, tickets, fines, &c., realised £98 3s. 4d. Mr. Passmore Edwards has most kindly contributed £1,200 during the year towards the cost of the new library, thereby bringing his gifts to the Public Libraries of this parish up to the munificent sum of £9,450 and 1,000 books. I have the honour to remain, Gentlemen. Your obedient servant, WM. C. PLANT, Chief Librarian and Clerk. 220 THE PASSMORE EDWARDS PUBLIC LIBRARY, PITFIELD STREET, HOXTON. OPENED BY THE RT. HON. SIR JOHN LUBBOCK, BART., M P., F.R.S. INTERESTING CEREMONY. Shoreditch has been making history rapidly in recent years—social, literary, and scientific. We have had quite a gamut of opening ceremonies, but none more far reaching in its effects than the function of Wednesday afternoon, when Mr. J. Passmore Edwards and the Public Libraries Committee, through Sir John Lubbock, handed over to the people of Hoxton the classical building equipped for study and research and literary recreation. The Committee and their indefatigable Librarian, Mr. W. C. Plant, had spared no pains to make the great event bright and memorable, and the large assembly of citizens attested the interest felt in the latest municipal possession. The visitors having been courteously received by the Committee and conducted to the dais in the reference library, Mr. J. J. Trowbridge took the chair, and the interesting programme was proceeded with. The Chairman, on behalf of the people of Hoxton and Haggerston, gave the chief guests a hearty welcome. In Sir John Lubbock they had one of the very first educationists in the country, who had always taken a great interest in public libraries; and Mr. Passmore Edwards had been with them so often that they had begun to look upon him as one of themselves. Since the Public Libraries Act was adopted in Shoreditch seven years ago the libraries had been much appreciated. They continued 23,958 volumes, and he could assure them there was room for many more; 1,013 were presented by their benefactor, Mr. Passmore Edwards, and 727 by his colleague on the Committee, Mr. Thos, Errington, whom they wished to publicly thank for his generosity and also for his good work on the Building and Book Sub-Committees. There were 12,281 volumes at that library, and in a few weeks they hoped to add another 1,000. Borrowers' tickets would be available at both libraries. The cost of the new library, with the site and fittings would probably be about £20,000. As the three-farthing rate would only produce about £2,000, and the repayment of capital and interest would take about £800 a year, the Library Committee would have to be very economical to make both ends meet. The Chairman concluded by handing to Sir John Lubbock and Mr. Passmore Edwards handsomely bound catalogues of the library as mementos of the occasion, a bouquet of lovely flowers bsing presented to Lady Lubbock, and another to Mrs. Passmore Edwards. Sir John Lubbock said he felt great pleasure in accepting the invitation to be present, because he thought that to take any part in opening a free library was one of the most pleasant duties that could fall to the lot of a Member of Parliament. They were a little slow in the Metropolis in availing themselves of the advantages of the Free Library Act, and in the first 16 years, only one Library was opened, Westminster having had the honour of taking the lead. In the next ten years not a single public library was started in London, and from 1877 to 1886 only two were opened, but since 1886 more than 30 had been opened, and several more were in course of construction. To the wise generosity of Mr. Passmore Edwards they were indebted for something like 12 of their public libraries in London, and he had also bestowed a cousiderable number on his own county and other parts of the country. (Cheers.) Statistics showed how much the local libraries were appreciated, and he felt sure they would now become much more useful and valuable. It had been said that when a new 221 library was first opened there was a rush for novels and story books ; but, as the habit of reading was required, the majority generally rose to a higher plane and works of a greater utility became more in demand. They were beginning to realise that education was not merely a matter of schools and childhood, but that it goes on throughout life. These libraries were really continuation schools and universities doing an enormous amount towards the technical and general progress of the people. (Cheers.) A library was a true fairyland, a very palace of delight, a haven of repose, where amusement, comfort, and consolation would be found by everyone who brought to it the right frame of mind, and he was confident this one would add in many ways to the prosperity of the district. (Cheers.) He had much pleasure in declaring the building open. Mr. E.J. Wakeling. J.P., proposed a hearty vote of thanks to Mr. Passmore Edwards, for his presence, and for his munificence to the parish. He had now given £6,250 and 1,000 books to the Haggerston library, and £3,200 towards the Pitfield-street library, and without him the parishioners could not have done what they had succeeded in doing. (Cheers.) Mr. T. Errington seconded. The Right Hon. G. Shaw-Lefevre, L.C.C., who was cordially received, said he esteemed it a great privilege to support this vote of thanks, for genorosity manifold and most wise. In his connection with one of the most widely-spread newspapers their benefactor had set before him a very high ideal, and he had devoted a large amount of what he had so well earned to the public good. (Cheers.) In most of the West End parishes they had not yet succeeded in getting the Act adopted, but there was quite as large a population as in the east dependent for their literature upon public libraries, and he hoped those parishes would soon be induced to follow the example set by Shoreditch. (Cheers.) Mr. Henry Ward, L.C.C., very heartily supported the vote of thanks, and totally disagreed with the idea that people could be over educated. The more one was educated the more one saw the value of real honest work, no matter in what part of life it was done. Mr. Passmore Edwards had helped the people of Whitechapel to get a library, and now he was helping them to build an art gallery. He hoped that in course of time Shoreditch would have its art gallery. (Cheers.) The motion was carried, and Mr. Passmore Edwards was received with native enthusiasm. He said he was very thankful for their vote of thanks, particularly to the gentleman who did not say much but who had done a good deal. (Hear, hear.) The gentleman whom he hoped again to see a Minister in the House of Commons had referred to his connec tion with the public press : the very same question came up that day in his home, and he said to his wife that he looked back upon his connection with the press with vastly more satisfaction than the promotion of anything philanthropic or educational, because he had always endeavoured in a very humble way to purify and elevate that great institution. (Cheers.) He had never written a sentence in which he did not believe or in which he did not put his conscience, and he had always aimed at that which was greater than himself : the public good. (Hear, hear.) He was pleased with the character of the building, and its splendid architecture ; and though a little more top light was necessary, it was one of the most satisfactory constructions he had seen in London. Now the parishioners had got their new library he felt sure they would use it to advantage. (Hear, hear.) The public spirit of Shoreditch was an example to the wealthier parishes and was likely to find mitators, for he understood their experiment of making electricity from the dirt and dust was pre-eminently successful. (Cheers,) He sincerely thanked them for their appreciation. Professor Stuart, M.P., said he had much pleasure in moving a hearty vote of thanks to Sir John Lubbock for the function which he had performed in such an able and scholarly 222 manner. They could not listen to his words without feeling a great deal more enthusiastic than they did before about this undertaking. It was a credit to them to get Sir John to Shoreditch, because he had given great attention and much useful service to the public in the reading of books and in guiding them in their reading. Every man and woman connected with the parish was part proprietor of these municipal undertakings; they were not pushed upon them, but the product of their own labour, industry, and good sense; and the crown of them was the library. (Cheers.) Mr. John LowleS, M.P., cordially seconded the vote of thanks, observing that Sir John was always willing to assist every good movement, moral, intellectual and social. The interest in the combined scheme had reached to Australia, and while there he was asked to give an address upon the subject. He hoped Shoreditch would continue to hold its place as one of the most intelligent and Progressive parishes in the Metropolis. (Laughter and cheers.) Sir John Lubbock expressed his gratefal thanks, remarking that he had been a Londoner all his life, and he was therefore not a stranger to Shoreditch or any part of the Metropolis. On the motion of Mr. W. R. Cremer, seconded by Mr. H. T. Sawell, L.C.C., a vote of thanks was passed to Mr. Trowbridge for presiding, and for the zeal which he had thrown into the Chairmanship of the Library Committee. Light refreshments were excellently served by Mr T. Burnell, of 249, Old-street, assisted by a staff of courteous waitresses, and an interesting half-hour was spent in social intercourse, or in looking over the library and its treasures under the guidance of the Committee: Messrs. J. J. Trowbridge (chairman), H. T. Sawell, L.C.C. (vice-chairman), E. J. Wakeling, J.P. (chairman of the Vestry) C. J. Bouchard, J. G. Bowton, J. Cox, H. C. Dewell, H. E. Ellis, T. Errington, S. Fordham, W. R. Graham, C. H. Helsdon, J. Hurlin, T. Martindill, E. Moffatt, H.Morris, T. Noble, T. H. Pawley, It. A. Reeve. J. W. Vandy, Major F. M. Wenborn and Dr. H. Mansfield Robinson, Solicitor and Vestry Clerk. Amongst the company present were Mr. Nathan Moss, J.P., Rev. W. Cuff, Mrs. and Miss Cuff, Rev. F. E. Spencer, Mr. R. Clay, Mr. and Mrs. Grout, Mrs. Sawell, Mr. and Mrs. Garrard, Mr. and Mrs. Pearce, Mrs. Bouchard, Mr. and Mrs. Steel, Mrs. Fordham, Messrs. J. J. Clark, J. J. Freeman, Hall. Loder, Simpson, Field, Verinder, Brabner, Kershaw, Clement, Degerdon, J. T. Clark, Hinton, Winkler, Croucher, Hazell, Elsdon, Elven, Hepburn, Ravey, &c. The arrangement and fitting of the building were greatly admired and hearty congratulations bestowed upon the architect, Mr. Hare, the Committee, and the library staff (whose energies have lately been taxed to the utmost). The new bust of Charles Bradlaugh in the news room also attracted a good deal of attention, the general opinion being that the sculptor, Mr. Verheyden, has produced a life-like model of his subject. The work is executed in white marble, and on the pedestal is an inscription showing that Mr. Bradlaugh was born in Shoreditch on September 26th, 1833. The bust has been erected by subscripton Music was supplied by the band from the Cottage Homes, Hornchurch, under Mr. M. Larter, and the boys won all-round praise for their excellent playing, as well as for their healthy appearance. Reprinted from the " Hackney Express and Shoreditch Observer," 223 ATTENDANCE OF COMMITTEE. Name. Meetings Attended. Ordinary Meetings. Sub-Committee Meetings. Highest possible Attendance. Percentage. Bouchard, C. J. 9 9 • • • 19 48 Bowton, J. G. 23 18 5 28 82 Cox, Joseph 26 14 12 35 74 Dewell, H. C. 15 11 4 28 53 Ellis, H. E. 8 8 ... 19 42 Errington, T. 31 14 17 37 84 Fordham, S. 7 7 ... 19 36 Graham, W. B. 12 12 ... 19 63 Helsdon, C. G. 16 14 2 21 76 Hurlin, J. 13 13 ... 19 68 Martindill, T. 25 16 9 28 89 Moffatt, E. 4 4 ... 21 19 Morris, H. 11 11 ... 19 57 Noble, T. 2 2 ... 19 10 Pawley, T. H. 19 15 4 26 73 Reeve, R. A. 13 13 ... 19 68 Sawell, H. T. 18 15 3 35 51 Trowbridge, J. J. 34 20 14 35 97 Vandy, J. W. 5 5 • • • 19 26 Wakeling, E. J , J.P. 19 14 5 37 51 Wenborn, Major F. M. 22 13 9 37 59 Number of Ordinary Meetings Convened 19 Number of Sub-Committee Meetings Convened 18 Total 37 224 Haggerston and Hoxton Libraries. NUMBER AND CLASSIFICATION OF TOTAL STOCK. Letter. Class. Haggerston. Hoxton. Lending Departm't Reference Departm't Lending Departm't Reference Departm't A Theology, Philosophy, and Ecclesiastical History 464 226 423 70 B Science and Art 1371 538 1544 386 C History, Biography, Travels, &c. 2033 919 2402 393 D Poetry and the Drama 359 166 270 64 E Sociology, Law, Commerce, Education, &c. 340 111 441 89 F Prose Fiction (including Juvenile Literature) 3601 63 3685 37 G Language and Literature 129 284 162 39 H Miscellaneous Works 178 895 323 1349 John Dawson's Collection 634 Totals 8475 3202 9250 3061 11677 12311 Combined Total 23988 SUMMARY OF STOCK. Where Located. Vols.in Stock, 25th March, 1897. Number added. Vols.in Stock, 25th March, 1898. Purchased. Presented. Haggerston Library 11346 331 11677 8931 2746 Hoxton Library 6771 5540 12311 10602 1709 Totals 18117 5871 23988 19533 4455 Combined Total 23988 23988 23988 DAILY AVERAGE ATTENDANCE OF VISITORS TO THE LIBRARIES. Name of Library. April. May. June. July. August. September. October. November. December. January. February. March. Days open. Approximate No. of Visitors 1897-8. Daily Average for the Year. Haggerston 1458 1414 1398 1351 1308 1533 1400 1417 1430 1408 1441 1466 305 434625 1425 Hoxton 1389 1327 1364 1331 1259 1352 1371 1409 1385 1303 1404 1357 305 412970 1354 Total 2847 2741 2762 2682 2652 2885 2771 2826 2815 2711 2845 2823 305 847695 2779 Haggerston Library. NUMBER AND CLASSIFICATION OF VOLUMES ISSUED IN THE LENDING DEPARTMENT. Month. Theology, Philosophy, & Ecclesiastic History. Science and Art. History, Biography, Travels, etc. Poetry and the Drama. Sociology, Commerce, Law, Education, etc., Prose Fiction, including Juvenile Literature. Language and Literature. Miscellaneous Works. Total. Days Open. Daily Average. A B C D E F G H March (26th to 31st) 15 49 58 11 3 861 3 4 1,004 5 200 April 53 235 292 33 23 4,335 14 34 5,019 24 209 May 54 219 289 34 41 4,075 26 41 4,779 26 183 June 26 158 202 35 30 3,587 23 30 4,091 24 170 July 44 194 242 38 29 3,993 16 29 4,585 27 169 August 49 180 227 36 34 3,854 16 39 4,435 25 177 September 50 212 277 39 33 4,262 13 38 4,924 26 189 October 49 253 304 29 41 4,336 17 43 5,072 26 195 November 47 265 280 44 47 4,318 11 31 5,043 26 194 December 43 217 249 39 37 4,062 12 38 4,697 24 195 January 67 277 395 43 42 5,510 21 51 6,406 26 246 February 43 272 389 39 36 5,018 20 36 5,858 24 244 March (1st to 25th) 63 259 311 29 33 4,296 11 38 5,040 22 229 Grand Total 608 2,790 3,515 449 429 52,507 203 452 60,953 305 199 Percentage of Issues .997 4.575 5.766 .736 .703 86.143 .333 .741 100 - 225 Hasserston Library. NUMBER AND CLASSIFICATION OF VOLUMES ISSUED IN THE REFERENCE DEPARTMENT. Month. Theology, Philosophy, and Ecclesiastical History. Science and Art. History, Biography, Travels, etc., Poetry and the Drama. Sociology, Law, Commerce, Education, etc. Prose Fiction, including Juvenile Literature. Literature and Language. Miscellaneous Works. Total. Days Open. Daily Average. A B C D E F G H March (26th to 31st) 18 53 35 3 6 5 8 94 222 5 44 April 50 215 171 30 33 39 35 409 982 24 41 May 46 185 131 27 31 29 34 442 925 26 35 June 40 161 167 30 22 22 28 408 878 24 36 July 40 196 211 34 23 18 32 330 884 27 32 August 65 237 288 52 28 26 32 391 1,119 25 44 September 46 244 224 75 45 63 37 527 1,261 26 48 October 58 237 253 61 40 35 107 547 1,338 26 51 November 46 243 214 68 52 40 70 591 1,324 26 51 December 27 147 167 25 17 47 36 336 802 24 33 January 47 280 234 44 30 47 35 587 1,304 26 50 February 41 221 194 32 29 43 34 500 1,094 24 45 March (1st to 25th) 30 186 131 32 21 27 34 419 880 22 40 Grand Total 554 2,605 2,420 513 377 441 522 5,581 13,013 305 42 Percentage of Issues 4.257 20.019 18.596 4 2.897 3.38 4.011 4.2887 100 226 227 Hasserston Library. NUMBER AND CLASSIFICATION OF VOLUMES ISSUED IN THE LENDING DEPARTMENT. Month. Theology, Philosophy, & Ecclesiastical History. Science and Art. History, Biography. Travels, etc. Poetry and the Drama. Sociology, Commerce, Law, Education, etc. Prose Fiction, including Juvenile Literature. Language and Literature. Miscellaneous Works. Total. Days Open. Daily Average. A B C D E F G H March (26th to 31st) 6 17 29 1 1 636 1 2 693 5 138.6 April 21 100 101 13 15 2,935 8 24 3,212 24 133.8 May 12 86 107 19 8 2,994 8 21 3,255 26 125.1 June 12 71 73 9 12 2,456 3 21 2,657 24 110.7 July 14 61 74 8 3 2,658 3 14 2,835 27 105 August 12 71 75 14 8 2,604 3 16 2,803 25 112.1 September 18 93 91 18 13 2,723 12 16 2,984 26 114.7 October 13 76 102 16 10 2,793 8 21 3,039 26 116.9 November 12 92 108 13 12 2,857 6 10 3,110 26 119.6 December (to 24th) 8 54 59 10 6 1,666 2 7 1,812 20 90.6 Closed until opening of New Premises, Pitfield Street. Grand Total 128 721 819 121 88 24,322 49 152 26,400 229 115.2 Percentage of Issues .484 2.731 3.102 .458 .383 92.128 .185 .575 100 228 Hasserston Library. NUMBER AND CLASSIFICATION OF VOLUMES ISSUED IN THE REFERENCE DEPARTMENT. Month Theology, Philosophy, & Ecclesiastical History. Science and Art. History, Biography, Travels, etc. Poetry and the Drama. Sociology, Commerce, Law, Education, etc. Prose Fiction, including Juvenile Literature. Language. and Literature Miscellaneous Works. Total. Days Open. Daily Average. A B C D E F G H March (26th to 31st) 1 5 6 1 5 1 8 27 5 5.4 April 7 48 13 4 7 8 8 58 153 24 6.3 May 2 66 23 8 6 55 160 26 6.1 June 12 35 42 6 18 24 137 24 5.7 July 8 31 28 5 5 1 13 34 120 27 4.4 August 5 35 GO 5 3 11 89 25 3.5 September 4 36 8 2 3 2 29 . 84 26 3.2 October 4 63 29 1 9 2 21 25 154 26 5.9 November 8 63 17 4 10 16 21 139 26 5.3 December (to 24th) 2 46 15 1 4 3 9 80 20 4 Closed until opening of New Premises , Pitfield Street. Grand Total 53 428 206 18 62 11 91 274 1,143 229 5 Percentage of Issues 4.636 37.445 18.024 1.574 5.424 .962 7.961 23.972 100 229 DONORS AND DONATIONS. Received previous to March, 1897:—Money, £9,240 5s.; Books, 4,455. Received from 25th March, 1897, to 25th March, 1898: J. Passmore Edwards, Esq. £1,200 BOOKS. Name of Donor. Haggerston Hoxton. Name of Donor. Haggerston Hoxton. Vols. Vols. Vols. Vols. Bailey, J. 36 Brought forward 65 262 Benjamin, F. 1 London City Corporation 3 3 Bickerton, W. T. 1 London County Council 3 Birt, Sir W. 2 London Directory Co. 1 Board of Trade 5 Love and Wyman 1 Brinsmead, E. 1 Magnus, Sir P. 1 British Israel Association 2 3 Martin, J. 1 British Museum Trustees 3 May, W. A. 1 Britnnia Co., Colchester 3 Mitchell & Co. 1 Brown, T. B. 1 Morris, Mrs. 3 2 Catholic Truth Society 2 2 National Protestant Union 1 Christian Institute 62 Cook, Lady 1 Nicholson, C. N. 59 Crisp, F. A. 1 Nineteenth Century Building Society 4 "Daily News" Office 1 Dawson, J. T. 1 North British Association of Gas Managers 1 Edinburgh University College 1 Puttock, W. M. 1 1 Ellis, C. 1 Religious Tract Society 1 Emigration Office 1 Royal Agricultural Society 1 Errington, T 24 154 School Board (London) 4 21 Fogarty, Mrs. 4 Shoreditch Vestry 2 1 Friends Tract Association 3 Society of Accountants and Auditors 1 Gilchrist, J. M. 1 Grant, J. 1 Society of Friends 1 1 Great Eastern Railway 1 Spiers, J. 4 Guild of Reason 1 Stubbs' Directory Co. 1 Hammersmith Vestry 1 Taylor, S. 1 Hampton-Cook, C. 1 Thornton, J. H. 1 Hart, A. 4 Trinity College 1 Kendell & Sons 1 Williams and Norgate 2 1 Carried forward 65 262 Totals 164 294 Combined Total 458 Also Reports from the following Libraries:— Aberdeen, Ashton-under-Lyne, Assistants' Association, Barrow-in-Furness, Belfast, Blackburn, Blackpool, Bolton, Bootle, Boston (U.S.A.), Bournemouth, Brighton, Bristol, Bromley, Buxton, Cambridge, Chiswick, Croydon, Derby, Dewsbury, Dundee, Ealing., Edinburgh, Folkestone, Glasgow (Baillie Institute), Great Yarmouth, Halifax, Hanley, Kingston-upon-Hull, Leamington Spa, Leeds, Leicester, Lincoln, Liverpool, Longton. London:—Battersea, Clerkenwell, Cripplegate Institute, Fulham, Kilburn, Poplar, St. Bride's Institute, St. George's (Hanover Square), St. Giles' St. Martin'sin-Fields, St. Saviour's, Stoke Newington, West Ham, Westminster, Willesden Green. Manchester, Middlesbrough, Newcastle-upon-Tyne. Newcastle-under-Lyne, Nottingham (Mechanics' Institute), Plymouth, Portsmouth, Preston, Rochdale, Rotherhithe, St. Helen's, St. Louis, U.S.A. (Mercantile Library Association), Salford, Smethwick, Streatham, Watford, Wigan, Wimbledon, and Wolverhampton. P1 230 HAGGERSTON LIBRARY.—LIST OF PERIODICALS, &c. Those marked thus (*) are presented. NEWS ROOM. Birmingham Post Bristol Times and Mirror British Journal of Photography Christian World City Press *Civil Service Aspirant Contract Journal *Cook's Excursionist Daily Chronicle Daily Graphic Daily Mail Daily News Daily Telegraph *Dispatch Echo Engineer *Engineering Era Essex & County Standard Evening News Evening Standard Exchange and Mart Financial News Freeman's Journal Globe * Hackney and Kingsland Gazette *Hackney Express and Shoreditch Observer *Hackney Standard *Hotel Industries and Iron *Irish Times Islington Gazette *Justice Liverpool Mercury Lloyd's News London *London Argus Manchester Guardian *Mechanical World * Mercury Morning Morning Advertiser Morning Leader Morning Post Newcastle Chronicle News of the World Pall Mall Gazette People Reynolds' News *Rural World St. James' Gazette Scotsman South London Press Standard Star Sun *Temperance Chronicle Temperance Record Times *Tool Register Truth Universe *Vegetarian Weekly Times and Echo Western Morning News Westminster Gazette Yorkshire Post *Zoophilist MAGAZINE ROOM. * Alliance News Amateur Gardening Argosy Athenaeum *Australian Trading *Banner of Israel British Medical Journal Builder * Builders' Reporter Cabinet and Art Magazine *Canadian Gazette Carpenter and Builder Cassell's Magazine Cassell's Saturday Journal Chambers' Journal * Colliery Guardian Contemporary Review Cornhill Magazine *Country Sport * Cycling Cyclist *Drapers' Record *Educational Times Electrical Review *Emigrant's Information English Mechanic * Epicure Farm, Field and Fireside Fishing Gazette Fortnightly Review Good Words Graphic Great Thoughts Guardian Harper's Magazine *Herald of Peace Illustrated London News *Inventors' Review Journal of Decorative Art Journal of Gas Lighting Judy Justice of the Peace * Labour Gazette Lancet Leisure Hour *Local Government Journal * London County Council Minutes 231 LIST OF PERIODICALS, &c.—Continued. MAGAZINE ROOM—continued. Macmillan's Magazine Moonshine *Musical Herald *Musical Times Navy List *New Church Magazine Nineteenth Century Pearson's Weekly Penny Illustrated Paper Punch Quarterly Review Saturday Review *School Board Minutes Schoolmaster Shoe and Leather Record Spectator *State Correspondent Strand Magazine Sunday Magazine *Technical Education Gazette Timber Trades Journal Volunteer Service Gazette Westminster Review LADIES' ROOM. Black and White Enquire Within Gentlewoman Girls' Own Paper Home Notes House Lady Lady's Pictorial Queen Quiver St. Paul's 0 Schoolmistress Weldon's Journal of Costumes *Wings Woman * Woman's Signal BOYS' ROOM. Boys' Own Paper Chums *Work (Weekly and Monthly) (Weekly and Monthly) (Weekly and Monthly) Young England GARDEN. *Catholic Times Daily Graphic Sun *Church Family Newspaper Daily Mail Sunday Times *Church Weekly Daily News West Ham Guardian *Citizen Standard West Sussex Gazette RAILWAY TIME TABLES. A.B.C. Railway Guide *London, Chatham and *London and South- *Great Eastern Dover Western *Great Northern *London and North- *Metropolitan *Great Western Western *Midland *London, Brighton and *London, Tilbury and South Coast Southend 232 HOXTON LIBRARY—LIST OF PERIODICALS Those marked thus (*) are presented. NEWS ROOM. Army and Navy Gazette Birmingham Daily Post Black and White British Weekly *Catholic Times City Press Clarion Daily Chronicle Daily Graphic Daily Mail Daily News Daily Telegraph Dalton's Advertiser Echo Electrical Engineer Engineer Engineers' Gazette * English Churchman Era *Estates Gazette Evening News Evening Standard Exchange and Mart Field Financial Post Glasgow Herald Globe Graphic Guardian *Hackney and Kingsland Gazette *IIackney Express and Shoroditeh Observer *Hackney Mercury Illustrated London News *Irish Times Leeds Mercury Liverpool Courier Lloyd's News *Local Government Journal London * London Argus Manchester Guardian Morning Morning Advertiser Morning Leader Morning Post New Age Pall Mall Gazette People Referee Reynolds' Newspaper Scotsman Sheffield Telegraph Shipping Gazette *Shoreditch Vestry Agenda * „ „ Minutes Stage Standard Star sun *Thanet Times Times Weekly Dispatch Weekly Times and Echo Western Mail Westminster Gazette Academy *Alliance News Architectural Review Argosy Army List Art Journal Athenaeum Blackwood's Magazine Bookseller Brotherhood Building News Cabinet Maker Carpenter and Builder Cassell's Magazine Cassell's Saturday Journal Cassier's Magazine Century Magazine Chambers' Journal MAGAZINE BOOM. *Civilian Civil Service Competitor *Colliery Guardian Contemporary Review Cornhill Magazine *Cycling Drapers' Record Edinburgh Review English Illustrated Magazine English Mechanic Figaro Fortnightly Review Golden Penny Good Words Harper's Magazine *Hotel Idler *Investor's Guardian Journal of Gas Lighting Judy * Justice Knowledge Lancet Leisure Hour Lippincott's Magazine Literary World Literature *Modern Society Musical Times National Review Nature *Nature Notes *New Church Magazine New Review Nineteenth Century 234 OCCUPATIONS OF BORROWERS. t Haggerston. Hoxton. Haggerston. Hoxton. Actor 1 ° Brought Forward 612 281 Agents and Travellers 10 6 Electricians 2 Architect 1 Engineers 13 8 Artists, Photographers, etc. 4 1 Engravers and Facia Writers 4-3 Bakers, Confectioners, etc 13 2 Estate Agents 3 Bookbinders and Folders 13 13 Fancy Goods Makers 2 - 5 Booksellers 2 1 Farrier 1 Boot and Shoe Makers 40 - 13 Firemen 1 - 3 Box and Case Makers 17 - 16 Fishmongers 3 - 3 Brass Finisher 1 Florist 1 Brewers and Non-Alcholic Foremen and Forewomen 4 - 5 Brewers 2 French Polishers 11 — 8 Brush and Rope Makers 7 Fret Cutter 1 Builders, Bricklayers and Furriers 8 - 4 House Decorators 33 - 1 Gasfitters Plumbers, etc, 16 — 1 Butchers 4 - 5 ,,7 , Glass Workers 5 8 Cabinet Makers and Up- holsterers 52 - 38 Gold Blockers 4 - 1 Caretakers and Porters 19 - 11 Grocers aud Provision Mer- chants lb 8 Carmen and Contractors 6 ~ 6 Hairdressers lb - 7 Carpenters and Joiners 6 - 5 „ , llGl OailStS ••• ••• ••• ••• Chemists,Druggists and Per- TT turners 15 / 2 Horn Manufacturer 1 China and Glass Dealers 2 I Inspectors 3 1 Civil Servants 29 ° 12 Instrument Makers 6 - Clergymen and Mission Ironmongers 1 Workers 16 4 Japanners 2 Clerks, Cashiers and Account- Jewellers, Silversmiths and ants 132 J 55 Horologists 12 / ! Coal Merchants 1 I 1 Journalists 2 2 Collectors 2 1 Labourers 3-4 Cooks, Domestic Servants Lamplighters 2 and Waitresses 16 15 Laundresses 4 2 Cycle Makers and Salesmen 4 ~ Law Writer 1 Dairymen 2 ~ Le a t h e r Merchants and Drapers, Clothiers and Workers 10 1 Hosiers 69 26 Librarian and Assistants 3 5 Draughtsmem 2 1 2 Licensed Victuallers etc. 16 4 Dressmakers, Milliners, etc 83 - 45 Machine Rulcis Drysalter 1 - Managers and Secretaries 4 Dyers and Feather Manu- Masons 2 facturers 7 Medical Profession 7 3 Carried forward 612 281 Carried forward 808 371 235 B?• \ OCCUPATIONS OF BORROWERS.—Continued. Haggerston. Hoxtnn. Haggcrston. Hoxton. Brought forward 808 371 | Brought forward ...1006 447 Merchants 8 1 Stationers 22 4 Messengers and Offiee Boys 30 14 Stvdents and Scholars 52 45 Musicians 3 Tailors and Hat Makers 24 13 Newsagents 2 1 Telegraphists 8- 2 Nurses 17 3 Tie Makers 10 1 Oil Merchants 3 1 Tin Plate Workers 8 Optician 1 Tobacconists 8 1 Paper Bag Maker 1 ~~ Turners and Carvers 10 - 3 Pattern Maker 1 Umbrella and Stick Makers 4 - 3 Pawnbrokers 6 Undertakers 4 1 Pewterer 1 Van Builders 1 - 1 Pianoforte Makers and Tuners 10 - 1 Vellum Workers 4 Picture Frame Makers 7 Warehousemen and Packers 55 34 Policemen 6 Wheelwright - 1 Printers and Compositors' 46 - 37 window Blind Maker ... 1 Publisher and Assistant 2 Non - stated, (principally Saddlers and Harness Makers 5 2 493 179 Safe Makers 2 Sailors 11 Total of occupations 1710 735 Scale Maker 1 . „ . , , , Tickets in force— Schoolmasters, Mistresses, ^ and Pupil Teachers 32 14 March 25th, 1897 1710 Shopfitter 1 ' December, 1897 ^735 Silk-skeiners 6 - Total number of Tickets -2445 Smiths 6 - 1 Total number of Males996 480 Solicitor 0 1 Total number of Females 714 255 Carried forward1006 447 1710 735 2445 \ 1 shy ft* v 236 Sboreditch public libraries CLASSIFIED COMPARATIVE STATEMENT OF PETTY RECEIPTS FOR HAGGERSTON AND HOXTON LIBRARIES. Month. Catalogues. Tickets. Fines. Non Residents' Subscriptions. Waste Paper. Lost Books. Totals. Haggerston. Hozton. Haggerston. Hozton. Haggerston. Hozton. Haggerston. Hozton. Haggerston. Hoxton. Haggerston. Hoxton. Haggerston. Hoxton. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ 8. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. March (26 to 31) 0 2 4 0 1 0 0 2 7 0 1 9 0 16 1 0 8 7 — 0 0 1 1 1 0 0 11 5 April 0 12 8 0 2 0 0 8 6 0 7 5 3 16 3 1 9 10 — 0 3 3 0 0 1 5 0 8 1 19 4 May 0 3 6 0 13 0 0 9 0 0 5 1 4 5 8 2 3 1 0 15 0 0 1 0 0 0 9 0 0 2 0 4 8 5 14 4 3 6 7 June .. 0 3 8 0 4 0 0 4 2 0 4 2 4 5 1 2 4 7 0 10 0 0 3 3 0 0 3 0 2 0 5 6 2 2 15 0 July 0 4 2 0 2 4 0 8 11 0 5 2 3 15 0 1 16 3 — 0 5 5 0 1 8 0 2 2 4 13 6 2 7 7 August 0 7 2 0 5 10 0 10 11 0 6 11 3 14 4 1 18 5 — 0 0 3 0 0 6 0 0 6 0 3 10 4 13 2 2 15 6 September 0 12 8 0 7 10 0 10 5 0 8 9 3 9 2 1 15 9 0 15 0 0 2 6 0 0 6 0 3 1 5 9 9 2 15 11 October 0 4 10 0 6 2 0 13 3 0 7 7 3 10 8 1 4 5 0 15 0 0 5 0 0 0 5 0 2 9 0 2 0 5 6 2 2 15 11 November 0 13 8 0 4 10 0 9 11 0 8 5 4 3 10 1 16 5 2 0 0 0 3 2 0 1 10 0 6 11 7 10 7 2 18 5 December 0 19 8 0 1 0 0 11 9 0 4 7 4 13 0 2 4 1 1 0 0 0 2 9 0 3 3 7 7 2 2 12 11 January .. 2 5 8 0 16 7 0 0 1 5 6 6 0 19 1 — 0 1 1 0 2 7 0 1 2 8 11 0 1 1 9 February 1 11 6 0 15 7 4 1 9 0 2 4 0 10 0 0 1 0 0 0 6 7 0 4 0 2 4 March (1 to 25).. 0 12 4 0 10 2 3 12 5 — 0 1 5 0 0 6 « 4 16 10 Totals 8 13 10 2 8 0 6 11 9 2 19 11 49 9 9 18 2 10 6 5 0 0 5 0 1 5 6 0 14 3 0 4 10 1 2 8 72 10 8 25 12 8 Combined Totals £11 1 0 £9 11 8 £67 12 7 £6 10 0 £1 19 9 J 21 7 6 £98 3 4 237 MEMORANDA. Population of Shoreditch (Census 1891), 124,009. Area of Parish, 648 acres. Rateable value for Library purposes, £694,327. Public Libraries Act adopted, March, 1891. Commissioners first appointed, 14th April, 1891. First Librarian appointed, 5th January, 1892. Transfer of Powers to Vestry, 25th December, 1896. Public Libraries Committee first appointed, 19th January, 1897. Haggerston Library— News and Magazine Rooms opened, 7th November, 1892. Lending and Reference Libraries opened, 10th May, 1893. Extension of premises, 17th October, 1896. Hoxton Library— (Temporary premises)— News and Magazine Rooms opened, 27th November, 1893. Lending and Reference Libraries opened, 26th February, 1894. (Permanent premises)—New Library opened, 20th April, 1898. Total amount of money received as donations since opening, £10,440 5s. Od No. of volumes, &c., presented since the adoption of the Act, 4,455. No. of volumes in stock, at 25th March, 1898, 23,988. No. of volumes issued during year, 101,509, No. of volumes issued since opening, 528,880. No. of Borrowers' tickets in force 25th March, 1898, 2,445. Daily average attendance of visitors, 2,779. WM. C. PLANT, Chief Librarian and Clerk. SHOREDITCH MUNICIPAL TECHNICAL SCHOOL. REPORT OF THE SUPERINTENDENT 241 BOROUGH OF SHOREDITCH. Shoreditch Monicipal Cechnical Schools, 35 and 37, HOXTON STREET. REPORT OF THE SUPERINTENDENT. To the Vestry of the Parish of St. Leonard, Shoreditch, in the County of London. Gentlemen, In presenting my Fourth Annual Report of the work of the schools and of the various classes engaged, it gives one complete satisfaction to be able to state, that in the opinion of the Technical Committee, the progress made is entirely satisfactory. I desire also to express my entire approbation not only with the general attendance, but also with the great interest manifested by the students in all branches of instruction. Considering that the School is strictly a Trade School and that no student is allowed to join a class unless he is already engaged in that specific trade and also considering that many are unable to attend regularly owing to the system of work adopted in the workshops, I certainly think our progress is eminently gratifying. This want of continuity in their studies has handicapped many students from making that marked proficiency they would otherwise have attained, and yet taking all this into consideration the Committee feel that the progress of the School is one of its greatest characteristics. , By referring to the synopsis of attendance at the end of the Report, it can be seen at a glance that a remarkable improvement has taken place in the regularity of the students. 242 So great was the increase in the number attending the classes dealing with the cabinet-making industry, that the Committee resolved to take another building and so increase the accommodation, but finding the Vestry were about to purchase the old Fire Station and that when bought it would not be used by them for some time, they were approached for permission to use the ground floor. The Vestry acquiesced most heartily, and this increased accommodation put three rooms at our disposal, which were immediately used for lecture, drawing and dressmaking purposes. These rooms being all lit with electric light, a much greater benefit was derived, as the light is much brighter and much more diffusive than gas and therefore better for the purposes required. This additional room enabled us to arrange that all technical work should be carried on at the Fire Station while the practical work was confined to the schools in Hoxton Street. Perhaps one of the greatest advantages derived was that we were able to alter the position of our workshops. The cabinet and carpenter's shops were transferred from the top to the first floor; this being a much larger room enabled us to have five additional benches and thus we were able at once to cope with the greatly increased numbers attending these classes. This again enabled us to classify our students and provide for an advanced and elementary class, and I feel sure this has been the means of imparting a better tone to the school and is in a great measure answerable for our phenomenal success. That we are still doing good work and carrying out our scheme in a most commendable manner may be seen by the Report of the London County Council Technical Board, which testifies to the fact that our students are especially successful in gaining the Board's valuable artisan scholarships, and the Vestry should feel proud in having initiated such a school in a district so congested with a population depending almost entirely on the cabinet industry for its support. I may add that many of the manufacturers of the district have visited, and are continually visiting, the School, thus evincing a keen interest in the work carried on in their midst, and the high eulogies they pass, both on the system used and the work produced, all tend to show that the work we are doing is in the direction most beneficial to the interests of the Artisan. Should any further testimony be needed to point out the proficiency of the School and its high state of excellence, I need only refer to the public remarks of such eminent Educationists as Professor Stuart and Dr. Garnett. The first of these gentlemen characterises the work as " The finest thing done in Technical Education," while Dr. Garnet, speaking at a recent distribution of prizes at the Shoreditch Town Hall, assured his audience that so thorough was the 243 work that it was the full intention of the Technical Board to carry out the work in the newly-acquired Aske's School in exactly the same way and on the same lines. If this is done then the good to Shoreditch will be incalculable, otherwise the change will be of no benefit. \ DRAWING AND DESIGN. lnstrxictor Mr. W. BROAD. Assistant Instructor Mr. S. H. STILLWELL. The students attending this class are all artisans engaged in one or other of the many branches of the cabinet industry—designers, woodcarvers, cabinet makers, chair makers, or marquetry cutters—all desirous of gaining a thorough practical knowledge of the application of design as applied to their several crafts. It is my pleasant duty to report that the instruction afforded and the system adopted is bearing good fruit. This can be seen, not only in the successes of the students in open competition, but also by the adoption of true principles in the design of their work. It might not be out of place here to state that another of our students has been able—simply by zealous application at this class—to mount another rung in the industrial ladder by getting the position of designer in a large shop in the immediate neighbourhood. There is not the slightest doubt that the success of this class is entirely due to the wide and varied experience of Mr. Broad, who in design as applied to the cabinet industry has not a superior in the Metropolis ; and he has, in addition, the rare skill of imparting his knowledge in such a masterly manner, that his pupils become thoroughly interested, and feel compelled to attend his class. One of the chief features of the class is the encouragement which is given to the study of plant life and its varied application to design. This gives vitality and interest to its production and produces conventionalities quite new and distinct. Mastermen, who have visited the School, have been struck by the evidence of the widespread ability shown in the work of the Students. There is no doubt that the open spaces of Shoreditch which are so beautifully laid out, will be a great boon to the Student of the drawing and design classes, inasmuch as they will furnish material for him to work upon and thus save him the expense of buying, and also going miles to see like specimens. The Student will be able to watch the developments day by day, and so build up the structure of the plant in all its phases. This kind of study, to those who are working in the production of cheap work, which so greatly abounds in this locality, will open up a new life, and the toils of the day will be forgotten in watching the wonders of nature. Q 244 Resides the late class on Monday, it was found necesssary to start an early class at 5.30. This was doubly necessary, first on account of increased numbers and also in order that more individual attention might be given to the members, an indispensable feature in work of this kind. Great credit is due to the Committee for maintaining this class, for although the numbers are small students are afforded ample opportunities of discussing the very difficult details of their design with their most competent Instructor. Several students were desirous of studying from figure that they might the more readily gain Strength and Proportion in their work. In order to meet this demand five Statuettes were purchased to facilitate this branch of study. The excellent attendance has been maintained throughout the year, and when we have more room at our disposal, so that Students may be properly graded, we shall be able to produce much better work, and carry it through a much wider range than is possible under the present regime. The greatest number that have attended on any one evening is forty, this showing the bond of union existing between the Instructor and Students. In order to encourage drawing to the greatest possible extent, another class was started on Friday evening. Freehand was selected as the subject, and the class was placed under the very able guidance of Mr. S. H. Stillwell. Mr. Stillwell is a genius in the production of all work connected with design, following closely in the footsteps of his most able and gifted instructor. The school cannot but feel proud that it has been the means of producing a student of such marked abilities. During the recent examinations many of the Students have been successful in obtaining Scholarships. This testifies more than words of mine can do, to the very excellent instruction given at the class. WOOD CARVING. Instructor : Mr. R. BAKER. Assistant : Mr. A- GARDNER. It is in this class that the thoughts which have been developed on paper in the Design Class, are now put to a practical test. This is a work which requires very careful handling, so that every detail expressed in the drawing, can be manipulated and produced with perfect accuracy. In Mr. Baker, we have an Instructor most ably qualified to see this carried out. He is a man who throws untiring zeal and energy into his work. It is owing to this, that the class is kept together in such a marked manner. 245 There is no doubt that the instruction imparted must tend to produce a better condition in this particular branch of Industrial art, which at the present time is debased to the very greatest possible extent. Many of the Students have gained Artisan Scholarships at the recent Competitive examinations. Mr. Walter Crane, who judged the work sent in for competition to the London County Council Education Board, in a public speech spoke of the beautiful treatment of a piece of work executed by a Student of this class. But by far the greatest testimony bearing on the value of this Instruction, is the great praise accorded to the productions by Master Cabinet Makers, who have seen the Schools at work. Owing to the great increase in the numbers attending, it was found necessary to inaugurate another class. An Assistant Instructor was appointed, in the person of Mr. A. Gardner, another of our own trained Students, and the extra class was started on Wednesday Evening. The results, both in attendance, and also in the work generally, are highly satisfactory, and reflect the greatest credit on the Instructors. CABINET MAKING AND JOINERY. Instructor : Mr. W. SIM. Under the very able guidance of the Instructor, this class has been accomplishing very excellent work during the past year. Owing to the fact of increased accommodation a larger workshop was given over to this branch of Instruction, and an increased complement of five benches was able to be added. This was absolutely necessary when we consider the increased numbers attending the class. The increase in numbers is mainly owing to the fact that the artisan of the neighbourhood is finding out that he can improve his position by a greater knowledge of his craft obtainable at the school. I Several of the students, who on admission were only working at the roughest work in some of the surrounding shops, have profited by the instruction to such an extent that they are now employed by some of the best cabinet shops in the West. 0 Thus we can see that the work accomplished in the class is of a first rate quality, and we can claim that we are serving the needs of the artisan in the way we advocate, by lifting him out of the dead level of unskilled labour, and placing him in a much more useful and lucrative sphere of work. Ql 246 If all this can be accomplished in a building such as we have now at our disposal with what great confidence can we look forward to the time, when with increased accommodation and appliances we shall be able to greatly increase the very useful work we are performing. The attendance during the year has been well maintained. Many of the pupils have been successful in obtaining Artisan Scholarships. ELECTRICAL FITTING CLASS. Instructor Mr. W. H. MERN. This class is conducted by Mr. Mern, and although the numbers have been very low, considering the great importance of such a class in our midst, the attendance has been on the whole very good. The falling off in attendance, is I think, due to the fact that many of those attending have covered the ground they intended to cover, and have learned all they wished to know, rather than to the advent of summer weather. I would suggest that with the Committee's sanction, this class should be made a little more constructive. This would involve a little expenditure in tools, but I think the advantages would adequately repay it, for after all said and done, wiring in itself is rather monotonous and uninteresting work. On the theoretical side, although the instructor has endeavoured to make the subject as simple and interesting as posssible, yet it is found that with the exception of one or two students even the simplest formulas are too difficult for them to grasp. There is no doubt that scarcity of apparatus has led to apathy and a want of interest in this direction. I think that if the constructive element were introduced and made to go hand in hand with the theoretical side, not giving an undue prominence to the scientific side, then the necessary interest would be awakened. Some of the pupils are employed in Electrical work, and I find them much behind the times in workshop practice. If it were possible to introduce the subject on the lines of our Woodcarving classes then the instruction would be much more beneficial. After all, the time, for a subject of this description, is very short, and 2½ hours is soon gone. I should suggest that the class be divided into two parts, taken on separate evenings, one being devoted to the Theoretical side, and the other to the Practical. 247 WORKSHOP MENSURATION AND MECHANICS. Instructor Mr. G. RADDON. This is, I think, one of the most difficult classes held at the schools, yet in spite of this the average attendance has been well maintained, a fact which speaks very favourably for the methods Mr. Raddon adopts to make the subjects interesting. There is no doubt that to the average artisan, these and kindred subjects present very great difficulties. Many left school at the very earliest opportunity and finding themselves freed from restraint neglected their studies, and soon forgot the greater part of what they had learned. It becomes necessary, in the first place, to regain what they have thus lost and then apply it afresh, this is irksome, and unless handled in the most interesting way, fails to have the desired effect. When we consider, that, combined with this, the class is carried on without the least aid derived from the use of apparatus then the results attained are doubly gratifying. I cannot but think that when the classes are installed in the new building of Aske's Schools and are also provided with all necessary appurtenances, we shall have very much larger numbers attending and a corresponding gain in results will accrue. # DRAWING AND LECTURES FOR CABINET MAKERS AND JOINERS. Instructor : THE SUPERINTENDENT. Assistant Instructor : Mr. E. N. FLASHMAN. This Class has been eminently successful during the past year, and the results are perfectly satisfactory. Many advantages have resulted through the increased accommodation made at the commencement of this year, for we were enabled to separate the joiners from the cabinet -makers. The students of both classes are very enthusiastic, and take great pains, and throughout have followed with care and diligence my instructions. Their attendance is fairly regular, and taking into consideration that the majority had practically no knowledge of drawing as applied to their craft, and the limited time they are able to devote to this subject, it is exceedingly gratifying to hear the high commendations from the Master Cabinet Makers, corroborated by the students themselves, on the value of the instruction to their every day work. It is also interesting to note, that most of the students, who have gone through the course of this class, together with practical cabinet making, are now holding better positions. There is no doubt that the Educational Training the students receive in this and kindred classes, gives them a much higher ideal of life, especially when one considers the very wide range of knowledge they must cover before they become proficient. The course is arranged so that the following subjects are taught :— (<i) Practical Plane and Solid Geometry. (b) Building and Cabinet Construction. (c) The Nature and Properties of Timber. (il) Tools, their principles and uses. 248 It will be seen that the technical side of the work is well provided for, and its correlation with practical work brought into great prominence. I may add it is encouraging that four students of this class were able to be presented for examination in Woodwork Class B, and so qualify themselves as teachers of manual instruction, under certificate of the City and Guilds of London Institute. MANUAL TRAINING (WOODWORK) FOR TEACHERS. I am personally conducting these Classes, the work of which has again been most successful; but a diminution in the number of students is observable. This decrease I attribute to two primary causes, first, that the abnormal initial demand for certified manual training teachers has been now partly satisfied, and that the classes will in the future be recruited only by those students who are prepared to devote more of their time to become thoroughly efficient; and secondly to the action of the London School Board, who wisely or unwisely have appointed a preponderance ot artisan woodwork instructors in their schools. Manual Training is in my opinion essentially a teacher's subject and I view this action with no little curiosity. However, it must not be forgotten that manual training in this country has scarcely emerged from its experimental stage, and I am convinced that given wider scope and increased facilities this class will continue for many years to meet a widely felt want. MANUAL TRAINING (WOODWORK) FOR BOYS. Instructor: DRAWING—The SUPERINTENDENT. Instructor: WOODWORK—Mh. G. RADDON. The work is arranged so that instruction is given in Drawing and Bench work. The Committee desire that this class should form part of the general education necessary in the preparation of a boy for the real work of life. It is not intended to teach him a trade, but to develop his faculties, to give him manual skill, so that the skill acquired may be useful in any occupation of life, and be specialty beneficial to those who are likely to become artisans. The system of instruction adopted has been most satisfactory, the pupils are taught drawing to develop their perceptive faculties so as to view correctly and to understand what they see, and lithe fingers are taught to use tools so as to give a mastery of the fundamental mechanical processes. It will be seen that the work of this class tends to foster a due appreciation of the dignity ol intelligent labour and to develop simultaneously the intellectual and physical powers of the boys. I am pleased to state that four of the lads are either already apprenticed to carpentry and joinery trades or soon will be. One of the lads already 249 apprenticed was told by his foreman, that he was very pleased to find he had been taught to handle his tools in such a workmanlike manner. This, itself, is testimony in favour of the system adopted, and as long as we produce similar results we can conscientiously say we are doing good work. PLUMBING. Instructor : WORKSHOP PRACTICE—Mr. C. H. QUELCH. Instructor : DRAWING AND LECTURES—Mr. W. FIRTH. The full scheme of our work in plumbing aims at providing progressive instruction of a theoretical and practical nature ; first by workshop practice, secondly by drawing and lectures bearing on the every day work of the plumber, and thirdly by practice in calculations and problems so necessary to him, by attending the workshop lectures in mensuration and mechanics. Not only can many of the students draw and afterwards execute a piece of good work but the}* are able to compute the cubic capacity of cisterns of given size as well as the pressure such a body of water produces. It is gratifying to know that several students, who have gone through our course of instruction in plumbing, are now in business for themselves as mastermen. The excellent character of the work of the practical class is maintained as shewn by several students gaining honours, and one a Bronze Medal in the examinations of the • City and Guilds of London Institute. The attendance at the drawing and lecture class is still not good. It is to be deplored that plumbers are somewhat apathetic in acquiring the knowledge so useful in their craft. DRESSMAKING. Instructress : Mrs. L. MONROE. The high state of efficiency in this class is most successfully maintained ; the Lady Examiners have again expressed their high appreciation of the work done, both in the careful needlework, and the fit of the bodices made by the students. The attendance has not been as uniformly good as could be wished, but this is to be accounted for by many of the girls objecting to the dismal walk round the side of the New Tabernacle at the first half of the session, and since the removal to brighter premises, the numbers have not increased. There is no doubt that at the more commodious premises of Aske's school, when a complete course of instruction is provided in all branches of domestic economy, to include with dressmaking, cookery, housewifery and laundry work, there will be a great influx of students. SUMMARY. In perusing the foregoing reports, it will be readily seen that the past year has been most successful not only in the increased numbers attending these classes, but also in the very marked improvement of those who have attended. 250 It gives me sincere pleasure to think, that while I am penning this report, arrangements are being made to build four large workshops and also to redecorate the building known as Aske's Schools, which is to be the future home of the Shoreditch Municipal School. It is an unquestionable fact that one of the noblest ventures ever made was the one undertaken by the Shoreditch Vestry, when they inaugurated these Technical Schools. It is one of the greatest works accomplished in this Municipality, and one that should appeal most strongly to the thousands of artisans dwelling within its confines. Now, however, that school which hitherto has carried on its work in a badly lighted and ill-arranged warehouse of four floors and a basement is now about to attain the zenith of its glory by being installed in a thoroughly commodious and well arranged building. An outsider might wonder how all this has come about. This is the natural outcome of the great successes achieved by the school, successes which have been quite abnormal. Each year this school, since its inauguration, has shown a gradual development that has served the wants of the artisan, by teaching him in a thoroughly sound and practical manner, that which was best for him to know, in order to raise him from the mediocrity of an unskilled labourer, to a skilled artisan of sound judgment. The London County Council Education Board saw this and resolved to help us by placing at our disposal a building that would be entirely adequate for Technical Instruction. More than this, they saw that the system of instruction was one in which the teaching is brought to bear directly on the artisan, and through their Secretary— Professor Garnett—they state that those methods of instruction shall be continued in the new building. If this is so, then I am convinced we shall have one of the finest schools in the country, and one that will strike at the very foundation of its work, by extirpating all that is unskilled, and building up that which is so necessary for the production of skilled work. I I will now show by a very short statement how these excellent results have been brought about. For the last twenty years I have devoted my time to the system of Technical training in vogue in this country, and while I have seen how absurd many of the methods have been I have strained every effort to produce a scheme which aims at the very foundation, and will revolutionise the methods of instruction. This system was first adopted in the University of Cambridge workshops, and with additions and deductions from the original scheme, I claim that I have advanced in the right direction, and have so built up a method of instruction that is now sought after and admired by many kindred institutions. 251 One great characteristic of the scheme is that every pupil shall understand the principles involved in his work before he endeavours to carry them into effect. This is achieved by leading him on gradually to understand the drawing of his subject, the theoretical side, and the right and skilful use of the tools and materials necessary for the carrying out of his ideas. We have never trained a student at this school to gain any monetary value from the article he has manufactured, yet in the production of it all the points of construction and technique have been most faithfully adhered to. This method of teaching has been adversely criticised, but we have an overwhelming abundance of testimony from the leading designers and master cabinet makers, to show that it is the one thing necessary in a school of this kind. In order to show the effectiveness of our system, and how it is appreciated in the trade and elsewhere, the following extracts will abundantly demonstrate:— HAROLD F. LOCKE, Esq., says:—"The system adopted is an excellent one, and I feel that the work which has been accomplished is very satisfactory, and points to excellent direction and teaching on the part of the masters. Prof. J. STUART, says:—"The work done in this school is thorough in every respect, and there were few more promising undertakings in connection with the London County Council Technical Education Board than that in Shoreditch." The Report of the EDUCATION BOARD, in 1897, says:—" The principal centre of Technical Instruction for Woodwork, and the Furniture Trades, is the Shoreditch Municipal School." The LONDON COUNTY COUNCIL INSPECTOR says :—" We do bring our work to bear directly on the artisan." Sir PHILIP MAGNUS commented on the very valuable work which was being carried out in the Shoreditch Municipal School. Leading Technical Educationalists such as Dr. Garnett, Professor Stuart, Sir P. Magnus, Mr. Sidney Webb, and others, have stated on public platforms " That they have watched every development of the school with the greatest interest, and they could not help feeling that there was a great and beneficial future in store for the Shoreditch Municipal School." In conclusion, gentlemen, I feel it very strongly my duty, to urge that you insist that in the new school this same system—which has been adopted with such great success, and which has met with such overwhelming praise—shall be the one to be adopted. Our new school must not be a Secondary School, a Science School, or a Polytechnic—but a School where the Artisan of Shoreditch may acquire that knowledge which will the better equip him to fight labour's battle, enhance his position in life, and secure for him that knowledge of his craft which will enable him to obtain the topmost rung of the Industrial ladder. I am, Gentlemen, Your obedient servant, WALTER E. DEGEEDON, Superintendent. 959 LONDON COUNTY TECHNICAL BOAED SCHOLARSHIPS. Gained in open competition from the London County Council Education Board since 1895. £ s. d. 1895 *S. H. Stilwell Artisan Art Scholarship £ 20 for 3 years 00 0 0 „ *A. Gardner „ „ „ £20 „ 3 „ 60 0 0 „ F. W. Todd, Junior „ „ „ £5 „ 2 „ 10 0 0 „ W. G. Beavis Evening Exhibition £5 „ 2 „ 10 0 0 1896 *C. E. Dicken Artisan Art Scholarship £20 „ 3 „ 6O 0 0 „ *C. Picket „ „ „ £20 „ 3 „ 60 0 0 „ *F. W. Tod „ „ „ £20 „ 3 „ 60 0 0 „ S. Baron, Junior „ „ „ £5 „ 2 „ 10 0 0 „ A. T. Payne, Junior „ „ „ £5 „ 2 „ 10 0 0 „ L. Siebenhaar, Junior „ „ „ £5 „ 2 „ 10 0 0 T. Moffatt, Junior „ „ „ £5 „ 2 „ 10 0 0 1897 *S. Baron „ „ „ £'20 „ 3 „ 60 0 0 „ *H. Warren „ „ „ ££0 „ 3 „ 60 0 0 „ *S. J. Moffatt „ „ „ £10 „ 3 „ 30 0 0 „ *W. Ryan „ „ „ £10 „ 3 „ 30 0 0 „ *L. Siebenhaar „ „ „ £10 „ 3 „ 30 0 0 „ A. Snyer, Junior „ „ „ £5 „ 2 „ 10 0 0 „ W. Woodhouse, Junior „ „ „ £5 „ 2 „ 10 0 0 „ J. A. Clark Evening Exhibition £5 „ 2 „ 10 0 0 1898 *A. Sayer Artisan Art Scholarship £20 „ 3 „ 60 0 0 „ *F. Collins „ „ „ £20 „ 3 „ CO 0 0 „ *E. Dicken „ „ „ £10 „ 3 „ 30 0 0 „ *W. Bennett „ „ „ £10 „ 3 „ 30 0 0 „ *S. Archie „ „ „ £10 „ 3 „ 30 0 0 „ *C. Ward „ „ „ £5 „ 1 „ 5 0 0 „ *W. Moffatt „ „ „ £5 „ 1 „ 5 0 0 „ E. Larman, Junior „ „ „ £5 „ 2 „ 10 0 0 „ S. Cowdrey, Junior „ „ „ £5 „ 2 „ 10 0 0 „ W. Alleway, Junior „ „ „>> £5 „ 2 „ 10 0 0 Those marked with a (*) receive free tuition value 50 0 0 Making a grand total of value of Scholarships gained since the year, 1895 900 0 0 CITY AND GUILDS OF LONDON INSTITUTE EXAMINATION. Certificates Awarded for Successes. DRESSMAKING. L. Price, E. Heath, H. E. Johnson, A. L. Smith, M. Smith, A. Fowler, A. 13. Reeves, E. M. Soden, J. Montgomery. CABINET MAKING. L. Siebenhaar, L. Wolff, F. Crawley, A. T. Payne, R. Lee, W. Hoare, E. G. Dicken, S. H. Stillwell. PLUMBING. C. Elgar, J. A. Clark, C. Cleave, J. E. Abbott, who also gained a prize value £2 (Plumbers' Company) and the City and Guilds of London Institute's Bronze Medal. MANUAL TRAINING WOODWORK. W. H. Bush, J. S. Bartlett, JVC. Everett, E. Grimshaw, R. T. Williams, W. G. Beavis, A. W. Grove, J. F. Quarmby, R. S. Meats, W. H. Anthony. 253 ANALYSIS OF ATTENDANCES, MARCH, 1897-98. Subject. Evening. Total Attendances. Average Attendance. Per Cent. No. of Meetings. Duration of Meetings. Average No. on Roll. No. on Roll, March, 1896. Drawing and Design Monday 944 23.3 76.8 40 hours. 30.3 34 2 Do, Early Class Monday 304 7.7 81.6 39 2 9.5 11 Plumbing Lectures & Drawing Monday 300 8.5 82.5 35 2 10.3 12 Electrical Fitting — Workshop Lectures Monday 297 7.8 84.7 38 1 9.2 10 Do. Practical Work Monday 297 7.8 84.7 38 ½ 9.2 10 Carpentry and Joinery Monday 212 12.4 75.1 17 2 16.5 16 Wood Carving Tuesday 612 14.2 81.0 43 2 17.4 17 Clay Modelling—Early Class Tuesday 259 6.4 79.0 40 2 8.1 10 Cabinet Making—Advanced Tuesday 563 13.0 87.7 43 2 14.8 15 Artisan Drawing—Elementary Tuesday 739 17.1 82.5 43 2 20.8 29 Plumbing—Advanced Tuesday 372 9.2 82.1 40 2 11.2 12 Workshop, Mensuration, Mechanics, Wednesday 534 12.7 76.0 42 2 16.7 12 Dressmaking Wednesday 399 9.0 74.3 44 2 12.1 13 Wood Carving—Elementary Wednesday 312 14.8 83.1 21 2 17.8 13 Wood Carving Thursday 566 12.3 73.2 46 2 16.8 19 Cabinet Making—Elementary Thursday 523 11.3 80.7 46 2 14.0 15 Dressmaking Thursday 463 10.5 86.7 44 2 12.1 11 Plumbing—Elementary Thursday 460 10.0 73.5 46 2 13.6 13 Artisan Drawing—Advanced Thursday 508 11.0 82.0 46 2 13.4 16 Drawing and Design Friday 549 13.3 73.4 41 2 18.1 18 Manual Training for Lads Friday 838 19.0 84.4 44 1½ 22.5 28 Drawing for Manual Training Friday 803 18.2 85.4 44 1½ 21.3 24 Teachers' Classes 498 12.1 81.7 41 2 14.8 17 254 TIME TABLE OF CLASSES. Class. Subject. Teachers. Evenings. Hours. A Drawing and Design—Day Class W. Broad Monday 5 to 7.30 Do. do. —Advanced W. Broad Monday 8 to 10 Do. do. do. S. Stillwell (Assistant) Monday 8 to 10 E Carpentery and Joinery S. Switzer Monday 8 to 10 I Plumbing Lecture and Drawing W. Firth Monday 8 to 10 L Electrical Fitting—Lecture W. Mern Monday 7.30 to 8.30 M Do. Workshop Practice W. Mern Monday 8.30 to 10 C Wood Carving—Advanced R. Baker Tuesday 8 to 10 C Clay Modelling—Day Class R. Baker Tuesday 5 to 7 30 F Cabinet Making—Advanced W. Sim Tuesday 8 to 10 G Artisan Drawing—Elementary W. E. Degerdon Tuesday 8 to 10 Do. do. do. E. N. Flashman (Assistant) Tuesday 8 to 10 J Plumbing—Workshop Practice—Advanced C. H. Quelch Tuesday 8 to 10 D Wood Carving—Elementary A. Gardner (Assistnnt) Wednesday 8 to 10 N Workshop Mensuration and Mechanics G. Raddon Wednesday 8 to 10 P Dressmaking—Elementary Mrs. L. Monroe Wednesday 8 to 10 D Wood Carving—Advanced R. Baker Thursday 8 to 10 E Cabinet Making—Elementary W. Sim Thursday 8 to 10 H Artisan Drawing—Advanced W. E. Degerdon Thursday 8 to 10 Do. do. E. N. Flashman (Assistant) Thursday 8 to 10 K Plumbing—Workshop Practice—Elementary C. H. Quelch Thursday 8 to 10 Q Dressmaking—Advanced Mrs. L. Monroe Thursday 8 to 10 B Drawing and Design—Elementary S Stilwell (Assistant) Friday 8 to 10 O Manual Instruction in the use of Tools for Lads G. Raddon Friday 6.30 to 8 8 to 9.30 Drawing for Manual Instruction W. E. Degerdon Friday .... 7 to 8 Do. do. do. W. E. Degerdon Friday .... 8 to 9 R j Manual Classes in Woodwork for Elementary Teachers W. E. Degerdon • • •• Students attending Glass C or I) arc expected to attend Class A or B. Do. do. E or F do. do. G or H. Do. do. J or K do. do. I. Do. do. M do. do. L. All Students are desired to attend Class N. The Classes R are held on Saturday Mornings, 9 till 11 and 11 till 1, and such evenings as may be found necessary from 6 till 8. The Foes, including Drawing, Lectures, Workshop Instruction, and the use of tools and materials to Artisans, 2s. 6d. per term. STATISTICS, 2 57 Annual Vestry Elections, ??? Analysis of Expenditure under provisions of Local Government Act, 1894. No. HEADS OF EXPENDITURE. wards. total. Moorfields. Church. Hoxton. Wenlock. Whitmore. Kingsland. Haggerston. Acton. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. 1 Caretakers of Rooms or Buildings ... 0 15 0 ... ... ... ... ... ... 0 15 0 2 Cleaning, Lighting, Firing, &c., at ditto 0 15 0 ... 1 1 0 0 15 0 0 15 0 0 15 0 0 15 0 0 15 0 5 11 0 3 Fitting up Polling Stations 0 10 0 1 0 0 1 0 0 0 10 6 0 10 6 0 10 6 0 10 6 0 10 0 5 2 0 4 Delivery of Fittings and Cab Hire ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 5 Hire of Ballot Boxes 0 0 9 0 1 6 0 1 6 0 0 9 0 0 9 0 0 9 0 0 9 0 0 9 0 7 6 6 Purchase of ditto ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 7 Printing 2 13 0 6 4 0 6 9 0 3 10 6 3 1 6 2 13 0 1 15 0 2 4 0 28 10 0 8 Stationery 0 3 6 0 7 0 0 7 0 0 3 6 0 3 6 0 3 6 0 3 6 0 3 6 1 15 0 9 Refitting Stamping Instruments 0 2 0 0 3 6 0 3 0 0 2 0 0 2 0 0 1 6 0 1 6 0 1 6 0 17 0 10 Copies of Register ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 11 Presiding Officers 2 10 0 5 0 0 5 0 0 2 10 0 2 10 0 2 10 0 2 10 0 2 10 0 25 0 0 12 Poll Clerks 4 0 0 6 0 0 6 0 0 4 0 0 4 0 0 3 0 0 3 0 0 3 0 0 33 0 0 13 Counting Assistants 1 7 4 2 14 8 2 15 0 1 9 0 1 9 0 9 0 1 9 0 1 9 0 14 2 0 14 Conveyance of Ballot Boxes 0 2 0 ... 0 2 0 0 2 0 0 2 0 ... 0 2 0 0 2 0 0 12 0 15 Returning Officer's Fees for conducting Elections 7 0 0 15 0 0 9 0 0 8 0 0 9 0 0 7 0 0 7 0 0 7 0 0 69 0 0 [ £ 19 3 7 37 5 8 31 18 6 21 3 3 21 14 3 18 3 3 17 7 3 17 15 9 184 11 6 258 DUSTING, SCAVENGING, AND WATERING. COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL OP REFUSE FOR YEAR ENDING 25TH MARCH, 1898. Loads or Refuse Collected, Fodder Purchased. Street Sweepings 11,884 Hay 1,803 trusses House and Trade Refuse 16,185 Straw 3,213 „ Clover 1,748 „ 28,069 Mixture 1,600 „ Disposal of Clinkers, &c., from Dust Destructor. Oats 1,448 sacks Bran 340 „ Greenmeat 357 doz. bundles tons cwt. qrs. lbs. By Barge 2,138 8 2 21 Carrots 10 tons To Baths 406 10 0 0 Horses and Plant at March 25th, 1898. By Rail 10 11 0 4 Horses 45 2555 9 3 7 Water Vans 15 Slop and Dust Vans 42 Weight of Refuse disposed of Carts 6 tons cwt. qrs. lbs. Horse Machine Brooms 6 By Barge 24,379 5 0 21 Snow Plough 1 To Destructor (As from June, 1897) 18,378 18 3 21 8 horse-power Gas Engine Chaff Cutter 1 42,758 4 0 14 Drilling Machine 1 9 ton Weighing Machine Disposal of Manure from Vestry's Horses, and brought to Wharf by Parishioners. Tyreing Machine 1 Ferry Boat 1 Bv Barge 430 tons Staff. Paid to Contractors for— Wharf Manager 1 Street Inspector 1 £ s. d. Barging Refuse 3,795 15 6 General Clerk 1 Do. Manure 32 5 0 Dusting Foreman 1 £3,827 0 6 Scavenging Day Foremen 2 Do. Night Foreman 1 259 RATES LEVIED for POOR LAW and VESTRY PURPOSES, from 1856 to 1898, since the passing of the Metropolis Local Management Act, 1855. Year ended 25th March. Poor Rate. Vestry Rates. Total Rate in the £. Remarks. Lighting. General. Sewers. Main Drainage. Met. Board of Works. 1 2 3 4 5 6' 7 8 s. d. d. S. d. d. d. d. S. d. 1857 3 10 7 0 9 4 ... ... 5 6 Pavement Rates of 3d. per square yard for limited areas were also levied. 1858 3 11 5 1 5 4 ... ... 6 1 1859 3 9 4 1 3 4 ... ... 5 8 1860 3 2 4½ 1 4 4½ ... ... 5 3 1861 3 0 4 1 3 6 3 ... 5 4 1862 3 3 4 1 4 5 3 ... 5 7 1863 3 1 5 1 1 4 1 2 5 2 1864 3 2 4 0 11 3 3 ... 4 11 1865 3 2 5 1 2 5 4 ... 5 6 1866 3 9 3 1 5 4 4 ... 6 1 1867 4 1 1 1 7 6 4 ... 6 7 1868 4 1 ... 1 8 6 3 ... 6 6 1 1869 4 4 ... 1 9 4 2 ... 6 7 1870 3 11 ... 1 6 6 3 ... 6 2 1871 4 1 ... 1 9 2 12 ... 6 2 -(•Metropolitan 1872 4 1 ... 1 5 4 ... ... 5 10 Consolidated 1873 2 11 ... 1 6 4 ... ... 4 9 Rate. 1874 2 11 ... 1 6 4 ... ... 4 9 1875 2 5 ... 1 7 7 ... ... 4 7 1876 2 3 ... 1 11 7 ... ... 4 9 1877 2 4 ... 2 0 5 ... ... 4 9 1878 2 5 ... 1 9 6 ... ... 4 8 1879 2 6 ... 2 0 6 ... ... 5 0 1880 2 1 ... 2 1 7 ... ... 4 9 1881 2 2 ... 2 1 7 ... ... 4 10 1882 2 5 ... 2 0 6 ... ... 4 11 ! 1883 2 6 ... 1 10 8 ... ... 5 0 1884 2 4 ... 2 2 6 ... ... 5 0 1885 2 3 ... 2 2 7 ... ... 5 0 1886 2 5 ... 2 1 9 ... ... 5 3 1887 2 0 ... 2 1 8 ... ... 4 9 1888 2 2 ... 2 0 9 ... ... 4 11 1889 2 5 ... 1 9 10 ... ... 5 0 1890 2 11 ... 2 0 2 ... ... 5 1 1891 3 2 ... 2 0 1 ... ... 5 3 1892 3 0½ ... 2 2 ... ... 5 3 1893 3 3 ... 2 6 1 ... ... 5 10 1894 3 4 ... 2 6 3 ... ... 6 1 1895 3 5 ... 2 1 2 ... ... 5 8 1896 3 2 ... 2 6 3 ... ... 5 11 1897 3 7 ... 2 6 2 ... ... 6 3 1898 3 5 ... 2 q 0 2 ... ... 5 10 R 260 The Vestry of the Parish of Saint Leonard, Shoreditch, IN THE COUNTY OF LONDON. STATEMENT OF ANNUAL CONTRACTS ENTERED INTO BY THE VESTRY FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 1897—98, Pursuant to the Metropolis Local Management Act, 1855, 18 & 19 Vict., cap. 120. Date. Name of Contractor. Subject matter. 8th Mar., 1897 Stevens, E. & Son Ballast, Hoggin, Shingle and Sand. 8th „ „ Barnes, George Basket Work. 8th „ „ Bird, Frederick & Co. Ironmongery. 1th „ „ Blyth, Thomas Lime and Cement. 8th „ „ Clark, John A. & Son Painters' and Writers' Work. 7th „ „ Cow, P. B. & Co. Indiarubber Work. 7th „ „ Abbott, C. & Sons General Cartage of Materials. 8th „ „ Tyrie, G. Brooms, Brushes, &c. 7th „ „ Sergeant, Longstaff & Co. Coal and Coke. 8th „ „ Griffiths, William Masons' and Paviors' Work. 8th „ „ Ditto do. Granite Cubes and Broken Granite. 8th „ „ Gibb & Co. Gully Gratings, Street Posts, and other Ironw 28th „ „ Isaacs, S. & Sons Old Iron. 8th „ „ Nicholls & Clarke Glass for Str6et Lamps, Paint, &c. 10th „ „ Griffiths, Wm. Patent or Manufactured Paving Stone. 8th „ „ Roberts, A. T. Son & Co. Printing. 28th Feb., 1898 Sanitas Company Ltd Disinfectants and Soap. 8th „ „ Shipton, Herbert S. *Oats and Bran. 8th „ „ Straker, Charles & Sons, Limited Stationery. 8th „ „ Sewell, J. *lover and Straw. 8th „ „ Tilley, William Henry Street Lamps, Brackets and Fittings. 8th „ „ Tyrie, George Street Broom Heads. 8th „ „ Val de Travers Asphalte Co., Ltd. Asphalte or Manufactured In Situ Paving. 8th „ „ Jones Annealed Concrete Co. Ltd Ditto. 8th „ „ Dalston Forge Co. Smiths' Work. 8th „ „ White, W. J. & Co. Glazed Stoneware, Drain Pipes, Junctions, Bends, &c. 5th „ „ Dayloy G. O. Plumbers' Work. 5th April „ „ J. W. Newton & Co., Ltd Engineer's Stores. 5th „ „ Pryke & Palmer Ironmongery, Tools, &c. 5th „ „ Willcox, W. H. & Co. Engineer's Stores. 5th „ „ Witting Bros., Ltd. Arc Lamp Globes. 5th „ „ Bird, F & Co. Ironmongery, Tools, &c. 5th „ „ British Insulated Wire Co., Ltd. Electric Cables. 5th „ „ General Electric Co., Ltd. Sundries. 5th „ „ Glover, W. T. & Co. Electric Cables. 5th „ „ Haines & Co. Ironmongery, Tools, &c. 5th „ „ Haughton & Co. Engineer's Stores. 5th „ „ Henley, W. T. & Co. Electric Cables. 5th „ „ Johnson & Phillips Electric Cables and Sundries. 5th „ „ Livett & Son Engineer's Stores. Contracts for three months only, Dusting and Scavenging Department. 261 BOROUGH OF SHOREDITCH. LIST OF THE Vestrymen and Overseers for The Parish of Saint Leonard, Shoreditch, IN THE COUNTY OF LONDON, FOR THE YEAR 18 98-99. APPOINTED UNDER THE METROPOLIS LOCAL MANAGEMENT AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT ACTS. SHOREDITCH VESTRY. Chairman. S. G. PORTER, Esq., J.P., 33, Brownlow Road, Dalston, N.E. Ex-Officio Members. The Rev. SEPTIMUS BUSS, LL.B. (Vicar), The Vicarage, Hoxton square, N. STEPHEN FORDHAM, Esq., Reeves place, Hoxton, N. JOSEPH WILLIAM VANDY, Esq., 103, Hoxton street, N. Churchwardens Elected Members. No. 1, Moorfields Ward. (18 MEMBERS). Retire in the year 1899 BEASLEY, William Homeleigh, West Green,Tottenham N. 1900 BENJAMIN, Harold Hyan 62, Priory Road, West Hampstead, N.W. 1900 DEVEY, William 13, Holywell Lane, E.C. 1899 GATES, Edward 222, Willesden Lane, Brondesbury, N. 1901 HEPBURN, James 31, MauryRoad, Stoke Newington, N. 1901HODDER, Alfred Charles 27, New North Road, N 1899 HOWLETT, George 93, Clifton Street, E.C. 1899 LAW, William 45, Fountayne Road, Stoke ington, N. 1900 LEVY, Alfred 101, Highbury New Park, N. 1899 MALPASS, Richard Henry 97, Paul Street, Finsbury, E.C. 1901 MULLIS, William Henry 48, Scrutton Street, Finsbury, E.C. R l 262 i No. 1, Moorfirlds Ward (Continued). Retire in the year 1900 NORTON, William F. Essex Hotel, Shoreditch High Street, E.C. 1900 PURDIE, Edwin C. 5, Sun Street, Finsbury, E.C. 1900 REEVE, Richard A. 7, New North Road, N. 1901 SIMPSON, Henry C. 4, Pitfield Street, N. 1901 WHEATLEY, Henry Warren 95, Kingsland Road, N. 1899 WILLIAMS, George James 46, Curtain Road, and Morning Side, Reigate, Surrey. 1901 WINGFIELD, William 41, Curtain Road, E.C. No. 2, Church Ward. (21 MEMBERS). Retire In the year 1900 BARNETT, P. 1ll, Sandringham Road, Dalston N.E. 1901 BIGGS, Edward G. 820, Old Street, E.C. 1900 COCKING, Alfred 8, St. John's Road, N. 1901 COX, Joseph 299, Old Street, E.C., & 92, shire Road, Hackney, N.E. 1900 ENGLANDER, Adolph 6, St. Mark's Square, Dalston, N.E. 1900 FERRIS, Tom 91, Rivington Street, E.G., and 03, Colvestone Crescent, Hackney, N.E. 1899 GUNN, James 14, Church Road, N. 1899 JOHNSON, William 118, Hoxton Street, N., and Wal- deck House, Goldsmith Road, Friern Barnet, N. 1899 JOSEPH, John 102, Sandringham Road, N. 1901 KENDAL, James 2, Norfolk Gardens, Curtain Road, E. C. 1899 KENDELL, Thomas Boulton 107, Chestnut Avenue, Forest Gate, E. 1900 KERSHAW, Henry Edward 8, Onslow Gardens, Muswell Hill Road, Highgate; and 129, Curtain Road, E.C. 1901 MART1ND1LL, Thomas 108, Shoreditch High Street, E.C. 1901 MOSS, Nathan, J.P 91 to 95, Curtain Road, and 218, Ladbroke Grove, Notting Hill, W. 1899 POND, Frederick Coulsell 64, Hoxton Street, N. 1900 RESTORICK, Robert 61, Hoxton Streot, N. 1900 SHOREY, Charles 8, Harwar Street, Kingsland, N.E. 1899 TIBBITTS, James Josiah 135, Hoxton Street, N. 1901 VANDY, Joseph William 51, Harrogate Road, South Hackney, N.E., and 103, Hoxton Street, N. 1899 WELLS, Henry 844, Old Street, E.C. 1901 WINKLER, Hermann 76, Pitfield Street, N. 203 No. 3, Hoxton Ward. (21 MEMBERS) Retire in the year 1901 BOOTMAN, John 23, Mintern Street, N. 1901 CHANT, Tom B. 57, Crondall Street, N. 1901 CHAPPLE, William Henry 54, St. John's Boad, N. 1899 CLEMENT, Alfred Aaron 133, East Road, N. 1900 DOWLING, Charles 90, Foulden Road,Stoke Newington and 94, East Road, N. 1899 ELAM, William George 127, Northampton Buildings, Clerkenwell, E.C. 1899 FRITH, William J. 59, St. John's Road, N. 1899 GRAHAM, William Robert 25, Nile Street, N. 1899 HEADLEY, David 7, Buckland Street, N. 1901 HERRING, Edwin 124, East Road, N. 1900 HILL, John E. 54, Nicholas Street, N. 1900 LAMARE, Ceaser Louis 41, Charles Square, N. 1901 LOVEDAY, James 16, Brunswick Place, N. 1900 McCOMBIE, Samuel G. 17, Fairbank Street, East Road, N. 1901 MOFFATT, Ebenezer 53, New North Road, N. 1900 PICKETT, Charles Augustus 58, Buckland Street, N. 1899 POLLOCK, Joseph 49, Brunswick Place, N. 1899 RICHARDSON, Henry 101, Murray Street, N. 1900 ROWELL, Thomas 33, East Road, N. 1901 SANDERS, Robert James 1, Nile Street, N. 1900 STANNARD, William7 5 and 77, Bevenden Street, N. No. 4, Wenlock Ward. (18 MEMBERS). Retire in the year 1899 BARRETT, William 97, Nicholas Street N. 1900 BENTLEY, Arthur Francis 15, Buttesland Street, N, 1901 BLUNDELL, Henry Thomas 18, Herbert Street N. 1899 CEENEY, Edmund 100, Shaftesbury Street, N. 1901 LARK, John James 38, Eagle Wharf Road, N. 1899 ELLIS, Herbert Edward 75, New North Road, N 1901 FROST, John 31, Bristow Street, N 1900 FROST, William A. 58, Murray Street, N 1899 HALL, Frederick William 83, Murray Street, N 264 No. 4, Wenlock Ward (Continued). Retire in the year 1899 KELLY, Rev. Henry Plimley Christ Church Vicarage 112, New North Road, N. 1901 KNOWLAND, Peter 18, Murray Street, N. 1899 LOCKE, Edward Glover 54, Wenlock Street, N. 1900 LODER, John T. 67, Bridport Place, N. 1900 NOBLE, Thomas 36, New North Road, N. 1900 SHARLAND, William Arthur 123, East Road, N. 1901 TROWBRIDGE, John James 5, Parr Street, N. 1900 TURNER, George 13, Herbert Street, N. 1901 WAKELING, Edward James 149, New North Road, N. (M.A.B.) No. 5, Whitmore Ward. (12 MEMBERS). Retire in the year 1900 ARUNDEL, Arthur S. D. Penn Street Works, Penn Street, Hoxton, and Woodlands, High Road, Whetstone 1899 BOOTHBY, Henry George 31, Olinda Road, Stamford Hill, N. 1900 COOPER, John 74, Grange Street, Hoxton, N. 1901 GARRARD, Charles Worrill 32, Shrubland Boad, Dalston,N.E. 1900 HUCKLE, Henry F. 39, Hemsworth Street, Hoxton, N. 1899 KEETCH, George 285, Hoxton Street, N. 1899 KING, James 42, Hemsworth Street, N 1901 KING, Michael 274, Hoxton Street, N. 1901 PENNEY, Alfred Edward 69, New North Road, N. 1899 RICKARDS, William Edward 5, Hyde Road, N. 1900 SEAL, George 38, Englefield Road, N. 1901 VOHMANN, Stephen 271, Hoxton Street, N. No. 6, Kingsland Ward. (12 MEMBERS). Retire in the year 1901 BARKER, George William 39, Weymouth Terrace, N.E. 1901 BOWTON, John Grimes 112 Gt. Cambridge Street, N.E. 1901 DAVIES, William Parry 168, Kingsland Road, N.E. 1900 DEWELL, Henry C. 52, Queens Road, Dalston, N.E. 1899 EXLEY, Albert Charles 40, Clarissa Street, Haggerston, N.E. 1899 GREEN, George Edwin 25, Goldsmith's Row, N.E. 265 No. 6, Kingsland Ward (Continued). Retire in the year. 1900 GILL, James 125, Brunswick Street, Hackney Road, N.E. 1899 HELSDON, Charles George 92, Brunswick Street, Hackney Road, N.E. 1901 KNIGHT, Edward Henry 68, Hows Street, N.E. 1900 MARTER, John Wm. 99, Brunswick Street. Hackney Road, N.E. 1900 PORTER, Samuel George (j.p.) ..33, Brownlow Road, N.E. 1899 ROPER, William Thomas 47, Downs Park Road, Hackney, N.E. No. 7, Haggerston Ward. (9 MEMBERS). Retire in the year 1901 BARNARD, Alfred Fisk 309, Hackney Road, N.E., and 88, Columbia Road, Bethnal Green, E. 1899 BOUCHARD, Charles J.150a, Goldsmith's Row, N.E. 1900 CHAPMAN, Washington 74, Scawfell Street, N.E. 1900 CLARK, Joseph Thomas 36, Shrubland Road, N.E. 1899 DAYIES, William 8, Crondall Street, N. 1901 HURLIN, Joseph 47, Goldsmith's Row, N.E. 1901 SMITH, James 7, Brunswick Street, Hackney Road, N.E. 1900 SMITH, Samuel 22, Tuilerie Street, Hackney Road, N.E. 1899 MORRIS, Henry 277, Hackney road, N.E. No. 8, Acton Ward. (9 MEMBERS). Retire in the year 1899 CROUCHER, William 87, Marlborough Road, N.E. 1899 ELSDON, William Clement 40, Marlborough Road, N.E. 1899 ERRINGTON, Thomas 52, Broke Road, N.E. 1901 FREEMAN, John Jacob 81, Queen's Road, N.E. 1900 HAZELL, Arthur J. 3, Brownlow Road, Dalston, N.E. 1900 JEPSON, Joseph J. 54, Broke Road, Dalston, N.E. 1901 PAWLEY, Thomas Henry 50, Brougham Road, Dalston, N.E, 1901 STEEL, William 66, Albion Road, Dalston, N.E. 1900 WARDEN, William 60, Pownall Road, Dalston, N.E. 266 OVERSEERS OF THE POOR. (Appointed by the Vestry, 15th March, 1898.) Liberty of Holywell Street— HEPBURN, James 42, Curtain Road, E.C. Liberty of Moorflelds— VERINDER, Samuel Henry 8 to 11, Sun Struct, E.C. Liberty of Church End— HYATT, Charles 18 Goldsmith Row, N.E. MORRIS, Henry 277, Hackney Road, N.E. Liberty of Hoxton— SAWELL, Henry Taylor, (L.C.C.) 127, East Road, N. WAKELING, Edward James (M.A.B.) 149, New North Road, N. ELECTED AUDITORS OF ACCOUNTS 1898-99. Whitmore Ward— VALLANCE, Richard 24, Whitmore Road, N. Kingsland Ward— WILDMAN, George 13, Newton Street, N. Haggerston Ward— STRIBBLEHILL, Stephen George 13, Hows Street, N.E. Acton Ward— TILEY, Alfred Walter 230, Kingsland Road, N.E Nominated by the Vestry— FOSKETT, John 104, Shepherdess Walk, N 207 LIST OF THE COMMITTEES, appointed by the Vestry of the Parish of St. Leonard, Shoreditch, IN THE COUNTY OF LONDON, FOR THE YEAR 1898-99. (Pursuant to the Metropolis Local Management Acts, &c.) % S. G. PORTER, Esq, J.P., Chairman of Vestry, Ex-officio Member of all Committees. STANDING COMMITTEES. Finance Committee. (20 MEMBERS). BARNETT, P. DEWELL, H. C. (Vice-Chairman) ENGLANDER, A. EXLEY, A. C. GREEN, G. E. HALL, F. W. HEPBURN, J. (Chairman) HILL, J. E. HOLDER, A. C. KENDELL, T. B. KING, M. LAMARE, C. L. LAW, W. LEVY, A. MOSS, N. (J.P.) NORTON, W. F. RICKARDS, W. ROPER, W. T. SMITH, J. WHEATLEY, H. W. 268 Works Committee. (20 MEMBERS). CHAPMAN, W. COOPER, J. DOWLING, C. ELSDON, W. C. ( Vice-Chairman) FROST, W. A. GARRARD, C. W. HAZELL, A. J. KERSHAW, H. E. KING, J. LODER, J. T. MARTINDILL, T. PAWLEY, T. H. POND, F. C. PURDIE, E. C. RICKARDS, W. E. SANDERS, R. J. SEAL, G. SMITH, S. VANDY, J. W. WINKLER, H. (Chairman) Public Health Committee. (20 MEMBERS). BARRETT, W. BIGGS, E. G. BOOTHBY, H. G. CLARK, J. T. (Chairman) COOPER, J. ELSDON, W. C. FREEMAN, J. J. (Vice- Chairman) FRITH, W. J. FROST, W. A. GATES, E. GRAHAM, W. R. GUNN, J. HURLIN, J. JOHNSON, W. KING, J. MOFFATT, E. MULLIS, W. H. POLLOCK, J. RESTORICK, R. WARDEN, W. Parliamentary Committee. (20 MEMBERS). ARUNDEL, A. S. D. BARRETT, W. BEASLEY, W. BOWTON, J. G. CHANT, T. B. (Chairman) CLARK J.J. CLEMENT, A. A. CROUCHER, W. ELLIS, H. E. GREEN, G. E. (Vice-Chairman) HELSDON, C. G. HUCKLE, H. JEPSON, J. J. LODER, J. T. PENNEY, A. E. POLLOCK, J. REEVE, R. A. SIMPSON, H. C. TROWBRIDGE, J. J. TURNER, G. 269 Town Hall Committee. (20 MEMBERS). BARKER, G. W. BARNARD, A. F. BOOTHBY, H. G. BOUCHARD, C. J. BUSS, Rev. S. CHANT, T. B. COCKING, A. COX, J. FROST, J. GARRARD, C. W. GREEN, G. E. HALL, F. W. (Chairman) HEPBURN, J. HOWLETT, G. W. JOSEPH, J. MARTINDILL, T. (Vice-Chairman) MULLIS, W. H. PURDIE, E. C. SMITH, J. STANNARD, W. Scavenging Committee. (20 MEMBERS). CHAPMAN, W. CROUCHER, W. DAVIES, W. DEWELL, H. C. FREEMAN, J. J. (Chairman) FRITH, W. J. FROST, J. GATES, E. GUNN, J. HAZELL, A. J. HOWLETT, G. W. HURLIN, J. LODER, J. T. KING, M. PICKETT, C. A. SEAL, G. STEEL, W. TURNER, G. WARDEN, W. (Vice-Chairman) WAKELING, E. J. (m.a.b.) Valuation Committee. (20 MEMBERS). BARNETT, P. DAVIES, W. P. FERRIS, T. GARRARD, C. W. HAZELL, A. J. (Chairman) HODDER, A. C. JOHNSON, W. KNOWLAND, P. LEVY, A. LODER, J. T. PAWLEY, T. H. PURDIE, E. C. (Vice-Chairman) RESTORICK, R. TIBBITTS, J. J. (6 vacancies) 270 Housing of Working Classes Committee. (20 MEMBERS.) BARKER, G. W. BOOTHBY, H. G. BOOTMAN, J. BOUCHARD, C. J. (Chairman) BUSS, Rev. S. CLARK, J. T. (Vice-Chairman) CLEMENT, A. A. COOPER, J. ERRINGTON, T. FROST, W. A. HOWLETT, G. W. JEPSON, J. J. KEETCH, G. MOSS, N. (J.P.) PICKETT, C. A. PURDIE, E. C. SANDERS, R. J. STEEL, W. VOHMANN, S. WAKELING, E. J. (m.a.b.) Lighting Committee. (20 MEMBERS). ARUNDEL, A. S. D. COCKING, A. COX, J. FREEMAN, J. J. FROST, J. GRAHAM, W. R. HALL, F. W. HEPBURN, J. HOWLETT, G. W. HURLIN, J. KERSHAW, H. E. (Chairman) KNIGHT, E. H. MORRIS, H. MOSS, N. (J.P.) (Vice-Chairman) MULLIS, W. H. PICKETT, C. A. STANNARD, W. VANDY, J. W. WAKELING, E. J. (M.A.B.) WINKLER, H. Library Committee. (20 MEMBERS.) BLUNDELL, H. T. BOUCHARD, C. J. (Vice-Chairman) BOWTON, J. G. COX, J. (Chairman) DEWELL, H. C. ERRINGTON, T. FORDHAM, S. FRITH, W. J. GARRARD, C. W. GRAHAM, W. R. HELSDON, C. G. HURLIN, J. MARTINDILL, T. MOFFATT, E. MORRIS, H. PAWLEY, T. H. REEVE, R. A. TROWBRIDGE, J. J. TURNER, G. VANDY, J. W. 271 Baths Committee. (20 MEMBERS.) BARNARD, A. F. BOOTHBY, H. G. CHANT, T. B. COCKING, A. COX, J. ELSDON, W. C. FORDHAM, S. FREEMAN, J. J. FROST, J. HALL, F. W. (Vice-Chairman) HELSDON, C. G. KERSHAW, H. E. KNIGHT, E. H. MARTINDILL, T. PICKETT, C. A. STEEL, W. TROWBRIDGE, J. J. VANDY, J. W. WAKELING, E. J. (m.a.b.) (Chairman) WINKLER, H. Officers' Committee. (12 ELECTED MEMBERS, and the Chairmen of all Vestry Committees Ex-Officio.) Elected Members:— BEASLEY, W. (Vice-Chairman) BIGGS, E. G. (Chairman) BOWTON, J. G. COOPER, J. DEWELL, H. C. GREEN, G. E. HURLIN, J. KING, M. MARTER, J. W. MOFFATT, E. MORRIS, H. MULLIS, W. H. Ex-Officio Members:— BOUCHARD, C. J. Chairman of Housing Committee. CHANT, T B. ,, Parliamentary Committee. CLARK, J. T. ,, Public Health ,, COX, J. ,, Library „ FREEMAN, J. J. ,, Scavenging ,, HALL, F. W. ,, Town Hall ,, HAZELL, A. J. ,, Valuation ,, HEPBURN, J. ,, Finance ,, KERSHAW, H. E. ,, Lighting ,, STEEL, W. ,, Technical ,, WAKELING, E.J. (M.A.B.) ,, Baths ,, WINKLER, H. „ Works ,, 272 SPECIAL COMMITTEES. Technical Instruction Committee. (16 MEMBERS). ARUNDEL, A. S. D. COX, J. FREEMAN, J. J. FROST, J. (Vice-Chairman) GARRARD, C. W. HALL, F. W. HEPBURN, J. JEPSON, J. J. MORRIS, H. MULLIS, W. H. PENNEY, A. E. PICKETT, C. A. REEVE, R. A. STEEL, W. (Chairman) TURNER, G. (1 vacancy). The following Representatives of the Technical Education Board of the London County Council are also Members of this Committee. Name. Address. GARNETT, Dr. W. Technical Education Board, St. Martin's Place, W.C. MOSS, N. (J.P.) 91-95, Curtain Road, E.C. PYCRAFT, Miss Technical Education Board, St. Martin's Place, W.C. STUART, J, (M.P., L.C.C,). 24, Grosvenor Road, S.W. WALLAS, Gbaham(m.L.S.B.) 32, Gt. Orrnond Street, W.C. WARD, H. (C.E., L.C.C.) 28, Commercial Street, E. Assessment Committee. (12 MEMBERS.) To be elected between the 15th 29th April in each Year. Moorfields Ward LAW, W. HEPBURN, James Church Ward MOSS, N., J.P. (Chairman) VANDY, J. W. Hoxton Ward— MOFFATT, E. CLEMENT, A. A. Wenlock Ward— LODER, J. T. HALL, F. W. Whitmore Ward— HAZELL, A. J. Kingsland Ward— EXLEY, A. C. Haggerston Ward— CLARK, J. T. Acton Ward— STEEL, W. 273 The Vestry of the Parish of St. Leonard, Shoreditch, IN THE COUNTY OF LONDON. YEAR BOOK OF LOCAL INFORMATION. PARLIAMENTARY BOROUGH OF SHOREDITCH MEMBERS OF PARLIAMENT. HOXTON DIVISION of Borough, (comprising Moorfields, Church, Hoxton, and Wenlock Wards of the Parish). PROFESSOR JAMES STUART, M.A., LL.D., L.C.C., 24, Grosvenor Road, Westminster, S.W., and National Liberal Club, Whitehall, S.W. HAGGERSTON DIVISION of Borough, (comprising Whitmore, Kingsland, Haggerston, and Acton Wards of the Parish). JOHN LOWLES, Esq., F.S.S., "Hillcrest," Darenth Road, Stamford Hill, N., and Carlton Club, S.W. REVISING BARRISTER. MARTIN JOSEPH BLAKE, Esq., 9, Old Square, W.C. PARLIAMENTARY RETURNING OFFICER. J. M. McDONNELL, Esq., Solicitor, 32, Great George Street, Westminster, S.W. THE LONDON COUNTY COUNCIL. OFFICES : SPRING GARDENS, S.W. Clerk of the Council: C. J. STEWART, Esq. REPRESENTATIVES FOR SHOREDITCH. HOXTON ELECTORAL DIVISION. HENRY WARD, Esq., C.E., Toynbee Hall, 28, Commercial Street, Whitechapel, E. HENRY TAYLOR SAWELL, Esq., 127, East Road, N. HAGGERSTON ELECTORAL DIVISION. The Right Hon. BARON MONKSWELL, 7, Chelsea Embankment, S.W. The Right Hon. G. J. SHAW LEFEVRE, 18, Bryanston Square, W. DISTRICT SURVEYOR. HENRY LOVEGROVE, Esq., F.S.I., F.R.I.B.A., 124, Shoreditch High Street, E.C. 274 THE SCHOOL BOARD FOR LONDON OFFICES: VICTORIA EMBANKMENT, STRAND, W.C. Clerk of the Board: GEORGE HECTOR CROAD, Esq., B.A. MEMBERS FOR HACKNEY DIVISION, (comprising the Parishes of St. John-at-Hackney, Saint Leonard, Shoreditch, and Saint Matthew, Bethnal Green). WILLIAM CLIVE BRIDGEMAN, Esq., 89 Harley Street, W. Rev. STEWART D. HEADLAM, 31, Upper Bedford Place, W.C. Miss VIOLET HONNOR-MORTEN, Ivy Hall, Richmond, Surrey. JOHN LOBB, Esq., F.R.G.S., C.C., 75, Victoria Park Road, N. GRAHAM WALLAS, Esq., M.A., 17, John Street, Bedford Row, W.C. THE CHARITY TRUSTEES of the Parish of St. Leonard, Shoreditch. Offices :—Shoreditch Town Hall, Old Street, E.C.; and 81, New North Road, Hoxton, N. Clerk: F. M. WENBORN, Esq. E. G. BIGGS, Esq., 326, Old Street, E.C. W. H. BRAND, Esq., 3, Hoxton Square, E.C. Rev. S. BUSS, LL.B., The Vicarage, Hoxton Square, N. (ex-officio). J. DONOVAN, Esq., 116, Curtain Road, E.C. G. EDWARDS, Esq., 134, Kingsland Road, N. S. FORDHAM, Esq., Reeves Place, Hoxton, N. (ex-officio). T. MARTINDILL, Esq., 168, Shoreditch High Street, E.C. E. MOFFATT, Esq., 53, New North Road, N. H. MORRIS, Esq., 277, Hackney Road, N.E. Dr. F. H. OLIVER, 2, Kingsland Road, N.E. H. T. SAWELL, Esq., L.C.C., 127, East Road, N. J. W. VANDY, Esq., 103, Hoxton Street, N. (ex-officio). E. J. WAKE LING, Esq., 149, New North Road, N. H. T. WELLS, Esq., 344, Old Street, E.C. H. WINKLER, Esq., 76, Pitfield Street, N. 275 GUARDIANS OF THE POOR for the Parish of Saint Leonard, Shoreditch. (Elected under Provisions of Local Government Act, 1894). Offices : 213, KINGSLAND ROAD, N.E. Clerk : ROBERT CLAY, Esq. MOORFI ELDS WARD. ALABASTER, ROBT. GEO., J.P., The Hawthorns, 54, Amhurst Park, N. RAVEY, THOMAS, 229, High Street, Shoreditch, E.C. SIMPSON, HENRY CHARLES, 4, Pitfield Street, N. CHURCH WARD. BUCK, EATON, "Homleigh," 31, Parkholme Road, Dalston, N.E. HINTON, WILLIAM EDWARD, 143, Queen's Road, Finsbury Park, N. KERSHAW, HENRY EDWARD, 8, Onslow Gardens, Muswell Hill Road, Highgate, N. VANDY, JOSEPH WILLIAM, Senior, 103, Hoxton Street, N. WINKLER, HERMANN 76, Pitfield Street, N. HOXTON WARD. GROUT, MARY ANNE ELLEN, (Mrs.), 22, Buckland Street, N. MOFFATT, EBENEZER, 53, New North Road, N. NICHOLSON, CHARLES NORRIS, 35, Harrington Gardens, S.W. RICHARDSON, HENRY, 101, Murray Street, N. WENLOCK WARD. LODER, JOHN THOMAS, 67, Bridport Place, N. PARKER, MARGARET JANE (Mrs.), 25, Bracklyn Street, New North Road, N. WAKELING, EDWARD JAMES (M.A.B.), 149, New North Road, N. WHITMORE WARD. BIRKETT, GEORGE, 63, Hyde Road, Hoxton, N. FORDHAM, STEPHEN, 63, De Beauvoir Road, N. MATTHEWS, MARY (Mrs.), 244, Hoxton Street, N. KINGSLAND WARD. SACKETT, JOHN RICHARD, 21 and 23, Holms Street, Gt. Cambridge Street, Hackney Road, N.E. STEEL, ANNIE AMELIA (Mrs.), 66, Albion Road, Dalston, N.E. HAGGERSTON WARD. MORRIS, HENRY, 277, Hackney Road, N.E. SMITH, SAMUEL, 22, Tuilerie Street, Hackney Road, N.E. ACTON WARD. ERRINGTON, THOMAS, 52, Broke Road, Dalston, N.E. GARRARD, ELIZA JANE, (Mrs.), 32, Shrubland Road, Dalston, N.E. NOTE.—The Weekly Meetings of the Board are held at the Board Room, Relief Offices, Hoxton Street, N., on Wednesday, at 2:30 o'clock p.m. s 276 Elected Manager at Metropolitan Asylums Board, REPRESENTING THE PARISH OF ST. LEONARD, SHOREDITCH. Managers Offices :- NORFOLK HOUSE, NORFOLK STREET, STRAND, W.C. Olehk to the Board :- T. DUNOOMBE MANN, Esq. E. J. WAKELING, Esq., 149, Now North Road, N. Officials of the Guardians. Name. Nature of Office. Address. Robert Clay Clerk to the Guardians 213, Kingsland Road, N.E. J. Robert Aiming Treasurer do. London & County Banking Co., Limited (Shoreditch Branch) Berkley Roberts Collector of the Guardians 213, Kingsland Road, N.E. Rov Thos. Hodgson Chaplain of Workhouse and Infirmary 172, West Green Road, South Tottenham, N. Dr. E. E. Norton Medical Officer, Workhouse and Infirmary 204, Hoxton Street, N. J. C. Morgan Steward of Infirmary Do. do. Mrs. Ann Lenton Matron do. Do. do. E. J. Hodgkin Mastor of Workhouse 213, Kingsland Road, N.E. Mrs. M. A. Hodgkin Matron do. Do. do. James Cowley Superintendent of Cottage Homes Hornehurch, Essex. Mrs. Elizabeth Cowley Matron do. Do. do. Rev. W. R. Morris Chaplain do. Romford, Essex A. W. Wallis Modical Officer do. Brentwood, Essex G. R. Stothard Head Schoolmaster do. Romford, do. Miss Elsie Pyatt Do. Schoolmistress do. Hornchurch, do. Miss Sarah M. Cattell Infant do. do. Romford, do. 277 Officials of the Guardians—Continued. Name. Nature of Office. Address. Attendances at Dispensary. Dr. John Davies District Medical Officer 91, New North Road, N. 11.30 a.m. to 12 noon. Dr. Thos. Lloyd Brown Do. and Public Vaccinator 6, Hyde Road 12 noon to 12.30 p.m. Dr. Major Greenwood, junr. District Medical Officer 243, Hackney Road, N.E. 12 noon to 12.30 p.m. Dr. A. Greenwood Do. 26, Queen's Road, N.E. 11.30 a.m to 12 noon. Dr. F. H. Oliver Do. and Public Vaccinator 2, Kingsland Road, N.E. 11.30 a.m. to 12 noon. Dr. J. Ryan District Medical Officer 36, Great Eastern Street, E.C. 12 noon to 12.30 p.m. Dr. Major Greenwood, Senr. Public Vaccinator 26, Queen's Road, N.E. Austin Whiley Wolstenholme Dispenser Dispensary, 204, Hoxton Street, N. Districts. Ernest Nystrom General Relieving Officer 213, Kingsland Road, N.E. E. J. Sibley Relieving Officer 131, Shepherdess Walk 1st District. Hy. Thos. Kobelt Do. do. 44, St. Johns road, Hoxton, N. 2nd do. Walter Glover Do. do. 42, Brownlow Road, Haggerston, N.E. 3rd do. H. M. Parker Do. do. 55, Nichols Square 4th do. Robert Brown Out-Relief Distributor 204, Hoxton Street, N. Chas. Henry Waterer Vaccination Officer 213, Kingsland Road, N.E. Relieving Officers.—Daily attendance is given at the Relief Offices, Hoxton Street, N., from 9 a.m. to 12 noon, and at 5 p.m., except on Sundays. ROBERT CLAY, Superintendent Registrar, Register Office, 213, Kingsland Road, N.E. BERKLEY ROBERTS, Deputy Superintendent Registrar, Register Office, 213, Kingsland Road, N.E. Certificates of Births, Deaths and Marriages which have occurred in the Parish of Saint Leonard, Shoreditch, since 1st July, 1837, obtainable ; and Notices of Marriages received at the Register Office between 10 a.m., and 4 p.m. daily, except on Saturday, when the office closes at 2 p.m. 278 No. , Sub-District for Registration of Births & Deaths. Registrar. Address. Deputy Sub-Registrar. Address. 1 Shoreditch South F. J. Lockyer 68, Kingsland road D. L. Evans 68, Kingsland road, N.E, 2 Hoxton New Town Ohas. H. Waterer 83, New North Road, Hoxton, N. Mrs. Waterer 83, New North Road, N. 3 Hoxton Old Town Edward T. Pearce 22, Hyde Road, Hoxton, N. W. A. Pearce 22, Hyde Road, Hoxton, N. 4 Haggerston A. A. Lough 97, Brunswick Street, Hackney Road, N.E. C. Montel 97, Brunswick Street, Hackney Road, N.E Registrar of Marriages J. C. Clay \ Register Office, 213, Kingsland Road, N.E. Henry Phillips 213, Kingsland road, N.E. 279 METROPOLITAN ASYLUMS BOARD AMBULANCE SERVICE. REMOVAL OF PERSONS SUFFERING FROM INFECTIOUS DISEASES. 1. APPLY on WEEK DAYS, between 9 a.m. and 8 p.m., to the Chief Office (Ambulance Department):— Postal Address: Norfolk House, Norfolk Street, Strand, W.C. Telegraphic Address: Asylums Board, London. Telephone Numbers 2859 and 2859, Gerrard. N.B.—Applications in the latter part of the day must be dispatched in time to reach the Office before 8 p.m. APPLY at NIGHT, between 8 p.m. and 9 a.m., and on SUNDAYS, Christmas Day, and Good Friday, to the Ambulance Stations :— Eastern Ambulance Station, Brooksby's Walk, Homerton, N.E. North-Western Ambulance Station, Lawn Road, Fleet Road, Hampstead (near Hampstead Heath Railway Station), N.W. Western Ambulance Station, Seagrave Road, Fulham (near West Brompton Railway Station), S.W. South-Western Ambulance Station, Landor Road, Stockwell (near Clapham Road Railway Station), S.W. South-Eastern Ambulance Station, New Cross Road (near Old Kent Road Railway Station), S.E. Brook Ambulance Station, Shooter's Hill, Kent. 2. REMOVAL TO THE BOARDS HOSPITALS. (a) ONLY persons suffering from SMALLPOX, FEVERS, or DIPHTHERIA are ADMITTED into the BOARD'S HOSPITALS (b) Every application must state the name, age, and full address of the patient, from what disease suffering, and in cases of fever the particular kind of fever; and also the name of the person making the application. (c) Unless a Medical Certificate of the nature of the disease be handed to the Ambulance Nurse the patient will not be removed. (d) Patients should leave all valuables, money, &c., and all outside clothing at home, should wear body linen only, and be wrapped in the blankets provided for the purpose. (e) The Ambulance Nurse will leave, at the house from which the patient is removed, a notice stating the Hospital to which the patient is to be taken, and a copy of the regulations as to visiting, &c. N.B.—In any case of failure to remove on the day of application, in consequence of pressure on the accommodation in the Board's Hospitals, the application must be renewed every morning so long as the patient continues in a fit state for removal and removal is desired. Each application must contain a statement of the circumstances which render the removal urgent. Similar applications must be made in respect of patients taken from General Hospitals or other places to their homes, owing to there being no vacant bed available in the Board's Hospitals. Forms of application for the use of Public Officials may be obtained upon application to the undersigned. 280 Ambulance Service—Continued. 3. CONVEYANCE TO OTHER PLACES. (a) PERSONS suffering from ANY DANGEROUS INFECTIOUS DISEASE* may be CONVEYED by Ambulance to PLACES OTHER THAN THE BOARD'S HOSPITALS. (b) Every application for an Ambulance must state :— (i.) Name, sex, and age of patient. (ii.) Description of disease, and, in the case of fever, the particular kind of fever. (iii.) Full address from which the patient is to be conveyed. (iv.) Full address to which the patient is to be conveyed. (Arrangements for the reception of the patient must be made before application for the Ambulance.) (c) The patient must be provided with a Medical Certificate of the nature of the disease, to be handed to the Driver of the Ambulance. (d) The charge for the hire of the Ambulance, including (when the patient is over ten years of age) the services of a male attendant, is 5s. This amount must be paid to the Driver, who will give an official receipt for the same. (e) One person only will be allowed to accompany the patient, and such person may be conveyed back to the place from which the patient was conveyed. If desired, a Nurse will be supplied at an additional charge of 2s. 6d. for her services. (f) The Ambulances may be sent outside the Metropolitan district only by special sanction of the Ambulance Committee or of the Clerk to the Board, and in such cases an extra charge will be made of 1s. for every mile outside the Metropolitan area. 4. The Drivers of the Board's Ambulances are not allowed to loiter on their journeys or to stop for refreshments on pain of instant dismissal. It is particularly requested that any breach of this regulation, or any neglect or incivility on the part of the Drivers, Nurses, or Attendants may be immediately reported to the undersigned. The Servants of the Board are forbidden to accept any gratuities or refreshments. *N.B.—Dangerous Infectious Diseases include the following:—Smallpox, Cholera, Diphtheria, Membranous Croup, Erysipelas, Scarlatina or Scarlet Fever, Typhus, Typhoid, Enteric, Relapsing, Continued and Puerperal Fevers. The Ambulance Committee have also authorised the use of their Ambulances for Measles and Chickenpox. By Order, T. DUNCOMBE MANN, Dated 2nd May, 1898. Clerk to the Board. N.B.—PENALTY.—By Section 70 of the " Public Health (London) Act, 1891," it is enacted that—"It shall not be lawful for any owner or driver of a public "conveyance knowingly to convey, or for any other person knowingly to place in "any public conveyance, a person suffering from any dangerous infectious "disease, or for a person suffering from any such disease to enter any public "conveyance, and if he does so he shall be liable to a fine not exceeding "TEN POUNDS" 281 INLAND REVENUE. J. YULE, Esq., Surveyor of Taxes, 134, Custom House, E.C. Collectors of Income Tax, House Duty and Land Tax. Districts. Wards. Collector. Address. First Moorfields and Church (North and South divisions) Stanton Elgar 386, Old Street, E.C. Second . Hoxton, Wenlock, and Whitmore Joseph Hopwood 386, Old Street, E.C. Third .. Kingsland, Haggerston, and Acton George Ward Verry 122, Bethune Road, Stamford Hill. OPEN SPACES AND RECREATION GROUNDS. No. Name. Situation. Hours during which open. 1 St. Leonard's Churchyard, Shoreditch Shoreditch High Street 9 a.m. till dusk. 2 St. Mary's Churchyard, Haggerston Brunswick Street, Hackney Road Do. 3 St. John's Churchyard, Hoxton St. John's Road, New North Road, N. Do. 4 Shoreditch Old Burial Ground Hackney Road Do. 5 Goldsmith Square Recreation Ground, Goldsmith Square Do. 6 Charles Square Garden Charles Square, Pitfield Street, N. Do. 282 FIRE ENGINE STATION. TABERNACLE SQUARE, E.C. Engineer—Mr. W. HEATHER. FIRE ALARMS AND ESCAPE STANDINGS. (In connection with Shoreditch Fire Station.) Situation. Remarks. Pitfield Street, corner of Aske Street Fire alarm at this point. Hoxton Street, corner of Essex Street Do. Refuge, Old Street, corner of Hoxton Street Wellington Row, corner of Hart's Lane Church Street Junction, Bethnal Green Road Escape stands at this point. Shoreditch High Street, corner of Commercial Street Curtain Road, corner of Great Eastern Street Shoreditch High Street, corner of New Inn Yard Einsbury Market, corner of Vandy. Street Castle Street, corner of City Road Mintern Street, corner of New North Road Fire alarm at this point. Columbia Road, corner of Hackney Road Escape and Hose Cart at this station with Telephone to Shoreditch Station. Horsed Fire Escapes also at the Fire Station, Tabernacle Square. FIRE ALARMS AND ESCAPE STANDINGS. {In conncction with Kingsland Road Fire Station.) Situation. Remarks. Ridley Road Escape stands at this point. Richmond Road Escape stands at this point. Albion Road Queen's Road Bridge Kingsland Road, at St. Columba Church Escape stands at this point. Hyde Road, corner of Whitmore Road Escape stands at this point. Downham Road Englefield Road Newington Green Road Escape stands at this point. Mildmay Road Triangle, Mare Street, Hackney (Street Station) Escape stands here. Horsed Fire Escape also at the Fire Station, Kingsland Road. Abstract of the Accounts OF THE VESTRY of the PARISH OF SAINT LEONARD, SHOREDITCH, in the COUNTY OF LONDON, From 25th March, 1897, to 25th March, 1898. EDWARD J. WAKELING, Esquire, J.P., Chairman of the Board. HENRY WELLS, Esquire, Chairman of the Finance Committee. WILLIAM GEORGE SMITH, Esquire, Treasurer to the Vestry, Overseers of the Poor, and Burial Authority. (Manager of the London and Midland Bank, Limited, Shoreditch Branch). ERNST A. R. ADAMS, Accountant. aa POOR RATE ACCOUNT. ( Under the provisions of the Scant Leonard, Shoreditch, Act, 1858, 21 & 22 Vict., Cap. cxxxii.) OVERSEERS' EXPENSES. DISTRICT AUDITORS CERTIFICATES. aaI 286 286 The Accounts of the Vestry of the Parish of Saint Leonard, Shoreditch, in the County of London, acting as the Overseers of the Poor of the said Parish. POOR RATE ACCOUNTS, for the Half-Year ended Michaelmas-Day, 1897. To RECEIPTS— Finance Committee's Accounts. £ s. d. PAYMENTS— Finance Committee's Accounts. .£ s. d. From the poor Rate 57,825 1 11 Balance due to Treasurer, 25th March, 1897 (fo. 294) 223 8 2 H. M. Treasury—Grant in aid of Poor Rate 21 0 0 57,846 1 11 Poor Rate— Deficiency in Assessment of the Poor's Rates, under London (Boundary Street, Bethnal Green) Provisional Order Confirmation Act, 1891 15 4 6 Rate refunded, being amount allowed on appeal to Messrs. C. & R. Light, Limited 1 13 7 Shoreditch Board of Guardians— 57,861 6 5 Order for Contributions, dated 3rd March, 1897 47,200 0 0 Public Libraries and Museums Authority— Orders made by Vestry under Public Libraries Act, 1892 1,025 7 2 Shoreditch Burial Authority— Orders made by Vestry under Burial Acts, 1852 to 1885 150 0 0 Metropolitan Police— Warrant issued 1st July, 1897 7,227 3 4 Drowned Persons (Discovery and Interment) Act, 1886— Rewards paid for recovery of Bodies, &c. 0 10 0 Parliamentary, County Council, and Local Government Registration— Parliamentary, County Council, and Local Government Registration— Sale of Register 0 7 6 † Expenses of preparing Lists of Parliamentary, County Council, and Parochial Voters, Borough of Shoreditch (On account) 75 0 0 Vestry Elections— Vestry Elections— Fine on resignation of office 0 5 0 Costs of Elections under Local Government Act, 1894 184 11 6 Unclaimed Counting Assistant's fee 0 6 0 Fine on resignation of office (returned) 0 5 0 0 11 0 184 16 6 General Charges— Proportion of Salaries of Rate Collectors 355 0 0 Rate Receipt Stamps and Postages 49 10 2 404 10 2 56,269 0 9 56,492 8 11 57,826 4 11 Cash Balance, 29th September, 1897 :— In hands of Treasurer (fo. 287) 1,369 16 0 S. FORDHAM Churchwardens. J. W. VANDY I hereby certify that this Balance Sheet is correct. This 10th day of December, 1897. e. j. wakeling, j.p HENRY T. SAWELL Overseers of the Poor. T. BARCLAY COCKERTON, † Expenditure incurred by the Overseers elected under District Auditor of the Metropolitan Audit District, which comprises the above Parish. £57,862 4 11 the Saint Leonard, Shoreditch Act, 1858, and appointed under the Local Government Act, 1894. £57,862 4 11 287 287 The Accounts of the Vestry of the Parish of Saint Leonard, Shoreditch, in County of London, acting as the Overseers of the Poor of the said Parish . POOR RATE ACCOUNTS, for the Half-Year ended Lady-Day, 1898. To RECEIPTS— Finance Committees Accounts. / £ s. d. By PAYMENTS— Finance Committees Accounts. • £ s. d. In hands of Treasurer, 29th September, 1897 (fo. 286) 1,369 16 0 Poor Rate— From the Poor Rate 53,558 18 3 Rate refunded, being amount allowed on appeal to London County Council 27 5 5 H. M. Treasury—Grant in aid of Poor Rate 20 0 0 Shoreditch Board of Guardians 53,578 18 3 Order for Contributions, dated 1st September, 1897 49,420 0 0 Public Libraries and Museums Authority— Orders made by Vestry under Public Libraries Act, 1892 950 0 0 Shoreditch Burial Authority— Orders made by Vestry under Burial Acts, 1852 to 1885 250 0 0 Public Baths and Washhouses Authority— Order made by Vestry under Baths and Washhouses Acts, 1846 to 1882 500 0 0 Metropolitan Police— Warrant issued 1st January, 1898 7,227 4 2 Drowned Persons (Discovery and Interment) Act, 1886— Rewards paid for recovery of Bodies, &c 0 10 0 Parliamentary, County Council and Local Government Registration— Parliamentary, County Council and Local Government Registration— † Expenses of preparing Lists of Parliamentary, County Council, and Parochial Voters, Borough of Shoreditch (balance) 403 2 6 Sale of Registers 0 18 0 Do. List of Voters 0 1 6 Register for Year 1898— One-half of net expenses incurred by Overseers of the Poor under Registration Acts, ex Returning Officer's Expenses under Registration of Electors' Act, 1843— Londou County Council, out of General County Fund, as under:— Fees, Printing, and Disbursements 353 6 7 Borough Lists, year 1897-98 230 6 9 Deduct—One half payable by London County Council 176 13 4 County Lists, year 1897-98 6 3 6 236 10 3 176 13 3 579 15 9 237 9 9 Jury List— Jury List— † Printing Jurors' Book, Tower Division, County of London 87 4 7 Sale of List 0 5 0 General Charges— General Receipts— Proportion of Salaries of Rate Collectors 358 15 0 Moiety of Finesa imposed Under Bread Act 1 8 6 Rate Receipt Stamps and Postages 51 4 7 53,818 1 6 409 19 7 Balance, 25th March. 1898:— 59,451 19 6 Due to Treasurer (fo.294) 4,264 2 0 I hereby certify that this balance Sheet is correct. S. FORDHAM, J W VANDY, Churchwardens. This 20th day of May, 1898. S. H. VERINDER, HENRY MORRIS, Overseers of the Poor. T. BARCLAY COCKERTON, † Expenditure incurred by the Overseers, elected under the Saint Leonard, Shoreditch, Act, 1858, and appointed under the Local Government Act, 1894. £59,451 19 6 District Auditor of The Metropolitan Audit District, which comprises the above Parish. 59,451 19 6 POOR RATE ACCOUNT. (Under the provisions of the Saint Leonard, Shoreditch, Act, 1858, 21 &22 Vict., Cap. cxxxii.) 290 290 POOR RATE ACCOUNTS, from 25th March, 1897, to 25th March, 1898. To RECEIPTS— £ s. d. By PAYMENTS— £ s. d. Finance Committee's Accounts. Finance Committees Accounts. POOR RATE. SHOREDITCH BOARD OF GUARDIANS. ASSESSMENTS Hates made and allowed, from Lady-Day, 1897, to Lady-Day, 1898, viz.:— Analysis of "Orders for Contributions" levied during Year ended 25th March, 1898. Quarter ended. Made by Vestry. Allowed by Police Magistrate. Rateable Value. Rate in the Amount. Compound. Non-Compound. Total. County Rate made. For Half-year ended. Assessable Value in force 6th April, 1897. General County purposes. Rate in the Special County purposes. Rate in the Total. £ £ £ £ Midsummer, 1897 30th Mar., 1897 10th April, 1897 113,462 581,514 694,976 11d. 31,853 1 4 £ £ Michaelmas, 1897 29th June, 1897 3rd July, 1897 114,225 582,938 697,163 10d. 29,048 9 2 £ £ s. d. d. £ s. d. d. £ s. d. Christmas, 1897 5th Oct., 1897 7th Oct., 1897 113,997 588,504 702,501 10d. 29,270 17 6 25th May, 1897 30th Sept., 1897 693,732 17,343 6 0 6.00 3,251 17 4 1.125 20,595 0 4 Lady-Day, 1898 28th Dec., 1897 3rd Jan., 1898 115,180 589,155 704,335 10d. 29,347 5 10 19th Oct., 1897 31st Mar., 1898 693,732 16,620 13 3 5.75 3,251 17 4 1.125 19,872 10 7 119,519 13 10 Levied by London County Council — 33,963 19 3 11.75 6.503 14 8 2.250 40,467 13 11 Arrears of Rate brought forward 201 3 6 Contributions from H.M. Treasury in lieu of Rates 41 0 0 Order dated. For Half-year ended. Rateable Value in force 6th April, 1897 Poor Law purposes. Rate in the — — Total. Total amount to be collected 119,761 17 4 £ Less—Commission allowed to Owners of 25 per cent., under sec. 3 of Poor Rate Assessment and Collection Act, 1869 4,874 10 7 £ £ s. d. d. £ s. d. 3rd Mar., 1897 29th Sept., 1897 693,732 26,604 16 8 9.20 .... • • 26,604 l6 8 Do. during progress of collection 14 10 1 4,889 0 8 1st Sept., 1897 25th Mar., 1898 693,732 29,547 9 5 10.22 .... • • 29,547 9 5 Legally excused at Petty Sessions 74 1 0 Empties 2,202 14 11 Levied by Board of Guardians — 56,152 6 1 19.42 .... • • 56,152 6 1 Reduced on appeal 245 9 8 Runs 164 6 2 Total Shown below — 90,116 5 4 31.17 6,503 14 8 2.250 96,620 0 0 No effects and insolvencies 105 17 9 2,792 9 6 Recoverable arrears carried forward 119 10 1 7,801 0 3 Net amount collected (see fo. 395) £111,960 17 1 Collection— Order for Contributions, dated 3rd March, 1897, to cover expenditure to 29th September, 1897 47,200 0 0 Year ended Total Do. do. dated 1st September, 1897, to cover expenditure to 25th March, 1898 49,420 0 0 25th March,1897 25th March, 1898. 96,620 0 0 £ s. d £ s. d £ s. d. Rates made and allowed from Lady-Day, 1897, to Lady-Day, 1898 ...... 111,919 17 1 111,919 17 1 POOR RATE. Contributions from H.M. Treasury in lieu of Rates ...... 41 0 0 41 0 0 Rates refunded, being amounts allowed on appeal to— Amount actually collected, as shewn above ...... 111,960 17 1 111,960 17 1 Messrs. C. & R. Light, Limited 1 13 7 Less—Amount collected and banked after 25th March, 1898 ...... 3,137 18 0 3,137 18 0 London County Council 27 5 5 28 19 0 ...... 108,822 19 1 108,822 19 1 Increased Assessments, under 32 & 33 Vict., cap. 67, sec. 47 ...... 145 10 2 145 10 2 Rates previously written off, now recovered ...... 1 2 11 1 2 11 Balance of Rate made and allowed 2nd Jan., 1897 (uncollected at Lady-Day, 1897) 2,455 8 0 ...... 2,455 8 0 £2,455 8 0 108,969 12 2 111,425 0 2 Amount carried forward £96,648 19 0 Amount carried forward £111,425 0 2 291 291 POOR RATE ACCOUNTS (Continued), from 25th March, 1897, to 25th March, 1898. £ s. d. £ s. d. To RECEIPTS Amount brought forward £111,425 0 2 ... ... ... By PAYMENTS Amount brought forward £96,648 19 0 Finance Committee's Accounts. (continued.) Finance Committee's Accounts. (continued.) POOR RATE. ( Continued.) PUBLIC LIBRARIES ACT, 1892. Deficiency in Assessment of the Poor's Rates under London (Boundary Street, Bethnal Green) Provisional Order Confirmation Act, 1891, and incorporated Acts, Vestry of Shoreditch v. London County Council (ex Dwellinghouse Improvement Fund) 15 4 6 Produce of ¾d. Rate in the £ per annum— Year ended 25th March, 1897. Transferred by Vestry acting as the Rating Authority— Order dated 20th April, 1897 Balance 25 7 2 Year to 25th March, 1898—On account— Deduct—Received by Rate Collectors— Transferred by Vestry acting as the Rating Authority— Church South District Order dated 4th May, 1897 500 0 0 Haggerston East and Acton do Do. 20th July, 1897 500 0 0 Do. 5th October, 1897 500 0 0 15 4 6 111,440 4 8 Do. 4th January, 1898 450 0 0 1,950 0 0 1,975 7 2 BURIAL ACTS, 1852 to 1885. Transferred by Vestry, acting as Overseers- Order dated 12th July, 1897 (fo. 298) 75 0 0 Do 21st September, 1897 (fo. 298) 75 0 0 Do. 1st March, 189 8 (fo. 298) 250 0 0 400 0 0 BATHS AND WASHHOUSES ACTS, 1846 to 1882. Transferred by Vestry, acting as Overseers— Order dated 1st March, 1898 (fo. 307) 500 0 0 METROPOLITAN POLICE. METROPOLITAN POLICE. Analysis of "Warrants" issued during Year ended 31st March, 1898. Ascertained proportion of the net amount required to be contributed to the Police Fund, pursuant to the Metropolitan, Police Acts, 1829 to 1895:— Metropolitan Police District. Estimated sum issuable for purposes of Police District out of the Local Taxation Account under the Agricultural Rates Act, 1896. Net Amounts required. Rental upon which computed. Sum certified to be raised for purposes of Police District, being a " spending authority " under the Agricultural Rates Act, 1996. On Warrants issued. For Half-Year ended. Rental upon which computed. Total Rateable Value in force.) Rate in the £ Contributions (after making allowance for pro portion of amount receivable, see col. 6 opposite.) For Half-year ended Rateable Value in force. Assessable Value in force Rate in the 6th April, 1897. £ s. d. * £ 1st July, 1897 31st Dec., 1897 £ 693,732 2½d. 7,227 3 4 • 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 1897 £ £ d. £ s. d. £ s. d. s. d. 6th April, 1897. 31st Dec. 1898 40,800,641 40,585,502 2½ 425,006 13 6 2,194 17 4 422,811 13 2 1st January, 1898 30th June, 1898 693,732 2½d. 7,227 4 2 30th June 40,786,925 40,571,553 2½ 424,863 16 0 2,194 17 4 422,668 19 8 5 849,870 9 6 4,389 14 8 845,480 12 10 Analysis of Warrants issued shewn opposite (fo. 291). 14,454 7 6 14,454 7 6 Note. Approximate Values can only be given. In making calculations, account must be taken of Adjustments in respect of altered Valuations. DROWNED PERSONS (DISCOVERY AND INTERMENT) ACT, 1886. Rewards paid for recovery of human bodies from Regents' Canal 1 0 0 Amount carried forward £111,440 4 8 Amount carried forward £113,979 13 8 292 292 POOR RATE ACCOUNTS (Continued), from 25th March, 1897, to 25th March, 1898. To RECEIPTS— £ s. d. By Payments— £ s. d. Amount brought forward £111,440 4 8 Amount brought forward £113,979 13 8 Finance Committees Accounts. (continued.) Finance Committee's Accounts. (continued.) PARLIAMENTARY, COUNTY COUNCIL, AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT REGISTRATION. PARLIAMENTARY, COUNTY COUNCIL, AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT REGISTRATION. (a) Overseers of the Poor. (a) Overseers of the Poor. Borough of Shoreditch. Borough of Shoreditch. Year 1897. Year 1897. One half of net expenses under Registration Acts of 1843 to 1888 (section 2 of the Registration of Electors' Act, 1891), ex London County Council, out of General County Fund 230 6 9 Printing Lists Of Parliamentary, County Council, and Parochial Voters 259 14 6 Registrar's Returns of Deaths 12 11 4 Posting Notices and Lists on Church doors 6 3 6 Stamps for Owners' Returns, Second Notices, and Service Franchise Forms 4 17 2 Sale of Registers 1 5 6 Do. List of Voters 0 1 6 1 7 0 Copying Claims and Objections 3 17 0 Horse and Cab Hire, Porterage, &c. 4 2 0 231 13 9 Legal Handbooks 0 5 6 Preparing Revision Court 1 1 0 0 18 0 293 10 0 Allowed for Revision, &c.— Indoor Staff 80 0 0 Rate Collectors 33 12 0 Enquiry Officers 54 12 0 Relieving Officers 3 12 0 171 16 0 465 6 0 Tottenham Division, County of Middlesex Tottenham Division, County of Middlesex. Year 1897. One half of net expenses, under Registration Acts of 1843 to 1888 (section 2 of the Registration of Electors' Act, 1891), ex London County Council, out of General County Fund 6 3 6 Year 1897. Printing Lists of Parliamentary, and Parochial Voters (Ownership), and Separate Lists of Parochial Voters 7 16 6 Allowed for Revision, &c.— Clerk 5 0 0 12 16 6 478 2 6 237 17 3 (b) Returning Officer. (b) Returning Officer. Borough of Shoreditch. Borough of Shoreditch. Year 1898. Year 1898. Preparing Register of Parliamentary, County Sale of Registers 237 17 3 Council, and Parochial Electors— Returning Officer's Charges 78 17 7 Printing and other Disbursements 274 9 0 353 6 7 Deduct— Moiety of expenses paid out of General County Fund by London County Council 176 13 4 176 13 3 654 15 9 Amount carried forward £111,678 1 11 Amount carried forward £114,634 9 5 293 293 POOR RATE ACCOUNTS (Continued) from 25th March, 1807, to 25th March, 1897. To receipts— £ s. d.1 By payments— £ s. d. Amount brought forward 111,678 1 11 Amount brought forward £114,634 9 5 Finance Committee's Accounts. (continued.) Finance Committee s Accounts. / (continued.) JURY LIST. JURY LIST. 0 5 0 Printing Jurors' Book, Tower Division, County of London 65 15 6 Fixing Lists to Church doors 0 9 9 Horse and Cab Hire 0 12 6 Postages of Notices of Objection 0 7 10 Allowed for Revision, &c.— Rate Collectors 16 16 0 Supervision 3 3 0 19 19 0 87 4 7 VESTRY ELECTIONS VESTRY ELECTIONS. [under Local Government Act,, 1894, 56 and 57 Vict., cap. 73, sec. 31 (1).] [under Local Government Act, 1894, 56 and 57 Vict., cap. 73, sec. 31 (1)] Unclaimed Counting Assistant's Fee 0 6 0 Costs of Annual Elections, held 15th May, 1897 (analysis of Expenses shown at fo. 257) 184 11 6 Fine on resignation of office of Vestryman 0 5 0 Fins on Resignation of Office of Vestryman returned 0 5 0 0 11 0 _ - o ~ J 184 16 6 GENERAL RECEIPTS. GENERAL CHARGES. Fines under Bread Act imposed by Justices of the Tower Division of the County of London 3 0 0 Proportion of Salaries of Rate Collectors 713 15 0 Rate receipt Stamps and postage 100 14 9 814 9 9 Deduct—Moiety retained by County 1 10 0 Sum payable to Overseers of Shoreditch 1 10 0 Less—County Fee of 5 per cent. 0 1 6 1 8 6 111,680 6 5 Excess of Payments over Receipts (fo. 294) 4,040 13 10 £115,721 0 3 £115,721 0 3 BB 294 294 POOR RATE ACCOUNT—Income and Expenditure from 25th March, 1897, to 25th March, 1898. Source. Fo. RECEIPTS. ASSETS Accrued but not Received. income from 25 Mar 1897 Application. Fo. PAYMENTS. LIABILITIES Incurred but not Paid. EXPENDITURE from 25 Mar,1897 1 25 March, 1897. ' 25 March, 1898. to 25 Mar.,'98. 25 March, 1897. 25 March, 1898. to 25 Mar.,'98. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. Poor Rate 291 111,440 4 8 2,656 11 6 3,257 8 1 112,041 1 4 Poor Rate 290 28 19 0 1 13 7 ...... 27 5 5 Parliamentary, County Council, and Local Government Registration— 1 Shoreditch Board of Guardians 290 96,620 0 0 ...... ...... 96,620 0 0 Public Libraries Act, 1892 291 1,975 7 2 25 7 2 101 0 4 2,051 0 4 Overseers of the Poor 292 237 17 3 ...... ...... 237 17 3 Burial Acts, 1852 to 1885 291 400 0 0 ...... ...... 400 0 0 Jury List 293 0 5 0 ...... ...... 0 5 0 Baths and Washhouses Acts, 1846 291 500 0 0 ...... ...... 500 0 0 Vestry Elections 293 0 11 0 ...... ...... 0 11 3 General Receipts 293 1 8 6 ...... ...... 1 8 6 Metropolitan Police 291 14,454 7 6 ...... ...... 14,454 7 6 2,656 11 6 3,257 8 1 Drowned Persons (Discovery and Interment) Act, 1886 291 1 0 0 ...... ...... 1 0 0 2,656 11 6 Parliamentary, County Council, and Local Government Registration 293 111,680 6 5 600 16 7 112,281 3 0 Overseers of the Poor 292 478 2 6 478 2 6 Returning Officer 292 176 13 3 ...... ...... 176 13 3 Jury List 293 87 4 7 ...... ...... 87 4 7 Vestry Elections 293 184 16 6 ...... ...... 184 16 6 General Charges 293 814 9 '9 17 4 6 ...... 797 5 3 44 5 3 101 0 4 Balance -25thMarch, 1898- 44 5 3 Due to Treasurer 4,264 2 0 287 293 115,721 0 3 56 15 1 115,777 15 4 Less—25th March, 1897 Due to Treasurer 223 8 2 286 Excess of Payments over Receipts 293 4,040 13 10 Expenditure in excess of Income, carried to Balance Sheet 295 ...... ...... ...... 3,796 12 4 £115,721 0 3 £115,777 15 4 £115,721 0 3 £115,777 15 4 BB1 295 295 POOR RATE ACCOUNT— BALANCE SHEET, 25th March, 1898. LIABILITIES. Fo. £ s. d. £ s d. ASSETS. Fo. £ s. d. £ s. d. REVENUE ACCOUNT. REVENUE ACCOUNT. / To Sundry Creditors, for Balances due to them 294 101 0 4 By Poor Rate- Balance 294 3,257 8 1 To Cash Balance, 25th March 1898— Due to Treasurer 294 4,264 2 0 / Expenditure in excess of Income this year 3,496 12 4 294 Deduct— Surplus—25th March, 1897 2,388 18 1 4,365 2 4 DEFICIT—25th March, 1898 1,107 14 3 4,365 2 4 4,365 2 4 WILLIAM GEORGE SMITH, Treasurer, London and Midland Bank, Limited (Shoreditch Branch). £4,365 2 4 ERNST A. R. ADAMS, Accountant to the Vestry (acting as the Overseers of the Poor) and Rating Authority. £ 4,365 2 4 BURIAL AUTHORITY. 298 298 The Accounts of the Vestry of the Parish of Saint Leonard, Shoreditch, in the County of London, acting as the Authority for the execution of the Burial Acts. BURIAL AUTHORITY ACCOUNT, ??? FROM 25TH MARCH, 1897, to 25th March, 1898. To RECEIPTS— £ s. d. By PAYMENTS— £ s. \ d. Housing of the Working Classes Committee's Accounts. Housing of the Working Classes Committee's Accounts. ' Maintenance Account. Maintenance Account. Pain of Order of Vestry. 1897. July 12. POOR RATE. HACKNEY ROAD BURIAL GROUND. Wages of Gardeners 60 5 6 Out of the Poor Rate, pursuant to the provisions of the Burial Acts, 1852 to 1885 (fo. 291) 75 0 0 Plane Trees, Fir Poles and Roots 1 18 0 Seeds 5 15 0 Sept. 21. 1898. March 1. Do. do. (fo. 291) 75 0 0 Notice Boards 2 4 1 Plumber's work 0 10 6 Do. do. (fo. 291) 250 0 0 Oil 0 13 4 Watching Expenses (fo. 317) 24 7 11 400 0 0 Water 3 0 0 ST. LEONARD'S CHURCHYARD, SHOREDITCH. 98 14 4 ST. LEONARD'S CHURCHYARD, SHOREDITCH. Wayleave rentals for ground polos and stays, ex National Telephone Co., Limited 8 8 0 12 Wages of Gardeners 107 19 6 Do. Levelling, &c., Ground 16 13 5 Sale of Shrubs 0 7 6 12-11 Trees and Shrubs 30 8 0 8 15 6 Railway Carriage of do. 2 9 3 408 15 6 Travelling Expenses to Canterbury 7 2 8 Turf Loan 1 10 0 Excess of Payments over Receipts (fo. 299) 68 11 0 Notice Boards 4 7 7 Tar Paving Work and Repairs 25 9 1 Ironmongery 8 9 5 Horse Hire (fo. 321) 0 13 0 Advertising 5 4 4 Lithography 0 13 3 Tax on Wayleave Rentals 0 3 8 211 3 2 ST. JOHN'S CHURCHYARD, HOXTON. Wages of Gardeners 86 16 10 Grass Seed 1 10 0 Lawn Mower 3 12 0 Notice Boards 2 8 0 Ironmongery 0 10 7 Smith's Work 1 1 0 Omnibus Hire 1 0 0 Lithography 0 14 1 Water 1 4 0 98 16 6 ST. MARY'S CHURCHYARD, HAGGERSTON. Wages 60 18 4 Seeds 1 0 8 Notice Boards 1 4 1 Ironmongery and Plumber's Work 0 14 4 Oil 0 15 4 Lithography 0 13 3 Water 3 6 6 68 12 6 £477 6 6 £477 6 6 299 299 BURIAL AUTHORITY ACCOUNT—Income and Expenditure from 25th March, 1897, to 25th March, 1898. Source. Fo. RECEIPTS. ASSETS Accrued but not Received. INCOME from 25 Mar.'97 to 25 Mar.'98. Application. Fo. PAYMENTS. LIABILITIES Incurred but not Paid. EXPENDITURE from 25 Mar.'97, to 25 Mar. '98. 25 Mar., 1897. 25 Mar.,1898. 25 Mar.,1897 25 Mar.,1898. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. Poor Rate 298 400 0 0 ...... ...... 400 0 0 ???kney Road Burial Ground 298 98 14 4 1 18 0 0 15 0 97 11 4 St. Leonard's Churchyard, Shoreditch 298 8 15 6 ...... ...... 8 15 6 ??? leonar's Churchyard, Shoreditch 298 211 3 2 ...... 58 6 1 269 9 3 ???John's do. Hoxton 298 98 16 6 ...... ...... 98 16 6 298 408 15 6 ...... ...... 408 15 6 ???Mary's do. Haggerston 298 68 12 6 0 17 6 0 17 6 68 12 6 2 15 6 59 18 7 2 15 6 Balance-25th March, 1897 298 477 6 6 57 3 1 534 9 7 In hands of Treasurer 50 9 2 Add— BALANCE—25th March, 1898— Due to Treasurer 18 1 10 Excess of Payments over Receipts 298 68 11 0 Expenditure in excess of Income, carried to Balance Sheet 299 ...... ...... ...... 125 14 1 £477 6 6 £534 9 7 £477 6 6 £534 9 7 BURIAL AUTHORITY ACCOUNT— BALANCE SHEET, 25th March, 1898. LIABILITIES. Fo. £ s. d. £ s. d. ASSETS. Fo. £ s. d. £ s d. REVENUE ACCOUNT. REVENUE ACCOUNT. To Sundry Creditors, for Balances due to them 299 59 18 7 ly Sundry Debtors, for Balances owing by them ... ...... To Balance—25th March, 1898— Expenditure in excess of Income this year 125 14 1 299 Deduct— Due to Treasurer 299 18 1 10 Surplus—25th March, 1897 47 13 8 DEFICIT—25th March. 1898 ... 78 0 5 78 0 5 > 78 0 5 WILLIAM GEORGE SMITH, Treasurer to the Authority, London and Midland Bank, Limited (Shoreditch Branch). £78 0 5 f* ■ • / V ERNST A. R. ADAMS, Accountant to the Authority. £78 0 5 PUBLIC LIBRARIES AND MUSEUMS. 302 302 The Accounts of the Vestry of the Parish, of St. Leonard, Shoreditch, in the County London, acting as the Authority for the execution of the Public Libraries Acts. PUBLIC LIBRARIES AND MUSEUMS COMMITTEE'S ACCOUNTS- from 25th March, 1897, to 25th March, 1898. To RECEIPTS- £ s. d. By PAYMENTS- £ s. d. CAPITAL AND ERECTION ACCOUNT. CAPITAL AND ERECTION ACCOUNT. PASSMORE EDWARDS LIBRARY. PASSMORE EDWARDS LIBRARY. Mortgages. Loans to 25th March, 1898 5,000 0 0 Expenditure out of Loans and Donations to 25th March, 1897 8,128 8 1 Less Paid off to 25th March, 1897 356 17 1 Do. do. do. this year— Do. this year 97 3 1 Alterations to. and Extensions of Buildings. 454 0 2 Extension of Library (balance) 473 15 0 4,545 19 10 Extra Works, Graining, &c. 39 5 0 Revenue Account. Debt repaid to 25th March, 1897 356 17 1 Architect's Fees and Charges 50 1 0 Do. this year (fo. 303) 97 3 1 Measuring up work 12 12 0 - 454 0 2 575 13 0 8,704 1 1 HOXTON LIBRARY. HOXTON LIBRARY. Mortgages. Expenditure out of Loans and Donations to 25th March, 1897 8,304 15 9 Loan to 25th March, 1887 4,500 0 0 Do, borrowed this year 7,500 0 0 Do. do. do. this year— 12,000 0 0 Erection of Buildings. Less—Paid off this year 41 0 3 Salaries of Clerks of the Works 126 17 0 11,958 19 9 Revenue Account Architect's Fees (one-third) 170 16 8 Debt repaid this year (fo. 303) 41 0 3 Cost of Local Government Board Enquiry 0 5 0 Building Contract (on account) 6,500 0 0 Decoratvie Art frieze Work 200 0 0 DONATIONS. Stamp Duty on Loan of £7,500 9 10 0 Sums received to 25th March, 1897 8,540 5 0 Law Charges do. 10 10 0 Sums received this year from -J. Passmore Edwards, Esq. 1,200 0 0 Actuary's Fees do. 5 5 0 9,740 5 0 Bank Interest on overdrawn daily balances 25 8 4 SURPLUS LANDS. Disbursements 2 3 0 Donation from the Lawrence Family, per Sir Edwin Lawrence, Bart., M.P. 700 0 0 7,050 15 0 Furniture and Fittings. Electric Lighting Installation (on account) 100 0 0 GENERAL RECEIPTS. 7,150 15 0 15,455 10 9 Bank Interest on minimum fortnightly balances to 25th March, 1897 0 14 3 24,159 11 10 BALANCE—25th March, 1898— do. do. this year 12 15 10 13 10 1 3,294 3 3 £27,453 15 1 £27,453 15 1 303 303 public libraries and MUSEUM COMMITTEE'S ACCOUNTS ???me and Expenditure from 25th March, 1897, to 25th March, 1898. Source. Fo. receipts. assets Accrued but not Received. Income from 25 Mar.,'9 to 25 Mar.,'98 Application. Fo. payments liabilities Incurred but not Paid. EXPENDITURE from 25 Mar.,97 to 25 Mar.,98. rate and revenue account. 25 Mar.,1897 25 Mar.,1898. rate and revenue account. 25 Mar.,1897 25 Mar., 1898 £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. Passmore Edwards Library, & Hoxton (Temporary) Library. Pass-more Edwards Library, & Hoxton (Temporary) Library. Leasehold Rent of 91, Great Eastern Street ... 96 0 10 ...... ...... 96 0 10 From the Poor Rate 291 1,975 7 2 25 7 2 101 0 4 2,051 0 4 Land Tax ... 0 12 6 ...... ...... 0 12 6 Band Interest on Balances 22 7 3 22 7 3 Income Tax under Schedule A ... 3 6 8 ...... ...... 3 6 8 Wayleave Rentals 3 3 0 3 3 0 Income Tax on Wayleaves and Bank Interest ... 0 7 7 0 14 5 1 2 0 Sale of Catalogues 11 1 10 11 1 10 Do. Tickets 9 11 8_ 9 11 8 Gas ... 98 8 3 17 9 8 115 17 11 Fines and Penalties 67 16 2 i 67 16 2 Electricity Supply ... 40 18 0 48 4 6 89 2 6 Non-Residents' Subscriptions 6 16 11 6 16 11 water ... 10 h 4 2 12 5 12 17 9 Lost Books 0 14 8 0 14 8 Fire Insurance ... 10 2 0 9 5 0 19 7 0 Damage to Books 0 2 4 \ 0 2 4 Plate Glass Insurance ... 2 7 0 2 7 0 Sale of Newspapers and Waste Paper 1 19 9 1 19 9 Guarantee Premium ... 0 8 6 0 8 6 Agency Commission on Fidelity and Fire Risks 1 11 7 1 11 7 ]oal and Coke ... 13 12 0 4 4 0 4 19 0 14 7 0 Cleaning Materials ... 7 5 11 7 5 11 4 8 4 ???Jooks ... 1,063 6 3 4 2 6 6 4 677 8 5 Book binding ... 20 14 1 3 12 0 24 6 7 25 7 2 101 0 4 Newspapers ... 144 8 10 11 14 4 11 14 3 144 8 9 Subscriptions to Learned Societies ... 2 2 0 2 2 0 ' - 25 7 2 Telephonic Communication (moiety) ... 4 13 9 4 13 9 2,100 12 4 75 13 2 2,176 5 6 Salaries and Remuneration of Officers and Assistants ... 695 3 0 695 3 0 / / ■ ???Stationery ... 15 19 8 15 19 8 ???Printing ... 38 10 0 15 1 0 9 12 8 33 1 8 ???Uniform Clothing ... 7 0 0 ...... ...... 1 0 0 ???Porterage and Carriage ... 3 0 9 ...... ...... 3 0 9 ???Postages ... 5 2 9½ ...... ...... 5 2 2½ ???Blinds, Notice Boards and Fittings ... 7 16 4 ...... ...... 7 16 4 ???candescent Lamps ... 6 2 11 ...... ...... 6 2 11 Cleaning and Regulating "Wenliam" Lamps ... 3 2 6 ...... ...... 3 2 6 Gardener's Work ... 5 0 0 5 0 0 Audit Stamp (1896-97) ... 10 0 0 10 0 0 ...... ...... Repayment of Debt ... 138 3 4 105 0 4 154 17 8 188 0 8 BALANCES—25th March, 1897— In hands of— Interest on Debt ... 287 15 0 194 17 3 253 14 5 346 12 2 Income Tax under Schedule D, one year to 25th March, 1898 ... 9 14 8 ...... ...... 9 14 8 Treasurer 2,606 18 3 Chief Librarian 15 11 7½ 733 1 1 523 2 4 2,622 4 10½ 523 2 4 Deduct—25th Mar., 1898— In hands of— 2,751 10 4½ 209 18 9 2,541 11 n Treasurer 1,919 18 10 Chief Librarian 51 8 0 1,971 6 10 304 Excess of Payments over Receipts 650 18 0½ Bal. Expenditure in excess of Income, carried to Balance Sheet 304 365 6 1½ £ 2,751 10 H £ 2,541 11 7½ + £2 751 10 4½ £2,541 11 7½ cc 303 304 PUBLIC LIBRARIES AND MUSEUMS COMMITTEE'S ACCOUNTS BALANCE SHEET, 25th March, 1898. LIABILITIES. Fo. £ s. d. £ s. d. ASSETS. Fo. £ s. d. £ s. d. CAPITAL AND ERECTION ACCOUNT. CAPITAL AND ERECTION ACCOUNT. To Loan Accounts:—Balances. Public Libraries. Passmore Edwards Library. hoxton Library. Out of Loans. Out of Donations. Mortoaqics— Expenditure & Capital Outlay Passmore Edwards Library 302 4,545 19 10 to 25th March, 1898— £ s. d. £ s. d. s. d. £ s. d. Hoxton Library 302 11,958 19 9 Freehold Land (and Buildings) 4,309 5 8 302 3,030 0 0 1,279 5 8 16,504 19 \ Freehold Land 4,520 19 0 302 4,500 0 0 20 19 0 to revenue Account. Alterations to, and Extension of Buildings 3,538 18 10 302 1,250 0 0 2,288 18 10 Repayment of Debt— To 25th March, 1897 356 17 1 Erection of Buildings 10,834 11 9 302 7,500 0 0 3,334 11 9 This year 138 3 4 Furniture and Fittings 855 16 7 100 0 0 302 720 0 0 235 16 7 302 495 0 5 302 17.000 0 0 7,159 11 10 To Donations 302 9,740 5 0 To do. (Sale of Surplus Lands) 302 700 0 0 17,000 0 0 To General Receipts 302 13 10 1 i 8,704 1 1 15,455 10 9 302 24,159 11 10 Balance of Assets over Liabilities, on Capital & Erection Account 10,948 15 6 Cash Balance. In hands of Treasurer 302 3,294 3 3 "Note.—The Assets are taken at tlioir Capital Cost. 27,453 15 — 1 27,453 15 1 RATE AND REVENUE ACCOUNT. RATE AND REVENUE ACCOUNT. To Sundry Creditors for Balances due to them 303 523 2 4 / 4 y Sundry Debtors, for Balances owing by them 303 101 0 4 Surplus—25th March, 1897 1,914 10 11½ Cash Balances. Deduct— 1,919 18 10 303 Expenditure in excess of Income this year 365 6 303 51 8 0 303 1.971 6 10 2,072 7 2 SURPLUS- 25th March, 1898 1,549 4 10 2,072 7 2 WILLIAM GEORGE SMITH, Treasurer to the Authority. (London and Midland Bank, Limited (Shoreditch Branch.) £29,526 2 3 ???RNST A. R. ADAMS, Accountant to the Library Authority. 29,526 2 3 ccl PUBLIC BATHS AND WASHHOUSES. 307 307 T/u Accounts of the Vest) y of the Patish of St, Leonard, Shoreditch,in the County of Indon, acting as the Authority for the execution of the Public Baths & Washhouses Acts. PUBLIC BA1HS AND WASHHOUSES COMMITTEE'S ACCOUNTS— from 25th March, 1897, to 25th March, 1898. To RECEIPTS- £ s. d. By PAYMENTS— £ s. d. capital and construction account. capital and construction account. LOANS. land and bull dings Mortgages. Loans to 25th March, 1897 25,700 0 0 Expenditure and Capital outlay out of Loans, to 25th March, 1897, viz.:— Do. borrowed this year 24,000 0 0 49,700 0 0 Freehold Land 15,700 0 0 Erection of Buildings 2,658 14 7 Less—Paid off to 25th March, 1897 . 259 11 4 18 358 14 7 Do. this year . 470 4 6 Building Contract (on account) 22,000 0 0 729 15 10 Lithographing Plans 33 o 0 48,970 4 Mounting Drawings 1 4 9 REVENUE ACCOUNT. Law Engrossing and Writing 0 12 0 Debt repaid to 25th March, 1897 259 11 4 Stamp Duty on Loan 30 5 0 Law charges on Loan 17 17 0 Do. this year (fo. 307) 470 4 6 Actuary's Fees 3 3 0 729 15 10 Joint Architect's Commission of 5 per cent, (on account) 800 0 0 LAND AND BUILDINGS. Quantity Surveyor's Commission of 1 per cent, (on account) 100 0 0 Sale of extre copics of Specifieations 0 13 0 Reinstating Carriageway (fo. 317) 5 19 10 Salaries of Clerks of the Works 231 0 0 Disbursements 6 7 8 23,229 9 3 41,588 3 10 BALANCE—25th March, 1898— In hands of Treasurer (fo. 308) 8,112 9 2 £49,700 13 0 £49,700 13 0 MAINTENANCE ACCOUNT— from 25th March, 1897, to 25th March, 1898. To RECEIPTS— £ s. d. By PAYMENTS— £ s. d. labile Baths and Washhouses Committee's Accounts. J Public Baths and Washhouses Committee s Accounts. hoxton baths. hoxton baths. POOR RATE. REPAYMENT OF DEBT. Contribution by Vestry (acting as Overseers) to this Fund— Instalments of Principal of Mortgage Loans outstanding (fo. 383) 470 4 6 Order dated 1st March,1998 (fo. 291) 500 0 0 INTEREST ON DEBT. Interest on Balances of Loans outstanding (fo. 383) 884 16 8 Excess op Payments over Receipts (fo. 308) 957 8 10 30 10 0 915 6 8 GENERAL CHARGES. Framing Plans 2 15 0 Clerk of Works Disbursements 1 7 7 Land Tax 0 15 0 4 17 7 Expenses of Laying Foundation Stone. Lithography 20 3 0 Hire of Tent 35 0 0 Floral Decoration 2 2 0 Star Favours 2 8 0 Band Attendance 1 16 9 Extra Services of j. a. d. Milne 3 3 0 Incidentals 2 7 4 67 0 1 71 17 8 £1,457 8 10 £1,457 8 10 308 308 PUBLIC BATHS AND WASHHOUSES COMMITTEE'S ACCOUNTS— Some and Expenditure from 25th March, 1897, to 25th March, 1898. Source. Fo. ' RECEIPTS. ASSETS Accrued but not Received Income from 25 Mar '07 Application. Fo. PAYMENTS. LIABILITIES Incurred but not Paid. Expenditure from 25 Mar. ,'97. 25 Mar.,1897 .125 Mar., 1898. to 25 Mar., '98. 25 Mar., 1897. 25 Mar., 1898. to 25 Mar., '98. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. Maintenance Account. Maintenance Account. From the Poor Rate 307 500 0 0 ...... ...... 500 0 0 Repayment of Debt 307 470 4 6 76 13 9 544 9 3 938 0 0 Interest on Debt 307 915 6 8 8 5 6 222 16 5 1,129 17 7 General Charges 307 71 17 8 ...... ...... 71 17 8 84 19 3 767 5 8 BALANCE—25th March, 1897— 84 19 3 In hands of Treasurer 1,106 9 11 307 1,457 8 10 682 6 5 2,139 15 3 Less—25th March, 1898— In hands of Treasurer 149 1 1 308 Excess of Payments over rrcf.rpts 307 957 8 10 Expenditure in excess of Income, carried to Balance Sheet 308 ...... ...... ...... 1,639 15 3 £1,4 57 8 10 £ 2,139 15 3 £1,457 8 10 £2,139 15 3 PUBLIC BATHS AND WASHHOUSES COMMITTEE'S ACCOUNTS— BALANCE SHEET, 25TH MARCH, 1898. LIABILITIES. Fo. £ s. d £ s. d. ASSETS. Fo. £ s. d. £ s. d. CAPITAL AND CONSTRUCTION ACCOUNT. CAPITAL AND CONSTRUCTION ACCOUNT. To Loan Accounts :—Balances. By Hoxton Baths. Mortgages— Expenditure and Capital Outlay out of Loans, to 25th March, 1898— Site For baths and Washhouses 307 15,304 4 2 Erection of Buildings and constructing Baths 307 33,666 0 0 Freehold Land 15,700 0 0 307 48.970 4 2 Erection of Buildings 25,888 3 10 307 To Sale of Specifications 307 0 13 0 41,588 3 10 To Revenue Account. By Cash Balance. Repayment of Debt— In hands of Treasurer 307 8,112 9 2 To 25th March, 1897 259 11 4 307 This Year 470 4 6 307 307 729 15 10 Balance op Assets over Liabilities, on Capital and Construction Account 730 8 10 49,700 13 0 49 700 18 0 49,700 13 0 REVENUE ACCOUNT. REVENUE ACCOUNT. To Sundry Creditors for Balances due to them 308 767 5 8 By sundry debtors, for Balances owing by them 3y Cash Balance. in Hands of Treasurer 308 149 1 1 Expenditure in excess of Income this year 1,639 15 3 308 Deduct— Surplus—25th March, 1897 1,021 10 8 DEFICIT 25th March, 1898 618 4 7 WILL1AM GEORGE Smith, Trcasurer to the Authority, 767 5 8 767 5 8 London and Midland Bank, Limited (shoreditch Branch). 50,467 18 8 ERNST A. R. ADAMS, Accountant to the Authority. 50,467 18 8 GENERAL RATE ACCOUNT. 311 311 GENERAL RATE ACCOUNTS, FROM 25TH MARCH, 1897, TO 25TH MARCH, 1898. 311 To RECEIPTS- £ s. d. By PAYMENTS— £ s. d. Finance Committee s Accounts. GENERAL RATE. Finance Committee's Accounts. DEBT Assessments— Hates made and allowed, from Lady-Day, 1807, to Lady-Day, 1898, viz.:— Instalments of Principal, and Interest on Balances of Mortgage Loans outstanding (folios 383 & 384)— Quarter ended. Made by Vestry. Allowed by Police Magistrate. Rateable Value. Rate in the .L • Amount. Compound Noii-Com pound. Total. Purpose of Loan. Charged in this Year's Accounts Total. £ £ £ Midsummer, 1897 30th Mar., 1897 10th April, 1897 11:5,402 574,754 088,216 6d. 17,205 8 0 Fo. Repayment. Interest (including Tax) Michaelmas, 1897 29th June, 1897 3rd July, 1897 114,225 57G.178 690,403 6d. 17,260 1 6 Christmas, 1897 5th Oct., 1897 7th Oct., 1897 113,997 581,651 695,648 7d. 20,289 14 8 Goldsmith Square Open Space 316 40 0 0 62 13 0 102 13 0 Lady-Day, 1898 28th Dec., 1897 3rd Jan., 1898 115,180 582,302 097,482 8d. 23,249 8 0 78,004 12 2 Moira Place and Plumber's Place Area 316 229 8 0 857 19 0 1.087 7 0 Arrears ol Rate brought forward 160 12 9 Street Improvements & Paving Works 319 2,627 3 8 676 8 1 3,303 11 9 Contributions from H.M. Treasury in lieu of Rates 27 0 0 Total amount to be collected 78,192 4 11 Sun Street, &c., Improvement 319 783 0 0 960 16 9 1,743 16 9 Less—Commission allowed to owners of 25 per cent., under sec. 3 of Poor Rate Assessment and Collection Act, 1869 3,214 13 0 Dusting and Scavenging 321 122 0 0 109 7 8 231 7 8 Dust Destructor 323 749 0 0 404 0 4 1,153 0 4 Do. during progress of collection 10 8 2 3,225 1 2 Erection of Town Hall 326 200 0 0 187 5 3 387 5 3 Legally excused at Potty Sessions 48 9 3 I Empties 1,452 8 8 Reduced on appeal 161 14 8 4,750 11 8 3,258 10 1 8,009 1 9 Runs 108 10 2 No effects and insolvencies 72 19 4 SCHOOL BOARD FOR LONDON. 1,844 2 1 Recoverable arrears carried forward 95 0 4 5.104 3 7 Apportioned amounts raised by the Rating Authority of Shoreditch to meet the deficiency of the School Fund, as under:— Net amount collected (see folio 396) £73,028 1 4 Collection— On Precepts dated. For Half-Year ended. Assessable Annual Value. Sum xaised oul of Rates. Rate per £ Apportioned amount. Rate. Year ended Total. Metropolis. Shoreditch. 25th March, 1897 25tli March,1898 £ £ £ d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. Rates made and allowed from Lady-Day, 1897, to Lady-Day, 1898 73,001 1 4 73,001 1 4 10th Dec.,1896 29th Sept.,1897 35,825,881 685,947 875,526 5.86 16,763 8 6 Contributions from H.M. Treasury in lieu of Rates 27 0 0 27 0 0 29th July, 1897 25th Mar. 1898 36,096,769 687,566 976,958 6.49 18,608 18 3 Amount actually collected, as shewn above 73,028 1 4 73,028 1 4 35,372 6 9 Less—Amount collected and banked after 25th March, 1898 2,493 8 7 2,493 8 7 Returning Officer's Expenses, Triennial Election, held 25th November, 197 0 2 70,534 12 9 70,534 12 9 GENERAL RATE. 35,569 6 11 Increased Assessments under 32 & 33 Vict., cap. 67, sec. 47 115 8 1 115 8 1 Rate refunded, being amout allowed on appeal to- Rates previously written off, now recovered 0 18 4 0 18 4 Messrs. C. & R. Light, Limited 1 2 9 Balance of Rate made and allowed 2nd Jan., 1897 (uncollected at Lady-Day, 1897) 2 ,229 0 11 ...... 2 229 9 11 London County Council 18 9 0 £2,229 9 11 70,050 1 9 2 72,880 9 17 19 11 9 7 Amount carried forward £72,880 9 i Amounts carried forward £19 11 9 35,569 6 11 312 312 GENERAL RATE ACCOUNTS (Continued), from 25th March, 1897, to 25th March, 1898. To RECEIPTS— £ s. d. By PAYMENTS— _ . £ s. d. Amount brought forward £72,880 9 1 Amounts brought forward £19 11 9 35,569 6 11 Finance Committee's Accounts. (continued). Finance Committee's Accounts. (continued). EQUALISATION FUND, 1897-98. [Authorised by the London (Equalisation of Eaten) Act, 1894.] EQUALISATION FUND, 1897-98. [Authorised by the London (Equalisation of Rates) Act, 1894.] Sums received out of the Fund in respect of the year, from 1st April, 1897, to 31st March 1898— For Half-year ended. -(-Estimated Population, 6th April, 1897. Equalisation Fund. Grant. Metropolis. Shoreditch. £ s. d. £ s. d. 1 30th Sept., 1897 4,471,759 122,270 451,234 0 6 12,337 19 2 31st Mar., 1898 4,471,759 122,270 451,234 0 6 12,337 19 2 24,675 18 4 Less—Amounts credited to the Sanitary Authority of the City of London 2 0 4 24.673 18 0 Deduct—Contributions to Fund— For Half-year ended. Assessable Value on the 6th April, 1897. Rate i the £ n Contribution. £ s. d £ s. d. 30th Sept., 1897 693,732 0 3 8,671 13 0 31st Mar., 1898 693,732 0 3 8,671 13 0 . i 17,343 6 0 Net Grant, being Excess of Grant over Contribution, received by Sanitary Authority of this district 7,330 12 0 Grant for half-year to 30th September, 1897 3,665 6 0 Do. 31st March, 1898 3,665 6 0 7,330 12 0 +NOTE.—Estimated Population of County on 6th April, 1897. Administrative County of London Less—Enumerated Population of Tower of London on March, 1896 29th Total population as shewn above 4,471,759 Amount carried forward 80,211 1 \ 1 . Amounts carried forward £19 11 9 35,569 6 11 313 313 GENERAL RATE ACCOUNTS (Continued), from 25th March, 1897, to 25th March, 1898. To RECEIPTS— £ s. d. p.v payments— £ s. d. Amount brought forward £80,211 1 1 Amounts brought forward £19 11 9 35,569 6 11 Finance Committees Accounts. (continued.) Finance Committee's Accounts. (continued.) vestry clerk's department. vestry clerk's department. Fee on deposited plans, under Act 7 Will. IV. and 1 Vict., cap. 83 4 4 0 Proportion of Salaries— Vestry Clerk 268 6 5 Clerks 229 11 0 Inspection of do. do. 0 5 0 407 17 5 Search Fees 2 12 6 Solicitors' Practising Certificates— Subpoena Fee 0 10 6 Vestry Clerk 9 5 0 Agency commission on fidelity and fire risks 3 13 8 Law Clerk 9 5 0 11 5 8 18 10 0 Transfer from Moira Place and Plumber's Place Area, Capital Account- Services of Temporary Clerk 7 2 0 Hire of Shorthand Writer 5 5 0 Proportion of Salaries of Clerk's Staff, from 26th March, 1897, to 25th December, 1897 (fo. 371) 172 8 9 Candidates Travelling Expenses 7 12 8 Subscription to Law Library and "Justice of the Peace" 3 4 6 Law Books 7 6 2 183 14 5 Newspapers and Time Tables 5 1 0 accountant's department. Legal Forms, Stationery, and Copying Materials 10 11 () Court and Search Fees 2 13 6 Guarantee Premium 2 2 6 Advertising 15 13 3 Telegrams 2 12 2 Cab Fares 30 6 7 Disbursements 12 4 6 Law Engrossing and Writing 92 1 5 Less—Charged to sundry accounts 90 17 8 1 3 9 629 6 0 accountant's department. Searching Rate Books 2 18 6 Proportion of Salaries- Fees on House-numbering certificate 0 2 0 Accountant 163 17 5 3 0 6 Clerks 286 18 9 Rate Collectors 713 15 0 164 11 2 Services of Temporary Clerks 188 0 8 352 11 10 Local Taxation Returns 0 7 6 Advertising 2 11 5 Guarantee Premiums 25 10 0 Petty Disbursements 5 6 10 1,386 7 7 Amounts carried forward £186 14 11 80,211 1 1 Amounts carried forward dd £2,035 5 4 35,569 6 11 314 314 GENERAL RATE ACCOUNTS (Continued), from 25th March, 1897, to 25th March, 1898. To RECEIPTS— £ s. d. By PAYMENTS— £ s. d Amounts brought forward £186 14 11 80,211 1 1 Amounts brought forward £2,035 5 4 35, 5 69 6 11 Finance Committee's Accounts. (continued.) Finance Committee's Accounts. (continued.) general receipts. general charges. Sale of— Abstract of Accounts 0 1 4 Summonses, Warrant and Court Fees 5 19 2 Maps 0 8 0 Broker's Charges 8 5 3 10 Street Index 0 2 6 Expenses of watching disorderly houses 15 15 0 8 Waste Paper 0 1 0 Yearly contribution towards maintenance of Parish Church clock 20 0 0 11 0 12 10 Fines recovered 0 9 6 Report on Leverington Charity distribution 2 8 0 11 Costs recovered 0 19 0~ Publishing appointment of Charity Trustees 1 6 11 11 Broker's charges refunded 4 14 0 Sign Boards re Parochial Charities 17 14 0 11 Agency Commission on Fidelity Risks 7 7 9_ Elected Auditor's Expenses, Annual Audit, 1897 5 0 0 Deposits on tenders for Barge Freightage and Annual Contracts (per Contra) 100 0 0 Contra Subscription for telephonic communication 23 9 9 Do. to Stubb's Mercantile Offices 2 10 0 Bank Interest allowed on minimum aggregate fortnightly balances 25 7 1 Local Government Board Orders and Rules 1 8 1 Time Recorder and Keys 5 3 2 10 Less—Interest on overdrawn daily balances 15 5 5 Bill Posting 10 4 4 Typewriting Materials 2 8 3 110 1 8 Stationery and General Printing 1,063 9 3 Transfer from Moira Place, and Plumber's Place Area, Capital Account- Printing Municipal Diary and Year Book, 1898 26 5 0 Law Engrossing and Writing 8 0 1 Stationery and Printing, from 26th March, 1897, to 25th December, 1897 (fo. 371) 0 12 6 Refund of Deposits (per contra) 100 0 0 contra 224 17 3 Stamp Duty on Cheques and Orders 12 5 10 1,319 6 3 Rate Receipt Stamps and Postages 100 14 8 Postage and Receipt Stamps 108 0 0 221 0 6 Advertising— Annual Contracts 20 9 10 Vestrymen's Attendances 13 10 0 33 19 10 Electricity Works and Dust Destructor— Opening Ceremony, 28th June, 1897. Hire of Decorations and Pavilion 119 10 6 Floral Decorations 23 0 0 Hon. Artillery Company's Band 13 13 0 Tower Hamlets Rifle Volunteer Corps Band 10 0 0 Lithography 46 11 0 Emblazoned Favours 6 15 0 Extra Services of Clerks 2 12 0 Photographs, &c. 3 19 6 Cartage of Machinery 20 10 0 246 11 0 411 12 2 1,820 17 7 (Balance—£3,444 10s. 9d) 3,856 2 11 Amount carried forward £80,622 13 3 Amount carried forward dd1 £39,425 9 10 315 315 GENERAL RATE ACCOUNTS (Continued), from 25th March, 1897, to 25th March, 1898. To Receipts- £ s. d. By PAYMENTS— £ s. d. Amount brought forward £80,622 13 a. 3 Amount brought forward £ 39,425 9 10 Law and Parliamentary Committees Accounts. Law and Parliamentary Committee's Accounts. legal and parliamentary expenses. legal and parliamentary expenses. Firth v. Staines— Stamp Duty on agreements, leases, &c. 26 13 3 Taxed costs recovered re drainage works at Whiston Street (Nos. 91 and 93) 28 7 0 Affidavit, Search and Hearing Fees 5 11 9 Witnesses' Expenses 7 15 7 The Haberdashers Co. v. Vestry— Acts of Parliament 8 14 9 Taxed costs recovered re drainage works at Bevenden Street (Nos. 20, 22 and 24) 9 0 8 Law Engrossing and Writing 2 10 6 Reports and Digests of Charities 1 7 5 37 7 8 Costs in re Maxwell 0 15 1 53 8 4 Opposition to Bills in Parliament (Sessions 1897 and 1898)— Parliamentary Agents Costs re Great Northern and City Railway 13 5 6 Do. London County Council (Northern Tramways) 3 0 0 Do. North Metropolitan Railway and Canal 5 5 0 21 10 6 Re R. Stoneley (Brougham Road, Nos. 58 and 60) Re Mrs. H. Maxwell (Bateman's Row, No. 2) 6 16 0 Firth v. Staines (Whiston Street Nos. 91 and 93)— Counsel's Fees1 40 15 0 Shorthand Notes and Transcripts 10 14 8 51 9 8 Vestry v. Trustees of Hoxton Square— Counsel's Fees 4 11 6 The Haberdashers Co. v. Vestry— Counsel's Fees Plaintiff's Taxed Costs (Haberdasher Street, 11 7 6 Nos. 19-27, 43-47) 20 8 10 Do. do. (Pitfield Street, No. 79) 10 9 6 42 5 10 180 1 10 37 7 8 (Balance—£142 14s. 2d.) Amount carried forward £39,605 11 8 Amounts carried forward £80,660 0 11 316 £ s. d. 39,605 11 8 76 5 6 3 10 6 3 16 0 0 13 3 9 5 3 0 15 0 1 3 11 2 16 6 3 12 6 101 18 5 <7 40 0 0 62 13 0 102 13 0 °l a -i tr ii o 1 6 4 7 229 8 0 857 19 0 1,087 7 0 1,293 4 9 L27 17 11 L7fc 11 0 306 8 11 91 0 0 7 14 LI 1 14 9 0 10 5 3 3 0 5 13 2 416 5 2 to 1,122 16 1 14 0 u 56 9 9 o 14 0 1 17 6 5 6 3 2 7 0 1,208 10 7 i 5 0 0 l 21 0 0 m ;i,650 15 9 40,898 16 5 317 317 GENERAL RATE ACCOUNTS (Continued), from 25th March, 1897, to 25th March, 1898. To receipts— £ s. d. By Payments £ s. d. Amounts brought forward £53 14 0 80,660 0 11 Amount brought forward £1,650 15 9 40.898 16 5 Works Committee's Accounts. (continued.) Works Committees Accounts. (continued.) MAINTENANCE OF PUBLIC ROADS, STREETS & PATHS. MAINTENANCE OF PUBLIC ROADS, STREETS 8c PATHS. Repairs of Roads and Footpaths— Wages— East London Water-works Co. 184 11 10 Masons 1,058 4 2 New River Waterworks Co. 293 10 11 Paviors 519 14 7 Gas Light & Coke Co. 568 5 9 Yard Labour 948 8 1 Post Office Telegraphs 5 17 0 Watchmen 274 196 0 1,052 5 6 Cost of opening and making good trenches, received from National Telephone Co., Limited— Workmen' holiday 56 9 6½ 2,852 12 4½ Masons' and Pavior's Work 1,456 9 4 , Kingsland Road 754 0 0 New Paved Crossings 26 6 1 Paving Repairs in SundryStreets 25 5 4 779 5 4 Re-dressing Pitchings and Curbs 10 13 0 Asphalte Paving in Hoxton Street ex Shoreditch Asphalte Work 1,231 11 6 Board of Guardians 59 6 0 Wood Pavement, Maintenance 53 1 1 Asphalte Work at George's Place 31 3 3 Team Labour and Carmen's Work 521 19 1 Repairing Footways, &c. 5 7 5 Carting Rubbish 312 4 3 Cutting Coal-plate openings 4 8 6 Watching dangerous Gully 1 15 5 Sale of Old Stone and Cubes 13 10 0 6,464 16 8½ 1,947 1 5 Transferred, from Electricity Works, Capital Account (fo. 348) Transfers— Wages re-charged to this account 148 6 11 From accounts, as under, for works executed. &c.— 3,613 3 7½ 1 ■ Hackney Road Burial Ground (fo. 298) 24 7 11 Materials purchased during the Year— Public Baths and Washhouses, Capital Account (fo. 307) . 5 19 10 Guernsey Granite 95 0 6 Goldsmith Square Recreation Ground (fo. 316) 2 16 6 Do. Kerbs 16 7 11 Street Improvements (fo. 319) 6 19 0 Broken Granite 23 12 6 Dusting and Scavenging, Working Expenses (fo. 321) 21 3 11 York Flags 715 0 0 Lighting Department (fo. 322) 39 17 0 Cube Stones 5 13 9 Medical Officer's Department (fo. 324) 127 10 4 York Kerbs 84 17 3 Electricity Works, Capital Account (fo. 348) 4 18 11 Deposit Fund (fo. 374) 262 2 3 Patent Victoria Stone 74 7 6 Suspense Account (fo. 375) 24 16 0 Ballast, Hoggin, and Sand 469 14 0 2,467 13 1 Lime and Cement 206 2 2 Timber 2 14 10 Coke 17 13 0 1711 3 5 8,324 7 0½ Amounts carried forward £2521 7 1 80,660 0 11 Amounts carried forward £9,975 2 2½ 40,898 16 5 318 318 GENERAL RATE ACCOUNTS (Continued), from 25th March, 1897, to 25th March, 1898. To RECEIPTS— £ s. d. By PAYMENTS— £ s. d. amounts Brougnt forward £2,521 7 1 80,060 0 11 Amounts brought forward £9,975 2 9½ 40,898 16 5 Works Committees Accounts. (continued.) Works Committees Accounts. (continued.) FLEMMING STREET DEPOT. FLEMMING STREET DEPOT Wayleave rental for ground pole ex National Telephone Co., Limited (to 25th March, 18981 2 2 0 Rent 72 10 0 Parochial and District Rates 8 15 0 MISCELLANEOUS RECEIPTS. Income Tax 1 1 8 Land Tax 0 4 6 Gas 3 19 7 Water 0 12 0 Fire Insurance 0 3 0 87 5 9 MISCELLANEOUS EXPENSES. Easement Rents and privileges— Hammers, Tools and Wedges 19 14 8 Constructing two Bridges across Jane Shore Court 5 0 0 Street Guard Posts 44 9 11 Street Orderly Bins Sieves and Measures 6 17 0 Use of highway, part of Wenlock Road 1 1 0 Ironmongery 5 3 2 Laying underground steam-pipe, Anning Street 1 1 0 Blacksmiths' and Wheelwrights' Work 49 0 8 Do. do. High Street 9 13 4 Plumbers' Glaziers' and Writers' Work 21 2 4 Inserting slabs in pavement, High Street 0 1 0 Joiners' Work Notice Boards &c. 14 18 11 Extending railings upon pavement, Christopher Street 1 1 0 Repairs to Masons' Trucks 21 2 9 Repairing and Painting Water Carts 8 12 6 Laying Underground Wires by National Telephone Co., Limited, to 29th September, 1897 1 10 0 Removal of Water Post Service 6 5 1 Oil Waste Soap Candles. &c. 1 15 2 Clening Weighing Machine 0 14 0 Compensation for personal injuries, &c. 38 3 0 19 7 4 Bus hire for Committee 3 0 0 Acknowledgments for permission to— Construct Vault under Footway at Curtain Road (Nos. 38 and 40) 10 0 0 Winding and attention to Clocks 0 12 6 Income Tax on Easements 0 3 7 Perpetual Quit-rent of land thrown into street, Shepherdess 3 10 0 Connect branch house connections with hydraulic mains in various streets 4 0 0 245 5 3 14 0 0 Expenses in connection with laying mains for Electricity Works— Agreed sum for all rights and privileges in and over passageway, Earl's Place 200 0 0 License fees for affixing Advertisements to hoards, &c., under Advertising Stations (Rating) Act 1889 6 2 9 Witnesses' Fees and Costs 5 9 6 Compensation Mrs. Bryan v. Vestry 125 0 0 329 10 1 Counsel's Fees, do. 69 3 0 Taxed Costs do. 122 11 0 Witness Expenses do. 6 6 0 Jury and Sheriffs' Fees do. 13 14 0 Shorthand Notes do. 2 2 0 Law Engrossing and Writing, do. 4 7 1 348 12 7 593 17 10 Amounts carried forward £2,762 19 2 80,660 0 11 Amounts carried forward £10,656 6 4½ 40,898 16 5 319 319 GENERAL RATE ACCOUNTS (Continued), from march, 1897, to 25th March, 1898. To RECEIPTS— £ s. d. By Payments £ s. d. Amounts Brought Forward £2,762 19 2 80,660 0 Amounts brought forward £10,656 6 40,898 16 5 Works Committees Accounts. (continued.) Works Committee's Accounts. (continued.) STREET IMPROVEMENTS. STREET IMPROVEMENTS. Rent of Murray Street (No. 16) 22 18 7 Purchase of Freehold Land 120 0 0 Income Tax re-funded 1 8 2 Do. Leasehold do. 318 11 8 24 6 9 438 11 8 PRIVATE STREETS. Interest on Purchase Moneys 3 7 8 Vendors' Solicitors' Costs 43 10 11 Do. Surveyors' Fees 15 15 0 Stamp Duty on Conveyances 3 0 0 Middlesex Registry Fees 2 5 0 Owners' contributions towards paving and making good Law Engrossing and Writing 9 11 7 Compensation for Tenants' Interests 27 3 3 Cæsar Street 275 19 2 Paving Footways, Norfolk Place 49 0 8 Long Street 110 10 8 Watching Expenses (fo. 317) 6 19 0 386 9 10 Advertising 5 4 1 SITE OF ELECTRICITY WORKS AND DUST DESTRUCTOR, (Pitfield Street.) Income Tax 2 8 1 Rent 12 14 1 Parochial Rates 7 10 2 House Duty and Fire Insurance 1 0 6 Water Rent, 0 15 0 190 5 0 Advertising on hoardings 30 0 0 628 16 8 Debt— Repayment of Mortgage Debt 3,410 3 8 Interest on do. do. 1,637 4 10 5,047 8 6 5,676 5 2 3,203 , 15 9 (Balance—£13,128 15s. 9½d.) 16,332 11 6½ Amount carried forward £83,863 16 8 Amount carried forward £57,231 7 11½ 320 320 GENERAL RATE ACCOUNTS (Continued), from 25th March. 1897, to 25th March, 1 898. To RECEIPTS— £ s. s. By PAYMENTS— £ s. d. Amount brought forward £83,863 16 8 Amount brought forward £57,231 7 11½ Dusting & Scavenging Committee's Accounts. Dusting & Scavenging Committees Accounts. Maintenance Account. Maintenance Account. salaries and wages. salaries and wages. Unclaimed Wages repaid Bank 0 4 4 Salaries of Wharf Manager, Clerk, and Dust Inspector 360 0 6 de beauvoir wharf. Wages— Dusting 2,779 16 2 Slopping 5,133 9 11 Horsekeepers 169 17 8 • Mechanics 624 16 10 Miscellaneous 774 18 10 9,482 19 5 9,842 19 11 de beauvoir wharf. Leasehold Rents 70 0 0 Ground Rent 241 13 4 reliance wharf. Parochial and District Rates 44 3 4 Gas 71 13 1 Electricity Supply 65 8 0 Water 25 4 0 Fire Insurance 9 5 9 Plate Glass Insurance 0 5 0 Income Tax 16 6 8 473 19 2 Rent of Cottage 26 0 0 reliance wharf. stables. Ground Rent 96 13 4 Parochial and District Rates 30 6 0 Gas 20 7 10 Water 4 0 0 Fire Insurance 0 9 6 Income Tax 4 0 6 Inhabited House Duty 0 6 3 156 3 5 Sale of Two Horses 31 10 0 stables. Do. Three Horses (Dead) 4 10 0 Five Horses 337 0 0 36 0 0 Expenses of Purchase of ditto and Carriage 13 19 4 Oats, Bran, and Beans 667 4 7 Hay, Straw, and Clover 722 8 6 Carrots 13 10 6 Tares 26 15 6 Chaff Machine Knives 1 16 0 Visceral Analyses 11 11 0 Veterinary Surgery 49 12 3 Farriery 3 2 9 Saddlery and Harness 87 19 7 Stable and Loin Cloths 14 3 2 Auctioneer's charges on sale of horses 2 11 6 1,951 14 8 Amounts carried Forward £132 4 4 83,863 16 8 Amounts carried forward £12,424 17 2 57,231 7 11½ 321 321 GENERAL RATE ACCOUNTS (Continued), from 25th March, 1897, to 25th March, 1898. To RECEIPTS— £ s. d. PAYMENTS £ s. d. Amounts brought forward £132 4 4 83,863 16 8 Amounts brought forward £12,424 17 2 57,231 7 11½ Dusting & Scavenging Committee's Accounts. (continued.) Dusting & Scavenging Committee's Accounts.—(Cont.) working expenses. Barge Freightage 3,820 16 6 working expenses. Disposal of Rough Ashes 114 15 0 Removal of Trade Refuse 486 13 7 Do. Road Sweepings and Manure 38 10 6 Repairs, Cleansing, &c., at Kingsland Basin and Bridge since May, 1889 (apportioned amount) 45 2 8 Do. Rubbish 0 16 4 Do. Sand from Sewer in Mundy Street 0 8 3 Sale of Old Iron 6 4 10 Six Slop Vans 231 0 0 Brooms and Brushes 178 4 6 494 3 0 Bolts, Nuts, Studs, Nails and Screws 71 10 5 Transfers— Iron and Steel 56 8 4 Shovels, Forks and Scoops 14 4 0 Carriage and Van Springs, Axles and Wheels 14 14 11 Chains,Spindles&Wheels for Sweeping Machines 3 33 19 10 Tools, Ironmongery and Loose Fittings 32 3 4 Armoured Hose 14 6 1 From accounts as under, for work done, viz.— Timber, Spokes and Felloes 57 11 5 St. Leonard's Churchyard (fo. 298) 0 13 0 Tillage Salt 24 0 0 Disinfectants 98 10 0 Dust Destructor, Maintenance Account (fo. 323) 5 13 3 Oil, Varnish, Grease, Paint, Soap, &c. 45 3 0 Bricks and Lime 5 10 10 Medical Officer's Department (fo. 324) 2 3 11 Dust Van Covers and Repairs 23 18 6 Dust Baskets and Repairs 11 2 10 Squeegees 6 18 0 8 10 2 Plumbers', Painters' and Writers' work 5 12 9 502 13 2 Wiring and Fitting Work 127 3 5 Hire of Horses for Dusting Work 41 5 6 Do. do. Carting Clinkers 89 15 0 Carriageway Paving (fo. 317) 18 11 6 Bricks, Hoggin, and Cement (fo. 317) 2 12 5 Cleaning Weighbridge 4 0 0 Winding and attention to Clocks 0 12 6 Entrance Fees-London Cart Horse Parade Society 1 6 0 Coal, Coke and Firewood 27 9 2 Rent of Norway Wharf 21 0 0 Tramway Ticket 1 1 0 Advertising 11 16 6 Guarantee Premium 0 8 6 Compensation for injuries 2 10 0 Counsel's Fees and Costs re action of Newby v. Vestry 2 11 4 Disbursements 26 7 9 5,317 13 0 street watering. Wages 276 lb 0 Horse Hire 103 15 0 © Writing on Vans 8 15 1 Fittings and Repairs 5 10 9 Water 373 11 0 i 768 7 10 debt. Repayment of Mortgage Debt 122 0 0 634 17 6 Interest on Mortage Debt 109 7 8 (Balance—£18,107 8s. 2d.) 231 7 8 18,742 5 8 Amount carried forward £4,498 14 2 Amount carried forward ee £75,973 13 7½ 322 322 GENERAL RATE ACCOUNTS (Continued), from 25th March, 1897, to 25th March, 1898. To RECEIPTS— £ s. d. By PAYMENTS— £ s. d. Amount brought forward £84,498 14 2 Amount brought forward £75,973 13 7½ Lighting Committee's Accounts. Lighting Committee's Accounts. electricity works, deficit account. Cash deficits charged upon this year's Rates, as under:— Year ended 25th March. 1896 (fo. 351) 382 9 9 do. 25th March. 1897 (fo. 351) 872 18 5 1,255 8 2 lighting department. lighting department. Public Street Lamps. Gas supply, Lighting, and Maintenance of Private Lamps 44 8 9 Quarter ended. Gas Electricity. Total. Damage to Public Lamps 0 17 6 Are Lamps. Incandescent Lamps. Sale of— Old Lamp Columns 1 0 0 25th March, 1897 1,400 9 0 ...... ...... 1,400 9 0 Do. Metal 1 1 0 24th June, 1897 782 7 10 ...... ...... 782 7 10 Do. Copper 1 6 9 L 5 29th Sept., 1897 826 18 3 253 10 6 57 0 0 1,137 8 9 3 7 9 25th Dec., 1897 1,313 14 1 557 10 8 150 12 6 2,021 17 3 48 14 0 4,323 9 2 811 2 207 12 6 5,342 2 10 1 Salary of Engineer 228 0 3 Wages 1,123 11 0 Do. Repairs 251 9 9 1,375 0 9 Sugg's Lamp Governors and Repairs 8 12 0 Burners, Brackets and Fittings 33 9 6 Lamp Fittings, Governors and Cocks 109 14 9 Opal Shades and Iron Frames 105 11 8 Tools and Ironmongery 18 19 9 Painting Lamp Columns and Brackets 26 7 8 Altering and removing Lamp services 26 5 6 Mason's and Pavior's Work (fo. 317) 39 17 0 Diverting Water Mains 12 10 9 Rubber Goods 2 15 10 Glass, Oil. Paint, Putty and Driers 61 11 5 Adjusting water line of Meters 3 15 0 Ladders, Hire of Trestles and Repairs 8 1 0 Funeral expenses of workman 10 10 6 Gratuity to mother of workman (on account) 18 10 0 Tramway Ticket 1 1 0 Disbursement 4 0 6 2,094 15 3 7,436 18 1 48 14 0 (Balance—£7,388 4s. 1d.) Amount carried forward £84,547 8 2 Amount carried forward £84,665 19 10½ 323 323 GENERAL RATE ACCOUNTS (Continued), From 25th March, 1897, to 25th March, 1898. To RECEIPTS— £ s. d. By PAYMENTS— £ s. d. Amount brought forward £84,547 8 2 Amount brought forward £ 84,665 19 10½ Lighting Committee's Accounts. (CONTINUED.) Lighting Committee s Accounts. (CONTINUED.) DUST DESTRUCTOR, MAINTENANCE ACCOUNT. DUST DESTRUCTOR, MAINTENANCE ACCOUNT. Destruction of Trade Refuse 203 4 9 Work done and Materials supplied bv Contractor— Sale of Fine Ash and Clinker 1 5 6 Stoker's time 112 13 3 204 10 3 Superintendent 27 10 0 Coal and Coke 38 17 0 Oil 1 11 6 Ca.sks. La.mns An 3 0 0 183 11 9 Salary of Chief Electrical Engineer (one-third charged to this account) sp.ft fnlio 350 83 6 8 Wages 2001 6 0 Do. extra Labour 7 15 3 I 2092 7 11 Eirp. In sn ra n HP. 39 18 2 Employers' Liability Assurance 3 6 0 Disbursements by Chief Engineer 24 10 7 Advertising 4 19 8 stores. Law Engrossing and Writing 0 6 11 Stationery and Printing 17 2 0 Photographs 1 1 0 £ s. d. 2183 12 3 Materials paid for during the year 75 11 0 Carting Clinkers and Ashes 162 15 0 Outstanding accounts at 25th March, 1898 63 19 11 Coal 2 16 0 Disinfectants (fo. 321) 5 13 3 139 10 11 Boiler Fluid 3 0 0 Materials supplied out of Stores and used on Works 103 8 1 Oil 1 0 3 Castings, Cables, Tools and Fittings 16 11 2 Revenue Stores on hand at 25th March, 1898 (at net cost value), valued by Chief Electrical Engineer at £36 2 10 Smith's Work and Rpnairs 1 7 15 7 229 11 3 LESS— 2 2,596 15 3 Materials paid for during year (STOKES) 75 11 0 ADD— 2,521 4 3 Materials supplied out of Stores (see opposite) 103 8 1 2624 12 4 DEBT— Repament of Mortgage Debt 749 0 0 Interest on do. do do 404 0 4 1153 0 4 Note:—Charged in Accounts for Year to 25th March, 1898. Weight & quantity Expenditube. Tons. Cwt. Qrs lbs. £ s. d. Carting Clinkers and Ashes 4,712 16 1 14 423 2 10 Coal 54 0 0 0 46 16 0 Coke 33 C lialdi on s. 14 17 0 (Balance-£3573 2s. 5d.) 204 10 3 3,777 12 8 Amount carried forward £ 88,443 12 69 Amount carried forward £ 84,751 1 18 5 324 324 GENERAL RATE ACCOUNTS (CONTINUED), from 25th March, 1897, to 25th March, 1898. To RECEIPTS— £ s. d. By PAYMENTS— £ s. d. Amount brought forward £ 84.751 18 5 Amount Brought forward 88,443 12 6½ Public Health Committees Accounts. Public Health Committee s Accounts. medical officer's department. medical officer's department. Moiety of Salaries of Sanitary Officers transferred by London County Council from Exchequer Contribution Account, in substitution for local grants [payable under the Local Government Act, 1888, Section 24 (2c)], as under:— Proportion of Salaries— Medical Officer of Health 250 0 0 Inspectors and Clerks 601 10 3 851 10 3 Year ended. Medical Officer of Health. Sanitary Inspectors. Total. Fees paid for Medical Certificates under Public Health (London) Act, 1891, Sec. 55 (3) 158 3 6 £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. Mortaliy Returns 28 12 4 29th Sept., 1897. 250 0 0 423 9 2 673 9 2 New Bedding and Mattresses 9 1 5 Disinfectants 1 10 0 250 0 0 423 9 2 673 9 2 Drain Grenades, and Testers 9 16 6 Nuisance Caution Tablets 4 16 0 Deduct—Proportion credired to Sewers Rate Books, Reports, Pamphlets and Photographs 3 12 7 Account (fo. 335) 336 14 7 336 14 7 Summonses and Oarder b 14 0 Rewards to Police 6 9 0 Medical fees repaid for Notification of Infectious Diseases under Public Health (London) Act, 1891, sec. 55 (4) ex Managers of Metropolitan Asylum District 158 3 6 Costs allowed by Magistrate 5 5 0 Tramay Tickets 6 6 0 Candidates' Travelling Expenses 2 4 10 Advertising 5 9 6 Fines and Penalties under Public Health (London) Act, 1891 .. 6 3 0 Water and Rates, Old Street Yard 1 6 0 Repaving Albert Mews (fo. 317) 127 10 4 Costs recovered under above Act 4 16 0 Fixing Ventilating Pipe Britannia Street 2 18 4 Removal of Dead Horse, &c. (fo. 321) 2 3 11 Do. under Metropolis Local Management Acts 0 13 0 Chief Sanitary Inspector's Expenses to Brussels 5 0 0 Unclaimed Medical fees 0 7 0 170 2 6 Disbursements 9 10 10 506 17 1 1248 0 4 sale of food and drugs acts. sale of food and drugs acts. Fines imposed and costs recovered under Sale of Food and Drugs Act, 18/5, and Margarine Act, 1887 (one year to 25th March, 1898):— Salary of Public Analyst 50 0 0 Analyses of Samples 92 0 0 Purchase of do 3 13 3 Articles. Samples examined. Prosecutions instituted, j Fines. Costs. Bottles, Tins, Corks and Tapers 1 12 1 Costs allowed by Magistrate in re Quelch v. Grey 2 2 0 No. No. £ s d £ s d « Summonses, Orders and Witnesses' Fees 4 19 10 Milk 72 13 35 15 0 6 7 0 154 7 2 Butter 58 8 31 10 0 3 0 0 Coffee 6 1 2 0 0 0 12 6 Sugar - 3 1 2 6 1 17 6 Mustard 6 1 - 0 12 6 Margarine - 2 3 0 0 0 12 6 Whisky 15 3 7 0 0 0 14 6 Rum 6 1 3 0 0 0 Gin 9 - - - Vinegar 6 - - - 178 32 83 7 6 13 16 6 97 4 0 Amounts carried forward £601 1 1 84,751 18 5 Amounts carried forward £1,402 7 6 88,443 •/ 12 6½ 325 325 GENERAL RATE ACCOUNTS (Continued) from 25th March, 1897, to 25th March, 1898. To RECEIPTS- £ s. d. By PAYMENT £ s. d. Amounts brought forward £604 1 1 84,751 18 5 Amounts brought forward £1,402 7 6 88,443 12 6½ Public Health Committees Accounts. (continued.) Public Health Committee's Accounts. (continued.) town hall disinfecting station. town hall disinfecting station. Use of Disinfecting Apparatus ex Vestry of St. Luke, Middlesex 2 18 6 salaries 225 13 10 Overtime allowances 5 b 0 Disinfecting at Tenants' premises 3 13 6 Horse 42 0 0 6 12 0 Horse Hire 85 18 0 ' Stable Furniture 2 17 2 Entrance Gates 9 18 0 Fixing &c. Manholes 8 0 0 Mason's Repairs 2 12 0 Extending Chimney 4 19 0 Use of disinfecting apparatus to Vestry of St. Luke, Middlesex 7 13 0 Disinfectants 6 0 0 Limewashing 2 19 0 Oil, Candles, Grease, Varnish and Paste 6 9 6 Wheelwright's work 1 18 0 Sweeping Chimney Furnace 0 15 0 Coal 11 14 0 Boiler Insurance 1 10 0 Gas 1 1 6 / * 427 4 0 L temporary shelters Wages of Caretake 10 0 0 Sundries 0 18 9 Rent 46 16 0 L 57 14 9 V? public mortuary, maintenance. Wages of Caretaker 33 2 6 Removal of Corpses 1 5 0 Coal 1 4 6 0 1 2 3 0 0 [ 38 13 2 It7 smoke consumption. Police Court Costs in re Alexander u. Marshall 1 3 4 (Balance—£1,316 9s. 8d.) 610 13 1 1,927 2 9 Amount carried forward £ 85,362 11 6 Amount carried forward £ 90,370 15 3½ 326 326 GENERAL RA PE ACCOUNTS (Continued), from 25th March, 1897, to 25th March, 1898. To RECEIPTS— £ s. d. By PAYMENTS— £ s. d. Amount brought forward 85,362 11 6 Amount brought forward £ 90370 15 3½ Town Hall Committees Accounts. Toivn Hall Committee's Accounts. ESTABLISHMENT OF TOWN HALL. ESTABLISHMENT OF TOWN HALL. Hire of Hall 586 9 6 Salaries 144 2 3 Do. Council Chamber 9 18 6 Use of Utensils 20 0 0 Wages of Cleaners 132 10 0 Use ol Committee Rooms 3 6 0 Do Charwomen 24 9 0 Do. Footlights 3 5 0 Do. Cleaning windows 26 2 6 Hire of Basement Rooms for Vaccination Station ex Shoreditch Board of Guardians (one year to 25th March, 1898) 5 5 0 Temporary Assistants 10 16 2 Overtime allowances 18 3 6 376 3 5 Parochial Rates 297 8 10 Kent of Petty Sessions Rooms ex Standing Joint Committee of London Country Council 30 0 0 Income Tax 34 12 8 Gas 168 10 10 Charges for permission to sell excisable liquors 3 3 0 Electicity 142 14 0 water 15 U u Half cost of preparing agreement with National Sunday League 0 7 6 Use of Fire Hydrants 2 2 0 Testing do 1 5 0 641 8 6 Coal and Coke 25 10 0 Fire Insurance 15 0 0 702 2 11 Erecting Orchestra 2 14 0 Carpentry and Locksmith's work, &c. 74 2 9 Plumbers', Glaziers' and Writers' work 16 11 7 Portable Racks 31 4 0 Varnishing and Limewashing 8 17 6 Chairs and Stools 10 17 0 Notice Boards 10 5 0 Curtains 10 15 0 Card Cases and Framing Photographs 6 11 1) / Lamp Glasses, Mantles & Incandescent Lamps 18 10 2 Canvas Hose 12 10 0 Clearing Strong Rooms and preparing Indexes 7 7 0 Electrical Fittings (Contract) 430 5 0 Heating Apparatus (on account of Contract) 200 0 0 Covering Ducts in Committee Room 13 18 0 Clocks 4 5 0 Sweeping Chimneys and Flues 4 0 0 Brushes, Oil, Soap, Glassware, &c 4 19 8 , Uniform Clothing and Waterproof Coat 9 17 6 Winding and attention to Clocks (one year) 6 6 0 893 14 8 1,972 1 0 Debt— Repayment of Mortgage Debt 200 0 0 Interest on do. do 187 5 3 387 5 3 (Balance—£1,717 17s. 9d.) 641 8 6 2359 6 3 Amount carried forward £ 86,004 0 0 Amount carried forward £ 92,730 1 6½ 327 327 CENEUAL HATE ACCOUNTS (Continued), from 25th March, 1897, to 25th March, 1898. To receipts— £ s. d By PAYMENTS— £ s. d. Amount brought forward £ 80,004 0 0 Amount brought forward £ 92,730 1 6½ Valuation List Committee s Accounts. Valuation List Committee s Accounts. VALUATION LIST EXPENSES. [.Pursuant to The Valuation (Metropolis) Act, 1869.] Year to 25th March, 1898— Law Engrossing and Writing 1 14 3 Assessment Tables 0 12 0 Omnibus Hire for Surveys 18 0 0 (Balance—£20 6s. 3d.) 20 6 3 Assessment Committee's Accounts. Assessment Committee!s Accounts. ASSESSMENT COMMITTEE EXPENSES. [Pur,'it/ant to The Valuation (Metropolis) Act, 1869.] Supplemental Valuation List, in force 6th April, 1897— C. J. Barr and Sons (Scrutton Street, Nos. 58, 60 and 62)— Counsel's Fees re Appeal to Court of Quarter Sessions 8 7 0 Rating Valuer's charges do. 3 3 0 11 10 0 Supplemental Valuation List, in force 6th April, 1898— j. King & Co. (Canal Road, No. 52)— Rating Surveyor's and Valuer's Fees re Appeal to Special Assessment Sessions 6 6 0 Shoreditch Vestry v. Shoreditch Assessment Committee— Counsel's Fees re appeal against totals 7 1 0 24 17 0 Year to 25th March, 1898— Salary of Clerk 50 0 0 Law Engrossing and Writing 4 5 7 Printing 3 12 0 (Balance—£82 14s. 7d.) 57 17 7 82 14 7 86,004 0 0 Excess of Payments over Receipts (to. 329) 6,829 2 4½ £ 92,883 2 4½ £ 92,833 2 4½ 328 328 GENERAL RATE ACCOUNT Income and EXPENITURY from 25th March, 1897, to 25th March, 1898. Sourck. Fo. RECEIPTS. ASSETS Accrued but not Received. INCOME Application. Fo. PAYMENTS. LIABILITIES Incurred but not Paid. EXPENDITURE 25 March, 1897 25 March, 1898 from 25 March 97 to 25 March 25 March, 1897. 25 March, 1898. from 25 March, 97,to 25 March, 98. Finance Committee's Accounts. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. ???nance Committee's Accounts. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. General Rate 311 72,880 9 1 2,400 11 7 2,5S8 8 11 ...... 73,068 6 ???Hiool Board for London 311 35,569 6 11 8,381 14 3 8,218 14 2 ........ 35,406 6 10 Equaliation Fund 312 7,330 12 0 ...... ...... ...... 7.33 12 ???Generla Rate 311 19 11 9 1 2 9 ......... ....... 18 9 0 Vestry Clerk's Department 313 183 14 5 ...... ...... 183 14 5 ...... ???stry Clerk's Department 313 629 0 0 1 4 0 3 15 1 0 631 17 4 Accountant's Department 313 8 0 0 ...... ...... 8 0 0 ...... ???countant s Department 313 1,380 7 i ...... 3 15 0 1390 2 7 General Receipts 314 224 17 8 7 7 9 ...... 217 9 0 ...... Gneral Charges 314 1,820 17 7 o 2 235 1 11 1810 14 0½ 404 4 3832 13 11½ Law and Parliamentary Committee Amounts ???nw and Parliamentary Committee's Accounts Legal and Parliamentary Expenses 315 37 7 8 ...... ...... 37 7 8 ???gal and Parliamentary Expenses 315 180 1 10 12 2 7 0 15 8 168 14 11 168 14 11 37 7 ???ousing of the Working ???Classes Committee's Accounts. Works Committee's Accounts. ???oldsmitli Square Recreation ???Ground 310 204 u 5 30 5 9 25 18 1 1 200 4 7 ???harles Square do 316 1 6 4 ........ ........ 1 6 4 ???oira Place and Plumbers Place Area, 310 1 087 7 0 750 0 0 249 4 0 577 10 0 779 1 5 /orks Committee's Accounts. Surveyor's Dopartmont 310 58 14 0 ...... ...... 53 14 0 ???urveyor's Department ???team Road Rollers 316 310 416 1 '>08 5 10 2 7 5 5 l 9 2 0 0 18 2 17 0 4 411 1,221 6 18 0 11 Maintenance, ol 1 Miblu; Roads, Streets and Paths 3I7 2,407 13 I 300 15 10 891 12 0 2,558 9 8 ???lanting Trees in Public Roads and Streets 316 5 0 O 1 5 0 6 5 0 lemming Street Depot 318 2 2 0 ...... ...... 2 2 0 ???Public Fountains 310 21 0 0 21 0 0 Jvliscollaneous Receipts 318 239 10 1 2 10 0 2 10 0 239 10 1 ??? Street Improvements 319 24 0 9 10 0 0 14 0 9 ???Maintenance of Public ???Roads Streets and Paths 317 8324 7 0½ 808 17 8 396 6 10 7,851 10 2½ Site ol Electricity Works and Dust Debtruotor 319 30 0 0 ...... ...... 80 0 0 ???lemming Street Depot 318 87 5 9 2 4 6 1 4 3 86 5 6 Private St nets 319 386 0 10 0 16 0 0 10 9 386 9 10 ???liscellaneous Expenses 318 593 17 10 67 15 4 26 4 1 552 6 7 8,284 11 1 ???Street Improvements 319 5.670 5 2 1,444 19 5 2,447 7 11 6,678 13 8 16829 11 10½ Dusting and Scavenging Committee's Accounts Maintenance Account ???Dusting and Scavenging Committee's Accounts Maintenance Account ???Salaries and Wages 320 9842 19 11 9,842 10 11 Salaries and Wages 320 0 1 4 ...... ...... 0 4 4 ???De Beauvoir Wharf 320 473 19 2 51 4 1 72 19 3 495 14 4 De Beauvior Wharf 320 70 0 0 17 10 0 17 10 0 70 0 0 ???Reliance Wharf 320 156 3 5 9 5 11 5 14 2 152 11 8 Reliance Wharf 320 26 0 0 ...... ...... 26 0 0 ???Stables 320 1 951 14 8 123 18 0 443 12 5 2,271 9 1 Stables 320 36 0 0 ...... ...... 36 0 0 ???Working Expenses 321 5 317 13 0 613 7 11 600 15 7 5, 305 0 8 Working Expenses 321 502 13 2 137 10 5½ 133 5 8½ 49+8 8 5 ???Street Watering 391 768 7 10 ...... ...... 768 7 10 ...... " 630 12 ???Debt 29.1 9,SI 7 8 83 19 8 82 12 10 230 8 3 ...... 19066 11 9 Lighting Committee's Accounts. Lighting Committee's Accounts. Lighting Department 322 48 14 0 44 8 9 45 6 3 ...... 49 11 1 Electricity Works Deficit Account 322 1,255 8 2 ...... ...... ...... 1,255 8 2 Dust Destructor, Maintenanco Account 323 204 10 3 45 4 9 ...... 249 15 81 Lighting Department 399 7,430 18 1 1,441 17 4 1920 12 11 ...... 7915 13 8 Dust Destructor, Maintenance Account 393 3 777 19 8 480 9 11 904 14 8 ...... 4,202 4 5 Amounts carried forward £ 84,751 18 5 2,921 11 1½ 3,224 14 4½ 35,055 1 8 Amounts carried forward 88,443 12 6½ 14,628 11 3½ 15,659 14 9 ...... 89,474 16 0 329 329 GENERAL RATE ACCOT NT—Income and Expenditure From 25th March, 1897, to 25th March, 1898 (Continued). Source. Fo. RECEIPTS. ASSETS income Application. Fo. PAYMENTS. LIABILITIES Incurred rut not Paid. EXPENDITURE Accrued but not Received. from 25 March,'97, to 25 March, 25 March, 1897. 25 March, 1898. 25 March, 1897. 25 March, 1898. from 25 March 97 to 25 March 98 £ s. d. | £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. Amounts brought forward £ 84,751 18 5 2,921 11 1½ 3,224 14 4½ .......... 85,055 1 Vounts brought forward £ 88,443 12 6½ 14,628 11 3½ 15,659 14 9 ........ 89,474 10 0 Public Health Committee's Accounts. ???lie Health Commit???i's Accounts. Medical Officer's Department. 324 506 17 1 194 14 0 188 11 9 500 14 10 ???:al Officer's Department. 324 1,248 0 4 56 1 7 38 18 7 1,230 17 4 Sale of Food and Drugs Acts 324 97 4 0 ....... ....... 97 4 0 ???of Food and Drugs Acts 324 154 7 2 26 10 0 22 0 0 149 17 2 TownHallDisinfectingStation 325 6 12 0 ??? ??? 6 12 0 ???HallDisinfectingStation 325 427 4 0 40 2 6 25 19 9 413 1 3 / 604 10 0 ???norary Shelters 325 57 14 9 ........ ...... 57 14 9 Town Hall Committee's Accounts. *i ifee Mortuary,Maintenance 325 38 13 2 0 15 0 0 5 8 38 3 10 ???Consumption 325 1 3 4 1 3 4 1890 17 8 ???Hall Committee's ???counts. Establishment of Town Hall 326 641 8 6 14 6 6 8 17 6 635 19 6 ???ulishment of Town Hall 326 2,359 6 3 337 8 9 501 11 I 2,523 8 7 635 19 ???1 2,523 8 7 / ???ation List Commit???ted Accounts. ???nation List Exnenses 327 20 6 8 8 0 0 2 0 0 14 0 3 14 6 3 ???SsmentCommittee's ???counts. ???isment Committee Expenses 327 82 14 7 3 3 0 1 0 0 80 11 7 80 11 7 3,130 11 7½ 3,422 3 7½ 15,100 12 4 10,251 9 10 £ 3,130 11 7½ 15,100 12 327 86,004 0 0 291 12 0 86,295 12 i 92,833 2 1,150 17 8* 93,984 0 1 BALANCE—In hand at 25th March. 1897— As per last published Abstract (fo. 79) 14,554 2 10 Deduct—Balances. At 25th March, 18S Cash in hands of— Treasurer 8— 6,781 3 4 Accountant 946 14 2½ Sundry Officials 25 0 0 Stores on hand 36 9 1 0 323 7.789 0 4½ Less—Due to— Sundry Creditors 63 19 11 323 7,725 0 5* Excess of Payments over Receipts 327 6,829 2 4½ Expenditure in excess or Income carried to Balance Sheejb 330 7,688 8 1 £ 92,833 2 4½ £ 33,984 0 1 £ 92,833 2 4½ 93,984 0 1 330 330 GENERAL RATE ACCOUNT- - BALANCE SHEET, 25th March, 1898 LIABITIES Fo. £ s. d. £ s. cl. Fo. £ s. d. £ s. d. CAPITAL ACCOUNT. ASSETS. CAPITAL ACCOUNT. To Loan Accounts:—Balances. Mortgages— „„ . By Property and Permanent Works— Out of Loans. Out of Revenue. Total. Street Improvements and Paving Works 39,017 10 0 Fvnpnditiirp to 25th March. 1898— £ s. d £ s. rl £ s d Sun Street to Worship Street (Appold Street) improvement 369 25,034 18 6 • Street Iirmrovements and Paving Works 72,504 2 2 368 738 18 7 73,243 0 9 309 9,750 0 0 Sun Street to Worship Street (Appold Street Tmnrovement ) 6,000 0 0 369 65,000 0 0 Goldsmith Square, Open Space 370 1,700 0 0 Dusting and Scavenging 870 3,034 0 0 Errction og Town Hall 38544 1 4 0 309 5 799 19 5 44 344 14 2 Moira Place and Plumber's Place Area 871 29,570 6 2 Goldsmith Square, Open Space 2,000 0 0 370 9 17 0 2,009 17 0 Erection of Dust Destructor 372 13,491 0 0 Dusting and Scavenging 8,027 18 0 370 345 1 9 8,372 19 9 To Revenue Accont Working Class Dwellings 254 14 0 370 254 14 0 Repayment of Debt Mnim TMh.pp nrirl Plumber's Place Area 53,228 1 8 371 53,228 1 8 To March 1897 92,902 12 2 TCrpri.ion of Dust Instructor 1,142 18 5 372 15,142 18 5 This Year 4,750 11 8 97,653 3 10 Moiety of proceeds of Sales of Surplus Lands, <tc. (Appold Street) Improvement 22,854 1 6 309 120,507 5 4 By Cash Balances— u o,owo io 9 zoi,oyt> o y * contributions and Recoipts ironi other soiuccs. 23944 7 7 In hands of Treasurer— Rate Account 4233 4 7 Street Improvements and Paving Works 1,843 3 b obo 28177 12 2 Erection of Town Hall 5 5 3 1 369 1 1 R4R R Q Less "*• J Cash Balances transferred to Rate Account 627 14 4 368 27,549 17 10 Dduct—uue to Treasurer— 902 1 8 5 372 Dusting and Scavenging 27 18 0 370 Workincr Class Dwellings 254 14 0 370 Moira Place and Plumber Place Area 1.944 0 3 371 Balance of Assets over Liabilities, on Capital Account 148, 057 3 2 3,129 16 8 8,718 12 1 270314 17 10 REVENUE ACCOUNT. 270,314 17 10 REVENUE ACCOUNT To Sundry Creditors, for Balances due to them— By Sundry Debtors, for Balances owing by thorn 833 14 8* 327 By General Rate 2.588 8 11 On Rate Account 16,251 9 10 329 3.422 3 7+ On Stores ACCOUNT 63 19 11 329 Bv Cash Balances—25th March 1898. 16,315 9 9 In bands of— Treasurer 0,781 3 4 329 Accountant 940 14 2½ Sundry Officials 25 0 0 £ 971 14 2½ 329 BYStnppiR nri Viand 7,752 30 17 2 6½ 10 329 7,789 0 4½ 11,211 4 0 Expenditure in excess of Income this year 7,688 8 1 329 Deduct— Surplus—25th March, 1897 2,584 2 4 DEFICIT—25th March. 1898 5,104 5 9 16315 9 9 16315 9 9 WILLIAM GEORGE SMITH, Treasurer, £28630 7 7 ERNST A. R ADAMS, Accountant. 286,630 7 7 London & Midland Bank, Limited (Shoreditch Branch). SEWERS RATE ACCOUNT. 333 SEWERS RATE ACCOUNTS, from 25TH MARCH, 1897, TO 25TH MARCH, 1898. To RECEIPTS— finance Committee's Accounts. SEWERS RATE. £ s. d. By PAYMENTS— Finance Committee s Accounts. DEBT. £ s. d. Assessments— Rates made and allowed, from Lady-Day, 1897, to Lady-Day, 1898, viz. Instalments of Principal and Interest on Balances of Mortgage Loans outstanding (folio 384)— Quarter ended. Made by Vestry Allowed by Police Magistrate. Rateable Value. Rate in the £ Amount. Compound. Non-Compound. Total. Purpose of Loan. Fo. Charged in this Year's Accounts. Total.  Midsummer, 1897 ..... ..... £ ..... £ ..... £ ..... .. ... ... ... Repayment. Interest. (Including Tax) Michaelmas, 1897 29th June,1897 3rd July, 1897 114,225 576,178 690,403 1d. 2,876 13 7 Christmas, 1897 5th Oct., 1897 7th Oct., 1897 113,997 581,651 695,648 1d. 2,898 10 8 Construction of New Sewers in Hoxton District. 334 281 0 0 97 16 7 378 16 7 Lady-Day, 1898 .... .... .... .... .... .. ... ... ... Do. do. Haggerston District 334 618 0 0 438 11 5 1,056 11 5 5,775 4 3 High Street Underground Convenience (No. 1). 336 64 0 0 56 0 10 120 0 10 Arrears of Rate brought forward 10 8 11 Contributions from H.M. Treasury in lieu of rates 2 0 0 Old Street do. do. 336 84 0 0 74 11 6 158 11 6 Total amount to be collected 5,787 13 2 1,047 0 0 667 0 4 1,714 0 4 Less—Commission allowed to owners of 25 per cent., under sec. 3 of Poor Rate Assessment and Collection Act, 1869 238 2 5 Do. during progress of collection 0 15 5 SEWERS RATE. 238 17 10 Legally excused at Petty Sessions 3 11 9 Rate refunded, being amount allowed on appeal to— C. & R. Light, Limited 0 2 2 Empties 118 19 9 Reduced on appeal 11 19 7 London County Council 0 10 11 Runs 8 0 9 No effects and insolvencies 5 8 1 0 13 1 147 19 11 VESTRY CLERK'S DEPARTMENT. Recoverable arrears carried forward 386 17 9 Porporaton of Salaries— Net amount collected (see folio 396) £ 5,400 15 5 Vestry Clerk 268 6 5 Collection— Clerks 211 11 0 479 17 5 10 Rate. Year ended Total. ACCOUNTANT'S DEPARTMENT. 25th March, 1897. 25th March, 1898. Rates made and allowed from Lady-day, 1897, to Lady-Day, 1898 £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. Proportion of Salaries— ...... 5,398 15 5 5,398 15 5 Accountant 163 17 5 Contributions from H.M. Treasury in lieu of Rates ...... 2 0 0 2 0 0 Clerks 254 3 9 418 1 2 10 Amount actually collected, as shewn above ...... 5,400 15 5 5,400 15 5 Less—Amount collected and banked after 25th March, 1898 ....... 0 3 5 0 3 5 5,400 12 0 5,400 12 0 Increased Assessments (under 32 and 33 Vict., cap. 67, sec. 47) ...... 8 6 8 8 6 8 Rates previously written off, n ow recovered ...... Balance of Rate made and allowed 2nd Jan., 1897 (uncollected at Lady-Day, 1897) 0 7 1 0 7 1 (Balance—£898 1 1 s. 8d.) 898 11 8 £ 0 7 1 5,408 18 8 5,409 5 9 Amount carried forward . £ 898 11 8 Amount carried forward £ 5,409 5 9 334 SEWERS RATE ACCOUNTS (Continued), from 25th March, 1897, to 25th March, 1898. , £ s. d. By PayMENTS £ s. d. To RECEIPTS— Amount brought forward £5,409 5 9 Amount brought forward £ 898 11 8 Works Committees Accounts. surveyor's department. Works Committee s Accounts. surveyors department. Fee for inspection of drainage plans 0 10 6 Proportion ot salaries— Surveyor 127 17 11 Assistants and Clerk 152 1 0 279 18 11 10 Tramway Ticket 1 1 0 Ordnance Sheets 3 6 3 Drawing Materials 1 6 10 5 14 1 285 13 0 sewerage and drainage works. sewerage and drainage works. Wages— Owners apportioned cost of Sewer works (balances) at:— Mechanics 761 1 4 Flushers 552 19 4 Cæsar Street 199 18 4 Watchmen, &c. 157 1 0 Long Street 71 15 10 Sewer Extension Works— 1,461 1 8 271 9 2 Csesar Street and Long Street 407 6 6 ' 279 6 5 bowers connections anci urainage worns cione for private owners (jobbing works) 7 17 3 Essex Street and Harman Stree 645 10 11 1,059 1 7 5 Drain Construction work ex School Board for London 15 2 0 4 22 4 Fixing Ventilating Shafts and Pipes 11 2 1 Gully Grates and Frames 164 10 0 Do. do. ex Shoreditch Board of Guardians 7 12 0 Side Entrance Covers 16 12 7 Owner's contribution towards estimated cost of deepening sewer in Earl Street 100 0 0 Manhole Covers 8 4 1 Earthenware Pipes, Junctions and Blocks 165 16 6 Norfolk Buildings— Bricks 26 17 6 In settlement of debt and costs in re action of Vestry u. J. S. Pilbrow and others 150 0 0 12-4 Lime and Cement 39 12 10 Sale of Old Scrap Iron 9 17 5 11-4 Timber 17 0 4 Drain Rods 1 18 0 Transfer— Windlass 4 7 8 Sewer Lanterns and Repairs 2 10 6 From account, as under, for works executed, viz.:— Waterproof Clothing 24 10 6 Plumbers' Work 6 9 6 Deposit Fund (fo. 374) 734 2 8 12-4 Masons' Work 3 3 4 1,296 0 6 Ironmongery 1 13 11 Disinfectants 9 4 0 Oil, Brushes, Cotton Waste, and Candles 14 7 11 Lithography 23 7 0 Diverting Water Mains 2 3 9 Compensation for Damage 19 11 0 Water for Flushing Sewers 14 3 6 Sewer Gas Ventilation— 3,091 5 7 Destructor Lamp 20 0 0 Piping 70 0 0 Gas Supply 39 19 0 Norfolk Buildings— 129 19 0 Law Writing and Engrossing 0 12 0 322 4 7 Rent Agents' Charges 10 10 0 ' 11 2 0 10 Debt— 3,232 6 7 Repayment of Mortgage Debt 899 0 0 Interest on do. do. 536 8 0 f 1,435 8 0 9 1,296 11 0 4,667 14 7 4,953 7 7 (Balance—£3,656 16s. 7d.) Amount carried forward £ 6,705 16 9 Amount carried forward £ 5,851 19 3 335 SEWERS RATE ACCOUNTS (CONTINUED), FR0M 25th March, 1897, to 25th March, 1898. To RECEIPTS— £ s. d. By PAYMENTS— £ s. d. Amount brought forward 6,705 16 9 Amount brought forward £ 5,851 19 3 Public Health Committee's Accounts. MEDICAL OFFICERS DEPARTMENT. Public Health Committee's Accounts. MEDICAL OFFICER'S DEPARTMENT. Proportion of Salaries— Proportion of Salaries ot Sanitary Omcors transferred by London County Council from Exchequer Contribution Account, in substitution for local grants [payable under the Local Government Act, 18HH, Section 24 (2c)], one year to 29th September, 1897 (fo. 324) 336 14 7 13 Medical Officer of Health 250 0 0 Inspectors and Clerks 427 15 3 677 10 5 Combined Drainage Works—Expenses of Owners at— Cavendish Street (Nos. 44, 46) 35 0 0 Harman Street (Nos. 30, 32) 6 0 0 New North Road (No. 41) 3 5 6 Shrubland Road (No. 39) 20 0 0 Wimbourne Street (No. 4) 14 7 1 78 12 7 Caution Plates 1 10 0 757 17 10 6 PUBLIC URINALS. PUBLIC URINALS. Annual Contribution towards maintenance of Urinal, Shepherdess Walk, ex Vestry of St. Luke, Middlesex 16 0 0 -5 Wages 167 15 2 Do., Cleaning Urinals 69 9 7 Repairs to Urinals 28 6 4 Rubber Hose and Fittings 5 3 9 Plumbers' work 23 11 4 Painting Urinals 62 5 0 Oil, Pamt, and Varnish 5 2 11 Brooms, Brushes and Mops 2 11 6 Acknowledgments for privilege to erect urinals 0 13 6 Electricity 4 0 0 Water 456 15 4 818 14 5 5 KIOSK CONVENIENCE. (Cloned 29th Octobcr, 1897). KIOSK CONVENIENCE. (Closed 29th October, 1897). Use of Lavatory 7 4 8 Attendant s wages 60 0 0 Sanitary Paper 1 13 4 Convenience Fees 138 15 9 Sundries 0 8 3 145 19 8 Gas 7 6 4 Advertising on structure, to 5tli September, 1897 13 6 8 Water 21 17 6 Damage to structure 0 2 6 159 8 10 \ 91 5 5 5 FLUSHING COURTS AND GULLIES. Wages of men, flushing courts and gullies 73 7 0 Repairing Hose Reel 5 17 6 Do. Leather Hose 17 11 0 Water 183 15 0 280 10 6 6 Amounts carried forward £512 3 5 6,705 16 9 Amounts carried forward £1,948 8 2 5,851 19 3 336 SEWERS RATE ACCOUNTS (Continued), from 25th March, 1897, to 25th March, 1898. To RECEIPTS— £ s. d. By paymentsê— £ s. d. Amounts brought forward £512 3 5 6,705 16 9 By PAYMENTS— Amounts brought forward £ 1 ,948 8 2 5,851 19 3 Public Health Committee s Accounts. (continued.) Public Health Committee's Accounts. (continued.) HIGH STREET UNDERGROUND CONVENIENCE (No. 1.) [Opened 21st October, 1895.) HIGH STREET UNDERGROUND CONVENIENCE (No 1). [Opened 21st October, 1895.) Gentlemen's Lavatory— Attendants' Wages 290 1 0 Use of Lavatory 17 5 1½ Sanitary Paper 3 6 8 Convenience Fees 399 9 7 2 15 0 346 14 8½ Brushes and Sundries 2 0 11 Ladies' Lavatory— Mats and Squeegees 3 1 8 Use of Lavatory 5 11 3 Chimneys and Lamp Mantles 2 8 0 Convenience Fees 288 1 0 Wiring and Fitting Work 19 13 9 Urinette Fees 2 15 9 Attendants' Uniform Clothing 12 10 0 291 8 0 Female Costumes 4 0 0 638 2 8½ Tickets 3 12 11 OLD STREET UNDERGROUND CONVENIENCE. Royalty on Box Punches 6 0 0 Gas 17 11 4 GENTLEMEN'S LAVATORY— Electricity 9 1 6 Use of Lavatory 13 2 0 Debt— 376 2 9 5 Convenience Fees 285 1 6 Repayment of Mortgage Debt. 64 0 0 290 3 6 Interest on do. do. 56 0 10 Ladies Lavatory— 120 0 10 9 use oi uavaiory 2 17 8 496 3 7 Convenience Fees 127 13 1 OLD STREET UNDERGROUND CONVENIENCE. (Ovened 19tli October. 1896.) Urinette Fees 2 8 4½ 132 19 1½ Attendants' Wages 289 19 0 431 2 7½ Sanitary Paper 7 5 10 HIGH STREET UNDERGROUND CONVENIENCE (No. 2) (Opened 10th March, 1898.) Towelling 2 13 0 Brushes, Combs, Soaps, &c. 2 5 3 . Gentlemen's Lavatory— Indiarubber Mats 2 8 8 Use of Lavatory 0 18 3 Wiring and Fitting Work 19 13 9 • Convenience Fees 12 18 5 Shades and Lamp Mantles 1 17 11 13 16 8 Attendants' Uniform Clothing 5 0 0 Ladies' Lavatory— Female Costumes 2 0 0 U se of Lavatory 0 2 4½ Tickets 3 12 11 Convenience Fees 8 11 1 Royalty on Box Punches 6 0 0 Urinette Fees 0 3 1½ Gas 15 8 10 8 16 7 Electricity 10 15 10 22 3 3 Water 54 4 6 NEW NORTH ROAD UNDERGROUND CONVENIENCE. (Opened 10th March, 1898.) Debt— 423 5 6 5 Repayment of Mortgage Debt 84 0 0 Gentlemen s Lavatoky— Interest on do. do. 74 11 6 Use ot Lavatory 0 2 4½ 158 11 6 9 Convenience Fees 3 11 1 581 17 0 \ 3 13 5½ HIGH STREET UNDERGROUND CONVENIENCE (No. 2). (Ovened 10th March, 1898). Ladies' Lavatory— Use of Lavatory 0 0 6 Attendants' Wages 12 0 0 Convenience Fees 2 0 9 0 5 8 Urinette Fees 12 5 8 5 2 12 6½ NEW NORTH ROAD UNDERGROUND CONVENIENCE. (Ovened 10th March, 1898). 6 6 0 Attendans' Wages 12 0 0 [Balance—£ 1,440 9s. 5d.) 1,610 8 0 Soap 0 3 0 —— 8,316 4 9 12 3 0 5 Excess oe Payments over Receipts (fo. 337) 586 11 11 3,050 17 5 £ 8,902 16 8 £ 8,902 16 8 337 SEWERS HAIR ACCOUNT— Income and Expenditure from 25th March, 1897, to 25th March, 1898. source. Fo. RECEIPTS. ASSETS Accured but not received income Application. Fo. PAYMENTS. LIABILITIES Incurred but not Paid. 25 March, 1897. 25 March, 1898. EXPENDITURE from 25 March,'97, to 25 March,'98. 25 March, 1897. 25 March, 1898 from 25 March '97, to 25 March, £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. Finance Committee's Accounts. ???nance Committee's Accounts. Sewers Rate 333 5,409 5 9 0 7 1 0 3 5 5,409 2 1 Sewers Rate 333 0 13 1 0 2 2 0 10 11 5,409 2 1 Vestry Clerk's Department 338 479 17 5 479 17 5 Works Committee's Accounts. Accountant's do 333 418 1 2 418 1 2 808 9 6 Works Committee's Accounts. Surveyou's Department 334 0 10 6 ...... ...... 0 10 6 Surveyor's Department 334 285 13 0 ...... ...... 285 13 0 Sewerage and Drainage Works 334 1,290 0 6 152 6 0 7 15 0 1,151 9 6 1,152 0 0 Sewerage and Drainage Works 384 4,667 14 7 654 10 6 1072 3 10 5,085 7 11 public Health Committee's Accounts. 5,371 0 11 Public Health Committee's Accounts. Medical Officer's Department. 335 336 14 7 158 5 0 167 4 3 345 13 10 Medical Officer's Departmt 335 757 17 10 ..... 31 3 7 789 l 5 Public Urinals 335 16 0 0 15 13 10 15 13 10 16 0 0 Public Urinals 335 818 14 5 111 14 11 123 9 8 830 9 2 Kiosk Convenience 885 159 8 10 ...... ...... 159 8 10 Kiosk Convenience 335 91 5 5 12 4 2 0 13 4 79 14 7 High Street Underground Convenience (No. 1) 336 638 2 8½ ...... ...... 638 2 8½ Flushing Courts & Gullies 335 280 10 6 ...... ...... 280 10 6 High Street Underground Convenience (No. 1) 830 496 3 7 79 5 7 75 12 11 492 10 11 Old Street do. 386 131 2 7½ ...... ...... 431 2 7½ High btreet (No. 2) do. 336 22 13 3 ...... • • • • • 22 13 3 Old Street do 336 581 17 0 65 5 5 73 13 1 590 4 8 New .North Road do 336 6 0 0 ...... ...... 6 6 0 High Street do. (No. 2) 336 12 5 8 ...... 51 9 8 63 15 4 1,619 7 3 New North Road do 386 12 3 0 ...... 44 6 3 56 9 3 326 11 11 190 16 6 3,182 15 10 923 2 9 1472 12 4 190 16 6 923 2 9 336 8,310 4 9 135 15 5 8,180 9 4 336 8,902 16 8 549 9 7 9,452 6 3 BALANCE— 25th Mar., 1897. In hands of Treasurer 15 13 7 Add— BALANCE— 25th Mar., 1898. Due to Treasurer 5 70 18 4 338 Excess of Payments over Receipts 330 586 11 11 Expenditure in excess ok Income carried to Balance Sheet 338 ...... ...... ...... 1,271 16 11 £ 8,902 16 8 £ 9,452 6 3 £ 8,902 16 8 £ 9,452 6 3 338 SEWERS RATE ACCOUNT— BALANCE SHEET, 25th March, 1898. 338 LIABILITIES. Fo. £ s. d. £ s. d. ASSETS. Fo. £ s. d. £ s. d. capital account. capital account. To Loan Accounts:—Balances. By Construction of New Sewers. Out op Loans. Out of Rates and Revenue Total. Construction of New Sewers in Hoxton District. 5,297 0 0 372 Expenditure to 25thMarch, 1898— £ s d. &J s. d. £ s. d. Do. do. Haggerston Distriet 25,295 0 0 372 Hoxton District 5,500 8 0 372 2,09 8 s 2 7,058 10 8 Underground Sanitary Conveniences. 30,595 0 0 Haggerston District 18,979 14 7 372 4,55 0 4 8 23,529 19 3 High Street (No. 1) 1,836 0 0 373 24,540 3 1 372 0,04 3 12 10 31,188 15 11 Do. (No. 2) 2,450 0 0 373 New North Road 1,650 0 0 373 .31 IPft 15 11 Old Street 2,416 0 0 373 By underground sanitary conveniences. Expenditure to 25th March, 1898— 8,352 0 0 38,944 0 0 High Street, No. 1 1,900 u 'J ard ii / ti ID To revenue Account. Rena,vment. of Debt— Do. No. 2 1,720 7 11 373 To 25th March 1897 3,629 0 0 New North Road 1,200 13 3 373 This year 1,047 0 0 333 Old Street 2,208 0 11 373 4,676 0 0 Contributions and Receipts from other sources 630 1 6 7 101 9, 1 11 7 f 10 7,218 8 11 Rate Account 3,977 4 10 372 38,407 4 10 4,607 18 4 Less— By Cash Balances. Cash Balacnce transgerred to General Rate Account 512 13 2 373 In hands of Treasurer— 4,095 5 2 Construction of New Sewers 372 7,90 9 2 5 Balance of assets over liabilities, on Capital Account 8,771 5 2 Ilndfircrnnnrl Sanitary Conveniences 373 1 39 ft 17 11 9,308 0 4 47,715 5 2 47,715 5 2 / REVENUE ACCOUNT. REVENUE ACCOUNT To Sundry Creditors, for Balances due to them 337 1,472 12 4 By Sundry Debtors, for Balances owing by them 190 13 1 To Cash Balance. By severs Rate—Balance 0 3 5 Due to Treasurer 337 570 18 4 337 190 16 6 Deficit—25th March, 1897 580 17 3 \ Add— Expenditure in excess of Income this year 1,271 16 11 337 DEFICIT—25th March. 1898 1,852 14 2 2,043 10 8 2,043 10 8 william george smith, Treasurer, London and Midland Bank, Limited (Shoreditch Branch). £ 9,758 15 10 Ernst a. r. adams, Accountant. £ 49,758 15 10 TECHNICAL INSTRUCTION FUND. gg1 341 TECHNICAL INSTRUCTION FUND ACCOUNTS, from 25TH March, 1897, to 25th March, 1898. To receipts— £ s. d. By payments— £ s. d. Technical Instruction Committee s Accounts. Technical Instruction Committees Accounts. \ EQUIPMENT. Expenditure of permanent value, this year— Tools 23 8 8 Lathe 9 0 0 Technical Books 18 0 7 50 9 3 ORGANIZATION CHARGES ORGANIZATION CHARGES. Materials— materials— 8 11 6 Sheet Lead and Solder 22 5 0 Timber 22 18 7 Casts and Panels 3 17 0 Sectional Paper 3 8 10 Easels 1 2 6 Baize 4 15 10 58 7 9 FEES. FEES. Instructors' Fees— Student's Fees— Woodwork Classes— wooaworK Classes— 8 2 6 Drawing, and Design 71 2 6 Drawing, Design, and Carving 8 7 6 Wood Carving 47 10 0 Cabinet Making and Drawing 8 7 6 • Practical Cabinet Making 54 5 0 Manual Instruction and Drawing 2 7 0 Manual Training in Woodwork 27 10 0 Teachers Classes in Woodwork 12 15 0 31 19 6 Carpentry and Joinery 2 0 0 202 7 6 Drawing in Light and Shade, and Clay Modelling ...... Practical Plumbing 43 0 0 Theoretical Plumbing and Drawing 19 10 0 Electrical Fitting, Drawing, and Theory 27 5 0 Plumbing, Drawing and Theory 7 5 9 Dressmaking 32 12 6 Electrical littmg, Drawing, and Theory 2 7 0 Workshop Mensuration and Mechanics 21 0 0 Workshop Mensuration and Mechanics 0 7 6 Modelling 23 0 0 Dressmaking 4 4 6 166 7 6 45 17 3 368 15 0 Amount carried forward £ 54 8 9 Amount carried forward £ % 477 12 0 342 TECHNICAL INSTRUCTION FUND ACCOUNTS (Continued), from 25th March, 1897, to 25th March, 1898. 342 To RECEIPTS— £ s. d. Bv PAYMENTS— £ s. d. Amount brought forward £ 54 8 9 Amount brought forward £ 477 12 0 Technical Instruction Committees Accounts. (continued). Technical Instruction Committee-s Accounts. (continued.) MAINTENANCE ACCOUNT. MAINTENANCE ACCOUNT. Grant in aid of Maintenance from Technical Education Board of London County Council— Salary of Superintendent (one year)5 221 7 0 Minuting work 5 0 0 Session, 1896-97(balancce) 500 0 0 Keeping Account Books 5 0 0 Do. 1897-98 (on account) 600 0 0 1,100 Wages of Caretaker 77 9 0 Leasehold Rent 96 0 10 Rent of New Tabernacle for Dressmaking Class 31 0 0 Parochial Rates 30 5 6 Fire Insurance 4 2 0 Income Tax 6 16 6 Land Tax 1 9 9 Gas 23 7 5 Electricity Supply 1 15 6 Water Rents 4 5 4 Guarantee premium 0 8 6 Winding and attention to Clocks 0 10 6 Coal 2 13 0 Wiring and Fitting Work 8 13 8 Gas Fittings 5 3 1 Fixing Rails 1 16 8 Painters' and Writers' Work 11 15 10 Stationery and Printing 3 5 0 • Law Engrossing and Writing 0 13 7 1,100 0 0 Petty Disbursements 25 13 0 568 11 1 MISCELLANEOUS RECEIPTS. MISCELLANEOUS EXPENSES. Advertising on Street Lamp Columns to 1.1th September, 1897 (one year) 200 0 0 Tax on Rent received from advertisements 6 13 4 Afffincv Commission on Fire Eisks 0 3 4 PRIZE FUND. 200 3 4 PRIZE FUND. Grants in aid, from the City and Guilds of London Institute, on results of Technological Examinations, 1897 (Plumber's Class) 17 0 0 Marquenterie Panel 2 0 0 Sums paid in Cash 4 0 0 6 0 0 (Balance—£312 15s. 8d.) 1,058 16 5 312 15 8 £ 1,371 12 1 £ 1,371 12 1 343 TECHNICAL INSTRUCTION FUND—Income and Expenditure from 25th March, 1897, to 25th March, 1898. Source. Fo. RECEIPTS. ASSETS Accrued but not Received income from 25 Mar., '97, Application. Fo. PAYMENTS. LIABILITIES Incurred but not Paid. EXPENDITURE from 25 Mar., '97, 25 Mar., 1897 25 Mar., 1898. to 25 Mar., '98. 25 Mar., 1897 .25 Mar., 1898. to 25 Mar., '98. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. Equipment ... ...... 25 17 4 75 18 2 50 0 10 341 50 9 3 7 7 0 6 18 7 50 0 10 Organization Charges 341 8 11 6 ...... ...... 8 11 6 Organization Charges 341 58 7 9 0 18 0 8 14 7 66 4 4 Fees 341 45 17 3 ...... 18 12 0 64 9 3. 341 368 15 0 24 18 3 29 6 4 572 19 2 Maubtebance Account 342 1,100 0 0 300 0 0 200 0 0 1,000 0 0 Maintenance Account 342 568 11 1 Miscellaneous Receipts 342 200 3 4 100 0 0 100 0 0 200 3 4 Miscellaneous Expenses 342 6 13 4 ...... ...... 6 13 4 Prize fund 342 17 0 0 ...... ...... 17 0 0 342 6 0 0 ...... ...... 6 0 0 425 17 4 394 10 2 61 15 9 79 9 6 394 10 2 — ' 61 15 9 342 1,371 12 1 31 7 2 1,340 4 11 342 1,058 16 5 17 13 9 1,076 10 2 BALANCES—25th March, 1898— In hands of Treasurer fc 04 17 2 • Do. Supt 10 0 0 Less— 14 17 2 343 BALANCES—25th March, 1897— In hands of Treasurer 292 1 6 Do. Supt 10 0 0 302 1 6 Excess op Receipts over payments 342 312 15 8 Incobie in excess op Expenditure, carried to Balance Sheet 343 ...... ...... ...... 263 14 9 £ 1,371 15 1 f 1,340 4 11 £ 1,371 12 1 - . 1,340 4 11 TECHNICAL INSTRUCTION FUND— j BALANCE SHEET, 25TH March, 1898. LIABILITIES. Fo. £ s. d. £ s. d. ASSETS. Fo. £ s. d. £ s. d. REVENUE ACCOUNT. REVENUE ACCOUNT. To Sundry Creditors, for Balances due to them 343 79 9 6 By Technical Educational Board— For Equipment 75 18 2 For Grant in aid of Maintenance 200 0 0 Surplus—25tli March, 1897 666 3 1 275 18 2 Add— By Advertising on Lamps 100 0 0 Income in excess of Expenditure this year 263 14 9 343 By Fees 18 12 0 343 394 10 2 By Cash Balances, 25th March, 1898— SURPLUS—25th March, 1898 ... 929 17 10 In hands of Treasurer 604 17 2 343 Do. Superintendent 10 0 0 343 1,009 7 4 614 17 2 . 1,009 7 4 WILLIAM GEORGE SMITH, Treasurer, London and Midland Bank, Limited (Shoreditch Branch). £1,009 7 4 =— § ERNST A. R. ADAMS, Accountant to the Schools. £ 1,009 7 4 ELECTRICITY WORKS ACCOUNTS From 25th MARCH, 1897, to 25th MARCH, 1898. [Authorised by Board of Trades Provisional Order and Electric Lighting Orders Confirmation (No. 6) Act, 1892, 55 and 5G Vict., cli. ccxx. 27th June, 1892.] 346 ELECTRICITY WORKS ACCOUNTS, from 25th March, 1897, to 25th March, 1898. To RECEIPTS— £ s. d. By PAYMENTS- £ s. d. CAPITAL ACCUUJNT. LOANS. CAPITAL ACCOUNT. †Mortgages. Expenditure out of Loans to 25th March, 1897 49,071 2 6 Loans to 25th March, 1898 71,032 0 0 Do. out of Loans this year, viz.:— Less—raid off to 25th March, 1897 203 0 4 LANDS. Do. this year 831 18 10 1.034 10 9 69,997 0 10 Description. Freehold. Leasehold. Total. REVENUE ACCOUNT. No. 19. Coronet Street £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. Debt repaid to 25th March, 1897 . 203 0 4 (Christian Institute). Do. this year (fo. 351) 831 18 0 Purchase of Land 3,750 0 0 3,750 0 0 1,034 19 2 Interest on Purchase Money 48 13 4 48 13 4 SURPLUS LANDS. Counsel's Fees 3 13 0 3 13 0 Vendor's Solicitor's Costs 100 14 11 100 14 11 Receipts to 25th March, 1897 107 0 0 Stamp Duty 19 15 0 19 15 0 Engrossing & Law-writing 7 4 1 7 4 1 3,930 0 4 3,930 0 4 No 10, Reeves Place (Sub-Station). Purchase of Land 335 0 0 335 0 0 Interest on Purchase Money 3 12 10 3 12 10 Vestry's Solicitor's Costs 15 0 0 15 0 0 353 12 10 353 12 10 †Total Capital Expenditure to 25th Mauch, 1898. No. 2, Evelyn Street (Sub- Station) Sanctions. — Authorised to be Raised. Unexercised Borrowod. Actual Outlay. Purchase of Land 300 0 0 300 0 0 Interest on Purchase Money 1 17 6 1 17 6 £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. 71032 0 0 71032 0 0 87802 8 7 Vendor's Solicitor s Costs 5 0 0 5 0 0 (sco fo. 384). (sco fo. 384). (see fo. 354). Stamp Duty on Underlease 2 8 6 2 8 6 Fire Insurance 0 1 6 0 1 6 Parochial Rates 0 14 10 0 14 10 310 2 4 310 2 4 Total 4,283 13 2 310 2 4 4,593 15 6 Lands 4,085 0 0 300 0 0 4,385 0 0 4,385 0 0 Legal Expenses 198 13 2 10 2 4 208 15 6 208 15 6 4,283 13 2 310 2 4 4,593 15 6 Amounts carried forward £107 0 0 71,032 0 0 Amount carried forward £ 53,664 18 0 347 ELECTRICITY WORKS ACCOUNTS (Continued), from 25th March, 1897, to 25th March, 1898. To RECEIPTS— £ s. d. By PAYMENTS— £ s. d. Amounts Brougnt forward £107 0 0 71,032 0 0 Amount brought forward £ 53.664 18 0 CAPITAL ACCOUNT. (continued.) CAPITAL ACCOUNT. (continued). BUILDINGS. Payments under Contracts— Stores Room 210 12 6 Erection of Chimney Shaft 40 0 0 Do. Buildings 859 18 10 Fitting un and Lighting of Central Station 353 0 9 Transformer Sub-Stations— Evelyn Street 13V 10 8 Great Eastern Street 413 4 6 Reeves Place 52 9 1 603 4 3 2066 16 4 Completing Building work by own workmen— Situation. Wages. Materials. Total. Central Station 61 18 0 17 12 1 72 10 1 Evelyn Street 84 6 11 20 4 10 4 11 4 Reeves Place 95 15 2 32 16 11 12b 12 1 £ 242 0 1 70 13 5 312 13 6 010 1 q a Wiring, &c., Sub-Stations 30 0 0 Casing old Walls with Brickwork 87 10 0 Distempering Wall and Ceiling 14 0 0 Cutting and Gilding Granite Tablet 6 8 0 Inscribing ditto 10 0 0 Polishing Pedestals 2 11 0 Bricks 2 0 6 Slates 0 9 3 Writers Work 2 10 0 Deal Fittings for Stores 19 0 0 Window Shutters in Test Room 20 18 4 Clerk of Works' Disbursements 0 12 5 Do. Wages in lieu of holiday 6 6 0 2581 15 4 MACHINERY. Iron work 192 5 6 Boilers and Accossories 1,540 0 0 Pumps, Pipe Mains, Valves and Cast-Iron work 3.150 0 0 Iron Castings 0 11 4 Galvanised Wire Work 3 12 0 Oil Cisterns and Stands 11 14 0 4,898 2 10 ACCUMULATORS. Accumulator Stands and Accessories at generating and distributing station 373 3 9 Amounts carried forward £107 0 0 71,032 0 0 0 Amount carried forward £ 61,517 19 348 ELECTRICITY WORKS ACCOUNTS (Continukd), fbom 25th March, 1807, to 25th March, 1898. To RECEIPTS- £ s. d. By PAYMENTS— £ s. d. Amounts brought forward £107 0 0 71,032 0 0 Amount brought forward £ 61,517 19 11 CAPITAL ACCOUNT (continued.) CAPITAL ACCOUNT (continued). MAINS. MAINS. Receipts to 25th March, 1897 18 5 3 Mains, Cables, and Junction Boxes 4,750 0 0 Sale of Cable 2 6 0 Conduits, Drawing-in and House Connection Boxes 3,389 15 5 Deposit for Connection to Consumers Premises 10 0 0 Opening and making good Trenches by own workmen— Materials 1,679 3 10 12 6 0 Wages 4,288 11 4 30 11 3 5,967 15 2 Less—Charged in accounts to 25th March, 1897 5.894 5 10 73 9 4 Compensation for Damage to Water Pipes 3 1 l4 4 Tracing Cloth and Paper 4 2 5 Drain Rods 7 6 3 Trench Work (fo. 317) 4 18 11 Malacca Cane 3 1 .7 0 Waterproof Cover 10 9 0 Iron Tubing and Fittings 42 1 8 Cable 1 3 4 Fuse Boxes 7 5 1 0 Insulators and Covers 3 1 4 stores. Accumulator Box 2 7 3 Disconnecting Box Gland 1 1 9 1 £ s. d. Jointers Tent 5 0 0 Cable, Meters, and other Capital Stores 2,700 17 5 Rubber Strip and Tape 2 4 6 Value of Cable, brought into account 40 0 0 Ironmongery 4 1 5 9 2800 17 5 Gun Metal Castings 1 8 4 Materials used on Works— Wages— Capital Account 2035 12 5 Plant arid Mains 46 12 0 Dust Destructor, Capital Account 20 16 0 TTnnsp. Sp.vvif.p.s 171 1 3 2,056 8 5 217 1 3 3 Capital Stores on hand 25th March, 1898 (at not cost value) valued by Chief Electrical Engineer at £144 9 0 Connections to Consumer's premises— Work done under Contract bu u i Disconnecting Boxes 21 15 0 Materials and Labour by own workmen 63 8 10 145 4 5 8,681 1 7 5 Deduct:—Waees during vear transferred (fo. 317) 148 6 11 8,533 10 6 TRANSFORMERS AND MOTORS. Motor Generator, and Transformers 2,450 0 3 Motor Transformers 1300 0 0 3,750 0 0 METERS. Meters 538 3 3 Ferranti Meters 390 0 0 928 3 3 Amounts carried forward £ !137 11 3 71,032 0 0 Amount carried forward £ ■ ' 74,729 13 8 HH 349 ELECTRICITY WORKS ACCOUNTS (Continued), from 25th March, 1897, to 25th March, 1898. To RECEIPTS— £ s. d. By PAYMENTS— £ S. d. Amounts brought torward £137 11 3 71,032 0 0 Amount brought forward £ 74,729 13 8 CAPITAL ACCOUNT. (continued.) CAPITAL ACCOUNT. (continued.) ELECTRICAL INSTRUMENTS. Generator, Switchboard, &c 12000 0 0 Testing Apparatus 18 0 0 Pressure Gauge 2 2 0 Milli-Voltmeter 12 3 9 Dial Voltmeter 15 12 0 Watertight Switches 5 17 6 Electrical Fittings 15 7 11 12,069 3 / 2 PUBLIC LAMPS. PUBLIC LAMPS. Receipts to 25th March, 1897 9 17 0 Arc and Incandescent Lamp Columns 63 11 6 Ornamental Brackets 7 18 5 incidfntal receipts Incandescent Lamps 7 2 6 78 12 5 INCIDENTAL EXPENSES. Receipts to 25th March 1897 85 4 0 Consulting Engineer's Fees (further on account) 500 0 0 232 12 3 7 8 6 Extension Ladders 5 14 3 71264 12 3 Repairing Weighing Machine 0 17 0 513 19 9 FURNITURE AND FITTINGS. Oak Desks 30 6 6 Desk and Sea 4 18 0 INOTE.—ANALYSIS OF PAYMENTS UNDER UONTRACTS DURING YEAR. Stand and Counter 32 0 0 No. Contractor. Nature of Work. Sum Paid. Chairs 18 0 6 Book Case 13 10 0 .£ S. d. Tables 27 10 0 1 Manlove, Alliott & Co., Ltd. Boilers and Accessories 1,540 0 0 Shelving 7 16 6 1 (sec.A) Do. do. Ironwork 192 5 6 2 Do. do. Chimnev Shaft 40 0 0 Cupboards 41 13 0 3 Atherton & Dolman Buildings 859 18 10 Linoleum 21 3 6 4 (sec.A) Electric Construction Co., Ltd. Generator, Switchboards,&c. 12,000 0 0 Stair Treads 10 19 5 4 (sec.B) Thames Iron Works Co., Ltd. Pumps, Pipe Wains & Valves 3,150 0 0 India-Rubber Mats 45 16 6 4 (sec.b) Electric Construction Co., Ltd. Motor Generator and Transformers 2,450 0 0 Fixing Telephone Apparatus 8 9 10 4 (sec.D) Pritchetts & Gold Accumulators 373 3 9 Clocks 6 11 0 5 (sec.A) British Insulated Wire Co.,Ltd. Mains and Conduits 4,750 0 0 Scales 0 10 0 5 (sec.B) W. T. Glover & Co., Limited Do. do. 3,389 15 5 269 4 9 G Chas. A. Hemingway Pitting up Supply Station 353 0 9 GENERAL CHARGES. 7 (sec A) Walter Macfarlane & Co. Arc & Incandescent Lamp Columns 4 12 6 Salaries and Wages— 8 Atherton & Dolman Transformer Sub-station, Great Eastern Street 413 4 6 Chief Electrical Engineer, to 24th June, 1897 63 3 9 9 Do. do. Stores room, Central station 210 12 6 Clerk of Works to 24th September 1897 30 5 0 10 Do. do. Sub-station, Evelyn Street 137 10 8 Caretaker, to 9th July, 1897 20 12 6 ii {sec.A) Venner & Siller Meters boo o 3 114 1 3 11 (sec.B) 12 b. Z. de Ferranti, Limited Atherton & Dolman Do. Transformer Sub-station, Reeves Place 390 52 0 9 0 1 Advertising 3 14 6 Fire Insurance 4 9 4 14 Electric Construction Co., Ltd. Motor Transformers 1,300 0 0 Lithographing Specifications 18 8 9 Includei 1 in Accounts to 25th March, 1898 £32,144 16 9 Date Stamps 1 1 0 141 14 10 BALANCE—25th March, 1898— Due to Treasurer (fo. 354) 16,537 16 4 £ 87,802 8 7 Total Payments to 25th March 1898 87,802 8 7 hhI 350 ELECTRICITY WORKS ACCOUNTS (Continued), fhom 25th March, 1897, to 25th March, 1898. To RECEIPTS- £ s d. By PAYMENTS- £ s. d. REVENUE ACCOUNT. (Works opened 28tli June, 1897.) REVENUE ACCOUNT. (Works opened 28th June, 1897.) SALE OF CURRENT. GENERATION OF ELECTRICITY. Meter Supply— Materials supplied out of Stores (fo. 356)— Charge. Coal (315 tons) A18 19 8 Carbons, &c 91 1 6 Quarter ended. Private Lighting. Public Lighting. Total. Written off. (Allowances) Collectabkle Arrears and Charges accrued at 25th March, 1898. Net Cash Collected. Oil, Waste, &c 56 0 0 Incandescent Lamps 21 0 0 Streets. Other Departments Engine Room Stores and Sundries 41 15 5 488 16 7 Water (1,046,000 gallons) 37 7 11 1897. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. June '24th .... .... .... .... .... .... .... .... .... 5260 4 6 Sept. '29th 183 19 2 294 10 0 71 5 0 549 14 2 .... .... 477 18 8 Wages at Generating Stations 774 3 3 Dec. 25th 1,240 8 6 695 19 2 231 12 4 2,168 0 0 26 4 0 .... 2,047 7 6 Repairs and Maintenance of Engine and Boiiers. 1898. Mar. '25th 2,330 5 2 692 13 9 387 19 10 3,410 18 9 .... 3,144 5 3 432 17 6 Work done by Contractors— 3.754 12 10 1.683 2 11 690 17 2 6,128 12 11 26 4 0 3,144 5 3 2958 3 8 Men's time running Engines 206 14 7 Cylinder Oil 8 11 6 Men's Expenses 2 18 9 218 4 10 Under Contracts— Hire of Tarpaulins 1 3 0 Sale of Current under Contract 15 10 0 Wages 57 14 6 [ 277 2 4 • 2,973 13 8 - 1,577 10 1 GENERATION OF ELECTRICITY. DISTRIBUTION OF ELECTRICITY. Disbursements by Clerk of Works 2 9 9 Sale of Globes 1 2 0 MISCELLANEOUS RECEIPTS. Sale of Empty Cases 0 3 0 Testing Installation 0 15 0 Charging Motor Cars 0 13 2 Refund of Watchmen's Wages 0 1 9 RENTS, RATES, AND TAXES. RENTS, RATES, AND TAXES. 9 2 11 Sub-Stations— Rents 136 10 0 Ground Rent 2 10 9 Parochial Rates 8 3 1 Income Tax 1 0 7 Water 0 15 9 12 10 2 Hoxton Square Enclosure Rate, under 17 Geo. III, chap. 60 0 18 4 Income Tax on Rents 5 8 10 18 17 4 MANAGEMENT EXPENSES MANAGEMENT EXPENSES. Sale of Copy of Provisional Order 0 1 6 Salary of Chief Electrical Engineer (from 25th June 1897) 187 10 0 Less—Charged to Dust Destructor, Maintenance Account (f0. 323). 83 6 8 104 3 4 Wages of Clerks and Storekeeper 134 8 4 Amount carried forward £ 3,120 10 1 Amounts carried forward £ 238 11 8 1,598 17 2 351 ELECTRICITY WORKS ACCOUNTS (Continued), from 25th March, 1897, to 25th March, 1898. To RECEIPTS— £ s. d. By PAYMENTS— £ s. d. Amount brought forward £ 3,120 10 1 Amounts brought forward £ 238 11 8 1,598 17 2 REVENUE ACCOUNT. (continued.) REVENUE ACCOUNT. (continued.) MANAGEMENT EXPENSES. (CONTINUED.) Disbursements by Chief Electrical Engineer 58 12 9 t Stationery 41 10 1 Printing 23 13 6 Advertising 5 10 6 Copying Press and Apparatus 5 10 0 do. Materials 1 17 9 Omnibus Hire 1 10 0 Law Engrossing and Writing 8 6 5 Stamp Duty 0 10 6 Candidates' Travelling Expenses 11 14 4 • Guarantee Premiums 0 10 6 Meter-reader's Cap 0 10 6 Subscription to Municipal Electrical Association 1 1 0 Subscription for telephonic communication 12 15 0 412 4 6 SPECIAL CHARGES Employer's Liability Assurance 2 5 0 Jbire Insurances for— Premises of Christian Institute 2 16 3 Engines, Dynamo House, Works and Plant 73 3 6 Boilers 36 0 0 Steam Pipes 8 5 0 Thermal Storage Vessel 6 0 0 ' 126 4 9 128 9 9 WIRING AND FITTING WORK WIRING AND FITTING WORK. Arrears at 25th March, 1897 235 3 3 Salaries— Superintendence 107 L0 0 Work done at oonsumers premises— Clerks 45 5 0 Materials 1,558 2 1 152 15 0 Wages 679 1 0 Wages of Wirers 137 7 7 Supervision 216 0 1 Dibursements 7 16 3 2,453 3 2 2688 6 5 1297 18 10 Less Written off (allowances) 12 17 8 Materials supplied out of Stores (fo 356) 334 1 10 Outstanding at 25th March, 1898 784 17 9 3,632 0 8 797 15 5 CONTRACTORS' DEPOSIT ACCOUNT. 1,890 11 0 CONTRATORS DEPOSIT ACCOUNT Deposits on specifications for work under contract 51 9 0 Return of Deposits in respect of tenders 42 0 0 DEFICIT ACCOUNT. REPAYMENT OF DEBT. Transferred from General Rate Account (fo. 322) and charged upon Rates during Year ended 25th March 1898 Instalments of Principal of Mortgage Loans outstanding (fo. 346) 831 18 10 Cash Deficit for Year to 25th March, 1896 382 9 9 INTEREST ON DEBT. do. do. 25th March, 1897 872 18 5 1,255 8 2 Interest on Balances of Mortgage Loans outstanding 2022 17 7 Tnr.nme Tax. under Schedule D. to 25th March. 1898 69 14 10 6,317 18 3 2,092 12 5 Excess of Paymenrs over Receipts (fo 353) 2,420 5 1 £ 8,738 3 4 £ 8,738 3 4 352 352 ELECTRICITY WORKS REVENUE ACCOUNT from 25th March, 1897, to 25th March, 1898. Source. Fo. RECEIPTS. ASSETS Accrued but not Received. INCOME from 25 Mar., '97. to 25 Mar., '98. Application. Fo. PAYMENTS. LIABILITIES Incurred but not Paid. EXPENDITURE from 25 Mar., '97, to 2.") Mar., '98. WORKING ACCOUNT. 25 March, 1997. 25 March, 1898. WORKING ACCOUNT 25 March, 1897 25 March 1898 Sale of Current— £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. Meter Supply 350 2,958 3 8 ... 3,144 5 3 6,102 8 11 Generation of Electricity 350 1577 10 1 ... 129 8 10 1706 18 11 Under Contracts 350 15 10 0 ... •• 15 10 0 Distribution of Electricity 350 2 9 9 ... ... 2 9 9 Generation of Electricity 350 1 2 0 ... • • 1 2 0 Rents Rate and Taxes 350 18 17 4 ... 0 14 6 19 11 10 Miscellaneous Receipts 350 9 2 11 ... n 9 2 11 Management Expenses 351 412 4 6 3 1 6 67 16 3 476 19 3 . Rents, Rates and Taxes 350 136 10 0 37 14 0 • • 98 16 0 Special Charges 351 128 9 9 ... ... 128 9 9 Management Expenses i 350 0 1 6 ... •• 0 1 6 Wiring and Fitting Work 351 3632 0 8 ... 16 15 0 3648 15 8 Wiring and Fitting Work 351 1,890 11 0 235 3 3 784 17 9 2440 5 6 Contractors Deposit Account 351 42 0 0 3 3 0 9 9 0 48 6 0 Do. do. Works in progress Contractors' Deposit Account 351 51 9 0 ... 1,041 15 6 1041 15 6 6 4 6 224 3 7 Sale of Stores ... ... ... ...... 1 8 0 51 9 0 5,813 12 1 217 19 i 6031 11 2 272 17 3 4,972 6 6 1 8 0 272 17 3 5,062 10 1 4,699 9 3 9,761 19 4 Balance carried down 359 ... ... ... 3,730 8 2 £ 9.761 19 4 £ 9,761 19 4 PROFIT 8c LOSS—NET REVENUE. ASSETS Accrued but not Received. INCOME from 25 Mar., '97, to 25 Mar., '98. PROFIT &. LOSS—NET REVENUE. LIABILITIES Incurred but not Paid. EXPENDITURE from 25 Mar., '97, to 25 Mar.,' 98. 25 March, 1897. 25 March, 1898. 25 March, 1897 25 March 1898 £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ d. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. Balance brought down 352 ... ... ... 3,730 8 2 Repayment of Debt 351 831 18 10 100 15 4 103 1 0 834 4 6 Deficit Account 351 1,25£ 8 2 ... ... 1,255 8 2 Interest on Debt 351 2092 12 5 196 0 1 191 19 2 2088 11 6 4985 16 4 296 15 5 295 0 2 ... ... 295 0 1 1 15 3 2,922 16 0 BALANCE transferred to Profit ai Loss—Appropriation Account, bei Income in excess of Expenditu "•ID ng re ...... ...... ...... 2063 0 4 Amounts carried forward £ 6,3117 18 3 ... ...£ 4,985 16 4 Amount carried forward £ 8738 3 4 ... ... £4985 16 4 353 353 ELECTRICITY WORKS, REVENUE ACCOUNT—Income & Expenditure from 25th March, 1897, to 25th March, 1898 (Continued). Source. Fo. RECEIPTS. income from 25 March, 189' to 25 March, 1898. j Application. Fo. PAYMENTS. EXPENDITURE from 25 March, 1897, to 25 March, 1898. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. Amounts brought forward 351 6,317 18 3 4,985 16 4 Amounts brought forward 351 8,738 3 4 4,985 16 4 BALANCES—25th March, 1898— Due to Treasurer 3,782 19 7 354 Less—In hands of Engineer 20 0 0 354 3,762 19 7 Stores— Owing 47 10 5 356 On hand 160 0 7 356 do. 279 4 11 356 486 15 11 Less— Sundry Creditors 158 17 6 356 do. do. 231 11 10 356 Brought into account 5 8 9 356 395 18 1 90 17 10 At 25th March, 1898 3,672 1 9 Deduct— BALANCES—25th March. 1897— Due to Treasurer 1 ,255 8 2 Less—In hands of Engineer 10 0 0 1,245 8 2 Less—Stores— Sundry Creditors 81 4 3 Stores on hand 74 15 9 6 8 6 1,251 16 8 Excess of Payments over Receipts 351 2,420 5 1 £8,738 3 4 4,985 16 4 £8,738 3 4 4,985 16 4 354 354 ELECTRICITY WORKS ACCOUNT— BALANCE SHEET,—25th march, 1898. LIABILITIES. Fo. £ s. d. £ s. d. ASSETS. Fo. £ s. d. £ s. d. capital account. CAPITAL ACCOUNT. To Loan Accounts:—Balances. Loans to 25th March, 1898. Repaid. Balances at 25th March, 1898. By Lands, Works, Plant, &c. To 25th March, 1897. Repaid. Total to 25th March, 1898. Mortgages— Site for Electric Lighting Station 13,817 0 0 321 10 11 346 13,495 9 1 Expenditure & Capital Outlay out of LoansFreehold Land 13,924 10 0 346 4,085 0 0 18,009 10 0 Electric Light Installation 57,215 0 0 718 8 3 316 56,501 11 9 Leasehold do. 580 0 0 346 800 0 0 880 0 0 Legal Expenses 238 14 11 346 208 15 6 447 10 5 71,032 0 0 1,034 19 2 346 69,997 0 10 69,997 0 10 Buildings 6,417 0 0 347 2,581 15 4 8,998 15 4 Machinery 8,030 0 0 347 1,898 2 10 12,928 2 10 To Cash Balance. Accumulators 200 0 0 347 373 3 9 573 3 9 Due to Treasurer 349 16,537 16 4 Mains 17,534 6 4 348 8,533 10 6 26,067 16 10 16,537 16 4 Transformers and Motors ... 348 3,750 0 0 3,750 0 0 Meters ... 348 928 3 3 928 3 3 86,534 17 2 Electrical Instruments ... 349 12,069 3 2 12.069 3 2 Public Lamps 540 12 0 349 78 12 5 619 4 5 To Revenue Account. To 25th March, 1897. This Yeas. Total to 25th March, 1898. Incidental Expenses 871 2 7 349 513 19 9 1,385 2 4 Furniture and Fittings 2 18 1 349 269 4 9 272 2 10 Repayment of Debt 203 0 4 831 18 10 346 1,034 19 2 General Charges 731 18 7 349 141 14 10 873 13 5 To Sale of Surplus Lands 107 0 0 ... 346 107 0 0 49,071 2 6 ... 38,731 6 1 87,802 8 7 To Incidental Receipts 113 6 3 12 6 0 349 125 12 3 423 6 7 844 4 10 1,267 11 5 Balance of Assets over Liabilities, on Capital Account 1,267 11 5 consumers deposit account. 87,802 8 7 CONSUMERS DEPOSIT ACCOUNT. 87,802 8 7 By Cash Balance. To Balance at credit 355 105 12 6 In hands of Treasurer 355 105 12 6 105 12 6 105 12 6 revenue account. REVENUE ACCOUNT. To Sundry Creditors, for Balances dun to them. By Sundry Debtors, for Balances owing by them 352 4,972 6 6 On Working Account 224 3 7 352 On Net Revenue Account 295 0 2 352 By Stores on hand. On Stores Account 395 18 1 353 Central Station 207 11 0 353 ... 915 1 10 Wiring and Fitting Work 279 4 11 353 To Cash Balances. 355 486 15 11 5,459 2 5 Due to Treasurer 3,782 19 7 353 Less—In hands of Chief Engineer 20 0 0 353 3,762 19 7 To Surolus. Income in excess of Expenditure this year 807 13 2 4,678 1 5 Contribution from General Rate Account 1,255 8 2 2,063 0 4 352 Less— Deficit—25th March, 1897 1,281 19 4 SURPLUS—25th March, 1898 ... 781 1 0 5,459 2 5 WILLIAM GEORGE SMITH, Treasurer, London and Midland Bank, Limited (Shoreditch Branch). £93,367 3 6 ERNST A. R. ADAMS, Accountant. £93,367 3 6 355 355 ELECTRICITY WORKS ACCOUNTS— from 25th March, 1897, to 25th March, 1898. Expenditure— £ s. d. Income— £ s. d. PROFIT AND LOSS—NET REVENUE (APPROPRIATION ACCOUNT). PROFIT AND LOSS—NET REVENUE (APPROPRIATION ACCOUNT). To Balance brought forward at 25th March, 1897, as per last published Abstract (fo. 100) 1,281 19 4 By Transfer from Net Revenue Account (fo. 352) — Income in excess of Expenditure this year 807 12 2 To Balance— Bv Contributions from General Rate Account for Cash deficits— Unappropriated at 25th March, 1898, to be carried to next Account (see Balance Sheet, fo. 354) 781 1 0 Year ended 25th March, 1896 382 9 9 do. 25th March, 1897 872 18 5 1,255 8 2 2,063 0 4 2,063 0 4 £ 2,063 0 4 To RECEIPTS- CONSUMERS DEPOSIT ACCOUNT. £ S. d. By PAYMENTS- CONSUMERS DEPOSIT ACCOUNT. £ s. d. On Supply of Current Account— Security for payment of Accounts 5 12 6 BALANCE—25th March, 1898— In hands of Treasurer (fo. 354) 105 12 6 On Wiring and Fitting Work Account— Deposit of 25 per cent. towards cost 100 0 0 105 12 6 £105 12 6 £105 12 6 †WIRING AND FITTING WORK—Summary Statement of Expenditure and Income from 11th December, 1896, to 25th March, 1898. EXPENDITURE. Year ended 25th March. Fo. Total. INCOME. Year ended 25th March. Fo. Total. 1897. 1898. 1897. 1898. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. To Salaries, Wages and Materials 255 4 1 3,648 15 8 352 3,903 19 9 By Materials and Work done at Consumers' premises 263 12 3 2,440 5 6 352 2,703 17 9 Do. do. Works in progress 1,041 15 6 352 1,041 15 6 263 12 3 3,482 1 0 3,745 13 3 255 4 1 3,648 15 8 ... 3,903 19 9 By Surplus brought forward from 1897 ... 8 8 2 ... 8 8 2 To Surplus-1897 8 8 2 ... ... 8 8 2 (Note.—Ordered to be prepared by Lighting Committee, 4th May, 1898.) By Deficit-1898 166 14 8 ... ... • • • • • • Less—Surplus-1897 8 8 2 ... 158 6 6 ... 158 6 6 £263 12 3 3,648 15 8 3,912 7 11 £263 12 3 3,648 15 8 3,912 7 11 COMPARATIVE TABLE shewing Financial Result, since commencement of Undertaking. Year ended. Expenditure. Income. Surplus at 25th March, 1898. Net Profit or Loss since opening of account. Surplus at 25th March, 1898. Year ended. Loss. Profit. 25th March, 1895 3 19 2 £ s. d. Period from 19th January, 1895, to 25th March, 1895 3 19 2 ... £ s. d. 25th March, 1896 697 4 3 328 13 9 25th March, 1896 368 10 6 ... 25th March, 1897 1,348 9 2 438 19 6 25th March, 1897 909 9 8 ... 25th March, 1898 8,954 7 2 9,761 19 4 25th March, 1898 ... 807 12 2 11,003 19 9 10.529 12 7 1,281 19 4 807 12 2 10,529 12 7 807 12 2 Expenditure in excess of Income, at 25th March, 1898 £474 7 2 Net Loss, at 25th March, 1898 £474 7 2 Subsidy received from Rates ... 1 255 8 2 Subsidy received from Rates ... 1,255 8 2 Less—Expenditure shewn above ... 474 7 2 Less—Net Loss shewn above ... 474 7 2 See Balance Sheet (fo. 354) ... 781 1 0 781 1 0 See Balance Sheet (fo. 354) £781 1 0 781 1 0 356 356 ELECTRICITY WORKS, STORES ACCOUNTS-from 25th March, 1897, to 25th March, 1898. Income— REVENUE ACCOUNT. (CENTRAL STATION). Materials supplied out of Storks, for your ending 25th March, 1898 £ s. d. Expentiure REVENUE ACCOUNT. (CENTRAL STATION) Materials Purchased during the Year— £ s. d. ALECTRICTITY WORKSRENVENUR ACCOUTN— £ s. d. description. PAYMENTS. LIABILITIES Incurred but not Paid. Total. Coal 278 19 8 Carbons, &c. 91 1 6 Oil, Waste. &c. 6 0 0 25th March, 1898. Incandescent Lamps 21 0 0 £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. Sundries 41 15 5 Coal 278 19 8 86 17 2 365 16 10 Carbons, Globes, &c. 98 4 3 10 3 5 108 7 8 488 16 7 Oil, Waste, &c. 78 17 11 17 1 8 95 19 7 Dust Destructor—Revenue Account— Incandescent Lamps 28 3 6 24 3 4 52 6 10 47 10 5 530 7 0 Sundries 53 4 9 20 11 11 73 16 8 Stores on Hand at 25th March, 1898 (at net. cost value), as per Certificate of Chief Electrical Engineer, dated 11th April, I898(see fo. 1153) 160 0 7 £537 10 1 158 17 6 696 7 7 696 7 7 £ 696 7 7 £696 7 7 INCOME- REVENUE ACCOUNT. (WIRING AND FITTING WORK.) £ s. d. Expenditure— revenue account. (WIRING AND FITTING WORK.) £ s. d. 74 15 9 Materials supplied out op Stores, for year ending 25th March, 1898 Materials Purchased during the Year— £ s. d. description. PAYMENTS. LIABILITIES Incurred but not Paid. Total. Wire and Cabins 527 4 1 Casing and Tubing 112 4 5 Switchns and Ceiling Roses 388 11 2 25 Mar., 1897. 25 Mar., 1898 Fittings 525 14 3 £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d Arc and Glow Lamps 634 18 1 Tools 0 15 6 ... ... 0 15 0 Blocks 23 6 2 Wire & Cables 525 18 8 13 1 10 17 0 0 529 16 10 Screws 47 14 6 Casing and Tubing 113 3 7 3 1 6 14 1 0 124 3 1 Insulating Material 11 13 2 Switches & Ceiling Roses 444 18 4 40 17 2 33 10 0 437 11 2 Motor 36 0 0 Cut Outs 83 5 1 ... ... 83 5 1 Whitewood 1 13 11 Fittings, Shades, &c. 400 17 11 14 5 2 59 9 4 446 2 1 Iron Barrel 4 19 5 Are & Glow Lamps. 699 13 1 9 18 7 103 16 8 793 11 2 Sundries 23 7 2 Blocks 11 8 6 ... ... 11 8 6 2,337 6 4 Screws 30 6 9 ... 1 1 10 31 8 7 Insulating Material 0 11 0 ... 0 3 7 0 14 7 Less—Goods Returned into Store 3 4 6 2,334 1 10 Motor 36 0 0 ... ... 36 0 0 Whitewood 14 16 4 ... ... 14 16 4 Trestles 12 2 1 ... 1 4 7 13 6 8 Stores on Hand at 25th March, 1898 (at net cost value), as per Certificate of Lighting Engineer, dated 22nd April, 1898 (see fo. 353.) 279 4 11 Sundries 8 17 10 ... 1 4 10 10 2 8 81 4 3 231 11 10 81 4 3 £ 2,382 14 8 150 7 7 2,533 2 3 2 533 2 3 Value of Stores, brought into account 5 8 9 £2,013 6 9 £2,613 6 9 II CHARGE. Quarter ended. Private Lighting. Public Street Lighting. Total. Supply of Current Rental of Meters. Miscellaneous Charges. Total. 1897. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. June 24 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... September 29 255 4 2 294 10 0 549 14 2 548 14 2 ... 1 0 0 549 14 2 December 25 1,472 0 10 695 19 2 2,168 0 0 2,155 10 0 11 5 0 1 5 0 2,168 0 0 1898. March 25 2,718 5 0 692 13 9 3,410 18 9 3,388 8 9 22 10 0 .... 3,410 18 9 Totals 4,445 10 0 1,683 2 11 6,128 12 11 6,092 12 11 33 15 0 2 5 0 6,128 12 11 COLLECTION. Quarter ended. Private Lighting. Public Street Lighting. Rental of Meters. Miscellaneous Charges. Total. Written off. (allowances). Collectable Arrears and Charges accrued at 25 Mar., 1898 Net Cash Collected. Units at 6d. Amount. Units at 4d. Amount. Units at 3d. Amount. Units at 2d. Amount. Units at 5d. Amount. 1897. No. £ s. d. No. £ s. d. No. £ s. d. No. £ s. d. No. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ S. d. June 24 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Sept 29 10,028 250 14 0 ... ... ... ... 421 3 10 2 14,136 294 10 0 ... 1 0 0 549 14 2 ... ... 477 18 8 Dec 25 49,965 1,249 2 6 12,193 203 4 4 204 2 11 0 558 4 13 0 33,406 695 19 2 11 5 0 1 5 0 2,168 0 0 26 4 0 ... 2,047 7 6 1898. Mar 25 82,528 2,063 4 0 9,993 166 11 0 36,612 457 13 0 1,002 8 7 0 33,249 692 13 9 22 10 0 ... 3,410 18 9 ... 3,144 5 3 432 17 6 Totals.. 142,521 3,563 0 6 22,186 369 15 4 36,816 460 4 0 1,981 16 10 2 80,791 1,683 2 11 33 15 0 2 5 0 6,128 12 11 26 4 0 3,144 5 3 2,958 3 8 358 *Approximate Statement of Income and Expenditure on Revenue Account, for Nine Months from 24th June, 1897, to 25th March, 1898. (Ordered to be prepared by Lighting Committee, 4th May, 1898. Submitted to the Vestry, 17h Mag, 1898.) Folio in this Abstract Income. Folio in this Abstract Expenditure. £ s. d. £ s. d. Ordinary Income (exclusive of Contributions from General Rate Account) 352 9,761 19 4 Ordinary Expenditure 352 6,031 11 2 Deduct— Deduct— Wiring & Fitting Work 2,440 5 6 352 Wiring and Fitting Work 3,648 15 8 352 Do. Works in Progress 1,041 15 6 352 Contractor's Deposit Account 48 6 0 352 3,697 1 8 3,482 1 0 352 Contractor's Deposit Account 51 9 0 352 3,533 10 0 2,334 9 6 6,228 9 4 Balance carried down 358 3,893 19 10 6,228 9 4 6,228 9 4 Balance brought down j 358 3,893 19 10 Repayment of Debt 625 13 5 Interest on Debt 1,566 8 8 2,192 2 1 Balance, being approximate Income in excess of Expenditure for the above period 1,701 17 9 *Note.— Works opened 28th June, 1897. £3,893 19 10 £3,893 19 10 OBSERVE.-The expenditure to be paid by the General Rate Account to the Electricity Works, Revenue Account, for interest on and redemption of Debt for 3 years, to the 25th March, 1898, in respect of the area upon which the Dust Destructor is erected, amounts to £836 0s. 0d iii 359 Prescribed, Form of Accounts returned to Board of Trade under 45 and 46 Vict., cap. 56, section 9. THE VESTRY of the PARISH OF ST. LEONARD, SHOREDITCH, in the County of London. THE SHOREDITCH ELECTRIC LIGHTING ORDER, 1892. [Electric Lighting Orders Confirmation (No. 6) Act, 1892, 55 and 56 Vic., Ch. ccxx.] Year ending 25th March, 1898. [I].—STATEMENT AS TO LOANS AUTHORISED FOR THE PURPOSES OF THE UNDERTAKING REFERRED TO IN THE ABOVE-MENTIONED ORDER prior to the 25th March, 1898. Amounts sanctioned. Amount borrowed. Amount repaid. Amount sanctioned but not borrowed. At % 3¼ At % 3½ At % 2⅞ Total. At % 3¼ At % 3½ At % 2⅞ Total. £ s. d. £ £ £ £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. 12,200 0 0 12,200 12,200 0 0 262 6 8 262 6 8 1,617 0 0 1,617 1,617 0 0 59 4 3 59 4 3 57,215 0 0 57,215 57,215 0 0 713 8 3 713 8 3 71,032 0 0 12,200 1,617 57,215 71,032 0 0 262 6 8 59 4 3 713 8 3 1,034 19 2 360 360 CAPITAL ACCOUNT for the Year ending 25th March, 1898. Dr. [No. II ] Cr. Expenditure up to 25th March, 1897. Expended during the year. Total Expenditure to 25th March, 1898 Receipts up to 25th March, 1897. Received during Year. Total Receipts to 25th March, 1898. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. To Expenditure to 25th March, 1897 49,071 2 6 38,731 6 1 87,802 8 7 1.By Amount raised by Loans 71,032 0 0 71,032 0 0 Expenditure since that date. 2. By Sale of Patents or Patent Rights, &c. 1. To Lands, including Law Charges incidental to acquisition 15,003 16 10 4,593 15 6 19,597 12 4 3. By Value of Lands belonging to Authority appropriated for Electrical purposes 4. By Value of Surplus Lands sold 107 0 0 107 0 0 2. To Value of Lands appropriated for Electrical purposes, as per contra 113 6 3 12 6 0 125 12 3 N 3. To Buildings 6,417 0 0 2,581 15 4 8,998 15 4 4. To Machinery 8,030 0 0 4,898 2 10 12,928 2 10 5. To Accumulators at generating and distributing stations 200 0 0 373 3 9 573 3 9 6. To Mains, including cost of laying the mains and services 17,534 6 4 8,533 10 6 26,067 16 10 7. To Transformers, Motors, &c. 3,750 0 0 3,750 0 0 8. To Meters, and Fees for certifying 928 3 3 928 3 3 9. To Electrical Instruments, &c. 12,069 3 2 12,069 3 2 10. To General Stores (cable, mains, lamps) 540 12 0 78 12 5 619 4 5 11. To Purchase of Patents or Patent Rights 12. To Transfer to Sinking Fund of value of lands sold, as per contra 13. To Amount applied to the reduction of principal of Borrowed Money from value of lands sold, as per contra 14. To Other Items (to be specified) 1,345 7 4 924 19 4 2,270 6 8 Total Expenditure £ 49,071 2 6 38,731 6 1 87,802 8 7 £71,252 6 3 12 6 0 71,264 12 3 To Balance of Capital Account By Balance of Capital Account 16,537 16 4 £87,802 8 7 £87,802 8 7 361 361 REVENUE ACCOUNT, for the Year ending 25th March, 1898. Dr. [No. III.] Cr. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. (a) Generation of Electricity. 1. By Balance from last Account Less—Bad Debts written off 1. To Coals or other Fuel, including Dues, Carriage, Unloading Storing, and all expenses of placing the same on the works (Note.—Weight of Coals used on Works, 315 Tons). 278 19 8 2. By Sale of Current per Meter 4,383 6 0 £ s. d. 3. By Sale under Contracts 15 10 0 2. To Oil, Waste, and Engine-room Stores 222 10 2 4. By Public Lighting 1,683 2 11 6,081 18 11 To Water (4,689,000 gallons) 166 16 9 389 6 11 5. By Rental of Meters and other Apparatus on Consumers' Premises 33 15 0 3. To Wages at Generating Stations 980 17 10 4. To Repairs and Maintenance, as follows:— 6. By Sale and Repairs of Lamps, Arc or Incandescent 1 2 0 Engines, Boilers 57 14 6 By Sale and Repairs of other Apparatus 1 0 0 35 17 0 Dynamos, Exciters, Transformers, Motors, &c. 7. By Royalties, Licences, &c. Other Machinery, Instruments and Tools Accumulators and Accessories 8. By Rents Receivable 98 16 0 57 14 6 Less—Received for Old Material 57 14 6 S. By Fees for Inspection of Maps 5. To Other Items 1,706 18 11 10. Other items viz.:— By Attendance at Installations 1 5 0 By Miscellaneous Receipts 13 15 5 (b) Distribution of Electricity. By Wiring and Fitting Work 3,482 1 0 1. To Wages and other Remuneration to Linesmen, Fitters, Labourers 2. To Repairs, Maintenance, and Renewals of Mains of all Classes, including Materials and Laying the same Less-Amounts refunded 3. To Repairs, Maintenance, and Renewals of Transformers, Meters, Switches, Fuses, and other Apparatus on Consumers' Premises, together with Cost of Materials and Lamps sold, as per Contra 4. To Repairs, Maintenance, and Renewals of Apparatus at tributing Stations To Disbursements by clerk of Works 2 9 9 2 9 9 Carried forward 1,709 8 8 Carried forward£ 9,713 13 4 302 302 REVENUE ACCOUNT, For the Year ending 25th March, 1898. Dr. [No. III.—cont.] £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. Brought forward 1,709 8 8 Brought forward 9,713 13 4 (c) Public Lamps. 1. To Attending and Repairs 2.To Renewals of Lamps (d) Royalties, &c. 1. To Royalties, &c., Payable for use of Patents or Patent processes (e) Rents, Rates, and Taxes. 1. To Rents Payble 7 19 7 2. To Rates and Taxes 11 12 3 19 11 10 (f) Management Expenses. 1. To Salaries, viz.:— Engineers' Department 238 11 8 Accountant and Clerical Staff 2. To Salaries or Commissions of Collectors 3. To Stationery and Printing 127 15 7 4. To General Establishment Charges 110 12 0 476 19 3 (g) Law and Parliamentary Charges. 1. To Law Expenses (h) Special Charges. 1. To Insurances 128 9 9 2. To Expenses for Certification of Meters 128 9 9 To Wiring and Fitting Work 3,648 15 8 3,648 15 8 Total Expenditure 5,983 5 2 Amount carried to Net Revenue Account (fo. 363) 3,730 8 2 Balance carried to next account to provide for Bad Debts £9,713 13 4 £9,713 13 4 363 NET REVENUE ACCOUNT. Dr. [No. IV] Cr. £ s. d. £ s. d. 1. To Balance from last Account 1,281 19 4 1. By Balance from last Account 2. To Interest on Mortgage Debt accrued due to date 2,088 11 6 2. By Balance brought from Revenue Account (No. iii) 3,730 8 2 3. To Instalments of Principal of money borrowed 834 4 6 3. By Interest on Money at deposit 4. To Amount transferred to Sinkfng Fund where such fund is authorised 5. By Deficiency of Income contributed out of General Rate Account (fo. 322)— 5. To Expenses of executing the Order (License) not included in [No. Ill] and not chargeable to capital Year ended 25th March, 1896 382 9 9 Do. 25th March, 1897 872 18 5 1,255 8 2 6. To Payments to Reserve Fund, where such fund is authorised by the Order or License 7. To Sum applied to Local Rate 8. To Balance carried forward (present available surplus) 781 1 0 £4,985 16 4 £4,985 16 4 364 SINKING FUND ACCOUNT. Dr. [No. V.] Cr. Stock. £ s. d. Stock. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. 1. To Amount paid for purchase of (nature of investment to be specified) 1. By Balance brought from last Account 2 By Amount brought from Net Revenue Account 2. To Stock sold during period of Account 3. By Interest on Investments 3. To Amount of Principal of borrowed money repaid 4. By Value of Lands transferred from Account [No.II] To Amount of Balance to next Account 5. By Amount realised by sale of Stock (nature of stock to be specified) 6. By Stock purchased £ £ RESERVE FUND ACCOUNT. Dr. [No. VI.] Cr. Stock. £ s. d. Stock. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. 1. To Amount paid for purchase of (nature of investment to be specified) 1. By Balance brought from last Account 2. By Amount transferred from Net Revenue Account 2. To Stock sold 3. To Sum transferred to Revenue Account 3. By Stock purchased 4. By Amount realised by Sale of Stock (nature of stock to be specified) To Amount of Balance to next Account £ £ 365 GENERAL BALANCE SHEET, at 25th March, 1898. Dr. [No. VII.] Cr. Liabilities. £ s. d. Assets. £ s. d. 1. To Capital Account—Amount received as per Account [No. II] 71,264 12 3 1. By Capital Account—Amount expended for Works, as per Account [No. 11] 87,802 8 7 To Capital Account—Due to Treasurer 16,537 16 4 2. By Stores on hand at 25th March, 1898— 2. To Sundry Creditors 915 1 10 Coal, Oils, Waste, &c. 207 11 0 3. To Net Revenue Account: Balance at Credit thereof 781 1 0 General 279 4 11 486 15 11 4. To Sinking Fund Account 3. By Sundry Debtors, for Current supplied to 25th March, 1898 3,144 5 3 5. To Reserve Fund Account 4. By Other Debtors 1,828 1 3 6. To Other Items (to be specified) 5. By Securities held (cost price) 7. To Revenue Account-Due to Treasurer 3,888 12 1 6. By Other Items (to be specified) Less—Cash on Deposit 105 12 6 3,782 19 7 7. By Cash with Treasurer 8. By Cash in hands of Chief Engineer 20 0 0 20 0 0 £93,281 11 0 £93,281 11 0 Accountant's Office, Shoreditch Town Hall, London, E.C., 17th May, 1898. ERNST A. R. ADAMS, Accountant to the Vestry. 366 STATEMENT OF ELECTRICITY GENERATED, SOLD, &c. Quantity generated in B. T. Units. Quantity Sold. Quantity used on Works. Total Quantity accounted for. Quantity not accounted for. Number of Public Lamps. Total Maximum Supply demanded. Public Lamps. By Contract. Private Consumers by Meter. Total sold. 491,107 80,791 — 203,504 284,295 156,725 including that quantity used by lift and fan motors, also loss in distribution. 441,020 50,087 57 Arcs, 114 lncandescents (32 c.p.) 408 K.W. C. NEWTON RUSSELL, Chief Engineer. Dated the 11th day of May, 1898. SPECIAL AND CAPITAL ACCOUNTS. jj 368 368 GENERAL RATE ACCOUNT— STREET IMPROVEMENTS & PAVING WORKS.—25th March, 1898. To RECEIPTS- capital account. £ s. d. By PAYMENTS- capital account. £ s. d. Mortgages. Loans to 25th March,1897 55,470 0 0 Expenditure out of Loans to 25th March, 1897 59,095 17 4 Do. this year— Do. borrowed this year— York Flagging Works 5,323 0 0 Nature of Work. Situation. Sum Paid. Kerbing do. 1,164 0 0 £ s. d. Granite Paving 6,552 0 0 Masons' and Paviors' work Bateman's Row 49 2 1 Wood do. 3,507 0 0 Paving Footways and Channelling Bridport Place 560 5 3 Asphalte do. 6,914 0 0 Concrete Foundations 5,040 0 0 Paving Footways & Carriageways Curtain Road 2,510 10 8 Contingencies 1,005 0 0 Paving Footways East Road 289 13 4 29,505 0 0 Paving Carriageways with Old Cubes Great Cambridge Street 2,450 0 0 84,975 0 0 Wood Paving High Street 2,366 0 0 Less—Paid off to 25th March, 1897 42,730 6 4 Masons' & Paviors' Work Do. 652 18 7 Do. this year 2,627 3 8 Asphalting Carriageways Hoxton Street 979 12 3 Granite Paving Do. 354 18 7 45,357 10 0 Laying Curbs Long Street 52 11 4 Revenue Account. 39,617 10 0 Asphalting Footways and Carriageways Do. 279 18 5 Debt repaid to 25th March, 1897 42,730 6 4 Wood Paving Wilson Street & Paul Street 73 0 0 Do. this year (fo. 319) 2,627 3 8 Asphalting Footways and Carriageways Moye Street 626 11 8 45,357 10 0 Paving do. Do. 61 4 9 Paid out of General Rate for Property and Permanent Works, to 25th March, 1898 187 11 1 Granite Paving Scawfell Street 155 7 2 Re-Paving with old Setts Shepherdess Walk 1,256 2 0 Paving Footways and Carriageways and redressing Pitchings Tuilerie Street 418 2 3 Contributions and other Receipts. Carriageway Paving at Wilson Street ex Vestry of parish of St. Luke (Middleses) 551 7 6 738 18 7 Granite Paving York Street 164 6 8 Erecting Hoarding, &c. New Street (Moira Place Area) 47 0 8 13,347 5 8 Law Charges on Loans 14 14 0 Stamp Duty do. 37 0 0 Advertising 4 6 6 Lithography 4 12 0 Law Engrossing and Writing 0 6 8 13,408 4 10 72,504 2 2 Expenditure out of Revenue to 25th March, 1898 738 18 7 73,243 0 9 Cash Balances transferred to Revenue Account, to 25th March, 1891 627 14 4 BALANCE—25th March, 1898— In hands of Treasurer (fo. 330) 11,843 3 6 £85,713 18 7 £85,713 18 7 JJl 369 369 GENERAL RATE ACCOUNT—‡SUN STREET TO WORSHIP STREET (APPOLD Street) IMPROVEMENT—25th March, 1898 To RECEIPTS- capital account. £ s. d. By PAYMENTS— capital account. £ s. d. Mortgages. Loans to 25th March, 1898 65,000 0 0 Expenditure out of Loans (borne by the Vestry) to 25th March, 1898 65,000 0 0 Less Paid off to 25th March, 1897 39,182 1 6 Do. this year 783 0 0 39,965 1 6 25,034 18 6 Revenue Account. Debt repaid to 25th March, 1897 16,328 0 0 Do. this year (fo. 319) 783 0 0 17,111 0 0 Contributions. Moiety of proceeds of Sales of Surplus Land, Property, &c., contributed towards Redemption of Debt to 25th March, 1898, ex Metropolitan Board of Works 22,854 1 6 39,965 1 0 £65,000 0 0 ‡ The total net cost of this Improvement was borne jointly by the Vestry and the late Metropolitan Board of Works. £65,000 0 0 GENERAL RATE ACCOUNT— ERECTION OF TOWN HALL.—25th March, 1898. To RECEIPTS- CAPITAL ACCOUNT. £ s. d By PAYMENTS- CAPITAL ACCOUNT. £ s. d. Mortgages. Expenditure out of Loans to 25th March, 1897— Loans to 25th March, 1898 34,000 0 0 Land in Old Street Road; Site for Erection, &c. 7,425 0 0 Do. borrowed this year 4,550 0 0 Buildings 26,575 0 0 34,000 0 0 38,550 0 0 Less—Paid off to 25th March, 1897 28,600 0 0 Do. this year- Do. this year 200 0 0 Purchase Money of Freehold Site and Premises of Old Fire Brigade Station 4,500 0 0 28,800 0 0 Revenue Account. 9,750 0 Stamp Duty on Conveyance 22 10 0 Debt repaid to 25th March, 1897 28,600 0 0 Do. on Loan 5 15 0 Do. this year (fo. 326) 200 0 0 Law Charges do. 7 7 0 Paid out of General Rate for Property and Permanent Works, to 25th March, 1898 3,711 7 9 28,800 0 ??? Actuary's Fees do. 4 4 0 Law Engrossing and Writing 0 13 9 Cutting Doorway in Boundary Fence Wall 4 5 0 Contributions and other Receipts. 4,544 14 9 Purchase money of Fire Brigade Station ex Metropolitan Board of Works 1,550 0 0 38,544 14 9 Expenditure out of Revenue to 25th March, 1898— Sale of Old Building Materials 150 0 0 Works of completion, including Furniture, Fixtures, Fittings, &c. 5,799 19 5 Bank Interest, Rents, &c. 388 11 8 538 11 8 BALANCE—25th March, 1898— 44,344 14 2 2,088 11 8 5,799 19 5 In hands of Treasurer (fo. 330) 5 5 3 £44,349 19 5 £44,349 19 5 370 370 GENERAL RATE ACCOUNT— GOLDSMITH SQUARE OPEN SPACE.—25TH MARCH, 1898. To RECEIPTS- CAPITAL ACCOUNT. £ s. d. By PAYMENTS- CAPITAL ACCOUNT. £ s. d. Mortgage. Loan to 25th March, 1898 2,000 0 0 Expenditure out of Loans to 25th March, 1898— Less—Paid off to 25th March, 1897 200 0 0 Contribution to London County Council re Purchase of Freehold Land, Goldsmith Square area, under Open Spaces Acts, 1877 to 1890 2,000 0 0 Do. this year 40 0 0 240 0 0 1,760 0 0 Expenditure out of Revenue to 25th March, 1898 9 17 0 Revenue Account. Debt repaid to 25th March, 1897 200 0 0 Do. this year (fo. 316) 40 0 0 240 0 o Paid out of General Rate for Property and Permanent Works to 25th March, 1898 9 17 0 £2,009 17 0 £2,009 17 0 GENERAL RATE ACCOUNT— DUSTING AND SCAVENGING.—25TH MARCH, 1898. To RECEIPTS- CAPITAL ACCOUNT. £ s. d. By PAYMENTS— CAPITAL ACCOUNT. £ s. d. Mortgages. Expenditure out of Loans to 25th March, 1898 8,000 0 0 Loans to 25th March, 1898 8,000 0 0 Less—Paid off to 25th March, 1897 4,844 0 0 Do. in anticipation of Loan this year— Do. this year 122 0 0 Erection of Van Store and Workshop— 4,966 0 0 3,034 0 0 Estate Agents Charges 3 3 0 Solicitor's do. 3 3 0 Revenue Account. Printing Specifications 9 0 0 Debt repaid to 25th March, 1897 4,844 0 0 Wages of Clerk of Works 12 12 0 27 18 0 Do. this year (fo. 321) 122 0 0 4,966 0 0 8,027 18 0 Paid out of General Rate for Property and Permanent Works, to 25th March, 1898 324 8 9 Expenditure out of Revenue to 25th March, 1898 345 1 9 Contributions and other Receipts. Re-building Wall at De Beauvoir Wharf 5 10 0 Analysis of Expenditure. Total. Sale of Saw Bench 7 0 0 Do. Patent Switch Block 8 3 0 £ s. d. 20 13 0 345 1 9 Compensation and Law Expenses 359 1 0 Stables, Buildings and Van Store 3,396 0 7 BALANCE—25th March, 1898— Plant, Live and Dead Stock, &c. 4,617 18 2 Due to Treasurer(fo. 330) 27 18 0 £8,372 19 9 £8,372 19 9 £8,372 19 9 GENERAL RATE ACCOUNT—WORKING CLASS DWELLINGS—25TH MARCH, 1898. To RECEIPTS- £ s. d. By PAYMENTS- £ s. d. CAPITAL ACCOUNT. CAPITAL ACCOUNT. Pursuant to Housing of the Working Classes Act, 1890, Section 80 (1). Pursuant to Housing of the Working Classes Act, 1890, Section 80 (1). (Authorised by Orders of Local Government Board dated 24th March, 1896, and 3rd May, 1897). (Authorised by Orders of Local Government Board dated 24th March, 1896, and 3rd May, 1897.) Expenditure in anticipation of Loan to 25th March. 1898— BALANCE—25th March, 1898— Sketch Plans 6 17 6 Due to Treasurer (fo. 330) 254 14 0 Quantity Surveyor's Commission (on account) 150 0 0 Lithographing Specifications and Quantities 75 19 6 Advertising 9 15 0 Salary of Clerk of the Works 12 12 0 254 14 0 £254 14 0 £254 14 0 371 371 GENERAL RATE ACCOUNT— MOIRA PLACE & PLUMBER'S PLACE AREA.—25TH March, 1898. To RECEIPTS— £ s. d. By PAYMENTS £ s. d. CAPITAL ACCOUNT. CAPITAL ACCOUNT. Pursuant to Housing of the Working Classes Act, 1890. Part II.—Unhealthy Dwelling-houses. Pursuant to Housing of the Working Classes Act, 1890. Part II.— Unhealthy Dwelling-houses. (Scheme made 28th June, 1892, sanctioned by Local Government Board 2nd April, 1894, confirmed 10th October, 1891, and modified 21th March, 1896.) 1 (Scheme made 28th June, 1892, sanctioned by Local Government Board 2nd April, 1894, confirmed 10th October, 1894, and modified 24th March, 1896). Mortgages. Expenditure out of Loans to 25th March, 1897 48,086 0 1 Loans to 25th March, 1898 30,000 0 0 Do. out of Loans this year, viz.:— Less- Paid off to 25th March, 1897 200 5 10 Classification. Freehold Property. Leasehold Property. Total. Do. this year 229 8 0 429 13 10 £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. 29,570 6 2 Purchase Moneys 3,295 0 0 3,295 0 0 Revenue Account. Interest on do. ... 65 5 10 65 5 10 Debt repaid to 25th March, 1897 200 5 10 Income Tax on do. ... 1 19 5 1 19 5 Do. this year (fo. 316) 229 8 0 Vendor's Surveyor's costs ... 106 16 0 106 16 0 429 13 10 Vendor's Solicitor's do. ... 536 18 4 536 18 4 Contributions. Accountant's Charges ... 53 11 0 53 11 0 Instalments on account of total contribution of £27,500 payable by London County Council under agreement dated 3rd March, 1896, pursuant to Act of 1890, section 46 (7)— Trade Valuer's Bees ... 30 9 0 30 9 0 Purchase of improved Ground Rent 13 0 0 13 0 0 Stamp Duty ... 49 5 0 49 5 0 1st instalment, received during year ended 25th March, 1897 10,000 0 0 Ground Rents ... 224 8 10 224 8 10 Income Tax ... 17 14 0 17 14 0 2nd do. do. 25th March, 1898 10,000 0 0 Land Tax ... 3 17 1 3 17 1 20,000 0 0 Water Rents and Rates ... 6 19 9 6 19 9 Receipts to 25th March, 1897 901 2 8 Parochial Rates ... 7 8 3 7 8 3 Do. this year, viz.:— £ 13 0 0 4,399 12 6 4,412 12 6 Ground Rents 96 7 7 Weekly and Quarterly Rents 161 16 8 258 4 3 INCIDENTAL CHARGES. Inhabited House Duty 0 2 3 Water Rates 0 6 3 Compensation to Tenants 49 4 0 Sale of Old Building Materials (on account of contract) 80 0 0 Commission on Rents collected by Vestry 8 12 11 Caretakers' Wages to 17th March, 1898 54 12 0 Advertising on Hoardings, Bast Road 44 0 0 Salaries of Conveyancing Clerks 34 1 0 382 12 9 Surveyors' and Valuers' Fees 142 10 0 1,283 15 5 Redemption of Land Tax 94 17 6 BALANCE—25 th March, 1898— Search and Land Registry Bees 26 9 0 Due to Treasurer (fo. 330) 1,944 6 3 Dangerous Structure Bees, under London Building Act, 1894 38 19 9 Law Engrossing and Writing 44 5 6 Notice Boards 28 0 0 Disbursements 34 16 2 556 7 10 Revenue Account— Proportion of Salaries of Vestry Clerk s Staff, to 25th December, 1897 (fo. 313) 172 8 9 Stationery and Printing, to 25th December, 1897 (fo. 314) 0 12 6 729 9 1 5,142 1 7 £ 53,228 1 8 £ 53,228 1 8 372 372 GENERAL RATE ACCOUNT— ERECTION OF DUST DESTRUCTOR.—25th March, 1898. To RECEIPTS- £ s. d. By PAYMENTS— £ s. d. CAPITAL ACCOUNT. CAPITAL ACCOUNT. Mortgage Expenditure out of Loan to 25th March, 1891 11,885 14 8 Loan to 25th March, 1898 14,240 0 0 Do. do. this year. Less Paid oft this year 749 0 0 On account of contract for- 13.491 0 0 Furnaces, Hues, &c. 1,840 0 0 Iron work 180 0 0 Revenue Account Chimney Shaft 249 10 8 Debt repaid this year (fo. 323) 749 0 0 Building 630 0 0 Fitting up Station 178 0 0 Balance - 25th March, 1898 3,077 10 8 Due to Treasurer (fo. 330) 902 18 5 Tilling Pump Room 53 2 8 Lockers 15 15 0 Dynamo Covers 3 18 2 Ampere Guages 5 14 11 Iron Water Trough 8 10 0 Wire Work and Gas Tubing 36 0 0 Wiring and Fitting Work 29 15 5 Hose and Fittings 10 5 3 Sundry Fittings 8 7 6 Table and Chair 1 17 0 Clock 2 15 0 Advertising 8 12 2 179 13 1 3,257 3 9 £ 15,142 18 5 £ 15,142 18 5 SEWERS RATE ACCOUNT— CONSTRUCTION OF NEW SEWERS.—25TH MARCH, 1898. To Receipts- £ s. d. By Payments £ s. d. CAPITAL ACCOUNT. CAPITAL ACCOUNT. Mortages Loans to 25th March 1897 19,175 0 0 Expenditure out of Loans, to 25th March,1897 19,175 0 0 Do. borrowed this year— Do Revenue to 25th March, 1897 6,648 12 10 25,823 12 10 Reconstructing Brick Sewers 8,185 0 0 Do. this year— Do. Pipe sewers 7,760 0 0 On account of Sewer Extension Works— 15,945 0 0 35,120 0 0 Anning street, New North Road, and Felton Street 1,195 5 6 Less—Paid off to 25th March, 1897 3,629 0 0 Fanshaw Street, Contract No. 12 272 0 0 Do. this year 899 0 0 Haggerston District, Section No. 5 3750 0 0 4,528 0 0 30,592 0 0 5,217 5 6 Revenue Account. Retention Money— Debt repaid to 25th March, 1897 3,629 0 0 Clifton Street and Dysart Street 26 17 0 Do. this year (fo. 334) 899 0 0 Curtain Road 11 11 2 4,528 0 0 38 8 o Paid out of General Rate for Property and Permanent Works, to 25th March, 1898 3,977 4 10 Advertising 35 13 10 Contributions and other Receipts. Lithography 37 8 6 Law Writing and Engrossing 1 12 10 Refund of sheriff's costs 0 13 6 Stamps Duty on Loans 20 0 0 3,977 18 4 Law Charges do. 14 14 0 109 9 2 39,097 18 4 5,365 3 1 District. Source defrayed from. 31,188 15 11 Out of Loans. Out of Rates and Revenue. Total. BALANCE—25th March, 1898— £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. In hands of Treasurer 7,909 2 5 Hoxton 5,560 8 6 2,098 8 2 7,658 16 8 Haggerston 18,979 14 7 4,550 4 8 23,529 19 3 24,540 3 1 6,648 12 10 31,188 15 11 £ 39,097 18 4 £ 39,097 18 4 373 373 SEWERS RATE ACCOUNT— UNDERGROUND SANITARY CONVENIENCES—25th March, 1898. 373 To RECEIPTS— £ s. d. By PAYMENTS- £ s. d. Captial account CAPITAL ACCOUNT. High Street, No. 1. High Street, No. 1. Mortgage. Expenditure out of Loan, to 25th March, 1898 1,900 0 0 Loan to 25th March, 1,900 0 0 do. Contributions, &c. do. 117 6 1 0 Less—Paid off this year 64 0 0 2,017 6 10 1,836 0 0 Revenue Account Revenne Account. Cash Balance transferred to General Rate in aid of Local Street Improvements 512 13 2 Debt repaid this year (fo. 336) 64 0 0 1,900 0 0 Contributions and other Receipts. Advertising on Hoarding 30 0 0 Contribution towards cost of Underground Urinal and Passengers' Refuge, received from North Metropolitan Tramways Co. 600 0 0 630 0 0 2,530 0 0 2,530 0 0 High Street, No. 2. High Street, No. 2. Expenditure out of Loan this year— Loan borrowed this year 2,450 0 0 Constructing Convenience (on account) 1,700 0 0 Stamp Duty on Loan 8 1 3 Law Charges do. 3 13 6 Lithography 2 9 9 Advertising 3 2 9 Connecting Water Supply 9 7 4 Fixing Water Meter, &c. 4 13 4 2,450 0 0 1,726 7 11 New North Road. New North Road. Mortgage. Expenditure out of Loan this year— Loan borrowed this year 1,650 0 0 Constructing Convenience (on account) 1,200 0 0 Stamp Duty on Loan 2 1 3 • Law Charges do. 3 13 6 Law Engrossing and Writing 0 18 6 1,206 13 3 Old Street Old Street. Mortgage. Expenditure out of Loan, to 25th March, 1897 2,160 8 5 Loan to 25th March 1897 2,500 0 0 Do. do. this year— Less—Paid off this year 84 0 0 Constructing Convenience (on account) 102 0 0 2.416 0 0 Advertising 3 2 9 Revenue Account Lithography 2 9 9 Debt repaid this year (fo. 336) 84 0 0 107 12 6 2,500 0 0 2,268 0 11 BALANCE—25th March, 1898— In hands of Treasurer (fo. 338) 1,398 17 11 £9,130 0 0 £9,130 0 0 374 374 WAGES AND DISBURSEMENT ACCOUNT— From 25th March, 1897, to 25th March, 1898. To RECEIPTS— £ s. d By PAYMENTS- £ s. d. GENERAL RATE ACCOUNT. GENERAL RATE ACCOUNT. Cash Balance, 25th March, 1897— Charged on General Rate (Revenue) Account 19,081 2 5½ In hands of Accountant as per last published Abstract (fo. 106) 835 7 8 Transferred to other Funds, viz.:— Receipts by cheques during financial year 24,700 0 0 Burial Authority, Maintenance 5 9 3 Public Baths &Washhouses, Capital 226 19 10 Sewers Rate Account, Revenue 2,526 7 9 Technical Instruction Fund, Revenue 77 9 0 Dusting and Scavenging, Capital 12 12 0 Working Class Dwellings, Capital 12 12 0 Dust Destructor, Capital 1 0 0 Electricity Works, Revenue Account 2,265 14 8 Purpose. Payments to 25th March. Do. Capital do. 354 6 6 5,482 11 0 1894. 1895. 1896. 1897. 1898. 24,563 13 5½ £ s. d. £ s. d £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. Cash Balance, 25th March, 1898— Wages 17,358 7 9 15,463 12 6 16,297 9 9 22,217 18 8 24,164 13 2½ Disbursements 487 10 3 336 10 8½ 412 9 3½ 402 1 1 399 0 3 In hands of Accountant (fo. 330) 971 14 2½ 17,845 18 0 15,800 3 2½ 16,709 19 0½ 22,619 19 9 24,563 13 5½ £25,535 7 8 £25,535 7 8 DEPOSIT FUND— from 25th March, 1897, to 25th March, 1898. To RECEIPTS- rate accounts. £ s. d. By PAYMENTS- rate accounts. £ s. d REVENUE ACCOUNT. General. Sewers. REVENUE ACCOUNT. General. Sewers. £ s. d. £ s. d. Transfers— £ s. d. £ s. d. Deposits for Paving, Sewerage, and other works 754 12 0 1,027 0 0 1,781 12 0 Contributions to Rate Accounts, as under, for cost of works executed, &c. Additional Cost re do. 15 6 9 61 14 7 77 1 4 Maintenance of Public Roads and Streets(fo.317) 262 2 3 ... ... ... 262 2 3 Sewerage and Drainage Works (fo. 334) ... ... ... 734 2 8 734 2 8 769 18 9 1,088 14 7 1,858 13 4 262 2 3 734 2 8 996 4 11 Cash Balance, 25th March, 1897— Surplus of Deposits returned 477 1 0 380 6 11 857 7 11 Cash Balance, 25th March, 1898— In hands of Accountant 494 7 8 187 15 6 682 3 2 In hands of Accountant (fo. 380) 525 3 2 162 0 6 687 3 8 £1,264 6 5 1,276 10 1 2,540 16 6 £1,264 6 5 1,276 10 1 2,540 16 6 375 375 income tax account- from 25th march, 1897; to 25th march, 1898. to receipts- £ s. d. By payments— £ s. d. Income Tax, deducted from Interest paid to Mortgagees, as under:— Income Tax paid to Commissioners of Inland Revenue this year:— Prudential Assurance Co., Limited 5 8 4 Public Libaries and Museums, Revenue Account 9 14 8 London County Council 235 7 6 Do. Baths and Washhouses, Do. 30 10 0 240 15 10 General Rate Accounts 108 12 1 Sewers Rate Accounts 22 4 3 Electricity Works, Revenue Account 69 14 10 240 15 10 £240 15 10 £240 15 10 SUSPENSE ACCOUNT—CHARLES SQUARE RECREATION GROUND—25th March, 1898. To RECEIPTS- £ s. d. By PAYMENTS- £ s. d. SUSPENSE ACCOUNT. SUSPENSE ACCOUNT. Refund of Watching Expenses 0 5 0 Purchase Money of Land, Charles Square 300 0 0 Interest on Purchase Money 5 6 8 BALANCE—25th March, 1898— Middlesex Registry Fees 0 7 6 Due to Treasurer (fo. 380) 524 2 7 Stamp Duty 1 10 0 Vendor's Costs 14 14 0 Law Engrossing and Writing 2 0 5 Lithography 0 16 0 Advertising Contracts 4 17 0 Watching Expenses (fo. 317) 24 16 0 Erecting Iron Railings (on account of Contract) 170 0 0 524 7 7 £524 7 7 £524 7 7 SUMMARY OF CASH BALANCES, at 25th March, 1898. Fund or Account. Folio in Accounts Accounting Officers. Treasurer. Total. Fund or Account. Folio IN Accounts Accounting Officers. Treasurer. Total. To Balances in hand:— £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. By Balances overdrawn:— On Revenue Accounts— On Revenue Accounts— Public Libraries and Museums 304 51 8 0 1,919 18 10 1,971 6 10 Poor Rate 295 4,264 2 0 4,264 2 0 Public Baths and Washhouses 308 149 1 1 149 1 1 18 1 10 18 1 10 General Rate 330 971 14 21 6,781 3 4 7,752 17 6½ Burial Authority 338 570 18 4 570 18 4 Technical Instruction 343 10 0 o 604 17 2 614 17 2 Sewers Rate 338 3,782 19 7 3,782 19 7 Electricity Works 354 20 0 0 20 0 0 Electricity Works 375 524 2 7 524 2 7 Do. Consumer's Deposit Account 354 105 12 6 105 12 6 Suspense Account (Charles Square) 375 Deposit Fund 374 687 3 8 687 3 8 On Capital Accounts- On Capital Accounts— Electricity Works 354 16,537 16 4 16,537 16 4 Public Libraries and Museums 304 3,294 3 3 3,294 3 3 Dusting and Scavenging 370 27 18 0 254 14 0 Public Baths and Washhouses 308 8,112 9 2 8,112 9 2 Working Class Dwellings 370 254 14 0 1,944 6 0 Street Improvements and Paving Works 368 11,843 3 6 11,843 3 6 Moira Place and Plumbers' Place Area 371 1,944 6 3 1,944 6 3 Town Hall Extension 369 5 5 3 5 5 3 Erection of Dust Destructor 372 902 18 5 902 18 5 Construction of New Sewers 372 7,909 2 5 7,909 2 5 28,827 17 4 28,827 17 4 Underground Sanitary Conveniences 373 1,398 17 11 1,398 17 11 By Net Balances in hand 1,740 5 10½ 13,295 17 1 15,036 2 11½ £1,740 5 10½ 42,123 14 5 43,864 0 3½ £1,740 5 10½ 42,123 14 5 43,864 0 3½ 376 AUDITORS' CERTIFICATE. GENERAL AND SEWERS RATE ACCOUNTS. [Extract from the Cash Books.] CERTIFICATE OF THE AUDITORS. To the Vestry of the Parish of St. Leonard, Shoreditch, in the County of London. We, the Auditors appointed under the provisions of the Local Government Act, 1894, and acting pursuant to Section 195 of the Metropolis Local Management Act, 1855 (18 & 19 Vict., c. 120), have examined and audited the Accounts of the Vestry of the said Parish, from the 25th March, 1897, to 25th March, 1898. We hereby Certify them to be true and correct in all particulars, and we accordingly allow the said Accounts. Given under our hands this 24th day of May, 1898. ZEPHANIAH BUNKER, JOHN FOSKETT, RICHARD VALLANCE, Auditors of the Parish of St. Leonard, Shoreditch. AGGREGATE STATEMENT OF LIABILITIES AND ASSETS, AT 25th MARCH, 1898. kk1 378 378 AGGREGATE STATEMENT OF LIABILITIES AND ASSETS—25TH MARCH, 1898. 378 LIABILITIES. Fo. £ s. d. ASSETS. Fo. £ s. d. CAPITAL ACCOUNTS CAPITAL ACCOUNTS. General Rate. Sewers Rate. Property, Permanent Works, and other Capital Outlay. To 25th March, 1897. This Year. Total to 25th March, 1898. To Loan Accounts:—Balances. Mortgages— £ s. d. £ s. d. Street Improvements and Paving Works 39,617 10 0 300 £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. Sun Street to Worship Street (Appold Street) Improvement 25,034 18 6 330 Street Improvements &PavingWorks. Out of Loans 59,095 17 4 13,408 4 10 72,504 2 2 330 Erection of Town Hall 9,750 0 0 330 Goldsmith Square Open Space 1,760 0 0 330 Do. Rates and Revenue 738 18 7 738 18 7 330 Dusting and Scavenging 3,084 0 0 330 59,834 15 11 13,408 4 10 73,243 0 9 Moira Place and Plumber's Place Area 29,570 6 2 330 Erection of Dust Destructor 13.491 0 0 330 Sun Street to Worship Street Construction of New Sewers 30,592 0 0 338 (Appold Street) Improvement. Underground Sanitary Conveniences 8,352 0 0 338 Out of Loans 65,000 0 0 65,000 0 0 330 Electricity Works 69,997 0 10 354 Erection of Town Hall. 192,254 15 6 38,944 0 0 Out of Loans 34,000 0 0 4,544 14 9 38,544 J 4 9 330 231,198 15, ??? Do. Rates and Revenue 5,799 19 5 5,799 19 5 330 Poor Rate. 39,799 19 5 4,544 14 9 44,344 14 2 Public Libraries and Museums 16,504 19 7 304 Goldsmith Square Open Space. Public Baths and Washouses 48,970 4 2 308 Out of Loans 2,000 0 0 2,000 0 0 330 65,475 3 9 Do. Rates 9 17 0 9 17 0 330 65,475 3 2,009 17 0 2,009 17 0 Total Liabilities on Capital Account 296,673 19 Dusting and Scavenging. Out of Loans 8,000 0 0 27 18 0 8,027 18 0 330 Do. Rates and Revenue 345 1 9 345 1 9 330 8,345 1 9 27 18 0 8,372 19 9 Working Class Dwellings. Out of Loans 254 14 0 25 14 0 330 Moira Place & Plumber's Place Area Out of Loans 30,000 0 0 1,944 6 3 31,944 6 3 330 Do. Contributions 17,184 17 5 2,815 2 7 20,000 0 0 330 Do. Revenue 901 2 8 382 12 9 1,283 15 5 330 48,086 0 1 5,142 1 7 53,228 1 8 Erection of Dust Destructor. Out of Loans 11,885 14 8 3,257 3 9 15,142 18 5 330 Construction of New Sewers. Out of Loans 19,l75 0 0 5,365 3 1 24,540 3 1 338 Do. Rates and Revenue 6,648 12 10 6,648 12 10 338 25,823 12 10 5,365 3 1 31,188 15 11 Underground Sanitary Conveniences Out of Loans 4,060 8 5 3,040 13 8 7,101 2 1 338 Do. Rates and Revenue 117 6 10 117 6 10 338 4,177 15 3 3,040 13 8 7,218 8 11 Amount carried forward £296,673 19 Amount carried forward £264,962 16 11 35,040 13 8 300,003 10 7 £ 379 379 aggregate statement of liabilities and assets-25th March, 1898—(continued). LIABILITES. Fo. £ s. d. ASSETS. Fo. £ s. d. CAPITAL ACCOUNTS. Amount brought forward £ 296,673 19 3 CAPITAL ACCOUNTS. (Continued). General Rate. Sewers Rate. (continued). To Revenue Account. £ s. d. £ s. d. Repayment of Debt— By Property, Permanent Works, and other Capital Outlay. To 25th March, 1897. This Year. Total to 25th March, 1898. Street Improvements and Paving Works 45,357 10 0 Sun Street to Worship Street (Appold Street) Improvement 17,111 0 0 Erection of Town Hall 28,800 0 0 £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. Goldsmith Square Open Space 240 0 0 Amounts brought forward 264,962 16 11 35,040 13 8 300,003 10 7 Dusting and Scavenging 4,966 0 0 Moira Place and Plumber's Place Area 429 13 10 Electricity Works. Erection of Dust Destructor 749 0 0 Out of Loans 49,071 2 6 38,731 6 1 87,802 8 7 354 Construction of New Sewers ...... 4,528 0 0 338 Underground Sanitary Conveniences ...... 148 0 0 338 Electricity Works 1,034 19 2 354 Public Libraries and Museums. Out of Loans 9,500 0 0 7,500 0 0 17,000 0 0 304 98,688 3 0 4,676 0 0 ... 103,364 3 0 Do. Donations, Rates & Revenue 6,933 3 10 226 8 0 7,159 11 10 304 16,433 3 10 7,726 8 0 24,159 11 10 Poor Rate. Public Baths and washhouses. Public Libraries and Museums 495 0 5 304 Out of Loans 18,358 14 7 23,229 9 3 41,588 3 10 308 Public Baths and Washhouses 729 15 l0 308 £348,825 17 10 104,727 17 0 453,553 14 10 ... 453,553 14 10 1,224 16 3 1,224 16 3 By Cash Balances. Due to Treasurer. In hands of Treasurer. General Rate. Sewers Rate. Contributions from Rates and other Receipts— Street Improvements and Paving Works 738 18 7 Erection of Town Hall 5,799 19 5 Goldsmith Square Open Space 9 17 0 Street Improvements and Paving Works 11,843 3 6 330 Dusting and Scavenging 345 1 9 Erection of Town Hall 5 5 3 330 Moira Place and Plumber's Place Area 21,283 15 5 Dusting and Scavenging 27 18 0 ...... 330 Construction of New Sewers ...... 3,977 18 4 338 Working Class Dwellings 254 14 0 ...... 330 Underground Sanitary Conveniences ...... 630 0 0 338 Moira Place and Plumber's Place Area 1,944 6 3 ...... 330 Electricity Works 232 12 3 ...... 354 Erection of Dust Destructor 902 18 5 ...... 330 Construction of New Sewers 7,909 2 5 338 28,410 4 5 4,607 18 4 338 Underground Sanitary Conveniences 1,398 17 11 338 Electricity Works 16,537 16 4 ...... 354 Less—Cash Balances transferred to Rate Account 627 14 4 512 13 2 338 Public Liabraries and Museums ...... 3,294 3 3 304 27,782 10 1 4,095 5 2 Public Baths and Washhouses ...... 8,112 9 2 308 Add—Metropolitan Board of Works— 19,667 13 0 32,563 1 6 Moiety of proceeds of Sale of Surplus Land and Property—Sun Street, &c., Improvement 22,854 1 6 50,636 11 7 ... 54,731 16 9 19,667 13 0 ... 12,895 8 6 Poor Rate. Public Libraries and Museums 10,453 15 1 304 Public Baths and Wash-houses 0 13 0 308 10,454 8 1 ............................. ... 10,454 8 1 Excess of Assets over Liabilities, on Capital Account £169,775 4 1 ... Amount carried forward £ 466,449 3 4 Amount carried forward £ 466,449 3 4 380 380 AGGREGATE STATEMENT OF LIABILITIES AND ASSETS—25TH MARCH, 1898—(CONTINUED). LIABILITIES. Fo. £ s. d. £ s. d. ASSETS. Fo. £ s. d. £ s. d. Amount brought forward ...... ...... 466,449 3 4 Amount brought forward ...... ...... 466,449 3 4 REVENUE ACCOUNTS. REVENUE ACCOUNTS. To Consumers' Deposit Account—Balanco at credit 354 105 12 6 By Consumers' Deposit Account—Cash Balance 354 105 12 6 To Deposit Fund—Accumulations to date 374 687 3 8 By Deposit Fund—Cash Balance 374 687 3 8 792 16 2 792 16 2 To Sundry Creditors. By Sundry Debtors. Poor Rate Account 101 0 4 295 Poor Rate Account 3,257 8 1 295 Burial Authority 59 18 7 299 Public Libraries and Museums 101 0 4 304 Public Libraries and Museums 523 2 4 304 General Rate Account 3,422 3 7½ 330 Public Baths and Washhouses 767 5 8 308 Sewers do. 190 16 6 338 General Rate Account 16,315 9 9 330 Technical Instruction Fund 394 10 2 343 Sewers do. 1,472 12 4 338 Electricity Works 4,972 6 6 354 Technical Instruction Fund 79 9 6 343 12,338 5 2½ Electricity Works 915 1 10 354 By Stores on hand. 20,234 0 4 Dust Destructor 36 2 10 330 Electricity Works 486 15 11 354 522 18 9 12,861 3 11½ Due to Treasurer. In hands of Treasurer. By Cash Balances. Surplus. Deficit. Poor Rate 4,264 2 0 295 Burial Authority 18 1 10 299 Public Libraries and Museums ...... 1,919 18 10 304 Deficit. Public Baths and Washhouses ...... 149 1 1 308 Poor Rate ...... 1,107 14 3 295 General Rate ...... 6,781 3 4 330 Burial Authority ...... 78 0 5 299 Sewers Rate 570 18 4 ...... 338 Public Libraries and Museums 1,549 4 10 ...... 304 Techinical Instruction Fund ...... 604 17 2 343 Public Baths and Washhouses ...... 618 4 7 308 Electricity Works 3,782 19 7 ...... 354 General Rate ...... 5,104 5 9 330 Suspense Account (Charles Square) 524 2 7 375 Sewers Rate ...... 1,852 14 2 338 Technical Instruction Fund 929 17 10 ...... 343 9,160 4 4 9,455 0 5 Electricity Works 781 1 0 ...... 354 Add—In hands of Officials— 9,160 4 4 Suspense Account ...... 524 2 7 375 Accountant 946 14 2½ 294 16 1 3,260 3 8 9,285 1 9 Vestry Clerk 10 0 0 Surveyor 10 0 0 3,260 3 8 Medical Officer of Health 5 0 0 Total Deficit at 25th March, 1898 (see opposite) 6,024 18 1 ...... 971 14 2½ 330 Chief Librarian 51 8 0 304 Superintendent of Technical Schools 10 0 0 343 Chief Electrical Engineer 20 0 0 354 1,053 2 2½ 1,347 18 3½ 14,209 2 3 20,234 0 4 By Total Deficit at 25th March, 1898 (details shown opposite) . 6,024 18 1 WILLIAM GEORGE SMITH, Treasurer, London & Midland Bank, Limited (Shoreditch Branch £ 187,475 19 10 ERNST A. R. ADAMS, Accountant. £ 487,475 19 10 MORTGAGE DEBT. 383 383 STATEMENT shewing the DEBT OUTSTANDING on the ACCOUNTS of the VESTRY of the ??? Parish of ST. LEONARD, SHOREDITCH, in the COUNTY OF LONDON, and the Amounts of PRINCIPAL AND INTEREST charged in the Accounts ??? for the Year ended 25th March, 1898. Purpose of Loan. No.of Mort gage. Sanctioned. When Borrowed. Period within which to be repaid. First and Last years of Repayment Original Loan. Repaid. Balance of Loan ??? standing, ??? March,1898 Rate of Interest. Principal to be repaid during the ensuing financial year. Charged in Accounts. Date oi Sanction. Authority. Per Cent. When Payable. Amount. Date of Repayment. Mode of Repayment. Principal. Interest (including Tax). Total. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 Passmore Edwards Library— Years £ £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. Freehold Land LI 30 Jan.,1892 Local Govt. Board 12 April,1892 50 1893 1942 3,030 124 0 905 19 1 3½ Yearly 27 9 6 12 April By Annuity 26 10 11 106 1 2 132 12 1 Buildings L2 do. do. 12 April,1892 30 1893 1922 1,250 129 17 120 2 10 3½ Do 28 15 3 12 April do. 27 15 9 41 10 4 69 6 1 Furniture& Fittings L3 do. do. 12 April,1892 15 1893 1907 720 200 2 519 17 11 3½ Do 44 6 5 12 April 42 16 5 41 10 4 63 3 6 Hoxton Library— Freehold Land L4 11 Dec.,1894 do. 30 Nov.,1896 50 1897 1946 4,500 41 0 458 19 9 27/8 Half-yearly 42 4 2 30 May do. 41 0 3 129 11 1 170 11 4 30 Nov Buildings 57 22 Mar, 1897 do. 10 Dec.,1897 30 1898 1927 7,500 ...... 500 0 0 27/8 Half-yearly 160 1 1 10 June do. ...... ...... ...... 10 Dec. Public Baths and Washhouses— £ 17,000 495 0 504 19 7 £ 302 16 5 £ 138 3 4 297 9 8 435 13 0 Site for Hoxton Baths Bl 5 Jan., 1895 Local Govt. Board 23 Mar., 1895 50 1895 1945 15,700 395 15 304 4 2 3¼ Half-yearly 140 14 1 23 Mar & By Annuity 136 4 6 502 15 0 638 19 6 23 Sept. Buildings do. 51 27 Feb., 1897 do. 18 Mar., 1897 30 1898 1927 10,000 334 0 666 0 0 27/8 Quarterly 334 0 0 1Januarv Bylnstalment 334 0 0 226 13 1 560 13 1 do. do. 54 do. do. 21 July,1897 30 1898 1927 10,000 ...... 000 0 0 27/8 do. 334 0 0 1 July do ...... 128 11 9 128 11 9 do. do. 56 do. do. 10 Nov.,1897 30 1898 1927 14,000 ...... ,000 0 0 27/8 do. 466 0 0 1 October do. ...... 57 6 10 57 6 10 £ 49,700 729 15 970 4 2 £ 1,274 14 1 £ 470 4 6 915 6 8 1,385 11 2 Paving Works 23 16 Feb.,1877 Met. Board of Works 1 Oct. 1877 20 1878 1897 5,000 5,000 0 ...... ... ... ...... ... ...... 250 0 0 7 0 6 257 0 6 Street Improvements and Paving Works Improvement of 31 16 Feb.,1892 Lond.County Council 19 Feb., 1892 15 1893 1907 2,900 1,163 0 737 0 0 3½ Quarterly 193 0 0 1 Jan. By Instalment 193 0 0 67 11 0 260 11 0 ing Green Walk 37 9 April, 1895 do. 24 July, 1895 54 1896 1949 1,070 17 10 052 10 0 3½ Half-yearly 7 8 9 24 Jan.& 24 July By Annuity 7 3 8 37 3 9 44 7 5 York & Granite Paving 44 20 Oct.,1896 do. 21 Oct 1896 15 897 1911 1,020 68 0 952 0 0 3 Quarterly 68 0 0 1 Oct. By Instalment 68 0 0 29 12 3 97 12 3 Concrete Foundations 44 do. do. 21 Oct 1896 10 1897 1906 1,480 148 0 1,332 0 0 3 do. 148 0 0 1 Oct. do. 148 0 0 42 19 8 190 19 8 Wood Paving 44 do. do. 21 Oct., 1896 7 1897 1903 7,000 1,000 0 6,000 0 0 3 do. 1,000 0 0 1 Oct. do. 1,000 0 0 203 5 8 1,203 5 8 Paving Works 52 13 April,1897 do. 20 May, 1897 17 1898 1914 16,330 961 0 369 0 0 27/8 do. 961 0 0 1 Jan do 961 0 0 288 15 3 1,249 15 3 do 58 14 Dec., 1897 do. 16 Dec.,1897 12 1898 1909 3,175 ...... 175 0 0 27/8 do. 1,097 0 0 1 Oct. do. ...... ...... ...... £ 47,975 8,357 10 617 10 0 £ 3,474 8 9 £ 2,627 3 8 676 8 1 3,303 11 9 Sun Street to Worship 22 13 July, 1877 Met. Board of Works 31 July,1877 52 1878 1929 40,000 15,392 0 608 0 0 3¾ Quarterly 769 0 0 1 Oct. Bylnstalment 769 0 0 944 8 6 1,713 8 6 Street (Appold St.) Improvement 25 15 Nov.,1878 do 1 Oct., 1878 51 1879 1929 15,000' 14,573 1 426 18 6 3¾ do. 14 0 0 1 Oct. 14 0 0 16 8 3 30 8 3 £ 55,000 29,965 1 5,034 18 6 £ 783 0 0 £ 783 0 0 960 16 9 1,743 16 9 Alterations & additions to Town Hall 35 14 Nov.,1893 Lond.County Council 22 Nov.,1893 30 894 1 923 0,000 800 0 i 5 ,200 0 0 3i Quarterly 200 0 n 1 Oct. 200 0 0 187 5 3 387 5 3 1 FreeholdLand and Buildings (Old Fire Station) 55 26 Oct., 1897 do. 29 Oct., 1897 50 1898 1947 4,550 ...... 4,550 0 0 3 Half-yearly 39 18 8 29Apr. & By Annuity ...... ...... 29 Oct. £ 10,550 800 0 9,750 0 0 £ 239 18 8 £ 200 0 0 187 5 3 387 5 3 Goldsmith Square, Open Space 29 27 Oct., 1891 do. 31 Oct., 1891 49 1892 1940 2,000 240 0 1,760 0 0 3½ Quarterly 40 0 0 31 Oct. By Instalment 40 0 0 62 13 0 102 13 0 Dusting & ScavengingBuildings 30 27 Oct., 1891 . do. 31 Oct., 1891 30 1892 1921 1,700 336 0 1,364 0 0 3½ do. 56 0 0 1 Oct By Instalment 56 0 0 49 4 2 105 4 2 do. 32 22 Nov.,1892 do. 30 Nov.,1892 30 1893 1922 2,000 330 0 1,670 0 0 3½ do. 66 0 0 1 Oct. do. 66 0 0 60 3 6 126 3 6 £ 3,700 666 0 3,034 0 0 £ 122 0 0 £ 122 0 0 109 7 8 231 7 3 Amounts carried forward £ 185,925 41,253 7 144,671 12 3 £ 6,236 17 11 £ 4,380 11 6 3,209 7 1 7,589 18 7 384 384 STATEMENT shewing the DEBT OUTSTANDING on the ACCOUNTS of the VESTRY of the ??? Parish of ST. LEONARD, SHOREDITCH in the COUNTY OF LONDON, and the amounts of PRINCIPAL AND INTEREST charged in the Accounts ??? the Year ended 25th March, 1898—(Continued). Purpose of Loan. No.of Mortgage. Sanctioned. When Borrowed. Period within which to be repaid. First and Last years of Repayment. Repaid. ??? of Loan landing, arch, 1898 Rate of Interest. Principal to be repaid during the ensuing financial year. Charged in Accou nts. Date of Sanction. Authority. Original Loan. Per Cent. When Payable. Amount. Date of Repayment. Mode of Repayment. Principal. Interest (including Tax). Total. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 ll 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 Years £ £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. Amounts brought forward £ 185,925 41,253 7 ??? 71 12 3 £ 6,236 17 11 £ 4,380 11 6 3,209 7 1 7,589 18 7 Moira Place and number's Place Area 41 80 July, 1895 Lond. County Council 7 Aug., 1895 54 1896 1949 10,000 200 16 ???9 3 9 27/8 Half-yearly 84 8 11 7 Feb. & By Annuity 82 1 1 284 10 7 366 11 8 7 Aug. do. do. 42 17 Dec., 1895 do. 10 Jan.,1896 53 1896 1949 10,000 165 8 ???4 11 4 27/8 do. 86 6 9 10 July& do. 83 18 0 285 11 10 369 9 10 10 Jan. do. do. 45 20 Oct., 1896 do. 30 Oct., 1896 2 1898 1898 2,500 ...... ???0 0 0 27/8 Quarterly ...... 1 Oct 1898 In one sum ...... 71 17 8 71 17 8 do. do. 46 20 Oct., 1896 do. 30 Oct., 1896 52 1897 1948 7,500 63 8 ???36 11 1 27/8 Half-yearly 65 5 8 30 Apr.& By Annuity 63 8 11 215 18 11 279 7 10 30 Oct. £ 30,000 429 13 ??? 70 6 2 £ 236 1 4 £ 229 8 0 857 19 0 1,087 7 0 Dust Destructor- Buildings, Machinery, and Plant 47 3 Nov., 1896 Lond.CountyCouncil 4 Nov., 1896 30 1897 1926 6,040 202 0 ???38 0 0 27/8 Quarterly 202 0 0 1 Oct. Bylnstalment 202 0 0 172 4 0 374 4 0 do. do. 47 8 Nov., 1896 do. 4 Nov.,1896 15 1897 l911 8,200 547 0 ???53 0 0 27/8 do. 547 0 0 1 Oct. do. 547 0 0 231 16 4 778 16 4 £ 14,240 749 0 ???91 0 0 £ 749 0 0 £ 749 0 0 404 0 4 1,153 0 4 Contruetion of New Sewers— Hoxton District 24 15 Feb., 1878 Met. Board of Works 19 Feb., 1878 30 1878 1907 4,000 2,670 0 ???30 0 0 3¾ Quarterly 133 0 0 1 Oct. By Instalment 133 0 0 53 12 5 186 12 5 do. do. 53 13 April, 1897 Lond.County Council 20 May, 1897 17 1898 1914 2,500 148 0 ???52 0 0 27/8 do. 147 0 0 1 Jan. do. 148 0 0 44 4 2 192 4 2 Haggerston do. 33 1 Aug., 1893 do. 11 Aug., 1893 20 1894 1913 2,400 480 0 ???20 0 0 3½ do. 120 0 0 1 July do. 120 0 0 69 6 0 189 6 0 do. do. 34 1 Aug., 1893 do. 11 Aug.,1893 30 1894 1923 3,500 468 0 ???32 0 0 3½ do. 117 0 0 1 July do. 117 0 0 108 3 5 225 3 5 do. do. 39 30 July, 1895 do. 7 Aug., 1895 20 1896 1915 4,225 424 0 ???801 0 0 3 do. 212 0 0 31 July do. 212 0 0 117 4 2 329 4 2 do. do. 40 30 July, 1895 do. 7 Aug., 1895 30 1896 1925 5,050 338 0 ???712 0 0 3 do. 169 0 0 31 July do. 169 0 0 143 17 10 312 17 10 Hoxton and Hagger ston istricts 59 21 Dec., 1897 do. 23 Dec., 1897 30 1898 1927 5,995 ...... ???995 0 0 27/8 do. 200 0 0 1 Oct. do. ...... ...... ...... do. do. 59 21 Dec., 1897 do. 23 Dec., 1897 20 1898 1917 7,450 ...... ???450 0 0 27/8 do. 373 0 0 1 Oct. do. ... ...... ...... Underground Sanitary Conveniences- £ 35,120 4,528 — 0 ???592 0 0 £ 1,471 0 0 £ 899 0 0 536 8 0 1,435 8 0 High Street, No.1 43 13 Mar. 1896 Local Govt. Board 8 July,1896 30 1897 1926 1,900 64 0 ???836 0 0 3 Quarterly 64 0 0 1 July Bylnstalment 64 0 0 56 0 10 120 0 10 do. No. 2 60 19 Oct., 1897 do. 4 Mar., 1898 30 1899 1928 2,450 ...... ???450 0 0 3 do. 137 0 0 1 Jan do. ...... ...... ...... New North Road 60 19 Oct., 1897 do. 4 Mar , 1898 30 1899 1928 1,650 ...... ???650 0 0 3 do. Old Street 49 28 Nov., 1896 do. 31 Dec., 1896 30 1897 1926 2,500 84 0 ???416 0 0 3 do. 84 0 0 1 Oct. 84 0 0 74 11 6 158 11 6 Electricity Works — £ 8,500 148 0 352 0 0 £ 285 0 0 £ 148 0 0 130 12 4 278 12 4 Site for Electric Lighting Station 36 31 July, 1894 Lond.County Council 28 Mar., 1895 54 1896 1949 12,200 262 6 ???937 13 4 3¼ Half-yearly 93 5 2 23 Mar.& By Annuity 90 5 9 391 15 5 482 1 2 23 Sep. do. do. 37 9 April, 1895 do. 24 July, 1895 54 1896 1949 930 15 4 914 15 9 3½ do. 6 9 4 24Jan.,& do. 6 4 10 32 6 7 38 11 5 24 July do. do. do. do. 38 38 23 July, 1895 23 July, 1895 do. do. 24 July, 1895 24 July, 1895 54 30 1896 1896 1949 1925 107 580 4 40 0 0 103 540 0 0 0 0 3½ 3½ Quarterly do. 2 20 0 0 0 0 30 April 30 April Bylnstalment do. 2 20 0 0 0 0 3 19 12 1 5 6 5 39 12 1 5 6 Electric Light Installation 48 3 Nov., 1896 do. 13 Nov.,1896 42 1897 1938 15,415 192 4 ???222 15 10 27/8 Half-yearly 197 16 0 13 May & By Annuity 192 4 2 443 8 11 635 13 1 13 Nov. do. do. 50 9 Mar., 1897 do. 18 Mar., 1897 42 1897 1939 41,800 521 4 ???,278 15 11 27/8 do. 536 7 0 18 Sep. & do. 521 4 1 1,202 7 7 1,723 11 8 18 Mar. £ 71,032 1,034 19 ???997 0 10 £ 855 17 6 £ 831 18 10 2,092 12 5 2,924 11 3 Total £ 344,817 48,143 0 ???6,673 19 3 £ 9,833 16 9 £ 7,237 18 4 7,230 19 2 14,468 17 6 385 STATEMENT shewing the MORTGAGE DEBT Outstanding at 25th March, 1898, and the Rates per cent, of interest payable thereon. Purpose of Loan. Rate of Interest. Total. per cent. 3 per cent. 3¼ per cent. 3½ per cent. 3¾ per cent. Poor Rate. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. Public Libraries and Musoums 11,958 19 9 .... .... 4,545 19 10 .... 16,504 19 7 Public Baths and Washhouses 33,666 0 0 .... 15,304 4 2 .... .... 48,970 4 2 General and Lighting Rates. Street Improvements and Paving Works 28,544 0 0 8,284 0 0 .... 2,789 10 0 .... 39,617 10 0 Sun Street to Worship Street(Appolo Street) Improvement .... .... .... .... 25,034 18 6 25,034 18 6 Town Hall Extension .... 4,550 0 0 .... 5,200 0 0 .... 9,750 0 0 Goldsmith Square, Open Space .... .... .... 1,760 0 0 .... 1,760 0 0 Dusting and Scavenging .... .... .... 3,034 0 0 .... 3,034 0 0 Moira Place & Plumbers Place Area 29,570 6 2 .... .... .... .... 29,570 6 2 Dust Destructor 13,491 0 0 .... .... .... .... 13,491 0 0 Sewers Rate. Construction of Now Sewers 15.797 0 0 8,513 0 0 .... 4,952 0 0 1,330 0 0 30,592 0 0 Underground sanitary Conveniences .... 8,352 0 0 .... .... .... 8,352 0 0 Electricity Works. Site for Station and Electric Light Installation 56,501 11 9 .... 11,937 13 4 1,557 15 9 .... 69,997 0 10 Total 189,528 17 8 29,699 0 0 27,241 17 6 23,839 5 7 26,364 18 6 296,673 19 3 BALANCES OF LOANS duo to: — £ s. d. Metropolitan Board of Works (now transferred to London County Council) 26,364 18 6 London County Council 265,763 0 11 Prudential Assuranco Company, Limited 4,545 19 10 Total Mortgage Debt outstanding on the security of the Poor, General, Lighting and Sewers Rate Funds £ 296,673 19 3 Memo :—Dobt at 25th March, 1897 218,311 17 7 Borrowed by Vestry since that date— Public Libraries and Museums 7,500 0 0 Public Baths and Washhouses 24,000 0 0 Paving Works 29,505 0 0 Town Hall Extension 4,550 0 0 Underground Sanitary Conveniences 4,100 0 0 Construction of New Sewers 15,945 0 0 85,600 0 0 303,911 17 7 Less— Repaid during year (fo. 384) 7,237 18 4 Balances of Loans at 25th March, 1898 (as shown above) £ 296,673 19 3 Note:-Average Rate of Interest per cent. 1890-91 3 17 9 Do do. do 1891-92 3 15 11 Do. do. do. 1892-93 3 15 6 Do. do. do. 1893-94 3 14 1 Do. do. do. 1894-95 3 12 0 Do. do. do. 1895-96 3 7 4 Do. do. do. 1896-97 3 2 8 Do. do. do. 1897-98 3 1 0 Accountant's Office, Shoreditch Town Hall, London, E.C., 25th March, 1898. ERNST A. R. ADAMS, Accountant. 386 STATEMENT SHEWING LOANS AND BALANCES OUTSTANDING, from [25th March] 1891 to [25th March] 1898. Year ended 25th March. Original Loans. Balance of Loans Outstanding at end of Year. Principal to be repaid during Financial Year. Actual Payments charged in Accounts. Principal. Interest (including tax). TOTAL. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. 1891 129,000 0 0 45,404 18 6 3,412 6 8 4,459 6 8 1,900 12 1 6,359 18 9 1892 124,900 0 0 53,292 11 10 4,562 6 8 3,412 6 8 1,784 9 9 5,196 16 5 1893 131,900 0 0 55,730 5 2 4,713 0 0 4,562 6 8 1,967 7 10 6,529 14 6 1894 143,800 0 0 62,917 5 2 5,152 19 2 4,713 0 0 2,126 14 2 6,839 14 2 1895 156,000 0 0 69,964 6 0 4,430 13 2 5,152 19 2 2,200 18 11 7,353 18 1 1896 191,662 0 0 113,012 12 5 4,555 14 10 4,613 13 7 3,228 1 11 7,841 15 6 1897 1898 295,517 344,817 0 0 0 0 218,311 296,673 17 19 7 3 7,375 9,833 12 16 7 9 4,555 7,237 14 18 10 4 4,096 7,230 18 19 3 2 8,652 14,468 13 17 1 6 ALLOCATION OF OUTSTANDING BALANCES OF LOANS, from [25th March] 1891 to [25th March] 1898. At 25th March. poor rate. GENERAL AND LIGHTING RATES. SEWERS RATE. Electricity Works. TOTAL. Average Rate of Interest Per Cent. Public Libraries and Museums. Public Baths and Washhouses. Street Improvements and Paving Works. Town Hall Buildings. Recreation Grounds and Open Spaces. Dusting and Scavenging. Moira Place and Plumber's Place Area. Dust Destructor. Construction of New Sewers. Underground Sanitary Conveniences. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s d. £ s. d. 1891 .... .... 38,143 18 6 5,000 0 0 .... .... .... .... 2,261 0 0 .... .... 45,404 18 6 3 17 9 1892 .... .... 39,097 18 6 4,066 13 4 2,000 0 0 6,000 0 0 .... .... 2,128 0 0 .... .... 53,292 11 10 3 15 11 1893 5,000 0 0 .... 36,557 18 6 3,133 6 8 1,960 0 0 7,084 0 0 .... .... 1,995 0 0 .... .... 55,730 5 2 3 15 6 1894 4,915 6 8 .... 34,017 18 6 8,200 0 0 1,920 0 0 6,102 0 0 .... .... 7,762 0 0 .... .... 62,917 5 2 3 14 1 1895 4,827 14 2 .... 31,477 18 6 7,066 13 4 1,880 0 0 5,120 0 0 .... .... 7,392 0 0 .... 12,200 0 0 69,964 6 0 3 12 0 1896 4,737 0 3 l5,572 6 4 30,804 10 11 5,933 6 8 1,840 0 0 4,138 0 0 19,960 19 7 .... 16,297 0 0 .... 13,729 8 8 113,012 12 5 3 7 4 1897 9,143 2 11 25,440 8 8 38,557 12 2 5,400 0 0 1,800 0 0 3,156 0 0 29,799 14 2 14,240 0 0 15,546 0 0 4,400 0 0 70,828 19 8 218,311 17 7 3 2 8 1898 16,504 19 7 48,970 4 2 64,652 8 6 9,750 0 0 1,760 0 0 3,034 0 0 29,570 6 2 13,491 0 0 30,592 0 0 8,352 0 0 69,997 0 10 296,673 19 3 3 1 0 SALARIES AND ALLOWANCES TO OFFICIALS. 388 388 salaries and allowances to officials— from 25th march, 1897, to 25th march, 1898. Name. Nature of Office. Annual Salary at 25th March, 1898. Total. Paid during Financial Year. Total. Fo. Salaries charged in Accounts. Remarks. Poor Rate. General Rate sewers Rate. Technical Instruction. Moira Place Area. Electricity Works. Baths and Washhouses. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. Burial Authority. H. Mansfield Robinson Clerk to Authority ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... See Clerk's Department (fo. 389). Ernst A. R. Adams Accountant to do. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... See Accountant's Dept (fo. 389) Henry Hyatt Gardener .... .... 20 9 8 .... .... .... .... .... .... .... Uniform Caps provided. S. Archer Gardener 65 0 0 23 15 0 George Bance Gardener 65 0 0 40 0 0 A. Polson Gardener ... 1 1 0 F. Cohen Gardener ... 7 5 10 R.Omes Gardener ... 2 8 0 George Cowling Gardener 65 0 0 60 18 4 J. Sheppard Gardener 62 8 0 19 16 0 Charles James Casbard Gardener 65 0 0 60 18 4 John Keene Gardener 65 0 0 59 0 6 David Quarry Gardener 65 0 0 20 7 6 452 8 0 316 0 2 298 316 0 2 ... ... ... ... ... ... Public Libraries & Museums. W. C. Plant Chief Librarian 2,00 0 0 200 0 0 Thomas Aspling Sub-Librarian ... 1 0 0 G Vicars Brown Senior Assistant 59 16 0 59 16 0 G.E. Roebuck do. 57 4 0 57 4 0 John Wilson Brown do (from 11th April, 1897) 57 4 0 53 18 0 William Brace Assistant 46 16 0 42 6 0 A.M.J. Steed do. 33 16 0 33 10 0 A. Thomas do. 33 16 0 33 10 0 G. M. Morgan do. 33 16 0 33 10 0 W. Howe do. (from 30th, August 1897) 8 14 0 D. Thomas do. (from 12 th Mar., 1897, to 31st July, 1897) 0 6 0 1 P. Wilson do. 15 12 0 5 14 0 Thos Duddles Caretaker 84 10 0 82 17 6 J. T. Charlesworth do. 84 10 0 82 17 6 707 0 0 695 3 0 303 695 3 0 ... ... ... ... ... ... Public Baths and Washhouses J.A.D. Milne Minuting Clerk ... ... 3 3 0 T.L. Johnson do. ... ... 4 4 0 W. C. Gardner Clerk of Works 218 8 0 226 16 0 218 8 0 234 3 0 307 3 3 0 ... ... ... ... ... 231 0 0 Carried forward £ 1,377 16 0 ... 1,245 6 2 1,014 6 2 ... ... ... ... ... 231 0 0 389 389 SALARIES AND ALLOWANCES TO OFFICIALS (CONTINUED)— FROM 25TH MARCH, 1897, TO 25TH MARCH, 1898. Name. Nature of Office. Annual Salary at 25th March, 1898. Total. Paid during Financial Year. Total. Fo. Salaries charged in Accounts. Remarks. Poor Rate. General Rate. Sewers Rate. Technical Instruction. Moira Place Area. Electricity Works. Baths and Washhouses £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. Brought forward £ 1,377 16 0 ... 1,245 6 2 1,014 6 2 ... ... ... ... ... 231 0 0 Clerk's Department. H. Mansfield Robinson Solicitor, Vestry Clerk and Clerk to the Overseers 550 0 0 536 12 10 Arthur 0. Clarke (Solicitor) Assistant Solicitor to 1st June, 1897 ... 27 17 6 F. S. Robinson do. do. (from 20th Sept., 1897) 200 0 0 102 10 2 John A. D. Milne Chief Clerk 135 0 0 130 13 0 M. Gardner Assistant Clerk (from 31st May, 1897, to 18th Sept., 1897) ... 45 11 0 W. L. Black Assistant Clerk (from 8th Nov., 1897) 120 0 0 45 18 4 R. Molton Malcolm Assistant Clerk 75 0 0 70 12 0 C. W. V. Harris Junior Clerk (from 17th May, 1897, to 10th Sept., 1897) ... 6 16 0 \ Ernest Richard Stow do. (from 11th Sept., 1897) 20 16 0 11 4 0 1,100 16 0 977 14 10 313 ... 497 17 5 479 17 5 ... ... ... ... ... 333 Accountant's Department. Ernst A. R. Adams Accountant to Vestry, Overseers of the Poor, and Assessment Committee 350 0 0 327 14 10 William Culshaw. Chief Clerk 175 0 0 163 17 4 Rate Department. John W. Phillips Rate Clerk 115 0 0 113 18 2 Horace G. Gregory do. 110 0 0 110 0 0 Fredk. S. Case Assistant 75 0 0 70 12 0 James Alfred Eke Junior Clerk (to 30th April, 1897) 3 0 0 A. Fawcett Clerk (from 24th Dec., 1897) 105 0 0 26 5 0 J. Trebilcock do. do. 95 0 0 23 15 0 G. W. Flaxman Junior Clerk (from 8th May, 1897, to 31st Dec., 1897) 21 15 0 E. G. Marlow do. (from 23rd Jan., 1898) ... 26 0 0 4 10 0 A. Cooper do. (from 7 th Feb., 1898) .. 26 0 0 3 10 0 ... Carried forward£ 1,077 0 0 2,478 12 0 868 17 4 25,223 1 0 1,014 3 2 497 17 5 479 17 5 ... 231 0 0 390 390 SALARIES AND ALLOWANCES TO OFFICIALS (CONTINUED)— FROM 25TH MARCH, 1 897, TO 25TH MARCH, 1898. 390 Name. Nature of Office. Annual Salary at 25th March, 1898. Total. Paid during Financial Year. Total. Fo. Salaries charged in Accounts. Remarks. Poor Rate. General Rate Sewers Rate. Technical Instruction. Moira Place Area. Electricity Works. Baths and Washhouses £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. ] Accountant's Department— (continued). Brought forward £1,077 0 0 2,478 12 0 868 17 4 2,223 1 0 1,014 6 2 497 17 5 479 17 5 281 0 0 H. Leopold Loly Rate Collector 185 0 0 181 5 0 Arthur Hurn do. 175 0 0 171 5 0 George C. Young do. 200 0 0 200 0 0 Edwin Cranston do. 200 0 0 200 0 0 Robert S. Ricketts do. 185 0 0 181 5 0 James H. Pickup do. 165 0 0 161 5 0 Alfred Barr do. 165 0 0 161 5 0 Harry Taylor do. 175 0 0 171 5 0 298 2,527 0 0 2,296 7 4 313 713 15 0 1,164 11 2 418 1 2 1338 Goldsmith Square Recreation Ground. Francis Childs Gardener & Caretaker. 70 4 0 76 5 6 Uniform Cap provided. 70 4 0 76 5 6 316 76 5 6 Surveyor's Department. J. Rush Dixon Surveyor 260 0 0 255 15 10 Henry J. Hills Assistant Surveyor 160 0 0 151 17 8 J. Newton Heale Clerk 160 0 0 152 4 4 Herbert Edward Tasman Junior Assistant 26 0 0 26 10 0 316 606 0 0 586 7 10 334 300 8 11 279 18 11 Dusting & Scavenging Department. (See Surveyor's Department (fo. 390). J. Rush Dixon Surveyor Samuel Dawkins Clerk & Bookkeeper 124 16 0 126 14 7 Including Overtime. F. Taplin, house, rent, gas, rates and taxes provided. Frederick Taplin Wharf Manager 130 0 0 120 10 0 Henry J. Smith Dust Inspector 117 0 0 112 15 11 371 16 0 360 0 6 320 360 0 6 Lighting Department. Chas. H. Doughty Lighting Engineer 250 0 0 228 0 3 250 0 0 228 0 3 322 228 0 3 Medical Officer's Department Lewis T. F. Bryett Medical Officer of Health 500 0 0 500 0 0 Hugh Alexander Chief Sanitary Inspector 200 0 0 200 0 0 James W. Lear Sanitary Inspector 150 0 0 150 0 0 Charles H. Quelch do. 150 0 0 150 0 0 William Firth do. 185 0 0 130 14 0 Samuel H. Brown Sanitary Inspector (to 5th Oct., 1897) 65 1 10 Edward T. D. Jordan Sanitary Inspector 125 0 0 121 10 4 A. A. Lindon do. (from 1st Dec., 1897) 120 0 0 38 4 4 Carried forward 1,380 0 0 6,303 12 0 1,355 10 6 5,770 2 5 1,728 1 2 2,63 3 3 9 1,177 17 6 231 0 0 391 391 SALARIES AND ALLOWANCES TO OFFICIALS (Continued)— from 25th March, 1897, to 25th March, 1898. 391 Name. Nature of Office. Annual Salary at 25th March, 1898. Total. Paid during Financial Year. Total. Fo. Salaries charged in Accounts. Remarks. Poor Rate. General Rate Sewers Rate. Technical Instruction, Moira Place Area. Electricity Works. Baths and Washhouses. £ s. d. £ s. d £ s. d £ s. d £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. Brought forward 1,380 0 0 6,303 12 0 1,355 10 6 5,770 2 5 1,728 1 2 2,633 3 9 1,177 17 6 231 0 0 Medical Officer's Department (continued.) H. C. Rodford Clerk 78 0 0 79 10 0 Geo. W. Flaxman Junior Assistant (to 7th May, 1897) 3 10 0 Transferred to Account tant's Department A. Hayes Do. (from 9th May, 1897) 20 16 0 18 8 0 J. Barclay Messenger 78 0 0 72 7 0 1,556 16 0 1,529 5 6 324 851 10 3 677 15 3 335 Sale of Food and Drugs Acts. Thomas Stevenson Public Analyst 50 0 0 50 0 0 50 0 0 50 0 0 324 50 0 0 Dr. Thomas Stevenson also received a fee of 10s. each for Analyses and Reports on articles examined, (see fo. 324. £92) Town Hall Disinfecting Station. H. G. Suffield Disinfector 78 0 0 79 10 0 Frederick Ford do. 78 0 0 79 10 0 William Blott 1897) 34 13 0 I. Innes do. (from 21st Nov., 1897, to 11th March,1898) 65 0 0 19 7 8 Temporary Assistants 12 13 2 221 0 0 225 13 10 325 225 13 10 Public Mortuary. Henry Wilton Caretaker 32 10 0 33 2 6 32 10 0 33 2 6 325 33 2 6 Assessment Committee. H. Mansfield Robinson Clerk to Committee 50 0 0 50 0 0 50 0 0 50 0 0 327 50 0 0 Moira Place & Plumbers Place Area. D. A. Nicholl (Solicitor) Conveyancing Clerk, to 10th April, 1897 12 7 0 A. F. Sharman (Solicitor) do. (from 24th May, 1987, to 7th July, 1897) 21 14 0 34 1 0 34 1 0 371 Establishment of Town Hall. W. C. Filmer Hall Keeper 90 0 0 88 18 3 Apartments,Coal,Gas, Water, Rates, Taxes & Uniform provided John William Christie Doorkeeper (to 21st Jan., 1898) 55 4 0 Uniform provided. 90 0 d 144 2 3 326 L4 2 3 Carried forward £8,303 18 0 7,836 7 6 1,728 1 2 3,987 12 7 1,855 12 9 34 1 0 231 0 0 392 392 SALARIES AND ALLOWANCES TO OFFICIALS (Continued)— from 25th March, 1897, to 25th March, 1898. Name. Nature of Office. Annual Salary at 25th March, 1898. Total. Paid during Financial Year Total. Fo. Salaries charged in Accounts. Remarks. Poor Rate. General Rate. Sewers Rate. Technical Instruction. Moira Place Area. Electricity Works. Baths and Washhouses. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s, d Brought forward £8,303 18 0 7,836 7 6 1,728 1 2 3,987 12 7 1,855 12 9 34 1 0 231 0 0 Shoreditch Municipal Technical Schools. H. Mansfield Robinson Hon. Secretary See Clerk's Department (fo. 389). Ernst A. R. Adams Accountant See Accountant's De( partment (fo. 389). Walter E. Degerdon Superintendent 225 0 0 221 7 0 E. Guidal Instructor in Drawing and Early Design Fees. Fees. 0 10 0 0 10 0 W. Broad do. do. 39 7 6 39 7 6 Robert Baker do. Wood Carving 44 0 0 44 0 0 A. Gardner do. do. 5 5 0 5 5 0 Robert Baker do. Modelling 21 0 0 21 0 0 William Sim do. Cabinet Making 52 0 0 52 0 0 S. T. Stilwell do Drawing 23 5 0 23 5 0 G. N. Flashman do. Cabinet Drawing 10 10 0 10 10 0 Geo. Raddon do. Workshop Mensuration 21 0 0 21 0 0 Do. do. Manual Training 27 10 0 27 10 0 Sidney A. Switzer do. Carpentry and Joinery 2 0 0 2 0 0 Charles II. Quelch do. Plumbing 43 0 0 43 0 0 William Firth do. do 19 10 0 19 10 0 A. M. Sillar do. Electrical Fitting. 7 10 0 7 10 0 W. H. Walton do. do. do. 1 5 0 1 5 0 E. J. Everett do. do, do. 2 5 0 2 5 0 W. H. Mern do. do. do. 16 5 0 16 5 0 Mrs. L. Monroe. do Dressmaking 32 12 6 32 12 6 John Higgins Caretaker 77 9 0 671 4 0 77 9 0 667 11 0 342 221 7 0 • • > 341 368 15 0 342 77 9 0 Electricity Works. C.Newton Russell Chief Electrical Engineer 250 0 0 250 13 9 H. D. Crombie Canvasser and Clerk 117 0 0 107 10 0 H. Allensby Junior Clerk 32 10 0 27 5 0 W. A. Taylor Stores Clerk (from 3rd Jan., 1898) 78 0 0 477 10 0 18 0 0 403 8 9 323 83 6 8 63 6 9 Capital Account. 349 350 256 18 4 Revenue Account. 351 ' Total £9,452 12 0 8,907 7 8 1,728 1 2 4,070 19 3 1,855 12 9 667 11 0 34 1 0 320 2 1 231 0 0 RATES ASSESSED AND LEVIED in 1897-98, WITH SUMMARY OF RATE COLLECTION 1895-98. 395 395 POOR RATES, Assessed and Levied in respect of the Year, from 25th March, 1897, to 25th March, 1898. 395 No. Collecting Districts, Public Companies, &c. Rateable Value at Lady-Day, 1898. \ Rates Levied at 3/5 in the £. Commission allowed to Owners. Arrears at 25th March, 1897. Total Amount to be Collected. Amount actually Collected. Recoverable Arrears at 25th March, 1898. Legally Excused. Irrecoverable. Otherwise not Recoverable. No. Empties. Reduced on appeal. Commission allowed to Owners. Runs. No effects and Insolvencies. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 Collecting Districts. £ £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. 1 Moorfields Ward 105,785 17,848 12 11 443 4 10 11 11 5 17,416 19 6 16,810 18 8 42 1 0 19 14 2 414 12 10 106 1 4 1 18 5 11 16 2 9 16 11 l 2 Church North District 71,725 12,187 16 1 684 1 6 29 17 9 11,533 12 4 11,252 2 4 26 11 2 208 11 7 11 19 7 20 17 4 13 10 4 2 3 Church South District 83,418 13,843 13 10 385 9 8 30 12 7 13,488 16 9 12,827 9 8 7 2 0 2 11 3 566 8 2 42 0 6 0 14 3 20 4 4 22 6 1 3 4 Hoxton Ward 79,029 13,503 5 5 552 3 4 35 11 3 12,986 13 4 12,404 8 10 10 0 0 17 11 8 484 17 4 18 18 1 1 14 4 24 3 4 24 19 9 4 5 Wenlock Ward 63,190 10,668 9 3 361 5 4 12 1 5 10,319 5 4 10,098 4 2 13 14 9 156 3 11 5 3 11 0 8 1. 29 15 6 15 15 0 5 6 Whitmore Ward 57,934 9,910 7 2 750 8 0 34 12 10 9,194 12 0 8,991 3 9 22 19 6 7 9 11 105 13 0 27 17 8 2 5 10 28 15 6 8 6 10 6 7 Kingsland and Haggerston West District 57,813 9,888 6 8 683 19 0 23 11 2 9,227 18 10 9,049 13 0 9 7 6 9 10 7 125 17 9 12 16 11 12 8 7 8 4 6 7 8 Haggerston East & Acton District 67,247 11,485 15 9 1,013 10 5 23 5 1 10,495 10 5 10,312 0 9 1 8 5 3 8 8 140 10 4 11 9 4 7 9 2 16 5 5 2 18 4 8 586,141 99,336 7 1 4,874 2 1 201 3 6 94,663 8 6 91,746 1 2 119 10 1 74 1 0 2,202 14 11 236 7 4 14 10 1 164 6 2 105 17 9 Public Companies, &c. 9 School Board for London 13,407 2,282 4 6 2,282 4 6 2,282 4 6 9 10 Gas Light and Coke Co. 31,483 5,378 6 11 0 8 6 5,377 18 5 5,368 16 1 9 2 4 10 11 Great Eastern Railway Co. 19,000 3,245 16 8 3,245 16 8 3,245 16 8 11 12 London & North Western Railway Co 26,716 4,563 19 8 4,563 19 8 4,563 19 8 12 13 North London Railway Co 26,588 4,542 2 4 4,542 2 4 4,542 2 4 13 14 Shoreditch Town Hall 1,000 170 16 8 170 16 8 170 16 8 14 Government Property. 15 H.M.Treasury—Shoreditch County Court 240 41 0 0 41 0 0 41 0 0 15 £704,575 119,560 (see fo. 290) 13 10 4,874 10 7 201 3 6 114,887 6 9 111,960 17 1 119 10 1 74 1 0 2,202 14 11 245 9 8 14 10 1 164 6 2 105 17 9 16 Percentage this year 1897-98 ... 100.00 4.077 .168 96.091 93.643 .099 .062 1.843 .205 .013 .138 .088 16 17 Do. last year 1896-97 ... 100.00 4.016 .180 96.164 92.979 .162 .084 2.601 .112 .013 .184 .029 17 396 396 GENERAL and SEWER RATES, Assessed and Levied in respect of the Year from 25th March, 1897, to 25th March, 1898, 396 No. Collecting Districts, Public Companies, &c. Rateable Value at Lady-Pay, 1898. Rates Levied. Commission allowed to Owners. Arrears at 25th March 1897. Total amount to be collected. Amount actually collected. Recoverable Arrears at 25th March, 1898. Irrecoverable. Otherwise not Recoverable. No. General Rate at 2/3 in the £. Sewers Hate at 2d. in the £. Total of Vestry Rates at 2/5 in the £. Legally excused. Empties. Reduced on appeal. Commission allowed to Owners. Runs. No effects and Insolvencies 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 Collecting District £ £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. 1 Moorfields Ward 104,073 11,576 2 5 855 15 11 12,431 18 4 314 5 7 8 10 9 12,126 3 6 11,688 17 5 33 8 9 15 15 4 295 19 0 76 12 6 1 5 9 7 12 9 6 12 0 1 2 Church North District. 71,725 8,031 13 1 594 13 7 8,626 6 8 483 6 4 24 1 6 8,167 1 10 7,957 19 11 21 2 0 155 14 0 8 12 6 15 4 7 8 8 10 2 3 Church South District. 83,418 9,152 9 11 678 9 9 9,830 19 8 273 2 2 27 15 2 9,585 12 8 9,120 11 4 5 14 0 1 19 5 396 7 6 28 8 9 0 10 0 13 11 10 18 9 10 3 4 Hoxton Ward 79,029 8,893 4 11 659 6 11 9,552 11 10 390 11 2 31 14 11 9,193 15 7 8,779 1 10 8 0 0 11 9 5 342 18 2 14 4 6 1 7 6 17 11 4 19 2 10 4 5 Wenlock Ward 63,190 7,031 15 3 518 11 2 7,550 6 5 256 9 7 9 19 1 7,303 15 11 7,141 16 2 ..... 8 6 8 117 0 10 3 16 3 0 5 0 20 13 8 11 17 4 5 6 Whitmore Ward 57,934 6,525 17 5 483 18 10 7,009 11 3 531 19 4 30 16 9 6,508 8 8 6,355 18 9 18 2 11 5 11 5 79 3 1 19 6 0 1 16 9 22 17 1 5 12 8 6 7 Kingsland and Haggerston West District 57,813 6,510 15 1 482 3 2 6,992 18 8 484 5 10 21 1 7 6,529 14 0 6,407 18 3 7 10 0 6 9 5 84 12 8 8 5 8 ...... 8 11 5 6 6 7 7 8 Haggerston East and Acton District 67,247 7,564 4 10 560 7 9 8,124 12 7 718 9 5 17 1 11 7,423 5 1 7,293 9 10 1 2 8 2 9 4 99 13 2 8 5 11 5 18 7 10 8 3 1 17 4 8 584,429 65,286 2 11 4,888 2 1 70,119 5 0 3,452 9 5 171 1 8 66,837 17 3 64,745 13 6 95 0 4 52 1 0 1,571 8 5 167 12 1 3 7 116 10 11 78 7 5 Public (Companies, &c. 9 School Board for London 12,720 1,431 0 0 106 0 0 1 537 0 0 ...... ...... 1,537 0 0 1,537 0 0 ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... 9 10 Gas Light & Coke Co. 31,483 3,541 16 9 262 7 2 3,804 3 11 0 6 0 ...... 3,803 17 11 3,797 15 9 ...... ...... ...... 6 2 2 ...... ...... ...... 10 11 Groat Eastern Railway Co 19,000 2,137 10 0 158 6 8 2,295 16 8 ...... ...... 2,295 16 8 2,295 16 8 ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... 11 12 London & North Western Railway Co. 22,262 2,504 9 6 185 10 4 2,689 19 10 ...... ...... 2,689 19 10 2,689 19 10 ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... 12 13 North London Railway Co. 26,588 2,991 3 0 221 11 4 3,212 14 4 ...... ...... 3,212 14 4 3,212 14 4 ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... 13 14 Shoroditch Town Hall 1,000 112 10 0 8 6 8 120 16 8 ...... ...... 120 16 8 120 16 8 ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... 14 15 Government Property. H.M. Treasury (Shoreditch County Court) 240 27 0 0 2 0 0 29 0 0 ...... ...... 29 0 0 29 0 0 ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... 15 £697,722 78,031 12 2 5,777 4 3 83,808 16 5 3,452 15 5 171 1 8 80,527 2 8 78,428 16 9 95 0 4 52 1 0 1,571 8 5 173 14 3 11 3 7 116 10 11 78 7 5 (see fo. 311) (see fo. 333) 16 Percentage this year, 1897-98 ...... 93.107 6.898 100.00 4.120 .204 96.084 93.581 .113 .062 1.874 .208 .013 .139 .094 16 17 Do. last year 1896-97 93.759 6.241 100.00 4.057 .195 96.138 92.803 .186 0.092 2.708 .109 .0.14 .197 .029 17 397 397 SUMMARY OF COLLECTION ON POOR, GENERAL, AND SEWERS RATE ACCOUNTS, 397 IN RESPECT OF THE YEAR FROM 25TH MARCH, 1897, TO 25TH MARCH, 1898. No. Collecting Districts, Public Companies, &c. Rates Levied at 5/10 in the £ Commission allowed to Owners. Recoverable Arrears at 25th March, 1897. Total Amount to be Collected. Total Amount Actually Collected. Uncollected at Balancing. No. Arrears at 25th March, 1898. Legally Excused. Otherwise not Recoverable. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 Collecting Districts. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. 1 Moorlields Ward 30,280 11 3 757 10 5 20 2 2 29,543 3 0 28,499 16 1 75 9 9 35 9 6 932 7 8 1 2 Church North District 20,814 2 9 1,167 7 10 53 19 3 19,700 14 2 19,210 2 3 47 13 2 ...... 442 18 9 2 3 Church South District 23,674 13 6 658 11 10 58 7 9 23,074 9 5 21,948 1 0 12 16 6 4 10 8 1,109 1 3 3 4 Hoxton Ward 23,055 17 3 942 14 6 67 6 2 22,180 8 11 21,183 10 8 18 0 0 29 1 1 949 17 2 4 5 Wenlock Ward 18,218 15 8 617 14 11 22 0 6 17,623 1 3 17,240 0 4 ...... 22 1 5 360 19 6 5 6 Whitmore Ward 16,919 18 5 1,282 7 4 65 9 7 15,703 0 8 15,347 2 6 41 2 5 13 1 4 301 14 5 6 7 Kingsland and Haggerston West District 16,881 4 11 1,168 4 10 44 12 9 15,757 12 10 15,457 11 3 16 17 6 16 0 0 267 4 1 7 8 Haggerston East and Acton District 19,610 8 4 1,731 19 10 40 7 0 17,918 15 6 17,605 10 7 2 11 1 5 18 0 304 15 10 8 169,455 12 1 8,326 11 6 372 5 2 161,501 5 9 156,491 14 8 214 10 5 126 2 0 4,668 18 8 Public Companies, &c. 9 School Board for London 3,819 4 6 3,819 4 6 3,819 4 6 ...... ...... ...... 9 10 Gas Light and Coke Co 9,182 10 10 0 14 6 ...... 9,181 16 4 9,166 11 10 ...... ...... 15 4 6 10 11 Great Eastern Railway Co 5,541 13 4 ...... ...... 5,541 13 4 5,541 13 4 ...... ...... ...... 11 12 London and North Western Railway Co. 7,253 19 6 ...... ...... 7,253 19 6 7,253 19 6 ...... ...... ...... 12 13 North London Railway Co. 7,754 16 8 ...... ...... 7,754 16 8 7,754 16 8 ...... ...... ...... 13 14 Shoreditch Town Hall 291 13 4 ...... ...... 291 13 4 291 13 4 ...... ...... ...... 14 Government Property. 15 H. M. Treasury—(Shoreditch County Court) 70 0 0 70 0 0 70 0 0 15 £203,369 10 3 8,327 6 0 372 5 2 195,414 9 5 190,389 13 10 214 10 5 126 2 0 4,684 3 2 (see fo. 398). 16 Percentage this year 1897-98 100.00 4.095 .183 96.088 93.618 .105 .062 2.303 16 17 Percentage last year 1896-97 100.00 4.033 .186 96.153 92.904 .171 .088 2.990 17 398 398 COMPARATIVE SUMMARY OF RATE COLLECTION, for the Three Years from [25th March] 1896 to [25th March] 1898. No. Collecting Districts, Public Companies, &c. 1895.1896. 1896 1 —1897. 1897—1898. No. Total Rates levied at 5/11 in the £. Amount to be Collected. Amount actually Collected. Recover. able Arrears at 25th Mar., 1896. Irrecover. able. Total Rates levied at 6/3 in the £. Amount to be Collected. Amount actually Collected. Recoverable Arrears at 25th March, 1897. Irrecoverable. Total Rates levied at 5/10 in the £ Amount to be Collected. Amount actually Collected. Recoverable Arrears at 25th March, 1898. Irrecoverable. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 Collecting Districts. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. 1 Moorfields Ward 30,086 2 9 98.15 91.00 .19 6.30 32,328 10 11 97.89 93.08 .06 4.75 30,280 11 3 97.50 94.12 .25 3.19 1 2 Church North District 20,593 10 11 94.72 90.39 .69 3.64 22,296 11 6 94.92 91.09 .24 3.59 20,814 2 9 94.65 92.29 .23 2.13 2 3 Church South District 22,977 3 2 98.60 92.22 .07 6.31 24,451 13 9 97.35 91.14 .24 5.97 23,674 13 6 97.46 92.71 .05 4.70 3 4 Hoxton Ward 23,121 12 2 96.07 91.01 .03 5.03 24,877 19 9 95.94 91.02 .27 4.65 23,055 17 3 96.20 91.88 .08 4.24 4 5 Wenlock Ward 18,019 2 5 96.90 93.89 .36 2.65 19,437 14 9 97.01 94.62 .11 2.28 18,218 15 8 96.73 94.03 .00 2.10 5 6 Whitmore Ward 16,823 7 8 92.74 88.38 .60 3.76 18,296 18 9 93.21 90.62 .36 2.23 16,919 18 5 92.80 90.70 .24 1.80 6 7 Kingsland and Haggerston West District 16,860 10 10 92.96 90.03 .09 2.84 18,070 10 9 93.11 90.89 .24 1.98 16,881 4 11 93.34 91.56 .10 1.08 7 8 Haggerston East & Acton District 19,413 14 3 92.97 89.54 .02 3.41 20,919 19 3 91.40 88.75 .19 2.46 19,610 8 4 91.37 89.78 .01 1.58 8 167,895 4 2 95.71 90.99 .24 4.48 180,680 5 5 95.38 91.48 .21 3.69 169,455 12 1 95.30 92.35 .12 2.83 Public Companies, &c. 9 School Board for London 3,888 14 9 100.00 100.00 . . . ... 3,974 9 0 100.00 100.00 ... ... 3,819 4 6 100.00 100.00 ... ... 9 10 Gas Light and Coke Co 8,171 10 2 99.99 99.99 ... ... 9,838 8 9 99.99 99.99 ... ... 9,182 10 10 99.99 99.83 ... .16 10 11 Great Eastern Railway Co 5,380 6 5 100.00 100.00 ... ... 5,937 10 0 100.00 100.00 ... ... 5,541 13 4 100.00 100.00 ... ... 11 12 London & North Western Railway 6,916 13 5 100.00 100.00 ... ... 7,754 17 8 100.00 100.00 ... ... 7,253 19 0 100.00 100.00 ... ... 12 13 North London Railway Co. 7,865 12 4 100.00 100.00 . . . ... 8,308 15 0 100.00 100.00 ... ... 7,754 16 8 100.00 100.00 ... 13 14 Shoreditch Town Hall 369 15 10 100.00 100.00 ... ... 312 10 0 100.00 100.00 ... ... 291 13 4 100.00 100.00 ... ... 14 Government Property. 15 H.M Treasury—(Shoreditch County Court) 71 0 0 147.89 147.89 ... ... 75 0 100.00 100.00 ... ... 70 0 0 100.00 100.00 ... ... 15 Total 200,558 16 1 96.43 92.48 .20 3.75 216,881 16 4 96.15 92.90 ' .17 3.08 203,369 10 3 96.08 93.01 .10 2.37 as per published Abstract fo. 1801 (as pcrpublished Abstract fo. 180) (see fo. 397) COMPARATIVE STATEMENT OF INCOME AND EXPENDITURE. 1892-98. 401 401 COMPARATIVE STATEMEN OF INCOME AND EXPENDITURE??? SEVEN YEARS, FROM [25TH MARCH], 1892, TO [25TH MARCH], 1898. INCOME. 1891-92. 1892-93. 1893-94. 1894-95. 1895-96. 1896-97. 1897-5 EXPENDITURE. 1891-92. 1892-93. 1893-94. 1894-95. 1895-96. 1896-97. 1897-98. Poor Rate Account—Revenue. £ £ £ £ £ £ £ ???Rate Account—Revenue. £ £ £ £ £ £ £ Rate 95,333 101,382 103,613 107,094 99,760 116,098 112,0 ???oreditch Board of Guardians 75,400 82,576 85,800 88,600 82,900 95,500 96,620 Burial Acts — — — — — 99 - ???rial Acts 250 350 225 325 275 285 400 Metropolitan Police — 147 — — — 7 - ???blic Libraries and Museums 1,965 1,930 1,957 1,958 1,975 2,025 2,051 Vestry Elections — — — — 1 1 - ???blic Baths and Washhouses — — 11 49 1,500 1,000 500 Parliamentary & County Council Registration 1,305 305 233 256 294 222 2 Metropolitan Police 14,215 14,218 14,203 14,197 14,270 14,412 14,454 General Receipts — — — — 10 5 ???rowned Persons Act, 1886 - — - - 2 2 1 Vestry Elections 111 72 96 254 - 176 185 Parliamentary & County Council Registration 656 584 605 665 752 609 655 ???ary List 32 31 63 97 99 71 87 General Charges 1,033 977 935 855 779 756 825 Establishment of Town Hall 99 — — — — — - Burial Authority—Revenue. 96,638 101,834 103,846 107,350 100,065 116,432 112,28 Burial Authority—Revenue. 93,761 100,738 103,895 107,000 102,552 114,836 115,778 Contributions from Poor Rate 250 350 225 325 275 285 4??? Hackney Road Burial Ground 58 368 69 59 61 60 97 Hackney Road Burial Ground - 300 — — — - - St. Leonard's Churchyard, Shoreditch 114 66 58 111 86 88 269 St. Leonard's Churchyard, Shoreditch - — — 8 9 9 St. John's Churchyard, Hoxton 61 68 82 57 77 61 99 General Receipts - — 1 - — 29 - St. Mary's Churchyard, Haggerston 60 54 52 48 58 68 69 General & Sewers Rate Account- 250 650 226 333 284 323 40 General & Sewers Rate Accounts— 293 556 261 275 282 277 534 Revenue. General Rate 63,407 77,339 77,037 64,721 77,671 80,145 73,06 Revenue. School Board for London 30,385 29,257 28,690 29,972 33,404 35,199 35,406 Vestry Clerk's Department 649 574 756 828 856 879 1,112 Sewers Rate 5,196 2,584 7,754 5,185 7,798 5,322 5,40 Accountant's Department 1,696 1,573 1,564 1,482 1,489 1,615 1,808 Equalisation Fund — - - 3,355 6,729 7,214 7,38 Legal and Parliamentary Expenses 5 119 18 197 248 152 169 School Board for London - 234 - - - 19 - Electric Lighting (Preliminary Expenses) 116 3 42 — — — — Vestry Clerk's Department 7 5 4 4 600 207 18??? do, do. Deficit Account — — — — — — 1,255 Accountant's Department 3 3 3 1 4 4 General Charges 1,169 1,100 1,255 1,057 1,492 1,549 1,830 Legal and Parliamentary Expenses 1 - - - 125 - 3 Surveyor's Department 515 418 426 543 469 766 697 General Receipts 102 76 113 62 75 181 21 Maintenance of Public Roads and Streets 7,321 11,210 9,125 7,525 11,204 12,560 9,740 Surveyor's Department 44 44 38 45 44 45 5 Street Improvements 4,064 3,907 3,840 4,293 7,236 4,936 6,679 Maintenance of Public Roads and Streets 974 894 1,283 971 1,728 3,974 3,18 Site of Electricity Works, &c. — — — — 977 9 - Street Improvements - - - - 2,724 811 l??? Dusting and Scavenging—Contract system 7,974 — — - — — — Site of Electricity Works, &c. - - - - 352 38 3??? do. do. Maintenance 5,439 19,445 20,833 18,219 18,873 20,005 19,067 Dusting and Scavenging—Contract system 362 - - - - - - Street Lighting 5,774 5,823 5,895 6,104 6,210 6,379 7,916 do. do. Maintenance 137 858 487 799 607 517 63 Dust Destructor, Maintenance - — — - — 517 4,202 Street Lighting 38 473 65 64 71 64 5??? Public Health, &c 3,865 3,631 3,654 3,482 4,221 4,096 5,074 Dust Destructor, Maintenance - - - - - - 25??? Recreation Grounds 71 320 1,186 234 198 300 201 Public Health, &c. 311 503 678 1,485 1,215 1,774 2,22 Moira Place and Plumbers' Place Area — — — — 299 1,391 578 Recreation Grounds - - 600 - - - - Town Hall 2,104 2,480 2,673 3,173 3,739 2,038 2,523 Moira Place and Plumbers' Place Area - - - - - - - Labour Bureau — 32 119 — — — — Town Hall 611 398 265 468 556 572 63??? Housing of the Working Classes 48 — 2 285 — — — Housing of the Working Classes - 42 - - - 8 - Valuation List Expenses 375 11 108 421 521 3 14 Valuation List Receipts - - - - - 4 - Assessment Committee Expenses 1,738 556 157 55 496 82 80 Assessment Committee Receipts 218 211 - - 1 4 - Sewerage and Drainage Works 2,151 3,493 3,657 3,569 7,310 3,466 5,085 Sewerage and Drainage Works 740 810 779 620 448 829 1,151 75,459 83,952 84,000 81,439 99,242 95,942 103,436 72,151 84,474 89,106 77,780 100,748 101,732 94,47??? Technical Instruction Fund—Revenue. - 30 969 891 780 932 1,077 Technical Instruction Fund—Revenue. — — 1,372 893 1,053 946 1,3??? Electricity Works— Revenue Account - - - 4 697 1,423 8,954 Electricity Works— Revenue Account - - - - 329 514 11,017??? Capital do - - — 45 14,431 34,595 38,731 Capital do — — — 12,200 1,808 57,245 12 - - - 49 15,128 36,018 47,685 Capital Accounts- — — — 12,200 2,137 57,759 11,029 Capital Accounts— Street Improvements and Paving Works 2 900 - - - 1,070 9,500 29,505 Street Improvements and Paving Works 1,898 1,153 - - 1,107 13,754 13,408 Town Hall Buildings 50 280 5,926 74 - — 4,545 Town Hall Buildings - - 6,000 - - - 4,550 Goldsmith Square Open Space 2,000 - - - - — — Goldsmith Square Open Space 2,000 - - - - - - Dusting and Scavenging 6,032 2,313 - - - — 28 Dusting and Scavenging 6,000 2,000 - - - - - Working Class Dwellings - - - - - — 255 Moira Place and Plumber's Place Area - - - - 20,447 20,454 10,383 Moira Place and Plumber's Place Area 42 347 199 180 24,587 22,731 5,142 Erection of Dust Destructor - - - - - 14,240 - Erection of Dust Destructor - - - - 13 11,873 3,257 Construction of New Sewers - - 5,900 - 13 ,253 - 15,945 Construction of New Sewers - 72 4,861 2,527 11,693 2,671 5,365 Underground Sanitary Conveniences — — - — 630 4,400 4,100 Underground Sanitary Conveniences - - - - 2,001 2,176 3,041 10,900 2,000 11,900 - 35,400 48,594 64,483 10,022 4,165 10,986 2,781 39,401 53,205 35,041 ???PENDITURE on Revenue Account 169,513 185,276 189,125 189,609 203,553 213,410 229,779 INCOME on Revenue Account 169,039 186,958 194,550 86,356 2 02,479 219,947 219,523 do. Capital Account 10,022 4,165 10,986 2,826 53,832 87,800 73,722 do. Capital Account 10,900 2,000 11,900 12,200 37,208 05,839 64,495 Total 179,939 188,958 206,450 98,556 239,687 325,786 284,018 Total 179,535 189,441 200,111 192,435 257,385 301,210 303,551 Note.- The Income and Expenditure on Revenue and capital Account for (1) public Libraries and Museums (2) public Baths and Washhouses, is excluded from this Statement, expect in so far as those accounts are subsidised from the Poor Rate STATISTICS. 404 STATEMENT shewing LAND ACQUIRED by the VESTRY of the Parish of ST. LEONARD, SHOREDITCH, in the COUNTY OF LONDON, and the Purchase-money charged in the Accounts for the Year ended 25th March, 1898. Situation. Description. Purchase Money. Legal and other Expenses. Total Cost. Remarks. 1 2 3 4 5 6 £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. Street Improvements.— 4, 5, & 6, Norfolk Place ......... ......... +49 0 8 49 0 8 †Paving Footways 16, Murray Street Freehold 120 0 0 7 11 8 127 11 8 Widening & Improvement of Princess Alice Passage. Do. Leasehold ......... 55 3 10 55 3 10 Do. do. 74 & 79, Custance Street Leasehold 160 0 0 66 8 6 226 8 6 95, 97 & 99, Goldsmith's Row Leasehold 158 11 8 12 0 4 170 12 0 Frontages 438 11 8 190 5 0 628 16 8 ...See folio 319. Electricity Works— 19, Coronet Street Freehold 3,750 0 0 180 0 4 3,930 0 4 10, Reeves Place Freehold 335 0 0 18 12 10 353 12 10 2, Evelyn Street Leasehold 300 0 0 10 2 4 310 2 4 4,385 0 0 208 15 6 4,593 15 6 See folio 346. Total £4,823 11 8 399 0 6 5,222 12 2 405 STATEMENT SHOWING STATUTORY ACCOUNT OF PAYMENTS UNDER THE LONDON (EQUALISATION OP RATES) ACT, 1894, Sec. 1 (7), For the Year ended 31s£ March, 1898. Total Amount received from the London County Council under the Act by the Sanitary Authority during the Year. Total Amount of the Expenses incurred by the Sanitary Authority during the Year. Expended out of the Sums received from the London County Council under the Act by the Sanitary Authority during the Year. Under the Public Health (London) Act, 1891 (including Expenses of Scavenging Streets). In respect of Lighting. In respect of Streets (other than the Expenses of Scavenging Streets). Total. Under the Public Health (London) Act, 1891 (including Expenses of Scavenging Streets). In respect of Lighting. In respect of Streets (other than the Expenses of ScavengingStreets.) Total. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 £ s. d. £ s d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ S. d. £ s. d. 7,330 12 0 21,347 3 8 7,436 18 1 16,332 11 6½ 45,116 13 3½ 7,330 12 0 ...... ...... 7,330 12 0 7,330 12 0 21,847 3 8 7,436 18 1 16,332 11 6½ 45,116 13 3½ 7,330 12 0 7,330 12 0 Dated the 25th day of July, 1898. I hereby certify that the above is a true account. ERNST A. R. ADAMS, Accountant to the Sanitary Authority. 406 DUSTING AND SCAVENGING DEPARTMENT. Comparative Statement, 1892-96. Particulars of Staff, Plant, &c. At 25th March, 1892. At 25th March, 1893. At 25th March, 1894. At 25th March, 1895. At 25th March, 1896. 1 2 3 4 5 6 Staff.— "Superintendent 1 1 1 * ... Wharf Manager ... ... ... ... 1 Clerk 1 1 1 l 1 ^Night Scavenging Foremen 2 2 2 2 2 Dusting Inspector 1 1 1 1 1 Watering ,, (six month, summer only) ... 1 1 1 1 Storekeeper and Weigh Clerk . 1 1 1 1 6 7 7 6 6 Half year to 25th March, One year to 25th March, One year to 25th March, One year to 25th March, One year to 25th March, 1892. 1898. 1894. 1895. 1896. wages.— Actual Payments— £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ 8. d. £ s. d. Office Staff 151 10 5 358 15 8 361 8 3 406 10 8 298 7 6 Dusting 372 17 7½ 1,561 17 1 1,865 11 0 1,945 1 2 2,374 12 10 Scavenging 897 1 1½ 4,092 19 1 5,440 8 7 1,029 16 6 4,463 10 1½ Horsekeeper 36 12 8 1 2 7 148 10 7 150 9 7 155 17 8 Removal of Snow 78 0 11 24 17 7 272 18 2½ 441 6 5 Street Watering † 227 19 5 279 8 5 156 10 4 304 9 1 Wharf Staff 350 0 0 883 17 4 989 9 9 1,101 12 4 958 17 0½ Workmen's Holiday 9 12 6 15 17 6 15 17 6 15 15 0 Unemployed Labour 898 4 2 1,886 2 4 7,289 1 8 9,868 12 3½ 8,645 8 8 8,566 8 10 Average amount paid for weekly wages 67 7 6 140 3 6 180 8 4 166 5 2 164 14 10 Quantity to 25th March, 1892. Quantity to 25th March, 1898. Quantity to 25th March, 1894. Quantity to 25th March, 1895. Quantity to 25th March, 1896. Fodder purchased.— Hay trusses 859 2,492 2,456 2,211 2,899 Do bales - - 78 - — Straw trusses 522 198 2,922 2,421 2,605 Do bales 148 584 — 37 — Peat „ 12 - — — Clover trusses 545 1,581 2,048 1,097 1,132 Mixture 86 490 - 1,219 72 Oats sacks 898 1,044 1,800 1,200 1,804 Beans ,, 22 52 t) Ik 8 10 10 Carrots tons 2 - — 4 Bran sacks 186 854 448 280 240 Linseed 3 2 2 2 — Chaff tons 1 — — 1 Greenmeat bundles — 1,452 — 100 2,469 £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. Average cost per horse per week 0 15 0 0 17 8 0 19 8 0 14 2 0 12 3 * Department transferred to Surveyor's control on this date. § 1 for Eastern Division; 1 for Western Division. † Note.— Carried out by General Purposes and Sanitary Committee, 406 DUSTING AND SCAVENGING DEPARTMENT. Comparative Statement, 1892-96.—continued. Particulars of Staff, Plant, &c. 1 Quantity to 25th March, 1892. 2 Quantity to 25th March, 1893. 3 Quantity to 25th March, 1894. 4 Quantity to 25th March, 1895. 5 Quantity to 25th March, 1896. 6 Collection and Removal of Refuse.— Loads. Loads. Loads. Loads. Loads. Street Sweepings to barge 3,917 12,999 11,653 10,037½ 9,888 „ „ „ rail - 17 - 553 312 Dust to barge 3,042 13,111 13,933 11,948½ 12,080 ,, rail 96 - 66 4,969½ 3,397 ,, wharves - 156 105 - - Trade Refuse to barge 339 2,212 1,549 - - Refuse carted by ratepayers to barge (no charge) 40 933 - - - 7,434 29,428 27,306 27,5081 25,677 On 25th March, 1892. On 25th March, 1893. On 25th March, 1894. On 25th March, 1895. On 25th March, 1896. Horses and Plant.— Horses 28 36 35 36 39 Water Vans 15 15 15 15 15 Slop Vans 30 30 30 30 36 Slop Carts 4 4 4 8 4 Tumbler Carts *2 *2 *2 — — Horse Machine Brooms 6 6 6 6 6 Snow Plough 1 1 1 1 1 One 8 h.p. Gas Engine 1 1 1 1 1 Chaff Cutter 1 1 1 1 1 One Drilling Machine - 1 1 1 1 9-tonWeighing Machine 1 1 1 1 1 One Tyreing Machine 1 1 1 1 1 Ferry Boat - - - 1 1 Dung, Stable Manure, and Mixture. Carted away weekly by Market vehicles (free of charge) About tons 6 About tons 6 About tons 7 About tons 6 About tons. 30 Barged away (free of charge) — — — — 50 6 6 7 6 80 * Not used by Department. 408 INDEX SUBJECT. DEPARTMENT. Clerk. Public Health Department. Surveyor. Miscellaneous. Accountant. Abatement of Nuisances ... 134—137 ... ... ... Abstract of Accounts ... ... ... ... 283—406 Accommodation of Baths 9 ... ... ... ... Accountant's Department 39 ... ... ... 313, 333 Accountant's Report ... ... ... ... 283—406 Advertising on Lamp Columns ... ... ... 205 342 Aggregate Balance Sheet ... ... ... ... 378—380 Alma Music Hall ... 139 ... ... ... Ambulance Service ... ... ... 279 ... Analysis of Mortgage Debt ... ... ... ... 385, 386 Analyst's Reports ... ... ... 123—133 324, 391 Anning Street Bridge 33 ... ... ... 318 Annual Contracts ... ... ... 260 314 Appeals, Valuation 62 ... ... ... 327 Appendix to Reports 43—58 112—122 ... 123—133 404—406 Aske's Schools and Charity 4 ... ... ... ... Asplialte Work ... ... 158, 162 ... 317, 368 Assessment Committee's Expenses ... ... ... ... 327 Do. do. Report 61—64 ... ... ... 327 Assets and Liabilities, Aggregate Statement of ... ... ... ... 378—380 Asylums Board, Metropolitan ... ... ... 276 324 Attendance at Libraries ... ... ... 224 ... Auditors, Elected ... ... ... 266 376 Baths, Laying Foundation Stone of 47-50 ... ... ... 307 Bakehouses ... 105—106 ... ... • • • Balance Sheets ... ... ... ... 295, 299, 304, 308, 330, 338, 343, 354 Banquet, Opening of Electric Lighting Undertaking 57—58 ... ... ... 314 Barging Refuse ... ... 187 ... 321, 406 Barr. C. J & Son's Appeal ... ... ... ... 327 Baths and Washhouses 3, 5—11 ... ... ... 307, 308 Behaviour of Bacillus of Enteric Fever in the Soil ... 89 ... ... ... Bills in Parliament 27 ... ... ... 315 Births ... 68,122 ... ... 324 Board Schools, Trough Closets in ... 138 ... ... ... Books in Libraries ... ... ... 224 304 Bridges across streets 33 ... ... ... 318 Brown, Mr. S. H. 41 ... ... ... 390 Buecker's Hotel ... ... ... ... 318 Butler's Charity 21 ... ... ... ... Buildings, Contract for (Electric Light).. ... ... ... ... 347, 349 Buildings redrained ... ... ... ... 335 Burial Authority Accounts ... ... ... ... 298, 299 By-laws and Standing Orders 22 ... ... ... ... 409 409 INDEX.—(continued). SUBJECT. DEPARTMENT. Clerk. 5ublicHealth Department. Surveyor. Miscellaneous. Accountant. Cabinet Making and Joinery Class 245 341, 392 CfEsar Street ... 171 ... 319, 334 Canals Protection (London) 20 ... ... • . . Capital and Special Accounts ... 368, 375 Capital Expenditure 4 ... ... 368—373 401 Carriageways . 148 317, 368 Cart Horse Parade ... ... 321 Cash Balances ... 375 Cat and Mutton Bridge ... 171 • . . ... Charge for Electric Current ... ... 213 350, 357 Charges (General) on Poor Rate ... ... 293 Charity Trustees • • • 274 314 Charities, Parochial 22 ... ... 314 Charles Square 3, 19 ... ... ... 375 Chief Sanitary Inspector's Report ... 134—142 ... ... 390 ... ... ... ... 349 33 ... ... 322 Churchwardens and Overseers' Accounts... ... •• 292 Churchyards, Maintenance of ... ... ... 298, 299 City and Guilds of London Institute ... ... 254 342 Clarke, Mr. Arthur 0 38 ... ... ... 389 Cleansing of Persons Act, 1897 ... 94 ... ... ... Clerk's Report 1—42 ... ... ... Clerks of Works 10 ... ... 307, 388 Clinker, Utilisation of 167—169 • • • 323 Collection of Rates 395—398 Collection and Disposal of Refuse 188 321, 323 Collectors of Rates and Taxes 281 390 Combined Drainage 20, 41 102 176, 182 . . • 335 Committees 267—272 Comparative Statement of Income and Expenditure, 1892-1898 ... 401 Consumption of Gas ... ... 196 322 Consumers of Electricity • . .' ... 212 357 Contracts, Annual ... 260 314 Contributions to Guardians •.. ... 290, 401 Conveniences, Public 3 171—173 203, 208 336, 337 Conveyancing Clerks ... ... 391 Cost of Laying Electric Light Conduits 34, 35 ... 318, 348 County Council for London ... 290 County Rate ... ... ... 290 Cowhouses ... 104 ... ... Crossings 100 317, 368 Curtain Road (Nos. 38/40) 31 ... ... 318 Custance Street 29, 30 170 ... 404 Customs and Inland Revenue Acts ... 103 ... ... ... Deaths 69—76 ... 324 De Beauvoir Wharf ... ... • . • 320 Debt 4, 5 ... ... . 383—386 Deficiencies of Poors' Rates • . • ... ... 291 410 INDEX.—(continued). 410 SUBJECT. DEPARTMENT. Clerk. PublicHealth Department. Surveyor. Miscellaneous. Accountant. Degerdon, Mr. W. E., Report of, &c 240—254 341—343 Demand for Electric Current ... . . . 212 357 Deposit Fund 374 Depots ... • • • • • • 318, 320 Diarrhoea 86, 87 Diphtheria 83—86 Disinfection 93 325 Disinfectants 95 ... • • • 324,-325 Disinfecting Station . , . 325 Disorderly Houses • • • 314 Dispensary, Parish ... 277 • • • Disposal of Refuse 321, 323 District Auditor's Certificates 286, 287 District Medical Officers 277 ... District Surveyor ... 273 • • • Donations to Libraries 229 304 Drainage Construction » • • 334 Drain Ventilating Pipes 181 . , 334 Drawing and Design Class 243, 244 341, 392 Drawing and Lectures for Cabinet Makers . ■ . 247 392 Dressmaking Class 249 392 Drowned Persons' Act, 1886 291 Dust Destructor 2 323, 328, Dust Destructor and Electricity Undertaking, Opening Ceremony 50—58 372 314 Dusting and Scavenging ... ... 187—190 258 320, 321, 406 Earl's Place (Messrs. Waterlow's premises) 32 318 Earl Street Sewer 181 334 East London Waterworks Co \ 317 Elected Auditors' Certificates 376 Election of Vestrymen 1 • • • 257 293, 401 Electrical Engineer's Report 211, 214 366 Electricity Works Undertaking 1, 50—58 193 322, Electric Light Conduits (Cost of Tia.vincA 34 346—366 318, 348 Vjlpfttrical Fitting Glass 246 392 Enteric Fever 87, 89 ■ • • • • • Emia.lisation of Rates ... 312, 405 TT.vo^firm nf Tnwn T-Jfl.ll .. 369 89 ... ... Establishment of Town Hall • • • ... 326 3, 5 • • • ... Expenditure and Income • • • ... 401 Extra Works to Baths 10 ... ••• 106, 107 • • • ... 139 40 • • • • • • 389 Q1 1 ... 2b/ Oily OOO 411 INDEX.—(continued). SUBJECT. DEPARTMENT. Clerk. Public Health Department. Surveyor. Miscellaneous. Accountant. Fire Engines and Alarms ... ... ... 282 • • • Fire-Escape Stations • • • ... ... 282 ... Flaxman, Mr. Geo. W ... • • • ... ... 389 Flemming Street Depot (Inventory) • • • ... 184 ... 318 Flushing Courts and Gullies ... ... • • • 335 Food and Drugs Acts, Sale of ... 108, 123 136 ... ... 324 Food Condemned and Destroyed • • • 103, 136 ... 324 Footway and Carriage-way Paving • • • ... 154—158 • • • 317, 368 Foundation Stone of Baths 9, 47—50 ... ... • • • 307 Foundry Place • • • 139 • • • • • • ... French Court 29 ... • . . ... 319 Freehold Property owned by Vestry 46 ... ... ... 378, 379 Gas Consumption ... ... ... 196 322 Gas Light and Coke Co ... ... ... ... 317, 322 Gas, Price and Quality of ... ... ... 196 322 General Rate • • • ... ... ... 311, 396 Gonpral Rate Accounts ... ... ... ... 311—330 General Receipts and Charges • • • ... ... ... 293, 314 Goldsmiths Row Improvement 31... ... ... ... 404 Goldsmith Square Open Space . . • ... ... ... 370 Great Northern and City Railway Bill 27 ... V ... ... 315 Guardians of the Poor ... ... ... 274 290, 401 Gullies in Streets ... ... ... ... 334 Hackney Road Burial Ground • • • ... ... ... 299, 401 Hackney Express" (Extracts from) 47—58 ... ... ... .... Haggerston Library ... ... ... 224—226 304 Haggerston Sewerage • • • ... 178 ... Health Department 41 ... ... ...... 324, 325, 335, 336 Heating of Town Hall Buildings ... . . . ... 326 Heating of Baths 5 ... ... ... Hoxton Library • •• ... ... 224, 227 ... High Street Underground Convenience ... ... ... 336, 337 Highways Department ... ... 144—186 ... 316—319 Holidays and Sick Pay ... ... 147,188 ... 317,320 Horses ... ... 187 ... 320, 406 Horse Provender ... ... 258 320, 406 Hours of Lighting Lamps ... ... ...... 201 ...... Houses Closed ... 101, 137 ... ... ... Houses let in Lodgings ... 103 ... ... ... Housing of the Working Classes 11 ... ... ... 316,370 Hoxton Square 26 ... ... ... 350 Hydraulic Mains and Connections ... ... 170 ... 318 Illness amongst the Poor ... 120 ... ... ... Income and Expenditure ... ... ... ... 294, 299, 303, 308, 328, 329, 337, 343, 352,401 412 INDEX.—(continued). SUBJECT. DEPARTMENT. Clerk. Public Health Department. Surveyor. Miscellaneous. Accountant. Income Tax Collectors ... ... ... 281 ... Infectious Diseases ... 122 .... ... 324 Influenza ... 92 ... ... ... Inland Revenue ... ... ... 281 375 Interest on Debt ... ... ... 383—386 Inventory of Plant and Material ... ... 184 205 ... Introduction 1 ... ... ... ... Iron Work for Destructor ... ... ... ... 372 Isolation of Cases of Infectious Disease ... 78 ... ... ... Ivy Street Open Space 3 ... ... ... ... Jobbing Works ... ... 175 ... 334,374 John Street 32 ... ... ... ... Jury List ... ... • •• ... 293 King & Co.'s Assessment Appeal 62 ... ... ... 327 Kiosk Convenience ... ... ... ... 335,337 Labour. Cost of ... ... 147 ... 374 Lamps, Repairs to, and Maintenance ... ... ... 200 322 Land Acquired • • • ... ... ... 404 Land Transfer Act, 1897 24 ... ... ... • . • Law and Parliamentary Committee • • • ... ... ... 315 Legal Proceedings ... 100, 137 ... ... 315,324 Legislation ... ... ... ... 315 Lettings of Hall 28 ... ... ... 326 Leverington Charity 24 ... • • • 314 Libraries, Statistics of Public • • • ... ... 224—229 302—304 Licenses ... ... 182 ... 316,326 Light from Dust 50—58 ... ... ... 323, 350 Lighting Committee ... ... .... 270 322,323 346—366 Lighting Engineer's Report ... ... ... 193—209 366 litigation 42 ... ... • • • 315 Lindon, Mr. A. A. 41 ... • • • 390 Long Street ... ... 171 ... 319,334 Loans ... ... ... • • • 383—386 Tocal.l Rates ... ... ... 259 395—398 London Cart Horse Parade Society • . • ... ... . . • 321 London County Council Regulations 11 ... ... ... • . • London County Councillors • • • ... ... 273 ... London (Equalization of Rates) Act, 1894 ... ... ... ... 312,401 London County Council (General Powers) Bill 27 ... ... ... 315 London County Council (Northern Tramways 27 ... ... • • • 315 London County Council Rates ... ... ... • • • 290 London County Council Technical Education Board, Schorlarships ... ... ... 254 • • • London School Board Precepts • • • ... ... ... 311 413 INDEX.—(continued). SUBJECT. DEPARTMENT. Clerk. Public Health Department. Surveyor. Miscellaneous. Accountant. London Water Supply 24 ... ... ... ... Losses on Rates ... ... ... • • • 398 Loynes Buildings 34 ... ... . • . ... Lowles, John, Esq., M.P ... • • • ... 273 • . • Lower John Street ... 141 ... ... ... Lyons, Peter (Accident to) 33 ... ... ... 318 Mains and Conduits ... ... ... 213 317, 318 348 Maintenance of Baths 7 ... ... • • • 308 Maintenance of Roads ... .. 146, 248 ... 317, 401 Malcolm, Mr. R. M 36 ... ... 389 Manholes ... ... 174 ... 334 Manual Training ... ... ... 248 341 Margarine Penalties ... ... ... ... 824 Marriages ... 69 ... ... 324 Masons ... ... 146 ■ • • 317 Materials and Costs in connection with Roads ... ... 148—166 ... 316—319 401 Measles ...... 91 ... ... ... Medical Officer's Department ... ... ... 324, 335 Medical Officers, District ... 276 • • • ... ...... Medical Officer of Health's Report ... 67—133 ... ... 324, 335 Members of Parliament ... ... ... 273 .... . . Members of London County Council ... ... ... 273 ... Members of London School Board ... ... ... 274 ... Metropolis Water Acts 23 97 • • • • • • ••• Metropolitan Asylums Board ... 79 ... 276, 279, 280 324 Metropolitan Police ... ... • •. ... 291, 401 Metropolitan Sewers and Drains Bill. 20 . • • . • • • • • ... Milne, Mr. J. A. D 36 ... ... ... 389 Model Dwellings 14 ... ... ... 370 Moira Place and Plumbers' Place Area 3, 11, 44 ... .... ... 368, 370 371 Mortality Tables ... 112—122 ... • • • 324 Mortgage Debt ... ... ... • • • 383—386 Mortuary ... 95 . • • ... 325 Mount Pleasant ... ... 171 • • • . . . Municipal Year Book & Diary ... ... ... • • • 314 Municipalities for London 26 ... ... ... ...... Murray Street and Custance Street Improvement 29, 30 ... ... ... 404 National Telephone Co., Ltd ... ... ... ... 298, 318 New Buildings ... ... 182 ... ...... Nicholl, Mr. D. Arthur 36 ... ... ... 391 Norfolk Buildings 42 ... ... ... 334 Notification of Diseases ... ... ... 324 Nuisances abated ... 99, 134 ... ... ••• 414 INDEX.—(continued). 414 SUBJECT. DEPARTMENT. Clerk. Public Health Department. Surveyor. Miscellaneous. Accountant. Occupations of Borrowers of Library Books ... ... ... 234 ... Officials of Guardians ... ... ...... 276—278 ... Official Staff 36—40 • . . ... 388—392 Office Accommodation (Sanitary Department) ... 141 ... • • • ... Old Burial Ground ... ... ... ...... 298, 299 Open Spaces 3, 18—20 ... ... 281 298, 316 Opening of Library, Pitfield Street • • • ... ... 220 Orderly Bins • • • ... ... • • • 318 Overseers' Expenses ... ... 286, 287 Overseers of the Poor ... ... ... 266 286, 287 Owners' Returns 42 ... ... ... ... Parish Churchyard ... ... ... ... 298 Parish Dispensary ... ... ... 277 Parliament, Members of ... ... ... 273 • • • Parliamentary, County Council, and Local Bihar Registration ... ... ... • • • 292, 401 Parliamentary Matters 20—28 ... ... • • • 315 Parliamentary Schemes (1898) 27 ... 183 • • • 315 Parliamentary Returning Officer ... ... 273 292 Parochial Charities 22 ... ... 314 Passmore Edwards Library ... ... 217 303 Paving Footways and Carriageways • •. ... 154 . . • 317, 368 Paving, Maintenance . . . ... ... • • • 317 Paving and Sewerage ... ... ... ... 317, 334 Paving Works, Capital Account ... ... ... ... 368 Paviors • • • ... 146 317 Periodicals at Libraries •. • ... ... 230—233 303 Petty Receipts at Libraries ... ... ... 236 303 Pilbrow v. Vestry 42 ... ... ... 334 Pipes across Finsbury Avenue 33 ... ... ... Pitfield Street, Properties on Site of • • • ... ... ... 319 Pitfield Street, Accident in 33 ... ... ... 318 Plant and Materials ... ... • . • . . • 317, 356 Planting Trees ... ... . . . ... 316 Plumbers Place, &c., Area 3, 11, 44 ... ... • •• 316, 371 Plumbing Class • • • ... ... 249 341 ooi Ani Police Rate ... ... ... ... zyi, 4U1 Poor Rate ... ... ... ... 290—295 Poor Rate Accounts ... ... ... ... 290—295 Population ... 67,122 ... ... 312 Premises under Notice ... 134 ... ... ... ... . . . ... 290, 291, 311 Princess Alice Passage, Accident in 33 ... ... ... ... Pririvat dne ... ... 174 ... 374 Private Lighting ... ... ... 202 322, 357 Prosecution ... 137 ... • • • Public Companies ... ... • • • ... 317, 397 Public Health 41 ... ... ... 401 415 415 INDEX.—(continued). SUBJECT. DEPARTMENT. Clerk. Public Health Department. Surveyor. Miscellaneous. Accountant. Public Health Department 41, 46 ... ... ... 324, 335 Public Health (London) Act, 1891 ... ... .... 324 Public Libraries 62 ... ... 215 302—304 Public Mortuary ... 95 ... ... 325 Public Street Lighting ... ... ... 193 322 Public Urinals ... • • ' ... 206 335, 336 Puerperal Fever ... 90 ... ... ... Purchases Completed (Moira Place and Plumbers Place) 45 .... ... ... 371 Rate Collection ... ... ... ... 395—398 Rate Collectors • • • ... ... ... 390 Rateable Value 62 ...... ... ...... 290, 311, 333 Rates 3 ...... ... 259 290, 311, 333 Rates assessed and levied ... ... ... 259 395—398 Recreation Grounds ... ... ... 281 298, 316, 401 Refuse barged ... ... ... 188 321, 406 Refuse burned in Destructor ..... ... ... 213 328 Regents Canal ... ...... ...... ...... 321 Registration of Voters ... ...... ...... ... 292 Re-organisation of Dusting and Scavenging Department ... ... 187 ...... ...... Reliance Wharf • . • ... ... ... 320 Relieving Officers ... ... 277 ... Removal of House Refuse • • • ... ... ...... 321 Removal of Snow ... ... ... ... 406 Repairs of Roads and Footpaths ... ... ... 328, 401 Repayment of Debt • •. ... ... ... 385, 386 Returning Officer, Parliamentary • • • ... ... 273 292 Revising Barrister ... ... ... 23 292 Riga Wharf, Canal Road 62 ... ... 23 ...... Roads and Streets, Maintenance of • • • ... 146 ... 328, 401 Road Foremen ... ... 146 ... ... Rolling and Live Stock ... ... 188 258 406 Rosemary Branch Bridge ... ... 171 ... ... Rotherham's Premises Vaults) 33 ... ... ... ... St. John's Churchyard, Hoxton 20 ... ... ... 298 St. Leonard's Churchyard, Shoreditch 18 ... ... .... 298 St. Luke's Vestry ... ... ... 325, 335, ... 368 St. Mary's Churchyard, Haggerston 20 ... ... ... 298, 299 Salaries and Allowances to Officials • . . ... ... ... 388—392 Sale of Food and Drugs Bill 41 ... ... ... ... Sale of Food and Drugs Acts ... 108 123,136 ... ... 324, 391 Sanitary Staff 41 109 ... ... 390, 391 Sanitary Work ... 98 ... ... 334, 335 Scale of Fees for Surveyors and Valuers 63 ...... ... ... ... INDEX.—(continued). 41 SUBJECT. DEPARTMENT. Clerk. Public Health Department. Surveyor. Miscellaneous. Accountant. Scarlet Fever ... 82 ... ... ... Scavenging and Dusting ...... ... ... ... 328, 401 Scavenging and Watering ...... ... ... ... 328, 401 School Board for London • • • ... ... 274 311, 401 Sewers and Drains Bill 20 ... ... ... ... Sewer Gas Ventilators and Destructors • • • ... ... 203 334 Sewer Ventilating Shafts and Ventilation • • • ... 181 ... 334 ... • . . 173 ...... 334, 374, Sewerage and Drainage Works 3 ... 176 ... 401 337, 372, Sewers Rate ...... ... ...... ... 401 333—338 Shelters, Temporary ... 95 ... ... 325, 329 Shooting Rubbish in Public Thoroughfares ...... ... 187 .... a a ... Shoreditch Board of Guardians ... ... ... ... 290, 401 Shoreditch High Street ... ... ... ...... 368 Shoreditch High Street, No. 62 32 ... ... ... ... Shoreditch Local Debt 4 ... ... 383—386 Shoreditch Municipal Technical Schools...1 3 ... ... 240—254 341—343 Shoreditch Model Dwellings 14 ... ... ... 370 Shoreditch Parish Churchyard ... ... ... ... 299 Sickness amongst the Poor • • . 76 ... ... . ... Sick Pay ... ... 147 ... ... Slaughterhouses ... 104 ... ... Slipper Baths 6 ... ... ... ... Small Pox ... 81 ... ... ...... Smoke Nuisances ... 104 ... ...... 325 Snow, Removal of ...... 188 a a a ... 406 Special Committees ... ...... ... ...272 ... Special Committee, Report of 34 ... ... Statistics ... . ... ...... 257—260 404—406 Stables ... ... ... a a . 328 Staff and Plant at Wharves ... ... 189 258 390, 406 Staff ... ... ... 212 388—392 Standard Theatre ... 102 ... ... Standing Committees ... ... ... 267 ... Standing Orders and Bye-Laws 22 ... ... Steam Road Rollers ... 145, 146 ... 328 Stores and Stocks on hand ... 356 Street Gullies ... ... ... 334 Street Imnrovements. Local ... ... ... 401, 404 Street Watering ... ... • •• 328, 401 Streets and Public Roads ... ... ... ... 328, 401 Stuart, Professor James, M.P ... ... a a a 273 ... Summary of Rate Collection a a a ... ... 397 Sun Street Improvement a a a ... ... ... 369 Supplemental List, 1897 62 ... ... ... 327 Superannuation (Metroplis) Bill 26 ... ... ... .... Surplus Land, Plumbers lace Area 18 ... ... ... Surveyor, District a < a ... 273 ... Surveyor, Report of a a a ... 145—190 ... 328 Swimming Ponds 5 ... .... ...... 307 417 INDEX.—(continued). SUBJECT. DEPARTMENT. Clerk. Public Health Department. Surveyor. Miscellaneous. Accountant. Technical Instruction Board ...... ..... ...... ...... 272 Do. Committee ... ... ... 272 341—343 Do. Schools 3 ..... ... 240 341—343 Temporary Shelters ....... 95 . . . ... 325, 329 Tenement Houses • * • 141 ... ... ... 28 ... . . . ... 326, 329 Time Table of Classes ... ... ... 252 ... Town Hall Disinfecting Station .... ... ... ... 325, 329 Do. Establishment ... ... ... ... 326, 329 Do. Maintenance of ... ... ... ... 326, 329 Trade Refuse, Removal of ....... ... 188 ... 321, 406 Treasurer's Balances ....... ... ... ... 375T rebilcock, Mr. J. 40 ... ... ... 389 Trench, Drain, &c., Repairs . . . ... 159 ... 334, 374 Trough Closets .... 138 ... ... ... Trustees of Shoreditch Charities ... ... ... 274 314 Tubercular Disease ... 92 ... . • • ... Typhoid Fever ... 87 ... ... ... Underground Sanitary Conveniences 3 ... 171 203, 208 336, 337, 373 Unemployed and Snow Removal ... 188 406 Urinals, Public ... ... ... 204 335—337 Utilisation of Clinker Concrete ... ... 167 ... ... Vaccination in the Parish ... 81 ... ... ... Vaccination Officers ... ... ... 277 ... Valuation Appeals 62 ... ... ... 327 Valuation of Parish 62 ... ... ... 290, 311, 312 Valuation List Committe ....... ... ... 269 327 Vault at 38 and. 40 Curtain Road 31 ... ... ... 318 Vaults at Messrs. Rotherham's premises, Shoreditch 33 ... ... ... ... Ventilation of Sewers ....... ... ... ... 334 Vestry Clerk's Department 36 ... ... ... 313, 333, 401 Vestry Clerk's Report 1—64 ... ... ... 313, 333, 401 Vestry Elections ....... ... ... ... 257, 293 Vestry of St. Luke (Middlesex) ... ... ... ... 325, 335, 368 Vestry v. London County Council ... ... ... ... 291 Vestrymen and Committees, List of ... ... ... 261—272 ... Vital Statistics ... 112—122 ... ... 324 Wages of Employees ...... ... 183, 189 ... 317, 320 Wages and Disbursement Account ...... ... 189 • •• 374 Wards ...... ... ... 261—265 397 Washhouses and Baths ... ... ... ... 307, 308 418 NDEX.—(continued). SUBJECT. DEPARTMENT. Clerk. Public Health Department. Surveyor. Miscellaneous. Accountant. Washing Troughs 6 ... ... ... 307, 308 Water Supply ... 96 ... 207 ... Water Supply of London 24 ... ... ... ... Waterlow's premises, Earl Street 32 ... ... ... 318 Water Troughs ... 138 ... ... Water Vans • • • ... 190 ... 321, 406 Watering Streets ... ... ... ... 328, 401 Wharves ... ... ... ... 320 Whooping Cough ... 92 ... Wood Carving Class ... ... 244 341, 392 Wood Paving • • • ... 159, 161 ... 317, 368 Works 29 ... ... ... 316—319 328 Workshop Mensuration and Mechanics ... ... ... 247 341, 392 Workshops and Factories ... 106, 107, 139 ... ... ... Working Class Dwellings 44 ... ... ... 370 Yard Labour ... ... 147 ... 317 Year Book of Local Information ... ... ... 273 ... Zymotic Diseases ... 76 ... ... ...