1892-93. THE VESTRY OF THE PARISH OF SAINT LEONARD, SHOREDITCH, IN THE COUNTY OF LONDON. the THIRTY-SEVENTH ANNUAL REPORT, with an Abstract of the Accounts, FOR THE YEAR From 25th March, 1892, to 25th March, 1893. PUBLISHED PURSUANT TO THE METROPOLIS LOCAL MANAGEMENT ACT (18th and 19th Vic., cap. 120). Printed for the Destry of the Parish of st. Leonard, Shoreditch. BY a. t. roberts. son & co., 5, hackney road, london, n.e. 500—9.98. CONTENTS. Reports of— Folio Clerk 3— 40 Accountant 47-107 Surveyor 117-147 Lighting Inspector 151—164 Medical Officer of Health 167—208 Chief Sanitary Inspector 209—217 Analyst 218—223 Abstract of the Accounts 17—107 Assessment Committes 13— 46 Burial Board 60, 61 Commissioners for Public Libraries and Museums 227—244 Members of the Vestry 247—251 Officials 97, 244 Standing and Special Committees 253—256 Wards, Divisions, and Boundaries 245, 246 Year Book of Local Information 257—269 the Vestry of the Parish of St. Leonard, Shoreditch, in the county of london. ANNUAL REPORT. / Gentlemen, The past year has seen a large increase in the work of the Vestry. The Dusting and Scavenging of the Western Division of the parish was taken over on the 25th March, 1892, by the Vestry, to be performed with their own plant and staff instead of by a contractor. An important departure has been made in the institution of a Municipal Technical School specially for the furniture trade, which is the first of its kind established in the Metropolis. Substantial progress has been made with the reconstruction scheme for the insanitary area known as the Moira Place and Plumber's Place Area, the gross cost of which is estimated by Mr. Eve, the Vestry's valuer, at £60,000. With the object of meeting the distress due to the large number of the unemployed, the experiment of establishing a Labour Bureau to assist men in getting employment was tried during the past winter, and the results were sufficiently encouraging to cause the Vestry to resolve to re-open it next winter on • the necessity arising. Progress has been made with the Electric Lighting question by the adoption of a report by Mr. E. Manville, Consulting Electrical Engineer, recommending an installation being undertaken by the Vestry on the system and according to estimates submitted to the Vestry. The Baths and Washhouses Acts have been adopted by the Vestry for this parish, with the approval of the Local Government Board, and Commissioners appointed, and a highly important combined scheme for the erection of baths and washhouses in connection with a central electric lighting station, both being supplied with heat from dust utilizing furnaces has been formulated and is under consideration, the buildings to be erected on a central site, which would also accommodate a public library for Hoxton. An extensive scheme for the reconstruction of sewers in fifteen streets in Haggerston has be£n submitted by Mr. Martin, the Vestry's b 4 surveyor, and approved by the Vestry. Tenders for executing the work, amounting to £5,633, have been accepted and the work has been commenced. A number of measures for improving the sanitary condition of the parish have been taken, amongst them being the appointment of an additional sanitary inspector ; the purchase of a new disinfecting apparatus and two vans for disinfecting work, and the institution of numerous proceedings under the Public Health (London) Act, 1891, especially against so-called Model " dwellings for artizans. The Goldsmith Square Recreation Ground has been laid out as an open space. A thorough inspection has been made of all the street gulleys in the parish, and a large number of them have been repaired or re-constructed to prevent odours arising. In accordance with the requirements of the London County Council extensive alterations to this Town Hall, to make it safe against panic by fire and to improve the accommodation and conveniences, have been put in hand. All these special undertakings have made the year's work unusually severe, as they have come in addition to the ordinary routine work of the Vestry which, owing to new legislation, is tending to increase in several departments. Although they have involved of necessity an increase of expenditure, it is a well established fact that money laid out upon sanitary improvements is a good investment, leading as it certainly does to a decrease of disease and ill health, which again causes a direct decrease in the poor rate, a large proportion of which is spent in maintaining the families of those who are disabled from work by illness. Some of the other works undertaken are calculated in a short time to be a relief rather than a burden to the rates, and all of them may certainly be said to tend to the ultimate advantage and benefit of the parish and of its industries. RATES. Rates for the past year have been levied, as follows:— s. d. Poor Rate 3 3 in the £ General Rate 26 „ Sewers Rate 01 Total 5 10 „ The amount paid away by the Vestry on the precepts of the general Metropolitan bodies and the Guardians was £126,288, as against £J20,000 during the preceding year, being an increase of £6,288, which represents an increased rate of 1 3d. in the £. I pointed out in my last report that the general precepts had increased by 7½d. in the £ in the three years from 1888 to 1891, whilst rates for local purposes had decreased by 3½d. in the £ during that period. The continual increase of these central precepts has the effect of starving local work and preventing the growing requirements of sanitary legislation from being fullv met. 5 ELECTRIC LIGHTING. In July, 1892, the Royal Assent was given to an Act of Parliament confirming a Provisional Order granted by the Board of Trade to the Shoreditch Vestry for supplying electricity in this parish for public and private purposes. As explained in my last Annual Report the Vestry resolved to apply for this Order themselves, to prevent the monopoly of electric lighting being granted to a private company, two of which save notice of their intention to apply for Orders in July, 1891. The Ordor being obtained, at the request of the Parliamentary Committee I prepared a report on the present position of electric lighting in this country from the municipal point of view. This report dealt with the history of the question, the corporations which had undertaken the supply, and the question of transferring the Order to a private company. The opinions of experts, and some facts relating to the comparative cost of gas and electricity, the advantages of the electric light, the probable loss to be incurred in starting the undertaking, and the probable demand in Shoreditch for electricity were collected and commented on, and statistics shewing the working of the municipal installations of Brighton, St. Pancras and Bradford were given. The combination of a small electric light installation with a dust destructor at Southampton was described, and the importance of extending this principle to a large central station was emphasized. The report concluded with the following suggestions :— 1. To engage a practical consulting engineer experienced in electric lighting and independent of any special system or company, at an agreed fee, to advise the Vestry— (a) Whether this district and class of property therein is such as to justify the Vestry in establishing a central station and installation. (ib) What would be the best system for meeting the requirements of the district, and the best site for a central station, and whether the heat from a dust destructor could be advantageously employed in generating steam for the station. (c) What capital would be required in the first instance, and what loss might be anticipated before the undertaking became remunerative, and (d) Generally as to the best course to be pursued by the Vestry under their Provisional Order. 2. To confer with the Dusting and Scavenging Committee as to the question of erecting a dust destructor at the central station. 3. To view certain stations and installations specified as types of the different svstems. b1 6 These suggestions were adopted by the Vestry on the 8th November, 1892, when the Vestry resolved to engage a practical Consulting Engineer to advise them— 1. Whether the supply of electricity could be advantageously undertaken by the Vestry of Shoreditch, and at what preliminary loss ? 2. What would be the best system of supply for the Vestry to adopt, and the best site for a generating station, and the capital required, and 3. Generally on the best means of carrying out the Order. 4. As to the advisability of combining a dust destructor with the station for the utilization of heat. The report of the Parliamentary Committee of the 16th December, 1892, stated that the Committee had instructed the Clerk to write to the leading electrical engineers named below asking on what terms they would be prepared to make a preliminary report upon the above points, and that the Clerk had received replies from the following six gentlemen, who required payment of the fees set out in the third column. ENGINEER. Municipal Electric Lighting Stations superintended. FEE. Professor Kennedy Glasgow, Oldham, Aberdeen, and three public companies. 100 guineas W. H. Preece General Post Office, Bristol, Malta, Gibraltar. Has advised 13 public bodies 100 guineas Professor Ayrton, Chief Professor of Electrical Engineering, City & Guilds of London Central Institution. Chelmsford, Cheltenham, also several theatres, etc. 100 guineas E. Manville, Firm of Waller & Manville Dublin, Salford, Portsmouth, and Kilkenny (in progress) 30 guineas James M. Shoolbred Bradford, Brighton, Forth Bridge, advised 6 other corporations 25 guineas S. Dobson, Consulting Engineer, St. James and Pall Mall Electric Lighting Company. Cannot act outside his company 7 The above mentioned report of the Parliamentary Committee was considered by the Vestry on the 10th January, 1893, when the Committee's action in appointing Mr. E. Manville, Consulting Electrical Engineer to the Dublin, Portsmouth, Salford, and Kilkenny Corporations, to report to the Vestry on the preliminary points required by the Vestry, at a fee of 30 guineas, was approved. Mr. Manville proceeded to make an elaborate report upon the questions submitted to him, in which he expressed the opinion: (1) That the supply of Electricity could be established in Shoreditch with greater profit to the undertakers than in many of the more favourable neighbourhoods in London, owing to the late hour the shops were kept open and to the probable demand for motive power for the various industries, which indicated that Shoreditch would prove a most admirable field for the introduction of a Municipal electric lighting generating station. He pointed out that in the case of the three electrical supply stations of St. Pancras, Dublin, and Brighton, no charge had had to be made against the rates to meet the maintenance and sinking fund of the undertaking, though only in their first year of working. (2) He was of opinion that the most advantageous system which could be adopted for Shoreditch was the high tension continuous current transformer system for private lighting, and the high tension continuous current system for public lighting by arc lamps. Distributing sub-stations would have to be used, and the system would be applicable for supplying current for motive power purposes. The system recommended possessed nearly all the advantages of the high tension alternating system in point of economy in conductors, whilst it could be used in combination with accumulators. (3) He advised that there should be three sub-stations located—(a) In the basement of the Town Hall ; (A) At about the junction of Curtain Road and Holywell Lane ; (c) In the central generating station itself, unless the site for the generating station was away from the district of the compulsory area, when another station might become necessary, and he described the method of distribution proposed. (4) After discussing the dust destructors at Chelsea, Battersea, South Warrington, and Leeds, he adds that " in order to ensure perfect combustion in a destructor, the refuse should be burnt under forced draught so as to raise the temperature of some portion of the furnace to over 1500 degrees Fahrenheit. All the gaseous products of combustion that are produced in this furnace should then be passed through the hottest part of the furnace, so as to ensure these gases being raised to at least that temperature, when they are perfectly consumed and rendered absolutely innocuous even at the chimney's mouth. There can be no reasonable 8 doubt that a destructor designed upon this principle can be arranged in combination with a suitable range of boilers, so as to produce all the steam requisite for the generation of the electricity required in Shoreditch, and I think the figures appended hereafter will shew you that it will be exceedingly economical for you to combine such a dust utilizer with your electrical supply station, since it would undoubtedly put you in a more favourable position than any local authority yet owning an electric light station as far as cost of fuel is concerned, and this is a most considerable item in the cost of generation of electricity, and would obviously allow you to supply the residents within your parish with electricity at a cheaper rate than it can be supplied where dust is not used for the generation of steam, or on the other hand, if you decide to charge the same prices as elsewhere, you would make a correspondingly greater profit out of your electric lighting undertaking." He then proceeds to give full estimates for the erection of a dust utilizer in combination with the electric light station. The total capital outlay (exclusive of site) being estimated at £63,572. The cost of generation and distribution is estimated at £4,772 10s. 0d., or 3.75d. per unit, and the income at 6d. per unit is estimated at £7,500, leaving a credit balauce of £2,727 10s. Od. The cost of utilization of dust is estimated at £1,250 per annum, or about Is. 3d. per ton. As these estimates were prepared from the commercial standpoint, and did not cover the question of cost of taking up the necessary loans and repayment of principal and interest, I was instructed by the Parliamentary Committee to present a memorandum to the Yestry on this part of the scheme, so that the Vestry might be able to have the whole question fully before them in a succinct form. I pointed out that it was reasonable to calculate that the Vestry would be able to obtain loaus for the same number of years as St. Pancras, that is, repayable over 42 years in respect of outlay on generating station, and 50 years for cost of site. The portion of the Pitfield Street site, stated to be required by the engineer for electric lighting and dust utilization, would appear on a fair apportionment to work out at about £14,000 (including a piece of land in Bowling Green Alley). The repayment of principal and interest combined on the annuity principle would work out on this basis as follows: — £ Annual sum to cover interest and instalment on cost of site (50 years) £14,000 567 Annual sum to cover interest and instalment on capital outlay of £65,000 for generating station, mains, &c. (42 years), engineer's commission, &c. 2,1)70 Annual charge for whole scheme . . £3,537 9 Against this must be set:— c5 Annual saving on Just utilization, being difference between 1/3 per ton (engineer's estimate? page 13) and present cost of 3/- per ton on 20,000 tons 1,750 Estimated annual balance of revenue from electric works over expenses (page 14 of report) 2,727 Annual saving to baths and washhouses 500 Clear net rental from property on site not used (after allowing for repairs, &c.) 150 £5,127 Which leaves a net annual profit (including saving of present expenditure) on the combined works, of £1,590. I concluded that it might prudently be taken from the above summary that, even assuming the most unfavourable circumstances and after allowing for unfore- seen losses and expenses, the important works of electric lighting and dust utilization could be carried out (in combination with baths and washhouses) without any loss whatever to the rates, and with the fair expectation of some profit. In the above calculation the actual cost of purchasing the site and the undertakingis being paid for out of revenue, which would be equivalent in the case of a private company to the subscribed capital being returned to the shareholders by annual instalments, in addition to the dividends earned, which, in the Vestry's case, may be taken as representing interest on borrowed money. Thus in 42 years the Vestry would possess an undertaking worth, with goodwill, about £100,000 unencumbered by any debt, even if no further extension took place. If, however, the more favourable view of the case be taken, and the extensions which the engineer anticipates are realized, involving a proportionately greater profit at comparatively little increased expense, the proposed undertaking assumes very large proportions, and offers such magnificent profits that it would, in my opinion, soon compare favourably with the most successful gas or water monopolies. Mr. Manville's report was considered and the recommendations therein adopted at a special meeting of the Vestry held on the 28th February, 1893, when an Electric Lighting Committee for giving effect to the report was appointed,consisting of the following twenty members, viz.—Messrs. Belstead, Brabner, Darby, Elstow, Field, Hall, Kendell, Law, Moffatt, Morris, Noel, Sawell, D. Smither, S. Smither, Solomon, Styman, Trowbridge, Verinder, Wenborn, and Whiteman. On the 6th March, 1893, this Committee appointed Mr. H. T. Sawell as their Chairman, and Mr. C. W. Brabner as their Vice-Chairman, and in their report of That date recommended that Mr. Manville should be engaged as Consulting 10 Electrical Engineer to carry out the scheme for an Electric Light Installation and Dust Utilization on the lines of his report, on the following terms, viz.—Three per cent, on the amount of the original tenders accepted for electrical plant and buildings, and Five per cent, on those for the buildings for dust utilization, the thirty guineas for the preliminary report made by him to be included in such charges. The Vestry, however, decided at their meeting on the 21st March, 1893, that the appointment of a consulting engineer should be deferred until a convenient site had been secured. pitfield street site. The consulting engineer's report having been adopted by the Vestry, the question of obtaining a suitable site was discussed by the Parliamentary Committee and later by the Electric Lighting Committee, who made enquiries as to a large site in Pitfield Street, containing about one and a half acres, which was thought to be suitable for a joint scheme for the erection of an Electric Lighting Station and Dust Utilizer, and for Public Baths and Washhouses, and a Public Library ; in addition another site in Ivy Street was also considered. The Pitfield Street site was recommended to the Vestry, and negotiations for its purchase were pending at the conclusion of the period covered by this report. MOIRA PLACE AND PLUMBER'S PLACE AREA. Substantial progress has been made in giving effect to the scheme for reconstructing this unhealthy area under Part II. of the Housing of the Working Classes Act, 1890. On the 18th March, 1892, the Housing of the Working Classes Committee discussed the advisability of continuing the proposed new road mentioned in their scheme (a copy of which is printed in my report for the year ending 25th March, 1892, at page 43), by making it pass through a portion of the St. Luke's Parish to the City Road. This alternate scheme was estimated by the Surveyor (Mr. Eve) to cost a sum of £8,200 more than the Committee's scheme. The Committee were unanimously of opinion that this would greatly improve their scheme, and be an advantage to the neighbourhood. The Committee accordingly approached the St. Luke s Vestry, and pointed out to them the advantages which would accrue to both parishes if this were done, and urged them to co-operate with this Vestry by providing the necessary outlay for the extension of the road, through a small portion of their parish. The St. Luke's Vestry replied that they did not consider the construction of a new street through a portion of their parish to the City Road in continuation of this Vestry's proposed new street an improvement which would materially affect that parish, and consequently they wore not prepared to co-operate with this \ estry in the matter. The negociations with the St. Luke's Vestry having led to no result, the Committee approached the London County Council with a view 11 to the Council contributing to the cost of the St. Luke's portion of the scheme as a Metropolitan Improvement, but without effect, and the Committee were therefore compelled to terminate the proposed new road at Britannia Street, In their report of the 8th April, 1892, the Housing Committee recommended that the resolution of the Vestry of the 17th February, 1891, enumerating the properties included in the Moira Place and Plumber's Place areas, should be altered by the addition of the following buildings and premises to the buildings and premises contained in the scheme already approved by the Yestry:— (1) In Provost Street, those numbered 32 and 38. In Britannia Street, that numbered 4. At the back of premises on the south-east side of Plumber's Place, a small portion of the wood yard, buildings and premises in the occupation of Messrs. Gould & Co., and coloured green on plan marked "A" then laid before the Yestry. The streets, passages and courts known as Moira Place, Plumber's Place, and so much of Moneyer Street and Custance Street as were coloured pink on the plan marked "A." And all other the lands, buildings, hereditaments and premises coloured pink on the said plan marked "A." (2) That the reconstruction scheme, as shown in the plan marked ' A,'' be approved and adopted by the Vestry for dealing with the Moira Place and Plumber's Place areas, under section 39 of the " Housing of the Working Classes Act, 1890," and that Nile Street be widened to the extent of the line edged with red on the said plan, and a new street be formed between East Road and Britannia Street, as shown by the lines edged with red on the said plan. (3) That it be referred to the Housing Committee to take the necessary steps to serve the notices required by the said section of the said Act. As the London County Council are required by the Act to pay half the cost of the scheme, the Committee thought it advisable to submit the scheme as finally approved by the Yestry to the Council for their approval. This was done, and a deputation was appointed to wait upon the Council. The Council's Housing Committee were at first inclined to take exception to the scheme adopted by the Vestry, as it was alleged that it included street improvements which the Council's Committee thought were not within the tenour of the Act, and the Council's Committee suggested that the area should be dealt with piecemeal. The Vestry's Committee discussed the matter with the four local members of the Council, and ultimately the Council signified its intention of supporting the scheme, provided the following matters were omitted from it:— (1) The proposed roadway between Britannia Street and City Road. (2) The public house in Provost Street and Plumber's Place. 12 (?)) A certain amount of property fronting Provost Street. (4) A certain amount of property fronting Nile Street. The Council also intimated that they were not prepared to include the timber vard of Messrs. Gould in their scheme, as they would approve of the width of the new street without it. The Vestry's Housing Committee, after considering the Council's suggested modifications, were still of opinion that the Vestry's scheme was preferable, and they instructed the Medical Officer and the Surveyor (M!r. Eve) to wait upon the Council's Surveyor and Medical Officer with a view to inducing the Council to modify their requirements so as to bring them more into conformity with the Vestry's ideas. Subsequently, after further negociations, the Council approved of the scheme as settled by the Vestry, the proposed roadway between Britannia Street and City Road being omitted. The public house in Provost Street was not intended to be included in the Vestry's scheme. I then proceeded to prepare and serve the owners and occupiers with notices in accordance with the requirements of the Housing of the Working Classes Act. The whole of this work was undertaken by my department, with a little temporary assistance from Mr. C. Webster as an enquiry officer. The preparation of the Statutory Declarations of Service was also undertaken by my department, and in this heavy and responsible work I have received most valuable assistance from Mr. Clarke and Mr. Milne. During the period these negociations were taking place with the London County Council, the Vestry's Surveyor (Mr. Eve) had been in communication with several of the owners of property on the area, with a view to purchasing the property by private treaty and avoiding the cost and delay of submitting the question of compensation to arbitration, and he has reported the result of his negociations to the Committee from time to time The suggested amounts required by owners have been carefully compared with the Surveyor's Valuations, and the (committee are negociating with the view of making the best terms for the parish, and have instructed Mr. Eve to discuss each case with the valuer of the London County Council. I think it should also be reported to the Vestry that the whole of the freehold estate in the area has been claimed by the Trustees of Mrs. Hannah Cox, the present representative of the Mogg family, and this may necessitate the Vestry paying the purchase money into Court. A local inquiry by the Local Government Board, which was duly advertised in the local press and by placards on the area, was held at the Town Hall on the 22nil February, 1893, by Mr. Samuel Joseph Smith, C.fcj., one of the Board's 13 Inspectors, when I appeared in support of the Vestry's scheme, whilst Mr. Davis represented the London County Council, and some owners of property were also represented. Evidence in favour of the scheme was given by Drs. F. J. Allan and L. T. F. Bryett, by Mr. Eve the (Surveyor for the scheme, and it was supported by the officials of the London County Council. The Inspector subsequently viewed the area, but the final order of the Local Government Board approving the scheme was not received within the year covered by this report. As to raising the necessary funds for acquiring the area, at a meeting of the Vestry,held on the 5th April, 1893, the Finance Committee presented the following report, dated 28th March, 1893:— " PROPOSED ISSUE OF DEBENTURES AT ¼ % "(UNDER THE LOCAL LOANS ACT, 1875.) "main features of scheme. "Your Committee have had under consideration the question of raising the Loan of £40,000 required by the Housing of the Working Classes Committee, for dealing with the Moira Place and Plumber's Place areas, and they have carefully considered a report of the Vestry Clerk and Accountant on the desirability of borrowing this money by the issue of Debenture Bonds, under the official sanction of the Local Government Board. "(1) issue. "As no Metropolitan Vestry or District Board have availed themselves of the provisions of this Act for the purpose of raising loans, the matter was placed before the Vestry's Bankers, the London and Midland Bank, Limited, who write that they are prepared to arrange the loan and undertake the inscription on the following terms :— " The Debentures to be issued to the Bank at 99 % firm. The Bank to be at liberty to float it off at par in such amounts as may be convenient. This 1 % difference to include all expenses of the Bank for floating the loan, but the Vestry to prepare and complete the necessary documents and to pay stamp duty. "The Bank to undertake the inscription at an annual fee of ,£35 per annum. " The Bank to receive all the transfer fees, etc. "(2) discharge of loans. "The Debt will be redeemed by equal annual appropriations, raised by quarterly instalments of Rate, spread over the prescribed period, which in this case should be 50 years. "Out of such fixed sum, the interest due on the Debentures would be paid and the residue applied to the paying off of a corresponding amouut of the principaj sum secured by such Debentures. 14 "Debentures to be paid off.—Annual drawings for cancelling a certain number of Bonds will take place at any ordinary meeting of the Vestry, after due notice. "The Debentures will be redeemable at par on a given date, unless sooner determined by lot. " (3) GENERAL RULES. "It will be necessary for the Vestry to make certain regulations with respect to the payment of interest, keeping register of securities, etc., and these will be submitted hereafter. "(4) ADVANTAGES AND SAVIXG TO THE VESTRY. "The Debentures being in amounts of £10, would be a very useful and good investment for the small investors of Shoreditch, the interest being better by three quarters per cent, than that obtainable from the Post Office Savings' Bank, and it is probable that if this Loan is taken up as readily as is anticipated future loans could be issued on even better terms. "The following statement shows the benefits accruing to the Vestry as compared with the usual method of borrowing from the London County Council. BORROWED THROUGH LONDON COUNTY COUNCIL. RAISED BY VESTRY. Interest at £3 10s. Od. pen cent. Interest at £3 5s. Od. per cent. £ s. d. £ s. d. Stamp Duty on Issue 55 0 0 Stamp Duty on Issue 55 0 0 Law and Stationery Charges, &c. 10 10 0 Printing, Certificates, &c. 10 10 0 Average Annual Instalment of Principal and Interest required to repay £40,000 in 50 years 1,705 0 0 Average Annual Instalment of Principal and Interest required to repay £40,000 in 50 years 1,630 0 0 Keeping Register (Annual Fee) 35 0 0 Interest on Procuration Fee (Annual Sum) 13 0 0 1,678 0 0 Net Annual Saving by issuing Debentures 27 0 0 £1,705 0 0 £1,705 0 0 " The total saving on the loan for 50 years would therefore be about £1,350. " The proportionate share of the Vestry in the profit which the County Council would realize from lending the money would be about £4 per annum, but none of this would be realized for about 50 years. " \our Committee, therefore, unanimously recommend—' That the Vestry be recommended to make arrangements to raise this loan of £40,000 by the issue of Debentures under the Local Loans Act, 1875, and that the Vestry Clerk be instructed to lay a provisional proposal on the above lines before the Local (lovernment Board for their sanction.' " 15 In moving the reception and adoption of this report, Mr. E. Moffatt, the Chairman of the Committee, informed the Vestry that the London and Midland Bank had, since the preparation of the above report, agreed to reduce the annual charge for the management of the loan from £35 to £30, to be reduced at the end of five years to £20, which would effect a further saving to the Vestry of about £ 1,850. The report was received and the Committee's recommendations were adopted. A formal application was made to the London County Council for their consent to the loan, but owing to the delay in obtaining the Order of the Local Government Board, sanctioning the Vestry's scheme for dealing with the Moira Place and Plumber's Place area, the Council were not in a position to consider the matter within the time covered by this report. The official sanction of the Local Government Board to this method of borrowing the money will also be applied for in due course. The Accountant has been informed by the Inland Revenue Department, that the Vestry are a duly constituted corporate body empowered to enter into an agreement under the Stamp Act, 1891, sec. 115, for the composition of Stamp Duty on the transfers of Stock and Funded Debt. On the 1st April, 1892, the Housing of the Working Classes Committee reported to the Vestry, as follows :— " Your Committee think no time should be lost in making arrangements for raising the necessary money for purchasing the property included in the Moira Place and Plumber's Place scheme, as official sanctions have to be obtained. The [Surveyor (Mr. W. Eve) certifies that a sum of at least £40,000 will be required soon after the scheme has been published, and your Committee have referred his certificate to the Finance Committee to consider how the money is to be raised, and " Recommend—The Vestry to apply to the London County Council for their consent to the borrowing by the Vestry of £40,000 for the above purpose, from such sources as the Vestry may decide. As some questions may arise between the London County Council and the Vestry in carrying this scheme into effect, your Committee think it would be advantageous for the Vestry to have a free hand in borrowing this money, and concur with the Finance Committee in recommending the Vestry to issue Debentures under the Local Loans Act." The above recommendation was endorsed by the Vestry. LITIGATION. SHOREDITCH VESTRY v. PILBROW. This important sanitary case, which occupied five days in hearing at the Worship Street Police Court, before Mr. Rose, the Police Magistrate, was concluded on the "24th August, 1892. I 16 Mr. E. Lewis Thomas (instructed by me) appeared for the plaintiff's, and Mr. Woodfin (instructed by Mr. Lambert) for the defendant. Mr. Thomas said the summons was for £209, the expenses of executing drainage works at Norfolk Buildings, Shoreditch, on the owner failing to comply with notices under sec. 85 of the Metropolis Local Management Act, 1855. The premises consisted of 48 tenements of so-called Model Artisans' Dwellings, and on the Medical Officer of Health causing them to be examined for a certificate for exemption from inhabited house duty, the whole system of drainage was found to be in a most defective and dangerous state, many closets having no water supply, the ground under some of the bedrooms being saturated with sewage floodings from stoppages in the drains, and the yards being unpaved, undrained and covered with refuse. During 1890-1 a number of cases of typhoid fever, diphtheria, and other infectious diseases had occurred in the premises. Notices were served in November, 1891, on Mr. Pilbrow, the collector of the rents (as the owner could not be found), to reconstruct and amend the main drain between the two blocks, and all the branch drains of the tenements, with other necessary works. Conferences took place, but nothing was done, and in February, 1892, the Vestry employed a builder to execute the work, the expenses of which were now sought to be recovered. Since the work had been done the drains had been stopped several times, but this was found to be due to the insertion of brick and coke rubbish, and a tightly bound mass of hay in the drain through the ventilating pipe on ihe roof, in such a way as to point to a wilful stoppage by some persons. The cover of an inspection chamber had also been broken by force. Dr. Allan, the Medical Officer of Health, Inspectors Alexander and Stiles, and Mr. Barr, proved the counsel's statement. I also proved certain photographs (produced) which were taken of the drains when opened up, and the necessary resolutions of the Vestry, and showed the difficulty experienced in finding that the collector of the rents was Mr. Pilbrow. This man was identical with Newby & Co., of Chancery Laue, who appeared to act for a syndicate of owners of this class of property in different parts of London. The owner was said to be a Mr. Smith, in Spain, but Pilbrow had compromised an action against him by the ground landlord for rent by paying half the rent due, and to this extent he appeared to have a charge on the property. Pilbrow's two sons were set to collect the rents at the time of the service of the notices. Mr. Tidman, sanitary engineer, and Mr. Jarvis, a builder of large experience, were called as experts, and they proved testing the drains as amended, and the satisfactory execution of the work, which they valued at £230, no charge having been made for supervision. Messrs. Walesby and rhomerson, builders, produced plans of the old and new drainage schemes, and considered the work very well done. Three tenants of the premises proved payment of rent to Pilbrow and his sons. Mr. Woodfin took the objections that Pilbrow was not the collector of the 17 rents or the owner, that more works had been done than were stated in the notices, that the works were unnecessary, and had been improperly and extravagantly done without a previous estimate or tender, that the main drain between the two blocks was not a drain within the meaning of the Act, and that the inspection of the drains, which admittedly was only of the branch drains of one house and part of the main drain, did not warrant notices requiring the drains of the other eleven houses in the blocks to be reconstructed, and that complaints of the tenants were not sufficient grounds for the service of such notices under sees. 82 and 85 of the Act. He called Mr. Saltmarsh, late Inspector under the City Commissioners of Sewers, who condemned the work as improper and the inspection chambers provided as unnecessary. Cross-examined, he admitted he had been frequently censured by his late employers, and had been ordered to apologise to a ratepayer for misconduct ; that he had been called on to resign and warned that his pension would be stopped if he carried on business in the City. Mr. Parsons, a Sanitary Inspector of St. Luke's, Mr. Peacock, late Inspector of Holborn, and Messrs. Breviler, Hughes, Whitfield, and Hullon, builders, gave evidence generally condemning the work done, which they thought worth only £100. The caretaker and nine tenants of the premises stated that no rent was paid to Pilbrow, but only to his sons. Mr. Hose, in giving judgment, said that Pilbrow had the chance, under sec. 211 of the Act, of appealing to the London County Council if he thought the notices improper, or the works unnecessary, but he had failed to do so. It was a matter of common knowledge that inspection chambers were necessary in such works as these. He thought the inspection of the drains in the first instance a reasonably sufficient one, and it was not necessary to open up all the drains for inspection. The price charged for the work appeared to be reasonable, and the Yestry was not bound to get tenders for the work, or do it in a cheap and nasty manner, and he could not conceive a public body carrying out such works in the most expensive way possible. The defendant had the opportunity of proving he was not the owner or collector in the easiest way, but he had not chosen to avail himself of it, and Mr. Rose was of opinion that he was the owner under the Act, and he accordingly gave judgment for the Vestry for the amount claimed, with £20 costs. He declined to grant a case for the opinion of the Queen's Bench Division. NATHAN v. SHOREDITCH VESTRY. On the 10th May, 1892, a writ was issued by Mr. Abraham Nathan, of Mansfield Street, Kingsland Road, for damages in respect of an alleged injury to his knee, said to have been caused by stumbling against one of the Yestry's brooms laid slanting against the wall on the pavement under the arch in Mansfield Street, Kingsland Road, on 10th December, 1891. The Paving Committee having fully considered the matter before proceedings were taken, had resolved that they could not see their way to recommend the 18 Vestry to pay any compensation, as the facts were in dispute, and the person alleged to have placed the broom against the wall was in the service of Messrs. Abbotts, the Vestry's contractors for general cartage of materials. I proceeded therefore to enter an appearance and to defend the action. A summons was taken out on behalf of the Vestry for further and better particulars of the plaintiff's claim, and the Master ordered the particulars required to be delivered. I also made an affidavit as to the plaintiff's means being insufficient to meet any costs should judgment be given against him, which was supported by an affidavit of Mr. Noel, Vice-Chairman of the Paving Committee, and I proceeded to take out a summons for the action to be transferred to the Shoreditch County Court, in pursuance of sec. 66 of the County Courts Act, 1888, unless security for costs were given. This summons was heard before the Hon. Robert Butler, on the 16th July, 1892, when he made an order transferring the action to the Shoreditch County Court for trial. No further proceedings have been taken by the plaintiff, and the action has accordingly lapsed. CHICK v. QUELCH. On 22nd October, 1892, a requisition on behalf of Mr. John Chick, of 47, North Street, Victoria Park, against Mr. Quelch, one of the Vestry's Sanitary Inspectors, for damages for slander alleged to have been uttered by him before the Vestry's General Purposes Committee, in reporting the unsatisfactory progress of the work executed by Mr. Chick in accordance with the Vestry's orders. As the report of the Inspector was made in pursuance of his duty and was supported by other evidence, the Vestry resolved to defend the action for him, and I entered an appearance accordingly. The plaintiff took out a summons to transfer the action to the Shoreditch County Court for trial, to save time and expense, but inasmuch as the County Court Acts only allow the privilege to transfer an action to the County Court to the defendant, I would not agree to this course, and no further proceedings have been taken by the plaintiff, so that the action has accordingly lapsed. TOTALS OF QUINQUENNIAL VALUATION. Upon the reduction of the assessments of the Gas Light and Coke Company and others by the Court of Quarter Sessions on appeals against the Quinquennial Valuation List, it was found impossible to get the Court to alter the totals in order to give corresponding relief to the Vestry in payment of the General Metropolitan Precepts. I accordingly entered an appeal by the Vestry against the totals of the List, and the Assessment Committee were made respondents. This appeal (which is reported more fully in the Assessment Committee's report) was successful, the 19 result being a reduction of the totals by £499 gross and £3.521 on rateable, and the Vestry obtained from the London County Council, the School Board, and the Receiver of the Metropolitan Police, a rebate of the various sums overpaid to them in respect of the above reduction since April, 1890. BISHOPSGATE DISASTER. A disastrous railway collision occurred at Bishopsgate Railway Station on the Great Eastern Railway, on Tuesday, the 14th June, 1892, by which four persons were killed, and a number of others badly injured. An inquest was held at this Town Hall by Mr. Hodgkinson, Deputy Coroner for North East London, upon the circumstances attending the deaths of the victims, when, as the accident happened to one of the workmen's early trains run under clauses inserted in the Company's Act at the instigation of this Vestry, I appeared on behalf of the Vestry and tendered evidence with regard to the insufficient lighting at the end of the station, but for which the engine-driver of the approaching train might have seen the train with which he collided standing in the station, and the collision might have been averted. Mr. Charles Doughty, the Vestry's lighting engineer gave evidence to this effect, and the jury brought in a verdict of accidental death and recommended that the station should be better lighted by the electric light. It is satisfactory to observe that the Great Eastern Railway Company are now erecting an electriclighting station, not only to light the Bishopsgate passenger station, but the Bishopsgate goods station, and to provide some additional lighting at Liverpool Street. POLICE COURT PROCEEDINGS. With reference to the Sanitary Work of the parish, proceedings have been taken in the Police Courts in respect of 19 premises, resulting in the infliction of £37 in fines, and £3 8s. in costs. Under the Adulteration of Foods Acts 14 prosecutions were instituted, and £40 0s. 6d. inflicted in fines in 13 cases, and £1 2s. 6d. in costs. Numerous cautionary notices were served on behalf of the Overseers in respect of disorderly houses, one prosecution was instituted, resulting in a fine of £.10, or in default, one month's imprisonment. In the Highways Department several minor prosecutions were instituted, in all of which convictions were obtained. In the conduct of the general litigation of the Vestry I have to acknowledge the valuable assistance rendered by Mr. Geo. W. Clarke. OFFICIALS AND ORGANIZATION. (a) RATE COLLECTOR—MOORFIELDS WARD. In the month of March, 1892, an advertisement for a Rate Collector was issued, to fill the vacancy in the Moorfields Ward occasioned by the dismissal of Mr. E. F. Russell. In reply to this advertisement 200 applications were received, c 20 and after interviewing 18 candidates, the names of the following 6 applicants were selected for presentation to the Vestry:— 1 C. H. Belward. 2. J. F. Coffin. 3. C. W. Cranston. 4. H. L. Loly, Clerk in Vestry's Rate Department years, responsible for the Rate Books for Moorfields, Wenlock and Whitmore Wards. 5. H. E. Manger. 6. F. D. Price. On the 5th April, 1892, Mr. Hector Leopold Loly was appointed a Rate Collector of this Vestry and Parish, at a salary of £160 per annum, he providing an office in the Ward to which he might be assigned, and to devote the whole of his time to the duties, and to furnish security in an approved Guarantee Society in the sum of £500. Mr. Loly was subsequently assigned the Moorfields Ward, and he at once entered upon his new duties. (b) Mr. J. F. BURTON, ARREARS CLERK. On the 3rd May, 1892, a letter was read to the Vestry from Mr. J. F. Burton tendering his resignation as an officer of the Vestry. A resolution was passed accepting the resignation, and the question of filling up the vacancy was referred to the Officers' Committee. (c) GENERAL AND ARREARS CLERKSHIP, AND RATE CLERKSHIP. On the 12th April, 1892, the question of the filling up of the vacant Rate Clerkship occasioned by the promotion of Mr. H. L. Loly to the post of Rate Collector, was referred to the Officers' Committee, who caused the usual advertisements to be inserted. The matter of filling up the vacancy on the Vestry Clerk's staff, occasioned by the retirement of Mr. Burton, was also referred to the Officers' Committee, who recommended in their report of the 9th May, 1892, that one of the applicants for the appointment of Rate Clerk (then being advertised) who was able to write shorthand and to take minutes, should be selected to fill Mr. Burton's position, at a salary of £100 a year. The Committee also recommended that 7 candidates should be submitted to the Vestry for the selection of candidates to fill this vacancy and that of Rate Clerk. These recommendations were adopted by the Vestry. The Committee received 88 applications, and after interviewing 18 selected candidates, selected 3 applicants for the office of General and Arrears Clerk, and 4 for the office of Rate Clerk. These candidates appeared before the Vestry on the 31st May, 1892, when Mr. J. A. Douglas Milne, Junior and Corresponding Clerk to the Walthamstow Local Board, was appointed as General and Arrears Clerk; and Mr. James H. Pickup, of Bacup, near Manchester, 21 Assistant in the Town Clerk's Office, was appointed as Rate Clerk, and they respectively entered on their duties on the 13th day of June, 1892, and the 27th day of June, 1892. (d) SURVEYOR'S ASSISTANT. On the 3rd day of May, 1892, the Vestry, on the recommendation of the Paving and Sewers Committee, referred to the Officers' Committee the question of providing the Surveyor with professional assistance to enable him to prepare the necessary plans, &c., with a view to a scheme being formulated for the reconstruction of a large part of the Haggerston sewerage system. The Committee issued advertisements for a competent Surveyor, as a temporary Assistant, at a salary of £2 2s. per week, and received 19 applications for the appointment, and after interviewing 4 applicants and considering their qualifications, Mr. H. V. Broomfield, of Lawton Road, Altegar, was on the 6th September, 1892, appointed by the Committee in accordance with the terms of the reference, subject to 14 days' notice on either side. (e) Mb. JOSEPH RILEY (Deceased). At their meeting held on the 28th June, 1892, I reported to the Yestry that Mr. Joseph Riley, the Yestry's Senior Rate Collector, had died suddenly on Friday, the 24th June, whilst engaged on his collection, also, that the Finance Committee had passed a vote of condolence with his relatives, and had appointed his son to get in the outstanding rates on his providing a temporary guarantee in the sum of £300. The Yestry thereupon resolved that a letter of condolence be written to Mrs. Riley, expressing the Yestry's sympathy with her and her family in the sad bereavement she had sustained. This was done, and gratefully acknowledged by the widow. The Yestry's officers also subscribed for a wreath, and were represented at the funeral. The question of filling up the vacancy was referred to the Officers' Committee, who issued an advertisement for a Rate Collector, at the commencing salary of £160 per annum, who was to devote the whole of his time to the duties; to provide an office in the ward to which he might be appointed; and to furnish security in an approved Guarantee Society in the sum of £500. The Committee reported that 126 applications for the post were received in reply to the advertisement, and that 10 of this number had been interviewed by them, and after considering their respective qualifications, they had finally selected 6 candidates for presentation to the Yestry, for the latter to make the appointment. On the 26th July, 1892, the 6 candidates in question, viz., Messrs. C. W. Cranston, J. G. Golding, Wm. Hayes, Arthur Hurn (Yestry's Rate Department), T. G. Rolfe, and Harry Taylor (Rate Collector, Leamington Town Council), appeared before the Yestry, when it was unanimously resolved that Mr. Harry Taylor, of Leamington Spa, be appointed a Rate Collector in accordance with the cl 22 terms of the advertisement. Subsequently Mr. Taylor was assigned the Haggerston East and Acton Wards, and entered upon his duties on the 29th September, 1892. Mr. G. C. Young, the previous Collector of those Wards, in consideration of his long and faithful service being transferred to Church Ward South. (f) Mr. ALFRED BARR, CLERK IN SANITARY DEPARTMENT. An application from Mr. Alfred Barr, Clerk in the Vestry's Sanitary Department, was considered by the Officers' Committee, and in accordance with the Committee's recommendation, the Yestry on the 1st November, 1892, increased his salary from £80 to £90 per annum. (g) ACCOUNTANT. On the 1st November, 1892, the Yestry, on the recommendation of the Officers' Committee, voted a sum of £25 to Mr. Adams, the Accountant, for extra work performed by him in opening up a new set of books, and for the satisfactory manner in which it was done. (h) MEDICAL OFFICER OF HEALTH. On the 20th December, 1892, a letter was read to the Yestry from Dr. F. J. Allan, giving notice of his intention to resign his office of Medical Officer of Health to the parish at the end of three months, he having been appointed Medical Officer to the Board of Works for the Strand District. The letter was referred to the Officers' Committee, who recommended in their report of the 29th December, 1892, as follows:— (1) That Dr. Allan's resignation (after three months) be received with regret. (2) That in compliance with the General Order of the Local Government Board as to Medical Officers of Health, a proposal be forwarded to the Local Government Board of the Yestry's intention to appoint Dr. Allans successor at a salary of £350 per annum, to devote the whole of his time to the duties of the office, and to commence such duties at Lady-day next. (3) That the question of re-filling the appointment be referred back to the Committee with power to negociate with the Local Government Board, and to report to the Vestry the best terms the Committee can make with the Board. (4) That the Vestry accept the following arrangement with Dr. Allan as to completing his engagement and special work in this office, the terms of which are, that Dr. Allan be allowed to commence his duties at the Strand Board of Works (which last for two hours each day) on the 2nd January next, ho to provide at his own expense an Assistant Medical Officer of Health until his three months' notice expires, such Assistant to devote 23 the whole of his time to the Vestry's work, and Dr. Allan, after his service at the Strand, to devote the rest of his time in superintending the work of the Vestry's Public Health Department and to attend Committees, and after the expiration of his notice, to give the Vestry such assistance as may be required with regard to the Moira Place Improvement Scheme gratuitously. These recommendations were adopted by the Vestry on the 3rd January, 1893, and a proposal was sent to the Local Government Board, in accordance with the terms of the second recommendation in the Officers' Committee's report. The Local Government Board replied, requesting the Committee to reconsider the amount of the proposed salary to be paid to the Medical Officer, and quoting the cases of other parishes in the Metropolis where larger salaries were being paid. Much correspondence has taken place between the Local Grovernment Board and myself on the question of the salary, and the hours during which the Medical Officer 'should be required to attend to discharge his duties, but no settlement has been arrived at within the period covered by this report. The Board, who are practically masters of the situation by virtue of the powers conferred upon them by the Public Health (London) Act, 1891, required the Medical Officer to be paid a salary of £600, and to devote the whole of his time to the duties of the office, but the Officers' Committee have urged the Board to sanction a smaller salary, in view of the requirements and position of this parish. In view of the fact that some time was likely to elapse before the Committee were able to come to terms with the Local Government Board, they recommended the Vestry to engage Dr. L. T. F. Bryett (a Doctor of Medicine of the London University and Diplomate in Public Health, who had acted as Assistant Medical Officer to Dr. Allan), to act temporarily as Medical Officer of Health, to devote the whole of his time to the duties of the office, his salary to be at the rate of £400 per annum, and the engagement to be determinable at a month's notice on either side. The Vestry adopted the recommendation and appointed Dr. Bryett temporarily on the 4th April, 1893. On the 16th March, 1893, the General Purposes and Sanitary Committee resolved— "That this Committee expresses its regret on losing the services of Dr. F. J. Allan as Medical Officer of Health, he having discharged those duties with courtesy and to the Committee's entire satisfaction, and it hereby wishes him every success in discharging the duties of his new appointment." This resolution was endorsed by the Vestry at their meeting on the 4th April, 1893. (i) ASSISTANT CLERK. On the 10th January, 1893, a letter was read to the Vestry from Mr. G. W. Clarke, asking for an increase of his salary, and was referred to the Officers' Committee for consideration and report. The Committee in their report of the 24 12th January, 1893, recommended— "That in view of the very satisfactory way in which Mr. Clarke has performed his duties, and of the amount of litigation and conveyancing in which he has assisted at a substantial saving of law costs to the Vestry, the Vestry increase Mr. Clarke's salary £10 per annum, to date from the 25th December last, and that his salary rise by annual increments of £10, commencing on the 1st September, 1893 (being two years from his appointment) to a maximum of £190 per annum." The report was discussed by the Vestry at its meeting on the 17th January, 1893, when an amendment was moved by Mr. Wells to the following effect:— "That the words 'to a maximum of £200 per annum, to include the £15 paid to Mr. Clarke for assessment work' be substituted for the words 'to a maximum of £190 per annum.'" The amendment was carried, and the Committee's report as amended was adopted unanimously. (j) ASSISTANT ACCOUNTANT. Mr. W. Culshaw, Assistant Accountant, on the 10th January, 1893, applied to the Vestry for an increase of his salary, and on a reference to the Officers' Committee, the latter reported on the 12th January, 1893— "That in view of the very satisfactory and reliable way in which Mr. Culshaw has performed his duties, which owing to the opening of a new set of books and re-organisation of the finances have been exceptional, the Yestry be recommended to increase his salary £10 per annum, to date from the 25th December last, and to further raise his salary by annual increments of £10 to a maximum of £150 per annum, commencing on the 1st September, 1893 (being two years from the date of his appointment.)" This report was received, and the Committee's recommendation unanimously adopted by the Yestry on the 17th January, 1893. (k) SANITARY INSPECTOR QUELCH. The Officers' Committee having considered a letter from Mr. C. H. Quelch, asking to be allowed to reach his maximum salary in four instead of in eight years, by doubling the amount of his annual increments (referred to them by the Vestry for consideration and report), recommended, on the 12th January, 1893, "That the application be granted," and the Vestry on the 17th January, 1893, adopted the recommendation accordingly, which was approved by the Local Government Board on the 8th day of April, 1893. (I) SANITARY INSPECTOR STILES. On the 6th December, 1892, the Vestry formally appointed Mr. Ambrose \\ illiam Stiles a Sanitary Inspector, in pursuance of the Public Health (London) Act, 1891, at a salary of Jt'110 per annum, rising by annual increments of £!) to a maximum of £150 per annum, his duties to be those laid down in the General Order of the Local Government Board as to Sanitary Inspectors. The appointment was approved by the Local Government Board, and half of his salary will be payable out of the Exchequer Contribution Account. 25 (m) RE-ORGANIZATION OF THE VESTRY CLERK'S AND ACCOUNTANTS STAFF. The Officers' Committee, on the 12th January, 1893, discussed a letter from Mr. Milne, the General and Arrears Clerk, stating that in consequence of an increasing pressure of minuting and other work, caused by the large and increasing amount of business undertaken by the various committees of the Vestry attended by him, he was unable to devote sufficient time to the important duty of checking the Rate Collectors' arrears, The Committee also discussed a joint report of the Accountant and myself on the matter, and after considering that report, re-arranged the duties of the Rate staff in some particulars, with a view to The better equalization of the work of the Vestry Clerk's and Accountant's departments; the arrangement to be reported on again after its working had been tried. TOWN HALL. On the 1st October, 1892, I applied before the Theatres Committee of the London County Council at the annual Licensing Meeting for a renewal of their license for music and dancing at the Hall, but the Committee insisted on an undertaking being given by the Vestry not to use the Hall until the required alterations had been carried out. This condition was confirmed by the Council, but the Vestry declined to assent to these terms as they were ready and willing to carry out the works but were prevented from doing so by the refusal of the Council to sanction the necessary loan for the purpose. Further application was made by me to the Council, and on the inconsistency of the position being emphasized, and the serious loss to the locality which would be entailed by closing the Hall in the winter being pointed out, the Council ultimately agreed to grant a provisional license up to the 31st. day of March, 1893, the required works to be commenced after that date. The negotiations for obtaining the sanction of the London County Council to the loan required for carrying out the alterations to the Hall ordered by them resulted in the sanction of the Council to the borrowing of the money being obtained under their seal, on the 22nd November, 1892. Clauses were also inserted in the General Powers Bill of the Council to remove the legal difficulties which had arisen with regard to the building and use of Town Halls by London local authorities for the purposes of music and dancing. This Bill has now passed both Houses of Parliament, and will shortly receive the Royal assent, when the Council will be in a position to advance the amount required by the Vestry. The contract with Mr. Steed was sealed on the 30th March, 1892, for £5,676, being £250 in addition to his original tender approved by the Vestry, to meet the rise in wages in the building trade which had taken place during the delay in obtaining the Council's sanction. During the year from Lady-day, 1892, to Lady-day, 1893, the Large Hall has been let 87 times, and the Council Chamber 7 times. Committee-rooms have also been let separately on various occasions. 26 CITY AND SOUTH LONDON RAILWAY BILL. This Bill, which was dealt with in the last Annual Report, having been postponed in the 1892 session of Parliament, was introduced again this session, clauses were inserted providing that in no case should the surface of any roads be broken up, and as no property would be taken in this parish, and only the small portion of City Road in this parish would be tunnelled under, it was not found necessary to oppose the Bill. The London County Council also saw no reason to oppose, and the Bill has now become law. LONDON STREETS (REMOVAL OF GATES AND BARS, etc.) BILL, 1893. On the 24th December, 1892, I reported on the above Bill, and Book of Reference of the streets which would be affected by the Bill in this parish. The London County Council asked the Vestry to pass a resolution in favour of the Bill, so that the resolution might be used before the Select Committee. The matter was referred to the Parliamentary Committee, who reported that they had considered the Bill promoted by the London County Council to provide for the removal of obstructions iu certain streets in London, including three iu this parish, and were strongly of opinion that as such obstructions have the effect of restricting and impeding the traffic through the streets, their continuance would tend to the public inconvenience, and that they were in favour of their removal and of the said Bill becoming law. This report was adopted by the Vestry on the 17th January, 1893, and I was instructed with the Chairman of the Committee (Major Wenborn) and the Surveyor to give evidence before the Committee considering the Bill in favour of the removal of such obstructions, if required by the London County Council. The Bill has now passed the House of Commons. TECHNICAL EDUCATION. At a meeting of the Vestry held on the 5th January, 1892, I reported to the Vestry upon the Annual Report of the London School Board, and the Techuical Education Act, 1889, from which it appeared that Six Manual Instruction centres had been established in Loudon but none in Shoreditch, which was in special want of such a centre, as the nearest one was in Bethnal Green, about a mile from this parish. The Vestry thereupon referred the report to the Parliamentary Committee with special reference to the portion bearing on Technical Education. The Parliamentary Committee, after considering the matter, reported that they had fully discussed that portion of the report of the London School Board, 1890-91, which dealt with this subject, with statistics shewing that 35½ per cent, of the population of Shoreditch consists of artizans, this being the highest proportion in London. It appeared that six centres for manual training had been established by the School Board in London, the nearest to Shoreditch beiug Summerford Street, Bethnal Green, and the Committee recommended that a deputation be appointed to wait upon the London School Board for the purpose of calling the Board's attention to the large proportion of the artizan population in Shoreditch, which renders necessary the establishment of a centre for Technical Education, and asking the Board's co-operation to form such a centre in Shoreditch. This report was adopted by the Vestry on February 2nd, 1892, when Messrs. H. T. Sawell, J. Cox, and J. Donovan were appointed members of a deputation to wait upon the London School Board. A petition was then presented to the London School Board to provide a centre for manual instruction in the parish for the benefit of the children it contains, of whom there are 43,842 under 15 years of age, who will, in most cases, have to earn their livings iu the local industries. The School Board granted the request and established a wood-work centre at the Catherine Street Board Schools, Hoxton. Further inquiries showed that there was no technical instruction whatever provided for the apprentices and artizans of the district, of whom there are 42,832 engaged in the following trades:— Furniture aud Woodwork 16,046 Building Trades 8,369 Machinery and Metals 5,161 Printing 4,646 Sundry Artizans 4,577 Furs and Leather 2,339 Watches, Instruments, &c. . . 1,523 Silk Weaving. . 171 42,832 Thus the proportion of artizans in Shoreditch is 354 per cent. of the population, which is the highest percentage in London, being higher by 12.4 per cent. than the average of the East End districts. It also appeared that in the Finsbury Technical Schools in the adjoining parish of St. Luke's there was no carpenters', shop, and only about 10 artizans (actually employed in cabinet making) were attending the classes in that subject. 28 In view of the grant by the Exchequer to the London County Council of moneys arising from the beer and probate duties for Technical Education, the Vestry presented a petition to the Council asking for the establishment of Municipal Technical Schools in Shoreditch in conjunction with the London School Board, and the deputation waited upon the Technical Instruction Committee of the Council to discuss the matter. The Committee pointed out the difficulty of the Council initiating such an undertaking, but encouraged the deputation (which was the first to approach them) to make a local effort to start the schools so as to be in a position to receive a subsidy from the Council when the grant came to be distributed by the Technical Instruction Board which was about to be formed. The Vestry accordingly resolved to establish Municipal Technical Schools for Shoreditch, which appear to be the first Municipal Schools of the kind started in London, but owing to legal difficulties as to the application of rates for this purpose, their means were limited to a sum of £400 per annum derived from letting the lamp posts of the parish for advertisement purposes. The objects of the School were formulated as follows:— (1) To improve the industries of Shoreditoh by increasing the skill and knowledge of the artizans engaged therein. (2) To supplement the practice of the workshop by teaching apprentices and artizans the practical application of the principles of Scince and art to such industries. (3) To enable specialists in particular branches of an industry to become good all-round men. (4) To develop the art faculty of artizans by moans of a Technical Museum, and Lectures on the application of art to industry The Rt. Hon. the Lord Mayor of London kindly consented to be the first President of tho Sohool, and the following gentlemen are Vioe-Presidents: — The Right Hon. Baron Monkswell, L.C.C. Sir James D. Linton (P.R.I.) Prof. Stuart, M.P., L.C.C. J. Williams Benn, Esq., M.P., L.C.C. W. R. Cremer, Esq., M.P. R. G Alabaster, Esq, J.P. The Hon. Claude Hay Nathan Moss, Esq., L.C.C. J. C. Horsley, Esq., R.A. W. J. Orsmau, Esq., L.C.C. T. Humphry Ward, Esq. Henry Ward, Esq., L.C.C. E. Austin, Esq. J. Look, Esq. (of the firm of Messrs. Collinson & Look). All tho classes at this school, exoept tho Manual Instruction Class, have been limited to artizans and apprentices actually engaged in the trades dealt with. 29 The Vestry were fortunate in securing some very suitable workshops, at 35, Hoxton Street, on the 9th February, 1893. Arrangements were made with the Committee of the Whitechapel Craft School—who have had special experience of the system required for teaching the wood industries—to organise classes in Carpentry and Joinery, Drawing and Designing, Woodcarving and Manual Instruction, which were commenced on the 25th March, 1893, at the very low fee of 2/6 per term of 11 weeks, and 59 students were entered on the register of the classes by the 25th April. The Worshipful Company of Plumbers generously resolved to equip a Plumbers' Shop at the schools, and to hold examinations and give prizes to the students. A fine shop has been provided, and a class for students actually engaged in the Plumbing Trade was commenced on the 18th April. 1893, and thirteen students were registered by the 25th April. A class for Electrical Fitting will also shortly be commenced, for which applications have been received from 32 students. Altogether 110 applications have been received from students desirous of entering the school, but the funds at disposal have only allowed of the above classes being commenced. A second class for Manual Instruction has had to be started, and the Superintendent has asked for a second class on Wood Carving, Drawing, Cabinet Making, and Plumbing to be formed, as the present ones are overflowing. The Shoreditch Free Library Commissioners made a grant of a library of technical books, costing £50, for the use of students of the schools, which will be of great educational value. The development of the schools has, therefore, been exceptionally rapid, and the Technical Instruction Committee entertain no doubts of the complete success of the undertaking. In connection with the formal opening of the schools by the Eight Honourable the Lord Mayor of London on the 5th May, an Exhibition of Antique and Modern Wood Carving and Furniture was held in the Shoreditch Town Hall, an account of which will be given in the next annual report. DUSTING AND SCAVENGING. As from the 25th March, 1892, the Vestry took over the collection of the refuse of the whole parish directly, in place of the contract system. The collection in the Eastern Division of the parish had been taken over by the Vestry on the 29th September, 1891, and with the experience thus gained, arrangements were successfully made for carrying out the whole of the work from Lady-day, 1892, without any difficulties arising. As was anticipated in the preliminary report of the Committee, the annual cost of the collection and disposal of refuse under this system is larger than under the contract system, but the new duties imposed on the Vestry by the Public Health (London) Act, 1891, in respect of cleansing the footpaths and the growing 30 cost of disposing of refuse all over London, has made this increase more than was anticipated. The total not payment for collecting and disposing of the refuse of this parish and watering the streets for the year, from 25th March, 1892, to 25th March, 1893, has been £17,850 16s. 5d., in addition to which £1,117 19s. 8d. was paid for interest and repayment of loans taken up to meet the cost of plant, buildings and permanent works, thus making a total cost of £18,968 16s. 1d. This calculation includes depreciation of plant, horses, &c., as the loans in respect of them will be paid off when they are worn out. The total cost under the contract system (including £1,022 for watering) for the year 1890-91 was £11,311; for the year 1891-92, the amount of the contracts provisionally accepted was £11,380 (the contract for the Eastern Division being terminated at Michaelmas, 1892), which included £905 for watering. Thus the total cost for last year is 66 per cent. more than that for 1891 -92. I find on enquiry, however, that the cost of collecting and disposing of refuse has been steadily increasing in the surrounding parishes where no change of system has been adopted, as the following table shews:— PARISH. 1890-91. 1891-92. 1892-93. Hackney. £ £ £ Paid to Contractors 4,650 4,893 8,762 Paid in Wages 865 910 1,418 Total £5,515 £5,803 £10,180 Bethnal Green. Paid to Contractors 5,314 6,354 7,102 Wages, &c. 2,147 2,277 2,254 Total £7,461 £8,631 £9,356 £2,168 paid to unomployed. St. Luke, Middlesex £7,296 £7,958 £8,222 In Bethnal Green the lowest tender for this year is £10,400, and taking wages at the same figure as last year, the total for the current year would be £12,654. It will thus be seen that the cost of refuse collection and disposal has been increasing in each of these parishes, and the increase in Bethnal Green of the cost of the current year, as against that of 1890-91, is £5,193, or at the rate of 69 per cent., whilst in Hackney the cost in 1892-93 is 84½ per cent. higher than in 1890-91. It is thus apparent that the increased cost in this parish is not due altogether to the changed system, but rather to causes common to this part of London, among which the principal are increased difficulty in finding shoots for refuse in the suburbs of London, whose sanitary authorities are raising objections to the practice; additional duty of cleansing footways, and more frequent removal of 31 refuse under the Public Health Acts, and general increase in wages of employees. The largest item of expenditure in this parish is the cost of barging the refuse, being at the rate of 3/- per ton. This is a heavy charge on the undertaking, and there seems no prospect of reducing this item except by the carrying out of a scheme for burning the dry refuse, which could apparently be done at a cost of less than 1/6 per ton. Against this increased cost must be put the more efficient carrying out of the work, and in view of the intimate connection between insufficient scavenging and filth diseases (such as cholera) this is a matter of the very greatest importance. The best test of the efficiency of executing scavenging work is the number of complaints received during the year from ratepayers in respect of the neglect of such work. During the past year (Lady-day, 1892, to Lady-day, number of complaints of non-removal of dust has been as follows: — First complaints 32 Second do. 3 Total 35 Under the contract system the number of complaints for non-removal of dust was:— Year. No. of Complaints (both divisions). 1887-88 3761 1888-89 4256 1889-90 4150 1890-91 8902 and in the early part of 1891, the number of complaints in the Eastern Division was so scandalous, through the break-down of the Contractor (Mr. Turner), that the Vestry had to employ their own men and to pay another Contractor £1,250 to complete Mr. Turner's work. The Superintendent reports that the staff during the year superintended by him have worked very well, and the work of the department has met with general satisfaction. On the 6th September, 1892, the Vestry decided to raise the weekly wages of the employees, as follows:— Sweeping Machine Men from 24/- to 26/6 Slop Carmen, 1st class „ 23/- ,, 25/6 2nd „ 22/- „ 24/6 Leading Gully-men, 1st class 23/- „ 25/6 2nd „ 22/- „ 24/6 Sweepers (Road) „ 21/- „ 23/6 Dust Carmen „ 21/- „ 24/- 32 Dust Carriers per load 1/- to 1/1½ General Clerk from 30/- ,, 33/- Foreman, Night, Western District „ 25/- 28/- „ „ Eastern „ 25/- „ 28/- Farrier ,, 36/- „ 38/- Striker, boy learning „ 24/- ,, 26/- Wheelwright 36/ - „ 38/- Horsekeeper 26/- „ 28/- Dust Inspector „ 26/- „ 28/- Watering Inspector, for six months only.— 28/- Storekeeper and Weighing from 24/- to 27/- The Superintendent reports that this increase of wages has tended largely to add to the efficiency and zeal shown in the various sections of the work by the officers and men. In view of this increase the Vestry decided to have notices put on all their vehicles stating that no gratuities were allowed, which has practically led to the abolition of the objectionable 'tip' system. The arrangement is now working smoothly, and the work has been thoroughly and promptly done, as is proved by the largely decreased number of complaints received. The price of forage for the horses has run very high during the year, especially the last six months, but the prices obtained for the various articles (the supply of which was not contracted for,) have compared very favourably with the current market prices. During the winter, from the middle of December, 1892, to the following March, 1893, the weather was exceedingly inclement, thus causing a great increase in the account for barging away the refuse. A considerable amount of work has been thrust upon the department by the coming into operation of the Public Health (London) Act, 1891, which requires the Vestry to cleanse the footways. This necessitated a daily increase in the stall' of about ten sweepers. The Vestry invited tenders for cleansing the footways of the Western Division only, but had no responses. The whole of this work was therefore carried out by the Vestry's staff under their Superintendent, and is still continued. The extra cost of this work in wages was £550 for the year, besides additional implements required for the work. During the winter the Vestry decided to give work in this department to the unemployed to the extent of about fifty men per week, twenty-five for three days, and another twenty-five for the other three days, thus dividing the work so as to relieve more of the unemployed. The employment of this casual labour, which lasted tor some six or seven weeks, entailed an additional outlay of £164 10s. 11½d. 33 DISTRICT COUNCILS' SCHEME. A copy of a scheme containing suggestions for District Councils, by the Islington Vestry, was received on the 1st March, 1892, and referred by the Vestry to the Parliamentary Committee, who presented a report to the Vestry on the 13th September, 1892, setting out details of a scheme which they approved and recommended to the Vestry for adoption. This scheme, whilst following the main lines of the Islington one, contained numerous modifications and enlargements, which were as follows:— SCHEME. AREA. 1. That the Parish of St. Leonard, Shoreditch, should form one District area. 2. That such area be divided into eight Wards, as at present. QUALIFICATION AND ELECTION OF COUNCILLORS. 3. That the franchise for District Councils be the same as for the County Council and Parliamentary Elections. 4. That the qualification for the office of District Councillor be beneficial occupation and payment of rates in the District, always excepting such persons who during the previous seven years may have been convicted of felony, gross immorality, or gambling, or have become bankrupt. 5. That the number of District Councillors for Shoreditch be 52, i.e., eight each for Hoxton and Church Wards, and six each for the other Wards. 6. That Councillors hold office for three years. 7. That the elections be held early in the month of March, so that they may take place soon after a new register comes into force, and that newly elected Councillors may commence their duties at the commencement of the financial year. 8. That the election of District Councillors be conducted in the same manner and upon the same register as that of County Councils and Parliamentary Elections (including the application of the Municipal Elections Corrupt Practices Acts). 9. That if the principle of annual elections of one-third be adopted, casual vacancies be only filled up at the next annual election; that if, however, the elections be triennial, casual vacancies occurring in the first two years be filled up by the Electors, those occurring during the third year being left over until the next election. EX OFFICIO MEMBERS. 10. That the only ex officio members of the District Council shall be the County Councillors for the divisions in each district. 34 VACATION OF OFFICE. 11. That the following persons shall vacate office as Councillors:— (a) Councillors ceasing to retain the qualification. (b) Councillors who shall become Bankrupt or enter into a Composition whether statutory or otherwise with their Creditors. (c) Councillors accepting office under, or being interested in Contracts with the Council (excepting Shareholders in Companies having such Contracts). (d) Councillors convicted during their term of office of felony. (e) Councillors convicted under any Act administered by the District Council twice of any like offence. (f) Councillors who (except with the permission of the Council) continuously absent themselves from discharge of their duties for more than three months. CHAIRMAN. 12. The District Council shall elect a Chairman and Deputy-Chairman from among the members of their own body, and such elections shall take place annually at the first meeting after the first election of Councillors and as near as may be on the same day in subsequent years. POWERS OF COUNCIL. 13. That there be transferred to the District Council the following powers and responsibilities of the Vestry:— (a) As a Board of Works constituted by the Metropolis Management Acts with the entire control of the roads and footpaths, lighting, drainage and removal of dust and ashes and all powers incidental to this control. (b) As the Sanitary Authority under the Public Health (London) Act, 1891. (c) As the Local Authority under Part II. of the Housing of the Working Classes Act, 1890. (d) As the Overseers under the Local Acts of the Parish, with power to assess all rateable property in the District, to prepare Valuation Lists, to estimate the expenditure necessary for various purposes, to make all rates, collect and recover the same and excuse from payment those whom they think entitled on the ground of poverty, and with power under the Poor Rate Assessment and Collection Act, 1869, to compound with the owners for payment in certain cases should it be deemed advisable 35 (e) As the Local or Highway Authority under any Tramway, Electric Lighting, Gas, Water, Open Spaces, or other similar Acts in the County of London. 14. That there be further tram/erred to the District Council:— (a) The civil duties of the Churchwardens and Overseers, including control over Disorderly Houses, the preparation of the Borough and County Lists of Voters, and the preparation of the Jury Lists. (b) The powers of the Overseers and Assessment Committee under the Valuation Act, 1869. (c) The powers and duties at present exercised by the Commissioners for Public Baths and Washhouses. (d) The powers and duties at present exercised by the Burial Board. (e) The powers and duties conferred upon Commissioners under the Public Libraries Acts or under any Act relating to Museums and Art Galleries. (f) All powers and duties which the Vestry exercises under Michael Angelo Taylor's Act (57 George ILL, c. 29). (g) The control of District Surveyors, their dismissal being subject to the consent of the London County Council. (h) The duties of the Charity Trustee Board of this Parish and the administration of all local charities. 15. That the District Council be empowered:— (а) To appoint, fix the remuneration of, dismiss and retain entire control over the whole of the officers employed in the execution of any of the powers and duties conferred upon such Council. (b) To make Bye-Laws for the prevention and suppression of nuisances arising from Shows, Fairs, Exhibitions, and other like matters within the District, and also for the regulation of Street Trading. (c) To purchase compulsorily land for official buildings, and to erect such buildings. (d) To borrow for the purpose of these buildings and for other improvements on the security of the rates. (e) To promote and oppose Bills in Parliament, and to prosecute and defend legal proceedings necessary for the promotion or protection of the interests of the inhabitants of the District. (f) To exercise such powers as may from time to time be conferred upon it by Parliament or by any Government Department. d 30 16. That the power of electing Churhwardens or other Church officials be not vested in the District Council, and that Overseers of the Poor cease to bo appointed. 17. That the District Council be constituted a local authority under the Technical Instruction Act, 1880. RATING AND PRECEPTS. 18. That the following bodies shall make separate Precepts on the District Council for the amounts required to meet their several expenses: — (a) The Guardians of the Poor. (b) The Metropolitan Asylums Board. (c) The County Council. (d) The School Board. (e) The Commissioners of Police. 19. That the District Council shall make the following one Rate to be called a General Rate which shall bo collected as one Rate, but on the demand notes and receipts shall be stated the proportion required for (a) Poor Rate to meet the precept of the Guardians. (b) Asylums Rate to meet the precept of the Metropolitan Asylums Board. (c) County Rate to meet the precept of the County Council. (d) Education Rate to meet the precept of the School Board. (e) Police Rate to meet the precept of the Commissioners of Police. (f) District Rate to defray the expenses of the District Council. The Notice to set out proportion chargeable for Sewers Rate, so that the same may be deduoted by the tenants from their rent. 20. That all expenses (other than those incurred by the Guardians) at present raised as part of the Poor Rate be transferred to such of the other Rates as they may be properly applicable to. ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT. 21. That such accounts be audited half-yearly at a Publio Audit by an Auditor to be appointed by the Local Government Board. ARBITRATION. 22. That general power be given to the County Counoil to arbitrate between District Councils whenever disputes arise as to their duties and jurisdiction respectively, and to determine the same. 37 PROPERTY VESTED. 23. That the property, assets, and liabilities of all existing bodies, whose duties and powers are to be transferred under this scheme to the District Council, shall vest in such Council. Re CHURCHWARDENS AND OVERSEERS' ACCOUNTS. On the 17th day of Jauuary, 1893, the Vestry appointed a Committee of Enquiry of five members, to enquire into the Overseers' Accounts, and Messrs. Barralet, Belstead, Brabner, Moffat, S. Smither, Wenborn, and Winkler, were appointed members of such Committee. The Committee appointed Major Wenborn as their Chairman, and held six meetings, and on the 2nd February, 1893, reported with reference to the 1892 Churchwardens and Overseers, as follows:— "Your Committee find that the sum of £9 18s. 8d., was overdrawn by the Overseers of this year, but that this sum was paid into the Poor Rate Account on the 20th day of December, 1892. Your Committee learn with pleasure that a suggestion of one or more of the Overseers to spend this balance on a supper or other entertainment was not tolerated by the others." With reference to the 1891 Churchwardens and Overseers, the Committee recommended as follows:— 1. "That the Churchwardens and Overseers for 1891, be called upon to refund the amount of the ascertained deficiency (£33 16/-) to the Vestry forthwith, and in default thereof, that proceedings be taken against them." 2. "That the matter be referred back to your Committee to take proceedings (if necessary), and obtain such advice as may be needful, and that the present Overseers be requested to co-operate with them." The Committee's report was discussed at a meeting of the Vestry held on the 7th February, 1893, when it was received, and the recommendations of the Committee adopted. The £33 16/- was subsequently repaid, and the Committee on the 16th February, 1893, reported as follows:— "That a oheque for the unexpended balance of £33 16/- has been received by your Committee from the Churchwardens and Overseers for 1891, and your Committee have directed the same to be paid into the Poor Rate Account," and "Recommend—That in future the Churchwardens and Overseers of the Poor be instructed to disburse the expenses of the Registration and Jury List through the Accountant." d1 This latter report was received, and the recommendation adopted, at a meeting of the Vestry hold on the 7th March, 1893. LABOUR BUREAU. The Vestry, at a meeting hold on the 8th November, 181)2, considered a letter from the Secretary of the London Trades Council advocating the immediate establishment of a temporary Labour Bureau in the parish, and it was resolved to refer the letter to the Town Hall Committee to take such steps: as they might deem necessary for opening a Labour Bureau at the Town Hall for the use of the unemployed. The Town Hall Committee thereupon took the matter up, appointing Mr. Brooks, of No. 33, Crondall Street, as the Superintendent of the Bureau, at a salary of £1 6s. per week, and the Bureau was started on Wednesday, the 30th day of November, 1892. The number of persons who applied for labour, and were placed upon the register up to 5th May, 1893, was 792 (men) and 42 (women), and employment was found for 21 (men) and 5 (women). There were 34 employers of labour who applied for 47 (men) assistants and 23 employers of labour who applied for 102 (women) assistants. A return shewing these figures in tabular form is attached hereto. The total cost of carrying on this work from 30th November, 181)2, to 5th May, 1893, was £36 13s. 2d., made up as follows:— £ s. d. Wages of Attendant (A. W. Brooks) 28 1 2 Petty disbursements 0 3 0 Stationery, Books, Envelopes and Printing 8 9 0 £36 13 2 The Bureau was closed on Friday, the 5th day of May, 181)3, and the Vestry resolved to open it each year from the 1st October to the 31st March. The Bureau was made as widely known as possible by paragraphs in local newspapers, and by circulating 500 circular letters amongst the employers of the district. Application to the railway companies in the district to grant a reduction in fares to persons on the register travelling for work, was refused. Employers in this district usually exhibit a notice in their windows for hands required, and the facilities afforded by this method prevented many unemployed from availing themselves of the Bureau, especially as many working men got the 39 idea that by going on the register they were in some way being assisted by the parish. It has been calculated that if two working-men's families are kept from the Workhouse by means of a Labour Bureau during the year, its cost is more than saved. BATHS AND WASH-HOUSES. On the 17th day of May, 1892, the Vestry considered an application from the Hoxton Liberal and Radical Club, urging the Vestry to adopt the Baths and Wash-house Acts in this parish, and the matter was referred to the Parliamentary Committee for consideration and report. The Parliamentary Committee reconsidered the report of the Special Committee dated October 25th, 1887, in which that Committee had collated information and statistics relating to the Metropolitan Baths and Wash-houses and the Parliamentary Committee proceeded to supplement this report by bringing the information up to date. The Committee visited several Metropolitan Baths, including Marylebone and Islington, and they presented their report to the Vestry on the 25th October, 1892, recommending the Vestry to take steps to at once adopt the Act, and appoint Commissioners for carrying the Act into execution. It appeared that the Act had been adopted in this parish as far back as 1852, and Commissioners appointed, but that nothing had been done, and again in 1882 when the same result followed, whilst the Committee's recommendations for adopting the Acts in 1887 had likewise been adjourned sine die. On the 25th day of October, 1892, the Vestry resolved that the Baths and Wash-houses Acts should be adopted in this parish, and instructed me to apply to the Local Government Board for their formal sanction. The Local Government Board's sanction was given on the 6th day of December, 1892, and the Vestry proceeded on the 3rd day of January, 1893, to appoint the following seven Commissioners for carrying the Acts into execution, viz., Messrs. E. J. Wakeling, F. M. Wenborn, E. Moffatt, S. Smither, J. Cox, H. Winkler, and W. Cherry. The Commissioners have held several meetings, and appointed Mr. E. Moffatt as Chairman. The Vestry Clerk agreed to act as Hon. Secretary until some definite scheme had been sanctioned by the Vestry. After considering the question of site, the Commissioners agreed to take a portion of the Pitfield Street site on having a free supply of heat given them by the Vestry, but this matter is still under the consideration of the Vestry. 40 BURIAL AND RECREATION GROUNDS. The old Burial Ground in Hackney Road, which for some time had been closed and unused, was laid out at the expense of the Metropolitan Gardens Association who expended £160, and of the Burial Board who expended £20 14s. 4d. in wire-fencing and other repairs. The ground was formally opened on the 28th June, 1892, by Sir William Vincent, Vice-Chairman of the Gardens Association, accompanied by Lady Vincent and the Earl of Meath. Mr. Marshall, Chairman of the Board of Guardians, Major Wenborn on behalf of the Vestry, Professor Stuart, M.P., the Hon. Claude Hay and other gentlemen spoke. A very interesting feature of the opening was a performance of music by the Boys' Band of the Hornchurch Cottage Homes, by the kind permission of the Shoreditch Board of Guardians. The large attendance of children at this ground shows that it is being thoroughly appreciated, and the caretaker has had no difficulty in maintaining order and preventing injury to the shrubs or flowers. GOLDSMITH SQUARE RECREATION GROUND. Some delay has taken place in laying out this ground, due to the necessity of building boundary walls, with railings, to properly fence the ground, and to the fact that special arrangements had to be made to deal with the unstable state of the ground. Tenders for building the walls and railings, amounting in all to £'761, by Messrs. Clark, Hunt & Co., have been accepted, and the work is now practically complete, and arrangements are being made for opening it this summer. Mr. Scott has generously promised £300 towards the laying out of the ground, the London County Council £150, and the Metropolitan Gardens Association £50. CHURCHYARDS of ST. LEONARD'S, SHOREDITCH, ST. JOHN'S, HOXTON, and ST. MARY'S, HAGGERSTON. These churchyards have been maintained as public gardens during the year by the Burial Board, who pay a gardener and caretaker for each churchyard £1 per week, and also provide any shrubs, flowers and materials required. I have the honour to be, Gentlemen, Your obedient servant, H. MANSFIELD ROBINSON, Solicitor and Vestry Clerk. Vestry Clerk's Department, Shoreditch Town Hall, Old Street, E.C., 25th March, 1893. REPORT OF ASSESSMENT COMMITTEE. 43 The Parish of Saint Leonard, Shoreditch, IN THE COUNTY OF LONDON. REPORT OF ASSESSMENT COMMITTEE. To the Vestry of the Parish of Saint Leonard, Shoreditch. Your Committee beg to make the following report of the work of the past year for the information of the Vestry. Your Committee were appointed on the 19th day of April, 1892, and have held during the year twenty-five meetings. The members of your Committee have attended meetings as under— Mr. J. W. Vandy (Chairman) 24 ,, G. H. Elstow 3 ,, J. Hurlin 1 ,, W. Law 21 ,, D. Meredew 12 ,, E. Mofifatt 18 ,, N. Moss, L.C.C 13 ,, Daniel Noel 10 ,, T. Ravey 4 ,, H. T. Sawell 14 ,, H. B. Stroud 8 ,, F. M. Wenborn 14 Your Committee have heard objections to the decisions of the Valuation Committee with the result that they have reduced Assessments in 315 cases, confirmed 58 Assessments, have viewed 21 Properties, have increased 21 Assessments, have directed second notices to attend to be given in 15 cases, have referred 7 cases back to the Valuation Committee for reconsideration, and have adjourned 13 cases for further evidence of value. 44 VALUATION (METROPOLIS) ACT, 1869. The following return shows the alterations effected in the total gross and rateable value of the Parish during the year:- Particulars. Value as finally determined by Assessment Committee. Gross. Rateable. £ £ Valuation (6th April, 1892) upon which the County and Police Rates were levied 833,118 682,476 Add— Increased Valuation effected by Supplemental Valuation List, 1892, as finally deposited 3,447 2,793 Deduct— 836,565 685,269 Reductions made by the Court of Quarter Sessions on the Vestry's appeal against totals, to correspond with the reductions made by that Court on the appeals of individual ratepayers and so as to save payment of General Metropolitan Precepts 499 3,521 Total Valuation (6th April, 1893) upon which the County and Police Rates are levied £836,066 £681,748 Total Valuation (6th April, 1893) upon which the Rates for School Board and Local Purposes are levied £829,534 £676,465 LITIGATION AND LEGAL WORK. (1) APPEAL AGAINST TOTALS. The reductions made by the Court of Quarter Sessions on the 1890 Quinquennial Appeals amounted to £3,521 in the rateable value, but on a motion by the Islington Vestry in a similar case to have the totals of their lists altered, to correspond with similar reductions in their Quinquennial Valuation Totals, the Court dismissed the application with costs, and refused to alter the totals of the lists, except upon an appeal against "totals," as the Orders of the Court made in the respective appeals only affected the individual assessments. In consequence of this decision, this parish would have had to pay five years' General Metropolitan "Precepts," at about 3s. 3d. in the pound, on the reduction made in the Ratepayers' Assessments. This would have amounted to a sum of about £2,860, and could not have been recovered from the individual ratepayers, as their Assessments had been reduced and altered by the Court. The Vestry Clerk accordingly advised that an appeal should be lodged against the "totals." This appeal had to be in the form of an appeal by the Vestry acting as Overseers, and your Committee were made Respondents. As notice of this appeal 45 should have been given in December, 1890, a special application had to be made to the Court to allow the notice of appeal to be given out of time, and the Court, after reading an affidavit by the Vestry Clerk setting out all the facts, allowed an appeal to be entered and ordered notice of the appeal to be given to the London County Council, to the Receiver of the Metropolitan Police Fund, to the London School Board, the Asylums Board, the Guardians, and the Surveyor of Taxes. The Vestry Clerk acted as Solicitor for your Committee, and also for the Vestry. The appeal was heard on the 2nd of February, 1893, when the London County Council appeared, and, a technical objection by the Council being disposed of, the Court allowed the appeal, and reduced the totals of the Quinquennial Valuation by £3,521—the amount asked for. The result of this decision was that the Vestry became entitled to a return of about £1,430 from the amounts paid by them to the Metropolitan Authorities. This work was carried out at an expense to the Respondents (the Assessment Committee) of £3 10s. 6d., and the whole costs of the Appellants (the Vestry), for Court and Counsel's Fees, amounted to £12 18s. 8d. (2) HOXTON HOUSE ASYLUM. The proprietors of the Hoxton House Asylum, having been inserted in a Provisional List by the Vestry in respect of additions to their Asylum, objected before your Committee against the Assessment of the valuation based on Mr. W. Barnett's figures. The proprietors produced figures before the Committee, and, after going carefully into the matter, the Committee fixed the Assessment at £1,700 gross, and £1,416 rateable, and refused to adopt the figures contended for by the appellants, which were £1,620 gross, and £1,350 rateable. The proprietors accordingly appealed to the Court of Quarter Sessions, and the Vestry Clerk acted as Solicitor for the Committee, who were made Respondents to the appeal. The appeal was heard on the 13th February, 1893, and the evidence given on each side was so conflicting that Sir Peter Edlin decided to "split the difference" between the respective contentions, making the gross £1,660, and the rateable £1,384. No Order was made as to costs, and, consequently, the proprietors of the Asylum had to pay their own costs. In the course of the case it transpired that the proprietors had employed a number of their own workmen, and that a conservatory and other additions had, since the valuation by the Vestry's Surveyor, been added to the property. The proprietors have, accordingly, been inserted in a Provisional List, at an increase in respect of these additions of £125 gross and £104 rateable, and the Assessments now amount to £1,785 gross, and £1,488 rateable—so that the result of the appeal has, on the whole, been satisfactory. The out-of-pocket costs in respect of this matter amounted to £6 18s. 4d. for Court and Counsel's Fees, and £13 7s. 0d. for Mr. Barnett's Fees. (3) LONDON COUNTY COUNCIL APPEAL. The London County Council resolved to appeal against the totals of this year's Supplemental List, as they required the addition of £398 to the rateable value. In view of the fact that any additions to the totals of the Lists of this Parish involve a 46 payment until 1895 of about 3s. 3d. in the pound on such addition, which could not be recouped from the ratepayers, the Committee resolved to contest the matter, and, as the Council seemed to be under some misapprehension as to the facts of some of the cases, the Vestry Clerk had several communications and interviews with their Solicitor, with the result that the Council resolved not to proceed further with the appeal. The Committee incurred no costs in respect of this appeal. (4) GREAT EASTERN RAILWAY COMPANY. The Committee heard an important objection by the Great Eastern Railway Company against the Assessments of their widened lines in Worship Street and Shoreditch High Street. The legal questions involved—as to the basis of re-valuation, owing to the fact that the new station is not yet in working order, and the Company's Assessments had not been raised at the Quinquennial Valuation, 1890—were of such importance and complexity, that the Committee decided to take the opinion of Mr. Poland, Q.C., on the matter. This was taken by the Vestry Clerk, and the matter was settled in accordance with Counsel's opinion on the various points involved. The out-of-pocket expenses incurred by the Committee in this matter amount to £6 for Mr. Poland's fees. CLOSE OF QUINQUENNIAL APPEALS. As already reported to the Vestry, the Gas Light and Coke Company's appeal against the Quinquennial List of 1890, which was commenced in December, 1890, dragged on until the summer of 1892. Messrs. Mills, Lockyer & Co. have acted throughout as the Solicitors for the Committee. The appeal resulted in a reduction of the Company's Assessments by £3,023, and although the Appellants had contended for a reduction of £8,411 more, the Committee were ordered to pay a proportionate part of the costs of the Company's appeal. These costs have been taxed and allowed at the sum of £235 8s. 6d., and have been paid by the Vestry. In addition, the Vestry have already paid Mr. Barnett's fees, amounting to £136 4s. 2d., and have paid Messrs. Mills, Lockyer & Co. £978 9s. 0d. for their net costs and Counsel's fees, the Gas Light and Coke Company having had to pay them £210 15s. 8d. in addition for costs of the first day. Your Committee have passed a vote of thanks to the Chairman for his conduct of the business of the Committee during the past year. Submitted by order of the Committee, H. MANSFIELD ROBINSON, Shoreditch Town Hall, Clerk to the Assessment Committee. Old Street, E.C., April, 1893. Abstract of the Accounts OF THE VESTRY OF THE PARISH OF SAINT LEONARD, SHOREDITCH, IN THE COUNTY OF LONDON, From 25th March, 1892, to 25th March, 1893. WILLIAM GEORGE SMITH, Esq., Treasurer to the Vestry, Overseers of the Poor, and Burial Board, London and Midland Bank, Limited (Shoreditch Branch). ERNST A. R. ADAMS, Accountant. POOR RATE ACCOUNT. OVERSEERS' EXPENSES. DISTRICT AUDITOR'S CERTIFICATE. 50 The Accounts of the Vestry of the Parish of Saint Leonard, Shoreditch, in the County of London, acting as the Overseers of the Poor of the said Parish. 50 POOR RATE ACCOUNTS, for the Half-Year ended Michaelmas-Day, 1892. £ s. d. £ s. d. To RECEIPTS— By PAYMENTS- In hands of Treasurer, 25th March, 1892 (fo. 57) 6,918 11 6 Shoreditch Board of Guardians- From the Poor Rate 52,960 16 1 Order for Contributions, dated 2nd Sept., 1891 Balance 8,500 0 0 Do. dated 2nd March, 1892. On account 32,788 0 0 H. M. Treasury—Grant in aid of Poor Rate 8 15 0 41,5488 0 0 London Guarantee and Accident Co., Limited— Metropolitan Police— Proportion of Claim re default of E. F. Russell 15 12 10 Warrant, dated 1st July, 1892 7,109 2 6 52,985 3 11 Shoreditch Burial Board— . Certificates under Burial Act, 1852, sec. 19 225 0 0 Commissioners for Public Libraries and Museums, &c.— Precepts under Public Libraries Act, 1892 1,918 14 0 Parlimentary and County Council Elections- Parliamentary and County Council Elections— Sale of Registers and Lists of Voters 7 11 0 †Expenses of preparing Lists of Parliamentary and County Council Voters, Borough of Shoreditch On account 50 0 0 Hire of Voting Compartments 5 8 0 Use of Ballot Boxes 1 0 0 †Proceeds of Sale of Registers (one moiety) 2 5 0 One half of net expenses incurred by seers of the Puor under Registration Acts, for year 1891—1892, ex London County Council, out of General County Fund 230 19 4 Voting Compartments 30 3 0 Re-fitting Stamping Instruments 1 7 6 83 15 6 244 18 4 Vertry Elections- Sale of Jury List 0 2 6 Costs of Elections, under 18 & 19 Vict., cap. 120, sec. 24 71 13 9 Other Charges— Poundage 274 5 2 Salaries of Collectors 213 13 3 Receipt Stamps 20 6 1 Suppression of Disorderly Houses, per 48 & 49 Vict., cap. 69 2 12 9 510 17 3 53,230 4 9 51,207 3 0 Cash Balance, 29th September, 1892:- In hands ot Treasurer (fo. 51) 8,941 13 3 I hereby certify that this Balance Sheet is correct. This 1st day of December, 1892. ALFRED MOLLOY Churchwardens. STEPHEN FORDHAM T. BARCLAY COCKERTON, District Auditor of The Metropolitan Audit District, which comprises the above Parish. 60,148 16 3 J. J. FREEMAN Overseers of the Poor. THOS.B. KENDELL †Expenditure incurred by the Elected Overseers. £60,148 16 3 E 51 The Accounts of the Vestry of the Parish of Saint Leonard, Shoreditch, in the County of London, acting as the Overseers of the Poor of the said Parish. 51 POOR RATE ACCOUNTS, for the Half-Year ended Lady-Day, 1893. £ s. d. £ s. d. To RECEIPTS— By PAYMENTS- In hands of Treasurer, 29th September, 1892 (fo. 50) 8,941 13 3 Shoreditch Board of Guardians— Order for Contributions, dated 2nd March, 1892 Balance 10,788 0 0 From the Poor Rate 49,335 5 1 Do. dated 24th Aug.,1892 On account 29,500 0 0 40,288 0 0 H M. Treasury—Grant in aid of Poor Rate 10 0 0 Metropolitan Police— 49,345 5 1 Warrant, dated 2nd January, 1893 7,109 2 6 Metropolitan police— Shoreditch Bural Board- Refund of Contributions for years 1891—1893, re Alteration in Rateable Value 146 14 2 Certificates under Burial Act, 1852, sec. 19 125 0 0 Commissioners for Public Libraries and Museums, &c.— Precepts under Public Libraries Act, 1892 890 0 0 Parliamentary and County Council Elections — Parliamentary and County Council Elections— Sale of Registers 7 17 6 †Expenses of preparing Lists of Parliamentary and County Council Voters, Borough of Shoreditch (balance) 371 5 4 One halt of not expenses incurred by Overseers of the Poor under Registration Acts, ex London County Council, out of General County Fund, as under:- †Do. Lists of Parliamentary Voters, Tottenham Division, County of Middlesex 15 3 6 Register fob Year 1893— Borough Lists, year 1892-98 202 2 10 Returning Officer's Expenses under Registration of Electors' Act, 1843— County Lists, years 1888-93 17 0 9 Fees, Printing, and Disbursements 280 11 3 249 3 7 Deduct—One half payable by London County Council 140 5 7 Refund of balance of expenses allowed by Revising Barrister, 6th October, 1891 33 16 0 140 5 8 Expenses overdrawn, year 1892-98, repaid Treasurer (fo. 55) 9 18 8 †Repayment to London County Council of one-half of sum brought into account 16 18 0 300 15 9 543 12 6 †Preparing Jury List, Tower Division, County of London 31 0 0 Other Charges— Poundage 192 7 2 Salaries of Collectors 312 10 0 Receipt Stamps 24 4 0 529 1 2 49,792 15 0 Cash Balance, 25th March, 1893:— 49,515 16 2 In hands of Treasurer (fo. 57) 9,218 12 1 I hereby certify that this Balance Shoot is correct. This 9th day of June, 1898. STEPHEN FORDHAM Churchwardens. J. W. VANDY THOS. B. KENDELL ) Overseers of the poor. T. BARCLAY COCKERTON, District Auditor of The Metropolitan Audit District, which comprises the above Parish. £58,784 8 3 GEO. SANDERS †Expenditure incurred by the Elected Overseers. £58,734 8 3 XI POOR RATE ACCOUNT. 53 53 POOR RATE ACCOUNTS, from 25th March, 1892 to 25th March 1893. £ s. d. £ s. d. To RECEIPTS— By PAYMENTS— POOR RATE. SHOREDITCH BOARD OF GUARDIANS. Arrears of Rate, quarter ended Lady-Day, 1892 441 8 6 Order for Contributions, dated 2nd September, 1891, to cover expenditure to 25th March, 1892 Balance 8,500 0 0 †Rates made and allowed, from Lady-Day, 1892, to Lady-Day, 1893 (see below) 110,738 18 10 Do. do. dated 2nd March, 1892, to cover expenditure to 29th September, 1892 43,576 0 0 Add—Additional Assessments 38 3 5 Government property 19 10 0 Do. do. dated 24th August, 1892, to cover expenditure to 25th March, 1893 On account 29,500 0 0 57 13 110,796 12 3 81,576 0 0 111,238 0 9½ Less—Allowance to Owners of 25 per cent. 4,275 9 3 106,962 11 6½ Deduct—Excused at Rate Sessions 114 0 5 BURIAL BOARD OF ST. LEONARD, SHOREDITCH. Irrecoverable, &c. 5,173 3 9 Certificate, dated 27th April, 1892 (fo. 60) 75 0 0 5,287 4 2 Do. 24th May, 1892 (fo. 60) 75 0 0 £101,675 7 4½ Do. 9th August, 1892 (fo. 60) 75 0 0 Quarter ended Made by Vestry. Allowed by Police Magistrate. Rateable Value. Rate in the £ Amount. Do. 10th October, 1892 (fo. 60) 75 0 0 Do. 16th January, 1893 (fo. 60) 50 0 0 £ £ s. d. 350 0 0 Midsummer,1892 29th Mar., 1892 8th April, 1892 683,455 9d. 25,629 11 3 Michaelmas, 1892 28th June, 1892 1st July, 1892 682,531 11d. 31,282 13 5 Christmas, 1892 4th Oct., 1892 6th Oct., 1892 682,991 10d. 28,457 19 2 Lady-Day, 1893 27th Dec., 1892 2nd Jan., 1893 676,500 9d. 25,368 15 0 COMMISSIONERS FOR PUBLIC LIBRARIES AND MUSEUMS, SHOREDITCH. †£110,738 18 10 Produce of ¾d. Rate in the £ per annum— Year ended 25th March, 1892. Rate made and allowed 5th January, 1892 (uncollected at Lady-Day, 1892) Balance 3,920 5 7 Precept, dated 25th March, 1892 Balance 938 14 0 Year to 25th March, 1893—On account— Rates made and allowed, from Lady-Day, 1892, to Lady-Day, 1893 On account 98,243 12 5½ Precept, dated 8th June, 1892 490 0 0 Do. 30th August, 1892 490 0 0 102,163 18 0½ Do. 14th November, 1892 490 0 0 Rates previously written off, now recovered 35 11 8½ Do. 16th January, 1893 400 0 0 Deficiency on Poor Rates under 53 & 54 Vict., ch. 154 and the Lands Clauses Acts, ex L. & N. W. Railway Co. 112 4 3 1,870 0 0 2,808 14 0 H. M. Treasury—Grant in aid of Poor Rate, re Shoreditch County Court, excluded from Valuation List (one year) 18 15 0 102,330 9 0 Amount carried forward £102,330 9 0 Amount carried forward £84,734 14 0 54 o4 POOR RATE ACCOUNTS (Continued), from 25th March, 1892, to 25th March, 1893. £ s. d. £ s. d. To RECEIPTS- By PAYMENTS- Amount brought forward £102,330 9 0 Amount brought forward £84,734 14 0 METROPOLITAN POLICE. METROPOLITAN POLICE. Refund of Contributions re Alteration in Rateable Value of Quinquennial List in force on 6th April, 1891, viz.— Contributions to the Police Fund, viz.- On Warrants issued. Rateable Value. Rate in the £ Amount. Rateable Value altered to Warrant altered to. Repaid. On Warrants issued. For Half-Year ended Rateable Value. Rate in the £ Contributions. £ £ s. d. £ £ s. d. £ s. d. £ £ s. d. 1st July, 1891 682,328 2½d. 7,107 11 8 678,807 7,070 18 1½ 36 13 6½ 1st July, 1892 31st Dec., 1892 682,476 2½d. 7,109 2 6 1st Jan., 1892 682,328 2½d. 7,107 11 8 678,807 7,070 18 1½ 36 13 6½ 1st July, 1892 682,476 2½d. 7,109 2 6 678,955 7,072 8 11½ 36 13 6½ 2nd January,1893 30th June, 1893 682,476 2½d. 7,109 2 6 1st Jan., 1893 682,476 2½d. 7,109 2 6 678,955 7,072 8 11½ 36 13 6½ 146 14 2 14,218 5 0 VESTRY ELECTIONS (under 18 and 19 Vict., cap. 120, sec. 24.) VESTRY ELECTIONS. (under 18 and 19 Vict., cap. 120, sec. 24.) Costs of Annual Elections held 11th and 12th May, 1892, viz.— Division of Expenses. Presiding Officers 10 10 0 Clerks to do. 5 5 0 £ s. d. Inspectors of Votes 12 0 0 Moorfields Ward 4 7 6 Rate Collectors 3 5 6 Church do. 3 11 6 Messengers 2 10 0 Hoxton do. 4 7 6 Caretakers 2 0 0 Wenlock do. 12 8 0 Expenses of Staff 7 7 0 Whitmore do. 3 6 6 42 17 6 Kingsland do. 4 7 6 Use of Rooms 6 6 0 Haggerstone do. 12 7 6 Stationery, Printing, and Advertising 13 3 0 Acton do. 4 7 6 Bill Posting 3 2 0 Common Charges 22 10 3 Delivery of Ballot Boxes, &c. 1 1 3 Churchwardens' Expenses 4 4 0 †See opposite £71 13 9 Police Services 1 0 0 †71 13 9 Amount carried forward £102,477 3 2 Amount carried forward £99,024 12 9 55 55 POOR RATE ACCOUNRS (Continued), form 25th March, 1892, to 25th March, 1893. To RECEIPTS- £ s. d. By PAYMENTS- £ s. d. Amount brought forward £102,477 3 2 Amount brought forward £99,024 12 9 PARLIAMENTARY AND COUNTY COUNCIL ELECTIONS. PARLIAMENTARY AND COUNTY COUNCIL ELECTIONS. (a) Overseers of the Poor. (a) Overseers of the Poor. Borough of Shoreditch. Year 1891-92. Refund of balance of expenses allowed by Revising Barrister, 6th October, 1891 33 16 0 Borough of Shoreditch.. Year 1891-92. Repayment to London County Council of one-half of sum brought into account 16 18 0 Year 1892-93. One half of not expenses under Registration Acts of 1843 to 1888 (section 2 of the Registration of Electors' Act, 1891) ex London County Council, out of General County Fund— YEAR 1892-93. Printing Lists of Parliamentary and County Council Voters 278 16 0 Registrars' Mortality Returns 9 1 10 Year 1891—92 228 14 4 Posting Notices and Lists on Church doors 5 11 0 ,, 1892—93 202 2 10 Stamps for Owners' Returns, Notices, &c. 4 3 0 430 17 2 Preparing Revision Court 1 1 0 Sale of Registers and Claims 8 3 6 Law Book 0 16 10 Hire of Voting Compartments 5 8 0 Cab hire and Journey expenses 2 6 6 Use of Ballot Boxes 1 1 0 801 16 2 6 8 0 Allowed for Revision, &c.- 445 8 8 Indoor Staff 61 3 0 £ s d. Rate Collectors 17 6 6 Enquiry Officers 31 1 0 Barrister's Certificate, 7th October, 1892 121 5 4 109 10 6 Less—Repaid Treasurer (fo. 51) 9 18 8 411 6 8 †Overseers' Expenses (see opposite) £111 6 8 Voting Compartments 30 3 0 Tottenham Division, County of Middlesex. Re-fitting Stamping Instruments 1 7 6 31 10 6 Tottenham Division, County of Middlesex. One half of net expenses, under Registration Acts of 1843 to 1888 (section 2 of the Registration of Electors' Act, 1891), ex London County Council, out of General County Fund— Year 1892-93. Printing Lists of Parliamentary Voters 9 4 0 Bill Posting 0 14 6 Year 1888—89 19 3 3 Allowed for Revision, &c.— „ 1889-90 7 8 3 Clerk 5 5 0 „ 1890-91 7 13 9 15 3 6 ,, 1891—92 5 8 9 „ 1892—93 7 6 9 47 0 9 Sale of Claims and Objections 0 10 0 47 10 9 526 15 5 474 18 8 (b) Returning Officer. (b) Returning Officer. Borough of Shoreditch. Borough of Shoreditch Year 1893. Sale of Registers 6 15 0 Year 1893. Preparing Register of Parliamentary and County Council Electors— Returning Officer's Charges 77 1 7 Printing and Disbursements 210 4 8 Deduct— 287 6 3 Moiety of Expenses paid out of General County Fund, ex London County Council 143 13 1 Sale of Registers (one-half) 3 7 6 147 0 7 140 5 8 533 10 5 615 4 4 Amount carried forward £103,010 13 7 Amount carried forward £99,639 17 1 56 56 POOR RATE ACCOUNTS (Continued), from 25th March, 1892, to 25th March, 1893. To RECEIPTS- £ s. d. By PAYMENTS- £ s. d. Amount brought forward £103,010 13 7 Amount brought forward £99,639 17 1 jury list. jury list. Sale of List 0 2 6 Printing Jurors' Book, Tower Division, County of London 25 15 0 Allowed for Revision, &c.- Clerk 1 1 0 Rate Collectors 4 4 0 5 5 0 31 0 0 other charges. Poundage 466 12 4 Salaries of Collectors 506 3 3 972 15 7 Agreed remuneration, re Rate collection, Church South Ward (William Riley) 20 0 0 992 15 7 Receipt Stamps 44 10 1 Suppression of Disorderly Houses, per 48 & 49 Vict., cap. 69 2 12 9 1,039 18 5 Excess of Receipts over Payments (fo. 57 ) 2,300 0 7 £103,010 16 1 £103,010 16 1 57 57 POOR RATE ACCOUNT- Income and Expenditure from 25th March, 1892, to 25th March, 1893. Source. Fo RECEIPTS. ASSETS Accrued but not Received. Income from 25 Mar.,'??? to 25 Mar.,'93??? Application. Fo. PAYMENTS. LIABILITIES Incurred but not Paid. Expenditure from 25 Mar.,'92, to 25 Mar.,'93. 25 March, 1892 25 March, 1893. 25 March, 1892. 25 March, 1893. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. Poor Rate 53 102,330 9 0 4,361 14 1 3,412 19 9 101,381 14 8 Shoreditch Board of Guardians 53 81,576 0 0 8,500 0 0 9,500 0 0 82,576 0 0 Metropolitan Police 54 146 14 2 ...... ...... 146 14 2 Burial Board of St. Leonard, Shoreditch 53 350 0 0 ...... ...... 350 0 0 Parliamentary and County Council Elections 55 533 10 5 228 14 4 ...... 304 16 1 Commissioners for Public Libraries and Museums, Shoreditch 53 2,808 14 0 938 14 0 60 8 0 1,930 8 0 Jury List 56 0 2 6 ...... ...... 0 2 6 Metropolitan Police 54 14,218 5 0 ...... ...... 14,218 5 0 4,590 8 5 3,412 19 9 Vestry Elections 54 71 13 9 ...... ...... 71 13 9 3,412 19 9 Parliamentary and County Council Elections 55 615 4 4 31 10 6 ...... 583 13 10 103,010 16 1 1,777 8 8 Jury List 56 31 0 0 ...... ...... 31 0 0 101,833 7 5 Other Charges 56 1,039 18 5 156 4 10 93 9 9 977 3 4 9,626 9 4 9,653 17 9 9,626 9 4 100,710 15 6 27 8 5 100,738 3 11 BALANCES—25th March, 1893— In hands of Treasurer 9,218 12 1 Less—25th March, 1892— In hands of Treasurer 6,918 11 6 Excess of Receipts over Payments 56 2,300 0 7 Income in excess of Expenditure carried to Balance Sheet 58 1,095 3 6 £103,010 16 1 £101,833 7 5 £103,010 16 1 £101,833 7 5 58 58 POOR RATE ACCOUNT—BALANCE SHEET, 25th March, 1893. Fo. £ s. d. £ s. d. Fo. £ s. d. £ s. d. LIABILITIES. ASSETS. REVENUE ACCOUNT. REVENUE ACCOUNT. To Sundry Creditors, for Balances due to them 57 9,653 17 9 By Poor Rate—Balance 57 3,412 19 9 Surplus, 25th March, 1892 1,882 10 7 Add— By Cash Balance, 25th March 1893— Income in excess of Expenditure this year 1,095 3 6 57 In hands of Treasurer 57 9,218 12 1 SURPLUS—25th March, 1893 2,977 14 1 12,631 11 10 12,631 11 10 WILLIAM GEORGE SMITH, Treasurer, London and Midland Bank, Limited (Shoreditch Branch). £12,631 11 10 ERNST A. R. ADAMS, Accountant. £12,631 11 10 BURIAL BOARD. 60 60 The Accounts of the Burial Board for the Parish of Saint Leonard, Shoreditch,.in the County of London. BURIAL BOARD ACCOUNTS, from 25th March, 1892, to 25th March, 1893. To RECEIPTS— £ s. d. By PAYMENTS— £ s. d. Date of Certificate. Maintenance Account. POOR RATE. Maintenance Account. 1892. ST. LEONARDS CHURCHYARD, SHOREDITCH. Apr, 27 Out of the Poor Rate, pursuant to the provisions of Act 15 and 16 Vict., cap. 85 (fo. 53) 75 0 0 Wages of Gardeners 60 14 6 Erecting Tool House 2 1 5 Broom 0 10 4 May 24. Do. do. (fo. 53) 75 0 0 Shrubs and Seeds 9 4 Aug. 9. Do. do. (fo. 53) 75 0 0 65 10 9 Oct. 10 Do. do. (fo. 53) 75 0 0 ST. MARY'S CHURCHYARD, HAGGERSTON. 1893. Wages of Gardener 38 0 0 Caution Boards 1 8 0 Jan. 16 Do. do. (fo. 53) 50 0 0 Garden Hose 2 1 6 Repairing Entrance Gates and Ironwork 5 0 0 350 0 0 Plumbers' Work 1 19 5 HACKNEY ROAD BURIAL GROUND. Ballast, Hoggin and Sand 1 6 3 Shrubs 0 19 0 Tools and Brooms 0 18 0 3 10 0 55 2 2 ST. JOHN'S CHURCHYARD, HOXTON. Wages of Gardener 52 0 0 Caution Boards 3 1 0 Garden Roller 3 0 0 Repairs to Iron Railings 5 0 0 Brooms 0 8 0 Shrubs and Seeds 7 15 6 71 4 6 HACKNEY ROAD BURIAL GROUND. Capital cost of laying out grounds, contributed by Metropolitan Public Gardens Association (per contra) 300 0 0 Laying out Grounds, &c. ( per contra) 300 0 0 Wages of Gardener 36 5 0 GENERAL RECEIPTS. Wire Fencing and Fixing, &c 13 14 0 Revolving Frieze 3 2 6 Timber for Tool Shed 2 10 9 Tools, Castings, and Ironmongery 2 15 6 Repairing Drinking Fountain 0 11 0 Rewards to Police 0 5 0 Bandmaster's Fee 0 10 6 Bouquet 0 10 6 Water 2 5 0 Transfers— Contributions to Vestry of Shoreditch, as under— Sand and Cement (fo. 67) 0 13 4 Drainage Construction (fo. 81) 4 9 6 5 2 10 367 12 7 GENERAL CHARGES. Bank Interest on on minimum balances 0 1 1 Stamp Duty on Cheques 0 12 6 Refund of Stamp Duty 0 2 10 560 2 6 0 3 11 Excess of Receipts over Payments (fo. 61) 90 1 5 650 8 11 £650 3 11 650 3 11 61 61 BURIAL BOARD ACCOUNT—Income and Expenditure from 25th March, 1892, to 25th March, 1893. Source. Fo. RECEIPTS. ASSETS Income Application. Fo. PAYMENTS. LIABILITIES Expenditure from 25 Mar.'92, Accrued but not received. from 25 Mar.'92, Incurred but not paid. 25 Mar.,1892. 25 Mar., 1893. to 25 Mar.'93. 25 Mar.,1892. 25 Mar.,1893. to 25 Mar.'93. £ s. d. £ s d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d Poor Rate 60 350 0 0 350 0 0 St Leonard's Churchya, Shoreditch 60 65 10 9 65 10 9 Hackney Road Burial Ground 60 300 0 0 300 0 0 St. Mary's do. Haggerston 60 55 2 2 2 0 8 0 17 6 53 19 0 General Receipts 60 0 3 11 0 3 11 St. John's do. Hoxton 60 71 4 6 3 4 6 68 0 0 650 3 11 650 3 11 Hackney Road Burial Ground 60 367 12 7 0 11 4 0 15 0 367 16 3 General Charges 60 0 12 6 0 12 6 Balances-25th March, 1893- 5 16 6 1 12 6 In hands of Treasurer 63 8 5 1 12 6 Do. Accountant 11 17 9 560 2 6 4 4 0 555 18 6 Add— 75 6 2 BALANCES—25th March, 1892— Due to Accountant 89 18 5 Less—In hands of Treasure 75 3 2 14 15 3 Excess of Receipts over Payments 60 90 1 5 Income in excess of Expenditure, carried to Balance Sheet 61 94 5 5 £650 3 11 . £ 050 3 11 £650 3 11 £650 3 11 BURIAL BOARD ACCOUNT— BALANCE SHEET, 25th March, 1893. LIABILITIES. Fo. £ s. d. £ s. d. ASSETS. Fo. £ s. d. £ s d. REVENUE ACCOUNT. REVENUE ACCOUNT. 75 6 2 To Sundry Creditors, for Balances due to them 61 1 12 6 By Cash Balances—25th March, 1893. Income in excess of Expenditure this year 94 5 5 61 In hands of Treasurer 63 8 5 61 Deduct— Do. Accountant 11 17 9 61 Deficit, 25th March, 1892 20 11 9 Surplus-25th March,1893 73 13 8 SURPLUS-25th March,1893 75 6 2 75 6 2 WILLIAM GEORGE SMITH, Treasurer, ERNST A. R. ADAMS, Accountant to the Board. £75 6 2 London and Midland Bank, Limited (Shoreditch Branch). 375 6 2 63 63 GENERAL RATE ACCOUNTS, FROM 25TH MARCH, 1892, TO 25TH MARCH, 1893. To RECEIPTS— £ s. d. By PAYMENTS— £ s. d. Finance Committee's Accounts. Finance Committees Accounts. General Rate. Repayment of Debt. Arrears of Rate. Quarter ended Lady-Day. 1892 256 17 10½ Instalments of Principal of Loans outstanding (fo. 95)— †Rates made and allowed from Lady-day, 1892, to Lady-Day, 1893 (see below) 84,498 3 8 Erection of Town Hall 933 6 8 Street Improvements and Paving Works 1,757 0 0 Add—Additional Assessments 25 10 0 Sun Street, &c., Improvement 783 0 0 Government Property 15 0 0 Goldsmith Square Open Space 40 0 0 40 10 0 Dusting and Scavenging 916 0 0 84,539 13 8 4,429 6 8 84,799 11 6½ . Interest on Loans. Less—Allowance to Owners of 25 per cent. 767 18 10½ 84,031 12 8 Deduct—Excused at Rate Sessions 84 17 6 Irrecoverable, &c 3,955 18 5 4,040 15 11 Interest on Balances of Loans outstanding (fo. 95)— £79,990 990 16 9 Erection of Town Hail 200 17 9 Street Improvements and Paving Works 304 6 1¼ Quarter ended Made by Vestry. Allowed by Police Magistrate. Rateable Value. Rate in the £. Amount. Sun Street, &c., Improvement 1,107 12 10¾ Goldsmith Square Open Space 69 13 0 Dusting and Scavenging 201 19 8 Midsummer, 1892 29th Mar., 1892 8th April, 1892 £ 678,172 8d. £ 22,605 s. 14 d. 8 1,884 9 5 Michaelmas,1892 28th June, 1892 1st July, 1892 677,248 7d. 19,753 1 4 Christmas, 1892 4th Oct., 1892 6th Oct., 1892 677,708 7d. 19,766 9 8 Lady-Day, 1893 27th Dec., 1892 2nd Jan., 1893 671,217 8d. 22,373 18 0 †£84,499 3 8 Collection— Rate made and allowed 5th January, 1892 (uncollected at Lady-Day, 1892)Balance 2,268 3 5 Rates made and allowed from Lady-Day, 1892 to Lady-Day, 1893 On account 74,667 16 0½ 76,939 19 5½ Rates previously written off, now recovered 27 6 10½ Deficiency on Poor Rates, under 53 & 54 Vict., ch. 154, and the Lands Clauses Acts, ex L. & N. W. Railway Co. / 75 8 3 H. M. Treasury—Grant in aid of General Rate re Shoreditch County Court, excluded from Valuation List (one year) 13 10 10 0 77,052 4 7 Amount carried forward £77,052 4 7 Amount carried forward £6,313 16 1 ... ... ... 64 64 GENERAL RATE ACCOUNTS (Continued), FROM 25th March, 1892, to 25th March, 1893. To RECEIPTS— £ s. d. by PAYMENTS— £ s. d. Amount brought forward £77,052 4 7 Amount brought forward £6,313 16 1 ... ... ... Finance Committee's Accounts. (continued). Finance Committees Accounts. (continued). VESTRY CLERK'S DEPARTMENT. VESTRY CLERK'S DEPARTMENT. Fees on deposited plans, under Act 7 Will. IV. and 1 Vict., cap. 83 2 2 0 Salary of Vestry Clerk (proportion) 214 0 3 Do. Clerks 113 15 5 Agency Fees 2 10 6 327 15 8 4 12 6 Temporary Copying Clerks 11 12 0 Solicitor's Practising Certificate 9 5 0 Subscription to Law Library 1 10 0 Law Books 14 11 10 Parliamentary Papers, Session 1893 4 0 0 Reports, Pamphlets, and Acts of Parliament Law Engrossing and Writing 4 9 2 5 4 4 Typewriting Apparatus 19 16 0 Guarantee Premiums 3 15 0 Petty Disbursements 12 4 2 417 17 4 Less—Charged to Capital Account (fo. 89)— Proportion of Salaries of Vestry Clerk's staff 163 17 10 253 19 6 Accountant's Department. ACCOUNTANT'S DEPARTMENT. Searchinr Rate Books 3 2 6 1 1 Salary of Accountant (proportion) 107 15 5 House-numbering fee 0 2 6 Do. Clerks 205 18 5 3 5 0 Rate Collectors 834 6 5 8 5 0 1,148 0 3 « Remuneration for Rate collection of Church South Ward (William Riley) 27 10 0 Copying Rate Books 21 18 0 Extra services of Accountant 25 0 0 Reward for recovery of rates (H. L. Loly) 5 0 0 Advertising 13 19 4 Candidates' Travelling Expenses 19 2 3 Guarantee Premiums 6 12 6 Petty Disbursements 2 4 9 1,269 7 1 Amounts carried forward £7 17 6 77,052 4 7 Amount carried forward £7,837 2 8 ... ... ... 65 65 GENERAL RATE ACCOUNTS (Continued), , from 25th March, 1892, to 25th March, 1893. To RECEIPTS— £ s. d. By PAYMENTS— £ s. d. Amounts brought forward £7 17 6 77,052 4 7 Amount brought forward £7,837 2 8 ... ... ... Finance Committees Accounts. (continued.) Finance Committees Accounts. (continued.) LEGAL AND PARLIAMENTARY EXPENSES. LEGAL AND PARLIAMENTARY EXPENSES. Sale of Electric Lighting Orders 0 3 0 Shoreditch Electric Lighting Order, 1892— GENERAL RECEIPTS. Printing 42 0 0 Advertising 1 14 1 Lodgment Fees & Disbursements 1 6 4 15 0 5 Parliamentary Agent's charges Great Northern and City Railway Bill 32 3 0 Counsel's fees re Deficiency in Rates 5 0 0 Law Costs in re Scavenging contracts—Vestry v. Turner 80 0 0 Incidental Expenses 1 8 5 118 11 5 163 11 10 GENERAL CHARGES. Salaries 52 0 0 Bank Interest on minimum fortnightly balances 73 19 1 Tax on Bank Interest 6 14 9 Half cost of preparing agreement with National Sunday League 0 7 6 Court Fees and Brokers Charges 8 3 1 Expenses of suppressing disorderly houses 2 13 6 Sale of— Yearly contribution towards maintenance of Parish Church clock 20 0 0 Reports 1 1 9 Maps 0 5 10 Publishing appointment of Charity Trustees 2 5 0 Waste Paper 0 6 0 Elected Auditors' Expenses, Annual Audit 1892 5 0 0 1 13 7 76 0 2 Subscription for telephonic communication 18 15 0 Maps of Parish 12 15 0 Books, Newspapers, and Acts of Parliament 13 7 11 Copying apparatus and materials 8 7 11 Stationery and General Printing 775 11 0½ Petty Disbursements, Sundries, &c 4 8 1 930 1 3½ Advertising— Annual Contracts 42 14 3 Vestrymen's Attendances 33 15 0 76 9 0 Stamp Duty on Cheques & Contracts 18 17 11 Receipt Stamps for Collectors 44 9 11 Postage and Receipt Stamps 54 16 4 118 4 2 1,124 14 8½ Less—Charged to Capital Account (fo. 89)— Proportion of Stationery and Printing 22 4 3 1,102 10 5½ Amounts carried forward £84 0 8 77,052 4 7 Amount carried forward £9,103 4 11½ ... ... ... 66 66 GENERAL RATE ACCOUNTS (Continued) from 25th March, 1892, to 25th March, 1893. To RECEIPTS— £ s. d. Rv PAYMENTS— £ s. d. Amounts brought forward £84 0 8 77,052 4 7 Amount brought forward £9,103 4 11½ ... ... ... Finance Committee's Accounts. (continued.) Finance Committees Accounts. (continued.) SCHOOL BOARD FOR LONDON. SCHOOL BOARD FOR LONDON. Refund of Contributions re Alteration in Rateable Value of Quinquennial List in force on 6th April, 1891, viz.— Deficiency of the School Fund apportioned to Shoreditch, viz.— On Precept dated For Half-Year ended Rateable Value. Rateable Value altered to Equal to a Rate in the & of Repaid. On Precept dated For Half-Year ended Rateable Value. Equal to a Rate in the a £ of Amount pportioned. £ £ d. £ s d £ d. £ s. d. 9th July, 1891 25th Mar., 1892 677,045 673,524 5.48 80 10 3 17th Dec.. 1891 29th Sept., 1892 677,045 5 19 14,647 3 1 17th Dec., 1891 29th Sept., 1892 677,045 673,524 5.19 76 3 5 30th June. 1892 25th Mar., 1893 677.193 5 26 14,847 14 1 30th June, 1892 25th Mar., 1893 677,193 673,672 5.26 77 3 11 , 29,494 17 2 233 17 7 38,598 2 1½ 317 18 3 (Balance- £38,280 3s. 10½d.) Paving and Sewers Committees Accounts. Paving and Sewers Committees Accounts. SURVEYOR'S DEPARTMENT. SURVEYORS DEPARTMENT. License Fees for scaffold erections, &c 44 7 6 Salary of Surveyor (proportion) 145 0 0 Do. Clerk 55 0 0 200 0 0 Temporary Copying Clerk 6 16 0 Instruments and Measures 1 5 6 Railway Plan and Map 1 18 8 Pettv Disbursements 3 10 10 213 11 0 STEAM ROAD ROLLERS. Wages 1,176 0 11 Hire of Road Rollers 84 5 0 Smiths' Work, Sharpening Picks, &c 36 15 1 Waste, Lard, Oil, and Sundries 10 0 6 Coal Sacks 2 2 0 Firewood 6 3 6 1,315 14 0 PLANTING TREES IN ROADS AND STREETS. Plane Trees 3 12 0 Timber 0 14 0 4 6 0 Amounts carried forward £44 7 6 77,370 2 10 Amounts carried forward £1,533 11 0 38,598 2 1½ 67 67 GENERAL KATE ACCOUNTS (Continued), From 25th March, 1892, to 25th March, 1893. 67 To RECEIPTS £ s. d. Bv PAYMENTS— £ s. d. Amounts brought forward £44 7 6 77,370 2 10 Amounts brought forward £1,533 11 0 38,598 2 1½ Paving and Sewers Committee's Accounts. (continued.) Paving and Sewers Committee's Accounts. (continued.) MAINTENANCE OF PUBLIC ROADS AND STREETS. MAINTENANCE OF PUBLIC ROADS AND STREETS. Wages— Repairs of Roads and Footpaths. East London Water-works Co 72 6 5 Pavement Labour 1,360 9 2 Highways do 705 9 0½ New River Waterworks Co 247 13 1 Breaking Stones 261 11 2½ Gas Light & Coke Co 160 6 5 Workmen's holiday 12 16 0 Post Office Telegraphs 3 5 1 2,340 5 5 Maintenance of Wood Pavement, Goldsmith Row and Hoxton Street 27 13 8 483 11 0 Team Labour and Carmen's Work 624 6 7 Street Paving Repairs 4 14 11 Do. do. do. done by Dusting and Scavenging Department (fo. 70) 6 19 6 Cutting Coal-plate openings 5 17 0 Watching expenses 0 13 4 Hire of Water Carts 2 15 6 Owners' contribution towards Paving work re dedication of Livermere Road 18 13 2 Re-dressing Granite Curbs and Pitchings 80 16 00 Hire of Water Carts 2 15 6 Transfers— Asphalte Repairs 0 19 5 From accounts, as under, for works executed, &c. Transferred from Capital Account (fo. 86)— Shoreditch Burial Board (fo. 60) 0 13 4 Expenditure in excess of Loan sanctioned 150 12 11 Dusting and Scavenging,Maintenance Account (fo. 70) 5 11 8 Materials purchased during the Year— Granite, Setts, and Edgeston es 43 7 8 Sewerage and Drainage Works (fo. 81) 106 3 8 York Flages 536 12 10 Deposit Fund (fo. 90) 108 6 10 Norway Kerbs and Moor Stone 12 9 4 734 4 11 Patent Victoria Stone 46 13 4 Broken Granite 1,134 12 9 Ballast, Hoggin, and Sand 600 8 11 Lime and Cement 180 19 8 Coke 30 11 0 2,585 15 6 7,708 6 0 FLEMMING STREET DEPOT . 29 5 0 Parochial and District Rates 7 17 0 Income Tax 1 2 8 1 3 5 0 12 0 Fire Insurance 0 3 O 40 3 1 Amounts carried forward £778 12 5 77,370 2 10 Amounts carried forward £9,282 0 1 38,598 2 1½ 68 68 GENERAL RATE ACCOUNTS (Continued), From25th March, 1892, to 25th March, 1893. 68 To RECEIPTS— £ s. d. By PAYMENTS— £ s. d. Amounts brought forward £778 12 5 77,370 2 10 Amounts brought forward £9,282 0 1 38,598 2 1½ Paving and Sewers Committees Accounts. (continued.) Paving and Sewers Committee s Accounts. (continued.) MISCELLANEOUS RECEIPTS. MISCELLANEOUS EXPENSES. Damage to Mason's Truck 0 5 0 Brooms and Brushes 17 1 6 Unclaimed balances of deposits for Paving and Drainage Works 1 15 9 Ironmongery 6 19 6 Street Lanternsr 4 6 2 Annual acknowledgment re laying of under ground steam pipe, Shoreditch High Street 20 0 0 Pails, Picks, and Rammers 23 12 6 Office Clock, Desk, and Stools 6 3 0 License fees for affixing Advertisements to hoards &c., under Advertising Stations ( Rating Act, 1889) 55 11 4 Blacksmiths' Work 84 1 10 Carpentry and Repairs 10 14 6 77 12 1 Plumbery and Repairs 8 5 8 Mason's Truck and Repairs to Barrows 17 3 0 Watching Expenses re dilapidated buildings 0 19 10 Oil, Waste, Soap, &c 11 19 5 Bus hire for Committee 1 0 0 Compensation for damage to Stock, &c, 2 17 0 Advertising Road Foremanship 4 12 0 Candidates' Expenses re do 0 18 7 Tax on Easements 0 10 6 Acknowledgment for user of land thrown into street, Shepherdess Walk 3 10 0 856 4 6 204 15 0 (Balance-£8, 630 10s. 7d.) 9,486 15 l Dusting and Scavenging Committee's Accounts. Dusting and Scavenging Committee's Accounts. DUSTING AND SCAVENGING DEPARTMENT. DUSTING AND SCAVENGING DEPARTMENT. (a) Contract System. (a) Contract System. Work done for non-compliance with Contract, Western Division, ex Henry Crane 38 2 8 Ykar ended 25th March, 1893—Balance— Western Division—Henrv Crane 456 3 4 On account of agreed sum to be received from W. R. Rogers, in settlement of judgment Vestry v. Turner 200 0 0 238 2 8 Amounts carried forward £238 2 8 78,226 7 4 Amounts carried forward £456 8 4 48,084 17 2½ 69 69 i GENERAL RATE ACCOUNTS (Continued), From 25th March, 1892, to 25th March, 1893. To RECEIPTS— £ s. d. By PAYMENTS— £ s. d. Amounts brought forward £238 2 8 78,226 7 4 Amounts brought forward £456 3 4 48,084 17 2½ Dusting and Scavenging Committee's Accounts. (continued.) Dusting and Scavenging Committees Accounts. (continued.) (b) Maintenance Account. (b) Maintenance Account. salaries and wages. Salary of Superintendent and Clerks 358 15 8 Wages— Dusting 1,561 17 1 Scavenging 4,092 19 1 Horsekeepers 129 2 7 Removal of Snow 24 17 7 Wharf Staff, &c 883 17 4 Workmen's holiday 9 12 6 6,702 6 2 7,061 1 10 De beauvoir wharf. De beauvoir wharf. Leasehold Rents 73 0 7 Ground Rent 243 15 0 Wayleave rental for ground pole ex National Telephone Co., Limited (one year) 0 10 6 Parochial and District Rates 28 10 10 67 16 10 20 3 0 78 11 1 Reliance wharf. Fire Insurance 14 11 9 Plate Glass insurance 0 5 0 Income Tax 4 0 0 379 2 5 reliance wharf. Ground Rent 97 10 0 Cottage Rents 21 0 0 Stables. Parochial and District Rates 27 7 4 13 18 11 3 10 0 Fire Insurance 0 9 6 Income Tax 1 17 6 144 18 3 Stables Horse Provender 806 9 9 Sale of- Lead Horse 1 10 0 Hay and Straw 846 4 10 Hav Bands 0 0 6 Bait Charges 18 13 8 1 19 6 Veterinary Surgery 37 6 3 Saddlery, Harness and Repairs 83 15 10 1,793 0 4 Amounts carried forward £96 10 7 238 2 3 78,226 7 4 Amounts carried forward £9,377 17 10 456 8 4 48,084 17 2½ 70 70 GENERAL RATE ACCOUNTS (CONTINUED), Froom25th MARCH, 1892, TO 25TH MARCH, 1893. To RECEIPTS — £ s. d. By PAYMENTS— s. d. Amounts brought forward £96 10 7 288 2 8 78,226 7 4 Amounts brought forward £9,377 17 10 456 3 4 48,084 17 2£ Dusting & Scavenging Committee s Accounts. (continued.) Dusting & Scavenging Committees Accounts. (continued.) WORKING EXPENSES. working expenses. Removal of Trade Refuse 281 6 2 Barge Freightage 7 050 18 9 Tjoss of Tools 0 8 Railway Carriage 3 8 0 Rebate on Barge Freightage, to 29th September, 1892(one year) 378 5 0 Dredging Regent's Canal 89 14 0 Brooms and Brushes 331 5 2 Tax adjustment on surrender of lease 0 7 0 Iron and Steel 32 12 6 Cart Arms and Van Springs 9 19 11 Shovels and Scoops 9 6 0 Transfers. Ironmongery 24 17 3 From accounts as under, for Cartage work, viz.— Badges and Straps 8 18 6 Enamelled Caution Tablets 20 19 5 Maintenance of Public Roads and Streets (fo. 67) 6 19 6 Tools and Loose Fittings 43 12 6 Timber 51 19 9 Goldsmith Square Recreation Ground (fo. 78) 29 8 6 Wood Paving 6 1 4 Tillage Salt 7 16 0 696 12 4 Disinfectants, Oil, and Soap 79 19 10 798 2 11 Lime and Cement 13 12 5 Memo.—Apportionment of Expenses. Horse Hire 30 18 8 Repairing Dust Baskets 10 7 4 Plumbers' and Writers' work 6 19 0 Coal and Coke 28 1 0 Cleaning offices 8 9 0 Sundries 23 3 9 Deputation Expenses re Refuse Destructor 8 11 10 Committee's Travelling Expenses re Purchase of Horses 6 0 6 Advertising 2 2 9 Law Charges and Stamp Duty on Loan of £2,000 9 17 0 £ s. d. Guarantee Premium 1 8 0 Dusting 6,409 12 7 Petty Disbursements 4 16 7 Sewernging 10,682 14 8 Building Manhole, &c. (fo. 67) 5 11 8 Watering 758 9 7 Sewerage & Drainage Works (fo.81) 38 14 1 £17 850 16 5 Transferred, from Capital Account Expenditure in excess of Loans sanctioned (fo. 88) 324 8 9 (Balance -.£17,850 16s. 5d.) 8,289 11 3 street watering Wages 227 19 5 Horse Hire 123 11 10 Repairing Stand Pipes 7 12 7 Repairs to Water Vans 1 14 8 " Damage to Guard Posts 1 19 11 Leather Hose 4 4 0 Water 391 7 0 758 9 7 1,081 5 7 18,425 18 8 18,882 2 0 Amount carried forward £79,257 12 11 Amount carried forward £66,966 19 2½ 71 71 GENERAL RATE ACCOUNTS (Continued), , from 25th March, 1892, to 25th March, 1893. To RECEIPTS— £ s. d. By PAYMENTS- £ s. d.  Amount brought forward £79,257 12 11 Amount brought forward £66,966 19 2½ General Purposes and Sanitary Committee's Accounts. General Purposes and Sanitary Committee's Accounts. LIGHTING DEPARTMENT. LIGHTING DEPARTMENT. Gas supply, Lighting, and Maintenance of Private Lamps 46 15 10 Public Lamps. Gas supply for Quarter ended Lady-day, 1892 1,279 8 0 Do. do. Midsummer, 1892 710 0 1 Damage to Public Lamps 5 15 6 Do. do. Michaelmas, 1892 790 9 9 Sale of Old Iron 0 9 0 Do. do. Christmas, 1892 1,379 13 10 Do. Broken Glass 0 2 6 4,159 11 8 Advertising on Lamp Columns 406 0 0 Salarv of Inspector 200 0 0 459 2 10 1,192 18 6 Do. Workmen's holiday 6 2 0 1,199 0 6 Painting Lamp Columns and Brackets 5 6 6 Maintenance of Public Lamp Meters 59 4 8 Altering and removing Lamp services 13 6 4 Lamp posts and Lanterns 63 9 10 Brackets and Fittings 52 19 3 Glass and Sash Tools 32 6 4 Lamplighters' Torches 8 8 0 Smith's Work, Repairs, &c 40 12 1 Adjusting Meters 6 2 0 Oil, Paint, Putty, &c 2 10 0 Rewards to Police re damage to Lamps 0 15 0 1,684 0 6 5,843 12 2 Street Name-Plates, &c. Writing and fixing Name-plates 6 15 4 Shoreditch Electric Lighting. 8 19 2 Expenses of Deputation to Southampton 15 14 6 Amounts carried forward £459 2 10 79,257 12 11 Amounts carried forward £5,859 6 8 66,966 19 2½ 72 72 GENERAL RATE ACCOUNTS (Continued), from 25th March, 1892, to 25th March, 1893. 72 To RECEIPTS— £ s. d. Bv PAYMENTS— £ s. d. Amounts brought forward £459 2 10 79,257 12 11 Amounts brought forward £5,859 6 8 66,966 19 2½ General Purposes and Sanitary Committee's Accounts. (continued.) General Purposes and Sanitary Committee's Accounts. (continued.) MEDICAL OFFICER'S DEPARTMENT. MEDICAL OFFICERS DEPARTMENT. Medical fees repaid for Notification of Disease under Public Health (London) Act, 1891, sec. 55 (4) ex Managers of Metropolitan Asylum District 169 2 6 Salary of Medical Officer of Health 156 5 0 Do. Public Analyst 50 0 0 Do. Inspectors and Clerk 379 17 3 586 2 3 Unclaimed Medical fees 0 2 0 Fees paid for Medical Certificates under Public Health (London) Act, 1891, Sec 55 (3) 169 2 0 Fines under Sale of Food and Drugs Act, 1875 36 10 0 Do. Public Health (London) Act, 1891 0 10 0 Analyses of Food Samples 64 0 0 Costs recovered under above Acts 4 14 0 Purchase of Food Samples, Disbursements, Sale of Bye Laws 0 1 6 Postages, Porterage, &c 16 9 11 211 0 0 Mortality Returns 31 13 9 Removal Expenses re Infectious Diseases 17 8 9 New Bedding and Mattresses 49 9 8 i Books, Reports, and Pamphlets 10 0 2 Photographs and Testing Apparatus 5 5 4 Nuisance Caution Tablets 4 10 0 Rewards to Police 8 13 0 Summons and Witness Fees 13 9 6 Advertising Bye-Laws, &c 6 0 10 Water and Rates, Old Street 1 6 0 983 11 2 TOWN HALL DISINFECTING STATION. Salaries 130 8 6 Extra Assistance 67 18 3 Uniform Clothing 3 3 0 Disinfectants 9 6 Brooms 6 9 Gas Fittings 6 9 Repairing Truck 14 3 Horse and Van Hire 12 6 7 Coal and Coke 13 14 2 Gas 5 2 10 Use of Apparatus, ex Vestry of St. Luke, Middlesex 8 15 6 Petty Disbursements 1 13 11 270 0 0 Amounts carried forward £670 2 10 79,257 12 11 Amounts carried forward £270 0 0 6,842 17 10 66,966 19 2½ 73 73 i GENERAL RATE ACCOUNTS (Continued), from 25th March, 1892, to 25th March, 1893. To RECEIPTS— £ s. d. By PAYMENTS- £ s. d. Amounts brought forward £670 2 10 79,257 12 11 Amounts brought forward £270 0 0 6,842 17 10 66,966 19 2½ General Purposes and Sanitary Committee's Accounts. (continued.) / General Purposes & Sanitary Committee's Accounts. (continued.) (Balance—£7,402 3s. 6d.) I town hall disinfecting station.—(continued.) New Vans, Apparatus, &c. Architect's Fees 13 13 0 Erecting Shed at rear of Hall 27 15 0 Two Disinfecting Vans 110 0 0 Reconstructing Chamber 117 19 8 Laying Foundations, &c 94 10 0 Patent Steam Disinfector 253 1 7 Ventilators, Racks and Fittings 18 6 11 Plumber's Work 3 12 3 638 18 0 908 18 5 Public mortuary, maintenance. Wages of Caretaker 26 0 0 2 15 0 0 11 2 3 0 0 32 6 2 street watering. Painting and Renovating Water Vans 67 19 5 Repairing Leather Hose 4 2 11 72 2 4 Goldsmith square Recreation Ground. Laying out, &c., by Metropolitan Public Gardens Association— Wages 51 ) 9 Materials L23 1 4 174 L7 1 Watchman's Wages 11 16 0 Carting Gravel (fo. 70) 29 8 6 41 4 6 216 1 7 8,072 6 4 670 2 10 Amount carried forward £79,927 15 9 Amount carried forward £75,039 5 6½ 74 74 GENERAL RATE ACCOUNTS (Continued), From25th March, 1892, to 25th March, 1893. To RECEIPTS £ s. d, By Payment- £ s. d. Amount brousrht forward £79927 15 9 Acccount brought forward £75,039 5 6½ Town Hall Committee's Accounts. Town Hall Committees Accounts. Establishment of town Hall. Eestablishment of town hall. Hire of Hall and Council Chamber 357 1 0 Salary of Hall Keeper 100 0 0 Do. Basement Rooms for Vaccination Station ex Shoreditch Board of Guardians (one year) 5 5 0 Use of Utensils Wages of Cleaners 20 98 0 9 0 0 218 9 0 Use of Booms for Coroners' Court 32 0 0 364 11 8 Extra consumption of Gas 0 15 5 Income Tax and House Duty 37 15 0 Gas 183 17 8 Water 15 0 0 Coal and Firewood 27 4 0 Fire Insurance 15 0 0 643 8 4 Uniform Clothing 4 8 6 Cleaning Materials 6 7 6 , Cleaning Windows 26 0 0 Winding and attention to Clocks 4 0 0 Table, Rugs, and Linoleum 12 15 10 Deed Boxes 5 7 6 Coal Vase and Fire Irons 1 10 6 Locksmith's Work and Repairs 3 8 0 Plumbing, and Writer's Work 7 4 0 i Refixing rain water pipes 20 6 2 £ s. d. Carpentry and Whitewashing 24 10 10 †Lettings for the Year 395 1 5 Disconnecting Urinals in basement 27 0 0 Less—Outgoings do 321 14 2 Building Manholes (fo. 81) 15 13 2 Sweeping Flues and Chimneys 4 0 0 Balance of Receipts £73 7 9 Admission Cards 2 10 0 165 2 0 1,026 19 4 alterations to town hall. Transferred from Capital Account(fo.86) Architect's Fees 174 5 0 ■ Quantity Surveyor's Charges 124 6 6 Lithography 31 10 0 330 1 6 Counsel's Fees 7 0 2 Lithography 9 13 6 Advertising 3 3 0 19 16 8 349 18 2 shoreditch labour bureau. Wages of Attendant 21 11 9 Books, Stationery, and Printing c 9 0 Postages ] ft 0 Petty Disbursements 0 3 0 +395 1 5 1 32 3 2 1,409 ft 8 (Balance—£1,013 19s. 3d.) Amount carried forward £76,448 6 2½ Amount carried forward £80,322 17 2 75 75 GENERAL RATE ACCOUNTS (Continued), From 25th March, 1892, to 25th March, 1893. 75 To RECEIPTS— £ s. d. By PAYMENTS— £ s. d. Amount brought forward £80,322 17 2 Amount brought forward£ 76,448 6 Housing of the Working Classes Committees Accounts. Housing of the Working Classes Committees Accounts. MOIRA PLACE AND PLUMBER'S PLACE AREA. MOIRA PLACE AND PLUMBER'S PLACE AREA. Transfer from Capital Account (fo. 89)— 5 4 2 Expenditure for year to 25th March, 1892, transferred 42 9 4 (Balance—£37 5s. 2d.) Valuation Committee s Accounts. Valuation Committee s Accounts. (Balance—£ 190 19s. 2d.) VALUATION COMMITTEE EXPENSES. Tursuant to The Valuation (Metropolis) Act, 1869. Year to 25th March, 1893— Surveyor's and Valuer's Fees (G.E.R. widening, Bishopsgate Goods Station 179 15 3 Engrossing, Forms, &c 1 4 2 Carriage and 'Bus Hire (for Surveys) 9 19 9 190 19 2 Assessment Committees Accounts. Assessment Committees Accounts. (Balance—£427 8s. 1d.) ASSESSMENT COMMITTEE EXPENSES. [Pursuant to The Valuation (Metropolis) Act, 1869. Quinquennial Valuation List, 1890— Solicitor's costs, Counsel's fees, &c., re Appeal of Gas Light and Coke Company 250 0 0 Valuer's charges do. do 136 4 2 386 4 2 Year to 25th March, 1893— Counsel's fees re Appeal against totals 10 4 0 Court fees, Law Engrossing, &c 4 16 1 1 Counsel's fees re Deficiency in Rates (proportion) 6 0 0 Hoxton House Private Asylum— Counsel's fees 6 16 0 Surveyor's charges 10 10 0 Photography 2 17 0 20 3 0 41 3 11 427 8 1 Excess of Receipts over Payments (fo. 77) 3,293 8 10½ £80,365 6 6 £80,365 6 6 76 76 GENERAL RATE ACCOUNT—Income and Expenditure From 25th March, 1892, to 25th March, 1893. Source. Fo. RECEIPTS. ASSETS Acceded but not Received. Income Application. Fo. PAYMENTS. LIABILITIES Incurred but not Paid. Expenditure 25 Mar., 1892. 25 Mar , 1893. from 25 Mar.,'92, to 25 Mar.,'93 25 Mar., 1892. 25 Mar., 1893. from 25 Mar., ' 92, to 25 Mar., '93. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. Finance Committee's Accounts. Balance Committee's Accounts. General Rate 63 77,052 4 7 2,528 1 3 2,815 3 8 77 339 7 ???ment of Debt 63 4,429 6 8 2,301 11 11 2,282 13 9 4,410 8 6 Vestry Clerk's Department 64 4 12 6 4 12 6 ???st on Loans 63 1,884 9 5 423 9 7 410 4 8 1,871 4 6 Accountant's Department 64 3 5 0 3 5 0 Clerk's Department... 64 253 19 6 7 7 4 246 12 2 Legal and Parliamentary ???ntant's Department 64 1,269 7 1 92 16 10 73 6 5 1,249 16 8 Expenses 65 0 3 0 0 3 0 ??? and Parliamentary General Receipts 65 76 0 2 76 0 2 Expenses 65 163 11 10 42 0 0 121 11 10 School Board for London 66 233 17 7 233 17 7 ???al Charges 65 1,102 10 5½ 220 15 10 217 17 3½ 1,099 11 11 ??? Board for London 66 29,494 17 2 7,323 11 7 7,085 9 3 29,256 14 10 317 18 38,256 0 5 Paving and Sewers Committee's Accounts ???vig and Sewers Committee's Accounts Surveyor's Department 66 44 7 6 44 7 6 ???yor's Department 66 213 11 0 213 11 0 Maintenance of Public Roads and Streets 67 734 4 11 173 16 7 256 0 4 816 8 8 Road Rollers ???ring Trees in Public 66 1,315 14 0 4 6 7 75 0 1 1,386 7 6 Miscellaneous Receipts 68 77 12 1 5 0 0 5 0 0 77 12 1 Roads and Streets 66 4 6 0 4 u (J ???itenance of Public Roads and Strepts 67 7,708 6 0 585 4 4 2,440 2 3 9,563 3 11 ???ming Street Depot 67 40 3 1 1 16 11 38 6 2 ???llaneous Expenses 68 204 15 0 18 6 1 31 10 8 217 19 7 938 8 11,423 14 2 Dusting and Scavenging Committee's Accounts Contract System 68 238 2 8 338 2 8 100 0 0 ???ting and Scavenging Committee's Accounts bract System 68 456 3 4 456 3 4 Maintenance Account— ???tenance Account— De Beauvoir Wharf 69 78 11 1 1 15 7 17 10 0 89 5 6 Salaries and Wages 69 7,061 1 10 .... 7,061 1 10 Reliance Wharf 69 21 0 0 21 0 0 ??? Beauvoir Wharf 69 379 2 5 26 15 2 40 6 5 392 13 8 Stables 69 1 19 6 1 19 6 Baliance Wharf 69 144 13 3 1 17 6 11 1 10 152 17 7 Working Expenses 69 696 12 4 45 5 4 94 3 2 745 10 2 Tables 69 1,793 0 4 176 17 8 106 16 11 1,722 19 7 Working Expenses 70 8,289 11 3 703 8 0 625 9 6 8,211 12 9 Street Watering 70 758 9 7 758 9 7 857 15 18,300 15 0 General Purposes and Sanitary Committee's Accounts General Purposes and ???nitary Committee's Accounts. Lighting Department 71 459 2 10 21 17 6 35 19 0 473 4 4 ???ting Department 71 5,859 6 8 1,344 8 8 1,308 11 4 5,823 9 4 Medical Officer's Department. 72 211 0 0 18 16 16 61 6 9 253 10 9 ???cal Officer's Department. 72 983 11 2 67 5 7 81 11 2 997 16 9 ???n Hall DisinfectingStation 73 908 18 5 156 3 10 23 10 7 776 5 2 ???ic Mortuary,Maintenance 73 32 6 2 0 18 10 1 4 4 32 11 8 ???et Watering 73 72 2 4 72 2 4 ???smith Square Recreation ???round 73 216 1 7 216 1 7 726 l5 1 7,846 4 6 Amounts carried forward £79,927 15 9 3,132 14 11 3,385 2 11 80,180 3 9 mounts carried forward 75,039 5 6½ 14,02 7 7 11 14,814 16 5½ 75,826 14 1 77 77 GENERAL RATE ACCOUNT Income and Expenditure From 25th March, 1892, to 25th March, 1893 (Continued). Source. Fo. RECEIPTS. ASSETS Accrued but not Received. Income from 25 Mar.,'92, to 25 Mar.,'9: Application. Fo. PAYMENTS. LIABILITIES Incurred but not Paid. Expenditure from 25 Mar.,'92, to 25 Mar., '93. 25 Mar., 1892. 25 Mar., 1898. 25 Mar., 1892. 25 Mar., 1893. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s d. £ s d. £ s. d. Amounts brought forward 79,927 15 9 3,132 14 11 3,385 2 11 80,180 3 Accounts brought forward 75,039 5 6½ 14,027 7 11 14,814 16 5½ 75,826 14 1 Town Hall Committee's Accounts. ???on Hall Committee's Accounts. \ Establishment of Town Hall. 74 395 1 5 3 3 9 398 5 2 ???blishment of Town Hall 74 1,026 19 4 84 0 8 60 14 10 1,003 13 6 398 5 ???rations to Town Hall 74 349 18 2 349 18 2 ???reditch Labour Bureau 74 32 8 2 32 3 2 1,385 14 10 Housing of the Working Classes Committee's Accounts. ???sing of the Working lasses Committee's Accounts. Moira Place and Plumber's Place Area 75 42 9 4 42 9 4 ??? Place and Plumber's Place Area 75 5 4 2 5 4 2 — 42 9 • ???uation Committee's Accounts. ???nation Committee Expenses 75 190 19 2 3 79 15 3 11 3 11 11 3 11 Assessment Committee's Accounts. Assessment Committee's Accounts. Assessment Committee 210 10 2 210 10 2 Assessment Committee Expenses 75 427 8 1 964 3 11 1,092 18 2 556 2 4 210 10 2 556 2 4 3,132 14 11 3,598 16 10 15,260 11 11 15,968 9 5½ 3,132 14 11 15,260 11 11 80,365 6 6 466 1 11 80,831 8 5 BALANCES -•25th Mar., 1893- 77,071 17 7½ 707 17 6½ 77,779 15 2 ???hands of— reinsurer 6,789 7 2 Accountant 328 17 4 Sundry Officials 25 0 0 Met. Public Garden h Associatn. 148 2 11 Due from Sewers a/c 34 6 10½ 7,325 14 3½ Product—BALANCES, 25th March, 1892:— k ??? per last published Abstract (fo. 88) 4,032 5 5 ???cess of Receipts over Payments 75 3,293 8 10½ Lome in excess of Expenditure, Carried to Balance Sheet 3,051 13 8 £ 80,365 6 6 £ 80,831 8 5 80,365 6 6 £80,831 8 5 78 78 GENERAL KATE ACCOUNT— BALANCE SHEET, 25th March, 1893. Fo. £ s. d. £. s. d. Fo. £ s. d. £ s. d. LIABILITIES. CAPITAL ACCOUNT. To Loan Accounts:—Balances. ASSETS. CAPITAL ACCOUNT. Mortgages— Erection of Town Hall 86 3,133 6 8 By Property and Permanent Works- Out of Loans. Out of Revenue. Street Improvements and Paving Works 86 7,608 0 0 Sun Street to Worship Street (Appold Street) Improvement 87 28,949 18 6 Expenditure to 25th March, 1893— £ s. d. Goldsmith Square, Open Space 87 1,960 0 0 Erection of Town Hall 28,000 0 0 86 5,4/4 4 5 Dusting and scavenging 88 7,084 0 0 Street Improvements and Paving Works 44,272 5 8 86 702 0 5 48.735 5 2 Sun Street to Worship Street (Appold Street) Improvement 65,000 0 0 87 To Revenue Account. Repayment of Debt— Goldsmith Square, Open Space 2,000 0 0 87 9 17 0 To 25th March, 1892 71,881 6 8 Dusting and Scavenging 8,000 0 0 88 345 1 9 This year 63 4,429 6 8 Moira Place and Plumber's Place Area 389 1 6 89 76,429 6 8 147,661 7 2 6,531 3 7 154,192 10 9 Moiety of proceeds of Sales of Surplus Lands, &c. (Appold Street) Improvement 87 22,854 1 6 99,164 14 10 Contributions and Receipts from other sources 2,661 1 0 Rate Account 3,870 11 5 Less— 6,531 12 5 Cash Balances transferred to Rate Account 86 627 14 4 5,903 18 1 To Cash Balance. Due to Treasurer—Moira Place and Plumber's Place Area 89 388 12 8 Balance of Assets over Liabilities, on Capital Account 105,457 5 7 154,192 10 9 154,192 10 9 REVENUE ACCOUNT. REVENUE ACCOUNT. By Sundry Debtors, for Balances owing by them 783 13 2 To Sundry Creditors, for Balances due to them 77 15,968 9 5½ By General Rate—Balance 2,815 3 8 76 77 3,598 16 10 By Cash Balances—25th March, 1893. In hands of— Treasurer 6,789 7 2 77 Accountant 328 17 4 Sundry Officials 25 0 0 Metropolitan Public Gardens Association 148 2 11 7,291 7 5 Due from Sewers Account 34 6 10½ 77 7,325 14 3.1 Deficit—25th March, 1892 8,095 11 7 Less— Income in excess of Expenditure this year 3,051 13 3 77 DEFICIT—25th March, 1893 5,043 18 4 15,968 9 5½ 15,968 9 5½ WILLIAM GEORGE SMITH, Treasurer, London & Midland Bank, Limited (Shoreditch Branch). £170,161 0 2½ ERNST A. R. ADAMS, Accountant. 170,161 0 2½ SEWERS RATE ACCOUNT. 80 80 SEWERS RATE ACCOUNTS, from 25th March, 1892, to 25th March, 1893. £ s. d. £ s. d. To RECEIPTS— By PAYMENTS— Finance Committee s Accounts. sewers rate. Finance Committees Accounts. repayment of debt. Arrears of Rate, quarter ended Lady-Day, 1892 28 12 6 Fifteenth Instalment of Principal of Loan outstanding (fo. 95):— †Rate made and allowed, from Lady-Day, 1892 to Lady-day, 1898 (see below) 2,821 17 4 Construction of New Sewers 133 0 0 Add Additional Assessments 2 19 4 interest on loans. Government Property 0 10 0 2,825 6 8 2,848 19 2 Interest on Balance of Loan outstanding (fo. 95):— Construction of New Sewers 78 11 0 Less—Allowance to Owners of 25 per cent 109 14 1½ . vestry clerk's department 2,739 5 0½ Deduct—Excused at Rate Sessions 8 8 9 Irrecoverable, &c. 103 18 5½ 107 7 2½ Salary of Vestry Clerk (proportion) 214 0 3 Do. Clerks 113 15 5 £2,631 17 10 327 15 8 accountant's department. Quarter ending Made by Vestry. Allowed by Police Magistrate. Rateable Value. Rate in the £. Amount Midsummer, 1892 .... .... £ £ S. d. 678,172 .. - Salary of Accountant (proportion) 107 15 5 Michaelmas, 1892 28th June, 1892 1st July, 1892 677,248 1d. 2,1 321 17 4 Do. Clerks 205 18 5 Christmas, 1892 .... .... 077,708 .. .... Poundage 16 12 5 Lady-Day, 1893 .... .... 071,217 .. .... 330 6 3 †£2, 321 17 4 Collection— Rate made and allowed, 5th January, 1895 (uncollected at Lady-Day, 1892) Balance 205 17 8 Rate made and allowed, from Lady-Day 1892, to Lady-Day, 1893 On account 2,601 6 10 2,8( 37 4 11 Rates previously written off, now recovered 0 11 0 Deficiency on Sewers Rate, under 53 & 54 Vict., ch. 154 and the Lands Clauses Acts, ex L. & N. W. Railway Co. t, ). 4 17 7 H. M. Treasury—Grant in aid of Sewers Rate, re Shoreditch County Court, excluded from Valuation List (one year) 0 15 0 2,813 7 8 869 12, 11 (Balance—£869 12s. 11d.) Amount carried forward 2,813 7 8 Amount carried forward £869 12 12 81 81 SEWERS RATE ACCOUNTS (Continued), from 25th March, 1892, to 25th March, 1893. To RECEIPTS £ s. d. By PAYMENTS £ s. d. Amount brought forward £2,813 7 8 Amount brought forward £869 12 11 Paving and Sewers Committees Accounts. Paving and Sewers Committee's Accounts. surveyor's department. Salary of Surveyor (proportion) 145 0 0 Do. Clerk 55 0 0 200 0 0 Drawing Boards 2 2 0 Advertising 2 8 1 204 10 1 sewerage and drainage works. | sewerage and drainage works. General Wages— Sewers' connections for private owners 41 9 4 Mechanics and Flushers 1,122 0 5 Cleaning Sewers re Trade Refuse 2 18 0 Watchmen 220 3 0 Constructing New Sewer, Nicholl's Square 228 5 8 Repairing Defective Gullies— 1,342 3 5 Sale of Old Castings 22 18 10 Wages 283 19 11 Transfers— Materials (fo. 67) 106 3 8 From Accounts, as under, for works executed, viz.:— 390 3 7 Shoreditch Burial Board (fo. 60) 4 9 6 Reconstruction and Repairs to Sewers 8 18 4 Dusting and Scavenging, Maintenance Account (fo. 70) 88 14 1 Cleaning Sewers, Gullies, &c. 6 9 11 Establishment of Town Hall (fo. 74) 15 13 2 Gully Grates, Frames and Castings 183 18 4 Deposit Fund (fo. 90) 554 13 8 Earthenware Pipes, Junctions and Blocks 230 1 11 Bricks 36 0 0 Timber and Poles 12 12 5 Waterproof Sheets 3 0 0 Lamps and Lanterns 3 0 0 < • Disinfectants 9 7 6 Advertising and Stamp Duty 3 11 8 Surveyor's Charges 2 2 0 Drainage Works done for Owners 273 16 4 Norfolk Buildings- Drainage Work 209 7 6 Witnesses' Fees 7 7 0 Counsels' Fees 28 7 6 Disbursements 17 16 2 262 18 2 2,768 3 7 (Balance—£2,060 11s. 5d.) 912 2 8 2,972 13 8 Amount carried forward £8,725 9 11 Amount carried forward 3,842 6 7 83 82 SEWERS RATE ACCOUNT—Income and Expenditure from 25th March, 1892, to 25th March, 1893. Source. Fo. RECEIPTS. ASSETS Accrued rut not Received. Income from 25 Mar. 1892, to 25 Mar. 1893 By PAYMENTS- £ s. d. 25 Mar., 1892. 25 Mar., 1893. Amount brought forward 3,842 6 7 £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. General Purposes and Sanitary Committee's Accounts. MEDICAL OFFICERS DEPARTMENT. Finance Committee's Accounts. Sewers Rate 80 2,813 7 8 229 9 9 2,583 17 1 Salary of Medical Officer of Health 156 5 0 Paving and Sewers Committee's Accounts. Do. Inspectors and Clerk 308 4 3 464 9 3 Drain Plugs 3 3 0 467 12 3 PUBLIC URINALS Sewerage and Drainage Works 81 912 2 3 459 19 2 357 15 1 809 18 2 Wages 215 17 9 809 18 New Urinal at Rivington Street 49 6 0 General Purposes and Sanitary Committee's Accounts. Sheet Iron Erection 6 10 0 Masons' and Paviors' work 17 6 4 Plumbers' work 9 9 5 Smiths' work, cleaning, and repairs 6 10 10 Medical Officer's Departmt. 82 18 8 5 18 8 5 35 10 8 35 10 3 Painting Urinals 36 5 7 Public Urinals 82 16 0 0 15 13 10 15 13 10 16 0 0 Oil, Lead, Brushes, &c. 4 19 6 Kiosk Convenience 82 107 7 1 0 10 4 197 17 5 Enamelled Caution Tablets 4 12 0 249 7 Acknowledgments for privilege to erect urinals 0 8 6 Water 352 11 5 723 11 2 409 9 6 703 17 4 409 9 6 KIOSK CONVENIENCE. 3,957 5 5 314 1 8 3,643 3 Attendant's wages 80 2 6 Sanitary Paper and Brushes. 4 0 2 BALANCES—25th Mar., 1892 Towels, and Washing, &c. 4 7 4 In hands of Treasurer 845 6 7 Ironmongery 0 15 3 Less—Due to General Plumbing repairs 2 19 5 Account 46 8 2½ Gas 15 11 0 798 18 4½ Water (one half) 8 3 0 ADD—BALANCES 25th March, 1893— Due to— 115 18 8 FLUSHING COURTS, &c. Treasurer 708 4 11 General A/c 34 6 10½ Wages of men, flushing courts and gullies 76 10 0 742 11 9½ Disinfectants 13 12 1 Testing New Apparatus 3 12 10 Excess of Payments Repairs to Hose, &c. 4 15 0 over Receipts 82 1,511 10 2 Cart hire 1 15 0 Water 268 15 10 Expenditure in excess of Income carried to Balance Sheet 84 2,529 12 369 0 9 1,656 9 0 £5,498 15 7 £6,172 16 £5,498 15 7 84 84 SEWERS RATE ACCOUNT— . BALANCE SHEET, 25TH MARCH, 1893. Fo. £ s. d. £ s. d. Fo. £ s. d. £ s. d. LIABILITIES. CAPITAL ACCOUNT. ASSETS. CAPITAL ACCOUNT. To Loan Account—Balance. MORTGAGE — By Sewerage and Drainage Works. Construction of New Sewers 89 1,995 0 0 Expenditure out of Loans to 25th March, 1892 89 4,000 0 0 1,995 0 0 Do. do. this year 89 71 17 4 To Revenue Account. Repayment of Debt— 4,071 17 4 To 25th March, 1892 1,872 0 0 This year 133 0 0 89 2,005 0 0 To Cash Balance. Duo to Treasurer 89 71 17 4 Balance of Assets over Liabilities, on Capital Account 2,076 17 4 4,071 17 4 4,071 17 4 % REVENUE ACCOUNT. REVENUE ACCOUNT. To Sundry Creditors, for Balances due to them 83 1,360 15 7 By Sundry Debtors, for Balances owing by them 83 409 9 6 To Cash Balances, 25th March, 1893— Expenditure in excess of Income this year 83 2,529 12 3 Less— Due to Treasurer 83 708 4 11 Surplus—25th March, 1892 835 14 14½ Add—Due to General Rate Account 83 34 6 10½ 742 11 9½ ) DEFICIT, 25th March, 1893 1,693 17 10½ 2,103 7 4½ 2,103 7 4½ WILLIAM GEORGE SMITH, Treasurer, London and Midland Bank, Limited (Shoreditch Branch). £6,175 4 8½ ERNST A. R. ADAMS, Accountant. £6,175 4 8½ SPECIAL AND CAPITAL ACCOUNTS. 86 86 GENERAL RATE ACCOUNT— ERECTION OF TOWN HALL.—25th March, 1893. £ s. d. £ s. d. To RECEIPTS— CAPITAL ACCOUNT. By PAYMENTS- CAPITAL ACCOUNT. Loans to 25th March, 1893 28,000 0 0 Expenditure out of Loans to 25th March, 1892— Less Paid off to 25th March, 1892 23,933 6 8 Land in Old Street Road; Site for Erection, &c. 7,425 0 0 Do. this year 933 6 8 Buildings—(proportion) 20,575 0 0 24,866 13 4 28,000 0 0 Revenue Account. 3,133 6 8 Do., this year— Debt repaid to 25th March, 1892 23,933 6 8 Architect's fees 174 5 0 Do. this Year (fo.63) 933 6 8 24,866 13 4 Quantity Surveyor's Charges 124 6 3 Paid out of General Rate for Property and Permanent Works, to 25th March, 1893 3,055 11 3 Lithography 31 10 0 330 1 6 Contributions and other Receipts. 28,330 1 6 Purchase money of Fire Brigade Station ear Metropolitan Board of Works 1,550 0 0 Expenditure out of Revenue to 25th March, 1893— Works of completion, including Furniture, Fixtures, Fittings, &c. 5,144 2 11 Sale of Old Building Materials 150 0 0 Bank Interest, Rents, &c. 388 11 8 538 11 8 2,088 11 8 5,144 2 11 Transfer from Establishment of Town Hall Account (fo. 74) Expenditure out of Income and Rate, in excess of Loam sanctioned 330 1 6 5,474 4 5 £33,474 4 5 £33,474 4 5 GENERAL RATE ACCOUNT— STREET IMPROVEMENTS AND PAYING WORKS.—25th March, 1893. To RECEIPTS £ s. d. By PAYMENTS— £ s. d. CAPITAL ACCOUNT. Mortgages. CAPITAL ACCOUNT, Loans to 25th March, 1893 44,900 0 0 Expenditure out of Loans to 25th March, 1892 43,821 7 1 Less—Paid off to 25th March, 1892 35,535 0 0 Do., this year— Do. this year 1,757 0 0 37,299 0 0 Granite Paving at East Road 1,152 19 0 Revenue Account. 7,608 0 0 - 44.974 6 1 Debt repaid to 25th March, 1892 35,535 0 0 Do. this year (fo. 63) 1,757 0 0 Cash Balances transferred to Revenue Account, to 25th March, 1891 627 14 4 37.292 0 0 Contributions and other Receipts. Carriageway Paving at Wilson Street ex Vestry of Parish of St. Luke (Middlesex) 551 7 6 Transfer from Maintenance of Public Roads and Streets Account (fo. 67)—Expenditure out of Income and Rate, in excess of Loans sanctioned 150 12 11 702 0 5 £45,602 0 5 £45,602 0 5 87 87 GENERAL RATE ACCOUNT—‡ SUN STREET to WORSHIP STREET (Appold Street) I MPROVEMENT—25th March, 1893. 87 To RECEIPTS- £ s. d. By PAYMENTS- £ s. d. CAPITAL ACCOUNT. Mortgages. CAPITAL ACCOUNT. Loans to 25th March, 1893 65,000 0 0 Expenditure out of Loans (borne by the Vestry) to 25th March, 1893 65,000 0 0 Less—Paid off to 25th March, 1892 35,267 1 6 Do. this year 783 0 0 36,050 1 6 28,949 18 6 Revenue Account. Debt repaid to 25th March, 1892 12,413 0 0 Do. this year (fo. 63) 783 0 0 13,196 0 0 Contributions. Moiety of proceeds of Hales of Surplus Land, Property, &c., contributed towards Redemption of Debt to 25th March. 1893, ex Metropolitan Board of Works 22,854 1 6 36,050 1 6 £65,000 0 0 ‡ The total net cost of this Improvement is borne jointly by the Vestry and the Metropolitan Board of Works. £65,000 0 0 GENERAL RATE ACCOUNT— GOLDSMITH SQUARE OPEN SPACE.—25th March, 1893. To RECEIPTS- CAPITAL ACCOUNT. Mortgage. £ s. d. By PAYMENTS- CAPITAL ACCOUNT. £ s. d. Loan to 25th March, 1893 2,000 0 0 Expenditure out of Loan to 25th March, 1893— Less—Paid off this year 40 0 0 Contribution to London County Council re Purchase of Freehold Land, Goldsmith Square area, under Open Spaces Acts, 1877 to 1890 2,000 0 0 1,960 0 0 Revenue Account. Expenditure out of Revenue to 25th March, 1893 9 17 0 Debt repaid this year (fo. 63) 40 0 0 Paid out of General Hate for Property and Permanent Works to 25th March, 1893 9 17 0 £2,009 17 0 2,009 17 0 88 88 GENERAL RATE ACCOUNT— DUSTING AND SCAVENGING.-25th March, 1893. To RECEIPTS- £ s. d. Bv PAYMENTS- £ s. d. CAPITAL ACCOUNT. Mortgages. CAPITAL ACCOUNT. Loans to 25th March, 1892 6,000 0 0 Expenditure out of Loans, to 25th March, 1892 6,032 2 0 Do. borrowed this year 2,000 0 0 Do. this year— 8,000 0 0 New Stables and Buildings. Less —Paid off this year 916 0 0 Alterations and repairs to House at Reliance Wharf 74 19 2 7,084 0 0 Erecting Stable walls at Reliance Wharf 142 13 6 Revenue Account. New w.c. and Urinals at do. .30 4 0 Masons' and Paviors' work 605 3 8 Plumbers' work 4 3 8 Debt repaid this year (fo. 63) 916 0 0 Team Labour and Cartage .7 2 5 Contributions and other Receipts. Castings, Drain Pipes, &c. 8 16 10 Lime, Cement and Sand 7 12 0 880 15 3 Re-building Wall at De Beauvoir Wharf 5 10 0 Plant, Live and Dead Stock, &c. Sale of Saw Bench 7 0 0 18 Horses 1,040 0 0 Do. Patent Swich Block 8 3 0 Cart Harness 133 0 0 Tipping Vans 185 0 0 20 18 0 Machine gear for Barge Shoots 55 10 0 Transfer from Dusting and Scavenging Department, Maintenance Account (fo. 70)—Expenditure out of Income and Rate, in excess of Loans sanctioned 324 8 9 Barrows 5 13 6 Ladder 5 17 6 Lamps and Fittings 7 3 6 1,432 4 6 345 1 9 2,312 19 9 8,345 1 9 8,345 1 9 ANALYSIS OF CAPITAL EXPENDITURE. Description. Payments to 25th March, Total. 1892. 1893. & s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. Compensation and Law Expenses 359 1 0 359 1 0 New Stables and Buildings 2,487 7 4 880 15 3 3,368 2 7 Plant, Live and Dead Stock, &c. 3,185 13 8 1,432 4 6 4,617 18 2 £6,032 2 0 2,312 19 9 8,345 1 9 £8,345 1 9 £8,345 1 9 89 89 GENERAL RATE ACCOUNT— ¶MOIRA PLACE & PLUMBER'S PLACE AREA.—25th March, 1893. To RECEIPTS- £ s. d. By PAYMENTS- £ s. d. CAPITAL ACCOUNT. Pursuant to Housing of the Working Classes Act, 1890. Part II.—Unhealthy Dwelling-houses. CAPITAL ACCOUNT. Pursuant to Housing of the Working Classes Act, 1890. Part II.—Unhealthy Dwelling-houses. Expenditure out of Loans to 25th March, 1892 42 9 4 Receipts to 25th March, 1893, viz.— Do. this year— Fees 0 8 10 Surveyor and Valuer's Fees (on account) 150 0 0 Advertising 2 7 0 Engrossing and Law Writing 3 5 4 Service of Notices 3 14 0 Petty Disbursements 1 3 9 Transferred from Revenue Account— Proportion of Salaries (fo. 64) 163 17 10 0 8 10 Stationery and Printing (fo. 65) 22 4 3 BALANCE—25th March, 1893— 186 2 1 346 12 2 Due to Treasurer 388 12 8 389 1 6 £389 1 6 The total net cost of this Improvement is borne jointly by the Vestry and the London County Council. £389 1 6 SEWERS RATE ACCOUNT— CONSTRUCTION OF NEW SEWERS.—25th March, 1893. To RECEIPTS- £ s. d. By PAYMENTS- £ s. d. CAPITAL ACCOUNT. Mortgage. CAPITAL ACCOUNT. Loans to 25th March, 1893 4,000 0 0 Expenditure-out of Loans to 25th March, 1893 4,000 0 0 Less—Paid off to 25th March, 1892 1,872 0 0 Do. this year—Haggerston Sewerage— Do. this year 133 0 0 Salary of temporary assistant 54 5 0 2,005 0 0 Candidates' Expenses re Surveyorship 6 11 8 1,995 0 0 Advertising 11 0 8 Revenue Account. 71 17 4 Debt repaid to 25th March, 1892 1,872 0 0 4,071 17 4 Do. this year (fo. 80) 133 0 0 2,005 0 0 BALANCE—25th March, 1893— Due to Treasurer 71 17 4 £4,071 17 4 £4,071 17 4 90 90 DEPOSIT FUND— from 25th March, 1892, to 25th March, 1893. To RECEIPTS- rate accounts. £ s. d. By PAYMENTS- rate accounts. £ s. d. General. Sewers. General. Sewers. revenue account. £ s. d. £ s. d. revenue account. £ s. d. £ s. d. Deposits for Paving, Sewerage, and other 383 12 6 728 9 0 1,112 1 6 Transfers— Contributions to Rate Accounts, as under, for cost of works executed. Additional Cost re do. 4 8 0 84 12 10 39 0 10 Maintenance of Public Roads and Streets (fo. 67) 108 6 10 108 6 10 Sewerage and Drainage Works (fo. 81) ... ... ... 554 18 8 554 13 8 388 0 6 763 1 10 1,151 2 4 108 6 10 554 13 8 663 0 6 Surplus of Deposits returned 338 11 0 176 15 6 515 6 6 Cash Balance, 25th March, 1892— In hands of Accountant 414 18 2 42 6 7 457 4 9 Cash Balance, 25th March, 1893— In hands of Accountant 356 0 10 73 19 3 430 0 1 £802 18 8 805 8 5 1,608 7 1 £802 18 8 805 8 5 1,608 7 1 TECHNICAL INSTRUCTION FUND— from 25th February, 1893, to 25th March, 1893. To RECEIPTS- £ s. d. By PAYMENTS— £ s. d. revenue account. Shoreditch Municipal Technical School. revenue account. Shoreditch Municipal Technical School. Advertising on Lamp Columns 3 0 0 Wages 2 4 0 Gas Fittings 11 4 0 Cleaning Schools 2 3 0 Bill Posting 0 11 5 Stamp Duty on Agreement 0 10 0 Connecting Water supply 0 13 6 Leasehold Rent 12 3 9 Disbursements and Postages 0 9 8 3 0 0 29 19 4 BALANCE—25th March, 1893— Due to Treasurer 26 19 4 29 19 4 £29 19 4 91 VESTRY RATE ACCOUNTS. ELECTED AUDITORS' CERTIFICATE. To the Vestry of the Parish of St. Leonard, Shoreditch, in the County of London. We, the undersigned, being the Auditors appointed, pursuant to Section 195 of the Metropolis Local Management Act, 1855 (18 & 19 Vict., c. 120), have examined and audited the Accounts of the Vestry of the said Parish, for the financial year, from the 25th March, 1892, to 25th March, 1893. We hereby Certify them to be true and correct in all particulars, and we accordingly allow the said Accounts. Given under our hands this 24th day of May, 1893. JOHN FARTHING, Chairman, ARTHUR BEDINGIIAM, ZEPHANIAH BUNKER, JOHN FOSKETT. BURIAL BOARD ACCOUNTS. ELECTED AUDITORS' CERTIFICATE. We, the undersigned, being the Auditors appointed by the Vestry of the Parish of St. Leonard, Shoreditch, in the County of London, pursuant to Section 18, of the Burial Act, 1852 (15 & 16 Vict., c. 85) have examined and audited the Accounts of the Burial Board of the said Parish, for the financial year, from the 25th March, 1892 to 25th March, 1893. We hereby Certify them to be true and correct in all particulars, and we accordingly allow the said Accounts. Given under our hands this 24th day of May, 1893. JOHN FARTHING, Chairman, ARTHUR BEDINGHAM, ZEPHANIAH BUNKER, JOHN FOSKETT. AGGREGATE STATEMENT OF LIABILITIES AND ASSETS. K 1 92 92 AGGREGATE STATEMENT OF LIABILITIES AND ASSETS—25TH MARCH, 1893. LIABILITIES. Fo. £ s. d. ASSETS. Fo. £ s. d. CAPITAL ACCOUNTS. CAPITAL ACCOUNTS. To Loan Accounts:—Balances. General Rate. Sewers Rate. Property, Permanent Works, and other Capital Outlay. As per last published Abstract (fo. 102). This Year. To 25th March, 1893. Mortgages— £ s. d. £ s. d. Erection of Town Hall 3,138 6 8 78 Street Improvements and Paving Works Sun Street to Worship Street (Appold Street) 7,608 0 0 78 Erection of Town Hall. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. Out of Loans 28,000 0 0 28,000 0 0 78 Improvement 28,949 18 6 78 Do. Rates and Revenue 5,194 2 11 280 1 6 5,474 4 5 78 Goldsmith Square Open Space 1,960 0 0 78 Dusting and Scavenging 7,084 0 0 78 33,194 2 11 280 1 6 33,474 4 5 33,474 4 5 Construction of New Sewers 1,995 0 0 84 48,735 5 2 1,995 0 0 50,780 5 2 Street Improvements Paving Works. Out of Loans 43,269 19 7 1,002 6 J 44,272 5 8 78 To Revenue Account. Do. Rates and Revenue 551 7 6 150 12 11 702 0 5 78 Repayment of Debt— Erection of Town Hall 24,866 13 4 43,821 7 1 1,152 19 0 44,974 6 1 44,974 6 1 Street Improvements and Paving Works 87,292 0 0 Sun Street to Worship Street (Appold Street) Improvement 13,196 0 0 Sun Street to Worship Street (Appold Street) Improvement Goldsmith Square Open Space 40 0 0 Out of Loans 65,000 0 0 65,000 0 0 78 65,000 0 0 Dusting and Scavenging 916 0 0 Construction of New Sewers 2,005 0 0 76.310 13 4 2,005 0 0 84 Goldsmith Square Open Space. —— 76,310 13 4 78 Out of Loans 2,000 0 0 2,000 0 0 78 Contributions from Rates and other Receipts— 78,315 13 4 Do. Rates 9 17 0 9 17 0 78 Erection of Town Hall 5,474 4 5 2,009 17 0 2,009 17 0 2,009 17 0 Street Improvements and Paving Works 702 0 5 Goldsmith Square Open Space 9 17 0 Dusting and Scavenging. Dusting and Scavenging 345 1 9 Out of Loans 6,000 0 0 2,000 0 0 8,000 0 0 78 Moira Place and Plumber's Place Area 0 8 10 Do. Rates 32 2 0 312 19 9 345 1 9 78 6,531 12 5 78 6,032 2 0 2,312 19 9 8,345 1 9 8,345 1 9 Less—Cash Balances transferred to Rate Account 627 14 4 78 5,903 18 1 78 Moira Place & Plumber's Place Area. Out of Loans 389 1 6 389 1 6 78 389 1 6 Metropolitan Board of Works — Moiety of proceeds of Sales of Surplus Land and Property—Sun Street, &c., Improvement . 22.854 1 6 78 Construction of New Sewers. 28,757 19 7 To Cash Balances—25th March, 1893. Out of Loans 4,000 0 0 71 17 4 4,071 17 4 84 4,071 17 4 154,057 9 0 4,206 19 1 158,264 8 1 158,264 8 1 Due to Treasurer— Moira Place and Plumber's Place Area 388 12 8 78 Construction of New Sewers 71 17 4 84 460 10 0 Excess of Assets over Liabilities, on Capital Account 107,534 2 11 Amount carried forward £158,264 8 1 Amount carried forward £158,264 8 1 93 93 AGGREGATE STATEMENT OF LIABILITIES AND ASSETS—25th March, 1893 (Continued). LIABILITIES. Fo. £ s. d. £ s. d. ASSETS. Fo. £ s. d. £ s. d. Amount brought forward 158,264 8 ??? Amount brought forward 158,264 8 1 REVENUE ACCOUNTS. REVENUE ACCOUNTS. To Deposit Fund—Accumulations to date 90 430 0 1 Deposit Fund—Cash Balance 90 430 0 1 To Technical Instruction Fund—Cash Balance 90 26 19 4 Technical Instruction Fund 90 26 19 4 456 19 5 456 19 ??? To Sundry Creditors. Sundry Debtors. Poor Rate Account 17 9 58 Poor Rate Account 3,412 19 9 58 General do 15,968 9 5½ 78 General do. 3,598 16 10 78 1,360 15 7 84 Sewers do. 409 9 6 84 26,983 2 9½ 7,421 6 1 Cash Balances. In hands of Treasurer— Poor Rate 9,218 12 1 58 General Rate 6,789 7 2 78 16,007 19 3 Less—Due to Treasurer— Sewer Rate 708 4 11 84 15,299 14 4 In hands of— Vestry Clerk 5 0 0 Accountant 328 17 4 Surveyor 0 0 Medical Officer 5 0 0 Dust Superintendent 10 0 0 Metropolitan Public Gardens Association 148 2 11 - 502 0 3 78 15,801 14 7 Deficit. Deficit. surplus. 2,977 14 1 58 General Rate 5,043 8 4 78 Sewers Rate 1,693 l7 10½ 84 6,737 16 2½ 2,977 14 1 2,977 14 1 TOTAL DEFICIT, 25th Mar.,1893 3,760 2 1½ 3,760 2 1½ 26,983 2 ??? 26,983 2 9½ £185,704 10 ??? ^RNST A. R. ADAMS, Accountan t. £185,704 10 3½ MORTGAGE DEBT. 95 95 STATEMENT shewing the DEBT OUTSTANDING on the ACCOUNTS of the VESTRY of the Parish of ST. LEONARD, SHOREDITCH in the COUNTY OF LONDON, and the Amounts of PRINCIPAL AND INTEREST charged in the Accounts for the Year ended 25th March, 1893. Purpose of Loan. No. of Mortgage. When Borrowed. Period within which to be repaid. First and Last years of Repayment Original Loan. Repaid. Balance of Loan outstanding, 2oth March,1893 Interest. Present Annual Instalment. Chabged in Accounts. Folio. Rate Per Cent. When Payable. Amount. Date of Repayment. Principal. Gross Interest. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 Years £ £ s. d. £ s d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. GENERAL RATE ACCOUNT. Erection of Town Hall 10 5 Sept. 1865 30 1866 1895 10 000 9 000 0 0 1 000 0 0 5 Half-yearly 333 6 8 13 September 333 6 8 60 3 6 do. 1 ] 21 Nov.,1865 30 1866 1895 4 000 3,600 0 0 400 0 0 5 do. 133 6 8 29 November 133 6 8 27 9 4 do. 12 6 Feb., 1866 30 1867 1896 4,000 3,600 0 0 400 0 0 5 do. 133 6 8 7 February 133 6 8 27 9 5 do. 13 9 Oct., 1866 30 11867 1896 4,000 3,466 13 4 533 6 8 5 do. 133 6 8 10 October 133 6 8 34 6 1 do. 14 29 Jan.,1867 30 1868 1897 6,000 5,200 0 0 800 0 0 5 do. 200 0 0 30 January 200 0 0 51 9 5 £28,000 24,866 13 4 3,133 6 8 £933 6 8 £933 6 8 200 17 9 63 Paving Works 20 24 Mar., 1877 20 1877 1896 5,000 4,000 0 0 1,000 0 0 3¾ Quarterly 250 0 0 1 October 250 0 0 44 10 7½ do 21 23 June,1877 20 1878 1896 5,000 3,948 0 0 1 052 0 0 3¾ do. 263 0 0 1 October 263 0 0 46 16 11 do 23 1 Oct., 1877 20 1878 1897 5,000 3,750 0 0 1,250 0 0 3¾ do. 250 0 0 1 October 250 0 0 53 18 1¾ do 31 19 Feb., 1892 15 1893 1907 2,900 194 0 0 2,706 0 0 3½ do. 194 0 0 1 January 194 0 0 87 15 5 Street Improvements & do. 26 1 Apr., 1879 15 1880 1894 6,000 5,200 0 0 800 0 0 3¾ do. 400 0 0 1 April 400 0 0 33 15 0 do. 27 1 July, 1879 15 1880 1894 6,000 5,200 0 0 800 0 0 3¾ do. 400 0 0 1 July 400 0 0 37 10 0 . £29,900 22,292 0 0 7,608 0 0 1,757 0 0 £1,757 0 0 304 6 1¼ 63 Sun Street to Worship Street (Appold Street Improvement) 22 31 July, 1877 52 1878 1929 40 000 11 547 0 0 28,453 0 0 3¾ do. 769 0 0 1 October 769 0 0 1,088 12 3¾ 25 1 Oct., 1878 51 1879 1929 15,000 14,503 1 6 496 18 6 3¾ do. 14 0 0 1 October 14 0 0 19 0 7 £55,000 26,050 1 6 28,949 18 6 £783 0 0 £783 0 0 1,107 12 10¾ 63 Goldsmith Square, Open Space 29 31 Oct., 1891 49 1892 1940 2,000 40 0 0 1,960 0 0 3½ do. £40 0 0 31 October £40 0 0 69 13 0 63 Dusting & Scavenging— Buildings 30 31 Oct., 1891 30 1892 1,921 1,700 56 0 0 1,644 0 0 3½ do. 56 0 0 1 October 56 0 0 59 0 Plant, Machinery, &c 30 31 Oct., 1891 5 1892 1896 4,300 860 0 0 3,440 0 0 3½ do. 860 0 0 1 October 860 0 0 142 19 6 Buildings 32 30 Nov.,1892 30 1893 1922 2,000 2,000 0 0 3½ do. 66 0 0 1 October ...... ...... £ 8,000 916 0 0 7,084 0 0 £982 0 0 £916 0 0 201 19 8 63 SEWERS RATE ACCOUNT. Construction of New Sewers 24 19 Feb.,1878 30 1878 1907 4,000 2,005 0 0 1,995 0 0 3¾ do. £133 0 0 1 October £133 0 0 78 11 0 80 Total £ 126,900 76,169 14 10 50,730 5 2 £4.628 6 8 £4,562 6 8 1,963 0 5 96 STATEMENT shewing the MORTGAGE DEBT Outstanding, 25th March, 1893, and the Rates per cent, of Interest payable thereon. Purpose of Loan. 3½ per cent. 3¾ per cent. 5 per cent. Total. £ s. d. £ s d. £ s. d. £ s. d. GENERAL RATE ACCOUNT. Erection of Town Hall ...... ...... 3,133 6 8 3,133 6 8 Street Improvements and Paving Works 2,706 0 0 4,902 0 0 ...... 7,608 0 0 Sun Street to Worship Street (Appold Street Improvement) ...... 28,949 18 6 ...... 28,949 18 6 Goldsmith Square, Open Space 1,960 0 0 ...... ...... 1,960 0 0 Dusting and Scavenging 7,084 0 0 ...... ...... 7,084 0 0 SEWERS RATE ACCOUNT. Construction of New Sewers ...... 1,995 0 0 ...... 1,995 0 0 Total £11,750 0 0 35,846 18 6 3,133 6 8 50,730 5 2 BALANCES OF LOANS due to :— Metropolitan Board of Works (now transferred to London County Council) 35,846 18 6 London County Council 11,750 0 0 Mutual Life Assurance Society 3,133 6 8 Total Mortgage Debt outstanding £50,730 5 2 Note :—Average Rate of Interest per cent. £ s. d. 8 15 0 ERNST A. R. ADAMS, Accountant. SALARIES AND ALLOWANCES TO OFFICIALS. 97 9797 SALARIES AND ALLOWANCES TO OF FICIALS, 25th March, 1803. SALARIES AND ALLOWANCES—25th March, 1893—(Continued). Name. Nature of Office. Present Annual Salary. Amount Paid during Flnan cial Year. Fo. Salaries charged in Accounts. Name. Nature of Office. Present Annual Salary. Amount paid during Financial Year. Fo. Salaries charged in Accounts. Poor Pate. General Rate Sewers Rati Poor Rate. General Rate Sewers Rate £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. Vestry Clerk's Dept. brought forward £3,706 13 5 972 15 7 1,875 15 11 858 1 11 H. Mansfield ???cal Officer s Dept. las. J. Allan, M.D. Medical Officer of Health 350 0 0 312 10 0 ... 156 5 0 156 5 0 son, LL.J). (Lond.) Do. Vestry Clerk Clerk to 450 0 0 428 0 6 ... 21 0 8 214 0 3 ment Com. 60 0 0 ... ... ... ... ???'ios. Stevenson,M.D. Public Analyst 50 0 0 50 0 0 ... 50 0 0 (ieo. W. Clarke Law Clerk 1 16 0 0 137 10 0 ... 68 15 0 68 15 0 Migh Alexander Chief Sanitary Inspector 200 0 0 200 0 0 ... 100 0 0 100 0 0 Jno. F. burton(infull) Minute Clerk 1 10 0 0 11 15 0 ... 5 17 6 5 17 6 John A. I). Milne General and ,mes W. Lear Assistant do. 150 0 0 150 0 0 ... 75 0 0 75 0 0 Arrears Clerk 100 0 0 78 5 10 39 2 11 39 2 11 W. Stiles do. do. 110 0 0 111 3 0 ... 73 8 6 37 14 6 ???inarles Quelch do. do. 110 0 0 106 19 6 ... 53 9 9 58 9 9 655 11 4 64 327 15 8 327 15 8 Clerk 90 0 0 84 0 0 ... 42 0 0 42 0 0 80 Messenger 54 12 0 35 19 0 ... 85 19 0 ... Accountant s Dept. 72 1,051 11 6 82 ... 5386 2 3 464 9 3 Ernst A. R. Adams Accountant 220 0 0 215 10 10 107 15 5 107 15 5 82 ???n Hall,Disinfecting ???Station. William Culshaw Chief Clerk 120 0 0 112 10 0 56 5 0 56 5 0 llate Deuartment. 1. G. Suffield Disinfector 78 0 0 78 0 0 ... 78 0 0 ... Arthur Bennett Rate Clerk 120 0 0 120 0 0 60 0 0 60 0 0 rederick Ford do- 62 8 0 52 8 6 ... 52 8 6 ... Arthur Hurn do 105 0 0 105 0 0 52 10 0 52 10 0 James H. Pickup do 100 0 0 74 6 10 37 3 5 37 3 5 130 8 6 72 ... 130 8 0 ... Poundage lie Mortuary. Josepn Riley (in full) Geo. Pearce Rate Collector do. 179 887 15 5 0 1 179 887 15 5 0 1 102 194 6 10 5 2 74 1 85 18 6 4 10 2 7 15 8 8 1 ???enry Wilton Caretaker 26 0 0 26 0 0 ... 26 0 0 ... H. W. Hart do. 21)4 7 10 294 7 10 169 15 9 118 »> u 0 6 9 i! Salaries. 26 0 0 73 ... 26 0 0 ... Edwin Cranston do. 200 0 0 200 0 0 100 0 0 100 0 0 ???iting & Scavenging Department. George C. Young do. 200 0 0 200 0 0 100 0 0 100 0 0 Robert S. Ricketts. do 180 o o 180 0 0 90 0 0 90 0 0 ???ohn Robinson Superintendent 130 0 0 130 0 0 ... 130 0 0 ... Henry F. Jones do. 180 0 0 180 0 0 90 0 0 90 0 0 ???lamuel Dawkins General Clerk 85 16 0 88 4 6 ... 88 4 6 ... E. F. Russell (in full) do 18O o o 12 6 6 6 q 3 6 3 3 ???rthur May Weigh Clerk 70 4 0 69 14 6 ... 69 14 6 ... H. Leopold Loly do. 160 0 0 160 0 0 80 0 0 80 0 0 ::: ???I. J. Smith Dust Inspector 72 16 0 70 16 8 ... 70 16 8 ... H. Taylor do. 160 0 0 80 0 0 40 0 0 40 0 0 56 358 15 8 69 ... 358 15 8 ... 2,451 2 1 64 972 15 7 1,148 0 3 330 6 3 ablishment of Town Hall. 80 Surveyor's Dept. V. B. Filmer Hall Keeper 100 0 0 100 0 0 ... 100 0 0 ... Alfred J. Martin Surveyor 290 0 0 290 0 0 145 0 0 145 0 0 100 0 0 74 ... 100 0 0 ... 1. Newton 1 Leale Clerk 1 10 0 0 110 0 0 ...... 55 0 0 55 0 0 •leral Charges. 400 0 0 66 200 0 0 200 0 0 'fredk. S. Case Junior Clerk ... 26 0 0 26 0 0 ... 26 0 0 ... 81 Robert M. Malcolm do. 26 0 0 26 0 0 ... 26 0 0 ... Lighting Dept. 52 0 0 65 ... 52 0 0 ... Chas. H. Doughty Lighting Inspector 200 0 0 200 0 0 ... 200 0 0 Total £5,424 9 1 972 15 7 3,129 2 4 1,322 11 2 200 0 0 71 ... 200 0 0 ...... a With a fixed fee of 10/- each for Analysis of Food Samples. h And Residence, Fire, Light, Rates and Taxes free. c And Apartments, Fire, Light, Rates and Taxes free, and Uniform Clothing. Carried forward £8,70(5 18 5 972 15 7 1 ,875 15 11 858 1 11 THE VESTRY OF THE PARISH OF SAINT LEONARD, SHOREDITCH, IN THE COUNTY OF LONDON. TABULAR STATEMENT SHEWING THE RATES ASSESSED AND LEVIED, WITH SUMMARY OF COLLECTION, IN RESPECT OF THE YEAR FROM 25th MARCH, 1892, to 25th MARCH, 1893. COLLECTING DISTRICTS, PUBLIC COMPANIES. Ac. POOR RATE. VESTRY RATES. SUMMARY OF COLLECTION. Rateable Value in force at 1I-ady-Day 1893. Rates levied at 3s 3d. in the £ Allowance to Owners. Arrears 25th March, 1892. Total amount to be collected. IRRECOVERABLE. Rateable Value in force at Lady-Day, 1893. RATES LEVIED. Allowance to Owneis. Arrears 25th March, 1892. Total amount to be collected. Actually collected. Recoverable arrears at 25th March, lt93. IRRECOVERABLE. UNCOLLECTED AT BALANCING,. Actually collected. Recoverable Arrears at 25th March, 1893. Legally excused. Empties. OTHERWISE NOT RECOVERABLE. [ General Rate at 2s. 6d. in the £ Sewers Rate at Id. in the £ Total of Vestry Rates at 2s. 7d. in the £ Legally excused. OTHERWISE NOT RECOVERABLE. Total net charge (Cols. 6 and 21). Total actually collected (Cols. 7 and 22). Arrears outstanding 25th March, 1893. Legally excused. Otherwise not recoverable Reduced on Appeal. 25 per cent, allowance to Runs. ' No effects and Insolvencies. Empties. Reduced on Appeal. 25 per cent, allowance to Rons. No. effects and Insolvencies. 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. 10. 11. 12. 13. 14. 15. 16. 17. 18. 10. 20. 21. 22. 23. 24. 25. 26. 27. 28. 29. 30. 31 32. 33. 34. £ £ s. d. £ s d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d £ £ s. d. £ s. d £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d £ s d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. Collecting Districts- Moor-fields 101,835 16,619 11 3 353 18 5 130 14 9½ 16,396 7 7½ 15,348 7 6 135 5 3 1 13 8 777 3 11 58 11 6 3 19 8 251 17 2½ 45 8 11 100,224 12,583 1 1 419 10 1 13,002 11 2 281 5 9 82 16 1½ 12,804 1 6½ 11,985 12 3½ 107 2 7 1 9 11 609 11 4½ 46 1 11 3 0 11 18 19 7 32 2 11½ 29,200 9 2 27,333 19 9½ 242 7 10 3 3 7 1,620 17 l1½ 1 Church North 68,926 11,166 5 9 639 3 6 28 5 7½ 10,555 7 10½ 10,083 16 6½ 23 13 3 13 7 1 360 5 6 32 11 9 5 3 2 24 18 9½ 11 11 9½ 68,926 8,588 14 8 286 13 10 8,875 8 6 508 11 2 18 17 6½ 8,385 14 10½ 8,014 4 9½ 19 6 8 10 13 7 284 3 10 25 4 3 3 16 2 20 3 7 8 2 0 18,941 2 9 18,098 1 4 42 19 11 •24 0 8 776 0 10 2 Church South 78,217 12,666 19 4 351 10 5 66 11 6 12,382 0 5 11.497 6 6½ 56 11 9 18 18 9 713 1 4½ 12 1 9 11 19 9 51 6 7 20 13 11 78,217 9,743 17 9 324 11 11 10,068 9 8 279 10 1 44 3 10½ 9,833 3 5½ 9,133 11 11 46 1 5 15 8 7 563 6 0 10 0 8 9 17 11 39 11 4½ 15 5 7 22,215 3 10½ 20,630 18 5½ 102 13 2 34 7 4 1,447 4 11 3 Hoxton 79,422 12,962 5 10 408 18 11 44 8 5½ 12,597 15 4½ 11,717 16 7½ 18 18 6 10 1 10 736 11 5 33 14 10½ 6 5 6 39 6 0 29 0 7½ 79,422 9,971 4 7 332 16 0 10,304 0 7 325 9 0 28 9 11½ 10,007 1 6½ 9,307 6 2½ 16 13 7 13 0 5 583 6 0 27 15 4 4 18 4 31 5 10 22 15 10 22,604 16 11 21,025 2 10 35 12 1 29 2 3 1,514 19 9 4 Wenlock 60,818 9,882 6 5 293 11 5 14 19 0½ 11,603 14 0½ 9,316 6 3½ 23 6 11 22 17 10 185 11½ 10 14 7½ 0 12 9 38 12 5 5 14 3 00,818 7,601 11 2 253 7 9 7,854 18 11 233 14 1 9 12 1½ 7.630 16 11½ 7,402 4 1 20 0 2 17 1 5 147 1 6 8 14 4 0 10 8 1 31 0 1 4 4 8½ 17,234 11 0 16,718 10 4½ 43 7 1 39 19 3 432 14 3½ 5 Whitmore 9,218 11 0 694 3 8 10 5 0½ 8,534 12 4½ 8,273 10 5½ 15 5 5 19 17 2 183 17 1 8 6 10 1 11 5 19 5 1 10 12 18 2 56,932 7,092 16 6 236 0 8 7,328 17 2 552 6 11 6 9 6 6,782 19 9 6,574 9 5 13 11 5 14 16 3 146 15 1 6 14 5 1 5 11 15 3 8 10 3 7 15,317 12 1½ 14,847 19 10½ 28 16 10 13 0 2 0 6 Kingsland and Haggerston West. 57,809 9,405 5 8 646 12 10 127 14 6½ 8,886 7 4½ 8,479 14 4½ 4 2 7 5 14 11 336 11 9½ 16 5 9 6 8 8 27 19 5 9 19 10½ 5.,809 7,234 12 5 241 2 9 7,475 15 2 514 16 5 80 13 5 7,041 12 2 6,718 17 11 3 4 7 6 6 267 5 8 13 6 10 4 15 0 21 16 3 7 19 5 15,927 19 6½ 15,198 12 3½ 7 7 2 10 1 0 711 8 7 Haggerston East and Acton 65,577 10,661 6 3 887 2 1 9 14 6½ 9,783 18 8½ 9,477 18 8 23 10 7 15 9 2 234 18 5½ 7 16 10 0 4 4 20 6 11 3 13 9 65,577 8,201 2 4 273 4 3 8,474 6 7 705 16 3 6 2 10 7,774 13 2 7,531 0 8 18 13 9 11 9 7 188 3 1 6 3 11 0 3 10 15 16 5 3 1 11 17,558 11 10½ 17,00 19 4 42 4 4 26 18 9 48 9 5½ 8 Public Companies, &c. School Board for London 12,216 1,985 2 0 .... .... 1.985 2 0 1,985 2 0 .... .... .... .... .... .... .... 12,216 1,527 0 0 50 18 0 1,577 18 0 1,571 18 0 1,577 18 0 3,50 0 0 3,56 0 0 .... .... .... 9 Great Eastern Railway Company 27,622 4,488 11 6 0 8 0 .... 4,488 3 6 4,028 8 6½ .... .... .... 459 14 .... .... .... 27,622 3,452 15 0 115 1 10 3,567 16 10 0 6 6 3,56' 10 4 3,233 14 0i • 333 15 9½ 8,05 13 10 7,26 2 3 1 .... .... 793 10 9 10 Great Eastern Railway Company 17,132 3,595 14 0 .... .... 3,595 14 0 2,028 9 0 984 8 4 .... .... 582 16 8 .... .... .... 17,132 2,736 15 8 98 8 10 2,835 4 6 2,83. 4 6 1,679 17 4 689 1 10 466 5 4 6,43 18 6 3,70 8 6 4 1 1,673 10 2 .... 1,049 2 0 11 London & North western Railway Company 22,163 3,601 9 9 ........ .... 3,601 9 9 3,601 9 9 .... .... .... .... .... .... .... 18,491 2,311 7 6 77 0 11 2,388 8 5 2,388 8 5 2,388 8 5 5,98 18 2 5,98 9 18 2 .... .... .... 12 North London Railway Company 26,588 4,320 11 0 .... .... 4,320 11 0 4,320 11 0 .... .... .... .... .... .... .... 26,588 3,323 10 0 110 15 8 3,434 5 8 3,434 5 8 3,434 5 8 7,75 4 1(J 8 7.7 4 10 8 .... .... .... 13 Shoreditch Town Hall 1,250 203 2 6 .... .... 203 2 6 203 2 6 .... .... .... .... .... .... .... 1,250 156 5 0 5 4 2 161 9 2 16 9 2 161 9 2 8G 4 11 8 364 11 8 .... .... .... 14 Government Property— H. M. Treasury Shorditch County Court (excluded from Valuation List) 120 19 0 0 8 15 28 5 0 18 15 0 9 10 0 120 15 0 0 0 10 0 15 10 0 .... 6 5 0 21 15 0 14 5 0 7 10 0 0 0 33 0 0 17 0 0 .... .... 15 676,627 †110,796 12 3 4,275 9 3 441 8 6½ 106,962 11 100,380 14 9½ 1,294 12 7 114 0 5 3,527 8 6 1,222 15 6½ 36 5 3 247 13 2 139 1 3½ 671,344 1184,539 13 8 42,825 6 8 87.365 0 4 3,401 16 2 283 10 4½ 84,241 14 6½ 79,157 5 5 941 6 0 88 6 3 2,78$ 12 6½ 944 2 9½ 28 8 9 193 16 9½ 103 16 0 191,209 6 1 179,538 0 2½ 2,235 18 7 202 6 8 9,233 0 7½ 16 Percentage 95.743 3.859 .398 100.00 93.847 1.210 .107 3.298 1.143 .034 .231 .130 .... 92.684 3.098 95.782 3.894 .324 100.00 93.959 1.117 105 3.311 1.121 .034 .230 1.123 100.00 93.896 1 1.169 .106 4.935 100.00 4-943 Levied on Occupiers. Levied on Owners. 100.00 4.924 Kates levied during year (see fo. 53) Al>U — 110,738 18 10 Rates levied during year (see folios 63 & 80) 84,499 3 8 2,82 1 7 4 ernst a. h. adams, , , 24th Mat,, 1SS3. Accountant. Additional Assessments 38 3 5 Add— Additional Assessments 25 10 0 2 9 4 Government Property 19 10 0 Government Property 15 0 0 0 0 0 †£ †110,796 12 3 U £84,539 13 8 §£2,82 5 6 8 98 tabular statement SHEWING THE RATES ASSESSED AND LEVIED, WITH summary of collection, 1892-93. COMPARATIVE STATEMENT OF INCOME AND EXPENDITURE. 1891-93. 1 100 101 COMPARATIVE STATEMENT OF INCOME AND EXPENDITURE FOR THE THREE YEARS TO 25TH MARCH, 1893. No. INCOME. 1890-01. 1891-92. 1892-93 No. EXPENDITURE. 1890-91. 1891-92. 1892-93 Poor Rate Account—Revenue. £ £ £ Poor Rate Account—Revenue. £ £ £ - Rate 93,932 95,333 101,382 1 Shoreditch Board of Guardians 78,200 75,400 82,576 4 5 Metropolitan Police — -— 147 2 Burial Board 160 250 350 Parliamentary and County Council Elections 3 1,305 305 3 Public Libraries and Museums 100 1,965 1,930 4 Metropolitan Police 13,434 14,215 14.218 5 Parliamentary and County Council Elections 803 656 584 6 Vestry Elections 87 111 72 7 Jury list 34 32 31 8 Other Charges—Cost of Collection 1,010 1,033 977 9 Establishment of Town Hall 158 99 - 93,935 96,635 101,884 93,976 93,761 100,738 Burial Board—Revenue. Burial Board—Revenue. - Contributions from Poor Rate 150 250 350 10 St. Leonard's Churchyard, Shoreditch 74 114 66 13 Hackney Road Burial Ground —- - 300 11 St. Mary's Churchyard, Haggerston 25 60 54 12 St. John's Churchyard, Hoxton 19 61 68 13 Hackney Road Burial Ground - 58 368 150 250 650 118 293 556 Rate Accounts (General and Hewers)—Revenue. Rate Accounts (General and Sewers)—Revenue. - General Rate 59,070 63,407 77,339 14 School Board for London 29,028 30,385 29,257 - Sewers Rate 2,453 5,190 2,584 15 Repayment of Debt 3,954 4,255 4,543 14 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 School Board for London - - 234 16 Interest on Loans 1,862 1,839 1,948 Vestry Clerk's Department 2 7 5 17 Vestry Clerk's Department 426 649 574 Accountant's Department - 3 3 18 Accountant's Department 1,451 1,090 1,573 Legal and Parliamentary Expenses - 1 - 19 Legal and Parliamentary Expenses 260 121 122 General Receipts 138 102 76 20 General Charges 074 1,169 1,100 Surveyor's Department 40 44 44 21 Surveyor's Department 430 515 418 Maintenance of Public Roads and Streets 904 974 894 22 Maintenance of Public Roads and Streets 5,791 7,321 11,210 Dusting and Scavenging—Contract system 212 362 - 23 Dusting and Scavenging—Contract system 9,930 7,974 - 24 do. do. Maintenance Account - 137 858 24 do. do. Maintenance Account 4,898 18,301 25 Street Lighting 52 38 473 25 Street Lighting 5,852 5,774 5,823 20 28 29 31 32 Public Health, &c 240 311 503 26 Public Health and Sanitary Expenses 3,483 3,865 3,631 Town Hall 044 611 398 27 Recreation Grounds 35 21 216 Housing of the Working Classes - - 42 28 Town Hall 909 881 1,386 Assessment Committee Receipts - 218 211 29 Housing of the Working Classes — 48 — Sewerage and Drainage Works 301 710 810 30 Valuation Committee Expenses 705 375 11 31 Assessment Committee Expenses 124 1,738 556 32 Sewerage and Drainage Works 1,748 1,935 3,283 64,110 72,151 84,474 66,668 75,459 83,952 General Rate Account Capital. General Rate Account—Capital. 34 36 Street Improvements and Paving Works—Loans - 2,900 - 33 Erection of Town Hall — 50 280 Dusting and scavenging-Loans - 6,000 2,000 34 Street Improvements and Paving Works — 1,898 1,153 35 Goldsmith Square Open Space — 10 - 30 Dusting and Scavenging — 6,032 2,313 37 Moira Place and Plumber's Place Area — 389 38 Construction of New Sewers - - 72 - 8,900 2,000 7,990 4,207 INCOME on Revenue Account 158,201 169,039 186,958 EXPENDITURE on Revenue Account 100,762 109,513 185,246 do. Capital Account - 8.900 2,000 do. Capital Account 7,990 4,207 Total 158,201 177,939 188,958 Total 160,762 177,503 189,453 STATISTICS. M 104 RATEABLE VALUE and RATES LEVIED for POOR LAW and VESTRY PURPOSES, from 1856 to 1892, since the passing of the Metropolis Local Management Act, 1855. Your. Annual Net Rateable Valuation. Poou Rate. Vestry Rates. Total Rate in the £. . Lighting. General. Sewers. Mam Drainage. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 £ s. d. d. s. d. d. d. s. d. 1856 244,988 4 0 †6 †0 8 †3 ... 5 5 1857 251,609 4 0 4 1 5 3 ... 6 0 1858 256,032 4 0 5 1 4 4 . . . 6 1 1859 267,088 3 2 4 1 3 4 • • • 5 1 1860 271,165 3 1 4 1 3 5 3 5 4 1861 274,831 3 3 4 1 5 6 3 5 9 1862 276,726 3 1 5 1 1 4 1 5 0 1863 281,042 3 1 4 0 11 3 4 4 11 1864 289,201 3 0 5 1 2 5 4 5 4 1865 298,330 3 9 3 ] 4 4 4 6 0 1866 304,461 4 0 2 1 5 6 4 6 5 1867 324,436 4 1 ... 1 8 6 4 6 7 1868 366,239 4 1 ... 1 8 4 4 6 5 1869 388,794 4 3 ... 1 6 5 4 6 6 1870 390,057 3 10 ... 1 11 6 1 6 4 1871 389,840 4 4 ... 1 5 2 ... 5 11 1872 441,456 3 5 ... 1 5 5 ... 5 3 1873 443,936 2 7 ... 1 6 4 ... 4 5 1874 145,311 2 10 ... 1 8 7 ... 5 1 1875 447,610 2 0 ... 1 10 6 ... 4 4 1876 453,845 2 6 ... 1 10 6 ... 4 10 1877 503,486 2 6 ... 1 10 6 ... 4 10 1878 512,656 2 7 ... 2 0 6 ... 5 1 1879 527,340 2 1 ... 2 1 6 ... 4 8 1880 535,657 2 3 ... 1 10 10 ... 4 11 1881 541,812 2 4 ... 1 11 7 ... 4 10 1882 591,215 2 6 ... 2 0 7 ... 5 1 1883 609,500 2 4 ... 2 1 7 ... 5 0 1884 612,919 2 3 ... 2 1 7 ... 4 11 1885 614,926 2 6 ... 2 1 8 ... 5 3 1886 615,970 2 0 ... 2 3 8 ... 4 11 1887 643,535 2 2 ... 1 11 8 ... 4 9 1888 643,043 2 4 ... 1 10 10 ... 5 0 1889 644,758 2 9 ... 1 10 5 ... 5 0 1890 646,185 3 2 ... 2 1 1 ... 5 4 1891 682,444 3 0 ... 2 1 1½ ... 5 2½ 1892 682,991 3 3½ ... 2 3½ 1½ ... 5 8½ † Three Quarters only. Pavement Hate.— The Kate of 3d. per square yard, to defray the cost of maintenance, &c., of Canal Bridges and Public Ways, adjoining Buildings, Dead Walls or Void Spaces (pursuant to 57 Geo. III., cap. 20), was discontinued at Christmas, 1877. Note. This Schedule shews the Rates levied in the £ in respect of the Year from 1st January to 31st December, 105 RETURN shewing AMOUNTS CONTRIBUTED UNDER PRECEPTS. (1) For Toll Bridge Expenses (Redemption of Charges), from 1879 to 1 889. Debt and Maintenance (2) For General Expenditure in respect of dated Rate, from 1860 to 1889. Metropolitan Consoli- Year. Raised in Vestry Rates. Total amount of Precept. General Kate. Sewers Rate. Toll Bridges. General Expenses. 1 2 3 4 METROPOLITAN BOARD OF WORKS. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. 1860 ...... 3,944 17 5 3,944 17 5 1861 ...... 4,653 2 9 4,658 2 9 1862 ...... 5,875 14 7 5,875 14 7 1868 ...... 5,217 9 5 5,217 9 5 1864 ...... 5,784 15 11 5,784 15 11 1865 ...... 6,504 13 9 6,504 13 9 1866 ...... 7,975 6 11 7,975 6 11 1867 ...... 8,859 13 2 8,859 13 2 1868 ...... 10,016 0 9 10,016 0 9 1869 ...... 8,587 9 11 8,587 9 11 1870 ...... 9,335 7 2 9,335 7 2 1871 ...... 9,167 17 11 9,167 17 11 1872 ...... 5,884 12 11 5,884 12 11 1878 ...... 4,523 6 6 4,523 6 6 1874 ...... 4,804 17 7 4,804 17 7 1875 ...... 7,957 18 11 7,957 18 11 . 1876 ...... 9,854 8 6 9,854 8 6 1877 ...... 9,480 8 2 9,480 8 2 1878 ...... 9,896 7 11 9,896 7 11 1879 370 1 9 9,783 12 6 10,153 14 3 1880 1,208 15 0 11,114 13 6 12,323 8 6 1881 1,814 3 7 11,994 13 9 13,808 17 4 1882 1,899 9 9 13,336 4 3 15,235 14 0 1883 `` 1,931 3 6 13,410 6 4 15,341 9 10 1884 1,877 13 7 14,179 3 1 16,056 16 11 1885 2,156 5 11 16,538 17 2 18,695 3 1 1886 2,458 19 9 16,288 5 8 18,747 5 5 1887 2,625 0 4 17,647 18 4 20,272 18 8 1888 2,560 6 4 19,837 12 3 22,397 18 7 LONDON COUNTY COUNCIL. 1889 592 12 7 6,169 4 8 6,761 17 3 Ml 106 RETURN shewing AMOUNTS CONTRIBUTED UNDER PRECEPTS in aid of the Expenditure of the SCHOOL BOARD for LONDON, under the elementary education ad\ 1870. (Apportioned on Rateable Annual Value). Year. Amount paid out of General Rate. £ s. d. 1872 882 13 2 1873 1,643 3 1 1871 1,358 6 11 1875 3,246 8 2 1876 5,656 16 2 1877 8,255 2 6 1878 10,700 3 4 1879 10,680 14 11 1880 11,538 6 2 1881 13,520 5 10 1882 14,242 12 11 1883 16,641 7 9 1884 19,525 13 2 1885 21,763 7 11 1886 23,825 18 r> 1887 22,273 1 6 1888 21,207 7 7 1889 23,704 8 2 / 1890 28,561 1 2 1891 30,235 9 10 1892 29,494 17 2 \ 107 The Vestry of the Parish of Saint Leonard, Shoreditch, in the Countij of London. STATEMENT shewing ANNUAL CONTRACTS entered into by the VESTRY for the Financial Year from 2oth March, 1893, to 25th March, 1894, pursuant to the Metropolis Local Management Act, 1855, 18 & 19 Vict., cap. 120. Date of Contract. Contractor. Material or Proposed Works. Terms of Agreement. Name. Address. GENERAL WORKS, j ] 2nd Mar., 1893 Abbott, Clias., & Sons Digby Road, Homer ton General Cartage of Materials At Schedule prices. 2 1st Mar., 1893 Bird, Frederick & Co. 11, Great Castle Street, Regent Street, W. Lamp Columns, &c Do. 8 28th Feb., 1893 Blyth, Thomas 317, Kingsland Road Lime and Cement ... Do. 4 2nd Mar., 1893 Clark, John A 161, Goldsmith's Row Painters' and Writers' Work Do. Do. Do. Do. Plumbers' Work Do. 6 Do. Griffiths, William 283, Kingsland Road, N.E Broken Granite Do. 7 Do. Do. Do. Masons' Work Do. 8 Do. Do. Do. Paviors' Work Do. 9 28 th Feb., 1893 Jones, J. G 90, Phillip's Street, Hoxton Smiths' Work Do. 10 Do. Nicliolls & Clarke 6, High Street, Shoreditch, E.C. Glass for Street Lamps, Paint, &c. Do. 11 5th Aug., 1891 Pearson, E.J 45, St. John Street Road, Clerkenwell, E.C. Repair of Harness 2/- per Set per month 12 13th Mar.,1893 Roberts, A.T., Son & Co. 5, Hackney Road Printing At Schedule prices 13 27th Feb.. 1898 Smith, F. & Co. 118 & 120,Tabard Street, Borough Street Broom Heads, &c Do. 14 2nd Mar., 1893 Stevens, William E.... 24, Bridge Street, Homerton Ballast, Hoggin, Shingle and Sand Do. 15 13th Mar., 1893 Straker & Sons,Limited Bishopsgate Avenue, E.C Stationery (for all Departments)... Do. 16 2nd Mar., 1892 Tilley, Wm. Henry ... 53, Kingsland Road Street Lamps, Brackets & Fittings. Do. 17 Do. White, W. J. & Co. ... Railway Yard, Worship Street, E.C. Drain Pipes, Junctions, Bends, &c. Do. IK Do. Williamson, W. T. ... Pottery Works, Finsbury Park, N. Flints Do. 108 DUSTING AND SCAVENGING DEPARTMENT. COMPARATIVE STATEMENT, 1892-93. Particulars of Staff. Plant, Ac. At 25th March, 1892. At 25th March, 1893. Remarks. Staff. Superintendent 1 1 General Clerk 1 1 1 for Eastern Division. Night Scavenging Foremen 2 2 1 ,, Western ,, Dusting Inspector 1 1 Watering ,, 1 For summer only (6months Storekeeper and Weigh Clerk 1 1 6 7 Half year to 25th March, 1892. One year to 25th March, 1893. Wages.- Actum. Payments- £ s. d. £ s. d. Superintendent and Clerks 151 10 5 358 15 8 Dusting 372 17 7½ 1,561 17 1 Scavenging 897 1 1½ 4,092 l9 1 Horsekeepers 36 12 8 129 2 7 Removal of Snow 78 0 11 24 17 7 Street Watering ...... 227 19 5 † Curried out by General Purposes and Wharf Staff 350 0 0 883 17 4 Sanitary Committee Workmen's Holiday 9 12 6 1,880 2 4 7,289 1 3 Average amount paid for weekly wages 67 7 6 140 0 0 Quantity to 25th March, 1892. Quantity to 25th March, 1893. Fodder purchased. Hay trusses 859 2,492 Straw „ 522 198 hales 143 584 Peat „ 12 - Clover trusses 545 1,581 Mixture „ 36 490 Oats sacks .398 1,044 Beans „ 22 52 Carrots tons 2 Bran sacks 186 354 Linseed „ 3 2 Chaff tons 1 Green meat bundles. ... 1,452 £ s. d. £ s. d. Average cost per horse per week 0 15 0 0 14 6 109 DUSTING AND SCAVENGING DEPARTMENT. Comparative Statement, 1892-93.—continued. Particulars of Staff, Plant, &c. Quantity to 25th March, 1892. Quantity to 25th March, 1893. Remarks. Collection and Removal of Refuse. Loads. Loads. Street Sweepings to barge 3,917 12,999 „ „ „ rail ... 17 Dust to barge 3,042 13,111 ,, rail 96 - ,, Newton's wharf ... 156 Trade Refuse to barge 339 2,212 Refuse carted by ratepayers to barge (no charge) 40 933 7,434 29,428 Horses and Plant. On 25th March, 1892. On 25 th March, 1893. Horses 28 36 Water Vans 15 15 Slop „ 30 30 ,, Carts 4 4 Tumbler ,, *2 *2 *Not used by Department. Horse Machine Brooms 6 6 Snow Plough 1 1 Dung and Stable Manure. About About Carted weekly by Market vehicles (free of charge) Tons 6 Tons 6 JOHN ROBINSON, Superintendent. De Beauvoir Wharf, 287, Kingsland Road, N.E. 25th March, 1893, 110 The Vestry of the parish of Saint Leonard, Shoreditch, IN THE COUNTY OF LONDON. RETURN showing the Attendances at Vestry and Committee Meetings held during the year from 1st may, 1892, to 30TH april, 1893. N.B.—Commissioners of Baths and Washhouses—Appointed 3rd January, 1893. Electric Lighting Committee—Appointed February 28th, 1893. Technical Instruction Committee—Appointed December 6th, 1892. Number of Mooting held 42 | 30 38 29 20 22 17 51 18 25 15 10 53 3 8 3 18 Total 307 Retire in the year. NAME. Vestry. Finance. Paving and Severs. General Purposes and Sanitary. Parliamentary. Town Hall. Officers. Dusting and Scavenging. Housing of the Working Classes. Assessment. Valuation. Burial Board. Free Library Commissioners. Commissioners of Baths and Washhouses. Special Committee re Churchwardens' and Overseers' Accounts. Electric Lighting Committee. Technical Instruction Committee. Total Number of Meetings attended. Number which could have been attended. Buss, Rev. S., L.L.B. 26 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 26 42 MOORFIELDS WARD. 1893 Dunlop, C. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 0 42 ...... Gracie, R. T. 7 ... ... ... 0 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 7 62 ...... Haslam, G. 29 ... *26 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... *8 ... ... ... ... ... ... 63 95 ...... Hirsch, A. 1 ... 8 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 12 80 ...... Riley, S. 14 ... ... 7 ... 10 ... ... ... ... 2 ... ... ... ... ... ... 33 108 ...... Wills, Rev. F 1 • • • • • • 0 1 62 1894 Bartlett, K. (Resigned October 20th, 1892) 2 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2 42 ...... Cox, J. 34 13 ... ... ... 21 7 ... ... ... ... ... 40 3 ... ... 9 127 180 ...... Law, W. 28 21 ... ... 14 ... ... ... ... 21 ... ... ... ... ... 2 ... 86 120 ...... Nightingale, T. W. 13 ... 0 ... 1 2 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 16 122 ...... Ravey, T. 18 ... 7 ... ... 6 1 ... 5 4 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 41 162 ...... Tuck, C. 3 ... ... ... ... ... 3 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 6 59 1895 Darby, R. 39 ... 28 18 ... ... ... ... ... ... 14 ... ... ... ... 3 11 113 140 ...... Hepburn, J. 29 22 ... ... ... 12 10 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 73 111 ...... Hunt, T. J. 14 7 ... ... ... 7 ... ... ... ... 0 ... ... ... ... ... ... 28 109 ...... Smither, S. 38 13 ... ... ... 7 ... ... ... ... 15 3 ... 3 7 1 0 87 146 ...... Verinder, S. II. 27 ... ... ... ... 10 8 ... ... ... 6 ... ... ... ... 1 ... 52 99 ...... Whiteman, C . 32 ... 27 14 ... 7 ... ... 9 ... ... *1 ... ... ... 2 ... 92 162 111 Return of Attendances, &c.—continued. Number of Meetings held 42 30 38 29 20 22 17 51 18 25 15 10 53 3 8 3 13 Total 397 Retire in the year. NAME. Vestry. Finance. Paying and Sewers. General Purposes and Sanitary. Parliamentary. Town Hall. Officers. Dusting and Scavenging. Housing of the Working Classes. Assessment. Valuation. Burial Board. Free Library Commissioner's. Commissioners of Baths and Washhouses. Special Committee re Churchwardens' and Overseers' Accounts. Electric Lighting Committee. Technical Instruction Committee Total Number of Meetings attended. Number which could have been attended. CHURCH WARD. 1893 Cocking, A 31 ... ... ... 8 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 39 62 ...... Chaffey, T. H. 9 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 9 42 ...... Leach, A. 4 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2 ... ... ... ... ... ... 6 6 7 ...... Parry, T. 10 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 10 42 ... Snellgrove, W. 2 ... ... 0 ... 0 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2 93 ...... Wells, H. 39 ... ... ... ... 20 ... ... ... ... ... 9 ... ... ... ... ... 68 74 ...... Winstanley, E. (Removed from parish). ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 0 42 1894 Barralet, W. H. 30 ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... 51 ... 0 ... ... 82 154 ...... Burton, J. 1 1 ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 3 92 ...... Marshall, J. C. 13 ... ... ... ... ... 5 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 18 59 ...... Martindill, T. 17 ... ... 3 ... ... 3 10 6 ... ... 4 53 ... ... ... ... 96 220 ...... Moss, N., L.C.C. 10 8 ... ... ... 4 1 ... ... 13 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 36 186 ...... Vandy, J. W. 34 ... 13 ... ... ... ... ... ... 24 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 71 105 ...... Winkler, Hermann 42 ... 38 ... ... ... 17 10 14 ... ... ... ... 3 8 ... ... 132 177 1895 Buck, Eaton (Resigned 12th July, 1892) ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 0 42 ...... Donovan, John 20 3 ... ... 4 ... ... 33 7 ... ... ... 42 ... ... ... 9 118 221 ...... Rowland, B. 3 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 3 42 ... Lucraft, G. T. 8 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 8 42 ...... Smither, D. 29 14 ... ... ... 22 ... 18 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 3 ... 86 148 ...... Speight, R. 27 ... 20 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 10 ... ... ... ... ... ... 57 95 ...... Steed, D. 29 ... ... ... ... ... 6 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 35 59 HOXTON WARD. 1893 Field, J 20 3 ... ... 5 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 3 2 33 108 ...... Gibson, A. 6 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 6 42 ...... Lewis, D. 23 ... 21 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 12 ... ... ... ... ... ... 56 95 ...... Morss, A. 5 ... ... ... 0 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 5 62 ...... Stanuard, W. 4 1 ... ... ... ... 0 ... ... ... 0 ... ... ... ... ... ... 5 104 ...... Walesby, E. F. (Removed from parish) 2 ... ... 0 ... ... ... ... ... ... 2 ... ... ... ... ... ... 4 86 ...... Wilson, J. 9 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 10 ... ... ... ... ... ... 19 57 1894 Biggs, E. G. 23 19 ... 12 ... ... ... ... ... ... 2 ... ... ... ... ... ... 56 116 ...... Clement, A. A. 22 ... 10 ... 10 15 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 57 122 ...... Marter, J. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 0 42 ...... Moffatt, Ebenezer 32 30 ... ... ... 2 ... 13 5 18 ... ... 32 3 8 1 ... 144 255 ...... Richardson, H. 4 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 4 42 ...... Thomas, G. J. 15 ... 17 ... ... 16 ... ... ... ... 12 ... ... ... ... ... ... 60 117 ...... Trowbridge, J. J. 133 5 ... ... 13 ... 6 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 3 ... 60 112 1895 Chant, T. B. 17 ... ... ... 5 ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 23 79 ...... Dawson, W. 12 ... ... 5 ... 3 2 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 22 110 ...... Hennessey, A. (Resigned 6th March, 1893) 5 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 5 42 ...... Kempton, D. 10 ... 0 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 10 80 ...... Reeve, R. A. 26 ... ... ... 4 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 30 62 ...... Sawell, H. T. 31 ... ... 20 16 ... ... 33 13 14 ... ... ... ... ... 3 12 142 201 ...... Styman, J. 32 ... ... 9 ... ... ... 10 10 ... 3 ... ... ... ... 1 ... 65 158 112 Return OF Attendances, &c.—continued. Number of Meetings held 42 30 38 29 20 22 17 51 18 25 15 10 53 3 8 3 13 Total 397 Retire in the year. NAME. Vestry. Finance. Paving and Sewers. General Purposes and Sanitary. Parliamentary. Town Hall. Officers. Dusting and Scavenging. Housing of the Working Classes. Assessment. Valuation. Burial Board. Free Library Commissioners. Commissioners of Baths and Washhouses. Special Committee re Churchwardens' and Overseers' Accounts. Electric Lighting Committee. Technical Instruction Committee. Total Number of Meetings attended. Number which could have been attended. WENLOCK WARD. 1893 Green, J. 34 16 ... ... 11 14 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 75 114 ...... Kelly, Rev. H. P. 8 ... ... ... 0 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 8 62 ...... Lee, C. A. 32 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 32 42 ...... Lowry, J. R. 10 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 10 42 ...... Meredew, D. 16 11 ... ... ... 2 7 ... ... 12 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 48 136 ...... Wittey, R, T. 12 ... 1 ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... 2 ... ... ... ... ... ... 16 117 1894 Blundell, H. 27 ... ... ... 12 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 39 62 ...... Glennie, G. 18 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 18 42 ...... Marshall, G. 17 ... ... ... 8 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 25 62 ...... Hall. F. W. 24 6 ... ... 7 5 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2 ... 44 117 ...... Thomas, F. 13 ... ... ... 4 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 17 62 ...... Wakeling, E. J. 31 11 ... 16 ... ... 31 ... ... ... ... ... 3 ... ... ... 92 154 1895 Belstead, H. 31 ... 0 ... 16 ... 5 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 8 3 ... 53 128 ...... Noble, T. 26 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 26 42 ...... Noel, D. 27 ... 22 ... ... ... ... 27 ... 10 ... ... ... ... ... 3 ... 89 159 ...... Robinson, Rev. J. Cartmell. 6 ... ... 1 2 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 9 91 ...... Selley, G. 15 ... 2 6 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 23 109 ...... Tavener, L. 19 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 19 42 WHITMORE WARD. 1893 Cook, J. 15 ... ... 2 ... ... 3 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 20 88 ...... Freeman, J. J. 24 11 ... ... ... ... 6 28 ... ... ... 5 ... ... ... ... ... 74 150 ...... Kendell, T. B. 33 16 ... ... ... ... 10 28 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 4 92 156 ...... Sanders, G. 26 ... 8 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2 37 122 1894 Brown, A. 24 17 ... 13 ... ... ... ... ... ... 12 ... ... ... ... ... ... 66 116 ...... Fordham, S. 17 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 7 45 ... ... ... ... 69 105 ...... Rhodes, G. 20 12 ... 16 ... 15 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 63 123 ...... Sulman, G. R. 15 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 4 ... ... ... ... ... ... 19 57 1895 Coker, A. 23 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... *7 ... ... ... ... ... ... 30 57 ...... Elstow, G. H. 27 ... ... ... ... 18 ... ... ... 3 ... 9 ... ... ... 3 ... 60 102 ...... Solomon, G. 32 ...10 ... ... ... 7 ... ... ... 10 ... ... ... ... 2 ... 61 115 ...... Taylor, J. 13 ... ... ... ... ... 4 ... ... ... 4 ... ... ... ... ... ... 21 74 KINGSLAND WARD. 1893 Brabner, C. W. 39 ... ... 28 12 21 ... ... 13 ... ... *1 ... ... 8 2 ... 124 j 152 ...... Howe J. W. (Removed from parish) 5 ... ... 2 ... ... ... ... ... ... 2 ... ... ... ... ... ... 9 86 ...... Langan, J. R. 25 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... 0 ... 3 ... ... ... ... ... ... 29 105 ...... Thompson, W. M. 38 ... 16 13 ... ... 11 ... ... ... 10 ... ... ... ... ... ... 78 l41 1894 Roper, W. T. 13 6 ... ... ... 2 ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... 22 109 ...... Ship, J. 27 ... ... 10 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 37 71 ...... Wenborn, F. M. 39 ... ... ... 19 ... 13 43 11 14 ... ... 46 3 8 3 5 204 253 ...... Winfield. J. 17 ... 8 13 ... ... 4 ... ... ... 0 ... ... ... ... ... ... 42 141 113 Return of Attendances, &c.—continued. Number of Meetings held 42 30 38 29 20 22 17 51 18 25 15 10 53 3 8 3 18 Total 397 Retire in the year. NAME. Vestry. Finance. Paving and Sewers. General Purposes and Sanitary. Parliamentary. Town Hall. Officers. Dusting and Scavenging. Housing of the Working Classes. Assessment. Valuation. Burial Board. Free Library Commissioners. Commissioners of Baths aDd Washhouses. Special Committee re Churchwardens' and Overseers' Accounts. Electric Lighting Committee. Technical Instruction Committee. Total Number of Meetings attended. Number which could have been attended. KINGS LAND WARD. continued. 1895 Anderson, W 10 3 ... ... ... 7 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 21 111 ...... Davies, W. P. 24 ... ... 13 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 37 74 ...... Dickason, J. 5 ... 0 ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 6 100 ...... Edwards, G. ... ... ... ... 0 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 3 64 HAGGERSTON WARD. 1895 Burrill, F. W. 2 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2 42 ...... Donovan, D. 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 42 ...... Hyatt, C. 11 ... ... 1 0 ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 13 108 1894 Creasey, J. P. 29 11 ... ... ... 14 ... 22 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 76 145 ...... Hurlin, J. 33 ... ... 15 ... ... ... 37 ... 1 ... 4 53 ... ... ... ... 143 210 ...... Molloy, A. 18 ... ... 4 ... ... 3 ... 3 ... ... 5 41 ... ... ... ... 74 169 1895 J (Removed from parish) ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 0 42 ...... Condon, P. 7 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 7 42 ...... Morris, H. 36 ... 21 ... 16 ... ... ... ... ... ... *0 ... ... ... 3 ... 76 113 ACTON WARD. 1893 Little, J. 15 3 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 18 72 ...... Peek, W. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 0 42 ...... Tongue, J. T. 5 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 5 42 1894 Hunt, J. A. 12 ... ... 3 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 15 71 ...... Rollings, W. 3 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 3 42 ...... Stroud, H. B. (Remved from parish) 17 10 ... ... ... ... 3 ... ... 8 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 38 114 1895 Simpson, C. 16 ... 2 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 18 80 ...... Spencer, Rev. F. E. 26 ... 17 14 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 47 109 ...... Webber, F. G. 13 6 ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 20 101 HIGHWAYS DEPARTMENT. 117 The Vestry of the Parish of St. Leonard, Shoreditch, ix the county of london. REPORT OF THE SURVEYOR. Surveyor's Department, 25 th March, 1893. Gentlemen, I have the pleasure to submit a summary of works, &c., carried out uuder the superintendence of the above Department during the year ending the 25th March, 1893. MAINTENANCE OF ROADS. The following quantities of materials were supplied by the Contractors and Guardians at the cost stated, and used on the Macadam and Ballast roads in the Parish during the vear:— £ S. d. 1680½ yards cube Broken Granite 1406 0 0 332½ ,, ,, ballast 116 7 6 1175 „ „ Hoggin 411 5 0 During the year 2059¾ cubic yards of old Pebbles, York, etc., were broken up, costing £261 11s. 3d. (of which £105 1s. 5d. was paid to the unemployed), and loaded and carted for repairing the roads at a further cost of about £205 19s. 6d. One foreman and nine labourers on an average were employed in the yard, and on the general repairs of the unpaved roads, also over trenches opened by the Gas and Water Companies and Post Office Telegraphs, their wages lor the year 118 amounted to £699 15s. 0½d. The sum of £5 14s. 0d. was also paid for watchmen's wages. The companies contributed £111 5s. 0d. for labour (exclusive of foreman's time), and £33 17s. 7d. for material required in the said repairs. One labourer and two watchmen were employed at Reliance Wharf upon constructive works. The labourer's wages amounted to 7/- and the watchmen 14/- In consequence of the use of the Vestry's Steam Roller and hired rollers the unpaved roads are, generally speaking, in a satisfactory condition. Those requiring attention are enumerated hereafter. The Vestry's Roller was at work 267 days during the past year, and about 11 men on an average were employed, under the direction of the road foreman, in scoring, rolling, sweeping, and watching the highways under repair, and also upon ballast footway repairs, and other incidental works. The amount expended in their labour was £733 15s. 5½d. Owing to the distress during the winter, arising from want of employment by many of the residents in the district, works which would have been carried out by the Vestry in the ordinary course, were put in hand, so that relief might be afforded to those out of employment. The labour consisted chiefly in picking and regulating the macadam roads, also in breaking up old pebbles at the Vestry's stone yard. For the first mentioned, three extra 10 ton Steam Rollers were engaged, one being at work 66 days, one 20 days, and one 8 days. Additional tools were purchased for the men, and extra quantities of materials supplied. Fifty streets or roads, as per detailed statement at pages 123—130, were made good, about 29 men on an average per day being employed, but owing to the large number of applicants and in order to divide the work as beneficially as possible, they were placed in sections under gangers, each person being employed three days in the week, and every man was paid on the completion of each day's work. Their wages amounted to £365 15s. 5½d. In this way about 300 men were found temporary employment between the week ending 25th November, 1892, and the 24th March, 1893, and the results, so far as can be ascertained in thus affording help in time of need, were very successful. The tabulated statements at pages 119—122 give the roads that have been rolled by the Vestry's workmen and the unemployed, together with the cost of same, and other details. 111) MATERIALS AND COST OF WORKS IN CONNECTION WITH VESTRY'S OWN MEN—1892-93. LOCALITY. Broken Guernsey Granite. Flints. Hoggin. Earth to Shoot. Sittings, &c. from Yard. Wages for Labour and Watchmen. Roller Expenses. Sharps and Steels. Water and Horsing Water Cart. Total Cost. Superficial Area. Cost per yard. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. Yards. Clift Street ... ... 4 12 4 0 ... ... 2 18 10 1 8 3 1 8 6 9 19 7 ... ... Cavendish Street 10 9 Broken pebbles 8 9 2 3 3 0 ... 7 20 0 0 9 19 4 3 16 4½ 3 1 10½ 35 9 9 1318 /6½ Sylvia Street 1 4 0 Broken York 1 1 8 1 15 0 1 9 9½ 14 4 5½ 710 /4¾ 8 12 10 0 10 Mark Street 23 12 Ground 19 9 1 4 4 0 ... 1 10 6 8 2 15 3½ 1 19 9 38 17 3½ 796 /10½ 0 2 6 De Beauvoir Crescent 40 9 Ground 33 16 8 3 3 0 ... 1 9 0 6 2 11 0½ 1 18 5 50 12 1½ 1203 /10 0 2 6 Aske Street 10 Ground 3 10 0 ... 2 14 0 0 1 9 2 17 0 23 19 9 1325 /4¼ 0 5 0 Ash ford Street Pebbles 10 8 2 1 13 8 3 1 5 2 3 1½ 25 8 1332 /4½ 8 9 2 ... 2 16 0 ... 0 14 0 Broken York 1 0 5 0 120 LOCALITY. Broken Guernsey Granite. Flints. Hoggin. Earth to Shoot. Sittings, See., from Yard. Wages for Labour and Watchmen. Roller Expenses. Sharps and Steels. Water and HorsingWater Cart. Total Cost. Superficial Area. Cost per yard. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ S. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. Yards. Haberdasher Street Pebbles (J 15 56 21 12 2 7 3 5½ 5 14 0 64 10 7½ 1957 /7¾ 5 1 6 ... 5 5 0 ... 19 12 0 Ground 1 0 2 6 Livermere Road 6 7½ 10½ ... 1 5 0 ... Pebbles 3 18 4 1 18 0 1 11 8 15 16 10½ 1472 /2½ 6 15 1 0 7 0 Napier Street 21 2.6 10 ... 5 16 0 ... Pebbles 21 13 10 8 0 11 6 18 7 89 16 2 1741 1/0¼ 19 12 73 25 11 0 Great Chart Street 9 ... 18 Pebbles 32 0 6 7 15 0 6 10 6 77 7 3 1628 /11½ 7 12 3 6 6 0 49 17 3 0 Buttesland Street ... ... ... ... ... 1 18 4 0 18 10 1 0 5 3 17 7 ... ... Styman Street ... ... 1 ... ... 1 14 6 0 9 5 0 9 11 3 0 10 147 /5 0 7 0 Pownall Road 7 ... 42 ... Pebbles 56 1 8 17 13 13 17 l0½ 147 0 4 2713 1/1 107 5 18 14 14 0 37 9 0 Broken York 4 1 0 0 121 LOCALITY. Broken Guernsey Granite. Flints. Hoggin. Earth to Shoot. Sittings, &c., from Yard. Wages for Labour and Watchmen. Roller Expenses. Sharps and Steels. Water and HorsingWater Cart. Total Cost. Superficial Area. Cost per yard. £ S. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. Yards. Brougham Road ... ... 4 ... Pebbles 4 17 8 1 0 4 0 18 11 11 0 11 289 /9 1 8 0 8 2 16 0 Lee Street 5 ... 3 ... ... 3 2 2 ... 0 2 3 8 10 0 ... ... 4 4 7 1 1 0 Ipswich Road ... ... 4 Broken York 2 9 6 1 0 4 0 19 8 7 17 6 373 /5 1 8 0 8 2 0 0 Suffolk Road ... ... ... ... ... 0 15 0 0 10 11 0 9 9 1 15 8 161 /2½ Queen's Road 56 ... 50 ... Pebbles 74 8 2 23 17 18 7 8 224 15 9½ 5302 /10 119 47 7 4 17 10 0 41 13 0 Ground 13 1 12 6 Kent Street ... ... Pebbles 9 8 0 4 5 1 3 16 8 25 6 9 924 /6½ 10 11 10 0 3 17 0 Ground 4 0 10 0 Marlborough Road ... ... 3 10 10 0 ... ... 4 11 4 0 18 0½ 0 9 4½ 9 8 9 292 /7¾ I 99 I t—i — LOCALITY. Broken Guernsey Granite. Flints. Hog-gin. Earth to Shoot. Siftings, &c., from Yard. Wages for Labour and Watchmen. Roller Expenses. Sharps and Steels. Water and HorsingWater Cart. Total Cost. Superficial Area. Cost per yard. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ S. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. Yards. Shrubland Road 41 49 11 ... 17 0 ... Pebbles 26 18 0 8 6 3½ 6 10 10 102 9 2587 /9½ 87 12 19 0 Broken York 5 19 1 0 5 0 Ground 1 0 2 6 Eagle Wharf Road 44 53 7 ... 4 14 0 ... Pebbles 19 7 10 7 1 6 5 15 8 83 3 7 3459 /5¾ 2 16 18 0 14 0 Ground 4 0 10 0 Cropley Street ... ... ... ... ... 1 7 6 0 10 11 0 9 5 2 7 10 134 /4¾ Hyde Road 73 87 9 7 20 0 ... Pebbles 22 8 2 6 16 10 5 4 5 115 13 2 4219 /6½ 1 11 0 7 0 0 Ground 2 0 5 0 tc MATERIALS AND COST OF WORKS IN CONNECTION WITH THE UNEMPLOYED, From 25th November, 1892, to 8th March, I8(J3. Locality. Broken Guernsey Granite. Hoggin. Sittings, &c., from yard. Wages for Labour and Watchmen. Roller Expenses, Sharps and Steels. Water and Horsing Water Cart. Total Cost. Superficial Area. Cost per square yard. Vestry Labour including Ganger, included in Wages for Labour and Watchmen. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. Yards. £ s. d. Wiltshire Row .. 3 10 0 Broken York \ 13 11 6½ 3 7 5 0 11 1 27 7 7 796 /8¼ (4 13 2) 24 yds. 10 6 0 0 Ground 3 loads 0 7 6 Hems worth Street 40 7 20 0 0 Broken York 18 4 10 7 0 2 0 2 78 0 10 1201 1/3½ (7 13 8) 6 1 10 0 3 Broken pebbles 6 2 2 0 Broadway, London Fields 16 20 4 4 12½ 6 .. 8 1 10 1 17 8 0 7 2½ 31 12 503 1/3 (4 13 10) 18 7 Brunswick Street 169 200 4 27 77½ Broken pebbles 81 15 9 43 13 6 5 0 9 339 7 10 6222 1/1 (28 17 2) 3 2 36 12 12 0 Rushton Street 67 80 4 9 26¼ Pebbles 28 0 9 16 15 6 2 5 4 126 8 2 1952 1/3½ (9 19 4) 6 13 3 1 2 2 0 Ground 3 1 0 7 6 J 124 LOCALITY. Broken Guernsey Granite. Hoggin. Siftings, &c., from yard. Wages for Labour and Watchmen. Roller Expenses, Sharps and Steels. f 1 Water and Horsing Water Cart. Total Cost. Superficial Area. Cost per square yard. Vestry Labour including Ganger, included in Wages for Labour and Watchmen. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. • £ s. d. £ s. d. Yards. £ s. d. Salisbury Street 11 13½ 2 7 3 10 10 0 Ground 14 8 10 6 9 11 1 0 6 44 6 10 1041 /10 (6 16 0) 8 1 0 0 Broken York 27 6 15 0 Shaftesbury Street 50 60 15 0 7 20 0 0 Ground 20 2 8 13 10 0 0 17 8 94 10 10 1348 1/4 (4 12 8) 8 1 0 0 Broken Pebbles 4½ 1 11 6 Myrtle Street 80 26 Ground 9 7 6 5 7 7 0 8 8 50 17 6 920 1/1 (4 14 4) 25 7 6 9 8 9 9 1 2 6 Newton Street 5 15 Ground 11 11 8 15 0 10 1 3 5 08 15 8 2017 /8 (6 12 4) 9 1 2 6 Broken York 12 13 9 5 5 0 24 6 0 0 Pebbles 45½ 15 18 6 Fairbank Street 50 15 Ground 14 4 6 11 10 10 1 3 8 74 14 10 1467 1/ (5 17 3) 42 5 10 5 5 0 2 0 5 0 125 LOCALITY. Broken Guernsey Granite. Hoggin. Siftings, &c., from yard. Wages for Labour and Watchmen. Roller Expenses, Sharps and Steels. Water and Horsing Water Cart. Total Cost. Superficial Area. Cost per square yard. VestryLabour including Ganger, included in Wages for Labour and Watchmen. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. Yards. £ s. d. Penn Street 50 15 Pebbles 14 11 11 12 5 1 1 3 0 76 8 10 1164 1/3 (5 14 8) 42 5 10 5 5 0 0 10 6 Ground 3 0 7 6 Hobbs Place 3¾ 3¾ Ground 3 10 2 3 3 0 0 7 9 11 15 7 125 1/10½ (1 11 4) 3 3 5 1 6 3 2 0 5 0 Ivy Lane 26| 15 Ground 6 16 4 2 18 2 0 14 9 38 5 9 694 1/1¼ (3 11 4) 22 4 0 5 5 0 3 0 7 6 Gopsall Street 76 90 2 5 5 15 5 0 Ground 26 8 5 23 7 3 1 10 6 135 7 2 2414 1/1½ (8 12 10) 1 0 2 6 Pebbles 6 2 2 0 Taplow Street 50 12½ Ground 17 17 4 10 0 0 1 10 7 78 0 0 1354 1/l¾ (9 15 4) 2 0 5 0 Broken York 5 10 4 7 6 4½ 1 2 6 Pebbles U (] 10 <; 126 LOCALITY. Broken Guernsey Granite Hoggin. Siftings, &c., from yard. Wages for Labour and Watchmen. Roller Expenses, Sharps and Steels. Water and Horsing Water Cart. Total Cost. Superficial Area. Cost per square yard. Yestrv Labour including Ganger, included in Wages for Labour and Watchmen. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. Yards. £ s. d. Dunston Street 65 15 Ground 18 14 4 18 12 10 2 6 1 103 18 4 2043 1/0¾ (7 19 4) 4 0 10 0 Broken York 54 19 7 5 5 0 1½ 0 7 6 Pebbles 9 3 3 0 Shap Street 30 10 Ground 11 2 0 2 17 11 0 15 G 43 15 5 775 1/1½ (5 14 8) 25 7 6 3 10 0 1 0 2 6 Dysart Street 5 Ground 10 4 6 1 4 8 13 9 2 326 /9¾ (2 19 4) 1 15 0 2 0 5 0 Phipp Street 10 Pebbles 3 10 2 0 10 0 10 19 2 360 /7¼ (1 19 8) 3 10 0 9 3 3 0 Mintern Street 40 15 Ground 14 12 11½ 6 17 8 1 12 6 62 16 5½ 1300 /11½ (6 19 8) 33 16 8 5 5 0 5 0 12 Acton Street 60 17 21¼ Ground 25 4 1 17 8 6 2 6 6 104 10 10 1954 1/0¾ (10 19 8) 7 0 17 6 50 15 0 7 8 9 Pebbles 1¼ 0 10 6 127 LOCALITY. Broken Guernsey Granite. Hoggin. Siftings, &c., from yard. Wages for Labour and Watchmen. Roller Expenses, Sharps and Steels. Water and Horsing Water Cart. Total Cost. Superficial Area. Cost per square yard. Vestry Labour including Ganger, . included in Wages for Labour and Watchmen. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. Yards. £ s. d Stean Street 80 15 Ground 17 2 4 9 13 11 1 19 3 63 8 6 1432 /10½ (4 12 4) 7 25 7 6 5 5 0 0 17 6 Pebbles 9 3 3 0 Loanda Street 45 Ground 6 6 8 2 11 1 11 60 10 7 736 1/7 (2 14 8) 1 38 1 3 5 19 5 0 0 2 6 Pebbles 3 110 Witham Street 37 10 Ground 6 0 4 4 14 8 2 6 l 51 15 4 677 1/6 (2 18 10) 3 0 7 6 Pebbles 31 16 9 3 10 0 7½ 2 12 6 Broken York 1 1½ 0 7 6 Avebury Street 1½ 6 Pebbles 4 7 0 4 5 4 0 17 0 14 19 7 407 /10 (1 19 2) 1 6 3 2 2 0 6 2 2 0 Alma Street 20 21 Pebbles 15 3 8 9 2 10 3 14 5 89 0 0 2103 110 (4 16 10) 88½ 16 18 4 7 8 9 35 19 6 Ground 5 0 12 6 L:>8 LOCALITY. Broken Guernsey Granite. Hoggin. Sittings,&c., from yard. Wages for Labour and Watchmen. Roller Expenses, Sharps and Steels. Water and Horsing Water Cart. Total Cost. Superficial Area. Cost per square yard. Vestry Labour including Ganger, included in Wages for Labour and Watchmen. £ s. a. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. Yards. £ s. d. dinger Street ... ... Ground 1 16 8 0 6 8 ... 2 5 10 204 /2½ (0 16 8) 1 0 2 6 Holms Street ... ... Ground 8 10 7 1 7 8 ... 10 8 3 1183 /2¾ (1 11 4) 4 0 10 0 Tuilerie Street ... ... ... 4 9 6 0 15 4 ... 5 4 10 36(5 /3½ (1 13 10) Hows Street ... ... pebbles 7 18 10 0 19 4 ... 9 8 8 1688 /1¼ (1 13 10) J 1½ 0 10 6 York Street ... ... ... 9 8 3 1 11 8 ... 10 19 11 965 /2¾ (8 19 8) Bookham Street ... ... Pebbles 1 18 4 0 6 8 ... 2 15 6 266 /2½ (0 18 4) 1½ 0 10 6 Wellington Street ... ... pebbles 3 8 6 0 18 8 ... 5 5 2 235 /5½ (0 12 6) 1½ 0 10 6 Ground 1½ 0 7 6 Nil Street ... ... 2 2 6 0 10 0 ... 2 12 6 125 /5 (1 12 6) Fellowes Street ... ... Pebbles 4 17 0 0 17 4 ... 14 0 7 511 /6½ (1 13 10) 23¾ 8 6 3 12(J LOCALITY. Broken Guernsey Granite. Hoggin. Siftings, &c., from yard. Wages for Labour and Watchmen. Holler Expenses, Sharps and Steels. Water and Horsing Water Cart. Total Cost. Superficial Area. Cost per squan yard. VestryLabou including Ganger included in Wages for Labour and Watchmen. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. Yards. £ s. d Bacchus Walk .. .. Broken York 5 14 9 0 16 8 .. 8 16 5 559 /3¾ (2 14 4 9 2 5 0 Gt. James Street .. .. .... 3 15 3 0 12 8 .. 4 7 11 1207 .. (0 12 6) Nicholas Street .. .. .. 5 6 9½ 0 10 8 .. 5 17 5½ 329 /4¼ (2 18 2) Grange Street 45 20 Pebbles 1 6 12 11½ 6 9 2 3 13 4½ 28 0 l 1088 /6 (1 18 8) 4½ 4 4 7 7 0 0 1 11 6 Ground 8 1 0 0 Scawfell Street .. .. Pebbles 3 7 1 0 19 4 .. 4 16 11 349 /3¼ (0 8 4) 1½ o 10 6 Gt. Cambridge Street .. .. peobbies 3 .22 12 2 3 15 4 .. 28 1 0 2210 /3 (2 2 2) 1 1 0 Ground 0 5 12 6 Gifford Street .. .. .. 1 8 4 0 8 8 .. 1 17 0 150 /2¾ (0 8 4) Angrave Street .. 3¾ .. 4 7 1 0 8 8 .. 2 0 177 /8 (1 17 6) l 6 3 130 LOCALITY. Broken Guernsey Granite. Hoggin. Siftings, &c., from yard. Wages for Labour and Watchmen. Roller Expenses.! Sharps and Steels. Water and Horsing Water Cart. Total Cost. Superficial Area. Cost per square yard. VestryLabour including Ganger, included in Wages for Labour and Watchmen. £ s. d. £ s d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ S. d. £ s. d. Yards. £ s. d. Norris Street .. .. Broken York 4 5 8 0 18 3 0 7 11 7 16 10 263 /7 (2 4 8) 9 2 5 0 Little Essex Street .. .. .. 2 3 0 0 5 4 .. 2 8 4 101 /5¾ (1 5 0) Boston Street .. .. .... 1 16 8 0 10 0 .. 2 6 8 96 /5¾ (0 16 8) Dunloe Street .. .. Pebbles 12 0 5½ 1 16 0 0 4 0 19 3 4½ 1060 /4 (1 13 4) 12 4 4 0 Broken York 4½ 1 2 6 Regent's Row .. .. Pebbles 4 10 3 0 10 0 .. 6 11 9 457 /3½ (2 2 2) 4½ 1 11 6 I Britannia Gardens .. .. 5 1 9 2 4 9 1 2 1½ 8 8 7½ 492 /4 (2 6 8) Laburnum Street .. .. Pebbles 4 18 2 0 13 4 .. 7 3 0 416 /4 (2 0 10) 4½ 1 11 6 131 CARRIAGEWAY PAYING, 1892-1893. Shepherdess Walk, northward of Murray (Street— Macadam road excavated and carted, a portion paved with granite pitchings re-dressed and carted from Reliance Wharf and Flemming Street Yard, a portion paved with pitchings supplied and carted (special contract), a portion with granite pitchings carted and laid, also a portion taken up and re-laid, all on lias lime concrete, rammed, and grouted with cement and part lime grout; labour cutting on granite 975 10 6 Edward Street— Old pitchings taken up, re-dressed, selected, and re-laid, a portion carted from Flemming Street Yard and laid, a portion taken up and re-laid only, all on lias lime concrete, rammed and grouted with lias lime; labour cutting on granite 340 4 8 Wenlock Road, south of Edward Street (after removal of Iron Gates)— Macadam road excavated and carted, old carriageway taken up, a portion re-laid, a portion with cubes carted from Stone Yard re-dressed and laid on lias lime concrete and grouted 65 12 3 Napier Street— Channel taken up, re-laid with cubes, re-dressed and carted from Vestry's Depot, a portion carted and re-laid only, and a portion of new 4" × 4" granite cubes supplied and laid, all grouted with lias lime; labour cutting on granite 35 19 6 Reliance Wharf (paving and trench repairs)— A portion of carriageway taken up and re-laid, new 4" × 7" pitchings supplied and laid, a portion of pitchings dressed and re-laid, all on lias lime concrete, and grouted with cement. Old tram stone carted and fixed, curb re-fixed; 2 spur stones supplied and fixed 46 12 7 Hill Street— Cube carriageway taken up, a portion re-laid, a portion dressed, carted, and re-laid, all on lias lime concrete and grouted ; labour cutting on granite 52 9 5 Finsbury Market— A portion of carriageway taken up, re-laid and grouted 11 15 5 132 Shepherdess Walk, from Baths to Canal Bridge— Channel taken up, a portion of 4" × 7" cubes supplied, carted and laid; a portion re-dressed and re-laid on lias lime concrete and grouted 30 7 11 Kinsrsland Road, from Drysdale Street to Basing Place— A portion of carriageway re-laid ; a portion dressed, carted and laid ; labour cutting on granite 4 7 5 Kingsland Road, east side, by Y.M.C.A.— A portion of cube carriageway, taken up, trimmed aud relaid; a portion re-dressed, carted aud laid; and a portion of new 3" × 7" pitchings supplied and laid, all on Portland cement concrete and grouted 39 8 0 Ivy Lane— Ground excavated and carted; new 4" × 6" aud 4" × 4" pitchings supplied and laid on lias Jime concrete; a portion of carriageway taken up and re-laid; a portion re-dressed, carted, and laid; aud all grouted with lias lime 213 3 9 A portion paved with 1½-in.Yal de Travers compressed rock asphalte on 6-in. Portland cement concrete, including excavation and cartage of ground to shoot 126 1 7 Ashford Street, eastern end— Carriageway carted and re-laid on lias lime concrete aud grouted 1 11 10 Opposite 287, Hackney Road (Drain Trench)— Carriageway taken up, re-laid on concrete aud grouted 1 7 8 Wilkes Place (Repairs to a Sewer Trench) — Carriageway taken up and re-laid on lias lime concrete and grouted 3 15 6 Shepherdess Walk, by "Royal Standard" (Drain Trench)— Carriageway taken up and re-laid on lias lime concrete and grouted *0 10 2 Dunloe Street (in consequence of widening below railway bridge)— Macadam road excavated, sifted, and carted; a portion of cube carriageway taken up aud re-laid, a portion of new 4" × 7" and 3" × 7" Guernsey granite cubes supplied and laid on lias concrete and grouted 164 4 10 1 33 Hoxton Street, opposite Asylum— Maintenance of 2047 1/3 superficial yards of wood pavement bv the Improved Wood Pavement Company (as per agreement) 10 4 4 Goldsmith's Row, opposite Children's Hospital— Maintenance of 333 superficial yards of wood pavement bv the Improved Wood Pavement Company (as per agreement) 16 13 0 Old Street, opposite Town Hall— ' XI Maintenance of 4182/9 superficial yards of wood pavement by the Improved Wood Pavement Company (as per agreement) 26 3 9 Paved granite crossings (private) executed as follows :— Assay Works, Paul Street *9 5 7 By New Workshops, Maria Street *15 1 1 „Batey's, Canal Road *2 17 9 „60, Queens Road, in Shrubland Road *3 3 0 „New Warehouse, Batemans row *23 5 9 „London & North-Western Railway Depots, Pearson Street, Dunloe Street and Harvvar Street *82 3 11 Three paviors on an average and their labourers were employed in repairing the paved roads, and over trenches opened by the gas and water companies and Post Office Telegraphs; their wages for the year amounted to £676 19s. 0½d., and £16 12s. 0d. was paid for watchmen's wages. The companies contributed £167 18s. 11d. for labour, use of tools, &c., and £94 5s. 2d. for materials required in the said repairs. The contractor supplied 24 tons of 4" × 7" Guernsey granite cubes for use in repairing the channels and carriageways, at a cost of £38 1s. 6d., also 1½ tons 4" × 4", £2 2s. 0d., and redressed 359 super yards of pitchings at the yard, at a cost of £34 2s. 6d. Nine Plane Trees have been supplied and planted to replace others which had died at a cost of £3 12s. 0d. There are about fifty-one miles of carriageway in the parish, fifteen being paved, and the remaining portion constructed of macadam or flints. * The whole or a portion repaid to the Vestry. 134 The carriageway or channel paving in unsatisfactory condition, and should be prevent danger to traffic:— Bacchus Walk Bateman's Row Bevenden Street City Road Fanshaw Street Great Eastern Street Haberdasher Street Hoxton Square Hoxton Street (portion of) Ivy Street Laburnum Street (portion of) the following localities is in a most repaved or steam rolled (as required) to Leonard Street Maidstone Street Mur ray Street Paul Street Primrose Street Shoreditch High Street (portions of) Skinner Street Upper John Street Wenlock Street Wilson Street (portion of) FOOTWAY PAYING. The following works at the cost stated have been executed by the Contractor during the past year:— Brownlow Street— New 4-in. tooled landings to sizes, supplied and laid; new 3-in. and 2½-in. York paving, squared to sizes, supplied and laid *7 16 0 Shepherdess Walk, between Murray Street aud Shaftesbury Street- Curb taken up and re-fixed, a portion carted and fixed, and a portion of new 6-in. curb supplied and fixed on 6-in. concrete; old York paving taken up, a portion relaid, and a portion of new 3-in. York supplied and laid; 1 hole cut in 30 12 0 Napier Street— A portion of old York paving taken up, squared, aud re-laid, a portion of new 3-in. York paving supplied and laid; curb taken up, a portion re-fixed, a portion re-dressed, carted aud fixed, and a portion of new 6" × 12" circular and straight edge curb supplied aud fixed on concrete; labour cutting on York; 66 coal plates, 1 hydrant box, 1 manhole, and 2 lamp posts cut in 365 0 0 Hill Street— A portion of new 2½-in. York stone supplied and laid, old York taken up and re-laid, new 6" × 12" circular and straight edge curb supplied and fixed on concrete; 1 iron post re-fixed, and 1 coal plate let in 31 3 3 135 Fiusbury Market and Clifton Street— A portion of curb taken up and re-fixed, a portion carted aud fixed, and new 12"×9" and 6"×12" curb supplied and fixed on lias lime concrete; old York paving taken up and re-laid, a portion of new 3-in. ditto supplied and laid; cutting on York; 1 corner to curb rounded 29 3 0 Shepherdess Walk, from Wenlock Baths to Canal Bridge— New 6"×12" edge curb supplied and fixed, a portion of old curb taken up, dressed and re-fixed, and a portion carted and fixed on 6-in. concrete; old York paviug taken up and re-laid, a portion of new 3-in. ditto supplied and laid; labour cutting on York; 1 coal plate rebated, 2 lamp posts, 1 hydrant box, and 1 meter box cut in 137 9 6 Kingslaud lioad, west side, from south corner of Drysdale Street to No. 27— Old curb takeu up, a portion re-fixed, a portion dressed, carted and fixed, a portion of new 6"×12" edge straight and circular curb supplied and fixed on lias lime concrete; new 3-in. York paviug supplied and laid, a portion of old York taken up and re-laid; labour cutting on York, channel cut, 5 boxes, 5 lamp posts, 4 telegraph boxes and 1 hydraut cut in; 1 iron post refixed 159 14 10 Kingslaud Road, east side, from Shoreditch High Street to No. 14 Curb re-dressed, carted and re-fixed on lias lime concrete: old York paving taken up, squared and re-laid, a portion of new 3-in. York supplied and laid; labour cutting on York, channel cut, 3 coal plates, 2 posts and 1 telegraph box cut in 67 8 0 Ivy Lane— New 6"×12" and 7"×10" curb supplied and fixed, a portion of old curb refixed, a portion redressed and refixed, and a portion carted and fixed; a portion of York paving taken up and relaid; 2 quadrant blocks supplied and fixed ; 4 corners to curb rounded, and 7 posts refixed 100 16 0 Ash ford Street, eastern end— Footway taken up, a portion relaid and a portion of new 2i-iu. York supplied and laid ; curb taken up, a portion refixed, and a portion dressed, carted and fixed; cutting on York 12 7 10 136 Dunloe Street (in consequence of widening below Railway Bridge)— A portion repaved with new 3-in. York paving supplied and laid; a portion of old York relaid; old curb reset; a portion of new circular and straight-edge curb supplied and fixed; 1—24-in. angle block and 2—30"×9"×6" spur stones supplied and fixed; 1 iron post fixed; cutting on York 25 17 10 Nichols Square— Asphalte trenches repaired by Yal de Travers Asphalte Co. 0 19 5 Ivy Lane— Footway paved with 1½-in. Val de Travers asphalte on 3-in. best Portland cement concrete 125 19 7 Goldsmiths Row— Gully trenches reinstated by Val de Travers Asphalte Co. 1 17 4 The footway paving in the following localities is in a bad condition, and should be repaved to prevent danger to the public:— Allerton Street Hackney Road (portions of) Baring Street (portion of) Hoxton Street (portions of) Bateman's Row Ivy Street Bracklyn Street Kingsland Road (portion of) Bridport Place (east side) Laburnum Street Broadway, London Fields Maidstone Street Cavendish Street Mintern Street Clifton Street (portion of) Paul Street Crondall Street (portion of) Parr Street Curtain Road (portion of) Pit field Street (portion ol) Custance Street Rush ton Street East Road (portion of) Scawfell Street Forston Street Upper John Street Grange Street Wenlock Street Haberdasher Street, Whiston Street (portion of) Wilson Street The Road Foreman's wages, whose duties include the directing of the masons and paviors (also the Steam Road Roller), amounted to £130 0s. 0d. Four masons, on average, and their labourers, were employed in repairing the footways, and over trenches opened by the Gas and Water Companies and Post Office Telegraphs. One bricklayer and labourer was employed in cementing wall on both sides at Reliance Wharf, also in building retaining walls at Ivy Lane; their wages for the year amounted to £586 18s. l½d. The Companies contributed £99 9s. l0d. for labour, 137 use of tools and mortar, and £28 12s. 3d. for paving material required in the said repairs. Other contributions for paving, &c., amounted to the sum of £178 9s. 6d., part of which was due and paid to the Contractor. The Contractors supplied 1,900 superficial feet of patent Victoria stone for use in repairing the footways, at a cost of £55 8s. 4d.; 16,300 superficial feet of new 2½-in. tooled York stone, at a cost of £578 13s. 0d.; and 146 lineal feet of edge curb, at a cost £12 8s. 6d.; 100 feet Moor Stone at a cost of £6 5s. 0d. The following quantity of Stone,- in addition, was re-dressed bv piece-work in the yard, at the costs stated:— 1,379 feet run granite edge curb 40 4 5 344 super yards granite cubes 82 15 10 SEWERS WORK. The following works, at the costs stated, have been executed by the Contractor during the past year: — Nichol Square (in consequence of widening London & North Western Railway)— Construction of a new egg-shaped sewer; 189 feet run 3-ft. 9-in. ×2-ft. 6-in. brick sewer; 6 gullies constructed; 1 manhole built in, bends and all necessary drain connections; old sewer destroyed and trench filled in *222 8 3 Garden Walk— Sewer damaged by Chemical Works, made good *5 9 4 Plough Yard (in consequence of widening Loudon & North Western Railway).— Construction of new pipe sewer; 193 feet run 15-in. pipe inclosed in cement concrete, including excavation and cartage to shoot; 2 manholes constructed; 32 super feet new York stone landings supplied and fixed over manholes, having 2 20-in. diameter holes cut in centres *125 13 6 Crondall Street—from Hoxton Street to St. John's Road— Construction of new pipe sewer; 620 feet run 18-in. pipe sewer. Timber left in trenches. 40 drains connected; 8 manholes constructed; 48 super feet of new 6-in. York stones provided for manholes; cutting 8 24-in. holes in same 1165 18 7 * The whole or a portion repaid to the Vestry. 01 138 STREET GULLIES. On the 1st September, 1892, your Medical Officer having reported to the Paving and Sewers Committee that in view of the prevention of the spread of Cholera the o-ulleys in the parish should be cleansed. The committee resolved " hat the Vestry be asked to request the Dusting and Scavenging Committee to issue instructions for that purpose to the Superintendent, and that all complaints respecting defective gullies be made to the Surveyor." Owing to several complaints, all the gullies, numbering about 1,864 (irrespective of those upon private ground), were inspected by the Foreman of Sewers, who reported that 1,061 were in good condition, but 803 were defective. The question was fully considered by the Committee, who decided to take steps to repair the defective gullies as soon as possible, and tenders were obtained from several of the largest sewer contractors for carrying out the work. After deliberation and enquiry it was resolved "That this committee recommend the Vestry to leave the work in the hands of the Surveyor to put the work in band at once, aud to employ the necessary labour for carrying out the work efficiently." This resolution being adopted by the Vestry 15th November, 1892, one Foreman with four Bricklayers and their Labourers were started upon the work; their wages, exclusive of watchmen, amounted to £283 19s. 11d. Up to the 20th March, 1893, 292 gullies had been reconstructed or repaired, the cost of materials supplied for the same being £318 11s. 0d. JOBBING SEWERS AND PRIVATE DRAIN WORK. The jobbing sewers and private drain work continues to be executed by the Vestry's own staff in a satisfactory manner, although a considerable increase in the latter has taken place since the appointment of additional Sanitary Inspectors. The undermentioned sewers have been cleansed by the Vestry's workmen, the deposit removed and carted to the Vestry's wharves, and barged away. 139 Situation. Description. Feet. Crondall Street Brick Sewer 1200 Pearson Street ” ” 1100 New North Road ” ” 1300 Commercial Street ” ” 300 Willow Street ” ” 300 Garden Walk ” ” 200 Great Eastern Street ” ” 1550 Clifton Street ” ” 700 Mansfield Street ” ” 600 Buttesland Street ” ” 900 Earl Street ” ” 600 Aske Street ” ” 300 Great Chart Street ” ” 600 Bevenden Street ” ” 570 Haberdasher Street ” ” 500 Rivington Street ” ” 400 Hearn Street ” ” 350 Ormesby Street ” ” 400 Shap Street ” ” 400 Appleby Street ” ” 800 Poole Street ” ” 700 East Road ” ” 1800 Shepherdess Walk ” ” 1606 Weymouth Terrace ” ” 150 Goldsmiths Row ” ” 1600 Dove Row ” ” 260 George's Square and Grove Walk 12 in. Pipe Sewer 400 Acton Street 12 in. ,, 250 Moye Street 12 in. ,, 200 Watsons Place 12 in. „ 250 Maidstone Street 12 in. „ 300 Hertford Street 12 in. ” 280 Hilcot Street 12 in. ” 240 Dove Row 9 in. ,, 430 St. John's Terrace 12 in. „ 130 John Street 12 in. „ 200 Phillips Street 12 in. ,, 250 Holms Street 12 in. „ 50 Boston Street 12 in. ,, 230 King John Court 12 in. ” 100 Bevenden Street 12 in. ,, 250 Old Street 15 in. ,, 500 Garden Place 12 in. ,, 300 Mintern Street 2 ft. Barrel Sewer 250 Brougham Road 2 ft ” 100 Dunloe Street 2 ft. ” 170 Singer Street 2 ft. „ 300 Hoxton Street Old Sewer Cleansed and Destroyed 250 Grange Street ” ” ” 100 Allerton Street ” ” ” 60 140 One hundred and six Gullies, additional to the beforementioned number, have also been reconstructed or repaired, and the Sewers mentioned below constructed or reconstructed. Marlborough Road —Sewer reconstructed with 250 feet run 12 in. pipe—and all necessary drain connections—at a cost of about £70 10s. l0d. Ivy Lane.—Sewer reconstructed 220 feet run 12 in. pipes, 45 feet run 9 in. pipes, with all necessary bends, junctions, and drain connections. Seven new stoneware gullies, and one manhole with step irons and side entrance cover constructed, at a cost of about £124 14s. 11d. Brougham Road.—Sewer extended by 100 feet run of new 12 in. pipe—all necessary drains connected—at a cost of about £28 15s. 8d. Maria Street.—Sewer extended by 64 feet new 12 in. pipe, and all necessary drains connected, at a cost of about £19 17s. 2d. Wilks Place.—A portion of old sewer taken out and reconstructed, and a portion extended 80 feet run of 12 in. pipe, and all necessary drains connected, at a cost of about £30 1s. 0d. Elder Street.—Extended with 100 feet run of 12 in. pipe, and all necessary drains connected, at a cost of about £33 17s. 11d. New North Road, from Brick Sewer.—Sewer extended by 30 feet run 12-inch pipe, at a cost of £7 9s. 6d. Seventy-three new house drains from sewer to line of frontage have been constructed, one hundred and fifteen drains reconstructed, and thirty-eight stoppages in drains removed. These works were carried out at the owner's expense, the cost of the work amounting to £733 4s. 10½d., payment having been first deposited by the parties interested, in accordance with the Vestry's regulations. The sewers in the following localities are in a very unsatisfactory condition, and should be reconstructed:— Aiming Street (a portion) Bateman's Row Britannia Street Brunswick Street (a portion) Curtain Road (a portion) Dunloe Street (a portion) Dysart (late Princes) Street Earl Street (a portion) Flemming Street (a portion) Gifford Street (a portion) Hows Street (a portion) New North Road (a portion) Rushton Street Taplow (late Windsor) Street Weymouth Terrace (a portion) 141 One ganger (who was made foreman in May, 1892), two mechanics and four fiushers on average, with labourers, were employed in cleansing, disinfecting, re-constructing, repairing, &c., the sewers, drains and gullies in the parish; their wages for the year amounted to £1,122 0s. 5d. The sum of £220 3s. 2d. was also paid for watchmen's wages. Three men have been constantly employed cleansing the parish urinals (including Sundays and holidays, in the early morning); their wages for the year amounted to £215 17s. 9d. The following, in addition to other smaller amounts, represent the value of naterials, &c., supplied during the year:— £ s. d. Sand 131 0 9 Lime, cement, &c. 186 2 3 Bricks 48 0 0 Sanitary pipes, junctions, &c. 317 9 8 Smith's work (for yard tools, &c.) 99 18 7 Ditto (for steam roller tools, &c.) 46 15 7 Hydrant repairs, street name plates, plumber's, glazier's and writer's work 18 16 8 Castings 199 15 2 Cartage (including ground to shoot) 759 16 3| Water for roads 391 7 2 Water for flushing Gt. Chart Street and Fanshaw Street sewers (testing apparatus) 2 12 6 Lard Oil for steam roller 2 10 0 Coke for ditto and yard 38 1 0 Disinfectants 11 5 0 Brooms, pails, mops, &c. 29 6 6 Making good 3-in. main belonging to Gas Light and Coke Company 1 11 4 New hose reel and flushing apparatus 69 0 0 Wheelwright—Truck repairs 6 0 0 „ Repairs to water cart o O 0 0 New sewer lamps and repairs 13 5 10 Timber 8 16 5 New waterproof sheets for covering tools and materials of fiushers and gullymen o o 0 0 New coke sacks 2 2 0 New fiushers' boots (repaid to Vestry) 4 10 0 New clock at stone yard. 2 10 0 New picks, &c. 11 3 7 142 Hire of three steam rollers 174 3 0 New stone trolley 2 10 6 Repairing a square of glass broken by pickers. 1 5 8 7 straight edges and 3 half yard measures O O J 5 17 7 Horse, cart and man hire—Dusting and Scavenging Committee 6 19 6 Polling boards for drain and sewer works o 6 0 0 Paviors' rammers 3 0 0 INVENTORY OF PLANT AND MATERIAL ON HAND AT FLEMMING STREET DEPOT, at 25th MARCH, 1893. For Highways— I steam roller G twivels 1 tarpaulin for same 12 spalling hammers 1 set leather hose for ditto 4 paviors' hammers 1 hand roller 4 rammers 9 masons' and paviors' trucks 8 punners 3 box barrows 12 crowbars 6 navvy barrows 24 stone breakers' hammers 1 trolley 100 pickaxes 1 water cart 3 set boning sticks 3 wooden shelters for watchmen 1 straight-edge 45 lamps and lanterns for watchmen 6 iron wedges 1 large cast iron column and 20 ,, shovels 6 iron posts taken from refuge 24 hand brushes by Shoreditch Church 1 screen 3 cast iron street posts 1 weighing machine 36 iron trestles 24 rag mops 9 galvanized pails 24 brooms 4 masons' beetles 6 notice boards 72 ,, chisels 4 sieves 24 „ pitching tools 4 concrete measures 4 ,, bedding hammers 1 step ladder 7 ,, trowels 1 lifting jack 4 ,, levels 1 branding iron 3 ,, straight edges 1 tripod and winch 143 For Sewers— 3 iron sewer trucks 3 rakes 6 sewer lamps 18 pickaxes 200 ft. cane sewer rods 50 ft. ash „ 2 ladders 8 machines and scoops cjmplete 1 gully bowl and fork 8 scaffold poles 6 12 ft, battens 24 6 ft. „ ½ fathom polling board 12 5×5 struts Material at Yard— 420 ft. run tram stone 570 „ re-dressed edge&circular curb 200 „ old „ „ „ 250 super ft. Victoria stone . 20 cubic yds. broken granite 50 super yds. old York stone 50 „ York edging 6 cast iron side entrance covers 4 „ large gully grates 2 ,, medium ,, 7 „ ventilating grates 9 ,, „ (with catch pit) 3 ,, flushing boxes Patterns for castings complete 53 6 in. stoneware block traps 8 9 in. ,, „ 11 15×36 ,, gully pans 6 15×30 „ „ 8 15 in. junctions 9 12 in. 4 9 in. ,, 12 bushels Portland cement 9 ,, blue lias lime 9 ,, Roman cement 10 tons granite cubes (old) ,, spalls ,, pebbles (old) 2 tons old iron 4 6 in. junctions 20 ft. run 15 in. stoneware pipe 8 ,. 12 in. „ 36 ,, 9 in. ,, 100 „ 6 in. „ 18 ,, 4 in. ,, No. 1 15×12 stoneware reducing pipe „ 2 12×9 „ 6 9×6 18 9 in. bends 30 6 in. „ 3 4 in. 500 bricks LONDON AND NORTH WESTERN RAILWAY. (NEW DEPOT AND WIDENINGS.) The reconstruction of roadway and sewer at. the west end of Nichols Square, Hackney Road, and of Plough Yard, Shoreditcli High Street, have been carried out bv contract under the supervision of this department after deviation by the Company. 144 (DUNLOE STREET.) In order to widen and improve this thoroughfare, it was suggested that the Company give up a strip of land, on the south side near their depot, belonging to them, to which they consented on condition the area be paved by the Vestry—which work lias been carried out, and a considerable street improvement thereby effected. GOLDSMITH'S ROW. Having taken exception to the line of frontage as proposed and shown on plans for Industrial Dwellings on the site of the old Goldsmith's Almshouses, the matter was submitted for arbitration to the Superintending Architect of the London County Council, who decided that the prolongation ot the general line of buildings along this street should be maintained. My exception was thereby confirmed. The acquirement of a strip of land in front of this property, in order to improve the footway of Goldsmith's Row, is still under consideration. HAGGERSTON DISTRICT.—NEW SEWERS. Complaints (arising from various causes, as stated in the following report) having been made as to the sewerage of this district, plans (subsequently approved by the London County Council with their addition: "all pipe sewers to be laid in concrete") and estimates lor a thorough system of re-drainage were prepared with the aid of a competent temporary assistant, and submitted to your Paving and Sewers Committee, who Resolved—"That this Committee recommend the Vestry to approve the scheme as submitted, and that the contract be divided into two sections, and tenders invited for the work; also, that a quantity Surveyor be employed on the usual terms." These resolutions having been approved by the Vestry, further particulars in reference to the execution of the work will be given in a future report. "REPORT OF THE SURVEYOR UPON THE RE-DRAINAGE OF A PORTION OF THE DISTRICT OF HAGGERSTON. " Surveyor's Department, Town Hall, Old Street, December, 1892. "To the Pnvimj ami Sewers Committee. "Gentlemen,—In consequencc of the numerous complaints received from the Sanitary Department as to the impossibility of properly dealing' with the drainage of Dwellings, Board Schools and other premises in that portion of the Parish surrounded by Regent's Canal on the North, Ilackney Road on the South, Goldsmith's Row on tiie East, and Great Cambridge Street on the West, and owing to 145 the very unsatisfactory condition of the sewers, several openings were made and an inspection took place during 1890 by the Paving and Sewers Committee. "Beyond giving an instruction to have some of the sewers cleansed no resolution was then come to. "In the spring of the present year, owing to further complaints embracing drain stoppages, flowing of sewage back into premises, and fonl smells throughout the district, and having regard to the shallowness, inadequate gradients, and general bad construction of the Vestry's sewers there, it was resolved to have a survey made of the District and plans prepared for a thorough system of re-drainage. "Having been allowed the necessary assistance in September, plans, sections, and detail drawings have since been prepared, which are submitted herewith for your approval, and an approximate estimate is appended to this report. "It is proposed to construct a new 3-ft. 9-in. by 2-ft. 6-in. egg shaped brick sewer, commencing at the Hackney Road end of Tuilerie Street, by connection with the new Main Sewer belonging to the London County Council, passing from thence through Tuilerie Street, Holms Street, Boston Street, across Dove Row, through Jacobin Street and Whiston Street to the corner of Nicholl Street, allowing a gradient throughout of 1 in 120. " The depths from the surface would be : at Hackney Road, about 24§-ft., and at Nicholl Street about 8^-ft. " A branch sewer 3-ft. 6-in. by 2-ft. 4-in, also of brickwork, and egg shaped, would be connected to the sewer referred to, at the junction of Audrey Street with Boston Street. It would pass through Audrey Street and be connected to the existing sewer in Goldsmith's Row. The average depth of this sewer would be between 10 and 11 feet, and the gradient 1 in 120. " It is proposed to construct 15-in. Pipe Sewers through portions of Dove Row and Jacobin Street at average depths of about 5-ft. 9-in. and 7-ft. respectively, and with gradients of 1 in 128, and 1 in 120. " The whole of the remaining sewers would be constructed of 12-in. pipes as detailed hereafter, at depths varying from 5 feet to 17 feet respectively, and gradients generally of 1 in 120. " Abundant means of road surface ventilation, and access by manholes and side entrances for cleansing purposes and inspection have been provided. "The following is a summary of my approximate estimate of the cost of this section of the proposed scheme. 146 SUMMARY. £ s. d. 3 ft. 9-in. by 2-ft. 6-in. Sewer in Tuilerie Street, Holms Street, Boston Street, Jacobin Street, and Whiston Street 2,498 1 6 3-ft. 6-in. by 2-ft. 4-in. Sewer in Audrey Street 406 16 5 12-in. Pipe Sewer in Dunloe Street 247 10 0 12-in. Pipe Sewer in Boston Street 219 14 2 12-in. Pipe Sewers in Maidstone Street 363 9 2 12-in. Pipe Sewers in Moye Street, north and south of Dove Rov 293 19 O 15-in. and 12-in. Pipe Sewers in Dove Row and Hay Street 212 0 8 12-in. Pipe Sewers in Dove Row and Nicholl Street 129 12 4 15-in. Pipe Sewer in Jacobin Street 90 10 0 12-in. Pipe Sewers in Park Place, Talavera Place, and Nortl Place 187 19 1 Add extras for two new Manholes over present sewer in Holim Street 22 0 0 Add for assistance of Clerk of Works, Quantity Surveyor, &c. 528 7 8 £5,000 0 0 "I am, Gentlemen, "Yours obediently, "ALFRED J. MARTIN, "Surveyor" Note.—The additional requirements of the London County Council are not included in the above Summary. GOLDSMITH'S ROW WIDENING, AND RECREATION GROUND. As previously reported, the widening of a portion of Goldsmith's Row and Square was commenced and completed by the London County Council at the close of 1891, and arrangements were in progress for the formation of a Recreation Ground, for which land had been purchased. Measurements were taken and several plans, specifications and detail drawings were prepared in the Surveyor's Department and ultimately approved by your Housing, &c., Committee. Upon the 23rd September, 1892, tenders for the erection of a dwarf wall and railings on the north side of the site for Recreation Ground were received, and the tender of Messrs. Clark, Hunt & Co., of Shoreditch High Street, was accepted. Upon the 30th December tenders were received and considered for fence wall aud railings on the south and east sides of the Square, and the tender of Messrs. Clark, Hunt & Co. was accepted. 147 Your Surveyor having been instructed to interview the adjoining owners with the view of getting a straight "give and take" line of fence in lieu of the existing very irregular line, was successful in obtaining the desired improvement without any cost to the Vestry. Messrs. Clark, Hunt & Co. commenced these works on the 10th January, 1893, and full particulars as regards costs, &c., will be furnished in the report next year. On the 10th March the Surveyor reported that owing to the subsoil being insecure it would be unsafe to build the walls according to drawings and specification. It was resolved to construct concrete piers with intervening brick arches to carry the walls, in accordance with drawing and estimate submitted. The Surveyor further reported that in consequence of the London Countv Council having given consent to the Vestry adhering to the old line of frontage for the northern fence wall, it would be necessary to erect about 17 feet of additional fencing on the east side of Recreation Ground. The Committee accordingly resolved that Messrs. Clark, Hunt & Co. be instructed to execute this additional fencing at the same rates of payment as those upon which their contract was based. It is anticipated that the whole of the works will be completed so as to allow the Recreation Ground to be formally opened to the public in the autumn of this year. In the preparation of this report it gives me much pleasure to acknowledge the very able assistance rendered by Messrs. J. N. Heale and H. V. Broomfield, who together have arranged the particulars. With equal pleasure I must also acknowledge the labour given by Messrs. T. Byford, J. Hart, aud W. Edwards, foremen, in furnishing the numerous measurements and statistics upon which the report is founded. This extra labour, always most willingly rendered, will be especially gratifying to the Vestry when the additional duties now thrown upon the Surveyor's Department are taken into consideration. 1 am, Gentlemen, Yours obediently, ALFRED JACKSON MARTIN, Surveyor. Shoreditch Town Hall, Old Street, E.C. LIGHTING DEPARTMENT. Vestry of the Parish of Saint Leonard, Shoreditch IN THE COUNTY OF LONDON. INSPECTOR DOUGHTY'S REPORT. Lighting Department, 26th March, 1893. Gentlemen, PUBLIC STREET LIGHTING. I beg to present the following report and tables showing the work done by this department, and the operation of the average meter system during the fifteenth year of its operation. The average meter system was adopted by the Vestry in the year 1877, and previously to that date the cost of public lighting was defrayed under the ''contract system." The price of gas supplied to the public lamps during the year was 2/2 per 1000 cubic feet, the number of meters distributed throughout the parish is 68, the reading of the indices is taken once a month in the presence of an inspector of the Gas Light and Coke Company. The meters are all periodically cleaned and repaired, they are also tested and stamped by an inspector appointed by the London County Council, according to the Sales of Gas Act, 1878. The total net payment for gas, lamplighters' wages, lighting, extinguishing, and cleaning, materials, and wages for repairs, painting, &c., for the year, including 263 improved lamps of increased illuminating power, fixed at refuges and in positions were increased light was required, and the provision of 9 additional lamps and fittings and 24 new columns, was £5,384 9s. 4d. The average cost per ordinary lamp for the year was £2 18s. 2½d., 14 additional ordinary lamps have been fixed and put in lighting during the year. 5 have been discontinued and the positions of 7 re-arranged. 152 The following tabular statement shows the number of lamps at present in use: No. of Lamps. Description of Lamp. Consumption per hour. Ordinary. Cubic feet. 1424 14 in. 4.6 4 24 „ Globe 6.9 133 17 „ Square 8.0 23 18 „ „ 12.0 64 18 „ 15.0 4 24 „ Hexagon 16.0 1 30 „ „ 20.0 4 33 „ 24.0 3 33 „ 30.0 25 33 „ „ 33.0 J 36 „ Octagon 50.0 1 36 „ „ 58.0 1687 1251 of these lamps are fixed upon columns on the footways, 36 are fixed on columns at refuges in the carriageways, 399 are fixed upon brackets, and one over entrance to De Beauvoir Wharf. Fourteen additional ordinary lamps have been fixed and put in lighting in tho following streets during the year:— 1 in Hoxton Market 1 „ Ely Place 2 „ Mark Street 2 „ Rivington Street 1 Bateman's Row 1 „ Pearson Street under railway bridge 1 „ Harwar Street „ „ 1 „ Dunloe Street „ „ „ 1 „ Long Street „ „ „ 1 „ Hewitt Street 1 „ Little Essex Street 1 „ Great Chart Street 14 Five lamps were discontinued during the year, as follows:— 1 in Ebenezer Street 1 „ Hivington Street 1 „ Bateman's Row 1 „ Preedy Buildings (place closed) I „ Great Chart Street 5 153 The positions of 7 lamps were re-arranged in the following streets during the year:— 1 in Ely Place 1 „ Rivington Street 1 „ Mark Street 1 „ Bateman's Row 1 „ Little Essex Street 1 „ New North Road bridge 1 „ Plough Yard 7 During the months of September, November, and December, lamps were lighted during the day time for a period of 17½ hours, on account of the foggy weather. The sum of £5 15s. 6d. has been recovered from persons causing damage to lamps by driving against them, or by projections from their vehicles. 15/- has been paid to the police and others for reporting particulars and detecting persons extinguishing lamps during the night, to the danger of the public and property; and 11/6 has been received by the sale of old metal. The following statement shows the particulars of repairs and renewals for the year to 25th March, 1893:— MONTH. Governors Tested and Exchanged. Lamps repaired in Street or Shop. Panes of Glass used. New Standpipes and Cocks, &c. Defective Lights attended to. Lights turned off by the public. Lamps, Cradles and Chair-irons renewed. Columns broken and renewed. Brackets broken and renewed. March & April. 125 25 325 4 72 4 9 ... 1 May 187 20 278 1 51 5 10 ... 2 June 115 40 245 2 83 7 3 2 July 175 18 299 2 107 3 ... ... ... August 110 15 194 ... 27 2 6 1 1 September 109 5 237 2 73 3 2 October 99 14 256 1 114 5 1 ... 1 November 163 16 133 1 72 17 1 1 l December 98 12 51 2 62 6 2 ... ... January 97 7 171 3 165 3 1 ... ... February 123 3 175 5 55 3 2 1 ... March 114 9 159 3 30 4 3 ... ... Totals 1515 184 2523 26 911 62 40 3 8 154 The maintenance and keeping in repair of the lamps, columns, brackets and fittings, re-glazing, fixing and fitting up new lamps, columns and brackets, lighting, extinguishing and cleaning the lamps, is now done by the Vestry's own staff of workmen, consisting of 16 lamplighters, 3 spare men, one fitter and a labourer; extra men are put on during the summer months to paint the urinals and tree guards, &c., and any additional works. Each lamplighter has on an average 105 lamps to light, extinguish, and clean; they are started night and morning from 3 mustering places in the parish by a foreman, who keeps the time. One of the lamplighters died during the year after a short illness, and the senior spare man has been promoted to his place. PRIVATE LIGHTING. The quantity of gas consumed during the year is as follows:— DEPARTMENT. Gas consumption in cubic feet. Total Cost. £ s. d. Town Hall and General Offices 1,181,100 183 17 8 Disinfecting Chambers 32,900 5 2 10 Public Mortuary 2,300 0 11 2 De Beauvoir Wharf 425,800 67 16 10 Reliance Wharf 88,500 13 18 11 Kiosk Convenience 98,400 15 11 0 Total 1,829,000 286 18 5 ADVERTISING ON LAMP COLUMNS. All the lamp columns are now let for advertising purposes, except those in Great Eastern and Old Streets, to Messrs. Heath, Limited, of Manchester, for the sum of £400 per annum, who are to paint the lamps and columns and brackets. The use of the columns in Great Eastern and Old Streets, formerly let to Mr. S. R. Stevenson for advertising purposes, has now been discontinued. 155 PUBLIC URINALS. These conveniences are situated and lighted as under:— Situation. No. Description of Lamp. Kiosk, High Street (on top) 1 200 candle power lamp Do. Urinal 2 Ordinary lamps High Street, by Great Eastern Railway 4 „ „ Rivington Street 2 „ „ Anning Street 1 „ „ Great Eastern Street 2 „ „ King John Court 1 „ „ Wood's Buildings 1 „ „ Mills Court 1 „ „ Grove Walk „ „ Pitfield Street 1 „ „ Plumber's Court 1 „ „ Tabernacle Street 1 100 candle power lamp Phipp Street 1 50 „ „ Haberdasher Street 1 50 „ „ Wenlock Street 1 50 „ „ Great Chart Street 1 40 „ „ Hoxton Street, opposite Infirmary 1 60 „ „ Shepherdess Walk 2 50 „ „ Cavendish Street 1 Ordinary lamp Hyde Road 2 „ „ Nil Street 1 „ „ Bacchus Walk 1 „ „ Hudson Court 1 „ „ Union Walk, by Union Street 1 „ „ Maria Street 1 „ „ Hows Street 1 „ „ Nuttal Street 1 „ „ Dunston Road 1 „ „ Acton Mews 1 „ „ Whiston Street 1 „ „ Edith Street 1 „ „ Weymouth Terrace 1 „ „ 156 KIOSK CONVENIENCE. This public convenience and lavatory consists of five w.c.'s, three lavatory basins, and a six-compartment urinal. The total receipts during the year amounted to £197 7s. 1d., being £10 14s. 2d. for use of lavatory, and £186 2s. 11d. for convenience fees. The payments during the year for attendant's wages, gas and water supply, &c., cleaning and maintenance, amount to £115 18s. 8d., being an excess of receipts over payments of £70 4s. 3d. for the year. PUBLIC URINALS. One new iron urinal with four compartments has been erected in Great Chart Street by Messrs. Macfarlane & Co., in place of the worn-out one with two stalls, which was found to be inadequate to the requirements of the neighbourhood. This new urinal has been constructed upon improved principles, and fitted inside with glass enamelled iron plates, which are impervious to moisture and corrosion and more easily kept clean. One brick and slate urinal with five compartments has been removed from Hoxton Street, by Red Lion Court, in consequence of the owner of the ground requiring the site for building purposes. The public urinals (33 in number), and 50 tree guards, were all painted during the summer by men employed by the Vestry for the purpose, the cost for wages, paint, and tools amounted to £41 5s. 1d. Twenty-four enamelled iron caution tablets were supplied during the year and fixed in various positions, with a view of abating the much complained of nuisances. WATER SUPPLY TO URINALS. The water supplied to the public urinals in the parish is by meter; the rate per 1000 gallons supplied by the East London Company is sixpence, and the rent of meter two shillings and sixpence per quarter. In the New River Company's district the rate per 1000 gallons varies according to the amount used. If the quantity supplied during any one quarter shall not exceed 50,000 gallons, the sum of £1 11s. 3d. is charged; for a quantity exceeding 50,000 gallons, and not exceeding 100,000, supplied during any one quarter, sevenpence per 1000 gallons is charged; exceeding 100,000 gallons and not exceeding 200,000 gallons during any one quarter, sixpence halfpenny per 1000 gallons is charged; for a quantity exceeding 200,000 gallons supplied during 157 any one quarter, the rate of sixpence per 1000 gallons is charged, and five shillings per quarter for rent of meter. The cost for water supplied to the urinals and rent of meters for the year is £360 14s. 5d. The 33 public urinals are situated as follows:— No. Situation. Description. No. of Compartments. 1 High Street,opposite Shoreditch Church Slate 6 2 Do. opposite Great Eastern Railway Iron and slate 12 3 Rivington Street, under railway bridge Iron and glass enamelled 6 4 Anning Street, by New Inn Yard Iron and slate 2 5 Great Eastern Street, by railway bridge Iron and slate 12 6 King John Court, by railway bridge Slate ') 7 Wood's Buildings, by Great Eastern Street Iron 2 8 Mills Court, by Curtain Road Slate 4 9 Grove Walk, Hoxton Square Slate q »> 10 Pitfield Street Iron 5 11 Plumber's Court Slate 2 12 Tabernacle Street Iron and slate 6 13 Phipp Street Iron 2 14 Haberdasher Street, by East Road Iron and slate 4 15 Wenlock Street Iron and glass 2 16 Great Chart Street, by Pitfield Street Iron and glass 4 17 Shepherdess Walk, by City Road Iron and slate 6 18 Cavendish Street, by New North Road Iron 2 19 Hyde Road, by Rosemary Branch Iron 5 20 Nil Street, near Alma Street Iron and glass 2 21 Bacchus Walk, near Hoxton Street Iron and slate 4 22 Hudson Court, by Kingsland Road Iron 6 23 Union Walk, by Union Street, Kingsland Road Iron and glass 2 24 Maria Street, by Harwar Street Iron and slate 4 25 Hows Street, by Kingsland Road Iron and slate 2 26 Nuttall Street, by Kingsland Road Iron and slate 4 27 Hoxton Street, opposite Infirmary Iron 6 28 Dunston Road, by Kingsland Road Slate 4 29 Acton Mews, by Ilaggerston Station Slate 4 30 Whiston Street, Goldsmith Row Iron and slate 3 31 Edith Street, by Great Cambridge Iron and slate 3 32 Weymouth Terrace,near Hackney Road Brick and slate 3 33 Hoxton Market Iron 6 158 FLUSHING COURTS AND GULLIES. The cost of flushing the Courts and Gullies with water direct from the mains through a 2¼-inch hose was, for water, £268 15s. 10d., and £76 10s. for labour, the East London Company's district being done in the day-time and the New River Company's district in the night-time. INVENTORY OF TOOLS, LAMPS, BRACKETS AND MATERIALS IN STOCK at 25th MAECH, 1893. 1 Testing Apparatus complete. 6 pairs Gas Tongs. 18 pairs Gas Pliers. 1 Pipe Cutter. 2 Screw Plates. 1 Leg Vice. 2 Drill Stocks and Drills. 5 Hammers. 2 Soldering Irons and 1 Stove. 1 Melting Pot. 2 Ladles. 19 Ladders. 2 pairs Steps. 1 pair Trestles. 1 Spring Truck. 2 Crow Bars. 7 Files. 2 Augers. 16 Lighting Torches. 13 Lamp Columns. 20 Lamps. 17 Cradle Irons. 9 Chair Irons. 5 Brackets. 78 Lever Cocks. 60 Gas Governors. 137 feet Gas Barrel. 298 Glass Sides and Tops. 17 Paint Cans. ½ cwt. White Lead. ¼ „ Red Lead. 17 Porcelain Cones. 4 dozen Spindles. 1 gross Steatite Burners. 1 gross f-inch Washers. 3 lengths 1-inch Hose. 7 Enamelled Iron Caution Tablets. 137 Opal Street Name Tablets. 14 lbs. Solder. 5 Scrubbing Brushes and sundry small tools. 159 TABLE I. Cost of New Works for the Year to March, 1898. Supplying 48 14-inch lamps and 48 14-inch cradle irons: 1 18-inch lamp and chair iron; 15 bracket irons and fittings; 48 ¾-inch bends; 36 ½-inch stand pipes; 144 3/8-inch spindles and 6 cones; 6 dozen wedges; 2 gross steatite burners; 10 dozen lever cocks; 3 dozen pipe hooks; 6 gross washers; 3 wire cages and 14 30 c.-p. burners 86 6 l 140 opal tablets 6 15 4 25 octagon columns 49 17 1 Tools 0 11 0 Erecting 10 new lamp columns, re-arranging the positions of 7, removing of 5 discontinued and re-instating foot and carriageways disturbed, and re-instating footways to 9 bracket lamps, and ground disturbed in removing defective fittings 16 9 0 Wages, fitting up new lamps, fixing new standpipes, street name and caution tablets 29 18 6 Lamplighters' wages for large lamps 170 6 0 Materials and labour, re-pairing, painting, and glazing 202 large lamps and columns, and painting guard posts at refuges 45 11 4 Smiths' work, re-pairing lamp irons, &c. 3 7 1 Removal of lamp services 13 6 4 Fittings for disinfecting rooms 1 6 9 2 reflecting lamps and fittings fixed at De Beauvoir Wharf, and 2 lamps and brackets fixed at Reliance Wharf 20 15 0 Sundry fittings for Town Hall and Offices 1 14 1 £446 3 7 TABLE II. Statement of the cost of Repairs and Painting, Lighting and Extinguishing and Cleaning, for the year to March, 1893. Materials and labour for repairing, painting and glazing 14-inch ordinary lamps, columns, brackets, standpipes, &c. 151 5 3 Lamplighters' wages 935 19 10 do. for holiday 6 2 0 Reward to police constables and others 0 15 0 £1094 2 1 I GO TABLE III. (lout of Maintenance of Meters and Governors, dx., -Salaries and Expanses for the year to March, 1893. Maintenance of Meters and Governors (proportion) ... 47 16 11 Inspector's salary 200 0 0 £247 16 1] TABLE IV. 1 )et,ails of the 1 lours of Liyhtiny per Lamp duriny the year. Month of N umber of Hours per Month. Average Number of Hours burning per Night. January 474-73 14-83 February •563-77 12-54 March 344-58 1111 April 272-48 8-93 M ay 200-06 6-55 June 167-37 5*57 July 191-91 5-99 August... 221-99 7-65 September 295-41 9-84 October 374-68 ' 12-08 November 425-39 14-11 December 482-60 15-32 The Year 3814-97 10-37 161 TABLE V. Shelving the comparative cost of Gas and the saving under the new system. Number of hours charged for. Consumption per hour charged cu. ft. Consumption per lamp per quarter cu. ft. Number of Lamps. Total Consumption per quarter. Rate per 1000 cu. ft. £ s. d. Saving £ s. d. A Old System, March 1892 Sunset to Sunrise. 1257.34 X 5. = 6286.70 X 1411.45 = 8,873,362 X 2/2 = 961 5 7 B New System, March 1892 Actual Number of Burning Hours. 1188.08 x 1.61 =, 5454.82 X 1411.45 = 7,699,205 X ,, = 834 1 7 = 127 4 0 C Old System, June 1892 Sunset to Sunrise. 788.80 X 5. = 3944.00 X 1423.57 = 5,614,560 X ,, = 608 4 10 D New System, June 1892 Actual Number of Burning Hours. 639.91 X 4.75 = 3044.81 X 1423.57 = 4,384,500 X „ = 469 11 5 = 138 18 5 E O1d System, Sept. 1892 Sunset to Sunrise. 882.25 X 5. = 4411.25 X 1422.76 = 6,276,150 X „ = 679 18 4 F New System, Sept. 1892 Actual Number of Burning Hours. 709.81 X 4.76 = 3377.68 X 1422.76 = 4,805,627 X „ = 520 12 1 = 159 6 3 G Old System, Dec. 1892 Sunset t0. Sunrise. 1871.61 X 5. = 6858.05 X 1420.39 = 9,741,105 X ,, = 1055 5 8 H New System, Dec. 1892 Actual Number of Burning Hours. 1282.67 X 4.52 = 5801.39 X 1420.39 = 8,240,236 X „ = 892 13 9 = 162 11 11 Total saving in the cost of Gas for the year £587 15 7 162 TABLE VI. Comparative cost of Lighting, Extinguishing, Cleaning and Repairs, and the Saving under the Old and New System. OLD SYSTEM. Cost of Lighting, Extinguishing and Repairs to Lamps. Lamps. S. d. £ s. d. Quarter ending March, 1892 1411.45 @ 5 5.90 = 387 18 3 June „ 1423.57 ,, 5 3.85 = 378 14 6 Sept. ,, 1422.70 ,, 3 8.23 202 4 0 Dec. ,, 1420.39 ,, 3 5.96 201 15 3 £1290 12 0 NEW SYSTEM. Cost of Lighting, Extinguishing and Repairs to Lamps. As per Table II. 1094 2 1 Saving for the year £190 9 11 TABLE VII. Showing the Total Saving by the Meter System and Modified Hours. In the cost of Gas shown by Table V. 587 15 .7 In the cost of Lighting, Extinguishing and in repairs to lamps shown by Table VI. 196 9 11 784 5 0 Deduct cost of maintenance of meters and governors, salaries, &c., shown by Table III. 247 10 11 247 10 11 Total Saving £536 8 7 16.3 TABLE VIII. Shewing the consumption of Gas in Lamps of greater illuminating power than the ordinary lamps. Quarter ending Number of hours charged for. Consumption per hour charged cu. ft. Consumption per lamp per quarter cu. ft. N umber of Lamps. Consumption per quarter cu. ft. Rate per 1000 cu. ft. £ s. d. Total £ s. d. March, 1892 1180.40 x 6.9 = 8,144.76 X 4. = 32,579 x 2/2 3 10 7 „ „ x 8. = 9,443.20 x 126. = 1,189,843 x ,, = 128 17 11 „ „ x 12. = 14,164.80 x 23. = 325,790 x „ = 35 5 10 „ „ x 15. = 17,706.00 X 64. = 1,133,184 x „ = 122 15 2 „ „ x 16. = 18,886.40 X 3. = 56,659 x ,, = 6 2 9 „ „ x 20. = 23,608.00 X 1. = 23,608 X ,, = 2 11 1 „ „ x 24. = 28,329.60 X 5. = 141,648 X „ = 15 6 10 „ „ x 30. = 35,412.00 X 3. = 106,236 X ,, = 11 10 2 „ „ x 33. = 38,953.20 X 25. = 973,830 X „ = 105 9 11 „ „ x 50. = 59,020.00 X 1. = 59,020 X „ = 6 7 10 „ „ x 58. = 68,463.20 X 1. = 68,463 X „ = 7 8 4 = 445 6 5 June, 1892 637.55 x 6.9 = 4,399.09 X 4. = 17,596 x 2/2 . 1 18 1 „ „ x 8. = 5,100.40 X 125.85 = 641,885 X „ = 69 10 9 „ „ x 12. = 7,650.60 X 23. = 175,963 X „ = 19 1 3 „ „ x 15. = 9,563.25 x 64. = 612,048 X „ = 66 6 1 „ „ x 16. = 10,200.80 x 3. = 30,602 X „ = 3 6 3 „ „ x 20. = 12,751.00 X 1. = 12,751 X „ = 1 7 7 „ „ X 24. = 15,301.20 X 5. = 76,506 X „ = 8 5 9 „ „ X 30. = 19,126.50 x 3. = 57,379 X ,, = 0 4 3 „ „ X 33. = 21,039.15 X 25. = 525,978 X ,, = 50 19 7 „ „ X 50. = 31,877.50 X 1. = 31,877 X „ = 3 9 0 „ „ X 58. = 36,977.90 x 1. = 36,977 X ,, = 4 0 1 = 240 8 8 I 64 TABLE VIII.—Continued. Quarter ending Number of hours charged or. Consump tion per hour charged, cu. ft. Consumption per lamp per quarter cu. ft. Number of Lamps. Consumption per quarter cu. ft. Rate per 1000 cu. ft. 1L d. Total £ 8. a. Sept. 1892 712-15 x 6-9 = 4,913-83 X 4- 19,655 x 2/2 - 2 2 7 y * x 8- = 5,697-20 x 127.99 = 729,184 x ,, = 78 19 10 x 12- 8,545*80 x 23- = 196,553 x „ = 21 5 10 7 7 x 15- 10,682-25 X 64- - 683,664 x ,, = 74 1 3 7 ♦ x 16- = 11,394-40 x 3* = 34,183 x ,, = 3 14 0 7 * x 20- = 14,243-00 x 1* = 14,243 X ,, = 1 10 10 7 * X 24- 17,091-60 X 5- = 85,458 X ,, = 9 5 1 7 * X 30- = 21,364-50 X 3- 64,093 x ., = 6 18 10 7 7 x 33- = 23,500-95 X 25- 587,523 x ,, = 63 12 11 7 » ? j x 50- - 35,607-50 x l- 35,607 x ,, = 3 17 1 ? 7 x 58- = 41,304-70 X 1* 41,304 x ,, = 4 9 5 = 269 17 8 Dec. 1892 1277-38 x 6-9 = 8,813-92 X 4- 35,255 x 2 2 = 3 16 4 n 7 7 x 8- = 10,219-04 X 133-1 1,360.154 x ,, = 147 7 0 7? 7 7 x 12- = 15,328*56 x 22- 337,228 x ,, = 36 10 7 77 x 15- = 19,160*70 X 64- 1.226.284 x ,, = 132 16 11 7 7 x 16- = 20,438-08 X 4- 81,752 x ,, = 8 17 1 1 7 x 20- = 25,547-60 X l- 25,547 x ,, = 2 15 4 j 7 x 24- = 30,657*12 X 4- = 122.628 X ,, = 13 5 8 } ) x 30- = 38,321-40 X 3* 114,964 x ,, = 12 9 1 j j x 33- = 42,153*54 X 25- 1,053,838 X ,, = 114 3 3 > 7 x 50- = 63,869-00 x I- = 63,869 x ,, = 6 18 4 j 7 X 58- = 74,088-04 X 1- 74.088 X „ = 8 0 6 == 487 0 1 £1442 12 10 Shoreditch Town Hall, « 7 Old Street. E.C. I am, Gentlemen, Your obedient Servant, C. H. DOUGHTY, Li<thtiny Inspector. PUBLIC HEALTH DEPARTMENT The Vestry of the Parish of Saint Leonard, IN THE COUNTY OF LONDON. REPORT OF THE MEDICAL OFFICER OF HEALTH. Public Health Department, lst January, 1893. To the Vestry of St. Leonard, Shoreditch. Gentlemen, In presenting my report for the year 1892, I have not considered it necessary to do more thau refer to subjects which have already been fully dealt with in the quarterly reports I have had the honour to submit to you. PART I.—STATISTICAL. POPULATION. While certain parts of the district were shown at the census to be decreasing in population, others were slightly increasing, it is therefore necessary to re-calculate for each year the numbers for each district, so that a proper estimate of the health of the parish may be made. I estimate the population to be as follows:— The Parish 122,463 Shoreditch South 19,720 Hoxton New Town 28,410 Hoxton Old Town 28,803 Haggerston 45,530 BIRTHS. The births registered in this parish in the year 1892 numbered 4,487, deducting therefrom 98 births in Holborn Infirmary, situated in this parish, where the mothers were not previously resident in Shoreditch, the rate was 35.7 per 1,000 living; the rate for London was 30.9. 168 Last year the rates were above the average, being respectively 36.7 and 31.8. The births were distributed thus:— District. Males. Females. Total. Shoreditch South. 260 286 546 Hoxton New Town 633 501 1,134 Hoxton Old Town 511 505 1,016 Haggerston 944 847 1,791 Totals 2,348 2,139 4,487 In the Haggerston division are included all births in the Shoreditch Infirmary, there being no information available as to the previous residence of the mothers. MARRIAGES. 1,036 marriages were registered in the year, giving an annual rate of 8.4 per 1,000 of the estimated population. In London the rate was 174. DEATHS. The total deaths of parishioners whether occurring in the parish or in other parts of London, amounted to 2,828, against a total of 3,042 in the previous year. The corrected deaths of residents were distributed thus:— District. Males. Females. Total. Shoreditch South 214 209 423 Hoxton JSew Town 328 317 645 Hoxton Old Town 336 320 656 Haggerston 548 556 1,104 Totals 1,426 1,402 2,828 The true death rate was 23.09 per 1,000 inhabitants. For all London the rate was 20.36. The corresponding rates for last year were 24.8 and 21.4 respectively. In tables II, III, and IV, the rates for London, Shoreditch, and its subdistricts, and for the five groups of registration districts of the metropolis, have been worked out so that comparisons may be readily instituted. It will be noted that the Shoreditch death-rate shows a distinct improvement over the two preceding years in which the death rate was raised by the influence of influenza which was then prevalent. During 1892 this disease again visited the parish, but the mortality both directly and indirectly was much less, so that had the parish not been affected by it I should have been able to record a gradually decreasing rate. 169 3 deaths were uncertified by a medical man or coroner. Inquests were held in 262 cases. 598 persons (residents and non-residents) died in hospitals or other public institutions. Of the total deaths, 744 were of infants under one year of age, forming 256 per cent. of the whole deaths, as against 26.36 per cent, last year. Measured by the proportion of deaths under one year to registered births, the infant mortality was equal to 169 per 1000, being an improvement of 6.5 over last year, London remaining the same, viz., 154 for both years. The chief causes of death at this age were: diseases of the respiratory organs 146; premature birth or debility at birth, 154; diarrhœa and enteritis, 76; "marasmus" and syphilis, 72; convulsions and teething, 68; tubercular diseases, 64; while 33 infants were suffocated in bed with their parents. I have made a note of the days of the week on which these children were found dead, and I find that 16 of them died during Saturday night, 12 on Monday and Tuesday (6 of these being on or the day alter bank holidays). Between 1 and 5 years of age 520 took place. The total deaths under 5 were 1,264 against 1,385 last year, being 446 and 45.5 per cent. of the total deaths in their respective years. Between 1 and 5, respiratory diseases, measles, whooping cough, and diphtheria were the cause of the largest number of deaths. Of the 1,564 remaining deaths, 117 took place between the ages of 5 and 15; 593 above 60 years of age, 39 of these being over 85. 854 deaths therefore occurred between the ages of 15 and 60; pulmonary consumption and diseases of the respiratory organs being responsible for a large proportion (45.4 per cent.) of them. Shoreditch having a larger proportion of artizans than other metropolitan parishes, it is desirable that an enquiry extending over a number of years should be made into the causes of death in persons over 15 years of age. These might be found either to be due to the nature of the employment or to the conditions under which it was carried on, and in either case might lead to steps being taken to improve matters. I have during the past year noted the occupation and cause of death of each male between the ages of 15 and 65, and of females when they had an occupation of their own recorded; but as Dr. Ogle, the head of the Statistical Department, points out, comparisons are of little value unless account be taken of the age distribution of the persons in each group. Until the Census figures are disclosed, this important information cannot be obtained, and it cannot be ascertained whether those engaged in the various occupations in Shoreditch are more or less healthy than the average workers in the same trades throughout the country. Q 1 170 ZYMOTIC DISEASES. During the year notifications were received referring to 1,478 cases of infectious disease, 862 in 1891, and 1158 in 1892. These are classified below:— Disease. First Quarter. Second Quarter. Third Quarter. Fourth Quarter. Total. Deaths. Small Pox 26 53 - - 82* 4 Scarlet Fever 75 154 306 299 834 34 Diphtheria & Mem branous Croup 42 49 71 50 212 50 Typhus Fever - 1 1 - 2 - Enteric Fever 16 18 28 29 91 12 Continued Fever - 1 1 3 5 1 Puerperal Fever 2 1 1 5 12 6 Erysipelas 26 46 87 84 243 1] Totals 187 323 498 470 1,481 Removed to Hospital 106 176 196 154 632 56.6 % 54.4 % 39.3 % 32.7 % 41.4 % The notifications received equal 12 per 1000 of the population, against 10.8 for the whole of London (the previous year's rates were 8.5 and 6.9 respectively). In the different parishes, the rates vary from 5.6 in St. James, "Westminster, to 15.5 in Bethnal Grreen. Small Pox, Scarlet Fever and Erysipelas have increased the rate in Shoreditch. The proportionate rate per 1000 inhabitants in London and Shoreditch respectively, affected by the various notifiable infectious diseases, may be ascertained from the accompanying table. Small Pox. Scarlet Fever. Diphtheria. Typhus Fever. Enteric Fever. other Continued Fevers Puerperal Fever. Erysipelas. Cholera. Annual Rate, 1892. Annual Rate, 1891. LONDON 0.09 6.37 1.95 0.00 0.57 0.03 0.07 1.62 0.00 10.8 6.9 SHOREDITCH 0.59 6.81 1.71 0.01 0.74 0.04 0.06 1.98 - 12.0 8.5 Small Pox.—I have already reported fully upon the 73 cases which appeared in this district, together with a number arising from them in other districts. The disease was imported from an adjoining parish. It is important to notice that no vaccinated person died out of that number; the only four in whom the disease proved fatal being unvaccinated. *Nine of the cases notified proved not to be Small Pox. 171 423 cases were notified in all London, with 41 fatal cases. 349 cases were admitted into the Metropolitan Asylums Board's hospitals. Scarlet Fever.—Over the whole of London this disease has spread in epidemic form, no less than 27,092 cases having been notified. 75 cases were notified in Shoreditch (chiefly in Haggerston) in the first quarter of the year, and they gradually increased in number, reaching a maximum in the beginning of the fourth quarter; before that time, however, the hospitals of the Metropolitan Asylums Board were full, and many patients had to be left in their own homes, with the result that the disease spread more extensively in the district. On the 8th October the Managers were able to open the North Eastern Hospital. The death-rate in Shoreditch per 100 cases notified appears to be a little lower than that for all London, the figures being 4.07 and 4.30 respectively. In 1890 the number of cases notified was 639; in 1891, 369 ; and in 1892, 834. Diphtheria.—212 cases of this disease were notified, which is about the average rate of the previous two years. It caused 50 deaths, against 84 last year, but the death-rate 23.5 per 100 cases is a little higher than that of the total metropolitan cases notified, viz. 22.2. The rates per 1000 inhabitants is 0.44 and 0.40 for London and Shoreditch respectively. Enteric Fever.—I have again the pleasure to record a substantial reduction in the number of cases of this disease in the parish. It is sometimes asked what good is being done by the sanitary works which are being required on all hands ? Some people seem to expect extensive and immediate results, forgetting that when people have been subjected to insanitary influences for lengthened periods it is impossible that their constitutions can be renovated as soon as the faulty conditions are removed, and that improvement in health, as shown by the death rates, can only be gradual. That such an improvement is steadily taking place a comparison of the mortality statistics extending over 20 or more years at once shows, but in regard to certain diseases the results follow more quickly upon the execution of sanitary works, and of these typhoid or enteric fever is one. A continuous decrease in the number of cases has been taking place in this parish for some years—in 1890, 202 were notified; in 1891 there were 111; and in 1892 the number had still further fallen to 91 with 12 deaths, 8 less than in 1891—the deaths being 14 3 for Shoreditch, 17.1 for London per 100 cases notified. The mortality per 1000 inhabitants was practically the same for Shoreditch as for the whole of London. Erysipelas showed a marked increase in the number of cases notified (243) over those (137) in 1891, and, as I have already reported, puerperal fever, between which and erysipelas there is undoubtedly some connection, was also in excess of the two former years. 172 As regards infectious diseases which are not notifiable— Measles and Whooping Cough again proved fatal to a large number of children in the early part of the year, the death rate from both, but especially the latter, being in excess of those for all London. Diarrhœal diseases were not so fatal as in 1891, but still contributed 93 deaths to the list. The causes which produce diarrhoea depend largely upon meteorological influences, as heat and moisture, and when these are more or less absent, as was the case this year, a corresponding effect is produced in the death rate, as the germs resident in polluted soil in and around houses are unable to develop. I anticipate an improvement in this and in the next class of diseases from the important works which have been carried out, or are about to be, in the parish, although in the case of Tubercular Diseases, it will take longer time to show it. The deaths from this class of disease were the same as in 1891. Influenza. —37 deaths, almost entirely in the first quarter of the year, are ascribed directly to this disease, as against 63 in the previous year. The Registrar General classifies small pox, scarlet fever, measles, diphtheria, whooping cough, fevers (including typhus, enteric, and continued), and diarrhoea under the heading of the "Principal Diseases of the Zymotic Class,'''' The death rates for London and Shoreditch respectively of each of these diseases will be seen in Table III. The rates for the last three years are shown below. 1890. 1891. 1892. London 2.9 2.3 2.8 Shoreditch 3.2 3.9 3.2 so that Shoreditch shows a little improvement in this particular group of diseases, London being 0.1 above the average of the preceding seven years. DISTRIBUTION OF DEATHS. From Tables I, II, III and IV may be seen the manner in which the various diseases were distributed among the four divisions of the parish. Haggerston has the largest death rate of 24 per 1000, Shoreditch South the lowest with 21.45, both improvements on the previous year, but not to such an extent as in the Hoxtons, which have fallen the Old Town from 26 to 22.7, the New from 24.4 to 22.3. As regards the principal zymotic diseases, Haggerston reached nearly 4 per 1000, the New Town was 3, and the other two divisions 2.5 each. The first named was in excess in regard to all the infectious diseases, except small pox, while Hoxton New Town had more measles, whooping cough and fever than the remaining two. 173 VACCINATION. I have to thank Mr. Waterer, the Vaccination Officer, for supplying me with the numbers of persons vaccinated during 1892. These are Number of Primary Vaccinations 4,621 „ Re-Vaccinations 2,718 I calculated last year that 560 infants were not vaccinated, but for 1892, after deducting those who died before the age of 3 months, it appears that 730 children more than those born in the year were vaccinated. Undoubtedly the large number of persons who availed themselves of this protection against small-pox is due to the outbreak of that disease in the Metropolis, from which it had been absent for seven years, during which time many were lulled into the belief that vaccination was unnecessary and even dangerous. The experience of last year, however, inflicted a sharp lesson on some of those misguided persons, and the parish has been put to an expense in coping with this outbreak, which it would have been spared had vaccination been efficiently carried out in previous years. In a report published in The British Medical Journal on a number of outbreaks of small-pox throughout the country in 1892, it has been calculated that at a low estimate each case costs the ratepayers £8 10s. At this figure the outbreak in Shoreditch cost £620 10s., without counting the loss by reason of deaths, of interference with business, &c., which would be a serious item had compensation been allowed. In the list of deaths, 3 are entered as being the result of vaccination. Independent enquiry, however, has been made into these cases, and I am given to understand that while vaccination had been performed, death was not the result of the operation, but was due to other causes such as might have followed any abrasion or irritation of the skin. FOURTH QUARTER OF 1892. A separate report not having been published for this quarter of the year, 1 append a table (No.V.) similar to that presented for the previous quarter. From it may be seen that the death rate presents a marked improvement over that for the preceding two years when measles, whooping cough and influenza were prevalent. The zymotic death rate of 186 also compares favourably with that (1.89) for all London. In respect of the sub-districts there were no deaths from any of the principal zymotic diseases, except diphtheria, in Shoreditch South, none from small pox and diphtheria in Hoxton New Town, none from small pox, scarlet fever, whooping cough or fever in the Old Town, and none from small pox or whooping cough in Haggerston. The birth rate 35.4 is the same as in the second quarter, and is especially low in Shoreditch South District. 174 TABLE I. DEATHS FROM ALL CAUSES IN THE PARISH OF SAINT LEONARD, SHOREDITCH, AND IN EACH SUB-DISTRICT. Note. The Deaths of Non-Parishioners occurring in Hospitals, &c., in the Parish, are excluded; and the Deaths of Parishioners occurring in Hospitals, &c., situated in London beyond the limits of the Parish, are included. DEATHS FROM ALL CAUSES DURING THE YEAR ENDING 31st DECEMBER, 1892. DEATHS IN EACH SUB-DISTRICT. CAUSES OF DEATH. AGES. Total Deaths under Five. Shoreditch South. Hoxton New Town. Hoxton Old Town. Haggerston. Total. Under 1 1 to 5. 5 to 15. 15 to 25. 25 to 35. 35 to 45. 45 to 55. 55 to GO. 60 to 70. 70 to 85. 85 and upwards. I.—ZYMOTIC DISEASES. (1) Miasmatic. Small Pox - Vaccinated ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Unvaceinated ... 2 1 ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... 2 3 ... 1 ... 4 Measles 15 77 8 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 92 14 27 19 40 100 Scarlet Fever (Scarlatina) ... 21 10 1 2 ... ... ... ... ... ... 21 2 6 6 90 34 Diphtheria (including Membranous Croup) 5 36 7 1 ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... 41 10 8 12 9,0 50 Influenza 1 3 ... 1 1 8 4 3 8 7 1 4 5 9 13 10 37 Whooping Cough 32 68 3 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 100 15 25 14 50 104 Typhus ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Enteric or Typhoid Fever ... 2 6 1 2 ... ... ... 1 ... ... 2 1 3 2 6 12 Simple Continued Fever ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 1 (2) Diarrhœal Diseases. - Diarrhoea and Dysentery 63 19 1 ... ... ... 1 9 3 3 ... 82 5 20 20 47 92 Simple Cholera (Choleraic Diarrhoea) ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... 1 ... 1 (3) Malarial Diseases. 175 (4) Zoogenous Diseases. Cowpox and effects of Vaccination 3 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 3 ... 1 1 1 3 Tetanus ... ... ... ... ... 1 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 1 2 (5) Tubercular Diseases. Tabes Mesenterica 43 6 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 49 7 10 11 21 49 Phthisis 5 10 9 30 79 74 46 13 9 9 ... 15 55 78 59 86 278 Hydrocephalus and Tubercular Meningitis 12 18 8 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 30 6 7 12 14 39 Other forms, Scrofula 4 7 7 1 4 1 1 1 ... ... ... 11 5 5 6 10 26 (G) Venereal Diseases. Syphilis 11 ... .. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 11 ... 4 3 4 11 (7) Septic Diseases. Erysipelas 4 ... ... ... 1 1 ... 1 1 3 ... 4 3 2 4 2 11 Pyaemia, Septicaemia 1 ... 2 ... 1 ... 1 ... 1 ... 1 ... 3 1 4 2 ... 7 Puerperal Fever ... ... 3 1 2 ... ... ... ... ... ... 2 1 2 1 6 II.—PARASITIC DISEASES. Thrush and other Vegetable Diseases 4 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 4 1 1 ... 2 4 Worms, Hydatids, &c. ... 1 ... ... ... ... .. ... ... ... ... 1 1 ... ... ... 1 III.—DIETIC DISEASES. Privation ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... 1 ... 1 Want of Breast Milk 6 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 6 ... ... 2 4 6 Alcoholism a. Del. Tremens ... ... ... 2 2 1 ... ... ... ... 1 1 ... 3 5 b. Intemperance ... ... ... ... 3 2 4 1 ... 1 ... ... 3 2 2 4 11 IV.—CONSTITUTIONAL DISEASES. Gout ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 2 1 1 ... ... ... 3 2 ... 5 Rheumatic Fever and Rheumatism of Heart ... ... 3 ... 1 3 ... ... 1 ... ... 3 2 ... 3 8 Rheumatism ... ... 1 2 1 ... 2 1 1 2 ... ... 1 3 4 2 10 I 7(1 DEATHS FROM ALL CAUSES DURING THE YEAR ENDING 31st DECEMBER, 1892. DEATHS IN EACH SUB-DISTRICT. CAUSES OF DEATH. AGES. Total Deaths under Five. Shoreditch South. Hoxton New Town. Hoxton Old Town. |Hag-gerston. Total. Under 1. 1 to 5. 6 to 15. 15 to 25. 25 to 35. 35 to 45. 45 to 55. 55 to 60. 60 to 70. 70 to 85. 85 and upwards. iIV.—CONSTITUTIONAL DISEASES—contd. Cancer ... 1 ... 1 1 7 17 10 19 7 ... 1 7 7 17 32 63 Rickets 2 5 ......... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 4 3 7 Diabetes ... ... ... ... 1 4 2 1 ... 1 ... ... 4 3 ... 2 9 Other Constitutional Diseases 1 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2 ... ... 1 1 2 V.—LOCAL DISEASES. (1) Diseases of the Nervous System. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Inflammation of the Brain or Membranes 14 17 6 6 ... 2 1 1 3 1 ... 31 7 16 8 20 51 Apoplexy and Brain Paralysis 1 2 ... 1 4 8 18 6 20 30 2 3 13 15 22 54 104 Insanity ... ... ... ... 7 6 9 7 13 11 1 ... 6 10 11 27 54 Epilepsy ... 1 ... ... 4 2 1 3 ... 2 ... 1 3 2 2 6 13 Convulsions 45 14 1 ... ... ...... ... ... ... ... ... 59 14 12 10 18 60 Teething 23 13 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 36 6 12 13 5 30 Diseases ot Spinal Cord ... ... 2 ... ... 1 2 1 ... ... ... ... ... 1 3 2 6 Other Nervous Diseases 2 2 ... 1 1 ... 1 1 ... 1 ... 4 1 4 ... 4 9 (2) Diseases of Circulatory System. Pericarditis ... ... ... 2 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 2 ... ... 3 Heart Disease 3 3 9 13 15 20 33 18 32 24 ... 6 26 34 53 57 170 Diseases of Blood Vessels ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... 2 3 2 1 ... 3 2 2 2 9 177 (8) Respiratory Organs. • Laryngitis ... 8 1 ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... 8 2 5 2 1 10 Bronchitis 109 93 7 5 5 16 28 32 63 62 6 202 60 95 98 178 426 Pleurisy 1 1 1 3 2 1 1 ... 1 1 .. 2 4 3 B 2 12 Pneumonia 85 51 7 5 13 15 22 8 26 7 2 86 29 40 45 77 191 Asthma ... .. ... ... 1 ... 1 ... 6 2 ... ... 4 2 2 2 10 Other Lung Diseases 1 ... ... 2 1 1 2 2 1 ... ... 1 1 1 3 5 10 (4) Digestive Organs. Quinsy 1 . 1 2 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2 4 1 ... ... 5 Diseases of Gullet and Stomach 24 3 ... ... 2 4 ... 1 ... 1 ... 27 2 6 9 18 35 Enteritis 13 3 2 1 1 ... 1 ... 1 ... ... 16 3 4 3 12 22 Peritonitis 2 ... 1 3 3 3 ... ... 1 1 ... 2 3 ... 7 4 14 Hernia 1 ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... 5 7 1 1 2 4 5 4 15 Obstruction of Intestines 1 2 ... 1 ... ... ... 2 4 1 ... 3 2 2 4 3 11 Cirrhosis of Liver ... ... ... ... ... 4 3 1 2 2 ... ... 2 2 4 4 12 Other Liver Diseases 1 ... ... 1 ... ... 1 2 1 1 ... 1 2 1 1 3 7 Disease of Spleen 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... 1 1 (5) Urinary Organs. Bright's Disease (Nephritis) 1 1 ... 2 3 6 8 4 11 9 ... 2 9 7 11 18 45 Other Kidney Diseases ... ... ... ... 1 2 ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... 1 ... 3 4 Diseases of Bladder or Prostate ... ... ... ... ... 2 1 ... 3 7 1 ... ... 2 5 7 1 4 (6) Diseases of Generative System. Abortion ... ... ... 1 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... 1 2 Child-birth ... ... ... 3 3 4 ... ... ... ... ... ... 3 3 2 2 10 Other Diseases ... ... 1 1 ... 1 2 ... ... ... ... ... 2 ... 3 ... 5 (7) Diseases of Bones and Joints. * Caries and Necrosis ... ... 1 ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 1 2 Other Diseases of Bones and Joints ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... 1 (8) Diseases of Integumentary System. Ulcer ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 1 Other Skin Diseases 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 1 ... ... ... 1 178 DEATHS FROM ALL CAUSES DURING THE YEAR ENDING 31st DECEMBER, 1892. DEATHS IN EACH SUB-DISTRICT. CAUSES OF DEATH. AGES. Total Deaths under Five. Shoreditch South. Hoxton New Town. Hoxton Old Town. Haggerston. Total. Under 1. 1 to 5. 5 to 15. 15 to 25. 25 to 35. 35 to 45. 45 to 55. 55 to 60. 60 to 70. 70 to 85. 85 and upwards. (9) Diseases of Organs of Special Sense. Ear 1 ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... 1 ... .. 1 ... 1 ... 2 3 Nose ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... 1 (10) Diseases of Glandular Organs ... 1 ... 1 ... ... ... ... 1 ... 1 1 ... ... ... 4 4 VI.—DEVELOPMENTAL DISEASES. Premature Birth (Debility at Birth) 154 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 154 18 44 31 61 154 Malformations 8 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 8 ... 1 3 4 8 Old Age ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 14 75 20 ... 14 31 19 45 109 VII.—VIOLENT DEATHS, &c. (1) Accident or Negligence. Bv Falls 1 4 1 1 ... 2 3 1 8 ... 2 5 2 4 8 4 18 ,, Horses and Vehicles ... 1 2 1 ... 2 1 ... ... ... ... 1 ... 4 1 2 7 ,, Wounds—Gunshot, Cut, and Stab ... ... 1 1 ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... 2 1 ... 3 By Burns and Scalds ... 7 2 ... 2 ... 2 ... ... ... ... 7 1 5 1 6 13 ,, Poison 1 ... ... ... ... 1 ... 1 ... ... ... 1 ... 1 1 1 3 ,, Drowning ... 1 5 ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... 1 1 3 1 2 7 ,, Suffocation (in bed) 33 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 33 3 7 8 15 33 ,, Negligence at Birth 3 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 3 1 ... 1 1 3 Otherwise ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 1 7'J (2) Homicide. Murder and Manslaughter ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... (3) Suicide. Wounds-Gunshot, Cut, Stab ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... 1 Poison ... ... ... ... 3 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 1 1 1 4 Drowning ... ... ... 1 2 3 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2 4 6 Hanging ... ... ... ... ... 2 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 1 ... 2 Otherwise ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 1 ... ... ... 2 ... ... 2 VIII. Causes not specified or ill-defined— Marasmus 50 11 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 61 11 16 13 21 61 Dropsy ... ... 1 ... ... ... 1 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 2 3 Abscess 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... 1 ... ... ... ... 2 Total 744 520 117 104 175 218 228 129 268 286 39 1264 423 645 656 1104 2828 180 TABLE II. SUMMARY OF THE DEATHS IN THE PARISH OF SAINT LEONARD, SHOREDITCH, AND IN EACH SUB-DISTRICT, FOR THE YEAR 1892. CAUSES OF DEATH. DEATHS IN EACH SUB-DISTRICT. Shoreditch South. Hoxton New Town. Hoxton Old Town. Hagg-erston. Total. I.—ZYMOTIC DISEASES. 1. Miasmatic Diseases 50 78 67 147 342 2. Diarrhœal 5 20 21 47 93 3. Malarial ,, ... ... ... ... ... 4. Zoogenous ,, ... 1 2 2 5 5. Tubercular 73 100 86 131 392 6. Venereal ... 4 3 4 11 7. Septic 6 7 8 3 24 Total Zymotic Diseases 134 210 189 334 867 II.—PARASITIC DISEASES 2 1 ... 2 5 III.—DIETIC „ 4 3 5 11 23 IV.—CONSTITUTIONAL „ 15 18 28 43 104 V.—LOCAL DISEASES. 1. Diseases of the Nervous System 50 72 75 136 333 2. „ „ Circulatory ,, 30 38 55 59 182 3. „ „ Respiratory Organs 100 146 153 260 659 4. „ „ Digestive ,, 20 20 33 49 122 5 „ „ Urinary ,, 9 10 16 28 63 6. ,, ,, Generative System 5 4 5 3 17 7. ,, Bones and Joint 1 ... 1 1 3 8. ,, ,, Integumentary System 1 ... ... 1 2 9. ,, ,, Organs of Special Sense ... 1 1 2 4 10. ,, ,, Glandular Organs ... ... ... 4 4 Total Deaths Local Diseases 216 291 339 543 1389 VI.—DEVELOPMENTAL DISEASES 32 76 53 110 271 VII.—VIOLENT DEATHS. 1. Accident or Negligence 8 26 23 31 88 2. Homicide ... ... ... ... ... 3, Suicide 1 4 5 5 15 Total Violent Deaths 9 30 28 36 103 VIII.—CAUSES ILL-DEFINED 11 16 14 25 66 Total Deaths from all causes 423 645 656 1104 2828 181 TABLE III.—ANALYSIS AND COMPARISON OF LONDON AND SHOREDITCH BIRTHS AND DEATHS FOR THE YEAR ENDING 31ST DECEMBER, 1892, Districts. Estimated population middle of 1892. Annual Rate per 1000 persons living. Deaths under 1 year to 1000 Births. percentage to total deaths. births total deaths during deaths from Inquest Cases. Deaths in Public Institutions. Uncertified Causes of Death. Principal Zyruotic Diseases. Small-Pox. Measles. Scarlet Fever. Diphtheria Whooping Cough. Fever. Diarrhoea. Tubercular Diseases Violence. 1889. 1890. 1891. 1892. London 4,263,294 30.9 18.3 21.5 21.4 20.6 2.82 0.01 0.80 0.28 0.44 0.58 0.11 00.60 .. 0.76 154 7.6 25.7 0.92 Shoreditch 122,463 35.7 19.85 25.4 24.8 23.09 3.22 0.03 0.82 0.27 0.40 0.85 0.10 0.75 3.05 0.91 169 9.2 11.0 0.10 Sub-Districts. Shoreditch South 19,720 27.4 ... .. 22.4 21.45 2.51 0.15 0.70 0.10 0.50 0.76 0.05 0.25 3.7 0.4 ... ... ... ... Hoxton New Town 28,410 34.5 ... ... 24.4 22.35 3.09 - 0.94 0.21 0.28 0.87 0.10 0.69 3.5 10 ... ... ... Hoxton Old Town 28,803 35.3. ... • • 261 22.77 2.59 0.03 0.66 0.22 0.44 0.48 0.07 0.69 3.12 0-9 ... Haggerston 45,530 *39.4 ...... ... 25.2 24.02 3.95 - 0.87 0.43 0.43 1.08 014 1.00 2.8 0.7. ... ... ... ... *Includes Births in Shoreditch Infirmary. Note.—Where the deaths under any heading are too few to express as a rate per 1000 within two places of decimals, 0 00 is inserted ; where no deaths have occurred, it is expressed thus: — . 182 TABLE IV.—BIRTH and DEATH-RATES of Persons belonging to LONDON and to its Groups of REGISTRATION DISTRICTS, in the 52 weeks of 1892. Per 1000 Persons living. Deaths under 1 year to 1000 Births registered. Births. Deaths from All Causes. Principal Zymotic Diseases. Small-pox. Measles. Scarlet Fever. Diphtheria Whooping Cough. Typhus. Enteric Fever. Simple & 1 ll-defined Fever. Diarrhoea. Registration—London 30.9 20.3 2.80 0.01 0.80 0.27 0.44 0.58 0.00 0.10 0.00 0.60 154 West Districts 26.2 19.1 2.61 0.00 0.95 0.22 0 38 0.41 - 0.06 0.01 0.58 158 North Districts 29.2 19.2 2.53 0.01 0.67 0.24 0.46 0.50 0.00 0.10 0.00 0.55 145 Central Districts 29.9 25.1 2.88 0.02 0.94 0.26 0.49 0.52 0.00 0.13 0.00 0.52 169 East Districts 37.1 23.6 3.78 0.02 0.93 0.41 0.62 0.94 0.00 0.14 0.01 0.71 163 South Districts 31.7 19.3 2.61 0.00 0.72 0.26 0.35 0.57 0.00 0.09 0.00 0.62 151 In this T able, 0.00 indicates that the deaths were too few to give a rate of 0.005; when no death occurred, — is inserted. Thi.. Table is- taken fiom the Annual Summary prepared by the Registrar-General. Shoreditch is included in the East District. 183 TABLE V.—ANALYSIS AND COMPARISON OF LONDON AND SHOREDITCH BIRTHS AND DEATHS FOR THE THIRTEEN WEEKS ENDING 31ST DECEMBER, 1892 (FOURTH QUARTER). Districts. Estimated population middle of 1892. Annual Rate per 1000 persons living. Deaths under 1 year to 1000 Births. PERCENTAGE TO TOTAL DEATHS. Births TOTAL DEATHS DURING QUARTER OF DEATHS FROM Inquest Cases. Deaths in Public Institutions. Uncertified Causes of Death. Principal Zymotic Diseases. Small-Pox. Measles. Scarlet 1 Fever. Diphtheria. Whooping Cough. Fever. Diarrhoea. Tubercular Diseases. Violence. 1889. 1890. 1891. 1892. London 4,263,291 29.7 18.7 22.5 20.5 18.5 1.89 0.00 0.36 0.37 0.60 0.16 0.16 0.24 ... 0.73 140 9.0 27.2 0.90 Shoreditch 122,463 35.4 21.53 27.2 26.71 20.2 1.86 - 0.22 0.32 0.58 006 0 19 0 44 3.00 0.88 162 10.0 ... - Sub-Districts. Shoreditch South 19,720 23.7 ... ... ... 19.04 0.60 — — - 0.60 — — — 3.04 0.20 ... ... ... ... Hoxton New Town 28,410 35.1 ... ... ... 19.43 1.54 — 0.28 0.42 — 0.28 0.42 0.14 2.53 0.70 ... ... ... ... Hoxton Old Town 28,803 32.3 ... .. ... 19.86 2.10 — 0.28 — 1.26 — - 0.56 3.19 0.98 ... ... ... ... Haggerston 45,530 *36.8 ... ... ... 21.34 2.50 - 0.26 0.63 0.54 — 0.26 0.81 3.24 0.45 ... ... ... ... *Includes Births in Shoreditch Infirmary. Note.—Where the deaths under any heading are too few to express as a rate per 1000 within two places of decimals, 0.00 is inserted; where no deaths have occurred, it is express! thus:— 184 PART II.—GENERAL. THE STAFF OF THE HEALTH DEPARTMENT. At the end of last year a joint report prepared by the Vestry Clerk and myself was laid before the General Purposes Committee, but did not come before the Vestry until January, 1892. The Vestry Clerk pointed out that the Vestry had asked him and the late Medical Officer to report upon the criticisms of Mr. Cubitt Nicholls and Dr. Seatou, but that Dr. Sutton's death prevented that being carried out. He also pointed out that it was important if the Vestry were desirous of keeping the sanitary work of the parish in their own hands that a sufficient staff should bo provided at an early date. My part of the report was as follows:— "To the General Purposes and Sanitary Committee "Gentlemen,—In the report relating to the sanitary condition of Saint Leonard, Shoreditch, presented to the Home Secretary by Mr. Cubitt Nicholls and Dr. Edward Seaton, special attention is drawn to the strength of the sanitary staff. Having referred to the increased amount of work thrown upon the sanitary staffs of London vestries by the operation of the Infectious Diseases (Notification) Act, the Commissioners proceeded to state that— 'In order to cope with the work that at the present time needs to bo 'done, we think that an iucrease in the sanitary staff is absolutely 'necessary, and that without such increase the sanitary condition of 'parish cannot be properly maintained. In order to bring the condition 'of the parish up to a satisfactory level, another full inspector at least is 'required. In our opinion the sanitary condition of the parish cannot 'be properly maintained with a less numerous staff than that now 'indicated. Briefly summarised, the immediate sanitary requirements 'of Shoreditch are, in our opiuion, as follows:— '(1). An extension of the work of subsoil and house drainage, the 'details of which have been so well executed under the supervision of 'the Vestry's sanitary staff, and an enlargement of the staff to enable 'this and similar work to be effected. To this end the appointment of 'an additional inspector is imperative. The staff for the parish would 'then consist of:— ' A Medical Officer of Health. ' A Public Analyst. ' A Chief Sanitary Inspector. ' A Second Inspector. ' Two Assistant Inspectors. ' A Clerk. ' A Disinfecting Officer. 185 '(2). The adoption and enforcement of tenement regulations, and 'the institution of systematic house-to-house inspection.' "As Medical Officer of Health, I have carefully considered this part of the report, and having made examination myself into the work which has been done by the various officials, I have come to the conclusion that the amount of work to be overtaken is really more than the staff, as at present constituted, can satisfactorily overtake; and I would here take leave to say that I believe every member thereof has been, and is doing his utmost to keep the parish in a healthy condition. The praise bestowed upon Mr. Alexander by the Commissioners for the quality of the work done under his supervision, is in my opinion well deserved, and I have been much gratified to find in going through the parish that the standard of excellence which has been adopted is in every respect a high one; but it is physically impossible for the staff, however hard they may work, to maintain that systematic inspection of houses which the Commissioners considered necessary. In poor localities, experience has proved it is only by frequent inspections that nuisances can be prevented, and especially is this the case where the houses are built of inferior materials and in an inferior manner. It was stated at the enquiry that every house in the parish ought to be visited by an inspector at least once a quarter, and many in the worst localities should be rapidly inspected every week, but to call at each house in the parish but once a year would give a man steady work for four hours a day, if he gave only five minutes to each house, without taking into consideration the time occupied in getting to various parts of the parish. But where work is ordered to be done, visits have to be paid again and again to ensure the proper carrying out of instructions. "Present duties of staff. "Mr. Alexander (Chief Sanitary Inspector), besides supervising the work of the staff, has devoted himself largely to house-to-house visitation as already stated. "Mr. Lear (Assistant Inspector) inquires into all cases of infectious diseases which are notified, sees to their removal, and the subsequent disinfection of the rooms, bedding, clothing, etc., and examines the houses to discover sanitary defects present, and takes steps to have them remedied; he also takes charge of part of the daily complaints sent to the Town Hall, and examines into them. On Saturday evenings he takes part with Mr. Styles in an inspection of the five markets held in the streets, and on alternate Sundays attends to the clearing of the same. "Mr. Stiles (second Assistant Inspector) has charge of the collection of samples under the Food and Drugs Act; superintends the street markets during the week-days, Saturday evening included, and clears them on alternate Sundays; superintends dustiug, scavenging and watering of streets R1 186 in the two western districts, and shares the work of enquiry into daily complaints. "Besides, all have books to keep in the office, forms to fill up, and notices to send out. "In addition, there is a clerk (Mr. Barr) who remains in the Sanitary office, receives complaints, enters the certificates of infectious diseases, the returns of the registrars, keeps the books of the department, and assists the inspectors in filling up notices, etc., and in office work generally. "There is also a disiufector, upon whose work I have already reported in connection with the question of disinfection. "The time of all these officials is most fully occupied, and it is of frequent occurrence that they are to be found in the office at work after the Town Hall has been closed for the day. "The department will shortly be relieved of the work of dusting and scavenging, and this will enable Mr. Stiles to devote himself more to other work, and it might have been possible, with some rearrangement of duties, to have grappled more completely with the sanitary requirements of the district with the present staff were it not that numerous fresh duties, previously performed by factory inspectors, district surveyors and police constables, will be imposed upon this department by the Public Health (London) Act, when it comes into operation on the 1st January, 1892; while the scope of other duties already carried out will be much enlarged by the creation of special bye-laws which must be made (1) by the London County Council for matters extending to the whole Metropolis, but which are to be enforced by the local authorities, as those in respect to slaughter-houses, cowhouses, bakehouses, the cleansing of workshops, water-closets, dust bins, and receptacles for dung and the proper accessories in connection with buildings, whether constructed before or after the passing of the Act. (2) It will be the duty of the Vestry to make bye-laws for keeping w.c.'s supplied with sufficient water, and to see that all w.c.'s, and all the apparatus, traps, syphons, drains, etc., connected therewith, are properly constructed or repaired, and to undertake prosecutions against persons improperly constructing such, and against persons not properly cleansing w.c.'s when such are used in common by occupiers of separate dwelling houses; to make bye-laws for the prevention of nuisances arising from matters of all kinds in streets, from offensive matters coming from factories, shops, dunghills, etc., for the prevention of keeping animals on any premises so as to be a nuisance; and as to paving yards and open spaces in connection with dwelling houses; for the regulation of houses let in tenements or lodgings, a subject which is of the utmost importance to the public health, and which will give the Vestry increased power over persons who let houses in this manner, but which will entail constant supervision by the inspectors to ensure the proper performance of the requirements of the bye-laws. Any article 187 intended for the food of man, instead of only certain ones, may be seized, if diseased, unsound, and unwholesome. The Act transfers from the district surveyors the duty of discovering and reporting all cases of underground rooms illegally occupied, and all cases in which the Act is infringed must be reported and registered. This will involve numerous careful measurements in each case, as the requirements have been made much more exacting than formerly; and will throw a considerable amount of extra work on the staff, especially at first. Most of this, doubtless, will be done when the register of houses 'let in lodgings, or occupied by members of more than one family,' is being compiled; a work which will necessitate the ascertaining the exact cubical capacity of every room in such houses, of which there are a very large number in the parish. The Act imposes upon the Vestry the duty of regulating and supervising the sanitary conveniences in factories and workshops, and of dealing with the subject of smoke consumption, which has hitherto required the sole attention of a special body of police constables. If this duty is to be vigilantly carried out, it will make very serious demands upon the time of your sanitary inspectors. Besides these increased duties, there will be a very considerable increase in the number of notices to be sent out, and all notices and orders given under the Act must be in writing.* The sending out of these, together with the writing of reports (copies of reports by the Medical Officer of Health are required to be sent to both the Local Government Board and the County Council), and the work of registration of houses, will greatly increase the amount of clerical work and reduce the time of your inspectors available for out-door work. "Even this incomplete synopsis of the duties imposed upon the sanitary department, will convince you, I am sure, that it will be necessary in some way to make provision for their efficient performance. "In the first place it seems that it will be necessary to make some alteration in the allocation of duties to be performed by your sanitary staff. There are two ways usually adopted for carrying out sanitary work:—under one, each inspector takes charge of certain departments over the whole parish, and under the other, a division of the parish is allotted to each inspector, and he is responsible for the sanitary work in all its branches in that division; or it may be while the latter plan is adopted, certain special duties may be reserved. "The first-mentioned method is the one which has obtained in this parish, but it is one which in an extensive district like this must lead to the loss of much time in travelling about from one part of the parish to another. It is possible now for all three inspectors to be in one neighbourhood about the same time, for different purposes ; while both Mr. Lear and Mr. Stiles have almost daily to pay visits to the more distant parts of the parish in all *Reference to the Table under the heading "Sanitary Work." will show that the increase anticipated in all branches of the department was fully borne out by the experience of the past year. 188 directions; thus, both the time and energy of the men are wasted by the amount of travelling they have to undertake over the 648 acres of the parish. I would recommend, therefore, that a definite district be assigned to one man, who shall be responsible for the proper carrying out in his districts of all the duties of a sanitary inspector, excepting such special duties as you desire to otherwise arrange for. By this means I believe the work will be more efficiently and readily accomplished, and each officer will be able to become experienced in all the duties of a sanitary inspector. "There are several ways in which the staff at your command may be utilised. Either you may make all your inspectors of equal rank and have a sufficient number of them to divide the parish among them, so that each shall be responsible for all the work in his portion, including the examination of houses for registration purposes, but excluding the execution of the Food and Drugs Act; or you may continue the practice of having a chief sanitary inspector, so that while each inspector would report daily to me the work done, they would be under the direct supervision of the chief sanitary inspector; and I consider Mr. Alexander's knowledge of the parish, and his long experience in it, must be of great service both to the Yestry and to the inspectors. Certain duties under the Act will require a considerable amount of skill and care in dealing with them, especially at the first, and I would recommend, if you adopt this plan, that the execution of the bye-laws in connection with houses let in tenements, and with cellar dwellings, should not be, for the present, part of the work of the district inspectors, but should be allotted to the chief sanitary inspector. One of the inspectors will have to be appointed inspector under the Food and Drugs Act for the whole of the parish. "Under either scheme it will be necessary that you strengthen your staff, in order that the work be dealt with to your satisfaction, and I do not see my way to suggest that this increase be less than two, as even under the old Acts there was sufficient work to fully occupy the time of another inspector. Under the first-mentioned plan the parish would be divided into four parts, to each of which an inspector would be appointed, and the fifth man would have charge of smoke prevention, taking samples of foods, and assisting in clearing the street markets, in office work, and in any special work on hand; thus, for the first year at least, there would be ample work for him in assisting to measure rooms with the other inspectors. This fifth man might be called an assistant inspector. "Under the second scheme the parish would still be divided into four, but all the work under the lodging house and cellar dwellings bye-laws would be taken from the ordinary inspectors and given to the chief inspector as as already mentioned. 180 "Another way of meeting the difficulty would be, by the appointment an inspector and an extra clerk, but it appears to me that it would be better and more economical to appoint a second extra inspector instead of an extra clerk, as the Vestry would receive back half the inspector's salary, but the whole expense of the clerk would fall on the parish. "I would take leave to draw your attention to the fact that the amount of time your Medical Officer of Health is required to devote to the duties of his office is quite inadequate to enable him to do justice to them; and under the new Act, besides new duties imposed upon him, the large increment of new work which he ought to direct and supervise, must, if he is to have that command of the sanitary staff desired by the vestry, increase his responsibilities to a very considerable extent, and make greater demands upon his time. "I am, Gentlemen, "Your obedient servant, "FRANCIS J. ALLAN, M.I). "December 10th, 1891." Eventually the Vestry decided to divide the parish into three parts, and to place each under the charge of an inspector, Mr. Alexander to supervise their work under the directions of the medical officer, and to discharge certain other duties in regard to houses let in lodgings, houses being dealt with under the Housing of Working Classes Act, &c. Messrs. Lear and Stiles were appointed full inspectors, and Mr. Quelch, who previously had 18 years' experience in plumbing and sanitary work, was elected fourth inspector. To Mr. Lear was allotted the Hoxton division of the parish, containing Hoxton New Town and part of Hoxton Old Town, extending to 223 acres, with about 45,000 residents. To Mr. Stiles the parish of Haggerston, comprising 45,530 persons, spread over 258 acres ; and to Mr. Quelch the third division of Shoreditch South, with the piece of Hoxton Old Town cut off from the first district, making in all 167 acres, with a resident population of 31,900. At first sight this would appear to be the easiest district to work, but it must be remembered that it includes a large day population and that it contains a great number of business premises, the sanitary conditions of which must certainly be of an importance equal with that of dwelling houses, for in them are the bread-winners, upon whose continued good health and fitness for work depend a considerable portion of the parishioners. This is a phase of public health work which is now beginning to attract public attention, and it is with satisfaction that I report that a good start has been made in this parish, and that already in a large number of Shoreditch workshops conditions have been removed which must have been prejudicial to the health of those 190 employed therein. Still there remains much to be done, more especially as to the overcrowding of workshops, but also in reference to ventilation and drainage. The inspector for this district has also imposed upon him the duty of taking samples under the Food and Drugs Act, while the three junior inspectors divide among them the supervision of the street markets. The assistant disinfector, who had been engaged casually, was placed upon the staff, and drives the van with the bedding, &c., to and from the disinfecting oven. Mr. Barclay, who was employed in distributing disinfectants during the summer, has been detained in the office to assist the clerk (Mr. Barr) upon whom much of the large increase in clerical work has necessarily fallen He also assists the inspector in taking samples of food. Finally, in regard to the Medical Officer, it was felt by the General Purposes Committee that if he was to have that control over the work of the department as the Vestry desired he should, he must attend more than the minimum half-hour a day, which on his appointment was thought to be sufficient, and eventually, with this object, the salary was raised to £350 per annum. The supervision of the health of a parish of the size of Shoreditch, with its crowded population and numerous industries, requires undoubtedly the whole time of a medical officer of health, and it is also evident that the increased duties imposed by recent Acts will necessitate some further increase in the staff of the department. For there are yet several matters which await settlement, chief among these will be the execution of the bye-laws passed by the London County Council and by the Vestry, which are still under the consideration of the Local Government Board. Especially in regard to those relating to houses let in lodgings will the work at tirst be heavy, as each room in houses which are to be registered must be measured and brought into compliance with the bye-laws. The Public Health Act further increased the duties of sanitary authorities by making them responsible for the prevention of the smoke nuisance. The inspectors have frequently cautioned persons using furnaces which did not consume their own smoke, but more severe measures are evidently required to abate this nuisance. The Control Department of the County Council send down from time to time complaints of chimneys its officers have seen smoking, but when the Vestry proposed to prosecute the offending owners, the County Council refused to allow the officer who had witnessed the offence to give evidence. It is desirable that a record be kept of the various works which are carried out in the parish with more detail than is at present done. By a reference to the counterfoils of notices which have been served in past years, it is possible to 191 ascertain in a general way what has been ordered, but it is impossible, except from the memories of the officials to find out what works were actually carried out, and whether satisfactorily or the reverse. Were the sanitary history of each house to be kept not only would a vast amount of valuable information be at hand in any enquiry, but owners of property could refer new officials to what had already been done, and much trouble might thereby be saved. But to do this would certainly require almost the whole time of another clerk; or, if each inspector undertook this for his own district, then an additional inspector might be more economically appointed, as half his salary would be recoverable from the County Council. Had the four inspectors been re-elected under the Public Health Act as the General Purposes Committee recommended, a saving of £169 per annum would have been effected compared with what was being paid to the three inspectors formerly. To have appointed another inspector as I suggested in my report, would only have reduced this saving by half his salary. As this will be my last annual report as medical officer of Shoreditch, I will take the opportunity to express my thanks to the members of the Vestry, and especially to those upon the General Purposes and Sanitary Committee, and the Housing of the Working Classes Committee, for the courtesy with which they have at all times treated me, to the staff of the Health Department for the hearty manner with which they have at all times co-operated with me, and to the other officers of the Vestry who have always been ready to give me their assistance and advice. SANITARY WORK The following list summarises the work which has been done under the supervision of the department during the year, and has been compiled as usual by the Clerk of the Department, Mr. Barr, from the reports of Chief Inspector Alexander and of Inspectors Lear, Stiles, and Quelch. The figures for 1891 are added for comparison, but some particulars are now noted which were not formerly, these are marked by an (*). It will be at once evident that the work accomplished is largely in excess of the previous year, in most cases almost double. An increase of work was expected under the new Act, but that the staff have been able to carry it out is in my opinion in large measure to be ascribed to the re-arrangement of duties of the Inspectors. A larger amount of work has been accomplished by them than under the old plan, and it has been of a more systematic character. Glazed pipe drains provided in lieu of dilapidated 1892 1891 brick drains in 163 40 premises Defectively constructed pipe drains repaired or relaid in 882 589 „ Rats infesting, and sewer gas impregnating (cured) in 301 25 „ 192 1892 1891 Cesspools emptied and filled up in 34 14 premises Accumulation of sewage removed from 148 26 „ Stack pipes (having their heads dangerously close to bedroom windows, permitting sewer gas to pass into the dwellings) disconnected from drains in 775 435 „ Stack pipes provided in 744 203 „ Eaves, gutters provided in 614 216 „ Waste pipes of sinks within doors (untrapped and permitting sewer gas to impregnate the dwellings) have been securely trapped, or otherwise disconnected from drains, and have now their ends in the open air, and immediately over the yard sinks in 886 465 „ Back fronts re-pointed in 298 27 „ Roofs repaired in 570 134 „ Stairs repaired in 345 71 „ Floors repaired in 498 90 „ Ground Floors re-instated and ventilated in 45 * „ Walls and ceilings cleansed, whitened and repaired throughout in 460 185 Ditto ditto in part in 242 360 „ Sashes repaired in 404 50 „ Water closets (foul and dilapidated) cleansed, repaired, and fitted to "Shoreditch Model" and with improved pans in 1515 740 „ Water restored or newly laid on to water closets in 908 578 „ Obstructions in water closets removed in 85 51 „ Water closets in close, dark, and otherwise injurious situations removed into light and air in 92 27 „ Water supplied direct from main in lieu of cisterns in 312 96 „ Leaking water pipes, causing dampness, repaired in 53 24 „ Yards and areas and w.c.'s lime-washed in 1968 272 „ Dust bins provided in 958 574 „ Yards paved imperviously with stone or cement concrete in 1154 772 „ Areas and forecourts paved imperviously with stone or cement concrete in 663 156 „ Sculleries ditto ditto in 412 150 „ 193 Miscellaneous— 1892 1891 Premises unfit for habitation closed 27 20 Total number of rooms cleansed and repaired 2542 * Door and window cills provided 1067 249 Smoke nuisances abated 12 — Urinals provided 14 2 Dung bins provided 16 2 New areas constructed 59 * Overcrowding abated 30 23 Animals unfitly stabled 31 10 Accumulations of dung and rubbish removed 40 39 Dead bodies removed 9 9 Preliminary notices served 2592 1569 Orders made by Vestry 125 74 In addition to the ordinary notices served for the abatement of nuisances, 1650 letters have been written. 63 reports have been made to the Vestry or to one of the Committees, including special reports upon Disinfecting Apparatus. Vans for removal of bedding, &c. Use of Disinfectants. The Sanitary condition of Board and other Schools. The Sanitary condition of the Regent's Canal. The Water supply of the Parish. The prevalence of Influenza, Measles, and Whooping Cough. The Duties and Strength of the Staff of the Department. Norfolk Buildings, Norfolk Gardens. The precautions to be taken in regard to Cholera, and the provision for patients. With the exception of those on the Staff, and on the Regent's Canal, abstracts of these reports have already been presented to you in my quarterly reports. FOOD CONDEMNED. The street markets have been kept under supervision by your Inspectors, and special steps taken to prevent the throwing of vegetable and animal refuse matter on the roadways. During the twelve months the following articles have been seized and destroyed as unfit for human food:— Beef 2 cwt. 18 lbs. Skate trunks Mutton 66 lbs. Oysters 21 baskets Meat Cuttings 14 lbs. Apples 18 boxes Rabbits 4 cwt. Oranges 11½ „ Geese 4 (9 lbs. each) Kale 1 sack Haddocks (wet) 14 trunks 194 MORTUARY. The number of bodies received into the mortuary in the last four years were as follows— Year 1889 1890 1891 1892 300 337 340 375 During 1892 twenty of the bodies admitted were dead of infectious diseases. Necessity therefore exists for the provision of a separate room for these, and I have recommended the General Purposes Committee that steps be taken to effect this. In nine cases the bodies were removed to the mortuary by order of the department. CUSTOMS AND INLAND REVENUE ACTS. Under this Act 352 applications were made to me for certificates of the sanitary fitness of dwellings, whereby an abatement of the inhabited house duty might be obtained. In 97 instances certificates were granted at once after inspection; in 117 dwellings the owners were informed that certain amendments in regard to drainage, cleanliness, lighting, ventilation, paving or such like would have first to be carried out; 61 certificates were then given after a second inspection, and in the remaining 56 either the works have not been carried out, are not completed, or were not finished in time to obtain the abatement of the tax for that year, so that the certificate was not required for 1892. Thus 158 certificates were granted in respect of the same number of dwellings. 21?? DISINFECTION. The Vestry after considering the claims of the various disinfecting apparatus in the market decided to purchase one which has recently been held in a patent action to be the patent of Mr. W. Lyons, though an appeal about the matter to the House of Lords is pending. In the first quarter of 1892 plans were prepared for the enlargement of the old disinfecting chamber, and in the beginning of April the new oven was able to be used for the first time. By the old method coal gas was used to generate dry heat, which in some instances damaged the articles, and generally the temperature was very unequal in different parts of the apparatus; in the new a greater amount of heat can be obtained by the use of steam, which in itself is a powerful adjunct to the process of disinfection, and no damage can be done to the articles exposed to it—with the exception of leather, which can still be treated with dry heat only, by the same apparatus. 195 The apparatus consists of a steel boiler enclosing the disinfecting chamber; the lower part of the boiler contains water, whose level can be ascertained by a water guage; the top part of the casing is connected by valves and pipes with the inner chamber to allow the passage of steam into it. A dead-weight safety valve permits the steam to blow off when the pressure reaches 20-lbs. A small furnace is built below part of the boiler, and the products of combustion are conducted underneath the steel boiler, round the sides of the outer shell of the casing to the chimney, coming in contact on the way with iron baffle plates, which convey the heat to the air entering the hot air chamber, whence it is drawn as required into the interior of the apparatus. The method of working is as follows:—The fire being lighted, the articles to be disinfected are placed in the chamber which measures 5-ft. by 5-ft. and is 6-ft. 6-ins. in length; the doors each end are closed and screwed up. As soon as the steam in the boiler has reached 20-lbs. pressure, an exhauster is set to work causing a current of hot air to pass into the chamber, raising the temperature of the articles; after a few minutes the valves are closed and steam is admitted and the pressure is brought up to 20-lbs., as shown by the guage communicating with the interior of the chamber, and maintained at that point for 20 or 30 minutes, according to the character of the articles being treated; then the steam is withdrawn and the exhauster set in action, and as soon as the pressure falls to zero a current of hot air is drawn through, displacing any steam which would condense on the articles when the door is opened. The whole operation taking about an hour to carry through. But as soon as one batch of articles have been dealt with, another can be inserted without loss of time or steam. A wall has been run across the building at right angles to the apparatus, dividing the room into two compartments into which the ends of the apparatus protrude. One compartment is reserved for infected articles, the other for those which have been withdrawn after disinfection, so that there may be no risk of re-infection. The total cost of the apparatus has been as follows:— The Apparatus £253 1 7 Laying foundations and fixing do. 94 10 0 Ventilators, Racks and Fittings 18 6 11 Plumbing work 3 12 3 £369 10 9 The building in which the oven was contained was found not to afford much room for the disinfectors to work, and it was enlarged at a cost (including architect's fees) of £131 12s. 8d. 196 The cost of coals used in the nine months has been £11 14s. 6d., being 7 tons at 18/6, and 6 tons at 17/6 (the price paid by contract). Two one-horse vans, each 8-ft. 6-in. long by 6-ft. 6-in. broad, were built for the Vestry by Messrs. Hayes & Son at a cost of £54 apiece, and have been in use for six months. One is reserved for infected articles, the other to take home the articles after being disinfected at the oven. During the nine months in which the apparatus has been in use, 9105 articles have passed through it, and in no case has any damage been done to the articles, which have all been satisfactorily disinfected. Previously to the introduction of this apparatus it was not infrequent to find that when patients returned home from infectious disease hospitals fresh cases appeared within a week or two in the same house. During a period when a disease like scarlet fever is epidemic, it is difficult of course to say that these latter cases are not due to infection from outside, but two other reasons have been alleged to explain their occurrence at that time ; it has been asserted that the original patient may have been sent home before the dead skin had completely peeled off, while yet it was in an infective condition,* but considerable care is exercised at the hospitals in this matter, and it is therefore suggested that, failing the existence of fresh infection, the "return" cases (as they have been called) were due either to the insufficiency of the disinfection to which the clothing, &c., were submitted, or, that clothing which had been worn before the disease had properly shown itself, had been put away until the return of the patient, and had thus escaped disinfection. Since the introduction of this apparatus, notwithstanding the extensive epidemic of scarlet fever, there has been a marked reduction in the number of such cases, and this I ascribe to the thoroughness of the new process and to the greater care taken to secure all articles which may have been exposed to infection for the purpose of passing them through the oven. The following table shows the number of premises and articles disinfected during the year—the figures for 1891 being placed alongside for comparison:— 1891 1892 Number of Premises 816 1,027 Total number of articles 9,630 10,867 Number of Beds 833 1,157 „ „ Palliasses 568 545 „ „ Pillows 1,602 1,801 „ „ Bolsters 504 559 „ „ other articles 6,123 6,758 * Another reason suggested by Dr. Hopwood, the Resident Medical Officer of the London Fever Hospital, appears to be a more likely explanation; persons who have been in fever wards for some time, must on leaving have in their air-passages germs which would be in the air they had been continuously breathing, and these germs might be given off on the patient's return home. Especially in regard to diphtheria this explanation might hold good, as it is now known that the germs of this disease may remain in the throat for considerable periods after the patient has recovered from the attack which has protected him from their further influence. 197 In addition to those disinfected—66 beds, 70 palliasses, 20 bolsters, 61 pillows. 6 sofa squabs, and a piece of carpet were destroyed and re-placed with new ones. Nearly half of these articles were destroyed during the small-pox outbreak and when the oven was being built. The number of premises and articles disinfected would have been larger had not during the last quarter the state of the hospitals prevented the usual proportion of cases being removed to them, so that a number of premises will fall to be disinfected in the first quarter of 1893, when the patients are better. DISINFECTANTS. I reported to the General Purposes Committee in the Spring of 1892, that many of the so-called disinfecting powders and liquids in the market were of little or no use for purposes of destroying infection, on the one hand because some of them did not contain substances capable of doing so, and on the other, that those that had the power were used in too dilute a condition, so that the only service which many of them rendered was simply to overpower effluvia. The end to be sought after is rather to destroy than to mask foul odours, and to prevent or arrest decomposition of organic substances until they can be removed from the vicinity of dwellings. It had been the custom to distribute freely during the summer months packets of carbolic powder to all who liked to apply, and I recommended that as greater attention was now paid to the cleansing of the streets and the removal of house refuse, powder should only be distributed where there was some need for it. 1¼ tons of Sanitas Powder were given away during 1892, at cost of £15 12s. to 5,616 applicants, as against 3½ tons of Carbolic Powder to 7,298 applicants, at a cost of £52 10s., in the previous year. An enquiry was made in each case as to the use for which it was intended to be put, and one of the inspectors subsequently inspected the premises if the reason alleged for its use was some insanitary condition. In this way a number of long-standing defects were remedied, and the use of the powder rendered unnecessary. Frequent complaints have been made to the Health Department of the offensive smells which proceed from the ventilating openings into the sewers ; solutions of corrosive sublimate, chloride of lime, and other substances, have from time to time been put down the openings, but disinfectants cannot be used in sufficient quantity or strength to be of much use. The defect lies in the faulty condition of the sewer, leading to the accumulations of decomposing filth, so that instead of acting as a means by which offensive matters can be removed from our midst as quickly as possible, it is merely an elongated cesspool. Unfortunately many of the sewers in the parish are in this abominable condition, they are old brick sewers without proper fall and of improper shape and construction, so that it 198 is only possible to cleanse them properly by hand labour. It is urgently necessary that new sewers be substituted for these defective ones, but in the meantime steps should be taken to keep them free from deposits and in as clean a state as possible. Not only does this condition of the sewers hamper the sanitary work of this department, but it is a continual source of danger to the inhabitants of the parish, and must undoubtedly have an important influence in the spread of several infectious diseases by affording their germs a place where they can multiply and be carried into the atmosphere again to be possibly inhaled by passers by. The remedy for the offensive smells then is not the closing of the ventilating openings or the pouring in of disinfectants, but the reconstruction and cleansing of the sewers; and, in view of the nearness of cholera, I can recommend no better work for the Vestry to undertake. THE REGENT'S CANAL. An examination was made by your surveyor (Mr. Martin) and myself in November, of that part of the Regent's Canal situated in this parish or bordering on it. Inclusive of basins, it extends to nearly 1¾ miles, but for 368 yards the south bank only is in Shoreditch. We submitted a detailed report on the conditions found, which were generally that the main channel way of the canal was fairly clean, but that in the lay-byes, alongside wharves, and in little used angles, there was much accumulation of offensive black mud with vegetable and animal refuse, weeds and debris. This is due to the admission of refuse from wharves, workshops, stable yards, and surface washings generally from the towing path and from premises abutting on the various parts of the canal. Two water closets drained into the canal, and sewage was found to be percolating through the brickwork of a cesspool on its banks, but these were the only instances of direct contamination of this description, and they have now been removed. We recommended that:— (1) The Vestry should take proper measures to prevent objectionable solid or liquid substances from fouling the canal, and to prohibit the discharge into the canal of all drains and drainage other than unpolluted surface water. (2) The Vestry should request the London County Council to make bye-laws pursuant to section 16 of the Public Health (London) Act, 1891, in relation to offensive cargoes. (3) The Canal Company should be requested by the Vestry to systematically scavenge the surface of the canal and the banks thereof three times a week, on alternate days throughout the months of June, July, and August, and twice a week throughout the other months of the year. 199 (4) The Canal Company should be required to scavenge the bottom of the whole of the canal (including the basins and lay-byes) annually, removing the whole of the mud and other deposit by dredging or other effective means. (5) The Canal Company should be required to protect the canal and towing path by proper and effective walls or close palings. The General Purposes and Sanitary Committee of the Vestry resolved: That the report be received, and the recommendations adopted with the addition (6) That the Canal Company be required to macadamise the towing paths. These recommendations were adopted by the Vestry, and the Canal Company and other bodies interested have been supplied with copies thereof and of the report. Other parishes having moved in the same direction, the County Council have now directed one of their assistant medical officers to inspect the whole of the canal in their behalf. SLAUGHTERHOUSES AND COWHOUSES. The London County Council are the licensing authority for slaughterhouses, cow-houses and knackers' yards, and all licenses have to be renewed in October of each year, notice being previously sent by each applicant to the sanitary authority of the district of his intention to apply. All the slaughter-houses and cow-houses in the parish were inspected by me, and their condition reported to the Vestry, who thereupon gave notice to the Council of objections existing in regard to 3 slaughter-houses and 13 cow-houses. There are no knackers' yards in Shoreditch. I attended on three occasions before the Public Health and Housing Committee of the County Council in support of the Vestry's objections, and the following table shows the alterations which have taken place:— Slaughter-houses. Cow- houses. Number existing in 189.1 23 21 Use discontinued 4 2 New applications refused 1 — Applications held over for works to be executed — 2 License granted conditionally 9 13 Total number of premises at end of 1892 19 19 In regard to one of the slaughter-houses, the use of it has been suspended pending its re-construction, with the plans for which both the County Council and Vestry are satisfied. 200 Most of the conditions imposed had reference chiefly to want of ventilation, defective paving, and improper water supply, but in the cases of the two cowhouses in which the license was held over, works of a more serious nature had to be carried out. In one, the house used in part for the sale of milk, required cleansing and repairing, while the drainage of the cow-house, yards, &c., was very defective. The arrangements for the drainage of the cow-house appeared to be satisfactory, but on exposing the drain, it was found a few feet from the gulley to be rising instead of falling towards the sewer, this, coupled with leaky joints, permitted the whole of the drainage from the cow-house to soak into the ground beneath, and the rest of the drain to its junction with the yard drain was quite dry, and apparently had never been used. These conditions have now been re-arranged satisfactorily. In the other case, the necessary works have progressed somewhat slowly, and are not yet completed; while the cow-house itself was fairly good, its surroundings were in a disgraceful condition. The yard between the dwelling house and cow-house had been covered in, shutting out both light and air from both premises; it contained a hay loft in the upper part, in the lower an undrained stall for a pony, and a large dung pit into which ran the urine, washings of cans, &c. The ground floor room of the house immediately adjoining was used for cleaning cans, and as a scullery ; the floor was badly paved, it had no proper drainage, its only light being through the door into the yard, it was dark, wet, and extremely dirty, and in one corner it contained a water-closet with no water laid on ; the house generally was in a dilapidated condition. The yard has now been opened up, the stable removed, and the water closet placed outside; the floor of the room and yard is to be concreted and properly drained, and a window is to be formed to light the back room. When these works are completed, the Vestry will have the satisfaction of knowing that the slaughter-houses and cow-houses in the parish have been placed in as sanitary a condition as the law at present permits. The tendency, especially in regard to the former, is to a reduction in number, butchers obtaining their meat instead from the public slaughter-houses, and this movement is certainly in the interests of the public health, as only under such circumstances can proper inspection of the animals and meat be made. Two questions in regard to manure will shortly require consideration. Throughout the district manure has been generally stored below the level of the ground in pits, not always water-tight and often of considerable size. It is impossible that fluids can drain away from such pits, as any outlet which could be provided would necessarily be at the bottom, and would readily be stopped up by solid matters. The County Council in their draft bye-laws propose to remedy this by requiring that all receptacles for dung shall be above ground. The second 201 question refers to the method in which manure is disposed of. At present the practice is for market gardeners, farmers, and others, to remove the manure when convenient; that time being at irregular intervals and dependent upon whether they are sending a cart to London. If the farmers are busy, as during harvest, the manure may not be removed for some weeks. It is proposed in the bye-laws that unless dung-bins are to be emptied every 48 hours, they shall not be constructed to hold more than one cubic yard, hence in either case it will not be possible for the owners of stables and cow-houses to rely in future upon the irregular collection at present in vogue. But even were the present system satisfactory in that respect, it is not desirable that the same carts which bring vegetables to market should also be used as dung carts on the return journey. If, therefore, this particular bye-law be confirmed, it will devolve upon the Vestry, under the powers given them by section 36 of the Public Health Act, to make arrangements "for collecting and removing the manure and other refuse matter from any stables and cow-houses within their district, the occupiers of which signify their consent in writing to such removal."' BAKEHOUSES. The 104 bakehouses in Shoreditch have been personally inspected, and of these only about 30 were found to be in a satisfactory condition in regard to sanitary arrangements, ventilation, and general cleanliness. The bulk of the bakehouses are underground, where necessarily proper ventilation is more difficult to obtain than when they are above ground; but the objectionable conditions I found were not by any means absent from those bakeries which were above ground. Considerable improvement has been or is in process of being obtained, water-closets and urinals (in some cases in a very foul state and with no water laid on) have been removed from within the bakehouses into the open air, defective drains and traps have been remedied, water supply, separate from that directly supplying the water closet, has been provided straight from the main; regular cleansing of walls and floors has been insisted on; ventilation has been improved, but so long as the stoke hole of the furnace opens in the same room as that in which the men work, dust and fumes must get scattered about each time the furnace is attended to. After viewing the conditions in which our chief food supply is prepared, it is not a matter for surprise that bakers are a short-lived race, or that chest complaints are prevalent among them. It was at one time a common practice for beds to be made up in the bakehouse, but no evidence of this was to be seen in any Shoreditch bakery, nor does it appear that lads under 18 years of age are now employed for night work ; although a good deal may yet be done to render these places better fitted for the purposes for which they are intended, and to secure healthier s1 202 conditions for those employed therein. The insanitary condition of so many bakehouses is due in great measure to the way in which the legislature have dealt with them from time to time, placing them for one period under one authority, and at another period under a different body. I consider that all places in which food is prepared for sale should be under systematic inspection. HOUSES CLOSED DURING THE YEAR 1892 AS UNFIT FOR HABITATION. Closed under Public Health (London) Act:— Whitmore Road, 47 & 49 2 New North Place, 1 to 4 4 Cotton's Gardens, 1 to 20 20 Weymouth Terrace, 86 1 Whitecross Place, 15 1 Lee's Buildings, 1 to 10 10 Hoxton Square, 21 1 — 39 Closed under Housing of the Working Clares Act :— St. John's Terrace 3 Marsom Street 7 — 10 Closed by District Surveyor:— Preedy's Buildings 7 Closed by County Council:— Boundary Street 3 — 10 Total 59 With the exception of the houses in Whitmore Road, it may be said the houses in the first group were practically closed voluntarily. I saw the owners in each case and represented to them the condition in which the property was in, and they agreed that they would close them on receipt of notice to do so. Whitmore Road, Nos. 47 and 49.—Notices were served upon these houses requiring certain works to be carried out, but the owner rather than do so when legal action was threatened, elected to close them. New North Place, Nos. 1 to 4.—These four houses have no back yards, the waterclosets are in the basements and the houses are old and worn out. The front areas encroached upon the roadway of New North Place, and a good 203 opportunity now offers to acquire the land necessary to make the roadway at this constricted part. Cotton's Gardens run from Hackney Road to the back of Hudson's Court in Kingsland Road; the houses on the south side and at the end being the ones dealt with. They are old, damp and dilapidated, and three of them fell down soon after the residents left them Nothing now remains between Hudson's Court but a washhouse and two waterclosets, and these form the only conveniences for the residents in that Court. The houses there are also damp, and have no through ventilation and no back yards; an improvement might readily be effected here by opening up Cotton's Gardens so as to make it a through thoroughfare. Weymouth Terrace.—No. 86 was underground and used both as a workshop and sleeping room. It was unsuited for either purpose. Whitecross Place.—No. 15 was a basement suite of rooms in a block of Artisans' Buildings there. They were quite dark and unfit for habitation. Lee. s Buildings required a considerable amount of repairs and reconstruction, necessitating their closure until these could be effected. Hoxton Square, No. 21.—This is a very old house and will have to be rebuilt. A number of sanitary improvements were necessary, but in view of the extreme age and generally dilapidated condition, the owners adopted my view that it would be better to close the house at once. St. John's Terrace.—The whole of this Terrace has been occupying the attention of the Department, and three of the houses were in such a bad condition that it was impossible to do anything while people were living in them. It was only, however, on a summons being taken out that the work was commenced. Marsom Street.—This small street runs across Moneyer Street, and was included in the 200 houses which have during the whole of the twelve months been occupying the attention of your Chief Sanitary Inspector. Every one of these houses was in a bad condition, some more, some less so, and it would have been well had the whole of them been included in the adjoining Moira Place and Nile Street Scheme. The work there is approaching completion, and each house has been put into good sanitary condition. Yards have been opened up, waterclosets rebuilt and supplied with water, old cesspools removed, many walls have been underpinned, wet earth removed from below floors and concrete laid down; many of the houses have had to be almost entirely renewed from roof to basement; new drains have been inserted in place of those found defective. Only one owner had to be taken before a magistrate to compel him to carry out the work properly. The seven houses in Marsom Street were closed under an order of the Housing of the Working Classes Committee, and with one exception, works have now been 204 executed rendering them more fit for habitations than they were. The one house which still remains closed is wedged in between two others and has no back yard of its own, and no works appear to be possible to effect its improvement. Preedy's Buildings.— These houses were in a dilapidated state and requiring thorough repair; they were also in a dangerous condition, and the owner closed them on receiving the notice from the District Surveyor. Boundary Street.—The three houses closed here form part of the Bethnal Green Scheme. LEGAL PROCEEDINGS. In addition to those cases already reported in my Quarterly Reports, the following were dealt with in the Fourth Quarter:— Cossett's Buildings.—This block consists of 20 tenements. There is a central staircase 3 feet wide, on the landings of which are placed the waterclosets. These closets were below the level of the landing, the pans were found stopped up and surrounded by water and sewage which percolated through the walls of the adjoining houses and flowed down the stairs on to the yard where it lay in pools among the broken concrete paving. The rooms on the ground floors were quite dark, those on the second floor not being much better. At the back of each half of the building was an open space, one being 7 ft. 2 in. by 11 ft. 10 in., the other 8 ft. 8 in. by 7 ft. 2 in.; in each case this was converted into a well by the back wall having been built up about 40 ft. high, shutting off both light and air. Ordinary methods having failed to effect any improvement, the freeholder into whose hands the building had come, was summoned at Worship Street Police Court, with a view to having the premises closed. An adjournment was asked for in order that a lawyer might be instructed on behalf of the owner, and was granted, it being distinctly stated by the magistrate that it was not for the purpose of affording an opportunity to carry out works. The time of the magistrates sitting at this Court is so fully taken up with cases of theft, assaults, &c., that they cannot always hear cases at the time they are set down for, consequently adjournments from this cause are numerous, and much time has thus to be spent fruitlessly in attendance at the Courts. It would be well were there one or more magistrates appointed for London who would take only such cases as those under the Public Health Acts, Excise prosecutions, School Board cases and such like, which upset the ordinary work of our Police Courts. With special magistrates cases could be more carefully dealt with, because it is evident that with every desire to do justice to both parties, magistrates cannot carry the details of such cases during the several weeks over which, an hour or so at a time, the cases are prolonged. During the adjournments which thus ensued in this case the opportunity was seized to pull down the wall of one of the air-wells, to repair the waterclosets, to whitewash walls which were wet 205 with the soakings from the waterclosets, and generally to give the place an appearance of being in good sanitary condition. In view of these works, the magistrate, when the case was eventually heard, only ordered the closure of the ground floor rooms and such on the first floor as were wet, although it was pointed out that the site and arrangement of the building were such that the insanitary conditions were certain to recur.* When the plans of these buildings were submitted to the Vestry in the end of 1890 in order to show the drainage connections, representations were made to both the landlord and architect by your late Medical Officer, your Surveyor, and Chief Sanitary Inspector, and to the County Council by the District Surveyor, in the hope that steps might be taken to prevent the erection of dwelling-houses in the manner proposed, but unfortunately no law exists to prevent buildings like this being constructed so long as the builder complies with the feeble requirements of the Building Act. Within eight months of their occupation their condition necessitated the action reported above being taken. Clinger Street.—The occupier of premises at No. 1, Clinger Street was summoned for failing to provide a proper receptacle for dung, to repave his stables and yard, and the magistrate (Mr. Bushby) made an order directing the works to be executed within fourteen days. He had been before the General Purposes Committee and been granted time in which to do the work, but he neglected to avail himself of the opportunities. FACTORY AND WORKSHOP ACTS. The Home Secretary, under the powers given him by the Factory and Workshops Act, 1891, has made the accompanying Order. The Local Government Board have issued a circular to Sanitary Authorities instructing them to at once take measures to make known the requirements of the Order, and to direct their officers from time to time to examine the lists, so that they may become aware of the places in which such out-workers are carrying on their employment, and thus be enabled to take prompt measures to suppress any insanitary conditions which may be found to exist therein. The General Purposes and Health Committee have fully discussed this Order, and have laid a statement before the County Council and the Local Government Board, suggesting that the officers of the County Council engaged in carrying out the Shop Hours Act might collect the lists of outworkers and distribute them to the several parishes in which the out-workers are resident, as it would be a matter of extreme difficulty for Local Authorities to do this in a thorough manner. This however they do not seem willing to acquiesce in. * At the time this Report is going through the press, these buildings are reported to be as bad as ever they were. 206 No. 44.) FACTORY AND WORKSHOP ACTS, 1878-1891 (Gazetted 4th November, 1892.) ORDER OF SECRETARY OF STATE REQUIRING OCCUPIERS OF CERTAIN FACTORIES AND WORKSHOPS TO KEEP LISTS OF OUTWORKERS. WHEREAS by Section 27 (1) of the Factory and Workshop Act, 1891, it is enacted that:— "The occupier of every factory and workshop (including any workshop conducted on the system of not employing any child, young person, or woman therein) and every contractor employed by any such occupier in the business of the factory or workshop shall, if so required by the Secretary of State by an Order made in accordance with Section 65 of the principal Act, and subject to any exceptions mentioned in the Order, keep in the prescribed form and with the prescribed particulars lists shewing the names of all persons directly employed by him, either as workman or as contractor, in the business of the factory or workshop, outside the factory or workshop, and the places where they are employed, and every such list shall be open to inspection by any inspector under the principal Act or by any officer of a sanitary authority." Now I, the Right Honourable Herbert Henry Asquith, one of Her Majesty's Principal Secretaries of State, by this Order, made under Section 65 of the Factory and Workshop Act, 1878, and Section 27 of the Factory and Workshop Act, 1891, require the occupier of every factory and workshop (including any workshop conducted on the system of not employing any child, young person, or woman therein), and every contractor employed by any such occupier in any of the businesses mentioned in the schedule hereunder, to keep in the form and with the particulars hereunder prescribed. lists shewing the names of all persons directly employed by him, either as workman or as contractor, in the said business outside the factory or workshop, and the places where they are employed, and every such list shall be open to inspection by any inspector under the Factory and Workshop Act, 1878, or by any officer of a sanitary authority. The order of the 18th July, 1892, under the above recited enactments, is hereby revoked. This order shall come into effect on the twentieth day of November, 1892, and shall continue in force until revoked. HERBERT H. ASQUITH. Whitehall, 31.st October, 1892. 207 SCHEDULE. The Manufacture of Articles of Wearing Apparel. The Manufacture of Electro Plate. Cabinet and Furniture Making and Upholstery Work. The Manufacture of Files. OUT-WORKERS. OUT-WORKERS. Form for use of Occupier. Form for use of Contractor. FORM PRESCRIBED BY THE SECRETARY OF STATE. FORM PRESCRIBED BY THE SECRETARY OF STATE. FACTORY AND WORKSHOP ACT, 54 & 55 Vict., c. 75, s. 27. FACTORY AND WORKSHOP ACT, 54 & 55 Vict., c. 75, s. 27. (OUT-WORKERS.) (OUT-WORKERS.) Address of Factory or Workshop Address of Factory or Workshop Name of Occupier of Factory or Workshop Name of Occupier of Factory or Workshop Business carried on Business carried on Names of persons employed by the OCCUPIER outside the Factory (or Workshop) in the business of the Factory (or Workshop) and places where they are employed, viz.:— Names of persons who are employed outside the Factory (or W orkshop) in the business of the Factory (or Workshop), by A. B., a CONTRACTOR with the Occupier, and places where they are employed, viz. : — A. Persons so employed as workmen. A. Persons so employed as workmen. Christian and Surname. Place where employed. Christian and Surname. Place where employed. B. Persons so employed as Contractors. B. Persons so employed as Contractors. Christian and Surname. Place where employed. Christian and Surname. Place where employed. NOTE.—In order that these lists may be correct lists of persons employed at any given time, it will be necessary that the name of any person newly taken into employment should be immediately entered, and the name of any person ceasing to be employed should be immediately struck through. NOTE.—In order that these lists may be correct lists of persons employed at any given time, it will be necessary that the name of any person newly taken into employment should be immediately entered, and the name of any person ceasing to be employed should be immediately struck out. 208 ANALYST'S REPORTS. During the year the provisions of the Food and Drugs Acts have been duly enforced, and your Analyst's Quarterly Reports, with the results of legal action taken, are shewn in this Report at pages 218 to 223. 107 samples in all were taken, 102 by your Inspectors, and 5 by a private individual. Of these, 33 were found to be adulterated, viz. :—21 of the 45 samples of milk, 9 of the 28 samples of butter, aud 3 of 8 samples of spirits. Samples taken of vinegar, mustard, pepper, cocoa, aud beer, were reported as being genuine, although the last-named article on several occasions contained more salt than seemed desirable. I am, Gentlemen, Your obedient servant, FRANCIS J. ALLAN, M.D., Medical Officer of Health. Shoreditch Town Hall, Old Stbekx', E.G. The Vestry of the Parish of the Parish of St.Leonard,Shorditch., IN THE COUNTY OF LONDON. INSPECTOR ALEXANDER'S REPORT. Public Health Department, 31 st December, 1892. Gentlemen, I beg to present the following report on the work of the Sanitary Department during the year ending 31st December, 1892, showing the number of premises inspected, the nature of nuisances under notice, and the orders made for their abatement. Special reports were also presented on the condition of the following premises, and as to other matters:— Maidstone Street Board School. Norfolk Buildings. Kossuth Buildings. Urinals—Bishopsgate Station (Great Eastern Railway). Dusting and Scavenging Western Division (first Quarter). To the Housing of the Working Classes Committee on the Houses of © © St. John's Terrace, Nos. Notices were served requiring the abatement of nuisances in 2592 premises. In addition to the ordinary notices 1650 letters have been written, which have generally been successful in allaying friction, and avoiding legal proceedings. WORKS DONE TO SECURE ABATEMENT OF NUISANCES. Glazed pipe drains provided in lieu of dilapidated brick drains in 163 premises Defectively constructed pipe drains repaired or re-laid in 882 ,, Drains provided where there were none before in 122 „ Rats infesting, and sewer gas impregnating (cured) in 301 „ Cesspools emptied and filled up in 34 ,, Accumulation of sewage removed from 148 „ Stack pipes (having their heads dangerously close to bedroom windows, permitting sewer gas to pass into dwelli ngs) disconnected from drains in 775 „ 210 Stack pipes provided in 774 premises Eaves gutters provided in 014 ,, Waste pipes of sinks within doors (untrapped and permitting sewer gas to impregnate the dwellings) have been securely trapped, or otherwise disconnected from drains, and have now their ends in the open air, and immediately over the yard sinks in 886 ,, Back fronts repointed in 298 „ Door and window sills provided in 1,067 ,, Roofs repaired in 570 ,, Stairs repaired in 345 , Floors repaired in 498 ,, Walls and ceilings cleansed, whitened and repaired throughout in 400 ,, Ditto ditto in part in 242 „ Total number of rooms in 2,542 ,, Sashes repaired in 404 „ Ventilation provided under ground floors in 45 ,, Water closets (foul and dilapidated) cleansed, repaired, and fitted to "Shoreditch Model" in 1,515 ,, Water restored or newly laid on to water closets in 908 ,, Obstructions in water closets removed in 85 ,, Water closets in close, dark and otherwise injurious situations removed into light and air in 92 ,, Water closets' light and ventilation improved in 41 ,, Water supplied direct from main in lieu of cisterns in 312 ,, Leaking water pipes, causing dampness, repaired in 53 Water restored in 57 ,, Yards and areas lime-washed in 1,243 ,, Dust bins provided in 958 ,, Yards paved imperviously with stone or cement concrete in 1,154 Areas and forecourts paved imperviously with stone or cement concrete in 663 ,, Sculleries ditto ditto in 412 ,, Areas constructed in 59 „ Urinals provided in 14 ,, Dung bins provided in 16 Premises unfit for habitation closed 27 ,, MISCELLANEOUS. Overcrowding abated in 30 premises Dead bodies removed from 2 ,, Animals, kept so as to be a nuisance, removed from 31,, Accumulations of dung and rubbish removed from 40 ,, Smoke nuisances abated 12,, 211 LEGAL PROCEEDINGS. Summonses were taken out for the abatement of nuisances in 19 premises, and abatement orders obtained. In four instances costs were recovered amountino to £3 8s. 0d. PREMISES AND ARTICLES DISINFECTED AT VESTRY'S DISINFECTING CHAMBER. Premises 1,060 Beds 1,114 Palliasses 509 Pillows 1,846 Bolsters 572 Sundries 6,928 Total articles 10,969 ARTICLES DESTROYED AND REPLACED BY VESTRY. Beds 64 Palliasses 70 Bolsters 19 Pillows 59 Squabs 6 Total articles 218 FOOD. CONDEMNED AND DESTROYED, BEING UNFIT FOR HUMAN CONSUMPTION. Beef 2 cwt. 18 lbs. Mutton 66 „ Meat Cuttings 14 „ Rabbits 4 dozen Geese 4 Haddocks (wet) 14 trunks Skate 5¾ ,, Oysters 21 baskets Apples 18 boxes Oranges 11½ ,, Kale 1 sack 212 "SALE OF FOOD AND DRUGS ACT, 1875." ARTICLES ANALYSED. (Sec Analyst's Report.) Milks 45 Butters 27 Cocoas 4 Peppers 4 Mustards 4 Vinegars 6 Rums 2 Gins 2 Whiskies 2 Brandies 2 Beers 4 Ales 4 Total 106 Prosecutions were instituted in 11 cases, and fines inflicted in 6 cases amounting to £18, and costs recovered amounting to £1 6s. 6d. DETAILS OF WORK. Details are again submitted of some of the principal matters occupying the attention of the Department during the year. ST. PAUL'S SCHOOLS, BROKE ROAD. The w.c. arrangements for the children at these schools numbering 250 boys and an equal number of girls were of the foulest and most dilapidated character, and altogether inadequate in number for 500 children. The vicar having voluntarily commenced alterations, it was proposed to fit up new w.c.'s with the troughs, which have so often been objected to as exposing children unnecessarily to odours arising from accumulations of the excreta of other children. These objections being urged on the vicar's attention, and the advantage of the Shoreditch w.c.'s as fitted up in other schools having been demonstrated to him on personal inspection, orders were given to carry out the new arrangements in accordance with the suggestions submitted on behalf of the Vestry. This has been done, and the w.c.'s fitted up in a superior manner with pans and traps, hinged seats, and syphonic water-flushing apparati. The cleanly condition in which these closets are now kept—in addition to those of four other middle class schools fitted in the same manner—is a positive proof of their great superiority to the foul trough system. 213 In reference to the substitution of the Shoreditch w.c. for the troughs previously in use in those schools, and specially with reference to those mentioned in the last Annual Report as having been provided at St. Columba Church Schools, Kingsland Road, the vicar, Rev. Christopher Bromby, wrote on April 28th, desiring the Sanitary Committee to be informed that "Their construction was highly approved by Her Majesty's Inspectors of Schools at their recent visit, remarks on the great improvement having been made in the report under the three departments of the Schools." NORFOLK BUILDINGS. It will probably be of public interest to put on record the circumstances attending the erection of these buildings, and the re-construction of the drainage of the premises by order of the Vestry. The site was occupied up to 1881 with a large number of ruinous cottages, approached by several narrow courtwavs. After much effort by the Sanitary Officers, the owner was induced to pull the whole of the cottages down, and the land was sold as a building site, and in November of 1881 plans were submitted to the Metropolitan Board of Works for the erection of the present buildings, which were objected to by the Vestry. In March, 1882, a communication was received from the Metropolitan Board of Works reporting receipt of amended plans and asking if the Vestry had any suggestions to offer thereon. To that it was replied that the Vestry's objection still remained. Nevertheless, the buildings were erected in accordance with the plans objected to by the Vestry, and in several respects in an insanitary manner, but not until 1891 was it discovered that the drains were so defectively constructed that it had been necessary several times to open up the floors of the basement rooms to remove stoppages, with the result that the ground under the floors of several rooms used as day rooms and bedrooms was soddened with foecal matters. These conditions being reported to the "Vestry, it was ordered that notices be served on the owner requiring him to amend the drains. The owner failing to comply with the notices, an order was made by the Vestry under which a contractor was employed and the necessary works carried out at a cost of £209 7s. 6d., for the recovery of which sum it became necessary to summon the owner at Worship Street Police Court; much disputation took place on the hearing of the case. Finally the Magistrate (Mr. Rose) gave judgment as follows:—Mr. Pilbrow had set up the various pleas, that he was not the owner, that the work done was altogether unnecessary, and that work was done that was not specified in the notices. The case of the Vestry set forth that on inspection they found the drains in bad order, and they served notices in November, 1891, upon Mr. Pilbrow in person, requiring him to amend and re-construct the defective drains, and in February, 1892, nothing having been done to amend the conditions complained of, the Vestry entered upon the premises under the powers given by the 85th Section of the Metropolis Local Management Act and work was done to 214 the value of £209 7s. Cel., which sum the Vestry had paid, and now sought to recover. It was alleged on behalf of Mr. Pilbrow that this sum was excessive, and and that the Vestry should have contracted for the execution of the work. As to these contentions, he was of opinion that the bill was not excessive, and that the Vestry was not obliged to contract to get the work done cheaply and, perhaps, nastily; as to the inspection chambers being constructed that were not specified, he found that the notices required all necessary works to be done, and it was a matter of common knowledge that inspection chambers were a necessity of modern drainage. Mr. Pilbrow had also set up the objection that he was not the owner, but, if he really were not the owner, nothing would have been more easy of proof, and no such proof had been adduced; he was therefore of opinion that Mr. Pilbrow was the owner; it was given in evidence that since the completion of the works defects had been found, well, probably, no sanitary arrangements could long be retained in perfect condition in the buildings in question owing to the habits of the tenants. Then it was contended that the drains had always been in good order, and that the works required by the Vestry's notices were unnecessary. If that were a valid objection, Mr. Pilbrow had his remedy, he could have appealed to the London County Council under the 211th Section of the Metropolis Local Management Act against the notice of the Vestry, but that he had not done, he allowed the work to be finished, and now resisted payment; the Vestry had done the work and paid the money, and he could not believe that any local authority had any interest in doing work that was not necessary, and, as he believed Mr. Pilbrow to be the owner, he therefore gave judgment for the Vestry for the sum claimed, £209 7s. 6d., and £20 costs. THE STANDARD AND BRITANNIA THEATRES. The w.c.'s and urinals of both of these theatres were found in a most offensive state, aud the dressing rooms very unclean and defectively ventilated. The proprietor of the Standard on being approached very readily gave instructions for a thorough rectification of the conditions complained of, including new drainage, refitting w.c.'s "Shoreditch style," and ventilating them, the provision of proper urinal accommodation, cleansing and ventilation of dressing rooms and passages. The above works having been completed were shown to the proprietor of the Britannia who also very readily gave orders to have his theatre treated in the same way. The whole of the works referred to were carried out under the supervision of Mr. Inspector Quelch in a satisfactory manner. 215 KOSSUTH BUILDINGS. The history of these buildings, and the houses known as Ann's Place which formerly stood on the same site, and the proceedings of the Vestry in reference thereto, is instructive as to the fallibility of legal machinery for the removal of houses unfit for habitation, and for the prevention of the erection of houses unfit for habitation. The old houses were condemned in 1876, under Torrens' Act, against which condemnation the owner appealed to the Quarter Sessions, and the premises were visited by the Bench of Magistrates, and although the houses were found situated in a court only 11 feet wide, into which a ray of sunlight never fell, and although they were in the last stage of dilapidation, and traversed with a disused sewer full of sewage into which the walls were evidently settling, the magistrates nevertheless decided to allow the owner to effect alterations which he asserted would make the houses fit for habitation. A great deal of work was then done to sustain the tottering walls; the sewer was removed, and the grosser defects remedied, and the houses were again occupied. The Vestry having spent in legal proceedings a sum not less than £500. The conditions again became so urgent, that in 1889 a summons in reference to one of the houses was taken out at the instance of Mr. Bennett Burleigh of the Daily Telegraph. At the hearing I related to the magistrate the action taken by the Vestry, and at my request he visited the place, with the result that a closing order was made in reference to No. 9, and subsequently, on pressure by the Vestry, all the houses were closed and demolished, and Ann's Place was advertised as a building site. In 1890, plans were submitted for the erection thereon of a block of so-called model dwellings. It was at once evident that those plans were wanting in proper sanitary provisions, and a letter was therefore addressed to the building owner in October, 1890, notifying him that the plans were not satisfactory, and that if buildings were erected on those plans, it would be the duty of the Medical Officer of health to advise the Vestry to take proceedings to have them closed as unfit for habitation. Nevertheless the buildings were erected on those plans and occupied, and in last October, within twelve months of being occupied, the walls of many of the rooms were found to be soddened with sewaga, and application was therefore made to Worship Street Police Court for a closing order. That application was not effectual, the magistrate being influenced by the circumstance that they were new buildings and (without inspecting their condition himself), would only order some of the worst of the tenements to be closed. A few more months elapsed when, as this report is passing through the press, it became necessary to make another application to the Court, with the result that an order was obtained for closing the whole of the premises. T 216 PROVOST STREET, MONEYER STREET, CUSTANCE STREET, and ALLERTON STREET and MARSOM STREET, abutting on the south side of Nile Street and not included in the Vestry's "Nile Street Improvement Scheme.'' The insanitarv condition of the above houses numbering 230 was reported to the Housing of the Working Classes Committee, and following thereon they were viewed, and referred by that Committee to be dealt with under the Public Health Act by the General Purposes Committee, by whose order comprehensive notices were served for the abatement of nuisances, and repair of the premises of one street after another. Commencing with those of Provost Street, which are four-roomed cottages, with small washhouses attached. They were generally damp and very dilapidated. Those on the west side were provided with extremely small yards—in which the w.c.'s, dust bins, and sinks left but very little room for movement of air, or for any other purpose—the back rooms were therefore, and in addition to other unwholesome conditions, very dark. Between the back of these premises and the Model Dwellings in Chatham Avenue there was a strip of waste land from 7 feet to 10 feet wide which extended from one end of the street to the other. The desirability of adding to each house that part of the waste land immediately behind it, was pressed upon the attention of the various owners, and the freeholder's agent, with the result that in each case the owners have been enabled on payment of 10s. per year to more than double the size of the yards of their houses, and to secure thereby greatly improved light and ventilation to the back rooms. » The difficulty of dealing with these houses has been greatly increased by the circumstance that the leases will expire in a very few years. There was therefore a very natural objection on the part of many of the leaseholders to execute substantial works, of which the freeholder would in a few years reap the benefit, and without contributing anything to the expense of the improvements. There was a further difficulty in the circumstance that 57 of the houses belonged to 29 different owners each of whom employed their own builder, many of whom were utterly incompetent for the proper execution of the work they were employed to carry out. Nevertheless the work done has made the houses much more fit for habitation. Dampness, rats, and sewer gas have been removed by the provision of new drains, the paving of yards, and the provision of broad concrete cills to back and front doors, and the thox'ough cleansing and repair of the interiors, and the provision of proper w.c.'s. The same process, less the addition to the size of yards, has been carried out in the houses of the adjoining streets, viz.:—Moneyer Street, Custance Street, Allerton Street, and Marsom Street. 217 DUSTING AND SCAVENGING. (WESTERN DIVISION.) Much difficulty was experienced towards the expiration of the contract for the above Division in getting the daily work fairly attended to. Frequent reports were presented thereon, and finally large numbers of the complaints were dealt with by the new department for dusting and scavenging, and the cost charged to the Contractor, whose contract came to an end on the 25th March, since which time the Sanitary Department has been relieved of the work connected with dusting and scavenging. WATER VANS. In handing over the vans (15 in number) to the new department, it was held that they should be transferred in a good state of repair; specifications were therefore prepared, and the tender of Mr. Travis, of Kingsland Road, accepted, who carried the works out to the satisfaction of the Committee at a cost of £67 19s. 5d. STAFF. In reference to the increase in the staff, and the apportionment of Districts to the Junior Inspectors. It has been found that the work of the Department has been carried out during the year with an entire absence of friction, and that a spirit of co-operation and mutual helpfulness has characterised each member of the staff, and it is gratifying to acknowledge that the aid, which by long experience I am enabled to supply, is as freely sought by my colleagues, Messrs. Lear, Stiles and Quelch, as it is freely rendered. I am, Gentlemen, Your obedient Servant, HUGH ALEXANDER, Chief Sanitary Inspector. Shoreditch Town Hall, Old Street, E.C. t1 218 ®{re fetru of tire fstrislr ot J51. ffeoirarir, §{roreiritc{r, in tire ®omttg of goniron. SALE OF FOOD AND DRUGS ACT, 1875. The Report of the Analyst appointed under the above Act tor this (Jounty, ot the number ot Articles ot .food, Drink, and Drugs, which have been received and Analysed by such Analyst, specifying the nature and kind of Foreign Ingredients detected in such Articles, &c., during the Year ending the 31st day of December, 1892. Date of receipt by Analyst of the Article to be Analysed. Name of Person from whom the Article was received. Number marked on the parcel containing the Article by which it is to be identified by the Inspector in lieu of the name of the person from whom it was procured. Article received. Result of Analysis specifying the nature and kind of foreign ingredients detected in such article (if any). Observations. Fines. Costs. 1892. Feb. 4 Fredk. C. Knight, 28, Glenpark Road, Forest Gate, E. U.P Butter Foreign fats, i.e., fats other than butter fat, 70 per cent.; water, salt, and curd, 12 per cent. Butter fat not exceeding 18 per cent. Not decomposed \ i „ 13 Ambrose W. Stiles. J 50 Rum Water over and above that contained in 25 degrees under proof rum, 6¼ per cent Strength— 31¼ deg. under proof. ,, ,, ,, ,, J51 ,, Genuine 24½ ,, ,, ,, ,, ,, ,, J 52 Gin Genuine 31 ,, ,, ,, ,, ,, ,, J 53 ,, Genuine 35,,,, ,, ,, ,, ,, J 54 Whiskey Genuine 17¾ ,, ,, ,, ,, ,, ,, J 55 ,, Waster over and above that contained in 25 degrees under proof whiskey, ½per cent » 25½ ,, ,, 20 ,, ,, J 56 Brandy Genuine 15½ ,, ,, ,, ,, ,, ,, J 57 ,, Water over and above that contained in 25 degrees under proof brandy. 2£ per cent 27¼ ,, ,, ,, ,, ,, ,, ,, ,, J 58 J59 Beer An excess of chlorides equal to 68 grains of common salt per gallon Genuine Beer ought not to contain as a maxim m chlorides equal to more than 50 prains per gallon ; hence there is in this beer an excess of at least 18 g. ains per gallon. Strength 10J percent, of proof spirit . ,, ,, ,, ,, J 60 ,, Genuine Strength 9½ per cent. proof spirit ,, ,, ,, ,, J 61 ,, Genuine Strength 8¾ per cent. proof spirit 1 219 Analyst's Report for the Year ending the 31st day of December, 1892—continued. Date of receipt by Analyst of the Article to be Analysed. Name of Person from whom the Article was received. Number marked on the parcel containing the Article by which it is to be identified by the Inspector in lieu of the name of the person from whom it was procured. Article received. Besult of Analysis specifying the nature and kind of foreign ingredients detected in such article (if any). Observations. Fines. Costs. 1892. j Feb. 20 A. W. Stiles J 62 Ale An excess of chlorides equal to 82 grains of common salt per gallon .. Beer ought not to contain as a maximum chlorides equal to more than 50 grains per gallon; hence there is in this ale an excess of at least 32 grains per gallon. ,, ,, ,, ,, • J 63 Ale Genuine Strength 8¾ percent. proof spirit ,, ,, ,, ,, J 64 Ale Genuine Strength 9 per cent. proof spirit ,, ,, ,, ,, J 65 Ale Genuine Strength 10½percent. proof spirit Mar 3 ,, ,, Nfiw milk 5 per cent, of water beyond the normal Not decomposed ,, ,, ,, ,, J 67 New milk Genuine Not decomposed ,, ,, ,, ,, J 68 New milk Added water 10 per cent Not decomposed ,, ,, ,, ,, J 69 New milk ,, 8 per cent Not decomposed ,, ,, ,, ,, J 70 New milk Deficient in butter fat 20 per cent. Not decomposed ,, ,, ,, ,, J 71 New milk Added water 10 per cent. Not decomposed ,, ,, ,, ,, J 72 New milk ,, 20 per cent. Not decomposed ,, ,, ,, ,, J 73 New milk Genuine, of low quality. Not decomposed ,, ,, ,, ,, J 74. Butter Genuine Not decomposed ,, ,, ,, ,, J 75 Butter Foreign fats, i.e., fats other than butter fat, 75 per cent. Water, salt, and curd, 13 per cent. Butter fat not exceeding 12 per cent. Not decomposed, a sample of margarim ,, ,, ,, ,, J76 Butter Genuine Not decomposed ,, ,, ,, ,, J 77 Genuine Not decomposed May 18 ,, ,, J 78 New milk Deficient in butter fat 25 per cent. Not decomposed . ,, ,, ,, ,, J79 New milk Genuine Not decomposed ,, ,, ,, ,, J 80 New milk Genuine Not decomposed 220 Analyst's Report for the Year ending the 31st day of December, 1892—continued. Date of receipt by Analyst of the Article to be Analysed. Name of Person from whom the Article was received. Number marked on the parcel containing the Article by which it is to be identified by the Inspector in lieu of the name of the person from whom it was procured. Article received. Result of Analysis specifying the nature and kind of foreign ingredient detected ir. such article (if any). Observations. Fines. Costs. 1892. ,, ,, A W Stiles J 81 New milk Genuine Not decomposed ,, ,, ,, ,, J 82 New milk Dpfifiient, in butter fat 15 uer cent. Not decomposed ,, ,, ,, ,, J 83 New milk Deficient in butter fat 20 per cent. Not decomposed ,, ,, ,, ,, J 84 New milk Genuine Not decomposed ,, ,, ,, ,, J 85 New milk .. 4 per cent, water beyond the normal. Not decomposed ,, ,, ,, ,, J 86 New milk Deficient in butter fat 25 per cent. Not decomposed ,, ,, ,, ,, J 87 New milk Genuine, of low quality Not decomposed ,, ,, ,, ,, J 88 New milk Genuine Not decomposed ,, ,, ,, ,, J 89 New milk Genuine, of low quality Not decomposed ,, ,, ,, ,, J 90 Butter Genuine Not decomposed ,, ,, ,, ,, J 91 Butter Genuine Not decomposed ,, ,, ,, ,, J 92 Butter Genuine Not decomposed ,, ,, ,, ,, J 93 Butter Genuine Not decomposed ,, ,, ,, ,, J 94 Butter Genuine Not decomposed ,, ,, ,, ,, J 95 Butter Foreign fats, i.e., fats other than butter fat, 80 per cent. Water, salt, and curd, 15 per cent. Butter fat not exceeding 5 per cent. A sample of margarine June 24 ,, ,, J 96 Cocoa Genuine Not decomposed ,, ,, ,, ,, J 97 Cocoa Genuine Not decomposed ,, ,, ,, ,, .J 98 Cocoa Genuine Not decomposed ,, ,, ,, ,, J 99 Cocoa A trace of sago starch Probably an accidental admixture ,, ,, ,, ,, J100 Pepper Genuine Not decomposed ,, ,, ,, ,, K 1 Pepper Genuine Not decomposed ,, ,, ,, ,, K 2 Pepper Genuine Not decomposed.. . ,, ,, ,, ,, K 3 Pepper Genuine Not decomposed ,, ,, ,, ,, K 4 Mustard Genuine Not decomposed ,, ,, ,, ,, K 5 Mustard Genuine Not decomposed.... ,, ,, ,, ,, K 6 Mustard Genuine Not decomposed ,, ,, ,, ,, K 7 Mustard Genuine Not decomposed 221I A nulyst's Report for the Year ending the 31st dag of December, 1892—continued. Date of receipt by Analyst of the Article to be Analysed. Name of Person from whom the Article was received. Number marked on the parcel con- i jaining the Article by which it is to be identified by the 1 Inspector in lieu of the name of the person from whom it was procured. Article received. Result of Analysis specifying the nature and kind of foreign ingredients detected in such article (if any). Observations. Fines. Costs. 1892. Aug. 22 Fredk. Clias. Knight, 21, Water lane, Gt. Tower street HA Butter Foreign fats, i.e., fats other than butter fat, 86 per cent. Water, salt, and curd, 12 per cent. Butter fat not exceeding 2 per cent. Not decomposed, a sample of margarine ,, ,, ,, ,, HB Butter Foreign fats, i.e., fats other than butter fat, 82 per cent Water, salt, and curd, 13 per cent. Butter fat not exceeding 5 per cent. Not decomposed, a sample of margarine Not decomposed ,, ,, ,, ,, H C Butter Genuine ,, ,, ,, ,, HD Butter Foreign fats, i.e., fats other than butter fat, 87 per cent,; water, salt, and curd, 11 percent. Butter fat not exceeding 2 per cent. Not decomposed, a sample of margarine Oct. 25 Chas. Henry Quelch K 8 Vinegar Genuine Not decomposed . ,, ,, ,, ,, K 9 Vinegar Genuine Not decomposed ,, ,, ,, ,, K 10 Vinegar Genuine Not decomposed ,, ,, ,, ,, K 11 Vinegar Genuine Not decomposed ,, ,, ,, ,, K 12 Vinegar Genuine Not decomposed ,, ,, ,, ,, K 13 Vinegar Genuine Not decomposed yy yy ,, ,, K 14 Butter Genuine Not decomposed yy yy ,, ,, K 15 Butter Foreign fats, i.e., fats other than butter fat, 45 per cent. Water, salt, and curd, 17 per cent. Butter fat not exceeding 38 per cent. Not decomposed, a sample of margarine Not decomposed ,, ,, ,, ,, K 16 Butter Genuine, of low quality ,, ,, ,, ,, K 17 New milk Genuine ,, ,, ,, ,, K 18 New milk Genuine LC tc Analyst's Report for the Year ending the 31st day of December, 1892—continued. Date of receipt by Analyst of the Article to be Analysed. Name of Person from whom the Article was received. Number marked on the parcel containing the Article by which it is to be identified by the Inspector in lieu of the name of the person from whom it was procured. Article received. Result of Analysis specifying the nature and kind of foreign ingredients detected in such article (if any). Observations. Fines. Costs. 1892. Oct. 25 Charles Henry Quelch K 19 New milk Genuine, of low quality ,, ,, ,, ,, K 20 New milk Added water 12 per cent. Butter fat, 3-33 per cent.; solids not fat, 7'45 per cen. Not decomposed ,, ,, ,, ,, K 21 New milk Genuine Not decomposed.. ,, ,, ,, ,, K 22 New milk Added water 14 per cent. Butter fat, 3.81 per cent.; solids not fat, 7.22 per cent. ; water 88.97 per cent. Not decomposed Nov. 2 ,, ,, K 23 New milk Geneuine Not decomposed ,, ,, ,, ,, K 24 New milk Genuine Not decomposed ,, ,, ,, ,, K 25 New milk Added water 18 per cent. Butter fat, 402 per cent.; solids not fat, 6.86 per cent.; water 89.12 per cent. Not decomposed £1 12/6 ,, ,, ,, ,, K 26 New milk Genuie Not decomposed ,, ,, ,, ,, K 27 New milk Genuine, of low quality Not decomposed ,, ,, ,, ,, K 28 New milk Genuine Not decomposed ,, ,, ,, ,, K 29 Butter Foreign fats, i.e., fats other than butter fat 35 per cent. Water, salt, and curd, 15 per cent. Butter fat not exceeding 50 per cent. Not decomposed, a sample of margarine ,, ,, ,, ,, K 30 Butter Foreign fats, i.e., fats other than butter fat, 30 per cent. Water, salt, and curd, 17 per cent. Butter fat not exceeding 53 per cent. Not decomposed, a sample of margarine ,, ,, ,, ,, K 31 Butter Genuine Not decomposed ,, ,, ,, ,, K 32 Butter Genuine Noc decomposed ,, ,, ,, ,, K 33 New milk Genuine Not decomposed ,, ,, ,, ,, K 34 New milk Added water 10 per cent. Butter fat 3.19 per cent. ; solids not fat, 7.69 per cent.; water 89-12 per cent. Not decomposed £3 2/ ,, ,, ,, ,, K 35 New milk Added water 17 per cent. Butter fat 2-89 per cent.; solids not fat, 7.01 per cent.; water 9010 per cent. Not decomposed £3 2/ 223 Analyst's Report for the Year ending the 31sf day of December, 1892—continued. Date of receipt by Analyst of the Article to be Analysed. Name of Person from whom the Article was received. Number marked on the parcel containing the Article by which it is to be identified by the Inspector in lieu of the name of the person from whom it was procured. Article received. Result of Analysis specifying the nature and kind of foreign ingredients detected in such article (if any;. Observations. Fines. Costs. 1802. Nov. 2 Charles Henry Quelch K 36 New milk 4 per cent. water beyond the normal. Not decomposed ,, ,, ,, ,, K 37 New milk Added water 12 per cent. Butter fat 3.19 per cent.; solids not fat, 7.47 per cent.; water 89-34 per cent. Not decomposed £6 2/ ,, ,, ,, ,, K 38 New milk Geneune Not decomposed ,, ,, ,, ,, K 40 New milk Added water 20 per cent. Butter fat 2.39 per cent.; solids not fat, 675 per cent.; water 90.86 per cent. Not decomposed £3 2/ ,, ,, ,, ,, K 41 New milk Added water 10 per cent. Butter fat 2.85 per cent.; solids not fat, 7*69 per cent.; water 89.46 per cent. Not decomposed £2 2/ ,, ,, ,, ,, K 42 Butter Genuine Not decomposed ,, ,, ,, ,, K 43 Butter Genuine Not decomposed ,, ,, ,, ,, K 44 Butter Genune Not decomposed ,, ,, ,, ,, K 45 Npm milk Genuine Not decomposed ,, ,, ,, ,, k 46 New milk Deficient in butter fat 10 per cent. Not decomposed ,, ,, ,, ,, K 47 Butter Genune Not decomposed ,, ,, ,, ,, K 48 Butter Genuine Not decomposed ,, ,, ,, ,, K 49 Butter Genuine Not decomposed ,, ,, ,, ,, K 50 New milk Genuine Not decomposed ,, ,, ,, ,, K 51 New millr Genuine Not decomposed ,, ,, ,, ,, K 52 . New milk 6 per cent. of water beyond the normal > Not decomposed Chemical Laboratory, Guy's Hospital, London, S.E. THOMAS STEVENSON, M.D., Public Analyst. PUBLIC LIBRARIES AND MUSEUMS. SECOND ANNUAL REPORT. ABSTRACT OF THE ACCOUNTS. 1892-93. SECOND ANNUAL REPORT of the COMMISSIONERS for PUBLIC LIBRARIES and MUSEUMS FOR THE PARISH OF SAINT LEONARD, SHOREDITCH. For the Year 1892-93. The Commissioners have great pleasure in submitting the following report of their second year's work in carrying out the Public Libraries' Act in this parish. A detailed account of the purchase of the buildings and site having been given in last year's report, it will only be necessary to state here in reverting to the negotiations then carried on that the borrowing of three sums, amounting in the aggregate to £-5,000, was sanctioned by the Local Government Board, and the loans obtained from the Prudential Assurance Company, at 3| per cent, per annum on the annuity principle, on the 12th April, 1892, and conveyance of the premises completed on the same date and possession obtained. As will be seen from the financial statement at the end of this report, the whole of the loans have been expended on the purposes for which they were sanctioned. The repairs and alterations of the premises were entrusted to Mr. J. Ivory of Great Cambridge Street, N.E., and the heating and lighting to Messrs. Strode and Co., Osnaburgh Street, N.W., according to the plans and specification prepared by Mr. Richard J. Lovell, Architect, Queen Victoria Street, E.C., under whose supervision the work was carried out. The alterations were practically completed in September, the Commissioners holding their first meeting in the Library on the 12th of the same month, and Mr. J. Betteridge was appointed caretaker. 400 applications were received for the post of sub-librarian, and 14 of the caudidates were selected for interview by the Commissioners, who resolved to appoint Mr. J. F. Summers of the Marylebone Free Library, whose death the Commissioners regret to record took place on 19th October, after a very brief illness, and within two months of the date of his appointment. The Commissioners 228 shortly afterwards appointed Mr. F. J. West, of the Camberwell Public Libraries to the vacant office, and Mr. A. T. Ward, of the St. Martin's Public Library, as senior assistant, both of whom had been previously selected for interview. Four temporary assistants were engaged to assist in the preliminary work connected with the organization of the library, and the services of two of them (Miss Dodd and Miss Richardson) have been retained. The donations to the library in money and kind have been both numerous and valuable, and the Commissioners take this opportunity of once more returning their cordial thanks to the donors. A complete list of donors and donations from the commencement has been appended. The Commissioners are particularly indebted to Mr. J. Passmore Edwards for his very munificent gift. The whole of the amount, £4,250, paid by the Commissioners for the building and site, including the garden with an area of 10,000 feet and the librarian's house adjoining, with all freehold rights, was most generously defrayed by him on November 26th, 1892, he having also previously made a donation of over 1,000 volumes to the library. The gift was accompanied with an expression of hope that the Commissioners would with that assistance soon be enabled to have two public libraries for the benefit of the large and densely populated parish of St. Leonard, Shoreditch. There was, he said, judging from experience, abundant reason to believe that when the two public libraries were open and in full swing they would prove an immeasurable blessing to tens of thousands who were living, and to generations that are to follow; and he further hoped that other parishes would soon follow the courageous example of Shoreditch in the adoption of the Act, and that before the expiration of the present century, London would be adequately supplied with public libraries. The News and Magazine Rooms were opened to the public on 7th November, 1892, and the fact of the daily average having been since then 547, the number is a sufficient demonstration of their appreciation. The same rooms were open on Sundays during the winter months from 6 to 9 p.m., with an average attendance of 44. Newspaper boards with the day's advertisements posted on, are placed in front of the building in the early morning, for the convenience of the unemployed. As the reading rooms at times are inconveniently crowded, the Commissioners have provided additional accommodation by erecting a readers' shelter in the garden, which is being furnished with tables, chairs and newspaper stands. 229 For this acquisition, and the laying out of the garden, the Commissioners are indebted to Mr. W. J. Orsman, J.P , L.C.C., for his successful endeavours in obtaiuing from the City Parochial Foundation a grant of £'250. The nucleus of a museum, consisting of a miscellaneous collection of stuffed birds, reptiles, shells, stones and minerals, has been purchased at a comparatively low figure from a private gentleman, and is stored temporarily in the basement. Owing to the inadequacy of space, which prevents the objects being exhibited to advantage, the Hoxton Library is intended to be its ultimate destination. The library contains 8,806 volumes, classified and catalogued, 6,460 of which are located in the lending department, and intended for home reading, and 2,346 in the reference library. In addition to the above, however, nearly 2,000 volumes, including 662 volumes left by Mr. John Dawson to the parish in the year 1765, and the remainder purchased with the museum collection, are in the store room awaiting careful inspection. Many being duplicates of works already in stock will come in for the second library. A printed catalogue has been issued of the books of the lending library, and a card catalogue of the works in the reference department. A classified account of the stock has been annexed to this report. By the time this report reaches the Vestry it is hoped that the Commissioners will be in possession of temporary premises at the Technical Schools in Hoxton Street. A number of technical works have already been located there for the benefit of the students ; and the vacant rooms, although rather small, are light and lofty, and well adapted for the purposes required. The Commissioners are at the present time negotiating for an eligible site for their permanent library for the Hoxton division, which, if secured, will be very centi'al and of sufficient area to allow the erection thereon of a handsome and commodious building. The opening ceremony of the present library in Kingsland Road was kindly performed by His Grace the Duke of Devonshire, K.G., on Wednesday, 10th May, 1893, and notwithstanding its clashing with the opening of the Imperial Institute on the same day, the inauguration was a decided success, passing off with great enthusiasm and eclat. On behalf of the Commissioners, THOMAS MARTINDILL, Chairman. 30th June, 1893. Seal. 230 The following report of the proceedings is reprinted from the Hackney Express and Shorediteh Observer for 13th May, 1893:— SHOREDITCII FREE LIBRARY. OPENING CEREMONY BY THE DUKE OF DEVONSHIRE. MUNIFICENCE OF Mr. PASSMORE EDWARDS. The deep interest of the people of Shorediteh in the free library movement and their fervent gratitude to Mr. J. Passmore Edwards for so munificently helping' the parish found enthusiastic expression in the brilliant ceremony of Wednesday afternoon, when, in the presence of a large and representative assemblage, the Duke of Devonshire opened for public use the substantial and splendidly equipped free library in the Kingsland Road. The glorious weather which favoured east and west alike added greatly to the pleasure and success of the function ; and the scene was most imposing when the noble duke drove up to the gaily decorated building between an avenue of Second Tower Hamlets Rifles, who as a guard of honour, under the command of Major F. M. Wenborn, edged the dense crowd of parishioners gathered to participate in the welcome and rejoicing. On alighting, his Grace was cordially received by the indefatigable Commissioners of the Library, and after a hasty inspection of the building he proceeded to the grand pavilion erected in the grounds. Here the Duke was warmly welcomed by the large audience who had been listening with manifest enjoyment during the previous half-hour to the excellent music provided by the lads from Hornchurch, under the able direction of their painstaking instructor, Mr. M. Larter. The chair was appropriately occupied by Mr. Thos. Martindill, president of the Commission, supported by his colleagues, Messrs. W. H. Barralet (vice-chairman), J. Cox, J. Donovan, S. Fordham, J. Hurlin, E. Moffatt, H. T. Sawell, and F. M. Wenborn, with Dr. Robinson (hon. solicitor), and Mr. W. C. Plant (chief librarian and clerk). On the right of the chairman sat the Duke of Devonshire, and on the left Mr. J. Passmore Edwards, Mrs. and Miss Edwards, the company including Pro. Stuart, M.P., Mr. W. R. Cremer, M P., Mr. W. J. Orsman, L.C.C., Mr. Nathan Moss, L.C.C., Mrs. and Miss Moss, Hon. Claude Hay, Mr. J. Lowles, Mr. Edwin Austin, Mr. R. G. Alabaster, J.P., and Mrs. Alabaster, Rev. T.Priestley (St. Peter's, Hoxton), Rev. C. Everitt (St. Andrew's, Hoxton), Mr. John Carter, Mr. C. W. Cox, J.P., Rev. A. H. Vine and Mrs. Vine, Mr. R. J. Lovell (architect), Mr. E. A. R. Adams, Messrs. R. Marshall, R. Clay, J. Little, R. Dummett, W. Ellis, G. Gotelee, C. W. Brabner, H. Belstead, J. P. Creasey, J. Harverson, W. Beasley, T. B. Chant, E. Biggs, J. J. Frseman, J. W. Vandy, J. Field, D. Noel, J. Cowley, H. Winkler, J. Langan, R. Speight, W. Cocks, W. Anderson, G Andrews, R. J. Larcombe, J. Ivory (builder), H. Alexander, Dr. Oliver, and many others. The Chairman commenced the proceedings with a brief statement of the history and progress of the free library movement in Shorediteh, observing that the parish had a population of 124,000, composed chiefly of the artizati class, who, up to the present time, had been deprived of the advantage of free access to the best literature of the day. Having obtained a substantial and suitable building, the Commissioners spent £1,870 in alterations, £1,500 on books, and £270 on furniture and fittings. A vast amount of detail work had been carried out by a competent staff under the direction of Mr. Plant, librarian, who brought his previous experience to bear upon the task in a thoroughly efficient and expeditious manner. In view of the need for technical instruction, 16,000 persons in the par sh being employed in woodwork alone, an ample supply of books bearing upon that industry had been obtained, which would be of valuable assistance to artizans. The Commissioners wished to express their gratitude to Mr. Edwards for coming forward with that philanthropic spirit characteristic of himself and removing the debt on the building and site ; to Mr. Errington, for 200 valuable books ; and to Mr. Foster, Tolworth Hall, Surrey, for a very fine painting, " The Finding of Jane Shore." They had also an acquisition which no other library in London possessed, viz., the large garden in which they were now assembled, where the public could promenade on fine evenings, and readers could enjoy a 231 book and a pipe if they chose. The £250 expended in laying- out the garden and building the readers' shed was obtained by the efforts of Mr. Orsman from the central governing body of the City Parochial Foundation. The Commissioners had also purchased a valuable museum collection, and they believed that the new library would prove a great success and a veritable boon to the inhabitants of Shorediteh. (Applause.) The Duke of Devonshire, who was greeted with cheers, said, although the work in which " he had been engaged that day (the opening of the Imperial Institute) had no special reference to the Metropolis, it was one that might be found to be of great advantage to the inhabitants of the Metropolis, inasmuch as it was hoped that it would lead to a better acquaintance on the part of its inhabitants with the great resources of the vast Colonial and Imperial dependencies of this Empire. (Cheers.) In saying a few words in opening the library, he desired to express his sincere congratulations on having taken part in the great movement for the extension of public libraries. (Cheers.) The passing of the Public Libraries Act was not followed by any remarkable activity in the Metropolis for a considerable period ; but of late years he was glad to learn that a very remarkable extension of activity had taken place. (Cheers.) He believed that up to September, 1891, the Act had been adopted in 28 Metropolitan parishes. That was a fact which he looked to with the greatest possible satisfaction, although he was quite aware that the principle of that Act was not universally approved. There was a school of persons—he was not sure whether they called themselves social reformers or not—who had devoted a great deal of thought and consideration to social questions, with many of the principles of which he admitted that he had great sympathy, inasmuch as their object was to advocate the principle of self-help as opposed to the principle of State-help. With many of their principles he had the fullest sympathy, but when they carried their opposition to State-help or Municipal-help in social movements so far as to oppose the adoption of the Free Libraries Act they were carrying their principles much too far. (Hear, hear.) He endeavoured to look at this question from a practical point of view. He asked himself whether public libraries were good or bad institutions for the people. He asked whether it was probable that by any other means than that provided by the Act adequate provisions of these public libraries would, within any reasonable time, be effected ; and his answer was that public libraries were not only good things, but almost essential to the welfare of the people if no other means could be provided within a reasonably short time. We should not be content, he thought, that this generation should wait for this benefit in order that two or three generations hence might possibly be provided with these institutions upon a better principle, and that those future generations might possibly be better trained than the present one in the habit of self-help and self-reliance. (Cheers.) He congratulated the district of Shorediteh in the acquisition of this Institution, and he also sincerely congratulated their founder, Mr. Passmore Edwards—(applause)—on the personal service which he had been able to render to a large number of his fellow citizens—a number which it was difficult to estimate at the present moment, and still more difficult to estimate if they attempted to look into the future. He congratulated him also on the continued pleasure which it had been in his power to bestow upon great numbers of his fellow citizens and countrymen. (Cheers.) They had lately seen a great development of the spirit of private munificence, and there was an increasing sympathy between man and man, between class and class, and an increasing recognition of those ties which bound together those whose lot was cast in the same communities and localities. (Cheers.) Anyone who undertook the duty which he had was expected to say something as to the advantages and benefits which a free library could confer upon the people, and this part of his duty he did not feel very well qualified to perform, because he neither had, nor professed to have, a very intimate acquaintance with books, which ought to be the subject of his observations. The only excuse he could make was that during the past few years he had endeavoured to give some attention to the great question of technical education, and in the course of what he had been able to do in that direction he had been led to give some little consideration to the objects and results of the efforts which we were now making in the direction of popular education. We were spending a great dei1. of money on popular luration, derived from public and local u 232 sources. But that was not all: we were, to a certain extent, interfering with and restricting the liberty of parents in the treatment of their children. We were depriving a number of parents of the labour of their children for a certain period, which, under the circumstances in which they were placed, was a very serious matter. He had not the smallest doubt, however, that it was worth while to give all this inconvenience which we were incurring- in extending the education of the people, if we could only be satisfied that the education we gave was an education of the right sort. (Hear, hear.) We had to remember that the vast majority of those for whom this popular education was provided were children who would be dependent for their subsistence upon the labour of their hands, and the object of the education which we were giving them ought not, in his opinion, to be to take them out of the class of manual labour ; it ought not to be to induce them to rise, as it is called, into some other class which was supposed, but erroneously, to be a higher class than that of manual labour. Our object ought not to be to take them out of the ranks of manual labour, but to endeavour to make them better, more intelligent, and more useful labourers and citizens to their country. Our object ought to be, in fact, to raise the material condition of the working classes as a whole. (Cheers.) There was another and still higher object of our national education. It was one great object that a sound system of education would tend to improve the material condition of the people ; but a further object, and perhaps a higher one, was to endeavour to get the people to make the best use of that material improvement in their condition. They hoped that education would have the effect of raising, widening, civilising, and brightening the lives of those who were now receiving it. (Cheers.) He did not suppose it could be said that, at the present, there was any large proportion of the working classes who took much pleasure in reading or in the pursuit of literature ; but if this could not be said of the working classes, it certainly could not be said universally of any class. If dull, hard labour was an obstacle, as no doubt it was, to reading and study, idleness was certainly 110 passport to study (hear, hear) ; and he ventured to think that if the larger proportion of those who lived by the labour of their hands were in the habit of finding their highest relaxation and pleasure in literature and study, it was more on account of the facilities which they possessed of access to books and literature than in any difference in the condition of their lives. (Hear, hear.) One of the characteristics of books was that they created to their students a new world and a new life which was not limited by their own surroundings, but which was as wide as human knowledge was extended. The problem which lay before those who had the direction of our popular education was how this new world was to be opened to the masses of the people. However it might be done, it could not be done by cramming unwilling minds with information and knowledge which they did not appreciate. (Hear, hear.) It could better be done by creating a taste for after study, which alone was of value. (Cheers.) That would be the best test of our system of education, and, in his opinion, public libraries had a double function to discharge. They would be in themselves most powerful instruments for aiding and assisting after education, which alone could be of value, and they would also furnish the test by which we should be able to ascertain whether our system of education was proceeding on right or wrong lines, and whether it was doing for the people the work which it was intended to do. (Cheers.) He concluded by formally declaring the Library open. (Applause.) Me. W. H. Barralet said he regretted a larger audience was not possible to carry the resolution he was about to move with the acclamation it deserved. Thousands would have been glad to be present at the public opening of that library to thank Mr. Passmore Edwards for his generous assistance. (Cheers.) But if the gathering was not so numerous as they could have desired, they had not failed in making it thoroughly representative. (Hear, hear.) He moved with great pleasure, " That this meeting of representatives of the inhabitants of Shorediteh hereby tender their thanks to Mr. Passmore Edwards for his magnificent gift of £4,250 and 1,000 books to the Haggerston Branch of the Shorediteh Public Library." (Cheers.) It seemed to him that the Education and Public Libraries Acts were working together and would ultimately blend together, so that the Free Libraries would be a continuation of the education the children received at school. He hoped Bethnal Green and other districts would be stimulated to follow the example of Shorediteh in providing a free library. (Cheers.) 233 Major F. M. Wenborn heartily seconded, observing that they heard a great deal of State and rate-aided institutions, compulsory charges for this and the other thing, but lie felt sure the advocates of these methods would join in saying " May voluntaryism of this kind over exist and flourish amongst us." (Cheers.) Through Mr. Edwards' generosity the Commissioners had been almost able to guarantee the provision of a second library without any serious difficulty. He hoped they would be able to carry out the second branch without any further call upon the ratepayers ; and he could assure Mr. Edwards that when the forest of hands went up in support of this resolution their hearts went along with it. (Cheers.) The motion was carried with great enthusiasm. Mr. Passmore Edwards, who was very cordially received, said lie should like to answer a question which had been put to him since he was in the adjoining building. " Why," said a gentleman, " Have you gone away so far from the West-end of London to assist a community in this part of London ? " He answered that he did it lartrely from a sense of duty. (Hear, hear.) He considered that the East of London had large claims on the West-end, and particularly 011 those who could afford to assist the people of the East. But there was another reason which induced him to come to their assistance and it was this. He was told that if the parish could be assisted in the way it had been they would have two libraries instead of one. That satisfied him. It had been said that " He who can make two blades of grass grow where only one grew before is a benefactor of his race." (Cheers.) And certainly, if anyone could do anything to make two libraries spring up where only one might have sprung up he was, lie would not say a benefactor of his race, but he assisted or co-operated with his fellow citizons. (Hear, hear.) Supposing he gave 5/- for a book, it became his property, but if he read that bookit became his in a double sense in that the spirit of the book had passed from the dead book unto him as a living human being. Then, if he gave that book to a fellow citizen, it was still more his own, and both had the spirit of it, but if he gave it to a community it was yet more his own and still did good. (Cheers.) That was one of the inducements that animated him in the aid of public libraries and the distribution of books. (Hear, hear.) In giving away books he was really assisting, in a small way, to solve the great labour question, because as books were multiplied so money was distributed and labour paid. (Hear, hear.) In conclusion, he had great pleasure in moving a vote of thanks to the Duke of Devonshire for his kindness in coming to open the library. His Grace occupied a central position in the State, and had materially assisted in the spread of technical education. He had been present that afternoon at the Imperial Institute and at their Free Library, which were both in line, parts of one whole, contributing each to the greatness and strength and endurance of the British Empire, which would only be maintained intact by having educated, and strong men and women. (Cheers.) Mr. W. J. Orsman, L.C.C., said he most heartily seconded this vote of thanks, expressing the hope that they would have the pleasure of seeing his Grace in Shorediteh again, and that they would soon have another library, together with electric light and baths and wash-houses. (Cheers.) The motion having been carried with enthusiasm, The Duke of Devonshire made an apposite response, observing that he was glad to find men of all parties on a platform such as that, working together in what they believed to be a cause which would benefit the people of that country, irrespective of any political questions. (Cheers.) He earnestly hoped that this institution would prove of as much advantage and benefit to the inhabitants of the parish, especially those most in need of such assistance, the working classes, as had been anticipated by every speaker of that day. (Cheers.) Mr. W. R. Cremer, M.P., said he had the agreeable task of proposing that the best thanks of the friends present be accorded to the Commissioners for the arduous labours they had necessarily undertaken in bringing about such a splendid result. They had not only performed their task wisely and well, but in secret, away from the applause of the multitude, though animated by a sense of duty. (Hear, hear.) lie thought these free libraries did a magnificent work in weaning 234 the young people from tho streets and music-halls, and many of the older people from the public-houses. (Cheers.) PllOKKSSOU STUAKT, M.P.,Haid he had much pleasure in seconding the resolution. It was not often that a poor district like Shorediteh gave such an example to the rest of London aw had been itiven twice during the last week in the opening of the technical schools and exhibition, and the opening of this permanent library. (Cheers.) If they had to thank the Commissioners for nothing else they could thank them for that opportunity of acknowledging the public munificence of Mr. Passmore Edwards, who might well assist a library like that, because he was one of the most efficient means of raising from day to day the literary tastes of Londoners. (Cheers.) They had to thank the Commissioners for their unostentatious but remarkably effective work. (Cheers.) Mr. J. Donovan, in acknowledging the unanimous thanks of the company, said he and his colleagues were determined to hopefully persevere with their work, which as yet was only half done. The band having played the National Anthem, the company dispersed, a trood many previously taking a look over the institution. ATTENDANCES OF COMMISSIONEKS—1892-0:}. GENERAL MEETINGS. NUMBER OF MEETINGS CONVENED—53 Thomas Martindill (Chairman) 53 W. II. Barralet (Vice-Chairman) 51 Joseph Cox 40 J. Donovan 42 S. Fordham 45 J. liurlin 53 Ebenezer Moffatt 32 A. Molloy 41 F. M. Wenborn 46 GARDEN COMMITTEE. NUMBER OF MEETINGS CONVENED—6 Thomas Martindill (Chairman) 6 W. II. Barralet (Vice-Cliairman) 6 J. Ilnrlin 6 F. M. Wenborn 3 In compliance with the " Public Libraries Act, 1802," the Commissioners have agreed to the following rotation for retiring:— Retire in 1893. Retire in 1894. Retire in 1895. W. H. Barralet S. Fordham Joseph Cox J. Donovan T. Martindill J. Hurlin A. Molloy F. M. Wenborn E. Moffatt 235 NUMBER AND CLASSIFICATION OF BOOKS IN (a) LENDING AND (b) REFERENCE LIBRARIES. (a) pending Total. Letter. Class. Number A Theology, Philosophy, and Ecclesiastical History 343 B Science and Art 1,098 C History, Biography, Travels, etc. 1,515 D Poetry and the Drama 296 E Sociology, Law, Education, and Commerce 292 F Prose Fiction 2,689 G Language and Literature 91 H Miscellaneous Works 136 6,460 (b) Reference Library. Letter. Class. N umber A Theology, Philosophy, and Ecclesiastical History 133 B Biography, Travels, and Mythology 197 C History, Topography, and Archaeology 435 D Natural and Mathematical Sciences 147 E Useful Arts 78 F Fine Arts 37 G Recreative Arts 2 H Law, Commerce, Economics, Sociology, etc. 74 I Language, Literature, Bibliography 77 J Poetry and the Drama 91 K Prose Fiction 57 L General Dictionaries and Encyclopaedias 12 M Miscellaneous Works (principally collections of Essays) 111 N Reports, Directories, etc. 14 0 Magazines, Reviews, and Learned Society's Transactions 881 2,346 Total 8,806 Number of Volumes Presented 2,532 Do. do. Purchased 6,274 Grand Total 8,806 236 LIST OF PERIODICALS, &o. Those marked with an asterisk (*) are presented. DAILIES. Birmingham Daily PostDaily Chronicle Daily Graphic Daily News Daily Telegraph Echo Evening News and Post Evening Standard Freeman's Journal Globe Irish Times Liverpool Mercury Manchester Guardian Morning Advertiser Morning Post Pall Mall Gazette Scotsman Standard Star Times Yorkshire Post TRI-WEEKLIES. Bazaar, Exchange and Mart *Hackney and Kingsland Gazette BI-WEEKLIES. City Press London Gazette WEEKLIES. * Alliance News Amateur Gardening A then [Bum * Beacon British Medical Journal Builder Cassell's Saturday Christian World * Civil Service Competitor *Colliery Guardian *Cycling Cyclist * Drapers' Record English Mechanic Engineer T Engineering Enquire Within Era * Family Doctor Farm, Field and Fireside Fishing Gazette *Fun Gentlewoman Graphic Guardian * Hackney Express & Shorediteh Observer Illustrated London News * Industries '*Insurance Observer 0 Invention Journal of Gas Lighting Judy * Justice Justice of the Peace Ladies' Pictorial Lancet Lloyds' AVeekly Newspaper * Mercury Moonshine * National Reformer Pearson's Weekly Penny Illustrated Paper 2:37 LIST OF PERIODICALS, &c;.—(Continued.) WEEKLIES. People Punch Rej'nolds' Newspaper * Rural World Saturday Review Shoe and Leather Record Temperance Record Truth *Uni verse Volunteer Service Gazette Weekly Times and Echo MONTHLIES. Argosy Cabinet and Art Magazine Cassell's Family Magazine Chamber's Journal Chums Cornhill Magazine Contemporary Review Educational Times Fortnightly Review Good Words Great Thoughts Harper's Magazine Journal of Decorative Art Leisure Hour Macmillan's Magazine * Musical Times New Review Nineteenth Century * Protestant Observer Quarterly Review Strand Magazine Sunday Magazine *Volunteer Service Magazine Westminster Review * Zoophilist TIME TABLES. A.B.C. Railway Giiide *Cook's Excursionist *Great Eastern * Great Northern *Great Western *London and North Western *London and South Western *London and South Western (Continental) *London, Brighton and South Coast *London, Chatham and Dover *London, Chatham and Dover (Continental) *London, Tilbury, and Southend *Metropolitan ^Midland *South Eastern 238 LIST OF DONORS AND DONATIONS. NAME. Year to 25th March, 1892. Year to 25th March, 1893. Folio in Accounts. £ £ Worshipful Company of Cloth workers 10 196 Carnegie, Andrew, Esq 25 241 Edwards, J. Passmore, Esq. 4,250 • 10 4,275 £4,285 NAME. Books. Pamphlets, Manuscripts, etc. Alabaster, R. G. 1 — Allen, F. J. 1 — Billing, Mrs. 1 — Brittania Co. 3 — Buss, Rev. S. 4 — Chambers, George (Tyssen Library) 1 22 Church of Eugland Book Society 85 — Cobbe, F. P. 2 — Cobden Club 31 — Cocks, R., & Co. 5 — Dawson, J. (Bequeathed to the Parish in 1765) 662 — Edwards, J. Passmore 1,013 — Errington, T. 181 — _ Shorediteh Library Provisional Committee 1 — Foskett, E. 1 — Harverson, J. 3 11 H. M. Stationery Office 214 — Hibbert Trustees 11 — London County Council 2 — Martindill, Thomas 8 — Nicholson, C. N. 44 — Paterson, J 5 — Pitman, Isaac 10 — Prosser, R. B. — 31 Steel, C. 13 — Swedenborg Society 46 — Turner, Mrs. 11 — Vestry of St. Leonard, Shorediteh 102 — Voysey, C. 6 — Anonymous 1 — Total 2,468 64 2,532 239 Foster, H. Hylton, a large painting representing the " Finding of Jane Shore," by Hon. L. Wingfield, R.H.A. Reports or Catalogues have been received from the following:— Baillie's Institution, Glasgow, Battersea, Belfast, Buxton, Chelsea, Cheltenham, Chester, Clapham, Clerkenwell, Croydon, Ealing, Folkestone, Gt. Yarmouth, Hammersmith, Holborn, Hull (Eastern), Kensington (Central and North), Leeds, Leicester, Liverpool, Manchester, Paddington, St. Giles, St Martin's, Sheffield, Streatham, Toynbee Hall, Westminster. MEMORANDA. Population of Shorediteh (1891), 124,009. Area of Parish, 648 acres. Rateable value Public Libraries Acts adopted, March, 1891. Commissioners first appointed, 14th April, 1891. First Librarian appointed, 5th January, 1892. News and Magazine Rooms opened, 7th November, 1892. Library opened, 10th May, 1893. 240 240 The Accounts of the Commissioners for Public Libraries and Museums for the Parish of Saint Leonard, Shorediteh, in the County of London. STATUTORY FINANCIAL STATEMENT, for the Year ended 25th March, 1893. UNDER "PUBLIC LIBRARIES ACT, 1892." To RECEIPTS— £ s. d. By PAYMENTS— £ s. d. Cash Balances, 25th March, 1892:— (a) RATE AND REVENUE ACCOUNT. 570 11 5 Do. Hon. Secretary 2 17 2 573 7 (a) RATE AND REVENUE ACCOUNT. Fram the Poor Rate 2,808 14 0 Expenditure in excess of Loans sanctioned— Purchase of Site 723 3 11 Donation 4,275 0 0 Furniture and Fittings 219 7 1 Rent of Librarian's house 30 0 0 942 11 0 Wayleave rental for ground pole (one year) 2 2 0 Books, Periodicals, &c 1,094 9 9 Banker's Interest 37 10 9 Newspapers 20 4 7 ' Museum Collection 330 0 0 1,444 14 4 Salaries of Officers and Assistants 282 12 10 Stationery and Printing 49 8 2i Typewriter 19 16 0 Advertising 8 10 1 Stamp Duty and Postages 7 13 11 Cleaning, Fuel, and Incidentals 23 9 8 Rates and Taxes 3 7 2 (las and Water 20 19 7 Fire Insurance 4 5 3 Rent of Telephone 13 5 7 Petty Disbursements 4 14 1½ 155 9 7 Interest on loans 4 7 5 Do. on Purchase Money 11 14 8 Legal Expenses 3 1 10 Tax on Banker's Interest 0 1 8 7,153 6 9 2,844 13 4 (b) CAPITAL ACCOUNT. (b) CAPITAL ACCOUNT. Purchase of Site—Loan for 50 years 3030 0 0 Purchase of Site 2,604 9 6 Alterations, &c. do. 30 years 1,250 0 0 Alteration to Buildings, &c 1,250 0 0 Furniture & Fittings, do. 15 years 720 0 0 Furniture and Fittings 720 0 0 4,574 9 6 5,000 0 0 7,419 2 10 Cash Balances, 25th March. 1893:— In hands of Treasurer 5,304 19 10 Do. Chief Librarian and Clerk 2 12 8 5,307 12 6 I hereby certify that I have compared the entries in this Financial Statement with the Vouchers and other Documents relating thereto, and that the Regulations with respect to such Statement have been duly complied with. I hereby further certify that I have ascertained by Audit the correctness of such Statement, and that the amount expended by the Commissioners during the year ended the 25th day of March, 1893, included in such Statement, and allowed by me at the Audit, is Seven thousand four hundred and nineteen pounds, two shillings and tenpence. As witness my hand this 13th day of June, 1893. W. C. PLANT, Chief Librarian and Clerk, £ 13th day of June, 1893. 12,726 15 4 HERBERT V. THOMAS, Assistant District Auditor. & 12,720 15 4 241 241 RATE AND REVENUE ACCOUNT—Income and Expenditure from 25th March, 1892, to 25th March, 1893. Source. Fo. RECEIPTS. ASSETS Accrued but not received Income from 25 Mar???92 to 25 Mar.???93 Application. Fo. PAYMENTS. LIABILITIES Expenditure from 25 Mar.,92 to 25 Mar.,93 25 March,'92 25 March,'93 25 March,'92 ujl isul fali). 1 25 March,'93 Haggerston Library. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. Haggerston Library. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. From the Poor Rate 240 2,808 14 0 938 14 0 60 8 0 1,930 8 0 Building, Repairs and Maintenance 240 942 11 0 ...... 41 17 8 984 8 8 Donations 240 4,275 0 0 ...... ...... 4,275 0 0 Books, Periodicals, &c 240 1,444 14 4 ...... 30 0 11 1,474 15 3 Rents 240 32 2 0 ...... 1 11 6 33 13 6 Salaries and remuneration of Officers and Assistants 240 282 12 10 10 0 0 ...... 272 12 10 Bankers' Interest 240 37 10 9 2 11 7 ...... 34 19 2 Establishment Charges 240 155 9 7 27 14 1 20 0 8 147 16 2 941 5 7 61 19 6 Repayment of Debt ...... ...... 80 9 10 80 9 10 61 19 6 ...... ...... Interest on Loans 240 4 7 5 ...... 162 4 4 166 11 9 7,153 6 9 879 6 1 ...... 6,274 0 8 Do. on Purchase Money 240 11 14 8 11 14 8 - Legal Expenses 240 3 1 10 3 1 10 Tax on Banker's Interest 240 0 1 8 ...... 0 1 8 37 14 1 334 13 5 37 14 1 2,844 13 4 296 19 4 3,141 12 8 BALANCES—25th March, 1893. In hands of— Treasurer 5,304 19 10 Chief Librarian 2 12 8 5,307 12 6 240 Less—25th March, 1892. In hands of— Treasurer 995 11 5 Hon. Sec. 3 7 8 998 19 1 Excess of Receipts over Payments 240 4,308 13 5 Income in excess of Expenditure, carried to Balance Sheet 243 3,132 8 0 £ 7,153 6 9 £ 6,274 0 8 £ 7,153 6 9 £ 6,274 0 8 242 242 CAPITAL ACCOUNT— from 25th March, 1892, to 25th March, 1893. To RECEIPTS- £ s. d. By PAYMENTS— £ s. d. capital account capital account. Mortgages. Expenditure out of Loans to 25th March, 1892 425 10 6 Loans borrowed, to 25th March, 1893— Do. this year— Purchase of Site 3,080 0 0 Purchase of Site. Alterations to Buildings, &c 1,250 0 0 Freehold Land and Buildings (Balance) 3,825 0 0 Furniture and Fittings 720 0 0 Counsel's Fees 6 16 0 5,000 0 0 Plans and Conveyance Charges 4 19 2 Transfer from Rate and Revenue Account (fo. 210) — Expenditure in excess of Loans sanctioned 912 11 0 Stamp Duty on Conveyance 21 5 0 Land Registry Fees 0 5 0 Law Costs re purchase and obtaining Loans 25 10 0 3,883 15 2 Alterations to Buildings, &c. Renovation and other Incidental works 931 10 11 Drainage work 59 10 4 Architect's charges 28 7 0 1,019 8 3 Furniture and Fittings, Fitting up Librarian's House 56 10 0 Heating and Lighting 288 3 8 Chairs, Tables, and Reading Desks 116 8 8 Linoleum, Mats, and Carpets 53 1 9 Venetian Blinds, &c 9 18 5 Gas Fittings 4 9 3 Kitchen Range and Irons 7 18 9 Indicator 56 7 6 Clock 4 5 9 Common Seal 13 19 0 Copying Press 2 14 4 613 17 1 5,517 0 0 £ 5,912 11 0 £ 5,942 11 0 243 243 COMMISSIONERS FOR PUBLIC LIBRARIES AND MUSEUMS— BALANCE SHEET, 25th March, 1893. Fo. £ s. d. £ s. d. Fo. £ s. d. £ s. d. LIABILITIES. ASSETS. CAPITAL ACCOUNT. CAPITAL ACCOUNT. To Loan Account:—Balances 242 5,000 0 0 By Haggerston Library— Purchase of Site 242 4,309 5 8 To Excess of Assets 242 942 11 0 Alterations to Buildings, &c 242 1,019 8 3 5019 11 0 Furniture and Fittings 242 613 17 1 RATE AND REVENUE ACCOUNT. 5,942 11 0 RATE AND REVENUE ACCOUNT. To Sundry Creditors, for Balances due to them 241 334 13 5 By Sundry Debtors, for Balances owing by them 241 61 19 6 Surplus—25th March, 1892 1,902 10 7 By Cash Balances—25th March, 1893. Add— Income in excess of expenditure this year 3,132 8 0 241 In hands of Treasurer 5,304 19 10 241 Do. Chief Librarian 2 12 8 241 SURPLUS—25th March, 1893 5,034 18 7 5,307 12 6 5,369 12 0 5,369 12 0 WILLIAM GEORGE SMITH, Treasurer, London and Midland Bank, Limited (Shorediteh Branch.) £ 11,312 3 0 W. C. PLANT, Chief Librarian and Clerk. £ £ 11,312 3 0 STATEMENT shewing the DEBT outstanding on the ACCOUNTS of the COMMISSIONERS FOR PUBLIC LIBRARIES AND MUSEUMS, SHOREDITCH, and the Amounts of PRINCIPAL AND INTEREST charged in the Accounts for the Year ended 25th March, 1893. Purpose of Loan. Mortgage No. Sanction. When Borrowed. Mode of Repayment. Original Loan. Repaid. Balance of Loan outstanding1, 25tli Mar., 1893. Interest. Charged in Accounts. Date. Amount Period within which to be repaid. Rate per cent. When Payable. Principal. Gross Interest. l 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 ll 12 13 14 HAGGERSTON LIBRARY 1892. £ Years. 1892. By equal annual Instalments of Principal and Interest combined. £ £ s. d. £ s. d. 1 £ s. d. £ s. d. Purchase of Site 1 30 Jan. 3,030 50 12 April 3,030 ....... 3.030 0 0 3½ 12 April ....... 2 13 0 Erection of Library 2 30 Jan. 1,250 30 12 April do. 1,250 ....... 1,250 0 0 3½ 12 April ....... 1 1 10 Furniture & Fittings 3 30 Jan. 720 15 12 April do. 720 ....... 720 0 0 3½ 12 April ....... 0 12 7 £5,000 £5,000 ....... 5,000 0 0 ....... £ 4 7 5 244 SALARIES AND ALLOWANCES TO OFFICIALS OF THE COMMISSION, 25th March, 18!) Name. Nature of Office. Present Annual Halary. Amount paid during Financial year. Charged in Account. Fo. Remarks. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. W. C. Plant Chief Librarian and Clerk 150 0 0 150 0 0 150 0 0 J. F. Summers (deceased) Sub-Librarian 60 0 0 10 0 0 10 0 0 Fredk. J. West do. 60 0 0 21 16 2 21 16 2 A. T. Ward Assistant 50 0 0 19 2 8 19 2 8 Lena m. Richardson do 26 0 0 11 0 0 11 0 0 Aunic j. Dodd do 26 0 0 11 0 0 11 0 0 A. Philpott do 15 12 0 5 2 0 5 2 0 J. Betteridge* Caretaker 65 0 0 35 0 0 85 0 0 With Apartment*, Fiiv.LiKlit, Itnti'K and Tbxoh freo, anil Uniform Clothing. H. L. Loly Honorarium for) Clerical ser( vices rendored) ........ 10 0 0 10 0 0 Temporary Assistants ........ ........ 9 12 0 9 12 0 152 12 0 282 12 10 282 12 10 240 STATEMENT OF FIRE AND PLATE GLASS INSURANCES, 25th March, 1893 Company. Nature of Risk. Amount covered. llato per cent. Annual Premium. When due. Charged in Accounts. Fo. Guardian Fire and Life Assurance Company. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. I Library Buildings 2,600 1 6 2 5 0 25 Dec. 2 5 0 (Librarian's Residence 400 1 6 Do. do. Furniture, Fixtures, Fittings 1,000 1 6 1 17 6 25 Doc. 2 0 8 Printed Books 1,500 1 6 Do. do. Museum Collection. 850 4 6 1 7 0 25 Mar. ...... Oil Painting 250 4 6 National Provincial Plato Glass Insurance Company Limited. Against breakage of glass in buildings. .... ... 1 5 0 21 .June ..... 6,100 6 14 6 4 5 8 240 The Destry of the Parish of St. Leonard, Shoreditch. IN THE COUNTY OF LONDON. WARDS, DIVISIONS, AND BOUNDARIES OF THE DISTRICT. No. 1.—MOORFIELDS WARD. All that part of the Parish lying South of a line commencing at the Bethnal Green Boundary in Bethnal Green Boad (Church Street); and continuing- through Church Street, New Inn Yard, and Leonard Street to the St. Luke's Boundary. No. 2.—CHURCH WARD. North of the line above described. The Eastern Boundary commences at the corner of Boundary Street, Bethnal Green Road, and continues by Boundary Street to Austin Street, Hackney Road, thence to Kingsland Road, and by that road to Mary Street; crosses Hoxton Street to Great James Street, thence by St. John's Road and Pitfield Street to Old Street, thence westward through Old Street, and thence by the boundary of St. Luke's to Leonard Street. No. 3.—HOXTON WARD. West and North of the Boundary of Church Ward. The Northern Boundary of this ward commences at the St. John's Road end of Nicholas Street, through that street to the New North Road, Murray Street, Shepherdess Walk and Edward Street to the St. Luke's Boundary, and thence by that boundary, near the City Road, until it intersects the Church Ward Boundary in Old Street. No. 4.—WENLOCK WARD. Noi'th and West of the Hoxton Boundary. The Eastern Boundary commences at the New North Road, corner of Nicholas Street, thence by Mintern Street and Bridport Place, over the Rosemary Branch Bridge, and thence by the Islington and St. Luke's Boundaries, the Canal, Wharf Road, &c., to the Boundary of oxton Ward in Edward Street. vl 240 No. 5.—WHITMORE WARD. All that part North of Church Ward, and East of Wenlock Ward, and West of a line commencing at Kingsland Road, by the end of Mary Street, and continuing a few yards over the Bridge. The Parish of Hackney is the Northern Boundary. No. 6.—KINGSLAND WARD. The line commences at the point of Kingsland and Hackney Roads, opposite Shorediteh Church, and continuing by Hackney Road to Brunswick Street, thence to the Regent's Canal, thence by the Canal to Kingsland Road, and by that road to the point at Shorediteh Church. No. 7.—HAGGERSTON WARD. All that part of the Parish lying East of Brunswick Street and South of the Regent's Canal. The Boundary of the Parish is the Hackney Road, from Brunswick Street to Gloucester Place, and continues by an irregular line and crosses ever the Pritchard's Road Bridge. No. 8.—ACTON WARD. All that part of the Parish lying on the Hackney side of the Regent's Canal and East of the Kingsland Road. The Northern Boundary is the Parish of Hackney. WARDS AND DIVISIONS OF THE PARISH. Electing the following Representatives. No. Wards. 120 Vestrymen. 18 Elected Guardians of the Poor. 2 Members of Parliament. 4 Members of London County Council. Adopted under Metropolis Local Management Act, 1855. No. of Members assigned to each Ward. 1 Moorfields 18 First Ward Hoxton Division of Borough. Hoxton Electoral Division. 2 Church 21 3 Hoxton 21 Second Ward 4 Wenlock 18 5 Whitmore 12 Third Ward Haggerston Division of Borough. Haggerston Electoral Division. 6 Kingsland 12 7 Haggerston 9 Fourth Ward 8 Acton 9 247 LIST OF THE VESTRYMEN. OVERSEERS, AND AUDITORS for the Parish of Saint Leonard, Shoreditch, IN THE COUNTY OF LONDON, FOR THE YEAR, 1893-94, APPOINTED UNDER THE METROPOLIS LOCAL MANAGEMENT ACTS. The Rev. SEPTIMUS BUSS, LL.B. {Vicar), The Vicarage, Hoxton square, N. STEPHEN FORDHAM, Esq., Reeves place, Hoxton, N. JOSEPH WILLIAM VANDY, Esq., 103, Hoxton street, N. Chuirarhwardew. No. 1, Moorfields Ward. (18 MEMBERS). Retire in the year 1896 CAWLEY, J. C 28, New Inn yard, E.C. 1894 COX, Joseph 299, Old street, E.C. 1895 DARBY, Robert 4, Providence place, Scrutton street, E.C 1894 DUNTON, George 13, Holywell lane, E.C. 1896 GATES, Edward 61, Curtain road, E.C. 1896 HASLAM, George 118, Clifton street, E.C. 1895 HEPBURN, James 42, Curtain road, E.C. 1895 HUNT, Thomas John 36, Clifton street, E.C. 1894 LAW, William 43, Great Eastern street, E.C. 1896 MALPASS, Richard Henry 97, Paul street, E.C. 1896 MULLIS, William Henry 48, Scrutton street, E.C. 1894 NIGHTINGALE, T. W 24, Shepherdess walk, City Road, E.C. 1894 RAVEY, Thomas 229, Shorediteh High street,E.C. 1895 Limes, 9, Albion rd.,Dalston,N.E. 1896 STEVENS, George 77, Clifton street, E.C. 1894 TUCK, Charles 81, Clifton street, E.C. 1895 VERINDER, Samuel H 6 to 14, Sun street, E.C. 1895 WHITEMAN, Charles 28. Clifton street, E.C. 248 No. 2, Church Ward. (21 MEMBERS). Retire in the year 1894 BARRALET, William Henry 74, Paul street, E.C. 1896 BREWER, James 38, Essex street, N. 1894 BURTON, John 32, Rivington street, E.C. 1896 COCKING, Alfred 8, St. John's road, N. 1896 CHAFFEY, Thomas Ilayman 38, Pitfield street, N. 1895 DONOVAN, John 116, Curtain road, E.C. 1896 LEACH, Augustus 18 & 20, Pitfield street, N. 1895 LEVY, Charles 81, Murray street, N. 1895 LUCRAFT, George T 161, Kingsland road, N. 1894 MARSHALL, Joseph C 11, Drysdale street, N. 1894 MARTINDILL, Thomas 168, Shorediteh High street, E. 1894 MOSS, Nathan, (L.C.C.) 91, 93 & 95, Curtain road, E.C. 1896 RESTORICK, Robert 56, Pitfield street, N. 1896 RILEY, Samuel 56, Paul street, E.C. 1895 ROWLAND, Benjamin 16, Huntingdon street, N. 1895 SMITHER, Daniel 81, Curtain road, E.C. 1895 SPEIGHT, Robert 104, Hoxton street, N. 1895 STEED, Daniel 45, Harman street, N. 1894 VANDY, Joseph William 103, Hoxton street, N. 1896 WELLS, Henry 344, Old street, E.C. 1894 WINKLER, Herman 76, Pitfield street, N. No. 3, Hoxton Ward. (21 MEMBERS). Retire In the year 1894 BIGGS, E. G 326, Old street, E.C. 1896 BOOTMAN, John 23, Mintern street, E.C. 1895 CHANT, Tom B 57, Crondall street, N. 1896 CHERRY, William 120, New North road, N 1894 CLEMENT, Alfred Aaron 133, East road, N. 1895 DAWSON, William 37, Pitfield street, N. 1896 FIELD, Joseph 69, Buckland street, N. 1895 KEMPTON, David 136, East road, N. 1896 LEWIS, David 25, Fairbank street, N. 1894 MARTER, John 5, Bookham street, N. 249 No. :B, Hoxton Ward (Continued). Retire in the year 1895 McCANN. Frank .28, Pit field street, N. 1894 MOFFATT, Ebenezer .53, New North road, N. 1895 REEVE, Richard Augustus .35, Alma street, N. 1894 RICHARDSON, Henry .101, Murray street, N. 1895 SAWELL, Henry T 127, East road, N. 1895 STYMAN, Joseph 56, Brunswick place, N. 1894 THOMAS, George John 12, St. John's road, N. 1894 TROWBRIDGE, John James 5, Parr street, N. 1896 WALESBY, Edward F Staff's yard, East road, N 1896 WALTON, George 132, East road, N. 1896 WILSON, James 183, Old street, E.C. No. 4, Wenlock Ward. (18 MEMBERS). Retire in the year 1895 ... BELSTEAD, Henry .80, Bridport place, N. 1894 ... BLUNDELL, Henry 18, Herbert street, N. 189G DALE, Allen John 19, Bridport place, N. 1896 DYER, Henry 17, Forston street, N. 1894 ... GLENNIE, George 74, New North road, N. 1896 ... GREEN, James 40, Ci'opley street, N. 1894 HALL, Frederick William 83, Murray street, N. 1896 ... KELLY, Rev.Henry Plimley,M.A. 112, New North road, N. 1894 MARSHALL, George 35, Herbert street, N. 1896 MEREDEW, Daniel 65, Shaftesbury street, N. 1895 NOBLE, Thomas 36, New North road, N. 1895 NOEL, Daniel 98, New North road, N. 1895 ROBINSON, Rev. J.Cartmel, M.A. Holy Trinity Vicarage, 6, Chuich street, Murray street, N. 1895 SELLEY, George 2, Rushton st., New North rd., N. 1894 THOMAS, Frederick 80, Herbert street, N. 1895 TAVENER, Lucking 81, Herbert street, N. 1894 WAKELING, Edward James 149, New North road, N. 1896 WATSON, James William 20, Bridport place, N. 250 No. 5, Whitmore Ward. (12 MEMBERS). Retire in tho year 1894 BROWN, Alfred .230, Hoxton street, N. 1895 COKER, Albert J .54 and 56, Scrutton street, E.C. 1896 COOK, James J .209, Kingsland road, N. 1896 EATON, George Edward Tlios .14, Gopsall street, N. 1895 ELSTOW, George Henry .58, Whitmore road, N. 1894 FORDHAM, Stephen Reeve's place, Hoxton, N. 1896 PROTHEROE, George 20, Grange street, N. 1894 RHODES, George 211, Kingsland road, N.E., and 16, De Beau voir road, N. 1896 SCOTT, Henry J 29, Whitmore Road, N. 1895 SOLOMON, George Red Lion passage, Hoxton, N. 1894 SULMAN, George Robert 157, St. Johns road, N. 1895 TAYLOR, Joseph 255, Hoxton street, N. No. 6, Kingsland Ward. (12 MEMBERS). Retire in the year 1895 ANDERSON, William 67, Kingsland road, N. 1896 BERNARD, James H 178, Kingsland road, N.E. 1896 BRABNER, Charles Wesley 150, Kingsland road, N.E. 1895 DAVIES, William P 168, Kingsland road, N.E. 1895 DICKASON, James 42, Mansfield street, Kingsland road, N.E. 1895 EDWARDS, George 134, Kingsland road, N.E. 1896 LANG AN, Joseph R 42, Laburnum street, N.E. 1894 ROPER, William Thomas 171, Hackney road, N.E. 1894 SHIP, James 152, Kingsland road, N.E. 1896 THOMPSON, William M. 36, Dunloe street, N.E. 1894 WENBORN, Frederick Moore 81, New North road, N. 1894 WINFIELD, John 193, Hackney road, N.E. '25 1 No. 7, Haggerston Ward. (9 MEMBERS). Retire in the year 1895 BOND, Thomas 71, Pearson street, Kingsland road, N.E. 1895 CONDON, Patrick 1894 CREASEY, James Paul 13, Shrubland road, Dalston, N.E. 1894 HURLIN, Joseph 47, Goldsmith's row, N.E. 189G HYATT, Charles 18, Goldsmith's row, N.E. 1895 MORRIS, Henry 1896 SACKETT, John R Great Cambridge street. 1890 SMITH, R. G "Champion " public-house, Weymouth terrace. No. 8, Acton Ward. (9 MEMBERS). Retire in the year 1894 GARRARD, Charles W 32, Shrubland road, N.E. 1894 HUNT, Joseph A 6, Shrubland road, N.E. 1896 LITTLE, Joseph 146, Brunswick street, Hackney road, N.E. 1896 ROGERS, Philip Webb 27, Marlborough road, N.E. 1894 ROLLINGS, William 39, Haggerston road, N.E. 1895 SIMPSON, Christopher 22, Queen's road, Dalston, N.E. 1895 SPENCER, Rev. F. E., M.A .1, Livermere road, N.E. 1896 TONGUE, John Thomas 29, Haggerston road, N.E. 1895 WEBBER, Frederick George 31, The Broadway, London Fields, N.E. 252 OVERSEERS OF THE POOR. (Appointed by Magistrate 16th March, 1893.) Liberty of Holywell Street— HEPBURN, JAMES 42, Curtain road, E.C. Liberty of Moorfields— WHITEMAN, CHARLES 28, Clifton street, E.C. \ Liberty of Church End— HASLAM, GEORGE 118, Clifton street, E.C. KENDELL, THOMAS B 2G, Norfolk place, Shoreditch, E.C. Liberty of Hoxton— SANDERS, GEORGE 219, Hoxton street, N. SOLOMON, GEORGE Red Lion Passage, Hoxton, N. ELECTED AUDITORS OF ACCOUNTS. Moorfields Ward— MAT THE WS, WILLIAM 103, Worship street, E.C. Church Ward— FARTHING, JOHN 47, Essex street, N. Hoxton Ward— BUNKER, ZEPHANIAH 51, East road, N. Kingsland Ward— TILEY, ALFRED WALTER 230, Kingsland road, N.E. Acton Ward- EE BON, THOMAS 64, Queen's road, N.E. 253 LIST OF THE COMMITTEES, Commissioners for Public Libraries, Public Baths and Washhouses, and Burial Board, appointed by the Vestrn of the Parish of St. Leonard, shoreditch, IN THE COUNTY OF LONDON, FOR THE YEAR 1893-94. (Pursuant to the Metropolis Local Management Acts, &c.) Finance Committee. (20 MEMBERS). BIGGS, E. G. BOOTMAN, J. BROWN, A. CAWLEY, J. C. COX, J. (Vice-Chairman) CREASEY, J. P. DONOVAN, J. HEPBURN, J. LAW, W. LITTLE, J. MARSHALL, J. C. MEREDEW, D. MOFFATT, E. [Chairman.) MOSS, N., L.C.C. REEVE, R. A. RHODES, G. SACKETT, J. R. SMITHER, D. SMITHER, S. WELLS, H. Paving and Sewers Committee. (20 MEMBERS). CLEMENT, A. A. COKER, A. HASLAM, G. LEWIS, D. MARTINDILL, T. MORRIS, H. NOEL, D. (Vice-Chairman) RAVEY, T. SACKETT J. R. SCOTT, H. J. SHIP, J. SPEIGHT, R. SPENCER, Rev. F. E. STYMAN, J. THOMAS, G. J. THOMPSON, W. M. VANDY, J. W. WALESBY, E. F. WINFIELD, J. WINKLER, H. (Chairman.) 254 General Purposes and Sanitary Committee. (20 MEMBERS). ANDERSON, W. BELSTEAD, H. BIGGS, E. G. BRABNER, C. W. (('hainnan.) GARRARD, C. W. GATES, G. HURLIN, J. (1 ice-Chairman) LEWIS, D. MARTINDILL, T. MORRIS, H. RHODES, G. RILEY, S. SAWELL, H. T. SCOTT, H. J. SPENCER, Rev. F. E. STYMAN, J. THOMPSON, W. M. WALE SBY, E. F. WIIITEMAN, 0. WINFIELD, J. Parliamentary Committee. (20 MEMBERS). BELSTEAD, H. BRABNER, C. W. CHANT, T. B. CLEMENT, A. A. DYER, H. GREEN, J. KELLY, Rev. H. P. LAW, W. LITTLE, J. (Vice-Chairman) MARSHALL, G. MULLIS, W. H. NIGHTINGALE, T.W. PROTHEROE, G. REEVE, R. A. SAWELL, II. T. THOMAS, F. TROWBRIDGE, J, J. VERINDER, S. H. WAKELING, E. J. WENBORN, F. M. (Chairman) Town Hall Committee. (20 MEMBERS). ANDERSON, W. BERNARD, J. H. BRABNER, C. W. CLEMENT, A. A. COX, J. (Chairman.) CREASEY, J. P. EDWARDS, G. ELSTOW, G. H. GARRARD, C. W. HEPBURN, J. MORRIS, H. MOSS, N., l.c.c. RAYEY, T. RHODES, G. RILEY, S. SMITHER, D. (Vice-Chairm an.) SMITHER, S. SOLOMON, G. VERINDER, S. H. WELLS, H, Valuation List Committee. (30 MEMBERS). BROWN, A. CAWLEY, J. C. COKER, A. J. EDWARDS, G. HUNT, T. J. LANGAN, J. R. (Vice- Chairman) LEWIS, D. MALPASS, R. H. McCANN, F. RESTORICK, R, RILEY, S. SMITHER, Samuel (Chairman.) SOLOMON, G. STYMAN, J. SULMAN, G. R. TAYLOR, J. THOMAS, G. J. WALE SB Y, E. F. WILSON, J. Note.—There are 11 vacancies on this Committee, which the Vestry can fill up at any Ordinary Meeting. 255 ANDERSON, W. BELSTEAD, H. CAWLEY, J. C. CHANT, T. B. CHERRY, W. COX, J. CREASEY, J. P. Officers' Committee. (20 MEMBERS). HEPBURN, J. MARTINDILL, T. MOFFATT, E. MOSS, N., L.C.C. NIGHTINGALE,T.W. STEED, D. THOMPSON, W. M. TROWBRIDGE, J. J. YANDY, J. W. VERINDER, S. H. (Vice-Chairman) WENBORN, F. M. WINFIELD, J. WINKLER, H. [Chairman) Dusting and Scavenging Committee. (20 MEMBERS). BOOTMAN, J. BROWN, A. CHANT, T. B. DONOVAN, J. (Vice-Chairman) DYER, H. GARRARD, C. W. GREEN, J. I-IASLAM, G. HURLIN, J. HYATT, C. McCANN, F. NOEL, D. SAWELL, H. T. SCOTT, H. J. SMITHER, D. TROWBRIDGE, J. J. WAKELING E. J. WALTON, G. WENBORN, F. M. (Chairman) WHITEMAN, C. Assessment Committee. (12 MEMBERS.) To be elected between the 15th and 29th of April in each Year. MoorfLelds Ward— LAW, W. [Chairman.) HEPBURN, James Church Ward— MOSS, N., L.C.C. VANDY, J. W. Hoxton Ward— MOFFATT, E. SAWELL, H.T. Wenlock Ward— NOEL, Daniel MEREDEW, Daniel Whitmore Ward— ELSTOW, G. H. Kingsland Ward— WENBORN, F. M. Haggerston Ward— CREASEY, J. P. Acton Ward— LITTLE, Joseph Commissioners for Public Libraries and Museums. (9 MEMBERS). Appointed 18th April, 1893. Retire in 1896...BARRALET. W. H. 1895...COX, Joseph 1896...DONOVAN, John Retire in 1894... FORDH AM, Stephen 1895...HURLIN, Joseph 1891.. .MARTINDILL.Thos. (President.) Retire in 1895...MOFFATT, E. 1896...SAWELL, Henry T. 1894...WENBORN, F. M. t 25f> Commissioners for Public Baths and Washhouses. (7 MEMBERS). Appointed Bvd JuvKiirj/, 1808. Cherry, W. MOFFATT, E. ((chairman) WAKE 1/ING, E. J. C()X, J. WEN BORN, F. M. SMITHER,S. WINKLER, II. Burial Board. (9 MEMBERS). Appointed 14ih March, 1808. Retire inI 11 {el ihi in Retire 1896.. liUABNER, C. W. ls»r>...FREEMAN, J. J. 185)5.. SMITlIEIt, Samuel 1894aa.. ELSTOW, (I. II 1H0-I...IIUllLIN, JoHopli 181M.. WELLS, II. 1805,. EOUDIIAM, S. IH90...]Vl()JimS, llonry 189(5... WIIITEMAN, 0. SPECIAL COMMITTEES. Housing of Working Classes Committee. (12 MEMBERS). liUABNE.lt, 0. W. MOFFATT, E. VEItlNDER, S. II. DONOVAN, 0. UAVEY, T. WENBORN, F. M. (1 ire < 'hair Hunt) HAW ELL, II. T. (Chairman) LANGAN, J. It. STY MAN, J. WIIITEMAN, 0. MARTI NDILL, T. WINKLER, II. Technical Instruction Committee. (0 MEMBERS). Appointed (\th December, 1H02. UAIt.ltALET, W. II. DONOVAN, .1. S A WELL, H. T. ((chairman) 00X, J. DYElt, II. DAUBY, It. FIELD, J. HMITIIER, S. WENBOUN, F. M. Electric Lighting Committee. (20 MEMBERS). Appointed 'ZHih Fvhrmrij, 1H98. BELSTEAD, H. MOFFATT, E. STY MAN, .J, IlltABNEIt, 0. W. (Vice -chairmanl) M0.ltIt 1H, II. TROWBRIDGE, J. J. NOEL, D. VEItlNDEJt, S. II. DAItliY, It. SAW ELL, H. T. (('hairman) WENBOUN, F. M. ELSTOW, G. 11. WAKELING, E. J. FIELD, J. SMITH Lit, D. WIIITEMAN, C. HALL, F. W. SMITH Lit, S. LAW, W. SOLOMON, G. NOTE. The Finance, Paving and Sowers, General Purposes, Parliamentary, Town Hall. Officers, Ousting and Scavenging, and Valuation Committee# were appointed on the 27th Juno, 1803, and will continue In office until re appointed in 1894. 257 The vestry of the parish of St. Leonard , shoreditch IN THE COUNTY OF LONDON. YEAR BOOK OF LOCAL INFORMATION. PARLIAMENTARY BOROUGH OF SHORE DITCH MEMBERS OF PARLIAMENT. HOXTON DIVISION of Borough, (comprising Moorfields, Church, Hoxton, and Wenlock Wards of the Parish). PROFESSOR JAMES STUART, M.A., 24, Grosvenor Road, Westminster, S.W. HAGGERSTON DIVISION of Borough, (comprising Whitmore, Kingsland, Haggerston, and Acton Wards of the Parish). WILLIAM RANDAL CREMER, Esq., 23, Bedford Street, Strand, W.C. REVISING BARRISTER. WILLIAM FREDERICK WEBSTER, Esq., 3, Stone Buildings, W.C. PARLIAMENTARY RETURNING OFFICER. J. M. McDONNELL, Esq., Solicitor, 32, Great George Street, "Westminster, S.W 25 8 THE SCHOOL BOARD FOR LONDON. OFFICES: VICTORIA EMBANKMENT, STRAND, E.C. Clerk of the Board: GEORGE HECTOR OROAD, Esq., B.A. MEMBERS FOR HACKNEY DIVISION, (comprising the Parishes of St. John-at-Hackney, Saint Leonard, Shoreditch, and Saint Matthow, Bethnal Green). JOHN LOBB, Esq., F.R.G.S., Carlton House, 75, Victoria Park Road, E. JOHN C. HOROBIN, Esq., M.A., Iiomertun College, 75, High Street, Homer ton, N. FRANCIS HOWSE, Esq., 13, Amhurst Park, Stamford Hill, N. Rev. 13. MEREDYTII-KITSON, M.A., All Saints' Vicarage, Lower Clapton, N.E. Rev. STEWART I). 11EADLAM, 31, Upper Bedford Place, W.C. THE LONDON COUNTY COUNCIL. OFFICES: SPRING GARDENS, S.W. Clerk of the Council: H. DE LA HOOKE, Esq. REPRESENTATIVES FOR SHOREDITCH. HOXTON ELECTORAL DIVISION. NATHAN MOSS, Esq., 7, Ladbroke Grove Road, Netting Hill, W. HENRY WARD, Esq., C.E., Toynbee Hall, 28, Commercial Street, Whitechapel, E. HAGGERSTON ELECTORAL DIVISION. The Right Hon. BARON MONKSWELL, 7, Chelsea Embankment, S.W. W. J. ORSMAN, Esq., J.P., Milton House, Shacklewell Green, Hackney, N.E. DISTRICT SURVEYOR. Mr. HENRY LOVEGROVE, 314, Old Street, E.C. 259 ELECTED GUARDIANS OF THE POOR for the "5Paris6 of Satrtf ^tcoitar6, <50oveMfc6. Offices: 213, KINGSLAND ROAD, N.E. Clerk: ROBERT CLAY, Esq. FIRST WARD WILLIAM H. BRAND, Esq., 2, 3, and 4, Hoxton Square, N. JAMES CHARLES CAWLEY, Esq, 23, New Inn Yard. E.G. WILLIAM COCKS, Esq , 64, 66, and 68, Pitfield Street, N. JOSEPH COX, Esq., 299, Old Street, E.C. SAMUEL SMITHER, Esq, 92, Leonard Street, E.C. SECOND WARD. WILLIAM DAWSON, Esq, 37, Pitfield Street, N. The Rev. J. CARTMEL-ROBINSON, Holy Trinity Vicarage, 6, Church Street, Murray Street, N. The Rev. HENRY P. KELLY, M.A . Christ Church Vicarage, Hoxton, N. RICHARD MARSHALL, Esq, 43, Pitfield Street, N.(Chairman of the Board). EBENEZER MOFFATT, Esq, 53, New North Road, N. THIRD WARD. WM. ANDERSON, Esq., 67 and 69, Kingsland Road, N.E. JOSEPH HARVERSON, Esq, 325, Hoxton Street, N. THOMAS WM. HODGES, Esq, 79, Queen's Road, Dalston, N.E. WILLIAM P. HUGHES, Esq, 148, Southgate Road, N. FOURTH WARD. JAMES P. CREASEY, Esq, 13, Shrubland Road, Dalston, N.E. DANIEL KING, Esq, 70, Queen's Road, Dalston, N.E. JOSEPH LITTLE, Esq., 146, Brunswick Street, N.E. (Vice-Chairman of the Board), ALFRED P. BARNARD, Esq, 309, Hackney Road, N.E. Guardians nominated by the Local Government Board. ROBERT GEORGE ALABASTER, Esq, J.P, The Hawthorns, Amhurst Park, Stamford Hill, N. JOSEPH WILLIAM HUNT, M.D, 101, Richmond Road, N.E. CHARLES N. NICHOLSON, Esq, 19, New North Road, N. The Rev. G. P. POWNALL, M.A, The Vicarage, Hoxton, N. NOTE.—The Weekly Meetings of the Board are held at the Board Room, Relief Offices, Hoxton Street, N., on Wednesday, at 10 o'clock a.m. w 260 Elected Manager at Metropolitan Asylums Board, REPRESENTING THE PARISH OF SAINT LEONARD, SHOREDITCH. Manager's Offices:—NORFOLK HOUSE, NORFOLK STREET, W.C. Clerk to the Board:—T. DUNCOMBE MANN, Esq. ROBERT GEORGE ALABASTER, Esq., J.P., The Hawthorns, Amhurst Park, Stamford Hill, N. Officials of the Guardians. Name. Nature of Office. Address. Robert Clay Clerk to the Guardians 213, Kingsland Road, N.E. J. Robert Arming Treasurer do. London & County Banking Co., Limited (Shoreditch Branch) Berkley Roberts Collector of the Guardians 213, Kingsland Road, N.E. Rev. Thos. Hodgson Chaplain of Workhouse and Infirmary 160, Downham Road Dr. D. M. Forbes Medical Officer,Workhouse and Infirmary 204, Hoxton Street, N. C. R. Martin Steward of Infirmary Do. do. Mrs. Ann Lenton Matron do. Do. do. R. J. Larcombe Master of Workhouse 213, Kingsland Road,N.E. Mrs. Ada Larcombe Matron do. Do. do. James Cowley Superintendent of Cottage Homes Hornchurch, Essex Mrs. Elizabeth Cowley Matron do. Do. do. Rev. W. R. Morris Chaplain do. Romford, Essex A. W. Wallis Medical Officer do. Brentwood, Essex G. R. Stothard Head Schoolmaster do. Do. do. Mrs. Mary Leader Do. Schoolmistress do. Do. do. Miss Sarah M. Cattell Infant do. do. Do. do. 201 Officials of the Guardians—continued. Name. Nature of Office. Address. Attendances at Dispensary. John Da vies District Medical Officer and Public Vaccinator 91, New North Road,N. 11.30 a.m. to 12 noon Dr. Thomas Leonard Do. do. 29, New North Road,N. 12 noon to 12.30 p.m. Dr.Major Greenwood, junr. Do. do. 243, Hackney Road, N.E. 12 noon to 12.30 p.m. Dr.Major Greenwood, senr. Do. do. 26, Queen's Road, N.E. 11.30 a.m. to 12 noon Dr. F. H. Oliver Do. do. 2,Kingsland Road,N.E. 11.30 a.m. to 12 noon Dr. C. J. Kirton Do. do. 36, Great Eastern Street, E.C. 12 noon to 12.30 p.m. John William Lane Dispenser Dispensary,204,Hoxton Street, N. Districts. H. M. Parker Relieving Officer 20, Baring Street, Hoxton, N. 1st District Wm. Geo. Judge Do. do. 7, Hemsworth Street, 2nd do. Hoxton, N. Walter Glover Do. do. 45, Brownlow Road, 3rd do. Haggerston, N.E. James Wilkinson Do. do. 26, Nichols Square 4th do. Shirley Fussell Pay Clerk 204, Hoxton Street, N. Chas. Henry Waterer Vaccination Officer 213, Kingsland Road, N.E. Relieving Officers.—Daily attendance is given at the Relief Office?, Hoxton Street, N., from 9 a.m. to 12 noon, and at 5 p.m., except on Sundays. ROBERT CLAY, Superintendent Registrar, Register Office, 213; Kingsland Road, N.E. BERKLEY ROBERTS, Deputy Superintendent Registrar, Register Office, 213, Kingsland Road, N.E. Certificates of Births, Deaths and Marriages which have occurred in the Parish of Saint Leonard, Shoreditch, since 1st July, 1837, obtainable; and Notices of Marriages received at the Register Office between 10 a.m. and 4 p.m. daily, except on Saturday, when the office closes at 2 p.m. Wl 262 No. Sub-District for Registration of Births & Deaths. Registrar. Address. Deputy Sub-Registear. Address. 1 Shoreditch South C. J. Stevens 43, New Inn Yard, Shoreditch, E.C. A. J. Stevens 43, New Inn Yard, Shoreditch, E.C. 2 Hoxton New Town Chas. H. Waterer 83, New North Road.Hoxton,N. F. T. Cutting 83, New North Road, N. 3 Hoxton Old Town Geo. Pearce 22, Hyde Road, Hoxton, N. Edwd. T. Pearce 22, Hyde Road, Hoxton, N. 4 Haggerston A. A. Lough 107, Brunswick Street, Hacknev Road, N.E. F. H. Iona 42, Archway Road, Highgate, N. Registrar of Marriages George W.Bedford Register Office, 213, Kingsland Road, N.E. James Wilkinson 26, Nichols Square THE CHARITY TRUSTEES OF the Parish of saint Leonard, shoreditch. Offices:—Shoreditch Town Hall, Old Street, E.C.; and 81, New North Road, Hoxton, N. Clerk: F. M. WENBORN. W. H. BRAND, Esq., 3, Hoxton Square, E.C. Rev. S. BUSS, LL.B., The Vicarage, Hoxton Square, E.C. J. DONOVAN, Esq., 116, Curtain Road, E.C. G. EDWARDS, Esq., 184, Kingsland Road, N. G. H. ELSTOW, Esq., 58, Whitmore Road, N. J. FIELD, Esq., 69, Buckland Street, N. STEPHEN FORDHAM, Esq., Reeves Place, Hoxton, N. T. HODGES, Esq., 79, Queen's Road, Dalston, N.E. W. P. HUGHES, Esq., 148, Southgate Road, N. THOMAS MARTINDILL, Esq., 168, Shoreditch High Street, E.C. EBENEZER MOFFATT, Esq., 53, New North Road, N. JOSEPH WILLIAM VANDY, Esq., 103, Hoxton Street, N. E. J. WAKELING, Esq., 149, New North Road, N. H. T. WELLS, Esq., 344, Old Street, E.C. HERMAN WINKLER, Esq., 76, Pitfield Street, N. 26.3 INLAND REVENUE. GEO. C. LESLIE, Esq., Surveyor of Taxes, 134, Custom House, E.G. Collectors of Income Tax, House Duty and Land Tax. Districts. Wards. Collector. Address. First Moorfields and Church Stanton Elgar 386, Old Street, E.C. (North and South Second... divisions) Hoxton, Wenlock, and Joseph Hop wood 386, Old Street, E.C. Whit mo re Third .. Kingsland, Hagger- George Ward Verry... 1, Pearson Street, ston, and Actoti Kingsland Road CENSUS SUMMARIES. Parliamentary Borough 1 Inhabited Houses. Population. of Shoreditch. 1881. 1891. 1881. 1891. Hoxton Division 8,279 7,288 69,590 67,653 Haggerston Division 6,877 6,644 57,001 56,356 Total for Civil Parish and Poor Law Union 15,156 13,932 126,591 124,009 I Registration Sub-Districts. Area in Statute Acres. INHABITED HOUSES. POPULATION. Increase or Decease of Population tdtwecn 1881 and 1894. 1881. 1891. 1881. 1891. Increase Decrease Shoreditch South 141 3,121 2,164 22,m 20,098 — 2,245 Hoxton New Town 132 3,159 3,144 29,937 29,313 — 624 Hoxton Old Town 117 3,296 3,240 28,036 28,354 318 — Haggerston 258 5,580 5,384 46,275 46,244 — 31 Total for Civil Parish and Poor Law Union 648 15,156 13,932 126,591 124,009 318 2,900 Decennium 1800 1811 1821 1831 1841 1851 1861 1871 1881 Population 34,76(i 13,930 52,066 08,564 83,432 109,257 129,864 127,H54 126,591 264 OPEN SPACES and RECREATION GROUNDS. No. Name. ' Situation. Hours during which open. 1 St. Leonard's Churchyard, Shoreditch Shoreditch High Street 10 a.m. till dusk, from May 1st to October 31st 2 St. Mary's Churchyard, Haggerston Brunswick Street, Hackney Road 9 a.m. till dusk, Winter 9 a.m. till 7 p.m. Summer 3 St. John's Churchyard, Hoxton St. John's Road, New North Road, N. Closed in Winter ; 10 a.m. till 8 p.m. Summer 4 Shoreditch Old Burial Ground Hackney Road 9 a.m. till dusk 5 Goldsmith Square Open Space Goldsmith Square [The site is cleared and the ground is being laid out.] WORSHIP STREET POLICE COURT, E.C. Police Magistrates HENRY JEFFREYS BUSIIBY, Esq., Wormley Bury, appointed for Hoddesdon, Herts. this Division of Metropolis. JOHN ROSE, Esq., 37, Marloes Road, Kensington, W. Chief Clerk to the Court.—H. TITTERTON, Esq. Hours of Attendance.—Every day, excepting Sundays, Christmas Day, Good Friday, or any day appointed for a public fast or thanksgiving, from 10 till 5, and at such other times as urgent necessity may require, or as directed by one of Her Majesty's Principal Secretaries of State. Court Division.—The space included within the following boundary, the same being within the Metropolitan Police District:—" From the boundary of the City of London in Whitechapel High Street, in a line running eastward along the centre thereof and of Whitechapel Road and Mile End Road to Globe Road, thence along the centre thereof to the southern side of the Great Eastern Railway; thence eastward along the same to the River Lee, and along the said River Lee and Hackney cut to the Hertford Union canal; thonce westward along the said canal, 265 and along the Regent's canal to Shepherdess Walk; thence along the centre thereof, and of Bath Street and Bunhill Row, to the boundary of the City of London ; and thence along the same to Whitechapel High Street aforesaid." SHOREDITCH COUNTY COURT. Court House :—221, OLD STREET, E.C. Judge :—HIS HONOUR JUDGE HOLROYD. Registrar:—ERNEST E. WICKHAM, Esq. High Bailiff:—ROBERT HACKSHAW, Esq. Hours of Attendance.—The Registrar's Office (16, Charles Square, Hoxton, N.) is open daily from 10 till 4 ; Saturdays, 10 till 1. Summonses granted every day ; money paid in daily, paid out Wednesdays, Thursdays, and Fridays. Sittings, &c.—The sitting days of the Court are usually Tuesdays and Thursdays in each week. The days arid hours for sitting are appointed three months previously, and notice of such days is affixed in the Court House and in the Registrar's Office. But the days may be altered (notice of alteration being affixed in like manner), and additional and adjourned courts be held. The Registrar's Offices are open daily from 10 till 4, except on Christmas Day, Good Friday, Easter Eve, Easter Monday, Easter Tuesday, Whit Monday, the first Monday in August, and public fast, humiliation or thanksgiving days, or any day appointed for closing the same by the Lord Chancellor ; and except on Saturdays, when they close at 1; and except also on days when the Court is sitting elsewhere. A Table of the Court Fees is put up in the Court House and in the Registrar's Office. District.—By the original Order in Council of 9th March, 1847, it was ordered that:—" The District of the Shoreditch County Court of Middlesex " should "include all within a line drawn from the point where the boundary of the City of London crosses Finsbury Place, along the eastern boundary of the district of the Clerkenwell County Court to the southern boundary of the parish of Tottenham ; thence eastward along the said boundary to the boundary of the county of Middlesex ; thence southward along the boundary of the said county to the northern boundary of the parish of Stratford-le-Bow ; thence westward along the boundary of the said parish until it is crossed by the southern side of the Eastern Counties Railway ; thence westward along the southern side of the Eastern 266 Counties Railway till it crosses Brick Lane ; thence along the middle of Brick Lane, Phoenix Street, Wheeler Street, and White Lion Street to Norton Folgate; thence along the middle of Norton Folgate to the boundary of the City of Loudon; thence westward along the boundary of the City of London to the point first described."—But by the subsequent Order in Council of 25th June, 1851, certain portions of the above were taken from the district of the Shoreditch County Court, and.added to the districts of the Bow County Court and the Whitechapel County Court; and the following portions of the Clerkenwell County Court District (as established by the Order in Council of 1847) were taken therefrom, and added to the district of the Shoreditch County Court, viz. :—" So much of the district of the Clerkenwell County Court of Middlesex as is included within a line drawn from the point where the south boundary of the district of the said Court crosses Whitecross Street, along the middle of Whitecross Street to Old Street; thence along the middle of Old Street to Bath Street; thence along the middle of Bath Street to the City Road ; thence across the City Road to Shepherdess Walk ; thence along the middle of Shepherdess Walk, and the road opposite Yaughau Terrace, Ashley Crescent, and Ashley Terrace, to the Regent's Canal; thence along the middle of the Regent's Canal to the New North Road; thence along the eastern and southern boundary of the distiict of the said Court, to the point where the said southern boundary crosses Whitecross Street as first described ; " and "so much of the district of the said Court as is included within a line drawn from the point where the Regent's Canal is crossed by a bridge called the Rosemary Branch Bridge, leading to Southgate Road in the parish of St. John's, Hackney ; along the middle of the Southgate Road to Ball's Pond Road; thence along the middle of Ball's Pond Road and Paul's Road to the New River, until it is crossed by the Green Lanes Turnpike Road, south of Paradise Place in such Road ; thence along the middle of Green Lanes Turnpike Road to the northern boundary of the district of the said Court; thence eastward along the said boundary to the Kingsland Road ; thence along the middle of the Kingsland Road to the Regent's Canal; thence westward alona: the Regent's Canal to the point where the said Rosemary Branch Bridge crosses the said canal, as first described." By a further Order iu Council, dated 25th November, 1853, the parish of St. Mary, Stoke Newiugton, was taken from the district of this Court and added to the district of the Edmonton County Court. And by a further Order in Council, dated 7th January, 1865, " So much of the parish of Hornsey as is detached from that parish by the interposition of any portion of the parish of Stoke Newington," was also added to the district of the Edmonton County Court. 267 LIST OF MAGISTRATES acting in and for the tower division (in which the p.\ri>h of St. Leonard, Shoreditch, is situate.) Name. Address. ALABASTER, R. G., Esq The Hawthorns. Amhurst Park, Stamford Hill, N. BAXTER, WYNNE E., Esq., d.l. 170, Church Street, Stoke Newiugtoii, N. BEAUMONT, Capt. W. S Arthurs Club, St. James' Street, S.W. BELLAMY, J., Esq Byug Street, Mill wall, E. CHAMBERS, H., Esq 671, Commercial Road, E. CHAMBERS, W. E., Esq 40, Seething Lane, E.C., and Sutton, Surrey. COOK, E. R., Esq Bow, E. CORNER, F. M., Esq., m.k.c.s. Manor House, East India Road, E. CUOWDER, A. G., Esq 6, Montagu Square, W. DALY, F. H., Esq., m.d 185, Amhurst Road, Hackney Dowus, N.E. FINNIS, G. C., Esq 1, Billiter Avenue, E.C. FLETCHER, BAN1STKR, Esq. . 29, New Bridge Street, E.C. FREMANTLE, Major-General A. J. L., c.h 32, Cadogau Place, S.W. FREMANTLE, The Hon. Sir C. W., k.c.b Royal Mint, Tower Hill, E. IiARDCASTLE, H., Esq 38, Eaton Square, S.W. 1IOSKIN, T., Esq 186, Amhurst Road, Hackney Downs, N.E. HUNTER, W., Esq 48, Bow Road, Bow, E. JONES, J. FENTON, Esq 12, Northumberland House, King Edward Road, South Hackney. LAMPLOUGB, C. E., Esq 72, Cornhill, E.C. LESCHER, J. F., Esq Boyles Court, Brentwood. MARTINEA.U, P. M.,Esq.,l.c.c. " Littleworth," Esher, Surrey. McCALL, J., Esq Stadacona, Amhurst Park, Stamford Hill, N. MILLS, F. C., Esq 38, Albert Square, Ratclifi', E. MILMAN, Genl. B., c.h. The Tower, E.C. MORLEY, J., Esq Upper Clapton, N.E. ORSMAN, W. J., Esq., l.c.c. . . Milton House, Shacklewell Green, N.E. PEACOCK, 0. W., Esq 531, Commercial Road. E. • PEEK, C. E., Esq 25, Bryanston Square, W. PIXLEY, S., Esq 21, Leinster Gardens, Hyde Park. PONSONBY, E., Esq 17, Cavendish Square, W. SO PER, W. G., Esq Bury Street, St. Mary Axe, E.C. TRENCH, Thk Hon. Wm. le p0er, r.e St. Huberts, Gerrard's Cross, Bucks. WEBB, M. R., Esq Court House, Gt. Prescot Street,Whitechapel. WHATMAN, GEO. D 2, Cranley Gardens, S.W. YOUNG, Sir F„ k.c.m.g Emmett Street, Poplar, E., and o, Queensberry Place, S.W. to Oi oo DAY SCHOOLS OF THE SCHOOL BOARD FOR LONDON, IN THE PARISH OF SAINT LEONARD, SHOREDITCH. Name of School. Locality in Parish. MANAGERS. Divisional Member in charge of School. Chairman. Vice-Chairman. * Curtain Road Wellington Street Shoreditch do. J. J. Freeman, Esq., 81, Queen's Road, Dalston, N.E. A. P. Little, Esq., 3, Albion Road, Dalston, N.E. John C. Horobin, Esq., M.A. Nichol Street do. Catherine Street Hoxton James H. Porter, Esq., Wm. Hy. Barralet,Esq., Rev. B. Meredyth-Kitson. M.A Chatham Gardens do. 95, Tabernacle 74, Paul Street, Scrutton Street. . Shoreditch Street, E.C. Finsbury, E.C. Napier Street Trinity Place (late Church Street) Wenlock Road,New North Road Hoxton do. do. John Lobb, Esq., F.R.G.S., (Member of Board) - John Lobb, Esq., F.R.G.S. St. John's Road Canal Road Hammond Square Hoxton do. do. Ebenezer Moffatt,Esq., - 53,New North Road. Hoxton, N. .... Francis Howse, Esq. Ilaggerston Road Scawfell Street, Hackney Road Shap Street, Kingsland Haggerston do. do. J. J. Freeman, Esq., 81, Queen's Road, Dalston, N.E. Joseph Hurlin, Esq., 47, Goldsmith Row, Hackney Road, N.E John C. Horobin, Esq , M.A. NO IE. All urgent and important matters should be referred to the Divisional Member in charge of the School. Official Correspondent for the Division :—Mr. JAMES WHITE, Divisional Offices, Homerton Terrace, Hackney, N.E. 269 FIRE-ENGINE STATION. 380, Old Street (next to Shoreditch Town Hall). Engineer—H. Searle. FIRE-ESCAPE STATIONS. Station. Situation. Fire Engine Station Old Street St. Columba Church Kingsland Road Bookham Street Hoxton FIRE ALARMS. Position. In connection with New North Road, Eagle Wharf Road Islington Station Shepherdess Walk, corner of City Road St. Luke's ,, Cat and Mutton Bridge, Broadway, London Fields Bethnal Green Station Finsbury Market (S.E. corner of Waterlow & Son's Factory) Bishopsgate Station Kingsland Road (opposite No. 404) Shoreditch „ † ,, „ St. Columba Church „ „ Queen's Road Bridge, Dalston „ „ Shoreditch High Street, corner of Commercial Street „ „ Great Eastern Street, corner of Curtain Road „ „ City Road, south corner of Castle Street „ „ Tabernacle Square „ „ †New North Road, corner of Bookham Street „ „ Hyde Road, corner of St. John's Road „ „ Note.—† Fire Escapes are also situated here. 271 INDEX. SUBJECT. DEPARTMENT. Clerk. Accountant Surveyor. Med. Officer of Health. Miscellaneous. Abstract of Accounts ... 47—107 ... ... ... Accountant's Department ... 64,80, 97 ... ... ... Accountant's Report ... 47—107 ... ... ... Accountant's and Vestry Clerk's Staff 25 97 ... ... ... Adams, Mr. E. A. R 22 64,97 ... ... ... Advertising on Lamp Columns ... 71,90 ... ... 154 Aggregate Balance Sheet ... 92, 93 ... ... ... Allan, Dr. F. J 13, 22, 23 97 ... 167—208 ... Alterations to Town Hall 25 74 ... ... ... Analysis of Mortgage Debt .. 96 ... ... ... Analyst's Reports ... ... ... 208 218—223 Appeals, Valuation 18, 44—46 75 ... ... ... Arrears' Clerk 20 97 .. ... Artizans, &c., in District 27 ... ... ... ... Ashes and Dust Utilization 3,5,7 70 ... ... ... Assessment Committee's Expenses 44—46 75 ... ... ... Do. do. Report 43—46 ... ... ... ... Assets and Liabilities, Aggregate Statement of ... 92, 93 ... ... ... Auditors, Elected ... 91 ... ... 252 Balance Sheets ... 58,61,78, ... ... ... Bakehouses ... 84, 92, 93 ... 201,202 ... Barr, Mr. A. 22 97 ... 191 ... Baths and Washhouses 39 ... ... ... ... Boundaries of Wards ... ... ... ... 245 Bills in Parliament 26 65 143,144 ... ... Births and Deaths, Sub-districts ... ... ... 168 262 Bishopsgate Disaster 19 • • • ... Britannia Street 11 ... ... ... Broomfield, Mr. H. V 21 89 ... ... ... Bryett, Dr. L. T. F 13,23 ... ... ... ... Bureau, Labour 38 74 ... ... ... Burial Board 40 53 ... ... ... Burial Board Accounts ... 60, 61 ... ... ... Burton, Mr. J. F. 20 97 ... ... ... Canital Accounts ... 86—89 ... ... ... Carriageway Paving ... ... 131—134 ... ... Census ... ... ... ... 263 Charity Trustees ... ... ... ... 262 Chick v. Quelch 18 ... ... ... ... Chief Sanitary Inspector's Report ... ... ... 191 209—217 Churchwardens and Overseers' Accounts 37 55 ... ... ... Churchyards, Maintenance of 40 60 ... ... ... City and South London Railway 26 ... ... ... ... Clarke, Mr. G. W 12,19,23,24 97 ... ... ... Clerk's Report 3—40 ... ... ... ... Cleansing of Footways 30 69 ... ... ... Collection of Rates ... 98 ... ... ... Collectors of Rates and Taxes 19, 21,22 ... ... ... 97,268 272 NDEX.—(continued). SUBJECT. DEPARTMENT. Clerk. Accountant. Surveyor. Med. Officer of Health. Miscellaneous. Comparative Statement of Income and ... 100,101 ... ... .. Commissioners for Libraries, &c ... 53 ... ... 227—244 Contracts, Statement of ... 107 ... ... ... Contract System—Dusting, &c ... 68, 76 ... ... ... Contributions to Guardians ... 50, 51, 53 ... ... ... Conveniences, Public ... 82, 83 ... ... 155—157 County Council for London ... ... ... ... 258 County Court ... ... ... ... 265 Cowhouses ... ... ... 199,200 ... Culshaw, Mr. William 24 97 .. ... ... Customs and Inland Revenue Acts ... ... ... 194 ... Day Schools ... ... ... ... 268 Deaths and Births, Sub-Districts ... ... ... 168 262 De Beauvoir Wharf ... 69 ... ... ... Debentures, issue of 18,14 ... ... ... ... Debt ... 95, 96 ... ... ... Deposit ... 90 ... ... ... Depots ... 67, 69 ... ... ... Disinfecting Station ... ... ... 194 211 Disorderly Houses 19, 35 50, 65 ... ... ... District Auditor's Certificate ... 50,51 ... ... ... District Councils' Scheme 33—37 ... ... ... ... District Medical Officers ... ... ... ... 261 District Surveyor ... ... ... ... 258 Doughty, Mr. C. H. 19 97 ... ... ... Drainage Construction ... 81 138 ... ... Dust Utilization 3, 5, 7 ... ... .. ... Dusting and Scavenging 29—32 68—70, 76 ... ... 109,217 Dwellinghouses Closed ... ... ... 202 ... East London Waterworks Co. .. 67 ... ... ... Elected Auditors' Certificates ... 91 ... ... ... Election of Vestrymen ... 54 ... ... ... Electric Lighting 3, 5 65, 71 ... ... ... Elementary Education Act, 1870 ... 66 ... ... ... Erection of Town Hall ... 86 ... ... ... Establishment of Town Hall ... 74 ... ... ... Eve, Mr. William 10,12 ... ... ... ... Exhibition of Art Furniture, &c. 29 ... ... ... .. Expenditure and Income ... 100,101 ... ... ... Factory and Workshops Acts ... .. ... 205—207 ... Finance Committee ... 63—66,80 ... ... 253 Fire Alarms ... ... ... ... 269 Fire-Escape Stations ... ... ... ... 269 Flemming Street Depot ... 67 ... ... ... Flushing Courts and Gullies ... 82 ... ... 158 Food and Drugs Acts, Sale of 19 72 ... ... 212 Food seized and Condemned ... ... ... 193 211,212 Footways ... 67 134—136 ... ... Furniture Exhibition 29 ... ... ... ... 273 INDEX.—(continued). SUBJECT. DEPARTMENT. Clerk. Accountant Surveyor. Med. Officer of Health. Miscellaneous. Gas Light and Coke Co 46 67,75 ... ... ... General Purposes and Sanitary Committee ... 71—73,82 ... ... 254 General Rate 4 63 ... .. ... General Rate Accounts ... 63—77 ... ... ... General Receipts and Charges ... 65 ... ... ... Goldsmith Square Open Space 40 73,87 146,147 ... ... Great Eastern Railway 19, 46 ... ... ... ... Great Northern and City Railway ... 65 ... ... ... Guardians of the Poor ... 53 ... ... ... Gullies in Streets ... ... 138 ... ... Hackney Road Burial Ground 40 60 ... ... ... Haggerston Library .. ... ... ... 240—244 Haggerston Sewerage 21 89 144,146 ... ... Health Department ... 72, 82 ... 167—208 ... Highways Department ... 66,81 117—147 ... ... House Refuse, Utilization of 3, 5, 7 ... ... ... ... Housing of the Working Classes 10—15 75,89 ... ... 256 Hoxton House Asylum Appeal 45 75 ... ... ... Income and Expenditure ... 57, 61,76, ... ... ... 83,100 Income Tax Collectors ... ... ... ... 263 Infectious Diseases (Notification) ... 72 ... ... ... Inhabited Houses ... ... ... ... 263 Interest on Loans ... 63,80 ... ... 95 Jury List ... 56 ... ... ... Kiosk Convenience ... 82 ... ... 156 Kossuth Buildings ... ... ... ... 215 Labour Bureau 38,39 74 ... ... ... Legal and Parliamentary Expenses ... 65 ... ... ... Lettings 25 74 ... ... ... Libraries Commissioners, &c. ... 53 ... ... 227—244 Lighting Department ... 71 ... ... ... Lighting Inspector's Report ... . ... ... 151—164 Litigation and Legal Work 15—19 65 ... 201 211 44—46 Loans ... 95,96 ... ... ... Local Rates 4 98,104 ... ... ... Local Government Board 12,23 ... ... ... ... Loly, Mr. H. L 20 ... ... ... ... London County Council 11, 14,45 ... ... ... 258 London School Board 26,27 66 ... ... 258 London Streets (Removal of Gates and Bars) Bill 26 ... ... ... ... Losses on Rates ... 98 ... ... ... Magistrates ... ... ... ... 267 Maintenance of Roads ... 67 117 ... ... Manville, Mr. E. 6—10 ... ... ... ... 274 INDEX.—(continued). SUBJECT. DEPARTMENT. Clerk. Accountant. Surveyor. Med. Officer of Health. Miscella neous. Medical Officer's Department 22 76,83 ... ... ... Medical Officers, District ... ... ... ... 261 Medical Officer's Report ... ... ... 167—208 ... Members of parliament ... ... ... ... 257 Metropolitan Police ... 54 ... ... ... Metropolitan Rates ... 54, 66 ... ... ... Mills, Lockyer & Mills (Solicitors) 46 7 5 ... ... ... Milne, Mr. J. A. D. 12,20,25 97 ... ... ... Model Dwellings 15- 17 ... 144 ... ... Moira Place, &c., 10—15 75, 89 ... ... ... Moneyer Street 11 ... ... ... ... Mortality Tables ... ... ... 174—183 ... Mortgage Debt ... 95, 90 ... ... ... Mortuary, Maintenance of ... 73 ... ... ... Nathan v. Vestry 17—18 ... ... ... ... Nile Street Improvement 11, 12 ... ... ... 216 Norfolk Buildings 15—17 81 ... ... 213,214 Nuisances abated ... ... ... 191—193 209,210 Office Boys ... 97 ... ... ... Officers' Committee ... ... ... ... 255 Officials of the Guardians ... ... ... ... 260 Officials and Organisation 19—25 97 ... ... ... Old Burial Ground 40 60 ... ... ... Open Spaces 40 60, 01 ... ... ... Other Receipts and Charges (Poor Rate) ... 50 ... ... ... Overseers' Expenses 37 55 ... ... ... Overseers of the Poor ... 55 ... ... 252 Parliamentary Committee ... ... ... ... 254 Parliamentary & County Council Elections ... 55 ... ... ... Parliament Members of ... ... ... ... 257 Parliamentary Returning Officer ... 55 ... ... 257 Paving, Maintenance 67 131—136 ... ... Paving and Sewers Committee ... 66, 81 ... ... 253 Paving Works, Capital Account ... 86 ... ... ... Pickup, Mr. J. H. 20 97 ... ... ... Pilbrow and Vestry, case of 15—17 81 ... ... ... Pitfield Street Site 10 ... ... ... ... Plant and Materials ... ... 142,143 ... 158,159 Planting Trees ... 66 ... ... ... Plumbers Place, &c., Area 10—15 75,89 ... ... ... Police Court Proceedings 15—17,19 ... ... ... ... Police Rate ... 54 ... ... ... Poor Rate 4 98 ... ... ... Poor Rate Accounts ... 50—58 ... ... ... Population ... ... ... 107 263 Precepts 4 53, 54, 66 ... ... ... Private Drain Works ... 90 138 ... ... Property and Permanent Works ... 92 ... ... ... Provost Street 11, 12 ... ... ... Public Companies ... 67 117 ... ... 275 INDEX.—(continued). SUBJECT. DEPARTMENT. Clerk. Accountant Surveyor. Med. Officer of Health. Miscellaneous. Public Health (London) Act, 1891 ... 72 ... 202 ... Public Mortuary ... 73 ... 194 ... Public Urinals ... 82 ... ... 155-157 Quelch, Mr. C. H. 18, 24 97 ... ... ... Quinquennial Valuation List 46 75 ... ... ... Railway and Tramway Schemes ... 65 143 ... ... Rates 4 53, 63, 80 ... ... ... Rates assessed and levied 4 98 ... ... ... Rate Collection ... 98 ... ... ... Rate Collectors 19, 21, 22 97 ... ... ... Rateable Value .. 98, 104 ... ... ... Recreation Grounds 40 60,61,73,81 146, 147 ... ... Regent's Canal ... ... ... 198,199 ... Registration of Voters 37 55 ... ... ... Registrar of Marriages, &c. ... ... ... ... 262 Reliance Wharf ... 69 ... ... ... Relieving Officers ... ... ... ... 261 Removal of House Refuse 31 70 ... ... ... Removal of Snow ... 69 ... ... ... Reorganisation of Vestry Clerk's and Accountant's Staff 25 ... ... ... ... Repairs of Roads and Footpaths ... 67 ... ... ... Repayment of Debt ... 63, 80, 95 ... ... ... Return of Attendances ... ... ... ... 110— 113 Returning Officer, Parliamentary ... 55 ... ... ... Revenue Accounts ... 57,61,77,83 ... ... ... Revising Barrister ... 55 ... ... 257 Riley, Mr. Joseph (deceased) 21 97 ... ... ... Roads and Streets, Maintenance of ... 67 117 ... ... Russell, E. F., late Rate Collector ... 97 ... ... ... Salaries and Allowances ... 97 ... ... ... Sanitary Inspectors ... 97 ... ... • • • Sanitary Work ... ... ... 191 ... Scavenging and Dusting ... 68—70 ... ... 109,217 School Board for London ... 66 ... ... ... School Managers ... ... ... ... 268 Sewerage and Drainage Works ... 81 187 ... ... Sewers Rate 4 80 ... ... ... Shoreditch Board of Guardians ... 53 ... ... ... Shoreditch Municipal Technical Schools 26—29 90 ... ... ... Shoreditch Parish Churchyard 40 60 ... ... ... Slaughterhouses ... ... ... 199,200 ... Small Pox ... ... ... 170 ... St. John's Churchyard, Hoxton 40 60 ... ... ... St. Luke's Vestry 10 82 ... ... ... St. Leonard's Churchyard, Shoreditch 40 60 ... ... ... St. Mary's Churchyard, Haggerston 40 60 ... ... ... Stables ... 69 ... ... ... Stamp Duty on Debt 15 ... ... ... ... Steam Road Rollers ... 66 118 ... ... 276 INDEX.—(continued). SUBJECT. DEPARTMENT. Clerk. Accountant. Surveyor. Med. Officer of Health. Miscellaneous. Stiles, Mr. A. W. 24 97 ... ... ... Street Improvements ... 86, 87 ... ... ... Street Gullies ... 82 138 ... ... Street Watering ... 70 ... ... ... Streets and Public Roads ... 67 ... ... ... Summary of Collection ... 98 ... ... ... Sun Street Improvement ... 87 ... ... ... Surveyor, District ... ... ... ... 258 Surveyor's Department ... 66, 81 .. ... ... Surveyor's Report ... ... 117—147 ... ... Taylor, Mr. Harry 21, 22 97 ... ... ... Technical Education 26—26 90 ... ... ... Technical Instruction Committee ... ... ... ... 256 Toll Bridge Expenses ... 105 ... ... ... Totals of Valuation List, Appeals against 18, 44 ... ... ... ... Town Hall, Alterations of 25 74 ... ... ... Do. Committee ... 74 ... ... 254 Do. Disinfecting Station ... 72 ... 197 ... Do. Establishment ... 74 ... ... ... Do. Maintenance of ... 74 ... ... ... Do. Music and Dancing License 25 ... ... ... ... Trade Refuse, Removal of ... 70 ... ... ... Trades of Inhabitants 27 ... ... ... ... Turner's Action ... 65 ... ... ... Unemployed 32 ... 118 ... ... Unhealthy Dwelling Houses 10—15 ... ... 202 ... Urinals, Public ... 82 ... ... 155—157 Vaccination Officers, &c ... ... ... 173 ... Valuation Appeals 18, 44,46 75 ... ... ... Valuation List Committee ... 75 ... ... 254 Vestry Clerk's Report 3—40 ... ... ... ... Vestry Clerk's and Accountant's Staff 25 .. ... ... ... Vestrymen ... 54 ... ... 110,247-251 Vital Statistics ... ... ... 174—183 ... Wages 31, 32 ... ... ... ... Wards ... ... ... ... 246 Washhouses and Baths 39 ... ... ... ... Water Supply to Urinals ... ... ... ... 156,157 Watering Streets ... 70 ... ... ... Water Vans ... 73 ... ... 217 Wharves ... 69 ... ... ... Worship Street Police Court ... ... ... ... 264 Year Book of Local Information ... ... ... ... 257—269 Young, Mr. G. C 22 97 ... ... ... Zymotic Diseases ... ... ... 170 ... 6 6261 A