1891-92. THE VESTRY OF THE PARISH OF SAINT LEONARD, SHOREDITCH, IN THE COUNTY OF LONDON. THE THIRTY-SIXTH ANNUAL REPORT, WITH AN Abstract of the Accounts, FOR THE YEAR From 25th March, 1891, to 25th March, 1892. \ PUBLISHED PURSUANT TO THE METROPOLIS LOCAL MANAGEMENT ACT (18th and 19th Vic., Cap. 120). printed for the Vestry of the parish of St. Leonard, Shoxeditch, BY A. T. ROBERTS, SON & CO., 5, HACKNEY ROAD, LONDON, N.E. 350-9.92. CONTENTS. Map of District To face Title Reports of— Folio. Clerk 3— 54 Accountant 61—114 Surveyor 117—143 Lighting Inspector 147—156 Medical Officer of Health 160—183 Analyst 184—188 Abstract of the Accounts 61—114 Assessment Committee 57— 60 Burial Board 73, 74 Commissioners for Public Libraries and Museums 191—197 Members of the Vestry 201—205 Officials 106 Standing and Special Committees 207—210 Wards, Divisions, and Boundaries 199, 200 Year Book of Local Information 211—223 The Vestry of the parish of St. Leonard, Shoxeditch, IN THE COUNTY OF LONDON. ANNUAL REPORT. Gentlemen, It is with no little satisfaction that I present the following record of the work accomplished by you during the first year I have had the honour of acting as your Clerk and Solicitor. The importance of the schemes launched and carried into execution, and the numerous changes in your official staff and methods of administration, will make the year ending 25th March, 1892, a memorable one in the municipal history of Shoreditch, and will prove that a Metropolitan Vestry is well able to keep pace with the important changes of local government legislation and the increasing needs of municipal life. The successful execution of a scheme for the Dusting and Scavenging of the Parish by the Vestry's workmen, instead of through Contractors ; the acquisition of the important monopoly of the Electric Lighting of the Parish ; the adoption of an improved system of Rate Collection, effecting a saving of about £2,000 a year ; the acquisition of the first Open Space in Shoreditch ; the settlement of a scheme for re-constructing the Moira Place and Plumber's Place insanitary areas, and raising a loan of £40,000 for that purpose by the issue of Debentures under the Local Loans Act, 1875; and the appointment of Commissioners for Public Libraries, who have acquired a Library building—constitute the chief results of a year's work, of which the most ambitious local authority might well be proud. And, when it is remembered that the rates for the year have been the same as for the previous year, it may be claimed that increased economy has accompanied increased efficiency, and a larger amount of work has been performed at the same expenditure as heretofore. RATES. The total rates raised during the past year amount to 5s.3d. in the £, which is the same total as that for the previous year. Of this amount 1s. 5d. was expended 4 by the Vestry for local purposes, and the remainder 3s. 10d. was paid to the Guardians of the Poor and for general Metropolitan expenses. It is important to bear in mind the continual increase in the precepts of the general Metropolitan authorities, as the effect of such increase in Shoreditch has been to cause a corresponding decrease in the expenditure for local purposes. This result is a natural one where the authority administering local affairs is constantly confronted with the difficulty of collecting increasing rates from overburdened ratepayers, on many of whom distresses have to be levied, and where pledges to secure the strictest economy are exacted by ratepayers from their local representatives, who are the first to be held responsible for an addition to the rates. This tendency for the precepts of the general Metropolitan authorities to increase at the expense of local expenditure and so starve local work is clearly shown by. The following table taken from figures published by the London County Council. AUTHORITY. 1887-8. 1888-9. 1889-90. 1890-1 d. d. d. d. County Justices 1.25 1.25 London County Council. 12.53 13.25 Metropolitan Board of Works 7.62 10.90 Police 5.0 5.0 5.0 5.0 School Board 8.36 7.97 8.9 10.69 Asylums Board 1.75 2.25 1.875 2.125 Common Poor Fund 7.54 7.40 7.67 7.96 s. d. s. d. s. d. s. d. Total Rate for Metropolitan purposes 2 7.52 2 10.83 2 11.975 3 3.025 Kates for Local purposes 2 3.48 2 117 2 1.025 1 11.975 4 11 5 0 5 1 5 3 In the above table "local purposes" includes the expenditure of the Vestry, Burial Board, Overseers, and of the Guardians on local poor. It will thus be seen that in three years the rates for Metropolitan purposes have increased by 7½d. in the £, whilst rates for local purposes have decreased by 3½d. in the It is not surprising, under these circumstances, that charges of insufficiency of work are brought against Metropolitan local authorities, whose members find themselves in the dilemma of having to decrease their expenditure or of ceasing to represent the ratepayers. 5 FINANCES. Upon his appointment in May, 1891, Mr. E. A. R. Adams, the Accountant, undertook the important work of opening a complete new set of books for recording the Vestry's finances, kept by double entry, and based upon the best Municipal systems. Some idea of the system adopted can be gained from the Abstract of Accounts accompanying this report, from which it will be seen that not only is an account shown of all actual receipts and payments in the financial year, but a statement is also given of the income and expenditure for the year, that is the income which has accrued due and become payable in the course of the year (though perhaps not actually received), and the expenditure incurred therein (though perhaps not actually met) ; a balance sheet of liabilities and assets is also shown, so that the actual result of the year's working can be seen at a glance. Moreover, all receipts and expenditure are kept under distinct headings, and the working of each department and each separate subject dealt with is easily ascertainable. The capital accounts have also been carefully written up, so that the history of the various loans and improvements can be traced. The enormous amount of detail work involved in such a fundamental change of system cannot be understood without an examination of the various books required, and the carrying out of the work and getting all the books properly written up to date as they now are, has necessitated a constant amount of night work from Mr. Adams, who has spared no pains to put the Vestry's finances on a sound basis. The introduction of such an admirable system has certainly relieved me of all anxiety as to the Vestry's financial work, and I think the Vestry may now feel assured that they have the best system of book-keeping which can be applied to the work of a local authority. RATE COLLECTION. The thorough investigation into the circumstances of a rate collector's defalcations in April, 1891, showed that though the system of rate collection in vogue possessed some good features, many of the Vestry's instructions were unheeded, and the system of checking was performed in such a way as to be utterly valueless. There were clear indications also that there was no proper supervision of the work and that the rates might, on a better system, be collected very much more closely than was being done. Owing to the important legal questions involved in every detail of rate collection I went very carefully into the whole question, and on Mr. Adams' appointment I worked out with him a system of collection and supervision which, whilst maintaining the best features of the system in vogue, included some new features suggested by municipal experience. The clerical work was reduced to a minimum by combining the three separate "Report" books of the collector into one book, and by a novel arrangement of the rate book which records two rates inonebook. Collection and deposit books were substituted for the old system of loose sheets, and the bankers' slips so formed that the Accountant f, can check every payment into the bank. A complete system of checking in the most thorough manner every operation of the collection was introduced, and as longas this is maintained there is on chance of any defalcations occurring to any serious amount without immediate detection. The successful working of the system was soon shown in the case of the Moorfields Ward where the defalcations and false entries of the collector were detected directly they reached £25, and within one day of the false return being made the Accountant required an explanation from the collector, and I was enabled to have all his outstanding arrears cheeked in the course of the three following days. The rate is now collected and closed earlier than heretofore by which many losses are saved, but the most important feature of the system is the institution of an arrears clerk by the proper direction of whose work the rate can be much more closely collected than heretofore, and I think the results amply justify the extra expenditure on this head of £60 per annum which is the proportion of the arrears clerk's salary attributable to this work. The total reduction in loss of rates through empty properties, bankruptcies and runs since the introduction of the new system is indeed so surprisingly large that 1 have thought it well to describe at some length the thorough changes effected in the old system, as it is rather to these changes than to any past negligence on the part of the collectors (other than those now dismissed) that the great reduction of the loss on rates is due. By a comparison of carefully tabulated statements of irrecoverable rates it appears that the percentage of loss in respect of the above heads for the year ending Christmas, 1890, on the total rates charged amounted to 5.4 per cent., whilst fcr the year ending Christmas, 1891, it is only 4.3 per cent., a reduction of 1.1 per cent., which represents a saving of £1,564 on the year's collection of 1891. The reduction in losses of rates commenced to be very noticeable at Lady-day quarter, 1891, when there was a decrease of .8 per cent. (which is at the rate of £1,188 per annum) over the average loss of the preceding four quarters of 1890, and as the system above referred to has been perfected and put in full working order, the loss under the above heads has gone on decreasing, until for the Lady-day quarter, 1892, the percentage of loss has been reduced to 8.9, or a decrease of 1.5 per cent. over the average quarterly loss for the year 1890. This decrease represents a saving at the rate of £2,133 per annum in the collection of the rates, whilst if the Lady-day quarter, 1892, is compared with the Lady-day quarter, 1890, the decrease in the loss of rate is 1.8 per cent., or a saving at the rate of £2,560 per annum. In making these calculations losses on the rates of public companies (which are collected through the Vestry Clerk's office) by excusal of the Magistrates, reduced assessments, and allowance to owners, have been eliminated, as these are beyond the collector's power, and the loss has been reckoned by percentage on rates charged to prevent misapprehension from the increase of assessment by the 7 quinquennial revaluation. I am not aware of any improvement in trade or the letting of house property in Shoreditch sufficient to account for the above heavy reductions in loss of rates, but on the contrary, through the action of the London County Council many empty properties are now on the rate-book which were previously left off, so that the loss has for some quarters past been increased to this extent. I think, therefore, the whole of the above reductions are fairly attributable to the new system above described, and that the result justifies the future enforcement of every part of the system, the introduction of which has involved a good deal of friction, and has given a large amount of trouble and anxiety to the Finance Committee and their responsible officials. DUSTING AND SCAVENGING SCHEME. During the year a most important departure in the system of dusting and scavenging the parish has been carried out. Instead of the work being let out to contractors, as has long been the custom, it is now being performed directly by the Vestry employing its own men and plant for the purpose. The necessity of the Vestry having direct control over the performance of this work was strongly shown in the Eastern division of the parish at (he commencement of 1891, when the Vestry's contractor for that division, Mr. A. Turner, completely broke down, and after a scandalous number of complaints of non-removal of dust and failure in cleansing the streets, the Vestry was compelled to step in and employ men and carts to carry out the work, and the contract was let for the remainder of Mr. Turner's period to another contractor at an enhanced price. On the Vestry's withholding the money which Mr. Turner would have been entitled to receive had he performed the work undertaken, he proceeded to sue the Vestry for £532, being one instalment of his contract, but the Vestry defended the action, made a counter claim for £1,820 5s. 4d., and at the trial of the case on 12th February, 1891, recovered judgment against Turner in the Queen's Bench Division for £1,820 5s. 4d. with costs, being £357 2s. 8d. for work of snow removal executed by the Vestry tor the contractor, £200 for fines inflicted on the contractor for 40 cases of special neglect, and £1,263 2s. 8d. for the additional sum paid to another contractor for completing the work. Of this judgment, £300 will be paid by Mr. Rogers, one of the contractor's sureties, who has given three bills of exchange of £100 each, payable at six, twelve and eighteen calendar months, but as both the other surety and Mr. Turner have become bankrupt, there is little hope of recovering the balance. On the 25th March, 1891, contracts for dusting and scavenging the parish for six months only were entered into, and the Special Committee charged with the execution of the new scheme had made sufficient progress to be able to take over the Eastern division of the parish on the 29th September, 1891, when the Vestry commenced doing its own work in that half of the parish. The arrangements made were so far satisfactory that on the 25th March, 1892, the remainder of the parish 8 was taken over by the Dusting and Scavenging Committee, who from that date became responsible for the dusting, scavenging and watering of the whole parish. To enable the Committee to carry out the work, two wharves on the Regent's Canal were taken on long leases. One of these is known as De Leauvoir Wharf, No. 287, Kingsland Road, and is held on a lease of 70 years from 24th June, 1891, at a yearly rent of £250, payable quarterly. Details will bo found in the Abstract of Accounts of the sums spent in erecting additional stabling, a weigh-bridge, office and dust-shoots, and in executing necessary repairing, paving, dredging, and other works on this wharf, which is used for the disposal of dust and dry refuse by shooting the same directly into barges. A recoupment of £95 per annum is effected by letting of part of the offices on the wharf to Messrs. J. & A. Stroud (£25 per annum), and Messrs. Lea & Co. (£70 per annum). The house, No. 287, Kingsland Road, is occupied by the Committee's superintendent, and part of it is used as a Committee-room and for offices for transacting the clerical part of the work. There is stable accommodation for 33 horses, with two loose boxes, a blacksmith's and farrier's shop, wheelwright's shop, and a gas engine of 8-horse power for chaff cutting, sawing, and other work. The other wharf taken by the Committee is known as Reliance Wharf, Hertford Road, and is held on lease for 70 years from June 24th, 1891, at a yearly rent of £100, payable quarterly. The Committee have executed certain repairs to the house and stabling, and some necessary paving and drainage works. The house is occupied by the Committee's head horsekeeper, and the wharf is used chiefly for the disposal of slop. There is stable accommodation for seven horses, and one loose box. The capital expenditure on the two wharves and on plant has been partly met out of a loan of £6,000 borrowed from the London County Council, but a supplementary loan of £2,500 is being applied for. The following instructions to ratepayers were distributed to every householder:— Removal of House Refuse. The Vestry of the Parish of St. Leonard, Shoreditch, in consequence of the unsatisfactary way in which the dusting of the Parish has hitherto been carried out by the Contractors, have made arrangements to carry out the work by their own workmen, and the ratepayers of the Parish are earnestly requested to carefully observe the following regulations in order that the work may be efficiently and promptly carried out. All the dustmen employed by the Vestry are paid a fair rate of wages, and they are subject to instant dismissal if they demand, or require, any gratuity or fee for removing any dust or refuse, besides being liable to penalties under the Public Health Act, 1891, and ratepayers are requested to assist the Yestry in putting a stop to this objectionable custom. Arrangements have been made for dustmen to 9 pass down every street in this district, and to call at every house in which is exhibited a D card which accompanies this notice, on the day named at the back of the D card. The refuse which the dustmen are ordered to take away must consist of domestic house refuse, and all ordinary refuse, such as sweepings from shops. The Vestry's men will not remove trade refuse from factories, or gardens, unless special application is made to the Vestry on forms to be obtained from the Superintendent at the address below. There will be a settled charge for removal of such trade refuse, and not less than one quarter of a load will be called for. Householders are requested to exhibit the D card which accompanies this notice and to allow the dustmen to remove the refuse regularly, on the day named at the back of the card, as with a weekly collection the Dustmen will not call at any house except upon the appointed day. The Vestry desire to call the serious attention of all householders to the objectionable practice of depositing vegetable refuse, and other decomposable matter, in the dust-bins; not only is this very injurious to health but it is exceedingly expensive to the ratepayers to get it removed. All burnable refuse, such as potato and turnip peelings, cabbage leaves, pea shells, &c., should be burnt as fuel, both on economical and sanitary grounds ; and this can easily be done under a copper or in a close range. At least one half of the so-called dust in dust-bins, could and ought to be so treated, when it is remembered that this would effect the saving of some thousands of pounds a year. The Vestry confidently hope the ratepayers will, in their own interest, cordially co-operate in effecting such a sanitary improvement and so large a reduction in the rates. Any communication or complaint relating to removal of dust or refuse, or incivility, or negligence on the part of the men, or requests for gratuities should be addressed to Mr. John Rokinson, Superintendent of Dusting and Scavenging Department, 287, Kingsland Road, Shoreditch. Morning collection of Dust and Ashes. The Vestry desire to draw the attention of the inhabitants of those streets in which the daily collection is carried out, to the importance of placing their boxes on the edge of the footway as early as possible in the morning and not later than 8 a.m. in any case, so as to facilitate the removal of house refuse and leave the streets in a clean and orderly condition before traffic commences. 10 The Committee have engaged the services of Mr. John Robinson as their superintendent, who was previously very successful at Deptford in a similar position, and their full staff for the work of the whole parish consists of Wharf staff (287, Kingsland Road) 4 Horsekeepers 2 (1 night and 1 day) Wheelwrights 1 Farriers 2 Shoot-men 2 (1 night and 1 day) Watering inspector 1 Summer months only, between 25th March and 30th Sept. Scavengers 32 excluding extra force for footways in wet weather. Gullymen 4 Carmen 37 ,, extra 4 when watering. Dust carriers 14 Boy 1 Men at Reliance Wharf 4 including night watchman. „ De Beauvoir 1 night watchman. Total 109 The Committee have purchased 37 horses and 37 carts and vans, 6 sweeping machines, and 1 snow plough, which are sufficient for the whole parish. A contract for the disposal of refuse by barge was entered into with Messrs. G. A. & A. Fuller at 3/3 per ton which price is to be reduced to 3/- per ton if the contract is continued for three years. The canal dues of 1/- per ton are included in this price and make it a very heavy charge on the scheme. During the six months between Michaelmas, 18(Jl, and Lady-day, 1892, there has been removed from the Eastern Division:— 331) cart loads of Trade Refuse 3,957 van „ of Slops, &c. 3,138 „ ., of Dust of which 190-tons 13-cwt. have been disposed of by rail, and 9,904 tons by barge. An arrangement was made with the Great Eastern Railway for disposing of dry dust and refuse at their Spitalfields depot for 2/- a ton, but as the Company could not guarantee to take refuse as a permanent arrangement the committee could not rely much on this means of disposal, and as shoots have been in course of erection at the depot they have been unable to avail themselves to any great extent of this arrangement. 11 For the purpose of facilitating the removal of dust the parish has been divided into six divisions, each division being cleared on a fixed day of the week so that the dust from every house in the parish is removed at least once a week, and oftener in special cases. The success attending the execution of the new scheme is well shown by the greatly reduced number of complaints. From Michaelmas, 1891, to Lady-day, 1892, the number of complaints in the Eastern division (the one worked by the Committee) was 30, there being no second complaints, whereas in the Western division (worked by a contractor) there were 1,222 complaints during the same period, and during the last four years the average number of complaints in the Eastern division has been 2,208 per annum under the contract system. The Yestry Contractor for the Western division was fined £20 by the Vestry in respect of some of the above complaints and was charged £22 12s. 7d. for work done on his behalf. The greatly improved state of the streets swept by the Committee's men speaks for itself; moreover, the nuisance caused by the Vestry's Contractors storing large accumulations of refuse on their wharves in the parish, with which the Sanitary Committee of the Vestry had to interfere twice in the last year, has been done away with by the system of immediate disposal, and in a recent case the Contractors in the adjoining parish of Hackney have been compelled by a Police Magistrate to adopt a similar system on it being proved that the Shoreditch Yestry were working it with success. The objectionable practice of dustmen exacting 'tips' from ratepayers has been to a large extent put down, as any employee of the Yestry found demanding any fees is subject to instant dismissal. The men are paid fair wages and they are not left as they were under the contract system to supplement very low wages by exactions from ratepayers. An important benefit will be derived from the scheme indirectly by the cessation of the practice of sweeping slop down the gullies which, under the old system led to frequent stoppages of the sewers, entailing much inconvenience and expense. There is no doubt that the cost of the new system of dusting and scavenging will be a good deal greater than under the old contract system, but this must be the case where work which has been m a large measure neglected is carried out in a thoroughly efficient manner. Moreover, by sec. 29 of the Public Health Act, 1891, the additional labour and expense of cleansing all the public footways in the parish is thrown upon the Vestry, and this work must add considerably to the cost of dusting and scavenging the parish, especially in the case of snowfalls. The drastic provisions of this Act which came into operation on the 1st January, 1892, require a very much higher standard of efficiency, than heretofore, in this work which has such an important bearing on the sanitary welfare of the parish, and in view of the heavy penalties inflicted by the Act on Local Authorities for neglecting dusting and scavenging 12 work it is a very fortunate circumstance that the Vestry have now such a direct control over the work that any complaints can be immediately attended to, and the Vestry do not run the risk of incurring heavy penalties through the neglect of a careless contractor. ELECTRIC LIGHTING. The Shoreditch Vestry is the second local authority in the Metropolis and the first in the Eastern District which has obtained powers to undertake the supply of Electricity for public and private purposes. Electric lighting and motive power have passed from the experimental stage to that of proved success. From being regarded as the luxury of the rich, electricity is fast showing itself to be a necessity for the poor owing to the great sanitary advantages which electric light possesses over all other means of illumination. The Vestry of St. Pancras have demonstrated that electricity can be produced in large quantities at an actual cost much below the present price of gas, and the vast strides which are being made every year in the application of electricity to the industries and necessities of life, make it certain that the monopoly of supplying this universally useful force, will in a few years become the most valuable and highly prized undertaking of local authorities. With the experience before them of the enormously increased value of the water and gas undertakings of the Metropolis for the benefit of private Companies, it is lamentable that so many local authorities in the Metropolis have allowed the monopoly of electric light, which will probably excel in magnitude those of water and gas, to pass out of their hands for forty-two years, and even then only to be re-purchasable by the local authority at a large expense. On the 2nd of July, 1891, the Vestry received notices of the intention of three Electric Lighting Companies to apply for provisional orders for supplying this Parish with electricity. I reported to the Parliamentary Committee that if the consent of the Vestry continued to be refused to these Orders without anything being done by the Vestry itself, the Board of Trade might in their discretion grant such Orders in spite of the Vestry's consent not having been given, and in that case, it at a future time the Vestry desired to get the monopoly into their hands they would have to pay dearly for it, as in the case of Gas and Water Companies. I also pointed out that the Board of Trade had granted Orders to local authorities with power to transfer their powers and duties under the Order on favourable conditions to contractors, and by this means the local authority obtained the monopoly, and could make its own terms with private companies as to division of profits, &c., if required. That if the Vestry obtained such an Order (the cost of which, if done in my department, would not exceed £120), they would not be bound to take any steps for two years, or for a longer period on reasonable grounds, and that 1 considered that the monopoly was worth a very great deal more than the cost of obtaining it. 13 The Parliamentary Committee thereupon recommended the Vestry to apply in the next Session of Parliament for a Provisional Order empowering them to supply Electric Light and Power in this Parish, and to transfer or let out the work hereafter, if thought desirable, and that the Vestry Clerk be instructed to take the necessary steps to obtain the Order. This recommendation was adopted by the Vestry, and a special meeting of the Vestry was called, as required by the Electric Lighting Acts, on the 1st September, 1891, when the following resolutions were unanimously passed, on the molion of Major F. M. Wenborn:— (1) "That this Vestry proceed to obtain power to supply electricity within the Parish of Saint Leonard, Shoreditch, for public and private purposes." (2) "That a Memorial be forthwith presented to the Board of Trade for a Provisional Order under the Electric Lighting Acts, 1882 and 1888, to enable this Vestry to supply the Parish of Saint Leonard, Shoreditch? or any part thereof, with electricity." (3) "That it be referred to the Parliamentary Committee to present such Memorial, and to lake all necessary steps and incur all necessary expenses for obtaining such Order, and that the Vestry Clerk be instructed to carry out the necessary work in connection with the application." In accordance with these resolutions, I prepared the necessary advertisements, and served the requisite notices, with copies of plans showing the area of supply. A Memorial by the Vestry praying for a Provisional Order was sealed on the 1st December, 1891, and duly lodged with the Board of Trade, and I prepared a draft of the proposed order which was duly deposited at the necessary offices. Objections to the Order were lodged by The Conservators of the River -Thames, The North London Railway Company, and The London and North Western Railway Company, but these objections were, after negociations, satisfactorily met, and oil the 16th January, 1892, I attended at the Board of Trade and proved to their satisfaction that all the requirements under the Electric Lighting Acts and the Rules of the Board had been legally complied with. I also obtained some modification of the County Council clauses in the Vestry's favour, but the Board limited the net profit to be made by the Vestry from the supply to 5 per cent, on the capital involved (instead of 7 per cent, as asked by the Vestry) as this margin is now the uniform rate allowed to local authorities. The Board also made various amendments in the draft, which recent experience has suggested, are improvements in the form of the Model Order to facilitate the working of the undertaking by local authorities, and in April, 1892, the Board of Trade formally granted a Provisional Order to the Vestry in respect of this parish. 14 I then inserted fresh advertisements of the grant of this Order, and made the necessary deposits required by the Rules. A Bill for the confirmation of this Order was introduced into the House of Lords, which was passed in due course, and the Order has now become Law. Copies of the Order as settled may, by a Resolution of the Yestry, be obtained by Members of the Yestry on application, and the public are entitled to be supplied with copies at 1s. each. With the valuable assistance of Mr. G. W. Clarke, I have been enabled to carry out the whole of the work connected with this order without a parliamentary agent or consulting engineer at a total cost for fees, printing, &c., of £115 3s. 6d. (a) SYNOPSIS OF ORDER. The Shoreditch Electric Lighting Order, 1892, sanctioned by the Board of Trade under the Electric Lighting Acts, authorises the Yestry of this parish, who are called the "undertakers," to supply electrical energy for public and private purposes, for electric lighting or motive power within the area of the parish of St. Leonard, Shoreditch, and the Order will commence from the date of passing of the Act of Parliament confirming the Order (sec. 3). The supply of energy must be by a system approved by the Board of Trade, and subject to regulations already made by the Board to secure the safety of the public, and overhead wires are prohibited (sees. 7 and 8). Lands not exceeding 5 acres may be acquired by the Vestry for the purposes of the Order. The Vestry are empowered to break up the level crossings of the L. & N. W. Railway, and the lines of the North Metropolitan Tramway, for the execution of their work, and they may break up private streets with the consent of the owners or the Board of Trade. Special provisions are laid down for the protection of wires of the PostmasterGeneral, and of tramways, canals, sewers of the London County Council, water and gas pipes, and telegraphic and telephonic wires, and notices with plans of any works interfering with such properties are to be given by the Vestry to the owners before the works are executed, and any questions in dispute or as to compensation for injury may be referred to arbitration. The most important provisions are those headed "Compulsory Works." By sec. 20 the Vestry is bound within two years of the commencement of the Order to lay down sufficient mains for general supply in all the following streets: Great Eastern Street, Shoreditch High Street, Curtain Road, Rivington Street, Bateman's Row, Charlotte Street, Garden Walk, New Inn Yard, New Inn Broadway, Holywell Lane, and so much of Old Street, Bethnal Green Road, and Commercial 15 Street as are in the parish. They must, also, after the same period, lay down mains in such other streets in the parish as two or more owners or occupiers of premises in such street may by requisition demand, provided such persons guarantee to undertake a supply of electricity for two years of such amount as will produce 20 per cent, upon the expense of providing and laying down the necessary distributing mains. The "undertakers" may appeal to the Board of Trade if they think any requisition is unreasonable. Failure to execute such compulsory works will render the Vestry liable to have the Order revoked by the Board of Trade on the representation of the London County Council, but experience shows that where a local authority is taking any steps bond fide to work the Order, the above periods are not strictly enforced, and the Board of Trade have power to extend them (sec. 21). The clauses are intended, however, to prevent local authorities acting as a " dog in the manger " and keeping private companies from supplying electricity without supplying it themselves. The "undertakers" are bound under penalty to keep up a sufficient supply of electricity to consumers on their giving an undertaking to consume for two years a minimum quantity of energy (sec. 24). The Vestry are enabled to charge for any amount of electricity up to twenty units 13s. 4d., and for each unit over 20 units 8d. per unit. Other provisions follow for the appointment by the County Council of Electric Inspectors, and for the testing and inspection by them of the mains, works, supply and instruments. Metres for ascertaining the value of the supply are to be used unless otherwise agreed, and the Vestry may let for hire metres for the purpose. Maps showing the area of supply, and the mains, street boxes, and lines from time to time laid down, are to be made and kept corrected up to date ; and the Board of Trade, the Postmaster-General, and the County Council may procure copies. The revenue from the undertaking is to be applied in payment of cost of jvorks and establishment, penalties, damages, interest on loans, instalments towards repayment of same, and in providing a reserve fund until it amounts to one-tenth of the capital involved in the undertaking. The nett surplus may be applied in relief of the rates or paying off loans, provided that where such surplus exceeds 5 per cent, per annum on the capital involved in the undertaking a rateable reduction in the charges for electrical energy is to be made to reduce the surplus to such maximum rate of profit. Any loss on the undertaking is to be met out of the rates. Any moneys arising from the sale of lands and other capital moneys are to be applied in paying off loans. Provisions follow as to the service of notices and as to the revocation of the Order by the Board of Trade on default by the Vestry to execute the works or supply energy as directed by the Order. 16 An important provision is made, enabling the Vestry, by deed, to transfer their powers, duties, liabilities, and works, under this Order to any Company or person for such rent or other pecuniary consideration as may be agreed on, and on such transfer the transferees become the "undertakers" under the order, and the Vestry may resume the undertaking on certain circumstances arising. The Board of Trade is empowered to remedy the system and works of the "undertakers" on it being proved, that they are not in accordance with the Order, or are dangerous to the public, or affect any telegraphic lines, and the " undertakers" are made responsible for any damages or accidents caused to passengers by their works. (b) ADVANTAGES. It may be convenient to summarize here the leading advantages which have been proved by experience to be possessed by the Electric Light. These are as follows:— (1.) The air is not vitiated, and consequently health is better maintained, and furniture, tapestry, and book-bindings are not injured. The injurious effects which gas has upon flowers, birds, &c., are not present where electricity is used for lighting purposes, and in warehouses and show rooms where materials of delicate hues and textures are dealt with, Electric Lighting must prove an invaluable substitute for gas. On this ground Mr. J. Blundell Maple, M.P., of the well-known furnishing house in the Tottenham Court Road, has stated to the St. Pancras Committee that he would use the electric light for the purposes of his business should it cost twice the amount that gas does. The average illness of factory operatives is found to be largely reduced where electric light is introduced. (2.) Owing to the great ease with which the current can be turned on or off by the mere movement of a switch, the lights can be extinguished when, ever a room is left instead of being left to burn as is often done in the case of gas, to avoid the trouble and delay in re-lighting. In the case of public lamps the expense of lighting the lamps is saved. (3.) In a large installation the actual cost of production per unit need not exceed 3d., so that, given a fair consumption, the electric light is certainly cheaper than gas. The most important point which rises on the question whether a local authority should supply electricity is the price which must be charged for energy to leave a fair working profit, and its comparison with the present price of gas. The best evidence on this point is the experience of the Vestry of St. Pancras who are supplying electrity at Gd. per Board of Trade unit at night, and at 3d. per unit during the day time, when it 1s chiefly used for motive power. The Vestry calculate 17 that even these low charges will enable a fair profit to be made, as the actual cost of producing electricity is reckoned at 2d. per unit. From the figures of Sir David Salomons, electricity at Gd. per unit is equivalent to gas at 3s. 7d. per 1,000 cubic feet, but at 3d. per unit electricity is equal to gas at 1s. 10d. per 1,000 cubic feet. As to the desirability of transferring the Vestry's power to a company at a rent or for a lump payment, experience shows that electricity can be supplied more cheaply by local authorities than private companies, because the former can raise the necessary capital at 3¼ per cent., while the latter can only obtain it with difficulty at 5 or 6 per cent. OFFICIALS AND ORGANIZATION. (1) ACCOUNTANTSHIP. Soon after my appointment the question of the method of keeping the Vestry's accounts came before the Vestry, owing to the omission of a liability from the Rate Estimates, and I found it necessary to report that the system in vogue was insufficient and unsatisfactory, as it constituted merely a record of receipts and payments, without showing the current liabilities of the Vestry as required by the Metropolis Local Management Act, 1855. The Vestry accordingly, on the 24th March, 1891, appointed a Special Committee of five members (Messrs. Moffatt, N. Moss, L.C.C., Wenborn, Kendell, and Law) to consider the system of keeping the Vestry's accounts, and to report what alterations (if any) should be made in the Accountant's Department. On the 14th April, 1891, this Committee, owing to the conduct of the Accountant, Mr. H. F. Jones, suspended its meeting, and at its next meeting reported that the Committee had examined the books and considered they were kept in a most unsatisfactory way, and that Mr. Jones was quite unsuited for the position of Accountant. On the 10th April, 1891, the Officers' Committee, after considering the Accountant's conduct before the Special Committee, and other matters in connection with the defalcation of the Rate Collector of Kingsland and Haggerston West Wards, suspended Mr. H. F. Jones from his office, and on the 14th April the Vestry considered these reports, and after hearing a letter from him, resolved that the Accountant, Mr. H. F. Jones, be called on to resign forthwith, and directed an Accountant to be advertised for, referring the matter to the Special Committee to consider and report on the duties and emoluments of the office. On the 21st April, Mr. H. F. Jones resigned his office, and the Rate Collectorship of Kingsland and Haggerston Wards becoming vacant at this time, he was appointed, in view of his long service under the Vestry, to the post of Rate Collector of that Ward on the 19th May, 1891. The Special Committee made the following report on the duties and emoluments of the office of Accountant:— 18 (1) That the Accountant should be responsible, under the Vestry Clerk, for all the Vestry's financial work and the keeping of the accounts, and should devote his whole time to the duties of his office. (2) That the salary should be £200 per annum, rising (subject to the Vestry's approval), by five yearly increments of £20, to a maximum of £300 per annum. The vacancy was duly advertised, and 99 applications were received. The following six candidates were selected by the Committee for the Vestry to appoint from:— E. A. R. Adams, Chief Book-keeper in the Borough Accountant's Office of Corporation of Sheffield. W. H. Bates, Assistant to Clerk to Guardians of Maidstone. J. Goulding, of the Borough Treasurer's Office, Preston. H. Richards, of the Borough Accountant's Office, Nottingham. D. Smith, of the Borough Treasurer's Office, Birkenhead. W . L. Smith, of the Borough Accountant's Office, Great Yarmouth. On the 19th May the Vestry unanimously appointed as their Accountant, Mr. Ernst Alexander Reginald Adams, who entered on his duties on the 15th June, 1891, providing a guarantee of £1,000 in the Provident Clerks' and General Guarantee Society. An agreement under seal was entered into between the Vestrv and Mr. Adams, providing for three months' notice on either side, and comprising the duties of his office. (2) RATE COLLECTORSHIP OP KINGSLAND AND HAGGERSTON WEST WARDS. On the 7th April, 1891, I reported that proceedings under the Criminal Law Amendment Act, 1883, had been taken at Worship Street Police Court, against Mr. John Jones, the Rate Collector of the above Wards, whereupon the Vestry suspended him from his office and appointed Mr. Joseph Riley, temporarily, to collect his rates. On making a thorough scrutiny into Mr. J. Jones'accounts, I reported that certain defalcations had occurred, and that owing to the absence of any adequate check upon his returns of empty properties and absconding ratepayers, that these defalcations had been going on for some time. On the 14th April the Vestry discharged Mr. Jones from their service, owing to the defalcations in his accounts, and he was subsequently convicted under the Criminal Law Amendment Act and sentenced to twenty months' imprisonment with hard labour. The ultimate loss to the Vestry, after the Guarantee Society had contributed the amount of their policy, was £15, but the disclosures in this case were of the greatest use in enabling the Vestry to adopt a re-organization of the whole system of rate collection, which I subsequently recommended in conjunction with Mr. Adams. 19 (3) MEDICAL OFFICERSHIP. On the 9th day of June, 1891, Mr. Henry Gawen Sutton, M.D., F.R.C.S., who had occupied the position of Medical Officer of Health to the Vestry since the year 1865, died after a short illness at his residence at Sevenoaks, Kent, of pneumonia, following an attack of influenza. At the following meeting of the Vestry a sincere vote of condolence with the late Dr. Sutton's widow and family was passed by the Vestry, and the officials of the Vestry joined in a consolatory address to them, and at the funeral gave expression to the loss they had incurred in a Medical Officer whose kindness and friendship to the officials were conspicuous. Dr. Sutton was a Master of Arts and a Doctor of Medicine of the London University, Fellow of the Royal College of Physicians and Examiner of that body, Fellow of the Royal Medical Chirugical Society, Member of the Pathological and Clinical Societies, of the Medical Pyschological Association, and a Member of the Association of Medical Officers of Health, Physician and Lecturer on Pathology to the London Hospital, Consulting Physician to the Poplar Hospital, and Physician to the City of London Hospital for Diseases of the Chest. He was the author of several works, including:—"Lectures on Medical Pathology," "Fibroid degeneration of the Lungs," "Natural History of Rheumatic Fever," "Clinical Report on Cholera," "Abscesses on the Brain," "Report on the Morbid Anatomy of Cholera," "Mitral and Tricuspid Bruits," "Rheumatic Fever," "Chronic Brights Disease," "Morbid changes in the Spinal Cord in cases of Arterio Capillary Fibrosis," '• Relations of disturbances in general circulation of Kidney Diseases." He was also a contributor to the Medical Times, Gazette, British Medical Journal, and the British and Foreign Medical and Chirurgical Review. He was an eminent authority on pathology. He did important work in connection with the public health during his service under the Vestry, especially in connection with an outbreak of cholera, and in obtaining the constant watersupply from the East London Water Company, and the abolition of storage cisterns. The Vestry referred it to the General Purposes and Officers' Committees, conjointly, to bring up a report of the salary and duties of the Medical Officer, and as to the election of Dr. Sutton's successor. The joint Committees were of opinion that the Medical Officer should be appointed and paid wholly by the Vestry, and it was resolved on the 7th July, 1891, on their recommendation:—That a duly qualified Medical Officer be advertised for at a salary of £200 per annum. The Vestry also resolved that Dr. Bate, the Medical Officer of Health of Bethnal Green, be requested to act for the Vestry in cases of necessity, and it was left in the hands of the Vestry Clerk to call him when required, and to arrange with him as to payment of his fees, 20 The joint Committees reported that they had issued an advertisement for a Medical Officer of Health. That 45 applications had been received, from which the Committees had selected 15 candidates for interview. That a further selection of the following 6 candidates had been made by the Committees for the Vestry to appoint from:— Francis John Allan, D.P.H. Camb.; M.D., M.B. & M.S. Edin.; 53, Devonshire Street, Assoc. College State Med., Lond.; Portland Place, W. Memb. Sanit. Institute and Soc. of M.O.H.; Treas. and Hon. Sec., Pub. H. Med. Soc., &c. J. Newton Burns, M.B., Edin. ; C.M., Edin. ; D.P.H. C. E. Dumbleton, M.A., Camb.; M.D.,Camb.; D.P.H.,Eng.; &o. Alfred John Gregory, D. P. H., Lond. ; R. C. P. & S., Lond. ; &c. A. P. Luff, M.D., Lond.; B.Sc., Lond.; D.P.H.,Glas.; &c. Leonard Wilde, M.D., Dur.: M.R.C.S., Eng.; D.P.H., Lond. On the 1st September, 1891, Dr. F. J. Allan was appointed by the Vestry Medical Officer of Health for the Parish of Saint Leonard, Shoreditch, at a salary of £200 per annum. His duties were prescribed to be those laid down by the Local Government Board, and the execution of the various Sanitary Acts. His attendance at the Town Hall was required at least half an hour daily, and at Vestry and Committee meetings, and such further time was to be given as the sanitary work of the parish might necessitate. The terms of Dr. Allan's appointment have been revised since the end of the period covered by this Report. (4) RE-ORGANIZATION OF VESTRY CLERK'S AND ACCOUNTANT'S STAFF. In the month of July, 1891, I found it necessary, in conjunction with the Accountant, to present special reports to the Officers' Committee on the re-arrangement of the staff of the office, and in these reports such changes were indicated as were deemed absolutely necessary to secure efficiency and the regular performance of the work of the Vestry. 1 pointed out that the staff in my office was quite inadequate, and further, that in consequence of overwork and having to attend at night meetings of Committees, the health of Mr. Burton had been tried to such an extent that his doctor advised him that he ought not to continue such a strain, and that he required more work out of doors. The Accountant moreover stated in his report, that he required the partial services of a Clerk to check arrears of rates, 21 including the Collectors' returns of empties and losses, and to properly check the counterfoils of receipt books, and he thought Mr. Burton could assist him in this respect. The following joint recommendation was accordingly made:— (1) That Mr. Barton's duties in future consist of attending and taking the minutes of such Committees as meet in the daytime, doing the work required by the Accountant in checking Collectors' counterfoils and returns of empties and losses (which would give him work out of doors), and employing the residue of his time in doing some of the Clerk's correspondence, and the proper keeping of all documents. I went on to report further, that by the appointment of the Accountant to do financial work solely, the necessity arose of some assistant being appointed to represent me in my absence; to take up the position of Deputy or Assistant Clerk, and to help me in the legal portion of the assessment work of the parish. I suggested that an Assistant Clerk with experience in a Solicitor's office should be appointed, at a salary of £135, with £15 per annum for assisting in the legal work of the Assessment Committee. I stated that this arrangement would enable me to undertake the usual legal work of the Vestry, and would effect a large saving to the parishioners in law costs. I therefore recommended— (2) That an Assistant Clerk be appointed to assist in the conveyancing and legal work of the Vestry, to act as my deputy, attend to take minutes of evening Committees and Vestries, do some of the correspondence, and such other office work as Mr. Burton would have no time for, and that if the above recommendations were adopted, all temporary Clerks employed by the Vestry should be dispensed with. I also made a recommendation as to the appointment of office boys in view of the unsatisfactorv conduct of the Messenger. j The Accountant in his report called attention to the insufficiency of his staff, and was strongly of opinion that two permanent assistants would be requisite for the proper carrying out of the work of his department, but with the assistance of Mr. Burton's services as an Arrears Clerk, he recommended— (3) That one permanent Assistant, at a yearly salary of £110, should be appointed. And he was of opinion that this would enable him to satisfactorily cope with the increasing work of his office. He also recommended the appointment of an office boy. The reports of the Vestry Clerk and the Accountant were laid before the Officers' Committee on the 9th July, 1891, and the Committee resolved that the recommendations embodied, therein should be laid before the Vestry, and the latter 22 recommended to give effect to all of them except those relating to the office boys, which were postponed for further consideration. The recommendations were accordingly submitted to the Vestry, and the whole of those numbered 1, 2 and 3 were adopted on the 28th July, 1891. (5) LAW AND ASSISTANT CLERKSHIP. In pursuance of the Vestry's directions, the Officers' Committee issued advertisements, and received 57 applications for this appointment, and after interviewing 12 selected candidates, selected the following 5 applicants, whose names were duly presented to the Vestry— G. W. Clarke, A.K.C., Managing, Common Law, Chancery, &c., Clerk to Dr. White, Solicitor, of Ludgate Circus, author of a Handbook on County Court practice, called "The Tradesman's Aid to Debt Collecting." S. P. Forder, Shorthand and Common Law Clerk to Mr. G. D Wansborough, Solicitor, Foster Lane, E.C. Percy Helps, Managing Clerk to Mr. W. R. Helmore, Solicitor, Strand. H. D. Parsons, Clerk to Mr. J. Greenfield, Solicitor, of Queen Victoria Street. W. Steele, Common Law and Chancery Clerk to Messrs. Simpson and Cullingford, Solicitors, Gracechurch Street. On the 1st September, 1891, Mr. George William Clarke (Associate of King's College, London), was appointed Law and Assistant Vestry Clerk of the Parish at a salary of £135 per annum, with £15 per annum for assisting with the Assessment Committee's legal work; and he entered on his duties on the 21st September, 1891. (6) ASSISTANT ACCOUNTANT AND BOOK-KEEPER. Advertisements for candidates for this post were issued by the Officers' Committee, and 32 applications were received, and after interviewing 9 candidates, the names of the following 5 applicants were selected for presentation to the Vestry. James A. Battersby, Assistant Clerk in Guardians' Offices, St. Mary Abbotts, Kensington. William Culshaw, Second Bookkeeper, Borough Accountant's Department, Southport (selected out of 40 applicants). Henry J. Hoare, Clerk to Pratt & Norton, Chartered Accountants, Old Jewry, E.C. James H. Pickup, Assistant to Town Clerk of Bacup. Arthur E. Smith, Clerk, Rate Office, Parish of St. Mary, Newington. 23 On the 1st September, 1891, Mr. William Culshaw was appointed Bookkeeper and Assistant to the Accountant, at a salary of £110 per annum; and he entered on his duties on the 21st September, 1891. (7) MESSENGER. In the month of June, 1891, owing to numerous complaints as to the service of Notices of Vestry and Committee Meetings, the Vestry referred it to the Officers' Committee to consider the method of summoning such meetings with a view to an improvement being effected. The Officers' Committee considered the question, and made the following report, dated 3rd July, 1891— "That having regard to the serious complaints made by the Vestry Clerk and other officials, and various members of the Vestry, of acts of disobedience and neglect of duty on the part of the Messenger, he be called upon to tender his resignation." This report was considered by the Vestry on the 21st July, 1891, but in view of Mr. Russell's long service under the Vestry, the further consideration of the recommendation was postponed for three months. On the 27th November, 1891, the Officers' Committee considered a letter from a Medical man complaining of the Messenger (Mr. Russell) having required money and his tram fare for conveying to him a fee for notifying an Infectious disease, and the Committee, after fully enquiring into the case, recommended— "That Mr. Russell be dismissed from the service of the Vestry forthwith, and that he be suspended until the Vestry Meeting on the 1st December." This report was considered by the Vestry on the 1st December, 1891, but owing to Mr. Russell's denial of the charge, the recommendation was not adopted. I then read a second letter to the Vestry which had been received that day from another Medical man, making a similar complaint against Mr. Russell, whereupon Mr. Russell handed in his resignation, which was accepted by the Vestry. Mr. Russell applied subsequently for a superannuation grant, but this was not entertained by the Vestry. On the 9th December, 1891, the Officers' Committee, in view of the decision ot the Vestry on the 1st December, 1891, re Russell, decided to resign their positions on that Committee, and resolved as follows— "That we, the undersigned members of the Officers' Committee have resolved, that in our opinion the action taken by the Vestry relating to the Committee's recommendation re Russell, renders it impossible for us to continue our membership with proper regard to our self respect, and 2 hereby resign our respective positions on the Officers' Committee accordingly." This resignation was signed by Messrs. H. Winkler (Chairman), E. Moffatt H. J. Staff, T. B. Kendell, J. Hardy, F. M. Wenborn, Gr. Wood, J. Winfield, J. J. Freeman, Joseph Little, J. Cook, J. Taylor, S. Fordham, T. Martindill, C. Hyatt, D. Meredew, Charles Tuck, J. C. Marshall, Nathan Moss, l.c.c., and W. Cherry. The report was considered by the Vestry at its meeting on the 15th December, 1891, and received, but a further resolution was unanimously passed, as follows— "That a vote of confidence in the members of the Officers' Committee who have resigned be passed, and that they be requested to resume their positions on the Committee." A further resolution re-appointing the whole of the members who had resigned was carried unanimously. (8) OFFICE BOYS. On considering the question of filling up the vacancy caused by the retirement of the Messenger, the Officers' Committee recommended the Vestry to appoint two office boys, at salaries of 10/- a week each, to deliver notices, take messages, and do copying and other office work, and thus become trained in the routine of the Vestry's work. The Vestry adopted this recommendation, and the Officers' Committee issued advertisements, received 55 applications, and after interviewing 16 of the candidates, elected as the two office boys Robert Molton Malcolm, of 19, Appleby Street, N.E. Fredk. S. Case, of 78, New North Road, N. Both lads commenced their duties on the 29th February, 1892. (9) RATE COLLECTORSHIP OF MOORFIELDS WARD. At the closing of the Christmas Rate it became apparent that the amount of money outstanding was exceptionally large in this Ward, and the Accountant required the Collector (Mr. E. F. Russell) to pay all monies received by him into the Bank. This he failed to do, and I thereupon instructed the Arrears Clerk to check the Collector's returns of empties and losses, and cases in the hands of the broker. It was soon discovered that many of these entries were false, and particularly that the broker had not received anything like the number of cases returned as in his hands, and that in numerous cases of rates alleged to be outstanding, the money had been received by the Collector previously to the date of closing his books. I thereupon ordered the Collector finally to pay into the Bank all monies received by him up to date, but he was unable to pay in £25 which his books shewed ho had 25 received. The Finance Committee gave Mr. Russell some time to make good the deficiency, but as fresh defalcations came to light, and Mr. Russell brought a pistol into the Rate Office where some of the clerks who had made enquiries in his Ward were waiting to be heard by the Committee, it was unanimously resolved to recommend the Vestry to dismiss him forthwith, and this recommendation was adopted by the Vestry on the 26th January, 1892, who left the question of prosecution to the Guarantee Society. Mr. Riley was appointed temporarily to carry on the collection, and to check all the Collector's returns of empties, losses, and outstandings for the Christmas quarter, when it appeared that £27 17/- had been received by Mr. Russell and was unaccounted for. The London Guarantee and Accident Company, Limited, paid this amount, but did not think it advisable to prosecute, as they had received the money from the Collector. A further sum of .£9 4s. 3d. subsequently appeared to have been received by the Collector without being accounted for, but of this sum £1 3s. 3d. has been paid to the Vestry by Mr. Russell, leaving a sum of £5 1s. 0d. still owing by him. The detection of these defalcations within three days of the false returns being made by the Collector, proves the efficiency of the system of rate collecting and checking which had been adopted by the Vestry at the commencement of the Christmas quarter. Under this system the most perfect check which is I think devisable is kept on every operation of rate collection. The Vestry issued the following advertisement for a Rate Collector, to fill the vacancy in the Moorfields Ward:— "Vestry of St. Leonard, Shoreditch.—Appointment of Rate Collector.— "Applications are invited for the above office at the commencing salary "of £160 per annum. The officer appointed to devote the whole of his "time to the duties, to provide an office in the ward to which he may "be appointed, and to furnish security in approved Guarantee Society "in the sum of £500." *The appointment was not made within the period covered by this Report, and will be dealt with in my report of next year. (10) SANITARY INSPECTOR. On the 26th January, 1892, the Vestry, on the recommendation of the General Purposes Committee "Resolved—That in view of the report of Mr. Cubitt Nichols and Dr. Seaton, and in consequence of the large increase of work thrust upon the Vestry's Sanitary Department by the Public Health (London) Act, 1891, that an additional Sanitary Inspector be appointed, and that it be referred to the General Purposes and Sanitary Committee, to advertise in the usual way, and to select five candidates for submission to the Vestry." 26 It was also resolved at the same meeting that the salary of the new Sanitary Inspector be £100 a year, hut this salary was subsequently reviewed and fixed at £110, rising by annual increments of £5 to a maximum of £150 per annum. The Committee inserted advertisements, and 38 applications for the office were received. The Committee selected twelve candidates for interview, and of these the four following applicants were presented to the Vestry on the 1st March, 1892, for the Vestry to appoint from:— Alfred Barb, Clerk in the Vestry's Sanitary Department. Albert Bennett, Sanitary Inspector to the St. Pancras Vestry. E. K. T. Martinson, Assistant Inspector of Nuisances, Walthamstow. Chables H. Quelch, Manager, Sanitary Department, Co-operative Builders, Brixton, S.W. After two ballots, Mr. Quelch obtained the largest number of votes, whereupon he was appointed a Sanitary Inspector of this Vestry, in accordance with the terms of the advertisement, subject to the approval of the Local Government Board. An alteration in the duties and salary of the Medical Officer of Health, and the proper allocation of the duties of the sanitary officers under the Public Health (London) Act, 1891, have not been brought to an issue within the period covered by this Report, and a recapitulation of them is reserved for next year's Report. (11) OFFICE ORGANIZATION. It may bo satisfactory to tho Vestry to know how far the cost of the increased staff in the Vestry Clerk's and Accountant's Departments compares with that under the old regime. Tho following statement will afford the information. As on 25th March, 1890. As on 25th March, 1892. £ s. d. £ s. d. Tho Vestry Clerk 450 0 0 The Vestry Clerk 425 0 0 Minuting Clerk 110 0 0 Assistant Clerk 135 0 0 Messenger 104 0 0 Minute and Arrears Clerk 100 0 0 The Aooountant 200 0 0 Office Boy 26 0 0 Assistant 93 12 0 The Accountant 200 0 0 Three Rate Clerks 330 0 0 Assistant „ 110 0 0 Three Rate Clerks 325 0 0 Office Boy 26 0 0 £1,287 12 0 £1,347 0 0 27 As against this increase of £59 per annum must be set the value of legal k done in my department during the year. Estimated at two-thirds of the full e charges, the vestry would have had to pay the following sums for solicitor's •k done in mv office during the year:— £ Obtaining lease of De Beauvoir Wharf and registering Memorial 11 Do. Reliance Wharf and registration 8 Preparing and completing three surrenders of same wharf (Booth, Lock, and Aspinall) 10 Completing lease to Lea & Co., and Stroud & Co. 7 Conveyance of Kiosk 2 Conveyance of Library Premises, Kingsland Road less Counsel's fees), registration and mortgage 37 Obtaining Electric Lighting Provisional Order 150 Opposing Railway Bills in Parliament, as solicitor—Great Northern and City Railways 20 Do. North Metropolitan Tramways Company 10 Do. City and South London Railways 10 Moira Place Scheme—serving notices, &c. 20 Be Inquiry and Conveyance of Goldsmith Square and loan 18 Various litigation, re Turner, Nathan, &c , and legal notices re Stone Yard, &c. 15 £318 The saving of £2,000 per annum in the Rate Collection has already been referred to, and the change in the system of dusting and scavenging has thrown a large amount of new work on the Accountant's Department, whilst the appointment of two new committees, viz., the Scavenging Committee, and the Housing of the Working Classes Committee, also involve additional work in my department. The exceptionally numerous changes in the official staff above-mentioned have necessarily caused me a grave amount of anxiety, and during the intervals between the vacancies occurring and their being filled up, and until the new officials settled down to their work, some disorganization of the work of the office has been unavoidable, and many improvements which I hope to effect have had to be postponed. Some alterations in the details of office work have, however, been carried out, and the following may be mentioned for the information of Vestrymen. A Post and Stamp Book is now kept in which is entered the name and address of every person to whom letters, circulars, or telegrams are sent, with the initials of the person posting or delivering the same, the hour of posting or delivery, and the amount paid for stamps, and in the case of registered letters the receipts are attached to the book. By this means, proper legal proof of the dispatch of all 28 letters, &c., is forthcoming whenever required, and one person (Mr. Kilmer) is made responsible for all tho stamps required by the different departments. A Deed Register Book is also now kept in which is being recorded short particulars of all deeds and important documents belonging to the Vestry, which are properly indexed up. An entry is also made of the person to whom any deed may be handed over, with the dates of the transaction and of the return of the deed. The absence of such a book in the office caused me much loss of time and difficuties when deeds had to be referred to. RED LION STONE YARD. (HOXTON STREET DEPOT.) For many years there had been little or no use for this yard, and as a rent of £60 per annum had to be paid for it the Vestry had on several occasions endeavoured to give it up, but certain legal difficulties existed which made it difficult to do so. At the request of the Paving Committee I made enquiries into the history of tho yard which was a curious and interesting one. It appears that about thirty years ago the yard was found to be unoccupied, and no owner of it being ascertainable the Vestry entered into occupation of it for highway purposes and held it for so many years that it is difficult to understand why they did not obtain a good possessory title at law to the land. Some years ago, however, the trustees of some neighbouring property (one of whom was a solicitor), laid claim to the land and took proceedings in Chancery for its recovery. The Vestry appear not to have defended the action, leaving it to the claimant to show his title to the satisfaction of the Court In the absence of opposition this was easily done, and the trustees got a decree in their favour, and the Vestry consequently had to pay £60 per annum rent for the yard. I entered into negotiations with the solicitors for the landlords, with the result that the legal difficulties as to Red Lion Passage were overcome, and I advised the Vestry that they might safely give notice to deliver up possession of the yard. This was done at Michaelmas, 1891, and the notice expired on Lady-day, 1892, without any difficulties being raised, and the Vestry will in future be relieved of this useless expense. WORSHIP STREET BRIDGE. On the 9th June, 1891, tho Surveyor made a report on the construction of this bridge by the Great Eastern Railway Company, pointing out that the level of Worship Street was not remaining unaltered as originally provided in the plans deposited with the Company's Bill, and that to obviate tho increased decline into High Street the Company had only laid throe inches of concrete under the paving stones instead of nine inches as required by him. 29 Before the work was concluded I took Counsel's opinion on the matter, with the result that a writ was issued by the Vestry against the Company for an injunction to prevent the bridge being constructed otherwise than in accordance with the deposited plans and for damages. Unfortunately for the Vestry, the Whitechapel Board of Works in whose district half of Worship Street and the bridge in question lies, passed their portion of the work as satisfactory on the report of their Surveyor, despite tho representations of the Vestry's officials. Ample justification, however, was afforded for the Vestry's action by the fact that soon after the roadway was finished it began to sink and require repairs at the very place where the Vestry's Surveyor reported it would do, owing to the insufficient depth of concrete. On a careful investigation into the legal position of the Vestry it was found however that the clauses in the Company's Special Act were so loosely and widely drawn that the same difficulty that arose in the Sun Street case would be raised and that it would be impossible to insist on the observance of mere statements made on the plans as to road levels, &c., which were not properly incorporated in the Act. In view also of the attitude of the Whitechapel Board of Works it was deemed advisable to meet the Company, and the action was settled on the terms of the Company undertaking to maintain and keep the roadway over the bridge in good repair (which was the substantial part of the Vestry's case) and of the Company paying all the costs of the Vestry in the matter. PUBLIC HEALTH (LONDON) ACT, 1891 This Act, in common with the Housing of the Working Classes Act, 1890, is one of the most important measures which the legislature has framed in the interests of public health. Coming into operation so lately as New Year's Day, 1892, its effects have not yet been fully realized, but it has already had a considerable influence upon the Vestry's sanitary administration, the Vestry being one of the sanitary authorities responsible for its due execution. The ultimate benefits it will confer cannot yet be definitely gauged, hut judging from the results in the provinces of the corresponding Act of 1875, it is certain to be of the greatest utility in furthering the work of sanitary bodies, and the mere fact that it codifies and simplifies the numerous and complex enactments relating to the public health in London which preceded it, will be a great public advantage both in enabling the public to understand easily the laws protecting health, and in removing many of the technical difficulties which have hitherto hampered and delayed local authorities in their sanitary work. In Shoreditch, especially, it is to be welcomed as a measure tending to the improvement of the sanitary condition of the poorer classes, for whose benefit in the main it has been placed upon the Statute Book. It may be described as a Sanitary Code for the Administrative County of London. It repeals and re-enacts various sanitary laws, brings into existence new duties and powers, and consolidates the whole laws relating to the public health in one Act. The more important of the old Acts which it has supplanted are those which relate to nuisance removal and the prevention of diseases, but portions of other Acts such as 30 Michael Angele Taylor's Act, and the Metropolis Management Acts, so far as they deal with sanitary measures are also repealed or re-enacted with certain amendments. The Vestry, in common with other Sanitary Authorities, are required to make byelaws for the following purposes:— (a). The prevention of street nuisances arising from snow, ice, salt, dust, &c. (b). The prevention of nuisances occasioned by the running of offensive matter out of manufactories, &c. into uncovered places. (e). The prevention of the keeping of animals in unfit places. (d). The paving of yards and open spaces in connection with dwelling houses. (e). Securing the cleanliness of cisterns, water-tanks, &c. (f). The removal to and the keeping in any hospital of persons suffering from infectious disease brought within their district by any vessel. (g). Keeping water-closets supplied with sufficient water for flushing purposes and (h). The regulation of houses let in lodgings, their registration, inspection and cleanliness. The London County Council are also required to make bye-laws:— (i). For prescribing the times, &c., for the removal of any fœcal or offensive matter through London. (j). For the closing and filling-up of cesspools, and the removal and disposal of refuse, &c. (k). As to water-closets and their accessories. All these bye-laws require the sanction of the Local Government Board, and must be submitted to the Board within six months of the commencement of the Act. The Vestry are required to enforce the bye-laws of the London County Council as well as their own. One of the most important novelties of the Act is the provision that the London County Council is empowered, in some cases with, in others without the sanction of the Local Government Board, to execute any work which the Vestry may neglect, and appeals to the Council are allowed to persons aggrieved by the Vestry's decision on certain matters. The first part of the Act deals with nuisances : first with nuisances generally, and secondly with some particular nuisances. Under the same head offensive trades are dealt with, and the Acts relating to the consumption of Smoke are discussed. These are repeated with very slight alteration, the principal amendment being the shifting of the responsibility for the smoke abatement provisions from the shoulders of the police 31 and delegating it to local sanitary authorities. The Act then deals with workshops and bakehouses, and provides for certain sanitary conditions therein. The Local Government Board are enabled to make orders for the registration and inspection of dairies, for securing the cleanliness of milk vessels, and for prescribing precautions to be taken for protecting the milk against infection. The next part of the Act deals with the removal of refuse, and the most important change is that which abolishes the duties formerly incumbent upon the owners or occupiers of premises to cause the footways and water-courses adjoining their premises to be swept or cleansed in time of snow or the like. The Vestry is now required to give notice of the times appointed for the removal of dust, and to remove it at those times, or in default will be liable to a fine not exceeding £20. Another provision is inserted to the effect that "any dustman or dustman's employer who demands any fee or gratuity for removing any house refuse" shall be liable to a penalty of not less than 20/-. The next part of the Act effects some most important and necessary sanitary reforms with reference to water-closets and sanitary conveniences. A new house must now be provided with as many water-closets as circumstances may require, and a penalty of £20 is imposed on a person responsible for the improper construction or repair of a water-closet or drain. The Vestry are empowered to provide public lavatories as well as other sanitary conveniences. In the section which deals with unsound food the law is assimilated to that now in force throughout the rest of the country under the Public Health Act, 1890. The powers of Medical Officers and Sanitary Inspectors as to unsound food are now extended to every article of food, and a person who has been twice convicted within twelve mouths of selling such food may, in addition to his punishment, be pilloried by having a notice affixed to his premises of the facts upon which he has been convicted. As to the water-supply, there are one or two very important and novel provisions. One of them is that an occupied house without a proper and sufficient supply of water is considered a nuisance, and can be dealt with summarily, and if a dwelling house it is deemed unfit for human habitation. Another is that if a water company cuts off the supply of water from any dwelling house they must give notice to the Vestry. A further innovation is that which relates to the cleansing of drinking-water cisterns, a question on which the Vestry have in the past taken important action. The provisions relating to the notification of infectious disease are much the same as those contained in the Notification Act of 1889, which will no longer apply to London. The Medical Officer of Health, upon receipt of a notice of infectious disease must now send to the head teacher of the school attended by the patient (if a child), or by any child who is an inmate of the same house as the patient, a copy of the notice. Every Sanitary Authority must now provide a mortuary for their respective districts, or in combination with another Sanitary Authority. They have also a discretionary power to provide a place for post-mortem examinations. The London County Council must provide proper places for the holding of inquests, and may provide one or more places for the retention and preservation of dead bodies found in London and not identified. Underground rooms not separately used as dwellings before the 5th August, 1891, when the Act passed, may not be so used in future unless they fulfil certain enumerated conditions. With regard to underground rooms which were occupied as dwellings 32 before that date, these must fulfil the same conditions after the lapse of six months from the 1st January, 1892, except to such extent as the Vestry may permit a modification or dispensation of these requirements. The Act requires that a Medical Officer of Health shall be legally qualified for the practice of medicine, surgery, and midwifery; and also either be registered in the Medical Register as the holder of a diploma in Sanitary Science, Public Health, oxState Medicine under sec. 21 of the Medical Act, 1886, or have been during three consecutive years preceding 1892 a Medical Officer of a district with a population of not less than 20,000, or have before the passing of the Local Government Act, 1888, been for not less than three years a Medical Officer or Inspector of the Local Government Board. A Sanitary Inspector appointed after the 1st January, 1895, must possess a certificate that he has by examination shown himself competent to discharge the duties of his office, or shall have, during three consecutive years preceding the year 1895, been a Sanitary Inspector or Inspector of Nuisances of a district with a population of not less than 20,000. There is also a provision that one-half of the salaries of these officers shall, if appointed or re-appointed after the Act comes into operation, be paid by the County Council out of the Exchequer Contribution Account, provided the Local Government Board approve such appointment or re-appointment as the case may be. Among the several sections relating to legal proceedings may be mentioned that which makes a defendant charged with an offence, and the wife or husband of such defendant, a competent and compellable witness; and that which provides that all fines are to be the property of the Vestry. The Act promises to be a most useful measure, and one that can be easily worked, and it is certain that if the Vestry and its officers fully carry into effect its very wide and searching provisions and exercise efficiently its large and important powers, their district will be put in due time into a thoroughly sanitary state, and although at first some extra expenses will have to be incurred to meet the extra work, under the Act, the prevention of diseases which cost large sums for treatment and isolation, and pauperite so many of the artizan class, must in the long run effect a considerable reduction in the Poor Rate, and the precepts of the Metropolitan Asylums Board. The Vestry are to be congratulated, so far as the amendments of the law are concerned, all the chief requirements of their petition with reference to the Bill have been inserted in the Act, and the clause requiring Vestries to cleanse the footways, to which the Vestry objected in vain has proved so impracticable in working that a conference of Metropolitan Vestries has recently recommended its abrogation. (a) STEPS TAKEN BY THE VESTRY UNDER THE ACT. At the Vestry meeting on the 22nd December, 1891, the Clerk asked for instructions as to inviting tenders for sweeping and cleaning the footways in the Western division 33 of the parish for the periods up to the 25th March, 1892, when the dusting and scavenging work of this portion of the parish would be taken over by the Vestry's Scavenging Committee. The Vestry passed a Resolution to the following effect:— "Resolved—That the matter be referred to the Dusting and Scavenging Committee to take the necessary steps for sweeping and cleansing such footways." The Vestry's Dusting and Scavenging Committee on the l6th December, 1891, reported as follows:— (b) "CLEANSING OF FOOTWAYS. "Your Committee have considered the provisions of the Public Health (London) Act, 1891, requiring the Vestry to cleanse and sweep the footways after the 1st January, 1892, and have made arrangements for a sufficient number of men and boys to be engaged to perform such work in the Eastern division of the parish. It is anticipated that the extra work in this respect will not be anything considerable, except in cases of heavy snowfall, to provide against which special arrangements for extra labour are being made. Your committee think one snow-plough will be necessary for the Eastern division, and will save much labour in case of a snowfall, and "Recommend—That your Committee be authorised and empowered to purchase one snow-plough of approved pattern accordingly." This report was received and adopted by the Vestry on the 22nd December. In pursuance of sec. 99, s.s. 4, and sec. 123 of the new Act, the Vestry passed resolutions on the 26th January, 1892, to the following effect:— (1.) "That the General Purposes and Sanitary Committee be, and the same Committee is, hereby appointed a Committee for the purposes of the Public Health (London) Act, 1891, and that such Committee be empowered to serve and receive notices, take proceedings and otherwise to execute the provisions of the said Act, submitting to the Vestry all acts done by them under this authority, for the confirmation and approval of the Vestry." (2.) "That the Vestry Clerk, Mr. Geo. W. Clarke, the Medical Officer of Health, Mr. H. Alexander, Mr. James W. Lear, and Mr. A. W. Stiles, be and are hereby appointed officers for the making of complaints and taking proceedings on behalf of the Vestry, for the execution of the said Act." Each member of the Vestry (in accordance with a resolution passed by theVestry on the 16th February, 1892) has been supplied with a small hand-book on the new Act arranged and annotated by Mr. W. A. Willis, LL.B. (Lond.). 34 TOWN HALL. (a) ALTERATIONS REQUIRED BY THE LONDON COUNTY COUNCIL. On the 21st day of November, 1890, the Vestry received the following list of structural alterations which the London County Council considered necessary to make the Hall safe in case of panic from fire. (1) That the two stone staircases and the two wooden staircases between the ground floor and the body of the hall, and the four wooden staircases to the gallery, be pulled down, and the flooring made good where necessary with fire-resisting materials. (2) That two new staircases be constructed to the gallery, one in the northeast angle of the hall, and the other in the north-west angle leading directly from Old Street, and be carried up to the level of the topmost part of the gallery, that such new staircases do have solid "square" (as distinguished from "spandril") steps of York or other approved stone, with 11 inch treads and 6 inch risers, 4 feet 6 inches wide in the clear, in flights of not more than 12 steps each, without winders, with intermediate landings between such flights, and a landing at the top and bottom, and the steps of the staircases be supported at both ends, and that the staircases be enclosed upon all sides by brick walls 9 inches thick; that the landings of such staircases be formed of similar materials to the steps, and be 4 feet 6 inches wide and 6 inches thick in one stone; that such staircases do have a roof formed of brick arches 9 inches deep, or constructed of other fire resisting materials to be approved by the Council and to the satisfaction of the District Surveyor; and that iron handrails be fixed to strong brackets built into the walls on both sides of such landings and staircases. (3) That the two stone staircases at the south-east and south-west angles of the hall on each side of the platform be reconstructed in a similar manner as described in paragraph No. 2, with doorways at the foot leading directly into the private passages on the east and west sides of the building, and that such staircases be carried up to the level of the floor of the hall. (4) That the floor of the hall be constructed of fire resisting materials, to be approved by the Council and to the satisfaction of the District Surveyor. (5) That all doors used by the public be not less than 4 feet 6 inches wide, and hung in two folds, and made to open outwards, and be fastened on the inside by approved automatic bolts. (6) That the doors in the principal entrance in Old Street be made to open outwards. 35 (7) That the gates to the porch in front of the principal entrance next Old Street be made to lock back when open. (8) That a 2½ inch hydrant be placed on the ground floor and one on the hall floor, both in an approved position, each provided with 40 feet length of hose, with all necessary branch pipes and nozzles of the Metropolitan Fire Brigade pattern. (9) That the doors leading from the ante-rooms on to the short flight of wooden steps be made to open outwards. (10) That the gas plate on the short flight of steps from the ante-room in the south-west angle of the hall, be removed, and be re-fixed in an approved position. (11) That the gangways round the four sides of the hall be made not less than 3 feet 6 inches wide, and that a central gangway be formed not less than 3 feet wide. Mr. Martin, following the Vestry's instructions to confer with the Council's Surveyor, and draw up plans of proposed alterations, presented his report to the Vestry on the 16th December, 1890, which was referred to the Town Hall Committee. After full consideration, the Committee referred their recommendation to the Vestry on the 17th March, 1891, when the Vestry resolved to protest against the required alterations of the London County Council, as they were considered extravagant, and as to some requirements unnecessary. The plans drawn up by the Surveyor provided for the above requirements and some extra accommodation for Coroner's Court and Committee Rooms and were estimated to cost £4,637 to carry into effect. The London County Council pointed out that the Music and Dancing License for the Hall would not be granted unless the alterations were made, and as the Committee considered it would be a public misfortune if the poor of three east end parishes were deprived of the only large hall available for the performance of good concerts and high class music, they submitted Mr. Martin's plans on the 21st April, 1891, to the Vestry, with a recommendation that they be approved and sealed, which recommendation was adopted, and the plans were submitted to the Council as the provisional proposals of the Vestry. The Council's Theatres Committee thereupon made out the following further list of requirements in addition to those originally ordered. (12) That the floor and ceiling of the Coroner's room should be formed of fire resisting materials. (13) That an extra exit 4 feet 6 inches wide should be made on the west side of the Council Chamber, the doors to be hung in two folds and made to open outwards, and fitted with automatic bolts. 36 (14) That the emergency staircases on the east and west sides of the building should bo enclosed with brick walls, and lead directly into the passage way at the side, and not through tho ladies' lavatories as shown on the drawings. (15) That the swing doors in tho glazed screcn must be increased in width equal to the main entrance. (1G) That a hydrant and fitting be provided in the main entrance hall on the ground floor level in an approved position. (17) That handrails must be provided to the lower flights of staircases to be retained. The whole question was then debated at length by the Vestry at a special meeting called for the purpose. It appeared on a careful consideration of the Council's requirements, that the alterations if carried out would leave the floor of the large hall with only two exits at one end instead of four (two at each end) as at present, and that though the two new exits would discharge directly out of the building, there would be more danger of crushing in case of panic than existed with the four exits discharging into the entrance hall. The fact of a Fire Brigade Station with all necessary appliances existing next door to the Hall in Old Street seemed to have been overlooked by the Theatres Committee, and after much discussion the following resolution was passed on the 14th July, 1891— "That a communication be addressed to the London County Council informing them that the Vestry is not prepared to incur the outlay necessary to comply with the Council's requirements, and must abandon the license if those requirements are insisted upon." On the 1st September, 1891, a letter was received from the London County Council stating that the Council must insist on its requirements with respect to tho alterations being complied with, if it was the intention of the Vestry to apply to the Council for tho renewal of tho music and dancing license. Whereupon it was resolved that the Vestry Clerk be instructed to make the usual application for the Vestry's license, and the Council's letter was referred to the Town Hall Committee. The anticipation of the loss of the Vestry's music license for the Hall had already occasioned much dissatisfaction in the neighbourhood among those interested in the provision of good music for the people, and the inability of the Committee to make their annual engagement with the Hackney Choral Association for the performance of Sacred Oratorios in the winter was followed by the dissolution of that excellent association. The Town Hall Committee feeling the gravity of the situation accordingly recommended the Vestry on the 15th September, 1891 — 37 "To appoint an Architect of special experience, at a fee not exceeding £50, to confer with the Architect to the London County Council as to the minimum requirements, upon carrying out which by the Vestry, the Council would grant the Vestry's music and dancing license." This was agreed to by the Vestry, and the services of Mr. Charles Barry, F.S.A., of 1. Westminster Chambers, Victoria Street, S.W., were engaged for the purpose. In accordance with the Vestry's instructions I applied for a music and dancing license for the Town Hall, at the sitting of the Licensing Committee of the London County Council on the 1st October, 1891, when the license was granted subject to an undertaking being sent by the Vestry to the London County Council before the 23rd October, 1891, to carry out the works agreed on between Mr. Barry and the Council's Architect. Mr. Barry proceeded to make plans and estimates, and submitted the following report on the requirements. "1, Victoria Street, Westminster, 30th September, 1891. To the Town Hall Committee. Gentlemen,— In accordance with your invitation, I attended a meeting of the Committee on the 23rd instant, and received their instructions to put myself in communication with the Superintending Architect of the London County Council with as little delay as possible, in order to endeavour to come to an understanding with him as to the least costly mode of meeting the requirements of the London County Council, with the necessary object of making the Town Hall buildings more secure for the public in the event of a fire occurring when large assemblies were in the building. Accordingly I saw the Superintending Architect at once, and was shewn certain plans which had been proposed a year ago with this object, and which were generally approved by the London County Council, but as to which no action has hitherto been taken, because (as I understand) the cost was then considered too large by the Vestry. I have, so far as the very limited time would permit, carefully studied the building, and also the requirements of the London County Council, and have prepared a set of plans, which I herewith beg to submit for your approval. I propose to utilise the present staircases within the building, which now give access to the Hall on each side of the central entrance at the south-east and south-west angles of "the Hall, by altering them somewhat in position and re-arranging their landings, as shewn on the plans and sections. 38 By this arrangement another advantage beside economy is gained, by an open transverse corridor with exit doors at each end to the open areas on each side of the building. From this corridor the doors into the Council Room, which are at each end of it, will give immediate access to the outer air, and thus obviate the necessity of any new door from that room, as had been required by the London County Council, if that room was to bo included in the license for music and dancing as heretofore. By the appropriation of a small room at the end of the present entrance corridor, on tho right hand side of it, the lavatory for the use of the Council can bo retained in a slightly modified position, and one formed for tho use of ladies at the foot of the stairs on the ground floor, which I am informed has been found to bo much wanted on occasions of Balls in the Great Hall. The London County Council further required that the staircases and bulkheads now in the Hall on each side, and bv means of which inconve- nient communication has hitherto been obtained upwards and downwards should bo removed. Both these side staircases at present give access also to the basement, but it seems to mo that one will be amply sufficient for this purpose, and thus two good objects will bo attained—(1st) A new and large Committee Room will be obtained on the ground floor, more than replacing tho small room above alluded to as appropriated for ladies' cloak room and lavatories; (2nd) There will be ample well-lighted and ventilated space on the basement floor available for far better lavatories and conveniences than at present exist. A good cross light to the basement central corridor will also thus be obtained. Tho Committee will notice that all the works I have yet alluded to will bo within the walls of the building, and save tho cost of four new blocks of building which were proposed by the plans of last year. A further requirement of tho London County Council was, that there should be two new staircases from the ground to the uppermost level of the gadlery of tho Hall, one on each side, and that these should have no communication with tho floor of the Hall. This requirement is met, as shewn on the accompanying plans, by erecting two blocks of building, one on each side of tho entrance front to contain these gallery stairs, but in planning these I have obtained an advantage not actually required by the London County Council, but which seems to me to bo essential. I have managed so to arrange the gallery stairs as to got another staircase having no connection with it, but following its course flight by flight, and from this we got two excellent fireproof exits to the north-east and north- 39 west .ingles of the Great Hall, directly into the open areas each side of the Town Hall buildings. Thus it will be seen that spacious fireproof exits from the floor of the Hall will be provided, one at each of its four angles, and obviously in the most economical manner. The other requirements of the London County Council refer to details of door openings, fastenings, and the like, and also to two fire hydrants, but all these can be readily complied with. I have the pleasure to report that the plans and proposals above described, and shewn on the plans and sections I send herewith, have been submitted to and carefully examined by the Superintending Architect, and he will feel able to recommend that they be accepted (subject to minor details) by the London County Council. I have as yet made no estimate of the cost of the works above proposed, but I think it will be obvious, on comparing them with the former proposals, that they must be of less cost, while incidentally some advantages are obtained which the former plans did not afford. At the first meeting I had with the Committee, a question was mooted as to the stability of the roof over the Great Hall. I have had it most carefully examined, and am glad to report that I find it in excellent condition and perfectly stable. Waiting your further instructions, I remain, Gentlemen, Your obedient servant, CHARLES BARRY, Architect." This report came before the Vestry on the 19th October, 1891, when it was resolved— i "That the plans of Mr. Barry and his report be approved, and that the Clerk be authorised to sign the undertaking required by the London County Council to carry out the work proposed therein." 1 accordingly signed the necessary undertaking, and the license was granted by the Council, but it was ordered to be retained in their Clerk's office until the works had been carried out. On the 22nd December, 1891, the Vestry resolved—" That Mr. Barry be employed as architect to carry out the alterations," and referred it to the Town Hall Committee to make arrangements to carry out the work. 40 The Committee accordingly arranged with Mr. Barry for the commencement of the work on the 1st May, 1892, and the Vestry authorised him to appoint a Clerk of Works at £3 3s. Od. per week, when his services become necessary. Mr. Barry was also authorised to appoint Messrs. Ruault & Young, of 17, Southampton Street, Holborn, as his surveyors for the preparation of quantities, and Mr. Barry's plans having been finally approved by the Council, and some of their requirements withdrawn, tenders were advertised for in the public press and nine tenders were received. The tender of Messrs. Houghton & Co. for £4,973 was accepted in the first instance, but as they had made a mistake in the amount, they were allowed to withdraw it, and the tender of Mr. James Steed was accepted for £5,426. Application was then made to the Council for their consent to a loan of £5,500 for carrying out the works, but to the surprise of the Vestry the following letter was received from the Solicitor to the London County Council. London County Council, Conveyancing Department, Spring Gardens, S.W., 10tli May, 1892. SHOREDITCH VESTRY, LOAN OF £5,500. Dear Sir, The Council can only sanction the cost of such additions and alterations to the offices of the Vestry as are required to meet the reasonable office necessities of the Vestry when acting under the Metropolis Management Acts. Any requirements of the Theatres Committee of the Council do not appear to be within this limitation. I shall be pleased to see you if you can do anything to remove this initial difficulty. Yours faithfullv, •/ * GEO. JACKSON, Assistant Solicitor. In view of this letter it became impossible for the Vestry to proceed with the work, and I accordingly wrote to the Clerk of the Council on the 21st May, 1892, pointing out that the Vestry had been relying on the fact that the Metropolitan Board of Works expressly sanctioned a loan for building the Town Hall which must have been illegal if the Council's view was the right one, and that the Council themselves had recently sanctioned a loan to the Kensington Vestry for alterations to their Town Hall under precisely similar circumstances, and the Vestry anticipated that this practice would be followed in their case. As the 41 Vestry bud been put to an expense of about £500 in preparing to carry out the works ordered in November, 1890, 1 asked for an explanation why the Council had not pointed out at an earlier period that the Vestry had no legal power to carry out the works ordered by the Council. To this letter no reply has been received. (b) LETTINGS. During the vear the large hall has been let 135 times, the Council Chamber o •/ o 19 times, the Committee rooms have been used by local societies on several occasions. The receipts for the hire of the Large Hall, Council Chamber and Committee rooms for the financial year ended 25th March, 1892, were £626 3s. Od. HOUSING OF THE WORKING CLASSES. (I) BOUNDARY STREET IMPROVEMENT SCHEME. One of the most important schemes framed by the London County Council for the betterment of the condition of the labouring classes is that known as the London (Boundary Street, Bethnal Green) Improvement Scheme, 1890. The scheme, which is framed in pursuance of Part 1 of the Housing of the Working Classes Act, 1890, was undertaken by the Council in consequence of representations made by Dr. G. P. Bate, Medical Officer of Health of Bethnal Green, and Dr. H. G. Sutton, the Vestry's late Medical Officer. These representations were to the effect that the houses, courts and alleys within the area were unfit for human habitation, and that diseases indicating a generally low condition of health amongst the inhabitants had been prevalent, and were occasioned by the closeness, narrowness, and bad arrangement of the streets and houses, and by the absence of light, air^ ventilation and proper sanitary conveniences. In consequence of such representations, the London County Council on the 4th November, 1890, sealed an improvement scheme, which was duly submitted to the Home Secretary. An inquiry was subsequently held by Mr. D. Cubitt Nichols, who represented in favour of the scheme. The Home Secretary thereupon made a Provisional Order slightly modifying the scheme of the London County Council, but in the main confirming its provisions. The principal points in the Provisional Order wrere the following— That after clearing the area, dwellings to accommodate not less than 5,100 persons of the working class are to be erected, but this number is to be reduced to 4,600 in the event of the Council acquiring Goldsmith Square, and supplying accommodation there for 500 persons of the working classes. 42 The dwellings erected to bo approved by the London County Council and the Secretary of State, and to bo provided with w.c.'s, sinks with water supply, and dust shoots, according to the number and size of the tenements in such buildings, and are not to exceed four stories in height. The modification of the scheme obtained by the Vestry with reference to Goldsmith Square, is dealt with in this report under the heading of" Open Spaces." The houses in this jxirish included in the scheme, and which are condemned as insanitary, are— Nos. 53, 55 and 57, Boundary Street. Noa. 59 and 61, Boundary Street (a small portion only of those premises at the western extremity is in this parish); and Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6 and 7, Duncan Court. The following houses, which are all in this parish, do not form part of the unhealthy area, but are included in the Home Secretary's order, as they are required for the carrying out of the improvement scheme — Nos. 43, 45, 47, 48 and 51, Boundary Street. Nos. 1, 2, 3 and 4, Boundary Place. Nos. 2, 3, 4, 6, 8, 10, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 5, 7, 9 and 11, Calvert Street. Nos. 114 and 115, Shoreditch High Street. The streots in this parish affected are— (1) Boundary Street, which is to be widened to a minimum width of 40 feet. (2) Jacob Street, in the parish of Bethnal Green, is to be widened to 40 feet, and continued into this parish through Calvert Street to Shoreditch High Street. The estimated cost of the scheme is as follows— £ s. d. Cost of Land, &c. 371,000 0 0 Cost of Roads 35,000 0 0 406,000 0 0 Less-Recoupment 106,000 0 0 Total not cost ... £300,000 0 0 The scheme, which is now in process of execution, will effect a most comprehensive sanitary improvement in a densely crowded and insanitary district, which 43 will now be opened up and sufficient light and air admitted to enable the area to be put into a thoroughly sanitary condition. The scheme ought certainly to conduce to the general health of that part of the parish adjoining Bethnal Green, and to the proper housing of the artizan population so largely predominant in the condemned area. (II) MOIRA PLACE AND PLUMBER'S PLACE AREA. The Housing of the Working Classes Committee were instructed by the Vestry, on the 17th February, 1891, to prepare a scheme for dealing with the above area, under Section 39 of the "Housing of the Working Classes Act, 1890," and they accordingly prepared the following scheme, which gives the history of the proceedings relating to the area, and the proposed method of reconstructing it. Scheme. The Housing of the Working Classes Act, 1890. " Scheme under Part II. of the above Act, for the improvement of an Unhealthy Area in East Eoacl, Nile Street, Custance Street, Moneyer Street, Plumber's Place, Provost Street, Ebenezer Street, Moira Place and Britannia Street (hereinafter called ' the said area') in the Parish of St. Leonard, Shoreditcli, in the County of London." PRELIMINARY. " Whereas on the 26th of April, 1890, au official representation under the Artizans and Labourers' Dwelliugs Improvement Acts, 1875 & 1879, was made to the London County Council by Henry Gawen Sutton, M.D., the Medical Officer of Health for the said Parish in relation to the houses comprised in the said area ; And whereas the London County Council resolved that (inter alia) the said area was not of general importance to the Metropolis, and should be dealt with under the Artizans and Labourers' Dwelling Acts, 1868-1882 ; And whereas upon such resolution being submitted by the London County Council to Her Majesty's Secretary of State for the Home Department, the Secretary of State, pursuant to Section 5 of the Housing of the Working Classes Act, 1885, appointed an arbitrator, who held a local inquiry, and made a report to the effect that the case was of general importance to the County of London ; And whereas such report having been made and applied under the provisions of the Housing of the Working Classes Act, 1890, Section 73, (1) the Secretary of State decided that the said area should be dealt with under Part II. of the Housing of the Working Classes Act, 1890, and that the London County Council ought to contribute one-half of the expense of dealing with the same ; And whereas on the 17th day of February, 1891, the Vestry of the said Parish as the Local Authority, passed a resolution in reference to the said area to the effect of 44 Section 39, Sub-section 1 (b) of the Housing of the Working Classes Act, 189C, and thereby directed a scheme to be prepared for the improvement of the said area ; Now, therefore, we the Vestry of the Parish of St. Leonard, Shoreditch, in furtherance of such resolution and by virtue of the powers conferred upon us by the Housing of the Working Classes Act, 1890, do make this scheme for the improvement of the said area. DESCRIPTION OF AREA. 1. The lands and houses comprised in the said area are delineated by the colour red in the plan hereto annexed, and the houses are specified in the Schedule hereunder written. ACQUISITION OF LANDS. 2. It is intended by the petition of the Vestry to the Local Government Board for an Order sanctioning this Scheme, to ask that such Order do incorporate the provisions of the Lands Clauses Acts, so that the said area, or any part thereof, may be taken compulsorily if it cannot be purchased by agreement. REMOVAL OF EXISTING BUILDINGS. 3. So soon as the Vestry shall have purchased the said area by agreement, or taken it compulsorily, the materials of the buildings thereon shall be sold and removed therefrom. DEALING WITH THE VACANT AREA. 4. It is proposed to close Moira Place and so much of Custance Street and Moneyer Street, as are in the area, and discontinue their use as public streets or ways. The vacant area shall with all convenient speed as to so much thereof as lies between Nile Street and the red line drawn parallel therewith, and so much thereof as is included between the red lines drawn on the said plan, between East Road and Britannia Street, be laid out and dedicated as and for public streets, and as to the remainder (including the sites of Custance Street, Moneyer Street and Moira Place within the said area) either as a whole or in sections be sold in fee simple, or let on building lease for 99 years, upon such terms and conditions (subject to clause 5 of this scheme) as the Vestry shall approve, or be applied to such other purpose.; as the confirming authority may allow. Any sale or letting may be preceded by an agreement providing that the erection of houses according to Clause 5 of this scheme by the purchaser or lessee, shall be a condition precedent to such sale or letting. ERECTION OF HOUSES FOR THE WORKING CLASSES. 5. In the conveyances, building agreements, or leases of some part or parts of the said area, the Vestry shall provide for the erection or completion by the purchaser or lessee within a reasonable and stated time, of dwelling-houses suitable for the 45 working classes, and capable of accommodating 250 persons at tlie least. The plans of such dwelling houses shall be previously approved by the Vestry, and the dwelling houses shall be provided with water-closets, sinks, with water supply, dust shoots, and other proper sanitary requirements according to the number and size of the tenements in such dwelling-houses. EXPENSES OF SCHEME. 6. The Vestry propose to borrow the money necessary to meet the expenses of dealing with the scheme on such terms as the authorities whose consent is necessary thereto, may allow, and it is proposed to repay the ultimate net cost of the scheme to the Vestry by instalments extending over a period of 60 years, or such other period as may be allowed. So much of the expenses as are to be contributed by the London County Council are proposed to be borrowed by the Vestry in the first instance and repaid as and when the money is received from the London County Council. "SHORT TITLE." 7. This scheme may be cited for all purposes as "The Moira Place and Plumbers Place Scheme," Shoreditcli. THE SCHEDULE ABOVE REFERRED TO. Nos. 75, 77, 79, 81, 83, 85, 87, 89, 91 & 93, East Road 62, 64, 66, 68, 70, 72, 74, 76, 78, 80, 82, 84 & 86, Nile Street 1, 3, 5, 7, 9, 10, 11, 13, 15, 17, 19, 21, 2a, 2b, 2, 4, 6 & 8, Custance Street 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16 & 17, Moneyer Street 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6 & 7, Plumbers' Place 38, 40, 42, 44, 46, 48, 50, 54, 56, 58, 60, 62, 64, 66 & 68, Provost Street (East side), and Nos. 11, 13, 15, 17, 19, 21, 23, 25, 27, 29, 31, 33 & 35, Provost Street (West side) Nos. 6, 7, 8, 9 & 10, Ebenezer Street The Sites of Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20 and 21, Moira Place, the buildings on which are now demolished. Nos 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14 & 15, Britannia Street (East side) The Vestry approved this scheme, and submitted it to the London County Council for their approval. Although under the Act the consent of the Council is not required to the execution of schemes undertaken by Vestries, yet as the Council could object to the scheme on the holding of the public enquiry by the Local Government Board, it was considered advisable to have the Council's anction at the outset. The Council's Housing Committee endeavoured to reduce the area of the improvement and the cost of it by omitting the properties in Nile Street and Provost Street, but the Vestry's Committee felt this would spoil the improvement and deprive them of a valuable recoupment, and in view of the Home 46 Secretary's Order and the wretched state of the property in those streets, they declined to adopt this suggestion. The Council on further consideration agreed to support the Yestrv's scheme with some additional provisions as to re-housiug the persons displaced; and the necessary steps for proceeding to execute the scheme are now in progress. The views of the Vestry were strongly supported before the Council by their representative Mr. Nathan Moss. The Vestry adopted a scheme for raising the sum of £40,000 for the above improvement by the issue of Debenture Bonds under the Local Loans Act, 1875, but this scheme has not advanced far enough to be dealt with in this Report. OVERSEERS' BUSINESS. (a) DISORDERLY HOUSES. On behalf of the Overseers of the Poor I have conducted three prosecutions during the year against the managers of disorderly houses, in each of which a conviction was obtained, and fines to the amount of £20 inflicted. The following are particulars of the cases:— Defendant's Name. Premises. Fine. Date. Emma Mitchell 39, Clifton Street £5 or 1 month's imprisonment. 14th March, 1891 Mary Smith 11, Bridport Place £5 or 1 month's imprisonment. 10th Sept., 1891 Jessie Johnson 25, Clifton Street £10 or 1 month's imprisonment. 7th Dec., 1891 In Mitchell's case the two rewards of £10 each, under 25 Geo. II. c. 36, were claimed by the National Vigilance Society on behalf of the two informants. I pointed out that as the prosecution had been carried out by the Overseers and not by the constable on whom the preliminary notice was also served, the reward had not strictly become payable, as the exact conditions laid down in the statute had not been complied with. The fact that the overseers of other parishes had paid the reward under similar circumstances was urged by the Society in pressing their case, but after some negotiation it was agreed that the claim should be withdrawn on payment of the expenses of the Society in connection with some witnesses in the case. In Smith's case there were two children living in the house, and application was made to the magistrate to take them out of the custody of the defendant. Upon the aunt of the children coming forward and promising to take care of them, the magistrate allowed her to have the custody of them. Complaints were received and observation was kept on 2, Lewington Buildings, 7, Brunswick Place, 2, Hilcott Street, and 19, Hertford Road. The result only justified the issue of a warrant in one case (19, Hertford Road), but the defendant moved away before it could be executed. In the other cases, notices cautioning the occupiers were served, as there was not sufficient evidence to 47 warrant a prosecution, and the nuisance occasioned by the houses has not been further complained of. (b) REGISTRATION OF ELECTORS. The preparation of the lists of voters was carried out by the Overseers in the usual way at an expense of £461 18s. 8d., and the Revising Barrister expressed his satisfaction at the care shown in the correct preparation of the various lists. On the question of the Registration expenses coming up, it appeared that part of them were chargeable under the Registration Acts on the County Council, and on the 2nd November, 1891, I made application to the London County Council for the repayment of one-half of the Returning officer's expenses, and of those of the Overseers since the passing of the County Electors Act, 1888, with which is incorporated the provisions of the Municipal Registration Act, 1878, requiring such proportion of these expenses to be paid out of the General County Account. This claim was allowed, and the sum of £1,047 8s. 8d., in respect of three years' arrears, has been received and paid into the Vestry's account in respect thereof. (e) POLL AS TO ADOPTION OF PUBLIC LIBRARIES ACTS. On the 7th day of March, 1891, the Overseers of this parish were served with a requisition signed by nineteen ratepayers, requiring them to take a poll of the parish, to ascertain the opinion of the ratepayers as to whether the Public Libraries Acts should be adopted in this parish, and that the rate should be fd. in the £. The Vestry resolved that the work of taking a poll of the parish for this purpose should be carried out by the Overseers, who appointed Mr. Martindill Returning officer, and the Vestry Clerk was instructed to make the necessary arrangements for carrying out the poll. Voting papers were issued to all persons on the Register of County Electors on the 23rd March, 1891, and were collected on the 26th March, and after due scrutiny the presiding officer declared the result of the poll to be as follows : — Question I. As to the adoption of the Acts is answered in the affirmative. Number of voters voting "Yes" 3,154 Number of voters voting "No" 2,076 Majority for 1,078 Question II. As to the limitation of rate to fd. in the £ is answered in the affirmative. Number of voters voting "Yes" 3,019 Number of voters voting "No" 1,705 Majority for 1,314 48 The total cost of taking the poll was £103 6s. 0d. The Public Libraries (England) Acts, 1855 to 1890, having been thus adopted by the ratepayers, the Vestry proceeded to appoint Commissioners for carrying the Acts into execution, and after 28 nominations had been received, a ballot was taken on the 14th April, 1891, when the following nine members of the Vestry were duly appointed the first Commissioners for Public Libraries and Museums for the parish of St. Leonard, Shoreditch. Messrs. Martindill, Wenborn, Moffat, Hurlin, Cox, Barralet, J. Donovan, Fordham and Molloy. The first annual report, with an Abstract of the Commissioners' accounts, will be found at the end of this volume. SCHOOL BOARD FOR LONDON ELECTION, 1891. The triennial election for members of the London School Board was held on the 26th November, 1891, and the Vestry voted the sum of £23 Is. 4d. to enable a special revision of the Rate books to be made, and to obtain the necessary returns from owners of property, the rates of which are compounded for. A return of the members elected will be found at the end of this report. LONDON COUNTY COUNCIL ELECTION, 1892. The triennial election for members of the London County Council, which should in the ordinary course have been held in November, postponed by statute to the 5th March, 1892. A return of the members elected will be found at the end of this report. OPEN SPACES. (a) GOLDSMITH SQUARE. In connection with the Boundary Street, Bethnal Green, Improvement scheme, 1890, prepared by the London County Council under Part I. of the Housing of the Working Classes Act, 1890, it was proposed by the Council to rehouse 500 persons of the working classes displaced by the execution of the scheme, upon the site of Goldsmith Square, off Goldsmith Row, in this parish. At a public inquiry held on the 3rd day of March, 1891, I attended and opposed this part of the scheme on behalf of the Vestry, and pointed out that the square was formerly occupied by twenty-four houses used by artizans, which had been closed eighteen months previously by the owner in pursuance of notice under the Nuisances Removal Acts, that these houses only contained 150 persons, and that to place 500 persons on this site which only contained 3,677 square yards, would be creating] the very evil of overcrowding which the Bethnal Green scheme was intended to obviate. 49 I also urged that it was specially important in this parish to provide against the further influx of a population of the worst class, because this district is the most densely populated one in London, and contains 27 more persons to the acre than Bethnal Green. On the 7th of April, 1891, the Vestry passed the following resolution:— "That in the opinion of this Vestry, Goldsmith Square ought to be preserved as an open space, and that it be an instruction to the Housing of the Working Classes Committee to open such negotiations with the County Council and Mr. Scott for such purpose as they may think desirable." The Vestry's Housing of the Working Classes Committee sent a deputation to the London County Council's Housing Committee, and they represented that the persons displaced from the Bethnal Green area should be rehoused in that parish, and not drafted into this parish as proposed, for although Shoreditch contains the large population of nearly 130,000 inhabitants, there were no recreation grounds except churchyards. They also pointed out that the Council could use for the purpose of housing 500 persons, an area in Bethnal Green adjoining Goldsmith Square, containing 3,101 square yards, at a cost of little, if any, more than that arranged for Goldsmith Square, and as that property was very small cottage property in a bad condition, the County Council would thus carry out the spirit of the Housing of the Working Classes Act, 1890, which by section 2, subsection 1, requires— " That the dwellings to accommodate the persons displaced shall be situate within the limits of the same area, or in the vicinity thereof" and although a small part of this parish was comprised in the original area, all the persons displaced therefrom could be accommodated in that area itself. The deputation also pointed out that the crowding of 500 persons on Goldsmith Square would be most dangerous and injurious to the public health of this district, as in the first place it would cause overcrowding, secondly, the class proposed to be thus accommodated being admittedly ol the worst kind and of filthy habits, would be the cause of the proposed dwellings (however sanitary thev might in the first place be) becoming insanitary in a very short space of time, and thus the scheme would become a menace to the public health of this parish, and thirdly, such persons would also become a burden on the poor rate of Shoreditch, and altogether would be a general nuisance to the neighbourhood. The Council's Housing Committee declined, however, to give up the square as it was considered necessary for rehousing purposes. The Vestry's deputation as a last resource then waited upon the Council's Public Parks and Open Spaces Committee, and after a good deal of negotiation, 50 in which the Shoreditch representatives on the Council lent valuable assistance^ this Committee, in view of the offer of the Vestry to contribute £2,000 towards the purchase-money, recommended the ouncil to devote about two-thirds of the area of the square for use as a recreation ground. The Council agreed to this course, and a conveyance to the Council was executed by the owner under the Open Spaces Act, of so much of the square as was agreed to be used as a recreation ground, and the Vestry borrowed from the Council the sum of £2,000, which was paid to the owner as the Vestry's contribution towards the purchase-money. Mr. Arthur Scott, of Rotherfield Park, Acton, the owner of the square, was also approached by the deputation, and he very generously promised to contribute £300 towards the acquisition and laying out of the square as an open space. The Metropolitan Public Gardens Association, whose chairman, the Earl of Meath, lent the Vestry's case valuable assistance before the Council, have also generously contributed £50 towards the cost of laying out the square, and the London County Council have agreed to contribute £150 for the same purpose. Arrangements have been made with the Metropolitan Public Gardens Association for carrying out the work, and in the course of a few months the first open space in Shoreditch (apart from burial grounds) will have been completed and dedicated to the use of the public for ever. (b) OLD BURIAL GROUND, HACKNEY ROAD. On the 7tli day of July, 1891, the Vestry resolved to refer to the Burial Board the question of opening to the public the Old Burial Ground in Hackney Road, which had long been disused for burial purposes The Burial Board accordingly appointed a caretaker (Henry Hyatt) to look after the ground, and on the 14th July, 1891, threw the place open to the public. Such a large number of children took advantage of the admirable playground afforded, that the grass on the central portion soon became worn away, and sinkages in the ground caused water to collect in certain places in wet weather, to the discomfort of the public. The Metropolitan Public Gardens Association very generously offered to lay out the ground in a better manner, at an expense of £160, if the Vestry and Burial Board would undertake to maintain it under the " Open Spaces Acts " as a recreation ground for ever. This undertaking was readily given, and the Association proceeded to gravel the central part of the ground, after the same had been carefully levelled and drained. A few more trees were planted, and a number of plants for the flower beds, and garden seats provided. The Burial Board erected some strong wire fencing to keep the children from damaging the shrubs and flowers, and did other necessary repairs, at a cost of £20 14s. 4d. The result was so satisfactory that the Association arranged to have a formal opening of the ground, and on the 28th June, 1892 Lady Vincent, accompanied by Sir William Vincent, Vice-Chairman of the Association, declared the ground open to the public. 51 (c) THE CHURCHYARDS OF ST. JOHN'S, HOXTON, AND ST. MARY'S, HAGGERSTON. The Burial Board in the early part of the year considered the system of making a yearly grant of £25 to the Vicars for maintaining these churchyards as public gardens au unsatisfactory one, and resolved to appoint caretakers and gardeners themselves, and to provide such plants, shrubs, and materials as might be required. Advertisements were accordingly issued for gardeners, and George Cowley was appointed gardener aud caretaker for St. John's, Hoxton, at £1 per week; and John McCulloch was appointed gardener and caretaker for St. Mary's, Haggerston, at £1 per week. The wages of these men are paid out of the funds of the Burial Board, and any plants, flowers and materials required to keep up the gardens, are also provided out of the same fund, as has been done in the case of St. Leonard, Shoreditch. Details of the expenditure on each churchyard will be found in the Abstract of Accounts. (d) CHURCHYARD OF ST. LEONARD, SHOREDITCH. The Metropolitan Public Gardens Association have kindly provided a number of seats for this churchyard, which were much required, and they have also planted several creepers and plants, and thus brightened up the ground considerably. It was found necessary, owing to the number of children who resorted go this ground, and the difficulty of keeping them from damaging the grass and flowers, to portion off a part of the ground specially for their use, and by this means the rest of the ground can be kept for adults in a much more satisfactory way than heretofore. (e) HOXTON SQUARE. A strong effort was made by the Vestry to get this very desirable open square thrown open to the public as a recreation ground. The old Act of Geo. II, under which the square was originally enclosed,, recited that its enclosure was effected "for the public convenience," and the public right of access which formerly existed was never expressly taken away by the Enclosure Act. As the occupation of the surroundinghouses has no;v almost entirely changed from residential to business purposes, the square is not used by the bulk of the occupiers of houses in the square, very few of whom now reside there, and the want of an open space in this locality is so much felt, that the Vestry have for some time been endeavouring to persuade the Trustees and Owners of the square to transfer the square to them on equitable terms, for the purpose of a public recreation ground. With this end in view the Parliamentary and Improvement Committee approached the Trustees, but met with a strong opposition from a few owners who still resided in the square. On the llth April, 1891, the occupiers of the square presented a petition to the Vestry praying for the roadway surrounding the square, which is in a very bad condition, to be re-paved. The Vestry referred this petition to the Parliamentary Committee, who considered the question, and came to the conclusion that this roadway had never been taken over by the Vestry, and so was not repairable by the inhabitants at large, and that the owners of the adjoining property were liable to repair it. The owners urged that some temporary repairs of the road had been executed in the past by the Vestry, and that the footway had been paved and kept in order by the Vestry. With e 52 a view to the settlement of both questions, the Parliamentary Committee appointed a Deputation to wait on the Trustees and offer to recommend the Vestry to pave the roadway in consideration of Hoxton Square being conveyed to the Vestry for a public recreation ground, and as a further inducement the Committee offered to recommend the payment of £200 compensation money, and to provide a proper gardener for the square, and agree to certain regulations to prevent the use of the square beiug a nuisance to the occupiers of adjoining property. Under this arrangement the occupiers would have been relieved of the rate now levied on them for maintaining the square, and the Metropolitan Gardens Association had promised to lay out about £200 on the square. The Trustees took a poll of the inhabitants, who were with very few exceptions in favour of handing over the square to the Vestry, but on the question being finally considered by the Trustees, a Motion to accept the Vestry's proposals was unfortunately lost by the casting vote of the chairman. There is reason to hope, however, that an opportunity will soon be afforded for getting the question reconsidered. EAST LONDON WATERWORKS COMPANY. FAILURE OF SUPPLY. In April, 1891, the Vestry submitted a memorial to the London County Council, praying them to take proceedings for penalties against the East London Waterworxs Company, under the Metropolis Water Act, 1871, for the alleged failure by that Company to keep up the constant supply system in respect of 560 premises in the parish. This was alleged to be injurious to health, a great inconvenience to the inhabitants, and dangerous in case of fire. The Company's excuse of the supply being cut off through the severe frost was found to be insufficient, as the failure had existed for over two months after the frost had broken up, and the supply of whole streets was cut off where only the pipes of a few premises were defective. Some legal difficulties were raised by the Council, and such a long time elapsed before Counsel's opinion could be taken by them that the supply was restored in the meantime, and the Council thought it sufficient to warn the Company, as had been done under similar circumstances by the Metropolitan Board of Works in the year 1877. The Vestry expressed dissatisfaction at this conclusion, as they contended that nothing but the infliction of a penalty would have the effect of remedying the recurrence of such failures of supply. ADULTERATION OF FOOD. 22 prosecutions have been conducted on behalf of the Vestry out of 95 samples procured for the adulteration of food during the year, and, on conviction, fines have been inflicted, amounting in total to £77. 53 RAILWAY AND TRAMWAY BILLS IN PARLIAMENT. (a). GREAT NORTHERN AND CITY RAILWAY BILL. On the 2nd November, 1891, notices, plans and books of reference were deposited at my office, in connection with a Bill promoted in Parliament by the Great Northern and City Railway, for powers to construct an Underground Elcctric Railway, between the City, near Cripplegate, and Finsbury Park, which it was proposed should pass through this Parish under the City Road, East Road and New North Road. Negotiations for clauses protecting the interests of the Yestry were opened with the Parliamentary Solicitors and Agents for the Bill, but it was found necessary to lodge a lengthy petition to be heard by Counsel for the purpose of obtaining the desired clauses, and compensation for wayleave under the public highways, and the questions raised were so important that Messrs. Sharpe, Parker & Co., were instructed to act as the Vestry's Parliamentary Agents. It was referred by Parliament to a Joint Committee of both Houses of Parliament to consider the conditions under which this and several other proposed Electric Railways should be allowed to be constructed, and this Committee, after hearing evidence, decided that such railways ought to be allowed to pass under public highways free, without paying compensation or wayleave to the local authorities, in consideration of special facilities being provided by them for the conveyance of the working classes. After further negotiations with the Company's Agents, when the Bill came before a Committee of the Commons, the following clauses were agreed to be inserted by the Company in their Bill :— 1. A clause compelling the Company to repair and make good all damage done to any road used by tliem under a penalty of £5 per day. This clause is intended to meet surface damage caused by the carting away of excavations, as there is already a clause in the Bill providing that the surface of roads should not be broken up by the Company. 2. A clause that the Company should not take more than 10 houses occupied by the labouring classes and consequently all regulations for re-housing persons displaced are unnecessary and have been struck out of the bill. 3. Certain alterations to clause 48 of the Bill, which provides for the protection of the Vestry's sewers, making the Company responsible for re-constructing sewers and paying the Vestry's cost for superintending the execution of the works, and other expenses incurred by the Vestry. 4. A clause prohibiting placards and advertisements in view of any public street. 5. A clause making the Company liable to pay all deficiencies of rates in respect of property taken by them. 6. The provision of a Station at the junction of Old Street and City Road. El 54 These clauses having been duly inserted, I stated in my evidence before the Committee, that the proposed railway was approved of by the Vestry, as it promised to afford special facilities and cheap fares for working class traffic to and from the suburbs, and it would also constitute a valuable rateable property without the demolition of house property. The Bill was passed by both Houses of Parliament, and the Act received the Royal Assent, July, 1892. (b). CITY AND SOUTH LONDON RAILWAY BILL. (c). LONDON TOTTENHAM AND EPPING FOREST RAILWAY BILL. These Bills were also promoted in Parliament in the session of 1892, and a petition for clauses was prepared by me in the case of the City and South London Railway Bill, which proposed the construction of an underground electric railway, passing through a small portion of the Parish under City Road. The Bill, however, was not considered by the Committee of the House of Commons and was postponed to next session. Tne London Tottenham and Epping Forest Railway Bill was withdrawn at an early stage. (d). THE NORTH METROPOLITAN TRAMWAYS BILL. This Bill was promoted in Parliament in the Session of 1892, and negotiations were entered into with the Company's Solicitors and Agents for the purpose of obtaining the insertion of protective clauses. It was proposed to lay a new tramway in the Bethnal Green Road and to make a junction between the lines in Commercial Street and Shoreditch High Street, which involved the removal of the urinal. The Vestry resolved to withhold their consent to the Bill unless the following conditions were complied with: — 1. An underground urinal to be substituted for the present one, or a sum of £750 to be contributed by the Company towards its cost. 2. All paving work necessitated by the scheme to be paid for by the Company at 12s. a yard. 3. All refuges and lamp posts displaced, to be re-placed to satisfaction of Vestry Surveyor. The London County Council declined to give their consent to the Bill unless the hours of the tramway employees were limited to 10 per day, but the Company decided not to proceed further with their Bill under such conditions, so that it was withdrawn. (e). REGENT'S CANAL RAILWAY ACT. This Act has been abandoned as to a part of the proposed Railway not situate in this Parish, and an extension of time for constructing the Railway in this Parish has been obtained from Parliament. I have the honour to be, Gentlemen, Your most obedient servant, H. MANSFIELD ROBINSON Shoreditch Town Hall, Vestry Clerk. Old Street, E.C., August, 1892. REPORT of ASSESSMENT COMMITTEE. 57 The Parish of Saint Leonard, Shoreditch. IN THE COUNTY OF LONDON. REPORT OF ASSESSMENT COMMITTEE. Gentleman, I have to report that this Committee, which consists of twelve members, was appointed on the 28th April, 1891, and that I was appointed Clerk thereto, at a salary of £50 per annum. The Committee held during the year thirty-eight meetings, and four provisional lists and a supplemental list were made. In seventeen cases the Surveyor of Taxes inserted in duplicate valuation lists, amounts which differed from the amounts inserted by the Valuation Committee, but the whole of the cases were satisfactorily dealt with by the Committee. The number of appeals heard by the Committee was 885, of which 775 were allowed, and 110 dismissed. There were no appeals to special sessions against the Committee's decision, and one by the London County Council, to quarter sessions, against the totals of the supplemental list, was compromised on terms approved by the Court. The total gross and rateable values for the purposes of Poor Rates, on the 25th March, 1892, amounted to £833,118 gross, and £682,476 rateable, and after deducting the amount to be carried to the City of London in respect to General Sewers and Consolidated Rates, it left for the purposes of General Sewers and Consolidated Rates on the date named, a gross of £825,206, and a rateable of £676,038. The following statements will show the total gross and rateable assessments effected by the Supplemental Valuation List, 1891:— 58 VALUATION (METROPOLIS) ACT, 18G9. Return showing alterations effected in the total Gr»ss and Rateable Value of the Parish during year ended 5th April, 1892. Particulars. Value as finally determined by Assessment Committee. Gross. Rateable. £ £ Valuation (6th April, 1891) upon which the County and Police Rates were levied 882,440 682,328 Deduct— Decreased Valuation effected by Supplemental Valuation List, 1891, as finally depobited 702 1,007 Add— Increased Valuation under Order of Court of Quarter Sessions, on appeal against totals of the above-mentioned Supplenlental List by the London County Council 831,738 1,380 681,321 1,155 Total Valuation (6th April, 1892) upon which the County and Police Rates are levied 833,118 682,476 Total Valuation (6th April, 1892) upon which the Rates for School Board and Local purposes are levied £825,206 £676,038 THE GAS LIGHT AND COKE COMPANY versus SHOREDITCH ASSESSMENT COMMITTEE and 127 other Parishes. This very important appeal against the Quinquennial Valuation List of 1890, which occupied twenty-two days in being heard at the County of London Quarter Sessions, has now been finally settled, except that the costs have not yet been taxed. Messrs. Mills, Lookyer & Mills acted as Solicitors for the Committee, and Mr. John Montefiore as Junior Counsel, whilst the services of the Solicitor-General, Sir Edward Clarke, Q.C., M.P., as leading Counsel, were shared by the Committee with four other Parishes. The Gas Light and Coke Company appealed against the Assessment of their Mains in the Parish, and not against that of their Works, which are separately assessed and which now appear to have been considerably undervalued, but under the Valuation (Metropolis) Act they must remain at the Valuation of 1890 until the Quinquennial Valuation 1895. 59 The following figures will show the result of the Company's Appeal as to their M ains:— PARTICULARS. Value. Gross. Rateable. For the past ten years the Valuation Liat for the Company's mains was agreed by both parties at £ 18,649 £ 15,541 The Assessment Committee proposed to retain the same figures in the present list, but the Company by their Valuer attended the Committee and contended that they should only pay on 6,108 5,090 The Committee could not accept that large reduction, and the Company thereupon appealed, and stated in their case that the figures should be those contended for by them before the Committee The Company afterwards delivered an amended case, further reducing the figures to 4,744 4,107 They also stated that the Rateable Value of the whole of the directly productive mains was £113,667. The Court held that the Rateable Value of the whole of the productive mains, plus proportion of rates was £463,205, which being worked out by the valuers brought the figures in respect of this Parish to ... 12,518 Which is a reduction on the old Assessment of ... 3,023 It is a rule that where an Appellant gets a material reduction from the Valuation List the costs are paid by the Respondents, and in this case the Court directed this Parish with certain other Parishes, to pay the Appellants such a proportion of their general costs as may be determined to be properly chargeable to this Parish, but Messrs. Mills, Lockyer & Mills point out that the Parish has benefitted by the appeal to the extent of increasing the rateable value of the Mains by £8,411, that being the difference between the figures as found by the Court, and the figures demanded by the Appellants in their amended case. On the first day of the Appeal, the Coupany obtainad leave to abandon the figures for the year 1889 on which they had founded their case, and substitute as the basis of their Apeal the figures of 1890, which had only been ascertained since F 60 the Appeal was commenced and which were more favourable to the Company, but the Court in allowing this ordered them to pay the costs of this Parish of the first case and the first day's hearing. and this will be a slight set off against the heavy costs of the rest of the case, which will be paid by the Parish. The costs of the shouthand writer's notes, which are heavy, will be equally divided between the Appellants and all the Respondents, and the half falling on the latter will be apportioned according to the relative Rateable values of the respective parishes. Since the hearing of the case the Company have increassd their price of gas by fourpence per 1000 cubic feet, and the consequence of this is that the Assessments arrived at by the Court are proportionately inadequate. The question now arises whether the Company should not be included in a supplemental list for the increased value of their property consequent on the increased price of gas. The Company have secured substantial advantages by this Appeal, as in the case of several parishes where the working out of the figures of the Judgment of the Court proved that they were underassessed, the Court has been unable to increase their assessments, and of course where the Judgment of the Court shewed they were overassessed they have got the benefit of the reductions. The fact, however, that the figures for this Parish finally settled by the Court are much nearer the figures of the Committee's Valuation than those demanded by the Company, fully justifies the action of the Committee in contesting the matter. I am, Gentlemen, Your obedient Servant, H. MANSFIELD ROBINSON, Clerk to the Assessment Committee. Shorkditch Town Hall, Old Street E.G., August, 1892, Abstract of the Accounts OF THE VESTRY OF THE PARISH OF SAINT LEONARD, SHOREDITCH, IN THE COUNTY OF LONDON, From 25th March, 1891, to 25th March, 1892. WILLIAM GEORGE SMITH, Esq., Treasurer to Vestry, London and Midland Bank, Limited, (Shoreditch Branch). J. ROBERT ANNING, Esq., Treasurer to Burial Board, London and County Banking Co., Limited, (Shoreditch Branch1, ERNST A. R. ADAMS, Accountant. Parish for the Vestry of the Parish of St. Leonard, Shoreditch. by A. T. ROBERTS, SON & CO., 5, HACKNEY ROAD, LONDON, N.E. POOR RATE ACCOUNT. OVERSEERS EXPENSES. DISTRICT AUDITOR'S CERTIFICATE. 64 64 The Accounts of the Vestry of the Parish of Saint Leonard, Shoreditch, in the County of London, acting as the Overseers of the said Parish. POOR RATE ACCOUNT, for the Half-Year ended Michaelmas, 1891. To RECEIPTS— £ s. d. By PAYMENTS— £ s. d. In hands of Treasurer, 25th March, 1891 3,754 10 1 Shoreditch Board of Guardians— Order for Contributions, ilated 3rd Sept., 1890 Balance 8,000 0 0 From the Poor Rate 49,563 4 11 Do. dated 4th March, 1891 On account 32,200 0 0 H. M. Treasury—Grant in aid of Poor Rate 9 0 0 40,200 0 0 Metropolitan Police Rate— Provident Clerks' and General Guarantee Association, Limited—Proportion of Guarantee Bond £500, re defalcation of John Jones 303 12 0 Warrant, dated lnt, July, 1891 7,107 11 8 49,875 16 11 Burial Board— Expenses under "The Burial Act, 1852" 125 0 0 †Expenses of Poll proceedings under Public Libraries (England) Acts, 1855 to 1889 Balance 3 6 0 Commissioners for Public Libraries and Museums, &c.— 533 0 0 Election of Vestrymen, under 18 & 19 Vic., cap. 120, sec. 24 111 7 2 Parliamentary and County Council Elections— Parliamentary and County Council Elections— Sale of Registers 2 12 6 † Expenses of preparing Register of Parliamentary and County Council Voters, Borough of Shoreditch On account 50 0 0 Rate for town Hall 98 19 2 Other Receipts— Other Charges— Stamp Duty refund ex Commissioners of Inland Revenue 0 8 0 Poundage 258 8 10 Salaries of Collectors 233 17 6 49,878 17 5 Receipt Stamps 10 14 8 Stamp Duty on Cheques 0 8 4 503 9 4 48,732 13 4 Cash Balance, 29th September, 1891:- 1 hereby certify that this Balance Sheet is correct. This 4th day of December, 1891. T. BARCLAY COCKERTON, In hands of Treasurer 4,900 14 2 thomas martindill Chukchwakdens. alfred molloy j. j. freeman ovebseers of the irOOR. thos. kavey District Auditor of The Metropolitan Audit District, which comprises the above Parish. £53,633 7 6 †Expenditure incurred by the Elected Overseers. £53,633 7 6 65 65 The Accounts of the Vestry oj the Parish of Saint Leonard, Shoreditch, the County of London, acting as the Overseers of the said Parish. POOR RATE ACCOUNTS, for the Half-Year ended Lady-Day, 1892. To RECEIPTS— £ s. d. By PAYMENTS— £ s. d. In hands of Treasurer, 29th September, 1891 4,900 14 2 Shoreditch Board of Guardians— Order for Contributions, dated 4th March, 1891 Balance 10,200 0 0 Do. dated 3rd Sept.,1891 On account 24,500 0 0 From the Poor Rate 44,588 1 6 34,700 0 0 H. M. Treasury—Grant in aid of Poor Rate 9 10 0 Metropoltan Police Rate:- 44,542 11 6 Warrant, dated 1st January, 1892 7,107 11 8 Burial Board— Expenses under "The Burial Act, 1852" 175 0 0 Commissioners for Public Libraries and Museums, &c.— Precept, dated 15th January, 1892 490 0 0 Parliamentary and County Council Elections:- Parliamentary and County Council Elections— Sale of Registers 4 10 0 †Expenses of preparing Register of Parliamentary and County Council Voters, Borough of Shoreditch (balance) 411 18 8 Hire of Voting Compartments 18 0 0 Use of Ballot Boxes 2 0 0 † Do. Parliamentary Register, Tottenham Division, County of Middlesex 10 17 6 Do. Stamping Instruments 8 17 0 28 7 0 Returning Officer's Chatges under Registration of Electors' Act, 1843, and County Electors Act, 1888 73 10 3 One half of net expenses incurred under Registration Acts, for years 1889—1891 ex London County Council, out of General County Account, as under:— Printing and other Disbursements 228 18 0 302 8 3 Overseers of the Poor 654 0 3½ Deduct—One halt payable by London County Council 151 4 2 Returning Officer 398 8 4½ 1,047 8 8 151 4 1 1,075 15 8 574 0 3 Sale of Jury List 0 1 0 †Preparing Jury List, Tower Division, County of London 32 5 0 45,618 8 2 Other Charges— Poundage 265 12 10 Salaries of Collectors 230 0 0 Receipt Stamps 19 9 7 Suppression of Disorderly Houses, per 48 & 49 Vict., cap. 69 6 11 6 521 13 11 43,600 10 10 Cash Balance, 25th March, 1892:— In hands of Treasurer 6,918 11 6 I hereby certify that this Balance Sheet is correct. This 4th day of June, 1892. T BARCLAY COCKERTON THOMAS MATINDILL ALFRED MOLLOY Churchwardens. THOS. B. KENDELL GEO. SANDERS Overseers of the Poor. District Auditor of The Metropolitan Audit District, which comprises the above Parish. £50,519 2 4 †Expenditure incurred by the Elected Overseers. £50,519 2 4 POOR RATE ACCOUNT. 67 67 POOR RATE ACCOUNTS, From 25th March, 1891, to 25th March, 1892. To RECEIPTS- £ s. d. £ s. d. POOR RATE. By PAYMENTS- Arrears of Rate, quarter ended Lady-Day, 1891 154 18 8½ contributions to shoreditch board of guardians. †Rates made and allowed, from Lady-Day, 1891, to Lady-Day, 1892 (see below) 103,497 3 6 Order for Contributions, dated 3rd September, 1890, to cover expenditure to 25th March, 1891 Balance 8,000 0 0 Do. do. dated 4th March, 1891, to cover expenditure to 29th September, 1891 42,400 0 0 Add—Excess Assessments, &c. 44 15 1½ Do. do. dated 3rd September, 1891, to cover expenditure to 25th March, 1892 On account 24,500 0 0 Government property 18 5 0 63 0 1½ 103,560 3 7½ 74,900 0 0 103,715 2 4 metropolitan police rate. Less—Allowance to Owners of 25 per cent 3,937 8 4 Warrant, dated 1st July, 1891 7,107 11 8 Do. do. 1st January, 1892 7,107 11 8 99,777 14 0 14,215 3 4 Deduct—Excused at Rate Sessions 90 0 11½ expenses of burial board of st. leonard, shoreditch. Irrecoverable. &c 4,223 11 1 4,313 12 0½ Certificate, dated 18th March, 1891 (fo. 73) 50 0 0 £95,464 1 11½ Do. 24th July, 1891 (fo. 73) 75 0 0 Do. 12th October, 1891 (fo. 73) 75 0 0 Do. 28th January, 1892 (fo. 73) 100 0 0 Quarter ended Made by Vestry. Allowed by Police Magistrate. Rateable Value. Rate in the £ Amount. 300 0 0 public libraries acts. £ £ s. d. Expenses of Poll proceedings under Public Libraries (England) Acts, 1855 to 1889, held 26th March, 1891— Midsummer, 1891 31st Mar., 1891 10th April, 189 1 678,805 9d. 25,457 8 9 Michaelmas, 1891 30th June, 1891 7th July, 1891 681,692 10d. 28,403 16 8 Christmas, 1891 6th Oct., 1891 9th Oct., 1891 682,444 8d. 22,748 2 8 Clerks and extra assistance 46 13 9 Lady-Day, 1892 29th Dec., 1891 5th Jan., 1892 679,270 9½d. 26,887 15 5 Legal Expenses 10 10 0 Police Services 21 11 0 †£103,497 63 6 Printing and Bill Posting 14 13 6 Stamps and Sundries 6 9 9 Collection— Petty Disbursements 3 8 0 Rate made and allowed 2nd January, 1891 (uncollected at Lady-Day, 1891) Balance 3,301 1 1 103 6 0 Less—Cash Advance, 25th March, 1891 100 0 0 Rates made and allowed, from Lady-Day 1891, to Lady-Day, 1892 On account 91,098 17 4 3 6 0 commissioners for public libraries and museums, shoreditch. 94,399 18 5 On account of produce of ¾d. Rate in the £ per annum— Precept, dated 13th July, 1891 533 0 0 H. M. Treasury—Urant in aid ol Poor Rate, re Shoreditch County Court, excluded from Valuation List (one year) 18 10 0 Do. 15th January, 1892 490 0 0 94,418 8 5 1,023 0 0 Amount carried forward £94,418 8 5 Amount carried forward £90,441 9 4 68 68 POOR RATE ACCOUNTS (Continued) from 25th March, 1891, to 25th March, 1892. To RECEIPTS— £ s. d. By PAYMENTS— £ s. d. Amount brought forward 94,418 8 5 Amounts brought forward £ 90,441 9 4 ELECTION OF VESTRYMEN. (under 18 and 19 Vic., cap. 120, sec. 24. ) Expenses of Elections held 20th and 21st May, 1891, viz.:- Moorfields Ward 12 7 6 Church Ward 12 1 6 Hoxton Ward 4 7 6 Wenlock Ward 12 7 6 Whitmore Ward 3 9 0 Kingsland and Haggerston West Ward 4 7 6 Haggerston East Ward 12 7 6 Acton Ward 12 7 6 73 15 6 Stationery, Printing, and Advertising 11 10 8 Bill Posting 2 4 0 Delivery of Bills, and Cart Hire 0 19 6 Churchwardens' Expenses 4 4 0 Police Services 4 0 6 22 18 8 Expenses of Bye-Election held 24th June, 1891— 96 14 2 Acton Ward 12 7 6 Printing and Bill Posting 2 5 6 14 13 0 111 7 2 PARLIAMENTARY AND COUNTY COUNCIL ELECTIONS. PARLIAMENTARY AND COUNTY COUNCIL ELECTIONS. (a) Overseers. (a) Overseers. Borough of Shoreditch Borough of Shoreditch. Sale of Registers 7 2 6 Printing Register of Parliamentary and County Council Voters 304 12 6 Hire of Voting Compartments 18 0 0 Preparing, copying, examining, and revising Lists of Householders, Lodgers, Objections, and Claimants 70 0 0 Use of Ballot Boxes 2 0 0 Do. Stamping Instruments 3 17 0 30 19 6 Registrars' Mortality Returns 11 13 0 One half of net expenses of Overseers of the Poor, under Registration Acts of 1843 to 1888 (section 2 of the Registration of Electors' Act, 1891) ex London County Council, out of General Countv Account— Stamps for Owners' Returns, Delivery of Notices,&c. 21 11 11 Posting Lists, &c. 5 0 0 Preparing Barrister's Court, &c 1 1 0 Year 1888—89 213 9 9½ Bill Posting 0 12 6 „ 1889—90 209 1 4 Expenses of Enquiry Officer as to Claimants, attending Revision Court, &c. 47 7 9 „ 1890—91 231 9 2 654 0 3½ 461 18 8 Amounts carried forward £654 0 3½ 30 19 6 94,418 8 5 Amounts carried forward £461 18 8 90,552 16 6 69 69 POOR RATE ACCOUNTS (Continued), from 25th March, 1891, to 25th March, 1892. To RECEIPTS— £ s. d. By payments— £ s. d. Amounts brought forward £654 0 3½ 30 19 6 94,418 8 5 Amounts brought forward £ 461 18 8 90,552 16 6 parliamentary and county council elections. (Continued.) parliamentary and county council elections. (Continued). Tottenham Division, County of Middlesex. Printing Hegister of Parliamentary Voters 7 9 0 Copying, Examining, and Revising Lists 2 2 0 Bill Posting 1 6 6 10 17 6 (b) Returning Officer. (b) Returning Officer. 472 16 2 Borough of Shoreditch. Borough of Shoreditch. One half of net expenses of Returning Officer, under Registration Acts 1843 to 1888 (section 2 of the Registration of Electors' Act, 1891)— ex London County Council, out of General County Account— Returning Officer's Charges, pursuant to Registration of Electors' Act, 1843, sec. 55; the Local Government Act, 1888, sec. 3 (xii); and the County Electors' Act, 1888, sees. 7 and 8, under Certificate of London County Council (One half) 151 4 1 Year 1888—89 111 5 9 „ 1889—90 120 19 3 „ 1890-91 161 3 4½ 393 8 4½ 1,047 8 8 1,078 8 2 624 0 3 jury list. jury list. Sale of List 0 1 0 Printing Jurors' Book, Tower Division, County of London 27 0 0 Preparing, Copying and Revising Lists, &c 5 5 0 32 5 0 establishment of town hall. Poor Rates 98 19 2 other receipts other charges. Stamp Duty refund—ex Commissioners of Inland Revenue 0 8 0 Poundage 524 1 8 Salaries of Collectors 441 7 6 965 9 2 Agreed remuneration,re Rate Collection,Moorfields Ward (Joseph Riley) 22 10 0 987 19 2 Receipt Stamps 30 4 3 Stamp Duty on Cheques 0 8 4 Suppression of Disorderly Houses, per 48 & 49 Vict., cap. 69 6 11 6 1,025 3 3 Excess of Receipts over Payments (fo. 70) 3,164 1 5 £95,497 5 7 £95,497 5 7 70 POOR RAIL AOOOlJNI -Income and Expenditure fe from 25th March, 1891, to 25th March, 1892. Source. Fo. RECEIPTS. ASSETS Acobced but not Received. Income from Mar. 25, 91, to Mar. 25, 92. Application. Fo. PAYMENTS. LIABILITES Incurred but not Paid. Expenditure from Mar. 25. 91, to Mar. 25, 92. Mar. 25, 1891. Mar. 25, 1892. Mar. 25, 1891. Mar. 25,1892 £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d £ s. d. £ s. d. Poor Rate 67 94,418 8 5 3,440 19 9 4,301 14 1 95,333 2 9 Contributions to Shoreditch Board of Guardians 67 74,900 0 0 8,000 0 0 8,500 0 0 75,400 0 0 Parliamentary and County Council Elections 69 1,078 8 2 2 12 0 228 14 4 1,304 10 0 Metropolitan Police Rate 67 14,215 3 4 ..... ..... 14,215 3 4 Jury List 69 0 1 0 ..... ..... 0 1 0 Expenses of Burial Board of St. Leonard, Shoreditch 67 300 0 0 50 0 0 ..... 250 0 0 Other Receipts 69 0 8 0 ..... ..... 0 8 0 Public Libraries Acts 67 3 0 0 ..... ..... 3 6 0 3,449 12 3 4,590 8 5 Commissioners for Public Libraries and Museums, Shoreditch 67 1,023 0 0 ..... 938 14 0 1,961 14 0 3,449 12 3 Election of Vestrymen 68 111 7 2 ..... ..... 111 7 2 Parliamentary and County Council Elections 69 624 0 3 ..... 21 10 6 655 10 0 95,497 5 7 1,140 10 2 06,038 1 « 9 Jury List 69 32 5 0 ..... ..... 32 5 0 Establishment of Town Hall 69 98 19 2 ..... ..... 98 19 2 Other Charges 69 1,025 3 3 148 17 11 150 4 10 1,032 10 2 8,198 17 11 9,026 9 4 8,198 17 11 92,333 4 2 1,427 11 5 93,760 15 7 BALANCES—25th March, 1892— In hands of Treasurer 0,918 11 0 Less—25th March, 1891 In hands of Treasurer 3,754 10 1 Excess of Receipts over Payments 69 3,104 1 5 Income in excess of Expenditure carried to Balance Sheet 71 2,877 6 2 £95,497 5 7 £90,038 1 9 £95,497 5 7 £96,638 1 9 70 Gl 71 71 POOR RATE ACCOUNT— BALANCE SHEET, 25th March, 1892. LIABILITIES. Fo. £ s. d. £ s. d. ASSETS. Fo. £ s. d. £ s. d. REVENUE ACCOUNT. REVENUE ACCOUNT. To Sundry Creditors, for Balances due to them 70 9,020 9 4 By Sundry Debtors, for Balances owing by them 228 14 4 Income in excess of Expenditure this year 2,877 6 2 70 By Poor Rate—Balance 4,301 14 1 Deduct— 70 4,590 8 5 Deficit, 25th March, 1891 994 15 7 By Cash Balance, 25th March 1892— In hands of Treasurer 70 6,918 11 6 SURPLUS—25th March, 1892 1,882 10 7 11,508 19 11 WILLIAM GEORGE SMITH, Treasurer, London and Midland Bank, Limited (Shoreditch Branch). 11,508 19 11 £11,508 19 11 ERNST A. R. ADAMS, Accountant. £11,508 19 11 BURIAL BOARD. 73 73 The Parish of Saint Leonard, Shoreditch, in the County of London. BURIAL BOARD ACCOUNTS, from 25th March, 1891, to 25th March, 1892. £ s. d. £ s. d. To RECEIPTS— By PAYMENTS— Date of Certificate. Maintenance Account. Maintenance Account. 1891. Mar, 18. POOR RATE Out of the Poor Rate (for defraying the expenses of the Burial Board of Saint Leonard, Shoreditch), pursuant to the provisions of Acts 16 and 17 Vict., st. leonard's churchyard, shoreditch. Wages of Gardener 55 13 0 Relaying forecourt in Churchyard 38 16 3 cap. 134 ; and 18 and 19 Vict., cap. 128 (fo. 67) 50 0 0 Repairs to Tombstone, &c. (Fairchild's Bequest) 9 10 0 Cast Iron Shields 1 10 0 July 24. Do. do. (fo. 67) 75 0 0 Locksmiths' work, Plumbery, &c 4 15 1 Oct. 12. Do. do. (fo. 67) 75 0 0 Writers' work and Painting 3 10 2 1892. 1 0 0 Jan. 28. Do. do. (fo. 67) 1 100 0 0 114 14 6 st. marys churchyard, haggerston. Contributions towards Maintenance of Churchyard 37 10 0 Wages of Gardener 38 0 0 Cast Iron Shields 1 10 0 Lawn Mower, Tools, and Ironmongery 3 11 7 Advertising, Petty Disbursements, &c 0 19 0 Water Rate 1 1 0 82 11 7 • st. john's churchyard, hoxton. Contributions towards Maintenance of Churchyard 37 10 0 Wages of Gardener 38 0 0 Cast Iron Shrields 1 10 0 Barrows, Tools, and Ironmongery 4 12 7 Advertising, Petty Disbursements, &c 0 18 11 82 11 6 hackney road burial ground. Wages of Gardener 27 0 0 Wire Fencing and Fixing, &c 20 14 4 Rustic Summer House 5 5 0 Cast Iron Shrields 1 10 0 Writing Notice Boards 2 3 0 Erecting Hut, Tools, Repairs, &c 1 6 9 57 19 1 300 0 0 337 16 8 Excess of Payments over Receipts (fo. 74) 37 16 8 £ 337 16 8 £ 337 16 8 74 BURIAL BOARD ACCOUNT Income and Expenditure from 25th March, 1891, to 25th March, 1892. Source. Fo. RECEIPTS. ASSETS Accrued but not received. Income from Mar.25, 91, to Mar. 25, 92. Application. Fo. PAYMENTS. LIABILITIES Incukred but not paid. Expenditure from Mar.25, 91, to Mar. 25, 92. March 25,'1)1. 1 March 25,'92. March 25,'91. March 25,'92. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. Poor Rate 78 300 0 0 50 0 0 ..... 250 0 0 St. Leonard's Churchyard, Shoreditch 73 114 14 6 1 1 0 ...... 113 13 6 St. Mary's do. Haggerston 73 82 11 7 25 0 0 2 0 8 59 12 3 BALANCES —25th March, 1891 In hands of Treasurer 11 11 10 St. John's do. Hoxton 73 82 11 6 25 0 0 3 4 6 60 16 0 Do. Accountant 11 9 7 Hackney Road Burial Ground 73 57 19 1 ...... 0 11 4 58 10 5 Add— 28 1 5 51 1 0 5 16 6 BALANCES—25th March, 1892 Due to Accountant. . 89 18 5 5 16 6 Less—In hands of Treasurer 75 3 2 337 16 8 45 4 6 292 12 2 14 15 8 Excess of Payments over Receipts 78 87 16 8 / Expenditure in Excess of Incomh, carried to Balance Sheet 74 42 12 2 £ 887 16 8 £ 292 12 2 £ 337 16 8 £ 292 12 2 74 BURIAL BOARD ACCOUNT— BALANCE SHEET, 25th March, 1892. LIABILITIES. Fo. £ s. d, £ s. d. ASSETS. Fo. £ s. d. £ s d. REVENUE ACCOUNT. REVENUE ACCOUNT. To Sundry Creditors, for Balances due to them 74 5 16 6 Expenditure in excess of Income this year 42 12 2 74 To Cash Balances—25th March, 1892. Deduct— Due to Accountant 89 18 5 74 Surplus, 25th March, 1891 22 0 5 Less—In hands of Treasurer 75 8 2 74 14 15 8 DEFICIT—25th March, 1892 — 20 11 9 J. ROBERT ANNING, Treasurer, 20 11 9 20 11 9 London and County Banking Company,"Limited, (Shoreditch Branch.) £ 20 11 9 ERNST A. R. ADAMS, Accountant to the Board. £ 20 11 9 GENERAL RATE ACCOUNT. 76 76 GENERAL RATE ACCOUNTS, from 25th March, 1891, TO 25th March, 1892. To RECEIPTS— £ s. d. By PAYMENTS— £ s. d. Finance Committees Accounts. GENERAL RATE. Finance Committee's Accounts. SCHOOL BOARD FOR LONDON. Arrears of Rate, quarter ended Lady-Day, 1891 103 5 8 Half-year's Precept dated 5th January, 1891, to cover expenditure to 29th September, 1891 14,753 9 1 †Rates made and allowed from Lady-day, 1891, to Lady-Day, 1892 (see below) 68,959 5 6½ Do. do. 9th July, 1891, to cover expenditure to 25th March, 1892 15,482 0 9 Add—Excess Assessments, &c. 28 0 2½ Government Property 12 5 0 40 5 2½ 30,5435 9 10 68,999 10 9 Returning Officer's Expenses, Triennial Election, held 26th November, 1891 (proportion) 202 5 7 69,102 16 5 Less—Allowance to Owners of 25 per cent. 2,642 8 8½ 30,437 15 5 66,460 7 8½ PAYMENT OF DEBT. Deduct—Excused at Rate Sessions 62 8 4½ instalments of principal of Loans outstanding (fo.104)— Erection of Town Hall 933 6 8 i Irrecoverable, &c. 2,855 6 5 Street Improvements and Paving Works 1,563 0 0 2,917 14 9½ Sun Street, &c., Improvement 783 0 0 £63,542 12 11 3,279 6 8 INTEREST ON LOANS. Quarter ended Made by Vestry. Allowed by Police Magistrate. Rateable Value. Rate in the £. Amount. Interest on Balances of Loans outstanding (fo. 104)— Erection of Town Hall 235 12 6 £ £ s. d. Midsummer, 1891 31st Mar., 1891 10th April, 1891 674,554 7d. 19,674 9 10 Street Improvements and Paving Works 275 2 10¼ Michaelmas,1891 30th June, 1891 7th July, 1891 676,409 6d. 16,910 4 6 Sun Street, &c., Improvement 1,137 0 0¾ Christmas, 1891 6th Oct., 1891 9th Oct., 1891 677,161 6d. 16,929 0 6 Goldsmith Square Open Space 17 10 0 Lady-Day, 1892 29th Dec., 1891 5th Jan., 1892 673,987 5½d. 15,445 10 8½ Dusting and Scavenging 35 13 5 †£68,959 5 6½ 1,700 18 10 Collection— Rate made and allowed 2nd January, 1891 (uncollected at Lady-Day, 1891) Balance 2,195 7 3 Rates made and allowed from Lady-Day, 1891 to Lady-Day, 1892 On account 60,963 14 1 63,159 1 4 H. M. Treasury—Grant in aid of General Rate re Shoreditch County Court, excluded from Valuation List (one year) 12 10 0 63,171 11 4 Amount carried forward £63,171 11 4 Amount carried forward £35,418 0 11 ... ... ... 77 77 GENERAL RATE ACCOUNTS (Continued), from 25th March, 1891, to 25th March, 1892 £ s. d. By PAYMENTS— £ s. d. To RECEIPTS Amount brought forward 63,171 11 4 Amount brought forward £35,418 0 11 ... ... ... Finance Committee's Accounts. (continued). Finance Committees Accounts. (continued). VESTRY CLERK'S DEPARTMENT. VESTRY CLERK'S DEPARTMENT. Fees on deposited plans, under Act 7 Will. IV. and 1 Vict., cap. 83 3 13 0 • Salary of Vestry Clerk (proportion) 226 10 10 Do. Clerks 90 9 8 Inspection of do. do 2 5 0 317 0 6 Agency Fees 1 5 6 Solicitor's Practising Certificate 9 5 0 7 4 0 Subscription to Law Library 1 10 0 Law Books 17 2 0 Parliamentary Papers, Session 1892 4 0 0 Law Engrossing and Writing 22 6 1 Candidates' expenses re Law Clerkship 5 7 3 Petty Disbursements 6 6 4 382 17 2 ACCOUNTANTS DEPARTMENT. ACCOUNTANT'S DEPARTMENT Salary of Accountant (H. F. Jones) 14 16 0 Search Fees 3 0 0 Do. do. (E. A. R. Adams) 77 14 10 Do. Clerks 193 18 3 Rate Collectors 804 14 6 1,091 3 7 Temporary Assistants 172 19 0 Agreed remuneration, Rate Collection of Kingsland and Haggerston West Ward (Joseph Riley) 30 0 0 Do. do. Moorfields Ward 22 10 0 Extra Services of H. L. Loly 7 0 0 Advertising 9 0 11 Guarantee Premiums 9 5 0 Candidates' Travelling Expenses 37 8 1 Grip-bolt Safe 19 13 7 Petty Disbursements 2 18 8 1,401 18 10 LEGAL AND PARLIAMENTARY EXPENSES. LEGAL AND PARLIAMENTARY EXPENSES. Sale of Electric Lighting Orders 0 16 0 Shoreditch Electric Lighting Order, 1892— Deposit fee on Memorial to Board of Trade 50 0 0 Advertising 23 3 6 Petty Disbursements 1 11 6 74 15 0 Counsel's fee re Worship Street Bridge approach, Great Eastern Railway / 4 11 6 79 6 6 Amounts carried forward £11 0 0 63,171 11 4 Amount carried forward £37,282 3 5 .... ... ... 78 GENERAL RATE ACCOUNTS (Continued), from 25th March, 1891, to 25th March, 1892. £ s. d. By Payments £ s. d. To RECEIPTS Amounts brought forward £11 0 0 63,171 11 4 Amount brought forward £37,282 3 5 ... ... ... Finance Committees Accounts. (continued. ) GENERAL RECEIPTS. Finance Committees Accounts. (continued.) GENERAL CHARGES. Bankers' Interest 117 4 9 Salaries 4 0 0 Allowance for spoiled Stamps ex Commissioners of Inland Revenue 9 18 0 Wages of Messenger 73 0 0 Livery for Messenger 5 16 0 ' Sale of— Wages of Temporary Attendants 16 19 6 Reports 0 5 3 Court Fees and Brokers Charges 7 6 9 Maps 0 6 6 Solicitors and Witnesses Expenses re Disorderly Houses, &c 16 12 6 Waste Paper 6 11 3 134 5 9 Correcting Rate Books re School Board for London Election, 1891 23 1 4 Extra Services of late Accountant, and Clerk 30 0 0 Refitting Common Seal &c. 4 3 6 Stationery and General Printing 729 9 6 Contribution to Churchwardens of St. Leonard, Shoreditch, in aid of maintenance of Church Clock 20 0 0 Elected Auditors' Expenses, Annual Audit 1891 5 0 0 ' Rent of Telephone (Vestry's proportion) 18 15 0 Petty Disbursements, Sundries, &c 39 12 4 Advertising— 993 16 5 Annual Contracts 4 17 6 Law Clerkship 22 15 5 Vestrymen's Attendances 16 16 1 44 9 0 Stamp Duty on Cheques 9 16 11 Receipt Stamps for Collectors 47 19 7 Postage and Receipt Stamps 52 7 2 110 3 8 (Balance—£38,285 6s. 9d.) 145 5 9 1,148 9 1 38,430 12 6 Paving and Sewers Committee's Accounts. SURVEYOR'S DEPARTMENT. Paving and Sewers Committees Accounts. SURVEYOR'S DEPARTMENT. License Fees re scaffold erections &c. 43 12 6 Salary of Surveyor (proportion) 140 0 0 Do. Clerk 57 2 4 197 2 4 Temporary Assistant (C. L. Cadney) 107 2 0 Surveying Instruments 15 10 0 Guarantee Premium 2 10 0 322 4 4 Amounts carried forward £43 12 0 63,316 17 1 Amounts carried forward. £322 4 4 38,430 12 6 78 79 79 GENERAL RATE ACCOUNTS (Continued), from 25th March, 1891, to 25th March, 1892 £ s. d. By PAYMENTS— £ s. d. To RECEIPTS— Amounts brought forward £43 12 6 63,316 17 1 Amounts brought forward £322 4 4 38,430 12 6 Paving and Sewers Committee s Accounts. (continued.) Paving and Sewers Committees Accounts. (continued.) MAINTENANCE OF PUBLIC ROADS AND STREETS. MAINTENANCE OF PUBLIC ROADS AND STREETS Repairs of Roads and Footpaths. East London Water-works Co. 61 6 0 Wages— Pavement Labour 1,360 2 11½ Highways do. 571 12 0 New River Waterworks Co. 309 3 8 Dusting and Scavenging 173 15 10 Gas Light & Coke Co 267 7 9 Breaking Stones 93 13 6 Post Office Telegraphs 0 15 5 Workmen's Holiday 10 16 0 638 12 10 2210 0 3½ Maintenance of Wood Pavement, Goldsmith Row and Hoxton Street 26 17 4 Street Paving Repairs 1 17 0 Cutting Coal-plate openings 5 16 9 Do. do. Old Street (5 years) 156 16 8 Half Cost crossing. Rosemary Branch Bridge, ex Hackney District Board of Works 40 15 2 Team Labour and Carmen's Work 557 3 3 Masons' and Paviors' Work 1,002 0 1 • Transfers— Re-dressing Curbs and Pitchings 54 13 10 From Accounts, as under, for works executed, viz:Dusting & Scavenging,Capital Account (fo.97) 238 6 4 Repairing Trenches 26 15 7 Val de Travers Asphalte 476 1 2 Deposit Fund (fo. 100)— 4,510 8 2½ Mason's and Pavior's Work 203 12 3 Materials purchased during the Year— Watching Expenses 1 17 9 Granite, Setts, and Edgestones 419 9 3 205 10 0 ! York Flags 222 9 6 1,130 18 1 York Setts and Curbs 146 15 0 Patent Victoria Stone 35 0 0 Broken Granite 439 5 6 Ballast, Hoggin, and Sand 421 16 4 Lime and Cement 141 4 5 Coke 27 1 0 1,833 1 0 6,343 9 2* PLANTING TREES IN ROADS AND STREETS. Iron Guard 23 15 0 Grate Castings 47 10 0 Altering Gas Mains 16 0 10 • Masonry, fixing,&c. 13 10 9 100 16 7 STEAM ROAD ROLLER. Wages 612 13 11½ Smiths' Work — Sharpening Picks, &c 29 7 5 Waste, Lard,Oil, and Sundries 12 3 0 Leather Hose, and Sacks 3 6 0 Firewood 4 0 0 661 10 4½ Amounts carried forward £1,174 10 7 63,316 17 1 Amounts carried forward £7,428 0 6 38,430 12 6 80 80 GENERAL RATE ACCOUNTS (Continued), from 25th March, 1891, to 25th March, 1892. To RECEIPTS £ s. d. By PAYMENTS— £ s. d. Amounts brought forward £1,174 10 7 63,316 17 1 Amounts brought forward £7,428 0 6 38,430 12 6 Paving and Sewers Committees Accounts. (continued.) Paving and Sewers Committees Accounts. (continued.) FLEMMING STREET DEPOT. Rent (J. L. Tuffnell Tyrrell) 36 0 0 Parochial and District Rates 10 4 9 Property Tax 1 18 4 Gas and Water 1 8 2 Fire Insurance 0 5 0 49 16 3 HOXTON STREET DEPOT. HOXTON STREET DEPOT. Wayleave rental for ground pole ex National Telephone Co., Limited (one year) 1 1 0 Rent (R. F. Steele and others) 72 16 8 Parochial and District Rates 12 1 6 Property Tax 1 16 8 MISCELLANEOUS RECEIPTS. 86 14 10 MISCELLANEOUS EXPENSES. Annual Fine re Laying of underground steam pipe, Shoreditch High Street 20 0 0 Scavengers' Brooms 15 16 0 Tools and Ironmongery 7 19 2 Street Lanterns and Repairs 8 7 9 License fees for affixing Advertisements to hoards &c., under Advertising Stations (Rating) Act, 1889 9 14 0 Blacksmiths' Work 55 0 6 Plumbery and Repairs 27 19 9 Compensation for damage to stock, &c 9 18 3 29 14 0 Gratuity to disabled workman (T. Murphy) 5 0 0 Acknowledgment for user of land thrown into street, Shepherdess Walk (Alderman Challis' Executors) 5 5 0 135 6 5 7,699 18 0 (Balance—£6,494 12s. 5d.) 1,205 5 7 Amount carried forward 46,130 10 6 Amount carried forward £64,522 2 8 81 GENERAL RATE ACCOUNTS (Continued). from 25th March, 1891, to 25th March, 1892. To RECEIPTS— £ s. d. By PAYMENTS— £ s. d. Amount brought forward £64 522 2 8 Amount brought forward £46,130 10 6 Dusting and Scavenging Committees Accounts. Dusting and Scavenging Committees Accounts. DUSTING AND SCAVENGING DEPARTMENT. DUSTING AND SCAVENGING DEPARTMENT. (a) Contract System. (a) Contract System. Fine imposed for non-compliance with Contract, Western Division, ex Henry Crane 20 0 0 Year ended 25th March, 1891—Supplemental Contracts:— Western Division—Henry Crane 750 0 0 Eastern do. W. E. Stevens & Sons 1,250 0 0 2,000 0 0 Year ended 25th March, 1892—On account :— Western Division—Henry Crane 5,017 16 8 Eastern do. W. E. Stevens & Sons 2,500 0 0 7,517 16 8 (b) Maintenance Account (Half-year only). (b) Maintenance Account (Half-year only). 9,517 16 8 Miscellaneous Receipts. Salaries and wages. Salary of Superintendent and Clerks 151 10 5 Removal of— Dust and Slop 3 0 0 Wages— Rubbish 0 15 6 Dusting 372 17 7½ Trade Refuse 18 17 1 Scavenging 897 1 1½ 22 12 7 Horsekeepers and Carters 36 12 3 Sale of Old Iron 1 3 6 Removal of Snow 78 0 11 Leasehold Rents 69 9 5 Wharf Stalf, &c 350 0 0 93 5 6 1,886 2 4 De Beauvoir Wharf. 182 16 3 Farochial and District Rates 16 12 3 • Gas and Water 18 16 2 Fire and Plate Glass Insurance 8 6 0 226 10 8 1 Reliance Wharf. Ground Rent 73 2 6 Parochial and District Rates 21 6 8 Fire Insurance 0 9 6 94 18 8 / Stables Account. Horse Provender 116 6 11 Hay and Straw 237 7 3 Bait Charges 6 12 0 Veterinary Services 7 9 3 Harness and Repairs 7 1 0 374 16 5 Amounts carried forward £113 5 6 64,522 2 8 Amounts carried forward £2,582 8 1 9,517 16 8 46,130 10 6 81 82 82 GENERAL RATE ACCOUNTS (Continued), from 25th March. 1891, to 25th March, 1892. To RECEIPTS £ s. d. By PAYMENTS— £ s. d. Amounts brought forward £113 5 0 64,522 2 8 Amounts brought forward £2,582 8 1 9,517 16 8 46,130 10 6 Dusting and Scavenging Committee's Accounts. (continued.) Dusting and Scavenging Committee's Accounts. (continued.) Working Expenses. Barge Freightage for removal of Ashes and Slop 1,031 11 0 Railway Carriage 15 13 3 Brooms and Brushes 87 1 9 Iron and Steel 63 11 7 Tools, Ironmongery, Fittings, &c 41 7 2 Shovels and Scoops 14 1 5 Timber 49 6 7 Waterproof Clothing, Rubber Goods &c 10 10 1 Oil, Tallow, Disinfectants, &c 21 12 9 Horse Hire 2 10 0 Coal and Coke 11 15 10 Candidates' expenses re Superintendentship 11 12 5 Sundries 35 3 8 Petty Disbursements 11 0 2 1,400 17 8 3,989 5 9 113 5 6 13,507 2 5 (Balance—£13,393 16s. l1d.) General Purposes and Sanitary Committee's Accounts. General Purposes and Sanitary Committee's Accounts. LIGHTING DEPARTMENT. LIGHTING DEPARTMENT. Public Lamps. Gas supply, Lighting, and Maintenance of Private Lamps 44 7 9 Gas supply for Quarter ended Lady-day, 1891 1,262 7 5 Do. do. Midsummer, 1891 711 0 11 Damage to Public Lamps 4 18 0 Do. do. Michaelmas, 1891 800 6 8 Use of do., East Road, for Parliamentary Notices 2 2 0 Do. do. Christmas, 1891 1,388 19 4 4,162 14 4 Advertising on Lamp Columns 8 0 0 Salary of Inspector(1½ years) 250 0 0 Sale of Old Brass and Iron 1 9 9 Wages 1,151 0 2 Do. Workmen's Holiday 6 2 0 1,157 2 2 Painting Lamp Columns and Brackets 55 0 0 Maintenance of public Lamp Meters 102 0 0 Removal of Lamps Services 8 0 8 Lamps, Columns, and Fittings 68 2 8 Glass and Sash Tools 21 5 7 Ladders and Steps 3 15 0 Smith's work 21 7 5 Adjusting Meters 3 15 6 Amounts carried forward £1,690 9 0 4,162 14 4 59,637 12 11 Amounts carried forward £55 18 0 64,685 8 2 83 83 GENERAL RATE ACCOUNTS (Continued), from 25th March, 1891, to 25th March, 1 892. To RECEIPTS— £ s. d. By PAYMENTS— £ s d. Amounts brought forward £55 18 0 64,635 8 2 Amounts brought forward £1 G90 9 0 4,162 14 4 59,087 12 11 General Purposes and Sanitary Committee's Accounts. (continued.) General Purposes and Sanitary Committees Accounts. (continued.) LIGHTING DEPARTMENT.—(continued.) Oil, Paint, Putty, Hards, &c. 23 7 3 Rewards to Police re damage to Lamps 2 3 0 Petty Disbursements 1 3 1 \ i 1,717 2 4 5,879 16 8 Street Name-Plates, &c. Writing and fixing Name-plates 13 8 1 Caution Tablets 4 12 0 18 0 1 5,897 16 9 MEDICAL OFFICER'S DEPARTMENT. MEDICAL OFFICER'S DEPARTMENT. Salary of Medical Officer of Health 108 6 8 Medical Fees repaid for Notification of Disease under Public Health (London) Act, 1891, sec. 55 (4) ex Managers of Do. Public Analyst 62 10 0 Do. Inspectors and Clerk 358 17 9 Metropolitan Asylum District 145 11 6 529 14 5 Fines under Sale of Food and Drugs Act, 1875 56 15 0 Costs recovered under do. 2 13 0 Fees paid for Medical Certificates under Public Health (London) Act, 1891, Sec 55 (3) 99 15 0 904 19 6 Fees for analyses of Food Samples 34 10 0 Purchase of Food Samples, Disbursements, Postages, Porterage, &c. 17 3 11 Mortality Returns 38 10 1 Removal Expenses re Infectious Diseases 6 19 6 New Bedding and Mattresses 19 12 9 Rewards to Police 6 15 0 Law Costs and in pettlement of action, Reed v Goodwin 20 0 0 Witnesses Fees re Shap Street Schools 3 11 6 Advertising Medical Officership 9 14 9 Reports, Pamphlets, Photographs, and Apparatus 6 13 7 Water and Rates, Old Street 1 16 9 • 794 17 3 Amounts carried forward £260 17 6 64,635 8 2 Amounts carried forward £6,692 14 0 59,637 12 11 84 84 GENERAL RATE ACCOUNTS (Continued). from 25th March, 1891, to 25th March, 1892. To RECEIPTS— £ s. d. By PAYMENTS— £ s. d. Amounts brought forward £260 17 6 64,635 8 2 Amounts brought forward £6,692 14 0 59,637 12 (i. 11 General Purposes and Sanitary Committee s Accounts. (continued.) General Purposes and Sanitary Committee's Accounts. (continued.) TOWN HALL DISINFECTING STATION. Wages of Disinfector 79 10 0 Extra Assistance 39 15 0 Sulphur and Disinfectants 73 8 6 Joiner's, Repairs, Fittings, &c 6 12 11 Gas 14 10 2 213 16 7 PUBLIC MORTUARY, MAINTENANCE. Wages of Caretaker 28 0 0 Removal of Bodies 4 0 0 Plumbing and Glazing 1 17 6 Gas and Water 10 18 9 44 16 3 STREET WATERING. Wages of Inspector 37 10 0 Horse Hire 491 5 5 Repairing Water Vans and Hydrants 49 12 3 Oil, Grease, &c. 3 8 0 New Leather Hose 3 6 10 Water Supply 320 1 11 905 4 5 REMOVAL OF SNOW (Winter 1890-91) Cartage and Team Labour (balance) 24 4 0 RECREATION GROUNDS. Law Charges and Stamp Duty re Goldsmith Square Open Space (fo. 99) 9 17 0 Wages of Caretakers, viz.:— St. John's Churchyard, Hoxton 5 7 6 St. Mary's do. Haggerston 6 15 0 21 19 6 7,902 14 9 260 17 6 (Balance—£7,641 17s. 3d.) Amount carried forward £64,896 5 8 Amount carried forward £67,540 7 8 85 85 GENERAL RATE ACCOUNTS (Continued), from 25th March, 1891, to 25th March, 1892 To RECEIPTS £ s. d. By PAYMENTS— £ s. d. Amount brought forward £64,896 5 8 Amount brought forward 67,540 7 8 Town Hall Committee's Accounts. Totvn Hall Committee's Accounts. establishment of town hall. establishment of town hal1 Hire of Hall and Council Chamber 574 10 6 Salary of Hall Keeper 108 6 8 1 1 1 Do. Basement Rooms for Vaccination Station ex Shoreditch Board of Guardians 5 5 0 Use of Utensils 25 0 0 Use of Rooms for Coroners' Court 43 16 6 133 6 8 Wages of Cleaners 142 14 6 Do. Committee Rooms 2 5 0 276 1 2 Parochial Rates 229 3 4 Property Tax and House Duty 37 15 0 Gas and Water 165 15 9 Coal and Firewood 22 17 6 Fire Insurance 20 0 0 475 11 7 £ s. d. Uniform Clothing 4 8 6 † Lettings for the Year 626 3 0 Cleaning Windows, Offices, &c. 26 0 0 Lens—Outgoings do 315 19 0 1 Cleaning Materials 8 15 6 Winding and attention to Clocks 4 0 0 Balance of Receipts 310 4 0 Linoleum and Matting 12 6 8 Locksmith's Work and Repairs 11 12 9 Plumbing, and Repairs to Gas Meter 30 10 8 Carpentry and Whitewashing 23 12 1 Erecting and taking down Orchestra 5 10 0 Sweeping Flues and Chimneys 4 0 0 Admission Cards (Town Hall Committee) 1 10 0 New Offices for Sanitary Department. Furniture, Fixtures, & Fittings (balance) 3 8 6 (.Balance—£261 4s. 5d.) †626 3 0 135 14 8 887 7 5 Housing of the Working Classes Committee's Accounts. Housing of the Working Classes Committees Accounts. (Pursuant to Housing of the Working Classes Act, 1890, Part II— Unhealthy Dwelling-houses.) moira place and plumber's place area, shoreditch. Arbitrator's Charges re Enquiry held 1st July, 1890, under Act 1885 (Vestry's moiety) 36 15 0 Counsel's Fees 4 11 6 (Balance—£42 9s. 4d.) Petty Disbursements 1 2 10 42 9 4 Amount carried forward £65,522 8 8 Amount carried forward £68,470 4 5 86 86 GENERAL RATE ACCOUNTS (Continued), from 25th March, 1891, to 25th March, 1892. RECEIPTS £ s. d. By Payments £ s. d. Amount brought forward 65,522 8 8 Amount brought forward £68,470 4 5 Valuation Committee's Accounts. Valuation Committee's Accounts. VALUATION COMMITTEE EXPENSES. [Pursuant to The Valuation (Metropolis) Act, 1869.] Quinquennial Valuation List, 1890 :— Surveyors' and Valuers' Fees—Walter Barnett 94 10 0 Year to 25th March, 1892:— Carriage and 'Bus Hire (for Surveys) 5 18 7 Pocket Books 14 8 0 (Balance—£117 0s. 1d.) Acts of Parliament, Forms, &c 2 3 6 22 10 1 117 0 1 Assessment Committees Accounts. ASSESSMENT COMMITTEE RECEIPTS. Assessment committee's Accounts. [Pursuant to The Valuation (Metropolis) Act, 1869.] ASSESSMENT COMMITTEE EXPENSES. [Pursuant to The Valuation (Metropolis) Act, 1869.] Quinquennial Valuation List, 1890:— Quinquennial Valuation List. 1890:— Respondent's taxed costs recovered, re Appeals, as under :— Salary of Clerk (H. F. Jones) 50 0 0 Blades, East & Blades 34 12 10 Solicitor's Costs, Counsel's Fees, &c. 753 17 2 Waterlow & Sons, Limited 182 19 2 Valuer's Charges 23 10 7 827 7 9 Year to 25th March, 1892 :— Salary of Clerk 50 0 0 Do. Staff 15 0 0 Appellant's Taxed Costs re Supplementa List, 1891 (London County Council) 5 2 6 Counsel's Fees do. 2 4 6 Carriage Hire 1 14 6 74 1 6 917 12 0 901 9 3 (Balance—£683 17s. 3d.) Excess of Payments over Receipts (fo. 88) 3,748 13 1 £69,488 13 9 £69,488 13 9 87 GENERAL RATE ACCOUNT—Income and Expenditure from 25th March, 1891, to 25th March, 1892 Source. Fo. RECEIPTS. ASSETS Accrued but not Received. Income Application. Fo. PAYMENTS. LIABILITIES Incurred but not Paid. Expenditure Mar 25, 1891. Mar 25, 1892. From Mar 25, '91.to Mar 25, '92. Mar 25, 1891. Mar 25, 1892. from Mar. 25,'91, to Mar. 25,'92. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. Finance Committee's Accounts. lance Committee's accounts. General Rate 76 63,171 11 4 2,292 12 11 2,528 1 3 ...... 63,406 19 School Board for London 76 30,437 15 5 7,376 14 7 7,323 11 7 30,384 12 5 Vestry Clerk's Department 77 7 4 0 ...... ...... 7 4 0 Repayment of Debt 76 3,279 6 8 1,459 3 9 2,301 11 11 4,121 14 10 Accountant's Department 77 3 0 0 ...... ...... 3 0 0 Interest on Loans 76 1,700 18 10 368 15 1 423 9 7 1,755 13 4 Legal and Parliamentary Expenses 77 0 16 0 ...... ...... Vestry Clerk's Department 77 382 17 2 33 6 8 7 7 4 356 17 10 0 16 0 Accountant's Department 77 1,401 18 10 108 9 11 102 1 8 1,395 10 7 General Receipts 78 134 5 9 32 2 9 ...... 102 3 0 Legal and Parliamentary Expenses 77 79 6 6 ...... 42 0 0 121 6 6 113 3 l General Charges 78 1,148 9 1 191 8 8 211 11 0 1,168 11 5 Paving and Sewers Committee's Accounts 39,301 6 11 Paving and Sewers Committee's Accounts Surveyor's Department 78 43 19 6 ...... ...... 43 12 6 Surveyor's Department 78 322 4 4 2 10 0 ...... 319 14 4 Maintenance of Public Roads and Streets 79 1,130 18 1 360 2 3 173 16 7 944 12 5 Maintenance of Public Roads and Streets 79 6,343 9 2½ 603 12 2 585 4 4 6,325 1 4½ Hoxton Street Depot 80 1 1 0 ...... ...... 1 1 0 Planting Trees in Public Roads and Streets 79 100 16 7 ...... ...... 100 16 7 Miscellaneous Receipts 80 29 14 0 5 0 0 5 0 0 29 14 0 Steam Road Roller 79 661 10 4½ 4 0 4 4 6 7 661 16 7½ 1,018 19 1 Hemming Street Depot 80 49 16 3 6 15 0 1 16 11 44 18 2 Hoxton Street Depot 80 86 14 10 14 6 8 ...... 72 8 2 Miscellaneous Expenses 80 135 6 5 37 7 5 18 0 1 116 5 1 7,641 0 4 Dusting and Scavenging Committee's Accounts Dusting and Scavenging Committee's Accounts Contract System 81 20 0 0 ...... 341 17 8 361 17 8 Contract System 81 9,517 16 8 2,000 0 0 456 3 4 7,974 0 0 361 17 ??? 7,974 0 0 Maintenance Account— (half-year only) Maintance Account (half-year only) Salaries and Wages 81 1,886 2 4 ...... 1,886 2 4 Miscellaneous Receipts 81 93 5 6 ...... 43 5 11 136 11 5 De Beauvoir Wharf 81 226 10 8 ...... 26 15 2 253 5 10 Reliance Wharf 81 94 18 8 ...... 1 17 6 96 16 2 135 11 ??? Stables Account 81 374 10 5 ...... 176 17 8 551 14 1 Working Expenses 82 1,406 17 8 ...... 703 8 0 2,110 5 8 4 898 4 1 Amounts carried forward £ 64,63 8 2 2,689 17 11 3,092 1 5 ...... 65,037 11 ??? Amounts carried forward £59,637 12 11 12,206 10 3 12,386 8 8 59,817 11 4 87 88 GENERAL RATE ACCOUNT—Income and Expenditure from 25th March, 1891, to 25th March, 1892 (Continued). Source. Fo. RECEIPTS. ASSETS Accrued but not Received. Income Application. Fo. PAYMENTS. LIABILITIES Incurred but not Paid. Expenditure Mar. 25, 1891. Mar. 25, 1892. From mar. 25 '91 to Mar. 25, '92 Mar. 25,1891. Mar. 25,1892. from Mar. 25,'91, to Mar. 25, '92. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ S. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. Amounts brought forward 64,635 8 2 2,689 17 11 3,092 1 5 ....... 65,037 11 | Amounts brought forward 59,637 12 11 12,206 10 3 12,386 8 8 ....... 59,817 11 4 General Purposes and Sanitary Committee's Accounts. General Purposes and Sanitary Committee's Accounts Lighting Department 82 55 18 0 39 6 8 21 17 6 38 8 10 lighting Department 83 5,897 16 9 1,468 9 9 1,344 8 8 5,773 15 8 Medical Officer's Department. 83 204 19 6 97 8 6 18 16 0 126 7 0 ???edical Officer's Department. 83 794 17 3 115 15 1 67 5 7 746 7 9 164 15 1 ownHallDisinfectingStation 84 213 16 7 3 14 0 156 3 10 366 6 5 Public Mortuary,Maintenance 84 44 16 3 3 3 8 0 18 10 42 11 5 ???creet Watering 84 905 4 5 72 2 4 977 6 9 Town Hall Committee's Accounts. Removal of Snow (Winter 1890-91) 84 24 4 0 16 3 3 8 0 9 ???r.reation Grounds 84 21 19 6 1 0 0 20 10 a 7 a Q own Hall Committee's w " Anrounts. Establishment of Town Hall. 85 626 3 0 15 2 6 611 0 6 .stablishment of TownHall 85 887 7 5 90 13 2 84 0 8 880 14 ll ftftO 1 A 1 1 611 0 1 lousing of the Working Classes Committee's Accounts. Moira Place and Plumber's Place Area, Shoreditch 85 42 9 4 ....... 5 4 2 47 13 6 47 13 6 AssessmentCommittee's Accounts. Valuation Committee's Accounts. Valuation Committee Expenses 86 117 0 1 ....... 257 15 0 374 15 1 374 15 1 AssessmentCommittee's Accounts. Assessment Committee Receipts 86 217 12 0 217 12 0 Assessment Committee Expenses 86 901 9 3 50 0 0 886 4 2 1,737 13 5 1,737 13 5 217 12 ??? 2,841 15 7 3,132 14 11 13,955 9 2 15,260 11 11 BALANCES—25th Mar..1891- 2,841 15 7 13,955 9 2 As per last published Accounts (fo. 44)7.780 13 6 65,740 0 8 290 19 4 66,031 0 ??? 69,488 13 9 1,305 2 9 70,793 16 6 Deduct—BALANCES, 25th March, 1892— In hands of— Treasurer 685 19 3 Accountant Wages,&c. 309 12 5 Do. Valuation anc Assessment t 2 6 11 i Due from Sewers a/c 4-6 8 2½ Less— ,044 6 9½ Suspense a/c 2 12 1 4½ 4,032 5 5 Excess of Payments over Receipts 3,748 13 1 Expenditure in excess of Income, carried to Balance Sheet 89 4,762 16 ??? 69,488 13 9 £ 70,793 16 ??? £69,488 13 9 £70,793 16 6 88 89 89 GENERAL RATE ACCOUNT— BALANCE SHEET, 25th March, 1892. LIABILITIES. Fo. £ s. d. £ s. d ASSETS. Fo. £ s. d. £ s. d. CAPITAL ACCOUNT. CAPITAL ACCOUNT. To Loan Accounts:—Balances. Mortgages— Dusting and Scavenging 97 6,000 0 0 ! By Property and Permanent Works— Out of Loans. Out of Revenue. Erection of Town Hall 98 4,066 13 4 Expenditure to 25th March, 1892— £ s. d Street Improvements and Paving Works ■ 98 9,365 0 0 6,032 2 0 97 Sun Street to Worship Street (Appold Street Improvement) 99 29,732 18 6 Erection of Town Hall 28,050 0 0 98 5,144 2 11 Goldsmith Square, Open Space 99 2,000 0 0 Street Improvements and Paving Works 43,821 7 1 98 51,164 11 10 Sun Street to Worship Street (Appold Street Improvement) 65,000 0 0 99 To Revenue Account. Repayment of Debt— Goldsmith Square, Open Space 2,000 0 0 99 9 17 0 To 20th March, 1891 08,602 0 0 144,903 9 1 5,153 19 11 150,057 9 0 This year 3,279 6 8 76 71,881 6 8 By Cash Balances, transferred to Revenue Account, Moiety of Proceeds ol Sales ol Surplus Lands, &c. (Appold Year ended 25th March, 1878 123 18 8 Street Improvement) 99 22,854 1 6 Do. 25th March, 1880 503 15 8 94,735 8 2 I Bv Cash Balances—25th March, 1892. 98 627 14 4 Contributions and Receipts from other sources 2,639 19 2 98 In hands of Treasurer— Street Improvements and Paving Works Deduct— 1,002 6 1 98 Paid out of Rate Account 3,065 8 3 5,705 7 5 Due to Treasurer— Dusting and Scavenging 32 2 0 97 Erection ol Town Hall 50 0 0 98 82 2 0 920 4 1 Balance of Assets over Liabilities, on Capital Account 100,440 15 7 1,547 18 5 151,605 7 5 151,605 7 5 REVENUE ACCOUNT. REVENUE ACCOUNT. To Sundry Creditors, for Balances due to them 88 15,260 11 11 By Sundry Debtors, for Balances owing by them 604 13 8 By General Rate -Balance 2,528 1 3 3,132 14 11 By Cash Balances—25th March, 1892 In hands of Treasurer 3,685 19 3 88 Do. Accountant—Wages, &c 30 9 1 2 5 88 Do. do. Assessment, & 5c. 2 6 1 LI 311 19 4 Due from Sewers Account 46 8 2½ 88 4,044 6 9½ Less—Suspense Account 12 1 4½ 4,032 5 5 Deficit—25th March, 189 3,332 15 l 88 Add— Expenditure in excess of Income this year 4,762 16 6 88 DEFICIT 25th March, 1892 8.095 11 7 15,260 11 11 15,260 11 11 WILLIAM GEORGE SMITH, Treasurer, London & Midland Bank, Limited (Shoreditch Branch). £166,865 19 4 ERNST A. R. ADAMS, Accountant. £166,865 19 4 SEWERS RATE ACCOUNT 91 91 SEWERS RATE ACCOUNTS, from 25th March, 1891, to 25th March, 1892. To RECEIPTS— £ s. d. By PAYMENTS— £ s. d. Finance Committee!s Accounts. Finance Committee's Accounts. SEWERS RATE. REPAYMENT OF DEBT. fRates made and allowed, from Lady-Day, 1891, to Lady-day 1892(see below) 5,625 10 8 Fourteenth Instalment of Principal of Loan outstanding (fo. 104): — Add— Excess Assessments, &c. 0 6 11½ Construction of New bewers 133 0 0 Government Property 1 0 0 INTEREST ON LOANS. 1 6 11½ Interest on Balance of Loan outstanding (fo. 104):— 5,620 17 7½ Construction of New Sewers 83 10 11 Less—Allowance to Owners of 25 per cent. 215 7 0 216 10 11 5,411 10 7½ VESTRY CLERKS DEPARTMENT. Deduct—Excused at Rate Sessions 5 1 11 Irrecoverable, &c. 233 1 9½ Salary of Vestry Clerk (proportion) 220 10 10 238 3 8½ Do. Clerks 90 9 8 £5,173 6 11 317 0 6 ACCOUNTANT'S DEPARTMENT. Quarter ending Made by Vestry. Allowed by Police Magistrate. Rateable Value. Rate in the £. Amount £' ,' s. d Salary of Accountant (proportion) 77 14 10 Midsummer. 1891 31st Mar., 1891 10th April, 1891 6574,554 1d. 2,810 12 10 Do. Clerks 193 18 3 Michaelmas, 1891 .... .... 676,409 .. Poundage. 22 0 1 Christmas, 1891 6th Oct., 1891 9th Oct,, 1891 677,161 ½d 1,410 15 0½ 293 13 2 Lady-Day, 1892 29th Dec., 1891 5th Jan., 1892 673,987 ½d. 1,404 2 9½ †5,625 10 8 Collection— Rates made and allowed, from Lady-Day, 1891, to Lady-Day, 1892 On account 4,965 14 0 H. M. Treasury—Grant in aid of Sewers Rate, re Shoreditch County Court, excluded from Valuation List (one year) 0 10 0 4,960 4 0 827 4 7 (Balance—£827 4s. 7d.) Amount carried forward £827 4 7 Amount carried forward % £4,900 4 0 92 92 SEWERS RATE ACCOUNTS (Continued), from 25th March, 1891, to 25th March, 1892. 92 To RECEIPTS £ s. d. By PAYMENTS— £ s. d. Amount brought forward 4,966 4 0 Amount brought forward. £827 4 7 Paving and Sewers Committee's Accounts. Paving and Sewers Committee's Accounts. SURVEYOR'S DEPARTMENT. Salary of Surveyor (proportion) 140 0 0 SEWERAGE AND DRAINAGE WORKS. Do. Clerk 55 0 0 195 0 0 SEWERAGE AND DRAINAGE WORKS. Sewers' connections for private owners 13 9 2 wages— Mechanics and Flushers 928 2 5 Opening and cleansing gully 0 12 0 Watchmen 130 0 0 Transfers— Sewer Extension Works— 1,058 2 5 From Accounts, as under, for works executed, viz.:— Medical Officer's Department (fo. 92) 4 18 4 Eagle Wharf Road 175 4 6 Livermere Road 103 2 4 Deposit Fund (fo. 100)— 278 6 10 Reconstruction & house drainage 295 4 6 Reconstruction and repairs to Sewers 147 6 6 Sale of old castings 14 14 0 Cleaning Sewers, Gullies, &c 5 17 7 309 18 6 Gully Grates, Frames and Side Entrance Covers 103 16 0 314 16 10 Earthenware Pipes, Junctions and Blocks 92 5 6 Bricks, Brooms, Poles, &c 22 18 8 Drain Cleaning Apparatus 8 3 0 Disinfectants 5 12 6 ComDensation for damaere 6 0 4 1,728 9 4 328 18 0 1,923 9 4 (Balance—£1,594 l1s. 4d.) General Purposes and Sanitary Committee's Accounts. General Purposes and Sanitary Committee's Accounts. MEDICAL OFFICER'S DEPARTMENT. Salary of late Medical Officer (Dr. Sutton) 50 0 0 Do. Medical Officer (Dr. Allan) 58 6 8 Do. Insnectors and Clerk 211 5 0 319 11 8 Taxed Costs of Public Inquiry, held 12th November, 1890, re Sanitary condition of Parish 134 16 0 Surveyor's and Valuer's charges, Nile Street property 21 0 0 Drain reconstruction at 8, Hoxton 13 10 1 Do. work done by Paving and Sewers Committee (fo. 92) 4 18 4 " 174 4 5 493 16 1 Amount carried forward £5,295 2 0 Amounts carried forward £493 16 1 2,750 13 11 93 93 SEWERS RATE ACCOUNTS (Continued), from 25th March, 1891, to 25th March, 1892. To RECEIPTS— £ s. (1 By PAYMENTS— £ d Amount brought forward 5,295 2 0 Amounts brought forward £493 16 1 2,750 13 11 General Purposes and Sanitary Committee's Accounts. (continued.) General Purposes and Sanitary Committee's Accounts. (continued.) PUBLIC URINALS. PUBLIC URINALS. Wages 202 13 1 Annual Contribution towards maintenance of Urinal, Shepherdess Walk, ex Vestry of St. Luke, Middlesex 16 0 0 New Urinal at Hoxton Market 75 0 6 Erecting Hoardings, &c 6 2 3 Painting Urinals 40 1 1 Water supply to Kiosk, ex International Hygienic Society 5 5 3 Plumbers' work 20 0 10 Smiths' work and repairs 3 11 4 21 5 3 Water supply 269 3 4 KIOSK CONVENIENCE. 616 12 5 KIOSK CONVENIENCE. Use of Lavatory 8 13 0 Purchase money of building, Shoreditch High Street 100 0 0 Convenience Fees 140 2 9 148 15 0 Painting, Zincworking, and Plumbery 96 12 3 Lavatory Range 17 0 4 Mirrors, Tell-tales, &c 7 8 6 221 1 1 Attendant's wages 50 13 6 Cleaning Materials, Washing Towels,&c. 6 3 8½ Gas 3 11 9 Water (one half) 8 10 9 68 19 8½ 290 0 9½ FLUSHING COURTS, &c. Wages of men, flushing courts and gullies 82 2 6 Repairs to Hose,&c. 3 15 6 Disinfectants and Lime 14 19 9 Water Supply 248 5 5 349 3 2 1,749 12 5½ 170 1 0 (Balance—£1,579 l1s. 5½d.) Excess of Receipts over Payments(fo. 94) 964 16 7½ 5,465 3 0 £5,465 3 0 K 94 94 SEWERS RATE ACCOUNT—Income and Expenditure from 25th March, 1891, to 25th March, 1892. Source. Fo. RECEIPTS. ASSETS Accrued hut not Received. Income from Mar. 25, "91, to Mar. 25,'92 Application. Fo. PAYMENTS. LIABILITIES Incurred but not Paid. Expenditure from Mar. 25,'91 to Mar. 25,'92. Mar. 25, 1891. Mar. 25, 1892. Mar. 25, 1891. Mar. 25, 1892. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. Finance Committee's Accounts. ???inance Committee's Accounts. Repayment of Debt 91 133 0 0 66 10 0 66 10 0 133 0 0 Sewers Rate 91 4,966 4 0 /..... 229 9 9 ..... 5,195 13 9 Interest on Loans 91 83 10 11 19 5 7 18 12 5 82 17 9 Vestry Clerk's Department 91 317 0 6 25 0 0 ...... 292 0 6 Accountant's do. 91 293 13 2 ...... 7 8 0 301 1 2 808 19 5 Paving and Sewers Com mittee's Accounts. Paving and Sewers Committee's Accounts. Surveyor's Department 92 195 0 0 ...... ...... 195 0 0 Sewerage and Drainage Works 92 328 18 0 48 12 7 459 19 2 740 4 7 Sewerage and Drainage 92 1,728 9 4 309 11 5 516 7 5 1,935 5 4 740 4 7 2,130 5 4 General Purposes and Sanitary Committee's Accounts. General Purposes and Sanitary Committee's Accounts. Medical Officer's Medical Officer's Department ..... ..... 18 8 5 18 8 5 Department 92 493 16 1 44 18 1 448 18 0 Public Urinals 93 616 12 5 51 8 1 69 19 10 635 4 2 Public Urinals 93 21 5 3 19 12 9 15 13 10 17 6 4 Kiosk Convenience 93 290 0 9½ 7 17 6 297 18 3½ Kiosk Convenience 93 148 15 9 ..... ..... 148 15 9 lushing Courts, &c 93 349 3 2 5 5 0 343 18 2 184 10 6 1,725 18 68 5 4 723 11 2 521 18 2 686 15 2 68 5 4 621 18 2 5,465 3 0 655 5 10 6,120 8 10 BALANCES—25th Mar., 1892 4,500 6 41 164 17 0 4,665 3 In hands of Treasurer 845 6 7 Less— Due to General Account 46 8 n 798 18 4A Add BALANCES— 25th March, 1891— Due to Treasurer 174 19 10 Less— In hands of Surveyor 9 1 7 165 18 3 Excess op Receipts over Payments 93 964 16 71 Income in excess of Expenditure carried to Balance Sheet 95 1,455 5 £5,465 . 3 0 £6,120 8 10 £5,465 3 0 £ 6,120 8 10 k1 95 SEWERS RATE ACCOUNT— BALANCE SHEET, 25TH MARCH, 1892. LIABILITIES. Fo. £ s. d. £ s. d. ASSETS. Fo. £ s. d. £ s. d. CAPITAL ACCOUNT. CAPITAL ACCOUNT. Co Loan Account—Balance. Mortgage - By Sewerage and Drainage Works. 100 2,128 0 0 2,128 0 0 Expenditure Out of Loans to 25th March, 1892 100 4,000 0 0 To Revenue Account. 4,000 0 0 Repayment of Debt— To 25th March, 1891 1,739 0 0 This year 133 0 0 91 1,872 0 0 Balance of Assets over Liabilities, on Capital Account 1,872 0 0 4,000 0 0 4,000 0 0 REVENUE ACCOUNT. REVENUE ACCOUNT. To Sunday Creditors, for Balances due to them 94 686 15 2 By Sundry Debtors, for Balances owing by them 94 723 11 2 Income in excess of Expenditure this year 1,455 5 5½ 94 By Cash Balances, 25th March, 1892— • Deduct— In hands of Treasurer 845 6 7 94 Less—Due to General Rate Account 46 8 2½ Deficit, 25th March, 1891 619 11 1 94 798 18 4½ SURPLUS—25th March,1892 885 14 4½ 1,522 9 6½ 1,522 9 WILLIAM GEORGE SMITH, Treasurer, London and Midld Bank, Limited (Shoreditch Branch). £5,522 9 6½ ERNST A. R. ADAMS, Accountant. \ £5,522 9 6½ SPECIAL AND CAPITAL ACCOUNTS. 97 97 GENERAL RATE ACCOUNT— DUSTING AND SCAVENGING. To RECEIPTS- £ s. d. By PAYMENTS- £ s. d. CAPITAL ACCOUNT. CAPITAL ACCOUNT. Mortgage. Loans to 25th March, 1892— Expenditure out of Loans, for Works, Plant, &c., at De Beauvoir and Reliance Wharves, to 25th March. 1892— Buildings 1,700 0 0 Compensation and Law Expenses. Plant, Machinery, &c 4,300 0 0 6,000 0 0 Stamp Duty on Mortgage 7 10 0 Law Charges do 7 7 0 Compensation on surrender of Leasehold interests 270 0 0 Solicitor's and Surveyor's Costs 74 4 0 359 1 0 New Stables, Buildings, &g. Constructing Stables, Drainage, Alterations to old Buildings, &c 1,947 0 0 Building Washhouse and Retaining Wall 64 2 9 Entrance Gates and Lamp 54 15 0 Joinery and Mason's work 25 10 8 Zineworking, Painting, &c 41 0 8 Plumbing, and Gasfitting 47 18 11 Ironwork, Bricks, and Pipes 24 1 3 Team Labour, Ballast, Hoggin, &c 44 11 9 Work done by Paving and Sewers Committee (fo. 79) 238 6 4 2,487 7 4 Plant, Live and Dead Stock, &c. 19 Horses. 1,038 0 0 Cart Harness 138 5 0 Tipping Vans 747 0 0 Dust and Slop Carts 466 0 0 Tumbler Carts 54 0 0 Sweeping Machines 110 15 0 Weighbridge and Portable Scales 103 3 9 Tyre Table and fixing 28 7 0 Implements, Tools and Fittings 172 6 10 Machinery and Fixtures, ex. J. & A. Stroud. 200 0 0 Repairs to Gas Engine 17 10 2 Office Furniture 33 18 11 Advertising, Printing, and Serivenery 76 7 0 3,185 13 8 6,032 2 0 6,000 0 0 BALANCE—25th March, 1892— Due to Treasurer 32 2 0 £6.032 2 0 £6,032 2 0 98 98 GENERAL RATE ACCOUNT— M ERECTION OF TOWN HALL. To RECEIPTS- £ s. d. By PAYMENTS- £ s. d. CAPITAL ACCOUNT. CAPITAL ACCOUNT. Mortgages. Loans to 25th March, 1892 28,000 0 0 Expenditure out of Loans to 25th March, 1891— Less—Paid off to 25th March, 1891 23,000 0 0 Land in Old Street Road; Site for Erection, &c. 7,425 0 0 Do. this year 933 6 8 Buildings—(proportion) 20,575 0 0 23,933 6 8 28,000 0 0 Revenue Account. 4,066 13 4 Architect's Fee—Charles Barry 50 0 0 Debt repaid to 25th March, 1891 23,000 0 0 28,050 0 0 Do. this year (fo. 76) 933 6 8 Expenditure out of Revenue to 25th March, 1892— 23,933 6 8 Works of completion, including Furniture, Fixtures, Fittings, &c 5,144 2 11 Amount paid out of General Rate for Property and Permanent Works to 25th March, 1892 3,055 11 3 Contributions and other Receipts. Purchase money of Fire Brigade Station ex Metropolitan Board of Works 1,550 0 0 - Sale of Old Building Materials 150 0 0 Bank Interest, Rents, &c 388 11 8 538 11 8 2,088 11 8 BALANCE—25th March, 1892— Due to Treasurer 50 0 0 £33,194 2 11 £ 33,194 2 11 GENERAL RATE ACCOUNT— 1 street improvements and paving works. To RECEIPTS £ s. d. By PAYMENTS- £ s. d. CAPITAL ACCOUNT. CAPITAL ACCOUNT, Mortgages. 41,923 13 2 Loans to 25th March, 1892 44,900 0 0 1,886 14 5 Less—Paid off to 25th March, 1891 33,972 0 0 3 12 6 Do. this year 1,563 0 0 7 7 0 35,535 0 0 1.897 13 11 9,365 0 0 43,821 7 1 Revenue Account. Cash Balances transferred to Revenue Account, to 25tli March, 1891 627 14 4 Debt repaid to 25th March, 1891 33,972 0 0 Do. this year (fo. 76) 1,563 0 0 BALANCE—25th March, 1892— 35,535 0 0 Contributions. In hands of Treasurer 1,002 6 1 Carriageway Paving at Wilson Street ex Vestry of Parish of St. Luke (Middlesex) 551 7 6 £45,451 7 6 £45,451 7 6 99 GENERAL RATE ACCOUNT- SUN STREET to WORSHIP STREET (Appold Street Improvement). 99 To RECEIPTS- £ s. d. By PAYMENTS- £ s. d. CAPITAL ACCOUNT. Mortgages. CAPITAL ACCOUNT. Loans to 25th March, 1892 65,000 0 0 ‡ Expenditure out of Loans (borne by the Vestry) to 25th March, 1892 65,000 0 0 Less—Paid off to 25th March, 1891 34,484 1 6 Do. this Year 783 0 0 ‡ The total net cost of this Improvement is borne jointly by the Vestry and the Metropolitan Board of Works. 35,267 1 6 29,732 18 6 Revenue Account. Debt repaid to 25th March, 1891 11,630 0 0 Do. this year (fo. 76) 783 0 0 12,413 0 0 Contributions. Moiety of proceeds of Sales of Surplus Land, Property, &c., contributed towards Redemption of Debt to 25th March, 1892, ex Metropolitan Board of Works 22,854 1 6 35,267 1 6 £ 65,000 0 0 £65,000 0 0 GENERAL RATE ACCOUNT— GOLDSMITH SQUARE OPEN SPACE. To RECEIPTS- £ s. d. By PAYMENTS- £ s. d. CAPITAL ACCOUNT. CAPITAL ACCOUNT. « Mortgage. Loan to 25th March, 1892 2,000 0 0 Expenditure out of Loan to 25th March, 1892— Contribution to London County Council re Purchase of Freehold Land, Goldsmith Square area, under Open Spaces Acts, 1877 to 1890 2,000 0 0 Revenue Account. Amount paid out of General Rate for Property and Permanent Works to 25th March, 1892 (fo. 84) 9 17 0 Expenditure out of Revenue to 25th March, 1892— 2 10 0 7 7 0 9 17 0 £2,009 17 0 £2,009 17 0 100 100 SEWERS RATE ACCOUNT— CONSTRUCTION OF NEW SEWERS. To RECEIPTS £ s. d. By PAYMENTS- £ s. d. CAPITAL ACCOUNT. CAPITAL ACCOUNT. Mortgage. Loans to 25th March, 1892 4,000 0 0 Expenditure out of Loan to 25th March, 1892 4,000 0 0 Less—Paid off to 25th March, 1891 1,739 0 0 Do. this year 133 0 0 1,872 0 0 2,128 0 0 Revenue Account. Debt repaid to 25th March, 1891 1,739 0 0 Do. this year (fo. 91) 133 0 0 1,872 0 0 £4,000 0 0 £ 4,000 0 0 DEPOSIT FUND From 25th March, 1891, to 25th March, 1892. To RECEIPTS- rate accounts. £ s. d. By PAYMENTS- Rate Accounts. £ s. d. General. Sewers. General. Sewers. REVENUE ACCOUNT. £ s. d. £ s. d. REVENUE ACCOUNT. £ s. d. £ s. d. Deposits for Paving, Sewerage, and other works 442 17 6 420 0 0 862 17 6 Transfers— Contributions to Rate Accounts, as under, for cost of works executed, &c. Additional Cost re do 19 17 1 23 11 7 43 8 8 Maintenance of Public Roads and Streets (fo. 79) 205 10 0 ... ... ... 205 10 0 Sewerage and Drainage Works (fo. 92) ... ... ... 309 18 6 309 18 6 462 14 7 443 11 7 906 6 2 205 10 0 309 18 6 515 8 6 Surplus of Deposits returned 185 3 7 111 6 1 296 9 8 Cash Balance, 25th March, 1891: In hands of Surveyor 342 17 2 19 19 7 362 16 9 Cash Balance, 25th March, 1892:— In hands of Accountant 414 18 2 42 6 7 457 4 9 £805 11 9 463 11 2 1,269 2 11 £805 11 9 463 11 2 1,269 2 11 101 VESTRY RATE ACCOUNTS. ELECTED AUDITORS' CERTIFICATE. To the Vestry of the Parish of St. Leonard, Shoreditch, in the County of London. We, the undersigned being the Auditors appointed, pursuant to Section 105 of the Metropolis Local Management Act, 1855 (18 & 19 Vict., c. 120), have examined and audited the Accounts of the Vestry of the said Parish, for the financial year, from the 25th March, 1891, to 25th March, 1892. We hereby Certify them to be true and correct in all particulars, and we accordingly allow the said Accounts. Given under our hands this 31st day of May, 1892. JOHN FARTHING, Chairman, ARTHUR BEDINGHAM, JOHN LAMING, ZEPHANIAH BUNKER, JOHN FOSKETT. BURIAL BOARD ACCOUNTS. ELECTED AUDITORS' CERTIFICATE. We, the undersigned being the Auditors appointed by the Vestry of the Parish of St. Leonard, Shoreditch, in the County of London, pursuant to Section 18, of the Burial Act, 1852 (15 & 16 Vict., c. 85) have examined and audited the Accounts of the Burial Board of the said Parish, for the financial year, from the 25th March, 1891 to 25th March, 1892. We hereby Certify them to be true and correct in all particulars, and we accordingly allow the said Accounts. Given under our hands this 31st day of May, 1892. JOHN FARTHING, Chairman, ARTHUR BEDINGHAM, JOHN LAMING, ZEPHANIAH BUNKER, JOHN FOSKETT. AGGREGATE STATEMENT OF LIABILITIES AND ASSETS. 102 102 aggregate statement of liabilities and assets—25th march, 1892. LIABILITIES. Fo. £ s. d. £ s. d. ASSETS. Fo. £ s. > d. £ s. d. CAPITAL ACCOUNTS. General Rate Sewers Rate. CAPITAL ACCOUNTS. General Kate. Sewers Rate. To Loan Accounts:—Balances. By Property and Permanent Works. Mortgages— 6,000 0 0 89 Dusting and Scavenging 6,032 2 0 89 Dusting and Scavenging Erection of Town Hall 33 194 2 11 89 Erection of Town Hall 4,066 13 4 89 Street Improvements and paving Works 43, 821 7 i 89 Street Improvements and Paving Works 9,365 0 0 89 Sun Street to Worship Street (Appold St. Improvement) 29,732 18 6 89 Sun Street to Worship Street (Appold St. Improvement) 65 000 0 0 89 Goldsmith Square, Open Space 2,000 0 0 89 Goldsmith Square, Open Space 2,009 17 0 95 Construction of New Sewers 95 2,128 0 0 Construction of New Sewers 4,000 0 0 51,164 11 10 2,128 0 0 53,292 11 10 150,057 9 0 4,000 0 0 154.057 9 0 To Revenue Account. Repayment of Debt— By Cash Balances, transferred to Revenue Account. Erection of Town Hall 23,933 6 8 98 Year ended 25th March 1878 . 123 18 8 Street Improvements and Paving Works 35,535 0 0 98 Do 25th March 1880 503 15 8 Sun Street to Worship Street(Appold St. Improvement) 12,413 0 0 99 89 627 14 4 Construction of New Sewers 100 1,872 0 0 71,881 6 8 1.872 0 0 By Cash Balances—25th March, 1892. Contributions from Rates and other Receipts— In hands of Treasurer— Erection of Town Hall 5,144 2 11 98 Street Improvements and Paving Works 1,002 6 1 89 Street Improvements and Paving Works 551 7 6 98 Deduct— Goldsmith Square, Open Space 9 17 0 99 Due to Treasurer— Dusting and Scavenging 32 2 0 89 Metropolitan Board of Works — Erection of Town Hall 50 0 0 89 Moiety of proceeds of Sales of Surplus Land and Property—Sun Street, &c., Improvement 22,854 1 6 99 82 2 0 920 4 1 1,547 18 5 100,440 15 7 1,872 0 0 100,440 15 7 Excess of Assets over Liabilities, on Capital Account. 102,312 15 7 RF1VENTTE ACCOUNTS 155,605 7 5 REVENUE ACCOUNTS. 155,605 7 5 By Deposit Fund Cash Balance 100 457 4 9 To Deposit Fund- Accumulations to date 100 457 4 9 457 4 9 457 4 9 By Sundry Debtors. To Sundry Creditors. Poor Rate Account 4 590 8 5 71 Poor Rate Account 9,626 9 4 71 General Rate Account 3,132 14 11 89 General Rate Account 15,260 11 11 89 Sewers Rate Account 723 11 9 95 Sewers Rate Account 686 15 2 95 25,578 16 5 8,446 14 6 By Cash Balances. In hands of Treasurer— Poor Rate 6,918 11 6 71 General Rate 3,685 19 3 89 Sewers Rate 845 6 7 95 Add— 11,449 17 4 In hands of Accountant (Wages, &c.) 311 19 4 89 ' 11,761 16 8 Less—Suspense Account 12 1 4½ 11,749 15 3½ 5y Deficit. Surplus. Deficit. Poor Rate 1,882 10 7 71 General Rate 8,095 11 7 89 Sewers Rate 835 L4 95 2,718 4 1 8,095 11 7 TOTAL DEFICIT, 25th March, 1892 2,718 4 11½ 5 377 6 7½ 25,573 16 5 25,573 16 5 £181,636 8 7 MERNST A. R. ADAMS, Accountant. £181,636 8 7 MORTGAGE DEBT 104 104 STATEMENT shewing the DEBT outstanding on the ACCOUNTS of the VESTRY of the Parish of ST. LEONARD, SHOREDITCH (COUNTY OF LONDON), and the Amount of PRINCIPAL AND INIEREST charged in the Accounts for the ended 25th March, 1892. Purpose of Loan. 1 No. of Mortgage. 2 When Borrowed. Period within which to be repaid. 4 Original Loan. 5 Repaid. 6 Balance of Loan outstanding, 25th March, 1892. 7 Interest. Present Annual Instalment. Charged in Accounts. 3 Rate Per Cent. 8 When Payable. 9 Amount. 10 Date of Repayment. 11 Principal. 12 Interest. 13 Folio. GENERAL RATE ACCOUNT. Years £ £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. Erection of Town Hall 10 5 Sept., 1865 30 10,000 8,666 13 4 1,333 6 8 5 Half-yearly 333 6 8 13 September 333 0 8 73 2 6 do. 11 21 Nov., 1865 30 4,000 3,466 13 4 533 6 8 5 do. 133 6 8 29 November 133 6 8 82 10 0 do. 12 6 Feb., 1866 30 4,000 3,466 13 4 533 6 8 5 do. 133 6 8 7 February 133 6 8 32 10 0 do. 13 9 Oct., 1866 30 4,000 3,333 6 8 666 13 4 5 do. 133 6 8 10 October 133 6 8 39 0 0 do. 14 29 Jan., 1867 30 6,000 5,000 0 0 1,000 0 0 5 do. 200 0 0 30 January 200 0 0 58 10 0 28,000 23,933 6 8 4,066 13 4 933 6 8 933 6 8 235 12 6 76 Paving Works 20 24 Mar., 1877 20 5,000 3,750 0 0 1,250 0 0 3 ¾ Quarterly 250 0 0 1 October 250 0 0 53 18 1½ do. 21 23 June, 1877 20 5,000 3,685 0 0 1,315 0 0 3¾ do. ' 263 0 0 1 October 263 0 0 56 14 11 do. 23 1 Oct., 1877 20 5,000 3,500 0 0 1,500 0 0 3¾ do. 250 0 0 1 October 250 0 0 63 5 lb do. 31 19 Feb., 1892 15 2,900 2,900 0 0 3½ do. 194 0 0 1 January Street Improvements & do. 26 I April, 1879 15 6,000 4,800 0 0 1,200 0 0 3¾ do. 400 0 0 1 April 400 0 0 48 15 0 do. 27 1 July, 1879 15 6,000 4,800 0 0 1,200 0 0 3¾ do. 400 0 0 1 J uly 4U0 0 0 52 10 0 29,900 20,535 0 0 9,365 0 0 1,757 0 0 1,568 0 0 275 2 10* 76 Sun Street to Worship Street (Appold Street, Improvement) 22 31 July, 1877 52 40,000 10,778 0 0 29,222 0 0 3¾ do. 769 0 0 1 October 769 0 0 1,117 9 1 \ †25 1 Oct., 1878 51 15,000 14,489 1 6 510 18 6 3¾ do. 14 0 0 1 October 14 0 0 19 10 111 55,000 25,267 1 6 29,732 18 6 783 0 0 783 0 0 1,137 0 Of 76 Goldsmith Square, Open Space 29 31 Oct., 1891 49 2,000 2,000 0 0 3½ do. 40 0 0 31 October 17 10 0 76 Dusting and Scavenging— Buildings 30 31 Oct., 1891 30 1,700 1,700 0 0 3½ do. 56 0 0 1 October 10 2 li Plant, Machinery, &c 30 31 Oct., 1891 5 4,300 4,300 0 0 3½ do. 860 0 0 1 October 25 11 3 i=r 6,000 6,000 0 0 916 0 0 35 13 5 76 SEWERS RATE ACCOUNT. Construction of New Sewers 24 19 Feb., 1878 30 4,000 1,872 0 0 2,128 0 0 3¾ do. 133 0 0 1 October 133 0 0 83 10 11 91 Total £124,900 71,607 8 2 53,292 11 10 £ 4,562 6 8 £ 3,412 6 8 1,784 9 9 Note.—† Mortgage No. 25. The annual instalment was reduced by agreement with the Metropolitan Board of Works to £14 from 1st October, 1888, [in consideration of the allocation of certain proceeds of Surplus Lands, Interest, &c., arising from the Works of Improvement, pursuant to Act 39 and 40 Vict., cap. 1xxix. (27th June, 1876).] General Rate Account 3,279 6 8 1,700 18 10 76 Sewers do 133 0 0 83 10 11 91 £ 3,412 6 8 1,784 9 9 105 STATEMENT shewing the TOTAL MORTGAGE DEBT Outstanding, 25th March, 1892, and the Rates per cent. of Interest payable thereon. Purpose of Loan. 3½ per cent. 3¾ per cent. 5 per cent. Total. £ s. d. £ s d. £ s. d. £ s. d. GENERAL RATE ACCOUNT. Erection of Town Hall 4,066 13 4 4,066 13 4 Street Improvements and Paving Works 2,900 0 0 6,465 0 0 9,365 0 0 Sun Street to Worship Street (Appold Street Improvement) • 29,732 18 6 29,732 18 6 Goldsmith Square, Open Space 2,000 0 0 2,000 0 0 Dusting and Scavenging (5,000 0 0 6,000 0 0 SEWERS RATE ACCOUNT Construction of New Sewers 2,128 0 0 2,128 0 0 Total £10,900 0 0 38,325 18 6 4,066 13 4 53,292 11 10 BALANCES OF LOANS due to :— Metropolitan Board of Works (now transferred to London County Council) 38,325 18 6 London County Council 10,900 0 0 Mutual Life Assurance Society 4,066 18 4 Total Mortgage Debt outstanding £53,292 11 10 £ s. d Note:—Average Rate of Interest per cent. 3 15 11 ERNST A. R. ADAMS, Accountant. SALARIES AND ALLOWANCES TO OFFICIALS 106 106 salaries and allowances to officials of the vestry, salaries and allowances to officials of the vestry, 106 25th March, 1892. 25th March, 1892—(Continued). Name. Nature of Office. Present Annual Salaries. Amount paid during Finan cial Year. Fo. Salaries Charged in Accounts Name. Nature of Office. Present Annual Salaries. Amount paid during Financial Year. Fo. Salaries Charged in Accounts. Poor Rate. General Rate Sewers Rate Poor Rate. General Rate Sewers Rate. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. Vestry Clerk's Dept. Brought forward £3,676 9 3 965 9 2 1,905 6 5 805 13 8 H. Mansfield Robinson, LL.D. (Lond.) Vestry Clerk and Solicitor 425 0 0 453 1 8 226 10 10 226 10 10 Medical Officer's Dept. H. G. Sutton, M.D. (in full) (late) Medical Officer of Health 200 0 0 100 0 0 ... 50 0 0 50 0 0 Do Clerk to Assessment Com. 50 0 0 50 0 0 50 0 0 Fras. J. Allan, M.D. do. 200 0 0 116 13 4 ... 58 6 8 58 6 8 Geo. w. Clarke Law Clerk 135 0 0 70 19 4 35 9 8 35 9 8 "Thos Stevenson,M D. Public Analyst 50 0 0 62 10 0 ... 62 10 0 John F. Burton Minute Clerk 110 0 0 0 0 0 55 0 0 55 o 6 Hugh Alexander Chief Sanitary ... • 77 Inspector 200 0 0 200 0 0 ... 100 0 0 100 0 0 684 1 0 86 367 0 6 317 6 James w. Lear Assistant do. 150 0 0 182 10 0 91 5 0 91 5 0 91 A. w. Stiles do. do. 109 4 0 111 6 0 111 6 0 Alfred Barr Clerk 80 0 0 76 6 9 56 6 9 20 0 0 Accountant's Dept. H. G. Suffield Disinfector 78 0 0 79 10 0 79 10 0 83 Henry F. Jones (late) A ccountant 200 0 0 14 16 0 14 16 0 928 16 1 84 609 4 5 319 11 8 Ernst A. R. Adams Accountant 200 0 0 155 9 8 77 14 10 77 14 10 92 William Culshaw Chief Clerk 110 0 0 57 16 6 28 18 3 28 18 3 Public Mortuary. Rate Department. Henry Wilton Caretaker 26 0 0 28 0 0 28 0 0 Arthur Bennett Rate Clerk 120 0 0 120 0 0 60 0 0 60 0 0 28 0 0 84 ... 28 0 0 Arthur Hurn do 105 0 0 105 0 0 52 10 o 52 10 0 H. Leopold Loly do 105 0 0 105 0 0 52 10 0 5? 10 0 Pound ait e. Dusting &. Scavenging Department. Joseph Riley Rate Collector 336 18 3 336 18 3 193 18 11 134 16 1 8 3 3 Geo. Pearce do. 304 8 10 304 8 10 175 15 1 121 6 10 7 6 11 b Johm Robinson Superintendent 130 0 0 77 10 0 77 10 0 H. W. Hart do. 268 1 8 268 1 8 154 7 8 107 4 1 6 9 11 Samuel Dawkins General Clerk . 78 0 0 43 6 3 43 6 3 Salaries. Arthur May Weigh Clerk 62 8 0 30 14 2 30 14 2 ... Edwin Cranston do. 200 0 0 230 0 0 115 0 0 115 0 0 151 10 5 81 ... 151 10 5 ... G. C. Young do. 200 0 0 185 0 0 92 10 0 92 10 0 R. S. Ricketts do. 180 0 0 180 0 0 90 0 0 90 0 0 Henry F. Jones do. 180 0 0 1 52 15 0 76 7 6 76 7 6 Establishment of Town Hall. E. f. Russell (in full) do. 180 0 0 135 0 0 67 10 0 67 10 0 69 1 • c W. B. Filmer Hall Keeper 100 0 0 108 6 8 ... 108 6 8 2,350 5 11 77 965 9 2 1,091 3 7 293 13 2 > • 108 6 8 85 108 6 8 ... 91 Surveyor's Dept. | General Charges d E. H. Russell (in full (late)Messengei 104 0 0 73 0 0 73 0 0 ... Fredk. S. Case Junior Clerk 26 0 0 2 0 0 2 0 0 ... Alfred J. Martin Surveyor 280 0 0 280 0 0 140 0 0 140 0 0 Robert M. Malcolm do. 26 0 0 2 0 0 ... 2 0 0 ... J. Newton Heale Clerk 110 0 0 112 2 4 • 57 2 4 55 0 0 77 0 0 78 77 0 0 ... 392 2 4 78 92 • f 197 2 4 195 0 0 Total £4,970 2 5 965 9 2 2,879 7 11 1,125 5 4 Lighting Dept. Chas. H. Doughty Lighting Inspector 200 0 0 250 0 0 250 0 0 a With a fixed fee of 10/- each for Analysis of Food Samples. b With Residence, Fire, Light, Rates and Taxes free. c With Apartments, Fire, Light, Rates and Taxes fee, and Uniform clothing. d With Uniform Clothing. 250 0 0 82 • 250 0 0 • • • Carried forward £3,676 9 3 965 9 2 1,905 6 5 805 13 8 L 2 TABULAR STATEMENT shewing the RATES ASSESSED AND LEVIED, with SUMMARY OF COLLECTION, 1891-92. 107 THE VESTRY OF THE PARISH OP SAINT LE??? SHOREDITCH, IN THE COUNTY OF LONDON. TABULAR STATEMENT SHEWING THE RATES ASSESSED AND LEVIED, WITH SUMMARY COLLECTION, IN RESPECT OF THE YEAR FROM 25th MARCH, 1891, to 25th MARCH, 1892. COLLECTING DISTRICTS, PUBLIC COMPANIES, &c. POOR RATE. VESTRY RATES. SUMMARY OF COLLECTION. Rateable Value in force at Lady-Day, 1892. Rates levied at 8s. 0½d. in the £ Allowance to Owners. Arrears 25th March, 1891. Total amount to be collected. Actually collected. Recoverable Arrears it 25th March, 1892. IRRECOVERABLE. Ruteable force at Lady-Day 1892. ' General Rate 2s. 0½d. into ??? Total of Vestry Rates at 2s. 2½d. in the £ Allowance to Owners. Arreur 25th March, 1891. Total amount to be collected. Actually collected. Recoverable arrears at 25th March, 1892. IRRECOVERABLE. Total actually collected (Cols. 7 and 22). UNCOLLECTED AT BALANCING. OTHERWISE NOT RECOVERABLE. ??? OTHERWISE NOT RECOVERABLE. Arrears outstanding 25th March, 1S92. Legally excused. Otherwise not recoverable Legally excused. Empties. Reduced on Appeal. 25 per cent, allowance to Owners. Runs. No effects and nsolvencies. Legally excused. Empties Reduced on Appeal. 25 per cent, allowance to Owners. Runs. No effects and Insolvencies. 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. 10. 11. 12. 13. 14. 15. 16. 17 18. 19. 20. 21. 22. 23. 24. 26. 27. 28. 29. 30 31. 32. 33. 34. Collecting Districts— £ £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ £ s. d s. d. £ s. d. £ S. d. £ s. d. £ S. d. £ S. d. £ S. d. £ s. d. £ d. £ S. d. £ S. d. £ S. d. £ S. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ S. d. £ S. d. £ S. d. 1 Moorfields 102,787 15,637 4 10 326 0 8 52 15 1 15,363 19 3 14,207 6 6 130 14 9½ 1 8 4 889 12 5½ 104 14 10½ 2 13 10½ 17 17 8 9 10 9 101,176 10,331 10 10½ 16 5 11,174 7 34 236 11 10 35 3 4 10,972 18 9½ 10,151 0 0 82 16 1½ 0 17 0 648 16 8½ 69 13 11 1 19 7½ 10 9 6½ 7 5 10½ 26,336 18 04 24,358 6 6 213 10 11 2 5 4 1,762 15 3½ 1 2 Church North 68,668 10,438 10 3 571 13 5 19 19 11 9,886 16 9 9,483 13 9 28 5 7½ 9 13 6 253 10 3 68 12 4 8 8 2½ 28 4 10 6 8 3 68,668 7,004 5 11½ 0 5½ 7,574 6 5 415 4 6½ 13 6 8 7,172 8 6½ 6,881 4 3 18 17 6½ 6 15 0 184 8 4 49 7 11 5 19 4 20 14 3 -5 1 11 17,059 5 3A 16,364 18 0 47 3 2 16 8 6 630 15 7½ 2 3 Church North 77,723 11,807 17 11 327 7 11½ 17 5 0 11,497 14 11½ 10.696 18 7½ 66 11 6 21 19 10 629 13 3 49 10 4½ 1 19 4 29 7 6½ 1 14 6 77,723 7,926 17 5 17 4½ 8,573 14 9½ 237 3 1½ 11 10 0 8,348 1 8 7,765 7 5 44 3 10½ 18 14 0½ 459 10 9 35 2 4 1 15 0 21 17 10 1 10 5 19,845 16 74 18,462 6 0½ 110 15 4½ 40 13 10½ 1,232 1 4 3 4 Hoxton 79,955 12,168 6 2½ 369 6 4½ 15 14 7 11,814 14 5 10,983 17 3 44 8 5½ 11 5 11 642 16 5 46 18 10½ 7 0 0 32 15 7½ 45 11 10½ 79,955 8,167 10 4½ 15 9½ 8,834 6 2 268 0 6½ 10 9 9 8,576 15 4½ 7,976 17 9 28 9 11½ 8 12 7½ 466 15 6½ 34 0 8½ 5 1 8 22 6 5 34 10 8½ 20,391 9 94 18,960 15 0 72 18 5 19 18 6½ 1,337 17 10 4 5 Wenlock 60,811 9,244 19 7 273 0 9½ 12 6 9 8,984 5 6½ 8,690 9 2 14 19 0½ 26 13 11 162 5 0½ 38 9 8 6 6 4 24 5 1 20 17 3½ 60,811 6,203 18 11½ 12 10½ 6,710 11 10 198 2 3 8 4 6 6,520 14 1 6,312 12 11 9 12 1½ 17 8 0½ 118 14 9½ 26 1 2 3 17 6 17 1 9½ 15 5 9 15,504 19 74 15,003 2 1 24 11 2 44 1 11½ 433 4 5 5 6 Whitmore 56,644 8,657 6 3 641 4 2 1 6 3 8,017 8 4 7,810 7 5 10 5 0½ 7 12 7½ 120 17 0½ 32 7 7½ 2 8 2 30 4 10 3 5 7 56,644 5,811 11 3 4 10½ 6,285 16 1½ 465 16 1½ 0 17 6 5,820 17 6 5,673 9 4 6 9 6 5 13 0½ 87 13 5 22 8 1 1 18 4½ 20 18 7 2 7 2 13,838 5 10 13,483 16 9 16 14 6½ 13 5 8 324 8 10½ 6 7 Kingsland and Haggerston West 57,789 8,809 14 6½ 602 10 6½ 23 0 7 8,230 4 7 7,774 14 10 127 14 6½ 9 5 6 291 11 5 14 12 10 1 10 0 1 5 6 9 9 11½ 57,789 5,913 2 2½ 12 4 6,395 14 6½ 437 3 7 15 6 11 5,973 17 10½ 5,656 9 2½ 80 13 5 7 15 7 210 11 10 9 5 8 1 2 7 1 2 8 6 16 11 14,204 2 Si 13,431 4 0½ 208 7 11½ 17 1 1 547 9 4½ 7 8 Haggerston East and Acton 65,613 10,030 5 1½ 825 16 10 3 10 6 9,207 18 9½ 8,838 9 1½ 9 14 6½ 2 1 4 263 2 2 39 18 3 4 18 1½ 39 11 5 10 3 10 65,613 6,734 6 9½ 1 4 7,284 8 14½ 599 8 3 2 7 0 6,687 6 10½ 6,418 8 10 6 2 10 1 14 11½ 192 3 6½ 30 18 2 3 11 5 27 12 10½ 6 14 2 15,895 5 8 15,256 18 0½ 15 17 4½ 3 16 3½ 618 13 11½ 8 Public Companies, &c— 9 School Board for London 12,216 1,857 17 0 .... .... 1,857 17 0 1,857 17 0 .... .... .... .... .... .... .... 12,216 1,247 1 0 16 0 1,348 17 0 .... .... 1,348 17 0 1,348 17 0 .... .... .... .... .... .... .... 3,206 14 0 3.206 14 0 .... .... .... 9 10 Gas Light and Coke Company 27,622 4,743 19 4½ 0 7 7 0 0 0½ 4,743 11 10 4,630 18 6 .... .... .... 12 13 4 .... .... .... 27,622 3,192 16 0½ 17 6 3,453 13 6½ 0 5 5½ .... 3,453 8 1 3,361 3 .... .... 91 10 10 .... .... .... 8,196 19 11 7,992 9 .... .... 204 4 2 10 11 Great Eastern Railway Company 23,626 2,549 0 10 .... .... 2,549 0 10 2,444 17 6 .... .... .... 104 3 4 .... .... .... 23,626 1,701 3 10 6 10 1,834 10 8 .... .... 1,834 10 8 3,361 17 3 .... .... .... 62 0 0 .... .... .... 4,883 11 6 4,216 18 2 .... .... 166 13 4 11 12 London & NorthWestern Railway Company.. 22,163 3,374 12 9 ½ .... .... 3,374 12 9½ 3,369 13 5 .... .... 0 0 0½ 4 19 4 .... .... .... 18,491 1,919 0 11½ 8 0½ 2,077 9 0 .... .... 2,077 9 0 2,041 0 4 .... .... ... 36 8 8 .... .... .... 5,452 1 9½ 5,410 13 9 .... .... 41 8 0½ 12 13 North London Railway Company 26,588 4,032 1 10 .... .... 4,032 1 10 4,024 18 3 .... .... .... 7 3 3 .... .... .... 2,706 8 0 19 5½ 2,927 7 5½ .... .... 2,927 7 5½ 2,922 4 0 .... .... .... 5 3 5½ .... 6,959 9 3½ 6,947 2 3 .... .... 12 7 0½ 13 14 Shoreditch Town Hall 1,250 190 2 1 .... .... 190 2 1 190 2 1 .... .... .... .... .... .... .... 1,250 127 12 1 ??? 4 138 0 5 .... .... 138 0 5 138 0 5 ... .... .... .... .... .... .... 328 2 6 328 2 6 .... .... .... 14 Government Property— 15 H. M. Treasury—Shoreditch County Court (excluded from Valuation List) 120 18 5 0 .... 9 0 0 27 5 0 18 10 0 8 15 0 .... .... .... .... .... .... 120 12 5 ??? 0 0 13 5 0 .... 6 0 0 19 5 0 13 0 0 6 5 0 .... .... .... .... .... .... 46 10 0 31 10 0 15 0 0 .... .... 15 683,575 †l03,560 3 7½ 3,937 8 4 154 18 8½ 99,777 14 0 95,022 13 5 141 8 6½ 90 0 11½ 3,253 8 1 624 4 5 35 4 0½ 203 12 6 107 2 0½ 678,292 768,999 10 ??? 17 7½ 74.626 8 4½ 2,857 15 8½ 103 5 8 71.871 18 4 68,432 9 5½ 283 10 4½ 67 10 3½ 2,368 14 11 472 10 11 25 5 6 142 3 14 79 12 11 171 12 4 163,455 2 10½ 724 18 11 157 11 3 7,311 19 34 16 Percentage 96.049 3-802 149 100.00 95.235 .443 .090 3.260 .626 035 .204 .107 88.792 Levied on Occupiers. ???mi Bed on 96. 033 3.829 .138 10000 95.215 .394 093 3.296 .658 .035 .198 .111 100.00 95.226 .422 .092 4.260 16 4.3 22 100 00 4.391 4.352 Rates levied during year (see folios 76 & 91 68,959 5 6½ 5 10 8 Add— 28 0 2½ 0 6 11½ 12 5 0 1 0 0 £68,999 10 9 6 17 7½ ERNST A. R. ADAMs, Accountant. 31st May, 1892 STATISTICS. L3 100 RATEABLE VALUE and RATES LEVIED for POOR LAW and VESTRY PURPOSES, from 1856 to 1890, since the passing of the Metropolis Local Management Act, 1855. Year. Annual Net Rateable Valuation. Poor Rate. Lighting. Vestry Rates. Total Rate in the £. General. Sewers. Main Drainage £ S. d. d. S. d. d. d. s. d. 1856 244,988 4 0 †6 †0 8 †3 ... 5 5 1857 251,609 4 0 4 1 5 3 ... 6 0 1858 256,032 4 0 5 1 4 4 ... 6 1 1859 267,088 3 2 4 1 3 4 ... 5 1 1860 271,165 3 1 4 1 3 5 3 5 4 1861 274,831 3 3 4 1 5 6 3 5 9 1862 276,726 3 1 5 1 1 4 1 5 0 1863 281,042 3 1 4 0 11 3 4 4 11 1861 289,201 3 0 5 1 2 5 4 5 4 1865 298,330 3 9 3 1 4 4 4 6 0 1866 304,461 4 0 2 1 5 6 4 6 5 1867 324,436 4 1 ... 1 8 6 4 6 7 1868 366,239 4 1 ... 1 8 4 4 6 5 1869 388,794 4 3 ... 1 6 5 4 6 6 1870 390,057 3 10 ... 1 11 6 1 6 4 1871 389,840 4 4 ... 1 5 2 ... 5 11 1872 441,456 3 5 ... 1 5 5 ... 5 3 1873 443,936 2 7 ... 1 6 4 ... 4 5 1874 445,311 2 10 ... 1 8 7 ... 5 1 1875 447,610 2 0 ... 1 10 6 ... 4 4 1876 453,845 2 6 ... 1 10 6 ... 4 10 1877 503,486 2 6 ... 1 10 6 ... 4 10 1878 512,656 2 7 ... 2 0 6 ... 5 1 1879 527,340 2 1 ... 2 1 6 ... 4 8 1880 535,657 2 3 ... 1 10 10 ... 4 11 1881 541,812 2 4 ... 1 11 7 ... 4 10 1882 591,215 2 6 ... 2 0 7 ... 5 1 1883 609,500 2 4 ... 2 1 7 ... 5 0 1884 612,919 2 3 ... 2 1 7 ... 4 11 1885 614,926 2 6 ... 2 1 8 ... 5 3 1886 615,970 2 0 ... 2 3 8 ... 4 11 1887 643,535 2 2 ... 1 11 8 ... 4 9 1888 643,043 2 4 ... 1 10 10 ... 5 0 1889 644,758 2 9 ... 1 10 5 ... 5 0 1890 646,185 3 2 ... 2 1 1 ... 5 4 1891 682,444 3 0 ... 2 1 1½ ... 5 2½ † Three Quarters only. Pavement Rate.—The Rate of 3d. per square yard, to defray the cost of maintenance, &c., of Canal Bridges and Public Ways, adjoining Buildings, Dead Walls or Void Spaces (pursuant to 57 Geo. III., cap 20), was discontinued at Christmas, 1877. Note.—This Schedule shews the Rates levied in the £ in respect of the Year from 1st January to 31st December. 110 RETURN shewing AMOUNTS CONTRIBUTED UNDER PRECEPTS. (1) or Toll Bridge Expenses (Redemption of Debt and Maintenance Charges), from 1879 to 1889. (2) For General Expenditure in respect of Metropolitan Consolidated Rate, from 1860 to 1889. Year. Raised in Vestry Rates. Total amount of Precept. General Rate. Sewers Rate. Toll Bridges. 1 General Expenses. 2 Metropolitan Board of works. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. 1860 ...... 3,944 17 5 3,944 17 5 1861 ...... 4,653 2 9 4,653 2 9 1862 ...... 5,875 14 7 5,875 14 7 1863 ...... 5,217 9 5 5,217 9 5 1864 ...... 5,784 15 11 5,784 15 11 1865 ...... 6,504 13 9 6 504 13 9 1866 ...... 7,975 6 11 7,975 6 11 1867 ...... 8,859 13 2 8,859 13 2 1868 ...... 10,016 0 9 10,016 0 9 1869 ...... 8,587 9 11 8,587 9 11 1870 ...... 9,335 7 2 9,335 7 2 1871 ...... 9,167 17 11 9,167 17 11 1872 ...... 5,884 12 11 5,884 12 11 1873 ...... 4,523 6 6 4,523 6 6 1874 ...... 4,804 17 7 4,804 17 7 1875 ...... 7,957 18 11 7,957 18 11 1876 ...... 9,854 8 6 9,854 8 6 1877 ...... 9,480 8 2 9,480 8 2 1878 ...... 9,896 7 11 9,896 7 11 1879 370 1 9 9,783 12 6 10,153 14 3 1880 1,208 15 0 11,114 13 6 12,323 8 6 1881 1,814 3 7 11,994 13 9 13,808 17 4 1882 1,899 9 9 13,336 4 3 15,235 14 0 1883 1,931 3 6 13,410 6 4 15,341 9 10 1884 1,877 13 7 14,179 3 4 16,056 16 11 1885 2,156 5 11 16,538 17 2 18,695 3 1 1886 2,458 19 9 16,288 5 8 18,747 5 5 1887 2,625 0 4 17,647 18 4 20,272 18 8 1888 2,560 6 4 19,837 12 3 22,397 18 7 London county council. 1889 592 12 7 6,169 4 8 6,761 17 3 111 RETURN Shewing AMOUNTS CONTRIBUTED UNDER PRECEPTS IN AID OF THE EXPENDITURE OF THE SCHOOL BOARD FOR LONDON, UNDER THE ELEMENTARY EDUCATION ACT, 1870. (Apportioned on Rateable Annual Value). Year. Amount paid out of General Rate. £ s. d. 1872 882 13 2 1873 1,643 3 1 1874 1,358 6 11 1875 3,246 8 2 1876 5,656 16 2 1877 8,255 2 6 1878 10,700 3 4 1879 10,680 14 11 1880 11,538 6 2 1881 13,520 5 10 1882 14,242 12 11 1883 16,641 7 9 1884 19,525 13 2 1885 21,763 7 11 1886 23,825 18 5 1887 22,273 1 6 1888 21,207 7 7 1889 23,704 8 2 1890 28,561 1 2 1891 30,235 9 10 112 PETITION re TECHNICAL EDUCATION. (Containing Statistics). To The Honourable the London County Council. THE PETITION OF THE VESTRY OF THE PARISH OF SAINT LEONARD, SHOREDITCH, IN THE COUNTY OF LONDON. Sheweth: 1. That your petitioners are a Vestry under Schedule A of the Metropolis Management Act, 1855, tor the Parish of St. Leonard, Shoreditch, which contains about 15,350 inhabited houses, and 1,438 workshops, and a population, according to the recent census, of 124,000, and they are concerned in the technical education of the inhabitants of the said Parish. 2. That of this population, it appears from the most reliable statistics, that about 42,832 persons are artizans in the following trades in the following numbers:- Furniture, Woodwork, &c. 16,046 Building Trades 8,369 Machinery and Metals 5,161 Printing 4,646 Sundry Artizans 4,577 Furs and Leather 2,339 Watches, Instruments, &c. 1,523 Silk Weaving 171 42,832 3. That the proportion therefore of artizans in Shoreditch is 35.4 per cent. of the population, which is the largest percentage in London, being higher by 124 percent. than the average of the East End districts of the Metropolis, and higher by about 6 per cent. than Bethnal Green, which contains (after Shoreditch), the largest proportion of artizans in London. There are, moreover, 13,352 labourers in Shoreditch, and 3,377 shop assistants, 3,463 persons manufacturing at their own homes, and 11,509 persons engaged in connection with dress and food, whilst of the lowest class of loafers and unemployed there are only 2,500 in the whole parish. 23,265 persons earn regular minimum wages of from 18/- to 21/- weekly, whilst 54,972 have ordinary standard earnings of from 22/to 30/- weekly. 4. That it appears from the above statistics that the inhabitants of Shoreditch are of a class having special need of technical education, whereas there is little or no provision made for them, the Finsbury technical schools adjoining the boundary of the 113 Parish in St. Luke's Parish being of too advanced and expensive a character to meet the requirements of the large mass of ordinary artizans who require in the first place good elementary instruction. 5. That the nearest centre for technical and manual instruction provided by the London School Board is situate about one mile from the Parish in Summerford Street, Bethnal Green, and your petitioners are approaching that Board with a view to establish such a centre in the Parish to meet the needs of the children, of whom there are 48,842 under 15 years of age. 6. That in the opinion of your petitioners the high standard of English manufactures has been chiefly attained by the manual skill of the English artizan, and that the prosperity of English trade depends to a very large extent on the same ultimate cause. 7. That since the recognition of this fact by the Governments of foreign countries, great strides have been made in the provision of technical education abroad, and it is feared that owing to the large State subsidies and the efforts of the educational authorities, the manual training of artizans in Germany, France and other continental countries is much more complete and more widely established than that provided in England, and in the opinion of your petitioners the severity of foreign competition at the present time is largely due to improved foreign workmanship resulting from such education. 8. That the danger referred to is likely to be a growing one unless it is counteracted by better provision being made in England for the thorough technical training of English artizans, who in this respect are at a disadvantage compared with artizans abroad. 9. That your Petitioners are of opinion that it would be advantageous and economical if your Honourable Council could combine with the London School Board in erecting suitable buildings in this parish where the education of children in manual work could be carried on, conjointly with more advanced classes for youths and artizans. Your Petitioners therefore pray your Honourable Council to make a grant out of the money payable to the Council out of the Beer and Probate duties lor the purpose of providing technical schools in this Parish, either separately from or in connection with any elementary centre that may be provided by the London School Board. The Seal of the Vestry was hereunto affixed in the presence of 12th April, 1892. H. MANSFIELD ROBINSON, Solicitor and Clerk. 114 STATEMENT shewing CONTRACTS entered into by the VESTRY for the Financial Year from 25th March, 1892, to 25th March 1893, pursuant to the Metropolis Local Management Act, 1855, 18 & 19 Vict., cap. 120. Date of Contract. Contractor. Material or Proposed Works. Terms of Agreement. Name. Address. General Works. 1 25th Mar.,1892 Aspinall, P. & Son Stroud Green Road, Finsbury Park, N. Patent and Manufactured Stone... At Schedule prices. 2 29th Feb., 1892 Blyth, Thomas 317, Kingsland Road Lime and Cement Do. 3 3rd Mar., 1892 Clark, John A 161, Goldsmith's Row Painters' and Writers' Work Do. 4 Do. Do. Do. Plumbers' Work Do. 5 Do. Crane, Henry Raglan Wharf, Hertford Road, N. Flints 7/10 per cubic yard, delvd. 6 Do. Do. Do. do. General Cartage of Materials At Schedule prices 7 llthMar.,1892 Eve, William 10, Union Court, Old Broad Street, E.C. Duties of Surveyor and Valuer re Moira Place &c. Scheme 400 guineas payable by instalments 8 18th Aug.,1891 Fuller, G. A. & A. Lion Wharf, Millwall, Poplar, E. Barging Dust, Slop and other Refuse 3/3 per ton, 3/- per ton if for 3 years 9 2nd Mar., 1892 Gibb, James & Co. 99, Fenchurch Street, E.C. Lamp Columns, &c. At Schedule prices. 10 7th Aug., 1891 Glover, W.& Sons, Lim. Eagle Works, Warwick To construct Dusting & Scavenging Vehicles, and to keep same in repair for 12 months, after 18th March, 1892 As per Specification. 11 3rd Mar., 1892 Griffiths, William 283, Kingsland Road Broken Granite At Schedule prices 12 Do. Do. Do. Masons' Work Do. 13 Do. Do. Do. Paviors' Work Do. 14 28th Apr., 1892 Improved Wood ment Co., Limited Victoria Street, E.C. 90, Phillip's Street, Hoxton Repair and Maintenance of Wood Paving in front of the Shoreditch Town Hall Smiths' Work 1/3 per square yard per annum 15 29th Feb., 1892 Jones, J. G. 90, Phillip's Street, Hoxton Smiths' Work At Schedule prices 16 3rd Mar., 1892 Nicholls & Clarke 6, High Street, Shoreditch, E.C. Glass for Street Lamps, Paint, &c. Do. 17 25th Mar., 1892 Patent Indurated Stone Co., Limited Glengall Road, Millwall, E. Patent and Manufactured Stone Do. 18 Do. Patent Victoria Stone Co., Limited 283a, Kingsland Road do. do. Do. 19 5th Aug., 1891 Pearson, E. J. 45, St. John Street Road, Clerkenwell, E.C. Repair of Harness 2/- per Set per month 20 29th Feb., 1892 Pontifex, S. & Co. 22, Coleman Street, E.C. Street Lamps, Brackets & Fittings. At Schedule prices 21 3rd Mar., 1892 Roberts, A.T.,Son & Co. Steam Printing & Litho' Works, 5, Hackney Road Printing Do. 22 15th Mar., 1892 Southwood, Smith & Co 4, King Street, Cheapside, E.C. Stationery (for all Departments) Do. 23 3rd Mar., 1892 Stevens, William E. 24, Bridge Street, Homerton Ballast, Hoggin and Sand Do. 24 29 th Feb., 1892 Stiff, James & Son London Pottery, Lambeth, S.E. Drain Pipes, Junctions, Bends, &c. Do. 25 Do. Tyrie, John 9 & 10, Holywell Lane, Shoreditch. Street Broom Heads, &c. Do. 26 25th Mar.,1892 Val de Travers Asphalte Paving Co., Limited Old Broad Street, E.C. Asphlate Do. HIGHWAYS DEPARTMENT. The Vestry of the Parish of St. Leonard, Shoreditch, IN THE COUNTY OF LONDON. REPORT OF THE SURVEYOR. Surveyor's Department, 25th March, 1892. Gentlemen, I. have the pleasure to submit a summary of works, &c., carried out under the superintendence of the above Department during the year ending the 25th March, 1892. MAINTENANCE OF ROADS. The following quantities of materials were supplied by the Contractors and Guardians at the cost stated, and used on the Macadam and ballast roads in the Parish during the year:— £ s. d 1058 yards cube Broken Granite 865 10 6 4¼ „ „Granite Siftings 1 7 0 338¾ „ „ Ballast 131 5 6 538¾ Hoggin 208 15 1 Daring the year 860¼ cubic yards of old pebbles, York, etc., were broken up, costing £93 13s. 6d., and loaded and carted for repairing the roads at a further cost of about £86 0s. 6d. One foreman and nine labourers on an average were employed in the yard, and on the general repairs of the unpaved roads, also over trenches opened by the Gas and Water companies, their wages for the year amounted to £567 14s. 0d. The sum of £3 18s. 0d. was also paid for watchmen's wages. The companies contributed £46 3s. 6d. for labour (exclusive of foreman's time) and £84 17s. 3d. for material required in the said repairs. Other labourers were employed at the De Beauvoir and Reliance Wharves during their preparation for the Vestry's Dusting and Scavenging scheme; their wages amounted to £121 4s. 7d., watchmen, £29 3s. 6d., and 215 super yards pitchings were redressed, 105 super yards carriageway relaid on concrete and grouted, and 47 feet run cutting on splay at a cost of £23 7s. 9d. In consequence of the use of the steam roller the unpaved roads are, generally speaking, in a satisfactory condition. Those requiring attention are enumerated hereafter. The roller was at work 250 days during the past year, and about 11 men on average, under the direction of the road foreman, were employed in scoring, rolling, sweeping and watching the highways under repair, also upon ballast footway repairs, and other incidental works. The amount expended in labour was £612 13s. 10d. The following table gives the roads that have been rolled, together with the cost of same and other details:— 118 LOCALITY. MATERIAL AND COST, 1891-1892. Wages for Labor and Watchmen. Roller Expenses, and Sharps and Steels. Water and Horsing Water Cart. Total Cost. Superficial Area. Cost per yard. Broken Guernsey Granite. Flints. Hoggin. Earth carted to shoot. Siftings, &c., from yard. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. Yards. Audrey Street Broken Pebbles 15 6 0 1 16 3 3 9 6 49 7 9 854 1/1¾ 29 8 2 24 13 0 .. 3 2 0 .. 0 16 0 Ground 2 0 5 0 Boston Street Broken pebbles 19 8 6 1 15 10 3 18 8 54 13 6 1539 /8½ 5 24 12 2 0 0 20 8 0 .. 4 13 0 .. Broken York 1 0 4 6 Ground 2 0 5 0 Dove Row 4 6 Ground 8 15 8 0 16 0 1 18 10 20 7 6 347 1/2 6 8 0 .. 2 6 6 .. 1 0 2 6 Whitfield Street 52 18 44 4 0 • • 6 19 6 .... 32 17 4 4 6 9 6 10 4 94 17 11 2219 /10¼ Nichols Street 20 8 Ground 8 13 6 0 13 6 1 10 6 31 4 6 505 1/2¾ 17 0 0 .. 3 2 0 2 0 5 0 Aske Street • • .. .. .. .... 1 12 0 0 15 1 0 10 5 2 17 6 222 /3 119 LOCALITY. MATERIAL AND COST, 1891-1892. Wages for Labor and Watchmen. Roller Expenses, and Sharps and Steels. Water and Horsing Water Cart. Total Cost. Superficial Area. Cost per yard. Broken Guernsey Granite. Flints. Hoggin. Earth carted to shoot. Siftings, etc., from yard. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. Yards. Haggerston Road •• •• 4 •• Broken pebbles 5 16 2 0 12 9 1 10 4 10 6 3 689 /3½ 1 11 0 2 0 16 0 • • Broken pebbles 40 18 0 7 1 4 9 19 2 99 9 6 3215 /7½ 74 Whiston Street •• •• 30 29 12 0 11 12 6 Broken York 1 0 4 0 Ground 1 0 2 6 Fellowes Street •• •• Broken pebbles 33 16 8 5 2 3 7 8 2 117 16 10 2346 1/ 39 50 21 15 12 0 42 10 0 8 2 9 Broken York 25 C 0 0 Ground 2 Dunloe Street 11 7 .. C 5 0 8 5 10 1 2 0 2 4 5 23 13 6 472 1/ 9 7 0 2 14 3 .... •• Broken York 26 2 4 4 3 3 6 9 6 104 9 1 1907 1/1 Shaftesbury Street 69 .. 18 6 58 13 0 6 19 6 1 4 0 Ground 7 0 17 6 120 LOCALITY. MATERIAL AND COST, 1891-1892. Wages for Labor and Watchmen. Roller Expenses, and Sharps and Steels. Water and Horsing Water Cart. Total Cost. Superficial Area. Cost per yard. Broken Guernsey Granite. Flints. Hoggin. Earth carted to shoot. Siftings, &c., from yard. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. Yards. Dunston Street •• 2 •• ( Ground ) 2 3 6 0 13 8 1 0 6 4 15 8 413 /2½ 0 15 6 1 0 2 6 Brunswick Place 34 •• 13 ( Ground ) 17 3 10 2 13 8 4 2 1 58 15 10 1159 1/ 28 18 0 5 0 9 7 0 17 6 Rushton Street •• •• Broken pebbles 9 16 2 0 17 11 2 1 3 22 11 4 1268 /4½ 2 18 6 0 16 0 5 6 0 2 6 6 Broken York 5 1 0 0 Ground 3 0 7 6 Tyssen Street •• 3 Broken pebble 4 2 6 0 6 6 1 1 1 7 1 4 133 1/0¾ 1 3 3 1 0 8 0 Shepherdess Walk .. .. Broken pebbles 18 0 4 2 5 9 3 12 10 48 0 8 1807 /6¼ 32 9 2 19 14 0 3 9 9 0 8 0 Ground 4 0 10 0 121 LOCALITY. MATERIAL AND COST, 1891-1892. Wages for • Labor and Watchmen. Roller Expenses, and Sharps and Steels. Water and Horsing Water Cart. Total Cost. Superficial Area. Cost per yard. Broken Guernsey Granite, Flints. Hoggin. Earth carted to shoot. Siftings, &c., from yard. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. Yards. Wenlock Street •• Broken , pebbles 52 9 10 7 4 7 13 18 5 179 13 4 3456 1/0¼ 1 107 32 0 8 0 90 19 0 12 8 0 Broken York 2 0 8 0 Ground 15 1 17 6 Baches Street 14 •• 8 •• Ground ) 11 17 0 0 17 0 2 6 8 38 8 4 948 /9½ 10 0 8 3 2 0 2 0 5 0 Sturt Street •• •• Ground 10 17 0 1 17 3 3 0 10 30 3 1 569 l/0½ 5 13 6 0 12 6 11 1 0 2 6 6 Broken pebbles 1 0 8 0 Clarissa Street •• •• ( Broken York 37 7 4 5 4 10 9 4 11 146 3 2 2576 1/0 104 30 4 88 8 0 11 12 0 0 16 0 Ground 22 2 15 0 Lee Street 4 .. •• •• Broken Pebbles 6 9 0 0 11 2 0 10 2 11 6 4 890 /3 3 8 0 1 - 0 8 0 122 LOCALITY. MATERIAL AND COST, 1891-1892. Wages for Labor and Watchmen. Roller Expenses, and Sharps and Steels. Water and Horsing Water Cart. Total Cost. Superficial Area. Cost per yard. Broken Guernsey Granite. Flints. Hoggin. Earth carted to shoot. Siftings, &c., from yard. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. Yards. Mansfield Street 28 .. 30 .. Ground 72 9 8 7 11 10 11 6 1 201 11 1 4641 /10¼ 3 0 7 6 Broken Pebbles 108 16 0 11 12 6 2 0 16 0 Broken York 1 0 4 0 Weymouth Terrace 16 6 • • Broken Pebbles 4 6 6 0 18 5 1 8 5 23 7 10 522 /10¾ 13 12 0 2 6 6 2 0 16 0 Wimbourne Street 44 •• 8 •• .... 23 11 2 1 19 8 4 11 6 •• 1355 l/0¼ 37 8 0 3 2 0 Clift Street 29 • • •• • • Broken pebbles 10 1 8 0 9 3 1 0 6 41 8 5 1057 /9½ 24 13 0 13 5 4 0 Cavendish Street .. .. .. .. .. 5 11 10 0 10 6 •• 6 2 4 •• •• 123 CARRIAGEWAY PAYING, 1891-1892. The following works at the cost stated have been executed by the Contractors during the past year:— Red Lion Street— £ s. d. Paved with 1½ in. Val de Travers compressed rock asphalte on 6 in. Portland cement, including excavation and cartage of earth to shoot 223 17 6 Styman Street— Channels paved with new 4×6 granite cubes, a portion with old cubes, selected, re-dressed, and re-laid, all on lias lime concrete and grouted; 27 loads of old cubes taken up and carted 59 16 0 Crossings paved with 1½ in. Val de Travers compressed rock asphalte on best Portland cement concrete 11 5 0 Edward Street, by No. 13— A carriageway crossing re-dressed and re-laid on lias concrete and grouted 5 6 9 New North Road, from No. 59 to No. 93, at North corner of Wenlock Street— Carriageway taken up, cubes re-dressed and re-laid, a portion re-paved with new 3×6 granite cubes on concrete, and grouted in Portland cement 130 18 11 Whiston Street (upon west side of Iron Bridge)— A channel paved with new 4×7 cubes on lias lime concrete and grouted. Macadam road excavated and carted to receive cubes 12 15 10 Shepperton Road (from Rosemary Branch Bridge to Southgate Road)— A crossing paved with new 4×7 and new 3×7 cubes, a portion paved with old cubes, all on lias lime concrete and grouted. Ground excavated and carted to receive same 69 2 0 A portion of cost re-paid by the Hackney District Board of Works. Clifton Street, Bowl Court, and Plough Yard, Gas, Light and Coke Co.'s trenches— Carriageway taken up, re-laid on lias lime concrete, rammed and grouted ; 18 new cubes supplied, one load carted from yard *19 7 2 * The whole or a portion re-paid to the Vestry. 124 Shoreditch High Street, by Unicorn P.H., and opposite Central Bank— £ s. d. Carriageway taken up and re-paved with new 3 × 9 Guernsey granite and old pitchings, all on has lime concrete, rammed and grouted; cutting on granite and one post re-fixed 169 3 8 Goldsmith's Row— Old pitchings taken up and carted to stone-yard and space re-paved with 2 in. Val de Travers compressed rock asphalte on 6 in. Portland cement concrete 104 17 4 Huntingdon Street, crossing by Hoxton Street— Old pitchings taken up, a portion re-dressed and re-laid, and a portion of new 3×7 granite pitchings supplied, laid, and grouted, all on lias lime concrete; cutting on granite, &c. 15 1 10 Tuilerie Street, by Hackney Road— Carriageway crossing taken up, re-dressed, re-laid on lias lime concrete, rammed and grouted; cutting on granite, &c. 6 4 4 Whiston Street, by Goldsmith's Row— Carriageway taken up, a portion dressed and re-laid; a portion re-laid with stone carted from the Vestry's stone yard, and with new 4×7 Guernsey granite pitchings supplied, all on Portland cement concrete, rammed and grouted in cement; cutting on granite, &c. 11 10 7 Boston Street, by Hackney Road— Carriageway crossing taken up, re-laid, a portion re-dressed, carted and re-laid, a portion of now 4×7 Guernsey granite pitchings, supplied and laid, all on lias lime concrete, rammed and grouted in cement. Tram stone re-dressed and re-laid; one load carted from yard 33 3 10 Hoxton Street, opposite Asylum— Maintenance of 204 1/3 superficial yards of wood pavement by the Improved Wood Pavement Company (as per agreement) 10 4 4 Goldsmith's Row, opposite Children's Hospital— Maintenance of 333 superficial yards of wood pavement by the Improved Wood Pavement Company (as per agreement) 16 13 0 125 Old Street, opposite Town Hall— Five years' maintenance of 418$ superficial yards of wood pavement by North Metropolitan Tramways Co. 156 16 8 Curtain Road, from near Great Eastern Street to Old Street- Old cubes taken up and carted to Reliance Wharf and Flemming Street Yard. Carriageway re-paved with new 3×7 Guernsey granite pitchings, supplied, laid, rammed, a portion of carriageway taken up, dressed, and re-laid,and portion re-laid only, all on 6 in. concrete, and grouted with lias lime; cutting on pitchings, &c. 1,871 17 6 East Road (on East side from Start Arms to Great Chart Street, and West side from Mount Pleasant to 59, New North Road)— Margins re-paved with new 3×7 Guernsey granite pitchings; channels with new 4×7 Guernsey granite pitchings, all on lias lime concrete and grouted; old cubes carted to Vestry's Depot 1,152 19 0 Paved granite crossings (private) executed as follows:— 80, Haggerston Road *5 5 11 By Brewery, Wenlock Road and Edward Street *8 0 4 Bateman's Row *5 8 1 1a, Kay Street *4 3 6 Bateman's Row *9 6 1 Three paviors on an average and their labourers were employed in repairing the paved roads, and over trenches opened by the gas and water companies and Post Office Telegraphs; their wages for the year amounted to £627 19s. 6d., and £9 13s. 3d. was paid for watchmen's wages. The companies contributed £154 18s. l1d. for labour, use of tools, &c., and £127 15s. 2d. for material required in the said repairs. The contractor supplied 12 tons 16 cwt. of Guernsey granite cubes for use in repairing the channels and carriageways, at a cost of £16 12s. 9d., and redressed 438 super yards of pitchings at the yard, at a cost of £40 2s. 7d. There are about fifty-one miles of carriageway in the parish, fifteen being paved, and the remaining portion constructed of macadam or flints. * The whole or a portion repaid to the Vestry. 126 The carriageway or channel paving in the following localities is in a most unsatisfactory condition, and should be repaved or steam rolled (as required) to prevent danger to traffic:— Bacchus Walk Bateman's Row Bevenden Street Boundary Street City Road Fanshaw Street Hoxton Square Hoxton Street (portion of) Ivy Lane Ivy Street Laburnum Street (portion of) Leonard Street Maidstone Street Murray Street Paul Street Primrose Street Skinner Street Upper John Street Wenlock Street Wilson Street (portion of) FOOTWAY PAVING. The following works at the cost stated have been executed by the Contractor during the past year:— Red Lion Street— £ s. d. A portion re-paved with new 2½ in. York stone; old York re-laid,curb re-set on lias concrete,and channels cut *13 17 4 Nile Street— A portion re-paved with new 2½ in. York stone; old York re-laid, and curb re-set on lias concrete 19 13 3 Styman Street— A portion re-paved with new 2½ in. York stone; old York re-laid, a portion of curb re-set, a portion redressed and re-set, and a portion of new 6 × 12 curb supplied and fixed, six corners rounded. All curb on lias concrete 48 7 0 Do. do.— A portion re-paved with ¾ in. mastic Asphalte on 3 in. Portland cement concrete, including excavation and cartage of ground to receive the same 79 6 8 Edward Street, on south side— Re-paved with new 2½ in.York stone; and old York re-laid. A portion of old curb re-dressed and re-set, and portions of new 6 × 12 edge circular curb, and 12 × 8 flat straight ditto, supplied and fixed; remainder of curb re-fixed only. All curb on has concrete. Two corners rounded; four holes cut, curb grouted with lias lime and Portland cement 72 13 8 127 Old Street, by Obelisk— Repaired with Val de Travers Asphalte on 3 in. concrete 7 5 3 Hoxton Street, by Mundy Street— A portion re-paved with new 2½ in. York stone, a portion of old York re-laid, curb re-set, and a portion of new 7 × 12 curb supplied and fixed on lias concrete, a portion of new Victoria paving supplied and laid. Two loads ground carted *15 6 11 New North Road, by Wenlock Street— A portion re-paved with new 3 in. York stone, old York taken up and re-laid. New 6 × 12 circular curb supplied and fixed, and curb carted from depot and re-fixed. All on lias concrete 4 19 0 Shepperton Road— New 7×12 circular curb supplied and fixed, new 7 x 12 straight do. do., new 2½ in. York paving supplied and laid, old York paving re-laid, one hole cut for lamp *1 12 5 Masons' and Labourers' time assisting to fix 50 tree guards 12 5 9 Clifton Street, Bowl Court, and Plough Yard, Gas Light and Coke Co.'s trench— Old York paving taken up and re-laid, a portion of new 2½ in. York paving supplied and laid, and a portion of curb re-fixed. One box cut in *7 7 11 Hoxton Square and Coronet Street— A portion re-paved with new 3 in. York stone, old York taken up and re-laid, and a portion of new 2½ in. York supplied and laid. Curb carted and re-set on lias concrete, three posts taken up and re-fixed, one hole cut in, and cutting on York *7 16 4 Red Lion Street— Old York paving taken up and re-laid, a portion of new 2½ in. York stone supplied and laid. Curb re-fixed, a portion of new 6 inch straight and circular curb supplied and fixed; all on lias lime concrete. Cutting on York, and a portion of edge curb re-dressed 68 3 3 * The whole or a portion re-paid to the Vestry n 128 Huntingdon Street, by Hoxton Street— York paving re-laid, a portion of new 2½ in. York stone supplied and laid, new 6 in. and 7 in. edge circular curb supplied and fixed, and a portion of edge curb re-fixed; all on lias concrete 4 15 10 Tuilerie Street, by Hackney Road— Old York paving taken up and re-laid, a portion of new 3 in. York stone supplied and laid; a portion of edge curb, dressed, carted, and fixed; old curb taken up and re-fixed, all on lias concrete; cutting on York 5 2 1 Boston Street, by Hackney Road— Old York paving taken up and re-laid, a portion of new 2½ in. York stone supplied and laid; curb re-dressed, carted, and fixed; a portion of new 7 in. curb supplied and fixed, and curb taken up and re-fixed, all on lias concrete; one post re-fixed; four corners to curb rounded 16 15 5 The footway paving in the following localities is in a bad condition, and should be repaved to prevent danger to the public:— Allerton Street Baring Street (portion of) Bateman's Row Bracklyn Street Bridport Place (east side) Broadway, London Fields Cavendish Street Clifton Street (portion of) Crondall Street (portion of) Curtain Road (portion of) Custance Street East Road (portion of) Forston Street Grange Street Hackney Road (portions of) Ivy Lane and Street Kingsland Road (portion of) Laburnum Street Maidstone Street Mintern Street Paul Street Parr Street Pitfield Street (portion of) Rushton Street Upper John Street Wenlock Street Whiston Street Wilson Street The Road Foreman's wages, whose duties include the directing of the masons and paviors (also the Steam Road Roller), amounted to £134 2s. 6d. Four masons, on average, and their labourers, were employed in repairing the footways, and over trenches opened by the Gas and Water Companies and Post Office Telegraphs; their wages for the year amounted to £588 7s. 8d. The Companies 129 contributed £95 14s. l1d. for labour, use of tools and mortar, and £19 19s. 7d. for material required in the said repairs. Other contributions for paving, &c., amounted to the sum of £266 8s. 7d., part of which was due and paid to the Contractor. The Contractors supplied 1,200 superficial feet of Victoria patent stone for use in repairing the footways, at a cost of £35; 14,700 superficial feet of new 2½ in. tooled York stone, at a cost of £496 2s. (id.; 19 superficial feet of new 3 in. tooled York stone at a cost of 13s. 9d., and 60 lineal feet of edge curb, 3 granite spur stones, and 15 super feet 4 inch squared York stone, at a cost of £43 0s. 6d. The following quantity of stone, in addition, was re-dressed by piece-work in the yard, at the costs stated:— 1,247 feet run granite edge curb £36 7 5 SEWERS WORK. The following works, at the costs stated, have been executed by the Contractor during the past year:— Red Lion Street— £ s. d. 12 in. pipe Sewer cleansed, old brick Gully receivers destroyed, and new stoneware gullys and outlets constructed 22 11 2 Eagle Wharf Road—extension of Sewer West of Cropley Street— 168 feet run 15 in. pipe sewer, 290 feet 6 in. of 12 in. pipe, connection to Main Line Sewer in Cropley Street, old opening built off, five gullies reconstructed, and two manholes constructed; bends, flushing box, step irons, and all drain connections 175 4 6 Also Private Drain Work, one new house drain, and one reconstruction 5 17 7 Jobbing Sewers Work and Private Drain Work.—On the 2nd June, 1891, upon the recommendation of the Paving and Sewers Committee, the Vestry decided to do these works with its own Staff instead of by Contractor. The undermentioned sewers have been cleansed by the Vestry's workmen, the deposit removed and carted out of the Parish as follows; numerous gullies have also been constructed or repaired:- Sewers. Length. Pearson Street Brick 600 feet Dunloe Street „ 610 „ Weymouth Terrace „ 120 „ Nichols Square „ 1330 „ n 1 130 Boston Street 12 in. pipe 220 feet Whiston Street Brick 1326 „ Moye Street 12 in. pipe 185 „ Dove Row „ 100 „ Goldsmiths Row Brick 596 „ Marlborough Road 9 in. pipe 130 „ „ „ Brick 458 „ Broke Road „ 1550 „ Brownlow Road „ 1200 „ Hewett Street 12 in. pipe 200 „ Curtain Road Brick 800 „ Holywell Row „ 200 „ Willow Street „ 276 „ Luke Street „ 300 „ Sun Street „ 484 „ Jacobin Street 12 in. pipe 141 „ Louisa Street „ 150 „ Mill Row Brick 330 „ Hammond Square „ 215 „ Ashford Street 12 in. pipe 220 „ Nile Street „ 76 „ Britannia Street Brick 1180 „ Cropley Street 12 in. pipe 100 „ Hobb's Place.—Sewer reconstructed with 82 feet run 12 in. pipe and all necessary house drains connected. Westmoreland Place.—Sewer reconstructed with 156 feet run 15 in. pipe and all necessary house drains connected. Forty-eight new house drains from sewer to line of frontage have been constructed, forty house drains reconstructed, and twenty-five stoppages in drains removed. These works were carried out at private expense, the cost of the work amounting to £335 2s. 9d., having been first deposited by the parties interested in accordance with the Vestry's regulation. The sewers in the following localities are in a very unsatisfactory condition, and should be re-constructed:— Bateman's Row Britannia Street Brunswick Street (a portion) Crondall Street Curtain Road (a portion) Earl Street (a portion) Dove Row Dunloe Street Dysart (late Princes Street) Flemming Street (a portion) Gifford Street (a portion) Jacobin Street 131 Kent Street Maidstone Street Moye Street Nichols Street (a portion) New North Road (a portion) Taplow (late Windsor Street) Hay Street Hows Street (a portion) Rushton Street Weymouth Terrace (a portion) One ganger, two mechanics and lour flushers, on average, with labourers, were employed in cleansing, disinfecting, re-constructing, repairing, &c., the sewers, drains and gullies in the parish; their wages for the year amounted to £928 2s. 5½d. The sum of £130 was also paid for watchmen's wages. Three men have been constantly employed cleansing the parish urinals (including Sundays and holidays in the early morning); their wages for the year amounted to £202 13s, 1d. WAGES. In consequence of a Memorial sent to the Vestry, which was referred to the Paving and Sewers Committee for their consideration and report, the committee, after a most exhaustive enquiry, during which it was elicited that most of the men preferred the weekly wage system (which has been the custom of the Vestry) to the hour system, it was recommended "That the present system of weekly wages should be continued." With reference to the rates paid; each man's case was taken separately, and after the fullest investigation, it was recommended "That (with the exception of one Pavior who was raised to the regular rate) the rate for Masons, Paviors, Rammermen, Sewer Mechanics and Flushers, remain as at present; but the Urinal Flushers, and able-bodied Labourers to be advanced to 25s. per week, one Ganger to be increased to 26s. per week, and one to 28s. per week; Watchmen to 4s. per night. These recommendations were adopted by the Vestry on the 24th November, 1891. The following, in addition to other smaller amounts, represent the value of materials. supplied during the year:— £ s. d. Sand 115 5 9 Lime, cement, &c. 145 13 4 Bricks 18 7 11 Sanitary pipes, junctions, &c. 122 14 9 Smith's work (for yard, &c.) 46 2 7 Ditto (for steam roller) 29 16 8 132 Hydrant repairs, street name plates, plumber's, glazier's and writer's work 33 19 4 Castings 132 7 6 Cartage (including ground to shoot) 568 11 11 Water for roads 320 1 11 Fitting new meter box at Great Cambridge Street 1 10 0 Lard Oil for steam roller 2 10 0 Coke for ditto and yard 28 9 0 Disinfectants 5 12 6 Brooms, pails, mops, new sewer machine, &c. 27 14 6 Making good 3-in. main belonging to Gas Light and Coke Company 2 10 9 New hose for Beauvoir Wharf 14 4 9 Ditto for steam roller 1 18 0 For hoardings at Kiosk, Shoreditch High Street, and urinal at Hoxton Market and Goldsmith's Square. 11 7 2 Wheelwright—Truck repairs 8 12 6 Repairs to water cart 2 19 0 New sewer lamps 4 8 3 Timber 6 14 3 Slate channels, &c., for Kiosk, Shoreditch High Street 3 2 10 New waterproof sheet for steam roller 1 18 6 Surveying Instruments 15 10 0 INVENTORY OF PLANT AND MATERIAL ON HAND AT FLEMMING STREET YARD, 24th MARCH, 1892. For Highways— 1 steam roller 1 tarpaulin for same 1 set leather hose for ditto 8 masons' and. paviors' trucks 3 box barrows 6 navvy do. 1 trolley 1 water cart 3 wooden shelters for watchmen 30 lamps for watching 1 large cast iron column and 6 iron posts taken from refuge by Shored itch Church 9 cast iron street posts 12 galvanized pails 4 masons' beetles 48 „ chisels 12 „ pitching tools 6 „ bedding hammers 4 „ trowels 5 masons' levels 3 „ straight-edges 6 twivels 12 spalling hammers 6 paviors' do. 3 rammers 6 punnors 10 crowbars 133 For Highways (continued)— 48 pickaxes 24 rag mops 1 set boning sticks 60 brooms 1 straight-edge 6 notice boards 6 iron wedges 6 sieves 36 „ shovels 2 concrete measures 24 hand brushes For Sewers— 3 iron sewer trucks 3 rakes 6 sewer lamps 9 pickaxes 200 feet cane sewer rods 50 „ ash „ „ 1 machine and scoops complete 1 gully bowl and fork 10 scaffold poles 6 12-ft. battens 24 6-ft. „ ¼-fathom polling board Material at Yard— 430 feet run tram stone 360 „ „ edge and circular curb 20 super feet Victoria stone 10 cubic yds. broken granite 18 bushels blue lias lime granite cubes (old) „ spalls „ pebbles (old) At Reliance Wharf— Say 450 super yds. of old pitchings 100 super yds. of old pitchings, redressed Material at Yard — 16 cast iron side entrance covers 11 „ large gully grates 9 „ medium „ 8 „ small „ 9 „ ventilating grates 7 „ „ (with catch pit) 10 „ flushing boxes Patterns for castings complete 18 6-in. stoneware block traps 3 9-in. „ „ 5 15 × 36 „ gully pans 1 15×30 „ „ 7 15-in. junctions 8 12-in. „ × 7 9-in. junctions 4 6-in. „ 26 feet run 15-in. stoneware pipe 32 „ 12-in. „ „ 120 „ 9-in. „ „ 240 6-in. ,, 28 „ 4-in. „ „ No. 3 15 × 12 stoneware reducing pipes 3 12×9 „ „ 20 9-in. bends 15 6-in. „ 9 4-in. ,, 2000 bricks 134 During the period covered by this Report a considerable amount of extra ordinary work has been dealt with by the Surveyor's Department. embracing the survey and preparation of drawings and. specifications for proposed alterations and additions of the Town Hall, to meet the requirements of the London County Council, and to provide additional accommodation for the Vestry, its Official Staff, and the Coroner: the survey and preparation of drawings and specifications for additions and alterations of the stables and other premises at De Beauvoir and Reliance Wharves (recently acquired by the Vestry) in order to adapt them to the requirements of the new Dusting and Scavenging Department: the survey and preparation of sketch plans for the proposed rearrangement of Moira Place and Plumber's Place insanitary areas: the survey and preparation of plans in connection with Goldsmith's Square proposed recreation ground, and other matters hereafter referred to in detail. ALTERATIONS AND ADDITIONS TO TOWN HALL. In consequence of a circular letter from the London County Council, dated 20th November, 1890, the Vestry at a meeting held upon the 2nd December following, resolved—"That the Surveyor to this Vestry be directed to confer with the Council upon the subject of the proposed alterations to the Town Hall." Such conference took place two days afterwards, between the Council's Superintending Architect and your Surveyor, when a scheme dealing seriatim with the suggested structural alterations of the Town Hall for public safety, was discussed and mutually agreed to. Upon the 10th December your Surveyor, accompanied by the acting Vestry Clerk, attended a meeting of the Theatres and Music Halls Committee of the Council, and his report dealing with the whole circumstances, having been read at a Vestry meeting held upon the 11th, was referred to the Town Hall Committee. Acting upon instructions, an efficient temporary architectural assistant was at once engaged, detailed measurements were taken of the Hall, and drawings prepared, under the immediate supervision and approval of the Town Hall Committee. Rough tracings were submitted to the Superintending Architect of the Council on the 26th January, 1891, and subject to slight modifications the proposed arrangements were approved. The Theatres and Music Halls Committee of the Council surveyed the Town Hall upon the 4th February, and as no expressed objection arose at or immediately after such visit to the Vestry's proposals, the drawings together with cloth tracings and a preliminary specification were submitted to the Vestry upon the 17th March, 135 and upon the 21st April they were approved and ordered to be sealed and submitted for the approval of the Council, such instruction being carried out four days afterwards. The approximate estimate of cost to carry out your Surveyor's scheme, was as follows:— Alterations and additions required by the London County Council £2,762 18 5 Ditto, to provide extra accommodation for the Vestry, its Official Staff, and the Coroner 1,874 13 6 Total £4,637 11 11 The contract drawings were pushed forward to completion, and upon the 2nd June following it was proposed to invite certain specified contractors to tender for carrying out the work, and instructions were asked for the necessary forms of tender, &c., to be prepared, but upon the 16th of the same month, when the drawings were submitted complete by your Surveyor, it was proposed that estimates be advertised for. These recommendations were disapproved by the Vestry upon the 30th June, and the whole scheme was referred back at the following meeting a fortnight afterwards. About this time, a communication having been received from the London County Council condemning the Council Chamber as unsafe for public assemblies, the Vestry upon the 15th September, resolved—"That the Vestry do appoint an architect of special experience to confer with the architect of the London County Council as to the minimum requirements, &c." And upon the 13th October following, Charles Barry, Esq., F.S.A., whose services had been retained, was requested to attend a special meeting of the Vestry to explain his plans, &c., the outcome of which it is scarcely within the province of your Surveyor to deal. DUSTING AND SCAVENGING SCHEME. The report, dated March 11th, 1890, of a Special Committee appointed to consider as to the dusting, scavenging and watering of the parish, to which the Surveyor's department largely contributed, came before the Vestry upon the 12th December following, and the 20th January, 1891. Several schemes for new stables, &c., and alterations to existing stables at De Beauvoir Wharf, were prepared, the Committee's printed report was dealt with by the Vestry seriatim upon the 12th June following, and the Committee presented 136 plans embracing stabling, hay lofts, men's conveniences, weigh-bridge and office, and dust-shoots, recommending the acceptance of plans marked B. These were referred back, and it was not until the 7th July that a scheme was adopted. Acting upon instructions, your Surveyor on the 15th July, 1890, applied to the London County Council for a loan of £7,200, embracing £3,300 for stabling and other structural works, repayable over a period of thirty years, and £3,900 for horses, carts, machinery, &c., repayable over a period of ten years. Following this, after the Vestry's approval of plans marked F, a modified application was sent, amounting to £6,000, embracing £2,100 in regard to the first mentioned proposed outlay, and £3,900 upon the second outlay. The Council in acceding to this application, varied it by advancing only £1,700 upon structural works, repayable over a period of thirty years, and £4,300 upon horses, plant, &c., repayable over a period of five years. Working drawings and specifications having been prepared, tenders were advertised for, and the lowest but one, submitted by Mr. James Steed, builder, of Chalk Farm Road, N.W., was accepted. Mr. Steed carried out his contract in a most efficient manner, and so expeditiously that the whole works were completed sufficiently to enable the dusting and scavenging of the parish to be commenced from De Beauvoir Wharf upon the 29th September following. £ s. d. Mr. Steed's contract amounted to 1522 0 0 Extra works carried out by him were as follows:— Repairs to Superintendent's house 67 4 0½ ,, ,, entrance gates 45 0 0 Sundry works, embracing additional foundations, canal wall, dwarf wall to smithy, furnace and party wall reconstructions, gas fitters' work, ventilation, &c. 327 0 11½ Additional loose box 36 14 0 Superindent's now washhouse 25 0 0 500 19 0 2022 19 0 Loss value of work in contract but not carried out 5 19 0 Net expenditure 2017 0 0 137 The cost of additional works not executed by Mr. Steed, were as follows:- £ s. d. Paving (Griffiths) 407 10 0 Hoisting gear (Noble) 48 0 0 Dredging charges (Regents Canal Company) 89 14 0 Repairs to existing structures (various tradesmen) 182 19 10 levelling, drainage and other work (Vestry's staff) 108 4 11 836 8 9 Making a gross expenditure (exclusive of law charges) at De Beauvoir Wharf upon structural works of about £2,853 8s. 9d. The 10-ton Weighbridge cost £97, fixed complete. The Tireing Table £28 7s., fixed complete. And £200 was paid to Messrs. Stroud (former tenants) for a Gas Engine and other fixed machinery. In order to take over and execute the Dusting and Scavenging of the whole parish at Lady-day, 1892, it was considered necessary to acquire an additional, Wharf, and the lease of Reliance Wharf, Hertford Road, having been obtained, plans and specifications for alterations and additions were prepared and approved and the following works have been carried out at the cost stated:— Paving (Griffiths) 197 13 8 Canal retaining wall (Thomerson) 39 2 9 Stable additions and repairs (Jarvis & Sons) 142 13 6 „ „ (Steed) 3 10 0 Repairs to existing structures, and other works (various tradesmen*) 114 18 5 Digging, levelling, drainage, and other works (Vestry staff) 130 1 5 Making a total expenditure (exclusive of law charges) at Reliance Wharf upon structural works of about £627 19s. 9d. MOIRA PLACE AND PLUMBER'S PLACE AREA. In connection with this insanitary area, ordered to be cleared and re-constructed, measurements were taken, and several preliminary sketch plans were prepared in the Surveyor's Department, for the Housing of the Working Classes Committee, during the past year, one being (with slight amendments) ultimately adopted and handed over to an outside Surveyor to be carried into execution. *Including a small prospective cost for further necessary paving work. 138 GOLDSMITHS ROW WIDENING and RECREATION GROUND. The widening of a portion of Goldsmiths Row and Square was commenced and completed by the London County Council at the close of 1891, and arrangements are in progress for the formation of a Recreation Ground for which land has been purchased, measurements were taken and several plans of the site were prepared in the Surveyor's Department. BILLS IN PARLIAMENT. The following report was submitted by your Surveyor in compliance with instructions having reference to proposed Railways through Shoreditch Parish. The London, Tottenham and Epping Railway scheme was withdrawn. The Great Northern and City Railway project, with certain modifications, was passed into law during the last session of Parliament, whilst the City and South London Railway scheme was postponed. LONDON, TOTTENHAM AND EPPING FOREST RAILWAY. A most exhaustive report on the above having been printed and circulated, and the scheme withdrawn as previously intimated, it is unnecessary to reproduce it here. GREAT NORTHERN AND CITY RAILWAY. This railway would commence by a junction with the Great Northern Railway at Finsbury Park, and terminate in the Parish of St. Stephen, Coleman Street, E.C., near to the junction of Finsbury Pavement with West Street. It would enter Shoreditch at the parish boundary Northward of the Regent's Canal bridge, New North Road, proceed in a Southerly direction, underneath 6 streets and roads, viz.:— New North Road East Road Murray Street Allerton Street Fairbank Street City Road, and leave the Parish at the boundary near to Messrs. Champion's Vinegar Works. The greater portion of the railway would probably be underground, having standard rail gauge, 4ft. 8½in., adopted. The motive power employed would be electricity or "other motive power as the Board of Trade may sanction." The up and down lines would be placed in separate tunnels of 16 feet internal diameter with enlargements for platforms at the stations, and it is proposed to afford access to the railway by means of stairs and lifts. 139 The depths from surface of carriageway to soffit of tunnels would be approximately as follows:— ft. in. At Canal Bridge, New North Road 45 10 „ Murray Street 38 4 „ Fairbank Street (North end) 40 5 „ Ditto (South end) 41 3 „ East Road 40 0 „ City Road (tunnels increased in size, probably for a station) 32 0 The length of the railway within Shoreditch Parish would be approximately 1,300 lineal yards, same as the scheme previously referred to. Permission is sought "To authorise the Company to provide engine houses, stations, passages, subways, tunnels, shafts, fitting shops, workshops, warehouses, yards, depots and works; "also, "to cross, stop up, close for traffic, alter, remove, divert, and otherwise interfere with, either temporarily or permanently, any roads, streets, highways, footpaths, places, &c."; also sewers, culverts, subways, drains, &c."; and "to appropriate and use for the purposes of the intended works, or of the intended Act, the subsoil and undersurface of any lands, streets, roads, highways, and places under, along, or across which any of the works are intended to be made." "To authorise the Company to deviate from the lines or situations of any of the works, and also to deviate from the levels of any of the works to such extent as may be authorised or determined under the powers of the intended Act, and in either case whether beyond the limits allowed by the 'Railway Clauses Consolidation Act, 1845,' or otherwise." As suggested in the scheme before reported on, the County Council and the Vestry should claim absolute power of deciding in what manner each individual case comprised within the previous paragraphs should be dealt with, and have authority to require detailed plans and sections for their approval or otherwise; also to provide supervision at the Company's cost. Considerable alterations and deviations of the main and local sewers, street gullies, and private drains may be anticipated, all of which should be carefully done by approved contractors, and supervised. Special provisions in the Bill against the ingress of steam from machinery into the sewers should also be required. Again, although the promoters state that "It is not intended to alter the surface level of any street or road," much disturbance by excavations must necessarily occur. The proper reinstatement of all street and road surfaces, at existing levels and gradients by approved contractors should be secured, and adequate hoardings 140 (minus advertisements), properly watched and lighted, insisted upon to enclose the works during their progress. By a further clause the Company seek to obtain consent "to enter into agreements with public authorities for, or with respect to the construction or maintenance of the intended railway, works, &c.' as hereinbefore suggested. This proposal should be supported and amplified. Power is sought, "To authorize the Company to purchase by compulsion or agreement, lands, houses, and other property and easements, in, under, or over the same, and notwithstanding the 92nd Section, or any other section of the ' Lands Clauses Consolidation Act, 1845,' or any Act amending the same, to appropriate and use a part only of any such premises," without being compelled, to acquire the whole." The Company should be opposed in regard to this apparently inequitable proposal. Power is asked for, "To alter, amend, extend, and if need be to repeal the provision or some of the provisions of ' The Metropolis Local Management Acts, 1855 and 1856,' 'The Local Government Act, 1888,' and other specified Acts. This intention should be carefully noted by the responsible officers, and, if deemed advisable, opposed. As in this scheme it is intended to remove 83 separate premises, including 75 dwelling houses and 2 lodging houses (tabulated hereafter), precautions should be taken, as suggested in the previous scheme, to have accommodation provided for a large proportion of the inhabitants to be disturbed (altogether probably exceeding 1,000), before the removal of their dwellings. TABULAR STATEMENT REFERRED TO IN THE FOREGOING REPORT Name of Street, Road, &c. PREMISES PROPOSED TO BE DEMOLISHED. REMARKS Houses includin Shops. Lodging Houses. Factories and Workshops. Chapels. Public Houses. Stables, Ac. Passage Ways. 1. .New North Road 18 .. .. .. .. .. l 2.. Murray Street 4 .. .. .. .. .. .. 3.. Fairbank Street 18 1 3 .. .. 1 l 4..East Road 31 1 .. 1 1 .. .. 5.. Allerton Street 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. 6..City Road 3 .. .. .. .. .. .. 75 2 3 1 1 l 2 83 141 The County Council and the Vestry should require payment from the Company of all rates upon the properties proposed to he demolished, until the railway is constructed aud assessable. A complete inventory of the several properties and their assessments, should be taken by the responsible department. THE CITY AND SOUTH LONDON RAILWAY. (Islington Extension). This railway would commence in the Parish of St. George-the- Martyr, Southwark, by a junction with the Company's existing underground railway, and terminate in the Parish of St. Mary, Islington, near to the Northern end of City Road. It would enter Shoreditch at the Parish boundary, near to Messrs. Champion's Vinegar works, proceed in a North-Westerly direction underneath the carriage-way of City Road, and leave the Parish at its boundary, opposite Britannia Street. A short length of City Road within Shoreditch Parish, would also be tunnelled opposite the Vestry Hall of St. Luke's Parish. Standard guage (4ft. 8£in.) would be adopted for the railway, and the "motive power would be electricity or any other mechanical power other than steam locomotives." "The up and down lines would be placed in separate tunnels, each circular in section, and of 11½ feet internal diameter, with enlargements for station platforms; and it is proposed to afford access to the railway by means of stairs and lifts." The depth from surface of carriageway to soffit of tunnels, would be approximately 55 feet within Shoreditch Parish. It appears doubtful whether this would be sufficiently deep to permit the proposed Great Northern and City Railway to pass overhead. The length of Railway within the Parish would be about 242 lineal yards. Special attention should be given to clauses by which the Company seek power, "To cross, stop up, or divert either temporarily or permamently, any roads, streets, &c.; also sewers, drains, &c." The Sewer below City Road belongs tc the London County Council, but the Vestry has a considerable area of the Parish draining into this sewer. Also "To construct and maintain shafts or openings from the surface of the road, &c., to any portion of the proposed railway. These shafts might be an obstruction to the sewers, and become a nuisance to the public overhead. Also "To deviate from the levels as shown." 142 As previously suggested in the reports herewith, the County Council in conjunction with the Vestry should claim absolute power as to how each matter comprised within these paragraphs should be carried out. Plans and Sections should be submitted for approval or otherwise, and the works supervised, all at the Company's cost. Should any alteration or deviation of the sewers, drains, &c., or any disturbance of the road surface be found necessary, (the promoters state that "It is not intended to alter the surface level of any street or road "); provisions should be required for re-instatement in every case by approved Contractors under proper supervision. Adequate Hoardings (minus advertisements), properly watched and lighted, should be insisted upon to enclose the works during their progress. Power is sought "To authorise the Company to purchase by compulsion or agreement, lands, houses, &c., notwithstanding the 92nd section of the Lands Clauses Consolidation Act, 1845, or any amending Act, without being compelled to purchase the whole;" also, "To appropriate and use the subsoil under any road or property, or any part thereof, without being compelled to purchase any easement or right to such subsoil." Both these intentions appear to be inequitable and should be opposed. The clause "To empower the company to enter into agreements with local authorities for or with respect to the construction, or maintenance of the intended railway, works, &c.," should be supported, and amplified as before suggested. Power is sought " To alter, amend, extend, or repeal, provisions in the City and South London Railway Acts, 1884 to 1890, and any other Act relating to the company, including the Metropolis Local Management Acts, 1855 and 1856." The Company should be kept to the provisions of the latter Acts, especially in regard to Section 75, of 25 and 26 Victoria, cap. 102, affecting the general frontage line of buildings. Careful note should be made of the provisions contained in the other specified Acts. The Company do not schedule for purchase any private property within the Parish of Shoreditch. GREAT EASTERN RAILWAY. LIVERPOOL STREET TO GLOBE ROAD WIDENING. The close of the year 1891 witnessed the completion of this work, so far as related to Shoreditch Parish, which had been in progress about three years. Everything, so far as your Surveyor by close observation could judge, was satisfactorily carried ont, excepting the reconstructed viaduct carrying Worship 143 Street across the railway. The Company's Act of Parliament and accompanying approved plans particularly stipulated that the Worship Street road surface should remain unaltered; nevertheless, your officers discovered whilst the viaduct was in progress of construction, that a serious deviation would occur, and having reported the fullest details to the Vestry, the services of an eminent City Surveyor were retained to ascertain by measurements, with your Surveyor, what the deviation actually would be. Levels were taken, drawings prepared, and it was reported to the Vestry that there would be an extra rise of about 10 inches in the road surface from the centre of the bridge Eastward, tending to cause serious inconvenience and difficulty to traffic. In consequence of this breach of the Railway Company's statutory powers, and because in continuing this work the Company in order presumably to obviate a steeper gradient, failed to introduce a sufficient depth of concrete foundation, legal proceedings were commenced by the Vestry. Your Surveyor submitted a further report of imperative alterations necessary in order to render the approach to Worship Street from Shoreditch High Street reasonably convenient and safe to traffic, but the scheme was not accepted by the Company, ultimately the case was compromised upon the terms stated in the Vestry Clerk's report. LONDON and NORTH WESTERN RAILWAY. (NEW DEPOTS AND WIDENINGS). This work in progress under the Company's statutory powers obtained about five years ago whereby the Company have acquired a large amount of property within Shoreditch Parish, embraces the deviation and re-construction of road-way and sewer at the West-end of Nichols Square, Hackney Road, and of Plough Yard, Shoreditch High Street, will be reported upon in a future report. In conclusion I would avail myself of this opportunity to impress on the Vestry, in consequence of increasing labour in the Surveyor s Department, brought about by the Public Health Act, 1891, and other new Acts, also in anticipation of large sanitary works to be carried out at Haggerston, the urgent necessity of providing a larger staff, and improved accommodation at the earliest convenient opportunity. I am, Gentlemen, Yours obediently, ALFRED JACKSON MARTIN, Surveyor. Shoreditch Town Hall, Old Street, E.G. Q LIGHTING DEPARTMENT. ol The Vestry of the Parish of St. Leopard, IN THE COUNTY OF LONDON. INSPECTOR DOUGHTY'S REPORT. Lighting Department, 25th March, 1892. Gentlemen, I beg to submit the following report and tables showing the work done by this department, and the operation ol the Average Meter System during the fourteenth year of its operation. No increase in the price of gas supplied to the public lamps has been made during the year, which remains at 2/2 per 1,000 cubic feet. The lamplighters' wages were increased in December last from 23/- to 25/- per week, and the lamp repairer and fitter's wages from 27/- to 30/- per week. The total net payment for gas, lamplighters' wages, lighting, extinguishing, and cleaning, materials and wages for repairs, painting etc. for the year, including 258 improved lamps of increased illuminating power fixed at refuges and positions where more light was required, and the provision of 21 additional lamps and fittings is =£5,823 18s. 8d., being £239 l6s. 0d. more than last year, which is due to the additional lamps fixed and the increased time of burning during foggy weather. The average cost per ordinary lamp for the year was £2 18s. 10½. Two large lamps and 27 new ordinary lamps have been fixed and put in lighting during the year, 8 have been discontinued and 23 removed to more favourable positions. 148 The following tabular statement shows the number of Lamps at present in use :— No. of Lamps. Description. Consumption per hour. 1,423 14-inch ordinary 4.6 feet 4 ditto 6.9 „ 126 ditto 8.0 „ 28 ditto 12.0 „ 64 18-inch Victoria 15.0 „ 3 ditto 16.0 „ 1 60 candle power 20.0 „ 5 80 ditto 24.0 „ 3 90 ditto 30.0 „ 25 100 ditto 33.0 „ 1 180 ditto 50.0 „ 1 200 ditto 58.0 „ 1,679 The sum of £4 18s. 6d. has been recovered from persons causing damage to lamps by driving against them, or by projections on their vehicles; £2 3s. 0d. has been paid to the police and others for reporting particulars and detecting persons extinguishing lamps during the night to the danger of the public and property. During the months of September, November, December and January, lamps have been lighted in the day time for a period of 87 hours on account of the foggy weather. Additional lamps have been fixed in the following streets during the year:— 1 in Little James Street 2 „ Poole Street 1 „ Hemsworth Street 1 „ Thomas Street 3 „ Gt. Chart Street 2 „ Hoxton Market 2 „ Leonard Street 2 „ Kingsland Road 1 „ Boot Street 1 „ New Inn Square 2 „ Willow Street 1 „ Bristow Street 1 „ Parr Street 1 „ Fairbank Street 1 „ Cassett Buildings 1 „ Boston Street 3 „ Baring Street 2 „ Nichols Square 1 „ Goldsmith Row 29 149 LAMPS DISCONTINUED DURING THE YEAR. No. Situation. 1 Moira Place (place closed) 1 Worship Street (by bridge construction) 1 Poole Street (alterations) 1 Kingsland Road (alterations) 1 Goldsmith Square (alterations) 1 Goldsmith Row, off Audrey Street (alterations) 1 Haddons Gardens (place closed) 1 Bath Court (place closed) 8 POSITION OF LAMPS RE-ARRANGED in Streets during the Year. No. Situation of Lamp. 1 Poole Street 2 East Road 2 Great Chart Street 1 Murray Street 3 Leonard Street 1 Kingsland Road 1 Shepherdess Walk 1 New Inn Broadway 2 Nichols Square 1 Bristow Street 1 Parr Street 1 Willow Street 1 St. Johns Road 2 Baring Street 1 Drysdale Street 1 Bath Place 1 Hemsworth Street 23 150 ADVERTISING ON LAMP COLUMNS. All the lamp columns arc now let for advertising purposes, those in Old Street and Great Eastern Street to Mr. S. R. Stevenson, of Nottingham, at £1 per column utilized, the contractor to paint the column; all the other columns in the district are let to Messrs. Heath, Limited, of Manchester, for the sum of £40C per annum, who are to paint the lamps and columns. The rent is payable half yearly and commenced as on and from 12th March, 1892. (a) PUBLIC URIlNALS. One new octagon Iron Urinal with six compartments has been erected during the year in Hoxton Market, by Messrs. Steven Bros. 33 Public Urinals were cleaned and painted in the summer by men employed for the purpose by the Vestry. One Brick and Slate Urinal has been removed from Goldsmith Square to give place to the recreation ground and improvements being made at that spot, and the materials taken to the stone yard. (b) KIOSK CONVENIENCE. (Opposite St. Leonard's Church). This public convenience and lavatory was purchased by the Vestry in June, 1891, from the International Hygienic Society, and has been thoroughly renovated, repaired and painted. New fittings, 3 Lavatory Basins and Mirrors have been provided, and the ventilation of the buildings has been improved. It now consists of 5 W.C's., 8 Lavatory Basins and a six-stall Urinal. The total expenditure upon it to 25th March, 1892, including the sum paid to the original owners, the attendant's wages, gas and water supply, and cleaning materials, amounts to £290 0s. 9d. FLUSHING COURTS AND GULLIES. The cost of Hushing courts and gullies with water direct from the mains through a 2¼ inch hose, the East London Company's district being done in the day-time, and the New River Company's district in the night-time, was, for water, £248 5s. 5d. and £82 2s. 6d. for labour. The amount paid for chloride of lime and other disinfectants, was £14 19s. 9d. 151 TABLE I. Cost of New Works for the year to March, 1892. Supplying 25 14 inch lamps and 25 14-inch cradle irons; 12 16-inch lamps and 12 16-inch cradle irons; 24 6-inch iron spindles; 12 standpipes; 6 14-inch porcelain cones; 6 20-inch porcelain cones; 24 ¾ and finch nipples; 1 dozen ½-inch short pieces; 6 bracket irons and fitting up same, and 24 spindles, etc. 36 19 9 Tools 2 5 9 135 opal street name tablets 7 8 6 11 octagon lamp columns, weighing 65 cwt. 0 qrs. 9 lbs., at 7/6 per cwt. 24 8 9 Wages, fitting up 23 new lamps, fixing street name and caution tablets and new standpipes 22 11 0 Erecting 20 new lamp columns, rearranging the positions of 23, removing 8 discontinued, and reinstating foot and carriageways disturbed, and reinstating footways to 9 bracket lamps, and ground disturbed in removing decayed fittings (labour) 18 3 0 Lamplighters' wages for large lamps 164 0 0 Materials and labour repairing, painting and glazing 192 large lamps and columns, and painting guard posts at refuges 46 13 0 Removal of lamp services 8 0 8 £330 10 5 TABLE II. Statement of the cost of Repairs and Painting, Lighting and Extinguishing and Cleaning, for the year to March, 1892. Materials and labour for repairing, painting nd glazing 1,422 14-inch ordinary lamps, columns, brackets, standpipes, etc. 137 16 5 Lamplighters' Wages 908 4 0 do. for holiday 6 2 0 Rewards to police constables and others 2 3 0 £1054 5 5 TABLE III. Cost of Maintenance of Meters and Governors, etc. Salaries and Expenses for the year to March, 1892. Maintenance of meters and governors (proportion) 34 0 0 Inspector's salary 200 0 0 £234 0 0 152 TABLE IV. Details of the flours Burning per Lamp, awl savin;/ in respect of Twilight for the year 1891. Quarter ending. Number of Hours Burning per Quarter. Average Number of Hours Burning per Night. Savings in respect of Twilight. Hours. Minutes. Hours. Minutes. Hours. Minutes. 1891—March 1184 19 13 9 73 1 „ June 650 15 7 8 138 33 „ September 718 7 7 53 164 8 „ December 1283 4 13 56 88 33 The Year 3835 45 10 31 464 15 153 TABLE V. Shelving the comparative cost of Gas and the saving under the new system. Number of hours charged for. tion per hour charged cu. ft. Consumption per lamp per quarter cu. ft. N umber of Lamps. Total Consumption per quarter. Bate per 1000 cu. ft. £ S. d. Saving £ S. d. A Old System, March 1891 Sunset to Sunrise. 1257.34 X 5. = 6286.70 X 1403.00 = 8,820,240 x 2/2 = 955 10 6 B New System, March 1891 Actual Number of Burning i Hours. 1184.31 X 4.57 = 5414.65 X 1403.00 = 7,596,753 X „ = 822 19 7 = 132 10 11 C Old System, June 1891 Sunset to Sunrise. 788.80 X 5. = 3944.00 X 1402.89 = 5,532,998 X „ = 599 8 2 D New System, June 1891 Actual Number of Burning Hours. 650.25 X 4.75 = 3091.73 X 1402.89 = 4,340,118 X „ = 470 3 5 = 129 4 9 E 01d System, Sept. 1891 Sunset to Sunrise. 882.25 X 5. = 4411.25 X 1407.03 = 6,206,761 X „ = = 672 8 0 F New System, Sept. 1891 Actual Number of Burning V Hours. 718.11 X 4.86 = 3495.61 X 1407.03 = 4,918,428 X „ = = 532 16 7 = 139 11 5 G Old System, Dec. 1891 Sunset to Sunrise. 1371.61 x 5. = 6858.05 X 1409.74 = 9,668,067 x „ = = 1047 7 6 H New System, Dec. 1891 Actual Number of Burning Hours. 1283.07 X 4.62 = 5934.61 X 1409.74 = 8,366,257 x „ = = 906 6 11 = 141 0 7 Total saving in the cost of Gas for the year £542 7 8 154 TABLE VI. Comparative cost of Lighting, Extinguishing, Cleaning and Repairs, and the Saving under the Old and New System. OLD SYSTEM. Cost of Lighting, Extinguishing and Repairs to Lamps. Lamps. s. d. £ S. d. Quarter ending March, 1891 140800 @ 5 5.96 = 385 11 9 „ June 1402.89 „ 5 3.85 = 378 4 6 „ Sept. 1407.03 „ 8 8.28 = 259 6 1 „ Dec. „ 1409.74 „ 3 5.96 = 240 9 4 £1264 11 8 NEW SYSTEM. Cost of Lighting, Extinguishing and Repairs to Lamps. Ah per Table II. 1054 5 5 Saving for the year £210 6 8 TABLE VII. Showing the Total Saving by the Meter System and Modified Hours. In the cost of Gas shown by Table V. 542 7 8 In the cost of Lighting, Extinguishing and in repairs to lamps shown by Table VI. 210 6 3 752 13 11 Deduct cost of maintenance of meters and governors, salaries &c., shown by Table III. 234 0 0 284 0 0 Total Saving £518 13 11 155 TABLE VIII. Shewing the consumption of Gas in Lamps of greater illuminating power than the ordinary lamps. Quarter ending Number of hours charged for. Consumption per hour charged cu. ft. Consumption per lamp per quarter cu. ft. Number of Lamps. Consumption per quarter cu. ft. Rate per 1000 cu. ft. £ S. d. Total £. s. d. March, 1891 1181.25 x 6.9 = 8,150.62 x 4. = 32,602 x 2/2 = 3 10 8 „ „ X 8. = 9,450.00 x 127. 1,200,150 x „ = 130 0 4 „ „ X 12. = 14,175.00 x 23. 326,025 x „ = 35 6 5 „ „ X 15. = 17,718.75 x 64. 1,134,000 x „ = 122 17 0 „ „ X 16. = 18,900.00 x 3. = 56,700 x „ = 6 2 10 „ „ X 20. = 23,625.00 x 1. = 23,625 x „ = 2 11 2 „ „ X 24. = 28,350.00 x 4. = 113,400 x „ = 12 5 8 „ „ X 30. = 35,437.50 x 3. = 106,312 x „ = 11 10 4 „ „ X 83. = 38,981.25 x 24. = 935,550 x „ = 101 7 0 „ „ X 50. = 59,062.50 x 1. = 59,062 x „ = 6 8 0 „ „ X 58. = 68,512.50 x 1. = 68,512 x „ = 7 8 5 = 439 7 10 June, 1891 647.88 x 6.9 = 4,468.37 X 4. = 17,873 x 2/2 = 1 18 8 „ „ X 8. = 5,183.04 x 126.81 = 657,261 x „ = 71 4 1 „ „ X 12. = 7,774.56 x 23. = 178,814 x „ = 19 7 5 „ „ X 15. = 9,718.20 x 64. = 621,964 x „ = 67 7 7 „ „ X 16. = 10,366.08 x 3. = 31,098 x „ = 3 7 4 „ „ X 20. . 12,957.60 x 1. = 12,957 X „ = 1 8 0 „ „ X 24. = 15,549.12 x 4. = 62,196 x „ = 6 14 9 „ X 30. = 19,436.40 x 3. = 58,309 x „ = 6 6 4 „ „ X 33. = 21,380.04 x 24. = 513,120 x „ = 55 11 9 „ „ X 50. = 32,394.00 x 1. = 32,394 x „ = 3 10 2 „ „ X 58. = 37,577.04 x 1. = 37,577 X „ = 4 1 5 = 240 17 6 156 TABLE VIII.—Continued. Quarter ending Number of hours charged for. tion per hour charged, cu. ft. Consumption per lamp per quarter cu. ft. Number of Lamps. Consumption per quarter cu. ft. Rate per 1000 cu. ft. £ s. d. Total £ S. d. Sept. 1891 720.88 x 6.9 = 4,974.07 X 4. 19,896 x 2/2 = 2 3 1 „ „ x 8. = 5,767 04 X 126. = 726,647 X „ = 78 14 4 „ „ x 12. = 8,650.56 x 23. 198,962 x „ = 21 11 1 „ „ X 15. = 10,813.20 X 64. = 692,044 x „ = 74 19 5 „ „ x 16. = 11,534.08 x 3. = 34,602 x „ = 3 14 11 „ „ x 20. = 14,417.60 X • 1. = 14,417 x „ = 1 11 2 „ „ X 24. = 17,301.12 X 4. = 69,204 x „ = 7 9 11 „ „ x 30. = 21,626.40 x 3. = 64,879 x „ = 7 0 6 „ „ x 33. = 23,789.04 X 24. = 570,936 X „ = 61 17 0 „ „ X 50. = 36,044.00 x 1. = 36,044 X „ = 3 18 1 „ „ X 58. = 41,811.04 x 1. = 41,811 X „ = 4 10 7 = 267 10 1 Dec. 1891 1285.38 x 6.9 = 8,869.12 x 4. = 35,476 x 2/2 = 3 16 10 „ „ x 8. = 10,283.04 x 125.72 = 1,292,783 x „ = 140 0 11 „ „ x 12. = 15,424.56 x 23. = 354,764 x „ = 38 8 7 „ „ x 15. = 19,280.70 x 64. = 1,233,964 x „ = 133 13 7 „ „ x 16. = 20,566.08 x 3. = 61,698 x „ = 6 13 8 „ „ x 20. = 25,707.60 x 1. = 25,707 x „ = 2 1 5 8 „ „ X 24. = 30,849.12 x 5. = 154,245 x „ = 16 14 2 „ „ X 30. 38,561.40 x 3. = 115,684 x „ = 12 10 7 „ „ X 33. = 42,417.54 x 24.57 = 1,042,198 x „ = 112 17 9 „ „ X 50. = 34,269.00 x 1. = 64,269 x „ = 6 19 2 „ „ X 58. = 74,552.04 X 1. = 74,552 x „ = 8 1 6 =482 12 5 £1430 7 10 I am, Gentlemen, Your obedient Servant, C. H. DOUGHTY, Lighting Inspector. PUBLIC HEALTH DEPARTMENT. The Vestry of parish of St. Leonard, Shoreditch, IN THE COUNTY OF LONDON. REPORT OF THE MEDICAL OFFICER OF HEALTH. Public Health Department, 1st January, 1892. To the Vestry of St. Leonard, Shoreditch. Gentlemen, Hitherto the Annual Report of the Medical Officer of Health has been made for the 12 months ending the 25th March, but in future, under the provisions of the "Public Health (London) Act, 1891," the Local Government Board have directed that "He shall prepare an annual report, to be made to the end of December in each year." As the Act takes effect on the 1st of January, 1892, it appears therefore desirable to issue my first Report at this date. In order also to enable comparison to be made between the statistics of 1891 and future years, I have included the births, deaths, &c., of the first quarter of 1891, which was part of the last report of my esteemed predecessor, the late Henry Gawen Sutton, M.D., who for the long period of 25 years acted as Medical Officer of Health to this district. Dr. Sutton, I may remind you, died on June 9th, 1891, and the Parish was without a Medical Officer until the 1st September, so that I am not in a position to report so fully as I might otherwise have done the proceedings which have been taken during the past year to improve the sanitary condition of the Parish. STATISTICS OF BIRTHS AND DEATHS, &c. In the report which I presented to you on the statistics relating to the quarter ending 3rd October, 1891, I drew your attention to the fact that this Parish, and especially the more central part, was becoming less used for residential purposes, and more for business ones; and I also pointed out that in order to ascertain the correct birth and death rates of the various divisions of the Parish, it was necessary to deduct from the census figures those persons resident in the Holborn Infirmary, Workhouse, and in some other institutions, giving for the whole Parish an estimated population of 122,615. p 160 BIRTHS. During the 52 weeks ending January 2nd, 1892, 4,583 births were registered in Shoroditch, but from this must bo deducted 72 children horn in the Holborn Infirmary, whose mothers, I am informed by Dr. Yarrow, were, previous to admission, residents in parishes other than St. Leonard, Shoroditch, leaving 4,511 births, equivalent to an annual rate of 36.76 per 1,000 of the population. This birth-rate is a very high one. In London the rate for the corresponding period was 31.8 per 1,000. Throughout the country the birth-rate, which has been almost continuously declining since 1870, has risen during 1891, the rate for. that year exceeding by 1.2 per 1,000 the rate for 1890, which was the lowest on record since civil registration was established, more than 50 years ago. In Shoroditch there has also been an increase. The Birth-rates of the Registration Groups of London may be compared in Table II. appended herewith. . A number of births occur in the Shoroditch Infirmary, but having no statistics available, I am unable to apportion the births occurring therein among the districts of the Parish, to which they properly belong, except as stated in the following table:— District. Males. Females. Total. Shoroditch, South 810 292 002 Hoxton Now Town 529 553 1,082 „ Old „ 585 508 1,043 Haggerston 884 900 1,784 Total 2,258 2,253 4,511 DEATHS. In the 52 weeks 3,163 deaths were registered as having occurred in this Parish; from these are deducted the deaths of 421 non-parishioners who died in various institutions and elsewhere in the District, but the deaths of 800 parishioners who died in other parts of the Metropolis have to be added, making a total of 3,042 inhabitan's of Shoroditch who died during the year. This is equivalent to an annual death-rate of 24.8 per 1,000 inhabitants; compared with the rates of the previous three years, on their corrected population, the rate for 1891 shows some improvement over that for 1H00, but in still higher than these for 1888 and 1889. This higher rate is duo to the largo number of deaths in the first and last quarters of the year from Influenza, Measles, Whooping Cough, and Respiratory Diseases. The rate for London was 21.4 per 1,000, the same as last year, which had a higher rate than any year since 1882. 161 1,563 deaths occurred amongst males; 1,479 amongst females. These were divided as follows:— District. Males. Female. Total. Rate per 1,000 Shoreditch, South 238 209 447 22.4 Hoxton New Town 333 361 694 24.4 „ Old „ 384 368 752 26.1 Haggerston 608 541 1,149 25.2 Seven deaths were uncertified by a medical man or coroner. Inquests were held in 243 cases. 699 persons died in hospitals or public institutions. Of the total deaths 802 (26.36 per cent.) were of infants under one year of age, and Deaths under a quarter of these were attributed to "Debility" or Premature Birth; 13 deaths are one year of age attributed to Congenital Syphilis. The other chief causes of death at this age were Diarrhoea, 85; Tubercular Diseases, 79; Diseases of the Nervous System (including those ascribed to Teething), 71 ; and diseases of the respiratory organs, 176. Thirty infants were suffocated in bed with their parents. The rate of infantile mortality was 175.5 per 1,000 births; in London, 154; the lowest rate being 104 in Hampstead, the highest 228 in Holborn. 1,385 deaths occurred in children under five years of age, that is, 583 deaths took place in children between one and five years of age. Zymotic Diseases (in which may be included Tubercular affections) are responsible for 384 deaths, but probably a proportion of the deaths from diseases of the respiratory system, arising from damp condition of dwellings, should be included in the list of diseases which can be prevented. The deaths of children under five years amounted to 45.5 percent. of the total deaths in the year, the deaths for London, at the same age, were equal to 36.9 percent. Of the 1,657 remaining deaths, 136 took place between the ages of 5 and 15; 1,051 between 15 and 65, and 470 above the age of 65; of these latter 139 exceeded the age of 75, 27 being between 85 and 95, while two exceeded 95. Deaths under jive years of age. Of the 1,051 deaths of persons between 15 and 65 years of age, 25 percent. are attributable to respiratory diseases; 23 percent. to consumption in various forms; about ten percent. each to diseases of the Heart and Nervous System, while Cancer, diseases of the Kidneys and of the Digestive Organs claim about five per cent. Shoreditch has been shown to contain the largest proportion of artizans among metiopolitan parishes, and many of the diseases to which they are liable may be incident to the employment in which they are engaged ; but still much may be done to reduce the amount of sickness, P1 Deaths of Adults. 162 a proportion only of which is shown by the death-rate, by attention to the conditions under which they work, as well as to the sanitary state of their dwellings. Want of light and air in workshops and factories is quite as serious a matter as it is in respect to inhabited houses, for although in the latter you have the children, who are readily affected by the absence of these essentials, yet in the workshops are the skilled artizans, upon whom many families depend, and whose illness is a loss to the wealth of the district and of the nation. Necessity for Wider Streets. I have been led to make these remarks on account of the change which is being effected in the more central part of the parish, and to which I have already alluded. Houses for the most part of two, or at most three floors, are being demolished, and in their place huge blocks of high warehouses and factories are being substituted; streets which were none too wide for the height of the former buildings, now appear like narrow lanes, and access of light and movement of air are, to a great extent, prevented. It is really necessary that persons should not be permitted to erect high buildings of this description without making, at the same time, some increase in the width of the street commensurate with the height of the buildings. And for the above reasons, as well as in case of fire, the extent of these blocks ought to be limited in area by streets intersecting them at regular intervals. Tubercular Diseases. ZYMOTIC DISEASES. Nearly one-third of the total deaths, viz.:—993 deaths resulted from diseases of an infectious or contagious character; of this number, 412 (13.5 percent. of the total deaths) were due to Consumption of the Lungs, or other forms of Tuberculosis; in London the average is 13.29 percent. The prevalence of tubercular disease to such an extent is indicative of defects in the sanitary and social conditions under which the inhabitants of many districts of the Metropolis work and live. Many factors are concerned in the production of this disease, as want of pure air and sunlight, sedentary and other occupations in badly ventilated workshops and rooms, overcrowding, intemperance, dampness of houses, imperfect paving of yards and streets, which are thus unable to be properly cleansed; and in children, probably the use of unboiled milk, derived from tuberculous cows. Many of these defects are to be found in this parish. To obviate the dampness of the houses, which plays an important part in the production and aggravation of many diseases, and which exists in many houses from original defective construction, your sanitary staff have for a number of years endeavoured, and to a large extent successfully, to obtain the removal of the causes by such means as the formation of dry areas, the paving of the forecourts and back yards, &c.; but in this particular, as in many other matters relating to house construction, it is now imperative that the Building Acts be so amended as to give Local Authorities the power to prevent houses being built without proper consideration being given to sanitary requirements. Influenza.—During 1891, 63 persons died from Influenza, but many deaths ascribed to Pneumonia and other complaints should no doubt be attributed to Influenza. It is well known that in poorer neighbourhoods persons attacked by any disease do not 163 keep indoors until absolutely compelled to do so; thus many struggle on at their work in the early and distinctive stages of Influenza and do not consult a medical man until these have passed oft, and Bronchitis or Inflammation of the Lungs has resulted. If death occurs, then it is certified as due to the latter cause. It might thus lead to the impression that this disease did not affect the Eastern Districts of the Metropolis so much as the Western or suburban ones. Notification of Infectious Diseases.—During the year 1891, 862 certificates were received, as compared with 1,158 in the previous twelve months. They were distributed as follows :— Disease. 1890 1891 Fatal Cases. Sanitary defects found. Diphtheria and Membranous Croup 207 237 84 39 Scarlet Fever 639 369 17 75 Enteric (or Typhoid) Fever 202 111 20 16 Typhus Fever 2 Nil Nil Nil Remittent „ 1 „ „ „ Continued „ Nil 1 „ „ Puerperal 5 4 1 1 Small Pox Nil 2 Nil Nil Cholera 1 1 1 „ Erysipelas 101 137 6 7 In London the Notifications per 1,000 inhabitants varied from 3.2 at Woolwich to 10 at Clerkenwell, giving an average over all of 8.5. Shoreditch shows a rate of 6 9, which is exactly the average of the parishes in the Eastern Division, the lowest of these being Whitechapel, 5.2; the highest Poplar and Betlnal Green, 9.2 each. 232 of the cases reported in 1891 were treated in Hospitals; 129 of the total cases proved fatal. In 138 premises where infectious diseases occurred, works other than cleansing of walls and ceilings were carried out to remedy sanitary defects discovered by Inspector Lear. Diphtheria, (including Membranous Croup), affected 237 persons as compared with 207 in the previous year. The death-rate was 0.52 (including croup, 0 68) per 1,000 of population, as compared with 0.32 (including croup, 0.41) for London. The presence of an outbreak of this disease in Islington caused an increase in the number of cases in that part of the parish bordering on Islington. Scarlet Fever produced 369 cases instead of 639, with a death-rate 0 0.13); London being 0.14. This decrease corresponds with that noticed throughout the country generally. 164 Enteric (or Typhoid) Fever. —A continuous decrease in the number of cases of this disease has been observed in this Parish for some years, and during 1891 it has continued, 111 cases being notified with a death-rate of 0.16, as against 202 in the preceding year; the death-rate in London was 0.12 per 1,000. This bears witness to the thorough way in which the drainage work of the district has been carried out in the houses, under the instructions of your Sanitary Staff. Small Pox.—Two cases of this disease were reported in the early part of the year, but being promptly removed, no other cases appeared. Principal Zymotic Diseases.—Under this heading the Registrar groups deaths from Small Pox, Diphtheria, Scarlet Fever, Fever (including Enteric), Diarrhoea, Whooping Cough, and Measles. The death.rate for this group in 1891 was 3.9 for Shoreditcli, 2.3 for London. Diarrhoea.—Mortality was below the average generally, due to the absence of hot weather for any length of time. Shoreditch had 0.9 per 1,000, and London, 0.59. 81 of the deaths occurred in the third quarter of the year, when this disease is most prevalent. Measles and Whooping Cough.—In the first and last quarters of the last two years a large number of deaths have resulted from these two diseases. During 1891 the death.rate from Measles was equal to 1.0 per 1,000, London giving 0.43 and Whooping Cough 0.99, against 0.68 for London. The average rate during the last ten years for London was, for Measles, 0.64, for Whooping Cough, 0.69. On account of the large mortality from these diseases a desire has been expressed to have them included under the Infectious Diseases Notification Act, and some Local Authorities have so included Measles. This is a matter of special interest to Shoreditch, because while death from Measles is comparatively rare in the families of the well.to.do, there is ample proof that want of space, of pure air, of suitable food, and of proper nursing and care, together with the often present dampness of the living rooms, lead to a fatal issue in the families of the poorer classes, generally through the pulmonary or intestinal complications which ensue. If the children could be moved from their unhealthy surroundings, much benefit would certainly result, but without that I fail to see that the benefit to be gained from notification would be an adequate equivalent to the expense incurred. Experience among the poorer classes has convinced me that the want of care taken when children are suffering from Measles and Whooping Cough is due, to a great extent, to ignorance of the dangers attendant on those complaints, and of the most elementary rules of health. With the view of doing a little to remove this condition a circular, drawn up by myself, giving some instructions concerning these complaints, and some precautions that may be taken, is to be distributed throughout the Parish. Erysipelas.—137 cases of this complaint were notified during last year. Many of these cases are of a very slight nature, and I have instructed the Inspector, Mr. Lear, 165 that unless such conditions exist as render it desirable to disinfect the rooms, it need not be done as a rule in cases of Erysipelas. This is a disease, which, in my opinion, might well be removed from the list of diseases included in the Notification Act; the dangei to lying-in women, to vaccinated children, and to persons requiring surgical operations is one which can be usually met by the Medical Practitioner with ordinary precautions. REMOVAL OF PERSONS SUFFERING FROM INFECTIOUS DISEASES. Recently notification was received that a child was suffering from Scarlet Fever in a house in this Parish. On the house being visited by the Sanitary Inspector he was informed by the father, that on being told the nature of the complaint, he had carried the child to another house in an adjoining parish As it is contrary to Law for a person so suffering to be exposed in the streets, and calculated to spread the disease, a summons against the man was applied for, but it was refused by the Magistrate on the ground that no witness was present at the time the application was made, who had seen the child being removed, and could speak from observation to the method employed. It does not appear to be generally known, even by medical men, that the Metropolitan Asylums Board, besides taking persons to their hospitals, are at all times ready to convey persons suffering from any one of the following diseases, viz. :—Small Pox, Cholera, Diphtheria, Measles, Relapsing, Continued and Puerperal Fevers, Erysipelas, Scarlatina, Typhus, and Typhoid Fevers, to any place to which they may wish to be removed for the sum of 5/-, if within the Metropolitan Area, on application to the office, or to one of the ambulance stations, the one for this district being situate at Brooksby's Walk, Homerton, N.E. DISINFECTION. Mr. Lear, the Sanitary Inspector, who is charged with the duty of enquiring into all cases of infectious diseases, reports that he has caused to be disinfected, stripped and cleansed, 816 premises, and that in 138 houses he discovered sanitary defects of a more serious kind, which he has caused to be rectified; and in the following table is set forth by him the articles disinfected at the Vestry's oven, and those which had to be destroyed and replaced:— Articles. Disinfected. Destroyed and Replaced. Beds 833 12 Palliasses 568 37 Bolsters 504 4 Pillows 1602 8 Sofa Bed Squabs Nil 4 Various 6123 Nil Total 9630 65 166 The Disinfecting Oven.—Your late Medical Officer had drawn your attention to the worn out condition of the oven, which had done duty for a long period, and on coming into office, I reported to you that the action of the oven was very ineffectual, and presented a report on the best kind of apparatus for this purpose. The General Purposes and Sanitary Committee, having previously inspected one form, visited St. Pancras parish and saw the system adopted there, and decided that the apparatus used at the latter place, manufactured by Messrs. Goddard, Massey & Co., was the most suitable for the requirements of this parish. At the same time they saw and approved of the vans used by the St. Pancras Vestry for the purpose of taking bedding, &c., to and from the Disinfecting Oven, and decided to recommend that two similar ones should be obtained for use in Shoreditch. A Shelter.—I also pointed out the necessity under which the Vestry was placed of providing temporary shelter for the members of any family during the time they are compelled to leave their dwellings for the purpose of enabling such dwellings to be disinfected, but the necessary arrangements have not yet been able to be made. Disinfectants. —From June 22nd to October 31st, three and a half tons of disinfecting powder were distributed at the Town Hall to 7,298 applicants. The Public Mortuary. — 346 bodies were received into the Mortuary during the past year, of these nine were taken there at the instance of your Inspectors. Vaccination.—I am indebted to the Vaccination Officer, Mr. C. H. Waterer, for the following information in respect to vaccination in the Parish during 1891. Between the 1st of January and December 31st 4,515 births were registered ; 504 died without being vaccinated; of the remainder, 3,451 received certificates of successful vaccination, leaving 560 unvaccinated, about one-ninth of the total births. HOUSING OF THE WORKING CLASSES ACT. Since my appointment, it has been my duty to make representations under this Act in reference to four groups of property. In none of the cases has recourse been had to legal proceedings, as the desired object was, or is in process of being, attained. (l.) Batll Place, Old Street.—This court, containing 10 small houses, had previously been brought under the notice of the Vestry by Dr. Sutton, but no steps had been taken, partly because the property in front had been taken down, allowing access to both light and air. I reported in November that the houses were old and much dilapidated structures, with very small back yards. Warehouses were then being erected on the vacant ground, on the north side of the court, and had reached the same height as the houses, and there was only three feet of clear passage-way between the buildings. The houses were ordered to be closed under Sec. 32 of the Act; this has now been done by the owner, to whom also the warehouse belongs, and the courtway closed up. 167 (2.) Unicorn Tavern, Hoxton Street.—The Chief Inspector (Mr. Alexander) reported to me in October that he had inspected this house and found the residential part in an extremely dilapidated condition, and dangerous from both a sanitary and structural point of view. The yard was paved with fragments of stones which were imbedded in wet filth. The house was subsequently visited by the General Purposes and Sanitary Committee and myself, and the rain was seen pouring in through the roof and on to the staircases. I learned that most of the previous and present inmates had seriously suffered in health in consequence of the conditions present. Immediate action was taken by the Vestry, and the whole house was closed. Leave was subsequently given to carry on business in the bar, which is built out in front, as it was not possible to proceed with the rebuilding of the house until the plans are laid before the Licensing Sessions. (3.) Ivy Street, Nos. 2, 4, 6, and 8.— On the 3rd December I represented to the Vestry that these houses were in such a state as to be injurious to health, and recommended that they should be dealt with under Sec. 32, Clause 1, Schedule 3. Accompanying my report was a detailed list of defects, prepared by Mr. Alexander. This action was taken with a view to enforce the carrying out of works, which were absolutely necessary, no notice having been paid to the ordinary notices. The Vestry gave the necessary order, and on notices being served, work has been begun, but I cannot say that it has the appearance of being ultimately satisfactory. (4.) Basing House Yard contained five houses in an insanitary condition and a large yard in front was badly paved and drained. The place was viewed by the General Purposes and Sanitary Committee, and an order was made to deal with it under this Act; the arrangements to remedy the defects are progressing satisfactorily. Plumber s Place and Moira Place Areas.—The Committee under this Act resumed the consideration of this Scheme, which had been interrupted by Dr. Sutton's death, and are making steady progress in the preparation of plans for the re-arrangement of the sites. Goldsmith'S Square.—On the 14th July, the County Council determined that this area be purchased, one-third under the Housing Act, and two-thirds under the Open Spaces Act. The ground is in process of being cleared. Wood Stacks.—In the neighbourhood of the Regent's Canal and elsewhere in the parish, wood for building and other purposes is stacked, often to a considerable height. My attention was called to certain of these, on account of the way in which they obstructed light and air to adjoining dwellings, between which and the stacks only a few feet of clear space remained. It was found, however, that legal difficulties prevented action being taken; the advice of the County Council was then asked, but that body was unable to offer any, but as it appeared desirable to have power to regulate the position, size, &c., of these huge erections, the Council propose going to Parliament for the purpose of obtaining it. 168 New "Model" Buildings.—Although the Committee under the Housing of the Working Classes' Act, cannot interfere with the plans of any proposed building, however objectionable it may be from sanitary reasons, yet in two instances to which their attention was drawn by the Surveyor, and Paving and Sewers' Committee, they were able to obtaiu material alterations in the original plans. In the first case it was proposed placing three blocks of residential buildings, on a piece of ground formerly occupied by Almshouses. The site is situated in an already crowded neighbourhood and the street in front is a narrow one. One block was to face the street, and the two others were to be behind it leaving, between the two back ones, a courtyard 22 feet 9 inches, access to which was to be obtained through a tunnel in the front block. The provision of light and air was inadequate, and the arrangement of the rooms was objectionable; so that I had no hesitation in reporting that if the buildings were built as proposed, it would be my duty, on their completion, to have them closed as unfit for habitation. After several interviews between the proprietor and his architect, your Surveyor and myself, the plans were altered so as to remedy entirely the faults complained of. In the second case it was proposed building a block of residential buildings on a site where a number of small cottages had been pulled down, also in a crowded neighbourhood and facing a narrow street. Objections were taken to the plans on account of the extent of building proposed to be placed on the space at command; of the arrangement of the passage ways and rooms, and defective means for lighting and ventilation. In this case also we were able to obtain material alterations in the plans. Both these cases show clearly deficiencies in the existing Building Acts, the provisions of which had been complied with in the plans originally submitted. Conference on the Working of the Act.—A desire to have some uniformity in the execution of the provisions of the Housing of the Working Classes' Act, led to a Conference taking place early last year, between the County Council and the Vestries and District Boards of the Metropolis. It was found difficult to lay down definite rules, but the following statement may be taken as a guide:— "Whether a house is dangerous to health mainly depends upon:— " (a) Site and surroundings. " (b) Construction. " (c) Age and general want of repair. " (d) Nuisances. "(a) Site.—A dwelling-house built in a hollow, or in a situation not "admitting effectual drainage, or exposed to malarious influences, or built in a "manner or on soil which causes, or permits the air to be contaminated by "injurious gases, might be properly represented under Sec. 30 of the Housing of "the Working Classes' Act, 1890. "The fact that a dwelling-house is built on a site so surrounded by buildings "that access of sufficient light and air is impossible would, in our opinion, be a "good ground for representation. 160 "(b) Construction.—Under this head would be classed original defect of plan. For example: a dwelling house improperly ventilated or lighted, or with the "closet and dust bin so situated as to cause a nuisance within the house. Any condition which results in permanent dampness. "Such faulty construction of chimney flues as permits products of "combustion from adjoining promises to permanently contaminate the air of "living rooms. "(c) Age and General Want of Repair.—This, when it reaches a degree of "dilapidation, is obviously a just cause for representation. "(d) Nuisances.—Bad drainage, faulty closets, filth, per se, &c., are, in our "opinion, grounds for action rather under the Nuisances Removal and Sanitary "Acts, but when affecting a whole dwelling-house, or when combined with faults "of site and construction and general want of repair, they justify action also "under the Housing of the Working Classes Act. "In all the above Cases the question of Detjree comes in.—It is, indeed, this "question of degree that renders precise definition impossible ; general principles "can alone be laid down." "CUSTOMS AND INLAND REVENUE ACTS, 1890 and 1891." In 1890 an Act was passed containing a Section dealing with the exemption of certain houses from Inhabited House Duty. Under that Act, Sub-section 2, of Section 26, provided that "the assessment to Inhabited House Duty of any house originally built or adapted by additions or alterations, and used for the sole purpose of providing separate dwellings for persons at rents not exceeding for each dwelling the rate of seven shillings and sixpence a week, and occupied only by persons paying such rents, shall be discharged" if a certificate is produced to the Commissioners to the effect that the house is so constructed as to afford suitable accommodation for each of the families or persons inhabiting it, and that due provision is made for their sanitary requirements. The certificate is to be obtained from the Medical Officer of Health for the district in which the house is situate, or from some other legally qualified medical practitioner having the qualification required for the office of Medical Officer of Health of the district, and appointed as provided by the Section. The Section makes it the duty of the Medical Officer of Health, on request by the person who would be liable to pay the house duty on any house in the district, if the duty were not discharged by the Commissioners, to examine the house for the purpose of ascertaining whether a certificate can properly be given; and if the house is constructed so as to afford suitable accommodation for each of the families or persons inhabiting it, and due provision is made for their sanitary requirements, the Medical Officer is to certify the same accordingly, free of charge. 170 By Section 4 of the "Customs and Inland Revenue Act, 1801," this enactment is amended by the substitution of the words "Where the annual value of each dwelling shall not amount to £20," for the words "for persons at rents not exceeding for each dwelling the rate of seven shillings and sixpence a week, and occupied only by persons paying such rents." Section 4 of the Act of 1891 further extends this concession, and provides that in the case of any house originally built, or adapted by additions or alterations, and used, so far as the same is used as a dwelling-house, for the sole purpose of providing separate dwellings at an annual value not exceeding £40 for each dwelling, the Commissioners acting in the execution of the Acts, relating to Inhabited House Duties shall, upon production of such a certificate as is mentioned in Sub-section (2) of Section 26 of the Act 1890, grant relief by confining the assessment to the annual value of the house, exclusive of every dwelling therein of an annual value below £20 (if any), and by reducing the rate of duty to three pence. In pursuance of these Acts, and upon request of the owners, I have inspected, since my appointment, 114 dwellings, but in no case were the conditions such as to warrant the giving of a certificate, and indeed the examination in several cases led to notices being served upon the owners to rectify grave sanitary defects. STAFF OF THE DEPARTMENT. A report on the requirements of the Parish, to enable proper cognizance to be taken of sanitary defects, was submitted by me in December to the General Purposes Committee, and has been circulated in printed form among the Members of the Vestry, together with a memorandum by the Vestry Clerk, to whom, with your Medical Officer, the matter was remitted. The Committee have not yet had time to give the amount of attention they desire to the discussion of the report. LONDON WATER SUPPLY. In consequence of communications from the Vestry of St. Mary, Battersea, and the Board of Works for St. Saviour's, Southwark, enclosing statements of their public analysts in reference to the water supplied by several of the London water companies, I reported to you on the conditions under which London is supplied with water, and suggosted that the companies should be prohibited drawing water from polluted sources, in the same way as any private individual would be if he drew water from a polluted well. THE "SALE OF FOOD AND DRUGS ACT, 1875." Mr. Stiles, the Inspector appointed under these Acts, reports to me the following information as to the number of Samples procured, together with the result of Analyses during the year 1891:— 171 Samples. Number Procured. Number Adulterated. Milk 49 26 Butter 20 4 Coffee 12 5 Bread 1 0 Honey 6 0 Condensed Milk 5 3 Plum Jam 1 0 Cheese 1 0 Total 95 38 SUMMONSES. Date of Hearing. Samples. Fines Inflicted. Fines. Costs. £ s. d. s. d. January 22nd, 1891 Milk 0 10 0 2 0 April 10 th „ „ 2 0 0 2 0 „ „ „ 4 0 0 2 0 „ „ „ 2 0 0 2 0 „ „ „ 2 5 0 2 0 „ „ „ 2 0 0 2 0 „ „ „ 1 0 0 2 0 „ „ „ 4 0 0 2 0 „ „ „ 7 0 0 4 0 „ „ „ 4 0 0 2 0 „ „ Coffee 2 0 0 2 0 „ „ „ 2 0 0 2 0 „ „ „ 2 0 0 2 0 „ „ „ 5 0 0 2 0 July 10th, 1891 Milk 2 0 0 2 0 „ „ „ 2 15 0 2 0 „ „ „ 5 10 0 4 0 „ „ „ 5 0 0 2 0 „ „ Butter 1 0 0 2 0 „ „ Coffee 0 0 0 2 0 October 30th, 1891 Milk 1 0 0 2 0 November 27th, 1891 20 0 0 2 0 £77 0 0 48s. 0 172 FOOD SEIZED AND CONDEMNED. Spanish Onions 31 eases English „ 1 bag (about 100 lbs.) Scarlet Beans 1 bushel Cabbage Plants 1 cwt. Chorrios 22 baskets Strawberries 22 „ Plums 2 „ (about 401bs.) Apples 1 „ Skate 2 barrels and 1 box Cod Roes 1 kit Oysters About 6OO Escallops 1 bag Mackerol 30 Haddocks (smoked) 200 „ (wot.) 1 trunk Meat Cuttings 22 lbs. Lamb 2 breasts (about 6lbs.) Sheep One-third Mutton 2½ shoulders Pork 1 leg and 2 hands (about 10lbs.) Sparc Ribs Pork 2 (about 8lbs.) Beef 2 pieces (about 16lbs.) Bacon 8 „ (881bs.) Rabbits 2 I append the reports of Chief Sanitary Inspector Aloxander on the general work done by himself and the other Inspectors, under his supervision, in the inspection of premises by house-to-house visitation and otherwise, the nature of the nuisances discovered, and the orders made for their removal, and on the Scavenging and Dusting of the Parish, and the Watering of the Roads. In the Statistical Tables accompanying this report may bo scon the causes of death in the Parish, and in the separate districts thereof, and in Table II. the rates are given in parallel columns for the whole of Registration London, and its groups of Districts, whereby comparisons may ho made between the rates existing in this Parish and these in other parts of the Metropolis. Shoreditch forms part of the East Registration District. I am, Gentlemen, Your obedient Servant, FRANCIS JOHN ALLAN Medical Officer of Health. Shoreditch Town Hall, OLD Street, E.C. The Vestry of the Parish of St. Leonard, Shoreditch, IN THE COUNTY OF LONDON. INSPECTOR ALEXANDER'S REPORT. ??? Public Health Department, 31st December, 1891. To the Medical Officer of Health. Sir, I beg to present the following report on the Sanitary work done under my superintendence during the year ended December 31st, 1891, showing the number of premises inspected, the nature of nuisances under notice, and the orders made for their abatement. Notices were served requiring the abatement of nuisances in 1536 premises. WORKS DONE TO SECURE ABATEMENT OF NUISANCES. Glazed pipe drains provided in lieu of dilapidated brick drains in 40 premises Defectively constructed pipe drains repaired or re-laid in 582 „ Drains provided where there were none before in 7 „ Rats infesting, and sewer gas impregnating (cured) in 25 „ Cesspools emptied and filled up in 14 „ Accumulation of sewage removed from 26 „ Stack pipes (having their beads dangerously close to bedroom windows, permitting sewer gas to pass into the dwellings) disconnected from drains in 435 „ Stack pipes provided in 203 „ Eaves gutters provided in 216 „ Waste pipes of sinks within doors (untrapped and permitting sewer gas to impregnate the dwellings) have been securely trapped, or otherwise disconnected from drains, and have now their ends in the open air, and immediately over the yard sinks in 465 „ Back fronts repointed in 27 „ Roofs repaired in 134 „ Stairs repaired in 71 „ Floors repaired in 80 „ Hearth stones and jambs provided in 10 „ 174 Walls and ceilings cleansed, whitened and repaired throughout in 185 premises Ditto ditto in part in 360 „ Sashes repaired in 50 „ Water closets (foul and dilapidated) cleansed, repaired, and fitted to "Shoreditch Model" in 736 „ Water restored or newly laid on to water closets in 578 „ Obstructions in water closets removed in 51 „ Water closets in close, dark and otherwise injurious situations removed into light and air in 27 „ Additional water closets provided in 4 „ Water supplied direct from main in lieu of cisterns in 96 „ Leaking water pipes, causing dampness, repaired in 24 „ Yards and areas lime-washed in 272 „ Dust bins provided in 524 „ Dustbins repaired in 47 „ Yards paved imperviously with stone or cement concrete in 695 „ Yard paving repaired or rendered impervious in 74 „ Areas and forecourts paved imperviously with stone or cement concrete in 156 „ Sculleries ditto ditto in 150 „ Premises unfit for habitation closed in 20 „ MISCELLANEOUS. 1. Obstructive building altered, and open yard and water-closet obtained 1 2. Horse-dung bins built 2 3. Three public dust bins have been provided for the accommodation of 37 premises 4. Stable and Stable yards paved 3 5. Urinals on private premises trapped and purified 2 6. Overcrowding abated 23 cases 7. Dead bodies removed from 9 premises 8. Animals kept so as to be a nuisance, removed 10 9. Accumulations of dung and rubbish removed 39 In addition to the ordinary notices served for the abatement of nuisances, 1340 letters have been written, and special reports have been presented on the following matters :— (1) As to the insanitary condition of the Kiosk, and alterations required, which have been effected. (2j As to the insanitary condition of Shap Street Board School (works now in progress) 175 (3) As to the insanitary condition of St. Columba School, Kingsland Road (works now in progress). (i) As to the insanitary condition of Norfolk Buildings (works not yet commenced). (5) As to the insanitary condition of the houses north of Nile Street, in Allerton Street, Custance Street, Moneyer Street, Provost Street and Marsom Street. To show the character of the work done, a few cases are given in detail as follows :— BASING HOUSE YARD, Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4 and 5. These are 4-roomed cottages, with kitchen in back additions. Repeated efforts have been made during past years by sanitary notices to secure an enduring improvement in the condition of these premises ; unfortunately on each of those occasions the owner did not succeed in getting his work done in a substantial manner; it therefore resulted, a few years having elapsed, that the houses were found to be quite unfit for habitation, and that the money spent on insufficient worke had simply been wasted. In this case the Housing of the Working Classes Act secured what the Nuisance Removal Acts had failed to obtain. To avoid proceedings for closing the premises (as ordered by the Vestry), the owner requested to be supplied with a specification of necessary works, and although the Act in such cases does not direct the Vestry to do more than require the owner to make the premises fit for habitation, leaving him to his own devices as to the nature and extent of the repairs and alterations to be made, it was considered advisable to comply with the request, and therefore acting under instructions I supplied a specification under which the owner's builder has executed the works in a satisfactory manner, including repairs to roofs, repointing brick work, provision of window and door cills, repairs to walls, ceilings, floors, stairs, &c., reconstruction of drains, re-fitting of water-closets (Shoreditch pattern), paving of yards and provision of gullies, paving of forecourts, the construction of one public dustbin, &c. The houses have thus been put into good sound sanitary condition. PENNY BANK CHAMBERS (GREAT EASTERN STREET.) These (Model Dwellings) consist of six floors, the basement of which is used by the tenant of adjoining premises in Great Eastern Street, as part of a warehouse which extends under both premises. The ground floor is reserved for the Bank purposes. The 1st, 2nd, 3rd. and 4th floors are each divided into six suites of apartments, each floor being fitted with three water closets, two sinks, with draw taps for water supply, and one aperture (on landing) for reception of house refuse, opening into a shall, which extended from the top floor into a dust bin enclosed in the basement warehouse. 176 Complaint having been received that the receptacle for refuse in the basement was in a foul condition, led to an examination of the premises, with the following result. It was found that the various water closets wore fitted with tilting water pans and iron containers, all in an extremely foul condition. In several instances the water pans were gone, and the emanations of the foul containers rose freely into the closets. The cisterns, supplying the people living on the 1st, 2nd, and 8rd floors, were found in the water closets close up to the ceilings, so that an examination of the state of the cisterns could only he made by removing the floor boards of the water closet overhead. This having boon done the cisterns wore found to be in a, very filthy condition, and there was abundant evidence that the water was fouled by excrementitious matters overflowing the closet pans. Against that contingency it did not appear that the builder, nor even the architect, had thought it necessary to take any precaution whatever. As soon as these conditions were ascertained the tenants wore immediately cautioned not to use the water, and within a low days a, supply was laid on direct from the main. Following thereon, and after full discussion with an architect representing the Company, the whole of the foul cisterns and filthy water closet arrangements wore cleared away, and each w.c. fitted up in a superior manner after the Shoreditch pattern. The objectionable arrangements whereby the refuse of 24 dwellings was deposited in the basement warehouse, have also boon cleared away, and a space in the open air under the stone stairs has boon utilized, and now forms a suitable receptacle. 4 To ensure these works being done in a proper manner it has boon necessary for me to assume, not only the position of architect, but also of Clerk of Works on behalf of the owner, and it is quite certain the work would not have boon done properly if that had not boon done. BATH PLACE AND RIVINGTON STREET. It was reported as to tho houses in Bath Place (Nos. 1 to 15), and as to the houses 15, 17, 19, 21, 28, 25, 27, 29, and 81, Rivington Street, abutting 011 the houses 1 to 10, Bath Place, that the whole of these houses worn worn out and dilapidated structures, that they were very closely packed together, that efforts had boon repeatedly made in past years to improve their condition, but as they were held on short leases it had not boon possible to secure durable work, and the houses were again in an insanitary condition. On receipt of that report, the late Medical Officer of Health reported the premises under "Torren's Act" to the London County Council, following upon which the Council directed notices to bo served on the houses in Bath Place, under the now "Housing of the Working Classes Act,'' requiring their closure (which has been effected), and notices to bo served on the houses in Rivington Street for repairing the same, under 177 which drains have been re-laid, w.c.'s re-constructed, yards paved, and the premises generally largely improved. DUSTING AND SCAVENGING. Eastern Division.—The work which had generally throughout the contract been executed in a satisfactory manner, was found on the 29th September to be in arrears, and 600 complaints were addressed to the contractor, all of which were satisfactorily attended to, although not till after completion of contract on 20th September, 1891, at which date the Vestry commenced operations, on its own behalf, or the removal of dust and scavenging of roads in this Division. Western Division.—The work of scavenging and dusting for the three quarters ending 25tli December, 1891, has been done generally in a satisfactory manner. Watering.—The work has been done in a satisfactory manner. I am, Your obedient Servant, HUGH ALEXANDER, Chief Sanitary Inspector. Ql 178 TABLE I. DEATHS REGISTERED FROM ALL CAUSES IN THE PARISH AND IN EACH SUB-DISTRICT. N0TE.—The Deaths of Non-Parishioners occurring in Hospitals, &c., in the Parish, are excluded; and the Deaths of Parishioners occurring in Hospitals, &c., situated in London beyond the limits of the Parish, are included. DEATHS REGISTERED FROM ALL CAUSES DURING THE YEAR ENDING 2nd JANUARY, 1892. DEATHS REGISTERED IN EACH SUB-DISTRICT FROM ALL CAUSES. CAUSES OF DEATH. AGES. Total Deaths under Five. Grand Total. Shoreditch South Hoxton New Town. Hoxton Old Town. Haggerston. Total. Under 1 1 to 2. 2 to 5. 5 to 15. 15 to 25. 25 to 35. 35 to 45. 45 to 55. 55 to 65. 65 to 75. 75 to 85. 85 to 95. 95 and upwards. (Classes.) I.—ZYMOTIC DISEASES 256 163 162 74 49 85 85 62 25 26 6 ... ... 581 993 149 217 251 376 993 II.—CONSTITUTIONAL 5 2 5 8 3 12 22 25 27 26 6 2 ... 12 143 23 28 28 64 143 III.—LOCAL 266 128 85 47 47 59 116 172 221 211 71 7 1 479 1431 211 327 353 540 1431 IV.—DEVELOPMENTAL 236 20 3 0 3 5 4 0 3 31 55 18 1 259 379 48 104 91 136 379 V.—VIOLENT DEATHS 38 5 9 7 4 8 3 3 8 8 1 0 0 52 94 16 16 29 33 94 (III-defined) 1 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2 2 ... 2 ... ... 2 Total 802 319 264 136 106 169 230 262 284 302 139 27 2 1385 3042 447 694 752 1149 3042 I.—ZYMOTIC DISEASES. Order 1—Miasmatic. Measles 28 46 59 6 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 126 132 28 24 39 41 132 Scarlet Fever (Scarlatina) 2 ... 9 5 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 11 17 2 4 4 7 17 Diphtheria (including Mem. Croup) 7 10 43 23 ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... 1 60 84 8 23 23 30 84 Whooping Cough 34 48 81 7 2 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 118 122 14 19 30 59 122 IT 179 Erysipelas ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 2 2 ... 1 ... ... ... 6 ... 2 3 1 6 Puerperal Fever (Metria) ... ... ... ... 1 . . . ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 1 ... ... ... 1 Carbuncle ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... 1 1 Influenza 7 2 1 2 ... 5 6 6 10 19 5 ... ... 10 63 11 13 20 19 63 Diarrhœa 85 17 3 ... 1 1 1 ... 2 5 ... ... ... 105 115 12 29 29 45 115 Simple Cholera ... ... ... ... ... . . . ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... 1 ...1 Varicella 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 1 ... 1 ... ... 1 Septicæmia ... ... ... ... ... 1 4 ... ... ... ... ... ... 5 1 ... 1 3 5 Order 2—Enthetic. Syphilis 13 ... ...• ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 13 13 2 3 2 6 13 Order 3—Tubercular. Tabes Mesenterica 41 13 5 3 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 59 62 7 11 19 25 62 Phthisis 4 6 2 11 35 74 70 47 11 2 ... ... ... 12 262 44 55 52 111 262 Hydrocephalus and Tubercular Meningitis 30 14 10 10 1 1 ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... 54 67 13 20 15 19 67 Other forms of Tuberculosis Diseases 4 7 4 2 ... ... 2 2 ... ... ... ... ... 15 21 4 7 6 4 21 Order 4—Parasitic. Worms, &c. ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ••• ... 1 ... ... ... 1 1 II.—CONSTITUTIONAL DISEASES. Order 1—Diathetic. Rickets ... ... 2 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2 2 ... 1 1 2 Gout ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 1 ... ... ... ... ... 2 ... ... 2 ... 2 Rheumatism ... ... 1 6 1 4 ... 2 1 2 1 ... ... 1 18 2 6 4 6 18 Dropsy 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... 1 2 ... 1 ... 1 2 Cancer ... 1 1 1 1 2 13 13 22 17 4 ... ... 2 75 12 11 18 34 75 Cancrum Oris (Noma) 1 ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... . . . ... ... ... 2 2 1 ... ... 1 2 Mortification ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 3 1 1 ... ... 5 1 2 ... 2 5 Abscesses and Tumours ... 1 ... ... ... 1 1 ... 1 1 ... ... ... 1 5 1 1 ... 3 5 Myxœdema ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... 1 ... ... 1 ... ... 3 1 ... 1 1 3 180 DEATHS REGISTERED FROM ALL CAUSES DURING THE YEAR ENDING 2nd JANUARY, 1892. DEATHS REGISTERED IN EACH SUB-DISTRICT FROM ALL CAUSES. CAUSES OF DEATH. AGES. Total Deaths under Five. Grand Total. Shoreditch South. Hoxton New Town. Hoxton Old Town. Haggerston. Total. Under 1. 1 to 2. 2 to 5. 5 to 15. 15 to 25. 25 to 35. 35 to 45. 45 to 55. 55 to 65. 65 to 75. 75 to 85. 85 to 95. 95 and upwards. Order 2—Dietic. ; Privation ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 1 ... ... ... 1 Want of Breast Milk 3 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 3 3 ... ... ... 3 3 Purpura and Scurvy ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... 1 ... ... 1 Alcoholism a. Del. Tremens ... ... ... ... ... 1 2 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... 4 ... 1 ... 3 4 b. Intemperance ... ... ... ... ... 4 5 6 1 3 ... ... ... ... 19 4 4 3 8 19 III.—LOCAL DISEASES. Order 1—Nervous System. Apoplexy 1 ... ... 1 1 2 5 13 17 25 6 2 ... 1 73 14 22 18 19 73 Paralysis ... ... 1 ... ... 2 2 3 3 9 7 ... ... 1 27 2 7 5 13 27 Insanity ... ... ••• . ... 1 2 4 8 5 13 4 ... 1 ... 38 6 7 12 13 38 Epilepsy ... 1 1 ... 1 1 6 4 1 2 1 ... ... 2 18 3 6 4 5 18 Convulsions 60 7 4 ... 2 ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... 71 74 11 24 13 26 74 Brain Disease, &c. 10 2 16 11 6 3 7 7 8 10 1 ... ... 28 81 10 20 22 29 81 Order 2—Organs of Circulation. Aneurism ... ... ... ... ... • • • 4 2 ... ... ... ... ... ... 6 1 1 3 1 6 Heart Disease, &c. ... 1 1 14 7 16 23 28 41 30 9 1 ... 2 171 32 33 43 63 171 Order 3—Respiratory Organs. Laryngitis 1 2 3 1 1 • • • 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... 6 9 1 ... 4 4 9 Bronchitis 126 66 24 8 7 5 16 36 78 85 26 3 ... 216 480 62 112 122 184 480 Pleurisy 1 ... 1 1 1 1 2 2 2 1 ... ... ... 2 12 2 3 3 4 12 Pneumonia 47 41 30 7 7 14 22 33 25 15 6 ... ... 118 247 33 42 60 112 247 Asthma ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 2 2 1 2 ... ... ... 8 3 3 2 ... 8 Lung Disease, &c. 1 1 ... 1 ... ... 1 2 3 2 ... ... • • • 2 11 3 1 5 2 11 181 Order 4—Digestive Organs. | Gastritis 7 1 ... 1 ... 1 ... 2 ... ... 1 ... ... 8 13 3 3 3 4 13 Enteritis 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... 2 1 1 ... ... ... 1 5 ... 2 2 1 5 Peritonitis 1 1 1 ... 4 ... ... 2 2 ... ... ... 3 11 2 3 3 3 11 Hernia 1 ... ... ... ... ... 3 1 1 2 1 ... ... 1 9 1 1 3 4 9 Intussusception 2 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... 2 3 1 ... 1 1 3 Stricture of Intestines 1 1 ... ... ... ... ... 2 2 1 1 ... ... 2 8 ... 4 2 2 8 Stomach Disease, &c. 8 4 ... ... 8 1 1 2 1 ... ... ... ... 7 15 4 5 3 3 15 Liver Disease, &c. 2 ... ... ... ... 4 4 7 6 6 1 ... ... 2 30 3 6 4 17 30 Order 5—Urinary Organs. Nephritis ... • • • ... ... ... 1 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2 2 2 Bright's Disease (Nephria) ... ... ... ... 1 2 2 8 10 2 1 1 ... ... 27 8 7 7 10 27 Diabetes ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... 1 1 Cystitis ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 1 2 ... ... ... ... ... 4 ... ... 1 8 4 Kidney Disease, &c. ... ... ... ... 2 3 9 2 7 2 ... ... ... ... 25 8 6 2 9 25 Order 6—Organs of Generation Ovarian Dropsv ... ... ... ... . . . • • • ... ... ... 2 1 ... ... ... 3 1 ... ... 2 3 Uterine Disease, &c. ... ... ... ... 1 1 1 2 1 ... ... ... ... ... 6 .... 3 2 1 6 Ordy 7—Organs of Locomotion. Joint Disease, &c. 1 ... 1 2 ... ... ... ... 1 1 1 ... ... 2 7 ... 4 ... 3 7 Bone Disease ... ... ... ... 1 . . . ... ... ... ... 1 . . . ... • • • 2 ... ... 1 1 2 Order 8—Integumentary System Ulcer ... ... ... ... • • . ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... 1 ... 1 Skin Disease, &c. ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 1 ... ... 1 ... 1 Diseases of Glands ... ... 1 ... 1 ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... 1 3 2 ... 1 ... 3 IV.—DEVELOPMENTAL DISEASES. Order 1—Diseases of Children. Premature Birth 88 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 88 88 11 25 20 32 88 Spina Bifida 3 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 3 3 ... ... ... 3 3 Other Malformations 11 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 11 11 1 1 3 6 11 Teething 24 14 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 38 38 7 8 16 7 38 Order 2—Diseases of Adults. Child-birth ... ... ... ... 8 5 4 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 12 2 3 3 4 12 182 DEATHS REGISTERED FROM ALL CAUSES DURING THE YEAR ENDING 2nd JANUARY, 1892. DEATHS REGISTERED IN EACH SUB-DISTRICT FROM ALL CAUSES. CAUSES OF DEATH. AGES. Total Deaths under Five. Grand Total. Shoreditch South. Hoxton New Town. Hoxton Old Town. Haggerston. Total. Under 1. 1 to 2. 2 to 5. 5 to 15. 15 to 25. 25 to 35. 35 to 45. 45 to 55. 55 to 65. 65 to 75. 75 to 85. 85 to 95. 95 and upwards. Order 3—Diseases of Old People. Old Age ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 3 30 55 18 1 ... 107 13 27 20 47 107 Order 4—Diseases of Nutrition. Atrophy and Debility 110 6 3 ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... 119 120 14 40 29 37 120 V.—VIOLENT DEATHS, &c. Order 1—Accident or Negligence Fractures and Contusions 3 2 3 4 1 2 2 ... 3 2 1 ... ... 8 23 3 6 8 6 23 Wounds ... ... ... 1 1 2 ... ... 1 1 ... ... ... ... 6 2 1 3 ... 6 Burns and Scalds ... 2 4 1 ... ... ... ... 2 1 ... ... ... 6 10 2 3 4 1 10 Poison ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... 1 1 Drowning ... 1 1 1 1 1 ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... 2 6 ... 2 1 3 6 Suffocation 30 ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... 31 32 7 2 9 14 32 Otherwise 4 ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... 4 5 1 1 1 2 5 Order 2—Homicide. Murder and Manslaughter 1 ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 2 ... ... 1 1 2 Order 3—Suicide. Poison ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... 1 1 Drowning ... ... ... ... 1 2 1 1 ... 1 ... ... ... ... 6 ... ... 2 4 6 Hanging ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2 ... ... ... ... 2 l 1 ... ... 2 Causes ill-defined 1 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2 2 ... 2 ... ... 2 Total 802 319 264 136 106 169 230 262 284 302 139 27 2 1385 3042 447 694 752 1149 3042 183 Table II.—London and Shoreditch Birth and Death Rates, and Analysis of Mortality of the year 1891. Districts. Annual Rate per 1000 persons living. Deaths under 1 year to 1000 Births. percentage to total deaths. Districts. births 1891. total deaths. deaths from Inquest Cases. Deaths in Public Institutions. Uncertified Causes of Death. Principal Zymotic Diseases. Small.Pox. | Measles. Scarlet Fever. Diphtheria Whooping Cough. Fever. Diarrhoea. Tubercular Diseases Violence. 1888. 1889. 1890. 1891. London 31.8 19.3 18.32 21.55 21.4 2.3 0.00 0.43 0.14 0.32 0.68 0.14 0.59 2.8 0.77 154 7.4 25.6 1.0 London. Shoreditch 36.76 22.0 19.8 25.4 24.8 3.9 ... 1.00 0.13 0.52 0.99 0.16 0.9 3.36 0.76 175 7.9 22.9 0.2 Shoreditch. West Districts. 27.0 ... ... ... 19.5 1.83 ... 0.16 0.08 0.27 0.54 0.13 0.65 ... ... 154 ... ... ... North Districts 30.1 ... ... ... 20.0 2.23 ... 0.40 0.14 0.35 0.66 0.12 0.56 ... ... 146 ... ... ... Groups of Central Registration Districts 30.1 ... ... ... 27.6 3.04 ... 1.11 016 0.32 0.70 0.21 0.54 ... ... 177 ... ... ... Districts of East Districts. 38.1 ... • • ... 23.9 2.80 0.00 0.57 0.15 0.44 0.79 0.15 0.70 ... ... 161 ... ... ... London. South District 32.7 ... ... ... 20.2 2.15 0.00 0.39 0.15 0.26 0.71 0.13 0.51 .. ... 149 ... ... ... In this Table 0.00 indicates that the deaths were too few to give a rate of 0.005. 184 The Vestry of the Parish of St. Leonard, Shoreditch, in the court of London. Analyst's Report for Quarter ending 25th day of March, 1891. Date of receipt by Analyst of the Article to be Analysed. Name of Person from whom the Article was received. Number marked on the parcel containing the Article by which it is to be identified by the Inspector in lieu of the name of the person from whom it was procured Article received. Result of Analysis specifying the nature and kind of foreign ingredients detected in such article (if any). Observations. Fee payable for Analysing such Article. £ s. d. Mar. 5 Ambrose W. Stiles I 56 Butter Genuine Not decomposed 0 10 0 „ „ „ „ I 57 Butter Foreign fats 80 percent.; water, salt, and curd, 15 percent. Butter fat not exceeding 5 percent A sample of margarine 0 10 0 „ „ „ „ I 58 Butter Genuine Not decomposed 0 10 0 „ „ „ „ I 59 Butter Genuine, of low quality Not decomposed 0 10 0 „ „ „ „ I 60 Butter Genuine Not decomposed 0 10 0 „ „ „ „ I 62 New milk Genuine Not decomposed 0 10 0 „ „ „ „ I 63 New milk 10 percent. added water Not decomposed 0 10 0 „ „ „ „ I 64 New milk 20 percent. added water Not decomposed 0 10 0 „ „ „ „ I 65 New milk Deficient in butter fat 10 percent Not decomposed 0 10 0 „ „ „ „ I 66 New milk 10 percent. added water Not decomposed 0 10 0 „ „ „ „ I 67 New milk Added water 22 percent Not decomposed 0 10 0 Mar. 19 „ „ I 61 Butter Foreign fats 75 percent.; water, salt, and curd, 15 percent. Butter fat not exceeding 10 percent. A sample of margarine 0 10 0 „ „ „ „ I 68 Coffee Chicory 40 percent. 0 10 0 „ „ „ „ I 69 Coffee Genuine 0 10 0 „ „ „ „ I 70 Coffee Chicory 45 percent. 0 10 0 „ „ „ „ I 71 Coffee Chicory 50 percent. 0 10 0 „ „ „ „ I 72 Coffee Genuine 0 10 0 „ „ „ „ I 73 Coffee Genuine 0 10 0 „ „ „ „ I 74 New milk Genuine, of low quality Not decomposed 0 10 0 „ „ „ „ I 75 New milk Added water 10 percent.; also deficient in butter fat 25 percent. Not decomposed 0 10 0 „ „ „ „ I 76 New milk Genuine Not decomposed 0 10 0 „ „ „ „ I 77 New milk Genuine, of low quality Not decomposed 0 10 0 „ „ „ „ I 78 New milk Added water 20 percent. Not decomposed 0 l0 0 „ „ „ „ I 79 New milk 3 percent. of water beyond the normal Not decomposed 0 10 0 Mar. 23 „ „ I 80 New milk Deficient in butter fat 25 per cent. Not decomposed 0 10 0 „ „ „ „ I 81 Bread Genuine Not decomposed 0 10 0 £ 13 0 0 Total number of Samples analysed during the Quarter, 26. THOS. STEVENSON, Analyst. 185 Analyst's Report for Quarter ending 24th day of June, 1891. Date of receipt by Analyst of the Article to be Analysed. Name of Person from whom the Article was received. Number marked of the parcel containing the Article by which it is to be identified by the Inspector in lieu of the name of the person from whom it was procured. Article received. Result of Analysis specifying the nature and kind of foreign ingredients detected in such article (if any). Observations. Fee payable for Analysing such Article. £ s. d. May 21 F. C. Knight, 24, Wolseley road, Forest Gate, E. xu Butter Foreign fats, i.e., fats other than butter fat, 40 per cent. Water, salt, and curd, 11 percent. Butter fat not exceeding 49 percent. Not decomposed 0 10 6 paid „ „ „ „ XT Butter Foreign fats, i.e., fats other than butter fat, 80 per cent. Water, salt, and curd, 10 percent. Butter fat not exceeding 10 percent. Not decomposed 10 6 paid „ „ „ „ 20 Butter Genuine Not decomposed 0 10 6 paid June 1 A. W. Stiles I 82 New milk Genuine, of low quality Sour and partially churned when received, but not materially interfering with the analysis 0 10 0 June 4 „ „ I 83 New milk Added water 12 percent., deficient in butter fat 25 percent. Not decomposed 0 10 0 „ „ „ „ I 84 Butter Genuine Not decomposed 0 10 0 „ „ „ „ I 58 New milk Genuine Not decomposed 0 10 0 „ „ „ „ I 86 Butter Foreign fats, i.e., fats other than butter fat, 65 percent. Water, salt, and curd, 13 percent. Butter fat not exceeding 22 percent. Not decomposed A sample of margarine 0 10 0 „ „ „ „ I 87 New milk Added water 6 percent., deficient in butter fat 20 percent. Not decomposed 0 10 0 „ „ „ „ I 88 Butter Genuine Not decomposed 0 10 0 „ „ „ „ I 89 New milk Deficient in butter fat 15 percent. Not decomposed 0 10 0 „ „ „ „ I 90 Butter Foreign fats, i.e., fats other than butter fat, 85 percent. Water, salt, and curd, 12½ percent. Butter fat not exceeding 2½ percent. A sample of margarine 0 10 0 Carried forward £ 4 10 186 Analyst's Report for Quarter ending 24th day of June, 1891—continued. Date of receipt by Analyst of the Article to be Analysed. Name of Person from whom the Article was received. Number marked on the parcel containing the Article by which it is to be identified by the Inspector in lieu of the name of the person from whom it was procured. Article received. Result of Analysis specifying the nature and kin of foreign ingredient detected in such article (if any). Observations. Fee payable for analysing such article £. s. d. Brought forward 4 10 0 June 4 A. W. Stiles 191 New milk Added water 24 per cent., deficient in butter fat 20 percent. Not decomposed 0 10 0 „ „ „ „ I 92 Butter Genuine Not decomposed 0 10 0 „ „ „ „ I 93 Coffee Genuine 0 10 0 „ „ „ „ I 94 New milk Genuine, of low quality Not decomposed 0 10 0 „ „ „ „ I 95 Butter Genuine Not decomposed 0 10 0 „ „ „ „ I 96 New milk Added water 6 percent., deficient in butter fat 15 percent. Not decomposed 0 10 0 June 18 „ „ I 97 New milk 4 per cent, water beyond the normal Not decomposed 0 10 0 „ „ „ „ I 98 Coffee Chicory 25 percent 0 10 0 „ „ „ „ I 99 New milk Added water 8 percent., deficient in butter fat 15 percent. Not decomposed. Not a genuine whole milk 0 10 0 „ „ „ „ I 100 Coffee Chicory 10 percent 0 10 0 „ „ „ „ J 1 New milk Added water 25 percent Not decomposed 0 10 0 „ „ „ „ J 2 Coffee Genuine .... 0 10 0 „ „ „ „ J 3 New milk Genuine Not decomposed, but sour when received 0 10 0 „ „ „ „ J 4 Coffee Genuine .... 0 10 0 „ „ „ „ J 5 New milk 6 percent. water beyond the normal Not decomposed, but a little sour 0 10 0 „ „ „ „ J 6 Coffee Genuine .... 0 10 0 „ „ „ „ J 7 New milk Genuine Not decomposed, but a little sour 0 10 0 „ „ „ „ J 8 New milk 6 percent. water beyond the normal Not decomposed, but sour when received 0 10 0 £ 13 10 0 Total number of Samples analysed during the Quarter, 30. THOS. STEVENSON, Analyst 187 Analyst's Report for Quarter ending 29th day of September, 1891. Date of receipt by Analyst of the Article to be Analysed. Name of Person from whom the Article was received. Number marked on the parcel containing the Article by which it is to be identified by the Inspector in lieu of the name of the person from whom it was procured. Article received. Result of Analysis specifying the nature and kind of foreign ingredients detected in such article (if any). Observations. Fee payable for Analysing such Article. £ s. d. July 8 A. W. Stiles J 9 New milk 10 per cent. deficient in butter fat Not decomposed 0 10 0 „ „ „ „ J 10 Butter Genuine Not decomposed 0 10 0 „ „ „ „ J 11 New milk Genuine Not decomposed 0 10 0 „ „ „ „ J 12 Butter Genuine Not decomposed 0 10 0 Sept. 4 George Baldock, 5, Basing place, Kingsland road C Butter Genuine Not decomposed 0 10 6 paid Sept. 17 „ „ A Butter Genuine Not decomposed. 0 10 6 paid „ „ „ „ B Butter Genuine Not decomposed 0 10 6 paid „ „ „ „ C Butter Genuine Not decomposed 0 10 6 paid Sept. 24 A. W. Stiles J New milk Genuine Not decomposed 0 10 0 „ „ „ „ J 14 New milk 5 per cent, water beyond the normal. Not decomposed 0 10 0 „ „ „ „ J 15 New milk 25 per cent, of added water Not decomposed 0 10 0 „ „ „ „ J 16 New milk Genuine Not decomposed 0 10 0 „ „ „ „ J 17 New milk 4 per cent, water beyond the normal Not decomposed 0 10 0 „ „ „ „ J 18 New milk Genuine Not decomposed 0 10 0 „ „ „ „ J 19 New milk Genuine Not decomposed 0 10 0 „ „ „ „ J 20 New milk Genuine Not decomposed 0 10 0 „ „ „ „ New milk Genuine Not decomposed 0 10 0 „ „ „ „ J 22 New milk Genuine Not decomposed. 0 10 0 „ „ „ „ J 3 New milk Added water 7 per cent., deficient in butter fat 15 per cent. Not decomposed 0 10 0 „ „ „ „ New milk Genuine, of low quality Not decomposed 0 10 0 Sept. 25 F. C. Knight, 24, Wolseley road, Forest Gate, E. AC Butter Genuine Not decomposed 0 10 6 paid „ „ „ „ AD Butter Genuine Not decomposed 0 10 6 paid £8 0 0 Total number of Samples analysed during the Quarter, 22. THOS. STEVENSON, Analyst. 188 Analyst's Report for Quarter ending 25th day of December, 1891 Date of receipt by Analyst of the Article to be Analysed. Name of Person from whom the Article was received. Number marked on the parcel containing the Article by which it is to be identified by the Inspector in lieu of the name of the person from whom it was procured. Article received. Result of Analysis specifying the nature and kind of foreign iogredients detected in such article (if any). Observations. Fae payable for Analysing such article. \ £ s. d. Nov. 18 A. W. Stiles J 25 Honey Genuine 0 10 0 „ „ „ „ J 26 Honey Genuine 0 10 0 „ „ „ „ J 27 Honey Genuine 0 10 0 „ „ „ „ J 28 Honey Genuine 0 10 0 „ „ „ „ J 29 Honey Genuine 0 10 0 „ „ „ „ Honey Genuine 0 10 0 Nov. 27 „ „ J 31 Condensed milk Genuine 0 10 0 „ „ „ „ J 32 Condensed milk Genuine, prepared from milk deprived of about 90 per cent. of its cream Labelled as prepared from skimmed milk and sugar 0 10 0 „ „ „ „ J 33 Condensed milk Genuine 0 10 0 „ „ J 34 Condensed milk Genuine,prepared from milk deprived of about 90 per cent. of its cream Labelled as prepared from skimmed milk and sugar 0 10 0 „ „ „ „ J 35 Condenilk Genuine, prepared from milk deprived of at least 90 per cent. of its cream Labelled as prepared from skimmed milk and sugar 0 10 0 „ „ „ „ J 36 Plum jam Genuine 0 10 0 Nov. 30 „ „ J 37 Cheese Genuine, made from skimmed milk.. 0 10 0 Dec. 17 „ „ J 38 New milk Genuine Not decomposed 0 10 0 „ „ „ „ J 39 New milk Genuine Not decomposed 0 10 0 „ „ „ „ J 40 New milk Added water 13 per cent Not decomposed 0 10 0 „ „ „ „ J 41 New milk Genuine Not decomposed 0 10 0 „ „ „ „ J 42 New milk Genuine Not decomposed 0 10 0 „ „ „ „ J 43 New milk 5 per cent. of water beyond the normal Not decomposed 0 10 0 „ „ „ „ J 44 Butter Genuine Not decomposed 0 10 0 „ „ „ „ J45 Butter Genuine Noc decomposed n 10 n „ „ „ „ J 46 Butter Genuine Not decomposed 0 10 0 „ „ „ „ J 47 Butter Genuine Not decomposed 0 10 0 „ „ „ „ J 48 Butter Genuine Not decomposed 0 10 0 „ „ „ „ J 49 Butter Genuine Not decomposed 0 10 0 £ 12 10 0 PUBLIC LIBRARIES AND MUSEUMS. FIRST ANNUAL REPORT of the COMMISSIONERS FOR PUBLIC LIBRARIES and MUSEUMS for the Parish of Saint Leonard, Shoreditch, for the year 1891-92. The Commissioners have pleasure in submitting, for the information of the Vestry, the following report of their first year's work in carrying out the Libraries Acts in this Parish. Immediately after their appointment on the 14th April, 1891, the Commissioners visited the principal libraries of the Metropolis and obtained a large amount of information as to their practical working and the cost of building and establishing public libraries, and their maintenance. In view of the necessity which is found to arise in parishes as large as Shoreditch of establishing branch libraries as well as a central one, the Commissioners thought it expedient to provide at the outset two libraries for this Parish of about equal size, to supply the needs of the two Parliamentary Divisions of Haggerston and Hoxton. In the Haggerston Division they were fortunate in finding a substantial and suitable building, ready to hand, nearly in the centre of the division, known as the Independent Gas Offices, 236, Kingsland Road, having a large garden in the rear and a house No. 231, Kingsland Road, accompanying the property which the Commissioners thought it advisable to acquire as a residence for their Librarian. The tram, omnibus and train facilities to these premises, and their situation in such an important thoroughfare led the Commissioners to think that no better site could be obtained, and they opened negotiations with the owners, the Gas Meter Company, whose Directors and Manager—Mr. Andrews— met them in a very fair and generous spirit. The Commissioners succeeded in persuading the Directors to reduce their first price of £5,000 to £4,250 in view of the purpose for which the building was required, and the Vestry having given its sanction to this purchase, a contract for the purchase of the property, subject to the sanction of the Local Government Board, was entered into by the Commissioners on the 29th October, 1891. It then became necessary to raise a loan of £5,000 to pay the above purchase-money R 192 and provide a sum of £750 for fitting up, altering and furnishing the building as a library, and the Commissioners applied on the 13th August, 1891, to the Local Government Board for their sanction to the borrowing of this sum on the security of the Library Rate as provided by the Libraries Acts. On the 4th November, 1891, the Board held a public inquiry on the proposal of the Commissioners, with the result that on the 30th of January, 1892, the Board gave their sanction to the borrowing by the Commissioners of the following sums for the following terms of years and purposes:- £3,030 for 50 years for land in Kingsland Road and law expenses. £1,250 „ 30 „ buildings in Kingsland Road. £720 „ 15 „ furniture and fittings. £,5000 On the 18th day of November, 1891, the Commissioners applied to the London County Council asking them to lend the sum of £5,000 to the Commissioners, with interest at 3½% per annum, repayable on the annuity principle, that is by equal annual instalments of principal and interest combined, as the Commissioners thought the instalment principle which throws the heaviest burden on the present generation of ratepayers was an unfair principle to adopt in this case where the improvement is to be a lasting one and the property more likely to increase than decrease in value. If the instalment principle had been adopted the Commissioners would have had only £100 a year left for purchasing books for this library after the payment of other expenses, whereas, by the adoption of the annuity principle the amount available for books is £165 per annum. After a delay of about four months the Commissioners were very disappointed to find that although tbe London County Council were desirous of lending the money to be repayable on the annuity principle Her Majesty's Treasury would only give their consent to repayment on the instalment principle. The Commissioners deemed the question of such importance to their work that they resolved to apply to the Prudential Assurance Company for the money, who advanced the sum of £5,000 in the amounts and for the terms of years sanctioned, to be repayable on the annuity principle, with interest at 3½% per annum on the 12th April, 1892. The long and vexatious delays caused by the official departments, whose sanctions have had to be applied for, have seriously hindered the Commissioners in their work, but they are pleased now to be able to report that the conveyance of the Kingsland Road premises was completed by the Hon. Secretary on the 11th April, 1892, and possession obtained. The Commissioners have engaged Mr. Richard J. Lovell as the architect to superintend the alterations and fittingup of the premises as a Library, and he has prepared the specification, and tenders have been invited from several substantial builders. In the Hoxton Division the Commissioners made efforts to obtain on favourable terms the property known as Haberdashers' House, in Pitfield Street. The Haberdashers' Company offered the property on a long lease for £300 a year, which they subsequently reduced to £250 and then to £200. The latter figure seemed to the Commissioners to be the full market value of the property, and they offered £125 per annum and appointed a deputation to wait on the Company, who made an appeal to the Company to let them 193 the land on these or more favourable terms in view of the purpose for which it was required, and of the fact that the present building would probably have to be demolished. The Company declined, to the Commissioners disappointment, to reduce their offer, so that the negotiations fell through. The Commissioners have great pleasure in reporting that they have received a donation of £10 from the Worshipful Company of Cloth workers, London, for books, and also a very handsome promise of 1,000 volumes from Mr. Passmore Edwards, M.P. who has made such munificent gifts to the libraries of adjoining parishes. The Commissioners have passed hearty votes of thanks to these donors, who by their valuable gifts have encouraged and assisted the Commissioners in appealing for further donations from the public. The Commissioners have also made a small purchase of £6 worth of books, or about 100 volumes. The Commissioners, feeling that the time had arrived for the appointment of their Chief Librarian and Clerk, inserted the following advertisement for candidates once in The Times, and Athenaum, and twice in the Daily Telegraph, Baity News, and Daily Chronicle:— "LIBRARIAN.—The Shoreditch Public Libraries and Museums Commissioners invite applications for the office of Chief Librarian and Clerk to the Commissioners. Previous experience in the management and fitting-up of Public Libraries essential. Salary to commence at £150 per annum, rising (subject to the approval of the Board) by annual increments of £10 to a maximum of £200 per annum." Fifty-nine applications were received, from which fourteen candidates were selected for interview. The Commissioners finally unanimously appointed as their Chief Librarian and Clerk, on the terms of the advertisement, Mr. William Charles Plant, Chief Librarian and Curator of the Public Library, Buxton, which office he had held for three years. Mr. Plant had been eight years previously Librarian of a Literary Institute at Leek, and four years Foreign Correspondent to Mr. Matthew Knowles, Silk Manufacturer. Leek. Mr. Plant entered on his duties on the 25th March, 1892. At the commencement of the Commissioners' work the Vestry Clerk, Dr. H. Mansfield Robinson offered to act as Hon. Sec. to the Commissioners till the appointment of a Clerk and Librarian, and the Commissioners accepted his otter and appointed him as their Hon. Sec. They have now unanimously passed the following resolution: That the best thanks of the Commissioners be given to Dr. Robinson for his "very valuable services as Hon. Sec. during the past year, and that he he "asked.to kindly continue as their Hon. Sec. permanently." r1 194 Dr. Robinson has consented to act in such capacity The Commissioners have held twenty-eight meetings during tne past year, and below is a record of the attendances:— ATTENDANCES OF COMMISSIONERS. Barralet, Mr. W. H. 23 Cox, Mr. J. 28 Donovan, Mr. J 23 Fordham, Mr. S. 22 Hurlin, Mr. J. 21 Martindill, Mr. T. (Chairman) 28 Moffat, Mr. E. 21 Molloy, Mr. A. 22 Wenborn, Mr. F. M. 24 The Commissioners invited designs from the Schools of Art at Kensington, Birmingham, Nottingham and other Schools, for the Common Seal of the Commissioners, offering a prize of two guineas to the successful candidate. The choice of the Commissioners fell unanimously on the design of Miss Edith Mason, of the Kensington School of Art, and they have adopted it as the Common Seal of the Commissioners, and an impression of it is affixed at the end of this report. THOMAS MARTINDILL, Chairman of Commissioners. Shorf.ditch Town Hall, Old Street, E.C. 19th April, 1892. PUBLIC LIBRARIES AND MUSEUMS. ABSTRACT OF THE ACCOUNTS. 196 196 the commissioners for public libraries and museums, shore ditch REVENUE ACCOUNT— from 14th April, 1891, to 25th March, 1892. To receipts- £ s. d. By payments- £ s. d. maintenance account. maintenance account. From the Poor Rate— Haggerston Library. On account of produce of ¾d. Rate in the £ per annum— Books 16 0 0 Precept, dated 13th July, 1891 (fo. 67) 533 0 0 Design for Common Seal 2 2 o Do. 15th January, 1892 (fo. 67) 490 0 0 Candidates' Expenses re Chief Librarianship 9 3 0 1,023 0 0 Bill Posting 0 12 6 Stationery and Scrivenery 1 11 4 Donation ex Worshipful Company of Cloth workers, London 10 0 0 Handbooks, Pamphlets, &c 2 1 1 Bankers' Interest 3 2 8 Fire Insurance 2 6 3 13 2 8 Postages and Stamp Duty 2 0 4 Petty Disbursements 1 7 1 37 3 7 Excess of Receipts over Payments (see Mow) 998 19 1 £1,036 2 8 £1,036 2 8 REVENUE ACCOUNT—Income and Expenditure from 14th April, 1891, to 25th March, 1892. Source. Fo. RECEIPTS. ASSETS Accrued but not received Income from Apr 14,'91 to Mar 25.'92 Application. Fo. PAYMENTS. LIABILITIES Incurred but not paid. Expenditure from Apr.14,'91 to Mar. 25, '92 March 25,'1)1 March 25'92 March 25,'91 March 25,'92 £ s. d. £ s. d. £ S. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. From the Poor Rate 196 1,023 0 0 938 1 0 1,961 14 0 Haggerston Library 196 37 3 7 37 14 1 74 17 8 Donation 196 10 0 0 10 0 0 1 37 14 1 Bankers' Interest 196 3 2 8 2 11 7 5 14 3 941 7 37 3 7 37 14 1 74 17 8 BALANCES—25th March, 1892. 1,036 2 8 941 6 7 1,977 8 3 In hands of Treasurer 995 11 5 Do. Hon. Sec 3 7 8 Excess of Receipts over Payments 196 998 19 1 Income in excess of Expenditure, carried to Balance Sheet 197 1,902 10 7 £1,036 2 8 1,977 8 3 1,036 2 8 1,977 8 3 197 197 THE COMMISSIONERS FOR PUBLIC LIBRARIES AND MUSEUMS, SHOREDITCH. CAPITAL ACCOUNT— from 14th April, 1891, to 25th March, 1892. To RECEIPTS- £ s. d. By PAYMENTS- £ s. d. capital account. capital account. BALANCE—25th March, 1892— Expenditure out of Loans to 25th March, 1892— Due to Treasurer 425 0 0 Gas Meter Co., Limited—Deposit Money re Purchase of Freehold Land and Buildings, Haggerston Library, Kingsland Road 425 0 0 Do. Hon. Sec 0 10 6 425 10 6 Sketch Plans 0 10 6 425 10 6 £ 425 10 6 £ 425 10 6 COMMISSIONERS FOR PUBLIC LIBRARIES, &c., ACCOUNT— BALANCE SHEET, 25th March, 1892. LIABILITIES. Fo. £ s. d. £ s. d. ASSETS. Fo. £ s. d. £ s. d. CAPITAL ACCOUNT. CAPITAL ACCOUNT. To Cash Balances, 25th March, 1892— By Land and Buildings— Due to Treasurer 425 0 0 197 Haggerston Library, Kingsland Road 197 425 10 Do. Hon. Sec C 10 6 197 425 10 6 42,5 10 6 REVENUE ACCOUNT. 425 10 6 REVENUE ACCOUNT. To Sundry Creditors, for Balances due to them 37 14 1 196 By Sundry Debtors, for Balances owing by them 196 941 5 7 Add— Income in excess of Expenditure this year 1,902 10 7 196 By Cash Balances—25th March, 1892. In bands of Treasurer 995 11 5 196 Do. Hon. Sec 3 7 8 196 998 19 1 SURPLUS—25th March, 1892 - 1,940 4 8 1,940 4 8 1,940 4 8 WILLIAM GEORGE SMITH, Treasurer, London and Midland Bank, Limited (Shoreditch Branch.) £ 2,365 15 2 W. C. PLANT, Chief Librarian and Clerk. £2,365 15 2 The Vestry of the Parish of St. Leonard, Shoreditch. in the county of london. WARDS, DIVISIONS, and BOUNDARIES OF THE DISTRICT. No. 1.—MOORFIELDS WARD. All that part of the Parish lying South of a line commencing at the Bethnal Green Boundary in Bethnal Green Road (Church Street); and continuing through Church Street, New Inn Yard, and Leonard Street to the St. Luke's Boundary. No. 2.—CHURCH WARD. North of the line above described. The Eastern Boundary commences at the corner of Boundary Street, Bethnal Green Road, and continues by Boundary Street to Austin Street, Hackney Road, thence to Kingsland Road, and by that road to Mary Street; crosses Hoxton Street to Great James Street, thence by St. John's Road and Pitfield Street to Old Street Road, thence westward through Old Street Road, and thence by the boundary of St. Luke's to Leonard Street. No. 3.—HOXTON WARD. West and North of the Boundary of Church Ward. The Northern Boundary of this ward commences at the St. John's Road end of Nicholas Street, through that street to the New North Road, Murray Street, Shepherdess Walk and Edward Street to the St. Luke's Boundary, and thence by that boundary, near the City Road, until it intersects the Church Ward Boundary in Old Street Road. No. 4.—WENLOCK WARD. North and West of the Hoxton Boundary. The Eastern Boundary commences at the New North Road, corner of Nicholas Street, thence by Mintern Street and Bridport Place, over the Rosemary Branch Bridge, and thence by the Islington and St. Luke's Boundaries, the Canal, Wharf Road, &c., to the Boundary of Hoxton Ward in Edward Street. 200 No. 5.—WHITMORE WARD. All that part North of Church Ward, and East of Wenlock Ward, and West of a line commencing at Kingsland Road, by the end of Mary Street, and continuing a few yards over the Bridge. The Parish of Hackney is the Northern Boundary. No. 6.—KINGSLAND WARD. The line commences at the point of Kingsland and Hackney Roads, opposite Shoreditch Church, and continuing by Hackney Road to Brunswick Street, thence to the Regent's Canal, thence by the Canal to Kingsland Road, and by that road to the point at Shoreditch Church. No. 7.—HAGGERSTON WARD. All that part of the Parish lying East of Brunswick Street and South of the Regent's Canal. The Boundary of the Parish is the Hackney Road, from Brunswick Street to Gloucester Place, and continues by an irregular line and crosses over the Goldsmith's Row Bridge. No. 8.—ACTON WARD. All that part of the Parish lying on the Hackney side of the Regent's Canal and East of the Kingsland Road. The Northern Boundary is the Parish of Hackney. WARDS AND DIVISIONS OF THE PARISH. Electing the following Repkesentatives. No. Wards. 120 Vestrymen. 18 Elected Guardians of the Poor. 2 Members of Parliament. Members of London County Council. Adopted under Metropolis Local Management Act, 1855. No. of Members assigned 10 each Ward. 1 Moorfields 18 First Ward Hoxton Division of Borough. Hoxton Electoral Division. 2 Church 21 3 Hoxton 21 Second Ward 4 Wenlock 18 5 Whitmore 12 Third Ward Haggerston Division of Borough. Haggerston Electoral Division. 6 Kingsland 12 7 Haggerston 9 Fourth Ward 8 Acton 9 201 LIST OF THE VESTRYMEN, OVERSEERS, AND AUDITORS for the Parish of Saint Leonard, Shorditch, IN THE COUNTY OF LONDON, FOR THE YEAR 1892-93, APPOINTED UNDER THE METROPOLIS LOCAL MANAGEMENT ACTS. The Rev. SEPTIMUS BUSS, LL.B. (Vicar), The Vicarage, Hoxton square, N. ALFRED MOLLOY, 127, Pritcliard's road, N.E. STEPHEN FORDHAM, Reeves place, Hoxton street, N. Churchwardens No. I, Moorfields Ward. (18 members). Retire in the year 1894 BARTLETT, Edward 5, Paul street, E.C. 1894 COX, Joseph 299, Old street, E.C. 1895 DARBY, Robert 4, Providence place, Scrutton street, E.C. 1893 DUNLOP, Charles 3 & 4, Motley avenue, E.C. 1893 GRACIE, Richard Thomas 39, New Inn yard, E.C. 1893 HASLAM, George 118, Clifton street, E.C. 1895 HEPBURN, James 42, Curtain road, E.C. 1893 HIRSCH, Adolphus 17, Shoreditch High street, E. 1895 HUNT, Thomas John 36, Clifton street, E.C. 1894 LAW, William 43, Great Eastern street, E.C. 1894 NIGHTINGALE, T. W 33, Paul street, E.C. 1894 RAYEY, Thomas 229, Shoreditch High street, E. 1893 RILEY, Samuel 56, Paul street, E.C. 1895 SM1THER, Samuel 92, Leonard st., E.C., & 210, Richmond road, Dalston, N.E. 1894 TUCK, Charles 81, Clifton street, E.C. 1895 VERINDER, Samuel H 6 to 14, Sun street, E.G. 1895 WHITEMAN, Charles 28, Clifton street, E.C . 1893 WILLS, Rev. Freeman, M.A 28, Sun street, E.C. 202 No. 2, Church Ward. (21 members) Retire in the year 1894 BAHRALET, William Henry 74, Paul street, E.G. 1 895 BUCK, Raton 147, Shoreditch High street, E.G. 1894 BURTON, John 8.2, Rivington street, E.G. 1893 COOKING, Alfred 8, St. John's road, N. 1993 CHAFEEY, Thomas Hayman BH, Pitfield street, N. 1895 DONOVAN, John 116, Curtain road, E.G. 1893 LEACH, Augustus 1H & 20, Pitfield street, N. l895 LUCRAFT, George T 161, Kingsland road, N. 1894 MARSHALL, Joseph 11, Drysdale street, N. 1894 MARTINDILL, Thomas 168, Shoreditch High street, E. 1894 MOSS, Nathan, L.C.C 139, Curtain road, E.G. 1893 PARRY, Thomas 856, Old street, E.G. 1895 ROWLAND, Benjamin 16, Huntingdon street, N. 1895 SMITHER, Daniel 81, Curtain road, E.C. 1893 SNELLGROVE, William 115, Curtain road, E.G. 1895 SPEIGHT, Robert 101, Hoxton street, N. 1895 STEED, Daniel 45, Harinan street, N. 1894 VANDY, Joseph William 108, Hoxton stroet, N. 1893 WELLS, Henry 844, Old street, E.G. 1894 WINKLER, Herman 70, Pitfield streot, N. 1893 WINSTANLEY, Edmund 18, Fanshaw street, N. No. 3, Hoxton Ward. (21 members). Retire In the year 1894 BIGGS, E. G 82(5, Old stroet, E.G. 1895 CHANT, Torn B 57, Crondall street, N. 1894 CLEMENT, Alfred Aaron 188, East road, N. 1895 DAWSON, William 37, Pitfield street, N. 1893 FIELD, Joseph 60, Bucklaud street, N. 1893 GIBSON, Alexander 185, East road, N. 1895 HENNESSEY, Alfred 71. Groat Chart Street, N. 1895 KEMP TON, David 186, East road, N. 1893 LEWIS, David 25, Fairbnnk street, N. 1894 MARTER, John 5, Bookham street, N, 203 No. 3, Hoxton Ward (Continued). Retire in the year 1894 MOFFATT, Ebenezer 53, New North road, N. 1893 MORSS, Alfred 40, Alma street, N. 1895 REEVE, Richard Augustus 35, Alma street. N. 1894 RICHARDSON, Henry 101, Murray street, N. 1895 SAWELL, Henry T 127, East road, N. 1893 STANNARD, William 75, Beveuden street, N. 1895 STMMAN, Joseph 56, Brunswick place, N. 1894 THOMAS, George John 12, St. John's road, N. 1894 TROWBRIDGE, John James 5, Parr street, N. 1893 WALESBY, Edward F 34, Great Chart street, N. 1893 WILSON, James 183, Old street, E.C. No. 4, Wenlock Ward. (18 members). Retire in the year 1895 BELSTEAD, Henry 80, Bridport place, N. 1894 BLUNDELL, Henry 18, Herbert street, N. 1894 GLENNIE, George 74, New North road, N. 1893 GREEN, James 40, Cropley street, N. 1894 HALL, Frederick William 83, Murray street, N. 1893 KELLY,Rev.HenryPlimley,M.A. 112, New North road, N. 1893 LEE, Charles Albert 23, Herbert street, N. 1893 LOWRY, John 86, Herbert street, N. 1894 MARSHALL, George 35, Herbert street, N. 1893 MEREDEW, Daniel 65, Shaftesbury street, N. 1895 NOBLE, Thomas 36, New North road, N. 1895 NOEL, Daniel 98, New North road, N. 1895 ROBINSON, Rev. J.Cartmel,M.A. Holy Trinity Vicarage, 6, Church street, Murray street, N. 1895 SELLEY, George 2, Rushton sr., New North rd., N. 1894 THOMAS, Frederick 80, Herbert street, N. 1895 TAVENER, Lucking 81, Herbert street, N. 1894 WAKELING, Edward James 149, New North road, N. 1893 WITTEY, Richard Thomas 82, New North road, N. 204 No. 5, Whitmore Ward. (12 members) Retire in the year 1894 BEOWN, Alfred 280, Hoxton street, N. 1895 COKEB, Albert 54 and 56, Scrutton street, E.C. 1898 COOK, James 209, Kingsland road, N. 1895 ELSTOW, George Henry 58, Whitmore road, N. 1894 FORDHAM, Stephen Reeve's place, Hoxton, N. 1893 FREEMAN, John J 81, Queen's road, N.E. 1893 KENDELL, Thomas B 26, Norfolk place, Shoreditch, E.C. 1894 RHODES, George 211, Kingsland road, N.E., and 16, Be Beauvoir road, N, 1893 SANDERS, George 219, Hoxton street, N. 1895 SOLOMON, George Red Lion passage, Hoxton, N. 1894 SULMAN, George Robert 170, St. Johns road, N. 1895 TAYLOR, Joseph 255, Hoxton street, N. No. 6, Kingsland Ward. (12 members). Retire in the year 1895 ANDERSON, William 67, Kingsland road, N. 1893 BRABNER, Charles Wesley 150, Kingsland road, N.E. 1895 DAVIES, William P 168 Kingsland road, N.E. 1895 DICKASON, James 42, Mansfield street, Kingsland road, N.E. 1895 EDWARDS, George 134, Kingsland road, N.E. 1893 HOWE, John William 139, Pritchard's road, N.E. 1893 LANGAN, Joseph 42, Laburnum street, N.E. 1894 ROPER, William Thomas 171, Hackney road, N.E. 1894 SHIP, James 152, Kingsland road, N.E. 1893 THOMPSON, William M 36, Dunloe street, N.E. 1894 WENBORN, Frederick Moore 81, New North road, N. 1894 W1NF1ELD, John 193, Hackney road, N.E. 205 No. 7, Haggerston Ward. (9 members). Retire in the year 1893 BURRILL, Frederick Wm 108 & 110, Goldsmith's row, N.E. 1895 CANE, Joseph 47, Whiston street, N.E. 1895 CONDON, Patrick 171, Goldsmiths row, N.E. 1891 CHEASEY, James Paul 13, Slirubland road, Dalston, N.E. 1893 DONOVAN, Dennis 2G7, Hackney road, N.E. 1894 HURLIN, Joseph 47, Goldsmith's row, N.E. 1893 HYATT, Charles 18, Goldsmith's row, N.E. 1894 MOLLOY, Alfred 127, Pritchard's road, Hackney road, N.E. 1895 MORRIS, Henry 277, Hackney road, N.E. No. 8, Acton Ward. (9 members). Retire in the year 1894 HUNT, Joseph A 6, Shrubland road, N.E. 1893 LITTLE, Joseph 146, Brunswick street, Hackney road, N.E. 1893 PEEK, William 10, Brownlow street, N.E. 1894 ROLLINGS, William 39, Haggerston road, N.E. 1895 SIMPSON, Christopher 22, Queen's road, Dalston, N.E. 1895 SPENCER, Rev. F. E., M.A 1, Livermere road, N.E. 1894 STROUD, Henry Bishop 27, The Broadway, London Fields, N.E. 1893 TONGUE, J. Thomas 29, Haggerston road, N.E. 1895 WEI5BER, Frederick George 31, The Broadway, London Fields, N.E. s 206 OVERSEERS OF THE POOR. Liberty of Holywell Street- RAVEY, THOMAS 229, Shorediteh High street, E. Liberty of Moorfields— WHIT KMAN, GIIARLES 2H, Clifton street, E.G. Liberty 01 Church End— FREEMAN, JOHN JACOB 81, Queen's road, Dalston, N.E. KENDELL, THOMAS B 20, Norfolk place, Shoreditch, E.C. Liberty of Hoxton CHERRY, WILLIAM 120, Now North road, N. SANDERS, GEORGE 219, Hoxton street, N. ELECTED AUDITORS OF ACCOUNTS. Church Ward— FARTHING, -101 IN 47, Essex street, N. Hoxton Ward— BUNKER, ZEPHANI AH 51, East road, N. Wenlock Ward— FOSKETT, .101 IN 102, Shepherdess walk, N. Whitmore Ward— LAMING, JOHN 24, Whitmore road, N. Kingsland, Haggeraton, and Acton Wards— BEDING1IAM, ARTHUR 25, Broadway, London Fiolds N.E. 207 LIST OF THE COMMITTEES, Commissioners for Public Libraries, &c., and Burial Board, appointed by the Vestry of the Parish of St. Leonard, Shoreditch, IN THE COUNTY OF LONDON, FOB THE YEAR 1892-93. (Pursuant to the Metropolis Local Management Acts, &c.) Finance Committee. (28 MEMBERS). ANDERSON, W. BIGGS, E. G. BROWN, A. BURTON, J. COX, J. CREASEY, J. P. DONOVAN, J. FREEMAN, J. J. FIELD, J. GREEN, J. HALL, F. W. HEPBURN, J. HUNT, T. J. KENDELL, T. B. LAW, W. LITTLE, J. LANGAN, J. R, MOFFATT, E. (Chairman.) MOSS, N.,L.C.C. MEREDEW, D. RHODES, G. ROPER, W. T. SMITHER, D. SMITHER, S. STANNARD, W. STROUD, H. B. (Vice- Chairman) TROWBRIDGE, J. J. WEBBER, F. G. Paving and Sewers Committee. (28 MEMBERS). BELSTEAD, H. CLEMENT, A. DARBY, R. DICK A SON, J. HIRSCH, A. KEMPTON, D. LEWIS, D. MORRIS, H. NIGHTINGALE, T. NOEL, D. Vice-Chairman) RAVEY, T. SANDERS, G. SELLEY, G. SIMPSON, C. SOLOMON, G. SPEIGHT, R. SPENCER, Rev. F. E. THOMAS, G. J. THOMPSON, W. M. VANDY, J. W. WAKELING, E.J. WHITEMAN, C. WINFIELD, J. WINKLER, H. (Chairman.) WITTEY, R. T. Note.- There are 3 vacancies on this Committee, which the Vestry can f.ill up Ordinary Meeting. S1 208 General Purposes and Sanitary Committee. (28 MEMBERS). BIGGS, E. G. BRABNER, C. W. (Chairman.) BROWN, A. COOK, J. DARBY, R. DAVIES, W. P. DAWSON, W. HOWE, J. W. HYATT, C. HURLIN, J. (Vice-Chairman) HUNT, J. A. MOLLOY, A. MARTINDILL, Thos. ROBINSON, Rev. J. C. RHODES, G. RILEY, S. SAWELL, H. T. SPENCER, Rev. F. E. SHIP, J. STYMAN, J. SANDERS, G. SELLEY, G. SNELLGROYE, W. THOMPSON, W. M. WHITEMAN, 0. WINFIELD, J. WEBBER, F. G. WALE SB Y, E. F. Parliamentary Committee. (28 MEMBERS). BELSTEAD, H. BURTON, J. BRABNER, C. W. BLUNDELL, H. T. CLEMENT, A. COCKING, A. CHANT, T. B. DONOVAN, J. DICKASON, J. FIELD, J. GREEN, J. GRACIE, R. T. HALL, F. W. HYATT, C. KELLY, Rev. H. P. LAW, W. MARSHALL, G. MORRIS, H. MORSS, A. NIGHTINGALE, T.W. REEVE, R. A. ROBINSON, Rev. J. C. SAWELL, H. T. TROWBRIDGE, J. J. THOMAS, F. WILLS, Rev. Freeman WAKELING, E. J. WENBORN, F. M. (Chairman) Town Hall Committee. (28 MEMBERS). ANDERSON, W. BRABNER, C. W. CLEMENT, A. COX, J. CREASEY, J. P. DAWSON, W. EDWARDS, G. ELSTOW, G. H. GllEEN, J. HALL, F. W. HEPBURN, J. HUNT, T. J. MOSS, N., L.C.C. MOFFATT, E. MEREDEW, D. NIGHTINGALE,T.W. RAVEY, T. RHODES, G. ROPER, W. T. RILEY, S. SM1TIIER, D. SMITHER, S. SNELLGROVE, W. THOMAS, G. J. VERINDER, S. II. WITTEY, R. T. WELLS, H. WHITEMAN, C. 209 Valuation List Committee. (40 MEMBERS). BIGGS, E. G. BROWN, A. DARBY, R. HOWE, J. W. HUNT, T. J. LANGAN, J. R. (Vice- Chairman) LEACH, A. LEWIS, D. RILEY, S. ROPER, W. T. SMITHER, Samuel (Chairman.) SOLOMON, G. STANNARD, W. SPEIGHT, R. STYMAN, J. SULMAN, G. R. TAYLOR, J. THOMPSON, W. M. THOMAS, G. J. VERINDER, S. H. WALESBY, E. F. WILSON, J. WINFIELD, J. WITTEY, R. T. Note.—There are 16 vacancies on this Committee, which the Vestry can fill up at any Ordinary Meeting. Officers' Committee. (28 MEMBERS). ANDERSON, W. BELSTEAD, H. CHANT, T. B. COX, J. COOK, J. DAWSON, W. FREEMAN, J. J. HEPBURN, J. HYATT, C. KENDELL, T. B. MOSS, N., L.c.c. MOLLOY, A. MARTINDILL, T. MARSHALL, J. C. MEREDEW, D. RAVEY, T. SOLOMON, G. STANNARD, W. STROUD, H. B. STEED, D. TROWBRIDGE, J. J. TAYLOR, J. TUCK, C. THOMPSON, W. M. VERINDER, S. H. WENBORN, F. M. WINKLER, H. WINFIELD, J. Dusting and Scavenging Committee. (15 MEMBERS). BARRALET, W. H. (Vice-Chairman) CREASEY, J. P. DONOVAN, J. FREEMAN, J. J. HURL1N, J. KENDELL, T. B. MOFFATT, E. MARTINDILL, T. NOEL, D. SAWELL, H. T. STYMAN, J, SMITHER, D. WENBORN, F. M. (Chairman) WINKLER, H. WAKELING E. J. 210 Assessment Committee. (12 MEMBERS). To be elected between the 15th and 29th of April in each Year. MoorfLelds Ward— LAW, W. RAVEY, Thos. Church Ward— MOSS, N., L.o.c. VANDY, J. W. (Chairman.) Hoxton Ward— MOFFATT, E. SAWELL, Ii.T. W'enlock Ward— NOEL, Daniel MEREDEW, Daniel Whit more Ward— ELSTOW, G. H. Kingsl and Ward— WENBORN, F. M. Haggerston Ward— HURLIN, Joseph Acton Ward— STROUD, H. B. Commissioners for Public Libraries and Museums. (9 MEMBERS). Appointed 19th April, 1892. BARRALET, W. H. COX, Joseph DONOVAN, John FORDHAM, Stephen HURLIN, Joseph MARTINDILL, Thos. (President.) MOFFATT, E. MOLLOY, Alfred WENBORN, F. M. Burial Board. (9 MEMBERS). Retire in 1894 ELSTOW, G. H. 1895 FORDHAM, S. 1895 FREEMAN, J. J. Retire in 1894 HURLIN, Joseph 3 893 MARTINDILL, T. 1898 MOLLOY, Alfred Retire in 1898 SACKETT, J. R. 1895 SMITHER, Samuel 1894 WELLS, H. SPECIAL COMMITTEE, Housing of Working Classes Committee. (12 MEMBERS). BRABNER, C. W. DONOVAN, J. (Vice-Chairman) LANGAN, J. R. MARTINDILL, T. MOFFATT, E. MOLLOY, A. RAVEY, T. SAWELL, H. T. STYMAN, J. WENBORN, F. M. (Chairman) WHITEMAN, C. WINKLE Li, H. NOTE.—The Committees were appointed in June, 1892, and will continue in office until re-appointed in 1893. 211 The Vestry of the Parish of St. Leonard, Shoreditch, IN THE COUNTY OF LONDON. YEAR BOOK OF LOCAL INFORMATION. PARLIAMENTARY BOROUGH OF SHOREDITCH. MEMBERS OF PARLIAMENT. HOXTON DIVISION of Borough, comprising Moorfields, Church, Hoxton, and Wenlock Wards of the Parish. PROFESSOR JAMES STUART, M.A. 24, Grosvenor Road, Westminster, S.W. HAGGERSTON DIVISION of Borough, comprising Wliitmore, Kingsland, Haggerston, and Acton Wards of the Parish. WILLIAM RANDAL CREMER, Esq. 23, Bedford Street, Strand, W.C. REVISING BARRISTER. WILLIAM FREDERICK WEBSTER, Esq., 3, Stone Buildings, W.C. PARLIAMENTARY RETURNING OFFICER. J. M. MCDONNELL, Esq., Solicitor, 32, Great George Street, Westminster, S.W. J 212 THE SCHOOL BOARD FOR LONDON. OFFICES: VICTORIA EMBANKMENT, STRAND, E.C. Clerk of theBoard : GEORGE HECTOR CROAD, Esq., B.A. MEMBERS FOR HACKNEY DIVISION, comprising the Parishes of St. John-at-Hackney, Saint Leonard, Shoreditch, and Saint Matthew, Bethnal Green. JOHN LOBB, Esq., F.R.G.S., Carlton House, 75, Victoria Park Road, E. JOHN C. HOROBIN, Esq, B.A., Homerton College, 75, High Street, Homerton, N. FRANCIS HOWSE, Esq., 13, Amhurst Park, Stamford Hill, N. Rev. B. MEREDYTH-KITSON, M.A., All Saints'Vicarage, Lower Clapton, N.E. Rev. STEWART D. HEADLAM, 31, Upper Bedford Place, W.C. THE LONDON COUNTY COUNCIL. OFFICES: SPRING GARDENS S.W. Clerk of the Council: H. DE LA HOOKE, Esq. REPRESENTATIVES FOR SHOREDITCH. HOXTON ELECTORAL DIVISION. NATHAN MOSS, Esq., 73, Ladbroke Grove Road, Notting Hill, W. HENRY WARD, Esq., C.E., Toynbee Hall, 28, Commercial Street, Whitecbapel, E. HAGGERSTON ELECTORAL DIVISION. The Right Hon. BARON MONKSWELL, 7, Chelsea Embankment, S.W. W. J. ORSMAN, Esq., Milton House, Shacklewell Green, Hackney, N.E. DISTRICT SURVEYOR. PARISH OF SHOREDITCH and LIBERTY OF NORTON FOLGATE. Mr. CHARLES FOWLER, 314, Old Street, E.C. 213 ELECTED GUARDIANS OF THE POOR for the Parish of Saint Leonard, Shoreditch. Offices: 213, KINGSLAND ROAD, N.E. Clerk: ROBERT CLAY, Esq. FIRST WARD. WILLIAM IT. BRAND, Esq., 2, 3, and 4, Hoxton Square, N. W IL LI AM COCKS, Esq., 64, G6, and. 68, Pitfield Street, N. JOSEPH COX, Esq., 299, Old Street, E.G. NATHAN MOSS, Esq., l.c.c., 139, Curtain Road, E.C. DANIEL SMITHER, Esq., 81, Curtain Road, E.C. SECOND WARD. WILLIAM DAWSON, Esq., 37, Pitfield Street, N. The Rev. HENR^ P. KELLY, M.A., Christ Church Vicarage, Hoxton, N. RICHARD MARSHALL, Esq., 43, Pitfield Street, N. (Chairman of the Board). EBENEZER MOFFATT, Esq., 5o, New North Road, N. CHARLES N. NICHOLSON, Esq., 19, New North Road, N. THIRD WARD. WM. ANDERSON, Esq., 67 and 69, Kingsland Road, N.E. JOSEPH HARVERSON, Esq., 325, Hoxton Street, N. WILLIAM P. HUGHES, Esq., 148, Southgate Road, N. THOMAS WM. HODGES, Esq., 79, Queen's Road, Dalston, N.E. FOURTH WARD. JAMES P. CREASEY, Esq., 13, Shrubland Road, Dalston, N.E. DANIEL KING, Esq., 70, Queen's Road, Dalston, N.E. JOSEPH LITTLE, Esq., 146, Brunswick Street, N.E. (Vice-Chairman of the Board). ALFRED P. BARNARD, Esq., 309, Hackney Road, N.E. Guardians nominated by the Local Government Board. ROBERT GEORGE ALABASTER, Esq., The Hawthorns, Amhurst Park, Stamford Hill, N. The'Very Rev. G. P. POWNALL, M.A., The Vicarage, Hoxton, N. NOTE.—The Weekly Meetings of the Board are held at the Board Room, Relief Offices, Hoxton Street, N., on Wednesday, at 10 o'clock a.m. 214 Elected Manager at Metropolitan Asylums Board, REPRESENTING PARISH OF SAINT LEONARD, SHOREDITCH. Manager's OfficesNORFOLK HOUSE, NORFOLK STREET, W.C. Clerk to the Board:—T. DUNCOMBE MANN, Esq. ROBERT GEORGE ALABASTER, Esq., The Hawthorns, Amhurst Park, Stamford Hill, N. Officials of the Guardians. Name. Nature of Office. Address. Robert Clay Clerk to the Guardians 213, Kingsland Road, N.E. J. Robert Aiming Treasurer do. London & County Banking Co. Limited (Shoreditch Branch) Berkley Roberts Collector of the Guardians 213, Kingsland Road, N.E. Kev. Thos. Hodgson Chaplain of Workhouse and Infirmary 160, Downham Road Dr. D. M. Forbes Medical Officer,Workhouse and Infirmary 204, Hoxton Street, N. C. R. Martin Steward of Infirmary Do. do. Mrs. Ann Lenton Matron do. Do. do. R. J. Larcombe Master of Workhouse 213, Kingsland Road, N.E Mrs. Ada Larcombe Matron do. Do. do. James Cowley Superintendent of Cottage Homes Hornchurch, Essex Mrs. Elizabeth Cowley Matron do. Do. do. Rev. W. R. Morris Chaplain do. Romford, Essex A. W. Wallis Medical Officer do. Brentwood, Essex G. R. Stothard Head Schoolmaster do. Do. do. Mrs. Mary Leader Do. Schoolmistress do. Do. do. Miss Sarah M. Cattell Infant do. do. Do. do. 215 Officials of the Guardians—continued. Name. Nature of Office. Address. Attendances at Dispensary. John Davies District Medical Officer and Public Vaccinator 91, New North Road, N. 11.30 a.m. to 12 noon Dr. Thomas Leonard Do. do. 29, New North Road, N. 12 noon to 12.30 p.m. I)r.Major Greenwood, junr. Do. do. 243, Hackney Road, E. 12 noon to 12.30 p.m. Dr.Major Greenwood, senr. Do. do. 26, Queen's Road, E. 11.30 a.m. to 12 noon Dr. F. H. Oliver Do. do. 2, Kingsland Road,N.E. 11.30 a.m. to 12 noon A. C. Hutchinson Do. do. 36, Great Eastern Street, E.C. 12 noon to 12.30 p.m. John William Lane Dispenser Dispensary, 204, Hoxton Street, N. Districts. Charles Kimber Relieving Officer 51, Alma Street, Hoxton, N. 1st District Wm. Geo. Judge Do. c do. 17, Hemsworth Street, Hoxton, N. 2nd do. Walter Glover Do. c do. 45, Brownlow Road, Haggerston, N.E. 3rd do. James Wilkinson Do. c do. 44, Long Street, Kingsland Road 4th do. Shirley Fussell Pay Clerk 204, Hoxton Street, N. Chas. Henry Waterer Vaccination Officer 213, Kingsland Road, N.E. Relieving Officers.—Daily attendance is given at the Relief Offices, Hoxton Street, N., from 9 a.m. to 12 noon, and at 5 p.m., except on Sundays. ROBERT CLAY, Superintendent Registrar, Register Office, 213, Kmgsland Road, N.E. BERKLEY ROBERTS, Deputy Superintendent Registrar, Register Office, 213, Kmgsland Road, N.E. 216 No. Sub-District for Registration of Births & Deaths. Registrar. Address. Deputy Sub-Registrar. Address. 1 Shoreditch, South C. J Stevens 43, New Inn Yard, Shoreditch,E.C. A. J. Stevens 43, New Inn Yard, Shoreditch,E.C. 2 Hoxton New Town Clias. H. Waterer 83, New North Road, Hoxton,N. Robert Nay 1, Harman Street, Kingsland Road, N.E. 3 Hoxton Old Town Geo. Pearce 22, Hyde Road, Hoxton, N. Edwd. T. Pearce 22, Hyde Road, Hoxton, N. 4 Ilaggerston A. A. Lough 107, Brunswick Street, Hackney Road, N.E. H. C. Turnpenny 107, Brunswick Street, N.E. Registrar of Marriages GeorgeW. Bedford Register Office, 213, Kir.gsland Road, N.E. James Wilkinson 44, Long Street. Kingsland Road THE CHARITY TRUSTEES of the Parish of SaintLeonard, Shoreditch. Offices :—Shoreditcii Town Hall, Old Street, E.C.; and 81, New North Road, Hoxton, N. Clerk, F. M. WENBORN. G. H. ELSTOW, Esq., 58, Whitmore Road, N. W. H. BRAND, Esq., 3, Hoxton Square, E.C. T. WELLS, Esq., 344, Old Street, E.C. Rev. S. BUSS, LL.B., The Vicarage, Hoxton Square, E.C. G. EDWARDS, Esq., 134, Kingsland Road, N. THOMAS MARTINDILL, Esq., 1G8, Shoreditch High Street, E.C. W. P. HUGHES, Esq., 148, Southgate Road, N. ALFRED MOLLOY, Esq., 127, Pritchards Road, E. J. FIELD, Esq., G9, Buckland Street, N. T. HODGES, Esq., 79, Queen's Road, Dalston, N.E. EBENEZER MOFFATT, Esq., 53, New North Road, N. J. DONOVAN, Esq., 116, Curtain Road, E.C. 217 INLAND REVENUE. GEO. 0. LESLIE, Esq., Surveyor of Taxes, 134, Custom House, E.G. Collectors of Income Tax, House Duty and Land Tax. Districts. Wards. Collector. Address. First Moorfields and Church (North and South divisions) Stanton Elgar 386, Old Street, E.C. Second Hoxton, Wenlock, and Whitmore Joseph Hopwood 386, Old Street, E.C. Third Kingsland, Haggerston, and Acton George Ward Verry 1, Pearson Street, Kingsland Road CENSUS SUMMARIES. Parliamentary Borough of Slioreditch. Inhabited Houses. Population. 1881. 1891. 1881. 1891. Hoxton Division 8,279 7,288 69,590 67,653 Haggerston Division 6,877 6,644 57.001 56,356 Total for Civil Parish and Poor Law Union 15,156 13,932 126,591 124,009 Registration Sub-Districts. Area in Statute Acres. INHABITED HOUSES. POPULATION. Increase or Decrease of Population between 1881 and 1891. 1881. 1891. 1881. 1891. Increase. Decrease Slioreditch South 141 3,121 2,164 22,343 20,098 — 2,245 Hoxton New Town 132 3,159 3,144 29,937 29,313 — 624 Hoxton Old Town 117 3,296 3,240 28,036 28,354 318 - Haggerston 258 5,580 5,384 46,275 | 46,244 - 31 Total for Civil Parish and Poor Law Union 648 15,156 13,932 126,591 124,009 318 2,900 Decennium 1800 1811 1821 1831 1841 1851 1861 1871 1881 Population 34,766 43,930 52,966 68,564 83,432 109,257 129,364 127,164 126,591 218 OPEN SPACES and RECREATION GROUNDS. No. Name. Situation. Hours during which open. 1 St. Leonard's Churchyard, Shoreditch Shoreditch High Street 10 a.m. till dusk, from May 1st to October 31st 2 St. Mary's Churchyard, Haggerston Brunswick Street, Hackney Road 9 a.m. till dusk, Winter 9 a.m. till 7 p.m. Summer 3 St. John's Churchyard, Hoxton St. John's Road, New North Road, N. Closed in Winter ; 10 a.m. till 8 p.m. Summer 4 Shoreditch Old Burial Ground Hackney Road 9 a.m. till dusk 5 Goldsmith Square Open Space Goldsmith Square [The site is cleared and the ground is being laid out.] WORSHIP STREET POLICE COURT, E.C. Police Magistrates appointed for this Division of Metropolis. HENRY JEFFREYS BUSH BY, Esq., Wormley Bury, Hoddesdon, Herts. JOHN ROSE, Esq., 37, Marloes Road, Kensington, W. Chief Clerk to the Court.—EDWARD LEIGH, Esq. Hours of Attendance.—Every day, excepting Sundays, Christmas Day, Good Friday, or any day appointed for a public fast or thanksgiving, from 10 till 5, and at such other times as urgent necessity may require, or as directed byone of Her Majesty's Principal Secretaries of State (2 and 3 Vict., c. 71, sec. 12 ; 3 and 4 Vict., c. 84, sec. 3). Court Division.—The space included within the following boundary, the same being within the Metropolitan Police District:—"From the boundary of the City of London in Whitechapel High Street, in a line running eastward along the centre thereof and of Whitechapel Road and Mile End Road to Globe Road, thence along the centre thereof to the southern side of the Great Eastern Railway; thence eastward along the same to the River Lee, and along the said River Lee and Hackney cut to the Hertford Union canal; thence westward along the said canal, and along the 219 Regent s canal to Shepherdess Walk; thence along the centre thereof, and of Bath Street and Bunhill Row, to the boundary of the City of London; and thence along the same to Whitechapel High Street aforesaid." SHOREDITCH COUNTY COURT. Court House: 221, OLD STREET, E.C. HIS HONOUR JUDGE LUMLEY SMITH, Q.C. 4, Paper Buildings, Temple, E.C. Registrar: ERNEST E. WICKHAM, Esq. High Bailiff: ROBERT HACKSHAW, Esq. Hours of Attendance.—The Registrar's Office (16, Charles Square, Iloxton, N.) is open daily from 10 till 4 ; Saturdays, 10 till 1. Summonses granted every day; money paid in daily, paid out Wednesdays, Thursdays, and Fridays. Sittings, &c.—The sitting days of the Court are usually Tuesdays and Thursdays in each week. The Court is held at least once a mouth, except in August and September (28 and 29 Vict., c. 99, sec. 14) or at such other interval as a Secretary of State may order (9 and 10 Vict., c. 95, sec. 56). The days and hours for sitting are appointed three months previously, and notice of such days is affixed in the Court House and in the Registrar's Office. But the days may be altered (notice of alteration being affixed in like manner), and additional and adjourned courts be held (Order I, Rule 1 of 1875). The Registrar's Offices are open daily from 10 till 4, except on Christmas Day, Good Friday, Easter Eve, Easter Monday, Easter Tuesday, Whit Monday, the first Monday in August, and public fast, humiliation or thanksgiving days, or any day appointed for closing the same by the Lord Chancellor; and except on Saturdays (not being market days), when they close at 1; and except also on days when the Court is sitting elsewhere (Rule 3). A Table of the Court Fees is put up in the Court House and in the Registrar's Office (sec. 37; also 19 and 20 Vie., c. 108, sec. 78.) [The Common Law Jurisdiction of the Ancient County Court (held before the Sheriff or his Deputy) still subsists for all purposes except in cases within the jurisdiction of the Courts holden under the above-mentioned statute (9 and 10 A ict., cap. 95, see sec. 4)]. District.—By the original Order in Council of 9th March, 1847, it was ordered that:- "The District of the Shoreditch County Court of Middlesex" should "include all within a line drawn from the point where the boundary of the City of London crosses Finsbury Place, along the eastern boundary of the dislrict 220 of the Clerkeawell County Court to the southern boundary of the parish of Tottenham; thence eastward along the said boundary to the boundary of the county of Middlesex; thence southward along the boundary of the said county to the northern boundary of the parish of Stratford-le-Bow; thence westward along the boundary of the said parish until it is crossed by the southern side of the Eastern Counties Railway; thence westward along the southern side of the Eastern Counties Railway till it Crosses Brick Lane; thence along the middle of Brick Lane, Phoenix Street, Wheeler Street, and White Lion Street to Norton Folgate; thence along the middle of Norton Folgate to the boundary of the City of London; thence westward along the boundary of the City of London to the point first described."— But by the subsequent Order in Council of 25th June, 1851, certain portions of the above were taken from the district of the Shoreditch County Court, and added to the districts of the Bow County Court and the Whitechapel County Court; and the following portions of the Clerkenwell County Court District (as established by the Order in Council of 1847) were taken therefrom, and added to the district of the Shoreditch County Court, viz.:—"So much of the district of the Clerkenwell County Court of Middlesex as is included within a line drawn from the point where the south boundary of the district of the said Court crosses Whitecross Street, along the middle of Whitecross Street to Old Street; thence along the middle of Old Street to Bath Street; thence along the middle of Bath Street to the City Road ; thence across the City Road to Shepherdess Walk ; thence along the middle of Shepherdess Walk, and the road opposite Vaughan Terrace, Ashley Crescent, and Ashley Terrace, to the Regent's Canal; thence along the middle of the Regent's Canal to the New North Road; thence along the eastern and southern boundary of the district of the said Court, to the point where the said southern boundary crosses Whitecross Street as first described;" and "so much of the district of the said Court as is included within a line drawn from the point where the Regent's Canal is crossed by a bridge called the Rosemary Branch Bridge, leading to Southgate Road in the parish of St. John's, Hackney; along the middle of the Southgate Road to Ball's Fond Road; thence along the middle of Ball's Pond Road and Paul's Road to the New River, until it is crossed by the Green Lanes Turnpike Road, south of Paradise Place in such road; thence along the middle of Green Lanes Turnpike Road to the northern boundary of the district of the said Court; thence eastward along the said boundary to the Kingsland Road; thence along the middle of the Kingsland Road to the Regent's Canal; thence westward along the Regent's Canal to the point where the said Rosemary Branch Bridge crosses the said canal, as first described." By a further Order in Council, dated 25th November, 1853, the parish of St. Mary, Stoke Newington, was taken from the district of this Court and added to the district of the Edmonton County Court. And by a further Order in Council, dated 7th January, 1865, "So much of the parish of Hornsey as is detached from that parish by the interposition of any portion of the parish of Stoke Newington," was also added to the district of the Edmonton County Court. 221 LIST OF MAGISTRATES acting in and foll the tower division (in which tHe parish of st. Leonard, Shoreditch, is situate.) Name. Address. BAXTER, WYNNE E., Esq.,d.l 170, Church Street, Stoke Newington, N. BEAUMONT, Capt. W. S Arthurs Club, St. James' Street, S.W. CHAMBERS, H., Esq 671, Commercial Road, E. CROWDER, A. G., Esq 6, Montagu Square, W. COOK, E. R., Esq Bow, E. DALY, F. H., Esq, m.d 185, Amhurst Road, Hackney Downs FINNIS, G. C., Esq 1, Billiter Avenue, E.C. F RE MANTLE, Genl., A. L 32, Cadogan Place, S.W. FREMANTLE, The Hon. Sir C. W. Royal Mint, Tower Hill, E. GARFORD, F., Esq 2, Courtland Terrace, The Mall, S.W. GREEN, HENRY, Esq Brunswick Street, Blackwall, E. HARDCASTLE, H., Esq 38, Eaton Square, S.W. HUNTER, W., Esq 48, Bow Road, Bow, E. JONES, J., Esq 12, Northumberland Etouse, King Edward Road, South Hackney LESCflER, j. F., Esq Boyles Court, Brentwood LAMP LOUGH, C. E., Esq 72, Cornhill, E.C. MORLEY, J., Esq Upper Clapton, N.E. MARTINEAU, P. M., Esq 6, Christian Street, St. George's, E. MILMAN, Genl., g.b., c.b The Tower, E.C. Mc CALL, J., Esq Stadacona, Amhurst Park, Stamford Hill PONSONBY, E., Esq 15, Queen Anne Street, W. PIXLEY, S., Esq 21, Leinster Gardens, Hyde Park PEEK, C. E., Esq Wimbledon Plouse, Wimbledon, S.W. WHATMAN, GEO. D 2, Cranley Gardens, S.W. YOUNG, Sir F., k.c.m.g Emmett Street, Poplar, E. 222 DAY SCHOOLS. Group. Name of School. Locality in Parish. MANAGERS. Divisional Member in charge of School. Chairman. Vice-Chairman. 7 Curtain Road, Shoreditch Shoreditch J. J. Freeman, 81, Queen's Road, Dalston, N.E. A. P. Little, 3, Albion Road. Dalston, N.E. John C. Horobin, Esq., B.A. Scrutton Street, Finsbury do. WellingtonStreet, Hoxton do. 8 Catherine Street, Hoxton Hoxton James H. Porter, 95, Tabernacle Street, E.C. Wm. Hy. Barralet, 74, Paul Street, Finsbury, E.C. Rev. B. Meredyth-Kitson, M.A. Chatham Gardens do. do. 13 Napier Street, Hoxton Hoxton John Lobb, F.R.G.S. (Member of Board) John Lobb, Esq., F.R.G.S. Trinity Place(late Church Street), Hoxton do. Wenlock Road, New North Road do. 14 St. John's Road, Hoxton Hoxton Ebenezer Moffatt, Francis Howse, Esq. Canal Road do. do. 53,New North Road, Hamond Square do. do. Hoxton, N. 16 Haggerston Road, Hackney Haggerston J. J. Freeman, 81, Queen's Road, Dalston, N.E. Joseph Hurlin, 47, Goldsmith Row, Hackney Road,N.E. John C. Horobin, Esq., B.A. Scawfell Street, Hackney road do. Shap Street, Kingsland do. NOTE. All urgent and important matters should be referred to the Divisional Member in charge of the School. Official Correspondent for the Division Mr. JAMES WHITE, Homerlon Terrace, Hackney, N.E. 223 FIRE-ESCAPE STATIONS. Station. Situation. *Fire Engine Station Old Street St. Columba Chnrch Kingsland Road Bookham Street Hoxton FIRE ALARMS. Position. In connection with New North Road, Eagle Wharf Road Islington Station Shepherdess Walk, corner of City Road St. Luke's „ Cat and Muiton Bridge, Broadway, London Fields Beth rial Green Station Finsbury Market (S.E. corner of Waterlow & Son's Factory) Bishopsgate Station Kingsland Road (opposite No. 404) Shoreditch „ †„ „ St. Columbia Church „ „ Queen's Road Bridge, Dalston „ „ Shoreditch High Street, corner of Commercial Street „ „ Great Eastern Street, corner of Curtain Road „ „ City Road, south corner of Castle Street „ „ Tabernacle Square „ „ †New North Road, corner of Bookham Street „ „ Hyde Road, corner of St. John s Road „ „ Notes.—f Fire Escapes are also situated here. * Fire Alarm Station. t1 225 INDEX. SUBJECT. DEPARTMENT. Clerk. Accountant. Surveyor. Med. Officer of Health. Miscellaneous. Abstract of Accounts ... 61—114 ... ... ... Accountant's Department 17,20, 22 77,91 ... ... ... Accountant's Report ... 61—114 ... ... ... Adams, Mr. E. A. R 18,20,22 106 ... ... ... Advertising on Lamp Columns ... 82 ... ... 150 Aggregate Balance Sheet ... 102 ... ... ... Allan, Dr. F. J 20 106 ... ... ... Alterations to Town Hall 34 98 134,135 ... ... Analysis of Mortgage Debt ... 105 ... Analyst's Reports ... 83 ... 184—188 Artizans in District ... ... ... 161 112—113 Ashes and Dust 9,10 81, 82 ... ... ... Assessment Committee's Expenses ... 86,88 ... ... ... Do. do. Report 57—60 ... ... ...... 210 Assets and Liabilities, Aggregate Statement of ... 102 ... ... ... Auditors, Elected ... 101 ... ... ... Balance Sheets ... 71, 74, 89, ... ... ... Barry, Charles, Mr., Report of 37 95,102 135 ... ... Basing House Yard ... ... ... 167 175 Bath Place ... ... ... ... 176 Boundaries of Wards ... ... ... ... 199 Boundary Street Improvement 41 ... ... ... ... Bills in Parliament 53 ... 138 ... ... Births and Deaths, Sub-districts ... ... ... 160 178,216 Burial Board 48—52 67 ... ... ... Burial Board Accounts ... 72—74 ... ... ... Capital Accounts ... 97-100 ... ... ... Carriageway Paving ... ... 123 ... ... Census ... ... ... ... 217 Charity Trustees ... ... ... ... 216 Chief Sanitary Inspector's Report ... ... ... ... 173—177 Churchwardens ... ... ... ... 201 Churchyards, Maintenance of ... 73 ... ... ... City and South London Railway 54 ... 141 ... ... Clarke, Mr. G. W 22 106 ... ... ... Clerk's Report 1—54 ... ... ... ... Cleansing of Footways 33 81,82 ... ... ... Collection of Rates 56 107 ... ... ... Collection of Rates and Taxes ... ... ... ... 217 Commissioners for Libraries. &c 47 67 ... ... 191—197 Contrants Statement of 7,10 ... ... ... 114 Contract System—Dusting, &c ... 81 ... ... ... Contributions to Guardians ... 67 ... ... ... Conveniences. Public ... 93 ... ... 150 County Council for London 48 ... ... ... Countv Court ... ... ... 219 Culshaw, Mr. Wm 22 106 ... ... ... Customs and Inland Revenue Acts ... ... ... 169,170 ... 226 INDEX.—(continued). SUBJECT. DEPARTMENT. Clerk. Accountant Surveyor. Med. Officer of Health. Miscellaneous. Day Schools ... ... ... ... 222 Deaths and Births, Sub-Districts ... ... ... 160 178,216 De Beauvoir Wharf ... 81 ... ... Debt ... 104,105 ... ... ... Deed Book 28 ... ... ... ... Deposit Fund ... 100 ... ... ... Depots 28 80 ... ... ... Disinfecting Station ... 84 ... 165,166 ... Disorderly Houses 46 69,78 ... ... ... District Auditor's Certificate ... 64, 65 ... ... ... District Medical Officers ... ... ... ... 215 District Surveyor ... ... ... ... 212 Drainage Construction ... 92,100 129 ... ... Dust and Asbes 9,10 81,82 ... ... ... Dusting and Scavenging 7 81,82,87 135 ... 177,209 East London Waterworks Co 52 79 ... ... 150 Elected Auditors' Certificates ... 101 ... ... ... Election of Vestrymen ... 68 ... ... ... Electric Lighting Order 12—17 77 ...... ... ... Do. do. Synopsis 14 ... ... ... ... Elementary Education Act, 1870 ... 111 ... ... ...... Erection of Town Hall ... 98 ... ... ... Establishment of Town Hall ... 69,85 ... ... ... Expenditure and Income ... 70,74,87,94 ... ... ...... Finance Committee ... 76—78, 87,91, 94 ... ... 207 Finances 5 ... ...... ... ... Fire Alarms ... ... ...... ... 223 Fire-Escape Stations ... ... ... ... 223 Flemming Street Depot ... 80 ... ... ...... Flushing Courts and Gullies ... 93 ... ... 150 Food and Drugs Acts, Sale of ... 83 ... 170 ... Food Seized and Condemned ... ... ... 172 ... Footway 38 ... 126 ... ...... Gas Light and Coke Co.'s Appeal 58—60 ... ...... ... ...... General Purposes and Sanitary Committee ... 82—84, 88, 92—94 ...... ...... 208 General Rate ... 76 ...... ...... ... General Rate Accounts ... 76—89 ...... ...... ... General Receipts and Charges ...... 78 ... ... ... Goldsmith Square Open Space 48 84,99 138 167 ... Great Eastern Railway ...... ... 142 ... ...... Great Northern and City Railway 53 ... 138 ... ...... Guardians of the Poor ...... ... ... ... 200,213 Hackney Road Burial Ground 50 73 ... ... ... Haggerston Library ... ... ... ... 196 Health Department ... 83,84 ... 159—188 ... Highways Department ... 78—80 117 ... ... 227 INDEX.—(continued). SUBJECT. DEPARTMENT. Clerk. Accountant. Surveyor. Med. Officer of Health. Miscellaneous. House Refuse 8 ... ... ... ... Housing of the Working Classes 41 85,88 ... 166 210 Hoxton Square 51 ... ... ... ... Hoxton Street Depot 28 80 ... ... ... Income and Expenditure ... 70,74,87,94 ... ... ... Income Tax Collectors ... ... ... ... 217 Infectious Diseases (Notification) ... 83 ... 165 ... Inhabited Houses ... ... ... ... 217 Interest on Loans ... 76,91 ... ... ... Jury List ... 69 ... ... ... Kiosk Convenience •. . 93 ... ... 150 Legal and Parliamentary Expenses 27 77 ... ... ... Lettings 41 85 ... ... ... Libraries Commissioners, &c 47,48 67 ... ... 191—197 Lighting Department ... 82, 83 ... ... 147—156 Lighting Inspector's Report ... ... ... ... 147—156 Loans ... 104 ... ... ... Local Rates 3,4 107—109 ... ... ... London County Council 48 ... ... 212 London School Board 48 76 ... ... 212 London, Tottenham, and Epping Forest Railway 54 ... 138 ... ... London Water Supply ... ... ... 170 ... Losses on Rates 6 107 ... ... ... Magistrates ... ... ... ... 221 Maintenance of Roads • • • 79 117 ... ... Medical Officer's Department ... 83,92 ... 170 ... Medical Officers, District ... ... ... ... 215 Medical Officer's Report ... ... ... 159—172 ... Members of Parliament ... ... ... ... 200,211 Messenger 23 78 ... ... ... Metropolitan Police ... 67 ... ... ... Metropolitan Rates 3,4 ... ... ... ... Model Dwellings ... ... ... 168 175 Moira Place, &c., Area 43 85 137 167 ... Mortality Tables ... ... ... 178—183 ... Mortgage Debt ... 104,105 ... ... ... Mortuary, Maintenance of ... 84 ... 166 ... Music and Dancing License 36 ... ... ... ... North Metropolitan Tramways 54 ... ... . . . ... Nuisances abated ... ... ... 173 ... Office Boys 24 78 ... ... ... Officers' Committee 23,24 ... ... ... 209 Officials of the Guardians ... ... ... ... 214,215 Officials and Organisation 17—26 106 ... 170 ... 228 I NDEX.—(continued). SUBJECT. DEPARTMENT. Clerk. Accountant- Surveyor. Med. Officer of Health. Miscellaneous. old Burial Ground 50 73 ... ... ... Open Spaces 48—52 84 138 167 218 Order, Electric Lighting 12—17 77 ... ... ... Other Receipts and Charges (Poor Rate) ... 69 ... ... ... Overseers' Expenses ... 68 ... ... • • • Overseers of the Poor 46 64, 65 ... ... ... Parliamentary Committee ... ... ... ... 208 Parliamentary & County Council Elections ... 68,69 ... ... ... Parliament, Members of ... ... ... ... 200,211 Parliamentary Returning Officer 47 69 ... ... 211 Paving, Maintenance ... ... 117—123 ... ... Paving and Sewers Committee ... 78—80, ... ... 207 ... 87,92, 94 ... ... ... Paving Works, Capital Account ... 98 ... ... ... Plant and Materials ... ... 133 ... ... Planting Trees ... 79 ... ... ... Plumbers Place, &c., Area 48 85 137 167 ... Police Court ... ... ... ... 218 Police Rate ...... 67 ... ... . . . Poll re Libraries Acts 47 67 ... ... ... Poor Rate ... 67 ... ... ... Poor Rate Accounts ... 63—71 ... ... ... Population ... ... ... 160 217 Precepts 4 67,76, 111 • • • . . . ... Property and Permanent Works ...... 102 ... ... ... Public Companies .... .. 79 ... ... ... Public Health (London) Act, 1891 29—31 83 ... ... ... Public Mortuary ... 84 ... 166 ... Public Urinals ... 93 ... ... 150 Quelch, Mr. C. H 26 ... ... ... ... Quinquennial Valuation List ... 86 ... ... ... Railway and Tramway Schemes 53, 54 ... ... ... ... Rates 3,4 67,76, 91 ... ... ... Rates assessed and levied 3,4 107,109 ... ... 107 Rate Collection 5 107 ... ... ... Rate Collectors 5,6,18 106 ... ... ... Rateable Value ... 107,109 ... ... ... Recreation Grounds 48—52 84 138 ... 218 Red Lion Stone Yard 28 80 ... ... ... Regent's Canal Railway Act 54 ... ... ... ... Registration of Voters ... 68, 69 ... • • • ... Registrar of Marriages, &c ... ... ... ... 216 Reliance Wharf ... 81 ... ... ... Relieving Officers ... ... ... ... 214,215 Removal of House Refuse 8 ... ... ... ... Removal of Snow ... 81,84 ... ... ... Reorganisation 17—28 ... ... ... ... Repairs of Roads and Footpaths ... 79 ... ... ... Repayment of Debt ...... 76, 91 ... ... ... 229 INDEX.—[continued). SUBJECT. DEPARTMENT. Clerk. Accountant. Surveyor. Med. Officer of Health. Miscellaneous. Returning Officer, Parliamentary 47 69 ... ... ... Revenue Accounts ... 67, 76, 91 ... ... ... Revising Barrister 47 68 ... ... 211 Rivington Street • • • ... ... ... 176 Roads and Streets, Maintenance of ... 79 117 131 ... ... Russell, E. F., late Rate Collector 24 ... ... ... ... Russell, E. H., late Messenger 23 78 ... ... ... Salaries and Allowances ... 106 ... ... ... Sanitary Inspectors 25 106 ... 170 ... Scavenging and Dusting 7 81, 82, 87 135 ... 177, 209 School Board Election 48 76, 78 ... ... ... School Board for London 48 76, 111 ... ... 212 School Managers ... ... ... ... 222 Sewerage and Drainage Works ... 92 129 ... ... Sewers Rate ... 91 ... ... ... Shelter, Temporary Infectious ... ... ... 166 ... Shoreditch Board of Guardians 4 67 . . . ... 200, 213 Shoreditch Parish Churchyard 51 73 ... ... ... Small Pox • • • ... ... 164 ... St. John's Churchyard, Hoxton 51 73 ... ... ... St. Leonard's Churchyard, Shoreditch 51 73 ... ... ... St. Mary's Churchyard, Haggerston 51 73 ... ... ... Stables ... 81 ... ... ... Stamp Book 27 ... ... ... ... Steam Road Roller ... 79 ... ... ... Street Improvements ... 98, 99 ... ... ... Street Watering 10 84 ... ... ... Streets and Public Roads ... 79 117 ... ... Summary of Collection ... 107 ... ... ... Sun Street Improvement ... 99 ... ... ... Surveyor, District ... ... ... ... 212 Surveyor's Department ... 78, 92 ... ... ... Surveyor's Report ... ... 117—143 ... ... Technical Education ... ... ... ... 112,113 Toll Bridge Expenses ... 110 ... ... ... Town Hall, Alterations of 34 98 134,135 ... ... Do. Committee 84 85, 88 ... ... 208 Do. Disinfecting Station ... 84 ... 166 ... Do. Establishment ... 69, 85 ... ... ... Do. Maintenance of ... 85 ... ... ... Trade Refuse, Removal of ... 81 ... ... 119 Trades of Inhabitants ... ... ... ... ... Tramways Bill 54 ... ... ... ... Turner's Action 7 ... ... ... ... Unhealthy Dwelling Houses 41—46 85 ... 166,167 150 Urinals, Public ... 93 ... ... ... Vaccination Officers, &c ... ... ... 166 209 Valuation List Committee ... 86, 88 ... ... ... 230 INDEX.—(continued). SUBJECT. DEPARTMENT. Clerk. Accountant. Surveyor. Med. Officer of Health. Miscellaneous. Vestry Clerk's Department 20. 22 77, 91 ... ... ... Vestrymen ... 08 ... ... 200 Vital Statistics ... ... ... 178,183 ... Wards ... ... ... ... 199,200 Wages ... ... 131 ... ... Water Supply, Failure of 52 ... ... 170 ... Watering Streets 10 84 ... ... ... Wharves 8 81 ... ... ... Worship Street Bridge 28 77 142 ... ... Worship Street Police Court . .. ... ... ... 21b Wood Stacks ... ... ... 167 ... Year Book of Local Information ... ... ... ... 211—223 Zymotic Diseases ... ... ... 162 178 1261/A