u 1899-1900. THE VESTRY OF THE PARISH OF ST. GEORGE the MARTYR SOUTHWARK, IN THE COUNTY OF LONDON. ANNUAL REPORT FOR THE YEAR ENDING 25TH MARCH, 1900. Printed by Order of the Vestry, J. A. JOHNSON. Vestry Hall, Vestry Clerk. 81, Borough Road, S.E. 2 LIST OF VESTRYMEN. MARCH, l9OO. Ex-Offlcio. Rev. W. J. SOMMERVILLE, B.A., Rector 26, Searles Road, S.E. Mr. WILLIAM NEVILLE, Rector's Warden 136, Southwark Bridge Road ,, THOMAS HAYNES, Renter IVarden 26, Douglas Buildings, Marshalsea Road „ RICHARD RAMSDEN FULTON, Puisne IVarden l5,Waleran Buildings, Old Kent Road Ward No. X. Mr. WILLIAM BRAY 39, Lant Street „ RICHARD RAMSDEN FULTON 15, Waleran Buildings, Old Kent Road ,, THOMAS HAYNES, J.P. [Chairman) 26, Douglas Buildings, Marshalsea Road „ CHARLES JEFFREY MARLOW 39, Pocock Street Miss ALICE ELIZABETH BUSK 23, Douglas Buildings, Marshalsea Road Mr. GEORGE WILLIAM LACEY 5, Colnbrook Street. Mr. FREDERICK REDMAN (Vice-Chair man) 148, Borough High Street Miss ELIZABETH HARRIET KENNY 24, Douglas buildings, Marshalsea Road Rev. WILLIAM HOOK LONGSDON, M.A 85, Mint Street. Mr. ROBERT WILLIAM DYE 47, Douglas Buildings, Marshalsea Road Mr. WILLIAM SAVAGE 171, Southwark Bridge Road Mr. JAMES HOG AN 62, Borough Road „ THOMAS HUNTER, L.C.C Farm House, Disney Street, Marshalsea R (and 82, Cowley Road, Brixton) „ JOHN CROKER JAMES 16 and 17 O, Peabody Squaie „ WILLIAM NEVILLE, Rector's IVarden 136, Southwark Bridge Road ,, ALBERT WILSON 15, Union Street, Borough ,, EDWARD LOWMAN 4, Queen's Buildings Ward No. 2. Mr. JAMES KIMBER 42, Ontario Street „ CHARLES JOHN DOWNING 50&51, London Road „ JAMES BENHAM 29, Oswin Street „ RICHARD YOUNG 143, Waterloo Road „ WILLIAM JOHN HARVEY 200, Southwark Bridge Road 3 Ward 2 (continued). Mr. JOSEPH MALLEN HALE 68, Lambeth Road „ HENRY GEORGE RUSSELL 112, Blackfriars Road ,, DAVID JONES II, Sturge Street ,, JOHN SPILLARD 147, Queen's Buildings, Scovell Road „ GEORGE DAVID WOODCOCK 130, London Road Mr. ALEXANDER HAWKINS 126, London Road ,, ALFRED PAULL 20, St. George's Road ,, GEORGE CHAPMAN REVELL 207, Crystal Palace Road ,, EDWARD CHARLES MIDDLEDITCH 167, Queen's Buildings, Scovell Road „ WILLIAM JOHN SCUDAMORE 1a, Surrey Square Ward No. 3. Mr. ROBERT DREWITT HILTON 108, Old Kent Road ,, HENRY THOMAS DOBSON Ivy House, Acacia Grove, New Maiden ,, ALBERT GEORGE TONSLEY25, Old Kent Road ,, EDWARD ERNEST ATTENBOROUGH 41 & 43, Old Kent Road „ RICHARD HENRY JACKSON 17, Long Lane Mr. JOHN DANNHORN "Surrey Arms," Surrey Square, S.E. ,, WILLIAM KNOX 45, Warner Street (and Russell Place) ,, JAMES ROWLAND 201, Borough High Street „ THOMAS JOHN SMITH 40, Long Lane „ RICHARD THORN 116, Old Kent Road Mr. HENRY EDWIN SAMBROOK 37, Old Kent Road „ GEORGE THOMAS BATEMAN 73, Dover Buildings, Old Kent Road „ HENRY MORGAN 287, New Kent Road „ GEORGE KELLAWAY SHEPPARD 1, Old Kent Road Mrs. EMMA PRITCHARD 5, St. James' Road, Upper Tooting AUDITORS. Ward No. 1—Mr. EDMUND WASHINGTON KNIGHT 272, Borough High Street Ward No. 2.—Mr. JAMES CHUBB 12, Newington Causeway Ward No. 3—Mr. JOSEPH THORNTON, L.C.C 3. Bermondsey New Road 4 MEMBERS OF STANDING COMMITTEES 1899. Vestry Meetings—Every Alternate Tuesday at 6.30 p.m. WORKS. NIGHT of MEETING, on the THURSDAY following the Vestry Meeting, at 7 p.m. Chairman, Mr. Richard Ramsden Fulton. Vice-Chairman, Mr. Robert William Dye. Mr. George Thomas Bateman. „ William Bray. „ Charles John Downing. „ William John Harvey. „ John Croker James. „ James Kimber. „ George William Lacey. „ Charles Jeffery Marlow. „ Henry Morgan. „ William John Scudamore. „ George Kellaway Sheppard. „ Thomas John Smith „ John Spillard. „ Albert Wilson. PUBLIC HEALTH AND SEWERS. NIGHT of MEETING, on the MONDA' following the Vestry Meeting, at 6.30 p m. Chairman, Mr. William Savage. Vice-Chairman, Rev. William Hook Longsdon, M.A. Mr. Edward Ernest Attenborough Miss Alice Elizabeth Busk. Mr. Joseph Mallen Hale. „ James Hogan. „ William Knox. Miss Elizabeth Harriet Kenny. Mr. Edward Lowman. „ William Neville. „ Emma Pritchard. „ Henry George Russell. „ HEnry Edwin Sambrook. „ Albert George Tonsley. ,, George David Woodcock. GENERAL PURPOSES, TREES AND OPEN SPACES. NIGHT of MEETING, on the TUESDAY following the Vestry Meeting, at 6 p.m. Chairman, Mr. Albert Wilson. Vice-Chairman, Mr. William Neville. Mr. James Ben ham. ,, John Dannhorn. „ Henry Thomas Dobson. „ Joseph Mallen Hale. „ Alexander Hawkins. „ Robert Drewitt Hilton. „ Richard Henry Jackson. „ David Jones. „ Edward Charles Middleditch* „ Alfred Paull. „ George Chapman Revell. „ James Rowland. ,, Richard Thorn. „ Richard Young. FINANCE. NIGHT of MEETING, on the TUESDAY following the Vestry Meeting, at 7.15 p.m. Chairman, Mr. Richard Young. Vice-Chairman, Mr. Robert William I)ye Mr. Edward Ernest Attenborough „ George Thomas Bateman. „ James Benham. „ Richard Ramsden Fulton. „ Joseph Mallen Hale. „ Robert Drewitt Hilion. ,, William Knox. Rev. W. Hook Longsdon, M.A. Mr. Edward Charles Middleditch „ Henry Morgan. ,, William Neville. „ Henry Edwin Sambhook. „ William Savage. „ Albert Wilson. The Chairman and Vice-chairman of the Vestry, and Mr. Hunter, L.C.C., are Members of all Standing, Special and Sub-Committee*. 5 LIST OF members of the committees, 1899-1900. WARD No. 1. Works. Mr. WILLIAM BRAY „ ROBERT WILLIAM DYE (Vice-Chairman) ,, RICHARD RAMSDEN FULTON (Chairman) „ JOHN CROKER JAMES „ GEORGE WILLIAM LACEY „ CHARLES JEFFREY MARLOW „ ALBERT WILSON General Purposes and Open Spaces. Mr. WILLIAM NEVILLE (Vice-Chairman). „ ALBERT WILSON (Chairman). Public Health and Sewers. Miss ALICE ELIZABETH BUSK. Mr. JAMES HOG AN. Miss ELIZABETH HARRIET KENNY. Rev. WILLIAM HOOK LONGSDON, M.A. (Vice-Chairman) Mr. EDWARD LOWMAN. „ WILLIAM NEVILLE. „ WILLIAM SAVAGE (Chairman). Finance. Mr. ROBERT WILLIAM DYE. (Vice-Chairman). „ RICHARD RAMSDEiN FULTON. Rev. W. HOOK LONGSDON, M.A. Mr. WILLIAM NEVILLE. „ WILLIAM SAVAGE. „ ALBERT WILSON. WARD No. 2. Works. Mr. CHARLES JOHN DOWNING. „ WILLIAM JOHN HARVEY „ JAMES KIMBER. „ JOHN SPILLARD. „ WILLIAM JOHN SCUDAMORE. General Purposes and Open Spaces. Mr. JAMES BENHAM. „ JOSEPH MALLEN HALE. „ ALEXANDER HAWKINS. DAVID JONES. „ EDWARD CHARLES MIDDLED1TCH. .. ALFRED PAULL. GEORGE CHAPMAN REVELL. i. RICHARD YOUNG. Public Health and Sewers. Mr. JOSEPH MALLEN HALE „ HENRY GEORGE RUSSELL. ,, GEORGE DAVID WOODCOCK. Finance. Mr. JAMES BENHAM. „ JOSEPH MALLEN HALE. „ EDWARD CHARLES MIDDLEDITCH. „ RICHARD YOUNG (Chairman). 6 WARD No. 3. Works. Mr. GEORGE THOMAS BATEMAN. „ HENRY MORGAN. „ THOMAS JOHN SMITH. „ GEORGE KELLAWAY SHEPPARD. General Purposes and Open Spaces. Mr. JOHN DANNHORN. ,, HENRY THOMAS DOBSON. „ ROBERT DREWITT HILTON. „ RICHARD HENRY JACKSON. „ JAMES ROWLAND. „ RICHARD THORN. Public Health and 8ewers. Mr. EDWARD ERNEST ATTENBOROUGH. „ WILLIAM KNOX. Mrs. EMMA PRITCHARD. Mr. HENRY EDWIN SAMBROOK. „ ALBERT GEORGE TONSLEY. Finance. Mr. EDWARD ERNEST ATTENBOROUGH. „ GEORGE THOMAS BATEMAN. „ ROBERT DREWITT HILTON. „ WILLIAM KNOX. ,, HENRY MORGAN. „ HENRY EDWIN SAMBROOK. Mr. THOMAS HAYNES, J.P., (Chairman) „ FREDERICK REDMAN (Vice-Chairman) „ THOMAS HUNTER, L.C.C. (Ex-Officio) of all Committees. 7 OFFICERS. VESTRY CLERK'S DEPARTMENT. Vestry Clerk, Clerk to the Overseers, the Public Library Commissioners, and Trustees of Charities John Arthur Johnson, Solicitor. Acting Accountant Henry Hume. Assistant Clerks Edward Forsey Brion, H. W. Under- hill, Frank 0. Wright, Arthur Baldeey, A. H. Port, & A. J. Patrick. Collectors—Ward 1 T. Brown, 152, Southwark Bridge Road. Ward 2 F. Mackenzie, 69, St. George's Eoad. Ward 3 W. T. Montgomery, 222, New Kent Road. Professional Auditors Hart Bros., Tibbetts, Heiron, & Co., 30, Moorgate Street, E.C. Treasurer of the Vestry George James Green, London and County Bank, Newington Butts. Vestry Hall Keeper and Messenger J. Wheeler. Assistant Hall Keeper F. R. Fielder. SURVEYOR'S DEPARTMENT. Surveyor Arthur Harrison, M. Inst. C.E. Assistant Surveyor C. R. Williams. General Foreman Joseph Summers. Clerk S. Palmer. Veterinary Surgeon T. S. Price, Kennington Cross. HEALTH DEPARTMENT. Medical Officer of Health F. J. Waldo, M.A., M.D. (Cantab) D.P.H., &c. Public Analyst J. Muter, Ph.D., &c. Chief Inspector of Nuisances James Weatheritt. Inspectors of Nuisances—Ward 1 Joshua Owner. Ward 2 Robert Simpson. Ward 3 Philip David. Inspector of Tenement Houses—Wards 1 and 2 Annie Elliott. Inspector of Tenement Houses—Ward 3 Emily Harriet Wilkin. Sanitary Clerk E. O. Jones. Superintendent of the Disinfecting Department and Caretaker of Reception House H. Aylmer. Disinfector W. Thomas Mortuary Keeper C. H. Lynch. PUBLIC LIBRARY. Chief Librarian Thomas Aldrbd. Assistant Librarian P. H. Wood. 8 VESTRY OF St. GEORGE the MARTYR ' southwark Return of Attendances at : vestry & committee meetings, May 31st, 1899, to May 8th, 1900. Under Local Government Act, 1894. The total Meetings during the above period were as follows:— VESTRY and COMMITTEE of WHOLE YESTRT 23 STANDING COMMITTEES, VIZ:— W ores 31 Public Health and Sewers 26 General Purposes, Trees and Open Spaces 25 Finance 24 SPECIAL COMMITTEES, viz Charities 1 Inspection of Ancient Records 2 Labour Bureau 4 Lord Mayor's Show 5 London Government 19 31 Carried forward 160 9 Return of Attendances at Vestry and Committee Meetings—continued. Brought forward 160 SUB-COMMITTEES, viz. PUBLIC HEALTH AND SEWERS. Plans and Books 43 Ladies' Conveniences 1 Reception House 1 Sick Pay 1 Books at Stoneyard 2 WORKS. Lighting 1 Depot 12 Stoneyard 4 GENERAL PURPOSES. Junior Clerk 1 Open Space, West Square 2 FINANCE. Abstract of Accounts 1 69 229 Vestry of St. George Martyr, Southwark. Attendance of Vestrymen at??? and Committee Meetings, 18???00. Ward. N A M E. Vestry. Works Committee. Public Health and Sewers Committee. General Purposes and Trees and Open Spaces Committee. Finance Committee. Lord Mayor's Show Committee. Charitie. Committee. Labour Bureaux CommittM-. Inspection of Ancient Records Committee. London Government Committee. ?????? Sub Works Sick Pay Committee. Sub Works re Books at Stoneyard. Sub Works Lighting Committee. Sub Works Depot Committee, Sub Works Stoneyard Committee. Sub. General Purposes re Junior Clerk. Sub General Purposes re Open Space.West Square Sub Finance re Abstract of Accounts. Total ACTUAL Attendances at Vestry and Committees. Total POSSIBLE Attendances at Vestry and Committees, NAME. Total number of Meetings, 229. 23 31 26 25 24 5 1 4 2 19 ??? 1 2 1 12 4 1 2 1 Total number of Meetings, 229. 3 Atten borough, ED.ERNEST 14 ... 9 ... †4 ... 1 ... ... 5 ??? ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 33 87 Attenborough, Ed. Ernest 3 Bateman, G. T 12 8 ... ... 5 ... ... 3 ... ... ??? 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 29 83 Bateman, G. T. 2 Benham, James 17 ... ... 18 17 4 ... 2 ... ... ??? ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 58 81 Benham, James 1 Bray, William 19 19 ... ... ... ... ... 3 ... ... ??? ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 41 58 Bray, William 1 Busk, Alice Elizabeth 20 ... 23 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ??? ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 80 94 Busk, Alice Elizabeth 3 Dannhorn, John 17 ... ... 10 ... ... ... ... ... ... ??? ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 27 48 Dannhorn, John 3 Dobson, Henry Thomas 23 ... ... 8 ... 1 ... ... 0 ... ??? ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 32 55 Dobson, Henry Thomas 2 Downing, C. J 18 18 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ??? ... ... ... 1 0 ... ... ... 37 70 Downing, Charles John 1 I)ye, Robert William 18 22 ... ... 11 ... ... ... ... ... ??? 1 ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... 53 80 Dye, Robert William 1 Fulton, Richard Ramsden 22 21 ... ... 13 ... 1 ... 2 13 ??? 0 0 1 0 0 ... ... 0 73 121 Fulton, Richard Ramsden 2 Hale, Joseph Mallen 20 ... 20 19 17 2 1 ... 1 18 ??? ... ... ... ... ... ... 2 0 117 171 Hale, Joseph Mallen 2 Harvey, William John 9 14 ... ... ... ... ... 3 ... ... ??? 1 ... 0 0 0 ... ... ... 27 76 . Harvey, William John 2 Hawkins, Alexander 17 ... ... 7 ... ... ... ... ... 9 ??? ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 33 67 Hawkins, Alexander 1 Haynes, Thomas, J.P. 23 17 21 21 17 2 0 1 ... 15 ??? 0 1 1 0 1 1 2 1 151 229 Haynes, Thomas, J.P. 3 Hilton, Robert Drewitt 14 ... ... 9 10 ... 0 ... ... 7 ??? ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 40 92 Hilton, Robert Drewitt 1 Hogan, James 19 ... 19 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ??? ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 38 49 Hogan, James 1 Hunter,Thomas, L.C.C. 7 4 2 3 1 0 0 0 0 0 ??? 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 19 229 Hunter, Thomas, L.C.C. 8 Iackson, R. H. 3 ... ... 0 ... ... ... ... ... ... ??? ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 3 48 Jackson, R. H. 1 Jamks, I. C 9 13 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ??? ... ... ... ... 0 ... ... ... 22 58 James, J. C. 2 Jones, David 21 ... ... 19 ... ... ... ... ... ??? ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 40 48 Jones, David 1 Kenny,Elizabeth Harriet 21 ... 21 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ??? ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 43 50 Kenny, Elizabeth Harriet 2 Kimber, James 19 25 ... ... ... ... ... 4 ... ... ??? ... ... 1 ... 1 ... ... ... 50 63 Kimber, James 3 Knox, William 20 ... 23 ... 18 ... ... ... ... ... ??? ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 61 73 Knox, William 1 Lacey, George William 11 2 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ??? ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 13 54 Lacey, George William 1 Longsdon, Rev. Wm, Hook 22 ... 19 ... 12 ... 0 ... ... ... ??? ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 87 117 Longsdon, Rev. WM. Hook *1 Lowman, Ed 6 ... 5 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ??? ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 11 38 Lowman, Ed l Mar low, Charles Jeffrey 12 12 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ??? ... ... 0 0 1 ... ... ... 25 71 Marlow, Charles Jeffrey 3 Morgan, Henry 13 10 ... ... 10 ... ... ... ... ... ??? ... ... ... 3 ... ... ... ... 36 90 Morgan, Henry 2 Middleditch, Ed.Charles 22 ... ... 22 22 ... ... ... ... ... ??? ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 66 72 Middleditch, Ed. Charles I Neville, William 12 ... 10 13 7 ... 1 1 2 8 ??? ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 54 124 Neville, William 2 Paull, Alfred 5 ... ... 0 ... ... ... ... ... ... ??? ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 5 48 Paull, Alfred *3 Pritcjiard, Emma 8 ... 10 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ??? ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 18 38 Pritchard, Emma 1 Redman, Erv.derick 22 18 20 18 13 4 0 4 0 13 ??? 0 1 1 0 1 0 2 1 150 229 Redman, Frederick 2 Kevell. G. C. 8 ... ... 5 ... ... ... ... ... ... ??? ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 13 48 Revell, G. C. 3 Rowland, J 1 ... ... 2 ... ... ... ... ... ... ??? ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 3 48 Rowland, J. 2 Russell, Henry George 10 ... 7 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ??? ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 23 49 Russell, Henry Georgr 3 Sam brook, Henry Edwin 15 ... 13 ... 5 ... ... ... ... ... ??? ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 33 73 Sambrook, Henry Edwin 1 Savage, William 23 ... 26 ... 21 5 1 ... ... 16 ??? ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 0 132 144 Savage, William o Scudamore, W. John 6 12 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 4 ??? 0 2 0 1 1 ... ... ... 26 93 Scudamore, W. J. 3 Sheppard. G. K. 17 5 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ??? ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... 23 58 SHEPPARD, G. K. 3 Smith, Thomas John 5 5 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ??? ... ... 1 0 2 ... ... ... 13 71 Smith, Thomas John Ex. officio Sommervillk. W. I. (Rector) 1 ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ??? ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2 24 Sommerville, Rev. W. J. 9 Spillard, John 18 18 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ??? 1 ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... 38 56 Spillard, John 3 Tonsley. Albert George 14 ... 10 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ??? ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 30 92 Tonsley, Albert George 3 Thorn, Richard 1 ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ??? ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2 48 Thorn, Richard 1 Wilson, A. 20 ... ... 21 21 4 1 ... ... 15 ??? 1 2 ... 2 3 1 2 1 113 153 Wilson, A. 2 Woodcock, G. D. 22 ... 18 ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 51 94 Woodcock, G. D. 2 Young. Richard 22 ... ... 21 21 ... ... ... ... 14 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 0 78 92 Young, Richard 704 260 276 218 245 22 6 21 10 137 19 5 6 7 7 11 2 8 3 2151 4082 *Elecled July 24th, 1899. ???Committee September 12th, 1899. 10 REMARKS. The foregoing return shows that the total actual attendances at the Vestry and Committee Meetings combined, from 31st May, 1899, to the 8th May, 1900, have been 2,151 out of a possible 4,082, which gives a percentage of 52.69. The actual attendances at Vestry Meetings alone have been 704 out of a possible 1,104, a percentage of 63.76. Of the various Standing Committees, the Public Health and Sewers Committee shows the highest actual attendance, viz.: 276, with a percentage of 58.97. The Works Committee comes next, the actual attendances amounting to 260, which yields a percentage of 44 14. The Finance Committee then follows with an actual attendance of 245, and a percentage of 53.72, while the General Purposes, Trees and Open Spaces Committee shows an actual attendance of 218, and a percentage of 45.79. Special Committees grouped together show an actual attendance of 196, with a percentage of 55.68. and SubCommittees an actual attendance of 253, and a percentage of 39.71. VESTRY OF ST. GEORGE THE MARTYR. SOUTHWARK. ANNUAL REPORT for the year ending 25th march, 1900 IN accordance with the provisions of the Metropolis Local Management Acts, the Vestry presents the Annual Report for the twelve months ending the 25th March, 1900. The following meetings have been held throughout the year:— Vestry Meetings 23 Standing Committee Meetings 106 Special Committee Meetings 31 Sub-Committee Meetings 69—229 ELECTION OF CHAIRMAN AND VICE-CHAIRMAN. At the first meeting after the election in 1899, the Vestry re-appointed Mr. Thomas Haynes, J.P., as Chairman, and Mr. Frederick Redman as Vice-Chairman for the year. PERSONAL. Several changes have taken place in the personnel of the Vestry during the past year. Mr. Thomas Emary, one of the oldest members, and a Public Library Commissioner, died on the 10th June, 1899. He had for 18 years been a member of the Vestry, and was Chairman of the Finance Committee for several years prior to 1895. A vote of condolence was adopted to the widow and family. Mr. W. S. Cook, the successor to Mr. Emary, in 1895, in the Chair of the Finance Committee, died on the 15th June, 1899, and a vote of condolence with the family was adopted. Later on in the year, Mr. George Backhaul, another member of the Vestry, also died, and a similar vote was passed to his widow and family. 12 The vacancies caused in the Vestry by the deaths of Messrs. Emary and Cook were filled at a casual election on the 24th July, when Mr. Edward Lowman was elected for St. Michael's (No. 1) Ward and Mrs. E. Pritchard for St. George's (No. 3) Ward. Mr. Emary being at the time of his death one of the Public Library Commissioners, the Vestry, on the 27th June, 1899, elected Mr. Frederick Redman (Vice-Chairman) to fill his place. LONDON GOVERNMENT ACT, 1899. The most important matter which has engaged the attention of the Vestry has been the passing into law of the London Government Act, 1899. At the end of the Vestry year 1898-9, the Bill had been little more than introduced into the House of Commons, and the Vestry had adopted a number of recommendations for its amendment. Almost the whole of these recommendations were subsequently accepted by the Government and embodied in the Bill. One of the most important matters connected with the measure was the question of the area in which this parish should be included, and on the 2nd May, 1899, the Vestry expressed the opinion that the area of the parliamentary borough of West Southwark would be a suitable area for the constitution of a borough under the Bill. This area, however, was not considered sufficiently large by the Government, and they accordingly adopted the parliamentary areas, of W est Southwark, Newington, and Walworth as the area of the new borough. This proposal would have had the effect of transferring Ward No. 3 of this parish into the borough in which Bermondsey is included, and would have prevented the coming into operation of the provision of the Bill "that where the whole of a Poor Law Union is within one borough, the Assessment Committee shall be appointed by the Borough Council instead of by the Board of Guardians." Under these circumstances, the Vestry expressed the opinion that it was desirable that the lines of the Poor Law Union of St. Saviour's should be strictly followed as the boundary of the new borough. The Chairman and the Clerk of the Vestry were directed to communicate with Mr. R. K. Causton, M.P. for West Southwark, and owing to his successful efforts Ward No. 3 was subsequently included within the area of the Borough, which is described in the Act as "the 13 Area, consisting of the Parishes of St. George the Martyr, Christchurch, Southwark, St. Saviour's, Southwark, and Newington." On the 13th June, 1899, the Vestry unanimously adopted a resolution thanking Mr. R. K. Causton, M.P., and the Chairman and Clerk of the Yestry for obtaining the inclusion of this portion of the parish in the new Borough. The Bill passed through the House of Lords and received the Royal assent on the 13th July, 1899. It is unnecessary here, owing to the number of treatises which have already appeared on the subject, to give any detailed account of the provisions contained in the Act. It may, however, be stated that the first election of Councillors will take place on the 1st November, 1900. No date has, however, been fixed for the coming into operation of the Act. With regard to the delimitation of the boundaries of the new Borough and the allotment of Councillors and Aldermen to the various parishes, these subjects are dealt with in the portion of this report detailing the proceedings of the London Government Act Committee. CLEARANCE OF REMAINS FROM CRYPT OF ST. GEORGE'S CHURCH. At the date to which the last Report of the Vestry was brought up, the Vestry were awaiting a communication from the Home Secretary with regard to their request that the removal of the human remains from the crypt of St. George's Church might be delayed until the Long Lane Improvement Scheme was carried out. The Home Secretary on the 28th March pressed upon the \ estry the necessity of obeying the Order in Council without delay, and requested them to inform him when they proposed to commence operations. All the inquiries he had made in the matter confirmed him in the view that the removal of the bodies was necessary in the interests ot public health, and the present instance did not appear to him to present any feature which entitled it to exemption from the usual practice, or which would justify the postponement of the removal. In the same communication, however, it was stated that only those coftins reposing on the floor of the crypt need be removed in the first instance. Whether any further removals were necessary would 14 depend upon the state of the crypt after that removal had been effected. After this communication, the Vestry deemed it advisable to take no further action in opposition to the Home Secretary's request, but to allow the work to be proceeded with by the Churchwardens, acting in conjunction with the Overseers, and they accordingly permitted the Vestry Clerk and Surveyor to assist the Churchwardens and to receive special remuneration therefor. On the 26th September the Renter Warden reported to the Vestrv that the tender of the London Necropolis Company had been accepted for the removal of the human remains and the Churchwardens and Overseers had approved a site at Brookwood Cemetery, Woking, for the re-interment of the remains. Some correspondence took place with regard to the position of the Medical Officer of Health, as a statutory officer under the Order of the Local Government Board required to devote the whole of his time to the duties of the Vestry, carrying out the duties of supervising the work of removal, but after an interview by a deputation of the Overseers with the Assistant Secretary of State and by the Medical Officer of Health with one of the Assistant Secretaries of the Local Government Board, the Vestry passed a resolution permitting the Medical Officer to act in the supervision of the work of removing the remains from the crypt and to receive a fee as remuneration 1 for the same. On the 7th November, 1899, it was reported that 1405 bodies hail been removed, the crypt had been cleared down to the floor level, aud Dr. Hoffman had visited and inspected the place and decided to report fully to the Home Office. The Vestry inspected the crypt on the 11th November. A letter was subsequently received from the Home Office stating that no further removals from the crypt need be made provided the floor was covered with concrete and cement in the manner indicated in a plan forwarded to the Home Secretary by the Church wardens and that the crypt proper was cross ventilated, but suggesting that steps should be taken to ascertain whether there were any vault, immediately below the lloor of the church, between the crypt and the 15 3hurch walls. On the reading of this letter a deputation was appointed by the Vestry to wait upon the Home Office in reference to the suggestion contained therein. The Home Secretary, however, declined to receive the deputation personally, but stated that, if, in the opinion of the Vestry the representations could only be made conveniently by a deputation, one of the Assistant Under Secretaries of State would see them, but there were such obvious reasons why the examination desired should be made that the Secretary of State thought it would be very unlikely that his decision would be altered. The Vestry on receipt of this letter passed a resolution instructing the Vestry Clerk to reply stating that the deputation declined to attend before an Assistant Under Secretary seeing that the Home Secretary had apparently decided on the course to be followed before hearing what the deputation had to say. The Churchwardens subsequently caused the aisles of the Parish Church to be opened, and reported the result of their investigations to the Vestry on the 27th February, 1900, when an opinion was expressed that no further disturbance was necessary. It is satisfactory to know that this opinion was subsequently endorsed by Dr. Hoffman and the Home Office. At the conclusion of the Vestry year covered by this Report, the work of cementing the floor of the crypt was completed. SOUTH AFRICAN WAR. In October, 1899, war broke out between this country and the Republics of the Orange Free State and the Transvaal. The men of the Army Reserve were accordingly called out on active service, including some of the workmen employed by the Vestry. The Vestry, acting in accordance with the practice of other public bodies, determined, on the 24th October, to grant half-pay to the wives of the Army Reserve Men who were on the Vestry s permanent staff during the time they were on active service in connection with the war in the Transvaal. The large amount raised for the wives and families ot the reserve men by voluntary subscription being considered insufficient to 16 meet the requirements of the numerous cases, the Vestry of Lambeth directed a letter to be forwarded to Her Majesty's Government urging the desirability for increasing the allowance paid by the Government to the reserve men, and this Vestry passed a resolution concurring in the action taken by that Authority. At the meeting of the Vestry held on the 2nd January, 1000, the Chairman reported that Mr. E. E. Attenborough, a member of the Vestry, had volunteered and had been accepted for service in the Imperial Yeomanry, in connection with the war in South Africa, The meeting accordingly tendered to Mr. Attenborough their good wishes for his safe and speedy return. LOUD MAYOR'S PROCESSION, 1899. The announcement that the Lord Mayor's procession would on the 9th November, 1899, pass through Southwark and along Marshalsea Road and Borough High Street in this parish was received by the Vestry on the 24th October, 1899. A Committee was thereupon appointed to consider the question of decorating those portions of the parish through which the procession would pass, and proceeded at once to obtain subscriptions for that object. The tender of the City of London Firework and Decoration Company, Ltd., was accepted for the work of decorating the streets, and the Lord Mayor was thus accorded a fitting reception in the Borough of Southwark over which the City had ancient jurisdiction. BROCKWELL PARK. During the year a large Committee was voluntarily formed for the purpose of securing a portion of land adjoining Brockwell Park as an addition to that open space. An appeal was made to the public bodies of South London for their assistance towards the purchase of the land, and a deputation appointed by the Extension Committee waited upon the Vestry on the 5th December, 1899. The question was referred to the General Purposes Committee, and at the next meeting of the Vestry the following resolution was adopted:— "That, having regard to the distance of Brockwell Park from this district, and the large expense to which the parish has recently been put by the removal of the human remains from the Crypt of the Parish Church, the Brockwell Park Extension Committee be informed 17 ??? at the Vestry, whilst sympathising with their object, are unable to ??? e their way to make any contribution towards the cost of the ???rchase of the land proposed to be added to the Park." During the discussion on the subject an opinion was expressed ???at the price of £1,713 per acre to be paid for the 42½ acres of land as very heavy, and it was thought the amount Ought to be reduced. FAILURE OF COMPANY TO SUPPLY ELECTRIC LIGHT. Owing to repeated failures on the part of the London Electric ???upply Corporation, Limited, to provide sufficient electrical energy ??? enable them to carry out their obligation with regard to the light???g of premises in the parish, the Vestry on the 24th October directed letter to be sent to the London County Council calling their ???ttention to the unsatisfactory manner in which the company were ??? ischarging their obligations. A communication was also forwarded ??? the Company complaining of the irregularity. The Company eplied that the failure to supply was due to contracts for machinery which had been entered into with them not having been performed within the time limited. The Vestry, however, found that notwithstanding these assurances on the part of the Company, the supply did not improve, and was on ???many occasions totally insufficient for illuminating purposes. A communication was accordingly addressed to the Board of Trade laying before the Board the facts of the case. The Board of Trade replied that they had no power to take any action against the Company for their failure to supply under their Order, and pointed out that the Local Authority might take proceedings against the Company before a magistrate. It appeared, however, from the Order that should any fine be inflicted upon the Company, the same would be payable to the London County Council. Under these circumstances the Vestry requested the Council to take proceedings against the Company to compel compliance with the provisions of the Electric Lighting Order of 1899. The Vestry Clerk was subsequently instructed to furnish details to the Council of the failure to supply the Public Library and of three or four other cases. The Council are takiug steps to obtain 18 the whole of the facts, but have not yet issued any summonses in the matter. COVER v. ST. GEORGE'S VESTRY. It will be remembered that this case originally consisted of a appeal of Messrs. Gover, the owners of Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, and 5, Re??? Red cow Cow Alley; to the Newington Quarter Sessions against a Alle Order made by the Vestry under the Housing of the Working Classes Act, 1890, for the demolition of the premises as being i??? such a condition as to be dangerous or injurious to the health of t??? surrounding population. The Court of Quarter Sessions held that Section 33 of the A??? referred only to inhabited houses, and as these houses were not the inhabited, an Order for demolition could not be made, and the accordingly quashed the Order of the Vestry. The Court, however expressed willingness to state a case for the decision of the High Court. After considerable difficulty, a case was agreed upon between the two parties and heard before Justices Ridley and Darling in t??? Queen's Bench Division of the High Court on the 7th November 1899. The Court decided in favour of the Vestry's contention the Section 33 of the Housing of the Working Classes Act, 1890, applie??? to an uninhabited house, but referred the case back to the Court Quarter Sessions for re-hearing, to determine whether the whole ??? some and what part if any or all of the premises was dangerous ??? injurious to the health of the public or of the inhabitants of the neighbouring buildings. The case came on for hearing again at the Newington Session on the 19th January, 1900, when it was stated by counsel for Mess??? Gover, that they had taken steps to abate nuisances on the premise??? and it was suggested by Mr. Loveland-Loveland, Q.C., Deput??? Chairman of the Quarter Sessions, that the premises should be i??? spected by the Vestry's witnesses, so as to ascertain whether the wo??? done would satisfy the Vestry's requirements. On that occasion??? was stated that the drains had been sealed, and all necessary ste??? taken to abate nuisances. The case was then adjourned to the 16 February. 19 On the latter date, the Appellants did not appear, but sent a clerk requesting that the Appeal might be adjourned. Up to this time the officials of the Vestry had no opportunity of seeing the works executed by Messrs. Gover, and the Court accordingly adjourned the ???ppeal to the 14th March, and directed the Vestry to be permitted to ???nspect the drains. It was found on inspection that the drains had not been sealed as stated. On the 14th March, the evidence of Dr. Waldo, Medical Officer of Health, and Dr. Louis Parkes, Medical Officer of Health of Chelsea, was taken, when both medical officers agreed that the premises were dangerous to health at the time of the Demolition Order, and that the ruins still existed, and the state of the roof and floors and the filth was such that if they became wet by rain and dried by sun they would give off injurious effluvia which would be likely to be dangerous or injurious to the public or inhabitants of the neighbouring dwelling houses. Evidence was given on behalf of the appellants. Before giving judgment, however, Mr. Loveland-Loveland, Q.C., suggested that he should see the premises, and would take with him a medical officer and a surveyor with whom he was well acquainted. The Vestry consider this a most exceptional course for a magistrate to take in opposition to accepting the opinions of medical men of the eminence of Dr. Parkes, of Chelsea, and the Medical Officer ol Health of this parish. The inspection has been fixed for April 7th. BRIDGES OVER COLLIER'S RENTS. In September, 1899, the Vestry received from the London County Council plans for the erection of two iron bridges over the road at Collier's Rents, Long Lane, submitted to the Council by Messrs. Harding & Sons for the purpose of connecting two of their warehouses. The Yestry directed a communication to be sent to the Council disapproving the erection of bridges over the public thoroughfare. In October, 1899, however, an assistant from the Architect s Department of the London County Council had an interview with the Vestry Clerk in reference to the proposal, who asked whether the Yestry could see their way to reconsider their decision disapproving 20 the plans, as the suggestion had emanated from the branch of the Architect's Department of the Council, dealing with means of escape in case of fire. The matter was reported to the Vestry on the 10th October when a resolution was passed directing a communication to be sent to the Superintendent Architect of the Council stating that as the Vestry were strenuously opposed to the erection of bridges over public streets they were unable to reconsider the matter, and expressing the surprise of the Vestry that such a suggestion should have been made by the Department. To the intense surprise of the Vestry, they subsequently received a letter from the Superintendent Architect stating that the Council had given their consent to the erection of the two bridges. The Vestry thereupon passed a resolution protesting against the action of the Council and empowered the chairman and vice-chairman to take whatever action they might deem necessary in the matter. The Council was at the same time asked to state the authority under which they claimed to have jurisdiction to permit bridges of this character to be erected over public streets. No satisfactory answer was, however, received from that body, and the Vestry on the 19th December directed notice to be served on Messrs. Harding & Sons warning them not to proceed with the erection of the proposed bridges over the public highway. Messrs. Harding & Sons, however, proceeded with the work and completed the bridges. Some doubts were then expressed as to the powers of the Vestry to compel the removal of bridges of this character, placed at a considerable height over the roadway, and after hearing the opinion of counsel, the Vestry deemed it advisable to take no further action in the matter. At the same time they protested most strongly against the action of the Council in suggesting the erection of constructions over the public highway, especially in view of the fact that that body as well as the Vestry are the custodians of the rights of the public over the streets and roads of the Metropolis. PUBLIC LIBRARY LOAN. At the meeting of the Vestry on the 19th December, 1899, a report was received from the Public Library Commissioners to the 21 effect that the time within which the Commissioners might purchase the freehold of the site of the Library, at the price of £4,500, would in accordance with the terms of the agreement with the City Corporation expire on the 30th August, 1900. The Commissioners stated that they would have an available balance of £1,000 on the 25th March, 1900, towards the cost of the purchase of the freehold of the site, but that it would be necessary for them to borrow an additional £3,500 in order to complete the purchase. Before a loan for this amount could be taken up, it was necessary that the Yestry should give their sanction to the loan and that the Local Government Board should do the same. The Yestry determined to sanction the borrowing of the money for the above purpose, subject to the Public Library Commissioners obtaining the consent of the Local Government Board. FALCON COURT AREA. Having in view the resolution of the London County Council of the 29th November, 1898, viz.:—" That all clearances under the Housing of the Working Classes Act, 1890, which involve re-housing be done at the sole cost of the Council," and the fact that other local authorities had approached the Council to bear the whole cost of carrying out certain schemes in their parishes, the Yestry, on the 2nd May, 1899, passed a resolution urging upon the Council to sustain the whole cost of carrying into effect the Falcon Court Area Scheme, and asking the Housing of the Working Classes Committee of the Council to receive a deputation on the subject. After considering the question, the Council, however, intimated that they were advised that the resolution only applied to future schemes. A letter was received from the Clerk to the Council on the 24th April, 1899, asking the views of the Vestry upon certain alternative proposals with respect to the acquisition of properties in Brent s Court and the rights of way through that court to the Rman Catholic Schools. In dealing with this question, the Vestry took the opportunity of expressing their opinion of the best method of dealing with the 22 vacant land under the Scheme. The Vestry considered that the portion of the Falcon Court Area nearest to Union Street, and including Maypole Alley, Red Cross Place, and the adjoining houses, should, after the carrying out of the Scheme, he sold for commercial purposes, and that the southerly portion of the area consisting of Falcon Court and Bird Cage Alley should be retained and laid out for use as a playground for children. It is sincerely hoped that the Council may be able to see their way to construct this additional playground without expense to the parish. Considerable discussion having taken place with regard to the measures adopted by the Council for the removal and re-housing of the persons from the Falcon Court Area, Mr. Thomas Hunter, the County Councillor for the West Southwark Division attended the Vestry on the 13th March, 1900, and explained the steps that were being taken by the Council for this purpose and stated that every effort was being made to carry out the work in a satisfactory and effective manner. This explanation tended very considerably to allay a certain amount of feeling which had arisen on the question. ANCIENT RECORDS. At the meeting of the Vestry, held on the 16th January, 1900, the question of the preservation of the old books and documents relating to affairs of the parish, which have hitherto been stored in St. George's Church, was considered, when an opinion was expressed that the papers and documents should be gone through and a record made of the same. The Vestry thereupon directed a communication to be forwarded to the Hector and Churchwardens, asking them to permit representatives of the Vestry to go through the documents. Permission was granted for this to be done, and a Sub-Committee appointed to confer with the Rector and Churchwardens on the matter. Arrangements have since been made for the documents to be indexed and tabulated under the direction of the Vestry Clerk. On the 27th February, 1900, a letter was received by the Vestry, from the Trustees of the United Charities, requesting that the various deeds and documents relating to charities included in the Scheme under which the Trustees act, might be handed over to them. 23 Vestry accordingly passed a resolution directing the General Purposes Committee to examine the deeds and records in the ossession of the Yestry and to report thereon as to their future ustody. The Committee are still proceeding with the work. PUBLIC HEALTH AND SEWERS COMMITTEE. PREVENTION OF PHTHISIS. The Report presented by the Medical Officer of Health in the early part of 1899, suggesting regulations for the prevention of Phthisis, was considered by the Yestry on the 4th April, 1899, when the Medical Officer was requested to prepare the suggested regulations in a concise and abridged form so as to be issued as a leaflet to the inhabitants of the parish. After consideration and amendment these regulations have since been printed and 5,000 circulated throughout the parish. WEBBER ROW AND KING'S BENCH WALK, UNHEALTHY AREAS. It will be remembered that in November, 1898, the Medical Officer of Health presented a Report to the Yestry recommending that three unhealthy areas known as Webber Row, Grotto Place and King's Bench Walk Areas should be brought before the London County Council with a view to their dealing with the same under the Housing of the Working Classes Act, 1890. In order that the Council might be properly informed with regard to the state of affairs in these districts, a request was made by them for certain statistics to be supplied as to the death rate of the same. A Return was accordingly prepared under the direction of the Committee, and alter careful revision forwarded to the Council. From intimations received by members of the Vestry, it appeared that the Council were prepared to consider the suggestion that some portion of the areas should be acquired, and the Medical Officer of Health was requested by the Public Health and Sewers Committee to forward formal representations under Part I. of the Act, to the London County Council with respect to the three unhealthy areas. 24 The Council eventually determined to acquire the webber Row and King's Bench Walk areas, leaving the Grotto Place area for further consideration. An improvement scheme was accordingly prepared by the Council, and laid before the Home Secretary and Mr. H. T. Steward, on behalf of the Home office, held a Public Inquiry at the Vestry Hall, on the 12th and 13th March, 1900, in reference to the Scheme, whicn is entitled " London (Webber how and Wellington Place and King's Bench Walk) Improvement Scheme, 1899.'' Counsel appeared on behalf of the Loudon County Council, and o??? several of the owners and lessees of premises within the areas. The decision of Mr. Steward has not yet been made known. BACTERIOLOGICAL EXAMINATION OF MILK. At the meeting of the Vestry, held on the 18th April, 1899, the question of the danger to the public arising from the consumption ol milk from tuberculous cows, and the consequent spread of phthisis was considered by the Vestry, when a resolution was adopted to the effect that the question of taking samples of milk for the purpose o bacteriological examination, in order to ascertain the presence of the j bacillus of tuberculosis, was referred to the Public Health Committee i The Committee have, up to the present, not seen their way t( j take any further action in this matter. FEEDING AND MANAGEMENT OF CHILDREN. The high infantile mortality in this parish has drawn the atten tion of the Sanitary Authority to the necessity for parents and others having the custody and management of children, receiving informa tion as to the best methods of feeding and caring for infants. The Committee accordingly requested the Medical Officer of Health to prepare a report embodying suggestions to parents as to these matters and after giving careful consideration to the same, the Vestry directet 5,000 copies to be printed and distributed throughout the parish. It is hoped that the instructions given in the Report may be o use to parents and others in diminishing the death-rate amongs children. MEASLES. A letter was received in February, 1900, from the Vestry of St Mary, Battersea, asking the Vestry to consider as to the advisability. 25 of approaching the Local Government Board with a view to measles being included in the list of notifiable diseases. The Vestry, however, n view of a report prepared and presented to them by the Public Health Committee in 1896, directed a reply to be sent stating that they were not in favour of measles being included in the notifiable diseases. FREQUENT FLOODING OF BASEMENTS. Notwithstanding the various representations which had from time to time been made to the London County Council, urging upon them to take action to prevent the flooding of basements by the overflow of sewage in heavy rain storms, no action appears to have been taken by the Council prior to October, 1899. In that month a list was prepared by the Surveyor of the houses in the Parish which were liable to be flooded during heavy rains, and the Vestry determined to forward the list to the Council, together with a communication urging that no delay should take place to remedy the evil complained of. An extensive scheme for the main drainage of the Metropolis on the south side of the river was considered by the Council in November, but it appeared that a number of years must elapse before any mitigation could be afforded to the evils caused by the flooding of basements in this district. At the suggestion of the Vestry of Battersea, a deputation was accordingly appointed to wait upon the Main Drainage Committee of the Council urging them, if possible, to expedite the matter. The deputation was received by the Committee on the 30th November, but although the Committee undertook to deal as promptly as possible with the question, it appeared that seven or eight years must elapse before any adequate relief could be afforded to this district. HOUSES LET IN LODGINGS. The sanitary condition of several of the blocks of workmen s dwellings in the parish having been from time to time brought before the Committee, they formed the opinion that in order to maintain a high standard of efficiency and cleanliness in these buildings it was necessary that they should be placed under the supervision of the sanitary inspectors. With this view, on the recommendation of the Medical Officer of Health, three blocks of 26 such dwellings wore, on the 19th December, 1890, directed by the Vestry to be registered under the By-laws with respect to houses let in lodgings or occupied by members ot more than one family. In connection with one of the blocks (Block No. 1 Artisans' Dwellings, Gun Street), the owner, Mr. R. W. Cantlay, objected to supply the requisite information for registration on the ground that a building of this character does not come within the definition of "lodging house " contained in the By-laws. An endeavour was made to arrange the matter amicably with Mr. Cantlay's Solicitors, but on the 13th March, 1900, the Vestry passed a resolution stating that they saw no reason to alter their decision to register the premises under the By-laws. The matter will probably have to come before the Courts. SEWERAGE SCHEME. In December, 1899, the Committee had before them a scheme prepared by the Surveyor for the reconstruction of the sewers in what is known as the remainder of the Friar Street area and in St. George's Road, and the streets leading therefrom. After considering the matter the Vestry determined to instruct the Surveyor to prepare the necessary plans, drawings, specifications and estimates [for the carrying out of the works. These are now being proceeded with. MANHOLES TO SEWERS. It was reported to the Committee that several sewers in the district of Blackfriars Road and Waterloo Road were practicalh inaccessible owing to the want of manholes, and that whenever the sewers required to be cleansed, it was necessary to make an excavation. The Vestry accordingly decided that when next the sewers were broken into, steps should be taken to provide proper manholes and a sum of £142 was voted for that purpose. BOUNDARY SEWER, BACK OF BROOK STREET. It was found necessary during the year, owing to certain com??? plaints from Lambeth, that 340 feet of the old 15-inch sewer, between Brook street and Bethlem Hospital, should be broken up. The Governors of the Hospital were approached by the Committee, and they offered no objection to the portion of the old sewer being 27 roken up, provided the Vestry would undertake to lay a six-inch drain ???or about 60 feet, to their store-room, and make all necessary connecions, &c. The total cost of the work was estimated at £30, and the Hospital authorities agreed to contribute £15 towards that sum. Having in view the manner in which they were met by the ???nthorities, the proposal was agreed to,"and the necessary work is being carried out. DWELLINGS FOR WORKING CLASSES OUTSIDE LONDON. On the 2nd January, 1900, the Yestry considered a resolution rom the Yestry of St. Mary, Newington, expressing the opinion that the Metropolitan Yestries and District Boards should petition Parliament for power for the acquisition of land outside the Metropolitan area for the erection of dwellings for the working classes, with easy access to their work through increased railway facilities, but seeing that the Yestries and District Boards of the Metropolis would be dissolved in the course of a few months, the Yestry were of opinion that no action should be taken in the matter. RETIREMENT OF CHIEF INSPECTOR, During the year the Committee have unfortunately lost the services of Mr. John Edwards, as Chief Sanitary Inspector. The condition of Mr. Edwards's health was such that in May, 1890, he thought it advisable to ask the Yestry to consider his superannuation in view of his retirement. The Committee found that Mr. Edwards had been employed by the Yestry for 33J years, and was over 66 years of age. The Yestry accordingly determined to add 6f years to the number of years he had actually served, and to give him a pension of £140 a year. A formal resolution to this effect was adopted on the 27th June, 1899. In the meantime the question of filling the vacancy was considered by the Committee, who were unanimously of opinion that the best interests of the parish would be served by appointing Mr. James Weatheritt, Inspector of Ward I., to the vacant post, and he was accordingly appointed thereto, 28 WORKS COMMITTEE. UNION CRESCENT, NEW KENT ROAD. The scheme for the amalgamation of the St. Olave's and St Saviour's Grammar Schools being about to approach completion, and the proposal for the erection of a Grammar School for Girls being pro ceeded with, the Trustees and others having the management of the matter entered into arrangements with Lord Llangattock for the purchase of the property forming Union Crescent, New Kent Roar and with the Trustees of Sayer and Shaw's Charity, for the purchase of several houses in Buckenham Square, with a view to placing th new school on that site. In connection with this proposal, a com munication was received from the Clerk to the Trustees of St Saviour's Grammar School, asking whether, in the event of the purchase of the property from Lord Llangattock being completed the Vestry would raise any question as to the ownership of the road way in front of the Crescent. Having regard to the resolution passed by the Vestry in 1896 favouring the retention of the new school in Southwark, it was detor mined to offer no objection to the roadway being included in the proposed scheme. HOSING OF STREETS AND COURTS. The question of the systematic hosing of the various streets and courts in the parish, where filth is likely to accumulate, was on severa??? occasions under the consideration of the Vestry, on suggestions con??? tained in the reports of the Medical Officer of Health. The large expense likely to be incurred in this work had hitherto deterred the Vestry from taking action, but on the 19th December, 1899, the Work: Committee recommended, as an experiment only, that six hydrant and meters should be obtained and fixed in Borough High Street, fron Union Street to St. George's Church, for the hosing of that portion o??? the street and the courts leading off the same, and that the price o??? the Southwark and Vauxhall Water Company for the necessary hy??? drants and meters should be accepted. This recommendation was adopted by the Vestry, and the result so far, has proved the wisdom of the policy adopted. 29 BUILDING LINE IN ST. GEORGE'S ROAD. In the early part of 1899, a proposal was made by the Trustees f the Hayles Estate, for the extension of the " Prince of Wales " Public-house over the forecourt in St. George's Road. The Vestry, however, intimated to the London County Council their disapproval of the proposal, and the Council, after inquiring into the matter, letermined to oppose the erection of the extension of the publichouse. The owners of the property, however, contended that they had a right to build in accordance with a plan approved by the Metro???olitan Board of Works about 20 years ago; and the Vestry were a little surprised to hear, in October, 1899, that the Building Acts Committee of the Council had consented to the plan. The Council, however, on that occasion referred it back to the Committee for further consideration. A deputation was then appointed to wait upon the Committee of the Council, when it was pointed out by the Committee that they had obtained Counsel's opinion to the effect that the Council had no power to prevent the owners of the property bringing the line of building out to the front of the forecourt in St. George's road. The Vestry Clerk was instructed to obtain from the Council a copy of the opinion and the plans upon which it was founded, and after giving careful consideration to the matter, the Vestry took the opinion of Mr. Macmorren, Q.C., upon the question. In the meantime it was ascertained that the Trustees of the Hayles Estate had pulled down the houses between Hayles Street and the " Gibraltar " Public-house, and proposed to erect buildings on the site. The Vestry accordingly directed notice to be served on the Superintending Architect of the London County Council, requiring him, under Section 22 of the London Building Acb, 1894, to detine by certificate the general line of buildings on the south side of St. George's Road, between Elliott's Row and Ely Place. The Superintending Architect considered the matter on the 12th December, when the Vestry and the owners were represented. As, however, the building site in question (the " Prince of wales Public house) was in the block of buildings between Hayles Street and west Square, the Superintending Architect held that he had no power to lay down the building line in any part of St. Georges Load other than 30 between these two streets, and that, as the buildings to tho east o??? Hayles Street, as far as the " Gibraltar" Public-house, had been ??? demolished, and new buildings had been commenced to an entirely??? new frontage line, he could not lay down the line between Elliott's Kow and Hayles Street. The Committee, in their report to the Vestry expressed their surprise at the apparently narrow interpretation thus given by the Council and their principal official of their duty in regarc ??? to the maintenance of the uniformity of the line of frontage of a road which is, and is likely to continue, an important thoroughfare between Westminster Bridge and South London generally. The Superintending Architect was, at the same time, required by notice to deline by certilicate the general line of buildings on the south side of St. George's Road, between Elliott's Kow and Hayles Street. To this notice the Superintending Architect replied that as there was only one building between Hayles Street and Elliott's Row other than those in respect of which the Vestry required the building line to be defined, such building could not be deemed to constitute a general line of buildings, and he asked the Vestry to amend their application by extending the points westward, between which they wished the general line of buildings to be defined. This communication was so utterly inconsistent with the Superintending Architect's previous decision as to the building line between Hayles Street and West Square, that the Vestry declined to pursue the matter further. It was not until the meeting of the Vestry, held on tho 27th February, 1900, that a communication was submitted from the Superintending Architect, enclosing copy resolution passed by the Council in November, 1899, consenting to the erection of an addition to the " Prince of Wales Public-house, St. George's Road, at less than the prescribed distance from Hayles Street. The plan, however, showed the extension to cover the forecourt. TheVestry and the Committee cannot but express surprise at the interpretation given and the view taken by the Council and its officials of their powers under the London Building Act, 1894, to fix a building line for a public highway. It would appear from these opinions, as well as those of counsel, that the Council have no power 31 whatever, where it is proposed to construct buildings over forecourts, ??? o prescribe a uniform line to which buildings shall be erected. The ??? esult is, in St. George's Eoad and in other streets and roads of the parish, that almost every block of buildings is erected to a different ???ine. Some statutory authority is clearly necessary to obviate this difficulty, which is likely, in the future, to produce a most serious state of affairs from an architectural point of view, as well as from that of public convenience and morality. RE-PAVING STREETS. During the year the Vestry have, on the recommendation of the I Committee, authorised re-paving works to be executed in the following places :— Blackfriars Road footpath Alfreton Street roadway Crosslet Street footpath Deverell Street footpath Weston Street roadway Union Street footpath Potier Street roadway Belvedere Buildings Lombard Street roadway Further particulars of these works will be found in the lieport of the Surveyor. The above streets were paved out of current expenditure, with the exception of Weston Street, which was included in the loan referred to in the next paragraph. LOAN FOR STREET PAVING WORKS. On the 27th June, 1899, the Yestry directed application to be made to the London County Council for a loan of <£12,780 to defray the cost of paving the following streets, viz. :— Australian Hard Wood. Blackfriars Road, from boundary to Circus 2929 6 6 Waterloo Road, from boundary to where already paved. 1368 6 6 St. George's Circus, excluding where already paved 814 0 0 Weston Street, from Old Kent Road to Potier Street 492 2 0 Granite Setts. King James Street 627 0 0 Earl Street (both portions) 592 18 0 Lant Street 799 11 9 Asphalte. Pocock Street 1070 9 0 Green Street 788 6 0 Upper Green Street 198 17 0 Collinson Street 910 10 0 King's Bench Walk 560 1 0 Little Hunter Street 203 3 0 32 Footways. Newington Causeway, Borough Road to Southwark Bridge Road 958 0 0 West Square to Elliott's Row 471 4 0 £12783 14 9 The Council, after considering the matter, reduced the amount of the loan to 12,440, and fixed the period for repayment at 10 years and the interest at £3 15s. per cent. The loan was taken up on the 1st November, 1899. In August, 1899, as it had been intimated to the Surveyor that the loan of the London County Council would be granted, the Committee obtained tenders for the necessary wood blocks for the paving of Blackfriars Road, Waterloo Road, and St. George's Circus. When the loan was obtained from the Council, the tender of the Jarrahdale Jarrah Forests and Railway Company, Limited, for the supply of 450,000 wood blocks at the rate of £8 10s. 6d. per 1,000 was accepted by the Vestry. The Committee subsequently advertised for a tender for the old granite setts to be taken up in the roads intended to be paved with wood blocks, and the tender of Mr. W. H. Wheeler was accepted for the purchase of the setts. In view of the large area which it was proposed to asphalte, the Val de Travers Asphalte Paving Company, Limited, made an offer to the Committee to reduce their price of 7s. 9d. per superficial yard for roadway paving to 7s. 6d. per superficial yard, on the condition that the Vestry granted them an order for work over a considerable area. The Vestry, on the recommendation of the Committee, agreed to accept this tender. The works for which this loan was obtained are being proceeded with. ROPES ACROSS FOOTWAYS. In June and July, 1899, the Vestry received letters from the Vestry of St. James and St. John, Clerkenwell, and from the London County Council, with regard to the practice of publicans lowering barrels into cellars by means of ropes across footways, and the inconvenience caused to the public thereby. The Vestry of Clerkenwell had communicated with the County Council urging upon them to 33 bake steps to make it compulsory in all cases of public-houses which are pulled down and rebuilt, that provision should be made for lowering barrels into cellars by means of hydraulic or other power, and with this suggestion the Vestry concurred. WAGES AND SICK PAY. The question of the rate of wages paid to footway masons, carriageway paviors, and stonedressers was considered by the Yestry on the 30th June, 1899, when the Surveyor reported that, owing to the fact of the Yestry not paying the standard rate of wages, he had at times some difficulty in engaging practical men to carry out the necessary works. The Yestry thereupon determined that in future all skilled labourers employed by them should be paid the trade union rate of wages, and observe the recognised hours and conditions of the trade union. The Works Committee have for a long time had under consideration the arrangements for granting sick pay to the workmen in the permanent employ of the Yestry. After considering the various methods adopted for dealing with this subject in most of the parishes throughout the Metropolis, it was determined that a medical man should be appointed to attend all the workmen on the Yestry's permanent staff, and that no sick pay should be given unless his certificate was produced. It was decided to pay him in accordance with the usages of Friendly Societies. Dr. F. W. Smith, of 40, Newington Causeway, was accordingly appointed as Medical Attendant at Is. per quarter per man, provided the man lives within a radius of two miles of the Vestry Hall. NAME PLATES. A large number of the streets in the parish having been found to be without adequate name plates, the Yestry determined, on the recommendation of the Committee, to accept the price of Messrs. Willing & Co., for the supply of 285 name plates for the streets and roads in the parish. The plates have since been put up and have proved of considerable aid to pedestrians and others in ascertaining the names of the streets. PIPES AND WIRES UNDER STREETS. During the year the laying of a number of pipes and wires under the public streets has been sanctioned by the Committee, including 34 the laying by the Postmaster-General of cast iron pipes along Blackfriars and London roads, for telegraphic and telephonic communication purposes. For Electric Lighting purposes the following pipes and wires have been agreed to :— London Electric Supply Corporation.—From Trinity Street across Borough High Street to Great Suffolk Street; Bermondsey New Road ; Paragon Mews; Searles Road; Montague Street; Friar Street, mains and surface boxes. County of London and Brush Provincial Electric Lighting Company, Ltd.—Transformer Boxes in various streets and roads and Electrical Conduits on both sides of Webber Street, Marshal sea Road, Harrow Street, Friar Street, Lancaster Street, Surrey Square, Page's Walk, Skipton Street, and Scovell Road. SEARLES ROAD. In connection with the laying out of Lord Llangattock's estate, consequent upon the erection of the Board School at the Paragon, the Vestry, on the 21st November, 1890, directed Searles Road to be paved as a new street. Lord Llangattock shortly after this date offered to provide the requisite trees and tree guards for placing in the street in the event of the Vestry undertaking to maintain the same. The Vestry agreed to accept this offer, and tendered to his lordship their thanks for his gift. It may be added that the planting of the trees will very considerably improve the appearance of the Paragon Garden at the southerly side. SHORINGS. The attention of the Committee was called to the number of shorings placed on the streets and roads throughout the parish, and forming obstructions to the passage of the public. As several of the shorings had been erected under the direction of the London County Council, the Vestry directed a communication to be forwarded to that body, asking them to deal with the matter. The Council replied that in many of the cases the shorings had not been erected by their direction, and they expressed the opinion that the Vestry alone could take action against the persons offending. It was ascertained that several of the shorings had existed for some years, and the Surveyor was instructed to serve notice upon the owners calling upon them to remove them forthwith. In one or two instances the notices were 35 complied with, but eventually police proceedings had to be resorted to. In a test case, the magistrate held that the premises ought to be put into a state of repair and the shorings removed. It is to be hoped that the result of this case will have a beneficial effect in causing all the shorings to be removed. GENERAL PURPOSES, TREES, AND OPEN SPACES COMMITTEE. THE PARAGON GARDEN. The Committee having received a Report at the end of April, 1899, to the effect that the laying out of the Paragon Ground would be completed about the beginning of June of that year, recommended the Yestry to invite Lady Llangattock to perform the opening ceremony at a date convenient to herself, in June. Her ladyship kindly acceded to the Vestry's request, and fixed Wednesday, the 28th June, at three o'clock in the afternoon, as the time for the ceremony, The day proved to be beautifully fine, and a large company gathered together, including, in addition to the principal members of the Yestry, the Rt. Hon. the Earl of Meath, Lord Llangattock, several members of the London County Council, and the Chairman of the Newington Vestry. Lady Llangattock declared the Paragon and Portland Place Gardens open to the public. In July, 1899, Lord Llangattock kindly presented twelve additional seats for the Paragon Garden, and the thanks of the Yestry were accorded to his lordship for his generous gift. In the same month an offer was received from the " Perseverance " brass band for permission to play in the Garden one evening per week during August. The offer was accepted, and the performances were much appreciated by the large gathering who attended them. Communications were subsequently made to the London County Council, requesting them to arrange for weekly band performances to be given in the Garden in the year 1900, of a similar character to those in the Parks and Open Spaces of the Council. The Council consented to arrange for their bands to give performances on condition that the Vestry would make suitable arrangements for the accommodation of the bands. Steps were immediately taken for obtaining tenders for the erection of a suitable bandstand, and 36 eventually the price of Messrs. Allen, sen., & Son, for the erection of a bandstand, in accordance with their design submitted, for the sum of £140 was accepted. The work of preparing the foundation of the bandstand is being carried out by the workmen in the employ of the Vestry, at an estimated cost of .£40, and the erection of the stand will immediately be proceeded with. During the year the ornamental Drinking Fountain which stood on the footway of Newington Causeway, and was presented to the parish many years ago by the late Mr. J. Dunn, was removed to the Paragon Garden. The lease of the Portland Place Open Space from the Governors of St. Bartholomew's Hospital was completed in February, 1900. WEST SQUARE. A suggestion was made that it would be desirable to secure the centre of West Square as an open space for the use of the public, and with this view communications have been entered into with the Metropolitan Public Gardens Association, and through them with Colonel Temple West, the owner of the square, but up to the present no definite result has been attained. It is sincerely hoped that the owner may see his way to make an arrangement with the Vestry by which the centre of the Square will be secured to the public as an Open Space. AMALGAMATION OF THE SOUTH EASTERN AND CHATHAM AND DOVER RAILWAYS. In connection with the petition presented by the Vestry against this measure in February, 1899, a letter was received from the Solicitor to the Company stating that, on the amalgamation of the two Companies, the railway facilities would be equal to existing facilities, that both routes referred to would be kept open and that the rates would not be increased, and a clause would be inserted in the Bill to this effect. It was also pointed out that the rates and charges in many cases would be immediately reduced owing to the fact that they would be collected by one Company instead of two. The Vestry subsequently appointed a deputation to wait upon the Manager of the Company. The principal points dealt with were as to workmen's trains, and the facilities for goods traffic at the Bricklayers Arms Station and the station in Blackfriars road. With 37 regard to the former point, the Manager explained to the deputation that the Company had entered into an undertaking to provide double the number of workmen's trains that had hitherto run, and that the distance had been extended to Bromley, on the London, Chatham, and Dover Railway. As to the other questions, he would bring the matter before the Company, and every effort would be made to give equal facilities at each goods station, but there was a great difficulty in dealing with the increasing traffic at the Blackfriars Road Station. The Vestry deemed it advisable to leave the opposition to the Bill to be carried on by the London County Council. school board extensions (king james street and minor place). Parliamentary Notice was served on the Vestry in November, 1899, by the School Board for London of their intention to petition the Board of Education for an Order, to be subsequently confirmed by Parliament, for the purpose of empowering them to take certain property in King James Street and Minor Place for improving the accommodation at the Belvedere Board School. It was ascertained that the suggested action of the Board would necessitate the closing of certain tenements in King James Street without provision being made for the re-housing of the 230 persons displaced. The Vestry accordingly made representation to the School Board, the Education Department, and the London County Council, asking that provision should be made for the re-housing of the persons. It appeared, however, that the intention of the Board was only to take 17 houses, while the Standing Order of Parliament requiring re-housing schemes to be provided, only applies where more than 20 houses are taken. A circular letter was also addressed to the Vestries and District Boards in the metropolis, calling attention to the practice of the School Board to take a few less than 20 houses for each of their schemes. A considerable number of replies were received from the Vestries, from which it appeared that there was a general concensus of opinion that the Standing Order of Parliament should be altered so as to reduce the number of houses "to such a number as the Local Authority may deem necessary." 38 The School Board subsequently informed the Vestry that, if the property referred to was taken, accommodation would be provided for the number of people displaced, who might legitimately be housed in the 17 houses required by the Board. At the meeting of the School Board at which this resolution was adopted, statements were made by one of the members to the effect that the Vestry had allowed the houses in King James street to be shamefully over-crowded. It was found on inquiry that this was not the case, and the Vestry instructed a communication to be sent to the Board protesting against the statements in question as being entirely without foundation, and contrary to the facts of the case. The Education Department stated that the request of the Vestry for re-housing persons displaced would be noted when the petition of the School Board was received. In March, 1900, the Department, however, issued an Order consenting to the School Board's petition, but containing no provision such as had been asked for. The Order will require confirmation by Parliament, and it is suggested that the Vestry should oppose the Bill in the ordinary course. baker street and WATERLOO railway bill. In December, 1899, the Vestry received a Parliamentary notice of the intention of the Baker Street and Waterloo Kailway Company to apply to Parliament for power to continue their Kailway under Westminster Bridge lioad and along St. George's lioad to the corner of Lambeth lioad adjoining the School for the Indigent Blind, where it was proposed to erect a generating station; and also to continue their line along Westminster Bridge lioad from the top of St. George's lioad to London lioad, and along the latter road to the Elephant and Castle, a station being erected at the corner of Skipton Street and a subway constructed from there to the Elephant and Castle Station of the City and South London Railway. In February, 1900, the provisions of the Bill came before the Vestry when they determined to present a petition against the measure, with a view to obtaining a clause for the prevention of openings being made in the roads, making provision with regard to possible subsidence of buildings, the depth of the railway and other matters usual in Bills of this kind. 39 The Company at once suggested a meeting between their Engineers and the Vestry with a view to the joint consideration of the clause, and a Sub-Committee was appointed to have such interview with the Company. In the course of the interview a suggestion was made that in lieu of the Company constructing a station at the corner of Skipton Street and London Road, they should construct an underground station at the end of St. George's Road and Newingtou Butts, and construct subways to various points at the Elephant and Castle so as to enable pedestrians to cross the roads without danger. The matter is still under consideration. london county council tramways bills. In order to have power to reconstruct the tramways in various parts of London, and to adapt them for electrical traction, the London County Council introduced into Parliament two Tramway Bills—Bill No. 1 dealing with reconstruction, and Bill No. 2 dealing with electrical traction. These Bills were considered by the various Vestries and District Boards at a Conference held at the Clerkenwell Town Hall, on the 30th January, 1900. As a result of the Conference, a deputation was appointed to wait on the Highways Committee of the Council, and lay before them certain provisions which were agreed to by the Conference. The Highways Committee of the Council, however, refused to accept many of the provisions which the local authorities thought were absolutely necessary to the equitable working of the tramways system on the roads maintained by the authorities, and in order to protect the interest of this Yestry, petitions were directed to be presented against both Bills. The principal point required in this district was a provision to the effect that whenever a road along which lines of tramways were laid was re-paved by the local authority, the Council, as the tramway authority, should, at the same time, re-lay the outer margins of the tramways at the cost of the Council, with the same material as that used by the \estry. Having in view the attitude taken up by the Council on this question, in response to communications addressed to them by the Vestry, the matter will, without doubt, have to be decided by a Parliamentary Committee. 40 london hydraulic power company's bill. The Acts of Parliament under which the London Hydraulic Power Company was constituted and carries out its work empower the Company to lay mains on the south side of the Thames within GOO yards of the centre of the river, but not to lay mains in other districts of the Metropolis on that side of the river without the consent of the local authorities. The Company have on several occasions applied to the Vestry for power to lay such mains, and the Vestry have expressed their willingness to consent, subject to the Company paying a substantial way-leave. This the company has hitherto refused to do. The Bill, however, proposed to enable the Company to appeal to the Board of Trade against any refusal to grant them permission to lay mains in any parish or district in the Metropolis, or any consent granted upon terms, conditions and stipulations to which the Company might object. The Vestry strongly protested against the Bill as an attempt to interfere with the rights of local authorities, and at once issued a circular to the surrounding authorities with a view, if possible, of securing united opposition to the proposal. The Vestry also petitioned against the Bill. The Bill came on for hearing before a Committee of the House of Lords on the 19th March, 1900, when, after hearing the arguments addressed to them by Counsel on behalf of the London County Council and of the Vestry of Shoreditch and this Vestry, the Committee determined that the preamble of the Bill had not been proved. The; Bill was, therefore, thrown out. The Vestry deem this a very satisfactory termination to their opposition. county of london and brush provincial electric lighting company' bill. Notwithstanding the fact that a proposal of a similar character promoted by the Company was thrown out in the previous Session of Parliament, the Company again promoted this Bill in the Session 1900. The Bill had for its object the unification of all the accounts and undertakings of the Company in the various parishes in South London, the supply of the parishes by one large generating station and the granting of power to the Company to convey their mains through. 41 parishes where the Company do not possess an Order enabling them to supply electric energy. The Vestry at once determined to petition against the measure, and it is satisfactory to know that it was thrown but by the House of Commons on its Second Reading. south metropolitan gas company's bill. The object of this Bill was to empower the Company to make 3ertain alterations in the standard scale of charges for gas supply upon a sliding scale, the price being decreased in proportion to the reduction of the candle power supplied. The Bill also proposed to empower the Company to purchase so much of the undertaking of the Gas Light and Coke Company as lies to the south of the river Thames. The Vestry determined to petition against the Bill and appointed delegates to attend a Conference at Camberwell on the 26th February, 1900, to discuss its provisions. After hearing the expressions of opinion given at the Conference, the Vestry determined to be represented before the Committee on the Bill by independent counsel. It is understood that the chief object of the Company in promoting the measure is to enable them to supply gas of a low illuminating power, and at a cheap rate, leaving the consumer to go to the expense of providing such special burners as he may desire, to convert the gas into a strong illuminant. The Vestry, however, contend that, owing to large numbers of the people in this locality being of the poorer classes, the effect of the Bill will simply be to reduce the quantity of light given without bestowing any corresponding advantage upon the population generally. It is hoped that some provision may be inserted in the Bill to obviate this state of affairs. On the recommendation of the Committee, the Vestry expressed the following opinions on the undermentioned matters: ground values. In response to a circular letter from the Land Law Reform Association, the Vestry adopted a petition in favour of the rating of ground values. secondary education. After giving their careful attention to letters from the Technical Education Board of the London County Council and the 42 Vestry of St. Mary, Newington, the Vestry determined to take no action in regard to this subject. labour bureau. On the 4th April, 1899, the Vestry received a report from the delegates who attended a Conference at Islington Vestry Hall on the above subject, and the question of establishing a bureau in this parish was referred to the General Purposes Committee to consider and report. The Committee obtained certain statistics and made inquiries of the bureaux in Islington, St. Pancras and other districts, and again appointed delegates to attend a Conference at Hackney Town Hall, on the 12th March, 1900, but no definite decision has as yet been arrived at with regard to the establishment of a bureau in this parish. burial fees. At the suggestion of the Vestry of Lambeth a resolution was adopted on the 10th October, 1899, concurring in the action taken by that Vestry in petitioning Parliament to abolish all ecclesiastical fees other than those for services rendered. FINANCE COMMITTEE. The Accounts of the Vestry for the year ended the 25th March 1900, will be found at a later page of this Report. treasurer. In October, 1899, Mr. Frankland Fishwick, who, as manager of the London County Bank at Newington Butts had for many yean acted as Treasurer to the Vestry, resigned his position. The Committee then considered the appointment of a successor, and after making arrangements with the Bank for the conduct of the Vestry' accounts on an improved basis, Mr. George James Green, the new manager of the Bank, was appointed as Treasurer to the Vestry, or the terms agreed upon. SPECIAL COMMITTEES. ' london government committee. On the re-constitution of the Vestry's Committees, at the end of May, 1899, the London Government Committee was amalgamated with the Electric Lighting and Dust Disposal Committee previously appointed by the Vestry. 43 Immediately the London Government Bill had passed into law, the question of the alteration of the boundaries of the various parishes forming the new Borough arose on a communication from Lambeth suggesting that the boundary line should pass along the centre of King Edward Street, Tower Street, Gray Street, and Marlborough Street, instead of along the backs of the houses. As the Vestry were of opinion that the centres of roads were very undesirable as boundaries, in consequence of the difficulties likely to arise from two authorities having control of different parts of the same street or road, they objected to this proposal. Various other alterations having been suggested as to the boundaries of the new Borough, a Conference was convened by the Vestry of St. Mary, Newington, and held at the Vestry Hall, Walworth road, on Thursday, the 19th October, 1899. After consideration of various suggestions, a Committee was appointed to prepare and bring before a future meeting of the Conference a scheme of alterations of boundaries. Negociations accordingly took place between the Committee and the various Authorities of Lambeth, Camber well, and Bermondsey, with the result that several extensive Schemes involving the transference of considerable areas from one borough to another were proposed. On these Schemes coming before the Conference, a great divergence of opinion was expressed, and it was found impossible to secure unanimity amongst the various parishes. boundary between st. geoRge's paRish and bermondsey. The London Government Act Commissioner held an Inquiry at the Bermondsey Town Hall on the 22nd, 23rd and 24th November, 1899, with regard to the boundaries of the Borough of which Bermondsey forms part. Counsel appeared on behalf of the Vestries of St. George and Bermondsey, and of several other authorities. Various schemes were laid before the Assistant Commissioner by each parish, the principal object of Bermondsey being to take in a portion of the Old Kent Road which the St. George's Vestry resisted most strenuously. The Commissioner, however, intimated that he thought some portion of the property in Old Kent Road ought to be transferred to Bermondsey, and in the end the Order made by the Commissioners constituting the Borough of Bermondsey includes in that borough the 44 property in the Old Kent Road between Aberdour Street and Waleran Buildings, but transfers to St. George's a block of property to the west of Crosby Row, and to the south of Long Lane as far as Staple Street. boundary between newington, lambeth, and camberwell. The Public Inquiry in reference to the boundaries of the new Borough (including those of the parishes of St. George the Martyr, Christchurch, St. Saviour, and Newington) took place at the Vestry Hall, Walworth Road, on the 29th and 30th November, 1899. The Vestry were represented by the Rt. Hon. H. H. Asquith, Q.C., M.P., and Mr. Corrie Grant, and other counsel appeared for the various parishes concerned. The principal points raised at the Inquiry were with regard (a) to the boundary between this parish and Lambeth, and (b) to the alteration of the boundary between the parishes of Lambeth, Camberwell, and Newington. It was understood up to the last moment that the Vestry of Lambeth had agreed with the Vestry of St. George's as to the boundary along Gray Street, Tower Street, King Edward Street, Kennington Road, and Brook Street, but the Assistant-Commissioner was informed at the Inquiry that the Vestry of Lambeth had, by a majority of one, refused to agree to the Scheme relating to a portion of the property in Brook street being transferred. The Commissioners have, however, since decided that this should be included in the new Borough. With regard to the extensive scheme proposed by the three southern parishes, it was suggested that an area known as the Warrior Road area, having a rateable value of £4,354, and a population of 1,330, should be transferred from Lambeth to Newington, and a further area known as the Wyndham Road area, having a rateable value of £27,000, with a population of over 9,500, and an area of 43 acres, should be transferred from Camberwell to Newington. This huge transfer of property would have involved the new Borough in an extensive and costly scheme for the removal of an insanitary area, and the re-housing of the persons displaced, and have very largely increased the size, rateable value, and population of the parish of Newington. It would also have considerably tended to increase the number 45 of poor persons within the area of the new Borough. The scheme was. therefore, strenuously opposed by the St. George's, St. Saviour's, and Christchurch parishes, and by the St. Saviour's Union. In the course of the Inquiry, the Assistant-Commissioner intimated that he was unable to recommend it to the Commissioners. Other schemes were then proposed, but a very much smaller scheme of alteration has been finally adopted. boundaries of the borough of southwark. The boundaries of the new Borough as settled by the Commissioners' scheme are as follows: — From a point in the centre of the river Thames, on the curbstone of the eastern pavement of London Bridge, along that curbstone to a point on the northerly side of Duke Street in the ancient boundary line between the parish of St. Saviour's and St. Olave's, thence along that boundary line to a point on the curbstone of the pavement on the southerly side of the Railway Approach from London Bridge, thence in a south-easterly direction along that curbstone to the point where it joins the Railway Approach from Borough High Street, thence in a south-westerly direction along the curbstone of the Railway Approach last mentioned, across the end of Denman Street to a point opposite the curbstone on the eastern side of Borough High Street, thence southward along that curbstone to St. Thomas' Street, eastward along the centre of St. Thomas' Street to the centre of Great Maze Pond, along the centre of Great Maze Pond and Snow Fields to Crosby Row, thence southward along the centre of Crosby Row, Long Lane and Staple Street, thence along the ancient boundary between the parishes of St. George the Martyr and Bermondsey to Weston Street, southward along the centre of Weston Street, Rephidim Street and Potier Place to Bermondsey New Road, along the centre of Aberdour Street in a southerly and westerly direction to a point opposite the continuation of Aberdour Street in Old Kent Road, thence along the Old Kent Road in a southerly direction to a point opposite the boundary between the South Eastern Railway property and Waleran Buildings, thence along the boundary of the South Eastern Railway property t o a point opposite the north-western boundary of theend house at the northeast side of Marcia Road, thence along Marcia Road to a point in the I 46 centre of Upper Grange Road, and thence in a south-westerly direction to a point in the centre of Old Kent Road, along the centre of Old Kent Road to a point opposite Humphrey Street where the boundaries between Bermondsey and Camberwell meet, thence in a southwesterly direction along the centre of Albany Road to a point in the centre of Bagshot Street, thence in a northerly direction to the ancient boundary between Newington and Camberwell, along that boundary in a south-westerly direction to Albany Street, thence along the centre of Boundary Lane to Camberwell New Road, southward along the centre of the Camberwell New Road to Avenue Road, along the centre of Avenue Road, Cambridge Street and Fanner's Road to Kennington Park, along the eastern and northern boundaries of Kennington Park in a north-westerly direction to Kennington Park Road, proceeding northward along the centre of that road to a point opposite the junction of Lower Kennington Lane and Newington Butts, thence along the curbstone on the westerly side of Newington Butts to the centre of Dante Road, thence in a northerly direction to the centre of Brook Street, along the centre of Brook Street in a westerly direction to the centre of Kennington Road, thence northward to the centre of Lambeth Road, along Lambeth Road in an easterly direction to a point opposite the centre of King Edward Street; thence in a northerly direction along the centres of King Edward Street, Tower Street, Gray Street, Marlborough Street, Broadwall, to Commercial Road; thence in a south-westerly direction along the centre of Commercial Road to a point opposite the end of Duke Street; thence in a northerly direction along the western side of Nelson's Wharf, to the centre of the river Thames, and along the centre of that river to the point in London Bridge first mentioned. name of new borough. At the meeting of the Vestry on the 26th September, 1809, the question of the name of the new Borough was considered, when, on the recommendation of the Committee the name of "Southwark" was adopted. At the Public Inquiry held at the Newington Vestry Hall, considerable discussion took place as to the name. The names suggested were "Newington," "Southwark," and "Walworth." The Commissioners ultimately adopted as the name of the new municipality "The Borough of Southwark." 47 representation on council. At a meeting of the Vestry, on the 16th January, 1900, a communication was directed to be forwarded to the London Government Act Commissioners, requesting them to fix the number of Councillors in the new Borough at 60. The Committee subsequently directed a letter to be transmitted to the Commissioners asking that the representation of this parish on the new Borough Council should consist of 18 Councillors. The Commissioners, however, did not see their way to grant this request, but forwarded to the Vestry a draft of an Order allotting Councillors to the various parishes. From this it appeared that 30 councillors would be allotted to Newington, 15 to St. George's, 9 to St. Saviour's, and 6 to Christchurch. The Vestry, while regretting that the Commissioners had not allotted 18 Councillors to this parish, agreed to accept the Scheme. At the same meeting, a resolution was passed expressing the opinion that a friendly endeavour should be made to make arrangements so that at the first election of Aldermen to the new Borough a member should be elected from each of the 10 wards of the borough. An attempt was subsequently made by St. Saviour's Vestry to obtain an equal number of Aldermen to that allotted to St. George's Parish for Christchurch and St. Saviour's Parish. The Vestry strongly protested against this proposal and the Commissioners did not see fit to agree to it. provisional councils. A suggestion was made by the Board of Works for the Lee district that an Order or Scheme should be prepared to enable Borough Councils to take preliminary action as Provisional Councils for arranging to bring the Act into full operation. The Committee were, however, unable to see their way to support this suggestion, being strongly of opinion that the responsible work of the new ( ouncils should be taken over as soon as possible by the whole body ot each Council. electric lighting companies. Correspondence took place between the Vestry and the Board of Trade, with regard to the application of the County of London and 48 Brush Provincial Electric Lighting Company, Limited, to be allowed to adopt a two-phase alternating current system for the supply of energy under their order. As the Vestry were of opinion that such a current is not so economic or effective, from a user's point of view, as the continuous current system, and as the Company had delayed so long the carrying out of their order in the parish, they passed a resolution asking the Board of Trade to withhold their consent on those grounds. The same Company subsequently made an application for the consent of the Board of Trade for the use of an extra high-pressure supply, and to this the Vestry expressed their disapproval. Notwithstanding, however, the opposition of the representative Authority, the Board of Trade in both cases thought fit to grant the Company orders consenting to their applications. tramways. A letter was received from the London County Council in April, 1899, with regard to certain extensions proposed to be made to the Tramways in this district. After considering the same the Vestry passed the following resolutions:— (1) That the connection between the tramway in New Kent Road and the Bermondsey New Road line be approved. (2) That, in the opinion of the Vestry, the tramway lines laid down in St George's Road should be connected at the North end with the Westminstet Bridge Road line, and at the southerly end with the lines at the Elephant and Castle, and that the trams from Westminster Bridge to Peckham and Camberwell, should be made to run down St. George's Road instead of London Road. (3) That should the Council be of opinion that the extension of the lint from Southwark Bridge Road along Borough Road to Newington Causeway could be capable of being used successfully in connection with their other system of tramways, such connection should be made. (4) That, whilst, in the opinion of the Vestry, it is desirable that tramways? should be extended along Borough High Street between St. George's Church and the boundary of the Parish, the narrowness and crowded state of the traffic in that thoroughfare, render it unsuitable in its present condition for tramway traffic. A similar communication was received in March, 1900, when in 0 addition to the above representations the Vestry expressed the 49 opinion that the unused portion of the tramlines in Lancaster street should be used for relieving the tramway traffic in London road. CHARITIES COMMITTEE. In April, 1899, a communication was received from the Charity Commissioners enclosing an Order for the amalgamation of several of the Charities in this parish, and giving certain directions for the Scheme to be advertised and published. The Scheme directed that the Board of Trustees should consist of 13 persons, being one ex-officio Trustee (the Rector), five Co-optative Trustees, and seven representative Trustees. The representative Trustees were to be appointed by the Vestry and were to consist of— Three ratepayers or residents in No. 1 Ward. Two ,, „ No. 2 Ward. Two ,, ,, No. 3 Ward. The appointment to be made for a term of four years. At a meeting of the Vestry on the 2nd May, 1899, the following were elected as representative Trustees:— No. 1 Ward—Mr. T. Hunter, L.C.C., Miss A. E. Busk, and Mr. T. Haynes, J.P. No. 2 Ward—Mr. A. Hawkins and Mr. J. M. Hale. No. 3 Ward—Mr. R. R. Fulton and Mr. G. K. Sheppard, and at the following meeting of the Vestry, Messrs. Hunter, Hawkins and Fulton were chosen by lot to go out of Office at the end of two years. The Vestry Clerk was subsequently permitted to accept the office as Clerk to the Board of Trustees. Two of the principal Charities, Humphrey Williams' (Kent Street) Charity and Simmonds Charity, were not included in the Scheme, and as the property of the former Charity consisted only of a small estate in Tabard Street and St. Stephen's Square, Southwark, and the latter of a small farm at Tilbury, on the suggestion of the Charity Commissioners and of the Trustees of the former Charity, the question of amalgamating the two chanties was 50 considered by the Vestry on the 24th October and 7th November, 1899. At the latter meeting, a resolution was passed, agreeing to the suggestion of the Charity Commissioners that the property of the two Charities should be managed by one body of Trustees. Unfortunately the Vestry of St. Mary, Newington, declined to agree to this proposal, and the matter subsequently dropped. OFFICERS. vestry clerk's department. Mr. C. H. Patterson, A.S.A.A., the Accountant of the Vestry, was in August, 1899, appointed Accountant of the Newington Vestry. The Vestry, acting in the spirit of a resolution passed by the London Government Act Committee, that a working arrangement should be arrived at between the various parishes, so as to obviate the creation of new appointments, did not think it desirable to fill up the vacancy. The work of keeping the accounts was entrusted to Messrs. Hume and Baldrey of the Accounts Department of the Vestry Clerk's office, and it was arranged that they should receive a bonus for the extra work thus thrown upon them, and Mr. A. H. Port was appointed as Temporary Assistant in the Office. To fill the vacancy caused by the resignation of Mr. Balls, Minute Clerk, Mr. H. W. Underhill of the Town Clerk's office, Bury, wa§ appointed at a commencing salary of .£2 10s. per week. surveyor's department. Mr. R. T, Miller, the Assistant Surveyor, resigned his office on the 10th October, 1899, having obtained an appointment under the Metropolitan Asylums Board, and Mr. C. R. Williams was appointed as Temporary Assistant Surveyor on the 2nd November, pending the coming into operation of the London Government Act, 1899. public health department. Mr. James Weatheritt having been appointed Chief Sanitary Inspector, Mr. Joshua Owner was on the 11th July, 1899, appointed as Sanitary Inspector for Ward No. 1. The Vestry having previously determined to appoint an additional Female Sanitary Inspector, the applications for the post were considered 51 on the 2nd May, 1899, when Miss Emily Harriet Wilkin of Liverpool was appointed. In order to prevent the duties of the two Female Sanitary Inspectors overlapping, the Vestry on the recommendation of the Committee determined to divide the parish into two districts, Miss Elliott to be responsible for Wards Nos. 1 and 2, and Miss Wilkin, for Ward No. 3. Mr. E. 0. Jones was in July, 1899, appointed Sanitary Clerk in place of Mr. E. H. Thomas. % On the 19th December, 1899, the Vestry empowered the Public Health and Sewers Committee to appoint a man as Mortuary Keeper and Assistant Disinfector, and at a meeting of the Committee on the 8th January, 1900, Mr. C. H. Lynch was appointed. J. A. JOHNSON, Vestry Clerk. VESTRY OF The Parish of St, George the Martyr, Southwark, ANNUAL REPORT Of the Surveyor, FOR THE Year Ending March 25th, 1900. ARTHUR HARRISON, A.M.Inst., C.E., Surveyor. SURVEYOR'S ANNUAL REPORT. FOR THE YEAR ENDING MARCH 25TH, 1900. TO THE CHAIRMAN AND MEMBERS OF THE VESTRY. Ladies and Gentlemen, I beg to submit the following Report and Statement of the works executed under the supervision of this Department during the 12 months ending 25th March, 1900. ROADS AND FOOTPATHS. The works carried out under this head during the year have been more extensive than usual, and have taken the direction of substitution by a more permanent class of materials than those previously in use in the streets dealt with, which must result in greater, comfort to those people living in or using the streets, and a reduction in the cost of maintenance and scavenging. The Vestry, in the first instance, decided to convert the carriageways in the following streets from macadam into asphalte:— Gun street, Silex street, Little Lant street, Miniver street, Lombard street, White Cross street, Falstaff yard, Alfreton street, Potier street; and Union street was converted from a granite-paved road to an asphalte road. The above works were at once put in hand, and during the time they were being carried out the Vestry decided to have a further extension of this class of work, so application was made to the London County Council for a loan of £12,784 9s. 3d., estimated lor in the following way:— £ s. d. For Wood Paving 5,518 15 0 „ Granite Setts 1,124 18 0 „ Asphalte 4,450 17 9 „ New Gullies 135 0 0 „ Footways 1,554 18 6 £12,784 9 3 66 On this loan being granted the works were at once put in hand and the following streets have been asphalted: Lant Street, Green Street, Collinson Street; and Little Hunter Street. King James Street and Belvedere Buildings have been paved with granite setts taken from Union Street, excepting opposite the church in King James Street, where wood blocks were used, and the paving of Earl Street with granite is at present being carried out. That portion of of Weston Street between Old Kent Road and Potier Street, abutting on the Board School, has been paved with wood blooks, the old granite being taken away and redressed for use in repairing other streets. The greater part of the Wood Paving Loan, which was for paving in Blackfriars Road, Waterloo Road and St. George's Circus has had to stand over until some arrangement could be arrived at with the Tramway authorities, the Committee being anxious that the 18-inch margin maintainable by the Tramway authority should be re-laid with wood at the same time at the Vestry's work was proceedings. Beyond the above works, the following paved carriageways have been dealt with:— Repairs have been carried out on the hardwood paving in London Road, Old Kent Road, and St. George's Road, and the granite paving has been repaired in Borough High Street, Newington Causeway, New Kent Road, Great Suffolk Street, Valentine Place, Lambeth Road, Marshalsea Road, Potier Place, Southwark Bridge Road, Lancaster Street, St. George's Road, Russell Place, Bermondsey New Road, and Long Lane. A large portion of the macadam carriageways beyond those asphalted, have received considerable repair, although of a temporary character (the old macadam from the streets which have been asphalted being used), it being the intention to gradually replace the macadam carriageways with the more permanent materials. Macadam, although having for years answered the requirement in providing a fair carriageway, is felt to be unsuitable for use in such a district as this has developed into; and the Committee, taking all the points into consideration, have decided to asphalte further streets. These are now being selected with a view of linking up or completing areas, where the carriageways shall all have impervious surfaces. 57 The following is a list of those streets where temporary repairs to the macadam carriageways have been made:— Barron's place Clenham street Dorrit street Warner street Marcia road Smirk's road Mardyke street Oswin street Lamlash street Valentine place Grey street Surrey square Tower street Staple street Camelot street Massinger street St. Stephen's square Dodson street Quilp street Law street Webber row Chatham street Wickham place Amicable road During this year a number of important footways have been dealt with, the following being in asphalte on a bed of cement concrete:—Borough High street on the West side from Marshalsea road to Union street; Union street both sides, Crosslet street on the East side, part of Townsend street on the North side, a portion of Southwark Bridge road, Angel court, St. George's road, Belvedere place, and. repairs made in Blackfriars road and New Kent road, and Newington causeway on the West side from Borough road to Lancaster street has been relaid with new York stone. The following have been repaired in York stone:—Old Kent road, Valentine place, Warwick street, King's Bench walk, Deverall street, King James street, Miniver street, Collinson street, Paragon mews, William street, Borough High street, Silex street, Crosslet street, and Townsend street. Beyond the above, a number of streets have been partially dealt with under "Trenches," which still continue to be heavy. The following is a list of the openings dealt with during the year. GAS, WATER, ELECTRIC LIGHT, AND OTHER TRENCHES OPENED AND REPAIRED. South Metropolitan Gas Company 604 Gas Light and Coke Company 51 Southwark and Vauxhall Water Company 164 Lambeth Water Company 200 London Electric Supply Corporation 98 County of London and Brush Provincial Electric Lighting Company 190 London Hydraulic Power Company 1 Post Office Telegraph 3 Total openings 1,311 58 The Works Committee have also had under consideration the following plans and applications:— List of Applications (other than Drainage) received during year ending 25th March, 1900. Date. Nature of Application. Name of Applicant. Committee's decision. 1899 2nd May Building plan, Webber St., Webber row S. Brereton & Son Approved „ Do. buildings, Old Kent road Improved Industrial Dwellings Co. Approved „ Sign, Redcross street Webb & Co. Granted conditionally 31st May Lamp, 480 Old Kent road Mr. Steadman No objection 13th June Area lights, 222 & 224 High street, Borough Mr. Henry Perry No objection 25th July Building plan, Library mansions Mr. H. B. North Recommended that L.C.C. be requested to disapprove of plan 31st July Do. Prince of Wales, St. George's road — „ „ 12th Sept. Lamp, British Queen, East street Owner to J. Scudamore No objection Copy of original building plan submitted with letter from L.C.C. re Prince of Wales P.H. — — 6th Nov. Socket in pavement, Equestrian P.H. City of London Brewery Permission not granted 21st Nov. Pavement lights, Boys' Home, Westminster Bridge road St. Joseph's Training Home „ „ 5th Dec. Iron bridges across Collier's rents Harding & Son „ „ 1900 2nd Jan. Pavement lights, Gibraltar P.H., St. George's road J. Ham & Son „ „ 30th Jan. Two lamps, Moonrakers P.H. Additional hoard, rear of HaddonHall Mr. Winn L. H. & R. Roberts No objection Granted conditionally 13th Feb. Lamp and sign, 207a Borough High street, in Angel court . Geo. Sadler Granted on condition that it be left alight all night 13th Mar. Sign, Gresham Works, Belvedere buildings Cooke, Whale, & Co. Granted subject to its being raised to 8 ft. 6 in. above pavement 59 SEWERAGE. During the year the most important work under this head was the completion of the Friar Street scheme, and the following were the streets in which the sewers were dealt with since March, 1899:— Miniver street, Gun street (commenced last year), Tupman place, Pocock street, Upper Green street, Wellington place, King's Bench walk, Bean street, Hill street, and Green street. Beyond the above works, the sewers in Nelson's court and Stanford place have been relaid, and, in conjunction with the Lambeth Vestry, portions of the boundary sewers behind the Waterloo road end of Grey street, and between Bethlehem Hospital and Brook street, have been abolished, and in each case a private drain has been constructed in their stead. On the Surveyor's recommendation manholes have been constructed on the following sewers, which have now been placed in such condition that they are now accessible for cleansing purposes without excavation:— Dodson street Valentine place Lant street Grey street Webber row Collinson street Barron's place Webber street Searles Road, a new street, which has been laid out by Mr. E. J. Dickins, the Agent to Lord Llangattock, on the land behind the Paragon Public Gardens, has been made up by the Vestry's employees, at the cost of the frontager, under notices served in accordance with the requirements of the Metropolis Management Acts. The paving with asphalte of a portion of Caffrey Place and the re-metalling of Cook's Buildings, has also been carried out at the cost of the frontagers. Five new sett crossings have been placed across the footways in various parts, at the cost of the owners of the property. 60 61 Schedule of Wood- Paved Roads in the Parish. Name of Street. Position of Paving. Date when Paved. Date when Re-paved. Area. Total Cost. Cost per yard. Description of Paving and by whom laid. sq. yds. £ s. d. Borough High Street From Long Lane to Boundary May, 1885 May 1895 4522½ 452 5 0 — Maintained by Improved Wood Pavement Co., at the rate of 2/- per square yard per annum, for a period of 20 years. The whole to be relayed once in every five years. per annum. Southwark Bridge Road Opposite Fire Station 1892 930⅔ 734 6 3 15/9½ Jarrahdale wood blocks, 3-in. by 9-in. by 6-in. Laid by Vestry. Borough Road Opposite Library site 1893 78⅓ 82⅔ — — Jarrahdale Jarrah. Laid by Vestry. Soft Wood. London Road From Newington Causeway to Saint George's Circus August to Nov., 1893 4122 3116 15 10 15/2 Jarrahdale Jarrah 3-in. by 9-in. by 5⅜-in. Laid by Vestry. Long Lane From Borough High Street to Tabard Street October, 1893 404⅓ 272 19 5 13/6 Jarrahdale Jarrah blocks 3-in. by 9-in. by 5⅜-in. Laid by Vestry. St. George's Circus Western side Jan., 1894 1450 911 10 5 12/6¾ Jarrahdale Jarrah blocks 3-in. by 9-in. by 5⅜-in. Laid by Vestry. St. George's Road Opposite Cathedral June, 1894 1315½ 836 4 0 12/8½ Jarrahdale Jarrah blocks 3-in. by 9-in. by 5⅜-in. Laid by Vestry. St. George's Road Opposite St. Jude's Church Sept., 1894 190⅓ 21 151 9 8 14/4 Jarrahdale Jarrah blocks 3-in. by 6in. by 5⅜ in. Soft wood paving. Old Kent Road From Boundary to Boundary Oct. 1894 to March, 1895 10587 8237 8 4 15/6¾ Jarrahdale Jarrah blocks 3-in. by 9-in. by 5⅜-in. Laid by Vestry. Old Granite Setts were credited at 2 1 per super yd. Borough High Street From Borough Road to Great Suffolk Street Dec., 1895 700 540 11 0 155 / Jarrahdale Jarrah blocks 3-in. by 9-in. by 5⅜-in. Laid by Vestry. Borough Boad Opposite St. George's School April, 1896 673½ — — Jarrahdale Jarrah blocks. Laid by Vestry. Cost of this Paving with granite sett paving laid at same time, £1096 3s. 2d. Southwark Bridge Road From Newington Cause way to Borough Road ... Nov. 1896 2260½ 1424 14 3 12/7¼ Jarrahdale Jarrah blocks 3-in. by 9-in. by 5-in. Laid by Vestry. Lambeth Road Opposite Upton Chapel and Roman Catholic Cathedral ... May 1897 583½ 312 18 4 10/8¾ Jarrahdale Jarrah blocks 3-in. by 9-in. by 5-in. Laid by Vestry. Upper Grange Road Old Kent Road to Boundury ... May 1897 6387/9 374 5 2 11/8½ Jarrah blocks 3-in. by 9-in. by 5-in. Laid by Vestrv. Old materials not credited. Borough Road Opposite Library 1899 Jan. 1899 133 85 14 7 12/10¾ Jarrah blocks 3-in. by 9-in. by 5-in. Laid by Vestrv. Old materials not credited. Weston Street Weston Street (from Old Kent Road to Little Hunter Street) Oct., 1899 ... 700½ 448 10 5 12/95/8 Jarrahdale Jarrah blocks 3-in. by 9-in. by 4½. Laid by Vestry. King James Street Opposite St. Alphege Church Nov., 1899 ... 1017/9 — — — — 62 As a result of a survey of the sewers, a scheme has been prepared by the Surveyor, and submitted to the Committee for the re-sewering of further areas, also for the repair and re-modelling of other sewers. Amongst the streets to be re-sewered are:— Little Surrey street Library street King James street (part) Lancaster street (part) Warwick street Barbel street St. George's road West square West street Ely place Austral street Orient street Hayles street Elliott's row Lamlash street Oswin street Gladstone street Colnbrook street Garden row Burman street Marshall street Gaywood street Princess street And the Sewers to be altered and remodelled, and manholes built are in the following streets:— Ontario street Quilp street St. Stephen's square Skipton street Bittern street William street Bath street Toulmin street Crosslet street Scovell road STREET GULLIES. In this direction a great improvement has been made, 180 having been fixed, many being new gullies provided in place of defective gullies, the remainder being used in some of the streets where sufficient gullies where not already provided. The streets, generally, have been deficient in this respect, and a great improvement has been made where the additional gullies have been fixed. It is also intended to continue this work during the coming year. During the year 23 public sewers have been cleansed, and during the course of that work those sewers found suitable have been repaired and modernised where possible. A number of combined drains, some of them being of greater extent than hitherto, have been relaid in various parts of the district. This question has the appearance of becoming of greater trouble every year. Private drains have been cleared at the cost of the owners of the property in 16 places. New frontage drains have been constructed by your stair at the cost of the frontager in the following places:— 63 Webber street Garden row East street Great Suffolk street [2] Westminster bridge rd. [2] Burman street King James street [2] Bath street Tabard street Bermondsey New road Gerridge st 'eet Temple street Searles road [8] Old Kent road [4] Harrow street Borough road [2] Barbel street Library street Friar street Russell place Borough High st. [3] Paragon mews Miniver street [2] King's Bench walk Webber row Comus place The sewer for Mr. R. J. Dickins, agent to Lord Llangattock, has been completed in Searles Road. During the year the following drainage plans have been reported upon and submitted to the Public Health and Sewers Committee, and dealt with as indicated. DRAINAGE PLANS SUBMITTED TO THE VESTRY. name of applicant. SITUATION OF PREMISES. SIZE OF PIPES. committee's decision. W. Faulkner 3, 4, 5, & 7, Hendre Terrace ... Approved. W. Faulkner 5a & 5d, Marcia Road 6in. „ J. V. Olver 33, 35, & 37, Webber Row 6in. „ Braide, Pater & Co. 57, Lant street 6in. „ J. N. Try St. Jude's Church, St. George's Road 4in. r.w. „ H. D. Evans Stables, Garden Row two 9in. „ Kilby & Gayford Corner of Friar Street and Hill Street 6in. „ Day & Martin Rear of premises in Borough Road 4in. „ T. Sloman Workshops, Aberdour Street 6in. „ J. Smith & Son Pascall's, Valentine Place 4in. „ G. W. Colwell 108, Borough High Street 4in. „ Robins, Gore & Mercer 27 & 28, Miniver Street 6in. „ Canning & Mullins Ward & Sons, Van shed, Burman Street 6in. „ Geo. Mallory 230, 232, 234, & 230, Waterloo Road 6in. „ Hy. Wood "British Queen," East Street 6in. „ C. J. Flaxman Day & Martin's, Rear of, Borough Road ... „ Geo. Dunger Gordon, Wolseley, Stewart, Graham, Dover & Haddon Houses, in Russell Place G. Pott & Son 272, Borough High Street 6in. „ Improved Industrial Dwellings Co. 153, Old Kent Road (site of) 6 & 9in. „ Geo. Ashby 66, London Road Relay „ W. W. Exton Library Mansions, Library Street 6in. „ Courtney & Fairbairn 94 & 95, Great Suffolk Street 6in. „ J. W. Faulkner & Son St. George's Hall, Westminster Bridge Road 4in. „ James Moore 11, Barbel Street 6in. „ W. V. Goad 89, 91, & 93, Old Kent Road 6in. „ W. & H. Castle Corner of Friar Street and Hill Street (Ink Department) 4in. „ W. Romain Boys' Home, Westminster Bridge Road 4 & 6in. „ H. H. Ponsford 68, Lambeth Bridge Road 4in. „ Rice & Co. 18. King's Bench Walk ... „ S. F. Roberts Wake & Dean's Stables, St. Georges Market 4 & 6in. „ R. C. Scut 28, Dodson Street 4 & 6in. „ W. Downs 37 & 38. Miniver Street 4in. „ J. W. Faulkner & Son St. George's Hall, Westminster Bridge Road 4in. „ Thos. Axford Brook's Cottages, Smyrks Road 6in. „ Horace Cheston Part Bethlehem Hospital 6in. „ 64 ASSISTANT SURVEYOR. Mr. R. T. Miller who was appointed to this post in November, 1898, having obtained an appointment under the Metropolitan Asylums Board, sent in his resignation and left the service of this Vestry on the 21st October, and on 2nd November Mr. C. R. Williams was appointed as Temporary Assistant Surveyor, and commenced his duties on the 6th November, 1899. HORSEKEEPER. « Mr. A. Pallant who held this appointment for close on two years resigned his appointment, and on the 20th April Mr. S. Williamsor was appointed to this post. STOREKEEPER. Mr. W. Pike who had held this post for about four years, having obtained a better appointment under the West Ham Corporation resigned his appointment in August, and on the 21st September Mr W. C. Begley was appointed ; he held the post until the following February; he then resigned, and on the 14th March Mr. W. J McCulloch was appointed to the post. HORSES. During the past twelve months your staff of horses has been greatly improved by the sale of some of the old horses and the purchase of six fresh horses. The amount of illness generally ha??? been small, though, during the winter months, which has been a??? exceptionally bad winter for horses, we had several cases of pink-eye which, unfortunately, resulted in the loss of two horses, one o??? which had only been the property of the Vestry about nine months I am pleased to state that at the London Cart Horse Parade o??? Whit-Monday in Regent's Park, the three drivers who parade??? with their horses were each successful in obtaining a first prize Various other particulars of the horses are given in the horse return hereto annexed. 65 HORSE RETURN. No. Name of Horse. Bought of Cost. £ Date of Death or Sale. Amount Sold for. £ s. d. 1 Black Prince Mason, 9th May, 1885 68 Sold E. & C., 26/4/99 6 16 6 2 Merrymaid „ 14th October, „ 68 Slaughtered, 24/11/99 1 12 6 3 Livingstone „ 19th March, 1888 55 4 Archy Lines, September 29th, 1891 70 5 Freedom King, 9th March 1892 65 Sold E. & C., 26/4/99 7 7 0 6 Allfours Russell, 25th July ,, 63 7 Horncastle Lambeth & Glover, 25th July, 1893 68 Sold Mr. Frost, 3/10/99 13 13 0 8 Topthorn „ „ „ 70 Sold E. & C., 26/4/99 9 9 0 9 Hard Times Russell, Aug. 13th, 1894 60 10 Gipsy King, „ „ 58 11 Squire Mason, „ „ 58 12 Farmer Russell, June 4th 1895 60 13 Polly Perkins King July 2nd „ 60 14 Jack Frost ,, Feb. 3rd 1896 68 15 Daisy Gryspeerdt „ „ 70 16 Valentine ,, March 9th „ 70 17 Beauty Russell, May 18th, 1896 73 18 Plough Boy ,, Oct. 5th, 1896 63 19 Jet Mason „ „ 65 20 Big Ben Glover, Nov. 2nd, 1896 70 21 Skylark Smith, Aug. 2nd, 1897 47/5/- 22 Maid of Mill Russell, Sept. 27th, 1897 70 23 Bright ,, ,, ,, 73 24 Sunshine ,, ,, ,, 62 25 Kitchener Glover, November 15th, 1898 65 26 Speculation E. & C. R., December 1st, ,, 51/9/- 27 Doncaster ,, ,, ,, 57/15/- 28 Blossim ,, ,, ,, 48/6/- 29 Duke Russell, May 26th, 1899 63 30 May ,, ,, ,, 68 31 Elegant „ July 20th, ,, 75 Died, 6/3/1900 1 12 6 32 Vesta Gryspeerdt ,, ,, 65 33 Wallace „ December 6th, ,, 70 34 Bruce Russell, ,, ,, 75 Number of Horses, March 25th, 1900 28 66 Statement shewing quantities of Dust and Slop, carted to Mr. Murrell's Wharf, Blackfriars Bridge—March 26th, 1899, to March 25th, 1900. Date. Wharf. DUST. SLOP. Total Tonnage. Rate Cost. Total Tonnage. Rate Cost. Quarter Ending Tns. cwt. qr. £ s. d. Tns. cwt. qr. £ s. d. June, 1899 Murrell's Wharf 3976 2 1 2/4 463 17 5 2582 6 • 3 2/4 301 5 5 September, 1899 „ „ 3706 18 0 2/4 432 9 3 2077 19 1 2/4 242 8 6 December, 1899 „ „ 3535 4 1 2/4 412 8 9 3044 0 0 2/4 355 2 6 March, 1900 „ „ 4629 14 0 2/4 540 2 7 4171 6 0 2/4 486 12 11 Totals 15847 18 2 £1848 18 0 11875 12 0 £1385 9 4 67 Statement shewing cost of Shooting Dust and Slop for the last Ten Years:— NEWINGTON VESTRY. Dust. Slop. Total. Year ending Tons cwt. qr. £ s. d. Tons cwt. qr. £ s. d. Tons cwt. qr. £ s. d. Mar. 25/91 11374 9 0 — 10716 16 0 — 22091 5 0 2750 0 0 Mar. 25/92 12270 18 0 — 11592 7 0 — 23863 5 0 2750 0 0 STRAND DISTRICT BOARD. Mar. 25/93 12636 11 2 1474 5 4 11589 2 2 1352 1 2 24235 14 0 2826 6 6 Mar. 25/94 12484 10 2 1456 10 5 12540 9 3 1463 1 2 25025 0 1 2919 11 7 Mar. 25/95 11615 5 2 1355 2 4 11445 3 0 1335 5 3 23060 8 2 2690 7 7 Mr. MURRELL'S WHARF. Mar. 25/96 12899 8 3 1343 13 10 12756 14 1 1328 14 9 25656 3 0 2672 8 7 Mar. 25/97 12563 2 2 1308 13 1 12041 8 0 1255 6 1 24604 10 2 2563 19 2 Mar. 25/98 12004 15 1 1250 9 10 10956 0 3 1141 5 0 22960 16 0 2391 14 10 Mar. 25/99 12999 19 1 1516 11 5 11762 11 3 1372 6 10 24762 11 0 2888 18 3 Mar. 25/00 15847 18 2 1848 18 0 11875 12 0 1385 9 4 27723 10 2 3234 7 4 SCAVENGING AND DUSTING. In this department greater efficiency has been obtained through the new system adopted at the latter end of the previous year. Each street is now scavening in its proper order, and the sweepings and slop are picked up much quicker and cleared away, although this frequently means that a large quantity of water is hauled to the shoot, but even with this and the heavy snow-storms early in 1900 the total amount of slop hauled to the shoot is only about 100 tons more than the previous year, and this 100 tons is more than accounted for by the snow-storms as every quarter of the year was less than that of 1898, excepting the January to March quarter, that being the period during which the snow storms occurred. This reduction in the quantity of slop during three-quarters of the year is no doubt due to two things: (1st) the asphalting of a number of the Macadam carriageways, and (2nd) the adopting ot more gullies in the streets. During the coming year a further improvement may be looked for in the reduction of slop, over and above that caused by snow. The collection of dust is also working satisfactory, about thirefourths of the Parish having a bi-weekly collection and the remainder a weekly collection. The work here is getting much heavier, more dust having been collected during the last twelve months than in any recorded previous year, and amounting to about 3,000 tons more 68 than the preceding year, which was about 1,000 tons higher than the year ending March, 1898. This may be accounted for in several ways, but before any cause is suggested further observation will be taken. PLANT. Yonr plant has been well maintained, extensive repairs being necessary in many cases, and the following new plant have been constructed:—Two slop vans, one stone cart, three watch boxes, and one large tool box. STREET WASHING AND COURT FLUSHING. Towards the end of the year the Vestry decided to make arrangements for washing the wood paving in Borough High Street, from the northern boundary to Marshalsea road, also the courts abutting upon this street. The details of this work are now well in hand, and it is hoped to make an early start with this work. CONVENIENCES. Ladies' Convenience behind the Free Library. The work of constructing this convenience was carried out by Messrs. Smith and Son; it was completed and opened to the public in June. The contract amount for this work was £363, and the actual cost £360 13s.4d. At the Convenience in Old Kent Road a screw-down valve has been provided to cut off the sewer in time of heavy rain, as the Council's sewer there is quickly filled and Hooding has in several cases resulted. The whole of the conveniences have been fitted with grills over the top, this was found necessary to prevent the places being broken into during the time the attendants were off duty. The Mortuary has during the year had a fair amount of repairs and improvements carried out, the old paving has been taken out and the floor has been now paved with a granolithic pavement, provision has also been made for supplying hot water, and the place has been cleaned and re-painted. PUBLIC GARDENS. The work of laying out the Paragon and Portland Place Gardens was completed and they were opened in June, 1899. The work of planting and laying-out generally were carried out by the Metropolitan Public Gardens Association, and the Vestry provided Railings, Gates, 69 Hydrants, Tool House, Tar, Pavements, &c. The Gardens were opened by Lady Llangattock, and since that time have been greatly appreciated by the public. Since the opening of the ground the Vestry have removed the disused fountain which stood on the footway in Newington Causeway, and erected it and re-fitted it in the Paragon. The Vestry having arranged to erect a band stand in the Paragon tenders were invited, and that of Messrs. Allen, Sen, & Son, Glasgow, were accepted. The work of erection is now in hand; it is estimated to cost with foundation, painting, &c., £200. The trees now planted in the streets of the Parish number 471, this being an addition of 50 on the number twelve months ago, and are accounted for by those in Searle's Road towards which Lord Llangattock made a contribution. During the year 38 trees either died or were knocked down, these were replaced and are generally going on satisfactory. The Churchyard of St. George the Martyr was closed by order of the Churchwardens during the period of the Crypt being cleared. LIGHTING. The question of lighting the Parish with incandescent burners has been under consideration, the scheme proposes to increase the total illuminating power of the lamps from 9,464 candles to 54,080 candles. STREET NAMES. Over 300 name plates have been fixed in the various streets of the Parish, and every street is now properly marked. This work has been much appreciated both by residents and strangers. Beyond the above dealt with by this Department during the year, it has been necessary for your Surveyor to devote considerable time to the work of the Boundary Commissioners (appointed under the London Government Act, 1899), also to the various bills which have been promoted in Parliament affecting this district. I am, Ladies and Gentlemen, Your obedient Servant, ARTHUR HARRISON, A.M.Inst.C.E., Surveyor to the Vestry. ABSTRACT OF THE ACCOUNTS OF THE VESTRY. of the Parish of Saint George the Martyr. SOUTHWARK, From March 25th, 1899, to March 24th, 1900. GEORGE JAMES GREEN, Esq., Treasurer to the Vestry, London & County Banking Co., Ltd., Newington. HENRY HUME, Acting Accountant. GENERAL RATE ACCOUNT. MARCH 25th, 1899 to MARCH 25th. 1900. 74 75 VESTRY OF ST. GEORGE THE MARTYR, SOUTHWARK. Dr. General Rate Account. From March 25th, 1899, to March 25th, 1900. Cr. EXPENDITURE. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. INCOME. £ s. d. £ s. d. PUBLIC HEALTH DEPARTMENT. PUBLIC HEALTH DEPARTMENT. To Salaries and Uniforms— By Salaries— Salary of Medical Officer 500 0 0 Moiety of M. O. H. and Inspectors' Salaries from London County Council 664 18 11 Salaries of Inspectors 816 1 2 Salary of Clerk 79 15 0 Uniforms of Inspectors 37 13 0 By Fees— 1433 9 2 Fees from Metropolitan Asylums Board—I.D.N. Act 85 14 0 To Fees, &c.— Returns of Births and Deaths 22 5 9 Notification of Infectious Diseases 85 14 0 By Fines and Costs Recovered— Analyst's Fees 69 16 6 Under Public Health Act 50 18 6 Summonses, &c. 13 16 8 Do. Adulteration Act 79 16 0 191 12 11 To Disinfecting— 130 14 6 Wages of Attendant 153 9 11 881 7 5 Fuel for Apparatus 10 16 9 Repairs and Insurance 41 17 6 Disinfectants, Drain Testers, &c. 85 9 1 Rent of Incinerator 20 0 0 Cleansing, &c., rooms after Infectious Diseases 32 15 2 Sundries 3 2 3 Compensation for Clothing destroyed 3 11 0 351 1 8 To Reception House Expenses— Wages and Allowances of Caretaker 106 5 0 Rates and Taxes 32 12 10 Coal, Gas, Water and Insurance 18 15 11 Repairs 51 1 7 Stores 7 14 9 Sundries 12 3 3 228 13 4 To Mortuary Expenses— Wages of Attendant 58 13 4 Disinfectants 0 13 0 Gas 0 15 0 Repairs and Sundries 50 9 4 110 10 8 2315 7 9 To Amount carried forward £2315 7 9 By Amount carried forward £881 7 5 76 77 VESTRY OF ST. GEORGE THE MARTYR, SOUTHWARK. Dr. General Rate Account. From March 25th, 1899, to March 25th, 1900. Cr. EXPENDITURE. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. INCOME. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. To Amount brought forward 2315 7 9 By Amount brought forward 881 7 5 WORKS DEPARTMENT. WORKS DEPARTMENT To Maintenance and Repairs of Roads— Granite Sett Carriageways: By Trench Work— Valentino Place 21 16 4 Re-instating Footpaths, &c., charged to Public Companies 3515 11 10 St. George's Road 24 2 9 Marshalsea Road 73 13 2 Bv Rents and Fees— Belvedere Buildings 279 9 7 • Rents of Advertising Stations on Footways, &c. 29 18 0 Bermondsey New Road 14 18 1 License Fees for Hoardings 7 14 6 Potier Place 25 9 0 37 12 6 Russell Place 8 4 0 3553 4 4 New Kent Road 118 10 2 Southwark Bridge Road 24 4 11 • Toulmin Street 7 14 3 Newington Causeway 148 3 2 Long Lane 6 19 4 Bittern Street 7 13 2 Sundry Streets, &c. 220 7 10 1011 5 9 Macadam Carriageways: Barron's Place 12 5 4 Webber Row 37 15 0 • Clenham Street 18 19 6 Dorritt Street 5 15 0 Warner Street 35 11 7 Mardyke Street 8 0 6 Hayles Street 14 12 5 Marcia Road 10 17 6 Smyrkes Road 9 1 1 Chatham Street 4 17 0 Oswin Street 36 11 3 Lemlash Street 20 9 0 Valentine Place 20 16 7 Gray Street 10 4 2 Wickham Place 21 12 3 Garden Row 61 9 11 Surrey Square 59 10 9 To Amounts carried forward £387 8 10 1011 5 9 £2315 7 ??? By Amount carried forward £4434 11 9 78 79 VESTRY OF ST. GEORGE THE MARTYR, SOUTHWARK. Dr. General Rate Account From March 25th, 1899, to March 25th, 1900. Cr. EXPENDITURE. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. INCOME. £ s. d. To Amounts brought forward 387 8 10 1011 5 9 2315 7 9 By Amount brought forward 4434 11 9 WORKS DEPARTMENT (Continued). To Maintenance and Repairs of Roads— Macadam Carriageways (Continued): West Square 39 11 9 Skipton Street 38 15 2 Staple Street 37 13 5 Amicable Row 12 15 0 Camelot Street 18 16 4 Massinger Street 46 12 5 St. Stephen's Place 12 10 2 Dodson Street 5 0 9 Quilp Street 22 19 7 Montague Street 32 1 8 Theobald Street 10 1 7 Burman Street 36 19 9 Tower Street 128 8 7 Law Street 48 19 11 St. Stephen's Square 16 8 10 Sundry Streets 51 16 10 947 0 7 Wood Block Carriageways: Borough High Street 478 8 4 King James Street 70 0 0 London Road 127 11 4 Sundry Roads and Streets 58 15 4 734 15 0 Granite Curbing and Channelling: Falstaff Yard 11 16 6 Valentine Place 2 19 9 Union Street 23 9 6 Silex Stret 14 11 5 Borough High Street 27 0 5 Miniver Street 14 5 11 To Amounts carried forward £94 3 6 2693 1 4 £2315 7 9 By Amount carried forward £4434 11 9 80 81 VESTRY OF ST. GEORGE THE MARTYR, SOUTHWARK. Dr. General Rate Account From March 25th, 1899, to March 25th, 1900. EXPENDITURE. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. INCOME. £ £ s. d. To Amounts brought forward 94 3 S 2693 1 4 2315 7 9 By Amount brought forward 4434 11 9 WORKS DEPARTMENT (Continued). To Maintenance and Repairs of Roads— Granite Curbing and Channelling (Continued): Lombard Street 6 1 9 Whitecross Street 14 0 11 Newington Causeway 59 15 8 Little Hunter Street 2 1 7 Green Street 43 11 7 Weston Street 9 6 11 St. George's Road 52 18 6 Collinson Street 3 12 6 New Rent Road 3 16 4 Paragon Mews 8 11 7 Sundry Streets, &c 119 19 11 418 0 9 York Footways: Newington Causeway 33 14 0 Deverill Street 26 18 0 Union Street 15 5 9 Valentine Place 16 14 8 Borough High Street 8 11 1 Whitecross Street 6 2 3 Miniver Street 82 10 10 Collinson Street 5 9 8 • Lant Street 37 17 8 Old Kent Road 12 17 0 Sundry Streets, &c. 119 1 3 365 2 2 Asphalte Footways: Belvedere Place 18 12 1 Falstaff Yard 34 7 7 Blackfriars Road 17 19 2 70 18 10 To Amounts carried forward 70 18 10 3476 4 8 2315 7 9 By Amount carried forward 4434 11 9 83 83 VESTRY OF ST. GEORGE THE MARTYR, SOUTHWARK. Dr. General Rate Account. From March 25th, 1899, to March 25th, 1900. Cr. EXPENDITURE. £ s. d. £ s. d £ s. d. INCOME. £ £ s. d. To Amount brought forward 70 18 10 3476 4 3 2315 7 9 By Amount brought forward 4434 11 9 WORKS DEPARTMENT—Continued. Asphalte Footways (Continued): / Silex Street 15 2 5 Crosslett Street and Townsend Street 62 13 3 Union Street 16 3 0 Borough High Street 363 13 2 New Kent Road 44 16 1 Southwark Bridge Road 12 17 11 Great Suffolk Street 14 3 5 Angel Court 8 10 1 Sundry Streets, Sec 65 6 1 674 4 3 Asphalte Carriageways: Falstaff Yard 242 4 3 . Union Street 450 7 10 Little Lant Street 386 9 6 Silex Street 512 8 1 Miniver Street 444 7 0 Gun Street 359 13 6 Lombard Street 321 19 7 Whitecrosa Street . 28 18 3 Alfreton Street 362 13 6 Potier Street 258 14 10 New Kent Road 38 9 6 Sundry streets 0 4 8 3406 10 6 . Sanding and Miscellaneous : Sanding Streets 23 19 0 Name Tablets 56 14 4 Pontypool Place (Gates) 28 5 8 Borough High Street (Refuge) 22 8 5 Water Trough, Old Kent Road— Removing 20 17 8 Miscellaneous Repairs 57 16 6 210 1 7 7767 0 7 To Amounts carried forward 7767 0 7 2315 7 9 £ 4434 11 9 84 85 VESTRY OF ST. GEORGE THE MARTYR, SOUTHWARK. Dr. General Rate Account From March 25th, 1899, to March 25th, 1900. Cr. EXPENDITURE. £ s d £ S d. £ s. d. INCOME. £ s. d. To Amounts brought forward 7767 0 7 2315 7 9 By Amount brought forward 4434 11 9 WORKS DEPARTMENT (Continued). To Trench Work— Re-instating Footpaths, &c., after Public Companies 2622 19 8 To Plant, Tools, and Repairing Tools- Roadmen's Tools 70 5 4 Masons' Truck, No. 7 (part cost) 1 12 9 Repairing Tools 126 12 5 Asphalters' Pans and Tools 76 0 8 New Plant 156 19 4 4 Repairing Plant 85 15 10 Brushes and Sundries 0 12 6 517 18 10 Less Pronortion chareed to Sewers A/c 92 5 6 425 13 4 LIGHTING DEPARTMENT. 10815 13 7 To Gas and Lighting Public Lamps- South Metropolitan Gas Company 1956 11 10 Gas Light and Coke Company 358 14 5 2315 6 3 To Lamps, Repairs, &c.— Repairs and Sundries 9 13 7 2324 19 10 SCAVENGING DEPARTMENT. To Wages — Wages of Scavengers 2727 1 11 To Use of Shoot, &c.— . Use of Shoot and Wharf 1385 9 6 Early opening of do 6 10 0 1391 19 6 To Watering Roads, &c.— • Wages 180 16 2 Wati-r 189 9 2 Fixing and repairing Hydrants, Ac 20 13 5 Horbus, Carts, Ac. (Proportion) 97 18 0 488 16 9 To Horses, Provender, Farriery, Ac.— Horses 410 0 0 Lett Bold 86 11 0 379 9 0 379 9 0 4607 18 2 15456 1 2 4434 11 9 86 87 VESTRY OF ST. GEORGE THE MARTYR. SOUTHWARK. Dr. General Rate Account. From March 25th, 1899, to March 25th, 1900 Cr. EXPENDITURE. £ s d. £ s. d. £ s. d. INCOME. £ s. d. To Amounts brought forward 379 9 0 4607 18 2 15456 1 2 By Amount brought forward 4434 11 9 SCAVENGING DEPARTMENT (Continued). To Horses, Provender, Farriery, &c. (eontd.)— Provender 897 9 4 Farriery 255 6 6 Saddlery 101 3 10 Stable Expenses—Wages of Horsekeeper, Ac •• • • 169 12 7 Do. —Kent, Kates, and Repairs . 239 4 5 % Do. —Coal, Gas, Water, and Cleaning 36 8 5 Sundries 12 9 8 2091 3 9 Le proportion charged to other Accounts 1054 15 10 1036 7 11 To Yans and Repairing Yans— Constructing New Vans No. 1 and 6 107 8 11 ,, General Purposes Cart 27 13 2 135 2 1 Repairs to Vans 189 1 2 Cleaning Vans 15 12 9 Repairs to Sweeping Machine 12 4 1 Van Lanterns and Repairs to Lanterns 18 8 11 Greasing and Sundries 29 2 5 399 11 5 Less Proportion charged to other Departments 221 15 8 177 15 9 • To Brooms, Tools, and Sundries— Brooms and Scoops 125 14 2 Tools 21 1 2 Water and Sundries 30 17 3 177 12 7 To Clearing Gulleys — Clearing out Gulleys 117 17 10 DUSTING DEPARTMENT. 6117 12 3 To Wages, Use of Shoot, &c.— DUSTING DEPARTMENT. Wages of Dustmen 1425 6 8 To Removal of Trade Refuse— Gratuities 20 0 0 286 18 2 Use of Shoot 1436 2 8 „ (Early Opening) 6 10 0 2887 19 4 To Amounts carried forward 2887 19 4 21573 13 5 4721 9 11 88 89 VESTRY OF ST. GEORGE THE MARTYR, SOUTHWARK. Dr. General Rate Account. • From March 25th, 1899, to March 25th, 1900. Cr EXPENDITURE. £ s. d. £ s d £ s. d. INCOME. £ s d. To Amounts brought forward 2887 19 4 21573 5 By Amount brought forward 4721 9 11 DUSTING DEPARTMENT (continued). To Horses, Provender, Farriery, &c.— Proportion charged to this Department 685 19 8 To Yans and Repairs to Yans— Proportion charged to this Department 103 15 0 To Baskets, Covers, Ac- Baskets and Repairs 14 9 6 • Brooms and Sundries 0 0 * 28 9 6 To Removal of Trade Refuse— • Wages of Dustmen 81 0 8 Use of Shoot 102 11 6 Use of Horses, Vans, Arc 21 16 2 205 8 4 3911 11 10 GENERAL PURPOSES DEPARTMENT. GENERAL PURPOSES DEPARTMENT. To Yestry Hall Expenses- By Vstry Hall— Wages of Hallkeeper 146 11 6 Use of Hall 2 12 6 Less charged for Collecting from Conveniences 82 0 0 By Printing— 114 11 6 Proportion of cost re Boundaries, paid by various Local Authorities 22 10 0 Rent of Vestry Hall ... 106 6 8 By Law and Parliamentary Expenses— Do. Telephone 0 0 Costs recovered re City of London and Brush Provincial Electric Rates, Taxes, and Insurance 2 2 Lighting Company 20 4 0 Coal, Gas, and Water 15 1 45 6 6 Cleaning, and Cleaning Material 10 4 • Repairs and Alterations 1 5 Sundries 13 9 • 458 0 11 To Lighting, &c., Church Clock— Winding and Repairs ... 19 1 10 Eleotric Current ... 35 18 8 55 0 6 To Printing, Stationery, and Sundries- Printing, Stationery, Books and Bookbinding ... 48 L U 9 Printing, See., Annual Reports and Year Book ... 73 14 4 Minutes of Proceedings re Boundaries .... 27 12 0 To Amounts carried forward 581 0 1 513 1 5 25485 5 3 £ 4766 16 5 90 91 VESTRY OF ST. GEORGE THE MARTYR, SOUTHWARK. • Dr. General Rate Account From March 25th, 1899, to March 25th, 1900. Cr. EXPENDITURE. £ s d. £ s. d. £ s d. INCOME. £ s. d. £ s. d £ s. d. To Amounts brought forward 583 0 1 513 1 5 25485 5 3 By Amount brought forward 4766 16 5 GENERAL PURPOSES DEPARTMENT (continued) To Printing, Stationery, and Sundries (contd.) Maps, Drawing Material, Surveyor's Instruments, and Sundries 53 11 0 636 11 1 To Law and Parliamentary Expenses- Fees, Parliamentary Agents, re Sundry Bills 207 12 4 Do. re Boundaries 257 12 0 Do. City of London and Brush Provincial Electric Lighting Co 122 17 0 Gun street and Green street area 95 7 3 Do. Red Cow Alley 58 1 0 Do. Loans 22 19 6 Do. Borough Road and Warwick Street 20 10 0 Do. Sundries 21 14 0 Do. Parliamentary Proceedings and Postages 4 8 4 Do. Law Stationers Charges, Ac 4 8 7 815 10 0 1965 2 6 Lea Proportion charged to Sewers Rate 70 15 0 1894 7 6 TREES AND OPEN SPACES DEPARTMENT. TREES AND OPEN SPACES DEPARTMENT. To Wages and Uniform— Wages of Attendants 179 12 5 By Contribution towards Tree Guards, &c.— 19 in a 35 0 0 192 10 11 To Maintenance — Paragon Gates, Ac 259 16 10 ,, Tool-houso and Fixing 12 1 1 Fixing Fountain 39 12 11 ,, Part cost building Band Stand 12 11 7 Portland Place Fence, Ac 81 10 8 Trees, Repairs and Attendance 90 4 10 Repairs and Tools 58 18 2 Water 25 1 1 Plants, Shrubs, Mould, Ac 94 14 8 • 674 11 10 867 2 9 To Amount carried forward £ 28246 15 6 By Amount oarried forward 4801 16 5 93 93 VESTRY OF ST. GEORGE THE MARTYR, SOUTHWARK. Dr. General Rate Account. From March 25th, 1899, to March 25th, 1900. Cr. EXPENDITURE. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. INCOME. £ s d. £ s. d. £ s. d. To Amount brought forward 28246 15 6 By Amount brought forward 4801 16 6 FINANCE DEPARTMENT. FINANCE DEPARTMENT. To Salaries, Superannuation Allowances, &c. By Fees— Vestry Clerk 2 1 Re County Registration 36 5 5 Accountant 104 18 8 ,, Provisional Lists 2 8 0 Surveyor 11 8 ,, Sundries 33 11 8 Assistant Surveyor 18 1 72 5 1 General Staff 9 8 By Bank Interest— Extra assistance 29 17 4 Interest 105 12 3 Superannuation allowances 314 4 8 177 17 4 Bonuses 50 0 0 2205 2 2 Lessproportion charged to Sewers Rate a/c 230 0 0 „ „ various a/cts 696 9 7 926 9 7 1278 12 7 To Adveitising, Stamps, and Miscellaneous- Advertising 44 3 11 Stamps 16 10 Auditors' Fees 52 10 0 Travelling expenses, 'bus fares, Ac 5 10 Messengers' clothing 7 10 0 Assurance of Fidelity 10 7 6 Sundries 59 18 8 305 12 9 To Repayment of Loans, and Interest- Repayment of Loans 4477 5 7 » Interest on Loans 805 18 8 ■ 5283 4 3 6867 9 7 GENERAL ACCOUNT. GENERAL ACCOUNT. By Rates— To School Board for London— Precept levied and Balance of Collection 34, 805 0 8 One year's Preoept 16810 18 3 Equalisation of Rates Act, 1894— One year's Contribution from London County 5 649 18 10 40454 19 6 By Balance— 6490 5 1 Deficiency for the year, carried to Balance Sheet 51924 18 4 51924 18 4 SEWERS RATE ACCOUNT. MARCH 25th, 1899 to MARCH 25th, 1900. 96 97 VESTRY OF ST. GEORGE THE MARTYR. SOUTHWARK. Dr. Sewers Rate Account From March 25th, 1899, to March 25th, 1900. Cr. EXPENDITURE. £ s d. £ s. d. £ s. d. INCOME. £ s. d. £ s d. £ s. d. SEWERS DEPARTMENT. SEWERS DEPARTMENT. To Cleaning Out and Flushing Sewers- Cleaning out Sewers 465 11 5 Clearing Catchpits 33 6 4 Flushing 52 6 2 551 3 11 To Relaying and Repairing Sewers- Relaying Stanford Place 74 10 4 Do. Nelson Court and Princess Place 28 2 5 Do. Combined Drainage 195 0 5 Repairing Sewers, sundry streets 398 1 5 Examining Sewers 8 2 1 703 16 8 To Inspecting and Sundries- Inspecting Drains, &c 15 6 5 Sundries 0 6 6 . 15 12 11 To Gullies and Repairs- New Gullies 444 15 5 Repairs to Gullies 353 4 9 798 0 2 To Plant and Tools— Poling Boards 54 6 11 Tools, &o 110 7 8 164 14 7 PUBLIC CONVENIENCES. 2233 8 3 To St. George's Road— PUBLIC CONVENIENCES. Wages of Attendants 191 16 1 By Lavatory, &cM Fees— Uniforms 7 10 o St. George's Road 663 2 5 Rates and Taxes 27 8 3 Old Kent Road 326 14 4 Gas and Water 107 8 8 Borough Road 214 3 1 Washing Towels, &c. 18 18 2 New Alley 67 14 4 Repairs 110 14 4 Library Street 27 0 9 Clearing and Maintenance of LookB 2 7 9 1298 14 11 Toilet Requisites, Brooms, and Sundries 19 7 8 By Rents- Instalment of loan 140 0 0 Rent of Room, New Alley 10 0 0 interest on loan 19 12 0 Gas Rent Do. 0 5 0 645 2 11 10 5 0 1308 19 11 To Amounts carried forward £645 2 11 2233 8 8 By Amount carried forward 1308 19 11 98 99 VESTRY OF ST. GEORGE THE MARTYR, SOUTHWARK. Dr. General Rate Account From March 25th, 1899, to March 25th, 1900. Cr. EXPENDITURE. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. INCOME. £ s. d. To Amounts brought forward 645 2 11 2233 8 3 By Amount brought forward 1308 19 11 PUBLIC CONVENIENCES (continued). To Old Kent Road— Wages of Attendants 283 18 7 • Uniforms 5 0 0 Gas and Water 70 4 0 Washing Towels, &c 7 10 0 Repairs 67 16 6 Clearing and Maintenance of Locks 1 3 6 Toilet Requisites, Brooms and Sundries} 13 1 6 Instalment of Loan 66 13 4 Interest on Loan 58 10 0 573 17 5 To Borough Road- 4 Wages of Attendants' 189 16 2 Uniforms 5 0 0 Gas and Water 60 14 8 Washing Towels, Ac 3 15 0 Repairs 32 1 4 Clearing and Maintenance of Locks 1 0 2 Toilet requisites 11 19 5 Instalment of Loan 46 13 4 Interest on Loan 40 19 0 391 19 1 . To New Alley— Wages of Attendants 86 17 4 Rent, Rates, Taxes, and Insurance 18 15 11 Coal, Gas, and Water 11 6 8 Repairs 1 10 0 Clearing and Maintenance of Locks 1 1 9 Washing Towels, and Sundries 4 2 10 123 14 6 To Library Street- Wages of Attendants 67 17 8 Coal, Gas, and Water 16 0 2 Repairs 2 2 7 Clearing and Maintenance of Locks 0 8 0 Washing Towels and Sundries 7 2 10 93 11 8 To Amounts carried forward 1828 5 2 2283 I' 8 3 1308 19 11 100 U m , 101 VESTRY OF ST. GEORGE THE MARTYR, SOUTHWARK. Dr. Sewers Rate Account. From March 25th, 1899, to March 25th, 1900. Cr. EXPENDITURE. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. INCOME. £ s. d. £ s. £ s. d. To Amounts brought forward 1828 5 2 2233 8 3 By Amount brought forward 1308 19 11 PUBLIC CONVENIENCES (Continued). * To Public Urinals— Water 43 13 11 Cleansing 97 11 7 Borough Boad Gates 15 2 6 Do. adjusting Kerb 6 11 2 Repairs 2G 13 8 Instalment of Loan 16 13 4 Interest on Loan 14 12 0 220 18 8 2049 3 10 To Construction Account— Ladies' Lavatory, Library Street 307 8 4 To Capital Account— Amount expended on Friar Street Area Drainage Scheme over Loan borrowed 13 3 5 GENEBAL ACCOUNT. GENERAL ACCOUNT. To Salaries and Expenses— By Rates— Proportion of Salaries 230 0 0 Precept levied and balance of collection 2094 13 11 Do. General Expenses 70 15 0 300 15 0 To instalment of Loan, Friar Street Area 202 0 0 By Balance- Deficiency for the year, carried to Balance Sheet 1762 5 0 5165 18 10 5166 18 10 104 105 VESTRY OP ST. GEORGE THE MARTYR. SOUTHWARK. Dr Capital Account. From March 25th, 1899, to March 25th, 1900. Cr. EXPENDITURE. £ s. d. £ s. d. INCOME. £ s d. WORKS DEPARTMENT. By Balance in hand, March 25th, 1899— Amount as per Capital Account of last year 1823 j 16 10 To Sundry Paving— (Loan £12,440, dated November 1st, 1899). Weston Street 448 10 5 By Loan— Newington Causeway 1041 6 2 Loan from the London County Council for Sundry Paving in the King James Street 039 15 4 , * Parish 12440 0 0 Little Flunter Street 242 11 4 Earl Street 141 17 2 St. George's Cirous 36 14 1 By General Rate Account— Waterloo Road 30 12 0 Amount expended on New Drainage Works, Friar Street Area, over Rlackfriars Road 55 6 0 Loan borrowed 13 3 5 Green Street 901 6 4 Lant Street 919 17 9 St. Goorge's Road 247 2 9 Collinson Street 969 12 9 5673 12 1 SEWERS DEPARTMENT. To New Drainage Works— (Loan £4,025, dated October 3rd, 1898). Gun Street 102 17 0 Miniver Street 158 19 5 Bean Street 19 17 4 Belvedere Place 0 8 4 Minor Place 0 7 1 Lancaster Street 0 3 5 Tupman Place 132 17 1 Upper Green Street 65 6 1 Pocock Street 105 10 9 Wellington Place 257 3 1 Green Street 256 2 9 - Hill Street 210 11 0 King's Bench Walk 231 16 1 1 1837 0 3 To Balance in hand, March 25th, 1900 15766 7 11 14277 14277 0 3 0 3 BALANCE SHEET, MARCH 25th, 1900. 108 109 VESTRY OF ST. GEORGE THE MARTYR, SOUTHWARK. Dr. Balance Sheet. March 25th, 1900. Cr. 1 LIABILITIES. £ s. d. £ s. d. ASSETS AND CAPITAL OUTLAY. £ s. d £ s. d. £ s. d. Mortgages - Street Improvements, Paving, &c.— London County Council 34416 0 0 Sundry Creditors- Granite Paving: Various Accounts—Public Health Department 70 7 8 Blackfriars and Westminster Bridge Roads 6500 0 0 Do. —Roads Do. 2676 18 2 Waterloo Road 1700 0 0 Do. —Lighting Do. 604 13 8 Part Southwark "Bridge Road, St. George's Road, • Do. —Scavenging Do. 058 4 7 Lambeth Road, and part Borough Road 12500 0 0 Do. —Sewers Do. 252 10 1 East Street, part Great Suffolk Street, and Wood Paving part Borough Road 1782 19 9 Do. —General Purposes Do. 290 11 2 22482 19 9 Deposits on a/c of work to be executed 1057 14 0 Wood Paving: Do. with Contracts 105 0 0 3116 15 10 Instalments of Loans accrued due 2032 15 7 911 10 6 Interest on Loans Do. 239 2 0 St. George s Circus St. George's Road 836 4 0 9877 11 5 Old Kent Road 8237 8 4 Part Southwark Bridge Road 1424 14 3 Lambeth Road, and York Paving Elliott's Row. 480 16 0 15007 8 11 Asphalte Paving : Various Roads in the Parish 1576 8 3 Street Improvement: Gun Street and Green Street Areas 8045 6 4 Hard Wood, Granite, York Paving, and Asphalte: Various Roads in Parish 5673 12 1 52785 15 4 Reception House- King James Street 1905 2 5 • Sewer Works— 4038 3 5 Public Conveniences— St. George's Road 1403 0 0 Old Kent Road 2078 15 2 Borough road 1632 7 8 Urinal—Borough Road 802 18 0 • 6007 0 10 Amount carried forward 44203 18 6 64736 2 0 110 111 VESTRY OF ST. GEORGE THE MARTYR. SOUTHWARK. Dr. Balance Sheet. March 25th, 1900. Cr. LIABILITIES. £ s d £ s. d. £ s. d. ASSETS. £ s. d. £ s. d. Amount brought forward 44293 13 6 Amount brought forward 64736 2 0 • Cash Balances— Cash at Bank—Vestry Account 10429 4 4 Do. Petty Cash Account 72 17 10 In hands of Acting Accountant 36 1 0 • 10538 3 2 Balance of Assets- Loans redeemed to date 35734 0 0 Permanent Works, contributed to out of Rate Accounts 1352 9 11 37086 9 11 Sundry Debtors— • Lett Balance of Loan unexpended 6766 7 11 Overseers, for Balance of Rate 2468 14 7 30320 2 0 L.C.C., for Moiety of Medical Officer and Inspectors' Sewers Rate Account Salaries 337 10 2 Balance in hand last year 3323 4 8 Public Companies, for Trench Work 642 10 7 Lest Deficit this year, as per Account 1762 5 0 Sundry Persons, for Work executed, &c 2185 0 9 1560 19 8 Metropolitan Asylums Board, for Notification Fees 14 7 0 5648 3 1 General Rate Account. Deficit this year as per Account 6490 5 1 Less Balance in hand last year 5141 9 6 1348 15 7 212 4 1 Capital Account. Stocks on hand— Balance in hand, as per Account 6766 7 11 Material for Repairs to Roads, Sewers, Plant, &c 660 7 2 6766 7 11 Postage Stamps 9 12 0 37298 14 0 669 19 2 £81592 7 8 £81592 7 9 • Audited and found correct, E. W. KNIGHT, JAS. CHUBB, Parochial Auditor D. BEES JONES, HABT BBOTHEBS, TIBBETTS, HEIBON & Co., (Chartered Accountantts) HENRY HUME, Acting Vestry Accountant. LOANS STATEMENT, MARCH 25th, 1900. 114 VESTRY OF ST. GEORGE Particulars of Loans Outstanding No. of Mortgage Purpose of Loan. Date of Loan. Period. 7/238 Granite Paving—Blackfriars and Westminster Bridge Roads Aug. 13th, 1879 20 years 8/462 Granite Paving—Waterloo Road Nov. 7 th, 1883 20 do 9/660 Do. —Part Southwark Bridge Road, St. George's Road, Lambeth Road, and part Borough Road June 24th, 1886 20 do 12/688 Granite Paving Do. Sept. 28th, 1886 20 do 13/1219 Underground Conveniences—St. George's Road April 5th, 1893 10 do 14/1250 Jarrah Wood Paving—London Road July 5th, 1893 7 do 16/1338 Do. —St. George's Circus Feb. 14th, 1894 7 do 17/1374 Do. —St. George's Road, near Cathedral June 1st, 1894 7 do 19/1428 Purchase money—Gun Street and Green Street Areas—H.W.C. Act Oct. 17th, 1894 To July 1st, 1899 or earlier, if required Do. do. Oct. 17th, 1894 12 years 20/1448 Jarrah Wood Paving—Old Kent Road Nov. 14th, 1894 7 do 21/1620 Granite Paving—East Street, part Great Suffolk Street, and part Borough Road Feb. 26th, 1896 15 do Jarrahdale Paving—p&rt Borough Road 22/1674 Do. —part Southwark Bridge Road, Newington Causeway, to Borough Road July 28th, 1896 7 do 23/1771 Jarrahdale Wood Paving—Lambeth Road Mar. 9th, 1897 7 do York Paving—Footway, Elliott's Row 24/1781 Reception House, King James Street Mar. 23rd, 1897 30 do 25/1857 Asphalte Paving in Parish Oct. 19th, 1897 5 do 26/1953 Publio Conveniences—Old Kent Road £2000 May 11th, 1898 30 do Do. —Borough Road 1400 Do. do Urinal 500 27/2020 Friar Street—Sewer Works Oct. 3rd, 1898 20 do 28/2155 Sundry Paving in Parish (Hardwood, Granite, York Stone, and Asphalte) Nov. 1st, 1899 10 do 115 THE MARTYR, SOUTHWARK. at March 25th, 1900. Rate of Interest. Amount of Loan. Expenditure to March 25th, 1900. Amount charged to Rate Accounts. Balance transferred to Rate Accounts. Repaid to Date. Loans outstanding at March S5th. 1900. Per Cent. £ £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ £ 3¾ 6500 6500 0 0 ...... 6500 ...... 3½ 1700 1700 0 0 ...... ...... 1360 340 3½ 6700 6700 0 0 ...... ...... 4355 2345 3½ 5800 5800 0 0 ...... 3770 2030 3½ 1400 1493 0 0 93 0 0 ...... 980 420 3½ 3000 3116 15 10 116 15 10 ...... 2572 428 3½ 1000 911 10 6 ...... 88 9 6 858 142 3½ 900 836 4 0 ...... 63 16 0 644 256 3½ 5075 8045 6 4 570 6 4 ...... 5075 ...... 3½ 2400 1000 1400 3½ 8400 8237 8 4 ...... 162 11 8 6000 2400 3 1700 1782 19 9 82 19 9 ...... 640 1060 3 1450 1424 14 3 ...... 25 5 9 622 828 3 550 480 16 0 ...... 69 4 0 237 313 3 1650 1905 2 5 255 2 5 ...... 165 1485 3 1560 1576 8 3 16 8 3 ...... 624 936 3 3900 4514 0 10 614 0 10 ...... 130 3770 3 4025 4038 3 5 13 3 5 ...... 202 3823 3¼ 12440 5673 12 1 ...... ...... ...... 12440 £ 70150 64736 2 0 1761 16 10 409 6 11 35734 34416 AUDITOR'S REPORTS. 118 AUDITOR'S REPORTS. 30 Moorgate Street, London, E.C., 23rd July, 1900. J. A. Johnson, Esq., The Vestry Hall, Borough Road, S.E. Dear Sir, We herewith beg to hand you the following Accounts relating to the Vestry of St. George the Martyr, duly certified by us, viz.:— General and Sewers Rates, Expenditure and Income Accounts, and Balance Sheet. The Expenditure and Income Accounts show the following balances:— £ s. d. In favour of the Sewers Rate 1560 19 8 Against the General Rate 1348 15 7 Net Balance £212 4 1 At March 25th, 1809, the balances were :— £ s. d. In favour of the General Rate 5141 9 6 In favour of the Sewers Rate 3323 4 8 £8464 14 2 This large decrease is due to the fact that very much larger amounts have been spent out of Income for Roads and Sewer??? Maintenance and Improvement. 119 The Rate Collection for 1899-1900, as compared with 1898-9 is shewn in the following statement :— 1898-9 1899-1900 Increase. Decrease. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s d. General Rate 35918 8 11 34805 0 8 - 1113 8 3 Sewers Rate 1186 15 2 2094 13 11 907 18 9 — £37105 4 1 £36899 14 7 — £205 9 6 The Contribution under the Equalisation of Bates Act, for the year under review was £5649 18s. 10d., as against £5753 9s. 7d. for the previous financial year. We would draw your attention to the following shortages in the stocks of materials as shown by the Stocks Ledger, viz.:—Lighting and Watching Materials, £24 9s. 11d. ; Drain Pipes, £17 11s. 2d. ; and Fletton Bricks, £7 9s. 10d., and would suggest that greater care should be exercised by those responsible for the booking out of materials to the Vestry's jobs and to private works. Several instances of carelessness in this respect have been brought before our notice, thus considerably increasing the work in the Accountant's Department. We have audited the Overseers' Cash Book and Rate Books, also the Charities Accounts. We shall be pleased to give you any further information in our power. We are, Dear Sir, Yours faithfully, HART BROS., TIBBETTS, HEIRON, & CO. 120 statement OF allowance of the auditors. (18 & 19 Vict., cap. 120 s. 196). Wo, the undersigned, Auditors for the Parish of St. George the Martyr, Southwark, having in the present month of August, in the Year One Thousand Nine Hundred, attended at the Office of the Vestry of the said Parish, and there audited the Accounts thereof for the year ended the 24th day of March last, do hereby state our Allowance of the said Accounts as signed by us, in accordance with the foregoing Account in Abstract, shewing under the several distinct heads therein mentioned, the Income and Expenditure of the Vestry under the "Metropolis Mauagomeut Act, 1855," and the several Acts amending tho same; and wo find tho Cash Balances on the day last above-named to be as hereunder shown:— £ s. d. Vestry Account 10429 4 4 Petty Cash Account 72 17 10 Petty Cash in Acting Accountant's hands 36 1 0 Dated the 29th day of August, 1900, EDMUND WASHINGTON KNIGHT, JAMES CHUBB, DAVID REES JONES, Auditors for the Pariah of St. George the Martyr, Southwark. 121 STATEMENT of CONTRACTS ENTERED INTO BY THE VESTRY. From 25th March, 1899. to 25th March. 1900. (18 & 19 Vict., cap. 120, s. 196). Contractor. Nature of Contract. Terms, &c. J. Newell & Co. Vanwheels and Tyres 25th March, 1900, as per Schedule. Rawle & Son Harness and Repairs £1 10s. Od. per set. Thos Cornell Vestry Year Books For year 1899-1900. G. B. Kent & Sons Brooms, Brushes, &c 25th March, 1900, as per schedule. Mosers Limited Coach Ironmongery Do. do. Taylor & Gardiner Fodder Do. do. J. Owen & Sons, Ltd English Timber Do. do. Thomas James Foreign do. Do. do. Chittenden & Simmonds Steam Roller Do. 15 ton £2 13s. per day 10 ton £2 12s. 6d. per day J. Stiff & Sons Drain Pipes, &c. Do. as per schedule. Heather, Bailey & Co., Ltd. Cement £1 16s. 6d. per ton Wakeley Bros. & Co Lime, &c. 25th March, 1900, as per Schedule. Tuson's Disinfectants Co., Ltd. Disinfectants Carbolic Acid, £2 per cask 40 gals.; Carbolic Powder, £2 15s. per ton J. H. Simpson & Co Oils and Colours 25th March, 1900, as per schedule. Mosers Limited Shovels, Forks, &c. Do. do. J. Brooke & Sons Flagging, &c. Do. do. E. H. Beevers& Co Granite Kerbing Do. do. J. S. Gabriel Thames sand, &c. Do. do. Thos. Cornell Printing and Stationery 25th March, 1900 Jarrahdale Jarrah Forests and Railways Compy., Ltd. Wood Blocks £8 10s. 6d. per 1000. C. Murrell Use of Shoot for Dust and Slop Subject to six months' notice to terminate contract. T. S. Price Veterinary Attendance and Shoeing Three years from 25th March, 1897, £4 11s. 0d. per horse per annum. Val de Travers Asphalte Paving Co., Ltd. 1½ in. Asphalte on roads. 7s. 6d. per square yard James Allan Senior & Son Band stand £140. Dr. F. W. Smith Medical Attendance to Workmen of Permanent Staff 1/- per quarter per employee. VESTRY OF St. George the Martyr, Southwark. ESTIMATES FOR THE Year Ending March 25th, 1901, AND SUMMARY OF INCOME AND EXPENDITURE FOR THE Year Ended March 25th. 1899. HENRY HUME, J.A.JOHNSON, Acting Accountant. Vestry Clerk 124 Report of the Finance Committee. To the VESTRY OF ST. GEORGE THE MARTYR, SOUTHWARK. Your Committee beg to submit the detailed Estimates of the various Committees, showing the Expenditure under the General Rate and Sewers Kate for the Financial Year ending, March 25th, 1901, as follows:— General Rate £37,533 Sewers Rate £1,723 £39,256 The Committee accordingly recommend :— 1. That the Estimates be approved. 2. That an Order be made on the Overseers of the Poor and sealed, to raise and pay over to the Vestry the sum of £37,533, for the purpose of defraying the expenses of the Vestry properly chargeable to the General Rate for the year ending March 25th, 1901, and that the aforesaid sum of £37,533 be payable as stated below. 3. That an Order be made on the Overseers of the Poor and sealed, to raise and pay over to the Vestry the sum of £1,723 for the purpose of defraying the expenses of the Vestry properly chargeable to the Sewers Rate for the year ending March 25th, 1901, and that the aforesaid sum of £1,723 be payable as stated below. On or before June 24th, 1900. Sept. 29th, 1900. Dec. 25th, 1900. March 25th, 1901. Totals. £ £ £ £ £ General Rate 9814 8091 9814 9814 37,533 Sewers Rate — 1723 - - 1723 £9814 £9814 £9814 £9814 £39,256 February 20th, 1900. RICHARD YOUNG, Chairman. 125 VESTRY OF St. GEORGE THE MARTYR, SOUTHWARK. Estimate for the General Rate, 1900-1901. PUBLIC HEALTH & SEWERS COMMITTEE. PURPOSES. Expenditure, Year ended March 25th, 1899. Estimate One Year to Mar. 25th, 1901. PUBLIC HEALTH DEPARTMENT. £ s. d. £ Salaries of Medical Officer. Inspectors, and Clerk 1338 4 6 1500 Inspectors' Uniforms 26 6 0 32 Returns of Births and Deaths 21 1 9 25 Adulteration Act—Analysts' Fees, Samples, Summonses, &c 63 13 10 100 Disinfecting— Wages of Attendant 97 10 0 100 Fuel for Apparatus 13 13 0 15 Repairs and Incidentals 45 4 6 50 Disinfectants and Drain Testers 95 19 11 100 Rent of Incinerator 20 0 0 20 Reception House Expenses & Wages of Attendant 163 7 3 175 Cleansing Rooms, &c 47 4 11 30 Mortuary Expenses &Wages of Attendant 82 12 4 100 2014 18 0 2247 Less Income. Moiety of Salaries from London County Council 629 14 9 688 Fines and Costs under Public Health, and Adulteration Acts 293 10 9 150 923 5 6 838 Net Expenditure £ 1091 12 6 1409 February 19th, 1900. Approved by the Committee, W. SAVAGE, Chairman. 126 VESTRY OF St. GEORGE THE MARTYR, SOUTHWARK. Estimate for the General Rate, 1900-1901. WORKS COMMITTEE. PURPOSES. Expenditure, Year ended March 25th, 1899. Estimate oneYearto Mar. 25th, 1901. WORKS DEPARTMENT. £ s. d. £ Granite Cube Carriageways 388 1 2 200 Macadam Carriageways 498 1 8 200 Wood Block Carriageways 635 2 4 1000 Granite Curbing and Channelling 233 3 4 150 York Footways 475 6 0 300 Asphalte Footways and Carriageways. 180 18 2 200 Sanding and Miscellaneous 158 1 2 100 New Plant and Repairs to Old (Proportion) 282 9 9 300 Repairing Roads after Gas and Water Companies 1525 18 1 700 4377 1 8 3150 Less Income. Repairs to Roads after Gas and Water Companies, License Fees, &c. £ 2246 16 8 950 2130 5 0 2200 STREET LIGHTING DEPARTMENT. £ s. d. £ Gas for Ordinary Lamps 2000 2 1 2200 Ditto Meter ditto 220 0 0 200 Alterations and Additions to Lamps 17 12 8 100 £ 2237 14 9 2500 127 VESTRY OF St. GEORGE THE MARTYR, SOUTHWARK. Estimate for the General Rate, 1900-1901. WORKS COMMITTEE, PURPOSES. Expenditure, Year ended March 25th, 1899. Estimate One Year to Mar. 25th, 1901. SCAVENGING DEPARTMENT. £ s. d. £ Wages 2612 18 1 2900 Use of Shoot 1390 7 3 1400 Watering Roads, &c 442 3 5 400 Horses, Provender, Farriery, Saddlery, and Stable Exs. (Proportion) 983 13 8 950 Hire of Horses and Vans 8 8 8 10 New Plant & Repairs to Old (Proportion) 246 13 9 100 Brooms, Tools and Sundries 134 13 0 100 Cleaning Gullies 186 12 1 200 6005 9 11 6060 DUSTING DEPARTMENT. Wages, &c 1407 0 3 1600 Use of Shoot 1394 17 3 1500 Horses, Provender, Farriery, Saddlery, and Stable Exs. (Proportion) 519 9 6 700 New Plant and Repairs to Old ( do. ) 145 19 8 100 Repairs to Baskets 21 0 0 10 Removal of Trade Refuse 126 10 5 100 3614 17 1 4010 Less Income. Removal of Trade Refuse 139 16 5 120 £ 3475 0 8 3890 128 VESTRY OF St.GEORGETHE MARTYR,SOUTHWARK. Estimate for the General Rate, 1900-1901. WORKS COMMITTEE. SUMMARY. PURPOSES. Expenditure, Year ended March 25th, 1899. Estimate, One Year to Mar. 25th, 1901. £ s. d. £ Works Department 2130 5 0 2200 Lighting Department 2237 14 9 2500 Scavenging Department 6005 9 11 6060 Dusting Department 3475 0 8 3890 £ 13,848 10 4 14,650 February 15th, 1900. Approved by the Committee, R. R. FULTON, Chairman. 129 VESTRY OF St. GEORGE THE MARTYR, SOUTHWARK. Estimate for the General Rate, 1900-1901. GENERAL PURPOSES, TREES, AND OPEN SPACES COMMITTEE. PURPOSES. Expenditure, Year ended March 25th, 1899. Estimate One Year to Mar. 25th, 1901. GENERAL PURPOSES DEPARTMENT. £ s. d. £ Rent of Vestry Hall and Telephone 123 6 8 124 Rates, Taxes and Insurance 35 5 4 36 Coal, Gas, Water and Cleaning 131 12 2 135 Repairs and Furniture 81 11 6 50 Lighting and Winding Church Clock 74 3 7 50 Printing and Stationery 530 18 6 575 Law and Parliamentary Expenses 190 15 2 200 Wages of Hallkeeper & Assistant, less charged for Collecting at Conveniences 89 14 0 104 1257 6 11 1274 Less Proportion charged to Sewers Rate 62 17 4 70 1194 9 7 1204 TREES AND OPEN SPACES DEPARTMENT. £ s. d. £ Wages of Attendants 114 12 10 216 Contribution, Paragon 3400 0 0 200 Painting and Repairs 65 15 3 30 Water 9 19 0 25 Plants, Shrubs, &c 26 10 0 40 Uniform, Tools and Sundries 61 10 8 15 £ 3678 7 9 526 Less Contribution, Paragon 2800 0 0 £ 878 7 9 526 130 VESTRY OF St. GEORGE THE MARTYR,SOUTHWARK. Estimate for General Rate, 1900-1901. GENERAL PURPOSES, TREES AND OPEN SPACES COMMITTEE. SUMMARY PURPOSES. Expenditure, Year ended March 25th, 1899. Estimate One Year to Mar. 25 th, 1901. Expenditure. £ s. d. £ General Purposes Department 1194 9 7 1204 Trees and Open Spaces Department 3678 7 9 526 £ 4872 17 4 1730 Less Contribution, Paragon 2800 0 0 — £ 2072 17 4 1730 February 20th, 1900. Approved by the Committee, A. WILSON, Chairman. 131 VESTRY OF St. GEORGE THE MARTYR, SOUTHWARK. Estimate for the General Rate, 1900-1901. Approved by the Committee, R. YOUNG, February 20th, 1900. Chairman. FINANCE COMMITTEE. PURPOSES. Expenditure, Year ended March 25th, 1899. Estimate One Year to Mar. 25th, 1901. FINANCE DEPARTMENT. £ s. d. £ Salaries 1758 0 6 1850 Superannuation Allowances 217 10 0 350 Professional Auditors' Fees 52 10 0 52 Assurance of Fidelity 10 19 6 11 Travelling Expenses, 'Bus, &c., Fares 72 0 6 40 Advertising 63 18 3 50 Stamps and Sundries 56 3 6 80 Repayment of Loans 5214 15 0 5068 Interest on Loans 747 2 1 897 Contingencies ... ... ... £ 8192 19 4 8398 Less Income. Fees, Registration, &c 11 15 4 12 Proportion of Salaries and Superannuation Allowances, charged to Sewers Account 199 11 0 200 Bank Interest 74 17 0 70 £ 286 3 4 282 Net Expenditure £ 7906 16 0 8116 132 VESTRY OF St.GEORGETHE MARTYR,SOUTHWARK. Estimate for the General Rate, 1900-1901. SUMMARY. PURPOSES. Expenditure, Year ended March 25th, 1889. Estimate, One Year to Mar. 25th, 1901. Expenditure £ s. d. £ Public Health Committee • 1,091 12 6 1,409 Works Committee 13,848 10 4 14,650 General Purposes Committee 2,072 17 4 1,730 Finance Committee 7,906 16 0 8,116 School Board Precept 15,434 9 9 17,278 £ 40,354 5 11 43,183 Income. Contribution from London County Council under the Equalisation of Rates Act, 1894 5,753 9 7 5,650 Net Expenditure £ 34,600 16 4 37,533 Approved by the Finance Committee, RICHARD YOUNG, Chairman. February 20th, 1900. 133 VESTRY OF St. GEORGE THE MARTYR, SOUTHWARK. Estimate for the Sewers Rate, 1900-1901. PUBLIC HEALTH & SEWERS COMMITTEE. PURPOSES. Expenditure, Year ended March 25th, 1899. Estimate One Year to Mar. 25th, 1901. SEWERS DEPARTMENT. £ s. d. £ Cleaning out and Flushing Sewers 553 10 4 300 Relaying and Repairing Sewers 820 14 0 250 Inspecting Drains, &c 29 2 10 30 Clearing Catchpits 20 9 6 30 New Plant, and Repairs to Old (Proportion) 83 4 3 40 Boots and Sundries 8 0 1 15 New Gullies, and Repairs 111 0 1 300 1626 1 1 965 Contribution, Lambeth Vestry 25 0 0 — 1601 1 1 965 PUBLIC CONVENIENCES. £ s. d. £ St. George's Road :— Income. Fees £ 756 0 6 730 Less Expenditure. Wages of Attendants 195 8 7 185 Uniform 0 17 0 8 Rates, Taxes, Gas, and Water 130 3 10 120 Towels, Dusters, Washing, &c 18 12 7 25 Maintenance of Locks, Repairs, and Sundries 49 19 5 90 Clearing Locks, &c 15 8 0 15 Instalment and Interest on Loan 164 10 0 160 574 19 5 603 Net Income £ 181 1 1 127 VESTRY OF St. GEORGE THE MARTYR, SOUTHWARK. Estimate for the Sewers Rate, 1900-1901. PUBLIC HEALTH & SEWERS COMMITEE PURPOSES Expenditure, Year ended March 25th. 1899. Estimate One Year to Mar. 25th, 1901. PUBLIC CONVENIENCES. £ s. d. £ Old Kent Road:— Wages of Attendants 17 3 8 280 Uniform 0 17 0 8 Taxes, Gas and Water 12 0 11 70 Washing 0 19 0 10 Towels, Dusters, and Requisites 17 15 6 20 Repairs & Maintenance of Locks, &c. • • • • • • • • • 25 Collecting • • • • • • • • 10 Instalment and Interest on Loan 38 7 8 123 87 3 0 546 Less Income. Fees, &c £ 11 10 8 350 75 13 1 196 £ s. d. £ Borough Road:— Wages of Attendants 4 15 6 186 Uniform 0 17 0 8 Taxes, Gas and Water 1 5 0 70 Washing, &c 0 9 6 4 Towels, Dusters, and Requisites 13 8 4 10 Repairs & Maintenance of Locks, Ac. • • • • • 0 • • • 15 Collecting • • • • • • • • • 6 Instalment and Interest on Loan 26 17 5 85 47 12 9 384 Less Income. Fees, &c £ 0 12 3 250 47 0 6 134 135 VESTRY OF St. GEORGE THE MARTYR, SOUTHWARK. Estimate for the Sewers Rate, 1900-1901. PUBLIC HEALTH & SEWERS COMMIT PURPOSES. Expenditure, Year ended March 25th, 1899. Estimate One Year to Mar. 25th, 1901. PUBLIC CONVENIENCES. £ s. d. £ Ladies' Lavatory, New Alley:— Wages of Attendants 93 4 0 90 Rent, Rates, Taxes, Coal, Gas & Water 29 7 11 25 Repairs, and Maintenance of Locks 10 17 4 5 Collecting ... ... ... 2 Washing, Towels, and Sundries 3 13 8 3 £ Less Income. Fees, &c £ 137 96 2 1 11 0 125 100 £ 41 1 11 25 Ladies' Lavatory, Library Street:— £ s. d. £ Wages of Attendants ... ... ... 84 Taxes, Coal, Gas and Water ... ... ... 20 Repairs, and Maintenance of Locks. ... ... ... 10 Collecting ... ••• ... 2 Washing, Towels, and Sundries ... ... ... 3 £ ... ... 119 Less Income. Fees ... ••• .... 45 £ ... ... ... 74 136 VESTRY OF |^R St. GEORGE THE MARTYR. SOUTHWAK Estimate for the Sewers Rate, 1900-1901. PUBLIC HEALTH ft SERVERS COMMOTTEE PURPOSES Expenditure, Year ended March 25th, 1899. Estimate One Year to Mar. 25th, 1901. PUBLIC URINALS £ s. D. £ Water 33 19 9 36 Cleansing 93 19 2 90 Repairs 6 7 4 30 Interest and Instalment on Loan 9 11 11 30 Sundries — - - £ 143 13 3 186 GENERAL DISBURSEMENT £ S. d. £ Proportion of Salaries and tion Allowances 199 11 0 200 Proportion of Miscellaneous Expenses 62 17 4 70 £ 262 8 4 270 137 VESTRY OF St. GEORGE THE MARTYR, SOUTHWARK. Estimate for the Sewers Rate, 1900-1901. PUBLIC HEALTH & SEWERS COMMITEE SUMMARY. PURPOSES. Expenditure, Year ended March 25th, 1899. Estimate, One Year to Mar. 25th, 1901. Expenditure: £ s. d. £ Sewers Department 1601 1 1 965 Public Conveniences: Old Kent Road • 75 13 1 196 Borough Road 47 0 6 134 Ladies' Lavatory, New Alley 41 1 11 25 Do. Library Street — — — 74 Public Urinals 143 18 2 186 General Disbursements 262 8 4 270 Income £2171 3 1 1850 Public Conveniences, St. George's Road 181 1 1 127 Net Expenditure £1990 2 0 1723 Approved by the Committee, February 19 th, 1900. W. SAVAGE, Chairman. 138 VESTRY OF St. GEORGE THE MARTYR, SOUTH WARK. EPITOME OF ESTIMATES FOR THE GENERAL RATE AND SEWERS RATE, 1900-1901. PURPOSES. • Expenditure, Year ended March 25th, 1899. Estimate One Year to Mar. 25th, 1901. £ s. d. £ General Rate 35,918 8 11 37,533 Sewers Rate 1,186 15 2 1723 £ 37,105 4 1 39,256 Statement comparing Estimates of 1899-1900 & 1900-1901. Estimate, 1899-1900. Estimate, 1900-1901. Increase. Decrease. Expenditure. £ £ £ £ Public Health and Sewers Committee . 3,097 3132 35 Works Committee 14,458 14,650 192 General Purposes, &c., Committee 1,424 1730 306 Finance Committee 7,152 8116 964 "School Board Precept 16,000 17,278 1278 £ 42,131 44,906 2,775 Less Income. Contribution from L.C.C. under Equalisation of Rates Act, 1894 5700 5650 50 £ 36,431 39,256 36,431 2,825 Increase over 1899-1900 £ 2,825 2,825 139 Report of the Overseers OF THE POOR OF THE PARISH OF ST. GEORGE THE MARTYR, SOUTHWARD For the Year Ended 25th March, 1900. The Overseers submit the following report on their work for the year ended 25th March, 1900:— RATES. The rates levied during the past year are as follows : Date Rate made. Poor. General. Total. s. d. s. d. s. d. 12th April, 1899 1 9 1 3 3 0 14th October (half-year to 25th March, 1900) 1 10 1 4 3 2 3 7 2 7 6 2 The rates for the seven years 1893-1900 were as follows:— Poor Rate. General Rate (including Sewers Rate). Total for the Year. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. 1893—4 0 3 3 0 3 1 0 6 4 1894—5 0 3 6 0 3 0 0 6 6 1895—6 0 4 0 0 3 2 0 7 2 1896—7 0 3 8 0 2 11 0 6 7 1897—8 0 3 6 0 2 10 0 6 4 1898—9 0 3 4 0 2 8 0 6 0 1899- 1900 0 3 7 0 2 7 0 6 2 With a view to showing the effect of the Police Precept on the Hate during the period above named, the following statement of the amount of the precepts received from the Chief Commissioner of Police during the period above named is inserted. 140 POLICE PRECEPTS. £ s. d. 1893 5,790 18 4 1894 5,822 13 11 1895 5,823 17 10 1896 5,888 6 5 1897 5,964 6 11 1898 6,019 13 0 1899 6,144 2 7 1900 6,259 3 1 With regard to the General Hate, the amounts expended by the Vestry have of late years been very much smaller than those previously laid out, but the Vestry have to pay the School Board Precept out of the General Bate. The following table shows the increase in the School Board's Precept from the year 1894 to 1900 to amount to close upon £5,000 per annum, or an increase of the Rate from 9¾d. to 1s. 2d. in the pound per annum. SCHOOL BOARD PRECEPTS. £ s. d. Year ending March 25th, 1894 11,820 0 2 1895 12,310 6 8 1896 13,738 17 3 1897 14,634 8 11 1898 14,749 2 7 1899 15,434 9 9 1900 16,810 13 3 ASSESSMENTS. During the year the Assessments of 1,312 premises have been under review by the Overseers. Of these, old assessments have been altered representing a Gross Assessable Value of .£32,741 and Rateable Value of £26,662, producing an increase of Gross Value of £ 1,529 and Rateable Value £1,373 on the previous assessments, while new assessments to the extent of a Gross Assessable Value of £3,735 and Rateable Value £3,093 have been added. The total increase in the Gross and Rateable Value of the parish for the year is, therefore, Gross ,£5,264, Rateable £4,466. DISORDERLY HOUSES. The Board have during the past year actively proceeded with the work of suppressing disorderly houses. Several houses have been 141 watched and in four cases proceedings were taken. The prosecutions were conducted by the Solicitor and Clerk to the Overseers, with the result that in two cases fines were inflicted, and in the two other cases defendants were sent to prison. REMOVAL OF HUMAN REMAINS FROM THE CRYPT OF ST. GEORGE'S CHURCH. Perhaps the most important subject that has engaged the attention of the Overseers during the past year has been the removal of the above human remains. At the request of the Churchwardens the Board of Overseers agreed to co-operate with them in obtaining tenders and generally supervising the carrying out of the work. With this end in view the Overseers on several occasions visited the crypt and came to the conclusion that having regard to the age and alleged doubtful stability of the church, considerable care would have to be exercised in the removal of the human remains to prevent further damage to the structure. They accordingly requested the Vestry to permit the Vestry Clerk and Surveyor to act in connection with the removal of the bodies and to receive remuneration therefor. # Before actually beginning the work, however, and acting under the advice of Dr. Hoffman of the Burial Acts' Office, the Overseers caused advertisements to be inserted in the ''Daily Telegraph" and "Daily Chronicle," stating that any persons desiring to remove the remains of their relatives might do so on making written application to the Churchwardens before the 25th July, 1899, and on furnishing such evidence and entering into an undertaking to comply with such conditions as the Churchwardens might deem requisite. No persons, however, availed themselves of this offer, but the Overseers during the subsequent course of the work received inquiries from relatives of deceased persons as to the removal of the lemains of their friends, and in several instances they were able to satisfy the inquirers that these remains had been discovered and properly re-interred. Prior to commencing the work, the Overseers caused a specification to be prepared containing various precautions to be observed by the contractor undertaking the removal of the remains. 142 The specification was considered by the Medical Officer of Health and the Home Office, and having been finally agreed to by all parties, advertisements were issued inviting tenders for the work. Six tenders were received, and that of the London Necropolis Company at the following prices was accepted, viz.:— £ s. d. Removing intact coffins 1 5 0 per coffin. Removing damaged coffins 1 13 8 Removing cases of loose fragments 1 13 8 per case. The Overseers having inspected one or two proposed sites at Brookwood Cemetery for the re-interment of the remains, approved of one at the junction of St. Andrew's Avenue with an unnamed avenue which they requested the Company to name St. George the Martyr Avenue. A Clerk of Works was appointed, and the 2nd October, 1899, was fixed for commencing the work. The Churchwardens closed the Churchyard during the time the remains were being removed, and an order was made that no person should be admitted to the crypt without a written order signed by two of the Churchwardens. When the main portion of the crypt had been cleared to the floor level, a communication was sent to the Home Office, requesting that Dr. Hoffman might inspect the same with a view to his saying whether any further coffins should be removed, as it was found that should this become necessary, it might be requisite to underpin some of the walls of the church. At the request of the Board, the Surveyor at the same time prepared a plan showing the construction of a concrete arch covered by a layer of asphalte and faced with granolithic pavement to form a new floor, so dovetailed into the walls of the church as to form a source of strength by binding them together. Dr. Hoffman of the Burial Acts' Office inspected the crypt on the 2nd November and made certain suggestions with regard to trial holes being opened in the floor to ascertain the depth to which human remains might be found. After this had been done the Home Office agreed to the proposal that the floor of the crypt should be cemented in accordance with the specification prepared by the Surveyor. 143 Tenders for the work were advertised for, and that of Messrs. .C. W. Hobman & Co., at the sum of £229 9s. 4d. was accepted and the work is now completed. On the occasion when Dr. Hoffman inspected the crypt he had suggested that similar holes should be made in the side aisles of the ???urch to find out, if possible, whether there were vaults containing ???ains. On the representations of the Churchwardens, however, it as agreed that he should first report on the latter matter to the ???Lome Office, who would send down a communication to the Church???rdens directing what action should be taken. The Under Secretary of State wrote insisting that explorations should be made under the aisles of the church with a view of ???certaining whether there were human remains between the arch of ???e crypt and the side walls of the church. On the 2nd March, 1900, it was reported that the necesary ex???avations had been made in the side aisles of the church and that one ??? two coffins about three or four feet below the surface had been discovered, the ground was perfectly dry, and the coffins were earth ??? earth interments. No vaults were discovered. A communication was made of this fact to the Home Secretary, ???nd he was requested to arrange for a representative of the Home Office to inspect the church before any decisive action was taken in the matter. No definite decision with regard to the human remains supposed to be beneath the aisles of the church has as yet been com???aunicated to the Overseers. It is anticipated, however, that further ???xplorations will show that very few coffins have been interred here. The following amounts have been paid by the Overseers to the Churchwardens, on account of and in part payment of the expenses ???ncurred by them in the removal of the human remains in accordance with the Order in Council, viz.:— 18th December, 1899 £2000 12th March, 1900 £495 4s, 0d 144 QUINQUENNIAL VALUATION. The year 1900 is the one in which the whole of the work connected with the Quinquennial Valuation, which comes into operation on the 6th April, 1901, has to be done. In order to carry out the necessary procedure in connection with the preparation of the List, the Overseers are required to serve notice supplied to them by the Surveyor of Taxes, in the months of February and March of the year when the Quinquennial Valuation list is made The Board arranged for the Collectors to serve these forms, an they have now been received from the Surveyor of Taxes, and delivered. Immediately the necessary returns are sent in, the Oversee will proceed with the Valuation. ASSESSMENT OF GOVERNMENT PROPERTY. In December, 1899, a letter was received from the Clerk to the London County Council suggesting that a petition should be pre sented to Parliament praying that the Assessment Committee should be empowered to value Government properties, and that the exemption of such properties from legal assessment should I abolished accordingly. The Overseers agreed to the suggestion of the Council, and petition was presented accordingly. BASIS OF ASSESSMENT. During the year 1899, an important Conference of the Loc??? Government and Taxation Committee of the London County Coun??? and representatives of the various Boards of Overseers and Asses ment Committees throughout the Metropolis held numerous meeting at the County Hall, Spring Gardens, S.W. Resolutions were adopted laying down, as far as possible, a uniform scale of Assessment throughout the Metropolis. On the whole, the scale does not differ very materially from the one previously adopted, except in regard to small property where the rates are paid by the landlord. This scale will very materially reduce the assessment of properties of this class, which form a very lar??? proportion of the total assessment of the parish. I 145 BANKING ACCOUNT. In January, 1900, the Board considered the terms upon which the London and County Banking Company, Limited, had hitherto kept the Overseers banking account, and alter correspondence with the Company obtained improved terms for the keeping of the account. ACCOUNTS. The Overseers submit their accounts for the year ending 25th March, 1900, which have been audited by the District Auditor, and certified by him to be correct. By order of the Overseers, J. A. JOHNSON, Clerk. 146 The following is a true and perfect Account of all the Monies and Rates Martyr, Southwark, in pursuance of Orders of the Vestry of the said Parish, were directed to levy and pay over the following sums respectively, and Account is prepared in order to be (after it shall have been duly audited) "The Metropolis Management Amendment Act, 1862," 25 and 26 Vict., c. 102 J. A. JOHNSON, Vestry Clerk. THE OVERSEERS AS TO THE GENERAL RATE. Dr. RECEIPTS. 1899. To Balance from Last Account 8333 19 7 ,, Kate made April 12th, for the Half-year ended 29th September, 1899 at 1s. 3d. in the Pound:— April. ,, Collection 18875 3 1 May. ,, Collection June. ,, Collection July. ,, Collection August. ,, Collection September. „ Collection ,, Rate made October 14th, for the Half-year ended 25th March, 1900, at 1s. 4d. in the Pound:— October. ,, Collection 21427 6 8 November.,, Collection December. „ Collection 1900. January. ,, Collection February. ,, Collection March. ,, Collection Interest allowed on Account 28 2 6 Unpaid Drafts 84 2 0 Sundries 19 17 1 43768 10 11 145 received by the Overseers of the Poor of the Parish of Saint George the numbered 116 and 117, and dated the 7th day of March, whereby the Overseers namely, for a General Rate, £32558 0s. 0d.; for a Sewers' Rate, £1873 0s. 0d. delivered to the Vestry of the said Parish, in accordance with the provision of of s. 14. R. R. FULTON, J. MALLEN HALE, THOMAS HAYNES, J.P., Wm. NEVILLE, FREDERICK REDMAN, H. E. SAMBROOK, WILLIAM SAVAGE, Overseers. Collected between March 26th, 1899, and March 2.5th, 1900. payments. Cr. 1899. May 3 The Treasurer to the Vestry 3000 0 0 „ 18 ,, „ (balance of 1898 Order) 333 19 7 ,, 31,, on Account of 1899 Order 4000 0 0 June 14 ,, 3000 0 0 July 12 „ 1500 0 0 Sept. 13 ,, G500 0 0 ,, 27 ,, 700 0 0 Nov. 6 „ 500 0 0 ,, 22 ,, 2500 0 0 Dec. 6 ,, 3500 0 0 ,, 20 ,, 2000 0 0 1900. Jan. 31 ,, 1500 0 0 Feb. 15 ,, 3000 0 0 ,, 28 ,, 3500 0 0 Mar. 22 ,, 358 0 0 35891 19 7 Poundage on Collection— Mr. T. Brown 118 15 6 Mr. F. Mackenzie 92 16 7 Mr. W. T. Montgomery 113 0 11 324 13 0 Stamps- Mr. T. Brown 8 2 9 Mr. F. Mackenzie 4 16 3 Mr. W. T. Montgomery 5 0 5 17 19 5 Rates Refunded 11 1 5 Sundry Expenses 43 13 9 Disorderly Houses Prosecutions 71 7 3 Printing 147 12 11 Unpaid Drafts 84 2 0 Petty Cash 108 11 5 Cheque Book 0 8 4 Balance 7067 1 10 43768 10 11 146 147 THE OVERSEERS AS TO THE SEWERS RATE made between March 26th, 1899, and March 25th, 1900. Dr. Cr. RECEIPTS. PAYMENTS. 1899. To Balance from last Account 162 11 6 1899. May 18. By The Treasurer to the Vestry (Balance of 1898 Order) 3 162 11 6 Sept. 30th. Collection 1207 2 11 1899. Sept. 13. By ,, (On account of 1899 Order) 1873 0 0 2035 11 6 1900. March 31st. ,, 905 7 2 Poundage on Collection— Mr. T. Brown 8 10 0 Mr. F. Mackenzie 4 3 11 Mr. W. T. Montgomery 5 2 3 17 16 2 Balance 221 13 11 £2275 1 7 £2275 1 7 We, the undersigned, Auditors of the Accounts of the Parish of St. George the Martyr, Southwark, having audited the foregoing Accounts of the Overseers of the Poor of the said Parish relating to the Kates levied and paid over by the said Overseers in pursuance of Orders of the said Vestry, numbered 116 and 117, and dated the 7th day of March, 1899. Do hereby state our Allowance of the said Accounts, and do find in accordance therewith that the Balance at Bank on the 25th day of March, 1900 was in respect to the General Rate, £7067 is. 10d., and in respect to the Sewers Rate, £221 13s. 11d., (less the expenses of and incidental to the making and collecting of the said Rates). Given under our hands this 29th day of August, 1900, EDMUND WASHINGTON KNIGHT, JAMES CHUBB, DAVID REES JONES, Auditors for the Parish of SL George the Martyr. 148 149 THE OVERSEERS IN ACCOUNT WITH THE POOR RATE, for the Half Year ended Michaelmas, 1899. Dr. Cr To Balance from last Account 3439 8 9 By Cash to the Guardians 21652 2 11 Collected on Rates by— Police Rate, July, 1899 3106 10 6 Mr. T Brown (Ward 1) 8305 1 9 Library Commissioners, balance of 1898 Precept ... 196 1 2 Mr. F. Mackenzie (Ward 2) 8455 7 6 Mr. T. Brown (Poundage, &c.) 83 16 0 Mr. W. T. Montgomery (Ward 3) 8582 15 2 Mr. F. Mackenzie ,, 44 1 10 25343 4 6 Mr. W. T. Montgomery ,, 54 6 3 Received from the Guardians of St. Saviour's Union— 182 4 1 For Two Quarters' Rentof Workhouse, &c., to Midsummer 1899 400 0 0 Stamps 8 12 9 For Dividends on Consols belonging to this Parish 9 13 6 Mr. G. C. Whiteley (Charges for Notices) 1 11 0 409 13 6 Two Quarters' Ground Rent of Workhouse, to Sept., 1899, Less Income Tax 62 16 8 Government Contribution to Michaelmas, 1899 26 1 0 Mr. J. A. Johnson (Election of Vestrymen and Auditors) 12 0 0 Interest 14 10 7 Registration— Mr. J. A. Johnson 85 0 0 Mr. T. Cornell 113 19 0 198 19 0 Prosecution, re Brothels 4 0 0 Returned Rates 2 8 4 Expenses of County List 4 4 0 Mr. T. Cornell, Books, Demand Notes, Printing, &c 70 8 6 „ Printing 30 2 0 Balance 3701 3 10 £29233 4 9 £29233 4 9 We declare the Entries in the above Account and Memorandum to be true, just and complete, and in verification thereof we have hereunder subscribed our names this 15th day of January, 1900. R. R. FULTON, THOMAS HAYNES, J.P. FREDERICK REDMAN, H. E. SAMBROOK, Overseers. I find the Balance of this Account to be Three Thousand, Seven Hundred, and One Pounds, Three Shillings, and Ten Pence against the Overseers, which Sum I find has been paid by them to their Successors before this day. Dated January 29th, 1900. T. B. COCKER ION, Auditer. 152 153 An Account of the Parochial Rates and of the Collection and Balancing thereof respectively. RATES. COLLECTION. Made on the 12th day of April, 1899. poor rate. general rate sewers rate. totals. 3/- in the £. poor rate. general rate. sewers rate. 1/9 in the £. 1/3 in the £. Mr. T. Brown, Collector. Amount Collected . 8305 1 9¾ 5534 18 3 395 1 4 14235 11 4¼ Amount of Kates 8777 16 6 5851 17 8 417 19 10 11047 14 0 Deductions allowed to Owners 271 0 4¼ 180 14 4 12 8 2 464 12 10¼ Arrears of former Kates 4 3 4 3 17 6 0 5 2 8 6 0 Legally Excused or Irrecoverable 265 4 9 178 15 8 12 15 5 456 15 10 Additional Assessments 62 17 1 41 18 1 2 19 11 107 15 1 Arrears carried to next Rate 3 10 0 3 5 0 — 6 15 0 Amount to be Collected 8844 16 11 5897 13 3 421 4 11 15163 15 1 Totals 8844 16 11 5897 13 3 421 4 11 15163 15 1 Mr. F. Mackenzie, Collector. Amount Collected 8455 7 6 5637 3 2 402 13 1 14495 3 9 Amount of Rates 8531 3 3 5687 8 10 406 4 11 14621 17 0 Deductions allowed to Owners 66 12 1 44 3 6¾ 3 3 1 113 18 8½ Arrears of former Rates - - Legally Excused or Irrecoverable 107 11 6½ 71 14 1 5 2 5 184 8 0½ Additional Assessments 98 7 10½ 65 11 11½ 4 13 8 168 13 6 Arrears carried to next Rate — — — Amount to be Collected 8629 11 1½ 5753 0 9½ 410 18 7 14793 10 6 Totals 8629 11 1½ 5753 0 9½ 410 18 7 14793 10 6 Mr. W. T. Montgomery, Collector. Amount Collected 8582 15 0 5723 9 9½ 408 18 6 14715 3 3½ Amount of Rates 9037 3 6 6024 15 8 430 6 10 15492 6 0 Deductions allowed to Owners 406 6 11½ 270 18 3 19 7 0 696 12 2½ Arrears of former Rates 26 10 10 19 18 2 1 6 6 47 15 6 Legally Excused or Irrecoverable 232 7 4 155 5 4 11 1 10 398 14 6 Additional Assessments 164 14 11½ 109 19 6½ 7 14 0 282 8 6 Arrears carried to next Rate 7 0 0 5 0 0 — 12 0 0 Amount to be Collected 9228 9 3½ 6154 13 4½ 439 7 4 15822 10 0 Totals 9228 9 3½ 6154 13 4½ 439 7 4 15822 10 0 The Parish. The Parish. Amount Collected 25343 4 3¾ 16895 11 2½ 1207 2 11 43445 18 5¼ Amount of Rates 26346 3 3 17564 2 2 1254 11 7 45164 17 0 Deductions allowed to Owners 743 19 7¾ 405 16 1½ 35 8 3 1275 3 9¼ Arrears of former Rates 30 14 2 23 15 8 1 11 8 56 1 6 Legally Excused or Irrecoverable 605 3 7½ 405 15 1 28 19 8 1039 18 4½ Additional Assessments 325 19 11 217 9 7 15 7 7 554 17 1 Arrears carried to next Rate 10 10 0 8 5 0 — 18 5 0 Amount to be Collected 26702 17 4 17805 7 5 1271 10 10 45779 15 7 Totals 26702 17 4 17805 7 5 1271 10 10 45779 15 7 154 155 An Account of the Parochial Rates and of the Collection and Balancing thereof respectively. RATES. COLLECTION. Made on the 14th day of October, 1899. POOR RATE. GENERAL RATE SEWERS RATE. TOTALS. poor rate. general rate. sewers rate. TOTALS. 1s. 10d. in the £. 16d. in the £. 3s.2d. in the £ Mr. T. Brown, Collector. Amount Collected 8732 4 11¼ 6052 18 3 296 13 6 15081 16 8¼ Amount of Rates 9250 9 0 6414 2 0½ 313 9 10½ 15978 0 11 Deductions allowed to Owners 280 16 1¾ 194 9 7¾ 9 13 7½ 484 19 5 Arrears of former Rates 3 10 0 3 1 1½ 0 3 10½ 6 15 0 Legally Excused or Irrecoverable 257 13 8 178 14 7¾ 9 11 6½ 445 19 10¼ Additional Assessments 35 6 9 23 9 1½ 2 4 11 61 0 9½ Arrears carried to next Rate 18 11 0 14 9 9 - 33 0 9 Amount to be Collected 9289 5 9 6440 1 12 3½ 315 .8 8 16045 16 8½ Totals 9289 5 9 6440 12 3½ 315 18 8 16045 16 8½ Mr. F. Mackenzie, Collector. Amount Collected 8952 15 10 6208 2 7¼ 301 19 9¾ 15462 18 3 Amount of Rates 9044 4 0 6272 18 3¾ 304 ] 13 8¼ 15621 16 0 Deductions allowed to Owners 70 5 9 48 14 7¾ 2 7 3¾ 121 7 8½ Arrears of former Rates - - - - Legally Excused or Irrecoverable 99 7 2 69 8 9¾ 3 16 9¾ 172 12 9½ Additional Assessments 78 4 9 53 7 9 3 10 3 135 2 9 Arrears carried to next Rate • - — - - Amount to be Collected 9122 8 9 6326 6 0¾ 308 11¼ 15756 18 9 Totals 9122 8 9 6326 6 0¾ 308 3 11¼ 15756 18 9 Mr. W. T. Montgomery, Collector. Amount Collected 9066 18 2 6287 6 8 306 13 10¼ 15660 18 .8¼ Amount of Rates 9689 12 6 6724 4 104 322 15 1½ 16736 12 6 Deductions allowed to Owners 431 8 6 299 2 11 14 10 3 745 1 8 Arrears of former Rates 7 0 0 4 0 14 0 19 104 12 0 0 Legally Excused or Irrecoverable 256 12 3½ 178 5 11 8 6 4¾ 443 4 7¼ Additional Assessments 61 6 0½ 38 13 10 5 15 6 105 15 4½ Arrears carried to next Rate 2 19 7 2 3 4 — 5 2 11 Amount to be Collected 9757 18 6½ 6766 18 10 329 10 6 16854 7 104 Totals 9757 18 6½ 6766 18 10 329 10 6 16854 7 10½ The Parish. Amount Collected 2675 18 11¼ 18548 7 6¼ 905 7 2 46205 13 7½ Amount of Rates 27984 1 5 6 19411 5 23 940 18 8¼ 48336 9 5 Deductions allowed to Owners 782 10 4¾ 542 7 2½ 26 11 2¼ 1351 8 9½ Arrears of former Rates 10 10 0 7 1 3 1 3 9 18 15 0 Legally Excused or Irrecoverable 613 13 1½ 426 9 4½ 21 14 9 1061 17 3 Additional Assessments 174 \ 17 6½ 115 10 8½ 11 10 8 301 18 11 Arrears carried to next Rate 21 10 7 16 > 13 1 — 38 1 3 8 Amount to be Collected 28161 ) 18 0½ 19533 17 2¼ 953 13 1¼ 48657 3 4 Totals 28169 13 0½ 19533 17 2¼ 953 13 1¼ 48657 3 4 156 LIST OF OFFICERS or the vestry of ST. GEORGE THE MARTYR, SOUTHWARK AND THEIR SALARIES. Mr. J. A. Johnson, Vestry Clerk per ann. £500 Dr. F. J. Waldo, M.D., D.P.H., Medical Officer ,, 500 Mr. Arthur Harrison, Surveyor ,, 325 Mr. C. R. Williams, Assistant Surveyor ,, 130 Mr. J. Summers, Clerk of Works ,, 182 Mr. James Weatheritt, Chief Sanitary Inspector ,, 190 Mr. Joshua Owner, Sanitary Inspector, Ward 1 ,, 120 Mr. Robert Simpson, Sanitary Inspector, Ward 2 ,, 150 Mr. Philip David, Sanitary Inspector, Ward 3 „ 135 Miss Annie Elliott, Sanitary Inspector, Wards 1 and 2 „ 150 Miss Emily H. Wilkin Sanitary Inspector, Ward 3 ,, 110 Mr. E. F. Brion, Rate Clerk £2 15 0 weekly ,, 143 Mr. H. Hume, Acting Accountant £2 10 0 ,, 130 Mr. F. O. Wright, Assistant Rate Clerk £2 10 0 ,, ,, 130 Mr. H. W. Underhill, Minute Clerk £2 10 0 ,, ,, 130 Mr. A. Baldrey, Prime Cost Clerk £2 0 0 ,, ,, 104 Mr. A. H. Port, Assistant Clerk £2 0 0 ,, ,, 104 Mr. E. O. Jones, Public Health Clerk £2 0 0 ,, „ 104 Mr. S. Palmer, Surveyor's Clerk £1 7 6 ,, „ 71/10/0 Mr. A. J. Patrick, Junior Clerk £15 0 ,, „ 65 Mr.J. Wheeler, Messenger and Caretaker £1 17 6 ,, „ 97/10/0 Mr. F. R. Fielder, Assistant Messenger £0 16 0 „ For the Rate Collectors, set p.p. 145, 147, 148 and 149. . 157 REPORT OF THE Commissioners for Public Libraries AND MUSEUMS, For the year ending 25th March, 1900. The Public Library Commissioners, in submitting the report of the first year's working of the Public Library, think it desirable to preface the statistics and financial statements with a brief review of the history of the public library movement in the Parish, together with extracts from the reports already presented by the Commissioners to the Vestry. In August, 1895, a letter appeared in the Daily Chronicle, from Mr. Passmore Edwards, offering £5,000 for a building suitable for a public library, on the conditions that the Parish adopted the Public Libraries Acts, and acquired a site under favourable conditions. Universal pleasure was expressed, both privately and publicly, at this generous offer, and an organization was established for testing the feelings of the parishioners. On the 24th March, 1896, a poll of the Parish was taken, and the Public Libraries Acts adopted by a majority of 1814. The first Commission was composed as follows:— Miss A. E. Busk, Mr. T. Emary, Rev. T. G. Gardiner, M. A., Mr. T. Haynes, J.P., Mr. A. Hawkins, Mr. T. Hunter, L.C.C., Mr. E. W. Knight, Mr. J. Pascall, and Mr. G. Pocock. The Commissioners held their first meeting on April loth, 1896, and elected Rev, T. G. Gardiner, Chairman, and Mr. J. A. Johnson (Vestry Clerk), as Clerk. In the report of the Commissioners to the Vestry for the year ending 25th March, 1898, the Commissioners reported as follows:— 168 site for library. Immediately on their appointment, in April, 1896, the Commissioners considered the question of the provision of a site whereon to erect the Library buildings. One of the principal sites suggested was the large plot of land in Borough Road, upon a portion of which the Library building is now being erected. Negotiations took place between the Commissioners and the Bridge House Estates Committee for the sale of the whole of this site to the Commissioners, but as the amount asked for by the Committee was considerably in excess of that which the Commissioners thought it desirable should be paid for a site, the negotiations fell through. purchase of leasehold. An attempt was then made to secure the present site. It was found that the Bridge House Estates Committee had let the whole plot of land on a building agreement to Mr. C. J. Phipps, Architect, of 26, Mecklenhurgh Square. On further enquiry it was ascertained that the Committee had divided the ground rent of the two portions of the land into £175 per annum for the front portion and £50 per annum for the larger or back portion. After considerable negotiations with Mr. C. J. Phipps, the Commissioners agreed to pay him tho sum of £500 for a surrender of his building agreement for the corner plot of land, with frontage to the Borough Road, and a depth of 70 feet, in order that a new building agreement might be entered into between the Commissioners and the Bridge House Estates Committee at tho reduced rent of £150 per annum, the rent of tho back portion retained by Mr. Phipps being increased to £75 per annum. One of the conditions attached to the agreement by Mr. Phipps was that Messrs. Phipps & Jackson should be appointed Architects of tho building on the usual professional terms, subject to Mr. Passmore Edwards' approval. A formal agreement to the above effect was entered into between the Commissioners and Mr. Phipps, which bears date the 21st May, 1897—the delay in completing the agreement having arisen in consequence of Mr. Phipps absence on the Continent. arrangement for purchase of freehold. Negotiations had in the meantime taken place with the Bridgo House Estates Committee for the purchase of the freehold of the land. Tho Com mittee, however, declined to accept a smaller sum than £1500, or 30 years purchase of the ground rent. The Commissioners considered this amount somewhat excessive, but under the circumstances agreed to it. A new building agreement was. accordingly granted by the City Corpora tion to the Commissioners on the 30th August, 1897, embodying a clause 159 enabling the Public Library Commissioners to purchase the freehold of the ground at the above price within three years from the date of the agreement. redemption of land tax. The Commissioners have redeemed the Land Tax on the property for the amount of £121 7s. 6d. queen's diamond jubilee. The original arrangement between the Library Commissioners and Mr. Phipps was made in January, 1897. Some months, however, elapsed before the details were finally settled, and in the meantime the announcement that Her Majesty would pass along Borough Road on the occasion of the celebration of her Diamond Jubilee, for the time being, considerably enhanced the value of the land, which Mr. Phipps had agreed to hand over to the Commissioners, but of which he was still in possession. In view of this fact, Mr. Phipps approached the Commissioners, and an arrangement was made whereby he should receive the sum of £100 for giving up possession of the laud, so that the Commissioners might use the same for a stand on the occasion of the Jubilee celebration, and for supervising the erection of the stand on behalf of the Commissioners. The Commissioners were fortunate in obtaining a substantial offer of £2000 for the land for this purpose from Messrs. J & S. Motion, of Moorgate Street, along with Mr. E.J. Davenport, builder, of Balham. The amount was duly received, and formed a very substantial addition to the subscriptions towards the Library Fund. plans of library building. On the 19th May, 1897, the Architect submitted sketch plans of a proposed Library building, but the amount of the estimate was very much in excess of what the Commissioners deemed it advisable to expend. Instructions were accordingly given to the Architect to prepare plans of a building at a total estimated inclusive cost of £5000. Before these plans were submitted, Mr. Phipps, the Architect, died somewhat suddenly. Mr. Jackson, his partner, however, submitted drawings on the 2nd June, 1897. After various modifications, the plans were approved and forwarded to Mr. Passmore Edwards for confirmation on the 7th July, 1897. Tenders were obtained for the work, when it was found that the lowest tender amounted to £5868. As the contractors subsequently declined to carry out the work, the Architect was directed to again modify the plans so as to further reduce the cost. contract for erection of building. New tenders were then obtained, and on the 8th October, 1897, the tender of Messrs. J. Smith & Sons, of South Norwood, for erecting the proposed building at the price of £5115, and for erecting the boundary walls for the sum of £441, was accepted. The formal contract was entered into on the 18th October, 1897. 160 clerk of works. Mr. G. S. Rees was appointed Clerk of Works of the now building on the 10th October, 1897, at the salary of £3 13s. 6d. per week. laying of foundation stone. The laying of the foundation stone of the new building took place on the 2nd December, 1897. Mr. J. Passmore Edwards performed the ceremony. The report for the year 1898-9 is as follows:— librarian. One of the first matters calling for the attention of the Commissioners at the commencement of the year, was the question of appointing a suitable person as chief Librarian. Advertisements were issued for a Librarian at a salary of £160 per annum, rising by annual increments of £10 to £200 per annum with house, coals and gas so soon as the building should be completed. Eighty-four (84) applications were received, and Mr. Thomas AIdred, the Chief Librarian at Barrow-in-Furness, was appointed to the post, and he commenced his duties on the 25th May, 1898. ladies' convenience. An arrangement was arrived at, and a formal agreement dated the 15th October, 1898, was entered into between the Vestry and the Commissioners for the letting to the former Authority of a small plot of ground on the westerly side of the Library for the erection of a Ladies Convenience, at the rent of £5 per annum. books. The Commissioners made appeals to various institutions and persons for gifts of books, and these were in many cases responded to in a generous spirit. Application was made to the Lords Commissioners of Her Majesty's Treasury for copies of the Record Office publications, and 208 volumes wore subsequently received from that Department. A similar application was made to the Authorities of the British Museum for their publications; but the Trustees stated that they would bo prepared to consider the application when the Library had been established in a permanent building. The application will, accordingly, be shortly renewed. Considerable attention was paid to the quality and cost of the books purchased. The method adopted in selecting the books was that of sending a copy of the Librarian's draft list of books to each member of the Books Committee, which consisted of the Cornmissioners, and Mrs. E. M. Burgwin, Sir J. G. Fitch, LL.D., M.A., Miss H. C. Gardiner, Mr. J. M. Hale, Mrs. Hawkins, itev. St. Clare 161 Hill, M.A., Mr. S. W. Pascall, and Mr. A. W. Waters. The plan for members of the Committee to express opinion upon each book on the list according to a pre-arranged division of criticism, and also to add to the list the names of books they were of the opinion hould be purchased. The collective criticisms were then discussed nd on August 24th, 1898, instructions were given to purchase about 4,000 works, and at a later date orders were given for the purchase of he stock of Fiction. It may be added, that it was not deemed ???esirable to purchase a large or expensive stock on account of sums being set apart from the available funds to clear the cost of the building and furniture, and to provide a nucleus of a fund for the purchase of he freehold of the site. The majority of the books were bought from second-hand booksellers who affixed prices to each book they had for sale which was lamed in the list sent them. The prices were tabulated, with the Result that books were bought from over 90 booksellers. The remainder of the books were bought on very favourable terms in the ordinary way of trade. The total amount spent on the purchase of the initial stock of Dooks was £752 9s. 11d. to which may be added £44 0s. 9d. for re-binding. books of account, library specialities, etc. The Commissioners deemed it adviscible to obtain tenders for these matters, with the result that the prices of the following firms were accepted:— Books of Account—Mr. T. Cornell. Library Specialities—Library Supply Company. Typewriting Machine—Hammond Typewriting Company. fittings. The Commissioners obtained tenders for the necessary book racks, tables, newspaper stands, and counter from various firms, and Messrs. W ake A Dean, whose business is carried on in this parish, obtained the cod tract. catalogue. Immediately a sufficient number of works had been purchased, the Librarian proceeded with the preparation of the Catalogue of the Library, and in November, 1898, the Commissioners obtained tenders for the printing of the work, and, Mr. T. Cornell's tender, being the lowest, was accepted. 162 RULES. In view of the early opening of the Library, the Commissioners, on the 12th October, 1898, adopted rules as to the opening, closing, admission of persons and borrowing of books in the various departments of the Library. opening of the library. The formal opening of the Library took place on the 8th February, 1899. The ceremony was performed by the Right Hon. James Bryce, D.C.L., M.P., who delivered an admirable address on that occasion. Mr. J. Passmore Edwards, whose handsome donation of £5,000 has now been fully paid, was also present. description of library building. In order to afford the Vestry a full description of the Library Building, the Commissioners submit the following statement prepared by the Architect:— The building stands some twenty feet back from the pavement in the Borough Road, and tho space thus available is turfed. This arrangement greatly enhances the architecture effect of the building, and also removes the reading rooms further from the noise of the passing traffic. The building consists of a basement, ground floor, and first floor, with an attic floor over the portion assigned to the Librarian's residonce. The basement extends over the whole area of the building, being well lighted by an area which completely surrounds it. In tho basement are the heating chamber and the coal cellars; the rest of the space is available for the storage of books, and for repairs, and unpacking, &c. The ground floor is placed about three feet above tho level of the pavement. On entering, one reaches the Ladies' Room on the right hand side and the News Room on the loft hand side, the public portion of the Lending Library being immediately in front. The Boys' Room has a door opening into the News Room, but it is proposed that tho usual moans of access shall be through the Lending Library, thus enabling the staff to have full control over those who use the room. The public rooms are all under tho direct supervision of the staff in tho Lending Library, as is also the Entrance Hall. On tho first floor is the Reference Library and Magazine Room, with book store attached. A spiral staircase from the book store communicates with the ending Library and basement below. This enables tho stuff to reach one department from another with great facility. Adjoining tho Reference Library is the Committee Room. There is a separate entrance for the Librarian's staff, and this ontrance also leads to the Librarian's residence, which comprises drawing-room, dining room, and three bedrooms, bath-room, kitchen, scullery, &c. 163 The exterior facings of the walls are of red brick, with terra cotta dressings, cornices, mouldings, and enrichments, the roof being covered with slates. Over the entrance is a panel bearing the inscription "Passmore Edwards' Public Library," the rest of the space being filled in with a conventional Tree of Knowledge. The figure subject in the upper portion of the gable represents St. George and the Dragon, and the shields on either side of this bear the Cross of St. George and the Badge of the Vestry of St. George the Martyr, Southwark, lespectively. Above the western window there is a panel representing " Truth holding the mirror up to Nature." The main staircase is of teak, the newels, balusters, and handrail being polished, while the doors and screens are of varnished pine, the wood being stained in two different tints. This treatment is also carried out to the wood panel ceiling of the Reference Library. Glass has been largely used, in order to provide as much light as possible throughout the building. The electric light has been installed in the building, which is heated throughout by means of hot water pipes, with fixed radiators. In order to give publicity to the situation and work of the Library, circulars were distributed in the parish stating the advantages the institution gives, and the way in which all inhabitants of the parish can use the Library. To further advertise the Library, 20 enamelled tablets have been placed on lamps in different parts of the parish. The bronze medallions of Sir William Molesworth and Sir Austen Henry Layard which Mr. Passmore Edwards is providing to commemorate the connection of these worthies with the parliamentary representation of the district will be placed in the vestibule of the Library, and a distinguished statesman has promised to deliver an address on the occasion of the unveiling. It may be stated that while seeking portraits or busts of the former M.P's. for this district, inquiries were made of Lady Layard as to any pictorial representations which might be in existence, and she very kindly presented to the library a handsome bronze medallion of her husband, modelled by herself, which was transmitted from Venice. SUBSCRIPTIONS. In response to appeals the undernamed subscriptions were received in addition to Mr. Passmore Edwards munificent donation of £5,000 and the £2,000 received for letting the library site a stand for the Queen's Diamond Jubilee Procession. 164  £ s. d. The Draper's Company 500 0 0 Rector and Churchwardens of St. George the Martyr 250 0 0 Mr. C. J. W. Rabbits 105 0 0 Miss A. E. Busk 100 0 0 Mr. A. Hawkins 100 0 0 South Metropolitan Gas Company, Limited 100 0 0 The Fishmonger's Company 52 10 0 Mr. Edric Bayley, L.C.C. 50 0 0 Mr. R. K. Causton, M.P. 50 0 0 Mr. James Pascall 50 0 0 Mr. George Pocock 50 0 0 Mr. E. W. Knight 15 0 0 The Leatherseller's Company 10 10 0 Mr. H. Cosmo Bonsor, M.P. 10 0 0 Miss H. C. Gardiner 10 0 0 Mr. F. Redman 5 5 0 Mr. F. J. Waldo, M.D., M.A. 5 5 0 Mr. R. C. Doulton 5 0 0 Mr. S. Lupton 5 0 0 "W. H. L." 5 0 0 Mr. J. Edwards 2 2 0 Messrs. R. Hoe and Company 2 2 0 Mr. F. Braby 2 0 0 Mr. J. C. Bumsted 1 1 0 Mrs. Hawkins 1 1 0 Mr. H. Hawkins 1 1 0 Mr. E. C. Middleditch 1 1 0 Mr. C. Middleton. 1 0 0 Sundry Donors 35 14 0 £1,525 12 0 LECTURES. During the past winter the Commissioners, through the medium of Miss H. C. Gardiner, were able to secure the gratuitous services of prominent men for a series of lectures. The course, which was delivered in the lieference Library, was as follows:— Maj.-Gen. J. F. Maurice, C.B., R.A., on " The Army." Michael E. Sadler, Esq., M.A. (Director of Special Enquiries, Education Department), on “Thomas Arnold, of Rugby." Augustine Birrell, Esq., Q.C., M.P., on " Wit and Humour." 165 Bishop Barry, D.D., D.C.L., on "Charles Dickens and his Writings." Professor Westlake, on "South Africa." Lieut. Knox. R.N., on "The Navy." All the lectures were exceptionally well attended, and the result was satisfactory in every respect. LOAN. In order to purchase the freehold of the land on which the Library stands, the Commissioners have made application to the Local Government Board for a loan of £3,500 towards the £4,500 which the land is to cost. LOCAL BOOKS AND PRINTS. As it is the intention of the Commissioners to make local books and prints a speciality at the Library, they respectfully solicit the gift of anything pertaining to the history of the parish. ACCOUNTS. The Commissioners submit their accounts for the year ended 25th March, 1900, as audited by the District Auditor, and also a financial statement covering the whole of the period. In conclusion, the Commissioners are pleased to report that the Public Library has proved a success in each of its departments, and beg to call special attention to the appended statistics. On behalf of the Library Commissioners. ALEXANDER HAWKINS, Chairman of Commissioners. J. A. JOHNSON, Cltrk. CLASSIFICATION OF STOCK, ISSUES, &c. Class. Class Letter. Stock. Percentage of Stock to the whole. Total Issues. Percentage of Issues to the Total. Daily Average Issue in each Class. Annual Turnover of Stock in each Class. Lending Dept. Reference Dept. Total. Religion and Philosophy A 371 14 385 5.6 970 1.2 3.0 2.5 Social Science B 193 7 200 2.9 500 •6 1.5 2.6 Biography C 560 21 581 8.4 1,220 1.5 3.8 2.0 History and Geography D 806 240 1,046 15.2 3,959 5.0 12.5 3.7 Archaeology, Customs, &c. E 73 5 78 1.1 179 •2 •5 2.2 Fiction F 2,125 • • • 2,125 31.0 40,927 51.7 129.5 19.2 Science and Useful Arts G 590 33 623 9.0 3,471 4.3 10.9 5.6 Arts and Art Crafts H 60 49 109 1.5 501 •6 1.5 4.5 Juvenile Literature J 715 • • • 715 10.4 16,896 21.3 53.4 23.6 Music K 109 7 116 1.6 694 •8 2.1 5.9 Sports and Pastimes L 114 • • • 114 1.6 783 •9 2.4 6.8 Language and Literature M 351 89 440 6.4 1,346 1.7 4.2 30 Encyclopaedias and Magazines N 131 191 322 4.6 7,630 9.6 24.1 23.6 Total ... 6,198 656 6,854 1000 79,076 100.0 250.2 11.6 166 167 REFERENCE DEPARTMENT—Classification of Issues. Month. Class A. Class B. Class C. Class D. Class E. Class F. Class G. Class H. Class J. Class K. Class L. Class M. Class N. Total. Days Open. Daily Average Issue. February 24 13 12 40 1 ... 72 6 ... 9 32 11 438 658 16 41 March 37 8 14 73 10 1 94 6 68 10 30 21 348 720 23½ 30 April 18 8 11 64 4 ... 58 9 9 2 17 17 328 545 22 25 May 10 10 17 55 ... ... 93 11 3 5 26 10 270 510 23½ 21 June 19 15 19 40 6 ... 82 2 8 5 12 19 254 481 24 20 July 25 20 23 64 1 ... 84 3 4 3 12 32 285 556 24 23 August 24 25 29 75 17 1 69 37 7 11 13 49 584 941 23½ 40 September 10 17 39 85 1 ... 92 29 4 1 14 53 544 889 24 37 October 4 6 26 96 5 ... 80 26 4 3 36 44 588 918 24 38 November 7 15 17 117 3 ... 63 32 3 2 30 40 461 790 23½t 33 December 15 11 21 70 1 ... 70 12 4 3 9 54 303 573 22 26 January 22 17 45 94 4 ... 108 63 3 5 25 60 405 851 24½ 34 February 2 8 12 77 2 ... 112 19 1 7 18 52 382 692 22 31 March 4 12 12 50 1 ... 107 11 ... 6 9 50 265 527 19½ 27 221 185 297 1000 56 2 1184 266 118 72 283 512 5455 9651 316 30 168 LENDING DEPARTMENT—Classification of Issues. Month. Class A. Class B. Class C. Class D. Class E. Class F. Class G. Class H. Class J. Class K. Class L. Class M. Class N. Total. Days Open. Daily Average Issue. Transactions. February 31 9 42 133 11 1276 93 22 749 36 29 43 72 2546 16 159 2525 March 72 16 88 223 10 2849 191 24 1499 53 40 58 151 5274 23½ 224 5225 April 61 17 82 230 14 3163 203 18 1444 52 40 49 127 •5500 22 250 5455 May 68 20 82 223 13 3295 194 14 1426 43 41 43 116 5578 23½ 237 5511 June 69 13 68 162 6 2835 165 8 1218 50 36 60 107 4797 24 199 4708 July 45 20 65 157 8 2806 142 12 1181 29 42 40 130 4677 24 195 4617 August 42 22 43 169 8 2740 127 14 1077 20 40 40 136 4478 23½ 195 4412 September 66 24 57 215 8 3204 176 15 1041 40 44 54 173 5117 24 213 5041 October 57 21 63 236 10 3170 158 18 1088 57 34 90 217 5219 24 217 5145 November 65 37 78 237 5 3218 178 19 1171 51 30 78 183 5350 23½ 227 5273 December 32 34 59 215 6 2795 163 14 1145 34 34 54 177 4762 22 216 4708 January 43 30 52 270 6 3445 181 15 1385 31 39 66 240 5803 24½ 236 5723 February 52 30 68 283 8 3155 170 18 1233 62 23 79 209 5390 22 245 5319 March 46 22 76 206 10 2974 146 24 1121 64 28 80 137 4934 19½ 253 4867 Total 749 315 923 2959 123 40925 2287 235 16778 622 500 834 2175 69425 316 219 68529 169 SUMMARY Number of vols, in the Library 6,854 Average turnover of stock 11.5 Number of vols, lent 79,076 Number of days open 316 Daily average issue of books 250 Percentage of Class F (Fiction) issued 51.7 ,, ,, J (Juvenile Literature) issued 21.3 Number of Tickets in force, 25th March, 1900 2.239 ,, Notices sent re Overdue Books 670 ,, Students' Tickets issued 187 ,, Bookings re Reserved Books 368 ,, Books withdrawn re infectious diseases 15 ,, ,, lost and paid for by borrowers 9 ,, ,, re-bound 1,018 CLASSIFICATION OF BORROWERS.. 2471 Applications for Membership Tickets were passed during The year, but of these 232 have been cancelled for various reasons, The net number (2239) is classified as follows:— Males, 1308; Females, 931. Total 2239. 396 Scholars. 216 Clerks. 118 Compositors and Printers. 81 School Teachers. 36 Warehousemen. 34 Assistants. 29 Labourers. 27 Waitresses. 25 Engineers. 24 Tailors. 23 Dress and Mantle makers. 22 Packers. 20 Apprentices, Domestic servants. 19 Office boys. 17 Bakers and Confectioners, Carpenters and Joiners. 16 Porters, Tobacco workers. 10 Fitters, Bookbinders. 14 Messengers, Nurses, Stationers. 13 Bootmakers, Painters. 12 Chemists. 11 Managers, Milliners. 9 Housekeepers, Trimmers. 170 8 Cashiers, Foremen, Merchants, Plumbers, Policemen, Salesmen, Typists. 7 Brass finishers. Clergymen, Commercial travellers, Errand boys, Oilmen. ' Pawnbrokers. Publicans, Railway employees, Turners. 6 Agents, Box-makers, Collectors, Drapers, Grocers, Letter sorters, Poor-law officials, Students, Superintendents, Telegraph messengers. 5 Builders, Caretakers, Carmen, Coffee-house keepers, Hairdressers, Hat and Cap makers, Ironmongers, Laundry workers, Library employees, Musicians, Perfumers, Postmen. 4 Actors and Actresses, Bricklayers, Dairymen, Electricians, Machine minders, Masons, Needlewomen, Sanitary Inspectors, Secretaries, Surgeons, Smiths. 3 Booksellers, Cellarmen, Corn dealers, Costumiers, Draughtsmen, Engine drivers, Envelope folders, French polishers, Fruiterers, Mission workers, Packing case makers, Pattern makers, Portmanteau makers, Storekeepers, Telegraphists, Tinmen, Upholsterers. 2 Brace makers, Cabinet makers, Commissionaires, Cooks, Etchers, Fishmongers, Grey ladies, Harness makers, Hosiers, Iron moulders, Iron plate workers, Lace workers, Letter cutters, Plate layers, Registrars, Rulers, Samplemen, Seedsmen, Silk finishers, Soap makers, Stage hands, Stamp makers, Stewards, Sugar boilers, Surveyors, Tea dealers, Watchmakers, Watchmen, Wire goods workers. 1 Army contractor, Army pensioner, Artificial florist, Asbestos warper, Basket maker, Billiard table maker, Blind maker, Border turner, Bottle washer, Butcher, Braid maker, Cabman, Canvasser, Card cutter, Carpet planner, Cart contractor, Coachman, Coach wheeler, Coal merchant, Cocoa worker, Collar turner, Colour grinder, Cooper, Court keeper, Diamond setter, Draft stamper, Drysalter, Edge cutter, Egg merchant, Embosser, Engraver, Exhibitor, Fireman, Florist, Flower mounter, Gardener, Gas lamp maker, Gas man, Gas meter maker, Glass blower, Glass grinder, Glazier, Gold blocker, Gold embroiderer, Gold layer, Greengrocer, Gunsmith, India rubber manufacturer, Ironfounder, Journalist, Knitter, Leather dresser, Lamp shade cutter, Lathrender, Lavatory attendant, Liftman, Loophole boy, Map mounter, Metal merchant, Newsagent, Omnibus conductor, Ostrich feather dyer, Outfitter, Pager, Paperhangor, Pavior, Pewterer, Phrenologist, Picture frame maker, Plasterer, Sailor, Scaffolder, Sealing wax maker, Ship broker, Silver polisher, Skin furrier, Stencil cutter, Stevedore, Tie maker, Timekeeper, Transfer puller, Typefounder, Umbrella maker, Verger, Waterproof sheet marker, Weaver, Well sinker, Wheelwright. 453 Occupations not stated. 2239 Total. 171 NUMBER OF TIMES POPULAR BOOKS HAVE BEEN ISSUED. Farrar's Life of Christ 17 Nansen's Farthest North 23 Ranjitsinji's Cricket 27 Hoffman's Puzzles 38 World of Adventure, 3 vols, (issued separately) 55 British Battles, 4 vols, (issued separately) 97 Slingo and Brooker's Electrical engineering 12 Civil service year book 12 Pennell's Modern illustration 17 Balfe's Bohemian Girl 25 Ashton's The Fleet 10 Amateur Work, 8 vols, (issued separately) 99 Braddon's Lady Audley's secret 39 Donovan's Caught at last 40 Corelli's Sorrows of Satan (2 copies) 70 Caines's The Christian (2 copies) 54 Lang's Yellow fairy book 69 Arabian nights' entertainments 53 Henty's Beric the Briton 39 Verne's Around the World in 80 days 47 Doyle's Study in Scarlet 57 NEWSPAPERS AND PERIODICALS SUPPLIED TO THE NEWSROOMS. Those marked with an asterisk (*) are presented. daily. Birmingham Post Daily Chronicle Daily Graphic Daily Mail Daily News Daily Telegraph Echo *Financial News Freeman's Journal Glasgow Herald Globe bi-weekly. City Press *Les Annales *Architect *Aspirant Athenaoum weekly. Irish Times Manchester Guardian Morning Leader Morning Post Pall Mall Standard Star The Times Western Mail Westminster Gazette Yorkshire Post tri-weekly. Exchange and Mart Labour News Lady's Pictorial Lloyd's *Local Government Chronicle 172 Athletio News Block and White Boys' Own Paper Builder Cassell's Saturday Journal Chums *Civil Service Weekly Clarion Cycling Electrical Review Engineer English Mechanic Fun Gentlewoman Girls' Own Paper Graphic Illustrated London News *Justice Army List Art Journal Bookman *Borough Polytechnic News British Printer *Brotherhood Captain Cassell's Family Magazine Century Magazine Chambers' Journal Cornhill Contemporary *Educational Review *Educational Times English Illustrated Magazine Fortnightly Harmsworth Harpers Knowledge *Labour Gazette Ladies Realm monthly. *London Argus Municipal Journal Outlook *Photography Pitman's Shorthand Weekly Publisher's Circular Punch Queen Saturday Review South London Press Southwark Recorder Tit-Bits Truth *University Correspondent Volunteer Service Gazette Weekly Dispatch Woman's Life Work Leisure Hour *Literary Guide *London Technical Education Gaz. *Musical Herald *Nature Notes Navy List *New Church Magazine Nineteenth Century Pearsons' *Plumber and Decorator Quiver Review of Reviews Scribner'8 *Social Democratic Strand Studio Temple Weldon's Monthly Wide World Windsor Woman at Home railway guides. ABC Railway Guide Bradshaw's Railway Guide *Cook's Excursionist *District Railway . *Great Central *Great Eastern * Great Northern *Great Western *London, Brighton & South Coast *London and North Wen tern *London and South Western *Metropolitan *Midland *North British *North Eastern *South Eastern & Chatham & Dover 173 RESIDENCES OF BORROWERS. Ac worth Street 2 Angel Place 1 Aster Place 5 Austral Street 10 Barbel Street 1 Bath Street 15 Belvedere Place 14 Bittern Street 13 Blackfriars Road 59 Borough High Street 96 Borough Road 84 Bowling Green Lane 1 Buckingham Square 6 Buckingham Street 3 Burman Street 10 Butcher Row 1 Chatham Street 11 Collinson Street 16 Colnbrook Street 18 Comus Place 1 Dantzic Street 4 Darwin Street 4 Disney Street 2 Dodson Street 2 Earl Place 1 Earl Street 7 East Street 5 Elliott's Row 13 Eve's Place 1 Friar Place 1 Friar Street 15 Garden Row 21 Gay wood Street 20 Gerridge Street 8 Gladstone Street 47 Gray Street 3 Green Street 9 Gt. Suffolk Street 58 Gun Street 10 Hayles Street 7 Henshaw Street 1 Kell Street 1 King Edward Street 18 King James Street 20 King's Court 3 Lambeth Road 48 Lamlash Street 4 Lancaster Street 68 Lant Street 19 Law Street 1 Library Street 2 Little Suffolk Street 13 Little Surrey Street 12 London Road 67 Long Lane 12 Madron Street 3 Marcia Road 1 Marshall Street 14 Marshalsea Road 77 Mason Street 4 Massinger Street 4 Mermaid Court 2 Minnow Street 1 Miniver Street 7 Minor Place 1 Mint Street 4 Montague Street 8 Nelson Place 3 Newington Butts 2 Newington Causeway 39 New Kent Road 21 Noel Street 1 Old Kent Road 44 Ontario Street 11 Orient Street 10 Oswin Street 26 Ward No. 1 „ 2 „ 3 Out of Parish 1373 689 171 6 Parliament Street 2 Peabody Square 120 Pocock Street 18 Princess Street 8 Queen's Buildings 122 Quilp Street 3 Quinn Square 17 Red Cross Street 3 Rephidim Street 1 St. George's Circus 23 St. George's Road 94 Scovell Road 138 Searles Road 6 Skipton Street 5 Southwark Bridge Rd 168 Staple Street 1 St urge Street 13 Tabard Street 7 Temple Street 19 Tower Street 29 Toulmin Street 14 Townsend Street 3 Tupman Place 18 Union Street 5 Upper Green Street 1 Warner Street 13 Waterloo Road 41 Warwick Street 16 Webber Row 1 Webber Street 7 Wellington Place 1 West Place 1 West Square 73 Westminster Bridge Rd. 54 Weston Street 5 William Street 6 Residing out of Parish. 6 2239. 174 DONATIONS OF BOOKS. The following donations of books have been received during the year:— Vols. Hilts. Anonymous 1 3 Bairstow, Rev. J. O. 1 — Browne, T. B., Ltd. 1 — Busk, Miss A. E. 1 — Coques, Dr. Marius 9 — Crisp, F. A. 1 — Cundall, J. W. 2 — Dunnington, Rev. H. 4 — Dye, R. W. 44 — Emary, Thomas 16 — Gardiner, Miss H. 1 — Great Eastern Railway Co. 8 — Grey, H. 2 — Hawkins, Alex. 126 — Hill, Rev. St. Clare 1 - Holborn Public Library Commissioners 1 — Hunter, Thomas — 6 Jettan, Mrs. E. 1 — King, Mrs. A. M. 2 — Knight, E. W. 10 — Leigh Browne Trust 1 — Liverpool Public Library Committee 3 — London County Council — 2 Music Publishing and Advertising Co. 20 — Nisbet, J. & Co. 1 — Pocock, Edward 1 — Powell, G. H. Croxden 33 — Record Office of H.M. Stationery Office 208 — St. Bride's Foundation Institute 1 — Swann, Miss 1 — Sell, Messrs. 2 — South-Eastern Railway Co. 1 — Spiers, James 54 — Stoke Newington Public Library Commissioners 1 Waldo, Dr. F. J. 1 — Waters, A. W. 89 — Wilson, Mr. 4 — Busk, Miss A. E.—Embossed leather writing ease. Fawcett, Mrs. M. G.— Portrait of Henry Fawcett. 175 Gardiner, Miss H. C.—Visitors' book. Hawkins, Alex.—Pair of grass shears, and the re-arrangement of the electric light in the Lending Department. Knight, B. W.—Crayon elevation of Library. Layard, Lady—Bronze medallion of Sir A. Layard. Pascall, James.—Print of the " Elephant and Castle," 18th century. Pocock, George.—Marble clock. Waters, W. A.—Fourteen local prints. LIST OF COMMISSIONERS. Miss Alice Elizabeth Busk, 23, Douglas Buildings, Marshalsea Road. Mr. Robert William Dye, 47, Douglas Buildings, Marshalsea Road. „ Alexander Hawkins (Chairman), 126, London Road. „ Thomas Haynes, J.P., 26, Douglas Buildings, Marshalsea Road. „ Thomas Hunter, L.C.C., 82, Cowley Road, Brixton. „ Edmund Washington Knight, 272, Borough High Street. „ James Pascall, 223, Blackfriars Road. „ George Pocock, 235, Southwark Bridge Road. ,, Frederick Redman, 148, Borough High Street. OFFICERS. Thomas Aldred, Chief Librarian. Percy H. Wood, Assistant. Librarian. Ernest W. Garner Richard J. King Joseph Palmer, Porter. Junior Assistants. 176 177 PUBLIC LIBRARY COMMISSIONERS. Statement of Receipts and Expenditure to the 25th March, 1900. INCOME. EXPENDITURE £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d To Balance in hand at 25th March, 1899 2315 4 3½ By Buildings L706 0 0 Retes levied with and as part of the Poor Retes 696 1 2 Books, Periodicals, &c. 112 18 1 Donations and Subscriptions 118 1 0 Salaries and Remuneration of Officers 389 16 8 Fines and Penalties and Sale of Catalogues 43 10 5½ Establishment Charges 286 15 8 Bank Interest 19 17 10 Ground Rent 150 0 0 Miscellaneous receipts 1 2 6 Furniture and Fittings 19 6 0 Letting of Hoarding 0 18 6 Miscellaneous Expenses 6 8 7 Audit Stamp 10 0 0 2682 8 6½ Net Balance 511 13 8½ £ 3193 17 3 Total Expenditure and Balance £3193 17 3 Net Expenditure on which Stamp Duty is payable £2682 3 6½ (Signed) J. A. JOHNSON, Clerk. Thirteenth day of July, 1900. Total Expenditure as shown above 2682 3 Deduct— Amount disallowed at Audit - - - Amount allowed at Audit £2682 3 6½ I hereby certify that I have compared the entries in this Financial Statement with respect to such Statement have been duly complied with. I hereby further certify that I have ascertained by Audit the correctness of such ended the 25th day of March, 1900, included in such Statement, and allowed by mo Shillings, and Six Pence Halfpenny. As witness my hand, with the Vouchers and other Documents relating thereto, and that the Regulations Statement, and that the amount expended by the Commissioners during the year at the Audit, is Two Thousand Six Hundred and Eighty-Two Pounds, Three this 13th day of July, 1900. (Signed) T. BARCLAY COCKERTOX, District Auditor. 179 STATEMENT OF ALLOWANCE BY THE AUDITORS OF THE ACCOUNTS OF THE CHURCHWARDENS (18 & 19 Vic., cap. 120, s. 196.) We the undersigned, Auditors of the Accounts for the Parish of St. George the Martyr, Southwark, having attended at the Office of the Vestry of the said Parish, and there audited the Accounts of the Churchwardens from the 26th day of March 1899, to the 24th day of March, 1900, do hereby state our allowance of the said accounts, as the same are in the Churchwardens' Cash Book and Churchwardens' Ledger, signed by us, and we find the Cash Balances on the said 24th day of March to be as therein shewn, and the General Cash Balance in the hands of their Bankers, to be One Hundred and Twenty-nine Pounds, Thirteen Shillings and Two Pence. Dated the Twenty-ninth day of August, 1900. EDMUND WASHINGTON KNIGHT, JAMES CHUBB, DAVID REES JONES. Auditors for the Parish of St. George the Martyr, South wark. 180 181 ABSTRACT OF THE ACCOUNTS OF THE CHURCHWARDENS. WILLIAM NEVILLE, THOMAS HAYNES and RICHARD RAMSDEN FULTON, Churchwardens. Dr. Cr. 1899. As to KENT STREET CHARITY. To Balance from former Account 54 10 11 By Payment to Twelve Pensioners for 52 Weeks at 3s. each, to Proportion of Rents received from Trustees 129 17 3 March 21st, 1900 93 12 0 Balance in hand 90 16 2 £184 8 2 £184 8 2 Balance in hand, March 24th, 1900 90 16 2 As to GENERAL CHARITIES. To Balance from former account 14 18 11 By Cambell's Coals 9 18 6 Leather Sellers Company, "Scraggs," due Lady Day, 1899 0 3 4 Bread distribution on Sundays 4 4 0 Annual Rent Charge on Property in Long Lane, due Lady Day, 1899, "Brook's Yeoman" 1 0 0 Balance transferred to the United Charities 26 3 7 Balance in hand 38 17 0 Annual Rent Charge on Two Houses at Lower Tooting, Surrey, due Lady Day, 1899, "Dudsons" 2 12 0 Proportion of Rent Charge due Lady Day, 1899, less Tax, "Camps" 4 16 8 Annual Rent Charge on House 207, Borough High Street, Southwark, due Lady Day, 1899, less Tax, "Savage" 4 16 8 J. H. Cobley, Rent Charge, on 168, Borough High Street, due Lady Day, 1899, "Grayson" 2 0 0 Cambell's Coals, in error 9 18 6 Amount allocated by resolution of Committee to "Simmonds" 16 0 0 "Simmonds," Part Proportion of Rental of Beck's Lands at Tilbury, Essex, due Michaelmas, 1899 22 17 0 £79 3 1 £79 3 1 Balance in hand, 24th March, 1900 38 17 0 Nett Balance in hand, 24th March, 1900 £129 13 2 182 183 WILLIAM NEVILLE, THOMAS HAYNES AND RICHARD RAMSDEN FULTON, Churchwakdkns. Dr. Cr. 1899. As to DELAFORCE'S CHARITY. To Balance from former account 18 9 2 By Messrs. Gibberd, 32 pairs Boots at 4/6 7 4 0 „ One Quarter's Dividend on £3000 New 2¾ per cent. Consols 20 12 6 Messrs. Pocock Bros., Children's Boots 6 6 0 Balance in hand 25 11 8 £39 1 8 £39 1 8 Balance transferred to the United Charities 25 11 8 As TO MARTIN & FENNER'S CHARITIES. To Balance from former Account 69 12 11 By Balance in hand 80 10 5 Kent, Chandler's Farm, Hartfield, to Ladyday, 1899 9 10 0 One Quarter's Dividend on £200 New 2¾ per cent. Consols, per the Charity Commissioners 1 7 6 £80 10 5 £80 10 5 Balance transferred to the United Charities 80 10 5 As TO MARY PHILLIP'S CHARITY. To Balance from former account 0 9 5 By Balance in hand 2 10 8 One Quarter's Dividend on £300 New 2¾ per cent. Consols per Charity Commissioners 2 1 3 £2 10 8 £2 10 8 Balance transferred to the United Charities 2 10 8 As TO SAYER & SHAW'S CHARITY. To Balance from former Account 163 12 4 April 18 By Twenty-six Pensioners at 28/- 36 8 0 Rents, viz.:— May 16 „ „ 36 8 0 No. 82, Borough High Street, 1 quarter's Rent, to March 25th, 1890 35 0 0 June 13 „ „ 36 8 0 No. 84, Borough High Street, 1 quarter's Rent to March 25th, 1899 22 10 0 Less Income Tax 3 0 0 - 19 10 0 No. 86, Borough High Street, 1 quarter's Rent to March 25th, 1899 25 0 0 Less Income Tax and Rebate 5 16 8 Balance in hand 138 1 8 - 19 3 4 One Quarters' Rent of Pilgrim Fathers' Church, to Lady-day, 1899 10 0 0 £247 5 8 £247 5 8 Balance transferred to the United Charities 138 1 8 Carried forward £240 14 5 184 185 WILLIAM NEVILLE, THOMAS HAYNES AND RICHARD RAMSDEN FULTON, Churchwardens. Dr. Cr. Brought forward £246 14 5 As to SAYER & SHAW'S RENT ACCOUNT. 1899. 1899. To Balance from Former Account 177 9 3 By Premium of Insurance on Property in Buckenham Square, &c. 2 9 6 Collection of Weekly Rents of Property in Buckenham Square, &c., per Mr. H. Hume, to date 131 19 0 Repairs to Property 1 11 6 Mr. W. T. Montgomery, Rates 25 10 0 One Quarter's Rent of Beer House, 8, Old Kent Road, to Lady-day 25 0 0 Messrs. Kendall, Water Rate 7 11 6 Mr. H. Hume, Commission on Collection of Rents 6 7 2 Less Income Tax 2 17 9 Balance in hand 288 0 10 22 2 3 £331 10 6 £331 10 6 Balance transferred to the United Charities 288 0 10 As to HENRY SMITH'S CHARITY. To Balance from former Account 16 15 3 By Messers. Pocock Bros, women's boots at 4s. 9d. per pair, less discount 22 18 6 Balance overdrawn 6 3 3 £22 18 6 £22 18 6 Balance transferred to the United Charities. 6 3 3 As to MISS SOPHIA WATSON'S TRUST To Balance from former Account 4 12 1 By Balance in hand 4 12 1 £4 12 1 £4 12 1 Balance transferred to the United Charities 4 12 1 Carried forward £539 7 4 Carried forward 6 3 3 186 187 WILLIAM NEVILLE, THOMAS HAYNES AND RICHARD RAMSDEN FULTON, Churchwardens. Dr. Cr. Brought forward 539 7 4 Brought forward 6 3 3 As TO COWPER'S CHARITY. 1899. 1899. To Balance from former Account 2 2 10 By Cash to 50 Pensioners at 10s. each, 1 Quarter to May 6th, 1899 25 0 0 76, Bishopsgate Street, 1 Quarters' Rent to March 25th, 1899 25 0 0 Rector, Sermon 0 10 0 Balance in hand 4 2 2 Less Income Tax 0 16 8 - 24 3 4 One Quarters' Dividend on £480 10s. 1d. 2¾ percent. Consols 3 6 0 £29 12 2 £29 12 2 Balance transferred to the United Charities 4 2 2 As TO GENERAL CHARITIES. Balance transferred to the United Charities 26 3 7 By Apportionment, "Simmonds" 16 0 0 569 13 1 Cambell's Coal 9 18 6 32 1 9 25 18 6 Nett Balance transferred £537 11 4 £32 1 9 Examined and found correct, August 29th, 1900, EDMUND WASHINGTON KNIGHT, JAMES CHUBB, DAVID REES JONES, Auditors for the Parish of St. George the Martyr, Southwark. THE TRUSTEES OF THOMAS DICKINSON'S CHARITY. Dr. Cr. 1899 1899. Feb. 6. To Balance (as per audit this day) 107 16 5 By 1st Moiety of Premium, Carliery, Tilling, Burt and Edward 40 0 0 Four Quarters' Rent of Premises in Northumberland Alley to Christmas, 1899 95 0 0 2nd Moiety of Premium, Bond, Cushing, Elms, and Line 40 0 0 F. Stone, Parish of Ewell, 1 Year's Rent Charge to Easter, 1899 2 0 0 Less Income Tax 3 3 4 Clerk and Receiver's Salary, 1 Year to Christmas, 1899. 5 0 0 - 91 16 8 Petty Expenses during the year 1 10 0 One Year's Interest to January, 1900, on £278 1s. 9d, Consols 7 12 8 Balance in favour of this Charity in the Bankers' hands 118 15 9 £207 5 9 £207 5 9 188 189 THE DRAPER'S COMPANY IN RESPECT OF JOHN WALTER'S TRUST. Dr. Cr. 1899. 1899. To One Year's Income 1429 13 6 By Cash, City of Hereford 20 0 0 J. N. Godfrey, for Timber and Tithe 11 11 6 Shoreditch Almspeople 7 11 0 Proceeds of Sale of £3090 8s.9d. New 2¾ per Cent. Consols for purchase of Three Herring Court property 3223 1 9 Do. do. Coal 4 2 0 Purchase of Three Herring Court Property 3150 0 0 Allowance to Farm Tenant 17 12 3 Insurance on Grange Farm 1 15 1 Do. Beech Street 0 17 6 Law Charges and Rates 3 3 0 Surveyor 12 12 0 Poor of the Drapers' Company 6 13 4 Wardens, Clerk, and Beadle of Drapers' Company 59 10 0 3583 16 2 Balance to St. George's, Southwark, and St. Mary, Newington, Almshouses 1080 10 7 £4664 6 9 £4064 6 9 THE DRAPER'S COMPANY IN RESPECT OF SAINT GEORGE THE MARTYR, SOUTHWARK, ALMSHOUSES. Dr. Cr. 1899. 1899. To Balance brought forward 270 10 2 By Cash, Pensions to Almspeople 381 8 0 One Year's Income 44 12 2 Almspeople on Annual Visitation 1 17 6 Moiety of the Balance of John Walter's Trust 540 5 3 Coals for Almspeople 32 16 0 Medical Attendance on Almspeople 20 0 0 Repairs to Almshouses 45 5 6 Rates and Taxes on ditto 12 15 6 Water Rate 2 12 0 Insurance 1 2 6 Garden 8 0 0 Advertisements 2 7 3 Vestry Clerk of St. George's, 3 years 36 6 0 Chaplain 3 3 0 Parish Clerk at St. George's 0 6 6 Purchase of £192 15s. 4d., 2½ per cent. New Consols 200 0 0 747 19 9 Balance forward 107 7 10 £855 7 7 £855 7 7 190 191 The United Charities of St. George the Martyr, Southwark. Dr. Cr. 1899. £ s. d £ s. d. 1899. £ s. d. £ s. d. To balance transferred from St. George's Churchwardens 537 11 4 Oct. 31 By Cash, sundry Pensioners 16 16 0 „ Tensions returned per H. Hume 1 15 0 Nov. 11 „ „ 11 12 0 „ Drapers' Company, Clerk's fees, per J.A. Johnson 36 6 0 „ 28 „ „ 10 18 0 „ Cambell's Coals, per St. George's Vestry 17 14 8 Dec. 12 „ „ 10 18 0 - 55 15 8 „ 23 „ „ 10 18 0 1900. Jan. 9 „ „ 10 18 0 „ 22 „ „ 14 14 0 Feb. 5 „ „ 14 14 0 „ 19 „ „ 14 14 0 Mar. 6 „ „ 14 14 0 „ 20 „ „ 14 14 0 „ Cheque Book 0 8 4 „ Printing 21 5 0 - 167 3 4 As to SAYER & SHAW (General Account). 1899. To Rents, viz.:— No. 82, Borough High Street, three quarters' Rent, to Dec. 1899 105 0 0 July 11 By Cash, 26 Pensioners, at 28s. 36 8 0 Lett Income Tax 4 13 4 Aug. 3 „ „ 36 8 0 - 100 6 8 Sept. 5 „ „ 36 8 0 „ No. 84, Borough High Street, three quarters' Rent, to December, 1889 69 0 0 Oct. 3 „ 25 „ 35 0 0 „ No. 86, Borough High Street, three quarters' Rent, to December, 1889 67 10 0 „ 31 „ „ 35 0 0 „ Commissioners of Inland Revenue, return of Income Tax 15 15 5 Nov. 14 „ „ at 14s. 17 10 0 „ Three quarters' Rent of Pilgrim Fathers' Church, to December, 1899 30 0 0 „ 28 „ 24 „ 16 16 0 „ Pension returned per H. Hume 1 8 0 Dec. 12 „ „ 16 16 0 284 0 1 „ 23 „ „ 16 16 0 1900. Jan. 9 „ 23 „ l6 2 0 „ 22 „ „ 16 2 0 Feb. 5 „ „ 16 2 0 „ 19 „ 22 „ 15 8 0 Mar. 6 „ „ 15 8 0 „ 20 „ „ 15 8 0 „ Premium of Insurance on Nos. 82, 84, and 86, Borough High Street 6 5 0 As to SAYER & SHAW'S Rent Account. - 347 17 0 To Collection of Weekly Rents of Property in Buckenham Square, &c., per H. Hume 478 11 6 By Repairs to Property 53 2 1 „ Three quarters' Rent of Beerhouse, 8, Old Kent Road, to December, 1899 75 0 0 „ W. T. Montgomery-Rates 87 5 4 „ Kendall & Phillips-Water Rates 10 7 6 - 553 11 6 „ H. Hume Commission on Collection 22 16 8 „ H. Hume's bond 0 12 6 „ C. H. Hurst-Income Tax 8 3 3 - 182 7 4 As to COWPER. Aug. 3 By Cash, to 47 Pensioners, at 10s. 23 10 0 To 76, Bishopsgate Street, three quarters' Rent to Christmas, 1899 75 0 0 Nov. 4 „ 45 „ „ 22 10 0 Dec. 23 „ 45 „ at 7s. 6d. 16 17 6 Less Income Tax 2 10 0 1900. 72 10 0 Feb. 2 „ 43 „ at 10s. 21 10 0 Add Insurance 5 0 0 „ Rector's Sermons 2 0 0 - 77 10 0 „ Phœnix Fire, Premium of Insurance on 76, Bishopsgate Street 5 0 0 „ One Year's Rent of Cottage, once in Priests Alley 8 0 0 „ T. Cornell Printing 0 2 6 Less Income Tax 0 5 4 - 91 10 0 7 14 8 „ Three quarters Dividend on £480 10s. Consols, per Charity Commissioners 9 18 0 „ Return of Income Tax, per of Inland Revenue 3 12 0 „ Pensions returned, per J. A. Johnson 2 7 6 101 2 2 Carried forward £1532 0 9 Carried forward £788 17 8 192 193 Brought forward £1532 0 9 Brought forward £788 17 8 As to MARTIN & FENNER. By Annual Premium of Insurance on Chantlers Farm, Hartfield 0 4 6 „ Purchase of Bibles for Distribution 25 10 0 To Half year'b Rent Chantlers Farm, Hartfield, to Michaelmas, 1M99.. 12 10 0 „ Trustees Expenses visiting Chantlers Farm 3 13 5 „ Ellis & Palmer, Survey of Chantlers Farm, after fire 1 1 0 , Three quarters Dividend on £200 Consols, per Charity Commissioners 4 2 6 - 10 8 11 „ Proportion of three quarters' Dividend on Sale of Sproughton Farm, per Charity Commissioners 15 16 7 32 9 1 As to DELAFORCE. By Pocock Bros. for Boots 0 13 6 To Three quarters' Dividend on £3,000 Consols, per Charity Commissioners - 61 17 6 „ H E Sambrook, Annual Donation to Parochial Schools 13 15 0 - 14 8 6 As to SOPHIA WATSON. To Three qaurters' Dividend on £790 Madras Railway 5 per cent. Stock, per Charity Commissioners 38 3 8 „ Return of Income Tax, per Commissioners of Inland Revenue 1 6 4 - 39 10 0 As to HENRY SMITH. To Proportion of Rent of Farm, at Cowding, to Michaelmas, 1899 - 35 10 0 As to MARY PHILLIPS. To Three quarters' Dividend on £300 Consols, per Charity Commissioners - 6 3 9 As to BELCHER. To Three quarters' Dividend on £61 17s. 4d. Consols, per Charity- Commissioners - 1 5 6 As to SKIDMORE. To Three quarters' Dividend on £50 Annuities - 0 18 9 As to BROOKE (WILLIAM). To Rent Charge on Premises in Long Lane, to 24th June, 1899 4 16 8 „ Return of Income Tax, per Commissioners of Inland Revenue 0 3 4 • - 5 0 0 As to SAVAGE. To Return of Income Tax, per Commissioners of Inland Revenue - 0 3 4 As to CAMP. To return of Income Tax, per Commissioners of Inland Revenue 0 3 4 £1715 2 0 By Balance at Bank - 881 6 11 £1715 2 0 194 195 Receipts, Expenditure, Balances and Liabilities of the Guardians of St. Saviour's Union. For the Half Year ended September 30th, 1899. PARISHES. BALANCE in favour of each Parish at the commencement of this Half Year. RECEIPTS. BALANCE against each Parish at the end of this Half Year. Total. Balance Against each Parish at the commencement of this Half-year. EXPENDITURE BALANCE in favour of each Parish at the end of this Half-year. Total Contributions paid during this Half Year. All other Receipts. Common Charges. Separate Charges. Loans and Interest Repaid County Rates. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. Saint Saviour's ... 18725 4 1 ... 24 1 2 18749 5 3 499 13 7¼ 8964 9 6¾ 1736 17 5 1174 17 2 6373 7 6 ... 18749 5 3 Christ Church .. 10209 0 5 ... ... 10209 0 5 513 1 8¼ 4962 1 5¾ 492 19 1 650 6 2 3494 6 8 96 5 4 10209 0 5 St. Mary Newington 296 3 10¾ 37446 7 11 ... ... 37742 11 9¾ ... 19761 4 11 2589 16 5 14335 2 10 1056 7 7¾ 37742 11 9¾ Saint George the Martyr 668 3 4 21652 2 11 206 9 6 ... 22526 15 9 ... 11535 5 1 ... 1511 15 9 8387 13 9 1092 1 2 22526 15 9 Total 964 7 2¾ 88032 15 4 206 9 6 24 1 2 89227 13 2¾ 1012 15 3½ 45223 1 0½ 2229 16 6 5926 15 6 32590 10 9 2244 14 1¾ 89227 13 2¾ Common Fund Receipts. Amount of the Rateable Value upon which the Contributions have been Calculated Brushinaking Account, Christchurch, Profit for Half-Year 6 4 11 Firewood Account, St. George's (Profit for Half-Year) 63 19 0 London County Council—Lunatics, In Maintenance Grant, Teachers, Registrars, Medical Officers, Drugs 15397 19 3 Saint Saviour's 226600 0 0 Metropolitan Common Poor Fund 16433 9 3 Christchurch 125429 0 0 Relatives or Property of Persons or other sources 1160 12 1½ St. Mary Newington 499516 0 0 Repayment by Officers of the cost of Maintenance of their Families 38 9 10 Sale of old Stores, &c. 42 0 4½ Saint George the Martyr 291583 0 0 Sums receiyed from other Unions in respect to Paupers, Lunatics and others 268 18 11 Interest allowed by Treasurer 33 8 8 Deductions, Superannuation Act, 1896 7 7 6 Repayment of cost of damage by fire 48 10 0 Miscellaneous receipts 20 7 3½ £33521 7 1½ Total £1143128 0 0 For the Half Year ended March 31st, 1900. PARISHES. BALANCE in favour of each Parish at the commencement of this Half-Year. RECEIPTS. BALANCE against each Parish at the end of this Half Year. Total. BALANCE against each Parish at the commencement of this Half-year. EXPENDITURE. BALANCE in favour of each Parish at the end of this Half-year. Total. Contributions paid during this Half Year. All other Receipts. Common Charges. Separate Charges. Loans and Interest Repaid County Rate. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. Saint Saviour's ... 17438 10 1 • • • 42 9 11 17481 0 0 24 1 2 8286 4 7 1819 10 8 977 16 1 6373 7 6 ... 17481 0 0 Christ Church 96 5 4 9067 4 5 ... • • • 9168 9 9 ... 4543 1 7 521 5 7 536 2 0 3494 6 8 68 13 11 9163 9 9 St. Mary Newington 1056 7 7¾ 34303 0 9 ... • • • 35359 8 4¾ ... 18637 11 4¾ 5 0 0 2199 6 1 14335 2 10 182 8 1¼ 35359 8 4¾ Saint George the Martyr 1092 1 2 19932 14 7 138 9 0 ... 21163 1 9 ... 10905 2 0 10 0 0 1286 16 11 8387 13 9 573 12 1 21163 4 9 Total 2244 14 1¾ 80741 9 10 138 9 0 42 9 11 83167 2 10¾ 24 1 2 42371 19 6½ 2355 16 3 5000 1 1 32590 10 9 824 14 1¼ 83167 2 10¾ Common Fund Receipts. Amount of the Rateable Value upon which the Contributions have been Calculated. Brushinaking Account, Christchurch, Profit for Half-Year 12 18 8½ Firewood Account, St. George's, Profit for Half-Year 89 1 11½ London County Council—Lunatics, In Maintenance Grant, Teachers, Registrars, Medical Officers, Drugs 17919 4 0 Saint Saviour's 226609 0 0 Metropolitan Common Poor Fund 17565 10 7 Christchurch 124243 0 0 Relatives or Property of Persons or other sources 1074 12 1 St. Mary Newington 509694 0 0 Repayment by Officers of the cost of Maintenance of their Families 49 14 6 Sale of Old Stores, &c. 89 16 11½ Saint George the Martyr 298229 0 0 Sums received from other Unions in respect of Paupers, Lunatics and others 212 12 10 Interest allowed by Treasurer 28 2 0 Deductions, Superannuation Act, 1896 4 15 5 Miscellaneous Receipts 35 12 3¼ £37082 1 3¾ Total £1158775 0 0 196 197 Particulars of Common Charges of the St. Saviour's Union. For the Half Year ending September 30th, 1899. For the Half Year ending March 31st, 1900. In-Maintenance 15770 9 11¾ In Maintenance 18378 0 1½ Out-Relief 4109 4 3¼ Out-Relief 4035 13 7½ Non-resident Poor Relief 707 14 5 Non-resident Relief 667 16 8 Boarding-Out Expenses 823 7 6 Boarding-Out Expenses 810 16 7 Maintenance, &c., of Lunatics 13341 17 7½ Maintenance, &c., of Lunatics 13687 13 4 Salaries or other Remuneration of Officers 7343 13 1 Salaries or other Remuneration of Officers 7340 9 9 Officers' Uniforms 165 0 4 Officers' Uniforms 295 18 9¾ Officers' Rations, &c., and Money in lieu of 2617 9 2 Officers' Rations, &c., and Money in lieu of 2808 18 6¼ Extra Medical Fees 19 0 3 Extra Medical Fees 14 12 6 Superannuation Allowances under old Acts 139 11 2 Superannuation Allowances under old Acts 139 11 2 „ „ 1896 Act 397 1 5 „ „ under 1896 Act 451 19 4 Compensation Allowances 100 16 8 Compensation Allowances 100 16 8 Buildings, Alterations, and Repairs 1652 2 6¾ Buildings, Alterations, and Repairs 1182 18 5¾ Furniture and Property 1373 19 4¼ Furniture and Property 2167 0 8¾ Rents, Rates, Taxes, and Insurances 2706 4 9 Rent, Rates, Taxes, and Insurances 2942 18 10 Stationery, Printing and Advertisements 547 13 11 Stationery, Printing, and Advertisements 531 2 9 Horse and Carriage Hire 487 5 6 Horse and Carriage Hire 618 6 3 Visiting Committees Expenses 29 7 5 Visiting Committees' Expenses 45 5 11¼ Establishment Expenses 486 9 8 Establishment Expenses 463 17 0½ Maintenance in Deaf and Dumb and Blind Hospitals 64 12 3 Maintenance in Deaf and Dumb and Blind Hospitals 68 19 4 „ Certified Schools 1376 13 7 „ in Certified Schools 1622 16 6 „ Convalescent and other Institutions 521 5 8 „ in Convalescent and other Institutions 412 11 6 Registration Expenses 327 19 2 Registration Expenses 344 12 3 Vaccination Expenses 838 5 0 Vaccination Expenses 566 1 8 Legal Expenses 18 2 0 Legal Expenses 289 9 4 Subscriptions to Institutions, &c. 41 0 0 Subscriptions to Institutions, &c. 37 12 0 Emigration Expenses 8 8 7 Emigration Expenses 48 0 0 Union Assessment Committee Expenses 253 0 0 Union Assessment Committee Expenses 1 11 8 Audit Stamp, Settlement and Removal Expenses, Prosecutions, Rewards, &c. 169 16 4½ Audit Stamp, Settlement and Removal Expenses, Prosecutions, Rewards, &c. 194 0 4 56437 11 8 60269 11 8¼ Paid Metropolitan Asylums Board 14716 16 6 Paid Metropolitan Asylums Board 13406 9 2 „ Central London School District 7590 0 0 „ Central London School District 5778 0 0 Total of Common Charges 78744 8 2 Total of Common Fund Charges 79454 0 10¼ d ••• ••• ••• Less Common Fund Receipts 33521 7 1½ Less Common Fund Receipts 37082 1 3¾ Net Total apportioned to Parishes £45223 1 0½ Net Total apportioned to Parishes £42371 19 6½ 198 INDEX. List of Vestrymen 2 List of Auditors 3 List of Standing Committees 4 List of Members of Committees 5 List of Officers of the Vestry 7 Return of Attendances (1899-1900) 8 Annual Report 11 Surveyor's Report 53 Roads and Footways 55 List of Applications other than Drainage 58 Sewerage 59 Schedule of Wood Paved Roads in the Parish 60 Street Gullies 62 List of Drainage Plans submitted to Vestry 63 Assistant Surveyor 64 Horsekeeper 64 Storekeeper 64 Horses 64 Horse Return 65 Statement of Quantities of Dust and Slop 66 Scavenging and Dusting 67 Plant 68 Street Washing and Court Flushing 68 199 Conveniences 68 Public Gardens 68 Lighting 69 Street Naming 69 Abstract of Accounts 71 General Rate Account 73 Sewers Rate Account 95 Capital Account 103 Balance Sheet 107 Loans Statement 113 Auditors' Report 117 Allowance of the Auditors 120 Statement of Contracts 121 Estimates 123 Overseers' Report 139 The Overseers as to General Rate 146 „ Sewers Rate 147 Overseers in Account with the Poor Rate 148 Collection of Rates, made April, 1899, for half-year ending Michaelmas, 1899 152 Ditto, made October, 1899, for half-year ending Lady Day, 1900 154 List of Officers and their Salaries 156 Library Commissioners' Report 157 Classification of Stock, Issues, &c. 166 Reference Department 167 Lending Department 168 Summary 169 Statement of Receipts and Expenditure 176 Churchwardens' Accounts. Allowance of Auditors 179 Abstract of Accounts of the Churchwardens 180 Kent Street Charity 180 General Charities 180 Delaforce's Charity 182 Martin and Fenner's Charities 182 200 Mary Phillip's Charity 182 Sayer and Shaw's Charity 182 Sayer and Shaw's Rent Account 184 Henry Smith's Charity 184 Sophia Watson's Trust 184 Cowper's Charity 186 General Charities 186 Dickinson's Charity 186 John Walter's Trust 188 United Charities 190—192 Receipts, Expenditure, &c., of St. Saviour's Union 194 Particulars of Common Charges of Union 196