STE 3 ANNUAL REPORT of the MEDICAL OFFICER OF HEALTH for the Metropolitan Borough of Stepney. 1 9 0 2. REPORT. of the MEDICAL OFFICER OF HEALTH AND PUBLIC ANALYST, FOR THE YEAR 1902. To the Mayor, Aldermen and Councillors of the Metropolitan Borough of Stepney. Gentlemen, I have much pleasure in presenting you with my second Annual Report, which deals with the Vital and Sanitary Statistics of the Borough of Stepney for 1902. Population. The estimated population was 300,551, distributed as follows:— Limehouse District 58,071 St. George's District 49,658 Mile End District 113,720 Whitechapel District 79,102 A 2 4 Births. The total number of births registered during the year was 11,294, which consisted of 5,807 males and 5,487 females. 1,869 were registered in the Limehouse District, or at the rate of 32.1 per 1,000 of the population. 2,191 were registered in the St. George's District, or at the rate of 44.1 per 1,000 of the population. 4,425 were registered in the Mile End Old Town, or at the rate of 30.1 per 1,000 of the population. 2,809 were registered in the Whitechapel District, or at the rate of 35.5 per 1.000 of the population. The birth-rate for the whole of the Borough was equal to 37.5, which is slightly below the average for the preceding 10 years. It will be seen that the birth-rate varies in different parts of the District. In the Limehouse District the birth rate is lower than in any year during the last ten years, with the exception of 1900. It has been gradually declining since 1895. In St. George's, on the other hand, the birth rate was higher than in any year during the last ten years, with the exception of 1900. It is a curious fact that the birth rate was lower in the Limehouse District, and higher in St. George's, during 1900 than it has ever been in any year since 1892. The birth rate has been declining in Mile End Old Town since 1898, and in the Whitechapel District since 1899. The birth rate is, however, far higher in the Borough than that for the whole of London, which was 28.5 per 1,000 of the population in 1902. Marriages. The marriages during the year numbered 2,713, or 11 less than in the previous year. 5 The proportion of persons married was 18 per 1,000 of the population. 509 marriages occurred in the Limehouse District, or at the rate of 19.2 persons married per 1,000 of the population. 272 marriages occurred in the St. George's District, or at the rate of 10.9 persons married per 1,000 of the population. 1,526 marriages occurred in the Mile End District, or at the rate of 26.9 persons married per 1,000 of the population. 406 marriages occurred in the Whitechapel District, or at the rate of 12.9 persons married per 1,000 of the population. The annual rate of persons married per 1,000 of the population in the whole of London was 17.8. Taking into consideration the fact that the relative number of marriages is below and the birth-rate is very much above that of London, it is evident that it is due, among other things possibly, to the immigration of families at the childbearing period, and to the fact that these immigrants have, as a rule, a large number of children. This is more marked in St. George's, where of recent year's there has been more immigration. The birth rate is higher and the marriage rate is lower in St. George's than in any other part of the District. Deaths. The total number of deaths occurring in the Borough was 6,073 Deduct deaths occurring within the Borough among persons not belonging thereto 925 5,148 Deaths of residents outside the Borough 1,015 6,163 The deaths, exclusive of those of non-residents which occurred in Public Institutions situated in the Borough, but inclusive of those residents which occurred in out-lying Institutions, numbered 6,163, This corresponds to a death rate of 20.5 per 1,000 of the population. 6 1,374 occurred in the Limehouse District, or at the rate of 23 6 per 1,000. 1,100 „ „ St. George's District, „ „ 22.1 „ 2,166 „ „ Mile End District, „ „ 19.0 „ 1,523 „ „ Whitechapel District, „ „ 19.2 „ Though the death rate is higher than that for the whole of London (17.2), it is lower than that of any year during the last ten years, and is 2-1 below the ten years' average. Compared with 1901 the causes of death were:— Disease. 1901. 1902. Increase Decrease. Small-pox 22 252 230 — Scarlet Fever 41 26 — 15 Enteric Fever 47 33 — 14 Measles 155 158 3 - Diphtheria 78 79 1 - Croup 3 2 — 1 Whooping Cough 91 188 97 — Diarrhœa 247 117 — 130 Enteritis 192 188 — 4 Rheumatic Fever 12 7 — 5 Phthisis 626 576 — 50 Other Tubercular Diseases 239 233 — 6 Bronchitis, Pneumonia, and other Respiratory Diseases 1,290 1,349 59 - Heart Disease 481 444 - 37 Influenza 42 59 17 — Injuries 260 288 28 — Convulsive Diseases 348 304 — 44 Wasting Diseases 355 289 — 66 Premature Births 178 159 — 19 Old Age 345 260 — 85 Cancer 211 201 - 10 Alcoholism 100 102 2 — All other Diseases 854 849 — 5 6,217 6,163 437 491 The excess of births over deaths was 5,131. 1 The following is a list of the Out-lying Institutions and the number of residents that have died in them during the year:— Bean Yard Infirmary 1 Bethnal Green Infirmary 6 Brook Fever Hospital 4 Bethnal House Asylum 3 Banstead Asylum 14 Belgrave Hospital 1 Cane Hill Asylum 4 Convent Hospital 2 Caterham Asylum 2 Clayhall Road Asylum 1 Camberwell Workhouse 1 City of London Asylum 1 City of London Infirmary 2 Colney Hatch Asylum 41 Claybury Asylum 35 Children's Hospital, Great Ormonde Street 15 City of London Chest Hospital 19 Charing Cross Hospital 2 Children's Hospital, Paddington 1 Cancer Hospital 2 Darenth Asylum 4 Dartford Asylum 14 Eastern Fever Hospital 8 Found dead in street 69 French Hospital 1 Guy's Hospital 1 Grove Hall Asylum 1 Gore Farm Small-pox Hospital 9 German Hospital 29 Hanwell Asylum 5 Homœpathic Hospital 2 Hospital of St. John and Elizabeth 5 Hostel of God 2 Home for Aged Jews 5 Hoxton House Asylum 11 H.M. Prison, Holloway 1 H.M. Prison, Pentonville 1 H.M. Prison, Wandsworth 1 H.M. Hospital, Stepney Causeway 8 Horton Asylum, Epsom 3 8 Hampstead Workhouse 1 Holborn Workhouse 1 Kensington Infirmary 1 King's College Hospital 5 London Temperance Hospital 1 Lambeth Infirmary 1 Licensed Victuallers' Asylum 1 Leavesden Asylum 15 Middlesex Hospital 3 Mildmay Hospital 4 Metropolitan Asylum 6 National Hospital 6 North West London Hospital 1 North Eastern Fever Hospital 8 North Eastern Children's Hospital 9 Poplar Hospital 7 Poplar and Stepney Sick Asylum 183 Poplar Workhouse 2 Park Fever Hospital 17 River Thames 2 Sick Asylum, Blackwall 2 St. Pelagia's Creche 3 Seamen's Hospital 3 Stepney Workhouse 78 Spanish and Portuguese Hospital 1 Soho Hospital 1 St. Thomas's Hospital 2 St. Peter's Hospital 1 St. Anne's House, Stoke Newington 5 Salvation Army Hospital 1 St. Mary's Hospital 1 South Eastern Hospital 45 Small-pox Hospital Ships 236 St. Bartholomew's Hospital 19 St. Mark's Hospital 1 St. George's Hospital 1 Trinity Alms Houses 3 Throat Hospital, Golden Square 1 1,015 9 The following deaths of residents occurred in Public Institutions in the Borough:— East London Hospital for Children 195 London Hospital 746 Mile End Infirmary 296 Mile End Workhouse 1 Ratcliff Workhouse 76 St. George's Infirmary 244 Whitechapel Infirmary 366 Whitechapel Workhouse 48 Small Pox. The Small-pox epidemic which began in September, 1901, continued until the third quarter of 1902. During 1902, 1,242 genuine cases were notified, of which 252 died. The total number during the outbreak in 1901 and 1902 was 1,410, with 283 deaths. In addition to this number, another 129 cases were notified which turned out not to be Small-pox. Not only was this the largest number that occurred in any district in London (exceeding the nearest to it by nearly 850), but with one exception the rate per 1,000 was greater. This was due to several causes. In the first place, vaccination before the outbreak had been neglected throughout the whole of the Borough, but greater in some parishes than in others. In the second place, it was due to the large number of common lodging houses in the district, where it is most difficult to stamp out the disease once it has gained a firm foothold. It will be seen later on, in giving particulars of the cases that occurred in these houses, that the lodgers wandered from place to place, and did not seek medical advice till the eruption had appeared. In fact, when asked when they were first taken ill, they often gave the date when the rash appeared, and until it had appeared they did not feel ill. It was also due to the large number of prostitutes that contracted the diseaseSome of these were the lowest of the low, and in the intervals of sleeping in common lodging houses, they slept in the streets, when they did not have sufficient money to pay for a night's lodging. Questions were asked in every instance as to the patient's 10 employment. Thirty admitted that they were prostitutes. A still larger number said that they were out of work, and in these cases it was more than suspicious that they lodged in houses known to be brothels. In one common lodging house fourteen single women were removed, and seven of these admitted that they were prostitutes. In another, four out of the eight removed, stated that they were prostitutes. Another cause that materialy swelled the number was the outbreak at the Mile End Infirmary, which was responsible for 97 cases, 91 of them being nurses, patients and school-children, and five persons who worked in the Infirmary, as well as one discharged patient of the Infirmary. The number in common lodging houses in Whitechapel was 221 „ „ „ „ St. George's was 25 „ „ „ „ Limehouse was 10 Total 256 The number in Mile End Infirmary was 91 „ „ Whitechapel Infirmary 24 „ „ St. George's Infirmary 7 „ „ Ratcliff House 2 There were in addition 91 cases in houses in Whitechapel which were let out in furnished rooms. These rooms are let out nightly, often in the same way as common lodging houses, except that they are let to families and not to single persons. They are often let in conjunction with common lodging houses, and are owned frequently by the same owner. This leaves 774 cases, which were distributed as follows:— Limehouse District 142 St. George's „ 70 Mile End „ 457 Whitechapel „ 105 On the receipt of a notification of Small-pox, the Asylums Board was communicated with, and arrangements were at once made for the patient's removal to the Small-pox Hospital. I immediately visited the premises and endeavoured to find out from the patient, particulars as to the source of the infection, conditions as to vaccination, etc. The names of the children in the house, and the schools where they generally attended, were obtained. The children were forbidden from going to school, and the headmasters were communicated with. When the children could again with safety attend school, certificates were sent direct to the headmasters. 11 The names and addresses of all persons that had been in contact with the patient and had been exposed to the infection, were obtained. The employers were informed of the circumstances, and if the contacts lived in other districts the Medical Officers of Health for those districts were also informed of the particulars of the case. The Public Vaccinator of the district was also informed. I personally visited all the contacts living in our district, and examined all the persons living in the house where a case had occurred, at least twice a week for the succeeding fortnight. The Sanitary Inspectors visited these houses daily, and inquired whether anyone felt ill. If anyone appeared to be ill, the Inspector informed me. In comparing my list of contacts with the persons actually in the house at the time of my visits, I often found that some of the children were playing in the streets. I always waited till they were sent for, and in t welve instances I found that children actually suffering from modified Small-pox were out. All the people in the house, as well as those that had been exposed to infection, were urged to be at once vaccinated. The rooms were closed and fumigated with sulphur as soon as the patient was removed. The paper was afterwards stripped from the walls, and the clothing, etc., disinfected by steam. If the bedding and clothing were in a filthy condition, they were burnt. If the family occupied a few rooms only, they were asked to occupy rooms at one of the shelters, where food was provided for them. In addition to the shelters at Globe Road and Prospect Place, three others were acquired and furnished, two at Rose Lane, and one at Emmott Street. By visiting contacts I discovered 205 cases of Small-pox. No medical man had seen the patients, and in 104 cases there was no intention of seeking medical advice. This caused a great deal of extra labour, but its usefulness was proved by the results. I saw, in consultation with medical practitioners, 605 doubtful cases, of which nearly 300 were not suffering from Small-pox. Though this, is not considered part of my duties, I was always glad of it, as it gave me the opportunity of having the patients removed sooner than if the medical attendant waited, till he was absolutely certain of his diagnosis. By immediately visiting the premises on the receipt of the notifications, I saw an additional 500 patients, and obtained particulars of their illness, and, if possible, the source of the infection before they were removed to the hospital. The Metropolitan Asylums Board were asked that during the epidemic someone should be on duty at their offices at night, to receive messages and arrange for the immediate removal of persons suffering from Small-pox. In common lodging houses especially, it was essential that the patients should be at once removed, as they were frequently sitting in the kitchen with scores of others. The lodgers often did not come in till late in the evening, when they were then discovered to be ailing 12 and a doctor sent for. When it was found that the sick person was suffering from Small-pox, and the information conveyed to me, his removal by telephone could only be done before 8 p.m. Between 8 p.m. and 11 p.m. he could be removed by sending a telegram from the Whitechapel Road Post Office. After that hour he could only be removed by sending a telegram from Liverpool Street Station or by going direct to Homerton or any other Ambulance Station. In either case, much time was lost and a great deal of mischief could be done during that time. The reply of the Asylums Board was to the effect that during the four weeks ended on January 11th, 1902, the daily average number of applications made to the Stations after 8 p.m. for the removal of Small-pox cases was 2.7. In view of the small number of cases and of the very considerable cost of maintaining a night staff at the office, the Board did not feel they would be justified in acceding to the request. Considering that a patient can be removed at any time after the usual hours by the method above mentioned, I fail to see that any very great increase in the staff would be required at the Ambulance Stations, and one officer only, would be necessary during the night at the Board's offices, to receive the telephonic communications. Even though the number of daily applications remained as low as 2.7, I think the extra expense would be more than justified. This number must have been materially increased afterwards, as at this time the epidemic had not by any means reached its height. Early in the year I reported to the Public Health Committee that unavoidable delay was caused by the present system of vaccination. The Act requires that information is at once to be sent to the Vaccination Officer of the occurrence of any cases of Small-pox. The Vaccination Officer visits the premises, and obtains the names and ages of all those that want to be vaccinated. He reports to the Public Vaccinator, who then visits. In all instances I notified the Public Vaccinator at the same time as the Vaccination Officer, and, in the case of two of these officers, they visited without waiting for the report of the Vaccination Officers. I suggested to the Public Health Committee the advisability of employing a qualified medical man, who would devote his whole time to visiting houses where Small-pox had occurred, and vaccinating all those who desired to be vaccinated, immediately the patient had been removed to the Hospital. It was decided by the Public Health Committee that an application be made to the Local Government Board to sanction the proposed appointment during the period for which the epidemic lasted, and also to ask the Local Government Board to contribute toward the expense by supplying the lymph free of charge. In reply, the Board intimated that as the administration of public vaccination is at present vested by law in the hands of the Boards of Guardians, the Board could not understand on what grounds it was proposed by the Borough Council to employ a medical practitioner, other than the Public Vaccinator, to carry out the work which that officer is appointed by the Guardians to perform. Unavoidable delay was, of course, the chief reason. At the same time, vaccination is a sanitary measure, and I fail to understand, why the administration of the Vaccination Acts was ever placed in the 13 hands of the Boards of Guardians. I hope, however, that the next Vaccination Act will remedy this, and that the powers and duties of the Guardians in connection with vaccination, will be transferred to the Sanitary Authorities. Placards were posted throughout the district in January, calling attention to the spread of Small-pox, and recommending vaccination. The names and addresses of the Public Vaccinators in the various districts were given, together with the hours of attendance at the Vaccination Stations. At the beginning of the outbreak all the Sanitary Inspectors, Clerks, and Disinfectors were re-vaccinated. During the height of the epidemic 21 men were employed in the removal of infected clothing and in disinfecting rooms. The driver of the disinfecting van was employed by the contractor, and he was the only man who was not re-vaccinated. He took no actual part in removing the clothing, as his duties consisted entirely in driving. He was the only one that contracted Small-pox. All the others escaped. I had no difficulty in having persons suffering from Small-pox removed to the Hospital, with one exception only. In this case the parents wanted to isolate the patient at home. I applied to a magistrate at the Thames Police Court, and he granted me an Order to compel the patient's removal. This had the desired effect, and the patient was removed without further delay. Callousness and carelessness amounting almost to criminal negligence were, however, responsible for a great deal. The following instances will better explain what I mean. (1) A case of Small-pox occurred in a house in Agnes Street and was removed to the Hospital on January 18th. A school mistress lodged in the same house, and as soon as she heard of it, she left the house, leaving no address. On February 3rd she called at the Public Health Offices, and asked me for a certificate, so that she could resume her duties at the school. I noticed that she wore a very thick black veil, and after asking her a few questions, I requested her to lift her veil, so that I could see her face. As she did not appear to be anxious to do so, I became suspicious, and lifted up the veil myself. I then saw that her face was covered with a Smallpox eruption, which had probably appeared more than a week before. I did not give her another chance of running away, but locked her in a room till the ambulance arrived to remove her to the Hospital. (2) A man called to see a doctor at his surgery in the City. The doctor diagnosed Small-pox, gave the patient a notification certificate, and told him to take it to the Public Health Offices. I was in the office when he came, and he was detained until an ambulance arrived. I wrote to the medical man, calling his attention to the facts of the case, and pointing out to him that he had contravened the Public Health Act. In reply, he wrote that he had only recently come to the district, and was not conversant with the provisions of the Act. He was requested to take proper precautions in the future. 14 (3) On February 17th I received a communication that three children living at 65, Salmon Lane, were suffering from Small-pox. I visited the premises, and after examining them, they were at once removed to the Hospital . In investigating the origin of the disease, I learnt that the father had been unwell about three weeks previously. He had been attended for a fortnight by a medical man, who said that he was suffering from "influenza, and that his blood was out of order as well." He was apparently all right at the time of my visit, and had been at work for a week. He was employed by a dairyman, and in taking milk to the various customers, he supplied dozens of people with milk every day. I asked him to take off his clothes, when I found that there were unmistakable signs that he had recently suffered from Small-pox. Even at that time I considered he was in an infectious condition, and he was immediately removed to the Small-pox Hospital, where he remained for nearly a fortnight. On February 19th another case occurred, and on February 20th two more cases were removed to the Hospital. On February 21st and 24th two more cases were removed, making nine altogether. (4) On March 25th, a female was removed from Dixon Street to the Small-pox Hospital. I visited the premises, and on examining the other people in the house I found that the patient's husband had been ill a fortnight previously, and was attended by a medical man, who said he was suffering from influenza. On inquiring, I found that on March 5th he had what in my opinion were all the symptoms of Small-pox. On March 8th a rash appeared. His wife was taken ill on March 19th, or exactly a fortnight afterwards. I had not the slightest hesitation in coming to the conclusion that the husband had suffered from the same disease, and his clothing was taken away and disinfected. (5) A man living at 155, Ernest Street, was working in Epsom. He was taken ill on March 23rd, and on March 26th the rash appeared. On Saturday, March 29th, he came home in a crowded railway carriage, when the rash was in a purulent condition. (6) No. 3, Dorset Street, is a house in which furnished rooms are let. It is similar to a common lodging house, except that the rooms are generally let to families and not to single individuals. The class of people is the same, and the tenants are frequently changed. Several cases of Small-pox occurred in this house during March. On March 27th I examined everyone in the house, and I found one child in the house suffering from Small-pox. On account of the condition of the skin it was impossible to say how long the child had been ill, and the people in the same apartments did not know, or pretended not to know, that the child had been ill at all. The child was in a frightfully dirty condition, and in addition to the eruption of Small-pox, there was another rash due to Scabies, or the Itch. Tbe child was removed to the Small-pox Hospital, and the whole house was at once closed and thoroughly disinfected before it was allowed to be re-occupied. On April 2nd I received a notification from the London Hospital that another child in the same house, but belonging to another family, was suffering from Chicken 15 Pox. I had visited the house that morning, when the child in question was out. I again visited the house, and found that the child was suffering from Small-pox, and not Chicken Pox. (7) A female living at 53, St. Thomas' Road, was taken ill on March 13th, and on the 16 th a rash appeared. On March 17th she went to St. Bartholomew's Hospital, where she waited some time in the waiting-room. She was seen by the medical officer in charge, who prescribed for her, and she was told to go home, According to the patient's story, she was told to come again "if the spots became worse." She returned home partly by train and partly by tram. On March 21st she got worse and the rash became "milky" in appearance. She went to the hospital, taking the train at Aldgate as before. On this occasion the disease was diagnosed, and she was removed to the Small-pox Hospital. A few days afterwards two others in the house contracted the disease. The Hospital authorities on being communicated with, denied the statements made by the patient. (8) On March 23rd I received a notification that a case of Small-pox occurred at 2, Brant-ridge Street. I visited the premises on the same date, and examined everyone in the house. Two of the children were out playing in the streets. They were sent for, and I waited till they came. On examining them I found that one, a girl aged 13, was suffering from Small-pox. She was at once removed to the Small-pox Hospital. On inquiring I found that she was taken ill on March 13th, and was seen by a medical man on the 14th. She was again seen by the same medical man on the 15th, when a rash had appeared. The doctor diagnosed Chicken Pox, but failed to notify me of the fact. I saw him afterwards, and his excuse was that he thought the child was suffering from Chicken Pox, and he did not know that Chicken Pox was a notifiable disease. (9) Mr. L. A. Hince, living at 31, Portland Street, went to the Vaccinating Station to be vaccinated on March 13th. He was seen by the Public Vaccinator, who told him to go home at once, as he was suffering from Small-pox. The house where he lodged was visited the same night about 11 p.m. The patient had not then arrived home. His landlady was informed of the fact, and when the patient returned she told him that he was to go to his room and stay there till he could be removed to the Smallpox Hospital. He admitted to her, that he was suffering from Small-pox, but he would not stay in his room. In the morning he went out, taking a bag with him. He was removed to the Hospital on the same day. After his discharge, proceedings were taken against him for exposing himself in public while suffering from Small-pox. He was fined £5 and £2 3s. costs. (10) A woman went to the London Hospital on March 20th. She was informed that she was suffering from Small-pox, and was detained in the isolation room till the ambulance arrived. Before the ambulance arrived she ran away, and tried to obtain admission to the Whitechapel Infirmary. She was seen by the Medical Superintendent, who diagnosed Small-pox, and detained till the arrival of the ambulance, when she was removed to the Hospital. 16 For wilfully exposing herself, well knowing that she was suffering from Smallpox, the Public Health Committee gave authority to prosecute her, but her address could not be found in order to serve the summons when she was discharged from the Hospital. (11) On March 27th I received information that two people living at 109, Rhodeswell Road, were suffering from Small-pox. I visited the premises, and on examining the other members of the family I found that one man had been ill since March 2nd, and was treated for influenza by his doctor. In my opinion he had at the time of my visit just recovered from Small-pox. (12) On March 29th I received a notification of a case of Small-pox at 28, Beaumont Square. On examining the other members of the family I found one son had been ill about a month previously, and another son a fortnight later. The appearance of the skin was such that, in my opinion, they suffered from. Small-pox, but in such a mild form that they did not realise the nature of the disease. Their clothing, etc., were, however, disinfected. (13) A woman lodging at 2, Flower and Dean Street, was taken to the London Hospital on April 4th about 11.30 p.m., accompanied by the deputy of Smith's common lodging house, who was "almost certain that the patient was suffering from Small-pox." She told the receiving-room officer of her suspicions, but he did not detain the patient. He gave her some medicine, and a card to admit her to the out-patients' department on the following day. The patient went on the following day, and after sitting for some time in the waiting-room with scores of others, she was seen by a physician, who diagnosed Small-pox. The receiving-room officer, on being informed of the statements of the deputy, emphatically denied them. (14) On April 5th I received an anonymous communication that there was a boy at 122, Stepney Green,, suffering from Small-pox, and that he was concealed at home. I visited the premises, and found that the patient had been home from work for three weeks. The patient informed me that he knew that one of the men working in the same workroom as himself had been taken to the Small-pox Hospital. The patient's father and mother said that he had been ill and that he had a rash, but denied that they knew that the rash was due to Small-pox. They added that the patient had been kept in one room for three weeks, and had not allowed anyone to go near him. At the Police Court, where proceedings were taken against the father—Mr. Elias Simons—for failing to notify the existence of Small-pox, witnesses proved that the patient was seen in the yard at the rear of the house, and in other parts of the building. The father was fined the maximum penalty of £2 and £2 3s. costs (15) On May 14th I visited 46, Bridge Street, where a case of Small-pox had previously occurred, and found that a doctor was attending a child, and treating him 17 for Measles. I was of opinion that the case was one of Small-pox, and after communicating my opinion to the medical practitioner in attendance, I removed the patient to the Small-pox Hospital. On the day after the patient was removed, the doctor notified the case as Smallpox. Two days afterwards, I again visited the premises, and found two children in bed. The same doctor, who had left the house ten minutes before my arrival, was in attendance. He had informed the parents that the children were suffering from Measles. I was of opinion that they suffered from Small-pox, and they were immediately removed to the Small-pox Hospital. Two days after, the doctor, finding the children had been removed, sent a notification that they were suffering from Small-pox. (16) A young man living at 82, Cressy Houses, was notified on June 2nd to be suffering from Small-pox. He was informed by his medical attendant of the fact, and was told to remain in the house till he could be removed. In spite of this, he went to the out-patients' department of the London Hospital, and of course came in contact with a large number of persons. The Public Health Committee decided not to take proceedings against him, but instructed the Town Clerk to severely censure him for his conduct. (17) When friends visit patients who are dangerously ill, they are urged to be vaccinated before they go on board the ships. In almost all cases they submit to the operation unless they have been recently re-vaccinated. The following, however, refused, and a fortnight later they developed Smallpox:— J. W. 31, Quaker Street. E. W. 5, High Street, Wapping. D. K. 26, Nightingale Lane. C. K. 39, Perth Street. L. T. 16, Maplin Street. I. Persons Vaccinated in Infancy only. There were 881 cases of Small-pox, with 126 deaths, among persons vaccinated in infancy only. Number of Cases. Number of Deaths. Percentage. Under 1 year of age — — — Between 1 and 5 years of age — — — Between 5 and 10 years of age 6 — — Between 10 and 20 years of age 189 3 1.5 Between 20 and 30 years of age 291 32 11.0 Between 30 and 40 years of age 201 31 15.4 Between 40 and 50 years of age 110 35 31.8 Between 50 and 60 years of age 47 13 27.6 Over 60 years of age 37 12 32.4 B 18 It is true that there were 6 cases between 5 and 10 years of age, but they were all over 8 years of age and showed 3 scars only. The three deaths between 10 and 20 years of age occurred among persons between 17 and 20. II. Persons Unvaccinated, 335 cases occurred among the unvaccinated, with 122 deaths. Number of Cases. Number of Deaths. Percentage Under 1 year 18 14 77.7 Between 1 and 5 97 41 42.2 Between 5 and 10 101 27 26.7 Between 10 and 20 58 15 25.8 Between 20 and 30 29 14 48.2 Between 30 and 40 24 9 37.5 Between 40 and 50 4 1 25.0 Between 50 and 60 9 1 33.3 Over 60 1 — — III. Persons Re-vaccinated. There was one person who was between 20 and 30 years of age, and had been vaccinated in infancy, and who stated that he had been re-vaccinated a little over 10 years before the attack of Small-pox. There were two persons between 80 and 40 years of age who were vaccinated in infancy and again re-vaccinated 24 years ago. There were six persons between 40 and 50 years of age who were vaccinated in infancy; two were re-vaccinated 12 years ago, one was re-vaccinated 20 years ago (fatal), and three 25 years ago. Three persons between 50 and 60 years of age were re-vaccinated, two 11 years, and one 32 years ago. One person over 60 years of age was stated to be re-vaccinated ten years ago, but no signs of the scars could, however, be seen. IV. Persons having had Small-pox Previously. One old lady of 91 contracted the disease. She was vaccinated in infancy, and had Small-pox 40 years ago as well. V. Doubtful Cases. There were 12 doubtful cases, with 3 deaths. 19 Of the 1,410 cases of Small-pox that occurred during the whole epidemic, not a single child under 8 years of age, that had been vaccinated in infancy, contracted the disease. Not a single death occurred among persons under 17 years who had been vaccinated in infancy. In comparing the two tables it will be seen that the fatality among the unvaccinated is similar to what it was in the pre-vaccination days, viz.: that it was exceedingly fatal among children under one year of age. It becomes less fatal until the period 20—30 years is reached. On the other hand, among the vaccinated it is nil under 10 years of age, and from 20 years of age onward it becomes greater. During this epidemic the Jews have been exceptionally free from the disease, and there has been far less among the aliens than among the English-born Jews. The number of aliens who had arrived in London within the last five years and who contracted Small-pox was less than a dozen. Considering that within two or three years of their arrival in Stepney from the Continent, they are almost totally ignorant of the rudiments of sanitation, and that overcrowding is relatively more prevalent among them, than any other class of the community, the immunity of aliens from Small-pox can only be explained by the fact that they are exceptionally well vaccinated, which is an undoubted fact. Small-pox at Common Lodging Houses. There are in this Borough 84 registered common lodging houses, or one-sixth the total number in the whole of London. These are registered to lodge 6,755. In addition to these houses there are other common lodging houses in the district, but as they give free shelter they are not yet registered. Of the 84 registered houses, Small-pox occurred in 36. Early in January I called the attention of the Public Health Committee to the advisability of having persons in common lodging houses kept under constant medical supervision. As these houses are registered by the London County Council, and are under their control, it was decided to ask that authority to employ a medical man, whose duties would be to examine periodically at night, all the lodgers in houses where Small-pox had already occurred, with a view of detecting persons suffering from that disease. The County Council soon afterwards employed a medical man for that purpose. A large number of persons lodged in the same registered house and slept in the same bed, night after night for years. Others, unfortunately, changed from one place to the other, and in the intervals slept on doorsteps and in other places in the streets. As can be seen in the particulars given below, they often did not complain of any pain, nor did they seek medical advice, until the eruption was well developed, and their attention had been called to it, B 2 20 As they frequently did not sleep in the same house two consecutive nights, it was necessary to disinfect the premises where they were removed from, to the Hospital, as well as the rooms where they slept the two or three nights before that This, of course, caused not only a greater amount of disinfecting work, but also a greater danger of spreading the infection. In the particulars given below, I have given as far as possible the dates when the patients were discharged from the Small-pox Hospitals. Unfortunately they are not quite complete. The deaths and the dates thereof were, however, obtained from the returns of the Registrar-General, and are therefore complete, so that where no date is given to indicate the patient's discharge or death, it may be taken for granted that he recovered. 19 and 19½, Brick Lane (registered for 69 males). On Jan. 17th Edward Portoberry, aged 32, was taken ill, and the rash appeared on Jan. 21st. The patient was removed to the Small-pox Hospital on Jan. 31st. He had been vaccinated in infancy only. He had slept at this address for the previous eight months. On Jan. 17th Francis Casey, aged 32, was taken ill; the rash appeared on Jan. 20th, and he was removed to the Hospital on Jan. 21st. He was vaccinated in infancy, and was discharged on Feb. 28th. He had slept at this address up to, and including Jan. 19th ; but on Jan. 20th he slept at 20, Dorset Street. On Feb. 16th James Thomson, aged 39, was taken ill; he was removed to the hospital on the same day, where he died on Feb. 18th. He had never been vaccinated. On Feb. 16th Samuel Collins, aged 23, was taken ill, the rash appeared on Feb. 18th, and he was removed to the hospital on Feb. 19th. He had not been vaccinated. On Feb. 27th John Jones, aged 27, was taken ill, and he was removed to the hospital on Feb. 28th. He was discharged on March 16th. The patient was vaccinated in infancy only. On Feb. 26th John Francis, aged 28, was taken ill, and the rash appeared on Feb. 28th. He was removed to the hospital on Feb. 28th and discharged on March 22nd. He was vaccinated in infancy only. He lodged at this address for seven months. On Feb. 26th Walter Brooks, aged 17, was taken ill, and the rash appeared on Feb. 28th. The patient was removed to the hospital on Feb. 28th, where he died on March 12th. He said he had been vaccinated in infancy. He had lodged at this address for four months. On Feb. 27th Albert Bayford, aged 16, was taken ill, the rash appeared on Feb. 28th, and he was removed to the hospital on the same day. He was vaccinated in infancy only. He had slept at this address since Feb. 21st. 21 On Feb. 28th William Matthews, aged 52, was taken ill, and the rash appeared on March 1st. The patient was removed to the hospital on March 1st, and was discharged on March 19th. He was vaccinated in infancy only. He had lodged at this house for three years. On Feb. 28th George Davis, aged 45, was taken ill, and the rash appeared on March 3rd. On March 3rd he was removed to the hospital, where he died on March 7th. He had been vaccinated in infancy only. He had lodged at this address for 11 days. On March 4th John Murphy, aged 87, was taken ill; he was removed to the hospital on the same day, and was discharged on April 10th. He had been vaccinated in infancy only. He lodged here for a few nights only. On March 5th George Collins, aged 25, was taken ill, and the rash appeared on March 8th. The patient was removed to the hospital on March 8th, and was discharged on April 26th. He was vaccinated in infancy only. He was a lodger at this house for a week. I could not ascertain for certainty where he had slept previously. On March 14th George Bayford, aged 27, was taken ill and was removed to the hospital on the same day. He was discharged on April 8th. The patient was vaccinated in infancy only. He slept in the streets from Feb. 28th to the time he was removed to the Small-pox Hospital. Previous to that date, he had lodged at this address. On March 14th William Lothian, aged 35, was taken ill, and the rash appeared on March 17th. He was removed to the hospital on the same date, and was discharged on April 8th. The patient had been vaccinated in infancy only. He had lodged at this address for seven months. On March 17th James Lyons, aged 32, was taken ill, and the rash appeared on March 19th. The patient was removed to the hospital on March 19th and was discharged on June 16th. He was vaccinated in infancy only. On March 17th Frank Baker, aged 50, was taken ill, and the rash appeared on March 18th. The patient was removed to the hospital on March 22nd and discharged on April 8th. He was vaccinated in infancy only. 63½, Brick Lane (registered for 63 males). On April 18th Alfred Denmayl, aged 37, was taken ill. He was removed to the hospital on the same day, and was discharged on May 15th. He was vaccinated in infancy only. He slept for two nights only at this address. He slept in several common lodging houses during the fortnight previous to his being taken ill. 22 213, Burdett Road (registered for 51 males). On March 16th. John Whitehead, aged 30, was taken ill, and was removed to the hospital on the same day. He was discharged on April 7th. He had slept here for a few nights only. Previous to that, he had slept in several common lodging houses, as well as in the streets. The patient was vaccinated in infancy. On April 1st Alfred Hockley, aged 47, was taken ill, and was removed to the hospital on the same date. He died on April 5th. The deceased was vaccinated in infancy only. He had slept in the same room as Whitehead. 39 and 41, Commercial Street. Victoria Home (registered for 544 males). On Jan. 6th John Costelloe, aged 47, was taken ill, and the rash appeared on Jan. 8th. The patient was removed to the hospital on Jan. 11th and was discharged on Feb. 19th. He was vaccinated in infancy only. Other cases had occurred at the end of the previous year at this address. On Jan. 13th William Webb, aged 33, was taken ill, and was removed to the hospital on the same day. He was vaccinated in infancy only. He had slept at this address for three months. On Jan. 12th William Arthur, aged 35, was taken ill, and the rash appeared on Jan. 14th. The patient was removed on Jan. 16th and was discharged on Feb. 4th. He had been vaccinated in infancy only. He lodged at this address for three months. On Jan. 13th John Williams, aged 58, was taken ill, the rash appeared on Jan. 14th, and he was removed to the hospital on Jan. 15th. He was vaccinated in infancy only. On Jan. 23rd Richard Pilkington, aged 50, was taken ill, and the rash appeared on Jan. 27th. He was removed to the hospital on Jan. 27th. He had been vaccinated in infancy only. On Feb. 28th George Summers, aged 26, was taken ill, and the rash appeared on March 2nd. The patient was removed to the hospital on March 2nd, and was discharged on June 16th. He had been vaccinated in infancy only. From Feb. 15th to March 1st he had slept in the streets. On March 5th William Spiers, aged 24, was taken ill, and the rash appeared on March 8th. The patient was removed to the hospital on March 8th, and was discharged on April 7th. He had been vaccinated in infancy only. He slept at this address from March 3rd to March 6th. 23 On March 11th George Davis, aged 41, was taken ill, and was removed to the hospital on the same date. He had been vaccinated in infancy only. Previous to March 10th he had slept at 18 and 19, Dorset Street, where Small-pox had occurred. On March 12th Joseph Woolard, aged 65, was taken ill, the rash appeared on March 14th, and he was removed to the hospital on March 15th. He was discharged on April 21st. The patient had been vaccinated in infancy only. He had been an in-patient at the Whitechapel Infirmary for one month, and was discharged from that institution on March 3rd. Since that date he slept at the Victoria Homes. On March 30th Henry Bradshaw, aged 58, was taken ill, and the rash appeared on April 3rd. The patient was removed to the hospital on April 4th and died on April 10th. He had been vaccinated in infancy only. He lodged at this address for seven years. On April 18th Henry Addis, aged 41, was taken ill, the rash appeared on April 21st. The patient was removed to the hospital on April 21st, and was discharged on May 8th. He had been vaccinated in infancy only. On April 28th Alfred Johnson, aged 38, was taken ill, and the rash appeared on May 1st. The patient was removed to the hospital on May 2nd, and was discharged on June 4th. He had been vaccinated in infancy only. He had lodged at this address for 4½ years. On May 2nd George Sargent, aged 42, was taken ill, and the rash appeared on May 4th. The patient was removed to the hospital on May 11th. He had been vaccinated in infancy only. On May 5th Frederick Thomas, aged 44, was taken ill, and was removed to the hospital on the same day. He had been vaccinated in infancy only. On May 15th William Foskett, aged 23, was taken ill, and the rash appeared on May 17th. He was removed on May 19th and discharged on July 11th. He had been vaccinated in infancy only. He had lodged at this address for several months. On August 19th James Good, aged 39, was taken ill, and the rash appeared on August 22nd. The patient was removed to the hospital on August 22nd and died on September 1st. He had been vaccinated in infancy only. He slept at this address from August 11th to August 16th. From August 16th to August 19th he was at the Whitechapel Workhouse, and on August 19th he was admitted to the Whitechapel Infirmary, when he was found to be suffering from Small-pox, and was removed to the hospital on the same day. Previous to August 11th he said he had tramped from Uxbridge. 24 81, Commercial Street. On February 15th George Field, aged 1, was taken ill, and removed to the hospital on the same date. He died on February 26th. He had never been vaccinated. Previous to becoming a lodger at this address, he and his mother had slept in several common lodging houses where Small-pox had occurred. On February 14th William Field, aged 2, was taken ill. The rash appeared on February 17th, and he was removed to the hospital on February 17th, where he died on February 19th. He had never been vaccinated. 9 and 10, Dorset Street (registered for 134 males). On January 1st William Anderson, aged 17—a street newsvendor—was taken ill, and removed to the hospital on the same day. He was vaccinated in infancy. Previous cases had occurred at other houses in this street. On January 2nd James Corfield, aged 50, was taken ill, and was removed to the hospital on the same day, where he died on January 8th. He had been vaccinated in infancy only. He had slept at this address for twelve months. On January 14th Edward Wallis, aged 29, was taken ill, and died at the Whitechapel Infirmary, where he had applied for admission, before he could be removed to the hospital/ He had never been vaccinated. On March 18th John Green, aged 23, was taken ill, and was removed to the hospital on the same day. He had never been vaccinated. He was discharged on May 3rd. On April 21st Michael Baunty, aged 38, was taken ill, and the rash appeared on April 23rd. The patient was removed to the hospital on April 23rd, where he died on May 3rd, He had been vaccinated in infancy only. 11 and 12, Dorset Street (registered for 45 males). On February 28th George Newman, aged 17, was taken ill, and the rash appeared on March 2nd. The patient was removed to the hospital on March 2nd. He was vaccinated in infancy only. 16 and 17, Dorset Street (registered for 92 males). On February 7th John Humphries, aged 39, was taken ill, and was removed to the hospital on February 10th. He had been vaccinated in infancy only. He lodged at this house for several weeks. On February 18th Albert Pugh, aged 34, was taken ill, and the rash appeared on February 21st. The patient was removed to the hospital on February 22nd, and was discharged on March 18th. He had been vaccinated in infancy only. He had lived at this address for several months. 25 On February 18th Alexander Scott, aged 27, was taken ill, the rash appeared on February 22nd, and he was removed to the hospital on February 23rd. He had been vaccinated in infancy only. He had lived at this address for several months. On February 20th Charles Brown, aged 17, was taken ill, and the rash appeared on February 21st. The patient was removed on February 24th, and was discharged on March 17th. He had been vaccinated in infancy only. Brown was employed as night watchman at this address. On May 2nd John Lyons, aged 22, was taken ill, and was removed to the hospital on the same day. I could not ascertain whether he had been vaccinated or not. 19 and 20, Dorset Street (registered for 95 males). On March 6th James Mead, aged 32, was taken ill, and was removed to the hospital on the same day. He had been vaccinated in infancy. On March 16th John Holland, aged 18, was taken ill, and the rash appeared on March 18th. The patient was removed to the hospital on March 18th, and was discharged on May 15th. He had never been vaccinated. Holland was employed as kitchen lad at the above address. On April 1st Frederick Howell, aged 42, was taken ill, the rash appeared on the same date, and he was removed to the hospital on April 2nd. He was discharged on June 4th. He had been vaccinated in infancy only. The patient slept at this address for two nights only. On April 14th John Blower, aged 29, was taken ill, the rash appeared on April 15th, and he was removed to the hospital on the same day. He was discharged on June 9th. He had been vaccinated in infancy only. On April 11th Edward Shaw, aged 18, was taken ill, the rash appeared on April 12th, and he was removed to the hospital on the same day. He was discharged on May 18th. The patient had been vaccinated in infancy only. He slept at this address from April 7th to April 15th. Previous to April 7th, he had slept in the streets for a few weeks. On April 12th John Sullivan, aged 30, was taken ill, and the rash appeared on April 15th. The patient was removed to the hospital on April 15th, and was discharged on May 13 th. He had been vaccinated in infancy only. On April 16th Joseph Montell, aged 25, was taken ill, and was removed to the hospital on the same day. He was discharged on May 17th. It could not be ascertained whether he had been vaccinated or not. He slept for one night only at this address. 26 On April 15th William Hill, aged 47, was taken ill, and the rash appeared on April 16th. The patient was removed to the hospital on April 16th, and was discharged on May 3rd. He had been vaccinated in infancy only. He had lodged at this address for several years. On April 15th William Holding, aged 50, was taken ill, and the rash appeared on April 22nd. The patient was removed to the hospital on April 22nd, where he died on April 26th. Deceased had been vaccinated in infancy only. He had lodged at this address for several weeks. On April 20th Michael Murray, aged 17, was taken ill, and the rash appeared on April 24th. The patient was removed to the hospital on April 24th. He had been vaccinated in infancy only. On April 18th John Gunton, aged 28, was taken ill, and the rash appeared on April 24th. He was removed to the hospital on April 25th. The patient had been vaccinated in infancy only. 28 and 29, Dorset Street (registered for 25 married couples). On March 5th Mary Cosgrove, aged 28, was taken ill, and the rash appeared on the same date. She was removed to the hospital on March 6th, where she died on March 12th. The deceased had been vaccinated in infancy only. 30, Dorset Street (registered for 47 males and 35 married couples). On January 26th George Clark, aged 41, was taken ill, and the rash appeared on January 28th. The patient was removed to the hospital on January 29th, and was discharged on April 7th. The patient had been vaccinated in infancy only. He had slept at this address on January 28th. From the 25th to the 27th inclusive he slept at 20, Whitechapel Road. Previous to that date he had slept in the streets. On February 19th John Colman, aged 54, was taken ill, and the rash appeared on February 25th. The patient was removed to the hospital on February 25th, and discharged on April 11th. He had been vaccinated in infancy, and re-vaccinated 11 years ago. 35, Dorset Street (registered for 114 females). On January 13th Lily Smith, aged 18, was taken ill, the rash appeared on the same day, and she was removed to the hospital on January 19th. The patient had been vaccinated in infancy only. She had lived at this address for three months. On January 19th Ellen Shuttle, aged 30, was taken ill, the rash appeared on January 20th, and she was removed to the hospital on the same day. The patient had been vaccinated in infancy only. She had been employed as kitchen woman at this address for two months. 27 On January 30th Harris Nicholson, aged 32, was taken ill, the rash appeared on February 2nd, and she was removed to the hospital on February 4th. The patient had been vaccinated in infancy only. Previous to February 3rd she had slept for several nights in the streets. On February 8th Isabel Miller, aged 48, was taken ill, and the rash appeared on February 9th. The patient was removed to the hospital on the same day, where she died on February 13th. She had been vaccinated in infancy only. On February 8th Mary Collins, aged 23, was taken ill. On February 11th the patient was removed to the hospital, and was discharged on March 1st. She had been vaccinated in infancy only. She had slept at this address for several weeks. On February 8th Frances Neville, aged 26, was taken ill, and the rash appeared on February 10th. On February 11th the patient was removed to the hospital. She had never been vaccinated. On February 10th Louisa Jones, aged 18, was taken ill, and the rash appeared on the same day. She was removed to the hospital on February 10th, and was discharged on February 26th. She had been vaccinated in infancy only. On February 9th Emma Surname, aged 42, was taken ill, and the rash appeared on February 12th. On February 12th the patient was removed to the hospital, where she died on May 10th. She had been vaccinated in infancy only. On February 10th Ellen Lynch, aged 71, was taken ill, and the rash appeared on February 13th. The patient was removed to the hospital on the same date, and was discharged on March 13th. She had been vaccinated in infancy only. On February 11th Elizabeth Carroll, aged 19, was taken ill, and the rash appeared on February 13th. On February 13th she was removed to the hospital, where she died on February 18th. She had been vaccinated in infancy only. On February 11th Hannah Scott, aged 22, was taken ill, and the rash appeared on February 15th. She was removed to the hospital on the same day. She had been vaccinated in infancy only. On February 12th Sarah May, aged 25, was taken ill, the rash appeared on February 14th, and she was removed to the hospital on the same day. She had been vaccinated in infancy only. On February 13th Emma Delford, aged 17, was taken ill, and the rash appeared on the same day. The patient was removed to the hospital on February 14th. She had been vaccinated in infancy only. On February 21st Annie Duggan, aged 22, was taken ill, and the rash appeared on February 22nd. The patient was removed to the hospital on February 24th. She had been vaccinated in infancy only. 28 On February 21st Catherine Large, aged 21, was taken ill, and the rash appeared on February 22nd. On February 25th the patient was removed to the hospital, where she died on March 5th. She had been vaccinated in infancy only. On April 18th Emily Pummell, aged 50, was taken ill, and the rash appeared on April 21st. On the same day the patient was removed to the hospital, where she died on April 29th. The deceased had been vaccinated in infancy only. She slept on April 19th and 20th at this address. From October 1st, 1901, to April 18th she lived at the Dormitory, Crispin Street. On April 22nd Louisa Lawson, aged 3, was taken ill, and was removed to the hospital on the same day. She had never been vaccinated. The patient and her mother slept for one night only at this address. Previous to this date, they had slept at the Salvation Army Shelter, Hanbury Street. 5, Flower and Dean Street (registered for 122 males). On February 28th Henry Midwood, aged 41, was taken ill, and the rash appeared on March 1st. On March 1st the patient was removed to the hospital, and was discharged on April 17th. He had been vaccinated in infancy only. He had lodged at this address for six months. On February 28th Henry Day, aged 28, was taken ill, the rash appeared on March 1st, and he was removed to the hospital on the same day. He had been vaccinated in infancy only. The patient had lodged at this address for twelve years. On March 2nd Harry Watson, aged 24, was taken ill, and was removed to the hospital on the same day. He had been vaccinated in infancy only. He had lodged at this address for two months. On March 2nd William Johnson, aged 61, was taken ill, and the rash appeared on March 4th. On March 4th the patient was removed to the hospital, where he died on March 9th. He had been vaccinated in infancy only. He was a regular lodger. On March 7th James Tapper, aged 57, was taken ill, and was removed to the hospital on the same date. He had been vaccinated in infancy only. He had slept here for one night only. I could not find out where he had slept previous to his being taken ill. On March 10th Jeremiah McCarthy, aged 40, was taken ill, and the rash appeared on March 12th. On March 12th the patient was removed to the hospital, and was discharged on April 14th. He had been vaccinated in infancy only. He slept at this address for one night only. On March 16th George Hurey, aged 17, was taken ill, and the rash appeared on March 17th. On March 17th he was removed to the hospital, and was discharged on April 5th. He had been vaccinated in infancy only. He was a regular lodger. 29 56, Flower and Dean Street (registered for 46 males and 29 married couples). On January 3rd Annie Beadle, aged 18, was taken ill, and was removed to the hospital on the same day. The patient had been vaccinated in infancy only. She had lodged at this house for two months. On January 31st Lilly Ford, aged 20, was taken ill, and the rash appeared on February 4th. On February 5th the patient was removed to the hospital, and was discharged on February 23rd. She had been vaccinated in infancy only. On February 12th Kate Clarke, aged 27, was taken ill, and the rash appeared on February 17th. On February 18th the patient was removed to the hospital, and was discharged on March 17th. She had been vaccinated in infancy only. Previous to February 15th she had slept at 15, Great Pearl Street. On February 13th Jessie Bruce, aged 35, was taken ill, and the rash appeared on February 20th. On February 20th the patient was removed to the hospital, and was discharged on May 17th. She had been vaccinated in infancy only. She had slept at this address for three months. On February 18th Jessie Collins, aged 32, was taken ill, and the rash appeared on February 19th. On February 19th she was removed to the hospital, where she died on February 22nd. She had been vaccinated in infancy only, and had lodged at this address for three weeks. On March 4th Esther King, aged 40, was taken ill, and the rash appeared on March 7th. On March 8th she was removed to the hospital, where she died on March 11th. She had been vaccinated in infancy only. She had lodged at this address for two months. On March 30th Louisa Hubbard, aged 35, was taken ill, and was removed to the hospital on the same date. She had been vaccinated in infancy only. On April 21st Jane Smith, aged 33, was taken ill, and the rash appeared on April 25th. On April 25th the patient was removed to the hospital, and was discharged on June 7th. She had been vaccinated in infancy only. She had lodged at this address for five weeks. On May 24th Kate May, aged 20, was taken ill, and the rash appeared on May 27th. The patient was removed to the hospital on May 27th. She had been vaccinated in infancy only. She had lodged at this address for four months. 58, Flower and Dean Street (registered for 34 females and 8 married couples). On February 16th Ellen Regan, aged 34, was taken ill, and the rash appeared on the same day. On February 17th the patient was removed to the hospital, and discharged on April 8th. She had been vaccinated in infancy only. She had been a lodger for five weeks. 30 On February 21st Harriet Wells, aged 25, was taken ill, and the rash appeared on February 24th. On February 24th the patient was removed to the hospital, and was discharged on June 27th. She had been vaccinated in infancy only. She had lodged at this address for a week. On February 24th Rosina Smith, aged 26, was taken ill, and the rash appeared on February 28th. The patient was removed to the hospital on February 28th. She had been vaccinated in infancy only. She had been a lodger for several weeks. On February 25th Florence Fitzgerald, aged 36, was taken ill, and was removed to the hospital on the same date. She had been vaccinated in infancy only. She had lodged at this address for four months. On February 26th Sarah Wright, aged 38, was taken ill, the rash appeared on March 1st, and she was removed to the hospital on the same day. She had been vaccinated in infancy only. She had lodged at this address for twelve months. On February 28th Jane Stevens, aged 34, was taken ill, and was removed to the hospital on the same date. She had been vaccinated in infancy only. The deputy informed me that the patient had never slept there. On March 2nd Emily Howard, aged 40, was taken ill, and was removed to the hospital on the same date. She had been vaccinated in infancy only. She had lodged at this address for twelve months. On March 2nd Ellen Connor, aged 48, was taken ill, and on March 3rd was removed to the hospital, where she died on March 6th. The deceased was vaccinated in infancy only. She slept at this address on March 2nd. Previous to that date she slept for a week in the streets. On February 28th, Rose Carey, aged 45, was taken ill, and the rash appeared on March 3rd. On March 3rd the patient was removed to the hospital, and was discharged on April 20th. She had been vaccinated in infancy only. She had lodged at this address for four months. On March 1st Hannah Imber, aged 44, was taken ill, and the rash appeared on March 5th. The patient was removed to the hospital on March 5th. She had been vaccinated in infancy only. She had been a lodger for three months. On March 2nd Louisa Wood, aged 39, was taken ill, and the rash appeared oh March 3rd. The patient was removed to the hospital on March 4th. She had besn vaccinated in infancy only. Previous to March 1st she had slept in the streets for a week. On March 3rd Elias Davies, aged 28, was taken ill, and the rash appeared on March 4th, he was removed to the hospital on the latter date. He died on March 17th. The deceased had been vaccinated in infancy only. He had lodged at this address for a considerable time. 31 On March 3rd Caroline Bedford, aged 34, was taken ill, and the rash appeared on March 4th. The patient was removed to the hospital on March 4th, where she died on March 6th. She had been vaccinated in infancy only. She had lodged at this address for a long time. On March 15th Annie Desmond, aged 30, was taken ill, and the rash appeared on March 18th. On March 18th the patient was removed to the hospital, where she died on March 23rd. She had been vaccinated in infancy only. She had lived at this address for four weeks. 15, Great Pearl Street (registered for 7 females and 37 married couples). On February 9th Norah Leary, aged 31, was taken ill; the rash appeared on February 13th, and she was removed to the hospital on February 14th, where she died on February 23rd. The deceased had been vaccinated in infancy only. Previous to February 5th she had slept at 35, Dorset Street, where several cases had occurred. On March 1st Martha Gifford, aged 27, was taken ill, and was removed to the hospital on the same date. She was vaccinated in infancy only. She had slept at this address from February 25th to March 1st. Previous to that date, she had 3lept at other common lodging houses. 16, Great Garden Street (now done away with). On March 23rd Charles Jones, aged 25, was taken ill, the rash appeared on March 24th, and he was removed to the hospital on the same date. He died on March 30th. He was vaccinated in infancy only. Salvation Army Shelter, 194, Hanbury Street. On December 29th, 1901, Lydia Rule, aged 41, was taken ill, and the rash appeared on December 31st. The patient was removed to the hospital on January 1st, 1902, where she died on January 4th. She had been vaccinated in infancy only. She had been at the above shelter for nearly a month. On January 1st Mary Reardon, aged 9, was taken ill, and was removed to the hospital on the same date. She died on January 21st. The deceased had never been vaccinated. Other cases had previously occurred at the shelter. On January 2nd Annie Moore, aged 59, was taken ill, and the rash appeared o0n the same day. The patient was removed to the hospital on January 4th, and was discharged on January 22nd. She had been vaccinated in infancy only. On January 2nd Sarah Norton, aged 7, was taken ill, and the rash appeared on January 4th. The patient was removed to the hospital on January 4th, and was discharged on February 13th. Condition as to vaccination was doubtful. She was supposed to have been vaccinated in infancy, but no scars could be seen on her arms. 32 On January 11th Alice Stubbs, aged 13, was taken ill, and the rash appeared on January 17th. The patient was removed to the hospital on January 18th, and was discharged on February 17th. She had been vaccinated in infancy only. She was employed as an officer at the shelter. On January 13th Bridget Jones, aged 3, was taken ill, and was removed to the hospital on January 15th. She was not vaccinated. The patient's sister was removed to the Small-pox Hospital on December 31st, 1901. On January 19th Ellen King, aged 17, was taken ill, and the rash appeared on January 22nd. The patient was removed to the hospital on January 22nd. She had been vaccinated in infancy only. She had slept at the shelter for six weeks. On February 12th Margaret Dunham, aged 49, was taken ill, and the rash appeared on February 15th.. The patient was removed to the hospital on February 15th, and died on February 17th. She had been vaccinated in infancy only. Previous to February 11th the deceased lodged at 58, Flower and Dean Street. On March 3rd Elizabeth Langridge, aged 32, was taken ill, the rash appeared on March 3rd, and she was removed to the hospital on the same date. She was vaccinated in infancy only. The patient had slept at the shelter since February 25th. Previous to that date, she slept at the Dormitory, Crispin Street. On March 7th Mary Cooney, aged 42, was taken ill, and the rash appeared on March 9th. She was removed to the hospital on March 10th. She was vaccinated in infancy only. On April 20th Harriet Chappel, aged 32, was taken ill, and the rash appeared on April 21st. The patient was removed to the hospital on April 22nd. She was vaccinated in infancy only. On April 22nd Lawrence Green, aged 2, was taken ill, and was removed to the hospital on April 22nd. He was not vaccinated. 1, Heneage Street (registered for 392 men). On December 29th, 1901, "William Cheeseman, aged 26, was taken ill; on December 31st the rash appeared, and on January 1st he was removed to the hospital. The patient had been a lodger and slept here every night for the last six years. Ten cases had occurred at this place in the preceding four weeks. He was vaccinated in infancy only. He recovered, and was discharged from the hospital on January 23rd. On January 5th George Palmer, aged 61, was taken ill, and he was removed to the hospital on the same day. He had lived at the above address for twelve years. He died on January 7th. The deceased had been vaccinated in infancy only. 33 On January 18th James Wm. Elliott, aged 39, was taken ill, and the rash appeared on January 20th. He was removed to the hospital on January 20th, and discharged oil February 21st. He was vaccinated in infancy only. On January 17th William Rolfe, aged 24, was taken ill. The rash appeared on January 20th, and he was removed to the hospital on the same day. The patient had been vaccinated in infancy only. He had slept at this address for four nights before he was taken ill. Previous to that time, he had lived at 1, Watson Place, Kingsland Road. On January 17th Alfred Northwood, aged 42, was taken ill, and the rash appeared on January 21st. The patient was removed to the hospital on January 21st, and discharged on February 7th. He had been vaccinated in infancy only. He had been a lodger at this address for four years. On January 26th John Smith, aged 33, was taken ill, the rash appeared on January 28th, and he was removed to hospital on the same date. The patient had been vaccinated in infancy only. He had slept at this address for six years. On February 4th James Elliott, aged 34, was taken ill, and was removed to the hospital on February 7th. It could not be ascertained whether the patient was vaccinated or not. He slept at this address on February 4th and 5th. Previous to those dates, he had slept at various common lodging houses. On March 8th John O'Neill, aged 30, was taken ill, and the rash appeared on March 10th. The patient was removed to the hospital on March 10th, and was discharged on April 28th. He was vaccinated in infancy only. He had slept at this place for one week before he was taken ill. Prior to that, he had tramped for two weeks from place to place in search of work. On March 12th John Blake, aged 45, was taken ill, and the rash appeared on March 15th. The patient was removed to the hospital on March 16th, where he died on March 18th. He was vaccinated in infancy only. He had lodged at this address for twelve years. On March 31st John Kishorne, aged 81, was taken ill, and was removed to the hospital on the same day. He was discharged on April 23rd. The patient had been vaccinated in infancy only. He slept at this address for two years previous to March 25th. From March 25th to March 31st he slept in the streets. 86, Leman Street (registered for 126 men). On January 23rd William Ballard, aged 34, was taken ill, and the rash appeared on January 26th. Patient was removed to the hospital on January 26th, and was discharged on February 19th. He had been vaccinated in infancy only. C 34 9, Limehouse Causeway (registered for 35 men). On February 7th Henry Peacock, aged 19, was taken ill, the rash appeared on February 10th, and he was removed to the hospital on the same day. He had been vaccinated in infancy only. 6, Lolesworth Street (registered for 20 men). On March 14th James Homes, aged 48, was taken ill, and the rash appeared on March 16th. The patient was removed to the hospital on March 18th. He was vaccinated in infancy only. On March 17th he went to the London Hospital, where he was given some medicine and told to come again. On March 18th he went to the Whitechapel Infirmary, and was removed to the Small-pox Hospital on the same day. He had lodged at this address for two months. 4, North East Passage (registered for 60 men). On April 6th Joseph Holland, aged 52, was taken ill, and the rash appeared on April 9th. The patient was removed to the hospital on April 10th, and was discharged on April 19th. He was vaccinated in infancy only. 1, Osborne Place (registered for 143 men). On January 12th Samuel Marshall, aged 38, was taken ill. The rash appeared on January 15th, and he was removed to the hospital on January 18th. He had been vaccinated in infancy only. The patient slept at this address from January 10th to January 18th. Previous to that date, he had slept at 90, Wentworth Street. On February 10th Harry Bland, aged 43, was taken ill, and the rash appeared on February 14th. The patient was removed to the hospital on February 14th, and was discharged on March 15th. He had been vaccinated in infancy only. He had lodged at this address since February 5th. Previous to that date, he had slept in common lodging houses at Stratford. On March 5th George Long, aged 39, was taken ill, and the rash appeared March 7th. He was removed to the hospital on March 7th. He had been vaccinated in infancy only. He lodged here regularly for four years. On March 14th Henry Steventon, aged 29, was taken ill, and the rash appeared on March 16th. He was removed to the hospital on the same date. He was vaccinated in infancy only. He lodged at this address for four weeks. On March 25th James Gibney, aged 27, was taken ill, and was removed to the hospital on the same day. He was discharged on April 8th. He had been vaccinated in infancy only. The patient had lodged at this address for five weeks, 35 On March 27th Richard Dennis, aged 51, was taken ill, and was removed to the hospital on the same day. I do not know whether he was vaccinated or not. He had lodged at this address for five weeks. On April 5th Alfred Puddicombe, aged 42, was taken ill, and the rash appeared on April 10th. The patient was removed to the hospital on April 11th, and was discharged on May 20th. He was vaccinated in infancy only. He had lodged at this address for twelve years. On April 28th James Powell, aged 40, was taken ill, and the rash appeared on April 29th. The patient was removed to the hospital on April 29th, and was discharged on June 6th. He was vaccinated in infancy only. He slept at this address for eight days, and before that, at a common lodging house in Bermondsey. 12, Princelet Street (registered for 270 men). On January 25th George Brown, aged 62, was taken ill, and the rash appeared on the same day. The patient was removed to the hospital on January 27th. He had never been vaccinated. He had slept at this address for five or six weeks. On February 8th Alfred Sexton, aged 21, was taken ill, and the rash appeared on February 9th. The patient was removed to the hospital February 13th, and died on March 17th. He had never been vaccinated. He had slept at this address for seven months. On February 10th Charles Read, aged 48, was taken ill, and the rash appeared on February 13th. The patient was removed to the hospital on February 13th, and was discharged on April 12th. He had been vaccinated in infancy and again twelve years ago. He had slept at this address for ten weeks. On February 22nd Arthur Peers, aged 37, was taken ill, and the rash appeared on February 25th. The patient was removed to the hospital on February 27th, and died on March 2nd. He had been vaccinated in infancy only. Previous to February 22nd he had slept at the Salvation Army Shelter, Spa Road, for nine months. On February 23rd Tom Drayton, aged 22, was taken ill, and the rash appeared on February 28th. The patient was removed to the hospital on February 28th, and was discharged on April 11th. He was vaccinated in infancy only. A fortnight before his removal, he had visited a friend on the Small-pox Ship, when he refused to be re-vaccinated. On March 13th William Payne, aged 27, was taken ill, and was removed to the hospital on the same day. He was vaccinated in infancy only. On March 12th John Jeffries, aged 10, was taken ill, and the rash appeared on March 12th. The patient was removed to the hospital on March 12th, and was discharged on April 15th. He had never been vaccinated. He had lodged at this address for seven months. C 2 36 On March 11th Williad Hurrell, aged 29, was taken ill, and the rash appeared on March 13th. The patient was removed to the hospital on March 14th, and was discharged on April 11th. He was vaccinated in infancy only. He had lodged at this address for six months. On March 13th William Wall, aged 52, was taken ill, and the rash appeared on March 13th. The patient was removed to the hospital on March 15th. He was vaccinated in infancy only. He had lodged at this address for ten years. On March 12th James Spencer, aged 35, was taken ill, and the rash appeared on March 16th. The patient was removed to the hospital on March 16th, and was discharged on May 13th. He was vaccinated in infancy only. He had lodged at this address for two years. On April 7th Elias Leatherdale, aged 39, was taken ill, and was removed to the hospital on April 9th. He was vaccinated in infancy only. He had lodged at this address for twelve months. 50a, Princes Square (registered for 30 men). On January 4th John Younger, aged 23, was taken ill. The rash appeared on January 6th, and he was removed to the hospital on January 8th. The patient had been vaccinated in infancy only. 41A, Quaker Street. On January 30th John Alexander Oliver, aged 24, was taken ill, and the rash appeared on February 2nd. On February 3rd the patient was removed to the hospital, and was discharged on February 25th. He had been vaccinated in infancy only. Patient had slept at this address for eight months, and was employed at various Salvation Army Shelters. On March 18th Alfred Tabott, aged 47, was taken ill, and the rash appeared on March 21st. The patient was removed to the hospital on March 22nd, and died on March 24th. He was vaccinated in infancy only. He was a sailor, and had only arrived on the May Queen on March 17th. On April 8th Peter Hansen, aged 38, was taken ill, and the rash appeared on April 11th. The patient was removed to the hospital on April 11th. He was vaccinated in infancy only. 8, Rose Lane (registered for 51 men). On February 26th Charles Price, aged 27, was taken ill, and the rash appeared on March 1st. The patient was removed to the hospital on March 1st and was discharged on March 20th. He was vacacinated in infancy only. 37 22, St. Anne's Street, Limehouse (registered for 190 men). On May 9th James Mahoney, aged 21, was taken ill, and the rash appeared on May 11th. He was removed to the hospital on May 12th, and was discharged on June 8th. He was vaccinated in infancy only. He visited the Small-pox Hospital Ship on April 30tli, and refused to be revaccinated. On May 16th James Haggerty, aged 65, was taken ill, and the rash appeared on May 18th. He was removed to the hospital on May 18th, and was discharged on July 8th. He was vaccinated in infancy only. He also had Small-pox when he was a young man. 106, St. George Street (registered for 281 men). On January 12th Dennis Sullivan, aged 38, was taken ill, and the rash appeared on January 14th. The patient was removed to the hospital on January 15th. He was vaccinated in infancy only. On January 12th John Warner, aged 62, was taken ill, and the rash appeared on January 15th. The patient was removed to the hospital on January 17th, where he died on January 18th. He had been vaccinated in infancy only. On January 26th Edgar Picking, aged 23, was taken ill, the rash appeared on January 30th, and he was removed to the hospital on the same day. The patient had been vaccinated in infancy only. On February 9th John Hughes, aged 32, was taken ill, and the rash appeared on February 11th. The patient was removed to the hospital on February 11th, where he died on February 17th. He had been vaccinated in infancy only. On February 8th John Jones, aged 30, was taken ill, and the rash appeared on February 10th. The patient was removed to the hospital on February 11th, and was discharged on March 3rd. He had been vaccinated in infancy only. On February 10th Nathaniel Stapleton, aged 58, was taken ill, and the rash appeared on February 12th. The patient was removed to the hospital on February 12th, and was discharged on March 25th. He had been vaccinated in infancy only. On February 9th Edward Westby, aged 49, was taken ill, and the rash appeared on February 12th. The patient was removed to the hospital on February 12th, and died on February 15th. He had been vaccinated in infancy only. On February 11th Frank Cox, aged 24, was taken ill, the rash appeared on February 13th, and he was removed to the hospital on the same day. He had been vaccinated in infancy. 38 On February 12th Morris Beriosisky, aged 19, was taken ill, the rash appeared on February 15th, and he was removed to the hospital on February 16th. He had been vaccinated in infancy only. On February 16th James Bardell, aged 30, was taken ill, and was removed to the hospital the same day. He had been vaccinated in infancy only. On February 13th Fred Bunce, aged 41, was taken ill, and the rash appeared on February 16th. The patient was removed to the hospital on February 18th. He had been vaccinated in infancy only. On February 26th Michael Crawley, aged 43, was taken ill, and was removed to the hospital on February 28th. He was vaccinated in infancy only. On March 3rd John Barr, aged 25, was taken ill, and was removed to the hospital on the same day. He was vaccinated in infancy only. From February 15th to March 3rd the patient slept at 12, Princelet Street. Previous to that date, he slept regularly at 106, St. George Street. On March 3rd Patrick Donovan, aged 31, was taken ill, and was removed to the hospital on March 4th. He was vaccinated in infancy only. On March 16th William Dale, aged 27, was taken ill, and the rash appeared on March 18th. The patient was removed to the hospital on March 18th. He was vaccinated in infancy only. On March 22nd John Richenberg, aged 33, was taken ill, and the rash appeared on March 24th. The patient was removed to the hospital on March 24th, and discharged on May 2nd. He was vaccinated in infancy only. On April 16th Patrick Egan, aged 36, was taken ill, and the rash appeared on April 18th. The patient was removed to the hospital on April 19th, and was discharged May 10th. He was vaccinated in infancy only. Previous to April 15th the patient lodged at 20, Dorset Street, for two months. On April 19th Patrick O'Neal, aged 38, was taken ill, and the rash appeared on April 21st. He was removed to the hospital on April 22nd. He was vaccinated in infancy only. On April 19th Joseph Pitt, aged 20, was taken ill, and the rash appeared on April 22nd. Patient was removed to the hospital on April 22nd, and discharged on May 17th. He was vaccinated in infancy only. On April 21st Edward White, aged 16, was taken ill, and the rash appeared c,n April 24th. The patient was removed to the hospital on April 24th, and discharged on May 17th. He was vaccinated in infancy only. On April 21st George Clipson, aged 34, was taken ill, and the rash appeared on April 24th. The patient was removed to the hospital on April 24th, and was discharged on May 30th. He was vaccinated in infancy only. 39 16, Thrawl Street (registered for 6 married couples). On February 7th Hannah Burman, aged 21, was taken ill; she was removed to the hospital on the same day, and was discharged on April 7th. She had never been vaccinated. She had slept at this address on February 4th, 5th, and 6th only. Previous to that, she had slept for several nights in the streets. On February 18th William Stone, aged 39, was taken ill, and was removed to the hospital on the same day. He had been vaccinated in infancy only. He had been a lodger at this address for seven months. On March 1st Lizzie Collier, aged 24, was taken ill, and was removed to the hospital on March 2nd. She had been vaccinated in infancy only. She slept at this address for one night only. I could not find out where she had slept previously. On March 5th Rosin a Amello, aged 24, was taken ill, and the rash appeared on March 7th. The patient was removed to the hospital on March 7th, and died on March 11th. She had never been vaccinated. She had lodged at this address for three months. On March 8th Lydia Smith, aged 43, was taken ill, and the rash appeared March 9th. She was removed to the hospital on March 10th, and was discharged on April 17th. She was employed as deputy at this address. She was vaccinated in infancy only. On March 16th Mary Ann Hearne, aged 30, was taken ill, and the rash appeared on March 20th. The patient was removed to the hospital on March 20th, and was discharged on April 8th. She was vaccinated in infancy only. Previous to March 19th, she had slept at several common lodging houses where Small-pox cases had occurred. On April 20th Mary Eastwood, aged 28, was taken ill, and the rash appeared on April 21st. The patient was removed to the hospital on April 22nd, and died on April 30th. She was vaccinated in infancy only. She lodged at this address for four months. 28, Thrawl Street (registered for 177 men). On February 23rd Thomas Baldwin, aged 26, was taken ill, the rash appeared on February 23rd, and he was removed to the hospital on the same day. He was vaccinated in infancy only. Previous to February 20th, he had slept at various common lodging houses. On March 4th Timothy Dwyer, aged 17, was taken ill. He was removed to the hospital on the same day, and was discharged on March 17th. He was vaccinated in infancy only. The patient had lodged at this address for three months. 40 90, Wentworth Street (registered for 391 men). On February 14th George Giles, aged 67, was taken ill, and the rash appeared on February 16th. The patient was removed to the hospital on February 18th, and was discharged on May 12th. He had been vaccinated in infancy only. Prior to February 14th he had slept in various common lodging houses where cases of Smallpox had occurred. On February 23rd Arthur Thompson, aged 28, was taken ill, and was removed to the hospital on February 24th. He had been vaccinated in infancy only. The patient lodged at this address for several weeks. On February 24th Thomas Bosker, aged 52, was taken ill, and the rash appeared on February 25th. The patient was removed to the hospital on February 26th. He was vaccinated in infancy only. He was employed as a day porter at this place. On February 24th Henry Righaw, aged 53, was taken ill, and the rash appeared on March 2nd. He was removed to the hospital on March 3rd, and died on April 22nd. He had been vaccinated in infancy only. The patient had lodged here for some considerable time. On March 8th Nicholas Inker, aged 40, was taken ill, the rash appeared on March 11th, and he was removed to the hospital on March 11th. He was vaccinated in infancy only. On March 16th Patrick Foley, aged 40, was taken ill, and the rash appeared on March 19th. The patient was removed to the hospital on March 19th. He was vaccinated in infancy only. He had lodged at this address for three years. On April 8th Arthur Bodsworth, aged 46, was taken ill, was removed to the hospital on the same day, and discharged on May 3rd. He had been vaccinated in infancy only. He slept at this address on one night only. On April 8th James Coffee, aged 78, was taken ill, and the rash appeared on April 13th. The patient was removed to the hospital on April 13th, and was discharged on May 5th. He was vaccinated in infancy only. He lodged at this address for eight years. On April 13th Robert Goldby, aged 49, was taken ill, and the rash appeared on April 15th. The patient was removed to the hospital on April 15th, where he died on April 21st. He was vaccinated in infancy only. He had lodged at this address for 12 months. On April 19th Albert Bowen, aged 21 (night porter at this address), was taken ill, and the rash appeared on April 21st. He was removed to the hospital on April 21st. He was vaccinated in infancy only. On April 30th Daniel Evans, aged 40, was taken ill, and the rash appeared on May 1st. He was removed to the hospital on May 1st. The patient was vaccinated in infancy, and again 11 years ago. He had slept at this address for four weeks. 41 On May 16th William Hill, aged 28, was taken ill, and the rash appeared on May 18th. The patient was removed to the hospital on May 18th, and was discharged on June 14th. He was vaccinated in infancy only. He slept for one night only at this place, and previous to this, he had slept at various common lodging houses. On May 30th Frederick King, aged 38, was taken ill, and the rash appeared on June 1st. The patient was removed to the hospital on June 1st, and died on June 7th. He was vaccinated in infancy only. He had lodged at this address since May 27th, and before that date he slept at the Victoria Home, 177, Whitechapel Road. 20, Whitechapel Road, Salvation Army Shelter (registered for 232 men). On January 6th James Holmes was taken ill, and the rash appeared on January 9th. On January 10th the patient was removed to the hospital, where he died on March 31st. He had been vaccinated in infancy only. He had been living here for a month before he was taken ill. On January 16th Samuel Butler, aged 26, was taken ill, and the rash appeared on January 20th. On January 20th the patient was removed to the hospital, and was discharged on February 15th. He had been vaccinated in infancy only. He slept at this address on January 14th and loth. Prior, and subsequent to, these dates, he had slept in the streets. On January 17th Alexander Towers, aged 34, was taken ill, and the rash appeared on January 21st. On January 21st the patient was removed to the hospital, and was discharged on February 28th. He had never been vaccinated. He slept at this address on the 15th and 16th only. Previous to that date, he had slept for several nights in the streets. On February 5th John Frost, aged 27, was taken ill. He was removed to the hospital on the same date, and was discharged on March 3rd. The patient had been vaccinated in infancy only. He had lived at this address for a month prior to his illness. On March 8th John Dennis, aged 35, was taken ill, and the rash appeared on March 10th. On March 10th he went to the London Hospital, where he was given a bottle of medicine. On his return to the shelter, the superintendent saw him, and sent him to the Whitechapel Infirmary, where he was found to be suffering from Small-pox. He was removed to the Small-pox Hospital on the same day. The patient had ben vaccinated in infancy only. He lodged at this address for a month. On March 8th Edgar Coyle, aged 28, was taken ill, and the rash appeared on March 10th. On March 11th the patient was removed to the hospital, and was discharged on April 29th. He had been vaccinated in infancy only. He had lodged at the shelter for three months. 42 On March 8th Thomas Small, aged 20, was taken ill, and the rash appeared on March 12th. On March 13th the patient was removed to the hospital, and was discharged on April 18th. He had been vaccinated in infancy only. On March 19th Charles Haywood, aged 24, was taken ill, and the rash appeared on March 20th. On March 21st the patient was removed to the hospital, and was discharged on April 17th. He had been vaccinated in infancy only. Until March 17th he had slept at 19, Brick Lane. On March 18th Alfred Daw, aged 47, was taken ill, and the rash appeared on March 20th. On March 22nd the patient was removed to the hospital, where he died on April 1st. The deceased had been vaccinated in infancy only. Previous to being taken ill, he had slept at this address for three nights only. On March 18th Henry Davis, aged 51, was taken ill, and the rash appeared on March 21st. On March 23rd the patient was removed to the hospital, where he died on March 28th. He had been vaccinated in infancy only. He had occupied a bed at this shelter for four months. On March 26th Charles Fisher, agei 35, was taken ill, and was removed to the hospital on the same day in an unconscious condition. He was discharged on June 11th. I could not ascertain with certainty whether he had been vaccinated or not. On March 23rd William Johnson, aged 33, was taken ill, and the rash appeared on March 26th. On March 26th the patient was removed to the hospital, where he died on March 31st. He had never been vaccinated. On March 28th William Taylor, aged 40, was taken ill. The rash appeared on March 29th. The patient was removed to the hospital on the same day, and was discharged on April 17th. He had been vaccinated in infancy only. On May 20th John Potter, aged 27, was taken ill, and the rash appeared on May 24th. On May 26th the patient was removed to the hospital, and was discharged on June 18th. He had been vaccinated in infancy only. He had lodged at this address for a long time. 177, Whiteohapel Road, Victoria Home (registered for 628 men). On January 11th Edward Bates, aged 37, was taken ill. The rash appeared on January 13th, and he was removed to the hospital on the same day., The patient had been vaccinated in infancy only. He was discharged on February 4th. He slept for a few nights only at this address. Previous to that, he slept at some chambers near the Rowton House, Vauxhall. On January 26th Fred Gassney, aged 21, was taken ill. On January 29th the rash appeared, and he was removed to the hospital on the same day. The patient had been vaccinated in infancy only. He was discharged on February 17th. The patient's brother was removed from 1, Tenter Street, to the Small-pox Hospital on January 20th. 43 On February 8th Frederick Hopkins, aged 33, was taken ill, the rash appeared on February 11th, and he was removed to the hospital on the same day. He had been vaccinated in infancy only. On March 7th Wm. Chubb, aged 36, was taken ill. On March 8th the patient was removed to the hospital, where he died on March 10th. He had been vaccinated in infancy only. He had slept at this address for three years. On March 14th George Staples, aged 30, was taken ill, and the rash appeared on March 16th. On March 18th the patient was removed to the hospital, and was discharged on May 1st. He had been vaccinated in infancy only. He had slept at this address since January 21st. On April 12th William Thorpe, aged 35, was taken ill, and the rash appeared on April 14th. The patient was removed to the hospital on the same day, and was discharged on May 3rd. He had been vaccinated in infancy only. He had slept at this address since April 5th. Previous to that date he had slept at a common lodging house in Dorset Street, but he could not give the number. On April 12th William Harris was taken ill, the rash appeared on April 15th, and he was removed to the hospital on the same day. The patient had never been vaccinated. He was discharged on June 12th. On April 24th Edward Creed, aged 27, was taken ill, and was removed to the hospital on the same day. He had been vaccinated in infancy only. He had lodged at this address for three months. On May 13th Charles Gooday, aged 48, was taken ill, and the rash appeared on May 18th. The patient was removed to the hospital on May 19th, and was discharged on July 15th. He had never been vaccinated. On May 26th George Pignell, aged 33, was taken ill, and the rash appeared on May 30th. The patient was removed to the hospital on May 31st. He had been vaccinated in infancy only. On May 28th James Sheratt, aged 36, was taken ill, and the rash appeared on May 31st. Patient was removed to the hospital on May 31st, and was discharged on July 11th. He had been vaccinated in infancy only. On May 29th Matthew Parker, aged 38, was taken ill, and the rash appeared on June 1st. The patient was removed to the hospital on the same day. He had been vaccinated in infancy only. On May 30th George Williams, aged 18, was taken ill, and the rash appeared on June 1st. On June 3rd the patient was removed to the hospital, and was discharged on July 16th. He had been vaccinated in infancy only. 44 On May 30th Frederick Smith, aged 37, was taken ill, and the rash appeared on June 3rd. The patient was removed to the hospital on June 4th. I could not ascertain whether he had ever been vaccinated or not. On May 30th Henry Allen, aged 32, was taken ill, and the rash appeared on June 3rd. On June 4th the patient was removed to the hospital and was discharged on July 15th. He had been vaccinated in infancy only. On May 30th George Strange, aged 48, was taken ill, and the rash appeared on June 3rd. On June 4th the patient was removed to the hospital, where he died on June 7th. He had never been vaccinated. On May 30th James Boxall, aged 37, was taken ill, and the rash appeared on June 3rd. On June 4th the patient was removed to the hospital, and was discharged on July 15th. He had never been vaccinated. On June 4th William Harrison, aged 31, was taken ill, and the rash appeared on June 5th. The patient was removed to the hospital on June 6th, and was discharged on June 9th. He was vaccinated in infancy only. On June 5th Daniel White was taken ill, and was removed to the hospital on June 6tli. He had been vaccinated in infancy only. On June 2nd Thomas Reece was taken ill, and the rash appeared on June 6th. The patient was removed to the hospital on June 8th. He had been vaccinated in infancy only. On June 16th Frederick Jones, aged 40, was taken ill. The patient was removed to the hospital on June 17th, and was discharged on July 11th. He had been vaccinated once when he was eight years of age. On June 14th George Smith, aged 34, was taken ill, and the rash appeared on June 18th. On June 19th the patient was removed to the hospital, and was discharged on July 11th. He had been vaccinated in infancy only. On June 14th Henry Reynolds, aged 35, was taken ill, and the rash appeared on June 16th. The patient was removed to the hospital on June 20th, and was discharged on July 11th. He had been vaccinated in infancy only. He had lodged at this address for five years. On June 19th John Ryan, aged 43, was taken ill, and the rash appeared on June 23rd. On June 24th he was removed to the hospital, and was discharged on July 23rd. The patient had been vaccinated in infancy only. 8, White's Row (registered for 1 woman and 54 married couples). On March 8th Mark Collins, aged 29, was taken ill, and the rash appeared on March 9th. The patient was removed to the hospital on March 10 th. He had been vaccinated in infancy only. He had lodged at this address for several years. 45 The following are Common Lodging Houses, but are not registered by the London County Council, as they give free shelter:— The Dormitory, Crispin Street. On December 26th Thomas Mellows, aged 51, was taken ill. The rash appeared on December 30th, and he was removed to the hospital on January 2nd. He had slept at this house since December 21st. No information could be obtained as to where he slept previous to that time. He was vaccinated in infancy only. On January 7th Alice Jacobs, aged 25, was taken ill, and she was removed to the hospital on January 13th. She was vaccinated in infancy only. On February 13th Lydia Lawrence, aged 33, was taken ill. She was removed to the hospital on February 17th, and discharged on March 2nd. She was vaccinated in infancy only. On April 8th Elizabeth Minns, aged 41, was taken ill. She was removed to the hospital on April 11th, and was discharged on May 2nd. She was vaccinated in infancy and 24 years ago. She had slept at this address for a fortnight previous to being taken ill. On April 10th Elizabeth Larkin, aged 62, was taken ill, and the rash appeared on April 14th. She was removed to the hospital on the same day. She was vaccinated in infancy only. She had slept at this address since March 30th. On April 18th Reginald Barnes, aged 3, was taken ill. The rash appeared on April 19th, and he was removed to the hospital on April 20th. He had never been vaccinated. On April 21st Ernest Wm. Barker, aged 1½ years, was taken ill, and was removed to the hospital on April 23rd. He was not vaccinated. Medland Hall. On January 18th Francis Williams, aged 34, was taken ill. He was removed to the hospital on January 22nd, and was discharged on February 14th. He was vaccinated in infancy only. On March 8th Thomas Crompton, aged 49, was taken ill, and the rash appeared on March 11th. The patient was removed to the hospital on March 11th, and was discharged on April 24th He was vaccinated in infancy, and again 40 years ago. On March 8th William Brett, aged 56, was taken ill, and the rash appeared on March 11th. The patient was removed to the hospital on March 11th. He was vaccinated in infancy only. Both Crompton and Brett were friends of, and had been in contact with, Price, who was removed on March 1st from 8, Rose Lane. 46 On March 13th John Pelham, aged 52, was taken ill, and was removed to the hospital on the same day. He had been vaccinated in infancy only. This patient had also been in contact with Price. Particulars of cases of Small-pox occurring in Poor Law Institutions in the Borough:— Mile End Infirmary. On January 15th, a woman was found in a dying condition in the street by the police. They took her to the Mile End Infirmary. She was admitted to the Infirmary in the afternoon, and died in a general ward during the night. There is no doubt, in my opinion, that she suffered from hæmorrhagic Small-pox. I traced her movements on that day, before she was taken charge of by the police, and wherever she went a case of Small-pox occurred there in nine to twelve days afterwards. She went into a small shop in Bridge Street, where she collapsed. A crowd of children collected round the door of the shop, and four of these developed Small-pox within the next 14 days. A few minutes after she was removed from the shop by the police, the first-floor lodger walked through the shop, and on January 29tn she was taken ill, and removed to the Small-pox Hospital on February 1st. A man who was employed at the Infirmary, and called "the handy man," was working in the ward when the patient was admitted, was taken ill on January 25th and removed to the hospital on January 27th. Another man who was employed in the laundry was taken ill on January 26th and was removed to the hospital on January 29th. These two men were non-residents. Both died. In addition to these, one woman who was a patient at the Infirmary at tho time but was afterwards discharged before the onset of the illness, and three other women who worked in the laundry, contracted the disease. On January 25th, 6 cases were removed from the Infirmary to the Hospital. 27th, 7 „ „ „ „ „ 28th, 8 „ „ „ „ „ 29th, 7 „ „ „ „ „ 30th, 7 „ „ „ „ „ 31st, 6 „ „ „ „ „ February 1st, 7 „ „ „ „ „ 2nd, 2 „ „ „ „ „ 3rd, 4 „ „ „ „ „ 4th, 2 „ „ „ „ „ 5th, 2 „ „ „ „ „ 8th, 3 „ „ „ „ „ 10th, 2 „ „ „ „ „ 11th, 1 case „ „ „ „ 12th, 5 cases „ „ „ „ 15th, 1 case „ „ „ „ 47 February 17th, 1 case was removed from the Infirmary to the Hospital. 18 th, 1 „ „ „ „ „ March 1st, 1 „ „ „ „ „ 4th, 1 „ „ „ „ „ 7th, 1 „ „ „ „ „ 14th, 1 „ „ „ „ „ 17th, 1 „ „ „ „ „ 19th, 2 cases „ „ „ „ 23rd, 1 case „ „ „ „ April 9th, 1 „ „ „ „ „ At the Infirmary, there were actually on duty 40 nurses and two matrons. Of this number, 29 nurses and the two matrons had been re-vaccinated prior to the out break. None of these contracted the disease. Four were re-vaccinated on the first day of the outbreak; none contracted the disease. Seven nurses caught Small-pox ; of these, four were re-vaccinated after the disease had been contracted. This was evident, as the Small-pox eruption appeared within a week after they were vaccinated. The eruption of Small-pox generally appears on the 14th day, but occasionally it appears on the 9th, but never in less than that time. The other three nurses refused to be vaccinated. It was stated at the time that one of the nurses that developed Small-pox had been successfully re-vaccinated two years previously. That statement was false. Ratcliff Workhouse. On March 16th George Hammond, aged 28, was taken ill. He was removed to the hospital on March 17th, and was discharged on May 17th. He was vaccinated in infancy only. He left Dover, where he was last employed, a fortnight before he was taken ill, tramped to London, and on the night of March 16th he slept on the Thames Embankment. On April 18th Charles Donarth, aged 30—a tramp—was taken ill. He applied for admission on April 19th, and was removed to the hospital on the same day. He was discharged on May 8th. He was vaccinated in infancy only. St. George's Infirmary. On January 29th Michael Lynch, aged 70, was taken ill. He was removed to the hospital on January 31st, and was discharged on February 17th. He had been vaccinated when he was 30 years of age only. He was admitted to the Infirmary on January 13th, on the same day as John Warner, who came from 106, St. George's Street. On January 30th Edward Harrison, aged 74, was taken ill, and the rash appeared on February 1st. The patient was removed to the hospital on February 2nd, and was discharged on March 1st. He had been vaccinated in infancy only. He had been an in-patient at the Infirmary since September, 1900. 48 On February 12th George Hartley, aged 69, was taken ill, and the rash appeared on February 14th. He was removed to the hospital on February 14th, and was discharged on February 26th. He had been vaccinated in infancy only. He had been an inmate of the Workhouse since December 31st, 1901. On February 14th James Dynan, aged 26, was taken ill, and the rash appeared on February 16th. He was removed to the hospital on February 16th, and was discharged on March 17th. He had been vaccinated in infancy only. On February 13th William Chinnery, aged 66, was taken ill. The rash appeared on February 15th, and he was removed to the hospital on February 17th. He was vaccinated in infancy only. He had been an inmate of the Workhouse since November 11th, 1901. On February 15th John Kelly, aged 56, was taken ill, and the rash appeared on February 18th. He was removed to the hospital on February 18th. The patient had been vaccinated in infancy only. He burnt Harrison's clothing, and was urged to be re-vaccinated, but refused. He had been an inmate of the Workhouse since December, 1901. On February 12th Henry Brady, aged 64, was taken ill, and was removed to the hospital on February 18th, He had been vaccinated in infancy only. He refused to be re-vaccinated. The patient had been an inmate of the Workhouse since January 29th, 1902, Whitechapel Infirmaey. On January 2nd Emma Holland, aged 40, was taken ill, and was removed to the hospital on the same day. She had been an Infirmary in-patient since September, 1898. She was vaccinated in infancy only. She died on January 10th. Previous cases had occurred at the Infirmary. On January 1st William Douglas, aged 3, was admitted to the Infirmary from the South Grove Workhouse. His father had been removed to the Small-pox Hospital a fortnight previously. On January 4th he was removed to the hospital, and discharged on February 13th. He had never been vaccinated. Mary Newman, aged 40, was admitted to the Infirmary on December 6 th, removed to the Workhouse, South Grove, on December 18th, and re-admitted to the infirmary on January 3rd, A rash appeared on the same day, and she was admitted to the Small-pox hospital on January 5th. The patient was vaccinated in infancy only. She was discharged from the hospital on February 19th. Annie Smith, aged 27, was admitted to the Infirmary on December 27th, suffering from an affection of the eyes. She was confined on January 11th, and on January 12th the Small-pox eruption appeared. The patient was removed to the hospital on the same day. She was vaccinated in infancy only, 49 Matilda Hart, aged 66, had been an inmate of the Infirmary since the previous July. She occupied a bed in the same ward as Annie Smith. A rash appeared on January 14th. She was removed to the Small-pox hospital on the same date, and was discharged on February 6th. The patient had been vaccinated in infancy only. Elizabeth Ward, aged 9, was admitted to the Infirmary on December 20th, 1901. All the children in the ward were vaccinated but this one. She was missed. She was taken ill on January 16th and removed to the hospital on January 17th. She had never been vaccinated. On January 19th William Hackwell, aged 65, was taken ill, and the rash appeared on January 20th. On January 21st the patient was removed to the hospital, and was discharged on February 25th. He had been vaccinated in infancy and re-vaccinated a little over 10 years ago. He had been an inmate of the Infirmary since July 29th. Thomas Watson, aged 49, was admitted to the Casual Ward on January 17th, and from there to the Infirmary on January 18th. He was removed to the hospital on the same day, and was discharged on February 17th. He had been vaccinated in infancy only. Prior to being admitted to the Infirmary, he slept for several nights in the streets. On January 25th Herbert Watson, aged 31, was taken ill. The rash appeared on January 27th, and he was removed to the hospital on the same day. He was discharged on February 13th. The patient had been vaccinated in infancy only. The patient had been an inmate of the Infirmary since October 22nd, and helped to carry downstairs Edward Wallis, who had died from Small-pox. On January 25th James Mumford, aged 41, was taken ill. The rash appeared on January 28th, and he was removed to the hospital on January 28th, where he died on February 2nd. He had been vaccinated in infancy only. The patient had been an inmate of the Infirmary since April, 1901, and occupied a bed on the same floor as Wallis, who died on January 15th. On January 25th John Joseph Smith, aged 17, was taken ill, and the rash appeared on January 27th. The patient was removed to the hospital on January 28th, and was discharged on February 26th. He had been vaccinated in infancy only. He occupied a bed in the same block as Wallis. On January 28th, John Burns, aged 32, was taken ill. The rash appeared on January 31st, and he was removed to the hospital on the same day. He was vaccinated in infancy only. D 50 On January 31st Kate Dow, aged 24, was taken ill, and the rash appeared on February 1st. She was removed to the hospital on the same day, and died on February 5th. The deceased had been vaccinated in infancy only. She was homeless, and applied for admission to the Infirmary. Her condition was recognised, and she was at once removed, but refused to give any information as to where she had been sleeping lately. On February 2nd Annie Shepherd, aged 28, was taken ill, and the rash appeared on February 3rd. The patient was removed to the hospital on the same day, and died on April 11th. She was vaccinated in infancy only. She had been an inmate of the Infirmary since January 15th. On February 2nd Ellen Dow, aged 42, was taken ill, and was removed to the hospital on February 5th. She had been vaccinated in infancy only. The deceased was a sister of Kate Dow, who was removed to the hospital on February 1st. Both had been together, and had walked about the streets for several weeks, sleeping on doorsteps. They were not in-patients of the Infirmary, but as they were homeless, the Infirmary address is the only one given. On February 9th Daniel McKay, aged 24, was taken ill. He was found wandering in the streets by the police on February 10th, and taken to the Whitechapel Infirmary. He was removed on the following day to the Small-pox Hospital. He had been vaccinated in infancy only. Rose Harris, aged 30, of no address, and had slept in the streets for some time was admitted to the Casual Ward on February 13th. She was removed on the same day to the hospital, where she died on February 23rd. She had been vaccinated in infancy only. On February 13th Margaret Vogel, aged 43, was taken ill, and was removed to the hospital on February 16th, where she died on February 19th. She had been vaccinated in infancy only. She was destitute, and had slept on doorsteps for some time previous to her applying for admission to the Infirmary on February 15th. On February 18th Agnes Cusden, aged 54, was taken ill, and was removed to the hospital on February 20th. She had been vaccinated in infancy only. The patient had been an inmate at the Infirmary from January 30th to February 10th. On February 28th Emmanuel Cohen, aged 30, was taken ill, and was removed to the hospital on March 1st. He was vaccinated in infancy only. He had been an inmate of the Infirmary since January 14th. Thomas Walsh, aged 31, applied for admission to the Infirmary on March 5th. He had slept in the streets for the previous 14 days. He had been ill since March 3rd, and was removed to the hospital on March 5th. The patient was discharged on May 1st. He had not been vaccinated. 51 On March 13th James Hurley, aged 38, was taken ill, and was removed to the hospital on March 13th. He was discharged on April 15th., He was vaccinated in infancy only. The patient was in the same ward as Harrison, who was removed to the hospital on March 1st. He had been an in-patient since February 10th. Annie Barker, aged 18—homeless—was brought to the Infirmary on March 16th, and was removed to the hospital on the same day. She died on March 21st. She had never been vaccinated. Emily Marsh, aged 31, lived at 31, Quaker Street—where other cases of Smallpox had occurred—till March 3rd. Since that date she had been wandering about the streets. On March 15th she was taken ill, and a rash appeared on March 18th. She went to the Infirmary on March 19th, and was removed to the hospital on the same day. The patient was discharged on April 18th. She was vaccinated in infancy only. d 2 NAMES AND ADDRESSES, &c., OF THE REMAINING CASES OF SMALL POX. NAME AND ADDRESS. Age. Date of Illness. Date of appearance of Rash. Date of Removal. Vaccination. Source of Infection. Result. ert Gassney 1, Tenter Street 6 yrs. Dec. 29 Jan. 1 Jan. 1 Not vaccinated Died Jan. 10 la Rose 24, Yule Crt., Cornwall St. 25 yrs. Dec. 29 Dec. 31 Jan. 1 In infancy only Died Jan. 7 Anderson 9, Dorset St., Spitalfields 17 yrs. Dec. 27 Jan. 1 Jan. 1 do. Previous case in street est Schiff 50, Grove Road 15 yrs. Dec. 31 Jan. 2 Jan. 2 do. [Dec. 13 lliam Marshall 107, Wentworth Street 2 yrs. Dec. 29 Dec. 30 Jan. 2 Not vaccinated Previous case removed Died Jan. 5 A. Wiseman 124, Bedford Street 25 yrs. Dec. 29 Jan. 2 Jan. 2 In infancy only Previous case lip Davies 10, Irene House, Flower and Dean Street 22 yrs. Jan. 2 Jan. 2 Jan. 2 do. Recd. Feb. 1 derick Groves 29, Maroon Street 22 yrs. i About Dec. 13 About Dec. 16 Jan. 3 do. do. Recd. Jan. 21 ma Jackson 10, Moody Street 4 yrs. Dec. 28 Dec. 30 Jan. 3 Not vaccinated Recd. Mar. 17 Gill 29, Carlton Road 9 yrs. Dec. 30 Jan. 1 Jan. 3 do. Recd. Mar. 21 red Steward 7, White's Row 24 yrs. Dec. 29 Dec. 31 Jan. 3 In infancy only Recd. Feb. 6 llip Hill 63, Coborn Road 25 yrs. Dec. 31 Jan. 3 Jan. 4 do, Recd. Jan. 18 rah Marks 35, Royal Mint Street 23 yrs. Dec. 30 Jan. 3 Jan. 4 do. Died Jan. 8 thony Plantade 4, New Court, Dorset St. 41 yrs. Dec. 31 Jan. 2 Jan. 2 In infancy & 25 yrs. ago rence Kay 7, Miller's Crt-., Dorset St. 25 yrs. Jan. 3 Jan. 4 Jan. 4 Not vaccinated Died Jan. 10 lac Papier 2, Shepherd Street 7 yrs. Jan. 1 Jan. 3 Jan. 4 Doubtful 5, Freeman Street Knight 5, Sidney Street 16 yrs. Jan. 3 Jan. 3 Jan. 6 In infancy only Recd. Jan. 22 be Manuel 11, Paternoster Row 13 yrs. Jan. 2 Jan. 3 Jan. 5 Previous case in street Recd. Feb. 10 bert Charlton 42, Upper East Smithfield 43 yrs. Jan. 1 Jan. 4 Jan. 4 In Infancy only Recd.June 7 muel S. Neal 24, Spencer Street 39 yrs. Jan. 2 Jan. 3 Jan. 6 do. Recd. Jan. 25 lliam Hammond 10, Colmar Street 9 yrs. Dec. 30 Jan. 2 Jan. 6 Not vaccinated Recd. Mar. 23 hel Turner 110, Grafton Street 7 yrs. Dec. 30 Jan. 3 Jan. 6 do. Recd. Feb. 25 fred J. Chiddick 20, Dongola Street 17 yrs. Dec. 31 Jan. 3 Jan. 6 In infancy only Reed. Jan. 23 hn Lewis 96, Antill Road 38 yrs. Dec. 31 Jan. 1 Jan. 6 Not vaccinated Evans, Roman Road Died Jan. 10 rion Dickenson 10, Harding Street 19 yrs. Jan. 3 Jan. 6 Jan. 7 In infancy only Recd. Jan. 24 hn Nusett 10, Dundee Street 43 yrs. Jan. 3 Jan. 6 Jan. 7 do. Sutton Street Recd. Jan. 21 uisa Deane 45, Old Church Road 16 yrs. Dec. 31 Jan. 4 Jan. 7 do. Recd. Feb. 3 orge Newin 77, Sherindan Street 31 yrs. Jan. 2 Jan. 7 Jan. 8 do. Recd. Jan. 23 chard Hookaway 4, Storers Buildings, Exmouth Street 5 yrs. Jan. 4 Jan. 4 Jan. 9 Not vaccinated allace Foster do. do. do. 11 yrs. Jan. 8 Jan. 8 Jan. 9 In infancy only Recd. Feb. 4 rence Hookaway do. do. do. 24 yrs. Jan. 8 Jan. 9 Jan. 9 In infancy only Died Jan. 18 liter A. Martin 30, Albion Street 22 yrs. Jan. 7 Jan. 9 Jan. 9 do. Recd. Jan. 28 lly Foster 126, Turner's Road 5 yrs. Jan. 6 Jan. 8 Jan. 9 Not vaccinated [house Latie Pam 8, Entick Street 6½ yrs. Jan. 3 Jan. 5 Jan. 9 do. Previous case in same Died Jan. 14 Villiam Carter 39, Jane Street 29 yrs. Jan. 5 Jan. 8 Jan. 9 In infancy only ulia Perton 3S, Dorset Street 43 yrs. Jan. 3 Jan. 6 Jan. 10 do. Previous cases in street Recd. Feb. 17 Abraham Wallis 7, Hermitage St., Wapping 28 yrs. Jan. 7 Jan. 10 Jan. 11 do. Recd. Jan. 30 Lary Harrow 107, Wentworth Street 2 yrs. Jan. 10 Jan. 12 Jan. 12 Not vaccinated Previous case Died Jan. 18 nnis Lyons 8, Market Buildings 36 yrs. Jan. 8 Jan. 11 Jan. 13 In infancy only Recd. Feb. 5 uisa Stewart 7,White's Row, Spitalfields 30 yrs. Jan. 9 Jan. 11 Jan. 12 do. do. Recd. Feb. 8 later Jackson 10, Moody Street 6 mos. Jan. 11 Jan. 12 Jan. 12 Not vaccinated do. Died Jan. 21 Alfred Bevan 38, Dorset Street 14 yrs. Unknown Jan. 13 Jan. 13 do. do. Recd. Feb. 24 Arthur D. Leggon 23, Ann Street 31 yrs. Jan. 8 Jan. 11 Jan.13 In infancy only Died Jan. 15 Wm. Hammond 10, Colmar Street 35 yrs. Jan.13 Jan. 14 Jan. 14 do. do. Died Mar. 3 ud Hammond 10, Colmar Street 7 yrs. Jan. 12 Jan. 15 Jan. 15 Not vaccinated do. Recd. June 4 omas Hammond 10, Colmar Street 4 yrs. Jan. 12 Jan. 15 Jan. 15 do. do. Recd. Feb. 25 Lorence Sclater 29, Russel Street 24 yrs. Jan. 13 Jan. 16 Jan. 16 In infancy only 124, Bedford Street mma Eliz'b'th Loveday 9, Colmar Street 38 yrs. Jan. 13 Jan. 15 Jan. 17 do. Previous case at No. 10 Disd. Feb. 3 y Hammond 10, Colmar Street 6 yrs. Jan. 15 Jan. 17 Jan.17 Not vaccinated Previous case Recd. Apl. 17 rris Martyn 27, Brunswick Buildings, Goulston Street 2 yrs. Jan. 14 Jan. 17 Jan. 18 do. Died Jan. 23 tilda Martyn do. do. do. l yr. Jan. 14 Jan. 17 Jan. 18 do. zabeth Martyn do. do. do. 6½ yrs. Jan. 14 Jan. 17 Jan. 18 do. rris Martyn do. do. do. 3½ yrs. Jan. 14 Jan. 17 Jan. 18 do. [refused vaccination Died Jan. 23 Alice Gaffney 4, Bell Lane 16 yrs. Jan. 18 Jan.19 Jan. 19 do. Visited S. P. ship but Recd. Feb. 15 zabeth Jane Goring 11, Wapping Wall 20 yrs. Jan. 15 Jan. 18 Jan. 18 Vaccinated in infancy Lived at Old Church Rd., where a previous case occurred. Recd. Feb. 15 n Bredding 2, Agnes Street 60 yrs. Jan. 13 Jan. 17 Jan. 18 In infancy only rence Whitehead 3, Heneage Street 16 yrs. Jan. 17 Jan. 18 Jan. 20 do. [wick Bldgs. en Warren 26, Great Pearl Street 14 yrs. Jan. 16 Jan. 18 Jan. 20 do. Servant at 29, Bruns- ward Hawkins 330, Mile End Road 9 yrs. Jan. 17 Jan. 20 Jan. 20 Not vaccinated Recd. Feb. 22 ly Johnson 36, Dorset Street 16 yrs. Jan. 17 Jan. 19 Jan. 21 In infancy only Recd. Apl. 16 arles Halley 3, Oak Lane 50 yrs. Jan. 17 Jan. 20 Jan. 21 do. Died Jan. 27 briel Pam 8, Entick Street 13 yrs. Jan. 21 Jan. 22 Jan. 23 Not vaccinated Died Jan. 31 zabeth Wright 1, Globe Place, Ellen St, 16 yrs. Jan. 18 Jan. 21 Jan. 24 In infancy only Mther.of ptnt. wrks.at Cstm.Hse. (cleaner), where 2cses.prev.ocrd. nnah Lyons 8, Market Buildings 5 yrs. Jan. 23 Jan. 24 Jan. 24 Not vaccinated Previous case sannah Bailey 30, Albion Street 28 yrs. Jan. 19 Jan. 22 Jan. 23 In infancy only Died Mar. 2 rgaret Vincent 487, "A" Block, Cable St. 16 yrs. Jan. 22 Jan. 24 Jan. 27 do. NAME AND ADDRESS. Age. Date of Illness. Date of appearance of Rash. Date of Removal. Vaccination. Source of Infection. Result. ur Holland Conen 70, Turner's Road 29 yrs. Jan. 23 Jan. 26 Jan. 27 In infancy only Died Feb. 16 ed Chiverton 18, Cottage Grove 40 yrs. Jan. 25 Jan. 27 Jan. 27 do. Unrecognised case [at Infirmary [where he worked Died Feb. 3 Williams 4, Paternoster Row 38 yrs. Jan. 26 Jan. 27 Jan. 27 do. haniel Marinder 74, Walker Street 50 yrs. Jan. 21 Jan. 26 Jan. 27 Not vaccinated Died Jan. 28 May Bateman 3, Walter Street 36 yrs. Jan. 24 Jan. 27 Jan. 28 In infancy only ge Bowles 27, Great Pearl Street 45 yrs. Jan. 25 Jan. 25 Jan. 28 do. Recd. Feb. 17 nas O'Leary 2, Whitethorn Court, Prusom Street 2 yrs. Jan. 23 Jan. 25 Jan. 28 Not vaccinated Recd. Feb. 23 By Ellen Warren 26, Great Pearl Street 37 yrs. Jan. 25 Jan. 27 Jan. 27 In infancy only [22 Recd. Mar. 19 Phillips 4, Bell Lane 20 yrs. Jan. 26 Jan. 27 Jan. 29 In infancy, revac. Jan. Recd. Feb. 25 Carter 4, Bell Lane 21 yrs. Jan. 28 Jan. 29 Jan. 29 In infancy only Previous case Bed Jas. Coats 95, Mansell Street 29 yrs. Jan. 25 Jan. 28 Jan. 29 do. Previous case at his [place of employment Died Feb. 6 an Hopkins 200, Burdett Road 20 yrs. Jan. 25 Jan. 28 Jan. 29 do. Babeth Frost 21, Albion Street 18 yrs. Jan. 27 Jan. 29 Jan. 29 do. Recd. Feb. 26 Morris 12, Edwards Road 17 yrs. Jan. 26 Jan. 28 Jan. 29 do. Bard Snow 11, Brantridge Street 7 yrs. Jan. 27 Jan. 28 Jan. 29 Not vaccinated Died Feb. 7 ence Mitchell 101, Ernest Street 25 yrs. Jan. 26 Jan. 29 Jan. 29 In infancy only Recd. Mar. 20 Jas. Castleman 97, Grafton Street 55 yrs. Jan. 26 Jan. 29 Jan. 29 do. Previous case at Infirm[ary where he worked Died Jan. 30 abeth Farmer 12, Market Buildings 32 yrs. Jan. 27 Jan. 29 Jan. 29 In Infancy only Recd. Mar. 2 lrles Short 2, St. Ann's Road 22 yrs. Jan. 27 Jan. 29 Jan. 30 Not vaccinated Died Feb. 6 In Leggon 23, Ann St., Devonport St. 4 mos. Unknown Jan. 25 Jan. 29 do. Iherine Appleton 5, Brantridge Street 3 yrs. Jan. 25 Jan. 27 Jan. 30 do. Died Feb. 19 an Elson 76, Buxton Street 55 yrs. Jan. 27 Jan. 30 Jan. 30 In infancy only Died Feb. 11 rge Hodder 62, Samuel Street 28 yrs. Jan. 24 Jan. 30 Jan. 30 do. [ago Recd. Feb. 19 n Reilly 17 Ann Street 24 yrs. Jan. 23 Jan. 26 Jan. 30 In infancy and 10 yrs. Recd. Feb. 14 Izabeth Fenn 7, Durham Row 19 yrs. Jan. 25 Jan. 29 Jan. 30 In infancy only Recd. Feb. 15 Ann Long 58, Longfellow Road 27 yrs. Jan. 27 Jan. 30 Jan. 30 do. Recd. Feb. 22 bert Morley 34, Latimer Street 38 yrs. Jan. 28 Jan. 30 Jan. 30 do. Died Feb. 6 Milward 39, Duntan's Houses, Stepney Green 16 yrs. Jan.27 Jan. 30 Jan. 31 do. Recd. Feb, 15 Inuel Coster 47, Old Church Road 5 yrs. Jan. 26 Jan. 29 Jan. 31 Not vaccinated Died Feb. 7 |lliam Coster 47, Old Church Road 2½ mos. Jan. 26 Jan. 29 Jan. 31 do. Died Feb. 8 omas Shea 13, Cadiz Street 34 yrs. Jan. 29 Jan. 31 Jan. 31 In infancy only [address Recd. Feb. 17 Abbotts 4, Miller's Crt., Dorset St. 19 yrs. Jan. 30 Jan. 31 Jan. 31 Not vac. until Jan. 27 Previous case at this Recd. Feb. 15 mes Henry Boswell 20, Edwards Road 6 yrs. Jan. 27 Jan. 30 Jan. 31 Not vaccinated Recd. Mar. 23 uisa Wood 79, Maplin Street 47 yrs. Jan. 29 Jan. 31 Feb. 1 Vaccinated in infancy Worked at Mile End [Infirmary Recd. Feb. 23 ima Ford 41, West Bl., Peabody Bdgs. 5 yrs. Jan. 28 Jan. 30 Jan. 31 Not vaccinated Died Feb. 4 ancis Warren 26, Great Pearl Street 6 yrs. Jan. 29 Jan. 31 Jan. 31 do. rgaret Flemming 28, Cadiz Street 34 yrs. Jan. 29 Jan. 31 Feb. 1 do. Ada Thomas- [from this shop Prsn. remvd. to Infirm. ivitch 115, Bridge Street 39 yrs. Jan. 30 Feb. 1 Feb. 1 In infancy only Recd. Feb. 23 rence Warren 26, Great Pearl Street 9½ yrs. Jan. 31 Feb. 1 Feb. 1 do. Previous case n. H. Warren 26, Great Pearl Street 2½ yrs. Jan. 31 Feb. 1 Feb. 1 Not vaccinated do. zabeth Kaley 5, Dorset Street 21 yrs. Jan. 30 Feb. 2 Feb. 2 In infancy only Died Feb. 10 Bowling 100, Elsa Street 16 yrs. Feb. 1 Feb. 2 Feb. 2 do. Recd. Feb. 20 Wright 18, St. Ann;s Road 18 yrs. Jan. 28 Feb. 1 Feb. 2 do. Ptnt dschrgd, from Mile End Inf. where cses had occrd. on Jan. 18 Recd. Feb. 18 elia. Young 2a, Dukett Street 17 yrs. Jan. 29 Feb. 1 Feb. 2 do. Recd. Mar. 2: ia E. Anderson 52, Maplin Street 28 yrs. Jan. 30 Feb. 2 Feb. 2 do. Recd. Feb. 22 jrence Shea 30, Brantridge Street 3 yrs. Jan. 27 Jan. 31 [ds.old Feb. 3 Not vaccinated [Jan. 18 ry E. Urquhart 2, Agnes Street 42 yrs. About Jan.25 Jan. 31 Rash 3 Feb. 3 In infancy and Jan. 20 Previous case removed in Fletcher "Prince of Wales," 137, Bridge Street 26 yrs. Jan. 31 Feb. 3 Feb. 3 In infancy only Initial symptoms about 5 days after vaccination or 7 days after contracting disease. ima Jane Hill 41, Longfellow Road 22 yrs. Feb. 2 Feb. 2 Too ill to be re moved Not vaccinated [where she worked Mile End Infirmary Died Feb. 3 irgaret McDuall 36, Shandy Street 20 yrs. Jan. 29 Jan. 30 Feb. 2 In infancy and Jan. 31 orges Rogers 4, Bell Lane 25 yrs. Feb. 1 Feb. 3 Feb. 3 In infancy only Previous case Recd. Feb. 24 niel Rogers 4, Bell Lane 24 yrs. Jan. 31 Feb. 2 Feb. 3 do. do. Recd. Mar. 21 lith Higgins 28, Brantridge Street 44 yrs. Unknown Feb. 3 Feb. 3 Supposed to be in infn. anor Alice Busby 136, Burdett Road 6 yrs. Jan. 30 Feb. 3 Feb. 3 Not vaccinated [Cadiz Street Had been visiting 28, Recd. Feb. 17 isie Brierby 23, Cadiz Street 32 yrs. Feb. 2 Feb. 4 Feb. 4 In infancy only Died Feb. 9 ,ry Donoghue 11, Cadiz Street 10 yrs. Jan. 30 Feb. 2 Feb. 3 Not vaccinated Recd. Apl. 5 mes Ward 31, Quaker Street 44 yrs. Feb. 2 Feb. 4 Feb. 5 In infancy only Died Feb. 9 arles Seager 66, Maplin Street 18 yrs. Feb. 1 Feb. 4 Feb. 5 do. Recd. Feb. 19 derick Churcher 15, Finch Street 28 yrs. Feb. 2 Feb. 4 Feb. 5 do. Recd. Feb. 24 ry Ellen Sprung 70, Spencer Street 40 yrs. Feb. 3 Feb. 4 Feb. 5 do. [Miller's Court Sister of C. Abbott, isa Abbott 59, Duckett Street 30 yrs. Feb. 2 Feb. 4 Feb. 5 do. nnah Louard 27, Portland Street 37 yrs. Jan. 30 Feb. 3 Feb. 5 do. Mile End Infirmary rney Benovitch 110, Brunswick Buildings 24 yrs. Feb. 2 Feb. 5 Feb. 5 do. zabeth Ann Bland 4, Miller's Crt., Dorset St. 26 yrs. Feb. 3 Feb. 4 Feb. 5 do. Previous cases Reed. Feb. 17 hael Davis 143, Wentworth Buildings 35 yrs. Jan. 28 Feb. 1 Feb. 5 do. Reed. Feb. 22 NAME AND ADDRESS. Age. Date of Illness. Date of appearance of Rash. Date of Removal. Vaccination. Source of Infection. Result. Margaret James 43, Lolesworth Buildings, Commercial Street 36 yrs. Jan. 21 Jan. 29 Feb. 5 In infancy only Recd. Feb. 19 oseph Davis 10, Irene House, Flower and Dean Street 23 yrs. Feb. 3 Feb. 5 Feb. 5 do. Previous case Recd. Mar. 17 ebecca Davis do. do. do. 43 yrs. Jan. 30 Feb. 4 Feb. 5 do. do. Recd. Feb. 26 bsolom Coles Sailors' Home, Wells St. 22 yrs. Unknown Unknown Feb. 5 Not vaccinated [Street Visited 13 & 28, Cadiz eatrice Cowley 69, Ernest Street 28 yrs. Feb. 3 Feb. 4 Feb. 6 In infancy only ames Buttrey 26, Blomfield Road 26 yrs. Feb. 2 Feb. 7 Feb. 7 do. Died Feb. 9 Laron Davis 10, Irene House, Flower and Dean Street 10 yrs. Jan. 30 Jan. 31 Feb. 8 do. [as chicken pox Previous case notified Recd. Feb. 23 homas Streeter 26, Great Pearl Street 41 yrs. Jan. 20 Feb. 6 Feb. 8 do. Previous case Recd. Feb. 22 rnest Cuthbert 23, Baythorne Street 21 yrs. Feb. 3 Feb. 6 Feb. 8 do. [S. P. occurred Cadiz St. houses where Recd. Feb. 21 ane Gardener 5, Frimley Street 28 yrs. Feb. 3 Feb. 6 Feb. 8 do. Recd. Feb. 24 rah Appleton 5, Brantridge Street 15 yrs. Feb. 5 Feb. 8 Feb. 8 do. Previous case Recd. Feb. 28 Iice Philpot "Lion and Lamb," Skidmore Street 26 yrs. Feb. 6 Feb. 8 Feb. 10 do. Cowley, 69, Ernest St. Lary Avey 40, Ely Terrace 50 yrs. Feb. 4 Feb. 8 Feb. 10 do. [was a regular customer Previous case Recd. Feb. 23 dith Miranda 74, Walker Street 10 yrs. Feb. 6 Feb. 8 Feb. 9 In infancy and Feb. 4 William Miranda 74, Walker Street 13 yrs. Feb. 7 Feb. 8 Feb. 9 do. do. Recd. Feb. 24 Robert Appleton 5, Brantridge Street 6 mos. Feb. 8 Feb. 10 Feb. 10 Not vaccinated Previous case Died Feb. 19 Arnold Chadwick 127, Bridge Street 12 yrs. Feb. 7 Feb. 8 Feb. 9 In infancy only Recd. Feb. 26 Ann Price 17, Ernest Street 36 yrs. Feb. 7 Feb. 9 Feb. 10 do. Recd. Mar. 16 Elizabeth O'Leary 2, Whitethorne Place 23 yrs. Feb. 7 Feb. 10 Feb. 10 do. Died Feb. 23 Alice Read "The Dover Castle," Sutton Street 26 yrs. Feb. 7 Feb. 10 Feb. 11 do. Charles Cambridge 32, High Street, Shadwell 18 yrs. Unknown Unknown Feb. 10 Not vaccinated [charged Jan. 31 Marion Dickenson, dis- John Lockwood 10, Harding Street 25 yrs. Feb. 6 Feb. 10 Feb. 11 In infancy only Recd. Apl. 7 Thomas Stevens 111, Belgrave Street 12 yrs. Feb. 9 Feb. 11 Feb. 11 do. Ada Eliza Stevens 111, Belgrave Street 14 yrs. Feb. 9 Feb. 11 Feb. 11 do. Recd. Mar. 31 George Coster 47, Old Church Road 15 dys. Feb. 10 Feb. 11 Feb. 11 Not vaccinated Died Feb. 15 Lydia Mark 44, Devonshire Street 18 yrs. Feb. 8 Feb. 11 Feb. 11 do. Recd. Mar. 16 Leonard Bradshaw 97, Grafton Street 6 yrs. Feb. 9 Feb. 11 Feb. 11 do. Previous case Recd. May 4 Lane Fenn 7, Durham Row 17 yrs. Feb. 10 Feb. 11 Feb. 11 In infancy only Previous case keziah Fenn 7, Din-ham Row 13 yrs. Feb. 9 Feb. 10 Nt. rmv. Vaccinated Feb. 3 only do. Died Feb. 10 William Dartnell 1, Cleveland Grove 31 yrs. Feb. 6 Feb. 8 Feb. 11 Not vaccinated Recd. Mar. 13 William Green 26, Great Pearl Street 45 yrs. Feb. 9 Feb. 11 Feb. 11 In infancy and in 1877 William Tired 68, Tarling Street 2½ yrs. Feb. 6 Feb. 7 Feb. 11 Not vaccinated Died Feb. 12 Daisy Tired 68, Tarling Street 24 yrs. Feb. 6 Feb. 7 Feb. 11 In infancy only James Gardner 30, Brantridge Street 48 yrs. Feb. 8 Feb. 11 Feb. 11 do. do. Died Feb. 17 Alice Shead 30, Brantridge Street 10 yrs. Feb. 8 Feb. 10 Feb. 11 Not vaccinated do. William Appleton 5, Brantridge Street 13 yrs. Feb. 9 Feb. 12 Feb. 12 do. do. Recd. Apl. 6 Carolina Appleton 5, Brantridge Street 7 yrs. Feb. 11 Feb. 12 Feb. 12 do. do. Recd. Mar. 13 Brederick Appleton 5, Brantridge Street 5 yrs. Feb. 9 Feb. 12 Feb. 12 do. do. Recd. Apl. 13 Agnes Morris 6, Cadiz Street 25 yrs. Feb. 8 Feb. 10 Feb. 11 do. Visited 13, Cadiz St. Carolina Boon 44, Ocean Street 25 yrs. Feb. 7 Feb. 12 Feb. 12 In infancy only Thomas Elgar 18, Frederick Place 21 yrs. Feb. 9 Feb. 11 Feb. 12 Not vaccinated Died Feb. 20 Arthur Andrews 21, Hall Street 46 yrs. Feb. 9 Feb. 13 Feb. 13 In infancy only Died Feb. 16 John Worrow 17, Commodore Street 37 yrs. Feb. 8 Feb. 10 Feb. 13 do. Alen Lynch 36, Dorset Street 71 yrs. Feb. 10 Feb. 13 Feb. 13 do. Previous cases Recd. Mar. 13 rederick Saunders 17, West Street 34 yrs. Feb. 7 Feb. 10 Feb. 14 do. Oseph Johnson 6, Joseph Street 25 yrs. Feb. 9 Feb. 13 Feb. 13 Not vaccinated [her friends Previous cases among Recd. Feb. 28 Lara Emery 37, Brantridge Street 33 yrs. Feb. 9 Feb. 12 Feb. 13 In infancy only Died Mar. 6 George Coster 63, Conder Street 26 yrs. Feb. 10 Feb. 13 Feb. 13 do. Died Feb. 25 Benjamin Belcher 43, Portland Street 45 yrs. Feb. 9 Feb. 12 Feb. 13 do. Recd. Feb. 28 William Mapp 9, Wade's Place 22 yrs. Feb. 9 Feb. 11 Feb. 13 Not vaccinated rah Mapp 9, Wade's Place 22 yrs. Feb. 4 Feb. 5 Feb. 13 In infancy only Recd. Feb. 25 e Wall 27, Silver Street 33 yrs. Unknown Feb. 11 Feb. 14 do. arlotte Home 68, Longfellow Road 32 yrs. Feb. 11 Feb. 14 Feb. 15 Not vaccinated Recd. Mar. 13 Benjamin Magnus 48, Stepney Green Bldngs. 27 yrs. Feb. 10 Feb. 13 Feb. 14 In infancy only Recd. Mar. 1 ice Hill 41, Longfellow Road 1 yr. Feb. 9 Feb. 12 Feb. 14 Not vaccinated Prev. case (mother) Died Feb. 19 Charles Clark 74, Gill Street 36 yrs. Feb. 12 Feb. 14 Feb. 14 In infancy only Emplyd.at Drtfrd.Hspl. Died Feb. 21 Benjamin Derby 216, Cable Street 37 yrs. Feb. 9 Feb. 11 Feb. 14 do. St. George's In. where he worked. Recd. Feb. 25 Oseph Willshire 27, Great Pearl Street 13 yrs. Feb. 11 Feb. 13 Feb. 14 do. Previous case rriet Seger 66, Maplin Street 23 yrs. Feb. 12 Feb. 14 Feb. 14 do. do. fred Seger 66, Maplin Street 16 yrs. Feb. 12 Feb. 14 Feb. 14 do. do. lia Lynch 48, Cadiz Street 7 yrs. Feb. 10 Feb. 14 Feb. 15 Not vaccinated Died Feb. 21 arlotte Marshall 10, White Lion Street 37 yrs. Feb. 12 Feb. 16 Feb. 16 Vaccinated in infancy rah Seger 66, Maplin Street 21 yrs. Feb. 12 Feb. 15 Feb. 15 In infancy only Recd. Mar. 2 nest Newell 52, Maplin Street 17 yrs. Feb. 14 Feb. 15 Feb. 15 do. do. NAME AND ADDRESS. Age. Date of Illness. Date of appearance of Rash. Date of Removal. Vaccination. Source of Infection. Result. vis Davis 143, Wentworth Buildings 3½ yrs. Feb. 13 Feb. 16 Feb. 16 Not vaccinated Previous case Feb. 5 Died Feb. 23 en Crawford 49, London Street 7 yrs. Feb. 12 Feb. 15 Feb. 16 do. Died Feb. 20 Hannaford 27, Great Pearl Street 45 yrs. Feb. 13 Feb. 16 Feb. 16 In infancy only Previous case Recd. Mar. 19 en Brown 38, Cadiz Street 19 yrs. Feb. 13 Feb. 15 Feb. 16 do. Previous cases in street Recd. Mar. 15 mas Donoghue 11, Cadiz Street 34 yrs. Feb. 14 Feb. 15 Feb. 16 do. Died Mar. 8 omas Donoghue 11, Cadiz Street 14 yrs. Feb. 13 Feb. 14 Feb. 16 do. Recd. Feb. 28 ia Donoghue 11, Cadiz Street 9 yrs. Feb. 14 Feb. 15 Feb. 16 Not vaccinated Recd. Mar. 18 n Donoghue 11, Cadiz Street 8 yrs. Feb. 14 Feb. 15 Feb. 16 do. ggie Donoghue 11, Cadiz Street 7 yrs. Unknown Feb. 15 Feb. 16 do. lie Donoghue 11, Cadiz Street 6 yrs. Unknown Feb. 15 Feb. 16 do. nnis Donoghue 11, Cadiz Street 3 yrs. Feb. 14 Feb. 15 Feb. 16 do. Recd. May 8 m Doolan 37, Sutton Street 4 yrs. Feb. 4 Feb. 15 Feb. 17 do. Recd. Apl. 26 lie Lewes 15, Maidman Street 4 yrs. Feb. 10 Feb. 13 Feb. 17 do. Recd. Apl. 7 Robert Gray 11, Lockhart-Street 21 yrs. Feb. 12 Feb. 15 Feb. 17 In infancy only ce Twynham 65, Rhodeswell Road 28 yrs. Feb. 12 Feb. 15 Feb. 17 do. James 43, Lolesworth Buildings 36 yrs. Feb. 14 Feb. 17 Feb. 17 do. Previous case Feb. 5 ward Blackthorn 65, Salmon Lane 16 yrs. Feb. 14 Feb. 17 Feb. 17 do. Previous case William Blackthorn 65, Salmon Lane 18 yrs. Feb. 14 Feb. 17 Feb. 17 Doubtful do. Blackthorn 65, Salmon Lane 7 yrs. Feb. 14 Feb. 17 Feb. 17 do. Recd. Mar. 15 orge Wright 18, St. Ann's Road 46 yrs. Feb. 14 Feb. 17 Feb. 17 In infancy only orence George 33, Station Place, Sutton St 19 yrs. Feb. 15 Feb. 16 Feb. 17 do. Recd. Mar. 15 eanor Puckeridge 41, Longfellow Road 37 yrs. Feb. 14 Feb. 17 Feb. 17 do. za Barrett 2 a, Duckett Street 41 yrs. Feb. 15 Feb. 17 Feb. 18 do. do. Died Feb. 21 rgaret Donoghue 11, Cadiz Street 36 yrs. Feb. 16 Feb. 18 Feb. 18 do. do. Died Mar. 8 dia Fowler 39, Knott Street 17 yrs. Feb. 14 Feb. 18 Feb. 18 do. Recd. May 16 fred Hammond 30, South Block, Peabody Buildings, Shadwell 19 yrs. Feb. 14 Feb. 17 Feb. 18 do. Recd. Mar. 19 mrietta Forrester 23, Cadiz Street 42 yrs. Feb. 17 Feb. 18 Feb. 18 do. do. Died Feb. 23 chel Ann Leonard 51, Gill Street 15 yrs. Feb. 15 Feb. 17 Feb. 18 do. za Miller 209, Pelham Street Buildings 19 yrs. Feb. 14 Feb. 18 Feb. 18 do. [visited him when he was ill. Engaged to Charles Seger and Father is deputy at No.68 where several cases have occurred Died Feb. 26 rtha Lindsay 141, Bow Common Lane 19 yrs. Feb. 13 Feb. 18 Feb. 18 do. Turner 2, Flower and Dean Street 10½ yr. Feb. 16 Feb. 17 Feb. 18 do. A Hill 41, Longfellow Road 3 yrs. Feb. 16 Feb. 18 Feb. 18 Not vaccinated Previous case Died Feb. 19 Fuller 69, Ernest Street 11 yrs. Feb. 15 Feb. 17 Feb. 18 do. do. Recd. Apl. 26 eph Sears 69, Ernest Street 26 yrs. Feb. 15 Feb. 16 Feb. 18 In infancy only do. Recd. Apl. 19 Sears 69, Ernest Street 27 yrs. Feb. 15 Feb. 17 Fell. 18 do. do. derick Sharp 70, Shandy Street 18 vrs. Feb. 13 Feb. 16 Feb. 18 do. refd. revac. Houses in Cadiz St. [where he has visited Blackburn 65, Salmon Lane 45 yrs. About Jan. 28 About Jan. 31 Feb. 18 do. Recd. Mar. 3 liam Dillamore 342, Commercial Road 20 yrs. Feb. 15 Feb. 18 Feb. 19 do. trude Cole 6, Thomas Street 3½ yrs. Feb. 14 Feb. 18 Feb. 18 Not vac. until Feb. 7 Mother of child removed to hspl. frora a house in Paddington Recd. Mar. 23 Goldstein 25, Heneage Street 21 yrs. Feb. 16 Feb. 18 Feb. 19 In infancy only hard Reilly 1, Sceptre Street 18 yrs. Feb. 16 Feb. 16 Feb. 19 do. Recd. Mar. 18 abeth Goodwin 140, Eastfield Street 14 yrs. Feb. 19 No rash Nt. rmv. do. Died Feb. 20 ma Gregory 6, Cadiz Street 12 yrs. Feb. 16 Feb. 18 Feb. 19 Not vaccinated Previous case Died Feb. 28 Appleton 5, Brantridge Street 20 yrs. Feb. 19 Feb. 19 Feb. 19 In infancy only do. Recd. Mar. 1 Costigan 6, Adelina Grove 30 yrs. Feb. 16 Feb. 18 Feb. 19 do. Bateman 17, Commodore Street 4 yrs. Feb. 15 Feb. 18 Feb. 19 Not vaccinated Died Feb. 25 Donoghue 11, Cadiz Street 1½ yrs. Feb. 17 Feb. 18 Feb. 19 do. do. Died May 24 Lorrino 139, Old Church Road 28 yrs. Feb. 17 Feb. 19 Feb. 19 In infancy only Barnett 7, Artillery Passage 22 yrs. Feb. 16 Feb. 19 Feb. 19 do. liam Shead 30, Brantridge Street 25 yrs. Feb. 18 Feb. 19 Feb. 19 do. do. ert Gregory 102, Maroon Street 12 yrs. Feb. 15 Feb. 19 Feb. 19 Not vaccinated Recd. Mar. 25 Collins 27, Flower and Dean Street 32 yrs. Feb. 18 Feb. 19 Feb. 19 In infancy only do. Died Feb. 22 Blackburn 65, Salmon Lane 1 yr. Feb. 18 Feb. 19 Feb. 20 Not vaccinated do. nor Cavill 8, Ely Terrace 21 yrs. Feb. 18 Feb. 19 Feb. 20 In infancy only Levy 37, Ernest Street 9 yrs. Feb. 19 Feb. 20 Feb. 20 Not vaccinated Recd. Mar. 14 Callegan 3, Hanover Place, Brick Lane 14 vrs. Feb. 18 Feb. 20 Feb. 20 do. Recd. Mar. 18 lter M. Dew 10, Maritime Street 19 yrs. Feb. 17 Feb. 20 Feb. 20 In infancy only Recd. Mar. 20 oline Day 51, St. Ann's Road 14 yrs. Feb. 17 Feb. 18 Feb. 20 do. R. Singers 70, Skidmore Street 3 yrs. Feb. 18 Feb. 20 Feb. 20 Not vaccinated mas Chalkley 29, Perth Street 27 yrs. Feb. 16 Feb. 19 Feb. 20 In infancy only Recd. Mar. 14 Mary Dartnell 23, Shandy Street 27 yrs. Feb. 18 Feb. 19 Feb. 20 do. Husband was removed Feb. 11. from 1, Cleveland Grove Recd. Mar. 30 Brown 14, Salmon Street 30 yrs. Feb. 16 Feb. 20 Feb. 20 do. Recd. Mar. 18 Thompson 14, Salmon Street 32 yrs. Feb. 17 Feb. 20 Feb. 20 Vaccinated 24 yrs. ago Murphy 24, Tarling Street 27 yrs. Feb. 17 Feb. 19 Feb. 20 In infancy only Died Feb. 28 Gardiner 51, Lucas Street 3 yrs. Feb. 17 Feb. 20 Feb. 20 Not vaccinated Died Feb. 28 Goodwin 140, Eastfield Street 19 yrs. Feb. 20 Feb. 20 Feb. 20 In infancy only Recd. Mar. 14 Blackburn 65, Salmon Lane 20 yrs. Feb. 18 Feb. 19 Feb. 20 do. Previous case NAME AND ADDRESS. Age. Date of Illness. Date of appearance of Rash. Date of Removal. Vaccination. Source of Infection. Result. llen Blackburn 65, Salmon Lane 9 yrs. Unknown Feb 19 Feb.20 In infancy only Previous case Willliam White 41, Halley Street 29 yrs. Feb. 18 Feb. 19 Feb.20 do. Died Mar. 1 Largaret Brown 30, Ben Jonson Road 8 yrs. Feb. 17 Feb. 19 Feb. 20 Not vaccinated Died Feb. 25 rederick Booker "The St. Paul's Head," White's Row 22 yrs. Feb. 16 Feb. 20 Feb. 21 In infancy only Previous case returned from hospital 3 weeks ago. Recd. Apr. 26 ichard Nitz 80, White Horse Street 23 yrs. Feb. 19 Feb. 20 Feb. 20 do. John Fletcher 39, Pole Street 26 yrs. Feb. 18 Feb. 20 Feb. 20 do. Recd. Feb. 28 Samuel Millman 10, Frying Pan Alley 16 yrs. Feb. 15 Feb. 18 Feb. 21 do. Recd. Mar. 13 arah Allen 1, Baker Street 28 yrs. Feb. 17 Feb. 19 Feb. 21 do. Recd. Mar. 14 Charles Tanner 14, Walburgh Street 28 yrs. Feb. 17 Feb. 20 Feb. 21 do. da Wright 18, St. Ann's Road 10 yrs. Feb. 19 Feb. 20 Feb. 21 do. Previous case Recd. Mar. 15 sher Michalovitch 61, Jubilee Street 18 yrs. Feb. 17 Feb. 18 Feb. 21 do. Elizabeth Walker 73, Narrow Street 30 yrs. Feb. 20 Feb. 21 Feb. 21 Not vaccinated Larry Anthwaite 24, White Lion Street 32 yrs. Feb. 12 Feb. 16 Feb. 21 In infancy only dith Blackburn 65, Salmon Lane 11 yrs. Feb. 18 Feb. 21 Feb. 21 do. Recd. Apr. 5 Thomas Gibbons 74, Gill Street 84 yrs. Feb. 20 Feb. 21 Feb. 21 do. Recd. Mar. 23 mma Dutch 24, White's Row 8 yrs. Feb. 18 Feb. 21 Feb. 21 Not vaccinated Died Mar, 2 ary A. Bates 31, Quaker Street 8 yrs. Feb. 20 Feb. 21 Feb. 21 In infancy only Previous case Feb. 5 Recd. Apr. 14 elen Wright 5, High Street, Wapping 26 yrs. Feb. 16 Feb. 20 Feb. 22 do. [8, Fly Terrace ucy Latham 51, Ernest Street 27 yrs. Feb. 13 Feb. 18 Feb. 22 do. Visited Eleanor Covill, Recd. Mar. 15 m. Bone 3, Willow Row 44 yrs. Feb. 17 Feb. 21 Feb. 22 do. Slept at various common lodging houses where cases occured Died Mar. 17 Dennis Kileen 26, Nightingale Lane 38 yrs. Feb. 19 Feb. 21 Feb. 22 do. Died Feb. 25 Joseph Mitchell 8, Skidmore Street 3½ yrs. Feb. 17 Feb. 21 Feb. 22 Not vaccinated Died Feb. 26 Edith Still 452, Cable Street 16 yrs. Feb. 20 Feb. 20 Feb. 22 In infancy only John Harman 22, Thomas St. (Limehouse) 30 yrs. Feb. 18 Feb. 21 Feb. 22 do. Recd. Mar. 18 Vinifred Yates 29, Wilson Street 4 yrs. Unknown Unknown Feb. 22 Not vaccinated Recd. Apr. 13 Catherine Ward 31, Quaker Street 41 yrs. Feb. 20 Feb. 22 Feb. 22 In infancy only Previous case Feb. 5 Recd. Mar. 13 Arthur Stern 44, Wellesley Street 13 yrs. Feb. 20 Feb. 21 Feb. 23 Not vaccinated Died Mar. 3 arah Levy 15, Maidman Street 37 yrs. Feb. 20 Feb. 23 Feb. 23 In infancy only Thomas Baldwin 27, Dorset Street 26 yrs. Unknown Feb. 23 Feb. 23 do. Slept at common [lodging -houses Joseph Farmer 58, Cornwall Street 38 yrs. Feb. 22 Feb. 23 Feb. 23 do. Thomas Bryant 108, Old Church Road 15 yrs. Feb. 20 Feb. 23 Feb. 23 Not vaccinated Died Mar. 3 cy Harrow 31, Quaker Street 34 yrs. Feb. 21 Feb. 22 Feb. 23 In infancy only Previous case Feb. 5 fred Pollard 3, Market Street 29 yrs. Feb. 20 Feb. 21 Feb. 23 do. Recd. Mar. 29 ary Ann Monksfield 68, Blount Street 17 yrs. Feb. 22 Feb. 23 Feb. 23 do. Recd. Mar. 13 Alice Noble 19, Toilet Street 25 yrs. Feb. 19 Feb. 21 Feb. 24 do. Recd. Mar. 19 ary A. Lummis 47, Sutton Street 28 yrs. Feb. 22 Feb. 24 Feb. 24 do. Patient washed clothing of 68, Tarling Street where case occrd. Died Mar. 28 Largaret Ward 31, Quaker Street 2 yrs. Feb. 23 Feb. 24 Feb. 24 Not vaccinated Recd. Mar. 14 yer Gompertz 18, Morgan Street 30 yrs. Feb. 20 Feb. 23 Feb. 24 do. Died Mar. 3 ary Ann Coombes 65, Salmon Lane 38 yrs. Feb. 23 Feb. 24 Feb. 24 In infancy only Previous case yman Ebstein 65, Brick Lane 21 yrs. Feb. 17 Feb. 24 Feb. 24 do. wis Hammond 45, Shandy Street 5 yrs. Feb. 16 Feb. 19 Feb. 24 Not vaccinated elen Goodwin 140, Eastfield Street 6 yrs. Feb. 22 Feb. 24 Feb. 24 do. do. Lomas Salmon 36, Halley Street 14 yrs. Feb. 11 Feb. 21 Feb. 24 In infancy only Largaret Reardon 85, Cornwall Street 10 yrs. Feb. 21 Feb. 24 Feb. 24 do. therine Smith 3, Colmar Street 34 yrs. Feb. 18 Feb. 23 Feb. 24 do. Recd. Mar. 13 avid Overs 5, Freeman Street 24 yrs. Feb. 20 Feb. 23 Feb. 24 do. Recd. Mar. 19 hn Elvin 93, Kosh's Buildings 43 yrs. Feb. 17 Feb. 19 Feb. 24 do. roline Hughes 38, Howard's Buildings 33 yrs. Feb. 21 Feb. 23 Feb. 25 Not vaccinated Died Mar. 3 ily Turnbull 54, Smith Street 56 yrs. Feb. 20 Feb. 23 Feb. 25 In infancy only hn Storer 18, Brantridge Street 38 yrs. Feb. 21 Feb. 24 Feb. 25 do. Recd. Mar. 20 uisa Tooley 23, Joseph Street 8 yrs. Feb. 22 Feb. 23 Feb. 25 Not vaccinated Recd. Apr. 27 hel Attwat-er 143, Skidmore Street 14 mos. Feb. 23 Feb. 24 Feb. 25 do. Died Mar. 2 arence Ford 21, Hall Street 3 mos. Feb. 25 Feb. 26 Feb. 26 do. do. Died Mar. 2 seph Fogarty 40a, Clinton Road 24 yrs. Feb. 21 Feb. 25 Feb. 2(5 In infancy only Recd. Mar. 15 ary Lynch 48, Cadiz Street 5 yrs. Feb. 23 Feb. 26 Feb. 26 Not vaccinated Previous case Feb. 15 Died Mar. 6 ederick Stevens 136, Globe Road 21 yrs. Feb. 23 Feb. 26 Feb. 26 In infancy only Died Mar. 7 bert Green 26, Great Pearl Street 7 yrs. Feb. 24 Feb. 27 Feb. 27 Not vaccinated Previous case Recd. Mar. 17 nie Casey 11, Whitethorne Place 25 yrs. Feb. 24 Feb. 27 Feb. 28 In infancy only Visited S. P. ship Recd. May 3 ssie Dunn 96, Dempsey Street 1¾ yrs. Feb. 23 Feb. 25 Feb. 27 Not vaccinated bert Lodge 144, Jubilee Street 26 yrs. Feb. 21 Feb. 24 Feb. 27 In infancy only Recd. Mar. 15 hn Barnes 112, Carr Street 6 yrs. Feb. 23 Feb. 24 Feb. 27 Not vaccinated Died Mar. 4 s. Scholfield 63, Ernest Street 26 yrs. Feb. 24 Feb. 26 Feb. 27 In infancy only chael Godier 73, Heath Street 30 yrs. Feb. 27 Feb. 27 Feb. 28 do. [Visitor at time suffrng. from S.P. Patnt. vstd. by prsn. from Hxtn. s. Levi 15, Maidman Street 17 yrs. Feb. 27 Feb. 27 Feb. 28 do. Previous case Recd. Apr. 8 illiam Curtis 95, Turner's Road 24 yrs. Feb. 23 Feb. 25 Feb. 28 do. nie Barnes 112, Carr Street 43 yrs. Feb. 27 Mar. 1 Mar. 1 do. ne Green 49, Cleveland Street 22 yrs. Feb. 23 Feb. 26 Mar. 1 do. Recd. Mar. 15 seph Goodwin 4, Flower and Dean Street 20 yrs. Feb. 28 Feb. 28 Mar. 1 do. NAME AND ADDRESS. Age. Date of Illness. Date of appearance of Rash. Date of Removal. Vaccination. Source of Infection. Result. lbert Barnes 112, Carr Street 16 yrs. Mar. 1 Mar. 2 Mar. 2 Not vaccinated [Lane Recd. Apr. 18 lsie Dring 21, Barnes Street 5 yrs. Feb. 28 Mar. 2 Mar. 2 do. Visited 65, Salmon's Recd. Apr. 25 emima Young 13, Stayner's Road 37 yrs. Feb. 22 Feb. 28 Mar. 2 In infancy only Recd. Mar. 19 thel Glasscock 37, Toilet Street 5 yrs. Feb. 26 Mar. 1 Mar. 2 Not vaccinated Died Mar. 7 arian Clarke 6, Tait Street 42 yrs. Feb. 28 Mar. 2 Mar. 3 In infancy only Recd. May 3 avid Gabiloff 60, Quaker Street 21 yrs. Mar. 1 Mar. 2 Mar. 3 do. [Feb. 17 Recd. Mar. 15 arah Wilson 82, Rhodeswell Road 32 yrs. Mar. 1 Mar. 3 Mar. 3 do. Previous case removd. Recd. Mar. 14 llen Gregory 6, Cadiz Street 10 yrs. Mar. 2 Mar. 2 Mar. 3 Not vaccinated Previous cases removd. Died Mar. 18 William Harbnett 51, Rowsell Street 20 yrs. Feb. 23 Feb. 25 Mar. 3 In infancy only [Feb. 11 & 19 Alice Clarke 82, Rhodes well Road 12 yrs. Mar. 1 Mar. 3 Mar. 3 do. Previous case Recd. Mar. 19 William Manderson 87, St. George Street 26 yrs. Feb. 24 Mar. 1 Mar. 3 do. Visited 107, St. George Street Recd. Mar. 12 William Phillips 48, Brenton Street 19 yrs. Mar. 1 Mar. 2 Mar. 4 do. Driving infected clothing to be disinfected. Recd. Mar. 22 ary Waite 24, Cadiz Street 24 yrs. Unknown Mar. 4 Mar. 4 do. Recd. Apr. 20 ornelius Baker 17, Selwyn Road 23 yrs. Feb. 28 Mar. 3 Mar. 4 do. Recd. Mar. 22 lbert Booker "The Paul's Head," White's Row 21 yrs. Mar. 3 Mar. 4 Mar. 4 do. Previous case Joseph Berry 16, Great Garden Street 33 yrs. Unknown Mar. 4 Mar. 4 do. Recd. May 16 Elizabeth Davis 94, Heath Street 32 yrs. Feb. 28 Mar. 2 Mar. 4 do. Recd. Mar. 17 izzie Taudroff _26, Bradwell Street 21 yrs. Mar. 2 Mar. 4 Mar. 4 do. Recd. Mar. 20 llen Stevens 51, Ernest Street 14 yrs. Mar. 1 Mar. 4 Mar. 4 do. rank Williams 21, Whitehorse Lane 10 yrs. Feb. 28 Mar. 3 Mar. 4 do. Recd. Mar. 20 aurence Proops 53, Fieldgate Street 45 yrs. Mar. 2 Mar. 4 Mar. 5 do. House frequented by men from common lodging house. Died Mar. 12 John Lardison 20, Alma Road 29 yrs. Feb. 27 Mar. 2 Mar. 5 do. Removed a person that had died from small pox. William Twynham 82, Rhodeswell Road 33 yrs. Mar. 4 Mar. 5 Mar. 5 do. Previous case Feb. 17 Recd. Mar. 20 Emma Bateman 17, Commodore Street 26 yrs. Mar. 4 Mar. 5 Mar. 5 do. Previous cases Feb. 13 & 19 Recd. Mar. 22 Frederick Mayston 245, Mile End Road 40 yrs. Mar. 3 Mar. 5 Mar. 5 do. Recd. May 6 Henry Goodwin 140, Eastfield Street 17 yrs. Mar. 4 Mar. 5 Mar. 5 do. Previous case Recd. Mar. 22 Charles Thompson 14, Salmon Street 31 yrs. Unknown Mar. 6 Mar. 6 do. Charles Hammond 45, Shandy Street 10½ yrs. Mar. 5 Mar. 6 Mar. 6 do. Previous case Feb. 24 Recd. Apr. 27 Harry Forrester 45, Shandy Street 9 wks. Mar. 4 Mar. 6 Mar. 6 Not vaccinated do. do. Died Mar. 12 Minnie Forrester 45, Shandy Street 18 yrs. Mar. 3 Mar. 6 Mar. 6 In infancy only do. do. Lillian Staines 20, Morrison's Bldgs.,North 1½ yrs. Mar. 4 Mar. 5 Mar. 6 Not vaccinated Father had come in contact with S.p. cases in his employment. Died Mar. 13 Henry Timms 26, Rectory Square 39 yrs. Mar. 1 Mar. 6 Mar. 7 In infancy only Catherine Adams 3, Dorset Street 32 yrs. Mar. 4 Mar. 5 Mar. 6 do. Died Mar. 7 Caroline Bowen 6, Miller's Court 21 yrs. Mar. 4 Mar. 5 Mar. 6 do. Died Mar. 7 ose Hyam 2, Rupert Street 27 yrs. Mar. 3 Mar. 6 Mar. 6 do. James Chalkley 29, Perth Street 21 yrs. Mar. 1 Mar. 4 Mar. 6 do. Previous case Recd. Apr. 8 James Wicks 30, Longnor Road 40 yrs. Mar. 4 Mar. 6 Mar. 7 do. Henry Skeeles 167, Easttfield street 14 yrs. Mar. 3 Mar. 6 Mar. 7 do. Recd. Apr. 19 John Debtmar 11, West Arbour Street 18 yrs. Mar. 5 Mar. 6 Mar. 7 do. Charles Leeson 17, Spencer Street 17 yrs. Mar. 3 Mar. 6 Mar. 7 do. Recd. Mar. 23 rnest Bailes 65, Maplin Street 19 yrs. Mar. 5 Mar. 6 Mar. 7 Not vaccinated Died Mar. 13 Abraham Abrahams 15, Cecil Street 15 yrs. Mar. 3 Mar. 5 Mar. 7 In infancy only Recd. Mar. 25 Elizabeth Pollard 3, Market Street 27 yrs. Mar. 8 Mar. 8 Mar. 8 do. Previous case Died Mar. 24 John Elvin 93, Cosh's Buildings 15 yrs. Mar. 6 Mar. 8 Mar. 8 do. do. arrie Elvin 93, Cosh's Buildings 18 vrs. Mar. 6 Mar. 8 Mar. 8 do. do. Feb. 24 Frederick Hammond 45, Shandy Street 46 yrs. Mar. 5 Mar. 7 Mar. 8 do. do. do. Recd. Apr. 6 Laud Hammond 45, Shandy Street 16 yrs. Mar. 6 Mar. 8 Mar. 8 do. do. do. Recd. Mar. 16 Harry Forrester 45, Shandy Street 19 yrs. Mar. 3 Mar. 7 Mar. 8 do. do. Henry Coombes 65, Salmon Lane 13 yrs. Mar. 7 Mar. 8 Mar. 8 do. do. Recd. Mar. 23 Frank Emmerson 44, Wellesley Street 19 yrs. Mar. 7 Mar. 8 Mar. 8 do. do. Recd. Mar. 21 olly Emmerson 44, Wellesley Street 14 yrs. Mar. 5 Mar. 8 Mar. 8 do. do. Recd. Apr. 19 Arthur E. Brown 30, Ben Jonson Road 23 yrs. Mar. 5 Mar. 8 Mar. 8 do. do. Recd. Mar. 22 Albert Allen 13, Ewing Street 2 yrs. Mar. 6 Mar. 6 Mar. 8 Not vaccinated Recd. Apr. 9 Joseph Lyons 11, Floreston Street 33 yrs. Mar. 5 Mar. 8 Mar. 8 In infancy only Recd. Apr. 15 Hary Langton 2, Maidman Street 27 yrs. Mar. 4 Mar. 7 Mar. 8 do. ouisa Durrell 20, Edwards Road 64 yrs. Mar. 3 Mar. 6 Mar. 8 do. do. Recd. May 4 Benjamin Tanner 342, Mile End Road 39 yrs. Mar. 1 Mar. 5 Mar. 9 do. Recd. May 3 Samuel Mickleburg 124, Nathaniel Buildings, Flower and Dean St. 19 yrs. Mar. 6 Mar. 8 Mar. 9 do. plomon Cohen 34, Nathaniel Buildings, Flower and Dean St. 14 yrs. Mar. 4 Mar. 9 Mar. 9 do. Recd. Mar. 23 Alfred Austin 3, Shandy Street 32 yrs. Mar. 6 Mar. 9 Mar. 9 do. Charles Blair 57, Beaumont Square 49 yrs. Mar. 4 Mar. 9 Mar. 9 do. ulia Woolf 34, Edwards Road 23 yrs. Mar. 4 Mar. 8 Mar. 8 Recd. Mar. 19 anny Mickleberg 134, Nathaniel Buildings 15 yrs. Mar. 5 Mar. 8 Mar. 8 In infancy only Frederick Lucas 2a, Duckett Street 21 yrs. Mar. 7 Mar. 9 Mar. 9 do. do. Aice Passmore 2, Hanbury Street 21 yrs. Mar. 8 Mar. 9 Mar. 9 do. Recd. Mar. 22 ose Abberley 41, Quaker Street 25 yrs. Mar. 3 Mar. 9 Mar. 9 do. do. NAME AND ADDRESS. Age Date of Illness. Date of appearance of Rash. Date of Removal. Vaccination. Source of Infection. Result. dia Smith 63, Brick Lane 43 yrs. Mar. 8 Mar. 9 Mar. 10 In infancy only Common lodging-house deputy at 16, Thrawl Street Died Mar. 20 hn Salmon 36, Halley Street 20 yrs. Mar. 8 Mar. 9 Mar. 10 do. Previous case Recd. Apr. 17 hn Scott 6, Argyle Road 23 yrs. Mar. 6 Mar. 9 Mar. 10 do. Prev.case, 25, Bercham St., Pplr. Recd.Mar. 21 rah Salmon 36, Halley Street 48 yrs. Mar. 8 Mar. 9 Mar. 10 do. Previous case mes Bryan 5, Chiver's Court 32 yrs. Mar. 6 Mar. 10 Mar. 10 do. Previouse case, 3, Willow Row Recd. Apr. 8 Henry Osborne 21, Bradwell Street 18 yrs. Mar. 8 Mar. 10 Mar. 10 do. Recd. Apr. 19 achel Burman 20, Brantridge; Street 17 yrs. Mar. 5 Mar. 9 Mar. 10 do. Recd. Apr. 11 lred Hoopwood 13, Market Street 11½ yr. Mar. 8 Mar. 10 Mar. 10 Not vaccinated Previous case oraham Van-de-Har 12, Frying Pan Alley 24 yrs. Mar. 3 Mar. 7 Mar. 10 In infancy and Feb. 28 do. lly Harland 11, St. Ann's Road 20 yrs. Mar. 7 Mar. 10 Mar. 10 Not vaccinated ward Impey 77, Emmott Street 23 yrs. Mar. 8 Mar. 10 Mar. 10 In infancy only hn Nash 104, Maroon Street 20 yrs. Mar. 7 Mar. 9 Mar. 10 do. athleen Wright 5, High Street, Wapping 9 mos. Mar. 7 Mar. 9 Mar. 11 Not vaccinated do. Feb. 26 Died Mar. 13 iza Rees 24, Sheridan Street 24 yrs. Mar. 8 Mar. 9 Mar. 11 In infancy only Recd. June 11 Joseph Mitchell 41, Barnes Street 63 yrs. Mar. 9 Mar. 11 Mar. 11 do. niel Wheldon 19, Mary Street 39 yrs. Mar. 8 Mar. 10 Mar. 11 do. win Bridgman 31, Copley Street 11 yrs. Mar. 8 Mar. 10 Mar. 11 Not vaccinated Recd. May 9 ancy White 9, Salmon Street 27 yrs. Mar. 3 Mar. 10 Mar. 11 In infancy only Recd. May 21 hn Jekell 42, Buxton Street 3 yrs. Mar. 9 Mar. 11 Mar. 11 Not vaccinated n Goodman 18, Sidne Square 31 yrs. Mar. 10 Mar. 11 Mar. 11 In infancy only Servant at Smith's common lodging-house arriet Gregory 6, Cadiz Street 44 yrs. Mar. 8 Mar. 11 Mar. 11 do. Previous case Recd. Apr. 19 fred Barlow 16, Galt Street 17 yrs. Mar. 7 Mar. 11 Mar. 11 do. Recd. May 10 mes Connor 44,Wellesley Street 7 yrs. Mar. 9 Mar. 11 Mar. 12 Not vaccinated do. Recd. Apr. 23 fred Perkins 20, St. Ann's Road 20 yrs. Mar. 9 Mar. 11 Mar. 12 In infancy only ary Ann Aylett 3, Chiver's Court 26 yrs. Mar. 8 Mar. 12 Mar. 12 Not vaccinated Died Mar. 18 Arthur Bacon 6, Johnson Buildings, Church Court 16 yrs. Mar. 9 Mar. 12 Mar. 12 do. Recd. May 15 se Freeman 35, Dean Street 13 yrs. Mar. 12 Mar. 12 Mar. 18 In infancy only mes Wilson 61, Ropemakers' Fields 30 yrs. Mar. 9 Mar. 13 Mar. 13 do. Case of smallpox removed from house where he lodged at Ray- leigh, on Mar. 1, 1902 Recd. Mar. 23 William Payne 12, Princelet Street 27 yrs. Unknown Unknown Mar. 13 nnie Jones 4, Flower and Dean Street 19 yrs. Mar. 12 Mar. 13 Mar. 13 do. Recd. Apr. 6 dward Earl 39, Lowell Street 6 mos. Unknown Unknown Mar. 13 Not vaccinated oanna Buckley 2, Grocers' Crt., Dundee St. 30 yrs. Mar. 10 Mar. 13 Mar. 14 In infancy only Recd. Apr. 18 Martha Eliz. Lucas 2a, Duckett Street 20 yrs. Unknown Unknown Mar. 15 do. Previous case Sophia Martin 46, Cadiz Street 25 yrs. Mar. 11 Mar. 13 Mar. 14 do. Visited houses in Brantridge St. where cases of S.P. had occurred. Recd. Mar. 23 William Press 15, Drew's Buildings, Juniper Street 37 yrs. Mar. 8 Mar. 10 Mar. 14 do. Francis Hince 31, Portland Street 37 yrs. Mar. 10 Mar. 13 Mar. 14 do. Arthur Boswell 6, St. Dunstan's Road 29 yrs. Mar. 9 Mar. 11 Mar. 14 do. Recd. Apr. 8 Fred. W. Bare 73, St. Ann's Road 30 yrs. Mar. 10 Mar. 12 Mar. 14 In infancy & 23 yrs. ago Charles Soleries 3, West India Dock Road 25 yrs. Mar. 10 Mar. 14 Mar. 14 In infancy only Died Mar. 22 Richard Lincoln 9, Edwards Road 3 yrs. Mar. 12 Mar. 14 Mar. 14 Not vaccinated Died Mar. 18 Alfred Wm. Selby 10, Twine Court 2 mos. Mar. 11 Mar. 13 Mar. 15 do. Died Mar. 20 Mary Abbott 40a, Clinton Road 38 yrs. Mar. 13 Mar. 15 Mar. 15 In infancy only Previous case Recd. Apr. 24 Louisa Wood 27, Monteagle Street 24 yrs. Mar. 10 Mar. 14 Mar. 13 do. Lewis Rozelaar 147, Stepney Green 25 yrs. Mar. 13 Mar. 14 Mar. 15 do. Recd. Apr. 16 William Catchpole 102, Exmouth Street 33 yrs. Mar. 23 Mar. 16 Mar. 16 do. Recd. Apr. 13 Hannah Maloney 315, Cable Street 14 yrs. Unknown Unknown Mar. 16 Recd. Apr. 7 Elizabeth Pam 83, Sutton Street 18 yrs. do. do. Mar. 16 Recd. Apr. 11 James Raper 3, Flower and Dean Street 17 yrs. do. Mar. 16 Mar. 16 do. Percy Briggs 43, Wilson Street 4 yrs. Mar. 13 Mar. 15 Mar. 16 Not vaccinated Recd. Apr. 23 Bertha Belcham 20, Alma Road 29 yrs. Mar. 14 Mar. 16 Mar. 16 In infancy only do. Recd. Apr. 5 Elizabeth Davis 20, Alma Road 5 yrs. Mar. 14 Mar. 16 Mar. 16 Not vaccinated do. Recd. June 11 ane Davis 20, Alma Road 26 yrs. Mar. 14 Mar. 16 Mar. 16 In infancy only do. John Marshall 581, Commercial Road 36 yrs. Mar. 15 Mar. 16 Mar. 16 do. Recd. Apr. 19 Ralph Solomon 23, Spital Square 30 yrs. Mar. 9 Mar. 12 Mar. 17 do. Harriet Dixon 2, Flower and Dean Street 48 yrs. Mar. 14 Mar. 17 Mar. 17 do. Previous case at Smith's lodging- house, where she was employed. Mary A. Yeend 10, Brick Lane 4½ yrs. Mar. 14 Mar. 16 Mar. 17 Not vaccinated Alfred Drew 3, Dorset Street 6 yrs. Mar. 16 Mar. 16 Mar. 17 do. Previous case Died Mar. 23 Ellen Smith 17, Ernest Street 32 yrs. Mar. 14 Mar. 17 Mar. 17 In infancy only Recd. May 10 Henry Cash 31, Quaker Street 6 yrs. Mar. 14 Mar. 17 Mar. 17 Not vaccinated do. Recd. July 15 Frederick Marhoff 2, Strahan Road 12 dys. Unknown Mar. 17 Mar. 18 do. Died Mar. 22 Lydia Gaze 17r, Juniper Street 20 yrs. Mar. 14 Mar. 16 Mar. 18 do. Died Mar. 25 Mary Ellen Sickelmore 6, Dunk Street 19 yrs. Mar. 15 Mar. 17 Mar. 18 In infancy only Recd. Apr. 12 Richard Goodwin 46, Fashion Street 34 yrs. Mar. 14 Mar. 17 Mar. 18 do. Elizabeth Raper 3, Flower and Dean Street 17 yrs. Unknown Mar. 18 Mar. 18 do. do. Recd. Apr. 20 John Glover 37, Ann Street 4 yrs. Mar. 18 Mar. 19 Mar 19 Not vaccinated do. Recd. Apr. 23 Lara Douglas 29, Perth Street 21 yrs. Mar. 17 Mar. 18 Mar. 18 In infancy only do. Recd. May 2 essie Hamer 130, Grafton Street 26 yrs. Mar. 15 Mar. 18 Mar. 18 do. NAME AND ADDRESS. Age. Date of Illness. Date of appearance of Rash. Date of Removal. Vaccination. Source of Infection. Result. ice Green 85, Gt. Eastern Buildings, Quaker Street 28 yrs. Mar. 14 Mar. 18 Mar. 19 In infancy only Died Apr. 27 ice Coulson 124, Carr Street 29 yrs. Mar. 17 Mar. 19 Mar. 19 do. Died Mar. 28 mma Chalkley 29, Perth Street 45 yrs. Mar. 17 Mar. 19 Mar. 19 do. Previous cases Died Mar. 28 seph Survey 317a, Cable Street 29 yrs. Mar. 15 Mar. 16 Mar. 19 do. Died Mar. 27 Joseph Woolf 21, Edwards Road 27 yrs. Mar. 15 Mar. 19 Mar. 19 do. Previous case Alfred Page 29, Skidmore Street 17 yrs. Mar. 17 Mar. 19 Mar. 20 do. Recd. Apr. 7 aac Schneider 118, Davis Mansions, Goulston Street 20 yrs. Mar. 17 Mar. 19 Mar. 19 In infancy & 14 Mar. An apprentice was ill at his place of employment. Recd. Apr. 5 avid Douglas 29, Perth Street 32 yrs. Mar. 18 Mar. 19 Mar. 19 In infancy only Previous cases Recd. May 13 llian Carr 155, Ernest Street 13 yrs. Mar. 17 Mar. 19 Mar. 20 do. Recd. Apr. 9 hn Bedding 155, Ernest Street. 11 yrs. Mar. 16 Mar. 19 Mar. 20 Not vaccinated etsy Golinsky 5, Black Lion Yard 18 yrs. Mar. 14 Mar. 18 Mar. 20 In infancy only Recd. Apr. 13 Laggie Conolly 26, Rectory Square 46 yrs. Mar. 19 Mar. 20 Mar. 20 do. Recd. Apr. 6 James Davis 64, Sceptre Street 23 yrs. Unknown Unknown Mar. 17 Not vaccinated Recd. Apr. 6 Dennis Shepherd 3, Dorset Street 29 yrs. Mar. 19 Mar. 20 Mar. 20 In infancy only Previous case Recd. Apr. 5 dward O'Brien 5, High Street, Wapping 23 yrs. Mar. 18 Mar. 19 Mar. 21 do. do. Recd. Apr. 18 Harriet Pillar 23, Lydia Street 1 yr. Mar. 17 Mar. 19 Mar. 20 Not vaccinated Died Mar. 23 Catherine Dunlop 31, Quaker Street 50 yrs. Mar. 18 Mar. 19 Mar. 20 In infancy only do. rnest Bonner 71, Lincoln Street 16 yrs. Mar. 16 Mar. 20 Mar. 20 do. Recd. Apr. 7 Mary Pitchley 77, Ocean Street] 18 yrs. Mar. 16 Mar. 18 Mar. 21 do. Constantly visited 2a, Duckett St. where cases of small-pox had occurred iolet Catherine 16, Cranford Cot., Brook St. 14 yrs. Mar. 17 Mar. 20 Mar. 21 Not vaccinated Recd. May 22 Albert Rainbird 104, St. Paul's Road 13 yrs. Mar. 18 Mar. 20 Mar. 21 In infancy only Recd. May 2 Pennington Ford 58, Carr Street 32 yrs. Mar. 17 Mar. 20 Mar. 21 do. Recd. May 5 lorence Carter 3, Dorset Street 5 yrs. Mar. 18 Mar. 20 Mar. 21 Not vaccinated Previous case Margaret McDonald 15, Little Pearl Street 19 yrs. Mar. 18 Mar. 20 Mar. 21 In infancy only do. William Hayes 3, Dorset Street 18 yrs. Mar. 19 Mar. 20 Mar. 21 do. do. Recd. Apr. 10 olomon Bentz 13, Tenter Street 27 yrs. Mar. 19 Mar. 20 Mar. 21 do. Recd. Apr. 7 Annie Bates 3, Dorset Street 9 yrs. Mar. 19 Mar. 20 Mar. 21 do. Previous case, 3 scars Recd. Apr. 9 Emma Fowkes 9, Venour Road 22 yrs. Mar. 18 Mar. 21 Mar. 22 do. do Recd. Apr. 5 ane Townsend 53, St. Thomas's Road 20 yrs. Mar. 13 Mar. 16 Mar. 21 do. George Smith 155, Ernest Street 24 yrs. Mar. 19 Mar. 19 Mar. 22 do. Previous case Recd. Apr. 21 Emma Bare 73, St. Ann's Road 30 yrs. Mar. 20 Mar. 22 Mar. 23 In infancy only Previous case lara Regan 25, Lomas Buildings, Duckett Street 25 yrs. Mar. 19 Mar. 21 Mar. 22 do. Visited sister who suffered from smallpox at West Ham. Recd. June 7 lorrie Draper 37, Dorset Street 9 yrs. Mar. 21 Mar. 22 Mar. 22 Not vaccinated Catherine Kennedy 39, Perth Street 40 yrs. Mar. 20 Mar. 23 Mar. 23 In infancy only Visited S.P.ship Mar. 8 John Johnson 3, Limehouse Causeway 54 yrs. Mar. 20 Mar. 23 Mar. 23 Not vaccinated Recd. Apr. 30 Elizabeth Samuels 62, Cadiz Street 27 yrs. Mar. 21 Mar. 23 Mar. 23 In infancy only Visited infctd. houses, Cadiz St. Recd. Apr. 29 aac Goudeket 36, Tredegar Square 18 yrs. Mar. 20 Mar. 21 Mar. 23 do. Prev. case at Loiery's Recd. Apr. 11 alter Simonds 2, Brantridge Street 45 yrs. Mar. 20 Mar. 22 Mar. 23 do. do. unrecognised Died Mar. 31 John Penfare 80, Old Church Road 17 yrs. Mar. 20 Mar. 23 Mar. 23 Not vaccinated Recd. May 10 be Davis 173, Katharine Buildings, Cartwright Street 11 yrs. Mar. 17 Mar. 19 Mar. 21 In infancy only Died Mar. 23 dah Belmont 15, Palmer Street 17 yrs. Mar. 19 Mar. 21 Mar. 22 do. Prev. case at Lotery's Recd. Apr. 17 Elizabeth Symons 2, Brantridge Street 13 yrs. Mar. 13 Mar. 15 Mar. 24 do. Mary Dunberry 3, Dorset Street 46 yrs. Mar. 20 Mar. 22 Mar. 24 do. Previous cases Died Apr. 29 aniel Levy 19, Floreston Street 34 yrs. Mar. 20 Mar. 23 Mar. 24 do. Brother-in-law of Lyons, 11, F;prestpm St., removed March 8. Recd. May 3 enrietta Cameron 61, Copley Street 57 yrs. Mar. 22 Mar. 22 Mar. 24 In infancy & 11 yrs. ago Recd. Apr. 5 mnie Bearwisk 51, Duckett Street 24 yrs. Unknown Mar. 24 Mar. 24 In infancy only Friend suffering S.P. mothy McCarthy 6, Ashcroft Road 21 yrs. Mar. 20 Mar. 23 Mar. 24 J J do. Recd. Apr. 15 George W. Taylor 31, Antill Road 31 yrs. Mar. 20 Mar. 23 Mar. 24 do. [S.P. Recd. Apr. 5 amuel Newman 13, Notgrove Street 24 yrs. Mar. 21 Mar. 24 Mar. 24 do. Colleague taken away, liza Jane Murray 46, Dixon Street 30 yrs. Mar. 19 Mar. 22 Mar. 25 do. Unrecognised case in house (husband) Recd. Apr. 12 George Evans 28, Dupont Street 23 yrs. Mar. 22 Mar. 25 Mar. 25 do. Recd. May 17 Margaret Buckley 2, Grocers' Crt., Wapping 5 yrs. Unknown Unknown Mar. 25 Not vaccinated Recd. May 22 James Warner 134, Bow Common Lane 25 yrs. Mar. 24 Mar. 25 Mar. 25 In infancy only Recd. Apr. 26 ora Selby 10, Twine Court 23 yrs. Mar. 23 Mar. 24 Mar. 25 Not vaccinated Previous case Died Mar. 30 llen Harris 15, Jubilee Buildings, High Street, Wapping 19 yrs. Mar. 22 Mar. 24 Mar. 26 In infancy only do. Died Apr. 3 Mary Mollet 40a, Clinton Road 20 yrs. Mar. 23 Mar. 25 Mar. 26 Not vaccinated do. Recd. May 4 William Bare 73, St. Ann's Road 3 yrs. Mar. 24 Mar. 26 Mar. 26 do. do. Recd. May 10 Louis F. Tizley 14, Ben Jonson Road 24 yrs. Mar. 24 Mar. 26 Mar. 26 In infancy only Recd. Apr. 12 liza McKenzie 44, Cadiz Street 12 yrs. Mar. 24 Mar. 26 Mar. 26 J J Not vaccinated 7, Clifton St., Poplar Recd. May 8 aud Press 15, Drew's Buildings 7 yrs. Mar. 26 Mar. 28 Mar. 28 do. Previous case Recd. July 25 Elizabeth Press 15, Drew's Buildings 30 yrs. Mar. 26 Mar. 28 Mar. 28 do. do. Recd. May 22 Mary Peachey 109, Rhodeswell Road 18 yrs. Mar. 23 Mar. 26 Mar. 27 In infancy only Prev.case unrecognised Recd. Apr. 25 William Peachey 109, Rhodeswell Road 3 yrs. Mar. 23 Mar. 26 Mar. 27 Not vaccinated do. Died Apr. 7 louisa Bell 27, Red Mead Lane 14 yrs. Mar. 24 Mar. 26 Mar. 27 In infancy only Recd. May 8 NAME AND ADDRESS. Age. Date of Illness. Date of appearance of Rash. Date of Removal. Vaccination. Source of Infection. Result. rah Pam 83, Sutton Street 20 yrs. Mar. 26 Mar. 28 Mar. 28 Not vaccinated Previous case Mar. 15 Recd. May 7 lia Pam 83, Sutton Street 17 yrs. Mar. 26 Mar. 28 Mar. 28 In infancy only do. do. Recd. Apr. 9 ther Pam 83, Sutton Street 13 yrs. Mar. 26 Mar. 28 Mar. 28 do. do. do. Recd. Apr. 14 illipa Ready 13, Great Hermitage St. 32 yrs. Mar. 21 Mar. 22 Mar. 24 do. Died Mar. 28 chel Isaacs 30, Tenter Street 53 yrs. Mar. 25 Mar. 26 Mar. 28 do. Recd. Apr. 9 niel Leary 315, Cable Street 14 yrs. Mar. 27 Mar. 28 Mar. 28 do. do. Recd. May 18 iza Green 1, Claremont Place, Redman's Road 26 yrs. Mar. 24 Mar. 28 Mar. 28 do. Recd. Apr. 20 my Wells 144, Whitechapel Road 32 yrs. Mar. 25 Mar. 27 Mar. 28 do. ah Levy 28, Beaumont Square 28 yrs. Mar. 24 Mar. 28 Mar. 29 do. Died Apr. 5 s. Arrol 3, Dorset Street 3 yrs. Mar. 25 Mar. 28 Mar. 29 Not vaccinated do. Recd. Apr. 20 enry Cronin 107, Dunstan Place 16 yrs. Mar. 24 Mar. 27 Mar. 29 In infancy only Recd. Apr. 28 se Cordery 29, Cadiz Street 3 yrs. Mar. 28 Mar. 29 Mar. 29 Not vaccinated Recd. May 15 William Bowden 44, Cadiz Street 25 yrs. Mar. 28 Mar. 29 Mar. 29 In infancy only do. Recd. Apr. 18 gnes Gilbert 37, Brantridge Street 26 yrs. Mar. 26 Mar. 29 Mar. 29 do. do. Recd. Apr. 10 tten Toope 16, Maplin Street 43 yrs. Mar. 24 Mar. 28 Mar. 29 do. Visited S. P. ship Recd. Apr. 14 ndrew Shute 6, St. Dunstan's Row 3½ yr. Mar. 29 Mar. 30 Mar. 31 Not vaccinated Previous case Recd. July 11 ose Gaze 17k, Juniper Street 18 yrs. Mar. 28 Mar. 30 Mar. 31 do. do. Died Apr. 6 Richard M. Richards 39, New Gravel Lane 42 yrs. Mar. 28 Mar. 30 Mar. 31 In infancy only Died Apr. 3 eatrice Evans 41, Harding Street 32 yrs. Mar. 28 Mar. 30 Mar. 31 do. Recd. Apr. 17 Lichael Regan 25, Lomas Buildings 1½ yr. Mar. 30 Mar. 30 Mar. 31 Not vaccinated Previous cases Died May 6 hn Kervin 27, Emmott Street 5 yrs. Mar. 27 Mar. 29 Mar. 31 do. Died Apr. 13 Joseph Riddle 34, Ely Terrace 19 yrs. Mar. 27 Mar. 31 Mar. 31 In infancy only Recd. May 8 Henry Surtell 50, Coutts Road 64 yrs. Mar. 30 Mar. 30 Mar. 31 do. Recd. Apr. 19 William Neale 29, Alma Road 4 yrs. Mar. 29 Mar. 31 Mar. 31 Not vaccinated Died Apr. 11 ouisa Smith 1, Prusom Street 3 yrs. Mar. 29 Mar. 31 Mar. 31 do. Died Apr. 6 Robert Smith 1, Prusom Street 5 yrs. Mar. 29 Mar. 31 Mar. 31 do. Died Apr. 6 Annie Dean 4a, Lombard Street 18 yrs. Mar. 28 Mar. 31 Mar. 31 do. Recd. July 22 James Blair 24, Salmon Lane 22 yrs. Mar. 27 Mar. 28 Mar. 31 do. [of employment Recd. Apr. 23 lara Grime 12, Sheridan Street 15 yrs. Mar. 29 Mar. 31 Apr. 1 do. Prev. cases at her place Recd. Apr. 29 Arthur Everitt 15, Cecil Street 9 yrs. Mar. 29 Mar. 30 Apr. 1 do. [where he was emplyd. Prev. case at Lotery's Recd. May 19 Edward Hyman 21, Tenter Street 21 yrs. Mar. 27 Mar. 29 Mar. 30 In infancy only Recd. May 14 se Furness 31, Old Church Road 14 yrs. Mar. 30 April 1 Apr. 1 Not vaccinated William E. Clegg 27, Dupont Street 24 yrs. Mar. 29 April 1 Apr. 1 do. Died Apr. 13 mley Twinn 63, Aston Street 35 yrs. Mar. 29 Mar. 30 Apr. 1 In infancy only Recd. May 18 nuel Nuckley 25, Great Pearl Street 17 yrs. Mar. 29 Mar. 31 Apr. 1 do. George Nuckley 25, Great Pearl Street 14 yrs. Mar. 30 April 1 Apr. 1 do. mas Bansted 25, Great Pearl Street 13 yrs. Mar. 29 April 1 Apr. 1 do. Previous cases ra Haye 3, Dorset Street 16 yrs. Mar. 30 April 1 Apr. 2 do. ria Harris 211, Whitechapel Road 28 yrs. Mar. 25 Mar. 31 Apr. 1 do. [on Mar. 15, at Bethnel Green Patient was in contact with s.P. Recd. Apr. 12 an Cliffin 170, Cable Street 28 yrs. Mar. 29 April 1 Apr. 2 do. Recd. May 22 ce Carr 155, Ernest Street 17 yrs. Mar. 31 April 2 Apr. 2 Not vaccinated Previous cases Died Apr. 5 chel Edwards 65, Sutton Street 32 yrs. Mar. 31 April 1 Apr. 2 In infancy only Recd. Apr. 14 rles Pillar 23, Lydia Street- 29 yrs. Mar. 28 April 2 Apr. 2 do. Previous case Recd. Apr. 21 isa Carroll 53, St. Thomas's Road 35 yrs. April 2 April 2 Apr. 3 do. do. nry Bates 3, Dorset Street 5 yrs. Mar. 31 April 2 Apr. 3 Not vaccinated [ago do. [on Mar. 22. Recd. June 4 y Davis 173, Katharine Buildings 46 yrs. April 2 April 3 Apr. 3 In infancy, & 30 years Visited s.P. ship, and refd. vac. n Furness 31, Old Church Road 7 yrs. Mar. 31 April 4 Apr. 4 Not vaccinated Previous case Recd. July 19 rles Rogers 155, Bow Common Lane 20 yrs. Mar. 31 April 4 Apr. 4 Not known do. Mar. 21 Recd. Apr. 17 rge Pidgley 77, Ocean Street 15 yrs. April 3 April 4 Apr. 4 In infancy only Recd. May 11 ah Pidgley 77, Ocean Street 11 yrs. April 3 April 4 Apr. 4 do. do. do. e Wilson 77, Ocean Street 11 yrs. April 2 April 4 Apr. 4 do. do. do. rge Bristol 5, Crown Court, Little Pearl Street 48 yrs. April 1 April 4 Apr. 5 do. Recd. May 30 abeth White 2, Flower and Dean Street 26 yrs. April 4 April 4 Apr. 5 do. do. [in house Died Apr. 12 n Robertshaw 105, St. Paul's Road 42 yrs. April 1 April 5 Apr. 5 do. Prev. case unrecognised Recd. Apr. 27 ry Robertshaw 105, St. Paul's Road 30 yrs. April 1 April 5 Apr. 5 do. do. Recd. May 7 pel Robertshaw 105, St. Paul's Road 20 yrs. April 1 April 5 Apr. 5 do. do. Recd. Apr. 20 liam Furness 31, Old Church Road 16 yrs. April 4 April 5 Apr. 5 Not vaccinated Previous case Recd. June 4 rles Furness 31, Old Church Road 34 yrs. April 1 April 4 Apr. 5 In infancy only do. Recd. Apr. 23 ry Ann Furness 31, Old Church Road 34 yrs. April 1 April 4 Apr. 5 Not vaccinated do. Died Apr. 14 rge Vincent 57, Nicholas Street 8 yrs. Mar. 31 April 5 Apr. 5 do. Died Apr. 15 ah Hagger 113, Ernest Street 9 yrs. April 2 April 5 Apr. 5 do. [where he was emplyd. as Simons 122, Stepney Green 15 yrs. Fortnight or 3 wks. An anon. pst.-cd. sen Apr. 5 In infancy only Prev. case at Lotery's Reed. Apr. 21 mas Cordery 29, Cadiz Street 6 yrs. April 5 April 5 Apr. 5 Not vaccinated Previous case Died Apr. 12 rles Furness 31, Old Church Road 5 yrs. April 3 April 6 Apr. 6 do. do. Recd. Apr. 18 th Cliffin 170, Cable Street l½ yr. April 4 April 6 Apr. 6 do. do. Recd. June 16 ert Day 3, Flower and Dean Street 34 yrs. April 4 April 6 Apr. 6 In infancy only do. Recd. May 1 oline Green 624, Mile End Road 34 yrs. Mar. 28 April 5 Apr. 6 Not vaccinated Recd. May 4 NAME AND ADDRESS. Age. Date of Illness. Date of appearance of Rash. Date of Removal. Vaccination. Source of Infection. Result. a Tomkins 53, St. Thomas's Street 29 yrs. April 6 April 7 Apr. 7 In infancy only Previous case ie Wood 72, Burdett Road 18 yrs. Mar. 25 April 5 Apr. 7 Not vaccinated rge Woods 44, Gill Street 28 yrs. April 4 April 6 Apr. 7 In infancy only y Hurrell 4, Dorset Street 1 yr. April 4 April 6 Apr. 7 Not vaccinated do. Recd. June 5 nett da Costa 2, Palmer Street 22 yrs. April 2 April 5 Apr. 7 In infancy only Recd. Apr. 23 ed Grizzard 16, St. Mark Street 27 yrs. April 2 April 5 Apr. 7 do. herine Catling 32, Rowsell Street 1¾ yrs. April 2 April 6 Apr. 7 Not vaccinated Died Apr. 12 ph Catling 32, Rowsell Street 4½ yrs. April 2 April 6 Apr. 7 do. ncis Catling 32, Rowsell Street 6 yrs. April 2 April 6 Apr. 7 do. Died Apr. 12 ert Catling 32, Rowsell Street 12 yrs. April 2 April 6 Apr. 7 In infancy only Recd. May 9 n Catling 32, Rowsell Street 14 yrs. April 2 April 6 Apr. 7 Not vaccinated y Ann Collins 43, Heath Street 9 yrs. April 5 April 8 Apr. 8 do. n Sheen 24, Cadiz Street 27 yrs. April 6 April 7 Apr. 8 In infancy only Slept in Com.Lod.Hse. Brick Lne. where 3 cases of S.P. had occrd. nes Tubb 10, Denmark Street 8 vrs. April 5 April 8 Apr. 8 Not vaccinated Died Apr. 14 dgett McDonald 15, Little Pearl Street 10 yrs. April 5 April 8 Apr. 8 do. Previous case Recd. Apr. 18 oline Rogers 155, Bow Common Lane 41 yrs. Unknown Unknown Apr. 9 In infancy only [re-vaccination e Levy 19, Floreston Street 33 yrs. April 7 April 9 Apr. 9 do. Previous case, refused Recd. May 15 liam Nicholl 14, Dorset Street 1 yrs. Unknown Unknown Apr. 9 Not vaccinated Unable to verify address Died Apr. 13 nry Allen 8, Gainsborough Road 28 yrs. April 4 April 7 Apr. 14 In infancy only Had Magistrate's Order to remove him nes Mulhall 4, Mossford Street 23 yrs. April 8 April 10 Apr. 11 do. nett Nelson 144, Stepney Green Bldngs. 7 yrs. April 8 April 9 Apr. 11 Not vaccinated Recd. June 23 eph Nelson 144, Stepney Green Bldngs. 14 yrs. April 8 April 9 Apr. 11 do. arles Cordery 29, Cadiz Street 8 yrs. April 10 April 11 Apr. 11 do. Previous case Mar. 29 Recd. May 12 n Colthard 45, Lindley Street 20 yrs. April 9 April 11 Apr. 11 In infancy only e Hyman 21, Tenter Street 34 yrs. April 9 April 11 Apr. 12 do. do. Mar. 30 Recd. June 8 n Hyman 21, Tenter Street 84 yrs. April 9 April 12 Apr. 12 do. do. do. Recd. May 19 is Bines 14, Robeson Street 10 yrs. April 10 April 13 Apr. 13 Not vaccinated lly Bines 14, Robeson Street 22 yrs. April 10 April 13 Apr. 13 In infancy only [15, Drew's Buildings ederick Banks 331, Cable Street 26 yrs. April 10 April 11 Apr. 13 do. Contracted disease at Recd. May 15 ra Isaacs 30, Tenter Street 23 yrs. April 8 April 12 Apr. 13 do. Previous case Mar. 28 Recd. May 5 a. Isaacs 30, Tenter Street 17 yrs. April 9 April 12 Apr. 13 do. do. do. Recd. May 5 William Potts 3, Thomas Street 33 yrs. April 7 April 11 Apr. 13 do. ce Green 114, Charles Street 5½ yrs. April 10 April 13 Apr. 13 Not vaccinated Patient's Mother remoxed on Mar. 29, from 1, Claremont Place Died Apr. 22 nie Isaacs 30, Tenter Street 22 yrs. April 12 April 13 Apr. 14 In infancy only Previous case Mar. 28 Dunn 3, Dorset Street 1½ yrs. April 12 April 13 Apr. 14 Not vaccinated Previous cases Recd. May 3 nny Hoares 79, Ocean Street 42 yrs. April 10 April 14 An-. 14 In infancy only Cases next door Recd. Apr. 5 alter Rutterford 29, Cadiz Street lO½yrs. Unknown April 14 Apr. 14 do. Previous cases ry Ann Rutterford 29, Cadiz Street 39 yrs. April. 12 April 14 Apr. 14 do. do. ud Rutterford 29, Cadiz Street 14 yrs. April 11 April 13 Apr. 14 Not vaccinated do. red Rutterford 29, Cadiz Street 6 yrs. April 11 April 13 Apr. 14 do. do. Recd. June 5 bert Catling 32, Rowsell Street 9 yrs. April 7 April 12 Apr. 12 do. do. Recd. June 12 nes Catling 32, Rowsell Street 10 yrs. April 7 April 12 Apr. 12 do. do. rles W. Peters 3, Woodside Mansions, Old Gravel Lane 4 yrs. April 12 April 13 Apr. 15 do. uisa Caroll 53, St. Thomas's Road 6 yrs. April 13 April 15 Apr. 15 do. Previous cases Recd. July 7 mas Furness 31, Old Church Road 12 yrs. April 14 April 16 Apr. 16 In infancy only do. Recd. May 11 ristopher Furness 31, Old Church Road 1¾ yrs. April 14 April 16 Apr. 16 Not vaccinated do. est Penn 53, Lincoln Street 18 yrs. April 18 April 15 Apr. 16 In infancy only Recd. Junel5 elaide Polok 13, Butler Street 29 yrs. April 15 April 16 Apr. 16 do. er P. Donoghue 11, Cadiz Street 7 wks. April 14 No rash Not vaccinated do. Died Apr. 16 rence Smith 6, Lea Street 18 yrs. April 15 April 16 Apr. 16 In infancy only Infected clothing Recd. May 2 chel Nelson 144, Stepney Green Bldngs. 18 yrs. April 14 April 17 Apr. 17 do. Recd. May 17 nry Moore 16, Grove Road 42 yrs. April 12 April 15 Apr. 18 do. Recd. May 7 manuel Nathan 25, Tenter Street 23 yrs. April 15 April 16 Apr. 17 do. Recd. May 5 William Catling 32, Rowsell Street 8 yrs. April 16 April 17 Apr. 18 Not vaccinated Previous cases Recd. June 17 mas Newman 1, Flower and Dean Street 23 yrs. April 15 April 17 Apr. 17 In infancy only Slpt. at Com.Lodg.Hse. rgaret Newman 1, Flower and Dean Street 17 yrs. April 17 April 18 Apr. 18 do. do. do. Recd. June 30 lter Grew 10, Brick Lane 10 yrs. April 16 April 18 Apr. 18 Not vaccinated Previous case za Grew 10, Brick Lane 6 yrs. April 16 April 18 Apr. 18 do. do. Recd. June 30 tries Donath Relief Office, Barnes Street 30 yrs. Unknown April 18 Apr. 19 In infancy only Recd. May 8 rence Furness 31, Old Church Road 4 yrs. April 16 April 19 Apr. 19 J J Not vaccinated Previous case ily Phillips 68, South Grove Buildings 32 yrs. April 17 April 19 Apr. 19 In infancy only Died May 28 vid Carroll 53, St. Thomas's Road 33 yrs. April 17 April 20 Apr. 20 do. do. Died Apr. 28 lliam Rust 161, Turner's Road 24 yrs. April 17 April 20 Apr. 20 Not vaccinated Recd. June 13 Jordan 1, Flower and Dean Street 18 yrs. April 19 April 20 Apr. 20 do. do. Recd. June 25 zabeth Grizzard "Tenter House," St. Mark Street 24 yrs. April 17 April 21 Apr. 21 In infancy only do. Died Apr. 21 n Everingham 31, London Street 13 yrs. April 16 April 19 Apr. 20 do. Recd. May 17 nuel Smith 40, Morris Street 18 yrs. April 18 April 21 Apr. 21 do. NAME AND ADDRESS. Age. Date of Illness. Date of appearance of Rash. Date of Removal. Vaccination. Source of Infection. Result. ard Webber 33, Mossford Street 18 yrs. April 20 April 22 Apr. 22 In infancy only Recd. May 10 ph Solomons 3, Eaton Place 11 yrs. April 19 April 22 Apr. 22 Not vaccinated fence Cousins 370, Commercial Road 20 yrs. April 19 April 22 Apr. 22 In infancy only Only one not revac- Recd. May 22 tha Selzer 47, Wellclose Square 18 yrs. April 19 April 22 Apr. 22 Not vaccinated [cinated in house Recd. May 22 e Webb 159, High Street, Shadwell 23 yrs. April 20 April 22 Apr. 23 In infancy only Recd. May 21 n Tangstrum 46, Piggott Street 44 yrs. April 20 April 24 Apr. 24 do. Recd. May 22 ry Boorman 92, Heath Street 15 yrs. April 20 April 24 Apr. 24 do. Recd.June 23 Banks 331, Cable Street 22 yrs. April 23 April 24 Apr. 24 do. Previous case Apr. 13 Recd. May 15 abeth Punchard 30, Great Pearl Street 38 yrs. April 18 April 22 Apr. 24 do. Died Apr. 30 shon Phillips 23, Bell Lane 17 yrs. April 22 April 23 Apr. 24 do. Visited case of S. P. at Hasswell 13, King Edward Street, Whitechapel 24 yrs. April 20 April 23 Apr. 25 do. [Cecil Street Recd. May 22 nelius Lyons 38, Dorset Street 10 yrs. April 22 April 24 Apr. 25 Not vaccinated Recd. June 15 rris Asher 8, Stepney Green Bldngs. 7 yrs. Unknown Unknown Apr. 25 do. Recd. June 15 her Spice 3, Forester St., Canal Rd. 53 yrs. April 22 April 25 Apr. 25 In infancy only [of employment abeth Willet 87, Pennington Street 14 yrs. April 22 April 25 Apr. 26 do. Several cases at place herine Harper 2, Dorset Street 18.yrs. Unknown April 23 Apr. 26 do. ert Walker 45, Lindley Street 22 yrs. April 26 April 27 Apr. 27 do. Previous case riet Greenland 5, Worcester Street, St. George's 38 yrs. April 21 April 27 Apr. 27 do. Recd.June 7 herine Brooks 1, Grocer's Crt., Wapping 10 yrs. April 23 April 25 Apr. 27 Not vaccinated Previous cases at place Recd. June 11 mas Powell 33, Dora Street, Limehouse 35 yrs. April 22 April 24 Apr. 27 In infancy only [of employment liam Dobson 64, Tarling Street 32 yrs. April 25 April 27 Apr. 28 do. rry Howse 108, Heath Street 4 yrs. April 26 April 28 Apr. 28 Not vaccinated istopher Hickey 8, Pell Street 9 yrs. April 25 April 27 Apr. 29 do. Recd.June 7 alter Edwards 38, Bridge Street 28 yrs. April 25 April 28 Apr. 28 In infancy only Recd. May 21 sena Capps 91, High St., Whitechapel 26 yrs. April 22 April 28 Apr. 29 do. Recd.June 19 ice Meadows 32, Fordham Street 15 yrs. April 26 April 28 Apr. 29 do. lly Brisky 2, Coke Street 17 yrs. April 27 April 28 Apr. 29 do. Recd. May 22 ce Buckel 34, Medland Street 31 yrs. April 25 April 28 Apr. 29 do. arles Pearce 30n, Juniper Street 18 yrs. April 26 April 29 Apr. 29 do. Recd. June 15 njamin Clements 19, Steward Street 28 yrs. April 24 April 25 Apr. 30 do. Recd. May 22 ose Moore 16, Grove Road 31 yrs. April 29 April 30 Apr. 30 In infancy only Previous case y F. Johnson 101, Bromley Street 6 yrs. April 29 May 1 May 1 Not vaccinated Died May 7 aac Nathan 25, Tenser Street 28 yrs. April 29 May 1 May 1 In infancy only Previous ease Recd. May 22 arles F. Hodges ..^ 43, Settle Street 51 yrs. April 26 April 31 May 2 do. Recd. May 19 len Dewar 61, Lichfield Road 28 yrs. April 26 May 1 May 2 do. ewton Lovett- 61, Ropemakers'Fields 22 yrs. April 26 April 28 May 2 do. Recd. May 21 erlina Whitford 123, Jamaica Street 13 yrs. April 29 May 2 May 3 do. Recd. May 21 enry Morphet 36, Entick Street 21 yrs. April 21 April 30 May 4 do. arles Dewhurst 46, Bridge Street 52 yrs. April 31 May 2 May 4 do. Recd.June 4 enry E. Johnson 38, Dorset Street 8 yrs. May 1 May 4 May 8 Not vaccinated Recd. July 15 izabeth Bayford 4, Toilet Street 22 yrs. May 1 May 4 May 5 In infancy only Recd. May 21 George Brookes 77, Shandy Street 16 yrs. May 1 May 3 May 5 do. Recd.June 4 roline Isaacs 12, Tilley Street 25 yrs. May 3 May 4 May 6 do. atrick Flanagan 27, Pinchin Street 23 yrs. May 2 May 5 May 6 do. len Willis 7, Rygate Street 35 yrs. May 4 May 6 May 6 do. Recd.June 9 nnie Willis 7, Bygate Street 5 yrs. May 6 May 7 May 8 Not vaccinated Recd.June 9 ne Willis 7, Rygate Street 2 yrs. May 6 May 7 May 8 do. Died Apr. 16 mes Bayley 47, Farrance Street 19 yrs. May 5 May 8 May 8 In infancy only "Three previous cases at his work- bert Jenkin 24, Cadiz Street 18 yrs. May 4 May 8 May do. Recd. June 11 erbert Griffith 68, Medway Road 21 yrs. May 5 May 9 May 9 do. hn Hennessey 3, Greenwood Street 23 yrs. May 7 May 9 May 9 Not vaccinated Died May 19 dward Hughes 45, Lindley Street 50 yrs. May 7 May 10 May 10 In infancy only Third case Recd.June 19 ra Clements 19, Steward Street 15 yrs. May 8 May 9 May 10 do. Previous case Recd. June 16 bert Clements .;. 19, Steward Street 24 yrs. May 8 May 9 May 10 do. do. Recd.June 3 na Clements .;. 19, Steward Street 13 yrs. May 7 May 8 May 10 do. do. Recd.June 4 rah Burton 31, Quaker Street 45 yrs. May 9 May 10 May 11 do. do. Recd. June 23 aggie Lyons ..» 38, Dorset Street 12 yrs. May 9 May 10 May 11 do. do. lliam Lyons 38, Dorset Street! 16 ms. May 8 May 10 May 11 Not vaccinated do. Died May 16 izabeth Cummell 4, Margaret's Buildings, White's Row 26 yrs. May 6 May 10 May 12 In infancy only Previous case at Dorset Street. argaret Rooney 5, Grocers' Court 27 yrs. May 9 May 12 May 13 do. Recd. June 16 fred Johnson 14, Single Gardens 18 yrs. May 8 May 13 May 13 do. zzie Rosenbush 27, Pinchin Street 16 ms. May 9 May 11 Mav 13 Not vaccinated Previous case Died May 29 brt Penn 53, Lincoln Street 22 yrs. May 12 May 14 May 14 In infancy only do. Recd.June 6 ry Crispin 102, Blackwall Buildings 32 yrs. Unknown Unknown May 15 Not vaccinated Washing clothing from infected house at Poplar. Recd. June 22 rry Simons 122, Stepney Green 11 yrs. May 13 May 14 May 15 In infancy only Previous case Recd.June 9 n Fitzpatrick 24, Cadiz Street 22 ms. May 11 May 12 May 15 Not vaccinated do. Died May 19 NAME AND ADDRESS. Age. Dale of Illness. Date of appearance of Rash. Date of Removal. Vaccination. Source of Infection. Result. rge Dewhurst 46, Bridge Street 5 yrs. May 12 May 14 May 15 Not vaccinated Previous case Recd. Aug. 15 herine Watts 121, Duckett Street 20 yrs. May 10 May 14 May 15 In infancy only Recd.June 8 bert Sugg 10, Albion Street 18 yrs. May 12 May 14 May 15 do. Recd.June 8 thur Abbey 73, Devonshire Street 14 yrs. May 12 May 15 May 16 do. Recd. June 11 en Barlow 9, Sheridan Street 28 yrs. May 14 May 15 May 16 do. Recd. June 20 mes Pearce 30n, Juniper Street 53 yrs. May 14 May 15 May 16 do. Previous case Died May 19 omas Hughes 12, Great Garden Street 29 yrs. May 13 May 16 May 17 Not vaccinated Recd.July 7 mes Pugh 7, St. Ann's Street 2 mos. May 15 May 16 May 17 do. Died May 19 lliam Sparks 104, Blackwall Buildings 36 yrs. May 14 May 17 May 17 do. Died May 26 arles Roache 145, Whitechapel Road 32 yrs. May 14 May 16 May 17 do. Recd.July 20 rgaret Pugh 7, St. Ann's Street 13 yrs. May 14 May 15 May 17 In infancy only Recd.June 3 fred White 22, Prusom Street 5 yrs. May 7 May 9 May 10 Not vaccinated Recd.June 25 arles Dewhurst 46, Bridge Street 10 yrs. May 13 May 16 May 17 do. do. ace Dewhurst 46, Bridge Street 2 yrs. May 14 May 17 May 17 do. do. rry Yend 93, Ernest Street 9 yrs. May 15 May 16 May 17 Not known Previous case 24, Cadiz Street, where he recently lived Recd.July 8 rah Josephs 8, Station Place 25 yrs. May 14 May 16 May 18 In infancy only Recd.June 15 ther Hughes 12, Great Garden Street 2 yrs. May 16 May 19 May 19 Not vaccinated Previous case Died May 24 omas Hughes 12, Great Garden Street 10 yrs. May 16 May 19 May 19 do. do. than Levy 292a, Cable Street 21 yrs. May 15 May 17 May 19 In infancy only lliam Holmes 23, Cowley Street 35 yrs. May 17 May 18 May 19 do. Died May 24 te Phillips 68, South Grove Buildings 4 yrs. May 16 May 19 May 19 Not vaccinated hn Wicks 61, Rhodeswell Road 13 yrs. May 19 May 19 May 20 In infancy only Recd. June 11 arles Helps 13, Carter Street 33 yrs. May 17 May 19 May 20 do. Died May 28 ice Chapman 57, Rutland Street 19 yrs. May 18 May 19 May 20 do. Recd.June 10 oses Amstel 6, Tilley Street 30 yrs. May 12 May 17 May 20 do. Recd. June 20 roline Clements 19, Steward Street 5 yrs. May 15 May 17 May 19 Not known do. Recd.July 7 san Clements 19, Steward Street 47 yrs. May 16 May 17 May 19 In infancy only do. Recd. June 10 aud Draper 63, Brushfield Street 17 yrs. May 19 May 21 May 21 do. Recd.June 7 mes Hughes 12, Great Garden Street 11 yrs. May 18 May 11 May 21 Not vaccinated do. zzie Dixon 140, Eastfield Street 22 yrs. May 18 May 22 May 22 In infancy only [S.P. Recd.July 15 orge Scrivens 12, Maplin Street 47 yrs. May 19 May 22 May 22 do. Several customers had Died May 26 zabeth Lyons 38, Dorset Street 5 yrs. May 22 May 23 May 23 Not vaccinated Previous case nie Lyons 38, Dorset Street 3 yrs. May 22 May 23 May 23 Not vaccinated [ago Previous case [S. P. Recd.July 15 ry Moore 178, Rhodeswell Road 47 yrs. May 22 May 23 May 23 In infancy, & 20 years Her sister died from Died May 26 ederick Clack 2, Regent's Place 11 yrs. May 22 May 24 May 25 In infancy only chel Emmanuel 17, Ely Terrace 29 yrs. May 18 May 23 Ma y 23 do. Recd.June 13 isy Clack 2, Regent's Place 5½ yrs. May 22 May 24 May 25 Not vaccinated Recd.July 8 n Lyons 38, Dorset Street 32 yrs. May 24 May 25 May 26 In infancy only Previous case orge Walker 102, Jubilee Buildings 31 yrs. May 23 May 26 May 26 do. Died June 7 nie Crispin 102, Blackwall Buildings 6 yrs. May 25 May 26 May 26 Not vaccinated do. Died June 3 orge Tewson 128, Duckett Street 8 yrs. May 23 May 26 May 27 do. Recd.July 12 lliam Watts 26, Longnor Road 15 yrs. May 20 May 23 May 27 In infancy only Recd.June 13 ry Gore 26, Globe Road 12 yrs. May 24 May 27 May 27 Not vaccinated Recd.July 31 mry Boultwood 33, Portland Street 16 yrs. May 24 May 26 May 27 In infancy only Recd.June 19 zabeth Pyett 25, Portland Street 20 yrs. May 24 May 28 May 28 Not vaccinated se Knighton 121, Duckett Street 19 yrs. May 26 May 27 May 28 In infancy only Previous case Recd.July 31 wis Joel 8, Eric Street 4 yrs. May 26 May 28 May 21 Not vaccinated nnie Hooper 6, Dorset St., Limehouse 16 yrs. May 24 May 28 May 28 In infancy only Recd.June 21 bert Manston 25, Cephas Street 21 yrs. May 22 May 27 May 28 do. Recd. ce Cross 85, Whitehorse Lane 35 yrs. May 25 May 29 May 29 do. Recd.June 19 n Featherstone 74, Maplin Street 21 yrs. May 27 May 28 May 29 Not vaccinated Always shaved by Scrivener, 12, Maplin St., who died frm S.P. Recd.June 30 en Musto 14, Duckett Street 37 yrs. May 27 May 29 May 29 In infancy only Died June 2 race Rushton 95, Elsa Street 32 yrs. May 27 May 29 May 30 do. Recd.June 20 nam Croft 79, Eastfield Street 13 yrs. May 27 May 29 May 30 Not vaccinated ward Hughes 12, Great Garden Street 4 yrs. May 27 May 30 May 30 do. Previous case a Herbert 121, Duckett Street 24 yrs. May 28 May 31 May 31 In infancy only do. Olsen 87, St. George's Street 26 yrs. Unknown Unknown May 31 do. seph Musto 14, Duckett Street 39 yrs. May 29 May 30 May 31 do. Recd.June 15 sina Appleton 16, Matlock Street 29 yrs. May 29 May 31 May 31 do. her Benjamin 2, Prince's Place, Old Montague Street 19 yrs May 27 May 31 May 31 do. Recd.July 12 en Clark 113, Globe Road 22 yrs. May 26 May 29 May 31 do. Recd.July 12 neylia Allen 22, Alderney Road 71 yrs. May 25 May 30 May 31 do. orge Benton 168, Mile End Road 33 yrs. May 30 May 31 May 31 do. bel Vose 2, Single Street 3½ yrs. May 29 May 31 June 1 Not vaccinated do. Recd. July 29 ward Parker 93, Ernest Street 26 yrs. May 30 May 31 June 2 In infancy only do. Recd.June 23 lliam Scadden 82, Cressy Houses 23 yrs. May 28 June 1 June 2 do. arlotte Fitzpatrick 24, Cadiz Street 22 yrs. May 29 May 31 June 2 do. do. Recd.June 25 mas Knighton 121, Duckett Street 54 yrs. May 31 June 2 June 2 do. do. Recd.June 25 NAME AND ADDRESS. Age. Date of Illness. Date of appearance of Rash. Date of Removal. Vaccination. Source of Infection. Result. hard Hubbard 123, Bow Common Lane 25 yrs. May 30 June 2 June 2 In Infancy only At his employment Recd. July 9 rgaret Wickes 61, Rhodeswell Road 37 yrs. June 2 June 3 June 3 In infancy (no scars) Previous case May 20 Died June 12 n Turner 35, Toilet Street 32 yrs. May 31 June 1 June 5 Not vaccinated Died June 6 ah Hedge 12, Paternoster Row 37 yrs. May 31 June 2 June 5 In infancy only Died June 5 derick Major 85, Blackwall Buildings 19 yrs. June 2 June 5 June 6 do. Visited his uncle, disinfector, at Bethnal Green, and removed to S. P. Ship, May 19. Recd.June 30 nry Smelly 35, King Street 24 yrs. June 4 June 6 June 6 do. olf Amstel 6, Tilley Street 42 yrs. June 4 June 5 June 6 do. Previous case May 20 Recd.Aug. 15 orge Ford 60, Jupp's Road 18 yrs. June 4 June 7 June 7 Not vaccinated Died June 7 arles Tuson 128, Duckett Street 18 yrs. June 5 June 7 June 7 In infancy only Previous case mas Gore 26, Globe Road 16 yrs. June 6 June 8 June 8 do. do. zabeth Gore 26, Globe Road 43 yrs. June 7 June 8 June 8 do. do. lliam Weller 1, Old Tower Buildings, Brewhouse Lane 12½ yr. June 2 June 7 June 8 do. Recd. July 8 red Watts 26, Longnor Road 8 yrs. June 6 June 8 June 9 Not vaccinated Previous case May 27 Recd. July 15 lliam Tuson 128, Duckett Street 6 yrs. June 7 June 9 June 9 do. do. do. Recd. July 8 be Tuson 128, Duckett Street 1½ yr. June 7 June 9 June 9 do. do. do. Recd. July 24 red Tuson 128, Duckett Street 4 yrs. June 7 June 8 [athse. June 9 do. do. do. Recd. July 16 arles Bishoff 14, Diggon Street 7 yrs. About May 20 abt.My.23, concealed June 9 do. Recd. July 23 ud Coopey 14, Diggon Street 42 yrs. June 5 June 7 June 9 In infancy only Prev. case concealed. ce Gore 26, Globe Road 18 yrs. June 8 June 11 June 11 do. Previous case nie Deering 95, Globe Road 18 yrs. June 5 June 9 June 11 do. Recd. July 22 arles Bishoff 14, Diggon Street 42 yrs, June 11 June 12 June 12 do. do. Recd. July 8 ia de Friend 22, Alderney Road 34 yrs. June 10 June 12 June 14 do. do. Recd. Aug. 2 zabeth Dixon 140, Eastfield Street 1½ yr. June 11 June 12 Juue 14 Not vaccinated do. Died June 18 ry Meadow 1, Flower and Dean Street 20 yrs. June 13 June 14 June 14 In infancy only Recd.June 15 e May 4, Gill Place 21 yrs. Unknown Unknown June 16 do. Sister ? Recd.June 16 sina Vose 2, Single Street 33 yrs. June 15 June 16 June 17 do. Previous case ry Dixon 140, Eastfield Street 5 yrs. June 16 June 17 June 17 Not vaccinated ss Proops 68, Stepney Green 20 yrs. June 16 June 17 June 19 In infancy only ry Deering 95, Globe Road 28 yrs. June 17 June 20 June 21 do. Previous case Recd. July 18 uisa Deering 95, Globe Road 22 yrs. June 18 June 21 June 21 do. do. Williams 37, Dorset Street 4 yrs. June 19 June 20 June 21 Not vaccinated do. Recd. Aug. 12 ra Williams 37, Dorset Street 6 yrs. June 19 June 20 June 21 do. do. lian Williams 37, Dorset Street 7 wks. June 14 June 16 June 21 do. do. zabeth Woodhouse 34, Bale Street 23 yrs. June 19 June 21 June 22 do. 60, Jupps Road Died July 2 etsy Herring 27, Edwards Road 20 yrs. June 21 June 22 June 23 In infancy only homas Briggs 59, Copley Street 27 yrs. June 18 June 19 June 23 do. Recd. July 10 William Gore 26, Globe Road 4 yrs. Unknown Unknown June 23 Not vaccinated Previous case Recd. July 16 oseph Deering 95, Globe Road 4 yrs. June 26 June 27 June 27 do. do. Died June 27 ames Deering 95, Globe Road 8 yrs. June 26 June 27 June 27 do. do. ne Deering 95, Globe Road 8 yrs. June 26 June 27 June 27 In infancy only do. oseph Deering 95, Globe Road 28 yrs. June 26 June 27 June 27 do. do. Recd. July 14 harles Shelton 140, Eastfield Street 44 yrs. Unknown Unknown June 28 do. Recd. Aug. 18 nnie Bush 136, Eastfield Street 10½ yr. June 22 June 27 June 28 Not vaccinated rnest Briggs 59, Copley Street 4 yrs. Unknown Unknown June 30 do. Died July 12 lorence Briggs 59, Copley Street 25 yrs. Unknown Unknown June 30 In infancy bert Pledger 55, Duckett Street 4 yrs. July 2 July 4 July 6 Not vaccinated Recd. July 30 ellfrieder Morris 4, Palmer Street 18 yrs. July 2 July 3 July 7 In infancy only iriam Draper 37, Dorset Street 42 yrs. July 6 July 7 July 9 do. Previous case lfred Boyce 31, Silver Street 7 yrs. July 6 July 8 July 8 Not vaccinated Recd.Aug. 25 nnie Martin 19, Burdett Road 60 yrs. July 9 July 11 July 16 In infancy only Recd.Aug. 5 ssie Martin 19, Burdett Road 26 yrs. July 9 July 11 July 16 do. [previous day ema Rabbonavitch 21, Berner Street 21 yrs. July 15 July 17 July 17 do. Landed from Russia on ac Wetterfrieder 4, Palmer Street 19 yrs. July 18 July 21 July 22 do. Previous case Recd.Aug. 15 uis Wetterfrieder 4, Palmer Street 16 yrs. July 20 July 22 July 22 do. do. Recd.Aug. 15 ry Ann Hicks 37, Dorset Street 32 yrs. July 20 July 23 July 23 do. do. Died July 30 ry Ann Hicks 37, Dorset Street 1½ yr. July 22 July 24 July 24 Not vaccinated do. Died July 30 lliam Howard 68, Gt. Eastern Buildings 21 yrs. July 21 July 26 July 26 In infancy only 37, Dorset Street Recd.Aug. 20 nest Manley 8, Canal Road 11 yrs. July 25 July 28 Aug. 1 do. Recd.Aug. 27 dock Keksten 26, Little Alie Street 14 yrs. Aug. 1 Aug. 3 Aug. 4 do. Recd.Sept. 10 isy Bonner 54, Litchfield Road drew (? John) 25 yrs. Aug. 1 Aug. 5 Aug. 6 do. Recd.Sept. 4 Hatfield 24, Burdett Road 19 yrs. Aug. 10 Aug. 11 Aug. 12 do. Recd.Sept. 3 onard Curtis 8, Canal Road 1½ yr. Aug. 14 Aug. 17 Aug. 17 Not vaccinated Previous case bert Reinbeck 8, Canal Road 33 yrs. Aug. 14 Aug. 17 Aug. 18 In infancy only do. Recd.Sept. 5 bert Curtis 21, Commodore Street 5 yrs. Aug. 13 Aug. 15 Aug. 18 Not vaccinated 8, Canal Road Recd.Sept. 20 sn Dearman 94, Maplin Street 10 yrs. Aug. 19 Aug. 19 Aug. 22 do. Died Aug. 30 n H. Swindells South Grove Workhouse 64 yrs. Aug. 20 Aug. 22 Aug. 23 In infancy only Recd Sept. 17 ry A. Hatton 21, Commodore Street 43yrs. Aug. 30 Aug. 31 Sept. 1 do. Previous case liam Hatton 21, Commodore Street 45 yrs. Aug. 30 Aug. 31 Sept. 1 do. do. orge Dearman 94, Maplin Street 35 yrs. Sept. 1 Sept. 2 Sept. 2 do. do. Died Sept. 11 hia Dearman 94, Maplin Street 31 yrs. Sept. 1 Sept. 2 Sept. 2 do. do. liam Dearman 94, Maplin Street 5 yrs. Sept. 1 Sept. 3 Sept. 3 Not vaccinated do. irles Dearman 94, Maplin Street 3 yrs. Sept. 4 Sept. 7 Sept. 8 do. do. Died Sept. 17 ne Butcher 4, Grigg's Court 21 yrs. Unknown Unknown Oct. 14 In infancy only 78 Measles. The number of deaths was 158, or three more than in the preceding year. 41 occurred in the Limehouse District, or at the rate of .70 per 1,000 of the population. 28 occurred in the St. George's District, or at the rate of .56 per 1,000 of the population. 45 occurred in the Mile End District, or at the rate of .39 per 1,000 of the population. 44 occurred in the Whitechapel District, or at the rate of .55 per 1,000 of the population. The death-rate for the whole Borough was at the rate of .52 per 1,000 of the population. The death-rate for the whole of London was .51 per 1,000. Scarlet Fever. 954 cases of Scarlet Fever were notified, of which 828 were removed to the various Fever Hospitals. 191 occurred in Limehouse, with 7 deaths; 114 occurred in St. George's, with 1 death; 399 occurred in Mile End, with 10 deaths; and 250 occurred in Whitechapel, with 8 deaths. The death-rate in the whole of the Borough was at the rate of 08 per 1,000 of the population, that for the whole of London being .12 per 1,000. Whooping Cough. The number of deaths was 188, which corresponds to a death-rate of .62 per 1,000 of the population. 52 occurred in the Limehouse District, or at the rate of .89 per 1,000 of the population. 24 occurred in the St. George's District, or at the rate of .48 per 1,000 of the population. 85 occurred in the Mile End District, or at the rate of .75 per 1,000 of the population. 27 occurred in the Whitechapel District, or at the rate of .34 per 1,000 of the population. 79 Diphtheria. 641 cases of Diphtheria were notified, and 527 were removed to the Fever Hospitals. 161 occurred in Limehouse, 100 in St. George's, 182 in Mile End, and 129 in Whitechapel. 79 proved fatal, which is equal to a rate of .26 per 1,000 of the population. 16 occurred in the Limehouse District, or at the rate of .27 per 1,000 of the population. 19 occurred in the St. George's District, or at the rate of .38 per 1,000 of the population. 26 occurred in the Mile End District, or at the rate of .22 per 1,000 of the population. 18 occurred in the Whitechapel District, or at the rate of .22 per 1,000 of the population. The death-rate for the whole of London was .25 per 1,000. Membranous Croup. 33 cases were notified; none were removed to any hospital. 3 occurred in the Limehouse District. All recovered, 4 occurred in the St. George's District. All recovered. 13 occurred in the Mile End District. Two proved fatal. 13 occurred in the Whitechapel District. All recovered. Typhus Fever. One case occurred in the Mile End District. The patient recovered. Enteric Fever. 273 cases occurred during the year, of which 228 were removed to Fever Hospitals, 90 occurred in Limehouse; 50 in St. George's; 94 in Mile End; and 39 in Whitechapel. 80 38 proved fatal, which corresponds to .10 per 1,000 of the population. 17 occurred in the Limehouse District, or at the rate of .29 per 1,000 of the population. 3 occurred in the St. George's District, or at the rate of .06 per 1,000 of the population. 9 occurred in the Mile End District, or at the rate of .08 per 1,000 of the population. 4 occurred in the Whitechapel District, or at the rate of .05 per 1,000 of the population. The death-rate for the whole of London was at the rate of .13 per 1,000. Erysipelas. 437 cases were notified, of which 57 were removed to the various general hospitals and infirmaries. 80 occurred in Limehouse, with 3 deaths; 91 occurred in St. George's, with 6 deaths; 141 occurred in Mile End, with 1 death; and 125 occurred in Whitechapel, with 9 deaths. Diarrhoea. The number of deaths from Diarrhoea, which includes Epidemic and Zymotic Enteritis; Dysentery and Dysenteric Diarrhoea; Cholera and Choleraic Diarrhoeawas 117, of which 96 were deaths of infants under 1 year of age. 30 occurred in the Limehouse District, or at the rate of .51 per 1,000 of the population. 37 occurred in the St. George's District, or at the rate of .74 per 1,000 of the population. 39 occurred in the Mile End District, or at the rate of .34 per 1,000 of the population. 11 occurred in the Whitechapel District, or at the rate of .13 per 1,000 of the population. The death-rate for the whole of the Borough was at the rate of .38 per 1,000 of the population. ; CHART SHOWING THE NUMBER OF CASES NOTIFIED WEEK BY WEEK OF SMALL-POX SCARLET FEVER, TYPHOID AND DIPHTHERIA DURING 1902. . CHART SHOWING THE TOTAL NUMBER OF INFECTIOUS DISEASES NOTIFIED WEEK BY WEEK IN LIMEHOUSE, MILE END, ST. GEORGE S AND WHITECHAPEL, DURING 1902. CHART SHOWING THE TOTAL NUMBER OF CASES OF INFECTIOUS DISEASES NOTIFIED WEEK BY WEEK IN THE BOROUGH DURING 1902. 81 Enteritis. The number of deaths from Enteritis—which includes Gastro Enteritis, Muco Enteritis, and Gastric Catarrh—was 188. Of this number, 52 were those of children under 1 year of age. 39 occurred in the Limehouse District, or at the rate of .67 per 1,000 of the population. 54 occurred in the St. George's District, or at the rate of 1.08 per 1,000 of the population. 54 occurred in the Mile End District, or at the rate of .47 per 1,000 of the population. 41 occurred in the Whitechapel District, or at the rate of .51 per 1,000 of the population. The death-rate for the whole of the Borough was at the rate of .62 per 1,000 of the population. Puerpural Fever. 21 cases of Puerperal Fever occurred, of which 14 proved fatal. Five occurred in Limehouse; 3 in St. George's; 5 in Mile End; and 8 in Whitechapel. Chicken Pox. On February 7th, Chicken Pox was made a notifiable disease by the London County Council. I considered it would not be to the best interests of the District, and the Borough Council petitioned the Local Government Board not to give its approval. They were not successful. My chief objection to it was, that instead of asking me to see doubtful cases of Small-pox, as the medical practitioners in the District had been in the habit of doing, they would, even in doubtful cases, notify the disease as Chicken Pox. This actually occurred afterwards. If the Local Government Board had at the same time extended the privileges of the Medical Officers of Health, and gave them power to visit and verify the diagnosis of the medical practitioner in attendance, there would not be so much danger attached to it. A Medical Officer of Health has, however, no right to question the accuracy of any notification certificate; but must accept it, whether he has reason to believe that the diagnosis is correct or not. I saw the danger there might be in not taking any action in the matter, and decided to visit and examine all cases of Chicken Pox notified to me, irrespective of their ages. I reported my intentions to the Council, and my action was approved. The result proved that my fears were well founded. I found that F 82 18 persons notified to me as Chicken Pox were actually suffering from Small-pox. Some were adults and some were young children. I immediately communicated with the doctors in attendance in each case, and tried to persuade them to alter the notification certificates and substitute Small-pox for Chicken Pox. The doctor in attendance in each case refused, and maintained that he was still of opinion that the case was one of Chicken Pox and not Small-pox. I was therefore reluctantly compelled to remove the patients against their wish to the Small-pox Hospitals. My opinion was confirmed by the Metropolitan Asylums Board officials in each instance. These 18 cases were directly responsible for another 25 persons contracting the disease in the same families. 1,548 cases were notified. 543 occurred in the Limehouse District; 317 in St. George's District; 543 in Mile End District; and 362 in the Whitechapel District. Zymotic Diseases. The total deaths from Zymotic diseases numbered 868. This number corresponds to a death-rate of 2.88 per 1,000 of the population. This number includes : Small-pox, Measles, Scarlet Fever, Whooping Cough, Diphtheria, Croup, Enteric Fever, Puerperal Fever, and Diarrhoea. 201 occurred in the Limehouse District, or at the rate of 3.46 per 1,000 of the population. 132 occurred in the St. George's District, or at the rate of 2.65 per 1,000 of the population. 322 occurred in the Mile End District, or at the rate of 2.83 per 1,000 of the population. 214 occurred in the Whitechapel District, or at the rate of 2.70 per 1,000 of the population. Phthisis. The question of the advisability of making Phthisis a notifiable disease was discussed by the Public Health Committee. I supplied a sub-committee, appointed to go into the matter, with a report of the results obtained in the various towns and districts where voluntary notification was in force, and the opinions of the Medical Officers of those districts, as to whether any benefits had been derived by its adoption. After fully considering the matter, the Committee reported that where voluntary notification had been adopted, it was still in an experimental stage, and they therafore decided to postpone making any recommendation; although the Committee thought that the distribution of literature on the subject might be continued with advantage. 83 576 deaths occurred from Phthisis during the year, which is equal to a deathrate of 1.91 per 1,000, as compared with 2.09 in the previous year. 130 occurred in the Limehouse District, or at the rate of 2.23 per 1,000 of the population. 105 occurred in the St. George's District, or at the rate of 2.11 per 1,000 of the population. 168 occurred in the Mile End District, or at the rate of 1.47 per 1,000 of the population. 173 occurred in the Whitechapel District, or at the rate of 2.18 per 1,000 of the population. The Phthisis death-rate for the whole of London was equal to 1.64 per 1,000. In addition to the deaths from Phthisis there were 233 due to other Tubercular diseases. This corresponds to a death-rate of .77 per 1,000, that for the preceding year being .8. 43 occurred in the Limehouse District, or at the rate of .73 per 1,000 of the population. 49 occurred in the St. George's District, or at the rate of .98 per 1,000 of the population. 89 occurred in the Mile End District, or at the rate of .78 per 1,000 of the population. 52 occurred in the Whitechapel District, or at the rate of .65 per 1,000 of the population. Diseases of the Respiratory Organs. There were 1,349 deaths due to Respiratory Diseases, which is at the rate of 4 48 per 1,000 of the population. 288 occurred in the Limehouse District, or at the rate of 4.95 per 1,000 of the population. 270 occurred in the St. George's District, or at the rate of 5.43 per 1,000 of the population. 442 occurred in the Mile End District, or at the rate of 3.88 per 1,000 of the population. 349 occurred in the Whitechapel District, or at the rate of 4.41 per 1,000 of the population, F 2 84 Infantile Mortality. During the year, 1,707 infants died before they were 12 months old. This is equal to a rate of 150 deaths per 1,000 births. 369 occurred in the Limehouse District, or at the rate of 197 per 1,000 births. 351 occurred in the St. George's District, or at the rate of 160 per 1,000 births. 657 occurred in the Mile End District, or at the rate of 163 per 1,000 births. 330 occurred in the Whitechapel District, or at the rate of 117 per 1,000 births. The infantile mortality was less than in the preceding year, the number in that being 165 per 1,000 births. It was less than that of any of the other Eastern Boroughs, but higher than that of London as a whole, which was 141 per 1,000 births. As in the previous year, the infantile mortality was higher in the Limehouse district than in the other districts. In fact, it was higher than that of any Borough in London during the same period. The high infantile mortality in our Borough was considered by the Public Health Committee, and after some discussion, it was referred to a sub-committee, to report as to the advisability of appointing Lady Health Visitors, and also the practicability of organising the various sick visitors attached to places of worship and charitable organisations within the Borough. The sub-committee could not advise the Council to undertake such organisation, although of opinion that it might be dealt with by voluntary effort. The subcommittee submitted their report to the Public Health Committee, which was afterwards agreed to, and this Committee recommended the Council to appoint as an experiment, for a period of two years, two female health visitors, whose duties would be as follows:— (1) To visit the houses of the poor, and give advice upon matters of home hygiene, viz.: the proper feeding and clothing of infants. (2) To visit houses in the districts where Diarrhcea, Measles, and Whooping Cough are prevalent, and instruct the relatives as to the necessity of isolation and proper care of the sick. (3) To report any insanitary conditions found during the course of such visits to the Medical Officer of Health, and to act generally under his direction. The Committee suggested that the salaries should be £100 per year. 85 It was urged by the Committee that in view of the importance of these visitors being able to gain the good opinion and confidence of persons whom they visit, they should be both trained nurses as well as persons of tact and education. They should wear a distinctive dress (such as a nurse's costume). The Committee thought that in view of the large number of foreigners in the Borough, one of the visitors should be able to speak Yiddish. The Council, however, rejected the recommendations of the sub-committee as submitted by the Public Health Committee, and decided not to make such appointments. Old Age. 260 deaths were due to Old Age, which is equal to a death-rate of 0.8 per 1,000 of the population. 76 occurred in the Limehouse District, or at the rate of 1.3 per 1,000 of the population. 19 occurred in the St. George's District, or at the rate of 0.3 per 1,000 of the population. 130 occurred in the Mile End District, or at the rate of 1.1 per 1,000 of the population. 35 occurred in the Whitechapel District, or at the rate of 0.4 per 1,000 of the population. Notifiable Diseases. 5,150 notifications of infectious diseases were received. Excluding Chicken Pox, this number was 979 in excess of that of the previous year. 1,242 referred to Smallpox, 641 to Diphtheria, 33 to Membranous Croup, 437 to Erysipelas, 954 to Scarlet Fever, 1 to Typhus Fever, 273 to Typhoid Fever, 21 to Puerperal Fever, and 1,548 to Chicken Pox. 525 occurred in the Limehouse District. 362 occurred in the St. George's District. 1,138 occurred in the Mile End District. 851 occurred in the Whitechapel District. 86 Overcrowding. The subject of overcrowding has received, and still continues to receive the considerable attention from the officials of the Public Health Department. During the year it has attained still more prominence among the public owing to the evidence given before the Alien Immigration Commission. Though overcrowding has existed for a large number of years in the Districts now comprised in the Borough of Stepney, there can be no doubt that it is more prevalent now than ten years ago. The census of 1901 revealed an increase of 13,308 during the ten years, as compared with 2,616 during the previous intercensal period. The increase has been due entirely to the increased number of foreigners. The increase in the foreign-born population was over 22,000. Consequently there has been a decrease in the native population to the extent of 8,500. In 1881 to 1891 the increase affected Whitechapel and Mile End Old Town only; but the census of 1901 showed an increase in the number of inhabitants in all the parishes, St. George's having the highest proportional increase. The following table shows the population of the different districts in the Borough at census periods 1881, 1891, and 1901:— TABLE A. 1881. 1891. 1901. Limehouse 58,543 57,376 57,937 St. George's 47,157 45,795 49,068 Mile End Old Town 105,613 107,452 112,827 Whitechapel 71,363 74,669 78,768 282,676 285,292 298,600 The congestion resulting from this increase is more real than appears on the surface, as is evident from the following tables, which give the numbers of the inhabited houses, separate tenements, and families:— TABLE B.—Inhabited houses, 1881, 1891 and 1901. 1881. 1891. 1901. Limehouse 8,004 7,122 6,974 St. George's 5,781 5,296 5,007 Mile End Old Town 14,039 14,171 13,746 Whitechapel 7,521 7,277 5,735 35,352 33,866 31,462 87 For census purposes a block of model dwellings was counted as a single house, whatever may have been the number of separate tenements. At the census of 1891 in some cases the local registrars failed to observe this rule, and returned each tenement as a house; consequently the numbers of inhabited houses in 1891 and 1901 have not much value for comparative purposes. TABLE C.—Separate families, 1891 and 1901. 1891. 1901. Limehouse 12,425 12,485 St. George's 10,311 10,000 Mile End Old Town 24,668 24,558 Whitechapel 14,258 14,070 61,681 61,113 TABLE D.—Total tenements and tenements of less than five rooms. 1891. 1901. Total tenements 61,681 61,113 One roomed 16,101 13,282 Two roomed 16,437 15,690 Three roomed 10,979 11,926 Four roomed 7,666 8,284 Five roomed and over 10,498 11,931 The number of inhabited houses has decreased from 33,866 in 1891 to 31,462 in 1902; this is partly due to tenement dwellings which are being erected, but this does not entirely explain diminution, as the number of separate tenements has decreased from 61,681 in 1891 to 61,113 in 1901, Part of the area has been taken up by the warehouses and business premises, and the increased population has thus been crowded on a diminished area and in a smaller number of houses. These houses, however, are much loftier, and of course contain a larger number of rooms. The number of separate families has also decreased. This relation of a diminution of the number of families in an increased number of inhabitants is most marked in those districts where the proportional increase of aliens has been highest. Turning to the table giving the number of rooms in each tenement, the number of one-roomed and two-roomed tenements has markedly diminished, but there was an increase in the number of three, four and five-roomed tenements. In Limehouse the number of separate families rose from 12,425 in 1891 to 12,485 in 1901, whilst the percentage of foreigners only increased from 2.1 to 3.7. 88 In St. George's Was observed the greatest proportional decrease in the number of separate families, 10,311 in 1891 to 10,000 in 1901. The percentage of foreigners rose from 16.2 to 28.8. This is one element in the question of overcrowding which has been effected by the alien immigration. The birth-rate is higher among the foreigners, and their families are larger than the families of the native population. The death-rate is also lower, especially among infants. In the Borough the percentage of the foreign-born population has increased from 11.3 in 1891 to 18-2 in 1901; this increase has affected all the districts, but most markedly St. George's, which is evident in the following table:— TABLE E.—Number of foreign inhabitants 1891 and 1901. Males. Females. 1891 18,033 14,251 1901 29,363 24,947 TABLE F.—Percentage of foreign born inhabitants to total population 1891 and 1901. 1891. 1901. Limehouse ... 2.1 3.7 St. George's ... 16.2 28.8 Mile End Old Town ... 5.3 11.5 Whitechapel ... 24.1 31.8 Whole Borough ... 11.3 18.2 The question is naturally asked as to what extent has this alien immigration affected overcrowding. There is no district within the Borough where overcrowding does not exist to some extent. It exists in areas inhabited almost entirely by the native population. It is true that the evil is accentuated in the districts inhabited largely by the foreign population. The fact that the number of inhabited houses has diminished, and that there is an increase in the population tends to cause overcrowding. Poverty and high rents are also important factors in the causation of overcrowding. The tenants can afford to pay and. do pay a higher rent for a room if it is overcrowded. On the other hand, it is true that the tenants would be able to rent a larger number of rooms if the landlord did not demand such a high rent. The high rents cause overcrowding, and the overcrowding cause the high rents. They act and re-act. During the year, 664 intimations were served to abate the nuisance caused by overcrowding. In 296 instances the nuisance was abated without serving a statutory notice. A certain time—at least seven days—must elapse before the second notice can be served, as it must be authorized by the Public Health Committee. As the Committee meet every other week, a fortnight may elapse before a statutory notice can be served. This notice demands the abatement of the nuisance within seven days. Unless abated within that period, proceedings are taken at the Police Court. 89 368 statutory notices were served during the year, but legal proceedings Were taken in 16 instances only. Eleven only were heard in 1902, the other five summonses were heard on January 2nd, 1903, and will be dealt with in the report for that year. From the time the overcrowding is discovered to the time that the summons can be applied for, three weeks must elapse. The summons is generally made returnable in seven days. The magistrate, if he convicts, and grants an order to abate the nuisance, generally allows seven days for the defendants to leave the premises. The excessive rent received by the owner before the overcrowding can be discovered and till proceedings can be taken against him, pays him to take the risk, especially if the magistrate does not impose a substantial penalty. Section 7 of the Public Health (London) Act provides "that where two convictions for overcrowding have taken place within a period of three months, the magistrate may order the house to be closed for such a period as he may deem necessary." If it takes at least five weeks to obtain the first conviction, this is practically impossible. The standard adopted is 400 cubic feet for each adult, and 200 cubic feet for each child under 10 years of age, if the room is used both as a living room and bedroom. If the rooms are used separately we measure the sleeping room only, and the standard is 300 cubic feet for each adult and 150 cubic feet for each child. Number of intimations, statutory notices, and proceedings taken in the various districts during the year among Christians:— Intimations. Statutory Notices. Proceedings. Limehouse 39 18 — St. George's 48 16 — Mile End 55 28 4 Whitechapel 20 5 — 162 67 4 Jews. Intimations. Statutory Notices. Proceedings. Limehouse 25 8 — St. George's 225 133 3 Mile End 119 106 6 Whitchapel 133 54 3 502 301 12 90 Proceedings were taken against:— On February 21st, Annie Rosenthal, 7, East Mount Street, was fined 1s. and 23s. costs, with an order to abate the nuisance. On April 8th Gershon Harris was fined 1s. and 2s. costs for not abating overcrowding at 41, Booth Street Buildings, as well as an order prohibiting the same. On April 8th Gershon Harris is was fined 1s. and 2s. costs for not abating overcrowding at 66, Booth Street Buildings, as well as an order prohibiting the same. On April 18th Lewis Senft, 29, St. John's Place, was fined £3 and 23s. costs, and an order to abate. On May 23rd Joseph Cohenlask, 12, Union Street, was fined £5 and 23s. costs, and an order prohibiting the recurrence. On May 23rd Hyman Bernstein, 32, Bromhead Street. Order to abate, and 25s. costs. On May 23rd Isaac Israel, 8, Bromhead Street, was fined 40s. and 23s. costs. On May 23rd Joseph Goldstein, 48, Princes Square, was fined £8 and £2 4s. costs. On May 23rd Harris Edkin, 84, Cable Street, was fined £5 and 23s. costs. On December 4th Isaac Levy, 2, Duke Street, was fined 1s. and 23s. costs. On December 30th J. Krufston, 7, Winterton Street, was fined £3 or a month's imprisonment. In addition, 107 notices were served for the abatement of overcrowding under the Bye-laws respecting houses let in lodgings. No Police Court proceedings were taken during the year. In the St. George's District special observations were made by the four Inspectors allotted to this district. This special house-to-house inspection was continuous to that started in the year 1901. The inspections took place between 6 and 8 a.m. on Saturday mornings in Jewish houses, and on Sunday mornings in other houses at a similar hour. 32 streets were thus inspected. They consisted of 654 houses, and contained 3,217 adults and 2,061 children. Overcrowding was discovered in 174 houses, with 349 persons too many. 629 families occupied one-room tenements; 460 two-room tenements; 178 three-roomed tenements; 71 four-roomed tenements; 24 five-roomed tenements; 13 six-roomed tenements; and 3 sevenroomed tenements. 91 Artichoke Hill.—In this street 11 houses were inspected. They contained 55 adults and 27 children. 12 families occupied one-roomed tenements. 9 ,, ,, two-roomed tenements. 2 „ „ three-roomed tenements. 1 family occupied five-roomed tenement. One house was overcrowded, and that was to the extent of one adult too many. Boarded Entry.—Four houses were inspected. They contained 20 adults and 7 children. 2 families occupied one-roomed tenements. 5 „ „ two-roomed tenements. 1 family occupied four-roomed tenement. One house was overcrowded to the extent of one adult. Breezers' Hill.—Two houses were inspected. They contained 10 adults and two children. 4 families occupied one-roomed tenements. 2 „ „ two-roomed tenements. There was no overcrowding. Buross Street.—Fifty houses were inspected. They contained 252 adult and 169 children. 27 lamilies occupied one-roomed tenements. 28 „ „ two-roomed tenements. 30 „ „ three-roomed tenements. 12 „ „ four-roomed tenements. 5 „ „ five-roomed tenements. 1 family occupied six-roomed tenement. Cable Street.—Fifteen houses were inspected. They contained 112 adults and 84 children. 25 occupied one-roomed tenements; 22 occupied two-roomed tenements; and 3 three-roomed tenements. Eight were found to be overcrowded. 3 had a child too many. 1 had two children too many. 1 had three children too many. 1 had one adult and one child too many. 1 had one adult too many. 1 had two adults and five children too many. 92 ChalliS Court.—Twenty-one houses were inspected. They contained 136 adults and 108 children. 43 occupied one-roomed tenements; 20 occupied two-roomed tenements; 18 were found to be overcrowded. 1 had one adult too many. 8 had one adult and one child too many. 1 had three children too many. 1 had four children too many. 2 had one adult and two children too many. 4 had two adults and one child too many. 1 had two adults and two children too many. 1 had three adults too many. Choppin's Court.—Six houses were inspected. They contained 25 adults and 9 children. Two occupied one-roomed tenements; 4 occupied three-roomed tenements; and 1 occupied a five-roomed tenement. Two were found to be overcrowded. 2 had a child too many. Clifford House, Wellclose Square.—Twenty-two tenements were inspected. They contained 48 adults and 71 children. Two occupied one-roomed tenement; 17 occupied two-roomed tenements; and 2 occupied four-roomed tenements. Four were found to be overcrowded. 2 had one child too many. 1 had two children too many. 1 had three children too many. Grove Place.—Six houses have been inspected. They contained 20 adults and 19 children. Two occupied one-roomed tenements; 3 occupied two-roomed tenements ; and 3 occupied three-roomed tenements. Two were found to be overcrowded. 1 had one child too many. 1 had two adults and one child too many. Hungerford Street.—Forty-two houses were inspected. These contained 199 adults and 163 children. 39 occupied one roomed tenements; 35 occupied tworoomed tenements; 14 occupied three-roomed tenements; and 7 occupied four-roomed tenements. Nine were found to be overcrowded. 2 had one child too many. 2 had two children too many. 3 had three children too many. 1 had four children too many. 1 had one adult and one child too many. John's Court.—Four houses were inspected. These contained 7 adults and 2 children. Two occupied two-roomed tenements; 1 occupied a three-roomed tenement. In no instance was overcrowding discovered. 93 Kinder Street.—Thirty-four houses were inspected. These contained 124 adults and 97 children. Eighteen occupied one-roomed tenements; 19 occupied two-roomed tenements; 24 occupied three-roomed tenements; and 2 occupied four-roomed tenements. Fifteen were found to be overcrowded. 2 had one child too many. 4 had two children too many. 1 had three children too many. 1 had six children too many. 2 had one adult too many. 1 had two adults too many. 1 had one adult and one child too many. 2 had two adults and one child too many. 1 had one adult and three children too many. Little Turner Street.—Nineteen houses were inspected. These contained 110 adults and 97 children. Ten occupied one-roomed tenements; 21 occupied tworoomed tenements; 7 occupied three-roomed tenements; and 2 occupied four-roomed tenements. Six were found to be overcrowded. 1 had one child too many. 2 had two children too many. 1 had three children too many. 1 had one adult too many. 1 had one adult and two children too many. Lower Fenton Street.—Sixteen houses were inspected. These contained 71 adults and 40 children. Seven occupied one-roomed tenements; 7 occupied tworoomed tenements; 4 occupied three-roomed tenements; and 7 occupied five-roomed tenements. One was found to be overcrowded. 1 had one child too many. Mayfield Buildings.—Twenty-two houses were inspected. They contained 151 adults and 100 children; 39 occupied one-roomed tenements; 19 occupied tworoomed tenements; 5 occupied three-roomed tenements. Eleven were discovered overcrowded. 1 had one child too many. 1 had three children too many. 4 had one adult too many. 1 had two adults too many. 1 had three adults too many. 1 had one adult and three children too many. 1 had one adult and two children too many. 1 had five children too many. 94 Meeting House Buildings.—Five tenements were inspected. These contained 12 adults and 8 children. Four occupied one-roomed tenements; 1 occupied a tworoomed tenement. One was discovered overcrowded. 1 had one adult too many. Norman Buildings.—Seven houses were inspected. These contained 25 adults and 17 children. Eight occupied one-roomed tenements; 3 occupied three-roomed tenements. Four were discovered overcrowded. 2 had two children too many. 1 had two children too many. 1 had three adults too many. Pennington Place.—Five houses were inspected. These contained 22 adults and 4 children. One occupied a one-roomed tenement; 3 occupied two-roomed tenements ; and 3 occupied four-roomed tenements. One was discovered overcrowded. 1 had one adult and one child too many. Planet Street.—Fifty-four houses were inspected. These contained 293 adults and 207 children; 81 occupied one-roomed tenements; 41 occupied two-roomed tenements; 1 occupied a three-roomed tenement; 11 occupied four-roomed tenements. Eleven were discovered overcrowded. 2 had one child too many. 1 had two children too many. 1 had three children too many. 1 had four children too many. 1 had six children too many. 1 had one adult too many. 1 had two adults too many. 1 had three adults too many. 1 had one adult and three children too many. 1 had one adult and five children too many. Rycroft Court.—Eleven houses were inspected. These contained 43 adults and 17 children. Two occupied one-roomed tenements; 2 occupied two-roomed tenements; and 2 occupied three-roomed tenements. Four were discovered overcrowded. 1 had one adult too many. 3 had one child too many. Rygate Street.—Sixteen houses were inspected. These contained 87 adults and 47 children. Ten occupied one-roomed tenements; 23 occupied two-roomed tenements; 8 occupied three-roomed tenements; and one occupied a six-roomed tenement. No overcrowding was discovered. 95 St. George Street.—Forty-nine houses were inspected. These contained 302 adults and 159 children; 56 occupied one-roomed tenements; 24 occupied tworoomed tenements; 13 occupied three-roomed tenements; 10 occupied four-roomed tenements; 2 occupied five-roomed tenements; 6 occupied six-roomed tenements; and 2 occupied seven-roomed tenements. Eight were discovered overcrowded. 2 had one child too many. 1 had one adult too many. 2 had two adults too many. 3 had two adults and one child too many. St. George's Terrace.—Thirty-two houses were inspected. These contained 125 adults and 55 children. 31 occupied one-roomed tenements; 13 occupied tworoomed tenements; 12 occupied three-roomed tenements; and 1 occupied a fourroomed tenement. Ten were discovered overcrowded. 4 had one child too many. 3 had one adult too many. 1 had two adults too many. 2 had one adult and one child too many. Ship Street.—Six houses were inspected. These contained 30 adults and 11 children. Four occupied one-roomed tenements; 2 occupied two-roomed tenements; 2 occupied three-roomed tenements; 2 occupied four-roomed tenements; and 1 occupied a five-roomed tenement. One was discovered overcrowded. 1 had one adult too many. Starch Yard.—Four houses were inspected. These contained 16 adults and 5 children. Four occupied one-roomed tenements; 2 occupied two-roomed tenements; and 1 occupied a three-roomed tenement. Two were discovered overcrowded. 1 had one child too many. 1 had two adults too many. Taylor's Rents.—Five houses were inspected. These contained 18 adults and 2 children. Four occupied one-roomed tenements; 3 occupied two-roomed tenements. Four were discovered overcrowded. 3 had one adult too many. 1 had two adults too many. Umber.stone Street.—Sixty-seven houses were inspected. These contained 358 adults and 166 children. 76 occupied one-roomed tenements; 52 occupied two- 96 roomed tenements; 17 occupied three-roomed tenements; 4 occupied four-roomed tenements; 7 occupied five-roomed tenements; and 3 occupied six-roomed tenements. 3 had one child too many. 1 had two children too many. 1 had three children too many. 6 had one adult too many. 2 had two adults too many. 1 had four adults too many. 3 had one adult and one child too many. Waterloo Place.—Twenty-one houses were inspected. These contained 51 adults and 44 children. Twelve occupied one-roomed tenements; 15 occupied tworoomed tenements. Nine were discovered overcrowded. 3 had one child too many. 6 had one adult too many. William Street.—Twenty-eight houses were inspected. These contained 165 adults and 96 children. 44 occupied one-roomed tenements; 28 occupied two-roomed tenements; 3 occupied three-roomed tenements; 1 occupied a four-roomed tenement; and 1 occupied a seven-roomed tenement; 9 were discovered overcrowded. 4 had one child too many. 3 had one adult too many. 1 had three adults too many. 1 had two adults too many. Whitethorn Court.—Seven houses were inspected. These contained 33 adults and 15 children. Two occupied one-roomed tenements; 9 occupied two-roomed tenements. Two were discovered overcrowded. 1 had one child too many. 1 had two adults and one child too many. Winterton Street.—Forty-five houses were inspected. These contained 226 adults and 174 children. 47 occupied one-roomed tenements; 19 occupied tworoomed tenements; 18 occupied three-roomed tenements; 13 occupied four-roomed tenements; and 3 occupied six-roomed tenements. Five were discovered overcrowded. 2 had two children too many. 1 had three children too many. 1 had one adult too many. 1 had one adult and three children too many. York Buildings.—Nineteen houses were inspected. These contained 71 adults and 39 children. Nine occupied one-roomed tenements; 11 occupied two-roomed tenements ; 4 occupied three-roomed tenements. Four were discovered overcrowded. 2 had one child too many. 2 had one adult too many. 97 Housing of the Working Classes Act. On January 7th I made an official representation under Part II. of the Act, that the houses in a certain area in Great Pearl Street, Wheeler Street, and Quaker Street, Spitalfields, were unfit for human habitation. The narrowness, closeness, and bad arrangement of the groups of houses, together with the want of light, air, and ventilation, rendered them injurious to the health of the inhabitants. The evils connected with such houses and the sanitary defects in the area could not be effectually remedied, otherwise than by an improvement scheme for the re-arrangement and re-construction of some of the streets and houses within the area. The area consisted of 76 houses, 38 facing the main streets, the remainder being situated in seven courts and squares, approached by narrow covered entrances from the streets adjoining. The whole area consisted of about 55,000 superficial feet, or 124 acres. The distribution of the houses was as follows:— Great Pearl Street 12 houses Wilk Court 3 houses Half Wilk Court 1 house Wheeler Street 5 houses Union Place 3 houses Quaker Street 21 houses Pope's Head Court 15 houses Harrison's Court 4 houses New Square 4 houses Pool's Square 8 houses The 76 houses contained 289 rooms, of which 260 were occupied at the time of visiting. 179 families, consisting altogther of 710 persons, were in occupation. The houses in Great Pearl Street, Wilk Court, and Half Wilk Court, were by far the worst on the area, three only being in a moderately good condition, and the remaining 13 houses being very old and dilapidated. One house, No. 24½, Great Pearl Street, was without sanitary accommodation of any kind, while at Nos. 26, 27. and 29, the w.c. accommodation was very inadequate At No. 28a, Great Pearl Street, the ground floor room was almost in darkness, the dampness was very apparent on the walls up to a height of five feet above the floor level. The w.c. available was usually choked, and liquid filth was allowed to flow over the defective paving, immediately outside the small window which formed the only means of ventilation to the ground floor room, G 98 Out of eleven houses in occupation in Great Pearl Street, ten were let in tenements, consisting of 55 families. Of the 59 occupied rooms in these tenement houses, 24 were badly overcrowded. In one three-roomed house every room was overcrowded, and in another house containing nine rooms, each let separately, eight out of the nine rooms were found to be overcrowded. In several instances there was no wash-house accommodation whatever, and no provision of any kind had been made for the accommodation of the tenants. The majority of these tenements were let as furnished rooms at rentals varying from 6s. to 7s. per week. Wilk Court is a cul-de-sac approached by a narrow covered archway under part of No. 27, Great Pearl Street. There are three old cottages built back to back, the court dividing and forming a narrow passage in front of each of the houses. The walls were very damp, the woowdork generally was in an advanced stage of decay. Two w.c.'s were situated in this court for the common use of the occupants of five houses. The wall of one of the w.c.'s had fallen down. There was no flushing apparatus, and the pan was choked with filth. There were no receptacles for house refuse, and garbage of all kinds was deposited at the end of the court, rendering the atmosphere highly offensive. The three cottages contained eight rooms, being occupied by six families. Four of the rooms were overcrowded. (Half Wilk Court contained one cottage only, which was structurally dilapidated. It had no through ventilation, and was quite unfit for human habitation. There was a workshop immediately in the rear of the house ; the external walls of this structure being considerably bulged and in a dangerous condition. The cottage formed an obstructive building, hindering the access of light and air to the lower rooms of two of the houses in Great Pearl Street. Wheeler Street formed the boundary of the area on the west side, and included five houses, Nos, 25 to 29. One house, No. 27, was used as a timber store, and was in a ruinous condition. There was a large yard in the rear of No. 25, containing a series of sheds in which six men were employed in washing and storing bottles. The four occupied houses were all in a defective and insanitary condition. The floors generally were decayed and out of level, the sashes and frames were very defective, and there was no ventilation beneath the ground floors. The brickwork cracked or bulged, and the interior of the house was in a filthy condition. Overcrowding was also found in two of these houses. Union Place is a cul-de-sac, and is entered by a dark crooked passage at the side of 28, Wheeler Street. It contained three small two-roomed cottages, which faced the houses in Harrison's Court, from which they were divided by a high wooden fence. The houses were very old, and the front walls were considerably out of the perpendicular. The walls were damp and there was no ventilation beneath 99 the ground floors. The staircases were narrow and dangerously steep. The sashes and frames of the windows were generally defective, and not weather-proof. The yards were extremely small, having an area of from 60 to 75 superficial feet, and were enclosed by high walls. The interiors were fairly clean and no overcrowding was found. Quaker Street formed the northern boundary of the area. The portion dealt with consisted of 21 houses having a total frontage of about 350 feet. The houses were three-storey buildings. Two houses—Nos. 1 and 17—were in an extremely dirty and dilapidated condition. In the case of No. 1, the floors were defective and considerably out of level. The ceilings were dilapidated. The sashes and frames of the windows as well as the stair treads were very defective. There was no ventilation beneath the ground floors. The interior generally was also in a filthy condition. A board on the front of the house announced that the site was offered for sale for building purposes. At No. 17, the building was shored up from the front and from behind. The walls were considerably bulged, the internal woodwork was very decayed, and the upper staircase was dangerously defective. Part of the interior was also in a very dirty condition., At Nos. 3 to 15, the light and air were obstructed by the houses in Harrison's Court and Pope's Head Court, the backs of these cottages being within five feet of the Quaker Street houses. The yards were extremely small, varying from 36 to 50 superficial feet. The staircases in these houses were very narrow and steep, and the ground floors were lying directly on the earth. The party walls were damp. At No. 25, the interior was generally dirty, and some of the floors and ceilings were defective. This house was also badly overcrowded. The remaining houses all exhibited defects which were more or less serious. One house—No. 31—was occupied by 12 families, with a total of 42 persons. One w.c. only was available, and at the time of visiting, it was choked, and filth was lying about the yard. The house refuse was thrown anywhere, there being no receptacle of any kind. Several of the floors and ceilings were also defective, and three of the rooms were overcrowded. In another house, the w.c. was choked, and the space under the staircase was used as a receptacle for house refuse and decayed vegetable matter, the stench being very noticeable throughout the house. Out of a total of 62 families residing in this street 13 were overcrowded. Pope's Head Court is entered by a narrow archway under No. 11, Quaker Street. There were 15 houses, 13 being in the main court, and two were situated in a small courtyard at the rear of Nos. 9 and 10. These two houses—9a and 10a —were shored up from the front and from behind; one was unoccupied, the whole of the back wall having been removed. The other—No. 9a—was in an extremely dangerous condition, being only fit for demolition. There were three rooms, each occupied by a separate family, and two of these rooms were badly overcrowded. The houses in the main court were fairly well kept. Each consisted of two small rooms and a tiny space at the rear, which contained the w.c. The staircases were very narrow and steep and the light and air were obstructed by buildings in the rear, g 2 100 Harrison's Court is entered through an archway under No. 3, Pope's Head Court, and contained four two-roomed cottages which abutted on the houses in Union Place. The courtway was very narrow, and the house had each a small space in the rear except No. 4, which had a small yard at the side. This house, which was unoccupied at the time of visiting, had no through ventilation, and was in an extremely dirty condition. The four cottages were within a few feet of the rear of the houses in Quaker Street, and obstructed light and ventilation. New Square is a large open space entered by a covered passage under 27 and 29, Quaker Street. There were four small two-roomed cottages which had no back yards, part of the open square being railed off to form front gardens. There was no through ventilation to the ground floor rooms. The upper rooms were provided with one window each in the rear, and which was boarded up. In No. 1 the walls were damp and dirty, and the light was obstructed by an adjoining building. The drainage was defective, and choked, Sewage was oozing through the joints of the paving. Pool's Square is situated in the rear of No. 37, Quaker Street. There were eight houses, three having no back yards. No. 1 was an old detached house, partly timber built, the brickwork was badly bulged, and there was no ventilation beneath the ground floors. On the ground floor the inner room was used as a bedroom, it bad no fireplace or means of external ventilation. No. 2, a house of four floors, was very old and decayed, one wall was bulged, and dampness was noticeable. The sashes, frames, and woodwork generally were defective. Nos. 7 and 8 had no ventilation beneath the ground floors, and the light and air were obstructed in the rear by the close proximity of a high building. The paving of the forecourts was very defective. One w.c. in the Square was choked. There was one case of overcrowding. It will be seen from the foregoing report that while certain of the defects referred to admitted readily of abatement, yet in a large proportion of the area the decayed condition of the structures or the obstruction to light and air consequent upon the crowding of a number of cottages into small confined courts and alleys, rendered it impossible to effect any permanent improvement, unless the demolition and re-arrangement of such courts were undertaken. The representation was considered by the Housing of the Working Classes Committee on February 4th. The Committee decided to send a deputation to interview the Housing of the Working Classes Committee of the London County Council, to ask the Committee to take up the scheme under Part I. of the Act. The Committee of the County Council desired us to procure closing orders against as many of the houses as possible. The necessary steps were taken, and Nos. 24½, 25, 26, 28, and 28½, Great Pearl Street; Nos. 2, 3, and 4, Wilk Court; No. 1, Half Wilk Court; Nos. 9a and 10a, 101 Pope's Head Court, were all closed and demolished. At No. 17, Quaker Street, the front and back walls were pulled down and rebuilt. At 31, Quaker Street, an additional water-closet was provided. In New Square the whole of the drainage system has been reconstructed, and the ventilation of the houses has been improved by removing the boarding from the back windows of the upper rooms. Most of the houses have been cleansed and repaired, and ventilation below tho ground floors provided. Many other minor improvements were carried out. Under the circumstances the Borough Council decided not to proceed with the scheme. General Sanitary Work. The Sanitary Inspectors' Report Table will give some idea of the amount of work carried out by them during the year. It was an exceptionally heavy year for the inspectors, as in addition to their ordinary work, a great deal of extra work devolved on their shoulders through the Small-pox epidemic. 28,690 houses were inspected during the year, 10,639 being the result of houseto-house inspections. 15,691 notices for the abatement of various nuisances were served, besides other communications to the owners and others, asking them to proceed with the work. Proceedings were taken at the Police Courts in 224 instances. 3,584 houses and 522 workshops were cleansed, as the result of notices served on the owners. 6,768 drains were tested, and 3,931 were either constructed or re-constructed, cleansed or trapped. 574 new soil-pipes were fixed. 6,507 water-closets were either renewed, cleansed or repaired. 1,368 dust receptacles and 46 manure receptacles were provided, as the result of notices served on the owners. 769 offensive accumulations were removed. 125 smoke nuisances were abated, and in eight cases Police Court proceedings had to be taken against the persons causing the nuisance. 102 List of Proceedings taken under the Public Health (London) Act, 1891. On January 10th Mr. A. Davis, of Aldgate House, was fined £5 and 23s. costs for letting a dwelling house—7b, Christian Street—without first obtaining a certificate that the premises were supplied with a proper water supply. On January 24th the owner of 58, Repton Street, was fined £5 and 23s. costs for not complying with the Council's order to provide a proper and sufficient water supply. Two summonses were taken out against Annie Rosenthal, of 7, East Mount Street, for illegal occupation of an underground room. On February 21st the full penalty of 20s. in each case was imposed with 23s. costs in the first and 2s. costs in the second case. The owner of 115, Eastfield Street, was summoned for failing to remedy a defective drain. On March 21st an order was granted, compelling the owner to remedy the defects within 14 days, and to pay £1 8s. 6d. costs. On March 21st the owner of 117, Eastfield Street, was fined £1 and 12s. 6d. costs, and an order was made to remedy a defective drain for which he was summoned. Mr. Staines, the agent for the owner of 5, West Arbour Street, was summoned for failing to abate a nuisance caused by defective yard paving. An abatement order, with 25s. costs, was granted on March 21st. On April 25th Mark Specterman, of 2, Alie Place, the owner of 54, Smith Street, was summoned for non-compliance with the Council's order to remedy a defective drain. The magistrate granted an order for the completion of the work, with 23s. costs. On May 8th Mark Specterman, of 2, Alie Place, was summoned for non-compliance with the Council's order at 10, West Arbour Street, to remedy a defective drain. The Magistrate granted an order to complete the work, with 25s. costs. On May 23rd Mr. Sprung, of 35, Patherton Road, was summoned for non-compliance with the Council's order to remedy a defective soil-pipe at 42, Old Church Road. An order was made, with 25s. costs. Mr. Sprung was also summoned for refusing to ventilate the soil-pipe at 44, Old Church Road, but the hearing of the case was adjourned for 21 days. On May 23rd Harris Etkin, of 84, Cable Street, was fined £1 and 30s. costs for allowing the cellar to be illegally occupied. 103 On May 28th Mr. Gershon Harris, of 459, Mile End Road, was summoned for general nuisances at Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10 Blocks, Booth Street Buildings. The nuisance consisted of the dirty condition of the stairs, passages, etc., and the filthy condition of the water-closets. An order to abate, with 25s. costs, was made in each of the 10 summonses. On June 13th the adjourned case against Mr. Sprung re 44, Old Church Road, was heard. Mr. Sprung did not appear. An order was granted to ventilate the soil-pipes within seven days, with 27s. costs. On June 13th the owner of 41, Smith Street, was summoned for failing to comply with a notice of the Council to remedy a defective drain. Order granted, with 25s. costs. On July 16th Mr. Zigman Isaacs was fined 20s. and 40s. costs for illegally occupying underground rooms at 67, Wilkes Street, as a dwelling. On July 16th Mr. J. H. Bishop, of Braeside, Westcliff-on-Sea, the owner of 28, Great Pearl Street, was summoned for general nuisances caused by the dilapidated condition of the premises. A closing order was made, with 4s. costs. On October 2nd Mr. Joseph Donn, of 25, Princelet Street, was summoned for general nuisances caused by the dirty condition of Nos. 1 to 8, Montague Houses. The necessary work having been done, and the nuisances abated, the summonses was withdrawn on payment of £2 4s. costs. j On October 15th the Magistrate ordered Mr. Leschalles—the owner of 11, East Arbour Street—to remedy a defective drain at the above premises within 14 days, and to pay 25s. costs. On October 15th the Magistrate ordered Mr. Woolrauch—-the owner of 35, Blount Street—to remedy a defective yard paving within 14 days, and to pay 25s. costs. On October 28th Mr. Abrahams, the owner of 84, Salmon Lane, was summoned for failing to remedy defective roof, floor, and window sashes. The Magistrate granted an order for the work to be done within seven days, with 25s. costs. Mr. Abrahams, of 191, City Road, the owner of 24, King John Street, was summoned for failing to remedy defective drains, The Magistrate granted an order for the work to be done within seven days, with 25s. costs. The owner of 23, King John Street, was summoned for failing to remedy a defective drain. The Magistrate granted an order for the work to be done within seven days, with 25s. costs. 104 The owner of 208, Mile End Road, was summoned for allowing premises to be occupied without a satisfactory water supply. The supply having been reinstated, the summons was withdrawn on payment of 23s. costs. On November 20th Mr. Morris Cohen, of 15, Finch Street, was summoned for keeping live fowls in the yard in such manner as to be a nuisance. The summons was withdrawn on payment of £2 2s. costs, and undertaking not to keep fowls in the yard again. On November 20th Mr. Phillip Reuben, of 32, Finch Street, was summoned for the offensive condition of the fish barrows in the yard of the premises. The Magistrate granted an order to abate the nuisance within three days, and to prevent its recurrence, with 25s. costs. On November 27th Mr. Gershon Harris, of 459, Mile End Road, owner of Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10 Blocks, Booth Street Buildings, was summoned for further disobeying Magistrate's order made 28th May, 1902. The summons was adjourned for five weeks to enable the owner to rectify the whole of the yard and wash-house pavings and to commence the work of the trough closets. On November 27th Mr. Goode, of 1, Theydon Road, was summoned for noncompliance with the Council's order with regard to 11, West Street, to remedy a defective drain and general dilapidations. The Magistrate granted an order to complete the necessary work within seven days. On November 27th Mr. Staines, of 200, Cambridge Road, was summoned for non-compliance with a notice of the Council with regard to the premises, 2, Sceptre Street. The necessary work having been completed, the summons was withdrawn on payment of 25s. costs. On November 21st Mr. Simons, of 59, Nelson Street, owner of 45, Rhodeswell Road, was summoned for not complying with the Council's order to provide a propel water supply, etc. The Magistrate granted an order for the necessary work to be done within 14 days, with 25s. costs. On November 28th Hyman Reinis, of 71, Cable Street, was summoned for permitting the basement of the above house to be occupied as a dwelling on November 15th. He was fined £1 and 23s. costs. On December 4th the owner of 13, Bell Lane, was summoned for non-compli ance with notices to remedy a defective drain. The Magistrate granted an order to remedy the defects within 14 days, with 25s costs. 105 On December 4th the owner of 31, Lamb Street, was summoned for non-compliance with notices served to remedy a defective drain and yard paving. The Magistrate granted an order to complete the work within 14 days, with 25s. costs. On December 11th the owner of 71, Commercial Street, was summoned for non-compliance with notices served to remedy a defective soil-pipe and drain. The Magistrate granted an order to complete the work in 14 days, with 27s. costs. Mr. J. Moss, the owner of Nos. 25, 26, 27, 28, and 29, Wheeler Street, and 1, Quaker Street, was summoned for allowing the premises to be in such a state as to be unfit for human habitation. Summonses were withdrawn on payment of £6 18s., on his undertaking to put the premises into habitable condition. On December 19th Mr. Grotski, of 43, Grafton Street, the owner of 45, Repton Street, was fined £5 and 23s. costs for not complying with the Council's order to remedy the defective waterpipe. On December 24th Mr. Cohen, of 1, Bancroft Road, owner of 21, Durham Row, was fined 20s. and 23s. costs for not complying with the Council order to provide a proper and sufficient water supply. Legal Proceedings under Bye-Laws. On May 22nd Mr. J. H. T. Keeves, of 14, Highbury Terrace, was summoned for failing to give notice before constructing drainage works at 68, Nicholas Street. He was fined 20s. and 23s. costs. For non-compliance with Section 14 of the London County Council Bye-laws, by not giving notice, at 62, Nicholas Street, Mr. Keeves was fined 20s. and 2s. costs. On September 20th James Kelsey, a registered milk-seller, of 66, Salmon Lane, was summoned for having in use a dirty milk measure. He was fined 20s. and 12s. 6d. costs. On October 3rd Isaac Leventon, of 242, Oxford Street, was summoned for having dirty milk utensils on the premises. Defendant did not appear. The summons was adjourned to October 10th, when defendant was fined 25s. Smoke Nuisances. A great deal of attention was devoted to the abatement of black smoke during the year, and notices were served for its abatement on 125 premises. Most of these had no smoke consumers of any kind, and in others the nuisance was caused by the carelessness of the stoker. 106 I am glad to say that in nearly all of these, smoke consumers, of the most modern type, have been constructed, and towards the end of the year there was great improvement in this respect. Police Court proceedings were taken against the following:— On January 20th Mr. Harris Grodzinsky, of 20, Bedford Street, was fined £5 and 23s. costs. On July 20th Mr. Robert Ellis, 76, Copley Street, was fined £4 and 23s. costs. On October 10th Mr. Nicholas Louis, 146, White Horse Street, was fined £3 and £2 2s. costs. On October 24th Messrs. Durell & Co., Saw Mills, Globe Wliarf, were fined £5 and 23s. costs. On November 7th Messrs. Yeatman & Co., 9, Denmark Street, were fined £6 and 23s. costs. On November 14th Messrs. Allen & Son were fined £3 and 23s. costs for permitting black smoke to issue from their chimney at Canal Road. They were also fined £3 and 23s. costs for permitting black smoke to issue from their chimney at Copperfield Road. Also for a similar offence at Emmott Street they were fined £3 and 23s. costs. Canal Boats Acts, 1877 and 1884. 61 Canal Boats were inspected during the year. Their condition was very good. Infringement of the Acts and regulations were discovered as follows, viz.:— Certificates 1 Overcrowding 2 Marking 1 Painting 5 Whenever there was an infringement of the Acts, a notice was sent to the owner of the Canal Boat requiring him to remedy the cause of complaint, and to forward within a specified period a certificate signed by some duly appointed Inspector of Canal Boats, that the same had been done. Such certificate was afterwards received. One boat was registered during the year. Houses Let in Lodgings. New Bye-laws made under Section 94, Public Health (London) Act, 1891, were submitted to the Local Government Board early in 1901. 107 After several alterations were made by, and as the result, of, a Conference between that Board and a deputation from the Public Health Committee, the Byelaws were confirmed on July 24th.| They had to be advertised in the local papers before they came into force on September 1st. At the end of the year, 1,669 houses had been registered. 6,831 visits and re-visits were made to these premises during the year, and 295 intimations were served. It was necessary to serve 108 statutory notices. Nuisances caused by 107 cases of overcrowding were abated. Police Court proceedings were taken under the Bye-laws against:— (1) Mr. Saul Lyons, the owner of 5, Cox Square, was summoned for non-compliance with Bye-law 4. The defendant having complied with the Bye-law, before the date of the proceedings, the summons was withdrawn on payment of £2 4s. costs. (2) On December 5th Mr. Charles Filer, 89, Gore Road, Victoria Park, was fined 1s. and 23s. costs for failing to furnish particulars for the registration of 26, Eastfield Street. The defendant gave notice of appeal. (3) The landlord of 214, High Street, Shadwell, was summoned under Bye-law 14, for failing to cleanse the premises. He was fined 10s. and 23s. costs. Serving the landlords or keepers with forms requiring particulars of letting and the number of occupants of the various rooms, entail a great deal of work. Many of the forms have to be returned several times before anything like a correct return is obtained. About 10 per cent, only of the forms when they are first sent in, shew the correct number of persons occupying the premises. The fact that premises are registered has had a good effect in several ways. A large number of houses large enough for a moderatersized family, but occupied by two or more families, have been emptied as soon as the landlords are informed of our intention to have them registered. They are afterwards let to one family on the understanding that there is to be no sub-letting. This objection on the part of the landlords to have their houses registered is due partly to the fact that they are looked upon as registered lodging houses, and it is difficult to convince them of the difference between that and common lodging houses. The landlords also want to be relieved from the responsibility of annually cleansing the premises, which is required by the Bye-laws. Allowing these small houses to be occupied by one family aach, has materially reduced the overcrowding which formerly occurred in them. 108 BY-LAWS. Made by the Council of the Metropolitan Borough of Stepney, with respect to Houses let in Lodgings or occupied by members of more than one family, in the Metropolitan Borough of Stepney. 1.—In these by-laws, unless the context otherwise requires, the following words and expressions have the meanings hereinafter respectively assigned to them : that is to say— "Council" means the Mayor, Aldermen and Councillors of the Metropolitan Borough of Stepney. "Lodging-house" means a house or part of a house which is let in lodgings or occupied by members of more than one family. "Landlord" in relation to a house or part of a house which is let in lodgings or occupied by members of more than one family, means the person (whatever may be the nature or extent of his interest in the premises, and whether he resides on the premises or not) who receives or is entitled to receive the rack rent of a lodging-house. "Keeper" in relation to a house or part of a house which is let in lodgings or occupied by members of more than one family, means the person (whatever may be the nature or extent of his interest in the premises) by whom or on whose behalf such house or part of a house is let in lodgings, or for occupation by members of more than one family, or who for the time being receives or is entitled to receive the profits arising from such letting, whether on his own account, or as agent or trustee for any other person, or who would so receive the same if such house or part of a house were let at a rent. "Lodger" in relation to a house or part of a house which is let in lodgings or occupied by members of more than one family, means a person to whom any room or rooms in such house or part of a house may have been let as a lodging or for his own use and occupation, or who, not being a member of the family of such person, may occupy or use any such room or rooms by permission of the person to whom the same may be let. 2.—The keeper of a lodging-house or a lodger therein shall not knowingly cause or suffer a greater number of persons than will admit of the provision of three hundred cubic feet of free air space for each person of an age exceeding ten years, and of one hundred and fifty cubic feet of free air space for each person of an age not exceeding ten years to occupy, at any one time, as a sleeping apartment, a room which is used exclusively for that purpose, and which is under the control of such keeper, or which has been let to such lodger, respectively, as the case may be. 109 3.—The keeper of a lodging-house or a lodger therein shall not knowingly cause or suffer a greater number of persons than will admit of a provision of four hundred cubic feet of free air space for each person of an age exceeding ten years, and of two hundred cubic feet of free air space for each person of an age not exceeding ten years, to occupy, at any one time, as a sleeping apartment, a room which is not used exclusively for that purpose, and which is under the control of such keeper, or which has been let to such lodger, respectively, as the case may be. 4.—The keeper, or when there is no keeper the landlord, of a lodging-house, within a period of fourteen days after he shall have been required by a notice in writing signed by the Medical Officer of Health to the Council and duly served upon or delivered to such keeper or landlord to supply the information necessary for the registration of such house by the Council, shall himself, or by his agent duly authorised in that behalf, sign and furnish to the Council a true statement of the following particulars with respect to such house, that is to say— (а) The total number of rooms in the house. (b) The total number of rooms let in lodgings or occupied by members of more than one family. (c) The manner of use of each room. (d) The number, age, and sex of the occupants of each room used for sleeping. (e) The Christian name and surname of the lodger. (f) The amount of rent or charge per week payable by each lodger, and (g) The Christian name and surname of the landlord of the lodging-house. 5.—In any case where the landlord of a lodging-house occupies or resides in any part of the premises, or retains a general possession or control of the premises, such landlord, and in any case where the landlord of a lodging-house does not occupy or reside in any part of the premises, or retain a general possession or control of the premises, every keeper or lodger who is entitled to havo or to exercise control of the outer door of the premises shall, at all times when required by the Medical Officer of Health, the Sanitary Inspector, or any other officer specially appointed or authorised by the Council in that behalf, afford any such officer free access to the interior of the premises for the purpose of inspection. 6.—Every lodger in a lodging-house shall, at all times when required by the Medical Officer of Health, the Sanitary Inspector, or any other officer specially appointed or authorised by the Council in that behalf, afford any such officer free access for the purpose of inspection to the interior of any room or rooms which may have been let to such lodger. 110 7.—Where the Medical Officer of Health, the Sanitary Inspector, or any other officer specially appointed or authorised by the Council in that behalf, has, for the purpose of inspection, obtained access to the interor of a lodging-house, or to the interior of any room or rooms in such house, a person shall not wilfully obstruct any such officer in the inspection of any part of the premises, or without reasonable excuse, neglect or refuse, when required by such officer, to render him such assistance as may be reasonably necessary for the purpose of such inspection. 8.—In any case where a lodger in a lodging-house is entitled to the exclusive use of any court, courtyard, area or other open space within the curtilage of the premises, such lodger, and in any case where two or more lodgers in a lodging-house are entitled to the use in common of any court, courtyard, area or other open space within the curtilage of the premises, the keeper shall cause such court., courtyard, area or other open space to be thoroughly cleansed from time to time, as often as may be requisite for the purpose of keeping the same in a cleanly condition. 9.—The landlord of a lodging-house shall cause every drain or means of drainage, with which any water-closet belonging to such house may communicate, to be maintained at all times in good order and efficient action. He shall also cause all such means of ventilation as may be provided in or in connection therewith to be maintained at all times in good order. 10.—Every lodger in a lodging-house shall cause every solid or liquid filth or refuse to be removed once at least in every day from every room which has been let to him, and shall once at least in every day cause every vessel, utensil, or other receptacle for such filth or refuse, to be thoroughly cleansed. 11.—In every case where a lodger in a lodging-house is entitled to the ex clusive use of any staircase, landing or passage in such house, such lodger shall cause every part of such staircase, landing or passage to be thoroughly cleansed from time to time as often as may be requisite. 12.—A lodger in a lodging-house shall not cause or suffer any animal to be kept in any room which has been let to, or is occupied by, such lodger, or elsewhere upon the premises in such a manner as to render the condition of such room or premises filthy or unfit for human habitation. 13.—The keeper of a lodging-house shall cause every common passage or staircase in each house to be thoroughly cleansed from time to time as often as may be requisite. 14.—The landlord of a lodging-house shall, in the first week in the month of April in every year, and at such other times as the condition thereof may render it necessary, cause every part of the premises to be cleansed. He shall, at the same time, except in such cases as are hereinafter specified, cause every area, the interior surface of every ceiling and wall of every water-closet belonging to the premises, and the interior surface of every ceiling and wall of every room, staircase and passage in the house to be thoroughly lime-washed. 111 Provided that the foregoing requirement with respect to the lime-washing of the internal surface of the walls of rooms, staircases, and passages shall not apply in any case where the internal surface of any such wall is painted, or where the material of or with which such surface is constructed or covered is such as to render the lime-washing thereof unsuitable or inexpedient, and where such surface is thoroughly cleansed and the paint or other covering is renewed, if the renewal thereof be necessary for the purpose of keeping the premises in a cleanly and wholesome condition. 15.—The landlord of a lodging-house shall provide adequate means of ventilation in or in connection with every common passage or staircase in such house, and shall cause such means of ventilation to be maintained at all times in good order. 16.—The landlord of a lodging-house shall cause all such means of ventilation as may be provided in or connection with any room in such house to be maintained at. all times in good order. 17.—The keeper of a lodging-house in which furnished rooms are let shall cause the bedding, furniture, and other articles in such rooms to be at all times maintained in a clean and wholesome condition, and free from insects. 18.—In every case where, in pursuance of any statutory provision in that behalf, an order of a justice has been obtained for the removal from a lodging-house to a hospital of a person who is suffering from any dangerous infectious disease and is without proper lodging or accommodation, the keeper of such house and the lodger to whom any room whereof such person may be an occupant has been let shall, on being informed of such order, forthwith take all such steps as may be requisite on the part of such keeper and of such lodger, respectively, to secure the safe and prompt removal of such person in compliance with such order, and shall in and about such removal, adopt all such precautions as in accordance with any instruc tions which such keeper and such lodger, respectively, may receive from the Medical Officer of Health of the Council may be most suitable for the circumstances of the case. 19.—Every person who shall offend against any of the foregoing by-laws shall be liable for every such offence to a penalty of five pounds, and in the case of a continuing offence to a further penalty of forty shillings for each day after written notice of the offence from the Council. Provided, nevertheless, that the justices or court before whom any complaint may be made or any proceedings may be taken in respect of any such offence, may, if they think fit, adjudge the payment as a penalty of any sum less than the full amount of the penalty imposed by this bye-law. 20.—From and after the date of the confirmation of these by-laws, any by-laws with respect to houses let in lodgings, or occupied by members of more than one family, in force in the Metropolitan Borough of Stepney, shall be repealed. 112 Unsound Food. On account of the large number of prosecutions at the end of 1901, the condition of the food exposed or deposited for sale in the Borough greatly improved. Notices were served on the various Wharfingers, Importers, Brokers, etc., calling their attention to the fact that unsound food, whether exposed for sale or not, was liable to be seized. This I have no doubt caused the surrender to us of a large quantity of canned goods, which in former years found its way on the market. The following were destroyed under our supervision:— 1 barrel Apples. 94 tins canned Apples. 3,371 tins and 5 cases Apricots. 5,603 tins Apricot Pulp. 49 drums Anchovies. 47 tins and 9 cases Asparagus. 1 tin Black Currants. 14½ bodies diseased Beef. 1½ cwt. diseased Beef. 4,167 tins Canned Beef. 341 tins Beef and Mutton. 11 boxes Bloaters. 22 tins Brawn. 1,291 cases Bananas. 1 Cask Red Cabbage. 6 lbs. Ox Cheeks. 106 Chickens. 6 bags Cocoa. 2 carcases Calves. 220 baskets Gorgonzola. 69 lbs. Cheese. 39 seives and 1 tin Cherries. 5 bags Cocoanuts. 3 boxes Cucumbers. 1 hogshead Pickled Cucumbers. 18 cwt. Dates. 250 Eggs. 43 cases and 836 tins Liquid Eggs 10,963 tins Fruits (various). 51 cases, 27 tins, and 6 cwt. Fruit Pulp. 113 Fowls. 56 Ox Feet. 113 13 cwt. Dried Pish. 38 boxes, 2 baskets, 2 barrels, and 72 lbs. Fish. 2 hogsheads Gherkins. 160 Geese. 2 sieves Gooseberries. 565 cases and 2 barrels Grapes. 63 cases and 30 tins Canned Greengages. 221 cases Greengage Pulp. 14 Hearts. 14 Heads. 1 barrel Herrings. 56 lbs. Isinglass. 28 diseased Ox Kidneys. 1 cwt. Pigs' Kidneys. 14 diseased Ox Livers. 7,710 tins Canned Lobsters. 16 diseased Ox Lungs. 3 diseased Sheep's Lungs. 285 bales and 45 bags Liquorice Root (about 70 tons). 2,818 tins Canned Milk 3,947 tins Mackerel. 200 cases and 2,055 tins Canned Mutton. 5 bags Mussels. 19 cases Oranges. 81 bags and 135 cases Onions. 30 casks Pickled Onions. 3 tins Canned Oysters. 27½ sieves Pears. 31 cases and 330 tins Canned Pears. 2 cases Peach Pulp. 12 tins Canned Peaches. 3 tins Canned Peas. 7 tins Canned Prawns. 100 Pineapples. 38,828 tins Canned Pineapples. 17 sieves Plums. 1 bottle and 1 basket Mixed Pickles. 4 tons Potatoes. 3 boxes Pomegranates. 6 Rabbits. 857 tins Canned Rabbits. 4,090 tins Raspberry Pulp. 3 baskets Radishes. 3,651 tins Canned Sardines H 114 106 tins Salmon and Sardines. 7,980 tins Salmon. 1 diseased Ox Spleen. 23 cases and 9 tins Soups. 8 tons of Sugar. 200 lbs. Shrimps. 5 cases Strawberries. 4 tins Syrup. 19 bags Tapioca Flour. 22 boxes Tomatoes. 156 tins Tomatoes. 216 Turkeys. 14 Ox Tails. 1 ton 13 cwt. 81b. Tripe. 14 diseased Ox Tongues. 4,922 tins Canned Tongues. 1 hogshead Walnuts. Total Weights of Unsound Food Destroyed. Tons Cwts. Qrs. lbs. January 5 9 2 7 February 16 18 1 .24 March 8 1 0 21 April 44 8 2 18 May 23 10 2 26 June 76 13 2 20 July 24 0 1 19 September 45 18 . 1 22 October 104 3 1 16 November 36 12 1 — December 45 1 — 241 430 18 — 1 Legal proceedings were taken against the following:— On May 9th, Mr. Percy Crage, trading as Overall & Co., fish merchants, was fined £20 and £10 costs for having deposited for sale upon his premises, 88, High Street, Wapping, 3,948 tins of Mackerel in an unsound and unwholesome condition. 115 On December 19th, Mr. Davis Lederman, baker and confectioner, 157, Cannon Street Road, was fined £10 and 23s. costs for having deposited on his premises for the purpose of preparation for human food 192 eggs and 3 gallons of liquid eggs, the whole of which were unsound and unwholesome. On December 19th Miss Leah Levy, 111, Cable Street, was fined £8 and 23s. costs for having deposited on the premises for the purpose of preparation for food, 108 rotten eggs. The Mortuary. The number of bodies deposited in the Mortuary during the year was 722. 661 were removed by the Coroner's order, 33 by the Police, 2 by order of Relieving Officers, and 10 by request of friends, and 16 were persons that had either died from infectious diseases, or I did not consider their dwellings to be suitable. 13 bodies were deposited in the Infectious Mortuary, and 4 in the Jewish Mortuary for watching purposes. 713 Inquests were held, and 62 Post-mortems were made. Causes of death:— Atalectasis 13 Alcoholism 4 Ammonia poisoning 1 Burns 19 Bright's disease 3 Bronchitis and Pneumonia 69 Convulsions 104 Cerebral Haemorrhage 19 Cancer 1 Collapse of Lungs 2 Drowning 33 Diarrhœa 6 Debility 1 Delirium Tremens 3 Diphtheria 5 Dropsy 2 Erysipelas 1 Gastric Catarrh 1 Gastro-Enteritis 7 Gas poisoning 1 Hemorrhage from ruptured Varicose Veins 1 Haemorrhage after Circumcision 2 H 2 Ii6 Hereditary Syphilis 1 Heart Disease 226 Inanition 4 Influenza 2 Improper Feeding 5 Jaundice 1 Murder 2 Marasmus 10 Meningitis 10 Phthisis 16 Pleurisy 4 Ptomaine poisoning 3 Small-pox 6 Spasm of Glottis 2 Spinal Disease 1 Starvation (self-inflicted) 1 Suffocation in bed with parents 61 Suffocation due to vomiting 2 Still-born 23 Septic absorption from Circumcision 1 Ulcerated Stomach 2 Tuberculosis 9 Violence and Accidents 28 Want of attention at birth 2 Peritonitis 3 List of Bedding, etc., destroyed in the Incinerator from the 1st of January to December, 1902:— Beds 49 Vests 3 Pillows 87 Cloaks 2 Bolsters 5 Cushions 22 Blankets 15 Sundries 607 Sheets 14 Mattresses 132 Quilts 8 Palliasses 5 Coats 2 Bolster slips 28 Trousers 2 Pillow-slips 834 117 NUMBER OF ARTICLES DISINFECTED IN THE DISINFECTING APPARATUS. ARTICLES. January. February. March. April. May. June. July. August. September. October. November. December. TOTALS. Beds 481 565 505 417 345 299 235 185 176 222 185 155 3907 Mattresses 300 484 460 327 337 366 199 160 134 157 192 181 3267 Palliasses 55 156 112 143 114 61 38 40 35 53 45 58 910 Bolsters 154 212 278 l6l 140 124 93 77 8l 8l 86 72 1519 Pillows 777 911 669 787 634 607 460 418 375 491 377 340 6846 Sheets 779 664 617 596 548 426 225 210 174 238 235 166 4878 Counterpanes 56 I04 175 143 178 72 9 7 24 10 12 7 817 Quilts 376 416 291 211 297 187 156 130 119 198 161 130 2674 Blankets 786 643 832 1392 479 1040 160 482 171 198 507 184 6874 Vests 102 l68 155 71 115 78 6 14 7 4 32 24 776 Trousers 691 l6l 175 96 117 79 10 13 17 30 35 24 1448 Cushions 140 l6l 126 79 112 106 49 86 38 107 70 69 1040 Coats 216 280 301 149 173 103 17 35 31 29 59 33 1424 Sundries 6688 12004 8899 7235 6301 4040 1521 701 411 1297 1143 1109 51349 Totals 11601 16929 13595 11807 9890 6560 3178 2558 1793 3115 3137 2552 87529 118 Factory and Workshops Act, 1901. This Act came into force on January 1st, 1901, and consolidated with amendments all previous Acts. This Act requires the Council to "keep a Register of all workshops situated within the district." It also requires the Medical Officer of Health in his Annual Report to the Council to report on the administration of the Act in workshops and workplaces, and to send a copy of the Report to the Secretary of State. Workshops include (a) ropeworks, bakehouses, carpet-beating works, etc.; (b) any other premises in which manual labour is exercised by way of trade or for purposes of gain, in or incidental to the making, altering, repairing, etc., of any article, and over which the employer of the persons working there has the right of access or control; (c) any workshop in which, "with the permission of, or under agreement with the owner or occupier, two or more persons carry on any work, which would constitute the workplace a workshop, if the persons working therein were in the employment of the owner or occupier." Laundries are also treated as workshops unless worked by inmates of a religious or charitable institution, or by the members of one family, with or without the assistance of two others. A Workplace includes a stable, the kitchen of a restaurant and other places where people assemble together to do work permanently of some kind or other. Duties with regard to Workshops and Workplaces. (1) The sanitary condition of workshops and workplaces refers to:— (а) Cleanliness.—The Act provides a penalty for refusing to comply with the Council's notices to have the workshop limewashed or cleansed. The workshops were all cleansed during the year, most of the owners doing it voluntarily, but in 522 cases, notices had to be served before it was done. (b) Air Space.—250 cubic feet is allowed for each person, and 400 during time. Overcrowding occurred in 79 cases. In 77 instances it was abated as a result of notices that were served. In two cases Police Court proceedings had to be taken. (c) Ventilation.—Any workshop not properly ventilated may be dealt with as a nuisance. Alteration had to be made in 107 workshops to effectually ventilate them. 29 hoods were provided to the gas-stoves. 119 (d) Drainage of Floors.— If any process renders the floor liable to be wet to such an extent that the wet is capable of being removed by drainage, adequate means shall be provided for draining purposes. (e) Sufficient sanitary accommodation must be provided. Additional w.c. accommodation had to be provided in 165 workshops. (2) Homework.—New and important powers are given which aim at the prevention of homework being done— (а) In dwellings which are injurious or dangerous to the health of the workers themselves, e.g., through overcrowding, want of ventilation, or other insanitary conditions. The Council may prohibit the oecupier of the workshop or contractor from giving out work to be done in that place. 'litis power may be exercised in the case of work given out from laundries, warehouses, shops, etc., and applies to— (i.) The cleaning, making, washing, altering, and repairing of wearing apparel, etc. (ii.) The making, ornamenting, mending, and finishing of lace and lace curtains, and nets. (iii.) Cabinet and furniture making. (iv.) Making of electro-plate. (v.) Making of files. (vi.) Fur pulling. (b) In infected dwellings.— If any inmate of a house in which homework is being done, is suffering from any infectious disease, the Council may, by order served on the occupier of any factory, workshop, or other place from which work is given out, or on any contractor employed by such occupier, prohibit him from giving out such work to any person living or working in the house during such time as the Council may fix. In an emergency the power may be exercised by any two or more members of the Council, on the advice of the Medical Officer of Health. This power is applied to— Wearing apparel. Upholstery work, and Lace and lace curtains. Fur-pulling. All occupiers of factories, workshops, or any place from which work is given out, and contractors employed by such occupiers, are required in regard to the above classes of work, to keep lists showing the names and addresses of all persons employed by them, either as workmen or as contractors outside such factory, workshop, or place, and the place where they are employed, and to send to the Council twice a year (viz., on or before 1st February and 1st August) copies of such lists. 120 It will be the duty of the Council to have the lists examined, and if the place of employment of any outworker is in another district, to furnish his name and place of employment to the Council of that district. Domestic Workshops will be subject to the ordinary provisions of the Act, but are specially exempted from the special provisions as to mean: of ventilation and the drainage of floors. Powers of Borough Council.-— The Council and their officers are given the same powers of entry, taking legal proceedings, or otherwise, as a Factory Inspector pos sesses. These powers, in the case of workplaces, are given for the first time by the Act of 1901. Matters referred to Council by Factory Inspectors.— The Factory Inspector will—on finding in a factory or workshop any act, neglect, or default in relation to a drain, water-closet, ashpit, water supply, nuisance, or other matter which is punishable or remediable under the Public Health Acts, but not under the FactoryAct—give notice to the Council of such act, etc. It will be the duty of the Council to make inquiry into the matter, take such action as may seem proper, and inform the Inspector of the proceedings taken. If proceedings are not taken by the Council within one month, the Factory Inspector is authorised to take the same proceedings as the Council might have taken, and to recover from the Council the expenses incurred by him. On May 23rd Eva Cohen, 1, Berner Street, was fined £5 and 27s. costs for failing to abate overcrowding in the workshop. On November 14th Morris Vitzen, 92, Sidney Street, was fined £3 and 23s. costs for failing to abate overcrowding in the workshop. On November 14th Jacob Mann, 104, Newark Street, was fined £3 and 23s. costs for failing to comply with a notice requiring him to limewash and cleanse the workshop. 121 REGISTERED WORKSHOPS. Nature of Employment. Total number of workshops. Males employed. Females employed. Total. Army contractors and clothiers 2 38 26 64 Boot sewer and closer 4 2 1 3 Boot machinist 12 19 26 45 Boot finisher 11 23 2 25 Bootmaker 124 977 115 1092 Bag repairer 2 — 3 3 Blind maker 2 10 — 10 Basket maker 4 17 — 17 Bedding and feather bed making 3 8 19 27 Box and packing case making 10 58 28 86 Bottle merchant 1 6 30 36 Bamboo makers 3 86 — 86 Bag and bag handle makers 1 1 4 5 Bass dressers and brush makers 6 38 9 47 Button-holers 7 13 22 35 Builders, carpenters and joiners 3 3 — 3 Cleaners and dyers 3 3 10 13 Cigar and cigarette makers 6 57 99 156 Clothing manufacturers 2 154 557 711 Coach builders, painters and writers 3 9 — 9 Cap making 46 314 281 595 Coat and waistcoat making 3 20 21 41 Cork merchants and cork cutters 4 25 20 45 Costume making 12 83 36 119 Cane work 2 27 20 47 Cabinet makers 74 756 27 783 Corset makers 5 4 50 54 Coopering 1 5 — 5 Druggists 2 35 43 78 Dressmakers 54 62 264 326 Envelope addressers 1 14 — 14 Embroiders 3 14 9 23 Furriers 47 128 148 276 French polishers 1 2 — 2 Fancy paper cutter 1 2 — 2 Gut scraper 1 16 15 31 Harness and nosebag makers 6 46 2 48 Hat and helmet manufacturers 2 14 — 14 Jewellery 4 14 — 14 Japanners 1 10 — 10 Jam factory 1 2 4 6 Lamp shade maker 1 — 5 5 Lime juice, cordial and sauce manufacturers 4 26 48 74 Laundry 19 5 104 109 Ladies' skirt manufacturers 2 9 4 13 Ladies' tailoring 65 438 139 577 Totals 571 3593 2191 5784 122 REGISTERED WORKS HOPS—(continued.) Nature of Employment. Total number of workshops Males employed Females employed Total. Brought forward 571 3593 2191 5784 Demon and orange peel dryers 1 3 7 10 Millinery 14 4 68 72 Mattresses 1 2 — 2 Machinists 1 — 3 3 Mantle makers 56 468 157 625 Mineral water manufacturers 1 1 - 1 Military tailors 4 30 43 73 Old clothes renovated 5 42 14 56 Orange and lemon peel makers 1 1 1 2 Overmantel makers 1 5 — 5 Printers and stationers 5 19 — 19 Pickling 3 8 52 60 Picture frame and photo frame makers 5 9 17 26 Provision merchants 3 30 52 82 Paper bag making 1 4 - 4 Paper sorters 2 8 8 16 Portmanteau makers 1 30 9 39 Purse maker 4 12 8 20 Rag merchant and sorter 24 45 95 140 Silversmiths 1 - - — Scale makers 2 7 - 7 Sweet manufacturers and confectioners 3 11 11 22 Shirt makers 6 86 318 404 Sign and glass writer 1 3 - 3 Sack and mat manufacturers 3 13 24 37 Sugar merchants 1 - - - Silk manufacturers 2 3 54 57 Sail makers 1 6 6 Shell merchants 1 3 - 3 Soap powder packing 1 12 12 Ships' chandler 1 9 22 31 Tailoring 1251 6065 4458 10523 Trouser makers 12 41 115 156 Tarpaulin and tent makers 3 7 164 171 Zinc, tinsmiths and ironworkers 7 34 1 35 Tie makers 2 - 2 2 Upholsterers 7 33 — 33 Underlinen and clothing 8 — 53 53 Vermin destroyer 1 — - - Umbrella and walking stick makers 7 23 7 30 Wood chopper 1 5 - 5 Wood carver 4 11 — 11 Wheelwright 5 50 — 50 Waterproof and macintosh makers 9 46 94 140 Totals 2044 10770 8060 18830 123 LIST OF OUTWORKERS. TRADES. Number of firms employing Outworkers. Number of Outworkers employed. Boot, shoe and slipper manufacturers 11 87 Bodices and steels for ditto 1 1 Childrens' dresses manufacturers 1 1 Costume makers 2 6 Clothiers . 28 873 Drapers 4 6 Fancy collar, blouse and tunic makers 6 12 Furriers 3 3 Hat and cap manufacturers 2 88 House Furnishers 1 1 Ladies' tailors and outfitters 8 17 Manufacturers 4 38 Mantle making 10 61 Millinery 1 2 Outfitters 8 40 Stores 1 6 Shirt, collar, and cuff makers 4 71 Skirt makers 2 7 Silk manufacturers 1 1 Trouser makers 2 43 Tie and scarf manufacturers 3 5 Tailors 582 2366 Umbrella and stick manufacturers 1 5 Warehousemen 1 1 Woollen merchants 1 11 Water proffers, macintosh and India rubber makers 2 2 Totals 690 3756 124 Bakehouses. The Factories and Workshops Act, 1901, contains the following provisions for the regulation of bakehouses:— (a) A bakehouse must not contain or communicate directly with a water-closet or ashpit. A drain must not have any opening in the bakehouse. The penalty for contravening either of these is a fine of £2 on the owner or occupier. (b) The inside walls and ceilings must be limewashed every six months, or coated with three coats of paint or varnish every seven years, and washed with hot water and soap every six months. (c) Places on the same level with a bakehouse and forming part of the same building must not be used as sleeping places unless effectually separated from the bakehouse by partition from floor to ceiling, and provided with an external glazed window, 9 square feet, of which 4½ feet must be made to open. (d) No underground bakehouse shall be used as such, unless it was so used on August 17th last. (e) After January 1st, 1904, it will not be lawful to use any underground bakehouse (whenever established) unless the Borough Council are satisfied that it is suitable for the purpose in regard to construction, light, ventilation, and in all other respects, and have given it a certificate of suitability, This provision will apply to all bakehouses, whether wholesale or retail. Every bakehouse will be deemed an underground bakehouse if any room used for baking is so situated that the surface of the floor is more than three feet below the surface of the footway of the adjoining street, or of the ground adjoining or nearest the room. (d) and (e) are new provisions entirely. In order to carry out the requirements of the Act, the following suggestions were approved by the Public Health Committee. They were printed and distributed among the owners of bakehouses. The Public Health Committee will consider the condition of each bakehouse on this basis before granting a certificate. (a) Construction. (1) The bakehouse shall be of a minimum capacity of 1,500 cubic feet, and shall be at least eight feet high in every part thereof, measured from the floor to the ceiling. (2) The floor and walls shall be constructed of hard, smooth, durable, and impermeable material. (3) Provision must be made for suitable means of access—other than by a ladder—to the underground bakehouse, in the form of convenient stairs. No entrance from the shop floor will be allowed. (4) All areas must be constructed of white glazed bricks or tiled faces. 125 (b) Light. (5) The bakehouse shall be supplied with one or more windows, so as to be efficiently lighted, by means which shall exclude the entrance of street dust. Such window or windows must have a total superficial area, clear of the sash frame, equal to one-tenth of the floor space. (c) Ventilation. (6) The bakehouse shall be properly ventilated by permanent inlets and outlets—other than the windows—communicating directly with the open air. If necessary, artificial means of ventilation must be provided. (d) All Other Respects. (7) Proper provision shall be made for the storage of flour elsewhere than in the undergound bakehouse itself. (8) Conveniences for personal ablution shall be provided, in a suitable position, and shall include a water-tap and sink or lavatory basin of an approved pattern. (These conveniences should be outside the bakehouse.) (9) Proper provision shall be made for the depositing of wearing material outside the underground bakehouse. (10) All troughs, tables, or other furniture standing on the floor of the underground bakehouse shall be provided with strong, ball-bearing castors. (11) An underground bakehouse shall not be in communication with a washhouse, nor with any room, cellar or area containing objectionable materials. (12) An underground room, not entirely separated from the underground bakehouse, shall be well lighted thoughout, shall be sufficiently protected against the entrance of ground air, shall be properly ventilated, and shall be at all times clean. (13) Before making any alterations with a view to meeting these requirements, the owners or occupiers of underground bakehouses shall submit to the Sanitiary Authority a specification (and plans) of the alterations which they purpose making. There are in our Borough 201 retail bakehouses, 93 of them being underground. I personally visited every bakehouse during the last week in September and the first week in October. Some of the underground bakehouses were so structurally defective that it will be impossible for the owners to remedy them, in order to bring them within the requirements of the Public Health Committee. They will therefore have to be closed. I indicated to the owners of the others on what lines structural alterations should be made. 126 UNDERGROUND BAKEHOUSES. Situation. Number Employed Situation: Number Employed. 1, Alie Place 7 22, Gill Street 2 113, Back church Lane 3 38, Globe Road 2 20, Bedford Street 3 6, Gt. Alie Street - 7, Bell Lane 3 32, Gt. Hermitage Street 2 81, Ben Jonson Road 3 4, Hanbury Street 2 150, Bow Common Lane 2 27, Hardinge Street - 139, Bridge Street 1 68, Harford Street 3 92, Bridge Street 2 56, High Street, White chapel 3 21, Brady Street 3 161, High Street, Shadwell — 48, Brick Lane 2 84, High Street, Shadwell — 122, Brick Lane 4 47, High Street, Shadwell 3 119, Broad Street 3 115, Jubilee Street 2 85, Brook Street 2 32, King Edward Street 4 58, Burdett Road 3 38, Leman Street 3 278, Cable Street 2 15, Leman Street 2 293, Cable Street 2 117, Leman Street 2 341, Cable Street 2 7, Limehouse Causeway 2 111, Cable Street 3 68, Lime house Causeway 2 20, Cable Street 3 84, Locksley Street 3 36, Cable Street 4 67, Lower Chapman Street 3 108, Cannon Street Road 3 42, Mansell Street 2 127, Charles Street 2 68, Middlesex Street 3 67, Christian Street 4 622, Mile End Road 3 36, Christian Street 4 51, Morgan Street 3 14, Chicksand Street 2 4, Morris Street 2 32, Church Lane 4 34, New Road 2 5, Church Lane 2 66, New Road 1 18, Church Lane 3 27, Old Montague Street 2 127, Commercial Road 5 107, Old Gravel Lane 2 81, Commercial Road 2 42, Philpot Street 3 59, Commercial Road 2 77, Plummers Row 2 436, Commercial Road 3 41, Portland Street 2 136, Commercial Road 3 11, Providence Street 2 821, Commercial Road 3 11, Sidney Street 2 192, Commercial Road 3 89, Sidney Street 3 336, Commercial Road 3 6, St. Peter's Road 2 72, Commercial Road 6 10, St. Mark Street 2 76, Copley Street 2 31, St. George Street 3 18, Copley Street — 145, Salmon Lane 2 13, Devonport Street 2 131, Salmon Lane 2 34, Dock Street 2 77, Three Colt Street 2 127 UNDERGROUND BAKEHOUSES—(continued). Situation. Number Employed, Situation. Number Employed. 59, Umberstone Street 3 75, Wentworth Street 3 3, Varden Street 3 20, Whites Row 4 23, Vallance Road 2 205, White chapel Road 3 38, Vallance Road 2 42, Watney Street 2 147, White Horse Street 2 49, Watney Street 5 91, Wentworth Street 2 OTHER BAKEHOUSES. Situation. Number Employed. Situation. Number Employed. 104, Anthony Street 2 43, Cadiz Street 1 49, Anthony Street 2 81, Coutts Road i 51, Bedford Street 2 821, Commercial Road 3 91, Brook Street 2 367, Cable Street 2 26, Brick Lane 2 338, Commercial Road 4 48, Brick Lane 2 157, Cannon Street Road 2 70, Brick Lane 4 12, Duckett Street 2 13, Bell Lane 2 73, Duckett Street 1 43, Ben Jonson Road 2 137, East field Street 2 3, Bridge Street 2 31, Field gate Street 10 121, Burdett Road — 48, Field gate Street 2 173, Burdett Road 2 142, Globe Road 2 91, Burdett Road 3 48, Great Garden Street 3 54, Buxton Street 4 53, High Street, White chapel 3 224, Bow Common Lane 1 21, Halley Street — 70, Berner Street 3 34, Heath Street 2 411, Commercial Road 1 102, Hanbury Street 2 337, Commercial Road 2 3, High Street, Shorditch 3 265, Commercial Road 3 28, Hunt Street 3 141, Commercial Road 3 203, Jubilee Street 2 9, Coke Street 2 2, Jubilee Street 2 49, Charles Street 2 5, King David Lane 2 122, Charles Street 2 1, Lamb Street 2 508, Commercial Road 2 40, Limehouse Causeway 2 415, Cable Street 2 11, Mile End Road 4 631, Commercial Road 4 132, Mile End Road 2 167, Charles Street 2 220, Mile End Road .. — 9A, Chicksand Street 4 339, Mile End Road 2 62, Cleveland Street 2 322, Mile End Road 2 128 OTHER BAKEHOUSES—(continued) Situation. Number Employed. Situation. Number Employed 205, Mile End Road 2 64, St. Ann's Road 2 17, Mary Street i 31, St. Paul's Road 2 397. Mile End Road 4 117, St. Paul's Road 2 66, New Road . 2 209, Salmon Lane 2 14, Norton Folgate 2 181, Salmon Lane 3 75, Oxford Street 4 40, Sheridan Street 2 256, Oxford Street 3 45, Thomas Street, Limehous 2 8, Osborne Street 11 93, Three Colt Street 2 6, Old Castle Street 2 87, Three Colt Street 2 275, Oxford Street 3 36, Three Colt Street 2 17, Old Gravel Lane 4 22, Umberston Street 2 89, Old Gravel Lane 1 79, Vallance Road 2 42, Philpot Street 4 45, Wentworth Street i 35, Pelham Street 3 41, Wentworth Street 3 12, Parnham Street — 1, Wentworth Street 3 99, Redmans Road 2 7, West Street 2 35, Rhodeswell Road 1 96, West Street 2 56, Rhodeswell Road 2 185, White chapel Road 4 132, Rhodeswell Road 3 1, Wilson Street 2 3, Repton Street 2 88, West India Dock Road 2 31, Repton Street 2 42, White Horse Street 2 90, Red Lion Street 2 105, White Horse Street 2 71, Salmon Lane 2 146, White Horse Street 2 1, Shorter Street, Whitechap 1 84, White Horse Lane 3 4, Stepney Green 1 129 Public Analyst's Annual Report. During the year 1902, 1,187 samples were examined under the Sale of Food and Drugs Acts, consisting of 550 Milks, 209 Butters, 9 Cheeses, 3 Margarines, 6 Lards, 1 Tea, 71 Coffees, 2 Chicories, 7 Cocoas, 4 Breads, 4 Flours, 13 Oatmeals, 4 Ground Rices, 1 Sago, 3 Cornflours, 1 Baking Powder, 86 Peppers, 74 Mustards, 6 Vinegars, 8 Ground Gingers, 1 Brandy, 5 Gins, 3 Rums, 20 Whiskies, 4 Porters, 60 Demerara Sugars, 5 Sweetmeats, 1 Olive Oil, 2 Castor Oils, 5 Camphorated Oils, 2 Sweet Spirits of Nitre, 3 Milk of Sulphurs, 11 Crushed Linseeds, 1 Powdered Rhubarb, 2 Cream of Tartars. 260 samples, or 21.9 per cent., were found to be adulterated, as compared with 15 4 per cent, in the preceding year. These consisted of 167 Milks, 45 Butters, 4 Coffees, 3 Cocoas, 1 Sago, 1 Pepper, 5 Mustards, 1 Ground Ginger, 7 Whiskies, 1 Vinegar, 24 Demerara Sugars, 1 Sweet Spirit of Nitre. Proceedings were taken in 118 cases, 113 of which were successful; one summons was withdrawn; one was adjourned "sine die"; and three were dismissed. One was dismissed owing to em informality in the purchase; in one case the defendant produced a warranty, the other case was referred to Somerset House, and as their figures did not agree with the official certificate, and the certificate of the defendant's analyst, the case was dismissed. In four cases of Spirits the vendors displayed a notice to the effect that the Spirits were diluted, consequently no action was taken. No action was taken in two cases where Margarine was supplied for Butter, owing to informality of purchase. No action was taken in a Mustard which contained a small quantity of Starch, the adulteration probably being accidental. Five samples of Milk were examined unofficially; one was 7 per cent, deficient in Milk Fat, two contained 9 and 4 per cent, respectively of added water, and two were genuine. The samples of Porter were specially tested for arsenic. None was detected. 130 STATISTICS. Nature of Samples. Number Submitted. Number Adulterated. No. of Prosecutions. % of Adulteration. % of Prosecutions. Milk 550 167 67 30.4 12.2 Butter 209 45 18 21.5 8.6 Cheese 9 ... ... ... Margarine 3 ... ... ... ... Lard 6 ... ... ... ... Tea 1 ... ... ... ... Coffee 71 4 4 5.6 5.6 Chicory 2 ... ... ... ... Cocoa 7 3 2 42.9 28.6 Bread 4 ... ... ... ... Flour 4 ... ... ... ... Oatmeal 13 ... ... ... ... Ground Rice 4 ... ... ... ... Sago 1 1 ... 100 ... Corn Flour 3 ... ... ... ... Baking Powder 1 ... ... ... ... Pepper 86 1 1 1.2 1.2 Mustard 74 5 2 6.8 2.7 Vinegar 6 1 ... 16.7 ... Ground Ginger 8 1 1 12.5 12.5 Brandy 1 ... ... ... ... Gin 5 ... ... ... ... Rum 3 ... ... ... ... Whisky 20 7 1 35 5 Porter 4 ... ... ... ... Demerara Sugar 60 24 21 40 35 Sweetmeats 5 ... ... ... ... Olive Oil 1 ... ... ... ... Castor Oil 2 ... ... ... ... Camphorated Oil 5 ... ... ... ... Sweet Spirit of Nitre 2 ... ...I 50 50 Milk of Sulphur 3 ... ... ... ... Crushed Linseed 11 ... ... ... ... Powdered Rhubarb 1 ... ... ... ... Cream of Tartar 2 ... ... ... ... Total 1187 260 118 21.9 9.9 131 In the various Districts the Adulteration was as follows:— District. Number Submitted. Number Adulterated. No. of Prosecutions. % of Adulteration. % of Prosecutions. White chapel 290 73 34 25.2 11.7 St. George's 288 62 29 21.5 10.1 Limehouse 2l6 51 18 23.6 8.3 Mile End 393 74 37 18.8 9.4 Total 1187 260 118 21.9 9.9 I 2 132 ARTICLES ADULTERATED. Article. Extent of adulteration Result. Milk 4 per cent, added water Caution Milk 5 „ „ Caution Milk 7 „ „ Caution Milk 3 „ „ Caution Milk 14 grains per gallon boracic acid Caution Milk 11 per cent, added water Fined £3 and £1 11s. 6d. costs Milk 11 „ „ and 10 grains per gallon boracic acid Fined £1 and 23s. costs Milk 5 per cent, added water and 7 grains per gallon boracic acid Caution Milk 11 per cent, added water and 14 grains per gallon boracic acid Fined £1 and 23s. costs Milk 5 per cent, added water and 14 grains per gallon boracic acid Caution Milk 8 per cent, added water and 4 grains per gallon boracic acid Fined 15s. and 23s. costs Milk 11 per cent, added water and 7 grains per gallon boracic acid Fined £1 and 23s. costs Butter 12 per cent, excess of water Caution Milk 6 „ added water Caution Milk 4 „ „ Caution Butter 5 „ excess of water Caution Mustard 10 „ wheat flour and coloured with turmeric Caution Milk 15 grains per gallon boracic acid Caution Milk 12 per cent, deficient in fat Fined £1 and 23s. costs Milk 22 „ added water Fined £1 and 23s. costs Milk 5 „ „ Caution Milk 5 „ „ Caution Milk 5 „ „ Caution Milk 5 „ „ Caution Milk 4 „ „ and 15 grains per gallon boracic acid Caution Milk 5 per cent, added water Caution Milk 11 grains per gallon boracic acid Caution Milk 12 per cent, added water Fined £1 and 23s. costs Milk 11 „ „ Fined £1 and 23s. costs Milk 13 „ deficient in fat Fined £1 and 23s. costs Milk 6 grains per gallon boracic acid Caution Mustard 20 per cent, wheat flour and coloured with an organic dye Fined 10s. and 23s. costs Milk 10 per cent, deficient in fat Caution Butter 69 „ foreign fat Fined £4 and 23s. costs 133 Adulterated Articles—continued. Article. Extent of adulteration. Result. Butter 2 per cent, excess of water Caution Butter 3 „ „ Caution Butter 9 „ „ Caution Milk 10 „ added water Fined £1 and 23s. costs Milk 10 „ „ Fined £1 and 23s. costs Milk 6 „ „ Caution Milk 45 „ deficient in fat Fined £3 and 23s. costs Milk 18 „ added water Fined £3 and 23s. costs Milk 6 „ deficient in fat Caution Milk 14 „ added water Fined £2 and 23s. costs Milk 30 „ „ Fined £10 and 23s. costs Milk 15 „ „ Caution Pepper 50 „ wheat flour Fined £1 and 23s. costs Milk 36 ,, deficient in fat Fined £5 and 23s. costs Whisky 3 „ excess of water No action Whisky 11 „ „ „ No action Milk 3 „ added water Caution Milk 19 ,, „ and 25 grains per gallon boracic acid Fined £4 and 23s. costs Milk 4 per cent, added water Caution Milk 4 „ „ Caution Whisky 11 ,, excess of water No action Milk 13 „ deficient in fat Fined £2 and 23s. costs Milk 6 „ „ Caution Butter 4 ,, excess of water Caution Milk 20 „ deficient in fat Summons withdrawn Milk 9 „ added water and 10 per cent, deficient in fat Fined £1 Milk 7 per cent, added water Caution Milk 10 „ „ and 55 per cent, deficient in fat Fined £1 and 22s. costs Milk 24 per cent, added water Fined 30s. and 23s. costs Milk 19 „ „ Fined 25s. and 23s. costs Butter 20 „ excess of water Caution Butter 3 „ „ Caution Milk 13 „ added water Fined £2 and 23s. costs Butter 2 „ excess of water Caution Butter 16 „ „ Fined £5 and 23s. costs Butter 2 „ „ Caution Milk 3 „ added water Caution Milk 18 „ deficient in fat Fined 30s. and 23s. costs Milk 14 „ added water Fined 30s. and 23s. costs Butter 3 „ excess of water Caution Milk 22 „ deficient in fat Fined £2 10s. and 23s. costs 134 Adulterated Articles—continued. Article. Extent of adulteration. Result. Milk 25 per cent, deficient in fat Fined 30s. and 23s. costs Milk 10 „ added water Caution Milk 28 ,, ,, Fined £10 and 23s. costs Whisky 6 „ excess of water Caution Mustard 20 „ wheat flour Fined 5s. and 23s. costs Coffee 40 „ chicory Fined 10s. and 23s. costs Milk 3 „ added water Caution Milk 7 „ „ and 14per cent, deficient in fat Fined 20s. and 23s. costs Milk 24 per cent, deficient in fat Fined £2 and 21s. costs Butter 13 ,, excess of water Fined £3 and 23s. costs Milk 30 „ added water Fined £2 and 12s. 6d. costs Vinegar 13 „ deficient in Acetic Acid Caution Butter 100 „ margarine Fined £8 and 42s. costs Milk 14 „ deficient in fat Fined £2 and 12s. 6d. costs Butter 13 „ excess of water Fined £2 and 12s. 6d. costs Butter 10 „ „ „ Fined £2 and 12s. 6d. costs Milk 3 ,, added water Caution Milk 3 „ „ Caution Butter 100 ,, margarine No action Milk 6 „ deficient in fat Caution Butter 100 „ margarine Fined 10s. and 23s. costs Coffee 45 „ chicory Fined £1 and 23s. costs Milk 10 „ added water Fined 30s. and 23s. costs Milk 11 ,, deficient in fat and 2 per cent, added water Fined 10s. and 27s. costs Milk 10 per cent, deficient in fat Caution Milk 13 ,, added water Milk 10 ,, deficient in fat Caution Milk 30 „ „ „ Fined £3 and 23s. costs Milk 20 „ „ „ Fined 10s. and 23s. costs Milk 10 „ „ „ Caution Butter 19 „ excess of water Fined £4 Butter 22 ,, „ „ Fined £5 Butter 100 „ margarine Fined £1 and 23s. costs Butter 100 „ „ Fined 7s. and 23s. costs Milk 5 „ deficient in fat Caution Butter 100 „ margarine Fined £3 and 23s. costs Butter 100 ,, „ No action Milk 5 „ deficient in fat Caution 135 Adulterated Articles—continued. Article. Extent of adulteration. Result. Milk 6 per cent, deficient in fat Caution Milk 7 „ „ Caution Milk 15 „ added water Fined £2 and 23s. costs Coffee 55 „ chicory Fined £3 and 23s. costs Milk 6 „ added water Caution Milk 5 ,, deficient in fat Caution Milk 11 „ „ „ Caution Milk 7 „ „ „ Caution Milk 5 „ „ „ Caution Milk 6 „ „ „ Caution Butter 14 ,, excess of water Caution Milk 5 „ deficient in fat Caution Milk 16 „ „ „ Fined 30s. and 23s. costs Milk 17 „ „ „ Fined 30s. and 23s. costs Milk 4 „ „ „ Caution Milk 6 „ „ „ Caution Milk 5 „ „ „ Caution Milk 5 ,, added water Caution Butter 2 „ excess of water Caution Milk 6 „ deficient in fat Caution Milk 25„ „ „ Fined £1 Whisky 4 „ excess of water Caution Butter 16 „ „ Fined £2 and 12s. 6d. costs Butter 6 „ „ Caution Milk 5 „ added water Caution Milk 24 „ „ Fined £2 and 32s. 6d. costs Ground Ginger A mixture of ground cinnamon and cassia Fined £2 and 23s. costs Sago 100 per cent, tapioca Caution Milk 13 „ deficient in fat Fined £3 and 23s. costs Milk 60 grains boracic acid per gallon Caution Milk 50 per cent, deficient in fat Fined £3 and 23s. costs Milk 5 „ „ „ Caution Milk 5 „ ,, 1, and 29 per cent, added water Fined 1s. and 23s. costs Milk 13 per cent, deficient in fat Fined £3 and 23s. costs Milk 9 „ „ „ Caution Milk 43 „ „ „ Fined £4 and 23s. costs Milk 19 „ added water Fined £2 10s. and 23s. costs Milk 35 „ deficient in fat and 22 grains boracic acid Fined £2 and 23s. costs 136 Adulterated Articles—continued. Article. Extent of adulteration. Result. Milk 4 per cent, added water and 76 grains boracic acid Caution Milk 4 per cent, added water Caution Milk 11 ,, deficient in fat and 33 grains boracic acid Caution Milk 35 per cent, deficient in fat Fined £3 and 23s. costs Milk 12 grains boracic acid per gallon Caution Milk 16 per cent, deficient in fat Fined £2 and 23s. costs Milk 5 „ added water and 72 grains boracid acid Caution Milk 8 per cent, deficient in fat and 24 grains boracic acid Caution Milk 8 per cent, added water Caution Demerara Sugar 100 „ coloured crystals Caution Milk 5 „ deficient in fat Caution Milk 10 „ „ „ Fined £1 and 10s. 6d. costs Butter 18 „ excess of water Caution Milk Sweet 4 „ deficient in fat Caution Spirit of Nitre 20 „ „ nitrous ether Fined 10s. Milk 3 „ added water Caution Milk 6 „ deficient in fat, contained formalin Caution Butter 7 per cent, excess of water Caution Demerara Sugar 100 „ coloured crystals Fined £5 and 23s. costs Milk 14 ,, added water Fined £2 Milk 10 ,, „ Fined 30s. Milk 6 „ deficient in fat Caution Milk 3 „ „ and 31 grains boracic acid Caution Milk 53 per cent, deficient in fat Fined 25s. Milk 2 „ added water Caution Milk 3 „ „ „ Caution Butter 18 „ excess of water Fined 25s. Butter 2 „ „ „ Caution Milk 10 „ deficient in fat Warranty Butter 2 ,, excess of water Caution Milk 6 „ deficient in fat Caution Butter 5 „ excess of water Caution Milk 3 „ added water Caution Coffee 50 „ chicory Fined £2 and 23s. costs 137 Adulterated Articles—continued. Article. Extent of adulteration. Result. Milk 4 per cent, added water Caution Milk 2 „ „ Caution Butter 2 „ excess of water Caution Butter 3 „ „ „ Caution Milk 15 „ added water Fined £3 and 23s. costs Milk 5 „ deficient in fat Caution Milk 2 „ added water Caution Milk 3 „ „ Caution Butter 6 „ excess of water Caution Milk 11 ,, added water Fined £4 and 23s. costs Milk 3 „ „ Caution Butter 3 „ excess of water Caution Milk 3 „ added water Caution Milk 4 „ deficient in fat Caution Milk 2 „ added water Caution Demerara Sugar 100 ,, dyed crystals Fined £1 and 23s. costs Demerara Sugar 100 ,, ,, Fined £1 and 23s. costs Demerara Sugar 100 „ „ Fined £2 Butter 2 „ excess of water Caution Butter 8 „ „ „ Fined £5 and 23s. costs Milk 1 „ added water, 12 per cent, deficient in fat and coloured with an organic dye Fined £1 and 23s. costs Milk 2 per cent, added water Caution Milk 2 „ „ Caution Milk 3 „ „ Caution Demerara Sugar 100 ,, dyed crystals Fined £1 and 23s. costs Milk 3 „ added water Caution Milk 11 „ „ Fined 30s. Milk 4„ „ Caution Milk 4 „ „ Caution Milk 5 „ deficient in fat Caution Demerara Sugar 100 „ dyed crystals Fined £1 and 28s. costs Demerara Sugar 100 ,, ,, Dismissed. Informality of purchase Butter 2 „ excess of water Caution Mustard A few starch grains No action Demerara Sugar 100 per cent, dyed crystals Fined £1 and 23s. costs i3§ Adulterated Articles—continued. Article. Extent of Adulteration. Result. Demerara Sugar 1oo per cent, dyed crystals Fined £1 and 23s. costs Demerara Sugar 100 ,, „ Fined £1 and 23s. costs Demerara Sugar 100 „ „ Fined £1 and 23s. costs Demerara Sugar 100 „ „ Fined £1 and 23s. costs ra Sugar Traces of an organic dye Caution Demerara Sugar 1oo per cent, dyed crystals Fined £1 and 23s. costs Demerara Sugar 100 „ „ Fined £1 and 23s. costs Milk 5 „ added water Caution Butter 7 „ excess of water Caution Demerara Sugar 1oo ,, dyed crystals Fined £1 and 23s. costs Fined 10s. and 23s. costs Demerara Sugar 100 ,, ,, Demerara Sugar 100 ,, ,, Fined 10s. and 23s. costs Milk 5 ,, added water Caution Milk 6 „ deficient in fat Caution Milk 4 ,, added water Caution Milk 5 „ „ „ Caution Butter 1oo „ margarine Fined £3 3s. and 23s costs Milk 36 „ deficient in fat Fined 10s. 6d. and 23s costs Butter 100 „ margarine Fined 10s. 6d. and 23s costs Milk 7 „ added water Caution Milk 3 „ deficient in fat Caution Milk 28 „ added water Dismissed Demerara Sugar Traces of organic dye Caution Demerara Sugar 100 per cent, dyed crystals Fined 15s. and 23s. costs Demerara Sugar 100 ,, ,, Fined 15s. and 23s. costs Demerara Sugar 100 „ „ Fined 5s. and 23s. costs Milk 9 „ added water Fined £1 and 23s. costs 139 Adulterated Articles—continued. Article Extent of Adulteration. Result. Demerara Sugar 1oo per cent, dyed crystals Fined 10s. and 23s. costs Milk 1o „ deficient in fat Fined £2 Milk 22 ,, ,, ,, Fined £2 Whisky 5 „ excess of water No action Whisky 10 ,, ,, „ Fined £2 Milk 3 „ deficient in fat Caution Cocoa Ground cassia Caution Cocoa 25 per cent, cane sugar and 27 per cent, added starch Fined £2 2s. and 23s. costs Cocoa 25 per cent cane sugar and 28 per cent, added starch Fined £2 and 23s. costs Caution Mustard 5 per cent, wheat flour and coloured with turmeric Milk 6 per cent, deficient in fat Caution Milk 3 „ added water Caution Milk 10 „ deficient in fat Fined £2 and 23s. costs The fines and costs amounted to £332 8s. The fines and costs allowed by the Magistrate under the Public Health Act amounted to £245 5s. 6d. Total fines and costs, £577 13s. 6d. 140 I beg to express my indebtedness for the assistance that I received from the Sanitary Inspectors and Clerical Staff during the year, and the readiness with which they worked long after office hours and on Sundays during the outbreak of Small-pox. I have the honour to be, Mr. Mayor and Gentlemen, Your obedient Servant, D. L. THOMAS. Public Health Offices, 43, White Horse Street, Commercial Road East, E. June 18th, 1903. SANITARY INSPECTORS' REPORT. cox. lyon. twaits. johnson. woonton. wrack. cook. pavitt. willey. crook. mills. shepherd. white. flint. simpson. Inspection of Houses Let in Lodgings. totals. quaintrell stiles. Number of Inspections— House to house 681 590 357 357 681 668 278 484 581 514 310 356 883 545 674 1029 1235 10639 Miscellaneous 623 669 940 594 1161 675 1107 667 486 777 590 1200 565 811 479 ... ... 344 Complaints 56 145 160 175 122 99 154 138 61 160 168 I51 36 r56 130 ... ... 1912 Infectious diseases 461 405 485 361 168 191 396 322 193 317 497 277 162 201 359 ... ... 4795 Intimations served 465 489 921 724 938 498 517 888 55 2 644 662 792 604 751 977 129 166 10717 Statutory notices served 376 369 619 311 319 117 94 370 148 383 261 496 *34 210 659 37 71 4974 Houses re-visited 4876 35z7 4072 5468 3741 3792 4176 4641 3°37 3107 4478 4074 3476 3043 4695 2634 2533 65360 Summonses taken out under the Public Health (London) Act, 1891 2 9 11 3 1 ... 6 17 ... ... 41 ... 1 7 2 2 1 103 Samples taken under the Food & Drugs Acts 100 95 100 72 72 72 73 72 72 72 72 72 72 72 100 ... ... 1188 Summonses „ ,, „ ,, 5 9 11 9 9 6 16 6 5 3 4 9 6 8 14 ... ... 120 Houses or parts of houses cleansed 151 176 113 271 282 128 368 318 176 168 176 295 280 167 286 147 82 3584 Water supply to houses re-instated 19 26 18 60 15 4 23 40 9 16 8 20 24 8 19 6 ... 315 Drains constructed and reconstructed 49 121 157 106 56 63 89 141 7 78 87 101 76 65 160 ... ... 1356 „ cleansed and repaired 106 101 120 181 121 84 119 169 107 178 111 96 64 29 74 5 8 i 1673 ,, trapped 30 16 165 78 5 197 86 6 4 54 97 83 22 33 26 ... ... 902 New soil pipes fixed and ventilated 6 7 46 108 59 45 81 61 15 39 5a 10 18 4 23 ... ... 574 New closet pans and traps fixed 117 169 243 165 116 270 207 230 17 132 233 247 38 48 273 1 ... 2506 Closets provided with a water supply and flushing apparatus 29 63 225 123 96 278 211 170 161 160 211 161 42 22 168 ... 25 i 2145 Closets provided with light and ventilation 3 3 6 32 9 6 ... 15 7 ... 28 6 2 14 2 2 4 . 192 „ cleansed, repaired, &c. 9 23 132 92 42 269 230 118 52 48 199 188 39 47 87 52 35 ' 1664 Yards cleansed, repaved,or paving repaired 92 186 215 159 81 34 166 289 87 183 116 101 73 102 270 1 ... 2155 Wash-houses, forecourts, areas, &c., paved 44 27 63 75 13 12 72 29 8 7 48 1 30 , 24 31 ... ... 487 Sanitary dust receptacles provided 80 82 J53 146 60 9 35 z58 60 39 60 15 47 ' 32 373 2 1/ ' 1368 Sink, bath, and lavatory pipes and rainwater pipes disconnected 197 16 304 71 5 13 102 35 7 1 12 25 7 10 33 2 ... 840 Houses ventilated under lower floor H 86 32 53 15 ... 9 15 3 ... 33 3° ic 1 13 37 1 ... 351 Miscellaneous repairs, viz.: roofs, floors, gutters, &c. 46 122 208 499 184 171 263 495 244 334 310 287 234 . 267 309 76 1 492 Overcrowding in dwellings abated 5 10 89 15 150 3 48 21 43 27 61 22 47 82 4 46 61 771 Illegal occupation of underground rooms discontinued 2 *3 1 10 1 15 3 3 6 26 5 19 1 10 1 118 Manure receptacles provided or reconstructed 2 3 4 4 1 10 3 1 6 3 4 2 1 2 46 Offensive accumulations removed 3 5 10 25 18 67 202 12 19 4 221 118 11 18 19 10 1 ' 769 Workshops inspected 68 136 647 61 248 282 176 45 36 60 301 177 58 176 66 70 2607 ,, limewashed and cleansed 34 23 73 6 43 41 77 13 6 8 75 40 22 38 23 522 ,, ventilated and effluvium nuisances abated ... 3 12 2 5 11 18 1 ... ... 20 12 8 12 3 ... ... 107 Workshops, hoods provided to gas stoves ... ... 29 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 29 Overcrowding in workshops abated 3 1 21 16 2 7 5 2 5 6 1 1 5 4 ... ... 79 Additional W.C. accommodation provided for workpeople, &c. 9 9 12 20 15 6 29 4 13 5 21 2 1 8 9 2 ... 165 Bakehouses inspected 34 25 3i 43 26 21 38 24 r4 18 28 22 14 26 26 ... ... 390 „ cleansed 13 15 14 16 10 4 28 24 8 18 28 21 14 10 26 ... ... 249 Smoke nuisances abated 11 6 5 7 3 13 27 13 7 5 3 1 5 4 5 ... ... 125 Animals kept so as to constitute a nuisance removed ... ... 1 ... 4 1 8 10 2 3 16 3 ... 3 7 1 31 62 Cowhouses and slaughterhouses inspected J 2 6 9 8 5 20 ... 4 8 10 8 8 ... 5 5 ... ... 110 Dairies and milk shops inspected 94 102 146 176 122 76 116 91 43 48 206 108 24 73 41 ... ... 1466 Damp walls remedied 12 23 10 49 17 ... ... 14 ... 12 ... ... ... ... 8 ... ... 145 Cisterns cleansed and covered 3 ... 3 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 6 Urinals fixed ... ... 29 ... ... 3 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 32 Occupation of sheds as dwellings discontinue ... ... 1 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... 3 Basements closed ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2 2 Open fires in yards abolished ... ... ... ... 51 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 51 Canal Boats inspected ... ... ... 61 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 61 Areas and stables drained 17 4 23 ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 45 TABLE I. Vital Statistics of Whole District during 1902 and Previous Years. Metropolitan Borough of Stepney. Year Population estimated to Middle of each Year. Births. Total Deaths Registered in the District. Total Deaths in Public Institutions in the District. Deaths of nonresidents registered in Public Institutions in the District. Deaths of residents registered in Public Institutions beyond the District. Nett Deaths at all Ages belonging to the District. Number. Rate.* Under 1 Year of Age. At all Ages. Number. Rate per 1,000 Births Registered. Number. Rate.* Number. Rate.* 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 1892 285014 10963 38.4 1787 162 7029 24.6 2298 1054 1122 7097 24.9 1893 286267 11l86 39.07 1938 173.2 7401 25.8 2692 1365 1288 7324 25.5 1894 286700 10972 38.2 1758 160.2 6397 22.3 2740 1234 1311 6398 22.3 1895 290270 11339 39.06 2048 180.6 7l60 24.6 2819 I309 1296 7087 24 1896 295708 11564 39.1 1878 162.4 6481 21.9 2606 1280 1222 6423 21.7 1897 298308 1141o 38.2 1888 !65.4 6529 21.8 2797 1398 1260 6391 21.4 1898 299507 11390 38.02 1968 172.6 6976 23.2 2858 1394 1219 6801 22.7 1899 309926 11241 36.2 1958 174.1 7045 22.7 3063 1525 1282 6822 22 19oo 312340 11167 35.7 1854 166 6792 21.7 3128 1516 1296 6572 21 1901 298600 11o52 37 1817 165 654I 21.9 2813 995 671 6217 20.8 Averages for years 1892—1901 296264 11228 37.8 1889 168.1 6835 23 2781 1307 1196 6713 22.6 1902 300551 11294 37.5 1760 155.8 6073 20.2 2821 925 1015 6163 20.5 * Rates 1n Columns 4, 8 and 13 calculated per 1,000 of estimated populat1on. Note.—The deaths to be included in Column 7 of this table are the whole of those registered during the year as having actually occurred within the district or division. The deaths to be included in Column 12 are the number in Column 7, corrected by the subtraction of the number in Column 10 and the addition of the number in Column II. By the term " Non-residents " is meant persons brought into the district on account sickness or infirmity, and dying in public institutions there ; and by the term " Residents" is meant persons who have been taken out of the district on account of sickness or infirmity, ..id have died in public institutions elsewhere. The " Public institutions " to be taken into account for the purposes of these ' ables are those into which persons are habitually received on account of sickness or infirmity, such as hospitals, workhouses and lunatic asylums. A list of the Institutions in respect of the deaths in which corrections have been made should be given on the back of this Table. TABLE II. Vital Statistics of separate Localities in igo2 and Previous Years. NAMES OF LOCALITIES. 1.—LIMEHOUSE DISTRICT. 2.—ST. GEORGE'S DISTRICT. 3.—MILE END DISTRICT. 4.—WHITECHAPEL DISTRICT Year. Population Estimated to Middle of each Year. Births Registered. Deaths at all Ages. Deaths under One Year. Population Estimated to Middle of each Year. Births Registered. Deaths at all Ages. Deaths under One Year. Population Estimated to Middle of each Year. Births Registered. Deaths at all Ages. Deaths under One Year. Population Estimated to Middle of each Year. Births Registered. Deaths at all Ages. Deaths under One Year. 1892 57599 1940 1468 366 45343 1897 1262 292 107811 4035 2489 641 74261 3111 1878 488 1893 57600 1954 1597 394 45493 1966 I411 366 108006 4186 2430 665 75168 3080 1886 513 1894 57600 1911 1396 327 45360 1877 I202 282 108242 4022 2206 658 75498 3162 1594 491 1895 57600 2050 1515 456 45227 1972 1332 346 108443 4205 2436 763 79000 3112 1804 483 1896 58300 2012 1385 368 47506 2098 1183 322 111226 4297 2252 732 78676 3157 1603 456 1897 58508 1997 1462 386 47917 2029 1263 397 111883 4255 2085 643 80000 3129 1581 462 1898 58728 1912 1390 388 48241 2095 1193 407 112538 4275 2642 730 80000 3108 I576 443 1899 58807 1933 1500 418 48560 2068 1312 412 117559 4261 2346 690 85000 2979 1644 438 1900 58944 1839 1529 428 48875 2175 1187 308 119521 4273 2311 713 85000 2880 1545 405 1901 57937 1891 1427 399 49068 2119 II29 392 112827 4184 2139 627 78768 2858 1522 399 Averages of Years 1892 to 1901 58162 1943 1466 393 47159 2029 1247 352 111805 4199 2333 686 79137 3057 1663 457 1902 58071 1869 1374 369 49658 2191 1100 351 113720 4425 2166 657 79102 2809 1523 330 TABLE III. Cases of Infectious Disease notified during the year 1902. Notifiable Disease. Cases notified in Whole District. Total Cases notified in each Locality. No. of Cases removed to Hospitals from each Locality. At all Ages. At Ages—Years. 1 2 3 4 1 2 3 4 Under 1. 1 to 5. 5 to 15. 15 to 25. 25 to 65 65 and upwards Limehouse. St. George's Mile End. Whitechapel. Limehouse. St. George's Mile End. Whitechapel. Small-pox 1242 19 121 193 345 541 23 155 I09 536 442 153 109 532 441 Cholera ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Diphtheria 641 27 345 2 12 35 21 1 135 124 222 160 Il6 100 182 129 Membranous Croup 33 I 32 ... ... ... ... 3 4 13 13 ... ... ... ... Erysipelas 437 31 29 45 52 252 28 80 91 141 125 14 4 15 24 Scarlet Fever 954 22 518 344 50 20 ... 191 4 399 250 165 105 329 229 Typhus Fever 1 ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... 1 ... Enteric Fever 273 2 25 97 94 55 90 50 94 39 77 44 79 28 Relapsing Fever ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Continued Fever ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Puerperal Fever 21 ... ... ... 9 12 ... 5 3 5 8 ... ... ... ... Plague ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Chicken Pox 1548 214 965 343 16 10 ... 326 317 543 362 ... ... ... ... Totals 5150 316 2035 1235 601 911 52 985 812 1954 1399 525 362 1138 851 TABLE IV.— Causes of, and Ages at, Death during Year 1902. Causes op Death. Deaths in or belonging to whole District at subjoined Ages. Deaths in or belonging to Localities (at all Ages). All ages. Under 1 year. 1 and under 5 5 and under 15. 15 and under 25 25 and under 65 65 and upwards Limehouse. St. George's Mile End. Whitechapel. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Small Pox 252 18 39 32 36 120 7 35 20 103 94 Measles 158 50 107 1 ... ... ... 41 28 45 44 Scarlet fever 26 2 14 9 1 ... ... 7 1 10 8 Whooping-cough 188 84 104 ... ... ... 52 24 85 27 Diphtheria and membranous croup 79 9 54 15 ... 1 ... 16 19 26 18 Croup 2 I 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... 2 ... Fever- Typhus ... ... ... ... l6 8 ... ... ... ... ... Enteric 33 ... 2 7 ... 7 3 9 4 Other continued ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Epidemic influenza 59 1 1 1 2 30 24 6 29 11 13 Cholera ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Plague ... 96 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Diarrhoea 117 13 ... 1 1 6 30 37 39 11 Enteritis 188 152 22 1 ... 11 2 39 54 54 41 Puerperal fever 14 ... ... ... 4 10 ... 3 ... 3 8 Erysipelas 19 10 ... ... ... 7 2 3 6 1 9 Other septic diseases 46 7 4 8 8 16 3 9 10 14 13 Phthisis 576 2 11 16 70 455 22 130 105 168 173 Other tubercular diseases 233 90 94 31 4 10 4 43 49 89 52 Cancer, malignant disease 201 ... ... ... 2 131 68 45 30 64 62 Bronchitis 586 143 53 4 3 180 203 120 114 192 160 Pneumonia 683 204 222 22 16 165 54 151 139 222 171 Pleurisy 27 ... 2 ... 2 15 8 4 4 13 6 Other diseases of Respiratory organs 53 7 13 2 3 20 8 13 13 15 12 Alcoholism 102 ... ... ... 3 92 7 37 11 28 26 Cirrhosis of Liver Venereal diseases 28 21 1 ... 1 5 ... 3 4 5 16 Premature birth 159 159 ... ... ... ... ... 47 20 56 36 Diseases and accidents of parturition 23 7 ... ... ... 16 ... 6 5 8 160 4 Heart diseases 444 13 5 31 30 250 115 80 77 127 Accidents 261 74 51 27 12 76 21 66 37 93 65 Suicides 27 1 3 20 3 5 1 12 9 Old age 260 ... ... ... ... 4 256 76 19 130 35 Convulsive diseases, as hydrocephalus, infantile menengitis, convulsions and teething 304 232 65 7 ... ... 68 49 131 56 Wasting diseases, marasmus, atrophy, debility, want of breast milk, etc. 289 267 22 ... ... ... 63 53 130 43 Rheumatic fever 7 ... ... 1 3 3 ... 1 1 4 1 All other causes 719 58 27 37 37 381 179 158 138 244 179 All causes 6163 1707 927 253 257 2027 992 1374 1100 2166 1523 141 LIST OF COWHOUSES. Situation. Number of cows kept on the last licensing day. Situation. Number of cows kept on the last licensing day. 13, Beaumont Street 6 75, Prusom Street 2 63, Brook Street 19 Plough Square 15 21, Black Lion Yard 30 57, Prince's Square 33 Black Boy Yard, Globe Road 4 5, Russell Street 4 Batson Street 2 Railway Arch, Royal Mint Street 25 408, Commercial Road 5 77, Commercial Road 26 42 and 44, Ropemaker's Fields 9 147, Cannon Street Road 12 162, Rhodeswell Road — 155, 156, 157, Railway Arches, Drewton Street 39 1, Sidney Street 20 109, Sidney Street — 44, Dunk Street 13 150, Sidney Street 16 16, Grey Eagle Street 8 Shepherd's Place, Saw Yard 8 12, Hilton Street 8 5, Sage Street 16 1, Hannibal Road 25 15, Tilley Street 15 66, Harford Street 4 Tredegar Dairy, Upper Montague Street 71 37, Hanbury Street 18 42, Jubilee Street 44 11, Umberstone Street 14 15, Maroon Street 12 1, Upper Chapman Street 17 28, Mile End Place 4 37, White Horse Street 22 5, Meeting House Alley 10 7, White Lion Street 3 25, Norfolk Street 47 147, West Street 19 36, Old Church Road 142 64, White Horse Lane 10 33, Old Montague Street 14 33, St. Anne's Road 17 64, Pelham Street 16 LIST OF SLAUGHTERHOUSES. 301, Commercial Road. 6, Morris Street. 169, Commercial Road. 251, Oxford Street. 2, High Street, Whitechapel. 88, Redmans Road. 3, High Street, Whitechapel. 26, Three Colt Street. 4, High Street, Whitechapel. 160, White Horse Street. 42, Jubilee Street. 49, Wapping High Street. 199, Mile End Road. 142 LIST OF STREETS in the Borough of Stepney, their situation and the number of Infectious Diseases that occurred in them during the year. Streets. Districts. Small Pox. Scarlet Fever. Typhoid Fever Diphtheria. Membranous Croup. Erysipelas. Total. A Abbott's Cottages Limehouse 1 ... ... ... ... 1 Abel's Buildings Whitechapel ... ... ... ... ... ... Acland Street Limehouse 3 ... ... ... ... 3 Adelaide Place Spitalfields ... ... ... ... ... ... Adelina. Grove Mile End 1 1 ... 1 ... 3 Agatha Street St. George's . . ... 1 ... ... 1 Agnes Street Limehouse 2 ... .. ... ... ... 2 Agra Place St. George's ... ... ... ... ... Albany Street Ratcliff and Mile End 1 ... 1 ... 2 Albert Buildings, Cartwright Street Aldgate ... ... ... ... 1 1 Albert Cottages, Albert Street Mile End ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Albert Square Ratcliff ... 1 ... ... ... 1 2 Albert Street Shadwell ... 1 ... ... ... 1 2 Albert Street Buildings Shadwell ... ... ... ... ... ... Albion Cottages Shadwell ... ... ... ... ... ... Albion Street Mile End 4 2 ... ... ... ... 6 Albion Terrace Limehouse ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Alderney Place Mile End ... ... ... ... ... ... Alderney Road Mile End 2 ... ... ... ... ... 2 Albert Street Mile End New Town ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Albion Court, Redman's Row Mile End ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Albert Workshops, Grea Pearl Street Spialfields ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Arbour Square Mile End ... 1 ... 1 ... ... 2 Alexander Buildings, Commercial Street Spitalfields ... 2 ... ... ... ... 2 Alfred Buildings, Cartwright Street Aldgate ... ... ... ... ... 1 1 Alie Place Whitechapel ... ... ... ... ... ... .. Alma Road Mile End 5 ... 3 ... ... 1 9 Amber Place St. George's ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Amoy Place Limehouse ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Anchor Street Limehouse ... ... .. ... ... ... ... Angel Alley Whitechapel ... ... .. ... ... ... ... Ann Street Ratcliff 1 ... ... .. ... 2 3 Ann Street Mile End 3 ... ... ... ... ... 3 Ann's Place, Wentworth Street Spitalfields ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Antcliff Street Mile End ... 1 . 2 ... ... 8 Anthony Street St. George's ... 3 ... 2 ... 1 6 143 Returns of Infectious Diseases—continued. Streets. Districts. Small Pox. Scarlet Fever. Typhoid Fever Diphtheria. Membranous Croup. Erysipelas. Total. Argyle Road Mile End 1 1 1 ... ... ... 3 Arno Place Limehouse ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Antill Road Mile End 2 4 ... 1 ... ... 7 Artillery Lane Spitalfields and Old Artillery Ground .. ... ... ... ... ... Artillery Passage Ditto. 1 ... ... ... ... ... 1 Artichoke Hill St. George's ... ... ... 2 ... 2 Ashcroft Road Mile End 1 2 .. ... ... ... 3 Assembly Mews Mile End ... ... ... ... ... ... Assembly Passage Mile End ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Assam Street Whitechapel ... 2 . ... ... ... 2 Aston Street Limehouse 1 2 2 4 ... ... 9 Ashford House, Puma Court Spitalfields ... 1 ... ... ... 1 Augustine House Mile End New Town ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Apsley Street Mile End ... 2 . ... ... 2 Antill Terrace Mile End ... ... .. ... ... ... ... B Back Church Lane Whitechapel and St. George's ... 8 ... 1 ... 9 Baggally Street Mile End ... 1 .. ... ... ... 1 Baker Court Mile End ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Baker Street Mile End 1 ... . ... 1 ... 2 Bale Street Mile End 1 1 1 ... ... 1 4 Ball's Building Ratcliff ... ... ... ... ... ... Bancroft Road Mile End 90 5 ... 3 ... 2 100 Barnes Street Ratcliff 5 2 ... . ... 1 8 Barnett Street St. George's ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Batson Street Limehouse ... ... .. ... ... ... Batty Gardens St. George's ... 1 1 ... ... ... 2 Batty Street St. George's ... ... ... 1 ... ... 1 Baythorne Street Mile End 1 2 ... ... ... ... 3 Beachcroft Buildings, Brook Street Ratcliff ... ... ... ... ... ... Beagle Street Whitechapel ... ... ... ... ... ... Beard's Place Limehouse ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Beaumont Square Mile End 2 5 ... ... ... ... 7 Beaumont Street Mile End ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Beccles Street Limehouse ... ... ... ... .. 4 4 Bedford Street Mile End 1 5 ... 1 ... 1 8 Belgrave Street Ratcliff 2 1 ... 1 ... 2 6 Bell Court Spitalfields ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Bell Lane Spitalfields 6 2 ... 2 ... ... 10 Bennett's Place Spitalfields ... ... ... 1 ... ... 1 144 Returns of Infectious Diseases—continued. Streets. Districts. Small Pox Scarlet Fever Typhoid Fever Diphtheria. Membranous Croup. Erysipelas. Total. Ben Jonson Road Limehouse and Mile End 3 ... 1 ... ... ... 4 Bere Street Ratcliff ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Bermuda Street Mile End ... ... . 1 ... 1 2 Berner Street St. George's 2 ... ... 2 ... 1 5 Berney Buildings St. George's ... ... ... ... 1 1 Bett Street St. George's ... 1 ... ... ... 1 2 Birchfield Street Limehouse ... ... ... ... ... Bird Street St. George's ... ... ... 1 ... ... 1 Bewley Buildings Shadwell ... 1 ... ... ... ... 1 Black Bull Court Ratcliff ... .. ... ... ... ... ... Bellevue Place, Cleveland Street Mile End ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Black Eagle Street Spitalfields . ... ... ... ... ... ... Black Lion Yard Whitechapel 1 ... ... ... ... ... 1 Blackwall Buildings, Thomas Street Whitechapel 4 2 1 1 ... ... 8 Blakesley Street St. George's 1 ... . ... 1 2 Bloomfield Road Mile End ] .. ... 4 ... .. 5 Blossom Court Norton Folgate ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Blossom Street Norton Folgate ... 1 ... 1 ... ... 2 Blount Street Limehouse 1 2 2 ... ... 5 Boarded Entry St. George's ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Bohn Street Mile End .. ... ... ... ... ... ... Booth Street Spitalfields and Mile End New Town ... 2 2 3 ... 1 8 Booth Street Buildings Spitalfields ... 3 1 ... ... 2 6 Bostock Street St. George's ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Boundary Court Spitalfields and Mile End New Town ... ... ... ... ... ... Bow Common Lane Mile End and Limehouse 5 3 4 5 ... 2 19 Bowyer Street Ratcliffe ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Bowyer's Buildings St. George's ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Boyd Street St. George's ... 1 . ... 2 3 Bradwell Street Mile End 2 2 1 ... ... ... 5 Brady Street Wliitechapel ... ... 1 ... ... ... 1 Brady Street Buildings Whitechapel ... 9 ... 4 ... 1 14 Brantridge Street Mile End 19 ... 1 ... 1 ... 21 Breezer's Hill St. George's ... ... ... ... ... .. ... Brenton Street Limehouse 1 1 ... 1 ... ... 3 Brewer's Court Shadwell ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Brewhouse Court Wapping ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Brewhouse Lane Wapping ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Brick Lane Spitalfields and Whitechapel 23 1 1 3 1 3 32 Bridge Street Mile End 8 10 ... 2 ... 3 23 145 Returns of Infectious Diseases—continued. Streets. Districts. Small Pox. Scarlet Fever. Typhoid Fever Diphtheria. Membranous Croup. Erysipelas. Total. Bridge Terrace Limehouse ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Britton's Court St. George's ... ... .. ... ... ... ... Boar's Head Yard Wliitechapel ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Brilliant Street Mile End ... ... ... ... ... ... Bower Street, Commercial Road Limehouse ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Broad Street Ratcliff ... 1 ... 2 ... ... 3 Bromhead Road Mile End ... ... ... ... ... . ... Bromhead Street Mile End ... 2 ... 2 ... 1 5 Bromley Street Ratcliff 1 1 ... 1 ... 1 4 Brook Street Ratcliff 1 ... 2 2 ... 3 8 Browning's Court St. George's ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Brownson's Court, Great Alie Street Whitechapel ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Brunswick Buildings, Goulston Street Whitechapel 5 2 ... 8 1 3 19 Brunswick Place Ratcliff ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Brunswick Street St. George's ... 1 ... 2 ... ... 3 Brunton's Cottages Ratcliff ... .. ... .. ... ... ... Brunton's Place Ratcliff ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Brushfield Street Spitalfields and Old Artillery Ground 1 ... 2 1 1 ... 5 Buckeridge Street Mile End ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Buckle Street Wliitechapel ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Buckle Street Buildings Whitechapel ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Bull Court Whitechapel ... ... ... ... .. ... ... Bull Stake Court Whitechapel ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Bulwer House, Pelham Street Whitechapel . 1 ... ... ... ... 1 Burdett Road Limehouse and Mile End 8 23 2 7 ... 1 41 Burgess Street Limehouse .. 7 ... ... ... ... 7 Buross Street St. George's ... 1 ... ... ... ... 1 Burr Street Whitechapel ... 1 ... ... ... ... 1 Burton's Entry Ratcliff ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Butcher Bow Ratcliff ... ... 1 1 ... ... 2 Butler Street Spitalfields 1 1 ... ... ... ... 2 Buttress Gardens Mile End New Town ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Buttress Street Mile End New Town ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Bushel Street St. George's ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Buxton Street Mile End New Town 2 4 ... 2 ... 3 11 c Cable Street Shadwell and St. George's 11 9 ... 13 ... 8 41 Cadiz Street Mile End 38 ... 1 4 ... 2 45 K 146 Returns of Infectious Diseases—continued. Streets. Districts. Small Pox. Scarlet Fever Typhoid Fever Diphtheria. MemDranous Croup. Erysipelas. Total. Calverley Street Mile End ... ... ... 3 ... ... 3 Cambridge Road Mile End ... 3 1 1 ... 2 7 Cameron Place Mile End ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Canal Road Mile End 3 2 1 1 ... 1 8 Cannon Place Mile End and chapel ... 1 ... ... ... ... 1 Carlton Road Mile End 1 ... ... 1 ... ... 2 Carlton Square Mile End ... 1 ... ... ... ... 1 Carter Street Mile End 1 2 ... ... ... ... 3 Carter Street Spitalfields ... ... ... ... ... 1 1 Caroline Place Limehouse ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Caroline Street Ratcliff ... 1 ... ... ... 1 2 Carrick's Buildings Limehouse ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Carr Street Limehouse 5 1 3 ... ... 1 10 Cartwright Street Whitechapel ... ... ... ... ... ... . . . Casson Street Whitechapel ... 6 ... ... ... ... 6 Castle Court Whitechapel ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Catherine Terrace Whitechapel ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Causeway Court Ratcliff ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Cayley Street Limehouse ... 1 1 ... ... ... 2 Cecil Street Mile End 2 1 ... ... ... ... 3 Cephas Street Mile End 1 2 ... 2 ... 2 7 Caroline Place, Globe Road Mile End ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Cannon Street Road St. George's ... 6 ... 2 ... 6 14 Challis Court St. George's ... 1 ... ... 1 1 3 Chamber Court Whitechapel ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Chambers Square Wapping ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Chamber Street Whitechapel ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Chancery Place Shadwell ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Chandler Street St. George's ... ... ... ... ... ... Chapel Place Norton Eolgate ... 1 ... ... ... ... 1 Chapel Place Mile End ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Chapel Street Spitalfields ... ... ... 1 ... ... 1 Chapman Place St. George's ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Charles Place Shadwell ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Charlotte Court, Hunt Street Mile End New Town ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Charles Street Mile End 1 4 2 3 ... 1 11 Chaseley Street Ratcliff ... 1 ... ... ... ... 1 Chicksand Street Mile End New Town ... 3 ... ... ... 1 4 Chicksand Place Mile End New Town ... ... ... 1 ... ... 1 Chigwell Hill St. George's ... ... ... ... ... 1 ] Chiver's Court Limehouse 2 ... ... ... ... ... 2 Christian Street St. George's ... 5 ... ... 1 ... 6 Choppin's Court St. George's ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Christopher Court Whitechapel ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 147 Returns of Infectious Diseases—continued. Streets Districts. Small Pox. .... . Scarlet Fever. Typhoid|Fever Diphtheria. Membranous Croup. Erysipelas. Total. Church Court Wapping ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Church Lane Whitechapel ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Church Passage Spitalfields ... ... 1 1 ... ... 2 Church Row Limehouse ... 3 2 2 ... 2 9 Church Street Holy Trinity ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Church Street Wapping ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Chusan Place Limehouse ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Claremont Place Mile End 1 ... 1 ... ... ... 2 Clark Street Mile End ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Clayden's Buildings Limehouse ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Clegg Street St. George's ... ... 1 ... ... 1 2 Clemence Street Limehouse ... 2 ... ... ... ... 2 Cleveland Grove Mile End 1 ... ... ... ... 1 Cholsey Buildings, Booth Street Spitalfields ... ... ... 1 ... 3 4 Church Street Mile End New Town ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Clinton House, Pelham Street Mile End New Town ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Cleveland Street Mile End 1 ... ... 2 ... ... 4 Clinton Road Mile End 3 ... ... ... ... 2 5 Clive Street Mile End ... 1 ... ... ... ... 1 Clifford House (Wellclose Square) St. George's ... ... ... ... ... ... Cobbs Street Whitechapel ... ... 1 ... ... ... 1 Coborn Road Mile End 1 ... ... ... ... ... 1 Coburg Court Spitalfields ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Cohen's Court Mile End ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Coke Street Mile End 1 ... ... ... ... ... 1 Colchester Street Whitechapel ... ... ... ... ... ... Coleman Street Shadwell 1 ... ... 1 ... ... 2 College Buildings, Wentworth Street Whitechapel ... 2 ... 2 ... 4 College Street Mile End ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Collhurst villas, Devonshire Street Mile End ... ... ... ... ... ... Collingwood Street Ratcliff ... ... ... 2 ... 2 Colmar Street Mile End 6 ... ... ... ... ... 6 Cologne Street Mile End ... 2 ... ... ... 1 3 Commercial Road Whitechapel, St. George's, Mile End, Limehouse 4 16 8 6 ... 5 34 Commercial Street Whitechapel and Spitalfields 17 6 2 ... ... 2 27 Commodore Street Mile End 6 1 ... ... ... 1 8 Conder Street Limehouse 1 2 5 ... ... 1 9 Copenhagen Place Limehouse ... 2 3 2 ... 1 8 Copley Street Mile End 5 2 ... ... ... 1 8 k 2 148 Returns of Infectious Diseases—continued. Streets. Descriptions. Small Pox. Scarlet Fever. Typhoid Fever Diphtheria. Membranous Croup. Erysipelas. Total. Copos Buildings Limehouse ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Copperfield Road Mile End ... ... 1 ... ... 1 2 Corbett's Court Whitechapel ... 2 ... ... ... 1 3 Cordelia Street Mile End ... ... ... 2 ... ... 2 Cornwall Place Mile End ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Cornwall Road Mile End ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Cornwall Square Mile End ... ... ... ... ... ... Cornwall Street St. George's 2 1 ... 1 ... 2 6 Cosh's Buildings, Dunstan's Place, Brook Street Ratcliff ... 3 1 ... ... ... 4 Cosh's Buildings, School House Lane Ratcliff 4 ... ... ... ... ... 4 Cottage Court Mile End ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Cottage Court Mile End ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Cottage Grove Mile End 1 1 ... ... ... ... 2 Cotton Street Whitechapel ... 2 ... ... ... ... 2 Court Street Whitechapel ... 1 ... ... ... ... 1 Cowley Street St. George's 1 ... 1 1 ... ... 3 Cox Square Spitalfields ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Cranford Cottages Ratcliff ... ... ... 2 ... ... 2 Cressy Houses Mile End 1 1 ... 3 ... ... 5 Cressy Place Mile End ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Crispin Street Spitalfields 7 ... ... ... ... 2 9 Coutts Road Mile End 1 1 2 ... ... 2 6 Cross Street Whitechapel ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Cross Street St. George's ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Cross Street Ratcliff ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Crown Court Spitalfields 1 ... ... ... ... ... 1 Cross Street Limehouse ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Crebe Court Mile End ... ... ... ... ... ... ... D Dalgleish Place Limehouse ... 1 ... ... ... ... 1 Dalgleish Street Limehouse ... 2 ... 1 ... 1 4 Dakin Street Limehouse ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Davis Avenue, Hunt Street Mile End New Town ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Davis Mansions, New Goulston Street Whitechapel 1 ... 1 11 ... 1 14 Davis Terrace, Hunt Street Mile End New Town ... 1 ... ... ... ... 1 Deal Street Whitechapel ... ... ... ... * * * ... ... Dean Street St. George's 2 1 ... ... ... ... 3 Dellow Street Shadwell ... 8 ... 1 ... 1 5 149 Returns of Infectious Diseases—continued. Streets. Districts. Small Pox. Scarlet Fever Typhoid Fever Diphtheria. Membranous Croup. Erysipelas. Total. Dellow Street Buildings Shadwell ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Dempsey Street Mile End 1 4 ... 3 ... ... 8 Denmark Street St. George's 1 1 ... 2 ... ... 4 Devonport Street Ratcliff ... ... ... 1 ... ... 1 Devonshire Place Limehouse ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Devonshire Street Mile End 2 5 1 3 ... 2 14 Diggon Street Mile End 3 3 2 ... ... ... 8 Dixon Street Limehouse 1 2 1 ... ... ... 4 Dock Street Whitechapel and Wapping 1 ... ... ... ... ... 1 Dod Street Limehouse ... ... 1 ... ... ... 1 Dora Street Limehouse 1 4 ... ... ... ... 5 Dongola Street Mile End 1 1 ... l ... ... 3 Dorset Street Ratcliff 1 ... ... ... 1 2 Dorset Street Spitalfields 74 ... ... ... ... 3 77 Doveton Street Mile End ... 1 ... ... ... ... 1 Drew's Buildings, Juniper Street Shadwell 3 2 ... ... ... ... 5 Drew's Buildings, High Street Shadwell ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Drew's Buildings, Elbow Lane Shadwell ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Drewton Street Ratcliff ... 3 ... ... ... 1 4 Driver's Buildings Mile End ... ... ... 1 ... ... 1 Drum Yard Whitechapel ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Duckett Street Mile End 18 4 1 7 ... 2 32 Dudley Terrace Mile End ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Duke Shore Alley Limehouse ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Duke Street Old Artillery Ground ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Duncan Street Whitechapel ... ... ... 1 ... ... 1 Dundee Street Wapping 1 ... 2 ... ... 1 4 Dunk Street Mile End New Town 1 2 1 1 ... 1 6 Dunstan's House Mile End 1 1 ... 4 ... ... 6 Dupont Street Limehouse 2 ... 6 1 ... 1 10 Durer Place St. George's ... ... ... 1 ... ... 1 Dunstan's Place Ratcliff ... 1 1 ... ... 3 Durham Row Ratcliff 3 ... ... ... ... ... 3 Durward Street Whitechapel ... ... 2 ... ... 5 E East Arbour Street Mile End ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Eagle Place Mile End New Town ... 2 ... ... ... ... 2 Eagle Place Mile End ... 1 ... 2 ... ... 3 Eele Street, King Edward Street Mile End New Town ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Easington Buildings Whitechapel ... 2 ... ... ... l 3 150 Returns of Infectious Diseases—continued. Streets. Districts. Small Pox. Scarlet Fever. Typhoid Fever Diphtheria. Membranous Croup. Erysipelas. Total. Eastbury Terrace Mile End ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Eastfield Street Limehouse 11 5 1 2 2 1 22 East India Dock Road Limehouse ... ... 1 ... ... 1 Eastman's Court Spitalfields ... ... ... ... ... ... ... East Mount Street Whitechapel ... 1 ... 1 ... ... 2 East Pier Wapping ... ... ... ... ... ... ... East Smitlifield Wapping ... ... ... ... ... ... Eaton Place Mile End 1 2 ... 1 ... ... 4 Ebenezer Place Limehouse ... ... ... ... ... I 1 Edinburgh Road Mile End ... ... ... ... ... Edward's Road Mile End 7 ... 2 ... ... ... 9 Edward Street Mile End ... ... 1 ... ... ... 1 Elbow Lane Shadwell ... ... 1 ... ... 1 Elder Court Norton Folgate ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Elder Street Norton Folgate ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Elizabeth Cottages St. George's ... ... ... ... ... ... Elizabeth Plaoe Limehouse ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Elizabeth Place Whitechapel • • • ... ... ... ... ... Ellen Court St. George's ... .. ... ... ... ... ... Ellen Place St. George's ... ... ... ... ... ... Ellen Street St. George's ... 1 ... 1 ... 1 3 Elm Row Shadwell ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Elsa Street Limehouse 2 1 3 5 ... 3 14 Eltham Place Mile End ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Ely Place Whitechapel ... ... ... l ... 2 3 Ely Terrace Mile End 4 3 ... 2 ... 1 10 Emanuel's Almshouses Wapping ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Emery Place, Butler Street Spitalfields ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Emmot Street Mile End 2 1 ... ... 1 1 5 Endive Street Limehouse ... ... 3 ... ... ... 3 En tick Street Mile End 3 ... 1 ... ... ... 4 Eric Street Mile End 1 1 1 ... ... ... 3 Ernest Street Mile End 17 3 ... 3 ... 2 25 Essex Street Mile End ... 1 ... 1 ... ... 2 Essian Street Mile End ... 1 1 ... ... ... 2 Everard Street St. George's ... ... ... ... ... 1 1 Ewing Street Mile End 1 ... ... ... ... ... 1 Exmouth Street Mile End 1 1 1 8 ... 1 7 F Pair Street Mile End ... 1 1 ... ... ... 2 Fairclough Street St. George's ... 1 ... ... ... ... 1 Faith Street Mile End ... ... ... 1 ... ... 1 Farmer's Row Limehouse ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Farrance Street Limehouse 1 1 2 ... ... ... 4 Fashion Court Spitalfields ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Returns of Infectious Diseases continued. Streets. Districts. Small Pox Scarlet Fever Typhoid Fever Diphtheria. Membranous Croup. Erysipelas. Total. Fashion Street Spitalfields 1 2 ... ... 1 ... 4 Fenton Street St. George's ... 1 I 3 1 ... 6 Ficklin Buildings St. George's ... 1 ... 1 ... ... 2 Fieldgate Street Whitechapel 1 2 ... 3 ... 2 8 Finch Street Whitechapel and Mile End New Town 1 ... ... 1 ... ... 2 Five Bell Alley Limehouse ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Fleur-de-Lis Buildings Norton Folgate ... ... ... 1 ... ... 1 Fleur-de-Lis Street Norton Folgate ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Floreston Street Mile End 3 1 ... 1 ... ... 5 Flower and Dean Street Spitalfields 39 ... ... 1 ... 1 41 Ferrier's Court Mile End ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Freeman's Cottages Mile End ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Ford Square Mile End ... ... ... ... ... ... Fordham Street Mile End 1 3 ... 1 ... ... 5 Forrester Street Mile End 1 1 ... ... ... 1 3 Fort Sti'eet Old Artillery Ground ... 3 ... ... ... ... 3 Fournier Street Spitalfields ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Frederick Place Mile End 1 ... ... ... ... 1 2 Freeman Street Spitalfields 1 ... ... ... 2 1 4 French Court St. George's ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Friar's Hill St. George's ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Frimley Street Mile End 1 1 1 ... ... ... 3 Frostic Mansions Whitechapel ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Frostic Place Whitechapel ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Frying Pan Alley Spitalfields 2 ... ... 1 ... ... 3 Fulcher's Buildings Mile End ... ... ... ... 1 ... 1 G Garden Street, Smith Place Mile End ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Gainsborough Road Mile End 1 ... ... 1 ... ... 2 Galt Street Limehouse 1 ... 1 ... ... ... 2 Garden Cottages Limehouse ... ... ... 1 ... ... 1 Garden Place Mile End New Town ... ... ... 2 ... ... 2 Gardom Street Mile End ... 1 ... ... ... ... 1 Garden Street Mile End ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Garth Street Shadwell ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Gates Head Place Mile End ... ... ... ... ... ... ... George Court Whitechapel ... 1 ... ... ... ... l George Place Ratcliff ... ... ... ... ... ... ... George Place Mile End ... 1 ... ... ... ... 1 George Street Ratcliff ... ... ... ... ... ... ... George Street, Tower Hill Aldgate ... ... ... ... ... ... ... George Yard Whitechapel ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Georgina Place Mile End ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 151 152 Returns of Infectious Diseases—continued. Streets. Districts. Small Pox. Scarlet Fever. Typhoid Fever Diphtheria. Membranous Croup. Erysipelas. Total. Giles Place Ratcliff ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Gill Street Limehouse 4 6 2 5 ... 2 19 Gill Place Limehouse 1 ... ... ... ... ... 1 Glamis Road Shadwell ... 2 ... 1 ... 1 4 Grace's Alley Whitechapel ... ... ... 1 ... ... 1 Glasshouse Buildings Whitechapel ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Glasshouse Fields Ratcliff ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Glasshouse Street Whitechapel ... ... ... 1 ... ... 1 Globe Alley Limehouse ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Globe Buildings Mile End ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Globe Place St. George's 1 ... ... ... ... 1 Globe Road Mile End 15 1 1 ... ... 3 20 Globe Street St. George's ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Gloucester Court Limehouse ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Gloucester Buildings St. George's ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Gloucester Court Mile End ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Godfrey House, Thrawl Street Spitalfields ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Gold Street Mile End ... 1 1 ... ... ... 2 Goodhart Place St. George's ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Goodman's Stile Whitechapel ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Goodman's Yard Wliitechapel ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 Gould's Hill Shadwell ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Goulston Street Whitechapel .. ... ... ... ... ... ... Govey's Place Mile End ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Gower's Walk Whitechapel ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Grafton Street Mile End 4 2 ... 1 2 9 Gray Street Mile End ... 1 ... ... ... 2 3 Green Bank Wapping and St. George's ... ... 1 2 ... ... 3 Green Dragon Yard Wliitechapel ... ... 1 1 ... 1 8 Green Street Ratcliff ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Greenfield Street Mile End ... 1 1 2 ... 1 5 Green's Place Whitechapel and Mile End New Town ... 1 ... ... ... ... 1 Greenwood Street Mile End 1 1 ... ... ... ... 2 Grebe Court Mile End ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Grenade Street Limehouse ... 1 1 1 ... 1 4 Grey Eagle Street Spitalfields ... 4 ... 1 ... ... 5 Green Dragon Place Whitechapel 4 1 5 Grigg's Court Whitechapel 1 ... ... ... ... ... 1 Grocer's Court Wapping 4 ... ... ... ... ... 4 Grove Cottages Mile End ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Grove Cottages, Mile End Road Mile End ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Grove Court Ratcliff ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Grove Place St. George's ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 153 Returns of Infectious Diseases—continued. Streets. Districts. Small Pox. Scarlet Fever Typhoid Fever Diphtheria. Membranous Croup. Erysipelas. Total. Grove Road Mile End 3 ... ... 1 ... 5 9 Grove Buildings Mile End ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Green Street Whitechapel ... ... ... ... ... Great Tower Hill Aldgate ... ... ... ... ... ... Grosvenor Street Mile End ... 1 ... 3 ... 4 Grove Street St. George's ... 1 ... ... ... 2 3 Great Alie Street Whitechapel ... 1 ... 2 ... 1 4 Great Eastern Buildings, Quaker Street Spitalfields 2 6 1 1 ... 1 11 Great Garden Street Whitechapel 7 2 ... 1 ... 2 12 Great Hermitage Street St. George's 2 ... 2 4 ... 2 10 Great Pearl Street Spitalfields 15 2 ... ... ... ... 17 Great Prescot Street Whitechapel ... 4 ... ... ... 1 5 Gun Square Limehouse ... 1 ... ... ... 1 2 Gun Street Old Artillery Ground ... 2 1 1 ... 2 6 Great Eastern Buildings, Fieldgate Street Whitechapel ... 2 ... 3 ... ... 5 H Half Moon Passage Whitechapel ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Half Wilk Court Spitalfields ... ... ... ... ... ... Hall Street Mile End 2 1 ... ... ... ... 3 Halley Street Limehouse 5 1 1 3 ... ... 10 Hampshire Court Mile End ... 1 ... ... ... ... 1 Hanbury Street Spitalfields and Mile End New Town 14 7 ... 3 ... 5 29 Hannibal Mews Mile End ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Hannibal Road Mile End 3 ... ... 1 4 Hanover Court Whitechapel 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... Harding Street Ratcliff 3 1 4 1 ... 1 10 Harding Place Mile End ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Hare Street Mile End ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Harford Street Mile End ... 2 1 ... ... ... 8 Harlow Place Mile End ... ... ... 1 ... ... 1 Harriet Place Spitalfields ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Harrison's Court Spitalfields ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Harris Terrace St. George's ... 1 ... ... ... 1 2 Harold Alley Wapping ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Havering Street Ratcliff ... 3 ... 2 ... ... 5 Hawkins Street Mile End ... 2 ... ... 1 3 Haydon Street Holy Trinity ... ... 1 ... ... ... 1 Hanbury Fields Spitalfields ... ... ... 1 ... ... 1 Haydon Square Holy Trinity ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Harod's Place Whitechapel ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Harod's Alley Whitechapel ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Heath Street Mile End 5 1 ... 3 ... 2 11 154 Returns of Infectious Diseases—continued. Streets. Districts. Small Pox. Scarlet Fever. Typhoid Fever Diphtheria. Membranous Croup. Erysipelas. Total. Hayfield Passage Mile End ... 1 ... ... ... ... 1 Hayfield Place Mile End ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Hayfield Court Mile End ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Helena House, Lolesworth Street Spitalfields ... ... ... 1 ... 1 2 Helena Terrace, Chicksanc Spitalfields and ... 1 ... ... ... ... 1 Street Whitechapel Hellings Street St. George's ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Heneage Street Whitechapel and Mile End New Town 14 ... ... 1 ... 1 16 Hewitt's Court Mile End ... ... ... ... ... ... ... High. Street Shadwell 2 6 ... 6 ... 2 10 High Street Wapping 3 1 ... ... ... 1 5 High Street Ratcliff and Mile End ... ... 1 ... ... 1 Hilliard's Court St. George's ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Hilton Street Ratcliff ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Hobson's Cottages, Pelham Street Mile End New Town ... 1 ... ... ... 1 Hobson's Place Mile End New Town ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Holford Street Mile End ... ... 1 ... ... ... 1 Holkar Place Limehouse ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Holloway Street Mile End ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Hooper Street Whitechapel ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Hope Court Limehouse ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Hope Place Limehouse ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Hope Street Whitechapel ... 2 ... 1 ... ... 8 Horseferry Branch Road Ratcliff 4 ... ... ... ... ... 4 Horsley Buildings Mile End ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Howard's Buildings Mile End New Town 1 ... 1 ... ... ... 2 Huddart Street Mile End ... 1 ... 1 ... ... 2 Hungerford Street St. George's ... ... ... 1 ... 1 2 Hunt Court Mile End New Town ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Hunt's Mews Shadwell ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Hunt Street Mile End New Town • • • 2 ... 3 ... 1 6 Hogarth Houses St. George's • •• ... ... 1 ... ... 1 Hogarth House, Christian Street St. George's • •• ... 1 • • • ... ... 1 I Irene House, Flower and Dean Street Spitalfields 4 1 ... 1 ... 1 7 Irish Court Whitechapel ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Island Row Limehouse ... ... 1 ... ... ... 1 155 Returns of Infectious Diseases—continued. Streets. Districts. Small Pox. Scarlet Fever. Typhoid Fever Diphtheria. Membranous Croup. Erysipelas. Total. J Jamaica Passage Limehouse ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Jamaica Street Mile End 1 4 4 ... ... ... 9 James' Place Ratcliff ... ... ... ... ... 2 2 James' Street Mile End ... ... ... ... ... 1 1 James' Street St. George's ... 2 1 ... ... 1 4 Jane Court St. George's ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Jane Street St. George's 1 1 1 2 ... 2 7 Jewell Street Mile End ... ... ... ... ... ... ... John's Court, Casson Street Whitechapel and Mile End New Town ... 1 ... ... ... ... 1 John's Court St. George's ... ... ... ... ... ... ... John's Gardens Limehouse ... ... ... ... ... ... ... John's Hill St. George's ... ... ... ... ... ... ... John's Plaoe Mile End ... ... ... 1 ... 1 2 John's Place, Old Montague Street Whitechapel ... 1 ... ... ... ... 1 John Street St. George's ... ... ... ... 1 1 Johnson's Buildings Wapping 1 ... ... ... ... ... 1 Johnson's Court Whitechapel ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Johnson Street St. George's ... 1 ... 3 ... 1 5 Joseph Street Mile End 2 ... 2 1 ... ... 5 Josephine House, Thrawl Street Spitalfields ... I ... ... ... ... 1 Jubilee Street Mile End 2 6 1 3 ... 2 14 Juniper Street Shadwell 4 3 1 2 ... 2 12 Juniper Court St. George's ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Jupp's Road Mile End 1 10 4 2 ... ... 17 Jubilee Buildings Wapping 2 1 1 1 ... ... 5 Joseph Street St. George's ... ... 3 1 ... ... 4 K Katharine Buildings, Cartwright Street Aldgate 2 2 1 1 ... 1 7 Key Street Mile End ... 1 ... ... 1 2 Kent and Essex Yard Whitechapel ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Kinder Street St. George's ... 2 ... ... ... ... 2 King David Lane Shadwell ... 1 ... ... ... 2 3 King Street Aldgate ... 1 ... 1 ... ... 2 King John Street Mile End ... 4 ... ... ... ... 4 King Street Mile End 1 1 ... ... ... 2 4 King Edward Street Mile End New Town 2 ... 2 1 ... 1 6 King's Arms Court Whitechapel ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Kirk's Place Limehouse ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Knott Street Mile End 1 4 ... ... ... 2 7 156 Returns of Infectious Diseases—continued. Streets. Districts. Small Pox. Scarlet Fever. Typhoid Fever Diphtheria. Membranous Croup. Erysipelas. Total. L Lady Mica's Almshouses Ratcliff ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Lamb Court Spitalfields ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Lambeth Street Whitechapel ... 1 ... ... ... 1 2 Lamb Street Spitalfields ... 2 ... ... ... ... 2 Lancaster Place Whitechapel ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Lance Street Limehouse ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Langdale Street St. George's ... ... ... ... ... 4 5 Langdale Place St. George's ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Landsdown Cottages Whitechapel ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Latimer Street Mile End 1 ... 1 ... ... ... 2 Lavender Place St. George's ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Lawton Road Mile End ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Leading Street Shadwell ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Leatherdale Street Mile End ... ... ... ... ... 1 1 Lee Street Limehouse 1 ... ... 1 ... ... 2 Leman Street Whitechapel 2 ... ... 1 ... ... 9 Leopold Street Mile End ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Leslie Street Mile End ... ... ... 1 ... ... 1 Lewin's Buildings Mile End ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Limehouse Causeway Limehouse 2 ... l ... ... 2 5 Lincoln Street Mile End 3 ... ... ... ... 1 8 Lindley Street Mile End 3 ... ... ... ... ... 3 Litchfield Road Mile End 2 3 ... ... ... 1 6 Little Alie Street Whitechapel 1 2 ... ... ... 3 6 Little Ann Street St. George's ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Little Bridge Street Mile End ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Little Halifax Street Whitechapel ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Little Hermitage Street St. George's ... ... l ... ... ... 1 Little Holloway Street Mile End ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Little John Street Ratcliff ... ... ... 1 ... ... 1 Little John Street Whitechapel ... ... ... . . . ... ... ... Little Pearl Street Spitalfields 2 1 ... 1 ... ... 4 Little Prescot Street Whitechapel ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Little Thames Street Aldgate ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Little Tongue Yard Whitechapel ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Little Tower Hill Aldgate ... 1 ... ... ... ... 1 Little Turner Street St. George's ... 1 ... 1 ... ... 2 Loate's Buildings Aldgate ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Lockhart Street Mile End 1 ... l ... ... ... 2 Lockside Limehouse ... 2 ... 2 ... ... 4 Locksley Street Limehouse ... ... ... 2 ... ... 2 Lolesworth Street Buildings, Thrawl Street Spitalfields 2 4 ... ... ... 3 9 Lolesworth Street Spitalfields 1 ... ... ... ... ... 1 Lomas Buildings Mile End 2 3 ... ... ... ... 5 157 Returns of Infectious Diseases—continued. Streets. Districts. Small Pox. Scarlet Fever. Typhoid Fever Diphtheria. Membranous Croup. Erysipelas. Total. Lombard Street Mile End New Town 1 ... ... ... ... ... 1 London. Street Ratcliff 2 ... 2 1 ... ... 5 Longfellow Road Mile End 6 ... 3 ... ... 1 11 Longnor Road Mile End 3 ... ... 2 ... ... 5 Lotus Court Spitalfields ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Louisa Street Mile End ... 7 1 1 ... ... 9 Louisa Gardens Mile End ... ... ... ... ... 1 1 Louvaine Street Mile End ... 2 ... ... ... ... 2 Love Lane Sbadwell ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Love Court Shadwell ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Love Lane Square Shadwell ... 2 ... ... ... ... 2 Little Montague Street Spitalfields ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Lowder Street St. George's ... 5 ... 1 ... ... 6 Lowell Street Limehouse 1 6 ... 1 ... ... 8 Lower Chapman Street St. George's ... 1 ... 2 ... 3 6 Lower East Smithfield Aldgate ... ... ... ... ... 1 1 Lower Fenton Street St. George's ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Lower Shadwell Shadwell ... ... 1 ... ... ... 1 Lowood Buildings Shadwell ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Lucas Street St. George's 1 6 ... 2 ... 2 11 Ludens Place St. George's ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Lufton Place Limehouse ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Luntley Place Whitechapel ... 1 ... ... ... ... l Lyal Road Mile End ... ... ... 1 ... ... l Lydia Street Mile End 2 8 ... 7 ... ... 12 Lytton House, Pelham Street Mile End New Town ... ... ... ... ... 1 1 Lydbrook Street Limehouse ... 1 ... 1 ... ... 2 M Magdalen Passage Whitechapel ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Maidman Street Mile End 4 2 ... ... ... . . 6 Malay Street St. George's ... ... ... 2 ... ... 2 Manning Street Limehouse ... 1 2 3 ... ... 6 Manor Court Ratcliff ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Mansell Street Whitechapel 1 5 3 3 ... ... 12 Maplin Street Mile End 16 1 ... 2 ... 3 22 Mansell Passage Whitechapel ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Maria Terrace Mile End ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Maritime Street Mile End 1 ... ... ... ... ... 1 Market Street Ratcliff 3 ... ... ... ... ... 3 Market Hill Shadwell ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Market Buildings Shadwell 3 ... ... ... ... 1 4 Marmaduke Place St. George's ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Maroon Street Limehouse 3 5 ... • •• ... 1 9 158 Returns of Infectious Diseases—continued. Streets. Districts. Small Pox. Scarlet Fever. Typhoid Fever Diphtheria. Membranous Croup. Erysipelas. Total. Martha Street St. George's ... ... ... ... 1 1 Mary Ann Street St. George's ... ... 1 ... ... 1 Mary Street St. George's 1 ... ... 2 ... 1 4 Mary Place St. George's ... ... ... 1 ... ... 1 Mary Street Mile End ... 1 ... 1 ... ... 2 Mason's Court Mile End New Town ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Master's Street Mile End ... ... ... ... ... ... Matlock Street Limehouse 1 2 2 1 ... 2 8 Matilda Place St. George's ... ... ... ... ... ... Matilda Street St. George's ... ... ... ... ... ... May's Cottages Limehouse ... ... ... ... ... ... ... May's Buildings Mile End ... ... 1 ... ... 1 Mayfield Buildings St. George's ... 1 ... ... ... ... 1 Medland Street Ratcliff 1 1 ... 1 ... 1 4 Medway Road Mile End 1 1 ... ... ... ... 2 Meeting House Alley St. George's ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Meeting House Buildings St. George's ... ... • •• ... ... ... Mercer Street Shadwell ... ... ... 1 ... ... 1 Meredith Buildings St. George's ... ... ... 1 ... 1 2 Metropolitan Buildings Mile End New Town ... 1 ... ... ... ... 1 Middle Shadwell Shadwell ... ... ... 2 ... ... 2 Middlesex Street Whitechapel ... ... ... 2 ... 1 3 Mile End Buildings Mile End ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Mile End Place Mile End ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Mile End Road Mile End 5 13 4 5 1 2 30 Milk Yard Shadwell ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Miller's Court Spitalfields 5 ... ... ... ... 1 6 Miller's Cottages Mile End ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Mill Place Limehouse ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Mill Yard Whitechapel ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Minories (part of) Holy Trinity ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Mitre, The Limehouse ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Monmouth Street Shadwell ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Montague House, Old Montague Street Whitechapel ... 1 ... 1 ... ... 2 Montague Place Whitechapel ... ... ... ... ... ... Monteagle Street Mile End 1 ... ... ... ... ... 1 Montefiore House St. George's ... ... ... ... ... ... . . . Monza Street Shadwell ... ... 1 2 ... ... 3 Moody Street Mile End 2 2 1 ... ... ... 5 Morgan Street Mile End 1 ... ... ... ... 1 2 Morgan Street St. George's ... ... 1 ... ... 3 4 Morrison's Buildings, South Whitechapel ... ... ... ... ... ... Morris Street St. George's 1 1 1 1 ... 2 6 Moss Buildings, St. Mary Street Whitechapel ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Mossford Street Mile End 2 ... ... ... ... ... 2 159 Returns of Infectious Diseases—continued. Streets. Districts. Small Pox. Scarlet Fever. Typhoid Fever Diphtheria. Membranous Croup. Erysipelas. Total. Mount Street Whitechapel ... 2 1 ... 1 4 Mountford Street Whitechapel ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Monsey Street Mile End ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Murdock Cottages Mile End ... ... ... ... ... ... Mulberry Street Mile End ... ... ... 2 1 ... 3 Mundy's Place Whitechapel ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Myrdle Sti'eet Mile End ... 1 ... ... ... 1 2 Morrison's Buildings, North Mile End 1 ... ... ... ... ... 1 N Nag's Head Yard Whitechapel ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Narrow Street Limehouse and Ratchff 1 ... 1 1 1 1 5 Nathaniel Buildings Spitalfields 3 4 ... 5 ... 2 14 Nelson's Court, Fashion Street Spitalfields ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Nelson Street Mile End ... 3 1 l •* 2 7 Neptune Street Wapping ... ... ... ... 1 1 Nesbitt's Rents Limehouse ... ... ... ... . ... ... New Alley Limehouse ... ... ... ... ... ... ... New Alley Square Limehouse ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Newark Street Mile End ... 3 ... 2 ... 1 6 Newbold Street Mile End ... 1 ... ... ... ... 1 New Buildings, Tenter Street Whitechapel ... 1 ... 1 ... ... 2 Newton's Rents Shadwell ... ... ... 1 ... 1 2 Newcastle Street Whitechapel ... ... ... 1 ... 1 2 Newcastle Place Whitechapel ... 3 ... 1 1 1 6 New Court, Dorset Street Spitalfields ... ... ... 2 ... ... 2 Nelson's Court, Winthrop Street Whitechapel ... ... ... ... ... ... ... New Church Street Mile End New Town ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Neat's Cottages Mile End ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Norfolk Buildings St. George's ... ... ... ... ... 1 1 New Court, Fashion Street Spitalfields ... ... ... 1 ... ... 1 New Goulston Street Wliitechapel ... ... ... ... ... ... ... New Gravel Lane Shadwell 1 1 ... 2 ... ... 4 Newman's Buildings, Cox Square Spitafields ... ... ... ... ... l 1 New Martin Street Whitechapel ... ... ... ... ... ... ... New Square Spitalfields ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Newnham Street Whitechapel ... ... ... ... ... ... ... New Tower Buildings Wapping ... ... ... 2 ... ... 2 New Road Whitechapel and Mile End ... 2 ... ... ... 2 4 Nicholas Street Mile End 1 1 ... ... ... 1 3 160 Returns of Infectious Diseases—continued. Streets. Districts. Small Pox. Scarlet Fever. |Typhoid Fever Diphtheria. Membranous Croup. Erysipelas. Total. Nightingale Lane Limehouse ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Nightingale Lane Aldgate 1 ... ... ... ... ... 1 Norfolk Street Mile End ... ... ... 2 ... ... 2 Northey Street Limehouse ... ... ... ... ... 2 2 Norton Folgate Norton Folgate ... ... ... ... ... ... ... North-East Passage St. George's ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Norway Place Limehouse ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Norway Yard Limehouse ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Norwich Court Whitechapel ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Notgrove Street Limehouse 1 ... ... ... ... 1 Nottingham Place Mile End ... 2 1 1 ... 2 6 Norman's Buildings St. George's ... ... ... ... ... ... Norton Folgate Almshouses Norton Folgate ... ... ... ... ... ... North Place Mile End New Town ... 3 ... 1 ... ... ... Newman's Buildings, Pelham Street Spitalfields ... ... ... ... ... ... ... North Street ... ... ... ... ... ... ... O Oak Lane Limehouse 1 ... ...... ... ... ... 1 Ocean Street Mile End 6 ... 1 2 ... ... 9 Orson Place Mile End ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Old Castle Street Whitechapel ... 1 ... ... ... ... 1 Old Gravel Lane St. George's ... ... ... 2 ... 1 3 Old Montague Street Whitechapel 1 2 1 3 ... 4 11 Old Tower Buildings Wapping 1 ... ... ... ... ... 1 Oley Place Mile End ... 2 ... ... ... ... 2 Orchard, The Ratcliff ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Orange Court St. George's ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Osbrn Court Whitechapel ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Osborn House Whitechapel ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Orange Mews Mile End New Town ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Old Church Road Mile End 16 1 1 1 ... 3 22 Orchard Gardens Mile End ... ... ... 1 ... ... 1 Osbrn Place Whitechapel 8 ... ... ... ... 2 10 Osborn Street Whitechapel ... 1 ... ... 1 2 4 Oxford Street Mile End and Whitechapel ... 5 ... 3 ... ... 8 P Pauline Terrace, Old Montague Street Whitechapel ... ... ... 1 ... ... 1 Palmer Street Spitalfields 5 ... ... ... ... ... 5 Paragon Mansions Mile End ... 4 ... ... ... 1 5 161 Returns of Infectious Diseases—continued. Streets. Districts. Small Pox. Scarlet Fever. |Typhoid Fever Diphtheria. Membranous Croup. Erysipelas. Total. Parfett Street Mile End ... 5 ... ... ... ... 5 Painter's Rents Ratcliff ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Park Road Mile End ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Park Street Limehouse ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Parliament Court Old Artillery Ground ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Parnham Street Limehouse ... 1 ... 1 ... ... 2 Pattison Street Mile End ... 1 ... 1 ... 1 3 Paternoster Row Spitalfields 3 ... ... ... ... ... 3 Pavilion Yard Whitechapel ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Peabody Buildings Shadwell 2 2 ... 3 ... ... 7 Peabody Buildings Whitechapel ... 5 1 ... 1 9 Peabody Buildings Spitalfields ... ... 1 ... ... 1 Pearl Street St. George's ... 1 ... 4 ... ... 5 Pearl Place Mile End ... ... ... ... ... 2 2 Peel's Alley Shadwell ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Pelham House Mile End New Town and Spitalfields ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Pelham Street Spitalfields 1 2 ... 2 ... 1 6 Pelling Street Limehouse ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Pell Place St. George's ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Pelham Street Buildings Spitalfields 1 ... ... . . , ... ... 1 Pell Street St. George's 1 1 1 ... ... 3 Peck's Yard, Hanbury Street Spitalfields ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Pelham House, Spital Square Spitalfields ... 1 ... ... ... ... 1 Pelican Passage Mile End ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Periwinkle Street Ratcliff ... ... 1 ... ... ... 1 Perth Street Mile End 6 1 ... 3 ... ... 10 Pennington Street St. George's 1 ... ... 1 ... l 3 Pennington Street buildings St. George's ... 1 ... ... ... ... 1 Pennington Place St. George's ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Philpot Street Mile End ... 3 ... ... . . . 1 4 Philpot Place Mile End ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Phœbe Street Limehouse ... ... ... ... ... 1 1 Phœnix Court St. George's ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Pier Head St. George's ... ... ... ... ... 1 1 Pigott Street Limehouse 1 2 ... ... ... ... 3 Pinchin Street St. George's 2 ... ... ... ... ... 2 Pixley Street Limehouse ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Planet Street St. George's ... ... 3 2 ... 1 6 Pleasant Row Ratcliff ... ... ... • • • ... ... ... Plough Alley St. George's ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Plough Square Whitechapel ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Plough Street Buildings Whitechapel ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Plough Street Whitechapel ... 1 ... ... ... 1 1 162 Returns of Infectious Diseases—continued. Streets. Districts. Small Pox. Scarlet Fever. Typhoid Fever Diphtheria. Membranous Croup. Erysipelas. Total. Plumber's Row Whitechapel and Mile End ... 3 ... 1 1 2 7 Pole Street Mile End 1 1 ... 2 ... ... 4 Poonah Street St. George's ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Poole's Square Spitalfields ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Pope's Hill Shadwell ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Pope's Head Court Spitalfields ... ... ... ... ... ... Portland Street Ratcliff and Mile End 5 2 ... ... ... ... 7 Priestley's Buildings St. George's ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Princes Place Whitechapel 1 ... ... ... ... ... 1 Princes Place Limehouse ... ... ... ... ... 1 1 Princes Square St. George's 3 3 ... 1 ... 1 8 Pincelet Street Spitalfields 10 1 ... l ... ... 12 Princes Street Mile End ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Prinoes Street St. George's ... 1 ... ... ... l 2 Prince of Orange Court St. George's ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Prospect Place St. George's ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Prospect Place Limehouse ... ... 1 ... ... ... 1 Prosperous Place Limehouse ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Providence Street St. George's ... 1 ... ... ... 1 2 Phillip Street St. George's ... ... ... 2 ... l 3 Phillip Buildings St. George's ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Prasom Street St. George's ... ... ... 3 ... ... 6 Prusom Street Buildings St. George's ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Puma Court Spitalfields ... 1 ... ... ... ... l Q Quaker Street Spitalfields 12 ... ... 1 ... l 14 Queen Ann Street Whitechapel ... 4 ... ... ... l 5 Queen's Head Alley Wapping ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Queen's Place St. George's ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Queen Street Aldgate ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Queen Street Mile End New Town ... 1 ... ... ... ... 1 Queen's Cottages Mile End ... ... ... ... ... ... ... R Raby Street Ratcliff ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Railway Place Limehouse ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Railway Place Mile End ... 2 ... ... ... ... 2 Ramar Place Mile End New Town ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Raine's Mansions St. George's ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Raine's Street St. George's 7 1 1 ... ... 1 10 Ratcliff Square Ratcliff ... ... ... 1 ... ... 1 Ratcliff Street St. George's ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Raven Row Whitechapel and Mile End ... 1 ... ... ... ... 1 163 Returns of Infectious Diseases—continued. Streets. Districts. Small Pox. Scarlet Fever Typhoid Fever Diphtheria. Membranous Croup. Erysipelas. Total. Raymond Street St. George's ... 1 ... 3 ... 2 6 Rectory Buildings Shadwell ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Rectory Square Mile End 2 ... ... 1 1 1 5 Red Lion Court Wapping ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Red Lion Street St. George's and Wapping ... ... ... 2 ... 1 3 Regent's Cottages Limehouse ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Reginald Houses, Fieldgate Street Whitechapel ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Red Lion Street St. George's ... ... 1 6 ... ... 7 Red Mead Lane St. George's 1 1 ... ... ... 2 Red Lion and Spread Eagle Yard Whitechapel ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Redman's Gardens Mile End ... ... ... ... ... ... Redman's Road Mile End ... 2 2 3 ... 4 11 Reform Place Limehouse ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Regent's Court Limehouse ... ... 1 1 ... ... 2 Regent's Place Limehouse ... 2 ... ... ... ... 2 Regent's Place, Blossom Street Norton Folgate ... 1 ... ... ... ... 1 Regent's Place Mile End 2 ... ... ... ... ... 2 Regal Place Mile End New Town ... 1 ... 3 ... ... 4 Repton Street Limehouse ... ... 2 2 ... ... 4 Rhodeswell Road Limehouse and Mile End 9 ... 3 ... ... 12 Rich Street Limehouse ... 3 ... ... ... 1 4 Richard Court St. George's ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Richard Street St. George's ... 3 ... 2 ... ... 5 Richardson Street Mile End ... 1 ... ... ... ... 1 Ringer's Buildings Spitalfields ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Robert Street Limehouse ... ... ... ... ... 1 1 Robeson Street Mile End 2 3 ... ... ... 1 6 Roger's Court St. George's ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Romford Street Mile End ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Ronald Street Ratcliff ... ... 1 ... ... ... 1 Ropner Place Limehouse ... 2 ... ... ... 1 3 Ropemakers' Fields Limehouse ... 1 1 ... ... 1 9 Ropery Street Mile End ... 1 ... ... ... 1 2 Rose Place Mile End ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Rose Lane Ratcliff 1 ... ... ... ... 2 3 Rose Lane Limehouse ... 1 ... ... ... ... 1 Rosetta Place Spitalfields ... 1 ... 2 ... ... 3 Rosemary Court Spitalfields ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Rosina Cottages Whitechapel ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Rothschild's Buildings, Thrawl Street Whitechapel ... 5 ... 5 ... 3 13 Rowsell Street Mile End 9 4 ... 2 ... 1 16 L 2 164 Returns of Infectious Diseases—continued. Streets. Districts. Small Pox. Scarlet Fever. Typhoid Fever Diphtheria. Membranous Croup. Erysipelas. Total. Royal Jubilee Buildings St. George's ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Royal Mint Aldgate ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Royal Mint Square Buildings Aldgate ... ... ... ... ... 1 1 Royal Mint Street Whitechapel and Aldgate 1 ... ... ... ... ... 1 Rugg Street Limehouse ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Rupert Street Whitechapel 1 1 ... ... ... 1 3 Russell Street Mile End 1 ... ... ... 2 1 4 Russell Court St. George's ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Ruth House, Flower and Dean Street Spitalfields ... ... ... 1 1 ... 2 Rutland Street Mile End 1 12 ... 3 ... 1 17 Rycroft Court St. George's ... ... ... ... 1 1 Rygate Street St. George's 8 1 ... 1 1 ... 6 s Sage Street Shadwell ... 1 ... ... ... ... 1 Salisbury Street Mile End ... 1 1 ... ... ... 2 Salmon Street Mile End 4 1 ... ... ... ... 5 Salmon Court Limehouse ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Salmon Lane Limehouse 11 6 1 ... ... 1 19 Salter Street Limehouse ... 1 ... 1 ... ... 2 Salter Street St. George's ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Sampson's Gardens St. George's ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Samuel Court Mile End New Town ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Samuel Street Limehouse 1 4 2 1 ... 1 9 Samuel Street St. George's ... 1 ... ... ... ... 1 Sander Street St. George's ... 1 ... 1 ... 1 3 Sander Street Buildings St. George's ... ... ... 1 ... ... 1 Sandy's Row Spitalfields ... 1 ... 1 ... ... 2 Sarah. Street Shadwell ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Sawyer's Yard Whitechapel ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Scarborough Street Whitechapel ... 1 ... 1 ... 1 3 Senrab Street Mile End ... 5 1 ... ... ... 6 Selby Street Mile End New Town ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Schoolhouse Lane Ratcliff ... ... ... 2 ... ... 2 Shorter's Rents, Lamb Street Spitalfields ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Sceptre Street Mile End 2 2 ... ... ... 2 6 Selsey Street Limehouse ... 2 ... 1 ... ... 3 Selwyn Road Mile End 1 ... ... ... ... ... 1 Settle Street Mile End 1 2 ... 1 ... ... 4 Seven Star Alley St. George's ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Seven Star Yard Spitalfields ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Severne Street St. George's ... ... ... 1 ... ... 1 165 Returns of Infectious Diseases—continued. Streets. Districts. Small Pox. Scarlet Fever. Typhoid Fever Diphtheria. Membranous Croup. Erysipelas. Total. Shadwell Fish Market Shadwell ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Shadwell Green Shadwell ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Shandy Street Mile End 12 l 1 3 ... ... 17 Sharpe's Buildings Aldgate ... ... ... ... ... ... Sheba Street Spitalfields ... ... ... 1 ... ... 1 Shepherd Street Spitalfields 1 1 ... 1 3 Shepherd Street Buildings Spitalfields ... ... ... 1 ... ... 1 Shepherd's Place Spitalfields ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Sheppy Yard Holy Trinity ... ... ... ... ... ... Sheridan Street St. George's 4 6 4 ... 3 17 Ship Alley St. George's ... ... ... 1 ... ... 1 Ship Street St. George's ... ... ... 1 ... 1 2 Shoreditch High Street Whitechapel ... ... ... ... ... 1 1 Short Street Shadwell ... ... ... ... ... 1 1 Shorter Street St. George's and Wapping ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Shoulder of Mutton Alley Limehouse ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Silas Street Mile End ... ... ... 1 ... ... 1 Single Gar lens Mile End 1 ... ... ... ... ... 1 Single Place Mile End ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Single Street Mile End 2 1 ... ... ... ... 3 Sidney Street Mile End 1 7 ... 2 ... 3 13 Sidney Square Mile End 1 ... ... 4 ... ... 5 Silver Street Limehouse • •• ... 1 ... ... ... 1 Silver Street Mile End 2 2 ... 2 ... ... 6 Silver Street St. George's ... ... ... 1 ... ... 1 Sion Square Mile End ... ... ... ... ... ... Skidmore Street Mile End 5 2 1 4 ... 3 15 Sly Street St. George's ... ... ... ... ... ... Smith Place Mile End ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Smith Street Mile End 1 2 ... 3 ... ... 6 South Grove Mile End ... 1 2 ... ... 8 11 South Street Limehouse ... 2 ... ... ... 1 3 Size Yard Whitechapel ... 1 1 ... ... 2 Siun House Mile End ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Sion Square Mile End ... ... ... ... ... ... ... South Grove Buildings Mile End 2 1 1 ... ... ... 4 Spring Gardens, King Edward Street Mile End New Town ... ... ... ... ... 1 1 Spring Gardens Lime house ... ... ... 1 ... ... 1 Speck's Fields Mile End New Town ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Spectacle Alley Whitechapel ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Spencer Street St. George's 2 1 6 ... ... ... 9 Spencer Street Limehouse 1 2 ... . ... ... 3 Spelman Street Whitechapel, Spitalfields, and Mile End New Town ... 1 ... 1 ... 1 3 166 Returns of Infectious Diseases—continued. Streets. Districts. Small Pox. Scarlet Fever. Typhoid Fever Diphtheria. Membranous Croup. Erysipelas. Total. Spenlow Street Limehouse 2 ... 1 ... ... 3 Spital Court Mile End New Town ... ... ... ... 1 ... 1 Spital Square Norton Folgate 1 ... ... 2 ... 1 4 Spital Street Mile End New Town ... ... ... ... ... 2 2 Splidtz Street St. George's ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Spring Garden Place Mile End and Ratcliff ... 2 ... 1 ... ... 3 St. Ann's Road Mile End 10 7 1 3 ... ... 21 St. Ann's Row Limehouse ... ... 1 ... ... ... 1 St. Anne's Street Limehouse 4 1 ... 2 ... 1 8 St. Dunstan's Road Mile End 2 5 ... 1 ... 2 10 St. George's Buildings St. George's ... ... ... ... ... ... ... St. George's House, George Yard Whitechapel ... ... ... 1 ... ... 1 St. George's Street St. George's and Wapping 21 6 3 3 ... 4 37 St. George's Terrace St. George's ... ... ... 1 ... ... l St. Mark Street Whitechapel 2 3 ... ... ... ... 5 St. Mary Street Whitechapel ... 1 ... ... ... ... 1 St. Paul's Road Mile End and Limehouse 4 5 2 1 ... 1 13 St. Peter's Road Mile End ... 2 ... ... ... 1 3 St. Thomas' Road Mile End 5 2 1 2 ... ... 10 St. Thomas's Yard Mile End ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Spitalfields Market North No Houses ... ... ... ... ... ... ... South East West Strafford House, We???tworth Street Spitalfields ... 3 ... 2 ... ... 5 Stainsby Road Limehouse ... 1 ... 1 ... 1 3 Stanfield Road Mile End ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Star and Garter Yard St. George's ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Star Place St. George's v ... ... ... ... ... ... Starch Yard St. George's ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Station Place St. George's 2 ... ... ... ... 1 3 Stayner's Road Mile End 1 ... ... 1 ... ... 2 Steel's Lane Mile End ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Stephen's Cottages, Conder Street Limehouse ... ... 1 ... ... ... 1 Stepney Causeway Ratcliff ... 4 3 5 ... 1 13 Stepney Green Mile End 3 6 ... 1 ... 1 11 Stepney Industrial Dwellings Mile End 6 5 ... 3 ... ... 14 Steward Street Old Artillery Ground 6 2 1 ... ... 2 11 Stocks Place Limehouse ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Storer's Buildings Mile End 3 1 ... ... ... ... 4 Strahan Road Mile End 1 1 ... ... ... ... 2 167 Returns of Infectious Diseases—continued. Streets. Districts. Small Pox. Scarlet Fever. Typhoid Fever Diphtheria. Membranous Croup. Erysipelas. Total. Streatfield Street Limehouse ... 1 1 ... ... ... 2 Stutfield Street St George's ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Sugar Loaf Court Whitechapel ... ... ... 1 ... ... 1 Sun Tavern Place Wapping ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Sutton Street St. George's 8 4 ... ... ... 1 13 Swallows Gardens Whitechapel ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Swan Yard High Street, White chapel ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Stepney S uare Mile End ... ... ... ... ... ... ... T Tasburg Buildings St. George's ... ... ... 1 ... ... 1 Tait Street St. George's 1 1 ... ... ... ... 2 Tarling Street St. George's 4 1 5 3 ... ... 13 Taylor's Place Limehouse ... 3 1 ... ... ... 4 Taylor's Rents St. George's ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Tenbury Place Limehouse ... ... ... 2 ... ... 2 Terrace Place Mile End ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Tench Street St. George's ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Tenter Buildings, St. Mark's Street Whitechapel ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Tenter Court Spitalfields ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Tenter Street Spitalfields 11 2 1 1 ... ... 15 Tenter Street Whitechapel North ... ... ... 1 ... ... 1 South ... ... ... 1 ... ... 1 East ... ... ... ... ... ... ... West ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Tewkesbury Buildings Whitechapel ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Thirza Street Eatcliff ... ... ... ... ... 1 1 Thomas Street Limehouse 3 3 1 ... ... 1 8 Thomas Place St. George's ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Thomas Street Whitechapel and Mile End New Town ... 1 ... ... ... 1 2 Thrawl Street Whitechapel 8 ... ... ... 1 2 11 Three Compass Court Ratcliff ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Three Colt Court Limehouse ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Three Colt Street Limehouse ... 3 1 1 ... 1 6 The Cottages Limehouse ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Tile Yard Limehouse ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Tilley Street Spitalfields 3 1 ... ... ... ... 4 Tillman Street St. George's ... 1 ... ... ... ... 1 Tillotson Street Mile End ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Toilet Street Mile End 4 1 ... 1 ... ... 6 Tomlin Terrace Limehouse ... 2 ... ... ... ... 2 168 Returns of Infectious Diseases—continued. Streets. Districts. Small Pox. Scarlet Fever Typhoid Fever Diphtheria. Membranous Croup. Erysipelas. Total. Tower Buildings, Brewhouse Lane Wapping ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Tower Buildings, High Street Wapping ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Trafalgar Square Mile End ... 3 ... 2 ... ... 5 Tredegar Square Mile End 1 1 ... ... ... ... 2 Trinity Almshouses Mile End ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Trinity Square Aldgate ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Troon Street Ratcliff ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Turner's Buildings St. George's ... ... 1 ... ... 1 2 Turner's Place Limehouse ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Turner's Road Limehouse and Mile End 4 4 3 1 ... ... 12 Turner's Street Mile End ... 3 1 ... ... ... 4 Twine Court Shadwell 2 ... ... 1 ... ... 3 U Upper Montague Street Mile End ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Umberstone Street St. George's ... 1 ... 1 ... ... 2 Union Buildings Mile End ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Union Court, Wheeler Street Spitalfields ... 1 ... ... ... ... 1 Union Passage St. George's ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Union Place Limehouse ... 2 ... ... ... ... 2 Union Row Mile End ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Union Street Mile End ... ... ... 1 ... ... 1 Union Street St. George's ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Union Terrace Limehouse ... ... ... 1 ... ... 1 Upper Chapman Street St. George's ... 1 ... ... ... ... 1 Upper East Smithfield Aldgate and Wapping 1 3 1 ... ... ... 5 Underwood Street Mile End New Town ... 2 1 1 1 ... 5 V Vallance Road Whitechapel and Mile End New Town 22 8 2 1 ... 6 39 Varden Street Mile End ... 3 ... 1 1 ... 5 Venour Road Mile End 1 2 ... 2 ... ... 5 Victoria Buildings, Cartwright Street Aldgate ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Victoria Cottages, Albert Street Mile End New Town ... 1 ... ... ... ... 1 Victualling Office Square Victoria Buildings, Whitechapel ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Emmott Street Mile End ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 169 Returns of Infectious Diseases—continued. Streets. Districts. Small Pox. Scarlet Fever. Typhoid Fever Diphtheria. Membranous Croup. Erysipelas. Total. Vine Court Whitechapel ... 1 ... ... ... ... 1 Vine Yard Spitalfields ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Vintners' Almshouses Mile End ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Virginia Court St. George's ... ... ... ... ... ... ... w Wade's Place Mile End 2 1 ... ... ... ... 3 Waterloo Court St. George's ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Wainwright Place St. George's ... ... 1 ... ... ... 1 Walden Street Mile End ... 1 1 1 ... ... 3 Wellington Buildings ... ... ... 1 ... ... 1 Walker Street Limehouse 3 1 ... ... ... 2 6 Wallwood Street Limehouse ... ... 2 ... ... ... 2 Walter Street Ratcliff 1 ... ... ... ... ... 1 Wapping Wall Wapping 1 ... ... 3 ... ... 4 Wharton Place Ritcliff ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Warwick Place Limehouse ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Waterloo Place St. George's ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Waterloo Street Limehouse ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Watney Street St. George's ... ... 1 ... ... ... 1 Watts Street St. George's ... ... 2 1 ... ... 3 Watts Street Buildings St. George's ... ... ... 3 ... ... 3 Weaver Street Whitechapel ... ... ... ... ... 1 1 Webb's Place Whitechapel ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Well Street Whitechapel 1 ... ... 2 ... ... 3 Wellclose Square St. George's, Whitechapel and Wapping 1 2 1 3 ... 2 9 Wellesley Street Mile End 4 1 ... 1 ... 2 8 Wellington Buildings St. George's ... ... ... 1 ... ... 1 Wentworth Street Spitalfields and Whitechapel 14 1 ... 2 ... 4 21 Wentworth Court East Spitalfields ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Wentworth Court West Spitalfields ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Wentworth Buildings Whitechapel 2 2 ... ... ... 1 5 West Gardens Shadwell ... 1 ... 1 ... ... 2 West Gardens Buildings Shadwell ... 1 ... 1 ... ... 2 West Pier Wapping ... ... ... ... ... ... ... West Arbour Street Mile End 1 1 ... ... ... ... 2 West Street Mile End 1 4 ... 6 ... 2 13 Walburgh Street St. George's 1 ... ... 1 ... 1 3 Walburgh Place St. George's ... ... ... ... ... ... ... West India Dock Road Limehouse 1 2 1 ... ... 1 5 West's Folly St. George's ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Western Passage St. George's ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Wheeler Street Spitalfields ... 2 ... ... ... ... 2 Whitechapel High Street Whitechapel 2 2 ... ... ... 1 5 m 170 Returns of Infectious Diseases—continued. Streets. Districts. Small Pox. Scarlet Fever. Typhoid Fever Diphtheria. Membranous Croup. Erysipelas. Total. Whitechapel Road Whitechapel and Mile End 41 16 4 9 ... 9 79 White's Gardens St. George's ... ... ... ... ... ... ... White's Rents Limehouse ... 2 1 ... ... 3 White's Row Spitalfields 7 ... 1 ... ... ... 8 White Hart Court Mile End ... ... ... ... ... ... White Horse Lane Mile End 2 2 2 2 ... 2 10 White Horse Street Ratcliff 1 1 2 1 ... ... 5 White Lion Street Spitalfields and Norton Folgate 2 ... 1 ... ... ... 3 Whitehall Court Limehouse ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Whitehead Street Mile End ... 3 ... 5 ... ... 8 Whitethorne Court St. George's 1 ... ... ... ... 1 Whitethorne Place St. George's 2 ... ... ... ... ... 2 Whitman Road Mile End ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Williams' Buildings Mile End ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Williams' Place Limehouse ... ... ... ... ... ... ... William Street St. George's ... 1 ... ... 1 1 3 Willow Row Limehouse 1 ... ... ... ... ... 1 Willow Street Mile End ... ... ... ... ... ... Wilk Court Spitalfields 1 ... ... ... ... ... 1 Wilkes Street Spitalfields ... 1 1 5 ... 1 8 Wilson's Place Limehouse ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Wilson Street Mile End 2 2 1 ... ... 2 7 Winifred House, Thrawl Street Spitalfields ... 2 ... ... ... 1 3 Winterton Buildings St. George's ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Winterton Street St. George's ... ... ... 2 ... 4 6 Winter's Buildings Mile End ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Wolsey Street Mile End ... 2 ... ... ... ... 2 Woodison Street Mile End ... ... ... 1 ... ... 1 Woodside Mansions St. George's 1 ... ... ... ... ... 1 Worcester Street St. George's 1 ... ... ... ... ... 1 Worcester Court St. George's ... ... 2 ... ... ... 2 Wright's Buildings, Salmon Lane Limehouse ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Wright's Row St. George's ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Winthrop Street Whitechapel ... 1 ... 1 ... ... 2 Wood's Buildings Whitechapel ... ... ... ... ... ... ... X XX Place Mile End ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 171 Returns of Infectious Diseases—continued. Streets. Districts. Small Pox. Scarlet Fever. Typhoid Fever Diphtheria. Membranous Croup. Erysipelas. Total. Y Yalford Street Mile End ... 2 1 2 ... ... 5 Yeomans' Yard Whitechapel ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Yoakley's Buildings Whitechapel ... ... ... ... ... ... ... York Buildings Limehouse ... ... ... 1 ... ... 1 York Buildings St. George's ... ... ... 1 ... ... 1 York Road Ratcliff ... ... ... ... ... ... ... York Square Ratcliff ... ... 1 1 ... ... 2 York Street, East Ratcliff ... ... 1 ... ... ... 1 Yule Court St. George's 1 ... ... ... ... ... 1 172 Returns of Infectious Diseases—continued. Streets. Puerperal Fever. Total. Booth Street Buildings 1 ... ... ... ... ... 1 Brushfield Street 1 ... ... ... ... ... 1 Cologne Street 1 ... ... ... ... ... 1 Dempsey Street 1 ... ... ... ... ... 1 Devonshire Street 1 ... ... ... ... ... 1 Dupont Street 1 ... ... ... ... ... 1 Ellen Street 1 ... ... ... ... ... 1 Ely Place 1 ... ... ... ... ... 1 Forester Street 1 ... ... ... ... ... 1 Galt Street 1 ... ... ... ... ... 1 Glasshouse Street 1 ... ... ... ... ... 1 Hunt Street 1 ... ... ... ... ... 1 Lambeth Street 1 ... ... ... ... ... 1 Langdale Street 1 ... ... ... ... ... 1 Little Turner Street 1 ... ... ... ... ... 1 Locksley Street 1 ... ... ... ... ... 1 Montague House 1 ... ... ... ... ... 1 Mulberry Street 1 ... ... ... ... ... 1 Newnham Street 1 ... ... ... ... ... 1 Selsey Street 2 ... ... ... ... ... 2 Typhus Fever. Jamaica Street 1 ... ... ... ... ... 1 173 INDEX. A PAGE Articles disinfected, list of 117 Analyst's Report 129 Proceedings 129, 132 to 140 Articles adulterated 130 to 139 B Births 4 Birth rate in various districts 4 Bedding destroyed, list of 116 Bakehouses— Provisions as to 124, 125 List of underground bakehouses 126,127 ,, „ other bakehouses 127, 128 c Cowhouses, list of 141 Chicken pox 81, 82 Canal Boats Acts 106 Charts (Infectious Diseases) between 80 and 81 D Deaths 5 to 9 Total number of deaths in the Borough 5 ,, „ „ of non-residents 5 „ ,, ,, of residents outside the Borough 5 Death rate in various districts in Borough 6 n 174 page Deaths—confined. Causes of death compared with 1901 6 Deaths of residents in outlying institutions 7,8 „ „ in public „ 7, 8 „ „ in the Borough 9 Diphtheria 79 Diarrhœa 80 E Enteric Fever 79, 80 Erysipelas 80 Enteritis 81 F Factory and Workshops Act, 1901 118 Laundries 118 Duties with regard to workshops and workplaces 118 Infected dwellings 119 Domestic workshops 120 Proceedings 120 List of Registered workshops 121-122 List of outworkers 123 G General sanitary work 101 H Housing of the Working Classes Act 97 to 101 Particulars as to sanitary condition 97 Defects remedied at houses in following streets 97 Great Pearl Street 97-98 Wilk Court 97-98 Half Wilk Court 97-98 Wheeler Street 97-98 Union Place 97, 98-99 175 page Housing of the Working Classes Act—continued. Defects remedied at houses in following streets—continued— Quaker Street 97, 99, 101 Pope's Head Court 97, 99, 101 Harrison's Court 97, 100 New Square 97, 100-101 Poole's Square 97, 100 Houses let in lodgings List of proceedings 106-107 Definition of bye-laws 108,109,110,111 I Infantile mortality 84-85 Infectious diseases In various streets 142 to 172 Inquests, Number of 115 M Marriages— Marriage rate in various districts 4 and 5 Measles— Death rate in various districts 78 Membranous Croup 79 Mortuary 115, 116 N Notification of infectious diseases— Number of 85 O Old age 85 Overcrowding 86 to 96 No. of cases in various districts 86 ,, „ inhabited houses 86 „ „ separate families 87, 88 ,, ,, tenements 87, 88 176 page Overcrowding—continued. No. of foreign inhabitants, 1891 to 1901 88 Percentage of foreign born inhabitants to total population 88 Intimations and statutory notices served 89 Among Christians 89 Among Jews 89 Particulars as to Police Court Proceedings 90 Particulars as to overcrowding in houses 90 Particulars in Artichoke Hill 91 in Boarded Entry 91 Breezer's Hill 91 Buross Street 91 Cable Street 91 Challis Court 92 Choppin's Court 92 Clifford House (Wellclose Square) 92 Grove Place 92 Hungerford Street 92 John's Court 92 Kinder Street 93 Little Turner Street 93 Lower Fenton Street 93 Mayfield's Buildings 93 Meeting House Buildings 94 Norman's Buildings 94 Pennington Place 94 Planet Street 94 Rycroft Court 94 Rygate Street 94 St. George Street 95 St. George's Terrace 95 Ship Street 95 Starch Yard 95 Taylor's Rents 95 Umberston Street 95-96 Waterloo Place 96 William Street 96 Whitethorne Court 96 Winterton Street 96 York Buildings 96 177 page P Population 3 Puerperal Fever 81 Phthisis 82-83 Proceedings 101 List of, under Public Health (London) Act, 1901 102 to 105 Under Byelaws 105 Under Food and Drugs Acts 129 Unsound food 114-115 Post Mortems— Number of 115 R Respiratory diseases 83 s Small Pox— Number of cases in Borough 9 „ ,, Common Lodging Houses 10 ,, ,, Mile End Infirmary 10 ,, ,, Whitechapel Infirmary 10 ,, ,, St. George's Infirmary 10 ,, ,, Ratcliff House 10 ,, ,, Furnished rooms in Whitechapel 10 Method adopted of combating 10,11,12 Delay in vaccination 12, 13 Magistrates' order for removal 13 Source of infection (instances of) 13 to 17 Police Court proceedings 15-16 Number of cases among persons vaccinated in infancy only 17-18 ,, ,, „ ,, unvaccinated 18 „ ,, ,, ,, revaccinated 18 ,, ,, ,, „ having had small pox previously 18 Doubtful cases 18 178 page Smallpox—continued. Particulars of cases occurring in Poor Law Institutions 46 to 51 ,, ,, ,, ,, Mile End Infirmary 46-47 ,, ,, ,, ,, Ratcliff Workhouse 47 ,, ,, ,, ,, St. George's Infirmary 47-48 „ ,, ,, ,, Whitechapel Infirmary 48 to 51 Small pox tables between 51 and 78 Common lodging houses 19 to 44 Number of cases at common lodging houses in Whitechapel 10 ,, ,, „ „ St. George's 10 ,, „ „ „ Limehouse 10 ,, ,, „ „ the borough 10 Particulars of cases at— Brick Lane 20, 21 Burdett Road 22, 23 Commercial Street 24 Dorset Street 24 to 28 Flower and Dean Street 28 to 31 Great Pearl Street 31 Great Garden Street 31 Hanbury Street 31, 32 Heneage Street 32, 33 Leman Street 33 Limehouse Causeway 34 Lolesworth Street 34 North East Passage 34 Osborn Place 34, 35 Princelet Street 35, 36 Prince's Square 36 Quaker Street 36 Rose Lane 36 St. Anne's Street 37 St. George Street 37,38 Thrawl Street 39 Wentworth Street 40, 41 Whitechapel Road 41 to 44 White's Row 44 Unregistered lodging houses 45 to 46 The Dormitory, Crispin Street 45 Medland Hall 45-46 179 page Scarlet Fever 78 Slaughterhouses 141 Sanitary Inspectors' reports between 140 and 141 Statistics— Table I. Of whole district during 1902 and previous years ,, 140 and 141 Table II. Population, births and deaths registered ,, 140 and 141 Table III. Cases of infectious diseases notified during year 1902 ,, 140 and 141 Table IV. Causes of, and ages at death during year 1902 ,, 140 and 141 Streets— List of 142 to 172 Smoke nuisances 105 Proceedings taken and nuisances abated 105, 106 T Typhus fever 79 U Unsound food— Food destroyed 112 to 114 Proceedings in connection with 114,115 V Vaccination— Re-vaccination of staff 13 Delay in vaccination 12 Visits made by sanitary inspectors 11 180 PAGE w Whooping cough 78 z Zymotic diseases 82