HAN 10 No. X.] 14 QUARTERLY SUMMARY OP THE SICKNESS AND MORTALITY of Saint George, Sanober Square, AND OF THE PROCEEDINGS OF THE MEDICAL OFFICERS OF HEALTH, FOR THE QUARTER ENDING MARCH 31st, 1860. WITH A SHORT SUMMARY OF THE YEAR, LONDON: PRINTED BY GEORGE PHIPPS, UPPER RANELAGH STREET, PIMLICO, S.W. TO THE Vestry of St. George Sanober Square. My Lords and Gentlemen, I. The quarter just passed has been attended with a heavy loss of life. No fewer than 547 deaths have occurred in the parish, which is the highest number we have had to chronicle in any quarter, and is almost one death per diem above the average of the last ten years. In the year 1857, the deaths in the four quarters respectively were 436 374 424 442 In 1858 the numbers were 528 479 412 490 In 1859 they were 457 421 440 429 And now, in the Spring Quarter of 1860, they are 547 In considering this matter, we are bound to enquire into places, persons, and causes. As to places: on analysing the mortality of the different sub-districts, we find that the deaths in May Fair are exactly the average of the last twelve quarters, and those in the workhouses a little below it; whilst in the Hanover and Belgrave, they have been above it as nearly as possible in the proportion of 4 to 3; and that the excess of deaths this 4 quarter corresponds to the increase of 25 in the Hanover, and 71 in the Belgrave, and 8 parishioners, who have died above the average, in St. George's Hospital. As to the persons, we find that all ages have suffered; yet that, as was to be expected, children have furnished the largest proportional number of victims. Then, as to causes: zymotic disease gives 80 deaths, a fair winter average; the scrofulous and nervous groups, which include most diseases of degeneration, 123, also not the highest average; but diseases of the lungs count 150, which is high; and a high rate of deaths from all miscellaneous causes combines to raise the sum total. But it must be added, that our reckoning includes 72 deaths of non-parishioners in St. George's Hospital, and 9 of inmates of Little Chelsea Workhouse; that if the deaths have been numerous, so have the births in every sub-district of the parish; and moreover, that the increase of deaths in the Belgrave sub-district is a natural result of increase of population, as we shall further shew in the Annual Summary appended to this report. Amongst the deaths deserving notice, are three from small-pox, all of infants unvaccinated, at No. 65, Hanover Street, No. 32, Berwick Street, and No. 4, Robert Street, Pimlico, respectively. The father of the last-named infant objected to have his children vaccinated. To these ought to be added that of a man æt. 32, from No. 6, Gillingham Street, who died in the Small-pox Hospital. The deaths from measles are but seven. From the throat group, including scarlatina, putrid sore throat, and diphtherite, 21. Of the scarlatina cases, one, a boy of 6, died at No. 52, Mount Street; one at No. 24, Moreton Street West; No. 5, Stockbridge Terrace; No. 76, Westbourne Street; No. 15, Commercial Road; Nos. 2 and 5 30, Upper Ebury Street; 105, Lupus Street; two children at No. 3, Hindon Street; 1 girl of 14 in St. George's Hospital from No. 114, Eccleston Mews, (two deaths occurred from this cause at this place in the preceding quarter; see No. IX. p. 6 ;) a young man of 24, from No. 22, Eccleston Square, also was removed to the Hospital, and died there; and two children, nonparishioners, patients in the Hospital, caught the disease, and died there of it. One case of putrid sore throat was fatal at No. 4, Rutland Terrace. Of the diphtheria cases, one child in Shepherd's Market; another at No. 34, Upper Belgrave place; and an adult at No. 13, Little Ebury Sreet; two children of an eminent surgeon near Hanover Square; and one in Lancashire Court. The deaths of the two children near Hanover Square, one a girl of 10, in February, the other a boy of 8, in March, were accompanied by severe illness and narrow escape of other members of the same family, spite of the fact that they were removed from the infected house immediately after the first death (for an account of the house see p. 20). Here we may remark on the fact that the effect of the atmosphere of the house had long shown itself in the impaired health of the children. The case in Lancashire Court was that of a child of 2 years,' who had measles, and gangrene of the mouth, and was finished off by diphtherite; this shows the alliance of these low diseases to each other, and it may be observed, that diphtherite is now known to creep in at the close of the puerperal and similar fevers. Whooping-cough destroyed 20 lives—not many for the season; dysentery, a major in the Ceylon Rifle æt. 45; typhus, a male of 42, at the livery stable, No. 6, Park Lane; and a maid-of-all-work, set. 18, in the hospital, from 6 No. 43, Camera Square, Chelsea. The wife and child of a journeyman plumber in Shepherd's Court, and of a builder in Eaton place West, died soon after confinement. The deaths from moral causes are numerous, including three suicides: the wife of a licensed victualler, æt. 55; a potman, æt. 45 ; and a merchant's clerk, Eet. 31. Three children were scalded by boiling liquid upset over them; two were burned through playing with lighted paper ; one by a hot poker which fell from a fire; three other children were burned to death in various ways. One child was killed by falling from banisters, over which he was astride at play. Three new-born infants were made away with summarily, by being drowned; and three others, viz., the child of a housemaid, of a widow, and of a female of no occupation, perished more slowly from want of breast milk. A builder's clerk and fencing master died from delirium tremens. II. Sickness.—Hanover and May Fair.—The number of persons who received medical attendance from the Parochial and Dispensary Medical Officers this quarter, was 947. Of this number 196, or about one fifth were affected with bronchitis; 19 with diarrhœa; 30 with whooping cough; 11 with measles; 3 with chicken pox; 12 with small pox; 22 with fever of various degrees of severity, but usually very mild; 5 with scarlatina; 3 with ague; and only 1 with diphtherite, at Lancashire Court; this last named malady, and the sore throat so prevalent last year are now less frequently heard of. Ague has been prevalent this winter in the western outskirts of London: of the three cases here mentioned, one was that of a boy at 9, George Street, Grosvenor Square, who was attacked by a regular old fashioned 7 tertian, without any detectable cause; the other two cases were from the country. Of the small pox cases, there were sent to the Smallpox Hospital: 1859—Dec. 29. Margaret A., set 26, from 43, Davies Street, vaccinated. 1860—Feb. 11. Thomas S., set 25, 6, Brown Street. „ Mar. 26. James T., at 20, Rose and Crown, Hart Street. The following cases were received into a special set of Wards opened at the Workhouse, Mount Street: I860—Jan. 26. George B., set 15, 3, Tom's Court, not vaccinated. „ Feb. 27. Edward R., set 20, 29, Grosvenor Mews, vaccinated. „ Mar. 3. Caroline J., set 22, 6, Pollen Street, vaccinated, with her infant, not vaccinated, which died of the disease. „ Mar. 17. Jane A., set 18, vaccinated, 18, Queen Street, Oxford Street. Of the cases of small-pox treated at home, we may enumerate that of a young man, set 20, 5 Jan., 1860, who came from the country in search of a place as groom, and was lodging with, and occupying one apartment with his married sister and her husband, at 10, Chapel Street East. How such an arrangement could be tolerated by decent persons, not destitute, is past conception; but it is right to say that it was without the knowledge or consent of the highly respectable tradesman to whom the house belongs, and who put a stop to it, as soon as he knew it. The patient had been vaccinated, and the disease was mild. A girl, set 16,5th February, at Hertford Stables, Brick 8 Street, had been vaccinated at the National Vaccine by Mr. Carpue; cicatrices splendid; disease very mild. A boy of 10, at 41, Thomas Street; a girl of 10, 8, Lancashire Court; vaccinated. Besides the above cases on record at public institutions, we heard of cases at 18, Queen Street, where three children of the same family as Jane A. had the disease. They had all been vaccinated in early life, and their arms present perfect models of cicatrices; but it must be added that the only one of them who had the disease severely was Jane A., who had already had it once, after vaccination! A boy from 16, Davies Mews, removed to the hospital; the assistant of a medical gentleman in Mount Street; six children at 2, Tom's Court; five of them vaccinated; one had been three times attempted, but the vaccination had failed; a girl of 8, at Anderson's Stables, Brick Street; and a man at 21, Bloomfield Buildings. Several other cases were reported, which were not substantiated. Besides the above cases from the Hanover and Mayfair districts, there were received into the wards at Mount Street, from Belgravia: I860—Jan. 23. Henry W., set 23,26, "Westbourne St. vaccinated. „ Feb. 4. Elizabeth Gr., æt 26,16, King's Row. „ „ 15. Martha B.,æt 15,16,Wilton Crescent, vaccinated. „ ,, 21. Charles P., æt 18, 1, Flask Row. „ Mar. 4. Sarah A., æt 59,Grosvenor Row,(died). ,, ,, 9. Henry Potter, æt 32, 6, Gillingham Street, (died) vaccinated. „ „ 12. Thos. B., æt 18, 4, Robert Street, unvaccinated. 9 1860—Mar. 28. Benjamin F., æt 15, 4, Robert Street, unvaccinated. Sent to the Smallpox Hospital. Here follows the usual table of the number of sick cases contributed by the worst parts of the Hanover and Mayfair Districts:— Population. Cases of illness attended Gratuitously. Deaths of children. Deaths of adults. Model Lodgings 130 14 1 0 Blomfield Buildings 130 15 1 0 Brick Street 296 12 2 1 Brown Street 200 37 3 1 Carrington Street 280 20 1 1 George Street, Grosvenor Square 540 49 1 2 Grosvenor Market 211 8 3 0 Grosvenor Mews 944 75 1 2 Hart Street 265 16 2 1 Hertford Place 200 23 0 0 John's Court, Farm Street 80 18 0 0 Lancashire Court 270 32 2 1 May's Buildings 122 10 1 0 Mount Row and Place 133 19 0 1 North Bruton Mews 154 36 3 0 Queen Street 316 18 1 0 Robert Street 543 32 2 1 Thomas Street 600 34 1 0 In the Belgrave Sub-District 6,288 persons were treated by the Parochial Surgeons, at St. George's Hospital, the Royal Pimlico Dispensary, and the St. Paul's and St. Barnabas Dispensary, and at the Workhouse, Little Chelsea. Of these 3,416 were patients at St. George's Hospital, leaving a remainder of 2,872. We find that the total included 17 of small pox, 21 10 of chicken pox, 15 of measles, 20 of scarlatina, 53 of whooping cough, 8 of croup, 106 of diarrhoea, 35 of continued fever, 45 of rheumatic fever, 8 of erysipelas, and 9 of ague, 6 of which occurred in non-parishioners. There were 823 cases of bronchitis, 12 of pleurisy, and 24 of pneumonia. III.—Small-pox and Vaccination. The unusual prevalence of small-pox has caused us to devote considerable attention to the prevention and eradication of the disease, and especially to vaccination; an operation which is still so far neglected or mis-understood by certain classes, that no endeavours to create a sound and correct public opinion can be superfluous. Hence we crave attention to the shortest possible view of the facts and logic of vaccination. How loathsome and terrible a disease the small-pox is, the present generation, thanks to vaccination, has little opportunity of knowing by common observation. Yet a very slight acquaintance with the popular literature of the early part of the last century may convince them, that it was, as Dr. Copland observes, "the most generally diffused, the most frequently epidemic, the most fatal, and the worst treated, of all known pestilences." It spared no age, and no rank in life ; and they who escaped death, ran the greatest risk of blindness, or of permanent ill health, to say nothing of the scars and disfigurement of the countenance. It was noticed, that they who once had the disease, most rarely (it was commonly thought, never) had it again. Hence the disease came to be used as a protection against itself. The custom of implanting it by inoculation, in a cool season of the year, from a mild specimen, and with every precaution to ensure as mild an attack as 11 possible, was long known in the East, was practised upon a son of Lady Mary Wortley Montague at Constantinople, in 1717, was introduced into England in 1721, and was carried on vigorously up to the end of the century. Persons who submitted to the disease in this mild form, got all the protection it could afford, against a future attack; yet there were the obvious disadvantages, that the practice kept the pestilence alive, and scattered the seeds of it broadcast amongst the community at large. At the end of the century, it was discovered by Jenner, that a certain disease of the cow was a protection against small-pox. What the original nature of this cowpox may be, does not matter in practice; yet it deserves notice that there is every reason for believing that it is the small-pox itself, mitigated by having passed through the body of the horse or of the cow, or both. Be this as it may, from the day when vaccination was first performed, on the 14th May, 1796, the almost unanimous consent of civilized nations has testified to the fact that it protects from small-pox, without the disadvantages of inoculation. The latter operation was therefore gradually discontinued, and at last in 1840 was declared illegal, by an Act passed to promote the Extension of Vaccination. This Act was followed in 1853 by an "Act further to extend and make compulsory the Practice of Vaccination," according to the provisions of which, every child is bound to be vaccinated within four months after its birth, and provision is made for the gratuitous vaccination of every child and other person "not already successfully vaccinated." But in spite of the law, some persons remain unvaccinated; and in spite of vaccination, the small-pox occasionally prevails epidemically, striking severely those who are not vaccinated, and not altogether sparing 12 those who are. On these two points we venture to offer some remarks which have occurred to us in the discharge of our duties. First, that some persons remain unvaccinated arises from the fact that some object to vaccination; and that others neglect it out of sheer carelessness. Both of these causes will be diminished by the spread of sound information. The objections are in substance these two; that the protection afforded by vaccination is imperfect; and that itself is liable to produce certain evil consequences. Each of these objections is to a certain degree founded in fact; it is absurd to deny this, and the frank admission is, we humbly conceive, far better adapted to promote universal vaccination, than a dogmatic and disingenuous denial of them. For, after all, these objections amount to very little. As for the imperfection of the protection given, it can only be pretended that vaccine, being a very mild form of small-pox, gives as much protection as an attack of that disease would give in its severest form; but it is well known, that one attack of small-pox is not an absolute protection against a second; we cannot, therefore, expect vaccination to be. Some persons have so great a disposition to take small-pox, that nothing protects them absolutely ; but vaccination protects most persons; and it is unreasonable to object to a good thing, that is not perfect, since nothing human can be perfect. In the next place, it is quite true that children occasionally suffer from skin eruptions after vaccination; and that vaccination, like any other trifling wound, may be, under certain conditions, followed by severe or fatal inflammation. But what then? These ill consequences 13 may generally be prevented, or soon remedied by medical treatment; they are but a feather in the scale, and not to be compared to the inconveniences which follow small-pox. To all objectors on principle, or from reasons however inconclusive, we would shew the most scrupulous tenderness; and believe that by fairly admitting the amount of truth which these objections really possess, and by a little good-natured treatment, they may generally be disposed of. But as to those who neglect vaccination from pure carelessness, they are entitled to no consideration; and no feelings of delicacy need prevent us from coercing them. Yet the question arises, is it possible to coerce them? and if possible, is it expedient? We believe that both questions may be answered in the negative. Respecting the power of compelling the refractory by law to be vaccinated, we may observe that we were favoured with an audience of the Board of Governors and Directors of the poor of St. George, Hanover Square, in March 1860, when we laid before them a representation from the whole body of Metropolitan Medical Officers of Health, and a memorial from ourselves, respecting the defects of the present law, and a prayer that they would take steps to procure an amendment of it. Our memorial was kindly forwarded by a nobleman present, to the noble lord who promoted the present Vaccination Bill, and who admitted its defects; but as to a remedy, neither private members of the legislature nor the government seem to have much appetite for medical Acts of Parliament. The defects of the Act are these:—When the birth of any child is registered, the registrar is bound to give a notice to the father or guardian, requiring such child to 14 be vaccinated within three months; and "if after such notice" the father or guardian does not cause the child to be vaccinated, he is liable to a penalty of twenty shillings. But all children are not registered to begin with; and it would be necessary to prove registration and delivery of the notice before enforcing the penalty; and this is practically impossible. Moreover, in order that it may be known what children a'nd how many are vaccinated, the Act provides that the Registrars of Births shall keep a register of vaccinated children. But it also provides that a certificate of every case of successful vaccination shall be sent by medical practitioners to the Registrar of the district—not where the children were born, but where the operation was performed. Thus, as a child may be born and its birth be registered at Chelsea, and the vaccination be performed and registered in May Fair, it is evident that the Registration gives no clue whatever to what is really desired to be known; viz. the proportion of vaccinations to births in any given district. The Act further makes no provision for re-vaccination. Whilst thankfully acknowledging the services which this Act has rendered by providing gratuitous vaccination for all who choose to avail themselves of it, we may state that it fails in securing compulsory vaccination, but we may add our belief that no Act can ever effect this ; it must be the result of increasing intelligence, and will be greatly promoted by good-humoured persuasion; An Act may be useful to hold out in terrorem over the low Irish, but the enforcing such a law on the English would be a hazardous experiment. The recent spread of small-pox has been without doubt promoted by the residual number of unvaccinated 15 and ill-vaccinated persons. But this cannot be the whole truth; for we know but too well that though vaccinated persons are almost exempt from small-pox, and that even if they do catch small-pox, they are almost exempt from death, yet that neither proposition is absolutely true, either of those vaccinated, or of those who have had small-pox. Hence we believe that a thorough eradication, if possible, would be obtained, not by vaccination alone, but by cleansing or pulling down old houses, and getting rid of old wall paper, bedding and clothing, and other accumulations, where the poison can lurk and break out from time to time whenever the season suits it. In inspecting the children of the various schools, for the purpose of ascertaining the vaccination, we could not help being struck with the painful evidence of personal uncleanliness, of ill-conditioned and half diseased skins, and of the odour of old garments, too decayed for strings and buttons, but curiously pinned on and hidden by a pinafore. It occurred to us, that if these children did not have small-pox, they must have something else. Now for our own operations in the matter: we may say that by occasionally looking in at the schools, and enquiring after the younger children, and keeping the masters and mistresses in mind of their rules, that all children shall be vaccinated before admission, there is no possibility of the existence of unvaccinated children in great numbers, or necessity for measures which bespeak alarm or panic. Early in January, by way of experiment, a list was made, by permission of the Registrar General, of the children born in the poorest streets and mews of May Fair during 1859. A messenger was sent round to 98 families, with the result, that no fewer than 45 had left 16 their lodgings, and could not be heard of. These were families of grooms and other servants, and mechanics. Of the remaining 53 infants, 33 had been vaccinated, and 20 not; but the majority of those not vaccinated, were infants under three months. In the next place, the schools were visited and many or all of the children inspected, as seemed necessary. The number of the children at the schools is interesting. At the Grosvenor Infant School, of 98 children, 3 were found unvaccinated, 1 of whom was not a parishioner. The mistress and several of the elder girls, and doubtful cases, re-vaccinated. Curzon School. Boys, 87; girls, 69; infants, 168. The boys and girls were inspected in the autumn. Of the infants none required vaccination. South Street Schools. 510 children. Vaccination thoroughly looked after by master and mistress. John's Court, Farm Street Schools. 75 boys, 60 girls, 70 infants; four unvaccinated. St. Mark's Schools. 130 boys, 130 girls, 160 infants. 30 re-vaccinated. Hanover School. 120 boys, 120 girls, 125 infants. 53 boys and 25 girls and teachers re-vaccinated. Catholic School, Davie; Mews. Mixed school; 96 children ; a fourth non-parishioners. At the Hanover, St. Mark's, Curzon, Grosvenor, and the Catholic Schools, a regular visitation was made with Mr. Jay, the vaccinator, and all children whose vaccination was doubtful were re-vaccinated. In mentioning Mr. Jay's name, it is but fair to record the zeal and efficiency which he displayed; the trouble he took in going to vaccinate those who would not come to him; and the skill and care with which it was evident the 17 operation had been performed on the children for a series of years. The following schools, situate in the Belgrave subdistrict have been visited by Dr. Aldis, the arms of the children examined, and vaccination performed by Mr. Jorden in those who required it. At St. Peter's National School. 290 pupils were examined, of whom 14 were vaccinated. At St. Paul's School's, Knightsbridge. 235 pupils were examined, and 3 vaccinated. At St. Barnabas School. 249 were examined, and 13 vaccinated. At the Refuge. Two young women out of 12 were vaccinated. At the Orphanage. Three children, 2 of which had been vaccinated, out of 29, and 1 only, who had not undergone the operation, became infected. At St. Barnabas Free School. Eight were vaccinated, from among 90. At St. Gabriel's School. Two among 150 children needed vaccination. At Eaton Chapel School. One out of 105 was vaccinated. At Ebury Street Schools. Two required to be vaccinated out of 64 pupils, and they were the children of the schoolmistress. At Eccleston Chapel Sunday School. Where the medical officer attended on two Sunday afternoons, 299 were examined, and 8 vaccinated. Thames Bank Distillery School. All the children, who were very young, showed marks of vaccination. Catholic School, Ranelagh Grove. 104 children; 4 vaccinated. Brewer Street, Pimlico. A house to house visitation B 18 was made here, in consequence of several persons having been attacked with small-pox, most of whom appear to have become infected in Westminster. Sanitary measures were recommended, and 4 vaccinated. This opportunity is taken to thank Mr. Jorden for the skill and attention bestowed upon the cases brought to his notice. The Lords of Her Majesty's Privy Council having requested Dr. Seaton to make some inquiries upon the spread of small-pox, he conferred with the Medical Officers of Health, and the following suggestions were brought before the notice of the Poor Board, at their Meeting, of January 1860— 1. Issuing Notices. 2. Examination of children at parochial and other charity schools, and making arrangements for all unvaccinated children to be vaccinated. 3. Large employers to be communicated with for a similar object. 4. District medical officers to inquire in houses where they are in attendance, as to the vaccination of the inmates. 5. Registrars to supply lists of children born within the last 12 months, when vaccinations have not been registered, and in those localities in which it is deemed right by the Medical Officers of Health, the inspectors to inquire. If it be found that the children had not been vaccinated, notice to be served on the parties liable. 6. House to house visitation in certain localities where it may be deemed expedient. 7. To obtain early information of the existence of the disease. 19 The Board, after consultation, ordered the accompanying notice to be printed and circulated under the direction of the Medical Officers of Health, and inquiry to be made of the district registrars regarding the best mode of carrying out the 5th recommendation. NOTICE.—Small Pox.—Parish of St. George, Hanover Square.—In consequence of the presence of Small Pox in a severe and fatal form in various parts of London, the attention of all unvaccinated persons, and of the parents and guardians of all unvaccinated children, is earnestly called to the necessity of having Vaccination performed without delay. Already, during the present epidemic, above a thousand inhabitants of London have died from small-pox, whose lives, in almost every instance, might have been saved by efficient vaccination. Hitherto the disease has been almost confined to the more eastern and southern districts; but, it is now extending to the more western and northern parts of London, and there have been within the last few weeks several deaths from it in this parish. The public is therefore warned, that no time ought to be lost, before having vaccination performed. Grown-up persons, who were vaccinated in infancy, and have not since been re-vaccinated, are earnestly advised now to have this done, as they will thereby be rendered more secure. The public vaccinator of this parish attends regularly at the undermentioned time and place, to vaccinate, free of expense, all applicants, viz.:—for the In-Wards of the parish, Mr. Edward Jay, 51, Park Street, Grosvenor Square, on Mondays, between the hours of ten and twelve 20 o'clock; for the Out-Wards, Mr. W. P. Jorden, 14, Lower Belgrave Street, Eaton Square, on Mondays, between 9 and 1 o'clock. It must be remembered, that unless the arms of those vaccinated are afterwards properly examined, there can be no satisfactory assurance of protection against the dangers of small-pox. The law accordingly requires, that all persons vaccinated by the public vaccinators, shall attend for the purpose of this examination on the day week succeeding. Parents and guardians of all children born since the first of August, 1853, are liable to a fine if they neglect to have such children duly vaccinated. By order of the Governors and Directors of the Poor, T. B. CHAPPELL, Dated the 10th day of January, 1860. Clerk. IV. In the next place there follow the details of cases brought before the local authority during the quarter. Brook Street, No.—. This house was noticed in the report for Midsummer 1858, p. 6. The children were affected with choleraic symptoms in 1856, and again in 1858, when the water was suspected to be poisoned, and sent to be analyzed. Now, in February 1860, diphtherite appeared, as has been related in a former page. This house is overlapped at the back by the next house, so that there are no windows to the staircase and no means of ventilating the water closets. The air supply to the whole house was very deficient. The water-closets of the adjoining house had, for a fortnight previous to the outbreak of illness, leaked into this house, creating an intolerable effluvium. The four water- 21 closets of each house, eight altogether, discharged their contents into a pipe, which communicated with a rainwater pipe running down in an angle between the two houses at the back, and opening at the top into a gutter outside the nursery window. The basement was ill-ventilated and damp, and a strong current of sewer air came up from a decayed drain into the butler's pantry. Now, in such a house, acute disease, according to the writer's experience, is more likely to happen than not, either of the choleraic, or of the throat order; besides a general chronic state of debility. The house has been cleansed, and arrangements made for letting in more pure air, and for excluding sewer vapours. Mount Street, No. 16. This was a troublesome business. A veterinary surgeon from Yorkshire took the upper part of the house, and the back part of the ground floor; the latter part, consisting of rooms built on the earth, over the yard, with no ventilation except by skylights. One of the walls was an old spongy one, originally intended merely as the partition wall of the yard, and was rather damp. Some part of the water apparatus was out of order; and it was soon afterwards found, in consequence of complaint from the occupant of No. 17, that the drains in the basement were in a bad state. The new tenant, on coming downstairs in the morning after sleeping in the house for the first time, was so astonished at the atmosphere of it (for be it observed that when the yard is covered over all vapours must rise into the house) that he instantly applied to the Medical Officer of Health, and most pertinaciously and peremptorily required him to give a certificate of the unwholesomeness of the house, in the hope that it would enable him to get rid of the agreement which he, albeit a Yorkshireman and horse 22 doctor, had too hastily signed. It appeared, however, to the Medical Officer of Health, that it was his duty to cause all sources of unwholesome air to he removed, and the ventilation to be improved, but not to interfere in any other way. Davies Street, Nos. 42 and 43. A case of small-pox occurred in the latter house. In the former, the drains were so absolutely decayed and broken down, that no solid sewage could have passed through them for years, and a vast quantity of water must have leaked out of them into the gravel, and the next house was annoyed by effluvia. Anderson''s Stable-yard adjoining No. 10, Brick Street. Here pigs were kept. A case of small-pox in a child, and a case of ague in the mother, last autumn. The pigs and a common privy have been removed. Brick Street, No. 10, 11, and 12. Here common privies have been removed and water-closets substituted. Queen Street, Oxford Street, No. 17. Here there was fever, and a kitchen made filthy by the inmates. They have been turned out, and the place cleansed. The back yard is roofed in with glass, so as to interfere with the ventilation of the back part of the house, and of a cottage in the yard. Thomas Street, No. 40 and 41. In consequence of a case of small-pox in the latter house, and complaints of offensive effluvia, new pipe drains have been laid down in the front area, and the inlets trapped. Mount Street, No. 52. Death from scarlet fever ; some apartments dirty and drainage suspicious. Ditto, No. 84. Scarlet fever. The infected apartments have been cleansed. Park Lane, No. 6. Here a lamentable death from 23 fever occurred: a person who entered on the stables as lessee, dying in a fortnight. No adequate cause detected. Weaver's Place, No. 3. Fever; house clean, but cannot be ventilated. Grosvenor Mews, No. 38. Fever; apartments cleansed. Eaton Court, No. 5. Fever; the apartments cleansed. Tom's Court, Nos. 2 and 3. Cleansed in consequence of small-pox. The other houses, in which cases of this last-named disease occurred, were cleansed, but require no special notice; as No. 6, Brown Street, No. 29, Grosvenor Mews, No. 16, Davies Mews. Jones'1 Place, Grosvenor Mews, No. 2. Here was a death from diphtheria in the preceding quarter. Robert Street, No. 24. The back kitchen inhabited, dirty, and destitute of the legal qualifications for a residence. It has been cleansed and disused as a dwelling. South Molton Street, No. 39. A closet without water, and drains untrapped. Mount Row, No. 2. This house was perfectly drained, but received effluvia from an old disused brick drain in No. 1. This has been broken up and done away with. Ducking-Pond Mews, No. 3. A stable utterly without drainage of any sort. Has been properly drained under the superintendence of the Inspector. Davies Street, Nos. 53, 54, and 55. These three houses drain by one outlet into Brook's Mews, which having become dilapidated has been repaired. Lancashire Court, Nos. 1, 2, and 3, have been often inspected, and No. 8, partially cleansed in consequence of small-pox. This court is worse rather than better. Tenterden Street, No. 2. An obscure case of dampness. 24 Adam's Mews, No. 10. A dirty marine store dealer's. A complaint of nuisance committed by the workmen in Davis's lamp factory, over Harslett's cow-shed, a most improper place for both factory and cows. The urinal in Adam's Mews, close to the door of No. 11, and belonging to the owner of the hotel. A notice was served requiring it to be cleansed and deodorized. Dung-pit nuisances at Evans's stables, No. 54, Brook Street and No. 20, Park Lane have, as well as the foregoing cases, been attended to by the Inspector. Certain improvements required at No. 17, Avery Row, No. 6, Maddox Street, No. 7, Hart Street, and No. 10, North Row, are not yet completed. May's Buildings, Nos. 3, 4, and 5. Here, kitchens inhabited contrary to the provisions of the Metropolis Local Management Act, have been closed. The returns of sanitary inspections and recommendations made in the Belgrave sub-district relate to the following places:— Brewer Street, Pimlico, No. 21. A complaint of overcrowding in this house, and other nuisances, for which there was no foundation. The only nuisance in the house was caused by the complainant herself, who commenced collecting bones, &c., and wished to carry on the business of a marine store dealer, which the occupier would not allow. Upper Ebury Street, Pimlico, No. 28. Leakage of offensive water from the adjoining premises into the back yard, caused by a defective state of a water-closet in No. 25 7, Little Ebury Street, against the party wall. The closet and pipes have been repaired. Nell Gwynne Cottages, Grosvenor Row, Nos. 1, 2, 3, and 4. The ceilings of the rooms were dirty, and the roofs admitted rain. The ceilings have been limewashed, the rooms cleansed, and the roofs put into proper order. Upper Ebury Street, No. 62. The back room on the first floor is dirty, and out of repair. Dr. Aldis visited a child which was suffering from dysentery. He found it lying upon a narrow mattress placed on the floor, with scarcely any covering, and there was no furniture in the room. It appeared that the landlord was willing to do anything that might be required, and to forego the whole rent which was due, as soon as the family left the room. He also said that the mother of the child told a falsehood by stating that she possessed good furniture. It proved to be one of those cases wherein the parent obtained more money at home than by entering the workhouse, where the child would have been properly relieved. Ebury Street, No. 66, Upper Denbigh Mews, and O'Connor's Yard, West Street. A large quantity of dung has been removed from these places. Mr. Hatt's Cow-sheds, between Eccleston Street and Ebury Street. The walls were dirty, and have been limewashed. Messrs. Watlings' Yard, Charlotte Street, Pimlico. A large quantity of blood and garbage mixed with dung in the pit under the chapel window. The nuisance has been removed, and the pit cleansed. Ranelagh Street, No. 34. The house was infected 26 with small-pox. The closet was out of repair and the ash-pit full. Remedied. Eaton Lane North. The dust was removed from 22 houses. Eaton Court, Eaton Lane. Dust removed from 17 houses. Roger's Court, Eaton Lane. Dust removed from five houses. Eaton Lane North, Nos. 7 and 11. Marine store dealers. The houses have been limewashed and cleansed. King Street, Nos. 2, 3, and 8. The dust has been removed. There can be no doubt that the dustmen had been very negligent with regard to the removal of house refuse from this spot, as well as from several other places, although it is alleged that when they called, some persons refused to have it taken away; yet when the cart was taken for that purpose in the evening, after much delay, the occupiers, some of whom were laundresses, objected to its removal, on account of the unseasonable hour, fearing that the clean linen might be soiled. Much however, of the evil arising from the non-removal of dust at the proper time, has been obviated by the vigilance of the Inspector. Cases of small-pox having occurred at No. 7, Gillingham Street, No. 65, Hanover Street, No. 6, Eaton Place South, and No. 12, Caroline Street, directions were left by the Medical Officer for limewashing and cleansing, which have been done. Caledonia Street, No, 13. A large quantity of decomposed vegetable matter, with other refuse, has been removed. Messrs. Wood and Son's Yard, Grosvenor Row. A 27 quantity of garbage mixed with dung, which has been taken away, and the yard cleansed. Gregory Street, No. 12. This house was visited by the Medical Officer, on account of its being infected with scarlet fever. Flask Lane, Nos. 1 and 3. It may be remembered that the front kitchens in these houses have been already reported as unfit to be used as separate dwellings, because they have not the requirements mentioned in the 103 rd section of the Metropolis Local Management Act. The landlord has sent away former tenants by the express wish of the Inspector and Medical Officer; but immediately afterwards, has let them again to other persons. It may also be recollected that the question of underground dwellings was referred to the Vestry, who directed the District Surveyors to report upon them, and sent the reports to the Nuisances' Removal Committee, with a decision that the Medical Officers of Health should deal with them in such a manner as they might think advisable. Dr. Aldis, therefore, wrote a letter, dated January 27th, to the owner of the above premises to the following effect:— "The District Surveyor for the parish of St. George, Hanover Square, having reported the front kitchens in your houses, Nos. 1 and 3, Flask Lane, as not possessing the necessary requisites for separate dwellings, it became the Medical Officer's duty to inform the owner that unless he at once discontinued to let them, proceedings would be taken in accordance with the 103rd section of the Metropolis Local Management Act, which would render him liable to a penalty of twenty shillings for every day during which the same continued to be so let or occupied." Since then the kitchens at Nos. 1 and 3, have not been 28 used as dwellings; and that at No. 3, has been limewashed and cleansed, and water laid on to the closet. Ditto, No. 14. This house was visited by the Medical Officer on account of its being infected with scarlet fever Brewer Street, No. 30. House infected with smallpox, and dampness complained of from the drains, which must be opened before a report upon them can be made. Ditto, No. 22. Infected with small-pox, and the room occupied by the patient was dirty. A notice was served on January 23rd; and the rooms, with the yard, limewashed and cleansed. Westbourne Street, No. 65. A notice having been served on January 23rd, 1860, a new water-closet was erected. Ditto, No. 66. An old brick drain out of repair, and causing a nuisance. A notice having been served on January 23rd, the drains were cleansed and repaired, the closet trapped, and water laid on, and a new covered dust-pit erected. Parade House, Thames Bank. The Medical Officer visited this house in consequence of its being infected with small-pox. Westbourne Street, No. 26. House infected with smallpox. The patient was in the upper back room, which was small, and without a fire-place, or sufficient ventilation. The man was immediately removed to the smallpox wards in Mount Street, and the room limewashed and better ventilated. Ranelagh Grove, No. 11. House infected with smallpox. A man and his wife were affected, and it is curious, that the husband, although vaccinated, was the 29 first to be attacked, and communicated the complaint to his wife, who was unvaccinated. Rutland Terrace, No. 8. House infected with small-pox. St. George's Square, No. 39. The house was infected with small-pox. Tachbrook Street, No. 43. Ditto. dough's Cottages, Elizabeth Street South, Pimlico. Leakage of water from the adjoining houses, caused by an obstruction in the gully opposite, which has been cleansed, and the nuisance abated. Upper hbury Street, No. 54. This house was dirty and dilapidated throughout. The work is finished. Mr. Faulkner's Building Yard, at the rear of No. 9, Ranelagh Place. A notice having been served on Feb. 1, the cesspools were abolished, and the dung removed. Westbourne Street, No. 9. The upper back room was dirty, in consequence of a man occupying it who appears to be of unsound mind. The Medical Officer caused the man to be taken to the workhouse, and the room has been cleansed. Ditto, No. 76. This house was infected with scarlet fever. Robert Street, Commercial Road South, No. 2. House infected with small-pox. Upper Ebury Street, No. 2. The Medical Officer found three cases of scarlet fever in the house, a marine store dealer's, which was dirty. It has been repaired, limewashed, and cleansed. Mr. Hatt's Cow-yard, Eccleston Street East. An accumulation of dung during two days. A similar nuisance existed in Mr. Hatt's other yard in Brewer Street. In both instances the nuisance has been abated. 30 Westbourne Street, No. 55. A most offensive effluvium in the kitchen. The owner was recommended to have the floor taken up, and the drains opened for inspection, which has been done. Ditto, No. 54. A new water-closet and covered dustpit have been erected. Ditto, No. 51. Leakage of water into the watercloset, from a cistern in Mr. Newson's building yard adjoining. The cistern has been repaired. King's Row, Pimlico, No. 16. House infected with small-pox, and the room, occupied by the patient, dirty. She was admitted into the wards, at Mount Street, and the room has been cleansed. Ranelagli Grove, No. 8. House infected with smallpox. The patient refused to be taken into the wards at Mount Street. Mr. Smith's Stables, Gillingham Street. Infccted with small-pox. The patient appears to have taken the complaint from others who had been similarly affected, and resided in the same street. Wilton Road, No. 5. Infected with small-pox. The patient declined to be taken to the wards in Mount Street. Chester Square, No. 14. Infected with small-pox. Windsor Terrace, Vauxliall Road, No. 5. Leakage of water into it from No. 4, adjoining premises, and caused by the defective state of a water-closet againt the party wall. The nuisance has been abated. Berwick Street, No. 32. The house was infected with small-pox. There were three cases here, and the occupier complained of the drains, which have been repaired. Garden Terrace, No. 4. Infected with small-pox. The 31 mother refused to have her son removed to the wards in Mount Street. Upper Ebury Street, No. 30. Infected with scarlatina. Three children were ill at the same time, one with malignant scarlet fever, terminating in croup and bronchitis, which proved fatal. The father was paralyzed, and the wife worn out with distress and anxiety. The house is in a very dirty condition. A notice was served on March 10, 1860, and the premises are undergoing a thorough repair. Gloucester Terrace, St. George's Road, No. 3. Infected with small-pox. Wilton Crescent, No. 16. Infected with small-pox. The patient was removed to the wards in Mount Street, and the other servants were re-vaccinated. Chesham Place, No. 7. Infected with small-pox. Queen Street, Pimlico, No. 38. Case of whoopingcough in the front attic, and of bronchitis in the back one. The roof has been repaired and ceilings limewhited. Spring Garden Place, No. 1. Infected with small-pox. The patient caught the complaint while in the service of a Russian nobleman residing in Chester Square. The staircase and bed room have been limewhited. Queen Street, Pimlico, No. 43. The family occupying the attics are affected with sore throat, and the ceilings dirty, which have been limewhited. Knightsbridge Terrace, Hyde Park Corner, No. 1. The drains at the back part of the house are stopped up. The drains of this house and the drains of the three adjoining ones pass behind, along the terrace into the sewer in William Street. The occupiers intend to have their houses drained into the sewer in front. New "Grenadier" Public House, Crescent Mews, Wilton 32 Crescent. The drains are stopped up; there is no water to the closet. A notice was served on March 10. The drains have been cleansed and repaired, and water laid on to the closet. Back of Chester Terrace, Chester Square. A large quantity of dung has been removed. St. George's Row, No. 28. Infected with small-pox. Susannah Place, Little Ebury Street, Nos. 1, 2, and 3. Dirty throughout, water-butts dirty, and several of the inlets to the drains are untrapped. Each house has been properly limewashed, and the water-butts cleansed, Eccleston Place, No. 11. Infected with small-pox, and the house dirty. A notice was served on March 31, and the house is now being cleansed. Robert Street (left-hand side), No. 5. Infected with chicken-pox, small-pox, and the front parlour overcrowded. Dr. Aldis visited this house on Saturday, March 10, and found a case of chicken-pox in the back room. He went there again on the following Monday night, and found an infant suffering from small-pox, in the front room, which was occupied by a man, his wife, and seven children, together with a nurse-child, which had been sent there at 4s. a-week, for the benefit of the occupier. A person having been heard to groan in the upper back room, he inspected it, and saw a man exceedingly ill, covered with an eruption of small-pox, and blisters on his fingers produced by his falling into the fire. There certainly was a bedstead, but only a blanket to cover himself, mother, and brother. He had not received any medical attendance. A note was immediately forwarded to the workhouse, requesting a conveyance to be sent, that the sick man might be taken to Mount Street. The application was promptly attended to; and although late, the man was 33 received into the wards in Mount Street the same night. It is singular that no one told the Medical Officer of the cases of small-pox when he called on Saturday, although the disease had appeared on the previous Thursday, but probably the concealment was intentional. The overcrowding has been abated. Robert Street (right-hand side), No. 4. Infected with small-pox. Ditto, No. 8. Infected with small-pox. Commercial Road South, No. 24. Infected with smallpox. The room where the patient lies is damp, caused by an obstruction—now removed—in the rain water-pipe. O' Connor's Yard, West Street. A large quantity of dung has been removed from here, and from Eccleston Place. Eccleston Place, No. 20. Infected with small-pox. Gillingham Street, No. 60. Infected with small-pox. An analysis of the water supplied by the Chelsea Company, and taken January 3rd, 1860, from the main at Chapel Street, Belgrave Square, produced Grains per Gallon. Total Impurity 18.00 Organic ditto 2.12 February 7th, 1860, Total Residue 20.86 Organic Impurity 1.68 March, 6th, 1860, Total Residue 20.56 Total Impurity 1.60 We have the honour to be, Your faithful Servants, C. J. B. Aldis, M.D. R. Droitt. O 34 Short Summary of Births, Deaths, Vaccinations, and Sanitary Statistics and Improvements, for One Year, from April 2nd 1859, to March 31st, 1860. Births. The number of births in the whole parish was 2,300 or 44.2 per week. In the two years ending April 1, 1858 and 1859 respectively, the numbers were 2,165, or 41.6 per week, and 2,288, or 43.1 per week. In the Hanover and May Fair Sub-Districts 710 births against 660 and 705 in the preceding two years; in the Belgrave, 1,590, against 1,505 and 1,583 in the preceding two years respectively. Deaths. Gross number of deaths 1,837, or 35.3 per week; during the two preceding years, 1,768, or 34 per week, and 1,838 (in 53 weeks), or 34.7 per week. District Mortality. The deaths of non-parishioners in St. George's Hospital were 243, against 255 and 251 in the last two years respectively. The deaths of parishioners, 73 against 56 and 63. Of the 73, 24 came from the Hanover and May Fair, and 49 from Belgravia. In Mount Street Workhouse 72 deaths, against 88 and 75; in Little Chelsea 28, against 41 and 33; in the Orthopaedic Hospital 1 child. The deaths in the Serpentine have been 5, viz., 4 suicides, and 1 drowning by the ice breaking. In Hyde Park, 5, viz., 4 infants found murdered, and one which died a natural death there; 1 murdered infant found in Bolton yard. In the Hanover and May Fair Sub-Districts, the gross total mortality for four years has been respectively 35 560, 605, 543, and 567. The weekly averages being 10.76, 11.63, 10.26, and 10.9, for the four years respectively. And the deaths were at the rate of 17 per 1,000 of the population, supposing the population to be stationary at 33,000, which was the amount in 1851. In the aristocratic and first-class business streets of the Hanover and May Fair Sub-Districts, taken together (such as Albemarle, Arlington, Audley, Berkeley, Bond, Bolton, Brook, &c., &c.), the population of which was in round numbers 20,000 at the census of 1851, the deaths in the last four years, ending respectively 31st March, 1857, 58, 59, and 60, have been respectively 216, 209, 192, and 201; or at the rate 10.8, 10.45, 9.4, and 10.05 deaths per annum, out of every 1,000 living. In the second rate business streets, and the thoroughly poor streets and mews of these Sub-Districts (such as Adam's Mews, Avery Row, Bruton Mews, Bell Yard, Bishop's Yard, &c., &c.), the population of which in 1851 was in round numbers 13,000, the deaths at home during the four years were 251, 293, 269, and 279 respectively, that is at the rate of 19.3, 22.4, 20.3, and 21.46 per 1,000 living per annum. But inasmuch as many of our streets are of a mixed character, suppose we take the mews separately from the other dwellings of the labouring classes. Their population in 1851 was nearly 3,000; the average mortality during the preceding three years was nearly 16 per 1,000 per annum. During the year just expired it was 17.6 per 1,000; and the deaths under 20 were 64 per cent, of the whole. Let us next take a group of purely ARISTOCRATIC streets —Berkeley Square, Grosvenor Square, Upper Brook Street, Upper Grosvenor Street, Park Lane, Hill Street, and Norfolk Street. These are specimens of streets 36 habited by noblemen and gentlemen solely. Their population is 2,600. During the three years ending April 1st, 1859, the deaths in those streets were 45, or at the rate of 6 per 1,000 per annum; and of these deaths 3 or 6½ per cent, were of persons under 20. During the year just past, the deaths in these streets were 22, of which 4, or 18 per cent., were under 20 years of age. Let us next take a cluster of purely commercial streets —New and Old Bond Streets, Oxford Street (south side, west of Regent's Circus), Maddox Street, and North Audley Street; the population 3,158. The deaths in the foregoing three years were 119, of which 25 per cent, were under 20. This year the deaths were 39, of which 13, or 33 per cent., were under 20. Lastly, let us take a cluster of streets, inhabited by a strictly artizan population, such as Brick Street, Brown Street, Gilbert Street, George Street, (Grosvenor Square,) Hart Street, Robert Street, South Molton Street, Thomas Street, Union Street, Woodstock Street. Their united population is 4,413; the deaths in the three foregoing years added together equal 298, of which 151 were of persons under 20. During this last year the deaths were 93, of which 50, i. e. more than 50 per cent, were under 20. These figures show very conclusively that the older parts of St. George, Hanover Square, are decidedly healthy on paper-, the gross death-rate being that of a country village. But when the facts come to be dissected, it is found that the apparently low rate is got by mixing up the mortality of the rich with that of the poor. And it is found further, not only that the mortality of the poor is double that of the rich; but that the deaths under 5 amount to one-half of it. 37 It may be added, that of the whole population of the parish at least 1 person out of every 9 who dies, dies in a bed provided by public or private charity; i. e. either in hospital or workhouse. The mortality of some of the worst streets is considerably mitigated this year. For example: South Molton Street, in the last three years consecutively lost 18, 11, and 11; this year 7. Robert Street lost 13, 18, and 18; this year only 6. Thomas Street 8, 10, and 10; this year 11. Hertford Street this year had 13 deaths, exactly thrice its average. Carrington Street 11 deaths, 50 per cent, above the average. Mortality of Belgravia. The deaths at home were 926; weekly average 17.8, against 948, weekly average 17.8 in the preceding year of 53 weeks. In the year ending March 31st, 1858, the deaths at home were 813, but the greatly increasing population in this part of the parish should be considered. Causes of Death. There have been 346 deaths from zymotic disease this year, against 343 and 345 in the two preceding years; 8 from small-pox, against 4 last year; 49 from scarlatina, 29 from diphtheria, 4 from sore throat, altogether 82 from these throat diseases, against 109 and 75 in the two preceding years; 44 from fevers, against 59 and 57; 83 from diarrhoea, dyseutery, and cholera, whereas the numbers in the two preceding years were 76 and 48. Lastly, from diseases of degeneration, including teething, convulsions, consumption, and scrofula, the deaths were 353, against 346 and 395 in the foregoing two years respectively. Sickness. The number of cases relieved by the parochial and dispensary Medical Attendants, in the Hanover and May Fair Sub-Districts, 3,592. Of these, bronchitis 38 and catarrh contributed 500, diarrhœa 306, dysentery 3, various forms of sore throat 44, scarlet fever 141, diphtherite 4, fever (usually slight) 80, measles 84, whooping cough 38, ague 4, chicken-pox 7, small-pox 14. The entire number of cases of small-pox known to have occurred is 33, of which 2 were fatal. In the Belgrave Sub-District during the year, 23,220 cases were treated by the Parochial Surgeons, at St. George's Hospital, the Royal Pimlico Dispensary, and the St. Paul and St. Barnabas Dispensary, and at the Workhouse, Little Chelsea. Of these, 13,189 were patients at St. George's Hospital, leaving a remainder of 10,031. We find that the whole included 245 of measles, 48 of chicken pox, 57 of scarlatina, 136 of whooping cough, 1,218 of diarrhœa, 142 of continued fever, 195 of rheumatic fever, 52 of erysipelas, 11 of diphtheria, 29 of small pox, 6 of cholera, 11 of croup, and 14 of ague, 9 of which occurred in non-parishioners. The Medical Officer ascertained the existence of 51 cases of small pox, many of which occurred in private practice. He visited and reported 47 in the Complaints of Nuisances' Book for the Out-Ward between November 22 and March 19 inclusive. There were also 1804 cases of bronchitis, 22 of pleurisy, and 61 of pneumonia. Thanks are due to Messrs. W. Griffiith, E. Davis, and W. Pain, for their kind assistance in making returns of sickness. Vaccinations. During the year ending 25th March, 1860, Mr. Jay, District Vaccinator for the Hanover and May Fair Sub-Districts, vaccinated 853 persons; of these 423 were primary vaccinations, the remaining 430 were 39 cases of re-vaccination; of which 290 were successful and 140 unsuccessful. During the year from 1st April, 1859, to 31st March, 1860, Mr. Jorden vaccinated 1,074 persons; the numbers in the four consecutive quarters being 210, 193, 191, and 480. Total vaccination: this year 1,927 persons, against 782 and 1,025 in the foregoing two years. Sanitary Improvement. The number of nuisances reported in the year by Mr. Grant 735, against 425 last year. Notices served 182. In the Hanover and May Fair 362 cases ; 81 notices. Belgrave District 355 cases; 101 notices, 1 summons, and 1 magistrate's order. It is impossible to close this Report without bearing witness to the ability and good temper with which Mr. Grant discharges the duties of his office; difficult and unpalatable as any interference with private premises must often be. 40 APPENDIX. The result of experiments made during the first quarter of 1860 upon the Gas supplied to the Workhouse, Mount Street, is, that 2.5 feet per hour, burned in a batswing burner, gave a light equal to that of 13.5 sperm candles, burning 120 grains per hour. During January and February complaints were made of imperfect supply and offensive fumes. During March there was no complaint. During the same quarter, the gas supplied to the room in Ebury Mews, burned in a batswing burner, gave a light equal to that of 11.41 sperm candles, consuming 120 grains per hour, and presented no traces of sulphuretted hydrogen. Dr. Aldis tested the meter on January 18th, 1860, and found that it registered most accurately. TABLE OF MORTALITY. DEATHS registered in the Parish of St. George, Hanover Square, in the 13 Weeks endinq 31 st of March, 1860. Average, 42. DISEASES. Ages at Death. Sub-Districts and Population. Sexes. Under 1. 1 and under 5. Total under 20. 20 and under 40. 40 and under 60. 60 and under 80. 80 and above. Hanover Square.—20,216. May Fair.—12,980. Belgrave.—40,034. Mount-street Work.—268. Little Chelsea Work.—350. St. George's Hospital. —216. Males, 31,920. Females, 41,310. Total, 73,230. Parishioners, Nonparishioners. I. Zymotic. Small-pox 2 1 3 .. .. .. .. .. .. 3 .. .. .. .. 1 2 3 Measles .. 6 7 .. .. .. .. 6 .. 1 .. .. .. .. 4 3 7 Searlatina 1 6 13 1 .. .. .. 1 .. 9 .. .. 2 2 7 7 14 Diphtherite .. 2 5 .. 1 .. .. 3 1 2 .. .. .. .. 5 1 6 Whooping Cough 8 11 20 .. .. .. .. 3 .. 17 .. .. .. .. 12 8 20 Croup .. 4 4 .. .. .. .. .. .. 2 .. .. 1 1 1 6 4 Thrush 1 .. 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 .. .. .. .. 1 .. 1 Malignant Sore Throat .. 1 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 .. .. .. .. .. 1 1 Diarrhœa 2 .. 2 .. 1 1 .. 1 .. 2 1 .. .. .. 2 2 4 Dysentery .. .. .. .. 1 .. .. .. .. 1 .. .. .. .. 1 .. 1 Cholera .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Influenza .. .. .. .. .. 2 .. .. .. 2 .. .. .. .. 1 1 2 Ague .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Remittent Fever .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Infantile Fever .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Typhus Fever .. 2 6 .. 1 1 .. 1 1 5 .. .. .. 1 4 4 8 Child-bed Fever .. .. .. .. 1 .. .. 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 1 Rheumatic Fever .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Erysipelas .. .. 1 .. 2 .. .. .. 1 1 .. .. .. I 2 1 3 Syphilis .. .. 1 1 .. .. .. .. .. 2 .. .. .. .. 2 .. 2 Pyæmia .. .. 2 1 .. .. .. .. .. 1 1 .. 1 .. 1 2 3 Hydrophobia .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. II. Cancer, Dropsy. Hæmorrhage .. .. .. .. 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 1 .. 1 Dropsy .. .. .. .. 1 1 .. .. .. .. .. 1 .. 1 .. 2 2 Abscess 1 .. 1 3 1 2 .. .. .. 3 2 .. .. 2 5 2 7 Ulcer .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Fistula .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Mortification .. .. .. .. .. 1 .. .. .. 1 .. .. .. .. 1 .. 1 Cancer .. .. .. 1 3 1 .. .. 1 2 .. .. 1 1 .. 5 5 Gout .. .. .. .. .. 2 .. .. .. 1 .. .. .. 1 2 .. 2 III. Scrofula. Scrofula .. .. 4 .. .. .. .. 1 .. 3 .. .. .. .. 2 2 4 Mesenteric Disease 3 3 7 1 .. .. .. 4 1 2 1 .. .. .. 4 4 8 Consumption 1 1 9 29 11 .. .. 10 2 24 1 .. 3 9 24 25 49 Water in the Head 2 .. 2 .. .. .. .. .. 1 1 .. .. .. .. 1 1 2 IV. Nervous System. Inflammation of Brain .. .. .. .. 1 .. .. 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 .. 1 Apoplexy 1 .. 1 2 6 7 .. 5 2 7 .. 1 .. 1 5 11 16 Paralysis .. .. .. .. .. 8 1 1 .. 6 .. 1 .. 1 2 7 9 Delirium Tremens .. .. .. 2 .. .. .. .. .. 2 .. .. .. .. 2 .. 2 Chorea .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Epilepsy .. 1 1 1 1 1 .. .. .. 2 .. 1 .. 1 3 1 4 Tetanus .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 1 .. 1 Insanity .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Convulsions 8 5 13 .. .. .. .. 1 .. 12 .. .. .. .. 10 3 13 Diseaseof Brain, Spine, &c. .. 3 4 5 2 3 .. 4 1 4 .. .. 1 4 7 7 14 V. Heart, &c. Pericarditis .. .. .. 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 .. 1 1 Aneurism .. .. .. 1 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 2 1 1 2 Disease of Heart, &c. .. .. 1 1 11 10 2 0 2 13 .. .. .. 5 14 11 25 VI. Lungs, &c. Laryngitis 1 2 3 .. 1 .. .. .. .. 3 .. .. .. 1 3 1 4 Bronchitis 33 13 48 5 15 23 7 20 8 59 4 2 2 3 56 42 98 Pleurisy 1 .. 1 .. .. 1 .. .. .. l .. .. .. 1 .. 2 2 Pneumonia 7 8 16 3 0 2 1 5 4 14 .. 1 2 1 17 10 27 Asthma .. .. .. 1 .. 3 1 1 1 3 .. .. .. .. 2 3 5 Disease of Lungs, &c. 4 1 5 4 2 3 .. 3 2 9 .. .. .. .. 7 7 14 BIRTHS registered during 13 weeks.—Hanover Square, M. 80, F. 63; May Fair, M. 35, F. 34 Belgrave, M. 220, F. 212. Total 614 Average 49.5 DISEASES. Ages at Death. Sub-districts & population Sexes. Under 1. 1 and under 5. Total under 20. 20 and under 40. 40 and under CO. 60 and under 80. 80 and above. Hanover Square.—20,216. May Fair.—12,980. Belgrave.—40,034. Mount-street Work.—268. Little Chelsea Work.—350. 8t. George's Hospital. -216. Males, 31,920. Females, 41,310. Total, 73,230. Parishioners. NonParishioners. VII Of Stomach, &c. Teething 2 7 9 .. .. .. .. 2 .. 6 .. 1 .. .. 6 3 9 Quinsy .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Inflammation of Stomach .. .. .. .. .. 1 .. .. .. 1 .. .. .. .. .. 1 1 Inflammation of Bowels .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Inflammation of Peritoneum .. .. 1 1 .. .. .. .. .. 2 .. .. .. .. 1 1 2 Dropsy of Belly .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Ulcer of Bowels .. .. .. .. 1 1 .. .. 1 .. .. .. 1 .. 2 .. 2 Rupture .. .. .. .. 2 .. 1 .. .. 1 .. .. .. 2 1 2 3 Ileus .. .. .. .. .. 1 .. .. .. 1 .. .. .. .. .. 1 1 Intussusception .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Stricture of Bowels .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Disease of Stomach .. .. .. 2 2 1 .. 3 .. 2 .. .. .. .. 3 2 5 Disease of Pancreas .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Inflammation of Liver .. .. .. .. 1 1 .. .. 1 1 .. .. .. .. 1 1 2 Jaundice 1 .. 1 .. 2 .. .. .. 1 2 .. .. .. .. 2 1 3 Disease of Liver .. .. .. 3 4 1 .. 1 2 2 .. .. .. 3 7 1 8 Disease of Spleen .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. VIII. Urinary, &c. Inflammation of Kidney .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Bright's Disease .. .. .. 2 1 1 .. 1 1 2 .. .. .. .. 2 2 4 Ischuria .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Diabetes .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Stone .. v .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Disease of Bladder .. .. .. .. 1 2 .. .. 1 1 .. .. .. 1 3 .. 3 Stricture of Urethra .. .. .. .. .. 1 .. .. .. 1 .. .. .. .. 1 .. 1 Disease of Kidneys, &c. .. .. 1 2 4 .. .. 1 .. .. .. .. 2 4 4 3 7 IX. Womb, &c. Paramenia .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Ovarian Dropsy .. .. .. 1 2 .. .. .. .. 1 .. .. .. 2 .. 3 3 Child-birth .. .. .. 1 1 .. .. .. .. 2 .. .. .. .. .. 2 2 Disease of Uterus, &c. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. X. Joints, &c. Arthritis .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Rheumatism .. .. 1 1 .. .. .. .. .. 1 .. .. .. 1 2 .. 2 Disease of Joints, &c. .. .. 1 .. 1 1 .. .. .. 1 .. .. 1 1 3 .. 3 XI. Skin, &c. Carbuncle .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Phlegmon .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Disease of Skin, &c. 1 .. 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 .. .. .. .. 1 .. 1 XII. Malformations. Blue Disease .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Spina Bifida .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Other Malformations 2 .. 3 .. .. .. .. .. 1 1 1 .. .. .. 2 1 3 XIII. Debility: 7 .. 7 .. .. 1 .. 2 .. 6 .. .. .. .. 6 2 8 Premature Birth 7 .. 7 .. .. .. .. 2 .. 5 .. .. .. .. 6 1 7 XIV Atrophy: 6 2 8 .. .. .. .. 2 .. 5 .. 1 .. .. 2 6 8 XV. Age: .. .. .. .. .. 10 7 4 2 8 3 .. .. .. 6 11 17 XVI. Sudden: .. .. .. 1 .. .. .. .. .. 1 .. .. .. .. .. 1 1 XVII. Violent Death: .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Intemperance .. .. .. .. 1 .. .. .. .. 1 .. .. .. .. .. 1 1 Starvation .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Want of Breast Milk 4 1 5 .. .. .. .. I .. 4 .. .. .. .. 3 2 5 Neglect .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Cold .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Poison .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Burns and Scalds 2 7 12 .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 .. .. 2 9 8 4 12 Hanging (Suicide) .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Suffocation 1 .. 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 .. .. .. .. 1 .. 1 Drowning .. .. .. 1 1 .. .. 1 .. 1 .. .. .. .. 2 .. 2 Fractures .. 1 1 4 3 3 .. 1 1 1 .. .. 3 5 10 1 11 Wounds .. .. .. 1 i 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 2 1 2 3 Other Violence .. .. .. 1 1 .. .. .. .. 1 .. .. 1 .. 2 .. 2 All Violence .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. XVIII. Not Specified. 4 .. 4 .. 1 .. .. 2 1 2 .. .. .. .. 3 2 5 TOTAL: 114 88 245 85 99 98 20 100 40 288 14 9 24 72 306 241 547 DEATHS registered during corresponding weeks of ten years (average) 443.8 Weekly average 34.1 C. J. B. ALDIS, M.D. R. DRUITT. HAN 10 No. XL] QUARTERLY SUMMARY OF THE SICKNESS AND MORTALITY OF Saint George, Banober Square, AND OF THE PROCEEDINGS OF THE MEDICAL OFFICERS OF HEALTH, FOR THE QUARTER ENDING JUNE 30th, 1860. LONDON: PRINTED BY GEORGE PHIPPS, UPPER RANELAGH STREET, PIMLICO, S.W. TO THE Vestry of St. George, Banober Square. My Lords and Gentlemen, I. During the thirteen weeks ending June 30, 450 deaths occurred in the Parish, including those of 5 inmates at Little Chelsea, and of 70 non-parishioners at St. George's Hospital, so that the actual mortality is 375. The weekly average 34.6 exceeds that of the preceding ten years by 3.4, which is partly attributable to an increase in diseases of the air tubes and lungs, in consequence of the inclement state of the weather. We find, for example, that whooping cough killed 19, against 9 in the previous Midsummer quarter; and that diseases of the respiratory organs destroyed 75 persons, besides59 from consumption; whereas, in the corresponding period of last year, respiratory diseases numbered 64, and consumption 55, or 15 less than those now recorded as having died from the same complaints. Among the deaths in the Table, we notice 3 from smallpox, which took place in the Workhouse, Mount Street, two being deaths of patients admitted in the previous quarter, and noticed in the last Report. Nine deaths occurred from scarlet fever, respectively at 3, Hereford Street, Park Lane; 2 and 3, Robert Street, 4 Pimlico; 12, Glasgow Terrace; 9, Ranelagh Road; 25, Churton Street; 1, Thames Parade; 5 and 47, Gloucester Street. Sixteen deaths from the same disease were tabulated in same period last year. There were 4 cases of pyaemia, 1 of which proved fatal in a cook, aged 35, after secondary vaccination. Among the violent deaths we observe 2 from burns and scalds, and 5 from drowning, 1 of which occurred in the Serpentine, while the deceased was swimming, 2 from accidents, (1 a boy in the Grosvenor Canal while running on the wall, the other in the Thames,) another from suicide in Eccleston Mews, and the fifth, a female, aged 18, who was found in the Thames with marks of violence on her body. A child, aged 2 months, died at 6, Whitaker Street, from suffocation while in bed with the mother and father, who were intoxicated. Fractures proved fatal to 11 persons, 8 of whom were nonparishioners. A servant was sent from 3, Hereford Street, to the Fever Hospital, on June 23, and died on the 31st. A servant went from 56, New Bond Street, to the same Hospital, and died. II. The Sickness.—In the Hanover and Mayfair subdistricts, the number of cases attended gratuitously, was 711, against 833 in the corresponding quarter of last year. There were 9 cases of small-pox, 1 of chicken-pox, 6 of measles, 9 of scarlatina, 22 of whooping cough, 12 of fever, 2 erysipelas, 20 diarrhoea, and 86 bronchitis. There were sent to the Small-pox Hospital, during the quarter:— 1860, April 4, Harriet P., set. 22, 8, Mount Row. „ 18, Catherine S., set. 14, 9, Lancashire Court. 5 „ 28, George G., set. 28, a servant, who lodged for two nights only before his removal, at the "Running Horse," Davies Street. May 7, Charles F., set. 10, 19, Erick Street, never vaccinated, because he was said to have had small-pox in his infancy. „ 19, Thomas W., set. 20, 20, Brick Street, servant, who came ill from Marylebone, died. „ „ William J., set. 30, 5, May's Buildings. Besides there were sent to the Hospital from Belgravia— April 3, Dennis B., set. 18, from Spring Gardens, died. May 21, Roger W., set. 21, vaccinated, 18, Burton Street. June 26, Margaret W., set. 7, 4, Ranelagh Mews. „ „ John W., set. 1, ditto. Received into the Small-pox Ward at Mount Street, from Hanover and Mayfair:— April 2, Harriet W., set. 25, Davies Street. From Belgravia:— „ 7, Moses W., set. 40, vaccinated, 4, Whitaker Street, died. „ 11, Elizabeth D., set. 11, vaccinated, 5, Clifford's Row. „ 12, Susan F., set. 11, vaccinated, 4, Robert Street. Treated at home, George D., aged 15, 8, Carrington Street; vaccinated, disease slight. Treated at home, by private medical attendant, Mrs. G., aged 30, 4, Steel's Court, Lee's Mews; vaccinated, disease slight. 6 Even including the small-pox, the general illness was very light. The following is the usual list of the poorer streets of the In-Wards, with their population, sickness, and deaths for the quarter:— Population. Total Parish Patients. Deaths of Children. Deaths of Adults. Model Lodgings 130 11 0 0 Bloomfield Buildings 130 8 0 0 Brick Street 296 11 0 0 Brown Street 200 35 1 2 Carrington Street 280 11 0 1 George Street, Grosvenor 640 39 2 0 Square, and George Yard Grosvenor Market 211 13 3 1 Grosvenor Mews 944 55 2 2 Hertford Place 200 10 0 0 John's Court, Farm Street 80 9 2 0 Hart Street 265 25 1 1 Lancashire Court 270 20 0 0 May's Buildings 122 7 0 0 Mount Bow and Place 133 16 0 0 North Bruton Mews 154 13 0 0 Queen Street, Oxford Street 316 21 0 31 Robert Street, Grosvenor Sq. 543 21 3 0 Thomas Street 600 27 2 1 One advantage of counting up the cases in this way is, that it enables us to see how much illness has happened in each house during the quarter; No. 8, Hart Street, for example, has had 11 cases of illness in it; Nos. 2 and 6, Brown Street, 1 and la, Mount Row, and 6, George Street, show that they require to be looked after. In the Belgrave Sub-district, 5,668 persons were treated by the Parochial Surgeons, at St. George's Hospital, the Royal 7 Pimlico Dispensary, and the St. Paul's and St. Barnabas' Dispensary, and at the Workhouse, Little Chelsea. Of these, 3,406 were patients at St. George's Hospital, leaving a remainder of 2,262. We find, that the total included 17 of small-pox, 20 of chicken-pox, 91 of measles, 28 of scarlatina, 21 of whooping cough, 77 of diarrhoea, 40 of continued fever, 37 of rheumatic fever, 9 of erysipelas, 4 of diphtheria, and 16 of ague, 11 of which occurred in non-parishioners. There were 329 cases of bronchitis, and 23 of pneumonia. The Medical Officer of Health visited and reported 14 cases of small-pox. III. Bakehouses. During this quarter, we have begun an examination of the state of the various bakehouses in the parish. We were led to this step, partly in order to protect the journeymen employed in them. For allegations had been made publicly, by eminent personages, that the health of these men was suffering from hard work, during unnaturally long hours, the work being carried on principally at night; that in addition to overwork, loss of sleep, and the disadvantage of working by gas-light, the bakehouses in which they work are often dirty and ill-ventilated cellars; and, besides, that the men often sleep in them. More than this, it was alleged that many bakehouses contain disgusting nuisances in the shape of water-closets and dust-heaps. The notoriously pale doughy-looking faces of the men, was another reason why we should interfere, in order to protect them, and to protect the ratepayers from having to support them and their families in sickness. We, therefore, determined to call on each of the bakers, state fully the motives of our visitation, and request permission to inspect the bakehouse. The observations made 8 were noted under four heads, viz.:—First, the cleanliness and ventilation; secondly, the sleeping accommodation provided for the men; thirdly, the existence (if any) of offensive nuisances or bad drainage about the premises; and, fourthly, the hours of work, with a view of collecting information as to the motives for the present night work, and the chances of abolishing it. In the Hanover and May Fair Sub-districts, 25 bakers were visited. One, who lives in Grosvenor Mews, refused admission; the remainder very cordially agreed in the expediency of the visitation, if only as a means of disabusing the public mind of exaggerated statements to their prejudice. Dr. Druitt, who visited them, said that no details should be made public, supposing anything amiss should be found; and the masters, on the other hand, readily agreed to the few suggestions for the improvement of ventilation, and of sleeping places, &c., which were offered to them. The inhabitants, therefore, may eat their bread with increased confidence in the cleanliness of the manufacture, which will be made still the subject of occasional supervision. In many of the bakehouses, the arrangements for ventilation were elaborate and complete: and, in some instances, the sleeping accommodation provided for the men in the house, testified to great thoughtfulness for their welfare. Whilst there yet remain some things which can be done for the men in this parish, we cannot help remembering, that there are few workmen who enjoy better wages, or higher privileges, in the shape of lodging, food, and fire; and that with sobriety and honesty they might, if single, save money. As for the hours, the statements are too conflicting for us to speak positively at present. If, as is stated, some housekeepers insist on having their new bread by eight in the morning, though they do not allow it to be tasted till the next day; if hot rolls are a 9 necessity at breakfast for men who have been at work all night; if the night-work be, on the whole, less fatiguing to masters and foremen, it is obvious that there are elements in the dispute, quite out of our power to settle. It would be advantageous to the health of the employers and men, if the bakehouses were constructed behind instead of underneath the premises, where possible. We lay before you the result, in a tabular form, of a few visits to some bakeries, made by Dr. Aldis in Belgravia,* who inspected fifty-three with Mr. Grant. It is also right to observe, that the masters, whose premises were visited, have, in every instance, expressed a wish to make such alterations as may be required, and that they have been carried into effect. IV. Here follow the usual details of cases brought before the Sanitary Committee. Legal proceedings have been unusually rife. New Bond Street, No. 161, and Drainage of Grafton Street. The relative position, and peculiarly complicated drainage of these premises, and the attempts made to relieve Mr. Hodgkinson, the owner of wine cellars, No. 161, New Bond Street, from leakages of water, which were supposed to come from No. 13, Grafton Street, have been described in former Reports, No. vii, p. 7, and No. ix. p. 22. From the lastnamed Report, it will be seen that the Committee, after personal inspection by their Chairman, Mr. J. E. Evans, assisted by Mr. Richman, came to the conclusion, that the leakage complained of, arose from the natural water of the earth, and that it was not chargeable to defective drainage of No. 13. Grafton Street. However, on the 13th May, 1860, Mr. Hodgkinson * See page 24. 10 appeared at the Committee, and reiterated his belief, that his sufferings arose from some old and possibly disused and forgotten drain at No. 13, and claimed the protection of the Local Authority, and that an examination of his neighbours back-yard should be made, in the spot where he believed this old drain to exist. The occupier of No. 13, Grafton Street, naturally enough refused such an examination as was necessary to do the thing thoroughly. The Committee, under the circumstances, had no alternative, but to avail themselves of the power of appealing to a Magistrate, which is given by the Nuisances Removal Act; and desired the Magistrate's decision as to whether such examination should be made, and as to the course to be pursued in case the complainant's allegations proved correct. Accordingly, notice was served on the occupier of No. 13, Grafton Street, that an application wonld be made to the Magistrate on Monday, 28th May; on which day the several parties interested appeared before Mr. Beadon. He having heard both sides, did not make a formal order, but recommended the owner of No. 13, Grafton Street, to allow the excavation to be made, on condition that the complainant paid all expense, in case the excavation did not discover the drain supposed to exist. This was assented to. On the 1st of June, therefore, Mr. Grant entered with workmen, and began digging at the spot pointed out in the back yard of No. 13, and just outside Mr. Hodgkinson's cellar wall. After getting through 5 feet of dry brick rubbish, he came to a bed of sand, 2 inches thick, and running into pure water; under that, he went through 3 feet of clay, but found no drain nor cesspool. Hence, it seemed evident that the wetness arose from a natural spring; and Mr. Beadon, before whom the parties appeared again on the 4th, dismissed the case. 11 Hereupon, Mr. Hodgkinson, not satisfied, made fresh complaints respecting the small cesspool under the kitchen of No. 13, which he averred not to be kept properly emptied by pumping, as it ought to be, and from which he still believed some leakage to arise. To set this question at rest Dr. Druitt directed 2 ounces of yellow prussiate of potass, dissolved in water, to be put into one drain leading to this cesspool, and four days afterwards, a similar quantity into another drain, which leads into the cesspool and begins close to the wall of No. 161, Bond Street. The cesspool was charged full of water, and the heavy rains furthered this part of the experiment. Then the water which oozed into the wine cellar was tested, from time to time, with a solution of a salt of iron, which, if the water contained any prussiate of potass, would have struck a deep blue. But no blue was struck, and so there was evidence that no water came through from drains or cesspool. So it may be hoped this case is ended. It has been fairly worked out at a great expenditure of trouble. The writer desires never to miss an opportunity of saying, that the land ought to be drained, and that the mere conveyance of refuse water from houses is not enough. How, or by whom, this is to be effected in general, is a question; but there is no doubt that the owner of these cellars can drain them into the King's Scholar's Pond sewer, if he choose to incur the expense. Maddox Street, No. 6. Former reports on the drainage of Maddox Street, Hanover Street, and the intervening part of Regent Street, will show the ancient state of neglect into which the sewerage of the whole block of these important, expensive, and most respectably tenanted houses, had fallen (Reports No. vii, p. 10, No. v, p. 11). These are not houses into which the Inspector can enter unbidden; but to which 12 his services are invited by inhabitants who have been suffering from illness, and who gladly avail themselves of the interposition of the Local Authority, in order to be relieved of their grievances without expense and without litigation. All of these houses had cesspools, or were suffering from bad drainage; all had been remedied but No. 6, Maddox Street, the owner of which desired delay. But after waiting many months, the owner, or alleged owner, was summoned to Marlborough Street on the 14th May; he denied ownership and liability; nevertheless, promised that the work should be done. So the case was adjourned till the 28th, when the cesspool was reported to be abolished, and the summons was dismissed. The result of such cases may be given in a line; not so the many weary journeys, visits, broken promises, and unkept appointments, which the Inspector puts up with before resorting to law. Avery Row, Nos. 13a, 17, and Factory adjoining. These places have been reported before, as deficient in cleanliness drainage and ventilation; and reiterated application to the owner led to nothing but broken promises, till the Local Authority desired that he should be summoned to Marlborough Street. Then he set to work in good earnest. No. 17, the place where three idiot youths live, has been furnished with two new windows, a new water butt, water closet, and pipe drainage, No. 13a, once a very unhealthy crowded house, has received a new closet, and the skylight has been made to open; and proper drainage and water supply have been furnished to the factory; so that the summons, which was twice adjourned, is withdrawn, and the costs paid. Lancashire Court, No. 1, went just to the verge of a summons, but has been repaired and cleansed from top to bottom. The following premises have been visited by the Inspector, 13 and more or less cleansing effected, in consequence of fever or small-pox, viz.:—No. 13, Robert Street; "Rose and Crown," Public House, Hart Street; 18, Queen Street; 5, May's Buildings; 19 and 20, Brick Street; and 56, New Bond Street. A maid servant went from this last house to the Fever Hospital, and soon died; but no adequate cause of illness was found in the house. In the following cases, the drainage has been either made new, or repaired under the direction of the Inspector. North Row, No. 10. Here the Inspector found a cesspool, bad drainage, no traps, and no cover to ashpit. Swan Passage, No. 2. G-eorge Street, Grosvenor Square, No 2. Providence Court, No, 10. Chapel Mews, Robert Street No. 7. Park Lane, No. 26. Little Grosvenor Mews No. 3. In the following cases, kitchens have been shut up, because contrary to the provisions of the Local Management Act. Robert Street, No. 21. The back kitchen inhabited by man, wife, and three children, exposed to effluvia from rotten drain, underneath. The owner lost a child by scarlet fever. House dirty. The owner, a dealer in milk, said that it soon became tainted, if exposed to the drain effluvia in his back cellar, close to the kitchen aforesaid. Robert Street, No. 22. Back kitchen dirty and dark, inhabited, "during the season," by two charwomen; front kitchen crowded; attics dirty; house made damp by leakage from cistern next door; a dangerous place in the yard, where children might break their legs. Robert Street, No. 29. Basement offensive, house too full; and ill-ventilated,; or rather impossible to be ventilated. 14 The following premises, or some part of them, have been complained of for various degrees of dirt and dilapidation, dangerous to the health of the inmates, and have been, more or less, cleansed and repaired. Hart Street, No 10. Hart Street, No. 7. A house inhabited by a respectable tradesman, who was obliged to appeal to the Local Authority, on account of neglected drainage, a leaky roof, and walls thoroughly dirty. Legal proceedings were just about to begin, when the owner thought fit, after long delay, to execute the necessary repairs. Little Grosvenor Street, No. 17. Grosvenor Mews, No. 30a. Avery Row, No. 4. Dogs kept in the second floor. George Street, Glrosvenor Square, Nos. 7, 8, and 22. Carrington Street, No. 3. Streets Buildings, Nos. 1 and 2. Slaughter House in St. George's Market. Marine Store Dealers at No. 13, Lancashire Court, and No. 9, Little Grosvenor Street. Leakages of various sorts have been attended to by the Inspector, at the following places:— Charles Street, Grosvenor Square, No. 7, leakage into Wine Cellar from defective drains of No. 8. North Audley Street, No. 38, leakage into a room in the yard from defective water apparatus at No. 37. Mount Street, No. 17, Grosvenor Street, No. 82, and some Vaults under the Marquis of Westminster's stables in Reeves Mews. New Bond Street, No. 129. A dampness of the warehouse, supposed to proceed from a defective water pipe at No. 128. Mr. Grant entered the latter premises, opened the ground and examined the pipes, but could discover no defect. 15 Dung Nuisances have been complained of, and remedied by the Inspector, at No. 3, Park Lane, Bolton Yard, Bell Yard; Steward's Livery Stables at the rear of No. 50, Park Street; and Davies Mews. The returns of sanitary inspections, with recommendations thereon, related to the following places in the Belgrave Sub-district:— Spring Garden Place, No. 3. Infected with small-pox. The rooms have been limewashed. Whittaker Street, No. 4. Infected with small-pox. A letter was written for the patient, Moses Winter to be admitted into the workhouse. Robert Street, No. 4, Pimlico (left hand side). Infected with small-pox. The house has been cleansed. Cliffords Row, No. 5, Pimlico. Here a girl, aged 12, was attacked with small-pox. She had been vaccinated by Mr. Jorden on Monday, April 2, and on the 9th, the ordinary appearance of vaccination presented itself on the arms, when, according to the account of Mr. Davis, the parish Surgeon, it did not seem to advance for two days, which may be accounted for by small-pox showing itself on Tuesday the 10th. Robert Street, Pimlico, No. 2 (right hand side). Infected with small-pox, and part of the house dirty. The rooms have been cleansed. Robert Street, Pimlico, No. 3 (left hand side). Infected with small-pox and scarlet fever; back room on the ground floor dirty. The patient afflicted with small-pox refused to be taken to the Wards in Mount Street. The rooms have been cleansed. Grosvenor Row, No. 7. Infected with small-pox, the rooms have been cleansed. Little Chester Street, No. 22. Infected with small-pox. 16 A cesspool has been emptied and filled up, and new watercloset erected. Ranelagh Court, Ranelagh Mews, No. 4. Infected with small-pox ; the rooms which were dirty have been cleansed. Eccleston Street East, No. 13; Westbourne Street, No. 36; Grosvenor Row, No. 7; Gillingliam Street, No. 5, infected with small-pox, but nothing was required to be done in these places. Ranelagh Street, Pimlico, No. 24. Leakage of water into the back kitchen from 23, adjoining premises, caused by the defective state of the water-butt, for which a new one has been substituted, and the supply pipe repaired. Newland Street, No. 19. Here the drains have been cleansed and repaired. Mr. Halt's Cow-yard, behind Ebury Street, was reported to be very offensive, but it was found to be clean. Robert Street, No. 5 (right-hand side.) An obstructed closet was cleansed after a notice had been served, on March 31st. Messrs. Cowell & Sons' Slaughter-house, Knightsbridge. The slaughter-house is dirty, and requires to be limewashed, and partly re-paved. The work is finished in a very satisfactory manner. Mr. Belts' Slaughter-house, Knightsbridge. Dirty, and requires to be limewashed. The order was carried into effect. Mr. Wise's Cow-yard, Elizabeth Street South; Clayton's Yard, Hugh Street; Denbigh Mews, Denbigh Street; Ranelagh Mews, No. 9; Moreton Mews and Moreton Terrace Mews; Denbigh Mews, Denbigh Street; Cab Yard, Bloomfield Place; Commercial Road, No. 3, South; Messrs. Watling and Son's Yard, Charlotte Street, Pirnlico; and Mr. Smith's Cow Yard, Whitaher Street; a large quantity of dung has been removed from these places. 17 Grosvenor Row, Pimlico, No. 5. Obstructed drains, caused by the connection having been cut off with that of No. 4, where new drainage was supplied. A notice was served on March 31st, and a new closet has been erected, the drains cleansed, and pipe drains laid down, which have been joined with the drain at No. 4. Lupus Street, No. 52. Obstructed drains. A notice was served on April 2, since when they have been cleansed and reported. Erin Place, Nos. 1, 2, 3, and 4, Thames Bunk. The drains are obstructed. The owner of No. 4 wishes to connect the drainage of his house, with that of the three houses in question. A closet in this house was not connected with any drain, and the soil having penetrated the brick wall has entered the lower kitchen. The cesspools on the premises are full. No dust pit. A notice was served on April 5. The cesspools have been emptied and filled up. The premises properly drained by 6 inch pipe drains into the sewer, and new dust pit erected. Nos. 1 and 3 drain into No. 2. The drains are made of brick, and pass through No. 2 into the sewer in front. The closets are without traps, and No. 3 has no water supply. The trap of the gully in the back area of No. 3, is without a bell, and there are no dust pits. The drains have been cleansed. Chester Terrace, Chester Square, No. 1. A new trap has been supplied to the gully. Westbourne Street, No. 51. Leakage from the cistern into the adjoining premises. A notice was served on April 10, and the nuisance abated. Clifford's Row, No. 3. Dirty and dilapidated throughout. Information was given to the police about the condition of this house. R 18 Lower Eaton Street, No. 10. Offensive effluvia in the lower part of the house. An old brick drain was broken up, and a new 6 inch pipe laid down. Grosvenor Row, No. 21, Pimlico. Effluvia from the drains, which have been repaired and trapped. Cow-yard behind Shaftesbury Crescent. This place, formerly a wood yard, has been recently taken for the purpose of keeping about 40 cows; the premises, which are kept clean, have been newly paved and drained. A complaint, however, was brought of their being occasionally offensive. Eaton Row, No. 6 (Stable). Obstructed drains which have been cleansed. Ranelagh Place, No. 9. The obstructed drains have been cleansed. Information has been given to the police in reference to the dirty and dilipidated condition of the following houses:— Nos. 1. Grosvenor Row, Pimlico, and Nos. 1, 2, 3, and 4, Clifford's Row. Eliza Place, Elizabeth Street No. 3, South. Twelve persons sleeping in one room. The number has been reduced to three. Lower Belgrave Street, No. 3, Pimlico. New drains have been laid down. Motcomb Street, No. 14. A complaint arising from foul water, has been remedied. Upper Eaton Street, No. 33. Effluvia from drains, which have been cleansed. Gloucester Street, No. 11, Pimlico. Obstructed drains, which have been cleansed. Upper Eaton Street, No. 7. The yard flooded with sewage water, owing to the obstructed gully, which has been cleansed, and the nuisance abated. Rogers Court, Eaton Lane, North, No. 7. Flooded with 19 sewage from No. 16, Eaton Lane, North; new drains have been laid down. Robert Street, Nos. 5, 6, 7 and 8 Pimlico, (right hand side). The drains are stopped up, and the yard flooded with stagnant water. The drains and yards have been cleansed. Pembroke Mews, No. 21. Dung and rubbish removed. Robert Street, No. 7, Pimlico (right hand side). The kitchen occupied by two persons, although unfit for human habitation, according to Section 103, of the Metropolis Local Management Act. Commercial Road, South, No. 16, and Robert Street, No. 5, Pimlico. Infected with scarlet fever, houses clean. Brewer Street, No. 13. Staircase, parlour, and shop are dirty; no cover to dust pit, and no water to closet. A notice was served 5th May, 1860, and the work is finished. Ebury Street, No 7, Pimlico. Effluvia from drains and closet. A notice was served 5th May, 1860; the work will be finished in August, when the premises will be drained by pipes, and new water closets erected. Middleton Cottages, Runelagh Road, Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4 and 5. The drains which were stopped up from the closets to the washhouses have been cleansed. Ebury Square, No 3. The obstructed drains have been cleansed. Robert Street, Pimlico, No. 1. Infected with scarlet fever; and the front parlour, which was dirty, has been cleansed. Upper Eaton Street, No. 7, Pimlico. An old drain from Ranelagh Mews broken in. The drain in Ranelagh Mews was opened, and the drains from Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 and 6, Ranelagh Mews, with one from a closet belonging to 20 shops, and the drain itself was found to be in a dilapidated condition. This case was brought before the Committee of Works, and an old drain in the yard of No. 7, Upper Eaton Street, has been repaired and disconnected from the drains in Ranelagh Mews, which have been joined with a nine inch pipe, into the sewer laid down in the Mews about two years ago. Bridge Row, No. 3, Pimlico. Obstructed drains, and the contents escaping into the back area. The drains have been cleansed. Moreton Terrace, No. 6, Pimlico. The ball cock belonging to the closet, has been repaired. Commercial Road, South, Nos. 11 and 12. The basements were flooded on the 13th of May. The inundation at these places was attributable to the water in the Commercial Road sewer being kept at an unusually high level, about 4 feet, in consequence of a dam placed across the Ranelagh sewer, by Mr. Thirst as contractor, in order to form a connection with the new sewer for the Government in the Chelsea Bridge Road. A 12-inch pipe, with a flap, had been placed at the bottom of the dam, but it did not prevent the overflow. It was kept in this condition for some days without inconvenience; but directly the storm occurred on Saturday, May 12, the water rose to the basement of the houses. It also occurred at the time of high water, when the outlet gates were closed. It is right, however, to observe, that provision had been made long ago, by means of two reservoir sewers, opposite to these houses, to contain the storm waters of that immediate neighbourhood, yet the obstacle just alluded to, sufficed to render it useless. The new sewer having been completed, the dam was removed, and the nuisance abated. 21 It is said, that an application having been made to Mr. Thirst for a trifling compensation, it was refused. Formerly these houses were sometimes liable to inundations, when storms occurred at high water; but in October, 1859, an additional flap was placed by order of Mr. Richman, at the outlet of the sewer at Ranelagh Cottages, which has been found to answer the purpose completely, there having been no overflow from that time, until the erection of the dam in the Ranelagh sewer. Park Side, Knightsbridge, Nos.—. Basements flooded, with water about 9 inches deep. The overflow here arose from some flushing gates in the Ranelagh sewer being closed in order to divert some of the water from that sewer away from the work at Chelsea Bridge. The injury did not occur, until the storm happened on Saturday. The occupier of No.—, Park Side, having subsequently complained that the water from another inundation on the 2nd June, and reported at a meeting of the Committee of Works, did not pass away; a further examination was made, when no obstruction could be fonnd in the arms of the sewers; but his house, which drained into the old sewer at the back, was found to be more insufficiently so, the bottom of the drain being 4 feet above the level of his basement floor. This basement was formerly drained into the next house,-, also his property, which some time since he stopped up, with the view of preventing any overflow from the sewer. By thus destroying their drainage, and his basement being lower than that of the adjoining houses, the water had no chance of escape; he re-opened the drain, when all passed off rapidly. It appears by an answer from the Metropolitan Board of Works, that these premises must be subject to flooding before 22 the Ranelagh sewer is half full; the only remedy for which would be to lower the sewer about 4 feet, although it would still remain a shallow sewer, for the crown would then be 1 foot above the owner's basement. Waste Ground near No. 23, Sussex Street, Pimlico, and Mews behind 16 and 17, Lower Belgrave Place. A large quantity of rubbish, mixed with decomposed vegetable matter, has been removed from these places. Eccleston Terrace, No. 2, South. An offensive gully opposite to this house was reported to the Surveyor. Park Side, No 7, Knightsbridge. Slops emptied into the gullies of this house by the lodgers at No. 7, who were cautioned against a repetition of the nuisance in future. Belgrave Stables, Halkin Street, West. These stables contain 42 horses, and the drainage is in a defective condition, with a cesspool in nearly every stall, and a large cesspool which receives the drainage of a water closet and waste water of the yard; the nuisance is caused when the contents of the cesspools are being "ladled" on to the dung pit about once a week. A notice was served on June 7, and the work has been commenced. These stables are behind the north side of Lowndes Street, where the complainant purchased a house, thinking that in such a fashionable locality, as one of the best streets in Belgravia, he would be safe from any nuisance, but a high wall in the rear, instead of concealing, to a certain extent, the premises belonging to 6ome manufacturer of innocuous articles, as he supposed, actually hid the abominable nuisance just described. Upper Tachbrook Street. The basements of Nos. 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16 and 17, contained from 6 to 9 inches of water. Tachbrook Street. Nos. 37, 39 and 115, contain about 23 9 inches of water. At No. 107, the water extended to the third step in the front area. Mr. Richman reported, that all the houses referred to were drained into the King's Scholar's Pond sewer, which is one of the main lines under the superintendence of the Metropolitan Board of Works. On the day in question, it rained incessantly for six hours, from about a quarter past eight in the morning until a quarter past two; the greater part of the time the tide was flowing, it being high water about one o'clock. It appears that at the time of high water there was a depth of 14 feet above the sill of the gates of the sewer, the level of the water in the sewer being 6 inches above that of the river. The flood-gate keeper had been in office 16 years, and excepting on one occasion, he had never known it so high before. Some of the flaps were out of order. The level of the water in the sewer must have been much above the basement floors of the houses, consequently the drainage was pent up. No inconvenience was felt in those cases where the drains were sufficiently large to act as reservoirs until the tide had ebbed low enough to relieve them, but in others, where the drains may have been partially choked, or the flaps not in good action, a flooding occurred. The Surveyor thinks, that such an extraordinary accident cannot be remedied, until the main drainage scheme is perfected. Wilton Mews, No. 2. Effluvium from a marine store dealers in Little Chester Street. The marine store dealer has a window which opens into the yard of No. 2, and if this can be closed, the nuisance will be remedied. No order can 24 be made for the window to be closed, but the premises are periodically inspected in order to ensure cleanliness. Hugh Street Mews, Nos. 13, 14 and 15. The drains and closets have been properly cleansed after a notice served on June 13. Hours of Work 12—2 next day They relieve each other 12 hours 12 hours 12 hours 5 hours 8—10 hours I 16 hours 12 hours 12 hours Drainage. Good Good Good Good Good Good I Good j Good Tap does not act Good Where the men sleep. Two in the bake house A man and a boy Two men and boy in rooms up stairs Up stairs two men and a boy Out Family do the work On the troughs Ditto Ditto Family do the work Cleanliness & Ventilation. Requires lime-whiting, ventilation good Ventilation insufficient, gas burning day and night. Requires lime-whiting, ventilation good Clean and well ventilated j Requires lime-whiting Good Good Requires lime-whiting Requires more ventilation Requires lime-whiting* Residence. 81, Elizabeth Street 13, Ditto, South 81, Upper Ebury St. 74, Coleshill Street 84, Westbourne St 81, Westbourne St 40, Grosvenor Row 45, Ditto 6, Ditto 33, Ditto Date of Visit. 1860. 1. June 12 2. „ „ 3. „ „ 4. „ „ 5. „ „ I 6. 12 & 16 7. June 16 8. „ „ 9. „ „ 10. „ „ * All these have been remedied. An analysis of the water supplied by the Chelsea Com- 25 pany, and taken April 3rd, 1860, from the main at Chapel Street, Belgrave Square, produced Grains per Gallon. Total Impurity 19.84 Organic ditto 1.48 May 3rd, 1860, Total ditto 17.84 Organic ditto 1.48 June, 5th I860, Total Residue 19.92 Organic Impurity 2.32 We have the honour to be, Your faithful Servants, C. J. B. Aldis, M.D. R. Druitt. 26 APPENDIX. During the second quarter of 1860, the gas supplied to the Workhouse, Monnt Street, yielded an excellent light; the average of experiments made during the quarter, being that 2.5 feet of gas burned per hour in a batswing burner, gave a light equal to that of 15.9 sperm candles, burning 120 grains per hour. No complaint of deficient supply came to the writer's knowledge. Early in May, the fumes appeared pungent and offensive; and a series of experiments was instituted to test the quantity of sulphur, by burning very slowly a measured quantity in combination with ammonia, and collecting the products. It will be seen, that the quantity was much smaller than on a former occasion, and it may be noticed, that the quantity suggested before the Committee of the House of Commons, as a fair maximum, was 20 grains per 100 feet. It is but fair to state, that a tube, containing a piece of paper moistened with a solution of acetate of lead, has been incessantly used for a year, without betraying a trace of sulphuretted hydrogen. Sulphur Determinations. 1860. Feet of gas burned. Sulphate of Baryta yielded. Grains of sulphur per 100 feet. May 3 •904 .49 7.43 „ 4 1.2 .37 4.21 „ 5 1.2 .51 5.8 „ 7 1.7 .49 3.94 „ 12 1.8 .21 1.6 27 During the same period, the gas supplied to the room in Ebury Mews, burned in a batswing burner, at the rate of 2.5 feet per hour, gave a light equal to that of 10.20 sperm candles, consuming 120 grains per hour, and presented no trace of sulphuretted hydrogen. Dr. Aldis was occupied three hours on Saturday, May 5, 1860, in burning a cubic foot of gas over liquid ammonia, and collecting the products, which had passed through the condensing tube. These were submitted to careful analysis, in order to ascertain the amount of sulphur, which equalled •01524362 grammes, which multiplied by 15.4 gave 0.234696 grains of sulphur in one cubic foot, and 2.34 grains in 10 23.45 grains in 100 cubic feet. TABLE OF MORTALITY. DEATHS registered in the Parish of St. George, Hanover Square, in the 13 Weeks ending 30th of June, 1860. Average, 34 6. DISEASES. Ages at Death. Sub-Districts & Population Sexe s. Under 1. 1 and under 5. Total under 20. 20 iind under 40. 40 and unuer 60. 60 and under 80. 80 and above. Hanover Square.—20,216. May Fair.—12,980. Belgrave.—40,034. Mount-street Work.—268. Little Chelsea Work.—350 St. George's Hospital. —216. Males, 31,920. Females, 41,310. Total, 73,230. Parishioners. Nonl'artshioners. I. Order 1. 1. Small-pox 1 .. 1 .. 2 .. .. .. .. .. 3 .. .. .. 2 1 3 2. Measles 1 5 6 .. .. .. .. 1 .. 5 .. .. .. .. 2 4 6 3. Scarlatina .. 5 8 .. 1 .. .. 1 .. 8 .. .. .. .. 7 2 9 4. Diphtheria .. .. 1 .. .. .. .. 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 1 5. Quinsy .. 1 1 .. .. .. .. 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 .. 1 6. Croup .. 1 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 .. 1 1 7. Sore Throat .. 1 1 .. .. .. .. 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 .. 1 8. Whooping Cough 6 13 19 .. .. .. .. 6 2 11 .. .. .. .. 7 12 19 9. Typhus (and infantile fever) 1 1 6 2 2 2 .. 2 .. 7 .. .. 1 2 5 7 12 10. Erysipelas 1 .. 1 1 2 1 .. .. .. 4 .. .. .. 1 3 2 5 11. Metria .. .. .. 1 .. .. .. .. .. 1 .. .. .. .. .. 1 1 12. Pyæmia .. .. .. 3 .. 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 3 1 3 4 13. Carbuncle .. .. .. .. 1 1 .. 1 .. 1 .. .. .. .. 2 .. 2 14. Influenza .. .. .. .. .. 2 .. .. .. 2 .. .. .. .. 1 1 2 15. Dysentery .. .. .. .. 1 .. .. .. .. 1 .. .. .. .. 1 .. 1 16. Diarrhœa 1 .. 1 1 2 1 .. 3 1 1 .. .. .. .. 4 1 5 17. Cholera .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 18. Ague .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 19. Remittent Fever .. 5 5 .. .. .. .. .. 1 4 .. .. .. .. 3 2 5 20. Rheumatism .. .. 1 1 .. 1 .. .. .. 2 1 .. .. .. 2 1 3 Order 2. 1. Syphilis 1 .. 1 .. .. .. .. 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 .. 1 2. Stricture of Urethra .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Order 3. 1. Privation .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 2. Want of Brest Milk .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 3. Purpura and Scurvy .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 4. Alcoholism a Del. Tremens .. .. .. 1 .. 1 .. .. .. 1 .. .. .. 1 2 .. 2 b Intemperance .. .. .. .. .. 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 .. 1 Order 4. 1. Thrush .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. II. Order 1. 1. Gout .. .. .. .. .. 1 .. .. 1 .. .. .. .. .. 1 .. 1 2. Dropsy .. .. .. .. 3 5 2 1 1 6 1 .. .. 1 5 5 10 3. Cancer .. .. .. 2 1 4 .. .. .. 4 1 .. .. 2 4 3 7 4. Mortification .. .. 1 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 3 3 1 4 5. Abscess .. .. .. .. 2 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 1 1 1 2 Order 2. 1. Scrofula .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 2. Tabes Mesenterica 1 1 2 .. .. .. .. .. .. 2 .. .. .. .. .. 2 2 3. Phthisis .. 1 10 31 14 4 .. 7 5 32 5 .. 2 8 29 30 59 4. Hydrocephalus 2 3 4 .. .. .. .. 1 1 2 .. .. .. .. 1 3 4 III. Order 1. 1. Cephalitis 1 2 5 2 2 .. .. 1 1 3 .. .. 1 3 7 2 9 2. Apoplexy .. .. .. 1 5 3 .. 1 1 3 .. .. 2 2 6 3 9 3. Paralysis .. .. .. 2 1 3 .. 1 1 2 1 1 .... .. 2 4 6 4. Epilepsy .. .. .. 2 .. 1 .. .. 1 1 .. .. .... 1 2 1 3 5. Convulsions 10 14 22 .. .. .. .. 6 1 12 .. 2 .... 1 13 9 22 6. Brain Disease, &c. 1 1 5 2 1 2 .. 1 .. 5 .. .. 1 3 9 1 10 Order 2. 1. Pericarditis .. .. 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 .. .. .. .. .. 1 1 2. Aneurism .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 3. Heart Disease, &c. .. .. 1 5 13 8 1 4 4 12 1 .. 1 6 13 15 28 Order 3. 1. Laryngitis .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 2. Bronchitis 7 5 12 3 11 16 4 10 5 23 3 1 .. 4 23 23 46 3. Pleurisy .. .. .. 1 1 .. .. .. .. 1 .. .. .. 1 1 1 2 BIRTHS registered during 13 weeks.—Hanover Square, M. 58, F. 39; May Fair, M. 28, F. 31; Belgrave, M. 177,F. 148. Total 481 Average 37. DISEASES. Ages at Death. Sub-districts & population Sexes. Under 1. 1 and under 5. Total under 20. 20 and under 40. 40 and under60. 60 and under 80. 80 and above. Hanover Square.—20,216. May Fair.—12,980. Belgrave.—40,034. Mount-street Work.—268. Little Chelsea Work.—350. St. George's Hospital. —216. Mules, 31,920. Females, 41.310. Total, 73,230. Parishioners. NonParishioners. 5. Pneumonia 5 3 7 4 4 3 .. 4 4 5 .. .. .. 5 9 9 18 6. Asthma .. .. .. .. .. 2 .. .. .. 2 .. .. .. .. .. 2 2 7. Lung Disease, &c. 2 .. 3 1 1 2 .. .. .. 7 .. .. .. .. 3 4 7 Order 4. 1. Enteritis 2 .. 3 .. 1 1 .. 1 2 2 .. .. .. .. 3 2 5 2. Peritonitis .. .. 1 1 2 .. .. 1 .. .. .. .. 1 2 1 3 4 3. Ascites .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 4. Hernia .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 .. .. 1 1 5. Heus and Intussusception .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 6. Fistula .. .. .. .. 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 7. Stomach Disease, etc. .. .. .. 2 1 1 .. .. .. 3 .. .. 1 .. 2 3 5 8. Hepatitis .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 9. Jaundice .. .. 2 .. 1 1 .. .. .. 2 .. .. .. .. 1 1 2 10. Liver Disease, &c. 1 .. .. 1 2 .. .. 1 .. 2 .. .. .. 1 3 1 4 Order 5. 2. Nephria .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 2. Diabetes .. .... .. 1. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 1 .. 1 3. Kidney Disease, &c. .. .. .. 2 4 .. .. .. 3 2 .. .. .. .. 6 .. 6 4. Disease Bladder .. .. .. .. 1 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 2 1 1 2 Order 6. 1. Ovarian Dropsy .. .. .. 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 1 1 2. Uterus Disease, etc. 5 1 3 1 5 5 Order 7. 1. Arthritis 2. Joint Disease, etc. 1 1 1 1 2 Order 8. 1. Phlegmon .. .. .. 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 .. 1 .. 1 2. Ulcer .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 3. Skin Disease, etc. .. .. 1 .. .. .. .. .. 1 .. .. .. .. .. 1 .. 1 IV. Order 1. 1. Premature Birth 7 .. 7 .. .. .. .. .. .. 6 1 .. .. .. 3 4 7 2. Cyanosis .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 3. Spina Bifida 1 .. 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 .. .. .. .. 1 .. 1 4. Other Malformations .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 5. Teething 2 .. 2 .. .. .. .. 1 .. 1 .. .. .. .. 1 1 2 Order 2. 1. Paramenia .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 2. Child-birth (see Metria) 1 .. 1 .. .. 1 .. .. 1 1 .. .. .. .. .. 2 2 Order 3. 1. Old Age .. .. .. .. .. 14 10 4 3 7 10 .. .. .. 16 8 24 Order 4. 1. Atrophy and Debility 6 1 7 1 2 2 .. 4 .. 5 2 1 .. .. 10 2 12 V. Order 1. (Accident or Negligence.) 1. Fractures and Contusions .. .. 2 1 4 4 .. .. .. 1 .. .. 2 8 9 2 11 2. Gunshot .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 3. Wounds .. 1 1 .. 1 .. .. 1 .. .. .. .. .. 1 1 1 2 4. Burns and Scalds .. 1 1 .. .. .. 1 .. .. 2 .. .. .. .. 2 .. 2 5. Poison .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 6. Drowning .. .. 2 .. 1 .. .. 1 .. 2 .. .. .. .. 3 .. 3 7. Suffocation 1 .. 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 .. .. .. .. .. 1 1 Other Injuries .. 1 2 .. 2 .. .. .. .. 1 .. .. .. 3 3 1 5 Order 3. 1. Murder and Manslaughter .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Order 2. (Suicide.) 1. Cut, Stab .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 2. Poison .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 3. Drowning .. .. 1 .. 1 .. .. .. .. 2 .. .. .. .. 1 1 2 4. Hanging .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Sudden Deaths (Cause unascertained) .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Causes not specified or ill-defined .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. TOTAL: 61 66 160 81 98 93 18 71 40 216 29 5 19 70 249 201 450 DEATHS registered during corresponding weeks of ten years (average) 406 7 Weekly average 312 LONDON: PRINTED BY GEORGE PHIPPS, RANELAGH STREET, EATON SQUARE. 16 HAN 110 No. XII.] QUARTERLY SUMMARY OF THE SICKNESS AND MORTALITY OF Saint George, Hanober Square, AND OF THE PROCEEDINGS OP THE MEDICAL OFFICERS OF HEALTH, FOR THE QUARTER ENDING SEPTEMBER 29™, 1860. LONDON: PRINTED BY GEORGE PHIPPS, UPPER RANELAGII STREET, PIMLICO, S.W. TO THE Vestry of St. George, Ganober Square. I. MORTALITY. My Lords and Gentlemen, We are happy in being able to report a considerable decrease in the mortality during the Summer quarter which has just passed. In the year 1857 the deaths in the four quarters respectively were 436—374—4-24—442. In 1858 528—479—412—490. In 1859 457—421—440—429. In 1860 547—450—380. The last number, 380, which represents the deaths for the third quarter of 1860, is exactly the average of the last ten years. It includes four deaths in the Little Chelsea Workhouse, and 63 of non-parishioners in St. George's Hospital. It we compare the low death-rate of this Summer quarter with those of the preceding years, we get the following figures: Deaths from bowel disorder. Other deaths. Total. In Summer of 1857 64 360 424. „ 1858 35 377 412. „ 1859 62 378 440. „ 1860 17 363 380. So we see, that virtually, the lives saved are those which in other years were lost by diarrhœa; and especially 4 of children; and it is note-worthy that thirteen out of the seventeen deaths from diarrhoea were of infants under five. As to the district mortality, we find that the Hanover and Mayfair have less than their share of mortality, owing, doubtless, to the smaller birth-rate, and lesser number of children. Amongst the deaths, considered in the order of their causes, we are bound to notice two from small pox: one of a lady, set. 56, daughter of an Earl, residing in Grosvenor-place, who had been vaccinated when a child and revaccinated at the age of fourteen; there was a particularly good cicatrix upon the arm. It could not be ascertained how she caught the disease, but she was very much in the habit of attending upon the poor. The other, a girl of 8, the daughter of a butler, at 22, Ecclestonplace, never vaccinated. The deaths from measles, 20, are heavy for the season. Scarlatina was fatal in 13 cases, including one at 9, Queenstreet, Oxfurd-street,; 14, Shepherd's-market, where a child died from spinal disease some months after it; at 4 and 5, Robert-street, Pimlico; 19 and 23, Grosvenorrow; two cases at 1, Princes-row-west; 1, Churton-place; 29, Hugh-street-west; 24, West-street; and 4, Newstreet. One case of diphtheria was fatal in a girl of 4, at 3, Sutherland-street. Typhoid fever was fatal to a girl of 14, at the Rising Sun, Charles-street, Berkeleysquare, the cause absolutely unknown; and to a young man of 22, who slept in a kitchen at 1, Mountrow, just after the ground had been disturbed by the removal of old dilapidated drains; also at 39, Westmoreland-street; and to the wife of a tradesman, st. 20, at 134, Stanley-street. Of the 17 deaths from diarrhoea, dysentery, and cholera, 14 were those of children in the 5 humble ranks of life; and may be ranked with the 7 deaths from want of breast milk and the 12 deaths of infants from atrophy and debility. Any one who glances at the original returns soon sees the painful evidence of those influences which surround the lower orders of society. Of the 7 deaths from bowel disorder in the In-Wards, two (of twins) occurred at 17, Little Grovenor-street, and in these, and three other cases want of breast milk was rated; the remainder belonged to the mechanic class. Such entries as— F, 8 months; daughter of a journeyman shoemaker; wasting 7 months ! diarrhœa 5 days, dry-nursed. M, 8 months; chronic diarrhœa, measles and wasting; dry-nursed. M, 10 weeks; want of breast milk, diarrhoea, and exhaustion. F, 9 weeks; daughter of a single woman, no occupation ; wasting, dry-nursed. F, 3 months; debility, brought up by hand, convulsions 9 hours. Show the causes of infant mortality. We believe that practical instruction in the art of feeding and managing infants, and in some of the laws of life and health, might be carried further in girls' schools; and that the kind ladies who act as district visitors might often show with advantage how infants food should be prepared and administered. Amongst the deaths in St. George's Hospital are two from pyaemia: Wife of gardener, pyœmia, after amputation. Housekeeper, pyæmia, from abcess in side. Lady's-maid, at. 31, from peritonitis. General servant, æt. 22, puerperal fever, from Queen Charlotte's Lying-in Hospital. 6 These four cases point to morbid poisons arising wherever many patients are brought together, and which improved hospital management has already diminished, and must be made still further to diminish. Amongst the accidental deaths, those of children always bear with them this obvious moral, that children are safe whilst carefully watched, and no longer; for instance, a boy of 3, fell from a window in Duke-street; a boy of 3 months, son of a domestic coachman, was " found dead," having been suffocated "accidentally when in bed with his parents a boy of 2, died from burn whose clothes took fire from lighted shavings in the street; and a girl of 2, was scalded to death by "a bason of gruel which she pulled over herself when sitting at table." Two newly-born infants were found in Hyde-park, and one in Wilton-place. Kitchen Residences. Brick-street, No. 12. A child died in the kitchen of this house, and the certificate of the cause of death sent in by the medical attendant was worded thus:— "Teething: foul air of drains into kitchen; 6 weeks: hydrocephalus ostensibly." This certificate states what is the naked truth in many cases; that when hydrocephalus, or scrofula, or rickets, is returned as the ostensible cause of a child's death, these Greek words are but so many circumlocutions, for bad air, damp, thin clothes, and half-filled stomachs. The kitchen in question was, however, not offensive, but wet from land springs. Our municipal rulers are spending hundreds of thousands in throwing away the London sewage, but the land is yet undrained, and will continue so; whilst that sewage which would make a barren waste into a fertile meadow is thrown away. Fresh butter meanwhile (when it can be got) is 18d. or 20d per lb. And the sellers of milk palliate their adulteration of it 7 with water, by saying that with the present price of fodder they cannot afford to sell it pure. II. THE SICKNESS. This was light. The total number of Parish and Dispensary patients, in the Hanover and May-fair subdistrict, was 693; amongst whom were 4 cases of chicken-pox, 1 each of measles and scarlatina, 5 of whooping cough, 54 of diarrhoea, 1 ague, 16 continued fever, 52 bronchitis, and 1 diphtherite. The case of ague occurred at 45, Carrington-mews, to a coachman, set. 45. There were 3 cases of ague in persons not dependent on gratuitous medical aid, in Carrington-street, in June; and a very severe case in Brick-street last autumn. The last named 4 cases occurred in persons who never went away from home, and were due, beyond doubt, to the natural wetness of the soil in this part of the parish. Two patients were sent to the Small-pox Hospital from the Belgrave sub-district:— 1860—July 2nd, Samuel Best, set. 19; 20, Eatonlane-north, unvaccinated. „ 26th. John Miller, set. 4; 4, Ranelaghcourt, vaccinated. And three to the Fever Hospital:— 1860—Aug. 1st, Frances Leger, 8, St. George'sterrace. „ John M'Quill, 2, Princes-row, Queen-street, Pimlico. „ Donald M'Quill, 2, Princes-row, Queen-street, Pimlico. 8 No patient was admitted into the small-pox ward at Mount-street. The following is a list of the poorer streets of the Hanover and May-fair Sub-Districts, with their population, the number of sick attended by public charity, and deaths for the quarter:— Population. Cases of illness attended Gratuitously. Deaths of children. Deaths of adults. Model Lodgings 130 12 0 0 Blomfield Buildings 130 6 0 0 Brick Street 296 5 2 1 Brown Street 200 29 1 1 Carrington Street 280 20 0 0 GeorgeStreet,Grosvenor Square, and George Yard 540 41 2 1 Grosvenor Market 211 9 0 0 Grosvenor Mews 944 37 2 3 Hertford Place 200 11 1 0 John's Court, Farm Street 80 9 0 0 Hart Street 265 11 0 0 Lancashire Court 270 24 1 0 May's Buildings 122 1 0 0 Mount Row and Place 133 5 0 1 North Bruton Mews 154 14 0 0 Queen Street, Oxford Street 316 13 2 1 Robert Street, Grosvenor Sq 543 29 2 1 Thomas Street, Grosvenor Sq 600 40 3 0 Tom's Court, Grosvenor Square 101 14 0 0 Amongst the sickliest houses, were Nos. 10, 22, and 23, George-street, No. 17, Little Grosvenor-street, (where two children died of diarrhœa,) and there was one case (not fatal) of diphtherite; No. 8, Hart-street, and the whole of Lancashire-court and Tom's-court. A thorough cleansing vastly improves the healthiness of such houses, and the effects last for some months. 9 In the Belgrave Sub-District, 5,637 persons were treated by the Parochial Surgeons, at St. George's Hospital, the Royal Pimlico Dispensary, and the St. Paul's and St. Barnabas Dispensary, and at the Workhouse Little Chelsea. Of these, 3,372 were patients at St. George's Hospital, leaving a remainder of 2,265. We find, that the total included 6 of small-pox, 19 of chicken-pox, 61 of measles, 40 of scarlatina, 19 of whooping cough, 1 of croup, 272 of diarrhoea, 3 of dysentery, 47 of continued fever, 33 of rheumatic fever, 1 of diphtheria, and 14 of erysipelas. There were 212 cases of bronchitis, 12 of pleurisy, and 16 of pneumonia. Of the ague patients, one came to the Hospital from No. 47, Warwick-street, Pimlico, another lived at No. 2, Spring-garden-place, and the third was a non-parishioner. The 6 cases of small-pox occurred at the following places, viz.: 1 at No. 4, Ranelagh-row, (sent to Mountstreet, and thence to the Hospital;) 1 at No. 5, Ecclestonplace; 3 at 22, Eccleston-place; and 1 at 50, Upper Ebury-street. III. BAKEHOUSES. Some defects which were ascertained to exist in six of the bakehouses in the in-wards have been remedied. On the evening of the 10th of September, a large party of the bakers in the in-wards assembled, by invitation, at Dr. Druitt's, in order to discuss the various points in which the baking trade is alleged to be injurious to the health and welfare of the men employed in it. Dr. Aldis, and Dr. Chalice of Bermondsey, were present. On the 10 26th September, Dr. Druitt had the pleasure of receiving a numerous deputation from the bakers of Southwark, to discuss the same questions. It was generally agreed that the bakers would willingly receive suggestions from the Medical Officers of Health, on any matters in which health was concerned, such as ventilation of bakehouses. The subject of admixture with alum was also frankly discussed; and we may state our belief, that it is not put into the higher priced bread. Night work was then discussed at very considerable length, and notes made of the arguments for and against. The case seems practically to resolve itself into this:— that to begin labour at 11 p.m. instead of 4 a.m., is more convenient to many of the foremen, and to some of the masters; and that it is almost unavoidable during a heavy press of work at the west-end; and at all times in parts of the town where hot bread must be served at breakfast by 6 a.m. If the public wish to discourage it, they must consent to have their bread one day old (no hardship), or to take it in late in the day, or to send for it. IV. Nuisances. In the next place, we propose to give, in as small a compass as possible, an abstract of the cases brought before the Committee of the Vestry appointed to carry out the Nuisances' Removal Act, in consequence of complaints from divers ratepayers, or from ourselves, and which the Inspector has investigated, and taken measures to remedy; beginning with cases in the Hanover and Mayfair sub-districts. 11 General Nuisances. Lancashire-court, No 3. Again dirty and offensive; the water pipe stolen, and watercloset removed, and great accumulation of filth in the basement. Several partial improvements made; but the case not out of hand at the end of the quarter. Bell-yard, Mount-street, Nos. 11, 12, and 13. First floor front of No. 13, rendered offensive by dogs and cats. Diarrhoea in each house. Ditto, No. 4. One room overcrowded, house dirty, and drainage offensive. In this instance, and in those which follow, unless the contrary is stated, we imply that the requisite cleansings or alterations have been effected. Workshops in North-row, in the occupation of Mr. Bedford, behind 256, Oxford-street. These were rendered offensive, and the ceiling dangerous by repeated leakages from a water-closet over, in premises belonging to 256, Oxford-street. The owner of the latter premises gave a good deal of trouble, till a formal notice was sent to him, applying for admission under the llth Section of the Nuisances Removal Act, and stating that an application would be made to a magistrate if it were refused. He then set to work in good earnest, and did what was wanted. Market-street, May-fair, No. 22. In this case, a respectable tradesman occupying the shop and parlour, in the latter of which his wife and family lived and slept, applied for relief in consequence of effluvia from the latrines of the next house, which house is at right angles, and almost overlapping the complainant's. Mr. Grant took the greatest pains, but could afford no relief, because the things complained of were no more offensive than such things have a right to be. The complainant then received this piece of advice, which is applicable to 12 very many cases besides his :—" If you don't want air to come in from an offensive quarter, take care to let in plenty of it from a pure source." Street s-buildings, No, 1. A nuisance removed. Drainage Cases. Barlow-mews, Bruton-street, has been very extensively drained. Complaint was made that apartments occupied by a laundress, who employed 16 women, were without drainage of any sort; so were several inhabited stables. The result has been that 11 stables have been completely drained, for man and horse, and 5 new water-closets erected, at a very great cost, but with the entire good will of the owner, who admits the necessity of the measures. Thomas-street, No. 2. Here the drains were choked and offensive. Mill-street, No. 8. Basement flooded with sewage, in consequence of a choking of drains which pass through contiguous houses into Conduit-street. Union-street, No. 10. Here pipes have been substituted for the old brick drains, after complaint. Robert-street, No. 11. Defective drainage and water supply. Thomas-street, No. 43. An inhabited stable without drainage. George-street, Honover-square, Nos. 4 and 5. A huge cesspool belonging to these two houses conjointly, projected, with 2 old-fashioned latrines, into Mr. Evans's yard, No. 34, New Bond-street. He offered to crcct a new water-closet for each house, if allowed to abolish these old nuisances. This has been done, and an incredible quantity of human excrement (10 cartloads), which had been stored up there for generations, has been removed. 13 Oxford-street, Nos. 321 and 322. Dilapidated drains of 322 passing under 321. Broken up, and each house drained separately by pipes. Leakages and Dampness. New Bond-street, No. 54. Leakage into show-room, from defective rainwater pipes of Messrs. Tollard & Co. North Audley-street, No. 30. Leakage into cellars, from defect of pavement. Hertford-street, No. 37. Great dampness of wall, supposed to be caused by defective water-pipe at No. 38, and drainage of latter house defective. Robert-street, No. 1. An unventilated back kitchen, illegally occupied by man, wife, and four children; first floor back by man, wife, and five children. These persons had got possession of the apartments by deceiving the owner of the house, a respectable tradesman, who on our remonstrating, ejected them and put an end to the overcrowding. The public are scarcely aware of the extent to which false characters are used by by persons who desire to get admitted into lodgings, nor yet of the benefit which a summary power of ejectment would confer on the landlord and society at large. Tom's-court, No. 2. House clean, but overcrowded and sickly; kitchen occupied contrary to law, by a person who would not go till forced. Carrington-sireet, No. 8. A young married woman took in her two adult sisters, as inmates of the kitchen in which she slept with her husband and children. Houses inspected in consequence of illness. Herefordstreet, No. 3. Here a lady died of scarlet fever a few days after coming from Wales, and her servant sent to the Fever Hospital, died there of the same complaint. 14 Every precaution had been taken to prevent the spread of the disease. At No. 8, Thomas-street, a child died of scabies purulenta, an unusual form of illness. Other houses visited, in which nothing was found amiss, need not be detailed. Miscellaneous cases. Marine Store Dealers at No. 13, Lancashire-court, No. 6, Avery-row, No. 26, Thomasstreet, No. 12, Hart-street, and No. 15, Queen-street, Grosvenor-square, have been admonished by the Inspector for want of cleanliness. Dung has been complained of by the occupier of No. 9, Berkeley-street. The slaughterhouse in White-horse-yard, whitewashed by the Inspector's directions. Offensive gulleys have been-complained of in Chapel-mews, Robert-street, Street's-buildings, and opposite No. 81, Park-street. Also slops thrown on the roof of East's stables from the houses in Whitehorse-street. A sewer ventilator in Shepherd's-court, Upper Brookstreet, the effluvia from which created a great nuisance to the occupier of a public house close by, has been removed into a less objectionable situation. Belgrave Sub-District. Gateway leading to the Omnibus Yard, Belgrave-mewseast. A urinal was complained of, but the Sanitary Committee could not interfere, as it did not affect the public health. Denbigh-street, No. 14. There was a dangerous wall here, which has been repaired. "Nell Gwynne" Public House, Grosvenor-row. A common privy in the back yard. A new water-closet has been erected. 15 Grosvenor-row, No. 1. A fishmonger's shop. A quantity of oyster-shells and fish in a decomposed state, on some waste ground behind the house. The refuse has been removed. A Stable occupied by Mr. Charles Glover, Ecclestonplace. The drainage, which went into the dung-pit, has been connected with the sewer. Eaton-court, Nos. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, and 8. The drains have been cleansed and repaired. Queen-street, Pimlico, No. 40. The drains have been cleansed. Stone House, Commercial-road-south. The basement was flooded on the 26th of June. Remedied. Lower Belgrave-place, No. 21. A new water-closet has been erected in the back area, and new pipe drains laid down. Eccleston-street-east, No. 26. The water-closet has been repaired, and water supplied to it. Godby Rooms, Dear's-yard, Eaton-row, have been lime-washed and cleansed. Halkin-street, Belgrave-square, No. 4. The drains are stopped up, caused by an obstruction in the drain of No. 3, which consists of brick, has a flat bottom, and is without a fall. There is no sewer in front of Nos. 1, 2, 3, and 4, Halkin Street. No. 4 drains into No. 3,—No. 3 into No. 2,—and No. 2 into No. 1, which communicates with the sewer in Pembroke Mews. The drains have been cleansed at this house. Halkin-street, No. 3. The drains have been cleansed throughout the house, a new water-closet erected, the lower part of the house lime-washed, and premises drained into the front area. 16 Eccleston-square, No. 10. A complaint of smoke discharged from one of the chimnies belonging to Mr. Trollope's manufactory. Information was given to the police. A Urinal in Kinnerton-street, behind No. 2, Wiltoncrescent, by the side of the "Turk's Head" public house, has been trapped, and water laid on. Cowell and Sons' Slaughter House, Kinnerton-street, has been paved and drained. Park-side, Knightsbridge, Nos. 5 and 6. Complaint of slops thrown into the gutter from the attic window of No. 7, adjoining premises, and sometimes stopping up the rainwater pipe used jointly for the two houses. The gutters were examined on July 12th, and found clean. The Committee could not interfere. Mr. Wise's Cow Yard, Elizabeth-street-south, and Mr. Halts Cow Yard, Eccleston-street-east, have been limewashed and cleansed. Upper Belgrave-terrace, Pimlico, No. 1. The closet and drains have been cleansed, and the skylight made to open and shut. Newman's Yard, behind Nos. 13 and 14, Brewer-street. The drains have been cleansed, and the walls of Mr. Hatt's cow-shed lime-washed. Brewer-street, Pimlico, No. 17. A new rain-water pipe communicating with the drain has been erected. Westbourne-street, No. 94. A nuisance from an offensive gutter has been remedied. Upper Belgrave-terrace, Nos. 4 and 5, and Yard behind. Common privies and cesspools. The work is in progress. Commercial-road-south, No. 3. Basement flooded with sewage water; reported to the surveyor. The nuisance 17 arose from the flaps belonging to the sewer being open, which has been remedied. Erin Cottages, Nos. 1, 2, and 3. This was a very dangerous nuisance caused by an overflow of sewage. Two grown-up persons and a child were taken ill, one with symptoms of cholera. A brick drain passes through No. 2, which receives the drainage of the three houses. The drains were in a defective condition. When Dr. Aldis and the Inspector of Nuisances visited the premises, the danger to the health of the occupiers was so imminent, that the former wrote a letter to the owner, requesting his immediate attention to the unhealthy state of the drains, otherwise proceedings would be taken, and he would be held responsible for the result. Workmen were sent in forthwith, and new pipe drains laid down, which were connected with the sewer. The old brick drains have been cleansed and broken up, closets trapped, water laid on to No. 3, a new covered dust-pit erected to each house, and the lower part of each cleansed. Unenclosed Ground behind Wallace's Hotel. This place, being used for indecent purposes, is particularly objectionable, on account of the vicinity of the girls' school belonging to St. Paul's, Knightsbridge. The owner is willing to put a railing round it. The urinal formerly open to the public at Wallace's Hotel, is now locked up, which accounts in some measure for the present annoyance. Back of St. Paul's Church, Knightsbridge. One corner used for the calls of nature—neither closet, drainage, nor water. A notice was served on August 4, since when the rubbish has been removed, a new water-closet and dust-pit erected, and the closet properly drained. B 18 Brewer-street, No. 8. Infected with fever, back kitchen dirty, wash-house and closet offensive from neglect. The kitchen has been lime-washed and cleansed. Lupus-street, Pimlico, No. 66. Leakage of water into the back kitchen from No. 68, in consequence of the cistern being without a ball-cock. Nuisance abated. Flask Lane, No. 1. The kitchen let again as a separate dwelling. The Inspector acquainted the owner, that if he did not cause the kitchen to be shut up forthwith, a summons would be applied for. The kitchen has been shut up, and the owner has promised not to let it again. Flash Lane, No. 14. Water has been laid on to the closet, and a new dust-pit erected. Graham-street-west, No. 12. Complaint of a dead body here in so offensive a state, that it caused a nuisance throughout the house, from the widow frequently removing the lid to kiss the deceased! The complainant's wife being far advanced in pregnancy, became nauseated and unable to eat her food. Dr. Aldis recommended the body to be covered with sawdust, and the lid to be screwed down immediately, which was done, and the burial took place soon afterwards. St. George's-terrace, No. 8. Infected with fever, bedding in a filthy state. An order was given for the patient, with six young children, to be taken into the workhouse; but after every attention was paid by Mr. Badderley, the father refused to accompany them. The mother, however, improved in health. Union-street, No. 23. An offensive gully opposite to this house has been remedied. Urinal by the side of the Grosvenor Arms, Lower Belgrave-place. The place is properly washed every morning by one of the men employed by the parish. This case 19 was reported to the Surveyor from the Committee of Works, who had decided upon a similar complaint about two years ago. Pembroke-mews, No. 5. An offensive gutter opposite to these premises, was remedied after a notice served on August 14th. Flask-row, Pimlico, No. 2. Leakage of water into it from No. 3, adjoining premises, caused by a defective condition of the cistern against the party wall. Nuisance abated. Cottage adjoining Upper Ebury-street School. Infected with scarlet fever; walls damp. A new cistern has been erected, and water laid on to the closets. The dampness cannot be remedied unless the cottage is rebuilt. Upper Ebury-street School. Scarlet fever among the pupils, school-room dirty. The school was closed, and the room has since been lime-washed. Berwick-street, Pimlico, No. 5. An offensive gully opposite to this place has been remedied. The drains have been cleansed at Eccleston-place, Pimlico, No. 8 ; and at Skinner-cottages, Skinner-street, Pimlico, Nos. 1 and 2. Wilton-place, Knightsbridge, No. 32. A water-closet has been erected. Commercial-road-south, No. 26, and Commercial-road, No. 3. Infected with scarlet fever, but no nuisance could be detected on the premises. A notice was served on August 18th, upon the owners of the following houses, seven of which have been painted and put into excellent condition, and the required alterations have been made in the remainder. Robert-street, Pimlico (South side), No. 2. The rooms are dirty, and rain-water is leaking through the roof. 20 Robert-court, No, 1. The rooms are dirty. Ditto, No. 2. Parlour and water-closet dirty. Robert-street (South side), No. 3. Staircase dirty. Ditto (South side), No. 4. New water-butt required. Ditto, No. 5. Obstructed drains. Ditto, No. 6. Top rooms and staircase dirty. Ditto, No. 7. The kitchen is occupied again. Ditto, No. 8. The roof out of repair and house dirty. Ditto, No. 9. A new water-butt is required. Robert-street, Pimlico (North side), No. 1. Dirty throughout. Ditto, No. 2. Back parlour, bed room, and staircase dirty. Ditto, No. 4. Back bed room dirty. Ditto, No. 7. Parlour and staircase dirty. The yards from Nos. 1 to 7 are dirty, and there are no bells to the traps. Ditto, No. 9. Staircase, wash-house, and water-closet, dirty and out of repair. Ditto, No. 10. Wash-house and water-closet dirty. Ditto, No. 11. The front parlour and passage very dirty. Ditto, No. 12. The front parlour and wash-house very dirty. Skinner-street, Westbourne-street, No. 2. A new waterbutt has been erected. Princes-row, No. 1. Infected with scarlet fever. The walls of the staircase and cellar dirty, and the tap to the closet does not act. A notice was served on September 5th, and the work is in progress. Buckingham-place, No. 9. A notice was served on September 5th, and the drains, with the closet, have been cleansed. 21 Literary Institution, South-place, Pimlico. The drains are stopped up, and the basement inundated with water, which was caused by the drain from the preceding place being cut off, when a new pipe-drain was constructed for the adjoining premises. Remedied. Windsor-terrace, Vauxhall-bridge-road, No. 6. Leakage of water from No. 5, adjoining premises, into the back parlour, caused by the defective state of a closet against the party-wall. A notice was served on August 30th, and the closet has been repaired. Brewer-street, Allington-street, No. 1. The walls and ceiling of the shop damp from the defective state of the lead on the roof. A notice was served on September 5th, and the roof has been repaired. Chelsea Water Works Public House, Upper Belgraveterrace. The cellars are inundated with water from an obstructed drain, which has been cleansed. Caroline-street, Pimlico, No. 29. Escape of water into the yard from an obstructed drain, which has been cleansed. The bakehouses at Chapel-street, No. 38; Upper Eburystreet, No. 37 ; Eccleston-strect, No. 6; Lower Eaton-street, No. 3 ; Ranelagh-street, No. 7; Stockbridge-terrace, No. 25; Belgravc-road, No. 6; and Hindon-street, No. 38, have been lime-washed. Dung and rubbish have been removed from the following places: — Mr. Wise's Cow-yard, Elizabeth-streetsouth ; Messrs. Watting and Sons' Yard, Charlotte-street, Pimlico; Mr. Green's Cow-yard, Eaton-row; Stable at No. 4, Eaton-row, Eaton-lane ; South Moreton-mews, No. 3; Moreton-terrace-mews, No. 4 ; Shed at College-place, Kinnerton-street; Mr. Price's Stable-yard, Lupus-street; Upper Denbigh-mews ; Kinnerton-street, Nos. 4 and 5; Mr. Bull's * 22 Cow-yard, Ranelagh-mews; Ebury-mews, No. 3; May's Yard, Wilton-road; Tachbrook-mews, from No. 8 to 15. WATER. An analysis of the water supplied by the Chelsea Company, and taken July 3rd, 1860, from the main at Chapel-street, Belgrave-square, produced Grains per Gallon. Total Impurity 19.80 Organic ditto 1.92 Aug. 2nd, 1860, Total ditto 17.44 Organic ditto 1.52 Sept. 17th, 1860. Total ditto 19.20 Organic ditto 1.52 We have the honour to be, Your faithful Servants, C. J. B. Aadis,, M.D. R. Druitt. 23 APPENDIX. GAS. The average result of examinations during the quarter of the illuminating power of the gas supplied to the Workhouse, Mount-street, was, that 2.5 feet burned in a batswing-burner, per hour, gave a light equal to that of 14.9 sperm candles, burning 120 grains per hour. Sulphur Determinations. 1860. Feet of gas burned. Sulphate of Baryte in grains. Sulphur in grains per 100 feet. July 14 .85 .6 9.65 Sept. 29 1. 1.12 15.3 During the same period, the gas supplied to the room in Ebury-news, burned in a batswing-burner, at the rate of 2.5 feet per hour, gave a light equal to that of 9.84 sperm candles, consuming 120 grains per hour, and presented no trace of sulphuretted hydrogen. MORTALITY. DEATHS registered in the Parish of St. George, Hanover Square, in the 13 Weeks ending 29th of September, 1860. Average, 29 2. DISEASES. Ages at Death. Sub-Districts & Population Sexes. Under 1. 1 and under 5. Total under 20. 20 and under 40. 40 and under 60. 60 and under 80. 80 and above. Hanover Square.—20,216. May Fair.—12,980. Belgrave.—40,034. Mount-street Work.—268. Little Chelsea Work.—350 St. George's Hospital. —216. Males, 31,920. Females, 41,310. Total, 73,230. Parishioners. NonParishioners. I. Order 1. 1. Small-pox .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 2 .. .. .. .. .. 2 2 2. Measles 5 14 20 .. .. .. .. .. 1 19 .. .. .. .. 9 11 20 3. Scarlatina 1 8 13 .. .. .. .. 1 1 10 .. .. .. 1 7 6 13 4. Diphtheria .. 1 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 .. .. .. .. .. 1 1 5. Quinsy .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 6. Croup .. 1 2 .. .. .. .. .. .. 2 .. .. .. .. .. 2 2 7. Sore Throat .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 8. Whooping Cough 5 2 .. .. .. .. .. 1 1 5 .. .. .. .. 4 3 7 9. Typhus (and infantile fever) .. .. 1 1 1 1 .. 2 .. 2 .. .. .. .. 1 3 4 10. Erysipelas .. .. .. 1 1 2 1 .. 1 2 .. .. 1 1 3 2 5 11. Metria,(Puerperal Fever) .. .. .. 2 .. .. .. .. .. 1 .. .. .. 1 .. 2 2 12. Pyæmia, (Blood Poisoning) .. .. .. 1 2 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 3 2 1 3 13. Carbuncle .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 14. Influenza .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 15. Dysentery .. .. .. .. .. 1 .. .. .. 1 1 1 16. Diarrhœa 9 1 10 1 .. 2 .. 4 .. 9 .. .. .. .. 7 6 13 17. Cholera Infantum 2 1 3 .. .. .. .. 3 .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 2 3 18. Ague .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 19. Rheumatism .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 20. Rheumatism .. .. .. 1 2 .. .. .. .. 3 .. .. .. .. 2 1 3 Order 2. 1. Syphilis 1 .. 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 .. .. .. .. 1 .. 1 2. Syricture of Urethra .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Order 3. 1. Privation .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 2. Want of Breast Milk 7 .. 7 .. .. .. .. 3 1 3 .. .. .. .. 4 3 7 3. Purpura and Scurvy .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 4. Alcoholism a Del. Tremens .. .. .. 1 1 .. .. .. .. 1 .. .. 1 .. 2 .. 2 b Intemperance .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Order 4. 1. Thrush .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. II. Order 1. 1. Gout .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 2. Dropsy .. .. .. .. .. 2 .. 1 .. 1 .. .. .. .. 2 2 3. Cancer .. .. 1 .. 4 8 .. .. 2 7 .. .. .. 4 3 10 13 4. Mortification 1 .. 1 .. 1 2 .. 1 1 .. .. .. 2 2 2 4 5. Abscess 2 .. 3 1 3 .. .. .. .. 2 .. .. 2 3 3 4 7 Order 2. 1. Scrofula .. 1 3 .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 .. .. 2 .. 2 1 3 2. Tabes Mesenterica 2 3 6 .. .. .. .. 3 .. 1 .. .. .. 2 4 2 6 3. Phthisis 1 .. 6 24 19 1 .. 5 4 29 8 .. 2 2 32 18 50 4. Hydrocephalus 7 3 10 .. .. .. .. .. 1 8 .. 1 .. .. 6 4 10 III. Order 1. 1. Cephalitis .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 2. Apoplexy .. .. .. 4 2 7 .. 3 3 6 .. .. 1 .. 6 7 13 3. Paralysis .. .. .. 1 .. 2 .. .. 1 1 1 .. .. .. 1 2 3 4. Epilepsy .. .. .. 2 .. .. .. .. .. 2 .. .. .. .. 2 .. 2 5. Convulsions 8 2 11 .. .. .. .. 4 .. 7 .. .. .. .. 6 5 11 6. Bruin Disease, &c Order 2. .. 3 6 3 2 2 .. 3 .. 5 2 .. 2 1 4 9 13 1. Pericarditis .. .. 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 .. 1 1 2. Aneurism .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 3. Heart Disease, &c. .. .. 2 6 7 4 .. 2 2 5 .. 1 1 8 8 11 19 1. Laryngitis 1 1 2 .. .. .. .. .. 1 1 .. .. .. .. 1 1 2 2. Bronchitis 4 2 6 .. 3 5 .. 3 .. 8 2 .. 1 .. 6 8 14 3. Pleurisy .. .. .. .. 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 .. 1 .. 1 BIRTHS registered during 13 weeks.—Hanover Square, M 53, F. 55; May Fair, M. 33, F. 28 Belgrave, M. 193,F. 155. Total 517 Average 39.7, DISEASES. Ages at Death. Sub-districts & population. Sexes. Under 1. 1 and under 5. Total under 20. '20 and under 40. 40 and undert 60. 00 and under 80. 80 and above. Hanover Square.—20,216. May Fair.—12,980. Belgrave.—40,034. Mount-street Work.—268 Little Chelsea Work.—350. St. George's Hospital. —216. Males, 31,920. Females, 41,310. Total, 73,230. Parishioners. NonParishioners. 5. Pneumonia .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 .. .. .. .. .. 1 1 6. Asthma .. .. .. .. .. 1 .. .. .. 1 .. .. .. .. .. 1 1 7. Lung Disease, &c Order 4. .. .. 1 2 1 .. .. 1 .. 1 .. .. .. 2 4 .. 4 1. Enteritis 1 .. 1 .. .. 1 .. .. 1 1 .. .. .. .. 1 1 2 2. Peritonitis 1 .. 4 3 1 1 .. .. .. 5 .. .. .. 4 2 7 9 3. Ascites .. .. .. 1 .. 1 .. .. .. 1 .. .. .. 1 1 1 2 4. Hernia .. .. .. .. .. 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 .. 1 1 5. Ileus and Intussusception .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 6. Fistula .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 .. .. .. 1 .. .. .. 1 .. 1 7. Stomach Disease, &c. .. .. .. .. 3 1 1 1 .. 2 1 .. 1 .. 2 3 5 8. Hepatitis .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 9. Jaundice 1 .. 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 .. 1 .. 1 10. Liver Disease, &c Order 5. 1 .. 1 3 2 2 .. .. 2 2 .. .. 1 3 4 4 8 2. Nephria .. .. .. .. 1 3 .. .. .. 1 .. .. .. 3 3 1 4 2. Diabetes .. .. .. .. 1 .. .. .. 1 .. .. .. .. .. 1 .. 1 3. Kidney Disease, &c .. .. .. 1 4 .. 1 .. .. 1 .. .. 2 3 6 .. 6 4. Disease Bladder Order 6. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 1. Ovarian Dropsy .. .. 1 .. 1 .. .. .. .. 1 .. .. 1 .. .. 2 2 2. Uterus Disease, &c. Order 7. .. .. .. .. 3 .. .. 1 .. .. .. .. 1 1 .. 3 3 1. Arthritis .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 2. Joint Disease, &c Order 8. .. .. 2 1 1 .. .. .. .. 1 .. .. .. 3 4 .. 4 1. Phlegmon .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 2. Ulcer .. .. .. 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 1 .. 1 3. Skin Disease. &c. .. .. .. .. .. 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 .. 1 1 IV. Order 1. 1. Prematue Birth 6 .. 6 .. .. .. .. .. 2 4 .. .. .. .. 3 3 6 2. Cyanosis .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 3. Spina Bifida .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 4. Other Malformations 1 .. 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 .. .. .. .. 1 .. 1 5. Teething Order 2. 1 .. 1 .. .. .. .. .. 1 .. .. .. .. .. 1 .. 1 1. Paramenia .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 2. Child-birth (see Metria Order 3. .. .. .. .. 1 .. .. .. .. 1 .. .. .. .. .. 1 1 1. Old Age Order 4. .. .. .. .. .. 4 4 1 1 4 2 .. .. .. 3 5 8 1. Atrophy and Debility V. Order 1. 12 .. 12 .. 5 5 .. 6 2 10 2 2 .. .. 10 12 22 (Accident or Negligence.) .. .. .. 3 2 2 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. 8 8 .. 8 2. Gunshot .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 3. Wounds .. .. 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 1 .. 1 4. Burns and Scalds .. 2 2 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 1 1 1 2 5. Poison .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 6. Drowning .. .. .. 1 .. .. .. .. .. 1 .. .. .. .. .. 1 1 7. Suffocation 1 .. 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 .. .. .. .. 1 .. 1 Other Injuries 2 .. 2 1 .. .. .. 2 .. .. .. .. .. 1 3 .. 3 Order 3. 1.Murder and Manslaughter. Order 4. (Suicide) .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 1. Cut, Stab, Shot .. .. .. 1 .. .. .. 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 .... 1 2. Poison .. .. .. .. 1 .. .. 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 1 3. Drowning .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 4. Hanging .. .. .. .. 1 .. .. .. .. 1 .. .. .. .. .. 1 1 Sudden Deaths (Cause unascer- tained) .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Causes not specified or ill-de- fined 1 .. 1 1 .. .. .. .. .. 2 .. .. .. .. .. 2 2 Tortal: 84 45 162 60 78 62 9 53 29 190 19 4 22 63 194 186 380 DLATI1S registered during corresponding weeks of ten years (average) 378 3 Weekly average 29*] LONDON PRINTED BY GEORGE PHIPPS, RANELAGH STREET, EATON SQUARE. HAN 10 No. XIII.] QUARTERLY SUMMARY OF THE SICKNESS AND MORTALITY OF Saint George, Hawber Square, AND OF THE PROCEEDINGS OP THE MEDICAL OFFICERS OF HEALTH, FOR THE QUARTER ENDING DECEMBER 29th, 1860. LONDON: PRINTED BY GEORGE PHIPPS, UPPER RANELAGH STREET, PIMLICO, S.W. To The Destry of St. George, Hanober Square. I. MORTALITY. My Lords and Gentlemen, We are happy in being again able to report a low rate of mortality during the thirteen weeks which constitute the fourth quarter of the year 1860. During the corresponding quarter of 1857 the deaths amounted to 442; in 1858, to 490; in 1859, to 429; and in 1860, to 399. Out of this number, 57 were deaths of nonparishioners in St. George's Hospital, and 3 of our parishioners in Little Chelsea Workhouse. The average mortality for the quarter during the preceding ten years has been 390.5. The whole class of zymotic diseases have been less fatal during the present quarter. One death only has taken place from small-pox, that of a porter at Lansdowne House, whereas last year there were four. The poor man in question was 46 years of age, and had been vaccinated. The deaths from measles, scarlatina, and diphtherite are as nearly as possible the same as last year; but there are only 2 deaths from whooping-cough against 14 last year; and 6 from typhus against 10. 4 The places in which measles proved fatal, were Nos. 1, 6, and 11, Hertford-place : No. 9, Carrington-street; No. 3, Grantham-place; and No. 1, Bishop's-yard, Charlesstreet, in the In-Wards: and No. 12, Flask-row; No. 16, Effingham-street; No. 4, Whitaker-street; Nos. 13 and 19, New Grosvenor-place; and No. 18, Eburycottages, Ebury-square. Of course, in these cases, the residence indicates the condition of life of the parents, and shows the precise influences which render epidemic diseases fatal to children. The question to be solved is,—will greater care, a more intelligent manner of feeding and nursing, a more thrifty mode of expending the weekly wages, and something like increased knowledge of the laws of life, enable the artizan, even if continuing at the present rate of wages, to rear his children with less mortality? We believe that they will; and that the mortality from the measles is capable of being greatly reduced, and especially by ventilation. Scarlatina proved fatal at No. 26, Robert-street, Grosvenor-square; No. 6, Lancashire-court; and No. 56, New Bond-street, in the In-Wards: and at No. 55, Hanover-street; No. 2, Princes-row West; No. 34, Eccleston-place; No. 21, Berwick-street; No. 24, Coleshill-street; No. 16, Sutherland-street; and No. 8, Eccleston-place. Diphtheria, at No. 96, Mount-street; No. 35, Maddox-street; and at No. 12, Flask-lane. There were in each of these three cases circumstances which tend to create, or to aggravate, illness. Under the head of violent deaths, we notice four suicides ascribed to insanity. A gentleman destroyed himself with a razor; a hatter suffocated himself by fumes of charcoal; a tallow-chandler drowned himself in the Serpentine; and a woman strangled herself with a stay- 5 lace. One newly-born infant was found in Hyde Park; a labourer was found dead in Kensington Gardens, poisoned by oxalic acid, without evidence to show by whom it was administered; and a young man of 23, fell from a window which he was cleaning in Conduit-street, and was killed. Cheap iron balconies, affixed to the outside of windows, so as to allow a man to stand in, would save several lives annually in London. The Mosaic law ordered safeguards in the like cases. A man was burned to death owing to the rum from a cask which he was tapping spirting upon the candle and catching fire; and a boy of 13 was drowned whilst bathing in the Thames at the Pimlico Pier. II. THE SICKNESS. In the Hanover and Mayfair Sub-districts, the number of sick persons who availed themselves of gratuitous medical attendance at the Dispensary, No. 48, Mountstreet, or at the hands of the Parochial Medical Officers, was 766. The numbers during the corresponding quarters of the last five years have been 787, 1,126, 856, 781, and now 766. Out of the 766 cases, 162 were cases of bronchitis, besides 1 of pleurisy. Scarlet fever and measles were the most prevalent zymotic diseases, there being 32 cases of the former, and 11 of the latter. Besides, there were 2 cases of chicken-pox, 19 of diarrhoea, and 13 of continued fever. No case of small-pox occurred amongst the gratuitous patients. Here follows the usual list of the poorer streets, with their population and amount of sickness:— 6 Population. Cases of illness attended gratuitously. Deaths of children. Deaths of adults. Model Lodgings 130 7 0 0 Blomfield Buildings 130 7 0 0 Brick Street 296 11 0 0 Brown Street 200 35 1 0 Carrington Street 280 10 1 0 GeorgeStreet,Grosvenor Square 540 36 0 1 Grosvenor Market 211 19 0 0 Grosvenor Mews 944 53 1 1 Hart Street 265 6 1 1 Hertford Place 200 24 4 0 John's Court, Farm Street 80 17 0 0 Lancashire Court 270 30 3 1 May's Buildings 122 5 0 0 Mount Row and Place 133 14 0 0 North Bruton Mews 154 27 0 1 Queen Street 316 16 0 2 Robert Street, Grosvenor Sq. 543 29 2 0 Thomas Street, Grosvenor Sq. 600 34 0 0 Amongst the most sickly houses, were Nos. 66, 67, and 68, Davies-street; No. 11, North-row; No. 17, Little Grosvenor-street (which furnished 10 cases of illness); No. 10, Grosvenor-mews (which also furnished 10 cases); No. 2, John's-court; and No. 2, Tom's-court. In the Belgrave Sub-district, 5,717 persons were treated by the Parochial Surgeons, at St. George's Hospital, the Royal Pimlico Dispensary, the St. Paul's and St. Barnabas' Dispensary, and at the Workhouse, Little Chelsea. Of these, 3,098 were patients at St. George's Hospital, leaving a remainder of 2,629. We find that the total included 4 of small-pox, 14 of chicken-pox, 54 of measles, 62 of scarlatina, 17 of whooping-cough, 142 of diarrhoea, 3 of dysentery, 30 of 7 tinued fever, 47 of rheumatic fever, 3 of diphtheria, 7 of erysipelas, 4 of carbuncle, 1 of pyœmia, and 3 of ague, which occurred respectively at No. 11, Ecclestonplaee, No. 12, Hindon-street, and No. 8a, Robert's-buildings, Ebury-square. There were 448 cases of bronchitis, 14 of pleurisy, and 20 of pneumonia. III. Nuisances. The following is a summary of the nuisances and complaints which have been dealt with during the quarter:— Special Cases. New Bond-street, No. 161. This case, which has appeared more than once already, was again brought under our notice on the 14th September. The owner of the wine cellar believed that he could prove that large quantities of water flowed in from the area of No. 13, Graftonstreet adjoining, and that the water so flowing was sewage. An inspection was therefore made, the result of which was, that the drains of No. 13, Grafton-street were sound, and that the influx of water arose from land springs. The owner of No. 161 paid the expenses. (See Report, No. XI., p. 9.) Claries-street, No. 19. Flooding of cellars was proved to be from spring water. Oxford-street, No. 315b. Complaint was made by the occupier of most offensive smells proceeding from No. 314, and alleged to be caused by the charring of bone- 8 dust, used to caseharden steel. On paying a visit, and witnessing the process, some grounds were found to exist for the complaint; but measures were pointed out by which any future annoyance to the neighbours might be avoided. Gas Nuisance in Bolton-street. Owing to a defect in the main, the inhabitants were exposed to the escape of gas into their kitchens, and to the almost equal nuisance of incessant fruitless digging up the street for repairs. An application was made to the Chartered Company, who at once put down a new main. Great escape of gas into No. 9, Providence Court. Remedied. Inspections in consequence of Disease. Brown-street, No. 9. A youDg woman was admitted into the sick wards of the workhouse for fever from this house, where she lived in the same room with a man, his wife, and four children. She lived there by consent of the wife, to take charge of the children during her absence at an hospital. A very small room in the same house was occupied by an Irishwoman, with son of 13, daughter of 18, and young woman lodger. This overcrowding was abated, and the house cleansed. Brook-street, No. . Is the residence of a physician, whose children were ill with diphtheria. A letter was sent to him by the Medical Officers of Health, suggesting that there might be causes of the disease in the drainage. The reply was, that the house was abominably offensive. Mr. Grant inspected it, and caused a set of old rotten brick drains to be explored and removed; pipes were laid down, and the house made wholesome. 9 The same house was also subject to a very serious leakage of water from Weippert's Rooms, No. 11, Daviesstreet, which was investigated, and remedied. Maddox-street, No. 35. Here Mr. Grant found, and caused to be abolished, a cesspool and set of old rotten brick drains, and new pipes to be laid down. The occupier confessed, with grief, to the Medical Officer of Health that the house had long been in a poisonous state, and that if these alterations had been effected before, the lives of two of his children, who died here of diphtheria, might have been spared, and he might have been saved the loss and suffering arising from an attack of the same disease. Mount-street, No. 96. Here a child died of diphtheria a few days after returning in perfect health from the country. Mr. Grant found an untrapped sink covered with rubbish in the kitchen, in which the child passed most of his time, besides a dilapidated privy in the basement, yielding most offensive effluvia. Clarges-street, No. 43. A servant went from this house to St. George's Hospital, and ascribed his illness to sleeping in an underground room, filled with drain stench, and infested with rats. The drainage has been remedied, and completely reset with 6-inch pipes. Inspections were made, and necessary cleansing effected, at No. 18, Grosvenor-market, No. 9, Queen-street, No. 8, Woodstock-street, No. 3, Union-street, No. 83, Park-street, No. 3, Eaton-place, North-row, No. 1, Bolton-yard, Nos. 10 and 26, Robert-street, and Nos. 6 and 9, Lancashire-court, in consequence of scarlatina. 10 Drainage Cases. Carrington-place, No. 3. A stable utterly without drainage for the horses, or for the family that lives there. Most disgusting slops thrown on to the surface of the street to evaporate under the sun. Pipe-drainage constructed. Hertford-mews, May-fair, No. 14. A stable, similarly occupied, without water-closet. Disused as a dwelling habitation. Barlow-mews, No. 14. The only undrained stable left in the mews. (See Report, No. XII. p 12.) Disused as a dwelling. Dover-street, No. 9. A great nuisance occasioned by a brick shaft conveying the drainage of No. 8, Doverstreet, and No. 47, Albemarle-street, adjoining. The shaft abolished, and each house drained separately afresh. Park-lane, No. 6. (See Report, No. X., p. 22.) Three stables newly drained by pipes, and inlets trapped. Trafalgar Stables, Mount-street. This case was brought before the committee three years ago, but postponed in consequence of the enormous expense. The liquid manure from 100 horses, once received in cesspools, and allowed to soak into the gravel, is now carried by two main pipedrains into the sewer in Adam's-mews. Davies-street, No. 71. Made unwholesome by a dilapidated water-closet at 28, South Molton-street, adjoining. A new closet and cistern erected, and the wall repaired. Dover-street, No. 14, and Nos. 41 and 42, Albemarlestreet. Three houses poisoned by overflowings of large cesspools in the rear of the latter two. Cesspools abolished, and pipes laid down. 11 Thomas-street, Nos. 12, 13, 31, and 43. The former two stables without drainage, the latter two with defective drainage. A new pipe sewer has been laid down in the street at the expense of the occupiers, and three of the stables perfectly connected therewith. No. 13 allowed to stand over for the present. Tenterden-street, No. 2. Water leaking through a wall from defective drainage of adjoining premises. Park-street, No. 107. Wall of cellars undermined by rats; consequent current of foul air from street sewer, and leakage of water from defective drains of No. 37, Upper Grosvenor-street, adjoining. "Three Horse Shoes" Public House, Gilbert-street, No. 19. Most offensive and dilapidated drainage. Bolton-row, No. 11. An old cesspool in the kitchen, and a set of dilapidated brick drains leading from No. 23, Bolton-street, abolished, and pipes laid down. South Bruton-mews, No. 5. Stables dirty and undrained; whitewashed and drained by pipes. Robert-street, Nos. 21 and 22. In each house an offensive and dilapidated water-closet; new one erected. Lancashire-court, No. 3. This case brought before the magistrate at Marlborough-street, for general dirt and dilapidated drainage, which the owner, after adjournment, remedied. Park-street, No. 89. Cesspool abolished; pipes laid down. The above cases are particularly specified, because important works were executed, at very considerable expense to the owners. In the following cases, lesser drainage grievances have been investigated and remedied. Hanover-square, No. 17. Oxford-street, No. 271. 12 Berkeley-street, Piccadilly, No. 34. Conduit-street, No. 47. A tailor's workshop, where many men work. Henry's Stable, White-horse-yard. Park-street, No. 88. Carrington-street, No. 11. Davies-street, No. 54. Albemarle-street, No. 38. "Coach and Horses " Public House, Davies-street. Davies-street, No. 54. Premises Cleansed, &c. Hart-street, No. 8. A very dirty house; not yet cleansed. Brick-street, Nos. 19, 20, and 21. Cleansed and better ventilated. George-street, Oxford-street, Nos. 20 and 24. Park-street, No. 33. Hertsletts Cowshed, Providence-court. Mount-street, No. 10a. Shepherd's-market, No. 15. Bolton-street, No. 9. Adam's-mews. Dung nuisance. Grantham-place. Ditto. Belgrave Sub-District. Eccleston-place, No. 46. The stable and the dwelling rooms, which were dirty throughout, have been whitewashed and cleansed. The paving of the stable, and dung-pit, with the water-closet, have been repaired, and water supplied. 13 Allington-street, Pimlico, No. 8. Infected with erysipelas. The patient occupied the front kitchen, which has been cleansed. Grosvenor-row, No. 19. Infected with scarlet fever. The top of the closet has been remedied. Moreton-street, Pimlico, No. 8, and Hindon-place, Hindon-street, Pimlico, No. 21. The water-closets have been repaired. Ranelagh-street, No. 34. A closet offensive through neglect, remedied. A family removed from the front kitchen, which, with the back one, was unfit to be occupied, on account of dampness. Upper Belgrave-place, No. 16. The drains from the water-closet, which were obstructed in the yard, have been cleansed and repaired, and the nuisance abated. Belgrave-terrace, Pimlico, No. 2. Dr. Aldis and the Inspector of Nuisances attended the Westminster Police Court on November 30th, when, after hearing the evidence, Mr. Arnold, the magistrate, recommended the summons against the owner to be withdrawn, and a fresh one taken out against the occupier, who held the house on a repairing lease. The owner also, after having commenced an action of ejectment, could not obtain admission. Evidence was given on December 9th, that two cesspools existed on the premises, the drainage being in a defective state; and that when the fires at No 1 were lighted, the effluvium was drawn into it. The magistrate granted an order for the work to be done within six days; but as it was not carried into effect, the Local Authority has since remedied the evil. Eccleston-place, Pimlico, No. 50. A six-stall stable which was dirty and without drainage, has been properly 14 drained by six-inch pipe drains, the inlets trapped, the paving repaired, and the walls whitewashed. Eaton-place, No. 36. While passing here on Sunday October 7th, Dr. Aldis detected a strong smell of gas which was escaping to a dangerous extent from the cellars; he informed a servant of the circumstance, who said that the nuisance had been perceptible for two or three days, and had filled the house. The Inspector of the Company was applied to, who examined the premises the same evening, and found that a workman, who had been repairing a street-lamp, had broken a pipe half way down the lamp-post, and, instead of closing the aperture, had merely stopped up the upper part of the lamp-post, so that the gas escaped freely into the cellars and the house. This valuable house must have been destroyed if a lighted candle had been taken into the cellars, or if a lighted match had accidentally fallen through the perforated iron plates covering the coal-holes. The workman was immediately suspended. Gloucester-terrace, St. George's-road, Pimlico, No. 26. An obstructed closet, which has been remedied. Leakages, &c. Brewer-street, Pimlico, No. 1. Leakage of water into the shop, caused by the defective condition of the watercloset and cistern in the yard of No. 2, which have been repaired. Park-side, Knightsbridge, No. 21. Leakage of water into the basement from the ground floor, caused by the boiler overflowing, which has been rectified. Belgrave-terrace-mews, Pimlico, No. 1. Leakage of 15 water into the parlour from a cistern in the wash-house of No. 9, Belgrave-terrace, which has been repaired. The New Public House, Ranelagh-grove, Pimlico. Leakage of water through the party wall from No. 30, Weststreet, adjoining premises, caused by the defective condition of a brick drain and the closet, which has been repaired, and a new pipe drain laid down. Cambridge-street, Pimlico, No. 133. Leakage of water into the area, supposed to come from No. 25, adjoining premises. The nuisance is abated. Eaton-lane, North, No. 12. Leakage of water from No. 11, into the parlour cupboard, caused by the defective condition of a cistern, which has been repaired. Upper Tachbrooh-street, Pimlico, No. 11. Leakage of water into the basement from a pump in Tachbrook-mews. The work is completed. Ebury-street, Pimlico, No. 102. A notice was served on November 24th, 1860, and the cesspools have been emptied and filled up, the brick drains cleansed, and broken up, new six-inch pipe drains laid down and connected with the sewer, and inlets trapped. Warwick-street, Pimlico, No. 136. A nuisance which was said by the occupier to have arisen from obstructed drains, was found to proceed from decomposing pickles, kept in the kitchen cupboard. Park-side, Knightsbridge, No. 1. A urinal having been erected near the complainant's house in Hyde Park against the party wall, the Medical Officer of Health inspected the premises twice, and examined the situation of the urinal, which can be seen from the windows. He also wrote two letters to the Chief Commissioner of Woods and Forests upon the subject. The result was 16 that, although unwilling to cause it to be removed, he directed the top to be completely covered. Grrosvenor-row, Pimlico, No. 49. A new water-closet and dust-pit have been erected, a new water butt has been pitched and covered, the paving repaired, and the gully trapped. Upper Ebury-street, Pimlico, No. 50. Infected with small-pox. The drains here have been cleansed and repaired. Drainage Cases, &c. Eccleston-place, Nos. 8 and 14. The drains have been attended to, and the rooms limewashed and papered. The drains have been cleansed at Queen-street, Pimlico, No. 40; Eccleston-place, Nos. 53 and 54; BoycTs-gardens, No. 9 ; and Roberfs-buildings, Ebury-square, No. 8a. St. George's-place, Ebury-bridge, No. 6. Effluvia from neglected traps. Remedied. Cambridge-street, Pimlico, No. 95. Effluvia from neglect of one of the closets and sink trap. Remedied. The following were cases in which the Inspector could not interfere:— Ranelagh-street, No. 8. The complaint here was of stone masons' hammering during the day. At Mr. Croft's, Pork Butcher, Knightsbridge-terrace, that of a nuisance caused by the noise of a sausage-making machine, erected at the rear of complainant's yard. At Cumberlandstreet, No. 73, annoyance caused by the playing of an organ next door. And at Warwick-street, Pimlico, No. 78, a nuisance arising from smoke. 17 Flask-row, Pimlico, No. 12. The nuisance here, caused by lodgers, has been remedied. Mr. Waiting's Slaughter-house has been cleansed. Princes-row, West Pimlico, Nos. 3, 4, 5, and 6. No water to the closets. A notice was served on November 29th, and the water has been supplied. Ditto, No. 7. House dirty throughout. A notice was served on November 29th, and it has been cleansed. Upper Tachbrook-street, No. 16. Complaint of effluvia said to arise from a number of dogs kept in the yard, which was inspected, but no nuisance could be detected. Spring-garden-place, No. 14. The ceilings and walls damp through the rain penetrating the roof. A notice has been served, and the work finished. "Miner's Arms" Beer Shop, Queen-street, Pimlico, No. 31. The corner has been fenced in. Eccleston-itreet-east, No. 16a. The yard and watercloset dirty, and effluvia from the drain in the yard, which is partly uncovered. Remedied. < Eaton-row-mews, No. 6. Infected with scarlet fever. Effluvium arising from dung in Mr. Green's cow-yard, which has been removed. Houses Infected with Small-pox and Scarlet Fevek. The following houses, infected with small-pox, were lime-washed and cleansed, excepting one at which a gully was trapped:—Eccleston-place, No. 21, white-washed, papered, and cleansed, and No. 22, cleansed; Royal-oahmews, No. 2. Most of the following houses infected with scarlet fever, have been cleansed and lime-whited:—BoycCsgardens, Nos. 3 and 11; Eliza-place, Elizabeth-street-south, 18 Nos. 3 and 8; Eccleston-place, No. 34; Princes-row-west, Nos. 2 and 8; Spring-garden-place, Nos. 2, 10, and 19; Princes-row. No. 12; St. George'solace, No. 8; Boyd'sgardens, No. 6; Coleshill-street, Pimlico, No. 24; Queenstreet, No. 40. At No. 2, Princes-row west, Dr. Aldis found a dirty small room, occupied by a man, his wife, and three children, one of which had been lying dead from scarlet fever for three days without a coffin, and was buried as soon as possible. The two other children being very ill with the same complaint, were taken with the mother into the fever hospital, but one child was returned dead, and kept without a coffin for some days. A wake was held upon the first that died, so that some neighbours had been visiting the room, and running the risk of infection. Queen-street, Pimlico, No. 44. Information was given to the police of the dangerous state of the back wall. A notice was served on November 29th. The wall has been repaired, yard and closet cleansed, and water laid on. Offensive gullies have been remedied opposite to Nos. 62 and 63, Chester-square; at Eliza-place, Elizabeth-streetsouth; No. 47, Chester-square ; and No. 29, Be/grave-square. Dung and refuse have been removed from the following places:—Messrs. Clayton's Yard, Rutland-street,Pimlico; Mews at rear of Nos. 1 to 6, Churton-place, Churtonstreet, Pimlico; Mr. Wise's Cow-yard, Elizabeth-street-south; the rear of Mr. Morgan's, Egg Merchant, Grosvenor-row, Pimlico; Mr. Bill's Cow-yard, at Denbigh-mews, Denbighstreet; the rear of No. 73, Warwick-square; O'Connor's Yard, West-street, Commercial-road, and Kinnerton-street, Wiltonplace ; Queen-street, Pimlico, No. 43; Upper Denbigh-mews, Denbigh-street, and behind Moreton-terrace, No. 15; in Moreton-terrace-mews ; and Mr. Green's Cow-yard. 19 WATER. An analysis of the water supplied by the Chelsea Company, and taken, October 9th, 1860, from the main at Chapel-street, Belgrave-square, produced— Total Impurity 21 .40 Organic Ditto 1.88 Nov. 6, 1860. Total Impurity 21.12 Organic Ditto 1.12 Dec. 13, 1860. Total Impurity 20.84 Organic Ditto 2.84 We have the honour to be, Your faithful Servants, C. J. B. Aldis, M.D. R. Druitt. 20 APPENDIX. GAS. During this quarter, the average result of the examinations of the gas supplied to the Workhouse, Mountstreet, was, that 2.5 feet burned in a batswing burner, per hour, gave a light equal to that of 12 sperm candles, burning 120 grains per hour. The illuminating power was very low in the week before Christmas, so low as 10 candles. Dr. Druitt wrote to the Secretary of the Chartered Gas Company, and received a reply, admitting the justice of the complaint, and giving as an explanation, the want of Bog Head coal. The deficiency was very soon remedied. Sulphur Determination. On December 12th, between 6 and 10 p.m., 8 cubic feet were burned, the products of which, when filtered, acidulated with nitric acid, treated with chloride of barium, the precipitate washed, collected, and burned, yielded 1.04 grains of sulphate of baryta, equal to 17.7 grains of sulphur per 100 cubic feet of gas. During the experiments made between October 2nd and November 13th, upon the gas supplied by the London 21 Company to the rooms in Ebury-mews, it was burned at the rate of 2.5 cubic feet per hour, and gave an average light equal to 10.17 candles; whereas it was subsequently burned at the rate of 5 cubic feet per hour, in accordance with the "Metropolis Gas Act, 1860," and gave a light equal to 22.61 sperm candles. Very shortly after the end of this quarter, the illuminating power became so deficient, and the gas was so loaded with sulphuretted hydrogen, that Dr. Aldis visited the works at Vauxhall, and afterwards determined the amount of sulphur in each cubic foot, the result of which will be given in the ensuing Quarterly Report. DEATHS registered in the Parish of St. George, Hanover Square, in the 13 Weeks ending 29th of December, 1860. Average, 30.69. Diseases. Ages at Death. Sub-Districts & Population. Sexes. Under 1. 1 and under 5. Total under 20. 20 and under 40 40 and under 60. 60 and under 80. 80 and above. Hanover Square.—20,216. May Fair.—12,980. Belgrave.—40,034. Mount-street Work.—268. Little Chelsea Work.—350. St. George's Hospital. —216. Males, 31,920. Females, 41,310. Total, 73,230. Parishioners. NonParishioners. I. Order 1. 1. Small-pox .. .. .. .. 1 .. .. .. 1 .. .. .. .. .. 1 .. 1 2. Measles 4 9 13 .. .. .. .. 2 4 7 .. .. .. .. 3 10 13 3. Searlatina 2 4 10 .. .. .. .. 3 .. 7 .. .. .. .. 5 5 10 4. Diphtheria .. 1 3 .. .. .. .. 1 1 1 .. .. .. .. 3 .. 3 5. Quinsy .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 6. Croup 1 .. 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 .. .. .. .. 1 .. 1 7. Sore Throat .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 1 8. Whooping Cough 2 .. 2 .. .. .. .. 1 .. 1 .. .. .. .. 1 1 2 9. Typhus (and infantile fever) . .. 3 4 .. 1 1 .. .. ... 5 1 .. .. .. 3 3 6 10. Erysipelas .. .. .. .. .. 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 .. .. 1 1 11. Metris, (Puerperal Fever) .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 12. Pyaemia, (Blood Poisoning) . .. .. 2 2 2 1 .. .. .. 1 .. .. .. 6 5 2 7 13. Carbuncle .. .. .. .. .. 1 .. .. .... 1 .. .. .. .. 1 .. 1 14. Influenja .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 15. Dysentry .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 16. Diarrhœa 5 1 6 .. .. 3 .. 2 .. 5 2 .. .. .. 5 4 9 17. Clolera Infantum .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 18. Ague .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 19. Rheumatism .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 20. Rheumatism .. .. 1 1 .. .. .. .. .. 2 .. .. .. .. 1 1 2 Order 2. 1. Syphills .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 2. Stricture of Urethrs .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Order 3. 1. Privation .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 2. Want of Breast Milk 1 1 2 .. .. .. .. .. .. 2 .. .. .. .. 1 1 2 3. Inanition 1 .. 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 .. .. .. .. .. 1 1 4. Alcoholism a Del. Tremens b Intemperance .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 .. .. .. 1 .. .. .. 1 .. Order 4. 1. Trush .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. II. Order 1. 1. Gout .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 2. Dropsy .. .. 2 .. 6 3 .. 1 1 7 .. .. 1 1 5 6 11 3. Cancer .. .. .. 1 8 4 .. 2 1 5 1 .. .. 4 4 9 13 4. Mortification .. .. .. .. 1 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 1 2 .. 2 5. Bed Sores .. .. .. .. 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 .. 1 1 6. Abcess 1 .. 3 .. 3 .. .. .. .. 1 .. .. .. 3 5 1 6 Order 2. 1. Scrofula .. .. .. .. 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 .. 1 1 2. Tabes Mesenterica 3 4 8 .. .. .. .. .. 1 7 .. .. .. .. 4 4 8 3. Phthisis .. 1 9 20 15 2 .. 14 8 22 2 .. .. .. 28 18 46 4. Hydrocephalus 3 4 7 .. .. .. .. i .. 6 .. .. .. .. 6 1 7 III. Order 1. 1. Cephalitis .. .. .. .. 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 2. Apoplexy .. .. .. 1 3 8 .. 1 2 6 .. .. .. 3 6 6 12 3. Paralysis .. .. .. 1 1 7 .. 1 .. 6 1 .. .. 1 3 6 9 4. Epilepsy .. .. .. 1 1 .. .. 1 1 .. .. .. .. .. 1 1 2 5. Convulsions 2 4 7 .. .. .. .. 1 .. 6 .. .. .. .. 3 4 7 6. Brain Diseases, &c. 2 2 4 3 3 .. .. 2 .. 4 2 .. .. 2 7 3 10 Order 2. 1. Pericarditis .. .. .. .. 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 .. .. .. 2. Aneurism .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 3. Heart Disease, &c. . .. .. 1 4 4 4 .. 2 .. 5 .. 1 1 4 9 4 13 Order 3. 1. Laryngitis .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 2. Bronchitis 8 9 18 2 4 13 .. 8 5 21 1 .. .. 2 16 21 37 3. Pleurisy .. .. .. 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 1 .. 1 RIRTHS registered dnring 13 weeks—Hanover Square, M. 53, F. 45; May Fair,M. 27, F. 31: Belgrave, M. 183, F. 164. Total 503 Average 38.69. Ages at Death. Sub-districts & population. Sexes. DISEASES. Under 1. 1 and under 5. Total under 20. 20 and under 40. 40 and under 60. 60 and under 80. 80 and above. Hanover Square.—20,216. May Fair.—12,980. Bclgrave.—40,034. Mount-street Work.—268 Little Chelsea Work.—350. St. George's Hospital. —216. Males, 31,920. Females, 41,310. Total, 73,230. Parishioners. NonParishioners. 4. Pneumonia 6 10 18 1 .. 5 .. 7 1 16 .. .. .. .. 13 11 24 5. Asthma .. .. .. .. 4 .. .. 1 .. 3 .. .. .. .. 2 2 4 6. Lung Disease, &c. 1 . 1 .. .. 1 1 .. .. 3 .. .. .. .. 2 1 3 Order 4. 1. Enteritis .. .. .. .. .. 1 .. .. .. 1 .. .. .. .. 1 .. 1 2. Peritonitis .. .. .. 1 1 1 .. .. .. 1 .. .. .. 2 2 1 3 3. Ascites .. .. .. .. 1 1 .. 2 .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 1 2 4. Hernia .. .. .. 1 .. 2 .. 1 .. 1 .. .. .. 1 .. 3 3 5. Ileus and Intussusception .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 6. Fistula .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 7. Stomach Disease, &c. .. .. 1 2 1 1 .. 1 1 2 .. .. .. 1 3 2 5 8. Hepatitis .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 9. Jaundice .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 10. Liver Disease, &c. 1 .. 1 .. 5 1.. 3 .. 4 .. .. 1 2 4 6 10 11. Stricture of Œsophagus .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 1 .. 1 Order 5. 1. Nephria .. .. .. 2 3 .. .. .. .. 2 .. .. .. 3 4 1 5 2. Diabetes .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 3. Kidney Disease, &c. .. .. .. 1 .. 1 1 .. 1 1 .. .. 1 .. 2 1 3 4. Disease Bladder .. .. .. .. 1 1 1 .. 1 1 1 .. .. .. 3 .. 3 Order 6. 1. Ovarian Disease .. .. .. 2 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 2 .. 2 2 2. Uterus Disease, &c. .. 1 1 2 2 2 .. 1 .. 4 1 .. .. 1 .. 7 7 Order 7. 1. Arthritis .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 2. Joint Disease, &c. .. .. .. .. .. 1 .. 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 1 Order 8. 1. Phlegmon . .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 2. Pemphigus 1 .. 1 1 .. .. .. 1 .. .. .. .. .. 1 .. 2 2 3. Skin Disease, &c. .. .. .. .. .. 1 .. .. .. 1 .. .. .. .. .. 1 1 IV. Order 1. 1. Premature Birth 12 .. 12 .. 1 .. .. 1 3 9 .. .. .. .. 7 6 13 2. Diseased Spine .. .. 1 .. 1 .. .. .. .. 2 .. .. .. .. 2 .. 2 3. Spina Bifida .. .. 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 .. .. .. .. .. 1 1 4. Other Malformations .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 5. Teething 1 1 2 .. .. .. .. 1 .. 1 .. .. .. .. 2 2 2 Order 2. 1. Paramenia .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 2. Child-birth (see Metria) .. .. .. 1 .. .. .. .. .. 1 .. .. .. .. .. 1 1 Order 3. 1. Old Age .. .. .. .. .. 5 5 2 .. 3 3 2 .. .. 3 7 10 Order 4. 1. Atrophy and Debility 8 .. .. .. 1 1 .. 3 .. 5 2 .. .. .. 3 7 10 V. Order 1. (Accident or Negligence.) 1. Fractures and Contusions .. .. .. 2 2 3 1 .. 1 1 .. .. 1 5 7 1 8 2. Gunshot .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 3. Wounds .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 4. Burns and Scalds. 1 2 3 .. 2 1 1 .. .. 1 .. .. 1 5 2 5 7 5. Poison .. .. .. .. 1 .. .. 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 .. 1 6. Drowning .. .. 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 .. .. .. .. 1 .. 1 7. Suffocation .. .. .. .. .. 1 .. .. .. 1 .. .. .. .. 1 .. 1 8. Other Injuries .. .. 1 2 1 .. .. .. .. 2 .. .. .. 2 4 .. 4 Order 3. 1. Murder and Manslaughter .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 2. Adult Suicide .. .. .. .. .. .... .. .. .. .... .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Order 4. (Suicide.) 1. Cut, Stab, Shot .. .. .. .. .. 1 .. .. 1 .. .. .. .. .. 1 .. .. 2. Strangling and Suffocation .. .. .. 2 .. .. .. .. 1 1 .. .. .. .. 1 1 2 3. Drowning .. .. .. .. 1 .. .. 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 .. 1 4. Hanging .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Sudden Deaths (Cause unascer- tained 2 .. 2 .. .. 1 .. 1 1 1 .. .. .. .. 2 1 3 Causes not specified or ill-defined 2 .. 2 .. .. l .. 2 .. 1 .. .. .. .. 1 2 3 TOTAL: 70 57 161 61 85 82 10 76 36 201 17 3 9 57 209 190 399 DEATHS registered during corresponding weeks of ten years (average) 390.5 Weekly average 30