3126 THE VESTRY OF THE parish of St. Beorge. hanover square. ANNUAL REPORT for the YEAR ENDED 25th MARCH, 1877. June 1877. LONDON: PRINTED BY G. PHIPPS, 16, EBURY STREET, EATON SQUARE. 1877. THE VESTRY of the parish of St. Beorge, hanover square. ANNUAL REPORT for the YEAR ENDED 25th MARCH, 1877. JUNE 1877. LONDON : PRINTED BY G. PHIPPS, 16, EBURY STREET, EATON SQUARE. 4 1877. ST GEORGE, HANOVER SQUARE, IN WARDS. ST GEORGE, HANOVER SQUARE, KNICHTSBRIDCE WARD. ST GEORGE, HANOVER SQUARE, OUT WA R D. contents. PAGE List of the Vestry and Auditors of Accounts 5 Overseers of the Poor 8 Commissioners of Public Baths and Wash-houses 9 Burial Board 9 Representatives at the Metropolitan Board of Works 9 Guardians of St. George's Union 10 Standing Orders and Bye-laws 11 Officers appointed by the Vestry 19 Officers appointed by the Burial Board and Commissioners of Baths and Wash-houses 21 List of Freehold, Copyhold, and Leasehold Estates belonging to the Parish 21 District Surveyors 23 Police Fixed Points in Parish 24 Annual Report 25 Rates made by the Vestry 25 Sale and Purchase of Little Chelsea Workhouse.. 30 Extension of Chelsea Embankment 30 Fire Brigade Station in Neighbourhood of Knights- bridge Green or Sloane Square 31 Gas Supply to Public Lamps 31 Burial Board 36 Baths and Wash-houses 36 Sanitary Report 37 Water Companies'Accounts 37 Sacramental Alms' Fund— Parish Church 37 Charities 38 Mrs. Nasmyth's Charity 38 Death of Rev. Henry Howarth, B.D. 38 Poor Law Amendment Bill (1876)— Clause 34 39 Valuation Bill (1877) 39 Metropolis Toll Bridges Bill (1877) 40 Metropolitan Streets Improvement Bill (1877) 41 Gas Light and Coke Company's Bill (1877) 41 Applications to Metropolitan Board of Works 42 Applications to Vestry 42 Alterations in Names of Streets, and Renumbering of Houses 42 Lyon's Estate Charity 43 General Steuart's Charity 43 Wilkin's and Teage's Charity 44 iv CONTENTS. H.R.H. The Duchess of Gloucester's Charity 44 Tomlinson's Charity 45 William Terwin's Charity 46 Mrs. Nasmyth (1876) 46 Pest House Charity 47 Samaritan Fund 49 Resolutions of an active character 51 Surveyor's Report 55 Maintenance of Roads 55 Uxbridge Road 56 Grosvenor Road 56 The Steam Roller 57 Wood Pavement 58 Maintenance of Footways and Carriageways 59 Asphalte 59 Masons' Works 60 Paviours' Works 61 Lighting 61 Cleansing the Streets 62 Watering the Streets 63 Stock of Plant and Materials 63 Stable Arrangements 63 Sewers 64 Summary of Expenditure 65 Medical Officer's Report 67 Vaccination 75 Sanitary Work 76 Analytical Work 81 Accounts and Contracts of the Vestry, Burial Board, Commissioners of Baths, and Churchwardens, and the Financial Statements of Board of Guardians 83 Appendices:— I. The Attendances of Vestrymen at Vestries and Committee Meetings 112 2. List of present Vestrymen and Auditors of Accounts 114 8. List o 1 Guardians of St. George's Union 118 4. Summary of Rates 120 5. Return relating to Burial Board 122 6. Do. (No. of Interments) 123 7. Return relating to the Expenditure on the Baths and Wash-houses 124 8. Statement of the Accounts of Charities 125 9. Applications to Metropolitan Board of Works 126 10. Applications to Vestry 128 LIST OF THE VESTRY AND AUDITORS OF ACCOUNTS.. EX-OFFICIO. The Rev. Henry Howarth, B.D., Rector, 15, Grosvenor-street, (died August 25th, 1876). The Rev. E. Capel Cure, M.A., Rector, 15, Grosvenor-street. Mr. John Finch, 17, Duke-street, The Lord Fredk. Fitz Roy, 23, Grosvenor-st. Churchwardens. Elected Members corrected to 1st June, 1876, showing the years in which they go out of Office. DOVER WARD. 1877 Col. Thomas Ogilvy, 23, Grafton-street Mr. George Bubb, 167, New Bond-street 1878 Mr. Septimus Cooper, 58, Piccadilly Mr. Alfred Burden, 51, Conduit-street 1879 Mr. Frederick Shelley, 8, Albemarle street Mr. William Charles Brown, 13, New Bond-street CONDUIT WARD. 1877 Wm. Donald Napier, Esq., 22, George-street, Hanover-sq Mr. Alfred Webb Miles, 12, Brook-street, Hanover-square Dr. Wm. Brewer, 21, George-street, Hanover-square 1878 Mr. John Edward Evans, 134, New Bond-street Mr. George Frederick Cremer, 22, Conduit-street Captain Mortimer Hancock, 39, Bruton-street 1879 John Leslie, Esq., 60, Conduit-street Evan Jones, Esq., 15, Hanover-street Mr. Joseph Hemming, 28, Conduit-street 6 GROSVENOR WARD. 1877 Mr. Francis Morris, 21, Hyde-park-place Col. Arthur D. Hayter, M.P., 76, Grosvenor-street Mr. Richard Atkins, 46, Albemarle-street Mr. Thomas Lewis, 34, Mount-street 1878 Mr. Robert Hall, 63, South Audley-street Mr. John Morris, 26, Park-street The Lord Frederick FitzRoy, 23, Grosvenor-street Mr. Henry Jas. Benwell, 8, Charles-st., Grosvenor-sq. 1879 Admiral Hon. Arthur Duncomhe, 2, Up. Grosvenor-st. Mr. Charles W. Bonnett, 6, Farm-street Major William Lyon, 31, South-street Mr. John James Sparrow, 12, Grosvenor-mews BROOK WARD. 1877 The Earl Amherst, 43, Grosvenor-square Mr. William Henry James, 271, Oxford-street Dr. M urice Schulhof, 46, Brook-street Mr. Henry Oyler, 62, Davies-street Alexander Baillie Hamilton, Esq., 22, Green-street, 1878 Hugh Horatio Seymour, Esq., 30, Upper Brook-street Mr. John Finch, 17, Duke-street Mr. William Claridge, 51, Brook-street Mr. Montague Joseph Pickett, 265, Oxford-street Mr. William Weir, 33, South Audley-street 1879 Mr. Jonathan Barlow, 6, Queeu-street, Oxford-street Hugh Barlow Lindsay, Esq., 13, Charles-st., Berkeley-sq. William James Farrer, Esq., 18, Upper Brook-street Mr. Thomas Burrow Linscott, 274, Oxford-street Mr. John Shaw, 256, Oxford-street CURZON WARD. 1877 Mr. John Smith, 21, Half Moon-street Mr. Edmund Charles, 25, Clarges-street Mr. Edward Goddard, 8, Market-street Mr. William Smith, 28, Clarges-street 7 1878 Mr. Philip Wootten, 52, Clarges-street Henry Deedes, Esq., 7, Queen-street, May FailLord George Paget, 1, Farm-street Mr. James Chapman, 6, Half Moon-street 1879 Mr. John Edward Dowdeswell, 30, Half Moon-street Mr. Robert Fleming, 9 and 10, Half Moon-street Mr. John Chapman, 17, Half Moon-street Mr. William Sutton, 16, Chapel-street, May Fair KNIGHTSBRIDGE WARD. 1877 Mr. Thomas Acton, 33, St. George's-place Hampden Clement, Esq., 20, Wilton-crescent Mr. John Garrould, 101, Ebury-street Edmund C. Johnson, Esq., 4, Eaton-place Mr. James Palmer Pike, 168, Ebury-street Colonel the Hon. Chas. Grantham Scott, 79, Eaton-eq. James Sydney Stopford, Esq., 3, Halkin-place Colonel Charles Baring, 36, Wilton-place Matthjw Blakiston, Esq., 18, Wilton-crescent 1878 General Sir W. John Codrington, G.C.B., 110, Eaton-eq. Hon. Charles Lennox Butler, 5, Belgrave-square Mr. William Adshead, 34, Elizabeth-street Mr. George Fearis, 42, Pimlico-road Mr. George Luff, 42, Elizabeth-street Mr. John Hoby, 35, Chapel-street Mr. Richard Harrison, 21, Coleshill-street Mr. William Walker, 190 and 192, Ebury-street Admiral Sir H. John Codrington, K.C.B., 112, Eaton-sq. 1879 Henry Morgan Vane, Esq., 74, Eaton-place Dr. James Love, 85, Pimlico-road Mr. William Skinner, 64, Pimlico-road Mr. Henry Arthur King, 52, Pimlico-road Mr. John Winter, 5, Knightsbridge Mr. Thomas Akers Thorn, 20, Chester-terrace Mr. George Berry, 8a, Motcomb-street Adml. Sir Geo. St. Vincent King, K.C.B., 5, Eaton-ter. Mr. Thomas Darby Berry. 1 Halkin-street 8 OUT WARD. 1877 Francis Fortescue, Esq., 35, Eccleston-square Mr. John Dovey, 35, Stanley-street Mr. R. Tredwen, 40, Claverton-street Mr. Alfred Carroway, 2, Denbigh-street Mr. Charles Henry Field, 40, Warwick-street Mr. Alfred Southon, 5, Tachbrook-street Mr. Alfred Thompson, 64, Lupus-street B. M. Power, Esq., 151, Buckingham-palace road Victor Bury Hutchinson, Esq., 251, Vauxhall Bridge-rd 1878 Mr. Herbert James Cove, 88, Cambridge-street Walter Taylor, Esq., 101, St. George's-road Thomas Barker, Esq., 11, Eccleston-square Richard Spicer, Esq., 3, Chesham-place Col. Malcolm Green, 78, St. George's-road Mr. Stephen Belham, 129, Buckingham-palace-road Mr. George Thomas Smith, 21, Warwick-street Mr. John Tapp, 176, Cambridge-street Mr. James Parker, 308, Vauxhall-bridge-road 1879 Wm. Cliinnery Mitchell, Esq., 140, Warwick-street Hon. Geo. G. Nugent, 31, St. George's-road Mr. George Batt, 15, Clarendon-street Mr. Thomas Eastgate, 33, Buckingham Palace-road Mr. Alexander McMullen, 187, Lupus-street Charles Jacob, Esq., 29, St. George's-road Mr. Thomas Goodwin, 32, Buckingham Palace-road Mr. Francis Read, 60, Charlwood-street, West Joseph Bennett, Esq., 70, Eccleston-square AUDITORS OF ACCOUNTS, Mr. Charles Turner, 77, Park-side Mr. James Holmes, 2, Charles-street, Grosvenor-square Henry William Schneider, Esq., 67, Eaton-square Mr. Robert Thomas Benliam, 34 & 37, South Molton-st. Mr. C. Ravey, 4, Conduit-street [Note.— For list of present Vestrymen, see Appendix No. 2, June, 1877]. OVERSEERS OF THE POOR. Nominated by the Vestry on the 30th March, 1876, and afterwards appointed by two Magistrates for the County of Middlesex. Mr. Edward M. Burden, 38, Duke-street, Grosvenor-sq. Mr. William Walker, 190 & 192, Ebury-street Mr. George Thos Smith, 21, Warwick-street, Pimlico Mr. Herbert Jas. Cove, 88, Cambridge-street, Pimlico 9 COMMISSIONERS OF PUBLIC BATHS AND WASHHOUSES, & MEMBERS OF THE BURIAL BOARD, APPOINTED BY THE VESTRY. Showing the years in which they go out of Office. Commissioners of Public Baths and Wash-houses. 1878 Hugh Horatio Seymour, Esq. Dr. James Love 1879 Henry M. Vane, Esq. Mr. William Walker Col. Malcolm Green 1880 Mr. William Henry James William Chinnery Mitchell, Esq. Burial Board. 1878 Thomas Barker, Esq. Mr. John Edward Evans Mr. George Berry 1879 Mr. Francis Morris William Chinnery Mitchell, Esq. Mr. John Finch 1880 Admiral the Hon. Arthur Duncombe Mr. Jonathan Barlow Hugh Horatio Seymour, Esq. Representatives at the Metropolitan Board of Works. General Sir Wm. Codhington, G.C.B., 110, Eaton-square. John Leslie, Esq., 60, Conduit-street. 10 ST. GEORGE'S UNION. NAMES AND ADDRESSES OF ELECTED GUARDIANS OF THE POOR. St. George, Hanover Square. Colonel Thomas Wedderburn Ogilvy, 23, Grafton-street, Bond-street, W. William Alexander Baillie Hamilton, Esq., 22, Green-street, W. Lieut-Colonel Lord Frederick FitzRoy, 23, Grosvenor-st., W. Mr. Francis Morris, 21, Hyde Park-place, W. Mr Edward McMullen Burden, 38, Duke-st., Grosvenor-sq. W. William Ellice, Esq., 27, Upper Brook-st., Grosvenor-sq. W. Mr. Robert Fleming, 9 & 10, Half Moon-st., May Fair, W. The Hon. Eliot Constantine Yorke, M.P., 17, Curzon-street, May Fair, W. Mr. George Berry, 8a, Motcomb-street, Belgrave-square, S.W. Colonel Francis Haygarth, 24, Wilton-crescent, S.W., First Vice Chairman. Captain Edwin Augustus Porcher, R.N., 60, Chester-sq., S.W. Colonel the Hon. Charles Grantham Scott, 79, Eaton-sq., S.W. Mr. John Dover, 35, Stanley-st., Pimlico, S.W. Henry Hardcastle, Esq., 4, Chesham-st., Belgrave sq., S.W. Charles Jacob, Esq., 29, St. George's Road, S.W. Captain Richard William Spicer, 3, Chesham-place, Belgravesquare, S.W. St. Margaret and St. John, Westminster. Sir Rutherford Alcock, K.C.B., 14, Greal Queen-street, S.W. Mr. John Irving Courtenay, 1, Princes-st., Westminster, S.W. Mr. George Norgate Hooper, 113, Victoria-street, S.W. Mr. Thomas John White, 14, Parliament-street, S.W. Lord William Compton, 32, Rutland-gate, S.W. Edward Davidson Doughty, Esq,, M.R.C.S., 4, William-st., S.W. William Needlxam, Esq., 34, Montpelier-square, S.W. Zephaniah Deacon Berry, Esq., 16, Regency-street, S.W., Second Vice-Chairman. Mr. Henry Bingley, Ponsonby-street, Millbank, S.W. Mr. John Coppen, 42, Marsham-street, Westminster, S.W. Mr. John Thomas Fenn, 83 & 85 Regent-street, S.W. Mr. William Sugg, Vincent-street, Westminster, S.W. [For List of present Elected Guardians, see Appendix No. 3, June 1877.] 11 STANDING ORDERS AND BYE-LAWS FOR REGULATING THE BUSINESS AND PROCEEDINGS OF THE VESTRY, AND FOR CARRYING INTO EFFECT THE PURPOSES OF THE ACTS FOR THE BETTER LOCAL MANAGEMENT OF THE METROPOLIS. (Corrected to 19th July, 1877.) Standing Orders. I.—The Vestry shall meet at Eleven o'clock precisely the first and third Thursday in each month. At the hour of Two o'clock the Chairman shall quit the Chair, witheut any question being put, and thus close the proceedings of the day. Ordinary Meetings. II.—An Extraordinary Meeting of the Vestry may be convened by the Vestry itself at one of its usual Meetings. A Special Meeting of the Vestry may be called by the Vestry Clerk upon a written requisition signed by nine Vestrymen, specifying in writing the business to be brought before or the terms of any Motion to be proposed to such Special &Extraordinary Meetings & Adjournment of Vestry. Altered and confirmed 21st June and 19th July, 1877. Special Meeting. Three clear days notice of such Special Meeting shall be given to every Vestryman.—The Vestry may at any of its Meetings, upon due notice being given, adjourn between August 1st and October 31st, for a time not exceeding six weeks. Altered and confirmed 6th and 20th August 1874. III.—A copy of the Vestry Summons containing the business of the day shall be posted outside the Board Room in Mount Street and the Board Room at Pimlico Road, and the Vestry Clerk shall forward a copy of the same to each Member of the Vestry at least three days previous to the Meeting. Notice of Meetings. 12 Order of Business. IV.—The business of the Vestry shall be taken in order following, that is to say:— (a) Minutes of last Meeting to be read and signed, and no question to be raised thereon except as to their accuracy. Amended 16th Nov., 1877. (b) Boards and Committees to bo appointed (Special Committees excepted) at Twelve o'clock. (c) Deputations seen. (d) Communications from the Metropolitan Board of Works. (e) Finance questions requiring the immediate decision of the Vestry. (f) Reports of Ordinary Committees. (g) Reports of Special Committees. (h) Adjourned Debates or Motions. (i) Motions of which notice has been given. Questions in the order in which they stand, and communications from the Vestry Clerk; but should the communications relate to business on the Agenda, then to mention them at the time when the subject is read from the Chair for discussion. Order of Business reversed. V.—But on alternate fixed Vestries the business shall be taken in order following, that is to say:— (a) Minutes of last Meeting to be read and signed, and no question to bo raised thereon, except as to their accuracy. Amended 16th Nov., 1877. (b) Boards and Committees to be appointed (Special Committees excepted) at Twelve o'clock. (c) Deputations seen. (d) Communications from the Metropolitan Board of Works. (e) Finance questions requiring the immodiate decision of the Vestry. (f) Adjourned Debates or Motions. 13 (g) Motions of which notice has been given, and questions in the order in which they stand. (h) Reports of Special Committees. (i) Reports of Ordinary Committees and communications from the Vestry Clerk. VI.—No Motion shall be brought before the Vestry unless notice thereof has been given in writing and been read at a previous Meeting, or unless a notice thereof in writing has been given to the Vestry Clerk one week at least previous to the day of Meeting on which it is to be discussed, except on such matters as may arise out of Reports of Ordinary or Special Committees. Notice of Motions. VII.—No Motion or Amendment shall be put from the Chair unless reduced to writing and seconded; and no Motion or Amendment, having been seconded, shall be withdrawn witheut leave of the Vestry. Mode of putting Motions or Amendments. VIII.—Whenever an Amendment is made upon any Motion, no second Amendment shall be taken into consideration until the first Amendment is disposed of. If the Amendment is carried, it shall then be put as an original Motion, upon which a further Amendment may be moved; if the Amendment be negatived, then a further Amendment may be moved to the original Question, so far as it applies thereto; but the original Motion having been adopted cannot be superseded by any other Amendment. No Member shall be permitted to move more than one Amendment to a Motion. Amendments how dealt with. Bye-Laws. I.—Every Memorial must be sent to the Vestry Clerk to be laid before the Vestry, the same to be considered the following Vestry to that to which it is presented, when a Deputation may attend if they think fit,—only one Member of which shall address the Vestry, except in reply to questions from Vestrymen. 14 II.—Whenever Boards or Committees (Special Committees excepted) are appointed by the Vestry, notice thereof shall bo given in the Summons, and the appointments shall be made the first business after the Minutes of the previous Meeting are signed. III.—No Officer of the Parish shall in any way take part in the election of Vestrymen or Auditors of Accounts otherwise than required so to do by Act of Parliament. IV.—No person shall bo eligible for appointment as a salaried Officer of the Parish who has been a Vestryman within the preceding six months. V.—All printed Papers, of which copies have been sent to each Member by order of the Vestry or a Committee, may be taken as read before the Vestry. VI.—Any Motion, of which notice has been given, shall bo proposed by the Member who has given it; in case of his absence, any other Member having his written authority may move it; but in case it is not taken up, it shall be considered a dropped Motion, unless postponed by leave of the Vestry. VII.—In case it is thought advisable to adjourn the discussion of any question after debate, the Motion for adjournment must not be made later than a quarter of an hour before two o'clock. VIII.—No Member shall speak more than once on the same Motion, Amendment, or point of Order; but the Member making the original Motion shall have the privilege of reply; only such reply shall be strictly confined to the remarks of the previous speakers, and shall be made immediately prior to the Question being put from the Chair for decision. IX.—Upon all Questions of Order, the decision of the Chairman shall be final. X.—Every Notice of Motion shall be dated and signed 15 by the Member giving it, and be preserved by the Vestry Clerk. XI.—Election of Churchwardens and Sidesmen. First. That a Selection of names to be nominated be made and seconded at a Meeting of the Vestry previous to the day of Election; the day for holding this Meeting to be determined by the Vestry. Second.—That every Member of the Vestry be at liberty to propose the names of as many Candidates as there are vacancies, the same being duly seconded. Third. That the Election be confined to the Candidates nominated, except where the number nominated is the same as the number to be elected and a vacancy by death or resignation occur between the days of Selection and Election. Fourth. That any observations relative to the Nomination of any Candidate may be made either at the time of Selection, Nomination, or Election. Fifth. That when the Nominations are in excess of the number to be elected, the Yestry, by successive shows of hands, if necessary, reduce the number of Candidates to the number to be elected, by striking off the lowest after each show; but that every show of hands be subject to the ordinary right of any Member of the Vestry to demand a Poll. Sixth. That when the Candidate or Candidates are reduced to the number to be elected, it shall be moved and seconded and put to the vote, that the Candidate or Candidates left on the list, be elected Churchwarden or Churchwardens, or Sidesman or Sidesmen, as the case may be. 16 XII.—Election of Members of the Metropolitan Board of Works. First. That a Selection of Names to be nominated to be made and seconded at a Meeting of the Vestry previous to the day of Election; the day for holding this Meeting to be determined by the Vestry. Second. That every Member of the Vestry be at liberty to propose the names of as many Candidates as there are vacancies, the same being duly seconded. Third. That the Election be confined to the Candidates nominated, except where the number nominated is the same as the number to be elected, and a vacancy by death or resignation occur between the days of Selection and Election. Fourth. That any observations relative to the nomination of any Candidate may be made either at the time of the Selection, Nomination, or Election. Fifth. That when the Nominations are in excess of the number to be elected, the Vestry shall by successive shows of hands, if necessary, reduce the number to the number to be elected, by striking off the lowest after each show, but that every show of hands be subject to the ordinary right of any Member of the Vestry to demand a Poll. Sixth. That a division called for after any show of hands shall be confined to, and taken upon, the names submitted to the show of hands immediately preceding such call for division. Seventh. That when the numbers are reduced to the number to be elected, it shall be moved, seconded, and put to the vote, that the Candidate or Candidates, left on the list, be elected to the office or offices in question. 17 XIII.—Appointment of various Committees, Members of Burial Board, and Commissioners of Baths and Wash-houses. That these Appointments be conducted as heretofore, by show of hands, unless a Poll is demanded. XIV.—Officers' Securities:— First. In future, all expenses of Bonds and Securities given by Officers or Servants holding situations under the control of the Vestry, or its Committees, shall be borne and paid by the individual elected (except in special cases where ordered otherwise), and all such Bonds and Securities shall be prepared by the Parish Solicitors. Second. The Securities given by the Officers and Servants, whether now in office or hereafter to be appointed on behalf of this Parish, shall be examined every year, in the month of April, by the Parish Solicitors; and, in the event of their not being in a satisfactory state, the parties whose Securities are insufficient shall be called upon to give fresh Securities; and the Solicitors shall report what they have done therein, in writing, to the Vestry. Third. Any Officer or Servant, having given security, shall be bound to give notice of any want or insufficiency which shall come to his knowledge in reference to his sureties. XV.—That the Parish do not undertake the care of any Footway, Roadway, Mews, or Sewer, until the Surveyor of the Vestry has certified that the same has been properly constructed, and his certificate has met with the approval of the Vestry. B 18 XVI. That after the Minute and Reports have been road, Members of this Vestry be allowed to put a question to any Member of any Board or Officer present or within call; but no discussion shall take place thereon. 19 Officers Appointed by the Vestry Under the Metropolis Local Management Act, Showing their Present Salaries. 1877. Vestry Clerk, and Clerk to Overseers. Joseph Henry Smith, Board Room, Mount-street. Salary, £500 per annum. Surveyor. George Livingstone, Parish Offices, 1, Pimlico-road. Salary, £370 per annum, and residence. Medical Officer of Health and Analyst. William Henry Corfield, M.D., 10, Bolton-row. Salary, £350 per annum. Chief Assistant Clerk. Frederick Horace Doggett, Board Room, Mount-street. (Since resigned.) Salary, £170 per annum. Second Assistant Clerk. Sydney Whittell Knox, Board Room, Mount-street. Salary, £60 per annum. Inspector of Nuisances and Inspector under Adulteration Acts. J. G. Hopkins, Parish Offices, 1, Pimlico-road. Salary, £100 per annum, and residence. Clerk of Works for Sewers. Frederick Westbury, Parish Offices, 1, Pimlico-road. Salary, £2 17s. 6d. per week. Clerk of Works for Roads and Pavements. Henry Reeves, Stone Yard, Farm-street, Berkeley-square. Salary, £2 6s. per week. Clerks to Surveyor. George Goodwin, Parish Offices, 1, Pimlico-road. Salary, £2 10s. per week. Louis Jacob, Parish Offices, 1, Pimlico-road. Salary, £1 18s. per week. Chas. Pinnock, Junior Clerk, 1, Pimlico-road. Salary 15s. per week. Office Boy, 1, Pimlico Road. Salary, 9s. per week. 20 Wharf Clerks. Edwin Covington, Wharf, Ebury-bridge. Salary, £2 per week. William Smith, Clerk in Charge, Belgrave Wharf, Salary, 25s. per week. Foreman of Stone Yard. William Burnett, Stone Yard, Farm-street, Berkeley-square. Salary, £1 1s. per week, and residence. Collectors of Parochial Rates. Alfred A. Lambert, 85, Coleshill-st.—Knightsbridge Ward. At home on Fridays, from 10 to 5. Salary, £270 per annum. £57 extra has been allowed for collecting Metropolitan Consolidated Rate. George Dyke, 70, Cambridge-street.— Out Ward. At home on Fridays, from 10 to 5. Salary, £330 per annum. £67 extra has been allowed for collecting Metropolitan Consolidated Rate. Percy Keen Knox, 14, Davies-street.—In Wards. At home on Thursdays, from 10 to 3. Salary, £400 per annum. £76 extra has been allowed for collecting Metropolitan solidated Rate. Vestry Clerk's Offices, Board Room, Mount-st., Grosvenor-sq. Surveyor's Offices, 1, Farm-st., Berkeley-sq.,and 1,Pimlico-road. Office hours—9 to 5 o'clock; Saturdays, 9 to 2 o'clock. Under the Act, 29 Victoria, cap. 31, the Vestry can at their discretion grant superannuation allowances to their officers, subject to certain conditions set forth in the Act. The following allowance has been granted and paid by the Vestry, viz.:— E. C. Riohman (late Surveyor), £275 per annum, granted from 24th June, 1867. 21 Officers appointed by the Burial Board and the Commissioners of Baths and Wash-houses. burial board. Clerk. Joseph Henry Smith, Board Room, Mount-street. Salary, £20 per annum. Manager at Cemetery, Uxbridge-road, Hanwell. William Mitchell, Hanwell. Salary, £120 per annum, and residence and coals. commissioners of baths and wash-houses. Clerk. Frederick Horace Doggett, Board Room, Mount-street. Salary, £30 per annum. Superintendent and Matron. Thomas and Mrs. Inkster Davies-street Establishment. Buckingham-palace-road Establishment. Salary, £130 and residence. List of Freehold, Copyhold, and Leasehold Estates belonging to the Parish. Workhouse and Parochial Offices, situate in Mount-street, part freehold, and part held on lease from the Duke of Westminster, at an annual ground rent of £20 2s. 6d. Lease expires 1884. Workhouse, exclusive of Offices, rented by the Guardians of St. George's Union, under order of Poor Law Board, dated 14tlh August, 1871, at £1,000 per annum. Offices, at Mount-street, west of Board Room, freehold. The Offices held by the Guardians of St. George's Union, with partial use of large Board Room, are let to the Guardians for five years from 25th March, 1877, at an annual rent of £200. 22 Stone Yard, Workshops, Offices, and House, situate in Farm-street, held on Lease, at an annual rent of £120. Lease expires at Lady-day 1883. House let off at £150 per annum. A portion of premises rented by the Guardians of St. George's Union, under order of Poor Law Board, dated 14th August, 1871, at £200 per annum. Burial Ground at the back of Mount-street Workhouse. (Freehold, partially closed against burials in 1826, wholly closed, by Order in Council, in 1854.) New Workhouse and Grounds, situate at Little Chelsea. (Freehold.) Rented by the Guardians of St. George's Union, under order of Poor Law Board, dated 14th August, 1871, at £1,126 per annum. Wharf and Buildings at Ebury-bridge, including Three Small Houses in Commercial-road, held on Lease, at an annual rent of £400. Leasee xpires at Lady-day 1924. One Cottage let off at £25 per annum. Burial Ground, Bayswater-road (closed against burials, by Order in Council, in 1854, and Chapel attached. Annual payments in connection with same, £15 rent and £2 in lieu of rates, under the Act of Parliament, 3rd Geo. III., cap. 50. Fourteen Freehold Houses in Hyde-park-place, Bayswaterroad, in front of the Burial Ground,—with two exceptions —let on Leases for 21 years, the Leases expiring at Michaelmas 1886. Exceptions—one let on Lease for 30 years, expiring in 1900, the Yestry having the option to determine the Lease in 1886 upon payment of £400, and the other let on lease for 30 years, expiring in 1900. Annual rent as now let £2,135. New Cemetery at Uxbridge-road, Hanwell, about 19 acres 1 rod 4 poles. (Freehold.) Public Baths and Wash-houses in Davies-street, held on Lease, which expires at Lady-day 1881. Annual rent payable for the same, £380. Public Baths and Wash-houses in Buckingham-palace-road, held on Leases, which expire at Lady-day 1886. Annual rent 23 payable for the same £304 5s. These premises include Two small Houses, which are let off by the Commissioners at an annual rent of £105. No. 1, Derby-street. (Freehold.) Belonging to the Rector of the Parish for the time being. Let on Lease at £10 per year, expiring 1898. Rectory House, No. 15, Grosvenor-street. Belgrave Wharf, Grosvenor-road. Held on Lease at an annual rent of £218. Lease expires at Lady-day, 1929. Out-Relief Office, Buckingham-palace-road, held on Lease from Mrs. Batt, at an annual rent of £60. Lease expires Michaelmas 1882. These premises were rented by the Guardians of St. George's Union, under order of Poor Law Board, dated 14th August, 1871, up to Michaelmas 1876, at £60 per annum. Saint George's Church, George-street, Hanover-square. Saint Mark's Church, North Audley-street. Grosvenor Chapel, South Audley-street. Hanover Church, Regent-street. Saint Peter's Church, Pimlico. The District Surveyors appointed by the Metropolitan Board of Works, are as under:— In-Wards.—Mr. T. H. Watson. Office: 9, Conduit-street, Office hours, 11 to 3. Out-Wards.—Mr. Geo. Legg. Office: 19, Burton-street, Eaton-square. Office hours, 10 to 4. 24 The following are fixed points in this Parish, where Police Constables are permanently stationed from 9 a.m. to 1 a.m., viz:— C Division. Top corner of St. James's-street, Piccadilly. Corner of Hamilton-place and Piccadilly. Hyde Park-corner by Apsley House. Oxford-street circus, corner of Swallow-passage, south side of Oxford-street, west of Regent-street. Corner of Park-lane and Oxford-street. Corner of Davies-street and Oxford-street. Corner of Mount-street and South Audley-street Corner of Charles-street and John-street, May Fair. Corner of New Bond-street and Conduit-street. Corner of Berkeley-street and Piccadilly. B Division. Corner of Belgrave-square, Chesham-place. Albert-gate, Knightsbridge. Victoria Railway Station, Buckingham Palace-road. Victoria Railway Station, Junction of Victoria-street and Vauxhall Bridge-road. Eaton-square, near St. Peter's Church. St. George's-square, Lupus-street. Warwick-square, Belgrave-road. Wilton-crescent, Knightsbridge. Buckingham Palace-road, near Ebury-bridge. Grosvenor-road, Thames Bank, near Caledonia-street In the event of any person springing a rattle, or persistently ringing a bell in the street or in an area, the Police will at once proceed to the spot and render assistance. 25 ANNUAL REPORT. The Report of the Surveyor on the Works of Road Maintenance, Paving, Lighting, Cleansing, Watering, Improvement and Sewerage, is submitted herewith, as also the Report of the Medical Officer of Health on the Sanitary condition of the Parish; together with an Abstract of the Accounts of the Vestry which were allowed and signed by the Auditors in May last; and the Financial Statements furnished by the Board of Guardians of St. George's Union, and the Abstracts of the Vestry Poor Rate Account for the two Half-years ended Lady-day, 1877. During the year there have been 24 Special and Ordinary Meetings of the Vestry. The average attendance at these Meetings has been 60 Members. There have also been 97 Meetings of Committees of Vestry. A Return of the Attendances of Members at both Vestry and Committee Meetings between 1st June, 1876, and 13th May, 1877, is printed in Appendix No. 1. A list of the Members of the Vestry for 1877 is printed in Appendix No. 2; and a list of the elected Guardians of St. George's Union for the same year in Appendix No. 3. The following rates were made by the Yestry during the year viz.:— 30th March, 1876,— In the £ s. d. Poor Rate (including Police and County Rates, and Charges for Public Baths and Washhouses, Burial Ground at Hanwell, Metropolitan District Asylums, Metropolitan Common Poor Fund, and West London School District) 2 0 26  In the £ s. d. General Management Rate, for Paving, Lighting, Cleansing, Road Watering, Improvement, School Board Expenses, &c. 1 2 Extra Rate on Grosvenor-place District, to pay off the Debt incurred by the late Grosvenorplace Trustees 0 0½ Extra Rate on Hanover-square, to be paid to the Committee appointed by the Inhabitants, for keeping the enclosed Garden in good order 0 1 Extra Rate on Grosvenor-square, to pay off Instalment of Debt due to the Globe Insurance Company 0 3 21st September 1876,— Metropolitan Consolidated Rate 0 4 Towards the General Rate Account the following Bounties are annually received from the Treasury, viz.— £ s. d. In respect of the Wall or Fence of the Green Park, abutting on Piccadilly, being 10,411 square yards, at 6d. per square yard 260 5 6 In respect of the Wall or Fence of Hyde Park, abutting upon Park-Lane, being 9,025 square yards, at 6d. per square yard 225 12 6 In lieu of Rates on Buckingham Palace and Grounds 307 19 0 In respect of Wall or Fence in Hyde Park, situate at Knightsbridge, 4,800 yards at 6d. per square yard 120 0 0 £913 17 0 In addition to the above, H. M. Treasury contribute to the Rates of the Parish in respect of Government 27 property at the amounts in the pound fixed by the Vestry, upon the values hereunder stated— £ s. d. Clothing Depôt, Grosvenor Road 2,355 0 0 Ordnance Survey Office, No. 46, St. George's Road 125 0 0 Stabling, rear of 106, Piccadilly 209 0 0 Post Office, 26, Churton Street. 115 0 0 Post Office, South Audley Street 84 0 0 Lodges, Magazines in Hyde Park and ton Gardens 600 0 0 In District liable to Debt Rate as under— Two Cottages, in West Street 31 0 0 Chelsea Barracks 900 0 0 Chelsea Suspension Bridge 500 0 0 Post Office, Buckingham Gate 500 0 0 Chelsea Hospital Grounds 20 0 0 £5,439 0 0 A Summary showing the amount of the Rates assessed and the state of the Collection at the close of the same in April 1877 is printed in Appendix No. 4. Out of the General Management Rate, the Vestry have paid the sum of £26,176 10s. 2d. required by precept of the School Board for London, for the year ended at Lady-day, 1877. Up to the 25th March, the payments made by the Vestry amounted to— 28  £ s. d. £ s. d. Poor 130,064 16 1 General 86,749 2 2 Less repaid from Sewers' Account 1,542 9 6 85,206 12 8 Sewers 2,406 6 3 Metropolitan Consolidated Rate 29,162 19 5 £246,840 14 5 Out of this sum of £246,840 14s. 5d., the following payments were made to various authorities, over the expenditure of which the Vestry have no control, viz.:— Poor Rate Account. £ s. d. St. George's Union 101,854 10 1 Police Rate 22,543 18 6 Commissioners of Baths, &c. 2,283 16 8 Burial Board 483 19 10 General Management Account. School Board for London 26,176 10 2 Committee for Managing Hanover-square Additional Rate 56 5 0 Metropolitan Consolidated Rate Account. Metropolitan Board of Works . 28,940 14 1 £182,339 14 4 29 The following sums were received back by the Vestry, for works done at private expense, viz.:— £ s. d. Gas and Water Companies, for relaying pavements 650 18 1 Deposits on Licenses for Boards . 499 15 9 Disinfecting 29 6 3 Paving White Horse Street with Wood Paving 112 18 0 Cleansing and Watering Chelsea Suspension Bridge 70 0 0 One Year's maintenance of portion of roadways of Ebury, Eccleston, and St. George's Bridges 85 0 0 Paving portion of Park Street with wood 836 5 0 Paving works in St. George's Square Mews 74 19 8 Sundry Sewers' works 332 18 4 £22,692 1 1 The following were payments on account of debts incurred by particular districts, and met by additional rates on these districts. £ s. d. Grosvenor-place District Debt Account, to Alliance Assurance Company, including Income Tax 1,200 0 0 Grosvenor-square District Debt Account, to Liverpool, London and Globe Insurance Company, including Income Tax 546 5 10 £1,746 5 10 Thus leaving a sum of £60,062 13s. 2d. expended under the control of the Vestry. 30 Sale and Purchase of Little Chelsea Workhouse. The Board of Guardians, having declined to seal the Agreement, which had been arranged by the Solicitors for the two bodies, concerned, for the purchase of this workhouse for the sum of £40,000, the consideration of the matter has been postponed by the Vestry until October next. Extension of Chelsea Embankment. The Vestry, in October, 1876, hearing that the Metropolitan Board of Works were about to bring a Bill into Parliament for extending the Thames Embankment to Westminster, again resolved to memorialize the Board to take advantage of the opportunity of including in the Bill powers for completing the Embankment and Roadway up to the Chelsea Suspension Bridge. The Memorial was presented by Deputation to the Board, and subsequently a reply was received, stating that the Board, having considered the Memorial, was unable to accede to the request contained therein. The Vestry then again, by letter, urged a reconsideration of this decision, more especially with regard to the continuation of the paved footway and the lighting, but they regret to have to report that the Board again declined to accede to their request. The Vestry, after the failure of these efforts, fixed four additional lamps on the portion of the embankment between the boundary of the parish and the Chelsea Suspension Bridge, which are lighted at the parish expense. 31 Fire Brigade Station in Neighbourhood of Knightsbridge Green or Sloane Square. The Vestry having been asked by a Deputation, from the Westminster District Board of Works, to join in an application to the Metropolitan Board of Works for a Fire Brigade Station to be placed in the neighbourhood of Knightsbridge Green, after consideration, by writing, urged on the Metropolitan Board the necessity for the erection of a Fire Brigade Station in the vicinity of Knightsbridge or Sloane Square; and the Board, in reply, informed the Vestry that the funds now applicable to Fire Brigade purposes will not admit of any addition to the number of stations at present; that should, however, increased funds be placed at the disposal of the Board, the Board will probably be in a position to increase to some extent, the number of stations; and in that case the claims of the neighbourhood of Knightsbridge and Sloane Square shall be duly considered. Gas Supply to Public Lamps. Six Resolutions of the Vestry, under this head, were printed in last year's Report. In continuation, the Vestry have now to add that they have arranged with the London Gaslight and Coke Company for a reduction in the number of lighting hours for the public lamps in the district supplied by them from about 4500, to 3836 hours per annum. They also accepted an offer of the Company to transfer the services from the cannel to the common gas mains. Whilst the arrangement for reducing the number of lighting hours, will prove a saving in cost to the parish, the alteration in the services makes the charge for gas supply somewhat heavier. The Vestry feel assured, though, that 32 the marked improvement in the lighting of the district will give general satisfaction, The Gaslight and Coke Company having, as reported last year, applied to the gas referees to prescribe and certify the mode of ascertaining the quantity of gas consumed by the public lamps, the following notification was issued by the referees, viz.: "Parish of Saint George, Hanover Square. "Supply of Gas for Public Lighting by Measurement. "notification by the metropolitan gas referees. "Whereas the Gas Light and Coke Company have under the powers of section 38 of the City of London Gas Act, 1868, required that the gas for public lighting within the parish of St. George, Hanover Square, shall be supplied by measurement, and have further required the Referees to prescribe and certify the mode of ascertaining the quantity of gas consumed by the public lamps in the said parish. "We therefore in compliance with this requisition do prescribe and certify as follows:— "1. The gas shall be measured by a meter to be attached to every twelfth public lamp, and the average consumption of the whole of the lamps to which meters are attached, shall be taken to represent the consumption of each public lamp supplied. "2. The meters shall be wet meters, of the best and most improved construction, and made by makers of acknowledged reputation. "3. The meters shall work, when new, with such friction 33 that the excess of pressure on the inlet over that on the outlet shall not exceed one-tenth of an inch of water. "4. Each meter shall be placed in an iron box, of suitable construction and made water-tight by proper lids, to be let into the ground near the foot of the lamp column. "5. Each lamp shall be furnished with a proper burner, governor and cock of the best construction. "Similar burners, governors, and cocks shall be affixed to all the lamps metered and unmetered. "Each burner shall be so constructed, as to consume such quantity of gas per hour as the parish shall determine, with a pressure beneath the burner corresponding as nearly as may be to that hereinafter prescribed. "Each governor shall be so adjusted, as to maintain beneath the burner to which it is attached such pressure as will cause the said burner to consume the above-mentioned quantity of gas per hour, and shall be of such size and construction as to maintain this pressure, certainly and uniformily, under the usual variations of pressure in the mains, and to be in full action whenever the pressure at its inlet is not less than five-tenths of an inch of water. "The clear way through the cock when fully open shall in no part have a sectional area less than one twenty-fifth of a square inch. "6. The pressure of gas beneath the burners shall, in default of any other amount being mutually agreed upon between the parties, be fixed at two-tenths of an inch of water. "7. At intervals, not exceeding three years, every meter shall be taken out, examined, cleaned, tested, and put in order if necessary. Testings for friction and for percentage of c 34 error may also be made in situ (by proper apparatus contrived for the purpose) at more frequent intervals, at the option and at the expense of either party. "If at any time the friction of a meter shall be found to exceed one-tenth and a half of an inch of water, or the percentage of error shall be found to exceed the limits fixed by the Sales of Gas Act, the meter shall at once be taken out, and returned to the maker for re-adjustment, so as to reduce the friction to an amount not exceeding one-tenth of an inch of water, or to correct the error of registration. "8. The arrangements for lighting and extinguishing the lamps, and for the repair of the posts and lanterns, the situation of the metered lamps, and the provision, fixing, and maintenance of all motors, governors, and other requisite apparatus, must bo settled by agreement between the parties. "9. By section 85 of the City of London Gas Act, 1868, both the local authority and the gas company are entitled to have access to the governors for the purpose of examining the same, and any dispute with reference to the affixing, operation, or inspection of governors is to be referred to the determination of the chief gas examiner. But we recommend that every governor and burner shall be taken down and re-tested at least once a year, and that when the consumption of any governor and burner is found to vary to the extent of half a cubic foot per hour from the quantity of gas intended to bo consumed, such governor and burner should bo returned to the maker for re-adjustment. "10. The register of each meter shall bo road and recorded at regular intervals by two officers going round together, one on behalf of the company, the other on behalf of the parish, and their joint record shall furnish the data from which the average consumption is to be calculated. 35 "This record shall be taken at such intervals as the parties shall agree on, but not less frequently than once a quarter. "11. In the event of any disputes or differences arising between the parish and the company, as to any matters or things connected with the arrangements of the meter system (except such as are provided for by section 85 of the Act), such disputes or differences, shall be referred to an arbitrator to be agreed on between the parties, or failing such agreement to be nominated by the gas referees for the time being ; he shall investigate such disputes or differences, and shall decide thereon; his decision shall be binding on both parties, and his charges shall be paid as he may award. "12. The referees being required to prescribe and certify the mode of measurement "from time to time," it shall be competent for either party at any time after the system has been in full operation for one year, to make a further application to the gas referees for the time being, who shall thereupon examine into the working of the system, and order any modifications therein which they may deem just and reasonable. (Signed) "A. Vernon Harcourt, "William Pole. "John Tyndall." The Vestry, acting on the above notification, have entered into a contract with the Gaslight and Coke Company for the supply of gas, and have also contracted with Messrs. Wright & Co., of Millbank, for the supply and fixing of meters, governors, &c., and for their future maintenance for ten years. The meters and governors are being fixed, and the Vestry have made all the necessary arrangements for lighting and extinguishing of lamps, &c., in the 36 districts of the parish supplied by the Company, by workmen in the employ of the parish, from the 30th June, 1877. Those arrangements necessarily involve a large outlay for first cost, but the Vestry trust that an improvement in the lighting, and a saving in the annual expense will be the ultimate result of the change in the system. Burial Board. A return of the money paid out of the Poor Rate, and from Rent Accounts, to the Burial Board, since its formation, up to 25th March, 1877; and a return of the number of interments in the Cemetery at Han well, for every year or part of a year, showing the number of parishioners, non-parishioners, and paupers, are printed in Appendices * Nos. 5 and 6. A plan, showing the laying out of the Cemetery, can be soon at the Board Room, Mount-street, and full particulars of charges, &c., can also bo obtained at the above Office. Baths and Wash-houses. A return of the money paid out of the Poor Rate to the Commissioners of Baths and Wash-houses, up to the year ended March 25th, 1877, is printed in Appendix No. 7. This return shows the sums paid every year by the Commissioners for redemption of capital, interest of money borrowed, and rent of premises; together with the amounts received for rent of premises lot off; the amount of loan outstanding, the dates when the loan will be paid of, and the dates of the expiration of the leases of promises held by the Commissioners. The Baths are situated in Davies Street, Berkeley 37 Square, and in Buckingham Palace Road, Pimlico. They are not open on Sundays. Sanitary Report. The Sanitary condition of the Parish has been watched over by Dr. Cerfield, the Medical Officer of Health and Analyst, who has presented monthly reports to the Vestry upon the subject. Complaints of nuisances have been examined into by the Inspector of Nuisances. The Annual Report of the Medical Officer of Health will be found at page 67. Water Companies' Accounts. A Statement of the Accounts of the Grand Junction Water Works Company, and the Chelsea Water Works Company, for their financial year, ended in March last, has been forwarded to the Vestry Clerk in accordance with the Provisions of "The Metropolis Water Act, 1871," and may be inspected by any Ratepayer, free of charge. Sacramental Alms' Fund.— Parish Church. The money collected at the Offertory of Holy Communion, is under the control of the Rector and Churchwardens, who, during the past year, continued the monthly payment of seven shillings each, to the aged poor persons who remained on the list of recipients. The amount distributed during the past year (viz., from Ascension Day, 1876, to Ascension Day, 1877) was £256 4s. 38 The Offertory collected during the same period was as follows :— £ s. d. St. George's Church 81 18 2 Grosvenor Chapel 48 0 8 Berkeley Chapel 56 18 3 St. George's Chapel 26 9 3 £213 6 4 To provide the amount required for the recipients, the sum of £42 17s. 8c?. was withdrawn from the reserve fund at the Bankers. The balance then remaining (May 1877), on account of the fund with Messrs. Herries, Farquhar, and Co., was £109 l1s. 6d. Charities. A copy of the account for the year 1876, submitted by the Churchwardens, of their expenditure as trustees for Charities belonging to this Parish, is printed in Appendix No. 8. Mrs. Nasmyth's Charity. By the death of Mrs. Nasmyth, of No. 44, Queen's Road, Bayswater— formerly a parishioner of this Parish— an important addition has been made to the list of charitable bequests, the particulars of which will be found on page 46. Death of the Rev. Henry Howarth, B.D. The Vestry regret to have to report that the Rev. Henry Howarth, B.D., who was, during a period of 31 years, Rector of this Parish, and ex officio Chairman of the Vestry, 39 died on 25th August, 1876. The Rectory, which is in the gift of the Bishop of London, was accepted by the Rev. Edward Capel Cure, M.A., Rector of St. George's, Bloomsbury; and he was inducted into the office on 3rd December, 1876. PARLIAMENTARY. The Metropolis Gas Companies' Bill reported as referred to a Select Committee in the last annual report, was not passed. Poor Law Amendment Bill (1876).— Clause 34. The effect of this Clause, as amended in Committee, appeared to be to transfer the present Audit of the Vestry Accounts from the Auditors elected by the Ratepayers, to an Officer of the Local Government Board. The Vestry, through their Parliamentary Committee, communicated with the two Members of Parliament for Westminster, and urged them to see that the Clause was so altered as to exempt the Metropolis from its operation. Similar action was taken by many of the Vestries and District Boards of the Metropolis, and the result was that the Clause was amended in the way desired. Valuation Bill (1877). This Bill was again introduced into Parliament by the Government, and the Vestry, having considered the same, passed the following resolutions with regard to some of the Clauses which they forwarded to the President of the Local Government Board, viz.:— 40 On section 86.— For empowering the Local Government Board to direct, from time to time, what particulars shall be contained in a rate book. That the large and indefinite powers proposed to be conferred thereby on the Local Government Board may be uncertain in their operation. On section 89.— To enable the Local Government Board to make rules and orders for carrying out the Act. That though this section seems to follow on the lines of the existing law, yet it must be borne in mind that the law originated in the necessity of giving the Local Government Board powers for the amendment of the Poor Laws— a local purpose. By this Act the basis of rating for Poor Law purposes is taken as the basis of the Income and other Government Taxes, and that by these indirect means it will fall within the province of the Treasury, as the General Taxation Authority of the Kingdom, to guide and control the regulations of the Local Government Board, hence it indirectly gives it indefinite powers, the result of which it is difficult to foresee. The Bill was withdrawn. Metropolis Toll Bridges Bill (1877). This Bill was brought into Parliament on behalf of the Metropolitan Board of Works, to enable the Board to provide for throwing open to the free use of the public certain Toll Bridges within the Metropolis. The Vestry petitioned Parliament against the Bill, as 41 they deemed it unwise, at the present time, to further increase the debts of the Metropolis for such a purpose. The Bill has become law. Metropolitan Streets Improvement Bill (1877). This was a private Bill, introduced into Parliament by the Metropolitan Board of Works, for the purpose of enabling the Board to make certain new street improvements within the Metropolis, the gross estimated cost of which amounted to £4,566,040. The Vestry, looking to the very heavy amount of the existing debt of the Metropolis, protested against the Bill, and also presented a Petition to Parliament against it. The Bill has been passed. Gaslight and Coke Company's Bill (1877). By this Bill it was proposed to repeal Sections 30 and 51 of the Gaslight and Coke Company's Act, 1876, Section 30 imposing upon the gas referees the duty of prescribing and certifying the maximum amount of impurity, in each form, with which gas supplied by the Company shall be allowed to be charged; and Section 51 imposing a forfeiture of £50 for each station at which, on an average of three days, the gas supplied by the Company is of less purity than it ought to be under the Act. The Vestry unanimously agreed to ask the Metropolitan Board of Works to oppose this Bill, in the interests of the Metropolis. The Metropolitan Board petitioned Parliament against the Bill; and the Committee to which the Bill wa6 referred, reported the Preamble as not proven. 42 During the year 25 communications have been received from the Superintending Architect of the Metropolitan Board of Works, notifying the applications made for the consent of the Board to the erection of porticoes, bay windows, additions, or other alterations to property within the line of area in this Parish. A list of these communications, with the opinion of the Vestry, and the decision of the Metropolitan Board of Works upon each application is submitted in Appendix No. 9. Seventy-three applications for permission to build or alter vaults, areas, dung pits, and other works, abutting upon or under the public way, have been considered by the Yestry. A list of the various applications, with the decision of the Yestry, is printed in Appendix No. 10. Alterations in Names of Streets, and Renumbering of Houses. The Metropolitan Board of Works, during the year, have renumbered a portion of Warwick Street— Grosvenor Road (abolishing subsidiary names)— and a portion of Grosvenor Place. 43 LIST OF CHARITIES. Lyon's Estate Charity. The Vestry are interested, so far as the portion of the roadway of Oxford-street in this Parish is concerned, in the rents and profits of certain lands at Kilburn and St. Marylebone, which were left, about the year 1592, by John Lyon, the founder of Harrow School, towards the repair of the road, from Edgware to London, and the road, from Harrow to London. The rents and profits are paid annually to the Edgware Highway Board by the Keeper and Governor of Harrow School, and by that Board distributed amongst the various local authorities having jurisdiction over the roads. The total sum apportioned to the southern half of Oxford-street for the year ended 31st December, 1876, was £171 19s. 7d., and the portion credited to this Parish, by the St. Marylebone Vestry, (who have charge of the whole road,) in their precept upon this Parish, was £103 0s. 5d General Steuart's Charity. By will, dated 21st May, 1726, General Steuart left the sum of £5,000, Irish currency, in the hands of Trustees for the benefit of the Parish of St. George, Hanover-square; the sale of this stock, realized the sum of £4,484 16s. 1d., and land was purchased in South-street, and an Endowed School erected thereon. This school is now carried on by a Board of Managers, in conjunction with the Subscription School of the Parish of St. George, Hanover-square, in Southstreet, under an arrangement sanctioned by the Court of Chancery; but the funds of the Charity, which consist of £4,800, 3 per cent. Consols, and the School House and premises in South-street, let for £105 per annum, are 44 entirely under the control of the Trustees of the Charity. There are 24 boys in the School, who are clothed and taught the common rudiments of education, with the prospect of a reward of £10 towards an apprenticeship. The Trustees meet twice in the year to select children to fill up vacancies, and upon the general business of the Charity. Wilkin's and Teage's Charity. Mrs. Mary Wilkins, in 1771, left the sum of £50, the interest of which was to be used for the benefit of poor persons in the Parish not receiving relief. The sum of one hundred pounds was left by will by Mrs. Teage, in the year 1774, to the Minister and Churchwardens of the Parish for the time being, to be placed out at interest upon real security, or in the public funds, or in the purchase of lands or hereditaments, and the interest or produce, to be from time to time applied by the Minister and Churchwardens, and their successors, in the purchase of bread and coals, to be distributed by them to the poor of the Parish on every St. Thomas's Day for ever. £160 Consols have been purchased with these two Charities, and realize together £4 16s. per annum, which is distributed by the Rector and Churchwardens in the manner provided. H.R.H. the Duchess of Gloucester's Charity. H.R.H. the Duchess of Gloucester, by will, dated 29th January, 1857 (proved in the same year), left a sum of money for the benefit of poor persons in this Parish, and a like sum for the benefit of the poor residing in the vicinity of Grosvenor Chapel. 45 The sum of £253 17s. 7d. is invested in Consols, which produces £7 12s. 4d. per annum, and is distributed by the Rector and Churchwardens to the poor of the Parish. And a further sum of £253 17s. 7d. in Consols, which produces £7 12s. 4d. per annum, with regard to which, the Board of Charity Commissioners for England and Wales, have made an order, appointing the Rector and Churchwardens Trustees, during the tenure of their several offices, and their respective successors, to administer the Charity, and the dividends accruing are to be applied for the benefit of such poor people residing in the Parish, with preference to those, who reside in the vicinity of Grrosvenor Chapel, or in case any ecclesiastical district shall be hereafter assigned to the said Chapel, the income of the Charity is to be applied, for the benefit of the resident poor of such district. Tomlinson's Charity. Mr. Matthew Tomlinson, by will, dated 28th September, 1835 (proved the same year), gave afreehold house in Staffordstreet ("Goat" P.H.), and the accruing rent therefrom, that his Executors should annually clothe four poor men and four poor women in this Parish, and likewise three poor men and three poor women of the Parish of St. Martin-in-the-Fields; one of the Overseers of the Poor of each Parish to have access to the accounts of the Trustees. The poor persons to be clothed on the day of the month on which the Testator died. This Charity is in the hands of five Trustees. The house realizes £75 per annum, and a sum of £81 10s. 3c?. is invested in New 3 per Cents., which realizes £2 8s. 8c?. per annum. 46 William Terwin's Charity. Mr. William Terwin, by will, dated 2nd December, 1824, left the sum of £350 Consols to the Rector and Churchwardens, the interest of which was to purchase bread, to be distributed annually, in January, in that part of the Out Ward of the Parish called Neat House. The sum is invested in Consols, and realizes £10 10s. per annum, which is distributed by the Rector and Churchwardens. Mrs. Nasmyth— 1876. Mrs. Nasmyth, by Will, dated 15th May, 1869, bequeathed the residue of her Estate to the Rector and Churchwardens for the time being, to be invested by them in their names in the Consolidated Three per Cent. Bank Annuities, or upon Government or Real Securities at interest, in trust to pay and distribute the dividends and interest arising therefrom half-yearly as they shall become due and payable, in relief or gifts to the deserving poor, born or residing in the said Parish, who shall not at any time have received, or be then in the receipt of Parish relief. Every unmarried person selected to be paid the sum of £1 half-yearly, and every married person selected the sum of £2 half-yearly. It being Mrs. Nasmyth's wish that as many shall participate in the bequest as the annual produce thereof will admit of when distributed at the said rates, and further, that the selection of persons from among the deserving poor shall at all times be under the entire control of the Rector and Churchwardens for the time being, but so, nevertheless, that they shall select as recipients in the proportion of two married persons, widows, or widowers, to one unmarried person. 47 The residue of the Estate amounts to £3,935 19s. 3d. and this sum has been invested in New Three per Cent Annuities. Pest House Charity. This Parish, together with the Parishes of St. Martinin-the-Fields, St. Clement Danes, St. James, Westminster, and St. Paul, Covent Garden, are interested in this Charity, which was founded by Earl Craven, in 1687. The Charity, in 1868, consisted of property at Craven-hill-gardens, Cravenhill-mews, and Craven-mews, let at rents realizing £183 14s. per annum; and £15,537 cash, being the purchase-money due for premises belonging to the Charity, taken for the purposes of the Metropolitan Railway Company; and £395 7s. 8d. Bank 3 per Cent. Annuities, remaining on the credit of "Attorney-General v. Earl Craven." The Charity was originally demised by the Earl Craven, for the benefit of poor persons suffering from the plague. A scheme for the management and regulation of the Charity, and for the application of the income thereof, was approved by orders of the Court of Chancery, on 30th May, 1864, and 19th February, 1868. Under this Scheme, the Incumbents of each of the Parishes interested, are by virtue of their offices, always to be Trustees. In addition to which, Trustees have been appointed by the Charity Commissioners for England and Wales, upon the nominations of the several Vestries, in the following proportions, viz.:— St. Martin-in-the-Fields 2 St. George, Hanover-square 2 St. Clement Danes 4 St. James, Westminster 4 St. Paul, Covent Garden 4 48 One of the appointed Trustees from each Parish is to go out of office every fourth year, but shall be eligible for reelection. The duties of the Trustees, Receiver, and Clerk are laid down in the Scheme, and the application of the income is as follows, viz.:— "After providing for any costs or expenses which may from time to time be directed by any Court or authority of competent jurisdiction to be paid out of the funds of the Charity, and paying the current expenses of the management and administration of the trust, in pursuance of this Scheme, the Trustees shall, until the further order or direction of the Court of Chancery, from time to time pay three-fifth parts (not exceeding £600) of the net annual income to the Treasurers or other the persons for the time being acting in the administration of the funds of King's College Hospital in Portugal-street, Lincoln's-inn-fields, and the remaining two-fifth parts (not exceeding £400) of such net annual income to the Treasurers or other the persons for the time being acting in the administration of the funds of Charingcross Hospital in Agar-street, Strand, such payments to be received by the said Hospitals respectively on the conditions hereinafter mentioned:— "I. The Governors of King's College Hospital shall set apart twenty-four beds, and the Governors of Charing-cross Hospital shall set apart sixteen beds, in a convenient part or parts of their respective Hospitals, and shall receive therein such patients (herein called in-patients), being sick and otherwise qualified according to the provisions hereof, as shall be sent by the Trustees with in-patients' orders as hereinafter provided. "II. The said Governors respectively shall also receive 49 and supply with advice and medicine as outpatients all poor persons resident in the said several Parishes who shall be sent by the Trustees with out-patients' orders at the customary times for the attendance of out-patients. "III. The Secretaries of the said Hospitals respectively shall give immediate notice to the Clerk of all vacancies in the number of the in-patients, and of any person being rejected as an inpatient. "IV. All in-patients requiring medical or surgical aid, and being fit cases for Hospital treatment, shall be received by both Hospitals indiscriminately, whether suffering from contagious or infectious disorders or not (small-pox alone being excepted), and shall be treated in all respects in the same manner as the other patients received into the Hospitals respectively." The orders for admission as in-patients or for treatment as out-patients in the Hospitals, are granted by an Order Committee, consisting of five Trustees, one member of the Committee being elected from each Parish interested. A new Scheme is to be obtained, if by the falling in of leases or otherwise the net income of the Charity shall exceed £1,000, or if at any time, from change of circumstances or otherwise, Her Majesty's Attorney-General should be of opinion that further arrangements are desirable. Samaritan Fund. In the year 1862 the sum of £50 was left by Lady Williams to the poor of this Parish. The sum having been d 50 handed to the Clerk of the Governors and Directors of the Poor, they, under the authority of the 13th section of "The Parish Local Act" (7 Geo. IV., cap. cxxi.), on the 21st May, 1862, resolved:— "That a book be provided, called the Samaritan Fund Book, in which the amount should be entered; that the money be kept in the Clerk's hands, and disposed of, from time to time, by this Board, the sums given being signed by the presiding Chairman of the day." Subsequently the Board further resolved:— "That a box be placed at the House in Mount-street, with the following inscription,— 'Samaritan Fund of St. George, Hanover-square, for the Relief, by Gift, of such Poor Persons as the Poor Board cannot, by law, assist with Money and "That the Governors and Directors of the Poor, for the time being, constitute a Committee for the distribution of the Samaritan Fund." Upon the formation of St. George's Union, the Fund was handed over to Trustees, for the benefit of the poor of this Parish. The box is retained at the Mount-street Workhouse, and the funds arising therefrom are distributed by the Trustees, upon the recommendations of the Board of Guardians of St. George's Union. The following is a list of the Resolutions, of an active character, which have been passed by the Vestry, since March, 1873:— 51 The Resolutions passed between 1856 and March, 1873, are printed in a previous Report. Copies will be supplied to Vestrymen on application. 3rd April, 1873. Book 9, Folio 58. "That the Poor Rate Account be charged with "one-third of the salaries to the Vestry Clerk "and Clerks in his office." 5th February, 1874. Book 9, Folio 344. "That, in future, tenders for works and materials "for each parochial year be sent in early in "January, so that they may be opened before "the Rates are fixed." 6th August, 1874. Book 9, Folio 520. "That the Committee of Works be empowered to "contract in future for the construction of "new sewers in this Parish, which the "Vestry have previously ordered to be carried "out." 4th March, 1875. Book 10, Folio 165. "That the Parish workmen be directed to com"mence their day's work in times of snow "and in muddy weather, by sweeping the "footpaths round the garden inclosures of "squares, and adjoining other vacant spaces, "&c., in the Parish, according to a list "approved by the Committee." 6th May, 1875. Book 10, Folio 223. "That under no circumstances shall Interest be "again charged in any Parish Account Book, 52 "otherwise than in cases in which Interest "has been paid or is payable." 6th May, 1875. Book 10, Folio 224. "That the Surveyor do prepare annually a Report "showing all expenses incurred in connection "with the steam roller during the past year; "and its present estimated value and original "cost; together with some account of the "work accomplished by it in that period." 3rd June, 1875. Book 10, Folio 249. "That the situation and depth of all existing "public sewers be marked upon the two sets "of plans purchased last year for the Sur"veyor's Department, and that all new sewers "and alterations of old ones be marked from "time to time upon the plans at the time of "construction or alteration, so that the maps "may form a complete record of all the "public sewers in the Parish." 17th June, 1875. Book 10, Folio 263. "That in future the names of the Members "attending Deputations and serving on Sub"Committees be entered in the List of Attend"ances in the Annual Report." 19th August, 1875. Book 10, Folio 297. "That in the event of the Surveyor finding a "horse and vehicle to assist him in super"intending out-door work, the Vestry make "an allowance to him of £20 per annum 53 "and provide fodder, stable-room, and attend"ance." 20th January, 1875. Book 10, Folio 402. "That, in addition to the present Subscription for "Votes and Proceedings, the Vestry, in future, "subscribe for copies of all Parliamentary "Bills, Returns and Reports, as delivered to "the House of Commons, at a total annual "cost of £13 13s." 27th July, 1876. Book 11, Folio 75. "That the Minutes of all Vestries from this date "be printed; that a printed copy of the "Minutes of each Vestry be sent to the "Members of the Board one clear day before "the succeeding Vestry." 7th December, 1876. Book 11, Folio 199. "That the Committee of Works be empowered "to cleanse the various fountains, and such "other public monuments belonging to the "Parish, as and when they may consider it "necessary to do so." 1st February, 1877. Book 11, Folio 256. "That it be an instruction to the Committee of "Works in preparing Estimates in future, "to take a vote thereon, of say £1,000, to "cover additional works, which may be "ordered by the Vestry, and works of imme"diate necessity which may not be estimated "for, under the present heads." 54 1st February, 1877. Book 11, Folio 257. "That, in future, the Surveyor publish, on the "Quarterly Schedule of Bills sent out to the "Vestry, a statement of the total Estimated "General and Sewers Accounts in his depart"ment, and the amount expended under each "head up to the end of the quarter to which "the Schedule relates." 55 SURVEYOR'S REPORT. My Lords and Gentlemen, I beg to submit this my Third Annual Report of the various Works which have been carried out during the year ended Lady-day, 1877, also a statement showing the actual cost incurred in each department. Maintenance of Roads. At the commencement of this year owing to the long continued rain towards the close of the preceding one, many of the roads of the Parish were reduced to a very bad condition, and consequently the amount of material required to put them into their present state of repair has been greatly in excess of what was anticipated would be necessary. The expense under this heading, therefore, is much greater than it has been for several years past. Last Christmas I explained to the Committee of Works, that I had then already exceeded my estimate; but as more road material was required, and in as much as the contract price for its supply was lower, by 1s. 7d. a ton, than it would be the following quarter, the Committee directed me to obtain as much granite as possible at the reduced price: The purchase of this additional material has, of course, added considerably to the past year's expense. 56 The following thoroughfares have been converted from flint roads to granite roads:— Hindon Street. Denbigh Street (from Warwick Street to Belgrave Road). Eccleston Street (from Ebury Street to King's Road). Upper Eccleston Street. Lowndes Street. Halkin Street West. Belgrave Square (West and East Sides). Uxbridge Road. A considerable improvement has been effected by the raising of that portion of the Uxbridge Road between the Marble Arch and Stanhope Place. Previous to the alteration, the footway on the north side of the road was nearly three feet above the level of the roadway, and was in consequence exceedingly dangerous to foot passengers. The roadway, however, has been raised to within a few inches of the curb of the footway, which is now perfectly safe. The cost of the work has been about £400, towards which the Parish of Paddington has contributed the sum of £100. Grosvenor Road. The portion of Grosvenor Road between St. George's Square and Ranelagh Road, although raised in the spring of '76 an average height of 3 ft., to prevent the overflowing of the Thames, has since been raised an additional height of about 6 inches, in order that the property adjoining might be rendered as secure as possible from flooding during high tides. The cost of this additional work has been about £100. 57 The following statement shows the quantity of material used in the maintenance and repairs of the various roads in the Parish, and the total amount expended, including labour:— Granite. Tons. Flints. Tons. Actual Cost. £ 8. d. South Belgravia 1752 2544 2633 6 4 Grosvenor Place District 7580 3117 8563 12 7 In Wards 5929 ... 6925 1 6 15,261 5661 £18,122 0 5 The Steam Roller. The steam roller has worked continuously on the granite roads, and occasionally on flint roads. The horse roller has also been used on flint roads as often as circumstances would permit. The cost of maintaining the steam roller, including all expenses of every description, has been as follows:— March 25th, 1877. £ 8. d. Wages 230 1 4½ Cartage of Water 168 16 6 Oil, Tallow, Waste, &c. 51 5 7½ Coke 76 14 0 Coals (estimated) 6 0 0 Firewood 0 17 0 Repairs by Messrs. Aveling and Porter 199 12 3 Small Repairs by Engine Driver 25 13 1½ Sundries 13 14 7 Depreciation, 10 percent. 51 0 0 £823 14 5½ 58 The total area of streets rolled has been about 237,349 superficial yards, part of which has been done by hired rollers. Wood Pavement. Piccadilly. The wood pavement laid in Piccadilly by the Improved Wood Pavement Company in 1873, and subsequently, has worn exceedingly well. The pavement generally is in excellent condition. Owing to a leakage in one of the waterservice pipes, the foundation of that portion of the pavement between Park Lane and Hamilton Place was partly washed away. The pavement itself, however, was in perfectly good condition; but the entire portion has been relaid by the Company at their own expense. Park Street. The Improved Wood Pavement Company have laid down in August, '76, about 1,117 yards of their pavement in Park Street, between Mount Street and Grosvenor Street, at a cost of £837 15s.; the expense of which was paid by His Grace the Duke of Westminster. Victoria Station. I may also mention that the specimen piece of wood pavement laid in the Wilton Road, at the entrance to Victoria Station, in December, '75, although subject to considerable traffic, shows scarcely any perceptible signs of wear. 59 Maintenance of Footways and Carriageways. There have been constantly employed during the last year, in the various repairs, &c., four masons and four paviours; they have re-laid certain portions of the foot and carriageways which were worn, sunk, or broken, using new materials, supplied by contract, where the old was not fit to re-lay; they have also made good the pavements disturbed for gas, water, new buildings, alterations, &c. They have used, during the year, 1,129 yards super, of York paving, and the cost has been as follows:— £ s. d. South Belgravia 246 13 5½ Grosvenor Place District 400 2 11½ In Wards 536 0 5½ £1,182 16 10½ Carriageways. £ s. d. South Belgravia 228 17 6 Grosvenor Place District 320 2 9½ In Wards 545 1 10 £1,094 2 1½ £ s. d. Estimated 2,300 0 8 Actual 2,276 19 0 Asphalte. The Société Francaise des Asphaltes has, during the year, paved the following footways with Asphalte, which has been carried out at the rate of 5s. 6d. per yard super., including the Portland cement concrete foundation, 3 in. thick, and £ in. of asphalte. 60 The work has been done in a very satisfactory manner. The following footways have been re-laid with this asphalte at a cost of £845 15s. 6d.:— Portions of— Bond Street Buckingham Palace Road Eaton Square Ebury Street Motcomb Street Park Lane Piccadilly Stockbridge Terrace Super. Yards. 2,834 £845 15 6 Masons' and Paviours' Works. Masons' Works. The Paving Contractor has, during the year, executed the following works at the expense of the parties whose names stand opposite:— Footways. Situation. Old Footway relaid. New 3 in. York laid. New Curb set. Cost. Who for. Yds. Ft. Yds Ft. Ft. £ s. d. Grosvenor Square 3 0 51 0 49 32 15 9 Smith & Co. Upper Grosvenor Street 12 0 61 0 72 20 9 1 Deacon & Co. Grosvenor Mews. — 20 0 34 14 18 10 By waters & Co. Clarges Street 11 0 20 0 — 10 2 1 Cubitt & Co. Total 78 5 9 61 Carriageways. Paviours' Works. Situation. Carriageway Paving relaid and redressed. Cost. Who for. Yds. Ft. £ s. d. Grosvenor Mews 194 0 29 13 10 Parish. Little Bruton Street 210 6 33 8 0 „ Mill Street 492 0 81 7 1 „ Pollen Street 185 0 26 19 1 „ South Bruton Mews 689 4 104 19 8 „ Avery Row 513 3 83 10 11 „ Conduit Street 157 0 36 16 7 „ Curzon Street 39 0 20 11 6 „ Eaton Mews North 45 3 6 15 9 „ Grosvenor Road 173 5 35 0 0 „ Lees Mews 189 0 36 10 10 „ Lyall Mews 1,906 0 313 13 5 „ Lyall Street 30 0 5 5 10 „ Market Street 102 0 16 11 0 „ New Bond Street 41 0 8 14 3 „ Ranelagh Road 42 0 3 17 0 „ Rutland Street 98 0 8 19 8 „ South Molton Lane 677 0 108 2 3 „ White Horse Street 158 0 7 18 4 „ Aylesford Street 15 3 2 10 0 „ Clarges Street 15 0 0 19 8 „ *St. George''s Square Mews 1,132 0 75 15 4 Inhabitants. *Grosvenor Crescent Mews 281 0 211 2 2 Waller & Cubitt. 1,259 2 2 Note.—The whole of the above places have been paved with the granite pitching, removed from Piccadilly, except those marked (*). Lighting. The streets under the control of the Vestry have been lighted by gas supplied by the Gas Light and Coke Company and the London Gas Company. The Vestry having considered it desirable to obtain, as far as possible, a supply of gas of a uniform quality throughout the Parish, made application to the London Gas Company 62 to have the district supplied by them with cannel gas changed to common. The Company having agreed to this, the necessary alterations of services have been made, and the whole of the lamps in the Out Wards hitherto supplied with cannel gas will in future consume common gas, except thirteen, which are still burning cannel, but are charged for by the London Gas Company as burning common. The following Table will exhibit the number of lights in each district,—the cost, quality, and quantity of gas consumed per burner:— Name of Company. District Lighted. No. of Burners. (a) Rate of consumption per hour. Charge per Lamp, (b) Common Gas. Cannel Gas. Cub. ft. £ 8. d. Gas Light and Coke Comp. In-Wards . 218 —- 4.0 3 18 3 „ „ „ — 931 2.5 3 4 7 „ „ Vauxhall-bridge-rd - 11 2.5 3 4 7 „ „ South Belgravia 551 — 4.0 3 18 3 (c) Imperial Uxbridge-road 4 - 4.5 4 0 0 London. Grosv.-pl. District 62 - 4.0 3 19 4 „ „ „ — 828 2.5 3 9 0 835 1770 Note (a).—The total number of lamps includes 14 for lighting urinals. „ (b).—These charges include, in each case, repairs, painting, &c. „ (c).—Now the Gas Light and Coke Company. Cleansing the Streets. The cleansing of the streets has been done by men in the employment of the Vestry. The sweepings in the In Wards have been removed under contract by Mr. T. Hobbs, Jun.; the sweepings in the Out Wards have been carted from the streets by the Parish carts to the Parish Wharf, and thence barged away by contract. 63 With the view of preventing disagreeable smells which were complained of, the principal thoroughfares have, as occasion required, been thoroughly washed, and the effect has proved so beneficial that during the past summer I have not received a single complaint. Watering the Streets. The spreading of the water in the streets of the In Wards has been done by Mr. T. Hobbs, Jun.; in the Out Wards by the horses and carts belonging to the Yestry. The water for the In Wards is supplied by the Grand Junction Water Company, and that in the Out Wards by the Chelsea Water Company. Stock of Plant and Materials. The valuation of the plant and materials, consisting of 1 steam roller, 1 horse roller, 28 horses, 27 slop carts, and 14 water carts, 12 water vans, 4 shoot carts, &c., &c., the property of the Vestry, at the expiration of the parochial year was £8,246 0s. 7d. On the 25th of March, 1876, the number of horses in stock, the property of the Parish, was twenty-seven. Since then one horse ("Turpin") has been sold by auction, and realized £36 15s. Two horses have been purchased (August, 1876) at a cost of £140. The number of horses in stock, therefore, at the end of the past year (Lady-day, 1877) was twenty-eight; the value of which I estimate at £1,782. Stable Arrangements. The cost incurred, under this heading, in the maintenance of the Parish Plant, together with the keep of the 64 above horses, including all labour and expenses for the year ended Lady Day, 1877, has been £4,423 19s. 7d., viz:— Particulars. £ s. d. Fodder 1,726 17 4½ Veterinary Care 138 5 0 Harness 52 3 5 Repairs to Carts 382 10 6 „ Stables 5 0 0 Gas 25 0 0 Sundries, including Water, Oil, &c. 16 0 0 Hire of Horses (kept by Parish) 47 12 6 Wages to Carters, &c. 1,790 12 1½ Rent of Stables (estimated) 150 0 0 Purchase of Two Horses 140 0 0 £4,474 0 11 Cr. £ s. d. Sale of One Horse 36 15 0 „ Manure 13 6 4 50 1 4 £4,423 19 7 The average number of horses working per day during the year was 27, exclusive of Sundays. Sewers. The sewers in the Parish have been cleansed, repaired, and flushed from time to time by the workmen in the employment of the Vestry. New gullies have been fixed for carrying off surface water, and gullies and ventilators have been trapped and repaired in all cases where necessary. The Committee of Works having given instructions, as occasion offered, to fix ventilators over all man-holes which 65 were found unprovided with gratings, not only to promote the better circulation of air in the sewers, but also to prevent the accumulation of coal-gas at those places, I have had a proper ventilator fixed in every case where such is found. E Summary of the Expenditure for General Works, Year ended March 26th, 1877. Estimated Cost. Actual Cost. FOOTWAYS— £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. South Belgravia. 246 13 5½ Grosvenor Place District 400 2 11½ In-Wards 614 6 2 1,895 0 0 1,261 2 6 CARRIAGEWAYS— South Belgravia. 354 19 6 Grosvenor Place District 857 0 0 In-Wards 3,665 8 6 5,000 0 8 4,871 8 0 GRANITE & FLINT ROADS— South Belgravia. 2,633 6 4 Grosvenor Place District 8,563 12 7 In-Wards 6,925 1 6 13.000 0 0 18,122 0 5 CLEANSING— South Belgravia. 1,903 15 9 Grosvenor Place District 3,662 17 0 In-Wards 4,859 14 1 Piccadilly 101 6 2 10,194 0 0 10,527 13 0 Gravel Footpaths . 29 5 2 WATERING— South Belgravia. 769 5 8 Grosvenor Place District 1,678 13 11 In-Wards 1,730 5 11 4.246 16 4 4,178 5 6 LIGHTING— South Belgravia. 9,678 9 4 9,524 16 3 Grosvenor Place District In-Wards Sundries 1,066 4 10 CR. By Gas and Water Com- 49,586 15 8 panies, &c. 1,544 5 7 Total 44,614 6 4 Total 48,042 10 1 66 It will be seen by the above figures that the actual cost has exceeded the estimate by £3,428 3s. 9d. The following items and works, however, amounting to £2,305 25. have been ordered by the Vestry and included in this amount, but were not allowed for in the estimate. Additional Works not Estimated for. £ s. d. Paving and Lighting round Fountain in Park Lane 112 0 0 Raising the Level of Uxbridge Road (Portion of) 400 0 0 Park Street Excavation 91 2 0 Alteration to Horse Roller 30 0 0 Six new Stand Posts for Watering 72 0 0 Raising Portion of Grosvenor Road 100 0 0 Additional Supply of Granite, by Order of the Committee of Works 1,500 0 0 £2,305 2 0 When this amount, therefore, is added to the estimate, viz.:—£4,614 6s. 4d., making a total of £16,919 8s. 4d., the actual amount spent over and above the estimate would be £1,123 1s. 9d.; thus: £ s. d. Actual 48,042 10 1 £ s. d. Estimate 44,614 6 4 Extras 2,305 2 0 46,919 8 4 £1,123 1 9 I have the honour to be, My Lords and Gentlemen, Your faithful and obedient Servant, GEO. LIVINGSTONE, C.E., Surveyor. 67 REPORT on THE SANITARY CONDITION of The Parish of St. George, Banber Square, FOR THE YEAR 1876, by W. H. CORFIELD, M.A., M.D. (Oxon.), F.R.C.P. (Lond.), medical officer of health (BEING HIS FIFTH ANNUAL REPORT). To the Vestry of the parish of St. George hanover square. My Lords and Gentlemen, The year 1876 was a very healthy one for the Parish, and for London generally, in spite of the fact that an epidemic of small-pox was prevalent. Table I. shows as usual the number of deaths in each quarter of every year from 1868, and it will be seen that the gross total of deaths recorded in the Parish in 1876 (that is to say, during the 52 weeks ending Saturday, December 30th, 1876), was 1868, almost the same as that of last year, but still a larger number than that recorded during any year since 1871, and larger than the average of the last eight years; but this is accounted for by the large number of persons who died in Public Institutions, viz., 573, a larger number than in any year of which we have record : our share, according to population, of the 68 deaths occurring in Public Institutions throughout London, was only 362. To find our corrected total of deaths, we Table I. YEAR. Jan. to Mar. April to June. July to Sept. Oct. to Dec. Gross Total. Deaths in Public Institutions 1868 494 476 458 467 1,895 502 1869 547 418 409 449 1,823 520 1870 560 487 444 539 2,030 504 1871 579 436 384 474 1,873 433 1872 451 479 381 364 1,675 332 1873 452 402 404 407 1,665 368 1874 (53 weeks) 494 388 316 501 1,694 345 1875 581 442 378 466 1,867 502 Average during eight years, 1868—1875 . 520 440 397 458 1,815 438 Year 1876 532 490 404 442 1,868 573 Average during nine years, 1868—1876 . 521 446 398 457 1,832 453 must take the difference between 573 and 362, viz., 211 from 1868, which leaves 1,657, a lower corrected total than either last year or the year before (See Table I a). I estimate the population of the Parish at the middle of the year 1876 at 90,833, which is to the estimated population of London almost exactly as 1 to 38 2/5. Our corrected death-rate has therefore been 18.2 per 69 thousand per annum, or lower than either last year or the year before (Table I a.) Table I a. year. Gross Total of Deaths. Deaths in Public Institutions. Proportional Share of Deaths in Public Institutions. Corrected Total of Deaths (52 weeks). Corrected Death-rate per 1,000 per annum. 1874 (53 weeks) 1,694 345 355 1,679 18.66 1875 1,867 502 460 1,727 19.05 1876 1,868 673 362 1,657 18.20 The general London death-rate was 22.3 per 1,000 in 1876, showing a decrease on 1875, when it was 23.7, and being nearly 2 per 1,000 less than the average of the years since 1840. The death-rate in greater London was 21.3 per 1,000. The average rate in "London and 22 other large towns of the United Kingdom" was 237 per 1,000,—and all of these "22 other large towns" have also a higher death-rate than this Parish, the nearest to it being Brighton (population, 100,632) with a rate of 19.6 per 1,000,—and the farthest from it Salford (population 138,425) with a rate of 31.9 per 1,000. The corrected death-rate of the Western Districts was as usual lower than that of the other divisions of London, and was 21, or 2.8 higher than ours. Table II. shows that the birth rate, 23.88 per 1,000, was somewhat smaller than it was in 1875. It is always very small in this Parish. The London birth-rate was 36.5 per 1,000, and that of the other 22 large Towns varied from 28.7 in Dublin to 49.3 in Salford, the general average for 70 London and these towns being 37.7 per 1,000: Brighton, which had the lowest death-rate of any large town in England in 1876, had also the lowest birth-rate, viz., 30 per 1,000. On the other hand Table II. shows that the number of deaths of Children under one year was less than in either of the three preceding years, and that the percentages of such deaths to the Registered Births,* and to the total deaths were also less than in either of those years—a very satisfactory fact. The percentage of deaths of Children under one year of age to Births registered, viz., 15.09, was rather less than it was in London generally, viz., 15.7, and was, in fact, less than in any one of the 20 large English Towns mentioned by the Registrar-General, except Portsmouth, where it was 14.2, so that it is clear that the infantine mortality of the Parish is small, although it would be still smaller were it not for the infanticides committed in the Parks and in the Serpentine. Table II. YEAR. Registered Births. Birth-rate per 1,000 per annum (52 weeks). Deaths of Children under 1 Year. Total. Percentage to Registered Births. Percentage to Total Deaths (uncorrected). 1873 2,144 23.76 333 15.53 22.70 1874 (53 weeks) 2,266 24.59 333 14.69 19.57 1875 2,191 24.12 345 15.75 18.48 1876 2,174 23.88 328 15.09 17.56 Table III. is new to my Reports, and is substituted for the Tables showing the causes of death, which I am no longer * Except in one instance. 71 able to prepare. It shows that the number of violent deaths is increasing, and that the percentage of violent deaths to total deaths is much greater in this Parish than in London generally ; the number of inquest cases, although, of course, greater, is small in proportion to the number of violent deaths, for whereas in London generally there were in 1876 nearly twice as many inquest cases as deaths from violence, in this Parish there were only 148 inquest cases to 108 deaths from violence. The percentage of the deaths of persons of 60 years and upwards to the gross total of deaths was 24.36, or a little less than last year; as usual, this is a considerably higher percentage than that for London generally, which was 20.08; another fact which speaks well for the health of the Parish. Table III. year. A. Persons aged sixty years and upwards. b. Violence. c. Inquest Cases. Percentages to Gross Total of Deaths. a. b. c. 1874 445 76 93 26.95 4.60 5.6 1875 469 84 112 25.20 4.50 6.0 1876 455 108 148 24.36 5.78 7.9 London. 1876 16,542 2,885 5,279 20.08 3.73 6.8 72 Table IV. SUB-DISTRICT. Calculated Population at middle of 1876. Births. Birthrate. Total Deaths. Deaths in Public Institutions. Deaths (corrected). Deathrate (corrected). Hanover Square 18,138 326 17.97 254 — 326 17.97 Mayfair 13,095 282 21.53 285 166 171 13.06 Belgravia 59,600 1,566 26.27 1,329 407 1,160 19.46 Total 90,833 2,174 23.88 1,868 573 1,657 18.20 Table IV. shows the calculated populations with the births, birth-rates, deaths and death-rates of each of the three Sub-Districts. Usually, the birth-rate of Mayfair is less than that of Hanover Square; in 1876, however, not only was the reverse the case, but that of Hanover Square was much lower than it was in 1875, while that of Mayfair was much higher, that of Belgravia remaining nearly the same, thus:— Birth-Rates. 1875. 1876. Hanover Square . 20.55 17.97 Mayfair 16.54 21.53 Belgravia 26.93 26.27 Whole Parish 24.12 23.88 The correction for the deaths in Public Institutions raised the total of Hanover Square, and lowered it in the other two Sub-Districts; and the corrected death-rates were all less than they were last year, that of Mayfair being as usual the lowest, and that of Belgravia the highest. 73 Table V. Showing the number of Deaths in the eight years, 1868 to 1875, from the principal Infectious Diseases and Diarrhœa, and the number in 1876. DISEASE. 1868. 1869. 1870. 1871. 1872. 1873. 1874. 1875. Annual Average of eight years, 1868—1875. Proportion of Deaths to 1,000 Deaths in eight years, 1868-1875. 1876. Proportion of Deaths to 1,000 Deaths in 1876. Small-pox 2 1 2 59 3 1 — — 85 4.68 2 1.07 Measles 37 14 28 12 38 23 17 30 24.9 13.72 21 11.24 Scarlet Fever 71 46 133 39 15 9 32 40 48.1 26.45 22 11.78 Diphtheria 24 7 4 10 9 2 2 16 9.25 5.10 3 1.61 Whooping Cough 48 56 55 43 66 32 22 42 45.5 25.07 45 24.09 Fever 22 36 41 30 25 23 25 37 29.9 16.47 33 17.67 Diarrhœa 86 68 80 65 71 58 61 60 68.6 37.80 47 25.16 Cholera — 1 2 5 1 2 2 2 1.9 1.05 1 0.54 Total 2110 229 345 263 228 150 161 227 236.6 130.36 174 93.15 74 Table V. shows that the number of deaths from the principal infectious diseases and from diarrhoea was 174, a much smaller number than the average and than the number for 1875, but larger than the numbers for 1873 and 1874; the number for each disease is also smaller than the average except that for the continued fevers, which is however smaller than the number for 1875. The 174 deaths from these diseases are equivalent to a rate of only 1.9 per 1,000 persons living; while the general London rate was 3.6, and that for the 20 large English towns 4.1; the rate amongst those towns varying from 2.2 in Brighton to 8.5 in Salford. Small-Pox, which was epidemic in London, caused two deaths in the Parish during the year, besides the deaths which occurred in Hospitals, and the Inspector's Report book shows that it occurred in 19 other houses: in all the cases efficient disinfection was carried out. I extract from my report for the month of January 1877, the following summary of the mortality statistics of the small-pox epidemic in London during the year:— "There were 735 deaths in London from small-pox in the 52 weeks of 1876; of these 544 were certified, 325 as unvaccinated, and 219 as vaccinated, while the remaining 191 were uncertified as to vaccination. There are several reasons why many cases are not certified as to vaccination, one being 'that in the present state of the law some parents are inclined to give no information about unvaccinated cases,' and another, that many medical men do not consider it incumbent on them to give the information. All the deaths, however, which take place in the Hospitals are certified as to vaccination, so that the relative mortality can safely be calculated from them; of the 735 deaths, 338 took 75 place in the Metropolitan Asylum Hospitals, viz., 204 of unvaccinated, and 134 of vaccinated people; or unvaccinated 60 per cent., and vaccinated 40 per cent. of the deaths; so that 20 per cent. more of the deaths from small-pox in hospitals came from the unvaccinated population, than came from the vaccinated population, which is about nine times as numerous." As the deaths from each of the other infectious diseases were fewer than last year, and except in the case of fever (including typhus, enteric or typhoid, and simple continued fevers) fewer than the average, there is little to be said about them; I must remark however, that only 2 out of the 22 deaths from scarlet fever, and only 1 out of the 33 deaths from "fever" were reported to the Inspector, showing again the absolute necessity of my being provided with the returns of deaths from infectious diseases; this has since been done, so that I now receive immediate information, and am able to take measures to prevent the spread of these diseases. No less than 55 houses in which there were cases of scarlet fever, and 8 which were infected with enteric (typhoid) fever were reported to the Inspector, and the proper precautions taken, permanent sanitary improvements being carried out in several instances. Vaccination. By the courtesy of the Public Vaccinators, I am enabled to give the following return of the numbers of persons Vaccinated or Re-vaccinated by them during the year 1876. 76 District. Vaccinator. Vaccinations. Ra-Vaccinationn. Total. Hanover Square and May fair Mr. E. D. Jay 167 5 172 Belgraria Dr. E. L. Webb 474 74 548 Knightsbridge Mr. G.H. Pedler 74 0 74 715 79 794 Persons are also encouraged to take their children to St. George's Hospital for gratuitous vaccination, and 362 vaccinations have been performed there during the year. I am, of course, unable to give any account of the total numbers of children vaccinated, or of persons re-vaccinated throughout the Parish. Sanitary Work. For the year ending March 31st, 1877. The following Table has been compiled for me by Mr. Hopkins, your Sanitary Inspector, from the Report book. Table VI. Various Kinds of Complaints of Nuisances, &c., from, April lst, 1876, to March 31st, 1877. Total number of complaints 311 Notices served 56 Houses and premises limewhited and general repairs 45 Houses disinfected after infectious diseases 148 77 Drains trapped, ventilated, &c.; sinks repaired, and in some cases new pipes . 47 Closets supplied with water 17 Dust bins renewed, repaired, new covers, &c. 14 Cisterns repaired, new covers, &c. 7 Removal of animals improperly kept (cases of) 2 Meat, fish, &c., condemned (case of) 1 Drains and closets unstopped 17 Overcrowding abated 3 Cesspools abolished 2 Street gullies trapped on account of bad smells 2 Cases removed to hospitals 47* Old people living in filthy rooms removed 1 Inspection of houses after cases of infectious disease, viz., Typhoid and low fever 14 Typhus fever 5 Scarlet fever 68 Small-pox 102 Cholera 1 Various nuisances removed 69 No cause for complaint on inspection 95 Waste pipes disconnected 13 Legal proceedings taken 1 Accumulation of dung, straw, &c, removed 11 Bake-houses in the Parish 77 Licensed cow-houses 7 Licensed slaughter-houses 14 * Small-pox 25, Scarlet fever 16, and Enteric (Typhoid) fever 6. 78 The articles disinfected in the hot-air disinfecting chamber belonging to the Parish, were as follows:— 100 Beds 116 Bolsters 159 Mattresses 249 Pillows 77 Palliasses 148 Carpets 82 Quilts 46 Hearth-rugs 324 Blankets 89 Curtains 134 Sheets 52 Counterpanes 81 Dresses 29 Pillow-cases 1 Window-blind 21 Towels 57 Table-covers 61 Cushions 17 Shawls 24 Jackets 16 Bundles of small clothes 40 Suits of Clothing, and a large quantity of sundry articles. The number of complaints (not including dust complaints) was fewer than in 1875, and the number of nuisances attended to also fewer, but the number of disinfections after cases of infectious disease, and of articles disinfected at the hot-air chamber was very much greater, chiefly on account of the large number of cases of smallpox. Although 56 notices were served, it was only necessary to take out one summons; this was against the owner of a house the drains of which were in so deficient a state that they produced a nuisance both in the house itself and in the neighbouring house. The owner was summoned for noncompliance with the order, and the case was proved to the satisfaction of the magistrate, who made an order for a new drain to be laid throughout, and for the defendant to pay all the costs. Early in 1876 I made a special Report on the condition 79 of Street's Buildings, May's Buildings, and Lancashire Court, which resulted in my reporting Lancashire Court to the Metropolitan Board of Works as a suitable area to be dealt with under the Artizans' and Labourers' Dwellings Act, 1875. The Metropolitan Board, however, declined to deal with it under that Act; and various sanitary improvements have been carried out at several of the houses since. Several cases of enteric fever occurred in Grosvenor Mews during September, soon after the commencement of extensive alterations in the sewerage of a large block of buildings; by thorough disinfection, with suitable sanitary improvements in some of the houses, the epidemic was stamped out; but I would take this opportunity of urging that when any such alterations to drains, &c., are contemplated, the sanitary officers ought to be made aware of it. The slaughter-houses, cow-sheds and bakehouses of the Parish are regularly inspected, and kept in a cleanly state. No license was opposed by the Vestry at the annual licensing of slaughter-houses and cow-sheds, but the license of one slaughter-house was withheld on account of noncompliance with a bye-law of the Metropolitan Board of Works. I am happy to be able to say that the helmet making in the Government cap factory, which has been a considerable nuisance to the inhabitants of Claverton Street, Pimlico, from the vapour of naphtha which escaped, has been removed to a part of the premises where it is much less likely to cause any nuisance. I have analyzed the water supplied by the Grand Junction and Chelsea Water Companies from time to time, and found it to be of average purity, except during the winter months, when the filtration was inefficient, on account of the heavy floods in the river. 80 The common gas supplied by the London Gas Company has been examined by me from time to time at their testing room, and has always been found to be above the required standard of illuminating power, to contain occasionally faint traces of ammonia, and to be free from sulphuretted hydrogen. For the information of the Parishioners, I may mention that a hospital carriage for removing persons suffering from infectious diseases is kept at the workhouse, in Mount Street; but those who are in a position to bear the expenses of their support should apply at the London Fever Hospital, Liverpool Road, Islington, where they can be accommodated on favourable terms. I have the honour to be, My Lords and Gentlemen, Your obedient Servant, W. H. CORFIELD, M.A., M.D. (Oxon.), F.R.C.P. (London). 10, Bolton Row, Mayfair, W, June 1877. 81 APPENDIX TO THE REPORT OF THE Medical Officer of Health. Summary of Analytical Work for the Year ending March 31st, 1877. NAME of SAMPLE. Genuine. Of doubtful Quality. Adulterated. Total. Milk 6 8 6 19 Bread 19 — — 19 Butter 8 1 2 11 Swiss Milk 1 — — 1 Tea 16 1 3 20 Coffee 4 — 3 7 Mustard 6 — 2 8 Pepper 6 — — 6 Flour 1 — — 1 Whisky 1 — — 1 Totals 67 10 16 92 Of the above samples only 8 were brought by private purchasers, viz.: 5 of butter, 1 of Swiss milk, 1 of milk, and 1 of whisky; and 2 were samples of milk procured by myself at houses where there were cases of enteric fever, and the milk-supply was suspected: they were neither of them watered. F 82 Notice of intention to submit for analysis was given by the Inspector in two instances, at shops where adulterated samples of milk had previously been obtained. In the one instance the sample was found to be skimmed, but not watered; in the other, the sample was watered to the extent of 25 per cent.: the vendor was prosecuted, convicted, and fined 30s. and costs. The two adulterated samples of butter contained other fats not injurious to health; one of them was brought by a private purchaser. The three adulterated samples of tea were sold at a very low price, and contained a small proportion of "lie tea;" they contained no leaves other than those of tea. The three adulterated samples of coffee contained chicory, one in very small quantity; the other two being labelled as containing it. The two adulterated samples of mustard contained wheatflour. W. H. CORFIELD, Public Analyst. ABSTRACT OF THE ACCOUNTS AND CONTRACTS OF THE VESTRY, Under the Metropolis Local Managment Acts; ALSO OF THE ACCOUNTS OF THE CHURCHWARDENS, BURIAL BOARD, AND COMMISSIONERS OF PUBLIC BATHS AND WASH-HOUSES, FOR THE YEAR ENDED LADY-DAY, 1877; AND THE VESTRY POOR RATE ACCOUNTS, AND THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS FURNISHED BY THE GUARDIANS OF ST. GEORGE'S UNION, For the Two Half-Years ended Lady-day, 1877. 84 85 GENERAL ACCOUNT. Account, in abstract, showing the Receipts and Expen-diture on the General Management Account, under the Metropolis Local Management Acts, for the Year ended Lady-day 1877. RECEIPTS. EXPENDITURE. £ s. d. £ s. d. To Balance brought on from last Account 2,394 12 3 By Cash paid for Materials used in Paving and Repairs to Footways and Carriageways 12,529 1 4 To Cash received on Account of General Rates, made March 1875, and Arrears of previous Rates 6,845 12 10 By Cash paid for Gas Lights 9,277 6 0 To Cash received on Account of General Rates, made March 1876, and Arrears 70,558 9 7 By Cash paid for Masons' and Paviors' Works 5,228 6 9 By Cash paid for Removal of Dust and Ashes 2,785 0 0 To Cash received, Rents of Properties belonging to Parish- By Cash paid for Slopping, In-Wards 2,797 10 0 Fourteen Houses in Hyde Park-place 2,085 7 6 By Cash paid for Barging away Slop, Out-Wards 1,942 8 6 No. 1, Farm-street 148 15 0 By Cash paid for Water and Watering the Streets 2,596 6 4 Nos. 1 and 3, Commercial-road 37 0 0 By Cash paid for Purchase & Keep of Horses & Repairs to Carts 2,571 15 3 Offices, Mount-street 200 0 0 By Cash paid for Tonnage Dues 315 3 0 Kent for Window, overlooking Burial Board Ground, Mount-street, 1 year 0 1 0 By Cash paid for Hire of Horses and Carts 662 5 3 By Cash paid for Bass Brooms 132 0 6 To Cash received from Her Majesty 's Treasury, Contribution in lieu of Rates 1,212 10 7 By Cash paid for Ironmongery and Smith's Works 1,109 18 4 By Cash paid for Printing, Stationery, Books, &c. 431 1 2 By Cash paid for Rents, Rates, Taxes, and Insurance 776 3 10 To Cash received, being Compensation for Pavements displaced by Gas and Water Companies 650 18 1 By Cash paid for Expenses of Old Burial Grounds 84 3 3 To Cash received, being Balances on Deposits on Licenses for Hoards, &c., after deducting the Amounts paid back as per Voucher Books 499 15 9 By Cash paid for Miscellaneous Bills 414 1 2 By Cash paid for Salaries and Superannuation Allowance 1,424 18 8 By Cash paid for Collectors' Salaries 300 0 0 By Cash paid for Building, Carpentering, &c. 108 12 3 To Cash received for Private Works 1,179 2 8 By Cash paid for Disinfectants 20 9 0 By Cash paid Law Charges for year ended Ladyday, 1876 91 2 8 To Cash received from Sewers' Account for various sums paid out of this Account during the year 1875-6 1,542 9 6 By Cash paid Annuity Alliance Assurance Society on Account of Grosvenor-place District Debt (less Income Tax) 1,192 16 4 To Cash received, Rent of Board Room for Inquests 14 12 6 To Cash received, Miscellaneous Receipts 326 3 6 By Cash paid on Account of Grosvenor-square Debt (less Income Tax) 543 12 3 To Cash received for Disinfecting 29 6 3 By Cash paid the Vestry of St. Marylebone for Paring, &c., the South side of Oxford-street, situate in this Parish, one year to 31st December, 1875 943 18 6 By Cash paid Hanover-square Additional Rate, Balance 1875-6 37 10 0 Ditto, ditto, on Account of 1876-7 18 15 0 56 5 0 By Cash paid School Board for London, as per Precept, one year 26,176 10 2 By Cash paid for Stamping Rate Receipts 20 0 0 By Cash paid Tolls over Chelsea Bridge 6 15 10 By Cash paid Wages of Labourers and others employed under the Surveyor— Stone Yard, Farm street 3,743 13 3½ Wharf, Ebury Bridge 8,340 10 4½ 12,084 3 8 By Cash paid for Hire of Steam Roller 127 7 2 By Balance at Messrs. Drummond 1,270 0 1 By ditto in Clerk's Hands, In-Wards 87 10 1 By ditto, ditto, ditto, Out-Wards 85 5 0 1,442 15 2 Deduct Amount overdrawn, Committee of Works Account 467 0 4 By Balance 975 14 10 To Amount carried forward 87,724 17 0 By Amount carried forward 87,724 17 0 86 87 GENERAL ACCOUNT-(continued). £ s. d. £ s. d. To Amount brought forward 87,724 17 0 By Amount brought forward 87,724 17 0 £87,724 17 0 £87,724 17 0 H. W. SCHNEIDER, Auditors of Accounts. JAMES HOLMES, CHAS. TURNER, ROBT. T. BENHAM, CHAS. L. RAVEY, 24th May, 1877. ASSETS. LIABILITIES. £ s. d. £ s. d. To Balance in favour of Account 975 14 10 By Amount of Tradesmen's Bills, to Lady-day, 1877 12,332 5 7 To Estimated Amount of Rates to be received- By Law Charges to Lady-day, estimated at 87 15 0 Kinghtsbridge Ward 1,552 12 10 By Committee of Management, Hanover-square, Balance of Additional Rate 21 0 0 Out-Ward 3,155 14 1 In-Wards 6,735 14 1 By Collectors' Salaries, One Year, 1876-7 350 0 0 11,444 5 1 By Rents to Lady-day, as per Schedule Book, less Income Tax 310 11 5 To Contributions from Her Majesty's Treasury in lieu of Rates, in respect of Park Walls and Buckingham Place, Half-Year to Lady-day. 456 18 6 By Salaries and Superannuation Allowance to Lady-day, as per Schedule Book 365 10 5 By St. Marylebone, One Year's Expenses of Oxford-street, to 31st December last 3,374 10 6 To ditto, in respect of Government Property in the Parish 160 13 5 *By 1st Moiety of Precept of London School Board, due 1st June, 1877 16,332 5 5 617 11 11 To Half-Year's "Rent of Offices due by the Guardians 100 0 0 *By 2nd ditto ditto Moiety, 1st December, 1877 16,332 5 5 To Arrears of Rent, Hyde Park Place Property, to Christmas, 1876 61 6 0 By School Board for London, Expenses of Election as per Precept 564 0 5 To Rents, Hyde Park Place Property, &c., to Lady-day (less Income Tax) 518 14 9 By Registrars, for Mortality Returns 5 0 0 To Amount due from Sewers' Account, viz., One Year's Wages 1,021 1 8 To ditto, ditto, Proportion of Rents, Rates, Taxes 50 0 0 To ditto, ditto, Proportion of Stationery 10 0 0 To ditto, ditto, One year's Horse and Cart Work 80 6 6 To Gas and Water Companies, &c., for re-laying displaced Pavements 139 3 8 To Miscellaneous Bills 80 9 9 £15,098 14 2 £50,075 4 2 * Included in Estimate (or Rate made 29th March, 1877. Note There is an Annuity of £1,200 due to the Alliance Assurance Society (terminating in 1898), contracted by the Trustees of the late Grosvenor Place District, and met by an extra Rate on that District. Note—There is a Mortgage Debt of £4,975 11s., part of a Debt of £8,000 due to the Globe Insurance Society, on Account of the Trustees of Grosvener- Square, to be paid by various Annual Payments, the which is to be made on the 1st June, 1888. 88 89 SEWERS' ACCOUNT. Account, in abstract, shewing the Receipts and Expenditure on the Sewers' Account, under the Metropolis Local Management Acts, for the Year ended Lady-day 1877. RECEIPTS. EXPENDITURE. £ s. d. £ s. d. To Balance brought on last Account 5,568 2 0 By Cash paid Tradesmen's Bills 892 11 3 By Cash paid St. Marylebone for Oxford-street Sewer 90 0 0 To Cash received of the Sewers' Rate, made at Lady-day 1875, and Arrears at close of Collection— By Cash paid Wages to Lady-day 1876 1,214 10 4 By Cash paid proportion of Rents, Rates, Taxes, and Insurance to Lady-day 1876 50 0 0 £ s. d. Knightsbridge Ward, Mr. A. Lambert 29 0 9 By Cash paid proportion of Salaries 105 18 0 Out Ward, Mr. Geo. Dyke 65 6 7 By Cash paid Collectors' Salaries 50 0 0 In Wards, Mr. P. Knox 187 2 2 By Cash paid Stamping Rate Receipts, 1877-8 3 6 8 281 9 6 By Balance in favour of this Account at Messrs. Drummond's, the Treasurers 3.791 3 10 To Cash received, Arrears of Sewers' Rate, 1875-6— Kinghtsbridge Ward, Mr. A. Lambert 0 16 11 • Out Ward, Mr. Geo. Dyke 1 1 4 In Wards, Mr. P. Knox 7 8 8 9 6 11 To Cash reecived on Licenses for Sewers and Drains' Works 100 6 6 To Cash received from Her Majesty's Treasury, Contribution in lieu of Rates 5 18 4 To Cash received from Burial Board for Drain Works at Cemetery 232 1l 10 £6,197 10 1 £6,197 10 1 H. W. SCHNEIDER, Auditore of Accounts JAMES HOLMES, CHAS. TURNER, ROBT. T. BENHAM, CHAS. L. RAVEY 24th May, 1877. LIABILITIES. ASSETS. £ s. d. £ s. d. To Balance brought down 3,791 3 10 By Tradesmen's Bills to Lady-day 143 15 o To Amount of Rates estimated to be received— By Salaries and Superannuation Allowance, to Lady-Day 43 1 ??? InWards 0 19 8 By Sums due to General Management Account, viz. :— Out Wards 0 2 2 Knightsbridge Ward 0 1 0 One Year's Wages 1,021 1 8 1 2 10 Ditto, ditto, Proportion of Rents 50 0 0 Ditto, ditto, ditto, Stationery 10 0 0 Ditto, ditto, Horse and Cart Work 80 6 6 1,161 8 2 By St. Marylebone, Oxford-street Sewer 90 0 0 £3,792 6 8 .£1,438 4 5 90 91 METROPOLITAN CONSOLIDATED RATE 1876-7. Account, in abstract, showing the Receipts and Expenditure of the Metropolitan Consolidated Rate, under the Metropolis Local Management Acts, for Year ending 1877. RECEIPTS. EXPENDITURE. £ s. d. £ s. d. To Balance brought from last Account 2,944 11 4 By Cash paid Metropolitan Consolidated Bate, as per Precept of the Metropolitan Board of Works 28,940 14 1 To Cash received of Rates of 1875-6, and arrears, at close of Collection, viz.- By Cash paid Collectors' Salaries 105 0 0 £ s. d. By Cash paid for Postage and Receipt Stamps 26 15 10 Kinghtsbridge Ward, A. Lambert 290 5 9 By Cash paid Tradesmen's Bills 56 19 6 Out-Ward, G. Dyke 656 10 0 By Cash paid Clerks' Salaries, preparing Rate Books, &c. 33 10 0 In-Ward, P. Knox 1,873 3 4 2,81 ??? 1 ??? 1 To Cash received of Rate made Sept. 21st, 1876, and arrears— Knightsbridge Ward. A. Lambert 5,886 17 0 Out Ward, G. Dyke 4,809 12 5 In-Ward. P. Knox 11,118 16 11 21,815 6 4 To Cash received from Her Majesty's Treasury in lieu of Rates 101 19 7 To Cash Balance overdrawn 1,481 3 1 .£29,162 19 5 £29,162 19 5 H. W. SCHNEIDER, JAMES HOLMES, Auditors of Accounts. CHAS. TURNER, ROBT. T. BENHAM, CHAS. L. RAVEY, 24th May, 1877. ASSETS. LIABILITIES. Amount of Rates estimated to be received- £ s. d. By Balance brought on 1,481 3 1 £ s. d. £ s. d. By Collectors' Salaries 200 0 0 Knightsbridge Ward 306 11 7 By Tradesmen's Bills, as per Schedule 2 9 6 Out-Ward 792 17 1 *By precept from Metropolitan Board of Works, dated 5th January, 1877— In-Wards 1,523 12 7 2,623 1 3 First moiety, due 1st June 15,108 1 4 To Contribution from Her Majesty's Treasury to Rates, in respect of Government Property, Half-year to Lady-day 45 6 6 Second moiety, due 1st December 15,108 1 4 30,216 2 8 £2,668 7 9 £31,899 15 3 * Included in Estimate for Rate made ??? th March, 1877. 92 An Abstract of all Contracts entered into or continued Date of Contract. Name of Person -with whom Contract made. March 25th, 1876 Mr. Thomas Tuff, Borstal, Rochester March 25th, 1876 Messrs. W. & J. Freeman, Millbank Street, S.W. March 25th, 1876 Mr. Thomas Hobbs, The Wharves, Paddington March 25th, 1876 Mr. H. Covington, Ilford Wharf, Ilford March 25th, 1876 Mr. J. Batch, Camberwell Wharf, Addington Square March 25th, 1876 Messrs. Nowell & Robson, 3, Cannon Row, S.W. March 25th, 1876 Mr. Coppock, 1, Buckingham Place, S.W. March 25th, 1876 Messrs. J. & R. Hopwood, Stockbridge Terrace, S.W. March 25th, 1876 Messrs. Merryweather & Co., Long Acre, W.C. March 25th, 1876 Mr. T. Butler, 15, Elm Street, Gray's Inn Road March 25th, 1876 Messrs. Doulton & Co., Imperial Potteries, Lambeth March 25th, 1876 Messrs. E. Chappie & Sons, 3, Commercial Road, S.W. . March 25th, 1876 Mr. W. Sewell, 53, Elizabeth Street, S.W. March 25th, 1876 Messrs. Folkard & Sons, 57, Bread Street, S.W. March 25th, 1876 Messrs. Ford & Tilt, 52, Long Acre March 25th, 1876 The late Mr. H. Hales's Executors, 202, Kent St., S E March 25th, 1875 Mr. H. Covington, 14, Claverton Street May 22nd, 1876 Mr. J. Hastings, Saddler, Wood Street, S.W. May 4th, 1876 Mr. C. Froud, 5, West Street, Pimlico. We the undersigned, being Auditors of Accounts for the Parish of St. George, Vict., cap. 120, have carefully examined the Accounts of the Vestry of the said Books, Vouchers, and Receipts, for and in support of the same, and, finding thereof. And we, the said Auditors, have, in pursuance of the aforementioned we also certify to be correct, as witness our hands, this twenty-fourth day of 93 by the Vestry during the Year ended Lady-day 1877. Nature of Works to be performed or Materials to be supplied. Amount of Prices. Flints for Road Making At 4s. 2d. per yard cube. Yellow Pit Gravel At 4s. 3d. per yard cube. Hogging At 4s. Ad. per yard cube. Guernsey Granite Guernsey Granite for Breaking, 10s. 2d. per ton. Guernsey Granite, Ordinary Broken, 13s. 6d. per ton. Guernsey Granite, Broken to 5oz., 14s. 5d. per ton. Guernsey Granite, Broken to 4 oz., 14s. 9d. per ton. Spreading Water in the Streets To receive £1,150. Carting away Slop (In Wards) To receive £3,150. Removal of Dust and Ashes (InWards) To receive £1,460. Removal of Dust and Ashes (Out Ward and South Belgravia) To receive £1,950. Paviours' and Masons' Works At various prices, as specified in Contract. Enderby Granite Broken to Ordinary Size, at 15s. 3d. per ton. Paving Materials At various prices, as specified in Contract. Thames Ballast and Sand Ballast, 2s. per yard cube; Sand, 3s. per yard cube. Gas Fitter's Works At various prices, as specified in Contract. Smiths' Works At various prices, as specified in Contract. Repairs to Hose Pipes . At various prices, as specified in Contract. Hammers and Picks To maintain Stock of Hammers—Farm St. & Ebury Wharf, £20; ditto Picks, £115. Drain Pipes . At various prices, as specified in Contract. Oil and Candles At various prices, as specified in Contract. Shoeing and Veterinary care of Horses Shoeing, 18s. 9d. per Quarter; Veterinary care, 5s. per quarter per Horse. Books and Stationery At various prices, as specified in Contract. Printing and Bookbinding At various prices, as specified in Contract. Bass Brooms At 15s. 3d. per dozen; old Handles fitted, 13s. 3d. per dozen. Re-filling Machine Brooms, £1 18s. per set. Barging away Slop At 2s. per yard cube for 3 years. Maintenance of Harness To receive the sum of 30s. per Horse per annum for 3 years. Repairs to Carts and Vans . At various prices, as specified in Contract. Hanover Square, elected under the Metropolis Local Management Act, 18 & 19 Parish for the year ended Lady-day 1877, with the Account Books, Bankers' them to be correct and true, have signed the same in token of our allowance Act, caused to be prepared the foregoing Abstracts of the said Accounts, which May, one thousand eight hundred and seventy-seven. H. W. SCHNEIDER, JAMES HOLMES, CHAS. TURNER, ROBT. T. BENHAM, CHAS. L. RAVEY, Auditors of Accounts. 94 95 ST. GEORGE'S CHURCH ACCOUNT. Year ending Lady-day 1877. RECEIPTS. EXPENDITURE. £ s. d. £ s. d. To Cash received Balance from last Account 283 2 1 By Evening Service, for the Year ending Lady-day 1876 270 11 10 To Cash received Balance of Pew Rents, for year ending Ladyday 1876 108 5 0 By Salaries, One Year, to Michaelmas 1876 68 0 0 By Clerk in Orders, to augment Stipend, as per arrangement, to Christmas, 1876 61 16 0 To Cash received on account of Pew Rents, for the year ending Lady-day 1877 525 3 9 By Expenses maintaining Choir to February 5th, 1877 82 8 4 To Cash received from Monthly Collections, in aid of Church Expenses 85 4 8 By Common Annual Expenses, including Wages to Pew-openers and Vergers 559 11 6 To Cash received from Boxes at doors, in aid of Church Ex- Penses 20 11 6 By Balance 18 18 11 To Cash received, Subscriptions towards Expenses of maintaining Choir 38 19 7 £1,061 6 7 £1,061 6 7 • H. W. SCHNEIDER, Auditors of Accounts. JAMES HOLMES, CHAS. TURNER, ROBT. T. BENHAM, CHAS. L. RAVEY, May 24th, 1877. ASSETS. LIABILITIES. £ s. d. £ s. d. To Balance brought down 18 i 18 11 By Tradesmen's Bills, Wages of Pew Openers, to Lady-day, estimated at 536 13 11 To Balance due of Pew Rents, 1876-7 137 4 8 To Repairing Fund Account, estimated at 211 l 0 0 By Half-Year's Salaries to Lady-day 54 0 0 By Clerk in Orders, to Lady-day 19 13 11 By Evening Service, Balance of one-third of Pew Rents due to Rector, estimated at 70 0 0 £367 3 7 £680 7 10 96 97 GROSVENOR CHAPEL ACCOUNT. Year ending Lady-day 1877. RECEIPTS. £ s. d. expenditure. £ s. d. To Cash Balance from last Account 216 0 6 By Cash paid Rev. Canon Wright, One Year's Stipend, to Christmas 1876 600 0 0 To Cash received, Pew Rents, for the Year ending Lady-day 1877 966 16 7 By Cash paid Salaries 120 0 0 To Cash received, One Year's Interest on £200 Exchequer Bills 4 18 11 By Cash paid Pew-openers, &c., One Year's Wages, to Lady-day 111 6 0 To Cash received by Collection Boxes towards Church Expenses 6 5 3 By Cash paid Common Expenses, to Christmas 1876 140 9 5 By Balance in the hands of Bankers 222 5 9 £1,194 1 2 £1,194 1 2 May 24th, 1877. H. W. SCHNEIDER, JAMES HOLMES, CHAS. TURNER, ROBT. T. BENHAM, CHAS. L. RAVEY, Auditors Of Accounts. ASSETS. LIABILITIES. £ s. d. £ s. d. To Balance brought on 222 5 9 By One Quarter's Stipend to Minister to Lady-day 150 0 0 To Amount of Exchequer Bills held by Messrs. Drummond 200 0 0 By Salaries to Lady-day 54 0 0 £422 5 9 By Common Annual Expenses to Lady-day, estimated at 155 16 9 £359 16 9 g 98 99 BURIAL BOARD ACCOUNT. Year ending Lady-day, 1877. RECEIPTS. £ s. d. EXPENDITURE. £ s. d. £ s. d. To Cash Balance from last Account 49 0 7 By Cash paid Second Instalment of Principal of Loan of £5,000, of 13th April, 1874 251 8 0 To Cash received Interment Fees 354 13 0 By Cash paid Interest thereon(less Income Tax) 206 7 3 To Cash received for Right of Burial in Perpetuity 38 5 0 By Cash paid Fees to Rector 44 11 0 To Cash received for Extra Digging, Turfing Graves, &c. 40 7 6 By Cash paid Fees to Clerk in Orders 17 6 6 To Receipts, Fees for Rector and Clerk in Orders on lnterments in Consecrated Ground 63 3 6 61 17 6 To Receipts, Fees for Nonconformist Minister on Interments in Unconsecrated Ground 28 4 0 By Cash paid Fees to Nonconformist Minister 23 7 6 By Cash paid Rents, Rates. Taxes, and Insurnance 19 4 8 By Cash paid Salaries and Wages— To Cash received from Poor Rate Account for payment of Principal on Loan and Drainage Works 483 19 10 Clerk 20 0 0 Manager 120 0 0 To Cash received Rent of Field let off (less Income Tax) 40 3 11 To Cash received by Miscellaneous Receipts 13 7 2 Wages of Workmen 203 11 8 To Cash received Sale of Exchequer Bills and Interest 410 12 5 343 11 8 By Cash paid Miscellaneous Bills 160 7 1 £1,521 16 11 By Cash paid Sewers Account, for Cleaning and Repairing Main Drain running through Cemetery 232 11 10 By Cash paid Erection of Greenhouse 160 2 3 By Cash Balance in Messrs. Drummonds' hands 62 19 2 £1,521 16 11 H. W. SCHNEIDER, JAMES HOLMES, CHAS. TURNER, ROBT. T. BENHAM, May 24th, 1877. CHAS. L. RAYEY, Auditors of Accounts. ASSETS. £ s. d. LIABILITIES. £ l. d To Balance brought down 62 19 2 By Bills and Disbursements to Lady-day 76 14 2 To Half-year's Rent of Field (less Income Tax) 17 8 9 By Fees to Rector, one Quarter to Lady-day .. 13 2 6 To Extra Digging, &c. 8 12 0 By „ Clerk in Orders, one Quarter to Lady-day 5 9 6 By „ Nonconformist Minister, one Quarter to Lady-day 10 10 0 To Amount received for Right of Burial in Perpetuity 3 12 0 To Fees received for Rector 1 16 0 By Clerk's Salary, Wages, &c. 27 15 0 To „ „ Clerk in Orders 2 8 0 To „ „ Nonconformist Minister 3 16 0 £133 11 2 £100 11 11 Not*.—.Thera ramaint due to the Sun Life Assurance Society the Sum of £4,608 0». 6cf., Xh» Loan is repayable by various annual payments, the last of which is to be made on the being balance of Loan on the credit of the Poor Rates of £6,000, effected in April, 1874. 18th April, 1889. 100 101 PUBLIC BATHS AND WASH-HOUSES ACCOUNT. Year ended Lady-day 1877. RECEIPTS. EXPENDITURE. 1876. £ s. d. DAVIES STREET ESTABLISHMENT. March 25th. To CashBalance at Bankers', brought from last Account 932 9 7 1877. £ s. d. March 25th. By Cash paid Wages and Disbursements 840 7 4 1877, „ „ „ „ „ Rents, Rates, Taxes, &c. 446 7 5 March 25th. To Cash received, Receipts from the Establishment in Davies Street for the Year 1876-7:— „ „ „ „ „ Coals and Coke 470 13 0 „ „ „ „ „ Water Supply 234 8 6 „ „ „ „ „ Gas 68 19 5 108,795 Bathers 1,399 14 2 „ „ „ „ „ Soap and Soda 107 5 11 Soap sold to ditto 64 8 1 „ „ „ „ „ Tradesmen's Bills 260 5 10 25,269 Washers 826 7 3 2,428 7 5 Soap sold to ditto 20 4 11 BUCKINGHAM PALACE ROAD ESTABLISHMENT. Soda sold to ditto 18 0 0 March 25th. By Cash paid Wages and Disbursement 883 11 5 25,269 Washers 2,328 14 5 „ „ „ „ „ Rents, Rates, Taxes, &c. 376 19 8 „ „ To Cash received, Receipts from the Establishment in the Buckingham Palace Road, for the Year 1876-7:— „ „ „ „ „ Coals and Coke 505 5 5 „ „ „ „ „ Water Supply 287 11 11 „ „ „ „ „ Gas 74 9 7 „ „ „ „ „ Soap and Soda 111 12 7 139,867 Bathers 1,840 16 1 „ „ „ „ „ Tradesmen's Bills 366 3 5 Soap sold to ditto 105 19 4 2,605 14 1 24,115 Washers 763 3 3 GENERAL ACCOUNT. Soap sold to ditto 15 4 0 Soda sold to ditto 13 0 6 March 25th. By Cash, paid Part Principal of Loans paid off 1,150 0 0 2,738 3 2 „ „ To Cash received from Poor Rate, as per Estimate 2,283 16 8 „ „ „ Interest on Loans 444 9 1 „ „ To Cash received, Rents 100 0 0 „ „ „ Income Tax on Loans 4 3 10 „ „ „ Clerk's Salary 30 0 0 „ „ To Cash received, Miscellaneous Payments 4 18 4 „ „ „ Repayments to Poor Rate 500 0 0 2,128 12 11 £8,388 2 2 „ „ „ Balance in Bankers' Hands 1,225 7 9 £8,388 2 2 We, the undersigned, being Auditors of Accounts for the Parish of Saint 18th and 19th Vict., cap. 120, have carefully examined the foregoing Accounts Bankers' Book, Vouchers, and Receipts, for and in support of the same, and, allowance thereof. And the said Auditors have caused to be prepared the witness our hands this twenty-fourth day of May, one thousand eight hundred George, Hanover Square, elected under the Metropolis Management Act, of the said Parish for the Year ended Lady-day 1877 with the Account Books, finding the same correct and true, have signed the same in token of our foregoing Abstract of the said Accounts, which we also certify to be correct. As and seventy-seven. H. W. SCHNEIDER, JAMES HOLMES, CHAS. TURNER, ROBT. T. BENHAM, CHAS L. RAVEY, Auditors of Accounts. assets. £ s. d. LIABILITIES. £ s. d. 1877. 1877. March 26th. To Balance brought down 1,225 7 9 March 26th. By Wages and Disbursements 146 14 2 „ „ To Rents to Lady-Day 79 0 0 „ „ By Tradesmen's Bills, &c. 666 10 6 „ „ By Rents 175 4 5 £1,304 7 9 „ „ By Clerk's Salary 7 10 0 £995 19 1 102 THE VESTRY POOR RATE ACCOUNT FOR THE HALF-YEAR TO MICHAELMAS 1876. 1876. RECEIPTS. 1876. PAYMENTS. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. To Balance brought on 4,029 9 0 September 29th. By St. George's Union Board of Guardians 50,918 18 7 April 30th To Cash received, Balance of Rate 1875-6, and arrears— By Police Rate 12,543 18 6 Knightsbridge W ard (Mr. Lambert) 1,161 2 3 „ Commissioners of Baths and Wash-houses 800 0 0 Out ditto (Mr. Dyke) 2,625 19 8 „ Burial Board 483 19 10 In ditto (Mr. Knox) 7,495 3 2 „ Tradesmen's Bills 57 5 10 11,282 5 1 „ Collectors' Salaries 450 0 0 September 29th. To Cash received of Rate 1876-7, and Arrears of previous Year— „ Rent, Rates, and Taxes 24 13 11 „ Clerks'Salaries, to Midsummer, 1875 155 0 0 By Expenses, Election of Vestrymen 26 5 0 KnightsbridgeWard(Mr.Lambert) 16,013 13 6 „ Expenses in preparation of Valuation Lists 24 12 6 Out ditto (Mr. Dyke) 7,839 14 4 „ Law Charges, Brook House Appeal 106 14 10 In Wards (Mr. Knox) 23,635 5 6 47,488 13 4 To Half-year's Rent of Workhouses to Lady-day 1876 1,268 0 0 To Cash received. Contribution from Her Majesty's Treasury, in lieu of Rates 226 12 6 To Cash received, Commissioners of Inland Revenue, towards expenses of Brook House Appeal 53 7 5 Overdrawn, as per Banker's Pass Book 1,243 1 8 £65,591 9 0 £65,591 9 0 Abstract of Audited Account, J. H. SMITH, Vestry Clerk. 103 THE YESTRY POOR RATE ACCOUNT FOR THE HALF-YEAR TO LADY-DAY 1877. 1877. RECEIPTS. 1877. PAYMENTS. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. March 25th. To Cash received of Rate 1876-7, and Arrears of nrevious Rate— March 25th. By Balance brought forward 1,243 1 8 March 25th. By St. George's Union Board of Guardians 50,935 11 6 Knightsbridge do.(Mr. Lambert) 17,749 0 9 By Police Rate 10,000 0 0 Out ditto (Mr. Dyke) 16,347 2 2 „ Commissioners of Baths and Wash-houses 1,483 16 8 In ditto (Mr. Knox) 36,945 15 7 „ Expenses for preparing Voters' Lists 83 8 2 71,041 18 6 „ Rents, Rates, and Taxes 55 13 9 To cash received of the Guardians of St. George's Union, Rents of Workhouses to Michaelmas 1876 1,193 0 0 „ Collectors' Salaries 200 0 0 „ Stamping Rate Receipts for 1876-7 66 13 4 „ Clerks' Salaries to Christmas 1875 155 0 0 „ Printing and Stationery 15 18 8 To Cash received from the Commissioners of Baths and Washhouses 500 0 0 „ Expenses preparing Jurors' Lists 32 6 0 „ Expenses High Bailiff for Westminster in respect of Voters' Lists 202 0 6 To Cash received, Contribution from Her Majesty's Government in lieu of Rates 271 19 0 By Balance at Messrs. Drummonds' 8,533 7 3 £73,006 17 6 £73,006 17 6 Abstract of Audited Account, J. H. SMITH, Vestry Clerk. 104 105 ST. GEORGE'S UNION MIDDLESEX. STATEMENT of ACCOUNT, showing the Receipts, Expenditure Balances, and Liabilities for the Half-Year ended Michaelmas 1876. PARISHES. Balance in favour of each Parish at the commencement of this Half-Year. RECEIPTS. Balance against each Parish at the end of this Half-Year. TOTAL. Balance against each Parish at the commencement of this Half-Year. EXPENDITURE. Balance in favour of each Parish at the end of this Half-Year. TOTAL. Amount of the Rateable Value upon which the Contributions have been calculated. Particulars of Common Charges. Outstanding Liabilities of the Guardians at the end of the Half-Year. Contributions paid during this Half-Year. All other Receipts. Common Charges. Separate Charges. Workhouse Loan and Interest repaid. County Rate. Creditor's Name or Description. Description of the Claim. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. St. George, Hanover Square. - 50918 18 7 — 1998 2 3½ 52917 0 10½ 3021 8 10 39258 4 0 — 1262 13 9½ 9374 14 — 52917 0 10½ 1,505,397 0 0 In-Maintenance. 9895 '7 10½ Out-Relief (including Nonresident Relief and School Fees) 4189 4 2½ Paupers in Hospitals and Schools 422 18 9 Lunatics in Asylums, Registered Hospitals, or Licensed Houses 5327 10 10 Criminal Lunatics 18 4 0 Salaries or other Remuneration of Officers. 3462 15 8 St. Margaret and St. John, Westminster. 1323 9 0½ 22158 3 2 — — 23476 12 2¼ — 146 2 0¼ 282 4 11 471 18 10¼ 3261 6 4788 0 1¾ 23476 12 2¼ 562,654 0 0 Officers' Rations. 875 6 2½ Superannuation Allowances £136 0 0 Compensation Allowances £228 5 6 364 5 6 Extra Medical Fees 92 16 0 Emigration Expenses 11 5 1½ Vaccination do. 122 9 11 Registration do. 227 19 0 Legal do. 224 1 1 Other Charges, Viz.- Houseless Poor . 71 18 9 Metropolitan Asylum District 3998 0 9 West London School District 6080 16 2 Election of Guardians 29 16 0 St. Peter, Westminster. 10 9 3½ 68 0 9 — — 78 10 0¼ — 52 9 4¾ — 1 13 9¼ — 24 6 10¼ 78 10 0¼ 2012 0 0 Assessment Committee Expenses 1314 2 6 Removal of Paupers . 198 0 8 Metropolitan Common Poor Fund 3469 0 2 Furniture and Property 1176 10 10 Total of Liabilities 2712 1 3 General Repairs . 1216 12 10 Medicine and Medical Appliances . 348 10 2¾ Balance of Bills on Invoice Account included in Common Charges 6549 1 8 Dispensary Expenses(General) 79 3 4 Total £1333 18 3½ 73140 2 6 — 1998 2 3½ 76472 3 1 3021 8 10 53983 15 5 282 4 11 1736 6 5 12636 0 4812 7 0 76472 3 1 2,070,059 0 0 Dispensary at Stockbridge Terrace 382 11 8 £11943 5 4 Funeral Expenses 223 4 3 Rents, Rates, Taxes, &c. 2732 7 8 Liabilities at the end of the corresponding Half of last Year 13300 8 11 COMMON FUND RECEIPTS. Expenditure of corresponding Half of last Year 571 38 10 250 8 3 1253 12 10 9954 8 Rateable Value in corresponding Half of last Year 1 1,891,7 56 0 0 Printing, Stationery, and Office Expenses 447 3 0 Horse-hire and Provender 49 17 3 £ s. d. Total 57144 15 6 As compared with the Liabilities at the end of the corresponding Half of last Year Increase _ Paymaster-General — Parliamentary Grant on account of the Maintenance of Lunatics 3025 0 0 Farm Account, Kensington Workhouse—Balance to Credit 12 3 2 As compared with Expenditure of corresponding Half of last Year i - _ _ _ As compared with Rateable Value in corresponding Half of last Year Decrease 1357 3 7 Firewood Account, Fulham Road Workhouse—Balance to Credit 44 15 0 Baking Account, Mount Street Workhouse—Balance to Credit 70 1 5 Old Building Materials Account 9 0 6 (Signed) THOMAS WORLOCK, Clerk. 29th day of November, 1876. 3161 0 1 Increase. 31 16 8 482 13 7 2681 16 I Increase 178,303 0 0 Gross Total £79633 3 2 Decrease. 3154 10 5 _ _ — Decrease — (Signed) H. LLOYD ROBERTS, Auditor. 12th day of January, 1877. 106 107 ST. GEORGE'S UNION MIDDLESX STATEMENT of ACCOUNT, showing the Receipts, Expenditure Balances, and Liabilities, for the Half-Year ended Lady-day 1877. PARISHES. Balance in favour of each Parish at the commencement of this Half-Year. RECEIPTS. Balance against each Parish at the end of this HalfYear. TOTAL. Balance against each Parish at the commencement of this Half-Year. EXPENDITURE. Balance in favour of each Parish at the end of this HalfYear. TOTAL. Amount of the Rateable Value upon which the Contributions have been calculated. Particulars of Common Charges. Outstanding Liabilities of the Guardians at the end of the Half-Year. Contributions paid during this Half-Year. All other Receipts. Common Charges. Separate Charges. Workhouse Loan and Interest repaid County Rate. Creditor's Name or Description. Description of the Claim. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. St. George, Hanover Square In-Maintenance 12604 16 6 — 50985 11 6 — 2943 14 7 53879 6 1 1998 2 3½ 42069 12 4½ — 1999 6 2¾ 7812 5 — 53879 6 1 1,505,3 0 0 Out-Relief (including Nonresident Relief and Schoo Fees) 4042 16 1½ Paupers in Hospitals and Schools 320 8 2 Lunatics in Asylums, Registered Hospitals, or Licensed Houses . 5180 11 6 St. Margaret & St. John, Westminster., 4788 0 1| 19026 8 1 — — 28814 8 2¾ — 15723 17 10¼ 15 17 10 74 7 5 2¾ 2717 15 4609 12 1¾ 28814 8 2¾ 562,6 54 0 0 Criminal Lunatics 18 8 0 Salaries or other Remuneration of Officers 3263 12 10 Officers' Rations 1081 3 10½ Superannuation Allowances £136 0 0 Compensation Allowances 359 5 0 495 5 0 Extra Medical Fees 106 0 0 Vaccination „ 109 14 2 Registration „ 216 0 0 Legal Expenses 100 12 5 Other Charges,viz.- St. Peter, Westminster. 24 6 10¼ 6 8 0 9 — — 92 7 7¼ — 56 4 6½ — 2 18 5½ - 83 9 7¼ 92 7 7¾ 2012 0 0 Metropolitan Asylum District 8451 5 10 West London School District 5572 8 10 Boarding-out of Pauper Children 369 0 8 Total of Liabilities 2987 5 3 Assessment Committee Expenses 8 0 6 Balance of Bills on Invoice Account included in Common Charges 8174 10 1 Removal of Paupers 218 13 9 Metropolitan Common Poor Fund 11517 13 7 Total £4812 7 0 70030 0 4 — 2943 14 7 77786 1 11 1998 2 3½ 57849 14 9 15 17 10 2749 4 11 10530 0 0 4643 1 18¼ 77786 1 11 2,070,059 0 0 Furniture and Property 1211 15 10 £13562 14 5 General Repairs 942 5 5 Medicines and Medical and Surgical Appliances 431 12 8¾ COMMON FUND RECEIPTS. Rateable Value in corresponding Half of last Year 1,913,217 0 0 Dispensarry Expenses 58 14 7 Liabilities at the end of the corresponding Half of last Year 14323 10 8 Funeral Expenses 261 0 8 Rents, Rates, Taxes, &c. 2293 5 10 £ s. d. Expenditure of corresponding Half of last Year 58293 11 8½ 19 18 11 1760 4 1 11945 0 6 Printing, Stationery, and Office Expenses. 455 5 6½ Parliamentary Grant on account of Salaries of Medical Officers, &c. 1162 11 8 Horse Hire and Provender 38 1 6 As compared with th Liabilities at the end the corresponding Ha of last Year Increase — Houseless Poor 167 7 11½ Ditto, Repayment on account of Fees paid to Registrars of Births and Deaths 22 10 0 Total £59581 1 9½ Decrease 760 16 3 Ditto, Proportion of Amount received by the Managers of the Metropolitan Asylum District for Salaries of Medical Officers, &c. 175 9 2 As compared with Expenditure of corresponding Half of last Year — — — — As compared with Rateable Value in corresponding Half of last Year Farm Account, Kensington Workhouse—Amount to Credit . 33 17 8 Firewood Account, Fulham Road Workhouse—Amount to Credit 57 19 4½ Baking Account, Mount Street Workhouse—Amount to Credit 258 19 2 1681 7 0½ Increase 156,842 0 0 (Signed) THOMAS WORLOCK, Clerk. 2nd day of June, 1877. Gross Total £79467 8 11½ Increase — — 989 0 10 — (Signed) H. LLOYD ROBERTS, Auditor. 19th day of June, 1877. Decrease 443 16 11½ 4 1 1 — 1415 0 1 Decrease — 108 109 LATE GROSVENOR PLACE DISTRICT DEBT RATE ACCOUNT. 1876-7. RECEIPTS. £ s. d. 1876-7 PAYMENTS. £ s. d. April 30 To Balance brought forward due to this Account 322 16 5½ Feb. 13 By Cash paid the Alliance Assurance Society, One Year's Annuity due on the 13th February, less Income Tax deducted 1,192 16 4 „ „ To Cash received of Debt Rate made by the Vestry on 30th March, 1876, at One Halfpenny in the Pound upon the Grosvenor Place District 944 0 2 „ „ By Cash paid Income Tax deducted from above 7 3 8 „ „ To Arrears of former Rate collected 2 3 11½ April 30 By Balance due to this Account, included in General Management Account 69 0 7 £1,269 0 7 £1,269 0 7 Note.—This Debt Rate is to meet an Annuity of £1,200 due to the Alliance Grosvenor Place J. H. SMITH, Vestry Clerk. Assurance Society (terminating in 1898) contracted by the Trustees of the late District. GROSVENOR SQUARE DEBT RATE ACCOUNT. 1876-7. RECEIPTS. £ s. d. 1876-7. PAYMENTS. £ s. d. April 30 To Balance brought forward due to this Account 43 2 5½ June 1 By Cash paid the Liverpool, London, and Globe Insurance Company, part of Principal due this day on account of the Mortgage Debt of £8,000 302 15 2 „ To Cash received of Debt Rate of Three Pence in the Pound, made by the Vestry on the 30th March, 1876, on Grosvenor Square 530 2 4¾ „ „ By Half-Year's Interest due this day on account of ditto, less Income Tax deducted 124 3 2 Dec. 1 By Half-Year's Interest due this day on account of ditto, less Income Tax deducted 116 13 11 April 30 By Income Tax 2 18 7 „ „ By Collector, portion of Salary 4 0 0 „ „ By Balance due to this Account, included in General Management Account 22 19 0 £573 4 10 £573 4 10 HANOVER SQUARE ADDITIONAL RATE ACCOUNT. 1876-7. RECEIPTS. £ 8. d. 1876-7. PAYMENTS. £ 8. d. April 30 To Cash received of Additional Rate of Irf. in the pound made by the Vestry on 30th March, 1876, on Hanover Square, for keeping the enclosed Garden in repair .. 41 7 8 Jan. 4 By Cash paid the Committee of Management for keeping in order the Garden of Hanover Square, on account of the extra Rate for the Year ending Lady-day 1877 .. 18 ] 15 0 June 7 Ditto ditto Balance of Rate .. 21 0 0 „ „ By Expenses of Collection 1 . 12 8 £41 7 8 £41 7 8 J. H. SMITH, Vestry Clerk. J. H. SMITH, Vestry Clerk. APPENDICES. 112 PARISH OF ST. GEORGE, HANOVER SQUARE. [APPENDIX N0. 1. The Attendances of Vestrymen at Vestries and Committee Meetings, Between the 1st June, 1876, and the 15th May, 1877. Name of Vestrymen. Vestry Meetings. Committee and other Meetings. Works. Finance. Parliamentary. Special. Burial Board. Bath and Wash-hse. Sub-Committees. Total Attendances. Number of Meetings held 24 44 25 5 23 13 12 154 41 Dover Ward. Ogilvy, Colonel Thomas 13 22 ... ... ... ... ... 6 41 Bubb, George * ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Cooper, Septimus 7 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 7 Burden, Alfred 8 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 8 Shelley, Frederick 2 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2 Brown, William Charles 11 2 ... ... ... ... ... 1 14 Conduit Ward. Napier, William Donald 6 ... ... ... 2 ... ... 1 9 Miles, Alfred Webb 15 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 15 Brewer, Dr. William 18 ... ... ... 7 ... ... ... 25 Evans, John Edward 18 22 ... ... 10 10 ... 22 97 Cremer, George Frederick 16 13 ... 4 3 ... ... 15 51 Hancock, Mortimer 4 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 4 Leslie, John 20 ... ... 1 14 ... ... ... 35 Jones, Evan B. 7 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 7 Heming, Joseph 11 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 11 Grosvenor Ward. Morris, Francis 23 21 ... 3 ... 8 ... 9 64 Hayter, Colonel Arthur D. 5 ... ... 2 ... ... ... ... 7 Atkins, Richard 13 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 13 Lewis, Thomas 24 ... ... ... 3 ... ... 5 56 Hall, Robert 15 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 15 Morris, John 21 44 ... ... 4 ... ... 75 144 FitzRoy, Lord Frederick 10 17 ... 2 4 ... ... 18 51 Benwell, Henry James 15 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 15 Duncombe, Adml. Hon. Arthur. 11 ... ... 1 1 1 ... ... 14 Bonnett, Charles W. 23 32 ... ... 3 ... ... 20 78 Lyon, Major William 13 ... ... ... 2 ... ... 1 16 Sparrow, John James 6 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 6 Amherst, The Earl 3 8 ... ... ... ... ... 1 12 James, William Henry 24 ... 24 1 2 ... 4 ... 55 Schulhof, Dr. Maurice 22 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 22 Oyler, Henry 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 Brook Ward. Hamilton, Alexander Baillie * ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Seymour, Hugh Horatio 19 ... ... 2 2 10 2 ... 35 Finch, John 19 6 9 ... 8 6 ... 13 61 Claridge, William 20 ... 15 1 3 ... ... ... 39 Pickett, Montague Joseph 16 ... 16 ... ... ... ... ... 32 Weir, William 24 43 23 ... ... ... ... 109 199 Barlow, Jonathan 23 24 5 ... ... 12 ... 39 103 Lindsay, Hugh Barlow 16 ... ... 5 ... ... ... ... 21 Farrer, William James 14 ... ... 1 3 ... ... ... 18 Linscott. Thomas Burrow 13 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 13 Shaw, John 18 17 ... ... ... ... ... 7 42 Curzon Ward. Smith, John 21 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 21 Charles, Edmund 18 33 ... ... ... ... ... 24 75 Goddard, Edward 19 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 31 Smith, William 23 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 23 Wootton, Philip 13 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 13 Deedes, Henry 15 ... ... ... 10 ... ... ... 25 Paget, Lord George 6 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 6 Chapman, James 23 38 ... ... ... ... ... 38 99 Dowdeswell, John Edward 21 29 ... ... 5 ... ... 10 65 Fleming, Robert 20 14 ... 2 2 ... ... 1 39 Chapman, John 14 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 14 Sutton, William 15 ... ... ... ... ... ... 15 Note.—* denotes Vestrymen on Committees who have not attended. 113 Appendix No. 1.] PARISH OF ST. GEORGE, HANOVER SQUARE. The Attendances of Vestrymen at Vestries and Committee Meetings, Between the 1st June, 1876, and the 15th May, 1877. Name of Vestrymen. Vestry Meetings. Committee and other Meetings. Total Attendances. Works. Finance. Parliamentary. Special. Burial Board. Bath and Wash-hse. Sub-Committees. Number of Meetings held 24 44 25 5 23 13 12 154 Knightsbridge Ward. Acton, Thomas 4 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 4 Clement, Hampden 19 27 ... ... 3 ... ... 37 89 Garrould, John 13 24 ... ... ... ... ... 23 60 Johnson, Edmund C. 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 Pike, James Palmer 2 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2 Scott, Col. the Hon. C. Grantham 12 19 13 3 4 ... ... 26 77 Stopford, James Sydney 8 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 8 Baring, Colonel Charles 5 18 ... ... ... ... ... 1 24 Blakiston, Mathew 16 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 16 Codrington,Gen.SirW.J.,G.C.B. 16 21 ... ... ... 2 ... 15 54 Butler, Hon. Charles Lennox 6 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 6 Adshead, William 10 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 10 Fearis, George 20 25 ... ... ... ... ... 27 72 Luff, George 11 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 11 Hoby, John 21 21 6 ... ... ... 6 3 57 Harrison, Richard 21 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 21 Walker, William 22 29 ... ... 2 ... 10 32 95 Codrington, Adm. Sir H. John 17 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 17 Vane, Henry Morgan 18 ... ... ... 1 ... 8 ... 28 Love, Dr. James 10 8 ... ... ... 1 3 8 30 Skinner, William 16 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 16 King, Henry Arthur 6 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 6 Winter, John 12 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 12 Thorn, Thomas Akers 15 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 15 Out Ward. Berry, George 24 ... 17 ... 19 11 ... 11 85 King, Admiral Sir G. St. Vincent 6 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 6 Berry, Thomas Darby 9 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 9 Fortescue, Francis 6 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 6 Dovey, John 21 26 12 1 ... ... ... 8 68 Tredwen, Richard 14 26 ... ... ... ... ... 29 69 Carroway, Alfred 8 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 8 Field, Charles Henry 16 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 16 Southon, Alfred 24 40 ... ... ... ... ... 50 114 Thomson, Alfred 10 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 10 Power, B. M. 9 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 9 Hutchinson, Victor Bury 2 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2 Cove, Herbert James 22 36 8 ... 1 ... ... 51 118 Taylor, Walter 16 1 3 ... ... ... ... ... 20 Barker, Thomas 12 28 ... ... ... 3 ... 32 75 Spicer, Richard 11 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 11 Green, Colonel Malcolm 21 ... ... ... ... ... 11 ... 32 Belham, Stephen 15 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 15 Smith, George Thomas 14 22 ... ... ... ... ... 19 55 Tapp, John 13 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 13 Parker, James 11 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 11 Mitchell, William Chinnery 17 26 ... ... ... 2 7 11 63 Nugent, Hon. George G. 11 17 ... ... ... ... ... 5 33 Batt, George 13 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 13 Eastgate, Thomas 2 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2 McMullen, Alexander 4 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 4 Jacob, Charles 10 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 10 Goodwin, Thomas 9 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 9 Read, Francis 5 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 5 Bennett, Joseph 12 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 12 Note.—* denotes Vestrymen on Committees who have not attended. H 114 APPENDIX No. 2. 1877. LIST OF VESTRYMEN AND AUDITORS OF ACCOUNTS. Showing the years in which the Vestrymen go out of Office. The Rev. Edw. Capel Cure, M.A., Rector, 15, Grosvenor-street The Lord Fredk. FitzRoy, 23, Grosvenor-street ChurchHugh Horatio Seymour, Esq., 30, Upper Brook-st. wardens. DOVER WARD. 1878 Mr. Septimus Cooper, 58, Piccadilly Mr. Alfred Burden, 51, Conduit-street 1879 Mr. Frederick Shelly, 8 Albemarle-street Mr. Wm. Chas. Brown, 13, New Bond-street 1880 Mr. Louis Burgoyne Pillin, 14, Conduit-street Colonel Thomas W. Ogilvy, 23, Grafton-street CONDUIT WARD. 1878 Mr. John Edward Evans, 13, North Audley-street Mr. George Frederick Cremer, 22, Conduit-street Captain Mortimer Hancock, 39, Bruton-street 1879 John Leslie, Esq., 60, Conduit-street Evan Jones, Esq., 15, Hanover-street Mr. Joseph Heming, 28, Conduit-street 1880 Dr. William Brewer, 21, George-street, Hanover-square Donald Napier, Esq., 22, George-street, Hanover-square Mr. Joseph Pyke, 138, New Bond-street 115 [Appendix No. 2. GROSVENOR WARD. 1878 Mr. Robert Hall, 63, South Audley-street Mr. John Morris, 86, Park-street The Lord Frederick FitzRoy, 23, Grosvenor-street Mr. Henry Jas. Benwell, 8, Charles-street, Grosvenor-sq. 1879 Admiral Hon. Arthur Duncombe, 2 Upper Grosvenor-st. Mr. Charles W. Bonnett, 6, Farm-street Major William Lyon, 31, South-street Mr. John James Sparrow, 12, Grosvenor-mews 1880 Mr. Richard Atkins, 46, Albemarle-street Mr. Francis Morris, 21, Hyde Park-place Mr. Thomas Lewis, 34, Mount-street Colonel Arthur D. Hayter, M.P., 76, Grosvenor-street BROOK WARD. 1878 Hugh Horatio Seymour, Esq., 30, Upper Brook-street Mr. John Finch, 17, Duke-street Mr. William Claridge, 51, Brook-street Mr. Montague Joseph Pickett, 265, Oxford-street Mr. William Weir, 33, South Audley-street 1879 Mr. Jonathan Barlow, 6, Queen-street, Oxford-street Hugh Barlow Lindsay, Esq., 13, Charles-st., Berkeley-sq. William James Farrer, Esq., 18, Upper Brook-street Mr. Thomas Burrow Linscott, 274, Oxford-street Mr. John Shaw, 256, Oxford-street 1880 The Earl Amherst, 43, Grosvenor-square Mr. William Henry James, 271, Oxford-street Mr. Edward Haskell, 280, Oxford-street Mr. Clifford Probyn, 55, Grosvenor-street Dr. Maurice Schulhof, 46, Brook-street CURZON WARD. 1878 Mr. Philip Wootten, 52, Clarges-street Henry Deedes, Esq., 7, Queen-street, May Fair Lord George Paget, 1, Farm-street Mr. James Chapman, 6, Half Moon-street Appendix No. 2.] 116 1879 Mr. John Edward Dowdeswell, 30, Half Moon-street Mr. Robert Fleming. 9 & 10, Half Moon-street Mr. John Chapman, 17, Half Moon-street Mr. William Sutton, 16, Chapel-street, May-Fair 1880 Mr. Edmund Charles, 25, Clarges-street Mr. John Smith, 21, Half Moon-street Mr. William Smith, 28, Clarges street Mr. Edward Goddard, 8, Market-street KNIGHTSBRIDGE WARD. 1878 General Sir. W. John Codrington, G.C.B., 110, Eaton-sq. Hon. Charles Lennox Butler, 5, Belgrave-square Mr. William Adshead. 34, Elizabeth-street Mr. George Fearis, 42, Pimlieo-road Mr. George Luff, 42, Elizabeth-street Mr. John Hoby, 35, Chapel-street Mr. Richard Harrison, 21, Coleshill-street Mr. William Walker, 190 & 192, Ebury-street Admiral Sir. H. John Codrington, K.C.B., 112, Eaton-sq. 1879 Henry Morgan Vane, Esq., 74, Eaton-place Mr. Wm. Bowron, 60, Pimlico-road Mr. Wm. Skinner, 64, Pimlico-road Mr. Hy. Arthur King, 52, Pimlico-road Mr. John Winter, 5, Knightsbridge Mr. Thomas Akers Thorn, 20, Chester-terrace Mr. George Berry, 8a, Motcomb-street Admiral Sir. G. St Vincent King, K.C.B., 5, Eaton-terrace Mr. Thomas Darby Berry, 1, Halkin-street 1880 Hampden Clement. Esq., 20, Wilton-crescent Colonel Hon. Charles G. Scott, 79, Eaton-square Colonel Charles Baring, 36, Wilton-place Matthew Blakiston, Esq., 18, Wilton-crescent Thomas Percival Beckwith, Esq., 14, Eaton-place Henry Hardcastle, Esq., 4, Chesham-street Dr. James Love, 85, Pimlico-road James Sydney Stopford, Esq., 3 Halkin-place Mr. George Walker, 73, Ebury-street 117 [Appendix No. 2. OUT WARD 1878 Mr. Herbert James Cove, 88, Cambridge-street Walter Taylor, Esq., Ranelagh-road Thomas Barker, Esq., 11, Eceleston-square Richard Spicer, Esq., 3, Chesham-place Colonel Malcolm Green, 78, St. George's-road Mr. Stephen Belham, 129, Buckingham Palace-road Mr. George Thomas Smith, 21, Warwick-street Mr. John Tapp, 176, Cambridge-street Mr. James Parker, 308, Vauxhall Bridge-road 1879 Wm. Chinnery Mitchell, Esq., 140, Warwick-street Hon. George G. Nugent, 31, St. George's-road Mr. George Batt, 15. Clarendon-street Mr. Thomas Eastgate, 33, Buckingham Palace-road Mr. Alex. McMullen, 187, Lupus-street Mr. Richd. Tredwen, 40, Claverton-street Mr. Thomas Goodwin, 32, Buckingham Palace-road Mr. Francis Read, 60, Charlwood-street West Joseph Bennett, Esq., 70, Eccleston-square 1880 Mr. Alfred Carroway, 2, Denbigh-street Mr. John Dovey, 12, Stanley-street Mr. Charles Henry Field, 40, Warwick-street. Francis Fortescue, Esq., 75, Eaton-place Mr. Alfred Southon, 5, Tachbrook-street Mr. Alfred Thomson, 64, Lupus-street Mr. Benjamin Abbott, 26, Lupus-street Mr. Howard Gantlett, 48, Winchester-street Mr. John Roberts, 74, Lupus-street AUDITORS OF ACCOUNTS. Mr. Jas. Holmes, 2, Charles-street, Grosvenor-square Mr. Henry Oyler, 62, Davies-street Mr. Charles Earle, 13, Market-street Hy. Wm. Schneider, Esq., 67, Eaton-square Mr. Henry James Johnson, 56, Lupus-street Appendix No. 3.] 118 APPENDIX No. 3. SAINT GEORGE'S UNION. 1877. Names and Addresses of Elected Guardians. Parish of Saint George, Hanover Square. DOVER WARD. Colonel Thomas Wedderburn Ogilvy, 23, Grafton-street, Bond-street, W. CONDUIT WARD. William Alexandor Baillie Hamilton, Esq., 22, Green-street, W. GROSVENOR WARD. Lieut-Colonel Lord Frederick Fitz Roy, 23, Grosvenorstreet, W. Mr. Francis Morris, 21, Hyde-park-place, W. BROOK WARD. Mr. Edward Mc Mullen Burden, 38, Duke-street, Grosvenorsquare, W. William Ellice, Esq., 27, Upper Brook-street, Grosvenorsquare, W. CURZON WARD. Mr. Henry Charles Deedes, 7, Queen-street, Mayfair, W. Mr. Robert Fleming, 9 & 10, Half-moon-street, Mayfair, W. KNIGHTSBRIDGE WARD. Mr. George Berry, 8a, Motcombe-street, Belgrave-sq., S.W. Colonel Francis Haygarth, 24, Wilton-crescent, S.W. First Vice-Chairman. Captain Edwin Augustus Porcher, R.N., 60, Chester-sq., S.W. Colonel the Hon. Charles Grantham Scott, 79, Eaton-sq., S.W. 119 [Appendix No. 3. OUT WARD. Colonel the Hon. Algernon Sydney Annesley, 57, Belgraveroad, S.W. Mr. John Dovey, 12, Stanley-street, Pimlico, S.W. Henry Hardcastle, Esq., 4, Chesham-st., Belgrave-sq., S.W. Captain Richard William Spicer, 3, Chesham-place, Belgravesquare, S.W. Parishes of Saint Margaret and Saint John, Westminster. SAINT MARGARET WARD. Sir Rutherford Alcock, K.C.B., 14, Great Queen-street, S.W. Mr. John Irving Courtenay, 1, Princes-st., Westminster, S.W. Mr. William Sims Pratten, 1, Princes-st., Westminster, S.W. Mr. Thomas John White, 14, Parliament-street, S.W. KN1GHTSBRIDGE WARD. Edward Davidson Doughty, Esq., M.R.C.S.,4, William-st., S.W. William Needham, Esq., 34, Montpelier square, S.W. Second Vice-Chairman. John Reginald Yorke, Esq., M.P., 55, Rutland Gate, S.W. SAINT JOHN WARD. Zephaniah Deacon Berry, Esq., 16, Regency-street, Westminster, S.W. Mr. Henry Bingley, Ponsonby-street, Millbank, S.W. Mr. John Coppen, 42, Marsham-street, Westminster, S.W. Mr. John Thomas Fenn, 83 & 85, Regency-st., Westminster, S.W. The Rev. Arthur George Warner, St. Mary's Parsonage, Vincent-square, S.W. Parish of the Close of the Collegiate Church of Saint Peter, Westminster. John Charles Thynne, Esq., Little Cloisters, Westminster Abbey, S.W. 120 APPENDIX NO. 4.] SUMMARY OF RATES (EXCLUSIVE OF BOUNTIES) MADE 25th MARCH, 1876. CAUSE OF RATES UNCOLLECTED. WARDS. Rates Assessed at Lady-day 1876, with additions on Provisional Valuation List. Collected. Uncollected. Poverty. Empty Houses not Collectable. Abatements on Provisional Valuation Lists. Arrears to carry forward, 1876 to 1877. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. IN 118,328 12 7 113,468 7 10 4,860 4 9 - 4,161 4 5½ 32 2 10 666 17 KNIGHTSBRIDGE. 60,690 18 4½ 58,145 14 4½ 2,545 4 0 - 2,450 0 9½ 8 6 10 86 16 4½ OUT 48,204 16 1½ 45,976 9 8¾ 2,228 6 4¾ 3 12 10 1,290 3 0¾ 27 18 3 906 12 3 £227,224 7 l 217,590 11½ 11¼ 9,633 15 1¾ 3 12 10 7,901 8 3¾ 68 7 11 1,660 6 1 Arrears Received 773 8 3 218,364 0 2¼ 121 Appendix No. 4.] SUMMARY OF METROPOLITAN CONSOLIDATED RATE (EXCLUSIVE OF BOUNTIES) MADE 21ST SEPTEMBER, 1876. CAUSE OF RATES UNCOLLECTED. WARDS. Rate assessed at 21 September, 1876, with additions on Provisional Valuation List. Collected. Uncollected. Poverty. Empty Houses not Collectable. Abatements on Provisional Valuation Lists. Arrears to carry forward. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. IN 12,944 5 8 12,494 3 4 450 2 4 — 381 2 4 2 19 4 66 0 8 KNIGHTSBRIDGE. 6,458 1 8 6,176 17 8 281 4 0 — 270 11 10 1 13 4 8 18 10 OUT 5,743 8 8 5,420 17 4 322 11 4 — 150 16 6 1 5 0 170 9 10 25,145 16 0 24,091 18 4 1,053 17 8 — 802 10 8 5 17 8 245 9 4 122 Appendix No. 5.] ST. GEORGE, HANOVER SQUARE. RETURN relating to the Expenditure by the Burial Board. YEARS. Amount received by Burial Board from Poor Rate. Amount received by Burial Board out of Rents of Bayswater Property. Paid by Burial Board for redemption of Capital. Paid by Burial Board for Interest of Money. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. 1853-4 - - - 233 0 0 1854-5 - - 600 0 0 659 11 6 1855-6 3,192 10 0 29 3 10 Ground Rents. 1,050 0 0 966 18 5 1856-7 2,500 0 0 28 18 8 1,050 0 0 836 5 0 1857-8 2,150 0 0 28 18 8 1,050 0 0 789 15 0 1858-9 2,050 0 0 30 1 11 1,050 0 0 743 0 0 1859-60 2,100 0 0 30 7 1 1,050 0 0 696 15 0 1860-1 2,000 0 0 29 16 9 1,050 0 0 650 5 0 1861-2 1,950 0 0 29 14 2 1,050 0 0 603 10 0 1862-3 1,900 0 0 29 16 9 1,050 0 0 557 10 0 1863-4 1,950 0 0 29 16 9 1,050 0 0 510 15 0 1864-5 1,870 0 0 30 1 10 1,050 0 0 464 5 0 1865-6 1,800 0 0 30 4 7 1,050 0 0 417 15 0 1866-7 1,750 0 0 - 1,050 0 0 371 5 0 1867-8 1,400 0 0 300 0 0 1,050 0 0 324 15 0 1868-9 - 1,700 0 0 1,050 0 0 278 4 0 1869-70 - 1,700 0 0 1,050 0 0 231 15 0 1870-1 300 0 0 1,200 0 0 1,050 0 0 181 17 4 1871-2 1,188 15 0 - 1,050 0 0 138 15 0 1872-3 1,107 15 0 - 1,050 0 0 92 5 0 1873-4 1,084 0 0 - 1,050 0 0 45 15 0 1874-5 461 5 0 - 450 0 0 11 5 o 1874-5 New Loan Account - - 112 10 0 1875-6 240 11 6 - 240 11 6 219 11 9 1876 -7 483 19 10 - 251 8 0 208 10 5 £ 31,478 16 4 5,227 1 0 21,491 19 6 10.315 14 2 Loans of 1853 and 1854, £27,000, paid off May 1873 and May 1874. Further loan of £5,000, repayable in 15 years, raised in April 1874, paid off £491 19s. 6d. March, 1877. J. H. SMITH, Clerk to the Board. Appendix No. 6.] ST. GEORGE, HANOVER SQUARE. RETURN of the Number of Interments in the Cemetery at Hanwell in every year since the formation of the Burial Board, giving separately the number of Parishioners, Non-Parishioners, and Paupers. Year. Parishioners. Non-Parishioners. Paupers. Total. 1854 24 1 40 65 1855 88 2 195 285 18565 08 4 210 312 1857 89 12 227 328 1858 106 9 216 331 1859 105 20 208 333 1860 122 17 213 352 1861 147 16 249 412 1862 104 21 254 379 1863 140 18 211 369 1864 152 21 249 422 1865 166 42 242 450 1866 164 60 238 462 1867 164 137 229 530 1868 161 193 243 597 1869 166 331 257 754 1870 166 173 247 586 1871 273 420 198 891 1872 353 852 154 1359 1873 285 1129 72 1486 1874 272 965 - 1237 1875 369 975 - 1344 1876 321 871 - 1192 Total 4035 6289 4152 14,476 June 1877 WILLIAM MITCHELL, Manager, Cemetery, Hanwell. 123 124 Appendix No. 7.] ST. GEORGE, HANOVER SQUARE. RETURN relating to the Expenditure on the Baths and Wash-houses, giving the several years under the different columns, and the sum of money which will be required to redeem the remainder of the borrowed Capital, pay the Interest thereof, and the Rent of the Premises until the Leases expire. YEARS. Amount received by Commissioners from Poor Rate. Paid for Redemption of Capital. Paid for Interest of Money. Paid for Rent of Premises. Paid back in aid of Poor Rate. Amounts received for Premises Let off. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d, £ s. d. £ s. d. 1855 3,196 18 4 1,066 13 4 1,446 0 0 684 5 0 - 72 16 2 1856 3,353 16 8 1,150 0 0 1,519 11 8 684 5 0 - 87 9 3 1857 3,300 6 8 1,150 0 0 1,466 1 8 684 5 0 - 50 18 0 1858 3,246 16 8 1,150 0 0 1,412 11 8 684 5 0 - 89 5 2 1859 3,193 6 8 1,150 0 0 1,359 1 8 684 5 0 - 78 0 0 1860 3,139 16 8 1,150 0 0 1,305 11 8 684 5 0 - 90 2 1 1861 3,086 6 8 1,150 0 0 1,252 1 8 684 5 0 - 81 14 6 1862 3,032 16 8 1,150 0 0 1,198 11 8 684 5 0 - 104 5 2 1863 2,979 6 8 1,150 0 0 1.145 1 8 684 5 0 - 86 19 2 1864 2,425 16 8 1 150 0 0 1,091 11 8 684 5 0 - 102 17 0 1865 1,872 6 8 1,150 0 0 1,038 1 8 684 5 0 1,000 0 0 81 10 0 1866 1,818 16 8 1,150 0 0 984 11 8 684 5 0 1,000 0 0 98 17 6 1867 2,765 6 8 1,150 0 0 931 1 8 684 5 0 - 96 18 3 1868 2,711 16 8 1,150 0 0 877 11 8 684 5 0 - 103 14 9 1869 2,658 6 8 1,150 0 0 824 1 8 684 5 0 1,000 0 0 117 8 9 1870 2,604 16 8 1,150 0 0 770 11 8 684 5 0 1,000 0 0 117 9 5 1871 2,551 6 8 1,150 0 0 717 1 8 684 5 0 - 103 15 9 1872 2,497 16 8 1,150 0 0 663 11 8 684t 5 0 - 116 9 5 1873 2,444 6 8 1,150 0 0 610 1 8 684 5 0 500 0 0 109 4 9 1874 2.390 16 8 1,150 0 0 550 19 8 513 3 9 - 64 15 6 1875 2,337 6 8 1,150 0 0 498 18 1 684 5 0 1,100 0 0 92 5 6 1876 2,283 16 8 1,150 0 0 444 9 1 684 5 0 500 0 0 100 0 0 59,892 8 4 25,216 13 4 22,107 6 10 14,882 8 9 6,100 0 0 2,046 16 1 Sum required to pay off remainder at borrowed Amount to be paid for Amount of Interest Amount to be paid for Capital, Interest, and Rents up to the year 1886. redemption of Capital. to be paid on Debt. Rents up to 1886. Total 15,393 7 9 9,283 6 8 1,690 14 10 4,419 6 3 Dates when the Loans will be paid off.—Four Loans amounting to £34,500 will be cleared off as follows:—First Loan of £12,000 in June 1883; Second Loan of £12,000 in June 1884; Third Loan of .£8,000 in February 1885; and the Fourth Loan of £2,500 in August 1885. Dates of the expiration of the Leases of the Premises.—The Lease of the Premises in Davies-street will expire at Lady-day 1881; the Lease of the Premises in Buckingham-palace-road will expire at Lady-day 1886. FREDERICK HORACE DOGGETT, Clerk to the Commissioners. 125 Appendix No. 8.] PARISH OF SAINT GEORGE, HANOVER SQUARE. STATEMENT OF THE ACCOUNTS OF THE CHARITIES CALLED WILKINS, TEAGE, TERWIN, AND H.R.H. THE DUCHESS OF GLOUCESTER, For the Year ending the 31s£ day of December, 1876. Description of Stocks in the Public Funds. Amount. Gross Yearly Income. Names and Descriptions of Persons in whose names invested. £ S. d. £ S. d. Charity Commissioners of England. Wilkins and Teage (Consols) 160 0 0 4 16 0 253 17 7 7 12 4 H.R.H. The Duchess of Gloucester (Consols) 253 17 7 7 12 4 Terwin (Consols) 350 0 0 10 10 0 RECEIPTS. PAYMENTS. 1876. £ s. d. 1876. £ s. d. Jan. 1. Balance in favour of the Charity at the commencement of the Account 18 10 11 Mar. 10. By Amount handed over to Rev. Brymer Belcher for distribution in district formerly the Neat House Estate, as per Mr. Terwin's bequest 10 10 0 ,, 12. To Cash of Charity Commissioners. Be Terwin 10 10 0 „ ,, To Cash of Charity Commissioners, Be Wilkins and Teage 4 16 0 June 29. By Amount distributed by Rector and Churchwardens 18 9 10 July 12. To Cash of Charity Commissioners, Be Duchebs of Gloucester 7 12 4 Dec. 31. By Balance to carry forward in hands of Messrs. Herries & Co. 20 1 9 „ „ Ditto, ditto 7 12 4 £49 1 7 £49 1 7 Signed 14th July, 1877. FREDK. FITZROY, HUGH H. SEYMOUR, Churchwarden,. 126 Appendix NO. 9.] APPLICATIONS TO METROPOLITAN BOARD OF WORKS. Situation. Nature of Application. Opinion of Vestry. Decision of Metropolitan Board. Application for permission 18 & 19, South Audley-street To erect projecting balcony No objection Granted. 1a, Wilton-place „ do. covered way, partly enclosed Objectionable Refused. 1, Belgrave-square . „ do. projecting balcony and two bay windows. No objection Granted. 7, Dean-street, side of „ do. two projecting bay windows No opinion to offer, as the yard into which it is proposed to project the windows is private property Refused. 39, Lower Belgrave-street „ do. one-storey addition to shop Objectionable Granted. 20, Park-street ,, do. projecting hood over doorway No objection Do. 132, New Bond-street, and in mews at rear of same „ do art galleries Do. Do. 18, Grafton-street „ do. projecting bay window to proposed addition to the premises. Do. Do. 7a, Eaton-row ., bring forward the front to the extent of 9 inches. Objectionable Refused. 60, Grosvenor-street „ project balcony No objection Granted. 1A, Wilton-place „ do. glazed porch Do. Do. 1, Belgrave-square „ extend balcony Do. Do. 64, New Bond-street „ project bay fronting on Brookstreet. Do. Do. 13, Grosvenor-square „ enclose portico with plate glass Objectionable Refused. 127 Appendix No. 9.] Applications to Metropolitan Board of Works—continued. Situation. Nature of Application. Opinion of Vestry. Decision of Metropolitan Board. Application for permission 35, Belgrave-square To enclose portico Objectionable Granted. 1 do. „ erect new portico in place of existing one. No objection upon condition that the portico be made and kept open both at the sides and in front. Granted. 45, Belgrave-square „ erect colonnade, with verandah Objectionable Do. 33,Charles-street, Berkeley-square „ extend balcony No objection Do. 19, Grosvenor-gardens „ erect projecting portico Do. Do. 35, Belgrave-square ,, enclose ground floor front window No opinion to offer, as the work is already done- Do Grosvenor Gallery, New Bondstreet. „ erect an ornamental front No objection Do. 1, Belgrave-square „ extend balcony Do. Do. 5½, Chapel-street West, Mayfair „ erect new shop front, projecting 3 ft. Highly objectionable Refused. beyond present one. 10, New Bond-street „ erect bay windows and balcony Do. Granted. 136, New Bond-street „ do. portico No objection Granted. 128 Appendix No. 10.] APPLICATIONS TO VESTRY. Situation. Nature of Application. Decision of Vestry. Application for permission Application 41, St. George's-place To fix gas-lamp over front door . Granted, subject to usual regulations. Belgrave-mansions To fix two lamps and lamp-posts, Vestry to bear expense of lighting one of the lamps. Refused, but sanctioned lamps and posts to be fixed on condition that the lamps be lighted and kept alight from sunset to sunrise, and that they be not made a medium for advertisements, and that all expenses be born by the Company. 69, Piccadilly „ fix four 16-inch coal plates in front and side. Granted. Coal plates to meet approval of Surveyor. 1, Belgrave-square . Clifford's-row Hobart and Grosvenor-places (junction of). ,, construct new vaults For asphalte to be laid on footway of road, against the wall of Coleshill-buildings, as far as Mr. Whitworth's Premises. do. subject to usual regulations. Vestry offered to lay asphalte at applicant's expense. To substitute polished granite fountain for present one. Granteed. Belgravemews „ occupy end portion of mews for coach house. Refused. 18, Sutherland-terrace „ fix iron sockets in curb to support shop blind. Granted, upon condition that no portion of the blind be allowed to hang within 8 feet of the public way 9, Queen-street, May-fair To fix gates at entrance of archway adjoining the premises. Refused. George-yard, Duke-street Urinal to be placed Refused. 129 Appendix No. 10.] Applications to Vestry—continued. Situation. Nature of Application. Decision of Vestry. Application for permission Application Grosvenor-mews. To alter building lines at eastern end of mews. Granted. Grosvenor-mews. „ form overhead connection between the two next blocks of buildings at eastern end of mews. do. during pleasure, upon condition that applicants pay rent for the privilege at the rate of £1 per annum. Grosvenor-sqnare, corner of South Audley-street. ,, remove pillar letter-box to corner of Park-street and Upper Grosvenorstreet. Granted. 7a, Eaton-row „ project coach-house doors Refused. St. George's-square-mews For the Vestry to take to the management of the roadway of the Mews. Granted, upon condition that the applicants bear the expense of taking up and relaying the paving stones in the Mews, to the satisfaction of the Surveyor to the Vestry. 209, Ebury-street To form crossing in public footway opposite the gateway entrance. Granted, upon condition that the work be done by Parish workmen, at applicant's expense. Royal Oak-place „ extend coach-house Refused. 42, St. George's-square „ insert a 15-inch illuminated plate in footway in front. Granted. Brick-street To alter footway, and to make carriage entrance to new stables. Granted, on condition that the work be done by the Parish workmen, at the applicant's expense. Grosvenor-mews (Art Galleries) „ construct areas and pavement lights Granted, upon condition that the lights meet with the approval of the Vestry, and that the whole work be done to the satisfaction of the Surveyor. 130 Appendix No. 10.] Applications to Vestry—continued. Situation. Nature of Application. Decision of Vestry. Application for permission Application Conduit street, late Trinity Chapel. For stand-post to be shifted Vestry shifted stand-post to Grafton-street, expense of removal being borne by applicant. Hobart and Grosvenor-places (junction of). To fix granite trough, 6 ft. 6 in. long, by drinking fountain. Refused. 66, Chester-square (rear of) ,, build area in front of stable . do. Turf Club, Clarges-street „ erect two ornamental lamps opposite entrance—one of the lamps to be lighted by Vestry—and the adjacent Parish lamp to be removed. Granted, upon condition that the lamps be lighted every night, and kept alight all night, and properly cleaned, at the expense of the applicants. Turf Club, Clarges-street To insert six 16 inch coal plates in front of Club. Granted. Park-street, between Mountstreet and Upper Grosvenor-street „ pave roadway with wood pavement do. upon condition that the whole cost of the work be borne by the applicants. Elizabeth-street Footway pavement in street to be levelled do. upon condition that the work be done at the applicant's expense. Ebury-street For portion of ground given up to the footway in front of the Depository to be paved. Vestry offered to lay asphalte on the whole of the footway in front of Mr. Bishop's premises, from the kerb of Semley-place to the kerb of Little Ebury-street, upon condition that the expense of the portion which would cover the ground about to be given up to the public, be borne by applicant. 131 Appendix No. 10.] Applications to Vestry —continued. Situation. Nature of Application. Decision of Vestry. Application for permission Application Sneyd's-gardens To erect gate temporarily . Granted during pleasure of Vestry. Clifford's-row „ form paved crossings in front of new coach-houses do. upon condition that the work be done by the parish workmen at the applicant's expense. 55, Davies-street, comer of Grosvenor-street. „ fix ornamental lamp-post and column Refused. 66, Chester-square, rear of „ build area in front of stable (amended plan) do. 6, Derby-street „ re-build and extend vaults do. 8, Grosvenor-square „ fix one 16 inch and two 12 inch illuminating coal plates Granted upon condition that the plates meet with the approval of the Surveyor to the Vestry. Turf Club, Clarges-street „ fix standard lamps on private kerb Granted 17, South Audley-street „ construct vaults do. subject to the usual regulations. 47 to 59, Pimlico-road ,, do. do. do. Sneyd's-gardens . „ sewer and drain at eastern end to be removed to the roadway Refused. 8 & 9, Park-side, Knightsbridge „ construct vaults Granted, subject to the usual regulations. Albemarle-street , To erect lamp-post with name and number thereon, and to exchange present lamp-post for another lamp to match proposed new one. Refused. 38, Conduit-street For removal of gas-lamp and spur stone. The Vestry sanctioned the shifting of lamp-post 8 feet eastwards and removal of spur stone upon condition that expense of work be borne by applicant. 132 Appendix No. 10.] Applications to Vestry —continued. Situation. Nature of Application. Decision of Vestry. Application for permission Application 8 & 9, Park-side, Knightsbridge To fix iron gratings, to be partially covered with Hayward's patent prismatic pavement lights. Refused. George-yard „ relay breast in front of stables Granted, upon condition that the work be done by the Parish workmen. St. George's-place (rear of) For continuation of mews to be paved, and Vestry to bear half of expense Vestry expressed themselves willing to carry out works at applicant's expense. St. George's-place (rear of) For drain and paving to be laid, and Vestry to bear half of expense. do. do. do. do. Hanover-square Club, Hanover street. To fix two lamps Granted, upon condition that both lamps be lighted every night and be kept alight all night. 17, South Audley-street To extend vaults Granted, subject to usual regulations. Peabody-buildings, Sutherland-street. "For alteration to be made to paving at the entrance gates. Granted, upon condition that the paving works he done by the Parish workmen at the applicant's expense. 89b & 39½, Old Bond-street To construct two vaults under footway. do. subject to usual regulations. George-yard „ fix a 16-inch Hayward's patent coal plate. do. 155, Piccadilly To retain small plate on gas column Granted, during pleasure of the Vestry. 81 & 83, Buckingham-palace-road To insert glazed lights in footway do. Grosvenor-gardens „ wood paving to be laid . Refused. 1, Belgrave-square To form three vaults in continuation of the present ones. Granted, subject to the usual regulation. “Turk's Head” public-house, Motcomb-street. „ fix seven bracket lamps do. do. do. 133 Appendix No. 10.] Applications to Vestry—continued. Situation. Nature of Application. Decision of Vestry. Application for permission Application “Coachmakers' Arms,” Belgrave-mews-east. To fix three bracket lamps. Granted, subject to the usual regulations. 13 & 14, Park-side, Knightsbridge „ construct vaults and fix area lights. Granted; the construction of the vaults to be subject to the usual regulations, and the fixing of area lights to be subject to the condition that the lights shall not project more than 1 foot from the stall-board of shop. 14, Holden-terrace ,, suspend bracket lamp . Granted during the pleasure of the Vestry. Turf Club, Clarges-street „ lay Improved Wood Paving Company's Pavement in Clarges-street. Granted wood pavement at applicant's expense. Knightsbridge For wood paving to be laid Declined to accede to application this year. St. George's Hospital, north and east fronts of. ,, do. Vestry ordered wood paving to be laid by the Improved Wood Pavement Company, under provisions similar to the Piccadilly contract. 51, Brook's-mews To build dung pit Refused. Grosvenor road For paved crossing to be laid in front of the gateway of premises at the Gas Light and Coke Company. Granted, upon condition that the work be done by the Parish workmen at the applicant's expense. North-row, by 23, North Audley-street. To enlarge iron grating Granted, upon condition that the grating be similar to the one adjoining, and do not project more than 15 inches into the pathway. 8 & 9, Park-side, Knightsbridge To enlarge iron grating Granted, upon condition that the grating do not project more than 12 inches beyond the face of pilasters of the house. 134 Appendix No. 10.] Applications to Vestry—continued. Situation. Nature of Application. Decision of Vestry. Application for permission Application Chester-mews „ place moveable iron guard to hold manure in front of stable. Granted during pleasure of Vestry. 38, New Bond-street For lamp-post opposite entrance to premises to be shifted, at applicant's expense. „ the lamp post to be shifted not more than 4 feet from present position. 2, Audley- square To alter curb and footway paving do. upon condition that the work be done by the Parish workmen, at the applicant's expense. 8, Grosvenor-crescent-mews „ construct sunken dung pit Refused. 70, Piccadilly „ fix a 24-inch Hayward's patent pavement light, in place of present 18-inch light do. Throughout Parish In future lay new gas mains underneath footways, where practicable. do. Turpentine-lane To erect urinal in place of present one Granted, on condition that the applicants grant leave of site for 50 years at 1s. per year rent. Gatliff-road, by Grosvenor Canal. „ lay down temporarily double tramway from Lock Wharf do. subject to the usual regulations. 7, Queen-street, May-fair „ fix 16 inch coal plate 1 do. upon condition that the coal-plate meet with the approval of the Surveyor. London: printed by george phipps, 13 & 14, tothill street, westminster.