82 present brick drains, which will be at once thoroughly flushed, and remain unused for two months previous to the commencement of the drainage works. "But, so far from this being done during the height of the London season, this portion of the work will not be commenced until August, and then it will be entirely confined within the boundaries of the hospital, nor will it necessitate any opening of the external drains. "The reasons which induced the Board to select the next three months for the work were— "1. The more rapid completion of the work on account of the length of the days, and, consequently, the saving of cost and earlier admission of patients; and, "2. Because these are the months in which there is usually less sickness, and, therefore, fewer demands for beds. "It is hoped that this statement will dissipate the present and prevent any further alarm on the subject. "I remain, Sir, "Your obedient Servant, "Bessborough, "Chairman of the Weekly Board. "St. George's Hospital, Hyde-park-corner, "May 13th." Of course, as the hospital authorities had decided to invert the usual plan of operations, and to do repairs, painting, &c., before interfering with the sewers, I was satisfied, and laid the whole of the correspondence before your Committee, who decided that I should examine the plans of the proposed alterations, which I did, and found them very 83 satisfactory, suggesting only a few alterations in minor points. In the end, it resulted that no nuisance was caused by the carrying out of the works, and I received no complaints at all. The slaughter-houses, cow-sheds, and bakehouses of the Parish are all regularly inspected, and are in a satisfactory condition; several required alterations, and I had them carried out before the annual licensing. One of the cowsheds, though supplied with the Company's water, received it in an underground tank, and it was believed that some cases of enteric (typhoid) fever had been caused in a family who were served with milk from this shed. With the sanction of the Committee of Works, I made the cessation of the use of this tank, and the provision of a cistern, the condition that the license should not be opposed, and the magistrate withheld the license for the time being; the alteration was subsequently made. This is a very important matter, as an epidemic of typhoid fever was shown by Dr. Ballard to have originated in Islington by the leaking of a drain into an underground tank from which a cow-shed was supplied, the water being originally excellent water from the New River Company's mains. There were a considerable number of complaints during the summer of bad smells in Piccadilly and Knightsbridge. There being no fault whatever with the Piccadilly sewer, there could be no doubt that the smells arose from the unclean condition of the roadway, and they were much abated by its being cleansed; and by cleansing I mean the removal of the horse-droppings, for unless this is done mere watering (even with a disinfectant in the water) does little good, and a little watering in hot weather does harm by promoting fermentation. The water supplied to the Parish by the Chelsea Water