1866-7. SAINT JAMES'S. WESTMINSTER. Account in Abstract of RECEIPT AND EXPENDITURE FOR THE YEAR ENDING 25th MARCH,1867, AND SUMMERY STATEMENT OF CONTRACTS. TOGETHER WITH THE SURVEYOR'S REPORT OF THE PROCEEDINGS OF THE VESTRY IN THE EXECUTION OF THE ACT; TO WHICH ARE ???,THE REPORTS OF THE MEDICAL OFFICER OF HEALTH, AND THE SANITARY BY THE VESTRY, IN COMPLIANCE WITH THE ??? SECTION OF THE Metropolis Local Management Act. By order, GEORGE BUZZARD, Vestry ??? June,1867. St. Jamea's,, Mestminster. We, the undersigned ??? the Auditors appointed by Authority of the Metropolis Local Management Act to audit the Accounts of the Vestry of the said Parish, having carefully examined the said Accounts from the Twenty-fifth day of March, 1860, to the Twenty-fifth day of March, 1807, and the Vouchers in support of the same, and the Books, Papers, and Writings in the custoday or control of the said Vestry relating thereto, Do hereby certify that the said Accounts are to the best of our belief, true and correct, in token of which our examination we have signed the said Accounts, whereof an Abstract prepared and signed by us is annexed hereto, and we do make this our allowance of the said Accounts in conformity to the provisions of the said Act, As witness oar hand this sixteenth day of May, One thousand right hundred and sixty-seven. JOHN CLEMENTS, THOMAS JONES. ROBERT DICKER. FREDERICK JENNER.Auditors 2 3 ST. JAMES'S, WESTMINSTER. Statement of Receipt and Expenditure of the Sewers, Metropolis Main Drainage and General Rates, and of other Monies applicabe to the purposes of the Metropolis Local Management Acts, from the 1st day of June,1866, to the 25th day of March,1867. RECEIPTS. EXPENDITURE. £ s. d. £ s. d. Balance in Treasurer's hands at the close of the Account for 1865-6, on the 1st June, 1866 2,502 3 10 Contractor (Mowlem & Co.) far Paving, broken Guernsey, Lime, Sand,&c.c 509 15 9 Sewers, Metropolis Main Drainage, and General Rates of the year 1866, collected to the 25th March, 1867 28,883 7 3 Contractor( Browse) for Maintenance,&c.of Roadway in Regent St. Ditto, for Macadamizing portion of Piccadilly, from Burlington 2,6265 0 0 Cash for Works done for Gas and Water Companies 164 9 6 Arcade to St. James's Street 220 0 0 Cash by Vestry Surveyor, for grant of Scaffold Licences, and for Deposits on account of Pavements disturbed for Building and Drainage purposes 126 11 3 Ditto, for Maintenance &c. of Roadway in Piccadilly and Coventry Street 1,121 13 4 Ditto, for Reinstating Trenches made by Gas and Water Companies 21 13 6 Cash by Trustees of Archbishop Tenison's Chapel, for one year's nominal Rent of Ground and Porches in King Street, to Midsummer, 1866 0 3 0 Ditto, for Removing Snow from Piccadilly and Regent Street 91 15 9 Cash, Income Tax Commissioners, for use of Vestry Hall one year to Michaelmas, 1866 5 5 0 Vestry St. George, Hanover Square. for Repairing portion of St. James's, Street, pursuant to arrangement between the Parishes 1,400 0 0 htuor Brookcri and ^ orkmru NV age. 877 17 5 Carting Slop and Dust Removal 772 14 0 Sweepers Wages 732 18 10 Gas lighting 2,007 6 1 St fret Watering, Carta and Men 387 12 0 Voter Supply for ditto 27 7 13 11 Sewers Works and Wages and Flashing Sewers and Urinals 530 15 1 Metropolitan Board of Works, Expense by Precept 1866 5,024 13 5 Metropolitan Board of Works, Expenses Main Drainage Precept for 1866 5,775 8 0 Salaries 1,064 18 4 Stationary Books and Printing 120 4 9 Carried forward £31,681 19 10 Carried forward £23,652 0 2 4 6 RECEIPTS (Continued). EXPENDITURE Brought forward . £31,681 19 10 Brought forward £23,662 0 2 Britcklayer, Punter, Carpenter, Smith, Gas fitter Pump-maker, Wheelwright, &c 348 2 6 Horse Harness,Hay,Corn, &c. 57 9 0 Collectors Poundagr 180 11 9 Interest on overdrawn Account to 25th March, 1567 85 18 0 Fifth Instalment in Repayment of Loan of £6,000 300 0 0 Interval at 5 per cent. on remainder of Loan of £6,000, by London life Association. one year to 23th January, 1867 228 12 6 Insurance of Vestry Hall and Furniture 3 17 6 Coal, Gas, Water Hate, &c., to Vestry Hall 33 6 3 Law and other Disbursements 401 5 0 Interest on Golden Squares Debt. as paid to DondHnhlerx . 71 0 0 Surveyor for preparing Plans shewing Boundary Line of Streets in the Pariah of St. James's and St. George's, Hanover Square 3 3 0 St. Mary 1« bone Veatry for Oxford Street Management, for 1865-1 6878 6 4 Expemses incurred by Sanitary Committee during late Cholera Epidemic (1866) 310 8 1 Gratuity to Widow of a deceased Paviour 5 0 0 Balances in Treasurer's on 25th March, 1867 . 5,343 19 9 £.31,681 19 10 £31,681 19 0t JOHN CLEMENTS Auditors. THOMAS JONES, ROBERT DICKER, FREDERIC JENNER, 16th May 1867. 6 J St. James's Westminster. Outstanding Assets and Liabilities on the 25th March, 1567, to be received and paid by 1st June,1867. ASSETS. £. s. d. £. s. d. LIABILITIES. £. s. £ Remainder of Sewers, Metropolis Main Drainage Contractor (Browse) Repairs &c.,Regent Street Roadway 875 0 0 and General Rates of the year 1866, on 25th March, 1867 2,759 0 4 Ditto Repairs, Ac., Piccadilly and Coventry Street Ditto Reinstating Trenches made by Gas and Water 405 0 0 Less probable deficiencies at close of collection . 773 9 7 Companies 14 14 8 1,985 10 9 Contractors (Mowlem) for York Paving, Guernsey Lamps, Lime , Sand, &c. 323 3 0 Cash for Works done for Gas and Water Companies 77 0 0 Cash for the Grant of Scaffold Licences, Paving Deposits, &c. 25 0 0 Stone Breakers and Workmens Wages 220 0 0 Carting Slop and Dust Removal 238 17 0 Cash Assessed Tax Commissioners for use of Yestry Hall to Lady-day, 1867 5 5 0 Watering 9 12 0 Sweeperes Wages 180 0 0 Gas Lighting 706 14 % 1 Severs Works, Wagra, &c 178 12 6 Salaries 362 0 0 Collectors Poundage, and Kxpenses, for Rates of 1866 202 9 10 Stationery, Books and Printing 49 4 6 Bricklayer, Carpenters, Gas-fitter, and sundry other Tradesmens's Accounts 71 3 9 St. Marylebone Vestry fur Oxford Street Management for 1866.7 500 0 0 £.2,092 15 9 £.4,339 13 10 JOHN CLEMENTS, Auditors+ THOMAS JONES, ROBERT DICKER, FREDERIC JENNER, 16th May, 1867. H St. James's Westminster. An Account of all Contracts entered into or continued by the Vestery during the Year ending of March, 1867. Date of Contract. Name of Company or Party with whom Contract was made. NATURE of Work to be performoned to be used or suuplied. Amount,or Price. 30th June, 1865, EDWARD THIRST, Generals Works and Repairs to Sewers, At 2½ per cent. under the various prices affixed to the items in the Schedula to the Contracts. 25th March, 1866, MOWLEM & Co Paviours *and Masons Works, and for the supply of Graniter and other Stone, and Materials for Re-Laying and Repairing the Carriageways and Footway Pavings, At various Prices as specified in the Contract. 25th March, 1865, THOMAS FERGUSON, Cleansing the Parish, excepting Regent Street, Regent Cirrus Waterloo Place Piccadilly and Coventry Street,—Removing Dust from the whole of the Parish At and after the Rata of £.1,020 per Annum. 25th March, 1866, THOMAS FERGUSON, Street Watering the Parish, excepting Regent Street, Regent Circus Waterloo Place, Peeadily Cot entry Street and St. James's and Glolden At 12s. per day for each single Cart, Horse and Man. 25th March, 1866, CHARLES GODDARD, Watering St. Jamea'a and Glolden Squares. At 8s. per day far earh siagle Cart, Horse and Man 25th March, 1865, WESTERN GAS LIGHT COMPANY Lighting the Public lamps in their Division of the Pariah. At £.3 13s. per Lamp per Annum. 24th December, 1805, CHARTERED GAS LIGHT COMPANY . lighting the Public Lamps in their Division of the Pariah, At £.3 15a. 6d. per Lamps Annum 1st May, 1861, HENRY BROWSE, Repairing, Cleansing, Watering, and maintaining Regent Street, including the charge for Water, Not to exceeding £.3,500 per Annum. 25th March, 1865, HENRY BROWSE, Repairing, Cleansing, Watering, and Maintaining Roadway in Piceadily, and Coventry Street so much as Lies in the Parish . At and after the Rate of £,1,620 per Annum. JOHN CLEMENTS, Auditors. THOMAS JONES, ROBERT DICKER, FREDERIC JENNER, 16th May,1867. 10 St. James's Westminster. A Statement of the Debts and Liabilities owing by the Vestry on the 25th day of March, 1867. £ s.d. A sum of £.1,504 14s. 2d. remaining due to the Trustees of the County Fire Office, with Interest thereon at 4 per cent, from the 14th January, 1856, in respect of a Decd of Assignment executed by the late Board of Commissioners for Paving and Improving this Parish, on the 14th July, 1852, of the Rates under their jurisdiction, in consideration of a Loan of £3,300, made then by the said Trustees to the said Commissioners for the purposes of the Act 14 and 15 Vic. cap. 95,—vide sees. 18, 19 and 21. This sum of £1,504 14s. 2d., and Interest, is a charge upon and has to be specially raised from the occupiers of the Houses, &c. in Regent Street, situate as well within this Parish as within the Parish of St. George, Hanover Square, 1,504 14 2 A sum of £4,500 remaining due to the Trustees of the London Life Association with Interest thereon at 5 per cent, per Annum, in respect of a Mortgage of the Sewers and General Rates made by the Vestry on the 25th day of July, 1861, in consideration of a Loan of £6,000 for the erection of the Vestry Hall, in Piccadilly 4,500 0 0 A sum of £1,400 borrowed by the Trustees of the Golden Square upon Security of the Kates raised under their Local Act, with Interest at 5 per cent, paid by the Trustees to the Bondholders, from the 1st January, 1856, to the 16th July, 1863, and continued Interest to the Bondholders from the 16th December, 1864. The payment of such Debt and Interest being transferred to the Vestry by the 180th section of the Metropolis Local Management Act, 1855, 1,400 0 0 JOHN CLEMENTS, THOMAS JONES, Auditor ROBERT DICKER, 16th may, 1867. FREDERIC JENNER, General Report of Works KXECUTED BY THE VESTRY OF ST. JAMES'S, WESTMINSTER, IN THE YEAR 1866.67. 13 To the Chairman and Members of the Ventry of St. James's, Westminster. Vestry Hall, Piccadilly, June,1807. Reverend Sir, My Lords, and Gentlement, In accordance with the requirements of the Act of Parliament, I have the honor to submit a Report of the principal Works executed in the department under my official superintendence in the Parish, between the 2th of March, 1866, and the 25th of March, 1867. The appended lists will shew the most important of these Works, which do not appear to be very 14 numerous or to involve any great expenditure of money. This is to a certain extent accounted for by the fact, that the Parish has been for many years indebted to the judicious management of a Paving Board and Sewers Commission, now merged in the Yestry, which reduces the principal works to be performed, rather to the maintenance of those already in existence, than of executing new ones. Another reason for the absence of any large outlay of money or expensive works, is the very great care that is at all times exercised by the Yestry, and as carefully seconded by the Works Committee, that no outlay shall be made, or expense incurred, unless the same shall be found upon due investigation to be at least advisable, if not, as in most instances, actually necessary; at the same time it will be borne in mind that this very circumstance proves that a great amount of attention has been devoted even to the smallest items, and that an outlay of five pounds has received as much patient deliberation as an amount of five hundred. A few matters have during the last twelve months, prominently presented themselves not only to the notice of the Yestry, but to the public generally, and demand a passing notice. One of 15 these, and a most important one, was the inconvenience caused by the non-removal of the deposit canted by some most unexpected and unusually heavy falls of snow. The correspondence that has appeared upon this subject will still be fresh in the minds of all, and has been remarkable for the aide differences of opinion expressed with regard to the wisest course to be pursued under such exceptionable circumstances, all or most of which opinions had much sound sense in them, but had all to be modified by locality. The Parish of St. James's happens to be most unfortunately situated for such a disaster, as no open spaces exist in which to shoot the snow should that be desirable, and carting it, or any portion of it away, would render much deliberation necessary before such an expense as would be involved, was incurred, even if the practicability of doing so were not a matter of great doubt, and the immense traffic that is constantly occurring through the principal thoroughfares of the Parish, renders the attempt to heap snow in the centre or sides of the roadways, extremely hazardous, to say nothing of the unpleasant result of a rapid thaw. As this catastrophe is not unlikely to recur, perhaps oftener and more severely than formerly, 10 I would respectfully suggest that the matter should be taken in good time into the serious consideration of the Yestry, with the view of laying down some definite instructions thereon. Another, and more serious subject, which has frequently occupied the attention of the Yestry and its Works Committee, is that of the erection of Public Conveniences and Urinals, and hitherto the only result appears to be that none can be constructed, at least without such serious injury to individuals as to make it very difficult, whilst at the same time the demand for them is so great as almost to render the few existing ones, public nuisances. Everything appears to have been thought of, and every proposition discussed, but hitherto without finding a solution, unless so large an outlay were incurred as would seem most disproportionate to the result, such as renting or purchasing premises for the express purpose, in addition to the cost of construction. The only remedy which appears at all feasible would be to to compel every licensed victualler to provide reasonable accommodation within his house to meet the exigencies of the Public not requiring refreshment, to be so arranged as to give 17 independent access from the entrance. This suggestion may seem. impracticable, but unless the Vestry are prepared to adopt very bold measures indeed, very Utile abort of some such coarse will be of roach avail when the crowded state of the Pariah thoroughfare* is taken into consideration, and it might happen that the requisite accommodation being provided inside the public houses would to some extent reduce the necessity for the same convenience in more prominent situations. Should any apology be considered necessary for introducing this subject, it will bo found in the minutes of the meetings of the Vestry snd the Works Committee, in addition to the attempts I have personally made to propose something to surmount the difficulty aa far as this Parish ia concerned; as in the greater portion of the Metropolis the obstacles to be overcome are not of counts so formidable. It will be seen by the accompanying list that apart from some amall matters in cleansing, Ac., the operations of the Vestry have been restricted, in this particular, to the removal of one urinal from a small court loading from the Haymarket to St. James's Market 18 In referring to the Paving Works which have been executed it is necessary to bear in mind that some matters that appear in themselves trivial are in reality of great importance, such as making good the gas and water companies trenches, and openings after the paving has been disturbed by private individuals, and that although these works are from time to time reported as matters of course, they are actually of grave responsibility, as one misplaced stone is more likely to lead to accidents than the closing of a street. Apart from the customary endeavours to discover all defects, the Yestry are held responsible as soon as a written notice is delivered that any work requires making good, and as men cannot be kept idle, waiting for the notice, a little discrimination and judgment is required as to the best manner of making good such openings and disturbances, and of so executing the work as to obviate the probability of future difficulties in the shape of leakage from the surface into vaults, &c. As the Yestry do not in these matters delegate their responsibilities to a Contractor, it is a matter of congratulation that hitherto no unpleasant results 19 have arisen from the exercise of their functions no far as thin particular portion of them is concerned.* Among the transactions of the year deserving notice is the arrangement suggested by this Vestry and that of St. George's, Hanover Square, and afterwards ordered by the Metropolitan Hoard of Works for the purpose of simplifying the jurisdiction of the two several Vestries at the junction of the Parishes. By this arrangement I have no hesitation in stating that, although neither Parish has achieved any advantage over the other, they have both derived a benefit, and one advantage arising from it has been the continuation of the McAdam Paving at the North West Portion of Piccadilly which has obviated the previously iueonvenient arrangement of one half of the carriage way being McAdam and the other half Paving. The most unsatisfactory matter with which the Vestry have had to grapple in the way of Sanitary Measurea, is the condition of the Tributary Sewers in Regent Street. This subject has been so pro. • the result of openings greater upon ??? such sa the locality, amount of traffic of trench, and the state of the weather, or time of year, all of which either modify or increase the evill. 20 minently before the Vestry and has received so much annual attention that it may seem superfluous to allude to it here, and my only object in doing so is to record the fact that it really has received the consideration it deserves, discouraging though it is to be compelled to add that every year it appears to become more serious. In the ordinary course of things this must be so, and it is scarcely necessary to state that where decay once clearly begins, its progress is very rapid, especially when assisted by such indefatigable agents as Rats. Pending the Report of Mr. Haywood, Surveyor of the City Sewers, who has received instruction from the Yestry to report his opinion as to the best means of improving the Regent Street Sewerage, and whose more extensive experience may suggest some less formidable escape from the difficulty, than that which has presented itself to my mind, it is futile to pursue the matter further at present, except to point out that future exigencies and contingencies must, or should be considered, in connection with the present, and also that in the mean time these Tributary Sewers being a constant source of anxiety and expense—as experience proves beyond a doubt—they may in the course 91 of a few years involve nearly, if not quite as great an outlay, as is considered essential at the present time, taking it for granted that nothing unusually serious happens. The full and patient investigation given by the Veatry and the various Committees, to all the matters whether of public or private interest that have been brought before them previously to a derision having been arrived at, renders it unnecessary for me to do more, than record the results in the accompanying Lists, which shew the principal matters that have been accomplished in the department to which I have the honour to belong. All of these were works of necessity, more especially the Severs Works, which being to a great extent out of sight, do not generally obtrude themaelves upon public notice. Some of these Sewers are of comparative antiquity, some were originally badly constructed, and others have, for reasona too lengthy to enter upon here, been unfairly used. Actual defects have however been made good, and possible evils foreatalled and provented, such as accumulations that would impede private drainage; those Sewers in the Parish that run from North to South have au 20 excellent fall and require but little care, but those that run from West to East or East to West not having the same advantages require a great deal of attention, and find constant Work for two men at least; although the result of their labour does not appear, the want of it would soon be felt in a most serious form, and the maintenance of the intended efficiency of these Sewers involves a great amount of time and attention. This work is managed with as much economy as is consistent with a beneficial result, considering the offensive nature of the labour and the confined space in which the Work has to be performed. Due attention has been given to offensive Gullies and Sewer Ventilation, but the latter subject being under the consideration of the Metropolitan Board of Works, nothing beyond that dictated by actual necessity has been attempted. During the past year an improvement in the supply of Water for Street Watering purposes was effected, at a comparatively small outlay, which removed some of the previous difficulties by giving a permanent supply of Water instead of one limited to a few hours only; as this 23 involves no additional annual expenditure, it may I think, Curly be considered as an advantage to the Pariah, and will in time repay the outlay incurred. The Refuges for Foot Passengers in the centre of Regent Street, opposite Vigo Street and Charles Street, have been very beneficial judging from the use that is made of them, and are an encouragement to construct others where they may be required, but I would respectfully suggest that should any additional Refuges be constructed they should bo larger and more conspicuous, and square, instead of oval, so that Drivers of Vehicles could not attempt to avoid them so closely as st present. This is one of the matters in which experience is beneficial, as it becomes a useful guide for the future. The Minutes of the Proceedings of the Works and Improvements Committee, will furnish the reasons for the execution of most of the matters referred to in the lists accompanying this Report; snd if all the Works executed were not previously ordered by that Committee, it has been because they were of such a pressing character as to admit of no hesitation or delay, which is frequently the ease, particularly in Sewers Works. 24 This being the Tenth Annual Report I have had the pleasure of submitting, I beg in conclusion personally to thank the Vestry for the confidence, they have reposed in me by my annual re-election to the important Office I have the honor to hold, and which confidence it is my earnest wish to continue to deserve. I have the honour to be, Reverend Sir, My Lords and Gentlemen, Your most obedient humble Servant, A. P. HOWELL, Surveyor. 25 GENERAL WORKS, &c., elected by The Vestry of St. James's, Westiminster, from 25th March, 1866, to 25th March, 1867. Situation. Description of Work. Amount Expended. PAVING WORKS. £ s. d. £ s. d. Generally Trenches or openings made good after being disturbed by the various Gas and Water Companies, the cost of which is reimbursed to the Vestry. No. 1,604 No. 68 Openings made good where the Paving has been disturbed by vate individuals, the cost of which is reimbursed to the Vestry. Air Street Re-laying Footway, regulating Kerbs, &c. 22 3 2 Duke Street Re-laying portions of Footway and Footway 74 8 8 St. James's Market Forming Channels and re-laying Footway 19 16 1 Princess Street Regulating Kerbs and Channels, and Repairing Footway 29 5 11 Ditto ditto Re-laying portions of Carriageway, Dressing Stone, &c., &c. 165 7 9 Haymarket Repairing Footways, Kerbs & Channels 17 4 8 Richmond Street Re-laying Footways, Kerbs & Channels 45 13 3 Ditto ditto Repairing Carriageway 13 15 2 James Street, Upper Repair to Carriageway & Footways 33 5 2 Crown Ct. Pall Mall Forming Channel and re-laying way 16 2 7 Rose and Crown Yard Lowering and Repairing Entrance 20 13 2 St. James Square Re-laying and Widening Footway, west side 71 17 1 Ditto ditto Ditto ditto, north side 123 5 1 652 17 2 St. James's Street Re-laying portion, of Carriageway from Park Place to King Street, including Removal of Pitching Stone from west end of P??? 382 13 5 Regent Street, between Vigo Street and Glasshouse Street Paving Work in constructing Refuge for Foot Passengers and Fixing Posts, &c. 8 2 11 Waterloo Place, nite Charles Street. Ditto ditto 7 6 9 Ditto ditto Cost of 8 Hand Posts with Spurs attached 17 5 0 33 14 8 Altering Paving at north west portion of P???dilly by removal of Pitching, and ??? of McAdass 220 0 0 Carried forward £ 1288 5 3 26 GENERAL WORKS,—Continued. Situation. Description of Work. Amount Expended. Brought forward £ 1288 5 3 CLEARING AND REMOVING SNOW. Generally Amount Expended in clearing and removing Snow after the fall of the 2nd January, 1867, including purchase of Shovels, &c. 152 5 2 PUMPS AND WELLS. Opening, Examining, and Sounding Wells, and making good after same. Broad Street 1 14 6 Carnaby Street 0 18 6 Warwick Street 1 10 6 Marlborough Mews 0 18 6 Burlington Gardens 0 18 6 Duke Street 0 18 6 Little St. James's St. 1 15 6 Charles Street 0 16 0 Rupert Street 0 16 0 10 6 6 ALTERATION TO STAND POSTS, &c. Alterations made to Stand Posts to allow of Permanent Supply of Water for purposes of Street Watering. Generally Five Improved Cock Posts fixed in in place of previous Stand Posts 40 0 0 Five New Hose for ditto 12 10 0 52 10 0 Generally Repairs to Stand Posts, &c., &c. 7 16 0 PUBLIC URINALS. Brown's Court, Marshall Street Clearing and Repairing Drain 0 14 6 King's Arms Yard Clearing and Repairing Drain, making good Paving, &c. 0 8 6 Marlborough Mews Ditto ditto 0 17 2 Generally Clearing Urinals generally, removing Lime &c. 7 7 6 9 7 8 St. James's Market Removing Urinal and Cistern, and making good after same 2 9 1 Vine Street Providing Water supply to Urinal, fixing Meter, &c., &c. 4 7 2 Generally Water supply to Urinals 5 5 0 Carried forward £ 1532 11 10 27 GENERAL WORKS,— Continued. Situation. Description of Work. Amount Expended. Brought forward £ 1558 11 10 LAMPS Generally Six Ornamental Lamp Posts chased to be used as required, two of which are fixed at the Refuges in Regent Street 36 0 0 Urinal, Walls Street Old Lamp removed and New Lamp fixed 2 10 0 Walk Street Bracket Lamp removed and Pillar Lamp situated 3 5 0 Hars Yard, Gt. mill Street Alterations in positions of Lamps and improvements to same 6 1 0 Regent Street Refuges, opposite Charries St. and Vigo Street Fixing Columns, Repairing Lanterns and connecting Barners With Gas main 6 0 0 Jermyn Street Altering position of Lamp Post, to allow passage of Fire Escape by Church Place 1 5 0 Berwick Street and Noel St., corner of Altering position of Breacket Lamp 1 10 0 Removing and Re-fixing six columns and Lamps, and re-connecting 7 10 0 St. James's Square Burners with Main, caused by creased width of Paving Hill's Place, Oxford St. Alterations, additions and ments to Lamps after Hill's Place had been rebuilt 7 0 0 7l 1 0 BOUNDARY PLATES. Generally Providing and Fixing 5 new Boundary Plated, cleaning and painting twice is oil fifty existing Plates 6 7 6 SEWERS WORKS. Generally 108 Gullies ecptied and cleansed 105 0 0 GULLIES AND GULLEY DRAINS REPAIRED. Vigo Street Opening, Cleansing and Repairing Gulley 0 10 3 Crown Gt. Pall Mall Ditto ditto 0 10 3 Gt. Jermyn Street Ditto ditto 3 3 6 Appletree Yard Ditto ditto 1 8 9 Crown Court, Little Ditto ditto 3 4 6 106, Regent Street Ditto ditto 1 17 10 158, Ditto Ditto ditto 5 8 6 108, Ditto Ditto ditto 2 5 8 169, Ditto Ditto ditto 0 10 3 New Street Ditto ditto 1 15 2 Hay??? Ditto ditto 0 8 2 21 2 10 Carried forward £ 1138 ??? 2 28 GENERAL WORKS,— Continued. Situation. Description of Work. Amount Expended. Brought forward £ 1736 9 2 NEW GULLEY PITS BUILT. Broad Street Building Gulley Pit 12 0 0 Blenheim Mews Ditto ditto 13 16 0 25 l6 0 GULLIES TRAPPED. Leicester Street Trapping Gulley 1 3 10 228, Regent Street Ditto ditto 1 3 10 Pall Mall, John Street Ditto ditto 1 3 10 Ditto, Reform Club Ditto ditto 0 14 0 Glasshouse Street Ditto ditto 0 14 0 Argyll Place Trapping two Gullies 2 6 6 7 6 0 VENTILATING PIPES CARRIED UP. Blenheim Mews Ventilating Pipe carried up House 14 17 2 Argyll Street Ditto ditto ditto 42 17 0 57 14 2 CLEANSING SEWERS. Jermyn Street Cleansing Sewer generally 52 6 2 Piccadilly Ditto ditto 19 4 6 New Street Ditto ditto 7 0 0 Bridle Lane Ditto ditto 2 14 6 Dufour's Place Ditto ditto 5 8 9 95 to 103, Regent St. Cleansing and making good Sewer 45 18 10 132 12 9 SEWER REPAIRED. Pulteney Court Examining and Repairing Sewer, and making good Vaults of House No. 1, Cambridge Street 19 4 3 1, Cambridge Street Filling in Vault at No. 1, Cambridge Street, (with consent of owner) the said Vault requiring reconstruction if continued 16 0 6 35 4 9 DRAIN CONSTRUCTED. Broad Street Connecting Drain with Sewer at Drinking Fountain in Broad Street 0 14 4 Carried forward £ 1995 17 2 29 GENERAL WORKS,— Continued. Situation. Description of Work. Amount Expended. Brought forward £ 1995 17 2 preparations for flushing pipe sewers. Examining and Clearing Flushing Boxes and Pipes as follows:- Neol Street 3 18 2 Walker's Court 0 13 4 Hoddon Street 0 12 6 Appletree Yard 3 13 0 Coach and Horses Yard 1 0 9 9 17 9 SIDE ENTRANCE. St. James's Square. New Side Entrance Flap fixed in St. James's Square 5 15 6 £ 2011 10 5 30 PIPE SEWERS FLUSHED. Noel street Lowndes court Coach and horses yard Wardour mews Marlborough court Painter's court Portland mews Marlborough Row Ryder yard Bentinck street George place Ryder street Duck lane Golden square Blue ball yard Hopkins street Ditto ditto Cleveland row New street Bridle lane Russell court Tyler's court Smith's court Crown court, Pallmall Walker's court Catherine wheel yard Mason's yard Green's court Cooper's court Ormond yard Crown Court, Great Angel court Apple tree yard Crown court, Little Chapel court Babmaes mews Queen's head court Heddon court Charles street Panton square Vigo street Norris street Harris place Burlington gardens Jermyn street east Blenheim street Cork mews Peter street Nag's head yard Boyle street Cost of Flushing above Sewers, 28 15 3 Do. Water for ditto 14 16 0 £43 11 3 PRIVATE HOUSE DRAINS CONNECTED WITH SEWERS. 6, Upper James st. 194, Piccadilly 20, Argyll street 25, Piccadilly 7, Upper James street 6, Savile row 39, Piccadilly 29, Warwick street 41, Piccadilly 2, Vine street Hill's place (4 drains) South row 6, Gt. Marlborough st. Blenheim street Pall mall 10, Ryder street 64, St. James's street 36, Savile row [pipes 9, Old Burlington st. Babmaes mews Hill's place, laying 9 N.B.— No Amounts are appended to Private Works, as though executed by the Vestry, the Expense is defrayed by the individuals for whom the work is done. Eleventh Annual Report made to the VESTRY OF ST. JAMES'S, WESTMINSTER, FOR THE YEAR 1866, at EDWIN LANKESTER, M.D. LL.D. F.R.S. F.L.S. &c. &c. medical officer of health for st. james's, westiminster. 33 TO THE VESTRY The Parish of St. James's Westminster. Reverend Sir, Mr Lords, and Gentlemen, As the year 1860 was principally distinguished by the presence, in the Metropolis, of our muchdreaded epidemic visitant, Asiatic Cholera, my Eleventh Annual Report will be principally confined to an account of its presence in our Parish, and of the steps taken to meet and control it In my Report for 1865 I pointed out the fact that this disease had presented itself in Great Britain, and in the autumn of that year I stated my apprehension to the Vestry, that it would visit the Metropolis in 1866, and I urged upon you in that year the necessity of taking steps to meet this terrible enemy before it actually invaded our streets. That you did not st once adopt my suggestion is no reproach, as neither the Government nor any other local body in the kingdom were alive to the dinger that was so near at hand. The Cholera of 1866. The commencement of the year 1866 presented little to alarm the population of this country, and in c 34 our own Parish, up to the latter end of the month of June, nothing occurred to excite unusual alarm. I was, however, impressed with the necessity of endeavouring to meet the contingency of an outbreak of Cholera, and, amongst other measures, again urged the necessity of closing the surface wells of the Parish. At the request of the Vestry, I drew up the following Report on the state of the various surface wells then in use:— "June 4th, 1866. "I beg to state that at your request I "have examined chemically, as far as the means "you have placed at my disposal enabled me, the "water of the surface wells of the Parish. The "result of my enquires which have been carried on "for several weeks are as follows:— "1. That all the surface well water of the "Parish of St. James, Westminster, contains a larger "quantity of inorganic matter than the water sup"plied by the New River Company and the Grand "Junction Water Company, which draws its supply "from the Thames. The quantities of inorganic "constituents in the well waters being from 40 to "60 grains in the gallon, whilst the Thames water "seldom exceeds 30 grains in the gallon. "The whole of the surface well waters present a "considerable quantity of organic matter, which "varies from time to time, sometimes presenting "two and even three or more grains of organic 35 "matter in the gallon. In all cases when water "contains more than 2 grains of organic matter in "the gallon it should be regarded as liable to be dan"gerous. The Thames and New River water "seldom present 2 grains of organic matter in the "gallon. "In examinations made during the last two "years, the water found in the wells in Charles "Street, Duke Street, Marlborough Street, and "Burlington Gardens, hare been freest from organic "matter, and have usually contained lets than the "water supplied from the New River and the "Thames. The other well waters invariably present "a larger quantity of organic impurity than in the "Thames and New River waters. "It is not so much from their actual contami"nation and danger that I recommend these wells "to be closed, but from the fact that no amount of "supervision can prevent their accidental contami"nation, which may at any moment oecur, and "result in such an awful catastrophe as occurred in "the Parish in 1864. "5. I hare made diligent enquiries, and find "that there is no necessity for the existence of these "wells, and that the inhabitants of the Parish are "supplied with the superior water from the New "River and the Thames. I am further of opinion "that the keeping open these wells is perfectly un"necessary, and is exposing the population of this 36 "Parish to the risk of another such visitation of "Cholera as occurred in 1854. "6. I have visited the district which was "ravaged by Cholera in 1854. I have re-examined "the whole of the supposed causes of the outbreak "of Cholera in that district, and although at the "time of that outbreak, and in a Report I made to "the Vestry at that time, I thought the cause of "the outbreak was independent of the state of the "water in the Broad Street well, I now state, "as the result of twelve years thought and investi"gation of the subject, that the condition of the "water in the Broad Street well at that time was "the main cause of the fatal and terrible outbreak "of Cholera in the Golden Square district of the "Parish in 1854." On the 24th of June I reported that during the past fortnight there had been no cases of diarrhoea, and that there was less of this disease than usual for the time of the year. On the 5 th of July I again reported that there were no deaths from diarrhoea. In this I was mistaken; for on receiving the Report of the Registrar of Deaths for the 7th of July, I found that two sudden and fatal cases of choleraic diarrhoea had taken place in the Saint James's Model Lodging Houses. These cases had in no way been reported to me, and it shews how exceedingly imperfect our sanitary machinery was at that time. On the 10th July I made the following Report on those cases to the Sanitary Committee:— 37 "To the Sanitary Committee of St. James's, Westminster. "Gentlemen, "At your request, I beg to by before you "a Report on the cases of English Cholera, to "which the Medical Officer to the Privy Council "called my attention on the 4th of July, end whose "letter I read to the Vestry on July 5th. "After receiving that letter I lost no lime in "visiting No. 20, New Street where the cases "occurred. This house is the St James's Model "Home, and consists of sit sets of rooms, each "set intended to accommodate one family. "The rooms in which the cases of Cholera "occurred are numbered 4, end are on the first "floor on the side next to the premises lately occu"pied as cow houses. On waiting the rooms I "found them occupied by a tailor's porter, who, with "his wife and six children, occupied the rooms. "The two children who died had been ill since "Christmas when they had the measles. The "eldest was six years old, the youngest was two. "The latter had been ill with diarrhœa for a week. "On Friday the children had fish for dinner, and "on Saturday they had bacon and eggs and ate part "of a pound of cherries. They also ate on Saturday "and Sunday some coarse sweetmeats. Another "child besides those who died ate the sweetmeats 38 "and had diarrhœa, but a fourth child who ate no "sweetmeats had no diarrhœa. "On Sunday morning the two children who died "were observed to be very thirsty, and drank "copiously of water from the cistern. They were "very sick and purged during the whole of Sunday "night, and died within a few hours of each other "on Monday morning. A medical man was called "in on the Sunday, who gave it as his opinion that "the deaths had occurred from English Cholera, and "that no inquest was required, and gave a certificate "accordingly. The deaths were registered by Mr. "James, of Princes Street, and no notice of the "occurrence of these cases was given to the Medical "Officer of Health either by Dr. Hursley or Mr. "James. I have investigated these cases for the "purpose of ascertaining whether they arose "1. From the special poison of Cholera. "2. From taking improper food. "3. From the water in the cisterns. "4. From the state of the atmosphere. "5. From poison in the sweetmeats. "1. With regard to special poison. There does "not appear to have been any case of contagious "Cholera imported into the house, nor has there "been any Cholera in the neighbourhood. Since "the occurrence of the disease there has been no "fatal case of Cholera or Diarrhœa in the same "building. Hence I conclude that these cases 39 "have been purely sporadic and independent of any "special poison. "2. Have they been occasioned by improper "food? I could not find out that the fish eaten on "Friday made the members of the family ill. But "the two deceased children were the weakest, and "most liable to suffer from tainted food. One had "already Diarrhœa, and it is not improbable that "the fish on the Sunday was a link in the chain of "causes which led to the deaths on Monday. Then "there were this cherries on Saturday and Sunday, "though the children seem to have eaten very few, "yet cherries are known to be irritants to the bowels "where a disposition to Diarrhœa exists. "3. With regard to the water, I would here call "Attention to the fart that the cisterns in the Model "Lodging Houses are placed in the water closets, "and all the emanations from the closet pass up "into the cistern. I have found in all such cases "that water is more or less liable to contamination "from absorption of the sewer gases, and as the "children drank most on Sunday, when the supply "of water is lowest, I think it not improbable that "the water may have added to the previous effects "of the bad food. "4. The state of the Atmosphere. Although "the weather had not been unusually hot through "the week, Thursday the 21st of June, the day "before the children ate the fish was the hottest 40 "day we had had during the present year, and "might have had a tendency to act upon their food "as well as upon the children partaking of the "food. "5. With regard to the sweetmeats. The "sweetmeats taken by the children might be suspected, more especially as the woman states "that one of the four children who lives at home, "who had not partaken of them was free from "Diarrhœa. I have no means in my possession "by which I could carefully analyse these sweet"meats, of which specimens have been sent me "from the same shop where those which were "eaten by the children were bought. I may how"ever state that these sweetmeats are commonly "sold in the neighbourhood, and-after inquiry "I have not found that any of the children who "daily purchase them, are suffering in any way "from their use. The taking these sweetmeats "however by the deceased children, might have "increased their thirst and thus have acted as a "predisponent with the other causes mentioned, and "assisted in producing the disastrous result of "the death of the children. "There are two circumstances connected with "the history of these cases that demand attention, "and that is the want of action on the part of the "Medical man and Registrar. "With regard to the Medical man. Dr. Hursley, 41 "there are two things which be might have done. "In the case of two children dung suddenly after "eating sweetmeats and other improper food, there "would arise the question of poisoning, and if this "were for a moment entertained by parents, friends, "neighbours, or the Medical attendant, he ought "to have refused a Certificate and left the deaths "to find their way into the Coroner's Court. If "he did not consider it necessary to do this, he "might hare reported the cases to the Medical "Officer of Health of the Parish. "When the ease passed from the hands of the "Medical man and was presented to the Registrar "of the District, I think he should hare seen that "a form of death had been registered which was "likely to cause much alarm, and that he should "have immediately communicated with the Govern"ment or the Medical Officer of Health. I know "that there is no law compelling the Registrar to "do this, but the Registrar is left to hit judgment "in these cases, and is answerable to public opinion "for neglecting the opportunity be has of con"tributing to the public welfare. This letter was not communicated to the Vestry before evidence of the most decided kind was afforded that the true Asiatic Cholera was in London. In the month of July 2,104 persons in Loudon died of Cholera and Diarhœa. These cases were chiefly confined to the Last and of London. On the 2nd of 42 August I made the following report to the Vestry: "I have, now, to record two decided cases "of Asiatic Cholera, one which has proved fatal at "50, Brewer Street, and another which is recovering "at 30, Broad Street. I have enquired into the "history of these cases, and have not been able to "discover where the disease was contracted. The "case in Brewer Street was that of a jobbing "coachman, who had been ill for some days with "Diarrhœa before the attack came on. He lived in "a back room of the yard, 50, Brewer Street, "abutting on Smith's Court. The whole house is "overcrowded, the yard, dust bin, cistern, cellars, "kitchens, were filthy in the extreme. The drain"age bad; the water closet defective, and the "house overcrowded, the rooms of a small eight"roomed house, containing permanently living in "them 37 individuals. "The man at 30, Broad Street, who is recovering, "is a tailor, a teetotaller, and living on the first "floor back. The house, like many others, is "overcrowded, the cistern was filthy, the dust bin "was full, and the drainage was bad. "These two cases shew that were sanitary ar"rangements are most neglected, there the disease is "most likely to occur. These, however, are dropping "cases, what we have to dread is an outbreak —a "spread of the disease by poisoned water, such as is "now occurringin the East of London. I think this 43 "can occur in no other way but by our pumps. I "have that morning examined the water from them "afresh, and I have no hesitation in pronouncing "there dangerous. A single hot day might turn the "water in any one of them into a state of fermentation, "in which they would be dangerous to drink. A "single rat forming a connection between a cesspool "and one of these wells, might repeal the catas"trophe of 1854. I dare not take the responsibility "of remaining quiet whilst these pumps are open, "and at the risk of offending you by my pertinacity, "I implore you to order these pumps to be shut, "that I am not alone in my convictions with regard "to the danger of these pumps, allow me to read "a letter which appeared in the Times of Tuesday, "from two of the most eminent chemists in Europe. 'THE BROAD STREET PUMP. 'TO THE EDITOR OF THE TIMES. 'Sir,—We have just heard with surprise that 'this pump, after having been closed for several 'months, has been again opened to the public 'since the outbreak of Cholera in the Metropolis. 'The water from this pump has been repeatedly 'analysed and prouounced unlit for drinking and 44 'domestic purposes. One of us examined it as 'lately as July, 1865, and found it to be little else 'than filtered sewerage, notwithstanding its bright'ness and freedom from offensive smell and taste. 'We have no hesitation in saying that the use 'of this and other similar pumps in the Metropolis 'supplied as they are by surface and sewer drainage, 'is at the present juncture fraught with extreme 'peril to the community. It is well known that 'the pump in Broad Street was, in the cholera 'visitation in 1854, the centre of a terrible outburst 'of the disease; while an isolated fatal case in 'Hampstead was clearly connected with the use of 'Broad Street pump water. 'During the autumn of last year a startling 'outbreak of cholera occurred on the borders of 'Epping Forest, to which attention has again 'recently been called in the daily papers. The 'disease appears to have been brought to the spot 'by a member of a family who had been travelling 'in the west of England, and in this case it rapidly 'attacked other members of the household with 'great severity. All these persons used water from 'a particular pump, and it was ascertained by one 'of us, from the chemical analysis of the water, 'that it was largely contaminated with drainage 'from the water closet. Independently of this 'analysis, a leak from the closet into the well was 4ft 'discovered by the medical officer sent down to 'examine and report upon the case. 'The instances just cited distinctly show the 'danger of Allowing the discharges from cholera 'patients to find their way into waters used for 'dietetic purposes. Indeed, it can scarcely be 'doubted that a single case of cholera occurring 'within the drainage area supplying the Broad 'Street pump would, owing to the infected dis'charges from the patient finding their way into 'the well, provide the certain means of spreading 'disease And death among the surrounding in'habitants. 'For similar reasons we would most earnestly 'recommend the cloning of all pumps in the 'Metropolis during the continuance of cholera, 'since most of them derive their water from 'sources similar to that of Broad Street. With 'the supply of water now furnished by the drinking 'fountains such a temporary closing of these sur'fare wells could not occasion Any serious in'convenience, And might be the means of saving 'thousands of lives. 'It cannot be too strongly insisted upon that 'pollution of a nature to spread infection often 46 'really exists without sensibly affecting either the 'taste or the appearance of the water. 'We are, Sir, your obedient servants, 'W. ALLEN MILLER, M.D., F.R.S. 'King's College, London. 'E. FRANKLAND, F.R.S., Royal College, 'of Chemistry, London. Royal Hotel, Edinburgh, July 28." On the 16th of August I made the following report to the Vestry. "I must, however, draw your attention to the "fact that we have had in the three weeks five "deaths from Cholera, and one of Diarrhoea. "These cases have all been investigated, and only "one of them demands notice, because in only "one instance has the disease shewn a tendency to "spread. The case to which I allude is that of a "boy, eight years of age, at 5, Little Pulteney "Street. This boy came from Poplar, where his "mother was ill of Cholera, for the purpose of "seeing his relations in Little Pulteney Street, on "Tuesday, the 7th of August. The same night he "was attacked with Diarrhoea, and died on the "morning of the 9th. I had notice of this case "on the 11th, and visited the house. Apparently "every precaution was being taken to purify the 47 "house Disinfectants were used for the rooms "and closets, and the house was being whitewashed. "The came night the uncle of the boy was "attacked with Cholera, and died on Monday "morning. The house has been since thoroughly "examined, and no further cases hare occurred. "But this instance shews how thoroughly con"tagious this disease is, and how necessary it is to "investigate and watch every case of Cholera that "occurs in the Parish. Since I last reported, the "Sanitary Committee have held two meetings, and "steps have been taken to carry out the directions "of Privy Council issued under the Diseases Pre"ventive Act which is now called into force." During the remaining portion of August and throughout the whole of the month of September, up to the middle of October, the Sanitary Committee was in permanent session, and I wish here to record my sense of the ability and conscientiousness with which the Committee performed its arduous duties and supported me in all the measures I suggested for meeting the calamity which hung over us. On the reassembling of the Vestry on the 25th of October, I gave the following summary of the state of health of the Parish, and the measures adopted under the sanction of the Vestry by the Sanitary Committee: "As since I delivered my last report the Parish "has been subject to the long expected invasion of 48 " Cholera, I shall make this report special for "informing you of the sanitary condition of the "Parish during the ten weeks which have passed, "The Births and Deaths in the Parish during the "ten weeks, have been as follows: Date. Births. Deaths. * Zymotic Diseases. Ch. Di. M. S. F. H.C. Ty. Total. August 11 .. 15 2 • • 1 • • • • • • 3 „ 18 17 13 1 • • • • 1 , . • • 2 „ 25 18 16 1 • • • • • • • • • • 1 Sept. 1 14 11 • • 2 • • • • • • 1 3 „ 8 8 11 • • • • • • • • • • 1 1 „ 15 16 7 1 1 • • • • • • • • 2 „ 22 22 8 • • • • • • • • • • • • • • „ 29 14 15 1 2 1 • • 1 1 6 October 6 16 11 • • • • • • • • • • • • • • „ 13 14 8 • • • • • • • • • • • • • • 115 6 5 2 1 1 3 18 "From this table it will be seen that the deaths "are not only considerably below the average "deaths of the year, but that they are below the "average deaths of the season of the year. "It is, however, to the class of Zymotic diseases "to which we turn with most anxiety, and here we "find the following causes of Deaths: Cholera, 6; "Diarrhoea, 5; Typhus, 3; Measles, 2; Hooping "Cough, 1; Scarlet Fever, 1; making altogether "16 deaths. Now the average death from Zymotic "diseases in our Parish during the last four years " has been 115, or a little more than two a week. * In this Table Ch stands for Cholera; Di. for Diarrhæa; M. for Measles; S. F. for Scarlet Fever; H. C. Hooping Cough; Ty. Typhus Fever, 49 “That the deaths from Zymotic diseases has been “less during the put ten weeks than the average "of the last four years. “We come now to the examination of the "causes of Death in the Zymotic class and we “find that there have been 6 Deaths from Cholera, “and 5 from Diarrhœa. Even this amount of "death is favourable as compared with death of “the same class in past years. Thus during the "same ten weeks last year, we had 13 deaths from "Diarrhœa. From these statements it Appears "that we hare passed through this period of anxiety "with less death than usual. If you ask me how I “account for this I say it has been on account of "your sanitary activity. Whilst the sanitary com“mittee has organised a body of medical visitors "and inspectors to meet one enemy, it has kept ten "others from your doors. This shews the economic “value of sanitary measures, the few hundreds of "pounds spent upon them is a saving of thousands "of pounds to the Parish. “I now wish to draw pur attention to the "whole extent of the Cholera epidemic in this "Parish, which embraces a longer period than that "to which I hare alluded. The first case of “certified Cholera occurred on the 34th of July, “and the last to which I can now refer occurred on “the 16th of October. The following table is a 50 "record of all the cases. In this table I have not "inserted the case returned as "Diarrhœa" or "Choleraic Diarrhœa. LIST OF CASES OF CHOLERA FROM JULY 21th to OCT. 10th. Date. Sex. Age. Residence. Result. Where. July 24 M. .. 50, Brewer street Died. Mid. Hospl. „ 25 M. .. 30, Broad street Recovd. Mid. Hospl. Aug. 2 F. .. 2G8, Regent street Died. At home. „ 3 M. .. 29, Berwick street Lied. At home. „ 4 M. .. 14, Poland street Died. At home. „ 7 • • .. 76, Wardour street Died. At home. „ 9 M. .. 5, Little Pulteney st Died. At home. „ 11 M. .. 5, Little Pulteney st Died. At home. „ 23 M. .. 1, Harris's place Died. At home. Sept. 3 M. 58 3, Poland street Died. Mid. Hospl. „ 11 F. 22 24, Denman street Died. At home. „ 25 F. 60 8, Peter street Becovd. Mid. Hospl. „ 26 F. 9 8, Peter street Becovd. Mid. Hospl. „ 28 M. 33 Casual Ward Died. Mid. Hospl. Oct. 10 M. 42 25, Little Windmill st. Died. Mid. Hospl. "Of these 15 cases 12 died, and 3 recovered, "7 were treated in Middlesex Hospital, and the "rest at their own homes. Of the 7 sent to the "hospital, 3 recovered, and 4 died. It will be seen from "this list that several persons who contracted the "Cholera in our Parish died out of it. If this list "comprised all the cases of Cholera that occurred "in the Parish it would indicate an unusual mor"tality amongst those who had the disease, but it "is very probable that a large number of cases "occurred that got well without having been re"ported to me at all. We may be sure, however, "that all fatal cases have been reported. The "returns of 1866, thus contrast favourably with II “the disease as it appeared in its previous attacks. “In 1832 about 50 persons died; in 1849, 56 "persons; in 1854, 614 persons died. Provided “the disease does not linger throughout the winter "and break out agin next summer, we may regard "the result this year as highly favourable. This I “think be (airly attributable to the various measures "that have been taken for securing the health of "the Parish. "On the occurrence of the first cases of Cholera "at the end of July, the Sanitary Committee met, "and immediately took steps for the purpose of “cleaning and disinfecting those neighbourhoods “which were most exposed to the attacks of "Cholera. Two additional sanitary inspectors were "appointed, whose duty it was to visit from day to "day the houses of the most overcrowded streets “and courts. Disinfecting agents were applied to “those gullies and drains emitting offensive effluvia, "and the linen and clothes, and beds of those "known to suffer from Cholera were ordered to bo "destroyed. "The water companies were communicated with "and they gave a supply of water on Sundays, and "also furnished waster fur stand cocks in the street. "The water from all suspected cisterns and "water butta were collected, and brought to me "and examined. A large number of neglected “citterns and butts were thus discovered. 52 "The authorities of Middlesex Hospital and the "Committee of the St. James's Dispensary, King "Street, were communicated with, and arrangements "made with the Middlesex Hospital for receiving "patients attacked with Cholera, and with the Dis"pensary for supplying medicines for those taken with "Diarrhœa, and also with disinfectants adapted to "the demands of special cases. "A series of directions in case of attacks of "Diarrhoea and Cholera were printed and issued to "every house and posted in various parts of the "Parish. "On the 14th of August four medical visitors "were appointed to take the medical charge or "persons suffering from Diarrhoea and Cholera. "Mr. Armstrong of 32, Duke street, was ap"pointed for Pall Mall Ward; Mr. Keyes, of "Warwick Street, for Church Ward; Dr. Slight, "of Brewer Street, for Golden Square Ward ; Dr. "Hursley, of Princes Street, for Marlborough "Ward. "To each of these gentlemen a diary was "furnished in which they entered every case they "attended with the name, state of the house, and "notes of the symptoms in each case. These "books were examined by me every day. "Mr. Keyes discontinued his attendance on the "12th of September, Mr. Armstrong on the 17th, 53 “Dr. Slight on the 24th, and Dr. Hursley on the “ 2nd of October. “ In recommending the discontinuance of the “services of these gentlemen, I was guided by the decline of cases of Diarrhœa in their various “ districts. “The following is a weekly return of the number “of cases of Diarrhœa, principally under the care “of these gentlemen: August 18th 166 “25 the 339 Sept. 1 206 “8 188 “15 215 “22 107 “29 57 Oct. 6 11 “13 10 “20 10 1309 “It is impossible to say how many of these “cases were prevented from developing into Cholera “by the early and prompt attention which they “received. In all cases of Cholera the early or “premonitory stmptoms are precidely those of “Diarrhœa. hence every case of Diarrhœa. when “Cholera is prevailing, should be treated as a case 54 "of Cholera, and thus alone can Cholera be pre"vented. "The eases of Cholera which occured in our "Parish were clearly imported. Thus I ascertained "from enquiry the woman who died in Regent "Street had recently visited Poplar. The boy who "died at 5, Little Pulteney Street, came from "Poplar, the woman at 24, Denman Street, had "been attending upon her sister who had Cholera “at Ramsgate; the tramp who died in the casual "ward, had slept the night before at Brentford. "Although no positive evidence could be obtained "in the other cases, there was nothing to lead to "the conclusion that the disease had broken out "spontaneously or to prevent the supposition that "they had been in contact with previous Cholera "cases. "In two instances only did the disease spread. "The one was the case of the boy at 5. Little "Pulteney Street, whose uncle seemed to have "contracted the disease from him, and whose case “I have previously reported, and the case of the "woman and child at 8, Peter Street. In this “case the woman was taken ill one day and sent "to the Hospital, and the child was taken with the "same symptoms the next day; but these cases "recovered. “With regard to the future I would strenuously 55 “urge that the additional sanitary inspector be “ continued, that the surface well pomps be abso“lately closed, that if possible a constant instead of “an intermittent supply of water be procured, that "the provision of the Thames Purification Act be "carried out, that the sewerage of the streets be "improved, that disinfectants be extensively em“ployed, and that house to house visitation be “carried throughout the winter. It should be "remembered that the germs not of the Cholera poison "are still existing in our midst, and only waiting "the slumbering of our local authorities, to burst "out, and again demonstrate that the most costly “extravagance in which we can indulge is The neg“lect of the sanitary condition of our population.” Only one other case of Cholera was reported during the year, and this occurred In a young woman in Hed. don Court, Regent Street She died in Middlesex Hospital, and Or. Goodfellow, under whose care she was, expressed some doubt as to whether it was a case of genuine Asiatic Cholera. Mortality or 1800. I now beg to draw your attention to the Tables published with this Report. The four printed tables give you at a glance not only the number of deaths in each quarter, but the cause of the death. The following table gives the deaths in each quarter: 56 1st quarter, total deaths 211 2nd do. „ 265 3rd do. „ 128 4th do. „ 165 Total 769 The average death in the Parish for the list ten years has been 732, so that it will be seen that the excess of death has been 37; but this has not been owing to Cholera, for dining the quarter in —which Cholera was prevalent the death is less than in any other quarter. I can only attribute this to the general anxiety to care for health when a great danger is near, combined with the sanity activity prevailing during such a period. The excess of mortality above the average really occurred in the first and second quarters of the year, and was due to the same causes of which I made an elaborate and special investigation in the report which I laid before you for the year 1864. The prevention of the influence of sudden cold on life has not yet sufficiently occupied the attention of those engaged in the study of the laws of life, and at the present time our death rate is more influenced by the unlooked-for de- pression of external temperature than any other cause. 57 During the year the deaths from Zymotic diseases were as follows: Cholera, 8 Diarrhœa, 19 Hooping Cough 21 Measles, 19 Scarlet Fever, 30 'typhus Fever, 7 Small Pox, 1 105 The average deaths from Zymotic diseases during the past ten years has been 114, so that it will be seen thai the actual deaths from these preventable The Sanitary Inspector's report of nuisances of them was discharged when Cholera and Diarrhœa ceased, hut the services of the other hate been retained and the benefit of his labour is teen in the increased number of nuisances detected and removed. I hope to shew next year, that where nuisanees are removed, there health is maintained 58 and disease and death prevented, and that the most economical expenditure of public money, is in the maintaining that health and strength, which alone, is the source of wealth and national prosperity. I am, Rev. Sir, My Lords, and Gentlemen, Your most obedient humble Servant, EDWIN LANKESTER. Vestry Hall, Piccadilly, July 16th, 1867. Appendix. constating page 1. Tables of Causes of Death, 60 2, Report of Sanitary Inspector's Work, 64 3. A Summary of Work during the Year 1866, 69 4. Drains Reconstructed, cleansed, Repaired, &c. during the year 1866, 70 5. Directions for the preservation of Health, &c. 75 60 TABLE OF CAUSES OF DEATH. Deaths in Quarter ending March 1866. CAUSES OF DEATH. St. James's Square. Golden Square. Berwick Street. Workhouse. Under 1 Year of Age. Above 1 and under 5. Above 5 and under 20. Above 20 and under 40. Above 40 and under 60. Above 00 and under 80. Above 80 and upwards. At all Ages. Measles 2 8 1 .. 2 9 .. .. .. .. .. 11 Scarlatina 3 2 .. .. .. 2 .. .. .. .. .. 5 Diphtheria 1 1 .. .. .. 2 .. .. .. .. .. 2 Whooping Cough 1 2 i .. 1 3 .. .. .. .. .. 4 Erysipelas 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 .. 1 Dysentery 1 .. .. 1 .. .. .. .. 1 1 .. 2 Diarrhoea .. .. .. .. 1 .. .. .. .. 1 .. 2 Rheumatism .. 1 .. .. .. 1 .. .. .. .. .. 1 Syphilis .. 1 .. 1 2 .. .. .. .. .. .. 2 Delirium Tremens 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 .. .. .. 1 Gout 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 .. 1 Cancer .. .. .. 1 .. .. .. .. 1 .. .. 1 Tabes Mesenterica .. .. 1 .. 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 Phthisis 8 9 10 10 .. 2 7 13 12 3 .. 37 Hydrocephalus .. 1 2 .. .. 3 .. .. .. .. .. 3 Apoplexy 2 4 1 .. .. .. .. 3 3 1 .. 7 Paralysis 1 2 .. 2 .. .. .. .. .. 5 5 Epilepsy .. .. 1 .. .. .. .. .. 1 .. .. 1 Convulsions 5 3 2 2 8 4 .. .. .. .. 12 Brain Disease 2 1 3 I 1 3 .. .. 2 1 .. 7 Heart Disease 1 2 2 6 . . .. .. .. 4 7 .. 11 Laryngitis 1 1 .. .. 1 1 .. .. .. .. .. 2 Bronchitis 1 14 12 3 6 6 .. 1 9 7 1 30 Pneumonia 2 4 3 3 4 3 .. 1 3 .. 1 12 Asthma 2 2 .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 3 .. 4 Peritonitis .. .. 2 .. 1 1 .. .. .. .. .. 2 Ulceration of Intestines .. .. .. 1 .. .. .. 1 .. .. .. 1 Hernia .. .. .. 1 .. .. .. .. .. 1 .. 1 Hepatitis 1 1 .. .. .. .. .. 1 .. .. .. 2 Disease of Liver 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 .. .. 1 Nephritis .. 1 .. 1 .. .. .. .... 1 1 .. 2 Joint Disease .. .. .. 1 .. .. .. .. 1 .. .. 1 Phlegmon .. 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 .. .. 1 Ulcer .. 1 .. 1 1 1 .. .. .. .. .. 2 Premature Birth .. 1 1 1 3 .. .. .. .. .. .. 3 Teething .. .. 8 .. 4 4 .. .. .. .. .. 8 Childbirth .. .. 1 .. .. .. .. 1 .. .. .. 1 Old Age 1 1 1 1 .. .. .. .. .. 1 3 4 Atrophy and Debility 4 5 4 .. 10 1 .. .. 1 1 .. 13 Fractures and Contusions .. 2 .. 1 .. .. .. .. 1 .. 2 3 Causes not specified .. 1 .. .. 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 43 72 58 38 47 46 10 23 43 34 8 211 61 Deaths in Quarter ending March 1866. CAUSES OF DEATH. St. James's Square. Golden Square. Berwick Street. Workhouse. Under 1 Year of Age. Above 1 and under 5. Above 5 and under 20. Above 20 and under 40. Above 40 and under 60. Above 00 and under 80. Above 80 and upwards. At all Ages. Measles 1 1 4 .. .. 5 .. 1 .. .. .. 6 Scarlatina 11 3 1 .. 3 11 1 .. .. .. .. 15 croup .. .. 2 .. 1 1 .. .. .. .. .. 2 Whooping Cough 1 3 5 4 1 11 .. .. .. .. .. 12 Typhus 1 .. 1 .. .. 1 1 .. .. .. .. 2 Erysipelas .. .. .. 3 .. .. .. 1 .. 2 .. 3 Measles 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 .. .. .. 1 Diarrhœa .. 1 5 .. 3 1 2 .. .. .. .. 6 Remittent Fever 1 .. .. .. .. .. 1 .. .. .. .. 1 Rheumatism 1 .. .. .. .. 1 .. .. .. .. .. 1 Syphilis .. 1 .. 3 3 1 .. .. .. .. .. 4 Thrush .. .. 1 .. 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 Gout .. .. 1 .. 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 Dropsy 2 .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 3 .. .. 1 Cancer 3 .. 1 .. 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. 8 Scrofula .. .. 1 .. .. 1 .. .. .. .. .. 41 Tabes Mesenteries 1 .. 2 5 5 3 .. .. .. .. .. 1 Phthises 6 15 9 11 1 3 8 17 8 4 .. 1 Hydrocephalus .. 1 .. .. .. 1 .. .. .. .. .. 6 Cephalitis 1 10 Apoplexy 3 1 1 1 .. .. .. .. 3 3 .. 2 Paralysis 1 .. 1 8 .. .. .. .. 3 6 2 10 Epilepsy .. 2 .. .. .. .. 1 .. 1 .. .. 2 Convulsions 3 7 1 .. 5 5 1 .. .. .. .. 11 Brain Disease, &c. 2 1 1 2 1 1 .. .. 3 1 .. 6 Heart Disease, &c. 2 2 1 3 1 1 3 3 Laryngitis .. 1 .. .. .. 1 .. .. .. .. .. 1 Bronchitis 7 11 7 4 6 5 2 2 9 2 .. 26 Pleurisy 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 .. .. 2 Pneumonia 5 7 5 4 10 5 1 .. 1 4 .. 21 Asthma 1 1 .. 1 .. .. .. .. 1 2 .. 3 Lang Disease .. 1 1 1 .. .. 1 .. 1 1 .. 3 Gastritis 2 .. .. .. 1 1 1 .. .. .. .. 1 Enteritis .. .. 1 .. 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 Hepatitis .. .. 1 .. .. .. .. 1 .. .. .. 1 Jaundice 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 4 Liver Disease, &c. 1 .. 3 .. .. .. .. .. 3 1 .. 1 Kidney Disease .. .. 1 .. .. .. .. .. 1 .. .. 1 Uterus Disease, &c. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 .. .. 1 Ulcer .. 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 3 Premature Birth .. .. 4 1 3 .. .. .. .. .. .. 9 Teething 3 2 4 .. 6 3 .. .. .. .. .. 2 Childbirth .. .. 2 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 12 Old Age .. 2 1 2 .. .. .. .. 2 .. .. 5 Atrophy and Debility .. 2 1 2 .. .. .. .. .. 3 2 1 ??? .. 2 3 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 Gun shot Wounds 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 .. 1 Hanging .. 1 .. .. .. .. 1 .. .. .. .. 2 Causes not specified .. .. 2 .. 1 .. 1 .. .. .. .. 2 65 65 74 60 59 62 22 23 43 42 12 265 62 Deaths in Quarter ending September 29th, 1866. CAUSES OF DEATH. St. James's Square. Golden Square. Berwick Street. Workhouse. Under 1 Year of age. Above 1 and under 5. Above 5 and under 20. Above 20 and under 40. Above 40 and under 6O. Above 60 and under 80. Above 80 and upwards. At all Ages. Mealess • • • • 1 • • • • 1 • • • • • • • • • • 1 Scarlatina 1 • • • • • • • • 1 • • • • • • • • • • 1 Diphtheria • • 1 • • • • • • 1 • • • • • • • • • • 1 Whooping Cough • • 1 1 • • 1 1 • • • • • • • • • • 2 Typhus Fever • • • • 1 • • • • 1 • • • • • • • • • • 1 Erysipelas 1 • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • 1 • • 1 Dysentery • • • • 1 • • 1 • • • • • • • • • • • • 1 Diarrhoea 5 3 4 • • 7 2 • • 1 2 • • • • 12 Cholera 1 1 3 • • • • • • • • 2 2 1 • • 5 Remittent Fever 2 • • • • • • • • 1 • • • • 1 • • • • 2 Syphillis 1 • • • • • • 1 • • • • • • • • • • • • 2 Thrush 1 • • • • • • 1 • • • • • • • • • • • • 1 Cancer 2 • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • 2 • • 2 Mortification 1 • • • • • • 1 • • • • • • • • • • • • 1 Tabes Mesenterica 2 • • 2 • • 2 2 • • • • • • • • • • 4 Phthisis 1 6 4 • • • • 1 3 3 6 1 14 Hydrocephalus • • 1 3 • • 1 3 • • • • • • • • • • 4 Apoplexy 2 1 3 • • • • • • • • • • 1 3 • • 5 Paralysis 2 1 • • • • • • • • • • • • 1 2 • • 3 Epilepsy • • • • 2 • • • • • • • • • • 2 • • • • 2 Convulsions • • 5 1 • • 3 3 • • • • • • • • • • 6 Brain Disease, &c. • • 1 1 • • • • 2 • • • • • • • • • • 2 Heart Disease, &c. • • 1 • • 2 • • • • • • • • 2 1 • • 3 Bronchitis • • 1 4 2 1 1 • • • • 3 2 • • 7 Pneumonia 1 1 3 • • 2 • • • • • • 2 • • • • 5 Asthma 1 • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • 1 • • 1 Lung Disease, &c. 1 • • • • • • • • • • • • • • 1 • • • • 1 Enteritis • • • • 1 • • • • • • • • 1 • • • • • • 1 Stricture of Intestines 1 • • • • • • • • • • 1 • • • • • • • • 1 Stomach Disease, &c. 1 • • 1 • • • • • • • • • • 2 • • • • 2 Hepatitis 1 • • • • • • • • • • • • • • 1 • • • • 1 Liver Disease 1 • • 2 1 • • • • • • • • 3 1 • • 4 Nephria • • • • • • 1 • • • • • • • • 1 • • • • 1 Cvstitis • • • • • • 2 • • • • • • • • • • 2 • • 2 Kidney Disease 1 1 • • • • • • • • • • 1 • • 1 • • 2 Ovarian Dropsy 1 • • • • • • • • • • • • 1 • • • • • • 1 Spina Bifida • • • • 1 • • • • 1 • • • • • • • • • • 1 Teething 1 1 1 • • • • 1 • • • • • • • • • • 3 Childbirth • • • • 1 • • • • • • • • • • 1 • • • • 1 Old Age • • 3 1 6 • • • • • • • • • • 8 2 10 Atrophy & Debility • • 2 3 • • 5 • • • • • • • • • • • • 5 Poison • • 3 • • • • • • 1 • • 1 1 • • • • 3 32 34 44 18 28 24 6 11 31 26 2 128 63 Deaths in Quarter ending September 29th, 1866. CAUSES OF DEATH. St. James's Square. Golden Square. Berwick Street. Workhouse. Under 1 Year of age. Above 1 and under 5. Above 5 and under 20. Above 20 and under 40. Above 40 and under 6O. Above 60 and under 80. Above 80 and upwards. At all Ages. Small Pox .. .. 1 .. .. 1 .. .. .. .. .. 1 Measles .. .. 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 Scarlatina .. 4 2 .. .. 5 1 .. .. .. .. 6 Croup 1 .. .. .. 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 Whooping Cough 1 2 .. .. 1 2 .. .. .. .. .. 3 Typhus .. 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 .. 1 Dysentery .. .. .. .. 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 Diarrhœa 1 1 1 .. 1 .. .. .. 1 .. .. 2 Syphilis .. 1 .. .. 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 Gout .. 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 Dropsy .. 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 2 Cancer .. 1 .. .. .. .. 1 .. .. .. .. 1 Scrofula .. 2 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 .. 1 Phthisis .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 Hydrocephalus .. 2 1 .. .. .. .. .. 3 .. .. 3 Apoplexy 1 .. 1 1 1 .. .. .. .. .. 2 Paralysis 8 6 4 4 .. .. 3 9 7 3 .. 22 Epilepsy 1 1 2 .. 2 1 .. .. .. .. .. 4 Convulsions 1 1 1 1 .. .. .. 2 .. .. 2 4 Brain Diseases 1 .. .. 3 .. .. .. .. 2 .. 2 4 Heart Disease .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 Laryngitis .. 1 .. .. .. .. 1 .. .. .. .. 2 Bronchitis .. 1 .. 1 2 .. .. .. .. .. .. 9 Phthises 2 5 2 .. 4 2 .. 2 1 .. .. 14 Pneumonia 4 4 1 5 1 .. .. 4 5 4 .. 1 Asthma .. 1 .. .. .. 1 .. .. .. .. .. 29 Lung Disease 6 11 11 1 16 6 .. 1 3 8 1 2 Enteritis 1 .. 1 .. .. 5 .. .. .. 1 .. 17 6 8 8 .. 5 6 1 1 2 2 .. 1 Hepatitis 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 .. 1 Jaundice .. 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 .. 1 Liver Disease 1 .. .. .. 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. 3 ??? .. 2 1 .. .. 1 1 1 .. .. .. 1 Kidany Disease .. 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 .. .. 1 Uterus Diasese .. 1 .. .. 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. 2 Premature Birth 2 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 2 .. 2 Spina Births .. .. 1 .. .. 1 .. .. 2 .. .. 1 Teething .. 1 2 .. 1 2 .. .. .. 1 1 3 Old Age 2 3 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. 2 4 6 2 1 1 1 4 .. .. .. .. 1 .. 5 Hanging .. 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 .. 1 43 66 40 16 35 31 8 22 27 22 7 165 64 St. James's, westminster. REPORT OF SANITARY INSPECTOR'S WORK, FOR THE YEAR 1866. nuisances removed or abated. First Quarter. Second Quarter. Third Quarter. Fourth Quarter. For the whole Year. Areas, front, lime-whited 1 4 68 4 77 „ back „ 3 2 27 5 37 „ front, paving of, repaired .. .. 1 1 2 „ back„ „ .. 1 .. 3 4 „ cleansed , .. 1 5 1 7 Abodes cleansed 1 2 8 1 12 Animal matter removed .. 1 2 .. 3 Basement rooms, walls and ceilings lime-whited .. 3 30 5 47 passages „ .. 4 32 6 42 „ stairs „ „ .. .. 1 5 6 „ floors washed „ „ .. 1 2 15 18 „ room floors washed „ 2 .. 1 .. 3 Bedding purified .. .. 11 .. 11 „ and bed clothes 1 .. .. 1 3 „ destroyed 1 .. 6 .. 7 Beds and mattresses destroyed . .. .. .. 14 14 Bones removed .. 1 .. 1 2 Butts, cisterns, and other water receptacles cleansed .. 1 18 8 27 „ „ „ „ lepaired 2 1 .. 2 5 „ „ „ „ new ones added • • • • 1 • • 1 „ „ „ „ covers added to • • 3 29 5 37 Cesspools cleansed out and filled up 3 2 1 • • 6 Courts, lime-whited 1 2 • • 2 5 Corpse interred by request .. 1 • • .. 1 Drainage matter stopped from entering premises 2 3 2 2 9 Drains re-constructed with pipes 3 4 .. .. 7 „ defective pipes of, repaired 1 .. .. 1 2 „ repaired ...... 5 9 17 13 44 „ unstopped and cleansed 7 14 22 19 62 „ old ones not in use removed .. 1 .. .. 1 „ traps added to 12 11 53 13 89 „ connections of, made good .. .. 12 .. 12 „ foul ones cleansed 6 2 9 2 19 Carried forward 51 75 367 129 622 65 REPORT OF SANITARY INSPECTOR'S WORK,-(Continued.) nuisances removed or abated. First Quarter. Second Quarter. Third Quarter. Fourth Quarter. For the whole Year. Brought forward 51 75 367 129 683 Dast-??? cleared 19 38 25 40 122 „ new ones furnished 2 4 25 5 8 „ tops and corers added to 1 5 19 11 36 „ repaired 1 5 16 1 26 Dilapidations, interior, made good 3 8 24 1 36 „ interior 3 1 4 Damp prevented 3 1 2 Dwellings overcrowded 1 1 2 Dogs removed 2 5 2 2 9 fouls removed 1 1 foul smells prevented 5 6 12 2 25 Fish refuse 2 4 6 „ unfit for human food 1 1 Gas, stopped from entering houses and premises 1 1 Gallies cleansed .. 1 1 2 „ repaired 1 .. 1 .. 2 „ street deodorised .. .. 9 .. 2 Houses to which a full supply of water added 2 3 1 3 9 „ painted, white-washed, &c. .. 1 .. .. 4 Horses removed .. 1 .. .. 1 Kitchens line-whited, front 1 5 33 6 45 „ „ back 5 9 59 4 77 „ cleared of occupants 9 .. .. .. 9 Lumber removed .. .. 2 .. 2 Lead flats and gutters cleaned .. 2 10 2 14 Most unfit fot human food destroyed .. .. .. 1 1 Manure removed 1 .. .. .. 1 Oyster shells removed .. .. 2 .. 2 privies, open ones abolished .. 1 .. .. 1 passed and trapped .. .. 1 .. 1 pasanger, entrance line, whited 10 10 104 4 125 „ „ floors of, washed 3 1 3 9 16 „ „ „ repaired 1 .. .. .. 1 Paint work washed and cleaned 1 .. .. .. 1 carried forward 120 187 725 229 1961 66 REPORT OF SANITARY INSPECTOR'S WORK,—(Continued.) NUISANCES REMOVED OR ABATED. First Quarter. Second Quarter. Third Quarter. Fourth Quarter. For the whole Year. Brought forward 120 187 725 229 1261 Rain-water pipes repaired .. 2 4 5 11 ,, ,, unstopped and cleansed 2 1 1 2 (! ,, ,, trapped .. 2 2 1 5 Rain-water stopped from rooms 1 4 8 2 15 Rooms, walls and ceilings white-washed 30 95 472 48 045 ,, floors of, washed 4 7 9 4 24 ,, „ repaired .. 12 .. 1 13 „ over-crowded ones cleared 1 .. 3 3 7 „ ventilation of, attended to .. 1 .. .. 1 „ „ improved in .. .. 8 1 9 “purified .. .. .. l 1 Rubbish removed .. 2 12 4 18 Rabbits removed .. .. 2 1 3 Smoke 2 1 .. .. 3 Stairs, main, white-washed 11 17 155 8 191 „ basement, white-washed .. 6 70 .. 70 „ „ steps washed 4 3 .. 10 17 Shops, walls and ceilings white-washed .. 7 30 1 38 Sheds and out-buildings lime-whited 1 2 7 .. 10 Structures dangerous, made safe .. .. .. 2 2 Urinals cleansed .. 1 2 .. 3 „ public ones cleansed .. .. 8 .. 8 Urine, nuisance from, stopped 1 •• 1 • • 2 Vaults lime-whited 1 2 14 1 18 Vegetable refuse removed •• 3 3 1 7 Water stopped from entering premises . 5 3 2 .. 10 Water-closets lime-whited 13 34 118 2 107 „ ventilation improved in 2 .. .. .. 2 „ furnished with a supply of water 4 10 61 31 100 „ seats, new ones added to 2 .. .. 2 4 ,, seats of, repaired .. 6 4 1 11 ,, raisers, new ones added 2 .. 1 .. 3 ,, ,, repaired 2 7 .. 3 12 „ pans, new 1 6 5 3 15 ,, traps, new 3 8 2 6 19 ,, soil pipes, new 1 .. .. 1 2 „ ,, repaired .. 2 .. 12 14 ,, service pipes repaired 3 .. .. .. 3 Carried forward 216 431 1729 386 2762 67 REPORT OF SANITARY INSPECTOR'S WORK,-(Continued.) NUISANCES REMOVED OR ABATED. First Quarter. Second Quarter. Third Quarter. Fourth Quarter. For the whole Year. Brought forward 216 431 1729 348 2762 Water-closets apparates, new or repaired 2 8 81 24 65 „ general dilapidations in, repaired 1 7 22 4 34 „ pans of, cleansed of soil 6 12 21 32 71 „ „ foul ones cleansed .. 4 63 23 90 „ „ flaps added to .. 1 .. .. 1 „ Floors new or repaired 2 5 5 3 15 „ rebuilt 1 4 .. .. 5 „ cleansed generally 10 13 79 91 104 Windows repaired .. 3 1 1 5 „ top washes made to move down .. .. 7 1 8 Yard, walls of, lime-whited 8 21 95 2 126 „ Paving of, repaired 2 12 9 3 26 „ „ cleansed 5 3 5 73 86 „ walls of repaired .. .. 1 .. 1 SLAUGHTER HOUSES. Walls of, lime-whited .. 3 5 1 9 Yards „ .. 1 .. 1 2 Sheep pens .. 3 .. 1 4 Offal and blood removed .. .. 57 73 130 STABLES. Stables white-washed 1 4 .. .. 5 Main drains of yards let off .. .. 1 .. 1 Menure removed from .. 1 14 62 77 Yards of, cleansed .. .. 1 .. 1 BAKE-HOUSES. Walls and ceilings of, line whited 7 .. .. .. 7 „ „ store rooms 2 .. .. .. 2 „ „ basement stairs 6 .. .. .. 6 „ „ of yards 2 .. .. .. 2 „ „ front areas 2 .. .. .. 2 PUBLIC SCHOOLS. Urinal, walls cleansed .. .. 3 .. 3 Drains, traps furnished to .. .. „ pipes, offentive ones cleansed and altered 2 .. 1 Yard walls time whited .. .. 1 .. 1 Aros walls .. .. 1 .. 1 Dust line, dilapidated ones repaired .. .. 1 .. 1 „ covers furnished to .. .. 1 .. 1 Carried forward 27 139 21134 782 1247 68 REPORT OF SANITARY INSPECTOR'S WORK,—(Continued.) NUISANCES REMOVED OR ABATED. First Quarter. Second Quarter. Third Quarter. Fourth Quarter. For the whole Year. Brought forward 270 530 2150 782 3747 Rooms lime-whited .. .. 1 .. 1 Water-closets furnished with water .. .. 8 .. 8 ,, apparatus repaired .. .. 4 .. 4 „ cleansed .. .. 5 .. 5 „ pans of, broken, removed, and new ones furnished .. .. 1 .. 1 „ delapidated generally repaired .. .. 1 .. 1 „ offensive cleansed .. .. 12 .. 12 ,, pans furnished .. .. 1 .. 1 „ pans foul, cleansed .. .. 4 .. 4 ,, seats delapidated, repaired .. .. 8 .. 3 „ cleansed generally .. .. 5 .. 5 Totals 270 539 2201 782 3792 *9 SUMMARY OF WORK DURING THE YEAR. First Quarter. Second Quarter. Third Quarter. Fourth Quarter. For the whole Year. Number of Nuisenses removed 264 495 1804 456 3139 „ notices served 43 62 141 61 407 „ „ attended to 41 64 223 51 375 „ houses drained with 9 inch pipes 2 .. 1 1 4 „ „ „ 6 „ 1 3 8 .. 12 „ „ cases of scarlatina visited 4 10 17 22 53 „ „ typhus fever „ .. .. .. 1 1 „ „ typhoid „ .. .. .. 1 6 „ „ continued „ 1 1 2 4 „ „ small-pox „ 5 6 3 4 „ „ diphtheria 1 1 .. 2 „ „ diarrhoea „ .. 1 45 20 66 „ „ cholera „ .. .. 12 2 14 „ complaints received 36 53 216 49 334 „ of visits made to slaughter houses 36 12 ??? 163 335 „ „ „ to late houses 9 .. .. .. 9 JAMES H MORGAN, sanitary Inspector June 14th, 1867. 70 St James's, westminster. Drains reconstructed, cleansed, repaired, &c., during the Year 1866. 5, Angelsea Yard. Drain reconstructed with pipes. July 15th. 8, Argyll Street, Little. Drain unstopped. July 9th. 51, Brewer Street. Main drain unstopped. April 21st. 10, Blenheim Street. Main drain unstopped and cleansed. June 12th. 30, Broad Street. Branch drain in front area reconstructed. December 13th. 14, Coach and Horses Yard. Drain repaired. December 18th. 6, Crown Court, Great. Main drain repaired. February 27th. 26, Crown Court, Great. Main drain unstopped. May 18th. 26, Crown Court, Great. Main and branch drains let off. June 20th. 71 27, Crown Court, Grent. Main drain estopped. May 18th. 40, Haymarket. A portion of the drain ??? with 6 inch peper. August 2nd. 8, Husband Street. Drain let off. May 8th. 10, Hodon Court. Main drain unstopped. August 14th. 11, Heddon Court. Main drain unstopped. August 14th. 8, James Street Lower. Main drain reconstructed with 6 inch piper from front wall of house. 4, James Street, Upper. Main drain unstoped. May 2nd. 4, Kind Street, Pall Mall. Drains repaired. March 29th. 21, King Street, Pall Mall. Drain from water-closet repaired. February 26th. 7, ??? Street. Main drain unstopped. June 21 st. 46, Marlborough Street, Great. House drained from main power up to party wall of back kitchen with 9 inch piper, and from thence through wine collar with 6 inch ditto, all the branches 6 inch. February 26th. 11, Marshall street. Main drain let off. May 2nd. 46, Marshall Street, School. Drain from boys water-closet, repaired with piper. February. 46, Marshall street. National School, drain from Boys water-closet let off. November 14th. 16, New Street. Main drain let off. August 21st, 1 Norris Street, Main drain unstopped. November 30th. 2, Norris Street. Main drain unstopped. November 30th. 72 3, Norris Street. Main drain unstopped and repaired. November 30th. 4, Norris Street. Main drain unstopped and repaired. November 30th. 1, Poland Street. Drain in front area reconstructed with pipes. April 24th. 10, Poland Street. Main drain let off. September 15th. 1, Pall Mall. Main drain of house reconstructed with 6 inch pipes, and connected direct with the branch sewer in vault, August 7th. 2, Pall Mall. Main drain of house reconstructed with 6 inch pipes, and connected direct with the branch sewer in vault. August 7th. 3, Pall Mall. Main drain of house reconstructed with 6 inch pipes, and connected direct with the branch sewer in vault. August 7th. 4, Pall Mall. Main drain of house reconstructed with 6 inch pipes, and connected direct with the branch sewer in vault. August 7th. 5, Pall mall. Main drain of house reconstructed with 6 inch pipes, and connected direct with the branch sewer in vault. August 7th. 5½ Pall mall. Main drain of house reconstructed with 6 inch pipes, and connected direct with the branch sewer in vault. August 7th. 24, Portland Street. Main drain reconstructed with 6 inch pipes from back Area to front ditto. September 19th. 48, Piccadilly. A new main drain put down, from sewer up to water-closet on basement, main of 9 inch, branches of 6 inch pipes, December 11th. 73 23s, Peter Street. Main drain let off. March 254th. 21, Ryder Street. Drains repaired. February 5th. 46. Report Street. Mains drain unstopped and repaired. June 5th. 56, Report Street. House and Premises drained from water- closets to main sewer, with 6 inch pipes, and branch drains with 4 inch pipes, February 20th. 96, Regent Street. Main and branch drains cleaned and repaired. April 9th. 130, Regent street, Drain reconstructed with 9 inch pipes, from water-closet to branch sewer. July 2nd. 5, Richmond street. Main drain let off. August 3rd. 1 and 2, Smith's Court. Drains unstopped. May 17th. Smith's Court. Drain let off. September 15th. 9, St. James's Place. A new branch drain of 6 inch pipes, from water-closet in yard to main in back ares. June 11th. 10, St. James's Street. Drain repaired. February 26th. 71, St. James's Street. House drained from sewer to party wall of back Premises, with 9 inch pipes, there to water-closet, with 6 inch ditto, all the branches are of 6 inch pipes, February 24th. 2, Tyler's Court, Berwick street. Main drain let off. February 12th. 3, Tyler's Court, Berwick Street. Drain let off. may 3rd. 4, Tyler's Court, Berwick Street. Main drain let off. May 3rd. 27, Tichborne Street. Mian drain unstopped. March 1st. 74 17, Windmill Street, Little. Drain repaired. December 5th. 18, Windmill Street, Little. Drain unstopped. February 10th. 21, Warwick street. Main and branch mains reconstructed with pipes, main 6 inch, branches 4 inch. May 10th. 22, Warwick Street. House and Premises drained into main sewer, main of 6 inch, and branch of four inch pipes. May 25th. 73, Wardour Street. Main drain unstopped. May 19th. 77, Wardour Street. Drain in yard let off. May 2nd. Let off again, May 8th. JAMES H. MORGAN, Sanitary Inspector. June 14th, 1867. FOR THE PRESERVATION OF HEALTH, &c. \ * " . ■ i I.- DIRECTIONS FOR THE PRESERVATION OP HEALTH. Cleanliness.- Nothing contributes more to health than cleanliness, and nothing invited disease so much as dirt. Dwelling rooms should be white-washed at least once a year, and the floors of rooms and stairs scrubbed once a week. Children should be washed at home, from head to foot, once or twice a week; and grown up persons, both male and female, should frequently use a bath. The linen should be changed once a fortnight, and be;stcasds taken down and cleaned once a year at least. Dirty slops should never be allowed to remain in sitting or bed rooms, Every convenience for washing clothes and bathing will be found at the Baths and Washouses, 16, Marshall Street Fresh Air.- In every house, sitting room, bed room, work- shop, school, or public building, two things should be attended to: First, the getting rid of the bad air which comes from the lungs, and the letting is of the fresh air from without. Fires ventilate rooms in cold weather, but all rooms without fires should be ventilated by letting down the top much of the window, by ventilating panes in the windows, or valves is the chimaies, Care should be taken not to over-crowd sitting and bet rooms; and persons should avoid occupying over-crowded 78 houses. Every sitting room and sleeping room should have at least 500 cubic feet for each individual. The occupation of small and unventilated kitchens as sleeping rooms is contrary to law. Water.—Water should never be drunk when it is not clear, or smells. It is a safe plan to boil or filter it, or both, before drinking. Cisterns and water butts should be cleansed out at least once a month, when not exposed, and every week when they are exposed to light. It is better to keep them always covered. Water from pumps with surface wells should not be drunk. The following street pumps in the Parish have surface wells, and are liable to be charged with the leakage from sewers, cesspools, and drains, viz.:— Burlington Gardens; Warwick Street; Broad Street; Marlborough Mews; Great Marlborough Street; Tichborne Street; Little St. James's Street; Duke Street; and Charles Street. Food and Drink.—Stale fish and bad meat of all kinds, as well as fruit and vegetables in a state of decay should be avoided. The habitual use of ardent spirits is a common cause of disease and death. Bad Smells.—The inhabitants of no house are safe from disease if they are exposed to offensive or disgusting smells of any kind. These may arise from various causes, as follows: — 1. Dustbins or Ashpits.—These should never be allowed to smell. They should be emptied at least once a week. All vegetable and animal refuse should be burned, and not thrown into the dustbin at all. The parish dustmen, when requested, arc bound to remove the refuse from a dustbin without fee or reward. 2. Water Closets.—They should have a constant supply of water, and all defects be immediately remedied. 79 3. Drains.- The give rise to smells when they are stopped or impaired, or there is a want of proper traps or valves for preventing the bad air from pursuing into the house. 4. Cempu.- The law regards these as nuisances injurious to health, and their immedlistge sbolition, whetherr in use at present or formerly, is imperative on the owner of the premises on which they are situsted. 5. Ofensive Businesmen.- In all cases where persons are engaged in businesses, such as the keeping of cows, horses, pigs, poultry, or other animals, the slaughtering of animals, the boiling or stroing of grease, or other animal matter, they are liable to indictment, when such businesses produce bad smells and thus become nuisences injurious to health. Persons haring any complaints to male of the abort nuisences should apply at the Vestry Officer, Piccadilly,, between the houurs of 9 and 4 c'clock, where a book is lept for the registry of all complaints, which will be attended to by the Medical Officer of Health, and Sanitary Inspectors. Under the "Nuisances Removal Act," the Vestry has power to compel the removal of all Nuisances. The following are regarded as Nuisances:- a. Any premises in such a state as to be a nuisances or injurious to health. b. Any poll, ditch, gutter, water-course, privy, urinal, compool, drain, or ash-pit, so foul as to be a nuisances or injurious to health. e. Any animal so kept as to be a nuisances or injurious to health. d. Any accumulstion or deposit which is a nuisance or injurious to health. 80 II.-DIRECTIONS FOR THE PREVENTION OF INFECTIOUS (CATCHING) DISEASES. When any infectious disease, such as typhus fever, small- POX, SCARLET FEVER, MEASLES, 01' CHOLERA, exists in a house, observe the following rules:— 1. Keep the door of the room open, and if the weather be warm enough the top sash of the window a few inches down night and day, so as to secure the exit of bad air, and the entrance of fresh Air, into the room. 2. Keep the room and every thing about the sick person very clean. Change the patient's linen frequently, and let all dirty linen be taken out and put immediately into cold, and afterwards well washed in hot water. Let all discharges and evacuations be immediately removed, and the utensils well washed, and then rinsed with a solution of chloride of lime, or some other disinfecting solution. 3. Let no more people be in the room than are requisite to attend the sick person. The nurse or attendant should place themselves on that side of the bed towards which the current of air comes, and they should endeavour to avoid the patient's breath and. vapour from the discharges. 4. In all cases where infectious diseases break out the sick person should be separated from the rest of the family, either by removing the healthy part of the family or the sick person. In the case of those needing assistance for the removal of the sick, application should be made at the Workhouse, Poland Street. 81 5. In femillies where any infectious disease has broken out, such as typhus fever, scarlet fever,measles, small-pox, hooping cough, or cholera, the children should not be sent to schools. till such time as the medical attendant shall certify that there is no danger of conveying their infections, Grown-up persons, is such circumstences, should also avoid attending public, in any manner exping others to the danger of infection from them- sclves. 6. Where small-pox breaks out, no time should be lost in having every member of the family vaccinated, wheter they have been vaccinsted before or not. The following gentlemen are sppoinnted Public Vaccinators in this pairsh:- John James, F.R.C.S. 62, Princes Street, Leicester Square. George Slight, M.D. 25, Brewer Street, Golden Square. 7. Is cases of Death from infectious disease, the cropse should be buried within forty-eight hours after death. In the mean time no one should live or sleep in the rii, where the dead body lies. The bedding and linen that has been used should and walls white-washed, the floor washed with chloride of lime, and the windows and dooor be left wide open for some days befor being occupied again. III.- SPECIAL PRECAUTIONS TO BE TAKEN DURING THE PREVALENCE OF CHOLERA. I. Every person attecked by leoanness of the bowels, should get medical attendance at once. Purgative medicine should only be tkeen under the adive of a medical man. F 82 .2. All sudden checks to perspiration should be avoided, such as sitting in draughts of cold air when hot from exercise. It is always a good precaution to wear a belt of flannel round the stomach. 3. Every person should live regularly and temperately on those articles of food which he is used to, and which agree with him. There is no objection to fish, fruit, or vegetables if good, but all stale or over-kept fruit, fish, meat, and vegetables should be shunned. Great care should be taken to give no stale or sour food, especially sour milk, to children. 4. Intemperance and drunkenness are most dangerous. It is to be feared that more cases of choleraic diarrhoea occur on Mondays, and days after a holiday, than at other times. 5. It is of the utmost consequence to avoid all foul smells, as of sinks, closets, drains, dustbins, and the like. It should be remembered that every closet and sink which lets water down to a drain may allow bad air to come back, so that the traps should be looked to regularly, and be kept well charged with water, and a little of some disinfectant, such as chloride of lime, should be put down daily. 6. The house should be kept sweet by opening windows and admitting plenty of fresh air. . 7. If an inmate be attacked, and he cannot be put into a room by himself, it is better to send him to the Hospital provided for the purpose. Infected clothes, and bedding, and apartments should be purified under the direction of the medical attendant. All that passes from the sick should be looked on as highly poisonous, and be disinfected and got rid of at once; and every vessel, and sink, and cloth, or article of bedding or clothing that it touches, ought to be disinfected. 8. The greatest pains should be taken to secure pure water for drinking purposes. None should be used that is not quite bright; and this should be boiled and flavoured with tea, 83 coffie, or burnt bread. If at all turbid or discoloured, it should be allowed to settle, and should be boiled and filtered. No water should be drunk which comes out of a dirty butt, or that has been standing near a sink or closet. All disterns should be cleansed, and wooden butts be charred or pitched inside. The water from street pumps should be avoided. 9. persons who attend upon the sick should wash their hands and face before any meal, and should not take any food in the room occupied by the patient. 10. In the case of persons requiring removal, notice should be given at the Workhouse, in Poland Street: and information of thee occurrence of any case of Cholers, and complaints of nuisances affecting the public health, should at once be given at the Vestry Offices, Piecadilly. The following duly qualified medical Practitioners have been appointed to act as Medical Visitors under the Directions of the Privy Council, for supplying Medicines and affording Medical Assistance without charge to the Inhabitants, both by Day and Night, and to whom, on the slightest attack of Diarrhœs, cation should be forthwith made, by persons residing in Pall Mall Ward, to Mr. Aemersong, 32, Duke Street, Piecadilly: Church Ward, to Mr. Kets, 20, Warwick Street, Regent Street; Golden Square Ward, to Dr. Slight, 25, Brewer Street, Golden Square; Gt. Mariborough Ward, to Mr. Hemsey, 66, Wardour Street, near Little Pultency Street. 84 Gratuitous Medical Advice, Medicines, and Disinfecting Materials for the removal of Offensive Smells, &c. may also be obtained by the Inhabitants any hour of the Day or Night, at The St. George's & St. James's Dispensary, No. 60, King' Street, Golden Square. EDWIN LANKESTER, M.D. Medical Officer of Health. westminster : printed by j. miles and co. wardour street, oxeord street.