1868-9. SAINT JAMES'S. WESTMINSTER. Account in Abstract OF RECEIPT AND EXPENDITURE FOR THE YEAR ENDING 25th MARCH, 1869, AND SUMMARY STATEMENT OF CONTRACTS. TOGETHER WITH THE SURVEYOR'S REPORT OF THE PROCEEDINGS OF THE VESTRY IN THE EXECUTION OF THE ACT; TO WHICH ARK APPENDED, THE REPORTS OF THE MEDICAL OFFICER OF HEALTH AND THE SANITARY INSPECTOR. PRINTED BY THE VESTRY, IN COMPLIANCE WITH THE 198TH SECTION OF THE Metropolis Local management Act. By Order, GEORGE BUZZARD, Destrg Clerk. June, 1869. St. James's, Mestminster. We, the undersigned, being the Auditors appointed by Authority of the Metropolis Local Management Act to Audit the Accounts of the Vestry of the said Parish, having carefully examined the said Accounts from the Twenty-fifth day of March, 1868, to the Twenty-fifth day of March, 1869, and the Vouchers in support of the same, and the Books, Papers, and Writings in the custody or control of the said Vestry, relating thereto, Do hereby certify, that the said Accounts are to the best of our belief true and correct, in token of which, our examination, we have signed the said Accounts, whereof an Abstract prepared, and signed by us, is annexed hereto, and we do make this, our allowance, of the said Accounts, in conformity with the provisions of the said Act. As witness our hands this Twentieth day of May, One thousand eight hundred and sixty-nine. THOMAS JONES, FREDERIC JENNER, Auditors. ALFRED ELFORD, 2 3 ST. JAMES'S WESTMINSTER. Statement of Receipt and Expenditure of the Sewers, Metropolis Main Drainage and General Rates, and of other Monies applicable to the purposes of the Metropolis Local Management Acts, from the 5th day of June, 1868, to the 25th day of March, 1869. RECEIPTS. PAYMENTS. £. s. d. £. s. d. Sewers, Metropolis Main Drainage, and General Rates of the year 1868, collected to the 25th March, 1869 27,834 13 6 Balance due to Treasurer at the close of the Account for 1867-8 392 12 9 Contractors (Mowlem & Co) for Paving, broken Guernsey, Lime, Sand, &c. 1,513 13 2 Ditto do. Arrears of 1867 20 19 2 Cash for Works done for Gas and Water Companies 202 9 4 J. & A. Culverhouse, Maintenance, &c., of Roadway, in Regent Street 2,579 0 0 Ditto by Vestry Surveyor, for grant of Scaffold Licenses, for Deposits on account of Pavements disturbed for Building and Drainage purposes, and for Paving Works for private individuals 120 1 7 Ditto, Reinstating Trenches made by Gas and Water Companies 11 14 6 Ditto, Rolling St. James's Square, Pall Mall, &c. 7 1 4 H. Browse, Maintenance, &c., of Roadway in Piccadilly and Coventry Street 1,215 0 0 Ditto by Trustees of Archbishop Tenison's Chapel, for one year's Nominal Rent of Ground and Porches in King Street, to Midsummer, 1868 0 3 0 Ditto, for Reinstating Trenches made by Gas and Water Companies 6 3 8 Ditto Income Tax Commissioners, for use of Vestry Hall, one year to Michaelmas, 1868 5 5 0 Stone Breakers and Workmens Wages 786 10 2 Carting Slop and Dust Removal 738 15 0 Ditto Assessed Tax Commissioners ditto, to Lady-day, 1868 5 5 0 Sweepers Wages 811 10 5 Ditto Sale of Sewers Specifications 0 15 0 Gas Lighting 2,149 11 11 Ditto Sale of Old Iron 11 7 3 Street Watering, Carts and Men 484 4 0 Water Supply for ditto 277 13 11 Sewers Works and Wages, and Water for Flushing Sewers and Urinals 744 9 2 Metropolitan Board of Works, Expenses, by precept for year 1868 4,691 18 9 Ditto, Main Drainage Precept for year 1868 5,775 8 0 Salaries 1,415 0 0 Stationery, Books, and Printing 149 1 6 Bricklayer, Painter, Carpenter, Smith, Gas Fitter, Pump Maker, Wheelwright, &c. 121 2 2 Horse, Harness, Hay, Corn, &c. 75 15 3 Carried forward £.28,200 18 10 Carried forward £23,946 5 8 4 5 RECEIPTS (Continued). PAYMENTS (Continued). Brought forward £.28,200 18 10 Brought forward £.23,946 5 8 Collectors Poundage 157 3 1 Seventh Annual Instalment in Repayment of Loan of £6,000 to the London Life Association for Vestry Hall 300 0 0 One years Interest at 5 per cent. on remainder of said Loan of £6,000 197 8 9 Insurance of Vestry Hall and Furniture 3 17 6 Coal, Gas, Water Rate, &c., to Vestry Hall 46 12 0 Law and other Disbursements 51 16 8 One years Interest at 5 per cent. on Golden Square Debt, as paid to Bondholders 70 0 0 St. Marylebone Vestry, Management of Oxford St., for 1866-67 283 17 1 Interest at 4 per cent. on £1,504 14s. 2d., to County Fire Office, from 14th January, 1868, to 14th January 1869 60 3 10 C. Dotesio, Damage to Wine and Cellars at No. 95, Regent Street, caused by bursting of Main Sewer t 30 0 0 H. Bidgood, Drainage Work at 7, Vigo Street, caused by stoppage of Sewer 14 5 10 W. Haywood, examining and reporting upon the Regent Street Sewerage 73 10 0 Amount advanced to Vestry Clerk, for Payment of Wages Law and General Disbursements 100 0 0 Interest on Overdrawn Account 135 15 0 Balance in Treasurer's hands, on 25th March, 1869 2,730 3 5 £.28,200 18 10 £.28,200 18 10 THOMAS JONES, Auditors. FREDERIC JENNER, ALFRED ELFORD, 6 7 St. James's, Mestminster. Outstanding Assets and Liabilities on the 25th March, 1869. ASSETS. LIABILITIES. £. s. d. £. s. d. £. s. d. Remainder of Sewers, Metropolis Main Drainage and General Rates of the year 1868, on the 25th March, 1869 2,258 10 6 J. & A. Culverhouse, Repairs, Ac., Regent Street Roadway 858 0 0 Ditto, Reinstating Trenches made by Gas and Water Companies 1 15 3 H. Browse, Repairs, &c., Piccadilly and Coventry Street 405 0 0 Loss probable Deficiencies at close of Collection 1,157 0 6 Ditto, Reinstating Trenches made by Gas and Water Companies Contractors (Mowlem & Co.) for York Paving, Guernsey 0 18 8 1,101 10 0 Cash for Works done for Gas and Water Companies Cash for Grant of Scaffold Licenses, Paving 48 1 7 Lumps, Lime, Sand, &c. 347 15 6 Carting Slop and Dust Removal 216 5 0 Deposits, &c. 9 17 10 Watering 5 12 0 Cash Assessed Tax Commissioners for use of Vestry Hall to Lady-day, 1869 5 5 0 Gas Lighting 707 11 11 Sewers Works 77 17 4 Cash to be returned by Vestry Clerk as advanced to him for Payment of Wages, &c. 100 0 0 Collectors Poundage and Expenses for Rates of 1868-9 214 11 3 Stationery, Books, and Printing 41 10 3 Bricklayer, Carpenter, Gas Fitter, and sundry other Tradesmen's Accounts 47 9 0 St. Marylebone Vestry for Oxford Street Management for 1867-68 250 0 0 £.1,264 14 5 £.3,204 0 2 THOMAS JONES, Auditors. FREDERIC JENNER, ALFRED ELFORD, 8 0 St James's Mestminster. An Account of all Contracts entered into or continued by the estry during the Year ending the 25th day of March, 1869. Date of Contract. Name of Company or Party with whom Contract was made. Nature of Work to be performed or Materials to be used or supplied. Amount or Price. 25th March, 1868, JOHN AND ALFRED CULVERHOUSE, Repairing, Cleansing, and Watering Regent Street, including the charge for Water, &c. £3,240 per annum with certain provisions as to termination of Contract. 25th March, 1868, WILLIAM MEAD, Cleansing the Parish, excepting Regent Street, Regent Circus, and Waterloo Place, Piccadilly, and Coventry Street,—Removing Dust from the whole of the Parish, At and after the Rate of £985 per Annum. 25th March, 1865, HENRY BROWSE, Repairing, Cleansing, Watering and Maintaining Piccadilly and Coventry Street (so much as lies in this Parish), At and after the Rate of £.1,480 per Annum. 30th June, 1868, EDWARD THIRST, General Works and Repairs to Sewers At the various prices affixed to the items in the Schedule to the Contract. 25th March, 1869, WILLIAM WINN, Street Watering the Parish, excepting Regent Street, Regent Circus, Waterloo Place, Piccadilly, Coventry Street, and Saint James's and Golden Squares, At 8s. 9d. per day for each single Horse, Cart, and Man. 25th March, 1869, CHARLES GODDARD, Watering St. James's and Golden squares, At 8s. per day for each single Horse, Cart, and Man. 25th March, 1869, JOHN MOWLEM & Co., Paviors and Masons Works, and for the supply of Granite and other Stones and Materials for Relaying and Repairing the Carriageways and Footway Pnving, At various prices as specified in the Contract. 1st April, 1868, WESTERN GAS LIGHT COMPANY, Lighting the Public Lamps in their District of the Parish, At £.3 13s. 6d. per Lamp per Annum. 24th December, 1865, CHARTERED GAS COMPANY, Lighting the Public Lamps in their District of the Parish, At £.3 15s. 6d. per Lamp per Annum. THOMAS JONES, FREDERIC JENNER, ALFRED ELFORD, Auditors. 10 St James's, Mestminster. A Statement of the Debts and Liabilities owing by the Vestry on the 25th day of March, 1869. £. s. d. A sum of £1,504 14s. 2d. remaining clue to the Trustees of the County Fire Office, with Interest thereon at 4 per cent., from the 14th January, 1869, in respect of a Deed of Assignment executed by the late Board of Commissioners for Paying and Improving this Parish, on the 14th July, 1852, of the Bates under their jurisdiction, in consideration of a Loan of £3,300, made then by the said Trustees to the said Commissioners for the purposes of the Act 14th and 15th Vic. cap. 95,—vide sees. 18, 19, and 21 1,504 14 2 A sum of £3,900 remaining due to the Trustees of the London Life Association, with Interest thereon at 5 per cent. per Annum, in respect of a Mortgage of the Sewers and General Bates made by the Vestry on the 25th July, 1861, in consideration of a Loan of £6,000, for the . erection of the Vestry Hall, in Piccadilly 3,900 0 0 A sum of £1,400, borrowed by the Trustees of Golden Square upon Security of the Rates raised under their Local Act, with Interest at 5 per cent. paid by the Trustees to the Bondholders, from the 1st January, 1856, to the 16th July, 1863, and continued Interest to the Bondholders from the 16th December, 1864. The payment of such Debt and Interest being transferred to the Vestry by the 180th section of the Metropolis Local Management Act, 1855 1,400 0 0 THOMAS JONES, Auditors. FREDERIC JENNER, ALFRED ELFORD, General Report of Works EXECUTED BY THE VESTRY OF ST. JAMES'S, WESTMINSTER, IN THE YEAR 1808-69. 13 To the Chairman and Members of the Vestry of St. James's, Westminster. Vestry Hall, Piccadilly, June, 1869. Reverend Sir, My Lords, and Gentlemen, Once more I have the honor to submit the curtailed lists of the principal matters that have been executed by the Vestry since my last annual Report. The whole of the matters referred to have been, at various times, in their regular order, before the Works and Improvements Committee, and through them, or the Reports of their proceedings, before 14 the Vestry, and, every attention having been given to them, a detailed Report of each or any of the matters would be in every way superfluous. In previous Reports and explanations so much has been said for the purpose of making clear the reasons, or necessity for the execution of the various works, that to go into the matter now would be merely repetition, it is therefore only necessary to allude to such matters, either generally or in detail, as may seem to require some explanation, the lists annexed shewing the cost. Probably one of the most onerous duties of the Vestry is the maintenance of the paved surfaces of the Roadways; this is a matter that requires the most minute and constant attention, and is done almost entirely by the men employed directly by the Vestry. They make good all accidental damage, or purposely made openings, and execute such repairs as may be done with the material in the possession of the Vestry; but when new material is required it is found more advantageous to place the matter in the hands of contractors, and the Yestry may fairly congratulate themselves upon the honest manner they have hitherto been treated by such contractors. It happens, however, for the first time since I 15 have had the honor to servo you, that all the second hand paving stones that have from various causes accumulated from time to time, and have been most useful in repairs, are now exhausted, the consequence will be that in the next annual estimate, the means will have to be provided to meet this difficulty, which is most usefully done by executing some material or important work with new stone, and applying the old to more secondary matters. I am sorry to say, that a large portion of the Pitching Paving and Footways is in a condition that is far from desirable or satisfactory. The portion of the Hay market that was re-laid with new stone has turned out very successfully, in fact the prompt, able, and honest manner, in which Messrs. Mowlem, Burt, and Freeman executed the work, as in fact they do all their works, is the best guarantee that the Parish have practised the truest economy and obtained as sound and lasting a piece of Pitched Paving as can be found in the Metropolis. The rest of the Paving matters may be dismissed with little comment: they are periodically discussed and arranged by the Works and Improvements Committee, and as the Vestry place every reliance upon their judgment, nothing is done without their sanction and order, and after proper investigation. 16 Matters of emergency, where delay would be dangerous, are of course promptly attended to by myself; such matters usually consisting of leakage into vaults where valuable materials are stored, through defects in the Pavement. It will be seen that but few large works have been executed in the Sewers Department, cleansing gullies, &c., forming the main portion. In my Report presented to the Vestry last year, sufficient allusion was made to some of the reasons that cause stoppages in the Sewers as require the execution of works such as have been carried out in Great Windmill Street and Piccadilly, where the accumulations, were so great as to require removal. In Great Windmill street the sewer was all but filled up for a great part of its length with gravel, the immediate cause of this was removed, but constant vigilance is still demanded to see that no new trouble arises. The usual list of stoppages in the Regent Street Local Sewers appears, but the matter has been so recently and thoroughly discussed that it would answer no purpose to say more about it here- though in connection with the question it is right to notice a rather peculiar work that was executed and most successfully carried out, by Mr. Thirst, the Sewers Contractor for the Yestry, the original suggestion being from a member of 17 the Vestry; viz.: connecting one of the most troublesome portions of the Local Sewer, with the deep Low Level Main Sewer, nearly 50 feet from the surface; this has had the effect of relieving the Vestry from the anxiety of further trouble at that particular point for the present, but the general condition of the tributary Sewers in Regent Street uecessarily remains much as it was. The re-construction of an old portion of a Sewer between Little Pulteney Street and Crown Court was another work of peculiar difficulty as it ran beneath the party walls of several houses, which had to be carried on needles and underpinned. The Vestry may congratulate themselves that this work was successfully done and without accident, though during its progress (necessarily tedious) it was to me a source of much personal anxiety. The List shows such matters as have been done with regard to Lamps, Street Names, &c., and which require no comment, as they are small matters executed only by the orders of, and after the propriety of them has been decided on by the Works and Improvements Committee. I feel great regret at not being able to report any work executed in connection with Public Urinals, or conveniences generally. 18 It is not of course my duty to report on sanitary matters, but I must state a personal conviction founded upon ample evidence, that not only does the public convenience require such accommodation but to a far greater extent, the Public Health and safety, and it is a matter well worthy of consideration whether necessary additional power, should not be sought by the Vestries and Local Authorities to enable them to overcome the difficulties with which the question is at present beset; at the same time I feel called upon to bear witness, to the close attention that has at various times been given by the Vestry and the Works and Improvements Committee to this subject, whenever an opportunity, however slight, has enabled them to act in the matter; the difficulty, apparently insurmountable, of finding suitable sites, has hitherto, and doeg still hinder any advance at all in this Parish. Thanking the Vestry for the honor they have done me in retaining my services, and for the confidence reposed in me as well as for kindness received. I have the honor to be, Rev. Sir, My Lords and Gentlemen, Your most obedient servant, A. P. HOWELL, Vestry Sorbegor 19 GENERAL WORKS, &c., EXECUTED BY The Vestry of St. James's, Westminster, from 25th March, 1868, to 25th March, 1869. Situation. Description of Work. Amount Expended. Vestry Hall, Piccadilly £ s. d. £ s. d. General Office Alteration to Fire Place, and fixing New Stove 2 12 6 Letter Boxes Alteration to Letter Boxes 3 9 4 Strong Room Cleansing Cistern, &c.,&c. 2 5 6 Removing and fixing Gas Stove 1 8 6 Stone Yard Repairs to Roof of Office 1 9 2 11 5 0 Repairs to Hose, Stand Posts, Water Cart, New Hose, &c 15 9 0 NAMES TO STREETS. New Burlington Street New Tablet Painted 0 2 3 Arundell Street Two China Tablets fixed 1 2 6 Old Burlington Street China Tablet fixed 0 9 7 Park Place Ditto ditto 0 9 8 Silver Place Two China Tablets fixed 1 1 5 X fi 5 UTRINALS. Brown's Court . Repairs to Urinal, Cleansing Drain 1 8 4 Wells Street Ditto ditto ditto 2 19 1 Ham Yard Ditto ditto ditto 0 3 6 4 10 11 ALTERATIONS TO LAMPS. Corner Air Street and Brewer Street. Removing Bracket Lamp and substituting Lamp on Column Vestry propertion of cost 3 3 10 County Fire Office, Regent Street Replacing Old Standard Lamp with New Bracket 12 8 2 Panton Square . Altering Lamp in centre by adding additional Lamp 6 5 8 South side Altering position of Lamp 1 10 0 13, Norris Streeet Removing Bracket Lamp and substituting Lamp on Column 6 4 2 29 11 10 NEW SEWERS BUILT, OR OLD SEWERS RECONSTRUCTED. Little Pulteney Street and Crown Court . Removing old Brick Sewer and Reconstructing same with 15 inch Earthenware pipes 86 3 3 Regent Street, St. James's Hall . Connecting Tributary Sewer with Low Level Sewer by means of Glazed Earthenware Pipes . 77 10 0 163 13 3 Carried forward £227 15 5 20 GENERAL WORKS,— Continued. Situation. Description of Work. Amount Expended. Brought forward £ 227 15 VAULTS REBUILT. 21, Little Windmill Street Rebuilding Vaults 59 5 GULLIES REBUILT. St. James’s Street by Pall Mall Gulley Removed and Rebuilt 8 7 GULLIES EEPA1EED. Rose and Crown Yard Gulley Repaired 0 18 8 Golden Square, North side Ditto ditto 3 19 0 St. James's Square, South Side Gulley Altered and Repaired 3 9 10 Jermyn Street by Duke Street Ditto New Grate supplied . 2 4 2 10 11 GULLIES CLEANSED. Generally . Cleansing 115 Gullies 02 7 1 GULLEY DEAINS CLEANSED. Marshall Street. Cleansing Gulley Drain 0 6 6 Rose and Crown Yard Ditto ditto 1 12 9 21, Little Windmill St. Ditto ditto 6 1 10 8 1 GULLIES TRAPPED. King St.,St. James's Sq. King Street, Regent Trapping Gulley, 9 inch Trap 0 14 6 Street . Ditto ditto 0 14 6 Rose and Crown Yard Ditto ditto (Cost, included in amount above, 18s. 8d) 1 9 Carried forward £ 377 17 21 GENERAL W ORKS,—Continued. Situation. Description of Work. Amount Expended. Brought forward £ 877 17 7 SEWERS CLEANSED AND REPAIRED. Windmill St., Great. Cleansing Sewer and removing accumulation 30 17 0 Regent Street, No. 67. Cleansing Tributary Sewer and making good same 17 18 10 Ditto ditto No. 99. Ditto ditto ditto 11 1 7 Ditto St, James's Hall Ditto ditto ditto 30 15 4 Ditto by Air Street Ditto ditto ditto 7 17 0 Piccadilly Circus, Nog. 39 and 41 Ditto ditto ditto 10 7 4 Piccadilly Sewer Ditto ditto ditto 4 10 8 Portland Mews . Ditto ditto ditto 0 14 0 N.B.—Compensation paid for injuries sustained at No. 95, Regent Street. 30 0 0 162 2 0 NEW SIDE ENTRANCE FLAPS FIXED. Berwick Street by Chapel Broken side entrance Flap replaced by new 4 1 4½ Jermyn Street Ditto ditto ditto 4 4 10 Berwick Street. Ditto ditto ditto 4 15 4½ Upper John Street. Broken side entrance Flap replaced and re-fixed 3 15 4 King Street, Regent Street Ditto ditto ditto 3 10 3½ Broad Street by Berwick Street Ditto ditto ditto 3 10 3½ Duke Street by 23 17 6 son's Yard Reconstructing Drain, the same being used as Local Sewer 15 14 0 Ditto ditto Appletree Yard Repairing old Drain 6 2 0 Connecting Drain with Sewer 8 3 8 NEW AIR SHAFT BUILT. Windmill St., Great . New Air Shaft built and Ventilating Grate fixed 31 10 7 OLD DRAIN MOUTHS MADE GOOD Pall Mall, Junior Conservative Club AFTER DISCONTINUANCE OF DRAIN. 1 2 0 Cost of various Materials supplied to be used in emergencies 12 7 5 Vigo Street Portion of Drain continued to Sewer Carried forward 14 15 0 £ 653 18 3 22 GENERAL WORKS,—Continued, Situation. Description of Work. Amount Expended. Brought farward £ 653 18 3 FLUSHING PIPE SEWERS. Examining Boxes and Pipes, preparing for and Flushing the following Pipe Sewers, including cost of "Water 38 14 0 Noel Street Lowndes Court Wardour Mews Marlborough Court Portland Mews Marlborough Row Bentinck Street Marlboro St.,Little Duck Lane George Place New Street Golden Square Hopkins street Do. do. Tyler Court Bridle Lane Walker's Court CatherineWheelYd Green's Court Smith's Court Gt. Crown Court Cooper's Court Little Crown Court Angel Court Queen's Head Ct. Heddon Court Panton Square 1, Chapel Place Harris Place Vigo Street Blenheim Street Burlington Gardns. Blenheim Mews Boyle Street Nag's Head Yard Coach & Horses Yd. Hill's Place Cork Mews Painter's Court Russell Court Ho. do. Crown Ct.,Pall Mall Ryder Street Rose & Crown Yd. Ryder Yard Mason's Yard Blue Ball Yard Do. do. Ho. do. Ormond Yard Cleveland Row Apple Tree Yard Babmaes Mews Charles Street Do do. Norris Street Jermyn Street, east end. Carried forward £ 690 12 3 23 GENERAL WORKS,—Continued« Situation. Description of Work. Amount Expended. Brought forward £ 690 12 3 NEW CONNECTIONS MADE FOR PRIVATE HOUSE DRAINS. 3, Little Marlborough Street Junior Carlton Club . • 28, Brewer street 7, Wells Street Ham Yard New Building, 42, Glasshouse Street 11, Kemp's Court Messrs. Metzler, Marshall Street 40, Poland Street 2, South Row 105, Jermyn Street 5, Archer street N.B.—No amounts are attached to these works as the cost is defrayed by the owners of the houses. Generally . 1373 Openings made good after ground has been disturbed by Gas and Water Companies Generally . 74 Ditto ditto after having been disturbed by private Individuals N.B.—The cost of the above works is borne by the respective Companies or Individuals who cause the openings to be made. Cleveland Row . Re-laying portion of Carriageway,) Tram’d 7 17 8 St James's Square . Repairs to McAdam Roadway 219 5 3 Pall Mall . Ditto ditto and Pitching 173 8 5 Ditto Repairs to Footways 10 18 0 Ormond Yard Re-laying portion of Carriageway 18 8 6 Air Street . Re-laying portion of Footway 23 15 4 453 13 2 Carried forward . £ 1144 5 5 24 GENERAL WORKS,—Continued. Situation. Description of Work. Amount Expended. Brought forward £ 1144 5 5 Sherwood Street Re-laying Carriageway, Regulating Kerbs and Repairs to Footways 83 4 1 Vigo Street Re-laying portion of Footway and Repairing Carriageway 45 17 9 Peter Street Repairs to Carriage and Footways 47 4 3 Charles Street . Repairs to McAdam Roadway 73 9 4 Marlboro' Mews. Re-laying Carriageway 75 8 5 Babmaes Mews . Ditto ditto part. 19 10 1 Wells Street Ditto ditto 3 3 6 347 17 5 Haymarket, West side Re-laying portion of West side with New Narrow Aberdeen Cubes laid upon Concrete 1051 0 0 £ 2543 2 10 Chirteenth Annual Report MADE TO THE VESTRY OF ST. JAMES'S, WESTMINSTER FOR THE YEAR 1868, BY EDWIN LANKESTER. M.P. LL.D. F.R.S. Ac. Ac. MEDICAL. OFFICER OF HEALTH FOR ST. JAMES'S, WESTMINSTER. TO THE VESTRY OF The Parish of St. James’s, Westminster Reverend Sib, My Lords, and Gentlemen, I have the honour of laying before you, for the thirteenth time, the annual tables of the records of deaths in your Parish. In doing so I avail myself of your permission to make some remarks upon them, and also of pointing out the nature of the Sanitary Work which has been performed under my direction. General Mortality in 1868. In making up the Annual Report the first thing to which attention is drawn is the amount of that mortality. It is with much pleasure that I do this 28 on the present occasion as the mortality for the year 1868 is as low as in any year since I have held the post of Medical Officer of Health in St. James s, Westminster. The number of deaths reported as having occurred in the Parish is 684. The following The following table shows the deaths in every year since 1856:— 1856 682 1862 727 1857 712 1863 757 1858 669 1864 832 1859 764 1865 704 1860 723 1866 769 1861 758 1867 707 1868 684 Now, although there are two years, 1856 and 1858, when the mortality was apparently less than 1868, there is a deduction to be made on the mortality of 1868 which brings down the deaths to 669. This deduction is necessary on account of the deaths returned from the Workhouse, and which appear in my tables, including the deaths of fifteen persons who have died there and who had been brought from the neighbouring Parish of St. Anne, Soho. This has arisen from the Union of St. Anne's and other parishes with St. James, Westminster, for carrying out the objects of the Poor Law, and which have thus far disturbed my calculations with regard to the mortality of St. James, Westminster. 20 If we divide the last twelve years into three series of four years each, we shall find that the average death of the last four years is 707, of the preceding four years 768, and of the four years preceding that 717. The average death rate of the Parish for ten years preceding 1856 was 775. These facts will be best represented by the following tables:— Average death rate in 10 years, from 1846 to 1856 775 Average death rate from 1857 to 1860 717 Average death rate from 1861 to 1864 768 Average death rate from 1864 to 1868 707 The remarkable diminution of the death rate after 1855 is probably partly attributed to the death of a large number of persons of cholera in 1854 who, had they not died of cholera, would probably have increased the bills of mortality in the subsequent years. The high death rates from 1800 to 1864 are due as I have explained in my reports for those years, to exceptional cold, over which, unfortnnately, sanitary arrangements have little influence. The reduction in the mortality of the year 1868, and of the three preceding years may, I think, be fairly traceable to the result of the persistent use of sanitary means. Even during the second series of four years 30 when the mortality was highest, since we commenced sanitary proceedings, the death was then less than the average before sanitary proceedings were adopted. But taking the death rate ten years previous to 1856, and ten years after 1856, it will be found that whilst the death date of the first ten years is 775, the death rate of the second ten years is 730, or, on an average, 45 less every year. This would be farther diminished by adding the deaths of the last two years which are only 707 and 669, thus showing that we may claim in the score of health operations not much less than fifty lives a year, or in thirteen years, 650 lives. I need not say how large a saving this has been to the whole community. It has been a saving of sorrow, anxiety, and human trouble and grief which no sum of money could possibly represent. That it has been a saving of money both to the Parish and individuals there can be no doubt; amongst the 650 saved there must be men and women winning bread and saving money for their families; amongst them are children who since their lives have been saved have become the artisans and domestics of our teeming population. The doctor's fees have been saved, the undertaker's bills have been spared in 650 cases of death. But where one life is saved twenty cases of illness are prevented; this illness would have entailed loss of wages in the case of adults, and in the case of children, it would 31 have inflicted loss of time on mothers and others capable of earning wages. For a large number of these cases the medical man would have had to be paid. The sum gained to a community by health is hardly to be estimated, but everyone is capable of estimating the difference which death and disease make in the history of a single family in the course of the year. A Parish is but a congress of families, and, as families are affluent and happy where health and strength are maintained, so parishes become affluent and happy when disease and death are diminished amongst them. Sanitary Work of 1868. Unless the whole theory of the preventability of certain diseases by sanitary methods and action were untrue, you could not but have expected some beneficial results from the course you have pursued. In 1856 a Sanitary Inspector was appointed, whose duty it was to attend to any complaints of nuisances injurious to health, and to make a systematic inspection of Houses in streets where more than one family lived in the same house. The performance of these duties were attended with great success. At the same time, I found that it was impossible for one inspector to do all the duty required. In some districts of the Parish 32 houses in order to be kept clean and free from nuisance, required to be visited, especially in the summer, twice or three times a week. In fact with regard to a large number of the poor, they are like children, no amount of scolding and telling them what is right is equal to seeing that they are doing right. It was during the expected visit of Cholera in 1866, that you were induced to appoint an additional Sanitary Inspector. His services were found so important that he has been continued up to the present time with the greatest possible benefit. The amount of work done by the one inspector to the work done by the two, will be seen by the following table:— Number of Nuisances removed in 1865 1,448 „ „ „ 1866 3,139 „ „ „1867 4,235 ,, „ „ 1868 4,852 I would here call your attention to the Sanitary Inspectors' Report for 1868, which you will find in the Appendix to this Report, and from which you will see the nature of the nuisances removed. This removal is not always the mere superficial removal of dirt, and the sources of dangerous and contagious effluvia, but permanent works are executed which are beneficial to the population for 33 years to come. Thus to take one instance. In 1856, I believe I may say that there were hundreds of privies in the Parish. There are tens of thousands in London at the present moment. Amongst crowded populations there is no more fruitful source of disease than an open privy. It is here that contagious diseases are propagated by the effluvium from the discharges of one person being conveyed to another. In a large number of cases in London there is but one privy to one family, and it is through these abominable depositories of human filth that a large amount of the Zymotic disease of London and in large towns are disseminated. The privy has, I believe, been abolished in Saint James's, Westminster, and instead water closets have been erected which wherever they are likely to be neglected are visited by the Sanitary Inspector. Whilst there can be no doubt of the enormous benefit derived from the water closet system as compared to that of privies or cesspools which are only closed privies, it is still, I think, a question as to whether some more economical method of getting rid of the sewerage of our houses might not be had recourse to. In my Report for 1858 I said, "There can be no doubt that plans as cleanly, "as free from objection, and as economical as thfs c 34 "of water-removal might be introduced, and which "would secure the utilization of that which is now "an entire loss. "Since that time the introduction of earth closets has been found to attain the objects to which I alluded, and I would strongly recommend in cases where water closets cannot be constructed that in such instances the earth closet system be introduced. The great danger of all accumulations of human refuse arises from the fact that the germs which are produced in such abundance in diseased bodies, retain their vitality for months and even years, and are capable of propagating disease when they come in contact with human beings. It has been shewn that all matters containing carbon, as garden mould, charcoal, cinder, dirt, &c., are capable of decomposing these diseased germs, and. thus of disinfecting poisonous discharges of every kind. It is on this principal that diseased meat loses its putridity when buried in the earth, and that charcoal when placed in coffins with the dead annihilates the disgusting odour exhaled, and prevents illness in those who come in contact with the dead body. Tt was a Divine injunction on the Jew to bury the refuse of his household in the earth. Next in importance to the abolishing privies is the filling up of cesspools. Since the year 1856, 244 cesspools have been filled up. To those who 35 are acquainted with the nature of these foul deposits, it will at once be seen that a great source of disease has thus been cleared away from the Parish. In the year 1868 only three cesspools were filled up, and in 1867, there were seven; whilst in 1857 there were fifty-six, and in 1858 sixty.four. I mention these facts to shew that the nuisances removed have effected a permanent good for all future time. I may illustrate this remark again from the sanitary works executed with regard to the draining of houses. However well supplied with a water closet apparatus, and however free from cesspools, no household is safe with a defective drain. From imperfect drains those gasses escape which containing the germs of fever, lays a whole family down with what to the ignorant is a very mysterious disease. Whenever there is a smell in the house there is danger, and no man, woman, or child, is safe in that house till the smell is removed. I have often had to call your attention to the scandalous way in which all the drainage of our houses is executed. In the majority of houses the whole of this most important part of its arrangements is left to the most ignorant and negligent of workmen. It frequently happens that the terrible neglect of the builder on whom the responsibility ought to 36 fall is not discovered till the father or mother or a child of the family, has been killed by the fever that has been brought about by bad drainage. I submit that at the present moment, this is one of the most urgent necessities of our sanitary condition that the drains of every house be in a condition to prevent the escape of poisonous effluvia. Where builders can be shown to have neglected their duty in this respect, they ought to be subject to some penalty or punishment of so sharp and decisive a character as to prevent the repetition of the offence. Since the year 1856, upwards of 400 houses have been entirely supplied with new drain pipes, of which details have been given by the Sanitary Inspector in my previous Annual Reports. In above 1,500 other cases the drains of houses have been repaired, unstopped, cleansed, or connected with the main sewer. The water closets in an overcrowded population require constant attention. As I have said before the Assistant Sanitary Inspector has much of his time employed in visiting the water closets of certain districts of the Parish. Since 1856 I find that upwards of 3,000 water closets have thus been cleansed, white-washed, repaired, ventilated, or in some way or another better adapted to the health of the inmates of the houses where they exist. 37 A large number of houses have been permanently improved by the top sashes of the windows being made to come down so as to secure the ventilation of the rooms. Singular as the fact is that hot air ascends, and rooms can only be properly ventilated by a passage for the air in the upper part of the room, in the Parish of Saint James, Westminster, when I commenced my duties as Medical Officer of Health, few of the windows were so constructed as to allow of ventilation by letting down the top sash. Amongst the poorer classes when the top sash of the windows is fastened, I have treated such an arrangement as a nuisance injurious to health, and have issued orders for its removal. The ventilation of several hundreds of rooms have been thus improved. It is a great pity that the more opulent inhabitants of the parish are not aware of the necessity of fresh air for health and life, as many untimely deaths, and a large number of doctor's bills would be avoided by adopting some plan for the ventilation of their houses. A glance at the Sanitary Inspector's work will shew how varied are the sources of disease and death, with which he is constantly dealing, and will at once indicate how largely such work must contribute to the comfort, happiness, and morality of the population, amongst whom his work is done. 38 Zymotic Diseases in 1868. These diseases which are also called Catching, Infections, and Contagious Diseases, present a group which are of the greatest interest to the Medical Officer of Health. They are all propagated by poisons which are either conveyed from one diseased human body to another, or having been produced by animal or vegetable poisons, the diseased human body propagates the same poison. If man lived under proper sanitary conditions these diseases could not exist, and just in proportion as we improve our sanitary conditions do they diminish. Now there are two things that have a tendency to develop these diseases. The first is overcrowding, and the second is ignorance. In my last Report I discussed the question of overcrowding, and pointed out to you, that unless some further provision were made for lodging the working classes in your Parish very little good would attend any effort to depopulate your densely crowded streets, since you must send the inhabitants to districts equally overpopulated with your own. Under these circumstances the best thing to be done is to keep a watchful eye on these diseases wherever they break out, and to exercise whatever personal influence can be brought 89 to bear in adopting the best and wisest means for preventing the spread and extension of the disease. Unfortunately, so large an amount of ignorance and prejudice with regard to the nature of these diseases exist amongst the people, that frequently a great deal of mischief is done before the Medical Officer is acquainted with the existence of disease at all. A vast amount of disease and premature death might be prevented if children were taught at school something of the nature and functions of their bodies. This knowledge which certainly is the most essential of all the branches of instruction that can be given to the human mind is almost entirely neglected in our schools. The consequence is that children as they grow up become the victims of the wildest delusions with regard to the nature of disease, and are frequently found acting in direct opposition to those laws by which disease and death can be prevented. The greatest allies that the Medical Officer of Health can have in a community are those who have some knowledge of the Divine laws by which the Creator maintains the health and life of a human body. 40 Table of Zymotic Disease for 14 Years. Name of Disease. 1855 1856 1857 1858 1859 1860 1861 1862 1863 1864 1865 1866 1867 1868 Small Pox 3 5 .. .. 4 4 1 1 21 .. 2 1 3 2 Measles 7 5 13 10 38 8 17 9 24 29 17 19 17 11 Scarlet Fever & Dipht. 27 16 13 29 31 16 32 66 31 13 20 30 9 31 Whpg. Cough 60 26 26 18 22 34 47 33 22 29 17 21 34 21 Diarrhœa 11 15 31 12 20 5 10 13 20 15 15 19 18 17 Typhus and Typhoid Fev. 22 12 10 1 6 13 2 13 8 14 10 7 7 6 Cholera .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 8 • • • • Total 130 79 93 70 121 80 109 135 126 100 81 105 88 88 A glance at the above Table will shew the Zymotic diseases which are most prevalent in our Parish, and the fluctuations to which they are exposed from year to year. In the fourteen years there have been of— Whooping Cough 408 Cases Scarlet Fever and Diptheria 364 „ Measles 224 „ Diarrhœa 221 „ Typhus and Typhoid 131 „ Small Pox 47 „ Asiatic Cholera 8 „ 1395 The average of the fourteen years is about 41 100 cases annually. It will be seen that in the last two years these diseases have been below the average; also that the deaths of the last five years are much less on an average than the preceding five years, at the same time it is my opinion that many of these diseases defy the utmost santitary activity that can be brought to bear upon them. I do not mean to say that their prevalence is not and may not be much more controlled by sanitary means; but it is the utter and entire carelessness of families with regard to the propagation of these diseases, that causes them to exist and spread. Thus, children are constantly sent to school with whooping cough. If they are not sent to school with measles or scarlet fever, children are sent from families where these diseases exist. Grown up persons freely pass from diseased families to those who are free from them and communicate the contagion. Clothes are carried from the families of tailors, milliners, dress makers, washerwomen, and others, where infection exists, to families where previously there was no disease. The mind of the whole population needs to be impressed with the danger and fatal results of these practices, before we can expect to control and eradicate zymotic diseases. There is one disease in this group over which we possess entire control, and which only requires 42 efficient sanitary authority, combined with enlightened public opinion, to crush it out of existence, and that is Small Pox. It will be seen that in fourteen years there have been forty-seven fatal cases of this disease. In proportion to our population we have suffered less than most of the other parishes of London during the last ten years. At the same time we ought not to have suffered even to the limited extent exhibited by these forty-seven cases. It is well known that the communication of cow pox by means of vaccination is a certain means of preventing small pox, and it is questionable whether small pox could ever be propagated by exclusively vaccinated persons. It is a fact that there is always a large number of persons in this country who have not been vaccinated, and it is by means of this unvaccinated leaven that the disease is kept up, and every now and then spreads in all directions. Although our legislature has passed several Vaccination Acts, making it compulsory for all persons to be vaccinated, this law is still so defective that large numbers of persons escape vaccination. In the first place, it is accompanied with no Act requiring the registration of new-born children, and therefore it is impossible for the public vaccinator to discover the unvaccinated children. In the next place, the remuneration given to public vaccinators is so small that 43 it is no inducement for them to follow up children for the purpose of securing their vaccination. In carrying out the provisions of the Vaccination Act, there is great difference in various parishes. It is almost impossible in London for instance for one parish to succeed in arresting small pox by vaccination, when surrounding parishes are indifferent to the subject. The constant emigration of families from one parish to another is enormous, and a concerted plan of action for all London parishes is required before even registered children can be expected to be vaccinated. But whilst indifference on the part of the legislature, and of the bodies to whom they have entrusted power, prevents vacciuation on the one hand, there is another, and even greater evil springing up through popular opposition to the practice on the other. Whilst the great bulk of the intelligent medical men of Europe, the majority of rulers, legislators, and statesman, and the great bulk of the people, have accepted vaccination as one of the greatest of human benefits, there has been always a small minority of persons who have raised objections, to the practice. Amongst this minority is nowhere to be found men of science or seekers for the truth. The mass is composed of a few with more 44 gence than the rest seeking to direct a number of persons more or less ignorant or disposed to mock at all received truth. It is no use to say leave these people to themselves, as they are doing much mischief, especially amongst the careless ignorant, who are easily persuaded not to do a thing that gives them any trouble. It is perhaps worth while to answer two objections raised to Vaccination. First, it is said to be useless. There is something so extraordinary in this statement to those who have studied the question, that they are generally inclined to charge the persons who maintain this point, with being ignorant, and epithets are freely applied. The argument which these persons use is that you cannot say that, if people had not been vaccinated, the small pox would not still have retired. As well might an argument be used against taking food, on the ground that the experiment had not been tried on a sufficient scale to prove that people would not live without it. What we know from statistical facts, that permit of no contradiction, is that before the introduction of vaccination at the end of the Eighteenth Century upwards of forty-five millions of persons died of this disease alone. We know that up to the middle of the present century that not one tenth of this number have died in the whole civilised world. 45 The experience of every country in Europe confirms the fact that since the introduction of vaccination death from small pox has diminished. Comparing the death in England and Wales before and after vaccination was introduced we find that the deaths are only one in ten in proportion to what they were. This great diminution has taken place quite independent of legislation on the subject of vaccination. Since the introduction of the Vaccination Act, the mortality from Small Pox has diminished still further. The experience of Denmark is highly illustrative of the use of vaccination. "Vaccination was introduced into Denmark in the "year 1801. During the ten years preceding there "occurred in Copenhagen alone 2,546 deaths from "small pox, which becoming more prevalent in 1801 "carried off in that year 486 of the inhabitants of "the city. From 1802 to 1810 inclusive, that is, "in the course of the nine years succeeding the "introduction of vaccination, it occasioned only 58 "deaths. For this latter year until 1824, that is "for the next thirteen years, not a single death "from small pox is said to have happened."* Such facts might be multiplied from every kingdom in Europe, and from every county and parish in * Dr. Ballard "On Vaccination: its value, and alleged dangers.' London: Longmans. 46 England. It is such facts as these that constitute the basis of the belief of the people of England in the advantages of vaccination, and upon which our legislators have founded their legislation. The evidence in favour of the conclusion that vaccination when properly performed, controls and arrests small pox as a disease, is probably more conclusive and extensive than in any similar case of generalization amongst the organic sciences. It is useless to argue with or to talk to persons who have made up their minds to oppose vaccination, without any desire of arriving at the truth; but it is of the utmost importance that everybody should know how great a truth is involved in the statement that vaccination prevents small pox. A second objection to vaccination is that it is injurious. This was an early objection to the practice, and Dr. Jenner himself had to shew its futility. It was urged that as cow pox was derived from the cow it was not proper to introduce the disease into the human system. At the same time cow pox had been known to be communicable to man for centuries before Jenner had made his discovery of its preventing the small pox. This objection has been again brought forward, but with less success, seeing that there is not a tittle of evidence to shew that any other form of disease can 47 be introduced into the system with the vaccine lymph. Ever since the introduction of vaccination the death rate of Europe has been diminishing, and there has been no introduction of any new disease or intensification of any of the old diseases. Dr. Ballard in his work on Vaccination, says, "there "is no reason to believe that scrofula or ordinary "skin diseases are communicable by Vaccination," (p. 368.) It is, however, true that occasionally inflammation follows the puncture produced in vaccination, just as occasionally inflammation follows the prick of a pin, or other slight wounds of the body. Such cases, however, are very few indeed, and are not for one moment to be compared with the advantages conferred by vaccination. Even was death a much more constant result of vaccination than it is, the public would still be justified in using it; the medical man in recommending it, and the legislature in insisting on its use. It is sometimes said that the government has no right to coerce the people into adopting vaccination. It ought to be recollected that the government ought to put in practice the will of the nation, and especially in relation to the causes of disease and death. As well might any one object to the law that forbids stealing, as to a law which insists that people shall not needlessly be exposed to a loathsome disease, which either deforms for life, or destroys 48 the sufferer. I should not have made these remarks, but I know there is a class of persons who are attempting to oppose the progress of vaccination, and who denying the truth of Jenners discovery, are persuading people not to have their children vaccinated, flying in the face of that Divine Providence, which has given to mankind so great a good, and preparing for Small Pox a harvest of victims amongst those whom they lead away. These persons actually recommend that people who wish to avoid vaccination should not have their children registered. This is another reason why the Government should lose no time in introducing a compulsory registration bill. The necessity of such a measure was urged upon the Goverment by a deputation from your Vestry two years ago before the last Vaccination Bill was passed. It is quite unaccountable that whilst Scotland and Ireland have a compulsory Registration of Births, that in England the question should assume the permissive form of the rest of our sanitary legislation. Not only would such a measure secure a basis for the complete vaccination of the people, but it would also afford the Registrar-General a means of supplying an accurate account of the number of births which take place in the country, which he cannot do under present circumstances. An Act for the 49 complete registration of births should also be accompanied with a provision for the registration of births of still-born children. At the present moment no adequate arrangement is made for ascertaining whether a child taken to be buried is still-born or not, and I have reason to believe that a large number of children who are born alive are buried as still-born, and that much crime is thus concealed by our neglect of legislation on this point. In most civilized countries provision is made for the complete registration of births. The Workshop Regulation Act of 1867. Under this title an Act was passed in the Parliament of 1867, the great object of which was to prevent the working overhours of children and women engaged in manual labour. It had been long felt that some power should be given to local authorities to prevent the employment of young people in certain occupations carried on in illventilated rooms, beyond certain hours consistent with their health. No sooner was the above Act passed than it was referred to the consideration of the Sanitary Committee, who at once ordered the following abstract of the Act to be prepared and printed for circulation throughout the Parish:— D 50 An Abstract of the Principal Sections of "THE WORKSHOP REGULATION ACT, 1867." Object and extent of the Act. To regulate the hours of Labour of Children, Young Persons, and Women, in all premises which are not included in any of the Factory Acts; and further, to provide for the use of a Fan, or other mechanical means, for preventing the inhalation of Dust by Workmen in the processes of Grinding. The Act applies to every room or place, whether in the open air or under cover, in which any manual labour is exercised by way of trade, or for the purposes of gain, in making any article, or in any way adapting any article for sale. Powers of Inspectors and Sub-Inspectors of Factories. Every Inspector and Sub-Inspector has power to enter any Workshop, and examine the condition thereof, and the persons therein, touching the provisions of this Act, or the Sanitary Act, 1866. Any person obstructing such Inspector or Sub-Inspector is liable to a penalty not exceeding Twenty Pounds. Power of Local Authority. It is the duty of all local authorities to enforce the provisions of this Act, and all expenses incurred by them may be defrayed out of any funds in their hands, or any rates leviable by them. On complaint of any Officer of Health, Inspector of Nuisances, or other Officer appointed by a Local Authority, or of any Superintendent of Police, a Justice of the Peace 51 may, by order under his hand, empower such complainant to enter a workshop within forty-eight hours from the date of such order, and to examine such Workshop, and any person therein, touching the provisions of this Act, or of the Sanitary Act 1866. Any person refusing admission to the Officer so em powered, or obstructing him in the discharge of his duty, is liable to a penalty not exceeding Twenty Pounds. Employment of Children under Thirteen Years of Age. No Child under the age of eight years can be employed in any handicraft. No Child under the age of thirteen years can be employed for more than six and a half hours in any one day, nor before six, a.m., nor after eight, p.m. No Child under the age of eleven years can be employed in Grinding in the metal trades, or in Fustian cutting. School Attendance and Certificates. Every Child under the age of thirteen years must attend School for at least ten hours in every week. No attendance can be reckoned on Sundays, or before eight, a.m., or after six, p.m., or in excess of three hours at any one time, or of five hours in any one day. A Child may be excused if the teacher certify that the Child has been unable to attend from sickness, or other unavoidable cause; or during the closing of the School for the customary holidays, or other temporary cause; or while there is no School within one mile from the workshop or the residence of the Child. Parents must cause their Children to attend School. Any Parent who wilfully fails to send his Child to School is liable to a penalty of not more than Twenty Shillings. Occupiers of Workshops must, on Monday in every 52 week, obtain a Certificate from the Teacher, that the Children whom they employed have attended School during the preceding week. The Certificate should be in this form:— School. I do hereby certify that [Christian Name and Surname of the Child) has attended the above School for not less than Ten Hours during the Week ending on Saturday the of 18. (Signed) A.B. Principal Teacher of the above School Date of 18 . Address of School. The Certificate must be kept for one month, and must be produced to any Inspector or Sub-Inspector of Factories whenever required during that period. Every occupier not obtaining such Certificate, or refusing to produce it to an Inspector or Sub-Inspector of Factories, is liable to a penalty of not more than Three Pounds. On the written application of a Teacher, an Occupier is to pay a weekly sum, not exceeding twopence, for the schooling of a Child employed by him, and may deduct it from the wages of the Child. Any Occupier who refuses to pay such School fees, when so required, is liable to a penalty not exceeding Ten Shillings. Employment of Young Persons above the age of Thirteen Years and under the age of Eighteen Years, and of Women. No Young Person or Woman can be employed in any one day for more than Twelve hours, nor before five, a.m., nor after nine, p.m. One hour and and a half must be allowed for meals. 53 No Child, Young Person, or Woman can be employed on Sunday, or after Two o'clock on Saturday Afternoon, except where not more than five Persons are employed in making articles to be sold by retail on the premises, or in repairing articles of a like nature to those sold by retail on the premises. Where the Occupier is of the Jewish religion, and it is his custom to keep his workshop closed on Saturday until sunset, he may employ Young Persons or Women on that day, from after sunset until nine o'clock at night. The penalties for the employment of Children, Young Persons, and Women contrary to the provisions of this Act are,—1st, The Occupier is liable to a penalty not exceeding Three Pounds. 2nd,—The Parent, or person deriving any direct benefit from the labour of, or having the control over, the Child, Young Person, or Woman is liable to a penalty of not more than Twenty Shillings. Provisions with respect to the use of a Fan in Grinding. If it appear to the Local Authority, or any Inspector of Factories, that the inhalation of dust arising from any process could be prevented by the use of a Fan, or other mechanical means, he may require a Fan, or such mechanical means as may bo approved by one cf Her Majesty's Secretaries of State, to be provided by the Occupier of the Workshop within a reasonabe time. The penalty for non-compliance herewith is not less than Three Pounds, nor exceeding Ten Pounds, but the Court may, in addition to, or instead of the said penalty, give a certain time for providing the said Fan, or mechanical contrivance, and after the expiration of such time, a further penalty is incurred, not exceeding One Pound for each day that such non-compliance continues. 54 Temporary Exceptions. Until the 1st day of July, 1868, Children of eleven years of age may be employed as Young Persons of thirteen. Until the 1st day of July, 1870, Children of twelve years of age may be employed as Young Persons of thirteen. Until the 1st day of January, 1869, Children, Young Persons, and Women may be employed until half past Four o'clock on Saturday afternoon. Until the 1st day of July, 1870, Children, Young Persons, and Women may be employed in the manufacture of preserves from fruit, in the same manner as they were employed before the passing of this Act. Until the 1st day of July, 1870, Male Young Persons of not less than sixteen years of age, may be employed in the manufacture of Machinery as if they were Male Persons exceeding the age of eighteen years. The Secretary of State is empowered to authorize the employment of Male Young Persons at night, and the substitution of another day for the Saturday half holiday, where the customs or exigencies of certain trades require such modification. This Act does not apply to Foundries, or premises in which power is used for the manufacture of Machinery, or of any article of Metal, India-rubber, or Gutta-percha, nor to the Paper, Glass, or Tobacco manufacture, nor. to Letter-press Printing, or Book-binding, nor to any premises in which fifty persons are employed. All these works are under "The Factory Extension Act, 1867," which is 55 fully explained in a pamphlet, "Hints on the Administration of the Factory Acts, by Alexander Redgrave, Esq., H.M. Inspector of Factories, copies of which can he obtained, free of charge, at the Factory Office, No. 10, Whitehall. Published by the Vestry, being the Local Authority appointed to enforce the provisions of the Act within the Parish, and to whom, addressed to me, notice of any infringement thereof should be given. Vestry Hall, Piccadilly, 27th February. 1868. By Order, GEORGE BUZZABD, Vestry Clerk. Upwards of 6,000 of these Abstracts were printed and circulated through the agency of the Sanitary Inspectors throughout the Parish. The consequence has been that a large number of complaints have been forwarded to the Vestry Clerk. These have been all anonymous, or at least without the address of the writer, so that it would have been quite impossible to prosecute on the evidence supplied. At the same time in every case of complaint enquiries have been made, and the principals of the establishments complained of have at once shewn the greatest anxiety to comply with the regulations of the Act. In no case have I had a second complaint. It might have been thought advisable to prosecute in these cases at once, but as in so many instances in the case of the existance of 56 nuisances I have found persons comply with the law through personal application. I have not advised any attempt at procuring evidence for the purpose of prosecution. I have no doubt that a large number of young persons have been relieved from the pressure and exhaustion of extended hours of labour by the provisions of this Act. As to the extent of population to which this Act applies, I would remind you that we have 12,000 women in Saint James, above 20 years of age. Of these 5,000 have no occupation. Of the remaining 7,000, 3,000 are domestic servants to whom this Act does not apply. There is then a population of 4,000 women above 20 years of age, who are working at businesses protected by this Act. In addition to this I calculate that there is another population of children of both sexes, and young women under 20 years amounting to another 4,000, who may also obtain relief from fatiguing and exhausting labour by the provisions of this Act. It is to be hoped also that the moral effect of this Act will be to mitigate the excessive hours of labour to which many domestic servants are exposed, and whose case frequently requires as much consideration as that of their fellow-women employed in "manual "labour exercised by way of trade." 57 As my Report has extended beyond its usual limits, perhaps I may be excused from entering upon many other subjects which have occupied my attention, and been the subject of my bi-monthly Reports during the past year. I am sure it will be gratifying to you to see the result of your anxiety for the sanitary welfare repaid by a year of less disease, suffering, and death, than any since I have had the pleasure of holding the post of your Medical Officer of Health. I have the honor to be, Rev. Sir, My Lords, and Gentlemen, Your most obedient humble Servant, EDWIN LANKESTER. APPENDIX CONTAINING PAGE 1. Tables of Causes of Death 60 2. Report of Sanitary Inspector's Work 64 3. A Summary of Work during the Tear 1868 . 69 4. Drains Reconstructed, Cleansed, Repaired, &c. during the year 1868 70 60 TABLE OF CAUSES OF DEATH, Deaths in Quarter ending March 28th, 1868. CAUSES OF DEATH. St. James's Square. Golden Square. Berwick Street. Workhouse. Under 1 Year of Age. Above 1 and under 5. Above 5 and under 20. Above 20 and under 40. Above 40 and under 60. Above 60 and under 80. Above 80 and upwards. At all Ages. Small Pox •• • • 1 • • • • 1 • • • • • • • • • • 1 Measles • • 1 2 • • • • 3 • • • • • • • • • • 3 Scarlatina 1 1 • • • • • • • • 1 1 • • • • • • 2 Diptheria • • • • 1 • • • • 1 • • • • • • • • • • 1 Whooping Cough • • 3 3 • • 3 3 • • • • • • • • • • 6 Typhus • • 1 • • • • • • • • • • • • • • 1 • • 1 Diarrhœa • • 1 • • • • 1 • • • • 1 • • • • • • 2 Rheumatism 1 • • • • • • • • • • 1 • • • • • • • • 1 Delirium Tremens • • 1 • • • • • • • • • • 1 • • • • • • 1 Dropsy 1 • • • • • • • • • • • • 1 • • • • • • 1 Cancer • • 3 • • • • • • • • • • 3 • • • • 3 Scrofula • • 1 3 • • 3 • • 1 • • • • • • • • 4 Tabes Mesenterica 1 • • 1 • • 1 1 • • • • • • • • • • 2 Phthisis 4 9 1 6 • • 1 2 9 7 1 • • 20 Hydrocephalus • •. • • 1 • • 1 • • • • • • • • • • • • 1 Apoplexy 1 4 2 1 • • • • • • • • 6 2 • • 8 Paralysis • • 2 • • 2 • • • • • • • • 3 1 • • 4 Convulsions 3 12 6 • • 19 2 • • • • • • • • • • 21 Brain Disease, &c. 1 2 2 • • • • 1 2 1 • • 1 • • 5 Heart Disease, &c. • • 2 2 4 • • • • • • 1 3 3 1 8 Laryngitis • • 2 • • 1 • • 1 1 • • 1 • ■ • • 3 Bronchitis 9 5 7 5 8 2 1 1 7 7 • • 26 Pneumonia 3 2 1 2 1 3 1 2 1 • • • • 8 Asthma • • 2 • • • • • • • • • • 1 • • 1 • • 2 Ulceration of Intestines • • • • 1 1 • • • • • • • • 2 • • • • 2 Stomach Disease, &c. • • • • • • 1 • • • • • • • • 1 • • • • 1 Jaundice • • 1 • • • • 1 • • • • • • • • • • • • 1 Liver Disease, &c. • • 1 2 • • • • • • • • 1 2 • • • • 3 Diabetes 1 • • • • • • • • • • • • 1 • • • • • • 1 Joint Disease, &c. • • • • • • 1 • • • • 1 • • • • • • • • 1 Teething • • • • 3 • • 3 • • • • • • • • • • • • 3 Paramenia • • 1 • • • • • • • • • • 1 • • • • • • 1 Old Age • • 1 1 8 • • • • • • • • • • 10 • • 10 Atrophy and Debility • • 2 1 • • 3 • • • • • • • • • • • • 3 Fractures and Contusions • • 1 • • • • • • • • • • • • 1 • • • • 1 Suffocation • • • • 1 • • 1 • • • • • • • • • • • • 1 26 61 42 33 45 19 11 22 37 27 1 162 61 Deaths in Quarter ending June 27th, 1868. CAUSES OF DEATH. St. James's Square. Golden Square. Berwick Street. Workhouse. Under 1 Tear of Age. Above 1 and under 5. Above 5 and under 20. Above 20 and under 40. Above 40 and under 60. Above 60 and under 80. Above 80 and upwards. At all Ages. Small Pox • • • • 1 • • • • • • • • 1 • • • • • • 1 Measles • • 1 • • • • 1 • • • • • • • • • • • • 1 Scarlatina 1 2 • • • • • • 2 1 • • • • • • • • 3 Quinsy • • • • 1 • • • • 1 • • • • • • • • • • 1 Whooping Cough 4 • • 5 4 5 • • • • • • • • • • 9 Typhus 1 • • 1 • • • • • • • • 1 • • • • • • 2 Diarrhoea • • 2 • • • • 1 1 • • • • • • • • • • 2 Cholera 1 • • • • • • • • • • • • • • 1 • • • • 1 Dropsy 1 1 • • • • • • • • • • 1 1 • • • • 2 Cancer 1 4 1 3 • • • • • • 1 4 4 • • 9 Mortification • • 1 • • • • • • • • • • • • • • 1 • • 1 Scrofula • • 1 2 • • 2 1 • • • • • • • • • • 3 Tabes Mesenterica • • 1 3 • • • • 4 • • • • • • • • • • 4 Phthisis 3 9 9 • • 1 2 8 15 9 • • • • 30 Hydrocephalus • • • • 3 • • • • 2 1 • • • • • • • • 3 Cephalitis 1 • • 1 • • • • • • • • 1 1 • • • • 2 Apoplexy 4 1 • • • • 1 • • • • • • 2 2 • • 6 Paralysis 1 1 • • • • • • • • • • • • • • 3 • • 3 Epilepsy • • • • 2 • • • • • • 1 1 • • • • • • 2 Convulsions • • 3 • • • • 3 • • • • • • • • • • • • 3 Brain Disease, &c. • • 1 4 9 • • 3 1 1 2 • • • • 7 Heart Disease, &c 1 1 4 1 • • • • • • 3 1 3 • • 7 Laryngitis • • • • 1 • • 1 • • • • • • • • • • • • 1 Bronchitis 2 9 5 2 3 2 1 2 4 5 1 18 Pneumonia 2 • • 4 • • 3 1 • • • • 1 1 • • 6 Enteritis • • • • • • 1 • • • • • • 1 • • • • • • 1 Peritonitis • • • • 1 • • • • • • • • • • • • 1 • • 1 Ulceration of Intes-tines tines • • 1 • • • • • • • • • • 1 • • • • • • 1 Hernia • • • • 1 • • • • • • • • • • 1 • • • • 1 Stomach Disease, &c. 1 • • • • • • • • • • • • 1 • • • • • • 1 Hepatitis • • • • • • 1 • • • • • • • • 1 • • • • 1 Jaundice 1 • • 1 • • • • • • • • • • 1 1 • • 2 Liver Disease, &c. 2 • • 1 • • • • • • • • • • 2 1 • • 3 Cystitis 1 • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • 1 • • 1 Kidney Disease, &c. • • • • • • 1 • • • • • • • • • • 1 • • 1 Premature Birth 1 • • • • 1 2 • • • • • • • • • • • • 2 Other malformations 1 • • • • • • 1 • • • • • • • • • • • • 1 Teething • • • • 3 • • • • • • • • • • • • • • 3 Paramenia • • • • • • 1 • • • • • • 1 • • • • • • 1 Old Age • • 4 1 5 • • • • • • • • • • 1 • • 10 Atrophy and Debility 1 3 1 3 7 • • • • • • • • 1 • • 8 Suffocation • • 1 • . • • 1 • • • • • • • • • • • • 1 Cause not specified • • • • 1 • • 1 • • • • • • • • • • • • 1 31 47 54 34 35 24 8 31 31 27 10 =166 62 Deaths in Quarter ending September 26th, 1868. CAUSES OF DEATH. St. James's Square. Golden Square. Berwick Street. Workhouse. Under 1 Year of Age. Above 1 and under 5. Above 5 and under 20. Above 20 and under 40. Above 40 and under 60. Above 60 and under 80. Above 80 and upwards. At all Ages. Measles •• 2 2 •• 1 3 •• •• •• •• •• 4 Scarlatina 3 3 2 •• 2 6 •• •• •• •• •• 8 Diptheria •• 2 •• •• •• 1 •• 1 •• •• •• 2 Whooping Cough 1 1 2 •• 4 •• •• •• •• •• •• 4 Typhus •• 1 •• •• •• •• •• •• •• •• •• 1 Erysipelas 1 •• •• •• •• •• •• •• 1 •• •• 1 Dysentry •• 1 •• •• •• •• •• •• •• 1 •• 1 Diarrhœa 1 5 7 •• 12 •• •• •• •• 1 •• 13 Rheumatism •• •• •• 1 •• •• •• 1 •• •• •• 1 Delirium Tremens •• •• •• 2 •• •• •• 2 •• •• •• 2 Thrush •• 2 •• •• 1 1 •• •• •• • • •• 2 Gout •• •• •• 1 •• •• •• •• •• 1 •• 1 Cancer 2 1 •• 1 •• •• •• 1 •• 2 1 4 Mortification 1 •• •• •• •• •• •• •• 1 •• •• 1 Scrofula •• 3 •• 1 3 •• 1 •• •• •• •• 4 Tabes Mesenterica •• 1 2 •• •• 3 •• •• •• •• •• 3 Phthisis 3 4 9 18 2 1 2 14 14 1 •• 34 Hydrocephalus • • •• 1 •• 1 •• •• •• •• •• •• 1 Apoplexy 1 •• •• 1 •• •• •• 1 1 •• •• 2 Paralysis 1 1 •• •• •• •• •• •• 1 •• 1 2 Epilepsy •• •• •• 1 •• •• •• •• 1 •• •• 1 Convulsions 1 2 1 •• 4 •• •• •• •• •• •• 4 Brain Disease, &c 3 3 1 •• 2 1 •• 2 1 •• 1 7 Heart Disease, &c •• 3 •• 1 •• •• 1 •• 3 •• •• 4 Bronchitis •• 1 1 •• 1 •• 1 •• •• •• •• 2 Pneumonia 1 2 •• 1 •• •• •• 1 2 •• 1 4 Lung Disease, &c •• 3 1 •• •• •• •• .. 1 •• 1 4 Gastritis •• 1 •• •• 1 •• •• .. •• •• •• 1 Peritonitis 1 1 •• •• •• •• •• 2 •• •• •• 2 Uulceration of In-1 testines 1 1 •• •• •• •• •• •• 2 •• •• 2 Stomach Disease, &c. •• 1 •• •• •• •• •• 1 •• •• •• 1 Hepatitis 1 •• •• •• •• •• •• •• 1 •• •• 1 Liver Disease, &c 1 1 •• •• •• •• •• •• •• 2 •• 2 Kidney Disease, &c. •• 2 1 •• •• •• •• •• 1 2 •• 3 Phlegmon 1 1 • • •• •• •• •• 1 •• •• •• 2 Premature Birth 1 •• 2 •• 3 •• •• •• •• •• •• 3 Teething • • • • 3 •• 3 •• •• •• •• •• •• 3 Old Age 1 • • 1 6 •• •• •• •• •• •• 8 8 Atrophy and Debility • • 5 8 1 13 •• •• 1 • • •• •• 14 Fractures and tusions 1 •• •• •• •• •• •• •• •• 1 •• 1 Gun Shot W. 1 •• •• •• •• •• •• •• 1 •• •• 1 Drowning 1 •• •• •• •• •• •• 1 •• •• •• L 1 Cause not specified •• •• 1 • • 1 •• •• •• •• •• •• 1 29 54 45 35 54 18 7 29 31 11 13 =163 63 Deaths in Quarter ending December 26th, 1868. CAUSES OF DEATH. St. James's Square. Golden Square. Berwick Street. Workhouse. Under 1 Year of Age. Above 1 and under 5. Above 5 and under 20. Above 20 and under 40. Above 40 and under 60. Above 60 and Under 80. Above 80 and upwards. Atall Ages. Measles 2 1 • • • • 2 1 • • • • • • • • • • 3 Scarlatina 2 0 5 2 3 8 3 1 • • • • • • 15 Diptheria 1 1 • • • • • • • • • • • • 1 • • • • 1 Whooping Cough 1 • • 1 • • 2 • • • • • • • • • • • • 2 Typhus 1 1 1 • • • • 1 • • 1 • • • • • • 3 Rheumatism 4 • • • • • • • • • • • • 2 2 • • • • 4 Want of Breast Milk • • • • 1 • • 1 • • • • • • • • • • • • 1 Dropsy • • • • 1 • • 1 • • • • • • • • • • • • 1 Cancer • • 1 1 1 • • • • • • • • 1 • • • • 3 Scrofula • • • • 2 1 2 1 • • • • • • • • • • 3 Tabes Mesenterica 1 2 1 1 2 3 • • • • • • • • • • 5 Phthisis 3 5 11 9 2 2 1 15 7 1 • • 28 Hydrocephalus • • • • 2 • • 1 1 • • • • • • • • • • 2 Apoplexy 1 4 • • 2 1 1 • • • • 3 2 • • 7 Paralysis • • 1 • • 4 • • • • • • • • 2 3 • • 5 Insanity • • • • • • 2 • • • • • • • • • • • • • • 2 Epilepsy • • • • 1 • • • • 1 • • • • • • • • • • 1 Convulsions 2 1 2 • • 5 • • • • • • • • • • • • 5 Brain Disease, &c 4 2 2 1 1 • • 3 • • 3 2 • • 9 Pericarditis • • 1 • • • • • • • • • • • • • • 1 • • 1 Heart Disease, &c 4 1 3 1 • • • • 2 1 3 3 • • 9 Laryngitis • • 1 • • • • • • 1 • • • • • • • • • • 1 Bronchitis 1 7 9 7 4 6 • • • • 9 4 • • 23 Pleurisy • • • • 1 1 • • • • • • • • 1 1 • • 4 Pneumonia 3 4 4 3 4 6 1 2 • • 1 • • 14 Lung Disease, &c 1 .. 1 • • • • • • • • • • 1 1 • • 2 Gastritis 1 • • • • • • • • • • • • • • 1 • • • • 1 Enteritis • • • • 1 • • 1 • • • • • • • • • • • • 1 Peritonitis 1 1 • • • • 1 • • • • • • • • • • • • 2 Ulceration of Intestines 1 1 • • • • • • • • • • 1 • • 1 • • 2 Hepatitis • • 1 • • • • • • • • • • • • • • 1 • • 1 Jaundice 1 • • • • • • • • • •• • • • 1 • • • • • • 1 Liver Disease, &c 1 • • 1 • • • • • • • • • • 1 1 • • 2 Ovarian Dropsy • • 1 • • • • • • • • • • • • 1 • • • • 1 Joint Disease, &c 1 • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • 1 • • 1 Premature Birth 3 • • • • 2 5 • • • • • • • • • • • • 5 Teething 2 1 • • • • 3 • • • • • • • • • • • • 3 Old Age 2 4 • • 5 • • • • • • • • • • 1 10 11 Atrophy and Debility 1 4 • • • • 5 • • • • • • • • • • • • 5 Fractures and tusions • • • • • • 1 • • • • • • • • • • • • 1 1 Burns and Scalds 1 • • • • • • • • • • • • • • 1 • • • • 1 Suffocation 1 • • • • • • 1 • • • • • • • • • • • • 1 Cut, Stab • • 1 • • • • • • • • • • • • 1 • • • • 1 47 52 51 43 47 32 12 26 38 26 13 =194 64 St. James's, Westminister. REPORT OF SANITARY INSPECTOR'S WORE. FOR THE YEAR 1868. NUISANCES REMOVED OR ABATED. First Quarter. Second Quarter. Third Quarter. Fourth Quarter. For the whole Year. Areas, front, lime-whited 4 119 65 14 202 „ back, „ 1 68 55 10 134 „ front paving of, cleansed 24 11 12 6 53 „ back „ ,, 6 7 6 2 21 „ front „ repaired 1 4 .. 3 8 „ back „ „ .. .. 2 2 4 „ deodorised .. .. 2 1 3 Animals cleansed .. .. 1 .. 1 Animal matter removed .. 1 .. .. 1 Basement rooms, Avails and ceilings, lime-whited 2 18 19 4 43 „ passages „ „ 5 35 58 13 111 „ floors of, washed .. .. .. 1 1 „ stairs, walls, and ceilings lime-whited 10 128 65 16 219 „ „ steps of, washed 11 14 1 3 29 „ floors of, washed 9 39 4 3 55 „ „ repaired .. .. .. 1 1 „ deodorised .. 10 .. 2 12 Beds washed 4 .. 4 .. 8 ,, disinfected .. .. .. 1 1 Bedsteads washed, &c. 7 1 .. .. 8 Bedding and bed clothes washed .. 4 5 .. 9 Bones removed .. 2 2 2 6 Butts, cisterns, and other water receptacles cleansed 3 3 22 6 34 „ „ „ „ repaired 5 3 3 .. 11 „ „ „ „ new ones added 1 1 2 1 5 „ „ „ „ covers added to 2 4 10 4 20 „ „ „ „ apparatus of, repaired 9 1 .. 1 11 Cesspools cleansed out and filled up 1 .. .. 2 3 Clothing disinfected and washed .. .. 4 2 6 Corpses, human, removed by order .. .. .. 3 3 Drainage matter stopped from entering premises 1 3 5 3 12 „ removed .. .. 2 .. 2 Carried forward 106 476 349 106 1037 65 REPORT. OF SANITARY INSPECTOR'S WORK,—(Continued.) NUISANCES REMOVED OR ABATED. First Quarter. Second Quarter. Third Quarter. Fourth Quarter. For the whole Year. Brought forward 100 470 349 100 1037 Drains reconstructed with 6 inch pipes 2 0 4 8 20 „ „ 9 „ 1 • • 1 1 3 „ „ 12 „ • • • • • • 1 1 „ brick, repaired 20 9 12 4 45 „ Pipe „ • • • • 3 6 9 „ unstopped and cleansed 23 24 10 9 66 „ connected with main sewer • • • • 1 • • 1 „ old ones not in use removed 1 1 • • • • 2 „ traps added to 26 14 22 20 82 „ deodorised • • 11 22 3 36 Dust bins cleansed 80 167 89 88 424 „ new ones furnished • • 3 1 3 7 „ tops and covers added to • • 5 11 5 21 „ repaired • • 2 3 • • 5 „ deodorised 3 3 Dilapidations, exterior, made good 9 9 8 3 29 „ interior, „ 17 9 3 4 33 Dogs removed • • 1 2 1 4 Damp prevented 5 3 4 2 14 Dwellings, over-crowded ones, cleared • • • • 4 • • 4 Fat, 6tale, removed • • • • 3 .. 3 *Fish unfit for human food, destroyed 1 2 1 1 5 „ baskets, foul ones removed • • • • • • 1 1 „ refuse removed • • • • • • 1 1 Foul smells prevented 8 4 16 4 32 „ matter removed • • • • • • 3 3 Gas stopped from entering houses, &c. 1 1 1 • • 3 Gullies, private, cleansed 24 2 5 8 39 „ „ repaired 1 3 4 3 11 „ „ deodorised • • • • • • 1 1 Houses to which a full supply of water has been added.. 4 2 3 5 14 „ painted and white washed 5 • • • • • • 5 „ improvements of ventilation in • • • • • • 1 1 Kitchens front limp-whited or white-washed 7 43 30 13 93 „ back „ „ 5 69 59 9 142 Carried forward 546 866 674 314 2200 * March 4th, 48 Plaice; April 27th, 44 ditto ; April 30th, D3 ditto; September 8th, 36 ditto; October 22nd, 14 ditto. £ 66 REPORT OF SANITARY INSPECTOR'S WORK(Continued.) NUISANCES REMOVED OR ABATED. First Quarter. Second Quarter. Third Quarter. Fourth Quarter. For the whole Year. Brought forward 346 866 674 314 2200 Kitchens, front floors of, washed 4 .. 1 3 8 „ hack „ „ 4 1 2 1 8 ,, front „ repaired .. .. .. 1 1 „ „ cleared of occupants 3 .. .. .. 3 „ back „ „ 1 .. .. .. 1 Lumber removed 1 .. .. .. 1 Lead flats or gutters cleansed .. 2 .. 5 7 Mattrasses destroyed 2 4 10 1 17 „ washed 2 .. .. .. 2 Oyster shells removed .. 5 21 2 28 Pigs removed .. .. .. 4 4 Passages, entrance white-washed 13 107 52 17 189 „ „ floors of, washed 26 66 28 80 140 Rain water pipes unstopped and cleansed .. .. 2 4 6 „ „ connected with sewer .. .. 1 .. 1 „ ,, repaired .. 3 3 .. 6 „ „ trapped .. 1 .. .. 1 „ „ new ones added .. 1 .. .. 1 Booms, walls, and ceilings white-washed 62 132 68 88 350 „ dilapidations in, made good .. 17 .. .. 17 „ floors of, washed 18 10 5 3 36 „ overcrowded ones cleared 6 .. 18 25 49 „ sleeping, over-crowded, reduced .. .. .. 4 4 „ ventilation of, improved 5 .. .. .. 5 „ disinfected 4 .. 16 11 31 Rubbish removed 4 5 5 2 16 Smoke nuisance from, abated 2 2 2 4 10 Sink stones, waste pipes fitted to .. .. 1 .. 1 „ „ „ unstopped .. • • 1 .. 1 Structures, dangerous made safe 7 4 2 3 16 Stairs, main, white-washed 11 101 51 20 183 Carried forward 521 1327 963 532 3343 67 REPORT OF SANITARY INSPECTOR'S WORK,-(Continued.) NUISANCES REMOVED OR ABATED. First Quarter. Second Quarter. Third Quarter. Fourth Quarter. For the whole Year. Brought forward 521 1327 963 532 3343 Stairs, main, steps of, washed 43 10 20 17 90 Service pipes repaired 1 1 .. 4 6 „ „ new ones furnished .. 1 .. .. 1 Shops, walls and ceilings white-washed 3 7 7 3 20 „ floors of, washed .. .. 1 .. 1 Sheds white-washed .. 1 .. .. 1 Trades, or business nuisance from, abated .. .. .. 1 1 Urinals cleansed 1 .. .. .. 1 ,, drained 1 .. .. .. 1 „ repaired 1 .. .. .. 1 Vaults lime-whited .. 17 4 4 25 „ deodorised .. 1 .. .. 1 Vegetable refuse removed 2 2 .. .. 4 Water stopped entering premises from street .. .. .. 1 1 „ through roof 7 1 .. 4 12 „ „ „ other causes .. .. .. 3 3 Water-closets lime-whited 17 161 88 17 283 „ ventilated .. .. 3 .. 3 „ ventilation improved in 1 .. .. 4 5 „ abolished 1 1 1 .. 3 „ furnished with water supply 25 23 40 20 108 „ rebuilt 2 .. 1 4 7 „ new ones furnished 1 .. .. .. 1 ,, seats „ „ 11 3 4 3 21 „ „ repaired 7 5 2 2 16 „ raisers, new ones furnished 8 .. 2 .. 10 „ „ repaired 2 3 2 .. 7 „ pans, new ones furnished 6 5 6 7 24 „ traps „ „ 9 2 6 8 25 „ soil pipes „ „ 2 .. .. .. 2 „ „repaired 3 .. .. 1 4 „ unstopped .. .. .. 2 2 „ apparatus repaired 17 19 35 16 87 „ repaired generally 6 5 6 3 20 „ pans of, cleansed of soil foul, cleansed 29 22 21 27 99 „ „ foul, cleansed 19 20 59 18 116 floors of new ones furnished 3 .. .. 1 4 „ „ repaired 3 .. 5 2 10 Carried forward 752 1637 1276 701 4369 68 REPORT OF SANITARY INSPECTOR'S WORK,—(Continued.) NUISANCES REMOVED OR ABATED. First Quarter. Second Quarter. Third Quarter. Fourth Quarter. For the whole Year. Brought forward 752 1637 1276 704 4369 Water-closets cleansed generally 80 40 36 29 185 „ service pipes repaired 1 • • 1 2 4 „ deodorised • • 12 20 8 40 „ waste pipes trapped • • 1 • • , , 1 Workshops walls and ceilings white-washed • • • • • • 3 3 Windows repaired 4 • • • • 1 5 „ top sashes made to come down 36 10 • • • • 46 Yard walls of, lime-whited 15 141 63 71 290 „ paving of, cleansed 71 40 22 38 171 „ „ repaired 12 5 10 2 29 „ walls of, repaired 1 • • • • • • 1 „ drained 1 • • • • • • 1 „ paving deodorised • • 2 3 3 8 SLAUGHTER HOUSES. Walls of, lime-whited • • • • • • 1 1 STABLES. 2 • • 1 • • 3 Main drains cleansed and repaired 2 • • 1 • ■ 3 Paving of, repaired • • • • 1 • • 1 Manure removed from • • 1 • • 2 3 Coach house white-washed • • 1 • • • • 1 SCHOOLS, PUBLIC. Urinals reconstructed and drained 1 • • • • • • 1 Water-closets repaired generally 2 • • • • • • 2 BAKE HOUSES. Walls and ceilings of, lime-whited • • 31 • • • • 31 „ „ of store rooms lime-whited • • 13 • • • • 13 „ „ of basement stairs „ • • 1 • • • • 1 „ of yards lime-whited • •• • 1 • • • • I „ areas „ • • 2 • • • • 2 Totals 978 1938 1433 864 5213 Workshops or rooms visited 112 163 855 73 1203 „ „ lime-whited • • • • 2 • • 2 Abstracts delivered to employers and their workpeople • • 169 417 242 828 69 4 A SUMMARY OP WORK DURING THE YEAR. First Quarter. Second Quarter. Third Quarter. Fourth Quarter. For the whole Year. Number of complaints made 62 86 108 71 327 „ nuisances removed 978 1938 1433 864 5213 „ notices served 31 187 76 41 335 „ „ attended to 33 90 156 58 337 „ houses drained with 12 inch pipes 1 • • • • • • 1 „ „ „ 9 „ 1 • • 1 1 3 „ „ „ 6 „ 2 6 4 8 20 „ cases of scarlatina visited 14 12 32 47 105 „ „ typhus fever „ .. 1 .. 1 2 „ „ typhoid „ „ 2 2 .. 4 8 „ „ continued „ • • .. .. 1 1 „ „ small-pox „ 4 .. 2 • • 6 „ „ diptheria „ 1 .. 2 • • 3 „ „ diarrhœa „ • • .. 39 1 40 „ „ cholera „ • • 4 • • 4 „ „ erysipelas „ • • .. 1 • • 1 JAMES H. MORGAN, Sanitary Inspector. April 17 th, 1869. 70 St James's Westminster. Drains reconstructed, cleansed, repaired, &c., during the Year 1868. 19, Air Street, drained into Main Sewer in Air Street. Main of 6 inch, and branches of 4-inch pipes, May 27th, 3, Angel Court, Great Windmill Street. Branch drain unstopped, cleansed, and repaired, May 29th. 4, Anglesea Yard. Main drain repaired. February 17th. 5, Arundel Street. Pipe drain repaired. February 17th. 4, Bentinck Street. Branch drain unstopped and cleansed. November 26th. 5, Bentinck Street. Branch drain unstopped. January 14th. Again cleansed and repaired, February 26th. 3, Berwick Street. Drain from water closet to main drain, reconstructed with 6-inch pipes. February 26th. 7, Blue Ball Yard. The 6-inch pipe main drain repaired. July 31st. 9, Blue Ball Yard. Branch drain reconstructed with 4 inch pipes. June 22nd. 73, Berwick Street. Main drain unstopped, cleansed, and repaired, May 25th, 71 7, Brewer Street. Main drain, from basement stairs to soil pipe in workshop, reconstructed with 6-inch pipes. November 25th. 12, Brewer Street. Main drain let off. March 31st, May 1st, and reconstructed from sewer up to water closets in front area, with G-inch pipes. November 26th. 42, Broad Street. Branch drain cleansed and repaired, March 4th. 7, Burlington Gardens. New 6-inch pipe from water closet to sewer. June 3rd. 7½, Cross Street. Main and branch drains unstopped, cleansed, and repaired. April 3rd. 1, Crown Court, Pall Mall. Main drain cleansed and repaired. April 3rd. 6, Crown Court, Great. Main drain unstopped and cleansed. May 22nd. 26, Crown Court, Great. Main drain unstopped cleansed, and repaired. April 16th. 7, Denman Street. Main and branch drains reconstructed, main of 9-inch and branches of 6-inch pipes. January 7th. 21, Denman Street. Branch drain cleansed and repaired. July 6th. 10, Duke street. Drain from rain-water pipe in yard, to main in back kitchen, reconstructed with 6-inch pipes. December 24th. 38, Duke Street. Main drain from vaults in front area to water-closet in yard, reconstructed with 6-inch pipes. October 22nd. 72 4, Golden Square. Branch drain unstopped and cleansed. July 4th. Main drain from sewer up to vault in hack area reconstructed, also all the branches; main of 9-inch and branches of 6-inch pipes. September 2nd. 7, Ham Yard. Main drain unstopped and cleansed. October 27th. 50, Haymarket. Main drain repaired, July 10th. 51, Haymarket, Drains reconstructed, main of 6-inch and branches of 4-inch pipes. July 8th. 66, Haymarket. Main drain unstopped and cleansed. February 1st. 1, Heddon Street. Main drain repaired. March 14. 8, Heddon Street. Branch drain unstopped and cleansed. May 19th. 14, Heddon Street. Branch drain unstopped and cleansed. March 29th. 7, Heddon Court. Main drain unstopped. April 11th. 8, Heddon Court. Main drain unstopped. April 11th. 9, Heddon Court. Main drain unstopped. April 11th. 7, Heddon Court. Main drain of 9-inch pipes laid down in vault. May 21st. House and premises drained into this 12-inch pipe by a new 6-inch main. July 4th. 8, Heddon Court. Main drain of 9-inch pipes laid down in vault, as in No. 7, into which the house and premises was drained by a 6-inch pipe. May 21st. 9, Heddon Court. Main drain of 9-inch pipes laid down in vault, as in N03. 7 and 8, into which the house and premises was drained by a new 6-inch pipe. May 21st. 73 1, Kemp's Court. House and premises drained direct into main sewer. Main of 6-inch and branches of 4-inch pipes. November 14th. 82, Jermyn street. Main drain unstopped, cleansed, and repaired. January 6th. 66, King Street, Golden Square. Main and branch drains unstopped and cleansed. July 9th. 12, Leicester Street. Main drain from sink-stone in back kitchen to front area, cleansed and repaired; branch drain in front area reconstructed with 6-inch pipes. January 27th. 3, Lowndes Court. House and premises drained direct into main sewer; main of 6-inch and branches of 4-inch pipes. June 27th. 7, Market street. Main drain cleansed and repaired. June 6th. 38, Marshall Street. Main and branch drains cleansed and repaired. June 11th. 1, Mason's Yard. Drains of this stable reconstructed. Main of 9-inch and branches of 6-inch pipes. January 8th. 19, New Street. Drain in yard unstopped, cleanscd, and repaired. April 7th. 28, Piccadilly. A 12-inch main pipe drain laid down from Metropolitan sewer under the passage, between the houses No. 21 and 23, up to cistern, thence to the steam boiler with 9-inch pipe. November 1st. 24, Portland Street. Branch drain unstopped and cleansed, September 10th, and reconstructed with 4-inch pipes. September 30th. F 74 22, Pulteney Street, Great. Main and branch drains reconstructed from front area vault up to vault in back area; main of 6-inch and branches of 4-inch pipes. December 3rd. 8, Pulteney Street, Little. Main and branch drains unstopped, cleansed, and repaired. March 29th. 22, Pulteney Street, Little. Branch drain reconstructed with 6-inch pipes. December 31st. 29, Pulteney Street, Little. Main drain let off and repaired, June 16th; unstopped, cleansed, and repaired, June 23rd. 31, Pulteney Street, Little. Branch drain unstopped and cleansed. May 6th. 54, Regent Street. Main drain cleansed and repaired. August 29th. 37, Rupert Street. Main drain unstopped and cleansed. May 14th; again unstopped and cleansed November 12th. 22, Ryder Street. Branch drain cleansed and repaired. May 1st. 3, Sherwood Place. House and premises redrained to sewer. Main of 6-inch and branches of 4-inch pipes. December 16th. 20, Sherwood Street. Branch drain in front area repaired July 11th. 33, Silver Street. House drained direct into main sewer; main and branch drains of 6-inch pipes. June 9th. Smith's Court branch drains of Nos. 1, 2, and 3, unstopped and cleansed. July 4th. 75 Smith s Court. Branch drains leading from water- closets on west side of court unstopped and cleansed, September 15th, and again September 24th. 5, Swallow Street. Main drain reconstructed from sewer to sink-stone ; main and branches of G-inch pipes. August 4 th. 21a, Swallow Street. Main drain repaired, and the branch drains reconstructed with G-inch pipes. February 5th. 1, St. Alban's Place. Main drain repaired. February 17th. 9, St. James's Market. Branch drain in yard repaired. March 30th. 3, Tyler's Court, Berwick Street. Branch drain unstopped and repaired. October 30th. 4, Tyler's Court, Berwick street. Branch drain unstopped and cleansed, July 10th; and again unstopped, cleansed, and repaired, October 30th. 7, Vigo Street. Brick main drain from front area cleansed and repaired; branch to rain-water pipe reconstructed with 4-inch pipes. June 18th. 87, Wardour Street. Branch drain in yard unstopped and cleansed. April 28th. 7, Wells Street. Main and branch drains reconstructed ; main from sewer to water-closet in yard of 9-inch, and branches of G-inch pipes. October 17th. 8, Wells Street. Main drain reconstructed from Sewer to front area, of G-inch pipes, November 2nd, 76 14, West Street. Main and branch drains unstopped and cleansed; branch in yard repaired. September 12th. 38, Windmill Street, Great. Main drain let off. May 25th. 3, Windmill Street, Little. Main drain unstopped and cleansed. September 15th. 18, Windmill Street, Little. Branch drain unstopped, cleansed, and repaired. December 5th. 23, Windmill Street, Little. Main drain let off. April 9th. 29, Windmill Street, Little. Branch drain repaired, April 24th ; again repaired, August 17th. 36, Windmill Street, Little. Main drain let off. April 6th. JAMES H. MORGAN, Sanitary Inspector. April 171% 1869. Printed by J. MILES and Co.,122, Wardour Street, London:—W.