1 8 8 2-3. THE VESTRY OP THE PARISH OP ST. JAMES, WESTMINSTER, IN THE COUNTY OF MIDDLESEX. . TWENTY-SEVENTH- ANNUAL REPORT and Account in Abstract of RECEIPTS & EXPENDITURE FOR THE YEAR ENDED 25th MARCH, 1883, and SUMMARY STATEMENT OF CONTRACTS; together with REPORTS OF THE SURVEYOR, MEDICAL OFFICER OF HEALTH, PUBLIC ANALYST, & SANITARY INSPECTOR. Printed by order of the Vestry, HARRY WILKIN'S, Clerk. June, 1883. Hutchings & Crowsley (Limited), Printers, 123, Fulham Road, S.W. CONTENTS. Page Vestrymen List of 7 Officers of Vestry, List of 9 Guardians, Westminster Union, List of 10 Governors and Directors of the Poor, List of 11 Commissioners of Public Baths and Washhouses, List of 12 Report of the Vestry:— Westminster, Historical Sketch of 13 Parish, Boundaries of 21 „ Particulars relating to 25 Wards, Boundaries of 28 Population 30 Vestry, Functions of 31 Standing Orders 33 Vestrymen, Election of 38 Churchwardens 38 Sidesmen Overseers of the Poor 88 Governors and Directors of the Poor 39 St. James's Chapel and Burial Ground 39 Archbishop Tenison's Schools 41 Burlington School 42 Parochial Charities 42 Public Baths and Washhouses 43 Beadle Metropolitan Board of Works, Representative at 45 Vestry and Committee Meetings 45 Officers of the Vestry 45 Death of Vestry Clerk 48 Death of Assistant Vestry Clerk 48 iv Report of the Vestry—continued. Page Financial 49 Loans 49 Incidence of Local Taxation 49 Rateable Value 50 Rates 50 Sums raised in Rates for Metropolitan purposes 52 Vestry Property 53 Rules for Mortuary 55 Scavengering, Dust Removal, &c. 56 Street Lighting 56 Electric Lighting 58 Local Improvements 61 Names of Streets 62 Streets partly situate in other Parishes 63 Paving and Drainage Works 64 Refuges 65 Repair of Roads opened by Gas and Water Companies 65 Construction of Vaults 66 St. Thomas's Church 66 Sanitary 67 Infectious Diseases 68 Sale of Food, &c., Acts 69 Summary Proceedings 70 Claims for Compensation 70 Disorderly Houses and Assemblages 71 School Board for London 72 Expenditure of Metropolitan Board of Works 72 Increased Charges of Water Companies 73 Urinals 73 Cab Ranks 74 Cabmen's Shelters 74 Cab Radius 74 Pillar Letter Boxes 75 Fixed Points for Police Constables 75 Fire Brigade 75 Music and Dancing Licenses 76 Parliamentary Schemes, Session 1883 77 Ventilation of District Railway into Streets 78 Bills in Parliament 79 V Report of the Vestry—continued. Page Proposed alterations in Local Government 80 Royal College of Music 80 Concluding Remarks 81 Report of Surveyor Auditors' Allowance 91 Accounts of Vestry 92 Appendices 96 Statement of Loans 100 Statements of Assets and Liabilities 101 List of Contracts 102 Accounts of Baths and Washhouses Commissioners 103 Accounts of Governors and Directors of the Poor 104 Accounts of Guardians of the Poor 105 List of Endowed Charities 106 Report of Medical Officer of Health 111 Report of Sanitary Work126 > • til - • « - / « « . Vii A LIST OF THE VESTRYMEN AND AUDITORS OP ACCOUNTS FOR THE YEAR 1882-3. EX- OFFICIO MEMBERS. The Rev. JOHN EDWARD KEMPE, M.A., 197, Piccadilly, Rector. Mb. FREDERICK CRANE 55, Regent Street, Mr. WILLIAM COX 57, Pall Mall, Churchwardens. ELECTED MEMBERS. PALL MALL WARD. † BURGESS, Mr. ROBERT WHATTON 14, 15, and 16, Opera-arcade, † CHRISTIE-MILLER, SAMUEL, Esq. 21, St. James's-place. ‡ COBBETT, Mr. ARTHUR - 18, Pall Mall. * COX, Mr. WILLIAM - 57, Pall Mall. ‡ CRAIK, Mr. ANDREW 1b, King-street, St. James's-square. ‡ CRESWELL, Mr. CHARLES EDWARD - 11, Duke-street. ‡ GRAVES, Mr. HENRY 6, Pall Mall. * JENKINS, Mr. FREDERICK 4 and 5, St. James's-place. † MALIN, Mr. JOHN 117, Jermyn-street. † MAXSTED, Mr. WALTER - - 7, Carlton-street. * POOL, Mr. JOSEPH 2, Pall Mall-place. * ROOKE, Mr. PHILIP ALFRED - - 63, Pall Mall. CHURCH WARD. † BEAL, Mr. JAMES 20, Regent-street. * BELLAMY, Mr. THOMAS DASH 118, Jermyn-street. ‡ BONTHRON, Mr. JOHN 106, Regent-street. † BRADSHAW, Mr. JOHN 27, Warwick-street, † DICKINS, Mr. HENRY FRANCIS 232, Regent-street, † DICKINSON, Mr. BENJAMIN 26, Jermyn-street. * ELAM, Mr. THOMAS HENRY 33, Sackville-street. * FREEMAN, Mr. THOMAS 21, Swallow-street. ‡ HOYENDEN, Mr. ROBERT 5, Great Marlborough-street. * JEFFS, Mr. RICHARD 244, Regent-street. ‡ MARTIN, Mr. WILLIAM HENRY 64 and 65, Burlington-arcade. ‡ MORLE, Mr. SAMUEL 102, Jermyn-street. * REES, Mr. JOHN 101, Regent-street, † VENN, Mr. HENRY 42, Jermyn-street. ‡ WIMPERIS, Mr. JOHN THOMAS 25, Sackville-street. Viii GOLDEN SQUARE WARD, ‡ BREMNER, Mr. THOMAS 5, Golden-square. * CASTLE, Mr. FRANCIS 7, Sherwood-street. * FARWIG, Mr. ERNEST 16, Rupert-street. ‡ JENKINS, Mr. WILLIAM 3, St. James's - place. † LLOYD, Mr. WILLIAM 12, Denman - street. † PRIVETT, Mr. HARRY 47, Brewer-street, † SADLER, Mr. JOHN HONROYD 16, Swallow-street. ‡ SINCLAIR, Mr. JAMES SUMMERS 11, Golden-square. * WINTER, Mr. JAMES 151, Wardour-street. GREAT MARLBOROUGH WARD. * BERRY, Mr. JOSEPH WILLIAM 6 and 7, Richmond-street. * BRITTON, Mr. GEORGE 95, Wardour-street. * DAWES, Mr. JAMES ELLIOT - 1 and 2, Little Windmill-street, † DOWNES, Mr. DANIEL 14, Glasshouse-street. ‡ GARRETT, Mr. HENRY BUXTON 53, Brewer-street, † HALL, Mr. GEORGE 10 and 11, Archer-street, † LEWIS, Mr. JAMES 34, Great Windmill-street. * RUTHERFORD, Mr. PATRICK - 7, Great Marlborough-street. ‡ SPRYNG, Mr. ALFRED THOMAS 20, Little Pulteney-street. ‡ YORKE, Mr. WILLIAM 102, Berwick-street. ‡ WINDER, Mr. WILLIAM CHARLES 20, Coventry-street, † WINNETT, Mr. WILLIAM 71 and 73, Wardour-street. AUDITORS OF ACCOUNTS. BOX, Mr. JOSEPH 187, Regent-street for Pall Mall Ward. FROHLICH, Mr. WM., Junr. 10, Sackville-street for Church Ward. BROOKS, Mr. GEORGE 47, Glasshouse-street for Golden-square Ward. REED, Mr. THOMAS 30, Silver-street for Great Marlborough Ward. *** The one-third of the above-named Vestrymen in each Ward whose names are marked thus * and the four Auditors, go out of office in the month of May, 1883, but will, if duly qualified, be eligible for immediate re-election,—those marked thus † go out of office in May, 1884,—and those marked thus ‡ in May, 1885. ix OFFICERS OF THE VESTRY. Treasurer.— GEORGE RICHARD HEMMERDE, London and Westminster Bank, St. James's Square. Vestrij Clerk.— HARRY WILKINS, Vestry Hall, Piccadilly. Surveyor.—HENRY MONSON, Vestry Hall, Piccadilly. Medical Officer of Health and Public Analyst.—Dr. JAMES EDMUNDS, Vestry Hall, Piccadilly—attendance at 8, Grafton Street, daily till 1 o'clock. Inspector of Nuisances.—WILLIAM HILL WATSON, Vestry Hall, Piccadilly, and Paving Office, Dufour's Place,—including the Superintendence of the Cleansing, Lighting, Dust Removal, and Street Watering Departments. Sanitary Inspectors.—JAMES HUNTINGFORD MORGAN and EDWIN BROOKS, Vestry Hall, Piccadilly. Collectors of Rates.—FREDK. ALEX. ASHMEAD, 34, Warwick Street; JAMES SCOTT, 2, Warwick Street; JOSEPH JOHN JOHNSON, 10, Upper John Street; JEHOSHAPHAT HORATIO YORK, 40, Marshall Street. Stoneyard Clerk.—FREDK. WILLIAM HOREY. Hall-keeper and Messenger.—EDWARD WARREN. OFFICES: Vestry Hall, Piccadilly, and Stone Yard, Dufour's Place, Broad Street, Golden Square, Where all Inquiries, Complaints, and Notices as to Paving, Watering, Dust Removal, Sewers, Drains, Nuisances, &c., should be made or given between the hours of Nine and Five (Saturdays, Nine and Two). X LIST OF GUARDIANS OF THE POOR FOR THE WESTMINSTER UNION. EX - OFFICIO MEMBERS. All Justices of the Peace for the County of Middlesex resident within the Union. ELECTED MEMBERS. PARISH OF ST. ANNE. BONSOR, Mr. SAMUEL, 433, Oxford-street. FRASER, Mr. WILLIAM JOSEPH, 2, Soho-square. GOMM, Mr. HARRISS, 17, Newport-court. SHAND, Mr. JOHN EDWARD, 4, Sidney-place, Leicester-square. WARNE, Mr. EDMUND, 31, Soho-square. WEBB, Mr. SAMUEL, 13, Oxford-street. PARISH OF ST. JAMES. BONTHRON, Mr. JOHN, 106, Regent-street (Chairman). COCKS, Mr. ROBERT, 35, Somerleyton-road, Brixton. DICKINS, Mr. HENRY FREDERICK, 232, Regent-street. HOVENDEN, Mr. ROBERT, 27, Glasshouse-street. JEFFS, Mr. RICHARD, 244, Regent-street. JENKINS, Mr. WILLIAM, 3, St. James's-place. PRIVETT, Mr. HARRY, 47, Brewer-street (Vice-Chairman). REES, Mr. JOHN, 24, Little Pulteney-atreet. RUTHERFORD, Mr. PATRICK, 7, Great Marlborough-street. WHITE, Mr. WILLIAM, 345, Oxford-street. WINNETT, Mr. WILLIAM, 71 and 73, Wardour-street. WINTER, Mr. JAMES, 151, 153, and 155, Wardour-street. Clerk Mr. JOSEPH BOND, Union Offices, Poland-street. XI Parish of St. James, Westminster. LIST OF GOVERNORS AND DIRECTORS OF THE POOR FOR THE YEAR 1882-3. KEMPE, Rev. JOHN EDWARD, M.A. 197, Piccadilly. DOWNES, Mr. DANIEL 14, Glasshouse-street. BONTHRON, Mr. JOHN 106, Regent-street. HALL, Mr. GEORGE 10 and 11, Archer-street. REED, Mr. ROBERT 5, Great Pulteney-street. SPRYNO, Mr. ALFRED THOMAS 20, Little Pulteney-street. BRADSHAW, Mr. JOHN 27, Warwick-street, Regent-street. COX, Mr. WILLIAM 57, Pall Mall. PRIVETT, Mr. HARRY 47, Brewer-street WINNETT, Mr. WILLIAM 71 and 73, Wardour-street BURGESS, Mr. ROBERT WHATTON 14, 15, and 16, Opera-arcade. REES, Mr. JOHN 24, Little Pulteney-street. FREEMAN, Mr. THOMAS 21, Swallow-street. VENN, Mr. HENRY 42, Jermyn-etreet. JEFFS, Mr. RICHARD 244, Regent-street. COBBETT, Mr. ARTHUR 18, Pall Mall. POOL, Mr. JOSEPH 2, Pall Mall-place. MORLE, Mr. SAMUEL 102, Jennyn-street. BUSZARD, Mr. WILLIAM 350, Oxford-street. LEWIS, Mr. JAMES 34, Great Windmill-street. HARRISON, Mr. JAMES WILLIAM 59, Pall Mall. Together with the Churchwardens and Overseers of the Parish for the time being. XII LIST OF COMMISSIONERS FOR PUBLIC BATHS AND WASHHOUSES. BURGESS, Mr. ROBERT WHATTON, 14, 15, and 16, Opera-arcade. COX, Mr. WILLIAM, 57, Pall Mall. JEFFS, Mr. RICHARD, 244, Regent-street. REES, Mr. JOHN, 24, Little Pulteney-street. SPRYNG, Mr. ALFRED THOMAS {Chairman), 20, Little Pulteney-street. VENN, Mr. HENRY, 42, Jermyn-street. WINNETT, Mr. WILLIAM, 71 and 73, Wardour-street. Cleric. Mr. HENRY DOLBY. Superintendent. Mr. EDWARD WHITE. Offices: 16, Marshall Street. REPORT OF THE VESTRY OF THE Parish of St. James, Westminster, FOR THE YEAR 1882-3. Vestry Hall, Piccadilly, W., June, 1883. The following Report of the proceedings of the Vestry during the year ended the 25th March, 1883, has been prepared pursuant to the 198th section of the Metropolis Local Management Act, 1855; an account in abstract of Receipts and Expenditure, summary statement of Contracts, the Report of the Surveyor, the Report of the Medical Officer of Health, and particulars of proceedings under the Nuisances Removal Acts are also presented with the Report. THE CITY AND LIBERTIES OF WESTMINSTER," of which the Parish of St. James forms a part, cover an area of 2,518 statute acres, and date their origin from the seventh century, when, about ths year 610, a Monastery or Abbey was founded by Sebert, King of the East Saxons, and dedicated to St. Peter. The name "Westminster" was probably given some time subsequently * Many of the particulars relating to the City and Liberties of Westmins are taken from documents compiled by Mr. George Buzzard, late Vestry Clerk of St. James's. 14 to distinguish the Abbey from the Church of St. Paul, in the City of London, which had been founded by the same monarch seven years previously. Before the establishment of the Abbey, the land which was selected as its site comprised a marshy island, separated from the shore by a short branch of the river Thames, long since converted into a sewer. In the year 785, the island had acquired the name of Thorny Island, apparently in consequence of a thick growth of thorns and briers. According to the prevailing custom, the Abbey attracted a small colony of settlers in its immediate locality, partly no doubt for the sake of the protection and security afforded by the growing wealth and power of the religious corporations, as well as for the benefit of spiritual ministrations, and at an early period the houses erected round the Abbey had grown into the "town of Westminster." As time went on, Westminster received several marks of royal favour. One of the most frequently used residences of the Kings was erected in Westminster, and, being naturally followed by the building of houses for occupation by the nobility, had no small share in contributing to the early prosperity and importance of the place. It is indeed surmised that the Court party did not regard with unmixed satisfaction the privileges and immunities claimed by the citizens of London, and were, therefore, rather disposed to encourage what might be considered an opposing element. With this object, possibly, the wool staple was established at Westminster by Edward III. in 1353, in preference to London. On the suppression of the religious houses in the year 1539, the Abbey was converted into a college of secular canons, under the government of a Dean, and two years subsequently was formed into a Bishopric, Westminster being thus raised to the dignity of a city, a title which it still retains. Episcopal honours, however, were not long enjoyed, for the first bishop, Thomas Thurleby, was translated by Edward VI. in 1550 to the See of Norwich. Westminster was then reduced to a Deanery, until, in 1553, Queen Mary restored it to its original monastic character. The accession of Elizabeth however brought further changes, and in 1558, the monks were 15 again displaced and the Abbey once more converted to a Collegiate Church, with a Dean and twelve Canons or Prebendaries, in which form it has continued to the present time. The Dean and Chapter, who are appointed by the Crown, derive their authority and inherit their possessions from the Abbots, the ancient owners of the Manor. The City of Westminster is merely titular and has no territorial significance. It has, however, been generally taken to comprise the two parishes of St. Margaret and St. John the Evangelist; the latter having been constituted a separate parish in 1725. The "Liberties" are two in number, and, it will be seen, of far greater extent than what is commonly called the City; one Liberty includes the parishes of St. Anne (formed 1678), St. George, Hanover Square (formed 1725), St. James (formed 1685), St. Martin-in-theFields (formed 1356), and St. Paul, Covent Garden (formed 1660); the other, known as the Liberty of the Duchy of Lancaster, comprises the ancient parishes of St. Clement Danes, and St. Mary-leStrand, and the precincts of the Savoy. The first attempt at local government in Westminster was the granting of a Commission by Henry VI. in 1427, with jurisdiction over the sewerage of Westminster and the surrounding districts. This Commission was continued from time to time by Royal and Parliamentary authority until 1855, when it was superseded by the Boards created by the Metropolis Local Management Act. As regards municipal government, the earliest authority appears to be a statute passed in the 27th year of Queen Elizabeth, which placed the maintenance of law and order in the hands of the Dean and twelve Burgesses, the latter to be appointed annually, and each of them to have the government of a particular ward. The preamble of this Act sets forth that the population of Westminster had greatly increased, and the people being for the most part without trade or mystery had become poor, and many of them wholly given to vice and idleness. This state of affairs was common throughout the Kingdom, and was, in a large measure, due to the establishment and subsequent dissolution of wealthy religious corporations. Ordinances were promulgated by authority of the Burgesses in 1585, the same year that the Act was passed, 16 and afford some insight into the mode of life of that period. It is interesting to note that Cecil, Lord Burleigh, was the Steward of the City of Westminster at that time, and although the ordinances are not said to have been framed by him, there can be little doubt that they are the production of that eminent statesman. The following abridged extracts will give some idea of the scope and intention of the ordinances:— Lodgers not allowed to be received under a penalty of 10s. a week. Traders using unlawful weights or measures to be imprisoned for 24 hours and pay £ 1 for each offence. Bakers and brewers offering for sale bread or beer, "not being lawful and good or wanting in weight or in the assize," to have such condign punishment and fine as shall be assessed according to the custom of the City of London. Colliers using unlawful sacks, or not filling the sacks, to be imprisoned for 24 hours, and unlawful sacks to be burnt. The Burgesses and their assistants to attend the market the whole time to see that purchasers are not defrauded; if absent without just cause to pay 12d. Servants not to be engaged unless they have a lawful testimonial, and not to leave without warning, and employers not to put away servants without lawful warning. Regrating or engrossing victuals or fuel prohibited. Persons placing anything in the common sewer that may decay, &c., to be imprisoned for 24 hours. [It may be remarked that covered sewers were then practically unknown.] Keepers of cook's-shops not to keep an alehouse also. The number of alehouses throughout the City and Liberties to be limited to 100, of which 60 were assigned to St. Margaret's, 20 to St. Martin's, and 20 to St. Clement's and Savoy or Strand. In case of variance arising from uncharitable speeches or other annoyances, the party aggrieved to submit his case to the Burgess of the Ward, and not to commence any action-at-law without his consent. All traders to suspend a lantern from their premises between the Feast of St. Michael and the Feast of the Purification, from six in the afternoon until nine at night, except when the moon is shining and giving light; penalty for neglect, 4d. Other residents to provide a lantern as required by the Burgesses, under a penalty of 4d. 17 No tavern or innkeeper to keep a cook's-shop, under a penalty of 4d Any person banished for incontinence of life or such like, and returning to the City or Borough for habitation, to be whipped naked at a cart's tail throughout the said City. Constables willingly permitting rogues or sturdy beggars to wander in the streets to be fined 6s. 8d. No person to accept a tenant without a testimonial of good behaviour from the place of his or her last abode, and proof that such tenant lives by some lawful science or manual occupation ; penalty 40s. Inhabitants to wash with clean water the kennels and gutters near their dwelling houses every morning between 6 and 7 o'clock from Lady Day to Michaelmas Day, under a penalty of 4d. Persons casting or laying noisome things in the Old Palace, or near Henry VII.'s Chapel, or in any churchyard, to be fined 4d. Scavengers to clean streets and carry away soil upon pain of imprisonment for 24 hours. Persons sweeping or laying any rubbish in the street, after it has been cleansed by the scavengers, especially upon any Saturday or Sunday, to be fined 4d. The gate to Her Majesty's bridge in the Old Palace to be kept locked during Divine service every Sabbath and other usual holy day, or the keeper to be fined 12d. The owner of any hogs found staying on the common at Tuthill, or in any street, or churchyard, to be fined 12d. Noisome things not to be laid on the common at Tuthill, or turf removed therefrom without permission under penalty of imprisonment for 24 hours, and a fine to be assessed by the Burgesses. Butchers, poulterers, or fishmongers offering for sale any corrupt or unlawful flesh meat, poultry, or fish, to be imprisoned for 24 hours and pay a fine to be assessed by the Burgesses, and the meat, &c., to be consumed with fire or otherwise. Butchers not to offer meat for sale in the market, having their shop in King-street; penalty 3s. 4d. Meat not to be offered for sale in the market, except on Saturday morning, under a penalty of 3s. 4d. Butchers offering for sale any meat contrary to the orders and customs of the City of London, or using any "indirect or deceitful dealing " in respect of veal, mutton, or lamb, or offering for sale the flesh of any ewe or lamb at an improper season, or slaughtering in an unauthorised place, to be fined 3s. 4d. 18 Persona scalding hogs in unauthorised places or offering pork for sale at any season contrary to the custom of the City of London, to be fined 3s. 4d. Tradesmen opening their shops, or exposing their wares on the Sabbath or any usual holyday, and butchers, poulterers, or fishmongers selling or exposing their wares on a fast day, to be fined 3s. 4d. Three searchers to be appointed to see that the foregoing regulations are observed; penalty for refusing to serve, 20s. Persons not to receive into their house patients suffering from the plague, without permission of the Burgesses, and in the case of an outbreak in any house none of the occupiers (except one to fetch necessary provisions) to leave the house, nor to hang out any infected clothing, upon pain of imprisonment in the stocks for 12 hours, and such further punishment as the burgesses may direct. The Burgesses and their assistants in convenient order to attend service at St. Peter's Collegiate Church [Westminster Abbey] every Sabbath forenoon, and remain all the time of sermon, under a penalty of 4d. The Burgesses to attend at the Courthouse every Tuesday (except it is a holy day) to hear causes, under a penalty of 12d. Fines, after payment of expenses, to be applied to the use of the poor, and accounts thereof to be rendered quarterly. These ordinances were varied and extended in 1719, when provision was made for the appointment of 155 watchmen, of whom 35 were apportioned to the then recently formed Parish of St. James. Any of the residents selected as watchmen who desired not to act were at liberty to pay for a substitute to be provided by the burgesses. The watchmen were to be armed and on duty from 9 p.m. until 7 a.m. during the winter, and from 10 p.m. until 5 a.m. during the summer months. They were to hold themselves at the disposal of the burgesses, who were to see that the watchmen and constables did their duty. Additional watchmen were appointed in 1720, the number for the parish of St. James being increased to 38, and an evening watch was set for the outlets and entraDces to the Liberty from one hour after sunset until the grand watch was set. Halberts and lanterns were to be provided by the inhabitants for the use of the 19 watchmen, and a rate levied over the whole parish instead of only upon those able-bodied residents who desired to be relieved from the obligation of personally performing the duties of watchmen. At the same time the salary of the beadles was fixed at not less than £25, nor more than £45, according to the trouble and attendance required; this salary was a charge on the watching rate. No alteration in the rules of the burgesses appears to have been made since 1720. By an Act passed in 1756, a Leet Jury were authorised to appoint eighty constables for the City and Liberties of Westminster, fourteen of them being assigned to the Parish of St. James. Persons appointed as constables and refusing to serve were liable to a fine of £8, but the same person was not to be appointed a constable more frequently than once in seven years. A high constable was to be appointed, and for this office an innkeeper or retailer of spirituous liquors was ineligible; no person was to serve for more than three years together, and any person appointed and refusing to act was liable to a fine of £20. The same Act provided for the appointment of an Annoyance Jury, to consist of not more than 48 persons, for the purpose of preventing nuisances, defective pavements, obstructions, unlawful weights, and similar matters. The penalty for refusing to serve on this jury was 40s., and the penalty for possessing unlawful weights was not to exceed the like sum. No person was to be required to serve on the jury more than once in three years. All fines imposed by the Act were to be applied in aid of the Poor Rate, but amerciaments imposed by the Annoyance Jury were to be divided between the High Bailiff and the Court of Burgesses. In 1757, a further advance was made in the local government of Westminster; for an Act passed in that year required all pavements to be repaired by the occupiers of houses abutting thereon, or by the persons disturbing the pavement. Hoardings were not to be erectcd without the consent of the Court of Burgesses, and weights and measures were to be tested and marked by the proper officer before being recognised as lawful. Persons 63 years of age 20 and upwards were exempted from serving as constables, and 70 years of age and upwards, from serving on Leet or Annoyance Juries. It may be remarked that burgesses are still appointed, although most of their powers and functions have been superseded by subsequent legislation. Some parts of Westminster were placed, for paving purposes, under the control of a Board of Commissioners as early as 1762, and the jurisdiction of the Commissioners was gradually extended until the whole of Westminster was included therein. The only other local statutes relating to Westminster, until recent times, were for regulating the recovery of small debts and such like. From very ancient times and until 1844, Westminster had a separate Sessions of the Peace, but this privilege was abolished by the Act 7 and 8 Vic., cap. 71, sec. 11 and 13, which practically merged the City and Liberties in the County of Middlesex, the Sessions now held at Westminster being adjourned sessions for the whole County. Petty sessional divisions still exist; but for criminal business and police functions, Westminster is included in the Metropolitan Police District, which was constituted by Act of Parliament (10 Geo. IV., cap. 44) in 1829 and extended ten years later by the Act 2 and 3 Vic., cap. 47. The following extract from the charge of Serjeant Adams, Assistant Judge, to the Grand Jury of Middlesex, at a General Sessions held by adjournment at the Guildhall, Westminster, on the 1st September, 1851, briefly describes the position held by the City of Westminster :— " The City of Westminster is a city without a Charter of "Incorporation It possesses neither Mayor nor Aldermen, "nor Common Council nor Freemen Its magistrates are "appointed by the Crown, at the instance of the Lord Lieutenant "of Middlesex, in the same manner as the County Justices are "appointed. It has no Recorder or other Judicial Officers "It has neither a common seal nor corporate funds, nor the means "of acquiring any, and all its expenditure is provided for out of the "County Rate." Arms were granted to Westminster in the year 1601 under both the seals of office of the Kings-at-Arms, William Dethick, Garter 21 Principal King-of-Arms and William Camden, Clarencieux Kingof-Arms : azure, a portcullis or, on a chief of the first, the arms of King Edward the Confessor, a cross patonzee between five martlets, four in the cantons of the cross, and one in base, or, between two roses seeded, or, barbed vert. THE PARISH OF ST. JAMES, Which covers an area of 164 acres, was, as already stated, constituted in the year 1685, the boundaries being set forth in the Statute 1 Jac. II., cap. 22, sec. 1, and the newly-formed parish thereby declared to be divided and exempt from the Parish of St. Martin-in-the-Fields and from all dependencies, offices, charges, and contributions in respect thereof. Dr. Tenison was named first Rector of the Parish in the Act. The parish is bounded on the north by the Parish of St. Marylebone, on the east by the parishes of St. Anne, Soho, and St. Martin-in-the-Fields, on the south by the Parish of St. Martin, and on the west by the Parishes of St. Martin and St. George, Hanover Square. The Bounds commence at a House, fonnerly No. 125, Pall Mall, including the site of the said house, which was the last house on the South side of the East end of the said Pall Mall Street, and had an Iron Balcony, as described in the Act of Parliament 1st James II., cap 22. This house was pulled down in the year 1831, together with the house adjoining Eastward, No. 13, Cockspur Street (formerly called Powell's Buildings), and rebuilt as one house by Mr. Sharpus, a Chinaman. The Boundary line begins at a point on the North front of the said house, 9 ft. 6 in. eastward from the centre of the Western Party-wall, or 22 ft. westward from the obtuse angle of Cockspur Street, and extends from thence in a North-eastern direction to the middle of the Haymarket; then Northward up the centre of the Haymarket; then Eastward along the centre of Coventry Street; then Northward up the centre of Princes Street and Wardour Street to the centre of Oxford Street; thus runs Westward along the centre of Oxford Street as far as a 22 house, numbered 255 (formerly 325), at the Eastern corner of Swallow Passage; then turns Southward and runs through the said house, 9 ft. 7 in. eastward from the north-west brick-quoin of the said dwelling-house, and continues Southward in the same direction through No. 7, Swallow Place, 6 ft. 8 in. eastward of the East side of the Passage on the South front of the said house, to the centre of Swallow Place; then turns in a South-eastern direction to the West front of the "Princess Charlotte" Public House, 19 feet Northward from the South-west quoin, and runs through the same to a point on the South front, 4 ft. 8 in. Eastward from the said quoin, and continues in the same diagonal direction across Princes Street to the front of No. 22, 32 ft. 10 in. Westward from line of house in Regent Street, and further in tho same line to the Northern wall of Hanover Chapel, to a point 22 ft. 7 in. Westward from the face of the Pilaster of the said Chapel, then extends Eastward, Southward, and Westward, on the line of the Chapel Walls and Portico so as to exclude the said Chapel and Portico from the Parish of St. James, to a point on tho Southern wall of the said Chapel, 6 ft. 1 in. Westward from the Pilaster on the Eastern front of the same; then turns in a Southern direction, running 4 ft. 6 in. Eastward of the front of house, No. 229, Regent Street, at the North-east corner of Hanover Street and 2 ft. 1½ in. of front of house, No. 227, at tho South-east corner, and then to a point 7G ft. 6 in. Northward of Conduit Street, and 7 ft. 4 in. Eastward of the brick or compo front on the ground storey of No. 211, Regent Street; then turns Eastward 2 ft.; then turns Southward again, running 4 ft. 8 in. Eastward of the houses (upper part), No. 203, Regent Street, at tho North-east corner of Conduit Street and 4 ft. 3 in. Eastward of No. 201, at the Southeast corner, on to a point opposite No. 105, and 6 ft. 8 in. Eastward (measured on line) of the said house; then runs in a West Southwesterly direction through the said house, at a distance of 2 ft. 1 in. from the centre of the North party-wall on the Eastern front, and G ft. 2 in. from tho centre of the South party-wall on the back or western front of the mailt part of the said house, and continued in the same diagonal direction, on the line of the party wall 23 dividing the houses and the back premises in Conduit Street, which all belongs to the Parish of Saint George, Hanover Square, from the premises in Old Burlington Mews, Savile Passage, Boyle Street, Coach and Horses Yard, and Clifford Street, and continues in the same direction, including Scott and Freeman's Hotel, to the front of the same in Bond Street, then turns at the North-west quoin in a Southern direction on the west front of the said Hotel, continuing across the west end of Clifford Street along the west front of Long's Hotel, including the whole of the same into Cork Street Mews, at the back of the houses in New Bond Street from Nos. 8 to 15 inclusive, excluding the same, then extends still Southward in a straight line through Nos. 6 and 7 into New Bond Street at a point on the South front of No. 6, 7 ft. 6 in. Eastward from the South-west quoin ; then continues in the same direction to the centre of Burlington Gardens, passing at a distance of 8 ft. 1 in. Westward from the South-west quoin of No. 1, New Bond Street; then turns Eastward in the centre of Burlington Gardens as far as the West wall of the Burlington Arcade, then runs Southward along the West face of the Western party-wall of the said Arcadc (including within the bounds the whole of the buildings in the same) to the centre of Piccadilly, then turns Westward to the centre of St. James's Street, then Southward down the same to the centre of Park Place, then Westward along the centre of Park Place to a passage at the Western end of the same at a distance of 2 ft. 1½ in. from the North-east angle of No. 7; then further Westward in the same line through the said passage into a garden next the Green Park; then turns Southward in a straight line on the fronts of the houses in St. James's Place next the park, so as to include the whole of the said houses within the bounds, except the projecting bowTs, and continuing in the same Southern direction in a straight line along the Terrace belonging to Earl Spencer, the line commencing at the North end, 8 ft. 8 in. Eastward of the front of the bow to Lord Arden's house, No. 26, St. James's Place, and cuts through the boundary wall at Catherine Wheel Yard, at the South end of the said Terrace, 20 ft. 11 in. from Western angle of the bow on the South front of the said house 24 (measuring on the line of wall), the line from thence runs in a South-west direction down Catherine Wheel Yard for the length of 113 ft. 6 in., at which length it is distant Eastward from the Western garden wall 4 ft. 10 in., and then in a South-west by South direction down the said yard for the length of 41 ft., at which length it is distant Eastward of the said wall 7 ft., and from thence continuing in a straight line till it meets the North front of the late Lord Durham's house (No. 13, Cleveland Row) at a point 1 ft. G in. Westward of a break in the said North front, and continuing from the said point in a straight line Southward into the said house about the length of 35 ft., and then turning Eastward runs in a direct line at the back of the houses in Cleveland Row, and extends to a point on the Eastern side of the front court yard, belonging to Marlborough House, and which point is 74 ft. Southward of the line of houses in Pall Mall, then turning Southward at right angles, 29 ft., then Eastward the length of 158 ft., then again turning Southward for the length of 31 ft., and then turning Eastward runs in a direct line on the North side of the ancient Park Wall, inclosing the gardens and offices of Marlborough House, and from thence in the same direction at a distance of 39 ft. 10 in. Southward from the Southern face of the area wall to the Carlton Club House, 40 feet from the Travellers' Club House, 36 ft. 5 in. from the South front (basement line) of the Athenseum Club House, 39 ft. 6 in. from the upper part of the United Service Club House at the south-west quoin, and 39 ft. from the South front of the same (plinth line) at a point 62 ft. 3 in. Westward from the wall dividing off Carlton Mews, at which point it turns at right angles Southward for a distance of 15 ft., then again turns Eastward, and runs through Carlton Mews, and the stabling at the East end of the same at a point 17 ft. 10 in. from the North-west quoin (upper part) on the West front into Red Lion Stable Yai'd, and continues in the same direction Eastward, at the back of the houses on the South side of Lower Warwick Street, so as to include all the said houses, then turns Northward at the South-east quoin of No. 1, to the North-east quoin, then turns in a West Northwesterly direction in a straight line to the South-east quoin of 25 No. 8, Lower Warwick Street, then runs Northward along the centre of the East party-wall of the said house for a length of 32 ft., then turns Eastward for a length of 16 ft. across the back building of No. 13, Cockspur Street, formerly No. 25, Pall Mall, then Northward for a length of 58 ft. to a point Eastward of the centre of West party-wall 19 ft., and then turns in a North-westerly direction to a point on the North front of the said house 9 ft. 6 in. Eastward of the centre of the Western party-wall, being the point from whence the description of the Boundary line commenced, and thereby including the former site of No. 125, Pall Mall, formerly the house on the South side at the East end of Pall Mall as described in the said Act of James II. THE PARISH Is included for Poor Law purposes in the Westminster Union, which comprises the parishes of St. Anne, Soho, and St. James, and was formed in the year 1868. Twelve guardians are elected by the ratepayers of St. James's and six by the ratepayers of St. Anne's, all Justices of the Peace for the County of Middlesex, resident within the limits of the Union, being ex-officio members of the Board. A list of the guardians is given on page 10. The Workhouse is situate in Poland Street, part of it being the property of the Parish of St. James, for which rent is paid from the funds of the Union and applied in aid of the Poor Rates of St. James's. The large new building in Poland Street is the property of the Union, and was erected in the year 1872, by Messrs. Hill, Keddell, and Waldram, from the designs of Mr. Wm. Lee, Architect, at a cost (including £6,483 for additional site) of £21,934. To meet this expenditure the sum of £21,733 was borrowed from the London Life Association, at 4½ per cent, interest, repayable by 30 equal annual instalments, including principal and interest. The sum of £16,010 13s. 0d. has been repaid, leaving instalments to the amount of £24,015 19s. 6d. still to be paid. The entire Workhouse building affords accommodation for 677 inmates, in addition to Offices, Dispensary, Store-rooms, &c. The Union Schools are situate at Wandsworth Common. % 26 The Parish forms a part of the Central London Sick Asylum District, and 5 members of the Board of Managers for the District are elected by the guardians of the Westminster Union. For Ecclesiastical Purposes the Parish has been subdivided into 5 districts, the mother church being St. James's, Piccadilly, of which the Rev. J. E. Kempe, M.A., is the present rector. The cost of the parish church, exclusive of the steeple and rectoryhouse, is stated in the Act of 1685 at £7,000. The church was built from the designs of Sir Christopher Wren, the funds for its erection being subscribed by Henry Jermyn, Earl of St. Albans, and the principal inhabitants of the district. It was finished in 1G83, and consecrated as a Chapel-of-Ease to St. Martin's on Sunday, 13th July, 1684. In the following year St. James's was constituted a separate parish, and entirely severed from St. Martin's. The plainness of the exterior may be attributed to the comparatively small sum raised, and to a desire that the building should accommodate 2,000 worshippers; but the interior, both as regards fitness for its purpose and beauty of architecture, has always been regarded as a chef-d'oeuvre of the great architect referred to, whose labours extended over half a century. The steeple, which was not designed by Wren, was added after the church had been made paiochial by the Act of James II., and the cost thereof defrayed from rates. Upon the removal of the scaffolding the tower was found to be 14: inches out of plumb, and it has so remained to the present time. Representation in Parliament.—The Parish of St. James forms a part of the Borough of W estniinster, which returns two members to Parliament, the sitting members being the Right Hon. W. II. Smith and Lord Algernon- Percy. The Register prepared in 1882 contains the names of 3,618 electors, viz., 5 on the Scot and Lot List, 657 lodgers, and 2,956 possessing other qualifications. By the Elementary Education Act, 1870, the Parish is comprised in the Westminster Division of the School Board for London. Five members of the School Board are elected by the ratepayers of the Division. 27 Gas is supplied to the whole Parish by the Gas Light and Coke Company (Chief Office, Horseferry Road). Water is supplied by four companies, the approximate boundaries of their respective districts being as follows:— 1. Chelsea Water Works Company (Chief Office, 35, Commercial Road, Pimlico). So much of the Parish as lies to the south of the centre of Pall Mall and Cleveland Row. 2. New River Water Company (Chief Office, Clerkenwell, E.C.). So much of the Parish as lies to the west of a line running at the back of the east side of Poland Street, Cambridge Street, Little Windmill Street, Great Windmill Street, and along the centre of the Haymarket. 3. Grand Junction Water Works Company (Chief Office, f>5, South Molton Street). So much of the Parish as lies to the east of the district supplied by the New River Water Company and north of the centre of Pall Mall. 4. West Middlesex Water Works Company (Chief Office, 19, Marylebone Road). So much of Oxford Street as is situate within the Parish. The Coroner is Mr. Charles St. Clare Bedford, whose jurisdiction extends throughout the City and Liberties of Westminster. For the Registration of Births and Deaths, the Parish is divided into two districts, knoAvn respectively as the Golden Square and Berwick Street sub-districts, the boundary line running along the centre of the following thoroughfares—Poland Street, Cambridge Street, Little Windmill Street, Brewer Street, Glasshouse Street, Vigo Street, and Burlington Gardens. The Golden Square Sub-district comprises so much of the Parish as lies to the west and north of the above-named line, and the Berwick Street District the remainder of the Parish. Mr. Henry Dolby, of 3, Poland Street, is Registrar for the former, and Mr. Thomas Matthew Crowe, of 31, Wardour Street, for the latter district. The Superintendent Registrar is Mr. Joseph Bond, whose office is at the Workhouse, Poland Street. 28 WARDS. For the election of Vestrymen and Auditors of Accounts, the Parish has been divided into four Wards, under the provisions of the Metropolis Local Management Act, the boundaries thereof being described in the official division of the Parish into Wards under the said Act, as follows:— Ward No. 1 (Great Marlborough)— All such parts of the Parish of Saint James, Westminster, as lie upon the left hand side, that is to say, upon the side lying towards the north and north-east of the following boundary line, that is to say, a line commencing upon the western boundary of the said Parish in Swallow Passage, and drawn in an easterly direction immediately at the backs of the several tenements or premises forming the south-west portion of the Regent (Oxford Street) Circus, thence across Regent Street, to and along the southern party-wall of No. 268, Regent Circus, and thence along the backs of the several tenements or premises forming the south side of Oxford Street, across Argyll Street to the back of the tenements or premises forming the east side of Argyll Street, then turning south along the backs of the said several tenements or premises forming the east side of Argyll Street, and of the several tenements or premises in Great Marlborough Street forming the east side of the block of buildings between Argyll Place and Little Marlborough Street, then turning east across Carnaby Street, to and along the backs of the several tenements or premises forming the north side of Tyler's Court and Little Marshall Street, thence turning south along the backs of the several tenements or premises forming the east side of Marshall Street, to and turning east along the backs of the several premises forming the south side of Broad Street, to and drawn south along the backs of the several tenements or premises forming the west side of Cambridge Street, of Little Windmill Street, and of Great Windmill Street, passing ac the backs of the several tenements and premises forming Angel Court, Bull Yard, and Ham Yard respectively, and thence to the parish boundary at the angle thereof at the intersection of Coventry Street and the Haymarket. Ward No. 2 (Pall Mall)— All such parts of the said Parish of Saint James, Westminster, as lie upon the right hand side, that is to say, upon the side lying towards the south of the following boundary line, that is to say, a line commencing on the western boundary of the said parish at 29 the angle ther roof immediately to the went at Park Plane. and varried theses an easterly direction along the said boendary and following the same until it arrives in saint james street opposite the middle of Jermyn Stmt, there quitting the said boundary and drawn ia in aaetor\j direction along a part at Jermya Street, to aad along the western party-wall of no, 66, Jermyn Stmt, to and aloof Um back of Um aerveal tenementa tad premins— forming Um south ride of a part at Jermyn Street, acroaa Dairy Stmt and Duke Street, to aad along Um back at Um several ??? or ??? farming a portion at Um ??? side of a part of Duke Stmt, to and along the back of ??? ??? or prink— forming Um north ad* at ??? Yard, to and along Um middle at ??? Yard and at Apple ??? Yard to Um aaatern extremity thereof, ??? to aad along Um middle at the roadway on Um south aoatii, and cast sides respectively at Batocaan'a mews, thence drawn to and along the backa at the tonauMnta or premiere called Nos 15, 17, 19. 21, 23, and 25, Regent Stmt, to Um middle at Jarmya Stmt, thence acroaa regent Street. to and along Um backa at Um tenements or premises— called Na 20 and 22, Urgent Stmt, to and along the backa at Um several tenementa or pretinisse fanning the south side at that portion at Jermya Stmt lying to the east Regent Stmt, and thense along the southern and eastern party-walla at No. 133, jermyn street to the middle at Jarmjm Stmt, and thense in an easterly direction to Um pariah boundary ia the Hay market. Ward No. S (Church)— All such parts at the said parish af Saint James are not included in Ward No. 2, and lie an the right hand eide, that ia to say, an the ride lying towarde Um went and south at the following boundary line, that ia to My, a line commencing an the on boumlary at the said Parieh opposite the centre of maddex Stmt, and drawn in aa easterly direction acroaa Regent Stmt, to and along the middle at Argil Plane, to aad turaimt towards the aouth-aaat, along the middle at a part at King Stmt, la the northern party-wall of No 48, King Street thense carried along the party-wall, to aad along the ??? at the ??? ??? and ??? forming the south-weet ride at the ??? at King Stmt, and ??? Reak Stmt, to the ??? party wall ??? Warwick Stmt, and thence ta and along the tnrka of the aeveeal ??? the mt ride at Warwick Stmt, and pa—eg again to the centre at Warwick Stmt at Ha ??? end, and thence aloag the middle at a fart at Viae Stmt till the aw ??? ??? the math party wall at Xa 1, Viae Stmt ??? along the ail patty ???and 30 along the backs of the several tenements or premises forming the south side of part of Marylebone Street, and thence along the backs of the several tenements or premises forming the west side of the northern division of Air Street, and passing thence along the southern party-wall of No. 13, Air Street to the middle of Air Street, thence across the Regent's Quadrant towards the southeast, to and along the middle of the southern division of Air Street, and passing to and round the backs of the several tenements and premises abutting on the west side of the southern portion of Air Street, to and across the said southern portion of Air Street to the backs of the tenements or premises forming the east side thereof, and turning east along the backs of the several tenements and premises forming the north side of Piccadilly, to and passing south along the several party-walls of the houses forming the north-west division of the Regent (Piccadilly) Circus to the middle of Piccadilly, there turning north-east across the said Regent Circus to and along the north party-wall of No. 42, Regent Circus, to and along the backs of the several tenements and premises forming the north side of Piccadilly to the middle of Tichborne Street, and thence along the middle of Tichborne Street to the angle of the parish boundary at the intersection of Coventry Street and the Haymarket. "Ward No. 4 (Golden Square)— All parts of the said Parish of Saint James, Westminster, not included in the Wards hereinbefore particularly described. POPULATION. The preliminary Keport and tables issued by the Census Commissioners, giving tlie result of the ninth enumeration of the inhabitants of Great Britain, which was taken on the 4th April, 1881, show a continued diminution in the residential population of the Parish of St. James. The following is a statement of the population of the Parish at each decennial period during the last 50 years:— 1831 37,053 1841 37,407 1851 36,406 1861 35,324 1871 33,619 1881 29,865 31 It "will be seen that the population of the Parish has continuously decreased for the last 40 years, and the rate of decrease has been more rapid in each succeeding decade; the decline being 1,001, 1,082, 1,705, and 3,754 respectively, or a total of 7,542 during the 40 years. This large decrease, coupled with the fact that the rateable value still has an upward tendency (see page 50), clearly shows that the character of the Parish is undergoing rapid change, offices, warehouses, and clubs taking the place of residences, as the centre of trade continues to increase and move westward, and greater facilities are afforded for business men to live in the suburbs. A still further decrease in the resident population may be expected, inasmuch as there is not any land in the Parish now available for building purposes, and the causes which have already led to a diminution in the number of inhabitants will probably continue to operate for some years to come. The following figures give the comparative population of the Wards into which the Parish is divided for Vestry purposes:— Houses. Inhabitants. Pall Mall Ward 533 4,104 Church Ward 584 4,115 Golden Square Ward 764 8,448 Great Marlborough Ward 1,137 13,198 Total 3,018 29,865 It must, however, be remembered that no account is taken in the above figures of the large number of persons engaged in various ways in the Parish during the day only, the sleeping population being alone enumerated in the Census Returns. THE VESTRY Consists of 48 elected and three ex -officio Members, and was constituted by the Metropolis Local Management Act, 1855. It superseded an elected Vestry acting under the provisions of the Statute 1 & 2 William IV., cap. 60, which was adopted by the ratepayers of St. James's on the 6th April, 1832. All the powers 32 of the former Vestry and of the Paving Commissioners acting under the Local Acts referred to on page 20, as well as some of the functions of the Commissioners of Sewers (see page 15), were transferred to the newly-appointed body. An Act was passed in the year 1858 relative to the main drainage of the Metropolis, by which the Vestry, as the rating authority of the Parish, were required to meet precepts of the Metropolitan Board of Works for a Main Drainage Rate not to exceed 3d. in the pound per annum. In 1862, the powers of the Vestry were enlarged by the Metropolis Local Management Amendment Act, and in the following year turnpike roads in the Metropolis were transferred from Commissioners, who had power to take tolls from vehicles, to the Local Authorities, whose expenses are defrayed from rates. The Metropolitan Board of Works (Loans) Act, 1869, and Money Acts of the Board, subsequently passed, besides making some alterations in the mode of assessing the expenses of the Board, have afforded increased facilities for the raising of money by Vestries and District Boards, of which, however, the Vestry of St. James have not had occasion to avail themselves. The Vestry have also various powers under the Metropolitan Paving Act, 57 Geo. III., cap. 29, commonly known as Michael Angelo Taylor's Act, the Nuisances Removal Acts, the Metropolitan Building Acts, the Metropolis Gas Act, the Sanitai-y Act, 1866, the Artizans and Labourers' Dwellings Act, 1868, better known as Torrens' Act, and other statutes. By the Sale of Food and Drugs Acts of 1875 and 1879, the Vestry are empowered to purchase samples of food and drugs for analysis, to appoint a Public Analyst, and to prosecute vendors of adulterated articles. Proceedings under these Acts during the past yoar are mentioned on page 69. There has been a growing tendency for some years to include in the local rates various sums for Metropolitan purposes over the expenditure of which local authorities do not possess the slightest control. Thus, since the establishment of the Metropolitan Board of Works in 1855, the Vestry have at different times been 33 required by Parliament to provide funds for—(a) Main drainage; (6) Fire Brigade; (c) Elementary Education; (d) Thames Bridges— purchase, maintenance, and rebuilding; (e) Artizans' Dwellings, and other purposes. A statement of moneys raised with the parochial rates for Metropolitan purposes is given on page 52. STANDING ORDERS. Operative Resolutions in the nature of Standing Orders have been passed during the year as follows:— 18th May.—That in all cases of Summonses being ordered for obstructing the footway, professional support be obtained on behalf of the Vestry (V. 13/181). 15th June.—That the expenses of printing the petitions and lists for Le Quainter's Bounty, heretofore charged to the rates, for the future be deducted from the dividends of the Charity Fund before distribution among the recipients (V. 13/196). 29th Jane.—That the Signature of the Chairman of the Works Committee be attached to all the weekly wages books in token of their correctness (V. 13/204). 11th July.—That for the future, all time and pay-sheets connected with the weekly wages accounts shall accompany the wages books when brought before the Works and Improvements Committee for examination (W. 7/175). 13th July.—That in all future cases of relaying wood pavement when taken up by the Gas and Water Companies, the work be done under the supervision of the Vestry's Surveyor, such repairs to be executed within seven days after receiving the vouchers from the respective companies (V. 13/208). 18tli July.—That the Vestry Clerk do in the first instance receive all deposits for paving and other works from the Surveyor, and keep an account thereof, having on one side the deposits made, and on the other the amount returned or returnable in cases where more than the cost of the work may have been received, and that he produce the account to the Finance Committee at every monthly meeting, and take instructions for paying to the Treasurer the amount thereof which may appear to be wholly due to the Vestry (F. 5/203). 19th July.—That for the future the Inspector of Nuisances do superintend the spreading of ballast, when required, on the wood pavement, and that the men so employed be transferred from the Works Department to that of the Scavengers (W. 7 178). B 34 27th July.—That, in order to prevent the heavy loss which for many years the Vestry has suffered owing to builders and others not having paid the cost of relaying the pavement, roads, &c., the deposit on the granting of a license be calculated by the probable cost of relaying the whole pavement fronting the works proposed to be done (V. 13/220). 27th July.—That Piccadilly be swept a second time daily at 11 a.m., and for that purpose the two horses belonging to the Vestry be kept for the use of the sweeping machines, the Surveyor being authorised, in case he should require a horse for works purposes, to hire one (Y. 13/218). 12th September.—That two cheques be signed at each ordinary meeting of the Finance Committee for such amounts respectively as may be deemed sufficient for paying the wages and defraying petty disbursements during the two weeks then ensuing (F. 5/214). 27th September.—That in future wood paving repairs the wooden blocks be sawn to a proper gauge by men in the service of the Vestry, instead of any portion of the concrete bedding being removed (W. 7/200). 5tli October.—That the Accountant and Assistant Clerks act under the direction of the Vestry Clerk, and perform such duties beyond those specified on their appointment, as occasion may require from time to time (V. 13/266). 5th October.—Rules for Payment of Wages, etc., adopted as follows (V. 13/260) :— 1.—All wages to be paid (to each man personally) on Saturday, at One p.m., for labour performed up to and including the preceding day (Friday). 2.—For the purpose of recording the time made by the various men, a book shall be kept at the Stoneyard for the men's names and time to be entered daily, and each foreman shall be provided by the Vestry with a pocket book in which to enter the list of men at work daily, in order to check the number working in their respective gangs or under their control ; the said pocket books to be the property of the Vestry, and to be given up when filled, or on the foreman ceasing to be in the service of the Vestry. 3.—Each foreman shall on every Friday Evening supply to the Clerk at the Stoneyard a time sheet detailing the exact number of days and hours he and the men under him have been employed since the preceding Friday, also giving the rate of pay for and nature of work performed by each man, such sheet to be examined with 35 the book containing the daily record at the Stoneyard, and to be certified by the Surveyor and the foreman as a true statement of the time made and the amounts earned by the several men named therein. 4.—The Clerk at the Stoneyard shall, on each Saturday Morning, copy the time sheet into the weekly wages books, and shall afterwards take to the Vestry Clerk, at the Vestry Hall, the certified time sheet, and receive the exact amount named therein, for the purpose of paying the men. 5.—Daring the payment of wages the foreman shall remain outside the office and call out from their pocket books the names of and amount to be received by 'each of the men under their charge ; the wages books to be used by the Clerk at the Stoneyard, and the time sheet by the Inspector, to enable him to properly check the amounts paid. The Clerk at the Stoneyard and the Inspector of Nuisances shall certify in the wages books each week that the wages have been paid to the several men entitled to the same. 6.—The wages books to be forwarded to the Accountant at the Vestry Hall immediately after the payment of wages to be compared with the time sheets, the latter to be preserved at the Vestry Hall for twelve months at least. 7.—No payment for stone dressing or similar purposes shall be made without a detailed account being rendered for the same, and certified by the Surveyor after examination. 8.—Brooms in the Eoad Sweeping Machine to be changed by the men in the course of their ordinary daily work without extra payment. 9.—All measurements of work, requirements of material, and other entries, involving an outlay of money, to be made on printed forms or in books provided for the purpose. 19th October.—That it be referred to the Finance Committee to periodically examine the accounts of wages paid for disinfecting rooms and clothing (V. 13/273). 31st October.—That the principle of amalgamating all the rates in one set of books be adopted (F. 5/223). 31st October.—That in future the Collectors be furnished with a collecting book in lieu of a complete copy of the rate book as at present (F. 5/223). 16th November.—That the Stoneyard Clerk be required to give security to the amount of £100 through an approved Guarantee Society, and that the Vestry do pay the annual premium (V. 13/292). 36 30th November.—That the system for checking the delivery of goods and materials to the Works Department (by means of order book, invoices, and stock book), now submitted by the Works and Improvements Committee, be approved, subject to any modifications that may hereafter appear necessary or advisable (V. 13/311). 30th November.—That the draft list of duties to be performed by the Stoneyard Clerk, now submitted by the Works and Improvements Committee, be and the same is hereby approved and adopted as follows (V. 13/311): — 1.—To attend at the Stoneyard daily, from 6 o'clock in the morning until the closing of the yard, or until such later hour as may be required by the Surveyor. 2.—To enter in the book kept for the purpose all applications for the removal of house-dust. 3.—To take entire charge and responsibility of the Stoneyard, office, stables, stores, plant, and materials ; and to see that no goods or materials are given out except on written requisition of a foreman. 4.—To receive and examine, as to quantity and quality, all goods and materials supplied to the Vestry, and to certify the same ; to enter in the books provided for the purpose, all goods and materials delivered to the Vestry, and all goods and materials given out on the requisition of the foreman. 5.—To keep the daily time book of the men employed by the Vestry, examine the weekly time sheets, and copy the same into the wages books. 6.—To pay the workmen's wages weekly. 7.—To receive from the Surveyor and the Foreman measurements of works done by the Vestry for Gas and Water Companies and private persons ; to square dimensions, price the work, and enter the same in books provided for the purpose. 8.—To keep accounts of all works done by the Vestry for Gas and Water Companies and private persons, and to periodically furnish particulars thereof to the Vestry Clerk. 9.—To attend Meetings of the Vestry and of Committees when required. 10.—To keep the Surveyor informed of all matters in connection with the Works Department. 37 11.—To keep or prepare such accounts and statements as may be required from time to time by the Vestry, any Committee, or the Surveyor. 12.—To act under the direction of the Surveyor, to obey his instructions, to personally see that the orders of the Surveyor relating to the Stoneyard and Stores are properly carried out, and to report to the Surveyor, or to the Vestry Clerk, any irregularity coming uuder his notice, and any instance of the business or any order of the Vestry being insufficiently or improperly carried on or evaded. 13.—Such other duties as may be required. 6th December.—That when any vacancy occurs in the staff of sweepers, the instructions of the Works and Improvements Committee be taken as to supplying such vacancy before the same is filled up (W. 7/234). 6th December.—That it be an instruction to the Inspector of Nuisances to read the meters attached to public street lamps, the Vestry Hall, and the Stoneyard each quarter, as soon as convenient after the record of consumption has been received from the Gas Company, and to furnish the Vestry Clerk with his readings of the several meters, so that the same may be compared with the figures of the Company (W. 7/239). 12th December.—That the Sanitary Inspector be instructed to report to the Finance Committee full particulars of each case of disinfection, and ask their instructions as to whether application shall be made to the party concerned for repayment of the cost incurred by the Vestry in respect thereof (F. 5/234). 2nd January, 1883.—That in future the returns of rates collected be made up to the date of the meeting of the Finance Committee, instead of to the date of the Vestry Meeting (F. 5/237). 3rd January, 1883.—That the Inspector of Nuisances be authorised to employ such men as may be necessary for spreading ballast on wood-paved carriageways on emergencies (W. 7/250). 27th February, 1883.—That it be an instruction to the Rate Collectors to take steps for enforcing payment (if necessary) of rates due from occupiers holding short tenancies at the earliest practicable period (F. 5/250). It is intended to tabulate a complete list of operative resolutions now in force for publication in a future Report. 38 THE ELECTION OF VESTRYMEN AND AUDITORS OF ACCOUNTS Was held on Monday, the 22nd day of May, the places appointed for the purpose being—Pall Mall Ward, Willis's Rooms, King Street; Church Ward, Vestry Hall, Piccadilly; Golden Square Ward, National School House, Marshall Street ; and Great Marlborough Ward, Board Room, Poland Street. The total expense of conducting the election, including the hire of rooms, publication of notices, &c., amounted to £8 17s. 0d., and an order for payment of this sum from the Poor Rate was accordingly made by the Vestry in accordance with the Statute. It is a matter of great regret to the Vestry that so few of the Parishioners attend at the Annual Election of Vestrymen and Auditors of Accounts, of which due notice is publicly given. A list of the Vestrymen will be found on pages 7 and 8. CHURCHWARDENS Were elected on the 13th day of April, when the choice of the Vestry fell upon Mr. Frederick Crane, of 55, Regent Street, and Mr. William Cox, of 57, Pall Mall. SIDESMEN Were elected by the Vestry on the 13th day of April, the undermentioned gentlemen being selected to fill the office:— Mr. William Westley, 24, Regent Street. Mr. James Thomas Robertson, 7, St. James's Street. Mr. Samuel Morle, 102, Jermyn Street. Mr. Robert Gurney Barclay, 69, Pall Mall. OVERSEERS OF THE POOR. Eight parishioners were nominated by the Vestry on the 13th of April, 1882, to serve as Overseers of the Poor. The gentlemen 39 chosen from this list, and appointed by the Justices of the Peace at a Petty Sessions held on the following day, to act as Overseers for the year 1882-3, were:— Mr. William Westley, 24, Regent Street. Mr. John Malin, 117, Jermyn Street. Mr. James Styles, 63, Jermyn Street. Mr. Henry Lewis, 53a, Pall Mall. THE GOVERNORS AND DIRECTORS OF THE POOR Are appointed annually by the Vestry under the Act 2 Geo. III., cap. 58, their principal functions now consisting of supervising the collection of the Poor Rate, and paying the various sums charged thereon according to law. A list of the gentlemen appointed Governors and Directors of the Poor on the 13th April, 1882, is given on page 11. The Churchwardens and Overseers of the Poor are Governors and Directors of the Poor ex-officio. A statement of receipts and payments on account of the Poor Rate will be found on page 104. ST. JAMES'S CHAPEL AND BURIAL GROUND. The Parish churchyard proving inadequate for the reception of the remains of deceased parishioners, a piece of ground, situate in the Hampstead Road, was purchased for burial purposes, about the year 1790, under Parliamentary authority. This ground was originally four acres in extent, and was slightly increased by the renting of additional land (which was afterwards purchased) for the formation of approach roads. Shortly after the passing of the Metropolitan Burials Act in 1852, an Order in Council was made prohibiting any further interments in the ground, which consequently ceased to be of any use to the Parish. A chapel, however, had been built on a portion of the ground, capable of seating about 800 worshippers, in addition to the school children, for whom accommodation was provided, and on the closing of the burial ground, this chapel, and buildings 40 attached thereto, were let on lease at a rent of £140 per annum,, this sum being just sufficient to meet the charges on the land, but leaving no overplus to maintain the ground in proper order. It was subsequently discovered that part of the land had never been consecrated, and that it might consequently be utilised for secular purposes. After much deliberation, it was determined to apply to Parliament for power to sell the Chapel, and the unconsecrated portion of the ground for the benefit of the Parish. This proposal received Parliamentary sanction in 1869, and the Chapel was subsequently sold to the Rev. C. W. Hodson, for £3,000, and the remainder of the available property to the Trustees of the London Temperance Hospital for £6,050 ; making a total of £9,050. The following statement shows the application of this sum :— £ s. d. Redemption of Rent-cliarge of £100 a year 3,104 3 4 Invested in Consols for the maintenance of the ground 1,250 0 0 Invested in Consols for school purposes—One moiety for Scholarships in Tenison's Grammar School for boys, and one moiety for the Burlington School for girls 1,000 0 0 Towards building and endowing St. John's Church, Great Marlborough Street 2,500 0 0 Purchase of leasehold interest of part of the Chapel property 125 0 0 Professional charges in connection with the sales of the properties 342 5 2 Cost of obtaining the special Act of Parliament 589 8 11 Balance available for current expenditure 139 2 7 £9,050 0 0 The remainder of the ground is managed by ten Trustees, of whom two, the Rector and Senior Churchwarden, are cx-officio, and eight are elected by the Vestry from time to time as vacancies occur. Three vacancies have arisen during the year, caused respectively by Mr. George Griffiths ceasing to be a householder in the Parish, the death of Mr. John Bradshaw, and the resignation of 41 Mr. Joseph Haynes. Mr. A. T. Spryng was elected in the place of Mr. Griffiths, Mr. William Cox in the place of Mr. Bradshaw, and Mr. John Thomas Wiraperis in the place of Mr. Haynes. A Bill is now before Parliament by which the London and Northwestern Railway Company seek power to purchase a portion of the burial ground. ARCHBISHOP TENISON'S UNITED SCHOOLS, For the Parishes of St. Martin-in-the-Fields and St. James, owe their origin, so far as the latter Parish is concerned, to the gift, in 1700, by Dr. Tenison, the first Rector of St. James's, and also Rector of St. Martin's at the time of the constitution of St. James's Parish, and afterwards Archbishop of Canterbury, of certain property upon trust, among other objects, to provide one schoolmaster or more to teach poor boys, natives and inhabitants of this Parish. The schools appear to have originally belonged exclusively to St. Martin's, and formerly occupied a site now absorbed in the National Gallery, and were removed to their present building in Leicester Square on the Government acquiring the former property in the year 18G7 for enlarging the Gallery. Shortly afterwards the Charity Commissioners established a scheme by which the Schools and the endowment for a schoolmaster were merged into a middle-class School and placed under the management of a mixed body of Trustees, three of whom are elected by the Vestry of this Parish : Mr. Frederick Crane, Mr. Thomas H. W. Anderson, and Mr. Henry Graves, being the present Governors so elected. In addition to these elected representatives, the Rector of St. James's is a Trustee ex-oj/icio, and two other Trustees resident in the Parish are elected by the Board. These two co-optative Trustees are, at present, the Rev. H. A. Sherringham, Vicar of St. Peter's, and Mr. Hopkinson, of Regent Street. The present annual income of the charity derived from the endowment is £260, and 228 boys are educated. There are no Foundation scholars, but free scholarships are granted by the Board on the display of individual merit. The interest on the sum of £500, part of the purchase money of the land sold by the Trustees of St. James's Chapel and Burial 42 Ground under their Act of 1869 (see page 40), is applicable to Scholarships in this School, for St. James's boys only. Two additional class rooms are now being added to the School (which is freehold and wholly unencumbered) by which the accoin modation will be increased to 278. The master is Mr. John F. Arnold, who has a staff of six assistant masters. BURLINGTON SCHOOL. This Institution was established by voluntary contributions in the year 1699, and had for its original object the instruction of 60 poor girls whose parents could not afford to educate them. A site for the School was obtained in 1719 from the Earl of Burlington, and the building was opened for the reception of scholars in 1725, when 35 poor girls were admitted. The property of the charity has since been increased by the gift of a house from an unknown donor, and several pecuniary legacies, the two most important bequests being one of £500 by Priscilla Rolls, and one of £2,000 by Peter le Quainter. A scheme for the management of the School was established by the Charity Commissioners on the 8th July, 1875, and under this Scheme two of the Governors are elected by the vestry, the present Governors so elected being Mr. Thomas Henry Elam and Mr. William Cox. The last-mentioned gentleman was elected during the past year to supply a vacancy caused by the death of Mr. Bradshaw. The interest on the sum of £500, part of the purchase money of the land sold by the Trustees of St. James's Chapel and Burial Ground under their Act of 1869 (see page 40), is applicable to Scholarships in this School. The present annual income of the Charity derived from the endowment is £501 18s. 8d.' education is provided for 280 girls, all of whom pay fees. PAROCHIAL CHARITIES. The only Charity which is administered by the Vestry is that known as Le Quainter's. It arises from a bequest, in 1782, by Mr. Peter Le Quainter, formerly a resident in Piccadilly, who 43 directed that the income should be "equally distributed at Christmas amongst twenty poor persons who are, or have been, housekeepers in the Parish of St. James, Westminster, and such as the Rector and Churchwardens, and the other gentlemen for the time being who shall compose the Vestry of the said Parish, shall deem to be proper objects, and the most deserving to partake of the same." The property of the Charity consists of £9,969 2s. 9d. New Three per Cent. Annuities, and the following is a statement of the amount received and expended during the past year:— Receipts. Expenditure. £ s. d. £ s. d. Dividends on Stock299 1 6 Cost of printing forms of Amount received as interest ' petition and lists of for time Dividends were applicants 6 0 3 placed on deposit 2 8 9 Amount paid to 20 poor persons— (£14 15s. 6d. each) 295 10 0 £301 10 3 £301 10 3 The twenty recipients were selected by the Vestry from fortyfive applicants, after a careful investigation of each case. A list of other endowed Charities in which the Parish is interested is given on pages 106 to 110. PUBLIC BATHS AND WASHHOUSES. The Act to encourage the erection of Public Baths and Washhouses, passed in the year 18-16, was adopted by the Vestry on the lOtli December in the same year, and seven Commissioners were appointed to cai-ry the Act into execution. Some difficulty arose in securing a suitable site, and eventually some Baths and Washhouses were erected, in the year 1850, on a piece of freehold ground belonging to the Parish, formerly part of the Stoneyard, and the site of No. 16, Marshall Street; the establishment was enlarged in the year 1860 by the addition of the site of Nos. 17 and 18, Marshall Street. The original building was erected from the designs and under the superintendence of Mr. Pritchard Baly, C.E., at a cost, including furniture and fittings, and subsequent enlargements, of about £21,000 which sum was borrowed on the security of the Poor 44 Rates, with the sanction of the Vestry; £19,250 of this amount has been repaid, leaving a balance of £1,750 still due. The final payment on account of existing loans will be made in 1891. The accommodation provided for bathers consists of a swimming bath measuring 40 ft. by 30 ft.; 23 first class private baths for men ; 13 for women; 44 second class private baths for men ; and 13 for women. The laundry affords all necessary facilities for 83 washers, 8 manglers, and 10 ironers, at one time. The establishment is under the control of seven Commissioners appointed by the Vestry, one-third of them retiring annually. A list of the Commissioners is given on page 12. It is satisfactory to remark that these Baths and Washhouses are a source of profit to the Parish, no less than £1,000 having been contributed as surplus receipts to the reduction of the Poor Rate during the past year. The following resolution, passed by the Governors and Directors of the Poor, on the 16th of July, 1878, expresses the satisfaction of the Board with the management of the establishment:— "That the thanks of this Board be given to Mr. Alfred Thomas Spiyng, Chairman of the Commissioners for Public Baths and Washhouses, for the great interest and attention he evinces in the affairs of an Institution which, under efficient management, is calculated not only to afford health and comfort to the community, but ultimately to prove a source of permanent pecuniary advantage to the ratepayers." A statement of the receipts and expenditure of the Commissioners for the past year is given on page 103. BEADLE. According to custom, the Vestry appointed a Parish Beadle on the 1st June, 1882, Mr. Frederick Green being again chosen at a salary of £52 10s. for the year, with an additional £10 for Sunday duties. This salary is paid from Church funds, and is not a charge upon the rates. 45 REPRESENTATIVE AT THE METROPOLITAN BOARD OF WORKS. One member of the Metropolitan Board of Works is elected by the Vestry of St. James, under the pi'o visions of the Metropolis Local Management Act, 1855. Mr. Thomas Henry Elam, the member at present representing this Parish at the Board, was first elected in the year 1877, and has since been continuously re-elected from time to time. VESTRY AND COMMITTEE MEETINGS. The following is the number of meetings held during the year :— Vestry Meetings 42 Finance and House Committee 30 Sanitary, Parliamentary Bills, and General Purposes Committee 9 Works and Improvements Committee 36 Lighting Committee (appointed 16th November) 10 Joint Committees 5 Special Committees 6 Total 138 The Vestry usually meet on alternate Thursday mornings, but a special meeting may be convened at any time upon the requisition of five members, and some of the ordinary meetings are suspended at vacation times. Three Standing Committees are appointed annually, in accordance with the bye-laws of the Vestry, and meet as frequently as occasion may require. Special Committees are appointed from time to time to consider subjects not coming within the ordinary duties of either of the Standing Committees. OFFICERS OF THE VESTRY. Treasurer.—Mr. James Walter Weldon having resigned the appointment of Treasurer to the Vestry, on relinquishing the management of the London and Westminster Bank (St. James's 46 Square Branch), Mr. George Richard Hemmerde, who succeeded him as Manager of the Bank, was appointed Treasurer in his stead. An arrangement exists by which interest is allowed on the daily balance in the hands of the Treasurer, and interest at a fixed rate is charged on the account when the same is overdrawn. Vestry Clerk.—The Vestry have to regret the loss by death of two old and valued servants during the past year in the persons of Mr. George Buzzard, Vestry Clerk, and Mr. John ldfeld Phippard, Assistant Vestry Clerk. The death of the latter, which occurred on the 1st May, rendered necessary some rearrangement of the staff in the Vestry Clerk's Office, and a Special Committee, of whom Mr. Churchwarden Cox was elected Chairman, was appointed to consider the subject. After much anxious deliberation, it appeared to the Committee that, in view of the advancing age of Mr. Buzzard, the best course to adopt, both in kindness to that gentleman, and in the interest of the Vestry, would be to suggest the advisability of his retirement on a superannuation allowance, preparatory to considering the reconstitution of the office staff. This view was adopted by the Vestry, and accepted by Mr. Buzzard. Applications for the position of Vestry Clerk were thereupon invited, with the idea that the candidate to be appointed should commence his duties at Christmas, 1882, from which time the retirement of Mr. Buzzard was to date. Before the time specified for considering these applications had arrived, the circumstances were altered by the death of Mr. Buzzard, and it became necessary that the new Vestry Clerk should commence his duties forthwith, and an amended advertisement intimating this alteration was accordingly issued. The Committee selected eleven of the candidates for a personal interview, and ultimately submitted three to the Vestry. The election took place on the 7th September, when the choice of the Vestry fell upon Mr. Harry wilkins, Assistant Clerk to the Vestry of Kensington, who was thereupon declared duly elected Vestry Clerk of this Parish. On the same date the Vestry unanimously passed a vote of thanks to the Committee for the satisfactory manner in which they had discharged their important duties. 47 The whole arrangements of the office were then carefully considered by the Special Committee, and certain changes having been made in the mode of transacting the business, and the duties of the subordinate officers modified accordingly, Mr. James Plater, who had been engaged as auxiliary clerk for 2£ years, was appointed at a salary of £100 per annum, increasing at the rate of .£10 a year to £150, to fill the vacancy caused by the death of Mr. Pbippard, and Mr. Henry Thomas Brookcr was appointed copying clerk, at a salary of £70 per annum. The salary of Mr. Beacall, nccountant, was at the same time increased by £20 to £180 per annum. Surveyor's Department.—The administration of business in this department has formed the subject of careful investigation during the year. Some important alterations have been made in the system of business, and further changes are in contemplation, consequent upon the approaching termination of the engagement of Mr. A. P. Howell, the Surveyor. The Vestry have decided to require the Surveyor about to be appointed in succession to Mr. Howell to I devote his whole time to their service. Rules have been framed for the better checking of payments in respect of wages, and for a more complete system of stock-keeping. A vacancy caused by the resignation of the Clerk of the Works was filled by the appointment of a Clerk of the Stoneyard with considerably altered duties. A new Foreman of Sweepers has also been appointed. Public Analyst.—In consequence of inconveniences attending the use of the Laboratory at the Vestry Hall, an arrangement has been made with Dr. James Edmunds, the Public Analyst, to conduct analyses under the Sale of Food and Drugs Act at his private laboratory, No. 8, Grafton Street, the Vestry making an allowauce of £25 per annum in consideration of Dr. Edmunds using his own laboratory, materials, and appliances. By this arrangement a large room in the Vestry Hall is set free for general Vestry purposes. General.— With the exception of an increase in the salary of the Inspector of Nuisances by the sum of £20 to £120 per aunurn, and an 48 increase of £15 to £120 per annum in the salary of the Hallkeeper and Messenger, no alterations have been made with regard to other officers during the past year. A list of the officers of the Vestry and their respective salaries is given on page 98. DEATH OF THE VESTRY CLERK. Mr. George Buzzard, the late Vestry Clerk, died on the 12th August, after having faithfully served the Parish in various capacities for upwards of half a century. At a Special Meeting of the Vestry, held on the 15th August, the following resolution was unanimously adopted:— "That this Vestry, in offering its expressions of condolence to the family and friends of the late Mr. Buzzard on their sudden bereavement, desires to place on record its high appreciation of his notable career for more than 50 years as Vestry Clerk of this Parish, his great aptitude and knowledge, his unswerving honesty and great zeal, and his able performance of his duties through that lengthened period to the day of his death in the office of Vestry Clerk, and other appointments held by him in the Parish of Saint James." As a further instance of the esteem in which Mr. Buzzard was held, it may here be remarked that on the 19th April, 1882, a silver salver and an easy chair, purchased by private subscription, were presented to Mr. Buzzard in commemoration of his fifty years' service. The presentation took place at a dinner, at which the Rev. J. E. Kempe, the Rector, presided. The funeral of Mr. Buzzard took place at Hampstead Cemetery on the 16th August, when several members of the Vestry attended as a tribute of respect to one who had served the Parish with fidelity, diligence, and ability for so long a period. The steps taken for filling up the vacancy caused by Mr. Buzzard's death are mentioned on page 46. DEATH OF THE ASSISTANT VESTRY CLERK. Mr. John Oldfeld Phippard, who had held the office of Assistant Vestry Clerk from the passing of the Metropolis Local Management Act in 1855, died on the 1st May, and at a meeting of the Vestry, 49 held on the 3rd May, it was unanimously resolved that a letter expressing sympathy and condolence be sent to Mr. Phippard's family. The steps taken for filling up the vacancy caused by Mr. Phippard's death are mentioned on page 47. FINANCIAL. It will be seen on reference to the accounts given on page 92, that the year commenced with a balance due to the Treasurer amounting to £4,563 9s. 7d. The sum of £68,174 0s. 4d. was received during the twelve months, and the expenditure for the same period reached a total of £58,031 12s. 5d., leaving a balance of £5,578 18s. 4d. on the 25th March, 1883. Against this cash balance, however, there were on the lastmentioned date, debts and liabilities properly chargeable to income amounting to £10,562 2s. 3d., with assets (exclusive of cash balance) estimated to realise £1,202 10s. 9d. only, leaving £3,780 13s. 2c?. to be raised during the present year, in addition to the sum required to defray current expenses. LOANS. The only loan now outstanding is the sum of £5,714 5s. 8d., being the balance of the loan of £8,000 taken up in the year 1880, for wood paving works in Regent Street (Oxford Street to Piccadilly Circus). The loan is secured by mortgage of the General Rates, and the final payment in respect thereof becomes due in 1887. INCIDENCE OF LOCAL TAXATION. Early in the month of April the Vestry received for sealing, if approved, copies of Memorials to the First Lord of the Treasury and the Home Secretary, which had been agreed to at a Conference of representatives from Vestries and District Boards of Works, held 50 at the Town Hall, Kensington, in the previous month. Mr. Burgess, Mr. Cox, and Mr. Venn represented this Vestry at the Conference. The Memorials set forth the continually increasing burden of local charges raised solely from the occupiers of houses and lands for what it is thought may fairly be regarded as national purposes, and prayed the Government to take the matter into consideration with a view to adopting some measures for the relief of the ratepayers. The Vestry approved the Memorials, affixed their common seal thereto, and presented the same, as suggested by the Conference. Some measures had been projected by the Ministry for dealing with the question of local taxation, but the time of Parliament being occupied with matters of more pressing importance, the subject was not brought forward during the past Session beyond a grant of £250,000 being asked for and made by Parliament towards the cost of repairing main and disturnpiked roads. This grant afforded no relief to the Parish of St. James. RATEABLE VALUE. The rateable value, according to the last quinquennial re-valuation of the whole Parish in 1880, amounted to £666,813. A supplemental valuation list, prepared in 1881, increased this amount by £2,086, and a further supplemental valuation list, prepared in the following year, gave a further increase of £1,359, thus making a total rateable value of £670,258 on the 6th April, 1883. RATES Were made bv the Vestrv during' the vear as follows:— Amount in the Pound. s. d. Poor Rate (including, in addition to charges for the relief of the Poor, Police, County, and Luuatic Asylums Rates, contributions to the Metropolitan Common Poor Fund, and other general charges) 1 0 51  Amount in the Pound. s. d. General Rate for the lighting, maintenance, repairing and cleansing of street watering carriageways, administration expenses, precepts of the School Board for London, and proportion of the Bridge Expenses of the Metropolitan Board of Works 1 5 Sewers Kate, for the maintenance, repair, and cleansing of sewers vested in the Vestry 0 1 Metropolitan Consolidated Rate, for meeting the precept of the Metropolitan Board of Works, so far as relates to the Fire Brigade, Main Drainage, Metropolitan Improvements, and general expenses of the Board 0 6 Total 3 9 The following statement shows the amount of the rates and the collection thereof:— Poor Rate— £ s. d. Amount of rate as levied £58,636 2 3 Collected 56,404 12 7½ Loss from empty houses, &c. 1,538 13 0¾ Arrears at close of year 692 16 6¾ £58,636 2 3 Collected on arrears of former rates £344 7 11½ Other Parochial Rates— £ s. d. Amount of rates as levied £67,012 14 0 Collected 64,454 10 1 Loss from empty houses, &c. 1,753 16 5 Arrears at close of year 804 7 6 £67,012 14 0 Collected on arrears of former rates £985 0 1 52 Under the provisions of the Local Acts of Parliament relating to the Parish of St. James, the rates are made annually, but are recoverable by four quarterly instalments. For the convenience of Parishioners, however, it has become the practice to collect the rates in two half-yearly sums. In addition to issuing about the usual number of summonses for the recovery of rates and obtaining distress warrants, as customary, the Vestry have been compelled to resort to the extreme measure of applying for warrants of commitment to prison in default of distress in 6 cases. The Bills of Sale Amendment Act passed during the last Session, however, provides that Bills of Sale shall not avail against distress for rates, and it will therefore not be necessary when the Act is in full operation to apply for warrants of commitment except in very rare cases. In view of the increasing demands by central Authorities over whose expenditure the Vestry do not possess any control, although for economy in collection the funds are raised with the local rates, the following statement will be of interest to ratepayers:— Total amount expended, £115,849 19s. 5d. Under control of Local Authority. Not under control of Local Authority. Poor Rate:— £ s. d. Poor Rate:— £ s. d. Expended by Guardians of the Poor in relief, &c. 18,346 19 8 Metropolitan Asylum District.. 8,900 0 0 Central London Sick Asylum 3,550 0 0 Registration of Voters, Printing, Salaries, &c 1,570 15 6 Metropolitan mon Poor Fund 7,750 0 0 General and Sewers Rates:— Police 13,532 9 10 County & Lunatic Asylum Rates 4,168 2 0 Paving, Scavengering, Cleansing, &c., Local Sewers, and Administration Expenses 23,951 18 10 General Rate:— Expenses of School Board 16,465 16 2 Metropolitan Consolidated Rate:— Expenses of Metropolitan Board of Works 17,613 17 5 £43,869 14 0 £71,980 5 5 53 It will thus be seen that although the rates raised by the Vestry amounted to £115,850, the Local Authorities had no voice in the expenditure of £71,980 of that sum. The following statement illustrates the enormous increase in the demands of the Metropolitan Board of Works and the School Board for London during the last ten years:— 1873-4 1874-5 1875-6 1 870-7 1877-8 1878-9 1879-80 1880-1 1881-2 1882-3 Metropolitan Hoard of Works £5,852 9,577 11,681 10,056 11,142 11,594 14,008 15,357 10,516 17,614 School Board fur London 1,046 5,153 6,705 9,974 12,364 12,195 13,115 15,004 15,941 16,166 Total £7,798 14,730 18,386 20,930 23,806 23,789 27,123 30,471 31.487 34,080 The total amount raised with the local rates for these two Boards alone, during the ten years, is £233,549, being an average of £23,354 per annum. These precepts, which in the year 1873-74 represented a rate of 3½d. in the pound, had increased to a rate of a fraction over 1s. in the pound in the year 1882-83. VESTRY PROPERTY. The Vestry Hall stands on a portion of the old burial ground, and was erected under a Faculty obtained in 1861. Part of the site was formerly occupied by the Parish Vestry Room, which was removed to afford space for the new building. The Vestry Hall was erected by Messrs. Mansfield and Son from the designs and under the superintendence of Mr. A. P. Howell, the Vestry's Surveyor, at a total cost, including furniture and fittings, of about £8,(MX), the principal items being as follows:— £ s. d. Payments to Builders 6,360 18 3 Furniture and Fittings 736 8 2 Architect and Surveyor 142 7 0 Clerk of Works 213 0 0 Coet of obtaining Faculty 40 6 0 Paid to Churchwardens for reinstating, &c. Churchyard 500 0 0 Incidental Expenses 99 9 4 £8,092 8 9 54 The sum of £6,000 was borrowed from the London Life Association for a period of twenty years at the rate of 5 per cent. interest; the final instalment of the loan was paid in 1881, and the Vestry Hall is therefore now absolutely the property of the Parishioners. Permission has been granted for the St. James's Savings Bank, and for meetings of the St. James's Divisional Petty Sessions, and Commissioners of Income Tax to be held in the Vestry Hall. Tenders have been invited for cleansing, painting, and repairing the building, both externally and internally, with a view to the Hall and Offices being put in a thorough state of repair during the summer of the present year. An insurance for ,£2,500 has been effected in the Westminster Fire Office, and the plate glass is insured with the National Provincial Plate Glass Insurance Company. The Stoneyard, Dufour's Place, occupies part of the site of an old burial ground, which was held under Lord Craven at an annual rental of £53, until it was purchased for the sum of £3,443 in 1817, under the powers of an Act of Parliament (56 Geo. III., cap. 54). Stabling for two horses, store rooms, and an office have been erected in the Stoneyard. Part of the St. James's Public Baths are built upon the walls of the Stoneyard, thus forming a covering to the yard. A Mortuary House and Disinfecting Chamber have been erected in the Stoneyard. The Mortuary was erected in the year 1876, at a cost of £323 16s. 3d., and the Disinfecting Chamber, in 1871, at a cost of £122. The bodies of 47 persons have been received in the Mortuary, and the Disinfecting Chamber has been used on 17 occasions during the past year. As the main object of providing these buildings is to protect the parishioners at large against the spread of infectious disease, the Mortuary and Disinfecting Chamber may be used without charge. The following Rules and Regulations have been framed relative to the Mortuary House:— 55 1.—All applications for the admission or removal of bodies shall be made to the Superintendent in charge of the Building by printed forms to be properly filled up and signed by the applicants ; such forms may be obtained either at the Vestry Hall, Piccadilly, or at the residence of the Superintendent, Mr. Edwin Brooks, No. 15, Portland Street. 2.—Every dead body received into the Mortuary House shall be removed therefrom for interment within a period of six days, dating from the day on which the death occurred. 3.—In cases where death is certified as having been caused by Small Pox, Fever, Malignant Scarlatina, or other diseases of a highly contagious nature, the body shall be removed for interment within Three days from the day on which the death occurred ; but it shall be competent for the Medical Officer of Health to order interment at any time when from rapid decomposition, or other causes, an early interment shall, on the grounds of public health and safety, be in his opinion necessary. 4.—The time for receiving bodies into the Mortuary House shall be between 7 a.m. and 9. p.m. 5.—Any person wishing to use the Mortuary House as a temporary receptacle for the body of a deceased relative, friend, or servant, shall give the written guarantee of a responsible householder previous to the admission of such body, by way of security for the removal of the same at the proper time ; and if, from any cause, the said body be not removed within the specified time, the interment will be carried out by the order of the Parochial Authorities at the expense of the guarantor. 6.—Every dead body received into the Mortuary House must be first placed within a properly-made coffin or shell. 7.—In cases where a dead body has been removed to the Mortuary House by the order of a Justice of the Peace, or at the instance of the Medical Officer of Health, and the friends or relatives of the deceased person shall refuse or neglect to remove such body for interment at the time specified in such Order, or by these Regulations, the interment will take place by order of the Parochial Authorities. 8.—The friends or relatives of a deceased person deposited within the Mortuary House, not exceeding three at any one time, upon application to the Superintendent, may visit the building daily between the hours of 9 a.m. and sunset; but in the event of any person causing a disturbance, or behaving in a manner inconsistent with due decorum and propriety, the attendant is empowered to cause such person to be forthwith removed from the building. 56 SCAVENGERING, DUST REMOVAL, &c. A staff of road sweepers, averaging about 24 in number, has been regularly employed by the Vestry, at a total cost for the year of £1,324 2s. 8d. The refuse collected by the sweepers is removed under contract, at a fixed sum, the contractor providing his own horses, carts, shoot, &c. House dust and refuse is also removed and the carriageways watered under the contract system. The whole of the work has been satisfactorily carried out during the past year, at the following cost:— £ s. d. Payments to Contractors 4,588 14 1 Wages of Vestry's Workmen 1,324 2 8 Water for Street Watering 401 16 5 Total £6,314 13 2 The total number of loads of street refuse removed during the year was 8,697. STREET LIGHTING. On the 25th March, 1882, there were 757 public lamps in the various thoroughfares of the Parish, 741 of which were ordinary street lamps, (696 burning cannel gas, and 45 burning common gas), 4 were urinal lamps, and 12 were larger lamps attached to refuges. On the 25th March, 1883, the number of lamps was 753, showing a decrease of 4 in the twelve months; the proportion of different lamps now being 585 cannel gas street lamps, 149 common gas street lamps, 4 urinal lamps, and 15 refuge lamps. The whole of these lamps are lighted, extinguished, cleansed, and maintained by the Gas Company under an arrangement with the Vestry ; the agreed sum being £3 0s. 1d. per annum for each ordinary street lamp, whether burning cannel or common gas, 2½ ft. of cannel gas being supplied per lamp per hour, and 3 ft. of common gas. As regards the other lamps, payment is made according to the consumption of gas as registered by meter. The total cost of street lighting for the past year amounted to £2,576 1s. 11d., exclusive of 57 new lamp-posts, lanterns, and fittings, which cost a further sum of £98 11s. 2d. A larger burner was fixed to the bracket lamp in Marlborough Row, at the entrance to Carnaby Court, and permission was given for an improved bracket lamp to be substituted, at private expense, for an existing lamp outside No. 104, Jermyn Street, the new lamp becoming the property of the Vestry. The freeholders of Golden Square having decided to remove the existing railings round the Square garden, and erect new railings in place thereof, suggested that the public lamps then fixed to the railings should be removed, and new lamp-posts erected in the line of kerb. The Vestry, however, objected to this proposal, and, after some negotiation between the Vestry's Surveyor and Mr. Cubit Nichols, the Estate Surveyor, it was arranged that openings should be left at intervals in the new railings for the insertion of suitable lamps therein. As the parishioners would not derive any benefit from this alteration, the Vestry considered that part of the cost should be borne by the freeholders of the property, and, upon a representation being made to this effect, the freeholders agreed to contribute £12 towards the cost of the new lamp-posts and lanterns. Repeated damage having been caused to street lanterns in various parts of the Parish, evidently in a wilful manner, the attention of the Police was directed to the matter, with a request that any occurrence of the kind may be reported with a view to proceedings being instituted against the offender. The police authorities expressed their readiness to afford the Vestry every assistance in putting a stop to what might result in a great public danger, and special directions were issued to the constables on duty. No conviction has, however, yet resulted. At the request of Mr. William Laing, Managing Director of the Laing Electric Light Company, permission was given for an experiment to be made with that Company's system of street lighting in Waterloo Place and the lower end of Regent Street. A shed to contain the necessary engine and apparatus was accordingly erected by the Company in Waterloo Place, and the thoronghfares named 58 were lighted by electricity, at intervals, during the months of March, April, and May. The Vestry did not arrive at any decided opinion as to the value and cost of the light, as compared with gas for street lighting. The experiment was conducted without cost to the Vestry. ELECTRIC LIGHTING. This subject has engaged much attention during the past year. Several applications were received in the spring and summer of 1882 for permission to lay wires in various parts of the Parish for lighting purposes; but as a Government measure to deal with the Avhole question was then before the House of Commons, the Vestry declined to assent to any of the proposals, pending a decision by Parliament on the proposed legislation. The Bill was referred to a Select Committee, and ultimately, in an amended form, became law under the short title of " The Electric Lighting Act, 1882." If, as appears probable, electricity is likely to compete to any large extent with gas, it is desirable that precautions should be taken to prevent a monopoly arising in the supply of the new light, as is the case with gas. This aspect of the question was not lost sight of by the Board of Trade, which was the Department of the Government that had charge of the Bill, and the views of the Board, subject to a slight modification, were adopted by Parliament. In consequence of the elementary stage in which the science of Electric Lighting was at the time, legislation was necessarily to some extent tentative in character, and the Board of Trade have consequently large powers conferred on them by the Act, for the purpose of controlling the conditions of the supply and price of electricity. No Authority or Company can supply Electricity without either a license or Provisional Order from the Board of Trade. A license can only be granted with the consent of the Local Authority (in this Parish the Vestry), and for a period of seven years, although it is renewable from time to time for a similar period. A Provisional Order does not require the consent of the Local Authority, and may be granted for any term, limited or unlimited, but it is subject to Parliamentary sanction. A local authority, however, is 59 empowered to purchase the undertaking, if a Provisional Order has been granted to a Company, on the expiration of twenty-one years from the passing of the Act confirming the Order, or at the end of any subsequent period of seven years, without being required to pay any compensation for profits, whether past, present, or prospective. Immediately after the passing of the Act, one application for consent to a license and six notices of intended applications for Provisional Orders were received by the Vestry. Assent was withheld from the granting of a license, and the Vestry determined to consider whether they should as the Local Authority take in hand the supply of Electricity for public and private purposes in the interests of the ratepayers. A special meeting was accordingly held on the 16th November, and a resolution was then passed to apply to the Board of Trade for a license as provided by the Act and a Lighting Committee was appointed, among other matters, to prepare the draft license. Before the terms of the license could be prepared, the Vestry received further notice from the two Companies who intended to proceed with their applications for a Provisional Order, the other Companies who had given preliminary notice abandoning their proposals. The subject thus presented some complications, and the Vestry were called upon to decide (1) whether they would be justified in expending the large sum required for an installation of Electric Lighting in the Parish; (2) whether they should allow without opposition another authority to obtain the vast powers sought in the matter of disturbing the surface of streets; or (3) in what manner they could best secure the supply of Electricity under their own control. When the question came to be discussed in all its bearings there were manifest objections to the Vestry undertaking the supply of Electricity in the present stage of knowledge, especially as the Parish might thereby be committed to liabilities of an unknown extent. The Vestry therefore proceeded cautiously with regard to their intended application for a license. But whatever might be their ultimate decision with regard to undertaking the supply of Electricity themselves, the Vestry clearly recognised the duty of limiting as much as possible any powers 60 that might be conferred upon a Company by the Board of Trade, and the draft Provisional Orders of the two Companies referred to (the Metropolitan Brush and the Edison) were carefully examined. The amendments which appeared most essential to the Vestry were to require (1) that the whole parish (or district included in the area of supply) should secure the right to a supply of Electricity, and that the supply should not be restricted to the more important thoroughfares; (2) that the consumers should share with the Company any future reduction in the cost of producing and distributing Electricity; (3) that the Company should be required to exercise the powers conferred upon it; (4) that the Company should not be permitted to give an intermittent supply as they proposed; (5) that the Vestry should be allowed the option of purchasing the undertaking after fourteen years from the confirmation of the Order; and (6) that if the Vestry did not exercise this option, the Order should not last longer than 21 years. The time allowed for considering the subject was exceedingly short, the period within which objections were to be made extending only from the 21st December to the 24th January (subsequently enlarged to the 1st February); and as the draft Orders were lengthy documents treating of an entirely new matter, the Vestry and their Lighting Committee devoted much thought and consideration to formulating these principles in the limited time allowed. Upon objections and suggestions being lodged by various local authorities, the Board of Trade considered the views urged by the Companies and the authorities, and framed a draft code of model clauses for the use of applicants for Provisional Orders or licenses. These clauses did not meet the views of the Vestry in every particular, although in most respects they fairly protect the interests of consumers and the local authorities. The Vestry suggested certain amendments and additions to the draft model clauses, and the question will require further consideration when the attitude which the Board of Trade will assume with respect to the operation of the Electric Lighting Act has been finally declared. It is anticipated that the Metropolitan (Brush) and the Edison Electric Light Companies will submit amended draft Orders based 61 upon the above-named model clauses; but in the meantime the Vestry have received an application from another Company (the Jablochkoff) for consent to apply for a license from the Board of Trade. This application was under consideration at the close of the year. LOCAL IMPROVEMENTS. The only local improvement which the Vestry have taken in hand during the past year is a scheme by which Little Pulteney Street, the northern end of Great Windmill Street, that part of Great Crown Court which runs in continuation of Rupert Street, and part of Little Crown Court will be widened, and Queen's Head Court and the remainder of Great Crown Court will be closed and abolished. This improvement originated in the Surveyor to the Commissioners of Her Majesty's Woods, Forests, and Land Revenues suggesting that the approaching termination of the leases of the block of property above described, of which the Crown is the ground landlord, would afford an opportunity of effecting considerable improvements in the locality. The scheme, as first suggested, was far more comprehensive in scope, and would probably have required a special Act of Parliament to carry it into effect. The Vestry did not feel justified in incurring the expense which this course would have involved, and therefore entered into negotiations with the Crown Surveyor, in order to obtain some satisfactory modification of the original proposal. The Crown Surveyor received the views of the Vestry in a conciliatory spirit, and it was eventually agreed that on the falling in of the leases the Crown would surrender a portion of ground for the widening of the above-named thoroughfares, on condition that the Vestry would previously obtain the necessary authority for the closing of the public ways which will be affected by the scheme. In accordance with this arrangement, Messrs. Lee and Pemberton, Solicitors, were instructed by the Vestry to take all the necessary steps with a view to obtaining an Order of the Court of Quarter Sessions for the stopping up of Queen's Head Court and part of 62 Great Crown Court, under the provisions of the Highways Act, 5 and 6 Will. IV., cap 50. An agreement based upon this arrangement will be entered into with the Commissioners of Woods, &c., and no difficulty is anticipated in obtaining this Order; the greater part of the leases expired on the 5th April, 1883, and the improvement will therefore probably be put in hand at once. In connection with this proposed improvement, the Vestry suggested that the Metropolitan Board of Works should without delay open negotiations with a view to acquiring the land between Archer Street and Little Pulteney Street for the purpose of erecting artizans' dwellings thereon, so as to provide accommodation for the poorer classes who will be disturbed by the demolition of the small property when the Crown leases fall in. The Board, however, replied that having made inquiry into the cost of acquiring the ground, and finding that the price asked for the same was its full commercial value, and that there was a doubt whether the Board would be allowed to place upon it dwellings for the working classes, they did not deem it expedient to adopt the Vestry's suggestion. NAMES OF STREETS. Complaint having been made of the inconvenience arising from duplicate numbers in Marlborough Street and Great Marlborough Street, the Vestry suggested to the Metropolitan Board of Works the advisability of either incorporating the two thoroughfares, or re-numbering the houses in Marlborough Street in continuation of Carnaby Street, and abolishing the former name. Some of the residents in Marlborough Street, however, objected to their premises being described as in Carnaby Street, and the Metropolitan Board of Works thereupon asked the Vestry whether they considered there would be any objection to the re-numbering of the houses in Great Marlborough Street, so as to include the houses then known as Marlborough Street. The Vestry informed the Board that they were not aware of any special objection to this course beingadopted, and an order was subsequently passed by the Board accordingly. 63 An order has also been passed by the Metropolitan Board of Works for the re-numbering, under the name "Foubert's Place," of the line of houses formerly known as Foubert's Place, Tyler Street, Tyler's Court, and part of Marshall Street. In the month of November last the Metropolitan Board of Works informed the Vestry that they had received a representation of the inconvenience caused by the existence of the two names "Pall Mall" and "Pall Mall East," and inquired the views of the Vestry as to the desirability of abolishing the latter name and re-numbering the whole line of thoroughfare. It appeared to the Vestry that this course would be of public advantage, and the Board were informed accordingly. The Vestry of St. Martin-in-theFields, however, objected to the proposed alteration, Pall Mall East being within their jurisdiction, and the Board therefore took no further action in the matter. The following statement shows the number of houses affected by the above-mentioned orders of the Metropolitan Board of Works :— Names abolished. New name. Houses re-numbered. Marborough Street. Great Marlborough Street. 34 Tyler Street, and Tyler's Court. Foubert's Place. 33 STREETS PARTLY SITUATE IN" OTHER PARISHES. An order was made by the Metropolitan Board of Works on the 6th March, 1857, placing that portion of Oxford Street which is situate in the Parish of St. James under the jurisdiction of the Vestry of St. Marylebone for all the purposes of the Local Management Act. The cost of lighting, paving, cleansing, watering, &c., that portion of the thoroughfare is ascertained annually and paid by the Vestry. The annual charge for this work amounts to about £400. By an order of the Metropolitan Board of Works, dated the 10th August, 1866, specified sections of the following thoroughfares 64 are placed under the exclusive management of the Vestries of St. James and St. George, Hanover Square respectively, throughout the entire width thereof, instead of according to the actual Parish boundary, viz.:— Regent Street, Piccadilly, Burlington Gardens, St. James's Street, and Park Place. No payment is made by either Vestry to the other under this order, the exchange of area being regarded as an equivalent. An arrangement has been made with the Vestry of St. Martin-in-the-Fields for the apportionment of Coventry Street, as regards cleansing and paving, the boundary line being somewhat irregular; and by a similar understanding with the Board of Works for the Strand District, the Vestry cleanse and maintain the whole width of Wardour Street as far north as Little Pulteney Street, and the District Board cleanse and maintain the remainder of the thoroughfare, instead of each authority taking the whole length of the street, half width, according to the boundary. PAVING AND DRAINAGE WORKS. Wood pavement has been laid during the year in the carriageways of Regent Street (south end), Waterloo Place, Pall Mall (east end), and Air Street (from Regent Street to Piccadilly), the total area thus paved being 9,419 square yards, and the ccst of the work amounting to £5,513 16s. 0d. The work was executed by the Asphaltic Wood Pavement Company, according to specification and conditions put up to public tender. The whole cost of the work will be defrayed from current rates. Nearly all the leading thoroughfares in the Parish are now paved with wood. Some applications have been made for an extension of wood paving during the past year, and as regards the south end of St. James's Street, the Vestry have agreed to entertain the matter, on the residents concerned contributing one moiety of the cost. The consideration of other cases has been indefinitely deferred, but probably a further area of wood paving will be laid during the year 1883-84. The Vestry have decided to pave the carriageways of Silver Street and Beak Street, and also Smith's Court, with asphalte, in 65 the course of the summer of 1883, and to raise the cost of the work with the rates for the year. Although no new sewer works were undertaken, a large amount of time was occupied in cleansing and otherwise attending to existing sewers and drains. Details of this description of work will be found in the Reports of the Surveyor and the Medical Officer of Health, which follow the Vestry's Report. REFUGES. During the past year two refuges have been formed; one in Piccadilly, at the top of the Haymarket, and the other in Regent Street by Jermyn Street. The following is a complete list of refuges in the Parish:— Pall Mall, by the United Service Club. „ „ by the Athenæum Club. „ „ by St, James's Palace. Piccadilly, by St. James's Street. „ by Burlington House. „ by the Haymarket. Piccadilly Circus (3 Refuges). Regent Street, by Oxford Circus. „ „ by Conduit Street. „ „ by Glasshouse Street. „ „ by Air Street. „ „ by the County Fire Office. „ „ by Jermyn Street. „ „ by Charles Street. REPAIR OF ROADS OPENED BY GAS AND WATER COMPANIES. Attention was directed by the Vestry of Clerkenwell to a hardship frequently caused to paving authorities by the imperfect manner in which roads and footways are repaired by Gas and Water Companies after having been opened for the purposes of the Company, and that Vestry suggested that an endeavour should be made to extend the period of liability of the Company to make good subsidences in surfaces repaired by them from one year, as provided by the Gas Works Clauses Act, 1847, to two years, c 66 The Vestry have, however, adopted the practice of carrying out repairs by their own staff or contractors, and charging the cost thereof to the Company opening the road or footway, and in the opinion of the Vestry existing legislation is sufficient to meet all reasonable requirements of the paving authorities so far as the question of repairs is concerned. CONSTRUCTION OF VAULTS. By the Metropolis Local Management Act the consent of the Vestry is required to the construction of vaults under footways, and the following conditions are usually attached to any such consent in this Parish:— 1. The vault to be kept within the inner line of kerb. 2. A space of two feet to be allowed between the crown of the arch and the under surface of the pavement. 3. Special consent is required for coal-holes and other openings. ST. THOMAS'S CHURCH. In the year 1841, the Commissioners for Paving, at the request of the Trustees of St. Thomas's Church (then Known as Archbishop Tenison's Chapel) consented to an alteration in the footway of King Street, abutting on the Church, and the enclosure of a small piece of ground formerly used as part of the public way, in consideration of which the Trustees agreed to pay a nominal rent of one shilling per annum. This payment was regularly continued until the year 1881, when some question was raised as to the ownership of the enclosed ground. An application has since been made by Messrs. Richardson & Sadler, on behalf of the Trustees, to the Vestry for their assent to the erection of an addition to the Church upon the land enclosed in 1841, and the matter is still under consideration. The porches of the Church also project into the public way, and by an agreement with the Vestry in the year 1857, a nominal rent of two shillings per annum is charged to preserve the rights of the Parish to the ground, if required for public purposes at any future time. 67 SANITARY. There are now only two licensed slaughter-houses in the Parish, and the cowsheds which formerly existed have been altogether abolished. The slaughter-houses having been well kept during the previous year, the license to the same was renewed by the Justices in each case. Among other localities which have received special attention during the past year, St. James's Market has been under consideration on several occasions. Upon a report from the Sanitary Committee relative to a complaint of the alleged unsanitary condition of the Market, the Vestry directed the attention of the Commissioners of Woods, &c., the ground landlords of the property, to the structural unsuitability of the premises for human habitation in view of modern requirements; but the Commissioners stated that as the property is let on lease for several years they did not sec how they could take any action in the matter at present, unless the leases are in any way disregarded. The Vestry also desire to erect a public urinal in the Haymarket, with a view to prevent the committing of nuisances in the passages leading to St. James's Market; but in consequence of the objections which have been raised to the placing of such a structure in the Haymarket, the matter stands in abeyance for the. present. By the Bakehouses (Metropolis) Act, 1863, the Vestry were empowered to inspect and regulate bakehouses, but this power was transferred, by the Factory and Workshops Act, 1878, to a Government Department This transfer of authority has not proved altogether satisfactory, the Government Inspector being unable to visit the bakehouses so frequently as was the practice of the Vestry's Inspector, and the Vestry are of opinion that if any change in the law is made, the power vested in the Vestries and District Boards by the Act of 1803 should revert to those bodies, and that milkshops and dairies in the Metropolis should also be placed under the supervision of the local sanitary authorities. The Vestry have had under consideration a communication from the Board of Works for the St. Olave District, suggesting that the local authority should also have power to regulate and control the 68 structure of a bakehouse, and the materials and utensils used in the manufacture of bread and pastry; they are, however, of opinion that it is not desirable to confer any such power on a local authority or practicable to exercise the same efficiently. Particulars of the sanitary condition of the Parish, and sanitary works carried out during the year, are given in the Report of the Medical Officer of Health, commencing on page 113, and the Appendices thereto. INFECTIOUS DISEASES. The Vestry are empowered by the Sanitary Act, 1866, to provide hospital accommodation for non-pauper patients suffering from infectious disease; and also to remove to hospitals any such patients who are without proper lodging or accommodation, or are lodged in a room occupied by more than one family. It has, however, not been found necessary in practice for the Vestry to construct a hospital specially for this Parish, as they have been able to make satisfactory arrangements with the Managers of the Highgate Small Pox Hospital, and the Islington Fever Hospital, for the treatment of patients able to pay for their maintenance. The Metropolitan Asylums Board receive patients into their hospitals at the instance of Local Sanitary Authorities, the latter being responsible for the cost of the maintenance of the patients, with power to recover the same from the patients or their relatives. As, however, the principal object of removal to hospital is to prevent the spread of infection, the Vestry specially consider the merits of each case before applying for repayment of such expenses. Early intimation to the Sanitary Authority of the occurrence of even one case of infectious illness in a house will often effectually prevent the spread of the disease in the locality, and the Vestry therefore earnestly invite householders and others to promptly supply any such information, and thus co-operate in the protection of the public health. Any information of the kind will be treated as confidential. 69 In the event of an outbreak of any such disease, information and assistance in the way of removal and disinfection may be readily obtained by Parishioners at the Vestry Hall, Piccadilly. SALE OF FOOD, Ac., ACTS. During the past year, 99 articles of food, drink, and drugs have been submitted to the Public Analyst, and although in several instances, articles such as milk, mustard, &c., were found to be of low standard quality, it was not deemed necessary or advisable to institute any proceedings for penalties as provided by the Act. Several tradesmen were however cautioned as to the quality of the goods analysed, and in most cases the caution has resulted in an improvement in the quality of the articles sold. Notices have been issued calling attention to the requirements of the law regarding the sale of compounded or mixed articles, with a view to prosecution being subsequently undertaken if the law is infringed. The following is a list of the articles analysed:— Cocoa 18 Coffee 35 Milk 36 Mustard 5 Pepper 5 99 The cost incurred by the Vestry for the year, in respect of the Sale of Food and Drugs Acts, is as follows:— £ s. d. Allowance to analyst 62 10 0 Purchase of samples, &c. 1 15 4 £64 5 4 70 SUMMARY PROCEEDINGS. Summonses have been taken out for the following offences:— Unsanitary condition of premises 4 Obstructions 4 Non-payment of cost of reinstating pavement, &c. 3 Total 11 With one exception, the Vestry were successful in all the above cases, the necessary works being put in hand, or the claim satisfied, in most instances, before the summons came on for hearing. The exception referred to was a summons for an alleged obstruction on the footway in front of certain premises in Piccadilly, when the magistrate held that the ground in question did not form part of the public way, and accordingly dismissed the case. In consequence of this decision of the magistrate, the Vestry passed a resolution on the 18th May, 1882, authorising the Vestry Clerk to obtain legal aid in supporting prosecutions on behalf of the Vestry if necessary. CLAIMS FOR COMPENSATION. Five claims have been made upon the Vestry during the year. In two cases compensation was paid, one being for injury caused to certain premises by the non-connection of the drain thereof with the sewer, and the other for damage resulting from the bursting of the sewer into a house drain. Two claims for injury to a cab-horse alleged to have been caused by an unwatched and unlighted heap of stones, and for a window alleged to have been broken by the Vestry's workmen, respectively, were not entertained. In the fifth case, which was a claim for alleged injury to vaults, owing to the negligent and improper carrying out of the wood paving works in Pall Mall, notice of action was given, and Messrs. Lee and Pemberton were instructed to defend the action if the same was brought. A writ was subsequently served, but not proceeded with, and on the application of the Vestry's Solicitors, an order was made dismissing the motion for want of prosecution. 71 DISORDERLY HOUSES AND ASSEMBLAGES. Several complaints have teen received of premises being conducted in a disorderly manner, but owing to the difficulty of obtaining evidence, and the reluctance of householders to allow their names to appear in the proceedings, no prosecution has been instituted. Two cases, which were pending on the 25th March, 1882, have been decided, fines amounting to £85 being inflicted in one case, and the defendants in the other case, who pleaded guilty, being merely ordered to enter into recognizances for their good behaviour, although counsel for the Parish pressed for the infliction of fines. The cost of proceedings against persons keeping disorderly houses, as passed by the Vestry, amounts to £82 11s. 9d. for the twelve months, and the sum of £128 1s. 6d. has been recovered in respect of fines inflicted upon persons convicted of the offence. In the month of June complaint was made of the increasing annoyance caused by the assemblage of disorderly persons by night in Regent Street, and the attention of the police was directed to the matter, which was followed by some slight temporary abatement of the nuisance. Upon the requisition of many of the leading parishioners at the west end of London, a meeting was held at St. Martin's Vestry Hall, on the 2nd of November, to consider the increase of depravity as displayed even in the daytime at the West End. Resolutions were passed expressing a desire of the meeting for further legislation to deal more effectually with houses of ill repute, street-walkers, and the display and sale of immoral or indecent photographs, and requesting the Home Secretary to receive a deputation to urge the Government to take up the matter. These resolutions were communicated to the Vestry, and Mr. Winnett was requested to represent them upon the proposed deputation, in the event of the Home Secretary consenting to an interview. The Vestry have also requested two of their members to join another deputation to the Home Secretary with a view to the prevention of solicitation by persons of ill repute in the public streets. 72 SCHOOL BOARD FOR LONDON. The triennial election of the School Board for London, in November last, naturally attracted some attention from various rating authorities, in consequence of those authorities being required to provide from the local rates, funds to meet the increasing expenditure of the Board. Communications were received from several local authorities on the subject, but as members of the Board are elected by the Ratepayers, who are afforded opportunities of deciding between the various candidates, the Vestry did not feel called upon to take any action in the matter. With regard to a suggestion by the elected Vestry of Streatham, that the School Board should make and collect its own rate, the Vestry dissented from the proposal, inasmuch as it is not apparent what benefit the Ratepayers would derive from the adoption of such a course, while it is clear that the cost of collection would be enormously increased by duplicating the staff, books, notices, etc. In order to relieve local authorities from the odium of levying heavy rates, the Vestry suggested to the Streatham Vestry that the attention of the Ratepayers might be called by the rating authorities to the amounts raised for the School Board and other central authorities, over whose expenditure the local authorities do not possess any control, although for economical reasons these amounts are included in the local rates. At the close of the year the Vestry had under consideration the desirability of convening a Conference of Vestries and District Boards to discuss the expediency of applying to Parliments to limit the rating powers of the Board. A statement of the amount called for by the Board annually during the past ten years is given on page 53. EXPENDITURE OF METROPOLITAN BOARD OF WORKS. The following resolution was passed by the Vestry, on the 22nd March, 1883, and a copy thereof ordered to be forwarded to every 73 Vestry and District Board of Works in the Metropolis, with a request that they would support the views expressed therein:— "That this Vestry, understanding the Metropolitan Board of Works usually revise the Salaries of their Officers early in the year, respectfully urge the Board to carefully consider each case before granting any increased remuneration, with a view to the exercise of due economy in the administration of the funds of the Rate payers, having regard to the present stagnation in trade, and the increasing burden of local taxation." INCREASED CHARGES OF WATER COMPANIES. This subject has been brought under the notice of the Vestry on more than one occasion, and at the close of the year a memorial, requesting that a meeting of Ratepayers might be convened to decide upon some definite course of action, was under consideration. URINALS. The following is a list of public urinals erected and maintained by the Vestry:— Situation. No. of partments. Situation No. of Compartments. Blenheim Street 4 King's Arms Yard 3 Broad Street 8 Mason's Yard 3 Coach and Horses Yard 4 Vine Street 7 Cork Mews 2 Wells Street 5 Ham Yard 3 As stated on page 67, the Vestry have not been able to give effect to their desire to erect a public urinal in the Haymarket. By the 88th Section of the Metropolis Local Management Act, 1855, the Vestry are empowered to provide and maintain at the cost of the rates, water-closets, and other conveniences, as well as urinals, but their efforts to provide this necessary accommodation have hitherto proved ineffectual. Plans were prepared for the erection of a certain number of underground urinals and waterclosets in different parts of the Parish, but the Vestry did not feel justified in proceeding against the strong opposition from residents in the localities affected. Two convictions have been obtained during the year for posting objectionable bills in public urinals in the Parish. 74 The cost of maintaining the urinals during the year is as follows:— £ s. d. Water for flushing 81 18 5 Wages for cleansing 62 8 0 £144 6 5 CAB RANKS. The following is a list of the Cab Ranks in this Parish authorised by the Commissioner of Police:— Broad Street. Haymarket. Piccadilly. Regent Street. St. James's Square. St. James's Street. Waterloo Place. CABMEN'S SHELTERS. At the request of Miss Jackson, daughter of the Bishop of London, permission has been given for the placing of a Cabmen's Shelter in St. James's Square. The Shelter will be provided and maintained at private expense. CAB RADIUS. The adoption of Charing Cross as the centre of the four-mile radius for cabs, for the whole of London, appears to have operated with some disadvantage to the eastern districts of the Metropolis. Upon the request of the Hackney District Board of Works, the Vestry appointed five of their members to attend a Conference of representatives from Metropolitan Vestries and District Boards, to consider the advisability of seeking to obtain other centres for radii in different districts of London. The Conference was held at the Mansion House, on the 13th March, when the Lord Mayor presided, and a Committee was appointed to draw up a scheme for consideration at a future meeting. 75 PILLAR LETTER BOXES. With the assent of the Vestry, pillar letter boxes have been erected by the Postmaster General in the undermentioned thoroughfares:— Western District. Albany. Burlington Gardens. Coventry Street. Golden Square. Great Marlborough Street. New Burlington Street. Piccadilly, by the Egyptian Hall, Regent Street, by Piccadilly Circus. Regent Street, Quadrant. Sackville Street. Silver Street. South - Western District. Cleveland Row, by St. James's Street. Haymarket, by Jermyn Street. Jermyn Street, by St. James's Church. Pall Mall, by the War Office. Pall Mall, by Waterloo Place. St. James's Square, by Charles Street. One of the above pillar boxes, that in Jermyn Street, was erected during the year, and the position of another, that in Golden Square, was altered to better meet the requirements of residents in the locality. FIXED POINTS. The following list of fixed points where a constable may be found at all times, is given for the information of parishioners:— Marlborough House, Pall Mall. Oxford Circus. Piccadilly. Regent Street, by Beak Street. FIRE BRIGADE. There is only one Fire Brigade Station in the Parish, viz., at 29, King Street, Regent Street (near Argyll Place), but other stations in adjoining parishes are available in case of an outbreak 76 of fire. The stations nearest this Parish are situate at No. 171, Great Portland Street, Oxford Street, 38, King Street, Portman Square, George Yard, Crown Street, Soho, and 44, Chandos Street, Covent Garden. Fire Alarms in telegraphic communication with the King Street Station have been erected by the Metropolitan Board of Works in the undermentioned thoroughfares: Golden Square. Piccadilly (by No. 34). Fire Escapes with attendants are nightly stationed in Golden Square and next the Parish Church, Piccadilly. MUSIC AND DANCING LICENSES. In accordance with the Standing Orders of the Court of Quarter Sessions, notices were given to the Vestry in the month of August, by intending applicants for Music and Dancing Licenses, as follows:— Barrow, Thomas, The Crown, 22, Broad Street, Golde Square, for Music only. Bignell, Robert Richard, The Trocadero, 7 and 8, Great "Windmill Street, for Music only. Leslie, George, St. James's Hall, Piccadilly and Regent Street, for Music and Dancing. Phillips, Henry Frederick, The Piccadilly Art Galleries, for Music and Dancing. Spiers, Felix William, The Criterion, 221, Piccadilly, for Music and Dancing. Swallow, Benjamin Henry, The Goat and Star, G, Swallow Street, for Music only. Villiers, Robert Edwin, The London Pavilion Music Hall, Tichborne Street, for Music only. Willis, Frederick Wilson, and Willis, Edward Avery, Willis's Rooms, 26, King Street, for Music and Dancing. 77 Upon these notices being considered, the Vestry resolved to oppose the applications of Mr. Barrow and Mr. Phillips, and to favourably endorse that of Mr. Bignell. With regard to the application of Mr. Phillips, however, further particulars as to the purposes for which the Galleries were intended to be used, and the terms upon which the site was held, were subsequently submitted, which led the Vestry to modify their original opinion, and they decided not to press their opposition. When the applications came before the Court of Quarter Sessions, Mr. Barrow's application was refused, and a license as applied for was granted in each of the other cases; the dancing license of the Piccadilly Art Galleries, however, being restricted to occasions when the Galleries are let for private parties only. PARLIAMENTARY SCHEMES,—SESSION 1883. In addition to the notices and plans relating to applications for Provisional Orders under the Electric Lighting Act, 1882, mentioned on page 59, a notice and plan of a proposed Mid-Metropolitan Railway were deposited with the Vestry Clerk in the month of November, pursuant to the Standing Orders of Parliament. The projected railway, which was intended to be constructed underground, would enter the Parish at its western boundary in Oxford Street, and run the whole length of that portion of the street which is in St. James's, provision being made for a station near Oxford Circus. An influential deputation of ratepayers and residents in Oxford Street waited upon the Vestry, and in view of the vast interruption to business which the construction of the line would involve, urged the Vestry, as the local authority, to oppose the scheme. The whole matter was carefully considered, and it appearing that great loss would be inflicted upon the whole Parish, and especially upon that part abutting on the proposed railway during the construction of the works, and probably afterwards, without any corresponding benefit to the public, the Vestry asked the Metropolitan Board of Works to oppose the Bill. Objection was also raised by the owners and occupiers of certain properties affected by the scheme, on the ground of non-compliance with the 78 Standing Orders of Parliament, and the project was abandoned before the first reading of the Bill. VENTILATION OF DISTRICT RAILWAY INTO STREETS. In the year 1881 the Metropolitan District Railway Company obtained Parliamentary authority, in spite of the opposition of the Metropolitan Board of Works and the Corporation of London, to form ventilating shafts to the railway in the Victoria Embankment and other public places. The Local Authorities objected to the manner in which the Company proposed to exercise their powers, and the subject was referred to an arbitrator (Captain Galton) appointed by the Board of Trade in accordance with the provisions of the Act of Parliament. Some modifications in the plans of the Company were made by the Arbitrator, but it was evident that even the amended plans would cause no slight disfigurement to some of the finest thoroughfares in the Metropolis. The matter was brought under the notice of the Vestry on the 8th March, and having regard to the fact that the Company were practically proposing to appropriate public property to private purposes, without the slightest compensation, and even to the public detriment, although by legislative authority, a resolution was unanimously passed asking the Metropolitan Board of Works to use their utmost endeavours to prevent the erection of the proposed ventilators. A copy of this resolution was also sent to each of the Borough Members of Parliament, with a request that they would support any opposition to the carrying out of the plan of the Railway Company. At the same meeting two members of the Vestry were requested to attend a conference of representatives from various Local Authorities in the Metropolis with a view to concerted action being taken in the matter. BILLS IN PARLIAMENT. Among the Bills that have received attention during the year are the following:— Ballot Act Continuance and Amendment. Bankruptcy. Bankruptcy (No. 2). 79 Bankruptcy Law Amendment. Churchwardens' Admission. Employers' Liability Amendment. Factory and Workshop (1878) Amendment. Free Libraries. Imprisonment for Debt. Infectious Diseases Notification. Parliamentary Elections Corrupt Practices. Parochial Charities (London). Parish Churches. Police. Steam Boilers. Steam Boilers (Persons in charge). Theatres Regulation. The Vestry have petitioned against the first clause of the Theatre3 Regulation Bill, which would repeal the Act relating to the prosecution of keepers of disorderly houses, and also against the Imprisonment for Debt Bill, by which it is proposed to restrict the power of imprisonment under the fifth section of the Debtors Act, 1869, to the Superior Courts of Law or Equity, and in favour of the general principle of the Parliamentary Elections (Corrupt and Illegal Practices) Bill. On perusing the Bankruptcy Bill, it appeared to be the intention of the Government to repeal existing legislation by which poor and other parochial rates are made a preferential claim on an insolvent estate. Such an alteration in the law would in a highly-rented Parish like St. James's probably lead to a heavy annual loss, besides causing serious inconvenience with regard to the balancing of the accounts, and as Parochial Authorities cannot like an ordinary creditor exercise any option in the giving of credit, the Vestry called the attention of the President of the Board of Trade, who introduced the Bill in the House of Commons, the President of the Local Government Board, and the Members of Parliament for Westminster, to the subject, with a view to the Bill being amended in its passage through Parliament. No action was taken with regard to any of the other Bills, several of which wore still under consideration on the 25th March. 80 PROPOSED ALTERATIONS IN LOCAL GOVERNMENT. The announcement by the Government of their intention to introduce a Bill in the present Session of Parliament. for the creation of a single Municipality for the whole Metropolis, naturally attracted some attention from the authorities at present charged with the administration of local affairs, and at the request of the Fulham District Board of Works, the Westminster District Board of Works, and the Vestry of St. George, Hanover Square, the Vestry have appointed four of their members to attend a conference of representatives from Metropolitan Vestries and District Boards to consider the Bill of the Government when the same is presented. ROYAL COLLEGE OF MUSIC. At the request of His Royal Highness the Prince of Wales, President of the Royal College of Music, the Vestry granted the use of the Vestry Hall for the preliminary examination of candidates for scholarships in the College, and nominated three gentlemen for appointment as honorary local examiners to conduct the examination. The gentlemen so nominated were Mr. J. F. Burrowes, Mr. Alfred Gilbert, and Mr. C. S. Jekyll, and their appointment was duly made by the Prince of Wales. Thirtynine candidates presented themselves for examination. CONCLUDING REMARKS. The Vestry have not attempted in the foregoing Report to touch upon mere routine business requiring attention from day to day, but have endeavoured to submit to their fellow parishioners, in as clear and succinct a manner as possible, a statement of the principles which have guided them in the discharge of their trust, and of the present condition of the Parish. By Order, HARRY WILKINS, Vestry Clerk. Supplements Report of Works EXECUTED BY THE VESTRY OF ST. JAMES, WESTMINSTER, DURING THE YEAR 1882-3. Vestry Hall, Piccadilly, June, 1883. To the Vestry of St. James, Westminster: Reverend Sir, Mr. Chairman, and Gentlemen, But few observations are required to accompany the abbreviated list of the Works executed by the Vestry between the dates of March 25th, 1882, and March 25th, 1883. As such works may be commenced a little before, and be concluded a little after, those precise dates, one item may appear sometimes as it were twice over. As far as practicable, I have attempted to avoid this; which is not in itself material, the general record being correct. The cost of such works as appended is not in any way to be considered, further than detail, as the whole are included in the general Financial Statement, which covers all outlays and receipts, and is the most important of all. 82 The general purpose of such a list having for its object to show that the Vestry have not been idle, but have been active in their duties, and have seen that no neglect has accrued that has been in their power to prevent. The Paving Works, as it has been my duty to explain before, being upon the surface, are, more or less generally understood; but it is the maintenance of this, or these surfaces, that causes a great amount of consideration to the Vestry, to insure, as they ought to do, not only safety to the public, but safety combined with convenience, the vehicular and foot passenger traffic being equally studied. The numerous and judiciously placed Foot Passenger Refuges are sufficient proofs of the thought and care that have been given to this one portion of the question. It is needless to refer to the material that has been adopted: all that has been done, has been decided upon after very mature deliberation, not involving any lack of energy, but governed by the honest purpose of accomplishing the ends to be achieved-public safety and convenience, combined with the comfort of the residents. So far as my own knowledge goes, these have been the two rules that have guided the Vestry in their transactions, always governed by a due regard to expense. It would require a treatise to explain the peculiarities of the Parish of St. James. The underground works, as they exist at present, are not at all such as they were intended to be at the time they were done. Times have changed. That that was right 100 years since, is wrong now. The old sewers, gulley drains, &c. and the several gas mains, many of which are out of use, to say nothing of old house drains, and unknown vaults and foundations, render the unseen portion of the roads such an enigma, that after the years of experience I have had to try and comprehend them, the only course left to the Vestry is to make sure of the stability of such works as they do execute. The surfaces must be kept safe; then the word but forces itself to the surface, and all reasonable means, to put it in the mildest form, have to be thought of and employed to prepare for the said surface, so that it shall not only look but be sound and substantial. 88 In addition to this, the levels require great attention. Having referred to this before, it would be superfluous to mention it again. Having glanced at the surfaces, that which is beneath becomes the next in importance—or, perhaps, should be the first. At the time the Parish of St. James was created, so to speak, cesspools were in vogue. How many still remain there is no record to show. At the present time, I believe, none are in use "as cesspools," all the houses being in some way connected with a sewer; but in many, too many, instances by very old brick drains, very uncertain in their course : these were not intended to answer their present purpose at all, and were very roughly, if not carelessly, done, and as rats are not idle, they do not improve by age. The sewers in themselves are in fair condition, with some exceptions; but there are some peculiarities about the sewers in St. James's (and perhaps elsewhere) that baffle comprehension, such as their size, and having been built 150 years since with second-hand bricks, as indeed were many houses in the Parish; it is needless to say there is no clue to this mystery—such as they are, they are sound and reliable. The important question of ventilation of sewers may be summed up in one sentence—it cannot be done effectually. This does not refer to Suburban Districts, but to such as St. James's. There is a model at the Vestry Hall that will to some extent explain the complications that exist of a small but fair sample of the whole. The River Thames is the natural outfall of all the drainage between the lands on each aide, and such drainage must gravitate towards it. If any comprehensive system of ventilation can be done at all it will, or must be, at the top of the Hills—at Hampstead or at Richmond; the attempt to ventilate at the low level cannot succeed.* This would involve a most fearful reconstruction of the London sewerage, as to be most almost appalling to think of. But, after years of consideration, there is no other way. Wherever the land declines towards the Thames (Thame-Isis), there will the drainage find its way. The Parish of St. James, in * The word London is British, being "Lime-dune," or, "Hills in Water"— witness the numerous hills in the City ; and the general name Downs as applied to all high places—Sussex, Epsom, &c. 84 common with others, has to receive all from the higher grounds, and cannot ventilate itself; but they could ventilate St. James's. This would be a vast and most comprehensive scheme, and fearfully expensive, but the only rational one. Following the previous remarks, the subject of public conveniences follows. Admitting it is not a pleasant one, it must be looked in the face, and the St. James's Vestry have never evaded or "shirked" it. As the opinion of one individual who has felt it his duty to assist in solving a difficulty, the more public such places are, and the more they are out of doors, so to speak, the better. Although privacy and convenience at home are a great comfort, they are not of necessity paramount. Thousands of men—and, with all due respect, women—are so much occupied out of doors, public accommodation would be a positive blessing, and, as sanitary officers know, would work much benefit. Much suffering, disease, and death, would be avoided by putting on a bold front, and discarding the idea of delicacy (a very proper one) by substituting "necessity" in its stead. No apology is needed for approaching such a subject; such institutions would soon become matters of course, and be the rule instead of the exception. The "accidents" to the glass of the prominent lamps are, or have been, very discouraging; the old patterns, if such a term can be used in connexion with the largest amount of metal and the smallest amount of glass, seem to escape; but anything new becomes a target: this is a problem at present unsolved. Heat cannot do it, and the use of the word "target" appears to be uncharitable to somebody, but it cannot be withdrawn; in other words, they are injured purposely, without any gratification to those who do it, and it should be on record that it is not from any trade rivalry, or anything connected with the same. The idea that wanton mischief can be done with impunity, is, in my opinion, at the bottom of the annoyance and waste. It is almost invariably on the line of busy thoroughfares that the greatest amount of injury is found—and perhaps the weapon used is a whip, the effect of which is easily seen but difficult of detection. 85 All the previous observations are mainly intended to apply to the Parish of St. James; but some of them have a wider scope. I refer to the ventilation of sewers. Years since it has struck me that the chemist may be of more use than the engineer. Suburban districts cannot feel it, but it is in the densely-populated localities that the evils exist, as they have to relieve all the others. With these few remarks, and being about to be separated from the Parish whose interests have not suffered at my hands; and thanking the Vestry for the uniform courtesy with which I have been treated, and the confidence, never abused, that has been reposed in myself. I have the honour to be, Reverend Sir, Mr. Chairman, and Gentlemen, Your most obedient humble servant, A. P. HOWELL, Surveyor. 86 GENERAL WORKS EXECUTED BY The Vestry of St. James, Westminster, from the 25th March, 1882, to 25th March, 1883. SITUATION. DESCRIPTION OF WORK. AMOUNT EXPENDED PAVING WORKS. £ S. d. £ S. d. 1,785 openings made good after Gas and Water Companies, Post Office, and other unavoidable interferences with the surface, the cost of which is reimbursed to the Vestry. The quantities amount to— Pitching Paving 3,730 yards super Macadam 1,200 do. Wood 120 do. Footway 10,000 feet super. Asphalte — Practically nil, included in footways. 15 openings made good after disturbance by private individuals after Hoardings. Re-constructing vaults, the cost of which is also paid by those who disturb the same under licence from the Vestry. Regent Street, Waterloo Place, and Pall Mall Relaid with Wood in place of Macadam ... 5,601 2 8 Regent Street Making good Wood Paving after Electric Light Company 34 12 2 Piccadilly Repairs to Wood Paving 58 1 4 Pall Mall Do. do. 121 19 6 214 13 0 Repaid to Vestry 35 0 0 179 13 0 STREET REFUGES. Piccadilly, by Haymarket New Refuge erected, including Lamp and Pit for Meter 30 0 0 Regent Street, by Jermyn Street Do. do. 30 0 0 Painting do. 1 0 0 61 0 0 Total ... £ 5,841 15 8 87 GENERAL WORKS—continued. REPAIRS TO STREETS. £ s. d. £ s. d. Air Street 8 9 6 Brought forward 813 19 5 Archer Street 6 19 6 Marshall Street 21 14 7 Argyll Street 21 6 4 Norris Street 2 12 0 Argyll Street (Little) 20 11 2 Ormond Yard 2 16 0 Argyll Place 25 19 5 Pall Mall 159 4 1 Berwick Street 6 7 11 Piccadilly 206 6 0 Brewer Street 11 12 10 Pickering Place 1 5 0 Broad Street 12 5 11 Poland Street 1 4 7 Burlington Mews 17 7 7 Portland Street 3 14 3 Burlington Mews (Old) 3 19 4 Great Pulteney Street 1 5 8 Burlington Gardens 23 17 0 Regent Street 437 15 2 Charles Street 86 9 7 Regent Place 1 10 0 Cleveland Row 41 15 10 Rupert Street 2 12 9 Cleveland Square 1 4 11 Russell Court 78 0 8 Clifford Street 2 0 0 Ryder Street 0 12 8 Cork Street 2 15 6 Sackville Street 6 15 0 Cross Street 1 3 10 St. James's Square 31 2 2 Crown Court (Pall Mall) 0 14 9 St. James's Street 18 1 8 Denman Street 105 12 2 St. James's Street (Little) 9 13 6 Duke Street 11 16 1 St. James's Place 62 10 9 Eagle Place 1 1 0 Savile Row 16 5 6 Edward Street 87 11 7 Sherwood Street 1 7 3 Glasshouse Street 2 6 7 Silver Street 2 15 2 Golden Square 13 5 4 Tichborne Street 75 5 6 Haymarket 2 16 0 Vigo Street 2 3 8 Heddon Street 2 6 7 Great Vine Street 4 12 0 Hill's Place 0 14 4 Walker's Court 5 4 9 Hopkins Street 2 14 10 Wardour Street 6 12 4 Jermyn Street 206 13 6 Warwick Street 40 15 9 King Street (St. James's Square) 43 6 7 Great Windmill Street 11 18 2 Great Marlboro' Street 37 18 8 York Street 44 12 7 Great Marlboro' Row 0 15 3 Total £2,074 8 7 Carried forward 813 19 5 Paving Works executed in Churchyard and Workhouse, paid for by Churchwardens or Board of Guardians. 88 GENERAL WORKS—continued. SITUATION. DESCRIPTION OF WORK. AMOUNT EXPENDED SEWERS WORKS. £ s. d. £ s. d. - This includes maintaining Local Sewers, clearing Choked Gullies and Drains from the same, also the Public Urinals. Generally NEW GULLIES BUILT. 28 New Gullies built to obviate the necessity of future openings, and to guard against offensive smells. Average cost £5 0s. 0d. each on the improved principle This work is imperative before the commencement of variation in the Paving. 140 0 0 FLUSHING. Cost of Water for Flushing 61 Pipe Sewers 26 12 0 As the Vestry Workmen execute this work themselves, and a proportion of the cost of the Hose, and the men's time should be added, the actual amount would be increased by an approximate sum of £5 0s. 0d, which appears elsewhere. GULLIES CLEANSED. 153 Gullies cleansed and accumulation removed 30 0 0 106 12 0 URINALS. Generally Cost of Water to supply the same 66 4 6 Cork Street Mews lie-constructing Urinal 34 15 0 Wells Street Repairing Lamp 0 17 6 Notice Board 0 17 6 Broad Street Additional Repair to Lamp 0 3 0 Rent of Meter 0 2 0 Blenheim Street Repairs to Lamp 0 3 6 New Pit for Gas and Water Meters 4 0 0 Vine Street Repairs to Lamp 0 3 6 97 7 0 Carried forward • • • 293 10 0 GENERAL WORKS—continued. SITUATION. DESCRIPTION or WORK. AMOUNT EXPENDED STAND POSTS AND HOSE. £ s. d. £ s. d. Brought forward ... 293 19 0 Gulden Square Repairs to Stand Post 2 5 0 Hire of Pump 5 10 0 Ryder Street Hire of Hose 0 8 6 Do. for Urinals 0 6 6 Generally Preparing and Retiring Hose and Stand Pipes 10 12 6 19 2 6 NAMES TO STREETS. Generally Purchase of Letters and Fixing Names ... 5 0 0 BOUNDARY PLATES. Generally Painting Boundary Plates ... 3 5 6 LAMPS. Golden Square Eight New Lamps and Fixing name. 30 0 0 Repaid 12 0 0 18 0 0 Marlboro Row One New Bray's Lamp and Fixing 9 2 0 St. James's Place One New Lamp 3 17 6 Refuges— Haymarket ana Regent Street Included in cost of Refuges. Rupert Altering position of Lamp 1 1 6 178. Piccadilly Fixing Lamps Post 0 9 6 Ryder Street Two New Lamps Posts and Fixing 7 0 0 21 10 6 LAMPS REPAIRED. Generally 35 Lamps repaired from accident or wilful damage ... 10 6 0 N.B.— Three New Lamps have been added in Great Vine Street, the cost of which will appear in the current year's account—probably about £15 Total 371 3 6 SUMMARY. Paving Works 5,811 15 8 Repairs to Streets 2,074 8 7 Sewer and Miscellaneous Works 371 3 6 Total £3,287 7 9 89 St. fames, Westminster. We, the undersigned, being the Auditors appointed by the authority of the Metropolis Local Management Act to Audit the Accounts of the Vestry of the said Parish, having carefully examined the said Accounts, from the 25th day of March, 1882, to the 25th day of March, 1883, and the Vouchers in support of the same, and the Books, Papers, and Writings, in the custody or control of the said Vestry, relating thereto, Do hereby certify that the said Accounts are, to the best of our belief, true and correct, in token of which our examination we have signed the said Accounts, whereof an Abstract, prepared and signed by us, is annexed hereto, and we make this our allowance of the said Accounts in conformity with the provisions of the said Act. As witness our hands, this Twenty-fourth day of May, One thousand eight hundred and eighty-three. JOSEPH BOX, WILLIAM P. FROHLICH, Auditors. THOMAS REED, GEORGE BROOKS, 92 93 ST. JAMES, WESTMINSTER. Statement of Receipts and Expenditure of the Servers, Metropolitan Consolidated and General and of other Moneys applicable to the purposes of the Metropolis Local Management Acts, from the 25th day of March ,1882, to the 5th day of March, 1883. RECEIPTS. EXPENDITURE. £ s. d. £ s. d. Reference, see pages Nos. £ s. d. To Arrears of the years 1874-80-81, and 1881-82, brought forward 1,271 19 4½ By Balance due to Treasurer, 25th March, 1882 4,563 9 7 „ Arrears carried forward 154 5 6½ 96 A. „ Paving 8,882 17 1 „ Loss on do. 114 12 9 268 15 3½ B. „ Cleansing 5,385 12 6 „ Sewers, Metropolitan Consolidated, and General Rates of the year 1881-82, 1,003 1 1 97- C. „ Watering 1,000 15 9 D. „ Sewers 445 11 3 collected to the 19th May, 1882 1,516 10 5 E. „ Lighting 2,614 1 4 Sewers Rate made on Parish Poor Rate Rentals of £670,127 at 1d. in the pound 2,792 3 11 F. „ Vestry Hall 1,548 18 11 98 < G. „ Salaries 1,595 5 0 „ Metropolitan Consolidated Rate at 6d. in the pound 16,753 3 6 H. „ Temporary Clerks 20 0 0 I. „ Sanitary 43 7 2 „ General Rate do. at 1s. 5d. in the pound 47,467 6 7 99 J. „ Sundries 641 19 7 67,012 14 0 „ Collectors' allowances and expenses on collection of Rates 527 15 7 .. Amount of Arrears in Pall Mall Ward carried forward 118 2 0 „ Gratuity to Superintendent Dunlap for assistance rendered to Collector in recovery of Rates ,, Do. Church Ward do. 257 8 6 >/ „ Do. Golden Sq. Ward do. 127 18 6 for Her Majesty's Theatre 10 10 0 ,, Do. Gt. Marlboro'Ward do. 300 18 6 „ Do. to Detective Brown do. 5 5 0 804 7 6 „ Do. to Sergeant O'Dea do. 5 5 0 „ Do. to F. A. Ashmead, Collector 10 10 0 „ Returned to Mr. Ward, of No. 21,Tichborne St.,paid in excess of Rates, 1880-81 6 19 4 „ Metropolitan Board of Works, Precept for the year 1882 17,613 17 5 „ Losses by Appeals, Empty Houses, poor person, &c. 1,691 5 1 „ School Board for London, Precept for expenses of the Board for the year ended 25th March, 1883 16,465 16 2 1 I \ / tik) J W* vv >/• — J ~ - -w - 2,502 11 11 „ Grant of Scaffold Licenses, Deposits on account of Pavement disturbed for Building purposes, Drainage, Paving Accounts, &c. 54,510 2 1 „ Do. do. Expenses of Election of Members 229 17 10 • • • 505 19 0 „ St. Marylebone Vestry, per Precept for management of South side of Oxford Street for year 390 12 7 „ Works done for Gas and Water Companies 607 11 6 „ Cash advance for Wages (repaid, see page 96) 200 0 0 „ A. Clark, late Collector of the Parochial Rates for Golden Square Ward, Allowance 62 10 0 Carried forward £68,143 4 1 Carried forward £62,263 17 9 94 95 RECEIPTS—continued. EXPENDITURE—continued. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. Brought forward ... 68,143 4 1 Brought forward 62,263 17 9 To Fees paid by Patients sent to Small Pox Hospital ... 4 17 0 By W. Ridley, late Inspector of Nuisances, Allowance 35 0 0 „ Disinfecting Clothing ... 0 5 0 „ Mr. A. T. Spryng, towards expenses in connecting House Drain at No. 20, Little Pulteney Street with Sewer, per Vote of Vestry 35 0 0 „ Analyses Fees ... 0 5 0 „ Sutton Estate—One year's nominal rent for rights acquired by the Vestry of St. James, Westminster, over a portion of Smith's Court, Great Windmill Street ... 2 2 0 „ Gratuity to Mr. Beacall, Accountant, for extra services during the period between the decease of Mr. Phippard and the appointment of Mr. Wilkins, Vestry Clerk 10 0 0 „ Commissioners of Income Tax, use of Vestry Hall, &c., one year to Michaelmas, 1882 ... 5 5 0 „ Interest to Treasurer on Dr. Balances 206 7 2 „ Balance in hand of Vestry Clerk for payment of Wages, &c 44 17 1 „ London Life Association, Income Tax returned ... 0 18 1 „ Balance in Treasurer's hands, 25th March, 1883 5,578 18 4 „ Messrs. Doulton & Co., cash returned paid in excess, Michaelmas, 1882 ... 2 10 7 „ Artizans' Dwellings, surplus amount of Subscription returned ... 0 10 0 „ Mr. G. Buzzard, late Vestry Clerk, Balance due from his Estate paid by the Executrix, 21st November, 1882. Reference, see page 96 ... 14 3 7 £68,174 0 4 £68,174 0 4 R. H. BEACALL, Accountant. JOSEPH BOX, WILLIAM P. FROHLICH, THOMAS REED, GEORGE BROOKS, Auditors. 96 CASH ADVANCE ACCOUNT. £ s. d. £200 advanced to Mr. G. Buzzard, late Vestry Clerk (4th April, 1882), for payment of Weekly Wages, etc., settled in Account at his decease by his Executrix, in the following manner, viz :— Salary, one quarter due to Mr. G. Buzzard, Michaelmas, 1882 100 0 0 Paid Salary to Mr. J. Plater, Clerk 13 1 0 Paid Messrs. Allen and Son, Solicitors 13 12 0 Paid petty disbursements as per Vouchers 27 13 5 Office Furniture, etc., sold by the Executrix to the Vestry 31 10 0 Balance due from his Estate, paid by the Executrix, 21st November, 1882 14 3 7 £200 0 0 A. PAVING. £ s. d. Mowlem and Co., for Paving, Lime, Sand, Stone, etc. 1,301 13 11 Lloyd and Co., Wood Paving 1,259 9 6 Asphaltic Wood Pavement Co. 4,222 13 Muldoon Bros., Repairs to Wood Pavement 16 15 5 Posts, etc., for Refuges 21 2 2 Oilman, etc. 8 0 3 New River Co., Supply for paving purposes 0 16 8 Works Wages 2,052 5 6 £8,882 17 1 B. CLEANSING. £ s. d. Contractors for carting away Dust, Slop, etc. 3,905 0 0 Wooden Clogs for Sweepers 6 1 6 Sweeping Machinist 20 8 6 Provender for Horses 109 4 0 Veterinary Surgeon 10 0 0 Harness Maker, etc. 5 3 0 Oilman, etc. 5 12 10 Scavengers' Wages 1,324 2 8 £5,385 12 6 97 c. WATERING. £ s. d. Contractor for Water Carts, Horses, and Men 584 15 10 Water Supply 401 16 5 Owens and Co., Hydraulic Engineers 14 3 6 £1,000 15 9 D. SEWERS. £ s. d. Works 59 16 8 Works Wages 219 15 0 Water for Urinals 98 3 11 Do. for Flushing Sewers 7 7 • 6 Carbolic Acid 18 9 6 Clothing for men 14 5 4 Boots for men 10 3 0 Oilman 7 13 10 Sum granted by Vestry towards expenses of house-drainage, at 21, Berwick Street 5 0 0 Compensation granted by Vestry for loss of time and expenses, through the bursting of Parish Sewer and flooding cellars Nos. 4 and 5, Marlborough Row 4 16 6 £445 11 a E. LIGHTING. £ s. d. Gas Light and Coke Company 2,552 11 3 Gas-fittings, etc. 61 10 1 £2,614 1 4 F. VESTRY HALL. £ s. d. London Life Association, half a year's interest on balance of Loan of £8,000 (£6,857 2s. 10d.) at 4½ per cent. £145 14s. 3d., less Income Tax, £3 0s. 8d. 142 13 7 Do. Second Annual Instalment off do., due 7th October, 1882 1,142 17 2 Do. Half-year's Interest on do., £145 14s. 3d., less Income Tax, £3 19s. 0d 141 15 3 Insurance, one year, Plate Glass Windows in Vestry Hall and Offices 2 0 0 Works at Vestry Hall 15 7 0 Gas, Water, Rates, Taxes, Coal, &c. 104 5 11 £1,548 18 11 d 98 Annual Salaries Ladyday 1883. G. £ SALARIES. £ s. d. ... G. Buzzard, late Vestry Clerk, three months' Salary, to Midsummer, 1882* 112 10 0 • • • J. O. Phippard, late Assistant Vestry Clerk, two months' Salary, to 24th May, 1882 41 13 4 180 R. H. Beacall, Accountant, Salary, one year to Lady-day, 1883 170 0 0 400 H. Wilkins, Vestry Clerk, Salary, seven months to Lady-day, 1883 216 13 4 100 J. Plater, Assistant Clerk, Salary, eight months, to Ladyday, 1883 53 18 4 70 H. T. Brooker, second Assistant Clerk, four months' Salary to Lady-day, 1883 23 6 8 275 A. P. Howell, Surveyor, one year's Salary, to Lady-day, 1883 275 0 0 ... W. J. Dyer, late Clerk of the Works, &c., Salary, seven months, to 24th October, 1882 87 10 0 80 F. W. Horey, Stone Yard Clerk, four months' Salary to Lady-day, 1883 26 13 4 225 Dr. Edmunds, nine months' Salary, to 25th December, 1882, as Medical Officer of Health 156 5 0 140 J. H. Morgan, Sanitary Inspector, one year's Salary, to Ladyday, 1883 140 0 0 78 E. Brooks, Assistant do. do. 78 0 0 120 W. Watson, Inspector of Nuisances, one year's Salary to do. 105 0 0 120 E. Warren, Hall-keeper, etc., one year's Salary to do. 108 15 0 £1,788 £1,595 5 0 * Second quarter's salary charged in " Cash Advance Account," page 96. H. TEMPORARY CLERKS. £ 8. d. J. E. Wilkins, Vestry Clerk's Department ... 8 0 0 W. G. Morgan, Surveyor's Department, Stone Yard 12 0 0 £20 0 0 I. SANITARY DEPARTMENT. £ s. d. Registrar's Returns of Births and Deaths 10 3 6 Fees for admissions of Patients to Small Pox Hospital 4 4 0 Disinfectants, &c. ••• ••• ••• ••• ••• 6 0 4 Carried forward 20 7 10 99  £ s. d. Brought forward 20 7 10 Coal for Disinfecting purposes 2 15 0 R. Collier, Temporary Mortuary Keeper 2 0 0 Disbursements 3 19 10 Wages 14 4 6 £43 7 2 J. SUNDRIES. £ s. d. Stationer, Bookbinder, Printer 249 2 11 Carpenter, Smith, Bricklayer 91 18 8 Wheelwright and Workmen's Tools 206 6 11 Letters for Street Names 13 6 0 Uniform, &c., for Inspector of Nuisances 6 10 6 Oilman 8 15 11 Gas Light and Coke Company 0 11 6 Disbursements 65 7 2 £641 19 7 R. H. BEACALL, Accountant. JOSEPH BOX, WILLIAM P. FROHLICH, THOMAS REED, GEORGE BROOKS, Auditors. 100 PARISH OF ST. JAMES, WESTMINSTER. A Statement of Debt and Liability owing by the Vestry on the 25th day of March, 1883. £ s. d. Amount borrowed of the Trustees of the London Life Association, on Mortgage of the Sewers, Metropolitan Consolidated, and General Rates, at 5 per cent. per annum, with a proviso that if the Interest, payable on the Principal, be paid half-yearly, as expressed by deed—that is to say, on the 7th day of April, and the 7th day of October, or within thirty days thereafter, then the said Interest to be charged at and after the rate of 4¼ per cent, per annum, and the said Principal to be repaid by seven equal Annual Instalments of £1,142 17s. 2d., the first Instalment becoming payable on the 7th day of October, 1881, and the like sum to be paid in each successive year, until the entire Principal shall have been discharged 8,000 0 0 Amount of Principal repaid 2,285 14 4 Balance owing by the Vestry on the 25th March, 1883 £5,714 5 8 R. H. BEACALL, Accountant. JOSEPH BOX, WILLIAM P. FROHLICH, THOMAS REED, GEORGE BROOKS, Auditors. 101 PARISH OF ST. JAMES, WESTMINSTER. Outstanding Assets and Liabilities on the 25th day of March, 1883. Assets. £ s. d. Debts and Liabilities. £ s. d. Balance in Treasurer's hands, 25th March, 1883 5,578 18 4 Contractors (Mowlem and Co.), for York Paving, Guernsey Lumps, Lime, Sand, etc. 1,270 17 3 Do. in hands of Vestry Clerk, for payment of wages and petty disbursements 44 17 1 Do. (W. Mead), carting slop, removal of dust, and street watering 1,053 11 7 Arrears of Sewers, &c., Rate of the Years 1874, 1880-81, and 1881-82 154 5 6½ Dr. Edmunds, M.O. of Health, Salary, one quarter to Lady-day, 1883 56 5 0 Do. of the Year 1882-83 804 7 6 Works done for Gas and Water Companies 138 17 7 Gas Lighting 766 10 11 Archbishop Tenison's Chapel (now St. Thomas's Church), nominal rent of ground and porches erected thereon, in King Street, Regent Street, one year to Midsummer, 1882 0 3 0 Wood Paving (Muldoon Bros.) 180 1 10 Stationer, Printer, Bookbinder, etc. 89 15 3 Second Moiety of Allowance to Collectors, for collecting Sewers, etc., Rates of year 1882-83 200 0 0 Granting Scaffold Licenses, Paving Deposits, etc. 60 0 0 Horse Forage, Harness Maker, etc. 36 8 3 Excess of Liabilities over Assets. Wheelwright and Workmen's Tools 37 9 11 Current Accounts 3,780 13 2½ Iron Merchants, etc. 64 15 4 Loan Account 5,714 5 8 Grand Junction Water Co. Supply 30 1 0 9,494 18 10½ Gas-fitter, etc. 37 1 1 Ironmonger, Oilman, Coal Merchant, etc. 28 1 6 School Board for London, per precept for year ending 25th March, 1884 (£19,074 14s. 10c?.), first quarter due 24th March, 1883 4,768 13 8 St. Marylebone Vestry, per precept for year ended Christmas, 1882, for management of south side of Oxford Street 554 19 11 Asphaltic Wood Pavement Co., per Contract for paving Waterloo Place and other streets with wood 1,378 9 0 Income and House Taxes on Vestry Hall 9 0 9 Balance of Loan (of £8,000) granted by the London Life Association 5,714 5 8 £16,276 7 11 £16,276 7 11 JOSEPH BOX, WILLIAM P. FROHLICH, THOMAS REED, GEORGE BROOKS, Auditors. 102 PARISH OF ST, JAMES, WESTMINSTER, AN ACCOUNT OF ALL CONTRACTS ENTERED INTO OR CONTINUED BY THE VESTRY DURING THE YEAR ENDED 25th MARCH, 1883. Date of Contracts. Name of Company or Party with whom Contract was made. Nature of works to be performed or Materials to be used or supplied. Amount or Price. 25th March, 1881 Mowlem & Co Paviors' and Masons' Works, and for the supply of Granite and other Stones and Materials for Relaying and Repairing Carriageways and Footways At various prices, as specified in the Contract. 25th March, 1881 William Mead Street Watering At 9/6 per day for each single Horse, Cart, and Man. 25th March, 1882 William Mead Dusting and Slopping At £4,000 per annum. 25th July, 1882 Asphaltic Wood Pavement Company Wood Paving Works in Regent Street, Waterloo Place, and Pall Mall At 11/6 per yard superficial, with 12 inches of Concrete. R. H. BEACALL, Accountant. JOSEPH BOX, WILLIAM P. FROHLICH, THOMAS REED, GEORGE BROOKS, Auditors. 103 PUBLIC BATHS AND WASHHOUSES OF ST. JAMES, WESTMINSTER. STATEMENT OF RECEIPTS AND EXPENDITURE For the year ending 31 st December, 1882. (Abstracted from the Audited Accounts.) Receipts. Expenditure. 1882.January 1. £ s. d. £ s. d. 1882. £ s. d. £ s. d. To Balance at Bank 781 17 3 By payments during the year:- Receipts during the year: „ Wages 1,020 1 4 From Bathers 1,382 10 5 „ Petty Cash 20 10 3 „ Soap, Washing, and other conveniences 2,037 3 1 1,040 11 7 ,, Coals, Materials, Repairs, Renewals, Gas, Water, and Rates and Taxes 1,556 8 2 3,419 13 6 To amount received from Poor Rate for instalments of Loans and Interest 445 9 5 „ Amounts paid by Commissioners as instalments of Loans, Interest, &c. 456 4 11 „ Deposit 500 0 0 „ Surplus receipts applied in aid of Poor Rate 400 0 0 „ Balance at Bank 1,193 15 6 „ Deposit 500 0 0 £5,147 0 2 £5,147 0 2 NUMBER OF BATHERS AND WASHERS DURING THE YEAR. Washers, 49,166 Number of Hours, 263,846 Total Receipts, £2,037 3s. 1d. BATHERS:— First Class (Men), 22,289; Women, 4,950 Total, 27,239 Second „ „ 44,892; „ 14,659 „ 59,551 Swimming Bath (both Classes) „ 17,534 Total 104,324 Total Money Receipts from both Classes and Sexes, £1,382 10s. 5s. June, 1883. HENRY DOLBY, Clerk to the Commissioners. 104 PARISH OF ST. JAMES, WESTMINSTER. Statement of Accounts of the Governors and Directors of the Poor, for the year ended 25th March, 1883. Receipts. 1882. March 25. 1883. March 25, Expenditure. 1883.March 25. £ s. d. £ s. d. To Collection of Poor Rates during the year 57,649 17 3 By Balance due to Treasurer 5,150 13 4 „ Rent of Parish property 1,165 6 11 „ Guardians, Westminster Union 38,546 19 8 „ Fines recovered from keepers of disorderly houses 128 1 6 „ Police Rate 13,532 9 10 „ County and Lunatic Asylum Rates 4,168 2 0 „ Surplus Receipts of Commissioners of Public Baths and Washhouses 1,000 0 0 ,, Loans—Baths and Washhouses Acts 437 11 8 „ Registration of Voters 238 15 3 „ Sale of Voters' Lists 2 4 0 ,, Preparation of Jury List 35 15 0 59,945 9 8 ,, Election of Vestrymen 8 17 0 „ Salaries and Superannuation Allowance 625 0 0 „ Balance due to Treasurer at close of year 2,985 14 10 „ Legal Expenses, prosecuting keepers of disorderly houses 82 11 9 „ Printing, Stationery, and Stamps 52 7 6 „ Sundry Incidental Expenses 52 1 6 £62,931 4 6 £62,931 4 6 Note.—These Accounts are audited half-yearly by an Auditor appointed by the Local Government Board. Previous public notice is given of the time and place of each audit. 105 WESTMINSTER UNION. Statement of Account of the Guardians of the Poor for the Year ended Lady-day, 1883. Receipts. Expenditure. £ s. d. £ s. d. To balance in hands of Treasurer at commencement of year 8,732 7 2 By Maintenance of Paupers, Workhouse, and Schools, Cost of Provisions, Clothing, Necessaries, Furniture, Building Repairs, and Establishment Charges 13,380 12 10 „ Parish of St. James— From Poor Rates for General purposes 38,546 19 8 Ditto County Rates 4,168 2 0 „ Maintenance of Lunatics in Asylums 3,263 0 2 „ Parish of St. Anne— „ Relief to Outdoor Paupers 1,295 5 8 From Poor Rates for General purposes 6,953 2 4 ,, Salaries and Superannuations 3,593 8 11 Ditto County Rates 764 11 0 „ Instalment of Workhouse Loan and Interest 1,334 4 5 „ Receipts from other sources— „ Rents and Rates 1,500 8 5 Proceeds from Sale of Firewood 522 6 11 ,, County and Lunatics Act Rates 4,932 13 0 From Relatives and Friends of Paupers, on account of Maintenance in Workhouse 671 14 11 ,, Contribution to Central London Sick Asylum District 4,354 0 0 Dividends on amount invested in Consols 431 12 5 ,, Contribution to Metropolitan Asylum District 10,819 14 5 H.M. Treasury—Parliamentary grant in aid of Salaries and Maintenance of Lunatics in Asylums 1,800 17 0 „ Contribution to Metropolitan Common Poor Fund 9,375 9 0 „ Sundry other Expenditure 1,389 9 0 „ Balance in favour of the Guardians at end of year 9,485 7 11 From other Unions and Parishes, for the Maintenance of Paupers in the Workhouse 2,012 11 2 Sundry other receipts 119 9 2 £64,723 13 9 £64,723 13 9 106 LIST OF PAROCHIAL CHARITIES, &c. Benefactor. OBJECT. By whom Administered. Annual Income. SOURCE OF INCOME. 1 Burlington School, Boyle Street. Founded 1699. To provide for and advance the education of Girls. Five nominated, and Seven cooptative Governors. £ s. d. £18,819 9s. 11d. Consols. Rent of house, No. 15, Berwick Street. 1083 5 3 approximate, and fees from Pupils. 2 Thomas Tenison, D.D., Archbishop of Canterbury. 1725. To provide one or more Schoolmasters to teach Poor Boys, natives and inhabitants of the Parish. The Rector and the Senior Churchwarden for the time being, and Three Trustees. 148 0 0 One-third of Rent of house, No. 172a, Regent Street, and of Ground Rent paid by the Commissioners of Woods & Forests. 3 Offertory Schools, Swallow Street. Beginning of the year 1700. For the advancement of the education of Boys at any Public Elementary School or Schools in the Parish, by means of Prizes and Exhibitions. Two ex-officio Governors; Two representative Governors; Three co-optative Governors. 95 3 2 £2,705 19s. 8d. Consols (the accumulation of Communion alms during the Rectorship of Dean Andrews) and a portion of Charities Nos. 4 and 5. 4 Alice Knightsbridge. 1765. To be laid out in bread, to be distributed amongst Poor Housekeepers of the Parish. Rector and Churchwardens for the time being. 61 17 10 £2,063 9s. New Three per Cent. 107  Benefactor. OBJECT. By whom Administered. Annual Income. SOURCE OF INCOME. 5 Dickens. Brown. Hillier. John Allen. Elizabeth Lancaster. John Barnes. Richard Marsh. Margaret Haddle. James Dodsley. Included in Knightsbridge Charity. £ s. d. 6 Ann Broder. For the relief of Poor Housekeepers and others. Rector for the time being. 23 4 8 £774 11s. New Three per Cent. 7 Bishop Porteus. Dean Andrews. Included in Broder's Charity. 8 Peter Le Quainter 1782. To be equally distributed at Christmas amongst twenty Poor Persons who are, or have been, housekeepers in the Parish. Rector, Churchwardens, and the other Gentlemen, for the time being, who shall compose the Vestry. 299 1 5 £9,969 2s. 9d. Three per Cent. Bank Annuities. 9 Ann Newton. 1811. To apprentice one Boy, belonging to the Parish, annually, to be elected from the Union School, St. James's Road, Tooting, formerly from the "Workhouse School in Poland Street. Churchwardens, Overseers, and Governors and Directors of the Poor for the time being. 34 4 2 £1,169 12s. 11d. Three per Cent. Consols. 108  Benefactor. OBJECT. By whom Administered. Annual Income. SOURCE OF INCOME. 10 Samuel Jackson. 1823. Formerly to pay 1s. apiece to 20 Poor Men and 20 Poor Women in the Workhouse, who shall have lived most respectably in the world, and shall constantly attend Divine worship at the Chapel in the Infirmary, or who shall give good cause for non-attendance. The amount was last reduced to 9d., in consequence of an alteration in the Stock. Rector, Churchwardens, and Overseers for the time being. Distributed weekly, after Chapel service on Sunday Morning, by the Master of the Workhouse. £ s. d. £2,600 Four per Cent. Bank Annuities. Afterwards changed to 3½, and subsequently to New 3 per Cent. 78 0 0 1882. Now, by a scheme of the Charity Commissioners, dated 28th September, 1881, is applied by the Trustees in contributing to the funds of any Convalescent Hospital for the reception, treatment, and maintenance of deserving poor persons of either sex, who shall have partially recovered from, but shall be still incapacitated to some extent by the effects of accident, injury, or sickness, with the object of promoting their complete restoration to health. By same Trustees. Now standing in the names of the Official Trustees of Charitable Fund. 11 Ann Margaret Forster. 1836. To repair vault-tomb and railing in the burial ground of St. James's Chapel in the Hampstead Road, and to paint the railing enclosing the same, annually—the remainder to be distributed on the 25th March, in each year, amongst six poor deserving Women. The Rector for the time being. 13 6 8 £444 8s. 11d. Consols. 12 James Payler. 1853. To be divided equally between 20 poor deserving Persons, resident in the Parish. The Rector and Churchwardens for the time being. 30 10 8 £1,017 16s. 2d Three per Cent. Consols. 109  Benefactor. OBJECT. By whom Administered. Annual Income. SOURCE OF INCOME. 13 Atkinson Morley. 1850. To be divided yearly, is equal shares and proportions, between 10 Widows of Tradesmen, who at their respective deaths were Parishioners of the Parish, and had been respectively rated to the Poor at not less than £20 per annum. The Rector for the time being ; the Trustees of the Will; and Six Inhabitants of the Parish. £ s. d. £2,746 19s. 2d. Three per Cent Consols. 82 8 2 14 Charles Smith. 1869. To be divided annually at Christmas, amongst the Poor of the Parish. Rector for the time being. 2 17 9 £96 15s. 3d. Three per Cent Consols. 15 Earl Craven. 1734. One-fourth of the benefits of this Charity belongs to the Parish of St James, Westminster. Three-fifths (not exceeding £600) of the net annual income to be paid to the Treasurer of King'a College Hospital, Portugal Street Lincoln'a Inn Fields, and two-fiftha (not exceeding £400) to be paid to the Treasurer of Charing Cross Hospital, Agar Street. Strand The Governors of King's College Hospital to set apart 24 beds; and the Governors of Charing Cross Hospital, 16 beds, for the reception of patients suffering from contagious or other diseases (small-pox excepted), to be admitted by orders from the Trustees, from the Parishes of St. Martin-in-the-Fields, St. George, Hanover Square, St Clement Danes, St. James, Westminster, and St. Paul, Covent Garden, provided there are vacancies. The Governors to receive and supply with advice and medicines, as out-patients, all poor Persona resident in the said Parishes, who shall be sent by the Trustees with out-patient orders. Trustees, viz: the Incumbent of the said Parishes, and four resident Householders for the Parishes of St. Martin-in-the-Fields and St George, Hanover Square; and four resident Householders for each of the Parishes of St Clement Danes, St James, Westminster, and St. Paul, Covent Garden; one Trustee from each parish to go out of office by rotation every fourth year, but who shall be eligible for re-election. 694 14 9 £16,639 7«. 24 Three per Cent Conaola £365 7s. 8d. Three per Cent Conaols. Kent of ground, houses, and coachhouses, st Craven Hill. Battersea. £183 14s. 110  Benefactor. OBJECT. By whom Administered. ' Annual Income. SOURCE OF INCOME. 16 Mrs. Elizabeth Dennis Denyer. To be divided into seven equal parts to be allotted to seven poor Spinsters, not under 60 years of age at the time, of general good character, constant, when able, in their attendance at some place of public worship, and who have never been beggars. The several said persons when so selected to receive the said bequests during their natural lives. The Parishioners of St. Luke, Chelsea, St. Pancras, St. James, Westminster, and Christ Church, Newgate Street, to have precedence, provided the applicant is equally deserving. The distribution is made by the Rector and Churchwardens of St. Luke's, Chelsea, and the Trustees, of whom the Rector for the time being is one, in the Vestry Room of St. Luke's Church, on one of the first six days of the month of January in each year, and Notice of the day appointed is to be placed on the church doors one month previously, and printed forms may be obtained at St. Luke's Vestry Room, on any day after notice has been given between 10 and 12 o'clock. £ s. d. £6,989 17s. 8d. Three per Cent. Consols. 119 0 0 REPORT FOR THE YEAR 1882, made to the Vestry of St. James, WESTMINSTER, by JAMES EDMUNDS, M.D., M.R.C.P. Lond., F.R.M.S,, F.C.S., MEDICAL OFFICER OF HEALTH AND PUBLIC ANALYST FOR ST. JAMES'S, WESTMINSTER. 112 CONTENTS. I.—PUBLIC HEALTH. PAGE. General Report for the year 1882 113 Appendix of Tables. 1. Causes of Death 119 2. Cases of Fever, Small Pox, and Diphtheria 123 3. Sanitary Inspector's Work 126 4. Summary of Sanitary Inspector's Work 130 5. Particulars with regard to Drains re-constructed 131 6. Underground Rooms cleared of Occupants 133 II.—PUBLIC ANALYSIS. 1. Report upon Articles Analysed during year 1882 134 2. List of Articles obtained for Analysis 135 113 TO THE CHAIRMAN AND MEMBERS of the VESTRY OF ST. JAMES, WESTMINSTER. Reverend Sir and Gentlemen, I have the honour to submit the following Report upon the Public Health of the Parish of St. James, Westminster, for the year 1882. According to the Census of 1881, the District of the Parish of St. James covers an area of 162 acres, and contains a population of 29,865. The Golden Square Sub-District covers an area of 54 acres, and contains a population of 11,585. The Berwick Street Sub-District covers an area of 108 acres, and contains a population of 18,280. The District of the Parish of St. James has diminished in its population by 3,754 persons during the decade 1871-81; its population in 1881 being 29,865 against 33,619 in the year 1871. This decrease in the resident population is due, doubtless, to the growing value of business premises, and to an increasing tendency to reside in the suburbs of London. The mean density of the population is now 184 per acre, and the 114 net mortality for the year 1882 was 505—a death-rate of nearly 17 per 1,000. The density of the population in the Golden Square Sub-District is 215 persons per acre, and in the Berwick Street Sub-District 169 persons per acre. The mortality from zymotic diseases during the year has been 57, and there have been in addition, 4 other deaths among zymotic cases removed from the Parish to extra-Parochial Hospitals. Vide table II, page 125. Of Fever, Small Pox, and Diphtheria, 44 cases came under notice during the year; but many cases may not have been known, there being no law requiring that notice of such cases be given to the Sanitary Authority. Of these 44 cases, 7 were of Small Pox, 11 of Enteric or Typhoid Fever, 15 of Scarlet Fever, and 11 of Diphtheria. Seventeen cases—5 of Enteric Fever, 4 of Scarlet Fever, 3 of Diphtheria, and 5 of Small Pox—were removed to extra-Parochial Hospitals. During the year 1882, 47 bodies were removed into the Mortuary. In one case disinfection was required, and the removal of the corpse was probably the means of preventing the spread of infectious disease. In 21 cases bodies were removed from the presence of families generally living in a single room, and where, but for the public Mortuary, the living would have lived and slept in presence of a decomposing corpse, upon which, possibly, a post mortem examination would have to be made before the interment could take place. In 4 cases the bodies have been removed from hotels or lodging-houses. 11 Inquests have been held upon bodies lying in the Mortuary, and 11 post mortem examinations for judicial purposes have been made in the Examination Room which adjoins the Mortuary. 115 The following number of Deaths were registered as having occurred in St. James's during the year 1882:— First Quarter 145 Second Quarter 114 Third Quarter 131 Fourth Quarter 148 Gross mortality for year 1882 538 Deduct Deaths of Non-Parishioners: Dying in the Workhouse 37 Dying in the Throat Hospital 0 37 501 Add Deaths among Zymotic cases removed to extra- parochial Hospitals 4 Net mortality for the year 1882 505 505 deaths in a population of 29,865 is a death-rate of nearly 17 per 1,000. The deaths occurring in St. James's during the last ten years have been as follows:— Gross Mortality. Net Mortality. Year 1873 Deaths 686 629 „ 1874 „ 635 592 „ 1875 „ 686 621 „ 1876 „ 621 573 „ 1877 „ 554 517 „ 1878 „ 693 647 „ 1879 „ 608 568 „ 1880 „ 623 589 „ 1881 „ 569 545 „ 1882 „ 538 505 116 The following Table of gross Mortality shows the periods of life in which the deaths have occurred in the last Seven years respectively. Under 1 Year of Age. Above 1 and under 5. Above 5 and under 20. Above 20 and under 40. Above 40 and under 50. Above 60 and under 80. Above 80. Total. 1876 First Quarter 44 40 8 18 38 41 12 201 Second Quarter 46 22 6 18 31 35 6 164 Third Quarter 37 13 10 15 28 28 1 132 Fourth Quarter 22 12 8 30 25 25 5 124 Total 149 87 32 81 122 126 24 621 1877 First Quarter 30 12 4 26 26 25 5 128 Second Quarter 30 13 5 15 30 33 3 129 Third Quarter 52 16 11 19 29 22 2 151 Fourth Quarter 39 14 4 22 31 33 3 146 Total 151 55 24 82 116 113 13 554 1878 First Quarter 35 32 6 18 36 52 8 187 Second Quarter 37 30 9 12 24 26 5 143 Third Quarter 63 31 6 13 27 22 9 171 Fourth Quarter 37 26 13 24 34 50 8 192 Total 172 119 34 67 121 150 30 693 1879 First Quarter 34 18 4 14 35 54 14 173 Second Quarter 35 14 10 21 39 38 15 172 Third Quarter 22 8 6 8 16 20 1 81 Fourth Quarter 50 22 3 17 33 45 12 182 Total 141 62 23 60 123 157 42 608 1880 First Quarter 34 29 7 18 36 43 13 179 Second Quarter 39 39 7 10 22 35 6 158 Third Quarter 45 33 5 12 20 26 4 145 Fourth Quarter 21 32 12 15 23 29 9 141 Total 139 133 31 55 101 133 32 623 1881 First Quarter 30 17 3 13 41 37 7 148 Second Quarter 30 23 3 3 13 33 37 132 Third Quarter 42 20 6 24 23 29 3 147 Fourth Quarter 26 20 13 18 26 33 6 142 Total 128 80 25 58 103 122 53 569 1882 First Quarter 21 24 6 15 30 39 10 145 Second Quarter 16 19 7 12 26 25 9 114 Third Quarter 32 24 10 11 18 29 7 131 Fourth Quarter 24 39 6 12 21 35 11 148 Total 93 106 29 50 95 128 37 538 117 TABLE OF ZYMOTIC DEATHS FOR THE 25 YEARS—1858-82. 1858 1859 1860 1861 1862 1863 1864 1865 1866 1867 1868 1869 1870 1871 1872 1873 1874 1875 1876 1877 1878 1879 1880 1881 1882 Small Pox ... 4 4 1 1 21 ... 2 1 3 2 ... 3 18 6 1 ... ... 1 3 1 ... ... 3 Measles 10 38 8 17 9 24 29 17 19 17 11 14 13 6 24 20 1 4 21 8 19 6 26 10 17 Scarlet Fever &. Diphtheria 29 31 16 32 66 31 13 20 30 9 31 39 75 14 6 ... 13 19 14 7 20 15 20 10 11 Whpng. Cough. 18 22 34 47 33 22 29 17 21 34 21 43 12 19 30 18 14 28 14 7 19 14 18 8 12 Diarrhœa 12 20 5 10 13 20 15 15 19 18 17 13 26 28 28 29 11 21 19 13 21 9 23 15 12 Typhus and Typhoid Fev. 1 6 13 2 13 8 14 10 7 7 6 10 7 4 8 9 6 3 7 12 9 4 6 5 5 Cholera ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 8 ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Total 70 121 80 109 135 126 100 81 105 88 88 119 136 90 102 77 45 75 76 50 89 48 93 51 57 During the 24 years, 1858—1881 inclusive, the deaths from Zymotics were 2,154, being an average yearly mortality of 89.75. The Zymotic deaths registered in the Parish during the year 1882 were 57. The Table on page 118 shows the Zymotic and some other deaths in each quarter of the year 1882. 118 Table showing the Names and number of Zymotic and certain other Deaths which occurred in each Quarter during the Year 1882. First Quarter. Second Quarter. Third Quarter. Fourth Quarter. Whole year. Small Pox ... ... ... ... ... Measles 3 ... 1 13 17 Scarlet Fever ... ... ... 4 4 Diphtheria 3 2 2 ... 7 Whooping Cough 3 2 6 1 12 Typhus Fever ... ... ... ... ... Typhoid Fever ... 2 2 1 5 Diarrhœa ... ... 10 2 12 Total 9 6 21 21 57 Continued Fever ... 1 ... 1 2 Erysipelas 1 ... 1 1 3 Puerperal Fever ... ... ... ... ... Rheumatism ... 1 ... ... 1 Syphilis ... ... ... ... ... Croup 1 3 ... 1 5 Total 2 5 1 3 11 Tables of the causes of death and other data for the year 1882 are appended. I have the honour to remain, Rev. Sir and Gentlemen, Your obedient servant, JAMES EDMUNDS. 8, Grafton Street, Piccadilly. 119 ST. JAMES, WESTMINSTER. APPENDIX TO REPORT OF MEDICAL OFFICER OF HEALTH. Table I.—Causes of Death during Quarter ending April 1st, 1882. CAUSES OF DEATH. Golden Square. Berwick Street. Workhouse. Under 1 Year of Age. Above 1 and under 5. Above 5 and under 20. Above 20 and under 40. Above 40 and under 60. Above 60 and under 80. 80 and upwards. All Ages. I.—Zymotic Diseases. Measles 2 1 ... 1 2 ... ... ... ... ... 3 Diphtheria 1 2 ... ... 3 ... ... ... ... ... 3 Whooping Cough 2 1 ... 1 ... 1 1 ... ... ... 3 Erysipelas ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... 1 Diarrhœa ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Croup 1 ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... 1 II.—Constitutional Diseases. Cancer 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... 1 Gout 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... 1 Phthisis or Consumptn. 2 15 2 1 ... 1 6 10 1 ... 19 Tabes Mesenterica ... 2 ... 1 1 ... ... ... ... ... 2 Apoplexy 1 3 ... ... ... ... ... 1 2 1 4 Epilepsy ... 2 ... ... ... ... 1 1 ... ... 2 Paralysis ... ... 5 ... ... ... 1 ... 4 ... 5 Convulsions 2 4 ... 3 3 ... ... ... ... ... 6 III.—Local Diseases. Meningitis ... 1 ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 Brain Disease ... 2 ... 1 ... ... ... 1 ... ... 2 Heart Disease 2 3 ... ... ... ... 1 1 3 ... 5 Morbus Cordis 1 1 1 ... ... ... ... 1 2 ... 3 Bronchitis 10 12 10 4 7 2 2 8 9 ... 32 Intersusception ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Catarrh 2 ... ... 1 1 ... ... ... ... ... 2 Pneumonia 4 ... ... 1 3 ... ... ... ... ... 4 Intestine Disease 1 1 ... ... ... ... ... 2 ... ... 2 Liver Disease, &c. ... 3 ... ... ... ... ... 1 2 ... 3 Lung Disease, &c. ... 1 ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... 1 Stomach Disease 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... Bladder Disease 1 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... 2 ... 2 Bright's Disease ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... 1 Uterus Disease ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Laryngitis ... 1 ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... 1 Hemorrhage 1 ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... 1 Other Diseases ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... 1 IV.—Developmental Diseases. Old Age 2 7 8 ... ... ... ... ... 8 9 17 Atrophy and Debility ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... 2 Childbirth ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Marasmus ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... 1 Inanition 1 1 ... 2 ... ... ... ... ... ... 2 Teething ... 2 ... 1 1 ... ... ... ... ... 2 V.— Violent Deaths. Fractures and Contns. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Suffocation ... 1 ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... 1 Burns ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... 1 Suicide ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... 1 Puerpera ... 1 ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... 1 Premature Birth ... 2 1 3 ... ... ... ... ... ... 3 Spinal Disease ... 1 ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... 1 Cynanche ... 1 ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... 1 39 77 29 21 24 6 15 30 39 10 145 120 ST. JAMES, WESTMINSTER. APPENDIX TO REPORT OF MEDICAL OFFICER OF HEALTH. Cable I.—Causes of Death during Quarter ending June 24th, 1882. causes OF DEATH. Golden Square. Berwick Street. Workhouse. Under 1 Year of Age. Above 1 and under 5. Above 5 and under 20. Above 20 and under 40. Above 40 and under 60. Above 60 and under 80. 80 and upwards. All Ages. I.—Zymotic Diseases. Diphtheria 2 ... ... ... 1 1 ... ... ... ... 2 Whooping Cough ... 2 ... 1 ... ... 1 ... ... ... 2 Diarrhœa ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Continued Fever ... 1 ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... 1 Typhoid Fever ... 2 ... ... ... ... 1 1 ... ... 2 Rheumatism ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... 1 Erysipelas ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Croup 1 1 ... ... 2 ... ... ... ... ... 2 II.—Constitutional Diseases. Cancer 1 3 ... ... ... ... 1 2 1 ... 4 Phthisis or Consumptn 4 5 1 ... 4 ... 4 2 ... ... 10 Tabes Mesenterica ... 1 ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 Apoplexy 1 1 1 ... ... ... ... 1 2 ... 3 Paralysis ... 1 4 ... ... ... ... ... 3 2 5 Convulsions 2 2 ... 4 ... ... ... ... ... ... 4 Ill—Local Diseases. Meningitis 1 4 ... 1 2 2 ... ... ... ... 5 Brain Fever, &c. 1 ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... 1 Heart Disease ... 3 ... ... ... ... ... 1 2 ... 3 Morbus Cordis ... 1 3 ... ... 1 1 ... 1 1 4 Stomach Disease ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Hernia ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 Bronchitis 11 2 6 3 1 1 1 6 7 ... 19 Pneumonia 2 3 1 ... 3 1 ... 2 ... ... 6 Asthma, ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... 1 Liver Disease 2 2 ... ... ... ... ... 4 ... ... 4 Kidney Disease 1 3 ... ... 1 ... ... 3 ... ... 4 Diabetes 1 1 ... ... ... ... 1 ... 1 ... 2 Bladder Disease ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Bright's Disease 1 ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... 1 Teething ... 1 ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... 1 IV.—Developmental Diseases. Premature Birth ... 1 1 2 ... ... ... ... ... ... 2 Spinal Bifida 1 ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 Old Age 3 4 5 ... ... ... ... ... 7 5 12 Atrophy and Debility 2 ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... 1 ... 2 Inanition ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 Childbirth 1 1 ... 1 ... ... 1 ... ... ... 2 VI.— Violent Deaths. Fractures and Contns. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Nervous System Dis. ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... 1 Marasmus ... ... 1 ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... 1 Other Diseases ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Enteritis ... 1 ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... 1 Embolism ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... 1 Cynanche ... 1 ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... 1 38 52 23 16 19 7 12 26 25 9 114 121 ST. JAMES, WESTMINSTER. APPENDIX TO REPORT OF MEDIAL OFFICER OF HEALTH. Table I.—Causes of Death during the Quarter ending Sept. 30th, 1882. CAUSES OF DEATH. Golden Square. Berwick Street.) Workhouse. Under 1 Year of Age. Above 1 and under 5. Above 5 and under 20. Above 20 and under 40. Above 40 and under 60. Above 60 and under 80. 80 and upwards. All Ages. I.—Zymotic Diseases. Measles ... 1 ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 Diphtheria ... 2 ... ... 1 1 ... ... ... ... 2 Whooping Cough 1 5 ... 2 4 ... ... ... ... ... 6 Diarrhoea 4 6 ... 5 4 ... ... ... 1 ... 10 Cholera ... 1 ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... 1 Typhoid Fever ... 2 ... ... ... ... 2 ... ... ... 2 Rheumatism ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Erysipelas 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... 1 Croup ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... II.—Constitutional Diseases. Pleurisy ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... 1 Dropsy ... 1 ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 Cancer l 1 ... ... ... ... ... 1 1 ... 2 Phthisis & Consumptn. 5 12 5 2 1 5 5 6 1 ... 22 Tabes Mesenterica 1 2 ... 1 2 ... ... ... ... ... 3 Tuberculosis ... 1 ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 Hemorrhage 1 ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... 1 Apoplexy 2 1 1 ... ... ... 1 3 ... ... 4 Paralysis ... ... 4 ... ... ... ... ... 4 ... 4 Convulsions ... 4 ... 4 ... ... ... ... ... ... 4 Teething ... 1 ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... 1 III.—Local Diseases. Meningitis 3 ... ... 1 1 1 ... ... ... ... 3 Heart Disease ... 3 ... ... ... ... ... 1 2 ... 3 Bronchitis 2 7 7 3 1 1 ... 2 8 1 16 Pneumonia ... 1 ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... 1 Bright's Disease ... 2 ... ... ... ... ... 2 ... ... 2 Intestine Disease ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... 1 Liver Disease 1 1 1 ... ... ... 1 1 1 ... 3 Laryngitis 2 1 ... ... 2 1 ... ... ... ... 3 Lung Disease ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 Kidney Disease ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 Hernia 1 ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 Jaundice 1 ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 Throat Disease ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Catarrh ... 1 ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 Diabetes ... 1 ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... 1 Other Diseases ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Dentition 2 ... ... ... 2 ... ... ... ... ... 2 IY.—Developmental Diseases. Premature Birth ... 1 ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 Old Age 3 2 8 ... ... ... ... ... 8 5 13 Marasmus ... 2 ... 2 ... ... ... ... ... ... 2 Atrophy and Debility 1 1 ... 1 ... ... 1 ... ... ... 2 Childbirth ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Inanition 2 1 ... 3 ... ... ... ... ... ... 3 V.— Violent Deaths. Suffocation 1 ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 Other Diseases ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Enteritis ... 1 ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... 1 Thrombus ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... 1 Cyncope ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... 1 35 69 27 32 24 10 11 18 29 7 131 122 ST. JAMES, WESTMINSTER. APPENDIX TO REPORT OF MEDICAL OFFICER OF HEALTH. Table I.—Causes of Death during the Quarter ending Dec. 30th,1882. CAUSES OF DEATH. Golden Square. Berwick Street. Workhouse. Under 1 Year of Age. Above 1 and under 5. Above 5 and under 20. Above 20 and under 40. Above 40 and under 60. Above 60 | and under 80. 80 and upwards. All Ages. I.—Zymotic Diseases. Measles 2 11 ... 2 10 1 ... ... ... ... 13 Scarlatina ... 4 ... ... 4 ... ... ... ... ... 4 Whooping Cough ... 1 ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... 1 Diarrhoea 2 ... ... 1 1 ... ... ... ... ... 2 Typhoid Fever ... 1 ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... 1 Rheumatism ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Enteric Fever ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... 1 Erysipelas ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 1 Croup ... 1 ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 II.—Constitutional Diseases. Phthisis & Consumptn. 7 6 ... ... 2 ... 8 2 1 ... 13 Tabes Mesenterica ... 1 ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... 1 Hemorrhage ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... 1 Apoplexy ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... 1 1 ... 2 Paralysis ... ... 3 ... ... ... ... ... 3 ... 3 Convulsions 2 3 ... 5 ... ... ... ... ... ... 5 III.—Local Diseases. Meningitis ... 1 ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... 1 Heart Disease ... 5 4 ... ... 1 ... 1 7 ... 9 Bronchitis 12 25 11 9 10 3 ... 7 17 2 48 Pneumonia 3 5 ... 3 1 ... 2 2 ... ... 8 Bright's Disease ... 1 1 ... ... ... 1 1 ... ... 2 Liver Disease ... 2 ... ... 1 ... ... 1 ... ... 2 Laryngitis ... 2 ... ... 1 1 ... ... ... ... 2 Kidney Disease ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Bladder Disease ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 1 Lung Disease 3 2 ... ... 2 ... ... 2 1 ... 5 Jaundice ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... 1 Stomach Disease ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Other Diseases ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... IV.—Developmental Diseases. Premature Birth ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Old Age 3 4 5 ... ... ... ... ... 5 7 12 Inanition ... 1 ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 V.— Violent Deaths. Suffocation 1 1 ... 2 ... ... ... ... ... ... 2 Poison, Accidental ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Childbirth 1 ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... 1 Dentition 1 1 ... ... 2 ... ... ... ... ... 2 Other Diseases ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Scrofula ... ... 1 ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... 1 Exhaustion ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... 1 38 84 26 24 39 6 12 21 35 11 148 123 ST. JAMES, WESTMINSTER. APPENDIX TO REPORT OF MEDICAL OFFICER OF HEALTH. Table II.—Cases of Fever, Small Pox, and Diphtheria, coming under the notice of the Sanitary Inspector during the year 1882. Date. Name. Address. No. of Case. Sex. Age. Disease. Supposed Cause. If removed. To where. Result. Remarks. 1882. Jan. 23 Caroline Hill 20, Portland street 1 Female 10 years Scarlet Fever Unknown Not removed Recovered A dispensary case 23 William Tromer 25, Noel street 2 Male 35 years Small Pox Taken from parent Removed Stockwell Hospital Recovered Feb. 10 Mary Ann Cosey 26, King street, Golden square 3 Female 3½ years Scarlet Fever Unknown Removed Stockwell Hospital Recovered 20 Mary Ann McCaseley 173, Wardour street 4 Female 4 years Scarlet Fever Unknown Removed Stockwell Hospital Death Mar. 14 Clarence Endell 21, Sherwood street 5 Male 9 years Scarlet Fever Unknown Removed Stockwell Hospital Recovered 22 Mary Ann Cockley 5, Great Crown court 6 Female 15 years Typhoid Fever Unknown Removed Stockwell Hospital Recovered 24 Alice Holmes 63, Jermyn street 7 Female 7 years Small Pox Unknown Removed Stockwell Hospital Recovered April 9 Emma Cokley 17, Little Windmill street 8 Female 2 years Diphtheria Unknown Not removed ... Death 9 Louisa Caroline Baynes 29, Little Windmill street 9 Female 3 years Diphtheria Unknown Not removed ... Death 11 Adelaide Gilbert 13, Pall Mall 10 Female 26 years Enteric Fever Unknown Not removed ... Death 20 Ellen O'Leary 48, Warwick street 11 Female 2 years Diphtheria Unknown Not removed Death 20 Ann O'Leary 48, Warwick street 12 Female 3½ years Diphtheria Taken from sister Removed Hospital, Great Ormond st. Death May 8 Thomas Robins 40, Great Pulteney street 13 . Male 24 years Small Pox By visiting a patient Removed Stockwell Hospital Recovered Vaccinated 15 Richard Everard 37, Great Windmill street 14 Male 25 years Small Pox Unknown Removed Stockwell Hospital Recovered Vaccinated 24 Alice Holms 137, Oxford street 15 Male 24 years Small Pox Unknown Removed Holloway Hospital Recovered A private case ST. JAMES, WESTMINSTER. APPENDIX TO REPORT OF MEDICAL OFFICER OF HEALTH. Table II.—Cases of Fever, Small Pox, and Diphtheria, coming under the notice of the Sanitary Inspector during the year 1882. Date. Name. Address. No.of Case. Sex. Age. Disease. Supposed Cause. If removed. To where. Result. Remarks. 1882. May 24 Harold "Walter Vass 1, Portland street 16 Male 8 years Enteric Fever Taken at school Not removed ... Death June 6 George Benton 13, Norris street 17 Male 58 years Typhoid Fever Unknown Not removed ... Death 18 Robert Mallett Snooks 239, Oxford street 18 Male 5½ years Diphtheria Unknown Not removed Death 26 William Alfred Flood 11, St. James's market 19 Male 36 years Typhoid Fever Unknown Not removed ... Death A private case July 1 George Henry Cooper 22, Air street 20 Male 11½years Scarlet Fever Unknown Removed Stockwell Hospital Recovered 3 Charles Richard Andrews 24, Sackville street 21 Male 3½years Diphtheria Unknown Not removed Death A private case 11 John Wise 24, Heddon street 22 Male 21 years Typhoid Fever Unknown Removed Stockwell Hospital Death 12 Bennett Croft Chs. Wentworth 3, St. Alban's place 23 Male 23 years Typhoid Fever Unknown Not removed ... Death Aug. 9 George Stephen Mullins 27a, Sackville street 24 Male 3½ years Diphtheria Unknown Removed Great Ormond st Hospital Recovered 9 Charles Francis Mullins 27a, Sackville street 27 Male 2 years Diphtheria From prev's case Removed Great Ormond st Hospital Recovered 9 Horace Ernest Offord 14, Swallow street 28 Male 7 years Diphtheria Unknown Not removed ... Death A private case 14 Rosie Ellen Mary Barry 12, Little Marlboro' street 25 Female 9 years Small Pox Unknown Not removed ... Recovered Vaccinated. A private case 14 James Frederick Barry 12, Little Marlboro' street 26 Male 7 years Small Pox From sister N ot removed ... Recovered Vaccinated. A private case 23 Alexander McG rigor 1, Marlborough row 29 Male 13 years Typhoid Fever Unknown Removed Stockwell Hospital Recovered Oct. 2 Sarah Ann Woolway 9, Ingestre buildings 30 Female 6 years Diphtheria Unknown Not removed ... Death ST. JAMES, WESTMINSTER. APPENDIX TO REPORT OF MEDICAL OFFICER OF HEALTH. Table 11.—Cases of Fever, Small Pox, and Diphtheria, coming under the notice of the Sanitary Inspector during the year 1882. Date. Name. Address. No.of Case. Sex. Age. Disease. Supposed Cause. If removed. To where. Result. Remarks. 1882. Oct. 16 Alexander James 48, Berwick street 31 Male 3 years Scarlet Fever Unknown Not removed ... Death 16 Elizabeth Catteral 3, Ham yard 32 Female 3 years Diphtheria Unknown Not removed ... Death 16 Emma Grace Chapman 44, Rupert street 33 Female 5 years Scarlet Fever Unknown Not removed ... Death A private case 16 Ada Louisa Chapman 44, Rupert street 34 Female 5 years Scarlet Fever Taken from sister Not removed ... Recovered A private case 16 Florence Chapman 44, Rupert street 35 Female 6 years Scarlet Fever Taken from prev's case Not removed ... Recovered A private case 16 Esther Chapman 44, Rupert street 36 Female 27 years Scarlet Fever Taken from prev's case Not removed ... Recovered A private case 27 Frederick Chapman 44, Rupert street 37 Male 30 years Scarlet Fever Taken from prev's case Not removed ... Recovered A private case 30 Emily Miller 10, Green's court 38 Female 1 year Typhoid Fever From drinking foul water Not removed ... Death A private case 30 Mary May Grance 2, Richmond street 39 Female 4 years Scarlet Fever From cases at 44, Rupert st. Not removed • • • Death A private case Nov. 13 Mary Golda Friend 9, Bentinck street 40 Female 1½ years Scarlet Fever Unknown Not removed ... Death 17 Mary Alice Blackburn 165, Wardour street 41 Female 1½ years Scarlet Fever Unknown Not removed ... Recovered A private case 20 Fanny Hall 7, Wells street 42 Female 48 years Enteric Fever Unknown Not removed ... Death A private case Dec. 8 John Blackburn 165, Wardour street 43 Male 5 years Scarlet Fever Taken from sister Not removed ... Recovered A private case 19 Sarah Ann Humpage 11, Marshall street 44 Female 12 years Typhoid Fever Unknown Removed Stockwell Hospital Death 126 ST. JAMES, WESTMINSTER. APPENDIX TO REPORT OF MEDICAL OFFICER OF HEALTH. TABLE III.—SANITARY INSPECTOR'S WORK DURING THE YEAR 1882. NUISANCES REMOVED OR ABATED. First Quarter. Second Quarter. Third Quarter. Fourth Quarter. For the whole year. Animals, nuisance from abated Areas, front, limewhited 4 63 22 14 103 ,, back, „ 3 45 17 12 77 ,, front, paving of, cleansed ... ... 2 3 5 „ repaired ... ... ... 1 1 „ back, cleansed 2 ... ... ... 2 „ „ deodorised „ repaired ... ... 1 1 Basements, walls and ceilings whitewashed 1 10 8 1 20 Beds disinfected in Fraser's chamber, in lots of 20 9 5 8 42 „ with sulphur 1 ... 1 Bedclothes disinfected in Fraser's chamber, in lots of 75 39 23 38 175 „ with fluid and washed ... 12 12 Butts or cisterns cleansed ... 2 3 3 8 „ new ones furnished ... 1 6 2 9 repaired ... 1 3 ... 4 covers furnished to 1 6 3 1 11 apparatus repaired ... ... ... ... furnished with warming pipes ... ... 2 2 Cesspools cleansed out and filled up Corpses removed, by order 4 9 11 24 Courts limewhited ... 2 ... ... 2 Dilapidations, interior, made good • •• 1 1 2 Drains of 9-inch pipes, new ... ... ... 2 ... 2 „ 6 „ 1 3 2 3 9 „ unstopped and cleansed 5 1 4 9 19 „ repaired 1 7 5 2 15 „ traps furnished to 1 12 10 6 29 Drainage matter removed ... ... ... ... ... Dustbins cleansed 37 61 30 22 150 „ new ones furnished 2 2 3 2 9 „ repaired ... 4 2 6 12 „ doors furnished to 1 ... 1 ... 1 ,, covers furnished to 1 ... ... ... 1 Fouled matter deodorised and removed... • . . 1 . . . ... 1 Furniture disinfected and washed 10 ... 10 Gullies, private, new... ... 1 ... ... 1 „ repaired . . . 1 1 ... 2 127 ST. JAMES, WESTMINSTER. APPENDIX TO REPORT OF MEDICAL OFFICER OF HEALTH. TABLE OF SANITARY INSPECTOR'S WORK—continued. NUISANCES REMOVED OR ABATED. First Quarter. Second Quarter. Third Quartor. Fourth Quarter. For the whole year. Gullies unstopped and cleansed ... ... 1 ... 1 Gutters cleansed ... 1 ... 7 8 „ repaired ... ... ... 3 3 Houses furnished with a full supply of water 2 2 1 5 10 „ cleansed and painted throughout ... 6 ... ... 6 Kitchens, front walls, and ceilings whitewashed ... 27 12 7 46 back „ 4 50 18 10 82 „ occupied contrary to law, cleared 1 ... ... ... 1 „ floors of, repaired ... ... ... ... 1 Lead flats or gutters, cleansed ... 1 ... ... 1 Lumber removed ... 2 ... ... 2 Mattresses disinfected with sulphur ... ... 1 ... 1 „ „ in Fraser's chamber 17 12 14 7 40 Meat unfit for the food of man, destroyed ... ... ... 1 1 Miscellaneous articles disinfected in Fraser's chamber, in lots of 192 57 24 42 315 Miscellaneous articles destroyed 4 ... ... ... 4 Passages, main walls, and ceilings whitewashed 3 60 22 4 89 „ floors of, washed 4 6 4 3 17 ,, basement walls, and ceilings whitewashed 5 50 15 9 79 „ paint work of, washed ... ... 5 6 11 „ floors repaired ... ... 2 ... 2 Pillows disinfected in Fraser's chamber 36 21 22 19 98 Rain water pipes, new ones ... 1 ... 1 2 „ „ repaired ... 2 ... ... 2 „ „ unstopped and cleansed ... 1 1 ... 2 „ „ disconnected from drains ... ... 1 ... 1 Rooms, walls, and ceilings whitewashed and cleansed 11 122 71 23 ... „ disinfected 10 8 4 5 27 „ paint work of, washed 1 6 ... 4 11 „ floors of. washed 1 ... ... ... 1 ., overcrowded, cleared of occupants 1 1 ... ... 2 Rubbish, foul, removed 4 10 5 11 30 Service pipes, repaired ... ... 1 ... 1 „ new ones furnished ... ... 7 ... 7 Shops, walls, and ceilings whitewashed ... 2 2 1 5 „ paint work of, washed ... 1 ... ... ... Sink stones, traps furnished to 1 ... ... ... 1 „ abolished ... 1 ... ... 1 ,, waste pipes furnished ... ... ... 2 2 „ „ of, trapped ... 2 ... ... ... 128 ST. JAMES, WESTMINSTER. APPENDIX TO REPORT OF MEDICAL OFFICER OF HEALTH. TABLE OF SANITARY INSPECTOR'S WORK—continued. NUISANCES REMOVED OR ABATED. First Quarter. Second Quarter. Third Quarter. Fourth Quarter. For the whole year. Smoke, nuisance from, abated 3 ... ... 1 4 Stairs, main, paintwork of, washed ... 1 6 7 14 „ basement steps of, washed ... 2 ... ... 2 „ „ and repaired „ „ paintwork of, washed ... ... 4 ... 4 „ „ walls and ceilings whitewashed 5 83 20 12 120 „ main, whitewashed 3 62 22 4 91 „ „ steps washed 1 6 2 3 12 Urinals cleansed 5 ... ... ... 5 Urinals, new ones furnished ... ... 1 ... 1 „ water furnished to ... 1 ... 1 2 „ limewhited ... 1 1 1 3 Vaults, limewhited 1 30 15 3 50 Waterpipes repaired 2 ... ... ... 2 Washhouses, limewhited 1 7 4 3 15 ,, paving of, repaired ... . . . ... 1 1 Water closets, limewhited 13 99 35 13 168 furnished with water 6 23 21 25 75 ,, apparatus furnished to ... 2 2 . . . 4 ,, „ repaired 2 12 24 38 „ pans new 1 6 5 4 16 „ unstopped and cleansed 8 6 9 12 35 foul ones cleansed 9 22 6 4 31 ,, traps furnished to 2 5 5 4 16 ,, seats new 1 1 3 2 7 „ „ repaired ... 1 ... 1 2 „ raisers new 1 ... ... 1 2 „ floors new 2 2 2 1 7 „ „ repaired ... 1 1 2 „ doors new ... ... ... 1 1 „ cleansed generally ... 2 ... ... 2 „ soil pipes, new ones furnished 1 ... 2 ... 3 „ „ repaired ... ... ... 1 1 „ light and ventilation iu^nroved in 1 ... ... 2 2 „ repaired generally ... ... 1 3 4 „ new ones furnished „ water pipes repaired 2 ... ... 3 5 „ deodorised „ cleansed generally 17 1 2 ••• 29 Water stopped from running as a nuisance 1 ... ... ... 1 129 ST. JAMES, WESTMINSTER. APPENDIX TO REPORT OF MEDICAL OFFICER OF HEALTH. TABLE OF SANITARY INSPECTORS WORK—continued. NUISANCES REMOVED OR ABATED. First Quarter. Second Quarter. Third Quarter. Fourth Quarter. For the whole year. Wearing apparel disinfected in chamber, in lots of 226 72 38 36 „ „ with sulphur ... ... 10 ... 10 Workshops, walls and ceilings whitewashed 2 1 2 1 6 Yards, walls of, whitewashed 6 92 27 10 136 „ paving of, repaired 5 2 6 3 16 „ „ cleansed 15 1 3 3 22 ,, „ deodorised STABLES. Manure removed by notices 5 850 180 341 17 BAKEHOUSES. Walls and ceilings whitewashed ... 1 ... 10 11 Water closets in bakehouses abolished ... 1 ... ... 1 Bubbish, removed from ... 1 ... ... 1 Lumber, „ ... 1 ... ... 1 Store rooms, whitewashed ... ... ... 7 7 Bedrooms, „ ... ... ... 2 2 Yards, walls of ,, ... ... ... 3 3 Water closets, „ ... ... ... 4 4 „ „ water furnished to ... ... ... 1 „ „ pans of, cleansed ... ... ... 2 2 Basement, stairs whitewashed ... ... ... 2 2 ,, passages whitewashed ... ... ... 1 1 Areas, whitewashed ... ... ... ... 2 2 Vaults ... ... • • • 3 3 E 130 ST. JAMES, WESTMINSTER. APPENDIX TO REPORT OP MEDICAL OFFICER OF HEALTH. SUMMARY OF WORK BY SANITARY INSPECTOR DURING THE YEAR 1882. NUISANCES REMOVED OR ABATED. First Quarter. Second Quarter. Third Quarter. Fourth Quarter. For the whole year. Number of Nuisances removed 803 2111 853 876 „ complaints made 32 38 34 26 ,, notices served 46 99 74 51 „ „ attended to 17 46 51 46 „ small-pox cases visited 2 3 2 ,, scarlet fever cases visited 4 ... 1 8 „ typhoid fever cases visited 1 3 4 1 „ diphtheria cases visited • • • 5 5 „ beds disinfected 20 9 5 8 „ bedclothing disinfected 75 39 23 38 „ furniture disinfected 10 ... ... ... 10 „ miscellaneous articles disinfected 192 57 24 42 „ wearing apparel disinfected 226 72 38 39 ,, mattresses 17 12 14 7 „ pillows 36 21 22 19 „ rooms 10 8 4 5 ,, articles obtained for analysis 59 68 15 „ corpses received into mortuary 4 9 11 37 „ underground rooms reported to district surveyor ... 6 ••• ... 6 JAMES H. MORGAN, Sanitary Inspector. EDWIN BROOKS, Assistant Sanitary Inspector, and Superintendent of the Mortuary. Vestry Hall, Piccadilly, January 16th, 1883. 131 ST. JAMES, WESTMINSTER. APPENDIX TO REPORT OP MEDICAL OFFICER OF HEALTH. Particulars of Drains reconstructed, cleansed, &c., during the year 1882. 1, Angel Court. Main and branch drains unstopped, cleansed and repaired. July 13th, 1882. 6, Arundell Street. Branch drain reconstructed with 4-inch pipes. November 10th, 1882. 13, Broad Street. Branch drain unstopped, cleansed and repaired. May 9th, 1882. 6, Bentinck Street. Main drain reconstructed with 9 inch pipes, branch drain with 6-inch pipes. July 7th, 1882. 1, Cambridge Street. Main and branch drains unstopped, cleansed and repaired. May 12th, 1882. 12, Cambridge Street. Branch drain unstopped, cleansed and repaired. December 8th, 1882. 3, Great Vine Street. Main and branch drains unstopped, cleansed and repaired. April 26th, 1882. 22, Little Windmill Street. Branch drain unstopped and cleansed. Jul}7 19th, 1882. 42, Jermyn Street. Main drain reconstructed with 9-inch pipes, branch drain reconstructed with 6-inch pipes. December 13th, 1882. 47, Marshall Street. Main and branch drains unstopped, cleansed. June 6th, 1882, and again June 17th. 5, Marshall Street. Branch drain unstopped, cleansed and repaired. October 17th, 1882. 11, Marshall Street. Branch drain reconstructed with 6-inch pipes. November 21st, 1882. 132 54, Marshall Street. Main drain unstopped, cleansed and repaired. December 2nd, 1882. 2, Pulteney Place. Branch drain unstopped and cleansed. April 11th, 1882. 21, Poland Street. Main drain reconstructed with 9-inch pipes, branch drain reconstructed with 6-inch pipes. April 15th, 1882. 18, Poland Street. Main drain reconstructed with 6-inch pipes, branch drain reconstructed with 4-inch pipes. September 15th, 1882. 58, Poland Street. Branch drain unstopped and cleansed. December 8th, 1882. 59, Poland Street. Main drain unstopped and cleansed. December 9th, 1882. 48, Regent Street. Branch drain reconstructed with 6-inch pipes. April 13th, 1882. 90, Regent Street. Branch drain repaired. June 6th, 1882. 122, Regent Street. Main drain reconstructed with 9-inch pipes, branch drain reconstructed with 6-inch pipes. August 10th, 1882. 15, Sherwood Street. Branch drain unstopped, cleansed and repaired. June 16th, 1882. 6, South Row. Main and branch drains unstopped, cleansed and repaired. June 30th, 1882. 7, South Row. Branch drain unstopped, cleansed and repaired, July 27th, 1882, and again on November 6th, 1882. 189, Wardour Street. Main drain reconstructed with 9-inch pipes. April 12th, 1882. JAMES H. MORGAN, Sanitary Inspector. Vestry Hall, Piccadilly, January 16th, 1883. 133 ST. JAMES, WESTMINSTER. APPENDIX TO REPORT OF MEDICAL OFFICER OF HEALTH. Underground Rooms or Cellars cleared of Occupants, under the 103rd Section of the Act 18 and 19 Victoria, cap. 120. 4 Archer street 1 Marlborough row, two rooms 15 „ 2„ 1 Angel court, Gt. Windmill street 3 „ 4 Angel court, Gt. Windmill street, two rooms 4 „ 5 „ 5 Angel court, Gt. Windmill street 6 „ 6 „ 7„ 8 „ 9 ,, ,, two rooms 7 Bentinck street 10 „ 10 „ 10 Marshall street 16 Berwick street 25 „ 18 „ 29 ,, „ 26 „ 44 „ 28 „ 47 „ 29 ,, ,, 8 Marylebone street 30 „ „ 2 Noel street 36 „ 5 „ „ 43 ,, ,, 18 New street 45 „ 11 Peter street 49 „ 20 „ „ two rooms 50 „ 21 „ „ 56 „ 22 ,, ,, ,, 58 „ 26 „ „ 66A „ „ 11 Portland street 89 „ 15 „ 95 ,, ,, 4 Queen's Head court 50 Brewer street 5 „ 4 Broad street 15 Queen street, Gt. Windmill street 1 Cambridge street 31 Rupert street 6 Carnaby street 2 Rupert street, upper 5 Cross street 7 „ 3 Crown court, Great 1 Smith's court 6 „ 2 „ 3 Cross street 3 „ 1 Dufour's place 6 South row 9 „ 7 „ 3 Edward street 7 Sherwood street 6 Francis street 16 .„ 7 Green's court 3 Silver place 3 Heddon court 8 Windmill street, Little, two rooms 6 ,, „ 7 „ 10 „ 8 „ 11 „ 10 Heddon street 14 „ 9 Hopkins street, two rooms 22 „ 10 „ 23 „ 11 „ 24 „ 1 Kemp's court 28 „ 2 „ 29 ,, 4 „ 32 ,, ,, ,, „ ,, 7 King street, Golden square 31 „ 8 „ 24 Windmill street, Great 20 King street, Golden sq., two rooms 30 „ „ „ 21 King street, Golden square 14 West street 26 2 15 „ „ JAMES H. MORGAN, Sanitary Inspector. Vestry Hall, Piccadilly. 184 FOOD ANALYSIS. SALE OF FOOD AND DRUGS ACT, 1875. REPORT UPON ARTICLES ANALYSED DURING THE YEAR 1882. MADE TO THE James, Ht^tnunstyr, BT JAS. EDMUNDS, M.D., M.R.C.P. Lond., F.R.M.S., F.C.S., Medical Officer of Health and Public Analyst for St. James's, Westminster. Rev. Sir and Gentlemen, Daring the year 1882, under the provisions of the Sale of Food and Drugs Act, 1875, 140 samples were examined, of which 138 were procured for examination by the Vestry Officers, and two were submitted by a parishioner. Of these samples 47 were found to be mixtures coming more or less under the term adulterated. The mixtures comprised mustard mixed with starch ; cocoa mixed with starch and sugar ; and coffee mixed with chicory. In several cases specimens of milk were found to be probably watered, and peremptory warnings were sent in such cases. In no case was any poisonous ingredient discovered. 1 have the honour to remain, Rev. Sir and Gentlemen, Your obedient servant, JAMES EDMUNDS. 135 ST. JAMES, WESTMINSTER. APPENDIX TO REPORT OF PUBLIC ANALYST, SHOWING THE NAMES AND NUMBER OF ARTICLES OBTAINED FOR ANALYSIS DURING THE YEAR 1882. NUMBER OF ARTICLES OBTAINED. First Quarter. Second Quarter- Third Quarter. Fourth Quarter. For the whole year. Mustard 30 5 ... . . . 35 Pepper 30 5 ... ... 35 Cocoa ... 23 ... ... 23 Coffee ... 35 ... ... 35 Milk ... ... 15 ... 15 JAMES H. MORGAN, Sanitary Inspector. Vestry Hall, Piccadilly, January 16th, 1883,