Metropolis Local Management Act. BOARD OF WORKS for the ST. SAVIOUR'S DISTRICT. THE TWENTY-NINTH ANNUAL REPORT, BEING FOR THE YEAR 1884—85. LONDON: PRINTED BY H. SILVERLOCK, 92, BLACKFRIARS ROAD. S.E. mdccclxxxv. St. Saviour's District Board of Works. LIST OF MEMBERS OF STANDING COMMITTEES. PAVING&GENERAL PURPOSES COMMITTEE. RIDER, T. F., Chairman. BACK, USHER BAXTER, FREDERICK ECKSTEIN, WILLIAM GOODWIN, ARNOLD HALE, JOSIAH HAY, H. C. HENLEY, CHARLES KEITH, ALEX. J. MILLS, JOHN PALMER, JOHN SANITARY COMMITTEE. HUNT, RICHARD, Chairman. BROWN, JOHN COOPER, JAS. GILSON, R. A. GRANTHAM, A. G. HAWKINS, JAMES H. SINCLAIR, JAMES UMNEY, CHARLES WILLSON, HENRY SEWERS COMMITTEE. BOULDEN, ALBERT, Chairman. BIDMEAD, WILLIAM BOWERS, R. W. GILHAM, GEORGE JOSOLYNE, WALTER S. HAGGIS, A. H. HOPKINS, WILLIAM NEWTON, GEORGE PHILLIPS, JAMES SANDEMAN, FREDERICK FINANCE COMMITTEE. COUCHMAN, ALFRED, Chairman. ANGUS, WILLIAM GREGORY, HENRY GREENWOOD, CHAS., Senr. PELLS, HENRY REMNANT, A. J. RIDLEY, HENRY SLATTER, WILLIAM SMALL, W. H. St. Saviour's District Board of Works. REPORT OF PROCEEDINGS OF THE BOARD FOR THE YEAR 1884-85, BY THE CLERK, SURVEYOR, MEDICAL OFFICER, AND ANALYST; Also Account in Abstract of Sums received and expended by the Board during the same period. Printed in accordance with Section 198 of the Metropolis Local Management Act, (18 and 19 Vict., cap. 120,) and ordered to be circulated among the Inhabitants of the District. London (City) and Southwark Subway. At the date of publication of the last Annual Report of this Board, the London (City) and Southwark Subway Bill had, notwithstanding the opposition of various local authorities, passed through Committee of the House of Commons, who reported that the preamble had been proved and gave their sanction to the undertaking, subject to the insertion of clauses requiring a fuller description of the proposed Subway and mode of working the traffic; the certification of the line as a tramway by the Board of Trade before being opened for traffic; the impoundment of the deposit money as security for the completion of the work; the restoration, at the expense of the promoters, of the roadways to be disturbed, and other provisions for the protection of the public through the local authorities. The 33rd Section, enabling the promoters to stop up streets, either temporarily or permanently, had been withdrawn with their consent, but the 34th Section A2 4 (altered to No. 35 in the Act), authorising the construction of temporary shafts in the Borough High Street, for the purposes of the excavations, remained, the Engineer of the Company being of opinion that openings of the kind could not be altogether dispensed with, and as these constituted one, if not the chief, ground of objection entertained by the Board to the passing of the Bill, they resolved to oppose it in the House of Lords. The Committee of the Upper House to whom the Bill was entrusted consisted of Lord Romilly, Lord Lamington, and the Earls of Clarendon, Hopetoun, and Kintore, who, at the outset, intimated that they did not wish to hear any statement of facts as to the alleged inconvenience which would be occasioned to the district. Mr. Killick, however, on behalf of the Borough Market Trustees, gave evidence of the number of foot passengers passing over London Bridge to the Railway Stations, and down the Borough High Street; and Mr. Rider, on behalf of the Board, as to the state of the neighbourhood generally; and, at the suggestion of Counsel, photographs, prepared by Mr. Medland, were put in, for the purpose of indicating to their Lordships the crowded state of the Borough High Street on market mornings. Mr. O'Hara, the junior Counsel to the promoters, although in his opening speech he had offered to do anything he could to meet the wishes of the Board in regard to the number of shafts, declined to listen to any overtures on this subject; but the Committee, nevertheless, unanimously agreed that one shaft only should be sunk in the district, and in this respect an important concession has been obtained. Efforts were made by Counsel, on behalf of the Board, to obtain the insertion of clauses impounding the deposit if the works were not completed and opened to the public within a given time, and to prevent their being commenced or undertaken until a certain proportion of the capital had been bona fide subscribed and allotted, but in this he was unsuccessful, and the Bill was read a third time on the 11th July, 1884. Although not efficacious to prevent the passing of the measure, as had been hoped, the opposition of the Board has resulted in important concessions and alterations, which, in the event of the project being carried out, will give the Board considerable powers of 5 control over the proceedings of the Company, the 40th Section being as follows:—"There shall be but one temporary shaft or opening in the roads or streets of the district. Unless the Company and the District Board shall otherwise agree, such shaft or opening shall be so constructed as not to hinder or obstruct the traffic of the roads or streets more than may be absolutely necessary; and the Company shall, unless the Company and the District Board shall otherwise agree, at all times keep open and uninterrupted for public traffic, an aggregate clear width of thirty-two feet of roadway and eighteen feet of footway, and shall, at their own expense, shore up and put proper hoardings so as to prevent such shaft or opening from causing any danger to the traffic in the roads or streets. Such shaft or opening shall not be of a greater length (including the inclosure thereof) than one hundred feet." The same Company have since introduced a Bill to the House of Commons having for its object the construction of a similar Subway from Clapham to the "Elephant and Castle," to join the one above referred to, but, after being read a second time, it was withdrawn by the promoters. South Eastern Railway (Various Powers) Bill. The South Eastern Railway Company have, by their Various Powers Bill, Session 1885, applied to Parliament for, inter alia, an extension for two years of the time limited by their New Lines and Widenings Act, 1882, for the acquisition of lands in the Parishes of St. Saviour and St. George-the-Martyr, and which will expire on the 18th August next. An extension of time appearing to the Board to be unavoidable if the works were to be carried out at all, they did not consider it necessary to incur the expense of opposing the Bill, which, at the date of this Report, has been read a second time in the House of Commons. Telegraph and Telephone Wires. The Select Committee of the House of Commons appointed to consider the law relating to the control over Telegraph, Telephone, and other Wires having intimated that they would be prepared to receive evidence from the local authorities, this Board appointed Mr. Rider, Mr. Goodwin, and their Surveyor (Mr. Norrish) to appear as witnesses on their behalf. The Board had previously had under consideration a number of suggestions for the regulation of overhead wires, but, having regard to the danger thereof, had 6 come to the conclusion that under no circumstances should such wires be permitted, but that all wires, whether for telegraph or telephonic purposes, should be laid underground. The Select Committee, however, after hearing a number of witnesses on behalf of the postal authorities and others, reported that, in their opinion, the danger of overhead wires had been greatly exaggerated, and that the accidents which had been proved in evidence were few and insignificant. At the same time they expressed an opinion that the probable development of the telephonic system made it desirable that there should be some change in the law relating to control over wires of the kind, and agreed to report in favour of their continuance, subject to the Metropolitan Board of Works being constituted the authority for the Metropolis, with power to make bye-laws for their inspection and regulation by the local authorities. The Board also had under consideration a Bill promoted by the United Telephone Company, some of the provisions of which were of a most objectionable character, e.g. enabling the Company to carry lines at the low elevation of fifteen feet over any land, and at three feet only above the roof of any building, without consent on the part of owners. A strong representation was made to the Metropolitan Board, urging them to oppose the Bill, and the same has since been withdrawn. Railway Rates and Charges Bills. In February last the attention of the Board was directed by the Corporation of the City of London to Bills, nine in number, introduced to Parliament by the London, Chatham, and Dover, the London, Brighton, and South Coast, and other Railway Companies having termini in the Metropolis, with the object of establishing a new tariff of charges for the conveyance of traffic and merchandize on their respective lines. Under the Acts of Parliament at present in force a maximum rate is fixed for the conveyance of various classes of goods, which rate includes payment for station accommodation and the services known as "terminals," other than unloading and cartage, and it is proposed by the present Bills, which are almost identical in their terms, to establish a new scale of charges, which, it is generally considered, will have the effect of raising the rates, besides authorising the making of a special charge for the "terminals" and station accommodation. 7 The Board, being of opinion that the legislation proposed would operate injuriously, by imposing additional burdens on the trade and industries of the country, lodged a petition against the Bills in order to assist the Corporation in their opposition thereto. Shortly afterwards, Mr. Chamberlain, the President of the Board of Trade, consented to appoint a Special Commission of Inquiry, before which the Railway Companies have been heard, and it is questionable whether any further progress will be made with the measures in this Session of Parliament. River Thames. At the request of the Vestry of St. George, Hanover Square, the Board in January last appointed delegates to attend a Conference of Vestries and District Boards of Works on the system of discharging Metropolitan Sewage into the Thames, and the alleged silting up of that river in consequence, viz., Messrs. Goodwin, Hale, Hunt, and Rider, who attended several meetings of the delegates, and on the 17th March the following resolution was passed:—"That this Meeting is of opinion that the evils of the present system of discharging the Metropolitan Sewage are such as to require a remedy, and that it is in the public interest that a remedy should be applied with the least possible delay" Redistribution Bill. The Parliamentary Elections (Redistribution) Bill, introduced by the Government as a sequel to the Act for the Extension of the Franchise, was considered by the Board at an early period of the Session, the Clerk having in January last reported upon the subject, and a communication having been received about the same time from the St. Olave's Board of Works respecting it. By the Fourth Schedule of the Bill it was proposed to establish, in lieu of the ancient Borough of Southwark, three new Boroughs, to be named respectively Bermondsey, Rotherhithe, and Southwark, the latter consisting of the Parishes of St. George-the-Martyr and Christchurch only, to the exclusion of St. Saviour's, which last, together with the St. Olave's District, was to be incorporated with and form part of Kotherhithe. The St. Olave's Board, in the communication referred to, while expressing approval of the division of the Borough into three single member constituencies, objected to the proposed names and areas, and recommended that the new Boroughs should be constituted and named as under:— 8 East Southwark So much of the Parishes of St. Olave, St. John, St. Saviour, Bermondsey, and Rotherhithe as lies to the East of the Borough High Street and North of the South Eastern Railway. West Southwark The Parish of Christchurch and so much of the Parishes of St. Saviour and St. George-the-Martyr as lie to the West of the Borough High Street. Bermondsey The Parish of St. Thomas and so much of the Parishes of St. Olave, St. John, St. Saviour, Bermondsey, and Rotherhithe as lie to the East of the Borough High Street and South of the South Eastern Railway. Or as an alternative:— East Southivark St. Olave District, Parish of Rotherhithe, and the ith Ward of the Parish of Bermondsey. West Southwark Parish of St. Saviour, including the Clink Liberty, Parish of Christchurch, and 1st and 2nd Wards of the Parish of St. George-the-Martyr. Bermondsey 1st, 2nd, and 3rd Wards of the Parish of Bermondsey, and 3rd Ward of the Parish of St. George-the-Martyr. After careful consideration by a Committee of the Board, it was resolved to agree with the second of the two alternative propositions, subject to a slight alteration in the nomenclature whereby the first of the two suggested divisions would be named Rotherhithe instead of "East Southwark," and the second Southwark instead of "West Southwark," and to protest against the division of the ancient Borough in manner proposed in the Bill. It was further resolved to address a communication to the Prime Minister, the President of the Local Government Board, the Members of Parliament for the Borough and East Surrey, and the various local authorities, setting forth the objections entertained by this Board to the proposal, and urging the Government to take the new Boroughs in question out of the Fourth Schedule, and appoint a Special Boundary Commission to inquire into and hear evidence upon the subject. Letters were accordingly addressed to Mr. Gladstone, to Sir Charles Dilke (who had charge of the Bill in the House of Commons), the several Members of Parliament, and to 9 the local Vestries, setting forth the grounds of objection entertained by this Board to the proposal, and which were as under:— The St. Saviour's portion of the Borough of Southwark is of very great antiquity and comprises the ancient Priory Church of St. Mary Overie, the Parishes of St. Mary Magdalene and St. Margaret-onthe-hill, and the Clink or Bishop of Winchester's Liberty. The Priory Church, which, at the time of the dissolution of the Monasteries in the reign of King Henry the VIII., had been valued at the sum of £624 6s. 6d. (a), was surrendered to that monarch on the 21th October, 1539. Shortly afterwards a sum of money was subscribed by the inhabitants of the Borough, Gardiner, Bishop of Winchester, "putting to his helping hand," (b) and it was purchased back from the King; and, by Act of Parliament, the 32nd, Ilenry the VIII. cap. 15, the two Parishes of St. Mary Magdalene and St. Margaret were constituted one Parish under the name of St. Saviour, Southwark. Thus the existing Parish may be said to have been founded and established at the expense of the inhabitants of the Borough. By the constitution of the new Boroughs as proposed its connection with the ancient Borough will cease; it will be subordinated to an outlying Parish with which it has no connection whatever, and the name "Southwark" will be applied to the neighbouring Parishes of Christchurch and St. George-the-Martyr only. An injustice will thereby be done to St. Saviour's, and its historical associations and traditions wholly disregarded. The Parish of Christchurch, until the latter part of the seventeenth century, formed part of St. Saviour's, and is still united with it for the purposes of the District Board of Works under the Metropolis Local Management Act, the interests of the two Parishes being largely identified. The Parish of Rotherhithe, which will assume the title, is distant more than a mile from the nearest part of St. Saviour's, and is wholly separated from it and the other portion of the proposed Borough by the northern extremity of the Parish of Bermondsey (c) which intervenes to the depth of half a mile. (а) Stow, confirmed by Dugdale. Speed cites the amount at £656 10s., a large sum in those days. (b) Ibid. (Survay.) (c) Known as Bermondsey Ward, No. 4. Bermondsey and Rotherhithe formed no part of the Borough of Southwark until the passing of the Reform Act of 1832, B 10 The name Rotherhithe, therefore, applied to St. Saviour's will be inappropriate and misleading. The trading and commercial interests of the two districts are wholly separate and distinct, and might be better dealt with by separate representation. The combination for electoral purposes of two districts wholly detached from each other, and having no interests in common, will be unsatisfactory and attended with great inconvenience. There is only one other instance of the kind in the Metropolis, namely (d) of Parishes or Districts wide apart and totally unconnected, parochially or otherwise, being amalgamated in manner proposed, and in the case of Rotherhithe it is thought to be the result of some error or misconception on the part of the Parliamentary draughtsman who drew up the Bill. The anomaly or incongruity might be avoided by the a loption of the boundaries and titles suggested in the above resolutions; the desired numerical proportions would still be observed, and the new Boroughs rendered more compact and homogeneous. The Board, in co-operation with St. Olave's, also addressed a Petition to the House of Commons, reiterating their objections and praying "that the Bill might be amended in such manner as to secure a more satisfactory division of the Borough, having regard to the retention of its name to coherent and connected areas, and to the pursuits and the equalization of the population in the respective areas." Meanwhile the attention of the public had been directed by the newspaper press, and at public meetings to the anomaly of the proposed arrangement, as well as to the absurd shape of the new so-called Borough of Southwark, which was compared to "a hatchet with a block attached to the top of the blade;" Sir Charles Dilke, from whom a very favorable reply had been received to the communication addressed to him, admitted in the House of Commons that the Bill was open to amendment, and it was generally expected that some alteration would be made. The lourth Schedule was reached some time in March last, and Mr. (d) Westminster, which is formed by combining the Parish of St. James, Westminster, with the District of St. Margaret and St. John's. As to the detached portion of Chelsea at Kensal New Town it belongs to and is part of the Parish. 11 Raises, the Member for Cambridge University, who had taken a prominent and active part in procuring a series of amendments to the Bill, moved that the new Boroughs for Southwark should be struck out of it; to this Sir Ciiarles Dilke readily assented, and subsequently he consented to the restoration of the ancient Borough and its insertion in the third Schedule as "a Borough to be divided into wards, and to have three members, each ward returning a member." On the 31st March an official announcement was made that Lieut.-Col. Jones, R.E., one of the Boundary Commissioners, would hold a meeting at the Vestry Hall, Borough Road, on Wednesday, the 8th April, for the purpose of hearing objections to the scheme, and also that the new wards would be as under:— West Division (Population, 67,920). St. Saviours Board of Works District, Wards Nos. 1 and 2 of the Parish of St. George-the-Martyr. East Division (Population, 69,489). St. Olave's Board of Works District, with the Parish of Rotherhithe, and No. 4 Ward of the Parish of Bermondsey. Bermondsey Division (Population, 84,537). Wards 1, 2, and 3 of the Parish of Bennondsey, and No. 3 Ward of the Parish of St. George-the-Martyr. A commission of inquiry was held accordingly, the Vestries of Bermondsey, Rotherhithe, and St. George-the-Martyr, who strongly objected to any departure from the original scheme, being largely represented. Mr. Rider, as chairman of the committee to whom the matter had been referred, attended on behalf of the Board, together with Mr. Haggis, Mr. Sinclair, and others. Mr. Haggis also appeared on behalf of the Yestry of Christchurch, and handed in, as did Mr. Greenwood, for the Vestry of St. Saviour's, a resolution, expressing approval of the present scheme, which, it will be observed, was substantially the same as the one which had been approved and adopted by the Board. Numerous political associations were likewise represented, and considerable interest was manifested in the proceedings. The inquiry did not, however, result in any change, save the substitution, at the request of the parties interested, of the name "Rotherhithe Division" for East Southwark, to which no objection was offered. Thus amended, B2 12 the Bill has passed the House of Commons, and is now before the Lords. Improvements The improvement in Red Cross Place, mentioned in the last Annual Report of this Board, has been completed, and, as the result of further negotiations with Mr. Thomas Pink, a similar improvement is now being carried out in Adam's Place, in the same locality, whereby the thoroughfare will be enlarged from a narrow pathway to a street 25 feet in width. The cost of this improvement, exclusive of any drainage works that may be required, and of making good the pavements, will be £350, towards which it is expected that the Metropolitan Board of Works will contribute one-half. An improvement has also been effected by setting back the line of frontage of premises belonging to Mr. Richard White, on the south side of Stoney Street, Borough Market, at a cost of £71, towards which the Metropolitan Board have contributed a moiety. School Board Expenditure. From time to time during the course of the year communications have been received from local authorities protesting against the increased expenditure of the School Board for London, and, in April last, a letter was received from the Yestry of St. James, Westminster, forwarding printed copies of a Statement compiled under their direction, in which the various items of expenditure were critically examined and compared with the cost of education in other parts of the country, and requesting this Board to appoint delegates to attend a conference which it was proposed to hold at the Mansion House, in the City of London, on the 27th of that month. The Board appointed Messrs. Rider, Baxter, and Haggis as their representatives accordingly, and at the meeting, which was held on the 27th April, under the presidency of the Lord Mayor, the following Resolutions were passed:— 1.—" That in the opinion of this Conference the administration of the School Board for London has not produced results commensurate with the vast expenditure of the Board; that the present cost of maintenance of the London Board Schools is excessive, whether compared with the rate of expenditure by the Board in 1873, or with the expenditure of other Boards in England and Wales, or with the expenditure of the managers of Voluntary Schools in London; that in the cost of 13 administration and some other respects, the expenditure of the Board will admit of large reductions without impeding the work of popular elementary education in the Metropolis; and that the Board be urged to reduce its expenditure accordingly." 2.—"That the various Rating Authorities in the Metropolis be invited to call the attention of the Ratepayers in their several districts, in such manner as they may deem best, to the facts referred to in the foregoing resolution, and to the paramount necessity of securing and supporting at the forthcoming election of the School Board, candidates of administrative ability pledged to carry out the provisions of the Elementary Education Acts with a due regard to economy." 3.—"That the chairman be requested to sign, on behalf of the Conference, a Petition to the House of Commons for the appointment of a Select Committee to inquire into the expenditure of the School Board for London." 4.—"That the several Vestries and District Boards of Works in the Metropolis be also requested to Petition for the appointment of a Select Committee by the House of Commons to inquire into the expenditure of the School Board for London." This Board concurred with the above resolutions on their being submitted to them, and directed that a Petition, in form supplied by the Honorary Secretary of the Conference, should be presented, as under: — "To the Honorable the Commons of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland, in Parliament assembled. "The humble Petition of the Board of Works for the St. Saviour's District, under their Common Seal, sheweth— "That your Petitioners are required by law to raise the sums of money assessed from time to time by the School Board for London upon the St. Saviour's District towards meeting the deficiency in the School Fund of the said Board. "That the attention of your Petitioners has been drawn to the continuous and enormous increase in the amount of the Precepts of the School Board for London. "That the increase in the expenditure of the Board is not wholly due to the increased number of scholars, but is largely due to an increase in the cost per scholar. 14 "That taking England and Wales together, the charge upon the Ratepayers in respect of maintenance of Board Schools, i.e., salaries of teachers, books, repairs of furniture and buildings, light and warming, fell from 16s. 11¼d. per scholar in 1881 to 16s. 1d. in 1883. The cost of School maintenance in the London Board Schools has, on the contrary, increased, and is estimated for the year 1885 (after allowing for School Fees, Government Grants, &c.) at £561,505 0s. 1d. which, divided among the 312,671 scholars estimated to be in average attendance, gives £1 15s. 11d. per scholar, or more than double the average of all Board Schools in England and Wales (including London). The question of the cost of sites and buildings does not enter into consideration here, these figures relating to maintenance alone. Ln 1883 the proportion of the cost of School maintenance borne by the ratepayers of London was £1 10s. 7½d., while the ratepayers of England outside London contributed 11s. 10d. only, or a little more than one-third. The average of 16s. 1d. above given is thus largely increased by the heavy expenditure in London. "That according to the Report of the Committee of Council on Education for the year 1883-4 the average expenditure for salaries in Voluntary Schools for England and Wales was £1 7s. 3d., or taking London alone, £1 10s. 2¾d. The expenditure for salaries in Board Schools for the same period averaged £1 12s. 0½d. for the whole of England and Wales, but reached £2 3s. 0¼d. in London. The latter is nearly 13s. per scholar more than the expenditure in Voluntary Schools in London, and represents an annual additional charge upon the ratepayers of more than £200,000, or a rate of nearly 1¾d. in the pound. " That according to the published accounts of the Board for the two half-years ended the 25th March and 29th September, 1873, the annual cost of salaries of teachers was then at the rate of £1 4s. 3d. per scholar. The estimates of the Board for 1885 place this charge at £2 3s. per scholar for head and assistant teachers, and 3s. 1d. for pupil teachers, making a total of £2 6s. 1d., or an increase of £1 1s. 10d. per scholar under this head alone. Taking the number of scholars to be provided for at 312,671, this increase in the cost of the teaching staff represents an addition of £342,332 10s. 2d. to the rates. 15 "That the main causes of the increase under this head for the current year are stated in the Board's estimates to be, firstly, that 'latterly the Schools have been more liberally staffed and secondly, that 'the ratio of assistant teachers and pupil teachers has been constantly rising.' It is added that 'by paying greater attention to the composition of the staff' it will probably be 'possible to keep the cost of head and assistant teachers' salaries at £2 3s. per scholar. This apparently is an admission that due oversight has not hitherto been exercised in this particular matter. "That the highest grant earned during 1883-4 was 18s. 1¾d. per scholar in the Manchester Board Schools, and the expenditure in salaries in the same Schools was £1 10s. 2¼d. per scholar, being a difference of 12s. 0½d. In London, the average grant was 17s. 2½d. and the expenditure in salaries £2 3s. 0¼d., or a difference of £1 5s. 9¾d.—more than double the difference in the case of Manchester; this excess (13s. 9¼d.) between London and Manchester represents an annual expenditure of £215,937 11s. 10d., or a rate of 1¾d. in the pound on the Metropolitan ratepayer. Lt is clear from the results of the inspection that the Manchester Board Schools are not starved, and it would appear equally clear that the same rate of expenditure might be adopted in London at the enormous saving named. "That the cost of maintenance of the boys on the Board's Training Ship is far in excess per head of the cost of the boys educated and trained on Training Ships mainly supported by voluntary contributions, being £32 per head, compared with £19 to £20 on the 'Chichester'' and 'Arethusa' Training Ships on the River Thames and the 'indefatigable' Training Ship in the River Mersey, and being also far in excess of the cost of the Training Ship at Mount Edgcumbe. "That your Petitioners are much impressed with the necessity of educating the masses, and view with grave alarm the continuous increase in the demands of the School Board as likely to cause such an agitation as may seriously impede the work of popular elementary education in the Metropolis. "That your Petitioners, from a consideration of the figures above quoted, are constrained to believe that the School Board for London are not exercising due economy in the administration of the funds at their disposal. 16 "Your Petitioners therefore humbly yray your Honorable House to appoint a Select Committee for the purpose of inquiring into the administration and expenditure of the School Board for London with a view to ascertaining in what respects (if any) the administration of the Board is defective and their expenditure is excessive, and suggesting such remedial legislation as may appear necessary or expedient to prevent an unduly lavish expenditure in future. "And your Petitioners will ever pray, L. S. The above Petition was forwarded to Mr. Arthur Cohen, M.P. for presentation, and the Right Honorable W. H. Smith, M.P. having given notice of his intention to move, on the reassembling of Parliament after the Whitsuntide recess, for the appointment of a Select Committee to inquire into the expenditure of the School Board, Mr. Cohen was requested to give the same his support. The following is a statement of the sums contributed by this Board to the School Board for London from the date of its establishment to the present time, including the amount of the Precept now in course of collection:— £ s. d. Amount of Precept for the year ending 25th March, 1872 489 17 6 „ „ „ „ 1873 920 7 10 „ „ „ „ 1874 760 17 2 „ „ „ „ 1875 1,823 18 8 „ „ „ „ 1876 3,216 6 4 „ „ „ „ 1877 4,837 19 1 „ „ „ „ 1878 5,949 19 9 „ „ „ „ 1879 5,958 0 8 „ „ „ „ 1880 6,442 4 6 „ „ „ „ 1881 7,458 13 4 „ „ „ „ 1882 7,631 14 9 „ „ „ „ 1883 7,526 3 4 „ „ „ „ 1884 8,745 7 4 „ „ „ „ 1885 10,261 16 0 „ „ „ „ 1886 11,160 5 11 17 The following sums have also been contributed by this Board towards the cost of the elections:— £ s. d. First election, in the year 1870 63 11 11 Second ,, ,, 1873 85 2 11 Third „ ,, 1876 102 14 9 Fourth „ „ 1879 95 14 0 Fifth „ „ 1882 105 8 0 Precepts Precepts to meet the demands of the School Board for London and the Metropolitan Board of Works have, during the financial year, been issued as under:— SCHOOL BOARD FOR LONDON. DATE OF PRECEPT. AMOUNT. TOTAL. ST. SAVIOUR'S. CHRISTCHURCH. £ 8. d. £ 8. d. £ s. d. 25 March, 1885 .. 7,900 12 4 3,250 13 7 11,160 5 11 METROPOLITAN BOARD OF WORKS. DATE OF PRECEPT. AMOUNT. TOTAL. ST. SAVIOUR'S. CHRISTCHURCH. £ s. d. £ 8. d. £ s. d. 25 March, 1885 .. 6,789 2 1 2,800 17 10 9,589 19 11 To meet the estimated local expenditure for Sewer and Drainage Work, Paving, Lighting, Scavenging, Dusting, &c., the following Precepts have also been issued:— DATE OF PRECEPT DESCRIPTION OF RATE. ST. SAVIOUR. CHRISTCH'CH. TOTAL. £ £ £ 7 May, 1884 Sewer Rate 308 349 22 Oct. „ „ 516 225 1,398 7 May, 1884 Gen. Purp. Rate 4,789 2,594 22 Oct. ,, „ „ 3,930 1,820 13,133 14,531 Deputations The Board, on the motion of Mr. Haggis, has adopted the following as a bye-law with reference to deputations:— " Every Deputation desiring an interview with the Board shall be introduced by a Member of the Board, and shall give to the Clerk C 18 notice in writing, at least five clear days prior to the meeting, of the subject which it desires to bring before the Board, such notice to be inserted by the Clerk in the agenda paper. One member only of a Deputation shall be at liberty to address the Hoard, except in reply to Questions from Members of the Board." Contracts. The Contracts for Paviors' Work, Masons' Work, and Drainage Work expiring in March last, those for Scavenging and Dusting on the 24th inst., and the Contract for Watering at the end of the present season, fresh Contracts have been entered into for a period of three years as under:— description of work. name of contractor. AMOUNT Paving Carriageways Messrs. Wheeler & Hindle As per Schedule inserted in Contract. Ditto Footways Ditto. Ditto. Sewer and Drainage Work . Messrs. Hoare & Son Ditto. Scavenging and Dusting Mr. Ephraim Burton £3,450 per ann. Watering Ditto. £400 „ Mr. Edmund Reddin, the late contractor for Scavenging, Dusting, and Watering, who had carried out the works for many years past, died on the 28th January last, and the same are now being carried out for the remainder of the term by his Executor. A letter having been received from the Metropolitan Board of "Works, stating that the Postmaster-General had suggested that the houses in Surrey Row should be renumbered, and inquiring the views of this Board upon the subject, and the numbers having been found to be exceedingly irregular, the Board have caused a reply to be sent expressing an opinion that the Postmaster's suggestion should be acceded to, but calling the Metropolitan Board's attention to the fact that some of the frontages in Surrey Row are merely the backs of houses in Nelson Square, and which are already numbered. The Public Conveniences erected at the east end of Southwark Street, on the site formerly occupied by the central lamp column, which has been transferred about 30 feet nearer the Borough High Street (mentioned in the last Annual Report), have been completed, and were opened to the public on the 29th September Surrey Row. Public Conveniences. 19 last. A statement of the cost of erection and fitting up, and of the current receipts and expenditure, is appended to the other audited accounts at pages 54 and 55, from which it will be seen that the half-year's working has resulted in a deficit of £33 8s. 4d. It should be borne in mind, however, that the period covered by the returns is the winter season, and it may be confidently anticipated that the returns for the entire year, including the summer months, will be more satisfactory. The outlay for towels brushes, &c. will not occur again for a considerable time. Moreover, the cost of maintaining the old urinal in the vicinity, which has been superseded by the present structure and taken down, has been saved, and should be considered as a set-off. The books kept by Mr. Buckworth, the Inspector of Nuisances, who has charge of the sanitary arrangements, show that the number of persons who availed themselves of the accommodation afforded was as under: — MEN'S DEPARTMENT. Closets 17,139 Lavatories 2,120 19,259 WOMEN'S DEPARTMENT. Closets 7,832 Lavatories 233 8,065 Total for the half-year 27,324 The Board regret to have lost by death the valuable services of the late Mr. William Stafford, which event occurred very suddenly on the 4th September last, and within two months after his appointment as Chairman of the Sanitary Committee; whereupon the Committee appointed Mr. Richard Hunt in his place as Chairman. In December last Mr. C. Y. Jones resigned his membership in consequence of leaving the district. W. H. ATKINS. Hoard Room, Emerson Street, Bankside, S.E. 10th June, 1885. C2 20 SURVEYOR'S REPORT. From Lady-day, 1884, to Lady-day, 1885. I have the honour to submit a Statement of the various Works executed in my Department during the year terminating Lady-day last. ST. SAVIOUR'S. Paved Footways. The following is a List of the Works executed in the repair and maintenance of the Footways in this District:— New 3-inch York Stone Paving 920 feet super. Old Paving taken up and relaid 14,582 ,, ,, Old Curb reset 1,426 feet lineal. Paved Carriageways. The following is a List of the Works executed in the repair and maintenance of the Carriageways in this District:— New 3-in. x 7-in. Aberdeen Granite Pitching 1,196 yards super. Old Pitching relaid 10,062 „ ,, Block Channelling refixed 745 feet run. Limmer Asphalte 39 yards super. Ballast used in the repair, &c. of Carriageways 839 yards cubic. Ballast used to grit London Bridge and South- wark Bridge Inclines 1,152 ,, ,, CHRIST CHURCH. Paved Footways. The following is a List of the Works executed in the repair and maintenance of the Footways in this District:— 21 New 3-inch York Stone Paving 811 feet super. Old Paving taken up and relaid 11,307 ,, ,, Old Curb reset 1,063 feet lineal. Old Curb redressed 355 ,, „ New Victoria Stone, 2 inches thick 5,049 feet super. Paved Carriageways. The following is a List of the "Works executed in the repair and maintenance of the Carriageways in this District: — No new Carriageway Paving has been used during the year. Old Pitching relaid7,119 yards super. Block Channelling refixed 624 feet lineal. Limmer Asphalte 112 yards super. Ballast used in the repair &c. of Carriageways.. 553 cubic yards. Ballast used to grit Blackfriars Bridge Incline 576 ,, ,, The following is a list of the Macadam Roads repaired during the year. christcnurch. Hatfield Street Marlborough Street Collingwood Street York Street Bennett Street George Street Isabella Street William Street Charles Street Edward Street Brunswick Street Broad wall Boundary Row Jane Street St. Saviour's.—South Street. 22 The following List shows the amounts expended on each street during the year for the maintenance of Carriageway and Footway Paving. Macadam Roads not included. £ s. d. £ S d America Street 1 7 8 Brought forward 1,970 19 6 Adam's Place 0 6 11 Marlborough Street 13 10 5 Bankside 31 17 10 Moss Alley 0 10 8 Blackfriars Road 36 18 7 Newcomen Street 41 13 1 Borough High Street 8 13 1 Norfolk Street 5 0 10 Broadwall 42 0 5 Orange Street 24 18 0 Bear Garden 1 6 1 Pepper Street 4 13 11 Bowling Green Lane 3 19 10 Park Street 80 1 7 Burrell Street 39 15 10 Pump Court 6 4 0 Bennett Street 7 5 1 Prince's Street 2 5 5 Bear Lane 7 10 0 Pleasant Row 5 18 6 Barge House Street 29 5 6 Paviors' Alley 0 7 7 Boundary Row 3 11 5 Pitt's Place 2 5 8 Brunswick Street 5 4 10 Pike Gardens 7 1 10 Brunswick Court 0 7 5 Red Cross Street 38 5 6 Boddy's Bridge 0 10 6 Red Cross Place 15 2 11 Castle Street 18 4 10 Railway Approach 328 12 7 Casher's Grounds 5 6 10 Rose Alley 25 0 8 Clink Street 31 11 10 Robert Street 0 12 4 Church Street 15 12 6 Southwark Street 51 6 11 Counter Street 22 9 11 Southwark Bridge Road 80 15 10 Charlotte Street 19 14 8 Sumner Street 15 3 1 Charlotte Street (Great) 157 4 6 Skin Market Place 3 5 0 Charles Street 3 7 0 St. Margaret's Court 2 15 0 Collingwood Street 13 18 8 Stamford Street 124 12 0 Cross Street 19 8 6 Stoney Street 18 7 3 Denman Street 519 0 0 Suffolk Street (Great) 3 4 2 Emerson Street 5 6 8 St. Thomas's Street 1 0 4 Ewer Street 7 17 5 Surrey Row 1 17 3 Essex Street 10 19 10 Silver Street 3 12 9 Edward Street 1 9 6 South Street 1 16 4 Farnham Place 5 3 10 Tennis Court 2 13 8 Gravel Lane 710 16 2 Tooley Street 1 2 0 Guildford Street 26 15 2 Three Crowns Square 4 14 9 Grove, S.E. 3 19 2 Union Street 48 17 11 George Street 4 0 7 Union Court 3 15 4 Holland Street 95 14 5 Upper Ground Street 11 0 4 Horse Ride 4 10 2 William's Court 0 2 8 Hatfield Street 6 19 5 White Cross Street 9 10 10 Isabella Street 1 13 7 Worcester Street 7 19 5 Jane Street 1 5 2 Winchester Street 4 6 9 John Street West 12 5 0 William Street 6 19 0 Loman Street 14 11 6 White Hind Alley 0 16 11 Little Winchester Street 1 16 2 York Street 1 15 2 Montague Close 8 15 6 Zoar Street 6 9 6 Carried forward 1,970 19 6 Total £2,991 6 2 23 The principal Carriageway and Footway Paving Works executed during the year are as follows :— The whole of the Carriageway of Gravel Lane, from Southwark Street at the north end to Southwark Chambers at the south end, containing an area surface of 4,105 square yards, has been relaid. 1,890 square yards of redressed stone was used, and about 1,700 square yards of concrete, 6 inches in thickness. The Macadam Carriageways of Denman Street and Railway Approach have been broken up, and the portions of those streets within our boundary were paved with new 3-inch x 7-inch Aberdeen Granite Cubes, bedded on 6 inches of concrete. These thoroughfares had been in bad condition for some considerable time, but were handed over to this Board last year. The old Flint Carriageway of Rose Alley has been taken up and replaced with Granite Pitching. A portion of Burrell Street has also been paved with Granite Pitching, in place of the Macadam which formerly existed. The two last-mentioned streets were paved with old stone from London Bridge Incline. Portions of the Carriageways of Barge House Street and Upper Ground Street have been relaid. The Carriageway of Park Street, by Messrs. Barclay's, has been relaid with redressed stone. Guernsey Granite is laid at the junction with Red Cross Street; the remainder is Aberdeen Granite. The Channels of Newcomen Street have been entirely relaid. and all defective stones removed. The Channels of Castle Street have also been relaid throughout its whole length. The Carriageway on the north side of Red Cross Place has been temporarily relaid, this street now being 25 feet in width; a Footway on the same side has been formed; 6-inch x 12-inch new Aberdeen Curb and 3-inch York from our Stone Yard was used in this work. The Footway in William Street on the east side has been taken up and the York Stone squared and relaid ; the Curb has also been redressed and refixed. 24 The York Stone Footway in Stamford Street on the south side, from Broadwall to Hatfield Street, has been removed and Victoria Stone substituted. The same has also been done in Great Charlotte Street on the south side, from Blackfriars Road to Marlborough Street. The Asphalte Carriageway in Holland Street has been extensively repaired. GRANITE PITCHING REDRESSED. By cutting and dressing old wide Granite Pitching in our Stone Yard, we have made 2,107 square yards of Pitching, from 3 to 4 inches in width, and not less than 7 inches deep, at a cost of £263 7s. 6d. STATEMENT OF SEWER WORKS, &c. EXECUTED DURING THE YEAR. The following Brick Sewers have been cleared by the Board's Contractors:— Gravel Lane Sewer 1,170 feet lineal. Bear Lane Sewer 640 ,, „ The remainder of the Brick and Pipe Sewers belonging to this Board have been constantly flushed at all stream tides. The Flushing-pipes and Penstocks in connection with the river at the following places have been thoroughly overhauled and put in good order:— St. Mary Overy Dock. Doo's Wharf, Clink Street. Clink Street, at end of Stoney Street. Bankside, by Crown Wharf. Barge House Stairs. New Pipe Sewers constructed during the year:— Red Cross Street382 feet run 18-inch pipe. „ „ 68 ,, 12„ Red Cross Place 156 ,, 12„ Orange Street 158 ,, 15 „ Loman Street 142 ,, 12 „ 25 The following New Gullies have been built:— Denman Street 2 Railway Approach 2 Gravel Lane 1 Marlborough Street 1 Southwark Bridge Road 1 Pleasant Row 1 In consequence of the great depth of the Sewer in Borough High Street, into which the Gullies in Railway Approach and Denman Street have to drain, a large Catchpit has been built under the carriageway at the junction of the two streets, and the four Gullies are in connection with this by means of 6-inch pipes, the Catchpit is then connected with the Main Sewer with a 9-inch pipe; therefore, should any stoppage of the Gully connections occur, they can be cleared from the Catchpit, thereby saving any opening of the ground to get at the pipes. The following Gullies have been repaired, and the brickwork newly rendered with cement:— Gravel Lane 2 Gullies. Sumner Street 1 Gully. Southwark Street. .2 Gullies. Castle Street 2 ,, Orange Street 1 Gully. Bear Lane 1 Gully. Broadwall2 Gullies. Robert Street 1 Gully. Red Cross Street 1 ,, Upper Ground St 2 Gullies. Eleven new Gully Grates and Frames have been fixed, and six new Grates only. Three new Side Entrance Covers with wrought iron tops have been fixed. A new Man-hole has been built on the new Pipe Sewer at the junction of Orange Street and Loman Street, in order that the pipes may be examined in the event of any stoppage occurring. Two new Concrete Flushing Tanks have been constructed in York Street and George Street respectively. The York Street Tank is constructed of Portland Cement Concrete, and is built upon the break of the Sewer, so that the Sewer can be flushed throughout its whole length, both towards Blackfriars Road and towards William Street. D 26 The inside measurements of the Tank are as follows:—Length 12 feet, width 3 feet, and height to crown of arched roof 5 feet 3 inches. The Tank will hold 1,181 gallons, or about 5^ tons of water. The bottom of the Tank is slightly above the level of the invert of the Pipe Sewer; the Sewer at each end at its junction with the Tank is closed during the time the Tank is being filled by means of galvanized iron lug flaps, with ground faces; when the Tank is full these flaps are raised by means of a chain which is connected to each flap. The Sewer in York Street is 370 feet in length, and provious to the Flushing Tank being used these pipes were full to within a few inches of the top with heavy sewage matter: this Sewer is now perfectly clear. The George Street Tank is similar in construction to tho Tank in York Street, with the exception that the roof is formed of 6-inch York Stone landings instead of concrete as in York Street, it is also larger in size. Tho dimensions arc as follows: Inside measurement, length 16 feet, width 3 feet 6 inches, and height 8 feet 6 inches; it will hold 2,975 gallons, or about 13¼ tons of water. This Tank also discharges in two directions, it being constructed upon the break of the George Street Sewer, which falls eastward towards Gravel Lane, and westward towards Blackfriars Road. The length of the George Street Sewer is about 620 feet. These Tanks are filled from the nearest hydrant, canvas hose being used to convey the water. The George Street Tank can be filled in about 15 minutes. Another Tank is now in course of construction at the junction of Collingwood and Brunswick Streets. 291 cubic yards of soil have been removed from the sewers undor my control during the year. The soil is allowed to dry in tho sewer side entrances before being carted away. In September last, Public Conveniences were erected at the east end of Southwark Street, containing W. C.'s and Lavatories for Men and Women. Tho ground upon which the Public Conveniences now stand was formerly occupied by a large lamp column; this lamp column was removed about 30 feet nearer towards the Borough High Street, where it now affords a refuge for passengers 21 crossing the roadway at the end of Southwark Street. The drainage of the Public Conveniences is connected to the Metropolitan Board's Sewer in the Borough High Street. The Urinal which occupied the centre of the roadway in Southwark Street by the Hop and Malt Exchange has been removed, and a new Refuge has been constructed in the centre of the carriageway opposite the end of Counter Street. Two new Sugg's Lamps have been erected in St. Saviour's, and further alterations in the Lighting of the district are being carried out. Ten Public Lamps have been discontinued. Twenty-two applications for Private Drainage have been received, under which 39 houses have been drained, including seven large blocks of Artizans' Dwellings. 294 tons of Granite Chippings have been sold. Twenty-eight Licenses for Hoardings and Scaffolds have been issued. The Carriageways and Footways have been made good in 1,149 cases, after Gas and Water Companies' trenches. The whole of the Dams and Tide Boards belonging to this Board along the river frontage have been repaired and kept in order. Nc case of overflow from the river has occurred during the year. 8th June, 1885. GEO. ROPER NORRISH. 28 MEDICAL OFFICER'S REPORT. TO THE ST. SAVIOUR'S DISTRICT BOARD OF WORKS. Mr. Chairman and Gentlemen, I have the honour to place before you the Statistical Tables recording the number of Births and Deaths in the District for the year 1884, together with such Sanitary information as is required from me as your Officer of Health. The registered number of Births was 937, 485 occurring in Christchurch, and 452 in St. Saviour. The registered number of Deaths was 631, 346 occurring in Christchurch, and 285 in St. Saviour. Ninety-five deaths occurred in Christchurch Workhouse. The following statement will indicate the Parishes from which they were admitted. St. Saviour. Christchurch. Newington. St. George-theMartyr. 10 11 32 42 The following is a Return of the Deaths of persons who were removed from the District to Public Institutions. They amount to 77, and are comprised thus: — 29 DISEASES. CHRISTCHURCH. ST SAVIOUR. Totals. Totals. Zymotic 2 5 Dropsy, &c 2 4 Tubercular .. • • Nervous 3 3 Heart 8 4 Lungs 20 12 Digestive Organs 1 1 Kidneys 2 4 Childbirth .. .. Joints, Bones, &c .. .. Skin .. .. Malformation • • .. Premature Birth • • .. Atrophy • • .. Old Age • • .. Suddenness .. .. Violence 5 1 Not specified .. • • TOTALS 43 34 The following is a statement of all the Deaths which occurred in the District from various causes during the year:— DISEASES. CHRISTCHURCH. ST. SAVIOUR. Totals. Totals. Zymotic 50 67 Dropsy, &c 7 6 Tubercular 47 52 Nervous 47 36 Heart 15 15 Lungs 76 72 Digestive Organs 11 4 Kidneys 9 6 Childbirth • • 2 Joints, Bones, &c 1 • • Skin .. .. Malformation • • • • Premature Birth 18 8 Atrophy 3 4 Old Age 49 7 Suddenness • • • • Violence 12 6 Not specified 1 •• TOTALS 346 285 In the following statement I would direct your attention to the ages of those who died during the year, together with a comparison of the Births and Deaths:— SAINT SAVIOUR'S DISTRICT—Population at Census, 1881, 28,622. Area in Statute Acres, 203. Statement of Deaths Registered in the 52 weeks ended 31s£ December, 1884. Under 1 year. 1 year and under 20. 20 years and under 40. 40 years and under 60. 60 years and under 80. 80 years and upwards. Totals. In the District 184 159 50 70 60 13 536 In the Workhouse 3 .. 1 4 74 13 95 Totals 187 159 51 74 134 26 631 General Statement of the Causes of Deaths Registered in the year 1884. ZYMOTIC DISEASES. Total. Violence. Inquests. Other Causes. Totals. Small Pox. Measles. Scarlatina. Whooping Cough. Croup. Diarrhoea. | Typhus. Enteric. Typhoid Fever. Diphtheria. Erysipelas. Christchurch.. • • 13 1 14 2 14 2 2 1 1 50 12 14 270 346 St. Saviour 1 11 1 21 5 19 1 1 2 3 2 67 6 15 197 285 Totals 1 24 2 35 7 33 1 3 4 4 3 117 18 29 467 631 30 31 COMPARISON OF BIRTHS AND DEATHS. births. deaths. Christchtjecii. .Males 245 214 ,, Females 240b 132 485 346 Excess of Births, 139 St. Saviour ..Males 228 141 ,, Females 224 144 452 285 Excess of Births, 167 937 631 „ 306 In bringing under your notice the chief sanitary improvements which have been carried out during the year, I have to mention Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 6, 7, 8, 9, and 11a, Adam's Place, Iledcross Street. The sanitary condition of these houses was very defective, the water-closets broken down, water-cisterns exposed to the air, and no provision for dust. Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 6, and 11a were put in order, and 7, 8, and 9 were closed. Nos. 14, 15, 16, and 17, Pepper Street were in a very dirty and dilapidated state. The water-closets totally unfit for use, the paving in the yards very defective, and the water-cisterns in a foul condition. These evils were effectually remedied. Nos. 17, 19, 21, and 23, Orange Street were found so dirty and dilapidated, and the sanitary condition so defective, as to render them unfit for human habitation. The houses were thoroughly repaired, and new water-closets and dustbins erected. Nos. 13, 14, 15, and 16, Isabella Street, and 5, 6, 7, and 8, Norfolk Street, have had water laid on to the closets, and dustbins erected. Similar sanitary improvements have been effected at Nos. 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, and 23, Jane Street, and 11, Collingwood Street. All the Houses in White Hart Yard, Borough, have been closed, and remain unoccupied. They were found to be in such defective sanitary state as to be unfit for human habitation. A pipe drain has been substituted for a defective brick drain in Stamford Place, Hatfield Street. Similar work has been done to remedy defective drainage at Nos. 5, 7, 9, 11, 13, and 15, Loman Street. Water-closets have been provided with water in Brunswick Place, Brunswick Street. Most of the houses in Henry Place, Red Cross Street, were found 32 to be in a dirty and dilapidated state, and, in some instanoes, unfit for human habitation. The necessary sanitary works have been carried out, and the premises are now in a fair condition. Sanitary improvements have likewise been effected in the following Streets:— In Christchurch—George Street, Surrey Row, Hatfield Street, Blackfriars Road, Charlotte Street, Broadwall, Gravel Lane, Stamford Street, Robert Street, "William Street, Collingwood Street, Edward Street, Bear Lane, and Upper Ground Street. In St. Saviour—Ewer Street, Loman Street, Orange Stroet, Union Street, "Worcester Street, Sumner Street, Great Guildford Street, Newcomen Street, Park Street, Ladd's Court, Keppell Street, America Street, and Pepper Street. An outbreak of Typhoid Fever, which threatened to spread with great rapidity, occurred in E Block Peabody's Buildings, Southwark Street, on the 24th May. At No. 14 in this Block, a married woman had an attack of Typhoid which was concealed from the Superintendent. No steps were taken to disinfect the evacuations until the case became known early in June. The evacuations were emptied into the closet, and, in my opinion, poisoned the water which was drank by the inhabitants of this Block. That this was possible is clear from the following statement of your Surveyor, who kindly accompanied me in my examination, and from whom I have received on many occasions very able assistance:—"The cistern supplies water for all purposes to one-half the Block. Pive closets are connected, and the pipe to the closet-pans has direct communication with the cistern. The water-closets have no separate flushing or other cisterns." On the 7th June, a girl, aged 11 years, and a boy, aged eight years, were attacked and removed immediately to the Evelina Hospital. On the 9th a baby and married woman were seized and at once removed to Guy's Hospital. These cases all occurred in E Block, where the first mentioned case was. On the 10th a married woman was removed to Guy's Hospital from 4, C Block; and on the 11th two children, aged five and seven, were removed from 20, D Block, to the Evelina Hospital. Each case was promptly removed as soon as the nature of the disease was ascertained, and my statement of the probable origin of the 33 break was directed to be sent to the Governors of the Buildings, who directed that a separate supply of water should at once be provided for household purposes, and for the closets. Happily the outbreak subsided. Notices served and work done tor the abatement of nuisances during the year 1884:— St. Saviour. Christchurch. Totals. Notices served for the abatement of nuisances 154 117 271 Houses limewashed after cases of infectious disease 9 2 11 Rooms limewashed after cases of infectious disease 12 6 18 Filthy Houses whitewashed 30 7 37 Houses repaired 3 .. 3 Water-closets whitewashed 10 2 12 Houses closed as unfit for human habitation 22 • • 22 Yards repaired 13 5 18 Yards repaved 1 1 2 Drains trapped 1 8 9 Choked Drains opened 2 2 4 Brick Drains removed and Pipe Drains substituted 11 8 19 Drains repaired 2 1 3 Houses and Roofs of Houses repaired 10 4 14 Filth removed 2 2 4 Dilapidated Water-closets repaired 19 12 31 Water-closets supplied with Water 50 50 100 Water provided for household use 3 8 11 Dustbins repaired and covered 19 8 27 Dustbins provided for household refuse 15 2 17 Cesspools filled up 1 .. 1 Separate supply of Water provided 122 1 123 Pigs removed 1 • • 1 Drinking Water-cisterns cleansed 1 1 2 Drinking Water-cisterns covered 9 4 13 Water-closets pulled down and rebuilt 11 • • 11 Premises drained into Sewer 1 2 3 Sink Drains disconnected 7 7 14 Sink Drains Syphon trapped 5 10 15 Rooms closed as being unfit for human habitation .. 5 5 Insufficient Water-closet accommodation provided 1 .. 1 Manure removed 1 • • 1 Miscellaneous Nuisances removed 3 2 5 Rooms disinfected by sulphur after infectious diseases 25 12 37 Bedding ordered to be destroyed and replaced after infectious disease 2 •• 2 Dust complaints attended to | 1,724 1,263 2,987 34 One Cowshed and two Slaughterhouses have been discontinued since my last report. Previous to the Annual Licensing I inspected the Slaughterhouses and Cowhouses, and found them in a satisfactory condition. I attended the Sessions House on the 1st October, when licenses were granted to the applicants. Bakehouses. In 1883 the Factory and Workshops Amendment Act was passed, by which the legislation of 1878 was revoked, and the Vestries and District Boards restored to their former position, so far as relates to the inspection of Bakehouses, in respect to ventilation, overcrowding, and cleanliness. I was requested by the Sanitary Committee to prepare suggestions for regulations with respect to Bakehouses, which were approved by your Board, and ordered to be printed and supplied to each Bakehouse proprietor in the district. I inspected the Bakehouses in February and March, and again in September and October. On my first inspection I found many of the Bakehouses had fallen into a deplorable state of neglect; in some the drains were untrapped, and in two instances water-closets had been erected. In most cases lime-washing had been greatly neglected. These sanitary defects have all been remedied, and the Bakehouses are now in fair condition. COWHOUSES AND SLAUGHTERHOUSES. Cowhouses. Name of Person Licensed. Premises Licensed. Thompson, Farnham No. 5, Holland Street. Tilt, John No. 28, Cross Street. Slaughterhouses. Name ot Person Licensed. Premises Licensed. Skeffington, John G No. 57, Sumner Street. Row, Alfred No. 121, Union Street. Skeffington, John G Nos. 5 & 6, Cross Street. 35 Underground Rooms. During the past year notices have been served to close the following underground rooms, they not being in conformity with Section 103, 18 and 19 Vie., cap. 120, viz.: Nos. 1 and 2, Boundary How, 9, Charlotte Street, 13, Greorge Street, and 5, William Street. These rooms are no longer used as dwelling-rooms. Mortuary. During the year nine bodies have been received into the Mortuary, of this number six inquests were held, and the following verdicts were returned:— heart disease. found drowned. suicide whilst in a state op temporary insanity. 3 2 1 Disinfection. During the year a large number of infected articles of clothing and bedding have been disinfected; 61 beds, 88 mattresses, and 722 miscellaneous articles, and 28 houses have been disinfected with sulphurous acid. Water Supply. The samples of water which I have examined have generally been found bright and well filtered, and the supply has been abundant. I have scarcely heard a complaint from the public of the appearance or quality of the supply. As in a former report, I wish to draw attention to the necessity which exists for a regular cleansing of cisterns, and to the fact that water is contaminated by sewer gases from waste pipes, which are in direct communication with drains, and to urge as a prevention that an overflow pipe should be brought outside each house, and the end left exposed to the air instead of being carried into a drain, as is often the case. 36 Gas. The subjoined tables summarise the results of my testings of the Gas supplied to the District by the South Metropolitan Gas Company. Illuminating power.—Statutory standard sixteen candles. Maximum. Minimum. Quarter ending March 31st 16.3 16.0 ,, „ June 30th 16.3 15.9 „ ,, September 30th .. 16.4 16.1 ,, ,, December 31st 16.5 16.1 The minimum was only on one occasion below the standard, and that when the examination was made in the morning. Purity.—Sulphuretted Hydrogen was not present at any time, and Ammonia never reached the prescribed limit of four grains in 100 cubic feet of gas. In conclusion I sincerely thank you for your confidence and support. I am, Gentlemen, Your obedient Servant, ROBERT BIANCHI. 25, Stamford Street, S.E. 1885. 37 PUBLIC ANALYST'S REPORT. TO THE ST. SAVIOUR'S DISTRICT BOARD OF WORKS. Gentlemen, In presenting my Annual Report, I am pleased to be able to give one which is a distinct improvement upon those of many years past. Of 48 Milks, only six were subjects of prosecution. One interesting case was referred to Somerset House, and as I have always protested against a comparison of a stale milk with a fresh one, I venture to bring it forward so that it may remain upon record. No. 124 milk was thus reported upon by me. It was analyzed on the 10th March, and was forwarded to the Chemists at Somerset House on the 15th April. When, exactly, it was analyzed by them I do not know, but their answer was dated 27th April of the present year. Duplicate of fresh Milk. Somerset House, stale Milk, five weeks old. Total solids 11.25 11.28 10.90 Water 88.75 88.72 89.10 Fat 3.26 3.28 3.25 Solids not Fat 7.99 8.00 7.65 100.00 100.00 100.00 I had given this milk as containing 8 per cent, of added water. The judgment of Somerset House Chemists was as follows:— " From a consideration of these results, and after making allowance for natural loss arising from the decomposition of the milk through 38 keeping, we are of opinion that the milk contains not less than four per cent. of added water." The magistrate took the quantity as only four per cent., instead of as being not less than four per cent., and fined the defendant one shilling. I was the more aggrieved, although we had gained the case, because it was the milk of some anti-adulteration society. Only one Condensed Milk has been analysed in the past twelve months. There is no doubt that the condensed milks are, as a rule, somewhat skimmed, but they are, nevertheless, a very important and reliable addition to the poor man's store. They vary sufficiently to make it well worth the trouble of studying the analyses; but the different brands have a uniformity of composition, indicating also great uniformity in the composition of the various milks from which they are respectively prepared. Of 17 Butters, only one butter was a case for prosecution. It consisted almost entirely of oleo-margarine. If it had been sold under its proper name, and at a lower price, there ought to be no objection. Oleo-margarine is perfectly wholesome, and, for cooking purposes, almost equal to butter; but it is not butter. Two Breads were good, and free from any admixture; both of them were somewhat deficient in salt. Six Coffees were genuine; so also was a sample of Moist Sugar and a sample of Mustard. A Black Pepper contained more sand than was necessary; the sand was very clean and pure, and was, for the most part, derived from the soil in which the pepper was grown. Of Drugs, three kinds have been analysed. Flowers of Sulphur and Tartaric Acid were of first-rate quality. The sample labelled Citric Acid turned out to be acetic acid. I took it for granted that no deception was intended, as the acetic acid was of proper strength and quality according to the British Pharmacopoeia, and as citric acid docs not even keep in solution in water. Four Beers and eight Porters do not offer much opportunity for remark. With respect to salt, they were all well within the standard of the Excise, containing between 23 and 35 grains per gallon. it proves that the sugar used is of good quality, as it is 39 from the sugar that the chlorides of potassium and sodium are principally obtained, when not derived from the water used in brewing. Malt contains very little salt. Three Gins, three Brandies, and two Whiskies complete my list. All of these were up to the standard. I think, Gentlemen, having heard the Annual Report, you will agree with me in considering that there is great improvement upon years gone by. All the certificates are in the hands of your Inspector. I remain, Gentlemen, Yours faithfully, ALBERT J. BERNAYS. St. Thomas's Hospital, Chemical Laboratory, June 29th, 1885. 40 41 ST. SAVIOUR'S DISTR???DARD OF WORKS. ABSTRACT OF ACCOUNTS, ???March, 1884, to 25th March, 1885. RECEIPTS. PAYMENTS. £ s. d. £ ASSESSMENTS BY METROPOLITAN £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. To Balances from last Year's Account:—Treasurer's Account 4,796 7 5 BOARD OF WORKS. „ „ Labour „ 15 3 6 4,811 ash, Metropolitan Board, Amount of Precept for Consolidated Rate, dated 18th January, 1884 8,438 14 7 METROPOLITAN CONSOLIDATED RATE. DITTO, SCHOOL BOARD FOR LONDON ash, School Board for London, Amount of Precept To Cash, Overseers, Balance Precepts dated 14th February, 1883:— for Education Rate, dated 21st February, 1884 10,261 16 0 St. Saviour 215 13 3 WOrks „ Ditto, Precepts dated 13th Feburary, 1884 ???LIC DRAINAGE:- St. Saviour 5,965 0 4 Cash, Hoare & Son, Contractors, Public sewer and 642 15 9 Christchurch 2,473 14 3 Drainage Work, 1 Year to 29tn September ,, Evans, Iron Work for Sewers 28 3 3 8,654 „ Jacobs & Co., ditto 0 13 6 „ Waller & Co., ditto 10 10 6 EDUCATION RATE. „ Clark, Water Boots, &c. 4 17 0 „ Sband & Co., Hose . 2 11 0 To Cash, Overseers St. Saviour's, Precepts dated 26th March, 1884:— „ Other small items 0 9 7 St. Saviour 7,253 13 6 ???WATE Drainage:- 690 0 7 Christchurch (on account) 2,450 0 0 Cash, Hoare & Son, Contractors, House Junctions, &c., 1 Year to 29th September 9,7 03 71 14 8 SEWERS RATE. ???LIC CONVENIENCES:— To Cash, Overseers, Balance Precept dated 21st November, 1883:— ??? Cash, Lion Foundry company, Erection of Public W.C.'S and Lavatories at east end of Southwark Street, Borough 407 6 4 0 0 „ Hoare & Son, work in connection therewith 231 15 2 „ Ditto, Precepts dated 7th may, 1884:- £ s. d. 2 17 0 St. Saviour 308 0 0 „ Wright & Co., Gas Stoves 0 9 0 Christchurch 349 0 0 „ Allsop, Brushes 2 9 V 9 ,, Ditto, made 22nd October, 1884 : 657 0 0 „ Wildey, Door Mats 1 18 0 St. Saviour 516 o o „ Kenning, Armlets 0 14 0 Christchurch 225 0 0 „ Cleaver, Soap 0 10 6 „ Owtram & Co., Towels 4 17 0 741 0 0 „ Clayton, Washing Towels 2 9 0 1,722 „ Morgan, sundries 1 12 9 GENERAL PURPOSES RATE. ,, Southwark and Vauxhall Water Company, Supply of Water, 1 Year to 25th Dec. 26 10 9 „ Ditto (Stoney Street), to 29th September 3 18 9 To Cash, Overseers, Balance Precpts dated 21st November,188:- „ Lambeth Water Company, to ditto 39 10 0 „ Canter, Plumbers' Work 9 1 0 St. saviour 2,541 0 0 „ Other small items 0 17 10 Christchurch 1,971 0 0 736 16 10 ,, Ditto, Precepts dated 7th Mav, 1884:- 4,512 0 0 Total of Drainage Works 1,498 12 1 St. Saviour 4,789 0 0 ???WING, CARRIAGE-WAYS:— Christchurch 2,594 0 0 ???ly Cash, Wheeler & Hindle, Contractors, 1 Year to 25th December 7,383 0 0 3,422 14 6 ,, Ditto, on account Precepts dated 22nd October, 1884 :— „ Ditto, Works in Denman Street and Railway Approach 837 4 0 St. Saviour 3,400 0 0 „ Mowlem & Co., Hire Steam Roller 7 1 6 Christchurch 629 0 0 4,029 0 0 „ Limmer Asphalte Company, Repairs of Asphalte 93 9 7 15,924 4,360 9 7 Carried forward £40,815 Carried forward 4,360 9 7 £20,199 2 8 42 48 £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s Amounts brought forward 4,360 9 7 20,199 2 8 Amount brought forward 40,815 12 ???[NG, FOOT-WAYS :— Cash, Rutty, Contractor, 1 Year to 25th Dec. 314 9 8 WORKS. „ Victoria Stone Company, Works Charlotte PAVING:— Street and Stamford Street 174 10 4 489 o o To Cash, Messrs. Fielden, contribution towards cost of Paving Denman Street and Railway STENGING & DUSTING:— Approach, Borough 474 15 0 Cash, Reddin, Contractor, 1 Year to 25th 9 622 0 0 „ Lonn'on, Brighton, & South Coast Railway Company, ditto 175 5 0 December (less deductions) 385 V 14 0 „ South Eastern Railway Company, ditto .. 50 0 0 ,, Executors, ditto, in settlement of Quarter to lady day 1881 3,007 14 700 0 ???ERING:— INCIDENTAL OR GENERAL RECEIPTS. Cash, Southwark and Vauxhall Water Company, PUBLIC CONVENIENCES:— Water for Roads, Season 1884 200 0 0 To Cash, Fees 76 6 8 ,, Reddin, Contractor, Water Carts, &c. 385 0 0 585 0 0 RENT:— ???STING — Cash, South Metropolitan Gas Company, 1 Year To Cash, Executors of Wm. Lee, 2 Years Rent to 25th December 2,117 1 0 Premises in Upper Ground Street, to ,, Brush Electric Light Company, ditto to Christmas (less tax) 14 13 10 31st December 60 0 0 ,, Mrs. Humphery, Rent Charge on Vaults Gritton & Co.. Glass Globe for Lamp under Southern Approach to London Column, Borough 1 12 0 Bridge, 1 Year to 3rd April (less tax) 19 8 11 2 178 13 o w ' I \ / „ Mr. Wm. Grimsdell, 1 Year's Rent Premises in Price's Street, to Christmas (less tax) 6 17 0 ???OUR:— 530 12 7 „ Sundry small Rents 2 13 0 Cash, Hire of Labourers, 1 year to 25th Mareh — 43 12 9 AIRS, &c.:— PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS:— ??? Cash, Easton, Smiths' Work 2 6 0 To Cash, Contribution Metropolitan Board of Works, ,, Executors, ditto, in settlement of Quarter Jones, Plumbers' Work 5 18 11 • towards cost of Improvement in Stonev ,, Executors, ditto, in settlement of Quarter Cayzer & Co., Smiths' Work 9 17 0 Street, Borough Market 35 0 0 ,, Executors, ditto, in settlement of Quarter Beck & Co., Repairing Hydrants 5 2 11 ,, Executors, ditto, in settlement of Quarter Beggs & Son, ,, Water Meter 0 13 0 DEPOSITS:— 23 17 10 To Cash from various Persons for making House Total of General Works 11,175 7 0 Junctions with Sewers 149 19 0 ESTABLISHMENT. „ Ditto on erection of Hoardings, &c. 25 0 0 ARIES:— 174 19 0 ??? Cash, Officers' Salaries (quarterly), 1 Year to SUNDRIES:— 25th December 1,020 0 0 „ Ditto (monthly), to 21st February 144 0 0 To Cash, London & County Bank, 1 Year's Interest 1,164 0 0 on Current Account to 31st December 69 15 8 ???GARIES:— „ Fines received out of Court by Inspector of Nuisances.. 10 2 6 ??? Cash, Wages, 1 Year to 25th March 155 10 0 79 18 2 ???NT AND INSURANCE:— 409 16 7 ??? Cash, Churchwardens St. Saviour's, 1 Year's Rent of Offices to 25th Dec. (less Property Tax) 48 17 2 ,, Executors, ditto, in settlement of Quarter South Eastern Railway Company, ditto, Stone Yard, ditto 97 14 2 ,, Executors, ditto, in settlement of Quarter Churchwardens, Christcburch, ditto, Land in Upper Ground Street, ditto 7 6 11 ,, Executors, ditto, in settlement of Quarter Insurance 2 13 0 156 11 3 Carried forward £41,925 8 10 Carried forward £1,476 1 3 £31,374 9 8 44 45 £ s. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. Amount brought forward 41,925 Amounts brought forward 1,476 1 3 31,374 9 8 ???ES, &c.:— Cash, Poor, Sewer, General Purposes, &c. Rates, on Offices, Stone Yard, &c. 53 19 7 „ Water Rates ditto 6 12 9 „ Assessed Taxes ditto 10 19 6 71 11 10 ???NTING AND STATIONERY:— Cash, Munnings Printing 17 8 0 „ Small, Jr. 19 14 0 „ Silverlock „ 27 19 9 ,, Howes „ 1 9 6 „ Drewett Stationery 2 13 0 „ Ash & Co. 2 12 6 „ Winkley „ 12 10 6 „ Waterlow Bros. „ 4 9 0 „ Dawson & Sons „ 0 11 0 „ Knight & Co. „ 0 12 6 ,, Duffield & Co. „ 0 9 0 90 8 9 ???CE EXPENSES:— ??? Cash, Woolf, Winding, &c. Clocks, 1 Year to 5th April 3 3 0 „ Fielding, Coals 3 15 0 „ Hinton & Home, ditto 3 12 0 „ Barraud & Peters, ditto 3 15 0 ,, Vickridge, Water Bottles 0 11 0 „ Water Purifying Company, Recharging Filter 1 2 6 „ Walls & Son, Doorkeeper's Clothing 4 12 6 „ Williams, ditto 3 5 0 „ Lever, ditto Hat 0 12 6 „ Gill Bros., Floor Cloth 2 13 0 „ Stanley, Drawing Instruments 4 15 11 „ Poore & Co., Stove .. 2 16 6 „ Officers'Disbursements, viz.:— £ s. d. Clerk 10 5 3 Surveyor 9 15 1 Medical Officer 0 13 10 Inspector 7 10 11 Housekeeper 4 17 9 33 2 10 67 16 9 Total of Establishment Expenses 1,705 18 7 GENERAL. ???BLIC IMPROVEMENTS:— ???By Cash, Mr. Richard White, Compensation for setting back line of frontage of Premises on south side of Stoney Street, Borough Market 71 0 0 ???LANS:- ???By Cash, Metropolitan Board of Works, 1 Year's Interest on balance of Loan, to 1st January 36 16 3 „ Ditto, 11th Instalment of Principal 200 0 0 236 16 3 ???EPOSITS RETURNED:— ???By Cash, Return Excess Deposits for Drainage 13 6 1 „ Ditto, Hoardings, &c. 40 16 5 54 2 6 Carried forward £41,925 8 1 Carried forward £361 18 9 £33,080 8 3 46 47 Amount brought forward £ £ 8. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £11,925 Amounts brought forward 361 18 9 33,080 8 3 LIAMENTARY EXPENSES:— Cash, Charles Greenwood, jun., on account of Costs of Opposition to London (City) and South- wark Subway Bill, Session 1884 814 2 0 ???ITARY:— „ Cash, London Fever Hospital, Maintenance 0 6 0 „ Gaunt, Disinfectants 24 8 10 „ Calvert & Co., ditto 14 2 4 „ Blott & Co., ditto 6 5 3 „ Mayor & Co., ditto 0 12 4 „ Harrison, Bedding, &c. 0 19 0 „ Warner & Co., Posting Bills 0 12 0 „ F. Drewett, Mortality Returns 8 1 0 „ Green & Son, Tank on Wheels 6 5 6 „ Waters, Registration of Institution Deaths 2 4 0 „ Sundry Expenses of Disinfecting 12 16 0 71 12 3 ???DRIES:— r Cash, Johnson, Compensation in respect of dent in Union Street 10 0 0 ,, Drinking Fountain Association, moiety cost Water Supply, 1883 1 5 0 „ Ditto ditto 1884 1 5 0 „ Waterlow Bros. & Layton, copies of Gas Amalgamation Scheme 2 0 0 „ Moser & Son, Shovels, &c. 1 6 3 „ Willing & Co., Street Name Plates 1 10 0 „ Reddin, Cartage 14 13 0 „ Elson, Barrow 2 3 6 „ Cleaver, Oil, &c. 1 10 4 „ Bailey, Pegg & Co., Iron Posts 14 17 6 „ Advertisements 23 13 9 Other small items 3 15 8 78 0 0 1,325 13 0 Balances on 25th March, 1885:— Treasurer's Account 7,510 6 8 Labour Account 9 0 11 7,519 7 7 £41,925 8 10 £ 41,925 8 1 L0 48 49 General Statement of Account, showing the Apportionment of the se??? s of Receipt and Expenditure in the foregoing Abstract Account. RATEABLE VALUE OF DIST t - CH APRIL, 1884:— ST. SAVIOR £219,368 CHRISTCHI ??? 90,508 „ Dr. £309,876 Cr. RECEIPTS. ST. SAVIOUR'S. CHRISTCHURCH. total PAYMENTS. ST. SAVIOUR'S. CHRISTCHURCH. TOTALS. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d • £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. ???saments by Metropolitan Board of Works 5,965 0 4 2,473 14 3 8,438 14 7 Balances from last year's Account 3,061 9 2 1,750 1 9 4,811 10 ?? Ditto School Board for London 7,253 13 6 3,008 2 6 10,261 16 0 Metropolitan Consolidated Rates 6,180 13 7 2,473 14 8 8,654 7 ??? ??? and Drainage Work, Public 472 10 8 217 9 11 690 0 7 Sewer Rates 824 0 0 898 0 0 1,722 0 ??? ???age Connections, Private 48 11 5 23 3 3 71 14 8 General Purposes Rates 10,730 0 0 5,194 0 0 15,924 0 ??? ???c Conveniences 611 19 2 48 11 0 660 10 2 Education Rates 7,253 13 6 2,450 0 0 9,703 13 ??? ???g Works, Carriageways 2,590 4 2 1,070 5 5 3,660 9 7 Drainage Deposits Account 124 17 6 11 15 5 136 12 ??? Footways 194 2 0 294 18 0 489 0 0 Hoardings, &c., ditto 13 4 7 13 4 ??? ???snging and Dusting 2,129 4 4 878 9 8 3,007 14 0 Sundries ditto 10 11 2 10 11 ??? 414 2 8 170 17 4 585 0 0 1,450 16 3 727 16 9 2,178 13 0 375 12 10 154 19 9 530 12 7 ???irs, &c 16 18 3 6 19 7 23 17 10 ???ris, &c 824 0 5 339 19 7 1,164 0 0 ???es 110 1 7 45 8 5 155 10 0 ???t and Insurance Account 79 18 10 32 19 8 112 18 6 ???es and Taxes 50 13 8 20 18 2 71 11 10 ???ating and Stationery 64 0 5 26 8 4 90 8 9 ???ee Expenses 48 0 6 19 16 3 67 16 9 ???lie Improvements 36 0 0 • • .. .. 36 0 0 ???gns—Interest .. .. .. 36 16 3 36 16 3 Instalments .. .. .. 200 0 0 200 0 0 ???iosit Account Hoardings .. .. .. 29 1 0 29 1 0 ???iamentarv Expenses 814 2 0 .. .. .. 814 2 0 ???itary Works 50 13 11 20 18 4 71 12 3 ???idries 8 13 0 •• • • 8 13 0 ???ances on 25th March, 1885, viz.:— Treasurer's Account £7,510 6 8 Labour Account 9 0 11 4,578 18 5 2,940 9 2 7,519 7 7 28,187 18 4 12,788 2 7 40,976 0 11 28,187 18 4 12,788 2 7 40,976 0 11 Balances brought down, St. Saviour's £4,578 18 5 Ditto ditto Christchurch , 2,940 9 2 £7,519 7 7 50 51 Account showing the application of the Receipts and Pajme???egoing Abstract, to the various Ratal Accounts. Dr. CONSOLIDAV Cr. £ £ s. d. To Balance from last year's Account.. 215, * ' 8,654 7 10 To Payments to Metropolitan Board of Works 8,438 £8,654 £8,654 7 10 EDUCAT??? £ s. d. To Payments to School Board for London £ , 10,261 ???ts from Education Rates 9,703 13 6 £10,261 l Balance 558 2 6 Balance against Education Rate carried to General Balance, page 52 £10,261 16 0 558 SE^ —I A/ £ s. d. £ P £ s. d. £ s. d. To Payments for Sewer and Drainage Work 690 0 7 ce from last year's Account 429 2 10 „ „ „ Private Drainage Connections 71 14 8 pts from Sewer Rates 1,722 0 0 „ „ „ public Conveniences 736 16 10 Public Conveniences 76 6 8 ,, One-third proportion of £1,705 18s. 7d., Establishment Expenses (see pages 43 and 45) „ Drainage Deposits 149 19 0 568 12 10 1,948 5 8 ,, Deposits Account Drainage Balances returned 13 6 1 Balance 2,080 11 — 296 17 £2,377 8 6 £2,377 8 lance in favour of Sewer Rate Account carried to General Balance, page 52 . 296 17 6 GENERAL PU???S RATE. £ s d £ s £ s. d. £ s. d. To Payments for Paving Carriageways 4,360 9 7 . ???nee from last year's Account 15 924 0 0 4,596 1 4 „ „ „ .Footways 489 0 0 ???dpts from General Purposes Rates „ „Scavenging and Dusting „ „ Watering 3,007 14 0 ???ributions towards costs of Paving Denman Street and Railway 700 0 0 Lighting 585 2,178 0 13 0 0 ???ipproach ???tic Improvements 35 0 0 530 : 12 7 ???sits for Hoardings, &c. 25 0 0 „ „ Repairs, &c. 23 17 10 ??? 43 12 9 „ „ Public Improvements 71 0 0 ???dries 79 18 2 16,807 10 11 „ „ Loans 236 16 3 „ „ Deposits Account, Hoardings, &c., Balances returned 40 16 5 „ „ Parliamentary Expenses 814 2 0 „ „ Sanitary Works 71 12 3 „ Two-Thirds of £1,705 18s. 7d., Establishment Expenses (see pages 43 and 45) 1,137 5 9 „ Sundries . 78 0 0 13,624 19 Balance 7,780 12 £21,40 5 12 3 £21,405 12 ???Aoe in favour of General Rate Account earned to General Balance, page 52. £7,780 12 7 52 53 Dr. Cr. GENE???A N C E. £ £ s. d. To Sewer Rate Balance brought down 29?? ???nfjnn Rate Balance brought down 558 2 6 „ General Purposes Rate Balance brought down 7,78 ???VBalances, on 25th March, 18b5, viz • ???Treasurer's Account 7,510 6 8 ???Labour Account 9 0 11 7,519 7 7 £8,077 £8,077 10 1 Statement of Account, showing the ascertained or estiim???ts ami Liabilities of the Board on 25th March, ASSETS. LIABILITIES. £ s. d. Balance due from Overseers St. Saviour's on Precepts £ s Board Precept—Instalment due 25th March 2,790 1 5 Ditto Christchurch 530 0 ??? Work 437 0 2 Rents 1,749 0 ??? Work 43 0 11 Cash Balances 30 0 ??? Work 570 5 9 7,519 7 ???age Work 675 0 0 ???nging and Dusting 566 2 4 ???ing 267 0 0 ???es 35 0 0 ??? 275 0 0 ???Improvements 124 10 0 ???ries 150 0 0 Cash Balance £9,828 7 £5,933 10 7 54 55 Mortgage Debts or Loans remaining unpaid. Contracts in force on 25th March, 1885. Balance Unpaid. Name of Mortgagees. How Payable. Or???? of Contractor. Nature of Contract. Term. Amount. £ s. d. £ ????& Son Sewer and Drainage Work 3 Years from 25th March, 1885 Six per cent, below prices in printed blue book of prices. feeler & Hindle Paving Carriageways Ditto Per Schedule of prices in Contract. 800 0 0 Metropolitan Board of Works 3,000 ???? Paving Footways Ditto Ditto. By yearly instalemnts of 1-15th; Interest quarterly, at 37/8 per ???nund Reddin Scavenging & Dusting 3 Years from 24th June, 1882 £2,700 per annum. cent. per annum. ????to Watering Ditto Season 1883 — 4—5 £400 PUBLIC CONVENIENCES, ???? of Southwark Street, Borough. . Account of Receipts and Expenditure for the Half Year comment ???? September, 1884, and ending on the ->th March, 188o. (Sr. CAPI????COUNT £ s. d. £ s. d. £ ???Lion Iron Foundry Company, as per contract 407 6 4 To Cost Erection ana fitting up of Public Conveniences as per contract 680 ???Hoare & Son, Work in erecting and fitting up 269 18 4 Wright & Co., Gas Stoves 2 17 U £680 680 1 8 WORK???SPENSES £ s. d £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d £ s To Fees received for use of Closets and Lavatories, viz.:— CLOSETS—Quarter to Christmas: South Metropolitan Gas Company, 2 Quarters lighting 21 18 6 Men's Department 36 10 0 Southwark & Vauxhall Water Company, 2 Quarters Water Supply 15 17 0 Women's ditto 16 18 3 53 8 3 Sundries, viz.:— 4 17 0 „ Ditto—Quarter to Lady-day: Qwtram & Co. Towels 2 9 0 Men's Department 34 18 3 Clayton, Washing Towels 0 9 0 Women's ditto 15 14 5 Grill Bros., Chairs 1 18 0 50 12 8 Wildey, Door Mats 2 9 9 104 0 Allsop, Brushes 0 14 0 LAVATORIES- Quarter to Christmas Kenning, Armlets 0 10 6 Men's Department 3 14 6 Cleaver, Soap 1 12 9 Women's ditto 0 10 4 morgan, Brushes, Soap, &c. 0 17 10 ,, Ditto—Quarter to Ladv-day 4 4 10 Other small items 15 17 10 Men's Department 5 2 2 Wages of Attendants, 26 Weeks: • Women's ditto 0 9 1 Men's Department 52 0 0 5 11 3 Women's ditto 41 12 0 93 12 0 Balance 9 16 33 £147 8 5 £147 5 4 ????? certify that we have carefully audited the Accounts We, the undersigned Auditors of Accounts for the Parishes of Saint Saviour and Christchurct ????the best of our knowledge and belief correct, of the Saint Saviour's District Board of Works for the year ended 25th March, 1885, as above, and the same are to the best of our knowledge and belief correct (Signed) A. DAWSON,CLARENCE CLARK, CHARLES POULTON, Auditors. Dated the 19th day of May, 1885. 56 ST. SAVIOUR'S DISTRICT BOARD OF WORKS. NAMES AND ADDRESSES OF MEMBERS. ST. SAVIOUR'S. Angus, William 104, Union Street, Borough. Baxter, Fredk South Eastern Wharf, Park Street. Bidmead, William 8, Park Street, Borough Market. Boulden, Albert 81, Union Street, Borough. Couchman, Alfred 22, Southwark Bridge Boad. Eckstein, William 187, Union Street, Borough. Gilham, George 1ll, Ditto. Gilson, R. A. 180, Ditto. Goodwin, Arnold 56, Sumner Street. Gtapgory, Henry 75, Borough High Street. Wale, Josiah 63a, Southwark Bridge Road. Hay, H. C 91, Southwark Bridge Road. Hunt, Richard 42, Ditto. Josolyne, W. S 123, Borough High Street. Keith, Alex. J York Street, Borough Market. Newton, Geo 92, Union Street, Borough. Palmer, John Three Tuns Court, Borough. Pells, Henry 1, Bankside. Phillips, James 82, Union Street, Borough. Rider, Thomas Francis 181, Ditto. Sandeman, Fred 15, Borough High Street. Sinclair, James 65, Southwark Street. Small, William Henry 137, Union Street, Borough. Umney, Charles 50, Southwark Street. CHRISTCHURCH. Back, Usher 77, Blackfriars Road. Bowers, R. W 89, Ditto Brown, John 39, Charlotte Street, Blackfriars Road. Cooper, Jas 207, Blackfriars Road. Grantham Augustus G 50, Ditto. Greenwood, Charles, Senior .. 61, Nelson Square, Blackfriars Road. Haggis, A. H. 1, Brunswick Street, Blackfriars Road Hawkins, Jas. H 21, Burrell Street, Blackfriars Road. Henley, Charles 188, Blackfriars Road. Hopkins, William 50, Nelson Square, Blackfriars Road. Mills, John 59, Broadwall. Remnant, A. J 202, Blackfriars Road. Ridley, Henry 6, Great Charlotte Street. Slatter, William 48, Blackfriars Road. Willson, Henry 33, Gt. Charlotte Street. REPRESENTATIVE AT METROPOLITAN BOARD OF WORKS— Charles Harris, Esq., 147, Queen's Road, Peckham. S.E. OFFICERS. William McKewan, Medical Officer) Treasurer London and County and Robert Bianchi,25, Bank, Southwark. Gas Examiner Stamford Street. William H. Atkins, 52, Dr. Bernays, Pro- Clerk Union Road, South- fessor of Chemis- warkPark. analyst try, St. Thomas's Hospital. G. R. Norrish, Clyde Inspector under v Surveyor House Palace Sq. Sale of Food, Thos.BucWth3 Upper Norwood &c. Acts Emerson street Clerk of the Donald Brims,2, Can- Inspector of Bankside. Works non Row, Southwark Nuisances works Bridge Road.