Metropolis Local Management Act. BOARD OF WORKS FORTHE ST. SAVIOUR'S DISTRICT. THE THIRTY-FIFTH ANNUAL REPORT, BEING FOR THE YEAR 1890-91. LONDON: PRINTED by briginshaw & CO., 128, SOUTHWARK street, s.e. MDCCCXCI. Board of Works for the St. Sabiour's District. LIST OF MEMBERS OF STANDING COMMITTEES. PAVINGS GENERAL PURPOSES COMMITTEE. COLES, H. J., Chairman. CARTER, W. CASTLE, H. CLARK, JAS. GILSON, R. A. GRATTAN, H. H. G. HENLEY, CHARLES. KEITH, ALEX. J. MATTHEWS, J. MILLS, JOHN. ROSE, G. S. SEWERS COMMITTEE. CLOAKE, W. J., Chairman. BACK, T. BURTON, B. DAVENEY, T. HOPKINS, WILLIAM PINNER, J. SNOOK. GEORGE. TOZER, C. WILLIAMS. CHARLES. SANITARY COMMITTEE. SINCLAIR, JAS., Chairman. BLATCHFOltD, R. H. FAULKNER, W. B. GREGORY, HENRY. HAWKINS, JAMES H. HILL, W. E. LAYMAN, A. R. MEIKLE, JAS. RHODES, J. G., (L.C.C.) FINANCE COMMITTEE. BAXTER, F., Chairman. BOWERS, R. W. BRIDGMAN, T. R. COOPER, J. FRY, H. J. KINNELL, C. P. RIDLEY, HENRY. RIDEAL, ALF. ROBERTSON, W. Board of Works for the St. Sabiour's District. REPORT .OF PROCEEDINGS OF THE BOARD FOR THE YEAR 1890-91, BY THE CLERK, SURVEYOR, ANALYST, MEDICAL OFFICER AND INSPECTOR OF NUISANCES. Also Account in Abstract of Sums received and expended by the Board during the Year. Printed in accordance with Section 198 of the Metropolis Local Management Act (18 and 19 Vict., cap. 120), and ordered to be circulated among the inhabitants of the District. The Infections Disease (Prevention)Act, 1890. This Act received the Royal Assent on the 4th August, 1890, mid was directed to extend to every London district after the expiration of four months from the passing thereof. (Prevention) It is supplementary to and an adjunct of the Infectious Disease (Notification) Act, 1889, and applies to the diseases mentioned, or which may by certain process be included in that Act, and extends very considerably the powers of the Board in regard to the inspection of dairies and milk shops; the cleansing and disinfection of premises; the detention and removal of dead bodies, and other sanitary matters. Section 4 provides that where the Medical Officer of Health is in possession of evidence that any person in the district is suffering from infectious disease attributable to milk supplied within the district from any dairy situate within or without the same, or that the consumption of milk from such dairy is likely to cause infectious disease to any person residing in the district, the Medical Officer shall, with the authority of a Justice, have power to inspect such dairy; and, if accompanied by a veterinary inspector or surgeon, to inspect the animals therein, and if he is of opinion and reports that infectious disease is caused from consumption of the milk supplied 4 therefrom, the local authority may summon the dairyman to appear before them to show cause why an order should not be made requiring him not to supply any milk therefrom within the district until such order had been withdrawn ; and if he fails to show cause, the local authority may make a prohibitory order to that effect. The Act, however is wholly repealed, so far as it relates to the London district, by the Public Health (London) Act, 1891, which comes into operation on the 1st January next, and most of its provisions are reenacted in and form part of that Act. Housing of the Working Classes Act, 1890. This Act received the Royal Assent on the 18th August, Working 1890, and has the effect of consolidating and amending the Artizans' Dwellings Acts and Lodging House Acts. Part 1 is a re-enactment, with modifications, of what were known as Cross's Acts, the authoritv to administer the same being the London County Council. Part 2 is in lieu of Torrens's Acts, and the administration thereof rests with the Vestries and District Boards of the Metropolis. The Act is thus described in a Summary issued by the London County Council:—" It repeals the provisions in Torrens's Acts which enabled Vestries, or, failing them, the County Council, to enforce works under specifications from owners of insanitary dwellings, and substitutes the closing ordor from a magistrate, as provided by the Sanitary Acts, followed, if need be, by an order for demolition, incorporating such of the provisions of those Acts as are required for the purpose; at the same time the clauses of Torrens's Acts dealing with obstructive buildings are maintained, but enlarged in such a manner as to remove those difficulties which have hitherto impeded their successful execution, and to which the attention o: Mr. Ritchie was recently specially called by the Council." "The complicated machinery of the old Act of 1868, which provided for preliminary specifications of Surveyors and appeal thereon to Quarter Sessions anterior to the closing or demolition of insanitary dwellings, is all done away with ; and, to put it concisely, the law now makes it the absolute duty of the Medical Officer of every district to report to his local authority any premises unfit for human habitation. It also, by incorporating a section similar to one of the clauses of the Sanitary Act, 1866, makes it the duty of all local authorities to cause periodical inspection of their districts for the purpose of seeing whether any houses are so dangerous or injurious to health as to be unfit for human habitation. Where such is the case, the local authority is bound to serve a notice on the owner, who has then to find out for himself what works should be done, and if not done by a stated time, the local authority is bound to apply to a magistrate for a closing order, within seven days of which the premises must be 5 vacated , the magistrate being also authorised to impose a penalty up to £20 as well as make the order, and the local authority being given the power to sue an owner for the expense incurred by an occupier in removing after the closing order has been made; and, if not satisfied with the state of things, the local authority may make an order for demolition which must he obeyed within three months. An appeal against this order will lie to the Quarter Sessions." The Act also enables local authorities to purchase buildings which may be deemed obstructive to other premises in the locality by stopping ventilation or otherwise, and formulates schemes for re-construction, settlement of compensation, defraying of expenses, Ac. ° In November last, the Housing of the Working Classes Committee of the London County Council convened a Conference between themselves and representatives of Metropolitan Vestries and District Boards of Works, in order to discuss the bearings of some of the provisions of the Act and the methods of procedure to be followed under it; Mr. Baxter, Mr. Kinnell, the Medical Officer and Clerk being deputed to attend 011 behalf of the Board. The Conference was held at the County Hall, Spring Gardens,on the. 5th December, Earl Compton taking the chair, and after a prolonged discussion, resolutions were passed expressing an opinion that it was desirable that a common understanding should be arrived at between the Council and the local authorities as to the conditions or defects which render a house dangerous or injurious to health, and requesting the Medical Officer of the Council to convene a meeting of Medical Officers of Health of the Metropolis to consider the matter and report. A meeting of Medical Officers was held accordingly, and resulted in a report being drawn up and submitted to the adjourned meeting of the Conference which was held on the 23rd January, 1891. Another long discussion ensued but no practical result was arrived at, and ultimately a motion to proceed to the next business was carried. In February, however, in response to a memorial from the representatives of 25 metropolitan Vestries and District Boards, the Paddington Vestry convened a Conference in continuation of the one above referred to, this Board re-appointing the same delegates as were appointed on the former occasion to atton on its behalf. The Conference assembled at the Vestry Hall, Paddington Green, on the 20th February, Mr. W. H. Mills, Deputy-Chairman of the Vestry, taking the Chair. The question of the conditions or defects which cause a louse to be unfit for human habitation within the meaning of the Act was further discussed, and referred to a special commitee: who, at an adjourned meeting of the Conference, held on the 13th March, reported as follows:— 6 "1. That, in the opinion of the Committee, the Housing of the Working Classes Act, 1890, contemplates a distinction between those defects which make a house temporarily, and those which make it permanently, unlit for human habitation. "2. That a house may be considered so 'dangerous or injurious to health ' as to be permanently unfit for human habitation, which- (1) 13y reason of age or decay, has become so dilapidated or worn out as to be practically incapable of repair, (2) Being constructed of bad or improper materials, is offensive and unwholesome. (3) Is in a situation not admitting of effectual drainage, (4) Has been erected upon such an improper foundation that it is impregnated with foul air, (5) Is incurably damp, or (6) Is incapable of being provided with light and tion. "3. That a house may be considered to be temporarily unlit for human habitation which is in 'such a state as to be a nuisance or injurious to health,' from (1) Dilapidations which are capable of repair, (2) Want of light and ventilation which could be vided, (3) Dampness of a temporary character, (4) Defective or unventilated drainage, (5) Water-closet defective or ill-placed, badly lighted, or insufficiently ventilated into the open air, (6) Water supply of an unwholesome character; cisterns ill-placed, foul, or uncovered, (7) Want of a separate or disconnected water-supply for the water-closets, (8) Dust-bin so situated or constructed as to cause a nuisance, or (9) From filth. In conclusion, however, the Committee expressed an opinion that each case must be dealt with on its own merits, and that questions of degree would always have to be taken into consideration, as well as the co-existence of two or more defects. The Executive Committee also reported that, in their opinion, it would be futile for the Conference to attempt to lay down any fixed lines as to how the Act was to be carried out in the several districts. Public Health (London) law Amendment Bill 1891. Early in March last, the attention of the Board was called by the Vestry of Chelsea, and other local authorities, to the stringency of several of the provisions of this Bill, which had been introduced by Mr. Ritchie to the House of Commons and set down for second reading at very short notice, copies of the 7 Bill having been delivered only a few days previously. The Vestry inter alia pointed out that in their opinion, the penal pauses of he Bill directed against local authorities were highly objectionable as also were those subordinating the local bodies to central authorities: to wit, the Local Government Board and the London County Council; and, the Board concnrrina Petition was drawn up and presented to the House of Commons in opposition to the clauses referred to, most of the other District Boards and Vestries adopting a similar course of action. Owing to the strong opposition on the part of the local authorities and the representations made by the representative of metropolitan constituences, Mr. Ritchie was, prior to the third reading, induced to modify very considerably the penal and other clauses to which the local authorities objected; and, in its amended form, the Bill has become law, it having received the Royal Assent on the 5th August, 1891. ' The Bill mow Act) is one of great importance and extends very considerably, not only the powers of local, therein termed " Sanitary," authorities in regard to sanitary matters, but their duties and responsibilities likewise; subjecting them to penalties in the event of their not keeping the streets (including the footways) properly swept and cleansed, or, in the event of house-refuse not being removed at the ordinary period appointed for so doing; and it provides (Sect. 100 that "the County Council, on it being proved to their satisfaction that any Sanitary Authority have made default in doing their duty under this Act with respect to the removal of any nuisance, the institution of any proceedings, or the enforcement of any bye-law, may institute any proceedings and do any act which the Authority might have instituted or done for that purpose, and shall be entitled to recover from the Sanitary Authority in default all such expenses in and about the said proceeding or act as the County Couucil incur, and are not recovered from any other person, and have not been incurred in any unsuccessful proceeding." The whole of the sanitary laws relating to the metropolis, up to the date of tin passing of the measure now under review, are consolidated and amended; the Nuisances Removal Acts, the Diseases Prevention Acts, the Sanitary Acts (except one clause of the Act Of 1866), the Slaughterhouse Acts, the Smoke Nuisance Acts, and other, being wholly repealed, as well as the sanitary clauses of the Metropolis Management Acts, Ac. Altogether 35 Acts are wholly or partially repealed, and the provisions thereof for the most part re-enacted, with modifications and extensions. The following clauses may be cited as being new and of exceptional interest and importance, not only to sanitary authorities but to the public at large: 8 Section 15. Any person causing a drain, water-closet, Ac., or an ashpit to be a nuisance or injurious or dangerous to health by wilfully destroying or damaging the same, or anv water-supply, or the fittings connected therewith, to be liable to a tine of £5. Section 48. (1) The absence, in respect of any premises, of water-fittings, to be deemed a nuisance, liable tc be dealt with summarily; and if in respect of a dwellinghouse, it is to be deemed unfit for human habitation. (2) A house which, after the commencement of the Act is newly erected, or is pulled down to of below the ground floor and rebuilt, is not to be occupied as a dwelling house until the Sanitary Authority have certified that it has a proper and sufficient supply of water, either from a water company or by some other means. (3) If the Sanitary Authority refuse such certificate or fail to give it within one month after written request for the same from the owner of the house, he may apply to a Petty Sessional Court, and the Court may make an order authorizing the occupation of the house ; but unless such order is mad i, an owner who occupies, or permits to be occupied, the house as a dwelling-house without such certificate, is to be liable to a fine of £10 and 20s. per day. Section 62. (1) Any persou easting rubbish infected by a dangerous aEd infectious disease, without previous disinfection, into an ash-pit, to be liable to a fine of £5 and 40s. per day. Section 63. Any person who knowingly lets for hire a house, or part of a house, in which any person has been suffering from a dangerous infectious disease without having the same, and all articles therein liable to retain infection, disinfected, to be liable to a Fine of £20. Section 64. Any person letting for hire, or showing for the purpose of letting, any house or part of a house, and making false statements as to infectious disease in regard to same, to be liable to a fine of £20, or one month's imprisonment. Fection 65. Any person ceasing to occupy a house, or part of a house, in which a person has, within six weeks previously, been suffering from dangerous infectious disease, and who fails to have same disinfected, or who, in the event of any negotiations for letting, &c., fails to give notice, or who makes false statements regarding same, to be liable to a fine of £10. Section 68. Any person who knows himself to be suffering from a dangerous infectious disease, exposing himself, 9 without proper precautions against spreading the disease, in any street, public place, shop, inn &c to be liable to a tine of £5. Section 69. Any such person milking any animal, or picking fruit, or engaging in any occupation connected with food or carrying on any trade or business in such manner as to be likely to spread the infectious disease to be liable to a tine of £10. Section 72. Any person retaining unburied, without, sanction of a Medical Officer, &c., for more than 48 hours, in a room used as a dwelling place, or sleeping place, or work-room, the body of a person who has died Of any dangerous infectious disease, to be liable to a fine of £5. Tha Board, as the Sanitary Authority for the District, is charged with the duty of making bye-laws for the following- Section 16. (1) The prevention of nuisances arising from snow, ice, salt, dust, ashes, rubbish, offal, carrion, fish, or filth, or other matter or thing in any street. For preventing nuisances arising from any offensive matter running out of any manufactory, brewery, slaughter-house, knacker's yard, butcher's or fishmonger's shop, or dunghill, into any uncovered place, whether or not surrounded by a wall or fence. For the prevention of the keeping of animals on any premises in such place or manner as to be a nuisancc or dangerous to health. As to the paving of yards and open spaces in connexion with dwelling houses. Seetion8(9. (9) With respect to the keeping of waterclosets supplied with sufficient water for their eftective action. Section 50. For securing the cleanliness and freedom from pollution of tanks, cisterns, and other receptacles for Storing of water, used or likely to be used by man for drinking or domestic purposes, or for manufacturing drink for the use of man. Section 66. (3) For removing to any hospital, to which the Authority are entitled to remove, patients, and for keeping in that hospital, so long as maybe necessary, persons brought within their district by any vessel, who are infected with a dangerous infectious disease Section 94. For fixing the number of persons who may occupy a house, or part of a house, which is let m lodgings or occupied by members of more Than one family, and for the separation of the sexes in a house so let or occupied. 10 For the registration of houses so let or occupied. For the inspection of such houses. For enforcing drainage for such house?, and for promoting cleanliness and ventilation in the eame. For the cleansing and lime-washing, at stated times, of the premises. For the taking of precautions in cast- of an infectious disease. Section 95. (2) For promoting cleanliness in, and the habitable condition of tents, vans, sheds, and similar structures used for human habitation, and for preventing the spread of infectious disease by the persons inhabiting the same, and generally for the prevention of nuisances in connexion with the same. By sections 16 and 39, the County Council is required to make bye-laws, viz.:— Section 16. (2) For prescribing the times for the removal or carriage, by road or water, of any fcrcal, offensive or noxious matter or liquid in or through London, and providing that the carriage or vessel used therefor shall be properly constructed and covered so as to prevent the escape of any such matter or liquid and as to prevent any nuisance arising therefrom. As to the closing and filling up of cesspools and privies, and the removal and disposal of refuse, and as to the duties of the occupier of any premises in connexion with house refuse, so as to facilitate the removal of it by the scavengers of the Sanitary Authority. Section 39. (1) With respect to waterclosets, earth-closets, privies, ash-pits, cesspools and receptacles for dung, and the proper accessories thereof in connexion with buildings, whether constructed before or after the passing of the Act. and it is made the duty of the Sanitary Authority to observe and enforce such bye-laws. The Act comes into operation on the 1st January, 1892, It will require very careful consideration on the part of the authorities charged with its administration, and special arrangements will have to be made, without delay, for giving effect to its provisions; especially those which relate to the cleansing of the streets and footways. The Board has already referred it to the Paving and General Purposes Committee and Sanitaiy Committee for consideration, either conjointly or separately, and it will be one of the first matters to engage the attention of the Board after the recess. Factory and Workshop Act, 1891. This Act also received the Royal Assent on the 5th August, 1891, and is intended to amend the Factory and Workshop 11 Act, 1878, thereinafter referred to as the principal Act It comes into operation on the 1st January, 1892, and enables an Inspector under the principal Act to take proceedings on default by the Sanitary Authority in respect of workshops laundries. Ac., which are in an insanitary condition, and to recover from the Sanitary Authority the expenses incurred in so doing. It gives the Sanitary Authority a'id their officers similar powers of entry to those possessed by an Inspector Wider the principal Act, and provides - Section 3) that" If and child, young person, or woman is employed in a workshop, and the Medical Officer of the Sanitary Authority becomes aware thereof, he shall forthwith give written notice thereof to the Factory Inspector of the District." It also provides (Section 4) that:—" Where, on the certificate of a Medical Officer of Health or Inspector of Nuisances, it appears to any Sanitary Authority that the lime washing, cleansing or purifying, of any such workshop, or of any part thereof, is necessary for the health of the persons employed therein, the Sanitary Authority shall give notice in writing to the owner or occupier of the workshop to limewash, cleanse or purify the same, or any part thereof, as the case may require." In September 1890 a circulsr-letter was received from the SchoolBoard Vestry of Hammersmith, forwarding copy of a resolution pro- Expenditure, testing against the enormous and continuing increase in the expenditure of the School Board for London, and inviting the Board to appoint delegates to attend a conference on the subject. The Board appointed Mr. Baxter and Mr. Sinclair; seventeen other Boards and Vestries also appointed delegates, and, at a meeting of the Conference, which took place at the Vestry Hall, Hammersmith, on the 25th November, 1890, the following resolutions were passed, and the same were, at a subsequent meeting of the Board. ordered to be entered upon the minutes:— (a) "That in view of the undoubted past extravagance and waste in the expenditure of the School Board, by which the School Board Bate has reached such an enormous amount, viz. 11d. in the and the apprehension that similar extravagance and waste may be continued in the future, this Conference is of opinion that a petition should be presented to her Majesty the Queen, or Parliament. praying that a Royal Commission be appointed to enquire into the cause of such extravagance and waste, and matters generally connected with the Board." (b) That this meeting endorses the action of a Committee of Ratepayers who propose presenting to the School Board, by deptation, a memorial complaining of the extravagant expenditure of that Board; and without 12 committing this Conference to any further action, recommends members present (assuming they agree with the memorial) to support the deputation by their presence when the memorial is presented, of which due notice will be given by the public prens." (c) " That, in the opinion of this meeting, the School Board for Loudon has not kept to the spirit of the Act which called it into existence, inasmuch as that Act was passed to provide, for the children of the very poor, a plain elementary education, and to prevent careless or dissolute Parents from removing their children from school at too tender an age, while the School Board has steadily and most recklessly increased the number of ' Advanced Subjects' to be taught, and thus encouraged the attemhuice of children whose parents are well able to afford a proper education for them, other then by the assistance of the Rates." A petition in accordance with the first of the above resolutions was adopted, and signed by the Chairman of the Conference on behalf of the delegates. The prayer for the appointment of a Royal Commission was not, however acceded to. Water Supply. In October, 1S90, the Board, at the instance of the Board of Works for the Poplar District, presented a Memorial to tinPresident of the Local Government Board on the subject of cutting off water-supply in consequence of defective fittings, praying that a Bill might be introduced to Parliament extending the provisions of the 50 and 51 Vict., c. 21, and making it illegal for a water company to cut off water for any reason whatever. In April last, a Circular-letter was received from the London County Council relative to the various Bills relating to the water-supply of the metropolis wliich were before Parliament, and inquiring the opinion of the Board with regard to the Metropolis Water Supply Bill, the one which was jointly promoted by the Vestry of St. James, Westminster and other local authorities. In reply thereto the Board passed the following resolution and forwarded a copy of it to the Council:— " That, ichile declining to express any opinion as to the relative merits of the various Bills at present before Parliavient for the regulation of the water supply of the metropolis, this Board considers it of primary importance for the health of its inhabitants that the ivater-supptly of London should be cojnous in quantity, pure in quality and reasonable in price, and that it is the duty of the London County Council to provide the, same." Electric Lighting October, also, the Board gave its consent pursuant to 13 the provisions of the Electric Lighting Acts, 1882 and 1888 to an application made by the Brush Electrical Engineering Company to the Board of Trade for a Provisional Order for the supply of electricity within the District, in accordance with notice received by the Board in June previously The Order has since been granted and confirmed by Parliament the scheme being intituled "The Southwark Electric Lighting Order, 1891." The area of supply is that of the parishes of St. Saviour and Christchurch, constituting the District. The Company or their assignees (a) are, by the terms of the Order, under obligation to lay distributing mains in the following streets and places within two years after the commencement of the same, viz., Blackfriars Road (north of Southwark Street), Southwark Street (west of Holland Street), and Holland Street. The Brash is the second Company who have obtained powers for the supply of electricity in St. Saviour's, an Order having boon granted for that purpose to the London Electric Supply Corporation, Limited, in the year 1889, and considerable Progress has been made by them with the laying of the mains St tutary notices have lately been received from two other Companies of their intention to apply for Provisional Orders, viz., The County of London Electric Lighting Company, Limited, and the Camberwell and Islington Electric Light and Power Supply, Limited. In October, also, on receipt of a letter from Mr. Blundell Maple, M.P., advocating an extension of the system of work- men's trains. the Board I caused a communication to bead- dressed to the South Eastern Railway Company, and the London Chatham and Dover Railway Company, the two Companies having running powers in the district, expressing approval of the suggestion, and a hope that they might be able, consistently with their own interests and those of the public at large, to comply therewith. Later on, the Board, at the request of Mr. Maple, adopted the following Petition . 14 In the House of Commons, " Session 1891. "Cheap Trains (London) Bill. "Petition in favour. "To the honorable the Commons of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland, in Parliament assembled. "The humble Petition of the Board of Works for the District of St. Saviour, Southwark, in the County of London, under their common Seal: "That your petitioners believe that it is expedient to afford greater facilities for the residence of London work- (a) The Board has lately sanctioned the transfer of this undertaking pursuant to section 61 of the Order to a Company to be forword under the title of the " City of London Electric Lighting Company Limited. 14 ing men and women in the outer suburbs, owing to the congested state of the population of the central portion! of the Metropolis. Your petitioners are of opinion that the Cheap Trains (London) Bill, by fixing a low rate ol fare for workmen's tickets within twelve miles of London, will materially conduce to this end, as it will not «^nly cheapen many workmen's fares at present existing between suburban stations and the termini, but it will definitely fix the cost of conveyance, and thus encourage workmen, with their families, to reside in the suburbs. " Wherefore, your Petitioners humbly pray that your honorable House will be pleased to pass the aforesaid Bill. " And your Petitioners will ever pray, Ac.' Wayleave. In November the Board granted the Brush Electrical Engineering Company, Limited, in consideration of their agreeing to pay the Board a yearly rent of £50, leave to lay down mains from the north end of Holland Street, via that portion formerly called Green Walk, and Southwark Street, to Blackfriars Bridge, for the purpose of conveying electricity from premises in Holland Street which they were then seeking to acquire, to the City of London, for the lighting of a portion of which they were negociating. The Company, however, obtained other premises in lieu thereof, known as Meredith's Wharf, situate in Bankside, about midway between Blackfriars and Southwark bridges, and, in the early part of the present year, they applied to the Board for an extension of the wayleave westwards from those premises along Bankside to join their authorised line, and eastwards along the same thoroughfare, to Southwark Bridge. The Board granted their application, and the same was given effect to by an agreement in writing, dated the 27th April, 1891 (a). Fire Alarm Posts. November, also, the Board sanctioned an application of the Postal Telegraphs' Department for the erection of Fire Alarm Posts in Sumner Street and Park Street. London School Board Elections Bill In December a circular-letter was received from the Vestry of St. Pancras, calling attention to the provisions of the London School Board, Elections, Bill; requesting the Board to petition Parliament in favour of the same, and inviting it to appoint representatives to take part in a deputation to the Education Department of the Privy Council on the subject. The Board assented, appointing Mr. Carter and Mr. Sinclair (a) The Board has lately given its consent, pursuant to one of the provisions of the agreement, to the transfer by the Brush Company, of the Wuyleave in question, to the City of London Electric Lighting Company, Limited. 15 as its repersentatives and, in February, caused the following Petition to be presented:— " In the House of Commons, " Session, 1891. "London School Board Elections Bill. "Petition in favour. "To the Honorable the Commons of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland in Parliament assembled. "The humble Petition of the Board of Works for the Saint Saviour's District "Sheweth: "That your Petitioners are the Bating Authority of the said District, pursuant to the provisions of the Elementary Education Act, 1870. "That your Petitioners have had under consideration the London School Board Elections Bill, by which it is proposed to abolish the present Electoral Districts for members of the School Board for London, and to adopt the Parliamentary Divisions for School Board electoral purposes. " That, in the opinion of your Petitioners, many persons who would be willing to serve on the School Board for London are practically prohibited from becoming candidates for a seat on account of the enormous expense of contesting an Election in so large a Division ; and, if the Parliamentary Divisions were chosen as the representative areas, the candidates would be more likely to be known and recognised by the Ratepayers. "That in the opinion of your Petitioners, all vacancies on the School Board for London should be filled up by the Ratepayers and not by the Board. "That, in the opinion of your Petitioners, it is very desirable that the amendment of the law in the manner suggested should be effected before the period of the Election of Members to the School Board for London in November, 1891. "Your Petitioners therefore pray. "That the London School Board Elections Bill may be so amended that all vacancies on the School Board for London may be filled up by the Ratepayers, and that, in that form, the Bill may pass into law, and come into operation before the election of Members to the School Board for London in November, 1891 "And vour Petitioners will ever pray, &c. 16 Wood Paving Borough High Street In December, also, the Board adopted a Report of the Paving and General Purposes Committee, to whom the question of the repaving of the Borough High Street had been referred, stating that they were unable to recommend that wood should be used for the purpose in view, and expressing an opinion that the material to be employed should be 3x9 Aberdeen granite pitching. In last June, however, a deputation of inhabitants and ratepayers of the Borough attended before the Board and presented a memorial expressing the regret with which the memorialists had heard that it was proposed to re-pave the thoroughfare with stone; urging the superiority of wood on account of its comparative noiselessness and of its cleanliness, and praying that the matter might be re-considered. The Board referred the memorial to the same Commitiee, who carefully re-considered the matter, and, in deference to the earnest wish expressed by the memorialists, reported in favour of the adoption of wood for a portion of the carriageway, viz., from St. Thomas's Street to the boundary at St. George's. The report was adopted by the Board, and arrangements are now being made for carrying out tho work at the earliest possible opportunity. Board Room and Officer. The lease under which the Board Room and Oilices in Emerson Street was held expiring in June, 1891, the Board placed itself in communication with the Churchwardens of St. Saviour's, the freeholders, with a view to obtaining a renewal of the same ; and, as the result of the negociations, it has been arranged that the Board shall remain as a yearly tenant, at a rental of £125 per annum. Propsed Town Hall &c At the requst of the request of the Vestry of Sr. Saviour's, the Board, also in December, appointed three of its members as delegates, viz., Messrs. Carter, Coles, and Sinclair, to consider, in conjunction with the Overseers of the Poor for that Par if h and the Trustees of the Borough Market, the feasibility of erecting a central building for accommodating the various public bodies, and an office for the receipt of rates, and to inquire as to the advisability of adopting the Baths and Washhouses Acts and the Public Libraries' Acts. Royal Academy In the year 1889, the Board, at the request of the Vestry of Clerkenwell, petitioned the President and Council of the Royal Academy of Arts to open the galleries of that Institution on Saturday evenings during the whole period of the exhibition from 7.30 till 11, in like manner as they are opened during the last week of the exhibition, and at the same fee of sixpence. The authorities, however, declined, stating, in reply, that there were practical difficulties which rendered it impossible to comply. In April last, a further communication was received from the Clerkenwell Vestry, stating that they were 17 making a renewed effort to procure the opening of the galleries as suggested, and asking for the support of the Board The Board accordingly, again petitioned the President and Council on the subject, but without success, as the following letter will show:— " Royal Academy of Arts, " London, W. "May 8th, 1891. " Sir, "Iunreply to your letter of the 5th instant enclosing a petition from the Board of Works for the St. Saviour's District praying that the Royal Academy Exhibition maybe open on Saturday evenings at a reduced charge, I am desired by the President and Council to refer you to mv letter of June 21st. 1889 and to inform you that nothing has occurred in the meantime to lead them to alter the decision then arrived at, and which was communicated to you in my letter of that date The whole matter, as I then informed you, was most carefully considered, and the reasons which governed the decision then arrived at were such as no circumstances are likely to alter. "I am, Sir, "Your obedient Servant, "FRED. A. EATON, Secretary. " W. H. Atkins, Esq. Clerk, " Board of Works for the St. Saviour's District, Southwark, S.E. The Returns for St. Saviour's (preliminary) of the Census Census taken on the 6th April, 1891, have lately been published and ReturnB are as follows :— INHABITED HOUSES. INCREASE. POPULATION. DECREASE. Christchurch 1,485 66 13,264 399 St. Saviour 2,139 93 13,898 1,101 3.624 159 27,162 1,500 An increase in the number of inhabited houses being inconsistent with a reduction in the population, the Clerk ^iote calling the attention of the Census Officials thereto, and suggested that probably the blocks of Artizans' Dwellings, several of which had been erected during the decade, might have been wrongly enumerated as sepaiate we This was found to be the case, as the following letter will show:— 18 "Census Office, "Charles Street, Whitehall, London. "14th August, 1891. "Sir "I am directed by the Registrar General to acknowledge the receipt of your letter of the 12th instant; and, in reply, to state that, on reference to the Enumeration Hooks, it has been found that the tenements comprised in the Artizans Dwellings mentioned by you, were improperly returned as separate houses. The books will, of course, be carefully revised. "I am, Sir, "Your obedient Servant, "J. W. MAUNDERS, "W. H. Atkins, Esq., (for Secretary). "Clerk to the St. Saviour's Hoard of Works." The following Returns show the number of Inhabited Houses and the population of the District since the passing of the Metropolis Local Management Act, in the year 1855:Inhabited Houses— 1861 1871 l88l 1891 Christchurch 1,891 1,584 1,419 (Under revision)* St. Saviour 2,580 2,142 2,040 (Ditto) 4,471 3,726 3,465 Population— Christchurch 17,069 14,573 13,003 13,264 St. Saviour 19,101 15,677 14,999 13,898 36,170 30,250 28,062 27,162 The decrease of population in both Parishes is attributable to the demolition of houses for the construction of railways, the formation of new streets, and the erection of business premises: the diminution in the number of inhabited houses is due to the same causes, and to the erection of blocks of artizans' dwellings in lieu of the smaller description of houses, each block being counted as one house. Contracts. The Contract of Messrs. Hoare & Son for Sewer and Drainage work expired on the 25th March last; that of the Limmer Asphalte Company for repair of Footway on East side of the Borough High Street, on the 26th May; that of Mr. William Stubbs for Scavenging and Dusting on the 24th June, and the Contract of the latter for Watering will expire at the end of October. *Since the above was written the following corrected returns of inhabited houses have been received:— Chrlltchuroh 1816 St. Sav.our 1697 Total 3013 19 In lieu of thereof, respectively, the following new contract have been entered into:- Name and Address of contractor. Nature of Contract. Term. amount. Hoare & Son, 74, Blackfriars Road, S.E. Sewer and Drainage Work 3 years from 25th March, 1891 At prices named in printed Schedule of Prices Limmer Asphalte Paving Co., Limited Repair and maintenance of Asphalte Footway on cast side of Borough High Street 10 years from 24th April, 1891 5/6 per superficial yard for the 10 years Wakeley Brothers & Co , Ltd., Honduras Wharf, Bankside, S.E. Scavenging and Dusting 3 years from 24th June, 1891 £4500 per annum Ditto Watering 1892 1893, 1894. £475 per annum The following Contracts have also been entered into:— Name and Address of Contractor. Nature of Contract. Price. W. H. Wheeler, 13a, Sumner Street, Southwark Re-paving with granite cubes carriageway of Borough High Street, from foot of London Bridge to south end of sanctuary, opposite London and Westminster Bank 15/4 per superficial yard John Mowlem & Co., Grosvenor Wharf, Millbank, Westminster Taking up and carting away granite pitching of carriageway, Borough High Street, from St. Thomas's Street to boundary at St. George's To pay the Board 1/- per superficial yard Ditto Repaying same with creosoted wood blocks 10/8 per superficial yard The Contracts of Mr. Gabriel for Paving also expired on the 25th March, but the Board has not renewed them, it having resolved to execute works of the kind by a staff in its own employ, except in special cases. 20 With regard to Scavenging and Dusting, the lists of streets and places have been carefully revised ; all those which were scheduled for cleansing and dusting twice weekly being now required to be attended to three times, and others have, in many instances, been marked for more frequent attention than under the late Contracts. Finances. Ill order to meet the estimated expenditure for local purposes during the financial year ending 25th March, 1892, and the demands of the School Board for London for the same period, the following demands by Precept have been made upon the Overseers, viz:— GENERAL PURPOSES ACCOUNT. St. Saviour £8,682 0 0 Christchurch 4,640 0 0 £13,322 0 0 SEWERS ACCOUNT. St. Saviour £794 0 0 Christchurch 425 0 0 £1,219 0 0 EDUCATION ACCOUNT. St. Saviour £10,130 13 6 Christchurch 5,289 14 8 £15,420 8 2 In May last, the Board borrowed of the London County Council, the sum of £1,200, towards defraying the cost of repaving, with granite pitching, a portion of the carriageway of the Borough High Street at the foot of London Bridge, and the work will shortly be carried out. Application has also been made to the Council for a loan of £1,600 towards defraying the cost of wood paving works in the same thoroughfare. Obituary. Within the short period of a month, the Board had to mourn the loss, by death, of three of its oldest and most respected members, viz., Mr. Josiah Hale, Chairman of the Paving and General Purposes Committee; Mr. Richard Hunt, Chairman of the Sanitary Committee, and Mr. John Palmer, who had been a member of the Board since the year 1874. In each case the Board passed a resolution expressive of its deep and sincere regret, and of condolence with the family and friends of the deceased in their bereavement. W. H. ATKINS. Board Room, Emerson Street, Bankside, S.E. August, 1891. 21 SURVEYOR'S REPORT For the Year ending Lady-day, 1891. I have the honour to submit a Statement of the various Works executed in my Department during the year terminating Lady-day last. Footways. The following works haw been executed in the repair and maintenance of the Footways in the District:— New 2½-in. York Stone Paving laid 1,140 feet super. „ 3-in. „ „ „ ,, 7,023 „ „ „ Victoria Stone Paving laid 596 „ „ Old York Paving relaid 41,217 „ „ New 6-in. x 12-in. Granite Edge Curb fixed 84 „ lineal. Old Curb taken up and refixed 3,216 „ „ „ „ redressed 1,382 „ „ This does not include work done in reinstating after Gas, Water, and other Companies. Carriageways. The following works have been executed in the repair and maintenance of the Carriageways in the District:— New 3-in. x 9-in. Aberdeen Granite Pitching laid 1,173 yards super. Old Granite Pitching relaid 5,588 „ „ „ „ „ redressed 866 „ „ Block Channelling refixed 24 feet lineal. Ballast used under Pitching and on Roads, Bridge inclines, Wood Paving, &c. 1,468 yards cube. Concrete 6-in. thick under Pitching 1,601 „ super. Granite broken 96 „ cube. Concrete 3-in. thick under Pitching 174 „ super. Ground dug and carted away from under Pitching for Concrete space 284 „ cube. 3-in. x 6-in. Wood blocks 566 „ „ 4-in. x 5-in. „ „ 1,345 „ „ 22 The following is a List of the sums expended during the year for the maintenance of Carriageways and Footway Paving (Macadam Roads not included):- £ s. d. £ s. d. America Street 3 16 0 Brought forward 1,783 12 5 Adam's Place 2 4 10 Lavington Street . 1 0 3 Bankside 46 8 9 Montague Close 0 5 3 Blackfriars Road 1105 19 3 Moss Alley 0 5 1 Broadwall 7 3 4 Newcomen Street 21 4 1 Bear Garden 1 14 7 Noah's Ark Alley 0 11 1 Burrell Street 4 18 6 Norfolk Court 0 7 1 Bennett Street 1 11 6 Orange Street 5 3 0 Bear Lane 18 18 0 Pepper Street 1 9 8 Barge House Street 5 14 6 Park Street 48 12 7 Boundary Bow 0 5 4 Pleasant Row 0 13 6 Brunswick Street 21 4 9 Paviors' Alley 0 8 4 Brunswick Court 1 0 2 Pitt's Place 0 11 9 Castle Street 15 4 5 Price's Street 4 14 8 Casher's Grounds 3 14 10 Bed Cross Street 17 12 2 Clink Street 0 2 5 Bed Cross Place 2 16 l Church Street 2 9 4 Robert Street 1 9 4 Charlotte Street 12 18 0 Southwark Street 71 2 11 Charlotte Street (Gt.) 150 2 9 Southwark Bridge Rd. 47 1 4 Collingwood Street 3 8 5 Sumner Street 3 9 7 Cross Street 10 1 0 St. Margaret's Court 7 9 5 Duke Street 13 10 11 Stamford Street 104 18 0 Denman Street 1 13 0 Stoney Street 20 0 3 Emerson Street 2 2 6 Suffolk Street (Great) 0 18 7 Ewer Street 0 11 9 St. Thomas's Street 0 4 2 Essex Street 6 11 3 Surrey Row 0 18 11 Edward Street 0 16 4 Tooley Street 7 11 7 Falcon Court 2 4 0 Three Crowns Square 0 18 1 Gravel Lane 15 1 8 Union Street 98 11 5 Guildford Street 13 17 7 Upper Ground Street 9 11 4 George Yard 0 6 3 Whitecross Street 15 7 2 George Street 1 16 10 Worcester Street 1 1 l High Street, Boro' 285 8 11 Winchester Street 5 3 4 Holland Street 9 6 1 White Hind Alley 0 15 0 Hatfield Street 1 0 9 Wortenburg Court 0 5 7 John Street West 1 5 7 William Street 1 8 10 Isabella Street 1 3 2 York St., St. Saviour 3 18 4 Loman Street 1 15 2 York St., Christchurch 8 3 5 Carried forward 1,783 12 5 Total £2,299 14 8 23 The principal Carriageway and Footway Paving Works executed during the year are as follows:- A portion of the Carriageway of the incline leading to Blackfriars Bridge has been relaid with new 3-in. x 9-in. Aberdeen Granite Pitching, an area of 1,180 superficial yards; the whole of the incline from the south side of Stamford Street to the City boundary on the north side of Upper Ground Street has now been paved with New Stone, that portion adjoining the City Boundary, an area of 1,000 yards having been paved in January, 1889 Blackfriars Road. The Footway on the North side of this street from Blackfriars Road to Broad wall has been paved with new 2½-in. Tooled York Stone Paving; a portion of the Curb has also bean redressed and refixed; 3,554 superficial feet of York Paving, and 425 feet of Curb has been laid. Gt. Charlotte Street. The Footway on the North side between Worcester Street and South Street has been relaid with new 2½-in. Tooled York Paving, an are 1,141 superficial feet, 165 feet run of Curb was also redressed and refixed. Union Street The Footway on the East side from Bankend to Messrs. Barclay's Main Gates was relaid with Greenmore Granite Paving—this hard Granite was specially selected and dressed for the work, the Footway is subject to very heavy and rough wear—barrels, casks, &c., being constantly rolled over its surface; the York Stone with which it was formerly paved was continually being broken and needing repair, but since the Granite Paving has been down no repairs have been necessary; the area paved with Granite is about 560 superficial feet. Park Street. A portion of Carriageway at Bankend which had been enclosed by a hoarding erected during the carrying out of the widening of Cannon Street Railway Bridge has now been paved with stone of the same description as the Bankside Carriageway. Bankend. A short length of New Footway has been formed in Stoney Street on the East side by the South Eastern Railway StoneyStreet 24 pany's brick arch, no footway existed before at this spot; the new portion is about 70 feet in length. Duke Street. A portion of the Carriageway of Duke Street, about 200 0 superficial yards has been relaid. Trenches, The Gas, Water, Hydraulic Power, Telegraph, Electric Lighting and other Companies, have opened 690 Trenches in the Carriageways and Footways during the year. The London Electric Supply Corporation have laid their Electric Mains through Newcomen Street, Union Street, Charlotte Street, Blackfriars Road, Cross Street. Southwark Street, Boro' High Street, and Duke Street, a length of about 10,000 feet. Their Trunk Mains have been laid in the Carriageways, but their Distributing Mains under the Footways, excepting in the case of Southwark Street, where the mains are laid in the Subway which runs throughout the length of the street. The London Hydraulic Power Company have extended their main in Red Cross Street from Union Street to Marshalsea Road. Sewer Works. The following are the principal Works executed in connection with the Sewers, &c., during the year:— Bennett St. The old High Level Brick Sewer in this street between Stamford Street and Upper Ground Street has been abolished and a new 10-in. glazed stoneware pipe sewer laid in its place; the old sewer which was nearly five feet in height was in a most dangerous and insanitary condition, it being difficult to flush, the invert had been forced up through pressure of the side walls, and in consequence the sewage matter formed into stagnant pools and only a certain proportion found its way into the Stamford Street sewer; the new 15-in. pipe has been laid in nearly the same line as the old sewer, but to a much better fall and at a lower level, it can also be thoroughly flushed by tidal water from the Thames through the Barge House Flushing Penstock. All the house connections which formerly 25 drained into the brick sewer have been connected to the new pipe; the length of the new sewer is 268 feet. A Defective Brick Barrel Sewer having been found in Park Street, the public drainage has been diverted from a portion of the same, and a length of 94 feet of 15-in. Stoneware Pipe laid under the centre of the Carriageway. Park Street. The existing Pipe Sewer in William's Court has been lengthened in order to take the drainage of a surface water gully ; the first portion of this sewer—94 feet in length—was laid last year in place of an old pipe which formerly existed; the additional length laid this year makes the present total length of the sewer 144 feet. William's Court. A new Side Entrance has been constructed to the Sewer in Southwark Bridge Road, the distance which formerly existed between the North end of the sewer and the nearest side entrance was very great, and sewer-men complained of want of proper ventilation when working in the sewer, there is now no danger, and access to the North end of the sewer is now easy. Southwark Bridge Road. The Side Entrance to the Brick Sewer in Bear Lane has been altered and reconstructed, the brickwork of the old side entrance was in a defective condition. Bear Lane. The Pipe Sewer in Cross Street has been connected to the Cross Street, large Flushing Tank in Brunswick Street, which holds 3,581 gallons or nearly 10 tons of water; the sewer c&n now be thoroughly flushed. Private Drainage Connections. The following House Drainage Connections to the Public Sewers have been made: Size of Pipe, &c. No. of Connections. 12-in. Pipe to Brick Sewers 1 9-in. „ „ „ 6 6-in. „ „ „ 10 12-in. „ Pipe Sewers 1 9-in. „ „ „ 5 6-in. 6 Total 29 26 The length and size of Pipes laid during the year for house drainage connections are as follows Size of Pipe. Feet Lineal. 6-in. 200 9-in. 202 12-in. 40 Total 442 Public Drainage. The length and size of Pipes laid for Public Drainage are as follows:— Size of Pipe. Feet Lineal. 15-in. 369 12-in. 105 9-in. 71 6-in. 104 Total 649 GULLIES AND SIDE ENTRANCES. New Gullies Constructed. No. Boro' High Street 2 Gullies Repaired. Wagstaff Buildings 1 Stamford Street 1 Bennett Street 1 Gravel Lane 1 Broadwall 2 Total 6 New Side Entrances. Southwark Bridge Road 1 Side Entrances Repaired. Stamford Street 1 Sumner Street 1 Bear Lane 1 Total 3 27 No. New Side Entrance Covers fixed 3 New Gully Grates fixed 10 Slop carted from Side Entrances 125 loads. Hoardings and Scaffolds. Twenty-eight licenses for the erection of Scaffolds and Hoardings have been issued. Advertising Stations (Rating) Act. Under this Act, which came into operation in September, 1889, we have issued Four Licenses only, and the fees realised have been under £10. It has been found that the majority of builders who erect hoardings in this District prefer to keep them free of advertisements rather than pay the rate per square yard per month fixed by the Board. GEO. ROPER NORRISH, Surveyor, August, 1891. 28 PUBLIC ANALYST'S REPORT. TO THE BOARD OF WORKS FOR THE ST. SAVIOUR'S DISTRICT. Gentlemen, I have the honour to report that during the past twelve mouths I have analysed 155 samples of food, &c. These consisted of:— No. of Samples. Arrowroot 2 Borax 1 Brandy 6 Bread 2 Butter 11 Cocoa 4 Coffee 16 Flour 2 Gin 12 Glycerine 1 Milk 63 Mustard 3 Oatmeal 2 Olive Oil I Pepper 7 Precipitated Sulphur 2 Quinine Wine 1 Tapioca 2 Tartaric Acid 2 Vinegar 2 Whiskey 13 Total 155 29 Of these- the Samples of Arrowroot, Bread, Flour, Mustard, Oatmeal, Olive Oil and Tapioca were genuine, and call for no remarks. The two samples of Vinegar were genuine but rather weak. The Borax and Precipitated Sulphur were pure, and the Quinine Wine was most accurately prepared according to the British Pharmacopœa. Brandy,- 5 samples were genuine and above the legal strenght (25° U.P.), but 1 simple was watered down to 30½° U.P. Butter.— Out of 11 samples 4 only were genuine, and 7 were samples of Margarine, i.e., mixtures of fats with water salt and curd. Cocoa.— 1 sample was genuine unmixed Cocoa, and 3 samples were mixtures of cocoa with sugar and starch; but of these 3 mixtures 2 were sold in packets properly labelled as such. Cofff.k.—12 samples were genuine and 4 were adulterated With chicory to the extent of 25%, 40%, 40%, and 85%. The last is a gross case of adulteration. Gin. —9 samples were genuine and above the legal strength (35° U.P.). while 3 samples were watered down to 39¼°, 39¼°, and 41° U.P. respectively. Milk.— Of 63 samples 45 were genuine and of varying quality— some being extremely good milks. The adulterated and doubtful samples numbered 18, and were as follows:- 40% added water 1 sample. 23% „ „ 1 „ 20% „ „ 1 „ 14% „ „ 1 „ 10% „ „ 2 samples. 8% „ „ 2 „ 7% „ „ 2 „ 6% „ „ 1 sample. 5% „ „ 4 samples. 4% „ „ 2 „ Deficient in butter-fat 15% 1 sample. The samples containing 5 and 4 per cent. of water and also the one deficient in fat, come under the head of doubtfully genuine milks of very poor quality. 30 Pepper.— One sample contained 40% of ground rice; 6 samples were genuine. Tartaric Acid.— Both samples contained a very minute quantity of lead—an impurity of manufacture, but in each case the amount was too small to be injurious to health. Commercial Tartaric Acid frequently contains traces of lead. Whiskey.— Out of 13 samples 9 were genuine and above the legal strength (25° U.P.), 1 was just below the legal strength, being 25½° U.P., and 3 samples were watered down to 34½°, 32½°, and 27½° U.P. respectively. This completes the list of samples received. If we exclude the doubtful cases of Milk and the Cocoas labelled as mixtures, the total number of adulterated samples is 31 out of 155—exactly 20 per cent; while of the samples of Milk, 11 out of 63 (or 17.4 per cent.) were decidedly adulterated. I remain, Gentlemen, Yours faithfully, R. BODMER. 14, Southwark Street, July 1st, 1891. 31 MEDICAL OFFICER'S REPORT. TO I'm; HOARD OF WORKS FOR THE ST. SAVIOUR'S DISTRICT. Gentlemen, I beg to present to you a Report of the birth and death-rate of the District for the year 1890, together with a statement of matters affecting its sanitary condition. The number of births registered was 882. Of these, 418 occurred in Christchurch, and 464 in St. Saviour. During the year there were recorded 571 deaths, 292 occurring in Christchurch, and 279 in St. Saviour. One hundred and ninety-six deaths occurred in institutions outside the district, making a total of 767. This is equivalent to an annual death-rate of 268 per thousand of the population. After deducting the 31 deaths which occurred in Christchurch Workhouse, but belonging to other districts, I find the corrected annual death-rate to be 25.7 per thousand of the population. Tins very high death-rate is largely to be attributed to the epidemic of influenza that prevailed in the early part of the past year. And even where influenza was not the direct cause of death it lowered the vital energies to such an extent that the individual was less able to resist other affections. And from careful investigation of many cases which came under my own observation I am convinced that the epidemic was primarily the cause of a very much larger number of deaths than those actually attributed to it in the returns. 32 There has been an extensive outbreak of scarlet fever, which prevailed during the greater part of the year. Thanks to the provisions of the Infectious Disease Notification Act, the epidemic never assumed the proportions it would otherwise have attained had I not been made aware of the existence of each case at its commencement. I was enabled to form an opinion as to the possibility of isolation anil the nursing obtainable in each case. Where considered advisable every legitimate effort was made to have the case removed to hospital, and I am glad to say, with a very few exceptions, this was effected without friction either with the friends or the medical attendant. The disease was bo universally spread over the district, that without the facilities I possessed, there must have been recorded a very much higher death-rate from that disease alone. There was also a severe outbreak of Measles during the year, which was the cause of death in 50 cases. I cannot help feeling that if this disease came under the provisions of the Infectious Disease Notification Act, and accommodation were to be had 111 suitable hospitals, the mortality would be much less. The surroundings of many of these cases and the want of knowledge of proper nursing were 6uch as to leave little hope for the recovery of the patients. The death-rate of children under one year has been considerably in excess of the average. I have gone into these cases as far as possible, and endeavoured to ascertain the circumstances connected with each. The result of my investigations ba-> b.en to convince me that this excessive mortality occurs largel) in the offspring of early marriages among the very poor, the, children born under such circuinstam es being naturally constitutionally weak, and being separated from their mothers, who are out at work for the greater part cf the day, tiitjy are given a dietary which they are quite unable to assimilate. Another matter to which I desire to draw attention is the deplorable want oi domestic and personal cleanliness which prevails among the poorest classes of the community. I have no hesitation in saying that it baths and washhouses were placed within reach of this class the result would be highly advantageous to the health of the district. 33 In the following tables will be found a statement of deaths, the ages, and cause of death :— ST. SAVIOURS DISTRICT—Population at Census, 1881. 28,622. Area in Statute Acres, 203. Statement of Deaths Registered in the 52 weeks ended 31st December, 1890. Under 1 year. 1 year and under 20. 20 years and under 40. 40 years and under 60. 60 years and under 80. 80 years and upwards. Totals. In the District 149 161 51 92 96 22 571 Outlying Institutions 15 48 32 46 45 10 196 Totals 164 209 83 138 141 32 767 Table of Deaths during the Year 1890 in Christchurch Sub-District, classified according to Diseases and Ages. Scarlet Fever. Diphtheria. Membranous Croup. Typhus. Typhoid. Erysepelas. Measles. Whooping Cough. Diarrhœa and Dysentery. Rheumatic Fever. Influenza. Cholera Morbus. Phthisis. Bronchitis, Pneumonia, and Pleurisy. Heart Disease. Injuries. All other Diseases. Total. Under 5 years 2 .. 1 .. .. .. 20 7 5 .. .. .. 1 29 1 5 60 131 5 years and upwards .. .. 1 .. 1 .. .. .. .. .. 1 1 25 36 17 5 74 161 Totals 2 .. 1 .. .. .. 20 7 5 .. 1 1 26 65 18 10 134 292 34 Table of Deaths during the Year 1890 in St. Saviour Sub-District, classified according to Diseases and Ages. Scarlet Fever. Diphtheria. Membranous Croup. Typhus. Typhoid. Erysipelas. Measles. Whooping Cough. Diarrhœa and Dysentery. Rheumatic Fever. Influenza. Syphilis. Phthisis. bronchitis, Pneumonia, and Pleurisy. Heart Disease. Injuries. All other Diseases. Total. Under 5 years 3 .. 2 .. .. .. 30 14 7 .. .. .. .. 50 .. 4 45 155 5 years and upwards 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 .. .. 3 .. 21 28 9 8 53 124 Totals 4 .. 2 .. .. .. 30 15 7 .. 3 .. 21 78 9 12 98 279 Table of Deaths during the Year 1890 in Outlying Institutions among persons belonging to the District, classified according to Diseases and Ages. Influenza. Scarlet Fever. Diphtheria. Typhoid. Erysipelas. Measles. Whooping Cough. Diarrhœa and Dysentery. Rheumatic Fever. Phthisis. Bronchitis, Pneumonia, and Pleurisy. Heart Disease. Injuries. All other Diseases. Total. Under 5 years 1 4 3 .. 1 1 3 2 .. .. 10 .. 2 34 61 5 years and upwards .. 1 2 2 1 .. .. 2 1 28 45 13 2 38 135 Totals 1 5 5 2 2 1 3 4 1 28 55 13 4 72 196 35 COMPARISON OF BIRTHS AND DEATHS. Christchurch. St. Saviour. births. deaths. births. deaths. Males 201 164 Males 230 145 Females 217 128 Females 234 134 Totals 418 292 Totals 464 279 Excess of Births 126 Excess of Births 185 Total Births 882 Total Deaths 571 Total excess of Births 311 Inquests. In the year under notice Inquests were held on 40 bodies, and the following verdicts returned:— Convulsive Fit 2 Phthisis 1 Suffocation 9 Atrophy 1 Apoplexy 3 Drowned 6 Rupture of Aneurism of Aorta 2 Bronchitis and Rickets 1 Syncope 1 Uræmic Poisoning 1 Shock 1 Heart Disease 1 Meningitis 1 Accident 1 Chronic Bronchitis and Heart Disease 1 Found dead 1 Chronic Bright's Disease 1 Acute Pneumonia 1 Fracture of Skull 1 Epileptic Fit 1 40 36 Cowhouses. Name of Person Licensed. Premises Licensed. Thompson Farnham. 5, Holland Street. Slaughterhouses. Previous to the annual licensing I inspected the only slaughterhouse for which an application for license was made. The result of my inspection was to recommend the County Council not to renew the license. Bakehouses. The Bakehouses have been inspected by me, and where deemed advisable, notice has been served for such alterations as would bring them within the requirements of the Act. Sanitary Proceedings. There have been several seizures of unsound food, and in each instance prosecutions followed, resulting in substantial fines. Six hundred and eighty-four Notices for the Abatement of Nuisances were served during the year, particulars of which will be furnished in your Inspector's Report. The importance of house to house inspection may be estimated by the fact, that of 491 houses inspected, it was found necessary in nearly every instance to serve notice for the carrying out of urgent sanitary requirements. I am, Gentlemen, Your obedient Servant, JAMES HERRON, M.D. 37 INSPECTOR'S REPORT. For the Year 1890-91. I have the honour to submit my Annual Report of Works Sanitary Improvements, &c., executed in connection with my department during the Year ending Lady-day last. With respect to drainage many works of considerable extent have been carried out in various parts of the district , and a very large amount of work on a smaller scale has been carried out, as well as reconstruction of separate house-drains, w.c.'s, dust-bins, &c., paving and draining of yards, cleansing, limewashing and repairing of houses, paving of Courts, &c. All drainage improvements have been executed on the most improved ana modem principles, with stoneware pipes jointed in cement, laid on and covered with concrete, disconnected from sewer where practicable and provided with man-hole, inspection chamber, air inlet, and outlet ventilating shafts. In Bennett Street a very large amount of work has been carried out. In most of these houses I found that the drains were old brick barrel drains, in a very bad condition, or square brick drains simply covered with loose slabs of stone or wood, and within a few inches of the surface of the basements, which are used as living rooms. In all these cases good stoneware pipe drains have been put in as described, and in many cases isolated blocks of two, three, and four houses have been dealt with in a similar manner, the details of which will be found in the tabulated statement annexed. I have proceeded with the house-to-house inspection with all possible dispatch, and have inspected during the past year 520 houses in connection with house-to-house inspection alone, this being quite apart from a large number of houses that have been inspected in consequence of complaints or where my attention has otherwise been called to them. I have in every case, where one cistern was in use for w.c. and domestic water supply, had a distinct and separate supply provided, and where possible have abolished the cistern for domestic purposes, and substituted for same a constant supp y 38 from the main, as I find it impossible to ensure the thorough and periodical cleansing of receptacles for water. In many cases I have found cisterns literally full of organic, and at times decomposed animal matter. The only remedy, in my opinion, is to abolish such lively sources of disease. I have endeavoured to carry out this work with the least possible amount of friction, although I have found it necessary to obtain the Board's sanction to apply for summonses in several cases. Where the work has been completed before the hearing, I have invariably withdrawn the summons. In every other instance 1 have obtained a conviction with penalty and costs, particulars of which will be found in tabulated statement of convictions. I have made several seizures of unwholesome food, for which Magistrate's Orders to destroy have been obtained and carried out. In seven instances prosecutions were undertaken, four of which were successful, convictions being obtained and penalties of £3. £2, and two of £10, together with costs, were inflicted. In the remaining cases considerable quantities of vegetables were seized in the Borough Market, there being not the slightest doubt as to their being bad, they were seen and condemned by the Magistrate and by the Medical Officer of Health, and subsequently destroyed. At the hearing of the summonses the defendants' witnesses in two cases swore that they were not intended for sale, although samples were exposed to view, this being the customary way of effecting sales of vegetable produce in the Market. I may say, the fact of exposure has always been held to be sufficient evidence to ensure a conviction; in the remaining case, potatoes which were unsound and rotten were not only exposed, but sold, but in this case the defendant's witnesses swore that they were not intended for human food, but for the food of cows or pigs, the Magistrate took this view of the case and dismissed the summons, but refused to allow costs, although the defendant's counsel made every endeavour to obtain costs against the Board. In a case of adulteration of coffee with 40 per cent, of chicory, the summons was dismissed and £1 1s. costs allowed against the Board, although in an exactly similar case where there was a similar adulteration and the same price was paid for the coffee twelve months previous, the same Magistrate convicted and inflicted a penalty of £10 and costs, and although this was pointed out, the Magistrate refused to alter his decision, but consented to state a case for a higher Court, which course was recommended by the solicitor who 39 ducted the case on the Board's behalf; this course, however the Board declined to pursue. I may however say that I have since obtained a conviction in a similar case where the same price was paid although the adulteration was heavier but this Was before another Magistrate, who inflicted a penalty of £5 and costs. Among the rather numerous prosecutions for adulteration of milk one failed owing to the defendants proving a warranty. A summons was on the same day granted by the Magistrate against the farmer, but this also fell through on account of its being taken after the time limitation had expired. During the past \ear there have been 43 prosecutions, in 37 of which the Board have been successful, being 86 percent. of the prosecutions undertaken. This is very satisfactory, especially taking into consideration the element of doubt which exists in nearly all prosecutions. I have from time to time received complaints as to obstructions of footways, upon which I have served notices, this, in the majority of cases, has had the desired effect, and I have been successful in reducing the obstruction of footways about the Borough Market and other parts of the district to the lowest possible minimum In two cases only has it been necessary to issue summonses. In the first case, which gave some trouble, the whole of the articles complained of were seized and removed to the Board's stone yard, and at the hearing of the summons, the Magistrate inflicted the full penalty and costs of summons and removal of the goods. In the second cases the summons was adjourned for the Magistrate to visit the place before he gave his decision. At the adjourned hearing the Magistrate informed the defendant's counsel that he had visited the place and must decide against him, whereupon counsel offered to give an undertaking to discontinue the obstruction, and asked that the summons might be withdrawn. This was agreed to on payment of 23s. costs. I have obtained and submitted for analysis 150 samples under the "Food and Drugs Acts, 1675 and 1879, and the "Margarine Act, 1887," which has been followed by 27 convictions, against 11 last year. I may add that recently the Board have ordered the number of samples to be increased from 100 to 150 per annum, which, as I anticipated, has resulted in a large increase in the number of convictions. I have paid special attention to the removal of house refuse, scavenging, cleansing and watering of the district, and have found it necessary 011 several occasions to report default on 40 the part of the late contractor, with the result that the Board have, in several instances, inflicted a fine. The past winter, which will he remembered as one of excessive severity and length, during which there were many heavy falls of snow which necessitated the use of the snow ploughs, and also the continual carting of snow, day and night for weeks together. This, together with the continued hard frost (which was one of the longest on record), rendered the clearing of the snow extremoly difficult and laborious. There was, however, a number of cases in which streets where the snow was not removed as provided for in the contract, there being many complaints, I reported the matter to the Board, when the contractor was fined £75. I have pleasure in stating that the lighting, cleansing, and keeping in repair of the public Lamps has been satisfactory. In only one instance has it been necessary for me to communicate with the Gas Company. The Infectious Disease (Notification) Act," which came into operation in October, 1879, and which was made compulsory in the Metropolis, has been very effectual. In no one instance has it come to my knowledge of a case not having been reported. This, together with the fact that I am in direct telephonic communication with the Asylum's Board, greatly facilitates the speedy removal of all cases reported, the time usually taken from the receipt of the notification to removal of the patient in the ambulance, being generally about one hour. I am therefore enabled to greatly expedite the disinfection of the infected premises, &c. The vast importance of these matters cannot be over estimated, as it is only by these means that sanitary authorities are enabled to successfully grapple with epidemics. In the vast majority of cases of Scarlet Fever, Diphtheria, Typhoid Fever, and Membranous Croup, I have had the cases removed to the Metropolitan Asylum Board's Hospital; 131 out of 156 cases notified have been removed in this way. I have also periodically inspected the Bakehouses, Slaughterhouses, Cowhouses, and Lodginghouses throughout the district, as well as premises upon which an offensive trade is carried on. The licenses for Slaughterhouses which are now granted by the London County Council, subject to the approval of the Sanitary Authority, were at the last licensing sessions objected to and have not been renewed. The district is now without a licensed Slaughterhouse of any description, and has now only one licensed Cowhouse. 41 LEGAL PROCEEDINGS. I have great pleasure in being able to state that throughout the year the Magistrates have, with a few exceptions, upheld the proceedings which the Board have authorised me to take; and, where the offences have been proved substantial penalties have been inflicted, with the result that less delay has taken place between the service of Notices and execution of necessary Sanitary Works, which must have a corresponding and beneficial effect upon the public health. The seizure of unsound vegetables in the Borough Market has had a very beneficial effect in deterring salesmen from offering for sale unsound goods. ARTHUR A. GRIST, 3, Emerson Street, Southwark. Inspector Table of Convictions. OFFENCE. DATE OF HEARING. BY WHOM HEARD. DECISION. 1890. .... Neglecting to relay Drains July 4 Mr. Slade. Fined £8 3/- and 4/5 costs. Adulteration of Milk 10 ,, Fined 5/- and £1 31- costs. „ Coffee „ 11 ,, Fined £10 and £1 3/- costs. Under Margarine Act „ 28 Mr. Fenwick. Fined £5 and 12/6 costs. „ „ „ 28 ,, Fined £1 and 12/6 costs. Adulteration of Milk „ 28 ,, Fined £3 and 12/6 costs. „ Pepper 28 ,, Fined £5 and 12/6 costs. „ Brandy Aug. 11 ,, Fined £5 and 12/6 costs. „ Gin ,, ,, Fined £5 and 12/6 costs. „ Milk ,, ,, Fined £3 and 12/6 costs. Under Margarine Act ,, ,, Fined £2 and 12/6 costs. „ „ ,, ,, Fined £3 and 12/6 costs Neglecting to reconstruct drains Sep. 11 ,, Fined £4 15/- and 2/- costs. Adulteration of Milk Oct. 80 Mr. Slade. Fined 10/- and 12/6 costs. „ „ ,, ,, Fined £1 and 12/6 costs. „ „ ,, ,, Fined 10/- and 12/6 costs. „ „ ,, ,, Fined £1 and 12/6 costs. „ „ ,, ,, Fined 10/- and 12/6 costs. AduIteration of Gin Nov. 17 ,, Fined £5 and 12/5 cost. „ Cocoa ,, ,, Fined £1 and 12/6 costs. „ Coffee ,, ,, Fined £2 and 12/6 costs. „ Milk ,, ,, Fined £1 and 12/6 costs. Obstruction of Footway Nov. 18 ,, Fined £2 and 17/- costs. Shooting rubbish in Street Dec. 29 Mr. Fenwick. Fined £1 and 2/- costs. „ „ ,, ,, Fined £1 and 2/- costs. „ „ 1891. ,, „ „ Feb. 11 ,, Fined 2/- and 2/- costs. Neglecting to reconstruct Drains Mar. 13 Mr. Slade. Fined £1 and 2/- costs. Exposing for sale unsound vegetables ,, ,, Fined £10 and 2/- costs. „ „ ,, ,, Fined £10 and 2/- costs. Neglecting to periodically remove Manure Mar. 9 ,, Fined £8 and 2/- costs. Exposing for sale unsound vegetables April 9 Mr. Kennedy. Fined £3 and £1 3/- costs. Obstruction of Footway May 15 ,, Fined £1 and 2/- costs. Neglecting to reconstruct drains, &c „ 28 ,, Fined £15 17/6 and 6/- costs. Adulteration of Milk June 3 Mr. Marsham. Fined £5 and 12/6 costs. „ „ ,, 3 ,, Fined £2 and 12/6 costs. „ „ „ 10 ,, Fined £2 and 2/- costs. Exposing for sale unsound vegetable ,, 13 ,, Fined £2 and 12/- costs. Adulteration of Gin ,, 18 ,, Fined £2 and 12/6 costs. „ Whiskey ,, 18 ,, Fined £4 and 12/6 costs. „ Coffee ,, 18 ,, Fined £5 and 12/6- costs. „ Butter ,, 18 ,, Fined £1 and 12/6- costs. „ „ „ 18 ,, Fined £1 and 12/6- costs. 42 TABLE OF NUISANCES, WORKS AND OTHER MATTERS ATTENDED TO DURING THE YEAR 1800-01. July. Aug. Sept. Oct. Nov. Dec. Jan. Feb. Mar. Apl. May June. Total. Nuisance Complaints received and attended to 13 7 13 9 9 8 13 7 6 11 14 6 116 Notices Served 77 55 68 62 39 38 77 61 87 36 38 16 684 Premises Inspected 52 77 38 45 27 33 83 88 24 45 37 77 626 Inspection of Works during progress 114 142 170 94 86 105 111 98 147 83 112 206 1468 Drains Trapped with Syphon Traps 37 41 21 35 41 29 53 67 48 51 79 45 539 Drains Reconstructed with Stoneware Socketed Pipes (feet) 368 440 208 400 180 120 210 440 600 950 1200 1100 6216 Drains (Old Brick) Abolished (in feet) 146 175 74 150 150 80 110 300 250 290 580 500 2805 Drains Laid to New Houses 90 ... 250 ... ... ... ... ... ... 120 58 70 588 Drains Laid to New Houses Condemned and Relaid ... ... 52 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 52 W.C.'s reconstructed 19 13 11 18 7 10 3 1 13 22 18 37 172 Drains Unstopped 7 4 6 11 5 3 7 4 2 5 4 4 62 Water Laid on to W.C.'s 13 5 21 21 7 13 18 5 15 23 21 40 212 W.C.'s Cleansed and Limewashed 21 17 30 27 20 18 28 13 6 29 18 39 266 W.C.'s Repaired 7 5 3 7 10 2 ... 1 6 21 30 27 119 W.C.'s Rebuilt 3 1 5 6 3 ... ... ... 12 7 5 13 55 Washouses Cleansed and Limewashed 23 13 21 29 37 5 11 15 22 47 42 58 323 Dwelling Rooms Cleansed, Limewashed Si Re papered 44 51 83 70 48 23 28 13 51 185 138 160 894 Yards Cleansed and Limewashed 18 20 45 67 31 33 38 25 21 32 35 38 403 Yards Paved and Drained 29 21 17 47 30 21 ... ... ... 25 43 39 272 Dust Bins provided 13 8 24 15 22 12 3 10 21 27 28 98 281 Dust Bins Repaired 9 4 11 7 8 ... ... ... ... 13 14 18 84 W.C. Flush Pipes Disconnected from Domestic Water Supply 8 4 9 5 11 0 1 ... ... 7 5 14 66 Sink Wastes Disconnected from Drain 8 7 12 20 23 9 ... ... ... 11 13 21 124 Cellars Cleansed and Limewashed 11 7 5 13 7 3 5 ... 2 3 7 10 73 Cellars Drained 4 2 1 5 3 1 ... ... ... 9 3 5 26 Cellar Dwellings Closed 6 3 5 1 1 ... ... ... 2 3 4 ... 28 Cellars Paved 5 3 1 7 3 ... ... ... ... 2 5 3 29 Cellar Gratings Reinstated ... ... 3 1 1 ... ... 2 ... 1 ... ... 10 43 Cases of Infectious Disease, Visits paid 8 12 30 38 14 13 9 12 5 6 10 13 169 Nuisances from Overcrowding Abated ... 3 ... 2 6 1 1 2 ... 5 3 6 29 Roofs and Gutters Repaired 6 2 4 14 12 3 6 4 ... ... 4 12 67 Additional W.C.'s provided • • . 1 ... 1 • •• 2 1 ... ... 4 6 2 17 D Traps Abolished 2 2 6 2 4 4 5 ... ... 3 7 9 44 Pan Container Closets Abolished 1 ... 1 ... 2 • •• ... ... ... 6 4 2 16 Soil Pipes and Drains Ventilated 8 5 1 9 7 6 ... ... ... 4 12 22 74 Houses Repaired Throughout 17 21 12 23 35 17 10 2 6 5 33 56 237 W.C. Pans Cleansed 14 10 5 16 22 15 4 ... ... 2 11 5 94 Defective W.C. Pans Reinstated 20 16 12 17 9 2 2 5 10 8 11 119 W.C. Fittings Repaired 1:3 2 ... 4 ..... ... 27 33 25 22 12 27 196 Applications for Removal of House Refuse 46 35 45 42 44 87 159 17 61 61 42 57 799 W.C.'s Unstopped 3 2 2 6 2 1 3 6 4 1 3 4 36 Notification of Infectious Disease Reported to School Board 12 15 34 27 12 13 8 11 5 6 9 3 155 Rooms Disinfected after Cases of Infectious Disease 15 11 29 26 11 13 10 11 4 6 5 4 145 Clothing, &c. ditto ditto (by Dry Heat) 200 201 334 287 151 189 172 118 25 56 63 42 1846 Bedding, &c., Destroyed 3 7 ... ... ... ... ... 3 10 34 ... 4 61 Animals Removed, Pigs ... ... ... 7 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 7 ditto Rabbits 12 4 5 3 5 ... ... 4 16 12 22 17 100 ditto Fowls 20 16 9 12 29 7 4 12 26 30 29 34 228 Accumulation of Refuse, &c., Removed 2 4 1 ... 2 ... ... 5 2 1 4 2 23 Manure Pits Provided 1 ... 1 ... ... 3 ... 1 ... 2 ... 8 Areas Drained 3 7 4 7 3 ... ... 4 2 3 2 35 Courts, &c., Repaved ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... 1 1 ... 2 ... 5 Wasliouses Paved 4 7 3 11 12 6 1 ... ... 10 7 12 73 Cisterns Abolished 3 5 2 10 3 1 1 ... 1 7 3 8 44 Cisterns Provided with Covers 4 7 2 2 3 4 ... ... ... 6 12 11 51 Cistrrns Cleansed 9 3 7 6 4 ... ... ... 1 9 4 7 50 Obstructions Removed 3 7 4 ... 9 ... ... 4 3 ... 2 11 43 UNSOUND FOOD SEIZED AND CONDEMNED, Turnips, 348 Bags. Turnip Tops, 180 Bags. Brocoli, 2 Baskets and 16 Bags. 77 Bunches of Green. Onions, 5 Cases and 77 Bags. Brussell Tops, 6 Bags. Rape Tops, 129 Bags. 2 Crates of Cauliflowers, and 8 Bags Potatoes. 44 45 THE BOARD OF WORKS FOR HE ST. SAVIOUR'S DISTRICT. ABSTRACT OF ACCOUNTS, from the March, 1890, to 25th March, 1891. RECEIPTS. PAYMENTS. To Balances from last Year— £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. Treasurer's Account 4,001 18 9 EDUCATION RATE. Labour and Petty Cash a/c 65 2 6 cool Board for London, Amount Precepts, dated 3rd January, 1390 7,022 16 5 Cash in hand 6 5 5 71 7 11 dated 3rd July, 1890 7,284 12 11 4,073 6 8 14,307 9 4 EDUCATION RATE. PUBLIC DRAINAGE. Overseers, St. Saviour 9,644 4 8 ,, Christchurch 4,519 2 4 14,163 7 0 ???re it Son (Contractors), 1 year to 25th December 404 16 8 SEWER RATE. To Trolley 7 13 0 ???thwark and Vauxhall Water Company, Water for Flushing 3 3 0 Overseers, St. Saviour 686 0 0 ???nbeth Water Company ditto 6 17 6 Christchurch 325 0 0 1,011 0 0 ???ler & Company, Iron Work for Sewers 2 13 0 ditto 24 13 0 GENERAL PURPOSES RATE. Liver, Oil, &c 3 15 1 ???bs, Young & Co., Drainage Implements 10 8 6 Overseers, St. Saviour 6,664 0 0 ???rett & Son, Sewer Rods, &c. 4 13 6 ,, Christchurch 3,018 0 0 468 13 3 9,682 0 0 Carried forward 14,776 2 7 Carried forward £28,929 13 8 46 47 Brought forward £28,929 13 Brought forward £11,776 2 7 PUBLIC CHALET. PRIVATE DRAINAGE. ???rare & Sons, Contractors, 1 year to 25th Dec. 82 0 7 Fees 363 3 Various Persons, Balance Drainage Deposits, returned 12 1 5 94 2 0 CONTRIBUTION. CHALET. London County Council, Moiety Salary Medical Officer ... 57 10 Sothwark and Vauxhall Water Company, Water Supply 9 14 8 ???es, Plumbers' Work- 2 4 7 RENT. ???arc Son, ditto 2 18 1 ???livant, Paper 3 3 0 Executors of Win. Lee, Esq., 2 years Rent Premises in Upper Ground Street, to Christmas (less Tax) 14 12 6 ???in & Co., Towels 4 4 0 ???dges, Washing Towels 6 2 3 Cooks, ditto 5 9 8 Mrs. Humphery, Rent Charge on Vaults under Southern Approach to London Bridge, 1 year to 3rd April (less Tax) ... 19 7 3 11 11 11 ???tter, Printing Tickets 13 12 0 ???aver, Sundries 6 10 0 ???ders A Baker, Copper Boiler and Enamelled Basin 1 15 3 Various persons, Sundry Small Rents 5 5 0 39 4 ! 55 13 6 URINALS. PAVING. Sothwark and Vauxhall Water Company, Water Supply 36 9 9 Sale of Old Stone 23 18 ???Lmeth Water Company, Water Supply 36 9 11 ???es, Plumbers' Work 1 2 2 ???fere & Son, Repairs 3 8 9 DEPOSITS. ???e, ditto 3 14 0 London Electric Supply Corporation, Limited 250 0 0 ???mt, Spirits of Salts 1 18 8 Various persons on making Private Connections with Sewers ... 91 11 7 83 3 3 PAVING. Ditto, on erection of Hoardings, &c. 46 3 6 ???toriel, Contractor, Paving Works 2,555 12 7 387 15 ???ghts, Wood Paving Blocks 42 10 0 ???ide Travers Asphalte Company, Repairs 1 0 10 ???ftvlem & Co., Hire Roller 2 12 6 INTEREST. 2,601 15 11 London and County Bank, Interest on Current Account 100 7 SCAVENGING AND DUSTING. ???libbs, Contractor, to 25th December 4,000 9 0 Carried forward £29,901 12 Carried forward 21,611 6 3 48 49 Brought forward £29,901 12 Brought forward 21,61 6 3 sanitary. Metropolitan Asylums Board, Fees re infectious Diseases (Notification) Act 23 0 watering. Southwark and vauxhall water Company water for Road 200 0 0 Rubbs, Contractor, water carts, &c. 395 0 0 sundries Fines out of Court 165 10 595 0 0 Lighting. South Metropolitan Gas Company, 1 year to 25th December > 1,931 17 5 Labour. ???ire of Labourers, 1 year to 25th March 552 3 6 Repairs. London County Council 1 0 5 ???pre &Son 31 6 10 ???ck & Co. 24 13 6 ???nes 2 11 8 ???and, Mason & Co 0 15 0 Truth 0 6 0 60 13 5 Salaries and wages. Maries 1,197 5 10 273 18 8 1,471 4 6 Rent and insurance. Gurch wardens St. Saviour's, 1 year's Rent of Offices to 25th December (less Property tax and Insurance) 49 17 6 South Eastern Railway Co., 1 year's Rent, Stone yard, to 25th Dec. (less tax) 97 10 0 Gurchwardens, Christchurch, ditto, Land in upper Ground Street, ditto 14 12 6 ???ches Ewer Street 1 0 3 ???turance Office Furniture 0 8 0 163 3 0 Carried forward £30,090 3 Carried forward 26,385 13 1 50 51 Brought forward £30,090 3 Brought forward £26,385 13 1 RATES AND TAXES. 72 2 2 PRINTING, STATIONERY, &c. Runnings 32 12 0 ??? & Co. 12 14 0 ???impsell & Briginshaw 18 9 0 ???kley 3 0 0 ???terlow Bros. & Layton 1 6 3 Sewett 2 14 9 Bitter 6 8 0 77 4 0 OFFICE EXPENSES. ???ter Purifying Company, Re-charging Filter 1 2 6 Wolf, Winding, &c., Clocks 3 3 0 ???lls & Son, Uniforms... 14 13 6 Whiksey ditto 1 1 0 15 14 6 ???are & Son, Repairs Arc. 11 12 0 ???nley, Drawing Board 1 2 6 1 st, Accountant 7 7 0 ???kridge, Drinking Glasses 1 0 0 ???ted Telephone Company 20 0 0 ???aver, Soap, &c. 1 12 0 ???ton Horne, Coals 7 16 0 ???raud & Peters, ditto 3 15 0 11 11 0 ???ders it Baker, Coal Scoops Ac. 0 7 0 ???eyor, Sundries 2 12 1 ???, Inspector, ditto 37 0 0 ???sekeeper, ditto 5 17 8 Sundries 0 7 6 120 8 9 Carried forward £30,090 3 Carried forward £26,655 8 0 52 53 Brought forward £30,000 3 Brought forward £26,655 8 0 LOANS. London County Council, Interest 57 15 0 ??? Instalment Principal 200 0 0 257 15 0 ??? & PARLIAMENTARY EXPENSES. ???tlin, Washington & pasmore 419 17 9 SANITARY. ???re Son, Work at Mortuary 22 18 0 ???las Co., Disinfectants 7 11 6 ???ougall Bros., ditto 6 5 0 Sons & Co., Lime 1 1 0 ???ron, Squire & Francis, Sulphur 1 2 0 ???rn, Iron Dust Bin 0 12 0 Field, Coffins 3 18 6 ???rewett, Mortality Returns 1 9 0 ???Irs, ditto 2 10 0 3 19 0 3. Sanitary Implements 3 3 0 ???aer Sanitary Co., ditto 3 6 0 ???ht & Co., Forms 0 18 9 ???rtious Disease (Notification) Act, Fees 18 17 0 ???try Expenses of Disinfecting 31 19 0 ???ling Towels, Mortuary 0 8 0 Sundries 0 10 9 106 9 6 HOARDINGS, &c. ???ance Deposit Returned 4 6 0 Carried forward £30,090 3 Carried forward £27,443 16 8 54 55 Brought forward £30,090 Brought forward £27,443 16 3 SUNDRIES. ???linking Fountain Association 2 10 0 ???briel, Red Sand 35 8 0 ???bbey, Bottles for Samples 1 14 0 ???iley, Pegg & Co., Ironwork 8 8 0 ???tans & Co., Iron Post, See 2 3 8 Valley, Son Jones, Shovels, &c. 1 16 6 ???Tiller & Co., Street Name Plates 5 6 3 ???tarantee Society Premiums 3 0 0 ???bser Son, Shovels, &c. 0 5 4 ???ribbs, Cartage 12 7 3 ???gden, Hose 2 2 3 ???impbell, Copies Statement re School Board Expenditure 0 13 4 ???lings, Bag 0 18 6 ???py Acts of Parliament, &c. 6 5 10 ???echti, Tins for Samples 0 18 0 ???unp Duty 2 13 6 ???stage and other Small Items 7 14 0 94 4 5 Balance at Bank 2,526 13 4 Ditto (Petty Cash) 21 17 10 Cash in hand 3 11 8 25 9 6 2,552 2 10 £30,090 £30,090 3 6 56 57 Account shaving the application of the Receipt and Payment foregoing Abstract, to the various Ratal Accounts. GENERAL PURPOSES Dr. £ s. Cr. £ s. d. To Paving Carriageways and Footways 2,615 4 Receipts from General Purposes Rate 9,392 0 0 ,, Scavenging and Dusting 3,946 12 Interest on Bank Account 84 14 5 ,, Watering 695 0 Sundries 32 5 3 „ Lighting 1,946 19 Drainage Deposits 79 10 2 ,, Labour and Wages 552 3 Hoardings Deposits 41 17 6 ,, Repairs, &c. 99 12 Balance 1,573 0 2 ,, Interest on Loans, Paving Purposes 56 0 ,, Law and Parliamentary 419 17 ,, Sanitary 82 3 ,, 1/3 Establishment Expenses 989 13 £11,203 7 £11,203 7 6 SEWERTE. £ s. £ s. d. To Sewer and Drainage Work 389 16 Receipt from Sewers Rate 1,011 0 0 ,, Private Drainage Connections 95 11 Chalet 321 10 8 ,, Urinals 80 5 „ Wages 192 17 ,, 1/3 Establishment Expenses... 494 16 ,, Balance 79 3 £1,332 10 £1,332 10 8 ESTABLISHMENT SENSES. £ s. £ s. d. To Salaries 1,073 2 General Purposes Rate, 2/3 of Total 989 13 5 ,, Wages 81 1 Sewers Rate, 1/3 of Total 494 16 9 ,, Rent and Insurance 121 3 ,, Rates and Taxes 72 2 ,, Printing and Stationery 60 15 ,, Office Expenses 73 6 £1,484 10 £1,484 10 2 58 59 ST. SAVIOUR'S DISTRICT CARD OF WORKS. Statement of Account showing the ascertained or estimates and Liabilities of the, Board on the 26th March, 1891. ASSETS. LIABILITIES. £ s. £ s. d. £ s. d. Amount due from Overseers of St. Saviour's— Board for London 3,645 5 4 Education Rate 2,442 9 ???ry Creditors— Amount due from Overseers of Christchurch— Paving 348 12 11 Education Rate 1,346 18 Drainage 126 14 10 London County Council 50 0 Scavenging and Dusting 946 3 6 Cash Balance with Treasurer 2,526 13 Lighting 509 7 5 Petty Cash at Bank and in Hand 25 9 Salaries 262 10 0 Chalet Fees in Hand 17 0 Rents and Insurance 36 11 3 Interest due on Bank account 16 10 Urinals and Chilet 20 0 6 Balance 1,306 5 1 Office Expenses 7 7 0 Balance of General Purposes Rate 1,573 0 2 London Electric Supply Company 214 14 3 2,472 1 8 Less Balance Sewers Rate 79 3 0 ???Ion County Council— 1,493 17 2 Loan repayable by instalments extending over 8 years, and interest to date 1,614 0 0 Less Balance 26/3/90 187 11 8 £7,731 7 £7,731 7 0 I certify that I have examined the account of the St. Saviour's District of Works for the year ending 25th March, 1891. I have seen and Checked all the Vouchers for payments, and ascertained the correctness balance with the Treasurer, and, in my opinion, the above Statement is correct WALTER W. FEAST, F.C.A., St. George's House, 11th May, 1891. Eastcheap, London, E.C. 60 61 Dr. PUBLIC CONVENIENCES at ??? of Southwark Street, Borough. Cr. Account of Receipts and Expenditure the year ending 25th March, 1891. £ s. d. £ s. £ s. d. £ s. d. To Fees received for uso of Closets and Lavatories, viz.: South Metropolitan Gas Company, 4 Quarters' Lighting 31 8 3 Southwark and Vauxhall Water Company, 4 Quarters' Water Supply 9 14 8 MEN'S DEPARTMENT. Sundries, viz.:— Quarter to 24th June 72 14 4 Hoare & Son, Repairs 2 18 1 ,, 29th September 100 9 7 Ewn & Co., Towels 4 4 0 ,, 25th December 73 2 4 Hodges, Washing Towels 6 2 3 ,, 25th March 66 6 9 Brooks ,, 5 9 8 312 13 11 11 11 WOMEN'S DEPARTMENT Slatter, Printing Tickets, &c. 13 12 0 Cleaver, Soap, Ac. 6 10 0 Bullivant, Paper 3 3 0 Quarter to 24th June 16 4 6 Jones, Plumbers' Work 2 4 7 ,, 29th September 21 13 10 Ponders and Baker, Copper Boiler and Enamelled Basin 1 15 3 ,, 25th December 14 11 11 25th March 11 9 6 Other Small Items 1 5 0 63 19 47 3 10 Wages of Attendants, 52 Weeks :— Men's Department 114 15 2 Women's ditto 84 14 0 199 9 2 Balance 88 16 10 £376 12 £376 12 9 62 CONTRACTS IN FORCE on 20th MARCH, 1891. Name of Contractor. Nature of Contract. Term. Amount. Hoare & Son Sewer and Drainage Works 3 Years from 25th March, 1888 At Prices named in printed Schedule of Prices. Joseph S. Gabriel Paving Carriageways Ditto Per Schedule of Prices in Contract. Ditto Paving Footways Ditto Ditto. William Stubbs Scavenging and Dusting 3 Years from 24th June, 1888 £4000 per annum. Ditto Watering Ditto to November, 1891 £100 per annum. Limmer Asphalte Paving Company Rapair of Footway on East side of Boro' High Street 10 years from 26th May, 1891 COPY AUDITORS CERTIFICATE. We, the undersigned Auditors of Accounts appointed by the Board of Works for the Saint Saviour's District to audit the Accounts of the said Board for the financial year which ended on the '25th March, 1891, do hkkrby certify that we have investigated such Accounts, and the same are, to the best of our knowledge and belief, correct. Dated the 29th Day of May, 1891. (Signed) AUBRAY HYMAN, JOHN DYER FIELD, FREDK WM. DAVISION. Auditors. 63 ???KRD OF WORKS FOR THE ST. SAVIOUR'S DISTRICT NAMES AND ADDRESSES OF MEMBERS ST. SAVIOUR, S.E. ???rixter, Fredk South Eastern Wharf, Park Street. ???tchford, R. H. Hit, Bankside. ???ridgman, T. R Three Tuna Court. Borough. ???Istle, Henry 97a, Southwark Bridge Road. ???ake, W. J. 81, union Street, Borough. ???les, H. J 89, Stunner Street, Southwark Bridge Road. ???bveney, T. 8, Park Street. ???y, H. J Spur Inn Yard, Borough High Street. ???Ilson, R.A. 180, Union Street, Borough. ???dwin. Arnold Sumner Street, Southwark Bridge Road, ???regory, Henry 75, Borough Higii Street. ???rattan, H. H. G. 16, Borough High Street. ???till, W. E. 18, Borough High Street. ???kith, Alex. J. York Street, Borough Market. ???innell, C. P. 65a, Southwark Street. ???lytnan, A. R. 1, Deninan Street. ???atthewB.J. 53, Borough High Street. ???eikle, Jan. 57, Southwark Street. ???hodes, J. G. (L.C.C.) 7, 8outhwark Street. ???ideal, Alfred. 117, Union Street, Borough. ???ose: J. S. 17, Borough High Street. ???nclair, James 65, Southwark Street. ???ozer, C. 17, Park Street. ???illiatnti, Charles R. 107. Borough High Street. CHRISTCHURCH, S.E. ???ack, Thos 27, Stamford Street. ???owers, R. W. 89, Blackfriars Road. ???urton, B. 82, Blackfriars Road. ???arter, W. 40, Charlotte Street, Blackfriars Road. Clark, Jas York Street, Blackfriars Road. ???ooper. J. 207, Blackfriars Road. ???aulkner. Wm. B 223, Blackfriars Road. ???awkins. JaB. H 21, Burrell Street. Blackfriars Road. Menley, Charles 188, Blackfriars Road. ???opkins, William 50. Nelson Square, Blackfriars Road. Hopkins. John 99, Brixton Road. S.W. Dinner, J 175, Blackfriars Road. ???idley, Henry 6, Great Charlotte Street. ???obertson, W 200 & 210. Blackfriars Road. ???nook, George 51, Blackfriars Road. OFFICERS- Charles Edwd. Stowell, Manager, London and County Bank, Southwark Branch. William H. Atkins, Springtield House, Cambridge Rd., Teddington, S.W. I G. R. Norrisli, Hawley House, Tudor Road, Upper Nor wood, S.E. Percy W. Watson, 17, Harrington Road, South Norwood, S.E. Clerk of the Works - Medical Officer Analyst Inspector under Sale of Food, &c., Act Inspector of Nuisances . Donald Brims, 2 Cannon Row, Southwark Bridge Road, S.E. Dr. Jas. Herron, 73, Southwark Bridge Road, S.E. Richard Bodmer, F.I C., 12, Southwark Street, S.E. A. A. Grist, 3, Emerson Street, Bankside, S.E.