Metropolis local management Act BOARD OF WORKS FOR THE ST. SAVIOUR'S DISTRICT. THE THIRTY-THIRD ANNUAL REPORT, BEING FOR THE YEAR 1888-89. LONDON: PRINTED BY ASH & CO. 42, SOUTHWARK STREET 1886 St. sabionr's District Board of Works LIST OF MEMBERS of STANDING COMMITTEES PAVING AND GE N ERAL SEWERS COMMITTEE. PURPOSES COMMITTEE. HAGGLS, A H., (L.C.C.) HALE, JOSIAH, Chairman. Chairman. CLARK, JAS. BACK, T. COLES, H. J. CARTER, W. ECKSTEIN, WILLIAM CLOAKE, W. J. GILSON, R. A. HOPKINS, WILLIAM GOODWIN, ARNOLD PELLS. HENRY HENLEY, CHARLES PINNER, J. KEITH, ALEX. J. RIDEAL, ALFRED MILLS, JOHN STEVENS, ALFRED PALMER, JOHN WILLIAMS, CHARLES RIDER, T. F. SANITARY COMMITTEE. FINANCE COMMITTEE. HUNT, RICHARD, Chairman. BAXTER, F., Chairman. BLATCHFORD, R. H. BRIDGMAN, T. R. CHAPMAN, DANIEL ANGUS, WILLIAM DYKES, JAS BOWERS, R. W. GREGORY, HENRY COOPER, J. HAWKINS, JAMES H. MASON, G. H. KINNELL, C. P. MEIKLE, JAMES RHODES, J. G., (L.C.C.) RIDLEY, HENRY STUNT, OCTAYIUS SINCLAIR, JAS. St. Sabiour's District Board of Works. REPORT OF PROCEEDINGS OF THE BOARD FOR THE YEAR 1888-9, by the CLERK, SURVEYOR, MEDICAL OFFICER, INSPECTOR OF NUISANCES AND ANALYST; Also Account in Abstract of Sums received and expended by the Board during the same period. Printed in accordance with Section 198 of the Metropolis Local Management Act (18 and 19 Vict., cap 120), and ordered to be circulated among the inhabitants of the District. By the of the Local Government (England and Local Government Wales) Act, 1888 (51 and 52 Vict., c. 41), the Metropolitan Act, 1888. Board of Works has ceased to exist, and the London County Council has been established in its place. The mode of election being by direct vote of the ratepayers, the power which this Board possessed, under the Metropolis Local Management Act, of appointing a representative ceases, and, in common with other District Boards and Vestries, it is now without any official representation whatever. Two of its Members, however, Mr. Alderman Haggis and Mr. J. G. 4 Rhodes, have been chosen by the ratepayers as Councillo??? for West Southwark, the Parliamentary Division in which the District is situate, and the Board can always rely upon the courtesy of those gentlemen, in the event of any matter of local importance coming before the Council. The transfer of the duties of the Metropolitan Board Works to the County Council has notgreatly affected the status or position of the District Vestries, whose duties are for the most part separate from and independent ??? any central authority; but the provisions contained in the following Sections of the Act are important, and demand the careful consideration of the local authorities. Section XI.—Sub-section Enacts that every road in ??? County which is for the time being a main road within the meaning of the Highways and Locomotives (Amendment) Act, 1878, shall be vested in the County Council for the purposes of maintenance, repair, improvement,??? enlargement, and other dealing with such road. Sub-scction 2.—Provides that the local authority may, within 12 months, claim to retain the powers and duties of maintaining and repairing any main road, and thereupon shall be entitled to retain the same, and for the purpose of the maintenance, &c., shall have the» same powers and be subject to the same duties as if such road were an ordinary road vested in the local authority. It also provides that the County Council shall make to such authority an annual payment towards the cost of such maintenance and repair. Sub-section 3.—The amount of payment to be such annual sum as may be agreed on, or determined by arbitration of the Local Government Board. Sub-section 4.—The County Council and local authority may contract for the maintenance, repair, improvement, enlargement, &c., of any main road; and, if the County Council so requires, the local authority shall undertake the same, subject to arbitration. Sub-section 5.—No payment shall be made to a local authority until the County Council is satisfied by report of its surveyor, that roads, &c., have been properly maintained. Sub-scction 6.—Main roads, &c., vested in County Council, except when the local authority retains the powers and and duties of maintenance. Sub-scction 7.—Roads must be placed in proper repair and condition before being declared main roads. Sub-scction 8.—If any main roads, the maintenance of which is undertaken by the local authority, be not kept in proper repair and condition, notice may be served upon local authority, and on default, repairs executed by County Council. Sub-scction 9.—Differences to be referred to arbitration. Sub-scction 10—Enables the County Council to contribute towards the cost of maintenance, repair, enlargement, and improvement of any highway or public foot-path, although the same is not a main road. Sub-scction 11.—Power or duty of lighting main roads to remain in the hands of local authority. Sub-sccticn 12.—All duties exercised by a local authority in respect of main roads may be discharged by the County Council. Sub-scction 13—makes Section 20 of the Highways and and Locomotive (Amendment) Act, 1878, applicable. Sections XVII, XVIII, XIX, and XXIV.—Sub-section C relate to the qualification, appointment, duties, salary and tenure of office of Medical Officers of Health. Section 88 incorporates the 191st Section of the Public Health Act, 1875, which provides that no person shall be elected a Medical Officer of Health unless the appointment and salary be approved by the Local Government Board. By Sub-scction C, above referred to, it is enacted that the London County Council shall pay to every local authority for any area, wholly or partly in the County by whom a Medical Officer of Health or Inspector of Nuisances is paid, 6 one half of the salary of such Medical Officer, provide??? that his qualification, appointment, salary, and tenerd of office are in accordance with the regulations of the Local Government Hoard. By Section XLV. the licensing of Slaughterhouses and Cowhouses is transferred to the County Council. The Local Government Board has issued an order, dated the 28th March, 1889, containing regulations in regard to the appointment of Medical Officers of Health, and the same is referred to in a subsequent paragraph of this Report. Royal Academy. In the latter part of June, 1888, the Board, at the suggestion of the Vestry of Clerkenwell, presented a Memorial to the President and Council of the Royal Academy of Arts, praying that the galleries of that institution might, in the interests of the working classes, be open on Saturday evenings, at the same entrance fee and during the same hours as in the last week of the exhibition. In reply, a letter has lately been received from the secretary stating that, after giving the matter very careful consideration, it was found that there were difficulties of a practical character which, in the opinion of the President and Council, would render it impossible to comply with the request. Advertising Rating Bill. The Board also presented a Petition to the House of Commons in favour of the Advertising Rating Bill, the object of which was to facilitate the rating of land used for advertising purposes. Electric Lighting. In July statutory notices were received from the London Electric Supply Corporation, Limited, and the Metropolitan Electric Supply Company, Limited, of their intention to apply to the Board of Trade for a provisional order pursuant to the provisions of the Electric Lighting Acts, 1882 & 1888, to enable them respectively to supply electricity for lighting and other purposes within the district; and, in November, maps were deposited showing the "areas of supply." In December the House-to-House Electric Light Supply Company gave notice of application to the Board of Trade for a license under the same Acts. This Board at the outset resolved to offer no 7 opposition to the various schemes, being of opinion that it was to the interest of the public that electric lighting should be encouraged under proper restrictions, and to confine itself to making a representation of its views to the Board of Trade so soon as the draft orders and license should be forthcoming. Copies of these were shortly afterwards deposited, and in February a special meeting was, pursuant to the rules of the Board of Trade, convened to consider the applications. It was then formally resolved that. subject to a representation being made to the Board of Trade, the consent of the Board should be given to the several applications. The terms of such representation were then settled, and comprised, inter alia, the following That the number and sions of the distributing boxes to be inserted in the footways should be strictly defined and limited—that the surface plates should consist of a stone covering in an iron frame—that all wires for the conveyance of electricity should be placed underground—that local authorities should be invested with similar powers for reinstatement of roads after trenches to those which they possess in the case of gas and water companies, and that in the event of concessions to more than one company the district should be apportioned, a separate portion being allotted to each, unless the competing companies could be required to lay their wires in the same trench or channel. These terms were also forwarded to each of the three companies, and, after some negotiation, the House-to-House Company came to terms, agreeing substantially to the requirements of the Board, and the draft license was altered accordingly. The other two companies, however, held aloof, and the consent given in their case was therefore withdrawn. In March the Board of Trade ordered a Public Inquiry to be held, and appointed Major Marindin its Commissioner, who, on the 9th May, reported in favour of the London Company to the exclusion of the other two so far as this district is concerned, and a model order has since been promulgated which is in tended to apply to Electric Supply Companies generally throughout the Metropolis. This order provides, amongst 8 other things, that the Companies shall not, without the express consent of the London County Council, place any electric line above ground, along, over or across any street; but it does not in any other respect meet the views of this Board as expressed in its communication to the Board of Trade. The following streets have been scheduled for the compulsory laying down of wires within two years, viz.:—Borough High Street, Blackfriars Road and Southwark Street. Metropolitan Board of Works. In July also the Board, on the motion of Mr. Meikle, passed the following resolution, copies of which were forwarded to the late Metropolitan Board of Works and to the Vestries and District Boards of the Metropolis:— "That this Board, while approving of the action of the Metropolitan Board of Works in dismissing Messrs. Robertson, Goddard, and Goddard, jun., considers it of vital importance that an explanation should be demanded of the Chairman of that Board as to the reason why the proved malpractices of several of its Members and Officials could by any possibility have been allowed to pass without immediate detection." Zymotic Diseases. The Board, as stated in the last Annual Report, resolved to present a Memorial to the Local Government Board, a copy of which was set out on page 17, praying that that Board would promote a Bill in Parliament in order to legalise the reception into the Hospitals of the Metropolitan Asylums Board of cases of measles and of diphtheria in like manner and under the same restrictions as prevail in regard to fever, small pox, and other forms of zymotic disease. In July the Memorial was forwarded to the Local Government Board; and, in October, a letter was received from that Board adverting to the Memorial and the accompanying letter, and enclosing, for the information of this Board, copy of one addressed by them to the Metropolitan Asylums Board, stating that, pending the settlement of the legal question involved, the Managers had determined to admit cases of diphtheria into the hospitals under their control. In November the Medical Officer called the attention of the Sanitary Committee to the fact that measles was still prevalent to a large extent in the district, and expressed an opinion that, owing to the want of power to isolate such cases, the disorder might again assume an epidemic form. He also called the 9 attention of the Committee to the statistics of mortality as quoted in the above Memorial, from which it appeared that in 1887 the mortality from measles was more than twice as great as that from scarlet fever. It was therefore resolved to recommend the Board to again memorialise the Local Government Board to authorise the Managers of the Asylums Board [to receive into the hospitals under their control such cases of measles as the Medical Officers of Health might consider it desirable to send. The following Memorial was accordingly prepared and presented:— "To the Honourable the Local Government Board. The humble Memorial of the Board of Works for the Saint Saviour's District, under their Common Seal, Sheweth:— That, in July last, your Memorialists as the Sanitary Authority for the District of St. Saviour, Southwark, addressed a Memorial to your Honourabl. Board Showing (inter alia) that during the year 1887 the said district of your Memorialists in common with the rest of the Metropolis, suffered from m epidemic of zymotic diseases, and that an unduly large proportion of deaths resulted from measles, the numbc bing a, under viz., out of 12,027 cases which were recorded in the Metropolis, 3,762 suited from diarrhoea, 2,928 from whooping cough, 2,81)3 from measles, 1,431 from scarlet fever, 951 from diphtheria, 653 from different forms of fever, and 9 from small pox, and your Memorialists prayed that coses of measles and of diphtheria might be receivod into the hospitals of the Metropolitan Asylums Board in like manner and under the same restrictions as cases of fever, small pox and other forms of zymotic disease. Your Memorialists observe with satisfaction that provisional arrangements have been made by your honourable Board for the reception into the hospitals of persons suffering from diphtheria, and that it is the intention of your honourable Board to introduce a Bill for the purpose of removing any doubts which may exist as to the legality of the reception of such cases; hut your Memorialists regret that arrangements were not made simultaneously for the reception of cases of measles into the hospitals as prayed by your Memorialists. Your Memorialists desire to draw the attention of your honourable Board to the fact that, as shewn by the above statistics, the mortality from measles in the year 1887, was, notwithstanding the severe epidemic of scarlet fever which then prevailed, more than twice as great as from the latter. Your Memorialists are advised that, owing to the infectious nature of the disorder and to the great difficulty and oftentimes impossibility of isolating such cases in the homes of the poor, there is danger of the outbreak of measles assuming an epidemic form; and they submit that, having regard to the large proportion of deaths there from, it is 10 desirable, in the interests of the public health, that provision should be made for the reception of exceptional cases of measles into the hospitals of the Metropolitan Asylums Board on the certificate of the Medical Officers of Health, in the same manner as cases of fever, small pox and diphtheria. Your Memorialists therefore humbly pray that your honourable Board will be pleased to direct that similar arrangements shall be made for the reception of cases of measles into the hospitals of the Metropolitan Asylums Board, to those which have already been made in regard to diphtheria; and that any Bill which your honourable Board may promote for obtaining the sanction of the legislature to the reception of cases of diphtheria, measles may be included And your Memorialists will ever pray, Ac." Sealed with the Common Seal of the Board of Works for the St. Saviour's District in the presence of W. H. ATKINS, Clerk of the Hoard. 21st December, 1888. Main Roads. On this subject a circular letter was, in the latter part of October, received from the Vestry of Chelsea, inviting the Board to appoint delegates to attend a conference to consider the various clauses of the Local Government Act, 1888, relating to the control and management of the highways of the Metropolis, and the Board appointed Messrs. Baxter, Bovvers and Sinclair. The conference took place at the Town Hall, Chelsea, on Thursday, the 14th February, and the following resolutions were passed:— Resolved— "(a) That, in the opinion of this Conference, the Vestries and District Boards of the Metropolis, should make application to the County Council for orders declaring those highways in their respective districts which are means of communication between different districts, or thoroughfares to railway stations, or which are used largely by Metropolitan traffic, as opposed to local traffic, to be Main Roads under the Highways' and Locomotives' (Amendment) Act, 1878, and the Local Government (England and Wales) Act, 1888, and the Conference is further of opinion that the County Council should make such orders accordingly." "(6) That, in the opinion of this Conference, the Vestries and District Boards of the Metropolis, should claim to retain the powers and duties of maintaining and repairing main roads within their district." Subsequently, the question was considered by the Paving 11 and General Purposes Committee; and, acting on a recommendation from them, the Hoard submitted the following to the London County Council as being, in its opinion "main roads " within the meaning of the Act, viz. Borough High Street. Railway Approach, and Denman Street, leading to the railways, London Bridge. St. Thomas's Street. Southwark Street. Stamford Street. Southwark Bridge Road. Blackfriars Road. Newcomen Street. Union Street. Charlotte Street. Gt. Charlotte Street. In November a plan, with gazette notice, book of reference,&c., was deposited by the South Eastern Railway Company of certain proposed deviations and extensions, for which parliamentary sanction was sought to be obtained. The scheme being of little importance so far as this district was concerned, only one small block of property situate in Guildford Street being scheduled, the Board resolved not to oppose it. Maps were also deposited by the London Electric Supply Corporation, Limited, and the Metropolitan Electric Supply Company, Limited, of the undertakings, in respect of which they were applying to the Board of Trade for Provisional Orders; and, later on, a map was deposited by the House-to-House Company, who were applying for a license. Parliamentary Schem On the 4th December, a tidal barrier near Pond Yard, Bankside, was accidently broken by a waggon having been driven against it; and, on the 19th December, no steps having been taken to repair the barrier, the Surveyor reported the circumstance to the Board, who caused a letter to be written to the late Metropolitan Board of orks, calling their attention thereto. In reply, a letter was received from the Solicitor s Department enclosing copy of one addressed to the owners and Tidal Barrier. 12 tenents, giving them notice that if they did not execute the necessary repairs, the Board would have to make and serve a formal order under the Thames Floods Act, to have it done within 28 days. The Board was far from satisfied with this reply, thinking it intolerable that the district should week after week be exposed to the danger of inundation whilst the formality of serving notices was being gone through, and resolved to appoint a deputation to wait upon the Metropolitan Board at their next meeting, to lay the facts before them and direct their attention to the insecurity of the barriers generally. Accordingly a deputation was appointed, consisting of the following Members, viz.—Messrs. Clarke, Goodwin, Haggis, and Hale, who attended on the 4th January, 1889, the meeting of the Metropolitan Board, which was held on that day and presented the following Memorial:— "To THE Metropolitan Hoard or Works, The Memorial of the Board of Works for the Saint Saviour's District. Sheweth That, by the Thames River (Prevention of Floods) Act, 1879, your honourable Board is constituted the authority for requiring and enforcing the construction and maintenance of flood works, for proventing inundations caused by overflow of the River Thames. That, shortly after the passing of the said Act, your honourable Board caused clams or barriers to be erected in Bankside, and other places, and permitted certain moveable barriers for the convenience of wharfingers and others. That, on the 4th December last, a barrier near Pond Yard, Banksidc, was broken; and, on the same day, tho attention of your honourable Board was called thereto by tho Surveyor to your Memorialists. That, on the 6th December, an official of your honourable Board called upon the Surveyor to your Memorialists, and stated that he had seen the barrier, and would report as to the same. That the barrier not having been repaired or reinstated, a letter was, on the 20th December, by direction of your Memorialists, addressed to your honourable Board relative thereto, and calling your attention to the fact that there was a gap nearly twelve feet in width open to the river, and constituting a serious danger to the district and to the public at large. Your Memorialists desire particularly to call the attention of your honourable Board to the fact that for nearly twenty days the district of your Memorialists was absolutely unprotected from any overflow of the River Thames, and that, in consequence thereof, property to a . vast extent was placed in jeopardy. 13 Your Memorialists further desire to point out that it was not until after the receipt by your honourable Board of the letter from your Memorialists above referred to, dated the 20th December, that any -steps were taken to close the opening in the barrier in question but, about that time, the opening was boarded over with a view to temporarily protecting the district. Your Memorialists consider that the temporary boarding provided is faulty in construction, and of such a character as not to afford any security whatever against the risk of inundation. Your Memorialists therefore humbly pray that your honourable Board will take immediate steps to cause the flood works in question to be properly reinstated, and also exercise your powers for the enforcement of penalties as provided in in the Act. And your Memorialists will ever pray, &c." Signed on behalf of the Memorialists, this 4th day of January, 1889. W. H. ATKINS, Clerk of the Board. Shortly afterwards a letter was received from the Metropolitan Board of Works stating that the barrier in question had been properly reinstated. In March, however, the Surveyor made a further report, and pointed out that, in his opinion, the flood works generally on Bankside were in an insecure condition. A copy was forwarded to the then newly formed London County Council, who thereupon caused a survey to be made and a number of the barriers to be repaired. In consequence of the great and increasing obstruction occa- sioned by the placing of goods upon the three-feet space in front of the buildings in Southwark Street, the Board, in January last, took the opinion of Counsel (Mr. Besley) as to the same, and, acting under his advice, summonses were taken out under sect. 65 of 57 Geo. III., c. 29, at the Southwark Police Court against a number of the offenders. These were adjourned from time to time to meet the convenience of Counsel on either side, but, on the 12th March, they came on for hearing before Mr. Slade, the Magistrate, the case of Taylor & Wright, who occupied premises at the Hop Exchange, being taken as a test case. Mr. Besley appeared on behalf of the Board, and Mr. Bray for the Defendants, and a number of witnesses were called on either side. Ultimately the case was adjourned Southwark Street 3 feet. 14 ntil the 8th April, when Mr. Slade gave his decision as- under:— "The Defendants arc summoned under Michael Angelo Taylor's Act (57 Geo. TIL, c. 29, sect. G5) for placing wares upon the footway in Southwark Street. "This is a new street made, according to maps and plans produced before me, by a private Act of Parliament in 1857. "Tho footway in dispute is a Space of ground three feet in width, in front of and adjoining the premises of the defendants under which are arches of the defendants' premises, and upon which are gratings and flaps, placed there for the purpose of giving light and air below. "It was proved in evidence before me that the defendants had undoubtedly exercised acts of ownership over the ground in question by placing sacks of potatoes and carrots there, and in other ways without being disturbed for 20 years; that thoy had pavod it and kept it in repair at their own expense; that a lino was placed in the pavement showing tho extent of the boundary; moreover tho Board of Works had never interfered with their enjoyment until the present year. "If long user and uninterrupted enjoyment created a prescriptiveright in such cases, the defendants would perhaps have an indisputable right to tho land in question; but, in my opinion, lapse of time is no bar and cannot operate against the rights of tho public. The defendants have been hardly usod in this matter, but I cannot allow the laches of the Board of Works to prejudice tho community. Tho defendants have a grievance, but it is always better that a private mischief should bo endured than a public inconvenience. "I find as a fact that Southwark Streot, opposite defendants' premises, as defined according to the maps and book of reference, and according to the ovidence, is of tho width of 70 feet, of which 46 feet is road and 24 feet footway. "The summonses must bo upheld, and I inflict on the defendants the nominal penalty of Is. without costs." The occupiers of premises in Southwark Street have, for the most part, discontinued the obstructions complained of; but, in one instance where goods were afterwards persistently placed on the 3ft. way, a summons had to be taken out, and the defendant was fined 40s. and costs. School Board Elections. in December a circular-letter was received from the vestry of St. Pancras on the subject of School Board for London Elections, expressing an opinion that the Parliamentary areas should be constituted the electoral divisions for the School Board, and requesting this Board to appoint delegates to *This was a misconception, the tenancy of the defendants being of comparatively recent date. 15 attend a Conference upon the subject. The Board accordingly appointed Messrs. Bowers, Carter and Meikle as delegates, and the latter subsequently moved a series of resolutions which had been passed by the Conference, and of which this Board adopted the following:— " 1. That, in the opinion of this Conference, many persons who would be willing to serve on tho London School Board are practically prohibited from becoming Candidates for a seat on account of the enormous expense of contesting an election in so large a division; and, if the Parliamentary divisions were chosen as the representative areas, the Candidates would be more likely to be known and recognised by the ratepayers." " 2. That, in tho opinion of this Conference there should be two Members of the School Board elected for each Parliamentary Electoral Division in the Metropolis, and that the cumulative vote should bo abolished." " 3. That, in the opinion of this Conference, all vacancies on the London School Board should be filled up by the Ratepayers and not by tho Board." "4. That a petition be presented to Parliament in support of the proposed amendments, and that the Parliamentary Representatives be requested to support the same." A Petition was accordingly prepared and presented to the House of Commons, and the delegates already appointed were authorised to continue to act on behalf of the Board at any future meetings of the Conference. Complaint having been made to the Board ot the inconvenience arising from the irregular numbering of the houses in Union Place, and suggesting that it should be incorporated with Edward Street, Blackfriars Road, of which it is a continuation, the Board adopted the suggestion, and applied to the late Metropolitan Board of Works ; who, in December last, made an order sanctioning the alterations. These were shortly afteiwards carried out under the direction of this Board. - Union Place and Edward Street. ith In January last a letter was received from the Assistant Commissioner of Police, intimating that a standing had bee appointed for fifteen hackney carriages opposite No. 18 Southwark Street, extending in a westerly direction to the South Eastern Railway Arch ; and also a standing foi ten hackney carriages opposite No. 62, Southwark Street, extend Cab stands. 16 Gas, Price of ing westerly to the corner of Great Guildford Street, the horses' heads facing east in both cases. of In January also a letter was received from the South Metropolian Gas Company, notifying that the price of gas supplied by them had been reduced 2d. per 1000 feet from the Christmas quarter, making the price 2s. 3d. per 1000 feet, and that of the public lamps not on the meter system from £3 7s. 4d. to £3 3s. 9d. per lamp per annum, less the usual discount of 5 per cent, if paid within a month from quarter day. Cattle Trough In March the Metropolitan Drinking Fountain and Cattle Trough Association applied for permission to erect a trough for cattle at the west end of Southwark Street. The Board was, however, of opinion that one erected in that locality would cause obstruction, and suggested in lieu thereof the entrance into Holland Street from Southwark Street on the east side, the roadway there being very wide. The Association accepted the site, and a granite trough has lately been erected, which, judging by the number of carmen and drivers who resort to it for their horses, would appear to supply a public want. Mr. Rider. At the first meeting of this Board held after the disestablishment of the Metropolitan Board of Works, which took place on the 21st March, 1889, a resolution was passed thanking Mr. Rider, this Board's representative on that Board, for his valuable services, as such representative during the preceding three years; and, at a subsequent meeting held on the 24th April, the resolution, which had been suitably engrossed on vellum, was presented to him and was as follows:— " St. Saviour's, Southwakk. "At a Meeting of the Board of Works for the St. Saviour's District, held in the Board Room, Emerson Street, Bankside, Southwark, on Wednesday, the 27th March, 1889. Richakd Hunt, Esq., in the Chair. 17 It was, on the motion of Mr. James Sinclair, seconded by Mr. Arnold Goodwin, unanimously resolved That the best thanks of this Board be presented to Thomas Francis Rider, Esq., for his able, zealous, and faithful services as the Representative of this District at the Metropolitan Board of Works, during the past three years. (Signed Richard Hunt, Chairman. In accordance with the provisions contained in the Local Government Act, 1888, relating to Medical Officers of Health, (referred to in the first paragraph of this report), the Local Government Hoard. on the 30th March, issued an order containing regulations in regard to the appointment of such Officers. The order it dated the 28th March, 1889, and is addressed to the Commissioners of Sewers in the City of London, and the Vestries and District Boards, under the Metropolis Local Management Act. It is divided into two parts, the first relating to Medical Officers appointed on or after the 1st April, 1889, one half of whose salary will he payable by the London County Council to the local authority; the second to Medical Officers appointed on or after the date referred to, no part of whose salary will be payable by the London County Council. The order requires that before a local authority can receive a contribution under the Act, the Officer must be appointed in strict conformity with the requirements of the Local Government Board in regard to qualification, duties, salary, and tenure of office; and, in the event of the local authority accepting a contribution, he would at all times be under the control, orders, and direction of that Board. On receipt of a copy of the order and of the accompaning memorandum, &c., the Board referred the same to the Sanitary Committee for consideration. In May, a circular letter was received from the Vestry of St. Giles, Camberwell, relative to the order; expressing an opinion that uniformity of action on the part of the local authorities was desirable, and inviting this Board to appoint c 1 Medical Officer of ' Health. 1 18 Finances. delegates to attend a Conference on the subject. The Board appointed Messrs. Hunt, Hawkins, and Kinnell; and, at the Conference, which took place at the Camberwell Vestry Hall on Monday, the 3rd June, the following resolution was- passed:— Resolved " That, pending further legislation upon the subject, it is not desirable at present to alter in any way the relationship between the Medical Officers of Health and the Local Authority, and that therefore no action be taken upon the Order of the Local Government Board." The matter still stands referred to the Sanitary Committee of this Board. The following is a statememt of Precepts received and for which corresponding ones have been issued to the Overseers. SCHOOL BOARD FOR LONDON. DATE OF PRECEPT. AMOUNT. TOTAL ST. SAVIOUR'S CHRISTCHURCH £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. 5th July, 1888 3685 16 3 1704 8 0 28th Feb., 1889 3897 5 3 1803 12 11 11,088 2 5 METROPOLITAN BOARD OF WORKS. (For 3 months, ending 31st March, 1889.) DATE OF PRECEPT. AMOUNT TOTAL ST. SAVIOUR'S CHRISTCHURCH £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. 1st Feb., 1889 2359 13 9 1092 1 3 3451 15 0 The Board will henceforth be relieved of all responsibility in respect of the Consolidated Rate, as the Precepts for such rate will in future be addressed to the Boards of Guardians. In order to meet the estimated expenditure for Sewer and Drainage Works, Paving, Lighting, Scavenging, Dusting, &c., for the latter part of 1888 and to Lady Day, 1889, a Precept was issued as under:— 19 Date of Precept. Description of Rate. St. Saviour. Christch'ch. Total. £ £ £ 10th Oct. 1888 Sewer Hate 615 285 900 Genl. Purposes Rate 5674 262f> 8300 9200 In accordance with the report of the Special Committee which appeared in last year's published Reports, the services of a professional accountant (Mr. Walter W. Feast, F.C.A.) were called in to devise and inaugurate a new systen of accounts, and they are now kept in form of double entry. Mr. Feast likewise made up the books to the end of the financial year (25th March), and the same have been duly audited by Messrs. John Dyer Field and John Passmore, two of the Auditors appointed by the Board. A copy of their certificate will be found at page 54. In accordance with other recommendations of the Committee, the system of charging the parishes according to the incidence of work done has been discontinued, the whole of the moneys required being now raised according to the rateable proportion as shown in the Valuation Lists; and, in lieu of a Table of Apportionments, a Ratal Account is presented, together with a statement of establishment expenses, Ac. (see pages 48 &49.) Mr. Charles Edward Stowell, Manager of the Southwark Branch of the London and County Bank has been appointed Treasurer, the Bankers giving a guarantee for repayment of all moneys paid to, or received by the Treasurer on account of the Board. Security also has been given by the Officials of the Board as advised b) the Committee, and the recommendations generally have been carried out. It having been resolved that for the future the estimates for the year for Paving, Sewerage Works, &c., should be prepared in the month of January, so that Precepts for the same could be issued on receipt of the demands from the School Board, &c., the estimates were so prepared by the Surveyor; and, in c-2 20 February, Precepts for the year ending Lady-day, 1890, were issued as under :— Sewers Expenses £1,839 0 0 General Purposes 13,131 0 0 - £14,470 0 0 Board Room, W. H. ATKINS. Emerson Street, Bankside, S.E. 24th June, 1889. 21 SURVEYOR'S REPORT. For the Year ending Lady-day, 1889. I have the honour to submit a Statement of the various Works executed in my Department during the Year terminating Lady Day last. Footways. The following Works have been executed in the repair and maintenance of the Footways in the District:— New 3-inch York Stone Paving laid 7,488 feet super. New 2½ „ „ „ 6,580 „ „ Old York Paving relaid 58,086 „ „ New 6" x 12" Granite Edge Curb 2,217 „ lineal Old Curb redressed and refixed 1,753 „ „ „ refixed 2,378 „ „ New Victoria Stone Paving laid 4,792 feet super. Carriageways. The following Works have been executed in the repair and maintenance of the Carriageways in the District:— New 3" x 7" Aberdeen Granite Pitching, laid 322 yds. super. „ 3" x 8" „ „ „ „ 116 „ „ „ 3" X 9" „ „ „ „ 984 „ „ „ 4" x9" Guernsey „ „ „ 2,236 „ „ Old Granite Pitching relaid 14,593 „ „ redressed 2,637 „ „ Block Channelling refixed 2,371 feet lineal „ „ redressed 639 „ „ New 24" x 12" Granite Tram 30 „ „ Old Granite Tram redressed 160 „ „ New Wood Paving 3" x6" x9" Yellow Deal 501 yds. super. Wood Paving relaid 104 ,, „ Val de Travels Asphalte, 2" thick 27 „ „ Ballast used under Pitching 1,352 „ cube. Concrete 6" thick under pitching 1,822 „ super. „ 9" „ „ „ 2,180 „ „ Ballast used on Bridge Inclines, &c. 1,195 „ cube. 22 The following is a List of the Sums expended during the Year for the Maintenance of Carriageway and Footway Paving (Macadam Roads not included) £ s. d. £ s. d. American Street 0 7 2 Brought forward Adams Place 1 8 3 Loman Street 6 5 2 Boro' High Street 74 12 1 Little Winchester St. 1 5 8 Bankside 2055 14 1 Ladd's Court 0 5 5 Blackfriars Road 790 10 5 Montague Close 3 15 6 Broadwall 324 18 2 Moss Alley 1 19 10 Burrell Street 21 8 2 Marlboro' Stroot 0 11 2 Bennett Street 4 5 3 Marigold Alley 2 6 3 Bear Lane 13 5 1 Newcomen Street 839 6 2 Boundary Row 3 8 2 Orange Street 10 12 7 Brunswick Street 9 2 8 Pepper Street 1 2 0 Brunswick Court 3 3 0 Pitt's Place 1 12 4 Boddy's Bridge 1 7 1 Pleasant Row 3 6 11 Barge House Street 138 16 9 Pike Gardens 1 9 1 Bear Garden 1 4 10 Prices Street 2 12 11 Bowling Green Lane 1 11 0 Park Street 134 11 8 Castle Street 4 3 8 Princes Street 20 2 1 Casher's Grounds 0 10 0 Pump Court 3 5 7 Counter Street 21 14 8 Red Cross Street 16 6 1 Church Street 7 3 4 Hod Cross Place 1 8 9 Charlotte Street 220 8 2 Railway Approach 1 0 1 Charles Street 3 9 4 Robert Street 0 14 6 Collingwood Street 10 5 1 Southwark Street 488 5 3 Cross Street 4 8 4 Southwark Bridge Rd. 118 8 8 Christchurch Passage 3 4 5 7 Sumner Street 33 14 4 Clink Street 1 17 7 Skin Market Place 3 14 3 Duke Street 0 17 9 Silver Street 0 13 8 Denman Street 4 3 8 Stoney Street 15 13 11 Emerson Street 5 19 5 St. Thomas' Street 0 6 6 Ewer Street 4 2 5 Stamford Street 27 4 8 Essex Street 9 9 1 Surrey Row 1 7 10 Edward Street 3 1 5 St. Margaret's Court 4 0 10 Farnham Place 3 8 9 Three Crovn Square 3 18 11 Gravel Lane 127 13 9 Union Street 57 14 4 Guildford Street 196 8 9 UpperGround Street 3 7 11 George Yard 0 11 0 William's Court 1 14 8 Great Suffolk Street 2 1 6 White Hind Alley 1 9 7 Great Charlotte Street 2 13 1 William Street 3 7 11 George Street 30 11 6 Worcester Street 7 6 2 Hatfield Street 8 19 5 Winchester Street 13 11 6 Holland Street 8 12 4 Whitecross Street 9 12 9 John Street West 109 13 8 York Street C.C. 5 3 9 Jane Street 0 16 1 York Street S.S. 5 10 11 Keppel Street 0 11 6 Zoar Street 3 0 4 Carried forward £4243 3 1 Total £5606 11 6 23 The principal carriageway and footway paving works executed during the year are as follows :- The carriageway and footways of Bankside from Moss Alley to Clink Street have been paved with new stone. The carriageway has been laid with new 4"x9" Guernsey granite pitching on 9 of concrete. The footways have been paved with new 3" tooled York stone and new 6" x 12" granite edge curb. The area of the new carriageway is about 2,200 superficial yards; nearly 4,000 superficial feet of new 3" York stone has been laid, and 1,300 lineal feet of new 6"xl2" granite curl: fixed. Bankside has now been entirely repaved throughout its whole length with new stone; the first portion was completed in the year ending Lady Day, 1887. The carriageway of Newcomen Street from the boundary at Crosby Row to the Bough High Street has been entirely relaid; about 750 superficial yards of pitching was relaid only, about 400 yards was redressed and relaid, and 325 superficial yards of new 3"x8" Guernsey granite pitching was laid on 6" of concrete, about 500 feet run of block channel has been refixed, and 160 feet of 24"x12" granite tram redressed and refixed, about 30 feet of new granite tram was supplied and fixed in order to make up the deficiency caused by the worn state of the old granite. The carriageway of Southwark Street from Southwark Bridge Road to the Borough High Street has been taken up and relaid, the pitching was carefully sorted and the deepest stones laid in the line of the heaviest traffic; the area relaid is nearly 5,200 superficial yards. During the time this work was proceeding the South London Tramway Co. constructed an additional line of rails as sanctioned by this Board in a portion ot the street, they also abolished a short length of line which then existed, and the) replaced the whole of their old rails with new steel rails of an improved pattern. The carriageway of Park Street from Stoney Street to the Bankside. Newcomen Street. Southward Street. Park Street. 24 Barge House Street. Southwark Bridge Road John Street West. Blackfriars Road (Bridge Incline). Broadwall. Charlotte Street George Street Railway Bridge has been relaid. About 120 superficial yards of new 4"x8" granite pitching was laid to make up the deficiency caused by the worn state of some of tin old pitchingThe total area relaid is about 500 yards superficial. This portion of Park Street was widened and considerably improved last year when new footways were laid. The carriageway of Barge House Street from Hatfield Street to the Lambeth Boundary has been taken up and relaid with redressed granite pitching on 6" of concrete, an area of about 800 superficial yards. A portion of the wood carriageway paving in Southwark Bridge Road on the east side by the Evelina Hospital has been relaid with new 9" x6" x3" yellow deal paving blocks on a foundation of Portland cement concrete. The carriageway of this street has been relaid with new 9"x6"x3" yellow deal paving blocks on a new concrete foundation of Portland cement. A portion of the carriageway paving of the Bridge Incline has been relaid with new 3"x9" Aberdeen granite pitching; the existing block channelling was taken up and relaid; the area of carriageway repaved is about 1,000 superficial yards. The footways of Broadwall on the east and west sides, between Great Charlotte Street and Cross Street, have been laid with new 2½" tooled York paving; about 700 feet run of the old curb was redressed and refixed, and about 500 feet of new 6" x 12" edge curb fixed. The area of footway paved is 6,580 superficial feet. The footway on the south side of Charlotte Street has been paved with patent Victoria stone paving, an area of about 4,700 superficial feet. 241 feet run of new 6" x 12" granite curb was fixed and 412 feet redressed and refixed. A small quantity of new 3" York stone (110 feet superficial) was laid in front of the public house at the corner of Gravel Lane and Charlotte Street. The footway in George Street on the south side has been taken up and the old York paving squared and relaid. 430 25 feet of old curb was redressed and refixed. The area of foot way relaid is 2,106 superficial feet. The footway on the west side of Gravel Lane between Charlotte Street and Surrey Row has been relaid with new 2½' tooled York paving. About 350 feet run of old curb wa redressed and refixed, and 60 feet of new curb fixed. The area of footway paved is about 2,500 superficial feet. Sewer Works. The following works in connection with the Sewers, &c.,in the District have been executed during the year. A now concrete flushing tank has been constructed in connection with the new pipe sewer in Price's Street and Burrell Street. The tank is the largest yet constructed in the district and is of the following dimensions (inside measurement —length 20ft., width 1ft., and depth 9ft., it will hold 4,000 gallons or nearly is tons of water, and is filled from a hydrant in close proximity to the tank. We have now four of these concrete flushing tanks in the Christchurch District, they art periodically used and are invaluable for keeping those pipe sewers with which they are connected in thorough good condition. An old high level brick sewer on the north side of Stamford Street was found to be in a very defective and dangerous condition, rendering immediate attention necessary; the sewer was first shored up throughout its whole length 90ft, a portion of the invert was then cut out and a 15in. pipe sewer was laid connecting to the main brick sewer in Stamford Street, all existing connections wore then shifted from the old brick sewer to the new pipe sewer. Five head walls were then built in the old sewer and the sewer itself filled with hard core well rammed. The high level brick sewer in Bennett Street, between Upper Ground Street and Stamford Street, has been extensively repaired, the brickwork in many places having become defective, the sewer is now in fairly good order, but will have to be replaced by a new brick or pipe sewer at some later period. A length of 136ft. of new 12in. pipe has been laid in Boundary Gravel Lane. Price's Street Stamford Street. Bennett Street. Boundary Row. 26 Row in order to connect two surface water drains which had hitherto discharged into the private drain of a large printing establishment on the north side of the street; tho gullies were partly rebuilt and now traps and connections mn.rln The following now surface water gullies have boon constructed and connected to tho public sowers:— Name of Street. No. of Gullies. Bankside 3 Bargo House Street 1 Park Street 2 Newcomen Street 2 John's Place 1 Boundary Row 2 Total 11 The following gullies have been repaired: Name of Street. No. of Gullies. Red Cross Street 1 Nowcomen Street 5 Park Street 2 Bankside 10 Guildford Street 1 William Street 1 Southwark Bridge Road 3 Bankend 1 Total 24 Twenty-one private drainage connections have been made to the public sewers, as follows:— No. 12" pipes to brick sewers 1 9" „ „ 3 6" „ „ 12 9" pipes to pipe sewors 2 6" „ „ 3 Total 21 27 The lengths and size of the pipes laid for private drainage connections are as under:— Feet Lineal. 12" pipes 10 9" „ „ 166 C" „ 246 Total 422 The flushing valves and penstocks in connection with the river have been maintained in good order, and are used at all stream tides; especial attention is paid to the flushing of sewers in this district, and daring the summer months the flushing tanks and river penstocks are almost in constant use, and I am pleased to report that for the past few years I have not had a serious complaint respecting any sewer under the control of this Hoard. Hoardings. Twenty-nine licenses for hoardings and scaffolds have been issued. Lighting. The total number of public lamps in the district is 5G7, of which number nine are special meter lamps, the remainder are lighted by the (las Company at an annual rent per lamp. Gullies. The surface water drains number about 700, and each catchpit is constructed to contain on an average about a cubic yard of deposit. These catchpits are regularly and continually emptied, and in the summer months the pit when emptied is, if necessary, partially filled with water to cover the trap which forms a water seal between the gully and the sewer; nearly all gullies in this district are now trapped. GEO. ROPER NOURISH, Surveyor. July 11th, 1889. 28 MEDICAL OFFICER'S REPORT TO THE ST. SAVIOURS DISTRICT BOARD OF WORKS. Gentlemen, The following report contains the vital and sanitary statistics for the year 1888:— The registered number of Births was 933, 462 occurring in Christchurch and 471 in St. Saviour. The registered number of Deaths was 557. 292 occurring in Christchurch and 265 in St. Saviour. 61 persons died in Christchurch Workhouse, of which 4 belonged to St. Saviour, 20 to Christchurch, 20 to Newington, and 17 to St. George the Martyr. The following is a return of the deaths of persons who wore removed from the District to Public Institutions. They amount to 166, and are comprised as follow s : DISEASES. CHRIST- CHURCH. ST. SAVIOUR. Totals. Totals. Zymotic 6 15 Dropsy, &c. 8 11 Tubercular 11 13 Nervous 5 6 Heart 6 5 Lungs 22 20 Digestive Organs 4 7 Kidneys 2 4 Childbirth • • • • • • Joints, Bones, &c. 1 1 Skin ... .. Malformation ... ... Premature Birth ... 1 Atrophy • • • • • • Old Age • • • 2 Suddenness ... ... Violence 5 10 Not specified ... 1 Totals 70 96 The death rate was 19.4 per 1000 of the population, and in 29 order, as far as possible, to exclude any clement of inaccuracy from the death statistics, I have added the record of the deaths of parishioners who died in public institutions outside the District, and deducted those which occurred in Christchurch Workhouse belonging to other parishes. By this means the precise number of deaths is known, and reliable data secured upon which to calculate trustworthy rates of mortality. The corrected death rate will then read 23.9 per 1000. During the year under notice 92 deaths were caused by the principle zymotic diseases, of which 24 were registered as Dinrrhœa., 13 Whooping Cough, 32 Measles, 2 Scarlet Fever, 4 Diphtheria, 7 Croup, 1 Enteric Fever, 1 Pyæmia, and 8 Syphilis. These death were equal to an annual rate of 3.2 per 1000. I removed 31 cases of Scarlet Fever, 3 of Enteric Fever, and 1 of Diphtheria to the Hospitals under the management of the Metropolitan Asylums Board; these cases were of the nonpauper class, and 11 were removed from Peabody Buildings in Southwark Street. The following is a statement of all the deaths which occurred in the District from various causes during the year:— DISEASES. Christchurch. St. Saviour. Totals Totals. Zymotic 48 44 Dropsy, &c. 14 7 Tubucular 32 44 Nervous 49 34 Heart 13 16 Lungs 70 4 Digestive Organs 7 2 Kidneys 2 ... Childbirth 2 1 Joints, Bones, &c. 2 1 Skin ... ... Malformation ... ... Premature Birth 24 10 Atrophy 3 5 Old Age 11 6 Suddenness 1 1 Violence 13 21 Not specified 1 1 Totals 292 265 30 In the following statement I would direct your attention to the ages of those who died during the year, together with a comparison of the Births and Deaths. SAINT SAVIOUR'S DISTRICT. Population at Census, 1881, 28,622. Area in Statute Acres, 203. Statement of Deaths Registered in the 52 weeks ended 31st December, 1888. Under 1 year. 1 year and under 20. 20 years and under 40. 40 years and under 60. 60 years and under 80. 80 years and upwards. Totals. In the District 184 127 44 78 GO 8 496 In the Workhouse 5 ... • • • 2 50 4 61 Totals 189 127 44 75 110 12 557 General Statement of the Causes of Deaths Registered in the Year 1888. ZYMOTIC DISEASES. Total. Violence. Inquests. Other Causes. Totals. Measles. Scarlatina. Whooping Cough. Croup. Diarrhœa. Enteric Fever. Pyætnia. Syphilis. Diphtheria. Christchurch 16 1 6 4 14 1 1 4 1 48 13 15 216 292 St. Saviour 16 1 7 3 10 ... ... 4 3 44 21 26 174 265 Totals 32 2 13 7 24 1 1 8 4 92 84 41 390 557 31 COMPARISON OF BIRTHS AND DEATHS BIRTHS. DEATHS. Christchurch Males 230 174 ,, Females 232 118 - 402 - 292 Excess of Births 170 St. Saviour Males 203 128 ,, Females 268 137 - 471 - 265 // 206 933 557 376 COWHOUSES AND SLAUGHTERHOUSES. Cowhouses. Name of Person Licensed. Premises Licensed. Thompson, Farnham No. 5, Holland Street. Tilt, Elizabeth A. No. 28, Cross Street. Slaughterhouses. Name of Person Licensed Promises Licensed. Skeflington, John No. 57, Sumner Street. ,, Nos. 5 6, Cross Street. Previous to the annual licensing I inspected the Slaughterhouses and Cowhouses. The Magistrates renewed the licenses to the applicants. Bakehouses. I inspected the Bakehouses in June and July. 1 hey were in conformity with the Act of Parliament. Removals to Mortuary. In the year under notice 24 bodies were removed to the 32 Mortuary. Inquests were held on 19, and the following verdicts returned. Suffocation 2 Fractured Skull 1 Inflammation of Brain 1 Drowned 7 Syncope 2 Suicide 1 Intemperance 1 Unknown 1 Strangulated Bowels 1 Apoplexy 1 Run over 1 19 Gas. The subjoined tables summarise the results of my testing of the Gas supplied by the South Metropolitan Gas Company. Illuminating Power.—Statutory Standard, 16 candles. Maximum. Minimum. Quarter ended, 31*t March 16.4 16.1 „ „ 30th June 16.5 16.0 „ „ 30th September 16.3 16.1 31st December 16.6 16.1 Ammonia and sulphuretted hydrogen have been practically absent. The report of your Sanitary Inspector contains the particulars of the Sanitary works carried out during the year. I am, Gentlemen, Your obedient Servant, ROBERT BIANCHI. 80, Blackfkiars Road, S.E. 33 INSPECTOR'S REPORT. For the Year 1888-89. I have the honour to Report, that during the Year, the following Works (amongst others) have been carried out with respect to the abatement of nuisances, viz. :- Drains repaired and cleansed 44 Water laid on to Wat Closets 43 Water Closets cleansed and limewashed 43 „ repaired 2 Wash-houses cleansed and limewashed 3 Yards „ „ 29 repaved and repaired 48 „ (Stable. „ 1 Water Tanks removed 1 Urinals cleansed and limewashed 2 „ constructed 2 „ Water laid on 2 Cellars, cleansed and limewashed 5 Accumulations of Refuse, Ac., removed 24 Yard Traps constructed 10 Cesspools filled in 3 Old Drains filled in 13 Animals removed 2 Houses overcrowded 3 „ repaired 9 „ cleansed 24 Rooms cleansed and disinfected, after Infectious Disease 69 New Drains constructed in place of old Brick Drains 13 Cellar Coverings and Gratings repaired 55 Obstruction of Footpaths removed 14 Water supply laid on for domestic use Articles of Bedding, Clothing, &c., disinfected after Infectious Disease 516 34 Dust, applications for removal of 697 Water Closet Pans, cleansed 21 Ventilating Shaft constructed 1 W.C. Fittings repaired 10 Wash-houses „ 2 Houses closed as uninhabitable 2 125 Complaints as to various nuisances have been made at the offices, and attended to, and Notices served where necessary. I have daily inspected and reported to the Board as to the cleansing, scavenging, and watering of the District, which have on the whole been exceedingly well carried out. St. Saviour's is a most difficult Parish to keep clean, especially within the vicinity of the Borough Market; and, so long as the Market is conducted in the public streets, it will always remain so. On February 11th of this year we had a heavy fall of snow, the removal of which was made exceedingly difficult by a sharp frost setting in immediately after. I am pleased, however, to be able to report that every effort was made by the Contractor to clean and open up the main thoroughfares for traffic, and also in clearing the remaining streets as quickly as possible. I have paid careful attention to the lighting, cleansing, and keeping in repair the Public Lamps, and have pleasure in stating that the work on the whole has been very well done. I have had occasion to call the Medical Officer's attention to several houses, which, in my opinion, were unfit for habitation, viz:— 4 houses in St. Margaret's Court Brunswick Court Brunswick Place Queen's Arms Court 10 houses in Pepper Street 7 „ Golden Place 4 „ Orange Street * Being 252 applications less than 1887, and 490 less than 188G. 35 Three Crane Court, Boro' 72 to 80, Collingwood Street 30, Blackfriars Road 106 & 108, Broadwall (since closed) and 4 to 15, Loman Street the whole of this property which is let out in seperate rooms is occupied by persons of the poorer class, and in every case was in a most lamentable condition. With the exception of the two houses in Broadwall (since closed), and 4 to 15, Loman Street (now undergoing repair), the property has been thoroughly done up and made habitable. In respect to drainage several important alterations have been can id out during the year. Where old and defective brick drains have been found to exist, notices have been served to do away with them and new pipe drains have been substituted. Great difficulty has been experienced in ascertaining the source of the old drains, no plans having previously been deposited with the Board. In each instance of new drainage a plan has been submitted to the Surveyor, shewing the position, &c., of the drains, which will obviate any future difficulty in this respect. The obstruction of the footpaths in Southwark Street (especially) and other parts of the district, caused the Board to institute proceedings against several persons, with the result that, a conviction was obtained in each case, and a nominal fine inflicted. I have obtained and submitted to the Analyst the requisite articles for analysis under the "Sale of Food and Drugs Act, 1875," which will be found in his report. A number of minor matters have been dealt with during the year, which it is impossible to enumerate, but all of which I believe will have a beneficial effect upon the health of the neighbourhood. JOHN J. MOODY. Inspector. 36 PUBLIC ANALYST'S REPORT. TO THE DISTRICT BOARD 01 ST. SAVIOUR'S, SOUTHWARK. Gentlemen,- Daring the past twelvemonth I have analyzed thirty-two samples of Milk. Of those six were adulterated with, respectively, 11, 9, 10, 28, 7 and 20 per cent. of added water. The others were passed, although several of them were on the verge of condemnation. Five Others contained, each, nearly five per cent. of added water. One of the milks contained fifty-one per cent. of cream, and six per cent, of added water. I presume it was a top—kim and given with the idea that the large amount of cream would prevent the finding of the added water. In common justice I ought to mention that some of the milks retailed in our district are of very first-rate quality; tinvendors of such should be encouraged. Only two Condensed Milks have been analyzed. Neither of them is up to the mark. No. 32 is far supe ior to No. 33, but neither of them answers to the label. No. 32 is said to contain the whole of the cream ; if so, we have no acquaintance with such milk in England. It is certainly made from a genuine milk, but it is somewhat skimmed either previous t< or during condensation. No directions are given as to the amount of water to be added, and consequently 1 believe that no action can he taken against it. On the label of the condensed milk, No. 33, it is stated that a portion of the cream has been abstracted. This is certainly true; for, if made up with four parts of water, as directed, the butter fat in it amounts to 014 percent., or about one twentieth the quantitv contained in a srenuine milk. It is not watered but a bad skim. I subjoin the analyses of Nos. 32 and 33 :— No. 32. No 33. Water 28.98 25.530 Fat 6.06 0.695 Casein 14.19 9.770 *Ash 1.93 2.410 Sucrose and Lactose 48.84 61.595 100.00 100.000 * Chlorides 0.34 0.41 37 Of Butters, eight samples have been examined. Only one was found admixed with some 80 per cent. of fat other than butter fat. Several were passed, but I could not have said that I thought them altogether genuine. They have been manipulated by machinery and some of the volatile and tasty principles have been removed in the process. Six simples of Flour and six of Bread leave little to be desired. The same may be said of an Oatmeal and an Arrowroot. Three Coffees were distinctly of the nature, substance and quality demanded. So also were three Mustards and five Peppers. Four Jams were of varying quality. A very considerable insight into the quality of a jam may be obtained by washing a spoonful in a tea cup full of water. The character of the fruit and of the careful preparation, or otherwise, is often a revelation. In these jams there was no gelatine, and the sugar was of good quality. Nine samples of Ale, and nine samples of Porter, have been analysed. The ales have greatly improved. The sugar employed was in all cases, save one, of a kind not to bring the amount of chlorides to anything approaching excess. In only one case we;e the chlorides just past the allowed limits. Three drugs—Ipecacuanha Wine, Tartar Emetic, and Sulphate of Quina—complete my list. These were genuine. I remain, Gentlemen, Yours faithfully, ALBERT J. BERNAYS. Chemical Laboratory, St. Thomas's Hospital, S.L. Jane 24 th, 1889. 38 39 THE BOARD OF WORKS THE ST. SAVIOUR'S DISTRICT. ABSTRACT OF ACCOUNTS,March, 1888, to 25th March, 1889. RECEIPTS. PAYMENTS. To Balances from last Year— £ s. d. £ ' CONSOLIDATED RATE. £ s. d. £ s. d. Treasurer's Account 7,401 18 7 politan Board of Works, Amount Precept, dated 20th January, 1888 11,430 7 9 Cash in hand—Labour Account 16 13 2 7,418 EDUCATION RATE. METROPOLITAN CONSOLIDATED FUND RATE. Overseers, St. Saviour's, Amount Precept dated 14th March, 1888 7,790 17 7 4 Board for London, Amount Precept, dated st March, 1888 5,437 0 7 dated 5th July, 1888 5,387 4 3 Christchurch ditto 3,639 10 2 10,824 4 10 11,430 rning Officer for School Board for London, Amount Precept for Expenses of Election in November, 1888, dated 26th Januarv. 1889 96 19 11 EDUCATION RATE. PUBLIC DRAINAGE. Overseers, St. Saviour's, Amount Precept, dated 14th March, 1888 3,70/3 16 10 re & Son (Contractors), 1 year to 29th Sept. 467 15 9 hwark & Vauxhall Water Company, Water for Flushing 1 0 0 ' Christchurch ditto 1,731 3 9 5,437 0 7 beth Water Company, ditto 5 7 6 St. Saviour's, Amount Precept, dated 10th Oct., 1888 3,682 16 3 ler & Company, Iron Work for Sewers 7 17 0 ns ditto 45 3 9 ver. Oil, &c. 1 16 8 „ Christchurch ditto 1,704 8 0 bs, Young Company, Drainage Implements 0 7 6 5,387 4 3 10,824 Water Boots, &c. 4 17 0 SEWER RATE. ey, Son & Jones, Tools 0 13 6 & Son, Drain Cleaning Machine 5 0 6 Mason & Company, Hose 6 0 0 Overseers, St. Saviour's, Amount Precept, dated 10th October, 1888 615 0 0 ditto 1 3 4 & Company, Hydrents 4 17 0 „ Christchurch ditto 285 0 0 Jones, Widow of Sewer Ma, deceased, Gratuity 5 0 0 900 556 19 6 Carried forward £30,573 Carried forward £22,908 12 0 40 41 Brought forward £30,573 Brought forward £22,908 12 0 GENERAL PURPOSES RATE. PRIVATE DRAINAGE. Overseers, St. Saviour's, Amount Precept, dated 10th October, 1888 5,674 0 0 & Son (Contractors), 1 year to 29th Sept. 332 12 8 us Persons, Balance Drainage Deposits, urned 19 11 8 „ Christchurch, Balance Precept, dated 9th November, 1887 400 0 0 352 4 4 „ Christchurch. Amount Precept, dated 10th October, 1888 2,620 0 0 CHALET. 8,700 nwark and Vauxhall Water Co., Water supply 16 7 11 Plumbers Work 4 6 4 PUBLIC CHALET. rht & Co., Stove 0 19 0 Fees 388 vant, Paper 2 14 0 & Co., Towels 2 11 0 RENT. ton, Washing Towels 12 7 3 Executor of Win. Lee, Esq., 1 year's Rent Premises in Upper Ground Street, to Christmas (less tax) 7 5 8 p, Brushes, &c. 1 15 6 ver, Sundries 3 7 9 Mrs. Humphery, Rent Charge on Vaults under Southern Approach to London Bridge, 1 year to 3rd April (less tax) 19 5 8 44 8 9 URINALS. Mr. Wm. Grimsaell, 1 Years Rent Premises in Price's Street, to Midsummer (less tax) 6 16 3 thwark and Vauxhal Water Co., Water Supply 28 16 11 abeth Water Company 24 10 4 Various persons, sundry small Rents 3 10 0 as. Plumbers' Work 1 19 10 37 55 7 1 PAVING. PAVING. W. & H. Castle, Old Stone 5 dle Morrish, Limited Contractors) 2,809 18 10 Various Persons on making Private Connections with Sewers 408 16 10 riel (Contractor) 3,586 2 8 Ditto, on erection of Hoardings, &c. 38 5 0 de Travers Asphalte Company, repaving Counter Street, &c. 20 17 6 447 wlem & Co., Wood Paving 166 5 6 |,Ll" y 6,58a 4 6 INTEREST. London and County Bank, Interest on Current Account 56 13 SCAVENGING AND DUSTING. "ton (late Contractor), half-year to 24th June 1,720 0 0 LOANS. bbs (Contractor), half-year to 25th December 2,000 0 0 Metropolitan Board of Works, Loan for Paving Works, Bankside 2,000 6 3,720 0 0 Carried forward £33,663 16 8 Carried forward £42,207 4 42 43 Brought forward £42,207 Brought forward £33,663 16 - 8 PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS. WATERING. Ditto, Contribution, being moiety cost of Premises in Park Street, Borough Market. (White, Contra.) 231 wark Vauxhall Water Co., Water for Roads 200 0 0 n (late Contractor), Water Carts, &c. 400 0 0 s. Extra Watering 1 10 0 SUNDRIES. 601 10 0 Stewart, Old Iron 29 4 0 LIGHTING. Fines out of Court 23 19 6 53 Metropolitan Company, 1 year to 20th December 2,035 6 0 LABOUR. ■ Labourers, 1 year to 25th March 516 12 0 REPAIRS, &c. & Co. 2 1 6 & Co. 0 4 6 es 16 7 LI 1 10 1 20 4 0 SALARIES AND WAGES. aries 1,285 0 0 ges 272 14 0 1,557 14 0 RENT AND INSURANCE. urchwardens St. Saviour's, 1 Year's Rent of Offices to 25th December (less property tax) 48 14 0 uth Eastern Railway Company, 1 Year's Rent, Stone Yard, to 25th December (less tax) 97 7 11 urchwardens, Christchurch, ditto, Land in Upper 7 5 8 Ground Street, ditto 0 16 0 surance Office Furniture 0 0 6 arshall's Trustees, .Rent 154 4 1 Carried forward £42,491 Carried forward £38,549 6 9 - ' - 44 45 Brought forward £42, 491 Brought forward £38,549 6 9 AND TAXES 68 10 8 PRINTING, STATIONERY, &c. aings 22 3 0 & Co. 16 19 6 clock 9 19 10 psell & Briginshaw 6 14 0 cley 5 2 2 arlow Bros. & Layton 8 1 6 vett 9 13 6 78 13 6 OFFICE EXPENSES. Winding, &c., Clocks 3 3 0 & Son, Uniforms 14 9 0 erson, Oil-skin Coats 3 1 2 ted Telephone Company 20 0 0 ton & Horne, Coals 7 7 0 raud & Peters, ditto 7 7 0 14 14 0 dries 27 2 8 82 9 10 LOANS. tropolitan Board of Works, Interest 38 5 0 , Balance 1874 Loan 200 0 0 238 5 0 LAW EXPENSES. awks, Stokes and McKewan 21 0 0 Ward, Costs of Loan 9 17 0 ther small charges 8 9 6 34 6 6 Carried forward £42,491 —II riil <11 Carried forward £239,051 12 3 46 47 Brought forward £42,491 Brought forward £39,051 12 3 SANITARY. ugall, Disinfectants 5 0 0 ar Disinfecting Company 5 0 0 0 16 0 r & Co. 3 0 0 ewett, Mortality Returns 2 17 8 r, ditto 2 17 0 rs, ditto 1 7 0 ry Expenses of Disinfecting 9 1 0 29 18 8 HOARDINGS, &c. nce Deposits Returned 19 5 3 PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS. White, For setting back line of frontage in Park Street, Borough Market 462 0 0 SUNDRIES. ley. Pegg & Co., Ironwork 2 5 7 a Iron Foundry Company, ditto 1 11 0 sop, Brooms 2 10 6 ertisements 17 4 7 rton, Cartage 0 16 0 bbs, Cartage 1 16 0 arantee Society, Premium 3 8 0 pector Samples for Analysis 2 16 4 er small items 2 2 5 34 10 5 Balance at Bank 2886 11 8 7 9 8 Ditto Petty Cash 2894 1 4 £42,491 £42,491 7 11 48 49 Account showing the application of the Receipts and foregoing Abstract, to the various Ratal Accounts. Dr. GENERAL PURPOSE Cr. £ s. d. £ receipts from General Purposes Rate 8300 0 0 To Paving Carriageways and Footways 6125 erest on Banking Account 70 11 6 „ Scavenging and Dusting . 3862 ndries 28 13 1 „ Watering 601 ainage Deposits 401 6 6 „ Lighting 2009 ardings Deposits 18 19 9 „ Labour 516 lance 5733 5 3 „ Repairs, &c. 20 „ Returning Officer School Board 96 „ Interest on Loans, Paving Purposes 54 „ Law and Parliamentary 34 „ Sanitary 29 1 „ 2/3 Establishment Expenses 1201 £14,552 16 1 £14,552 1 " SEWER TE. £ s. d. £ s. eceipts from Sewers Rate 900 0 0 To Sewer and Drainage Work 532 halet 115 13 11 „ Private Drainage Connection 290 alance 483 17 11 „ Urinals 76 „ ⅓ of Establishment Expenses 600 1 £1,499 11 10 £1,499 1 ESTABLISHMENT EXPENSES. £ s. d. £ s. Sewers Rate, one third of Total 600 12 2 To Salaries 1285 0 General Purposes Rate, two-thirds of Total 1201 4 5 „ Wages T) _ i_ "I r 86 10 „ Kent and insurance 149 17 „ Rates and Taxes 68 10 „ Printing and Stationery ... 95 15 „ Office Expenses 116 8 £1,801 16 7 £1,801 16 50 51 ST. SAVIOUR'S DISFORD OF WORKS. Statement of Account showing the ascertained or estimists Liabilities of the Board on the 25th March, 1889. ASSETS. LIABILITIES. £ s. d. £ £ s. d. amount due from Overseers of Christchurch- opolitan Board of Works- Precept Consolidated Rate 1092 1 3 On Precept Consolidated Rate 3451 15 0 Education Rate 901 16 5 Board for London— 1993 First Instalment of Precept 2850 9 1 Amount due from Overseers of St. Saviour's— try Creditors— Precept Consolidated Rate 2359 13 9 Paving 303 2 1 „ Education Rate 1948 12 8 Drainage 197 19 3 4308 Scavenging and Dusting 1000 0 0 Cash Balance with Treasurer 2900 Lighting 500 16 8 Petty Cash in hand 7 Salaries 300 8 4 Chilet Fees in hand 14 Runts and Insurance 46 16 7 Balance 1317 Printing and Stationery 17 1 10 Urinals 20 17 3 Chalet 4 18 3 Chalet 31 5 0 Office Expenses 2423 5 3 mmlittin Ilniird of Woik-i Loan payable by instalments extending over and Interest to date 2016 11 2 £ 10742 j £10742 0 6 COPY ACCOUNTANERTIFICATE I certify that I have examined the accounts of the St. Saviour's Di?ard of Works for the year ending 25th March, 1889, I have seen and checked all the vouchers for payments and ascertained the correctness o?lance with the Treasurer, and in my opinion the Statement is correct. WALTER W. FEAST, F.C.A., St. George's House Eastcheap, London, B.C. 52 53 PUBLIC CONVENIENCES at of Southwark Street, Borough. Dr. Account of Receipts and Expenditure the ending 25th March, 1889. £ s. d. £ s. South Metropolitan Gas Company, 4 Quarters' Lighting £ s. d. To Fees received for use of Closets and Lavatories, viz.:— 34 1 7 Southwark and Vauxhall Water Company, 4 Quarters' Water Supply 9 4 2 MEN'S DEPARTMENT. Total Sundries, viz.:— Quarter to 24th June 58 19 4 Jones, Plumbers' Work 4 6 4 „ 29th September 88 8 4 Clayton, Washing Towels 12 7 6 Silverlock, Printing Tickets, &c. 6 13 4 „ 25th December 65 12 10 Cleaver, Soap, &c. 2 16 4 25th March 59 17 10 All sop, Brushes, See. 1 15 6 272 1H Bullivant, Paper 2 14 0 Hoare & Son, Sundry Work 8 11 0 WOMEN'S DEPARTMENT. Wright Co., Stove 0 19 0 Ewin & Co., Towels 2 11 0 Other Small Items 1 15 11 Quarter to 24th June 32 13 11 44 9 8 „ 29th September 25 13 7 Wages of Attendants, 32 Weeks:— „ 25th December 19 3 7 Men's Department 104 0 U „ 25th March 14 19 10 Women's ditto 83 4 0 187 4 0 82 10 Balance 80 9 10 £355 9 £355 9 3 Expenditure on Capital Account in enlarging Men's Department £102 19 LI 54 STATEMENT OF CONTRACTS. Name of Contractor. Nature of Contract. Term. Amount. Hoare & Son Sewer and Drainage Works 8 Years from 25th March, 1888 6 per cent. below Schedule of Prices in Contract. Joseph S. Gabriel Paving Carriageways Ditto Per Schedule of Prices in Contract. Ditto Paving Footways Ditto Ditto. William Stubbs Scavenging and Dusting 3 Years from 24th June, 1888 £1,000 per annum. Ditto Watering Ditto to November, 1881 £400 per annum. Limmer Asphalte Paving Company Repair of Footway on East side of Boro' High Street 10 Years from 26th May, 1881 COPY AUDITORS' CERTIFICATE. We, the undersigned Auditors of Accounts appointed by the Board of Works for the Saint Saviour's District to audit the Accounts of the said Board, do hereby certify that we have, for the which ended on the 25th March, 1889, investigated such Accounts, and the same are, to the best of our knowledge and belief, correct. Dated the Sixteenth day of May, 1889 (Signed) JOHN DYER ELELD 55 ST. SAVIOUR'S DISTRICT BOARD OF WORKS. NAMES AND ADDRESSES OF MEMBERS ST. SAVIOUR'S. Angus, William 104, Union Street, Borough. Baxter. Fredk South Eastern Wharf, Park Street. Blatchford, R. H. 39, Bankside. Bridgman, T R. Three Tuns Court, Borough. Cloake, W. J. 81, Union Street, Borough. Coles, H. J. 89. Sumuer Street, Southwark Bridge Road. Eckstein, William 187, Union Street, Borough. Gilson, R. A. 180, Union Street, Borough. Goodwin. Arnold 56, Sumner Street, Southwark Bridge Road. Gregory, Henry 75, Borough, High Street. Hale, Josish 63a, Southwark Bridge Road. Hunt, Richard 42, Ditto Keith, Alex. J. York Street, Borough Market. Kinnell, C. P. Southwark Street and Bankside. Meikle, Jos. 57, Southwark Street. Palmer, John Three Tuns Court, Borough. Pells, Henry 1, Bankside. Rhodes. J G. (L.C.C.) 7, 8outhwark Street. Rideal, Alfred 117, Union Street, Borough. Rider, Thomas Francis 181, Do. Sinclair, James 65, Southwark Street. Stevens. Alfred 67, Borough High Street. Stunt, Octavius 44, Southwark Bridge Road. Williams, Charles 107, Borough High Street. CHRISTCHURCH. Back, Thos. 27, Stamford Street. Bowers. R. W. 89, Blackfriurs Road. Chapman, Danl. 12, Burrell Street, Blackfriars Road. Carter, W. 40, Charlotte Street, Blackfriars Road. Clark, Jas. York Street, Blackfriars Road. Cooper, J. 207, Blackfriars Road. Dykes, Jas. 23½. Cross Street, Blackfriars Road. Haggis, A. H (L.C .C.) 1, Brunswick Street, Blackfriars Road. Hawkins, Jas. H. 21, Burrell Street. Blackfriars Road. Henley, Charles 188, Blackfriars Road. Hopkins, William 50, Nelson Square, Blackfriars Road Mason, George Hy. 70, Blackfriars Road. Mills, John 99, Brixton Road Pinner, J. 25, Collingwood Street. Ridley, Henry 6, Great Charlotte Street. OFFICERS— Charles Edwd. Stowell, Medical Officer Robert Bianchi, Treasurer Manager, London and and 80, Blackfriars County Bank, South- Gas Examiner. Road. wark Branch. Dr. Bernays, Clerk William H. Atkins, 52, Professor of Union Road. RotherAnalyst Chemistry, St. hithe. Thomas's G. R. Norrish, Hawley pital Surveyor House Tudor Road, Upper Norwood. Inspector under Sale of Food, &c. J. J. Moody, 3, Clerk of the ( Donald Brims, 2, Can- Act Emerson Street, Works non Row, Southwark Inspector of Bankside. i Bridge Road. Nuisances