Board of works for the St. Sabiour's District. RE PORT op the PROCEEDINGS OF THE BOARD for the YEAR 1897-98, by the Clerk, Surveyor, Medical Officer and Analyst; also ACCOUNTS IN ABSTRACT of Sums Received and Expended by the Board during the Year. Printed in accordance with the Metropolis Local Management Act, 18 & 19 Vict., c. 120. LONDON: Printed by Ash & Co., Ltd., 42, Southwark Street S.E. 1898- TABLE OF CONTENTS. List of Names and Addresses of Members page. 3 „ Standing Committees 4 „ Names and Addresses of Officers 5 Return of Attendance of Members 6 Statistics as to Area of District, Population, Inhabited Houses, Rateable Value, School Board Expenditure 8 Clerk's Report 11 Surveyor's Report 38 Medical Officer of Health's Report 49 Public Analyst's Report 65 Abstract of Accounts 68 Ratal Accounts 82 Estimate of Assets and Liabilities 84 Receipts and Expenditure at Public Conveniences 86 List of Contracts 90 3 LIST OF MEMBERS OF THE BOARD, With their Addresses. Chairman: W. E. HILL, Esq., J.P. ST. SAVIOUR, S.E. Barnard, Herbert W Cathedral Street, Borough .Market. Baxter, Fredk. South Eastern Wharf, Park Street. Bolt,H. 121, Borough High Street. Branston, Wm. W Dyer's Buddings, Gravel Lane. Brown, Harry Queen's Head Yard, Borough High Street. Castle, Henry 97a, Southwark Bridge Road. Colo. H Fenning' Wharf, London Bridge. Fry, H. J Spur Inn Yard, Borough High Street. Gaskain, D. H King's Head Yard. Borough High Street. Gaunt, U. D. 221, Union Street. Goodwin, Arnold 5G, Sumner Street. Hale, W. S 25, Southwark Bridge Road. Hendrichs, F. H 46, Bankside. Hill, W. E , J.P 48, Borough High Street. Jenings, J. F 30, Southwark Street. Layman, A. R Railway Approach, London Bridge. Morris, H 8, Stonev Street, Borough Market. Newton, G. J 93, Southwark Bridge Road. Rider, E. S 181, Union Street. Riley, Geo 13, Borough High Street. Such, W. C 183, Union Street. Weston, J. W 31, Park Street. White, Benj. 101, Southwark Bridge Road. Wood, Henry 41 to 57, Southwark Bridge Road. CHRISTCHURCH, S.E. Ayles, W. 7, Great Charlotte Street. Brown, C. 27, Nelson Square, Blackfriars Road. Denning, Dr. J. V. C. 174, Blackfriars Road. Hastwell Benj. 19 Bennett Street, Stamford Street. May, H. W. 18, Meymott Street, Blackfriars Road. Ore, John 12, Brunswick Street, Stamford Street Oviatt, N. W. Board School, Hatfield Street. Puxty, H. 30, Surrey Row, Blackfriars Road. Sanders, W. 58, Gravel Lane. Savage, W 38Blackfriars Road. Terry, W. 11 Charles Street, Blackfriars Road. Tiplady, E. 4, Nelson Square, Blackfriars Road. Woodcock, G. D 11, Blackfriars Road. Young, J. B. 33, Nelson Square, Blackfriars Road. Young, T. G. 33 Nelson Square, Blackfriars Road. 4 LIST OF STANDING COMMITTEES. Paving and General Purposes Committee. WOODCOCK, G. D., Chairman. CASTLE, H. GOODWIN, ARNOLD. HASTWELL, B. HILL, W. E., J.P. JENINGS, J. F. MAY, H. W. ORE, JOHN. RIDER, E. S. SUCH, W. C. WESTON, J. W. WHITE, BENJ. WOOD, HENRY YOUNG, J. B. YOUNG, T. G. Sanitary and Sewers Committee. BAXTER, F., Chairman. BARNARD, H. W. BOLT, H. BROWN, H. DENNING, Dr. J. Y. C. HENDRICHS, F. H. LAYMAN, A. R. MORRIS, H. NEWTON, G. J. OVIATT, N. W. PUXTY, H. RILEY, G. SANDERS, W. SAYAGE, W. TIPLADY, E. Finance Committee. FRY, H. J., Chairman. AYLES, W. BRANSTON, WM. W. BROWN, C. COLE, H. GASKAIN, D. H. GAUNT, R. D. HALE, W. S. TERRY, W. Pursuant to Resolution or Standing Order dated 11th July, 1894, the Chairman of the Board is, ex-officio, a Member of all the Standing Committees. OFFICERS OF THE BOARD. Treasurer Stowell, Charles Edwd., Manager, London and County Bank (Southwark Branch). Clerk Atkins, William H., 12, Kilmorie Road, Forest Hill, S.E. Clerk's Assistant Cole, Frank T., 7, Erpingham Terrace, Putney, S.W. Surveyor Norrish, G. R., Hawley House, Tudor Road, Upper Norwood, S.E. Surveyor's Assistant Watson, Percy W., 41, St. George's Avenue, Tufnell Park, N. Do. Clerk Batchelor, Arthur, 63, Lowth Road, Camberwell. Solicitor Topham, Geoffrey C., 19. Borough High Street. MEDlCAL Officer Herron, Jas., M.D., 73, Southwark Bridge Road, S.E. Analyst Bodmer, Ricliard, F.I.C., 16, Southwark Street, S.E. Sanitary Inspector and . Grist, Arthur Algernon, 37, Trinity Street, Inspector under Sale of Borough, S.E. Food and Drugs ActsJ Ditto ditto Cook, William George, 119, Union Street, Borough, S.E. Doorkeeper MacLeod, R., 3, Emerson Street, Bankside. BANKERS:— The London and County Bank (Southwark Branch), Borough Hign Steet. 6 LIST OF ATTENDANCES OF MEMBERS AT DURING the YEAR ENDED 25th MARCH, 1898. ST. SAVIOUR. NAMES OF MEMBERS. Board Meetings. Paving & General Purposes Committee Meetings. Sanitary & Sewers (including sub-) Committee Mtgs. Finance Committee Meetings- Meetings of Special Committees. Totals. Date of First Election. When last lie-elected. Mr. Barnard, H. W., attended 12 • • • 12 • • • • • • 24 1896 1897 ,, Baxter, F. ,, 13 • •• 11 • • • 4 28 1884 1896 „ Bolt, H. „ 12 • • • 9 • • • • • • 21 1897 ,, Branston, W. W. „ 5 • • • • • • 6 • • • 11 1896 1898 „ Brown, H. „ 12 • • • 8 • • • 1 21 1894 1897 ,, Castle, H. ,, 12 2 1 • • • 2 17 1891 1897 „ Cole, H. ,, 2 • • • ... 1 • • • 3 1898 „ Coles, H. J. „ 22 10 • • • ... 2 34 1884 1896 „ Collard, C. „ 2 • • • 1 • • • 1 4 1896 „ Doyle, J. M. 2 „ 6 • • • 4 • • • 1 11 1892 1896 ,, Francis, W. H. ,, 2 4 • • • • • • • • • 6 1894 1897 „ Fry, H. J. 20 • • • • • • 10 2 32 1890 1896 ,, Gaskain, D. H. „ 9 • • • • • • 5 2 16 1895 1898 ,, Gaunt, R. D. ,, 14 • • • • • • 4 1 19 1895 1898 „ Gibbings, H. D. „ 7 7 • • • • • • • • • 14 1893 1896 ,, Hale, W. S. ,, 13 17 • • • • • • • • • 30 1894 1897 „ Hendriohs, F. H. ,, 10 5 • • • • • • • • • 15 1895 1898 „ Hill, W. E., J.P. „ 16 • • • 12 • • • 1 29 1890 1897 „ Jenings, J. F. 14 13 • • • • • • 1 28 1895 1897 „ Layman, A. R. ,, 10 ... 20 • • • • • • 30 1891 1898 ,, Morris, H. „ 1 ... 2 • • • • • • 3 1892 1898 „ Neame, S. „ 3 • • • 2 • • • • • • 6 1897 ,, Newton, G. J. ,, 22 2 12 • • • 1 37 1881 1896 „ Rider, E. S. „ 9 12 • • • • • • • • • 21 1893 1 898 „ Riley, G. . „ 13 • • • 11 • • • • • • 24 1897 ,, Such, W. C. 4 7 • • • • • • • • • 11 1898 „ Weston, J. W. ,, 12 2 • • • • • • • • • 14 1896 ,, White, B. „ 12 4 • • • • • • • • • 16 1895 1897 „ Wood, H. „ 21 20 ... • • • 4 45 1892 1898 7 NUMBER OF MEETINGS HELD DURING THE YEAR. 24 Board Meetings Paving and General Purposes Committee Meetings 23 Sanitary and Sewers Committee Meetings (including 3 Sub-Committee Meetings) 12 Finance Committee Meetings 4 Special 64 Total 88 BOARD AND COMMITTEE MEETINGS and DATES of THEIR SEVERAL ELECTIONS. CHRISTCHURCH. NAMES OF MEMBERS. Hoard Meetings. paving & General Purposes Committee Meeting). Sanitary & Sewers (including sub-) Committee Mtgs Finance Committee Meetings. Meetings of Special Committees. Totals. Date of First Election. When last Re-elected Mr Ayles, W. attended 7 ... • •• ... ... 7 1897 „ Brown, C. „ 6 ... 3 ... 9 1897 Dr Denning, J. V. C. „ 20 ... 21 1 42 1895 1898 Mr Hastwell. B. „ 19 16 ... ... 2 37 1895 1896 „ May, H. W. „ 13 ... ... 5 ••• 18 1897 „ Ore, John „ 21 23 ... ... 2 46 1895 1896 „ Oviatt, N. W. „ 18 ... 19 ... 1 38 1895 1898 „ Puxty, H. „ 21 ... 20 ... 2 43 1895 1898 „ Sanders, W. „ 12 ... 18 ... 1 31 189G 1898 „ Savage, W. „ 9 ... 8 ... ... 17 1896 „ Terry, W. „ 1 ... ... ... ... 1 1897 „ Tiplady, E. „ 23 ... 23 ... 2 48 1896 1897 „ Woodcock. G. D. „ 20 20 ... ... 2 42 1892 1896 „ Young, J. B. „ 12 10 ... ... ... 22 1892 1898 „ Young, T. G. „ 21 17 ... ... 1 39 1896 8 STATISTICS. The St. Saviour's District comprises the Parishes of St. Saviour and Christchurch, in the County of Surrey, and forms part of the Administrative County of London. The area of the District is 203 statute acres, viz.:— St. Saviour 126 Christchurch 77 Total 203 acres. The population of the District at each of the four decennial periods of the census since the passing of the Metropolis Local Management Act in the year 1855, and at the quinquennial period of the last census (29th March, 1896) was, according to the Census Returns as under— POPULATION (a). 1861. 1871. 1881. 1891. 1896. St. Saviour 19,101 15,677 14,999 13,913 12,301 Christchurch 17,069 14,573 13,663 13,264 13,064 Totals 36,170 30,250 28,662 27,177 25,365 (a). The decrease of population is attributed in the Census Returns to the demolition of houses for the construction of railways, the formation of new streets, and the erection of business premises; the diminution in the number of inhabited houses is due to the same causes, and to the erection of blocks of artizans' dwellings in lieu of the smaller description of houses, each block being counted as one house. 9 The number of Inhabited Houses is also shown in the Census Returns as under:— INHABITED HOUSES. 1861. 1871. 1881. 1891. St. Saviour 2,580 2,142 2,046 1,417 Christchurch 1,891 1,584 1,419 1,316 Totals 4,471 8,726 3,465 2,733 RATEABLE VALUE Of the St. Saviour's District during the past three years as amended on appeal. £ On 6th April, 1896:— St. Saviour 224,024 Christchurch 124,458 348,482 Ou 6th April, 1897:— St. Saviour 224,178 Christchurch 124,795 348,973 On 6th April, 1898:— St. Saviour 226,600 Christchurch 125,429 352,029 10 SCHOOL BOARD EXPENDITURE. STATEMENT of Sums levied in the St. Saviour's District by the School Board for London since its establishment in the year 1870, and of the charges of the Returning Officer for the Expenses of the Triennial Elections. School Board. Returning Officer. £ s. d. £ s. d. For the year ending 25th March, 1872 489 17 6 63 11 11 „ ,, „ 1873 920 7 10 „ ,, „ 1874 760 17 2 85 2 11 „ ,, „ 1875 1823 18 8 „ ,, „ 1876 3216 6 4 „ ,, „ 1877 4837 19 1 102 14 9 „ ,, „ 1878 5949 19 9 „ ,, „ 1879 5958 0 8 „ ,, „ 1880 6442 4 6 90 14 0 „ ,, „ 1881 7458 13 4 „ ,, „ 1882 7631 14 9 „ ,, „ 1888 7526 3 4 105 8 0 „ ,, „ 1884 8746 7 4 „ ,, „ 1885 10261 16 0 „ ,, „ 1886 11160 5 11 110 19 1 „ ,, „ 1887 11999 13 2 „ ,, „ 1888 11367 2 3 „ ,, „ 1889 10824 4 10 96 2 4 „ ,, „ 1890 12071 13 4 „ ,, „ 1891 14307 9 4 „ ,, „ 1892 15158 11 8 102 16 0 „ ,, „ 1893 15019 8 9 „ ,, „ 1894 14672 2 4 „ ,, „ 1895 15094 2 5 113 5 8 „ ,, „ 1896 16520 9 5 „ ,, „ 1897 17893 18 6 „ ,, „ 1898 18121 14 9 100 17 8 „ ,, „ 1899 18153 18 7 11 THE BOARD OF WORKS for the ST. SAVIOUR'S DISTRICT. CLERKS REPORT. MEETINGS. During the year ended 25th March, 1898, 24 Meetings of the Hoard, 23 of the Paving and General Purposes Committee, 25 of the Sanitary and Sewers (including 3 Sub-Committee Meetings), 12 of the Finance, and 4 of Special Committees have been held—a total of 88 meetings of the Board and of its Committees. ELECTION OF MEMBERS. Returns from Vestries were received at the meeting of the Board held on the 8th June, 1898, of the re-election of the following Members, viz.:— St. Saviouk. Mr. W. W. Branston. „ D. H. Gaskain. „ R. D. Gaunt. „ Arnold Goodwin. „ F. H. Hendrichs. „ A. R. Layman. „ E. S. Rider. 12 Christchurch. Dr. J. V. C. Denning. Mr. N. W. Oviatt. . „ H. Puxty. „ W. Sanders. „ J. B. Young. Each for the term of three years. ELECTION OF CHAIRMAN. At the same Meeting, the Board, in pursuance of Section 31, (2) of the Local Government Act, 1891, proceeded to the election of a Chairman for the year ensuing. The voting was by ballot, and resulted in the election of Mr. William Edward Hill, the retiring Chairman being Mr. Geo. J. Newton, J.P. On the motion of Mr. N. W. Oviatt, seconded by Mr. B. "White, it was unanimously resolved, as follows:— "That this Board desires to record its high appreciation of the valuable services rendered to the St. Saviour's district by Geo. J. Newton, Esq., J.P., during the term of his office as the Chairman of the Board.'' It was also unanimously resolved that the foregoing resolution be engrossed upon vellum and presented to him. CHAIRMANSHIP OF COMMITTEES. Mr. H. Wood, in March last, having resigned the Chairmanship of the Paving and General Purposes Committee, Mr. G. D. Woodcock was appointed his successor for the remainder of the term. In July Mr. Woodcock was re-elected to fill that office for the ensuing year. Mr. Fredk. Baxter was appointed the Chairman of the Sanitary and Sewers Committee, and Mr. Henry J. Fry was re-elected to that of the Finance Committee for the ensuing year. AUDITORS OF ACCOUNTS. Pursuant ro Sect. 192 of the Metropolis Local Management Act, 1855, the Board, in April last, ballotted for Auditors to audit the accounts for the year ending 25th March, 1898, and the following were elected:— For St. Saviour's. Mr. John Adams, 25, Borough High Street, Jeweller. „ Charles Le May, 67, Borough High Street, Hop Factor. 18 For Christchurch. Mr. W. R. Poulton, 67, Blackfriars Road, Draper. The audit took place on the 24th of May. A copy of the Auditors' certificate is appended to the Accounts at page 85 CHRISTCHURCH BURIAL GROUND. In September, 1897, a proposal made by the Vestry of Christchurch with reference to the Christchurch Burial Ground and part of the Churchyard of the Parish Church was considered by the Board, the Vestry having passed and forwarded a resolution inquiring whether if the piece of ground referred to was laid out as a recreation ground, the Board would maintain it as an open space, the Metropolitan Public Gardens Association having offered to bear the expense of laying it out as a public garden. According to a plan furnished by the Vestry of Christchurch and reported upon by the Board's Surveyor, the ground contains an area of 16,155 superficial feet, or one third of an acre, plus 1638 feet. Being situate in the midst of a thickly populated district, it was thought desirable to secure it if possible as an open space, and to accept the responsibility of its maintenance, subject to its being laid out to the satisfaction of the Board prior to being handed over. It was further resolved to concur in any agreement or other proceeding which might be necessary to effectuate the arrangement. Drafts of the proposed agreements with the Vestry of Christchurch, the Trustees of Marshall's Charity, and the Rector of Christchurch have been forwarded for the Board's approval, and rules and regulations for the management of the ground have been prepared and are under consideration. THE CROSS BONES BURIAL GROUND. The question of the Cross Bones Burial Ground, situate in Union Street, Borough, has been repeatedly before the Board. In July, 1897, a letter was received from the London County Council, stating that an offer had been made by Messrs. James Spicer & Sons, who had lately purchased the property, to lay out at their own expense about one-eighth of an acre of ground and to hand it over to the Council or some other public body for maintenance; the Council suggesting that the Board, as the local authority for the district in which the burial ground was situate, should take over and maintain it for the use and recreation of the public. 14 On comparing the area of the land proposed to be surrendered with that of the Cross Bones as shown upon plans in the possession of the Board, it was found to be a portion only of the burial ground, the same in its entirety measuring about 13,000 superficial feet, nearly the third of an acre, and further inquiry elicited the fact that Messrs. Spicer, who had also acquired the adjoining premises in lied Cross Street, proposed to reserve to themselves a private roadway, and to erect buildings upon the north side of the burial ground ; that the Home Office had given its consent to the removal of human remains, holding that the land was, by Section 5 of the Disused Burial Grounds Act, 1884, exempted from the operation of the provisions of the Act which forbid the erection of buildings upon a disused burial ground, and that the Home Secretary had already intimated to Messrs. Spicer his willingness to grant a license accordingly. In reply to such communication the Board caused a letter to be written to the County Council expressing its disappointment at finding that only the eighth of an acre was proposed to be handed over, seeing that on former occasions it had been in treaty for the whole of the burial ground, declining to accept the same and adding that the Board strongly protested against any building being erected on any part of the burial ground. It also caused a letter to be addressed to the Home Secretary, protesting against the course proposed to be taken by him, and contesting the assertion that the land came within the terms of section 5 of the Act of 1884, seeing that in the case of the original sale of the land by the former owners, the Rectory Trustees of St. Saviour's, it was held by Vice Chancellor Bacon that such Trustees could not compel payment of the purchase money by the purchaser, the Vice-Chancellor basing his judgmenton the ground that the sale was effected after the passing of the Act, and that the sale therefore had had to be annulled. Further correspondence with the County Council and the Home Office ensued, and, in February, the Board presented a Memorial to the Home Secretary as follows:— "To the Right Honourable Sir Matthew White Ridley, Secretary of State for the Home Department. "The humble memorial of the Board of Works for the Saint Saviour's District, sheweth as follows:— "A proposal has been made to the London County Council by Messrs. Spicer & Sons, through Messrs. Freshfield & Williams, their Solicitors, for the erection of buildings upon a portion of the site of the Cross Bones Burial Ground, situate on the north side of Union Street, and 15 east side of Red Cross Street, in the Parish of St. Saviour, Southwark, and within the district of your Memorialists. Messrs. Spicer & Sons have also, your Memorialists are aware, applied to you for your license for the removal of human remains from the said ground, with a view to the erection of buildings upon the sarao. "The area of the said burial ground is about 13,000 superficial feet in its entirety. In consideration of being allowed to build upon a portion of the site, Messrs. Spicer propose to surrender and to lay out as an open space for the use of the public about one eighth of an acre, being the remainder of the site after the erection of the proposed buildings and the formation of a private roadway for their own use, as shown upon a plan submitted by them. "The burial ground in question, is a disused burial ground within the meaning of the Disused Burial Grounds Act, 1884, as amended by the open Spaces Act, 1887. The fee simple of the ground was formerly vested in Trustees elected by tho Vestry of tho Parish of Saint Saviour, known as the Rectory Trustees; and. by the Saint Saviour's, Southwark (Church Rate Abolition) Act, 1883, the said Trustees wero empowered to sell and dispose of the said ground. "In accordance with and in exercise of the power of sale so conferred upon them, the said Rectory Trustees, in the year 1885, sold the fee simple of the burial ground to ono Oyler. The same was duly conveyed to him; but. finding that he was precluded by the operation of the said Act of 1884 from erecting buildings upon the ground a« he had intended, he applied to the Court of Chancer)' to be released from his purchase, and an order to that effect was made by Vice-Chancellor Bacon. "Your Memorialists submit that subsequent legal decisions given in relation to other burial grounds, do not affect the decision in the case referred to, the judgment of the Vice-Chancellor being res judicata in respect of the said burial ground. "Apart, however, from the legal aspect of the case, it is submitted that it would be undesirable and contrary to public policy for any part of the Cross Bones Burial Ground to be built upon, for the reasons following, namely:— (a.) "The area of the ground remaining after the erection of buildings as proposed by Messrs. Spicer Sons, would be so small as to be of little or no value for the purpose suggested, and the irregular conformation of the ground proposed to be surrendered, would render it difficult to manage ; lead to abuses, and be objectionable on moral grounds. (b.) "The London County Council, it is understood, decline to undertake the responsibility of the custody, watching and maintenance of so small a piece of ground. (c.) "The locality is a very crowded one, and even though not now accessible to the public, the air-hole afforded by the open space is no small advantage. (d.) "It is a desirable space to have as a protection in case of fire, such as that which occurred recently in the City of London, and which would have spread much further but for the open space afforded by Cripplegate Churchyard, which is about the same size as the Cross Bones. 16 (e.) "A recreation ground is very much needed for the use and recreation of the inhabitants of the surrounding district, containing as it does within a small radius from the site of the Cross Bones, several large model or industrial dwellings tenanted by thousands of the working-class, men, women and children, to whom an open space of the kind, if dedicated to the public, would bo a considerable boon ; moreover, the Cross Bones Burial Ground would be available for, and, might be used as a playground by the children attending the Saint Saviour's Parochial Schools adjoining. (f.)"Your Memoralists have made repeated attempts to purchase the burial ground in question, but have been deterred and prevented from so doing by the enormous price asked by the late owner for the freehold of the same, and they are still willing to purchase the ground for the purposes of a public recreation grouud, if it can be acquired at a reasonable price. (g.) "The Metropolitan Public Gardens Association attach great importance to the acquisition of the burial ground in question, and its dedication to the public for the purposes named. (h) "There is no other space in tho Parish of St. Saviour which can by any possibility become available for the purposes of a recreation ground, and the only space accessible to the inhabitants at the present time is a very small garden, kept up by voluntary subscriptions, and quite inadequate in size. (i.) "Should you refuse your license, the ground cannot be built upon, and so long as it remains a vacant space there is a possibility of its being acquired by the public authorities at some future time. (j) "The removal of human remains, in such a quantity as is known to exist in the ground, might not be unattended with danger to the health of the inhabitants, and it would also outrage the feelings of the community to a considerable extent, as burials have taken place there even within the recollection of those now living. "Your Memorialists respectfully submit that, under the circumstanoes above set forth, you would be justified in refusing to consent to the removal of human remains from the burial ground, and that in so doing you would only be acting consistently with the course adopted by your predecessor in office in the year 1884. "Your Memorialists therefore humbly pray that for the reasons above set forth you will refuse to grant a license for the removal of human remains from the Cross Bones Burial Ground, and thereby prevent the erection of buildings upon the same or any part thereof. " And your Memorialists will ever pray, &c." 17 A similar Memorial was presented to the London County Council praying it to refuse its sanction to any plans for building upon the site and to use its influence with the Home Secretary to induce him to withhold his license for the removal of human remains as contemplated. The Board also appointed a deputation, consisting of the Chairman of the Board (Mr. George J. Newton, J.P.), Mr. Henry J. Coles, and the Solicitor (Mr. G. C Topham), to wait upon the Home Secretary upon the subject. It likewise placed itself in communication with Mr. R. K. Causton, M.P., and with Messrs. Edric Bayley and T. Hunter, the local representatives of the Council, the former undertaking to see the Home Secretary upon the subject, and the two Council representatives interesting themselves greatly in the matter. Both of these expressed an opinion that the Council was with the Board in its endeavours to secure the whole of the site. The deputation was very courteously received by Mr. Kenelm E. Digby, one of the Under Secretaries of State, at the Home Office, by appointment, on the 11th February, Messrs. James Spicer & Sons, the London County Council, and the Metropolitan Public Gardens Association being also represented. The decision of the Home Secretary was received shortly afterwards in the form of a reply to the letter forwarding the Memorial to him above set forth, as follows:— " Whitehall, " 9 th March, 1898. '' Sir,—In reply to your letter of the 22nd ultimo, I am directed by Secretary Sir Matthew Ridley to acquaint you, for the information of the Board of Works for the St. Saviour s District, that, after very careful consideration of all the circumstances of the case, he has decided to decline the application for his license for the proposed removal of human remains from the Cross Bones Burial Ground. " I am, Sir, " Your obedient Servant, " The Clerk to the Board " KENELM E. DIGBY. of Works for the St. Saviour's District." Subsequently Messrs. James Spicer & Sons submitted an amended plan for the erection of buildings upon the same portion of the site as shown upon their former plans, but of diminished 2 18 width, but the Board declined the proposal, and informed them that the decision of the Home Secretary must be strictly adhered to. PARLIAMENTARY SCHEMES Parliamentary Plans, Gazette Notices, &c., were, in November last, deposited of the following:— Nelson Square, Blackfriars Road, Removal of Gate at northern entrance from Charlotte Street. City and Brixton Railway. Both bills were referred to the Paving and General Purposes Committee for consideration. NELSON SQUARE. The removal of the gate at the northern entrance to Nelson Square from Charlotte Street was provided for in the London County Council's (General Powers) Bill of 1898. Sections 39, 40, 41 and 42 being as under:— "39. In this part of this Act the expression "the owner" used with reference to a gate bar rail post or other obstruction means the person or persons for the time being entitled to maintain such gate bar rail post or other obstruction. "40. At any time after the passing of this Act it shall he lawful for the Council on the one hand and the owner of each of the gates bars rails posts or other obstructions mentioned in the Third Schedule to this Act on the other hand to enter into and carry into effect any agreement or agreements as to the removal of such gate bar rail post or other obstruction and for opening the Street in which the same is situate to the free and unrestricted use either of traffic of all descriptions at all times or of such classes of traffic and at such times as may be defined in such agreement. "41,. If the Council and the owner of any such gate bar vail post or other obstruction fail to make such agreement then it shall be lawful for the Council at any time to serve notice in writing upon the owner of the gate bar rail post or obstruction with respect to which. he shall have failed to agree with the Council requiring him within a time therein stated (not to be less than three months after the date of the notice) to take down and remove the gate bar rail post 19 and other obstruction to which the notice relates and to restore and make good the site thereof so that the same shall form part of the footway or roadway of the street. "If on the expiration of the time stated in the notice the owner shall have failed to comply therewith it shall be lawful for the Council by their officers and servants to take down and remove every gate bar rail post and other obstruction to which any such notice relates and to restore and make good the site thereof. "From and after the date of such notice it shall not be lawful for the owner (except with the consent in writing of the Council) to erect any other gate bar rail post or other obstruction for limiting or restricting traffic in the street or any other street in the vicinity or in any way to limit or restrict the use of any such street for traffic of all descriptions. When and as soon as any of the said gates bars rails posts and other obstructions shall have been removed under the powers of this part of this Act the site of such gate bar rail post or obstruction shall for all intents and purposes form part of the street in which it was situate and may and shall thenceforth be used repaired maintained lighted cleansed and sewered in the same manner as the rest of the street and other public streets in the district. "Provided that if any lands shall be taken or injuriously affected by anything to be done under or by virtue of this part of this Act without the consent of the owner thereof compensation shall be made for the same by the Council in the manner provided by the Lands Clauses Consolidation Acts the provisions of which Acts so far as relates to lands taken otherwise than by agreement and to compensation for lands injuriously affected shall be deemed for that purpose to be incorporated with this part of the Act. The words "injuriously affected" shall have the same meaning as in the said Acts : Provided also that no claim for compensation under this part of this Act shall be made after the expiration of six months from the date of the notice served upon such owner under the provisions of this Section and duly published. "42. If the Council are unable to find the owner of any such gate bar rail post or other obstruction it shall be sufficient for the purpose of this part of this Act for the Council to affix the notice in a conspicuous position on such gate bar rail post or other obstruction or near thereto and at any time not less than three months after such 20 notice shall have been so affixed it shall be lawful for the Council to proceed to take down and remove the gate bar rail post or other obstruction in accordance with the provisions erf this part of this Act. "The Third Schedule " (Extract therefrom) „ (d) Gates and Railing in the Parish of Christchurch (Southwark) situate in Nelson Square Charlotte Street Blackfriars Road." The meaning of Section 41 being very uncertain owing to the obscure wording of the clause, the Committee took the opinion of Counsel (Mr. F. Dodd) as to its true and correct interpretation, and in order to ascertain what amount (if any) of liability the Board would incur in the event of the gate being removed. Mr. Dodd, in answer to the questions put to him, stated that he had found great difficulty in ascertaining the meaning of the Section ; he was of opinion, however, that the removal of the gate would have the effect of a dedication of the street to the public, but could see nothing in the Act which would impose on the Board any liability to pave, maintain or sewer it, even though the road had been completely dedicated to the use of the public. CITY AND BRIXTON RAILWAY. By the City and Brixton Railway ct, 1898, the promoters are authorised to construct a railway underground from the existing lines of the City and South London Railway in the Borough, to Brixton Bill, such railway to be worked by electrical power, the portion numbered 1 on the plan commencing at a point about 26 yards from the south east corner of Tabard Inn Yard,-and proceeding thence along the Borough Road and the Lambeth, Kennington, and Brixton roads to its destination. When this Bill was introduced into Parliament in December last, an examination of the deposited plan and sections was made by the Board's Surveyor, who reported that no indication was given of any shafts or openings that might be required to be made in the public thoroughfares in the St. Saviour's District; that power was sought to deviate vertically from the levels marked on the plan and sections to a distance of 20 feet from the top of the tunnel to the surface of the public way ; that the station tunnels would have an internal diameter of 30 feet, the excavations for which might, it was reasonable to suppose, have an injurious effect upon property belonging to the Board, and that there were other matters injuriously affecting the district. 21 The Board therefore lodged a petition against the Bill and instructed Counsel to appear on its behalf, with the result that the following clause, numbered 41, for the protection of the St. Saviour's District, was inserted in the Bill. "41. With reference to so much of the works by this Act authorised as will be made in or under the district of the Board of Works for the Saint Saviour's District (in this section called 'the District') and for the protection of the Board of Works for the Saint Saviour's District (in this section called the 'District Board') the following provisions shall apply and have effect notwithstanding anything to the contrary elsewhere herein contained. 1. The Company shall not deviate vertically upwards from the levels marked on the deposited sections of the works within the district authorised by this Act without the consent in writing of the District Board. 2. It shall be lawful for the Surveyor of the District Board or other person duly appointed for that purpose by the District Board from time to time during construction, to enter upon and inspect any works of the Company within the district. "3. The words 'house and buildings 'where used in this Act shall unless the context otherwise requires be deemed to include the underground lavatories or sanitary conveniences of the District Board.'' PAROCHIAL SCHOOLS, BEAR LANE. A proposal was made to the Board in November last by the Trustees of the Parochial Schools in Bear Lane, then lately rebuilt, for giving up and dedicating to the use of the public a strip of land in front of the Schools containing an area of about 320 superficial feet, and, in consideration of the improvement which would be effected thereby, the Board agreed to contribute £100 on completion of the improvement, subject to the London County Council paying half the amount. The Council, however, while admitting that the improvement was desirable, considered that the extent of the general through traffic along the thoroughfare was not sufficient to justify a contribution of that amount, and would only contribute one-third of the net cost not exceeding £33 6s. 8d. The Board, nevertheless, resolved to abide by the substance of its offer to the Trustees and to pay over the £10 , provided the Trustees would undertake to return the difference o £16 13s. 4d. This they have agreed to do, and have passed a resolution instructing their Architect to proceed with the emo 22 lition of the existing wall and the rebuilding of another wall to the satisfaction of the London County Council and the District Board. CRYSTAL PALACE. A circular-letter was, in October last, received from the Vestry of Camberwell, suggesting the acquisition of the Crystal Palace as a national memorial in celebration of Her Majesty s Jubilee Reign, and asking the Board to appoint representatives to attend a conference on the subject. The Board acceded to the request and appointed the then Chairman of the Board (Mr. Geo. J. Newton, J.P.), Mr. F. Baxter, and Mr. K. Tiplady, to act as such representatives. The conference met in due course and the following resolution was passed :— "That in the opinion of this conference, the present is an opportune time for the Government to secure as a permanent place of instruction and recreation the Crystal Palace and its grounds as a national memorial of Her Majesty's Diamond Jubilee, the building being the one used for the International Exhibition, 1851, and, under Royal patronage, opened to the public in 1854, and further, that this Conference is of opinion that every means should be taken to prevail upon the Government to acquire and maintain the same for the enjoyment of the people for ever." Subsequently a meeting of representatives of local authorities, including some outside districts, was held at the Mansion House under the auspices of the Lord Mayor, and resolutions were passed unanimously recommending the purchase, but nothing further appears to have been done in the matter. COMBINED DRAINAGE. The question of combined drainage has been again before the Board on receipt of a circular-letter from the London County Council, explaining the difficulties experienced by it in its endeavours to procure the passing of a Bill to amend the definition of the word " drain " in the Metropolis Local Management Act, 1855, as desired by the local authorities. A communication from the Holborn Board of Works having reference to the circular, and inquiring the opinion of this Board as to the expediency of summoning a further meeting of the conference of local authorities upon the subject, which had already sat at the Holborn Town Hall on different occasions was also received. The Board resolved to do all that lay in its power to assist the 23 London County Council in the matter. It also approved the suggested revival of the Conference at the Holborn Town Hall and authorized its Sanitary and Sewers Committee to appoint delegates. The Committee accordingly appointed delegates namely, their Chairman (Mr. A. R. Layman) and Mr. F. Baxter' to act as such at any future meetings of the Conference. THE POLICE. In consequence of an assault committed upon one of the lavatory attendants in the Borough, and of complaints as to the insufficiency of the protection to life and property afforded by the police, the Board referred the matter to its Paving and General Purposes Committee, who caused a letter To be addressed to the Secretary of State on the subject. In reply a communication was received from the Home Office stating that the attention of the Police had been drawn to the matter, and instructions given for them to do all in their power to prevent a recurrence of the annoyance. SCHOOL BOARD FOR LONDON. Prior to the election for the London School Board in November, a letter was received from the Court of Common Council of the City of London, forwarding copies of a report by the Local Government and Taxation Committee of the Common Council, in which it was pointed out that the cost of the education afforded by the London School Board, exclusive of all charges for school buildings, repayment of interest on loans, &c., was £3 11s. 0¼d. per child as" against £2 5s. 9d. for the whole of England, exclusive of London, or an excess of about 55.2 per cent. as regards London over the other part of the country, and suggesting that the School Board should itself arrange for a public inquiry into the question of expenditure with a view of discovering means for effecting the economies so loudly called for without impairing the efficient education which the School Board might be reasonably expected to provide. This Board passed a resolution expressing an opinion that an) serious attempt to bring the expenditure of the School hoard within reasonable limits must be made by the electors themselves, ant concurred with the suggestion that a public inquiry should be held. These views were communicated to the Court or Common Council and also to the School Board. The demands of the School Board upon the St. Saviour's District for the year 1898-9 amount to £18,153 18s 7d. A statement of the sums contributed to the School Board since 24 the formation of that Board in the year 1870, will be found at page 10. The Returning Officer's precept for the expenses of the last triennial election was also received and amounted to £100 17s. 8d. as compared with £113 5s. 8d. on the previous occasion. SEWER EMANATIONS. A circular-letter was received from the Vestry of Kensington stating that they had under consideration the question of the nuisance and annoyance occasioned by effluvia emanating from sewers through gullies and ventilators in the surface of roads; that they had brought the matter prominently before the London County Council with the request that a conference of Surveyors and Medical Officers of Health of the Metropolis should be convened to discuss the subject, and asking the Board to support the request. Subsequently a communication was received from the Vestry of Camberwell touching the question of sewer ventilation, and asking the Board to appoint delegates to discuss the matter. The Board referred the matter to its Sanitary and Sewers Committee, with power to act, and the Committee appointed their Chairman (Mr. A. R. Layman) and Dr. Denning delegates to attend on its behalf. Simultaneously a letter was received from the London County Council forwarding copy of report by Sir Alexander Binnie, its Chief Engineer, stating that a conference of Engineers and Surveyors of the various Vestries and District Boards of Works had been held at Spring Gardens on the 25th February with a view to some uniform system of ventilation of sewers being adopted, when the following resolutions were passed, viz.:— 1. That the closing of sewer ventilators in response to complaints increases the general evil, the diminution of which is to be attained by the multiplication of the ventilators at frequent regular intervals. 2. That in connection with any interceptor hereafter fixed on a main house drain it is advisable to carry a ventilating pipe from the sewer side of the interceptor up the front, side, or back of the house, to the satisfaction of the local sanitary authority, and that the outlet drains from the interceptor shall not be flap-trapped in sewer, unless required by the local sanitary authority. 3. The pipe ventilators up buildings, or otherwise where possible, should always be adopted, in addition to surface ventilation. 25 TRANSFER OF LAND. Under section 20 of the Land Transfer Act, 1897, power is given to Her Majesty, by Order in Council, to declare, as respects any County or part of a County, that, after a certain specified day, registration of land shall be compulsory on sale; the Privy Council had given the London County Council notice under the Act that it was proposed to make an order applying the Act to the County of London, and, in November last, the Council wrote inquiring the views of the local authorities and others as to the desirability of putting in force an order of the kind. In answer thereto the Board caused a letter to be written expressing an opinion that the registration of titles under the Act was unnecessary; that it would cause additional expense and delay in the buying, selling, and mortgaging of property, and that it would be prejudicial to all titles that could not be registered as indefeasible under the Act; dissenting therefore from the proposal. Twenty-one other local authorities expressed similar views; twelve were in favour of the order being applied, others declined to express an opinion, and, out of a total of sixty one replies received from Vestries, Railway Companies, Bankers, Building Societies and others, thirteen only were in favour of the proposal. The Council, nevertheless, by a large majority, voted in favour of it on the understanding however that the order will be so framed as to take effect according to the terms of a letter received from the Privy Council, dated 18th January, as follows:— " Privy Council Office, Whitehall, 18th January, 1898. "Sir,—1 am directed by the Lord President of the Council to acknowledge the receipt of your letter of the 17th inst., with reference to the draft of a proposed Order in Council, for applying Part III. of the Land Transfer Act, 1897, to the County of London. In reply, I am to state for the information of the London County Council that the form which the final Order in Council for giving effect o the compulsory clauses of the Land Transfer Act,1879, will take, will no doubt be settled with due regard to any suggestions which may be received from the County Council . But the intention at present is that the Order shall made to take effect progressively according to a division the County into convenient areas not less than four in number. 20 "The first area, comprising one-fourth or less of the County, would be selected with a view to the utilisation of the existing offices in Lincoln's Inn Fields as the Land Registry of the district. "This manner of carrying the Order into effect will have the advantage of not throwing immediately a very heavy burden on the registry, and will also afford such an opportunity as the County Council appear to desire of estimating the value of the work as it proceeds, and of watching generally the progress of the Act. "I am to add that any representations which their experience of the Act might lead the County Council to make, would undoubtedly receive careful consideration. " I am, Sir, " Your obedient Servant, " The Clerk of the " C. L. PEEL." " London County Council." ELECTRIC LIGHTING. In the Report for 1895-96, it was stated that the Board had given its sanction to an application made by the London and Brush Provincial Electric Lighting Company, Limited, to the Board of Trade for an Order enabling the Company to supply electricity within the St. Saviour's District, subject to the area of supply in St. Saviour's being limited to the neighbourhood of Bowling Green Lane at the extreme eastern end of the district, the principal object which the Company had in view in making the application for crossing St. Saviour's being to connect the two districts of St. Olave and St. George-theMartyr. The Order, known as the St. Saviour's District Electric Lighting Order, was granted accordingly, the system of supply sanctioned by it being that of a continuous current. In December last the Company applied to the Board for its approval of an application which they were making to the Board of Trade for the substitution of a system of supply by means of alternating currents, and the Board gave its consent accordingly. At the time of writing this report the Order had not been granted, but it was expected to be shortly. THE UNEMPLOYED. In December last, on the motion of Mr. N. W. Oviatt, it was unanimously resolved as follows:—"That the Clerk be '27 instructed to arrange for the keeping of a Register wherein to record the names and addresses of the Unemployed residing in the Parishes of St. Saviour and Christchurch, and that preference in employing men during the coming winter be given in the following order, viz., married men with families, married men without families, and single men, subject to their suitability. Further, that notice of vacancies be notified in writing to applicants." A book is kept at the Office of the Board for the purpose of registering any applications of the kind in accordance with the above resolution. MORTUARY. This subject was mentioned in the last Annual Report. A draft of the agreement between the Ecclesiastical Commissioners and the Board for sale of the site, which is situate in Lavington Street and Farnham Place, Gravel Lane, has been prepared and submitted by the Solicitors of the Vendors to the London County Council and by the Solicitor of the Council, after making various extensive alterations therein, to the Board. Subject to such alterations, it has been approved on behalf of the Board and returned to the Council's Solicitor, and it will now have to be returned to, and further considered by, the Commissioners. TELEPHONES. In January, the Corporation of London wrote informing the Board that application had been made to the Treasury by the late Commission of Sewers for an inquiry into the cost and efficiency of the Telephone Service in London and all matters relating thereto, and asking the Board to co-operate with the Corporation (to which body the powers and duties of the late Commission had been transferred), by making a similar application to the Treasury, and also asking the Board to appoint delegates to attend a Conference on the subject. The Board assented, and appointed its Chairman (Mr. George J. Newton, J.P.), Mr. Henry J. Coles and Mr. B. White delegates accordingly. The Conference took place at the Guildhall on the 17th March, and resolutions were passed as follows: "1. That, in the opinion of this Conference of Delegates representing the Corporation of London, and the A estries and District Boards of the Metropolis, the present sen ice of London is inadequate, inefficient and costly. "2. That, in the opinion of this Conference, an inquiry should be held by the Treasury as to the cost, adequacy and efficiency of the London Telephone Service ant a 28 matters relating thereto, agreeably to the request of the local authorities of London. "3. That, inasmuch as the National Telephone Company is not possessed of statutory powers for placing mains, pipes or wires underneath the streets of the Metropolis, it is undesirable that local authorities shculd give the Company permission to lay mains until the interests of the public are duly secured by statute as in the case of tramways and electric-lighting undertakings, and subject always to the previous consent of the road authority. "4. That This meeting of Metropolitan Delegates expresses its entire approval of the City Corporation's action on the telephone question, and also its thanks for the convening of this Conference. "5. That the best thanks of this meeting be presented to the Chairman, Alpheus Cleophas Morton, Esq., for presiding, and for his public spirited efforts to obtain an improved and cheaper telephone service for London, as well for the trouble taken by him in the matter. "6. That copies of the resolutions be forwarded to the Treasury, the Corporation of London, the London County Council, the Vestries and District Boards of the Metropolis, and every Municipality in the United Kingdom." Later on the Board received a letter from the London County Council referring to the fact that the House of Commons had appointed a Select Committee to inquire and report "whether the telephone service is or is not calculated to become of such general benefit as to justify its being undertaken by municipal and other local authorities, regard being had to local finance ; and, if so, whether such local authorities should have power to undertake such service in the districts of other local authorities outside the area of their own jurisdiction, but comprised wholly or partially in the same telephone area, and what powers, duties and obligations ought to be conferred or imposed upon such local authorities," and requesting the Board to appoint representatives to attend a Conference at the County Hall, Spring Gardens, to discuss the subject and determine as to the evidence to be submitted to the Select Committee. The Board authorised its former delegates, Mr. G. J. Newton and Mr. B. White, to attend, and appointed Mr. F. H. Hendrichs in the place of Mr. Henry J. Coles, who had resigned, to act on its behalf. The Conference was held at the County Hall accordingly on the 14th June, and the following resolutions were passed: 29 ''1. That, in the opinion of this Conference, the present telephone service of the London area, as supplied by the National Telephone Company, is both inefficient and inadequate; that the charges, as compared to those made by the same Company in the provinces, are much too high, and that disadvantages to London are largely due to the abandonment by the Post Office of that principle of competition which was expressly adopted prior to 1892 for the protection of telephone users. "2. That this Conference views with alarm the action of the Post Office in using, for the benefit of the National Telephone Company, its special powers as to the breaking up of streets, as instanced in the recent case of the Commissioners of Sewers and the Post Office ; and urges the Select Committee on Telephones, which is now sitting at the House of Commons, to preserve intact that control over the streets which has hitherto been vested in the municipal authorities. "3. That, in the opinion of this Conference, the telephone service is of such general public importance, and calculated to become of such general benefit, that it ought no longer to remain exclusively in the hands of a trading corporation, but be worked by the Government as a part of the postal service of the country. ''4. That, in the event of the Post Office not undertaking a telepone service, it is desirable that the local and central authorities of the London telephone district should at once combine to secure au efficient and cheap municipal telephone service. "5. That the Chairman of the Highways Committee of the London County Council be requested to place the views of the Conference, as indicated in the foregoing resolutions, before the Select Committee of the House of Commons." Resolutions were also passed at the same Conference with reference to generating stations for the supply of electricity in bulk and electric lighting LAND VALUES. A circular-letter was received from the Vestry of Battersea asking the Board to appoint delegates to attend a Conference to consider the question of the taxation of land values. The Board appointed Mr. E. Tiplady, and at the meeting of the 80 Conference which took place on the 10th March, the following resolutions were passed:— "1. That this Conference is of opinion that legislation should be at once undertaken providing for the separate valuation and assessment of land and improvements. « "2. That no scheme for the taxation of land values will be acceptable which does not provide for the collection of the tax from the occupier, with a statutory right of deduction as is the case in Income Tax, Schedule A. "3. That no scheme for the taxation of land values will be acceptable which does not provide for the assessment of land values for local as well as Imperial purposes." FIRE-ESCAPE. The London County Council has intimated that as a horsed fire-escape of an improved pattern is now kept at the chief station of the Fire Brigade in Southwark Bridge Road, the fire-escape stations in Sumner Street and Marshalsea Road will be discontinued. SALE OF FOOD AND DRUGS ACT. A circular-letter was received from the Board of Works for the St. Giles's District stating that the Board had had under consideration the Sale of Food and Drugs Amendment Bill, introduced into the House of Commons by the President and Parliamentary Secretary of the Local Government Board, and forwarding copy of a resolution passed by that Board as follows:— "That a communication be addressed to the Local Government Board urging that the Bill should be amended and brought into line with the recommendations of the Select Committee of the House of Commons." The Board referred the letter to its Sanitary Committee, who handed the same to the Analyst, Mr. R. Bodmer, F.I.C., for his opinion, who reported as follows:— "I have considered the circular-letter from the St. Giles's Board of Works re the Sale of Food and Drugs Bill and the report to that Board by two of their officers. I need not recapitulate the facts referred to in that report as to the long and exhaustive inquiry by a Select Committee of the House of Commons on the defects in the present 31 Acts and the large number of witnesses examined by that Committee. "Various recommendations were made by the Committee and it was naturally anticipated that the Bill introduced last session by Mr. Chaplin and Mr. T. W. Russell (the latter having been Chairman of the Select Committee), would give effect at any rate to the most important of those recommendations. "To the great disappointment of all parties interested in the question, the most important of these recommendations finds no place in the Bill. "This has been most clearly pointed out by the Council of the Society of Public Analysts, whose report was laid before you in February. "With this report I must heartily agree. "Leaving out minor defects in Mr. Chaplin's Bill, I will refer to one or two matters of the greatest importance. "1. The Court of Reference especially recommended by the Select Committee, whose functions would include the fixing of standards of purity and the settlement of disputed points, such as the harmfulness or otherwise of the "addition of preservatives, colouring matters, Ac. to articles of food, is not even referred to in the now Bill, and consequently the Somerset House (Inland Revenue) chemists remain, as before, referees in cases of dispute. "This omission alone is sufficient to render the Bill practically valueless. "I need not, I am sure, refer to the frequent disputes which have occurred between Public Analysts and the Somerset House referees to prove how necessary a properly constituted Court of Reference (such as the Select Committee recommended) has become. "Take, for instanca, the question of copper in preserved . peas. Had the proposed Court of Reference been in existence the question of how much copper per pound in an article of food such as preserved peas is sufficient to render the article injurious to health would have been settled by the Court of Reference, and the heavy expense of thrashing the matter out in a Police-court or Court of Appeal would not have been incurred. "I understand that the Trade are just as much in favour 32 of this proposed court of reference as are the public analysts. "Penalties.—I agree with the remarks made by the Council of the Society of Public Analysts, that the fixing of a minimum fine of £5 for a second offence should not be absolutely binding on a Magistrate, as it might lead to his dismissing comparatively trivial cases rather than imposing the £5 penalty. "2. The question of Warranty.—This being a purely legal point, your solicitor Mr. Topham, has kindly assisted me me with his valuable advice. "The warranty clause is being taken advantage of most unfairly by certain large milk dealers. "For instance.—A servant of a milk dealer adds water to a milk for his own profit (probably with the tacit connivance of his employer, who thereby is enabled to pay less wages to his servants). On the hearing of the case a warranty is produced, and the delivery of the milk is traced from the farmer to the man who delivers it to the consumer. The latter denies having tampered with the milk, and the Magistrate has to dismiss the case. The warranty clause should therefore be entirely repealed. "3. Notices of Dilution of Spirits.—The dilution of Spirits is not referred to at all in the new Bill. "At present, although the strength of Spirits is fixed by the Act, a publican has only to put up the usual notice, 'All Spirits sold in this establishment, to meet the requirements of the Sale of Food and Drugs Act are sold as diluted Spirits,' and he can sell any strength he pleases. "This plan has now been adopted by a certain large firm of refreshment contractors for the sale of milk. A notice is put up that ' Every care is taken that the milk sold should be of good quality, but it is not guaranteed as either pure or containing all its cream.' "This line of defence might be extended to various other articles of food. "The new Act should stop these practices. "There are various other defects, both of omission and commission, in Mr. Chaplin's Bill which I will not refer to. "In conclusion, I would suggest that this Board should 38 either oppose the Bill, or better, that a resolution should be passed and forwarded to the President of the Local Govern ment Board requesting him to amend his Bill, so as to carry out the recommendations of the Select Committee as done by the St. Giles's Board. ''It might also be of use to try and bring pressure to bear on our Member (Mr. Causton) to take the matter up." The Board adopted the suggestion contained in the last paragraph of Mr. Bodmer's report, and caused a letter to be addressed to the President of the Local Government Board in Support of the action taken by the St. Giles's Board of Works, and also to Mr. Causton, M.P. ICE CREAM. The attention of the Board having been directed to the danger to life and health attendant upon the sale of Ice Cream by itinerant vendors in the streets of London, the Board referred the matter to the Sanitary Committee, and, on the recommendation of that Committee, a letter was written to the Home Secretary and by him referred to the Local Government Board calling attention to the fact that Ice Cream is largely sold in the streets of London to children, and urging upon him the desirability of the Sale of Food and Drugs Act being so amended as to include the sale of that commodity, one of the Magistrates at the Southwark Police Court having decided that it did not come within the terms of that Act. CONTRACTS. Availing themselves of a provision contained in their contract with the Board for the shooting of dust and refuse, Messrs. Wakeley Bros. & Co., Ltd., gave notice to determine the same at the end of the second year of its term of three years in consequence of the increased cost of disposing of the refuse, and advertisements were issued and tenders received for the renewal of such contract; Messrs. Wakeley's being the lowest, theirs was accepted, and a fresh contract has been entered into. The contracts for the supply of Portland cement and lime, Thames ballast and sand, York paving and granite curb, hire of horses and harness, and for the cleansing by the Board of the Borough Market have likewise been the subject of public competition and been renewed. Other works and things contracted for during the year have been the laying down of compressed rock asphalte and the supply of creosoted wood blocks for paving part of the Borough High Street. By private 3 34 arrangement with Mr. George Tyrie, his contract for supply of bass brooms has been extended for another year on the same terms and conditions as under the late contract. A list of these and other subsisting contracts will be found at page 90. By arrangement with the Borough Market Trust the price to be paid for the cleansing of the Market has been raised from £550 to £600 per annum. GOVERNMENT BUILDINGS. A circular-letter was received from the Vestry of Islington stating that the Vestry had been advised that the provisions of the Metropolis Management Act and of the Public Health (London) Act, 1891, with reference to drainage and sanitary arrangements generally do not apply to government buildings, and urging that in the interests not only of the occupiers of such buildings, but of the health of the community at large such buildings should no longer be exempt. The Board concurred and caused a letter to be written to the Local Government Board in support of that view. SUPERANNUATION BILLS. The Board presented a petition to Parliament in favour of the Superannuation (Metropolis) Bill and the Local Authorities Officers' Superannuation Bill, subject to the adoption of a suggestion by the Camberwell Vestry that they should be so extended as to include workmen in the regular employ of the local authorities. The object of the first-named Bill was to bring the provisions of the Metropolis Superannuation Act, 1866, relative to the Superannuation of Officers of Vestries and District Boards, into line with those of the Poor Law Officers by requiring the Officers of such Vestries, Boards, etc. to contribute from their salaries and wages a percentage allowance to a fund from which their retiring allowance would in future be paid. The other Bill applied to the whole of England and Wales and included therefore the Metropolis. Its object was to extend to officers and servants in the service of local authorities the provisions of the Poor Law Officers' Superannuation Act, 1896, by which Parliament granted to officers and servants under the poor law, in return for a percentage contribution from their salaries and emoluments, superannuation when they become unable to discharge their duties by reason of permanent infirmity of mind or body or of old age. The term "servant" was defined to mean "every servant appointed by resolution of a local authority." 35 HOUSING ACCOMMODATION FOR THE POOR. On receipt of a letter from the Vestry of St. Saviour, calling the attention of the Board to certain remarks made by His Honor Judge Addison, of the Southwark County Court, and reported in the newspapers, as to the great and increasing difficulty experienced by the poor in Southwark in obtaining suitable lodgings, and suggesting that the Board should take steps to alieviate the overcrowding by the erection of artisans' dwellings, The Board, on the motion of Mr. Henry J. Fry, appointed a special committee to consider the question. The powers for the erection of such dwellings in the Metropolis being vested exclusively in the London County Council under the provisions of the Housing of the Working Classes Act, 1890, the Committee caused a letter to be addressed to the Council as follows:— Emerson Street, Bankside, Southwark, S.E., 22nd April, 1898. Sir,—In the year 1891 this Board was in correspondence with the London County Council with the object of inducing the Council to exercise its powers under the Housing of the Working Classes Act, 1890, for the erection of artisans' or workmen's dwellings in Southwark, but such correspondence proved abortive, the Council and the Ecclesiastical Commissioners being unable to agree as to the price to be paid for a suitable plot of land. Since then the matter has been in abeyance, but the necessity for additional housing accommodation of the kind suggested has greatly increased. This state of things has been induced by various causes, e.g., the erection, in consequence of the central position of the district, of a large number of warehouses and factories, and a corresponding increase in the number of persons employed in the neighbourhood; the pulling down of houses in order to make room for the erection of such warehouses and business premises; railway extensions necessitating the destruction of a vast number of dwelling houses formerly occupied by the labouring class, and the clearance of sites which has resulted from the operation of the Public Health Act of 1891. The attention of the Board has again been called to the matter in consequence of certain remarks made by Juge 36 Addison of the Southwark County Court, and which were reported in the newspaper press, to the effect that tenants under notice of ejectment come before him continually and complain that, although they have respectable references and can pay a fair rent, they are unable to find a habitation in the neighbourhood either in the way of lodgings or a tenement, that people with large families have no chance at all, and that the difficulty is on the increase. The Board would be glad if the Council would further consider the matter and see if it can devise some means of providing the housing accommodation, for the poorer classes especially, which is so much needed in this and the surrounding district. I append hereto a copy of a letter which his Honour Judge Addison has addressed to Mr. Causton, the local Member of Parliament, on the subject, and which has appeared in the public press. Yours faithfully, W. H. ATKINS, The Clerk Clerk. London County Council. At the instance of Mr. Causton, a meeting was held at the Bridge House Hotel, London Bridge, on Wednesday, the 29th June, for the purpose of conferring with the local authorities, the Vestry of St. George-the-Martyr, the Board of Guardians, and this Board being represented, Messrs. Edric Bayley, M.A., and T. Hunter, County Councillors, and many others being present. In opening the proceedings, Mr. Causton (who occupied the Chair), read the letter from Judge Addison above referred to, in which His Honor stated that from his experience of recent ejectment cases in the district of his County Court, there was great need for housing accommodation, many of the defendants being industrious people, willing and able to pay a suitable rent, but unable to find habitations within a reasonable distance of their work, and suggesting inquiry as to the same on the part of the local authorities. It was in consequence of that letter and his (Mr. Causton's) desire for personal information that he had called that meeting. The subject having been discussed, Mr. F. Baxter proposed and Mr. Henry J. Fry seconded the following resolution, which was unanimously passed:— "That this meeting, being convinced 37 of the great need of dwelling accommodation for the poorer classes in Southwark, urges the local authorities to take common action (1) in endeavouring to obtain from the Corporation of the City of London, the Railway and Electric Light Company, the Ecclesiastical Commissioners, and other landowners in the locality, facilities for the purchase of land on reasonable terms for the erection of dwellings, and (2) in impressing upon Parliament the necessity of assisting the London County Council in its efforts to provide further accommodation under the Housing of the Working Classes Act, without cost to the ratepayers by an extension of the terms of years for repayment of loans, and by the relaxation of the building conditions now imposed by the Home Office." THE LATE MR. J. M. DOYLE. With much regret the Board received intelligence, in February last, of the death of Mr. .J. M. Doyle, after along and severe illness, and passed a resolution expressing regret accordingly, and its sympathy with the widow and family of the deceased. Mr. Doyle had been a member of the Board since the year 1892, and had served during all that time on the Sanitary and Sewers Committee. THE RETIREMENT OF MR. HENRY J. COLES. Mr. Henry J. Coles resigned his membership of the Board in March last in consequence of the removal of his business to Derby, his resignation being greatly regretted by his colleagues. Mr. Coles had been a member of the Board since the year l884; he was elected its Chairman for the year 1896-97. Previously he held the position of Chairman of the Paving and General Purposes Committee for a period of six years, The valuable services rendered by him to the parish and district of St. Savioui were recognised by a public testimonial and the presentation to him of a service of plate which had been subscribed for by his numerous friends and colleagues in St. Saviour s. W. H. ATKINS. Offices, Emerson Street, Bankside, S.E, August, 1898. 38 SURVEYORS REPORT. For the Year ending Lady Day, 1898. Gentlemen, I beg to submit my Fifteenth Annual Report on the various matters connected with the Departments under my control. PAVING DEPARTMENT. The following are the principal carriageway and footway paving works executed during the year: — WINCHESTER STREET. The carriageway and footways of this thoroughfare from Little Winchester Street to Cathedral Street have been repaved with new stone. The carriageway was paved with new 3x7 inch Aberdeen granite pitching on a foundation of six inches of lias lime concrete, and the footways were paved with new 2½ inch York stone paving. About 320 supl. yards of pitching, 1,000 supl. feet of York stone, and 360 feet of new curb were used in the work. CATHEDRAL STREET. The carriageway and footways of this thoroughfare from Montague Close to the south end of the railings of St. Saviour's Church have been repaved. The old pitching in the carriageway has been taken up and replaced by Karri wood paving on a foundation of 6 inches Portland cement concrete. The footway on the west side has been paved with new York stone, and on the east side the old paving was re-squared and relaid. 39 The area paved with wood is about 350 supl. yards. ,, ,, new York is about 500 supl. feet. ,, ,, old stone re-squared is about 800 supl. feet. MONTAGUE CLOSE. This portion of public way, which immediately abuts on the east end of St. Saviour's Church, has now been paved with Enderby granite cubes, 4 inches square, on a foundation of 6 inches of lias lime concrete; the footways have also been paved with new York stone paving. The area paved with granite is 250 supl. yards, and with new York stone 550 supl. feet. LONDON BRIDGE APPROACH. The footway on the east side of the Bridge incline from the City boundary to the boundary of the adjoining parish of St. Olave's has been paved with new 3 inch York stone. The portions of granite footway on both the east and west sides of the Approach have been roughened. The area of new York paving laid was about 1,470 feet supl. NEWCOMEN STREET. The narrow-way of this thoroughfare has been repaved with new 24 x 12 inch granite tram and redressed granite pitching. About 190 feet linl. new tram and 60 yards supl. redressed granite have been laid. EWER STREET. This street has been greatly improved, the carriageway widened and straightened throughout its whole length from Lavington Street to Union Street. The carriageway has been paved with Val de Travers compressed rock asphalte on a foundation of 6 inches Portland cement concrete ; the footways have been paved with new 2½ inch York stone paving. The area of the carriageway paved with asphalte is 776 supl. yards, and the area of the footway paved with new York stone 1,610 supl. feet. About 800 feet linl. of new 6 x 12 inch granite curb has also been laid. 40 ORANGE STREET. A portion of this thoroughfare has been widened at the east end by Guildford Street, and is now available for two lines of vehicular traffic instead of for one line as formerly. The footway on the north side has been taken up and a new footway formed and the carriageway paved with redressed granite pitching on a concrete foundation. The area of the carriageway paved is 300 supl. yards, and of the footway 603 supl. feet. GEORGE STREET. The ea3t end of this thoroughfare at its junction with Bear Lane has been repaved with redressed granite pitching in place of the old worn pitching which formerly existed, the remaining portion of the street is paved with asphalte, but the gradient at the east end of the street is too sharp, and therefore is paved with granite. The area paved is about 179 supl. yards. PRICE'S STREET. The carriageway of this thoroughfare from Gravel Lane to Chancel Street has been paved with Val de Travers compressed rock asphalte, on a foundation of 6 inches of Portland cement concrete, and the footways with new and re-squared York stone. Another macadam road has now been abolished, and a cleanly and sanitary paving substituted. The area paved with asphalte is 759 supl. yards, and the area of footway paved with new and re-squared York stone, 4150 supl. feet. About 352 feet lineal of curb has also been laid. COLLINGWOOD STREET. The carriageway of this thoroughfare from Great Charlotte Street to Meymott Street has been paved with Val de Travers compressed rock asphalte in place of the macadam which formerly existed, and still another macadam road abolished in continuation of the policy adopted by the Board five years since. The area of the carriageway paved with asphalte is 1148 yards supl., and the area of the footways paved with new and re-squared York stone 3270 supl. feet. About 1090 feet lineal of new and redresssd curb has been laid. 41 BORO' HIGH STREET. The Limmer Asphalte Company, who have a maintenance contract for the footway in the Boro' on the east side from Denman Street to Newcomen Street, relaid nearly the whole of the surface with new asphalte in June. The contract expires in 1901. GENERAL WORKS, &c. In consequence of the widenings of the South Eastern Railway a large number of hoardings and stages have been constructed in the thoroughfares over which the railway passes, these have been arranged so as to interfere as little as possible with the vehicular and foot traffic. The lamp column, ballast bin, and refuge, situate on the London Bridge Approach, by Findlater's corner, were removed on Jubilee day at the request of the War Office. The tram lines in Blackfriars Road have been altered so as to run in parallel straight lines from Charlotte Street to Charles Street, and the road considerably levelled. These works were carried out in considerably of our removing the defective urinal which formerly stood in the centre of the road near the Railway Bridge. DISTRICT REPAIRS. The following works have been executed in the repairing and maintaining of the footways in the district:— Footways. New 2½ inch York paving laid 1649 ft. supl. New Victoria stone paving laid 163 „ „ Old York and Victoria paving relaid 16539 „ „ New curb laid 170 '' linl Old curb taken up and relaid 2221 '' '' Holes cut in York No. 9 Redressed curb laid 45 " " Carriageways. The following works have been executed in the repairing and maintaining of the carriageways in the district.— Old granite pitching relaid 86652/9yds. supl. New granite pitching 442/9 '' '' 42 Redressed granite pitching 295 yds. supl. Wood paving relaid 340 „ „ Lias lime concrete 6 inches thick under pitching in sewer trenches 210 „ „ Do. do. 12 inches thick 33 „ „ Portland cement concrete 6 inches thick under wood paving in sewer trenches 3½ „ „ New wood paving laid No. 4342 wood blocks 1½ inch asphalte on 6 inch concrete 11 yds. supl. Ground excavated and carted away for concrete space under pitching, (fee 47 „ cube. The above works do not include work done in restoration after Gas, Water, Electric Light, and other companies' trenches, nor the work executed under the head of " Estimated Works." The amounts received for reinstating footway and carriageway trenches after openings made by Water, Gas, Electric Light and other Companies, are as follows:— £ s. d. South Metropolitan Gas Company 431 5 3 London Electric Supply Corporation 340 6 6 Southwark and Vauxhall Water Company 115 17 8 Lambeth Water Company 56 8 2 Hydraulic Power Company 42 1 4 City of London Electric Lighting Company 29 9 4 National Telephone Company 14 4 5 Post Office Telegraphs 9 12 7 Sale of old stone, &c 61 0 11 £1,100 6 2 The quantity of ballast used on the Bridge Inclines, Wood Paving, &c., for the year was 1,247 yards cube, which cost, including spreading, £353 6s. 4d. BOARD'S WORKMEN. Surveyor's Department. The rate of wages paid to the workmen in the employ of the Board is as follows:— Paving Foreman 60s. per week. Masons 9½d. per hour. Paviors 9½d. Rammermen 7½d. „ Labourers 6½d. „ 43 Sewers Foreman 45s. per week. Sewermen. 30s. „ Timekeeper 30s. „ Dustmen 4s. 6d. per day. Golly men 4s. 6d. „ Sweepers 4s. 6d. „ Gangers 4s. Sd. „ Watchmen 4s. per night. Carmen 4s. 6d. per day. Yardmen 4s. 6d. „ Urinal Cleaners 6½d. per hour. Lavatory Attendants (Male) 26/6 per week. „ „ (Female) 17/6 „ „ „ (Lad) 18s. „ SCAVENGING DEPARTMENT. Scavenging, &c., work for one year ending March, 1898. Scavenging. Dusting. Market. Watering. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. Labour 1,923 0 7 767 9 1 330 7 0 123 14 3 Horse-hire 476 12 3 360 8 6 143 12 2 126 1 2 Disposal of refuse 893 16 9 919 0 4 273 9 1 3293 9 7 2046 17 11 747 8 3 249 15 5 6337 11 2 Brooms, tools, water, Ac. 346 2 7 1/10 amount (£1265 17s. 4d.) expended on plant 126 11 9 1/7 amount (£213 12s. 1d.) expended on building, &c. 30 10 3 Rent of depot and proportion of office expenses 295 0 0 Deduct:— 7135 15 9 Amount received from Boro' Market 55 0 0 0 Ditto ditto for collection of trade refuse 59 3 1 1 1143 17 1 £5992 14 8 Amount paid to the Southwark & Vauxhall Water Company for Water, for Street Watering 125 4 6 £6117 19 2 44 At the commencement of the year I recommended the Board to adopt the system of meters for the supply of water for street watering instead of paying as we have done for many years a lump sum of £200 for water for the season. I am pleased to be able to report that my calculations have proved correct, and although we keep five water vans going instead of four as formerly, the new system saves the Board at least £100 per annum. Statement showing the weight of Refuse disposed of in each month during the year:— Market. Dnst. Slop. 1897 Tons. Cwts. Qrs. Tons. Cwts. Qrs. Tons. Cwts. Qrs April 177 9 1 841 5 2 876 2 0 May 157 16 2 843 10 2 718 0 1 June 263 8 1 806 14 2 645 16 3 July 261 10 0 755 11 2 528 2 2 August 191 6 3 716 15 2 729 8 1 September 215 12 0 793 11 0 831 1 0 October 276 1 3 778 5 3 646 19 3 November 271 1 0 861 1 1 945 16 3 December 272 6 0 873 14 3 1118 5 2 1898 January 303 14 0 949 9 1 830 0 2 February 302 0 0 836 9 2 950 3 1 March 241 11 2 950 13 3 929 18 3 2933 17 0 10,007 2 3 9749 15 1 Totals. Tone. Cwts. Qrs. Market 2933 17 0 Dust 10,007 2 3 Slop 9749 15 1 22,690 15 0 45 The following statement shows the amount of Trade Refuse collected in each month during the year:- 1879 Tons. Cwts. Qrs. April 143 4 '2 May 175 0 9 June 171 6 0 July 230 8 0 August 171 5 1 September 213 0 2 October 163 14 3 November 213 18 3 December 246 2 0 1898 January 227 1 0 February 207 1 1 March 225 6 3 2387 9 3 SEWERS DEPARTMENT. PARK STREET. A new 12 inch pipe sewer has been laid in Park Street from Emerson Street to the Southwark Bridge Road archway, a length of about 400 feet. An old high level sewer which formerly existed has been filled up and abolished. The new sewer is laid at a much deeper level and has a better fall than the old sewer. SURREY ROW. A length of old high level sewer which existed on the north side of Surrey Row, between that thoroughfare and Nelson Square, has been filled up and abolished, and the drainage of premises, which formerly discharged into the sewer, diverted to the new low level sewer which runs down the centre of Surrey Row. SOUTHWARK STREET. Temporary latrines for the accommodation of troops on Jubilee Day were erected at the east end of this thoroughfare at the request of the War Office authorities. 46 PRIVATE DRAINAGE CONNECTIONS. The following private connections have been made to the public sewers:— Size of pipe 6 inches 32 The amount deposited for the execution of these works was £224 19s. 2d. URINALS. Since the abolition of the urinal near the triangle, Union Street, in consequence of the South Eastern Railway Company's extension works, many complaints were received of want of accommodation in the neighbourhood. A new six-stall slate urinal has now been erected in Southwark Street at the junction with Southwark Bridge Road, on the west side. The urinal is fitted with patent brown glazed radial stalls with brown glazed linings and automatic flushing cisterns, and lighted inside with a special lamp. A new refuge has also been formed, and is lighted by two incandescent gas lamps. RIDLER PLACE. The urinal which formerly stood at the corner of the above place and Holland Street has now been abolished. UNDERGROUND LAVATORIES. The underground lavatories continue to work satisfactorily. On Jubilee day the top of Lavatory No. 1 was hoarded in and used as an Ambulance Station, the joists underneath being well shored up for the occasion. CONCRETE FLUSHING TANKS. The following is a list of the Concrete Flushing Tanks which have been constructed under my direction:— Where situate. Dimensions. Capacity in Gallons and Tons. No. of Outlets for flushing. Length. Width. Depth. Ft. In. Ft. in. Ft. in. George Street 15 0 3 6 7 6 2,457, or 11 tons nearly 2 Scoresby Street 12 0 3 0 5 0 1,125, or 5 „ „ 2 CollingwoodStreet 18 0 3 9 8 6 3,581, or 16 „ „ 3 Price's Street 20 0 4 0 8 0 4,000, or 18 „ „ 3 Surrey Row 12 0 3 6 8 0 2,100, or 9½ „ „ 2 47 These tanks are connected with sewers that we are unable to flush from the river and are invaluable in dry weather in keeping the sewers with which they are connected thoroughly cleansed. We have also a brick flushing tank in St. Margaret's Court, and this is used periodically. In addition to these tanks we have our river Penstocks and Hydrants. The following is a list of works executed in this District for which licenses have been obtained:— Pulling down buildings 5 Alterations and repairs to ditto 22 Rebuilding 4 Constructing crossings 8 New buildings 10 49 Amount of deposits paid to the Board for same, £184 2s. 3d. ADVERTISING STATIONS (RATING) ACT. Two advertising licenses has been taken out during the year, for which deposits amounting to £43 15s. 4d. have been made. PUBLIC LIGHTING. The number of Public Lamps in the District is 566. Of these 17 are meter lamps. Lamps have either been removed or altered in position in the following streets. Borough High Street.—Removed and reinstated lanterns and regulators for Jubilee decorations. London Bridge Approach.—Removed and reinstated lamps for Jubilee procession. Orange Street.—Removed bracket lamp and refixed on column. Hatfield Street and Old Barge House Street.—Removed bracket lamp and refixed on hoarding. Burrows Mews.—Removed bracket lamp and refixed on opposite side of mews. Chancel Street.—New lamp fixed. Collmgwood Street.—New lamp fixed. 48 The Grove.—Lamp removed. Southwark Street, West End.—Altered position of lamp on north side. Stamford Place.—Lamp discontinued. Denman Street Refuge.—One incandescent globe lamp with two burners fixed. Hop Exchange Refuge.—One ditto ditto Southwark Street Refuge, West side by Southwark Bridge Road. —One incandescent "Farringdon" lantern with two burners fixed. Southwark Street by Gravel Lane.—Ditto ditto Southwark Street at junction toith Castle Street.—Four incandescent "Farringdon "lanterns, with one burner each fixed. Bear Lane, by Schools.—One ditto ditto. Blackfriars Road, opposite Nelson Square.—One ditto. Blackfriars Road, by Christ Church.—Four ditto. Holland Street, by Schools.—New ordinary lamp fixed. Ewer Street.—Old lamp removed and new one fixed. Winchester Street.—Removed bracket lamp. GEO. ROPER NORRISH, July, 1898. Surveyor. 49 MEDICAL OFFICERS REPORT. TO THE BOARD OF WORKS FOR THE ST. SAVIOUR'S DISTRICT. Gentlemen, I beg to submit to you my Annual Report for the year ending December 31st, 1897. I base my statistics on a combined population of 21,945, that of St. Saviour's being 11,931, and of Christchurch 13,014! These are the figures I am compelled to arrive at according to the law of a decreasing population, though from the peculiar circumstances of the district they can only be considered as an approximate estimation of the total numbers residing therein. The widening of the South Eastern Railway has largely contributed to cause this decrease. During the year under consideration the births in the St. Saviour's sub-district amounted to 412, of which 214 were males and 198 females, while those in the Christchurch subdistrict amounted to 350, of which 178 were males and 172 females, making 702 births for the whole district. This gives us a birth rate of 30.54 per 1,000, which is practically the same as last year. The birth-rate for the St. Saviour sub-district is as usual higher than that for Christchurch, being 34.53 per 1,000 compared with 26.89. During the same period the number of deaths in the St. Saviour sub-district amounted to 192, of which 110 were males and 82 females, while in the Christchurch sub-district there were 222 deaths, 122 being males and 100 females; to these have to be added 11 cases of death occurring in the Christchurch Workhouse, making a total of 425 deaths actually occurring in the district. Of these 15 were deaths of non-residents on whom inquests were held, while of the Workhouse deaths J were those of persons belonging to other districts. 4 50 In hospitals and other institutions outside the district there were registered 203 deaths of persons belonging to this district, of whom 145 were males and 58 females. Adding together all the deaths and substracting those of non-residents we have a total of 603 deaths of persons actually belonging to the district. This gives us a death-rate of 24.17 per 1,000, and when multiplied by the factor for age and sex distribution gives a corrected death-rate for the district of 25.30 per 1,000. This death-rate, when compared with that for the whole of London, viz., 17.7, seems a very high one, and demands some explanation. One cause is to be found in the number of common lodging houses existing in the district. The following is a list of the registered common lodging houses with the number of beds in each:— Address. No. of Beds. 75, Blackfriars Road 37 76, „ „ 45 77 49 80 „ „ 58 90 „ „ 75 18, Charlotte Street 14 8, Great Charlotte Street 95 30, George Street 10 57 „ „ 55 86, Gravel Lane 1ll 8, Stamford Street 35 21, „ „ 76 23, „ „ 42 45, „ „ let in tenements. 46, „ „ 36 57, Union Street 84 822 The Salvation Army "Ark" in Southwark Street does not come within the meaning of the Act, though to all intents and purposes it is of the same description as the ordinary common lodging house. The "Ark" contains 194 beds. The following is a list of the deaths occurring in the common lodging houses in the district:— Address. Sex. Age. Cause of Death. 8, Great Charlotte Street M. 44 yrs. Epileptic fit. „ „ M. 59 „ Pneumonia. „ „ M. 61 „ Heart disease. 57, George Street M. 37 „ Kidney disease. 51 And in addition in outlying institutions patients from common lodging houses died as follows:— Address. Sex. Age. Cause of Death. 86, Gravel Lane M. 56 yrs. Nephritis. „ F. 1 „ Marasmus. „ M. 47 „ Van accident. 3, Stamford Street M. 65 „ Cancer. „ „ M. 73 „ Gastric Ulcer. 21, „ „ M. 41 „ Phthisis. „ M. 68 „ Phthisis. 57, George Street M. 56 „ Tram accident. 75, Blackfriars Road M. 40 „ Phthisis. „ „ M. 27 „ Phthisis. 77, „ „ M. 65 „ Phthisis. 80, „ „ M. 40 „ Cirrhosis of liver. 67, Union Street M. 48 „ Phthisis. In or from the Ark, Southwark Street, there were three persons who died:— Sex. Age. Cause of Death. M. 38 yrs. Epileptic fit. M. 40 „ Pneumonia. M. 65 „ Cancer. In outlying institutions thirty-one persons gave as their address simply the parish of Christchurch or St. Saviour's, having probably for the most part passed but a day or two in the Workhouse or at some common lodging house in the district. These cases were as follows:— Sex. Age. Cause of Death. M. 66 yrs. Phthisis. M. 75 „ Cerebral sclerosis. M. 27 „ Epilepsy. F. 47 „ Phthisis. M. 88 „ Albuminuria. F. 72 „ Bronchitis. M. 71 „ Peritonitis. M. 66 „ Phthisis. M. 75 „ Senile decay. M. 52 „ Cancer. M. 63 „ Heart disease. M. 62 „ Phthisis. M. 79„ Cerebral sclerosis. 52 Sex. Age. Cause of Death M. 60 yrs. Myscœdema. M. 73 „ Senile decay. M. 76 „ Cancer. M. 78 „ Cerebral softening. F. 74 „ Bronchitis. M. 73 „ Phthisis. M. 72 „ Heart disease. M. 52 „ Brain. M. 66 „ Phthisis. M. 87 „ Bronchitis. M. 68 „ Cystitis. M. 66 „ Phthisis. M. 74 „ Heart Disease. M. 66 „ Phthisis. M. 70 „ Bronchitis. M. 65 „ Cancer. M. 72 „ Aneurism. M. 69 „ Cancer. It will be noticed that in these tabulated lists no less than 14 persons died from phthisis and six from lung affections. From this it can readily be inferred that persons resorting to these lodging houses are not of that class from whom longevity might be expected. In many instances they are people who have failed in the battle of life, and have sunk so low that the lives they lead are not calculated to enable them to withstand the attack of any serious illness. Thus, in all, 51 deaths have to be counted as belonging to us when in reality they have no claim on our district. With regard to the economical side of the question I have nothing to do as Medical Officer of Health, but against these persons being scheduled as residents of St. Saviour's I feel bound to raise a strong protest. If we eliminate these 51 cases we find the death-rate lowered to 22.12 per 1000, a difference of nearly 10 per cent., and considering the social conditions of the neighbourhood it is, perhaps, as favorable a comparison as possible with the rest of London, bearing in mind that the wealthy districts of Hampstead, Kensington and Lewisham are included in the County of London. The excess of births over deaths for the year 1897 is 159 as compared with 212 and 162 respectively for the years 1896 and 1895. 53 According to age distribution the deaths are as follows Under the age of 1 year 151 Between 1 and 5 years 108 „ 5 and 15 „ 16 „ 15 and 25 „ 19 25 and 65 „ 206 65 years and over 93 The percentage of deaths for each age period can therefore be calculated as follows:— 25.46 per cent. of total deaths took place under the age of 1 year. 1821 „ „ „ between the ages of 1 and 5 years. 2.7 „ „ „ „ „ 5 „ 15 „ 3.2 „ „ „ „ „ 15 „ 15 „ 34.73 „ „ „ „ „ 25„ 65 „ 15.7 „ „ „ over the age of 65 years. The deaths of infants under the age of one year equal 25.46 per cent. of the total deaths and 19.81 percent. of the registered births, while the deaths of all children under five years of age equal 13.67 of total deaths and 33 98 of registered births. From the following statement of the causes of death of these children, it will be seen that the chief fatal diseases have been measles, diarrhoea, debility, and diseases of the respiratory organs:— Cause of Death. Under 1 Year. 8—5. Total under 5. Measles 6 21 27 Scarlet Fever — 6 6 Whooping Cough 6 5 11 Diphtheria — 9 9 Diarrhœa 16 6 22 Syphilis 1 1 2 Rickets 2 - 2 Tabes Mesenterica 9 3 12 Tub. Meningitis 6 9 15 Phthisis 1 4 5 Consumptive Bowel 1 - 1 Rheumatism 1 - 1 Congenital Malformation 1 - 1 54 Cause of Death. Under 1 Year. 1—5. Total under 5. Premature Birth and Debility 39 3 42 Convulsions 12 1 13 Brain — 5 5 Heart — 1 1 Bronchitis, Pneumonia, Pleurisy 31 26 57 Other respiratory complaints 1 2 3 Digestive 12 1 13 Vomiting 1 — 1 Abscess 1 — 1 Carbuncle 1 — 1 Violence 3 5 8 151 108 259 The following is a general classification of the causes of death in the district in the form of a percentage of deaths from various classes of disease to the total deaths:— Zymotic diseases 14.50 Dietetic 84 Constitutional diseases 24.11 Developmental „ 10 46 Local— Nervous system 9.10 Circulatory „ 7.59 Respiratory „ 20.41 Digestive „ 5.73 Glandular „ .17 Integumentary „ .17 Urinary „ l.86 Bones and joints .17 Organs of Special sense .17 Violent deaths 4.38 Ill-defined .34 The following table will shew the localities in which fatal cases of the principal Zymotic Diseases occurred in 1897:— Locality. Measles. Typhoid. Scarlet Fever. Whooping Cough. Diphtheria. Stanhope Buildings 1 ... • • • 3 1 1 6 Mowbray Buildings 3 • • • 1 ... 1 3 8 Townsend Yard ... ... ... ... ... 1 1 Park Street ... ... ... 1 ... 1 2 Anchor Buildings • • . • • • ... 1 ... ... 1 Peabody Buildings ... ... ... 1 ... ... 1 55 Locality. Measles. Typhoid Scarlet Fever. Whooping Cough. Diphtheria. Diarrhœa. Total Street's Buildings • • • • • • ... ... ... 2 2 Noah's Ark Alley 1 ... ... ... 1 2 Moss Alley 1 ... ... ... ... ... 1 Union Street 1 ... ... ... 1 3 5 Zoar Street 4 ... ... ... ... ... 4 Burleigh Buildings 1 • • • • • • ... ... ... 1 Suffolk Grove • • • • • • ... ... 1 ... 1 Exeter Buildings 1 • • • • • • • • • ... ... 1 Red Cross Street 1 ... ... ... ... ... 1 Winchester House 1 ... ... ... ... ... 1 Newcomen Street • • • ... ... ... 1 ... 1 Fire Station • • • ... ... ... 1 ... 1 St. Margaret's Court • • • • • • ... ... ... 1 1 Damon Place ... ... 1 ... ... ... 1 Paved Place 1 ... ... 1 1 ... 3 George Streat • • • • • • • • • 1 • • • • • • 1 Brunswick Street ... • • • • • • 1 • • • • • • 1 Holland Street ... 1 • • • • • • ... • • • 1 Surrey Row 1 • • • • • • ... ... ... 1 Gambia Street 1 ... 1 • • • . . . ... 2 Gravel Lane 1 • • • • • . • • • .... 1 2 Nelson Square • • • • • • • • • • • • 1 1 2 Broad wall 2 • • • ... • • • 3 2 7 Stamford Street • • • ... ... • • • ... 1 1 Queen's Arms Court • • • • • • • • • ... ... 1 1 Ponson by Buildings 1 ... ... ... ... ... 1 Scoresby Street • • • • • • ... • • • ... 1 1 White Hart Court • • • • • • ... ... ... 1 1 Hatfield Street 1 • • • • • • ... ... 1 2 Blackfriars Road ... 1 1 1 ... ... 3 Bennett Street • • • • • • 1 ... ... ... 1 Charlotte Street ... • • • ... 1 ... ... l Charles Street 1 • • • ... ... ... ... 1 Upper Ground St. 4 • • • ... ... ... ... 4 Sumner Street ... • • • 1 ... ... ... 1 Orange Street ... ... 1 ... ... ... 1 Appended is a list of the various causes of death:— I. Zymotic Diseases. (a.) Measles.—In St. Saviour the deaths of five males and ten females were registered, and in Christchurch those of eleven males and two females. (b.) Scarlet Fever.—One male and one female death were 56 registered in Chriatchurch, while in outlying institutions four males and one female died of this disease. (c.) Whooping Cough.—In St. Saviour the deaths of four males and two females, and in Christchurch two males and three females were due to whooping cough. (d.) Diphtheria.—A total of eleven deaths, two in St. Savionr's, four in Christchurch, and five in outlying institutions. (e.) Enteric or Typhoid Fever.—Only two deaths were recorded, one in Christchurch and the other in an outlying institution. (f.) Diarrhœa. —In St. Saviour four males and six females died of this disease; in Christchurch six males and three females, and in outlying institutions three males. (g.) Syphilis.—Two children in the St. Saviour sub-district died from congenital syphilis. (h.) Erysiptelas was the cause of one death in St. Saviour. (i.) Other Septic Diseases.—There were two deaths from other septic diseases, one in Christchurch, and one in an outlying institutions. II. Dietetic Diseases. There were five cases of death from alcoholism, one in St. Saviour's, three in Christchurch, and one in an outlying institution. III. Constitutional Diseases. (a.) Cancer.—This disease claimed twenty-four victims distributed as follows: St. Saviour, three males and one female; Christchurch, three males and four females, and in outlying institutions nine males and four females. (b.) Tabes Mesenterica.—In the St. Saviour sub-district there were registered seven deaths, and in the Christchurch sub-district five deaths, of whom eight were males and four females. (c.) Tubercular Meningitis.— In St. Saviour three children died from this disease, in Christchurch seven, while in the outlying institutions five more deaths were registered. (d.) Phthisis.—This disease was the cause of death in the following cases: In St. Saviour, thirteen males and four females; 57 in Christchurch ten males and ten females; and in outlying institions thirty-four males and ten females. Three more cases of other tubercular diseases were also registered. (e.) Purpura caused one death in the St. Saviour sub-district. (f.) Rickets.—One case in Christchurch and one in an outlying institution were recorded. (g.) Gout and Rheumatism.—One death in Christchurch Workhouse, two in Christchurch, three in St. Saviour, and one in an outlying institution were attributed to these diseases. IV. Developmental Diseases. (a.) Oil Age.—Senile decay was the cause of two deaths in Christchurch Workhouse, and six in the St. Saviour subdistrict, of nine in the Christchurch sub-district, and of five more in outlying institutions. (b) Premature Birth and Infantile Debility were the causes of death in nineteen cases in St. Saviour, sixteen in Christchurch and seven in outlying institutions. (c.) Couggnital Malformation.—In an outlying institution one case was recorded. V. Local Diseases. (a.) Nervous System.—In St. Saviour, apoplexy caused three deaths, convulsions three deaths, paralysis one death, and other nervous disorders seven deaths. In Christchurch apoplexy caused two deaths, convulsions nine deaths, paralysis live deaths, and other nervous disorders, including one from the Workhouse, seven deaths. In outlying institutions one death from apoplexy, one from convulsions, one from paralysis and sixteen from other nervous disorders were registered. (b.) Circulatory System.—In St. Saviour eleven deaths and in Christchurch seventeen deaths were attributed to these diseases, while in outlying institutions twenty more cases were recorded, as well as four in Christchurch Workhouse. (c.) Respiratory System.—Bronchitis, pneumonia and pleurisy were responsible for the deaths of twenty-four males and twenty females in St. Saviour, of twenty-six males and twenty-one females in Christchurch, and of thirteen 58 males and ten females in outlying institutions. Other respiratory diseases caused the death of one person in St. Saviour, of three persons in Christchurch and of live persons in outlying institutions, while two persons in Christchurch Workhouse died from bronchitis. (d.) Digestive System.—Seven deaths in the St. Saviour subdistrict, fifteen in the Christchurch sub-district and twelve in outlying institutions were due to diseases of the digestive system. (e.) Urinary System.—Thirteen cases in all were registered, of which one occurred in St. Saviour, two in Christchurch, nine in outlying institutions and one in Christchurch Workhouse. (f.) Glandular System.—One death occurred in an outlying institution. (g.) Bones and Joints.—One death was registered in the Christchurch sub-district. (h.) Integumentary System.—The death of an infant from carbuncle was notified in an outlying institution. (i.) Organs of special sense.—In an outlying institution one death was registered. VI. Violence. Under this heading come fifteen deaths in St. Saviour, ten in Christchurch and sixteen in outlying institutions. Details of these will be found in the lists of inquests. VII. Ill-defined. Two deaths were not sufficiently defined to be tabulated in the above. During the year 1897, inquests were held on the bodies of 21 persons in St. Saviour's sub-district, on 20 persons in Christchurch sub-district, and on 18 persons belonging to the district who died in outlying institutions, and the following verdicts were returned:— ST. SAVIOUR-SUB-DISTRICT. Sex. Age. Verdict. F. few mins. Asphyxia caused by a piece of silk tied round neck. Wilful murder against some person or persons unknown. 59 Sex. Age. Verdict. M. 54 yrs. Found drowned. F. 29 „ Gastric ulcer, vomiting, syncope. M.45 " Excessive drinking, syncope. M. 3" Exhaustion due to bleeding caused by coming in contact with another child while playing. Accidental death. M. 38 „ Epileptic fit, syncope. M. 8 „ Found drowned. F. 38 „ Found drowned. M. 53 „ Suffocation by hanging. Temporary insanity. M. 33 „ Fracture of skull caused by getting his head crushed in planing machine. M. 33 „ Found Dead from asphyxia on the foreshore of Thames, probably from excessive drinking and falling in a certain position. M. 75 „ Found drowned. M. 24 „ Found drowned in a bath. M. 33 „ Suicide by carbolic acid. Temporary insanity. M. 34 „ Apoplexy accelerated by fall in a fit. M. 2 „ Inflammation of lungs, syncope. M. 2 „ Accidentally suffocated by aniseed ball in larynx. M. 66 „ Fatty heart, syncope. M. 55 „ Suicide by hanging. Temporary insanity. F. 8 wks. Accidentally suffocated in bed. M. 26 days „ „ CHRISTCHURCH-SUB-DISTRICT. M. 61 yrs. Weak heart, bronchitis, syncope. F. 70 „ Bronchitis, syncope. M. 50 „ Found drowned. M. 45 „ Found drowned. M. 37 „ Disease of kidneys, hypertrophy of heart. F. 34 „ Excessive drinking, fatty heart. F. 15 days Convulsive fit. M. 44 „ Epileptic fit from excessive drinking. M. 22 „ Found drowned. M. 16 „ Accidentally drowned. F. 5 mos. Convulsive fit. M. 1 day F. 50 yrs. Found drowned. F. 28 „ Suicide by taking phosphorous paste. F. 28 „ Suicide by jumping off Blackfriars Bridge. M. 50 „ Accidental fall in street while intoxicated. M. 54 „ Suicide by cutting throat. Temporary insanity. M. 57 „ Suicide by hanging. Temporary insanity. M. 37 „ Rupture of aneurism of aorta. F. 1 „ Inflammation of lungs following measles. 60 OUTLYING INSTITUTIONS. Sex. Age. Verdict. M. 1 yr. Shock from burns, accident. M. 23 „ Suicide by throwing himself from balcony while of unsound mind. M. 16 „ Died during administration of chloroform properly administered. M. 55 „ Heart disease, syncope, natural death. M. 5 „ Accidentally knocked down by tramcar. M. 15 „ Falling from rowing boat while changing seats. M. 54 „ Heart disease, syncope, natural death. M. 50 „ Serous apoplexy from Bright's disease, accelerated by alcoholism and self neglect. M. 56 „ Shock from fracture of ribs and leg when run over by a tram. M. 60 „ Fall on pavement while intoxicated. M. 37 „ Heart disease set up by delirium tremens. M. 47 „ Bun over by van from which he had fallen. M. 3 „ Fall from balcony, meningitis. M. 54 „ Fall from cart. M. 27 „ Suicide by cutting throat and oxalic acid poisoning while of unsound mind. F. 40 „ Throwing herself out of a window while of unsound mind. F. 4 „ Burns, shock. F. 72 „ Burns. During the year there has been a steady and consistent endeavour to remedy the various sanitary defects in the district, to abate over-crowding, and to render the homes of the residents fit for habitation; and though our death-rate has been a high one from causes which I have endeavoured to explain, there is the satisfaction of knowing that at the present time few if any houses could be classed as insanitary or unfit for human habitation. Appended to this report will be found the tables of population, births, deaths, and new cases of infectious diseases, as required by the regulations of the Local Government Board. A report of your Inspectors, giving a list of the work done under their supervision during the year, is appended. I am, Gentlemen, Your obedient servant, JAMLS HEREON, M.D., Medical Officer of Health. Table of DEATHS during the Year 1897, in the St. Saviour (Metropolitan) District, classified according to Diseases, Ages and Localities. Names of Localities adopted or the purpose of these Statistics; Public Institutions being shown as separate localities. Mortality from all Causes at subjoined Ages. (i) Mortality from Suboined Causes, Distinguishing Deaths of children Under Five Years of Age. At all ages. Under 1 year. 1 and under 5. 5 and under 16. 16 and under 25. 25 and under 65. 65 and upwards. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 Smallpox. Scarlatina. Diphtheria. Membranous Croup Typhus. Fevers Puerperal. Cholera. Erysipelas. Meales. Whooping Cough. Diarrhœa & Dysentery. Rheumatic Fever. Phthisis. Bronchitis, Pneumonia, & Pleurisy. Heart Disease. Influenza. Injuries. All other Diseases. ! Total. Enteric or Typhoid. Continued Relapsing (a.) (b) (c) (d) (e) (f) (g) (h) St. Saviour 192 67 40 5 3 59 18 Under 5 5 upwds. ... ... 2 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 14 6 10 ... ... 29 ... ... 5 41 107 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 1 ... ... ... 17 15 11 ... 10 30 85 Christchurch 222 64 41 5 5 72 35 Under 5 5 upwds. ... 2 3 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 13 5 9 ... ... 22 1 ... ... 50 105 ... ••• 1 ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 20 25 16 ... 10 44 117 Do. Workhouse 11 ... ... ... ... 1 10 Under 5 5 upwds. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2 4 ... ... 5 11 Totals 425 131 81 10 8 132 63 Under 5 5 upwds. ... 2 5 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 27 11 19 ... ... 51 1 ... 5 91 212 ... ... 1 ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... 1 1 ... ... ... 37 42 31 ... 20 79 213 The subjoined numbers have also to be taken into account in judging of the above records of mortality. Deaths occurring outside the district among persons belonging thereto. 203 21 27 7 14 85 49 Under 5 5 upwds. ... 4 4 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 3 4 6 ... 4 23 48 ... 1 1 ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 40 17 19 ... 12 64 155 Deaths occurring within the district among persons not belonging thereto. 24 1 ... 1 3 10 9 Under 5 5 upwds. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 . . . 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... 2 3 ... 15 3 23 Table of POPULATION, BIRTHS, AND OF NEW CASES OF INFECTIOUS SICKNESS, coming to the knowledge of the Medical Officer of Health, during the year 1897, in the St. Saviour, Southwark (Metropolitan) District; classified according to Diseases, Ages and Localities. Names of Localities adopted for the purpose of these Statistics; Public Institutions being shown as separate localities. Population at all Ages. Registered Births. Aged under 5 or over 5. New Cases of Sickness in each Locality, coming to the knowledge ok the Medical Officer of Health. Number of such Casks Removed from their Homes in the several localities for treatment in Isolation Hospital. Census 1891. Estimated to middle of 1897. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 18 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 Smallpox. Scarlatina. Diphtheria. Membranous Croup. Fevers. Cholera. Erysipelas. Smallpox. Scarlatina. Diphtheria. Membranous Croup. Fevers. Cholera Erysipelas. Typhus. Enteric or Typhoid. Continued. Relapsing. Puerperal. Typhus. Enteric or Typhoid. Continued Relapsing Puerperal. (a.) (b.) (c.) (d.) (e.) St. Saviour 12301 11931 412 Under 5 5 upwds. • • • 24 30 5 ... ... • • • ... • • • • • • 2 ... ... ... 23 29 5 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 47 30 1 ... 5 ... ... ... ... 14 ... ... ... 42 28 1 ... 4 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Christchurch 13064 13014 350 Under 5 5 upwds. • • • 18 17 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2 ... ... ... 14 16 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 40 34 . .. ... 12 ... ... ... ... 11 ... ... ... 35 31 .. ... 9 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Do. Workhouse Under 5 5 upwds. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Totals 25365 24945 762 Under 5 5 upwds. ... 42 47 5 ... ... ... ... ... ... 4 ... ... ... 37 45 5 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 87 64 1 ... 17 ... ... ... ... 25 ... ... ... 77 59 1 ... 13 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... TABLE OF NUISANCES, WORKS AND OTHER MATTERS Attended to by the Sanitary Inspectors during the year 1897. Total. Nuisance Complaints received and attended to 59 Notices Served 472 Premises Inspected 697 Inspection of Works during progress 3,600 Drains Reconstructed and Tested 183 Drains (Old Brick Abolished) 23 W.C.'s Reconstructed 43 Drains Unstopped 31 W.C.'s Cleansed and Whitewashed 92 W.C.'s Repaired 36 W.C.'s Rebuilt 29 Wash-houses Cleansed and Limewashed 38 Dwelling Rooms Cleansed, Limewashed and Re-papered 247 Yards Cleansed and Limewashed 86 Yards Paved and Drained 57 Dust Bins provided 41 W.C. Flush Pipes Disconnected from Domestic Water Supply 16 Sink Wastes Disconnected from Drain 17 Cellars Cleansed and Limewashed 18 Cellars Paved 4 Cesspools Cleansed and Filled in 5 Cases of Infectious Disease, Visits paid 699 Nuisances from Overcrowding Abated 16 Roofs and Gutters repaired 34 Additional W.C.'s provided 9 D Traps Abolished 14 Pan Container Closets Abolished 9 Soil Pipes and Drains Ventilated 240 Houses Repaired Throughout 102 W.C. Pans Cleansed 12 Defective W.C. Pans Reinstated 34 W.C. Fittings Repaired 52 232 Rooms Disinfected after Cases of Infectious Disease 2,436 Clothing ,, „ „ „ (by dry heat) 13 Cisterns Abolished 11 Cisterns Provided with Covers 23 Cisterns Cleansed 64 Total. Cellars disused for Dwellings 4 New Soil Pipes provided 83 Sanitary Conveniences provided for Workpeole 19 Workshops Cleansed and Whitewashed 25 Basement Floors Excavated and Ventilated 21 Nuisances from Animals being kept, abated 3 Areas Whitewashed 32 Areas Drained 6 Syphon Cisterns fitted to W.C.'s 34 Manure Receptacles provided or reconstructed 9 Premises closed by Magistrates' order 3 Cowsheds Limewashed and Paved 1 Courts Repaved 1 UNSOUND FOOD SEIZED AND CONDEMNED. 202 Boxes of Strawberries. 103 Bags of Peas. 50 Bags of Broad Beans. 8 Bags of Apples. 18 Cases of Tomatoes. Total amount of Fines and Costs re Police-court proceedings £42 0 0 65 PUBLIC ANALYST'S REPORT. To the Board of Works for the St. Saviour's District. Gentlemen, During the year ending June 24th, 1898, your Inspectors have submitted for analysis 154 samples of Food and Drink. They consisted of:— No. of Samples. Brandy 1 Butter 45 Cocoa 1 Coffee 4 Gin 2 Mustard 10 Milk 60 Olive Oil 4 Pepper 11 Whisky 16 Total 154 Brandy.—The one sample received was genuine and of alcoholic strength 23° under proof. Butter.—Forty-five samples in all were analysed. Of these forty-four were genuine, but five of the forty-four were of poor quality. They were foreign butters and came just within the limits of a genuine butter. One sample consisted entirely of Margarine. A fair proportion of the butters were taken from wholesale premises as imported. Coffee.—Out of four samples three were genuine, and one contained a mere trace of chicory—probably an accidental admixture introduced in grinding the coffee berries in a mill in which chicory had been previously ground. 5 66 Cocoa.—One sample was analysed. It was a genuine cocoa, free from admixture with starchy matter or sugar. Gin.—Two samples were analysed and both were found genuine and above the minimum legal strength, being 30 and 33¾° respectively under proof. Mustard and Pepper.—Ten samples of mustard and eleven of pepper were examined and all were found genuine. There has been very little adulteration in this direction for some years. Any mustards sold mixed with farina being properly labelled to that effect. Olive Oil.—Four samples were analysed. One contained at least 20 per cent. of rape oil; the others were within the limits of genuine olive oil. Small quantities of some vegetable oils are very difficult to detect when mixed with olive oil, and the quantitative determination of such mixtures can only be approximate. Milk.—Sixty samples of milk were analysed, which may be classified as follows:— Genuine Milk.—Of rich quality 24 Of average quality 21 Of poor quality 5 50 Watered Milks.— Containing 12 per cent. added water 1 „ 10 „ „ 1 „ 6 „ „ 2 „ 5 „ „ 1 „ 3 „ „ 1 6 Milks Deficient in Fat:— 20 per cent. deficient 2 10 „ „ 2 4 Thus out of sixty milks—ten were adulterated. 67 Whisky.—Fourteen samples were genuine and above the legal strength of 25° under proof, the strengths being as follows:— 16.2° under proof. 23° under proof. 18° „ 23° „ 19.7° „ 24° „ 21° „ 24° „ 22° „ 24.2° „ 225° „ 245° „ 225° „ 24.6° „ Two samples were below the legal limit, being respectively 26.2° and 26.8° under proof. In no case was any deleterious ingredient found. The adulterated samples were:— 1 Olive oil (20 % rape oil). 1 Butter (entirely margarine). 10 Milks (classified above). 2 Whiskies. 14 On 154 samples this gives 9 0 per cent. of adulterated specimens. Of sixty milks—ten were adulterated—a percentage of 16.6°. I am, Gentlemen, Your obedient Servant, R. BODMER, F.I.C. Analytical Laboratory, 16, Southwark street, 68 69 BOARD OF WORKS FOR THE ST. SAVIOUR'S DISTRICT. ABSTRACT OF ACCOUNTS, from 25th March, 1897, to 25th March, 1898. RECEIPTS. PAYMENTS. To Balance, from last Year— £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. Treasurer's Account 2,521 18 7 EDUCATION RATE. Labour and Petty Cash Account 323 18 3 School Board for London, Amount of Precept, dated 10th December, 1896 8,592 9 7 2,845 16 10 EDUCATION RATE. Ditto, dated 29th July, 1897 9,529 5 2 18,121 14 9Sep Overseers, St. Saviour 11,702 12 5 * Returning Officer, School Board for London, amount of Precept for Election Expenses. November. 1897 100 17 8 „ Christchurch 6,419 2 4 18,121 14 9 SEWERS AND DRAINAGE. SEWER RATE. Overseers, St. Saviour 1,502 0 0 Albion Clay Co. 60 17 7 „ Christchurch 824 0 0 Doulton & Co 19 11 0 2,326 0 0 G. Waller 31 10 9 GENERAL PURPOSES RATE. Rosling & Withall 8 12 6 Wakeley Bros. & Co. 12 13 9 Overseers, St. Saviour 9,289 0 0 Lambeth Water Co. 8 7 6 E. Reddin & Co. 13 9 0 „ Christchurch 5,100 0 0 Hoare & Son 11 4 0 14,389 0 0 J.W. Cunningham 11 1 7 PUBLIC CONVENIENCE FEES. Shand Mason & Co. 8 5 0 G.C. Clark 9 14 0 East end of Southwark Street (No. 1) 585 16 2 Heather, Bailey & Co 51 8 4 Horne & Hinton 3 5 0 West „ „ (No. 2) 332 16 2 G. Jones 7 0 9 918 12 4 London County Council 3 11 0 LONDON BRIDGE ARCHES. H.L. Cleaver 2 13 4 E. Grove 2 6 0 Messrs. Humphery 578 1 4 J King 1 11 6 Labour 806 9 3 Proprietors of Fnning's Wharf 67 13 4 Sundries 1 4 11 645 14 8 1,074 16 94 Carried forward £39,246 18 7 Carried forward 19,297 9 2 70 71 Brought forward £39,246 18 7 Brought forward £19,297 9 2 RENTS. PUBLIC CONVENIENCE No. 1 (East end of Southwark Street). City of London Electric Lighting Co., Ltd., Wayleave 50 0 0 Southwark and Vauxhall Water Co 61 3 6 National Telephone Co., Limited, Wayleave 48 6 8 City of London Electric Lighting Co. 21 2 9 Executors. of Wm. Lee, Esq., Premises in Upper Ground Street 7 5 0 Hoare & Son 5 10 0 Brooks 22 18 6 John Rawle, Premises in Chancel (late Price's) Street 7 14 8 H. L. Cleaver 7 16 5 • 8. Finch & Co 4 19 6 Various Persons, Sundry Small Rents 19 5 0 Thorpe & Salter 6 7 8 132 11 4 J. King 3 9 11 PAVING. H. Gregory 5 18 6 St. Saviour's Library 1 4 6 South Metropolitan Gas Co. 416 2 6 Wages 259 6 3 Southwark and Vauxhall Water Co 123 12 3 Sundries 2 19 0 Lambeth Water Co. 40 7 2 Poundage 1 19 8 Hydraulic Power Co. 44 2 5 404 16 25 South London Tramways Co. 10 17 11 PUBLIC CONVENIENCE No. 2 (West End of Southwark Street). London Electric Supply Corporation 370 3 1 Postal Telegraphs Department 13 5 11 City of London Electric Lighting Co. 88 3 8 National Telephone Co. 14 4 5 Couth wark and Vauxhall Water Co. 37 10 6 B. Edgington & Co. 7 19 11 Sale of old Materials 27 11 8 City of London Electric Light Co. 19 10 4 1.156 10 11 St. Saviour's Library 1 4 6 DEPOSITS. Hoare & Son 0 17 6 H. L. Cleaver 7 15 5 Martin & Co. 3 6 0 Various Persons on making Private Connections with Sewers 207 0 3 54.11.4 15 2 J. King 3 13 10 Thorpe & Salter 1 2 0 Ditto, on Erection of Hoardings, &c. 236 0 1 50.8.2 18 5 Brooks 10 8 11 Wages 252 7 7 443 0 4 Sundries 2 18 2 INTFRFST Poundage 1 2 8 341 17 55 London and County Bank 37 13 9 SANITARY. URINALS. G. Jennings 128 15 0 Metropolitan Asylums Board, Fees, Notification of Infectious Disease 30 1 6 Southwark and Vauxhall Water Co 17 5 1 Lambeth Water Co. 21 8 3 Carried forward £41,046 16 5 Carried forward £167 8 4 20,044 2 9 72 73 Brought forward £41,046 16 5 Brought forward £167 8 4 £20,044 2 9 SCAVENGING, &c. Sugg & Co. 12 16 3 Borough Market Trustees 550 0 0 Jones 3 17 8 Care k Son 94 2 6 Collection of Trade Refuse 593 1 1 V. C. Birney 2 8 0 Sale of old Plant 11 10 0 1,154 11 1 undries 2 1 6 SALARIES. 1 282 14 35 PAVING. London County Council, Moiety of Salaries of Sanitary Officers 229 6 5 Mowlem & Co. 120 16 8 V. H. Wheeler 352 10 9 SUNDRIES. S. Gabriel 462 19 2 Wakeley Bros, & Co. 11 6 6 Fines out of Court 25 10 0 12 Improved Wood Co. 33 0 0 M. Reddin k Co. 81 13 0 Sale of old Materials 2 10 0 12-1 Heather, Bailey & Co. 574 5 0 Other small amounts 4 13 6 12-8 Millar's Karri Wood Co. 170 0 0 32 13 6 kal de Travers Asphalte Co. 1407 15 2 4 Simmer Asphalte Co. 132 9 7 French Asphalte Co. 12 15 0 G. & H. Beevers 36 0 0 G. Jones 20 0 3 A. W. Cunningham 13 16 8 hoare & Son 10 19 6 Andrews-hawksley Patent Tread Co. 13 10 0 Southwark and Vauxhall water Co. 7 5 0 Lambeth Water Co. 22 3 3 Postal Telegraph Department 2 4 11 A. Rendell 9 2 6 London Electric Supply Co. 2 2 3 E.H. Bayley & Co. 1 9 0 B. Edgington 2 12 6 Horne & Hinton 4 15 0 J. Jones 3 17 8 Labour 2,136 16 1 Sundries 5 8 4 5.651 13 9 SCAVENGING, DUSTING & WATERING. Wakeley Bros. & Co. 2,090 18 10 Heather, Bailey & Co. 1,106 4 7 Carried forward £42,463 7 5 Carried forward £3,197 3 5 25,978 10 9 74 75 Brought forward £42,463 7 Brought forward £3,197 3 5 £25,978 10 9 southwark and Vauxhall Water Co. 184 18 1 T. Tyrie 143 4 0 hœck & Co. 15 17 4 Mith & Sons 18 18 0 oare & Son 12 16 8 . H. Bayley & Co. 168 7 6 H. Edgington 6 6 0 V. C. Birney ... 9 10 6 V. W. Cunningham 31 2 11 M. Little 5 8 0 Gosling Withall 1 13 6 H. Rendall 6 1 0 Mill & Co. 2 11 0 Mivett Frank Co. 5 1 10 Labour 3119 13 2 aundries 11 5 3 6,939 18 21 LIGHTING. South Metropolitan Gas Co. 2056 12 9 St.Olave's Board of Works 1 18 8 2,058 11 53 SALARIES AND WAGES. Salaries 1915 16 8 10 l. \ Wages 80 0 0 1995 16 8 SUPERANNUATIONS. O. Brims, late Clerk of Works 68 10 0 H. Young, late Doorkeeper and Messenger... 24 14 0 93 4 0 10 RENTS AND INSURANCE. Churchwardens, St. Saviour's, Offices Emerson Street 149 17 6 10 South Eastern Railway Company, Arches, Ewer Street 97 11 7 1 Carried forward £42,463 7 Carried for ward £247 9 1 37,066 1 0 76 77 Brought forward £42,463 7 Brought forward £247 9 1 £37,066 1 0 Ecclesiastical Commissioners, Depot, Laving- ton Street 91 16 8 Dristchurch Parochial Charities, Land in Upper Ground Street 7 5 0 1 entries 0 8 0 10 346 18 9 RATES AND TAXES. sussed Taxes 28 8 3 - parochial Kates 96 16 0 Later Kates 7 10 0 132 14 310 PRINTING, STATIONERY, &c. such & Co. 82 15 0 T. Drewett 7 3 6 Meddle & Couchman 19 5 6 Y. Winkley 3 2 0 Sandries 1 2 3 113 8 310 OFFICE EXPENSES. Soare & Son 5 1 3 National Telephone Co. 28 9 0 V. W. Feast 10 10 0 Advertisements 9 1 2 Horne & Hinton 18 3 0 Raleyser & Co. 1 5 0 Colden 3 5 0 Hill & Co. 1 5 0 H. L. Cleaver 0 13 0 Hill & Co. 9 5 10 H. L. Cleaver 5 0 0 H. Gregory 0 12 6 Roleman & Son 1 17 11 Surveyor, Sundries. 6 8 2 Housekeeper 5 6 10 Carried forward £42,463 7 Carried forward £106 3 8 37,659 2 3 78 79 Brought forward £42,463 7 Brought forward £106 3 8 £37,659 2 3 win & Co. 2 17 10 Postage, &c. 11 7 10 Miscellaneous small items 7 1 4 127 10 8 10 LOANS. London County Council, Instalments 958 17 9 „ „ Interest 235 12 8 1,194 10 5 9 LAW AND PARLIAMENTARY EXPENSES. Mayson & Co. 36 4 11 D.C. Topham 649 2 7 685 7 6 10 SANITARY. Sanitas Co. 54 6 0 McDougall Bros. 6 10 0 M. Gregory 21 1 0 A.W. Newton 5 0 0 Clinical Research Association 4 4 0 R. Bodmer 4 14 6 H. E. Burnett 2 12 6 Knight & Co. 1 6 6 J ones 0 19 10 Bibbey 2 0 0 Hoare & Son 3 17 3 Mortality Returns 6 4 0 Notification of Infectious Disease, Fees 21 7 5 W. Love 0 18 0 Inspectors' Petty Cash 15 0 0 Wages 161 5 0 Sundries 3 17 11 315 3 11 6 DEPOSITS RETURNED. Various Persons, Hoardings, &c. 50 8 2 A Contra Drainage 54 11 4 Contra 104 19 6 Carried forward £42,463 7 Carried forward £40,086 14 3 80 81 Brought forward £42,463 7 Brought forward £40,086 14 3 SUNDRIES. care & Son 173 14 5 8 sreet Name Plates 2 8 6 1 London County Bank 2 1 8 8 drinking Fountain Association 1 5 0 11 guarantee Society 2 10 0 acts of Parliament, &c. 3 0 7 10 Camp Duty 3 16 0 Small items 1 19 7 8 190 15 9 By Balance: Treasurer's Account 1,944 6 2 Labour and Petty Cash Account 241 11 3 2,185 17 5 Bal £42,463 7 £42,463 7 5 AUDITORS CERTIFICATE. We the undersigned Auditors of Accounts appointed by the Board of Works for the Saviour's District to audit the Accounts of the said Board of Works for the financial year which ended on the 25th March, 1898, do hereby certify that we have investigated accounts, and the same are, to the best of our knowledge and belief , correct. Dated the 24th day of May, 1898. (Signed) JOHN ADAMS, Auditors. CHAS. LE MAY WM. ROBERT POULTON, 82 83 RATAL ACCOUNTS FOR THE YEA NDING 25TH MARCH, 1898. Dr. GENERAL PURPOSE ATE Cr. £ s. £ S d To Paving Carriageways and Footways 4,524 2 Receipts from General Purposes Rate 14,389 0 0 „ Scavenging, Dusting and Watering 6,941 15 Interest on Bank Account 37 13 9 „ Lighting 2,052 18 Trade Refuse 593 1 1 „ Interest on Loans 122 5 Deposits—Hoardings 185 11 11 „ Law and Parliamentary 685 7 Borough Market Trustees, for Scavenging 550 0 0 » V „ Sanitary 293 1 Rents of London Bridge Arches 645 14 2 „ Returning Officer, School Board for London 100 17 Balance 26 14 2 „ Sundries 35 13 „ Superannuation 93 4 „ Two-thirds Establishment Expenses 1,578 9 £16,427 15 £16,427 15 7 SWEATE. To Sewer and Drainage Work 1,073 11 Receipts from Sewer Rate 2,326 0 0 „ Urinals 127 8 Receipts from Public Conveniences, No. I. 622 16 8 „ Public Conveniences:— „ „ „ No II. 351 1 11 Expenses No. I. 428 10 Drainage Deposits 152 8 11 Expenses No. II. 363 15 „ Interest on Loans 113 17 „ One-third Establishment Expenses 789 4 „ Balance 555 19 £3,452 7 £3,452 7 6 ESTABLISHES PENSES. To Salaries 1,685 10 General Purposes Rate, two-thirds of £2,367 14s. lOd. 1,578 9 11 „ Wages 80 0 3 Sewers Rate, one-third of £2.367 14s. l0d. 789 4 11 „ Rents and Insurance 213 10 „ Rates and Taxes 132 14 „ Printing and Stationery 127 15 „ Office Expenses 128 4 £2,367 14 £2,367 14 10 84 85 STATEMENT OF ACCOUNT showing the ascertains and estimated L1AIMLTIES and ASSETS of the Board on 25th March, 1898. LIABILITIES. ASSETS. £ s. d £ s. d. To School Board for London 4,208 12 By Amount due from Overseers of St. Saviour for Education Rate 2,716 18 5 „ London County Council, Loans repayable by Instalments, and Interest to date 6,706 17 „ Do do. do. Christchurch 1,491 14 4 „ Balance with Treasurer 1,944 6 2 „ Sundry Creditors 892 11 „ Petty Cash and Wages Account, Amount at Bank and in hand 241 11 3 „ Cash in hand, on account of Public Conveniences 50 13 9 „ Sundry Debtors, including Rents and Interest due to date 501 15 8 „ Balance— Balance, 26th March, 1897 5,390 7 8 Add General Rate 26 14 2 5,417 1 10 Less Sewers Rate 55 19 7 4,861 2 3 (Represented by the expenditure upon permanent works, paving, kerbing, public conveniences, &c., and against which the loans, per contra, now stand). £11,808 1 1 £11,808 1 10 I certify that I have examined the Accounts of the St. Saviour's District Board of wall for the year ending 25th March, 1898, and have seen and checked all the vouchers for payments iavo also verified the Balance in Treasurer's hands, and, in my opinion, the above stateness correct. In addition to the above Assets, the Board have Carts, Working-plant and Improvements to Public Works, &c. WALTER W. FEAST, F.C.A , St George's House, Eastcheap, E.G. 86 87 Dr. PUBLIC CONVENIENCES (No.1) at East and of Southwark Street, Borough. Cr. Account of Receipts and Expenditure for the Year ending 25th March, 1898. £ s. d. £ s. d £ s. d. To Fees received for use of Closets and Lavatories, viz.: By Southwark and Vauxhall Water Company 56 12 6 „ City of London Electric Lighting Company 21 5 9 MEN'S DEPARTMENT. „ Sundries, viz.: £ s. d. Quarter to 24th June 105 17 0 Brooks, Washing Towels 22 18 6 „ 29th September 129 16 9 Cleaver, Soap and Sundries 6 16 3 „ 25th December 97 16 9 King „ ,, 6 4 8 „ 25th March 94 8 11 Thorpe & Salter, Locks and Maintenance 6 7 8 427 19 5 WOMEN'S DEPARTMENT. St. Saviour's Library, Paper 1 4 6 Quarter to 24th June 50 12 11 H. Gregory, Clothing 5 18 6 „ 29th September 43 14 9 J. W. Cunningham, Ironmongery 0 19 9 „ 25th December 32 6 11 Poundage 1 19 8 w 25th March 32 11 4 Sundries 3 4 9 159 5 11 55 14 3 „ Wages 259 6 3 „ Interest on Loan 64 5 3 „ Balance 130 1 4 £587 5 4 £587 5 4 88 89 PUBLIC CONVENIENCES (No. 2) at West and of Southwark Street, Blackfriars Road. Account of Receipts and Expenditure for the year ending 25th March, 1898. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. To Fees received for use of Closets and Lavatories, viz.:— By Southwark and Vauxhall Water Company 40 7 0 „ City of London Electric Lighting Company 18 19 0 MEN'S DEPARTMENT. „ Sundries, viz.: £ s. d. Quarter to 24th June 65 18 8 Brooks, Washing Towels 10 8 11 „ 29th September 69 16 9 Martin & Co., Clothing 3 6 0 „ 25th December 55 14 10 Thorpe & Salter, Maintenance of Locks 1 2 0 „ 25th March 52 9 9 Cleaver, Soap and Sundries 6 15 3 - • 244 0 0 King, Ditto 6 14 0 WOMEN'S DEPARTMENT. St. Saviour's Library, Paper 1 4 6 Poundage 1 2 8 Quarter to 24th June 26 15 7 Sundries 3 15 8 „ 29th September 21 9 5 34 9 0 25th December 20 7 5 „ Wages of Attendants 252 7 7 25th March 20 16 11 „ Interest on Loan 49 12 3 89 9 4 To Balance 62 5 6 £395 14 10 £395 14 10 90 LIST OF CONTRACTS. ASPHALTE PAVING. Date. Name of Contractor. Nature of Contract. \ Term. Amount. 24 April, 1891 Limmer Asphalte Paving Company, Limited Repave with Compressed Rock Aspbalte Footway on East side of Borough High Street Keep in Repair for 10 years from 24th April, 1891 5/6 per superficial yard 18 June,1892 Ditto Provide Concrete and pave with ditto Blackfriars Road from Gt. Charlotte Street to Southern Boundary Ditto from 13th July, 1892 7/6 per superficial yard Ditto Ditto Ditto Bear Lane Ditto from 18th July, 1892 Ditto Ditto Ditto Ditto Southwark Bridge Road, East Side, from Swiss Milk Warehouse to Messrs. Petty, Wood & Co.'s Gateway Ditto from 23rd July, 1892 Ditto Ditto Ditto Ditto Meymott (late Cross) Street, Blackfriars Road Ditto from 10th October, 1892 Ditto Ditto Ditto Ditto Southwark Bridge Road, West Side from Union Street to Boundary opposite Marshalsea Road Ditto from 20th December, 1892 Ditto 12 May, 1893 Ditto Ditto Southwark Bridge Road, East Side, Abutment of Bridge to Swiss Milk Warehouse Ditto from 28th March, 1893 Ditto Ditto, West Side, Abutment of Bridge to a point 36ft 9in South Ditto 91 LIST OF CONTRACTS.—continual. ASPHALTE PAVING—continued. Date. Name of Contractor. Nature of Contract. Term. Amount. 12 May, 1893 Limmer Aspbalte Paving Company, Limited Provide concrete and pave with Compressed Rock Aspbalte Footways of Three Crown Square Keep in repair for 10 years from '2nd June, 1893 7/6 per superficial yard Ditto Ditto Ditto Gravel Lane, Fast Side, Union Street to Boundary, South Ditto from 6th June, 1893 Ditto 21 May, 1894 Societe Francaise des Asphaltes Ditto Carriageway Charlotte Street Do. 5 years from 23rd June, 94 9/9 per superficial yard George Street Ditto from 31st July, 1894 Ditto Hatfield Street Ditto from 1st Sept., 1894 Ditto Boundary Row Ditto from 14th July, 1894 Ditto Marlborough Street Ditto from 7th July, 1894 Ditto Whitecross Street Ditto from 14th Dec., 1894 Ditto 28 Feb., 1895 Val de Travers Aspbalte Company. Limited Ditto Bowling Green Lane Ditto from 10th July. 1895 9/10 per superficial yard Ditto Ditto Edward Street ditto Ditto from 10th July, 1895 Ditto Ditto Ditto Gambia Street ditto Ditto from 10th July, 1895 Ditto Ditto Ditto John Street West Ditto from 17th June, 1895 Ditto 25 March, 1897 Ditto Ditto Ewer Street Ditto from 24th April, 1897 Ditto Ditto Ditto Price's Street from Gravel Lane to the Railway Arch Ditto from 22nd May, 1897 Ditto Ditto Ditto Collingwood Street from Charlotte Street to Meymott Street. Ditto from 12th June, 1897 Ditto 92 LIST OF CONTRACTS.—continued. ASPHALTE PAVING—continued. Date. Name of Contractor. Nature of Contract. Term. Amount. 24 March, 1898 Val de Travers Asphalte Company, Limited Provide Concrete and pave with Compressed Rock Asphalte Carriageway of Union Street. Borough from Gravel Lane to Guildford Street Keep in repair for 5 years from 1898 10/- per superficial yard Ditto Ditto Union Street, Borough, and Bed Cross Street by National Schools Ditto from 27th April, 1898 Ditto Ditto Ditto from 15th June, 1898 Ditto Ditto Canvey Streot from Sumner Street to Southwark St. Ditto Ditto Ditto Ditto Ditto Zoar Street from Hopetown Place to Sumner Street Ditto September, 1898 Ditto Ditto Ditto Brunswick Street, Blackfriars Road GENERAL WORKS. 1898 The Board with the Trustees of the Borough Market Cleansing the Market 3 years from 24th June, 1898 To pay the Board £600 per annum 14 June, 1898 Wakeley Bros. & Co., Ltd. Shooting Dust and Refuse 3 years from 24th June, 1898 2/2 per ton 28 March, 1898 Heather, Bailey & Co., Limited Supply of Portland Cement and Lime 1 year from 25th March, 1898 As per Schedule of Prices 28 March, 1898 Ditto Supply of Thames Ballast and Sand Ditto Ditto 28 March, 1898 W. H. Wheeler Supply of York Paving and Granite Curb Ditto Ditto 9 March, 1896 Ash & Co Printing 3 years from 25the March, 1896 Ditto 1 June, 1898 Geo. Tyrie Supply of Bass Brooms 1 year from 25th March, 1898 Ditto 9 June, 1898 John Murray Ditto of Horses & Harness 3 years from 24th Juno, 1898 4/4 per horse per diem