Board of Works for the Saviour's District. Repoet of the PROCEEDINGS of the BOARD for the YEAR 1891-92, by the Clerk, Surveyor, Medical Officer and Analyst; also Account in Abstract of Sums Received and Expended by the Board during the year. PRINTED IN ACCORDANCE WITH THE METROPOLIS LOCAL MANAGEMENT ACT, 1855. LONDON: PllINTED BY ASH & Co., 42, SOUTHWARK STREET, BOROUGH, S.K. 1892. Board of Works for the St. Saviour's District. LIST OF MEMBERS OF STANDING COMMITTEES. Paving & General Purposes Committee. COLES, H. J., Chairman. AYLING, ERNEST. CARTER, W. CASTLE, H. GILSON, R. A. GRATTAN, H. H. G. HENLEY, CHARLES. MATTHEWS. J. ROSE, G. S. WOOD, HENRY. YOUNG, ALFRED. Sanitary Committee. SINCLAIR, JAS., Chairman. BLATCHFORD, R. H. DOYLE, J. M. GREGORY, HENRY. HAYWARD, JAS. LAYMAN, A. R. MEIKLE, JAS. MORRIS, H. RAWLE, JOHN. Sewers Committee. NEWTON, G. J., Chairman. BACK, T. BURTON, B. DAVENY, T. HOPKINS. WILLIAM. JOHNSON, ROBT. LEVY, EMANUEL. OSMOND, JNO. SNOOK, GEORGE. Finance Committee. BAXTER, F., Chairman. COOPER, J. FRY, H. J. GIBBS, W. HURWOOD, E. MORGAN, R. NICHOLL, A. H. RIDLEY, HENRY. ROBERTSON, W. 1892. THE THIRTY-SIXTH annual report of the Board Of Works for the ST. SAVIOUR'S DISTRICT. An abstract of such of the clauses of this Act as were deemed to be of special importance, or which being new and of general interest it was thought advisable to make as widely known as possible, was given in the last Annual Report of the Board. The Act came into operation on the 1st January, 1892. By it the Nuisances Removal, the Diseases Prevention, Sanitary, and other Acts (35 in all), were wholly or partially repealed, and the law relating to public health was consolidated and amended. As stated in the last Annual Report, the Board, on the passing of the Act, referred it to the Sanitary and General Purposes Committees for them to consider either conjointly or separately. They elected to consider it conjointly; and, on the 14th October, 1891, submitted a Report to the Board containing the following recommendations:— 1. That any orders or resolutions of the Board contrary to the propositions or resolutions arising out of the Report be rescinded. 2. That the cleansing of the footways as set out in the Public Health Act be done by persons directly employed by the Board, under the supervision of the Surveyor. 3. That two street foremen be appointed for the above purpose to act under the instructions of the Surveyor; and that their appointment and the purchase of the necessary plant, hire of premises, or wharf, &c., and all other arrangements necessary for carrying out the cleansing of the footways the referred" to the Paving and General Purposes Committee with power to act. Public Health (London) Act, 1891. 4 4. That the lighting and cleansing of the streets; the provisions of the clause on smoke consumption, and the giving of certificates in respect of newlyerected houses, be also under the control of the Paving and General Purposes Committee. 5. That an Assistant for the Clerk be appointed. G. That the Paving and General Purposes Committee make arrangements for further office accommodation. The Committee, in the concluding paragraphs of the Report, also expressed an opinion that the many new duties devolving on the Sanitary Staff under the new Act would necessitate the servicos of two Inspectors, and recommended that a Committee, consisting of the Chairman of each of the four Standing Committees, should bo appointed to consider all matters relating to the Staff, and to report. The Report was, after some discussion, adopted, and a Committee formed as suggested. Footways. Offices. In exercise of the powers conferred upon them by tho 3rd and 6th paragraphs, the Paving and General Purposes Committee proceeded to arrange for tho cleansing of the footways. A report was received from the Surveyor, setting forth in detail the number of men, and tho plant, tools, implements, and things which, in his opinion, would be requisite for carrying out the work and for tho cleansing of the wood pavements and the crossings of the principal thoroughfares in the District, and the Committee authorised him to engage a staff of men and obtain two slop-vans, a cart, brooms, shovels, and other plant and appliances necessary for commencing the work. All this was done, and details will be found in tho Surveyor's report hereinafter set forth. The Committee also placed themselves in communication with the Churchwardens of St. Saviour's with a view to renting the adjoining house, No. 2, Emerson Street, and ultimately became the tenants thereof at a rental of £28 per annum, paying Mr. Edroff £30 by way of compensation for quitting the premises at short notice. The requisite alterations were made and the lower portion of the building converted into offices, at a cost of about £150, exclusive of fittings, furniture, &c. The Staff. The Special Committee of Chairmen appointed to consider matters relating to the Staff also met, and, after carefully considering the matters referred to them, reported (amongst other things) that, in consequence of tho alteration in the method of carrying on the works under tho control of the Board, the services of a Clerk of tho Works were no longer required, and recommended that, in consideration of the long period during which Mr. Donald Brims had served the Board in that capacity, tho Board should 5 grant him a superannuation allowance of £68 9s 9d per annum for the remainder of his life, being at the rate of one- sixtieth of his salary for every year of his service under the Board, in accordance with the provision of the Superannuation Act, 29th Vic., cap. 31; that the Clerk's Assistant bo paid £80 per annum for his services; that a working foreman for drainage work be employed, and that the Sanitary Committee be authorised advertise for a Sanitary Inspector. The several recommendation. were agreed to, the salary of the additional Sanitary Inspector being fixed at £130 rising by annual increments of £10 to £150 per annum. In December, however, a special meeting of the Board was convened, and the resolution previously passed adopting the second paragraph of the Report of the Sanitary and General Purposes Committee, above set forth, rescinded; and, at a subsequent meeting, the Clerk was instructed to advertise for tenders for the performance of the work of cleansing the footways, &c., us required by the Public Health Act. It was also resolved that, pending the settlement of the matter, the Surveyor should utilise his staff and plant in cleansing the footways, and that orderly bins should be erected in the principal thoroughfares. An advertisement was issued, as directed, but no tender being received, the work of cleansing the footways by the Hoard's own staff was continued, and that method has prevailed up to the present time. Footways. On the 6th January, due notice having been given to every Member of the Board as required by law, a superannuation allowance of £68 9s. 9d., as recommended by the Special Committee above mentioned, was granted to Mr. Brims, such superannuation to take effect as from the 25th December, 1891; and, on the motion of Mr. Coles, seconded by Mr. Cloake, it was unanimously resolved as follows:— "That the Board of Works for the St. Saviour's District, in awarding a retiring allowance to Mr. Brims, their Clerk of the Works, who has been an Ollicer of the Board for over 27 years, hereby record their high appreciation of the manner in which he has discharged the duties devolving upon him during that period. The Board have found him faithful in all his service ; courteous in his transactions with the parishioners, and honourable in all his actions, and they trust that in health and happiness he may enjoy his well-earned retirement. Mr. Brims. A copy of the resolution, suitably engrossed, trained ana glazed, was presented to Mr. Brims, but some delay occurred in so doing on account of his serious illness at the time. The appointments of Sanitary Inspector and Office Clerk were advertised. For the former there were 52 candidates, for the latter, 152. The following were apppointed— For the Inspectorship, Mr. Samuel Broadhead 24, St. James Street, Humberstone Gate, Leicester, Sanitary Inspector to the Borough of Leicester. The Staff. 6 For the Office of Assistant to the Clerk, Mr. F. T. Cole, 47, Finborough Road, Earl's Court, 8.W., Clerk to an Accountant. The appointment of Mr. Broadhead has been duly sanctioned by the Local Government Board, pursuant to the provisions in that behalf contained in the Public Health Act, and the London County Council has consented to pay one half of the amount of his salary, as provided by Sect. 108 of the Act. Borough Market Cleansing In November, 1891, the Board appointed a deputation, consisting of Messrs. Baxter, Grattan, and Rose, to wait upon the Trustees of the Borough Market relative to the cleansing of the Borough Market and its approaches, the streets contiguous to the Market not having been cleansed to the satisfaction of the Board, and with the object of suggesting to the Trustees that the Board should undertake the work either by its own contractors or by a staff of its own. The deputation waited on the Trustees on the 13th November, and found that the object which they had in view had been anticipated, the Trustees having resolved that so soon as they could terminate their agreement with their Contractors they would do so and ask the Board to carry out the work, paying the Board such amount as they had been in the habit of paying their Contractors for the same. Negotiations ensued, and ultimately it was arranged that the Board should undertake the work for the sum of £550 per annum, the Trustees, at their own expense, providing a sufficient supply of water for flushing the gangways and footpaths of the Market, and also providing all valves and plugs necessary in so doing. A contract was entered into for the term of three years from the 24th June, 1892, and the Board is carrying out the work, utilising for that purpose the staff which was engaged for the cleansing of the footways. This fresh arrangement led necessarily to some modification and an enlargement of the staff, plant, &c., details of which will be found in the Surveyor's Report. Moreover, a shoot had to be obtained for the refuse, a necessity which has been supplied by the Strand Board of Works, who allow the refuse to be delivered at their premises, the Shot Tower Wharf, Commercial Road, Lambeth, at the rate of 2s. 4d. per ton, for which purpose a contract has been entered into for one year from the 24th June, 1892. Sanitary Committee. The Board, by special resolution passed on the 6th January, 1892, constituted the Sanitary Committee a Committee for the purposes of the Public Health (London) Act, 1891, in accordance with Sect. 99, Sub-sect. 4, of that Act, which provides as follows:— 7 "Where a sanitary Authority appoin ted a Committee for the purpose of this Act, that Committee, subject to the terms of their appointment, may serve and receive notices, take proceeding, and empower any Officer of the Authority to make complaints and take proceeding in their behalf, and otherwise to execute this Act." In compliance with the sections of the said Act enabling or requiring the Sanitary Authority so to do, the Sanitary Committee caused draft bye-laws to be prepared for the regulation of houses let in lodgings or occupied by members of more than one family, and for the various other purposes provided for in the Act. These were forwarded to the Local Government Board on the 13th May for approval, preliminary to being submitted to the District Board for adoption; but, although more than three months have elapsed, they have not yet been returned. Bye-laws. In November, Reports were received from the Mansion House Council on the Dwellings of the Poor, relative to the alleged insanitary condition of houses in the St. Saviour's District, and the Board ordered the same to lie upon the table. Thereupon the Council wrote to the Local Government Board, enclosing a summary of the results of their inspection, stating that they (the Council) had reason to believe that the whole of the Parishes of St. Saviour and Christchurch were in a more or less deplorably insanitary condition, and requesting the Local Government Board to recommend the Home Secretary to order an Inquiry similar to that which was held in November, 1890, at Shoreditch. The Local Government Board forwarded a copy of the communication to the District Board as the Sanitary Authority, and asked to be furnished with the observations of the latter in regard thereto. This communication was referred to the Sanitary Committee with instructions to frame a reply, but the Committee declined to do so on the ground that the Board had 011 previous occasions refused to allow the matter to come before them; and, on the 3rd February, the subject reverted to the Board, who, after a considerable amount of discussion, passed the following resolution:— "That this Board has from time to time received communications from the Mansion House Council, and, regarding as it does the said Council as an unauthorised and self-constituted body of people, has declined to accept their interference The Board, however, wish to point out to the Local Government Board, in answer to their letter, that it has a sufficient Staff for the keeping the District in sanitary condition." The Sanitation of the District. A copy of the resolution was forwarded to the Local Government Board, in answer to their letter, and that Board referred the matter to the London County Council, who, in April, ordered an Inquiry, as the following letter will show.— 8 "London County Council, Spring Gardens, S.W., 13th April, 1892. Sir, The Mansion House Council on the Dwellings of the Poor, on 30th March, after considerable correspondence with the Local Government Board, forwarded to the Council particulars of certain cases in which they consider your District Board have made default under tho Public Health (London) Act, 1891, and requested the Council to intervene under Sections 100 and 101 of the Act. Having regard to the large number of houses referred to in tho above mentioned letter, tho Council has instructed its Medical Officer to inquire into and report on tho sanitary state and administration of the St. Saviour's District, and I am directed to ask your District Board to be good enough to give him any facilities they can for the purpose of his inquiry. I am, sir, Your obedient servant, The Clerk, H. DE LA HOOKE, St. Saviour's District Board." Clerk of the Council. On the letter being submitted to the Board, they passed the following resolution:— "That, whilst we believe that the sanitary condition of tho St. Saviour's District will compare favourably with that of neighbouring parishes and other portions of the Mrtropolis, wo aro most willing that the Inquiry take place, and we will afford the greatest facilities to the said Inquiry." The Board also appointed a Special Committee, consisting of the four Chairmen of Standing Committees, and Messrs. Blatchford, Goodwin and Henley, to watch the proceedings and safeguard the interests of the Board in tho matter. After making various preliminary inquiries of the Medical Officer and Clerk of the Board as to the area, population, boundaries, &c., of the District, Mr. Shirley F. Murphy, the Medical Officer of Health to the London County Council, commenced an examination of the District on Wednesday, the 18th May, in company of Dr. Herron, the Medical Officer of the Board, and the two Sanitary Inspectors, the Mansion House Council being also represented; visiting in the first instance those premises which had been reported upon by the Mansion House Council. This part of the investigation proceeded intermittently, Mr. Shirley Murphy devoting all the time the could spare to the work; and, in the latter part of July, it was understood to have been completed. Mr. Murphy then commenced a further and independent investigation of the District, and it is expected that he will have completed the same and be ready to make his report to the County Council about October. Workmeri's Dwellings. In December last, the Board, on the motion of Mr. Meikle, caused a letter to be addressed to the Trustees of the Peabody Donation Fund, and also to the Trustees of the Guinness 9 Fund, calling their attention to the vacant land in Lavington Street, and at the west end of Union Street, belonging to the Ecclesiastical Commissioners, and inviting them to erect work- men's dwellings thereupon. The Secretary of the Peabody Trust replied, stating that having resolved to pay off the large amount still due from them to the Public Works Loan Board before extending their operations, they were unable to enter into negotiations for the purchase of the vacant land in question, and the Secretary of the Guinness Fund stated that he had visited the sites to which his attention had been called and found the same to be near the bridges and in a good position for men whose work was in the City; but, on writing to the Ecclesiastical Commissioners as to the terms of purchase their demands were such as to render it impossible, in his opinion, for the Trustees to build dwellings of the kind referred to and let the rooms ,at low rentals, without risk of incurring a loss. The Board also caused a letter to be addressed to the London County Council, requesting that Authority to exercise its powers under the Housing of the Working Classes Act, 1800, for the erection of workmen's dwellings in the District. The correspondence above mentioned was referred to the Sanitary Committee J and, on their recommendation, the Board caused a further letter to be written to the London County Council, asking the Council to promote a Bill in Parliament, or otherwise obtain Parliamentary powers to compel the Ecclesiastical Commissioners to sell, at a valuation, such of their land in the Parish of St. Saviour, Southwark, as might be required for the e rection of workmen's dwellings, on the grounds following, viz.:— "That the Ecclesiatical Commissioners, being large freeholders in the Parish, ask. such an excessive price for their land, as to prevent tii.' Motion of workmen's dwellings, and that much land that was recently covered with houses is now lying vacant." They also directed that a letter be sent to Mr. Causton, M.P., requesting him to move a resolution in the House of Commons to the following effect:— "That, in the opinion of this House, the Ecclesiastical Commissioners should bo compelled to sell such vacant land in the Parish of St. Saviour, Southwark, as may be required for workmen's dwellings at a fair market value, to be decided by valuation. In May, a circular-letter was received from the Limehouse Board of Works, forwarding copy of a resolution passed by them, as follows:— "That, having regard to the fact that there are in the District several plots of land, with or without houses thereon, for which no owners can be found and which are used for suchpurpose as to cause them to be a nuisance to the neighborhood, the London County Council be asked to obtain Parhamentay power enable the local authority to take possession of such land a houses for the benefit of the ratepayers. Vacant Land, &c. 10 The Board expressed its concurrence with the resolution. Insanitary Houses. In July, the Board, on the motion of Mr. Meikle, passed the following resolution, and a copy thereof was forwarded to Mr. Causton, M.P.; to the London County Council and its local representatives, Messrs. Bayley and Hunter, and to the Vestries and District Board of Works of the Metropolis, asking for their support:— "That our Member, Mr. Causton, M.P., bo requested to introduce a Bill into the House of Commons, on tho earliest possiblo opportunity, to compol the owners of insanitary house property (occupied or empty) to put tho samo in thorough repair; and. failing tho necessary work being done within three months of notice givon, the local authorities shall havo power to do the repairs themselves, and for that purpose they may raise the necessary capital, and be empowered to hold tho houses and collect the rents, paying tho ground-rent (if any), taxes, and other outgoings till they have recouped themselves." Mr. Causton replied that the matter should have his best attention, but it was understood that no new Bills were to l»e introduced during the present Session of Parliament. Wood Paving. The work of repaving with wood the Borough High Street, from St. Thomas's Street to the boundary at St. George's, referred to in the last Annual Report, has been carried out, at a net cost, after allowing for old stone taken up, of £1,679, Messrs. John Mowlem & Co. being the contractors. For this purpose a loan of £1,600 was obtained of the London County Council, at the usual rate of interest (3½ per cent, per annum) and repayable by annual instalments extending over a period of three years. It has also been resolved to repave Bennett Street, Christchurch, one of the streets provided for in the estimates, with wood instead of stone. Tenders. The following tenders have been received and accepted by the Board in the course of the year as under, viz:— Nature of Work. Name of Contractor. Amount. Wood Paving, Borough High Street John Mowlem & Co. 10/8 per superficial yard, 1/- per yard being allowed for the old stone taken up. Repairs Offices & Boardroom John Hoare & Son £128 Printing Annual Reports and Accounts Briginshaw & Co. £15 Cleaning and repairing Chalet John Hoare & Son £35 Supply of York Stone and Granite Kerb Tomes & Wimpey As per specification Ditto Sand and Ballast William Stubbs Ditto 11 The South Metropolitan Gas Company, the Company supplying the District, raised the price of gas in respect of the public lamps supplied per meter, as from the Michaelmas quarter, from 2/3 to 2/6 per 1,000 feet. The Company state in their notice that the increase they believe to be only temporary, and they have therefore decided to make no addition to the charge for the lamps which are supplied at a fixed rate, viz.: £3 3s. 9d. per annum, a discount of 5 per cent. if paid Within one month from quarter-day, being allowed. This discount has never yet been forfeited the accounts having always been paid within the prescribed period Gas. In March last, a circular-letter was received from the vestry of St. George, Hanover Square, forwarding copy of ' resolutions passed by them as under:- "That, in the opinion of the Vestry, the supply of water to the County of London should be placed under the control of the London County Council." "That the London County Council should not promote any Bill in Parliament affecting the water question, until the Royal Commision just appointed to investigate the matter in all its bearings shall have made their report." The Board expressed its concurrence with both resolutions. Water Supply. In consequence of renewed complaints being received from inhabitants of Union Street, of the nuisance occasioned by the so called "fair," at the Cross-bones Burial Ground, at the corner of Red Cross Street, in Union Street, Borough, the Board, in November, resolved to take legal proceedings against the persons Causing the nuisance. It was complained that a large organ, worked by steam and fitted with trumpets, was played from 7 till 10 every evening from Monday to Friday, and, on Saturdays, till 11; also in the afternoon of Saturdays from 1 till 4; that the noise was almost unendurable; that the fair" caused a large number of "roughs" of both sexes to assemble, and that business was greatly interfered with and property endangered. Some of the complainants also appealed on moral grounds to have the nuisance abated. The Board instructed Messrs. Hicklin, Washington & Pasmore to act as their solicitors in the matter. The defendants, Charles Hart, Henry Scard and Harry Germaine were summoned to the Southwark Police Court on the 30th December for creating a nuisance and permitting entertainments and music without a license; and the nuisance having been proved to the satisfaction of the presiding magistrate, Mr. Slade, they were committed to the Sessions for trial. The subsequent procee ings were by indictment, under the Act 25, Geo. II., charging them with "having on July 1st and on divers other days permitted a nuisance and kept a place of public en enteertainment, to wit, a steam organ, a steam roundabout and a razzle-dazz A true Bill was found, and, on the 29th January, the case came . Pair. 12 before Sir Peter Edlin and a jury, at the Sessions House. Newington Causeway, Mr. Bodkin prosecuting on behalf of the Board and Mr. Grain appearing for the defence. The defendants were found guilty and sentenced, Hart, to pay a fine of £25 and find two sureties in £25 each to be of good behaviour for 12 months, and Scard and Germaine, the other defendants, each to pay a lino of 40/- and bo bound over to keep the peace. The costs of the proceedings amounted to £70 13s. 2d. Stroot Nomenclature. In compliance with orders made by the London County Council, the following alterations have been made in the names of the undermentioned streets:— York Street, Borough Market, has been re-named Bedale Street. York Street, Blackfriars Road, has been re-named Scoresby Street. Essex Street, Sumner Street, has been re-named Canvey Street. Mr. Haggis. On the 2.5th November, the presiding chairman, Mr. Baxter, called the attention of the Board to the loss sustained by the sudden death on tho previous day of Mr. A. II. Haggis, the Deputy Chairman of the London County Council, and moved — "That tho Members of this Board learn with profound regrot of tho sudden death of Mr. A. II. Haggis, formerly a Member of this Hoard, and subsequently tho representative of West Southwnrk on tho London County Council, of which Body he was Deputy Chairman. They desire to record their high appreciation of his character and abilities, and tho esteem and regard ontertained towards him; thoy further desire to condole with their late friend's family in their painful loss." Tho motion was carried unanimously, and a copy of the resolution forwarded to Mr. A. J. Haggis, the eldest son of the deceased, who, in acknowledging the receipt of it, thanked, on behalf of the family and himself, the Board for their sympathy. Parliamentary Plans. On the 30th November, Parliamentary plans, with gazette notices, &c., were deposited of the following:— Tho lloyal Exchange and Waterloo Railway. The Waterloo and City Railway (Underground). The City and South London Railway, Islington (Extension, &c). The South Eastern Railway (Extensions, &c). The London, Chatham and Dover Railway (Extensions, &c.) The Camberwell and Islington Eloctric Light and Power Supply, Limited. 13 The Bills, together with a letter from the promoters of the last-named, the electric lighting scheme, asking the Board to give its consent to an application to the Board of Trade for a Provisional Order, were referred to the Paving and General Purposes Committee for consideration; who, after carefully considering the various schemes and a report from their Surveyor on the subject, were of opinion that it was not necessary for the Hoard to oppose any of the Bills, the one that affected the Board most seriously-the Royal Exchange and Waterloo scheme—having been withdrawn, and the others being of minor importance; and they advised that the Suryeor 01 should be instructed to have an interview with the Engineer of the London County Council, who, it was understood, Would lodge a petition against the Bills, and point out to him the objections entertained by the Committee in regard to matters of detail. With respect to the letter from the Camberwell and Islington Electric Light Company, the Committee advised that, inasmuch as there were already two Companies having statutory powers for the lighting of the District by means of electricity, such consent should not be given. The Board adopted the views of the Committee, and did not oppose and of the Bills, and the Surveyor had an interview with the Engineer of the County Council, as suggested. Shorth afterwards the electric lighting scheme was withdrawn by its promoters. The position of the several Bills at the present time may be briefly stated, as under:— The lioyal Exchange and Waterloo Railway—Withdrawn. The Waterloo and City (Underground Electric)—Read second time on 23rd May, and referred to a Select Committee of the House of Commons. The City and South London Railway (Islington Extension, &c.)—Read second time on the 25th May, and suspended until the next Session of Parliament. The South Eastern Railway—Royal Assent given on 20th June. The London, Chatham and Dover Railway—Royal Assent given on 20th June. The Camberwell and Islington Electric Light and Power Supply—Withdrawn. A revised list of Streets declared by the Commissioner ot Metropolitan Police to be within the provisions of Section o ot the Metropolitan Streets Act, 1867, was, in December received from the Commissioner; the effect of which Order is to rende illegal the removal of ashes, dust or refuse from any house Dust or Refuse. 14 the Streets named in the list between the hours of 10 a.m. and 7 p.m. The Streets referred to, so far as concerns the St. Saviour's District, are the following Borough High Street. Blackfriars Road, from Charlotte Street to Blackfriars Bridge. Duke Street. Toolev Street. Gates and Bars. The Board have, at the request of the London County Council, furnished the Council with information relative to gates and bars obstructing thoroughfares in the St. Saviour's District, with a view to enabling the Council to seek Parliamentary powers for the removal of such obstructions, viz.:— with respect to the gates in Montague Close and the gate at the entrance to Nelson Square (north side). Re Rogers. On the 6th January, the attention of the Board was called to the committal to prison for a month, on the 422nd December, of a man named Rogers, for non-payment of fines and costs, amounting to £40 10s., inflicted upon him for failing to comply within the stipulated time with a notice served upon him by one of the Sanitary Inspectors of the Hoard to provide sanitary dust-bins at six small houses in the District, for which he was responsible, and the following resolution was passed:— "That we, the St. Saviour's District Board of Works, the Sanitary Authority for the said District, being satisfied that the sanitary arrangements, according to our instructions, have been properly and completely carried out by Mr. Rogers, at Nob. 21 and 22, Pitt's Place, and 25, 26, 27 and 28, White Hind Alley, desire to request the Home Secretary to remit the remainder of the sentence passed upon him for the non-execution of tho said work." Application was made accordingly to the Home Secretary, Mr. Matthews, to remit the remainder of the sentence, but, after communicating with the Magistrate who tried the case (Mr. Slade) he declined to interfere, and the man served his full time. Cab Radius. In January, a circular-letter was received from the Vestry of Hammersmith forwarding copy of a resolution passed by them, as follows:— "That a communication be sent to the Secretary of State for the Home Department, asking him to take the necessary steps for the extension of the cab radius by one mile, and that the Vestries, District Boards and other local authorities be asked to make a similar representation." The Board directed a communication to be addressed to the Home Secretary, expressing concurrence with the resolution; and, in February, at the request of the Vestry, appointed two members to join a deputation to wait upon the Home Secretary, viz : Mr. Fry and Mr. Hopkins, together with the Clerk 15 The deputation was received by Mr. Secretary Matthews on Monday, the 22nd February, at the office of the Secretary of State, Whitehall who after listening to numerous addresses by members of the deputation, stated that he expected to receive a deputation from the cab proprietors and drivers shortly, and would ,, v. the matter his careful consideration! Up to the present time no decision has, it is believed been arrived at. ' In January, a circular-letter was received from the Vestry of St. Pancras, stating that the Vestry were anxious that some pressure should be put on Parliament in the next session to revise the Electoral Divisions for School Board purposes in London, and inviting the Board to appoint three persons to attend a Conference of Local Authorities, to be held at St. Pancras Vestry Hall, on Wednesday, the 27th January, on the subject. The Board passed a resolution approving of the object of the proposed Conference, and appointed Messrs. Coles. Meikle and Faulkner to attend as their representatives. The Conference was lu-1.1 on the day named, and the following resolutions were adopted:— 1. "That, in the opinion of this Conference, the Electoral Divisions for the School Board for London should be the Parliamentary Divisions; that cumulative voting should be abolished, and that there should be one Member of the Board for each of such Divisions. 2. "That existing vacancies in the School Board should be filled up by the Ratepayer in the ordinary way, and not as at present by the Members of the Board. 3. "That the Education Department be asked to receive a Deputation from the Conference, with a view of urging upon Her Majesty's Government the necessity for dealing with this question forthwith. 4. "That the Delegates now present, and any other Delegates appointed by any Vestry or District Board approving of the views of this Conference, be invited to attend the Deputation to the Education Department, if such Department consents to receive the same; and further, that all Members of Parliament representing Metropolitan Constituencies be invited to join such Deputation." School Board Divisions. Subsequently, an application was made by the Vestry Clerk of St. Pancras to Sir William Hart Dyke, the Vice-President of the Committee of Council on Education, to receive a deputation from the Conference on the subject, as provisionally arranged, but Sir William, in view of the improbability of any legislation in connection therewith during the then Session of Parliament, declined, and no further action has been taken up to the present time. Upon the lamented decease of H.R.H. the Duke of Clarence and Avondale, in January, the Board, on the motion of Mr. Keith, who occupied the Chair, passed a resolution of condolence Duke of Clarence. 16 with the Queen, the Prince and Princess of Wales, and the Princess Victoria of Teck in the loss which they had sustained, and a copy thereof was forwarded to their Royal Highnesses. Dr. Bernays. A resolution of condolence with the family of Dr. Bernays, who for many years had filled the office of Public Analyst for St. Saviour's and whose death was announced at the same meeting, was, on the motion of Mr. Gregory, also passed, and a copy of the resolution forwarded to his widow. Fire Escapes and Alarms. A circular-letter was, in the latter part of January, received from the London County Council, calling the attention of District Boards and Vestries to the desirability of making as widely known as possible the position of Fire Escapes and Fire Alarms in London, and suggesting that the object might be effected by placing tablets of some description in or upon the street lamps. The letter was referred to the Paving and General Purposes Committee; who, on considering the proposal, were of opinion that, in order to make the indications generally useful and intelligible, some uniform method should be adopted throughout the metropolis, and that that end could be best obtained by the County Council itself as being a central authority having jurisdiction over the whole of the metropolis. This view was communicated to the County Council, and, in reply, a letter was received stating that the Fire Brigade Committee were of opinion that the work should be carried out entirely by and at the expense of the Vestries and District Boards. It was thereupon suggested to the Council, 011 behalf of the Committee, that it should convene a conference of local authorities in order to discuss the matter and endeavour to come to some mutual arrangement with the object of securing uniformity; but the Council declined, being of opinion that uniformity was impracticable, owing to the diversity in the lighting arrangements, and suggested that the Surveyor of the Board should have an interview with Mr. Symonds, the Chief of the Brigade, and discuss the matter. Meanwhile a great amount of correspondence was taking place between the local authorities, inter se, and with the Council, the desire being very generally expressed that one uniform system should be adopted, if possible. Ultimately, so far as the Board was concerned, the Surveyor had an interview with Mr. Symonds, the Chief of the Brigade, as suggested, and, on discussing the matter, that gentleman expressed an opinion that possibly the difficulty might be met by indicating on the back of the dust cards and on the rating papers, the position of the fire escapes and alarms. On reporting this to the Committee, they resolved to adjourn the matter until such time as new dust cards were required to be printed. Ambulances. In February, the Board, on the application of the Hospitals' Association (Ambulance Department) consented to the placing 17 of a receptacle containing an ambulance in the Blackfriars Road, at the intersection of that thoroughfare by Stamford Street. The other two stations available for the district are at Guy's Hospital and at the Fire Bridge Head Quarters, Soth- wark Bridge Road. In February, the attention of the Board was called to the objectionable nature of several of the provisions of the National and of the New Telephone Companies' Bills in Parliament powers being sought to enable the Companies (inter alia) to open and break up tin roads, and place and maintain telephone wires thereunder, or to place them over any public road. About the same time a circular-letter was received from the Vestry of St. Margaret and St. Johns, Westminster, inviting the Board to appoint representatives to attend a proposed Conference, at the Town Hall, Westminster, on the 26th February, to consider the Bills. The Board accepted the invitation, and appointed Messrs. Carter, Coles and Grattan, as its representatives. The Conference assembled on the day appointed, and the following resolutions were passed:— "That this Conference of Representatives of Metropolitan Vestries is of opinion that concerted action should be taken to watch and protect the interests of such authorities with reference to the Hills introduced in the present session of Parliament by the National 'IVlophoM Company, Limited, and the New Telephone Company, Limited. "That a copy of this resolution be forwarded to the various local authorities, and that they be asked to appoint a representative to act upon a Committee which shall consider how the concerted action run be rendered most effective; and that it be suggested tn.it the repreventative should be authorised to co-operate in giving effect to the proposed opposition to the Bills." Telephone Bills. In accordance with the request contained in the second resolution, the Board appointed Mr. Coles as its representative, with the object of opposing the Bills, but the first-named —the National—was suspended after the first reading on the 16th Februarv. and the other Bill has been withdrawn. In March, a circular-letter was received from the Vestry of St. George's, Hanover Square, forwarding copy of a resolution passed by them, as follows: — "That the ground-rent ought to be taxed as well as the building-rent, and that the revenue derived from this source should be devoted to the relief of local rates." Ground Rents. The Board expressed its concurrence with the resolution. In April, on the motion of Mr. Grattan, the following resolution was passed:— "That, in all future contracts accepted or work given out by the Board, the firms selected be required to satisfy the Board that tliev are paving the union rate, or such wages as are general y accepted as current in the trade for competent workmen, and that all men in the employ of the Board be so paid. Rate of Wages. 16 In June, a circular-letter was received from the Vestry of Bermondsey, requesting the Board to appoint three delegates to attend a Conference of Delegates from the Metropolitan Vestries and Districts Boards, the Commissioners of Sewers of the City of London, the Vestries' Employes' Union, and the London Trades' Council, at the Town Hall, Bermondsey, on Monday, the 13th June, for the purpose of affirming certain resolutions previously agreed to at a Conference held at St. Luke's on the subject of the rate of wages, and the Board appointed Messrs. Carter, Grattan and Sinclair, who attended the Conference on the day appointed, when the following resolutions were passed:— "That it is desirable to establish a uniform rate of wages throughout the metropolis for all Vestry and District Boards' employes; and that, in the case of skilled mechanics, such rate should be the one current in each trade union. "That this Conference, believing that the scalo of wages put forward by the Vestry Employes' Union is a right and reasonable one. expresses the opinion that the London Vestries and the Local Boards should adopt that scale of remuneration for their employes." The Conference adjourned until Monday, the 25th July, and a further invitation was received from the Vestry to appoint delegates to attend it; but, after hearing a statement from the former delegates to the effect that the number of Vestry representatives present at the last Conference was 25, and of the London Trades' Council and Vestry Employes' Union, 1G, and that only ten Vestries and District Boards were represented, and on the delegates asking to be relieved from further attendance, the Board unanimously resolved to discharge them and not to appoint others in their place. Subways. On the motion of Mr. Meikle, the Board, in March last, caused a letter to be addressed to the London County Council, asking them to include in their next Parliamentary Bill, a clause compelling Water, Gas, and other Companies wishing to lay or re-lay pipes, wires, Ac., in Southwark Street, to use the Subway for that purpose. It transpired, however, that the Council was already promoting a Bill with respect to Subways, which, if passed, would have answered the purpose in view, but the same was suspended until the following Session. Gallery of Art. In April, the Board expressed its concurrence with the following resolution, a copy of which had been fonvarded by the Vestry of St. Marylebone:— "That this Vestry regret to hear that a suitable site has not yet been found for the Gallery of British Art offered to the nation by Mr. Tate (a gift of the value of £150,000), and trust that the Chancellor of the Exchequer will yet endeavour to find such site in a central position; or, failing that, that the London County Council will give a site, and endeavour to obtain from Mr. Tate a reconsideration of his withdrawal, that London may yet secure his magnificent offer." 19 In May, circular-letters were received from the Vestry of Clerkenwell and the Holborn Board of works of copy resolution passed by them respectively as follows:"That this Vestry petition the Board of Trade to institution a through inquiry into the means of ingress and egress at all metropolitan and suburban railway stations with a view if possible, of ing similar melancholy accidents occurring to that which took place on Easter Monday at Hampstead Heath Station" The Board referred both letters to the Paving and General Purposes Committee with power to act, and the Committee caused a letter to be addressed to the Board of Trade expressing concurrence with the reflation, and suggesting that the insufficiency of platform accommodation should likewise be considered. Railway Stations. The Board also expressed its concurrence with the fallowing resolution which had been passed by the Vestry of St. Saviour's Southwark, and transmitted by the medium of the Bermondsey Vestry:— "That this Vestry urges the First Lord of the Treasury, on behalf of the working classes, to arrange to open all Museums and Picture Galleries that are supported out of the taxation of the country on Sundays from Two o'clock till Ten, and close same on a week day, so that the employes have not more than six days' work each week, and that a copy of same be sent to each member of the Government, to the Members of Parliament for the Division, to the local representatives of the London County Council, and to the Vestries and Ditrict Boards in the Metropolis, asking them to assist this Vestry by taking similar action." Opening Museums on Sundays. In June, a circular-letter was received from the Vestry of Fulhain, calling attention to the case of Gordon v. Williamson touching the qualification of Vestrymen, and forwarding copy of a resolution passed by a Committee of that Vestry on the subject, as follows:— "That your Committee being of opinion that a large number of Vestrymen throughout the Metropolis occupy premises which appear in the rate-book of a considerable rateable value, but sublet a portion of such premises and occupy the remainder, although the portions which they retain in their own occupation are, in fact, of a rateable value of more than sufficient to qualify them as Vestrymen, but are not separately assessed in the rate-book, and having regard to the decision of Mr. Justice Denman, in the case of Gordon v. Williamson are not therefore qualified to be elected as Vestrvmen under the Metropolis Local Management Act, 1855, and where they have, in ignorance of the law, been so elected and attended and voted as Vestrymen are liable to penalties for so doing, your Committee are of opinion that a Bill of Indemnity should be at once introduced into Parliament to protect such Vestrymen from penalties to which that decision appears to render them liable, and also to amend the aw as regards the qualifications of a Vestryman, so far as may be necessary to qualify a person being a tenant of premises which appear in the rate-book as of sufficient rateable value, although he, may sublet a portion of such premises and occupy the remainder, provided that the portion which he retains m his own occupation is of sufficient rateable value to qualify him as a Vestryman." Vestrymen's Qualification. 20 The Board expressed its concurrence with the above resolution and caused a letter to be addressed to the Local Government Board in support of the suggestion that a Bill of Indemnity should be passed for the protection of Vestrymen against proceedings of the kind referred to. Legislation, however, of the kind suggested became unnecessary, the case having been carried to the Court of Appeal and the judgment of Mr. Justice Denman reversed, with costs against the common informer. Chairmen of Committees. The Paving and General Purposes Committee have reelected Mr. Coles, the Sanitary Committee Mr. Sinclair, and the Finance Committee Mr. Baxter to bo their respective Chairmen for the year 1892-93. On the resignation of Mr. Cloake, the Sewers Committee appointed Mr. Hawkins to be their Chairman, but he, in his turn, having resigned, they appointed Mr. Newton. Common Seal. On the retirement of Mr. Arnold Goodwin, in June, the Board appointed Mr. Coles to be the Custodian of one of the keys of the Common-seal. Bye-laws, &c. On the motion of Mr. Grattan, the Board have appointed a Special Committee, consisting of Messrs. Coles, Cooper. Gilson, Grattan and Rose, to examine and report upon the Bye-laws and Standing Orders of the Board, with a view to revising and amending the same. Finances. In order to meet the estimated expenditure for local purposes during the financial year ending 25th March, 1893, and the Precepts of the School Board for London for the same period, the following demands by Precept have been made upon the Overseers, viz :— General Purposes Account. St. Saviour £10,304 0 0 Christchurch 5,508 0 0 £15,812 0 0 Sewers Account. St. Saviour £1,106 0 0 Christchurch 591 0 0 £1,697 0 0 Education Account. St. Saviour £9,788 2 1 Christchurch 5,231 6 8 £15,019 8 9 21 In the early part of the year, the Clerk called the attention of the Board to the fact that, in April, 1893, the Boards of Works for St Saviour and St. Olave would succeed to the reversion in tee-simple of the Arches under the southern approaches to London Bridge (excepting the ends of certain of the Arches under the footways forming cellars to the adjoining houses, and that, at the same time, the apportioned rent-charge of 122 per annum received by the two Boards in respect of the same Arches would cease. London Bridge Arches. These Arches are 22 in number (excluding the public archwav leading from Tooley Street to Montague' Close), and extend from the foot of London Bridge to a point about 244 feet southwards, i.e. to the portion of the Borough High Street where the steps leading to St. Saviour's Church are situate, they arc of the full width of the roadway or viaduct; they also extend beneath the broad portion of the roadway at the foot of the bridge, and beyond the boundary eastwards into Duke Street, as shown upon the plan hereunto annexed, and which is taken from the deeds. The Arches in question (excepting the ends of certain of them and the public Archway of Tooley Street) were, by Indentures of Lease, dated the 30th October, 1834, leased by the Corporation of the City of London, to John Humphery and William Chadwick, respectively, for a term of 61 years from the 3rd April, 1832; and, on John Humphery (afterwards Alderman) purchasing the rents reserved by the leases, the Arches were (subject to the said leases), by Indenture dated the 23rd July, 1830, leased to him (together with other hereditaments), for a term of 61 years and one day, from the 3rd April, 1832. The term will consequently expire on the 4th April next. The demise to John Humphery was made by virtue of the Act 2nd William IV, cap. 23, intituled "An Act to amend several Acts relating to London Bridge and the Approaches thereto." By Section 15 of this Act it was enacted that the feesimple in possession of and in the several Arches through which there was or might be a public way or passage, and the immediate reversion expectant on the expiration of the leases or demises to be granted of the residue* of the Arches, and of and in the ground and soil whereon the residue of the same several Arches had been erected; and all right, propeity, etc., in respect of the same, should be vested in the respective Wards or Parishes to which the same respectively should belong, *By the term "residue" is meant the whole of the arches with the exception of the ends of certain of them under the footways, which ends were leased and ultimately sold along with the adjoining properties, and also with the exception of the public archway of Tooley Street. 22 or the Commissioners or persons liable to repair the streets or ways over the same Arches respectively, and such covenants and conditions should be enforced by them as if they were grantors of the reversion of the premises therein respectively comprised, and that the same Arches should be kept in repair in pursuance of such covenants, or by and at the expense of the said respective Wards or Parishes to which the same should respectively belong, or of the Commissioners or persons liable to repair the pavements of the Streets or Ways over the same Arches respectively. The Commissioners referred to were those appointed under the Act 6th Geo. III., for paving, cleansing, lighting, watching and regulating the Streets and Places in the Western Division of the Borough of Southwark, and to whose duties, so far as the Parishes of St. Saviour and St. Olave were concerned, the Boards of Works for St. Saviour's and St. Olave's succeeded after the passing of the Metropolis Local Management Act, in the year 1855. The proportion of the rentals to which this Board will be entitled is equal to about 88 per cent., by far tho greater portion of the Arches being in St. Saviour's. The matter stands referred to tho Paving and General Purposes Committee, with power to call in any professional or other assistance that may bo necessary. An abstract of the clauses in the Acts of Parliament relating to the Arches, and a fuller explanation of the Board's title thereto, is contained in Appendix "A." Attendances. A list of attendances of Members at Board and Committee Meetings forms Appendix "B," the Board having ordered it to be printed with the Annual Reports, in lieu of being printed and distributed separately, as heretofore. Inspectors' Reports. The Sanitary Inspectors' Reports are omitted, the statistics therein usually contained being comprised in tho Medical Officer's Report. W. H. ATKINS. Board Room, Emerson Street, Bankside, S.E., August, 1892. 23 APPENDIX A. Re ARCHES, LONDON BRIDGE. On the 3rd April, 1832, an Act of Parliament (2nd Will. IV c. 23,) was passed, intituled "An Act to amend several Acts relating to London Bridge and the Approaches thereto." This Act recited the several Acts previously passed for the rebuilding of London Bridge and improving the Approaches. It also recited as follows That a new Bridge had been erected and considerable progress made in completing the Approaches. That a plan for the alteration and extension of the Approaches had been submitted to and approved by the Lords of the Treasury, and deposited in the office of the Town Clerk of the City of London. That, for the purpose of carrying the plan into execution, it would be necessary to take down and use certain houses, tenements and hereditaments which were not described in the schedule to the therein previously recited Acts, and it was therefore expedient that the Mayor, Aldermen and Citzens of the City of London, in Common Council assembled, should be empowered to purchase or take the same. That several dry Arches had been erected under the Approaches to the new Bridge, and it was expedient that parts thereof should be attached to the houses adjoining or abutting on the said Approaches, and the residue thereof might be conveniently used as cellars or warehouses, and sums of money raised by letting the same and selling the rents to be reserved by the leases thereof, which sums might be applied towards defraying the expenses of making the said Approaches. That it was expedient that an open space not less than 130 feet in width should be left on the west side of the road forming the Southern Approach to the new Bridge opposite the east end of St. Saviour's Church, to the end that an uninterrupted view of the Church might be preserved. That a part of the ground between the said road and the Church had been purchased and taken by the Mayor, Aldermen, &c., under the therein recited Act, 10 Geo. IV., and was claimed to be the property of the Parish of St. Saviour ; and that, by the last meutioned Act, the said Mayor, Aldermen, &c., were empowered to grant building leases, or otherwise sell and dispose of any ground or hereditaments not wanted for the purposes of the Approaches by such Act authorised to be made. It then enacted (inter alia) that it should be lawful for the Corporation to cause spacious and convenient streets, ways, passages and places to be made and formed for the Approaches 24 to the new Bridge, in accordance with the plan deposited at the office of the Town Clerk as aforesaid; that the Corporation might take houses and lands, and pull down and remove same for the Approaches, as mentioned in the schedule thereto; that the new street to be formed in the Borough of Southwark, extending from the Bridge to St. Thomas's Street and York Street, should be called "Wellington Street," and that the new street leading therefrom into Tooley Street should be called "Duke Street." By Section 10 it was enacted that it should be lawful for the Mayor, Commonalty and Citizens of London, and they were thereby authorised and required to demise and lease any part or parts at the ends of the Arches under the several Approaches, not exceeding 10 feet (except those through which there was or might be a way or passage), together and in the same demise or lease with ground opposite or near thereto, and let in pursuance of the provisions and directions contained in the said recited Act, 10 Geo. IV., and afterwards to sell and dispose of the reversion and inheritance in fee-simple of the said part or parts of the said Arches, together with the reversion and inheritance of the ground and hereditaments contained in the same lease or demise, in the manner directed with respect to such ground and hereditaments by the said lastmentioned Act. By Section 11 it was enacted that it should be lawful for the said Mayor and Commonalty, Ac., and they were thereby authorised and empowered to demise and lease the residue of the said Arches (except those through which there was or might be a public way or passage) or any part or parts thereof, respectively, to any person or persons, for any term or number of years not exceeding the term of 61 years and one day, to be computed from the passing of the Act, so that there were reserved and contained in every such demise or lease such yearly rent or rents as to the said Mayor, Aldermen, &c., should seem reasonable, and covenants for payment of the rent thereby to be reserved, for keeping in repair the premises thereby to be demised, &c., and for re-entry on non-payment of the rent or non-performance of the covenants on the part of the tenant or lessee. Section 12 provided that the Commissioners or persons who were or might be liable to repair the pavements of the streets or ways over the Arches under the said several Approaches respectively, should be entitled, during the said term of 61 years and one day, to the yearly rent or sum of 20s. in respect of so much of the said Arches as was to be demised as lastly thereinbefore mentioned, which said yearly rent or sum should be issuing and payable out of so much of every such Arch respectively, as the said Mayor, Aldermen, 25 &c„ should think proper and direct; and before the said Mayor, &c, should grant a lease or demise of any part or parts of such Arches respectively, as lastly thereinbefore mentioned, they should and were thereby authorised and required by deed or deeds under their common seal, to charge such part or parts of the said respective Arches as they should think proper to charge with the payment of such yearly rent or sum, and with power of distress for enforcing payment thereof &c. . By Section 13 it was enacted that, as soon as conveniently might be after the granting of any such lease or leases of the residue of the said Arches or any of them, the said Mayor &c should, and they were thereby authorised and required, to sell and dispose of, by public auction or private contract, at such price or prices as the said Mayor, Ac., should think reasonable, the rent or rents reserved by such lease or demise respectively, and the reversion, subject to such lease or demise respectively, of the premises therein respectively comprised, for a term not exceeding 61 years and one day, and the said Mayor, &c., should, and they were thereby authorised and required, at the request, cost, Ac., of the purchaser, upon payment of the sum or sums of money agreed to be given for the same respectively, to the Chamberlain of the City of London, and upon the execution, by the purchaser of a Counterpart of the same Indenture, by an Indenture under the common seal of the said City to demise or lease the part or parts of the said Arch or Arches, or other the premises purchased by such purchaser or purchasers, respectively, subject to such lease or demise thereof, respectively, as aforesaid, unto such purchaser or purchasers, respectively, his, her or their executors, Ac., for a term of 61 years and one day, at and under the yearly rent of a peppercorn, if demanded, so as there were contained in every such last-mentioned Indenture, such, or the like covenants on the part of the tenant, lessee or lessees, as should be contained in the lease or demise to be first granted of the same premises respectively, as aforesaid, and also a covenant for re-entry on non-performance of covenants, Ac. By Section 15 it was enacted that the fee-simple in possession of and in the several Arches through which there was or might be a public way or passage, and the immediate reversion expectant on the expiration of the leases or demises to be granted of the residue of the said Arches, as thereinbefore mentioned, and also of and in the ground and soil whereon the residue of the same several Arches had been erected and built, and all right and property thereto respectively, and the benefit of the covenants, provisoes or conditions in the said lastmentioned Indentures to be contained, should be vested m the respective Wards or Parishes to which the same respectively 26 should belong, or the Commissioners or persons who were or might be liable to repair the streets or ways over the same Arches respectively, and such covenants and conditions should and might be enforced by them as if they were grantors of the reversion of the premises therein respectively comprised, and the same Arches should be kept in repair in pursuance of such covenants, or by and at the expense of the said respective Wards or Parishes to which the same should respectively belong, or of the Commissioners or persons liable to repair the pavements of the stroets or ways over the same Arches respectively. Section 16 provided that nothing in the Act contained should extend or be construed to extend to vest tho right and property of the pavement, stones, bricks and materials, which were already or should thereafter be laid down upon or over the said Arches, or any or either of them thereinbefore directed to be sold or demised or leased, as aforesaid, in the purchaser or purchasers, or the lessee or lessees of the said Arches respectively ; but that tho right and property of such pavements, stones, bricks and materials so laid, or thereafter to bo laid, as aforesaid, should belong to and bo the property of the respective Wards or Parishes to which tho same should respectively belong, or other the Commissioners or persons liable to repair the same, in the same manner as things of a like description in other parts of the said Wards or Parishes respectively were then vested by law. Section 16 required the rents and purchase moneys to be applied for the purposes of the Acts. By Section 18 the said Mayor, &c., were authorised and required to leave a clear and open space of ground opposite to the east end of St. Saviour's Church, and between tho said Church and the Southern Approach to the Bridge of not less than 130 feet in width, in equal distance from the choir of the said Church, for the purpose of leaving from the said approach an uninterrupted view of the said Church; and the section provided that it should not be lawful for the said Mayor, &c., to grant any building lease, or to sell or otherwise dispose of any portion of such space of ground for any of the purposes of the said Acts, or for any other purposes whatsoever; but that the same should be, and should be used as, a public way, and also as an approach to the said Church, except such part as was consecrated ground, for the purposes of burial; and that no erection or building should at any time thereafter be erected or set up on the said space of 130 feet, or any part thereof. By an Act passed on the 22nd May, 1834 (4th Will. IV., c. 14) intituled "An Act for extending the Approaches to London Bridge, and amending the Acts relating thereto," the said Mayor, Aldermen, &c., were authorised and empowered to 27 cause ways and passages to be made into and between the Arches or parts of Arches under the several Approaches to the said Bridge, in order to make and preserve convenient ways and communications to and between the same Arches and parts thereof respectively: and it was enacted that all the covenants conditions and provisions, which should be inserted in the leases or demises thereof respecting such ways and passages, and the right of using the same, should be valid and effectual and should and might be enforced by the Commissioners or 3 persons in whom the said Arches or parts thereof should become vested by virtue of the said Act, 2nd Will. IV., or in any other manner. By Indenture under the common seal of the City of London, bearing date the 29th October, 1834, made between the Mayor and Commonalty and Citizens of the City of London of the one part, and the Commissioners appointed for putting in execution the sevral Acts of Parliament made and passed for paving the streets and lanes within the Town and Borough of Southwark, and certain parts adjacent in the County of Surrey, and for cleansing, lighting and watching the same, and also the courts, yards, alleys and passages adjoining thereto, and for preventing annoyances therein so far as the same related to the West Division in such Acts mentioned, of the other part, the said Mayor, &c., in pursuance of and in obedience to the said Art, 2nd Will. IV., did charge and make subject so much of each and every of the said several Arches as was coloured red in the plan drawn in the margin thereof, and therein numbered from 1 to 22, both inclusive (see copy plan, opposite page 20), to and with the payment of the yearly rent or sum of 20s. for each of the said Arches respectively, unto the said Commissioners and their successors, for the term of 61 years and one day, from the 3rd day of April, 1832, and to be paid on the 3rd April, in every year, without deduction or abatement. The Commissioners referred to were those appointed under the Act, 6th Geo. III., known as the "Southwark Pavement Act." The area under their jurisdiction comprised the ancient Borough of Southwark and certain parts adjacent thereto, the same being for the purposes of the Act, separated into two divisions, viz. : the West Division and the East Division, t e first consisting of the Parishes of St. George-the-Martyr, st. Saviour (except the Clink or Bishop of Winchester s Liberty), St. Mary Newington, and so much of the High Street of the said Borough as was in the Parish of St. Olave, and the East Division comprising the other parts of the said Parish of St. Olave, the Parishes of St. John and St. Thomas, and parts of the Parish of St. Mary Magdalene, Bermondsey. On the coming into force of the Metropolis Local Managemen 28 the 1st January, 1856, the duties of the Commissioners in regard to paving, &c., ceased; and, so far as the Parishes of St. Saviour and St. Olave were concerned, they devolved upon and became vested in the District Boards of Works for St. Saviour and St. Olave by virtue of Section 90 of that Act. A small portion of the Arches in question being within the District of St. Olave, application was made to the Metropolitan Board of Works, in the year 1858, to apportion, under the powers conferred upon that Board by the 93rd Section of the Metropolis Local Management Act, the rent of £22 charged upon the said Arches, between the two Districts entitled to receive the same; and, shortly afterwards, an Order of Apportionment was made, by virtue of which St. Saviour's received the sum of £19 7s. 2d. and St. Olave's the sum of £2 12s. l0d. as and for their portions respectively of the said rent-charge. These sums have been regularly received by the two District Boards of the late Alderman Humphery and his representatives ever since, but they will, of course, cease to be payable after the 3rd April next, when the reversion to the rack rentals takes effect. On the 30th October, 1834, the said Mayor and Commonalty and Citizens, in exercise and execution of the powers and provisions of the Acts of Parliament first above-mentioned, and in consideration of a rental of £150 per annum, granted a lease to the said John Humphery of the parts, distinguished in the plan by a red colour, of the Arches numbered from 1 to 22, both inclusive, subject to payment of the rent-charge of 20s. in respect of each of the said Arches to the said Commissioners, as aforesaid. At the same time they granted, in consideration of a rental of £28 per annum, a lease to William Chadwick of the parts distinguished by a yellow colour of the two Arches numbered 21 and 22 in the plan, both leases being for a term of 61 years from the 3rd April, 1832. On the 6th April, 1835, the said Mayor and Commonalty and Citizens, in pursuance of the directions of the said Act of Parliament, 2nd William IV., caused the rents reserved by the two last-mentioned leases, and the reversion subject thereto, for a term of 61 years and one day (together with other rents and hereditaments) to be offered for sale by tender at the Guildhall of the City of London, when the said John Humphery having tendered the sum of £3,539 for the said rents forming lots 34 and 35, was declared the purchaser thereof; and, by Indenture dated the 23rd July, 1835, the said Mayor, Aldermen, &c., in consideration of that sum, demised and leased unto him all the parts aforesaid of the said Arches, leased to him on the 30th October, 1834, of which he was in possession, and of the two leased at the same time to William Chadwick, distinguished in the plan by the colours red and yellow respec- 29 tively; together with all ways and appurtances to the same belonging or appertaining; to hold the same unto the said John Humphery, his executors, administrators and assigns, for the term of 61 years and one day, from the 3rd April, 1832 (subject to the rent of 20s. charged upon the parts of each of the 22 Arches, as aforesaid, and also subject to the two leases above-mentioned) at the yearly rent of a peppercorn, if demanded. On the 4th April next, therefore, the Executors of John Humphery will be tenants in possession, not only of the parts of the Arches of which he was in possession by virtue of the first-mentioned lease to him, but also of the parts of arches coloured yellow on the plan and leased to William Chadwick; and, on the 5th April, the freehold of the same will revert to and become vested in the two Boards of Works as successors to the said Commissioners. From and after that date the rents and profits of the said Arches will be available in aid of the rates of the two Districts in the same proportion as that adopted in regard to the rentcharge. It will be observed, however, that the vesting of the Arches in the local authorities involves the responsibility of keeping them in repair as provided in Section 15 of the Act of Parliament first above mentioned. 30 31 APPEND Return of Number of Board & Committee Meetings held during the Year ended 25th ??? of attendances of Members thereat, and of the dates of their several Elections ST. SAVIOUR. ATTENCES, &C. CHRISTCHURCH. NAMES OF MEMBERS. Board Meetings. Paving & General Purposes Committee Meetings. Sewers Committee Meetings. Sanitary Committee Meetings. Finance Committee Meetings. Meetings of Special Committees. Totals. Date of First Election. NAMES OF MEMBERS. Board Meetings. Paving & General Purposes Committee Meetings, Sewers Committee Meetings. Sanitary Committee Meetings. Finance Committee Meetings. Meetings of Special Committees. Totals. Date of First Election. When last re-elected. Mr. Baxter, Fredk , attended 23 ... ... ... 12 8 43 1884 Back, T., attended 26 ... 5 ... ... ... 31 1888 1890 ,, Blatchford, R. H. 25 ... ... 22 ... ... 47 1889 Burton, B. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1889 ,, Castle ,, 19 12 ... ... ... ... 31 1891 Carter, W. „ 27 20 2 ... ... 5 54 1888 1891 „ Cloake, W. J. „ 22 ... 6 ... ... 2 30 1886 Clark. Jas. „ 14 8 ... ... ... 1 23 1888 1889 „ Coles, H. J. „ 28 24 ... ... ... 3 55 1888 cooper. J. „ 10 ... ... ... 3 ... 13 1889 „ Daveny „ 24 ... 3 ... ... ... 27 1891 Faulkner, W. B.,, 5 ... ... 6 ... ... 11 1891 „ Fry, H. J. „ 25 ... ... ... 10 ... 35 1890 Hawkins, J. H. „ 12 ... 2 3 ... ... 17 1881 1890 ,, Gilson, R. A. ,, 12 10 ... ... ... ... 22 1884 Henley, Ch. „ 15 3 ... ... ... ... 18 1879 1891 ,, Goodwin, A. ,, 22 14 ... ... ... ... 36 1870 Hopkins, W. „ 26 ... 6 ... ... ... 32 1885 1891 „ Gregory, Hy. „ 24 ... ... 17 ... ... 41 1877 Hurwood, E. „ 6 ... ... ... 5 ... 11 1891 ,, Grattan, H. H. G. „ 21 22 ... ... ... 5 48 1891 Pinner, J. 5 ... 1 ... ... ... 6 1889 I Hill, W. E. „ 17 ... ... 8 ... 1 26 1890 Rawlo, J. ,, 9 ... ... 7 ... ... 16 1891 „ Keith, A. J. „ 27 20 ... ... ... ... 47 1883 Ridley, Hy 10 ... ... ... 4 ... 14 1860 1891 ,, Kinnell, C. P. „ 20 ... ... ... 5 1 26 1888 Robertson, W. ,, 2 ... ... ... ... ... 2 1890 ,, Layman, A. R. ,, 18 ... ... 20 ... ... 38 1891 Snook, Georgo „ 20 ... 1 ... ... ... 21 1890 ,, Matthews, J. ,, 13 13 ... ... ... ... 26 1891 Young, Alfred „ 2 2 ... ... ... ... 4 1892 ,, Meikle, Jas. ,, 23 ... ... 27 ... ... 50 1886 number of meetings held during the year. ,, Rhodes. J. G. ,, 2 ... ... ... ... ... 2 1888 ,, Rideal, Alfred „ 24 ... 1 ... 9 ... 34 1886 30 Board Meetings „ Rider, T. F. 7 3 ... ... ... ... 10 1873 Ji Paving and General Purposes Committee Meetings Zl 6 „ Rose, J. S. „ 24 13 ... ... ... 2 39 1891 Sewers 33 Sanitary " 13 ,, Sinclair, J. „ 22 ... ... 28 ... 3 43 1885 18 Finance " 11 „ Tozer, C. 18 ... 4 ... ... ... 22 1891 Special " " 90 „ Williams, C. ,, 7 ... ... ... ... ... 7 1886 Total 120 32 SURVEYOR'S REPORT For the Year ending Lady-day, 1892. Gentlemen, I have the honour to submit the following Report on the various works executed in my Department during the year terminating Lady-day last. On Tuesday, March 31st, 1891, we commenced the execution of the repairs to carriageways and footways and the restoration of Gas, Water, Hydraulic, Electric and other trenches by men employed directly by the Board, thereby doing away with the contract system which had always hitherto been in force. In preparing for the new system the Stone Yard in Ewer Street was thoroughly overhauled, and a large quantity of old granite and stone which had lain useless for some vears was sold, ballast and sand bins were con- structed, foreman's office, tool sheds, &c., erected, and new entrance gates put up. It was at first intended to execute jobbing works or repairs only, as it was considered that with so small a plant as we commenced with it would not be advisable to attempt to carry out larger works, but at length it was decided to proceed with some of the more extensive works, and the following were executed entirely by the Board's own Staff. 33 ESTIMATED WORKS. Name of Street. Description of Work. Estimated Cost. Actual Cost. Reduction Effected. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. Southwark Bridge Road 3in. by Gin. by 9in. Yollow Deal Paving 78 15 0 65 5 6 13 9 6 Stamford Street Do. do. 1,085 0 0 905 12 6 179 7 6 Union Street Do. do. 335 0 0 286 0 0 49 0 0 Southwark Bridge Road Pitching Relaid and Redressed 447 8 4 311 3 0 136 5 4* Do. do. Now 2½in. York Footway 174 13 8 156 8 8 18 5 0 Bedale Street New Sin. do. 53 5 11 47 6 4 5 19 7 £2,174 2 11 £1,771 16 0 £402 6 11 * In this case full estimated area was not relaid. THE FOLLOWING WORKS WERE CARRIED OUT BY CONTRACT. Name of Street. Description of Work. Estimated Cost. Actual Cost. Area. Name of Contractor. £ s. d. £ s. d. Borough High Street Asphalte Footway 346 15 0 315 8 5 1139 yards super. Limmer Asphalte Co. W. H. Wheeler. (The area paved was in excess of that estimated) Messrs. Mowlem & Co. London Bridge Incline 3in. by 9in. Aberdeen Granite Pitching 1,680 5 10 1,739 12 0 2330 7/9 Borough High Street 3in. by 6in. by 9in. Creosoted Yellow Deal Paving on 6in. of Portland Cement Concrete Accepted Tender at 10/8 per yard super. less value of old stone 1,679 2 6 3463 B 34 The following works have been executed in the repairing and the maintaining of the footways in the District Footways. New 2½in York Stone Paving laid 935 feet super. Victoria Stone Paving laid 267 „ „ Old York Paving relaid 27,377 „ Old Victoria Stone relaid 2,290 „ Old Curb taken up and relaid 2,356 „ lineal. Holes cut in York for grates, boxes, Ac. 19 This does not include work done in restoration after gas, water, and other companies' trenches, nor the work executed under the head of "Estimated Works." Carriageways. The following works have been executed in the repairing and maintaining of the Carriageways in the District:— Old Granite Pitching relaid 4,694 yds. super. Block Channelling refixed 18 feet lineal. Lias Lime Concrete 6in thick under pitching in sewer trenches only 493 yds. super. Portland Cement Concrete 9in thick under pitching in sewer trenches 67 „ Wood Paving relaid 81 „ „ Ground dug and carted away for Concrete space under Pitching 99 „ cube. The following works have been executed in reinstating trenches after Gas, Water, Electric Light, Hydraulic Power and other companies:— LAMBETH WATER COMPANY. Carriageways. Macadam 37 yards super. Pitching relaid 147 ,, ,, 6 inches Lias Lime Concrete under ditto 125 „ „ 8 ,, ,, ,, ,, 14 „ „ 6 „ Portland Cement ,, 33 „ „ 9 ,, ,, ,, ,, 17 ,, ,, Ground excavated and carted away for Concrete space 29 1/3 „ cube. Wood Paving relaid 61 „ super. New Wood blocks No. 685. Boxes repaved ,, 9. 35 Footways. Old York Paving relaid 623 ½ feet super. New Victoria Paving 8 ,, ,, New York Paving 43 ,, ,, Old Curb refixed 13 ,, ,, Holes cut in York No. 11. SOUTHWARK & YAUXHALL WATER COMPANY. Carriageways. Wood Paving relaid 11 5/9 yards super Pitching relaid 359½ 6 inches Lias Lime Concrete under ditto 346½ 6 „ Portland Cement „ ,, 3 5/9 9 inches Portland Cement Concrete 17 ,, ,, 12 ,, ,, ,, ,, 4 ,, ,, Ground excavated and carted away for Concrete space 60 „ cube. Macadam 6½ „ super. Block Channel refixed 22 „ lineal. New Wood Blocks used No. 119. Footways. Old York Paving relaid 556 feet super. New York Paving 46 „ „ Holes cut in York No. 7. Curb refixed 17 feet lineal. SOUTH METROPOLITAN GAS COMPANY. Carriageways. Flints relaid 6 5/9 yards super. Granite Pitching relaid 505½ „ „ Wood Paving relaid 6 „ „ 6 inches Lias Lime Concrete under ditto 384 „ „ 8 „ „ „ 103 2/3 „ „ 6 „ Portland Cement „ ,, 4 2/3 „ „ 9 „ „ ,, ,, ,, 22 ½ Ground excavated and carted away for ^ Concrete space 53½ „ cube. Macadam 138 ,, super. Tram refixed 46 fe New Wood Blocks used No. 61. Footways. Old York Paving relaid *676 feet super. New York Paving „ Old Victoria Stone relaid 14 „ New Victoria Stone Paving 16Old Curb refixed 141 „ linea1. New Curb 3 „ Holes cut in York Paving No. 2. 36 LONDON ELECTRIC SUPPLY CORPORATION, Ld. Carriageways. Granite Pitching relaid 645 yards super. 6 inches Lias Lime Concrete under ditto 118 8 „ „ 191 „ 9 „ Portland Cement „ 144 „ „ Ground excavated and carted away for Concrete space 101 „ cube. Block Channel refixed 10 feet lineal. Footways. Old York Paving rolaid11048 feet super. Now York Paving 908 „ Granite Footway relaid 106 „ „ Holes cut in York No. 8. Curb refixed 60 feet lineal. BRUSH ELECTRICAL ENGINEERING COMPANY. Carriageways. Granite Pitching relaid 163 yards super. 9 inches Lias Lime Concrete under ditto 163 Ground excavated and carted for Concrete space 41 „ cube. Footways. Old York Paving relaid 2957 feet super. New York Paving 487 „ „ Old Curb refixed 635 „ lineal. Now do. 7 „ „ Holes cut in York .. No. 11. HYDRAULIC POWER COMPANY. Carriageways. Granite Pitching relaid 623 yards super. 6 inches Lias Limo Concrete under ditto 299 „ „ 9 „ Portland Cement „ 26 „ „ 19 9ft Ground excavated and carted for Concrete space 60 „ cube. Footways. York Paving relaid 130 feet super. Curb refixed 5 „ lin. Holes cut in York No. 2 POSTAL TELEGRAPH OFFICE. Carriageways. Granite Pitching relaid 1 yard super. Footways. Old York Paving relaid 102 feet super. Now York Paving 3 „ „ 37 SUNDRIES. Carriageways. Granite Pitching relaid 13 yards super 9in. Portland Cement Concrete under ditto 4 Ground excavated and carted away for Concrete space 1 „ cube Footways. Old York Paving relaid 90 feet super Old Curb refixed 8 „ lin With reference to the new system adopted in executing the several works required in the repair and maintenance of the public ways in the District by men directly employed by this department, I am pleased to report that the results have been very satisfactory; the work has not only been done at a considerably reduced cost, even after allowing a large margin for office expenses and depreciation and renewal of plant, but we have also a more complete and direct control over' our workmen, who are paid a fair rate of wages. The various trenches and openings made in the public ways now receive more prompt attention than under the old contract system, and the work of reinstating is very frequently commenced on the same day as the receipt of the voucher from the companies who have disturbed the Public ways. We are also enabled to give greater attention to maintenance repairs, and in cases of urgency, can put the whole of own men on any particular spot requiring special attention. With regard to larger works, we have found no difficulty in procuring such efficient labour as we have found necessary for the execution of the same. The following Statement shows the Expenditure on Plant, Materials, Labour, &e., under the new system :— From whom Purchased. Description. cost Cleaver Brushes £0 4 6 Anderson, Anderson & Anderson Macintosh 1 13 6 Jelley, Son & Jones Lamps 0 15 6 Do. do Repairs 0 8 0 Do. do. Axes and Pails 1 12 3 Do. do Sieve 0 3 0 Do. do Shovels 0 6 6 Do. do. Sundries, Repairs, &c 4 10 6 Moser & Co Tape and Brand 0 17 6 Do Brooms, Chain, &c. 2 13 0 Hopton Rammers 1 16 0 Do. Beetles 2 16 0 Cayzer Stonedresser 1 16 3 Bayley & Co Hand Trucks 40 0 0 Do Carts 39 13 0 Elson Wheelbarrows 4 0 6 Hoare & Son Straightedge 0 15 2 Do Watchman's Box 3 19 0 Croggan & Co. Galvanized Water Tank 1 4 0 Rogers Horse Reins, &c. £109 12 2 38 The sums expended in materials, viz.:— lime, cement, ballast, sand, now York stone, Victoria stone, rubbish shooting, horse hire, sundry repairs, &c., Ac., for jobbing works and trenches only, exclusive of estimated works, amounted to £385 14s. 8d. The sums paid in wages for carriageway works amounted to £402 4s. 3d., and for footway works £237 19s. 8d., making a total of £640 3s. lid., or a grand total, including wages and material, amounting to £1025 18s. 7d. The amounts received for reinstating trenches were as follows:— £ s. d. South Metropolitan Gas Co. 175 6 10 Lambeth Water Co. 68 17 1 Southwark and Vauxhall Water Co. 85 0 10 London Electric Supply Corporation 269 0 9 Hydraulic Power Co. 103 19 1 Postal Telegraphs Office 1 1 3 Brush Electrical Engineering Co. 95 2 4 Sundries 39 8 0 £837 16 2 It will bo seen by the foregoing statement that wo have (during the period covered by this Report), received largo sums from Electric Lighting and Gas Companies for the reinstating of trenches opened by thorn; the dimensions of these trenches have been unusually large, especially in the case of the London Electric Supply Corporation, who have laid trunk mains in many of the principal thoroughfares. As much of this work is now completed, we do not anticipate receiving such large sums during the ensuing year. The total sum expended on Carriageway and Footway Paving Works executed by ourselves, including Estimated Works, Repairs, Trenches, and the whole of the Plant purchased amounted to £2,437 18s. 10d., for which sum the whole of the following works were carried out, for a portion of which we have received from various Companies, £837 10s. 2d. Footways. Now 2½ York Stone Paving laid 7,235 feet, super. Victoria Stone Paving laid 291 „ „ Old York Paving relaid 47,066 „ „ Old Victoria Stone relaid 2,304 „ „ Old Curb taken up and refixed 3,805 „ lineal. Now Curb fixed 10 „ „ 39 Carriageways. Old Granite Pitching relaid . 8766 yards super Wood Paving relaid 159 New Wood Paving laid 3971" 6 inches Lias Lime Concrete under paving 1765 8 " " " 205 „ „ " " 411 6 „ Portland Cement 682 12 154 2 „ „ 32 „ 3330 Ground excavated and carted away for Concrete space 445 cube Macadam relaid 189 „ super Block Channelling refixed 96 feet lineal The quantity of Ballast used on the Bridge Inclines, Wood Paving, &c., for the year was 1030 yards cube, which cost, including spreading, £292 12s. The quantity of Ballast used under Pitching and other Paving Works was 373 yards cube. Board's Workmen. The rate of wages paid to the workmen in the employ of the Board is as follows :— Masons 9d. per hour. Paviors 9d. „ Hammermen 7d. „ Labourers 6d. „ Sewer Foreman 32/-per week. Sewermen 30/- „ Streets Foreman 30/- „ Sweepers 4/- per day. Watchmen 3/- per night. Carmen 4/2 per day. Chalet Attendants (male) 20/- per week. „ „ (female) 16/- „ Yardmen 27/- „ Urinal Cleaner 6d. per hour. Sanitary Inspector's Assistant 30/- per week. Messenger and Doorkeeper 30/- per week. General Foreman 55/- per week. Horses are hired by the day at 5/- for ordinary day work, and 6/- for Borough Market cleansing at nights, the Board finding their own carmen and carts. In the case of larger paving works the horses, carts and men are supplied for 10/- per day. 40 I make it a rule to have one of our own carts and carmen engaged on these works, from whom we expect a certain amount of work, thus forming a standard which the hired men are kept up to. The Principal Carriageway Paving Works executed during the year by our own Staff are as follows:— Stamford Street. The Carriageway of this Street, from the boundary at Broadwall to Blackfriars Road, has been paved with new yellow deal paving blocks, Sin. by Bin. by 9in. in size, not creosoted; the existing concrete foundation was floated over with an additional thickness of Portland cement concrete mixed in the proportion of 4 parts of ballast to 1 of cement, thus giving an increased roundness to the roadway which was formerly too flat in section, and consequently retained mud and water on its surface in wot weather. The blocks wore cut from good sound timber specially selected, free from sap, and clearly cut, and were laid with quarter-inch joints and were grouted in with Portland cement. A small portion of the Carriageway at the Blackfriars Road end has boon laid with the wood blocks placed close together without any joint, as an experiment, which seems to answer well. The area paved measures about 3,100 yards superficial, and nearly 130,000 now blocks were used; the work was executed in eighteen working days. The wood paving which before existed was laid by Messrs. Mowlem & Co. in 1885. Southwark Bridge Road. A small portion of the Carriageway paving of this street at our boundary was relaid with new wood blocks, and the old concrete foundation floated with Portland cement in order to give a better rounding; the area paved was about 230 yards, and nearly 10,000 blocks were used. Union Street and Rod Cross Street A portion of the Carriageway of this thoroughfare was paved with wood paving in 1883 by Messrs. Carey, 4in. Keyed blocks wore laid on a foundation of ballast, this has now been removed and a foundation of Portland cement concrete formed, on which new 3in. by Gin. by 9in. yellow deal blocks were paved. The area paved was about 641 yards, and the number of new blocks laid were 25,900. Southwark Bridge Road. A portion of the Carriageway in this road between Union Street and the Water Company's Offices was relaid with redressed granite pitching; an area of about 1615 yards. The whole of the Footway on the East side from Southwark Street to the parish boundary, with the exception of a small portion at the Triangle, was laid with new 2½in. tooled York paving; the Curb was also redressed and refixed. The quantity of new York laid was 3686 feet super., and curb redressed and refixed, 500 feet run. 41 The footway on the South side of this Street from the Borough high street to the railway bridge, was relaid with new 3in. tooled york stone paving; the curb was also redressed and refixed. Quantity of new york laid, 958 feet super.; quantity of curb refixed, 70 feet run. Bedale Street The works carried out by Contract are as follows :- The Footway on the East side, from Denman Street to Newcomen street, has been relaid with compressed asphalte 1 inch in thickness; this work was carried out by the Limmer Asphalte Company, who have also agreed to maintain the footway for ten years, subject, of course, to their being paid for all reinstatements after gas, water, sewer and other trenches. The area relaid measured 1139 super, yards. Borough High Street. The Carriageway of this thoroughfare, from the boundary of St. George's Parish to St. Thomas's Street, has been paved with Sin. by Gin. by 9in. deal paving blocks, creosoted under pressure. The old granite pitching was removed, the ground excavated, and a foundation of Portland cement concrete formed ; the creosoted blocks were then laid with quarterinch joints, these joints were then partly filled with asphalte and then grouted in with Portland cement and sand, mixed in the proportion of 5 of sand to 1 of cement; the whole of the levels of the Roadway were revised, and special measures were taken in order to cause as little inconvenience and delay as possible to the enormous traffic which passes along this thoroughfare. The area surface laid was 3463 super, yards, and the time occupied in the execution of the work four weeks. Borough High Street. The Carriageway of the Approach to London Bridge from the City boundary to the boundary line in Duke Street Railway Approach and a line drawn across the Bridge Incline from Findlater's corner to the opposite side, was paved with new 3in. by 9in. Aberdeen granite pitching. The old stone which had been down for eight years was taken up and carted away, and a portion of the most worn pitching sold to the Contractor. The new Aberdeen stone was of good quality and of a full depth of 9 inches, and was paved on a bed of new ballast 2 inches in depth; the joints were then grouted in with lias lime, and the whole well rammed three times in order to firmly consolidate the same. The weather during the execution of this work was extremely unfavourable and caused serious delay and great inconvenience to vehicular and other traffic, There was also some difficulty in getting the Contractor who carried out the works to exercise that expedition which we thought necessary in this case. The area paved was 2330 7/9 super, yards. London Bridge Approach. 42 Footway and Borough Market Cleansing. The cleansing of the Footways as required by the new Public Health Act, was placed under the control of my department, and a start was made on the 1st January, 1892. The number of men employed is seven, and a Street Foreman is also specially appointed to look after this work. Two patent tip vans were purchased with the other necessary plant. All parts of the District are visited daily, and the footway sweepings collected and carted to Messrs. Wakeley's Wharf, Bankside. Two of the seven men are specially engaged in the Borough High Street and Stamford Street respectively; these men keep the wood carriageway paving clean, and ballast the same when necessary. They also have charge of the footways. The whole of the cleansing and watering of the District, which was formerly superintended by the Inspectors of Nuisances, has now been thrown upon my department. The Board have also taken over the work of cleansing the Borough Market and carting away all refuse matter, the superintendence and responsibility of this work is also cast upon my department. Special arrangements had to be made for the execution of this work, and two extra vans, flushing apparatus and other extra tools were purchased, and a tool store erected within the precincts of the market. An agreement was entered into with the Strand Board of Works, by which all refuse collected by our vans is carted to their Depot in Commercial Road, and is barged away by them. We have amalgamated the footway sweeping and market cleansing gangs, and are able in cases of emergency to employ all our men and vans on the work requiring the most prompt attention. I anticipate (judging from the present expenditure) that it will be found at the end of a year that we have successfully carried out these works at a cost not exceeding the estimated amounts. William Street. Sewerage and Drainage Works. The following are the principal works executed in connection with the Sewers, &c., during the year:— The old high level sewer in this street from Charlotte Street to York Street has been abolished and a new 15in. pipe sewer laid in its stead. The length of the new pipe sewer is 280ft, the invert of the old sewer was cut out and the new pipes laid to a greater fall. A 14in. head wall in cement was built in the Charlotte Street sewer, and a new man-hole constructed at the junction with York Street. The concrete flushing tank in York Street was also connected to this sewer, this tank discharges 1,125 gallons, or 5 tons of water, at a single flush, and will effectually keep the sewer clear. All 43 house drainage and other connections were picked up and properly diverted into he new sewer. In this work eighteen 15m. junctions, 18ft. of 12m. pipe, 14ft. of 9in. pipe, No 10 9 inch bends, Ac were laid, and 94 loads of soil removed from the old sewer, 117 cubic yards of hard core were used in filling in the sewer. A length of 206 feet has been added to the 15in. pipe sewer in Surrey Row, and many houses which formerly discharged their drainage into the old Boundary Sewer in the rear of the premises are now connected to the new pipe sewer under the public thoroughfare in front. It is intended to disconnect all the houses in the Christchurch District from this defective high level boundary sewer, and the sewer, so far as we are concerned, could then be abolished. In laying this new length of 15in. pipes, junctions were left opposite every house on both sides of the way, in order that new connections may be made with no disturbance to the main sewer. New gully connections have been provided, as new gullies will be constructed at some tune when the Street is paved with a more suitable material than the old Macadam at present existing. Surrey Row The pipe sewer at the East end of this Street has been connected with the large flushing tank in Price's Street, by means of 12in. pipes ; this will enable us to flush the Edward Street sewer when necessary. The tank in Price's Street, to which this is connected, has a capacity of 4,000 gallons, or nearly 18 tons of water, and this quantity can be discharged through a 12in. valve. The length of pipes laid is 110 feet. Edward Street. The pipe sewer in this place was opened and cleared, about 10 loads of slop were removed, and the sewer thoroughly flushed and cleansed. Pitt's Place. A new inspection chamber has been constructed in this Place, and connected with a 9in. pipe connection, 68 feet in length, to the main brick sewer in Park Street, a Kenon trap being placed between the sewer and the inspection chamber. Emerson Place Private Drainage Connections. The following House Drainage connections to the Public Sewers have been made:— Size of pipes, &c. No. of connections. 12in. pipe to brick sewers 1 9in. „ „ 9 6in. „ „ 9 9in. pipe to pipe sewers 6 6in. „ „ 3 27 44 The length and size of pipes laid during the year for house drainage connections are as follows:— Size of pipe. 6in 248 9in 394 12in 14 656 The deposits for this work amount to £187 7s. 5d., and the amounts returned after the works were completed, £13 4s. l0d. New gullies have been constructed in the Borough High Street and Pitt's Place, and gullies have been repaired and reconstructed as follows:— Three Crown Square 1 St. Margaret's Court 1 Stoney Street 1 Borough High Street 2 Total 5 New side entrance covers fixed 2 New gulley grates fixed 9 Slop carted from sewers and side entrances 134 loads. Public Urinals. The following is a list of the Urinals in the District which are flushed by automatic water tanks, regulated to discharge about every 12 minutes, and also by a man twice daily. I find great difficulty in keeping these small urinals clean. St. Saviour's. London Bridge Steps 4 compartments slate. Southwark Street 6 „ „ Triangle, Union Street 4 „ „ Stoney Street 1 „ brick. Christchurch. Blackfriars Road 4 compartments slate. Southwark St. and do. 6 „ » Gravel Lane 4 „ enamelled Holland Street 3 „ iron John's Place 2 „ „ Chalet. In December last, the whole of the inside and outside of the Chalet at the corner of Southwark Street and Borough High Street, was thoroughly scraped, washed and cleansed, and painted twice, all fittings repaired where necessary, and 45 the whole of the water closets lavatory basins, pipes, etc., thoroughly overhauled and put into propel order. The tender of Messrs. Hoare & Son was accented at £33,and the work completed in one week. Licences. For the pulling down, rebuilding, repairing and alterations to and shoring up buildings, 42 Licences have been granted The cost of reinstating the pavements has been borne by the person taking out the Licence in each case. The amount expended and received for the execution of such work during the year being as follows 6 Amount deposited with the Board £76 10 0 Amount returned when works have been completed and after cost of reinstating the pavement has been deducted £2115 0 Advertising Stations (Rating) Act. There has been only one Licence issued for advertisements on hoardings under the Advertising Stations (Rating) Act, this was in Southwark Bridge Road, and in this instance the party intimated that they would never take out another. I find that the system of charging for advertisements tends to decrease the practice of advertising on temporary hoardings in this District. Lighting. The number of Public Lamps in the District is 570, of which 9 are Meter Lamps with special burners, placed at crossings or large open spaces. Repairs and Extension of Offices. In August, 1891, specifications were drawn up by us and tenders obtained for Repairing, Painting and Decorating the whole of the Offices, Housekeeper's Quarters and the Board Room. Messrs. Hoare & Son's tender of £128 was accepted, and the work satisfactorily carried out by them. In consequence of further accommodation being required by the increased Staff, I prepared plans and drew up specifications for several proposed alterations. Finally the Committee decided to acquire the premises No. 2, Emerson Street, and the tender of Messrs. Hoare & Son was accepted for the work of adapting these premises for Offices. Communications were made through the party wall, and an Office constructed for the Clerk's Assistant, and rooms fitted up for the Medical officer and Sanitary Inspectors. 46 The Clerk having reported that he had no shelves or cupboards in which to properly store the minute books and keep stationery, special designs for two oak pedestal book-cases were prepared in this department and submitted to the Board, who having approved of one design ordered the same to be carried out. Tenders were obtained, and Messrs. Josolyne & Young selected to do the work at a cost of £62 5s. The book-cases were made from the best selected wainscot oak, and the whole of the details executed in a first class manner. The following Contracts have been entered into for the supply of materials, &c.:— William Stubbs. Ordinary Thames Ballast at per yard cube, gin. Screened Thames Ballast „ Thames Sand Wm. Lee, Son & Co. Greystone Lime at per yard cube. Blue Lias Lime at per ton. Portland Cement at per sack, less for returned empty sacks. Tomes & Wimpey. 2-^in. New York Paving at per foot super. 6in. by 12in. Norway Edge Curb at per foot run. Limmek Asphalte Paving Company, Limited. For laying asphalte footways on concrete, and including maintenance for 10 years, 7/6 per yard super. Strand Board of Works. For shooting Borough Market refuse, 2/4 per ton. GEO. ROPER NORRISH, Board Offices, Surveyor. Emerson Street. 47 MEDICAL OFFICER'S REPORT. TO THE BOARD of works for the st. saviour's district. Gentlemen, I beg to present to you my Annual Report for the year ending December 31st, 1891. During the year there were registered 883 births, 449 beincr males and 434 females. Of the births recorded 436 occurred m St. Saviour s and 447 in Christchurch, the total exceeding that of last year by one. The total number of deaths registered was 836, distributed as follows St. Saviour, 260; Christchurch, 338 ; and in outlying institutions, 238. As they stand these figures are equvalent to an annual death-rate of 30.77 per 1000 of the population. After deducting .'50 deaths which occured in Christchurch workhouse, but belonging to other districts, and inquests held on the bodies of 16 persons found in the District, but not belonging to it, the death-rate amounts to 29.08 per Of the remaining deaths 50 owed their right to be considered those of residents in this District from the fact that the person had passed a single night within its boundaries. Every one of these either came from a common lodging house or had spent a night in Christchurch Workhouse prior to being sent to St. Saviour's Infirmary, where they ultimately died. Various reasons may be assigned for the great influx of the extreme poor, the improvident and the vagrant. Ever since the opening of the new Infirmary at Champion Hill there has been a steady and increasing flow of social outcasts into the District, attracted by the magnificent hospital accommodation and scientific treatment to be found there. Again, for the greater part of the year a well-meaning philanthropist nightly collected these homeless specimens of humanity on the south side of Blackfriars Bridge, giving each one at midnight an order for a night's accommodation in a lodging-house, which was generally situated in St. Saviour or Christchurch. As many of these were ailing at the time of their admission to these retreats, the keepers naturally sought to get rid of them as soon as possible, with the result that the various Poor Law Institutions attached to the District became their destination, where many of them died. , In addition, several speculative enterprises, floated in the name of Humanity and Christianity, have been establishe m recent years within the District, which give a home for t the time being to the nomadic section of the community. These refuges, of course, cannot accommodate those who are sick; an as 48 residents of the District, in the true sense of the term, never by any chance pass a night there, the large number of individuals transferred from these havens to institutions adapted for the treatment of the ailing, naturally tends to swell the death-rate. Another feature of this District is the wonderful array of charities belonging to the parishes of St. Saviour and Christchurch. A very short residence has, I believe, been generally sufficient to qualify applicants for these gifts, the result being that large numbers of people whose health has broken down, either through age, deprivation, or some other cause less easy to defend, crowd into the poorer and cheaper tenements, so as to become eligible for these charities. Whether they succeed or not in their enterprise, they are people who are the least likely to undergo the strain of any severe illness. If only we were fortunate enough to be in a position to offer fewer attractions to pauper immigrants, we should be able to show a death-rate that would compare favourably with the average mortality of London. As matters are at present, I fail to see how, notwithstanding any effort we may make in the cause of sanitary improvement, our death-rate can do otherwise than annually continue to increase. Eliminating only those 50 cases of persons whose claim on this District was founded on a short residence therein in a common lodging house or the workhouse, the death-rate is equal to one of 27.2 per 1000 of the population Out of the total number of deaths 176 were under one year, 113 between one and five, and 218 over sixty years of age. Appended is a list of the various causes of death :— Measles. —17 deaths occurred from this disease, 3 being infants under 1 year, and 14 between 1 and 5 years. This number is considerably below that of last year, viz., 50 ; but I am still of opinion that had this disease come under the notification of the "Infectious Diseases Act," the mortality would have been still less. Scarlet Fever.— 69 notifications were received during the year, and of these 58 were removed to hospital, with a result that only 3 deaths occurred. Whooping Cough.— Total number of deaths 21, of which 7 were under 1 year, 12 between 1 and 5 years, and 2 between 5 and 20 years; this total is 3 less than the numbers of the previous year. Croup.— 3 deaths occurred from this disease, 1 under 1 year, and 2 between 5 and 10 years. Diarrhoea.— 12 deaths occurred from this disease, 9 under 1 year, 1 between 1 and 5 years. Influenza.— Total number of deaths from this complaint, 11. Rheumatism.— 1 death. Erysipelas.— 4 deaths occurred from this disease out of a total of 32 notified. It is difficult to see the utility of 49 notifying this disease, as at present there is no hospital accommodation provided for such cases, and isolation, therefore, is, for all practical purposes, a matter of impossibility. Syphilis.—6 deaths occurred from this disease, 4 of which were infants under 1 year. It is a matter of regret that at the present time there is no means of limiting the ravages of this insidious and far-reaching disease. Diphtheria.- 12 deaths from this disease were recorded. 8 of which were under 5 years, and 4 between 5 and 15 rears.Ten of these occurred in hospital. The majority of these cases, 85 of which in all were notified, were of a very virulent type, and had not 28 of these been removed to hospital, the moitalit) would, in all probability, have been represented by a much higher figure. Typhoid Fever.-10 cases of this disease were notified, and 9 of these were removed to hospital. Two deaths were registered. Phthisis.—This disease was the cause of death in 93 instances, 3 being under 5 years, 5 between 5 and 20 years, and 5 over 60 years of age. Tuhercular Meningitis.—19 deaths occurred from this disease during the year, 13 being under 5 years, and the remaining 6 under 20 years. Other forms of tubercular disease were the cause of the following deaths:—Tabes Mesenterica, 11; Scrofula, 1; General Tuberculosis, 3. Lauyxgitis.—4 cases were attributed to this disease. Bronchitis.—180 deaths from this disease were registered; 46 were under 5 years, and 93 were over 60 years of age. Pneumonia.—65 deaths were due to this disease, 30 being under 5 years and 7 over 60 years of age. Other lung diseases were the cause of death in 4 instances. Heart Disease.—52 deaths were recorded as due to various diseases of this organ. Aneurism.—2 cases of death were registered. Apoplexy. 22 deaths were caused by this disease, 8 being under 60 years and the remainder between 60 and 80. Other diseases of the brain were the cause of death in 25 cases. They were grouped under the following heads:— Hydrocephalus, 4; Cephalitis, 4; Paralysis, 5; Epilepsy, 2; Insanity, 4; and General Paralysis, 6. Convulsions.—33 children died from this disease, 27 being Kindey Diseases-18 deaths were due to various diseases of the kidneys. Systitis.—5 deaths were due to this disease. Stricture of Urethra caused 1 death. 50 Old Age.—23 deaths were recorded as being due to simple decay of nature. Prematuke Birth.—21 cases were recorded. Atrophy.—24 deaths were ascribed to this rather vague term, 18 being under one year, and the remaining 6 between one and two years. Cancer.—25 deaths were registered. Diseases of the Liver and Digestive Organs were the cause of death in 34 instances, 8 being under 5 years, and 11 over 60 years. Diabetes.—2 deaths occurred from this disease. Childbirth.—1 woman died in labour. Uterine Disease caused death in two instances. Joint Disease.—4 died from diseases of the joints. Malformation caused death in 2 cases. Gout was the cause of death in 2 cases. Myxcedema caused 1 death. Quinsey caused death in 1 case. Dentition.—6 deaths were attributed to dentition. Intemperance.—8 deaths were caused by intemperance. Poison.—2 deaths were caused by poisoning. Accidents from Burning caused 3 deaths. Suffocation, caused by overlaying, caused the death of 11 infants under 1 year of age. Drowning caused 17 deaths. Fractures and Contusions caused 9 deaths. Natural Causes.—1 death, of an infant under 1 year was attributed to natural causes by a Coroner's jury. Indefinite.—1 death was attributed to Haemorrhage, 2 to Dropsy, 1 to Abscess, and 1 to Ulcer. Included in the above-mentioned deaths are those on which Inquests were held, which amount to the number of 75. The following verdicts were returned :— Drowning 17 Heart Disease 11 Suffocation 9 Pneumonia 6 Convulsions 5 Bronchitis 3 Fractured Skull 3 Fractured Ribs 3 Apoplexy 2 Shock to System 2 Burns 2 Poisoning (Oxalic Acid) 2 „ (Alcohol) 1 Prematurity 1 Accidental Haemorrhage 1 Natural Causes 1 51 o Eupture of Aneurism of Aorta 1 Congenital Debility 1 Found Dead 1 Phthisis 1 Meningitis 1 Bright's Disease 1 In 24 cases the bodies were removed to the Mortuary. The following Infectious Diseases were notified during the year:— Scarlet Fever 69 Removed to Hospital 58 Diphtheria 35 „ „ 28 Membranous Croup 4 „ „ 4 Enteric Fever 10 „ „ 9 Puerperal Fever 2 Erysipelas 32 Under the Sanitary Inspector's supervision, the following works and matters connected with the sanitary administration of the District have been carried out:— TABLE OF CONVICTIONS. 1891. Magistrate. ???eglecting to reconstruct Drains Exposing for sale unsound Vegetables Mar. 13 Mr. Slade. Fined £1 & 2/- costs Fined £10 & 2/- costs „ „ „ ???neglecting to periodically remove Manure Mar. 9 „ Fined £10 & 2/- costs Fined £8 & 2/- costs ???ixposing for sale unsound Vegetables April 9 Mr. Kennedy. Fined £3 & £1 3/- ???obstruction of Footway May 15 „ costs Fined £1 & 3/'- costs ???feglecting to reconstruct Drains, &c. „ 28 „ Fined £15 17/6 & 6/costs ???.dulteration of Milk June 3 Mr. Marsham. Fined £5 & 12/6 costs „ „ „ 3 „ Fined £5 & 12/6 costs „ „ „ 10 „ Fined £2 & 12/6 costs ???Ixposing for sale unsound Vegetables „ 3 „ Fined £2 & 2/- costs ???Ldulteration of Gin „ 18 „ Fined £4 & 12/6 costs ,, Whiskey „ 18 „ Fined £5 & 12/6 costs ,, Coffee „ 18 „ Fined £5 & 12/6 costs ,, Butter „ 18 „ Fined £1 & 12/6 costs „ „ 18 „ Fined £1 & 12/6 costs ???bstructing Footway July 30 „ Fined 10/- & 2/- costs ???Neglecting to comply with Notices Sept. 10 Mr. Slade. Fined £40 10/- „ „ „ „ 18 „ Fined £6 15/- ???Jelling Margarine without Label 24 „ Fined £2 & 12/6 costs ???Adulteration of Milk „ 24 „ Fined 10/ & 12/6 costs „ „ „ „ 24 „ Fined 10/ & 12/6 costs ???jelling Margarine without Label „ 24 „ Fined 10/ & 12/6 costs ???Adulterating Gin Oct. 8 Mr. Fenwick. Fined £5 & 12/6 costs ,, Whiskey „ 15 yy Fined £5 & 12/6 costs „ „ „ Dec. 3 Mr. Slade. Fined £5 & 12/6 costs 52 TABLE OF NUISANCES, WORKS AND OTHER MATTERS ATTENDED TO DURING THE YEAR 1891. Jan. Feb. Mar. Apl. May June July Aug. Sept. Oct. Nov. Dec. Nuisance Complaints received and attended to 13 7 6 11 14 6 13 3 11 5 10 10 Notices Served 77 61 87 36 38 16 107 62 58 49 89 136 Premises Inspected 83 88 24 45 37 77 82 57 39 33 61 58 Inspection of Works during progress 111 98 147 S3 112 206 124 114 120 80 72 60 Drains Trapped with Syphon Traps 53 67 48 51 79 45 43 31 32 25 53 27 Drains Reconstructed with Stoneware Socketed Pipes (foot) 810 440 600 950 1200 1100 245 361 270 290 300 210 Drains (Old Brick) Abolished (in feet) 110 300 250 290 580 500 100 125 140 90 200 130 Drains Laid to New Houses (in feet) • •• ... ... 120 58 70 ... 65 ... ... 80 • •• W.C.'s reconstructed 3 1 13 22 18 37 22 18 12 15 27 19 Drains Unstopped 7 4 2 5 4 4 3 8 4 5 11 7 Water Laid on to W.C.'s 18 5 15 23 21 40 23 15 12 18 20 14 W.C.'s Cleansed and Limewashed 18 13 6 29 18 39 37 27 35 29 27 38 W.C.'s Repaired • •• 1 6 21 30 27 17 4 13 11 9 12 W.C.'s Rebuilt ... • • • 12 7 5 13 ... 4 ... 8 ... ... Wash-houses Cleansed and Limewashed 11 15 22 47 42 58 18 23 19 27 35 42 Dwelling Rooms Cleansed, Limewashed and Repapered 28 13 51 185 13S 160 51 60 33 47 23 39 Yards Cleansed and Limewashed 38 25 21 32 35 38 22 29 24 35 47 58 Yards Paved and Drained • • • ... ... 25 43 39 32 2S 19 22 40 37 Dust Bins provided 3 10 21 27 28 98 9 17 15 21 30 22 Dust Bins repaired ... ... ... 13 11 18 13 7 4 6 10 8 W.C. Flush Pipes Disconnected from Domestic Water Supply 1 ... ... 7 5 14 18 7 11 14 22 25 Sink Wastes Disconnected from Drain ... ... ... 11 13 21 4 2 9 7 15 12 Cellars Cleansed and Limewashed 5 ... 2 3 7 10 15 6 3 8 4 ... Cellars Drained • • • ... ... 2 3 5 1 3 ... 2 ... Cellar Dwellings Closed • • • ... 2 6 4 ... 2 3 4 ... ... 2 Cellars Paved • . . ... 2 5 3 4 2 3 5 Cellar Gratings Reinstated 1 3 ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... Cesspools Cleansed and Filled in ... ... ... 3 8 2 ... 7 ... ... 4 53 TABLE OF NUISANCES, WORKS AND OTHER MATTERS ATTENDED TO DURING THE YEAR 1891—(continued.) Jan. Feb. Mar. Apl. May Juno July Aug. Sept Oct. Nov. Dec. Cases of Infectious Disease, Visits paid 9 12 5 6 10 3 18 15 9 12 15 19 Nuisances from Overcrowding Abated 1 2 • •• 5 3 6 3 ... 2 ... ... 5 Roofs and Gutters Repaired 6 4 ... • •• 4 12 14 9 18 22 45 67 Additional W.C.'s provided 1 ... ... 4 6 2 3 2 2 5 1 • •• D Traps Abolished 5 ... ... 3 7 9 9 7 4 • • • 12 11 Pan Container Closets Abolished • •• • •• • •• 6 4 2 3 4 4 ••• 12 9 Soil Pipes and Drains Ventilated • •• • •• • • • 4 12 22 18 11 7 6 19 15 Houses Repaired Throughout 10 2 6 5 33 56 23 18 9 11 42 47 W.C. Pans Cleansed 4 • • • ... 2 11 5 9 20 1 4 11 19 Defective W.C. Pans Reinstated 2 2 5 10 8 11 4 7 12 3 5 11 W.C. Fittings Repaired 27 33 25 22 42 27 11 15 4 7 16 22 Applications for Removal of House Refuse 159 47 64 61 42 57 37 32 29 30 31 39 W.C.'s Unstopped 3 6 4 1 3 4 • • • 1 3 ... 1 4 Notification of Infectious Disease Reported to School Board 8 11 5 6 9 3 9 11 8 9 11 10 Rooms Disinfected after Cases of Infectious Disease 10 11 4 6 5 4 11 12 8 8 12 11 Clothing, &c. ditto ditto (by Dry Heat) 172 118 25 56 63 42 94 111 83 85 131 143 Bedding, &c., Destroyed • • • 3 10 34 • • • 4 • • • • • • ... ... ... ... Animals Removed, Pigs ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ditto Rabbits ... 4 16 12 22 17 4 ... 18 ... j 7 6 ditto Fowls 4 12 26 30 29 34 22 ... ... 11 15 Accumulation of Refuse, &c., Removed ... 5 2 1 4 2 1 3 ... ... ... 2 Manure Pits Provided 3 ... 1 ... 2 ... ... 2 2 ... 1 4 Areas Drained ... ... 4 2 3 2 ... ... ... 2 ... ... Courts, &c., Repaved ... 1 1 ... 2 1 ... ... 1 2 1 Wash-houses Paved 1 ... ... 10 7 12 10 5 5 ... 18 26 Cisterns Abolished 1 ... 1 7 3 8 12 7 9 3 11 21 Cisterns Provided with Covers ... ... ... 6 12 11 2 9 3 7 11 Cisterns Cleansed ... ... 1 9 4 7 4 12 1 3 4 15 Obstructions Removed ... 4 3 ... 2 11 1 3 1 4 3 2 54 UNSOUND FOOD SEIZED AND CONDEMNED. Turnips, 112 bags. Turnip Tops, 180 bags. 77 bunches of Greens. Onions, 5 cases and 77 bags. 2 crates of Cauliflowers. I am, Gentlemen, Your obedient Servant, JAMES HEREON, M.D., Medical Officer of Health. 55 PUBLIC ANALYST'S REPORT. For the year ending Midsummer, 1892. TO THE BOARD OF WORKS FOR THE ST. SAVIOUR'S DISTRICT. Gentlemen, I beg to report that during the past year I have analysed 127 samples of food, drink and drugs, and 4 samples of water. The former consisted of:— No. of Samples. Brandy 6 Butter 8 Coffee 13 Condensed Milk 1 Eucalyptus Oil l Gin 14 Lard 2 Milk 56 Mustard 2 Pepper 5 Seidlitz Powders 2 Whiskey 17 127 All the Samples of Lard, Mustard and Pepper were genuine. Brandy.—4 samples were genuine, and respectively 14¾, 18¼, 18½ and 23½ degrees under proof. Two samples were diluted, being 28 and 29 degrees under proof, respectively. Butter.—Three samples were genuine, and five were Margarine, i.e., mixtures of fats containing varying per centages of butter, from practically none to 35 per cent. Coffee—11 samples were genuine, 1 contained 35per cent, of Chicory; 1 contained a mere trace of Chicory. In the last case the Chicory was no doubt accidentally introduced in grinding the Coffee, as the proportion too trifling to have been purposely added. 56 Condensed Milk.—The one sample I received consisted of skimmed milk (five-sixths of the butter-fat having been extracted), condensed to about one-third of its original volume, with the addition of 45 per cent, of cane sugar. Such milk is unfit for nursery use, and is certainly not cheaper than an equivalent quantity of fresh skim-milk. The tin containing the sample was labelled “Prepared from skimmed milk.” Eucalyptus Oil.—The sample received was a fair specimen of this vegetable oil. This article varies considerably in quality, and so far no definite standard of strength has been fixed. Gin.—8 samples were genuine, and of the strength shown below:— 1 sample was 26° u.p. 1 „ 30¼° „ 1 „ 31¼° „ 1 „ 34¼„ 4 samples were 35° ,, respectively. Four samples were diluted below the legal strength, viz.:— to 37°, 38°, 40° and 44° u.p., respectively. Two samples were very slightly diluted, being 353° and 36½° u.p. respectively. This trifling extra dilution was probably accidental. Milk.—Of 56 samples 42 were genuine and of varying quality. The adulterated samples were as follows:— One sample contained 18% added water (also deficient in butter-fat 65%). 1 sample contained 17% added water 1 „ „ 6% ,, 3 „ „ 5% 3 ,, ,, 4% water beyond the average also 2 samples were deficient in fat 25% 1 sample was ,, ,, 30% 2 samples were ,, ,, 15% Of these, the 3 samples containing 4% water and the 2 samples deficient in fat, 15% must be classed as possibly genuine but very poor milks. Seidlitz Powders.—One sample (labelled “extra strong”) was approximately of the correct strength, but the other (labelled “The improved seidlitz powders”; was almost exactly half the proper strength. The improvement, therefore, is not very obvious, except for the fact that the price charged for the powders was also half that of the stronger article. 57 Whiskey.— Seven samples were genuine and of the strength given below, viz.:— 1 sample was L8¼° u p. 1 „ „ 20¼° 1 „ „ 21° „ 1 „ „ 220 „ 1 „ „ 230 „ 1 „ „ 240 „ 1 „ „ 25° ,, Six sampler were decidedly diluted, being respectively 43°, 33°, 29¾° , 28¾° , 28° , and 27° u.p. Four samples were very slightly diluted, brim: respectively 26¾°, 26½°, 26°, and 25½° u.p. In the last four cases the extra dilution was, no doubt, accidental. Summary.— Excluding the doubtful samples of milk, condensed milk, and slightly diluted spirits, the adulterated samples amount to 28 out of 127 (22 per cent.). Out of 56 milks, 9 (16 percent.) were either skimmed or watered; and out of 37 samples of spirits, 12 (33 per cent.) was decidedly diluted. Waters. In October last, at the request of your Sanitary Committee, I analysed two samples of water, one from the Southwark and Vauxhall Company's Main and one from that of the Lambeth Company. I reported fully thereon, and the report was printed and circulated. In that report I stated that, in my opinion, the Lambeth Company's sample was (for a river wateri of average purity, while that of the Southwark and Yauxhall Company was inferior, and might well be improved by more perfect filtration. In July, I again analysed samples from each supply and found both samples to be of fairly good quality, an improvement being apparent in both cases, more especially in the case of the Southwark and Vauxhall Company's water. It is only fair, however, to state that the October analyses were made at a time when the river was in flood, while the analyses made last month represented the river after somewhat dry weather. I am, Gentlemen, Faithfully yours, Analytical Laboratory, R.BODMER. 16, Southwark Street. 12th August, 1892. 58 59 THE BOARD OF WORKS FO HE ST. SAVIOURS DISTRICT. ABSTRACT OF ACCOUNTS, from 5th March, 1891, to 25th March, 1892. RECEIPTS. PAYMENTS. £ s. d. £ s. £ s. d. £ s. d. To Balance from last Year- Treasurer's Account 2,526 13 4 EDUCATION RATE. Labour and Petty Cash a/c 21 17 10 hool Hoard for London, Amount Precepts, dated 5th January, 1891 7,290 10 7 Cash in hand 3 11 8 25 9 6 tto dated 9th .July. 1891 7,868 l 1 2,552 2 15,158 11 8 EDUCATION RATE. PUBLIC DRAINAGE. Overseers, St. Saviour 10,012 19 3 are & Son (Contractors), 1 year to 25th December 475 16 2 ,, Christchurch 5,289 14 8 15,302 13 Uuthwark and Vauxhall Water Company, Water for Flushing 3 2 6 SEWER RATE. Overseers, St. Saviour 794 0 0 mbeth Water Company ditto 8 5 0 aller & Company, Iron Work for Sewers 3 8 6 ,, Christchurch 425 0 0 raller & Company, Iron Work for bewers ans ditto 23 16 5 1,219 0 BOVPl* Oil &c., 5 11 5 GENERAL PURPOSES RATE. tnrk 4 17 0 Overseers. St. Saviour 7,682 0 0 an/l & Mason 1 15 0 „ Christchurch 3,320 0 0 B CV11 U IV ill CVOv li •.. ••• ••• ... krrett <fc Son, Sewer Rods, &c. 4 14 1 11,002 0 551 6 1 PUBLIC CHALET. PRIVATE DRAINAGE. Fees 405 2 care Son, Contractors, 1 year to 25th Dec. 128 7 1 URINALS. ftrious Persons, Balance Drainage Deposits, returaned 14 13 5 Macfarlane & Co. 2 18 143 0 6 CONTRIBUTION. CHALET. London County Council, Moiety Salary Medical Officer 100 0 uthwark and Vauxhall Water Company, Water Supply 8 7 5 RENT. nes Plumbers Work 4 3 0 City of London Electric Lighting Co., Limited, Way-leave to Christmas 25 0 0 bare & Son Paintnig and Repairs 48 15 0 llivont- Paper 2 0 6 Mrs. Humphery, Rent Charge on Arches under Southern Approach to London Bridge, 1 year to 3rd April (less Tax) 19 7 3 ooks, Wsmhing Towels 11 0 11 atter, Printing Tickets 15 19 0 eaver, Sundries 5 17 4 Various persons, Sundry Small Rents 4 13 9 49 6 indries... 0 16 6 96 19 8 Carried forward £30,633 21 Carried forward £15,929 17 11 60 61 Brought forward £30,633 21 Brough forward £15,929 17 11 URINALS. PAVING. arlane & Co. 46 14 0 Brush Electrical Engineering Co., Limited 127 17 10 wark and Vauxhall Water Company. Water Supply 36 18 3 London Electric Supply Co., Limited 85 5 9 Postal Telegraph Department 1 1 3 beth Water Company, Water Supply 19 4 8 Hydraulic Power Co. 88 10 9 nes, Plumbers Work 27 9 9 Southwark & Vauxhall Water Co. 64 5 9 & Wimpey 0 10 0 Lambeth Water Co. 31 11 9 130 16 8 PAVING. South Metropolitan Gas Co. 143 0 10 iel, Contractor, Jobbing Works 348 12 11 George Newton 7 10 0 „ York Stone 257 16 2 Williams, Son A Wallington 1 6 0 „ Ballast, Cartage, &c. 16 3 6 Voss 2 16 0 hts, Wood Paving Blocks 784 2 3 Sadler, Firth A Ross 0 10 0 Son, Lime 98 15 2 Sale Wood Blocks 6 15 6 dem & Co., Works, Borough High Street 1,343 6 0 555 11 am Ballast, &c. 436 18 1 DEPOSITS. de Travers Asphalte Company 17 12 11 ner Asphalte Company 315 8 5 Various persons on making Private tions with Sewers 223 6 4 ers 8 1 6 beth Vestry re Stamford Street 31 15 9 Ditto, on erection of Hoardings, &c. 82 17 6 eler, on account 500 0 0 306 3 gon & Co. 1 4 0 LOANS. 4,159 16 8 SCAVENGING AND DUSTING. London County Council 2,800 0 bs 1,967 1 6 INTEREST. eley Bros. A Co., Limited 2,251 10 0 4,218 11 6 WATERING. London & County Bank, Interest on Current Account 51 6 hwark and Vauxhall Water Company, Water for Roads 200 0 0 SANITARY. elev Bros. A Co.. Ltd.. Water Carts, &c. 400 0 0 600 0 0 Metropolitan Asylums Board, rees re Infectious Disease (Notification Act) 18 7 LIGHTING. h Metropolitan Gas Company, l year to 25th December 1,958 4 10 SUNDRIES. LABOUR. Fines out of Court (per Inspector Grist) 107 3 0 of Labourers, 1 year to 25th March 1,755 5 2 Isaacs & Son, Old Iron 18 11 8 PLANT, IMPLEMENTS, &c. B. E. Nightingale, Altering-Gateway 1 1 0 iey A Co. 140 19 0 Keevil, Reinstating Lamp 1 5 0 y, Son A Jones 62 7 3 Other small items 0 6 6 n 4 4 6 128 7 ton 1 12 0 er 1 16 3 bev ... 3 10 6 er & Sons 1 17 6 hrs • 1 17 6 hd,Mason & co. 2 0 0 ll item 0 14 7 233 1 7 Carried forward 34,492 19 Carried forward £28,985 13 4 62 63 Brought forward £34,492 £ Brought forward £28,985 13 4 REPAIRS. f re & Son 124 12 5 le 14 1 0 Jones 8 2 9 Jones 8 2 9 nd, Mason & Co. 1 5 0 .bn 6 0 0 k & Co. 5 3 0 filer & Co. 0 3 3 teller & Co. 1 10 9 163 3 7 SALARYS AND WAGES. aries 1,273 10 0 ges 265 0 0 1 538 10 0 RENT AND INSURANCE. rehwardens St. Saviour's, 1 year's Rent of Offices to 25th December (less Property Tax and Insurance) 85 6 4 th Eastern Railway Co., 1 year's Rent, Stone Yard, to 25th Dec. (less tax) 98 8 3 urance Office Furniture 0 8 0 184 2 7 RATES AND TAXES 62 8 10 PRINTING, STATIONERY, &c. nnings 52 12 6 & Co. 4 16 9 ginshaw & Co. 17 8 0 akley . 4 14 6 terlow Bros. & Layton 12 18 3 wett 21 9 6 livant 0 13 0 tter 6 19 0 rlor 0 9 3 r\ eriock 0 5 0 122 5 9 OFFICE EXPENSES. ere & Son 248 18 2 olyne &c Young 63 17 0 ffith & Son 9 0 0 insford & Co. 16 13 4 Brotf 2 14 0 ainpion Gas Light Company 7 15 0 lls & Son 10 7 0 10 7 0 Carried forward £34,492 1' man derson 1 13 6 Carried forward £390 18 0 £31,056 4 1 64 65 Brought forward £34,492 1 Brought forward £390 18 0 £31,056 4 1 oksey 1 1 0 mley 3 7 5 kson 1 10 3 rne & Hinton 7 19 0 and & Peters 8 2 0 st 7 7 0 kridge 2 5 9 colf 3 18 0 dical Officer, Sundries 1 3 11 Trvoyor, ditto 9 9 4½ nsekeeper 11 9 0 lylor & Co. 19 19 0 ited Telephone Company 20 0 0 vertisements 36 12 7 adidates for Inspectorship, &c. 5 2 0 Istage Stamps and Sundries 8 7 6½ 538 11 10 LOANS. ndon County Council, Interest 9 2 9 to nstalment Princinal 200 0 0 292 2 9 ,LAW & PARLIAMENTARY EXPENSES. Indon County Council 18 4 0 Icklin, Washington Si Pasmore 62 15 2 Ipburn, Son Si Cutliff 0 10 4 1 Parker 2 2 0 83 11 6 SANITARY. pitas Co., Disinfectants 20 15 0 IDougall Bros., ditto 6 5 0 rd, Thompson Si Co. 5 11 8 artality Returns 13 14 4 A dmer 4 4 r 0 o arp 1 7 9 jchti 2 18 4 Jone 1 17 3 niell 3 0 0 light Si Co., Forms 1 5 6 lectious Disease (Notification) Act, Fees 14 5 6 mdry Expenses of Disinfecting 21 5 0 ashing Towels, Mortuary 0 8 0 fcdries 2 19 8 upector Grist—Petty Cash £40 0 0 „ Broadhead „ 3 0 0 43 0 0 142 17 0 Carried forward £34,492 19 Carried forward £32,113 7 2 66 67 Brought forward £34,492 19 Brough forward 32,113 7 2 HOARDINGS, &c. alanco Deposits Returned 21 12 3 SUNDRIES. uthwark and Vauxhall Water Company 4 10 0 linking Fountain Association 1 5 0 ibbey, Bottles for Samples 1 14 0 ailey, Pegg &Co., Ironwork 2 8 7 arantee Society Premiums 3 0 0 he Never-Rust Iron Company 5 14 9 Gubbs, Cartage 10 2 6 ugden, Hose 1 0 3 leek A Co. 2 8 0 opy Acts of Parliament, Ac. 6 5 0 akiley Brothers &Co., Limited 1 0 0 amp Duty 1 6 4 her Small Items 1 3 9 41 18 2 alance at Bank 2,291 12 10 eque not presented 4 14 1 2,286 18 9 alance, (Petty Cash) 25 1 1 ash in hand 4 1 8 29 2 9 2,316 1 6 £34,492 19 £34,492 19 1 68 69 Account showing the application of the Receipts and Paym in the foregoin Abstract, to the various Ratal Accounts GENERAL PURROSS RATE. Dr. Cr. £ s. £ s. d. To Returning Officer School Board for London 102 16 BY Receipts from General Purposes Rate 13,322 0 0 ,, Paving Carriageways and Footways 4,655 5 ,, Interest on Bank Account 50 9 8 ,, Scavenging and Dusting 4,517 11 ,, Sundries 27 2 10 ,, Watering 600 0 ,, Drainage Deposits 208 12 11 ,, Lighting 1,956 4 ,, Hoardings Deposits 61 5 3 ,, Labour and Wages 1,677 4 ,, Balance 1,826 11 8 ,, Tools and Implements 112 17 ,,Repairs 118 8 ,, Interest on Loans Paving Purposes 111 7 ,, Law and Parliamentary 83 11 ,, Sanitary 81 9 „ Superannuation 17 2 ,, Two-thirds Establishment Expenses 1,462 2 £15,496 2 £15,496 2 4 SEWE RATE. £ s. £ s. d. To Sewer and Drainage Work 467 0 By Receipts from Sewers Rate 1,219 0 0 ,, Private Drainage Connections 130 9 , Chalet 298 6 11 ,, Urinals 125 7 , Balance 123 11 1 ,,Wages 187 0 ,, One-third Establishment Expenses 731 1 £1,640 18 £1,640 18 0 ESTABLISHMEN XPENSES. £ s. £ s. d. To Salaries 1,214 0 General Purposes Rale,2/3of Total 1,462 2 6 „ Wages 78 0 Sewers Rate, 1/3f Total 731 1 3 ,, Rent and Insurance 119 11 ,, Rates and Taxes 62 8 ,, Printing and Stationery 169 5 ,, Office Expenses 549 17 £2,193 3 £2,193 3 9 70 71 I certify that I have examined the Accounts of the St. Saviour's District Board of Works for the year ending 25th March, 1892. I have seen and checked all the vouchers for payments, and ascertained the correctness o he balance with the Treasurer, and, in my opinion, the above Statement is correct. WALTER W. FEAST, F.C.A., St. George's House, Eastcheap, London, E.G. 4th May, 1892. Statement of Account showing the ascertained or estimatesets and Libabilities of the Board on 25th March 1892. ASSETS. LIABILITIES. £ s. d. £ s. d. Amount due from Overseers of St. Saviour's— Education Rate 2,425 15 3 hool Board for London 3.7911 17 8 General Purposes Rate 1,000 0 0 pndon County Council— Amount due from Overseers of Christchurch— Loans repayable by Instalments and Interest 4,233 5 0 Education Rate 1,296 2 5 n dry Creditors 3,919 8 0 General Purposes Rate 1,320 0 0 London County Council 50 0 0 Cash Balance with Treasurer 2,286 18 9 Petty Cash at Bank and in hand 29 2 1 Interest due on Bank Account 15 13 9 Chalet Fees in hand 8 6 1 Rents due 41 0 0 Sundry Debtors 145 2 8 Balance 3,256 8 i Balance 26/3/91 1,306 5 6 Balance of General Purposes Rate 25/3/92 1,826 11 8 Balance of Sewers Rate, 25/3/92 123 11 1 £11874 10 £11,874 10 8 72 73 PUBLIC CONVENIENCES at End of Southwark Street, Borough. Account of Receipts and E.rpendt for the year ending 25th March. 1892 Dr. Cr. £ s. d. £ s. £ s. d. To Fees received for use of Closets and Lavatories, viz.: By South Metropolitan Gas Company, 4 Quarters' Lighting 31 2 3 ,, Southwark and Vauxhall Water Company, 4 Quarters' Water Supply 8 7 5 MEN'S DEPARTMENT. Quarter to 24th June 77 7 5 ,, Sundries, viz.:— £ s. d. „ 29th September 110 0 6 Hoare & Son, Painting and Repairs 48 15 3 „ 25th December 77 18 10 Brooks, Washing Towels 11 0 11 „ 25th March 65 17 0 Slatter, Printing Tickets, &c 15 19 0 331 3 Cleaver, Soap and Sundries 5 17 4 WOMEN'S DEPARTMENT. Withers, Combs 0 6 0 Bullivant, Paper 2 0 6 Jones, Plumbers' Work 4 3 0 Quarter to 24th June 16 8 1 Jenings, Bag 0 10 6 „ 29th September 22 15 5 Other Small Items 1 10 6 „ 25th December 14 11 4 90 3 0 „ 25th March 13 0 4 ,, Wages of Attendants, 52 weeks:— 66 15 Men's Department 105 6 8 Women's ditto 84 16 0 190 2 8 ,, Balance 78 3 6 £397 18 £397 18 10 —1 CONTRACTS IN FORCE ON 25th MARCH, 1892. Name of Contractor. Nature of Contract. Term. Amount. Hoare & Son Sewer and Drainage Works 3 years from 25th March, 1891 At Prices named in printed Schedule of Prices. Tomes & Wimpey Supply of York Paving Stone and Granite Kerb 1 year from 25th March, 1892 Ditto. William Stubbs Supply of Thames Ballast and Sand 1 year from 25th March, 1892 Ditto. WakeleyBros. & Co., Ltd. Ditto Scavenging and Dusting Watering 3 years from 24th June, 1891 Ditto to end of 1894 £4,500 per annum. £475 per annum. Limmer Asphalte Paving Company, Limited Repave and Repair Footway on East side of Borough High Street 10 years from 24th April, 1891 5/6 per superficial yard. COPY AUDITORS' CERTIFICATE. We, the undersigned Auditors of Accounts appointed by the Board of Works for tho Saint Saviour's District to audit the Accounts of the said Board of Works for the financial year which ended on the 25th March, 1892, Do Hereby certify that we have investigated such Accounts, and the same are, to the best of our knowledge and belief, correct. (Signed) JOHN DYer FIKLD Dated the 29th day of May, 1892. JOHN ADAMS, Atlilltors THE FOLLOWING CONTRACTS HAVE SINCE BEEN ENTERED INTO. Name of Contractor. Nature of Contract. Term. Amount. Limmer Asphalte Paving Company, Limited To Pave with Asphalte such Streets as may be ordered during the year 1892 10 years from date of completion of the works respectively 7/6 per superficial yard. The Board of Works for St. Saviour's District To Cleanse the Borough Market 3 years from 24th June, 1892 £550 per annum. The Board of Works for the Strand District To receive the Refuse from the Borough Market 1 year from 24th June, 1892 2/4 per ton. 75 BOARD OF WORKS FOR THE ST. SAVIOURS DISTRICT. NAMES AND ADDRESSES OF MEMBERS. ST. SAVIOUR, S.E. Ayling, Ernest 38, Borough High Street. •Baxter, Fredk. South Eastern Wharf, Park Street. Blatchford, R. H. 39, Bankside. Castle, Henry 97a, Southwark Bridge Road. Coles, H. J. 89, Sumner Street, Southwark Bridge Road Daveny, T8, Park Street. Doyle, J. M 18 &c 19, Newcomen Street. - Fry, H. J. Spur Inn Yard, Borough High Street. Gilson, R. A 180, Union Street, Borough. • Gregory, Henry 75, Borough High Street. Grattan, H. H. G 16, Borough High Street. Hayward, Jas 26, Borough High Street. Johnson, Robt. 50a, Southwark Bridge Road. Layman, A. R. 1, Denman Street. Levy, Emanuel 5, Stoney Street, Borough Market. Matthews, J. 53, Borough High Street. Meikle, Jas 57, Southwark Street. Morris, H. 8, Stoney Street, Borough Market -Newton, G. J. 92, Union Street. Nicholl, A. H. 13, Southwark Bridge Road. •Osmond, John. 5, Borough Market. ' Rose, J. S. 17, Borough High Street. Sinclair, James. 65, Southwark Street. Wood, Henry 41 to 57, Southwark Bridge Road. CHRISTCHURCH, S.E. Back, Thos. 27, Stamford Street. Burtou, B 82, Blackfriars Road. Carter, W 40, Charlotte Street, Blackfriars Road. Cooper, J. 207, Blackfriars Road. Gibbs, W. 16, Blackfriars Road. Henley, Charles 188, Blackfriars Road. Hopkins, William 50, Nelson Square, Blackfriars Road. Hurwood, E Cross Street, Blackfriars Road. Morgan, R. 213, Blackfriars Road. Rawle, J. 231, Blackfriars Road. Ridley, Henry 6, Great Charlotte Street. Robertson, W 209 & 210, Blackfriars Road. Snook, George 51, Blackfriars Road. Young, Alfred 55, Stamford Street. OFFICERS. Asurer ' Stowell, Charles Edwd., Manager, London and County Bank, Southwark Branch. Medical Officer Herron, Dr. Jas., 73, Southwark Bridge Road, S.E. aK Atkins, William H., Springfield House, Cambridge Rd., Ted- Analyst Bodmer, Richard, F.I.C., 12, Southwark Street, S.E. Veryor dington, S.W. Norrish, G. R., Hawley House, Tudor Road, Upper Norwood, S.E. wQ tenn w 17 Sanitary Inspector and Inspector. under Sale of Food &c., Act Grist, A. A., 3, Emerson Street, Bankside, S.E. eyor's istant >Y EtUbUll, iCiCj VY . j 1 I ) Harrington Road, South Norwood, S.E. Ditto ditto Broadhead, Samuel, 2, Nelson Square. Blackfriars Road, I S.E. Rk's stant ; Colo, F. T., 47, Finborough Road, Earl's Court. S.W.