Metropolis Local Management Act. BOARD OF WORKS FOR THE ST. SAVIOUR'S DISTRICT. THE THIRTY-FOURTH ANNUAL REPORT, BEING FOR THE YEAR 1889-90. LONDON: PRINTED BY KEMPSELL & BRIGINSHAW, 128, SOUTHWARK STREET, S.E. mdcccxc. Board of Works for the St. Saviour's District. LIST OF MEMBERS OF STANDING COMMITTEES. PAVING GENERAL PURPOSES COMMITTEE. HALE, JOSIAH, Chairman. CLARK, JAS. COLES, H. J. ECKSTEIN, WILLIAM GILSON, R. A. GOODWIN, ARNOLD HENLEY, CHARLES KEITH, ALEX. J. MILLS, JOHN PALMER, JOHN RIDER, T. F. SANITARY COMMITTEE. HUNT, RICHARD, Chairman. BLATCHFORD, R. II. DYKES, JAS. GREGORY, HENRY HAWKINS, JAMES H. HILL, W. E. RHODES, J. G., (L.C.C.) SINCLAIR, JAS. STUNT, OCTAVIUS SEWERS COMMITTEE. CLOAKE, W. J. Chairman. BACK, T. BURTON, B. CARTER, W. HOPKINS. WILLIAM NEWTON, GEO. J. PINNER, J. RIDEAL, ALFRED . SNOOK, GEORGE. WILLIAMS, CHARLES FINANCE COMMITTEE. BAXTER, F., Chairman. BOWERS, R. W. BRIDGMAN, T. It. COOPER, J. FRY, H. J. KINNELL, C. P. RIDLEY, HENRY ROBERTSON, W. Board of Works for the St. Saviour's District. REPORT OF PROCEEDINGS OF THE BOARD FOR THE YEAR 1889-90, BY THE CLERK, SURVEYOR, ANALYSTS, MEDICAL OFFICER AND INSPECTOR OF NUISANCES. Also Account in Abstract of Sums received and expended by the Board during the same period. Printed in accordance with Section 198 of the Metropolis Local Management Act (18 and 19 Vict.,cap. 120), and ordered to he circulated among the inhabitants of the District. Main Roads The London County Council has not taken any steps to carry out the provisions of the Local Government Act, 1888, and of the Highways and Locomotives' Act, 1878, relative to main roads (mentioned in the last Annual Report), and lately, in reply to the application of this Board for certain thoroughfares to be declared " main roads " within the meaning of the Act, the Board has received a letter stating that "the Council is of opinion that there is not probable cause for such application and declines to accede to it." Inquiry has been made of other Vestries and District Boards, and it appears from the answers that in all cases a similar reply has been received The communication may, therefore, be regarded in the nature of a circular-letter. 4 Notification of Infectious Disease. The Infectious Disease (Notification) Act came into operation on the 31st Oct., 1889. This Act provides (inter alia) that where an inmate of any building, ship, vessel, boat, tent, van, shed, or similar structure, used for human habitation, is suffering from any of the infectious diseases following, viz.—smallpox, cholera, diphtheria, membranous croup, erysipelas, scarletina, scarlet fever or typhus, typhoid, enteric, relapsing, continued, or puerperal fever, then (except in the case of hospitals) the head of the family to which such inmate belongs, and in his default, the nearest relatives of the patient present in the building or being in attendance on the patient, and in default of such relatives, every person in charge of or in attendance on the patient, and in default of any such person, the occupier of the building, must, as soon as he becomes aware that the patient is suffering from an infectious disease to which the Act applies, send notice to the Medical Officer of Health for the district. The expression "occupier" includes a person having the charge, management, or control of a building, or of the part of a building, in which the patient is, and in the case of a house the whole of which is let out in separate tenements, or in the case of a lodging-house the whole of which is let to lodgers, the person receiving the rent payable by the tenants or lodgers, either on his own account or as the agent of another person. The Act also provides that every medical practitioner attending on or called in to visit a patient must forthwith, on becoming aware that the patient is suffering from an infectious disease to which the Act applies, send to the Medical Officer of Health for the District a certificate stating the name of the patient, the situation of the building, and the infectious disease from which, in the opinion of such medical practitioner, the patient is suffering. Every person required to give a notice or certificate who fails to give the same is liable to a penalty of 40/With a view to making known the provisions of the Act, the Board, prior to its coming into force, caused postingbills to be exhibited and handbills to be circulated throughout the district containing a summary thereof, and cautioning 5 persons as to the penalties to which they will be liable for neglect. Advertising Rating Act. The Advertising Stations (Rating) Act, to amend the law with respect to rating places used for advertisements, received the Royal Assent on the 12th August, 1889, and, so far as its provisions refer to rating, the Overseers of the Poor are the responsible authorities. Section 5, however, provides (inter alia) that where a District Board of Works grants a license for the temporary erection of any hoarding, gantry, scaffold, or other structure upon or over any part of any public highway, or upon or over any lands or hereditaments the property of such Board, the Board may prohibit or may include in such license, a condition or conditions sanctioning the affixing of advertisements thereto upon payment of such sum as the Board may determine. The Board, after careful consideration of the provisions of the Act, resolved to sanction advertisements of the kind referred to upon payment by the licensees of fees according to the following scale or tariff of charges, and has divided the streets within the district under its jurisdiction, into first, second, and third class, for the purpose in view, viz:— Fikst Class. For each superficial yard of any hoarding, gantry or scaffold, per week 1½d. Second Class.— Do. do 1d. Third Class.— Do. do ½d. Builders and others requiring licenses tor hoardings, &c., can ascertain to which class the streets belong on application to the Surveyor of the Board. London Sub ways and Overhead Wires Bill This Bill, promoted by the London County Council, had for its objects to empower the Council to make subways under streets for the laying of pipes, wires, &c.; to make use of same and of existing subways in lieu of breaking up the surface of streets, and to control and regulate the use of overhead wires. The Board approved the provisions of the Bill; but, owing to the opposition which it encountered, it did not receive the sanction of the legislature. 6 London Tramways Bill. The Board also approved the provisions of a Bill promoted by the London Tramways Company to authorise the use of electrical or other mechanical power, other than steam power, on their tramways in lieu of horse traction. Public Health Consolidation Bill. In February last, the Local Government Board forwarded the draft of a Bill introduced by the Government for Consolidating the Laws Relating to Public Health, and invited the Board to make observations or suggestions in regard thereto. The object of the Bill, as its title implied, was to consolidate in one Act of Parliament the various provisions of the Nuisances Removal, Metropolis Management, Sanitary, &c., Acts, so far as they related to public health. The Board carefully considered the same, and, in reply, expressed an opinion that, inasmuch as the Acts in question were numerous and extended over a long period, it would be convenient to the local authorities and all persons concerned in their adminis tration, to have them brought together within the compass of a single Act of Parliament. South Eastern Railway Bill. In November a Parliamentary plan, with book of reference and gazette notice, was deposited by the South Eastern Railway Company, of proposed new railways, widenings, and extensions. The Bill for giving effect thereto was introduced in the House of Lords, and was entitled "An Act for conferring further powers upon the South Eastern Railway Company in connection with their own undertaking and those of other Companies, and for other purposes." The plan, &c., were referred to a Committee, who instructed the surveyor to make a report thereon, which he did, and from which it appeared that the Bill as drawn, taken in conjunction with the deposited plan and sections, was objectionable on the grounds following viz. : It would have sanctioned the construction of an arch across the Borough High Street in juxtaposition with the existing girder bridge, but at a lower level, the section relating thereto, showing a headway of 16 feet only above the carriage-way; also the construction of arches or bridges across Stoney Street and other streets in the vicinity of the Borough Market, at a lower level. Land to the north of Stoney Street was intended to be enclosed for a length of about 175 7 feet, whereby the roadway beneath the viaduct would have been darkened. The Bill contained no provisions for securing the free transit of vehicles in the Borough High Street or elsewhere during the execution of the works, or for lighting the thoroughfares, if darkened, or for preventing the percolation of water through the bridges, or for deadening the sound of passing trains, or for giving notice of and depositing detailed Plans and sections previous to the commencement of the works, or any special provisions for the protection of the district. The Board therefore resolved to oppose, and lodged a petition against the Bill, praying to be heard by counsel, agents, and witnesses in opposition thereto. The Bill came before a Select Committee of the House of Lords, of which Lord Kensington was Chairman, in April last, Mr. Balfour Browne, Q.C., and Mr. Rigg, appearing as Counsel on behalf of the Board. At an early stage the Engineer of the Company, Mr. Brady, in the course of his examination by Counsel, conceded the more important points as to height of bridges, &c., and agreed that the Borough High Street should be crossed by a girder bridge of the same description as the existing one, in lieu of an arch as described upon the deposited sections, and at the same elevation ; he also consented to the widening on the north side of Stoney Street being limited to 15 feet. After a considerable amount of argument, extending over several days, it was decided to allow similar clauses for the protection of the district to those which were inserted in the Company's New Lines and Widenings Act of 1882, so far as the same were applicable ; and also the insertion of clauses relative to the character and height of bridges but the control of the latter was given to the London County Council. The several clauses as finally settled were as under:— " Section 8 (Sub-section 2)—Notwithstanding anything in this Act or on the deposited plans and sections, where the bridges or works next hereinafter mentioned, are constructed under the powers of this Act over any street or road, there shall be left a clear headway throughout, above the existing surface of the street or road, and a clear span throughout measured on the 8 square in each case, not less than the headways and spans hereinafter mentioned (that is to say)— Parish Name of Road. No on deposited plan. Headway Span at right angles to Road Widening No 1. St. Saviour's South wark. Stoney Street 2 24 6 30 0 Church St. or York St. 20 23 0 40 0 Green Dragon Court 28 23 6 25 0 (Borough) High St. 24 Underside of new bridge to he level with underside of existing bdg. Same as span of existing bridge. Widening No. 2. Stoney Street 4 24 6 30 0 Widening No. 3. Green Dragon Court 8 23 6 25 0 (Borough) High St. 11 Underside of new bridge to be level with underside of existing bdg. same as span of existing bridge. " (3) All bridges, widenings, and works, constructed as aforesaid, shall be of the same construction and character as the existing bridge which they extend and they shall be made and maintained so as to prevent, as far as is practicable, the dripping of water therefrom on any part of any street or road, footway, area or forecourt, and so as to deaden, so far as is practicable, the sound of engines, carriages, and traffic passing over them. " Section 9.—Except where inconsistent with the enactments in this Act contained for the protection of the London County Council, the following provisions for the protection of the Board of Works for the St. Saviour's District (in this section called the 'St. Saviour's Board') shall have effect with respect to such part of the widening and works as arc to be constructed and made, and such of the powers of the Company as are to be exercised within the said district (that is to say)— " (1) The Company shall not commence the construction of any of the before-mentioned widenings, nor shall they breakup or disturb any road, street or place under the control or jurisdiction of the St. Saviour's Board, until they shall have given twenty-one days' notice in writing of their intention to commence the same; specifying the nature of the work to be done and the street intended to be broken-up and disturbed, to the surveyor of the St. Saviour's Board, and 3 left for him, at his office, plans, elevations, sections, and other necessary particulars of the construction of such wienings " (2) The Company shall repay to the St. Saviour's Board the cost of any extra lamps, including the expense of lighting and maintaining the same, which may, in the opinion of the St. Saviour's Board, be reasonably necessary for lighting any road or street crossed by suck widenings after the completion thereof; and the Company shall save harmless the said District against all and every expense to be occasioned thereby; and such work shall be done to the reasonable satisfaction of the surveyor of the St. Saviours Board, at the cost, charges, and expenses in all respects of the Company. "(3) In constructing the Widening (No. 1) by this Act authorised, the width of the said widening, where the same crosses Stoney Street, shall not exceed 15 feet, measured at right angles to the line of railway. " (4) If any dispute or difference of opinion shall arise between the Company and the St. Saviour's Board touching the reasonableness of any of the requirements of any surveyor acting for the St. Saviour's Board, such dispute or difference of opinion shall be referred to the arbitration of an engineer to appointed by the Board of Trade, in manner provided by the Railway Companies' Arbitration Act, 1859." On the Bill reaching the lower House, the Company refusing to give any undertaking not to alter or interfere with the clauses which had been inserted by the Lords, it was resolved to present a petition to the House of Commons praying that no alteration might be made in any of the clauses. Mr. Rigg appealed as counsel on behalf of the Board to watch its progress ; but no alteration was attempted, and the clauses now stand as part of the Bill. On the application of the London County Council, the Fire Escape Board, in November last, sanctioned the placing of a fire escape and watch-box at the junction of Sumner Street and Great Guildford Street. In April last, a circular-letter was received from the Vestry water of St. James, Westminster, on the subject of Metropolitan Water Supply, forwarding copy of a resolution passed by them 10 expressing agreement with a report adopted by the London County Council recommending that the Council should introduce to Parliament during the present Session a Bill for the purpose of suspending the powers of the Water Companies to « increase their charges for Water consequent upon the result : of the quinquennial valuations; also forwarding copy of a resolution passed by the Vestry expressing an opinion that the undertakings of the several Water Companies should be transferred to the London County Council, and Copy of a Petition to the House of Commons, praying that the whole subject might be taken into early and serious consideration, with a view either to restricting the powers of the Water Companies as suggested by the Vestry, or the creation of a Parliamentary Commission with powers to fix the terms upon which the London County Council might acquire the several undertakings of the Metropolitan Companies. The Board concurred, and a similar Petition to that drawn up by the Vestry was adopted and presented by Mr. Causton, M.P., to the House of Commons. Later on, at a Meeting of the Board held on the 20th May, Mr. Jas. Meikle, in consequence of replies given by Mr. Ritchie, the President of the Local Government Board, to questions put to him in the House of Commons, that the Government would be unable to deal with the question during the present Session; and having in view the probable increase in many of the Assessments, consequent on the quinquennial valuation to take effect next year, moved that Mr. Causton, M.P., be requested to present a Petition to the House of Commons praying the Government to pass a short Act this Session, suspending the powers of the Water Companies to increase their charges for water as the result of such re-valuation. After some discussion, however, the following amendment by Mr. Howard Moore was put to the Meeting and carried, viz.: "That Mr. Causton, M.P., be requested to introduce a short Bill into Parliament to suspend the powers of the Water Companies to further increase their charges for Water consequent on the quinquennial re-assessment of the Metropolis."—"That the Metropolitan Members be requested 11 to support such Bill," and "That a circular letter be addressed to every Vestry and District Board in the Metropolis asking them to Petition the House of Commons in its favour." A communication was accordingly addressed to Mr. Causton, who, in reply, expressed his willingness to comply with the request , and, shortly afterwards, he, with the consent of the House of Commons, introduced a Bill for the purpose in view, entitled, " A Bill to Regulate and Limit the Powers of Water Companies in Respect of their Charges for the Supply of Water." The other District Boards and Vestries were likewise written to, with the result that several have agreed to present Petitions in favour of the Bill. The Petition presented on behalf of this Board, was as follows:— " To Honourable the Commons of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland, in Parliament assembled. " The humble Petition of the Board of Works for the St. Saviour's District, under their Common Seal, Sheweth:— " That your Petitioners are a Public Body constituted under the Metropolis Local Management Act, 1855, and having jurisdiction over the Parishes of Saint Saviour and Christchurch, in the County of Surrey. " That a Bill is now pending in your Honourable House intituled A. Bill to regulate and limit the Powers of Water Companies in respect of their Charges for the Supply of Water. " That by the said Bill it is proposed to suspend the increase of Water Bates ill London by reason merely of such increase of value for reasons unconnected with Water Supply as will appear in the process of the forthcoming quinquennial valuation, and to declare that the present valuation rate on any tenement shall be a that no increase thereon shall be lawful except for equitable reasons. That by Section 68 of the Water Works Clauses' Act 1847, it is enacted that the charges for Water shall be Payable according to the Annual Value of the Tenement supplied with water; and similar provisions are contained in the Acts of the several Companies supplying the Metropolis. -That the reassessment of the Metropolis is now being proceeded with pursuant to the provisions of the Valuation 12 of the Metropolis Art, 1669, and your Petitioners have reason to believe that in many cases a considerable increase in the ratable value of premises within their District will be the result. " That in the event, as anticipated, of an increase in the assessments, the said Companies will be entitled to increase their charges pro rata, without any equivalent to the consumers. " Your Petitioners submit that gross injustice will thereby be done to the consumers, and it is desirable that pending a settlement of the question of Water Supply generally, provisional measures should be adopted without delay to limit or suspend the powers of the Companies so to increase their charges. " The Bill above referred to will, in the opinion of your Petitioners, accomplish the object in view if passed into an Act. " Your Petitioners therefore humbly pray your Honourable House that the said Bill may Pass into law during the present Session of Parliament. " And your Petitioners will ever pray, &c " Sealed in the presence of " W. H. ATKINS, " Clerk of the Hoard. " 11th July, 1889." Meanwhile, a further communication was received from the Vestry of St. James, Westminster, inviting this and other Local Authorities to appoint Delegates to attend a Conference on the subject of Water Supply. The Board appointed Messrs. Meikle, Moore, and Sinclair. Subsequently, a letter was received from the Vestry of St. Margaret and St. John, Westminster, suggesting that a deputation representing the Rating Authorities and the London County Council should seek an interview with the President of the Local Government Board, and ask him to re-consider his decision as communicated in the two replies above referred to; and, in the event of Her Majesty's Government being unable to promote a Bill, submit to him the importance of the Government affording facilities for the consideration of the measure introduced by Mr. Causton. The letter also requested this Board, either to appoint Delegates to join in the proposed deputation, or 13 authorise those already appointed, to attend at St. James's, to do so. The Hoard complied, and appointed Messrs. Blatch- ford, Carter, and Sinclair. The following is a copy of the resolutions passed at the Conference, which took place at St. James's Vastry Hall, Piccadilly, on Thursday, the 19th June:— " 1 That this meeting of delegates from the Vestries and District Boards of the Metropolis affirms the necessity of the Water Supply of London being placed in the hands of a municipal body representative of London. " 2 That in the opinion of this Conference, it is imperatively necessary to restrain the Water Companies from increasing then charges upon the basis of the Quinquennial Valuation now in progress; and that this Conference therefore request the President of the Local Government Board to receive them as a deputation to (a) request him to reconsider the. decision communicated to the House of Commons in reply to questions on 19th March and 19th May; (b) to submit the necessity for the introduction of a Bill by Her Majesty's Government to suspend the exercise of the powers conferral upon the Companies by the Act of 1847 and subsequent Acts as to the basis of their charges; and (c) failing the introduction of a Bill by the Government, to suggest that facilities may be afforded for the consideration of the Bill introduced by Mr. Causton, and now awaiting second reading. " 3. That, in view of the fact that the effect of the Quinquennial re-valuation of the Metropolis now in progress will be to augment the charge to consumers for the same supply of water as is enjoyed by them at the present tune and thereby to increase by a very large sum the value of the property of the Water Companies, the Government be requested forthwith to introduce a Bill to enable the London County Council or some other properly representative body to acquire the undertakings of the eight Water Companies now supplying London, or some of them, by agreement; or, failing agreement, to create a Board of Arbitrators to settle the terms of transfer by compulsory powers, or to give power to establish an independent supply. "4. That the President of the Local Government Board be requested to receive a Deputation from the Local Authorities of London in support of the above resolutions and that all Members of Parliamnet representing politan Constituencies be invited to join the Deputation. 14 " 5. That Mr. O. V. Morgan, M.P., and Mr. T. H. Bolton, M.P., be requested to introduce such Deputation. " 6. That Mr. James Beal be requested to state the views of the Deputation at the proposed interview with the President of the Local Government Board. " 7. That the Deputation to the President of the Local Government Board consist of all the Delegates appointed to attend this Conference. " 8. That the Vestry Clerk of St. James, Westminster, be requested to briny the foregoing Resolutions officially before the Committee of Enquiry on the London Water Supply now sitting at the Guildhall of the City of London." Electric Lighting, Ac On the 18th April last, notice was received from the London Electric Supply Corporation, Limited, of their intention, pursuant to powers granted to them by the Board of Trade Provisional Order, 1889), subsequently confirmed by Act of Parliament, to proceed, after the expiration of one month, with the laying-down of electric mains across the Borough High Street, and along Southwark Street and Stamford Street, in manner shown upon a plan accompanying the notice. The Board being of opinion that the subway in Southwark Street should, so far as it extended along the line of route, be utilized for the purpose in view, directed a communication to be addressed to the London County Council, calling their attention to the 21st Section of the Electric Lighting Orders' Confirmation (No. 2) Act, 1889, which enables the Council to require the Company to lay their mains in a subway wherever one exists, and urging the Council to avail themselves of the powers conferred by such section and call upon the Company to make use of the Subway in Southwark Street for the laying of their mains. On inspection, however, of the subway, it was thought to be unsuitable for the purpose, and the mains in question will have to be laid in the streets in the usual manner. In order to ensure the proper restoration of the surface of the streets, notice was given to the Company that this Board will require all works in and about such restoration to be carried out by the contractors of the Board, to the satisfaction of its surveyor and at the cost of the Company. Subsequently, the 15 Company withdrew their notice above referred to, and substituted another, expressing their intention to lay mains in Newcomen Street, Union Street, Charlotte Street, Blackfriars Road, and Cross Street, in lieu of the streets mentioned in their former notice, and it is expected that the works, which have been delayed owing to questions at issue between the Company and the Postmaster General, will shortly be proceeded with. Quite recently the Brush Electrical Engineering Company, Limited, have given statutory notice of their intention to apply to the Board of Trade for a Provisional Order, to authorise them to supply Electrical energy for any public or private purposes within the area of this Board's jurisdiction. School Board Sites. In March last, a circular letter was received from the Vestry of St. Mary Abbotts, Kensington, forwarding copy of a resolution passed by them, suggesting that a petition should be presented to the House of Commons praying for a Royal Commission to inquire into the irregularities alleged to have taken place in the acquisition of sites and construction of buildings by the School Board for London. The Board resolved to adopt a petition accordingly, and one was shortly afterwards drawn up and presented to the House by Mr. Causton, M.P., on behalf of the Board. School Board Precepts. In the same month a circular-letter was received from the Vestry of Battersea stating that the Vestry had had under consideration the question of the increase in the amount of the Precepts of the School Board for London ; that the Vestry viewed with concern the ever-increasing rate demanded for school-board purposes, and inquiring whether, in the event of the Vestry convening a conference upon the subject, this Board would send delegates. The Board assented, and appointed Messrs. Rider, Hale and Goodwin. Shortly afterwards a circular-letter was received from the Vestry of St. Mary Abbotts, Kensington, forwarding resolutions to the like effect, and also requesting this Board to appoint delegates. The Battersea Vestry having in the meantime, in consequence of the action taken by that of Kensington, resolved to forego the holding of a conference, the Board requested the delegates 16 named to attend the conference at Kensington instead. The conference took place in the latter part of April, and the following is a copy of the resolutions which were agreed to by the assembled delegates:— "(a) That, in the opinion of this Conference of Delegates, representing thirty-three of the Rating Authorities of the Metropolis, the Rate levied for the administration of the Elementary Education Act, 1870,' and Acts amending the same, has greatly exceeded the amount contemplated at the time of passing the original Act, and has gradually increased until it has become a very heavy and oppressive burden upon the Ratepayers of London. "(b) That, as it is feared the amount of the. present Rate may be greatly exceeded in the future, it is deemed by this Conference to be urgently necessary in the interests of the Ratepayers that the various charitable educational endowments throughout the Metropolis should be applied in aid of the required amounts hitherto levied in the shape of Rates, and that a limit should be fixed by a statutory enactment to the Rate to be hereafter leived to meet the expenditure of the School Board for London. " (c) That it is expedient that a portion of the Rate required to be raised for School Board purposes should be levied on the value of all lands within the area of the Electoral Divisions of the School Board for London. " (d) That this Conference is of opinion that the School Board for London has exceeded the intention of the Elementary Education Acts in recently sanctioning the supply of Pianofortes to certain of their Schools to be paid for out of the Rates. "(e) That the Rating Authorities of the Metropolis be urged to present Petitions to Her Majesty's Government on the lines of the resolutions passed at this Conference, and to communicate with the Parliamentary Representatives of their respective districts, urging them to bring pressure to bear upon the Government with a view to action being taken in the matter." This Board, however, did not take any further action in the matter. London CountyCounoil Chamber. On receipt of a circular-letter from the Vestry of St. Martinin-the-Fields protesting against the proposed building of a council chamber and offices by the London County Council ; 17 inquiring the views of this Board on the subject, and requesting the appointment of delegates, the Board, in March last, after considerable discussion and without expressing either approval or disapproval of the proposed buildings, appointed Messrs. Baxter, Coles and Kinnell to act as delegates on its behalf. Private Foot Bridge, &c. The Board, in April last, sanctioned, subject to a written agreement being entered into and the payment of a nominal rent of 5/- per annum, an application made by Messrs. Barclay, Perkins and Co., for permission to erect a Foot Bridge about two feet over the existing bridge belonging to them in Park Street, in order to establish a means of communication between the buildings in case of fire, and onable them to run a shaft across to work machinery. Ambulances. The Board also sanctioned an application made by the Hospitals' Association for permission to suspend notices from the bars of lamp-posts in the vicinity of Ambulance Stations lately established by them at Guy's Hospital and at the Fire Brigade Station, Southwark Bridge Road, indicating where the ambulances may be procured. South London Tramway Lines. Also the Board, on the application of the Solicitors of the South London Tramways Company, sanctioned the use of bells for the purpose of warning foot-passengers of the approach of tramcars on the Company's lines in the district. Finances. In order to meet the estimated expenditure for local purposes during the financial year ending 25th March, 1891, and the demands of the School Board for London, the following demands by Precept have been made upon the Overseers, viz :— GENERAL PURPOSES ACCOUNT. St. Saviour £6,374 0 0 Chrustchurch 3,018 0 0 £9,392 0 0 SEWERS ACCOUNT. St. Saviour £686 0 0 Christchurch 325 0 0 £1,011 0 0 SCHOOL BOARD FOR LONDON. St. Saviour £9,526 10 6 Christchurch 4,519 2 4 £14,045 12 10 c 18 Mr. Haggis In November, Mr. A. H. Haggis, the Chairman of the Sewers Committee, who had been elected a Member of the London County Council, and subsequently the Deputy-Chairman of the Council, resigned his position as a Member of the Board. On the 4th December, an official notiScation of the fact of his resignation was received, and the Board, on the motion of Mr. T. F. Rider, seconded by Mr. Jas. Meikle, unanimously passed the following resolution:—"That this Board, while deploring the loss of Mr. Haggis as a Member, congratulate him most heartily on his appointment to be the Deputy-Chairman of the London County Council, and trust that he may live long to enjoy the honourable position." A copy was forwarded to Mr. Haggis, who, in acknowledging the receipt of the communication, expressed his regret that the exigencies of his new position compelled him to sever his connection with the Board. Obituary. During the year 1889-90, the death occurred of the following Members of the Board, viz:—Mr. Dan. Chapman, Mr. Henry Pells, and Mr. Alfred Stevens; and, in November last, Mr. Robert Bianchi, who had been Medical Officer of Health for the District since the establishment of the Board in the year 1856, died. In each case the Board passed a resolution expressive of its regret, and of sympathy with the widow and family of the deceased. Medical Officer. By the death of Mr. Bianchi, a vacancy occurred in the offices of Medical Officer and Gas Examiner; and, as a preliminary step, it was unanimously resolved that Dr. James nerron, of No. 73, Southwark Bridge Road, who had, it was understood, assisted Mr. Bianchi in his practice, should be requested to fulfil the duties until the appointment of a Aualyst. successor to the deceased. About the same time a letter was received from Dr. Albert Bernays, the Public Analyst for the District, resigning his appointment, and the question of the course to be adopted in regard to the several vacancies thus occasioned was referred to the Sanitary Committee for consideration and report. Ultimately, on the recommendation of the Committee, it was resolved that a Medical Officer ■I 19 of Health should be appointed: that the appointment should be made in accordance with the provisions of the Local Government Act, 1888, and the General Order of that Board relative to Medical Officers of Health, dated 29th March, 1888, under which, on approval of the appointment by the Local Government Board, and on compliance with the rules and regulations promulgated in the Order referred to, the District Board is entitled to claim of the London County Council a recoupment of one-half of the salary of such Medical Officer ; that the salary should be £200 per annum, and that the duties should be as defined by the Local Government Board in their General Order above mentioned, and by the District Board. It was also resolved that steps should be taken to appoint a properly qualified person to fill the office of Public Analyst under the "Sale of Food and Drugs Act, 1875,"; and that he should be paid a salary of £75 per annum; the minimum number of samples to be analyzed to be 150, and a fee of 10s. 6d. per sample for any above that number in the course of a year. The several offices were advertised accordingly: thirty-six applications for the Medical Officership and fifteen for the office of Analyst being received; and, on the 19th February last, after the number in each case had been reduced to six, a ballot was taken, with the result that Dr. Jas. Herron, above referred to, was elected to be the Medical Officer of Health, and Mr. Richard Bodmer, F.I.C., of the Chemical Laboratory, Guy's Hospital, was elected to be the Public Analyst for the District, subject in each case to the approval of the Local Government Board. Both appointments were subsequently approved by the Local Government Board, and the formal appointment of Medical Officer took place on the 5th March last. The London Count) Council have consented to contribute a moiety of the salan of the Medical Officer, as applied for, annually at Michaelmas. Gas Examiner. With regard to the vacancy in the office of Gas Examiner, inasmuch as, on inquiry, it was found that the Lou County Council appoint and employ Gas Examiners pursuant 20 to Sect. 27 of the Metropolis Gas Act, 1860, and that Mr. Bodmer, as one of such Examiners, makes a daily examination of the gas supplied by the Company supplying this District, (the South Metropolitan) at the Gas Meter Station, Bilackfriars Road, and reports periodically to the Council the result of his 0 examinations; moreover the powers of the County Council being identical with those of this Board in the matter, it was resolved not to till up the vacancy in question. Inspector of Nuisances. In July last, Mr. Moody, the Inspector of Nuisances, gave notice of his intention to resign his appointment, and it became necessary to take steps to appoint a successor. The matter was referred to a Special Committee, who caused the vacancy to be advertised. Forty-one applications were received; a selection of four was made; and, on the 24th July, Mr. Arthur Algernon Grist, one of the Inspectors for the Parish of Clapham, was appointed to till the office, at the same salary and on the same terms as his predecessor. W. H. ATKINS. Board Room, Emerson Street, Bankside, S.E. 5th July, 1890. 21 SURVEYOR'S REPORT For the Year ending Lady-day, 1890. I have the honour to submit a Statement of the various Works executed in my Department during the Year terminating Lady-day last. Footways. The following Works have been executed in the repair and maintenance of the Footways in the District:— New 3-inch York Stone Paving laid 2,283 feet super. New 2½-inch „ „ „ 13,830 „ New Victoria Stone Paving laid 220 ,, ,, Old York Paving relaid 54,088 ,, ,, New 6-in. x 12-in. Granite Edge Curb fixed 862 ,, lineal Old Curb taken up and refixed 5,281 ,, ,, Old Curb redressed 3,515 ,, ,, Granite Flags squared and redressed 1,720 ,, super. This does not include work done in reinstating after Gas, Water, and other Companies' trenches. Carriageways. The following Works have been executed in the repair and maintenance of the Carriageways in the District:— New 8-in.x7-in. Aberdeen Granite Pitching laid 889 yds. super. New 4-in. x 9-in. ditto ditto 37 ,, ,, New 4-in. x 9-in. Guernsey ditto 18 ,, ,, New 4-in. x 4-in. Mount Sorrel ditto 9 ,, ,, Old Granite Pitching relaid 9,800 ,, ,, Ditto, ditto redressed 1,645 ,, ,, Block Channelling refixed 223 feet lineal Ditto redressed 1,459 ,, ,, Val de Travers Asphalte 18 yds. super Ballast used under Pitching 704 „ cube Concrete 6-in. thick under Pitching 2,045 „ super. Ballast used on Bridge Inclines, Wood Paving, etc., 1,192 „ cube Granite broken 212 '' " This does not include work done in reinstating after as, Water, and other Companies trenches. 22 The following is a list of the sums expended during the year for the maintenance of Carriageway and Footway Paving (Macadam Roads not included):— £ s. d. America Street 1 9 7 Adam's Place 2 17 9 Borough High St. 255 6 8 Bankside 6 13 6 Blackfriara Road 60 9 10 Broad wall 243 9 6 Burrell Street 20 6 11 Bennett Street 5 15 1 Bear Lane 8 19 3 Barge House Street 0 14 5 Boundary Bow 1 9 0 Brunswick Street 1 8 10 Boddy's Bridge 0 12 0 Bull Alley 2 15 11 Castle Street 70 11 6 Casher's Ground 1 8 8 Clink Street 15 18 3 Church Street 3 1 9 Charlotte Street 12 5 11 Charles Street 3 2 0 Collingwood Street 9 12 8 Cross Street 8 19 9 Christchurch Passage 8 15 1 Duke Street 25 18 0 Denman Street 15 0 2 Emerson Street 4 7 0 Ewer Street 10 11 5 Essex Street 6 11 3 Edward Street 7 8 11 Farnham Place 5 19 5 Gravel Lane 15 10 £ Guildford Street 825 11 4 Grove, S.E 13 5 2 Gt. Suffolk Street 1 12 7 Gt. Charlotte Street 3 19 4 George Street 2 4 3 Holland Street 22 16 1 Hatfield Street 18 10 11 Isabella Street 4 17 8 John Street West 012 6 Jane Street 2 G 0 Carried forward £1,723 5 10 £ s. d. Brought forward 1,728 5 10 Loman Street 4 1 1 Little Winchester St. 4 12 0 Ladd's Court 0 5 6 Montague Close 1 11 0 Marlboro' Street 1 5 10 Moss Alley 0 12 0 Newcomen Street 910 3 Norfolk Street 0 7 6 Orange Stroet 12 13 8 Pepper Street 1 5 6 Park Street 17 4 4 Princes Street 2 10 4 Price's Street 4 6 11 Pitt's Place 0 15 7 lied Cross Street 21 19 0 Railway Approach 15 9 Robert Street 1 11 11 lied Cross Place 2 17 8 Roupell Street 1 9 2 Southwark Street 115 19 11 Southwark Bridge Rd. 44 5 5 Sumner Street 356 14 0 St. Margaret's Court 0 5 4 Stoney Street 11 8 0 St Thomas's Street 1 12 1 Stamford Street 4414 3 Surrey Row 1 12 8 Silver Street 0 6 5 Tooley Street 0 4 11 Three Crown Square 1 16 1 Union Street 221 15 2 Upper Ground St.3 13 9 Whitecross Street. 7 13 7 Winchester Street 2 7 7 Worcester Street 5 14 2 William Street 1 9 0 William's Court 10 18 9 White Hind Alley 0 7 0 York St., St. Saviour's 6 4 6 Total £2,657 13 4 The principal carriageway and footway paving works executed during the year are as follows:— The carriageway of this street has been taken up from Southwark Street to Sumner Street, a portion of the old pitching was reduced and relaid, the remainder of the street was paved with new 3-in. x 7-in. Aberdeen granite pitching, the whole of the pitching was paved on 6-in. of concrete, the quantity of dressed pitching laid was 440 yards superficial, and the quantity of new stone 792 yards superficial; in addition to which the channels were laid with, new 4-in. x 9-in. granite pitching, 287 cubic yards of ground were excavated to make room for concrete and extra depth of new stone. The footway on the west1 side was also laid with new 2½-inch tooled York stone paving and new 6-in. x 12-in. granite edge curb, some portion of the old curb was also redressed and refixed. The quantity of new York laid was 2112 feet superficial ; new curb, 140 feet run, and redressed curb, 352 feet run. Guildford St. The footway of Union Street on the south side from Southwark Bridge Road to the boundary of the district eastward, has been taken up and new 2½-inch York paving laid, a portion of the old curb was redressed and new curb supplied to make up the deficiency; the quantities used were as uuder:— York paving 3,235 feet super. New 6-in. x 12-in. granite edge curb 333 „ run. Old curb redressed and refixed 286 ,, ,, The carriageway of a portion of Union Street, between Worcester Street and the wood paving eastward, has been taken up and relaid—an area of about 360 yards superficial. Union Street. The carriageway of Castle Street, between Southwark Street and Southwark Bridge Road, lias been taken up and relaid, a portion of the footway, on the north side, was also relaid. 700 superficial yards of carriageway were relaid, 1,560 superficial varda of footwav were relaid, and 187 feet run of curb fixed. Castle Street. The footways and carriageway of this street, from Holland Street to Guildford Street, have been taken up, the Guernsey pitching has been relaid, and the block channelling refixed concrete was laid under the pitching where thought necessary. Sumner St. 24 The footways have been paved with new 24-inch tooled York stone. The following quantities were used:— New 2½-inch York stone 5,041 feet super. New 6-in. x 12-in. granite edge curb 320 ,, run. Old curb redressed and refixed 795 ,, ,, Old York stone relaid 205 ,, super. Granite pitching relaid 1,240 yds. ,, Concrete, 6-in. thick under pitching 184 ,, ,, Granite Hags laid in footway. 49 feet ,, Red Cross St. The channels in Red Cross Street, from Southwark Street to the wood paving, have been taken up and 217 yards of pitching relaid. The carriageway of a portion of Southwark Street between Lavington Street and Gravel Lane has been repaired, 633 yards superficial of granite pitching were taken up and relaid ; much of the stone was greatly worn and had to be replaced with old pitching from our stone yard. Bro&dwall. A portion of the footways, on the east and west sides, between Cross Street and Duke Street, have been taken up and relaid with new 2-inch York Stone, the curb was taken up, rejointed and relaid. The following quantities were used:— 2,757 feet superficial of new York laid. 427 ,, ,, ,, old York relaid. 516 ,, run of curb jointed and refixed. The macadam carriageway of this street from Stamford Street to Barge House Street has been taken up for a width of 15 feet on the west side and paved with dressed granite pitching on 6-in. of concrete. The footway on the west side has also been relaid partly with new 2½-in. York Paving, the old paving which formerly existed being utilized as far as possible. The following quantities were used:— Redressed, Granite Pitching laid 334 yards super. Concrete 6-in. thick 320 ,, ,, Ground excavated and carted 160 ,, cube. New 2^-inch York laid ... ... 685 feet super. Old York squared and relaid ... 1,439 ,, ,, Curb refixed 480 ,, run. Southwark Street. 25 London Bridge In cline. The centre of the carriageway of the London Bridge incline, from St. Thomas's Street to Denman Street, has been taken up for a width of about 15 feet where it is much worn, and new 3x7 granite pitching substituted; about sixty-one tons of pitching were laid. I he whole of the carriageway paving from London Bridge to the end of the incline at St. Thomas's Street is much worn and is being continually repaired at great cost; it will be necessary to pave the whole surface with new material at an early date. The granite footway on the approach to London Bridge on the east side having become smooth and dangerous, the heavy blocks have been taken up, re-squared, and the surface refaced in order to give a good foothold. Sewer Works. The following works in connection with the sewers, &c., in the district, have been executed during the year:— Stamford St. A portion of the invert of the brick sewer in this street has been cut out and a new invert constructed, at a lower level, in order that a greater velocity of flow may be given to the sewer at its outlet or junction with the sewer in the Blackfriars Road. Southwa rk Bridge Road. A portion of this sewer, between Union Street and Southwark Street, lias been extensively repaired. A new length of invert (about 230 feet) ha6 been constructed, so as to give a better fall to the sewer towards Union Street. All defective brickwork in the crown and sides of the sewer has been made good, and all open joints pointed in cement. Orange St. A portion of the 12-inch pipe sewer in this street was found to be defective, and a length of about 70 feet was taken up, the old defective pipes were replaced by new, which were laid to an improved fall. Burrell St. by Railway Stables. The 9-inch pipe sewer, in the short portion of Burrell Street, between Southwark Street and the main portion of Bunell Street, was found to be stopped; the ground was opened and an attempt made to clear the sewer, but it was found neces sary to lay a new length of pipe sewer; this new server was laid at a greater depth, and a much better fall was given. I D 26 attribute the cause of the stoppage of this sewer to the fact that the stables of the Railway Company were not provided with proper traps, catch pits, or intercepting chambers, so that a large quantity of horse manure, straw and sand found its way into the sewer. The drainage arrangements of these stables has now been revised under notices served upon the Company. Marlborough Street. An old, high level sewer in Marlboro' Street, on the east side, between John Stroet, West, and Surrey Row, has been abolished—the sewer has been filled up with hard core—previous to which all drainage was disconnected. A new manhole has also been constructed at the junction of Marlboro' Street and John Street West. Isabella St. A portion of the 9-inch pipe sewer in this street was found to be defective, the ground was opened and the pipes removed, and replaced by new, sound pipes. Williams Court. The old brick and pipe sewer which carried a portion of the drainage of this court into the main sewer in Emerson Street, and which was in very bad condition, has been taken up and a length of 94 feet of new 12-inch pipe laid to a better fall. Edward St. The large, brick sewer in this street, between Blackfriars Road and Robert Street, has been cleared ; a large accumulation of dry rubbish having been found at the upper end. William St. The 12-inch pipe sewer in this street has been lengthened a few feet, in order that the gullies at the north end of the street may be drained into them. Brunswick Street. A short length of old, high level, brick sewer was found in this street, on the east side, running at an angle across the street; the slop was taken out of this and the sewer properly filled up with hard core. Southwark Bridge Road, by Castle St. An alteration has been made in the side entrance at this corner, in order that the two surface water gullies, which discharged originally into a high level sewer at this spot, should connect directly with the deep main sewer; large quantities of water are discharged into these gullies from the Southwark Bridge incline, and the connections have to be specially kept clear. 27 A new flushing penstock has been fixed by Mason's Stairs in order that the pipe sewers through Pike Gardens, White Hind Alley, Ac., &c. may be flushed from the river. Bankside The following new Gullies have been constructed. These Gullies have a catchpit which contains about a cubic yard of deposit. They are also trapped in the connection to the sewer:— Name of Street. No. of Gulliea. Holland Street 1 Gravel Lane 1 Charlotte Street 2 Total 4 The following Gullies have been repaired:— Name of Street. No. of Gullies. Guildford Street 1 Upper Ground Street 2 Emerson Street 1 Broadwall 1 Total 5 Private Drainage Connections. The following private connections to the Public Sewers have been made No. of Connections. 9-inch Pipes to Brick Sewers 6 6-inch ,, ,, ,, 8 9-inch Pipes to Pipe Sewers 3 6-inch,, ,, ,, 8 Total 25 The lengths and sizes of pipes laid for private drainage connections are as under:— Sizes of Pipes. Feet Lineal. 12-inch Pipes 9 9-inch „ 214 6-inch „ 184 Total 407 •28 The lengths and sizes of pipes laid for public drainage are as under:— Size of Pipes. Feet Lineal. 12-inch Pipes 186 9-inch ,, 198 6-inch ,, 142 Total 526 One hundred and eighteen feet of 6-in. pipe has been laid in connecting Gullies to the public 8ewers. Side Entrances and Manholes in Bankside, Edward Street, Orange Street, Park Street, Stamford Street, and Pepper Street, have been repaired. Portions of the Brick Sewers in Stamford Street, Bennett Street, Southwark Bridge Road, and Marlborough Street, have also been repaired. Four new side entrance covers have been fixed, and eight gully grates. One hundred and thirty-six cubic yards of soil have been removed from the Sewers by cartage. Hoardings. Thirty-seven licenses for Hoardings and Scaffolds have been issued. Lighting. The total number of Public Lamps in the district is 568, of which number nine are special meter lamps, the remainder are lighted by the Gas Company at an annual rent per lamp. 29 Trenches. The Gas, Water, Hydraulic Power, Telegraph, and other Companies have opened 734 trenches in the carriageways and footways during the year. The London Hydraulic Power Company have laid new mains or extended existing mains in the following streets:- Boro High Street, Newcomen Street, Stoney Street, Union Street, and Whitecross Street. New service pipes have also been laid in Maidstone Buildings, Great Guildford Street, Bankside, Tooley Street, Southwark Street and Castle Street. The concrete Flushing Tanks in the District are used at regular intervals, and the pipe sewers to which they are connected are thereby kept in good condition. Certain Brick Sewers are also flushed from the river at all stream tides. GEORGE ROPER NORRISH, Surveyor. June 24th, 1890. 30 PUBLIC ANALYSTS' REPORTS. TO THE BOARD OF WORKS FOR THE ST. SAVIOURS DISTRICT. Gentlemen— The half-year of 1889 was a somewhat broken one through the retirement of Mr. Moody. Consequently, the number of articles analyzed was below the normal. Between June 4th and September 19th, there was a complete cessation of analytical work. Before the end of the quarter I received six articles of food, viz:—Five Milks, and one sample of Pepper. Three of the milks were of good quality; two were adulterated with, respectively, 8 and 13 per cent, of water. The pepper was genuine. In the last quarter of the year, 1889, thirty samples were brought to me by Mr. Grist. The Milks were nineteen in number. Six of these were quite of the nature, substance, and quality demanded. Five were adulterated with, respectively, 5, 10, 9, 12 and 6 per cent. of added water. The remainder were all somewhat watered. None of them were skimmed. It may be interesting to note that several of the Condensed Milks which were brought to your notice were skimmed to such an extent that they ought not to be passed over. Several of them, if made up with the quantity of water recommended, are so dilute as "milks" that infants brought up on such might die of starvation. A case of this kind was prosecuted by the Camber well Vestry with such success that the article has been withdrawn from the market. The other samples of bread, oatmeal, arrowroot, butter, coffee, pepper, mustard (2), curry-powder and rhubarb, were of the nature, substance and character demanded. 31 In resigning my office, which I have held for so many years, I would wish to express my sincere thanks for the kindness with which I have been so uniformly treated. I am glad to think that you have appointed another gentlemen in my place who is sure to give general satisfaction. I remain, Gentlemen, Yours faithfully, ALBERT J. BERNAYS. Chemical Laboratory, St. Thomas's Hospital, S.E. TO THE BOARD OF WORKS FOR THE ST. SAVIOUR'S DISTRICT. Chemical Laboratory, Guy's Hospital, April 14 th, 1890. Gentlemen, I have the honour of presenting my first Quarterly Report of Analyses under the "Food and Drugs Act." Since my appointment as your Analyst, I have received from the Inspector and analyzed twenty-two samples of food, etc. These consisted of ten milks, three coffees, two mustards, two peppers, one butter, one cheese, one "Bovril" and two ketchups. Of the Milks.-Six were genuine, but of these two were of poor quality. One sample contained 10 per cent. of added water ; one sample contained 12 per cent. added water; and one sample 11 per cent. added water and was also deficient in butter-fat to the extent of 20 per cent. One sample contained 4 per cent. of water in excess of that present in average milk. This was possibly a genuine but exceptionally poor sample. The Coffees, Mustards, Butter, Cheese, and one of the Peppers were genuine. The other pepper contained a little 32 sandy earth and much pepper husk. The presence of the sandy matter is, in my opinion, due to imperfect cleaning of the berries before grinding. The "Bovril" was a meat extract of fair quality, and very palatable. It contained a considerable amount of the stimulating constituents of meat; but it is impossible to say from what kind of meat the extract has been obtained. There is no standard of quality for an article of this kind. The two samples of Ketchup were, in my opinion, free from injurious ingredients, and I was unable to find any evidence of the presence of animal matter. One sample was much inferior to the other in strength and flavour. I am, Gentlemen, Your obcdieut servant, R. BODMKR. TO THE BOARD OF WORKS FOR THE ST. SAVIOURS DISTRICT. Laboratory, 12, Southwark Street, June 25th, 1890. Gentlemen, I have the honour to report that during the quarter ending June 24th, I have received from the Sanitary Inspector and analyzed thirty-two samples of food and drink. These consisted of:— Milk. 17 Samples. Butter 3 „ Coffee 3 „ Pepper 1 Sago 1 Tapioca 2 Arrowroot rd 1 Whiskey 3 33 Of these five samples were adulterated, viz: three milks and two coffees. Of the Milks.—One contained 12 per cent. added water, one 6 per cent. and was also deficient in butter-fat, and one contained 5 per cent. of water beyond the average. This was possibly a very poor genuine milk. Of the Coffers. One contained 45 per cent. chicory, and one 15 per cent. chicory. The rest of the samples were all genuine. The three samples of whiskey were all above the minimum strength allowed by the Act (25 degrees under proof) being, respectively, 24 degrees, 21¼ and 20¼ degrees under proof. I am, Gentlemen, Your obedient servant, R. BODMER. 34 MEDICAL OFFICER'S REPORT. TO THE BOARD OF WORKS FOR THE ST. SAVIOURS DISTRICT. Gentlemen— The report I have the honour to submit to you, contains the Vital and Sanitary Statistics for the year 1889, compiled from my own notes, and from the papers supplied to me by the representatives of your late Medical Officer, Dr. Bianchi. Taking, first, the number of Births in the two districts as 890 : 464 occurred in Christchurch and 420 in St. Saviour. The number of Deaths registered was 470 : of which 243 occurred in Christchurch and 227 in St. Saviour. COMPARISON OF BIRTHS AND DEATHS. Christchurch. St. Saviour. births. deaths. births. deaths. Males 237 144 Males 219 106 Females 227 99 Females. 207 121 Totals 464 243 Totals 426 227 Excess of Births 221 Excess of Births 199 Total Births 890 Total Deaths 470 Total excess of Births 420 Estimating the population of the two districts at 28,662 and the number of deaths at 470, the death-rate is 16.3 per thousand, which is a decrease on the year 1888 of 31 per thousand, and below the average death-rate of the whole of London for the year by 1.1 per thousand. 35 Subjoined is an abstract of all the deaths that occurred in the district with their various causes:— DISEA8E8. Christ- church. Saint Saviour. Totals. Totals. Zymotic 27 36 Dropsy, Ac 8 4 Tubercular 34 32 Brain and Nerves 41 32 Heart Disease 22 18 Lungs 58 51 Digestive Organs 11 7 Kidneys 6 3 Childbirth 1 — Premature Birth and Debility 10 15 Atrophy 3 2 Old Age 13 16 Violence and Privation 7 11 2 — TOTALS 243 227 63 deaths occured from the principal zymotic diseases, and below is a tabular statement showing the cause in each case:— Measles. Scarlctiiiu. Pertussis. Croup. Diarrhœa. Typhoid. Syphilis. Diphtheria. Erysipelas. Total. Christchurch 6 1 1 3 12 — — 4 1 27 St. Saviour 7 2 6 3 14 1 1 2 — 36 Total 12 3 7 6 26 1 1 6 1 63 Violence. Inquests. Public Institutions. Uncertified i Christchurch 5 15 31 12 St. Saviour 11 19 11 Total 16 34 31 26 36 ST. SAVIOUR'S DISTRICT. Taking Population at 28,622. Area in Statute Acres, 203. Statement of Deaths registered in the 52 weeks ended the 81st December, 1889:— Under 1 year. 1 year and under 20. 20 years and under 40. 40 years and under 60. 60 years and under 80. 80 years and upwards. Totals Christchurch 70 37 21 43 61 11 243 St. Saviours 68 50 20 41 35 7 227 Totals 138 87 47 84 96 18 470 Inquests were held on 34 bodies: 17 were removed to the Mortuary. The following Verdicts were returned:— Syncope 6 Angina Pectoris 1 Drowned 8 Inanition 1 Tubercle of Brain 1 Injury to head 1 Heart Disease 2 Convulsions 1 Inflammation of Lunga 1 Hemorrhage from Rupture of Kidney and Liver 1 Suffocation 4 Apoplexy 3 Acute Pneumonia 1 Tabes Mesenterica 1 Burns Fractured Skull 1 COWHOUSES AND SLAUGHTERHOUSES. Cowhouses. Name of Person Licensed. Premises Licensed. Thompson, Farnham No. 5, Holland Street. Tilt, Elizabeth A. No. 28, Cross Street. Slaughterhouses. Name of Person Licensed. Premises Licensed. Skeffington, John No. 57, Sumner Street. 37 The Bakehouses were inspected by Dr. Bianchi, and found to be in a satisfactory condition. INFECTIOUS DISEASE (NOTIFICATION) ACT. This Act came into operation on October 31st, 1889. Its provisions have enabled me to become acquainted with the existence of diseases of an infectious nature, at an early period, and to have each case removed, where necessary, and the premises disinfected. By these means, the patient has been prevented from becoming a source of danger to the neighbourhood. SANITARY PROCEEDINGS. It will be seen, on referring to the table of the Summary of Nuisances and other matters attended to by the Inspector of Nuisances, that great diligence has been manifested in the inspection of dwelling houses, Ac., throughout the district. No less than 691 notices were served for the Abatement of Nuisances, Ac.; 158 rooms were cleansed and disinfected after cases of infectious disease; and 934 articles of clothing, bedding, Ac., were removed and disinfected by hot air: full particulars of these will be found in your Inspector,s Report. I am, Gentleman, Your obedient Servant, JAMES HEBRON, M.D. 38 INSPECTOR'S REPORT. For the Year 1889—90. I have the honour to submit my First Annual Report of Works, Sanitary Improvements, Ac., executed in connection with my department during the year ending Lady day last. With the exception of the months of July and August, 1889. these have been carried out since my appointment, as will be seen in tabulated statements annexed. In respect to drainage, many works of considerable dimensions have been carried out. The whole of the ancient brick drains of houses situate on the east side of Nelson Square have been abolished, a new deep 12-in. sewer has been laid in the square, the houses have been thoroughly drained in sections upon the most modern principles, with glazed socketed pipes, mica valve, air inlets, ventilators, manholes, syphon disconnectors, and inspection chambers, this has all been done at the freeholders expense, the square being private property. Similar improvements have been carried out to the whole of the houses in Townsend Yard, Union Street, eighteen in number, as well as thirteen houses in Hatfield Place, ten in Isabella Street, nine in Stoney Street, and seven in Upper Ground Place. In Pitt's Place, Ladd's Court, Moss Alley, Noah's Ark Alley, Williams Place, Skin Market Place, White Hind Alley, and Princes Buildings, Bankside, every house has been inspected, and in the majority of cases the drains have been reconstructed. Yards have been paved and drained, water has been laid on to W.C.'s, and the houses repaired and cleansed where necessary. In some cases the 39 works are not yet complete, but are in hand, or orders have been given to carry out the necessary works. In Prices Court and Downs Buildings, in all thirty-one houses, this has been done in every case, and the paving in the Court partially relaid and repaired. Numerous isolated blocks of two, three and four houses in various parts of the district have been dealt with in a similar way. T have found it necessary to call the Medical Officer's attention to several houses which were in my opinion unfit for human habitation, and in three instances it has been necessary to obtain a Magistrate's Order; and in one case an order was obtained to close the premises, which remains closed as unfit for human habitation. In a number of instances where I found houses delapidated or unsafe, I have communicated with the District Surveyor, and in every case they have been either wholly or partly, demolished; a number of houses have also been similarly dealt with, where notices have been served to thoroughly repair and render the same fit for human habitation; altogether, thirtyeight have been wholly or partly demolished. T have recently commenced an house to house inspection of the district, and have so far inspected 342 houses, and have where necessary, served notices to carry out sanitary improvements. I have in every case, where one cistern was in use for W.C. and domestic water supply, had a distinct and separate supply provided, and where possible have abolished the cistern for domestic purposes, and substituted for same a direct supply from the main, as I find it impossible to ensure the thorough and periodical cleansing of receptacles for water, and am convinced that cisterns not provided with filters are a prolific source of disease. In many cases I have found cisterns literally full of organic, and at times decompose animal matter, the only remedy in my opinion is to abolish such lively sources of disease. I have endeavoured to carry out this work with the least 40 possible amount of friction, although I have found it necessary to obtain the Board's sanction to apply for summonses in a number of cases. Where the work has been completed before the hearing, I have withdrawn the summons. In every other instance I have either obtained a Magistrate's Order with costs, or a conviction with penalty and costs. In one case I obtained the sanction of the Board to do the work, in default of the owner complying with the Magistrate's Order, and ultimately recovered the cost of so doing on a Warrant. I have made several seizures of unwholesome food, for which Magistrate's Orders to destroy have been obtained and carried out. In three cases summonses have been issued, and two convictions obtained, in which penalties of £10 and £20 respectively have been inflicted. I have from time to time received complaints as to obstructions of footways, upon which I have served notices, this, in the majority of cases, has had the desired effect, and I have been successful in reducing the obstruction of footways about the Borough Market to the lowest possible minimum. In two cases only has it been necessary to issue summonses, the Magistrate in the first case adjourned the summons to enable the defendant to discontinue the obstruction, this being done the summons was withdrawn; in the second case, which gave some trouble, a fine of 10s. and costs was indicted. I have obtained and submitted for analysis eighty-eight samples under the "Food and Drugs Acts, 1875 and 1879," and the "Margarine Act, 1887," which has been followed by eleven convictions. I may add that recently the Board have ordered the number of samples to be increased from 100 to 150 per annum, which I anticipate will result in a corresponding increase in the number of convictions. I have paid special attention to the removal of house refuse, scavenging, cleansing and watering of the district, and have found it necessary on several occasions to report default on the part of the contractor, with the result that the Board have, in most instances, inflicted a fine. 41 I have pleasure in stating that the lighting, cleansing and keeping in repair of the public Lamps has been very satisfactory, with the exception of the time of the Gas Stokers' Strike. During this period the Company provided sleeping accommodation, 4c., for the men not on strike, I therefore inspected these departments daily and nightly during the continuance of the strike, in order to prevent overcrowding. I may add that the Company's officials were always ready to fall in and comply with any suggestions that I made as to increased ventilation, sleeping accommodation, and air space for their employes. The Notification of Infectious Disease Act," which came into operation in October last, and which was made compulsory in the Metropolis, has been so far very effectual. In only one instance has it come to my knowledge of a case not having been reported, and here medical advice had not been sought; this being the first offence under the Act, the Board did not think it desirable to prosecute, but sent a letter cautioning the parents whose duty it was to report the case to the Medical Officer of Health. This, together with the fact that I am in direct telephonic communication with the Asylum's Board, greatly facilitates the speedy removal of all cases reported, the time usually taken from the receipt of the notification to the removal of the patient in the ambulance, being generally about one hour. I am therefore enabled to greatly expedite the disinfection of the infected premises, &c. The vast importance of these matters cannot be over estimated, as it is only by these means that sanitary authorities are enabled to successfully grapple with epidemics. A case of Scarlet Fever occurred in a block of artisan dwellings where it was impossible to procure isolation without removal, the parents, however, refused to allow the child to be taken away. I therefore obtained the Board's sanction to apply for a Magistrate s Order, which was granted on the evidence of the Medical Officer, and the child was removed, with the assistance of the police, after a deal of trouble Several thousand handbills have been delivered throughout 42 the district and playcards exhibited in convenient places, giving the inhabitants instructions how to proceed to notify Ac., in cases of infectious disease. I have also periodically inspected the Bakehouses, Slaughterhouses, Cowhouses, and Lodging houses throughout the district, as well as premises upon which an offensive trade is carried on. ARTHUR A. GRIST, Inspector. 43 LEGAL PROCEEDINGS. I have great pleasure in being able to state that, throughout the year, the Magistrates have generally upheld the proceedings which the Board have authorised me to take; and, where the offences have been proved, orders have been granted, or substantial penalties have been inflicted, with the result that less delay has taken place between the service of Notices and execution of necessary Sanitary Works, which must have a corresponding and beneficial effect upon the public health. TABLE OF CONVICTIONS. OFFENCE. DATE OF HEARING. BY WHOM HEARD. DECISION. Adulterating Milk ibbH. Oct. 11 Mr. Fenwick Fined £5 (including costs). Exposing for sale unsound fruit 19 „ Fined £10 and 23/- costs. Non-compliance with Notice to carry out Sanitary Improvements, &c. Dec. 2 „ Fined £12 and 14/6 costs. Ditto ditto > 9 „ Order made and 14/6 costs. Adulteration of Milk Dec. 10 „ 12/6 costs. Ditto „ Fined £2 10/- and 12/6 costs. Ditto „ Fined £5 and 12/6 costs. Ditto „ Fined £5 and 12/6 costs. Non-compliance with Notice to carry out Sanitary Improvements Dec. 11 „ Fined £1 and 2/- costs. Ditto ditto 1890. Jan.31 Mr. Slade Fined £27 and 6/- costs. Ditto ditto Feb. 10 Mr. Fen wick Fined £14 14/- (including costs). Ditto ditto April 15 „ Fined £22 (including costs). Adulteration of Milk April 22 „ Fined £5 and 12/6 costs. Ditto May 14 „ Fined £7 and 23/- costs. Ditto „ Fined £5 and 23/- costs. Ditto June 10 „ Fined £3 and 12/6 costs. Non-compliance with Notice „ Order made to close premises & 25/- costs Obstruction of footway June 19 Mr Slade Fined 10/- and 2/- costs. Exposing unsound food for sale June 23 Mr. Fenwick Fined £20 and 25/- costs. 44 TABLE OF NUISANCES, WORKS. AND OTHER MATTERS ATTENDED TO DURING THE YEAR 1880-90. July. Aug. , Sept. Oct Nov. Dec. Jan. Feb. Mar. Apl. May June. Total Nuisance Complaints received and attended to No R card 12 20 9 14 7 14 8 19 8 11 122 Notices Served 1 4 58 102 82 33 37 61 84 55 78 56 691 Premises Inspected ... ... 61 73 55 38 29 59 80 57 97 78 629 Inspection of Works during progress ... ... 90 152 113 85 71 120 140 98 154 179 1202 Drains Trapped with Syphon Traps ... ... 11 170 37 13 31 130 36 68 74 41 611 Drains Reconstructed with Stoneware Socketed Pipes (feet) ... ... 150 595 200 185 518 1489 235 865 745 370 5352 Drains (Old Brick) Abolished (in feet) ... ... 52 280 90 25 280 748 160 385 194 123 2337 W.C.'s reconstructed ... ... 4 27 7 4 5 18 12 26 24 27 154 Drains Unstopped ... ... 2 6 11 3 5 4 2 5 1 3 42 Water Laid on to W.C.'s 1 ... 13 22 12 11 4 5 12 10 18 30 138 W.C.'s Cleansed and Limewashed ... ... 10 19 12 10 15 8 18 14 31 35 172 W.C.'s Repaired ... ... 9 20 11 10 12 2 1 4 9 13 91 W.C.'s Rebuilt ... ... ... 2 ... ... ... 1 2 11 5 rj 7 28 Washouses Cleansed and Limewashed ... ... 2 8 5 5 16 3 4 5 / 3 57 Dwelling Rooms Cleansed, Limewashed & Repapered ... ... 8 142 98 21 162 65 83 59 112 73 903 Yards Cleansed and Limewashed ... ... 3 38 20 4 16 12 10 34 52 39 258 Yards Paved and Drained ... ... 10 50 27 7 19 1 30 49 57 33 283 Dust Bins provided ... ... 3 12 4 1 3 3 18 2 9 13 67 Dust Bins Repaired ... ... 2 4 7 4 14 5 6 4 21 65 W.C. Flush Pipes Disconnected from Domestic Water Supply ... ... ... 1 5 2 7 13 11 9 17 8 73 Sink Wastes Disconnected from Drain ... ... ... 9 6 1 ... 22 8 6 ... 4 56 Cellars Cleansed and Limewashed ... ... ... ... 7 1 ... 20 8 2 1 4 43 Cellars Drained ... ... ... ... 7 1 1 22 16 3 2 11 63 Cellar Dwellings Closed ... ... ... 3 16 ... ... ... 1 ... ... 2 22 Cellars Paved ... ... ... 4 21 3 1 6 ... ... 2 ... 37 Cellar Gratings Reinstated ... ... ... 2 6 ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 9 Cesspools Cleansed and Filled in ... ... 1 18 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 9 45 Overcrowded ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 2 ... 1 ... ... ... Roofs and Gutters Repaired ... ... 4 40 9 ... 11 2 2 1 11 7 87 Additional W.C.'s provided ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 3 ... 1 ... 4 D Traps Abolished ... ... 5 i 3 ... 2 ... 1 1 ... 7 Pan Container Closets Abolished ... ... 2 1 1 1 1 1 ... 1 ... 7 Soil Pipes and Drains Ventilated ... ... 1 ... 2 1 3 13 2 3 5 7 37 Houses Repaired Throughout ... ... 2 38 9 3 10 ... ... 7 31 15 115 W.C. Pans Cleansed ... ... 5 12 6 5 4 12 13 15 9 4 85 Defective W.C. Pans Reinstated ... ... 6 28 17 3 2 19 10 13 29 14 142 W.C. Fittings Repaired ... ... ... 39 14 4 13 23 8 6 12 6 125 Applications for Removal of House Refuse 44 43 43 65 88 78 98 67 93 58 69 40 786 W.C.'s Unstopped ... 2 2 1 4 2 3 6 4 1 4 ... 29 Notification of Infectious Disease Reported to School Board ... ... ... ... ... ... 5 9 5 3 2 2 26 Rooms Disinfected alter Cases of Infectious Disease 5 12 21 37 30 13 4 15 5 4 1 6 153 Clothing, &c. ditto ditto (by Dry Heat) 23 17 153 203 115 110 69 139 25 33 12 1 37 934 Bedding, &c., Destroyed ... ... 2 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2 Animals Removed, Pigs ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 13 2 15 ditto Rabbits ... ... 5 ... 3 10 4 6 4 9 5 6 52 ditto Fowls ... ... 7 10 ... 2 6 ... 15 6 28 7 81 Accumulation of Refuse, &c., Removed ... ... 1 1 1 ... 1 2 ... 4 6 ... 16 Manure Pits Provided ... ... 1 ... ... ... 1 ... 1 ... 1 ... 4 Areas Drained ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... 4 2 7 Courts, &c., Repaved ... ... ... 2 1 ... 1 ... ... 1 2 1 8 Washouses Paved ... ... ... 1 2 ... 1 ... ... 1 2 2 9 Cisterns Abolished ... ... 2 ... 1 1 6 ... 1 3 7 4 25 Cisterns Provided with Covers ... ... ... ... 4 1 3 ... 2 2 ... 4 16 Cisterns Cleansed ... ... 2 6 3 5 10 2 1 7 5 2 43 Obstructions Removed ... ... 8 3 7 4 6 10 2 ... 3 24 67 UNSOUND FOOD SEIZED, Plumr, 19 Baskets, Apples, 74 Barrels. Potatoes, 4 Barrels. Salmon, 11 Barrels and 357 Tins. Sardines, 170 Tins- Samples taken under Food and Drugs Act, 88. 46 47 THE BOARD OF WORKS FOR??? THE ST. SAVIOUR'S DISTRICT ABSTRACT OF ACCOUNTS, from 25th March, 1889, to 25th March, 1890. RECEIPTS. PAYMENTS. To Balances from last Year— £ s. d. £ s. 6 CONSOLIDATED RATE. Treasurer's Account 2,886 11 8 £ s. d. £ s. d. Labour and Petty Cash 7 9 8 London County Council, Amount Precept of Metropolitan Board of Works, dated 1st February, 1889 3,451 15 C 2,894 1 METROPOLITAN CONSOLIDATED RATE. Education RATE Overseers, St. Saviour's, Amount Precept dated 1st February, 1889 2,359 13 9 School Board for London, Amount Precept, dated 28th February, 1889 5,700 18 2 ,, Christchurch ditto 1,092 1 3 3,451 15 0 Ditto dated 25th 1889 6,370 15 2 EDUCATION RATE. 12,071 13 Overseers, St. Saviour's, Amount Precept, dated 28th February, 1889 3,897 5 3 PUBLIC DRAINAGE. ,, Christchurch ditto 1,803 12 11 Heare & Son1¼ year to 25th December 468 7 5 5,700 18 2 Precept, dated 25th July, 1889 4,321 0 0 Southwark & Company, Water for Flushing 3 3 0 Lambeth Water Company ditto 5 10 0 ,, Christchurch ditto 2,049 15 2 Waller & Company, Iron Work for Sewers 11 3 11 6,370 15 2 29 9 4 12,071 13 4 ditto i7 T Evans 3 1 6 SEWER RATE. Cleaver, Oil, &c. 0 7 6 Jacobs, Young & Co., Drainage Implements 8 12 6 Overseers, St. Saviour's, Amount Precept, dated 27th February, 1889 681 0 0 Clark, Water Boots, &c. 1 10 0 Jelley, Son & Jones, Sewer Lamps 1 10 0 ,, Christchurch ditto 323 0 0 Gaunt, Spirits of Suits 1 12 0 532 17 2 1,004 0 0 Carried forward £19,421 9 8 Carried forward 16,056 5 6 48 49 Brought forward £19,421 9 8 Brought forward £16,056 5 6 GENERAL PURPOSES RATE. PRIVATE DRAINAGE. Hoare & Son, Contractors, 1¼ year to 25th Dec. 49 6 0 Overseers, St. Saviour's, Amount Precept, dated 27th February, 1889 8,616 0 0 Various Persons, Balance Drainage Deposits, returned 7 11 10 ,, Christchurch ditto 4,225 0 0 56 17 10 12,841 0 0 CHALET PUBLIC CHALET. Southwark and Vauxhall Water Company, Water Supply 8 10 1 Fees 372 1 2 Jones, Plumbers' Work 6 0 4 Hoare & Son, ditto 2 11 10 RENT. Bullivant, Paper 2 14 0 Ewin & Co., Towels 5 5 0 Executor of Wm. Lee, Esq., 1½ year's Rent Premises in Upper Ground Street, to Christmas (less Tax) 7 6 3 Clayton, Washing Towels 10 11 0 Silverlock, Printing Tickets 9 6 8 Brown, Brushes 0 10 0 Mrs. Humphrey, Rent Charge on Vaults under Southern Approach to London Bridge, 1 year to 3rd April (less Tax) 19 7 3 Cleaver, Sundries 4 14 4 Boorman, Letter Plates, &c. 4 1 3 Mr. Wm. Grimsdell, 1 year s Rent Premises in Prices Street, to Christmas (less Tax) 10 5 3 Ponders & Baker, Copper Boiler 2 3 0 Attendants for Change 0 10 0 Various person's, Sundry Small Rents 4 5 0 56 17 6 41 3 9 URINALS. PAVING. Southwark and Vauxhall Water Company, Water Supply 30 16 6 Lambeth Water Company, Water Supply 26 4 4 Messrs. Harnss, Blackmail k Sons, for old Stone 3 0 0 Jones, Plumbers' Work 0 12 0 PAVING. Beggs & Son, Repairing Meters 2 4 6 Cleaver. Brooms 0 11 0 Various persons on making Private Connections with Sewers 90 0 3 Gaunt, Spirits of Salts 0 8 0 60 16 4 Ditto, on erecticn of Hoardings, &c. 49 2 6 PAVING. 3,068 19 7 139 2 9 Gabriel, Contractor, Paving Works 15 18 10 INTEREST. 3,084 18 5 SCAVENGING AND DUSTING London and County Bank, Interest on Current Account 63 19 2 Stubbs, Contractor, to 25th December 3,985 0 0 Carried forward £32,881 16 6 Carried forward £23,300 15 7 50 51 Brought forward £32,881 16 6 Brought forward £23,300 15 7 SANITARY. WATERING. Metropolitan Asylums Board, Fees re Infectious Disease (Notification) Act 6 10 0 Southwark and Vauxhall Water Company, Water for Roads 200 0 0 SUNDRIES. ubbs, Contractor, Water Carts, &c. 400 0 0 600 0 0 Fines out of Court 67 1 1 LIGHTING. ???uth Metropolitan Gas Company, 1 year to 25th December 1,933 2 11 Hoare Son 9 10 0 1,942 12 11 LABOUR. fire of Labourers, 1 year to 25th March 514 3 3 REPAIRS, &c. Hoare & Son 46 12 7 Lambeth Water Company 0 6 5 ???ugg & Co. 0 12 0 ' Seck & Co. 8 14 6 ones 4 13 3 Hole 2 7 6 Upher 1 5 0 ???eld 0 12 9 65 4 0 SALARIES AND WAGES. Salaries 1,250 0 0 Wages 278 6 6 Extra Allowance, Late Inspector 10 8 4 1,538 14 10 RENT AND INSURANCE. Churchwardens St. Saviour's, 1 Year's Kent of Offices to 25th December (less property tax) and Insurance 51 0 0 South Eastern Railway Co., 1 Year s Rent, Stone Yard, to 25th Dec. (less tax) 97 10 0 Churchwardens, Christchurch, ditto, Land in Upper Ground Street, ditto 7 6 3 Insurance Office Furniture 0 8 0 156 4 3 Carried forward £32,955 7 7 Carried forward £28,117 14 10 52 53 Brought forward < £32,955 7 ??? Brought forward £28,117 14 10 RATES AND TAXES. 72 7 3 PRINTING, STATIONERY, &c. ???unnings 28 2 0 ???sh & Co. 22 3 0 ???lverlock 9 2 6 ???empsell & Briginshaw 1 16 0 ???Vinkley 6 15 6 ???Waterlow Bros, & Layton 1 3 5 ???rewett 0 10 6 ???iddle & Couchman 5 5 0 ???latter 3 8 0 ???Sundries 1 14 3 80 0 2 OFFICE EXPENSES. Metropolitan Drinking Fountain Association 1 5 0 Woolf, Winding, Ac., Clocks 3 3 0 Walls and Son, Uniforms 15 3 0 Cooksey 0 12 6 15 15 6 Hoare & Son, Sundries 2 11 10 Feast, Accountant 17 17 0 United Telephone Company 20 0 0 Hinton & Home, Coals 3 15 0 Barraud & Peters, ditto 4 4 0 7 19 0 Surveyor, Sundries 4 1 6 Moody, late Inspector ditto 13 11 8 Grist, Inspector, ditto 6 10 11 Sundries 13 7 3 106 2 8 LOANS. London Country Council Interest 64 15 u Ditto, Balance 1874 Loan 200 0 0 264 15 0 LAW EXPENSES. Hicklin, Washngtonn & Pasmore 86 14 9 Carried forward £32,955 7 7 ??? Carried forward £28,727 14 8 54 55 Brought forward £32,955 7 7 Brought forward £28,727 14 8 SANITARY. Coal Tar Disinfecting Co., Disinfectants 17 16 3 Jeye9, Disinfectants 5 8 0 McDougall ditto 5 0 0 Fentum, Undertaker's Charges 1 10 0 Upsher, Repairing Truck 6 10 0 F. Drewett, Mortality Returns 2 10 6 Glover, ditto 2 10 0 Gainsford, Bedding 1 2 6 F. Drewett, Work Mortuary 8 17 6 Warner, Bill Posting 0 12 0 Knight & Co., Forms re Notification Act 11 13 0 Notification Fees 6 10 0 Sundry Expenses of Disinfectants 24 6 0 94 5 9 HOARDINGS, &c. Balance Deposits Returned 15 4 1 SUNDRIES. Cole, Advertisements 15 7 8 Bibbev, Bottles for Samples 1 9 0 Bailey, Pegg k Co., Ironwork 3 8 7 Jellev Son & Jones, Shovels, &c. 0 8 6 Willing & Co Street Name Plates 0 12 5 Guarantee Society Premiums 3 1 0 Clark, Removing Gas Testing Apparatus 1 1 0 Stubbs, Cartage 8 18 0 Candidates for Inspectorship, Travelling Expenses 5 5 6 Copy Acts of Parliament, &c. 1 3 2 Inspector Samples for Analysis 1 0 8 Stamp Duty 0 14 8 Other small Items 2 6 3 44 16 5 Balance at Bank 4,001 18 9 Ditto (Petty Cash) 65 2 6 Cash in hand 6 5 5 71 7 11 4,073 6 8 £32,955 7 £32,955 7 7 56 57 Account showing the application of the Receipts and Payments The foregoing Abstract, to the various Ratal Accounts. GENERAL PURPOSES Dr. Cr. £ s. d. £ s. d. To Paving Carriageways and Footways 3,154 16 10 Receipts from General Purposes Rate 13,131 0 0 ,, Scavenging and Dusting 3.985 0 0 Interest on Banking Account 82 4 6 ,, Watering 600 0 0 Sundries 22 4 8 ,, Lighting 1,986 1 2 Drainage Deposits 82 8 5 ,, Labour 514 3 3 Hoardings Deposits 33 18 5 ,, Repairs, &c. 65 4 0 ,, Interest on Loans, Paving Purposes 63 18 10 ,, Law and Parliamentary 86 14 9 ,, Sanitary 87 15 9 ,, 2/3 Establishment Expenses 1,242 0 0 ,, Balance 1,616 1 5 £13,351 16 0 £13,351 16 0 SEWERS ???ATE £ s. d. £ s. d. To Sewer and Drainage Work 506 10 10 Receipts from Sewers Rate 1,004 0 0 ,, Private Drainage Connection 35 10 3 Chalet 311 5 7 „ Urinals 62 17 8 ,, 1/3 Establishment Expenses 620 19 11 ,, Balance 89 6 11 £1,315 5 7 £1,315 5 7 ESTABLISHMENT EXPENSES. £ s. d. £ s. d. To Salaries 1,239 3 4 By General Purposes Rate, 2/3 of Total 1,242 0 0 ,, Wages 278 6 6 ,, Sewers Rate, 1/3 of Total 620 19 11 ,, Rent and Insurance 104 15 2 ,, Rates and Taxes 72 7 3 ,, Printing and Stationery 79 7 4 ,, Office Expenses 89 0 4 £1,862 19 11 £1,862 19 11 58 59 BOARD OF WORKS ???ST. SAVIOUR'S DISTRICT. Statement of Account showing the ascertained or estima??? and Liabilities of the Board on the 25th March, 1890. ASSETS. LIABILITIES. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. Amount due from Overseers of St. Saviour's— ???ool Board for London 3,511 8 2 Education Rate 2,381 12 7 ???adry Creditors- Paving 376 0 6 General Purposes 290 0 0 Drainage 152 13 6 2,671 12 ??? Scavenging and Dusting 1,000 0 0 Amount Due from Overseers of Christchurch— Lighting 494 4 11 Education Rate 1,129 15 Salaries 279 3 4 Cash Balance with Treasurer 4,001 18 ??? Rents and Insurance 36 11 3 Petty Cash at Bank and in hand 71 7 ??? Printing and Stationery 16 9 0 Chalet Fees in hand 4 16 ???? Urinals 22 18 7 Interest due on Bank account 32 2 ??? Chalet 2 4 4 Office Expenses 16 14 6 2,396 19 11 London County Council— Loan repayable by instalments extending over 9 years, and interest to date 1,815 15 0 Balance- 1,616 1 5 General Purposes Rate 89 6 11 Sewers Rate 1,705 8 4 Less Balance, 26th March 1889 1,517 16 8 187 11 8 £7,911 14 £7,911 14 9 COPY ACCOUNTANT CERTIFICATE I certify that I have examined the accounts of the St. Saviour's District Board of Works for the year ending 25th March, 1890. I have seen and checked all the vouchers for payments, and ascertained the correctness of the balance with the Treasurer, and, in my opiniiion, the above Statement is correct. WALTER W. FEAST, F.C.A., Sr. George's House, Eastcheap, London, E. C. 60 61 PUBLIC CONVENIENCES at of Southwark Street, Borought. Account of Receipts and Espenditure the year ending 25th March, 1890. Dr. Cr. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. To Fees received for use of Closets and Lavatories, viz.:- South Metropolitan Gas Company, 4 Quarters' Lighting 30 5 3 MEN'S DEPARTMENT. Southwark and Vauxhall Water Company, 4 Quarters' Water Supply 8 12 8 Quarter to 24th June 72 9 11 Sundries, viz.:— „ 29th September 91 7 2 Ewen & Co., Towels 5 5 0 „ 25th December 68 10 0 Clayton Washing Towels 10 11 0 „ 25th March 60 18 9 Silverlock Printing Tickets, &c. 9 6 8 Cleaver, Soap, &c. 4 14 4 WOMEN'S DEPARTMENT Brown, Brushes, &c. 0 10 0 Quarter to 24th June 20 5 9 Bullivant, Paper 2 14 0 „ 29th September 24 7 5 Jones, Plumbers' Work 6 0 0 „ 25th December 15 4 9 Ponders & Baker, Copper Boiler 2 3 0 „ 25th March 11 5 11 71 3 2 Boorman, Letter-plate Inscription 4 1 3 Other Small Items 1 15 8 47 0 11 ,, Wages of Attendants, 52 Weeks: Men's Department 112 3 6 Women's ditto 84 4 0 196 7 6 Balance 82 3 4 £364 9 2 £364 9 8 62 STATEMENT OF CONTRACTS. Name of Contractor. Nature of Contract. Term. Amount. Hoare & Son Sewer and Drainage Works 3 Years from 25th March: 188b 6 per cent. below Schedule of Prices in Contract. Joseph S. Gabriel Paving Carriageways Ditto Per Schedule of Prices in Contract. Ditto Paving Footways Ditto Ditto. William Stubbs Scavenging and Dusting 3 Years from 24th June, 188b £4000 per annum. Ditto Watering Ditto to November, 1881 £400 per annum. Limmer Asphalte Paving Company Repair of Footway on East side of Boro' High Street 10 Years from 26th May, 1881 COPY AUDITOR S CERTIFICATE. We, the undersigned Auditors of Accounts appointed by the Board of Works for the Saint Saviour's District to audit the Accounts of the said Board, do HERREBY certify that we have, for the year which ended on the 25th March, 1889, investigated such Accounts, and the same arc, to the best of our knowledge and belief, correct. Dated the 29tH day of May, 1890. (Signed) FRED. WM. DAVISON, JOHN DYER FIELD, Auditors. 63 ST. SAVIOUR'S DISTRICT BOARD OF WORKS. NAMES AND ADDRESSES OF MEMBERS. ST. SAVIOURS. S.E. ???axter, Fredk. South Eastern Wharf, Park Street, ???latchford, R. H. 39, Bankside. ???iridgman, T. R. Three Tuns Court, Borough. ???oake, W. J. 81, Union Street, Borough. ???foles, H. J. 89, Sumner Street, Southwark Bridge Road. ???ckstein, William 187, Union Street, Borough. ???rfry, H. J. Spur Inn Yard, Borough High Street, ???Gilson, R. A. 180, Union Street, Borough. ???goodwin, Arnold 56, Sumner Street, Southwark Bridge Road. ???Gregory, Henry 75, Borough High Street. ???Hale, Josiah 63a, Southwark Bridge Road. ???Hill, W. E..48, Borough High Street. ???Hunt, Richard 42, Southwark Bridge Road ???Keith, Alex. J. York Street, Borough Market. ???Kinnell, C. P. Southwark Street and Bankside. ???Newton, Geo. J. 92, Union Street, Borough. ???Palmer, John Three Tuna Court, Borough. ???Rhodes, J. G. (L.C.C.) 7, Southwark Street. ???Rideal, Alfred 117, Union Street, Borough. ???Rider, Thomas Francis 181, Ditto. ???Sinclair, James, 65, Southwark Street. ???Stunt, Octavius 44, Southwark Bridge Road. CHRISTCHURCH, S.E. ???Back, Thos. 27, Stamford Street. ???Bowers, R. W. 89, Blackfriars Road. ???Barton, B. 82 Blackfriars Road. ???Carter. W. 40, Chmrlotte Street, Blackfriars Road. ???Clark, Jas.York Street, Blackfriars Road. ???Cooper, J. 207, Blackfriars Road. ???Dykes, Jan. 231/3, Cross Street, Blackfriars Road. ???Hawkins. Jas. H 21. Burrell Street, Blackfriars Road. ???Henley, Charles 188, Blackfriars Road. ???Hopkins. William 50, Nelson Square, Blackfriars Road. ???Mills, John 99, Brixton Road. ???Pinner, J. 25, Collingwood Street. ???Ridley, Henry 6, Great Charlotte Street. ???Robertson, W. 209 & 210, Blackfriars Road. ???Snook, George 51. Ditto. Williams, Charles 107, Borough High Street. OFFICERS— Treasurer Charles Edwd. Stowell, Manager, London and County Bank, Southwark Branch. Medical Officer and Gas Examiner Dr. Jas. Herron, 73, Southwark Bridge Rd.,S.E. CLERK William H. Atkins, Springfield House, Cambridge Rd., Teddincton, S.W. Analyst Richard Bodmer, F.I.C. 12, Southwark St., S.E. Surveyor G. R. Norrish, Hawley House, Tudor Road, Upper Norwood, S.E. Clerk of the Works Donald Brims, Cannon Row, Southwark Bridge Road, S.E. Inspector under Sale of Food, &c. Act Inspector of Nuisances A. A. Grist, 3, EmersonStreet Bankside, S.E.