Board of Works For the St. Saviour's District. REPORT of the PROCEEDINGS of the BOARD for the YEAR 1893-94, by the Clerk, Surveyor, Medical Officer and Analyst; also ACCOUNTS IN ABSTRACT of Sums Received and Expended by the Board during the year. PRINTED IN ACCORDANCE WITH THE METROPOLIS LOCAL MANAGEMENT ACT, 18 & 19 VICT., C. 120. LONDON: Printed by Riddle & Couchman, 22, Southwark Bridge Road, S.E 1894 1* CONTENTS. Page Statistics 3 List of Members 5 „ Standing Committees 6 „ Officers 7 Clerk's Report 8 Attendances of Members 28 Bye-Laws of the Board under Public Health Act 30 Surveyor's Report 40 Medical Officer's Report 57 Analyst's Report 64 Accounts 68 List of Contracts 88 3 Thiry-eighth Annual Report OF THE BOARD OF WORKS FOR THE ST. SAVIOUR'S DISTRICT, Being for the year 1893-94. Published in accordance with the provisions of The Metropolis Local Management Act, 1855(18 and 19 Vic., c. 120). The St. Saviour's District comprises the Parishes of St. Saviour and Christchurch, in the County of Surrey, and forms part of the Administrative County of London. The area of the district is 208 statute acres, viz:— St. Saviour 126 Christchurch 77 Total 203 acres. The population, of the District at each of the four decennial periods of the census since the passing of the Metropolis Local Management Act, in the year 1855, is given in the census returns, as under:— 4 *POPULATION. 1861. 1871. 1881. 1891. St. Saviour 19,101 15,677 14,999 13,913 Christchurch 17,069 14,573 13,663 13,264 Totals 36,170 30,250 28,662 27,177 The number of Inhabited Houses is also shown in the Census Returns as under:— INHABITED HOUSES. 1861. 1871. 1881. 1891. St. Saviour 2,580 2,142 2,046 1,417 Cliristchurch 1,891 1,584 ] ,419 1,316 Totals 4,471 3,726 3,465 2,733 The following table shows the Rateable Value of the District for the past three years, as given in the Valuation Returns for the Metropolis. RATEABLE VALUE. 1892. 1893. 1894. St. Saviour £225,154 £224,599 £226,567 Cliristchurch 120,367 119,730 121,622 Totals £345,521 £344,329 £348,189 * The decrease of population is attributed to the demolition of houses for the construction of railways, the formation of new streets, and the erection of business premises; the diminution in the number of inhabited houses is due to the same causes, and to the erection of blocks of artizans' dwellings in lieu of the, smaller description of houses, each block being counted as one house. 5 The following is a List of the Members of the Board at the date of this report:- MEMBERS OF THE BOARD. Chairman: FREDK. BAXTER, Esq., J.P. ST. SAVIOUR, S.E. Ayling, Ernest Baxter, Fredk. Brown, H. Castle, Henry Coles, H. J. Collard, Ernest Doyle, J. M. Francis, W. H Fry, H. J. Gibbings, H. D Hale, W. S. Hill, W. E. Layman, A. R. Levy, Emanuel Matthews, J. Morris, H. Newton, G. J. Nicholl, A. H. Osmond, John Pearce, J. Rider, E. S. Skyrme, J. J. Wood, Henry Willcox, W. H 38 Borough High Street. South Eastern Wharf, Park Street. Queen's Head Yard, Borough High Street. 97a, Southwark Bridge Road. 89, Sumner Street, Southwark Bridge Road. 45, Borough High Street. 18 and 19, Newcomen Street. 38, Southwark Street. Spur Inn Yard, Borough High Street. 21, Park Street. 25, Southwark Bridge Road. 48, Borough High Street. 1, Denman Street. 5, Stoney Street, Borough Market. 53, Borough High Street. 8, Stoney Street, Borough Market. 92, Union Street. 13, Southwark Bridge Road. 5, Borough Market. Bridge House Hotel, London Bridge. 181, Union Street. 56, Newcomen Street. 41 to 57, Southwark Bridge Road. 36, Southwark Street. CHRISTCHURCH, S.E. Back, Thos. Cooper, J. Gibbs, W. Goodenough, R. H. Henley, Charles Hurwood, E. Mason, G. Morgan, R. Rawle, J. Ridley, Henry Skinner, R. Snook, George Winsford, Wm. F. Woodcock, G. D. Young, Alfred 27, Stamford Street. 207, Blackfriars Road. 16, Blackfriars Road. 10, Charlotte Street. 188, Blackfriars Road. Meymott Street, Blackfriars Road. 70, Blackfriars Road. 213, Blackfriars Road. 231, Blackfriars Road. 6, Great Charlotte Street. 19, Blackfriars Road. 51, Blackfriars Road. 4, Charlotte Street. 11, Blackfriars Road 55, Stamford Street. 6 LIST OF STANDING COMMITTEES. Paving & General Purposes Committee. Sanitary & Sewers Committee. COLES, H. J., Chairman. AYLING, ERNEST. BACK, T. FRANCIS, W. H. GIBBINGS, H. D. HALE, W. S. HENLEY, CHARLES. LEVY, E. MATTHEWS, J. NICHOLL, A. H. RAWLE, JOHN. SNOOK, G. WILLCOX, W. H. WOOD, HENRY. WOODCOCK, G. D. NEWTON, G. J., Chairman. BROWN, H. CASTLE, HENRY. COLLARD, ERNEST. DOYLE, J. M. HILL, W. E. LAYMAN, A. R. MASON, G. MORRIS, H. OSMOND, J. PEARCE, J. RIDER, E. S. SKYRME, J. J. WINSFORD, W. F. YOUNG, A. Finance Committee. FRY, H. J., Chairman. BAXTER, F. COOPER, J. GIBBS, W. GOODENOUGH, R. H. HURWOOD, E. MORGAN, R. RIDLEY, HENRY. SKINNER, R. The Chairman of the Board is, ex-officio, a Member of all the Standing Committees. 7 OFFICERS. Treasurer Clerk Clerk's Assistant Surveyor Surveyor's Assistant Medical Officer Analyst Stowell, Charles Edwd., Manager, London and County Bank, Southwark Branch. Atkins, William H., 12, Kilmorie Road, Forest Hill, S.E. Cole, F.T., 42, Broomhouse Road, Parson's Green, S.W. Norrish, G. R., Hawley House, Tudor Road, Upper Norwood, S.E. Watson, Percy W., 4, Pelham Road, Beckenham, S.E. Herron, Jas., M.D., 73, Southwark Bridge Road, S.E. Bodmer, Richard, F.I.C., 16, Southwark Street, S.E. Sanitary Inspector and Inspector under Sale of Food and Drugs Acts Grist, A.A., 3, Emerson Street, Bankside, S.E. Ditto ditto Broadhead, Samuel, 2, Nelson Square, Blackfriars Road, S.E. 8 THE LOCAL GOVERNMENT ACT, 1894. That which may be regarded as the first instalment of the long promised reform of Local Government in the Metropolis, has taken place in the passing of the Parish Councils Act, technically known as "The Local Government Act, 1894" and which received the Royal Assent on the 5th March, 1894. As originally drafted, it was intended to apply to the provinces only; but, owing to the pressure put upon the Government by some of the London Members when the bill was in Committee of the House of Commons, and after its second reading, amendments were introduced by Mr. Fowler, the President of the Local Government Board, making it applicable in part to the Vestries and District Boards of the Metropolis. The Act does not interfere with the time or method of election of Members of District Boards of Works, they having to be elected as heretofore by the constituent Vestries ; the rating qualification of members, however, is done away with, and henceforth any person, whether male or female, whose name appears upon the Local Government Register or the Parliamentary Register of Electors of the Parishes within the District will be capable of being elected. The following is a summary of the more important provisions of the Act so far as it affects the St. Saviour's District. Sect. 31.—The qualification of Members is to be the same as that of Urban District Councillors mentioned in the Act—that is to say: Sect. 23 (2).—A person will not be qualified to be elected unless he is a parochial elector of some Parish within the District, or has during the whole of the twelve months preceding the election resided in the District. It would seem that an elector may be chosen from either of the Parishes by the elective Vestry. Ibid.—No person will be disqualified by sex or marriage for being elected. Sect. 31 (2).—At the first meeting after the annual election of Members, the Board is to elect a Chairman for the year. 9 Ibid.—Section 41 of the Metropolis Local Management Act, which requires a Chairman to be elected at each meeting of a District Board of Works, is to apply only in the absence of the annually elected Chairman. Ibid.—The provisions of the Act with respect to Chairmen of Urban District Councils being Justices are to apply to a District Board of Works; i.e.— Sect. 22.—Unless a woman or personally disqualified by any Act, the Chairman will, by virtue of his office, be a Justice of the Peace for the county of London, subject to his taking the necessary oaths: that is to say, the oath of allegiance and the Judicial oath prescribed by the Promissory Oaths Act, 1868, 31 and 32 Vict., c. 72, s. 6. The oath referring to qualification by estate is not required to be taken. Sect. 46 (1).—The Act provides that "A person shall be disqualified for being elected or being a Member or Chairman of a Council of a Parish or of a District other than a Borough or of a Board of Guardians " if he is:— (a) An infant or an alien. (b) Has within 12 months before his election received parochial relief. (4). (c) Has within 5 years been convicted of crime, or has been adjudged bankrupt, or made a composition or arrangement with his creditors. (Such disqualification to cease when the adjudication is annulled or the bankrupt obtains his discharge with a certificate that his bankruptcy was caused by misfortune, without misconduct on his part, and in case of composition or arrangement on payment of his debts in full.) (d) Holds any paid office under the Parish or District Council. (e) Is concerned in any bargain or contract entered into with the Council or Board, or participates in the profit of any such bargain or contract or any work done under the authority of the Council or Board. 10 (6).—Is absent from meetings for more than six months consecutively, except in case of illness, or for some reason approved by the Council or Board. (2).—A person will not be disqualified for election or for being a member or chairman by reason of being interested— (a) In the sale or lease of any lands, or in any loan of money to the Council or Board, or in any contract with the Council for the supply from land, of which he is owner or occupier, of stone, gravel, or other materials for making or repairing highways or bridges, or in the transport of materials for the repair of roads or bridges in his own immediate neighbourhood. (b) In any newspaper in which any advertisement relating to the affairs of the Council or Board is inserted; or (c) In any contract with the Council or Board as a shareholder in any joint stock company; but he is not to vote at any meeting of the Council or Board on any question in which such company are interested, except that in the case of a water or other company, &c., the prohibition may be dispensed with. (7).—Where a Member of a Council becomes disqualified for holding office or vacates his seat for absence, the Council or Board is forthwith to declare the office to be vacant, and signify the same by notice signed by three Members, and countersigned by the Clerk of the Council or Board, and notified in such manner as the Council or Board directs, and the office is thereupon to become vacant. Sect. 46 (8).—Any person acting when disqualified or voting when prohibited under the section is to be liable for each offence, on summary conviction, to a fine not exceeding £20. Seet. 46 and Schedule 2.—The penal clause (Sect. 54) of the Metropolis Local Management Act is repealed "as from the appointed day" (8th Nov., 1894). Thus the penalty to which a member is liable for voting when in 11 any way disqualified will be reduced from £50 to £20 or less. Some difference of opinion however prevails as to whether the clause 46 can be held to apply to District Boards of Works, inasmuch as by sub-section 9 it is to apply in the case of any authority u'hose members are elected in accordance with the Act, and seeing that the mode of election of Members of District Boards is unaltered. If it do not apply there will be absolutely no disqualification of the kinds referred to for Members of a District Board of Works. Sect. 31 (2).—A curious anomaly will result from the conditional repeal of section 41 of the Metropolis Local Management Act. That section, which inter alia provides that the Chairman of any meeting, in case of an equality of votes on any question, shall have a second or casting vote, is to apply only in case of the absence of the annually elected Chairman; consequently such Chairman will not be able to give a second or casting vote, but any temporary occupant of the chair will have the power to do so. Sect. 33.—The Local Government Board may, on the application of the Council of any Urban District, make an order conferring on the Vestry, or other representative body within the District, the duty of appointing Overseers and the powers, duties or liabilities of a Parish Council, as mentioned in the Act. ELECTION OF MEMBERS. The Annual Election of Members of the Board by the constituent Vestries, took place at the usual period, viz., the first Wednesday in June, as provided by Sect. 36 of the Metropolis Local Management Act, 1855, the time and mode of such elections being, as above stated, unaltered by the new Act. ELECTION OF CHAIRMEN OF THE BOARD AND COMMITTEES. In accordance with the requirement of Sect. 31, that a District Board of Works shall, at its first meeting after the annual election of members, elect a Chairman for the year, the Board, on the 18th of June last, proceeded to elect a Chairman. The voting was by ballot, and the result was declared to be as follows:— For Mr. Frederick Baxter 17 votes. For Mr. Henry J. Coles 7 „ 12 Mr Baxter was therefore elected to be the Chairman of the Board and having taken the necessary oaths, he is now exofficio, a Justice of the Peace for the County of London. Mr. Baxter having resigned his Chairmanship of the Finance Committee, Mr. H. J. Fry was unanimously elected the Chairman thereof in his stead. At the first meeting of the Board after such election, it was, on the motion of Mr. Fry, seconded by Mr. Gibbings, unanimously resolved that a record be placed on the minutes of the Board of the Finance Committee's high appreciation of the painstaking and valuable labours rendered by Mr. Baxter, as Chairman of that Committee during the past six years, coupled with an expression of the hope that they might continue to be favoured with his valuable advice and assistance from time to time as necessity should arise. At a subsequent meeting, it was resolved, on the motion of Mr. Fry, seconded by Mr. Newton, that the Chairman of the Board should, by virtue of his office, be a member of all the Standing Committees of the Board. Mr. Henry J. Coles was unanimously re-elected the Chairman of the Paving and General Purposes Committee, and Mr. G. J. Newton that of the Sanitary and Sewers Committee for the year ensuing. LONDON EQUALISATION OF RATES BILL. This Bill has passed a second reading in the House of Lords, and there is every prospect of its becoming law. Its object is stated in the preamble to be "to make better provision for the equalisation of rates as between the different parts of London," and it provides that the London County Council shall form a fund, to be called the "Equalisation Fund," by levying a rate of 6d. in the pound on the rateable value of London, and shall determine the amount of the contribution among the parishes according to their rateable value as shown in the valuation lists. It further provides that the Council shall determine the grant due by apportioning the amount of the fund among the Sanitary districts in proportion to their population. Shortly after the introduction of the Bill, numerous communications were received from other local authorities, some objecting to, others approving the clauses of the Bill; and, in December last, the Vestry of St. Luke, Middlesex, convened a conference of delegates from local authorities to consider its provisions. The Board did not however, appoint delegates, but referred the matter to the 18 Finance Committee, who, after careful consideration of the same, reported as follows:— "We recommend the Board to protest against the so-called Equalisation of Rates Bill. It is an entire misnomer, and, if carried, will inflict grievous injustice, and increase the rates on districts least able to bear them The Bill would inflict an annual payment by St. Saviour's of nearly £3,000 per annum, and increase its rates from 5/2 to 5/5 in the pound; whereas the well-to-do residential parish of Islington would receive the enormous sum of £21,000, and its rates would be reduced from 5/2 to 4/11 in the pound, so that these two districts, the rates of which are now absolutely equal, would show a difference in favour of the richer parish of 6d. in the pound." The recommendation of the Committee was adopted, and copies of the report were forwarded to the Local Government Board and the Parliamentary representatives of the district. Taking the valuation returns of the Metropolis for 1893 as a basis for calculation (those for 1891 although issued, being incomplete) it appears that the sums which the Parishes of St. Saviour and Christchurch will, if the Bill become law, be called upon to contribute, are approximately as follows:— St. Saviour £5,614 Christchurch £2,993 And the sums which the two parishes will receive back by way of grant are approximately:— St. Saviour £2,756 Christchurch £2,628 The nett results being therefore that— St. Saviour's Parish will contribute £2,858, and Christchurch £365 in aid of the fund; equal, as shown by Mr. Langston, the Vestry Clerk of St. Saviour's, in a statement issued by him in September last, to a rate of 3d. and of ¾d. in the pound respectively. The contributions from the fund are to be applied, first, to defray expenses incurred for sanitation under the Public Health (London) Act, 1891; secondly, for lighting, and the balance (if any) to the maintenance of streets. CLINK STREET. The improvement in the neighbourhood of Clink Street and Bankend, referred to in the last Annual Report, pp. 16-17, has now been carried out, and the exchange of lands effected in accordance with the plan contained in such report and the agreement with the South Eastern Railway Company. 14 ARCHES, LONDON BRIDGE. Leases of the Arches under the southern approaches to London Bridge, the freehold of which reverted to and became vested in the Local Authorities on the 5th of April, 1893, have been granted as follows:— Per annum. To the Proprietors of Fenning's Wharf, for 7, 14, or 21 years, of the eastern portion of the Arches, on the north side of Tooley Street, at £70 0 0 To the Proprietors of the Humphery Estate, for 7, 14, or 21 years, of the western portion of the same Arches, at £70 0 0 (The above are wholly in St. Saviour's.) To the Proprietors of the Humphery Estate, for a like term, of the Arches on the south side of Tooley Street and extending under Duke Street, at £600 0 0 Total £740 0 0 An agreement has been entered into with the St. Olave Board of Works, in whose district a small portion of the Arches is situate, to apportion the rents as follows:- St. Saviour's District £668 St. Olave's District £72 £740 The proportion observed being the same as that of the rent charge of £22, which formerly subsisted upon the Arches and which lapsed when the fee simple reverted to the local authorities. GUY'S BURIAL GROUND. In October, 1893, a deputation attended from the Vestry of Bermondsey to ask the Board to contribute towards the cost of purchasing a piece of land situate in Bermondsey, known as Guy's Burial Ground, and of dedicating the same to public uses as a recreation ground. The application was referred to the Paving and General Purposes Committee for consideration, who, alter careful inquiry, reported that, in their opinion, the advantages to be derived from the dedication of the land as proposed, were purely of a local character, such as the St. Saviour's District could not participate in, and therefore the Board would not be justified in contributing towards the cost. The Board concurred and declined to accede to the application. 15 MORTUARY. For a considerable time past, the Board has been in treaty with the Ecclesiastical Commissioners for a site for the erection of a Mortuary, the London County Council being of opinion that the existing one, situate in Ewer Street, Gravel Lane, is inadequate for the purpose. The proposed site is situate on the north side of Lavington Street; it has an area of 3,260 superficial feet, and the price is £1,335. PUBLIC CONVENIENCES. In September, 1893, Mr. Newton called the attention of the Board to the desirability of constructing an underground public convenience in lieu of the then existing one at the Borough end of Southwark Street, and moved that specifications and estimates be prepared without delay in order that the work might be carried out during the slack time of the year, and thereby afford beneficial employment during the winter for the working classes. The motion was seconded by Mr. Fry and carried unanimously. The matter was referred to the Sanitary and Sewers Committee, with authority to carry out the work in accordance with plans prepared by Mr. Norrish, the Surveyor of the Board, at an estimated cost of £2,300. The work was commenced in November last and is now approaching completion. A loan of £2000 was, after a considerable lapse of time, occasioned by delay on the part of the Local Government Board in sanctioning the loan, obtained of the London County Council towards the cost, repayable by equal instalments of principal and interest in 30 years; the rate of interest charged being 3½ per cent. per annum. RAGLAN MUSIC HALL. In September, 1893, Mr. Grattan called attention to the fact of notice having been given by the proprietor of premises situate in Union Street, Borough, known as the "Raglan Music Hall," of application for a license to use the premises for music and dancing, and moved that a petition be presented to the Licensing Committee of the London County Council against the same. The motion was carried and a petition presented accordingly. The case was heard by the Licensing Committee on the 12th October, and the license refused. WORKMEN'S DWELLINGS. In October and November, vacancies in the Special Committee on the subject of Workmen's Dwellings, occasioned by the death of Mr. James Meikle and the retirement of Mr. R. H. Blatchford, were filled by the appointment of Mr. A. H. Nicholl 2 16 and Mr. W. Carter. In January, the Board, on the recommendation of the Special Committee, passed a resolution expressing satisfaction with the houses which, under the auspices of the Ecclesiastical Commissioners, had been erected in Orange Street and other parts of the district, and urging upon the Commissioners the desirability of suitable dwellings for the working classes being erected on unoccupied land in Union Street, and in the immediate neighbourhood of the buildings referred to. A copy of the resolution was forwarded to the Commissioners, who, in acknowledgment and reply, wrote promising to give the matter their attention. In July last, on the motion of Mr. Newton, the Special Committee was discharged, and a fresh Committee, consisting of Messrs. Coles, Collard, Hill, and the mover and seconder (Messrs. Newton and Fry) formed. WORKMEN'S WAGES. The question of the amount of wages paid to workmen in the employ of the Board was raised by Mr. Passmore, in November last, calling the attention of the Board thereto, and was referred to the Paving and General Purposes Committee for consideration. On their recommendation, it was resolved that in future the minimum wages paid by the Board, should be the same as those which were then paid by the London County Council for a similar class of labour. BYE-LAWS. The Board, as the Sanitary Authority for the District, is by various Sections of the Public Health (London) Act, 1891, required to make bye-laws with respect to houses let in lodgings or occupied by members of more than one family, the prevention of nuisances, the cleansing of cisterns and the keeping of waterclosets supplied with sufficient water for their effective action. Adopting certain model forms supplied by the Local Government Board, the Board, in February last, affixed its common seal to bye-laws accordingly, and the same were afterwards approved by the Local Government Board. A copy of such bye-laws is annexed hereto, and forms Appendix "B." The London County Council has also made bye-laws under the same Act, dealing with the removal of offensive or noxious matter, the closing and filling up of cesspools and privies, the removal and disposal of refuse and other matters. The duty of observing and enforcing these several bye-laws is cast upon the Sanitary authorities. FIRE HYDRANTS. In November last, the London County Council invited the Board to appoint representatives to attend a Conference of local authorities to discuss the propriety of making arrangements for 17 the use of fire hydrants, for flushing, street watering and other purposes, and the Chairman of the General Purposes Committee (Mr. Coles) was deputed to attend. The Conference took place at the County Hall, Spring Gardens, and the matter was discussed with the Fire Brigade Committee of the Council. Much difference of opinion however was expressed, many of the delegates being of opinion that it would be better in the interest both of life and property that the local authorities should have a separate and an independent supply. Afterwards the Council propounded a series of questions to the local authorities, and the Board, in answer to the inquiry whether local authorities should be allowed to use the fire hydrants for the purposes referred to, replied in the negative. MILK ANALYSIS. On receipt of a circular-letter from the Vestry of St. Mary, Battersea, relative to the standards adopted by the Society of Public Analysts and the Somerset House authorities for the analysis of milk, the Board, after conferring with Mr. Bodmer, the Public Analyst, on the subject, caused a communication to be addressed to the Local Government Board in support of the Vestry's suggestion, viz., that definite limits for the composition of milk should be fixed, and that that Board should take steps to enforce by legal enactment the recognition of the limits decided upon, and of such variations and alterations in the limits as that Board might see fit to introduce subsequently. ASPHALTE PAYING. The Board having resolved to pave with asphalte certain streets in the parish of Christchurch, at an estimated cost of £3,632, applied to the London County Council for a loan of £2,000 towards defraying the cost of the same. The Council agreed to advance the money on condition that the amount he repaid in five years by equal annual instalments, and interest quarterly at 3½ per cent. per annum. The loan was completed on the 26th July. GLANDERS AND FARCIES. In November, Mr. Grattan called the attention of the Board to a serious danger with which the district was menaced, viz., the erection of buildings in Orange Street, for the destruction of the carcases of diseased animals under the Glanders and Farcies Order, 1892, the Public Health Committee of the London County Council, having had before them and favourably entertained a proposal for the erection of buildings of the kind in the locality referred to, and moved a resolution strongly protesting against the same. The resolution was unanimously adopted 2* 18 and a Special Committee formed, consisting of the three Chairmen of Committees (Messrs. Baxter, Coles and Newton), and the mover and seconder of the resolution (Messrs. Grattan and Wood), and they were instructed to prepare the necessary evidence and to arrange to attend before the Public Health Committee of the Council in opposition to the scheme. Communications were addressed to the Managers of the Board Schools in Orange Street, the authorities of the Evelina Hospital, Mr. Causton, M.P., and others; and, on the 8th of December the deputation was received by the Committee of the Council. The School Managers also sent a deputation, and strong representations were made by Mr. Baxter, Mr. Newton and others on behalf of the Board, and by Mr. Dumphreys and others on behalf of the Managers, as to the dangerous character of the nuisance which would result from the establishment of a crematorium for the purpose referred to in so crowded a neighbourhood, and in close proximity to a school where hundreds of children were in daily attendance. Afterwards, on a report that the Council had purchased a piece of land in Orange Street for the purpose in view, another Special Committee was appointed, consisting of Messrs. Carter, Coles, Gibbings, Grattan and Newton, with instructions to take immediate action. Accordingly a Special Meeting of the Board was held on the 28th of February and a petition to the Council adopted, as follows:— "TO THE LONDON COUNTY COUNCIL." "The Humble Petition of the Board of Works for the St. Saviour's District, sheweth as follows:— "YOUR PETITIONERS beg most respectfully and earnestly to draw your attention to the serious consequences likely to follow the importation into this crowded district of the carcases of glandered and farcied animals for the purpose of destruction. "The proposed destructor will be close to a Board School recently enlarged to receive the children of those whose employment compels them to live in proximity to the City, and who are crowding into this already over-populated district. These children have scarcely any playground but the streets, they live and sleep in the small rooms of tenements, blockcd in by lofty warehouses or factories, and these with blank walls and dingy houses in narrow and dreary streets, form almost their only surroundings. Their vitality is therefore low and their general state of health such as to render them predisposed subjects for the contraction of any infection. The total absence of any objects of interest in the neighbourhood will make them more eager to crowd round any unusual or gruesome object that may come into the streets, and thus attract them to the very centre of disease. "A free Library and Public Baths and Wash-honses are in course of erection in the district with a view to make the lives of the inhabitants brighter and more tolerable, and to counteract these good influences by the erection of a destructor with its contaminating accompaniments would be a double wrong. 19 "Were all London in the same overcrowded and depressing condition, your Petitioners would have little ground for complaint; but as they feel sure there are very many places where there are few inhabitants, or where the inhabitants live under much more favourable and healthful circumstances, they venture to protest most emphatically against anything being brought into their midst that may make the struggle for even a moderately healthy existence more severe than it is at present for the poorer parishioners. "Your Petitioners therefore humbly pray that your Honourable Council will not proceed to the erection of the buildings as proposed." ( L. S. ) A public meeting of ratepayers and inhabitants was also held on the same evening at the Bricklayers' Hall, Southwark Bridge Road, Mr. Coles presiding, and a petition similar in its terms to that above set forth was adopted. Despite a rumour that the Public Health Committee intended to abandon the project, it was thought advisable, in the absence of any official announcement to that effect, to proceed with the opposition, and the petitions were forwarded to the Council. The rumour, however, proved to be well founded, and Mr. Edric Bayley, who had zealously co-operated with the Board in opposing the scheme, at a meeting of the Council held on the 13th of March, put a question to the Chairman of the Public Control Committee and elicited a reply to the effect that the Committee had resolved to abandon it and desired to withdraw their recommendation with regard thereto. The recommendation was accordingly by leave withdrawn and the scheme abandoned. COMBINED DRAINAGE. On the receipt, in February last, of a circular-letter from the Vestry of St. Mary, Islington, calling attention to the unsatisfactory state of the law in regard to the definition of the words "sewer" and "drain" as contained in the Metropolis Local Management Act, and the Acts for amending the same, and suggesting that the London County Council should be asked to take the necessary steps to cause the law to be amended in regard thereto, the Board, on the recommendation of the Sanitary and Sewers Committee, resolved to give its support to the suggestion, and a letter was addressed to the Council accordingly. Afterwards, a circular-letter was received from the Board of Works for the Holborn District asking the Board to appoint delegates to attend a conference on the subject, and the Board appointed the Chairman of the Sanitary and Sewers Committee (Mr. Newton) and their Surveyor as such delegates accordingly. The conference was held at the Town Hall, Gray's Inn Road, on the 17th of May, and it was resolved to memorialize the Council on the subject. 20 AUDITORS. In April, a ballot was taken for Auditors to audit the Accounts of the Board for the financial year 1893-4, with the result that the following were elected by the highest number of votes, viz: Mr. Aubrey Hyman Mr. J. J. Nicholls St. Saviour Mr. John Dyer Field - Christchurch. The Accounts were duly audited on the 24th May, and a copy of the Auditors' certificate will be found on pages 80 and 81. SANITARY CONDITION OF THE DISTRICT. The Mansion House Council on the Dwellings of the Poor having, in the year 1892, asked the Local Government Board to cause an Inquiry to be made into the sanitary condition of the St. Saviour's District, that Board suggested that the Mansion House Council should submit to the London County Council particulars of the cases in which they considered this Board had made default. The Mansion House Council thereupon, on the 30th of March, 1892, communicated to the County Council the particulars of certain cases, and asked the County Council to exercise its powers under Sections 100 and 101 of the Public Health (London) Act, 1891, and the Medical Officer of Health of the County Council (Mr. Shirley F. Murphy) was instructed to report on the sanitary condition and administration of the district. He has now done so, his report being dated the 23rd of December, 1893. Referring to the lists of alleged defects supplied by the Mansion House Council, numbering altogether 1029, Mr. Murphy remarks as follows:— "In more than one half of these houses the defects pointed out by the Mansion House Council had been remedied at the time of my inspection, and in the remaining houses notices had in almost every case been served, and in many instances the houses had been closed or works were in progress." After giving copious statistical information as to the nature of the soil, area, population, birth rate, mortality, &c., of the district, and other particulars, and referring to the Mortuary in Ewer Street, which he condemns as being unsuitable for the purpose, Mr. Murphy proceeds as follows:— "Disinfection.—For the purposes of disinfection, the sanitary authority has provided an oven which is situated in a railway arch adjoining that used as a mortuary. The oven is heated by gas, and is 21 an apparatus far less efficient than those in which steam is used. Articles requiring disinfection are removed by means of a truck. When bedding is unfit for further use, it is burnt and replaced, but this event is of rare occurrence. No charge is made for disinfection. Houses are disinfected by the burning of sulphur in the rooms, stripping paper from walls, and lime-whiting ceilings, the wall-stripping and lime-whiting being carried out at the owner's expense. "Scavenging.—At the time of the commencement of my inspection, the sanitary authority contracted for the removal of the house and street refuse of the district, and the cleansing of the roads, but employed its own servants to cleanse the footways and the Borough Market. The refuse which was removed by the contractor was taken to Bankside and shot into barges on the Thames. The refuse collected by the sanitary authority was removed to a wharf in Lambeth occupied by the Strand Board of Works. Now none of the work is done by a contractor, but the authority employs its own servants. The house refuse is removed systematically from houses, the scavenger calling at each house on his round, and not waiting to be summoned when his cry is heard. "Shelter for the accommodation of persons during the Disinfection of their rooms.—In accordance with the requirement of section 60 (4) of the Public Health (London) Act, the sanitary authority has provided two rooms at the top of a house in Nelson Square, occupied by one of the Sanitary Inspectors, in which poor persons can be accomodated during the disinfection of their own rooms. This shelter is provided with three beds and other furniture by the sanitary authority. "Sanitary Administration.—For the sanitary administration of the district, the District Board has appointed a Medical Officer of Health and two Sanitary Inspectors, and has also in its service a man who is employed in disinfection and in the testing of drains of houses. The second Inspector was not appointed until February, 1892. "There is no clerk attached to the sanitary department, the Inspectors preparing their own notices and keeping the records. The Inspectors' report to the Medical Officer of Health, who, since March 1st, 1892, has had general supervision of the work of the sanitary department. "A book is kept at the office to which the hall-porter has access, and in which inhabitants can enter their complaints; it is however found by experience that this book is not used, but complaints are often made verbally or sent by letter. In another book is entered the particulars of every house inspected, a page being devoted to each house. "There was at the time of my inquiry no ledger kept containing a list of premises, the subject of proceedings, and by which could be seen the nature of the proceedings and the results. This however, has since been provided. "The Sanitary Inspectors visit houses on complaint, but this inspection is not limited to houses concerning which representation is made to the sanitary authority. I am informed it is the practice of the Inspectors, when their attention is directed to any particular house, to inspect other houses in the same street, and further, when a complaint is received respecting any house, inquiry is not limited to the subject of the complaint, but the house is examined throughout with a view to the discovery of any other defects that may exist. 22 "The requirements of the Sanitary Inspectors are comprehensive. The ventilation of house drains is insisted on, and all new drains are subjected to the water test before being regarded as satisfactory. "A return which I presented to the Council's Public Health Committee in April of the present year, showed that while in the district of St. Saviour there was one Sanitary Inspector to 13,581 inhabitants, it was found necessary in St. Giles's to,employ one to every 7,956, and in as many as eight London districts the strength of the sanitary staff was in excess of that of St. Saviour's. "Until February of last year there has been but one Sanitary Inspector, and the arrears of work in the district must therefore have been considerable. "That much progress has been made is beyond doubt, but in view of the character of the district, which I have endeavoured to describe in the earlier pages of this report, I do not regard two Inspectors as sufficient to maintain it in proper sanitary condition. The systematic inspection of workshops still remains untouched, and the work which will devolve upon the sanitary authority in connection with the registration of houses let in lodgings will make further important demands upon the efforts of the staff." In conclusion, Mr. Murpliy adds:— (1). "I am satisfied that the representations of the Mansion House Council as to the condition of houses in the district were substantially accurate, and that these conditions had grown up as a result of the insufficiency of the staff. The sanitary authority had, before my inspection began, endeavoured to remedy the defects, and in this work they had been materially aided by the appointment of the second Sanitary Inspector in the early part of last year, practically doubling their staff. The work of improvement which has been done deserves recognition on acconnt of its thoroughness. I am, however, of opinion that two Inspectors are insufficient, especially in view of the necessity of a systematic inspection of workshops, and in view of the duties which must devolve upon the staff in connection with the regulation of houses let in lodgings. (2). "There is need for the sanitary authority to provide a proper mortuary. (3). "The present disinfecting oven should be replaced by one in which the disinfection is effected by steam." With regard to the number of Sanitary Inspectors, the Sanitary Committee caused the following letter to be addressed to the Council:— "Board of Works for the St. Saviour's District, Emerson Street, Bankside, Southwark, S.E. 18th July, 1894. "Sir, "The Sanitary Committee of this Board have considered your letter of the 22nd of February last, enclosing copy of a report by the Council's Medical Officer of Health on the sanitary condition and administration of the St. Saviour's District, and urging that, in view of the circumstances mentioned in the report, a larger number of Sanitary Inspectors for the District should be appointed. 23 "In reply, I am directed to state that since the report of the Council's Medical Officer referred to was prepared, the circumstances have been altered, the work of scavenging and dusting being no longer done by contractors, but by a staff in the direct employ of the Board. The Board's Inspectors have thus been relieved of the duty of superintending this work, which formerly occupied a considerable amount of their time, and the whole is now carried out in the Surveyor's department under the direction of a foreman specially appointed for the purpose. They have also been relieved of a large amount of clerical work, and are now free to devote the whole of their time to the sanitary work of the District. "I have further to submit that the Board has in its employ at the present time a larger number of Sanitary Inspectors in proportion to the population, than the great majority of the District Boards and Vestries in the Metropolis, and, in addition, a man is employed as Assistant Inspector, and devotes the whole of his time to the work, so that, practically, three Inspectors are constantly employed. (The proportion in St. Saviour's is one Inspector to 13,588 persons; or, if the services of the Assistant Inspector be taken into account, it is one to 9,059 persons, the population of the district at the last census being 27,177. "The Committee are not aware of any circumstances in connection with the St. Saviour's District which would necessitate the employment of a larger number or proportion of Inspectors than are found to be necessary in the other parts of the Metropolis, and they submit that their existing staff is amply sufficient for the efficient and satisfactory performance of the sanitary work of the District. "Yours faithfully, "W. H. ATKINS, Clerk. "H. De La Hooke, Esq., Clerk, London County Council." IMPROVEMENT, ORANGE STREET. An improvement has been carried out, as far as practicable, at the entrance into Orange Street from the Southwark Bridge Road, the Ecclesiastical Commissioners having given up for public uses a strip of land situate on the north side of the street for the purpose of widening the same. Arrangements are being made with the Vicar of All Hallows for taking over the small triangular piece adjoining and completing the improvement. The strip of land has been paved temporarily with granite pitching. LIGHTING COMMON STAIRCASES. In May last circular letters were received from several local authorities relative to the introduction into clause 5 of the London County Council's General Powers Bill, which provided inter alia for the lighting of staircases in flats or tenement buildings, when before the Select Committee of the House of Commons, of a sub-section requiring local authorities to bear one half the cost of such lighting, and, on the motion of Mr. Grattan, a resolution was passed strongly protesting against the ratepayers being burdened with the same or with any portion of 24 the cost. Copies of the resolution were forwarded to the Local Government Board, the other District Boards and Vestries of the Metropolis, and the Local Members of Parliament. The London County Council was unable to obtain the withdrawal of the sub-section, and rather than accept the clause in its altered form, withdrew it in its entirety. BULL ALLEY. On the application of Mr. Charles Murrell, who had taken a lease of Blackfriars Bridge Wharf, Upper Ground Street, the Board consented to his raising the level of the western portion of the ancient way situate between the River Thames and Upper Ground Street, and known as "Bull Alley," to the level of the adjoining premises ; subject to his paying a rent of £5 per annum for the use of the same, and undertaking to restore the public way to its then level, if at any time called upon so to do. An agreement in writing was entered into accordingly. SALE OF FOOD AND DRUGS ACTS. On the receipt, in June last, of a circular letter from the Vestry of St. George, Hanover Square, asking the Board to appoint delegates to attend a conference to consider the working of the Sale of Food and Drugs Acts, the Board appointed the Chairman of the Sanitary and Sewers Committee (Mr. Newton), Mr. E. F. Rider, and the Public Analyst (Mr. Bodmer). The conference was held at the Vestry Hall, Mount Street, Grosvenor Square, on the 22nd of June last, and resolutions were passed as follows:— 1. Inspectors or other duly authorised persons should be empowered to take samples of food and drugs at any railway station, or other place where the articles are in course of delivery by consignors or wholesale dealers, whether within or outside of the district for which they are appointed, which may be consigned or addressed to any person or Company within the limits of their respective districts. Difficulty arising out of Warranties:— 2. This Conference is of opinion that the best way of meeting the object aimed at would be to repeal the 25th Section of the principal Act, and to substitute therefor a provision similar to the proviso to Section 42 of the Public Health (London) Act, 1891, to the effect that where a person is charged with an offence under the principal Act he shall be entitled upon information duly laid by him, to have any other person, being the wholesale trader, manufacturer, or other person from whom he purchased the article, brought before the Court at the time of the hearing of the charge, and if he proves to the satisfaction of the Court that he purchased it as the article for which he sold it, and that he sold the article in the same state in which he received it, he shall be exempt from all penalties, and the said trader, manufacturer or other person may be summarily convicted of the offence. 25 3. That in all prosecutions under the Acts, when two or more persons are brought before the Court, the onus shall be thrown npon the original defendant to prove to the satisfaction of the Court that he has sold the article as he received it, and that the adulteration has been carried out by another defendant before he shall be exempt from conviction. 4. With any article bearing a label, the label shall describe the contents of the package, and when the contents are sold as a mixture, the proportions of the mixture shall be stated. The article sold shall be held to conform to the name or description on the label to which the greatest prominence is given, and any article differing in substance or purity or proportion from such description or descriptions shall be held to be an adulteration wider the Act. 5. That a standard for milk, and milk products and other articles mitting of definition, should be fixed by the Local Government Board, with power for them to alter in case of exceptional seasons. 6. That all articles of Food and Drugs imported as merchandise into, and landed at any port in Great Britain and Ireland which come from a foreign country, shall be subject to examination, inspection and analysis by officers of the Sanitary Authority of the Port, in the same way as tea is now examined by an Analyst appointed by the Commissioners for Customs under Sec. 30 of the Sale of Food and Drugs Act, 1875. 7. That a minimum penalty of 405. be imposed for all offences under the Act, and that the defendant shall be liable to a double penalty with or without imprisonment in cases of second or subsequent offences. 8. That all itinerant vendors of Food or Drugs shall only sell from vehicles or vessels or other receptacles having printed thereon the name and address of the person, who shall be responsible as master for such sale; and all itinerant purveyors of milk, whether employers or employed, shall be registered with the County Council of the district, and it shall be an offence, under the Act for the vendor of any article to give a false name and address of himself, or his employer, to an officer under the Act. 9. That a copy of the resolutions passed by this Conference be forwarded to the Select Committee appointed by the House of Commons to enquire into the working of the Acts, with the request that evidence may be called before the Committee in support of the views urged therein. A letter in support of the above resolutions was, by the direction of the Sanitary and Sewers Committee, addressed to the Select Committee of the House of Commons having the subject under consideration. BOUNDARY SEWER. The Surveyor of the Board having reported that the old boundary sewer between Surrey Row and Pocock Street was in a defective and an insanitary condition, and no longer required, only four small houses which were being connected with the new sewer in Surrey Row draining into it, the Sanitary and Sewers 26 Committee placed themselves in communication with the Vestry of St.-George-the-Martyr on the subject. Ultimately a deputation waited upon them and arranged with them for the abolition of the old sewer, The cost is estimated at £150, and is to be borne jointly by the two districts. ) SCAVENGING AND DUSTING. \ With reference to the work of scavenging and dusting, which is now done by a staff in the direct employ of the Board, the Paving and General Purposes Committee, in June last, presented to the Board a Report on the subject as set forth in the Surveyor's Report, page 41. On the reception of the Report, it was, on the motion of Mr. Coles, seconded by Mr. Wood, unanimously resolved as follows:— "That the Board express its satisfaction with the manner in which the Surveyor and the staff under him, have carried out the work of * scavenging and dusting during the past year." WATER SUPPLY. In July last, a resolution was received from the Vestry of St. Margaret and St. John, Westminster, as follows:— "That, in the opinion of this Vestry, it is high time the law with respect to Water Companies charges for water supply was revised, so as to provide that the supply of water for domestic purposes shall mean a supply for at least one water-closet included in the rateable charge for the supply for domestic purposes,'' and that where there is an upstairs water-closet, the Companies shall not be able to charge for the high service as well as the water-closet; that this opinion be communicated to the London County Council, and that this Vestry suggests to the other Vestries and District Boards the desirability of addressing similar communications to the County Council.'''' The Board approved of the resolution, and directed that a letter, expressing its views in somewhat similar terms, should be iorwarded to the London County Council. A letter was written accordingly, and expressing a hope that the Council would use its efforts to bring about an alteration in the direction suggested. FINANCES. In order to meet the estimated expenditure for local purposes during the financial year ending 25th March, 1895, and the Precepts of the School Board for London for the same 27 period, the following demands by Precept have been made upon the Overseers, viz.:— General Purposes Account. St. Saviour £9,934 0 0 Christchurch 5,333 0 0 £15,267 0 0 Sewers Account. St. Saviour £1,310 0 0 Christchurch 703 0 0 £2,013 0 0 Education Account. St. Saviour £9,833 2 2 Christchurch 5,201 0 3 £15,094 2 5 THE LATE MR. ARNOLD GOODWIN. At the last meeting of the Board prior to the recess Mr. Coles called the attention of the Board to the great loss which the district had sustained by the death, which occurred on the 26th of July, of Mr. Arnold Goodwin, who, for more than 22 years had been a very zealous and active Member of the Board, and moved:— "That this Board express its deep and sincere regret, and its condolence with the surviving members of the family of the deceased." The motion was seconded by Mr. Fry and carried unanimously. W. H. ATKINS. Board Room, Emerson Street, Bankside, S.E. August, 1894. 28 29 APPENDIX A. ATTENDANCES MEMBERS. Return of Number of Board & Committee Meetings held during the Year ended 25th MarcH ??; of Attendances of Members thereat, and of the dates of their several Elections. ST. SAVIOUR. CHRISTCHURCH. NAMES OF MEMBERS. Board Mectings. Paving & General Purposes Committee Meetings. Sub-Committee ditto. Sanitary & Sewers Committee Meetings. Sub-Committee ditto. Finance Committee Meetings. Meetings of Special Committees. Totals. Date of First Election. When last Board Meetings. Paving & General Purposes Committee Meetings. Sub-Committee ditto. Sanitary & Sewers Committee Meetings. Sub-Committee ditto. Finance Committee Meetings. Meetings of Special Committees. Totals. Date of First Election. When last re-elected. Mr. Ayling attended 12 7 • • • • • • • • • • 19 1892 Back, T, attended 20 21 11 • • • • • • • • 52 1888 1893 ,, Baxter, Fredk. ,, 11 • • • • •• • • 13 • • 24 1884 1893. Carter, W. „ 22 22 10 • • • • • • 2 56 1888 1891 ,, Blatchford, B. H. ,, 12 • • •• 22 • • • • 1 35 1889 1893 Cooper, J. „ • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • 1889 1892 „ Castle, H. ,, 13 6 1 14 1 • • 1 36 1891 Davey, F. E. ,, • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • 1892 ,, Coles, H. J. ,, 23 25 10 • • • • • • 6 64 1888 1892 Gibbs, W. „ • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • 1892 ,, Collard, E. „ 5 • • • • 4 • • • • • • 9 1894 Henley, Ch. ,, • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • 1879 1891 „ Daveny, T. 19 • • • • 5 • • • • • • 24 1891 ,, Doyle, J. M. ,, 19 • • • • 13 • • • • 1 37 1892 1893 Hurwood, E. ,, 5 • • • • • • • • • • • • 5 1891 1893 ,, Fletcher, B. ,, 1 • • • • 13 • • • • • • 14 1893 Mason, G; ,, • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • 1892 1893 ,, Fry, H.J. 18 • • • • • • • • • • • • 32 1890 189! Morgan, B. ,, . 3 • • • • • • • • 4 • • 7 1892 „ Gibbings, H. D. ,, 17 8 • • • • • • • • 1 26 1893 Kent, H. ,, 4 • • • • • • • • • • • • 4 1893 ,, Gilson, B. A. „ 6 5 • • • • • • • • • • 11 1884 189C Bawle, J. ,, 19 12 10 14 • • • • 1 56 1891 „ Gregory, Hy. 8 • • • • 16 1 • • • • 25 1877 1893 Bidley, Hy. • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • 1866 1891 ,, Grattan, H. H. G. ,, 27 26 13 • • • • • • 5 71 1891 ,, Hayward, J. 4 • • • • 5 • • • • • • 9 1892 Snook, George ,, 14 12 •• • • • • • • • • 26 1890 1893 ,, Layman, A. B. ,, 13 • • • • 27 4 • • • • 44 1891 1892 Young, Alfred „ 6 4 •• 6 • • • • • • 16 1892 „ Levy, E. 11 9 • • • • • • • • • • 20 1892 Woodcock, G. D. ,, 22 1 • • • • • • 3 •• 26 1892 1893 ,, Matthews, J. ,, 17 19 • • • • • • • • • • 43 1891 ,, Morris, H. ,, 2 • • • • 8 • • • • • • 10 1892 ,, Newton, G. J. ,, 21 8 1 21 6 • • 5 62 1881 1893 NUMBER OF MEETINGS HELD DURING THE YEAR. „ Nicholl, A. H. ,, 17 6 • • • • • • • • 1 24 1892 Board Meetings 27 ,, Osmond, J. „ 4 • • • • • • • • • • • • 4 1892 1892 Paving and General Purposes Committee Meetings 28 ,, Passmore, J. ,, 6 • • • • 4 • • • • • • 10 Ditto Sub-Committee ,, Sanitary and Sewers Committee Meetings 13 41 ,, Bider, E. ,, 5 • • • • 6 • • • • • • 11 1893 Ditto Sub-Committee ,, 5 „ Bose, G. S. ,, 6 11 • • • • • • • • • • 17 1891 Finance Committee Meetings 15 „ Skyrme, J. J. „ 11 • • • • 9 • • • • 1 21 1893 Special „ ,, 6 108 „ Wood, H. „ 25 '24 • • • • • • • • 1 50 1892 ,, Willcox, W, H. ,, 14 • • • • • • • • 8 • • 22 1893 Total 135 80 APPENDIX B. BYELAWS Made by the Board of Works for the St. Saviour's District, being the Sanitary Authority for the said District, pursuant to the Public Health (London) Act, 1891. (1.) With respect to Houses let in Lodgings or occupied by Members of more than one Family. Interpretation of Terms. Interpretation of Terms. 1. In these byelaws, unless the context otherwise requires, the following words and expressions have the meanings hereinafter respectively assigned to them; that is to say,— "Sanitary Authority" means the Board of Works for the Saint Saviour's District. "Lodging-house" means a house or part of a house which is let in lodgings or occupied by members of more than one family: "Landlord," in relation to a house or part of a house which is let in lodgings or occupied by members of more than one family, means the person (whatever may be the nature or extent of his interest in the premises) by whom or on whose behalf such house or part of a house is let in lodgings or for occupation by members of more than one family, or who for the time being receives, or is entitled to receive the profits arising from such letting: "Lodger," in relation to a house or part of a house which is let in lodgings or occupied by members of more than one family, means a person to whom any room or rooms in such house or part of a house may have been let as a lodging or for his use and occupation. Exempted Houses. Exempted Houses. 2. In either of the following cases a lodging-house shall be exempt from the operation of these byelaws; that is to say,— (a.) Where the rent or charge payable by each lodger, and exclusive of any charge for the use by such lodger of any furniture, is at a rate of seven shillings and sixpence per week or upwards. (b.) Where the rent or charge payable by each lodger and inclusive of any charge for the use by such lodger of 81 any furniture, is at the rate of twelve shillings and sixpence per week or upwards. (a.) For fixing the number of persons who may occupy a house or part of a house which is let in lodgings or occupied by members of more than one family. {b.) For the registration of houses so let or occupied: (c.) For the inspection of such houses: (d.) For enforcing drainage for such houses, and promoting cleanliness and ventilation in such houses: (e.) For the cleanliness and lime washing at stated times of the premises: (f.) For the tailing of precautions in case of any infectious disease. As to air space for each Person 3. The landlord of a lodging-house, or a lodger therein, shall not knowingly cause or suffer a greater number of persons than will admit of the provision of three hundred cubic feet of free air space for each person of an age exceeding ten years, and of one hundred and fifty cubic feet of free air space for each person of an age not exceeding ten years to occupy, at any one time, as a sleeping apartment, a room which is used exclusively for that purpose, and which is under the control of such landlord, or which has been let to such lodger, respectively, as the case may be. Ditto. 4. The landlord of a lodging-house, or a lodger therein, shall not knowingly cause or suffer a greater number of persons than will admit of the provision of four hundred cubic feet of free air space for each person of an age exceeding ten years, and of two hundred cubic feet of free air space for each person of an age not exceeding ten years to occupy, at any one time, as a sleeping apartment, a room which is not used exclusively for that purpose, and which is under the control of such landlord, or which has been let to such lodger respectively, as the case may be. Information to be given by Landlord. 5. The landlord of a lodging-house, within a period of fourteen days after he shall have been required by a notice in writing, signed by the clerk to the Sanitary Authority, and duly served upon or delivered to such landlord, to supply the information necessary for the registration of such house by the Sanitary Authority, shall, himself, or by his agent duly authorised in that behalf, sign and furnish to the Sanitary Authority a true statement of the following particulars with respect to such house ; that is to say,— (a.) The total number of rooms in the house: (b.) The total number of rooms, let in lodgings or occupied by members of more than one family: 3 32 (c.) The mariner of use of each room: (d.) The number, age, and sex of the occupants of each room used for sleeping: (e.) The Christian name and surname of the lessee of each room; and (f.) The amount of rent or charge per week payable by each lessee. Officers to have access to Premises. 6. In any case where the landlord of a lodging-house occupies or resides in auy part of the premises, or retains a general possession or control of the premises, such landlord, and in any case where the landlord of a lodging-house does not occupy or reside in any part of the premises, or retain a general possession or control of the premises, every lodger who is entitled to have or to exercise the control of the outer door of the premises shall, at all times when required by the Medical Officer of Health, the Sanitary Inspector, or any other officer specially appointed or authorised by the Sanitary Authority in that behalf, afford any such officer free access to the interior of the premises for the purpose of inspection. Officers to have access to Lodgers' Rooms. As to obstructing Officers, &c. Court or open space to be Cleansed. 9. In any case where a lodger in a lodging-house is entitled to the exclusive use of any court, courtyard, area, or other open space within the curtilage of the premises, such lodger, and in any case where two or more lodgers in a lodging-house are entitled to the use in common of any court, courtyard, area, or other open space within the curtilage of the premises, the landlord shall cause such court, courtyard, area, or other open space to be thoroughly cleansed from time to time as often as may be requisite tor the purpose of keeping the same in a cleanly condition. 7. Every lodger in a lodging-house shall, at all times when required by the Medical Officer of Health, the Sanitary Inspector or any other officer specially appointed or authorised by the Sanitary Authority in that behalf, afford any such officer free access for the purpose of inspection to the interior of any room or rooms which may have been let to such lodger. 8. Where the Medical Officer of Health, the Sanitary Inspector, or any other officer specially appointed or authorised by the Sanitary Authority in that behalf, has, for the purpose of inspection, obtained access to the interior of a lodging-house or to the interior of any room or rooms in such house, a person shall not wilfully obstruct any such officer in the inspection of any part of the premises, or, without reasonable excuse, neglect or refuse, when required by any such officer, to render him such assistance as may be reasonably necessary for the purpose of such inspection. 38 10. The landlord of a lodging-house shall cause every drain or means of drainage with which any water-closet belonging to such house may communicate to be maintained at all times in good order and efficient action. He shall also cause all such means of ventilation as may be provided in or in connexion therewith to be maintained at all times in good order. Water-Closet 11. Every lodger in a lodging-house shall cause all solid or liquid filth or refuse to be removed once at least in every day from every room which has been let to him, and shall once at least in every day cause every vessel, utensil, or other receptacle for such filth or refuse to be thoroughly cleansed. Daily removal of Filth. 12. In every case where a lodger in a lodging-house is entitled to the exclusive use of any staircase, landing, or passage in such house, such lodger shall cause every part of such staircase, landing, or passage to be thoroughly cleansed from time to time as often as may be requisite. Staircase to be Cleansed 13. A lodger in a lodging-house shall not cause or suffer any animal to be kept in any room which has been let to such lodger, or elsewhere upon the premises, in such a manner as to render the condition of such room or premises filthy. Animals. 14. The landlord of a lodging-house shall cause every common passage or staircase in such house to be thoroughly cleansed from time to time as often as may be requisite. Common staircase, &c., to be Cleansed 15. The landlord of a lodging-house shall, in the first week of the month of April in every year, cause every part of the premises to be cleansed. Annual Cleansing of Premises. He shall, at the same time, except in such cases as are hereinafter specified, cause every area, the interior surface of every ceiling and wall of every water-closet belonging to the premises, and the interior surface of every ceiling and wall of every room, staircase, and passage in the house to be thoroughly lime-washed. Provided that the foregoing requirement with respect to the lime-washing of the internal surface of the walls of rooms, staircases, and passages shall not apply in any case where the internal surface of any such wall is painted, or where the material of or with which such surface is constructed or covered is such as to render the lime-washing thereof unsuitable or inexpedient, and where such surface is thoroughly cleansed, and the paint or other covering is renewed, if the renewal thereof be necessary for the purpose of keeping the premises in a cleanly and wholesome condition. 3* 34 Ventilation. Ditto. Removal of Infectious Diseaso. 16. The landlord of a lodging-house shall provide adequate means of ventilation in or in connexion with every common passage or staircase in such house, and shall cause such means of ventilation to be maintained at all times in good order. 17. The landlord of a lodging-house shall cause all such means of ventilation as may he provided in or in connexion with any room in such house to he maintained at all times in good order. 18, In every case where in pursuance of any statutory provisions in that behalf, an order of a justice has been obtained for the removal from a lodging-house to a hospital of a person who is suffering from any dangerous infectious disease and is without proper lodging or accommodation, the landlord of such house, and the lodger to whom any room whereof such person may be an occupant has been let shall, on being informed of such order, forthwith take all such steps as may be requisite on the part of such landlord and of such lodger, respectively, to secure the safe and prompt removal of such person in compliance with such order, and shall in and about such removal, adopt all such precautions as, in accordance with any instructions which such landlord and such lodger, respectively, may receive from the Medical Officer of Health of the Sanitary Authority, may be most suitable for the circumstances of the case. (2.) For the Prevention of Nuisances arising from any Snow, Ice, Salt, Dust, Ashes, Rubbish, Offal, Carrion, Fish, or Filth, or other Matter or Thing in any Street. Interpretation of Terms. Interpretation of lerrns. 1. Throughout these byelaws the expression "the Sanitary Authority" means the Board of Works for the Saint Saviour's District. Removal of Snow from street not repairable by the Inhabitants. 2. The occupier of any premises fronting, adjoining, or abutting on any street not repairable by the inhabitants at large shall, as soon as conviently may be after the cessation of any fall of snow, remove or cause to be removed from the footways and pavements adjoining such premises and forming part of such street, all snow fallen or accumulated on such footways and pavements, in such a manner and with such precautions as will prevent any undue accumulation in any channel or carriageway or upon any paved crossing. The person in occupation of or having the charge, management, or control of the premises, or if there is no such person, then any person in occupation of or having the charge, management, or control of any part of the premises, and in the Definition of Occupier. 35 case of any premises the whole of which is let in tenements or to lodgers, the person receiving the rent payable by the tenants or lodgers, either on his own account or as the agent of another person, shall for the purposes of this byelaw be deemed to be the occupier. Deposit of Snow on Carriageway. 3. Every person who shall remove any snow from any premises on to any carriageway shall deposit the same in such a maimer and with such precautions as to prevent any accumulation thereof in any channel or upon any paved crossing. If in the process of such removal any snow be deposited upon any footway or pavement in any street, he shall forthwith remove such snow from such footway or pavement. Regulations as to the use of Salt. 4. Every person who shall throw any salt upon the footway of any street shall do so in such quantity and in such manner as effectually to dissolve the whole of such snow, and he shall forthwith effectually remove from the footway the whole of the deposit resulting from the mixture of the salt with the snow. He shall not place any part of such deposit 011 the carriageway of such street elsewhere than in proximity to any channel at the side of such carriageway, and he shall not remove any part of the same into any such channel unless it is sufficiently liquid to flow along such channel. No person shall throw any salt upon any snow on the carriageway of any street, unless it shall be practicable forthwith effectually to remove the whole of the deposit resulting from the mixture of the salt with the snow. Every person who shall throw any salt upon any snow on any such carriageway shall forthwith effectually remove the whole of the deposit, but he shall not place any part thereof on the footway of such street or on any paved crossing, or on the carriageway in such a manner as to interfere with the carriage traffic, nor shall he place any part thereof in the channel at the side of the carriageway, unless it is sufficiently liquid to flow along such channel. Refuse and filth not to be thrown into any Street. 5. A person shall not throw, cast, or lay, or cause to be thrown, cast, or laid, any dust, ashes, rubbish, offal, carrion, fish, or filth or other like matter or thing in or upon any part of a street. Provided always that this byelaw shall not apply to any act which is for the time being an offence within the meaning of any public general statute, or of any byelaw made by the London County Council and in force in the place where such act is done. Provided also that it shall not be an offence against this byelaw to lay any ashes or other suitable material in any street in time of frost to prevent accidents. 36 Litter in cases of Sickness. 6. Every person who shall lay or cause to be laid in any street any litter or other matter in case of sickness to prevent noise, shall lay the same so that it may be evenly distributed over the surface of the part of the street intended to be covered, and shall, when the occasion ceases, within forty-eight hours thereafter, remove or cause to be removed from such street the litter or other matter so laid in such street. For preventing nuisances arising from any offensive matter running out of any manufactory, brewery, slaughter-house, knacker's yard, butcher's or fishmonger s shop, or dunghill, into any uncovered place, whether or not surrounded by a wall or fence. Offensive Matter not to run out of manufactory, &c. 7. The occupier of a manufactory, brewery, slaughterhouse, knacker's yard, butcher's or fishmonger's shop, or of any premises comprising a dunghill, shall not cause or suffer any offensive matter to run out of such manufactory, brewery, slaughter-house, knacker's yard, butcher's or fishmonger's shop, or dunghill, into any uncovered place, whether or not surrounded by a wall or fence, so as to be likely to become a nuisance. For prevention of the keeping of animals on any premises in such place or manner as to be a nuisance or injurious or dangerous to health. Keeping of Animals. 8. The occupier of any premises shall not keep nor allow to be kept any animal on such premises in such a place or in such a manner as to pollute, or to be likely to pollute, any water supplied for use or used or likely to be used by man for drinking or domestic purposes, or for manufacturing drink for the use of man, or any water used or likely to be used in any dairy. Receptacle for Manure, &c. 9. Every occupier of a building or premises wherein or whereon any horse or other beast of draught or burden, or any cattle may be kept, shall deposit or cause to be deposited in a suitable receptacle all dung, manure, soil, filth, or other offensive or noxious matter other than urine and other liquid filth which may, from time to time, be produced in the keeping of any such animal in such building or upon such premises. He shall likewise provide in connexion with such building or premises a sufficient drain, constructed in such a manner, and of such materials, and maintained at all times in such a condition, as effectually to carry away all urine and liquid filth or refuse therefrom. Weekly Removal of Manure &c. Except where the Sanitary Authority by notice duly given under the statutory provision in that behalf shall have otherwise 37 required, he shall, once at least in every week, remove or cause to be removed from such building or premises all dung, manure, soil, filth, or other offensive or noxious matter produced in or upon such building or premises, and deposited in a receptacle as hereinbefore required. Provided that this requirement shall not apply to the occupier of any stable or cowhouse from which the Sanitary Authority remove or contract for the removal of manure and other refuse matter. Floor to be Paved. Where for the purpose of preventing the keeping of any horse or other beast of draught or burden or any cattle on any premises so as to be a nuisance or injurious or dangerous to health, it is necessary that the floor of the building in which such animal is kept should be impervious to liquid matter, no person shall keep any animal in such building unless or until the floor thereof shall have been paved with a hard and impervious pavement evenly and closely laid and so sloped as to effectually carry off all liquid matter therefrom to a properly trapped inlet to the drain hereinbefore required to be provided. As to the parin;/ of yards and open spaces in connexion with dwelling-houses. Yards in connexion with dwellinghouses to be Paved. 10. The owner of every dwelling-house in connexion with which there is any yard or open space shall, where it is necessary for the prevention or remedy of insanitary conditions that all or part of such yard or open space shall be paved, forthwith cause the same to be properly paved with a hard, durable and impervious pavement, evenly and closely laid upon a sufficient bed of good concrete, and so sloped to a properly constructed channel as effectually to carry off all rain or waste water therefrom; and he shall cause such pavement to be kept in proper repair. (3). With respect to the Keeping of Waterclosets supplied with sufficient Water for their effective Action. Interpretation of Terms. 1. Throughout these byelaws the expression "the Sanitary Authority" means the Board of Works for the Saint Saviour's District, W.C. to be supplied with Water. 2. The occupier of any premises in or for which any watercloset is for the time being provided, shall cause such watercloset to be at all times properly supplied with a sufficient quantity of water for securing its effective action. Where, however, any watercloset is provided for the use of persons occupying two or more separately occupied premises, and there is a person having the care and control of such watercloset, the foregoing requirement shall apply to such person. 88 The person in occupation of or having the charge, management, or control of the premises, or if there is no such person, then any person in occupation of or having the charge, management, or control of any part of the premises, and in the case of any premises the whole of which is let to lodgers, the person receiving the rent payable by the lodgers, either on his own account or as the agent of another person, shall for the purposes of this byelaw be deemed to be the occupier. (4). For Securing the Cleanliness and Freedom from Pollution of Tanks, Cisterns, and other Receptacles used for storing of water used or likely to be used by Man for Drinking or Domestic Purposes, or for manufacturing Drink for the Use of Man. Interpretation of Terms. Interpretation of Terms. 1. Throughout these byelaws the expression "Sanitary Authority" means the Board of Works for the St. Saviour's District. Provision of Tank, &c. 2. The owner of any premises who shall provide thereon a tank, cistern, or other receptacle to be used for storing of water used or likely to be used by man for drinking or domestic purposes, or for manufacturing drink for the use of man, shall cause the same to be so constructed and placed that it may conveniently be cleansed. As to covering of Tank, &c. 3. The owner of any premises on which a tank, cistern, or other receptacle not provided by the occupier of such premises is used for storing of water used or likely to be used by man for drinking or domestic purposes, or for manufacturing drink for the use of man, shall cause every such tank, cistern, or other receptacle which is erected outside a building or which being erected inside a building is not placed in a suitable chamber or otherwise constructed or placed so as to prevent the pollution of the water therein, to be provided with a proper cover. Tank to be kept Clean. 4. The occupier of any premises on which a tank, cistern, or other receptacle is used for storing of water used or likely to be used by man for drinking or domestic purposes, or for manufacturing drink for the use of man, shall empty and cleanse the same, or cause the same to be emptied and cleansed, once at least in every six months, and at such other times as may be necessary to keep the same in a cleanly state and free from pollution. As to covering of Tank not separately nsed. He shall cause every such tank, cistern, or other receptacle which is erected outside a building, or which being erected inside a building, is not placed in a suitable chamber, or otherwise 39 constructed or placed so as to prevent the pollution of the water therein, to be kept at all times properly covered. Provided that in every case where any tank, cistern, or other receptacle used for storing of water used or likely to be used by man for drinking or domestic purposes, or for manufacturing drink for the use of man, is used for supplying water to persons occupying two or more separately occupied premises, the foregoing requirements shall apply to the owner of such premises instead of to any occunier thereof. Definition of Occupier. The person in occupation of, or having the charge, management, or control of the premises, or if there is no such person, then any person in occupation of or having the charge, management, or control of any part of the premises, and in the case of any premises the whole of which is let to lodgers, the person receiving the rent payable by the lodgers, either on his own account, or as the agent of another person, shall, for the purposes of this byelaw be deemed to be the occupier. Owner not to be obstructed by Occupier. 5. The occupier of any premises or any other person shall not obstruct or interfere with the owner of such premises, or with any person duly authorised by him in that behalf, in the execution of any work to which the foregoing byelaws relate. Penalties. Penalties. 6. Every person who shall offend against any of the foregoing byelaws shall be liable for every such offence to a penalty of five pounds, and in the case of a continuing offence to a further penalty of forty shillings for each day after written notice of the offence from the Sanitary Authority. Provided, nevertheless, that the justices or court before whom any complaint may be made or any proceedings may be taken in respect of any such offence may, if they think fit, adjudge the payment as a penalty of any sum less than the full amount of the penalty imposed by this byelaw. The Common Seal of the Board of Works for the Saint Saviour's District was hereunto affixed, on the 13th day of February, 1894. (L.S.) W. H. ATKINS, Clerk of the Board. Allowed by the Local Government Board this 27th day of February, 1894. (L.S.) HENRY H. FOWLER, President. S. B. PROVIS, Assistant Secretary. 40 SURVEYOR'S REPORT. For the Year ending Lady Day, 1894. Gentlemen, It is again my privilege to submit for your consideration my Annual Report (being the eleventh) on the various works executed in my Department during the year ending Lady- dav last. This year has been a very important one as regards local matters in connection with this Board. In the year 1891 the contract system for paving works was discontinued, and this year has been the first in which the whole of the scavenging, footway cleansing, paving, drainage, and other works have been carried out by the direct employment of labour by the Board. In each case satisfactory results have ensued, although the organisation of the new systems has been of a responsible and experimental nature: they show improvements altogether on the old contract work, both financially and as regards the efficiency of the work dealt with. In having direct control over the workmen, more prompt action can be obtained in instances where immediate attention is necessary, and a greater command over details which are so essential in making an undertaking of this nature a complete-success, is afforded. SCAVENGING AND DUSTING DEPARTMENT. The work of the above Department for this the first year of the present system has resulted in my being able to report very satisfactorily in every way as compared with the contract system, notwithstanding the considerable increase in the wages ot the men. The horse contract obtained by Mr. S. Taylor, of Tooley Street, was faithfully carried out, and the cattle in every respect were of a high class, no complaint having been made throughout the year; the men as a whole have worked smoothly, and the facilities for shooting the refuse have been good, the shoot being in the District and almost central. 41 The following statement shows the expenditure on scavengingwork and a comparison with expenditure under the contract system:— £ s. d. Total amount expended in labour, horse hire, and disposal of refuse 5,805 9 11 1/10 of amount (£791 4s. 1d.) expended on plant 79 2 4 1/7 of amount (£185 0s. 3d.) expended on buildings 26 8 7 Brooms, tools, &c. 198 5 8 Rent of Depot and proportion of Office expenses 295 0 0 6,404 6 6 Less amount received for removal of trade refuse 258 4 4 £6,151 2 2 Contractor's Estimates. £ s. d. Scavenging Contract 4,500 0 0 Estimate for cleansing Borough Market 685 0 0 ,, „ Footways, &c 685 0 0 ,, „ Wood Paving 70 8 6 Estimate for cleansing Borough High Street once a day beyond provision of Contract 165 0 0 Estimate for cleansing Stamford Street, once a day beyond provision of Contract 137 10 0 Estimate for sweeping main thoroughfares on Sunday 49 8 0 £66,292 6 6 £ S. d. Total expenditure under Contract System 6,292 6 6 ,, ' ,, Present ,, 6,151 2 2 Difference £141 4 4 42 Statement showing the weight of Refuse disposed of in each month during the year:— 1893 Market. Tons. Cwts. Qrs. Dust. Tons. Cwts. Qrs. Slop. Tons. Cwts. Qrs. July 165 10 1 621 1 0 834 3 0 August 170 3 2 488 1 1 530 9 2 September 166 13 2 489 18 3 645 2 2 October 183 9 0 576 19 1 744 17 1 November 153 6 2 600 3 2 714 14 1 December 190 18 3 607 17 3 829 6 3 1894 January 237 0 2 779 4 2 1,095 17 3 February 225 0 3 661 1 3 666 8 2 March 203 19 2 696 4 0 731 10 1 April 301 3 3 681 9 1 680 16 2 May 247 6 1 695 13 3 789 6 2 June 231 12 8 533 19 1 661 0 1 2,476 5 0 7,431 13 0 9,123 13 0 Totals. Tons. Cwts, Qrs. Market 2,476 5 0 Bust 7,431 14 0 Slop 9,123 13 0 *19,031 12 0 Messrs. Wakeley Bros. & Co., of Bankside, obtained the contract for barging away the refuse collected by the scavenging staft, the price being 2s. per ton. The brooms have been supplied by Mr. J. Tyrie, the No. 1 quality at 82s. per dozen, No. 2 quality at 26s. per dozen. The horse brooms are refilled about every fortnight, the cost of same being £2 4s. 0d. per set. The total weight of trade refuse collected during the year has been 1,013 tons, the scale of charges fixed upon has been very satisfactory, scarcely any complaint having been made with regard to same. A lean-to van-shed has been erected in Lavington Street epot and a store lor tools, &c., at a cost of £100. *This does not include 1,200 tons of snow thrown into the Thames from the nidges, the rubbish from Paving works, or the slop from sewers. 48 The vehicles belonging to the Board and engaged upon this work are as follows:— Slop Vans 14 Dust Vans 4 Water Carts 4 Horse Brooms 2 Horse Scrapers 2 Trucks for Flushing Apparatus 2 Total 28 In November last application was made to the Board by the workmen of this Department for an increase of wages. The Special Committee to whom this was referred recommended the Board to advance the rate of wages as under:— Per day. Carmen, Dustmen 4s. 2d. to 4,s. 6d. Sweepers, Gullymen, Market Sweepers and others 4s. 0d. to 4s. 6d. The recommendation was adopted by the Board, the first payment of the additional amount being made on December 9th, 1893. The additional amount on the wages in consequence of this increase, for the remainder of the year, was about £95. The new asphalte streets in the District are a, great improvement so far as the cleansing work is concerned, they are more easily swept and flushed, and can be kept in far better condition than either pitching, macadam, or wood paving, especially so in the narrow courts and passages where cleanliness is so essential. The following works have been executed in the repairing and maintaining of the footways in the District:— Footways. New 2½-in. York Paving laid 312 ft. supl. Old York Paving laid 1,033 „ „ Victoria Stone Paving laid 47 „ „ Old York and Victoria Paving relaid 14,885 „ „ New Curb laid 12 ,, lineal. Old Curb taken up and relaid 1,016 „ „ Holes cut in York for Grates, Boxes, etc. No. 6. This does not include work done in restoration after Gas, Water, and other Companies trenches, nor the work executed under the head of "Estimated Works." 44 Carriageways. The following works have been executed in the repairing and maintaining of the Carriageways in the District:— Old Granite Pitching relaid 3,008 yds. supl. Block Channelling refixed 31 ft. lineal. Lias Lime Concrete 6-in. thick under Pitching in Sewer Trenches 390 yds. supl. Lias Lime Concrete 9-in. thick under Pitching in Sewer Trenches 9 „ ,, Portland Cement Concrete 6-in. thick under Pitching, etc., in Sewer Trenches 34 „ Portland Cement Concrete 9-in. thick under Pitching, etc., in Sewer Trenches 53 „ Wood Paving relaid 210 „ New Wood Paving No. 552 new blocks. Ground dug and carted away for Concrete space under Pitching, etc. 86½ yards cube. The following works have been executed in reinstating trenches after Gas, Water, Electric Light, Hydraulic Power and other Companies:— LAMBETH WATER COMPANY. Carriageways. Macadam relaid ... 391/3- yds. supl Pitching relaid ... 641/9 " " 6 inches Lias Lime Concrete under ditto 62 ,, ,, 6 ,, Portland Cement „ „ 91/3,, ,, 9 „ „ „ „ „ „ 22/9 „ „ Wood Paving relaid „ „ 91/3 Ground excavated and carted away for Concrete space ... No. 13 ,, cube. New Wood Paving ... ,, 132 blocks. Boxes Eepaved ... „ 7. Footways. Old York Paving relaid ... 637 ft. supl. New York Paving ... 82 „ „ New Victoria Paving ... 16 „ Old Curb refixed ... 4 ,, lineal. Holes cut in York ... No. 18. SOUTHWARK AND VAUXHALL WATER COMPANY. Carriageways. Granite Pitching relaid 947 yds. supl. Wood Paving relaid 17 „ „ 6 inches Lias Lime Concrete under ditto 942 „ „ 8 „ „ „ „ 5 „ „ 6 ,, Portland Cement ,, ,, 14 „ „ 45 9 inches Portland Cement Concrete under Wood Paving 31/3 yds. supl. Ground excavated and carted away for Concrete space 1461/3 ,, cube. Macadam 6 ,, supl. Block Channel refixed 7 ft. lineal. New Wood Paving No. 139 blocks. Footways. Old York Paving relaid 686 ft. supl. New Victoria Paving laid 4 „ „ New York Paving laid 46 ,, ,, Old York Paving laid 38 „ „ Holes cut in York No. 13. Curb refixed 16 „ lineal. SOUTH METROPOLITAN GAS COMPANY. Carriageways. Macadam relaid 170 yds. supl. Mints 16 „ „ Granite Pitching relaid 5292/3 „ „ Wood Paving relaid 252/3 ,, „ 6 inches Lias Lime Concrete under ditto 516 „ „ 6 „ Portland Cement ,, ,, 252/3 ,, ,, 9 „ „ „ „ „ 131/3 „ Ground excavated and carted away for crete space 931/3 ,, cube. New Wood Paving No. 230 blocks. Footways. Old York Paving relaid 4,796 ft. supl. New York Paving laid 193 „ „ Old York Paving laid 4 „ „ ^ J > ) > New Victoria Stone Paving laid 6 „ „ Old Curb refixed 190 ,, lineal. New 6 x 12 Edge Curb 6 ,, ,, CITY OF LONDON ELECTRIC LIGHTING COMPANY, LIMITED. Carriageways. Granite Pitching relaid • • • 852 yds. supl Wood Paving relaid • • • 86½ „ „ Brick Crossing relaid • • • 72/3 „ „ Asphalte Carriageway relaid • • • 21 „ „ 6 inches Lias Lime Concrete under ditto • • • 705 „ 6 ,, Portland Cement ., ,, • • • 562/3 „ „ 9 „ „ „ „ „ " " >> >> >> ... 1762/3 „ „ 46 Ground excavated and carted away for Concrete space 171 yds. cube. New Wood Paving No. 190 blocks. Footways. Old York Paving relaid 45,511 ft. supl. New York Paving laid 1,907 „ „ New Victoria Stone Paving laid 583 „ „ Old York Paving laid 882 „ „ Asphalte Footways relaid 809 „ „ Curb refixed 337 ,, lineal. New 6 x 12 Edge Curb 2 „ „ Holes cut in York No. 6. LONDON ELECTRIC SUPPLY CORPORATION, LIMITED. Carriageways. Granite Pitching relaid 144 yds. supl. 6 inches Lias Lime Concrete under ditto 105 ,, u ,, 8 „ „ „ „ 22 ,, ,, Ground excavated and carted away for Concrete space 22½ ,, cube. Footways. Old York Paving relaid 1,565 ft. supl New York Paving laid 76 „ „ LONDON HYDRAULIC POWER CO. Carriageways. Granite Pitching relaid 140 yds. supl. G inches Lias Lime Concrete under ditto 991/3 „ „ 8 „ „ „ „ 8 „ „ 9 ,, Portland Cement Concrete under ditto 8 „ „ Ground excavated and carted away for Concrete space 201/3,, cube. Footways. Old York Paving relaid New York Paving laid Curb refixed Holes cut in York 158 ft. supl. 8 „ „ 16 ,, lineal. No. 2. POSTAL TELEGRAPH OFFICE. Footways. Old York Paving relaid 66 ft. supl. New York Paving laid 6 „ „ The sums expended in materials, viz.—lime, cement, ballast, sand, new York stone, Victoria stone, rubbish shooting, horse hire, sundry expenses, &c., &c., for jobbing works and 47 trenches only, exclusive of estimated works, amounted to £526 16s. 10d. The following table shows the expenditure on jobbing work, repairs, reinstating Companies' trenches, and sundry works in maintaining the carriageways and footways in the District. Wages. Horse Hire. Rubbish Shooting and Materials. Asphalte Company's Accounts. £ 8. d. £ 8. d. £ S. d. £ s. d. Carriageway 543 8 0 84 11 6 442 5 4 17 6 6 Footway 384 3 7 303 7 3 £927 11 7 £84 11 6 £442 5 4 £320 13 9 Making a total amount expended on the above work of £1775 2.s. 2d. The amounts received for reinstating trenches were as follows:— £ s. d. City of London Electric Lighting Co. 1,070 3 0 Southwark and Vauxhall Water Co 211 9 0 South Metropolitan Gas Co. 188 3 10 London Electric Supply Corporation 45 8 6 Lambeth Water Co. 33 4 5 London Hydraulic Power Co 29 2 9 Postal Telegraphs Office 0 16 4 Builders, for sewer trenches, hoardings, &c, 135 15 4 Sundries 0 14 0 £1,714 17 2 The sums expended on Carriageway and Footway Paving Works executed by ourselves, including estimated works, repairs, trenches, and the whole of the plant purchased, is as follows, and for a portion of which we received from the various companies, etc., the sum of £1,714 17s. 2d. £ s. d. Labour 1,566 4 6 Horse Hire 141 3 6 Materials 1,157 13 8 Rubbish Shooting 99 8 6 Plant 142 2 5 Add Asphalte Work executed by 3,106 12 7 contract, etc. 1,305 12 1 £4,412 4 8 4 48 Footways. New 2£-in. York Stone Paving laid 7,126 ft. supl. Old ,, ,, 1,075 „ „ New Victoria „ „ 652 „ „ Old York and Victoria ,, relaid 08,804 „ „ 1 in. Asphalte 809 yds. ,, Old Curb taken up and refixed 1,945 ft. lineal. Old ,, ,, ,, redressed and refixed 710 „ „ New 6 x 12 Edge Curb laid 20 „ „ Holes cut in York No. 126. Carriageways. Old Granite Pitching redressed and relaid 488 yds. supl. Old Granite Pitching relaid only 5,753 „ Brick Crossing relaid 8 ,, „ Wood Paving relaid 417 „ „ New Wood Paving laid 480 „ „ 1½ in. Asplialte 21 „ „ 6 inches Lias Lime Concrete under Paving 2,820 „ „ 8 ,, ,, ,, 35 „ „ 8 ,, Portland Cement ,, ,, ,, 68 „ „ 6 „ „ „ „ „ „ 619 „ „ 9 „ „ „ „ „ 9 ,, ,, Ground excavated and carted for Concrete space 519 yds. cube. Macadam relaid 215 ,, supl. Flints relaid 16 ,, ,, Block Channelling refixed 38 ft. lineal. Horses are hired by the day at 5s. 5¼d. per ordinary day's work and for Borough Market cleansing at night, the Board finding their own carmen and carts. The quantity of ballast used on the Bridge Inclines, Wood Paving, &c., for the year was 1,120 yards cube, which cost, including spreading, £345 6s. 8d. The quantity of ballast used under Pitching and other paving works was 519 yards cube. BOARD'S WORKMEN. The Rate of wages paid to the workmen in the employ of the Board is as follows:— Masons 9£d. per hour. Paviors 9iW. „ Hammermen 7½d. 49 Labourers 6½d.. per hour. Sewer Foreman 35s. per week. Sewermen 30.s. ,, Streets Foreman 40s „ Timekeeper 30s. ,, Dustmen 4s. 6d. per day. Gullymen Sweepers' Gangers 4s. 6d. „ 4s. 6d. Sweepers 4s. 6d. ,, Watchmen 3s. 0d. per night. Carmen 4s. 6d. per day. Chalet Attendants (male) 20s. per week. ,, ,, (female) 16s. ,, Yardmen 27s. Urinal Cleaners 6½d. per hour. Sanitary Inspector's Assistant 30s. per week. Messenger and Doorkeeper 30s. Paving Foreman 55s. ,, The following Carriageway and Footway Paving Works were executed by the Board's workmen during the year:— RED CROSS STREET. The carriageway from Southwark Street to the wood paving by Union Street has now been paved with 3-in. by 5-in. by 9-in. Jarrah wood blocks on a foundation of 6-in. Portland cement concrete, covering an area of about 520 superficial yards. This is the first street in this District that has been paved with hard wood, and up to the present on fault has been found with it. 18,900 blocks were used in carrying out the work which has been done as a test job for the hard wood paving. The whole of the footways have been relaid and made good where required with new stone, 230 feet new curb fixed, and 70 feet refixed. The portion of the carriageway of the above-named street, from Southwark Street to Park Street, has been taken up and repaved with redressed granite pitching on a bed of 6-in. Lias Lime concrete, special attention has been given to this street on account of the very heavy traffic which passes through. The footways were entirely repaved last year with new 2½-inch York. THREE CROWN SQUARE. The whole of the carriageway in this square was prepared for and paved with 1½-inch Compressed Rock Asphalte on 6-in. 4* 50 Portland Cement Concrete, excepting the passage and crossing leading to the Borough High Street, which were paved with Jarrah wood. The area paved with 1½-in. Asplialte was nearly 290 superficial yards, the footways with 1 in. Asphalte on 3-in. Portland Cement Concrete 202 superficial yards, whilst the area of wood paving measured 50 superficial yards. A large amount of ground was excavated and a double curb fixed in order to keep the carriageway more flat than formerly. A hydrant has now been fixed in the Square, which enables the men to flush the whole of the paving with a hose pipe. BRUNSWICK STREET. The footways on the east and west sides of Brunswick Street were at first estimated to be paved with Rock Asplialte, but in consequence of the numerous gratings and vaults it was thought advisable to substitute 2½-in. Tooled York Paving. About 5,500 superficial feet of new York was laid, the curb redressed and refixed, and new curb supplied where necessary. GRAVEL LANE. The footway on the east side, from Union Street to the southern boundary, has been paved with Compressed Asplialte 1-in. in thickness on a foundation of 3-in. of Portland Cement Concrete; the area paved is about 370 superficial yards ; about 600 feet run of curb has also been redressed and refixed. EMERSON PLACE. This thoroughfare, which is available for foot passengers only, has now been paved with Compressed Asplialte on a Concrete foundation. The former stone paving was very defective and insanitary. The carriageways of the following thoroughfares, which were formerly macadam, have now been paved with Compressed Asplialte 1½-in. in thickness, on a foundation of 6-in. of Portland Cement Concrete. The total area naved in Portland Cement Concrete. The total area paved in each thoroughfare being as follows:— Robert Street 487 yards supl. Prices Street 405 „ Charles Street 505 „ „ Total 1,397 „ 51 The only works carried out by contract during the past year were for Asphalte carriageways and footways. The total areas paved by the Limmer Asphalte Company being as follows:— Locality. 1-in. Compressed Rock Asphalte Footway, on 3 inches Portland Cement Concrete. l½-in. Compressed Rock Asphalte Carriageway on 6-in. Portland Cement Concrete. Three Crown Square 202 yards supl. 280 yards supl. Gravel Lane 382 „ „ Emerson Place 180 „ „ Robert Street 487 „ „ Prices Street 405 „ „ Charles Street 505 „ „ Totals 764 yards supl. 1,677 yards supl. 52 ESTIMATED WORKS. Name of Street. Description of Work. Estimated Cost. Actual Cost. Remarks. Red Cross Street, Southward £ s. d. £ s. d. Street to Wood Paving by Union Street 3in. by 5in. by 9in. Jarrah Wood Paving 392 3 4 348 17 8 The whole of the work not executed. Do. do. York Paving squared and relaid 40 5 0 Red Cross Street, Southward Street to Park Street Pitching redressed & relaid 190 18 4 133 11 3 Do., do., do. Three Crown Square l½in. Compressed Bock Asphalte Carriageway 324 6 8 299 15 10 Limmer Asphalte Co. Do. do. lin. Compressed Rock Asphalte Footway Passage and Crossing leading to Boro' High Street Jarrah Wood Estimated for lin Asphalte. Brunswick Street New 2½in. York Footway 286 2 10 283 7 0 Gravel Lane lin. Compressed Rock Asphalte Footway 158 10 0 166 0 7 Dimmer Asphalte Co. Emerson Place Do. do. 84 5 0 75 12 11 Do. Robert Street l½in. Compressed Rock Asphalte Carriageway 281 14 3 277 13 10 Do. Prices Street Do. do. 257 2 2 249 2 6 Do. Charles Street Do. do. 290 4 0 306 10 0* Do. Total £2305 11 7 £2140 11 7 * A saving was effected on Asphalte, and additional cost entailed by defective vaults, &c. 53 SEWERAGE AND DRAINAGE WORKS. The work of constructing new sewers, reconstructing old ones, laying drainage connections, constructing flushing tanks and gullies, and all other works in connection with the drainage of the District is now carried out by the Board's own staff. The following are the principal works executed during the year:— SURREY ROW. A new 12-inch pipe sewer has been laid in Surrey Row at the east end, commencing at the new flushing tank which was constructed last year, and discharging into the large brick sewer in Gravel Lane. Surrey Row has now a new sewer throughout its whole length. The sewer discharges in two directions, viz., into Blackfriars Road main sewer and Gravel Lane. A flushing tank with a capacity of tons of water is constructed at the highest point of the sewer, from which a 15-inch pipe runs in a westerly direction and 12-inch pipe eastwards. All the houses in this thoroughfare are now disconnected from the old defective Boundary sewer, which runs in the rear of the premises on the South side, and we have arranged with the adjoining Parish of St. George-the-Martyr to abolish the sewer, and are now waiting until they are ready. RED CROSS STREET. A new side entrance to the main sewer in this street has been constructed near its junction with Southwark Street. This side entrance now permits this sewer being cleansed in the section between Union Street and Southwark Street, the large quantity of boiling water, steam, &c., in this sewer renders it necessary to have manholes at short distances apart in order that the men working in the sewer may have a ready means of escape in case of need. We have also constructed a new manhole in the same section of sewer near the junction with Union Street. UNDERGROUND CONVENIENCE. In October last I was instructed by the Sewers and Sanitary Committee to prepare plans and estimates for the construction of an Underground Convenience at the junction of the Borough High Street and Southwark Street, which plans were adopted by the Board, and the work of removing the old chålet was commenced in November, a hoarding 12 feet in height was erected and let for advertising purposes, and the new structure was started upon. An unusual depth was excavated before a suitable foundation was found. The accommodation provided is for both, men and women—in the case of the former 12 W.C.'s, 54 18 Urinals (provision for six more if required), 6 Lavatory Basins, and a Caretaker's Box; and lor the latter 4 W.C.'s, 3 Lavatory Basins, and Caretaker's Box. The facing of the walls is of best white glazed bricks, and the piers to the W.C. division walls are of special make, with an ornamental green dado; the top capping and the arches over doors are of Faience work, the whole of which was supplied by the Burmantofts Company of Leeds; the roof is composed of steel, covered with pavement lights. The drainage was specially constructed in such a manner that each W.C. is separately connected with an inspection chamber. The Fittings, comprising enamelled iron urinal backs with St. Ann's marble divisions, gusset pieces and backs, flushed by framed marble tanks, the fronts filled in with bevilled glass, white china lavatory basins with St. Ann's marble top, pedestal W.C.'s with mahogany seats and three-gallon flushing cisterns, were supplied and fixed by Messrs. Finch & Co. The whole of the wood work is of pitch pine, the floors of Roman mosaic, and the steps of blue York stone, with Mason's patent treads. The interior is lighted by electricity, and ventilation is afforded by an 18-inch open grating all round the roof, with additional outlets at the base of the lamp columns, no artificial means being resorted to. The whole of the constructional work has been carried out by men in the direct employ of the Board, and the total cost has been under my estimate of £2,640. CONCRETE FLUSHING TANKS. The following is a list of the Concrete Flushing Tanks which have been constructed under my direction:— Where situate. Dimensions. Capacity in Gallons and Tons. No. of Outlets for flushing Length. Ft. In. Width. Depth. Ft In George Street 15 0 3 6 7 6 2,457, or 11 tons nearly 2 York Street 12 0 3 0 5 0 1,125, or 5 „ „ 2 Collingwood Street 18 0 3 9 8 6 3,581, or 16 „ „ 3 Prices Street '20 0 4 0 8 0 4,000, or 18 ,, ,, 3 Surrey Row 12 0 3 6 8 0 2,100, or 9½ „ „ 2 These tanks are connected with sewers that we are unable to flush from the river, and are invaluable in dry weather in keeping the sewers with which they are connected thoroughly 55 cleansed. The quantity of water discharged from these tanks during the year is approximately 106,102 gallons, or 473 tons. We have also a brick flushing tank in St. Margaret's Court, and this is used periodically. In addition to these tanks we have our river Penstocks and Hydrants. PRIVATE DRAINAGE CONNECTIONS. The following private connections have been made to the public sewers:— Size of Pipes, etc. No. of Connections. Christchurch. St. Saviour's. 6-in. pipes to brick sewer 10 30 9 „ „ „ „ „ 4 2 6 „ „ „ pipe „ 89 8 9 „ „ „ „ „ — 1 53 41 The amount deposited for the execution of these works was £515 14s. 1d. The length and size of pipes laid during the year for the above connections are as follows:— Size of Pipe. Feet line 6-inch 1,582 9 252 Gullies Repaired. Park Street No. 6 ,, „ New grates ,, 5 Red Cross Street ,, 2 PUBLIC URINALS. The following is a list of the Urinals in the District flushed by automatic water tanks:— St. Saviour's. London Bridge Steps 4 compartments, slate. Southwark Street 6 „ ,, Triangle, Union Street 4 ,, ,, Stoney Street 1 ,, brick. Christchurch. Blackfriars Road 4 compartments, slate. South wark Street and do. 6 „ „ Gravel Lane 4 „ enamelled ware. Holland Street 3 „ iron. John's Place 2 „ „ 56 HOARDING LICENSES. For pulling down, reconstructing, repairing and alterations to and shoring up buildings, paving crossings, etc., forty-six Licenses have been granted, Where the public carriageways and footways have been disturbed the cost of reinstating same have been borne by the respective persons holding Licenses. The following is a list of the works executed in this District for which Licences have been obtained:— Amount of deposits paid to the Board for same, £120 4s. 8d. As in the preceding year, no Licenses have been taken out under this Act. There are 571 Public Lamps in the District, nine of these being meter lamps, which are placed at large open spaces, crossings, etc. Pulling down buildings 4 Alterations and repairs to do. 28 Rebuilding 6 Constructing crossings to do. 2 New buildings 11 46 ADVERTISING STATIONS (RATING) ACT. PUBLIC LIGHTING. GEO. ROPER NORRISH, Surveyor. July 1894. 57 MEDICAL OFFICER'S REPORT. TO THE BOARD OF WORKS FOR THE ST. SAVIOUR'S DISTRICT. Gentlemen, I beg to submit to you my Annual Report for the year ending December 31st, 1893. During the year there were registered in the Sub-District of St. Saviour 402 births and 226 deaths, and in the Sub-District of Christchurch 378 births and 22.1 deaths. In outlying institutions 102 deaths occurred of persons belonging to St. Saviour, and 109 deaths of persons belonging to Christchurch. 28 deaths took place in Christcliurcli Workhouse, 19 of which belonged to other districts. Inquests were held on the bodies of 19 persons who did not belong to St. Saviour's District. These figures, excluding those who did not belong to the district, represent an annual death rate of 22.95 per 1,000 of the whole district, as compared with 25.04 the previous year. The death rates for the two sub-districts, according to their several populations, are, St. Saviour, 22.58 per 1,000, and Christcliurcli, 23.08. The following tables represent the distribution and causes of death in the two districts. 58 Table of DEATHS during the Year 1893, in the ST. SAVIOUR'S Sanitary District of St. Saviour, classified according to Diseases, Ages and Localities. Names of Localities adopted for the purposes of these Statistics; public institutions being shown as separate localities. (See note on back of sheet. (Columns for Population and Births are in Table B.) Mortality from all Causes at subjoined Ages. Mortality from subjoined causes, distinguishing Deaths of Children under Five Tears of Age. At all ages. Under 1 year. 1 and under 5. 5 and under 15. 15 and under 25, 25 and under 65 65 and upwards 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 Smallpox. Scalatina. Diphtheria. Membranous Croup Fevers. Cholera. Erysipelas. Measles. Whooping Cough. Diarrhœa and Dysentery. Rheumatic Fever. Ague. Phthisis. Bronchitis, Pneumonia and Pleurisy Heart Disease. Injuries. All other Diseases. Total Typhus. Enteric or Typhoid Continued. Relapsing. Puerperal. (a) (b) (c) (d) (e) (f) (g) (h) (i) St. Saviour 226 53 40 7 13 86 27 Under 5 .. 3 .. 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 8 8 .. .. 3 26 .. 2 41 93 5 upwds .. 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 .. .. .. 1 .. .. .. 28 39 16 15 32 133 Totals 226 53 40 7 13 86 27 The subjoined numbers have also to be taken into account in judging of the above records of mortality. Deaths occurring outside the district among persons belonging thereto. 106 7 16 12 5 47 19 Under 5 .. 5 6 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 6 .. 2 3 23 Deaths occurring within the district among persons not belonging thereto. 5 upwds. .. 2 2 .. .. 1 .. .. .. .. 1 .. .. .. 2 .. 14 22 10 6 2 83 14 .. .. 2 3 9 Under 5 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 5 upwds. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 2 12 .. 14 59 Table of DEATHS during the Year, 1893, in the CHRISTCHURCH Sanitary District of St. Saviour's, classified according to Diseases, Ages, and Localities. Names of Localities adopted for the purpose of these Statistics; public institution being shown as separate localities. (See note 4 on back of sheet.) (Columns for Population and Births are in Table B. Mortality from all Causes at subjoined Ages. Mortality from subjoined causes, distinguishing Deaths of Children under Five Years of Age. At all ages. Under 1 year. 1 and under 5. 5 and under 15. 15 and under 25. 25 and under 65. 65 and upwards. 1 2 8 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 Smallpox. Scarlatina. Diphtheria. Membranous Croup. Fevers. Cholera. Erysipelas. Measles. Whooping Cough. Diarrhœa and Dysentery. Rheumatic Fever. Ague. Phthisis. Bronchitis, Pneumonia and Pleurisy Heart Disease. Injuries. All other Diseases Total Typhus. Enteric or Typhoid. Continued. Relapsing. Puerperal. (a) (b) (c) (d) (e) (f) (g) (h) (i) Christchurch 196 56 31 8 3 66 32 Under 5 .. .. 3 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 3 6 5 .. .. 2 26 1 2 38 87 5 upwds. .. .. 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 1 1 2 .. .. 7 41 14 5 36 109 Christchurch Workhouse 28 .. .. .. .. 3 25 Under 5 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 5 upwds. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 2 .. .. .. 5 3 1 17 28 Totals 224 56 31 8 3 69 57 Under 5 .. .. 3 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 3 6 5 .. .. 2 26 1 2 38 78 5 upwds. .. .. 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 1 1 4 .. .. 7 46 17 6 53 137 The subjoined numbers have also to be taken into account in judging of the above records of mortality. Deaths occurring outside the district among persons belonging thereto. 109 5 19 3 8 47 27 Under 5 .. 4 4 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 .. 2 1 .. .. 4 3 .. .. 5 24 Deaths occurring within the district among persons not belonging thereto. 5 upwds .. 3 .. .. .. 2 .. .. .. .. 4 .. .. .. .. .. 25 20 2 3 26 85 27 .. .. .. .. 7 20 Under 5 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 5 upwds .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 2 .. .. .. 4 5 3 13 27 60 Inquests were held on the bodies of 40 persons, and the following verdicts were returned:— Heart Disease 5 Fracture of Ribs 2 Congestion of Lungs 3 Suicide by Drowning 3 „ Shooting 1 Inanition 1 Rupture of Aneurism of Aorta 1 Fracture of Skull 1 Accidentally Suffocated in bed 3 Convulsions 4 Spasm of Glottis 1 Apoplexy from fall 1 Apoplexy 2 Suicide by cutting the throat 1 Drowned 11 During the year 414 notifications of infectious diseases were received. The following tables will show under what heads the various notifications were placed, and the number of cases removed to hospital. 61 Table of POPULATION, BIRTHS, AND OF NEW CASES OF INFECTIOUS SICKNESS, coming to the knowledge of the Medical Officer of Health, during the year 1893, in the ST. SAVIOUR Sanitary District of St. Saviour; classified according to Diseases, Ages and Localities. Names of Localities adopted for the purpose of these Statistics; Public Institutions being shown as separate localities. (See Note 2 on back of sheet.) Population at all Ages. Registered Births. Aged under 5 or over 5. New Cases of Sickness in each Locality, coming to the knowledge of the Medical Officer of Health. Number of such Cases Removed from their Homes in the several localities for treatment in Isolation Hospital Census 1891. Estimated to middle of 1898. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 Smallpox. Scarlatina. Diphtheria. Membranous Croup. Fevers. Cholera. Erysipelas. Smallpox. Scarlatina. Diphtheria. Membranous Croup. Fevers. Cholera. Erysipelas. Typhus. Enteric or Typhoid. Continued Relapsing. Puerperal. Typhus. Enteric or Typhoid. Continued Relapsing. Puerperal. a. b. c. d. e. St. Saviour 13,898 13,922 402 Under 5 .. 32 15 2 .. .. .. .. .. .. 2 .. 19 8 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 5 upwds. 5 94 38 .. .. 3 .. .. 1 .. 24 5 61 14 .. .. 2 .. .. .. .. 2 Table of POPULATION, BIRTHS, AND OF NEW CASES OF INFECTIOUS SICKNESS, coming to the knowledge of the Medical Officer of Health, during the year 1893, in the CHRISTCHURCH Sanitary District of St. Saviour; classified according to Diseases, Ages and Localities. Names of Localities adopted for the purpose of these Statistics; Public Institutions being shown as separate localities. (See Note 2 on back of sheet.) Population at all Ages. Registered Births. Aged under 5 or over 5. New Cases of Sickness in each Locality, coming to the knowledge of the Medical Officer of Health. Number of such Cases Removed from their Homes in the several localities for treatment in Isolation Hospital. Census 1891. Estimated to middle of 1893. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 Smallpox. Scarlatina. Diphtheria. Membranous Croup. Fevers. Cholera. Erysipelas. Smallpox. Scarlatina. Diphtheria. Membranous Croup. Fevers. Cholera. Erysipelas. Typhus. Enteric or Typhoid. Continued Relapsing. Puerperal. Typhus. Enteric or Typhoid. Continued Relapsing Puerperal. a. b. c. d. e. Christchurch 13,246 13,254 378 Under 5 1 22 8 2 .. 2 .. .. .. .. 1 1 10 6 2 .. 2 .. .. .. .. .. 5 upwds. 13 78 29 .. .. 14 .. .. .. .. 25 13 39 16 .. .. 7 .. .. .. .. 2 Do. Workhouse Under 5 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 5 upwds. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 3 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 3 62 As will be seen by the above figures, the percentage of the number of cases removed to hospital falls very far short of that of previous years. This was due to the deplorable breakdown of hospital accommodation for infectious diseases which occurred early in last year. For several months it was found practically impossible to get cases removed, so that the idea af limiting the spread of disease in a particular area was out of the question. So serious was the condition of affairs at one time that I asked the Sanitary Committee to provide an infectious hospital for the district, the superintendence of which I proposed to take in hand. The Committee was fully alive to the urgency of the case and cordially endorsed the suggestion ; at the same time they instructed me to write to the Asylums Board to enquire if that body could provide us with a staff of nurses. It was with regret that I received a communication to the effect that the Asylums Board did not see their way to help us in the matter, and so our desire to check the spread of infectious diseases was rendered nugatory, and for a considerable period any attempt to limit the spread of these diseases was almost futile. The appended report of sanitary works, carried out under the supervision of the Sanitary Inspectors, will show that we have been fully alive to the necessity of keeping abreast of modern ideas of sanitary reform. I am, Gentlemen, Your obedient Servant, JAMES HEBRON, M.D., Medical Officer of Health. 63 TABLE OF NUISANCES. WORKS AND OTHER MATTERS. Attended to by the Sanitary Inspectors during the year 1893 St. Saviour. Christchurch. Total. Nuisance Complaints received and attended to 27 15 Notices Served 351 387 Premises Inspected 394 420 Inspection of Works during progress 1420 918 Drains Trapped with Syphon Traps 301 380 Drains Reconstructed with Stoneware Socketed Pipes, & tested 139 223 Drains (Old Brick) Abolished 48 31 W.C.'s Reconstructed 111 38 Drains Unstopped 7 21 W.C.'s Cleansed and Whitewashed 43 26 W.C.'s Repaired 21 — W.C.'s Rebuilt 37 — Wash-houses Cleansed and Limewashed 10 — Dwelling Rooms Cleansed, Limewashed and Repapered 237 311 Yards Cleansed and Limewashed 22 12 Yards Paved and Drained 89 163 Dust Bins provided 43 121 W.C. Flush Pipes Disconnected from Domestic Water Supply 11 — Sink Wastes Disconnected from Drain 5 — Cellars Cleansed and Limewashed 35 — Cellars Paved 10 — Cesspools Cleansed and Filled in.. 9 11 Cases of Infectious Disease, Visits paid 591 497 Nuisances from Overcrowding Abated 17 4 Roofs and Gutters Repaired 31 29 Additional W.C.'s provided 63 10 D Traps Abolished 12 30 Pan Container Closets Abolished 4 15 Soil Pipes and Drains Ventilated 187 178 Houses Repaired Throughout 51 90 W.C. Pans Cleansed 132 41 Defective W.C. Pans Reinstated 33 14 W.C. Fittings Repaired .. 28 44 Rooms Disinfected after Cases of Infectious Disease 197 189 Clothing, &c. ditto ditto (by Dry Heat) 1988 2130 Cisterns Abolished 5 17 Cisterns Provided with Covers 21 30 Cisterns Cleansed 183 204 Obstructions Removed 18 – Dwelling-houses Permanently Closed – 19 UNSOUND FOOD SEIZED. 7 Bags Savoy Turnips Owner fined 10s. and 23s. costs. 13 Bags of Turnip Tops ,, £10 and 21s. ,, 300 Baskets of Plumns 70 Baskets of Peaches SMOKE NUISANCES. 15 Convictions obtained and penalties inflicted amounting to .. £18 18 0 Total amount of Fines paid out of Court, re Police-Court proceedings, for non-compliance with Nuisance Notices, Adulterations, etc. 247 8 6 5 64 PUBLIC ANALYST'S REPORT For the Year ending Midsummer, 1894. TO THE BOARD OF WORKS FOR THE ST. SAVIOUR'S DISTRICT. Gentlemen, I have the honour to report that during the past year I have analysed 118 samples of food and drink, all of which were submitted to me by your Inspectors. They consisted of:— Arrowroot 2 samples. Brandy 6 ,, Butter 11 ,, Coffee 12 ,, Gin 9 ,, Milk 57 „ Mustard 4 ,, Pepper 2 ,, Whiskey 15 ,, 118 Arrowroot.—Both samples were genuine. Brandy.—All six samples were genuine and above the legal strength, being respectively 9½°, 12°, 14°, 16½°, 18¾°, and 19½° under proof respectively. Butter.—Eleven samples were analysed, all of which were genuine. Thanks to the Margarine Act, adulterated butters are not so frequently met with as was the case some few years ago, but cases of margarine being exposed for sale unlabelled still occur in other districts. It would be well to take samples occasionally under the Margarine Act. Coffee.—Out of twelve samples analysed one only contained chicory to the extent of 50 per cent. This sample was, however, declared to be a mixture at the time of sale, and hence no proceedings could be taken against the vendor. The sale of 65 undeclared mixtures of coffee and chicory is no longer so frequently met with as heretofore, but, on the other hand, mixtures containing an undue proportion of chicory are still sold as coffee and chicory, or French coffee. Such mixtures should, in my opinion, be labelled with the approximate proportions of the ingredients stated on the label. Gin.—Nine samples were analysed, and of these six were genuine and above the statutory strength, being respectively 30¼°, 32¾°, 33¾°, 33¾°, 34½° and 35° under proof. Three samples were watered, being 36½°, 37°, and 87½° under proof respectively. The proportion of extra water was in one case (36½° u.p.) too trifling to justify a prosecution. Milk.—Fifty-seven samples were analysed and forty-eight were genuine ; of these fifteen were of poor quality. Nine samples were adulterated. Of these three contained 4 per cent, of water beyond that present in milk of average quality. These may possibly have been genuine, but of very poor quality, and the vendors were not prosecuted. The decidedly adulterated milks consisted of:— 1 sample containing 5% added water. 1 „ „ 8% „ „ and also deficient in fat 20 per cent. 1 sample containing 10% added water. 1 „ „ 23% „ 1 „ „ 25% ,, „ 1 „ ,, 30% „ „ and in addition one half a per cent, of starch (corn-flour), and was also half skimmed. In this case the vendor declared the milk to be "partly skimmed milk." In spite of the gross extent of the adulteration with water and starch, the case was dismissed by the magistrate on a legal technicality. It appears that on being asked for a pint of milk by Inspector Grist the vendor replied "I have no milk," and on being asked "What have you then?" replied "Partly skimmed milk." "Then give me a pint of partly skimmed milk," said the inspector. Nothing was said as to the water or starch by the vendor, and I am at a loss to understand on what grounds the case was dismissed. 5* 66 This is the second occasion on which I have found starch in milk and other analysts have also detected that adulterant. The object of the addition of starch is to conceal the added water and give an appearance of richness to the milk. Mustard.—Four samples were examined, all of which were genuine. Pepper.—Two samples were received, both being genuine. The adulteration of pepper with "poivrette" (or ground olive stones) seems to have been pretty well stamped out. Ground rice is still occasionally met with. Whiskey.—Fifteen samples were analysed, and of these only two were watered, being respectively 28° and 31¾° under proof. The genuine samples consisted of:— 1 sample 12° under proof, l 150° „ „ 1 „ 16° „ „ 2 samples 17½°,, ,, 1 sample 19½° ,, ,, 1 „ 20° „ 1 „ 20½° „ „ 1 „ 22° „ „ 2 samples 28° „ „ 1 sample 23½° ,, „ 1 „ 241½° „ „ Summary. — The total proportion of actually adulterated samples is small. Excluding the coffee (declared as a mixture) and the three doubtful milks (containing 4 per cent. of water) there remain three gins, six milks, and two whiskies, eleven samples in all, out of 118 samples analysed, or 9.3 per cent. Taking the milks separately, six out of fifty-seven, or 10.5 per cent. were actually adulterated. On June 22nd I had the honour of representing your Board at a Conference held at the Vestry Hall, St. George's, Hanover Square, to consider the amendment of the Sale of Food and Drugs Act. Various resolutions were passed, all of which in my opinion are worthy of support. On July 17th I reported to your Sanitary Committee on these resolutions. 67 A Select Committee of the House of Commons is now sitting to consider the whole question of the working of the Act, and the resolutions passed at the Conference have been, or will be laid before that Committee. The Society of Public Analysts has proposed a draft Bill to be laid before the Select Committee, and it is to be hoped that the Acts relating to the Sale of Food and Drugs will be thoroughly amended, of which amendment they stand in urgent need. I am, Gentlemen, Faithfully yours, R. BODMER, F.I.C. Analytical Laboratory, 16, Southwark Street, August, 1894. 68 69 BOARD OF WORKS FOR THE ST. SAVIOURS DISTRICT. ABSTRACT OF ACCOUNTS, from ???th March, 1893, to 25th March, 1894. RECEIPTS. PAYMENTS. To Balances from last Year— £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. Treasurer's Account 3,728 14 9 EDUCATION RATE. Labour and Petty Cash A/c 102 0 8 School Board for London, Amount Precept, dated 15th December, 1892 7,268 3 1 3,830 15 5 EDUCATION RATE. Ditto dated 22nd June, 1893 7,403 19 3 Overseers, St. Saviour 9,565 13 0 14,672 2 4 PUBLIC DRAINAGE. „ Christchurch 5,106 9 4 / / ' 14,672 2 4 ???oare & Son, to Michaelmas ... 538 0 7 SEWER RATE. • ???mbeth Water Co. 9 18 6 Southwark and Vauxhall Water Co. ... 1 10 0 Overseers, St. Saviour 1,195 0 0 ???aller & Co., Ironwork 33 19 11 Christchurch 637 0 0 ???vans, Do. 12 16 6 1,832 0 0 ???chards & Co., Tools 12 16 6 GENERAL PURPOSES RATE. ???irrett & Son, Do. 4 13 6 ???ark, Water Boots, &c. 9 4 6 Overseers, St. Saviour 8,783 0 0 ???son 1 12 0 „ Christchurch 4,683 0 0 ???akeley Bros. & Co. 3 15 0 13,466 0 0 ???caver 6 19 3 PUBLIC CONVENIENCE. ??? G. Jones 0 3 0 635 9 3 Fees 264 12 7 PRIVATE DRAINAGE. LONDON BRIDGE ARCHES. ???oare & Son, to Michaelmas 169 0 3 London County Council 7 3 4 Messrs. Humphery, Rent 468 3 9 176 3 7 Proprietors of Fenning's Wharf, Do. 49 13 4 PUBLIC CONVENIENCE. 517 17 1 Southwark and Vauxhall Water Company 11 10 0 RENTS. 1 South Metropolitan Gas Company 14 1 11 City of London Electric Lighting Co., Limited, in respect of Wayleave 50 0 0 ???ones, Plumbers' Work 1 12 2 ???oare & Son 1 0 5 Mrs. Humphery, Rent Charge on Arches at London Bridge 19 7 3 ???ullivant, Paper 2 18 6 ???rooks, Washing Towels 9 7 4 Executors of Wm. Lee, Esq., Premises in Upper Ground Street, Rent 14 11 10 ???latter, Printing Tickets 7 18 0 ???leaver, Sundries 4 3 10 John Rawle, Premises in Price's Street, Do. 7 15 4 ???win & Co., Towels 4 4 0 Various Persons, Sundry Small Rents 4 17 9 ???attendants 118 16 0 96 12 2 175 12 2 Carried forward £34,679 19 7 Carried forward £15,659 7 4 70 71 Brought forward £34,679 19 7 Brought forward £15,659 7 4 £ s. d. public convenience building account. contributions. Corporation of London, towards coat of Tooley Street Steps 75 0 0 ???sling & Withall, Timber 78 18 7 ???akeley Bros. & Co., Bricks 40 10 3 Ditto, Asphalting Footway at Southwark Bridge 50 0 0 •/ ???R. Norrish, Plans 50 0 0 ???llham, Cartage 21 14 6 125 0 0 ???ddin & Co., Shooting Rubbish 51 2 0 paving. ???Southwark and Vauxhall Water Company 5 0 0 ???Jones, Plumbers' Work 5 11 5 Postal Telegraph Department 28 4 8 ???Scellaneous 17 15 3 Hydraulic Power Co. 19 2 6 ???lbour 330 9 9 Southwark and Vauxhall Water Co. 197 1 1 601 1 9 Lambeth Water Co. 78 9 3 urinals. South Metropolitan Gas Co. 199 7 9 Sale of Old Stone 23 11 4 Barclay & Perkins 8 10 8 ???uthwark and Vauxhall Water Company 28 14 0 J.S.Gabriel 63 11 8 ???mbeth Water Company 15 3 8 Borough Market Trustees 11 0 9 ???Jones, Plumbers' Work 8 19 8 J. Mowlem & Co. 4 19 3 ???ant 0 8 0 London County Council 0 14 0 53 5 4 634 12 11 deposits. paving. City of London Electric Lighting Co., Limited, Paving Work 1,350 0 0 ???mes & Wimpey, Stone 277 13 4 London Electric Supply Corporation, Limited, do. 100 0 0 ???G. Elliott, Wood Blocks 264 11 4 Various Persons in connection with Drainage, Hoardings, &c. 661 18 8 nights, Sons & Co., ditto 82 18 10 ( Gillham, Horse-hire, Ballast, &c. 483 18 5 2,111 18 8 ???le, Son & Co., Lime 162 13 6 interest. ???mmer Asphalte Paving Co. 1,634 7 8 ???ew, Bear & Co., Staircase at Tooley Street 127 0 0 London and County Bank, Interest on Current Account 40 17 9 ???solyne & Young 39 16 5 sanitary. ???Taylor 16 5 6 ???ddin & Co. 6 18 0 Metropolitan Asylums Board, Fees, Notification of Infectious Disease. 41 12 0 ???ent Victoria Stone Co. 16 6 1 ???S.Gabriel 15 10 0 scavenging. ???owlem & Co. 33 2 10 ???ubbs 5 16 1 Borough Market Trustees, Cleansing the Market 550 0 0 ???Travers Asphalte Co. 24 1 3 Collection of Trade Refuse 127 2 3 ???ndries 14 9 8 677 2 3 3,205 8 11 Carried forward £38,311 3 2 Carried forward £19,519 4 72 73 Brought forward £38,311 3 ??? Brought forward £19,519 3 4 sundries. ???cavenging and dusting. Fines out of Court 243 4 6 ???keley Bros. & Co., Contractors 2,250 8 0 Partington & Co., for Hoarding at east end of Southwark Street 40 0 0 Ditto Shooting Refuse 1,260 14 11 ???and District Board of Works, Ditto 106 10 3 Sale of Old Iron 25 3 10 Taylor, Horse-hire 741 19 11 Other small amounts 0 10 0 Gillham, Ditto 82 6 6 308 18 4 ???thwark and Vauxhall Water Company 11 15 3 • ???ndries 13 9 6 4,467 4 4 ???epôt, lavington street. ???are & Son 37 3 7 ???olyne & Young 30 11 1 ???Jones 16 8 5 ???thwark and Vauxhall Water Company 5 4 3 ???uth Metropolitan Gas Company 6 5 0 ???Gillham 8 16 0 ???indries 1 5 0 105 13 4 watering. ???uthwark and Vauxhall Water Company, Water for Roads 200 0 0 ???akeley Bros. & Co., Ltd., Water Carts, &c. 475 0 0 675 0 0 lighting. ???uth Metropolitan Gas Company, to 25th December 1,945 7 3 labour. ???ving, Scavenging, &c. 4,022 12 6 ???wer Men 366 18 6 4,389 11 0 PLANT, IMPLEMENTS, &c. ???yley & Co. Vans 749 14 2 ???nth & Sons, Sweeping Machines 100 0 0 ???Tyrie, Brooms 82 5 0 ???xter, Lamps 7 6 0 ???lley, Son & Jones 31 8 0 ???gden 11 9 9 Carried forward £38,620 1 6 Carried forward £982 2 11 £31,101 19 3 74 75 Brought forward £38,620 1 6 Brought forward £982 2 11 £31,101 19 3 ???ble 9 17 6 ???and & Mason 4 15 0 ???lgers 10 0 0 ???alker & Son 5 1 11 ???tle 5 8 0 ???son 2 17 0 ???ndnes 3 12 6 1,023 14 10 REPAIRS. ???Jones 8 15 11 ???Jones 11 12 5 ???k & Co. 9 16 0 ???oare & Son 3 6 0 ???lson 2 13 3 ???ayley & Co. 4 8 6 40 12 1 SALARIES AND WAGES. ???laries 1,551 13 4 ???ages 78 0 0 1,629 13 4 SUPERANNUATION. ???Brims, late Clerk of Works 68 10 0 RENT AND INSURANCE. ???hurch wardens, St. Saviour's, Offices, Emerson Street 150 18 10 ???uth Eastern Railway Co., Arches, Ewer Street 98 2 0 ???cclesiastical Commissioners, Depot, Lavington Street 78 8 6 • ???hurchwardens, Christchurch, Land in Upper Ground Street 14 11 10 ???undries 0 9 0 342 10 2 RATES AND TAXES. ???ssessed Taxes 19 10 1 ???arochial Rates 98 19 10 ???ater Rates 11 10 3 130 0 2 Carried forward £88,620 1 ??? Carried forward £34,336 19 10 76 77 Brought forward £38,620 ??? ??? Brought forward £34,336 19 10 PRINTING, STATIONERY, &c. ???innings 57 16 3 ??? & Co. 4 4 0 ???ddle & Couchman 24 6 0 ???inkley 1 2 0 ???aterlow Bros. & Layton 5 2 8 ???ewett 42 6 3 ???amwell 2 12 4 ???totter 13 9 0 ???berts & Leete 17 2 9 ???ccato & Woolf 1 7 2 169 8 5 OFFICE EXPENSES. ???bare & Son 37 3 7 ???vin & Co. 4 8 10 ???anford 3 3 3 ???anley 6 1 3 ???edland 1 5 0 ???illiams 10 6 6 ???egory 13 13 0 ???Jones 3 11 0 ???derson 1 15 9 ???oksey 0 12 6 ???nders & Baker 1 0 6 ???ckson 0 19 6 ???idges 1 12 10 ???rne & Hinton 18 1 0 ???vinet & Co. 2 1 0 ???last 7 7 0 ???nings 1 5 0 ???oolf 3 3 0 ???ckridge 1 0 0 ???rveyor, Sundries 7 9 5 ???usekeeper 10 17 9 ???tional Telephone Co. 20 0 0 ???vertisements 30 7 5 ???stage, &c. 4 0 5 ???avelling, &c. 6 17 6 ???iscellaneous Small Items 3 12 4 201 15 4 Carried forward £38,620 1 ??? Carried forward £34,708 3 7 78 79 Brought forward £38,620 1 ??? * Brought forward £34,708 3 7 • LOANS. ???ndon County Council, Principal Repaid 833 0 0 ???erest 105 8 7 938 8 7 LAW AND PARLIAMENTARY EXPENSES. ???Tickle 233 11 2 ???C. Topham 54 7 10 ???npson, Palmer & Winder 15 16 6 ???te, Borrett & Co. 9 9 0 ???son & Co. 34 9 4 ???ndries 9 19 6 357 13 4 SANITARY. ???nitas Co., Disinfectants 47 17 0 ???inner Sanitation Co., Drain Testing Apparatus 5 8 0 ???Jones, Ditto 6 11 6 ???rtality Returns 6 10 0 ???dmer, Analysis of Water 6 6 0 ???D. Field 7 17 0 ???Pollock 5 7 6 ???lmp 1 15 0 ???akeley Bros. & Co. 1 5 0 ???ight & Co. 4 3 6 ???fication of Infectious Disease, Fees 23 18 11 ???penses of Disinfecting 59 13 0 ???oadhead, Rooms at No. 2 Nelson Square 21 0 0 ???right, Layman & Umney 2 0 11 ??? Broad, Compensation 1 5 0 ???Walker, ditto 3 0 0 ???bbey 1 14 0 ???ndries 1 9 0 ???spector Grist, Petty Cash 28 0 0 ???Do. Broadhead, do 28 0 0 56 0 0 263 1 4 DEPOSITS RETURNED. ???rious Persons, Drainage, Hoardings, &c. 123 9 8 Carried forward £38,620 1 ??? Carried forward £36,390 16 6 6 80 81 Brought forward £38,620 1 Brought forward £36,390 16 6 • • SUNDRIES. ???oare & Son 17 5 7 ???ield & Son 18 15 0 ???rinking Fountains Association 1 5 0 ???uarantee Society 3 0 0 ???ine repaid into Court 2 0 0 ???eek & Co. 4 6 7 ???opies of Acts of Parliament, &c. 4 2 1 ???tamp Duty 3 4 0 ???ondon and County Bank 2 1 8 ???ther small Items 2 15 6 58 15 5 ???alance at Bank 2,604 7 4 ???ess Cheques not presented 910 11 4 1,693 16 0 ???alance Petty Cash A/c 476 13 7 2,170 9 7 £38,620 1 ??? £38,620 1 6 auditors certificate. We, the undersigned Auditors of Accounts appointed by the Board of Works for the Sain ???viour's District to audit the Accounts of the said Board of Works for the financial year which ended on the 25th March, 1894, do hereby certify that we have investigated such accounts, and the same are, to the best of our knowledge and belief, correct. Dated the 24th day of May, 1894. (Signed) AUBREY HYMAN, J. NICHOLLS, Auditors. 82 83 RATAL ACCOUNTS. Dr. GENERAL PURPOSES ATE. Cr. £ s. d. £ s. d. To Paving Carriageways and Footways 1,368 8 2 Receipts from General Purposes Rate 13,466 0 0 ,, Scavenging and Dusting 5,635 13 2 Interest on Bank A/c 49 15 9 ,, New Depot, Lavington Street 153 17 5 Sundries 239 6 2 ,, Watering 675 0 0 Trade Refuse 127 2 3 ,, Lighting 1,926 0 1 Hoardings, etc., Deposits 114 18 10 ,, Labour and Wages 1,960 12 6 Borough Market Trustees, for Scavenging 550 0 0 ,, Plant, Tools and Implements 1,046 15 5 Rents of London Bridge Arches 610 19 4 ,, Repairs 36 13 10 ,, Interest on Loans, Paving Purposes 108 7 8 ,, Law and Parliamentary 318 8 8 ,, Sanitary 219 3 4 ,, Superannuation 68 10 0 „ Two-thirds Establishment Expenses 1,483 7 9 ,, Balance 157 4 4 £15,158 2 4 £15,158 2 4 SEWERS???ATE. £ s. d. £ s. d. To Sewers and Drainage Work 493 17 6 Receipts from Sewers Rate 1,832 0 0 ,, Private Drainage Work 284 4 8 Chalet Fees 265 2 7 ,, Urinals 59 12 11 Drainage Deposits 423 10 2 ,, Labour and Wages 366 18 C Balance 286 10 10 ,, Wages, etc., Public Convenience 171 17 4 % ,, Public Convenience Building A/c 688 18 9 ,, One-third Establishment Expenses 741 13 11 £2,807 3 7 £2,807 3 ESTABLISHMENT EXPENSES. £ s. d, £ s. d. To Salaries 1,372 18 4 General Purposes Rate, two-thirds of £2,225 1s. 8d. 1,483 7 9 ,, Wages 78 0 0 Sewers Rate, one-third of £2,225 1s. 8d. 741 13 11 ,, Rent and Insurance 259 8 8 ,, Rates and Taxes 133 17 8 ,, Printing and Stationery 175 18 5 ,, Office Expenses 204 18 7 £2,225 1 8 £2,225 1 8 84 85 Statement of Account showing the ascertained or estimated .ssets and Liabilities of the Board on 25th March, 1894. ASSETS, LIABILITIES. £ s. d. £ s. d. By amount due from Overseers of St. Saviour for Education * Kate 2,343 9 7 School Board for London 3,592 15 0 , London County Council—Loans repayable by Instalments, and Interest to date 2,546 8 3 „ Amount due from Overseers of Christchurch for Education Rate 1,249 5 5 , Sundry Creditors 2,050 17 11 „ Balance with Treasurer 1,693 16 0 % „ Petty Cash Account, amount at Bank and in hand 476 13 7 ,, Sundry Debtors, including Rents and Interest due to date 708 9 1 „ Balance 1,718 7 6 Balance 26/3/93 £1,589 1 0 Add Balance of Sewers Rate 286 10 10 £1,875 11 10 Less Balance of General Purposes Rate 157 4 4 £8,190 1 2 — £8,190 1 2 I certify that 1 have examined the Accounts of the St. Saviour's District Board of Works for the year ending 25th March, 1894. I have seen and checked all the vouchers for payments, and ascertained the correctness of ie Balance with the Treasurer, and in my opinion the above statement is correct. In addition to the above Assets the Board hold Working Plant, Carts, and improvements to Public Works, &c. WALTER W. FEAST, F.C.A. St. George's House, Eastcheap, London, E.C., 15th May, 1894. 86 87 PUBLIC CONVENIENCES at Eastead of Southwark Street, Borough. Dr Account of Receipts and Expenditure from the 25th March , 7th November, 1893, the date of Closing for Rebuilding. Cr £ s. d. £ s. ' £ s. d. To Fees received for use of Closets and Lavatories, viz.: y South Metropolitan Gas Company, Lighting 14 1 11 Southwark and Vauxhall Water Company, Water Supply 8 18 4 MEN'S DEPARTMENT. Sundries, viz.:— £ s. d. Quarter to 24th June 80 18 11 Hoare & Son, Repairs 0 14 0 „ 29th September 100 10 11 Brooks, Washing Towels... 9 7 4 To 7th November 34 8 0 Slatter, Printing Tickets 7 18 0 215 12 Cleaver, Soap and Sundries 4 3 10 WOMEN'S DEPARTMENT. Ewin & Co., Towels 4 4 0 Quarter to 24th June 19 13 10 Bullivant, Paper 2 18 6 29th September 22 12 5 Jones, Plumbers' Work 0 15 5 To 7th November 8 1 5 Poundage 0 17 9 50 7 Wages of Attendants:— 30 18 10 Men's Department 66 0 0 Women's ditto 52 16 0 118 16 0 Balance 93 5 5 £266 0 £266 0 6 88 LIST OF CONTRACTS. ASPHALTE PAVING. Date. Name of Contractor. Nature of Contract. Term. Amount. 24 April, 1891 Limmer Asphalte Paving Company, Limited Repave with Compressed Rock Asplialte Footway on East Side of Borough High Street Keep in Repair for 10 years from 24th April, 1891 5/6 per superficial yard 18 June, 1892 Ditto Provide Concrete and Pave with ditto Blackfriars Road from Gt. Charlotte St. to Southern Boundary Ditto from 13th July, 1892 7/6 per superficial yard Ditto Ditto Ditto Bear Lane Ditto from 18th July, 1892 Ditto. Ditto Ditto Ditto Southwark Bridge Road, East Side, from Swiss Milk Warehouse to Messrs. Petty, Wood & Co.'s Gateway Ditto from 23rd July, 1892 Ditto. Ditto Ditto Ditto Meymott (late Cross) Street, Blackfriars Road Ditto from 10th October, 1892 Ditto. Ditto Ditto Ditto West Side from Union Street to Boundary opposite Marshalsea Road Ditto from 20th December, 1892 Ditto. Ditto Ditto Ditto Bennett Street Ditto from 25th March, 1893 Ditto. 12 May, 1893 Ditto Ditto Southwark Bridge Road, East Side, Abutment of Bridge to Swiss Milk Warehouse Ditto, West Side, Abutment of Bridge to a point 36 ft. 9 ins. South \ Ditto from 28th March, 1893 Ditto 89 LI.ST OF CONTRACTS. ASPHALTE PAYING— Continued. Date. Name of Conteactoe. Natuee of Contract. Teem. Amount. 12 May, 1893 Limmer Asphalte Paving Company, Limited. Provide Concrete and Pave with Compressed Rock Asphalte, Carriageway of Three Crown Square Keep in Repair for 5 years from 2nd June, 1893 10/- per superficial yard. Ditto Ditto Ditto Footways of ditto Ditto Footway of Emerson Place Ditto 10 years from same date 7/6 per superficial yard. Ditto Ditto Ditto from 2nd May, 1893 Ditto. Ditto Ditto Ditto Gravel Lane, East Side, Union Street to Boundary, South Ditto from 6th June, 1893 Ditto. Ditto Ditto Ditto Carriageway of Charles Street Ditto 5 years from 27th June, 1893 10/- per superficial yard. Ditto Ditto Ditto Robert Street Ditto from 30th June, 1893 Ditto. Ditto Ditto Ditto Price's Street (Edward Street to Burrell Street) Ditto from 3rd July, 1893 Ditto. 21 May, 1894 Society Francaise des Asphaltes Ditto Charlotte Street Do. 10 years from 23rd June, '94 9/9 per superficial yard. George Street Ditto from 31st July, 1894 Ditto. Hatfield Street Ditto from 1st Sept., 1894 Ditto. Boundary Row Ditto from 14th July, 1894 Ditto. Marlborough Street Ditto from 7th July, 1894 Ditto. Whitecross Street Ditto Footways Not completed. Ditto. 6/6 per superficial yard. LIST OF CONTRACTS. GENERAL WORKS. Date. Name or Conteactoe. Nature of Contract. Term. Amount. 24 June, 1892 The Board with the Trustees of the Borough Market Cleansing the Market 3 years from 24th June, 1892 To pay the Board £550 per annum. 28 April, 1893 12 March, 1894 Wakeley Bros. & Co., Ltd. F. Roslier & Co. Shooting Dust and Refuse Supply of Portland Cement and Lime 3 years from 24th June, 1893 1 year from 25th March, 1894 2/- per ton. As per Schedule of Prices. 15 March, 1894 George Gillham Supply of Thames Ballast and Sand Ditto Ditto. 16 March, 1894 Jos. S. Gabriel Supply of York Paving and Granite Curb Ditto Ditto. 23 April, 1894 Jas. Stiff & Sons Supply of Drain Pipes, &c. Printing Ditto Ditto. 18 May, 1894 Riddle & Couchman Ditto Ditto. 21 May, 1894 John Tyrie Supply of Bass Brooms 1 year from 24th June, 1894 Ditto. 4 June, 1894 Frederick Hoar Ditto of Horses & Harness Ditto £84 per horse per annum and 5/7 per horse per day for those supplied on Sundays and Public Holidays. 90