84 Metropolis Local Mangement Act. BOARD OF WORKS FOR THE ST. SAVIOUR'S DISTRICT. THE TWENTY-EIGHTH ANNUAL REPORT, BEING FOR THE YEAR 1883—84. LONDON: PRINTED BY H. SILVERLOCK, 92, BLACKFRIARS ROAD. S.E. MDCCCLXXXIV. St. Sabiour's District Borard of Works. LIST OF MEMBERS OF STANDING COMMITTEES. PAVING & GENERAL PURPOSES COMMITTEE. RIDER, T. F., Chairman. BACK, USHER BAXTER, FREDERICK GOODWIN, ARNOLD HALE, JOSIAH HAY, H. C. HENLEY, CHARLES JOHNSON, ROBERT KEITH, ALEX. J. MILLS, JOHN PALMER, JOHN SANITARY COMMITTEE. STAFFORD, WM., Chairman. BROWN, JOHN COOPER, JAS. GRANTHAM, H. G. HAWKINS, JAMES H. HUNT, RICHARD SINCLAIR, JAMES UMNEY, CHARLES WILLSON, HENRY SEWERS COMMITTEE. BOULDEN, ALBERT, Chairman. BIDMEAD, WILLIAM BOWERS, R. W. JONES, Dr. C. L. JOSOLYNE, WALTER S. HAGGIS, A. H. NEWTON, GEORGE PHILLIPS, JAMES SANDEMAN, FREDERICK STANNAH, JOSEPH FINANCE COMMITTEE. COUCHMAN, ALFRED, Chairman. ANGUS, WILLIAM BOREHAM, EBENEZER GREGORY, HENRY JONES, C. V. PELLS, HENRY RIDLEY, HENRY SLATTER, WILLIAM SMALL, W. H. St. Saviour's District Board of Works. REPORT OF PROCEEDINGS OF THE BOARD FOR THE YEAR 1883-84, BY THE CLERK, SURVEYOR, MEDICAL OFFICER, AND ANALYST; Also Account in Abstract of Sums received and expended by the Board during the same period. Printed in accordance with Section 198 of the Metropolis Local Management Act, (18 and 19 Vict., cap. 120,) and ordered to be circulated among the Inhabitants of the District. The South London Tramway Company's Bill, 1883, (mentioned in the last Annual Report of this Board,) to which Bill the consent of this Board as the road authority within the meaning of the Tramways Act, 1870, had been given, subject to certain terms and conditions which were embodied in an agreement entered into by the Company, the object of which Bill was to sanction the laying down of tramway lines and the running of cars along the western portion of Southwark Street, Stamford Street, and York Road, Lambeth, in order to complete the system in that direction, was, after it had passed the House of Commons, rejected by the Committee of the Lords, to whom the same was referred. The Company in December last issued notice of a fresh application to Parliament, but did not proceed with it. South London Tramways. In November, 1883, plans with sections, book of reference, &c. were deposited with the Clerk of the Board of a scheme for the construction of a Subway, described as follows in the Gasette Notice:—"A Subway, commencing in the Parish of St. Mary, London (City and Southwark Subway. 4 Newington, at or near the south-west corner of Short Street, at the point of junction of that street with Newington Butts, and terminating in King William Street, in the Parish of St. Michael, in the City of London, at or near the western front of the house numbered 51, in King William Street aforesaid." And in December following a Bill intituled The London (City) and Southwark Subway Bill was deposited in the Private Bill Office of the House of Commons to authorise the carrying out of the same. By this Bill it is proposed to form a Subway in the direction above indicated, passing beneath the public roadways in Newington Causeway, Blackman Street, and Borough High Street, and the River Thames, and terminating at a point in close proximity to the station now in course of construction of the Inner Circle Railway, in King William Street. At an early stage the Bill was referred by this Board to a Committee for consideration, who reported adversely thereto, on the grounds following, namely:—That ample means of communication already existed between Newington Butts and the City. That the carrying out of the works would necessitate interference with roads, sewers, drains, and other property vested in the Board, and imperil the stability of the houses and premises on either side of the route proposed to be traversed. That power was sought to set aside Section 92 of the Lands Clauses Consolidation Act, 1845, and enable the company to take part only of any house or building. That Section 33 would enable the Company to stop up or divert either permanently or temporarily streets, footpaths, drains, &c., within the limits of lateral deviation, the entrance of Southwark Street being within those limits. That Section 34 would authorise the construction and maintenance of temporary shafts or openings from the surface of the Borough High Street, and Section 35 the under-pinning of any houses, cellars, or buildings within 100 feet of the subway, on notice to that effect. The Clerk also presented a report on the subject, showing that the Bill contained no provisions for the reinstatement of roads or pavements which might be disturbed; that it imposed no limitation in regard to the length of time during which the works might be in progress, and afforded no description of the subway, its mode of working, or whether it was intended for 5 carriage traffic of any kind, or for foot passengers only. The Board therefore resolved to oppose the Bill, and instructed Mr. Charles Greenwood to prepare and lodge the necessary petition. The Bill was read a second time on the 18th February, and referred to a Select Committee of the House of Commons, presided over by Mr. Walter, M.P., who sat on the 9th May and following days to consider same. The Bill was also opposed by the Corporation of the City of London, on the ground mainly of possible injury to London Bridge, and by the Vestry of St. George-theMartyr, whose objections were similar to those of this Board. In the course of the proceedings it was elicited that it was the intention of the promoters to construct a double line of subway, consisting of cast-iron tubes, each about ten feet in diameter, lined with white glazed bricks, and lighted by electricity, and to run a carriage or tramcar through the same by means of wire-rope cables attached to stationary engines on the principle of the steep grade tramway lately opened at Highgate; such subway to be approached by staircases and hydraulic lifts. The objectionable 33rd Section, enabling the promoters to stop up streets, was withdrawn with their consent, and they also consented to the insertion of various clauses for the protection of local authorities. After the case had been before the Committee for six days and counsel had been heard and witnesses examined for and against the scheme (Messrs. Rider, Mills, and Goodwin, Members of this Board, and Mr. Norrish, the Surveyor, giving evidence in opposition thereto), the Committee decided that the preamble had been proved subject to the amendments they had made, and which will require the insertion of clauses giving a fuller description of the undertaking and mode of working the traffic; providing for the certification of the tramway by the Board of Trade before it is opened for traffic; the impounding of the deposit as security for the completion of the work; the restoration of the roadways at the expense of the promoters; giving the right to the Engineer of the Corporation to inspect and stop the works if necessary by reference to an arbitrator; for restricting the limits of deviation on the south side of the river, and forbidding the construction of any part of the tubes below the level of the piles of London Bridge, or within a 6 certain number of feet of the abutments. The Bill thus amended has passed the House of Commons and it will now be submitted to the Lords. By the amendments and alterations which have been made, some of the more objectionable features of the Bill have doubtless been disposed of or eliminated, and the new clauses which have been introduced will afford the Board a certain amount of protection against, and control over, the proceedings of the Company. The Board may, for instance, require twenty-one days' notice to be given of the intention to break up streets, impose a limit on the extent of roadway to be broken up at any one time, and superintend and compel the restoration of roadways within a period of three months, to the satisfaction of the Surveyor and at the cost of the Company. But the most objectionable clause—the 38th, authorising the construction of temporary shafts in the Borough High Street, for the purpose of the excavations—remains, the Engineer of the Company being of opinion that they were absolutely necessary, and could not be dispensed with entirely. "Rather than incur the continued opposition of the Board, he would have consented to there being two of such shafts, and ultimately to there being one only, and that of limited dimensions—100 feet by 15; also to a limitation of the time during which such shaft might be kept open to eighteen months. The Board, however, after very careful consideration of the matter, were of opinion that even a single shaft with hoardings, machinery for hoisting, and a number of carts standing by to load and carry away the excavated materials, in the busiest portion of the Borough High Street, would occasion a very great obstruction of the traffic, particularly on market mornings, when the roadway and the approaches to the Borough Market are already liable to frequent blockages, and prove highly detrimental to the trade of the Borough Market, and to shopkeepers carrying on business in the locality. The Board therefore resolved to continue its opposition to the Bill in the House of Lords. Denman Street and Railway Approach. Denman Street and Railway Approach, the two streets leading from the Borough High Street to the Stations of the London, Brighton and South Coast and South Eastern Railway Companies, 7 have, after many vexatious delays and a great deal of correspondence and negotiation with the solicitors of Messrs. Fielden Bros., the owners, as regards the lower portion, by deed of conveyance and covenant dated the 31st December last, and with the consent of the Metropolitan Board of Works, been conveyed to this Board, Messrs. Fielden and the two Railway Companies contributing a sum of £700 for the purpose of paving the same, and this Board covenanting to repair, maintain, and light its portion of the two thoroughfares as far as the parish boundary at St. Olave's. The paving works are now being carried out by Messrs. Wheeler & Hindle, the Contractors, under the direction of Mr. Norrish, the Surveyor of this Board, and the same firm have in hand the paving of the upper portion in St. Olave's, for Messrs. Fielden, the St. Olave's Board not having yet succeeded in coming to terms with the owners for taking over their portion of the roads. Arrangements have also been made for the better drainage and lighting of the two thoroughfares. Thus a long-standing and dangerous nuisance has been got rid of to the satisfaction of all the parties concerned, and the responsibility of the repair and maintenance of the roads, so far as they are situate in St. Saviour's, will henceforth devolve upon this Board. Since the well-known decision of the House of Lords in the matter of the appeal of Mr. Archibald E. Dobbs, whereby it was finally decided that the words Annual Value occurring in the Water Companies' Acts meant the net annual value of the premises assessed, that is to say, the rent at which they would let after deducting the usual tenant's rates and taxes, the probable average annual cost of repairs, insurance, &c., several Bills have been introduced into Parliament for dealing with the Water Supply of the Metropolis, and for giving effect to the decision above referred to, the Water Companies having in many instances been unwilling to accept the Poor Rate valuation as the standard or basis of their charges, and numerous disputes having arisen in consequence which have had to be settled by the magistrates. The Bill of the Corporation of London sought for powers to enable any water consumer to require the water company supplying his district to supply him with water by meter, at his option, at the Water Supply. 8 price of 6d. per 1,000 gallons, and where a consumer did not desire to take his water by meter, then to give legislative effect to the Dobbs decision, and establish the Poor Rate valuation as the basis of future charges in the metropolis. Another object of the Bill was to apply The Water Works Clauses Act, 1847, to all the water companies, whereby their dividend would have been limited to 10 per cent. This Board resolved to give its support to the Bill. The Bill was however thrown out by the House of Commons on the second reading. The Further Powers Bill of the Metropolitan Board of Works, intituled, A Bill to confer further powers upon the Metropolitan Board of Works with respect to applications to Parliament, and legal proceedings relating to the Supply of Water in the Metropolis has been read a second time in the House of Commons. It provides that the Metropolitan Board of Works may from time to time make applications to Parliament, and may oppose applications made to Parliament, with respect to the supply of water in or near the Metropolis, as defined by The Metropolis Management Act, 1855, to the companies authorised to provide such supply, and to the undertakings of such companies, and may institute and carry on inquiries, negotiations, and other proceedings in relation to any such application, and prosecute and defend legal proceedings by or against the Board, or any consumer of water in the Metropolis, &c. The Water Works Clauses Act (1847) Amendment Bill, introduced by Mr. Torrens in the House of Commons, is intended to declare and explain the 68th Section of that Act, and provides that the words "the annual value of the tenement supplied with water" occurring therein, shall mean the net annual value, as settled from time to time by the local authorities. In May last a deputation from the Central Committee of the Water Consumers' Defence Association, to which this Board had sent delegates, waited upon the Home Secretary in support of the Bill, Sir Charles Dilke also being present, and were informed that the Government approved of the Bill subject to certain amendments they had prepared, and which would make the principal clause read thus—"The words annual value and yearly value in the Special Acts of the Companies mentioned in Section 3 of The Metropolitan Water Act, 1871, and the words annual value of the tenement supplied with water in the 9 68th Section of The Water Works Clauses Act, 1847, shall mean when incorporated with any special Act, the rateable value as ascertained by the Valuation List for the time being in force; provided that where the water rent or rate is chargeable on the annual value of a part only of any hereditament entered in the Valuation List, such annual value shall be a fairly apportioned part of the rateable value of the whole hereditament as entered in the Valuation List; the apportionment in case of dispute to be made in the manner provided in the said Section." This Bill, if passed in its amended form, will make the Valuation List absolutely conclusive, and finally settle, it is to be hoped, the legal basis of charge. Lastly, the Earl of Camperdown introduced a Bill in the House of Lords, the objects of which were to compel the eight Water Companies supplying the Metropolis to send in either quarterly or half-yearly to every person liable to pay water rates for domestic purposes, a demand note, containing particulars of the claim, including the annual value on which the percentage charge is levied, and to render it illegal for a company to cut off the supply without having obtained a magistrate's order for so doing. This Bill has been lost for the present Session on account of non-compliancc with the standing orders. In October, 1883, the attention of this Board was called by the Board of Trade to a Scheme promoted by the South Metropolitan Gas Company and The Gas Light and Coke Company (otherwise known as the Chartered Gas Company) for the amalgamation and incorporation of those Companies, application having been made to the Board of Trade for its consent thereto pursuant to Sections 18 to 24 of The City of London Gas Act, 1868, and Section 56 of The Gas Light and Coke Company's Act, 1871, which, it was assumed, gave the Board of Trade power to sanction such an arrangement. The Scheme was submitted to this Board and referred to the General Purposes Committee for consideration, who made inquiry and reported that in their opinion the amalgamation of the two Companies would result in a monopoly which could not fail to be injurious to the ratepayers, and recommended that a memorial should be presented to the Board of Trade praying that the sanction of that Board might not be given to the Scheme until B Gas Amalgamation 10 the local authorities most interested in the arrangement had had an opportunity of carefully considering it and of expressing their views thereon. This was done, and shortly afterwards a Conference was convened by the Vestry of Camberwell of local authorities to consider the Scheme, this Board appointing Messrs. Couchman, Hawkins, and Rider as delegates on its behalf. The delegates met accordingly, and the general opinion of the Conference being that the proposed amalgamation would be detrimental to the interests of the consumers, and Mr. Michael, Q.C., having advised that the Board of Trade would be acting in access of its powers in consenting thereto, it was resolved at an adjourned meeting of the Conference, held on the 20th November, to retain the services of that gentleman as Counsel on behalf of the Conference; to employ an Engineer, and to instruct Mr. Alfred Lass, a Chartered Accountant, to prepare a statement as to the relative financial position and prospects of the two Companies. It was further resolved to request the local authorities interested to contribute to a fund for defraying the expenses of the opposition, this Board agreeing to contribute pro rata to the extent of £50. The Counsel prepared accordingly a very able and comprehensive statement of objections to the Scheme, and Mr. Lass drew up a tabular statement to accompany the objections, the principal heads of which were as under:— 1.—That no power existed authorising the Board of Trade to sanction the Scheme of Amalgamation, the Acts of Parliament relied upon by the Companies having become obsolete or applying to other Companies. 2.—That that which Parliament had expressly determined, Parliament, unless it had given authority to some other authority in that behalf could alone alter. 3.—That what was proposed to be accomplished by the Scheme as to present and future financial arrangements was in direct defiance of all right principles governing capital expenditure, and in direct opposition to the enactments governing both the capital and revenue of the Companies. 4.—That the Scheme on its merits was highly objectionable, and would prove in its working most prejudicial to the interests of gas consumers in the district, and ought not to be sanctioned by the Board of Trade. 11 In December a copy of the Objections was submitted to, approved, and adopted by this Board, who caused its common seal to be affixed thereto, and the same, together with a copy of the tabular statement referred to, was forwarded to the Board of Trade, who shortly afterwards informed this Board that, having regard to the almost unanimous opposition of the representatives of the consumers, they had decided not to give their approval to the Scheme. One of the many duties imposed upon local authorities by the Metropolis Local Management Act is that of providing latrines, or public conveniences, and for a considerable time past this Board has had in contemplation the erection of places of the kind which should be available for both sexes, if a suitable site could be found for them in contiguity to the Borough Market and the Borough High Street. With that object in view, the Board caused a survey to be made of the locality, when it was found that the only site which could be made available for the purpose without undue interference with the traffic was that occupied by the central lamp column, at the east end of Southwark Street. The lamp column in question being likewise a ventilating shaft communicating with the subway in Southwark Street, the control of which is vested in the Metropolitan Board of Works, the consent of that Board had to be obtained before the column could be removed. Application was made to them accordingly, but they refused to allow it to be taken down; a fresh application was made to them for permission to transfer the column some twenty-five feet in a north-easterly direction towards the Borough, but they were still obdurate and declined to allow it to be interfered with. Thereupon this Board appointed a deputation consisting of Messrs. Thorn, Goodwin, and Hay, who waited upon the Works Committee at Spring Gardens, and urged them to reconsider the matter, on the grounds that the column would be in a better position, and out of the way of the intended conveniences. They then somewhat reluctantly consented, on condition that this Board should bear the expense of the removal of the column, restore its connections with the subway, and re-erect it under the direction and to the satisfaction of the Engineer of the Metropolitan Board. This has been done, and a contract has been entered into with the Lion Iron Foundry Com- B2 Public Conveniences. 12 pany for the erection of suitable conveniences, as suggested, at a cost, including the removal of the lamp column, of about £700. The Grove and Ewer Street. In order to obviate the confusion and inconvenience occasioned by the similarity of the nomenclature of the two thoroughfares known as Grove and The Grove, in Southwark Street, this Board applied to the Metropolitan Board of "Works for an order to incorporate the last-named (The Grove) with Ewer Street, under the latter name, the two streets forming now one continuous thoroughfare, and to re-number the houses and premises in Grove. This has been done, an order having been issued by the Metropolitan Board for the purpose on the 18th January last. Red Cross Place. On the 1st August, 1883, this Board's Medical Officer of Health made an Official Representation to the Metropolitan Board of "Works, pursuant to the provisions of The Artisans' and Labourers' Dwellings Improvement Act, 1875, to the effect that a block of houses in Red Cross Place, Red Cross Street, Borough, were in an unsanitary condition, structurally defective, and unfit for human habitation, and that the area was an unhealthy one within the meaning of that Act. The Metropolitan Board some time afterwards caused a survey to be made of the area in question, but, in their judgment, it was too limited in size to come within the scope of the Act, and they suggested that it should be dealt with by other means. The Sanitary Committee of this Board thereupon caused notices to be served upon the Ecclesiastical Commissioners, the owners, requiring them to put the premises into habitable condition, with the result that some of the houses were cleansed and others demolished. In December a letter was received from the Local Government Board adverting to the condition of the houses as set forth in the Medical Officer's Representation (a copy of which had been forwarded to the Secretary of State), requesting that the matter might be again brought under the notice of this Board, and suggesting that if the circumstances were the same as when the official representation was made, the provisions of Torren's Act should be applied thereto. The circumstances had, however, greatly changed, a large number of the houses having been pulled down. In February last a communication was received from the Ecclesiastical Commissioners to the effect that they were 13 about to let the site for artisans' dwellings, and shortly afterwards Messrs. Pink & Son, who had taken a lease of the premises, submitted plans of the proposed dwellings for the approval of this Board; the Paving and General Purposes Committee thereupon viewed the site, and were of opinion that the street, which was very narrow, should be widened to a uniform width of 25 feet. "With this object in view, negotiations were opened and an arrangement was made with the firm (the consent of the Commissioners having been first obtained), whereby they have undertaken to set back the line of frontage as required on payment to them of the sum of £200, the Metropolitan Board agreeing to contribute onehalf of that amount. The buildings, which are of considerable extent, and will accommodate a large number of families of the working classes, are now in the course of erection. An improvement has also been effected on the south side of Stoney Street, Borough Market, by setting back the line of frontage of premises belonging to Mr. White, at a cost of £71, the Metropolitan Board agreeing to contribute one-half of the amount. Stoney Street. The following Members have during the past year been appointed as delegates to attend Conferences on various subjects, viz.:— At Camberwell Vestry Hall on the proposed Amalgamation of Gas Companies, Messrs. Couchman, Hawkins, and Rider; at the same Vestry Hall on the subject of "Water Supply, Messrs. Hale, Rider, and Rideal; and on the Central Committee of the Water Consumers' Defence Association, Messrs. Back, Couchman, Goodwin, Hale, Hawkins, and Rider; at Plumstead on the subject of School Board Expenditure, Messrs. Couchman, Hawkins, and Henley; at Prince's Hall, Piccadilly, on the Government of London Bill, Messrs. Boulden, Couchman, Hawkins, Rider, and Sinclair; and at St. Mary-le-bone on the same subject, Messrs. Boulden, Couchman, and Rider; also to attend as a deputation to the Trustees of the Rectory, St. Saviour's, on the subject of the Cross-bones Burial Ground, Messrs. Gregory, Hay, Hawkins, Henley, and Stafford; and to the Metropolitan Board of Works respecting the removal of the lamp column and ventilating shaft at the east end of Southwark Street, Messrs. Goodwin, Hay, and Thorn. Delegates. 14 Finances and School Board Expenditure. In April last the Board caused the following Memorial to be addressed to Her Majesty's Government praying for an inquiry into the policy and expenditure of the School Board for London: — "To the Right Honourable William Ewart Gladstone, First Lord of the Treasury and Prime Minister. The Memorial of the Board of Works for the Saint Saviours District sheweth as follows:— "Your Memorialists are the "Rating Authority" for the St. Saviours District, Southwark, in the County of Surrey, within the meaning of "The Elementary Education Act, 1870"; and, as such, are charged with the duty of levying and raising the amounts required by the School Board for London, in respect of the said District. "The demands made by the School Board from the date of their establishment to the present time have steadily and enormously increased, the aggregate sum demanded of the rating authorities for the year ending Lady-day, 1885, being little short of a million of pounds sterling, of which sum your Memorialists, by precept dated the 21st February last, are called upon to contribute £10,261 16s. 0d., being at the rate of 8½d. in the pound on the rateable value, notwithstanding the assurances given by Mr. Forster, M.P. and others at the time when the Education Act was being promoted in Parliament, that the rate would not exceed 3d. in the pound, and upon the faith of which assurances the Act was passed. "Your Memorialists submit that the School Board was established for the purpose of providing, as set forth in the fifth section of the Act, in every school district "a sufficient amount of accommodation in public elementary schools for all the children resident in such district for whose elementary education efficient and suitable provision is not otherwise made," in other words, for the purpose of supplementing the existing schools, not of supplanting them; and that it is contrary to the spirit and intention of the Act to seek to impart, as the School Board are doing, a high-class education for which the children are in many instances unfitted, necessitating the employment of highly-trained and highly-paid teachers at the expense of the ratepayers. "Your Memorialists observe with regret that, after making every allowance for the greater cost of sites in London, the average outlay for the education of the children taught in the schools of the School Board 15 is largely in excess of the expenditure for that purpose in Birmingham, Bradford, Leeds, Liverpool, Manchester, Sheffield, and other large towns; whilst, on the other hand, the fees received are very much lower; and they have reason to believe that in many instances not only is an excessive price paid for sites for schools in London, hut a considerable loss is incurred in acquiring and allowing them to remain unutilised. "Your Memorialists have also reason to believe that the salaries paid to teachers are very much higher than in the towns referred to; that unnecessarily large sums are expended in the fitting up and maintenance of training ships; in the system of remunerating by fees the Solicitor and Architects employed; in the erection and fitting up of public offices, and in many other matters. "Your Memorialists submit that the imposition of a rate so heavy as that which is now required to meet the demands of the School Board will be a grievous and oppressive burden to the ratepayers of the Metropolis, and they fear that the maximum has not yet been reached. "Your Memorialists therefore are of opinion that the time has arrived when a full and searching inquiry should be made into the policy and expenditure of the School Board for London, in the interests of the metropolitan ratepayers generally, and "Your Memorialists humbly pray that Her Majesty's Government will be pleased to direct a Commission of Inquiry to be instituted accordingly, and your Memorialists will ever pray, &c." L. S. The Memorial has been referred to the Vice-President of the Council for Education, Mr. Mundella. The constantly increasing demands of the School Board for London, and of the Metropolitan Board of Works, are exemplified in the following tabulated statement, which was printed and circulated throughout the district by order of this Board in April last. During the ten years 1876-85 the Board has had to raise and pay away, in compliance with orders from the authorities named, and without exercising any control whatever over the expenditure of the School Board, no less a sum than £136,975, viz. 16 DATE. precepts of london school board. Precepts of returning officer for school board. Precepts of metropolitan board of works. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. For Year end. Lady-day, 1876 3,216 6 4 5,603 5 2 ,, ,, 1877 4,837 19 1 102 14 9 5,271 11 10 ,, ,, 1878 5,949 19 9 5,505 0 1 ,, ,, 1879 5,958 0 8 5,663 19 10 ,, ,, 1880 6,442 4 6 95 14 0 6,880 10 0 ,, ,, 1881 7,458 13 4 7,602 8 5 ,, ,, 1882 7,631 14 9 7,564 18 3 ,, ,, 1883 7,526 3 4 105 8 0 8,050 18 4 ,, ,, 1884 8,745 7 4 8,061 15 11 „ „ 1885 10,261 16 0 8,438 14 7 68,028 5 1 303 16 9 68,643 2 5 In juxtaposition with the above may be placed a statement of the sums levied by order of this Board for paving, lighting, cleansing, and other local purposes, during the decennial period 1874-83, showing that the increased taxation so much complained of is not due to any augmented expenditure on the part of this Board:— date. amount levied. rateable value of district. equal to a rate in the pound of £ £ d. 1874 14,545 254,875 13.70 1875 15,158 258,862 14.06 1876 12,839 273,223 11.28 1877 14,054 277,537 12.15 1878 14,855 281,241 12.67 1879 12,998 285,073 10.94 1880 12,941 289,852 10.72 1881 12,581 304,786 9.90 1882 12,539 305,759 9.84 1883 13,920 308,046 10.84 Preccpts to meet the demands of the Metropolitan Board of Works and the School Board for London have, during the financial year, been issued as under:— METROPOLITAN BOARD OF WORKS. date of precept. amount. total. st. saviour's. christchurch. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. 18 Jan., 1884 .. 5,965 0 4 2,473 14 3 8,438 14 7 17 SCHOOL BOARD FOR LONDON. DATE OF PRECEPT. AMOUNT. TOTAL. ST. SAVIOUR'S. CHRISTCHURCH. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. 21 Feb., 1884 7,253 13 6 3,008 2 6 10,261 16 0 To meet the estimated local expenditure, the following Precepts have also been issued: — ddate of precept description of rate. s. saviour. christch'ch. total. £ £ £ 25 April, 1883 Sewer Rate 329 222 21 Nov. ,, ,, 365 324 1,240 25 April, 1883 Gen. Purp. Rate 4,313 2,055 21 Nov. „ ,, 4,341 1,971 12,680 13,920 Mr. George Ware, the last of this Board's Annuitants, died on the 15th February last. Mr. Ware formerly filled the office of Clerk to the Commissioners for the West Division of Borough Pavements, one of the Trusts which became obsolete on the passing of the Metropolis Local Management Act in the year 1855, and was in receipt from this Board of an apportioned annuity of £7 13s. 0d., part of a sum of £25 per annum, granted to him by way of compensation for the loss of that office. The Bill for creating a municipality and for reform of the local government of London, introduced by the Home Secretary, Sir William Harcourt, and now awaiting its second reading in the House of Commons, is too well-known to render it necessary to describe, other than briefly, its provisions, a full abstract having appeared in most of the public newspapers; but a glance at some of its leading features will be necessary in order to illustrate its application to the St. Saviour's District. By this measure, then, it is proposed that the Corporation of London shall be so extended as to include the whole of the Metropolis now governed by the Metropolitan Board of Works, and the several Yestries and District Boards of Works. The Members of the Metropolitan Board are to be merged in the new Corporation, and every person who if London C London Government Bill. 18 were a municipal borough would be qualified to be a burgess, is, subject to certain modifications as to residence, to become a citizen on enrolment in a burgess-roll which it will be the duty of the new administration to prepare, the limit as to residence being extended from seven to fifteen miles. In addition to its powers and duties as at present constituted, the Corporation is to have the powers and duties, so far as they are administrative, of the Lord Mayor and Aldermen, (the latter of whom are to be abolished,) the Commissioners of Sewers, and the Wardmotes. All the powers and duties devolving upon, or exerciseable by the Vestries and District Boards of Works are likewise to be transferred to and vested in the new Corporation, who are to act as at present by the Common Council, such Common Council to consist of 240 Members and a Lord Mayor annually elected by the Common Councillors. The thirty-nine administrative areas into which London is now divided are (subject to the promulgation of a scheme by which the number, extent, and boundaries of the same may be altered) to be retained, the District of St. Saviour's, Southwark, constituting and becoming one of the new municipal districts. Each municipal district will have a right to elect such number of Common Councillors as is specified in the first schedule to the Bill, the number allotted to St. Saviour's being two; it will, however, in the first instance be entitled to return three, the Metropolitan Board Member having for three years ex officio the privilege of a seat on the central or common council—a privilege that will cease on the expiration of the three years. The Municipal Districts are to be divided into Wards corresponding with the Parishes where a District is now divided into Parishes. Thus each of the two Parishes of St. Saviour and Christchurch will constitute a Ward. Each Ward is to elect such number of District Councillors as the Common Council may direct, the number being left open and undefined in the Bill. The District Council for St. Saviour's will therefore consist of the two (in the first instance three) Common Councillors and others to be elected by the citizens, and will take the place of the District Board of Works. Each District Council will have such powers, duties, and officers as the Common Council may from time to time assign to it. Both the Common Councillors 19 and the District Councillors are to serve for three years, so that the elections will be triennial. A citizen may be elected a Common Councillor for any Municipal District, but to be elected a District Councillor, he must hold his qualifications in the District—not necessarily in the Ward for which he is elected. A citizen possessing a qualification in Christchurch might therefore be elected for St. Saviour's Ward or vice versa. Any person qualified to be a Common Councillor, {i.e. whose name appears in the burgess-roll,) will be eligible to fill the office of Lord Mayor, and need not at the time of election be a Common Councillor. The first election of Common Councillors is fixed for the 29th January, 1885; that of District Councillors, for the 29th April, 1885. The Bill is to come into full operation on the 1st May, 1885, and on that day, therefore, if passed, the functions of this Board will absolutely cease and determine.. Without attempting to discuss the provisions of the Bill generally, it may be observed that in one respect, at least, the District will be a loser, namely, in the voting power which it now possesses in relation to the government of the Metropolis under the Metropolis Local Management Act. For although under the new system it will be entitled to return two Members to serve on the Central Council, in lieu of one Member to serve on the Metropolitan Board of Works as at present, its voting strength will be impaired and diminished by diffusion in a much larger assembly. The Metropolitan Board of Works consisting of 46 Members, the representation of the District on that Board is equal to 1 in 46, or 2.17 per cent. The new Board will consist of 240 Members, and during the first triennial period, whilst the Metropolitan Board Member remains a Common Councilman, the representation of the District thereupon will be 1 in 80, or 1.25 per cent.; afterwards 1 in 120 or 0.83 per cent. only. That of the City will be a much larger proportion, namely, 1 in 8, or 12 50 per cent.; the number of Common Councillors allotted to the City of London (47, eventually to be reduced to 30) having been arrived at by a different mode of computation to that which has been adopted in the case of the Municipal Districts, the basis of calculation for the City being the rateable value only, whereas that of the Districts is the population and rateable value C2 20 combined. By this means an undue preponderance will be given to the strength of the City vote at the expense of the Municipal Districts, the number of Common Councilmen to which the City is fairly entitled being 16.40 only. This Board carefully considered the Bill at a Meeting held on the 7th ultimo, when conflicting opinions were expressed regarding its merits or demerits, it being maintained on the one hand by supporters of the measure that it would carry out a much-needed reform, and meet the requirements of the Metropolis; on the other, that it would be fatal to self-government, and lead to increased expenditure. Ultimately the following resolution was put to the vote and carried by a small majority, viz.:—"That while we fully agree as to the necessity of Reform in the Government of London, we cannot accept the proposals of the Government, as they would virtually destroy Local Self-Government, and cause an increase of taxation without any corresponding advantages." Death and Retirement of Members. The Board greatly regret to have lost by death the services of Messrs. Lawson, Rideal, and Rutt, during the past year, and by retirement, of Mr. Cathie, who held the office of Chairman of the Finance Committee for several years prior to his retirement. More recently, Mr. Thorn, who had been a Member of the Board from its first formation, in the year 1855, and Chairman of the Sanitary Committee during the whole of that period, and who, luring the past fifteen years had been regularly chosen to preside at the meetings, and was the accepted Chairman of the Board, tendered his resignation. The Board were most unwilling to lose the services of a gentleman who had been connected with them for so long a time, and whom they so highly respected, and urged him to re-consider his determination, assuring him of their constant and unfailing support. Mr. Thorn was, however, firm in his resolve, and the Hoard had no alternative than to accept his resignation. W. H. ATKINS. Board Room, Emerson Street, Bankside, S.E. 24Ih June, 1884, 21 SURVEYOR'S REPORT. From Lady-day, 1883, to Lady-day, 1884. I have the honour to submit a Statement of the various Works executed in my Department during the year terminating Lady-day last. ST. SAVIOUR'S. Paved Footways. The following is a List of the Works executed in the repair and maintenance of the Footways in this District:— New 3-inch York Stone Paving 3,400 feet super. Old Paving taken up and relaid 19,443 „ „ New 15-in. x 12-in. Curb 222 feet lineal. New 12-in. x 6-in. „ 9 „ „ Old Curb reset 1,100 „ „ Old Curb redressed 51 ft. 6 in. „ Paved Caeeiageways. The following is a List of the Works executed in the repair and maintenance of the Carriageways in this District:— New 3-in. x 9-in. Aberdeen Granite Pitching 1,375 yards super. Old Pitching relaid 12,044 „ „ Block Channelling reset 1,002 feet lineal. Block Channelling and Tram redressed 737 „ „ New Wood Paving, Carey's system, &c. 706 yards super. Limmer Asphalte 31 „ „ Ballast used in the repair, &c. of Carriageways 1,092 cubic yards. Ballast used to grit London Bridge and wark Bridge Inclines 1,248 „ „ CHRISTCHURCH. Paved Footways. The following is a List of the Works executed in the repair and. maintenance of the Footways in this District. 22 New 3-inch York Stone Paving 7,376 feet super. Old Paving taken up and relaid 10,926 „ „ New 12-in x 6-in. Curb 149 feet lineal. Old Curb reset 1,041 „ „ Curb redressed 19½ „ „ Paved Carriageways. The following is a List of the Works executed in the repair and maintenance of the Carriageways in this District:— No new Carriageway Paving has been used during the year. Old Pitching relaid 5,950 yards super. Block Channelling reset 224 feet lineal. Block Channelling redressed 63 „ „ Wood Paving 36 yards super. Ballast used in the repair of Carriageways 458 cubic yards. Ballast used to grit Blackfriars Bridge Incline 624 „ „ Unpaved Carriageways. The following List shows the quantity of Broken Granite used on the Macadam Roads in Christchurch during the year:— CUBIC YARDS. Hatfield Street 38 Marlboro' Street 30 Collingwood Street 57 York Street 7 Bennett Street 24 George Street 16 William Street 15 CUBIC YARDS. Charles Street 7 Edward Street 28 Brunswick Street 40 Broad wall 12 Boundary Row 24 Denman Street (St. Saviour's) 15 The whole of these streets were stripped with the exception of Denman Street and Railway Approach, which had not then been handed over to the Board. List showing amounts expended on each street during the year for the maintenance of Carriageway and Footway Paving. Macadam Roads not included. 23  £ s. d. £ s. d. America Street 6 8 11 Brought forward 366 19 5 Adam's place 1 7 6 Hatfield Street 7 2 5 Boro' High Street 1,439 1 6 Isabella Street 0 16 8 Bankside 27 5 2 Jane Street 0 11 11 Blackfriars Road 451 0 3 John Street West 15 0 5 Broadwall 21 13 10 Loman Street 7 6 3 Bear Garden 2 12 5 Little Winchester Street 1 13 7 Bowling Green Lane 5 3 0 Montague Close 9 15 7 Burrell Street 7 10 4 Marlborough Street 6 7 6 Bennett Street 5 2 1 Newcomen Street 54 12 6 Bear Lane 16 7 5 Noah's Ark Alley 1 11 6 Barge House Street 10 3 5 Norfolk Street 4 12 9 Boundary Row 2 10 6 Orange Street 7 0 8 Brunswick Street 6 9 8 Pepper Street 7 0 9 Burrows' Mews 3 9 3 Park Street 71 9 5 Castle Street 12 1 9 Pond Yard 1 18 0 Casher's Ground 6 3 6 Pump Court 3 6 11 Clink Street 33 4 7 Prince's Street 5 14 1 Cardinal Cap Alley 1 7 5 Pleasant Row 1 6 5 Church Street 1 19 6 Price's Street 5 17 4 Counter Street 0 13 6 Red Cross Street 154 4 4 Charlotte Street 15 19 5 Robert Street 0 2 2 Charlotte Street (Great) 13 9 7 Suffolk Street (Great) 5 3 7 Charles Street 2 3 3 Southwark Street 34 2 3 Collingwood Street 7 4 0 Southwark Bridge Road 32 0 3 Cross Street 2 15 11 Sumner Street 33 8 8 Christchurch Passage 6 18 6 Skin Market Place 2 14 5 Duke Street 90 19 5 St. Margaret's Court 0 3 2 Emerson Street 9 6 8 Stamford Street 54 8 3 Ewer Street 21 5 1 Stoney Street 2 1 6 Essex Street 4 3 8 Tooley Street 1 8 4 Edward Street 1 2 11 Tennis Court 0 19 0 Falcon Court 0 5 6 Union Street 319 0 8 Farnham Place 3 3 7 Upper Ground Street 38 12 0 Gravel Lane 89 15 6 William's Court 2 6 9 Guildford Street 9 2 1 White Cross Street 6 6 7 Grove 3 16 4 Worcester Street 3 14 5 George Yard 2 16 4 Winchester Street 3 18 4 George Street 5 5 4 William Street 3 18 1 Holland Street 12 6 11 York Street 0 11 1 Horse Ride 3 3 11 Zoar Street 1 14 7 Carried forward 2,366 19 5 Total £3,281 7 6 The principal Carriageway and Footway Paving Works executed during-the year are as follows:— The whole of the Carriageway of the Blackfriars Bridge Incline, from Stamford Street to the Boundary, has been relaid. 24 The footway in Blackfriars Road, on the east side, from Edward Street to Charlotte Street, has been relaid with new 3-inch York Stone. The footways from Denman Street to Findlater's Corner, and Duke Street from St. Olave's Boundary to the Bridge Boundary, have been laid with new 3-inch York Stone, and the old curb has been replaced by new 15-inch X 12-inch Aberdeen Granite curb. A row of guaged Guernsey Granite Pitching has been placed against the outside face of the curb, to protect it from the excessive wear at this spot. The carriageway paving of the Boro' High Street, from York Street to the Bridge Boundary, has been entirely relaid, the worn Pitching being replaced with new Granite cubes. The whole of the channels have been laid with Guernsey Granite. 1,375 square yards of new Pitching was used on this work. A portion of Union Street and Red Cross Street, by the Schools, has been laid with new Wood Paving, Carey's system being adopted. The carriageways in Red Cross Street and a portion of Park Street have been taken up and relaid, the worn Block Channelling being redressed or replaced with other from the depot. The footway on the south side of Upper Ground Street has been relaid with new 3-inch York Stone, and new 12-inch X 7-inch Edge Curb supplied where necessary. A Steam Roller was used to consolidate the Macadam in Brunswick Street. STATEMENT OF SEWER WORKS EXECUTED. The following Brick and Pipe Sewers have been opened and cleared by the Board's Contractor:— Southwark Bridge Road 560 feet lineal Bennett Street 232 „ „ America Street 230 „ „ Marlborough Street 270 „ „ Casher's Grounds 160 „ „ Pepper Street 267 „ „ John Street West 150 „ „ 25 The following Sewers have been cleared by our own Sewermen:— Sumner Street 460 feet lineal. Stamford Street 830 „ „ Holland Street 450 „ „ William Street 190 „ „ Broadwall (portion of) 600 „ „ Park Street (portion of) 200 „ „ In addition to the above, a large High Level Sewer, running eastward from Blackfriars Road to Price's Street, has been filled up with hard core for about 130 feet of its length; a 12-inch pipe has been laid in the invert to a better fall. Two head-walls and a man-hole have been built, and a ventilator placed upon its highest point. This sewer was also cleared out and the old connection to the main sewer reconstructed. Many other small Sewers, Barrel Drains, &c. have been cleared. The Drainage connections to eight houses have been put in working order. Twenty-three applications for private drainage into the Public Sewers have been received, under which 35 houses have been drained. A new side entrance has been constructed to the Broadwall Sewer, this was found to be necessary, in consequence of the great distance that existed between the old side entrances. Two new side entrance covers have been fixed and five have been repaired. Seventeen Gullies have been opened and their connections cleared Fifteen Gullies have been repaired. Two new Gullies have been built and connections made to the main Sewers. The Penstocks at Clink Street and Barge House Stairs have been taken out and repaired, and the whole of the flushing arrangements put in good working order. The Urinal at the corner of Southwark Street and Blackfriars Road has been connected with the main brick sewer in Blackfriars Road; it formerly discharged into a small private drain belonging to the London, Chatham and Dover Railway Co., and the drainage was frequently blocked. D 26 Special attention has been paid to the flushing of the Sewers in the District, and advantage is taken of all stream tides to send river water through all such sewers as are in connection with the flushing pipes from the river. Hydrants and Water Carts are used to flush pipe sewers. The Flushing Tank in St. Margaret's Court is used every three months, or more frequently if required. Two new Concrete Flushing Tanks, each capable of containing 5½ tons of water, will be constructed during the present year. I have made very frequent personal inspections of the Sewers in the District, and may state that the majority of the Brick Sewers are in a much better condition than they have been for some years past. The Main Brick Sewers in Bear Lane and Gravel Lane will be cleared by Contractors' men this year. 362 loads of soil have been removed from the Sewers, exclusive of the quantity taken from those Sewers, clcared under special contract. The additional Yard rented from Messrs. Hoare & Son has been clcared, and 500 tons of old pitching removed from there to our own Stone Yard. 1,704 square yards of wide pitching have been redressed into 3-in. and 4-in. pitchers. 251 cubic yards of Granite have been broken for macadam. 3,890 square feet of old Rockhill Paving have been sold. Twenty-nine loads of old Wood Paving have been sold. Thirty-nine Licenses for Hoardings and Scaffolds have been issued. The Carriageways and Footways have been made good in 843 cases, after Gas and Water Companies' trenches. The Doors, Gates, and Notice Boards of some of the public ways have been renewed, repainted, and repaired; and where necessary, new locks and bolts have been fixed. The whole of the Dams and Tide Boards along the river frontage have been repaired and kept in good order. No case of overflow has occurred, although many heavy tides have had to be guarded against. GEO. ROPER NORRISH. 27 MEDICAL OFFICER'S REPORT. TO THE ST. SAVIOUR'S DISTRICT BOARD OF WORKS. Mr. Chairman and Gentlemen, I submit herewith the statistics of births and deaths, together with the details of our Sanitary Work for the year ended 31st December, 1883. The number of births registered was 1,009, 500 occurring in Christchurch, and 509 in St. Saviour. The number of deaths registered in Christchurch amounted to 331, and in St. Saviour to 279, making a total of 610. The total number of births registered in 1882 was 1,013, there being a difference of four only in the year, and the total number of deaths registered during the same period was 690, showing a decrease of 80 in the year. Eighty-three deaths occurred in Christchurch Workhouse. The following statement will indicate the Parishes from which they were admitted. St. Saviour. Christchurch. Newington. St. George-theMartyr. 8 17 21 37 By sanction of the Sanitary Committee I made arrangements with an officer in the department of the Registrar-General to supply a return of the deaths of persons who were removed from the District to Public Institutions. 28 They amount to 53, and are comprised as DISEASES. CHRISTCHURCH. Totals. ST. SAVIOUR. Totals. Zymotic .. 4 Dropsy, &c. 2 5 Tubercular 5 3 Nervous 3 3 Heart 2 1 Lungs 3 3 Digestive Organs 4 1 Kidneys 6 2 Childbirth • • .. Joints, Bones, &c. • • .. Skin .. .. Malformation .. .. Premature Birth 2 .. Atrophy .. .. Old Age • • .. Suddenness • • .. Violence 2 2 Not specified • • .. TOTALS 29 24 The following is a statement of all the deaths which occurred in the District from various causes during the year. DISEASES. CHRISTCHURCH. Totals. ST SAVIOUR. Totals. Zymotic 25 45 Dropsy, &c. 11 5 Tubercular 52 54 Nervous 59 60 Heart 11 13 Lungs 84 60 Digestive Organs 11 7 Kidneys 2 8 Childbirth 4 1 Joints, Bones, &c. 1 .. Skin .. • • Malformation 1 1 Premature Birth 13 5 Atrophy 8 4 Old Age 36 8 Suddenness .. 2 Violence 13 6 Not specified .. .. TOTALS 331 279 In the following statement I would direct your attention to the agesof those who died during the year, together with a comprison of the births and deaths. 29 SAINT SAVIOUR'S DISTRICT—Population at Census, 1881, 28,622. Area in Statute Acres, 203. Statement of Deaths Registered in the 52 weeks ended 31st December, 1883. Under 1 year. 1 year and under 20. 20 years and under 40. 40 years and under 60. 60 years and under 80. 80 years and upwards. Totals. In the District 154 158 55 78 70 12 527 In the Workhouse .. .. 4 12 54 13 83 Totals 154 158 59 90 124 25 610 General Statement of the Causes of Deaths Registered in the Year 1883. ZYMOTIC DISEASES. Total. Violence. Inquests. Other Causes. Totals. Measles. Scarlatina. Whooping Cough. Croup. Diarrhoea. Dysentery. Diphtheria. Syphilis. Typhoid Fever. Christchurch 6 5 4 3 4 .. 2 1 .. 25 13 25 268 331 St. Saviour 10 11 6 1 12 1 .. 2 2 45 6 15 213 279 Totals 16 16 10 4 16 1 2 3 2 70 19 40 481 610 30 COMPARISON OF BIRTHS AND DEATHS. births. deaths. Christchurch Males 257 211 Females 243 120 500 331 Excess of Births, 169 St. Saviour Males 266 155 Females 243 124 509 279 Excess of Births, 230 1,009 610 „ 399 There was a considerable reduction in the Deaths from Diarrhœa and Scarlet Fever, whilst Small Pox does not appear in the mortality table. Whooping Cough and Measles were decidedly epidemic. Of these, Measles was the most severe, and caused the largest number of deaths. As is generally the case, the fatality from Scarlet Fever was specially marked during the months of September, October, and November. The following are the chief Sanitary Improvements which have been effected during the year:— At Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, and 11, James' Place, Union Street. The water-closets were found to be in a dilapidated state, without water-supply, and the drains were not trapped. The water-closets have been put into a proper sanitary condition, with a sufficient supply of water, and the drains trapped. At Nos. 73, 75, 77, 79, 81, 83, 85, 87, and 89, Park Street, and Nos. 3, 4, and 5, Emerson Place. The tenants of these houses were often complaining of most offensive smells in their dwellings and at the rear of their premises. On examination a defective brickdrain was found to be passing along the premises; the ground was saturated with soil which had oozed through the brickwork. This has been remedied by the substitution of an earthenwarepipe drain, being laid with proper junctions and traps, and connected with the main drain in Park Street. 31 At Nos. 33, 34, 35, 37, 38, 39, 40, 42, 52, 53, 54, 58, and 59, St. Margaret's Court. These houses were found to have waterclosets without water-supply and in close proximity to the houses, badly ventilated, some being even in the basement or cellars. In all cases water has been laid on. At No. 12, Marlborough Street, and Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, John Street West. In the whole of this block the water-closets were without water-supply; several of them were also in a dilapidated condition. This has been remedied by the owner putting on water to the same; also repairing the water-closets where found necessary. At Queen's Head Yard, Borough High Street. On visiting this Yard, the rooms (occupied by various families) were in a kind of gallery, in a very dirty and dilapidated state, badly ventilated, and without sufficient privy-accommodation. On receipt of notices, the landlord had the rooms thoroughly whitewashed and repaired throughout and properly ventilated, so as to afford sufficient light and air, and an additional water-closet made, with a supply of water. At Paved Place, Gravel Lane. The drains of 13 houses in this court were found not properly trapped; there were also small yards at the rear with dustbins. The drains have been trapped and the dustbins removed from the yards which were very narrow, and a covered bin in the court substituted. At Nos. 1, 2, 4, 5, 6, 7, and 8, Keppell Street; Nos. 21, 23, 25, and 27, Gt. Guildford Street; Nos. 23, 24, 25, 26, and 27, America Street. Water-closets were found in connection with this block of houses to be without water, and some of them in a dilapidated state; the paving of yards broken up, and many of the tenants without receptacles for the household refuse. Notices were served calling upon the owner to carry out works necessary to make the houses habitable, which he did by causing a supply of water to be provided to the water-closets, the water-closets to be repaired, and dust receptaelea provided to each of the houses. 32 At Nos. 37, 38, and 39, Ewer Street; Nos. 122, 124, 128, and 130, Union Street; and Nos. 8, 9, 13, 14, and 15, Pump Court, Union Street. In this block of houses the water-closets were found to be dilapidated and without a supply of water (the water-closets in Pump Court being actually under the same roof as the houses, and within a few feet of the living rooms). The yards were found to be broken up, also dustbins broken and uncovered. The owners of the houses in question were served with the necessary notices under the Nuisances Removal Act to abate the nuisances. The water-closets have all been supplied with water, repaired, and also in several cases taken down and rebuilt. Yards and dustbins have been repaired, so that the houses and premises are now in good sanitary condition. Various other sanitary works have been carried out for the abatement of nuisances on various premises in the following Streets: Surrey Row, Blackfriars Road, Charlotte Street, Stamford Street, Bear Lane, Gravel Lane, George Street, William Street, Cross Street, Burrell Street, Hatfield Street, Jane Street, Charles Street, Thurlow Street, Upper Ground Street, Collingwood Street, Broadwall, and Edward Street, and Park Street, Southwark Bridge Road, Ewer Street, Borough High Street, Union Street, Sumner Street, Great Suffolk Street, Orange Street, Loman Street, Park Street, Suffolk Grove, Great Guildford Street, Pepper Street, Princess Street, Castle Street, Pitt's Place, Holland Street, Southwark Street, Parvey Place, Union Court, St. Margaret's Court, and Red Cross Street. 33 Notices served and work done for the abatement of nuisances for the year 1883. Christchurch. St. Saviour. Totals. Notices served for the abatement of nuisances 122 280 402 Houses limewashed after cases of infectious disease 13 8 21 Rooms limewashed after cases of infectious disease 5 1 6 Filthy Houses whitewashed 27 16 43 Filthy Yard Walls whitewashed 5 10 15 Water-closets whitewashed 4 9 13 Houses pulled down as being unfit for human habitation 3 .. 3 Yards repaired 9 2 11 Yards repaved 19 5 24 Drains trapped 14 25 39 Choked Drains opened 4 4 8 Brick Drains removed and Pipe Drains substituted 14 7 21 Drains repaired 9 5 14 Houses and Roofs of Houses repaired 17 2 19 An accumulation of Filth removed 3 1 4 Dilapidated Water-closets taken down and rebuilt 6 2 8 Water-closets supplied with Water 53 28 81 Water-closets repaired 37 11 48 Water provided for household use 0 1 1 Dustbins repaired and covered 8 9 17 Receptacles provided for household refuse 9 6 15 Miscellaneous Nuisances removed. 12 9 21 Rooms disinfected by sulphur after infectious diseases 22 19 41 Bedding ordered to be destroyed and replaced after infectious 1 1 2 Dust complaints attended to 1,070 1,650 2,720 COWHOUSES AND SLAUGHTERHOUSES. Cowhouses. Name of Person Licensed. Premises where Licensed. Benjamin Jones New Buildings, Red Cross Street. Farnham Thompson 5, Holland Street. John Tilt 28, Cross Street. 34 Slaughterhouses. Name of Person Licensed. Premises where Licensed. J. G. Skeffiington 57, Sumner Street. Alfred Row 121, Union Street. J. Huskin 163, Union Street. Courtney Davy 207, Union Street. Thomas Horrell 5 & 6, Cross Street. I inspected the cowhouses and slaughterhouses previous to the annual licensing and found them in a satisfactory condition. I also attended at the Sessions House on 3rd October, 1883; the licenses in every instance were granted. Mr. Jenkin Morgan not having applied in time for a license for his cowhouse in Zoar Street, will not be able to continue his business until next licensing day. Underground Booms. During the past year notices have been served to close the following underground rooms, the same not being in conformity with Section 103, 18 and 19 Vic., cap. 120, viz.:—Nos. 19, 20, 21, 24, 25, 31, 33, 44, and 45, Surrey Row, and No. 118, Broadwall. They were all closed upon receipt of notices, with the exception of Nos. 19, 31, and 33, Surrey Row; summonses were applied for in these cases, and they are now unoccupied. Disinfecting Station. The Disinfecting Chamber in Ewer Street is doing good service, 476 beds, mattresses, and other articles of bed furniture were disinfected. Mortuary. During the year 20 bodies have been received into the Mortuary; of this number 17 Inquests were held, with the following results: — Heart Disease Found Drowned. Found Dead. Accidental Death. Suicide whilst in a state of temporary insanity. Convulsion Fits. Apoplexy. Brain Disease Total. 2 7 1 2 2 1 1 1 17 35 The Mortuary is kept in a clean state by the man employed by the Board at the Stone Yard, and is thoroughly washed down each week. Towels are provided for the use of those frequenting the place. In consequence of statements which are reported to have been made of the neglect of Sanitary Authorities to perform their duty of looking after the dwellings of the poor, I wish to bring under your notice that in July, 1876, 14 houses in Ewer Street were reported by me to your Board as unfit for human habitation, and in January, 1877, these houses were demolished. Again, on 25th February, 1876, the Sanitary Committee inspected 25 houses in Glasshouse Yard, and instructed me to give notice to the owners that these houses were unfit for human habitation. On the 9th June Mr. Partridge inspected the property and made an order to close the houses in conformity with the notices which had been served; some time after all the houses were pulled down. About the same period 10 houses called "Waterloo Buildings were demolished. In making these remarks I wish your Board to know that the ground upon which this property stood has remained vacant up to the present time, a condition which certainly could not have been contemplated by the Legislature; nor do I consider it prudent on our part, as custodians of the public health, to permit so large a number of poor people to be displaced from their homes without causing provision to be made for the erection of suitable dwellings for them. My own view is that in the event of any houses being found unfit for human habitation, or in other words, in such a condition as capable of being condemned under existing Acts of Parliament, the Yestry or District Board should have power to serve notice on the owner of such property to at once demolish it, and within a reasonable period to re-build the same in a fit and proper manner. In default thereof, to be liable to an accruing penalty, until such re-building is completed. The Acts of Parliament which apply to this matter, known as Torrens's Act of 1868, and amended in 1879, and that of Sir Richard Cross, passed in 1879, and amended in 1882, are both open to objection. In section 5 of the former Act, it states: "The owner 36 of any premises specified in an order of the Local Authority made under that Act and requiring him to execute any works or to demolish such premises, may, within three months after service on him of the order, require the Local Authority in writing to purchase such premises." We have recently attempted to put the latter Act into operation in the case of an unhealthy area which I reported to the Metropolitan Board of Works, which is the Local Authority under the Act. This report was not entertained, on the ground that the area was too small. Gas. With respect to illuminating power—the statutory standard being sixteen candles—the average was generally considerably above the standard, and only on rare occasions, and when the examination was made in the morning, did the minimum fall below the standard. With respect to. purity, sulphuretted hydrogen was not present in the gas at any time. With regard to ammonia, a valuable residual product, the limit never reached the prescribed quantity of four grains in 100 cubic feet of gas. Water. Extract from the report of Sir Francis Bolton, Official Water Examiner. "All the Companies are now more or less voluntarily giving constant supply, under the provisions of the Metropolis Water Act, 1871, in some portions of their Districts; and the Companies are ready to give constant supply and to affix hydrants whenever required to do so." In the monthly reports on the Metropolitan Water Supply, attention is drawn to the necessity which exists for a regular cleansing of cisterns, and also to the fact that contamination of water from gases generated by sewage is of far more frequent occurrence than is generally understood. Waste pipes from cisterns are still to be found which are in direct communication with drains, so that gases may flow back into the cistern and become absorbed by the water. To prevent this, an overflow pipe should bo brought outside each house and the end left exposed to the air, 37 instead of being carried into a drain, as is often the case. By the adoption of this plan, poisonous effluvia and gases from drains will be got rid of, which would otherwise ascend through the pipe, and not only be partly absorbed by the water in cisterns, but be mixed with the air in the houses, thereby becoming a cause of disease. The attention of consumers has been drawn to the fact, that in houses supplied on the constant system, all danger of drinking stale or contaminated water from cisterns may be avoided if the following recommendation is carried into practice, viz.:—To attach a small draw-off tap to the communication pipe which supplies the cistern from the main in the street, from which water may be drawn at any moment day or night, direct from the works; thereby taking full advantage of any efforts made by the Companies to purify the water to the utmost extent. This water should be used for drinking and cooking, and the contents of cisterns made use of for washing, flushing, baths, and similar purposes. The samples of water which I have examined, have generally been found clean, bright, and well filtered, and the supply has been abundant. The District is supplied by two Companies, viz.—by the Lambeth Waterworks from the Thames at Molesey, and by the Southwark and Vauxhall Waterworks from the Thames at Hampton. In directing your attention to the work which has been performed by Mr. Buckworth, your Sanitary Inspector, I wish to testify to the indefatigable industry and energy which that Officer has displayed. I am, Gentlemen, Your obedient servant. ROBERT BIANCHI. 25, Stamford Street, S.E. April 9th, 1884. 38 PUBLIC ANALYST'S REPORT. Gentlemen, During the year just passed, I have analysed forty.five samples of Milk, of which thirteen have been adulterated with water, varying from six to twenty per cent. An interesting case of reference to Somerset House deserves a more permanent record, and I therefore venture again to record the results. I had received from our Inspector a milk which, on analysis, gave the following results. Sp. gr. 1025. Cream 5 per cent. Total solids 9.97 10.03 Water 90.03 89.97 Fat 2.65 2.72 Solids not Fat 7.32 7.31 100.00 100.00 Ash 0.58 Chloride of sodium 0.10 I had stated that the milk had eighteen percent. of added water. The referees from Somerset House reported. Water 91.00 Fat 2.63 Solids not Fat 6.37 100.00 "From a consideration of these results, and after making the addition for natural loss, arising from the decomposition of milk through keeping; we are of opinion that this milk contains not less than fifteen percent. of added water." I had an opportunity of explaining to His Worship Mr. Slade, the meaning of the so-called discrepancy, and satisfied him that the opinion from the fresh milk was alone reliable. Considering, that we have to state in the terms of the Adulteration Act, that no alteration has taken place in the constitution of the article that would interfere with the analysis, it is not in 39 ance with our knowledge, that we can judge, with any accuracy, from the stale article as to the condition of the fresh. There has been a great improvement in the quality of milks in the last quarter, as indeed there ought to be; nevertheless it is a pleasing fact. Nearly 29 percent. of prosecuted cases may be still considered very large. Of sixteen Butters, three were found to consist either mainly, or entirely, of fat other than butter fat. Butter is very superior to the article that was sold even five years ago. Only one Coffee has been examined; it contained much chicory. Breads, two in number, were of excellent quality. They were thoroughly clean, well aerated, and completely free from any suspicion of alum. Neither did the microscope reveal a trace of any foreign admixture. A sample of Flour was genuine, although somewhat discolored. Of Spirits, sixteen samples have been analysed. Five of the Gins were below the Government standard. One sample of Rum contained 15 percent. of water above the standard. Nine samples of Beers and Porters stood fairly the test of analysis. None of them contained excess of the chlorides of sodium and potassium, the latter derived from the sugar employed. Three Peppers and a Mustard were all good of their kind. A Salad Oil was not olive oil; I believe it was cotton oil. But as I find cotton oil much commended, and as I could not say for certain that it was cotton-seed oil, and as olive oil had not been demanded, I could not give a Certificate of Prosecution. Of Drugs, five have been analysed; comprising Bromide of Potassium, Iodide of Potassium, Calomel, Glycerine, and Chloroform. All were good of their kind. The Certificates are all in the hands of our Inspector. I remain, Gentlemen, Yours faithfully, ALBERT J. BERNAYS. St. Thomas's Hospital, Midsummer, 1884.